Universal Naturopathic Encyclopedia
Benedict Lust
Universal Naturopathic Encyclopedia, Directory and Buyers' Guide: Year Book of Drugless Therapy, vol. I. Butler, NJ: Naturopathic Publishing, 1918.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/universalnaturop00lust).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

■  ■rt.r-:*>'r,^Tr:;ytin^>;i


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Lyrasis  Members  and  Sloan  Foundation


UNIVERSAL  NATUROPATHIC  _

ENCYCLOPEDIA

DIRECTORY

AND

BUYERS'  GUIDE

Year  Book  of  Drugless  Therapy

For  1918-19

VOLUME I.
II

CONTAINING:

E.  E.  PURINTON : EFFICIENCY  IN  DRUGLESS  HEALING

L.  KUHNE: NEO-NATUROPATHY,  THE  NEW  SCIENCE  OF  HEALING

L.  KUHNE: THE  SCIENCE  OF  FACIAL  EXPRESSION

A.  MatijACA: PRINCIPLES  OF  ELECTRO-MEDICINE,

ELECTRO-SURGERY  AND  RADIOLOGY


A REGISTER °^  Qualified  Naturopathic  Physicians,  such

as Nature Cure Doctors, Chiropractors,

Osteopaths, Mechanotherapists, Dieticians, Electrotherapists,

Neuropaths, Mental Scientists and Other Rational, Progressive

and Drugless Practitioners.

^ LIST  °^ Naturopathic Colleges, Schools, Institutions.
Societies, Medical and Naturopathic Books and
Periodicals, Material and Appliances Pertaining to Drugless
Therapeutics  and  Natural  Life.


Edited  by  BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  M.  D.

President  "Universal  Naturopathic  Alliance,"  "American  Naturopathic  Association."  "Nczi'
York  State  Society  of  Naturopaths."  "New  Jersey  State  Society  of  Naturopaths."  "Florida
State  Society  of  Naturopaths" ;  Editor  "Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath."  "Der  Hausdoktor" ;
Dean  American  School  of  Naturopathy" ;  Founder  and  Physician-in-Chief  of  the  Naturopathic
Sanitarium  "Vungborn,"  Butler,  Nezv  Jersey  and  "Qui-si-sana," Tangerine,  Florida, etc. etc.


Published  by  BENEDICT  LUST

NEW  YORK,  N.  Y.  BUTLER, N. J.  TANGERINE, FLA.


PRICE, - - $10.00


CorvniGiiT,  1918

I!V

Dit. Hi;nki)I(:t Lust,
Nkw Yohk, N. Y,


ALL HUiinS HKSHRVED


^  |NiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin^  s

1 1  qT®  %  ii^mcry  of  all  th^OBt  ttnbb  ||

II  ^^  poit^^ra  <xnh  itarou^r^ra  tul)0  ||

1 1  \^nw  hi^h  in  %  ]fnxtl\  nf  Naturnpatlja,  1 1

1 1  anb  t0  tljnr  OIouragMua  ^urr^aanra  ||

II  in  tl|^  Art  nf  irngbaa  paling,  all  ||

1 1  nf  ml|0m  Ijau^  anffrr^tn  p^ra^rntinn  ||

1 1  fnr  aauing  l|nman  ffiiu^a  tljat  H^biral  1 1

11  AntnrrarQ  rnnlb  nnt  aau^,  ttjia  Mnrk  ||

1 1  ia  a^ap^rtfnllii  i^birat^h  btf  ita  Sbitnr  1 1

II  MmtUtt  ICuat  N.i.,  il.i.  ||

B  I "  Slljr  litugbnnt."  iButIrr,  Nrui  Krrary.  11.  ^.  A.  |  ■

m  I A^ril  Jffirat, Ntnrtrrn  i^imbrrft  anb  Eigl^tprn  I  B


g  ^iiiiniiiiiiHiiiiiniiiiiiiiiniiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinii^


CONTENTS


j»


PAijn:

Introduction 9

Principles,  Aim  and  Program  of  the

Nature Cure System 13

How  I  Became  Acquainted  With
Nature Cure. By Henry Lind-

lahr,  M. D.,  N. D 33

The Nature Cure. By Carl Strueh,

M.  D.,  N.  D 51

Naturopathy. By Harry E. Brook,

N.  D 55

Present  Position  of  Naturopathy  and
Allied  Therapeutic  Measures  in
the British Isles. By J. Allen

Pattreiouex, X. D 56

Why  All  Drugless  Methods? By  Per

Nelson 63

Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing.  (A
Book.)  By  Edward  Earle  Purin-
ton 65

Chapter I — Experience and Ob-
servation 67

Chapter II — Opportunities in the
Nature Cure 86

Chapter III — The Start for Suc-
cess 96

Chapter  IV — The  Need  of  Organ-
ization 103

Chapter  V — Knowing  Your  Job.. 110

Chapter VI  — ■  Standardizing the
Nature Cure 116

Chapter VII— Who Should Heal? 124

Chapter  VIII — Training  and  Test-
ing a  Physician 131

Chapter IX  —  Should a Doctor
Study Medicine? 139

Chapter  X — The  Ethics  of  Adver-
tising 147

Chapter XI — Wiser Professional
Methods 156

Chapter XII — The Importance  of
Good  Letters 166

Chapter XIII — Improving Health
Correspondence 173

Chapter  XIV— Making  It  Pay  .... 179


Chapter  XV — The  \'alue  of  Tfjjer-

ance 187

An Open Letter from Benedict

Lust  to E. E. Purinton 194

Mr.  Purinton's Reply  to  Dr.  Lust 195
Chapter  XVI — Mental  Causation.. 198
Chapter XVII — Mental Diagnosis  205
Chapter  XVIII — Mental  Prescrip-
tion 212

Neo-Naturopathy, the New Science
of Healing. (A Book.) By

Louis Kuhne 223

Part One — What Led Me to the

Discovery  of  Neo-Naturopathy.  . 225
How Does Disease Arise? What

Is  Fever? 233

Nature,  Origin,  Purpose  and  Cure
of Diseases of Children, and

Their  Unity 245

Measles, Scarlet Fever, Diph-
theria, Small Pox, Whooping

Cough, Scrofula 247

Disease  a  Transmission  of  Morbid

Matter 259

Rheumatism,  Gout,  Sciatica,  Crip-
pling:  Their Cause and Cure.. 265
Cold  Hands  and  Feet,  Hot  Head:

Their Cause and Cure 279

Specific Cures Effected 281

Science of Facial Expression.... 283

My  Remedial  Agents 286

The  Digestive  Process.  What  Shall

We  Eat?  What  Shall  We  Drink?  296
The Indigestibility of Denatured

Food 299

Theoretical Principles That De-
mand  a Rational, Natural Sj's-

tem  of  Diet . .' 305

Man  a Frugivorous  Animal 307

Proof of the Beneficial Value of

Vegetable  Diet 311

What  Shall  We  Eat  and  Drink?.. 313
Part Two — Nervous and Mental
Diseases. Sleeplessness 318


Conlcids


PACK

Pulmonary  Affections.  Inflamnia-
tion  of  the  Lungs. Tuberculosis.

Pleurisy. Lupus 325

Cause  and Cure  of  Nodules 329

Tuberculin  Inoculation  Condcmn-
•ed. Cures By Natural Method


Sexual  Diseases 338

Sexual Diseases Only Curative

Crises  341

Diseases  of  Bladder  and  Kidneys.
Diabetes,  Uraemia,  Bed-Wetting,
Liver  Complaints,  Gall  Stones,
Jaundice. Intestinal Diseases.

Sweating  Feet.  Herpes 346

Heart  Disease  and  Dropsy 352

Diseases  of  Spinal  Cord.  Con-
sumption of  Spinal  Cord.  Hem-
orrhoidal Affections 359

Poverty of the Blood. Chlorosis  363
Epileptic Fits. Agoraphobia .... 366
Diseases  of  the Eye  and Ear.... 370
Diseases  of  the  Teeth. Cold  in  the
Head.  Influenza.  Diseases  of  the

Throat. Goitre 376

Headache,  Migraine.  Inflammation
of the Brain. Consumption of

the  Brain 380

Typhus, Dysentery, Cholera and

Diarrhea 383

Climatic  and  Tropical  Fevers:  Ma-
laria, Bilious  Fever,  Yellow  Fe-
ver and Ague 386

Leprosy 390

Scabies,  Worms,  Tapeworm,  Para-
sites, Intestinal  Hernia 397

Cancer, Proud  Flesh 399

Part  Three — Treatment  and  Cure
of Wounds Without Drugs or

Operations 406

Diseases  of  Women 422

How to Bring About Easy and

Safe Parturition 430

Conduct  After Birth 437

Treatment  of  the  Infant  During
the  First  Months. Bringing  Up

of Children 439

Part  Four — Reports  of  Cures  and
Letters of  Thanks 442

The Science of Facial Expression.

(A  Book.) By  Louis  Kuhne. .  . . 489

Introduction  490

The  New  Method  of  Diagnosis. .  . . 497
The  Diagnosis  in  Practice 539


PACK

Removal  of  Encumbrance 547

Increasing  the  Vitality 553

The  Science  of  Facial Expression

in  Relation  to  Phrenology 567

Conclusion 568

Principles  of  Electro-Medicine,  Elec-
tro-Surgery and  Radiology.  (A
Book.) By Antliony Matijaca,

M. D., ]:>.  O.. N. D 569

Introduction 573

Chapter I  —  \'oltage, Amperage,

Resistance 577

Chapter  II — Galvanism 580

Chapter III — Iontophoresis 586

Chapter  IV^ — Electro-Magnetism..  590
Chapter  \' — Static  Electricity  ....  594
Chapter  VI — Application  of  Static

Electricity 599

Chapter  VII — Alternating  Currents  603
Chapter VIII — High Frequency

Currents 606

Chapter  IX — Hydro-Electro-Ther-
apy 622

Chapter  X— Electro-Thermo  Ther-
apy. Ozone. Magnetic  Therapy  626
Chapter XI — Electro-Diagnosis  . . 629
Chapter  XII — Electro-Surgery ... 643

Chapter XIII— Radiology 648

Chapter XIV — Roentgen or X-

Rays 663

Chapter  XV — Roentgenology .... 674
Chapter  XVI — Radium  Therapy.. 691
Chapter  XVII — Mechanical  Vibra-
tion 694

Chapter XVIII— Blood Pressure  697

Neuropathy  Department  702

Neuropathy. By  VVm.  F. Havard,

N. D 702

Dietology Department 708

Materia  Alimentaria. By  Thomas

J.  Allen,  M.  D.,  N.  D.,  D.  O. .. 708
Milk  Diet  as  a  Remedy  for  Chron-
ic Disease. By  Charles  S.  Porter,

M.  D 709

Chiropractic  Department 712

Chiropractic. By Arthur L. For-

ster, M. D., D. C 712

Anatomical Basis  of  Chiropractic.
By  Wm.  Charles  Schulze,  M.  D.,

D.  C 723

Evolution  of  Chiropractic. By  An-
ton Deininger,  D.  O.,  D.  C 730

What  Chiropractic  Is. By  Dr.  Wil-
lard  Carver 731


(lonlcnb


Mechano-Therapy  Department^Mc-
chano-Therapy. By Dr. Tell

Berggren  734

Osteopathy  Department 737

Osteopathic Medioiiu'. By Ur. C.

E.  Binck 72,7

Remedying  Constiijation  on  Milk-
Diet  7i'i

Phytotherapy Department  —  Phyto-
therapy. By  Dr.  M.  G.  Young.. 739

Apyrtropher  Department 743

Trophotherapy. By Dr. Geo. J.

Drews 743

The  Founder  of  Apyrtrophism  and

Trophotherapy 747

Physi-Culture Department 750

The  Fasting  Treatment. By  Dr.  H.

B.  Galatian  750

Exercise and Rest. By Sigurd

Sampson, X. D 754

The  Milk  Diet.  By  Dr.  H.  B.  Gala-
tian 756

Physcultopathy. B>y Dr. H. B.

Galatian 759

Ophthalmology  and  Optometry  De-
partment 760

Ophthalmology  and  Optometry.
By Dr. Edward J. Perkins.... 760

Hydrotherapy Department 764

Hydrotherapy.  By  Jos.  H.  Hoe-
gen,  N.  D 764

Orthopedic  Department 770

Orthopedics.  By  Gustave  VV.  Haas,

N.  D.,  D.  C 770

Pathology  Department 774

General Pathology. By J. F. G.

Luepke,  M.  D., Sc. D 774

Natural  and  Divine  Healing  Depart-
ment 777

The  Science  and  Philosophy  of
Natural  and  Divine  Healing.  By
Charles  Zurmuhlen,  M.  D.,  D.  C.  777

Astroscopy  Department 782

Astro-Medical Diagnosis. By E.

G. Bradford 782

Phrenology Department 784

Modern Phrcnolog}-. By Jessie

Allen Fowler 784

Physiologic  Therapeutics. By  James
Montgomery Irving, M. D., N.

D., Ph. D 787

Naturopathic  Directory 797

Colleges,  Schools,  Institutions  and
Sanitaria 797


PAGF-,

Directory  of  Drugless  Physicians  in

Alphabetical Order 813

Key to Abbreviations of Profes-
sional Designations  813

Biographical  Notes  833

Directory of Drugless Physicians,

Geographically arranged '^)72>

United States 974

Canada 1073

Cuba 1076

Porto  Rico  1076

South  America 1076

Africa 1070

Asia 1076

Australia 1076

Europe  1077

Germany  1077

Great Britain — England, Scotland.

Ireland 1077

Sweden 1077

Nature Cure Institutes, Sanitaria,

etc., in British Isles 1078

Drugless Physicians in British

Isles 1079

Directory  of  Drugless  Physicians,
arranged  according  to  Profes-
sion 1083

Chiropractors — United States 1083

Chiropractors — Canada 1129

Christian  Scientists  1129

Dieticians 1130

Drugless  Doctors 1130

Electro-Therapists  1130

Hydropaths 1130

Iridologists 1130

Magnetopaths 1130

Masseurs 1 130

Mechano-Therapists 1133

Medical Doctors (using Drugless

Methods) 1135

Mental  Scientists 1136

Naprapaths 1136

Naturopaths 1137

Naturopaths — Consultants 1146

Neuropaths 1146

Optometrists 1 146

Orificial  Surgeons 1 147

Osteopaths 1147

Phrenologists 1173

Physical  Culturists 1173

Physio-Therapists 1174

Spiritual and Divine Healers. ...  1174

Spondylo-Therapists  1174

Suggestive Therapists 1174


Conlciils


Astroscopists 1176

Baths  and  Swimmiiip: 1176

Chiropodists 1177

Naturopathic Book Catalog 1179

Natural Healing and Natural Life

Books  and Periodicals 1217

Classified List of Medical Works  1239

Book  Reviews 1287

Buyers'  Guide  of  Naturopathic  Sup-
plies 1291

Buyers' Guide 1295

r.uildin-  Materials  1295

Greenhouses,  Nurseries,  Seeds  and

Plants 1295

Houses 1295

Household  Accessories 1295

Machinery  and  Tools  1296

Jewelry 1296

Oils  and  Greases 1296

Real Estate 1296

Sanitary  Goods 1296

Clothin- 1296


Foods  and  A|)])h'anccs 13(J(>

l-'ood Helps iolS

Therapeutic  Apparatus  1319

Physical  C"ulture  Apparatus  1326

llerhal and Physiolnsijical l^em-

■edics 1330

Therapeutic  Api)aratus,  continued 1344
Physiological Remedies and Mis-
cellaneous 1346

Vegetarian  and  Naturopathic  Res-
taurants, Health  Food  Com-
panies, etc 1348

Sup]ily I  Idiises  and  Service 1348

Notes  and Reviews 1357

Glossary 1381

A  Parting  Word 1383

Index 1385

List ot Illustrations 1408

Biographical  Index 1410

Index to Diseases 1411

Index  to Advertisers 1414

Index to Advertisemenis 1415


INTRODUCTION


rO  the  Xaliu'opalhic  Profession,  Ihe  Professors  of  Xdliwdl
Healing  in  all  its  branches,  the  Professors  of  Scientific
Diet,  Hydrotherapij,  Heliotherapy,  Electrotherapy,  Neu-
ropathy, Osteopathy,  Chiropractic,  Naprapathy,  Magneto-
pathy.  Phytotherapy,  Exercise,  Sivedish  Movements,  Curative
Gymnastics,  Physical  and  Mental  Culture,  Batneopathy,  and
all  forms  of  Drugless  Healing:  the  Faculties  of  all  Drugless
Colleges,  Institutions,  Schools,  and  all  Professors  of  Hygiene
and  Sanitation;  Manufacturers  of  Naturopathic  Supplies:
Publishers  of  Heallh  Literature,  and  N(dur(d  Hading  Societies,
GREETING:

I  have  the  honor  to  present  to  your  consideration  imd  good-
will, this  Volume,  No.  I,  Year  1918-19,  of  the  Universal  Naturo-
pathic Directory,  Year  Book  of  Drugless  Healing,  (uul  Buyers'
Guide.

For  twenty-two  years  past,  the  need  of  a  directory  for  Drug-
less Therapy  has  been  felt.  The  medical  world  is  in  a  condi-
tion of  intense  evolution  at  the  present  time.  It  is  evolving
from  the  Drugging  School  of  Therapy  to  the  Drugless  School.
People  by  the  million  have  lost  confidence  in  the  virtues  of
Allopathy  and  are  turning  with  joyful  confidence  to  the  Pro-
fessions of  Natural  Healing  until  it  has  been  estimated  that
there  are  at  least  forty  thousand  practitioners  of  Naturopathic
healing  in  the  United  Slates.

The  motto  that  IN  UNITY  THERE  IS  STRENGTH  is  the
foundation  of  the  present  enterprise.


10  Introdiiclion


mihcrlo.  l/ic  (Irnfilcss  profession  has  Utckcd  thai  presliije
in  the  ciics  of  the  iniblic.  mltich  conies  from  Ihe  conliniious
existence  of  <i  hifj  inslilulion,  dnlij  or(}(U\ized  and  wieldimj  ihe
immense  (inlhorilii  udiich  is  derived  no  less  from  or()(miz(ilion
and  hislori/  lh(m  from  Ihe  idrliies  of  Ihe  principles  Ihal  are
held  (Hid  pniclised  hi/  suc/i  inslilnlions.  The  public  (tl  large
inshnddneonslii  respecis  an  inslilulion  Ihal  is  Ihoroughlij  or-
(/(Uiized  and  has  ils  rools  eiuihed  in  hislorij.

The  lime  has  fullij  arrined  ndicn  Ihe  drugless  profession
should  no  lonijcr  e.visi  in  Ihe  form  of  isolaled  unils,  nol  know-
infl  one  (Uiolher  and  awing  bul  lillle  for  such  knowledge.
Our  profession  has  been,  as  il  ivere,  as  sheep  without  a  shep-
herd, bul  Ihe  i>(U'ious  individuals  that  conslilute  this  move-
ment so  pregnant  with  benefits  to  humanilg,  are  now  collected
for  the  first  time  into  a  Direclorg  (uul  Y ear-Book  of  Drugless
Healing,  nduch  alone  will  give  immense  weight  and  dignity
lo  Ihe  sl(U}(lii}g  of  the  individuals  mentioned  therein.

\ot  onlg  will  the  book  add  lo  the  prestige  of  the  practitioner
in  the  eges  of  his  patients,  bul  when  the  scattered  members  of
our  profession  in  every  Stale  desire  to  obtain  legislative  action
on  behalf  of  their  profession  and  themselves,  the  appeal  of
such  a  work  as  our  directory  null,  in  the  eyes  of  legislators,
g(nn  for  them  a  much  more  respectful  hearing  than  could
ol  hen  vise  be  obtained.

A'o//;.  for  the  first  linie,  the  drugless  practitioner  finds  him-
self one  of  a  vast  army  of  professional  men  cuul  women  who
(ue  employing  the  most  healthful  forces  of  nature  to  rejuve-
nate and  regenerate  the  world.  But  the  book  itself  throws  a
poiverful  tight  upon  every  phase  of  drugless  healing  and  an-
nihihdes  lime  and  distance  in  invesligating  who  is  who  in  the
rcidin  of  Drugless  Therapy.

.1  ///o.s7  sincere  effort  has  been  made  lo  obtain  the  name
<md  address  of  every  adherent  of  the  Rational  School  of  Medi-
cine ivho  practises  his  profession  within  the  United  States,
Canada  (uul  Ihe  British  Isles.  It  is  impossible  at  this  stage  of
Naturopathic  history,  nyhich  is  still  largely  in  the  making,  to
obhun  the  name  and  address  of  every  .such  practitioner. There


Inlrodiiclion  11


were  some  who,  even  when  appealed  to,  refused  to  respond  to
our  invitation,  not  understanding  the  object  of  our  work.
Many  of  even  the  most  intelligent  members  have  refused  to
advertise  their  professional  cards  in  our  pages.  But  we  can
only  attribute  these  drawbacks  to  the  fad  that  every  new  in-
stitution that  has  suddenly  dawned  upon  human  intelligence
will  find  that  a  certain  proportion  of  people  who  do  not  under-
stand the  nature  of  the  enterprise  because  the  brain  cells  that
would  appreciate  the  benefits  that  are  sought  to  be  conferred
upon  them,  are  undeveloped,  but  a  goodly  proportion  of  our
Naturopaths  have  gladly  responded  to  the  invitation  to  adver-
tise their  specialty  in  our  columns.  These,  of  course,  consti-
tute the  brightest  and  most  successful  of  our  practitioners
and  their  example  in  this  respect  should  be  followed  by  every
practitioner  whose  card  does  not  appear  in  this  book.

We  take  it  for  granted  that  every  one  of  the  forty  thousand
practitioners  of  Naturopathy  is  in  favor  of  the  enterprise
represented  by  this  Directory,  lliis  work  is  a  tool  of  his
trade  and  not  to  possess  this  book  is  a  serious  handicap  in  the
race  for  success.

Here  will  be  found  an  Index  of  by  far  the  larger  number
of  Naturopaths  in  the  country  arranged  in  Alphabetic,  Geo-
graphic and  Naturopathic  sections.  Besides  this,  there  is  a
classified  Buyers  Guide  that  gives  immediate  information  re-
garding where  you  can  find  special  supplies,  or  a  certain  ap-
paratus, or  a  certain  book  or  magazine,  its  name,  and  where
it  is  published.  The  list  of  Institutions  with  the  curriculum
of  each  will  be  found  exceedingly  useful.

Natural  healing,  that  has  drifted  so  long,  and,  by  reason  of
a  lack  of  organization,  has  been  made  for  so  many  years  the
football  of  official  medicine,  to  be  kicked  by  any  one  who
thought  fit  to  do  so,  has  now  arrived  at  such  a  pitch  of  power
that  it  has  shaken  the  old  system  of  bureaucratic  medicine  to
its  foundations.  The  professors  of  the  irrational  theories  of
life,  health  and  disease,  that  are  looking  for  victims  to  be  in-
oculated with  dangerous  drugs  and  animalized  vaccines  and
serums,  have  begun  to  fear  the  growth  of  this  young  giant  of
medical  healing  that  demands  medical  freedom,  social  justice


j2  I  iilrodiiilioii


(ind  iiiiiai  iHjhls  for  llw  iwin  hcaliiuj  syslcin  Hull  cxisls  alone
I'nr  Ihc  hcllcrnunl  and  iiplijliiuj  of  Jniindnihj.

I  nuiiil  rrt'iii  I'rojCssor  of  Dnifjlcss  Thcnipij  lo  become  nuj
iritiul  and  co-worker  in  Ihc  ureal  cause  lo  which  we  are  com-
inilled.  and  Ihosc  ndiosc  names  are  nol  recorded  in  Ihis  book
should  send  I  hem  In  me  wilhoul  delay.  J I  will  be  of  far  grealer
inlcrest  mid  ralue  lo  IhemseliH's  lo  have  Iheir  professional
C(U(l  included  (unonijsl  those  who  adverlise  wilh  us  than  the
ftiv  dtdhus  Ihal  such  advcrliscnicnl  costs.,

II  null  be  noted  that  there  are  quite  a  number  of  Drugtess
lltuders  beloiujimj  lo  foreign  countries  {parlicutarly  those  of
tin'  Western  Hemisphere)  represented  in  this  Directory.  The
firofcssion  of  medicine  is  nol  confined  lo  any  race,  country,
(time  or  religion.  It  is  a  uniner.sal  profession  and  demands
nnirersid  recognition.  It  witt  he  a  great  honor  lo  the  Direc-
tory, as  welt  as  to  llw  X(duropathic  profession  at  targe  to  have
every  Wduropcdhic  practitioner,  from  the  Arctic  Circle  to  the
furllu'st  limits  of  Pcdagonia,  represented  in  the  pages  of  this
immense  and  most  helpful  work.

I  e.ipect  that  the  Directory  for  the  year  1920  witt  be  larger
iUid  even  more  important  than  the  present  Directory  and  that
it  null  contiun  the  ncunes  of  thousands  of  practitioners  that
(ue  not  included  in  the  present  u^ork.

Tin-  pubticidion  of  this  Directory  wilt  aid  in  abolishing
wludever  evils  of  sectariiuiism,  narrow-mindedness  and  lack
of  loyidly  to  the  cause  to  which  we  are  devoted,  that  may  exist.
Tlud  it  witt  promote  a  fraternal  spirit  among  alt  exponents
of  ntdnrat  lieiding.  and  create  an  increase  of  their  prestige  and
jxiwer  to  resist  tl\e  encroachments  of  official  medicine  on
their  eonslitntionat  rights  of  liberty  (uut  the  pursuit  of  happi-
ness, by  fiuutrably  influencing  Legislators,  Law  courts,  City
Councils  (U]d  Hoards  of  Health  everywhere,  is  the  sincere  be-
lief of  the  editor  imd  pnbtislier.


tUuversitl  N(tlurop(ilhic  Dircclonj  <ind  Biu/ns'  (iiiidc  13

The  PRINCIPLES,  AIM  a«</PROGRAM
of  the  NATURE  CURE  SYSTEM

Hi]  Dh.  Rhnhdict  List

SINCE  the  earliest  ages,  Medical  Science  has  been  of  all  sciences  the
most  unscientific.  Its  professors,  with  few  exceptions,  have  sought
to  cure  disease  by  the  magic  ot"  pills  and  potions  and  poisons  that
attacked  the  ailment  with  the  idea  of  suppressing  the  symptoms  instead
of  attacking  the  real  cause  of  the  ailment.

Medical  science  has  always  believed  in  the  superstition  that  the  use  of
chemical  substances  which  are  harmful  and  destructive  to  human  life
will  prove  an  eflicicnt  substitute  for  the  violation  of  laws,  and  in  this
way  encourages  the  belief  that  a  man  may  go  the  limit  in  self  indulgence
that  weaken  and  destroy  his  physical  system,  and  then  hope  to  be  ab-
solved from  his  physical  ailments  by  swallowing  a  few  pills,  or  submit-
ting to  an  injection  of  a  serum  or  vaccine,  that  are  supposed  to  act  as
vicarious  redeemers  of  the  physical  organism  and  counteract  life-long
practices  that  are  poisonous  and  wholly  destructive  to  the  patient's
well-being.

From  the  earliest  ages  to  the  present  time,  the  priests  of  medicine  have
discovered  that  it  is  ten  times  easier  to  obtain  ten  dollars  from  a  man  by
acting  upon  his  superstition,  than  it  is  to  extract  one  dollar  from  him,  by
appealing  to  reason  and  common  sense.  Having  this  key  to  a  gold  mine
within  their  grasp,  we  find  ofticial  medicine  indulging  at  all  times  in  the
most  blatant,  outrageous,  freakish  and  unscientific  methods  of  curing
disease,  because  the  methods  were  in  harmony  with  the  medical  prestige
of  the  physician.

Away  back  in  pre-historic  times,  disease  was  regarded  as  a  demon  to
be  exorcised  from  its  victim,  and  the  medicine  man  of  his  tribe  belabor-
ed the  body  of  his  patient  with  a  bag  in  which  rattled  bones  and  feathers,
and  no  doubt  in  extreme  cases  the  tremendous  faith  in  this  process  of
cure  that  was  engendered  in  the  mind  of  the  patient  really  cured  some
ailments  for  which  mental  science  and  not  the  bag  of  bones  and  feathers
should  be  given  credit.

Coming  down  to  the  middle  ages,  the  Witches'  Broth — one  ingredient
of  which  was  the  blood  of  a  child  murderer  drawn  in  the  dark  of  the
moon — was  sworn  to,  by  official  medicine,  as  a  remedy  for  evei^  disease.

In  a  later  period,  the  docteiir  a  la  mode,  between  his  taking  pinches  of
snuff  from  a  gold  snuff  box,  would  order  the  patient  bled  as  a  remedy
for  what  he  denominated  spirits,  vapors,  megrims,  or  miasms.

Following  this  pseudo-scientific  diagnosis  and  method  of  cure,  came
the  drugging  phase  in  which  symptoms  of  disease  were  unmercifully
attacked  by  all  kinds  of  drugs,  alkalis,  acids  and  poisons  which  were


1 1


I'liii't'isdl  \(iluri>i)iilliic  Dircclory  and  Ihuids'  (iiu'ilr


Vincent  Priessnitz,  of  Graefenberg,  Silesia.  Founder  of  Hydropatliy.  Born
Octolicr  4th,  1799.  A  pioneer  Naturopath,  persecuted  by  the  medical  au-
thorities of  his  day,  and  convicted  of  using  Witchcraft,  because  lie  cured
his  patients  by  the  use  of  water,  air,  diet  and  exercise.  He  took  his  patients
back  to  Nature — to  the  woods,  the  streams,  the  open  fields — treated  them
with  Nature's  own  forces  and  fed  them  on  natural  foods.  His  fame  spread
over  the  whole  of  Kurope,  and  even  to  America.  His  cured  patients  were
numbered  by  the  thousands.  The  Priessnitz  compress  or  bandage  is  in
medical  literature.  Priessnitz  is  no  more,  but  his  spirit  lives  in  every  true
Naturopath.


Universal  Naturopathic  Director ij  and  Buyers'  Guide  15

supposed,  that  by  s-'focaling  the  symptoms  of  disease,  by  smothering
their  destructive  energ3%  to  tluis  enhance  the  vitalit}'^  of  the  individual.
All  these  cures  have  had  their  incei)ti()n,  their  period  of  extensive  ap-
l)lication,  and  their  certain  desuetude.  The  contemporary  fashion  of
healing  disease  is  that  of  serums,  inoculations  and  vaccines,  which,  in-
stead of  being  an  improvement  on  the  fake  medicines  of  former  ages  are
of  no  value  in  the  cure  of  disease,  but  on  the  contrary  introduce  lesions
into  the  human  body  of  the  most  distressing  and  deadly  import.

The  policy  of  expediency  is  at  the  basis  of  medical  drug  healing.  11
is  along  the  lines  of  self-indulgence,  indiflerence,  ignorance  and  lack  of
self-control  that  drug  medicine  lives,  moves  and  has  its  being.  The
sleeping  swineries  of  nuinkind  are  wholly  exploited  by  a  system  of
medical  treatment,  founded  on  poisonous  and  revolting  i)rodiicts,  whose
chemical  composition  and  whose  mode  of  attacking  disease,  are  equally
unknown  to  their  originators,  and  this  is  called  "scientific  medicine."

Like  the  alchemist  of  old  who  circulated  the  false  belief  that  he  could
transmute  the  baser  metals  into  gold,  in  like  manner  the  vivisector
claims  that  he  can  coin  the  agony  of  animals  into  cures  for  human  dis-
ease. He  insists  on  cursing  animals  that  he  may  bless  mankind  with
such  curses.

To  understand  how  revolting  these  products  are,  let  us  just  refer  to
the  vaccine  matter  which  is  supposed  to  be  an  efficient  preventive  of
smallpox.  Who  would  be  fool  enough  to  swallow  the  putrid  pus  and
corruption  scraped  from  the  foulest  sores  of  smallpox  that  has  been
implanted  in  the  body  of  a  calf?  Even  if  any  one  would  be  fool  enough
to  drink  so  atrocious  a  substance,  its  danger  might  be  neutralized  by  the
digestive  juices  of  the  intestinal  tract.  But  it  is  a  far  greater  danger  to
the  organism  when  inoculated  into  the  blood  and  tissues  direct,  where
no  digestive  substances  can  possibly  neutralize  its  poison.

The  natural  system  for  curing  disease  is  based  on  a  return  to  nature
in  regulating  the  diet,  breathing,  exercising,  bathing  and  the  employ-
ment of  various  forces  to  eliminate  the  poisonous  products  in  the
system,  and  so  raise  the  vitality  of  the  patient  to  a  proper  standard  of
health.

Official  medicine  has  in  all  ages  simply  attacked  the  symptoms  of
disease  without  paying  any  attention  to  the  causes  thereof,  but  natural
healing  is  concerned  far  more  with  removing  the  causes  of  disease,  than
merely  curing  its  symptoms.  This  is  the  g\ory  of  this  new  school  of
medicine  that  it  cures  by  removing  the  causes  of  the  ailment,  and  is  the
only  rational  method  of  practising  medicine.  It  begins  its  cures  by
avoiding  the  uses  of  drugs  and  hence  is  styled  the  system  of  drugless
healing.  It  came  first  into  vogue  in  Germany  and  its  most  famous  ex-
ponents in  that  counti*y  were  Priessnitz,  Schroth,  Kuhne,  Kneipp,  Rickli,
Lahmann,  Just,  Ehret,  Engelhardt,  and  others.


I'niioTsiil  \<iliir(>i'(illiif  lUrcrloni  and  liiuicrs'  (iuidc


Vnivcrsal  Xdlurojxithic  Dircclori/  <uul  Ihmcvs (iuide  17

In  Sweden,  Lini>  and  otluTs  developed  \;ii-i()iis  syslenis  of  nucliano-
therapy  and  curative  liiyni nasties.

In  America,  Palmer  invented  CJiiiopractic;  McCormick,  Ophllial-
mology.  Still  originated  Osteopathy;  Weltmei',  suggestive  Therapeutics.
Lindlahr  comhined  the  essentials  of  various  natural  methods,  while  Kel-
logg, Tilden,  Schultz,  Trail,  Lust,  Lahn,  Arnokl,  Strueli,  Havard,  Davis,
Jackson,  Walters,  Deininger,  Tyrrell,  Collins  and  others,  have  each  of
them  spent  a  lifetime  in  studying  and  putting  into  piactice  the  best
ideas  of  drugless  healing  and  have  greatly  enlarged  and  enriched  the
new  school  of  medicine.


LIFE  MALTRKATEO  l',V  ALLOPATHY

The  prime  object  of  natural  healing  is  to  give  the  principle  of  life  the
line  of  least  resistance,  that  it  may  enable  man  to  possess  the  most
abundant  health.

What  is  life?

The  finite  mind  of  man  fails  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  this
mysterious  principle.  The  philosopher  says  "Life  is  the  sum  of  the
forces  that  resist  deatli,"  but  that  definition  only  increases  its  obscurity.
Life  is  a  most  precious  endowment  of  protoplasm,  of  the  various  com-
binations of  oxygen,  hydrogen,  carbon  and  nitrogen,  and  other  purely
mineral  substances  in  forming  organic  tissues.  As  Othello  says,
referring  to  Desdemona's  life,  which  he  compares  to  the  light  of  a
candle —

"If  I  quench  thee  thou  flaming  minister,
I  can  thy  former  light  restore
Should  I  repent  me;  but  once  put  out  ihij  light,
I  know  not  whence  is  that  Promethean  heat
That  can  thy  light  relume."

The  spark  of  life  tlickers  in  the  sockets  of  millions  and  is  about  to
go  out.  What  system  of  medicine  will  most  surely  restore  that  llicker-
ing  spark  to  a  steady,  burning  flame?

Will  the  system  that  employs  poisonous  vaccines,  serums  and  in-
oculations, whose  medical  value  has  to  be  supported  by  the  most  menda-
cious statements,  and  whose  i)ractitioners  are  far  more  intent  on  their
emoluments  and  fame,  than  they  are  in  the  practise  of  humanity?

The  Allopathic  system,  which  includes  nine-tenths  of  all  medical
practitioners,  is  known  by  its  fruits,  but  it  is  an  appalling  fact  that  infant
mortality,  insanity,  heart  disease,  arteriosclerosis,  cancer,  debility,  im-
poverished constitutions,  degeneracy,  idiocy  and  ineliiciency  have
enormously  increased,  particularly  during  the  last  twenty-tive  years,
that  is,  during  the  regime  of  inoculations,  serums  and  vaccines.


IS


I  iiii'i-rsiil  .\<iltin>i>(illti<'  hircilon/  and  nin/crs'  (iuidc


Father  Kneipp  called  hy  T'opc  T.co  XITI  in  IS''.^,  for  consultation  aliout  his
health.  The  only  person  to  whose  call  Father  Kneipp  responded,  which
necessitated  his  leaving  his  parish.  He  was  frequently  requested  to  attend
royalty  in  their  homes,  hut  in  every  instance  he  made  tluni  come  to  him  and
await  their  turns  in  his  reception  room  along  with  the  most  humble  of  his
patients.  Among  his  patients  were  many  members  of  imperial  and  royal
families.  The  Prince  of  Wales,  later  King  Kdward  VII,  Empress  Frederick
of  flerniaiiy.  Kmpress  Klizabeth  of  Austria.  Raron  Rothschild,  and  many
high  (lignataries  of  the  church  were  freqviently  to  be  found  taking  the  Nature
Cure  under  Father  Kneipp's  direction.  Father  Kneipp  never  charged  a  fee
for  his  advice.  The  institutions  which  were  established  in  his  name,  were
owned  by  the  town  of  Woerishofen  and  by  various  orders  of  nuns  and
brotherhoods  who  served  the  poor. F'ather  Kneipp  was  a  true  humanitarian.


Vniuevsdl  Ndliiropdllilc  Direclonj  (iiul  liiu/crs'  Guide


19


Adolf  Just,  famous  author  of  "Return  to  Nature"

and Founder of original "^'ungborn" in Tler-

many.


Dr.  Carl  Strucli,  one  of  the  first  Medical
men  in  this  covnitry  who  gave  up  medicine
and  operation  for  Xatural  Healing.  Es-
tablished in  1897  the  first  Drugless  Insti-
tute in  Chicago,  and  1906  the  now  famous
^'oimgborn  and  Nature  Cure  Institution
at McHenry, 111.


Naturopathy,  on  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  it  has  been  developed,  and
so  far  as  official  medicine  will  allow  it  to  act,  leaves  no  such  trail  of  dis-
ease, disaster  and  death  behind  it.  Natural  healing  is  emancipation
from  medical  superstition,  ignorance  and  tyranny.  It  is  the  true  Elixir
of  Life.

The  Allopaths  have  endeavored  to  cure  sick  humanity  on  the  basis  of
the  highly  erroneous  idea  that  man  can  change  the  laws  of  nature  that
govern  our  being,  and  cure  the  cause  of  disease  by  simply  ignoring  it.
To  cure  disease  by  poisoning  its  symptoms  is  medical  manslaughter.

Dr.  Schwenninger  of  Germany  says:  "We  are  suffering  under  the
curse  of  the  past  mistakes  of  our  profession.  For  thousands  of  j-ears
medical  doctors  have  been  educating  the  public  into  the  false  belief  thai
poisonous  drugs  can  give  health.  This  belief  has  become  in  the  public
mind  such  a  deep-seated  superstition,  that  those  of  us  who  know  better
and  who  would  like  to  adopt  more  sensible,  natural  methods  of  cure,
can  do  so  only  at  the  peril  of  losing  practice  and  reputation.

"The  average  medical  man  is  at  his  best  but  a  devoted  bigot  to  this
vain  school-craft,  which  we  call  the  Medical  Art  and  which  alone  in  this
age  of  science  has  made  no  perceptible  progress  since  the  days  of  its
earliest  teachers.  They  call  it  recognized  science!  Recognized  ignor-
ance !  The  science  of  to-day  is  the  ignorance  of  to-morrow.  Eveiy  year
some  bold  guess  lights  up  as  truth  to  which  but  the  year  before  the
schoolmen  of  science  w^ere  as  blind  as  moles."

And  Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes,  Professor  of  Anatomy  in  Harvard  University,


20


I  Hii'rrsdl  .Wihtropal liii-  Dircclonj  <in<l  Hiii/crs'  (iiiidc


The  late  Rev.  Albert  Stroehele,  who  was  instrumental  in  the  selection  of  the  site
for  the  "^'ungborn"  at  Butler,  N.  J.  He  was  a  regular  contributor  to  the
pages  of  the  "Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath,"  and  revised  the  manuscript
for  the  translation  of  "Return  to  Nature,"  promoted  the  Naturopathic  Ideal
by  makuig  new  friends  for  the  cause  wherever  he  went.  A  Monument  to  his
memory  and  honor  was  erected  on  the  grounds  of  the  Yungborn  in  Bu.tler,
N.  J.,  an<l  unveiled  in  the  presence  of  a  large  gathering  of  his  old  friends  on
Sept. ISth, 1916.


Universal  Naturopathic  JJireclory  and  Buyers'  Guide


21


. -^^t^^


Bird's-eye view of American "Yungborn," Butler, N. T., founded in a wilderness in 1896. Home of

American School of Naturopathy since 1915. For five years, the annual convention of the American

Naturopathic Association took place at this beautiful and ideal spot for Natural Life.


states:  "The  disgrace  of  medicine  has  been  that  colossal  system  of  self-
deception,  in  obedience  to  which  mines  have  been  emptied  of
their  cankering  minerals,  entrails  of  animals  taxed  for  their  impurities,
the  poison  bags  of  reptiles  drained  of  their  venom,  and  all  the  incon-
ceivable abominations  thus  obtained  thrust  down  the  throats  of  human
beings,  suffering  from  some  fault  of  organization,  nourishment,  or  vital
stimulation."

And  these  misguided  drug  doctors  arc  not  only  not  ashamed  of  their
work,  but  they  have  induced  subservient  legislators  to  pass  laws  that
perpetuate  the  age-long  scandal  of  allopathic  importance,  and  the  de-
generative influence  of  the  poisons,  and  to  actually  make  it  a  crime  on
the  part  of  nature  doctors  to  cure  a  man  of  his  ailment.  The  brazen
effrontery  of  these  medical  despots  has  no  limits.  They  boast  of  mak-
ing the  State  legislators  their  catspaw  in  arresting,  fining  and  imprison-
ing the  professors  of  natural  healing  for  saving  human  hfe.

Legislators  have  no  right  to  sit  in  judgment  over  the  claims  of  rival
schools  of  heahng.  They  see  tens  of  thousands  of  sick  people  go  down  to
their  graves  by  being  denied  the  cures  that  the  employers  of  nature's
forces  alone  can  give  them.  It  is  their  business  to  provide  for  the
various  schools  of  medicine  a  fair  field  and  no  favor.


22


rnii't-rsdl  WitnrojKilliic  Dirccloni  (tiiil  nm/crs'  (liiidc.


^ ■' '■'


father  Kncipp  an<l  the  Archdukes  JosL-ph  and  Francis  Ferdinand  of  Austria  walking  barefoot  in  the
new  fallen  snow,  for  liardcning  the  constitution.  The  older  Archduke  was  cured  by  Father  Kneipp  of
Bri^ht>  disease  in  1892,  and  presented  in  appreciation  of  his  great  Cure  a  Public  Park  for  150.000
florins to the town of  Woerishofen. The younger  Archduke was the heir to the crown, whose murder

precipitated the World War  in 1914.


Universal  Natiirupatliic  Direrlory  and  Biiijers'  Guide


23


This  entire  Building  of  55 Rooms  was  used  by Dr. B. Lust's  Naturopathic  In-
stitute,  Clinic  and  Hospital  and  American  School  of  Naturopathy  in New  York

City from 1907 to 1915.

A  citizen  has  an  inalienable  right  to  liberty  in  the  pursuit  of  hap-
piness. Yet  the  real  saviors  of  mankind  are  persecuted  by  the  medical
oligarchy  which  is  responsible  for  compulsory  vaccination,  compulsory
medical  inspection  of  public  school  children,  and  the  demands  for  State
and  Federal  departments  of  health,  all  for  the  ostensible  good  of  the
people,  but  in  reality  for  the  gain  of  the  Medical  Trust.


The  Naturopaths

The  Naturopaths  are  desirous  of  freedom  for  all  schools  of  medicine.
They  are  responsible  practitioners  who  are  wdlling  to  be  examined  by
an  impartial  council,  appointed  by  and  acting  for  the  State,  who  will
testify  to  the  life  and  character  of  everj^  drugless  physician  before  he  is
entitled  to  practise  medicine.  Not  one  invidious  discrimination  should
be  made  between  the  different  schools  of  medicine.  The  State  should
see  to  it  that  each  school  should  have  a  full  opportunity  to  do  its  best
for  the  uplifting  of  its  citizens.


24


I'liii'crsiil  Xdltti-ojKiUiic  Dircilofij  and  lUii/rrs'  (iiiidc


Unincrsdl  Ndlurojmllnc  Dircclonj  cuid  lUujcr.s'  (iuide  ^5

THE  PROGRAM  OF  NATUROPATHIC  CURE

1.  Elinu'iuilion  of  evil  Iidhils,  or  the  weeds  ol'  life,  siicli  as  over-eating,
alcoholie  drinks,  drugs,  the  use  of  tea,  coffee  and  cocoa  that  contain
poisons,  meat  eating,  improper  hours  of  living,  waste  of  vital  forces,
lowered  vitality,  sexual  and  social  aberrations,  worry,  etc.

2.  Corrective  Habits.  Correct  breathing,  correct  exercise,  right
mental  attitude. Moderation  in  the  pursuit  of  health  and  wealth.

3.  New  Principles  of  Living.  Proper  fasting,  selection  of  food,  hydro-
pathy, light  and  air  baths,  mud  ])aths,  osteopathy,  chiropractic  and
other  forms  of  mechano-therapy,  mineral  salts  obtained  in  organic
form,  electropathy,  heliopathy,  steam  or  Turkish  baths,  sitz  baths,  etc.

Natm'al  healing  is  the  most  desirable  factor  in  the  regeneration  of  the
race.  It  is  a  return  to  nature  in  methods  of  living  and  treatment.  It
makes  use  of  the  elementary  forces  of  nature,  of  chemical  selection  of
foods  that  will  constitute  a  correct  medical  dietary.  The  diet  of  civilized
man  is  devitalized,  is  poor  in  essential  organic  salts.  The  fact  that  foods
are  cooked  in  so  many  ways  and  are  salted,  spiced,  sweetened  and  other-
wise made  attractive  to  the  palate,  induces  people  to  over-eat,  and  over
eating  does  more  harm  than  under  feeding.  High  proteid  food  and  lazy
habits  are  the  cause  of  cancer,  Bright's  disease,  rheumatism  and  the
poisons  of  auto-intoxication.

There  is  really  but  one  healing  force  in  existence  and  that  is  Nature
herself,  which  means  the  inherent  restorative  power  of  the  organism  to
overcome  disease.  Now  the  question  is,  can  this  power  be  appro-
priated and  guided  more  readily  by  extrinsic  or  intrinsic  methods?  That
is  to  say,  is  it  more  amenable  to  combat  disease  by  irritating  drugs,  vac-
cines and  serums  employed  by  superstitious  moderns,  or  by  the  bland
intrinsic  congenial  forces  of  Natural  Therapeutics,  that  are  employed  by
this  new  school  of  medicine,  that  is  Naturopathy,  which  is  the  only
orthodox  school  of  medicine?  Are  not  these  natural  forces  much  more
orthodox  than  the  artificial  resources  of  the  druggist?  The  practical
application  of  these  natural  agencies,  duly  suited  to  the  individual  case,
are  true  signs  that  the  art  of  healing  has  been  elaborated  by  the  aid  of
absolutely  harmless,  congenial  treatments,  under  whose  ministrations
the  death  rate  is  but  five  per  cent,  of  persons  treated  as  compared  ^^^th
fifty  per  cent,  under  the  present  allopathic  methods.


2(;


I'liiix-itidl  Snhn(>i><tUiic  Divcclonj  (IIkI  Hin/ci.s'  (iiiidc


Prof.  !■".  K.  Rilz.  Tliat  real  physicians  are  horn,  not
made,  is  well  illustrated  in  the  ease  of  Dr.  Bilz,  who
achieved  his  first  success  in  healing  as  a  lay  practi-
tioner. As  a  mark  of  gratitude,  a  wealthy  patient
presented  him  with  land  and  a  castle  on  wliicli  to
found  a  .Nature  C"ure  Sanitarium.  The  medical  pro-
fession apparently  is  not  as  watchful  in  Europe  as  it
is  in  America,  and  wealthy  i)atients  possibly  not  so
much  concerned  about  leaving  monuments  to  their
names  as  they  are  interested  in  promoting  good  works.
America  suffers  the  disgrace  of  not  having  one  wealthy
patron  of  Xatural  Healing,  while  the  state  and  Fed-
eral governments  have  actually  hindered  the  advance-
ment of  the  worthy  science.  They  not  oidy  have  refused
a  helping  hand,  but  in  most  cases  have  turned  a  deaf
ear  to  all  supi)Iications.  The  Bilz  institution  at
Drcsjen-Radcbeul,  (ierinany,  became  world-renowned
and  was  long  considered  the  center  of  the  Nature  Cure
movement.  Prof.  Bilz  is  tlie  author  of  the  first  Nat
uropathic  Kncyclopaedia,  "The  Natural  Method  of  Heal-
ing," which  has  been  translated  into  a  dozen  lan-
guages, and  in  German  alone  has  run  into  one  hundrcil
and  fifty  editions.  He  has  written  many  works  on
Nature  Cure  and  Natural  Life,  among  them  being
"The  Future  State,"  in  which  he  predicted  the  present
world  war,  and  advocated  a  Federation  of  Nations  as
the only logical solution of international problems.


Dr.  Katz.  As  Surgeon-in-Chief  of  the
Prussian  Army  during  the  Franco- Prussian
war,  Dr.  Katz  learned  a  thing  or  two
regarding  the  treatment  of  wounds.  He
became  convinced,  through  witnessing  re-
sults, that  antiseptics  were  more  damaging
than  they  were  of  benefit.  (It  has  taken
another  war  to  prove  this  fact  to  a  men
tally  dense  and  hide  bound  profession.  .\
normal  salt  solution  is  now  considered  the
best  cleanser  and  dressing  for  wounds.
Nature  Cure  has  advocated  this  for  many,
many  years.)  Dr.  Katz  knowing  at  tin-
time  that  it  meant  professional  and  social
Ostracism,  was  big  enough,  liroad  enough
to  forsake  convention  and  follow  his  con
victions.  He  became  a  staunch  advocate
and  practitioner  of  Natural  Healing.  He
foun<led  a  Nature  Cure  Sanitarium  at  Hoe-
henwaldau-Degerloch,  near  Stuttgart,  Ger-
many, of  which  he  continued  as  director
until  his  death.


Universal  Natnropat/nc  Dircvlonj  and  Ihujcrs'  (inide


27


Dr.  H.  Lahmann.  When  the  University  of  Leipzig
expelled  H.  Lahmann  for  spreading  medical  sedition
among  the  students,  it  added  a  staunch  advocate  to
Natural  Healing.  Dr.  Lahmann  finished  his  medical
education  in  Switzerland  and  returned  to  Germany  to
refute  in  practice  the  false  ideas  of  medical  science.
He  later  founded  the  largest  Nature  Cure  institution
in  the  world  at  VVeisser  Hirsch,  near  Dresden,  Saxony.
He  was  a  strong  heliever  in  the  "Light  and  Air'"  cure
and  constructed  the  first  appliances  for  the  adminis-
tration of  electric  light  treatment  and  baths.  He  was
the  author  of  several  books  on  Diet,  Nature  Cure  and
Heliotherapy.  His  works  on  diet  are  authoritative  and
his  "nutritive  salts  theory"  forms  the  basis  of  rational
dietetic  treatment.  This  work  has  but  recently  come
to  light  in  America  and  pnjgressive  dieticians  are
forsaking  their  old,  worn-out,  high  protein,  chemical  and
caloric  theories  for  the  "organic  salts  theory."  Carque,
Lindlahr,  McCann,  and  other  wide  awake  Food  Scien-
tists have  adopted  it  as  the  basis  of  their  work.  Dr.
Lahmann  was  a  medical  nihilist.  He  denounced  med-
icine as  unscientific  and  entirely  experimental  in  its
practice  and  lived  to  prove  the  saneness  of  his  ideas
as evidenced by his thousands of cured patients.


Louis  Kuhne  wrote,  in  1S6L  the  "New
.Science  of  Healing,"  the  greatest  work
of  Basic  Principles  in  rational  Healing.
His  renowned  work  constitutes  the  only
true  Scientific  Philosophy  for  the  ap-
plication of  all  Drugless  Methods.  He
was  the  first  to  give  to  the  world  a  com-
prehensible idea  of  pathology  and  the  first
to  proclaim  the  doctrine  of  the  "unity  of
disease"  and  the  "unity  of  cure."  His
book  "Facial  Fxpression"  gives  the  means
of  diagnosing  a  patient's  pathological  con-
dition and  determining  the  amount  and
location  of  the  systemic  encumbrance.  He
is  the  founilcr  and  first  Master  of  Naturo-
pathy.


28


(  nircrsdl  Salnntpulhif  Dircclonj  und  nui/crs'  (iitidc


The Editor  in a crowd at Dr. RaiiniKarten's lecture in Wocrishofen in 1907. Dr. Baumgarten, medical
Successor to Fatlicr Kneipp, holds a boy in the foreground.


former  Secretary  and  Lay  Successor  to  Fatlur  Kneipp
He  ministers  in  the  same  humanitarian  spirit  to  the
■  poor  as  Father  Kneipp  did,  and  is  a  most  worthy  man
pp's seat in the Consuling Room of the principal


Kneipp Institution. Kev. Reily completed Fatlur Kneipp's great work,
"Das grosse KncippBuch,"' as ordered before his death.


Universal  Naliiropalhic  Direr  lory  and  Ihujrrs'  (iiiide


29


Home of American "School of Naturopathy" and

Dr.  B.  Lust's  Naturopathic  Sanitarium  in  New  York

Citv  from  1896  to  1907


30  I 'nt'pcrsdl  .\(iluroi)<illiic  Dirccloi'ij  mid  lUnjcrs'  (iuidc


Uiiiix'i'sal  N(ilur<)p<illiic  Dircclonj  (iiul  lUiijcrs'  (iiiidr  '51


4

^

n

1  ^  1^

s


^^^^H

A^^

H


^^^K

f^i3i

r

^^^1

^^v

^

^^^H


a«

L

-o^  . 7  j^^^^^^^^^^^l

(m

1

■H

B

/  ^"l^^l

HH

viJpQ^K^

1  ^y^

TJI^  ^^H^^^H

I^^^IS'


ii^^^i^tf


dli

m

HL'  ^'' )^^^H^|

^^B

^1

IM^^I


.>i#»'^ -.  "^QBI

^■■^B


<1<>^

.-*^H

HUF^^I


^w/'-' ^■M[

HH

I^^IhhI

i^^^Hm

1

L^^^^

Q


T2


I  lu'prrsdl  XdliirapdUiic  Dirrclorij  and  Hiu/crs'  Guide


■  IBE  V  ., lyi


■  if

^^B|j^^rv  '/moG

^■I^H^^H

■  ^  ■  -

^^^K  .fl^-t^KiBte' B^^^^^^^^B

'  1  •,  -' .


*,^  €-5r-  *

»  4< ■'

»- '"'^f^'-^v;^

BSitt^^

L^i

r  ■  *'i

■;,; p-'^-J' Ir,^,,,  '

1  ■-v'<'

L.r  1

fiito^  .f^^^r^i^  i

FIP

^^i^

-.'#!* ,^ f

'

I /'lfc|R>'  ^f

1 •

^r  £iS!SjiV ^i^^^F ^TT-.-^^BW^^^^^^B

1

,4

^  '^'^••JR^  4'


\ ^ ^

•»

••

<jm

i

Universal  Naliiropalhic  Directory  and  Ihujers'  Guide


33


HOW  I  BECAME  ACQUAINTED  WITH
NATURE  CURE

By  HENRY  LINDLAHR,  M.  D.,  N. D.


Dr.  Henry  Lindlahr


In  our  halcyon  days  of  youthful
vigor,  we  are  apt  to  look  upon  health
culture,  mind  culture,  and  higher  phil-
osophy with  contempt  and  derision ;
but  suffering  is  the  great  awakener,  re-
vealer  and  teacher.  So  long  as  we  are
prosperous,  and  suffering  does  not
overtake  us,  we  are  content  to  jog
along  in  the  old  ruts,  and  to  live  in
"the  good  old  ways"  to  the  very  limits
of  Nature's  endurance.

In  my  youth  I  learned  the  ten  com-
mandments, but  neither  in  church,
school  nor  college  had  I  been  taught
that  there  is  a  decalogue  and  a  mor-
ality of  the  physical,  as  well  as  of  the
spiritual.

Left  in  total  ignorance  of  the  laws
of  natural  living,  and  following  the
example  of  friends  and  boon  compan-
ions, I  imagined  that  the  highest  phil-
osophy of  life  was  "to  have  a  good  time


while  it  lasted,"  and  "to  let  tomorrow
take  care  of  itself."

I  accepted  the  popiilar  belief  that
life  and  death,  health  and  disease,  are
largely  a  matter  of  chance,  dependent
upon  drafts,  wet  feet,  germs  and  ba-
cilli, or  upon  the  inscrutable  will  of  a
capricious  Providence.

My  friends,  the  doctors,  assured  me
that  eating  and  drinking,  and  the  use
of  tobacco,  had  little  to  do  with  our
physical  condition.  Their  advice  was,
"Eat  and  drink  what  agrees  with  you,
(that  is,  what  tastes  good  and  makes
you  feel  good)  ;  satisfy  your  physical
appetites  and  cravings  to  the  fullest
extent ;  it  is  only  natural  to  do  so.  If
you  should  get  into  trouble,  come  to
us  and  we  will  fix  you  up  all  right."
Again  the  comfortable  doctrines  of
"Do  as  you  please,"  and  of  "Vicarious
Salvation."


31


!'iiii>rrs(il  Suluropalhic  Directory  and  limjrrs'  Guide


Such  advice  is  administered  con-
stantly and  i^romiscuously  to  the  youth
of  t)ur  country,  in  private  consulta-
tions and  in  open  clinics,  by  physicians
of  g-ood  repute.

Nor  was  the  trend  of  popular  philo-
sophy conducive  to  the  strengthening
of  my  moral  fibre.  Leaders  of  mod-
ern thought,  among  them  highly  re-
spected college  professors  and  cele-
brated scientists,  boldly  applied  the
speculations  of  evolutionary  theories
to  the  origin  and  development  of  re-
ligion, of  ethics,  and  of  morality.

According  to  their  teachings,  men-
tal and  emotional  activities  are  chem-
ical reactions  of  physical  brain  and
nerve  matter;  there  have  been  all  kinds
of  forces  in  history,  except  ethical
forces ;  ethics  and  morality  grow  out
of  customs,  and  are  not  antecedent  to
them ;  moral  standards  are  all  a  mat-
ter of  evolution,  custom  and  expedi-
ency, and  subject  to  changes,  like  fa-
shions in  hats  and  dresses ;  ethical  and
moral  notions  are  mere  figments  of
speculation  a  n  d  unrealities  which
should  be  discarded,  the  sooner  the
quicker.

"Common  sense"  business  men  told
me  their  highest  principle  was:  "Do
the  other  fellow  lest  he  do  you."

As  a  result  of  these  teachings  and
examples  of  personal  irresponsibility,
and  of  ethical  and  moral  nihilism,
chaos  filled  my  miind  and  soul.  I  did
not  known  what  to  believe,  or  what
to  disbelieve,  and  as  a  natural  result
did  not  care  how  I  lived ;  my  only  con-
cern was  the  gratification  of  my  phys-
ical appetites  and  of  my  desires  for  di-
version and  amusement.

The  first  part  of  my  life,  up  to  the
age  of  manly  maturity,  was  a  sort  of
experiment  to  see  how  far  L  could  go
in  the  violation  of  the  rules  of  whole-
some living,  without  suffering  im-
mediately and  drastically  Nature's
penalties.

Finally,  however,  I  reached  the  li-
mits of  Nature's  endurance,  and  began
to  suffer  greatly  from  the  natural  re-
sults of  my  ignorance  and  foolishness.

Following  the  advice  of  my  friends,


the  doctors,  I  sought  relief  and  cure
in  drugging,  and  consulted  many  phy-
sicians, but  their  pills  and  potions,  at
best,  only  gave  temporary  relief.  At
the  age  of  thirty-five  I  was  a  physical
and  mental  wreck,  without  faith  in
(jod,  in  Nature,  or  in  myself.  Many
times  the  desire  to  end  my  misery  by
suicide  threatened  to  overwhelm  me.
The  terror  of  it  all  was  my  utter  ignor-
ance and  helplessness.  I  failed  to  see
clearly  the  causes  of  my  troubles,  and
much  less  the  way  out  of  them.  How-
ever, the  darkest  hours  are  those  be-
fore the  dawn.


The  Unity  of  Disease  and  Cure

One  day  I  confided  my  deplorable
condition  to  a  visiting  friend.  He
brought  me  a  book,  saying  that  its  pe-
rusal might  do  me  some  good.  It  was
one  of  the  first  books  published  deal-
ing with  the  laws  of  natural  living  and
healing.  The  book  was  written  by
one  of  the  pioneers  of  Nature  Cure,  a
humble  weaver  by  profession.  In  sim-
ple language,  but  convincing  reason-
ing, it  brought  out  the  fact  that  all  dis-
ease, barring  accidents  and  surround-
ings hostile  to  human  life,  is  due  to  vio-
lation of  Nature's  laws  in  our  common
habits  of  living ;  and  that,  therefore,  the
fundamental  principle  of  true  healing
must  consist  in  a  return  to  natural
habits  of  living.

The  author  demonstrated  for  the
first  time  in  medical  literature,  the  un-
ity of  disease,  showing  that  all  disease
in  the  final  analysis  is  due  to  a  few
primary  causes :  namely,  to  the  accu-
mulation of  effete  matter  and  poisons
in  the  organism ;  that  this  morbid  soil
is  the  breeder  of  germs  and  bacilli,  and
that  waste  matter  clogging  the  cells
and  tissues  of  the  body  becomes  the
cause  of  lowered  vitality  by  ob-
structing the  flow  of  blood  and
nerve  currents,  and  by  hindering
the  vibratory  activities  of  the  cells,
its  molecules  and  atoms.  From  these
premises  he  reasoned  that  the  primary
principle  in  true  healing  must  be  the
elimination  of  waste  and  foreign  mat-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


35


ter  from  the  system  throtig-h  natural
methods  of  hving-  and  of  treatment;
that  poisoning-  and  mutilating  the  hu-
man organism  cannot  be  conducive  to
good  health.

His  simple  means  of  cure  consisted
in  pure  food  diet,  free  from  the  morbid
matter  of  the  animal  carcass,  hydro-
pathic treatment,  air  and  sun  baths,
massage  and  systematic  exercise.

When  I  read  the  book,  it  seemed  to
me  as  though  a  great  light  was  rising
before  me  and  illuminating  my  dark-
ened consciousness.  For  the  first  time
in  my  life  I  realized  that  the  processes
of  life  and  death,  of  health,  disease  and
cure,  are  subject  to  the  workings  of
natural  laws,  as  definite  and  exact  as
the  laws  of  gravitation  and  of  chem'-
ical  affinity  ;  that  there  was  a  decalogue
and  a  morality  of  the  physical  as  well
as  of  the  spiritual,  and  that  if  I  faith-
fully complied  with  the  laws  of  my
physical  nature,  there  was  hope  of  re-
generation and  of  the  recovery  of
health,  physically,  mentally  and  spir-
itually.

I  read  through  the  night  and  into
the  morning  hours,  until  I  had  ab-
sorbed the  contents  of  the  book,  and
the  next  morning  in  the  bathroom  and
at  the  breakfast  table  I  began  the  prac-
tice of  the  natural  regime,  and  carried
it  out  from  that  time  on  to  the  best
of  my  ability.

The  results  were  most  gratifying.
There  were  ups  and  downs  and  healing
crises,  but  all  along,  to  my  great  joy,
there  was  steady  improvement  in  all
symptoms.  The  satisfaction  and  hap-
piness this  gave  me  were  indescrib-
able. They  were  caused  not  only  by
the  consciousness  that  I  was  working
out  my  own  salvation  through  my  own
knowledge  and  my  own  personal  ef-
forts, but  also  by  the  stirring  realiza-
tion that  I  had  arisen  out  of  utter  ig-
norance and  helplessness,  and  had  be-
come independent  of  the  quacks  of
philosophy,  priestcraft  and  medicine ;
that  from  that  time  on  I  was  master
of  my  fate.

I  had  at  last  sensed  the  great  funda-
mental fact  of  human  life  and  action,


that  knowledge  of  natural  lav/s  and
conscious  and  voluntary  co-operation
with  these  laws  are  the  master  keys
to  all  higher  development  above  the
purely  animal  plane  of  being,  and  that
on  the  same  basis  of  truth  and  law  only
can  the  human  race  at  large  work  out
its  vaster  and  more  complex  problems.

I  recognized  the  unity  of  disease  and
cure,  not  only  in  the  physical  body  but
also  in  the  social  and  political  body.
I  saw  that  in  the  final  analysis  all  that
which  we  call  sin,  disease,  suffering  or
evil,  is  identical  in  origin  and  nature;
that  all  of  these  abnormal  and  undesir-
able conditions  are  due  to  violations  of
Nature's  laws,  and  that  therefore  the
only  possible,  permanent  cure  there
can  be,  lies  in  a  return  to  Nature,  and
in  compliance  with  her  fundamental
laws  and  principles.


My Experiences in German Sanitar-
iums and  Schools  for  Nature  Cure

While  the  home  regime  of  natural
living  brought  about  considerable  im-
provement in  my  physical  health,  it
was  not  sufficient  to  cure  entirely  the
deep-seated,  chronic  ailments  from
which  I  was  suffering.  The  same  was
true  of  my  wife.  For  years  before  our
marriage  she  had  been  a  chronic  in-
valid. After  our  marriage  she  was  re-
jected as  a  risk  by  the  New  York  Life
Insurance  Company,  on  the  grounds
of  Bright's  Disease.  At  our  last  inter-
view, the  examining  physician  of  the
company  told  me  that  it  was  no  use
to  try  again  ;  that  she  was  incurable.
At  that  time  I  had  already  become  ac-
quainted with  Nature  Cure,  and  said
to  the  doctor,  "You  will  take  her  with-
in two  years."  To  this  he  smilingly
replied,  "Never!  Once  albumin,  al-
ways albumin."  I  surely  made  him  re-
tract his  statement,  for  after  our  so-
journ in  Germany  and  another  year  of
natural  living,  there  was  not  a  trace  of
albumin,  and  the  New  York  Life  In-
surance Company  accepted  her  as  a
risk  without  hesitation.  I  may  add
here  that  ever  since  she  has  enjoyed
perfect  health.


36


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


About  six  months  after  I  first  be-
came acquainted  with  Nature  Cure
philosophy.  I  sold  all  my  possessions
and  business  interests,  and  with  my
family  departed  for  Germany,  partly
for  a  visit  to  my  wife's  parents,  but
principally  to  seek  treatment  for  both
of  us  in  the  Nature  Cure  Sanifariums.
We  intended  to  remain  in  Europe
about, three  months,  but  in  the  mean-
time I  became  so  enthusiastic  over  the
improvement  we  experienced,  and  the
wonderful  things  I  learned  about  Na-
ture Cure  that  I  lost  interest  in  every-
thing else.  I  realized  that  purely  com-
mercial pursuits,  no  matter  how  re-
munerative, could  never  again  satis-
fy my  mind  and  soul ;  the  gratification
to  be  found  in  money-making  had  lost
its  charm.  Higher  and  finer  ideals  had
taken  its  place.  I  had  sensed  the  law
of  service  which  ordains  that  we  can
achieve  self-content  and  happiness
only  as  we  make  others  happy.  "Free-
ly ye  have  received,  freely  give."  In
compliance  with  this  injunction  of  the
Master.  I  concluded  to  take  up  Nature
Cure  as  my  life  work.  Instead  of  three
months.  I  spent  a  full  year  in  Nature
Cure  schools  and  sanitariums,  partly
for  study,  partly  for  treatment.  At  the
end  of  this,  the  first  really  happy  year
of  my  life,  I  returned  to  this  country,
and  took  up  the  study  of  osteopathy
and  medicine.

After  I  had  obtained  my  license  as
osteopathic  physician,  I  continued  the
study  of  medicine,  while  practicing  the
natural  methods  of  treatment  in  my
leisure  hours.

In  that  way.  I  had  the  opportunity
to  compare  the  results  of  my  own  work
with  those  obtained  by  medical  and
surgical  treatment  in  the  clinics  and
hospitals  of  the  medical  schools  which
I  attended.

In  the  classrooms  and  the  clinic  I
listened  with  two  ears,  and  saw  with
two  eyes.  I  mean  by  this  figure  of
speech  that  all  I  heard  and  saw  had  for
me  two  meanings — the  one  intended
by  the  books  and  professors  on  the
lecture  platform,  the  other  meaning  my
own  interpretation  of  their  theories
and  practices in  the  light  of  Nature


Cure  philosophy.  I  was  the  judge  of
all  that  transpired  before  me.  Though
already  well  advanced  in  years,  and
grayhaired,  I  thoroughly  enjoyed  these
belated  school  days.  I  was  so  deeply
interested  in  studies  and  researches
that  I  would  not  have  exchanged  a
lecture  or  clinic  for  the  best  "show"
in  Chicago.  • ■•• }

Compare  my  experience  with  that  of
the  average  student  On  the  benches
of  our  great  medical  schools,  drinking
in  every  word  uttered  by  the  teachers
as  gospel  truth,  not  able  to  judge  be-
tween truth  and  error,  not  allowed  to
entertain  an  independent  opinion  of
his  own,  helplessly  swayed  by  the
power  of  suggestion.  In  four  or  five
years,  he  is  hopelessly  hypnotized  and
obsessed  by  the  one-sided  theories  of
his  schools.  This  explains  why  we
find  it  easy  to  convince  any  person  en-
dowed with  common  intelligence  and
good  sense  of  the  simple  truths  of  Na-
ture Cure,  and  why  we  find  it  impos-
sible to  change  the  dogmatic  beliefs
of  the  trained  nurse,  the  medical  stu-
dent or  the  practicing  physician.  Their
brains  are  so  stuflFed  and  confused  with
the  "theories  of  the  schools"  that  they
have  lost  the  power  of  common-sense
reasoning.  As  a  German  proverb  puts
it.  "For  the  many  trees  they  cannot
see  the  forest."

In  due  time  I  graduated  in  allopathy,
homeopathy  and  eclectic  medicine,
passed  the  examination  of  the  State
Board  of  Health  of  Illinois,  and  ob-
tained my  license  to  practice  as  allo-
pathic physician and surgeon.

During  my  search  for  health  and
knowledge  in  European  Nature  Cure
schools  and  sanitariums,  I  found  that
all  of  these  institutions  were  teaching
and  practicing  part  of  the  truth  ;  they
would  emphasize  one  or  more  of  the
natural  methods  of  living  and  of  treat-
ment, and  ignore  others  which  accord-
ing to  my  judgment  were  just  as  im-
portant. Some  of  the  things  they  did
were  all  right,  others  all  wrong.  Not
one  of  them  came  up  to  my  ideal  of  an
all-around  Nature  Cure  institution.

These  experiences  inspired  me  with
the  idea  of  founding  in  this  country  an


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


37


institution  which  should  teach  and
practice  all  that  is  good  in  natural  liv-
ing and  healing.

For  the  last  fifteen  years,  I  and
my  good  helpers  have  been  trying  out,
sifting  and  selecting  the  true  and  the
practical  from  that  which  proved  ir-
relevant, harmful  and  destructive.  We
intend  to  continue  this  process  of  nat-
ural selection  indefinitely.  It  is  thts
which  makes  Nature  Cure  the  only
evolutionary  and  truly  scientific  sys-
tem of  therapeutics  in  existence.

In  our  Nature  Cure  institutions,  rep-
resentatives of  the  allopathic,  homeo-
pathic, osteopathic,  neuropathic,  chiro-
practic and  naprapathic  schools  of
healing  work  side  by  side  with  those
who  practice  Nature  Cure,  magnetic,
mental  and  spiritual  healing,  year  in
and  year  out,  in  perfect  harmony,
without  a  shadow  of  misunderstand-
ing, jealousy  or  intolerance.  There  is
not  another  institution  on  earth  that
exemplifies  true  eclecticism  in  a  sim-
ilar way,  and  yet  Nature  Cure  has
been  accused  many  times  of  being
narrow,  prejudiced  and  ignorant  of
true  values  in  medical  treatment.  This
impression  has  arisen  because  we  draw
the  lines  at  two  things  in  therapeutic
methods,  namely,  poisonous  drugs  and
promiscuous surgical operations.

We  cheerfully  confess  that  for  good
and  valid  reasons  we  are  unalterably
opposed  to  these  treacherous  and  de-
structive enemies  of  health  and  life.
Why  should  we  not  discourage  the  use
of  these  dangerous  agents  when  the
havoc  wrought  by  them  equals  and
surpasses  the  suffering  caused  by  a
mighty  war?  What  is  the  difference
whether  tens  and  hundreds  of  thous-
ands are  killed,  maimed  and  wounded
on  the  battle  field  or  driven  into  chron-
ic invalidism,  insanity  and  premature
death  by  poisonous  drugs  or  uncalled
for  surgical  operations?

I  know  that  comparisons  like  these
call  forth  the  opprobrium  of  fanaticism
and  intolerance.  There  exists,  how-
ever, positive  proof  of  these  state-
ments, some  of  which  I  shall  produce
in  this  volume.  If  they  are  true,  why
hide the facts? Why should these


practices  fraught  with  untold  suffering
be  hidden  from  public  view  any  more
than  the  evils  of  the  liquor  traffic,  of
the  social  traffic,  of  gambling,  hypno-
tism, mediumship,  and  of  the  traffic  in
habit-forming  drugs?

If  it  is  good  and  proper  to  denounce
and  suppress  these  enemies  of  health
and  life  and  happiness,  why  ignore  or
cover  up  the  suffering  inflicted  upon
unsuspecting  humanity  by  drug  poi-
sons and  commercialized  surgery,  ad-
ministered under  the  mistaken  idea
that  these  agents  cure  disease,  when  in
reality  they  suppress  nature's  healing
efforts,  and  become  the  most  prolific
causes  of  chronic  invalidism.

Where  lies  the  greater  responsibility,
in  selling  whiskey  or  in  selling  drugs?
The  man  who  goes  to  the  bar  for  whis-
key knows  what  he  is  taking  and  what
it  will  do  to  him.  The  man  and  woman
who  walk  into  a  drug  store,  believing
that  they  are  buying  health  for  them-
selves or  their  loved  ones,  are  cruelly
deceived,  as  well  as  injured,  when  they
take  home  the  worst  and  most  destruc-
tive poisons  on  earth,  in  the  guise  of
medicines  and  tonics.

How  do  I  know  that  these  state-
ments are  not  exaggerated  and  unjust?
Because  in  our  daily  practice  we  deal
with  the  miserable  victims  of  these  de-
structive agents ;  because  we  see  in
their  eyes  the  signs  of  mercury,  iodine,
strychnine,  arsenic,  coal  tar  poisons,
"606,"  salvarsan,  etc.,  etc.;  because
with  the  signs  in  their  eyes  we  get
from  the  suflferers  the  history  of  tak-
ing these  poisons,  and  the  characteris-
tic symptoms  of  the  different  forms  of
chronic  drug  poisoning,  such  as  loco-
motor ataxia,  paralysis  agitans,  paresis,
neurasthenia,  tertiary  syphilis,  and  all
other  forms  of  chronic  diseases.

After  we  have  recognized  these  facts
in  their  full  significance,  where  lies  our
responsibility?  What  is  our  duty  in
the  matter?  Shall  we  hide  the  facts  as
we  see  them  in  order  to  be  ethical,  or-
thodox and  mindful  of  the  professional
sensibilities  of  our  colleagues,  or  is  it
our  duty  to  proclaim  the  truth,  raise  a
warning  voice  against  the  fearful  dan-
gers to  life,  health  and  happiness  which


38


I'niifcrsdl  NutnropaUiic  Directory  and  Biiijrrs'  Guide


lurk  under  these  destructive  practices
of  pseudo-science?

When  the  public  once  fully  realizes
the  dangers  of  the  drug  evil,  there  will
be  another  prohibitionary  movement
more  determined  and  more  efhcient
than  that  directed  against  the  liquor
traffic.  What  the  earnest  workers  of
the  prohibition  movement  have  done
against  the  liquor  traffic,  other  earnest
workers  must  do  against  the  drug  traf-
fic. The  first  signs  of  this  rebellion
against  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of
mankind  are  already  noticeable  in  the
daily  press,  and  in  periodical  literature,
thanks  to  the  persistent  efforts  of  the
representatives  and  followers  of  drug-
less  healing  systems.


To  Tear  Dovioi  Is  Easier  Than  to
Build  Up

What  have  we  put  in  place  of  that
which  we  condemn?  So  far  we  have
dwelt  upon  the  work  that  Nature  Cure
has  done  in  exposing  and  destroying
the  errors  of  the  past.  What,  if  any-
thing, has  it  contributed  to  healing  sci-
ence in  a  constructive  way?  What  has
it  done  to  supplant  the  old.  destructive
ideas  with  new  ideas  and  practices  of  a
more  constructive  nature?

To  this  we  make  answer  that  Nature
Cure  has  completely  revolutionized  the
sciences  of  natural  living,  of  hygiene
and  of  treating  human  ailments,  not
in  one,  but  in  a  hundred  ways.  In  the
following,  I  shall  mention  only  a  few
of  the  most  important  and  valuable
contributions  of  Nature  Cure  Philoso-
phy and  Practice  to  modern  medical
science.

First  of  all.  Nature  Cure  Philosophy
has  done  original  and  revolutionary
work  in  the  discovery  and  practical
application  of  the  fundamental  laws
and  principles  underlying  the  processes
of  health,  disease  and  cure.  Hippo-
crates, "the  Father  of  Medicine,"
taught  and  practiced  these  laws  and
methods  over  two  thousand  years  ago.
but  they  were  lost  and  buried  with
other  wisdom  of  the  Ancients  in  the
intervening  ages  of  intellectual  dark-


ness and  superstition,  until  rediscov-
ered and  revived  independently  by  the
founders  of  the  Nature  Cure  move-
ment in  Germany.

It  remained,  however,  for  the  author
of  this  volume  to  formulate  and  to  pre-
sent these  laws  in  definite  scientific
terms,  and  to  demonstrate  their  prac-
tical application  in  the  diagnosis  and
treatment  of  human  ailments.  This
fact  is  beginning  to  be  quite  generally
recognized  among  students  and  read-
ers of  health  culture  literature.

Frequently  we  receive  letters  from
readers  of  the  Nature  Cure  books  con-
taining expressions  like  the  following:

"I  have  read  practically  all  the  health
culture  literature,  old  and  new,  the
books  of  Kuhne.  Bilz.  Lahmann  and
Just,  as  well  as  the  latest  English  and
American  publications  on  the  subject,
but  I  have  never  found  anything  that
reveals  the  underlying  principles  of  life
and  health  as  your  writings  do.  They
touch  rock  bottom.  There  is  nothing
else  in  existence  that  unifies  all  the
different  systems  of  treating  diseases,
reduces  them  to  a  common  basis,  and
from  a  few  simple  principles  shows
wherein  they  are  right  or  wrong,  as
it  is  done  in  'Nature  Cure  Philosophy
and  Practice.'  "


Vital  Force

Before  we  can  understand  the  laws
and  principles  governing  the  phenom-
ena of  life  in  the  processes  of  health,
disease  and  cure,  we  must  have  the
right  conception  of  life  itself,  in  so  far
as  finite  mind  is  able  to  grasp  its  source
and  nature.  This  all-important  subject
is  treated  in  Chapter  III  of  "Nature
Cure  Philosophy  and  Practice."  At
this  place  I  will  only  call  attention  to
one  phase  of  this  subject,  which  has
been  treated  fully  in  the  "Nature  Cure
Cook  Book  and  A  B  C  of  Natural  Diet-
etics." I  refer  to  the  relationship  of
the  life  force  and  its  derivatives,  vital-
ity, strength  and  recuperative  power,
to  food  and  drink,  medicines,  tonics
and  stimulants.  On  account  of  the  im-
portance of  the  problems  involved,  I


Universal  NaturopdUiic  Direclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


39


may  be  permitted  to  quote  from  the
"Nature  Cure  Cook  Book"  some  pas-
sages relating  to  this  sul)ject.

"This  life  force,  which  flows  into  us
from  the  one  great  source  of  all  life  in
this  Universe,  from  that  which  we  call
God,  Nature,  Creative  Force,  or  Uni-
versal Intelligence,  is  the  primary
source  of  all  energy,  from  which  all
other  kinds  and  forms  of  energy  are
derived.  It  is  as  independent  of  the
body,  and  of  food  and  drink,  as  the
electric  current  is  independent  of  the
glass  bulb  and  the  carbon  thread
through  which  it  manifests  as  heat  and
light.  The  breaking  of  the  glass  bulb,
though  it  extinguishes  the  light,  does
not  in  any  way  diminish  the  amount  of
electricity  back  of  it.

"In  a  similar  manner,  if  the  physical
body  should  'fall  dead'  as  we  call  it,
the  vital  energy  would  keep  on  acting
with  undiminished  force  through  the
spiritual-material  body,  which  is  an  ex-
act duplicate  of  the  physical  body,  but
whose  material  atoms  and  molecules
are  infinitely  more  refined  and  vibrate
at  infinitely  greater  velocities  than
those  of  the  physical-material  body.

"This  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  faith
or  of  speculative  reasoning,  but  a  dem-
onstrated fact  of  Natural  Science.

"When  St.  Paul  said  (1  Cor.  15:44),
'There  is  a  natural  (physical)  body,
and  there  is  a  spiritual  body,'  he  stated
an  actual  fact  in  Nature.

"Indeed,  it  would  be  impossible  to
conceive  of  the  survival  of  the  indi-
viduality after  death  without  a  material
body  which  serves  as  the  vehicle  for
consciousness,  memory,  and  the  rea-
soning faculties,  and  as  an  instrument
for  the  physical  functions.  Without  a
body  it  would  be  impossible  for  the
soul  to  manifest  itself  to  other  souls,
or  to  communicate  with  them.

"Therefore,  if  survival  of  the  individ-
uality after  death  be  a  fact  in  Nature,
and  if  the  achievement  of  immortality
be  a  possibility,  a  spiritual-material
body  is  a  necessity.

"Someone  may  say,  'If  the  life  force
is  independent  of  the  physical  body  and
of  fcfod  and  drink,  why  do  we  have  to
eat  and  drink  to  keep  alive?'


"The  answer  to  this  is :  Food  and
drink  are  necessary  to  keep  the  organ-
ism in  the  right  condition,  so  that  vital
force  can  manifest  and  operate  through
it  to  the  best  advantage.  To  this  end,
food  is  needed  to  build  up  and  to  repair
the  tissues  of  the  body.  It  also  serves
to  a  certain  extent  as  fuel  material,
which  is  transmuted  into  animal  heat
and  vital  energy.

"It  is  true  that  during  the  processes
of  digestion  and  combustion  (breaking
down  of  food  materials),  a  certain
amount  of  animal  heat  and  vital  en-
ergy is  liberated ;  but,  as  we  pointed
out  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  this
does  not  account  for  all  the  animal  heat
and  vital  energy  expended.

"Furthermore,  just  as  coal  has  to
come  into  touch  with  fire  before  it  can
be  transmuted  into  heat,  so  the  life
force  is  needed  to  'burn  up'  or  'to  ex-
plode' the  fuel  materials.  When  'life'
has  departed,  even  large  amounts  of
sugars,  fats,  proteins,  tonics  and  stim-
ulants are  not  able  to  produce  one
spark  of  vital  energy  in  the  body.

"On  the  contrary,  digestion,  assimi-
lation and  elimination  of  food  and  drink
require  the  expenditure  of  considerable
amounts  of  vital  energy.  Therefore,
all  food  taken  in  excess  of  the  actual
needs  of  the  body,  wastes  vital  force
instead  of  giving  it.

"If  these  facts  were  more  generally
known  and  appreciated,  people  would
not  habitually  overeat,  under  the  mis-
taken idea  that  their  vitality  increases
in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  food
they  consume ;  neither  would  they  be-
lieve that  they  can  derive  'strength'
from  poisonous  stimulants  and  tonics.
They  would  not  be  so  much  afraid  of
fasting.  They  would  understand  bet-
ter the  necessity  of  fasting  in  acute
diseases  and  'healing  crises'  and  avail
themselves  more  frequently  of  this
most  effective  means  of "  purification.
They  would  no  longer  believe  them-
selves in  danger  of  dying  if  they  were
to  miss  a  few  meals."

Briefly  stated,  all  that  food  and
drink  can  do  is  to  keep  the  body  in
normal,  healthy  condition,  which  will
make possible the inflow of  the life


40


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


force  into  the  body,  and  facilitate  its
free  distribution  through  the  sympa-
thetic nervous  system  to  the  various
organs  and  to  every  individual  cell.
Anything  and  everything  in  natural
methods  of  living  and  of  treatment  that
will  help  to  build  up  the  blood  on  a
more  natural  basis,  that  will  purify  the
system  of  waste  and  morbid  matter,
that  will  correct  mechanical  lesions
and  harmonize  the  mental  and  emo-
tional conditions,  will  insure  a  greater
supply  of  life  force  and  its  derivatives,
strength,  vitality,  resisting  and  recup-
erating power.

I  have  been  asked  at  different  times
why  it  is  that  life  ceases  when  the
physical  body  is  injured,  if  the  soul  is
such  a  powerful  entity  and  independ-
ent of  the  body.  The  following  illus-
tration may  help  to  answer  the  ques-
tion. The  boiler  which  feeds  an  en-
gine may  have  a  plentiful  supply  of
steam,  but  if  vital  parts  of  the  machin-
ery are  out  of  order,  the  engine  will
not  be  able  to  run  and  to  do  its  work.

Never  before  in  any  writings  deal-
ing with  dietetics  or  food  chemistry
has  there  been  revealed  the  true  rela-
tionship between  the  Life  Force  and
food,  medicines,  tonics  and  stimulants.
Here,  also,  the  true  principles  under-
lying alimentation  and  stimulation
through  drugs  and  tonics,  hypnotic
processes,  faith,  etc.,  are  treated  in  an
original  manner,  and  certain  facts  per-
taining to  these  interesting  subjects
are  for  the  first  time  clearly  revealed
and  explained.

Fundamental  Law  of  Cure

Foremost  among  the  laws  of  cure
which  for  the  first  time  in  human
history,  as  far  as  we  know,  have  made
healing  science  an  exact  science,  is  the
Fundamental  Law  of  Cure  which  the
author  has  formulated  in  the  following
sentence:  "Every  acute  disease  is  not
destructive,  not  an  enemy  to  be
dreaded,  but  a  friend  and  helper  if
properly  treated.  This  conception  of
acute  disease  applies  not  only  to  phys-
ical ailments,  but  as  well  to  the
problem  of  evil  in  general. It  explains


and  justifies  the  Biblical  injunctions,
"Resist  not  evil,  but  overcome  evil
with  good."

In  accordance  with  this  conception
of  disease  as  a  purifying,  healing  effort,
Nature  Cure  does  not  fight  disease
with  disease-creating  agents  and  the
knife,  but  it  overcomes  disease,  or
better  still,  prevents  it,  and  makes  it
impossible  through  health-building
methods.  It  eliminates  the  causes  of
disease  by  complying  with  the  laws  of
health.  Therefore  it  has  no  use  for
poisonous  drugs,  serums,  antitoxins,
vaccines  and  surgical  mutilations
which  only  suppress  the  symptoms  of
disease,  but  do  not  remove  the  under-
lying causes.  In  place  of  suppressing
symptoms,  Nature  Cure  teaches  and
applies  the  natural  ways  of  living  and
of  treating  the  human  body  which
make  for  prevention,  and  are  therefore
truly  health  insurance.  People  buy
life,  accident,  fire,  and  many  other
kinds  of  insurance,  but  the  majority
of  them  are  not  as  yet  aware  that  the
best  and  most  valuable  insurance,
health  insurance,  can  be  secured  with-
out expenditure  of  money,  simply  by
living  up  to  nature's  laws,  governing
our  habits  of  living,  thinking  and
feeling.

The  Law  of  Crisis

Wrong  living  and  the  suppressive
treatment  of  acute  diseases  creates
chronic  conditions.  Chronic  disease
means  that  the  system,  or  rather  the
cells  and  organs  of  the  body  are  so
lowered  in  vitality  and  encumbered
with  waste  and  morbid  matter  that
they  cannot  arouse  themselves  any
longer  to  acute,  purifying  efforts.
Therefore  in  the  treatment  of  chronic
diseases  Nature  Cure  builds  up  the
blood  on  a  natural  basis  through  sci-
entific selection  and  combination  of
foods.  It  purifies  the  system  through
making  the  organs  of  elimination
more  active  and  alive.  It  corrects
mechanical  lesions  in  the  bony  struct-
ures, muscles  and  ligaments,  corrects
and  harmonizes  the  mental  proc'esses
and emotional conditions. Through


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


41


these  constructive  methods  of  living
and  of  treatment  the  organs  and  cells
of  the  body  become  pure  enough  and
vigorous  enough  to  arouse  themselves
to  acute  eliminative  efforts.  Then
they  begin  to  throw  off  the  morbid
encumbrances,  the  waste  deposits  and
poisonous  materials  into  the  venous
blood  vessels.  These  carry  the  drain-
age to  the  organs  of  depuration.  While
in  process  of  elimination  these  morbid
excretions,  the  Pathogen  of  Dr.  Powell
may  irritate  the  skin,  kidneys,  in-
testines and  mucous  membranes  to
such  an  extent  as  to  cause  inflam-
matory processes  such  as  skin  erup-
tions, diarrhoeas,  acute  catarrh,
("colds")  furuncles,  boils,  carbuncles,
abnormal  perspiration,  hemorrhages,
hemorrhoids,  fissures,  open  sores,  etc.,
etc.

From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  these
acute  forms  of  elimination,  which  the
old  school  of  medical  science  calls  dis-
eases. Nature  Cure  regards  and  treats
as  healing  crises ;  therefore,  all  natural
treatment  of  chronic  diseases  intends
to  produce  these  healing  crises,  and
their  prompt  arrival  is  the  best  proof
that  the  treatment  is  correct  and  in-
deed, in  harmony  with  the  natural
laws  of  disease  and  cure.


The  Law  of  Periodicity

Nature  Cure,  for  the  first  time  since
the  days  of  Hippocrates,  has  definitely
applied  the  law  of  periodicity  to  the
occurrence  of  healing  crises  in  chronic
diseases  under  natural  treatment.  Dr.
Buchanan,  in  his  little  book,  "Period-
icity," reveals  the  manifestation  of  this
great  law  in  "sevens"  in  many  domains
of  life  and  action,  in  the  processes  of
birth,  growth,  maturity,'  fruitage,  de-
cline and  death.  But  he  failed  to  per-
ceive its  application  to  the  develop-
ment of  healing  crises  in  chronic  cases.
In  fact,  he  was  only  very  dimly  aware
of  the  existence  and  true  meaning  of
healing  crises.

In  accordance  with  this  law  of  per-
iodicity, if  conditions  are  favorable
and the treatment is  "natural,"  the


crises  manifest  counting  from  the  be-
ginning of  natural  treatment,  on  the
sixth  day  in  the  sixth  week,  sixth
month,  sixth  year,  and  in  periods  of
seven  thereafter.


Treatment  of  Acute  Disease

Many  people  who  know  that  we  can
and  do  cure  all  kinds  of  so-called  "in-
curable," chronic  diseases,  such  as  tu-
berculosis, cancer,  tertiary  syphilis,  lo-
comotor ataxia,  infantile  paralysis,  et
cetera,  et  cetera,  seem  to  think  that
we  are  unable  to  cure  acute  diseases
such  as  measles,  scarlet  fever,  diph-
theria, etc.  Incidents  like  the  follow-
ing are  of  frequent  occurrence :  Some
time  ago  I  met  a  lady  in  a  street  car
who  had  been  one  of  our  patients.  Be-
fore she  came  to  us  she.  was  suffering
with  a  disease  of  the  lower  jawbone.
Under  surgical  treatment  the  bone  was
scraped  and  shaved  half  a  dozen  times.
But,  as  usual,  the  old  trouble  reap-
peared in  aggravated  form.  Then  the
surgeons  told  her  it  was  cancer,  and
in  order  to  prolong  her  life,  the  lower
jaw  would  have  to  be  removed  en-
tirely. Frightened  by  this  terrible'  al-
ternative, she  was  ripe  to  listen  to  Na-
ture Cure  talk  from  one  of  her  friends,
who  had  attended  my  lectures.  She
placed  herself  under  our  care  and  treat-
ment,, and  in  six  months  the  jawbone
was  sound,  after  another  three  months
she  had  false  teeth  fitted,  and  has  not
had  any  trouble  since.

When  I  made  the  usual  inquiries
after  the  health  and  the  welfare  of
her  family,  she  told  me  tearfully  that
she  herself  had  been  getting  along  fine,
but  that  she  had  lots  of  trouble  with
her  children.  One  of  them  had  been
taken  with  diphtheria.  The  child  was
getting  along  fine  until  the  attending
allopathic  physician  administered  the
diphtheria  antitoxin.  Then  within
twenty-four  hours  the  child  became
paralyzed  from  the  hips  down,  and
died  two  days  afterward.

When  I  expressed  my  astonishment
at  the  treatment,  and  asked  her  why
she  had  not  called  in  a  Nature  Cure


42


rniixTSdl  XdturojHithir  Dircctorij  and  liiii/rrs'  Guide


Dr.  Lindlahr's Health  College
(Front  View)

physician  to  treat  the  case,  she  seemed
greatly  surprised  and  said,  "Why,  Doc-
tor, I  did  not  know  that  you  could
cure  such  diseases  as  that."  The  trou-
ble with  her  was  that  she  came  to  us
for  treatment'  on  the  transient  plan,
and  had  not  had  the  opportunity  of
attendinp^  our  lectures,  nor  had  she
read  the  Nature  Cure  books ;  like  many
others,  she  did  not  know  what  cured
her,  and  therefore  had  to  suffer  again
the  penalty  of  ignorance  and  of  vio-
lation of  the  law.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  in  the  treat-
ment of  acute  diseases  that  Nature
Cure  works  its  greatest  miracles.  In
our  sanitarium  practice,  in  the  treat-
ment of  chronic  diseases,  we  cope  with
the  hardest  phases  of  the  work.  Most
of  the  sanitarium  patients  do  not  come
to  us  for  advice  and  help  until  they
are  "down  and  out" — "until  there  is
nothing  more  to  spoil,"  and  then  if
Nature  Cure  cannot  make  good  within
a  few  weeks  or  months,  they  grumble
and  complain  "because  it  is  so  slow."
I  sometimes  meet  such  complaints
with  remarks  like  the  following:  "Na-
ture Cure  is  the  fastest  cure  on  record,
because  there  is  nothing  else  that  does
cure  chronic  diseases.  It  is  the  Twen-
tieth Century  Express  in  healing.  You
just  have  the  choice  of  two  things:
either  get  cured  by  slow  Nature  Cure,
or  keep  your  chronic  disease  until  the
undertaker  finishes  the  job."

Priessnitz.  the  pioneer  of  Nature
Cure,  replied  to  one  of  these  impatient


ones,  "To  cure  you  quickly,  I  should
have  started  with  your  grandmother."
I  realized  from  the  first  that  I  could
have  acquired  greater  fame  and  more
money,  with  much  less  work  and  trou-
ble, if  I  had  confined  myself  to  the
treatment  of  acute  diseases.  The  only
reason  why  I  took  up  the  sanitarium
work,  in  spite  of  the  advice  of  my  close
relatives  and  best  friends,  was  that  I
wanted  to  demonstrate  to  suffering  hu-
manity and  to  the  medical  profession
the  possibility  of  curing  chronic  dis-
eases. I  also  wanted  the  opportun-
ity of  teaching  and  training  as  many
young  people  as  possible  in  this  great
work  of  curing  chronic  ailments.  It
has  been  a  very  slow,  arduous,  and
from  the  worldly  standpoint,  a  thank-
less work,  but  a  few  years  more  of
growth  at  the  present  rate  of  devel-
opment will  see  the  realization  of  my
ideals.


The  Unity  of  Disease  and  Cure,

as  taught  in  Nature  Cure  Philosophy,
and  practically  demonstrated  with  the
greatest  possible  efficiency  in  the  treat-
ment of  all  acute  diseases  is  undoubt-
edly the  most  valuable  contribution
of  Nature  Cure  to  medical  science.  It
marks  the  greatest  of  all  revolution-
ary advances  in  the  art  of  healing  hu-
man  ailments.

Briefly,  the  idea  of  the  Unity  of
Disease  and  Treatment  is  based  on
the  following  propositions :

Briefly,  the  idea  of  the  Unity  of  Dis-
ease and  Treatment  is  based  on  the
following  propositions :

Barring  injury  by  accident  (trauma),
and  conditions  uncongenial  to  life  and
health,  there  is  but  one  primary  cause
of  disease,  namely,  violations  of  na-
ture's laws  in  our  habits  of  living,  and
in  our  treatment  of  the  acute  diseases
resulting  therefrom.  Violation  of  na-
ture's laws  in  our  habits  of  living  re-
sults in :

(1)  Lowered  vitality.

(2)  Abnormal  composition  of  blood
and  lymph  (mainly  through  wrong
eating  and drinking).


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


43


(3)  Accumulation  of  waste,  mor-
bid matter  and  poisons  in  the  system.

(4)  Mechanical  lesions :  pressure,
tension  or  strain  on  nerves  and  nerve
centers,  caused  through  luxations  of
bony  structures,  or  straining  of  mus-
cles and  ligaments.

(5)  Abnormal,  that  is,  discordant
or  destructive  mental  and  emotional
attitude.

When  through  these  primary  causes
of  disease  the  vitality  has  become  low-
ered to  such  an  extent  that  the  mor-
bid and  poisonous  encumbrances,
(Pathogen),  begin  to  endanger  health
and  life,  then  the  organism  reacts  to
these  disease  conditions  through  acute
healing  efforts  in  the  form  of  inflam-
mation  and  fever.

These  inflammatory  processes,  if
properly  treated  and  assisted,  are
therefore  always  constructive,  that  is,
purifying  and  healing  of  nature,  al-
ways run  their  course  through  the
same  five  stages  of  inflammation,  and
if  allowed  to  do  so,  always  result  in
effecting  better  conditions  ;  that  is,  they
leave  the  system  purer  and  more  nor-
mal than  before  they  started  their
salutary  work  of  house-cleaning.

While  readers  of  Nature  Cure  read-
ily accept  in  theory  this  principle  of
the  Unity  of  Disease  and  Treatment,
they  find  difficulty  in  applying  it  prac-
tically at  the  sick  bed.  It  sometimes
happens  that  those  to  whom  "Nature
Cure  and  Practice"  has  been  sent  on
approval  return  the  book  because  no
specific  treatment  for  their  particular
disease  is  given.  They  have  failed  to
grasp  the  great  fundamental  principles
of  Nature  Cure.

The  greatest  achievement  of  "Na-
ture Cure  Philosophy  and  Practice"
lies  in  the  fact  that  it  has  reduced  the
treatment  of  acute  and  sub-acute  dis-
eases, as  well  as  of  chronic  ailments,
to  the  greatest  simplicity.

Allopathy  lists  hundreds  of  differ-
ent diseases,  each  one  to  be  treated
with  different  "specific"  drugs,  serums,
antitoxins,  vaccines  or  surgical  oper-
ations.


Dr. Lindlahr's Heahh College
(Back  View)

Compare  with  this  the  marvelous
simplicity  of  "Nature  Cure  Philoso-
phy and  Practice"  which  reduces  the
treatment  of  all  acute  and  sub-acute
diseases  to  a  few  simple  principles  and
methods.

The  truth  of  this  we  have  proved  in
daily  practice  for  15  years.  Just  think
what  this  means!  It  means  that  any-
body with  common  intelligence  and
ordinary  good  sense  can  treat  any  and
all  acute  diseases  in  a  most  efficient
way  with  the  best  possible  results,
though  he  has  never  seen  a  medical
college.

It  is  the  wonderful  simplicity  of  Na-
ture Cure  Theory  and  Practice  which
for  the  first  time  in  human  history
makes  medical  science  an  exact  science.

The  fundamental  Law  of  Cure,  the
Laws  of  Crises  and  of  Periodicity,  will
do  for  medical  science  what  the  laws
of  gravitation  and  of  chemical  affinity
have  done  for  physics,  astronomy  and
chemistry.  Before  the  discovery  of
these  natural  laws,  astronomy,  chem-
istry and  physics  were  a  mass  of  su-
perstitious beliefs  and  contradictory
opinions,  just  as  medical  science  is
today.

Therefore,  do  not  send  the  book
back  after  hasty  inspection,  under  the
impression  that  it  does  not  contain  the
solution  of  your  particular  problem,
whether  it  be  in  the  nature  of  acute
or  chronic  disease.  A  careful  reading
of  the  book  will  answer  your  questions
and  solve  your  problems.


44


I'nivrrsdl  NdlnropaUiic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  Natural  Treatment  of  Wounds
and  Open  Sores

Ever  since  the  author  pubHcly  be-
gan to  teach  and  practice  Nature
Cure,  he  has  maintained  in  his  lec-
tures and  writings  and  demonstrated
in  his  daily  practice  that  the  natural
and  most'  elhcient  treatment  for
wounds  and  open  sores  consists  in  ex-
posure to  air  and  light,  and  that  the
best  of  all  antiseptics  is  lemon  juice
diluted  with  water.

The  efficiency  of  this  treatment,
which  flatly  contradicts  the  most  firm-
ly established  doctrines  of  medical
science,  I  have  demonstrated  for  many
years  even  in  the  germ-  and  dirt-laden
air  of  Chicago.  We  have  cured  through
this  simple  treatment  many  wounds
which  under  heavy  coverings  of  anti-
septic bandages  and  under  continuous
soaking  with  poisonous  antiseptics  and
germicides  had  entered  into  advanced
stages  of  malignant,  necrotic,  degen-
erative processes.

For  many  years  I  have  been  de-
nounced as  an  ignoramus  and  a  dan-
gerous fakir,  for  thus  contradicting  and
opposing  "the  most  important  discov-
eries and  practices  of  modern  medical
science  as  to  surgical  cleanliness  and
antiseptic  treatment."  The  editor  of  a
magazine  foremost  in  the  ranks  of  sci-
entific and  philosophical  publications
in  this  country  had  to  discontinue  a
series  of  articles  from  my  pen  because
hundreds  of  protests  came  in  from  old-
school  physicians  on  account  of  my
uncompromising  stand  against  the  use
of  antiseptics,  serums  and  antitoxins
in  the  treatment  of  wounds  and  of  in-
flammatory, febrile  diseases.

But  tempora  mutantur,  et  nos  mu-
tamur  in  illis,  which  in  our  beloved
United  States  vernacular  means.
"Times  change  and  we  change  with
them."  A  few  months  ago  Chicago
dailies  announced  in  a  leading  article,
"The  Most  Recent  Wonderful  Discov-
ery of  Surgical  Science."  They  related
that,  thanks  to  the  discovery  of  a  prom-
inent surgeon  in  one  of  the  great  West
Side  hospitals,  wounds  were  now  be-
ing treated  with  uniform  success  with-


out antiseptics  and  germicidal  agents,
and  that  this  revolutionary  treatment
consisted  solely  in  exposure  of  the
wounds  to  light  and  air.  The  article
concluded  by  saying  that  such  a  re-
volutionary discovery  could  be  made
only  by  a  great  and  learned  surgeon.

Until  recently  I  was  in  danger  of
arrest  and  trial  for  malpractice  for
teaching  and  practicing  this  "recent
wonderful  discovery  of  surgical
science."

I  do  not  bring  out  these  facts  from
a  desire  for  vain  boasting,  but  in  or-
der to  point  out  the  fact  that  many
of  the  teachings  of  Nature  Cure  Phil-
osophy are  being  gradually  adopted
by  orthodox  medical  science,  which
gives  hope  that  other  Nature  Cure
ideas  and  practices  may  also  in  time
receive  due  recognition.

In  this  connection  it  may  be  of  in-
terest to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that
the  open  air  treatment  for  tuberculo-
sis and  the  hydropathic  treatment  in
typhoid  fever  were  adopted  by  the
medical  profession  from  the  Nature
Cure  people  in  Germany.  For  more
than  thirty  years  Ignatz  Priessnitz,
Father  Kneipp,  Kuhne  and  other  pion-
eers of  Nature  Cure,  were  dragged  to
the  courts  and  tried  for  mal-practice
for  using  hydropathic  treatment  in  the
cure  of  acute  and  chronic  diseases,
until  Dr.  Brand,  of  Berlin,  began
to  notice  that  his  own  typhoid  fever
patients  died  at  the  rate  of  50  or  60
per  hundred,  while  the  typhoid  fever
patients  of  the  Nature  Cure  "quacks"
made  uniform  recoveries.  He  tried  the
water  treatment,  found  it  eminently
successful,  and  then  gave  his  "discov-
ery" to  the  medical  profession  in  an
derful efficacy  of  hydropathic  treat-
ment in  typhoid  fever.

Since  that  time  this  treatment  has
been  adopted  with  great  success  by
advanced  physicians  all  over  the  earth.
But  they  have  not  yet  awakened  to
the  fact  that  the  same  simple  cold  wa-
ter treatment  and  fasting  will  cure  ev-
ery other  acute  disease  with  exactlv
the  same  efficacy  as  in  the  case  of
.typhoid  fever.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


45


When  they  do  grasp  the  full  signifi-
cance of  "the  unity  of  disease  and  of
treatment,"  as  demonstrated  in  these
pages,  they  will  cease  to  waste  mil-
lions upon  millions  of  dollars  in  the
creation  of  medical  foundations  and
research  institutes  which  serve  no
other  purpose  than  to  experiment  upon
helpless  sufferers  with  concoctions  of
poisonous  drugs  and  disease  products
in  the  form  of  vaccines,  serums  and
antitoxins.  A  rather  useless  and  su-
perfluous waste  of  money,  time,  energy
and  human  lives,  when  the  problem  of
curing  all  acute  and  sub-acute  diseases
has  been  solved  by  Nature  Cure  Phil-
osophy and Practice.

This  awakening  will  sound  the  death
knell  of  the  darkest  superstition  that
ever  obsessed  humanity,  the  belief  that
health  can  be  created  and  maintained
by  saturating  human  bodies  with  dis-
ease-creating agents.


The  Treatment  of  Chronic  Diseases

In  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases,
Nature  Cure  undertakes  and  accom-
plishes "the  impossible."  "Chronic,"
in  the  vocabulary  of  the  old  school
of  medicine,  means  "incurable."  If  the
reader  should  doubt  this  statement,  I
advise  him  to  read  any  standard  work
on  medical  practice.  He  will  find  that
the  medical  authorities  divide  diseases
into  two  stages  or  types,  the  acute  and
the  chronic.  The  acute  stages  of  dis-
ease they  attempt  to  cure  by  the  or-
dinary medical  methods.  When  it
comfes  to  the  treatment  of  the  chronic
stages  of  disease,  we  find  invariably
expressions  like  the  following:  "When
this  disease  reaches  the  chronic  stages,
you  cannot  cure  it.  You  may  advise
the  patient  to  change  occupation  or
climate,  to  rest  or  to  travel ;  aside  from
this,  treat  the  symptoms  as  they  arise."
These  symptoms  arising  in  chronic
diseases  from  our  viewpoint  are  Na-
ture's feeble  efforts  to  purify  the  sys-
tem. To  treat  them  from  the  medical
viewpoint  means  to  check  and  suppress
them  with  poisonous  drugs  and  surgi-
cal operations.


_  To  illustrate  :  Suppose  a  chronic  pa-
tient develojjs  a  healing  crisis,  as  we
would  call  it,  in  the  form  of  a  vigorous
diarrhea,  acute  catarrh,  leucorrhea,
boil  or  fever,  under  medical  treatment
these  purifying  efforts  of  Nature  would
be  promptly  "treated,"  that  is,  thor-
oughly suppressed,  and  the  disease
poisons  driven  back  into  the  system.
How,  under  such  treatment,  in  the
narne  of  common  sense,  has  the  chronic
patient  a  chance  to  recover?  Is  it  not
clear  that  the  very  "treatment"  of
the  symptoms  makes  the  cure  an
impossibility?

Nature  Cure,  on  the  other  hand,
through  natural  methods  of  living,  as
before  explained,  builds  up  the  blood,
purifies  the  system,  adjusts  the  me-
chanical lesions,  harmonizes  the  men-
tal and  emotional  conditions  so  that
the  organism  can  once  more  arouse  it-
self to  a  cleansing,  healing  effort  in  the
various  forms  of  acute  elimination.
Anybody  endowed  with  common
sense  should  be  able  to  decide  which
is  the  natural  way  and  which  the  un-
natural and  destructive  way.


Natural  Dietetics

This  is  another  science  of  vital  im-
portance to  the  welfare  of  humanity,
created  by  the  founders  of  the  Nature
Cure  movement.  I  first  became  ac-
quainted with  the  principles  and  prac-
tical application  of  rational  vegetar-
ianism during  my  search  for  health
and  knowledge  in  European  schools
and  sanitariums.

When  I  returned  to  this  country  I
was  naturally  anxious  to  learn  what
progress  vegetarianism  and  natural
healing  methods  had  made  on  this  side.
I  found  that  the  leaders  of  vegetarian-
ism_  in  England  and  America  had  built
their  systems  of  meatless  diet  on  the
teachings  of  the  allopathic  schools  of
medicine,  according  to  which  protein,
fats  and  starches  are  the  most  import-
ant food  elements,  in  fact,  the  only
ones  worthy  of  consideration  in  the
daily  dietary  or  in  the  treatment  of
diseases.


4G


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


About  that  time,  E.  P.  Mills,  one
of  the  leaders  of  vegetarianism  in  Kng-
lanil.  published  a  book  entitled.  "Why
X'ejTctarians  h'ail."  The  p^ist  of  his  ar-
gument was  that  they  fail  because
their  diet  does  not  contain  enough  pro-
tein to  remedy  the  deficiency  caused
by  excluding  meat  and  eggs.  To  sup-
piement  the  protein  in  vegetable  foods,
he  recommended  a  i)reparation  called
"plasmon,"  made  from  fresh  cottage
cheese,  consisting  mainly  of  concen-
trated protein  and  fat.

We  know,  now,  thanks  to  Nature
Cure,  that  the  failures  of  vegetarian-
ism, which  Mills  observed,  were  due
to  an  excess  of  protein,  starches  and
fats  in  their  diet,  and  to  a  deficiency
of  the  positive  alkaline  mineral  ele-
ments.

Another  reason  why  many  vegetar-
ians in  his  day,  as  well  as  in  our  day,
failed  to  be  benefitted,  is  because  they
did  not  combine  with  the  vegetarian
diet  other  necessary  methods  of  nat-
ural living  and  treatment.  What  they
gained  through  a  meatless  diet  they
lost  through  hot  bathing,  wrong
breathing,  lack  of  exercise,  smoking,
drugging  and  suppression  of  acute
elimination.

Others  fail,  or  think  they  fail,  be-
cause they  do  not  know  of  the  exist-
ence of  the  fundamental  law  of  cure,
and  of  the  laws  of  crisis  and  of  per-
iodicity. They  follow  a  rational,  veg-
etarian diet,  and  practice  faithfully
cold  bathing;  they  exercise  system-
atically, breathe  deeply  and  rhythmic-
ally, and  think  and  feel  constructively
and  harmoniously.  As  a  result  of
these  rational  and  natural  habits  of
living,  they  improve  in  health  stead-
ily up  to  a  certain  point.  Then  sud-
denly all  their  old  aches  and  pains  and
f»ther  troubles  come  back.  Then  they
l)elieve  that  vegetarian  diet  is  a  snare
and  a  delusion,  and  return  repentently
to  the  flesh  pots  of  Egypt,  and  to
the  good  old  pills  and  potions.

The  editor  of  "Vim,"  whose  "cure-
all"  and  sole  hobby  is  deep  breathing,
is,  or  was,  a  rabid  anti-vegetarian.  In
his  magazine  he  published  a  few  years
ago  a  series  of  letters  from  readers  of


Vim,  "who  had  tried  vegetarianism
and  failed  utterly."  Most  of  these  let-
ters ran  about  as  follows :

"I  had  been  suffering  for  years  from
chronic  rheumatism.  I  tried  many
doctors  and  remedies  without  relief.
Finally,  yielding  to  the  urgent  plead-
ings of  a  dear  friend,  I  tried  a  strictly
vegetarian  diet  consisting  mostly  of
fruits,  whole  grain  bread  and  dairy
products.  I  also  practiced  systematic-
ally cold  bathing,  deep  breathing  and
other  health  exercises.

"For  a  while  I  seemed  to  improve
splendidly,  but  after  a  few  months
suddenly  all  my  old  rheumatic  aches
and  pains  and  other  symptoms  came
back  in  aggravated  form.  Then  I
realized  that  my  friends  were  right
when  they  told  me  I  was  making  a  fool
of  myself  by  following  this  starvation
diet  and  by  continually  chilling  my
body  with  cold  bathing.  I  then  re-
turned to  the  ordinary,  good,  nourish-
ing food  and  dropped  all  fads."

If  this  wise  one  and  many  others  like
him  had  known  the  laws  of  cure  they
would  have  rejoiced  at  the  arrival  of
these  healing  crises  and  would  have
assisted  Nature's  cleansing,  healing
efforts  by  even  stricter  adherence  to
the  natural  regime,  thus  laying  the
foundation  for  perfect  health  in  the
future.

In  the  largest  and  best  appointed
sanitariums  in  this  country  the  law  of
crisis  is  unknown,  or,  if  known,  flatly
denied  and  ignored.  Quite  frequently,
I  meet  with  people  who  tell  me  they
have  tried  the  same  treatment  we  are
giving  in  this  or  that  big  sanitarium.
The  story  usually  runs  like  this:  "I
seemed  to'  improve  splendidly  for  a
while,  but  then  I  got  worse  again  ;  all
my  old  troubles  came  back  as  bad  as
ever,  and  then  of  course  I  realized  that
this  natural  treatment  was  not  good
for  my  trouble."  So  of  course  they
packed  their  trunks  and  went  back  to
their  old  diet  and  medicines  or  had  an
operation  performed.

It  is  a  fact  that  down  to  this  day  the
best  known  and  most  luxuriously  ap-
pointed sanitariums in this country


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuyers'  Guide


47


which  are  supposed  to  educate  and
practice  (more  or  less)  natural
methods  of  healing-,  favor  a  hig-h
protein  diet,  rich  in  proteins,  starches,
fats  and  sugars.  Their  large  factories
and  food  stores  offer  to  the  health-
seeking  public  nothing  but  foods  pre-
pared from  cereals,  nuts,  legumes  and
olives.  The  menus  in  their  institu-
tions give  the  amounts  of  heat-produc-
ing units  (calories)  of  the  various
foods  and  the  patients  are  told  that
they  need  so  many  hundred  food  calo-
ries per  day  in  order  to  supply  the
necessary  fuel  for  the  production  of
animal  heat  and  energy.  They  are
taught  to  select  and  figure  out  the
kinds  and  quantities  of  food  required
to  supply  their  needs.

On  these  menus  and  food  tables  sup-
plied to  patients,  nothing  is  said  about
the  functions  of  the  positive  mineral
elements  in  the  human  organism,  nor
about  their  importance  in  a  well
balanced  diet.

Soon  after  my  return  from  Germany
I  met  Otto  Carque  in  Doctor  Lahn's
Sanitarium  near  Lincoln  Park,  which
at  that  time  was  the  favorite  rendez-
vous of  the  few  Nature  Cure  "cranks"
in  Chicago.  Carque  had  caught  the  in-
fection and  published  a  booklet  en-
titled, "The  Foundation  of  All  Re-
form," an  interesting  treatise  on  the
virtues  of  a  meatless  diet.  After  read-
ing the  book,  I  called  the  author's  at-
tention to  the  fact  that  he,  the  same
as  all  his  predecessors  in  this  country
and  England,  had  entirely  missed  the
true  and  only  solution  of  the  problem,
the  mineral  salt  aspect  of  the  food
question.

I  called  his  attention  to  the  classics
of  German  vegetarianism,  to  Hensel's
"Bread  from  Stones",  to  his  "Makro-
biatic."  to  Dr.  Lahmann's  "Dietische
Blutentmischung"  and  to  Dr.  Haig's
"Uric  Acid."  Friend  Carque  eagerly
followed  the  new  lead  with  much  bene-
fit to  himself  and  to  the  cause  of  vege-
tarianism in  this  country.

Soon  after  this,  Arthur  Brisbane,  the
gifted  and  versatile  literary  editor  of
the  Hearst  newspapers,  published  one


of  his  strong  articles  against  vege-
tarianism. I  have  always  admired  Mr.
Brisbane  for  his  wide  erudition.  He  is
well  informed  on  the  most  varied  sub-
jects of  philosophy,  science,  history
and  sociology.  But  when  he  writes
about  vegetarianism,  vaccination,
serums,  drug  treatment  and  surgery,  he
moves  in  the  old  ruts,  and  hits  way  off
the  mark.*

Otto  Carque  seized  the  opportunity
and  answered  Brisbane's  article  in  a
pamphlet  entitled  "The  Folly  of  Meat
Eating."  In  this  treatise,  he  empha-
sized the  importance  of  the  positive
mineral  elements  in  the  metabolism  of
animal  and  human  bodies  and  conse-
quently in  food,  drink  and  medicine.
This  was  the  first  essay  written  in  the
English  language  dealing  with  the
mineral  salt  problem  in  nutrition  and
medical  treatment.  I  followed  up  the
subject  in  a  series  of  articles  in  the
Nature  Cure  Magazine.  These  articles
on  "Natural  Dietetics"  appeared
monthly  covering  a  period  of  two
years.  Since  that  time  (1907-1909)
practically  all  advanced  food  reformers
in  this  country  emphasize  the  import-
ance of  the  positive  mineral  elements
in  their  writings  and  in  their  diet  pre-
scriptions.

An  example  of  this  is  Alfred
McCann.  The  title  of  the  book  which
brought  him  into  public  notice  is
"Starving  America,"  which  means
America  starving  for  the  mineral  salts
while  over-feeding  on  starches,  pro-
teins, fats  and  sugar.  The  book  deals
with  the  mineral  salt  problem  in
straight  Nature  Cure  fashion.  Since
McCann  was  not  a  Nature  Cure  doctor
and  therefore  not  an  offense  to  the
regular  medical  profession,  a  New
York  daily  published  his  articles  and
established  his  fame  as  an  authority  on
food  chemistry  and  dietetic  subjects.
Then  the  Chicago  Daily  News  began
to  publish  his  writings  and  advertised
them in all the big Chicago news-


*"The  Jack  of  all  trades  is  master  of
none";  so,  also,  the  dabbler  in  all  sciences
cannot  be  well  instructed  in  every  one
of  them.


48


Univrrsdl  Xatiirajxithic  Directory  (iiul  Ihiijcrs'  Guide


j):i])cr.s  ill  full-page  advertisements
which  must  have  cost  a  thousand  or
more  dollars  each.

Not  many  readers  of  these  writings
are  aware  of  the  fact  that  they  are
based  strictly  on  Nature  Cure  philo-
sophy and  practice,  which  proves  once
more  that  sometimes  good  does  come
"out  of  Nazareth."


Diagnosis  from  the  Eye

I  have  already  mentioned  so  many
original  discoveries  and  revolutionary
scientific  achievements  in  the  art  of
healing  given  to  us  through  Nature
Cure  Philosophy,  that  it  seems  to  be-
come monotonous.  But  the  end  is  not
yet  by  a  long  way.

The  Diagnosis  from  the  eye  is  a  very
valuable  gift  of  Nature  Cure  to
diagnostic  science.  Dr.  von  Peckzely,
of  Budapest,  Hungary,  discovered
Nature's  records  in  the  eye,  cjuite  by
accident,  when  a  boy  ten  years  of  age.

Playing  one  day  in  the  garden  at  his
home,  he  caught  an  owl.  While
struggling  with  the  bird,  he  broke  one
of  its  limbs.  Gazing  straight  into  the
owl's  large,  bright  eyes,  he  noticed,  at
the  moment  when  the  bone  snapped,
the  appearance  of  a  black  spot  in  the
lower  central  region  of  the  iris,  which
area  he  later  found  to  correspond  to
the  location  of  the  broken  leg.

The  boy  put  a  splint  on  the  broken
limb  and  kept  the  owl  as  a  pet.  As
the  fracture  healed,  he  noticed  that  the
black  spot  in  the  iris  became  over-
drawn with  a  white  film,  and  sur-
rounded by  a  white  border  (denoting
the  formation  of  scar  tissues  in  the
broken bone).

This  incident  made  a  lasting  impres-
sion on  the  mind  of  the  future  doctor.
It  often  recurred  to  him  in  later  years.
From  further  observations  he  gained
the  conviction  that  abnormal  physical
conditions  are  portrayed  in  the  eyes.

As  a  student,  Von  Peckzely  became
involved  in  the  revolutionary  move-
ment of  184(S  and  was  put  in  prison  as
an  agitator  and  ringleader. During  his


confinement,  he  had  plenty  of  time  and
leisure  to  pursue  his  favorite  theory,
and  he  became  more  and  more  con-
vinced of  the  importance  of  his  dis-
covery. After  his  release,  he  entered
upon  the  study  of  medicines,  in  order
to  develop  his  important  discoveries
and  to  confirm  them  more  fully  in  the
operating  and  dissecting  rooms.  He
had  himself  enrolled  as  an  interne  in
the  surgical  wards  of  the  college  hos-
pital. Here  he  had  ample  opportunity
to  observe  the  eyes  of  patients  before
and  after  accidents  and  operations,  and
in  that  manner,  he  was  enabled  to
elaborate  the  first  accurate  Chart  of
the  Eye.

The  discoveries  of  Von  Peckzely
have  been  elaborated  and  verified  in
their  details  by  many  conscientious
and  able  investigators  who  have  de-
voted their  whole  life  to  the  study  of
this  new  method  of  diagnosing  human
ailments  and  their  causes.

This  method  has  been  tested  and
used  successfully  by  many  Nature
Cure  physicians  in  Germany  and  by  a
few  homeopathic  doctors,  but  so  far
it  has  been  entirely  ignored  by  the  re-
presentatives of  the  regular  school  of
medicine.  This  is  not  strange  since
Nature's  records  in  the  iris  reveal  the
destructive  efifects  of  poisonous  drugs
and  of  uncalled-for  surgical  mutila-
tions.

Diagnosis  from  the  Eyes,  or  Iridol-
ogy,  was  first  introduced  in  this  coun-
try, about  15  years  ago,  by  Doctor  H.
Lahn  and  by  myself.  Now  it  has  be-
come widely  known  among  drugless
healers  in  this  country  and  has  proved
its  value  as  an  important  addition  to
diagnostic  science.

While  we  do  not  claim  that  Nature's
records  in  the  iris  disclose  all  pathol-
ogical conditions  in  the  human  body,
they  reveal  so  much  of  great  interest
and  real  value  about  the  internal  pro-
cesses of  health,  disease  and  cure,  es-
pecially about  the  underlying  causes  of
disease  that  we  cannot  afford  to  do
without  this  new  method  of  diagnosis.

What  makes  Iridology  of  especial
interest  and  value  to  the  followers  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Hinjcrs'  Guide


49


drugless  healing  systems  is  the  fact
that  the  signs  in  the  iris  verify  all  the
fundamental  laws,  principles  and  teach-
ings of  Nature  Cure,  Philosophy  and
practice.

Dr.  Lahn  wrote  the  first  book  in
English  dealing  with  this  subject.  I
followed  him  with  articles  in  the  Na-
ture Cure  Magazine  which  appeared
every  month,  covering  a  period  of  two
years.  I  hope  to  find  sufficient  time  to
re-edit  and  publish  the  substance  of
these  articles  in  an  additional  volume
of  the  Nature  Cure  series.


The Nature Cure Attitude toward
Mental  and  Metaphysical  Healing

While  Nature  Cure  realized  to  the
fullest  extent  and  endeavors  to  apply
practically  in  the  treatment  of  disease
all  that  is  good  in  magnetic,  mental
and  spiritual  healing  methods,  it  can-
teachings  advanced  by  the  various
cults,  schools  and  systems  which  deal
with  these  all-important  branches  of
natural  healing.  Nature  Cure  Philoso-
phy has  brought  out  certain  weak
points  and  errors  in  these  systems
which  never  before  have  been  clearly
recognized  and  brought  to  public  at-
tention.

Nature  Cure  cannot  accept  the
dogma  of  the  unreality  of  matter  and
of  disease.  Matter  is  just  as  real  and
substantial  in  the  highest  spiritual  and
celestial  spheres  as  it  is  on  this  earth
plane.  Acute  disease,  whose  existence
Christian  Science  tries  to  deny  in
theory  and  to  ignore  in  treatment,  is  in
reality  the  cure.

Another  weak  point  in  this  system  is
the  prohibition  of  all  physical,  material
methods  of  treatment  and  self-help.
In  my  books,  I  call  attention  to  the
wonderful  discoveries  of  modern
science  which  reveal  the  fact  that
matter  in  the  final  analysis  is  nothing
but  particles  of  electricity  in  vibratory
motion,  that  these  modes  of  motion  are
intelligent  or  controlled  by  intelligence,
^nd  are  therefore  an  expression  of  an


intelligent  mind,  of  that  which  we  call
"Divine  Mind."  While  it  is  true  that
these  revelations  of  physical  science  in
a  way  confirm  the  Christian  Science
doctrine  of  the  unreality  of  matter,  we
cannot  approve  of  Mrs.  Eddy's  de-
ductions and  dogmas  based  on  this  fact.

When  she  says  that  matter,  sin,  dis-
ease, and  evil  are  in  general  errors  of
mortal  mind  she  contradicts  herself
while  formulating  the  fundamental
proposition  of  her  creed.  An  erring
mortal  mind  is  an  abnormal  mind,  and
an  abnormal  mind  is  a  diseased  mind.
Whereby  she  admits  the  existence  of
disease.

Disease,  evil,  sin,  are  real  enough;  as
a  matter  of  fact  they  are  not  figments
of  a  diseased  imagination,  (errors  of
mortal  mind),  but  the  results  of  viola-
tions of  Nature's  laws.  If  this  concep-
tion of  Nature  Cure  Philosophy  is  the
right  one,  then  we  are  responsible  for
disease  and  evil,  and  then  it  is  up  to
us  to  study  the  laws  of  our  being  and
to  comply  with  them, — the  only  way
to  prevent  disease  and  evil  in  general.
If  the  Christian  Science  conception  is
true,  if  there  is  no  sin,  no  disease,  no
evil,  then  we  are  not  responsible  (for
things  which  do  not  exist),  then  there
are  no  laws  for  us  to  study  nor  to  obey.
Then  this  does  away  with  personal
responsibility.  If  there  is  no  personal
responsibility  there  cannot  be  a  moral
obligation.  Thus  the  Christian  Science
conception  of  sin,  disease  and  evil  does
away  with  the  basic  law  of  morality,
which  is  personal  responsibility.  There-
by it  does  away  with  the  necessity  for
individual  inquiry  into  the  causes  of
our  troubles,  and  benumbs  and
paralyzes  personal  effort  to  prevent
them.  This  will  prove  the  weakest
point  in  this  philosophy  of  disease  and
cure,  and  will  prevent  its  general  adop-
tion by  the  progressive  intelligence  of
the present and coming generations.

We  must  admit  that  Mrs.  Eddy  is
absolutely  consistent  in  the  treatment
of  disease  based  upon  these  dogmas
when  she  prohibits  her  healers  and
followers,  under  threat  of  expulsion
from the church from reading any-


50


rninrrsal  Xdtiiropatluc  Directory  and  Ihiyers'  Guide


thiiifT  concerning-  and  pertaining  to  the
physical,  material  conditions  of  the
human  body  in  the  way  of  anatomy,
physiology,  chemistry,  etc.  Prohibi-
tion of  rational  inquiry  and  self-help
through  personal  effort  however,  must
inevitably  lead  to  mental  and  moral
stagnation  and  atrophy.  No  fanatical
creed  or  tyrannical  government  has
ever  endeavored  to  exert  such  absolute
control  over  human  minds  and  souls
as  this  system,  which  is  not  Christian
and  is  not  Science.

The  good  and  the  bad  points  in
mental  and  metaphysical  therapeutics
from  the  viewpoint  of  Nature  Cure  are
clearly  brought  out  in  another  illumi-
nating chapter  of  this  helpful  and
healthful volume.


That  which  makes  some  of  these
teachings  so  attractive  to  the  multi-
tudes, and  the  reason  why  intelligent
people  submit  to  such  inental  tyranny
wdiich  stultifies  reason,  and  paralyzes
will-power  and  self-control,  is  the  in-
nate tendency  of  human  nature  to  get
something  for  nothing,  to  make  short
cuts  to  health,  happiness  and  success.
Christian  Science  is  the  most  alluring
"get-rich-quick"  system  ever  devised,
but  every-day  experience  shows  that
the  devotees  of  this  cult  cannot  cheat
nature  forever.  Sooner  or  later  she
will  exact  her  equivalent.  Every  day
we  see  "scientists"  succumbing  to
acute  and  chronic  diseases  in  just
al)Out  the  same  proportions  as  those


Calisthenics  in  Dr.  Lindlahr's  Health  Gymnasium


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


51


THE  NATURE  CURE

By  Dr.  CARL  STRUEH,  Chicago,  111.


Dr.  Carl  Strueh

There  are  many  ways  and  means  of
treating  the  sick.  There  is  the  "tea-
spoon" method,  i.  e.,  the  allopathic,
homeopathic  and  eclectic  drug  method,
the  electropathic  method,  the  osteo-
pathic method,  and  so  forth.

AVhile  these  various  systems  differ
widely  in  their  fundamentals,  all  of
them,  including  the  numerous  "fake
cures,"  boast  of  results  which  no  un-
biased observer  can  rightfully  dispute.

I  have  seen  people  cured  of  rheu-
matism by  swallowing  poisonous
drugs,  by  sucking  the  juice  of  lemons,
by  wearing  camel  underwear,  and  by
carrying  a  raw  potato  in  their
pockets.

In  order  to  credit  these  so-called
"results"  to  their  proper  source,  a  little
reasoning  on  our  part  is  absolutely  es-
sential ;  otherwise  .we  are  bound  to
form  the  most  illogical,  unreasonable
conclusions  which  will  not  stand  the
test.

Post  hoc  non  est  propter  hoc,  i.  e.
"after"  does  not  mean  "because  of."
For  instance,  if  during  a  drought  I  pray
for  rain,  and  if  after  my  praying  the
clouds  unload  their  precious  gift,  it
rains  "after"  (post)  I  prayed,  not  "be-
cause" (propter) I  prayed.


Many  of  our  so-called  "results"  have
not  more  to  do  with  our  doings  in  the
way  of  treatment  than  my  praying
with  the  raining.  They  are  merely  ac-
cidental and  are  to  be  credited  to  that
mysterious  force  which  exists  in  every
living  being  and  which  we  call  the
vital  or  life  force.

We  do  not  know  what  this  force  con-
sists of,  we  only  know  that  it  exists  and
how  it  manifests  itself.

It  is  the  driving  force  which  from
two  minute  cells,  secreted  from  the
maternal  and  paternal  organisms,
develops  a  living  being,  which  knits  to-
gether a  fractured  bone,  repairs  a
lacerated  skin,  etc.,  and  which,  under
proper  conditions,  also  corrects  those
disturbances  which  we  call  "disease"
(dis-ease).

The  physicians  of  ancient  times
were  well  aware  of  the  important  part
the  vital  force  plays  in  the  cure  of  dis-
ease and  termed  it  the  vis  medicatrix
naturae,  the  inborn  natural  faculty  to
cure.

The  better  the  physical  condition  of
the  patient,  i.  e.,  the  more  vigorous  his
vitality,  the  better  his  chances  of  re-
covery.

A  strong  constitution  may  overcome
a  disease  under  any  sort  of  medical
attendance,  even  under  a  harmful  one,
while  a  feeble  constitution  may  suc-
cumb in  spite  of  the  most  appropriate
treatment.

Every  physician  of  experience  will
remember  cases  in  whom  he  obtained
the  most  gratifying  "results"  not
through  his  excellent  treatment,  but
in  spite  of  his  irrational  treatment.

It  is,  therefore,  unwise  to  judge  a
method  of  treatment  merely  by  the
"results"  which  often  are  but  a  matter
of  luck  on  the  part  of  the  patient.

It  is  the  principles  of  the  physician's
method  which  count  and  which  people
must  strive  to  understand.  It  is  a
poor  policy  to  choose  a  physician  with-
out knowing  the  method  he  practises.


52


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Ignorance  in  this  regard  may  not  be
of  consequence  in  one  case,  while  in
another  case  it  may  he  a  matter  of  life
or  death.

As  a  rule,  our  endeavors  to  enlighten
people  in  matters  of  health  and  sick-
ness are  not  very  successflil,  at  least
that  is  my  experience.  Patients  who
have  been' cured  from  almost  incurable
diseases  and  who  should  be  grateful
to  the  Nature  Cure  for  the  rest  of  their
lives,  go  back  to  their  homes  without
having  learned  a  thing.  The  next  time
the  child  gets  the  measles  they  have  it
treated  with  the  same  old  drug  method
that  from  their  own  experience  they
have  every  reason  to  condemn.

The  vigor  of  the  patient's  vitality
being  the  deciding  factor  in  the  cure
of  a  disease,  it  follows  that  a  method  of
treatment  which  is  apt  to  invigorate
the  patient's  vitality,  will  improve  his
chances  of  recovery,  while  any  sort  of
treatment  which  diminishes  the  pa-
tient's fighting  powder  will  naturally
accomplish  the  contrary.

For  this  reason  we  swear  to  the
Nature  Cure  method  and  condemn  the
Drug  method.

Drugs  act  merely  symptomatically
and  are  in  their  place  in  "incurable"
diseases  in  which  the  sole  purpose  of
our  efTorts  consists  in  "relieving,"  not
"curing,"  the  patient.  They  also  are
of  value  in  suppressing  various  un-
bearable or  dangerous  symptoms  which
may  arise  in  any  disease  and  the  cause
of  which  we  can  not  remove  speedily
enough.

It  would  not  be  humane  to  refuse  a
dose  of  morphine  to  a  patient  sufTering
agony  from  the  pangs  of  cancer  or
from  whatever  cause.

In  incurable  diseases  we  may  do
anything  we  please,  as  long  as  we  les-
sen the  patient's  suffering.

When  it  comes  to  "curable"  diseases,
our  policy  must  be  entirely  different.

The  better  the  chances  for  a  cure,  the
more  essential  it  is  for  the  patient  to
abstain  from  the  use  of  drugs  almost
all  of  which  are  more  or  less  poisonous
and  apt  to  do  harm  in  many  ways.

Aside  from  the  disturbance  they
cause  in  the  digestive  organs,  they  get


absorbed  into  the  blood-serum  which
contains  the  nourishing  elements  for
the  blood-vessels,  the  "carriers  of  life."

If  these  receive  a  poisoned  blood,
they  will  be  enhanced  in  their  normal
function,  and  such  disturbance  is  apt  to
make  a  cure  problematic  and  bring  on
further  commotions  in  the  complicated
chemism  of  the  body.  One  sin  breeds
another.

Thus,  a  patient  who  relies  on  drugs,
may  sooner  or  later  have  to  cope  with
two  or  more  diseases,  instead  of  one.
"Medicine  is  a  capital  which  is  con-
stantly increasing."

By  the  way,  there  is  not  a  single  dis-
ease which  we  can  cure  by  means  of
drugs.

A  person  being  afflicted  with  chronic
constipation,  can  effect  a  movement  of
the  bowels  by  the  use  of  a  laxative,  but
the  latter,  while  giving  temporary  re-
lief, will  not  cure  the  atony  (weak-
ness) of  the  intestinal  organs,  which  is
the  cause  of  constipation.

On  the  contrary,  the  continued  irri-
tation by  drugs  will  render  the  condi-
tion worse  and,  in  the  course  of  time,
destroy  the  function  of  the  intestinal
organs  completely  and  lead  to  all  kinds
of  complications.

A  person  suffering  from  chronic  in-
somnia may  bring  on  sleep  by  a  dose  of
veronal  or  other  dopes,  but  he  can  not
cure  his  insomnia  that  way.  The
longer  he  continues  the  use  of  these
drugs,  the  nearer  he  gets  to  the  mad-
house.

A  sufferer  from  chronic  headaches
may  relieve  his  pain  by  a  dose  of
aspirin,  but  let  him  continue  this
hazardous  treatment  and  he  will  see
where  he  lands.

The  same  applies  to  most  all  chronic
diseases,  such  as.  rheumatism,  neu-
rasthenia, gout,  etc.,  which  are  caused
by  so-called  "auto-intoxication,"  i.  e.,
poisons  which  by  some  abnormal  cell
action  accumulate  in  the  system  and,
for  one  reason  or  other,  are  not  elimi-
nated.

Instead  of  suppressing  the  manifold
symptoms  which  such  a  condition  pro-
duces, the  treatment  must  eliminate
the  auto-toxins,  for  only  by  removing


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


53


the  cause  can  we  remove  the  effects,
i.  e.,  the  symptoms.  "Causa  cessat,
cessat  effectus."

One  more  word  about  the  drut^
method.  People  who  are  not  familiar
with  it,  imagine  that  it  possesses  a
highly  scientific  value,  which,  however,
is  not  the  case.  It  is  a  mystic  to  them,
and  everything  mystic  is  attractive  to
some  people.  In  fact,  the  drug  treat-
ment is  and  always  will  be  a  very  poor
science.

What  do  we  know  about  the  action
of  drugs?  We  know  that  a  dose  of
calomel  will  affect  a  movement  of  the
bowels,  morphine  will  relieve  pain,
trional  will  produce  sleep,  bromide  will
relieve  a  headache,  and  so  forth.
That  is  about  all  the  practical  knowl-
edge we  possess  of  the  action  of  drugs.

If  the  drug  treatment  is  to  become
an  exact  science,  we  must  first  of  all
know  the  chemical  processes  which  are
going  on  in  the  living  body  under
normal  and  abnormal  conditions.  So
far,  however,  our  knowledge  in  this
regard  is  absolutely  negative.

And  in  all  probability  it  never  will
amount  to  much,  for  the  simple  reason
that  there  are  not  two  creatures  alike
in  this  whole  wide  world,  and  that  even
the  single  individual  is  undergoing
continuous  changes  every  day  of  his
life.  What  may  apply  to  one,  will  not
apply  to  the  other,  and  what  may  be
right  in  a  person  to-day  may  be  wrong
to-morrow.

Considering  this  complete  lack  of
knowledge  as  regards  the  normal  cell-
chemism,  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that
we  know  still  less  of  the  chemical  com-
binations which  the  various  drugs
undergo  after  entering  the  body,  nor
the  effects  which  these  combinations
produce.

We  must  further  admit  that  we
know  very  little  of  the  dose  in  which

Not  more  than  we  know  how  much
liquor  a  man  may  imbibe  before  he
becomes  intoxicated,  how  long  a  person
can  indulge  in  the  tobacco  habit  before
signs  of  the  dreaded  "tobacco  heart"
appear,  how  long  a  woman  can  overdo
the use of coffee before she shows


symptoms  of  nervousness,  not  more  do
we  know  how  much  strychnine  or  any
other  poisonous  drug  a  person  can  take
into  his  system  without  being  harmed.

To  wait  until  so-called  toxic  (poison)
symptoms  appear  and  then  reduce  the
dose  or  discontinue  the  drug  alto-
gether, is  a  policy  more  humorous
than  scientific.  It  reminds  me  of  the
midwife  who,  when  asked  how  she
could  tell  whether  the  baby's  bathing
water  was  too  cold  or  too  warm,  re-
plied that  if  the  child  after  being  placed
in  the  baths  turned  blue,  the  water  was
too  cold,  and  if  it  turned  red,  the  bath
was  too  hot.

Prescribing  is  mere  experimenting.
Two  people  may  be  of  the  same  age,
the  same  build,  weigh  exactly  the  same,
etc.,  and  yet,  one  may  show  toxic
symptoms  from  a  certain  drug  ad-
ministered in  a  certain  dose,  while  the
other  does  not  show  any  visible  effect
of  the  drug  whatsoever.

An  infant  may  get  poisoned  by  a
single  drop  of  opium,  which  in  another
infant  will  not  produce  the  slightest
effect.

With  such  scant  knowledge  of  the
action  of  drugs,  it  certainly  is  a  wise
policy  to  keep  away  from  them  as  far
as  possible  and  use  them  only  in  case
of  emergency.

Christian  Science  has  done  and  is
doing  a  great  deal  of  good  by  keeping
thousands  of  people  from  the  bondage
of  the  drug  treatment.

Every  progressive  physician  shares
our  opinion  and  condemns  the  lament-
able practice  of  seeking  salvation  from
sickness  in  the  use  of  drugs.

The  "teaspoon"  method  is  rapidly
losing  ground  and  will  soon  be  prac-
tised by  unscrupulous  and  ignorant
physicians  on  ignorant  people  only.
The  future  belongs  to  the  Nature  Cure.

A  splendid  example  of  the  change  of
tactics  which  is  taking  place,  is  the
modern  treatment  of  tuberculosis.

Consumptives  used  to  be  treated
with  immense  doses  of  creosote  and
arsenic.  Then  followed  the  tuberculin
treatment.  And  what  does  the  treat-
ment consist  in  to-day?  No  con-
scientious physician nowadays will


54


rniorrsal  Xdliiropathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


waste  time  in  tU)siii^  a  consumptive
with  (lruj;s.  l)ut  will  seiui  him  to  one  of
the  open-air  sanitaria  where  no  arti-
ficial and  mystic  treatment,  but  a
simple  "natural"  method  will  enable
the  i)atient  to  regain  his  health,  pro-
viding' his  affliction  has  not  progressed
too  far.

And  what  is  the  secret  of  these  suc-
cesses? Is  there  anything  extraordi-
nary or  specific  about  the  treatment?
Certainly  not.  Pure  air,  proper  feed-
ing, etc.,  are  very  simple  means.
Simple,  indeed,  like  all  good  things,
but  mighty  powerful,  and  the  "only"
means  by  which  we  can  increase  the
patient's  vital  force  and  thus  accom-
plish a  cure.

The  treatment  does  not  attack  the
sickness  directly,  but  indirectly  by
enlivening  and  regulating  the  action
of  each  and  every  part  of  the  body.

What  applies  to  the  treatment  of
tul)erculosis,  also  applies  to  that  of
other  diseases,  such  as  rheumatism,
neurasthenia,  etc.

There  is  no  fundamental  difference
in  the  treatment  of  the  various  chronic
diseases.  The  same  simple  principle
applies  to  all  of  them,  and  the  same
satisfactory  result  is  the  outcome  in
the  majority  of  cases.


More  than  with  any  other  treatment
the  physician  practicing  the  natural
method,  must  be  well  able  to  indi-
vidualize, i.  e.,  apply  the  treatment  ac-
cording to  the  conditions  of  every  in-
dividual case.  We  must  not  treat  sick-
nesses, but  sick  people.  Because  two
patients  are  afflicted  with  the  same
sickness  does  not  mean  that  we  must
apply  the  same  treatment  in  the  same
manner  and  dose.

Anyone  who  wants  to  apply  the
natural  method  without  being  well
able  to  individualize,  i.  e.,  weigh  the
peculiarities  of  the  individual  case,  can
do  great  harm.

It  would  require  too  much  space  to
the  Nature  Cure  consists,  i.  e.,  the
Water  Cure,  including  the  Kneipp
system,  the  different  diet  Cures  (vege-
tarian diet.  Milk  Cure,  Raw  food  diet.
Fast  Cure,  etc.),  the  Sun  and  Air
Baths,  Massage  Treatments,  Physical
Culture,  Earth  Packs,  etc.

Whoever  is  interested  may  write  for
one  of  our  Booklets  (descriptive  of  my
Sanatorium  and  Health  Resort  at
McHenry,  111.),  which  contains  an  ex-
plicit description  of  these  various
methods,  and  which  will  be  mailed  on
request.


Dr.  Strueh  row-boating  near  his  Health  Resort  at  McHenry,  111.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcrs'  Guide


NATUROPATHY

By HARRY ELLINGTON BROOK, N. D.,

Editor  of  "Brain  and Brawn," Los  Angeles, Cal.


The  "Nature  Cure,"  "Naturopathy,"
the  "Natural  Method,"  the  "New
Hygiene,"  or  by  whatever  name  it  may
be  called,  is  no  new  thing.  It  is  merely
the  carrying  out  of  the  dictum  of  Hip-
pocrates, the  Father  of  Medicine,  who
declared :  "Nature  cures,  not  the  phy-
sician."

The  Nature  Cure  recognizes  the  fact
that  all  disease  is  merely  a  manifesta-
tion of  nature's  efifort  to  remove
morbid  matter  from  the  system  and
restore  health.  Therefore,  that  it
should  not  be  suppressed  or  checked,
but  should  be  encouraged.  As  aids  to
nature  in  her  curative  process  the  Na-
ture Cure  includes  such  rational
methods  as  diet,  fresh  air,  exercise,
hydrotherapy,  including  internal
baths,  air  and  sun  baths,  manipula-
tions of  the  spine  in  various  ways
(osteopathy  and  chiropractic),  mas-
sage, and  mental  suggestion.

In  Germany,  the  Nature  Cure  has
held  an  honored  position  for  over  half
a  century.  It  is  estimated  that  nearly
half  the  people  in  Germany  are  treated
by  this  method.  Not  long  ago,  a  Los
Angeles  physician,  who  was  making  a
tour  of  the  European  hospitals,  wrote
to  me  from  Germany,  expressing  his
surprise  at  the  wide-spread  develop-
ment of  the  Nature  Cure.  He  said :
"You  find  it  everywhere.  In  this
country  'regular'  physicians  do  not  dis-
dain to  avail  themselves  of  hydro-
therapy, and  other  rational  methods,
eveji  though  they  have  been  introduced
by  'laymen.'  They  often  send  their  pa-
tients to  such  institutions  as  the
'Weisser  Hirsch,'  Dresden,  the  lead-
ing Nature  Cure  establishment  on  the
continent  of  Europe."

Most  remarkable  cures  are  con-
stantly being  effected  by  this  natural
method  of  treating  disease,  by  relying
on  the  heaJing  powers  of  nature.  These
cures  are  all  the  more  remarkable  when
it  is  remembered  that  a  large  majority
of  those  who  take  up  this  method  of


treatment  have  tried  almost  every
other  system,  and  in  many  cases  have
been  given  up  as  hopeless  by  regular
practitioners.

There  is  nothing  mysterious  about
the  natural  cure  of  disease.  It  is
simply  what  the  name  implies — giving
nature  a  chance  to  get  in  her  beneficent
work.  Nature  is  always  trying  to  cure.
Every  outbreak  of  what  we  call  "dis-
ease" is  merely  one  of  Nature's  efforts
to  remove  morbid  material  from  the
body,  and  restore  normal  conditions.
Then  comes  along  the  medical  man,
and  proceeds  to  suppress  these  helpful
manifestations,  and  to  interfere  with
Nature's  healing  process,  by  putting
into  the  sick  stomach  foods  that  cannot
be  digested,  and  become  poisons,
drugs  that  are  direct  poisons,  and  in-
jecting into  the  blood  filthy  animal
virus.  After  a  time,  Nature  gives  up
the  effort  to  cure,  and  the  patient  dies.
Or,  if  he  recovers,  the  recovery  is  slow
and  painful,  and  perhaps  he  becomes  a
chronic  invalid  for  life.  Or,  the  cause
of  the  disease  not  having  been  re-
moved, but  driven  back  into  the  blood,
it  breaks  out  again,  in  some  more
malignant  form.

Nature  will  always  cure,  when  given
a  chance,  whenever  a  cure  is  possible,
as  it  is  in  almost  all  cases.  There  are,
however,  simple  methods  of  aiding
Nature  in  her  task.  Among  these  are
diet,  fasting,  active  and  passive  exer-
cise, hydrotherapy,  adjustment  of  the
spine,  deep  breathing,  sun  and  air
baths,  rest,  and  mental  suggestion.

Rich  men  give  millions  to  institu-
tions where  animals  are  put  to  ex-
cruciating tortures  to  bolster  up  the
false  germ  theory,  that  causes  the  pre-
mature death  of  millions  of  human
beings.  How  much  good  these  men
might  accomplish,  by  diverting  their
millions  to  institutions  where  the
physically,  mentally  and  morally  sick
may  be  reborn,  to  their  own  benefit,
and  that  of  society.


50


rnipersal  Xaturopdtluc  Direct onj  and  Bui/crs'  Guide


THE  PRESENT  POSITION  of  NATUROPATHY

and  ALLIED  THERAPEUTIC  MEASURES

in  the  BRITISH  ISLES

By  J.  ALLEN  PATTREIOUEX,  N.  D.

Therapeutic Institute. Kings Road, Sedgley Park. Manchester. England.


Great  Britain  is  much  behind  the
United  States  in  the  adoption  of  Na-
ture Cure  methods.  The  Allopathic
Schools  hold  sway,  and  no  one  who  is
not  a  licensed  member  of  one  of  their
schools,  save  under  the  penalty  of  a
heavy  fine,  is  allowed  to  style  himself
"doctor."  He  is  also  liable  to  be  prose-
cuted for  manslaughter  if  a  patient
under  his  care  dies,  and  it  is  considered
that  he  is  in  any  way  responsible  for
the  causation,  or  acceleration,  of  the
death  of  such  a  person.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Medical  Act  of  1858,  which
regulates  the  status  of  doctors,  physi-
cians, surgeons,  etc.,  does  not  prohibit
the  giving  of  treatment  by  other  than
licensed  practitioners.  It  simply  states
that  it  is  an  Act  to  provide  facilities
"to  regulate  the  qualifications  of  prac-
titioners in  medicine  and  surgery,"  and
to  thereby  enable  "persons  requiring
medical  aid  to  distinguish  qualified
from  unqualified  practitioners."  When
this  Medical  Act  of  1858  was  before
Parliament  as  a  Bill,  there  was  an  at-
tempt made  to  insert  in  the  Bill  cer-
tain clauses  which  would  make  it  a
penal  offense  for  any  unlicensed  per-
son to  practise,  but  the  attempts  were
fruitless.

Just  before  the  war,  however,  the
British  Medical  Association  inserted
in  a  Medical  Act  Amendment  Bill,  the
following  clauses:

Prohibition of Practice by Unregis-
tered Persons

Any  person  other  than  a  registered
medical  or  dental  practitioner,  who —
1.)  applies  any  medical  or  dental
treatment  to  any  person  without  the
supervision  of  a  registered  medical  or
dental  practitioner,  and  demands  or  re-
ceives any  valuable  consideration  for
such  treatment,  whether  by  way  of  re-
muneration, gratuity,  or  otherwise,  or


2.)  holds  himself  as  practising,  or  com-
petent to  practise  medicine,  surgery,
midwifery,  or  dentistry,  or  takes  or
uses  the  style  or  title  of  physician,  sur-
geon, doctor  of  medicine  or  dentist,  or
any  other  style  or  title,  whether  ex-
pressed by  words  or  by  letters  only
implying  that  he  possesses  the  skill  or
knowledge  necessary  for  that  practice,
shall  be  deemed  to  have  committed  an
offense  under  this  Act,  and  shall  be
liable  on  indictment  and  conviction,  to
imprisonment  for  six  months  with  or
without  labor,  and  alternately,  or  in
addition  to,  a  penalty  not  exceeding
one  hundred  pounds  for  each  offense,
and  on  summary  conviction  to  a
penalty  not  exceeding  forty  pounds  for
each  offense."

The  war  stopped  this  bill  from  being
introduced  into  Parliament,  or  was  one
of  the  main  reasons  for  it  not  being  in-
troduced, but  it  is  quite  possible  that,
should  a  favorable  opportunity  present
itself  in  future  times,  a  further  effort
along  this  line  will  be  made.  It  will
thus  be  seen  that  there  is  a  probability
of  "dangers  ahead"  for  unlicensed
practitioners  in  this  country,  unless
they  can  combine  together  to  such  an
extent  as  to  defeat  the  aims  of  the
medical  fraternity.

At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  stated
that  there  are  persons  practising  Na-
ture Cure  methods  in  this  country
who  are  regularly  in  receipt  of  pa-
tients sent  them  by  medical  men.  The
medical  profession  here,  in  some  cases,
recognizes  that  the  practice  of  Nature
Cure  methods  is  altogether  outside
their  purview,  and,  especially  amongst
the  younger  practitioners,  they  recog-
nize that  there  is  much  in  favor  of
these  newer  and  more  natural  methods
of  treatment.  So,  in  these  instances,  if
they  happen  to  have  any  particularly
hopeless cases, they are turned over


Univer&al  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


57


as  a  last  resort  to  such  a  Nature  Cure
practitioner,  to  see  if  he  can  do  any
good  with  the  case.  Let  it  be  said  that,
in  many  cases,  the  Nature  Cure  practi-
tioner makes  a  successful  job  of  these
otherwise  hopeless  cases.

There  are  also  instances  where  med-
ical men  have  themselves  taken  up  the
study  of  therapeutic  methods  of  treat-
ment, hydrotherapy,  medical  electri-
city, radiant  heat  and  light,  massage,
etc.,  but  these  doctors  are  generally
found  occupying  posts  in  connection
with  large  Sanatoria,  Hydropathic
Institutions,  Infirmaries,  etc.  There
are  also  a  few  medical  men  in  private
practice  who  openly  advocate  the  com-
pleter adoption  of  nature  cure
methods,  but  they  are  in  a  very  great
minority.

With  the  exception  of  Herbalism
and  Massage  there  are  practically  no
recognized  authoritative  training  in-
stitutions for  Nature  Cure  and  other
allied  therapeutic  measures  in  these
islands.  The  Osteopathic  profession
has  a  society  here,  members  of  which
must  hold  the  "D.  O."  certificate,  but
they  do  not  train  students.  In  Electro-
therapeutics, which,  with  the  possible
exception  of  Massage,  the  medical
profession  has  taken  up  more  fully
than  others,  there  are  doubtless  cases
where  medical  practitioners  in  same
have  to  go  through  a  preliminary
course  of  training,  especially  if  they  are
attached  to  a  large  hospital  or  Sana-
toria, but,  so  far  as  the  writer  knows,
there  are  no  recognized  courses  in
these  subjects.

In  Massage  and  Swedish  Exercises,
the  training  and  practice  of  students,
though  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  lay
profession,  is  yet  controlled  in  the
larger  training  institutions,  by  the
medical  profession.  Medical  men  in
this  country  do  not,  as  a  rule,  practice
Massage,  but  send  patients  needing
such  treatment  to  a  professional  mas-
seur or  masseuse.  The  principal  train-
ing institution  for  Massage,  is  "The
Incorporated  Society  of  Trained  Mas-
seuses" (I.  S.  T.  M.).  This  Society,  un-
til the  war,  did  not,  with  the  exception
of  trained  hospital  male  nurses,  grant


certificates  to  males,  but  since  the  war,
and  owing  to  the  great  demand  for
trained  masseurs  as  well  as  masseuses,
this  rule  has  been  abrogated.

Massage  has  come  much  to  the  fore
since  the  war  started,  and  so  useful  has
it  proved  to  be  in  the  case  of  wounds,
fractures,  etc.,  that  it  is  not  at  all  likely
that  it  will  sink  again  to  its  pre-war
level.  The  "Almeric  Paget  Massage
Corps"  is  a  corps  mostly  composed  of
young  women  who  are  certificated  or
can  otherwise  show  proficiency,  in
massage  routine.  This  Corps  is  fully
recognized  by  the  War  Office  and  its
members  are  employed  in  treating
wounded  soldiers,  under  medical
supervision,  by  means  of  massage  and
Swedish  Exercises.  Another  society
for  the  granting  of  certificates  to
trained  masseuses  and  masseurs,
another  outcome  of  the  war,  has
lately  been  started  in  Manchester.  This
Society  owes  its  inception  to  and  is  be-
ing very  largely  controlled  by,  the
medical  profession.  It  is  expected  that
the  certificates  of  this  paricular  Society
will,  in  course  of  time,  rank  as  second
to  none  in  intrinsic  merit,  and  also  that
other  therapeutic  measures,  such  as
Radiant  Heat  and  Light,  etc.,  etc.,  will
be  added  to  the  list  of  subjects.  Stu-
dents of  both  the  above  mentioned  in-
stitutions have  to  observe  the  rule  that
they  will  not  undertake  the  treatment
of  patients  except  under  doctor's
orders.  Coupled  with  Massage  tuition
a  course  of  training  is  also  given  in
Swedish  Exercises,  and  candidates  for
the  I,  S.  T.  M.  and  other  certificates
are  expected  to  show  proficiency  in
this  subject  likewise.

In  respect  to  Hydrotherapy,  this
branch  of  Natural  Therapy  had  a  great
vogue  here  some  years  ago  with  the
result  that  many  palatial  structures,
termed  "Hydros,"  were  erected,  where
patients  could  have  the  treatment  ad-
ministered on  scientific  lines.  At  the
present  time,  however,  most  of  these
so-called  "Hydros"  are  nothing  more
or  less  than  fashionable  hotels,  situ-
ated at  well-patronized  pleasure  re-
sorts, and  having,  in  addition,  a  few
extra  conveniences  in  the  way  of  hy-


58


I'niprrsd!  Xutnropdthic  Directory  and  Buijcrs Guide


(Iriatic  appliances.  There  are  some
Hydropathic  Establishments,  how-
ever, which  do  really  deserve  the  name.
Chief  amonjjst  these,  and  the  pioneer,
is  Smedley's  Hydropathic  I-'stablish-
ment  at  Matlock.  It  is  interesting  to
note  that  Smedley's  first  owed  its  in-
ception to  a  layman.  Smedley  by  name.
Other  well  known  places  are  at  South-
port.  Ben  Rhydding,  Peebles,  etc.

In  other  cases,  the  presence  of
springs  possessing  medicinal  proper-
ties have  caused  a  great  development
of  therapeutic  measures  to  be  adopted
at  such  places.  This  has  been  the  case
at  Huxton,  Harrogate,  Droitwich,  etc.
The  Institutions  erected  at  such  places
have  been  elaborately  fitted  up  for
treatment  on  other  than  hydriatic
lines ;  indeed,  other  branches  such  as
electro-therapeutic  measures  claim,  if
anything,  the  larger  share  of  patron-
age.

There  are  only  a  very  few  institu-
tions here  where  treatment  is  given  on
direct  "Nature  Cure"  lines.  "Broad-
lands"  Nature  Cure  Institute,  (Hamp-
shire), and  "Riposo"  Nature  Cure
Hydro  (Hastings),  are  examples  of
this  kind  where  Sun  Baths,  Rain,  Light
and  Air  Baths,  sleeping  in  Air  Chalets,
etc.,  etc.,  may  be  carried  out.  An  open
air  Sun-bath  may  also  be  obtained  at
Peebles  Hydropathic,  Scotland.  There
are  also  several  Sanitaria  in  these
islands,  modelled  after  the  pattern,
though,  of  course,  on  a  much  smaller
scale,  of  the  Battle  Creek  Sanitarium.
Michigan,  U.  S.  A.  The  diet  in  these
Sanitaria,  as  well  as  the  two  Nature
Cure  places  mentioned  above,  are  ex-
clusively vegetarian.

In  respect  to  Electro-Therapeutics,
this  is,  as  stated,  one  form  of  natural
therai)y  which  has,  in  certain  cases,
been  largely  taken  up  by  the  medical
profession.  The  "X"  rays  are  now  be-
ing very  largely  employed  for  diag-
nostic purposes  in  the  case  of  wounded
soldiers,  and  this  branch  of  it  is  largely
in  the  hands  of  men,  medical  and
otherwise,  who  have  specialized  along
this  particular  line.  High  Frequency,
(though  not  so  much  as  formerly).
Static Electricity.  Ionization, Galvan-


ism, Faradism  and  Sinusoidalism  are
all  being  pressed  into  the  service  of
suffering  humanity,  though  even  here
there  is  still  much  room  for  wider  and
more  useful  applications.  Scattered  up
and  down  the  country,  there  are  also
several  excellently  equipped  and
managed  therapeutic  institutions,  in
the  hands  of  laymen  where  many,  if
not  all,  of  the  electrical  measures  men-
tioned above  are  being  used  with  great
profit  to  patients  attending  same.

In  Radiant  Heat  and  Light  Treat-
ment (Thermotherapy  and  Photo-
therapy), there  are  several  systems  be-
ing used.  In  many  cases,  the  upright
and  reclining  bath  cabinets,  after  the
model  of  Dr.  Kellogg's,  are  being  used.

Another  is  the  "Dowsing"  system,
where  the  patient  lies  on  an  asbestos
covered  bed.  This  system  owes  its  in-
ception largely  to  Dr.  Hedley,  London.
The  licensees  of  the  "Dowsing"  Radi-
ant Heat  Co.,  Ltd.,  are  either  members
of  the  medical  profession,  or  trained
laymen.  This  Co.  issues  certificates  to
its  licensees,  as  it  claims  to  have  suc-
cessfully treated  over  a  million  cases
by  its  methods.  Radiant  Heat  and
Light  apparatus  is  now  being  exten-
sively used  at  the  Military,  Red  Cross
and  Voluntary  Aid  Detachment  Hos-
pitals. The  Greville  system  of  Hot-Air
treatment  has  also  a  certain  vogue
here.

Chromopathy,  as  a  system  of  heal-
ing, is  very  little  used  in  this  country,
although  properly  directed,  it  possibly
possesses  potentialities  for  healing
second  to  none.  Mention  here  might
also  be  made  of  "Idio-Kromopathy,"  a
system  of  healing  by  personal  color
rays.  This  system  is  based  upon  the
selection  of  certain  personal  health
colors  or  vibrations,  such  colors  large-
ly varying  with  the  individual.  It  is
affirmed  that  the  color  rays  so  selected
are  responded  to  by  the  individual  con-
cerned so  readily,  that  better  results,
with  much  less  costly  apparatus,  are
easily  obtained  than  in  the  usual
method  of  powerful  dosage.

Osteopathy  is  winning  a  gradually
widening  field  of  usefulness,  though
yet,  to  many  people,  medical  and  lay


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujers*  Guide


59


alike,  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  name.
As  already  mentioned,  there  is  a  So-
ciety in  existence  here  for  the  protec-
tion of  existing  interests,  but  there  are
many  individuals  practising  Osteo-
pathy who  are  not  members  of  this
Society.

Chiropractic,  as  a  separate  method
of  manipulative  treatment,  is  practical-
ly unknown  here.  The  general  ignor-
ance on  this  subject  may  be  illustrated
by  citing  an  experience  which  the
writer  of  this  article  had,  some  little
time  ago.  He  wrote  to  a  well  known
publishing  firm,  making  a  specialty  of
the  issue  of  books  in  Massage,  Nursing
and  Medical  subjects,  asking  them  if
they  had  any  work  dealing  with  Chiro-
practic. In  reply,  he  received  a  cata-
logue and  a  letter  calling  his  attention
to  a  certain  page  in  the  catalogue.  On
referring  to  the  book  marked,  he  found
it  was  a  book  dealing  with  Chiropody!

Likewise  of  the  newer  methods  of
treatment,  Spondylotherapy,  Napra-
pathy,  Neuropathy,  Somapathy,  Zone
Therapy,  Rythmotherapy,  etc.,  it  may
safely -be  said  that  nothing  whatever  is
known  on  this  side.

Herbalism  is  extensively  practised
in  this  country.  The  National  Insur-
ance Act,  passed  a  few  years  ago,  re-
cognizes it  as  a  definite  system  of
medication,  and  made  provisions  for
those  who  preferred  Herbal  to  Allo-
pathic treatment,  conditional  upon  the
sanction  of  the  administering  county
or  local  committee.  The  actual  work-
ing of  this  part  of  the  Act  has  largely
proved  a  dead  letter,  for  only  one  local
committee,  that  of  Worcester,  has
granted  the  concession  in  actual  fact.
The  Herbalists  point  to  an  old  act
passed  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII
(1542-43),  and  cfaim  that  this  Act
legalizes  their  practice.  With  the
gradually  increasing  power  of  the
medical  profession,  however,  to  pass
laws  in  conformity  with  their  own
wishes,  there  is  every  probability  that
before  long  there  will  be  a  battle  royal
on  this  matter  between  these  two
parties.  It  is  very  probable  that  the
medical  profession  will  find  that  their
uncompromising  attitude  on  the  "Bar-


ker" controversy  will  have  done  much
to  injure  their  cause  in  this  respect.

"The  National  Association  of  Med-
ical Herbalists  of  Great  Britain,  Ltd.,"
holds  examinations  twice  a  year,  to
grant  certificates  to  successful  candi-
dates. The  subjects  covered  by  the  ex-
amination embrace  Anatomy  and  Phy-
siology, Chemistry,  Biology,  Botanic
Materia  Medica,  Systematic  Botany,
Botanic  Pharmacy,  Practice  of  Medi-
cine, Pathology,  Hygiene,  Minor  Sur-
gery, and  Medical  Jurisprudence.  The
practice  of  Herbalism  here  varies  from
the  selling  of  a  collection  of  herbs  as  a
side-line  to  that  of  an  extensive  prac-
tice where  patients  are  not  only  ad-
vised and  particular  herbal  remedies
found  for  them,  but  where  they  can  at-
tend a  Botanic  Sanitarium,  and  re-
ceive, also,  other  kinds  of  treatment  on
therapeutic  lines.  We  also  have  here  a
Herbalist  Medical  College  and  School
of  Health.

The  scarcity  of  certain  kinds  of
foods,  together  with  high  prices,  has
caused  many  people  to  pay  more  atten-
tion to  their  dietetic  habits.  Meatless
days  have  already  been  introduced  in-
to hotels  and  restaurants  by  order  of
the  Government.  The  consequence  is
that  a  greater  demand  has  arisen  for
distinctively  vegetarian  foods,  but
whether  same  will  remain  so  when
things  take  on  a  normal  situation  is  yet
to  be  seen.  In  most  of  our  principal
towns  now  there  are  restaurants  where
only  vegetarian  dishes  are  served,  and
also  food  reform  stores  where  purely
vegetarian  specialties  may  be  pur-
chased. Manchester  is  the  head-
quarters of  the  parent  Vegetarian
Society.  This  Society  issues  an  in-
teresting monthly  periodical,  entitled
"The  Vegetarian  Messenger."  Man-
chester is  also  well  supplied  with
Vegetarian  restaurants  and  Food  Re-
form Stores  and  just  recently  the  idea
has  also  been  mooted  as  to  the  found-
ing of  a  Vegetarian  hospital  in  this
city  where  patients  can  be  treated
dietetically,  along  purely  vegetarian
lines.  Already  there  is  a  hospital  in  the
south  doing  similar  work  to  this,  the
"Lady Margaret Hospital," Bromley,


GO


rnincrsdl  Xatnropdthic  Directory  and  Ihiijrrs'  Guide


Kent, presided over by Dr. Josiah
Uldficld.

There  arc  also  many  guest-houses
and  holiday  homes  scattered  up  and
down  the  country  where  vegetarians
arc  specially  catered  to.  One  special
feature  of  the  Vegetarian  Society's
activities  is  the  holding  of  an  annual
Summer  School  during  the  holiday
period.  This  Summer  School  is  al-
ways very  well  attended  and  does  a
great  deal  of  useful  pioneer  work  along
vegetarian  and  allied  lines.

Of  special  dietetic  regimes,  there  are
one  or  two  in  vogue.  One  which  is  at-
tracting a  little  attention  at  the  present
time  is  the  "Airdrie"  system  of  diet,
named  after  its  promulgator,  Mr.  Wm.
.\ird.  This  diet  is  a  system  of  Apyr-
trophy.  for  nothing  in  the  way  of
cooked  vegetables  or  fruit  is  allowed.
Mrs.  Drew,  the  daughter  of  the  Rt.
Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  has  become  a
convinced  adherent  to  this  system,  and
ably  supports  it  in  her  writings  in  the
public  press.

The  "Wallace"  system  is  another
special  dietetic  regime.  The  adher-
ents of  this  system,  "inclusive  of  prac-
tising vegetarianism,  also  abstain  from
the  addition  of  any  mineral  salt,  such
as  sodium  chloride,  to  their  foods.
They  also  have  their  bread  and  cakes
made  without  yeast.  Their  official
organ  is  "The  Herald  of  Health."

Taking  it  as  a  whole,  the  medical
profession  does  not  seem  to  have  here
paid  much  attention  to  dietetics  as  a
distinct  and  separate  therapeutic  meas-
ure. There  are  some  notable  excep-
tions, however.  Dr.  Alex.  Bryce,  of
Birmingham,  has  published  a  work,
"The  Laws  of  Life  and  Health,"  which
shows  a  particularly  careful  study  of
foods  and  food  values.  Dr.  Valentine
Knaggs  is  also  a  great  student  of
dietetics,  particularly  along  vegetarian
lines,  and  his  many  published  writings
are  insistent  on  the  value  of  such.  Dr.
Rabagliati  is  also  a  pronounced  advo-
cate of  dietetics,  especially  in  relation
to  the  consumption  of  less  food  than
is  generally  taken.  His  recent  work,
"Initis,"  should  do  much  to  awaken  in-
terest in  this  question.


In  respect  to  Physical  Culture,
Eugene  Sandow's  institution  has  for
many  years  aimed  at  popularizing  this
practice.  Eustace  Miles,  M.A.  is  also
a  tireless  worker  in  this  and  allied
fields,  as  the  many  productions  from
his  pen,  and  the  "Normal  School  for
Physical  Training"  and  his  Corres-
pondence Courses  for  Health  bear  wit-
ness. There  are  many  Physical  Cul-
ture, Outdoor  Life  and  Rambling
Clubs  up  and  down  the  country.  Con-
spicuous amongst  these  is  the  work
done  by  the  co-operative  Holidays  As-
sociation. This  Association  has  its
own  Guest-Houses  where,  during  sum-
mer months,  city  workers  can  repair
and  enjoy  the  delights  of  long  rambles
into  the  country,  planned  and
organized  on  thoroughly  educational
lines,  whilst  at  the  same  time,  they  can
enjo)'  all  the  social  amenities  one  na-
turally connotes  with  holiday  times.

Turning  now  to  treatment  by  more
refined  means,  such  as  Magnetic  Heal-
ing, Hypnotism,  Suggestion,  etc.,  it
must  be  remarked  that  there  is  in  Lon-
don a  Psycho-Therapeutic  Society,
whose  members  practise  the  above
mentioned  methods  of  healing.  It  also
holds  a  clinic  where  patients  can  be
treated  on  the  above  lines  free  of
charge.  Much  useful  work  is  being
done.  This  society,  previous  to  the
war,  published  a  little  magazine,  "The
Health  Record  and  Psycho-Thera-
peutic Journal."

Magnetic  Healing  has  also  been
largely  taken  up  by  certain  members  of
the  Spiritualistic  Society,  and  a  Mag-
netic Healers  Association,  with  one  of
its  headquarters  in  Manchester,  has
been  formed.  This  association  also
holds  free  clinics  at  certain  times.

New  Thought  has  its  headquarters
in  London,  but  there  are  branches  in
other  large  towns,  such  as  Birming-
ham and  Manchester.  Certain  mem-
bers of  the  various  New  Thought
schools,  as  well  as  working  for  healing
collectively  at  such  places,  are  also
established  in  private  practice  for  heal-
ing purposes.  The  official  organ  of
New  Thought  here  is  "The  Rally."

The Theosophical Society has  also


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


61


a  "Healers  League"  amongst  its  many
activities.  This  league  possesses
branches  at  several  of  the  provincial
lodges.  The  members  meet  every  so
often,  and  collectively  and  solely  by
the  power  of  concentrated  healing
thought  in  certain  given  cases,  en-
deavor to  heal  such  cases.  No  payment
whatever is asked for  these services.

Christian  Science  is  well  represented
in  this  country,  but  claims  its  adher-
ents mostly  from  the  cultured  and
leisured  classes.  It  appears  to  have
grown  much  during  recent  years.  In
Manchester,  besides  having  several
churches,  they  have  a  reading  and  book
salon  in  the  heart  of  the  city  and  a
staflf  of  many  trained  healers.  This  is
repeated  in  other  large  towns.

In  respect  to  publications  dealing
with  Naturopathic  subjects,  we  have  as
yet  no  magazine  covering  exactly  the
same  ground  as  the  "Herald  of  Health
and  Naturopath"  does  in  the  U.  S.  A-
The  writer  believes  there  is  need  for  an
organ  of  this  nature  here.  There  are
several  magazines  issued  dealing  with
Physical Culture and allied subjects.


but  nothing  that  meets  the  needs  of  the
trained  Naturopath,  or  Therapist.  The
nearest  approach  to  same  is  a  monthly
magazine,  "The  Healthy  Life,"  to
which  one  or  two  medical  men  regu-
larly contribute.  This,  however,  is  an
organ,  as  its  name  implies,  issued  for
the  general  public,  which  is  interested
in  matters  of  health  and  outdoor  life  in
general.

The  same  remarks  apply  to  books
dealing  with  Naturopathic  subjects.
The  writer  of  this  article,  some  little
time  ago,  communicated  with  a  large
firm  of  publishers  with  respect  to  a
book  on  "Osteopathy"  which  they  had
stated  in  their  catalogue  as  being  ready
for  a  certain  date.  It  was  some  months
after  the  stated  time  when  he  wrote
this  firm  about  the  book.  He  received
repl}'  that  the  bo.ok  had  not  been  pub-
lished! So  far  as  the  writer  knows,
there  is  not  as  yet  a  single  published
work  on  this  side  dealing  with  Osteo-
path. Needless  to  say,  the  same  thing
obtains  in  respect  to  other  even  less
known  subjects  on  this  side.

There  have  been  one  or  two firms


TME NA/INNER

EASY  TO

guess'


COrnoy


62


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


established  in  London  lately,  dealing,
on  a  small  scale,  with  the  sale  of  Ap-
pliances and  Apparatus  for  the  carry-
ing out  of  "Nature  Cure"  and  other
therapeutic  remedies,  but  there  re-
mains yet  a  good  deal  of  ground  to  be
covered  in  this  direction.  Of  course,
there  are  several  manufacturers  and
agents  for  the  sale  of  Electro-thera-
peutic. Orthopedic,  and  similar  appara-
tus, but  no  facilities  exist  as  yet  for  the
])ublicity  and  purchase  of  the  many
distinctly  specialized  types  of  thera-
peutic appliances  which  are  on  the
U.  S.  A.  market.

Looking  at  the  matter  broadly,
however,  the  war,  in  the  opinion  of  the
writer,  is  opening  out  a  future  here  for
Naturopathic  methods  of  healing
hitherto  undreamt  of.  I  have  already
mentioned  the  great  use  to  which  Mas-
sage and  Swedish  Exercises  have  been
put  in  the  treatment  of  wounded  sol-
diers; also  the  stir  over  the  "Barker"
controversy  which  has  revealed  to  the
general  public,  in  such  a  startling
manner,  the  prejudice  of  the  medical
profession  in  respect  to  treatment  be-
ing given  by  any  individual,  however
well-trained  or  successful  in  his  prac-
tice he  may  be,  who  is  not  a  member
of  their  profession.

The  War  Office  has  equipped,  in
many  parts  of  the  country,  large  Con-
valescent Camps  where  the  wounded
are  being  treated  on  up-to-date  thera-
peutic methods,  such  as  by  means  of
Massage,  Hydrotherapy,  Radiant  Heat
and  Light,  Electro-therapeutics,  etc.
The  results  accruing  from  this  are
likely  to  be  of  a  two-fold  nature.

First,  the  doctors  employed  at  such
Institutions,  seeing  the  great  good  re-
sulting to  their  patients  from  such
methods,  will  naturally  be  more  dis-
posed either  to  treat  themselves,  or
sanction  the  use  of  such  therapeutic
measures,  in  a  much  fuller  measure
than  hitherto.  This  both  with  respect
to  the  special  work  on  which  they  are
at  present  engaged,  and  also  later  when
they  take  up  work  in  private  practice
again.  This  is  bound  to  result  in  a
leavening  of  the  whole  of  the  medical
profession  towards  a  completer  knowl-


edge of,  and  less  antagonistic  attitude
to,  the  benefits  of  those  measures
which  are  specifically  comprehended  in
the  word  "therapeutics."

Secondly,  the  public  itself,  coming
more  fully  into  touch  with  these
methods  and  realizing  their  value,  will
begin  to  demand  a  larger  use  of  them
in  civilian  life.

In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned
Convalescent  Camps,  where  the  treat-
ment given  is  almost  solely  of  a  thera-
peutic nature,  various  similar  kinds  of
appliances  and  apparatus  have  been
installed  in  many  of  our  Military  Hos-
pitals, Red  Cross  Hospitals  and  Volun-
tary Aid  Detachment  Hospitals.  In
other  cases,  again,  where  such  appara-
tus has  not  been  installed,  the  wounded
are  sent  for  treatment  to  various  local
privately  owned  therapeutic  institu-
tions. In  practically  every  hospital  of
any  size,  there  is  also  one  or  more
trained  masseuses  in  attendance.

Does  not  all  this  taking  up  of  these
newer  and  saner  methods  of  treatment
on  the  part  of  the  medical  profession
itself,  point  to  one  thing — a  confession
that  drugs  and  serums  are  insufficient
in  themselves  to  effect  a  cure.  For  it
has  only  been  because  the  profession
has  actually  been  driven  to  do  this  sort
of  thing  that  it  has  been  done,  and
these  various  places  equipped  with  the
newer  apparatus.  It  has  all  been  a
matter  of  very  slow  growth ;  let  us
hope  that  over  here,  at  any  rate,  the
lesson  has  been  learnt.  At  the  same
time  there  is  very  much  room  for  still
greater  improvement.  Cases  needing
massage  and  other  therapeutic  meas-
ures which  ought  to  have  attention  im-
mediately after  the  injuries  have  oc-
curred are  left  for  months  without  any
such  attention  being  given.  Progress
is  therefore  much  slower  and  re-
covery, if  not  made  impossible,  is  at
least  considerably  delayed.

The  writer  profoundly  hopes  that,
now  that  the  United  States  has  come
into  the  conflict,  it  may  be  possible  for
all  those  who,  in  your  country,  are
working  along  these  newer  lines  to  join
together,  and,  in  combination,  if  pos-
sible, with  the  legalized  medical  pro-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


63


WHY  ALL  DRUGLESS  METHODS?

By  PER  NELSON,  Physiopath,  Hartford.  Conn.


This  is  the  age  of  clrugless  healing.

None  dares  to  deny  this.  People  of
both  the  "upper"  and  "lower"  classes
begin  to  realize  that  the  old  school
drug  treatment  is  not  the  proper  treat-
ment for  restoring  and  maintaining
health.  Hundreds,  yes  thousands  of
these  people  come  to  the  drugless
practitioners  seeking  relief.

Some  happen  to  "strike"  the  "right
one"  and  get  permanent  relief.

Others  have  to  try  out  one  after  an-
other of  all  the  fifty-seven  varieties  of
drugless  healing-branches  before  relief
is  obtained.

This  proves  without  doubt  that  there
is  something  "wrong"  with  the  drug-
less healers.

It  should  not  be  so. — Let  us  face  the
situation  as  it  is. — Let  us  try  our  best
to  find  the  missing  link. — Let  us  see
things  as  they  are,  not  as  we  would
like  to  have  them.

What  happens  if  we  step  in  to
"brother  Osteopath"  for  examination
and  treatment?

The  Osteopath  immediately  begins
to  "find  out"  whether  there  is  any  dis-
ordered structure,  any  "misplaced"
ribs,  any  "slipped"  ligaments  or
tendons,  any  "overgrown"  muscles  or
any  congested  or  obstructed  blood  or
lymph-vessels.

This  constitutes  a  "thorough"  Oste-
opathic examination.  —  This  is  the
"Alpha  and  Omega"  of  Osteopathic
wisdom.

We  leave  the  "Osteopath,"  and  the
next  one  we  consult  calls  himself  a
"Naprapath."


fession,  assist  together  in  the  treat-
ment of  your  wounded.  If  such  a
rapprochement  were  found  to  be  pos-
sible, no  doubt  much  of  the  needless
suflfering  which  has  resulted  to
wounded,  injured  and  diseased  in  this
country  through  the  application  of  out-
of-date  methods,  would  be  largely
avoided.


What  will  happen?  The  Naprapath
tries  his  best  to  discover  any  "tighten-
ed" ligament  which  he  thinks  is  liable
to  irritate  nerves.

He  does  not  know  anything  about
"displaced  ribs"  or  "slipped  ligaments
and  tendons"  or  "congested  muscles"
and  pays  no  attention  to  them.

Then  we  go  to  the  "Chiropractor."
He  analyzes  the  spine  only,  and  all  he
cares  to  look  for  is  "majors"  and
"minors."  He  pays  no  attention  to
tightened  ligaments,  congested  or  ob-
structed blood  or  lymph  vessels,  dis-
placed viscera,  etc.

Then  we  pass  along  to  the  "Neuro-
path" who  only  looks  for  "abnormal
vaso-motor  activity."  He  does  not
know  and  does  not  want  to  know  any-
thing else.

Next  we  come  to  the  "suggestive
therapeutist"  who  has  a  "thorough"
knowledge  of  the  "power  of  mind  over
body"  and  how  to  "correct  and  har-
monize mental  influences."  He  does
not  know  anything  about  mechanical
body  faults  and  blames  all  troubles  on
the  "abnormal"  mind.

Then  we  have  the  "Doctor  of  Bio-
chemistry" who  only  looks  for  some
"deficiency"  of  some  inorganic  salt  in
the  body.

After  going  through  all  this,  we  per-
haps "slip  in"  to  the  food  scientist  who
claims  that  all  ills  are  due  to  "wrong
eating," — and  what  do  we  get?  We
get  a  long  "learned  lecture"  on  how
some  foods  tend  to  irritate  the  "great
sympathetic  nervous  system,"  which
through  "abnormal  reflexes"  causes
contractions  of  the  cells,  tissues  and
muscles,  which  in  their  order  obstruct
"cell  osmosis"  impinge  nerves  and
empty  blood-vessels.

And  so  on  through  all  the  fifty-seven
varieties  of  drugless  healing  branches.

Now  who  is  right? — What  system
will  benefit  us  the  most? — We  seek
relief.


64


rniix'i'sdl  MdhiroiHilIuc  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


We  do  not  care  whether  our  trouble
is  due  to  slipped  ligaments,  subluxated
vertebrae,  lack  of  cell  salts,  or  an  ab-
normal mind.

W'e  want  our  health  back.

Now  who  is  it  that  is  wrong?

Is  it  the  Osteopath  who  only  looks
for  mechanical  faults?  Is  it  the  sug-
gestive therapeutist  who  only  looks  for
abnormities  of  mind?  Is  it  the  food-
scientist  who  only  cares  about  the
chemical  composition  of  the  body,  or
who  is  it?

Well,  it  can't  be  the  Osteopath,  be-
cause the  Osteopaths  have  proved  time
and  time  again  that  disease  can  be
caused  by  displaced  ribs  and  viscera,
slipped  tendons,  etc.

But  is  it  not  likewise  true  that  the
Chiropractor  has  proved  that  disease
may  be  caused  by  spinal  subluxations?

The  Naprapath  has  proven  without
doubt  that  disease  may  be  caused  by
contracted  connective  tissue,  the  Neu-
ropath that  disease  is  sometimes
caused  by  disturbed  vaso-motor  activ-
ity, the  suggestive  therapeutist  that
disease  may  be  caused  by  an  abnormal
mind,  the  Doctor  of  Bio-chemistry  that
lack  of  a  certain  inorganic  cell  salt  may
cause  disturbances, — and  there  we  are.

Everybody  is  right. — None  is  wrong.

Let  us  draw  our  own  conclusion. —

Perhaps  we  better  ask  ourselves  this
question  :  Is  the  single  branch  drugless
practitioner  who  only  applies  one  mode
of  treatment  based  on  just  one  kind  of


diagnosis  worthy  the  confidence  of  the
people?

\Ve  answer  no.  The  practitioner  who
does  not  combine  and  employ  all  that
is  good  in  each  and  every  system  of
diagnosis  and  treatment,  is  not  worthy
the  confidence  of  the  public.

Louis  Blumer,  N.  D.,  of  Hartford,
said  in  one  of  his  public  lectures  not
long  ago :

"There  is  so  much  good  in  all  sys-
tems of  healing  that  it  would  be  a  crime
to  belittle  or  ignore  any  of  them,  but
there  is  so  much  bad  in  the  best  of
them  that  it  is  not  proper  for  one  who
uses  a  single  method  to  fight  all  other
methods."

This  is  the  truth  pure  and  simple.

Drugless  healing  will  not  advance  as.
long  as  this  antagonism  exists  in  drug-
less lines,  and  the  only  way  to  gain
and  keep  the  confidence  of  the  public,
and  to  successfully  compete  with  the
medical  men,  is  to  learn  and  apply  all
that  is  good  of  all  natural  methods  of
healing.

Only  the  one  who  does  this  is  a  true
physician,  and  the  people  of  the  future
will  not  call  for  an  Osteopath,  or  a
Chiropractor,  or  a  Naprapath,  but  on  a
full-fledged  drugless  physician,  one
who  has  a  knowledge  of  all  these  heal-
ing branches.

A  few  drugless  schools  have  now
started  to  teach  a  combination  of  drug-
less methods. That  is  good.

That  is  the  dawn  of  scientific  drug-
less healing.


MEN,  unless  they  are  of  extraordinary  mental  calibre,  are,  at  the  beginning  of  acting  col-
lectively, weak,  timid  and  apathetic,  shirking  their  duty  to  the  association.  And  yet  they
are  as  boastful  of  their  individual  importance  as  they  despise  their  collective  importance.  To
overpraise one's self is vanity, and to despise their collective worth is poverty of spirit.

It  seems  that  always  at  the  foundation  of  a  great  enterprise,  the  very  newness  of  the  under-
taking canriot  possess  the  prestige  of  history.  The  man  behind  the  scenes  in  a  theatre  sees  only
the  scaffolding  of  the  romance.  Men  in  general  are  ruled  by  superstition,  prestige,  make  believe.  An
institution  that  being  entirely  selfish  and  that  preys  upon  mankind,  like  a  certain  school  of  medi-
cine that  we  know  of,  but  that  has  its  roots  in  history,  controls  mankind  with  autocratic  authority,
and  is  revered  by  the  unthinking  for  so  doing,  whereas  an  institution  of  yesterday,  that  proposes  to
help mankind to the utmost, cannot command the respect of even its professional beneficiaries.

The  very  small  advertising  patronage  that  has  been  received  from  Naturopathic  practitioners,
argues  an  almost  total  lack  of  interest  in  the  publication  of  this  Directory,  the  responsibility  for  its
*"!?*»?'■'  ^''"S^  ''^'  *°  ^^^  energy  and  expense  of  one  individual.  Where  is  the  Committee  of  Ways
and Means  that  should be  responsible  for  the  financing  of  the  venture? Echo answers. "Where?"

And  yet  the  object  of  this  Directory  is  to  clothe  every  drugless  practitioner  with  prestige,  power,
honor,  success,  financial  reward  and  renown.  This  work  is  the  planting  in  history  of  a  great  institu-
tion, destined  to  achieve  international  power  and  fame.  It  is  to  create  men  from  those  who,  col-
lectively speaking,  are  only  dwarfs.  Endowing  them  with  prestige  and  authority  their  business
becomes  quadrupled  in  consequence  and  their  emoluments  correspondingly  great.  Any  advertising
patronage,  any  gifts  outright  of  money  for  this  venture,  would  be  returned  tenfold.  Such  patronage
accompanied  with  a  vital,  personal  interest  in  the  work,  in  ways  that  the  publisher  can  suggest,
IS  absolutely  necessary  for  the  highest  interests  of the Naturopathic  profession.


LFFICILNCY

IN  DRUGLL55  HEALING


a


By  LDWARD  LARLE.  PURINTON


CHAPTER  I

EXPERIENCE  AND  OBSERVATION


Health  is  the  prime  requisite  for  the  achievement  of  any  great  pur-
pose in  life.  The  work  of  healing  bodies,  minds  and  hearts  is  the  most
needed,  and  the  least  understood,  of  any  kind  of  human  service.  The
aim  of  this  book  is  to  present  the  fundamental  truths  of  the  great  health
movement  now  sweeping  the  world,  and  to  aid  the  movement  by  in-
creasing the  power  of  its  practitioners.

I  shall  write  as  frankly  as  though  I  were  speaking  to  a  personal
friend.  Books  are  as  valuable  as  they  are  vital.  Only  the  man  who
writes  himself  into  his  book  deserves  to  be  read.  Unless  you  feel,  after
reading  a  book,  that  you  know  the  man  who  wrote  it,  the  time  you  spent
in  reading  has  been  wasted.

I  have  put  fifteen  years  into  health  study  and  efficiency  work;  have
tried  out  the  methods  of  several  hundred  leading  physicians,  psychol-
ogists and  business  experts  in  Europe  and  America:  have  been  closely
and  actively  associated  with  the  great  health  pioneers  in  New  York
and  other  large  cities;  have  cured  a  dozen  chronic  weaknesses  and  dis-
orders in  myself;  have  been  privileged  to  offer  counsel  and  aid  to  sev-
eral thousand  personal  clients  and  pupils.

The  whole  story  is  here.  I  have  put  my  knowledge  and  experience,
such  as  they  may  be,  at  your  disposal.  If  the  benefit  you  receive  is  only
a  small  shadow  of  the  desire  on  my  part  to  be  of  service  to  you,  there
will  be  always  in  your  heart  a  sense  of  gratitude  to  Doctor  Lust,  and
of  interest  in  the  noble  cause  he  represents!  Then  my  work  will  have
been  done.

Suppose  you  were  making  $2,000  a  year.

And  suppose  a  friend  should  say  to  you,  "There  is  a  $10,000  position
I  think  you  can  have,  with  a  few  introductions  and  a  little  special  train-
ing on  your  part."

Would  you  not  listen  to  him,  thank  him,  and  try  for  that  position?

[67]


68  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

In  effect,  I  am  going  to  say  just  this  in  the  serial  expositions  that
Doctor  Lust  has  asked  me  to  write  on  "Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing."
If  you  are  professionally  engaged  in  any  branch  of  drugless  healing,  you
should  make  $10  where  you  are  making  $2,  and  you  might  accomplish
$10  worth  of  good  where  you  are  accomplishing  $2  worth.  I  do  not
guarantee  this  enlargement  of  your  income  on  the  day  following  the
reading  of  these  chapters;  I  do  guarantee  that  if  you  will  think  and  act
along  the  lines  here  suggested,  you  will  find  such  an  increase  developing
in  due  course  of  time.

The  Nature  Cure  in  America  is  only  20  per  cent  efficient.

The  statement  is  unwelcome,  but  the  fact  is  undeniable.  When  I
first  heard  the  fact,  I  was  tempted  to  be  angry  at  the  man  who  told  me
— we  are  always  shortsighted  in  facing  our  own  shortcomings.  But  as
I  listened  further,  and  reasoned  the  matter  out,  I  saw  he  was  right.

Briefly  the  situation  is  this.  There  are  five  things  the  Nature  Cure
must  do  in  America:

1.  Reach  the  great  masses  of  people,  with  its  gospel  of  right  heal-
ing and  right  living;

2.  Attract  and  convince  them,  and  induce  them  to  try  its  methods;

3.  Heal,  instruct  and  inspire  them  for  a  happier,  saner  life;

4.  Gain  a  financial  success  and  be  given  a  commercial  rating  in
Dun's  and  Bradstreet's;

5.  Adopt  a  general  standard  of  practice,  and  on  this  obtain  a  legal
recognition  and  license  in  every  State  of  the  Union.

Of  these  five  points,  the  Nature  Cure  thus  far  has  satisfactorily
covered  only  one — the  healing,  instructing  and  inspiring  of  the  compara-
tively few  whom  it  has  been  able  to  reach.  The  other  four  objects  re-
main to  be  accomplished.

Measured  by  modern  business  standards,  the  Nature  Cure  in  this
country  is  therefore  only  20  per  cent  efficient.

This  is  no  one's  fault,  but  every  one's  misfortune.  The  splendid
pioneers  of  drugless  healing  in  America,  headed  by  Doctor  Lust,  have
wrought  almost  superhuman  triumphs  in  spite  of  overwhelming  ob-
stacles. They  have  done  more  than  could  have  been  asked  or  expected.
But  that  80  per  cent  of  inefficiency  stares  us  in  the  face,  and  must  be
wiped  out.

For  ten  years  I  have  wanted  to  write  a  modern  book  along  this
line,  but  have  waited  until  I  had  proved  enough  efficiency  in  my  own
work  to  show  that  I  knew  the  subject. You  may  safely  disregard  what


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


69


a  man  says  until  you  have  asked  two  questions:  "What  reason  has  he
for  saying  it,  and  what  right  has  he  to  say  it?"  In  order  to  show  this
reason  and  this  right,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  making  this  introduc-
tory article  very  personal.  The  ground  covered  by  the  chapters  will  be
so  different  from  that  originally  covered  by  the  editorials  of  the  writer
years  ago,  in  the  colums  of  The  Naturopath,  that  it  seems  necessary  to
introduce  him  all  over  again.

For  a  number  of  years  the  old  friends  in  the  Nature  Cure  have  been
kind  enough  to  ask  about  the  work  I  was  doing  and  its  relation  to  the
health  propaganda.  This  introductory  article  may  serve  also  as  an  an-
swer to  these  friends.

It  is  often  best  to  leave,  for  a  time,  whatever  we  love  most.

To  keep  our  life  big  and  sweet  and  wholesome,  we  must  safeguard
our  warmest  sympathies  by  our  coolest  judgments.  And  if  anything — •
person  or  ambition  or  occupation  or  pleasure — claims  our  intense  de-
votion, our  whole  affection,  this  we  must  beware  of,  as  our  greatest
danger.  It  will  burn  us  out  and  leave  us  a  cinder;  we  must  flee  it,  or
subdue  it,  or  protect  ourselves  from  it,  else  it  destroys  us.

Here  lies  the  first  reason  for  my  apparent  desertion  of  Health  Re-
form and  the  Nature  Cure.  I  was  so  completely  wrapped  up  in  it  that
I  found  myself  slowly  suffocating.  We  need  "air-baths"  for  our  brains,
as  well  as  for  our  bodies.  And  to  live  constantly  in  the  same  mental
atmosphere  is  to  poison  our  intellect  with  the  carbonic  acid  gas  of
prejudice.

Many  a  time,  when  I  was  recommending  the  books,  foods  and  gar-
ments of  Doctor  Lust's  original  Kneipp  Store  of  New  York,  I  would  seize
the  poor  customer  by  the  force  of  my  loquacity,  and  keep  him  a  prisoner
till  midnight,  shackling  him  with  merciless  arguments  and  tying  him  up
in  long  phrases,  till  the  wretched  man  was  so  dazed  he  forgot  to  take
home  what  he  came  for,  when  at  last  I  allowed  him  to  limp  feebly  out.
Countless  repetitions  of  this  excessive  zeal  gradually  exhausted  me.

For  years,  the  only  meetings  I  went  to  were  the  stamping-grounds
of  freaks  and  cranks,  all  of  whom  had  a  theory  which  alone  would
save  the  world — and  no  two  of  them  alike!  I  read  only  health  books,
ate  only  health  foods,  studied  only  health  systems,  took  only  health
exercises,  wore  only  health  clothes,  followed  only  health  advice — and
got  deathly  sick  of  it  all!

A  good  riproarious  jambouree,  of  pork  and  pickles  and  soda  bis-
cuits, catsup  and  coffee  and  jelly  and  mince-pie,  is  a  first-class  remedy,
taken  at  proper  intervals — say  two  or  three  times  a  year — for  those


70  Universal  Naluropalhic  Dirrrlonj  (tiid  niu/crs'  (iiiidc

Mllliflcd  with  a  iKallh-cult  habit.  (This  volume  is  signed,  and  the
publisher  exonerated.)  When  a  man  is  so  healthy  he  is  miserable,  he
isn't  healthy.  I  was  getting  that  way — and  I  knew  I  had  to  find  some
otlier  business,  or  else  grow  utterly  narrow,  queer,  sour,  intolerant.

The  average  reformer  is  only  a  third  of  a  man.  He  needs  an  in-
former  to  keep  him  broad,  and  a  performer  to  keep  him  busy.  I  know
probably  five  hundred  reformers,  hygienic  and  metaphysical.  Out  of
that  number,  I  should  say  that  four  hundred  and  seventy-five  are  more
or  less  unsafe  as  teachers  and  guides  because  theoretical,  one-sided,
ignorant,  unadaptable,  mercenary,  egotistical,  or  immoral.  The  more
I  see  of  our  modern,  self-styled  "advanced  thinkers,"  the  less  I  want  to
sec.  Only  dunces  remain  devotees.  And  I  found  that,  no  matter  how
hard  1  fought  against  it,  I  myself  was  accumulating  a  "following"  com-
posed of  those  who  falsely  measure  a  man  by  his  notions  instead  of  by
his  actions.

When  I  was  assistant  editor  of  The  Naturopath,  many  people  took
the  magazine  just  because  I  wrote  for  it.  That  was  not  a  good  reason
for  taking  it.  As  well  drink  a  beverage  because  the  cup  is  painted
prettily,  as  read  only  that  magazine  which  hands  out  its  truth  in  fres-
coed phrases  of  a  particular  stamp.  I  am  not  ungrateful  to  the  hun-
dreds of  loyal  friends  and  devoted  readers  who  stood  by  Doctor  Lust
and  myself  in  our  early  struggles.  They  made  us,  perhaps,  even  more
than  we  made  ourselves.  But  my  work  in  the  Nature  Cure,  being  al-
most entirely  of  a  literary  character,  had  no  permanent  objective  basis.
And  there  came  a  time  when  I  said  to  myself:  "If  you're  any  good,
you'll  get  out  of  this,  start  in  again  where  you're  unknown,  make  a
place  for  yourself  on  a  business  footing — and  prove  all  the  truths  of
which  you  write  so  easily!"  A  collegian  isn't  educated  until  he  is  proud
to  exchange  the  "mortar-board"  he  wears  on  his  head  for  the  one  he
works  with  his  hands.  I  knew  a  prodigious  lot — but  Wisdom  never
once  looked  at  me  until  the  day  I  started  to  work.

There  was  another  personal  reason  for  going  elsewhere.  Certain
people  who  read  my  books  and  editorials,  having  not  the  wit  to  com-
prehend them,  forthwith  noised  abroad  their  suspicion  that  "Purinton
is  a  visionary — poetic  and  unpractical;  he  may  be  all  right  for  the  short-
haired  women  and  long-haired  men,  but  I'm  a  plain  business  man,  with
no  time  for  dreams."  Ah,  my  unfortunate  friend,  you  always  will  be  a
"plain"  business  man  so  long  as  you  have  no  time  for  dreams — the  ex-
traordinary, colossal  business  men  are  made  by  their  dreams!  How  do
I  know?  Because  for  the  past  twelve  years  I  have  worked,  side  by  side,
with  just  such  men.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirpctori)  and  Binjprs'  Guide  71

During  this  time,  I  have  been  not  only  the  associate  but  the
personal  friend  and  counsellor  of  various  types  of  business  men,  whose
incomes  ranged  from  $20,000  to  $50,000  a  year — and  every  one
was  a  pronounced,  self-confessed  "dreamer"!  When  I  was  in  the
Nature  Cure,  I  merely  talked  my  dreams;  since  I  have  been  in
regular  trades  and  pursuits,  I  have  worked  them  out; — but  they  are  the
same  dreams.  And  in  order  to  realize  them,  I  had  to  leave  the  place
where  I  was  thought  a  mere  poet.  Never  try  to  change  people's  first
impressions  of  yow,  when  you  want  to  develop  another  side  of  your
nature,  pack  up  and  dig  out.

So  much  for  the  personal  side.  I  have  mentioned  this  first,  because
of  the  many  kind  requests  about  me  that  are  still  coming  to  Doctor
Lust's  otTice,  and  1  don't  want  anybody  to  think  for  a  moment  that  my
absence  from  Naturist  circles  came  through  negligence  or  desertion.  It
was  all  a  part  of  a  great  plan,  through  which  I  might  become  of  more
service  to  Humanity.

But  the  real  reason  for  trying  to  broaden  my  experience  lay  in  the
hope  of  winning  to  our  cause  of  truth  and  freedom,  the  millions  of  peo-
ple who  had  not  yet  come  for  what  we  had  to  give  them.  I  had  seen
"quack  doctors"  flourish  amazingly  on  a  stylish  avenue  of  New  York; —
while  a  few  doors  away,  on  a  dingy  back  street,  a  sincere  Nature  Curist
was  literally  starving  for  bread.  I  had  watched  some  nervy  "professor"
of  physical  culture  reach  fame  by  a  single  bound,  on  a  mere  sensational
device  for  catching  trade; — while  an  honest  teacher  of  life's  greatest
truths  could  not  hold  his  little  handful  of  hearers.  I  had  known  the
maker  of  a  patent  health  food  and  a  metaphysical  rigmarole  to  have
his  devout  bands  of  worshippers  all  over  America; — while  a  great
healer  who  was  both  honest  and  unselfish  wasn't  believed  by  the  neigh-
bors next  door.  Why?  That  question  haunted  me.  Couldn't  a  man  be
sincere  and  shrewd  at  the  same  time?  Was  it  impossible  to  gain  popu-
larity and  hold  your  principles  too?  Was  it  right,  and  unavoidable,
that  Nature  Cure  should  be  so  shamefully  discredited,  while  the  vendors
of  poisonous  drugs  grew  rich  and  sleek  and  exalted  by  society?

So  long  as  I  protested,  blamed  and  rebelled,  I  had  no  answer  to
these  questions.  But  when  I  began  to  study  my  own  deficiencies,  the
answer  came  in  a  flash — "You  Naturists  don't  know  your  job!  You  are
in  the  business  of  selling  a  commodity — health.  But  you  have  never
learned  business  psychology,  nor  applied  business  methods,  nor  even
respected  business  principles.  If  you  were  selling  pianos  or
carpets  or  stove-polish,  you  would  hire  real  salesmen  and  establish  a
modern  system  of  management.  You  fail  to  win  popularity  because
you  neglect  the  right  methods  of  merchandising — or  because  you  try  to


72  Unipersal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


sell  reform,  which  no  one  wants,  and  no  one  pays  lor.  If  Doctor  Mun-
yon  is  a  millionaire,  it  is  because  he  is  a  clever  business  man.  He  is
richer  than  you,  not  because  he  is  less  respectable,  but  because  he  is
more  cniciont.  Put  your  brains  in  your  work — not  in  your  talk;  mean-
while stop  bemoaning  your  hard  luck;  you  haven't  any,  there  isn't  any,
there  is  only  hard  hearing  when  Good  Luck  calls."

When  my  kind  fairy  got  through  lecturing  me  in  this  fashion,  I
perceived  that  the  success  of  my  future  work  demanded  three  things:

1.  A  fuller  knowledge  of  and  sympathy  with  human  nature,  enab-
ling me  to  understand  normal  people's  wants,  and  also  their
diiViculties  in  applying  new  truths;

2.  A  thorough  training  in  the  psychology  of  advertising  and  sales-
manship, making  the  appeal  in  my  writings  commercially
effective;

3.  A  careful  observance  and  experience  of  business  methods  of
various  kinds,  preventing  those  mistakes  of  ignorance  by  which
most  reformers  are  defeated.

Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  "knowing  your  job,"

As  you  know.  Doctor  Lust  is  the  compiler  and  publisher  of  a
number  of  original  books  on  Natural  Healing  and  Wholesome  Living,
including  my  own  "Philosophy  of  Fasting"  and  "Lords  of  Ourselves."
It  was  my  work  to  announce  these  books  to  the  general  public.  How
did  I  mostlj'  do  it?  By  emphasizing  those  peculiar,  idealistic  or  icono-
clastic portions  which  were  attractive  to  only  a  few  of  us  "cranks"  but
sounded  crazy  to  the  average  superficial  thinker!  There  is,  for  example,
a  good  amount  of  really  valuable  and  helpful  information  in  the  book
"Lords  of  Ourselves"; — but  a  short  while  ago,  a  part  of  the  chapter  on
sound  sleep  was  copied,  almost  word  for  word,  by  one  of  the  New  York
Sunday  papers,  in  advising  nervous  women  how  to  relax  and  recuperate.
But  in  preparing  the  leaflet  of  announcement  for  this  book,  I  deliberately
chose  the  few  extremely  radical  statements  on  diet,  sex,  religion,  et
cetera,  which  the  book  contains — and  entirely  omitted  the  practical  side
of  personal  helpfulness!  This  was  noble  reform — and  wretched  sales-
manship !  No  man  will  pay  for  being  startled,  or  even  sermonized,  in  a
health  book.

The  sick  man  wants  recovery — not  discovery.

Another  example.  I  have  before  me  the  booklets,  letters  and  elabo-
rate "follow-up"  system  of  a  most  successful  Nature  Cure  institute.  The
proprietor  uses  modern  methods  of  advertising,  featuring  "testimonials"


Universal  Naturopathic  Directonj  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide  7;i

and  other  quack-medicine  schemes  to  influence  prospective  clients.  In
all  the  time  that  I  have  known  Doctor  and  Mrs.  Lust,  not  one  printed
testimonial  has  been  used,  I  believe,  in  presenting  the  advantages  of  the
"Yungborn"  at  Butler.  This  unique  fact  is  to  their  everlasting  credit.
They  have  built  up  a  large  sanitarium  system  on  the  basis  of  friend-to-
friend  recommendation,  and  the  personal  benefit  that  patients  and  vis-
itors have  received.  But,  nevertheless,  this  is  not  good  business,  from  a
worldly  standpoint.  The  Butler  health  home  is  competing  with  a  dozen
other  institutions  nearby — most  of  them  now  operated  by  men  who
received  a  large  share  of  their  knowledge  and  impetus  from  the  founders
of  the  Yungborn!  Should  scientific  advertising  be  made  to  serve  and
prosper  only  the  newer  health  resorts,  while  the  parent  of  them  is  too
modest,  or  too  unskilled,  to  sound  her  own  claims?

In  short,  the  use  of  words  in  the  Nature  Cure  has  been  too  much
art — too  little  science.  You  must  win  the  world  before  you  can  reform
it;  to  win  it,  you  must  study  it;  to  study  it,  you  must  live  with  it,  work
with  it,  sympathize  with  it,  fight  and  suffer  and  fall  and  rise  and  conquer
with  it; — therefore,  to  reform  the  world,  you  must  for  a  time  stop  re-
forming it.  I  left  the  reform  business  in  order  to  learn  the  reform  busi-
ness, this  being  perhaps  the  one  business  that  must  be  learned  from
the  outside.  And  the  first  booklet  written,  after  I  knew  my  work,  gained
a  circulation  of  500,000  copies  in  five  months — as  against  a  total  audience
of  perhaps  100,000  people  in  the  ten  years  preceding!  In  one  month  of
scientific  publicity,  I  have  recently  been  able  to  reach  as  many  heads
and  hearts  as  formerly  responded  in  the  course  of  ten  years!  Has  it
not  been  worth  while  to  get  training  as  well  as  truth?

There  are  two  reasons  for  this  lengthy  and  extremely  personal  in-
troduction.

The  first  reason  is  to  prove  the  writer's  willingness  to  take  his  own
medicine.  Some  very  plain  statements  will  be  made  in  these  chapters —
but  the  writer  has  forced  plainer  ones  on  himself!  You  may  be  angry
at  some  of  these  statements — your  anger  will  not  be  a  circumstance
compared  with  the  anger  of  the  writer  at  discovering  his  own  weakness,
inefficiency  and  one-sidedness  during  those  early  years  when  he  was
vainly  attempting  to  be  a  great  reformer.  The  test  of  good  advice  is
that  the  man  who  gives  it  swallowed  some  first.  Se//"-analysis,  self-
criticism,  se//-reform;  these  are  the  three  steps  to  a  life  of  genuine  al-
truism. The  best  way  to  teach  others  how  to  be  healthy  is  to  teach  our-
selves how  to  be  sane.

The  second  reason  for  a  personal  introduction  is  to  attest  the  knowl-
edge and  authority  of  the  writer  along  efficiency  lines. There  is  a  vast


74  I'liiiirrsdl  Sdiuropdlhic  Dirrchinj  (Uid  liui/crs'  Guide

amount  ol  picacliiiig  being  done  in  advanced  tliought  circles  by  those
who  have  hit  all  llio  praclicing  to  l)e  done  by  their  patients  and  students.
Women  w  ho  have  been  divorced  are  selling  instructions  on  how  to  make
marriage  a  success;  men  who  are  poverty-stricken  have  the  nerve  to
write  l)()oks  on  the  attainment  of  wealth;  "healers"  who  look  as  if  they
had  one  foot  in  the  grave  and  the  other  foot  on  the  yon  side  of  it,  guar-
antee to  make  you  well  in  a  few  magic  lessons  or  treatments; — and  such
performances  are  allowed  to  go  on,  ad  nauseam  and  ad  infinitum.

Being  weary  unto  death  of  this  sort  of  thing,  1  wrote  nothing  about
efliciency  in  drugless  healing  until  I  had  solved  the  efTiciency  problem
for  myself.  Your  forbearance  is  requested  a  little  further,  in  the  dem-
onstration of  this  fact.

Let  us  consider  the  practical  side  of  health  study.

The  last  place  to  look  for  wisdom  is  in  a  college,  just  as  the  last
place  to  look  for  health  is  in  a  drug-store  and  the  last  place  to  look  for
justice  is  in  a  law-court.  One  of  the  great  fallacies  of  the  day  is  that  a
college  of  medicine,  law  or  theology  turns  out  wise  men; — to  overcome
and  outgrow  this  fallacy  is  the  first  task  of  a  college  graduate.

We  grow  brain-wise  through  working,  body-wise  through  playing,
heart-wise  through  loving,  soul-wise  through  suffering.  We  grow  wise
in  no  respect  through  studying.

As  soon  as  possible  after  graduation  from  college,  I  made  friends
with  some  nice,  accommodating  rats  and  let  them  eat  up  my  diploma.
While  a  severe  method  of  poisoning  the  rats,  this  expedient  enabled
me  to  say  that  the  parchment  had  been  lost,  and  thus  delivered  me  from
the  customary  duty  of  framing  it  and  hanging  it  on  the  wall.  The  only
diploma  worth  having  is  a  record  of  deeds.  Some  colleges  are  fine  in-
stitutions, some  teachers  magnificent  men;  but  the  whole  system  is
wrong. It  fails  to  connect  with  life.

The  same  truth  applies,  at  least  partially,  to  schools  of  natural
therapeutics — whether  of  naturopathy,  hydrotherapy,  osteopathy,  chiro-
practic, mechanotherapy,  food  chemistry,  mental  science  or  spiritual
forces.  They  teach  the  art  of  healing,  but  not  the  business  of  healing;—
and  the  art  is  useless  without  the  business.  How  can  a  drugless  physi-
cian get  more  patients,  keep  those  he  has,  make  them  all  pay  promptly
and  well,  secure  their  fullest  co-operation,  and  save  his  own  time  and
strength  in  caring  for  them?  These  questions  are  as  important  to  him
as  the  question  of  cure  is  to  his  patients.  How,  in  short,  can  the  new
principles  of  "scientific  management"  as  applied  to  other  trades  and
professions,  be  utilized  in  the  Nature  Cure  for  the  equal  benefit  of  patient
and  practitioner?


Universal  Naturopathic  Direr  lory  and  lUu/crs'  Guide


This  question  has  never  been  stated  before,  to  my  knowledge;  much
less  answered!  The  reason  is  plain;  no  drugless  healer  has  learned
enough  about  scientific  management  to  adapt  the  principles  to  his  work;
and  no  efTiciency  engineer  has  been  paid  to  devote  his  time  for  several
months — at  $100  or  more  a  week — to  the  raising  of  business  standards
in  the  new  therapeutic  field.  Any  doctor  who  could  afford  to  pay  an
efficiency  expert  $100  a  week  is  too  good  a  business  man  to  need  the
expert.  So  the  profession  of  drugless  healing  and  the  science  of  busi-
ness method  have  remained  far  apart.

Some  naturopath  or  osteopath  or  psychopath  may  interject  the
query:  "Why  should  I  learn  business  method  for  my  work  of  healing
the  sick?  What  possible  connection  has  an  efhciency  engineer  with  the
relief  of  pain  and  recovery  of  health?"

Let  facts,  not  theories,  be  the  answer.  I  shall  cite  a  number  of
cases  of  rank  inefTiciency,  known  to  me  personally,  and  shall  outline
the  efficiency  principle  whose  adoption  would  have  prevented  the  error
in  each  case.  Most  of  these  friends  are  people  of  noble  character,  doing
a  noble  work.  But  a  man  may  be  a  true  physician,  a  superb  teacher,  a
great  reformer,  and  still  be  a  failure  as  regards  the  study  and  use  of
modern  efficiency  methods.  I  have  recently  been  told,  quite  forcibly,
that  the  saviors  of  the  world  have  never  been  "efficiency"  men.  True
enough — but  they  did  not  undertake  a  work  where  efficiency  was  needed
on  the  material  plane.  If  your  mission  is  to  be  a  martyr,  I  respect  and
love  and  revere  you  for  carrying  out  the  mission.  But  if  your  mission
is  to  take  money  for  lessons  or  treatments  or  books  or  prescriptions,  and
you  don't  make  a  successful  business  of  it,  I  pity  you  for  sadly  falling
down  on  your  job.  This  plain  distinction  must  be  sharply  enforced;
and  in  these  chapters  I  shall  discuss  only  the  efficiency  side,  referring  to
examples  of  inefficiency  as  a  business  engineer  would  do — frankly  and
impersonally.

Example  One

A  specialist  on  health  without  drugs  failed  to  read  up  the  laws  of
doctor.  The  Medical  Society  dragged  him  into  court,  and  robbed  him
of  a  large  sum  of  money.  He  posed  as  a  martyr.  He  w  as  a  fool — by
efficiency  standards.

Efficiency  principle :  Never  expect  to  succeed  in  the  Nature  Cure  by
transgressing  the  law.  If  you  are  strong  enough,  repeal  the  law;  if  not,
conform  to  it.  Either  smash  the  law  and  frame  a  new  one  legalizing
drugless  practice,  as  the  osteopaths  have  done  in  most  States  and  the


7r,  rniDcrsdl  Sdinrojntlliic  Dirrrtorij  and  Biiifrrs'  Guide


naturopaths  are  now  trying  to  do;  or  else  hire  a  cheap  doctor  to  make
vour  t'xaniinalions  and  prescriptions  legal,  as  the  quack  medicine  sharks
have  hcen  doing  for  a  generation.  All  this  wholesale  antagonism  of  the
Medical  Trust  by  healers  is,  to  an  efficiency  man,  sheer  waste  of  time
and  energy  and  money.

Example  Two

A  young  exponent  of  the  fast-cure  barely  escaped  a  year's  term  of
imprisonment  because  a  patient  died  while  fasting  and  the  law  accused
the  practitioner  of  murder.  In  this  case  the  law  was  right — the  patient
was  in  no  condition  for  a  measure  so  extreme.  Much  as  I  believe  in  the
junction with  a  qualilied  M.  D.,  who  would  technically  watch  the  symp-
toms and  assume  legal  responsibility  in  case  of  death.

Efiiciency  principle:  Never  treat  a  case  where  death  is  remotely
possible,  without  arranging  for  a  certificate  by  a  registered  physician.
We  protest  because  drug  doctors  are  licensed  to  kill — why  should
healers  be  allowed  to  do  so?  There  is  a  deal  of  malpractice  in  the  drug-
less  ranks,  due  to  ignorance,  prejudice  and  incompetency.  Our  first,
and  hardest,  job  is  to  weed  out  the  undesirables  from  our  own  back  yard.


Example  Three

A  gymnast  founded  a  health  resort.  He  made  so  much  money  that
the  bookkeeper  of  the  place  ran  off  with  $500  in  his  clothes,  and  the
money  wasn't  missed  till  the  absconder  was  caught  and  the  money
observed  sticking  in  his  coat,  hat  and  shoes.  The  founder  had  too  many
schemes  and  reforms  on  hand,  he  couldn't  follow  any  to  the  finish  and
his  employees  took  advantage  of  his  absence.

EfTiciency  principle:  Concentrate  on  one  thing  till  you  have  built
a  systematic,  automatic  basis  for  its  permanent  success.  I  used  to  heal
a  little,  teach  a  little,  write  a  little,  speak  a  little,  reform  a  little,  mer-
chandise a  little,  co-operate  a  little,  uplift  a  little,  and  do  various  other
things  a  little. I  got  nowhere.

The  phrenologist  said  my  "continuity"  was  w^eak.  It  was.  It  is  no
longer.  I  have  cut  out  everything  but  writing,  learned  how  to  do  that,
and  reached  the  place  where  I  wanted  to  be.  If  you  are  engaged  in
healing,  focus  on  that  and  forget  all  else.  Can  you  picture  a  leading
surgeon,  or  even  a  famous  prizefighter,  sloshing  around  to  wild-eyed


Universal  Naliiropathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  77

reform  gatherings  and  exhorting  the  populace  on  socialism,  single  tax,
eugenics,  anti-vaccination,  or  the  astral  emanations  of  the  sublunary
sphere? Too  many  healers  are  just  plain  cranks,  with  axes  to  grind.

Example  Four

A  great  hygienist  and  humanitarian  keeps  a  stenographer  who  is  a
noble  example  of  what  a  stenographer  ought  not  to  be.  She  can't  spell,
can't  punctuate,  can't  paragraph,  can't  edit,  and  when  feeling  real  good
she  takes  dictation  at  the  rate  of  a  word  in  three  minutes.  Why  does
the  great  humanitarian  keep  the  poor  stenographer?  Because  no  one
else  will  have  her.  And  he  is  a  great  humanitarian.  Far  into  the  night,
when  this  beauteous  maid  is  spending  her  carefree  young  life  at  the
"movies"  or  a  tango  whirl,  this  gray-haired  employer  laboriously  deci-
phers the  Chinese  puzzles  she  wrote  for  letters,  and  clumsily  corrects
them  for  her  ladyship  to  re-write  next  day.  At  the  stroke  of  midnight,
he  wearily  passes  his  lily-white  hand  across  his  fevered  brow,  and
placidly  murmurs  what  a  noble-hearted  fellow  he  is.  Noble-hearted
chump  and  transcendental  numskull!

Efficiency  principle:  Choose  your  helpers  by  how  much  work  they
can  do,  with  the  least  supervision,  in  the  best  and  easiest  way,  and  the
shortest  possible  time.  Any  other  basis  of  employment  is  unfair  to  you,
your  clerk,  and  your  client.  Some  day  we  shall  wake  up  to  the  fact  that
it  is  rotten  reform,  as  well  as  rotten  business,  to  clutter  up  the  office  with
a  sickly  bunch  of  addle-noodled  nobodies  who  couldn't  get  a  job  wash-
ing windows  in  a  regular  commercial  house.  When  I  have  to  enter  the
average  hygienic  or  metaphysical  institution,  I  always  fix  up  a  resolute
grin  and  plaster  it  firmly  on  my  face  in  advance;  otherwise  I  should
grow  suddenly  and  righteously  wrathy,  and  push  the  whole  perform-
ance out  the  window.

Example  Five

A  chiropractor,  of  unusual  skill  and  personality,  charges  half  the
rate  generally  asked  for  chiropractic  treatment,  and  for  good  measure
throws  in  a  free  lecture  on  diet,  exercise,  optimism,  and  mental  sugges-
tion. Having  educated  the  patients  to  the  point  where  they  don't  need
her  any  more  forever,  she  feels  her  duty  has  been  done— she  will  no
longer  be  under  the  painful  necessity  of  taking  money  from  them.  On
prosperous  days  she  earns  as  much  as  $1.25  an  hour — less  than  is  made
by  a  first-class  plumber;  and  I  think  she  suspects  herself  of  robbery  if
she  goes  above  75  cents  an  hour.  This  lady  missed  her  calling— she
should  have  been  a  charity  society.


78  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Ellicicncv  principle:  Never  cut  your  fee;  when  you  do  you  cheapen
your  work  and  impair  its  value  to  the  client.  Let  him  pay  with  notes,
or  on  the  instalment  plan,  if  he  is  very  poor.  But  have  enough  self-
respect  to  hold  your  standard  price,  and  to  give  only  as  much  instruction
as  the  fee  includes.

Example  Six

A  metaphysician,  some  of  whose  clients  are  millionaires,  didn't
have  enough  money  to  pay  her  board  bill.  She  wrote  a  personal  letter
to  some  of  her  wealthy  patients  who  owed  her  large  amounts,  explained
how  she  needed  money,  and  humbly  suggested  that  they  forward  a  small
sum  on  account.  There  was  not  the  faintest  ripple  of  response.  And
the  next  meal  of  the  metaphysical  lady  is  now  dependent  on  the  mercy
of  friends,  while  her  creditors  are  gadding  around  at  pleasure  resorts,
with  hundreds  of  dollars'  worth  of  unpaid  fees  deserted  and  forgotten.

Efficiency  principle:  Never  send  out  your  own  bills — employ  a
secretary,  or  if  needed  a  collection  agency.  And  render  the  bills  on  time,
as  a  meatman  or  grocer  does.  It  is  unprofessional  for  a  doctor  or  healer
personally  to  ask  a  patient  to  settle  up; — and  unbusinesslike  to  allow
the  bill  to  run  on.  Doctors  have  themselves  largely  to  blame  for  "bad
accounts";  they  render  the  statements  so  irregularly  and  unsystema-
tically  as  to  create  the  impression  of  their  indifference  to  the  manner
and  time  of  settlement.  It  is  fatal,  however,  to  let  a  client  suspect  that
you  are  actually  in  need  of  money;  being  a  mystery-dispenser,  you  are
supposed  to  be  fed  and  clothed  miraculously.  Your  secretary  may  sug-
gest that  you  are  purchasing  new  equipment,  or  conducting  original
researches,  or  doing  charity  work,  and  therefore  would  appreciate  the
payment  of  fees  overdue — but  never  that  your  landlady  wants  the  rent,
or  your  tailor  has  a  bad  look  in  his  eye!  Every  doctor  should  take  a
course  in  magic; — he  is  supposed  by  his  clients  to  wear  a  fresh  silk  hat
every  day,  and  to  produce  it  from  nobody  knows  where.


Example  Seven

A  magazine  devoted  to  mental  hygiene  failed  completely,  with
debts  aggregating  several  hundred  thousand  dollars.  The  editorial  end
outweighed  the  commercial.  The  two  means  of  self-support  for  a  maga-
zine of  this  character  had  been  neglected;  namely,  a  generous  income
from  regular  advertising,  and  the  possibility  of  making  the  journal  a
feeder  for  some  other  unprofitable  enterprise  or  institution.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  79

Efficiency  principle:  Run  the  financial  side  of  your  work  as  a
business — not  as  a  reform  or  philanthropy.  Get  a  business  manager
who  is  just  as  eager  to  make  money  as  you  are  to  do  good — then  you
will  have  a  sane,  effective  combination.


Example  Eight

A  healer,  lecturer  and  health  reformer  is  so  devoted  to  his  work
that  he  never  takes  a  vacation.  He  won't  even  spend  25  cents  for  a
gallery  seat  in  a  theatre,  for  fear  of  robbing  his  work  of  a  quarter  of  a
dollar  and  a  couple  of  hours.  The  man  is  prematurely  gray  and  wrin-
kled, his  nerves  are  on  edge,  he  cannot  find  repose.  The  world  exists
merely  for  him  to  reform.  I  have  been  tempted  to  suspect  that  God
may  have  had  some  other  purpose  in  mind  than  this,  when  He  made
the  world;  but  I  would  never  dare  to  hint  such  a  possibility  to  my  ar-
dent friend,  lest  he  accuse  me  of  sacrilege.

Efficiency  principle :  Love  your  work  enough  to  leave  it  and  forget
it  every  so  often.  We  are  only  atoms  in  the  Cosmic  Plan;  why  agitate
ourselves  as  though  we  were  supernal  cyclones  of  importance?  The
fatal  defect  in  all  reform  is  overseriousness;  and  no  reformer  is  really
sane  until  he  can  laugh  at  his  own  solemnity.  The  best  sermon  for  a
preacher  to  hear  is  a  funny  play;  and  a  hired  clown  should  hold  the
seat  of  honor  at  every  sanitarium.


Example  Nine

A  purveyor  of  mental  sunshine  organized  a  club  of  50,000  optimists.
He  then  prepared  a  rosy-hued  mining-scheme  attachment.  Believing  in
the  smiling  gentleman  and  all  his  works,  the  club  members  handed  over
large  sums  for  small  portions  of  stock — and  proceeded  to  wait  for  inde-
pendent fortunes  to  amble  to  their  doors.  They  are  still  waiting.  The
club  and  its  magazine  went  to  pieces,  together  with  the  faith  of  thou-
sands in  the  honesty  of  all  professional  reformers  and  uplif ters.  Moral :
To  regain  your  courage,  follow  an  optimist;  to  regain  your  cash,  follow
a  pessimist.

Efficiency  principle :  Never  try  to  capitalize  reform.  If  j'^ou  wish  to
incorporate  and  sell  stock,  make  no  promise  of  dividends  or  even  of
return  of  principal;  and  be  content  to  grow  normally,  without  any
get-rich-quick  features  or  sensational  appeals.


80  Unii'rrsdl  Naturopathic  Dirrctonj  and  Buyers'  Guide

Example  Ten

A  prolilic  writer  on  health  subjects  recently  killed  himself.  He
could  not  live  any  longer  with  his  conscience.  It  was  found  that  he  had
used  the  health  cult  as  a  cloak  for  the  most  horrible  infamies,  and  under
the  guise  of  East  Indian  philosophy  had  systematically  ruined  and  cor-
rupted young  girls  and  boys.  For  years  he  had  worn  a  sheet  of  iron
over  his  heart,  to  protect  him  against  the  weapons  of  outraged  husbands
and  fathers;  but  at  last  an  accusing  conscience  rose  within  him,  smote
the  iron  shield  asunder,  and  impelled  the  hypocrite  to  seize  the  means  of
his  own  self-destruction.

Efficiency  principle :  Do  not  imagine  that  you  can  substitute  cult  for
character,  and  get  away  with  it.  There  is  nothing  in  Christian  Science,
New  Thought,  Pragmatism,  Spiritism,  Theosophy  or  Vedanta  to  take  the
place  of  the  old-fashioned  Christian  virtues.  And  if  a  "guru",  swami  or
high  priest  of  the  occult  orders  you  to  violate  your  sense  of  reverence,
decency  and  honor,  tell  him  in  plain  language  to  go  to  Hell,  and  your-
self immediately  move  in  the  opposite  direction.

Forgive  this  outburst,  kind  friends.  I  am  not  pessimistic,  but  I  walk
no  more  in  cloudland.  Facts  are  things  to  be  faced.  During  my  past
fifteen  years  of  rather  close  observation,  not  merely  these  ten,  but
hundreds  of  examples  of  gross  inefficiency — mental,  moral,  financial  or
industrial — have  appeared  in  the  deeds  of  those  who  claim  a  superior
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  life.  We  who  know  the  fallacy  of  the  drug-
delusion  and  the  dogma-superstition,  have  learned  not  to  expect  much
from  doctors,  teachers  and  preachers  of  the  old  school.  But  how  shall
we  excuse  ourselves,  when  our  blunders  are  more  colossal?

In  1900,  my  great  object  was  to  reform  the  world.  In  1917,  my  great
object  is  to  make  of  myself  an  embodiment  of  the  ideals  I  used  to
cherish  for  the  world.  The  present  object,  while  perhaps  just  as  unat-
tainable, is  certainly  more  reasonable.  And,  beloved  brethren,  I  can
smile  a  heap  more — a  smile  being  God's  kind  of  sermon.

Efficiency  study  is  primarily  a  study  of  ideals.

Every  drugless  practitioner  is  more  or  less  an  idealist.  Having
found  a  saner  mode  of  healing  and  better  way  of  living,- he  endeavors
to  impress  them  on  his  patients,  and  embody  them  in  his  own  character.
A  healer  must  have  ideals  as  a  doctor  must  have  pills.

Now  the  reason  why  so  many  idealists  fail  to  get  anywhere  is  that
they  try  to  stand  alone  before  they  are  ready.  To  succeed  objectively,
they  must  have  the  antecedent  counsel,  system  and  co-operation  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/ers'  Guide  81

materialists.  A  young  idealist  needs  the  support  of  materialists  as  a
young  tree  in  a  land  of  storm  needs  the  support  of  a  wooden  box  or
brace,  to  which  it  is  securely  fastened.  The  heart  of  a  materialist  may
be  of  wood,  but  his  head  is  something  you  can  tie  to.

Preachers  are  paupers — hustlers  are  millionaires.  The  motive  of
the  former  and  the  method  of  the  latter  must  be  combined  in  any  man
who  is  fully  grown.  Until  the  apostles  of  the  Nature  Cure  learn  how
to  get  hold  of  money  in  large  sums,  and  to  expend  it  wisely  in  promot-
ing their  work,  they  must  expect  hardship,  anxiety,  persecution,  dis-
appointment. There  is  a  science  of  money-making,  which  science  we
reformers  have  not  learned.

Beautiful  visions  in  themselves  lead  nowhere.  They  must  be  sup-
plemented by  stern  vows,  disciplined  habits,  healthy  life,  modern
method,  wise  counsel,  earnest  co-operation,  fair  dealing,  genuine  service,
tolerant  spirit,  endless  toil,  boundless  optimism,  and  eternal  renewal
of  purpose.

When  the  writer  came  to  apprehend  his  material  inefficiency,  he
broke  away  from  the  little  band  of  dreamers  who  were  so  congenial,
and  set  his  feet  firmly  in  the  tracks  of  the  big  business  men,.  He  opened
his  eyes  and  ears,  and  shut  his  mouth  (a  course  of  action  earnestly
recommended  to  all  preachers  and  reformers) ;  he  unlimbered  his  cler-
ical knees,  grabbed  the  hardest  job  in  sight  with  his  velvet  palms  of  a
chronic  poet,  and  bathed  his  pedagogical  brow  in  the  honest  sweat  of
a  good  workman.  And  from  that  day  to  this,  he  has  had  small  use  for
most  parsons,  poets  and  pedagogues. They  are  living  an  imitation  life.

We  are  not  wandering  from  our  subject,  we  digress  in  order  to
progress.  There  should  be  a  law  forbidding  a  man  to  write,  preach  or
teach  until  he  has  done  a  regular  man's  job — of  deeds,  not  words;  and
made  a  good  living  at  it.  The  curse  of  our  libraries,  magazines  and
newspapers,  of  our  classical  schools  and  theological  seminaries,  of  our
pulpits  and  reform  centers  and  uplift  movements,  is  the  presence  in
them  of  men  who  never  did  anything  but  theorize.  Wisdom  is  a  con-
sequence of  work — it  enters  not  through  the  ears,  but  through  the  pores;
and  the  only  safe  leader  is  he  in  whom  inspiration  followed  perspiration.

The  writer  of  these  chapters  claims  no  merit  for  them  in  a  literary
sense.  If  they  possess  any  value,  it  is  because  they  are  the  record  and
result  of  his  fifteen  years  of  personal  experience  in  twenty  dififerent
lines  of  work,  all  of  them  bearing  on  "Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing."

He  has  overcome  in  one  way  or  another  a  large,  varied  and  beau-
tiful assortment  of  ailments  and  weaknesses;  from  indigestion,  catarrh,
emaciation,  chronic  headache,  liver  trouble  and  appendicitis,  to  sleep-


82  Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctorij  and  Buffers'  Guide

lessness,  the  worry  habit,  nervous  prostration,  a  congealing  bashfulness,
a  paralyzing  irresolution,  and  extreme  vocational  niisfitncss.  He  has
trebled  his  working  capacity,  lor  several  years  performing  the  duties  of
three  different  orticers  in  the  same  institution.  He  has  recently  earned
in  a  day  as  nuich  as  he  formerly  received  for  a  month's  wages.  Only
because  he  has  succeeded  fairly  well  in  producing  efficiency  for  himself,
does  he  dare  to  offer  suggestions  along  this  line  to  readers  of  his  books.

Professionally,  moreover,  he  has  had  unusual  opportunities  for
acquiring  knowledge  of  this  new  science.

He  has  served  an  apprenticeship  in  advertising  under  the  President
of  the  largest  outdoor  advertising  company  in  the  world.

He  has  worked  with  a  prominent  New  York  advertising  agency,  as
writer  and  solicitor.

He  has  had  access  to  the  Mahin  Course  in  Advertising,  the  Lord
School  of  Practical  Advertising,  the  Sheldon  Course  in  Salesmanship,
and  various  courses  in  Personal  Efficiency.

He  has  been  publicit}^  counsel  for  several  magazines  and  cor-
porations. .

He  has  organized  the  largest  club  devoted  to  Health  and  Efficiency
ever  established  in  this  City,  with  nearly  2,000  members  in  Greater  New
York,  and  memberships  extending  throughout  the  United  States  and  to
twenty  foreign  countries.

He  has  formed  a  partnership  with  the  President  of  a  leading  press
syndicate,  for  special  training  along  publicity  lines.

He  has  become  personally  acquainted  with,  and  more  or  less  in-
formed in  the  methods  of,  the  founder  of  the  National  Civic  Federation;
the  founder  of  the  National  Association  of  Corporation  Schools;  the
head  of  the  Industrial  League;  the  principal  teacher  in  the  Emerson
Institute  of  Efficiency;  the  secretary  of  the  American  Institute  of  Social
Service;  and  various  other  prominent  people  whose  experience  is  of
value,  in  adaptations  to  the  Nature  Cure.

He  has  been  offiicially  connected  with  a  drugless  health  resort,  and
has  helped  in  prescribing  for  the  patients  their  diet,  massage,  gymnas-
tics, and  instructions  in  hygiene.

He  has  written  a  number  of  health  books  and  has  been  staff  con-
tributor for  various  magazines  devoted  to  physical  and  mental  hygiene.

He  has  prepared  a  series  of  booklets  on  Efficiency  that  have  gained
the  widest  circulation  of  any  business  literature  of  the  kind  ever  pub-
lished— an  average  of  100,000  orders  a  month  having  been  received.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  83

from  such  institutions  as  Gimbel  Brothers,  Pennsylvania  Railroad,  Na-
tional Biscuit  Company,  Remington  Typewriter  Company,  U.  S.  Army,
Commercial  League,  Prudential  Life  Insurance  Company,  New  York
Hospitals  and  Board  of  Education.  So  great  has  been  the  demand  for
this  series  of  Efficiency  booklets  tl^at  the  publishers,  at  this  moment,
are  200,000  orders  behind  in  their  mailing  department.

The  object  in  the  foregoing  rather  distasteful  personal  recital  is  to
convey  to  you  the  idea  that  the  writer  has  had  sufficient  training  to
warrant  the  preparation  of  a  series  of  discussions  on  "Efficiency  in  Drug-
less  Healing,"  If  you  are  convinced  that  he  should  be  able  to  speak
with  some  authority,  let  us  proceed  with  the  discussion  proper.  It  is
being  qualified,  not  being  quoted,  that  makes  a  writer  worth  reading.
And  until  we  learn  to  judge  an  author  by  qualification  rather  than  quo-
tation, the  business  of  buying  books  will  remain  more  or  less  a  gamble,
and  that  of  making  books  more  or  less  a  crime.

What  do  we  mean  by  "Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing?"

We  mean  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  profession  with  regard  to  its
threefold  aspects  of  a  science,  an  art,  and  a  business;  a  frank  recog-
nition of  the  lacks  and  limitations  of  most  practitioners,  whether  me-
chanical (such  as  the  osteopath,  chiropractor  and  mechanotherapist) ;
physiological  (such  as  the  hydropath,  herbalist  and  dietist) ;  or  meta-
physical (such  as  the  "divine"  healer,  psychotherapist,  and  Christian
Scientist) ;  and  finally  a  systematic  endeavor  to  supply  the  needs  and
requirements  for  large  success — whether  social,  educational,  economic,
literary,  financial,  managerial,  clerical,  or  moral.

Of  the  science  and  the  art  of  drugless  healing  I  shall  say  nothing,
excepting  as  discussion  of  the  business  side  may  involve  such  mention.
Not  being  professionally  qualified  to  offer  advice  on  these  two  aspects,
I  shall  remain  silent.  But  as  any  man  who  thinks  for  himself  is  qualified
to  utter  an  opinion,  I  would  say,  in  passing,  that  the  science  and  the  art
need  improvement  as  much  as  the  business;  and  the  reason  that  the
Nature  Cure  in  America  finds  everywhere  opposition  and  misunder-
standing is  that  few  Nature  Curists  in  America  know  their  job.  They
are  inadequately  prepared — and  often  ignorant  of  the  fact.

When  we  blame  the  world  for  a  slow  acceptance  of  our  truth,  we
should  really  blame  ourselves  for  an  imperfect  expression  of  that  truth.
Martyrs  are  slain  not  for  their  principles,  but  for  their  prejudices.
Whenever  a  natural  healer  was  jailed  for  malpractice,  I  used  to  damn
the  jailer  and  deify  the  prisoner.  I  now  pity  them  both,  and  the
change  in  feeling  is  good  for  me,  whether  it  helps  them  or  not.  Only  a
fanatic  goes  to  prison  for  his  faith,  a  wise  man  turns  his  faith  into  deeds


84  Universal  Xatnropathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


that  tlie  woiltl  wants.  To  avoid  persecution,  we  must  live  more,  love
more,  talk  less,  and  condemn  not  at  all.  In  these  chapters  we  are  criti-
cizing not  men,  but  methods;  and  to  point  out  the  bad  methods  of  a
good  friend  is  one  of  the  friendliest  things  we  can  do.

1  base  the  following  analysis  (a)  on  a  familiarity  with  the  modern
elliciency  plans  now  being  used  by  the  most  successful  corporations;
(b)  on  a  general  survey  of  therapeutic  fields  extending  through  a  period
ol  lifteen  years;  (c)  on  a  recent  special  study  of  representative  Nature
Cure  institutions  acknowledged  to  be  the  leaders  in  America.  The
analysis  applies  to  any  sanitarium,  school,  or  private  practice  in  the
domain  of  drugless  healing.  To  obtain  personally  the  information  that
1  shall  try  to  give,  the  reader  would  have  to  stop  his  work  for  at  least  a
year,  devote  his  whole  time  to  research  and  experiment,  and  spend  at
least  $1,000  for  instruction  and  equipment,  besides  losing  his  own
regular  income.  Therefore,  I  hope  you  may  deem  the  suggestions
worthy  of  your  thoughtful  consideration.

The  Nature  Cure  is  not  merely  a  profession  of  healing.

It  is  a  department  store  of  health,  combining  at  least  fifteen  sections,
all  related  but  each  distinct,  and  each  for  its  highest  usefulness  to  be
conducted  by  a  corps  of  trained  workers  under  a  managing  expert.  The
wonderful  success  of  great  stores  like  Wanamaker's  or  Woolworth's
lies  in  the  fact  that  each  department  is  organized  as  a  separate  insti-
tution, and  is  made  to  pay  for  itself  or  is  discontinued.  To  every  Nature
Cure  establishment,  this  principle  applies;  and  because  it  has  never
been  adopted  or  even  recognized,  a  true  standard  for  estimating  costs,
labors  and  results  is  virtually  unknown  to  the  general  practitioner.

You  can  easily  verify  this  by  asking  a  naturopath  or  a  metaphysician
what  it  costs  to  secure  a  new  patient;  how  much  he  loses  a  year  in  the
interest  on  payments  deferred  and  the  capital  on  fees  never  met;  which
forms  of  advertising  pay,  which  do  not,  and  the  reasons  for  the  differ-
ence in  results;  how  much  work  his  stenographer  and  other  helpers
should  turn  out  each  day;  what  number  of  possible  students  or  clients
live  in  the  territory  covered  by  his  range  of  practice,  and  what  propor-
tion of  these  he  is  getting;  where  he  is  losing  time,  energy  or  money  by
needlessly  indulging  in  his  bad  personal  habits  and  eccentricities.  Put
questions  like  these  to  the  average  drugless  healer,  note  the  blank  look
on  his  face,  then  realize  how  far  he  is  from  being  an  efficient  man.

A  leader  in  the  business  world  must  base  any  permanent  success  on
such  figures,  in  black  and  white,  carried  to  the  last  penny.  These,  the
practitioner  should  know,  but  he  doesn't.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  85

The  fifteen  requisite  departments  in  the  ideal  Nature  Cure  estab-
lishment are  as  follows:

1.  Organization  8.  Social  Service

2.  Standardization  9.  Therapeutics

3.  Demonstration  10,  Education

4.  Publicity  11.  Co-operation

5.  Advertisement  12.  Philanthropy

6.  Correspondence  13.  Scientific  Management

7.  Salesmanship  14.  Law  and  Ethics

15.  Finance

Not  more  than  five  or  six  of  these  departments  will  be  found,  satis-
factorily covered,  in  the  scope  of  the  average  school,  sanitarium,  or
individual  practice.  They  must  all  be  found,  in  every  one  of  our  health
institutions,  before  we  can  justly  claim  "Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing."

If  through  these  chapters  I  can  succeed  in  pointing  oiit  the  possibil-
ity, desirability  and  necessity  of  making  the  work  of  every  hygienic
leader  from  two  to  five  times  as  effective  and  productive  as  it  now  is,  I
shall  feel  that  the  many  years  of  study,  toil  and  hardship  that  I  have
undergone  by  way  of  preparation,  are  at  last  sufficiently  rewarded.


86  I'ninrrsdl  Sdturopdlhic  Directory  and  Buijers Cmidc


CHAPTER  II

OPPORTUNITIES  IN  THE  NATURE  CURE


Books  arc  about  the  last  thing  in  the  world  for  a  human  being  to
study.  Books  are  valuable  to  the  student  only  when  things  more  valu-
able are  studied  first.

Neither  Nature,  man  nor  God  may  be  known  through  books.  And
the  first  three  studies  for  any  human  being  are  Nature,  man  and  God.
To  be  healthy  you  must  know  Nature,  to  be  successful  you  must  know
man,  to  be  happy  you  must  know  God,  and  to  be  useful  you  must  know
all  three.

A  young  man  should  hesitate  a  long  time  before  deciding  on  a  pro-
fessional career,  such  as  law,  medicine,  art,  music,  or  education.  The
reason  for  this  attitude  of  doubt  lies  not  in  the  career,  but  in  the  stupid,
theoretical  and  inadequate  preparation  for  the  career  that  American
civilization  offers.  If  a  boy  goes  to  a  business  college  or  enters  a  business
office,  he  may  reasonably  expect  in  due  time  to  become  a  business  man;
but  if  he  goes  to  a  school  of  medicine,  theology,  music  or  art,  there  is  no
possible  way  of  determining  what  he  will  end  up  as.

The  only  certain  thing  about  the  young  professional  man  is  that  he
should  be  taught  how  to  fast  indefinitely.  He  will  need  this  knowledge.
But,  alas,  he  will  find  it  was  not  included  in  his  diploma.  I  never  have
the  heart  to  preach  fasting  to  a  senior  in  college.  No,  say  I,  let  the  poor
fellow  eat  while  he  can.

Judged  by  efficiency  tests,  from  one  to  three  years  in  the  average
college  or  seminary  course  is  largely  wasted.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
judged  by  character  and  culture  tests,  proportionately  as  much  time  in
a  business  or  factory  training  is  lost  to  the  young  man  or  woman.  And
real  preparation  for  life  must  include  efficiency,  character  and  culture,
produced  together.

The  aim  of  both  education  and  employment  should  be  opportunity.
No  school,  and  no  business,  should  open  its  doors  to  a  young  man  or
woman  without  having  a  straight  course  mapped  out,  whereby  the  ap-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  87

plicant  may  be  ensured  promolion,  advancement,  and  the  highest  re-
wards commensurate  with  his  talents,  efforts  and  ambitions.  No  such
provision  has  been  made.  Probably  two-thirds  of  the  students  in
American  colleges  reach  their  senior  year  without  knowing  what  they
will  do  in  life  or  how  they  will  do  it.

Even  a  larger  proportion  of  the  young  men  and  women  occupied  in
the  trades  and  industries  lack  a  definite  goal  of  achievement,  and  the
knowledge  of  how  to  attain  it.  Practicality  in  education,  ideality  in  em-
ployment, both  leading  to  opportunity  for  the  young — these  problems
are  two  of  the  greatest  in  the  whole  wide  world  to-daJ^

Here,  in  passing,  I  would  offer  a  suggestion.  Why  should  not  the
science  of  health  as  taught  in  the  Nature  Cure  be  studied  by  every  pupil
at  an  American  college,  academy,  or  high  school?  Must  we  gain  all  our
converts  from  the  ranks  of  broken-down  invalids,  who  have  no  time,
strength,  money,  hope,  enthusiasm,  to  give  to  the  cause?  Would  it  not
be  possible  to  prepare  a  text-book  or  series  of  text-books,  adapted  to  the
requirements  of  universities  and  secondai*y  schools,  then  by  political
and  personal  influence  obtain  the  endorsement  of  school  officials  and
the  adoption  of  these  texts  as  a  part  of  the  regular  course  leading  to  the
bachelor's  degree?  If  a  noted  writer  or  teacher  prepared  the  texts  on
the  basis  of  material  furnished  by  Doctor  Lust  and  other  leading  na-
turists,  and  if  the  right  organized  effort  were  made  among  educators,  I
believe  that  ultimately  the  knowledge  of  Naturism  would  occupy  its
rightful  place  in  the  educational  system  of  America.

The  value  of  a  study  is  measured  by  the  number  and  kind  of  oppor-
tunities leading  from  it.  The  recognition  of  this  principle  is  fast  gaining
credence  in  our  scholastic  institutions.

When  I  was  a  boy,  one  of  the  marks  of  extreme  elegance  and  erudi-
tion was  the  fact  of  knowing  a  lot  of  dead  languages.  To  speak  Sanskrit
was  to  look  like  Solomon.  It  was  held  that  no  man  could  be  truly  pious
unless  he  could  with  speed  and  joy  dig  Sanskrit  roots  from  the  Scrip-
tures. Now,  happily,  the  truth  is  being  learned;  that  the  root  of  a  dead
language  is  like  the  root  of  a  dead  tooth — good  for  exhibition  purposes
only.  And  to  a  real  man,  exhibition  is  ir^hibition.  Even  for  a  prospect-
ive clergyman,  a  year  of  social  service  in  college  is  worth  five  years  of
Sanskrit.

On  the  other  hand,  the  engineering  classes  in  our  great  universities
have  doubled  and  trebled  in  a  single  generation.  I  can  remember  when
a  youth  who  studied  to  be  an  engineer  was  considered  lacking  in  ambi-
tion or  intellectuality.  Hardly,  hardly.  A  man  up  in  Schenectady  is  said
to  be  making  $100,000  a  year  as  an  electrical  engineer,  and  another  in


S8  Cninrrsa!  Xaliiropathir  Directory  and  Bui/rrs'  Guide


New  York  has  a  yearly  income  of  more  than  $200,000  from  his  profession
of  mining  engineer.  Who  would  not  be  an  engineer  with  such  oppor-
tunities ahead?

There  are  more  opportunities  for  an  ambitious  man  or  woman  in
the  study  of  Naturism  than  in  any  other  with  which  I  am  familiar.
These  may  not  appear  on  the  surface.  I  would  therefore,  as  one  who  has
derived  untold  benefit  from  Nature  Cure,  point  out  the  advantages  of
knowing  its  principle  and  practice.

No  young  person  is  ready  for  life  until  he  has  learned  his  relation  to
Nature,  his  relief  from  Nature,  his  resource  in  Nature.  All  failure,
sickness,  poverty,  miser}%  worry,  vice  and  crime  is  but  a  transgression  of
natural  law,  a  violation  of  natural  instinct,  a  repression  or  diversion  of
natural  talent.  When  we  learn,  live  and  do  only  what  is  natural,  we  are
bound  to  achieve  health,  vigor,  hope,  courage,  character,  poise,  efficiency,
growth,  usefulness,  happiness.

There  are  at  least  seven  kinds  of  opportunity  afforded  by  study  of
the  Nature  Cure,  with  its  various  branches,  connections  and  affiliations.
There  is  vocational  opportunity,  cultural  opportunity,  social  opportunity,
financial  opportunity',  fraternal  opportunity,  individual  opportunity,
inspirational  opportunity.  Each  kind  of  opportunity  merits  a  little  dis-
cussion by  itself.

1.  Vocational  Opportunity

A  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  Nature  Cure  lies  in  the  breadth  and
variety  of  its  applications.  When  you  have  mastered  the  subject,  you
can  take  your  choice  of  a  score  of  professions  or  occupations,  each  of
which  demands  a  working  knowledge  of  Naturism  for  its  largest  and
finest  development.

You  may  become  a  physician,  healer,  companion,  attendant  or  nurse,
a  gymnasium  instructor,  a  vocational  advisor,  a  teacher  of  domestic
science,  a  playground  director,  a  dietetic  counsel,  a  lecturer  on  health
and  kindred  themes,  a  social  service  worker,  a  traveling  salesman  for
hygienic  goods,  a  manufacturer  of  special  clothing,  foods  or  appliances,
a  baker,  grocer  or  restaurant  proprietor,  a  leader  in  efficiency  promo-
tion, a  writer  or  a  publisher  of  books  and  magazines  on  hygienic  and
psychological  themes;  or  an  influential  person  in  a  choice  of  many  other
fields  of  labor.

Indeed,  there  is  hardly  a  sphere  of  humanitarian  service  that  would
not  be  expanded  and  improved  by  the  application  of  Nature  Cure  ideas
and  methods. If  you  are  just  beginning  your  life  work,  or  if  you  know


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  H9


any  one  whose  career  is  not  yet  fixed,  a  tiioughtfui  consideration  of  the
value  of  Nature  Cure  study  will  repay  you  or  your  friend  to  an  unusual
degree.  Preparation  is  the  door  to  promotion.  And  as  a  preparation  for
any  kind  of  life,  or  position  in  it,  a  knowledge  of  Nature  stands  first.

2.  Cultural  Opportunity

Many  leading  thinkers  of  this  counti-y  have  uttered  strong  protest  in
the  matter  of  industrial  education.  These  men  declare  that  the  shop
studies,  vocational  courses  and  trade  schools  now  so  prevalent  have  a
tendency  to  blind  a  youth  toward  the  real  goal  of  life,  which  is  something
more  than  making  a  living,  and  to  cripple  and  dwarf  the  finer  traits,
sympathies  and  sensibilities.  There  is  ground  for  this  protest.  Many  of
the  old-fashioned  ideas  of  culture  and  ideals  of  character,  which  made
our  ancestors  clean,  strong  and  true,  are  being  swept  away  in  the  rush,
roar  and  dust  of  our  machine-made  environment.  The  American  of  to-
day needs  poise  more  than  power.  And  every  youth  should  be  cautioned
against  the  prevailing  psychic  malady  of  commercialism.

The  Nature  Cure  supplies  here  an  automatic  safeguard.  The  very
qualities  and  perceptions  that  make  a  man  succeed  professionally  in
drugless  healing  are  apt  to  make  him  succeed  personally  as  well.  He
must  have  intuitional  accuracy,  breadth  of  judgment,  a  high  sense  of
honor;  tact,  gentleness,  dignity,  fidelity,  courtesy,  faith,  sympathy,  force,
conviction.  He  must  build  his  own  character  into  his  clientele.  The
avenues  for  self-culture  in  the  naturist  field  are  from  three  to  ten  times
as  numerous  as  in  the  ordinary  old-style  trade  or  profession.  This  phase
proves  attractive  to  anybody  who  likes  to  keep  in  touch  with  modern
developments  of  human  research  and  progress.

3.  Social  Opportunity

The  advantage  of  knowing  all  classes  of  people,  rich  and  poor,  high
and  low,  learned  and  unlearned,  good  and  otherwise,  anything  and  the
opposite,  belongs  to  the  drugless  physician.  The  people  who  think  and
read  and  act  for  themselves  naturally  gravitate  to  him.  Succeeding
where  other  doctors  fail,  he  commands  respect,  honor,  gratitude,  fealty,
friendship.  By  means  of  the  close  relations  thus  induced,  he  may  wield
an  influence  second  to  none  in  the  community,  and  may  serve  his  own
advancement  while  benefiting  others.

Moreover,  the  rapid  extension  of  the  drugless  movement  in  America
has  created  new  centers  of  hygienic  thought  in  every  State  and  almost


90  fniiwrsdl  .Xdluroixifhic  Direr tonj  and  lUiijcrs'  Guide

even'  city  of  llu-  I'liion.  Meetings,  conventions,  banquets,  visitations,
lectures,  and  olher  ^alherin^s  almost  without  number,  offer  special  and
continual  moans  lor  the  Nature  Cure  leader  to  form  new  acquaintances,
learn  new  methods,  absorb  new  ideas,  achieve  new  successes.

4.  Financial  Opportunity

This,  I  fear  me,  is  what  you  have  been  waiting  for.  So  be  it — ^the
first  duty  of  a  job  is  to  pay  well  for  work  well  done.  I  will  give  you  a
few  examples  from  my  own  personal  observation,  as  to  the  many  re-
wards in  the  Nature  Cure,  using  the  term  in  its  broadest  significance.  I
shall  quote  figures  that  have  been  told  me  in  confidence  by  friends  of  the
persons  cited,  or  by  the  persons  themselves.

The  proprietors  of  a  health  magazine  and  book  business  have
cleared,  net,  an  average  of  $500  a  month.  The  graduate  of  a  Naturo-
pathic school  founded  a  sanitarium  and  mail  course  from  which  he
earned  $5000  the  first  year.  A  teacher  of  New  Thought  cleared  about
$5000  the  year  she  settled  in  New  York — probably  the  hardest  location
for  such  teaching  of  any  large  city  in  the  United  States.  An  Osteopath
here  has  taken  in  as  much  as  $1600  during  one  month.  A  Chiropractor
is  worth  $200,000  and  he  made  most  of  it  from  spinal  adjustments.  A
Mental  Scientist  built  a  city  from  the  proceeds  of  books,  courses  and
treatments.  And  a  Christian  Scientist  amassed  a  fortune  of  more  than
$2,000,000,  principally  from  royalties  on  books,  articles,  and  systems  of
treatment  and  instruction.

These  cases  are  unusual.  It  is  probable  that  a  majority  of  those
engaged  in  health  reform  do  not  make  much  more  than  a  good  living.
But  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  a  man  with  very  meager  education
and  influence  can  settle  in  a  poor  country  district,  after  qualifying  as  a
drugless  physician,  and  inside  of  a  year  be  earning  $50  to  $60  per  week.
This  is  more  than  twice  the  average  income  of  a  teacher,  preacher,  or
drug  doctor  in  the  United  States.

If  you  have  the  genius  of  organization,  the  attractions  of  this  work
will  appeal  to  you  with  irresistible  force,  because  of  the  many  ways  in
which  you  can  capitalize  your  experience.  With  a  complete  Nature
Cure  knowledge  and  training,  you  could  start  a  publishing  business,  a
mail  course  of  instruction,  a  lecture  bureau,  a  manufacturing  company,
a  chain  of  restaurants,  and  a  few  other  kinds  of  business,  all  at  once.
We  do  not  advise  you  to  do  this,  and  so  monopolize  the  entire  health
business  of  the  world,  as  other  hygienic  leaders  have  a  right  to  live.
But  the  chance  is  here,  waiting  for  a  J.  P.  Morgan  of  health  promotion.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  91

5.  Fraternal  Opportunity

The  ultimate  question  for  a  sane  person  to  ask  about  his  work  and
life  is  this:  How  can  1  do  the  most  possible  good  in  the  world?  Regard-
ing all  men  as  our  brothers,  which  we  must  do  when  we  have  reached
a  plane  of  moral  intelligence,  we  are  constrained  to  put  fraternity  ahead
of  opportunity.  The  crown  of  opportunity  is  fraternity.  There  comes  a
time  in  the  growth  of  every  individual,  when  the  one  supreme  and  over-
whelming desire  is  to  serve — nothing  else  really  satisfies.  The  part  of
wisdom  is  to  look  ahead,  anticipate  this  goal  of  evolution,  and  prepare
for  a  life  work  that  presents  a  great  field  for  service.

Measured  thus,  few  choices  of  life  work  even  approach  that  of  the
Nature  Cure.  In  probably  no  other  branch  of  classified  human  endeavor
may  the  physical,  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  welfare  of  the  individual
be  so  fairly  covered  and  so  fully  served.  You  may  heal  his  body,  waken
his  mind,  sharpen  his  sensibility,  strengthen  his  will,  lengthen  his  use-
fulness, conserve  his  finances,  improve  his  efficiency  and  increase  his
happiness,  all  at  the  same  time.  Is  there  anywhere  a  finer,  broader,
altruistic  field?

6.  Individual  Opportunity

Life  is  but  a  long  search  to  find  who  and  what  we  are.  Few  mortals
ever  make  this  discovery,  and  until  we  do  make  it  we  are  not  much
ahead  of  the  beasts  of  the  wild.  I  have  talked  with  college  professors
whose  knowledge  of  their  personal  origin  and  destiny  was  vague  and
dim  and  useless  as  a  child's.  Nothing  so  establishes  a  man  as  conscious
identification  with  his  Divine  Source.  The  religion  of  most  of  the
churches  of  to-day  proves  unequal  to  this  responsibility,  and  even  the
best  of  the  churches  fails  to  appease  the  intellect  in  a  full-orbed  quest
for  truth.

By  demolishing  the  drug  superstition  and  other  harmful  dogmas
and  delusions,  the  Nature  Cure  tends  to  make  its  practitioners  open-
minded  in  all  respects.  And  by  ofifering  connections  with  various
churches,  schools  and  systems  devoted  to  esoteric  thought,  the  service  of
Naturism  to  its  follower  extends  much  further,  enabling. him  to  see  far
back  through  antiquity,  and  far  on  through  posterity,  thus  relating  him-
self clearly  to  his  own  past  and  his  own  future,  and  governing  destiny
more  swiftly  and  powerfully  than  would  otherwise  be  possible.  More-
over, the  habit  of  studying,  comparing,  using,  developing  and  guiding
one's  natural  instincts,  desires  and  aspirations  leads  to  the  opening  of
a  new  realm  of  talent,  power,  and  resource.


92  I'nii'i'rsdl  Xdliirojxilhic  Dircrtonj  and  Ihiyrrs'  Guidr

7,  Inspirational  Opportunity

riic  (lirrct  way  to  (iod  lies  through  the  paths  of  Nature.  For  the
natural,  at  its  height  and  fulfilment,  becomes  the  supernatural.  Miracles
are  hut  natural  phenomena  raised  to  their  highest  potential.  And  the
world's  nu'ssiahs  have  been  redeemers  just  to  the  extent  of  living,  teach-
ing and  trusting  the  natural  life.

It  is  not  strange  that  Sebastian  Kneipp  was  a  minister,  Adolph  Just
a  teacher,  and  many  another  pioneer  in  health  advancement  a  public
servant  with  a  message  to  deliver.  The  voices  of  Nature,  of  the  birds
and  winds  and  flowers  and  seas  and  stars,  woo  a  man  up  to  God  as  well
as  back  to  earth.  When  civilization  has  approached  its  zenith,  com-
merce will  be  but  the  every-day  road  to  communion,  communion  with
one's  fellows,  one's  self,  and  one's  God.  In  the  realm  of  Naturism,  al-
ready this  ideal  may  be  largely  accomplished,  and  our  work  thereby
merge  into  worship,  our  labor  into  love,  our  duty  into  destiny,  our  goal

into  God.

*  *  *

If  now,  being  interested  in  the  Nature  Cure,  we  desire  to  learn
more  of  its  advantages,  and  investigate  its  opportunities,  how  shall  we
proceed  ?  There  are  five  principal  ways  of  approach,  any  or  all  of  which
we  may  follow.

1.  We  may  obtain  lists  of  Nature  Cure  books  from  the  leading  pub-
lishers, make  our  selection,  buy  or  rent  the  most  appealing,  and  devote
our  spare  time  for  the  next  few  months  to  a  personal  study  of  the  sub-
ject. Perhaps  it  may  be  urged  that  the  writer  does  not  believe  in  books,
according  to  statements  on  preceding  pages.  Not  so — the  writer  does
not  believe  in  bookish  books,  academic  books,  theoretical  books,  dry,
dismal  and  useless  books.  The  best  Nature  Cure  books  are  as  live  and
healthful  and  joyful  as  Nature  in  the  Springtime;  and  as  we  have  been
led  away  from  Nature  by  sickly  books,  so  must  we  be  guided  back  to
Nature  by  wholesome  books.

2.  We  may  read  two  or  three  health  magazines  regularly,  and  profit
by  their  valuable  suggestions.  There  are  now  in  this  country  at  least  a
dozen  hygienic  and  psychological  magazines  worthy  of  serious  attention.
To  he  well  informed,  evei-y  man  or  woman  who  can  read  English  ought
to  know  what  these  magazines  are,  and  how  each  is  superior  along  cer-
tain advanced  lines.  Many  publishers  offer  clubbing  rates,  whereby
three  of  the  magazines  may  be  had  for  little  more  than  the  price  of  two.
And  by  interesting  friends  in  the  formation  of  a  little  library  or  reading
circle,  we  may  have  access  to  a  number  of  periodicals  by  actually  pay-
ing less  than  the  price  of  one.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  fhn/ers'  Guide  93

3.  We  may  join  the  national  or  local  society,  club  or  association  of
health  practitioners  and  students  which  seems  most  available  and  at-
tractive. The  meetings  of  these  organizations,  their  personal  acquaint-
ances and  connections,  their  special  facilities  for  keeping  in  touch  with
the  newest  and  best  ideas  and  methods,  offer  peculiar  advantages  not
equalled  by  whole  libraries  of  books  and  magazines.  The  annual  dues
are  small,  the  obligations  few  and  easy.  A  list  of  these  organizations
may  be  had  from  almost  any  leading  publisher,  physician,  or  health  re-
sort occupied  with  drugless  means  of  cure.

over  the  entire  field  of  mail  courses,  systems,  schools,  and  treatments,
and  selecting  the  one  most  likely  to  give  us  a  thorough  understanding  of
Nature  Cure  principles.  No  less  than  twenty  colleges,  some  real  and
some  alleged,  now  provide  instruction  by  correspondence  of  undoubted
value  to  both  practitioners  and  laymen.  While  it  is  my  opinion  that  no
mail  course  will  ever  wholly  qualify  the  student  to  become  a  physician,
there  are  a  number  of  such  courses  that  would  form  an  excellent  prepa-
ration for  a  residence  period  of  study.  And  the  knowledge  thus  to  be
obtained  should  be  in  the  possession  of  every  teacher,  minister,  doctor,
housekeeper,  lawmaker  and  business  man  throughout  the  country,  for
personal  and  professional  use  every  day  in  the  year.

5.  We  may  visit  a  Nature  Cure  institution,  either  becoming  a  pa-
tient or  guest  of  a  sanitarium  for  a  few  weeks  or  months,  or  enrolling  in
a  school  for  a  term  of  special  instruction,  looking  to  final  employment  of
our  knowledge  in  a  professional  capacity.  When  the  colleges  of  America
have  banished  theory  and  put  efficiency  in  its  place,  nothing  but  a  six
months'  resident  course  of  study  at  a  naturist  resort  will  suffice  to  give
the  prospective  graduates  a  workable  knowledge  of  health.  We  look
for  the  time  when  such  a  health  course  will  be  required,  as  algebra,
history,  and  physics  are  now  required.  Each  family  should  delegate  a
member  to  pursue  such  a  line  of  education  and  demonstration  as  almost
any  good  Nature  Cure  college  or  sanitarium  would  be  glad  to  arrange.
In  respect  to  economy,  efficiency,  longevity,  productivity,  of  the  whole
family,  such  a  course  of  training  wisely  followed  should  pay  for  itself
three  times  over.

May  I  here  mention  a  few  examples  of  the  powder  of  the  Nature
Cure  to  bring  transformation  of  human  lives?  These  instances,  a  few
out  of  many,  have  come  under  my  personal  observation.  I  can  vouch
for  their  truthfulness.

A  chronic  semi-invalid  from  a  Western  State  heard  about  a  Nature
Cure  institute  in  New  York.  He  came  for  treatment,  as  a  last  resort,  all


94  f'nii'frs<tl  Saluropittliic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


other  available  methods  having  been  tried  and  found  wanting.  He  had
no  faith  at  all.  he  was  just  gambling  his  life  on  a  last  throw.  In  six
months,  the  man  was  physically  and  mentally  made  over.  He  went
back  home  as  joyful  as  he  was  direful  when  he  came.  Forthwith  he
started  to  convert  his  whole  family;  and  in  the  next  few  years,  he  saved
tiiem  literally  thousands  of  doctors'  and  surgeons'  bills  that  would  have
been  regarded  as  inevitable  prior  to  the  journey  of  our  friend  hither.

A  business  man,  with  a  small  enterprise  and  a  very  limited  sphere  of
usefulness,  broke  down  physically  and  mentally  when  he  was  ap-
proaching middle  life.  He  made  a  scientific  study  of  a  particular  branch
of  the  Nature  Cure,  saw  its  commercial  possibilities,  trained  himself  in
spare  time  to  be  an  expert,  threw  his  old  business  connections,  experi-
ences and  assets  to  the  winds,  launched  himself  on  a  new,  novel  and  un-
tried career,  with  not  much  but  courage  to  live  on.

This  man  told  me  not  long  since  that  he  was  spending  $1200  a  month
in  magazine  advertising  alone.  As  the  advertising  appropriation  of  a
business  hardly  ever  exceeds  10  per  cent  of  the  gross  income,  you  can
figure  what  this  health  pioneer  must  be  doing  in  the  way  of  financial  suc-
cess. The  Nature  Cure  has  helped  him  to  rise  from  disease,  obscurity
and  mediocrity  to  health,  fame  and  usefulness.

A  housewife  and  mother,  ailing  for  half  a  lifetime  and  burdened
with  uncongenial  cares,  duties  and  responsibilities,  came  under  the  in-
fluence of  drugless  teachings  when  on  the  verge  of  a  hospital  ordeal,
which  threatened  her  life.  She  saw  the  wisdom  of  the  Nature  Cure,  put
her  faith  in  it,  found  relief,  studied  the  various  principles  and  philoso-
phies underlying  and  surrounding  it,  then  changed  her  mode  of  life  in
many  respects.  This  woman  is  now  doing  the  work  and  meeting  the
responsibilities  of  two  ordinary  women,  and  cheerfully  withal.  She  has
bravely  surmounted  financial  reverses,  domestic  troubles,  and  the  death
of  those  dearest  to  her. Naturism  put  her  on  the  road  to  self-control.

A  young  college  graduate,  leader  of  his  class,  went  to  pieces  from
overwork.  He  was  a  wreck — nerves,  muscles,  digestion,  money,  hope,
ambition,  gone.  The  trouble  was  not  alone  physical.  He  had  begun  to
think  for  himself,  and  to  break  away  from  dogmas,  traditions,  supersti-
tions, conventions,  all  the  mental  ruts  and  catacombs  of  the  race.  Body
death  usually  accompanies  soul  birth,  and  the  physical  disintegration  of
tiiis  young  man,  but  marked  his  spiritual  awakening.  Of  course,  the
medical  doctors  were  baffled,  they  could  not  even  diagnose  the  lad's  ill-
ness. When  he  was  on  the  point  of  despair,  some  Nature  Cure  literature
fell  into  his  hands.  He  caught  a  glimmer  of  light  and  followed  it.
Mastering  first  the  truths  of  hygiene,  therapeutics  and  psychology,  he


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers*  Guide  95

went  into  social  service  work.  To-day  he  has  a  regular  following  of
more  than  100,000  people,  is  in  great  demand  for  consultations  and
lectures,  holds  some  of  the  largest  corporations  for  clients,  and  earns  a
month's  average  salary  in  a  day.  He  found  his  work  through  the  Nature
Cure.

A  young  immigrant  landed  on  our  shores,  without  friends,  fortune,
influence,  or  even  a  command  of  our  language.  He  was  a  clerk  in  a
business  that  held  out  no  future  to  him,  and  he  was  a  raw,  ungainly  and
unprepossessing  clerk  at  that.  Moreover,  he  was  sickly  and  people
made  fun  of  him,  you  would  have  said  that  -$25  a  week  was  the  most  he
could  ever  earn,  and  that  he  would  never  be  heard  of  outside  his  own
town.  He  stumbled  into  the  Nature  Cure,  gained  health  by  means  of  it,
resolved  to  carve  a  career  in  its  domain.  He  borrowed  a  little  capital,
though  the  lender  frankly  admitted  the  loan  was  as  good  as  a  gift — what
could  a  rash,  green,  foreigner  do  in  a  business  where  some  of  the  oldest,
shrewdest  thinkers  of  America  would  be  his  competitors?  The  unex-
pected, the  impossible,  happened.  Our  immigrant  friend,  with  his  few
dollars  and  his  million  dollars'  worth  of  grit,  has  built  up  a  business  of  at
least  $50,000  a  year;  owns  property  worth  more  than  that;  is  a  social,
educational  and  political  power  with  hardly  a  rival  in  his  own  sphere.
The  Nature  Cure  showed  him  a  path  to  success,  and  the  way  to  climb  it.

Learning,  loving  and  doing  together  make  achieving.  Whoever  has
a  real  man's  ambition,  with  enough  heart  and  brain  to  work  it  out,  will
find  that  learning,  loving  and  doing  are  finely  and  supremely  blended  in
-the  Nature  Cure.


96  Uniifcrsal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  III

THE  START  FOR  SUCCESS


The  way  to  get  a  thing  is  to  stop  wishing  for  it.  The  people  who
only  wish  for  things  are  lazy  beyond  redeem.  Rule  for  success:  Want
something  so  hard  you'll  break  your  neck  going  after  it.  Then,  even
if  you  don't  get  it,  you  will  be  satisfied;  for,  having  broken  your  neck,
you  won't  need  it  any  more.  Be  a  crusader  of  some  kind — any  kind —
if  you  really  want  to  live.  Most  people,  being  made  of  mush,  deserve
to  sizzle.

1  am  going  to  tell  you,  hygienic  neighbor,  how  to  ensure  a  real  hap-
piness for  yourself  by  earning  it.  And  there  is  no  other  way  to  get
it.  Believe  me,  any  man  or  woman  who  carries  out  a  fraction  of  the
plan  suggested  in  the  forthcoming  chapters,  will  have  to  be  an  angel  in
wisdom,  strength,  goodness. And  are  not  angels  happy?

Few  practitioners  of  drugless  methods  are  ever  downright  happy.
Their  whole  career  is  one  long  fight.  Their  toil,  devotion,  courage,
faith,  sacrifice,  deserve  the  richest  rewards  that  life  can  bestow.  Yet
some  are  languishing  in  prison,  others  have  been  martyred,  others  are
facing  daily  persecution,  all  for  the  sake  of  principle.

We  can  have  a  great  new  cycle  of  triumph.  But  we've  got  to  change
some  of  our  methods.  They  have  been  methods  of  failure.  And  it  will
take  all  the  resolution  we  can  muster,  plus  a  deal  of  humility  and  grace,
to  look  the  situation  in  the  eye.

When  you  probe  for  a  bullet,  you  can't  stop  to  ask  the  patient  if
he  likes  the  feel  of  your  knife.  We  have  all  been  grievously  wounded
by  the  missiles  of  the  Medical  Trust.  In  these  treatises  I  am  probing
for  bullets — searching  out  the  sore  spots  and  weak  spots — trying  to
save  our  life  by  opening  up  the  wounds.  We  all  need  a  mental  surgeon,
to  show  us  our  vulnerable  spot.  And  even  though  it  is  a  thankless  job,
I  am  here  to  carry  it  through.

When  a  great  army  finds  itself  on  the  wrong  track,  what  does  it
do? Takes  to  cover. Then,  having  reconnoitred,  provisioned  itself  and


Universal  Naluropathic  Directory  and  Binjers Guide  !)"

shaped  its  course  anew,  it  plows  ahead  with  the  dauntless  force  of
supreme  faith.  In  a  thousand-and-one  ways,  more  or  less,  we  have
been  on  the  wrong  track.  The  airship  has  become  the  international
scout  in  war;  so  I  am  hoping  that  this  volume  may  form  a  kind  of
mental  airship,  from  which  we  may  gain  a  clearer  view  of  the  opposing
camp,  and  of  our  own  strategic  position.

Our  first  great  need  is  to  unite  all  the  forces  of  drugless  therapeu-
tics under  a  single  banner,  with  a  single  purpose,  on  a  single  method.
How  can  this  be  done?

Let  us  examine  the  situation.  We  have,  I  should  judge,  at  least
100  different  schools  and  systems  of  health  in  America,  all  condemning
the  use  of  drugs.  These  various  methods  run  the  gamut  of  psychology
and  physiology,  from  Christian  Science  to  massage.  Each  has  some
truth,  none  has  all  truth.  Each  is  a  logical  branch  or  department  of  a
great  central  system,  uniting  and  co-ordinating  them  all.  Doctor  B.  Lust
calls  this  central  system  Naturopathy — you  may  call  it  anything  you
please,  if  you  only  recognize  the  basic  truth  of  it.

Now  let  me  give  you  a  scientific  reason  why  the  various  bills  before
legislatures,  arguing  for  the  license  of  drugless  healers,  have  not  been
passed.  Of  course  the  apparent  reason  is  the  opposition  of  the  medical
fraternity;  but  the  real  reason  is  something  very  different.  Let  us  take
for  example  the  Christian  Science  bill  and  the  Mechano-Therapy  bill,
recently  proposed  at  Albany.  Neither  of  these  bills,  in  my  opinion,
ever  should  be  passed  by  any  State  legislature.  If  they  were  passed,
without  revision  and  a  central  supervision,  they  would  be  a  menace  to
health  and  liberty — as  constant  a  menace  as  the  drug-laden  laws  of  the
past  have  become!

In  the  light  of  logic  and  jurisprudence,  there  is  no  more  reason  to
license  a  healer  who  gives  manipulations  or  suggestions  than  to  license
a  doctor  who  gives  drugs. The  only  test  for  both  is  efficiency:  What

does  each  know,  what  can  each  do? Some  day — some  day  far  off

when  we  are  beginning  to  be  civilized,  we  will  pass  a  law  like  this:
Every  candidate  for  a  doctor's  degree  and  license  shall  be  required  to
diagnose,  treat  and  cure  a  certain  number  of  cases  of  disease,  both
chronic  and  acute,  and  sufficiently  diverse  to  cover  the  points  in  the
average  daily  practice;  he  shall  gain  a  certain  percentage  of  successful
cures,  and  shall  submit  references  to  corroborate  the  cures,  before  a
license  may  be  granted  him  to  practice  indiscriminately.

We  will  have,  in  short,  a  doctor's  apprentice  school,  as  we  now
have  a  barber's  apprentice  school.  Why  should  a  doctor  be  allow^ed
to  kill  under  State  license — when  a  barber  is  not  allowed  to  cut  your


98  rnincrsa!  y(itnn>p(tlhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


chin?  Tlu'  doctor's  apprentice  school  will  grant  diplomas  irrespective
of  drug  or  aiiti-driig  theories  of  its  students.  The  question  will  be
simply:  "Can  you  cure  this  disease— quickly,  safely,  permanently?  If
so,  you  may  hang  out  your  shingle.  If  not,  the  shingle  will  be  applied
to  that  portion  of  your  anatomy  where  bad  boys  have  learned  to  look
for  it."  When  1  get  to  be  President  of  the  United  States,  I  shall  intro-
duce a  law  creating  an  official  spanking-machine  for  unsuccessful
doctors.  When  tliey  have  buried  five  patients,  they  shall  be  gorgeously
dressed  in  high-liat  and  broad-cloth,  then  conducted  by  automobile
and  a  brass  band  to  the  town  spanking-machine,  and  be  gently  labored
with,  in  full  view  of  the  assembled  populace.  This  measure,  while
somewhat  lacking  in  dignity,  would  be  redolent  of  honesty.

Par(h)n  the  digression;  when  I  start  to  think  of  the  doctor-business,
my risibles  run  ofiF  with  me.

Let  us  return  to  the  Mechano-Therapy  and  Christian  Science  bills
before  the  legislature.  By  no  means  would  I  charge  the  lawmakers  of
our  State  with  trying  to  be  public  benefactors; — manifestly  they  are
not  guilty.  But  1  do  thank  them  for  preventing  the  passage  of  any
measure  to  hurt  our  cause  in  the  end — no  matter  if  their  veto  is  a
signature  of  shame.  For  without  question,  the  legalizing  of  any  single
branch  of  the  Nature  Cure  would  re-act  badly  on  the  whole  movement.

Please  remember  that  Doctor  Lust  is  not  responsbile  for  my  opin-
ions— in  fact  he  often  disagrees  with  them.  But  we  both  are  seeking
truth,  just  as  you  are. And  all  sides  must  be  heard.

A  confusion  of  thought  is  the  beginning  of  all  our  troubles.  Let
us  see  how.  If  you  have  a  chronic  ailment,  such  as  liver  trouble  or
asthma,  you  go  to  a  Christian  Scientist,  and  are  given  a  certain  diag-
nosis and  treatment.  Next  day  you  consult  a  Mechano-Therapist,  and
for  the  same  disease  you  get  a  wholly  different  diagnosis  and  treatment.
Which  is  right? Both  cannot  be  right. Which  is  right?

We  accuse  the  doctors  of  "guess-work."  We  are  guilty  of  it  our-
selves. They  guess  with  drugs,  we  guess  without  drugs.  That  is  the
only  difference  between  us.

Each  of  tlie  hundred  branches  of  drugless  healing  in  America
wants  to  be  kgahzcd — and  no  one  deserves  to  be.  We  have  all  got  the
cart  before  tlie  horse,  we  have  put  license  ahead  of  merit.  Authority
is  the  echo  of  capacity;  and  if  God  Almighty  wanted  us  to  practice
witliont  restraint,  He  would  enact  a  Pentecost  or  a  Sinai,  and  force  our
law  through,  in  spite  of  ten  thousand  bribed  and  chained  legislators.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  99

The  question  for  us  to  answer  is  this:  Does  Christian  Science,  or
New  Thought,  or  Massage,  or  Diet,  or  Hydropathy,  cure?  I  have  known
cases  where  every  single  form  of  natural  treatment  failed  to  cure,
despite  the  allegations  and  promises  of  all  the  different  healers.  And
I  have  known  of  the  most  absurd  claims  by  fanatical  zealots;  that
even  a  child,  not  half-witted,  would  smile  at.

An  Osteopath  offered  to  cure  by  a  few  turns  of  the  hand  a  case  of
extreme  nervous  exhaustion  due  to  long  years  of  anxiety,  over-work
and  underfeeding.  A  Chiropractor  wanted  to  take  a  man  from  the
operating-table  when  gangrene  from  appendicitis  had  set  in;  the  Chiro-
practor was  sure  he  could  waft  the  gangrene  away,  by  a  set  of  magical
passes.  An  eloquent  masseur  guaranteed  to  grow  hair  on  a  bald  head,
when  the  roots  had  all  come  out.  And  a  bejewelled  high-priestess  of
metaphysical  rot  said  she  could  think  a  lady's  hump-backed  nose  into
becoming  a  work  of  art.  With  such  fakers  in  our  midst,  unmolested
and  unrebuked,  how  can  we  hope  for  a  State  license  to  do  anything
worth  while?  Some  doctors  are  charlatans — and  we  are  all  chumps.
The  variation  isn't  much  to  crow  over.

Doubtless  you  have  seen  what  befell  among  the  Osteopaths.  Ten
years  ago  they  were  with  us  heart  and  soul  in  our  fight  against  medical
tyranny.  Now  they  have  largely  withdrawn  the  hand  of  fellowship,
choosing  instead  the  hand  of  finance.  The  Osteopaths  are  today  almost
as  much  a  close  corporation  as  the  allopaths — a  bit  of  legal  standing
has  made  them  highly  bumptious  and  domineering.  And  the  Mechano-
therapist  or  Mental  Scientist  or  Dietist  or  Physcultopathist  would  be-
have just  as  foolishly  under  a  similar  premature  State  license.  It  is
just  as  ridiculous  to  legalize  any  of  them  as  it  would  be  to  elect  a
college  professor  from  a  class  of  boys  who  had  just  learned  the  alpha-
bet. Not  one  of  them  knows  enough  to  be  given  a  doctor's  license.

Here  somebody  stands  up  in  meeting  and  shouts  angrily,  wanting
to  know  since  when  have  I  become  a  traitor  to  the  cause.  Be  calm,
neighbor,  and  remember  that  truth  is  never  reached  by  a  man  in  a
temper.  I  have  never  been  so  real  a  friend  of  Nature  Cure  and  Mind
Cure  as  I  am  at  this  moment;  but  instead  of  shooting  a  volley  of  words
all  over  creation  and  hitting  nothing — as  the  majority  of  drugless
healers  do — I  have  learned  to  train  a  battery  of  deeds  on  the  walls  of
my  ambition,  which  walls  are  crumbling  and  I  am  entering  the  breast-
works. The  trouble  with  the  anti-drug  forces  is,  they  use  their  mouths
too  much  and  their  brains  too  little.  Valuable  suggestion  to  reformers :
A  holler  is  a  poor  substitute  for  a  headpiece.

Our  whole  fight  has  been  conducted  on  wrong  lines.  This  I  expect
to  prove  to  any  fair-minded  man,  before  I  get  through  with  this  series


\()(\  Inivrrsdl  ^tdnropatluc  Dircrlonj  and  liui/crs'  Guide

of  suggestions.  Meanwhile  be  patient^ — we  must  start  from  the  begin-
ning. If  I  said  now  what  I  shall  finally  say,  you  might  fall  in  such  a  rage
you  would  get  the  blind  staggers,  which  would  interfere  with  your  sight,
and  all  my  etTort  would  be  wasted.  That  would  not  be  elTiciency,  now
would  it?'

The  great  obstacle  to  the  advancement  of  the  Nature  Cure  in
America  is  well  shown  by  a  recent  conversation  with  a  health  reformer
in  a  prominent  position  among  the  foes  of  medicine.  The  substance
of  his  remarks  went  thusly:  "I  approve  the  work  you  are  doing,  to
wake  us  all  up,  and  am  in  hearty  sympathy  with  the  aims  of  Naturo-
pathy. But  1  cannot  join  a  movement  that  allows  such  fellows  as
Doctor  Jones  and  Healer  Smith  to  have  a  place  in  it.  Doctor  Jones  is
merely  a  bone-setter,  and  Healer  Smith  is  a  crazy  believer  in  the  occult.
My  system  of  original  manipulations  is  the  only  scientific  mode  of
treatment,  therefore  you  must  bar  Doctor  Jones  and  Healer  Smith  from
the  practice  of  Naturopathy,  or  ask  no  support  from  me."

Having  heard  the  opinion  of  this  gentleman,  whom  we  will  call
Professor  Brown,  I  went  to  Doctor  Jones  for  advice  in  the  matter.
Doctor  Jones  agreed  with  Professor  Brown  regarding  the  merits  of
Naturopathy,  but  said  Professor  Brown  ran  a  fake  school  and  should
not  be  encouraged  in  his  vileness.  Being  somewhat  bewildered,  I  be-
thought me  to  get  from  Healer  Smith  a  really  unprejudiced  view  of
the  controversy.  Healer  Smith  said  Naturopathy  was  all  right,  but
why  for  goodness'  sake  did  we  associate  with  such  a  liar  as  Professor
Brown  and  such  a  quack  as  Doctor  Jones?

I  ask  you,  speaking  from  the  heart  out,  what  can  we  do  with  such
a  gang  of  goops? This  is  our  real  problem.

There  are  just  two  fundamental  principles  on  which  we  can  unite
with  all  the  practitioners,  patrons  and  friends  of  rational  healing
methods.  Neither  of  these  principles  regards  the  merits  of  any  one
system  as  compared  with  any  other;  and  only  by  taking  and  enforcing
such  a  neutral  position  can  we  ever  join  hands.  The  tw^o  basic  prin-
ciples are  these:

1.  Every  grown,  sane  citizen  has  a  right  to  choose  his  own  doctor.

2.  Drugs  are  always  injurious,  often  dangerous,  and  never  to  be
used  when  a  natural  means  will  effect  a  cure.

rhc  Mechano-Therapist  and  the  Christian  Scientist  heartily  agree
on  these  two  propositions.  Then  why  do  they  not  take  their  stand  on
this  common  ground,  to  wage  a  iioly  war  against  the  drug  and  knife?
Suppose  the  right  wing  of  the  German  army  had  said,  "We  will  use


Universal  Naliiropdlluc  IJireclory  and  lUiijcvs Guide  ^^1

only  bullets";  and  the  left  wing  had  said,  "We  will  use  only  swords";
and  the  main  host  had  said,  "We  will  use  only  prayers"; — how  long
would  the  German  army  have  lasted?  Union,  concentration,  perfect
knowledge  of  a  central  system,  training  in  a  central  school,  obedience
to  a  central  authority,  made  the  German  army  equal  to  France,  Eng-
land and  Russia  put  together.  For  the  Christian  Scientist  or  the
Mechano-Therapist  to  strike  out  alone  is  as  fatal  as  it  would  be  for  a
single  regiment  to  challenge  a  whole  army  of  enemies;  and  with  absurd
ease  have  the  allies  of  the  doctors,  druggists  and  undertakers  killed
off  these  single  movements,  one  after  another.

By  a  conservative  estimate,  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  would
have  been  saved  through  a  scientific  union  of  all  drugless  practitioners.
For  example,  I  know  a  great  hygienic  pioneer  who  has  lost  $10,000
because  of  persecution  by  the  Medical  Trust.  After  years  of  suffering
— mental,  financial  and  social — he  has  worked  out  a  system  of  blocking
the  medical  sleuths  and  spies,  avoiding  arrest  and  escaping  unjust  fines.
This  original  system  of  parrying  the  sneaks  has  been  worth  at  least
$1,000  a  year  to  the  man  who  works  it.  Suppose  now  that  he  were  a
member  of  a  national  association  reaching  every  drugles*  doctor  in
America;  and  that  he  could  mail  the  particulars  of  his  secret  method  to
each  member  of  the  association; — ^what  a  godsend  this  would  be,  how
much  energy,  money  and  anxiety  it  would  save  to  all  the  health  re-
formers !

Today,  every  man  who  tries  to  help  his  fellows  on  and  up  to  free-
dom goes  through  martyrdom,  because  he  must  make  his  own  mistakes,
with  no  means  of  learning  from  the  mistakes  of  his  predecessors.
Tomorrow,  a  central  clearing-house  will  have  been  established,  w^here
daily  reports  of  progress  from  all  over  the  United  States  will  be  re-
ceived, filed,  culled,  copied  and  distributed;  and  where  every  healer
in  search  of  help  or  advice  may  be  sure  of  commanding  the  support
that  he  needs.

This  great  union  to  come  will  be  so  broad,  shrewd  and  sympathetic
that  the  psychic  and  the  masseur — wonder  of  wonders — will  lock  arms
and  call  each  other  good  fellows;  and  that  the  Osteopath,  when  the
Christian  Scientist  is  wrongly  treated,  will  rise  up  in  a  huge  wrath,  to
smite  the  invader  of  his  hygienic  household.

The  union  will  forbid  all  criticism  and  condemnation  of  physicians,
whether  drugfull  or  drugless;  and  will  impose  a  fine  on  the  member
who  speaks  or  writes  in  opposition  to  the  rule.

It  will  occupy  itself  entirely  with  constructive  work,  wasting  no
time  nor  strength  in  the  folly  of  battle. Having  secured  thousands  of


1(12  Cninrrsdl  ydhiropdlhic  Dircclonj  and  Buyers Guide


attested  cases  of  cure  by  driigless  means,  it  will  base  its  appeal  on  facts
alone  a  kind  of  argument  that  is  unanswerable,  but  that  has  never  yet
been  used  in  our  struggle  for  sanction  by  the  law.

It  will  compile  a  directory  of  all  healers,  teachers,  publishers  and
manufacturers  throughout  America;  and  will  adopt  a  system  of  creden-
tials, based  on  a  high  standard  of  qualifications,  whereby  the  many
brands  of  (piack  and  ignoramus  in  our  fold  may  be  separated  from  the
few  leaders  that  are  capable  and  worthy.

It  will  spend  its  force  not  on  militarism  against  the  old-style  doctors,
but  on  the  arrest,  prosecution  and  eviction  of  the  hundreds  of  so-called
drugless  healers  who  are  a  disgrace  to  our  calling.

It  will  standardize  the  schools  and  health  homes  and  sanitaria,  as
the  Carnegie  Foundation  has  already  standardized  hundreds  of  aca-
demic institutions;  so  that  when  a  health  system  bears  the  seal  of
approval  of  the  association,  every  possible  client  or  student  or  customer
may  know  he  is  safe  in  spending  time  and  money  here.

It  will  maintain  a  corps  of  attorneys,  editors,  financial  advisers  and
efficiency  engineers,  for  the  benefit  of  all  its  members;  and  will  supply
any  service  needed  at  cost  price,  from  writing  a  good  form  letter  and
printing  an  eff"ective  booklet,  to  raising  money  for  a  hospital  or  char-
tering a  health  university.

My  dream  of  the  great  achievement  of  such  a  splendid  union  goes
much  further.  But  you  have  enough  to  think  about.  May  I  suggest
that  you  write  Doctor  Lust  the  results  of  your  thought?  A  mental  union
must  precede  an  organic  union,  and  a  free  discussion  of  these  chapters
will  make  for  increased  efficiency  on  all  sides.  Am  I  wrong?  If  so,
how?  Am  I  right?  Then  what  are  you  going  to  do  about  it?  My  part
in  helping  to  make  this  endeavor  one  of  triumph  is  to  rouse  thought
and  feeling  on  the  points  that  seem  most  vital.  Your  part  is  to  act,
promptly  and  decisively,  on  the  suggestion  that  most  appeals  to  you.

The  first  logical  move  is  to  join  the  two  or  three  national  associa-
tions of  hygienists  and  drugless  physicians  that  contain  possibilities  of
endless  good.  Will  you  not  ask  Doctor  Lust  for  their  names  and
addresses,  write  for  their  literature,  and  start  to  get  in  line  for  the
mutual  benefits  of  scientific  organization?


Universal  Natiiropalhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  103


CHAPTER  IV

THE  NEED  OF  ORGANIZATION


A  drug  is  never  a  panacea — but  a  word  may  be.  Get  a  big,  true,
inspiring  thought  in  a  man's  mind,  and  you  cannot  tell  what  a  power
he  may  become.  The  great  scientists,  warriors,  poets,  inventors  and
messiahs  of  the  world  of  men  were  all  built  up  in  this  way.

Every  system  of  government,  philosophy  and  religion  was  based
on  a  central  thought  and  a  central  word.  The  word  that  made  Egypt
was  mystery,  the  word  that  made  China  was  ancestry,  the  word  that
made  Japan  was  poise,  the  word  that  made  Greece  was  art,  the  word
that  made  India  was  philosophy,  the  word  that  made  America  was
freedom.

And  every  man,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  moulds  his  life  on
the  meaning  of  a  word.  You  can  read  it  in  the  face,  the  speech,  the
action,  thought  and  emotion.  The  word  knowledge  made  Darwin,  the
word  power  made  Napoleon,  the  word  justice  made  Lincoln,  the  word
love  made  Christ.

There  is  a  word,  a  single  word,  which  when  properly  applied  will
cure  most  of  the  troubles — financial,  social  and  moral — of  the  drugless
physician. That  word  is

ORGANIZE!

Everywhere,  in  the  drugless  ranks,  chaos  prevails.  There  is  no
unification,  no  standardization,  no  co-operation.  There  is  no  loj'^alty,
even.  An  osteopath  will  knife  a  chiropractor,  metaphoricallj^  speak-
ing (we  have  taken  the  knives  of  surgery  from  our  treatment-rooms
but  we  have  yet  to  take  the  knives  of  jealousy  and  scorn  from  our  hearts
and  minds).  A  dietist  will  call  a  mental  scientist  a  fool — and  a  mental
scientist  will  call  a  dietist  a  fleshy  materialist.  A  kneippist  will  tell  you
that  fasting  is  dangerous — and  a  fast-curist  will  tell  you  that  Kneipp
is  out  of  date.  A  physical  culture  professor  goes  on  the  theorj^  that
muscles  create  health — and  a  psychic  affirms  that  emotions  make  the


104  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

man.  Among  this  choice  array  of  partial  lunatics,  no  two  agree.  Yet
they  all  ask  to  be  legalized  on  a  basis  of  practice  that  was  never  defined,
and  they  expect  the  general  public  to  embrace  the  drugless  code  when
they  themselves  do  not  know  what  the  code  is!

There  is  more  stupidity  among  drugless  healers  than  there  is  super-
stition among  doctors.  This,  beloved  brethren,  is  a  strong  statement —
coming  from  one  who  knows  doctors.  I  hope  you  will  challenge  it —
hate  it — refute  it  if  you  can.

Let  me  make  another.  Not  the  lethargy  of  the  people,  not  the
criminality  of  the  laws,  not  the  persecution  of  the  Medical  Trust,  holds
us  back  in  our  healing  work;  but  the  dissension,  friction,  scatterization
among  ourselves.  It  is  a  great  mistake,  in  my  opinion,  ever  to  think
of  the  doctor  as  your  enemy; — but  if  you  deem  this  a  necessary  evil,
then  why  do  you  not  present  a  united  front  to  the  foe?

If  you  were  on  a  martial  firing-line,  you  would  close  ranks  or  ex-
pect to  have  them  broken  and  destroyed.  You  are  on  a  mental,  social,
legal  and  moral  firing-line.  And  your  ranks,  brave  soldiers  of  Truth,
are  as  full  of  gaps  as  a  row  of  stalwart  Swiss  cheeses  is  full  of  holes.
You  must  get  together — or  get  smashed!

The  American  Medical  Association  is  one  of  the  most  powerful
corporations  in  the  world.  Only  the  man  who  has  watched  its  inner
workings  has  any  conception  of  how  far  its  influence  reaches.  It  has
not  only  organized,  equipped  and  trained  for  battle  the  allopaths,
homeopaths,  eclectics,  druggists  and  chemists,  and  other  professional
hangers-on;  it  has  lined  up  as  supporters,  abettors  and  allies  the  press,
the  school,  the  home,  the  church,  and  the  legislature.  Y'^ou  can't  get  a
therapeutic  foothold  anywhere  unless  the  doctors  let  you  in — or  you
throw  them  out.  The  only  solution  of  the  situation  is  for  you  to  become
strong  enough  to  dictate  terms  of  peace  to  the  captains  of  the  medical
hosts. Organize,  organize,  ORGANIZE!

I  said  the  doctors  had  impressed  as  their  co-adjutors,  the  news-
paper, the  school,  the  home,  the  church,  and  the  statehouse.  A  little
reflection  will  signify  the  truth  of  the  observation.

When  a  medical  society  meets,  advance  notices  are  mailed  to  the
reporters,  editors,  and  syndicate  managers;  excerpts  of  the  leading
addresses  are  enclosed;  and  complimentary  inferences  scattered  broad-
cast. The  publishers  print  the  free  advertising  notices — they  don't  dare
offend  the  social,  financial  and  psychological  stattis  of  the  Medical
Trust.  Now  suppose  you  mail  an  advance  notice  of  a  Naturopathic
Association  meeting  to  your  city  editor  of  the  daily  press;  he  wouldn't


Vniversul  Naturopdlbic  Dirrclonj  (iiid  nui/crs'  (iiiidr  105

print  it  if  you  promised  him  the  announcement  of  a  cure  for  death
itself!  There  are  a  dozen  leading  daily  newspapers  in  New  York;  out
of  that  number  only  two,  to  my  knowledge,  have  the  courage  even  to
and  criticizing  the  medical  monopoly.

In  our  schools,  physiology  is  taught  as  the  doctors  wish  it  taught.
If  children  really  learned  how  to  eat  and  drink  and  bathe  and  sleep  and
work  and  think  properly,  the  doctor-business  would  go  bankrupt.  In
general.  School  Boards  are  hot-beds  of  superstition.  You  can't  force  a
new  idea  into  them  with  a  crowbar.  Nothing  but  a  change  in  public
opinion,  which  must  be  organized  and  re-organized,  can  get  our  chil-
dren a  chance  to  know  the  truth  about  themselves.  We  must,  by  the
force  and  dignity  of  unity,  acquire  the  prodigious  influence  of  mental
whiskers  and  a  moral  high  silk-hat.

Suppose  your  neighbor's  child  falls  ill,  with  typhoid  or  diphtheria
or  scarlet  fever.  Offer  your  services  to  the  mother,  try  to  reason  with
her,  and  advise  her  on  the  natural  cure.  She  won't  let  you  touch  her
child,  she  won't  even  listen  to  you — she  must  "ask  the  doctor"  first.  He
may  have  buried  ten  children  for  her — no  matter,  he  is  still  the  doctor.
Women  worship  titles.  And  until  the  law  lets  you  write  "Doctor"  be-
fore your  name,  your  name  is  nil  to  the  average  lady  patient.

Even  the  church  connives  with  the  Medical  Trust.  Every  honest-
to-goodness  church  has  an  undertaker  close  by.  His  sign  is  mostly  on
the  church  wall,  just  as  you  enter.  He  is  the  trade-mark  of  the  Medical
Trust.  Seven  out  of  eight  deaths  are  unnatural,  therefore  immoral.  If
the  church  were  entirely  a  moral  institution,  the  undertaker's  sign
would  be  banished,  and  the  undertaker's  calling  be  cast  in  disrepute.

But  the  legislature  is  the  crowning  tribute  to  the  organizing  skill  of
the  doctors.  Do  you  know  that  there  is  a  regular  price  for  the  vote  of
legislators  on  therapeutic  measures;  and  that  when  a  bill  comes  before
the  house  jeopardizing  the  medical  monopoly  the  price  is  paid,  the  vote
delivered,  and  the  bill  quashed?  Do  you  know  that  professional  lobby-
ists hang  around  the  legislative  chambers  while  the  members  are  in
session,  and  for  a  large  fat  fee  of  dishonor  choke  every  possible
endeavor  to  write  medical  freedom  on  the  statute  books?  Do  you  know
that  Governors  of  States  have  actually  vetoed  anti-monopoly  bills  when
a  satchelful  of  currency  was  miraculously,  anonymously,  handed  to
them?  Because  naturopaths  are  financially  and  morally  unable  to  pay
the  usual  bribe,  in  short  to  out-bribe  the  doctors,  their  bills  have  mostly
been  defeated. How  long  are  we  going  to  stand  for  this?


106  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Do  you  know  what  I  should  do,  if  I  were  a  drugless  healer?  I
should  pick  out  a  nice,  fat,  prosperous  doctor  and  go  to  school  to  him.
I  should  learn  from  him  the  rudiments  of  human  wisdom,  as  I  had
learned  from  Nature  the  rudiments  of  human  health.  Above  all,  1
should  emulate  the  fine  sense  of  professional  honor  that  impels  him  to
stand  by  his  fellow-practitioners  in  the  public  view,  and  to  utter  no
word  of  disparagement  on  a  rival  doctor.  I  never  heard  an  allopath
in  good  standing  run  down  the  skill  or  character  of  a  homeopath — no
matter  what  the  allopath  may  have  thought  about  the  homeopath  in
private.  Yet  I  have  known  scores  of  naturopaths  to  be  guilty  of  such  a
breach  of  courtesy,  wisdom  and  honor.  A  family,  a  school,  an  army,
a  profession,  a  religion,  each  and  all  demand  the  continual,  uplifting
and  animating  presence  of  an  esprit  de  corps.  We  Naturists  are  a
family — a  school — an  army — a  profession— a  religion.  But  we  have  yet
to  cultivate  an  esprit  de  corps.

How  may  this  feeling  of  brotherhood  for  all  natural  practitioners
be  developed?  Chiefly  through  w^ar — a  forced  union  in  a  common
cause  against  a  common  foe.  Providence  directs  the  persecuting  hand
of  the  Medical  Trust; — it  shall  slay  itself,  but  give  new  life  to  its  victims.
Here  in  New  York,  for  example,  the  birth  of  the  American  Naturopathic
Association  sprang  from  the  martyrdom  of  its  founders.  Among  them,
they  have  spent  years  of  unappreciated  effort,  thousands  of  dollars,
even  terms  in  jail,  through  the  unfair  persecution  and  relentless  pursuit
of  thQ  Medical  Society.  They  have  been  driven  to  a  combination  for
self-defense.  And  in  every  city  and  large  town  of  the  United  States,  we
may  look,  and  should  prepare,  for  a  similar  battle.

The  European  war  has  accomplished  a  wonderful  thing.  It  has
made  the  Socialists  of  Germany  forget  their  personal  hatred  of  empire
and  join  the  communal  struggle  for  the  dear  Fatherland;  it  has  made
the  Suff"ragists  and  the  Ulsterites  of  England  lay  aside  their  implements
of  ruin  and  rush  to  the  fray  that  menaces  Britannia;  it  has  made  even
the  "Apaches"  of  the  slums  of  Paris  cast  off  their  slang  and  their  slug,
straighten  their  moral  spine,  and  follow  the  flag  of  their  beloved  France
with  the  honest  eye  of  pure  devotion.  What  leader  can  arise,  great
enough  to  reconcile  the  warring  factions  of  the  drugless  healing  forces,
and  unite,  equip  and  inspire  them  for  a  common  charge  against  the
ignorance,  prejudice,  and  greed  of  the  army  of  medical  monopolists?

We  Americans  pride  ourselves  on  our  progressiveness.  But  in  the
field  of  natural  therapeutics  we  are  so  far  behind  Europe  that  we  look
like  a  snail  in  a  race  with  a  hare.  A  few  facts  are  pertinent.  As  I  con-
sider Dr.  Benedict  Lust  the  best-informed  man  in  America  regarding


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  107

conditions  abroad,  I  have  asked  him  for  a  statement,  and  would  here
quote  the  figures  lie  lias  given.

In  1848  tlie  naturopaths  of  Germany,  France,  Denmark  and  Sweden
first  organized  their  forces  in  behalf  of  medical  freedom  and  the  sepa-
ration of  therapeutics  and  politics.  The  Berlin  Society,  the  same  year,
established  an  institution  in  the  country  for  the  cure  of  consumption  by
open-air  methods;  and  the  world-wide  growth  of  this  treatment,  now
accepted  by  doctors  themselves  as  the  one  specific  regimen  for  tuber-
cular affections,  may  be  traced  to  the  courage,  wisdom  and  united
action  of  the  Berlin  Society  of  Naturopaths  sixty-eight  years  ago.

We  think  of  Baden  as  the  seat  of  a  famous  watering-place  where
wealthy  Americans  leave  their  gout  and  their  money.  But  the  start  of
the  richness  of  Baden  came  when  the  naturists  there  adopted  a  resolu-
tion declaring  medical,  political  and  religious  freedom.  We  need  in
this  country  men  of  gigantic  faith  and  courage — men  like  Priessnitz,
Frank  Rausse,  Hahn,  Kuhne,  Kneipp,  Lahmann,  Schroth  and  Rikli;  who
by  the  sheer  force  of  their  personality  swung  the  masses  of  Europe  into
line  with  naturopathic  principles.

The  first  naturopathic  society  of  the  world  had  52  members.  But
these  few  in  Berlin  organized  public  lectures,  clinics  and  demonstrations
so  fast  and  far  that  Dresden,  Leipsic,  Cologne,  Hamburg,  Diisseldorf
and  Vienna  were  soon  represented  in  the  "Deutscher  Bund  fiir  natur-
gemasse  Heil-  und  Lebensweise."  (To  those  unfamiliar  with  German
we  may  say  that  these  terrible-sounding  words  mean  simply  "German
Naturopathic  Society.")

Branches  were  formed  in  every  province  of  Germany  and  Austria,
and  the  country  was  apportioned  for  campaigning  into  the  Eastern,
Western,  Northern  and  Southern  Federations  of  Drugless  Physicians.
Then  France,  England,  Switzerland,  even  darkest  Russia,  sent  repre-
sentatives and  organized  locally.  The  movement  grew  to  immense  pro-
portions, till  there  was  no  influential  city  or  even  hamlet  in  Germany
without  its  naturopathic  society.

Berlin  alone  has  22  local  organizations  devoted  to  natural  healing
and  living.  On  a  comparative  basis  of  population  and  resources.  New
York  City  should  have  at  least  100  such  organizations.  Where  are  they?
Why  are  they  not?

The  huge  membership  of  naturopathic  societies  abroad  may  be
judged  by  the  circulation  of  one  official  journal— "Der  Naturarzt."
This  approximates  1,000,000  copies  a  month.  Over  200  magazines  for
the  natural  cure  and  life  are  published  regularly  in  European  centres


108  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

of  influence.  France  has  18,  Russia  45,  Austria-Hungary  92.  The  Latin-
Americas  combined  have  more  than  50.  Even  little  Switzerland  has  28.
The  glorious  United  States  of  America  has  a  grand  total  of  9 — and  some
of  these  are  dying  for  lack  of  support.

We  are  so  lamentably  weak  in  the  United  States,  not  from  lack  of
interest  but  from  lack  of  unification.  We  have  yet  to  learn  the  first
principles  of  team-work  in  the  Nature  Cure.  There  are  supposed  to  be
20,000,000  people  in  America  who  believe  more  or  less  in  drugless
methods.  But  of  that  vast  number  probably  not  more  than  20,000  are
now  actively  co-operating  for  such  mutual  and  communal  benefits  as
the  European  societies  have  gained  for  themselves  and  their  neighbors.
Is  it  not  time  to  round  up  for  action  that  19,980,000  who  are  with  us  in
spirit  but  not  in  fact?

This  Dr.  Benedict  Lust  and  other  leaders  are  aiming  to  do,  by  means
of  the  American  Naturopathic  Association.  I,  for  one,  wish  them  God-
speed. If  my  purse  could  only  talk  as  voluminously  as  my  pen,  I  would
offer  the  A.  N.  A.  a  million-dollar  endowment  for  schools,  hospitals  and
clinics;  and  ask  for  no  return  but  the  pleasure  of  watching  the  Associa-
tion become  a  national  power  for  health,  truth  and  liberty.

What  might  such  an  organization,  properly  supported  and  con-
ducted, achieve  in  American  annals  of  progress?  Consider  what  the
European  associations  have  done.

They  have  established  schools  where  the  principles  of  hygiene,
sanitation,  diet  and  baths  and  exercise,  the  prevention  of  disease  and
its  rational  treatment,  are  wisely  and  impressively  taught,  for  a  nominal
sum.

They  have  opened  club-houses  for  men,  women  and  children,
where  gymnasia,  treatment-rooms,  parks  for  sun  and  air  baths,  large
meadows  for  barefoot  walking  a  la  Kneipp,  and  other  health-giving
features  are  provided.

They  have  united  the  advocates  of  temperance,  of  anti-vaccination
and  anti-vivisection,  of  moral  prophylaxis  and  sex  reform,  of  vegeta-
rianism, of  welfare  work,  of  eugenics  and  child  culture,  and  of  many
related  uplift  movements;  by  which  union  for  concerted  action  the  natu-
ropathic associations  have  put  through  great  legislative  measures  by  the
weight  of  numbers  alone.

They  have  made  it  their  first  business  to  reach,  influence  and  cure
the  political  and  financial  leaders  of  their  respective  realms;  and  thus
to  gain  the  backing  of  statesmen,  financiers,  and  persons  of  royal  blood.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihu/crs'  Guide  109

They  have  acquired  such  political  power  that  they  dictate  their
principles  and  policies  to  every  candidate  for  ofiice  in  the  Reichstag  and
Diet — no  man  in  Germany  who  hopes  for  political  advancement  dares
to  oppose  the  Nature  Cure.

They  have  secured  from  legislatures  ample  protection,  and  official
endorsement,  for  the  practice  of  Naturopathy  in  every  section  of  the
country;  and  have  gained  the  passage  of  bills  authorizing  the  appropria-
tion by  cities  of  large  sums  of  money  for  the  endowment  of  local  insti-
tutions— such  as  hospitals,  clinics,  sanitaria  and  schools.

They  have  so  permeated  the  whole  structure  of  German  life  that
children  are  reared  according  to  their  precepts,  magazines  and  news-
papers organized  for  their  cause,  even  schools  and  churches  conducted
for  their  honor  and  advancement.  The  naturopaths  in  Germany  are
more  highly  respected  than  the  doctors  are  here;  and  social  as  well  as
financial  standing  is  the  just  reward  of  their  splendid  work.

Whatever  we  think  about  the  right  and  wrong  of  the  European
war,  we  must  admire  and  respect  the  colossal  bravery  of  the  German
race,  in  challenging  the  world  to  mortal  combat.  That  bravery  is  largely
due  to  the  marvelous  strength  of  body  and  brain  implanted  in  the
German  youth  by  the  naturopathic  societies  of  the  Fatherland.  A
science  of  health  has  been  taught  the  German  army.  This  much,  at
least,  we  can  learn  from  their  astounding  efficiency  in  war — and  then
apply  the  methods  to  ourselves,  as  soldiers  of  peace,  of  progress  and
reform.  The  bigger  the  man,  the  bigger  his  battles.  To  gain  the  support
of  the  leaders  of  this  nation,  all  of  whom  need  the  increase  of  energy,
optimism  and  endurance  found  through  the  Nature  Cure,  we  have  but
to  organize  powerfully,  campaign  scientifically,  and  present  our  truths
in  acceptable  form.


110  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  V

KNOWING  YOUR  JOB


Advice  to  advice-givers:  Before  you  tell  us  what  to  do,  tell  us  how
to  do  it.

The  world  is  full  of  well-meaning  parents,  policemen,  philosophers
and  Sunday  School  teachers  who  enjoin  upon  us  wisdom  and  goodness,
without  offering  the  slightest  clue  of  how  to  attain  these  enviable  alti-
tudes. Result:  we  merely  become  dissatisfied,  without  the  power  to
change  conditions.  It  is  better  to  show  us  how  to  drive  a  nail  properly
than  to  paint  perfection  for  us  and  leave  us  motionless.

The  advocate  of  the  new  healing  methods  who  is  convinced  of  the
correctness  of  our  fifteen-point  analysis  may  put  an  efficiency  scheme
into  operation  in  one  of  three  ways:

First.  He  may  personally  secure  expert  counsel  and  trained  super-
visors for  the  carrying  out  of  these  suggestions  in  his  practice  or  the
various  departments  of  his  institution.

Second.  He  may  delegate  various  employees  to  the  study  of  the
respective  points,  letting  tliem  choose  tfieir  topics  by  their  natural  apti-
tudes, and  offering  rewards  for  practical  suggestions  that  prove  to  be
time-savers,  money-savers,  business-producers.

Third.  He  may  help  to  form  a  league  or  union  of  drugless  physi-
cians in  America,  which  league  or  union  could  regularly  employ  the
finest  experts  in  advertising,  scientific  management,  law,  finance,  etc.,
and  could  furnish  detailed  instructions  by  these  experts  to  members  of
the  league  at  a  negligible  cost.

This  third  metliod  seems  by  far  the  best.  I  should  judge  tliat  in  the
United  States  there  are  at  least  10,000  graduate  practitioners  of  drugless
methods,  and  probably  1,000  schools  and  sanitaria.  A  league  uniting
them  all  could,  by  charging  only  $5  yearly  dues  from  the  individuals
and  $10  from  the  institutions,  approximate  a  yearly  income  of  $60,000.
This  would  be  sufficient  to  cover  the  salaries  of  the  various  experts,
whose  advice  or  instruction  would  then  be  available  to  members  for
perhaps  the  bare  cost  of  postage  and  clerical  work.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  HI

The  second  method  is  partially  satisfactory,  when  your  clerks  are
loyal  and  naturally  bright.  One  of  the  girls  in  our  office  has  learned  to
read  proof  and  thus  to  save  my  time;  another  can  write  ordinary  busi-
ness letters  without  my  dictation;  another  is  gifted  along  advertising
lines  and  here  makes  valuable  suggestions;  another,  with  a  memory
for  names  and  faces  that  beats  any  filing  system,  acts  as  social  secretary
and  greets  the  visitors.  In  short,  by  putting  the  talents  of  each  employee
to  work,  we  have  increased  the  efficiency  of  our  office  probably  30
per  cent  and  have  correspondingly  taken  the  burden  from  the  officials
whose  time  is  most  valuable.

The  objection  to  the  first  method  is  the  cost.  While  the  quickest
and  best  results  would  follow  the  individual  employment  of  experts  in
publicity,  advertising,  salesmanship,  correspondence,  etc.,  you  would
have  to  pay  for  a  corps  of  such  experts  in  the  neighborhood  of  $1,000
a  week.  Can  you  picture  yourself  in  the  Nature  Cure  business  and
having  that  much  to  spare  every  week?

The  great  obstacle,  however,  in  the  way  of  adoption  of  any  ef-
ficiency plan  is  not  the  cost.  Nor  is  it  the  time  and  work  involved.  It
is  the  natural  conceit  of  reformers.  The  grandeur  of  their  egotism  is
an  awe-inspiring  sight.  If  I  could  only  paint  it  properly,  I  could  sell
the  picture  for  a  huge  sum  to  the  cult  of  "Devil-worshippers,"  and  re-
'tire  from  business.  The  beginning  of  commercial  success  is  for  a  man
to  realize  how  much  he  doesn't  know.  Few  drugless  healers  ever  reach
this  point.

John  Wanamaker  says  to  his  advertising  manager:  "I  will  give  you
$15,000  a  year  to  take  charge  of  my  announcements  to  the  public.  I
know  merchandising^I  do  not  know  advertising.  Take  my  appropria-
tion (a  half  million  or  a  million)  and  do  as  you  please  with  it  so  long
as  you  get  results."  John  Wanamaker  knows  how  much  he  doesn't
know;  he  pays  and  trusts  other  men  to  supply  his  lack.

Did  you  ever  see  the  head  of  a  drugless  sanitarium  who  would  pay
a  specialist  to  offer  him  advice,  or  would  give  an  employee  five  cents  to
spend,  without  being  anxious  lest  the  money  were  wasted?  No  one  man
can  ever  run  a  business  worth  running.  Yet  the  leader  in  hygienic
reform  demands  that  he  be  the  whole  thing,  with  everybody  in  his
employ  a  nobody.  Consequence :  the  business  end  goes  to  the  dogs.
And  the  employees  don't  care,  not  having  enough  responsibility  and
freedom  to  put  them  on  their  mettle.

A  few  examples  of  the  stubbornness,  obtuseness  and  conceit  of  the
typical  health  reformer.  As  the  chief  aim  of  these  chapters  is  to  improve
the  finances  of  the  drugless  healer,  I  will  confine  the  mention  of  horrible


112  I'liiDcrsdl  ^\^lllr(>l)a^lic  Directory  and  lini/rrs'  (iiiidc


examples  to  those  who  have  lost  money  through  their  pigheadedness
(a  big  headed  man  is  always  pigheaded).

A  zealous  hygienist  with  a  lot  of  new  ideas  opened  a  sanitarium,
and  offered  to  cure  any  disease  known  to  man,  by  a  combination  of
non-medical  systems.  The  writer  visited  the  place,  and  observed  the
following  interesting  occurrences.  A  refined  gentleman  came  all  the
way  from  California;  was  told  that  the  house  held  no  room  for  him;
was  herded  in  a  tent  with  a  boor  of  a  fellow;  was  put  on  a  fast  against
his  will;  and  was  charged  full  rates— being  given  no  food  and  no  decent
bed.  A  lady  so  weak  she  could  hardly  stand  was  forced  to  take  gym-
nastics three  times  a  day,  with  husky  athletes  setting  the  pace.  A  fat
butcher,  loaded  with  impurities,  was  allowed  to  go  nine  days  without
a  movement  of  the  bowels  and  almost  died; — the  owner  of  the  resort
didn't  believe  in  cathartics  and  considered  the  enema  wickedly  "un-
natural." A  run-down  sport  from  New  York  arrived  with  a  lady  not
his  wife,  their  presence  drove  a  band  of  good  Christian  people  from
the  house,  and  the  founder  merely  remarked  that  he  was  not  in  the
business  of  regulating  people's  morals.  At  the  opening,  the  place  was
crowded,  receipts  for  a  time  averaging  $300  a  day.  Now  the  place  is
closed.  The  founder  would  not  use  common  courtesy,  common  decency
or  common  sense  in  his  treatment  of  guests,  and  scorned  suggestions
from  all  employees  looking  toward  improvement.

Another  specialist  in  cure  without  medicine  was  spending  $500  a
month  in  advertising  a  course  of  treatment.  He  got  an  average  of  but
one  client  in  twenty  replies— not  enough  to  pay  the  mere  cost  of  adver-
tising, and  he  summoned  an  efficiency  man  to  locate  the  cause  of  the
trouble.  By  the  usual  ratio  of  customers  to  inquirers,  the  specialist
should  have  had  5  to  7  clients  from  every  20  replies  to  advertisements.
But  investigation  showed  that  his  booklet  of  information  was  neither
attractive  nor  convincing,  that  his  chief  clerk  didn't  know  the  first  prin-
ciples of  good  letter-writing,  and  that  most  of  his  mail-order  clients
were  handled  by  a  mere  boy,  while  the  specialist  was  off  doing  some-
thing foreign  to  the  healing  of  the  sick.  For  less  money  than  he  was
putting  into  the  magazines  on  a  single  month's  advertisements,  he  could
have  hired  an  advertising  counsel  to  overhaul  the  place  and  prepare
some  winning  letters  and  literature.  But  the  specialist  was  an  "indi-
vidual," and  refused  to  be  told  how  to  run  his  business.  Many  a  man
who  calls  himself  an  "individual"  is  merely  an  idiot,  unconscious  of  the
fact.  This  particular  individual,  through  his  blindness  and  conceit,  lost
probably  $20,000  a  year;  and  scores  of  others  do  as  badly,  in  a  smaller
way.

A  promoter  of  a  hygienic  enterprise  raised  $200,000  to  float  his
company,  but  refused  to  surround  and  safeguard  himself  with  expert


Universal  Naturopathic  Dircctonj  and  liuifcrs'  Guide  113

advisers  and  helpers.  Tlie  demand  for  his  products  grew  so  fast  that
he  could  not  guarantee  delivery.  He  was  a  big-hearted  man,  with  a
firm  belief  in  his  mission  to  the  world.  So  he  shipped  the  goods  on
request,  from  Maine  to  California,  express  prepaid,  and  wrote  the  cus-
tomers they  could  settle  when  the  delivery  department  was  in  running
order.  It  never  was;  the  plant  is  shut  down;  a  wonderful  career  of
service  now  seems  blighted;  and  many  of  the  "free"  customers  have
been  first  to  misunderstand  and  condemn.  This  generous,  foolish  man
trusted  to  the  "Higher  Law"  to  overrule  his  financial  blunders,  he  was
sure  Providence  would  supply  the  capital  needed  if  only  he  was  good
and  kind.  Providence  is  not  in  the  business  of  supplying  capital;
Providence  gives  us  brains,  and  if  we  don't  use  them  we  may  expect  to
starve.  This  great  health  reformer  and  promoter,  used  to  thinking  in
terms  of  millions,  now  sleeps  in  a  down-and-out  Bowery  hotel  and  is
thankful  when  he  has  20  cents  to  pay  for  his  dinner.

What  is  the  lesson  from  such  mistakes?

That  in  business  method  reformers  are  babies.  The  examples  I
have  mentioned  are  not  rare  in  drugless  healing.  They  are  common.  I
could  fill  a  book  with  them.  And  the  reason  why  we  do  not  see  more
big  failures  is  that  the  big  attempts  are  few  and  far  between.  I  am
convinced  that  if  the  majority  of  healers  and  teachers  had  the  nerve  to
embark  on  a  huge  enterprise,  they  would  end  in  a  huge  collapse.  Only
the  penny  failures  of  their  penny  plans  let  them  outwit  public  disgrace.

This  is  strong  language  and  a  hateful  charge.  Please  remember
that  I  have  damned  my  own  mistakes  with  greater  force — force  enough
to  make  me  spend  fifteen  years  in  learning  wisdom  at  a  cost  of  more
hardship,  toil,  humiliation,  suffering  and  bitterness  than  you  would
believe  a  man  could  endure,  if  I  told  you.  For  every  word  of  criticism,
1  bear  a  wound.

Long  years  ago  I  had  a  sort  of  simple-minded  notion  that  I  was  a
great  writer.  Then  one  day  an  advertising  expert  came  along,  and  be-
friended me  by  smashing  the  notion  into  pieces  the  size  of  a  zero  with
the  rim  knocked  off.  This  man  was  a  personal  acquaintance;  moreover,
he  charged  and  got  $100  a  day  for  his  fee  as  advertising  counsel;  there-
fore I  had  to  listen  to  him.  He  went  over  a  sample  of  my  advertise-
ments of  health  reform.  Then  he  calmly  announced  that  the  heading
was  wrong,  the  style  was  wrong,  and  the  substance  was  wrong;  he  also
intimated  that  I  knew  a  lot  of  words,  but  had  no  idea  what  to  do  with
them,  and  that  if  T  would  spend  a  few  years  in  studying  literature,  ad-
vertising, salesmanship,  psychology  and  human  nature,  I  might  be  able
to  write  a  page  of  oratory  that  would  sell  a  tooth-brush.


114  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Talk  about  bitter  pills  to  swallow!  Of  all  the  sixteen  kinds  of
medicine  that  I  used  to  pour  into  my  system  to  please  the  doctors,  this
dose  of  the  literary  doctor  was  the  quintessence  of  bitterness.  I  swal-
lowed it,  however,  and  I  went  forth  and  learned  my  job.

The  real  price  of  efficiency  is  not  in  books  and  courses  and  equip-
ments, nor  yet  in  high-salaried  counsel  and  expert  labor.  It  is  in  abso-
lute surrender  of  personal  pride,  personal  prejudice,  personal  pecu-
liarity, personal  ambition,  personal  gratification.  Few  will  pay  this
price;— so  the  majority  have  not  even  a  conception  of  their  maximum
of  usefulness.  If  every  drugless  healer  had  a  friend  able  and  willing  to
tell  him  the  truth  about  himself,  bluntly  and  forcibly,  such  an  education
would  be  worth  more  than  a  library  on  "Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing."

Do  you  have  trouble  securing  patients  or  students?  You  don't
know  your  job.

Do  you  find  it  hard  to  collect  your  fees? You  don't  know  your  job.

Are  the  neighbors  doubtful  or  antagonistic?  You  don't  know  your
job.

Have  rival  doctors  and  institutions  robbed  you  of  clients?  You
don't  know  your  job.

Is  your  work  too  much  for  your  time  and  strength?  You  don't
know  your  job.

Can  the  Medical  Trust  annoy  you  with  persecution?  You  don't
know  your  job.

Could  you  be  tempted  to  waste  energy  in  running  down  the  old-
school  doctors? You  don't  know  your  job.

Would  you  claim  to  cure  all  forms  of  disease  by  your  one  system?
You  don't  know  your  job.

Has  it  never  occurred  to  you  that  other  healing  methods  may  sur-
pass yours,  and  that  your  business  is  to  understand  them  all?  You
don't  know  your  job.

If  you  answer  any  of  the  foregoing  questions  in  the  affirmative,  it  is
very  clear  to  a  trained  student  of  psychology  and  business  method  that
you  don't  know  your  job.  Just  how  and  why  this  is  true,  we  have  not
space  to  discuss  here.  But  a  little  frank  and  serious  thought  will,  I  feel
sure,  enable  any  practitioner  of  modern  healing  to  trace  the  connec-
tion between  the  misfortunes  and  difficulties  that  beset  him,  and  his
own  lack  of  knowledge  or  equipment  that  is  a  more  fatal  handicap
than  external  opposition.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  115

A  chief  ingredient  of  success  is  the  habit  of  asking  oneself  in  the  face
of  a  hurt,  anxiety  or  failure:  "What  is  wrong,  or  what  is  lacking,  in  me?"
No  man  can  be  thoroughly  efficient,  as  both  a  personal  worker  and  a
helper  of  the  world,  until  he  has  formed  this  habit.  When  William  G.
McAdoo  took  up  his  work  as  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  of  the  United
States,  he  was  already  the  biggest  man  in  his  line  that  the  country  ever
knew.  How  did  he  act?  He  modestly  made  request  of  the  clerks  in  the
Treasury  Department  for  their  ideas  on  the  best  way  to  proceed,  for  a
maximum  of  economy  and  efficiency!  The  wielder  of  millions  was
willing  to  learn  from  the  humblest  wage-earner  in  his  employ.  He  was
shrewd  enough  to  capitalize  the  experiences  of  others,  and  to  avoid
mistakes  by  going  slowly  till  he  knew  his  ground.  The  aim  of  these
chapters  is  to  furnish  a  similar  advantage  to  the  drugless  healer,  before
whom  lies  a  wilderness  of  unexplored  territory.


116  Universal  Natiiropdthic  Direrlonj  and  Bui/rrs'  Guide


CHAPTER  VI

STANDARDIZING  THE  NATURE  CURE


What  is  the  Nature  Cure?  I  don't  know.  Furthermore,  I  don't
know  anybody  who  does  know.  This  fact,  strange  and  unaccountable
as  it  may  seem,  is  easy  of  explanation,  and  in  turn  explains  why  the
Nature  Cure  has  not  been  legalized  in  America.

It  is  no  disgrace,  even  for  a  drugless  physician,  not  to  know  what
the  Nature  Cure  is.  Few  preachers  know  what  Christianity  is.  Few
teachers  know  what  Education  is.  Yet  they  preach,  and  they  teach,
without  molestation.

treatments,  they  do  not  handle  cases  of  life  and  death.  The  harm  done
by  parsons  and  pedagogues  through  ignorance  or  prejudice,  while  con-
siderable and  unwarrantable,  is  of  a  mild,  negative  sort,  without  being
immediately  fatal.  The  harm  done  by  ignorant  physicians,  whether
old-school  or  new-school,  is  violent,  crucial,  deadly.  Hence  the  refusal
of  the  (iovernment  to  legalize  the  practice  of  the  Nature  Cure,  prema-
turely. We  already  have  enough  licensed  killers,  in  the  ranks  of
allopathy,  homeopathy,  pharmacy  and  surgery.

The  great  trouble  with  naturopaths  is  an  excess  of  emotionalism —
they  lack  the  courage  or  ability  to  look  at  cold  facts  in  a  cool,  impartial,
judicially-minded  manner.  I  say  this  with  an  unholy  joy,  remembering
how  many  readers  of  my  productions  charged  me,  years  ago,  with  being
a  mere  poet.  For  a  poet  to  be  a  poet  is  quite  rational — however  irra-
tional the  poet  may  seem;  but  for  a  doctor  to  be  a  poet  is  irrational,
unscientific  and  unsafe.  Most  naturists  need  to  take  their  brains  out  of
cold  storage,  and  to  put  their  hearts  in  it.

An  elliciency  engineer  is  absolutely  cold-blooded;  thrills  and
throbs  and  sighs  and  sobs  are  nothing  to  him,  facts  are  everything.  I
have  been  seeking  facts;  and  to  do  so,  have  endeavored  to  place  myself
in  the  position  of  a  State  legislator,  in  the  process  of  considering  a  bill
to  legalize  Christian  Science  or  Mechano-Therapy  or  Naturopathy.  The
job  of  simulation  is  a  hard  one — I  wouldn't  waste  my  life  in  a  State


Universal  Naturnpalhic  Directory  and  Buyers*  Guide  117


legislature  for  a  barrel  of  money,  and  a  bevy  of  railroads  thrown  in.
But  my  present,  unanimous  opinion  is  that,  if  I  were  afflicted  with  a  job
in  a  law-factory,  I  would  positively  refuse  to  sanction  all  bills  to  heal  by
drugless  methods  which  have  been  drafted  thus  far.  And  in  addition,  1
would  refuse  to  look  at  any  such  documents  in  future,  unless  the  framers
of  them  assured  me  that  they  contained  a  rudiment  of  common  sense!

From  a  long  acquaintance  with  Dr.  Benedict  Lust,  1  consider  him
one  of  the  bravest  men  now  living.  Should  he  publish  this  chapter,  I
proclaim  him  the  very  bravest  man  now  living.  For  in  this  chapter  I  am
gently  knocking  out  the  underpinning  of  the  whole  Nature  Cure  propa-
ganda as  it  now  exists.  Your  tribute  to  the  courage,  honesty  and  sin-
cerity of  Doctor  Lust  might  well  take  the  form  of  complimentary'  sub-
scriptions to  his  magazine,  mailed  at  once  for  the  benefit  of  your  most
valued  clients  or  personal  friends.  In  these  days  of  policy  and  greed,
the  sight  of  an  absolutely  fearless  man  is  a  vision  to  enchant  the  gods.

I  can  prove  my  statement  that  nobody  really  knows  what  the  Nature
Cure  is.  For  purposes  of  analysis  and  comparison,  1  recently  obtained
the  descriptive  matter  issued  by  a  dozen  of  the  most  prominent  schools
and  sanitaria  advertised  in  The  Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath,  Phys-
ical Culture,  Health  Culture,  The  Nautilus,  and  other  advanced  publica-
tions. The  aforesaid  literature  includes  booklets,  pamphlets,  prospect-
uses, personal  letters,  form  letters,  and  all  other  printed  or  typewritten
matter,  aiming  to  secure  customers,  patients  or  students.  I  now  have
this  collection  before  me. It  is  a  rare  exhibit.

The  doctors  and  professors  all  agree  that  Nature  Cure  is  the  only
cure,  but  no  two  of  them  agree  in  defining  the  term  and  describing  the
system.  To  get  on  the  trail  of  a  clear  definition,  from  studj^ing  these
print-marks,  would  require  the  allied  services  of  a  Philadelphia  lawyer,
a  pack  of  old  Virginia  blood-hounds,  a  crop  of  New  York  detectives,
and  a  posse  of  Wild  West  citizens  in  pursuit  of  a  horse-thief.  I  give  it
up,  and  sadly  and  wearily  hand  the  problem  over  to  you.

Prior  to  analyzing  the  choice  bits  of  literature  now  in  hand,  I  wish
to  state  a  few  reasons  for  obtaining  the  first-hand  statements  of  the
recognized  leaders  in  natural  therapeutics.  I  have  been  sorely  puzzled
for  years,  on  many  points  of  doctrine.  Here  are  a  few  questions  I  have
asked,  and  never  had  answered.

1.  What  is  the  difference,  logically  and  etiologically,  between  the
herbal  remedies  of  Kneipp  and  the  purely  vegetable  medicines  found  in
a  drug-store?  The  druggist  on  the  corner,  with  whom  I  have  had  many
a  friendly  argument,  says  that  cascara,  belladonna,  certain  opiates,  and
in  fact  scores  of  the  medicines  he  sells  are  of  strictly  vegetable  origin.


118  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


He  asks  on  what  ground  the  Nature  Cure  apostles  forbid  the  use  of
these,  while  prescribing  tinctures,  powders  and  teas?  How  can  such  a
position  be  defended?  And  is  it  not  true  that  some  of  the  herbal  ex-
tracts in  the  apothecary  of  the  German  Nature  Cure  have  a  more  violent
effect  than  many  of  the  milder  forms  of  mineral  drugs?  Are  any  in-
ternal remedies  "natural"? If  so,  which  and  why?

2.  What  is  a  "natural"  diet?  Some  animals  are  omnivorous,  some
herbivorous,  some  carnivorous.  To  which  class  do  men  belong?  Birds
and  fishes  have  no  meal-hours;  should  we  therefore  imitate  the  birds
and  fishes?  Domestic  animals,  almost  without  exception,  eat  a  regular
breakfast,  and  vociferate  loudly  on  being  deprived  or  delayed  in  the
matter.  Does  this  invalidate  the  no-breakfast  plan,  followed  with  such
good  results  by  thousands  of  ambitious  people,  including  the  writer?

In  the  advertising  pages  of  a  popular  magazine,  a  large  and  bold
announcement  of  a  certain  school  of  diet  affirms  the  everlasting  injury
of  meat-eating;  while,  if  you  merely  turn  to  another  page,  you  read
that  brain-workers  must  eat  meat,  or  become  dyspeptic,  morose,  pimply
and  dull-minded.  What  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  rational  and  honest
can  a  layman  think  of  reform  diet?  I  know  what  he  most  likely  thinks
— but  the  answer  is  unprintable.

The  publisher  of  this  book  believes  in  sane  fasting,  in  thorough
mastication,  in  wholly  natural  foods.  The  editor  of  another  health
movement,  long  and  widely  known,  maintains  we  do  not  eat  enough,  calls
Fletcherism  rank  folly,  and  declares  white  flour  bread  a  much  better
food  than  whole  wheat!  Now  where  is  the  truth?'  Has  either  editor
got  it?  Or  has  neither?  When  a  legislator  very  properly  asks  us  how
our  answer  is  bedlam; — which  induces  a  corresponding  state  of  feeling
in  the  weak-minded  legislator.  Foods  will  cure,  safely  and  pleasantly,
most  of  the  ailments  for  which  drugs  are  now  employed  unsafely  and
must  present  a  solid,  unimpeachable  array  of  facts;  instead  of  the  loose,
wild,  conflicting  theories  that  we  now  indulge,  and  scatter  abroad  with
a  rash  and  senseless  virtue.  A  foolish  virtue  may  be  more  unhygienic
than  a  shrewd  vice.

3.  Does  Nature  Cure  properly  include  osteopathy,  or  chiropractic,
or  mechano-therapy,  or  none  of  these  methods,  or  all  of  them?  The
other  day  1  talked  with  a  chiropractor.  He  is  a  fine  fellow  and  a  re-
markably successful  practitioner.  He  was  rational  and  sane  upon  all
themes  excepting  one;  but  when  I  spoke  the  word  "osteopathy,"  not
knowing  which  form  his  unsuspected  mania  took,  he  immediately  be-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  119

came  wild-eyed,  verbose  and  ugly,  charging  over  the  field  of  discussion
with  the  recklessness  of  an  escaped  lunatic.  It  developed,  after  1
quieted  the  unfortunate  brother  by  agreeing  with  him,  that  he  had
formerly  been  an  osteopath,  but  with  his  conversion  to  chiropractic  had
suddenly  developed  an  unreasoning  hatred  of  the  former  source  of  his
bread  and  butter.

Marveling  at  this  phenomenon,  I  sought  the  opinion  of  a  famous
osteopath — a  man  whose  yearly  practice  yields  $15,000  or  more — and  1
asked  him  an  explanation.  He  smiled  a  gentle,  pitying  smile,  and  he
said,  "When  a  man  fails  at  osteopathy,  he  drifts  into  chiropractic,  as  a
poor,  discouraged  medical  doctor  often  drifts  into  the  patent  medicine
field,  or  a  'Cure  for  Men  Only.'  We  consider  that  the  chiropractors  owe
all  their  possible  cures  to  the  principles  of  osteopathy,  having  merely
added  a  sensational  twist  to  their  diagnosis  and  treatment."  I  wished
to  verify  Brother  Osteopath's  opinion,  therefore  called  up  Brother
Chiropractic  on  the  telephone — deeming  this  a  discretionary  mode  of
communication  under  the  circumstances.  The  reply  scorched  my  ears,
and  was  deafening  in  its  detonations  of  wrath.  "He  is  a  liar,  an  out-
and-out  liar,  that  fool  osteopath!  Don't  we  know  that  the  osteopaths
took  all  they  know  from  Bohemia,  where  chiropractic  started  years
before  A.  T.  Still  was  ever  heard  of?"  And  there  you  are.  An  inter-
esting episode,  characteristic  of  the  perfect  harmony  and  unity  in  the
drugless  ranks.

By  a  strict  logic,  there  is  no  place  for  either  osteopathy  or  chiro-
practic in  the  Nature  Cure.  Both  depend  upon  a  stimulation  that  is
artificial,  and  extra-natural  if  not  unnatural.  Personally,  I  would  class
them  as  minor  subdivisions  of  the  Nature  Cure,  to  be  advised  occa-
sionally and  employed  judicially,  but  never  to  constitute  a  major  system
of  healing.  They  are  not  massage,  and  have  little  in  common  with
massage;  but  in  relative  importance  they  are  little  higher  than  massage,
considered  with  regard  to  healing  as  a  whole.  Medical  men  affirm  that
the  successful  osteopath  or  chiropractor  depends  really  not  on  manipu-
lation, but  rather  on  suggestion,  magnetism,  the  placebo-principle,  and
rational  advice  on  bathing,  eating,  exercising,  etc.  This  is  probably  true,
save  in  those  extreme  cases  where  a  pronounced  "lesion"  or  "sub-
luxation" does  exist;  therefore  the  osteopath  and  chiropractor  may  be
voted  natural  healers  in  disguise.  But  I  would  not  venture  a  final
opinion,  I  would  only  ask  that  this  point  be  somehow  decided,  con-
clusively and  unanimously,  by  naturopaths  in  advance  of  pleading  for
a  State  license.

4.  What  forms  of  exercise  belong  in  the  practice  of  Naturism?
Are  special  devices  needed,  or  are  they  unnatural? In  studying  the  life


120  l^ruucrsdl  S'dluropdthic  Directory  and  Biujcrs'  Guide

of  the  "lower"  animals,  we  observe  that  the  muscular  vigor  of  the  young
is  derived  largely  from  play,  that  of  the  adults  from  the  daily  search  for
food.  Now  contrast  the  involved  systems  of  "physical  culture"  in  vogue
among  men.  Professor  Jones  invents  a  weight-lifting  harness  we  must
wear  religiously,  to  retain  our  suppleness  and  strength;  Trainer  O'Toole
style  are  all  the  rage;  Doctor  Pneumaticus  vends  a  wonderful  breathing-
machine,  into  which  we  must  solemnly  blow  so  many  breaths  a  day;
and  Health  Specialist  Bumpaman  superintends  a  lot  of  mechanical
horses,  wigglers  and  jigglers,  that  he  guarantees  will  shake  our  ailments
down  and  out.

We  hesitate — not  being  able  to  spend  all  our  time  and  money  on
gj^mnastic  gyrations.  Then  comes  Mr.  Adonis  Psychotherapy,  declaring
that  all  the  foregoing  methods  are  highly  dangerous,  tending  to  rupture
the  heart,  the  brain  or  the  pocket-book,  and  the  only  natural  scheme  of
exercise  will  be  found  to  be  his — ^without  apparatus,  but  with  a  $30  fee
for  the  magic  lessons.  Are  we  not  now  tempted  to  die  of  paralysis,
rather  than  move  a  muscle  ever  again?

Seriously,  such  a  condition  of  things  is  a  menace  and  a  disgrace.
If  it  is  true,  as  I. believe,  that  certain  modes  of  advertised  exercise  tend
to  strain  the  heart;  that  other  devices  merely  rob  you  politely;  and
that  other  patent  schemes  neglect  the  vital  organs  while  demanding  un-
reasonable waste  of  time  and  energy  on  superficial  muscles; — then  some
recognized  college,  association,  clearing-house  or  other  tribunal  should
separate  the  good  from  the  bad,  affirming  which  is  Nature  Cure,  and
which  is  not.

5.  Should  hypnotism,  magnetism,  occultism,  and  other  more  or
less  intangible  forces  be  admitted  to  the  realm  of  Natural  Healing?  If
not,  we  must  avow  that  the  human  mind  is  not  a  part  of  Nature.  This
would  be  absurd,  since  even  the  snake  charming  the  bird  is  a  case  of
hypnotic  influence,  and  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  warning  certain
animals  of  the  approach  of  their  foes  cannot  be  explained  on  the  ground
of  merely  physical  phenomena.  Nature  is  an  endless  tale  of  marvels
and  mysteries;  and  the  mystic  element  is  the  most  powerful  in  human
life,  whether  operating  through  pills  of  a  secret  nature  or  through
prayers  to  an  unknown  God.

But  is  the  violent  imposition  of  a  stronger  will  upon  a  weaker  mind
a  natural,  wise  and  ethical  procedure?  I  know  of  ministers  and  doctors
who  state,  with  everj^  sign  of  omniscience,  that  hypnotism  was  born  of
the  Devil.  And  I  know  of  cases  where  hypnotism  has  healed  not  only
physical,  but  mental  and  moral  diseases,  that  stubbornly  resisted  all


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijrrs'  Guide  12i

other  available  modes  of  treatment.  If  hypnotism,  magnetism  and
occultism  are  to  be  approved,  taught  and  practised  in  our  Nature  Cure
sanitaria  and  schools,  they  must  be  confined  and  regulated  with  the
utmost  care  and  wisdom.  Should  they  be  so  incorporated?  If  so,  how
and  by  whom  and  to  what  extent?

6.  Should  the  Nature  Cure  platform  include  Christian  Science?
You  may  smile  at  this  question,  but  I  assure  you  it  is  one  of  the  most
logical  I  ever  asked.  Anything  logical  in  the  vicinity  of  Christian  Science
is  sadly  out  of  place;  but  we  are  all  a  queer  lot,  anyhow,  and  must  be
prepared  for  strange  happenings.  My  own  firm  conviction  is  that  the
principles  of  Christian  Science  should  be  taught  in  every  sanitarium;
and  that  the  Christian  Science  mode  of  "treatment"  is  as  much  a  part  of
Nature  Cure  as  is  diet,  or  massage,  or  hydrotherapy.  The  Christian
Scientist  and  the  Nature  Curist  will  both  disagree  with  me.  But  the
only  man  everybody  agrees  with  is  a  dead  man;  not  being  exactly  dead,
I  am  thankful  to  be  able  to  stir  up  healthy  opposition.

Christian  Science  is  the  gospel  of  concentration.  As  such  it  belongs
in  every  health  resort;  where  the  poor  inmates  are  now  engaged  in
moaning  over  their  ailments,  comparing  their  feels-ifs,  pitying  them-
selves, and  objecting  to  the  food,  the  climate,  the  accommodations,  the
nurses,  doctors,  remedies,  rules,  and  everything  else  in  sight.  The
mental  atmosphere  of  the  ordinary  hospital  or  sanitarium  is  a  pall  on
the  horizon.  Midnight  is  a  flare  of  luminosity,  compared  with  it.  I  have
often  been  obliged  to  urge  friends,  who  w^ere  of  a  delicate  nature  and
sensitive  nervous  organism,  against  planning  a  sojourn  at  a  drugless
institution,  because  I  knew  the  mental,  psychic  and  spiritual  influence
of  the  place  were  as  Bad  as  the  physical  methods  were  good.  Until  we
can  treat  the  sick  minds,  hearts  and  souls  of  ailing  men  and  women  as
promptly  and  effectively  as  we  now  treat  their  bodies,  we  have  no  right
to  ask  legal  sanction  as  physicians  of  Nature.

7.  What  is  the  natural  method  of  diagnosis?  Are  there  infallible
signs  of  detecting  the  presence  of  disease  in  the  human  organism?  Do
they  record  themselves  in  external  areas  and  ordinary  functions  of  the
body,  or  must  they  be  found  in  the  deeper  symptomatic  states,  from  the
blood-cell  and  plasmic  change  to  the  conditions  of  thought,  emotion  and
etheric  aura?  How  shall  the  tests  of  a  rational  and  complete  diagnosis
be  applied?  Is  the  practitioner  of  any  single  school  of  drugless  healing
adequately  trained  in  the  use  of  all  the  known  tests  for  locating  disease?
The  importance  of  such  questions  is  fundamental  and  universal.  Yet
they  have  not  received  proper  attention,  so  far  as  I  know,  in  all  the
history  of  Nature  Cure  in  America.

Go  to  any  old-school  doctor,  whether  allopath,  homeopath,  or  eclec-


122  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


tic,  and  he  will  diagnose  your  case  in  a  definite,  regular,  unanimous
fashion,  thoroughly  endorsed  and  solemnly  applied  by  thousands  of
other  old-school  doctors.  Medical  diagnosis  includes  examinations  of
the  pulse,  tongue  and  temperature,  with  such  local  tests  as  the  blood-
count,  urinanalysis,  nerve-reaction,  minute  inspection  by  the  stethoscope,
laryngoscope,  or  other  similar  device.  Whether  such  methods  are
scientific,  is  not  for  me  to  say;  the  point  is  that  every  doctor  knows  what
they  are,  and  every  doctor  thinks  he  knows  why  they  are.

Now  observe  the  wild  and  irrational  conflict  of  theory  and  usage
in  the  drugless  realm.  No  two  practitioners  follow  the  same  plan  of
diagnosis;  and  as  treatment  depends  on  diagnosis,  naturally  no  two
by  the  muscles,  another  by  the  eye,  another  by  the  ligaments,  another
by  the  spine,  another  by  the  tissue,  another  by  the  temperament,  another
by  the  adipose,  another  by  the  aura,  another  by  the  state  of  mind,  an-
other by  the  intake  of  food,  another  by  the  astral  conjunction,  another
by  the  hypnotic  revelation  of  subconscious  memory.  The  diagnostic
method  of  A.  T.  Still,  known  as  osteopathy,  and  that  of  Professor
Freud,  known  as  psycho-analysis,  are  utterly  variant,  if  not  antagonistic.
Yet  both  may  rightly  claim  a  place  in  the  scheme  of  non-medical
practice.

How  shall  these  disagreements  be  done  away?  How  shall  we  arrive
at  a  sane,  comprehensive,  mode  of  diagnosis  that  shall  be  error-proof?
My  own  belief  is  that  no  practitioner  should  be  allowed  to  diagnose  the
cases  he  treats;  he  is,  consciously,  or  unconsciously,  both  ignorant  and
prejudiced. The  time  is  coming  when  all  the  world's  means  of  diagnosis

fifty  or  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  methods— will  be  combined  in  one

establishment.  To  this  place,  invalids  will  go,  for  diagnosis  and  perhaps
nothing  else.  Then  they  will  be  sent  to  individual  healers  or  doctors  or
teachers  or  ministers,  as  the  need  may  be,  for  special  prescription,  ad-
vice and  co-operation.  We  are  now  so  far  from  this  ideal  state  of  things
that  the  osteopath  and  the  psychic  are  virtual  enemies — each  with  his
little  grain  of  diagnostic  truth,  so  proud  and  self-satisfied  that  no  other
grain  can  find  lodgment  for  all  the  pride  and  prejudice  that  swell  the
minds  of  these  gentlemen.

The  foregoing  questions  and  problems  are  but  a  few  out  of  hun-
dreds, propounded  to  me  and  by  me  in  the  last  fifteen  years — and  thus
far  void  of  logical  reply  or  solution.

Therefore  I  obtained,  quite  recently,  the  propaganda  literature
given  out  by  the  leading  schools  and  sanitaria  that  seemed  most  in-
fluential and  most  modern. The  discoveries  here  made  bear  a  most


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide  1^'i

interesting  relation  to  the  work  of  standardizing  the  Nature  Cure;  as
will  be  shown  in  the  chapters  to  follow.

I  would  meanwhile  suggest  this  one  thought  for  you  to  ponder  over:
Nothing  can  be  legalized  that  has  not  been  standardized.  Hence  the
first  step  for  drugless  physicians  to  take  is  to  decide  among  themselves
what  the  Nature  Cure  is  and  what  it  is  not,  why  it  deserves  legal  recog-
nition, and  how  its  practice  should  be  safely  regulated.  To  demand  the
approval  of  the  law-makers  at  the  present  time  is  like  summoning  a
party  of  dignitaries  to  a  reception  in  a  new  house,  not  yet  swept  and
dusted,  furnished  and  put  in  order.  The  action  is  premature,  and  has
failed  simply  as  all  things  premature  and  rash  deserve  to  fail.  Our
hearts  may  be  of  gold,  but  our  heads  have  been  of  wood.  And  a  head
of  wood  is  no  head  for  a  doctor.


P.  S.  On  reading  the  proofs  of  the  foregoing  chapter.  Dr.  Benedict
Lust  informs  me  that  he  does  not  wholly  agree  with  my  position,  and
that  he  considers  a  few  of  the  statements  rather  extreme  and  unnecessar-
ily harsh.  Dr.  Lust  knows  a  thousand  times  more  about  the  Nature
Cure  than  I  do,  therefore  I  am  inclined  to  respect  his  opinion  regarding
its  therapeutic  administration.  From  the  efficiency  viewpoint  I  see  no
reason,  however,  to  withdraw  any  statement  here  inade.

Doctor  Lust  further  claims  that  in  Germany,  the  Nature  Cure  has
been  standardized,  the  practice  regulated,  and  the  general  criticism  of
this  argument  satisfactorily  overcome,  I  would  suggest  that  if  Doctor
Lust  or  some  other  leading  Naturopath  would  answer  my  questions  in
detail,  the  subject  would  be  made  clearer  to  us  all.  And  if  I  am  in  the
wrong,  you  will  do  me  a  favor  by  showing  me  how.  Nobody  knows  very
much  anyway,  and  our  wisdom  lies  chiefly  in  our  willingness  to  learn.


124  Uniuersal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  VII

WHO  SHOULD  HEAL?


The  trouble  with  most  doctors  is  that  they  are  accidents; — they  fell
onto  their  jobs  in  the  dark.

This  is  also  true  with  most  men  in  other  professions,  from  plowing
to  preaching.  But  the  great  majority  of  trades  and  vocations  do  not
involve  loss  of  life  when  misfits  are  engaged  therein;  a  poor  clerk  or
editor  or  brick-layer  merely  loses  his  job.  A  good  physician  must  be  a
born  physician,  he  cannot  be  merely  graduated  into  the  divine  ministry
of  healing.  And  the  great  problem  of  the  Nature  Cure  schools  is  to
determine  how  to  select  the  born  physicians,  how  to  reject  all  others,
from  the  candidates  for  admission.

Out  of  100  graduates  from  both  medical  and  non-medical  schools,
probably  75  are  in  the  wrong  profession.  This  fact,  more  than  the  use
or  non-use  of  drugs,  explains  the  long  list  of  ugly  failures  and  prema-
ture deaths  in  the  practice  of  the  ordinary  doctor,  whether  old-school
or  new-school.  Every  case  of  malpractice  is  a  case  of  misfitness.  A
man  temperamentally  fit  to  be  a  doctor  would  be  constrained,  by  in-
stinct and  reason,  from  adopting  spurious  methods  of  practice.  The
bungler,  in  any  line  of  work,  is  the  man  who  doesn't  belong  there.  And
the  quacks  in  medicine  are  the  short-cut,  short-conscience  men,  who
jump  from  the  patient's  disease  to  his  pocket-book  with  no  regard  for
anything  but  speed.

I  would  go  further,  and  make  a  statement  that  most  of  our  readers
will  repudiate  with  scorn.  But  you  cannot  down  a  truth  with  denial.
It  only  hits  back  and  hurts  you.  And  I  earnestly  advise  you  not  to  reject
any  statement  here  made,  until  you  have  given  the  matter  as  much
thought  as  I  have.  Disagree  with  me?  Glad  to  have  you.  But  don't
announce  to  yourself  which  of  us  is  wrong.

Every  case  of  arrest  and  persecution  of  a  drugless  physician  was
brought  by  the  man's  own  blunders  of  misfitness  or  unfitness.  He
lacked  adaptation  for  his  work,  or  preparation,  or  both. We  rebel  at


Universal  Naluropalhic  Direcfonj  (tnd  Buijcvs (hiidr  125


the  grip  of  the  medical  monopoly,  that  holds  us  writhing  and  ranting
and  foaming  at  the  mouth.  We  arc  fools.  The  Lord  God  Almighty
never  yet  permitted  the  headway  of  injustice  on  this  earth,  by  so  much
as  a  hair's  breadth;  and  if  one  single  natural  healer,  out  of  the  many
thousands  in  America,  were  fully  qualified  to  heal,  the  interlocked
force  of  a  hundred  medical  monopolies  would  not  be  strong  enough  to
touch  that  man!  By  persecution,  and  by  that  alone,  we  are  being
stirred,  stung,  goaded,  into  a  realization  and  correction  of  our  own
deficiencies. Thank  God  for  persecution.

Let  me  try  to  make  this  matter  clear.  1  know  numbers  of  invalids
who  have  gone  the  rounds  of  drugless  healing,  and  are  still  suffering
from  one  disease  or  another.  They  have  tried  osteopathy.  Christian
science,  mental  science,  food  science,  magnetopathy,  hypnotism,  chiro-
practic, deep  breathing,  all  in  vain.  Should  the  teachers  and  healers
who  have  thus  failed  be  allowed  to  go  unpunished?  Indeed  not.  When
we  have  begun  to  straighten  out  this  hodge-podge  called  civilization,
we  shall  treat  doctors  as  we  treat  merchants;  if  their  goods  are  not  as
represented,  we  shall  demand  our  money  back.

When  a  doctor,  medical  or  natural,  undertakes  a  cure  and  fails  to
perform  it,  he  should  be  compelled  by  law  to  return  the  amount  of  his
fees,  or  such  proportion  of  the  amount  as  the  compliance  and  obedience
of  his  patient  would  justify,  as  denoting  the  physician's  responsibility.
If  an  egg  is  bad,  we  return  it  to  the  grocer,  and  get  a  good  egg  or  our
money  back;  if  a  prescription  is  bad,  we  swallow  it  and  pay  for  it,  and
must,  on  top  of  that,  go  buy  a  good  prescription  from  another  doctor!
What  sublime  nonsense.

My  claim  is  that  two-thirds  of  all  the  mistakes  of  doctors  and
healers  reside  in  the  fact  that  they  should  never  have  been  doctors  or
healers; — they  should  have  been  plumbers  or  butchers  or  reformers  or
porters  or  other  species  of  strong-arm  gentry.  The  first  college  of  ther-
apeutics that  sees  and  applies  this  truth  in  the  selection  and  training  of
students,  will  make  a  fortune,  and  will  revolutionize  the  healing  art.  1
can  here  but  sketch  the  barest  rudiments  of  the  principle  and  procedure
in  question.

A  comparison  of  interesting  photographs  drew  my  attention  to  the
whole  subject  of  vocational  guidance  for  doctors.  1  have  been  studying
various  group  pictures,  of  the  graduating  classes  of  medical  schools,  and
also  of  Nature  Cure  schools — and  forming  opinions  of  more  or  less
reliability.  From  a  rather  extensive  knowledge  of  character  analysis,
I  should  consider  that  perhaps  20  per  cent  of  the  medical  graduates  are
born  physicians,  and  40  per  cent  of  the  Nature  Cure  graduates. Hence


126  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

the  latter,  judged  by  inherent  qualities  and  gifts,  should  be  twice  as
successful  as  the  former.  But  1  find  that  the  heads,  faces,  clothes,  and
general  appearance  of  most  of  the  naturists  prove  them  sadly  deficient
in  refinement,  culture,  winsomeness,  shrewdness,  even  primary  educa-
tion. They  are  honest,  clean,  upright,  altruistic — but  short  on  tact,
wisdom,  selfishness,  poise,  method,  assurance.  These  traits,  with  a  few
dozen  more,  should  be  either  born  in  a  doctor  or  drilled  into  him.  And
as  our  Nature  Cure  colleges  have  thus  far  neglected  the  human  nature
side  of  the  doctor's  education,  he  must  be  born  with  certain  funda-
mental characteristics,  or  enter  his  profession  without  them.  The  only
way  to  be  a  good  doctor  is  to  start  before  you  were  born.  The  slight
difficulty  of  this  procedure  may  explain  the  scarceness  of  good  doctors.

In  a  graduating  class  from  a  Nature  Cure  school,  there  is  probably
twice  as  much  character  and  principle,  but  half  as  much  cunning  and
polish,  as  in  a  class  of  equal  size  from  a  medical  college.  Unfortunately,
the  masses  who  are  ill  pay  more  for  cunning  and  polish.  How  are  we
to  remedy  the  situation?  A  man  can  be  simple  and  natural  without
being  simple-minded  and  naturally  dull; — a  fact  that  should  be  taught,
if  necessary  by  dunce-cap  and  hickory  switch,  in  our  drugless  training
schools.

One  of  our  most  serious  handicaps  in  America  is  the  preponderance
of  foreigners  among  drugless  physicians.  Water-cure  came  from  Ger-
many, massage  from  Sweden,  manipulation  from  Bohemia,  mental
science  from  India,  sanitary  laws  from  the  tribe  of  the  Jews,  and  other
elements  in  physiological  therapeutics  from  other  foreign  races.  The
descendants  of  these  pioneers  logically  fell  heir  to  their  teachings;  con-
sequently, the  proportion  of  American-born  Nature  Cure  apostles,
hitherto,  has  been  shamefully  small.  We  must  find  a  way  to  interest
noble,  gifted,  cultivated,  American  youths  and  maidens  in  the  pro-
fessional study  of  the  Nature  Cure. How  shall  we  do  it?

Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  vocational  fitness  for  the  healing
work.  I  know  a  man  who  has  been  saving  lives  from  his  early  child-
hood. He  seems  to  know,  instantly  and  accurately,  how  to  treat  cases
of  acute  diseases.  Friends  and  relatives  almost  without  number,
stricken  with  all  manner  of  perils,  by  drowning,  sunstroke,  peritonitis,
nervous  collapse,  delirium,  typhoid  and  other  crises,  this  common  man
has  rescued  by  the  proper  treatment  or  remedy.  Often,  when  physi-
cians were  called  and  failed  to  equal  the  emergency,  he  would  order
them  around  like  slaves,  and  restore  a  life  that  was  fast  ebbing  away.
He  is  a  common  toiler,  with  no  position  or  culture,  not  even  gram-
matical language.  But  he  has  the  divine  gift  of  healing.  In  all  prob-
ability, he  was  a  noted  physician  in  a  previous  incarnation,  and  brought


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  127


with  him  a  rarely  strong  and  clear  intuition  as  to  disease  (intuition  be-
ing the  soul's  memory  of  past  experiences).

Now  let  me  cite  another  case— the  opposite  extreme.  A  certain
famous,  high-priced  "specialist"  attends  one  of  the  largest,  most  expen-
sive hospitals  in  New  York.  A  friend  of  mine,  suffering  with  a  rather
peculiar  and  very  serious  complication  of  troubles,  was  taken  to  this
hospital,  and  this  specialist,  for  cure.  After  staying  several  weeks,  at  a
cost  of  $60  per  week,  my  friend  had  not  received  one  single  idea  on
real,  permanent,  recovery;  whereupon,  being  disgusted  and  angered,  he
studied  his  own  case,  applied  to  it  certain  Nature  Cure  principles  he
knew,  and  made  out  a  schedule  of  treatment  for  himself,  to  be  followed
when  he  should  leave  the  $60-a-week  hospital.  My  friend  thus  cured
himself ;— and  the  "specialist"  wasn't  even  interested,  because  the  "case"
was  not  a  clinical  adventure  for  that  particular  kind  of  specialist!  Here
was  vocational  unfitness,  with  a  vengeance.  This  doctor  should  have
been  a  swineherd — no  other  occupation  would  befit  his  nature,  as  to
nobility  and  congeniality.

These  two  examples,  that  of  a  man  able  to  heal  but  not  licensed,
and  of  a  man  licensed  but  not  able,  show  how  far  we  must  progress,  in
order  to  put  the  doctor-business  on  a  rational,  scientific,  humanitarian,
basis.

What  makes  a  good  doctor?  Did  you  ever  stop  to  think?  If  you
are  a  layman,  why  did  you  choose  your  family  physician,  out  of  the
numbers  of  medical  men  available  in  your  community?  If  you  are  a
doctor,  why  do  your  patients  want  your  services,  and  the  patients  of
Doctor  Jones  on  the  next  block  prefer  his?

A  scientific  method  of  professional  rating  and  reference  should  be
devised  for  guaranteeing  the  responsibility  of  doctors,  as  to  experience,
honor,  skill,  etc.,  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  financial  rating  system
used  by  credit  men,  banks,  and  wholesale  manufacturers,  who  look  up
the  standing  of  a  customer  or  dealer  before  they  give  him  commercial
confidence.  A  vocational  guidance  test  for  all  young  men  and  women,
strictly  enforced  by  law  prior  to  their  matriculation  in  medical  schools,
would  be  the  first  move  toward  the  establishment  of  a  guaranty  for  a
doctor's  right  to  practice.  I  think,  moreover,  there  should  be  a  law
compelling  every  doctor  to  post  in  a  public  place,  or  print  in  his  local
paper,  at  least  once  a  year,  the  number  of  deaths  recorded  in  his  prac-
tice. Then  if  Doctor  Smith  had  nine  deaths  in  a  year  from  typhoid,
while  Doctor  Brown  had  only  three,  the  public  at  large  would  know
that  Doctor  Smith  was  three  times  as  dangerous,  for  a  typhoid  patient,
as  Doctor  Brown. (It  is  a  long  stretch  of  imagination  to  suppose  that


128  Universal  Naturopathic  Dirpctonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


any  doctor  could  be  three  times  as  dangerous  as  any  other  doctor,  but
while  we  are  imagining,  we  might  as  well  do  a  good  job.)

The  natural  qualificaljons  of  a  true  physician  are  spiritual,  mental,
and  physical. We  may  summarize  them  briefly,  as  follows.

1.  A  high  moral  character,  a  conscience  both  sensitive  and  strong,
a  firm  adherence  to  duty,  a  humanitarian  spirit.  Common  opinion
holds  that  the  clergyman  should  be  the  most  moral  man  of  the  com-
munity, the  teacher  next,  the  doctor  next.  I  would  reverse  this  order.
When  a  preacher  or  teacher  is  not  what  he  should  be,  the  public  soon
finds  him  out — then  forces  him  out.  A  doctor,  however,  may  gamble,
drink,  frequent  immoral  places,  and  otherwise  act  in  a  manner  to  dis-
grace his  calling  and  demoralize  his  clients — and  no  organized  protest
ever  is  made.  Hence  the  schools  that  educate  the  doctor,  must  require
of  him  a  personal  standard  of  morals  that  is  unimpeachable.

I  was  recently  shocked,  to  discover  that  the  head  of  a  drugless
college  advertising  widely  had  been  sued  by  a  dissolute  woman,  in
whose  company  he  had  violated  the  laws  of  common  decency,  and  by
whom  a  penalty  of  revenge  was  imposed.  Many  a  time  I  have  known
of  a  case  where  a  drugless  physician  or  sanitarium  took  advance  fees
and  made  false  promises,  when  a  cure  was  absolutely  impossible  by  the
methods  to  be  employed.  Numbers  of  so-called  Nature  Cure  practi-
tioners smoke  to  excess,  drink  beer  and  worse  liquors  without  apparent
shame,  eat  all  kinds  of  unwholesome  food  in  the  seclusion  of  their
kitchen  or  club.  Facts  like  these  are  a  menace  to  our  whole  movement.
For  the  Nature  Cure  physician  is  a  teacher  and  a  preacher  as  well  as  a
doctor;  and  he  must  become  a  three-fold  exemplar  of  the  truths  he
advocates.

2.  A  "healing  gift"  must  be  his,  a  temperament  finely  suited  to  the
work  of  redeeming  bodies  and  minds.  The  old-fashioned  idea  of  a
"call"  to  preach  was  fundamental  to  success  in  the  pulpit,  and  the
modern  decay  of  the  church  as  an  institution  is  largely  owing  to  the
modern  disregard  of  the  "call"  to  preach.  Now  a  true  physician  con-
ducts a  virtual  confessional,  every  day  of  his  life— to  him  are  entrusted
personal  and  family  secrets  that  may  be  rightly  shared  only  with  a  man
whose  high  sense  of  his  calling  makes  of  him  a  priest.  I  have  heard  a
young  fellow  say  he  was  going  to  be  a  surgeon  because  a  surgeon  "draws
such  fat  fees."  Many  a  youth  goes  to  a  medical  school  because  some
relative  is  a  doctor,  or  his  folks  want  him  to  be,  or  he  likes  to  fool  with
chemicals,  or  he  thinks  a  doctor  looks  grand  in  a  plug  hat,  or  he  doesn't
relish  hard  work  and  a  doctor's  ofiice  practice  looks  easy.  The  motive
is  the  first  thing  to  be  settled,  and  settled  right,  in  choosing  any  trade


Vniversal  Natiiropalhic  Directory  and  TUu/rrs'  Guide  129

or  profession;  bul  in  the  life  work  of  a  doctor,  it  means  life  or death,
literally,  in  hundreds  of  cases  that  will  be  given  to  his  care.

Among  the  brain-faculties  that  must  be  large  in  a  physician  are
those  of  human  nature,  causality,  continuity,  veneration,  firmness,
hope,  secretiveness,  conscientiousness.  He  must  be  lender  as  a  woman
— and  brutal  as  a  warrior.  He  must  be  unselfish,  but  not  too  unselfish
for  his  own  health  or  purse.  He  must  exercise  honesty  and  caution,
together.  He  must  have  intuition  to  a  large  degree,  supplementing
science,  and  enabling  him  to  handle  the  many  cases  of  psychic,  emo-
tional or  mental  disturbance,  prevalent  in  modern  life.  He  must,  1
should  say,  be  an  "old  soul",  one  who  has  journeyed  often  through  this
vale  of  tears  and  whose  perceptions  of  human  need  go  far  beneath  all
external  "symptoms",  penetrating  the  finer  bodies  of  man,  which  to  the
eye  are  invisible  yet  to  the  soul  perceptible.  Indeed,  I  would  have  a
committee  of  occultists  who  are  practical  and  spiritual — if  such  can  be
found, — to  determine  the  age  of  the  soul  in  every  candidate  for  a  doc-
tor's degree,  prior  to  his  matriculation.  A  young  soul,  as  yet  spiritually
blind,  can  no  more  be  an  efficient  doctor  than  a  little  puppy,  whose  eyes
are  not  yet  opened,  could  be  an  efficient  watch-dog.

3.  The  man  born  to  be  a  great  physician  must  have  a  good
physique,  large  lung  capacity,  perfect  heart  action,  steady  nerves,  and
a  soothing,  healing  touch.  The  demands  on  a  doctor's  vitality  are
enormous,  combining  as  they  do  mentality,  energy,  sympathy;  and  neces-
sitating irregular  hours,  with  loss  of  food  and  sleep  and  recreation-
periods.  Only  an  exceptional  physique  can  survive  the  strain  of  the  full
performance  of  duty.

One  of  the  special  points  to  regard  is  the  structure  and  texture  of
the  hand,  since  a  large  factor  in  drugless  healing  is  manipulation  of
one  kind  or  another.  A  hand,  like  a  saw  or  hammer,  must  be  shaped
for  its  work.  Some  hands  are  long,  cold  and  claw-like;  others  are  fat,
red  and  pudgy;  others  are  coarse,  clumsy  and  fishy; — none  of  these  can
give  satisfactory  treatment  by  manipulation.  I  would  as  soon  shake
hands  with  a  dragon  as  with  some  people;  imagine  such  persons  tr\ung
to  soothe  a  nervous  temperament  and  delicate  skin  by  massage  per-
formances !

A  genius  in  the  Nature  Cure  will,  some  day,  write  a  book  on  "The
Born  Doctor."  This  will  be  used  by  therapeutic  schools  as  a  prelimi-
nary test  for  candidates  and  a  text-book  for  students.  It  will  include
hundreds  of  specifications,  requirements  and  suggestions,  of  which  but
a  few  are  noted  here.  It  will  adapt  to  the  profession  of  healing  the
vocation  and  efficiency  principles  and  methods  of  such  teachers  as  Miss


130  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Fowler,  Dr.  Blackford,  Mr.  Parsons,  Mr,  Muenstcrbcrg,  Mr.  Hender-
schott,  Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Bloomficld,  Mr.  Gruenberg,  Mr.  Emerson,  Mr.
Purinton,  and  others.  It  will  save  thousands  of  intending  healers  from
becoming  misfits,  and  tens  of  thousands  of  sick  people  from  losing  their
lives  through  the  blunders  of  the  misfits  in  the  healing  profession.  Who
will  write  this  book?


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirpctory  and  Bmjers'  (iaide  131


CHAPTER  VIII

TRAINING  AND  TESTING  A  PHYSICIAN


In  a  single  American  city,  five  hundred  employees  of  a  street  rail-
way are  graduates  of  medical  schools.  If  one  business,  in  one  city,
employs  500  men  who  tried  to  be  doctors  and  failed — how  many  thou-
sands of  these  poor  fellows  would  be  discoverable  in  the  whole  United
States?

Whose  fault  is  this?  Partly  that  of  the  parents  and  teachers  of
these  men;  partly  that  of  the  legislators  who  sanctioned  a  false  entry
into  the  healing  profession;  but  mostly,  and  primarily,  that  of  the  schools
who  graduated  this  host  of  predestined  failures.  The  average  medical
school  is  a  disgrace  to  a  civilized  community,  not  only  because  it  has
filled  the  minds  of  its  graduates  with  a  desire  to  give  poisons  to  the  un-
suspecting, but  because  it  has  neglected  to  inform  the  graduates  how  to
make  a  living  doing  this.

The  average  doctor's  yearly  income  is  about  $700.  How  many  young
fellows  would  spend  four  years  and  a  couple  of  thousand  dollars  earning
their  medical  degree,  if  they  knew  their  financial  returns  for  life  would
probably  not  exceed  $58  a  month?  At  a  recent  meeting  of  a  medical
society,  the  members  were  asked  to  write  on  slips  of  paper,  anony-
mously, the  extent  of  their  incomes.  Out  of  the  70  doctors  present,  only
23  were  making  expenses !

A  good  physician  recently  observed  "Not  one  medical  student  in  ten
knows,  when  he  begins  his  training,  what  it  means  to  live  the  life  of  a
doctor  and  what  personal  qualifications  it  requires.  He  must  have
within  him  something  that  will  take  him  unrevolted  over  dreary  wastes
of  drudgery,  over  sordid  financial  and  political  cares,  over  strain,  ex-
haustion, temptation,  crushing  responsibility,  over  disgusting  episodes,
and  more  than  one  man's  normal  share  of  sorrow,  suspicion,  and  abuse."
Why  do  not  our  medical  schools  frankly  tell  the  youth  who  applies  for
admittance,  just  what  is  ahead  of  him?  Because  they  don't  dare— it
would  not  be  "good  business." The  officials  of  our  medical  schools  have


132  Universal  Naturopathic  Directonj  and  Buyers'  Guide

yet  to  learn  that  a  good  bunco  man  is  not  necessarily  a  good  business
man.

Efficiency  in  healing  must  come  through  the  demand  of  laymen  for
better  service;  thus  the  article  by  Robert  Haven  Schauff"ler  in  the
February  1915  McCIure's  Magazine  gives  a  clearer  idea  of  "What  It
Means  to  Be  a  Doctor"  than  any  article  I  ever  saw  in  a  medical  journal.
Some  of  the  facts  I  am  giving  were  taken  from  this  article.

The  condition  of  vagueness,  folly  and  irresponsibility  obtaining
generally  in  medical  schools  has  its  counterpart  in  Nature  Cure
"colleges."  I  hardly  know  a  Nature  Cure  college  worthy  of  the  name.
And  if  an  institution  bases  all  its  claims  on  a  falsehood  at  the  outset,
what  hope  can  we  entertain  of  its  moral  character?

A  profession  is  primarily  a  trade,  therefore  subject  to  the
recognized  trade  rules  and  standards  of  efficiency.  Because  of  the
glamour,  secrecy  and  dignity  surrounding  most  professions,  the  profes-
sional schools — whether  of  law,  medicine,  pedagogy  or  theology — have
thus  far  neglected  to  apply  straight  business  principles  to  their  work,
relying  on  the  degrees  they  confer  instead  of  on  the  deeds  they  accom-
plish.

Let  us  suppose  that  50  per  cent  of  the  shoes  turned  out  by  a  large
factory  showed  some  serious  defect  in  manufacture — how  long  would
the  company  stay  in  business?  Facts  gathered  b}'^  doctors  themselves
prove  that  50  per  cent  or  more  of  the  diagnoses  made  by  doctors  in
serious  cases  of  disease  are  wrong.  Hence,  of  course,  the  prescriptions
are  wrong,  and  the  entire  matter  is  a  botch.  Why  does  not  the  State
forthwith  turn  these  doctors  out  of  business?

The  principle  covers  the  realm  of  drugless  healing  also.  There  are
nalurist  physicians  whose  record  of  cures  is  said  to  approximate  90  per
cent,  and  there  are  others  who  reach  only  50  or  even  30  per  cent.  Why
is  there  no  central  tribunal,  to  pass  on  a  healer's  efliciency,  and  grade
him  accordingly  for  the  protection  of  the  public?  Why  is  there  no  com-
plete preliminary  test,  of  a  candidate  for  a  physician's  degree,  to  show
whether  the  man  is  A  one — or  Z  forty  'leven,  as  an  efficient  doctor?  A
plumber  who  can't  mend  leaks  gets  fired  from  his  job  and  his  Union.
But  a  doctor  who  can't  mend  bodies  or  brains  can  hold  a  glossy  repu-
tation among  the  fraternity — if  he  hollers  loud  enough  for  the  A.  M.  A.,
and  swears  the  oatli  of  Hippocrates  glibly  and  ghoulishly  enough.
While  drugless  healers  aim  in  general  to  be  honest,  they  are  so  poorly
trained  and  equipped  that  their  inefficiency  amounts  to  dishonesty,
therefore  I  cannot  see  how  they  should  boast  over  medical  doctors.


Uiiiuersal  Natiiropalhic  Dirrctorij  (ind  Biiijcrs'  Guide  ^^>'^

In  calling  attention  to  the  need  for  improved  educational  methods
among  health  schools,  may  I  give  a  personal  comment?  For  gener-
ations, the  leaders  in  our  family  on  both  sides  have  specialized  in  school
work.  My  father  was  a  college  president  for  twenty  years;  two  grand-
parents, four  uncles,  and  numbers  of  distant  relatives  liave  been
teachers;  during  nine  years  spent  in  college  walls  I  myself  was  prepar-
ing to  teach,  and  am  now  in  Efficiency  work  because  it  seems  the
broadest  opportunity  for  teaching  the  most  vital  truths  of  human  ex-
perience. If  I  should  write  with  excess  of  zeal,  perhaps  you  may  re-
member that  one  who  is  a  teacher  born  and  bred  may  with  propriety,  as
with  earnestness,  hope  to  share  his  convictions  with  other  teachers.

The  Nature  Cure  colleges  of  America  should  be  made  more  efficient
in  at  least  ten  ways.  I  would  here  name  five  of  them,  leaving  the  other
five  for  you  to  think  out.  The  improvements  suggested  are  (1)  consoli-
dation of  many  poor  and  small  schools  into  a  few  good  and  great  ones;

(2)  conformity  of  the  courses  and  curricula  in  these  model  schools;

(3)  recognized and enforced standards of entrance requirements;

(4)  old-fashioned  trade  system  of  apprenticeship,  to  guarantee  that  a
young  doctor  will  know  his  business;  (5)  adoption  of  superior  advan-
tages or  customs  in  the  medical  schools,  or  adaptation  thereof  to  the
Nature  Cure  schools.

Before  discussing  these  points,  I  would  emphasize  an  important
fact.  In  ordinary  lines  of  work,  a  reliable  efficiency  counsel  bases  all
plans  and  suggestions  on  experience,  the  data  being  available  to  show
similar  cases  where  his  advice  produced  results.  In  the  Nature  Cure
field,  such  data  cannot  be  offered,  not  having  yet  been  compiled.  There-
fore I  would  merely  present  a  number  of  ideas,  which  I  believe  correct
in  principle,  but  which  cannot  be  verified  on  a  basis  of  facts  and  figures.
You  may  disagree.  Very  well,  you  have  a  right  to.  Please  remember,
however,  that  I  have  spent  fifteen  years  in  studying  these  matters  out,
and  unless  you  have  devoted  as  much  time  to  tiie  subject,  you  are  hardly
qualified  to  challenge  my  conclusions.  Premature  opinions  are  the
galling  guns  in  the  warfare  of  Prejudice  against  Truth.

1.  Our  naturist  schools  are  too  man}^  and  not  good  enough.  I
should  guess  that  more  than  1000  institutions  and  individuals  in  this
country  now  attempt  and  assume  to  prepare  3'oung  men  and  women  for
the  work  of  healing.  Not  a  score  of  these  institutions  or  individuals  are
adequately  and  properly  equipped.  A  medical  school  of  any  repute  has
from  10  to  40  members  in  its  faculty — and  most  of  their  teaching  merely
centers  on  drugs.  A  naturist  school  of  equal  standing  should  have  at
least  100  professors,  because  of  the  variety  and  complexity  of  subjects


134  Universal  NaUiropatliic  Dirrrlunj  and  liiu/crs'  (iiiidc

to  be  taiighl.  A  specialist  in  mechanotherapy  cannot  also  be  a  specialist
in  mental  science,  but  the  knowledge  of  both  these  specialists  and  about
98  more  should  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  candidate  for  a  phy-
sician's degree.  We  have  a  school  of  osteopathy  in  Missouri,  a  school
of  mechanotherapy  in  Iowa,  a  school  of  dietetics  in  New  York,  a  school
of  milk  cure  in  New  Jersey,  a  school  of  mental  suggestion  in  California,
a  school  of  vacuum  treatment  in  the  district  of  Columbia,  a  school  of
hypnotism  in  Michigan,  a-  school  of  spinology  in  Pennsylvania,  a  school
of  Christian  science  in  Massachusetts;  and  indeed  I  suppose  a  different
kind  of  school  for  every  state,  with  a  few  hundred  left  over.

What  we  should  have  is  a  magnificent  chain  of  schools — ten  would
be  a  good  number,  in  the  ten  largest  cities  of  the  United  States.  Each
school  would  embody  all  the  good  features  of  the  separate  and  factional
schools  now  existing  poorly  and  meagerly,  but  would  not  exalt  any  one
system  of  healing  to  the  disparagement  of  any  other.  Ample  clinical
and  experimental  facilities,  with  laboratories,  libraries,  etc.,  would  be
offered  in  the  city,  while  a  sanitarium  or  farm  or  health  home  in  the
country  nearby  would  afford  the  means  for  demonstrating  the  natural
life.  What  the  Riker-Hegeman  people  have  done  for  the  drug  store
business,  a  combination  like  this  would  do  for  the  Nature  Cure  school
business.  The  economic  advantage  of  co-operation  and  consolidation
apply  equally  well  to  both  lines  of  business.  The  supreme  need  of  the
Nature  Cure  is  for  a  business  manager,  who  will  put  both  our  schools
and  sanitaria  on  a  broad,  modern,  efficient,  lucrative,  basis.  The  right
man  would  be  worth  $20,000  a  year  to  the  movement,  and  it  would  pay
all  our  schools  and  sanitaria  to  club  together  and  hire  him.

2.  The  courses  of  study  offered  by  naturist  schools  must  be  made
to  conform  to  some  principle  universally  recognized  and  approved.
When  a  youth  plans  to  be  an  allopath  he  can  choose  a  college  in  New
York,  Chicago,  Philadelphia  or  Baltimore,  and  be  sure  of  getting  about
the  same  course  in  any  standard  medical  college.  But  if  he  wants  to  be
a  psychopath  or  naturopath  he  must  face  endless  bewilderment,  the
whole  field  of  natural  therapeutics  being  in  a  state  of  hodge-podge.

I  have  before  me  the  announcements,  catalogues  and  prospectuses
of  most  of  the  leading  naturist  schools  in  America.  No  two  of  these
documents  agree.  Some  of  the  schools  teach — ^^while  others  do  not  even
mention — such  branches  as  Neuropathy,  Somapathy,  Naprapathy,
Spondylotherapy,  Magnelopathy,  Biochemistry,  Astrology,  Fast  Cure,
Divine  Science,  Ocular  Diagnosis,  Eugenics,  Calisthenics,  Anthro-
pometrA\  No  man  short  of  Solomon,  Blackstone,  Sherlock  Holmes  and
Christopher  Columbus  rolled  into  one  could  tell  what  Drugless  Heal-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  135

ing  is,  after  studying  and  comparing  the  advertising  literature  of  our
leading  schools.

Because  of  this  utter  chaos,  a  diploma  from  any  given  school  has  no
legal,  and  small  professional,  value.  When  you  can  buy  for  $25  a  mail
course  in  a  certain  branch  of  healing,  with  a  diploma  thrown  in,  what
chance  will  a  decent  college  offering  a  thorough  course  in  the  same
subject,  have  to  convince  a  legislator  and  convert  the  public?

Here,  in  brief,  is  the  situation.  Probably  200  subjects  bearing  on
the  healing  of  the  sick  are  taught  by  all  our  naturist  schools  combined,
yet  not  more  than  40  or  50  appear  in  the  curriculum  of  any  one  school.
If  all  the  200  branches  of  the  Nature  Cure  are  vital,  sane,  essential,  they
should  all  be  taught  in  every  school;  and  if  any  are  superfluous,  ir-
rational, unsafe,  they  should  not  be  taught  in  any  school.  As  things
stand,  the  mere  fact  of  being  a  drugless  physician  means  nothing  at  all,
since  the  majority  of  schools  granting  diplomas  are  unclassified,  un-
regulated, unrationalized.

A  specimen  of  the  bigotry  and  lunacy  now  prevailing  in  most  of  the
drugless  schools  is  the  manner  of  diagnosis  taught  and  practised.  There
are  in  the  United  States  more  than  100  methods  and  systems  of
diagnosing  the  sick  on  a  basis  more  or  less  scientific.  These  cover  the
physical,  mental,  emotional,  psychic,  moral,  and  astral  planes  of  life;
extending  all  the  way  from  study  of  the  pulse,  temperature,  eye,  nerves,
or  spine  to  the  casting  of  the  horoscope  and  the  penetration  of  subjective
causes  by  clairvoyance  or  psycho-analysis.  There  is  no  school,  to  my
knowledge,  teaching  more  than  a  half  of  all  the  possible  means  of
diagnosis.  What  right  have  we  to  lampoon  the  doctors  while  our  own
methods  of  diagnosis,  and  hence  of  treatment,  are  only  50  per  cent
etiicient?

Most  of  the  trouble  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  schools  have
a  certain  pet  mode  of  treatment,  and  must  overemphasize  a  correspond-
ing method  of  diagnosis.  An  osteopath  cannot  be  consistent  or  pros-
perous unless  he  always  finds  a  defective  backbone.  Therefore  a  college
of  osteopathy  must  make  spinal  diagnosis  a  fetish  and  fad,  out  of  all
proportion  to  its  relative  importance.  And  so  with  every  other  school
that  features  a  special  kind  of  treatment — the  diagnosis  must  fit,
whether  the  patient  lives  or  dies.  We  shall  never  obtain  a  scientific
method  of  healing  the  sick  until  we  have  separated  the  functions  of
diagnosing  and  treating;  for  a  man  who  is  narrow  enough  to  be  a  good
specialist  cannot  be  trusted  for  a  sane  diagnosis,  while  the  man  who  is
broad  enough  to  be  a  good  diagnostician  could  never  limit  himself  to
one  kind  of  prescription  or  manipulation.


136  Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctorij  and  Buyers'  Guide


3.  A  standard  of  entrance  requirements  for  the  matriculant  in  a
drugless  college  is  one  of  the  most  urgent  needs  of  the  time.  Even  the
old-fashioned,  impractical,  unscientific  seats  of  learning,  such  as  the
denominational  college  or  the  slate  university,  adopt  an  invariable  rule:
the  applicant  must  produce  a  diploma  from  an  accredited  high  school,  or
must  pass  an  entrance  examination  to  determine  his  general  fitness.
Can  he  spell,  use  decent  grammar,  write  a  legible  hand,  appear  on
friendly  terms  with  the  multiplication  table,  and  otherwise  prove  him-
self not  disgracefully  unintelligent? *.

There  are  graduates  of  Nature  Cure  schools  who  sp^ll  wrong  a
dozen  words  in  one  brief  letter;  who  interpret  all  kinds  of  punctuation
marks  in  a  manner  resembling  hieroglyphics;  who  wear  collars  reminis-
cent of  a  prehistoric  wash-tub;  who  carry  a  breath  that  seems  a  cross
between  a  pipe  of  stale  tobacco  and  a  mess  of  garlic;  who  eat  with  their
knives  and  emit  forks  instead  of  words;  who  are,  in  short,  as  ignorant  of
culture  as  a  druggist  is  of  reason.  Why?  Simply  because  the  Nature
Cure  schools  have  not  waked  up  to  the  necessity  of  graduating  men  and
women  who  shall  raise  the  standard  of  our  cause,  and  keep  it  raised.
We  roust  bar  the  illiterate,  the  immoral,  the  financially  incompetent,  the
temperamentally  unfit,  the  socially  and  professionally  undesirable,
from  entering  a  drugless  school.  It  would  be  better  to  graduate  half  the
number  of  naturist  physicians,  and  have  them  twice  the  men !

We  now  fail  at  both  ends  of  the  curriculum. We  neither  test  the

boy  who  enters  for  a  knowledge  of  his  general  character,  education,

suitability,  nor  test  the  man  who  leaves  for  a  knowledge  of  his  actual

skill  in  diagnosing,  treating,  educating  and  variously  handling  all  kinds

of  invalids. How  long  shall  we  be  thus  incompetent?

4.  There  should  be  devised,  and  universally  adopted,  a  system  of
apprenticeship  in  healing,  whereby  the  young  physician  may  serve  for  a
period  of  time  under  an  old  physician,  or  in  a  sanitarium  or  hospital,
before  being  granted  a  diploma.  A  barber  stays  in  a  barber  school  until
he  can  learn  to  shave  a  man  without  cutting  his  nose  off;  why  should  a
doctor  be  allowed  at  large  before  he  can  be  trusted  to  perform  as  well?
The  old-fashioned  partnership,  wherein  the  old  and  the  young  doctors
joined  forces,  uniting  the  counsel  of  the  experienced  man  with  the  action
of  the  inexperienced,  had  in  it  the  germ  of  a  scientific  mode  of  training.
A  graduate  might  be  put  on  probation  for  two  or  three  years,  and  re-
quired to  submit  a  full  statement  of  his  cases,  cures  and  failures,  before
receiving  a  final  diploma.  Or,  a  chain  of  dispensaries  and  consulting
offices  might  be  opened,  where  the  poor  could  be  treated  by  first-year
graduates  at  reduced  rates,  the  institutions  being  managed  by  business


Uniucrsdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiii/crs'  (iuidc  137

men  of  the  shrewdness  of  Munyon,  the  graduates  being  enipk)yed  on  a
small  salary.  Plenty  of  ways  would  appear,  to  work  out  the  apprentice
system,  when  we  put  our  minds  and  hearts  intently  on  the  problem.

In  this  connection,  a  vital  matter  is  that  of  telling  the  prospective
doctor  the  actual  conditions  he  will  meet  on  graduation,  and  the  effective
ways  of  meeting  them.  It  is  a  most  astonishing  thing  that  no  book  or
course  of  study  has  ever  been  prepared,  by  a  medical  or  a  non-medical
school,  with  the  intention  of  fore-warning  and  fore-arming  the  poor
graduate,  in  view  of  the  battles  just  ahead.  A  book  of  this  kind  might
well  be  in  the  form  of  a  symposium,  giving  the  experiences  and  sugges-
tions of  leading  physicians,  based  on  their  own  successful  practice.  A
few  of  the  chapters  would  be  headed :

How  to  Select  a  Location;  How  to  Open  an  Office;  How  to  Gain  Your
First  Clients;  How  to  Build  Up  a  Lucrative  Practice;  How  to  Adver-
tise; How  to  Collect  Bad  Debts;  How  to  Install  a  Filing  and  Book-
keeping System;  How  to  Secure  and  Distribute  Propaganda  Litera-
ture; How  to  Overcome  Opposition;  How  to  Organize  Your  Patients
and  Friends;  How  to  Win  the  Newspapers;  How  to  Educate  the
Public;  How  to  Inaugurate  Social  Service;  How  to  Co-operate  with
Local  Institutions;  How  to  Keep  at  the  Head  of  Your  Profession;  How
to  Plan  Your  Future;  How  to  Conserve  Your  Strength;  How  to  Teach
the  Laws  of  Health;  How  to  Handle  Special  Cases  and  Solve  Your
Hardest  Problems.

A  book  such  as  this,  properly  written,  read  and  applied,  would  save
thousands  of  young  physicians  from  the  needless  privation,  perplexity,
anxiety,  that  almost  invariably  attend  the  first  few  years  of  a  doctor's
life.  What  school  or  association  will  have  this  book  written,  by  a  man
who  knows  how  and  what  to  write?  In  addition  to  the  33,000
(estimated)  practitioners  of  drugless  methods  in  this  country,  the
150,000  old  school  doctors  would  find  such  a  book  of  immense  value.
Therefore  the  book  should  be  as  renumerative  as  it  would  be  altruistic —
and  from  the  efficiency  viewpoint,  an  enterprise  must  always  be  both
selfish  and  unselfish.

5.  The  ordinary  college  of  medicine  has  points  of  supremacy  over
the  best  naturist  school;  these  should  be  located,  studied,  adopted  or.
adapted.  I  have  looked  through  the  catalog  of  a  leading  medical  college,
visited  the  classrooms  and  clinics,  talked  with  members  of  the  faculty;
and  I  am  convinced  that  in  regard  to  facilities,  devices,  tools  and  in-
struments, the  medical  college  is  far  ahead  of  the  typical  drugless  school.
A  common  blunder  in  Nature  Cure  teaching  is  to  confuse  the  sympto-
matic truths  of  medicine  with  its  therapeutic  errors.  If  we  would
examine,  thoughtfully  and  honestly,  evei-y  appliance  and  procedure  of


138  FniixTsdl  Naturopathic  Dirrctonj  and  Bmjcrs'  (inide

the  medical  college,  we  should  find  that  many  of  these  are  more
scientilic.  reasonable  and  desirable  than  the  cruder  methods  popular  in
druglcss  resorts.

If  I  were  a  millionaire,  I  would  employ  a  corps  of  trained  investi-
gators, who  were  neither  for  nor  against  any  one  system  of  healing;  I
would  have  these  men  visit  every  prominent  school  of  therapeutics  in  the
^vorld — allopathic,  homeopathic,  osteopathic,  naturopathic,  psycho-
pathic, and  every  other  pathic.  I  would  have  the  results  of  these  investi-
gators collated,  compared,  sifted  and  weighed  and  measured,  till  the
advantages  of  each  method  were  all  made  potent,  and  the  disadvantages
absent.  Only  by  some  such  non-partisan,  careful,  thorough,  sane,  fine,
system  of  research  and  application  shall  we  ever  learn  how  to  train  and
test  a  physician.


Universal  Naiuropalhic  Directory  and  lUu/rrs'  Guide  l^^O


CHAPTER  IX

SHOULD  A  DOCTOR  STUDY  MEDICINE?

This  looks  like  a  foolish  question.

That  is  why  it  appeals  to  me.  Any  fool  can  answer  a  wise  question,
but  it  takes  a  wise  man  to  answer  a  foolish  question.

Should  a  doctor  study  medicine?  The  druggist  answers  "Of  course
he  should — if  he  doesn't  he  is  a  fake!"  The  naturist  answers  "Of  course
he  shouldn't — if  he  does  he  is  a  fake!"  Herein  do  the  naturist  and  the
druggist  manifest  how  little  each  knows.  When  two  people  entirely  dis-
agree, both  are  wrong. Truth  lies  where  opponents  meet.

If  we  had  propounded  this  query  ten  years  ago,  among  the  ranks  of
drugless  physicians,  the  answer  would  likely  have  been  a  loud  and  un-
animous "No!"  But  opinion  now  is  changing,  to  correspond  with  the
facts  in  the  case,  irrespective  of  theories.  And  I  would  call  your  atten-
tion to  the  facts.

When  I  was  manager  of  a  drugless  sanitarium,  fifteen  years  ago,
the  vei-y  word  "doctor"  was  taboo.  The  most  popular  patient  was  the
man  who  said  the  worst  things  imaginable  concerning  doctors.  If  a
doctor  came  for  treatment  (most  doctors  needing  treatment  of  one  kind
or  another),  he  had  to  conceal  the  fact  of  his  medical  degree,  lest  he  be
tarred  and  feathered.  The  place  was  a  vegetarian  resort,  but  the  officials
and  patients  joined  merrily  in  the  doubtful  culinary  feat  of  "roasting"
doctors,  a  roasted  doctor  being  a  sad  dish  to  set  before  an  invalid.  The
chief  boast  of  the  high  potentate  of  this  sanitarium  was  that  he  didn't
know  a  single  medical  name  for  a  disease — he  affirmed  that  ailments
didn't  need  names.

Now,  observe  what  a  revolution  has  come  to  pass.  The  system  of
treatment  which  was  given  here,  and  is  probably  the  most  famous  of
any  drugless  regime  in  the  United  States,  has  now  been  reduced  to  a
mail  course  of  advice  and  prescription,  covering  the  entire  country;  and
the  four  leading  exponents  of  the  cure  most  influential  and  prosperous,


140  rniversal  Naliiropathic  Directonj  and  Buyers'  Guide

have  all  taken  incdical  degrees!  They  are  all  doctors.  They  found  they
had  to  be,  or  lag  behind  in  therapeutic  and  hygienic  progress.  A  decade
ago,  people  were  very  ignorant  on  health  matters,  and  correspondingly
prejudiced.  They  wanted  all  doctoring,  or  no  doctoring.  Now,  the  most
intelligent  people  want  occasional  doctoring  in  sudden  crises,  but  real
teaching  and  permanent  healing  on  general  principles.  Wherefore,  this
new  demand  must  be  met.

I  was  talking  recently  with  one  of  the  greatest  health  pioneers  that
ever  lived — a  man  whose  reform  work  is  known  throughout  America
and  in  most  foreign  lands.  Here  is  what  he  said.  "The  chief  regret  of
my  life  is  that  I  did  not  take  a  thorough  medical  course,  get  my  diploma,
pass  the  State  Board,  and  be  able  to  defy  persecution.  If  I  could  live  my
life  over,  this  would  be  the  one  thing  I  would  surely  do."  The  reason
for  this  man's  conclusions,  based  on  twenty  years  of  the  hardest  kind  of
experience,  I  will  shortly  set  down  for  your  consideration.

When  Osteopathy  was  founded,  one  of  the  prime  requisites  of  an
osteopath  in  good  standing  was  that  he  should  hate  the  doctors  wath  a
vitriolic  hate.  But  for  some  reason  Osteopathy  attracted  men  of  shrewd
financial  judgment.  These  men  saw  that  their  practice  must  be  legal-
ized, to  make  it  pay.  Hence  they  not  only  abandoned  their  enmity  for
doctors,  they  established  in  the  Osteopathic  schools  many  of  the  fea-
tures of  diagnosis,  treatment  and  study  approved  by  the  medical
schools.  Now  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  an  M.  D.,  who  is  also  a  D.  O.
And  the  medical  man  who  also  gives  manipulations  can  charge  higher
fees,  other  things  being  equal,  than  either  an  allopath  or  an  Osteopath
void  of  the  knowledge  of  the  other.

Christian  Science,  too,  has  undergone  modification.  The  original
sentiment  branded  a  person  an  outcast  who  summoned  a  doctor  after
embracing  Christian  Science.  But  even  during  the  lifetime  of  Mrs.  Eddy,
so  unreasonable  an  order  was  virtually  annulled;  while  to-day  large
numbers  of  both  Christian  and  Divine  Scientists  do  not  hesitate,  in  a
crisis,  to  ask  a  physician's  aid.  As  for  New  Thought,  Hypnotism,  and
Suggestion,  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  leaders  in  these  branches
of  drugless  healing  are  graduate  physicians  of  the  old  school.

Medical  gymnastics  afford  another  meeting-ground  where  the
doctors  and  the  naturists  often  unite.  Some  of  the  finest  work  yet  ac-
complished in  our  public  schools  has  been  the  effort  of  doctors  who  are
athletic  directors  to  preach,  teach  and  practise  hygienic  and  psycho-
logical truths  as  first  promulgated  by  natural  healers.

One  of  the  most  famous  dietitians  in  the  world— a  man  who  is  said


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijer.s'  Guide  141

to  have  personally  healed  or  instructed  30,000  students  of  health,  told  me
not  long  since  that  many  of  his  most  earnest,  appreciative  and  influential
who  were  not  afraid  to  say  so.

These  few  examples  are  indicative,  and  highly  gratifying.  They  go
to  show  what  1  believe  to  be  a  fact  that  will  be  generally  recognized
fifty  years  from  now.  This  fa*ct  1  would  set  up  in  a  frame,  as  being
worthy  of  deep  study.


Evei-y  drugless  healer  should  also  be  a  trained
and  licensed  doctor;  and  every  doctor  should  also
be  a  drugless  healer.  To  separate  them  is  to
weaken  both.


I  am  quite  aware  that  such  a  statement  is  rank  heresy.  Forty-'leven
professors  in  drugless  colleges  will  jump  on  my  neck  before  the  type  is
cold.  But  I  tremble  not,  since  the  average  professor  in  a  drugless
college  is  such  a  light-weight  gentleman  that  forty-'leven  of  him,  lodging
on  my  head,  wouldn't  turn  a  hair.  The  only  man  whose  opinion  I  fear
is  the  man  who  says  nothing.  Those  who  have  something  to  say  usually
say  nothing.

To  get  this  matter  clearly  before  us,  let  us  take  the  problem  of  the
young  man  who  feels  that  he  has  had  a  "call"  to  become  a  physician.
How  shall  he  prepare  for  his  life  work?  He  has  only  two  alternatives.
an  "irregular"  healer.  Is  either  alternative  really  fair  to  the  young  man?
I  think  not.  A  third  choice  of  action  must  be  provided,  of  which  I  will
speak  later.

Suppose  the  youth,  never  having  learned  to  think,  prefers  the
medical  training.  What  happens?  He  leaves  college  with  a  mind
warped,  solidified,  rusted  and  poisoned.  He  will  need  half  a  lifetime  to
unlearn  the  fallacies  and  follies  of  the  medical  system.  He  will  probably
murder  scores  of  patients  while  he  is  acquiring  a  modicum  of  sense;  and
he  will  find,  at  least  four  years  too  late,  that  he  is  in  a  profession  whose
ranks  are  overgrown  and  whose  principles  outgrown.

But  if  he  has  learned  to  use  his  brain  with  some  degree  of  ration-
ality, he  won't  study  medicine,  he  will  choose  a  branch  of  the  Nature
Cure. What  happens  then? He  will  be  crammed  full  of  theories  and


142  Uniuersal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Hiii/crs'  Guide

eccentricities,  the  pet  fads  and  foibles  of  that  particular  school.  He  will
be  denied  the  absolutely  necessary  training  in  hospital,  clinic,  dispensary
and  laboratory  work,  because  the  drugless  schools  have  not  these  facili-
ties and  opportunities.  He  will  be  rushed  through  a  short-cut  system  of  a
few  months  to  possibly  two  years,  almost  never  the  four  years  of  study
and  experiment  required  by  the  medical  school.  He  will  be  left  in  total
ignorance  of  the  remedial  value  of  certain  drugs  in  certain  crises,  and  of
standardized  professional  methods  in  all  cases.  He  will  be  turned  out
of  the  school  with  a  diploma  that  has  no  legal  credit  save  in  a  few
localities,  and  that  means  in  general  simply  a  license  to  get  misunder-
stood, abused,  worried,  starved  and  persecuted.  Is  this  a  square  deal?
Hardly.

What  would  be  a  square  deal  to  the  young  candidate  for  a  doctor's
degree?  Offer  him  such  a  complete,  effective,  and  rational  course  in
hygiene,  diagnosis,  therapeusis  and  prophylaxis,  that  when  the  young
doctor  was  graduated  he  would  be  an  allopath,  a  naturopath  and  a
psychopath,  each  accredited  by  that  school  and  approved  by  the  other
schools!  Then,  brothers  in  the  faith,  we  should  begin  to  have  real
doctors !

A  reform  such  as  this — the  creation  of  a  school  system  to  provide
healers  with  all  the  available  human  knowledge  about  health  and  dis-
ease— would  never  be  attempted  by  the  medical  schools  nor  by  the
Christian  Science  churches.  Both  are  too  bigoted.  Therefore  it  must  be
the  work  of  the  naturist  leaders,  to  whom  I  earnestly  suggest  the  wisdom
of  such  an  undertaking.

Let  me  give  here  a  striking  analogy.  Ever  since  colleges  were
started,  college  authorities  have  despised  and  condemned  the  merely
practical  things  of  life.  They  have  considered  books  the  only  true  source
of  salvation  from  the  world's  woes  and  crimes.  They  have  supposed
that  every  idea  germinating  outside  the  academic  realm  was  mental
poison,  much  as  the  naturopaths  have  thought  concerning  healing
principles  non-naturopathic.  So  heinous  and  virulent  was  this  prejudice
that  American  society  was  divided  into  the  "classes"  and  the  "masses,"
the  former  having  education  and  no  commonsense,  the  latter  having
horny-handed  skill  but  no  book-learnihg.

The  past  five  years  have  witnessed  a  revolution.  By  means  of  the
new  vocational  schools  and  the  newer  continuation  schools,  young
people  are  being  taught  to  work  and  think  at  the  same  time,  to  absorb
the  culture  and  information  out  of  books  and  then  to  use  that  knowl-
edge on  the  self-same  day  in  the  shop  or  at  the  forge  or  by  the  counter.
Presently,  there  should  be  no  more  "classes" and  "masses,"  for  the


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Ihii/rrs'  Guide  143

masses  will  be  classes  in  mentality,  and  the  classes  will  be  masses  in
industry.

Therapeutic  ideas  of  to-day  are  as  mouldy  and  worm-eaten  as
scholastic  ideas  were  of  yesterday.  We  have  our  naturists  in  one  camp,
and  our  druggists  in  the  other.  No  man  dares  be  rational  and  step  from
one  to  the  other.  Each  assumes  it  has  the  whole  truth,  and  on  this  crazy
belief  it  shoots  daggers  at  the  other.  An  absolutely  sane  man,  wanting
all  the  truth  on  both  sides,  couldn't  get  it  unless  while  receiving  partial
truth  from  one  side  he  appeared  violently  hostile  to  the  equal  truth  on
the  other  side.  The  high-brow  druggist  and  the  low-brow  naturist,  one
full  of  theory  and  the  other  full  of  hate  of  theory,  seem  as  antiquated
as  the  high-brow  pedagogue  and  the  low-brow  manufacturer,  each  de-
claring that  all  wisdom  lies  with  him.  I  am  plumb  sick  of  both  bunches;
I  hunger  and  thirst  for  saneness,  but  lo  I  find  it  not,  in  either  camp  of
blind,  bawling,  bungling,  hostiles.

Here  is  what  should  be  done.  The  naturists  should  establish  a  great
school  of  therapeutic  training  where  every  subject,  plan,  device,  method,
instrument,  book,  test,  experiment,  now  used  in  the  leading  medical
schools  would  be  transported  and  incorporated  bodily.  The  only
difference,  positively  the  only  difference,  between  this  new  naturist
school  and  the  old  medical  school  would  be  that  a  system  of  substitutes
for  drugs  would  be  evolved,  whereby  foods  and  herbs  and  exercises  and
baths  and  mental  suggestions  would  do  the  work  of  drugs — but  safely
and  permanently.  Now,  if  the  system  of  equivalents  for  drugs  were
potent  and  unfailing,  don't  you  see  what  would  happen?  When  the
Medical  Trust  opposed  the  legalizing  of  the  Nature  Cure,  all  that  should
be  necessary  would  be  to  show  the  legislature  of  any  state  that  the
curricula  of  the  naturist  school  and  the  medical  school  were  identical
save  in  the  prescribing  of  drugs,  and  that  the  naturist  equivalents  for
drugs  were  more  effective  than  drugs!

I  personally  believe  that  no  complete  system  of  equivalents  can  be
devised,  that  in  certain  crises  certain  drugs  are  necessary,  and  that  no
physician  is  qualified  to  practise  until  he  knows  what  these  crises  are  and
how  to  handle  these  drugs  in  these  crises.  But  then,  being  a  heretic  on
this  point,  I  have  no  right  to  speak  for  the  naturists  as  a  whole.  I  merely
challenge  you  to  work  out  a  drugless  pharmacoepia,  in  which  the  effect
of  each  of  the  thousands  of  drugs  now  in  use  can  be  guaranteed  in  a
crisis,  but  without  the  aid  of  the  drug.  No  one  ever  did  this,  and  I  sur-
mise that  no  one  ever  can  do  it.  The  first  man  who  does  do  it  will  knock
out  the  underpinning  of  the  Medical  Trust's  persecution  platform.

If  a  young  man  thinking  of  going  to  tho  medical  spiiooi  of  Harvard


144  Unincrsal  Naturopathic  Dirrctory  and  Ihn/rrs'  Guide

or  Johns  Hopkins  were  to  receive  a  catalogue  of  a  modern  school  giving
the  entire  curriculum  of  Harvard  or  Johns  Hopkins,  but  instead  of  a  host
of  poisonous  and  manifestly  dangerous  drugs  a  wide  choice  of  safe,
easy  and  attractive  methods  of  prescription  and  treatment,  and  in  ad-
dition a  long  list  of  hygienic  and  therapeutic  subjects  not  even  mentioned
by  Harvard  or  Johns  Hopkins,  would  not  any  rational  youth  prefer  the
course  at  the  modern  school  with  advanced  methods?  There  are
numerous  reasons  for  believing,  as  I  believe,  that  such  an  institution
would,  if  rightly  founded  and  conducted,  be  the  means  of  popularizing
and  legalizing  the  Nature  Cure  in  every  State  of  the  Union.

While  we  are  waiting  for  some  genius  of  natural  therapeutics  to
evolve  and  plan  for  an  all-round  school,  can  we  not  find  a  substitute
method  for  giving  to  the  young  doctor  of  any  school  a  true  conception  of
the  scope  of  his  work?  As  an  aid  to  the  solution  of  this  problem,  I  would
offer  these  suggestions,

1.  Let  a  plan  be  developed  for  putting  Nature  Cure  literature  into
the  hands  of  every  freshman  in  a  medical  school  in  the  United  States,
Better  reach  him,  if  possible,  before  he  enters  the  school.  A  special  kind
of  appeal  would  have  to  be  formulated,  as  no  variety  of  Nature  Cure
literature  with  which  I  am  acquainted  would  carry  just  the  right  im-
pression for  a  young  medical  student.  We  must  show  him  in  how  many
ways  it  would  be  to  his  advantage  to  study  natural  healing  in  preparation
for  a  regular  course  at  a  medical  school.  The  time  to  convince  the  pros-
pective doctor  is  before  he  has  let  his  mind  be  inoculated  with  the  poison
of  the  drug  theory.

n.  Let  a  special  scheme  of  study  be  arranged,  for  intending  allo-
paths, homeopaths  and  eclectics,  aiming  to  ground  them  in  Nature  Cure
principles  before  they  enroll  at  a  medical  school.  The  time  to  campaign
among  these  youths  is  while  they  are  seniors  at  colleges  or  academies.
A  method  of  securing  their  names  could  easily  be  thought  out.

HI,  Let  a  post-graduate  course  also  be  devised,  particularly  for
young  medical  men,  to  supplement  but  not  supplant  their  M,  D.  curri-
culum. This  course  would  have  to  be  written,  taught  and  advertised  not
from  the  naturist's  viewpoint,  as  drugless  courses  now  are,  but  from  the
doctor's  viewpoint.  The  psychology,  language,  entire  appeal  must
consider  only  the  status,  personality,  peculiarity,  of  the  young  M,  D.

To  accomplish  the  foregoing  and  similar  objects,  a  Medical  Exten-
sion Board  might  be  appointed,  to  consist  of  representatives  from  all  the
leading  drugless  schools,  with  a  psychologist,  an  efficiency  counsel,  an
advertising  expert,  and  an  influential  old-style  doctor  who  believes  in
natural  methods. The  aim  of  this  Board  would  be  to  invent  ways  and


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  fhiijcrs'  Guide  145

means  for  co-operating  with  the  officials,  students  and  graduates  of  the
medical  schools  of  the  United  States,  for  mutual  benefit  and  satisfaction;
and  in  particular  for  examining,,  comparing,  broadening  and  raising  the
standards  of  professional  training  in  both  medical  and  non-medical
schools. Now  to  answer  the  main  question.

If  I  were  a  student  in  a  Nature  Cure  college,  I  should  plan  to  spend  at
least  a  year  in  a  medical  institution,  college  or  sanitarium  or  hospital,
before  commencing  to  practise.  And  if  I  could  afford  the  time  and
money,  I  should  take  the  entire  medical  course,  receive  a  diploma,  and
pass  the  examination  of  the  State  Board,  entitling  me  to  act  with  all  the
prestige  and  unction  of  a  licensed  M.  D.  I  should  do  this  for  many
reasons,  moral,  mental,  manual,  social,  legal,  political,  financial,  profes-
sional.

1.  Moral  reason.  A  doctor  cannot  know  too  much  about  the  nature,
cause,  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  disease.  It  is  the  business  and  duty
of  a  conscientious  physician  to  learn  all  that  can  be  taught  him  of  these
subjects  before  attempting  to  practise.  The  medical  schools  teach
valuable  things  not  yet  offered  in  the  drugless  curricula,  therefore  a
medical  course  should  supplement  a  naturist  course.

2.  Mental  reason.  A  doctor,  of  all  men,  cannot  afford  to  be  pre-
judiced and  one-sided.  Constant  association  with  any  one  class  of
thinkers,  to  the  exclusion  of  those  of  opposite  mind,  is  sure  to  warp*  a
man.  Violent  hatred  of  drugs  and  druggists  may  be  as  unwholesome  and
perilous  in  cases  of  acute  disease  or  disorder,  as  an  allopathic  mania  for
giving  drugs  would  be  in  chronic  cases.

3.  Manual  reason.  Facilities  and  opportunities  for  experiment,  re-
search, investigation,  clinical  work  and  tactile  experience,  are  much
greater  in  the  medical  schools  than  anywhere  else.  They  are  limited  to
a  most  pitiable  extent,  in  drugless  colleges.  The  only  way  at  present
for  a  young  physician  to  participate  actively  in  the  diagnosis  and  treat-
ment of  a  large  number  of  cases  prior  to  opening  an  office  is  to  ally
himself  with  a  medical  school  of  training.

4.  Social  reason.  No  matter  what  a  few  of  us  think  about  the
general  ignorance  and  incompetence  of  doctors,  the  sight  of  an  "M.  D."
after  a  man's  name  still  inspires  awe  and  respect  in  the  minds  of  the
vast  majority.  Not  for  another  generation  at  least  will  the  drugless
healer  enjoy  an  equal  social  standing  with  the  medical  graduate.  A
doctor  can  use  natural  methods  without  losing  caste  or  reputation,  but
a  natural  healer  cannot  employ  either  physiological  or  medicinal
agencies  without  running  amuck  of  society  and  the  law.


146  Uninersdl  Xatiiropcithir  Dirrctonj  and  Ihiyrrs'  Guide


5.  Legal  reason.  Except  in  certain  restricted  localities  the  practice
of  Nature  Cure  is  unlawful,  and  exposes  the  practitioner  to  constant
risk.  He  may  lose  in  one  lawsuit  the  fees  from  a  whole  year's  practice,
or  may  he  shut  up  in  jail  for  twenty  years  and  have  his  whole  life  work
ruined.  To  run  the  gamut  of  such  danger  seems  foolhardy  and  un-
necessary.

6.  Political  reason.  There  are  many  offices  in  the  State  now  open
to  an  M.  D.,  hut  closed  to  a  drugless  healer.  Great  corporations,  too,  are
coming  more  and  more  to  select  physicians  in  welfare  and  social  service
work;  philanthropies  and  charities  have  long  done  this.  A  regular
doctor  has  ten  times  the  opportunities  for  large  public  service  that  a
naturist  can  have  for  many  years  to  come.

7.  Financial  reason.  Large  fees  can  often  be  asked  legitimately
in  medicine  and  surgery.  If  they  can  be  asked — and  obtained,  in
natural  healing,  I  do  not  know.  I  only  know  they  are  not.  People  pay
for  mystery,  not  for  commonsense,  in  their  doctor.  And  he  who  cannot
dispense  mystery  cannot  hope  for  great  financial  reward.

But  the  ultimate  reason  of  all  is  professional.  The  scientific
way  to  destroy  an  evil  is  to  attack  it  from  the  inside.  When  you  want
to  cut  down  a  dead  tree,  you  don't  build  a  fence  around  it,  then  sit  on
the  fence  and  hack  at  the  tips  of  the  branches.  We  are  trying  to  cut  to
pieces  the  dead  tree  of  druggism  in  as  foolish  and  wasteful  a  manner —
we  spend  enough  energy  on  the  job  to  build  a  whole  city  of  model  houses.
Only  a  medical  doctor  can  effectively  destroy  the  evils  of  the  medical
system— for  only  he  can  get  close  to  them  to  attack  them  in  a  scientific
manner.  If  I  were  a  naturist  physician,  I  would  learn  medicine  in  order
to  fight  medicine.  And  the  first  one  who  does  this  properly,  will  be
stronger  than  the  entire  Medical  Trust.

The  way  to  surpass  the  doctors  is  to  know  more  than  they  know  and
do  better  than  they  do.  Whoever  achieves  this  must  be  himself  a  doctor.
The  hope  for  the  health  of  the  world  lies  in  the  physician  who  combines
the  knowledge,  skill  and  shrewdness  of  the  druggist  with  the  cleanness,
fearlessness  and  ideality  of  the  naturist.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  147


CHAPTER  X

THE  ETHICS  OF  ADVERTISING


Should  a  physician  advertise;  if  so,  what  and  where  and  when  and
how?

The  right  answer  to  this'  question  would  be  the  open  door  to  a
phenomenal  career  of  service  and  opulence,  for  any  doctor  who  knows
and  loves  his  work.  Advertising,  in  one  form  or  another,  prepares  the
way  for  success  in  any  trade  or  profession.  Publicity  is  popularity,  and
popularity  is  opportunity.  No  man  with  goods  or  services  to  sell  can
afford  to  remain  ignorant  of  the  twentieth  century  science  of  advertising.

A, doctor  is  a  merchant,  plus  a  heart  and  a  high  hat.  Though  he
has  a  mission  of  love  to  perform,  and  a  reputation  of  dignity  to  preserve,
he  must  be  a  salesman  of  treatments,  consultations  and  prescriptions —
with  all  the  science  of  salesmanship  at  his  subtle,  sure,  instant,  constant
command.  The  failure  of  doctors  to  recognize  this  financial  department
of  their  work  has  been  a  hindrance  to  their  largest  usefulness  and  hap-
piness, from  the  beginning  of  the  healing  art.

Now  advertising,  done  effectively,  in  the  proper  way,  medium,  lan-
guage, time,  cost  and  extent,  forms,  probably  30  per  cent  of  the  success
of  any  business.  A  factory  or  store  with  a  yearly  turn-over  of  $1,000,000
worth  of  goods  must  appropriate  $50,000  to  $80,000  a  year  for  advertis-
ing alone — and  this  expenditure  is  considered  one  of  the  best  possible
investments  by  shrewd  business  men.  Wherever  you  make  purchases
for  yourself  or  your  family,  you  find  and  you  buy  the  best-advertised
goods,  articles  which  have  become  standardized  in  your  mind  through
long-continued  repetition  of  their  names  and  claims,  through  the  me-
diums of  newspapers,  magazines,  bill-boards,  street-car  appeals,  trade-
marks and  packages  and  pictures  and  types  of  distinction  and  attraction.
It  may  be  said  of  almost  any  modern  business:  No  advertisement,  no
advancement.

The  psychology'  of  advertising  explains  the  hold  which  patent  medi-
cines and  other  fake  nostrums  have  on  the  public.  The  name  and  pic-
lure  of  some  alleged  doctor  and  benefactor  is  so  vividly  and  everlast-


148  ('nii)rrs(il  Naliiropalhic  Dircclonj  and  Ilui/rrs'  Guide

ingly  painted  on  tlic  incniory  of  drug-store  patrons  that  they  keep  on
buying  the  box  or  bottle  grown  thus  familiar,  not  only  for  themselves
but  for  their  children,  and  their  children's  children.  The  psychology
of  the  patent  medicine  is  as  good  as  the  physiology  is  bad.

The  name  of  Kneipp  is  world-renowned  chiefly  because  of  the  many
varieties  of  herbs,  foods,  and  garments  which  Kneipp  endorsed  and
some  Kneipp  company  sold  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  Father  Kneipp
had  the  goodness  of  the  naturist  and  the  shrewdness  of  the  druggist,
happily  and  wonderfully  combined.  He  was  a  pastor,  a  healer,  and  a
business  man;  his  reputation,  however,  grew  most  from  his  power  as  a
business  man.

But  Kneipp  did  not  advertise  himself,  or  his  ministry — he  adver-
tised only  his  books,  remedies  or  institutions.  The  cures  he  wrought
advertised  themselves;  and  this  may  be  said  of  nearly  every  great
pioneer  in  rational  therapeutics.  So  we  ask  one  of  the  most  vital  ques-
tions bearing  on  efficiency  in  drugless  healing:  Should  a  physician
advertise?

The  true  and  proper  and  scientific  answer  to  this  question  has  not
yet  been  made,  to  my  knowledge.  Further,  it  has  not  even  been  dis-
cussed in  a  manner  befitting  the  importance  of  the  problem.  I  shall  not
assume  to  offer  a  final  conclusion,  but  will  endeavor  to  outline  the  chief
points  for  consideration,  from  the  efficiency  side  only.

As  the  problem  relates  equally  to  medical  and  non-medical  physi-
cians, provided  they  are  equally  honest  and  efllcient,  I  propounded  it
first  to  old-school  doctors,  since  they  arc  in  the  majority.

1  was  immediately  confronted  Jjy  a  lot  of  mediaeval  hobgoblins
termed  "professional  ethics",  whose  horrible  shriek  at  the  very  mention
of  the  word  "advertising"  thrust  terror  in  my  soul.  Now  a  "professional
ethic"  is  the  ghost  of  a  personal  ideal.  When  the  ideal  departed  this
life,  the  "ethic"  hung  around  for  a  few  generations,  to  haunt  the  place.
Any  doctor  who  fears  a  host  of  "professional  ethics"  and  feels  paralyzed
thereby,  is  in  a  moral  graveyard,  and  doesn't  know  w^hat  ails  him.

However,  the  shades  of  the  departed  should  always  be  respected —
never  be  ridiculed.  And  I  determined  to  study  these  ghostly  "ethics"
that  forbade  a  physician  to  advertise.  Years  ago,  when  I  was  as  ignorant
as  very  good  people  usually  are,  I  didn't  believe  in  ghosts.  Now  I  realize,
from  a  prolonged  study  of  psychic  phenomena,  that  astral  bodies  and
personal  radiations  are  as  truly  scientific  facts  as  are  light  and  elec-
tricity. Just  so,  the  wraiths  of  dead  ideas  and  convictions,  which  we
term  superstitions,  may  contain  the  semblance,  if  not  the  substance,  of


Universal  Natiiropalluc  Dircctonj  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide,  ^49


living  truths.  They  should  not  he  dismissed  without  a  sympathetic,
scientific,  examination.  What  is  the  hasis  for  the  universal  antipathy,
among  skilled  and  conscientious  doctors,  individually  and  collectively,
toward  the  subject  of  advertising  in  the  medical  profession?  Why  do
the  best  doctors  and  medical  associations  forthwith  excommunicate  a
doctor  who  starts  to  advertise?  On  what  ground  is  modern  publicity  a
hindrance  to  advancement  in  healing  though  a  pronounced  help  to  ad-
vancement in  other  vocations?

These  questions  were  not  easy  of  answer,  A  doctor  is  an  oyster  of
eloquence,  and  I  never  could  open  oysters.  However,  I  managed  to
extract,  from  the  silence  and  ignorance  of  doctors  on  the  subject,  a  few
clear  and  cogent  reasons  why  doctors  in  good  standing  will  not  ad-
vertise. These  are:

*1.  Because  advertising  is  a  commercial  proposition,  designed  for
money-making  only,  and  a  physician  who  regards  his  calling  as  a  mis-
sion can  no  more  advertise  himself  than  a  minister  could.

2.  Because  the  advertising  columns  of  newspapers  and  magazines
are  filled  with  praise  of  shoes  and  soaps  and  cigars  and  other  material
products,  while  the  real  commodity  of  the  phj^sician  is  an  intimate,
disclosed.

3.  Because  the  returns  from  advertising  depend  on  a  regular
"follow-up"  system  and  other  commercial  methods,  for  which  a  true
physician  has  no  time,  talent  or  inclination.

4.  Because  the  brazen  exploitation  of  a  doctor  in  the  public  press
would  cheapen  him  in  the  eyes  of  his  best  clients,  and  would  rob  his
work  of  the  dignity,  secrecy  and  confidence  which  are  indispensable.

5.  Because  real  cures  advertise  themselves,  and  a  physician  who
has  made  himself  truly  efficient  does  not  need  to  advertise — he  has
more  clients  than  he  wants.

These  arguments  may  be  answerable,  but  they  certainly  are  re-
spectable, and  by  no  means  deserving  of  the  general  doubt  and  odium
cast  by  most  naturists  on  the  medical  fraternity.  The  reasons  apply  to
naturopaths  as  much  as  to  allopaths,  if  they  apply  at  all.  Do  they
apply?  Can  a  physician  deliberately  seek  publicity  for  which  he  pays,
and  still  be  true  to  his  calling?

Be  not  deceived,  however,  in  these  arguments.  No  matter  what  the
ideal  state  of  things  may  be,  the  actual  fact  is  that  great  numbers  of  old-
school  doctors  do  advertise. They  write  papers  for  medical  journals


150  Universal  Nutiivapdlhic  Dirrclory  and  Biiyers'  Guide

and  letters  for  the  daily  press;  they  deliver  speeches  before  health
societies,  women's  clubs  and  civic  bodies;  they  seek  appointive  or  legis-
lative oflice;  they  propound  new  cures  for  diseases  which  they  have  pre-
viously invented  for  a  new  cure  to  fit;  they  wear  a  graceful  goatee,  a
funereal  medicine-case,  an  omniscient  atmosphere,  and  other  items  of  a
self-announcing  suit  of  regalia;  they  perform  so  many,  many  tricks  that
work  as  well  as  a  paid  advertisement,  and  more  cheaply.  It  seems  to  be
not  a  crime  for  a  doctor  to  advertise,  but  a  crime  for  him  to  get  caught
at  it.  Having  ceased  for  lo  these  many  years  to  be  a  doctor-catcher,  1
wash  my  hands  of  the  job,  I  turn  it  over  to  the  dog-catcher.

Now  let  us  look  for  a  brief  spell  at  Doctor  Munyon,  Lydia  Pinkham
(there  haint  no  Lydia,  she  is  a  company),  and  Mr.  Bromo  Seltzer.  We
shall  not  look  long,  as  these  sights  are  too  horrible  for  the  human  eye  to
contemplate.  Their  one  redeeming  feature  is  their  financial  acumen;
and  this,  while  it  cannot  redeem  them,  should  redeem  us.  If  I  were  an
association  of  drugless  practitioners,  I  would  organize  a  complete  inves-
tigation of  the  methods  of  advertising  and  salesmanship  that  have  made
fortunes  and  followings  for  Munyon,  Pinkham,  Seltzer  and  Company.
I  would  emulate  the  shrewdness  of  these  rich  concerns,  but  eliminate
their  badness.  I  would  employ  their  knowledge  of  human  nature  and
psychological  appeal;  I  would  hire  one  of  their  chief  advertisement-
writers,  if  necessary,  and  let  him  adapt  their  money-making  offers  and
devices  to  the  business  end  of  the  Nature  Cure.

Is  there  any  earthly  reason  why  poisons  should  be  sold  to  millions
of  the  sick,  and  fortunes  made  for  the  vendors,  while  the  honest,  harm-
less, helpful  treatments  and  remedies  of  the  Nature  Cure  physician  are
limited  to  a  handful  of  immediate  patients — and  his  rewards  are  priva-
tion and  sacrifice?  Wealth  is  embalmed  wisdom.  I  am  tired  of  the
poverty-plaint  of  drugless  healers.  Poverty  is  stupidity.  A  man  may
get  to  Heaven  by  being  good,  but  if  he  is  nothing  but  good,  he  has  to  go
through  Hell  here. How  do  I  know? I  have  been  through  it.

Should  a  physician  advertise?  Emphatically,  yes.  Should  he  ad-
vertise the  personal,  confidential  service  he  hopes  to  render?  Emphat-
ically, no.  He  should  plan  a  system  whereby  all  his  publicity  may  focus
on  a  book,  a  remedy,  a  school  or  a  sanitarium,  so  that  the  first  person
singular  never  appears  in  a  public  advertisement.  The  individual
healer  or  teacher  must  always  advertise  not  his  personality,  but  a  pro-
duction of  it.

An  illustration  of  scientific  publicity  occurs  in  the  case  of  my  three
books  "How  To  Be  Happy",  aiding  optimism;  "The  Philosophy  of  Fast-
ing", promoting  health;  and  "The  Triumph  of  the  Man  Who  Acts",  urging


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  151

efficiency.  No  mention  is  made  in  these  books  of  the  fact  that  I  teach
their  respective  subjects;  or  that  I  know  anything  about  letter-writing,
advertising,  or  business  method;  or  that  I  lecture,  write  editorials,  or
give  personal  consultations.  Yet  from  the  readers  of  these  three  books
— numbering  now  over  1,000,000  people — thousands  of  requests  have
come,  for  every  kind  of  service  I  can  render.  If  1  were  at  the  head  of  a
sanitarium,  it  could  easily  be  kept  filled  by  merely  conducting  corre-
spondence with  health-seekers  who,  after  reading  these  books,  wrote
for  the  author's  aid  and  counsel.  Here,  1  believe,  is  an  example  of  the
most  ethical,  efficient  and  economical  way  of  advertising  a  health  in-
stitution.

Observe,  however,  that  these  books  were  not  written  with  any
thought  of  advertising  in  them  or  behind  them — such  an  object  would
have  killed  the  spirit  in  them,  which  alone  impels  the  reader.  They
were  written  to  serve  Truth,  to  aid  the  reader,  and  to  express  myself.
Your  best  advertising  is  the  radiation  of  your  own  soul;  and  here  the
very  word  "advertising"  is  grotesquely  out  of  place.  The  real  reason
for  studying  advertising  is  to  learn  how  not  to  need  it.  To  the  master,
in  any  profession,  the  people  must  come.  He  cannot  leave  his  work,
to  call  them,  for  his  work  is  himself.  When  your  work  is  you,  from  the
ends  of  the  earth  you  will  surely  be  summoned,  without  act  or  knowl-
edge on  your  part.

Let  us  now  demonstrate  the  need  for  a  better  knowledge  and  use  of
the  laws  of  advertising,  in  health  reform  circles,  I  have  clipped  a  num-
ber of  advertisements  from  our  standard  hygienic  and  metaphysical
magazines,  which  publications  are  supposed  to  represent  the  highest
moral  standards  in  the  health  held.  A  casual  observer,  not  acquainted
with  the  publishers  of  these  journals,  would  say  to  himself,  on  reading
these  advertisements,  "What  sort  of  a  fake  scheme  is  this  anyway?  Do
these  people  expect  me  to  believe  their  editorials,  when  their  advertise-
ments are  plumb  rotten?"  The  casual  observer  would  be  entirely
justified  in  such  a  query  and  conclusion.  The  simple  fact  is,  that  many
of  our  health  magazines  permit  the  publication  of  advertisements  which
are  misleading,  unprofessional  and  untrue,  and  which  would  be  turned
out  of  the  columns  of  the  better  class  of  newspapers  and  popular  maga-
zines making  no  pretensions  to  a  supermorality.

Some  of  these  "ads"  are  comic,  some  are  tragic.  We  will  consider  a
few  of  each  kind,  giving  the  actual  wording  in  most  cases,  with  the
meaning  and  substance  in  every  case.  Then  we  will  ofler  a  comment,
from  the  efficiency  viewpoint.  The  quotation  is  a  headline  or  principal
sentence  from  the  original  advertisement.  The  name  is  of  course  al'
tered,  to  conceal  the  identity  and  cover  the  shame  of  the  advertiser,


152  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biuiers (inide


THE MILK CURE

will cure any curable disease or  chronic ailment.

Copyrighted  booklet  with  full  instructions  on  home

treatment,  one  dollar.

PROF.  SIMON  SIMPLES

FOOLVILLE,  N.  Y.


Here  we  have  a  panacea,  and  it  costs  but  a  dollar.  I  have  consulted
a  famous  exponent  of  the  Milk  Cure,  and  he  says  that  the  ordinary  ap-
plication of  it  is  not  only  useless  in  many  cases,  but  is  actually  harmful.
Besides,  any  attempt  to  follow  it  in  your  own  home  is  fraught  with  great
difficulty,  if  not  with  danger.  Yet  here,  in  this  modest  little  ad,  we  are
guaranteed  a  cure  for  everything,  from  baldness  to  housemaid's  knee,
without  even  consulting  a  doctor,  and  the  miracle  is  worth  but  a  dollar.
This  advertiser  missed  his  calling — he  should  have  been  a  pea-in-the-
shell  bunco  man  trailing  a  circus.


HOW TO LIVE AS LONG AS YOU WISH

Healthy  physical  life  preserved  for  a  hundred
years. By  mail,  25  cents,  coin.

DR.  LOONY  GUESSER
Dear  Me,  Mo.


The  law  of  Karma  determines  our  length  of  life.  And  this  cannot
be  foretold,  save  by  celestial  record  of  our  past  and  present.  Further-
more, we  can  never  be  guaranteed  the  fulfilment  of  any  wish,  by  human
agency.  Often  the  thing  we  wish  for  is  the  worst  thing  to  have.  And
the  early  death  of  most  of  the  people  who  dote  on  metaphysical  mum-
mery, would,  I  am  persuaded,  be  a  mercy  to  the  race.  It  is,  however,
worth  25  cents  to  see  how  big  a  fool  a  self-conceited  man  can  make  of
himself.  You  may  answer  this  ad — and  get  your  money's  worth — even
if  you  should  die  laughing,  in  which  case  any  lawyer  would  advise
you  to  demand  the  return  of  your  money,  as  you  did  not  live  100  years.
The  man  whose  chief  study  is  how  to  live  100  years  never  lives  at  all.
He  is  already  a  mental  mummy.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrcionj  and  Ihiijcrs'  (iiiide


153


BEAUTIFUL HAIR FOR TEN CENTS

Luxuriant  hair,  eyebrows,  mustache,  or  beard,  a

positive  result  with  our  Recipe. Can  be  filled  in

every  home,  and  10  cents  worth  will  grow  a  healthy

head  of  hair.

FLUFFY  RUFFLES  COMPANY
Dandrufftown,  Penna.


These  people  are  too  generous  for  their  own  good,  somebody  should
warn  them  against  the  bankruptcy  of  overzealous  charity.  There  are
hundreds  of  bald-headed  men  and  ugly-haired  ladies  within  the  sound
of  my  voice  from  my  Broadway  office,  who  would  gladly  pay  $100  each
for  a  beautiful  and  luxuriant  growth  of  hair.  One  of  my  friends  has
recently  paid  out  $150,  to  have  his  fading  locks  restored,  and  they  aren't
back  yet.  Why  give  away  so  valuable  a  recipe  for  a  measly  dime?  If
ten  cents'  worth  really  grows  a  healthy  head  of  hair,  eager  mobs  of  scalp
specialists  would  fight  among  themselves  for  the  privilege  of  paying
$100  for  the  recipe.  Of  course  there  is  no  universal  remedy  for  bald-
ness, and  we  conjecture  that  the  one  suitable  thing  about  this  remedy
is  the  price  attached.


WRITE MOVING PICTURE PLAYS

Sell  for  $50  each. Learn  in  spare  time.
No  correspondence  course. Details  free.

GETRICH  PUBLISHING  CO.
FuLLPURSE,  Ohio


The  average  price  for  a  "movie"  scenario  by  an  unknown  writer
is  $15.  Few  such  plots  bring  more  than  $25,  unless  written  by  a  famous
author  who  can  set  his  own  figure  for  his  work,  and  whose  name  can
be  used  for  its  advertising  value  by  the  film  company.  But  the  worst
fraud  here  committed  lies  in  the  false  hope  aroused  in  the  minds  of
people  who  have  no  talenfwhatsoever  in  the  dramatic  field,  and  whose
efforts  will  be  wasted  in  trying  to  attain  a  virtual  impossibility.  To  lure
a  man  on  by  false  hope  is  more  of  a  crime  than  to  knock  him  down  and
steal  his  purse.


154  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


STOP  WORKING  FOR  WAGES!

Learn  a  money-making  profession  in  180  hours.
Full  particulars  free.  Lose  your  job  and  be  joyful.

MIRACLE  MENTAL  SCIENCE  COLLEGE
Sleight-of-Hand,  Mo.


The  inference  is  here  that  anybody  at  all — clerk,  blacksmith  or
hod-carrier,  may  prepare  himself  to  earn  a  good  income  as  a  mental
healer — and  do  it  in  221/2  days,  of  eight  hours  each.  I  should  judge  that
not  one  person  in  five  could  ever  be  a  good  practitioner  of  psycho-
therapy, and  that  several  years  of  deep  study  and  hard  work  would  be
needed,  to  train  the  one  in  five  persons  who  might  be  naturally  fit  for
such  a  career. Two  false  premises  in  one  short  ad  is  certainly  enough.


DO YOU WANT PROSPERITY?

A  hermit  living  in  a  dark  cave  had  a  magic  secret  for
attaining  all  that  the  human  heart  can  wish.  Many
princes  came  for  .this,  from  afar.  We  were  kings  in
our  mind,  so  he  gave  us  the  secret,  which  we  now
publish  and  sell  for  the  ridiculous  sum  of  10  cents.
Why  put  off  getting  rich? Learn  how,  now.

THE  MIGHTY  MASTER  MYSTICS
Opiumjoint,  State  of  Coma


The  hermit  lived  in  a  dark  cave.  We  believe  you — he  didn't  dare
come  out.  But  the  darkness  is  out,  having  come  with  his  "magic  secret."
The  fortune-telling  atmosphere  of  this  recital  is  bad  enough,  to  be  sanc-
tioned by  a  magazine  upholding  truth  and  decency.  But  the  advertiser
has  done  a  more  unrighteous  thing  than  prey  on  credulity;  he  has  pub-
lished in  the  advertisement  a  representation  of  the  face  of  a  holy  man,
presumably  that  of  the  Christ,  with  a  halo  shedding  light,  and  a  star
above.  Here  is  blasphemy  too  horrible  for  words.  A  friend  of  the  pure
Nazarene  can  only  turn  away,  heartsick,  weeping,  asking  God  why  such
desecration  was  allowed  to  be.  How  can  the  publisher  of  such  a  trav-
esty on  truth  expect  to  gain  the  confidence  of  the  public,  in  any  respect?


Universal  Ndturojxtlhic  Dirrcfory  (tnd  liui/cr.s^  (iiiidc  15^'^


PERFECT HEALTH AND EFFICIENCY

Superior  method  course  of  instruction. Masterkey  to

achievement. Simple  and  sure. Better  than  college

education. Costs  nearly  nothing. Send  10  cents  for

literature  explaining  all.

O.  ANANIAS

GULLIBLETOWN, CaL.


A  college  education  costs  at  least  $1,000.  Here  is  something  better,
for  10  cents.  Why  build  any  more  colleges?  Why  not  endow  this
modest  advertiser,  and  make  a  universal  educational  institution  out  of
him?  We  would  suggest  for  a  name — Gall  and  Omniscience,  Incorpo-
rated. And  we  would  further  suggest  that  all  the  asylums  and  hospitals
for  the  feeble-minded  should  be  emptied  at  his  door,  they  being  fit
subjects  for  his  intelligence  to  work  upon.


Well,  brothers  and  sisters,  what  are  we  going  to  do  about  all  this?
Would  it  not  be  a  kindly.  Christian  act  for  us  to  write  the  editor  of  any
magazine  publishing  such  advertising  as  the  foregoing,  and  protest  with
all  our  mind  and  heart  against  these  libels  on  our  intelligence  and  in-
sults to  our  honor?  Will  not  some  great  national  association  of
teachers,  physicians  or  publishers  take  up  the  matter  of  censorship  for
advertisements,  and  plan  some  way  to  abolish  the  evils  manifested  in
the  cases  I  have  quoted?  Advertising  is  the  scientific  presentation  of
the  simple  truth. Our  first  problem  is  to  see  that  we  have  the  truth.


15(i  Uniurrsdl  Ndliiropathic  Dirrclonj  (ind  Biujcrs'  Guide


CHAPTER  XI

WISER  PROFESSIONAL  METHODS^


There  is  a  lesson  for  naturists  in  the  story  of  the  Great  War.

When  Germany  defied  and  assailed  practically  the  whole  world,
Germany  rested  in  the  consciousness  of  two  invulnerable  sources  of
strength. The  first  was  information,  the  second  preparation.

Through  her  unequalled  spy  system,  Germany  knew  more  about
the  size,  location,  method  and  equipment  of  the  English  bulwarks  of
defense  than  the  body  of  the  English  army  knew.  This  advance  knowl-
edge, minute  in  detail  but  vast  in  scope,  formed  the  base  of  the  German
war-machine,  whose  efficiency  has  amazed  the  world.  How  to  beat
your  enemy :  Know  his  game  as  well  as  he  does,  then  play  it  first.

We  have  no  liking  for  a  spy.  A  spy  is  but  a  sneak  operating  on  a
large  scale,  and  to  steal  your  information  is  as  wrong  as  to  steal  your
mone}'.  However,  the  mental  and  mechanical  ingenuity  of  the  German
spy  system  holds  our  admiration,  if  the  method  of  its  use  forfeits  our
respect.  Germany  saw  that  her  fleet  could  not  oppose  the  fleet  of
England,  so  she  launched  a  submarine  war  to  prevent  the  sailing  of  the
English  fleet;  Germany  found  that  in  numbers  of  men  she  would  be
outdone,  so  she  bent  all  her  energies  to  giving  her  men  a  larger  allot-
ment of  ammunition  than  the  enemy  could  obtain;  Germany  reckoned
with  the  slow  and  imponderable  temperament  of  the  English  people,
and  rightly  figured  that  the  psychological  way  to  victory  was  to  rush
them  off  their  feet.  In  short,  by  knowing  all  the  strength  and  weakness
of  the  enemy  in  advance,  Germany  prepared  to  match  the  one,  and
overwhelm  the  other.


*  The  publisher  of  this  book  wishes  to  emphasize  again  the  fact  that  he  does  not  agree
with  ail  the  conclusions  of  Mr.  Purinlon,  and  believes  him  entirely  wrong  in  soma  of  them.
Hence  we  do  not  wish  to  be  held  responsible  for  any  of  these  chapters  as  a  whole,  but  merely  ofTer
thenj  to  our  readers  as  an  expression  of  individual  opinion.  Because  of  their  power  to  stimulate
thought  in  new  directions,  we  consider  these  suggestions  highly  valuable,  in  spite  of  what  seem
to  us  occasional  errors  for  which  we  cannot  stand  responsible.  A  discussion  between  the  publisher
apd Mr. Purinton will be foypd on another page, where the matter is explained more fully.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiujcrs'  (iiiide  lo7

Nature  Cure  soldiers  in  America  need  to  apply  the  German  system,
in  warring  on  the  fallacies  and  follies  of  the  Medical  Trust.  There  arc
scores  of  ways  in  which  the  doctors  are  wiser  than  we.  And  one  of  the
first  essentials  to  ultimate  victory  for  Natural  Healing  is  a  thorough
knowledge  of  the  superior  points  in  the  medical  system.  The  habit  of
drugless  physicians  has  ever  been  to  denounce  the  physiological  poison
contained  in  the  drug  school  of  practice,  without  recognizing  the  psy-"
chological  power  displayed  by  that  school.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  suc-
cessful doctor  is  a  practical  psychologist  whose  methods  the  natural
healer  may  well  study  and  emulate.  Human  nature  is  not  all  body —
it  is  first  and  foremost  mind.  And  to  omit  a  scientific  use  of  psycholo-
gized methods  in  therapeutic  work  is  an  unnatural  proceeding.

The  professional  habits  and  customs  of  most  drugless  healers  are
crude,  ineffective,  unwise.  The  profession  is  so  new  that  the  methods
pertaining  to  its  use  have  not  been  standardized.  They  must  be,  in  order
to  gain  the  prestige  and  power  enjoyed  by  the  old-school  doctors.
Furthermore,  instead  of  belaboring  and  ridiculing  the  allopaths  for  their
crimes  and  follies,  we  must  quietly,  and  humbly  prepare  to  learn  from
them  the  superior  wisdom  that  enables  them  to  get  and  hold  their  sway
among  the  masses.  I  would  earnestly  recommend  that  one  of  the  large
national  associations  of  naturist  physicians  employ  a  young  man —
preferably  a  psychologist,  writer  or  reporter,  to  go  through  the  entire
medical  system  of  training  and  practice,  becoming  a  regular  M.  D.  under
the  present  idiotic  laws,  for  the  express  purpose  of  analyzing  and
recording  the  details  of  the  medical  monopoly  from  the  inside.  The
history  of  such  an  experience,  accurately  made  without  heat  or  preju-
dice, would  form  a  book  of  inestimable  value  to  the  success  of  the
Nature  Cure  in  America.

We  are  most  handicapped  by  ignorance.  The  method  of  first-hand
study  employed  by  Upton  Sinclair  in  showing  the  evils  of  the  Chicago
stock-yards  and  by  Alfred  W.  McCann  in  exposing  the  rottenness  of  the
New  York  food-adulterators,  should  be  followed  by  any  man  who  hopes
to  reform  the  abuses  of  the  drug  business.  Will  not  some  young  health
enthusiast  among  our  readers  volunteer  to  immortalize  himself  by  un-
dertaking such  a  secret  mission  of  a  legitimate  spy,  among  the  ranks  of
the  "regulars"  in  the  drug-army?

1  have  been  doing  a  little  scout  work  myself.  And  I  find,  probably
to  your  disappointment,  that  we  have  as  much  to  learn  from  the  doctors
as  they  have  to  learn  from  us.  People  pay  only  for  what  they  want.
Doctors  give  people  what  they  want.  Therefore,  instinctively,  people
pay  for  doctors'  prescriptions.  But  we  assume  to  give  people  what  they


158  Vnivcrsal  Ndlnropathic  Dirrclunj  (tnd  Ihii/crs'  Guide

ought  to  have;  which,  beloved  brethren,  is  the  last  thing  they  will  pay
for.  We  have  not  yet  psychologized  Nature  Cure  practice  on  the  basis
of  human  nature  as  it  is  today.  I  would  make  a  beginning  toward  such
a  reform,  in  this  chapter.  The  only  reform  worth  attempting,  is  to  reform
reformers;  tiiis,  being  impossible,  holds  an  irresistible  appeal  for  a  man
who,  being  a  man,  hates  easy  things.

From  a  wide  acquaintance  among  doctors,  a  profound  respect  for
some  of  them,  a  cordial  dislike  for  most  of  them,  and  a  desire  to  be  fair
to  all  of  them,  I  deduce  the  following  lessons  for  the  consideration  of
Nature  Cure  physicians.  I  do  not  guarantee  the  conclusions  infallible,
but  only  commend  them  to  your  serious  attention.

1.  Healing,  teaching  and  reforming  should  he  made  wholly  sep-
arate, organized  and  maintained  under  auspices  and  methods  entirely
distinct.  The  average  drugless  physician  tries,  earnestly  but  stupidly,
to  act  as  healer,  teacher  and  reformer,  all  at  the  same  time.  In  striving
to  become  three  men,  he  finds  himself  only  a  third  of  each;  and  a  third
of  a  man  can  never  be  a  success.  Nature  Cure  as  a  reform  should  be
endowed,  in  the  manner  of  all  philanthropies  and  uplift  crusades;  and
our  reform  instincts  and  aims  should  be  focused  on  the  means  to  estab-
lish a  great  national  institution  of  health  reform,  which  shall  be  founded
and  supported  by  the  gifts  of  the  rich,  and  thus  receive  popular  acclaim
as  well  as  financial  guarantee.  There  should  be  hospitals,  clinics,  dis-
pensaries, homes  and  sanitaria  of  the  Nature  Cure,  one  or  more  of  these
in  every  city  of  the  United  States.  Before  they  can  be  established,  a
wise,  broad,  concerted  effort  must  be  made  to  attract  the  wealthy  and
powerful  to  the  cause  of  Natural  Healing  and  Living.  Only  by  the  help
of  men  and  women  of  means  can  the  reform  side  of  this  work  be  effect-
ively presented — those  who  earn  their  living  in  the  profession  cannot
safely  diverge  into  its  reform  aspects.

Neither  should  education  in  Nature  Cure  principles  be  attempted
by  the  practitioner  among  his  patients,  unless  they  voluntarily  ask  to  be
taught.  One  of  our  popular  axioms  is,  that  the  healer  should  be  first  a
teacher,  I  am  coming  to  doubt  this  very  seriously.  At  this  moment  I
believe  that  all  the  education,  for  the  sick  at  least,  should  be  carried  on
by  means  of  books,  magazines  and  courses  of  instruction,  while  the
physician  should  limit  himself  strictly  to  healing.  When  a  man  hires  a
lawyer,  a  preacher,  a  cook,  or  a  chauffeur,  he  does  not  want  to  be  in-
structed in  the  mere  technique  of  such  professions.  The  lawyer  must
save  him  from  jail,  the  preacher  from  hell,  the  cook  from  dyspepsia,
the  chauffeur  from  accident,  and  the  man  doesn't  want  to  think  how
they  do  it. That  is  their  job,  for  which  he  pays. Neither  does  the  in-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  159

valid  want  sermons  or  lectures  from  his  doctor — he  wants  cure,  and
cure  only.  To  give  him  long  harangues  while  treating  him,  is  a  psycho-
logical blunder,  a  pure  waste  of  time  and  energy,  a  token  of  inexperience
and  rashness.

There  are  two  special  reasons  why  the  drugless  physician  cannot  be
a  successful  teacher.  In  the  first  place,  a  man  ill  in  body  is  also  ill  in
mind.  We  know  how  hard  it  is  to  convince  those  who  seem  physically
well,  of  the  value  and  importance  of  the  Nature  Cure.  How  much
harder  it  is  to  impress  and  renew  the  disordered  minds  of  those  afflicted
with  chronic  disease!  The  majority  of  the  invalids  who  try  the  Nature
Cure  are  physically  and  mentally  incapable  of  understanding  the  philos-
ophy of  it,  their  instincts  and  intellects  are  both  on  a  vacation,  and  have
been  for  years,  else  they  would  not  be  confirmed  invalids.  Why  attempt
to  convert  them,  when  all  they  want  is  cure?  Here  is  where  the  reformer
mixes  in,  usurping  the  place  of  the  doctor,  and  making  confusion,  by
throwing  a  hodge-podge  of  new  ideas  into  the  patient's  weak,  distorted,
mind.

The  second  reason  why  the  healer  cannot  be  an  effective  teacher
lies  in  the  lack  of  ultimate  authority.  A  feeling  of  absolute  faith  and
security  is  one  of  the  first  essentials  to  recovery.  The  church  assumes
final  sanction  and  wisdom  over  all  its  devotees;  the  college  claims  to
have  the  ultimate  scientific  truth  pompously  writ  in  huge  tomes  by  far-
famed  authorities:  hence  the  church  and  the  college  teach  powerfully
because  they  engender  a  supreme  faith  in  their  right  to  teach.  Now
there  is  no  ultimate  authority  in  the  Nature  Cure,  and  there  never  can
be.  The  nearest  approach  will  be  some  great  national  institution,
heavily  endowed  and  thoroughly  approved  by  men  of  renown,  whereby
a  system  of  popular  education  in  the  Nature  Cure  may  be  given  a
semblance  of  ultimate  authority.  At  the  present  time,  with  no  such
powerful  institution  back  of  him,  it  seems  folly  and  futility  for  any
drugless  healer  to  try  to  teach  a  patient  a  set  of  principles  for  which  no
standard  or  tribunal  has  yet  been  established.

The  wonderful  work  of  Dr.  Alexis  Carrel  in  blood-transfusion,  bone-
transplanting  and  life-restoring  would  never  have  gained  fact  or
credence  but  for  the  millions  back  of  the  Rockefeller  Institute,  and  the
respect  which  arose  therefrom  in  the  public  mind.  Without  some  such
mighty  force  underlying  and  supporting  the  Nature  Cure  investigator,
he  wastes  himself  in  trying  to  convert  or  teach  the  public.  Let  him  be
a  straight  reformer,  and  get  a  rich  man  to  endow  him;  let  him  be  a
straight  teacher,  and  hold  a  position  in  a  health  school  or  issue  lessons
of  his  own;  let  him  be  a  straight  physician,  and  confine  himself  to  cure;


160  Vniversat  Naturopathic  Dirrciorij  and  Biujers'  Guide


let  him  be  any  one  of  these  three  humanitarians,  but  not  endeavor  to
be  more  than  one. He  can't.

2.  Silence  and  mystery  should  surround  the  healing  art.  It  is
indeed  fatal  to  let  a  patient  know  what  you  are  doing  to  him.  He  might
endeavor  to  save  money  and  do  it  himself,  or  to  hire  a  cut-rate  healer  to
perform  the  ceremony;  either  of  whicli  alternatives  would  be,  if  possible,
even  more  fatal  than  your  own  prescriptions.  Do  not  explain  liow  your
treatment  cures,  do  not  urge  him  to  depend  on  himself,  above  all  do  not
say  that  "Only  Nature  heals"  and  you  have  no  inherent  curative  power;
all  such  statements  weaken  your  hold  on  the  sick,  and  either  impair  the
cure  or  send  the  invalid  to  a  doctor  with  a  big  gob  of  self-esteem  at  the
phrenological  top  of  his  head. Frankness  with  a  patient  is  foolhardiness.

Somebody  here  probably  exclaims  "Well,  of  all  things,  this  is  the
limit!  How  often  I  have  heard  you  preach  honesty  and  openness  and
truthfulness.  Now  you  advise  mystery,  superstition  and  deception.
When  did  you  backslide,  what  caused  your  ruination,  and  oh  can  I  ever
believe  you  again?"  Not  so  fast,  my  hysterical  friend,  you  are  reading
only  with  your  eyes,  not  with  your  mind  and  heart.  (Most  people  read
everything  this  way,  hence  are  universally  misinformed.)  I  do  not
sanction  dishonesty,  I  hate  all  forms  of  deception,  and  I  want  to  smash
into  atoms  every  superstition  on  earth.  But  I  am  now  an  efficiency
engineer — not  a  reformer.  And  while  a  reformer  who  only  paws  the
air  in  a  verbose,  melancholy  way  may  be  content  with  pretty  theories,
an  etficiency  engineer  considers  only  results.  You  cannot  get  results  as
a  doctor  by  treating  your  patient  as  an  equal.  You  must  always  be
superior  in  knowledge  and  power.  Let  him  think  he  can  learn  all  that
you  know,  from  Nature  or  any  other  source,  and  at  once  you  begin  to
lose  your  influence.

The  mediaeval  custom  of  writing  medical  prescriptions  in  Latin  is
part  of  the  code  and  conspiracy  to  prevent  a  sick  man  from  learning
what  the  doctor  does  to  him.  I  used  to  think  the  Latin-prescription
business  merely  a  pedantic  and  archaic  form  of  medical  superstition.
Believe  it  not — this  array  of  unknown  figures,  strange  signs  and  foreign
polysyllabics  is  one  of  the  subtlest  means  of  psychological  strategy
known  to  science.  For,  observe  what  would  happen  if  a  doctor's  orders
were  to  be  writ  in  plain  English.  The  patient  would  try  to  fill  the  pre-
scription himself — and  thus  most  likely  poison  himself;  he  would  loan
the  prescription  to  friends  whose  ailments  were  apparently  similar  but
really  quite  dissimilar;  he  would  use  the  prescription  without  consul-
tation when  his  trouble  or  anything  like  it  should  recur — though  symp-
toms and  causes  might  be  very  different  to  the  professional  eye  of  a
trained  observer.


Universal  Natiiropathir  Directorij  and  liiii/rrs'  Guide  1<'1

In  short,  a  prescription  that  a  patient  could  read  would  at  once
become  an  instrument  of  peril,  to  his  own  life  and  to  the  practice  of  his
doctor.  This  explains  why  the  custom  persists,  and  why  a  code  of  like
impressiveness  should  be  formulated  and  adopted  by  drugless  physi-
cians. Tell  a  man  to  gargle  salt  and  water  for  a  sore  throat,  and  he  will
this  doctor?"  Tell  him  to  gargle  sodium  chloride,  aqua  pura  (HO),  and
some  other  hidden,  harmless  ingredient  from  a  drugstore — then  behold
the  fellow  is  grateful,  obedient,  and  ready  to  pay  your  fee  without
protest.  A  dose  thrives  only  in  the  dark — I  suppose  because  the  deed
is  evil.  But  if  sick  people  want  secrecy  with  their  prescription,  a  doctor's
business  is  to  furnish  the  secrecy  also.  As  teachers,  we  should  tell
people  something  about  the  science  of  health;  as  reformers,  we  should
tell  them  everything;  as  doctors,  we  should  tell  them  nothing.  Which
are  we?

3.  Every  doctor  should  possess  a  lot  of  queer-looking  instrument';
and  appliances,  that  he  alone  understands,  and  that  he  should  wield
with  solemn  unction  and  slow  suspense,  on  the  patient.  A  sick  person
likes  to  be  fussed  over,  and  allowed  to  believe  that  his  peculiar  trouble
is  the  most  subtle,  mysterious,  baffling  complication  of  blights  that  ever
attacked  a  human  frame.  Of  course  theoretically  he  should  be  stood
up  in  a  corner  and  spanked;  but  actually,  he  must  be  solemnly  bent  over
and  seriously  examined,  studied,  measured,  weighed,  turned  and  tried
and  tested  in  every  conceivable  manner,  to  satisfy  his  conceit  and  self-
pity.  The  more  of  this  sort  of  diagnosis  you  can  give  him,  the  more  he
will  believe  in  you  and  think  you  a  grand  little  doctor.  I  would  therefore
advise  the  drugless  physician  to  equip  his  office  with  the  crazy-looking
tools,  appliances  and  machines  to  be  found  in  the  office  of  a  popular
allopath,  to  the  extent  that  these  diagnostic  fooleries  and  flummadiddles
do  not  actually  harm  the  patient.

I  would  further  recommend,  this  time  seriously,  that  the  whole
range  and  import  of  symptoms  should  receive  ten  times  the  consideration
now  given  the  subject  by  the  average  Nature  Cure  school.  The  allopaths
are  wrong  in  prescribing  a  specific  remedy  for  each  of  a  thousand
specific  ailments;  but  they  are  right  in  locating  and  learning  a  thousand
symptoms  marking  a  thousand  ailments,  they  have  properly  emphasized
the  urgent  need  for  scientific  accuracy  in  studying  the  diverse  conditions
of  patients  minutely  and  continually.  Most  anti-drug  practitioners,
whether  physiological  or  metaphysical,  err  in  point  of  a  criminal
vagueness  and  ignorance.  Nature  will  cure,  without  drugs  or  opera-
tions, most  cases  of  appendicitis  and  of  typhoid  fever;  but  the  physician
must  know  whether  the  trouble  is  appendicitis  or  typhoid,  and  must


162  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bntjers'  Guide


choose  from  Nature's  host  of  remedies  the  ones  to  fit  the  case.  In  the
close  determination  of  the  many  varied  forms  of  disease,  the  allopath
is  to  my  way  of  thinking  far  ahead  of  the  naturopath.

4.  Preaching  and  teaching  prophylaxis  should  be  rigorously  barred,
unless  earnestly  requested.  In  watching  thousands  of  cases  of  physical
or  mental  disease,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  about  one  person
in  fifteen — certainly  no  more — may  appreciate,  understand  and  adopt
the  rules  of  right  living  that  Nature  Cure  rests  upon.  To  explain  them
to  the  other  fourteen  is  mere  waste  of  time,  energy  and  sympathy.  The
efiicient  man  wastes  nothing.  When  we  consider  the  matter,  as  it  should
be  considered,  in  a  purely  professional  way,  we  discover  that  the  doctor
is  merely  a  merchant  of  prescriptions  and  treatments,  he  is  selling  cure,
and  cure  only.  When  you  go  to  a  store  for  a  pair  of  shoes,  if  a  clerk
tries  to  sell  you  sandals  or  slippers  instead  of  shoes,  you  are  properly
indignant,  you  rebuke  or  report  the  clerk  for  unwarranted  ofiiciousness,
and  you  probably  trade  thereafter  with  another  store.  The  shoes  you
are  wearing  may  have  brought  you  corns  or  bunions — no  matter,  they
are  your  shoes  and  your  corns  or  bunions,  you  have  a  right  to  keep  them
all,  and  no  clerk  has  a  right  to  interfere.  Why  should  your  patients
think  otherwise,  when  they  seek  to  buy  cure  from  you?  If  they  ask  for
detailed  information  on  the  best  forms  of  exercise,  diet,  baths,  mental
habits,  and  the  like,  for  the  prevention  of  disease,  then  teach  them,  re-
form them,  promptly  and  gladly.  But  if  they  merely  want  to  be  patched
up,  not  renovated  and  regenerated,  do  the  patching  conscientiously,  and
stop  there.

5.  A  national  herb-store  conspiracy  should  be  formed,  that  would
do  for  the  drugless  physician  what  the  present  drug-store  conspiracy
does  for  the  doctor.  Think  how  many  press  agents,  boosters  and  allies
the  doctor  has  working  for  him,  at  no  expense  to  himself.  There  is  the
druggist;  the  chemist;  the  medicine-maker;  the  instrument-manufac-
turer; the  surgeon;  the  hospital  official;  the  nurse;  the  food-faker;  the
vendor  of  tight  shoes,  wool  underwear,  stiff  corsets,  high  collars  and
hermetic  hats;  the  teacher  of  wholly  theoretical  hygiene;  the  parson
who  ignores  the  body;  and  last  but  not  least  the  unctuous  undertaker.
These  folks  are  all  working  for  the  doctor — no  wonder  he  is  a  popular
man!  Conversely,  they  are  all  working  against  the  Nature  Cure  physi-
cian, because  if  he  gains  the  sanction  of  the  public,  the  jobs  of  these
aforementioned  persons  are  forthwith  gone.  Why  should  we  allow
this  thusness?

A  national  chain  of  herb-stores  should  be  established.  All  Nature
Cure  colleges,  whether  physical  or  metaphysical,  should  include  a  full
course  in  the  study,  prescription  and  application  of  herbal  remedies.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertori/  and  fiiii/rrs'  (iuidr  KJ'5


internal  and  external.  The  custom  should  be  inaugurated,  of  prescribing
a  harmless  vegetable  tea,  tincture,  powder,  bath,  infusion,  compress,  or
other  plant  remedy,  as  a  general  form  of  "placebo"  treatment.  Every
drugless  physician  should  carry  a  "medicine-case";  why  forsooth  should
the  dignity  and  mystery  of  that  solemn  reticule  be  for  an  asset  to  the
allopath  alone?  I  am  not  fooling,  I  am  in  dead  earnest.  We  cannot
hope  for  a  thousand  years  to  make  people  trust  in  principles  only,  and
I  have  observed  that  many  a  flowery  advocate  of  New  Thought  or
Physical  Culture  has  no  hesitation  in  swallowing,  secretly,  a  nice  little
pill  and  thereupon  feeling  better,  also  secretly.  The  wisdom  of  Kneipp
in  compounding  his  herbal  "Apotheke",  was  greater  in  a  therapeutic
sense  than  all  the  sentimental  theories  of  every  cloud-lodged  metaphysi-
until  the  practice  of  naturist  methods  has  been  legalized;  here  I  would
but  suggest  the  underlying  truth  for  a  general  herb  inaugural  through-
out the  healing  profession.

6.  A  substitute  for  surgery  should  be  devised,  to  warrant  an  equiv-
alent for  the  huge  fees  asked  and  received  by  famous  surgeons.  I  have
lately  talked  with  the  treasurer  of  a  $6,000,000  institution  for  the  cure
of  disease.  And  I  have  learned  that  many  of  the  great  surgeons  on  the
faculty  of  the  hospital  maintain  a  secret  list  of  charity  patients,  to  whom
they  donate  their  services  and  for  whom,  in  addition,  they  pay  the  ex-
penses of  board,  room,  and  medicine.  Here  is  but  one  instance  out  cf
many,  where  a  general  popular  movement  for  the  spread  of  belief  in
drugs  and  operations  is  being  carried  on,  quietly  but  unceasingly.  How
can  the  drugless  physician  afford  a  similar  charity,  with  his  present
income  too  meager  for  a  decent  living?  The  great  dispensaries  in  our
American  cities  are  possible  only  because  the  doctors  who  work  for
next  to  nothing  have  an  independent  means  of  support  from  their  rich
patients  in  the  private  wards.  Would  it  not  be  feasible  to  evolve  a
highly  difficult,  really  beneficial,  form  of  treatment  or  manipulation,
which  would  warrant  a  fee  of  $100  to  $5,000,  and  would  be  restricted
to  those  who  could  pay  for  it?  I  have  in  mind  the  success  of
Doctor  Lorenz  in  the  case  of  Lolita  Armour,  the  daughter  of  the  mil-
lionaire meat-packer.  You  may  recall  how  the  spinal  trouble  of  the
little  girl,  which  had  made  her  a  hopeless  invalid,  was  cured  by  the
manipulations  of  the  European  doctor,  with  a  fee  large  enough  to  com-
pensate for  a  host  of  charity  cases.  It  will  pay  to  give  this  whole  matter
of  large  fees,  their  psychology  and  availability,  a  great  deal  of  serious
thought.  How  can  the  rich  be  made  to  realize  their  need  for  the  Nature
Cure,  and  to  pay  in  proportion  to  their  wealth?  The  crowned  heads  of
Europe  have  been  clients  and  patrons,  in  large  numbers,  of  the  naturist


164  Univrrsal  Nalnropalhir  Dirrclory  and  Bin/rrs'  Guide

pioneers  over  there. What  is  tlie  matter  here,  why  can  not  an  equal
following  be  secured?

7.  The  principles  and  methods  of  the  so-called  specialist  should
be  incorporated  in  drugless  practice.  The  vogue  of  the  general  prac-
titioner, the  old-style  family  doctor,  is  fast  disappearing.  Except  in
counti-y  districts,  and  for  minor  ailments,  he  must  yield  to  the  popularity
of  the  highly  trained,  well  paid,  specialist.  Not  only  in  medicine,  but  in
law,  literature,  commerce,  education,  even  religion,  the  specialist  now
does  the  finest  work,  commands  the  best  field,  wins  the  largest  rewards.
The  Reverend  "Billy"  Sunday  has  turned  the  hearts  of  millions  of
people  toward  the  church,  and  he  has  collected  for  his  own  purse  as
much  as  $40,000  in  one  day.  If  specialism  has  invaded  the  church,  how
much  more  must  it  rule  the  hospital,  sanitarium  and  private  practice;
for  the  bodies  and  minds  of  men  are  infinitely  complex,  while  the  souls
are  one.

Tliere  are  two  luain  forms  of  therapeutic  specialism.  One  refers  to
the  kind,  character  and  location  of  disease,  the  other  pertains  to  the
method  of  treatment.  In  the  old-school  practice,  the  first  largely  obtains,
a  doctor  being  a  specialist  of  the  nerves,  eye,  lungs  and  throat,  or  some
other  part  of  the  anatomy.  In  drugless  healing,  my  own  belief  is  that
the  ideal  specialist  would  master  one  branch  of  the  Nature  Cure,  such
as  hydrotherapy,  mechanotherapy,  dietetics,  gymnastics,  mental  science,
and  work  in  conjunction  with  many  other  specialists,  each  having  a
separate  department,  but  all  being  correlated  in  one  great  institution.
A  doctor  studies  very  little  but  the  medical  mode  of  treatment — and  we
call  him  unprepared.  The  Nature  Cure  embraces  scores  of  systems,
each  as  flifficult  as  the  science  (?)  of  medicine;  how  absurd  then  to
claim  that  any  one  man  is  master  of  them  all!  Yet  this  is  what  a  Nature
Cure  college  virtually  does,  in  graduating  a  pupil  as  a  general  prac-
titioner. We  can  perhaps  do  no  better  at  present,  but  we  can  at  least
think  better  for  the  future.

Let  me  give  an  example  of  the  need  for  specialism  in  the  Nature
Cure.  A  friend  of  mine  has  spent  three  years  in  going  the  rounds  of
both  medical  and  non-medical  liospitals,  homes,  sanitariums,  and  other
health  resorts.  Tlie  experience  has  cost  him  over  $10,000,  and  suffering
of  mind  and  body  that  no  dollars,  no  words  even,  can  measure.  The
affliction  of  this  man  was  complex,  but  not  mysterious  or  incurable.
After  many  heart-breaking  attempts  to  gain  health  from  any  one  physi-
cian or  institution,  he  managed  finally  to  prepare  for  himself  a  com-
posite treatment  or  system  which  really  worked.  Portions  of  this  were
taken  from  the  different  sanitaria  he  had  visited — not  one  of  which  was
really  competent  to  handle  this  case. Morally,  the  man  had  a  right  to


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrrtonj  and  lUnjcrs (iuidc  165


sue  each  instilution  for  failing  to  provide  all  the  known  methods
applicable  to  liis  case.  For  every  major  class  of  chronic  disease — such
as  rheumatism,  dyspepsia,  insomnia,  neurasthenia,  kidney  and  liver
complaint,  and  so  forth,  a  special  resort  or  sanitarium  on  Nature  Cure
lines  should  be  founded  somewhere  in  the  United  States,  and  its  where-
abouts made  known  to  every  drugless  practitioner.  The  future  of
Naturism  lies  in  specialism.


These  are  but  a  few  vague  hints  on  the  subject  of  wiser  professional
methods.  I  would  now  make  one  definite,  particular  and  very,  very
peculiar  recommendation;  1  would  urge  that  the  American  Medical
Association  and  the  American  Naturopathic  Association  each  appoint
a  representative  or  committee  whose  sole  duty  will  be  to  ascertain  the
points  of  greater  wisdom  and  excellence  in  the  other  association.  The
A.  M.  A.  would  say  to  the  A.  N.  A. — "We  are  doubtless  making  serious
mistakes,  w^hich  your  superior  knowledge  would  enable  us  to  correct.
Please  inform  and  reform  us."

Then  the  A.  N.  A.  would  reply  to  the  A.  M.  A.— "Not  so,  brothers.
We,  verily,  are  the  bunglers — will  you  not  graciously  condescend  to
show  us  the  better  way?"  Each  would  thus  become  a  regular  Alphonse
of  courtesy  to  the  other's  Gaston  of  humility.

I  have  to  stop  here — such  a  spectacle  takes  my  breath  entirely  away,
and  I  must  needs  recover  from  the  shock.


166  Uiiincrsdl  Xahiropdlhic  Dircclorij  (uid  Bui/rrs'  Guide


CHAPTER  XII

THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  GOOD  LETTERS


I  have  received  a  letter  which  is  to  mine  heart  as  a  palm-tree  and
well-spring  in  a  desert.  So  refreshing,  unique  and  encouraging  a  mes-
sage has  not  come  in  many  a  day.

I  had  never  heard  of  the  writer  before,  and  he  wrote  me  for  only
two  reasons — to  thank  me  for  this  series  of  expositions,  and  to  ask  for
any  criticism  or  rebuke  that  he  may  have  deserved  from  the  standpoint
of  efiiciency.

A  part  of  his  letter  will  interest  and  inspire  you.  He  says  in
substance :

"The  town  in  which  I  am  located  has  a  population  of  350  inhabitants.
I  began  my  practice  here  just  a  year  ago.  I  was  born  here,  and  my
parents,  uncles  and  aunts,  and  cousins  galore,  live  here.  Several  of  them
have  called  me  and  paid  me  for  the  service.

"I  began  without  an  office,  a  telephone,  a  conveyance  of  any  kind,
or  a  dollar  that  I  could  call  my  own.  I  seem  to  have  no  trouble  to  get
patients,  to  get  good  results  and  to  get  my  fees.  My  day  book  tells  me
that  the  cash  return  for  this  week,  so  far,  is  $51.62.  This  is  Thursday
A.  M.  The  total  was  $169.75  for  last  month,  and  $275.50  for  the  month
previous.

"My  office  is  furnished  with  solid  quarter  oak  furniture,  the  best  to
be  found  in  any  physician's  office  in  this  county.  I  have  refused  $250
for  the  horse  that  I  drive.

"These  figures  are  not  large,  but  they  show  that  I  am  making  a  living
at  the  drugless  business  in  spite  of  the  devil,  and  the  fact  that  I  am  the
only  "rubber  doctor"  that  the  people  here  ever  saw  or  heard  of,  and  the
fact  that  this  is  my  home  town.  The  people  say  I  'rub',  and  know  only
what  they  have  heard.  They  have  never  read  a  printed  word  on  the
Nature  Cure.  The  majority  of  the  people  who  never  saw  me  with  my
hat  off  think  I  have  horns.  Notwithstanding,  I  have  had  patients  come
from  cities  over  100  miles  away,  for  a  treatment  so  new  and  different
that  even  my  patients  hardly  understand  the  first  principles  of  it.

"Please  write  me  a  personal  letter,  and  give  me  an  honest  and  un-
merciful criticism — a  picture  of  myself  and  my  business  as  you  see  it,
and  I'll  pay  you  for  it.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide  167


"I  am  satisfied  there  is  nothing  the  matter  with  the  Nature  business
except  our  inefliciency  and  our  deficient  organization,  and  I  am  hungry
for  a  personal  word  from  someone  who  knows  the  efficiency  side  of  it."

This  brother's  kttor  is  loo  good  to  keep,  and  I  also  wish  to  take  it
for  the  text  of  a  much-needed  sermon  to  other  naturopaths.  Hence
the  answer  is  published  here.

Please  observe  the  following  important  facts.

1.  This  man,  whom  we  will  call  Mr.  Rich  because  that  isn't  his
name  (but  will  be  if  he  keeps  on),  is  making  over  $50  a  week  in  a  town
of  only  350  people.  This  means  that,  on  the  average,  every  man,  woman
and  child  in  the  town  pays  Mr.  Rich  over  $7  each  year,  for  drugless
treatment  and  advice!  And  lately  I  had  a  heart-rending  plaint  from  a
naturopath  living  in  a  city  of  20,000,  to  the  eflect  that  he  could  not
make  ends  meet!  If  he  were  as  efTicient  as  Mr.  Rich,  he  would  be  earn-
ing $140,000  a  year  from  his  practice— quite  a  tidy  sum,  it  seems  to  me.

2.  Mr.  Rich  began  with  nothing — worse  than  nothing,  because  he
had  his  relations  all  about  him.  And  as  I  have  pointed  out,  relations
are  good  to  a  professional  man  after  he  has  succeeded,  but  before  this
they  are  as  mill-stones  around  his  neck  and  cobble-stones  to  the  rest
of  his  anatomy.  The  relatives  of  Mr.  Rich  consult  him  professionally,
and  pay  him  just  as  though  he  were  a  stranger.  This,  I  confess,  is  a
miracle  beyond  my  comprehension.  But  it  proves  that  wherever
money  is,  the  wise  and  eflicient  naturist  can  cause  the  transfer  thereof
to  his  own  jurisdiction.

3.  Mr.  Rich  has  not  resorted  to  advertising,  nor  to  printed  eulo-
gistics  on  the  Nature  Cure,  in  gaining  clients.  This  has  but  one  mean-
ing— he  "makes  good"!  It  would  be  a  happy  deliverance  from
avalanches  of  useless  words  if  nine-tenths  of  the  advertising  "specialists"
in  Drugless  Treatment  would  stop  talking  and  writing,  and  perform
such  fine  cures  that  the  cures  themselves  wotild  do  the  advertising.  I
don't  know  how  many  healers  have  asked  me  the  best  way  to  have  their
method  "written  up" — and  on  investigation  it  appeared  that  there  was
nothing  to  wTite  up !  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  a  thing  cannot  be  safely
written  up  unless  it  is  already  at  the  top.  Working  a  thing  up  should
precede  writing  it  up.

4.  Mr.  Rich  is  satisfied  there  is  nothing  the  matter  with  the  Nature
Cure  as  a  business.  He  doesn't  grumble  over  his  job,  nor  at  the  people
who  are  the  source  of  his  livelihood; — and  I  am  convinced  that  the
majority  of  naturopaths  commit  this  ungracious  and  unpsychological
error.  You  chose  your  work — why  get  peeved  about  it  and  reflect  on
the  wisdom  of  your  choice? It  is  not  the  boy  at  the  head  of  the  spelling-


168  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

class  who  doesn't  like  spelling — it  is  the  boy  at  the  foot.  The  same  is
true  of  the  man  and  his  trade  or  profession.  To  excel  in  anything  is
to  love  it.

5.  Mr.  Rich  asks  for  an  honest,  unmerciful  criticism — and  freely
offers  to  pay  for  it.  This,  beloved  brethren,  is  the  sign  not  only  of  a
successful  man,  but  also  of  a  great  man  in  the  making.  To  pay  gladly
for  scientific  censure  is  a  mark  of  supreme  wisdom.  There  are  efficiency
experts  who  are  paid  -$40,000  a  year  by  captains  of  industry,  to  pick  flaws
in  their  business.  It  takes  a  captain,  in  any  line  of  work,  to  be  strong
enough  to  fight  his  own  weaknesses  and  mistakes.  The  little  fellows
turn  and  run.  I  have  had  personal  requests  from  healers  and  teachers
asking  help  on  efficiency  lines.  Accordingly,  I  have  prepared  questions
for  the  ascertaining  of  the  real  facts  in  their  work,  have  requested
certain  data  and  co-operative  effort  on  their  part,  and  have  named  a  fee
(usually  a  half  to  a  third  of  the  value  of  my  time)  in  return  for  the
service.  Thereupon  I  have  observed  a  profound  silence  gathering
between  us,  and  remaining  to  this  day.  I  am  relieved,  because  I  have
no  time  to  bother  with  people  born  to  fail;  but  a  profession  all  cluttered
up  with  them  is  in  a  bad  way.  Nature  Cure,  like  marriage,  is  an  ideal
institution ;  the  only  trouble  is  with  the  people  who  practice  healing,  and
who  get  married.

Needless  to  say,  I  have  not  assumed  to  criticize  the  methods  of
Brother  Rich,  nor  to  accept  money  therefor.  To  analyze  his  work
sufficiently  for  this  purpose  would  take  time  that  hundreds  of  people
need  more  than  he  does.  He  is,  I  should  judge,  about  70  per  cent
efficient  in  his  work.  The  average  man  is  only  about  30  per  cent
efficient.  So,  while  Friend  Rich  has  no  occasion  to  be  boastful,  he  may
feel  a  just  pride  in  the  degree  of  success  already  achieved.  In  his  case,
I  hereby  take  back  the  harsh  things  I  have  felt  bound  to  say,  concerning
drugless  healers  on  the  whole.

Further,  I  would  earnestly  recommend  that  some  national  associa-
tion of  drugless  practitioners  make  arrangements  for  discovering  the
secret  of  this  man's  success,  preferably  by  sending  a  reporter  or  author,
a  photographer,  and  a  character  analyst,  to  his  home,  for  the  purpose
of  locating  the  elements  in  man  or  method  that  are  so  meritorious,  and
of  describing  these  attractively  and  scientifically,  for  the  benefit  of  all
practitioners  throughout  the  United  States.  Such  a  book  would  be  a
blessing  and  a  money-maker,  both  together,  if  handled  aright.

Now,  having  enjoyed  a  rare  diversion — that  of  meeting  a  naturo-
path who  knows  his  job,  we  will  proceed  with  our  regular  task  of
suggesting  improved  methods  for  the  health  propaganda.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertorij  and  Ihuffrs'  Guide  l'>0

I  have  before  me  thirty  letters,  written  to  me  personally  by  author-
ized ofTicials  of  the  most  prominent  Health  schools  in  the  United  States.
The  systems  taught  by  these  various  institutions  cover  Naturopathy,
Chiropractic,  Osteopathy,  Mechano-Therapy,  Physcultopathy,  Napra-
pathy,  Psychotherapy,  and  other  popular  modes  of  healing  and  living
without  drugs.  In  order  to  ascertain  with  positive  directness  what
literature  is  being  sent  out  by  the  leading  institutions,  1  wrote  personally,
asking  what  each  had  to  offer  a  prospective  candidate  for  a  practi-
tioner's degree  in  non-medical  therapeutics.  Each  of  these  colleges,  real
or  alleged,  supposing  that  I  might  be  good  for  a  tuition  fee,  turned  the
epistolary  battery  of  the  place  on  me,  full  force.  1,  being  old  at  the
game,  found  many  a  reason  for  smiling  at  the  inadequacy  of  their
ammunition — it  all  fell  short;  but  no  occasion  whatever  to  send  good
money  in  return  for  their  poor  arguments.  I  did  answer  one  letter,
because  I  respected  the  sincerity  of  the  man  who  wrote  it,  and  I  ad-
mired the  skill  and  science  of  the  man's  presentation.  If  only  one,  out
of  perhaps  fifty  letters,  brought  a  reply  from  me,  and  that  reply
negative — what  was  the  use  of  the  other  forty-nine?

It  costs  from  3  to  5  cents  each  to  issue  a  letter  from  an  office.  A
personal  letter  costs  about  5  cents,  a  "form"  letter  from  3  to  4  cents.
Say  the  average  is  4  cents — then  4  times  49,  or  $1.96,  was  entirely
wasted  on  me.  If  you  multiply  this  sum  by  the  many  thousands  of
such  inquiries  and  letters  to  be  counted  each  year,  you  will  have  some
idea  of  the  inefTiciency,  and  resulting  loss,  in  the  correspondence
departments  of  our  most  reputable  Nature  Cure  establishments.

Of  the  thirty  letters  that  seemed  worth  keeping,  perhaps  six  are
really  first-class,  presenting  good  argument  in  a  scientific  manner.
Five  or  six  more  are  excellent  in  spots,  ranging  from  fair  to  mediocre.
The  remaining  eighteen  or  nineteen  are  distinctly  bad,  in  one  or  more
of  the  five  respects  that  I  shall  name  shortly.  We  have  then  this  table
of  percentages:

Good letters 20%

Fair  letters 20% (approximate)

Poor  letters 60% (approximate)


100%


You  can  figure  that  about  70%  of  all  the  letters  mailed  from  Nature
Cure  sanitaria,  health  homes,  colleges  and  training  schools  would  be
safer  and  better  if  reposing  in  the  waste-basket  of  a  healer  who  never
wrote  them. However,  nothing  is  lost,  our  metaphysical  friends  keep


170  Uniucrsdl  Ndhiropdlhir  Dirrclonj  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide


saying ;^and  these  epistles  have  indeed  been  to  nic  a  call  for  patience
and  a  means  of  grace,  for  which  1  am  dutifully,  if  reluctantly,  grateful.

This  chapter  is  headed  "The  Importance  of  Good  Letters."  A  good
health  letter  must  possess  five  kinds  of  goodness: — moral,  professional,
psychological,  pictorial,  financial.

The  letters  from  a  Nature  Cure  institution  must  be  morally  good
because  the  officials  aim  to  be  reformers  as  well  as  teachers,  inculcating
principles  of  idealism,  aspiration,  clean  and  wholesome  living.  One
letter  ethically  bad  proves  their  whole  position  false.

Such  letters  must  be  professionally  good  because  rival  doctors,
institutes  and  colleges  are  ever  on  the  watch  for  mistakes  and  mis-
statements, eager  to  make  capital  out  of  the  same.

These  letters  must  be  psychologically  good  because  the  average
man  who  receives  them  is  now  pretty  well  acquainted  with  the  mail-
order method  of  appeal  for  business,  and  has  grown  hard-hearted  in
respect  to  all  but  the  most  convincing  arguments,  having  been  deluged
with  "follow-up"  missives  galore.

The  letters  must  be  pictorially  and  typographically  good  because
first  impressions  are  strongest,  and  if  your  communication  stands  out
as  a  model  of  neatness,  cleverness,  rare  quality  and  fine  display,  you
will  have  50  per  cent  more  chance  of  escaping  the  waste-basket.

The  letters  must  be  financially  good  because  their  final  object  is  to
sell  something;  and  no  matter  how  well  they  read,  or  impress  the  re-
cipient, they  are  failures  unless  they  produce  an  actual  sale.

It  would  be  an  interesting  and  valuable  experiment  for  every
reader  of  this  volume  who  writes  or  receives  letters  designed  to  sell
a  health  product  or  production,  if  he  would  analyze  a  few  of  these
letters  by  the  foregoing  standard  of  five-star  goodness.  Many  of  our
Nature  Cure  friends  who  imagine  they  are  stars  in  the  letter-writing
business  would  find  themselves  chunks  of  pig-iron.

We  -will  now  extract  a  few  warnings  from  the  rare  collection  of
exhibits  constituting  the  letter-writing  system  of  some  of  the  leading
drugless  colleges  of  America.  I  charge  the  schools  in  question  with  gross
ignorance,  incapacity,  and  in  not  a  few  cases,  immorality.  The  exhibits
confirm  the  charge.

Exhibit  A.  This  letter  starts  by  calling  me  "E.  E.  Purington" — no
prefix,  and  the  name  spelled  wrong.  Now  the  lack  of  a  "Mr."  may
denote  a  sort  of  blunt  frankness  and  straightforwardness;  I  don't  object
to  it,  though  the  majority  of  men  probably  do. But  to  mis-spell  a  man's


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Bui/rrs'  Guide  I'l


name  in  a  letter  is  as  unwise  and  discourteous  as  it  would  be  to  shake
hands  with  him  when  your  fingers  were  greasy  or  wet.  Needlessly,  you
make  a  bad  impression  at  the  outset.  This  communication,  also,  is
signed  with  a  rubber  stamp — one  of  the  most  atrocious  and  unpardon-
able forms  of  error  in  correspondence.  When  I  receive  a  letter  signed
thus,  it  goes  into  the  waste-basket  with  a  speed  that  would  crack  a
stop-watch.  The  rubber-stamp  signature  is  not  only  a  lie — it  is  a  crude
and  blundering  lie;  and  any  lady  will  tell  you  that  a  lie  done  badly  is
of  all  mean  things  the  meanest.  Stupid  goodness  may  be  forgivable,
but  stupid  badness  is  intolerable.

Exhibit  B.  This  letter  is  shamelessly  void  of  any  man's  name  on
the  printed  heading,  or  in  the  typewritten  signature  at  the  bottom.  This
augurs  badly  for  the  whole  concern.  A  reputable  "college" — this  calls
itself  a  college — has  a  president  and  secretai^y  and  faculty  and  other
officers.  Their  names  should  appear  on  the  letter-head,  to  impress  one
with  the  genuineness  of  the  course  and  the  standing  of  the  college.  This
letter,  moreover,  was  run  through  a  cheap  mimeograph,  and  staggers
like  a  drunken  man.  Why  should  a  good  letter  stagger,  any  more  than
a  good  man?  It  should  not,  and  does  not.  The  type,  also,  on  this
machine-made  letter,  is  old  and  worn  and  shabby  and  neurasthenic.  It
belongs  in  an  old  lady's  home,  with  a  sanitarium  for  paralytics  nearby.
It  needs  the  Nature  Cure.  Why  force  it  on  parade  in  its  weak  and
wobbly  superannuation?

Exhibit  C.  This  gold-bordered  Christmas  card  was  just  in  the
act  of  striking  me  favorably,  on  December  24th  of  last  year,  when  I
perused  the  following  sentence:  "We  invite  your  co-operation  to  in-
crease our  enrollment."  I  might  have  been  disposed  to  help  increase
their  enrolment,  or  eke  their  enrollment,  but  to  increase  any  school's
enrolement  is  an  impossibility,  there  being  no  such  word;  and  as  I  have
enough  impossible  tasks  already  on  hand,  I  gently  and  sadly  consigned
their  gold-framed  card  to  the  trash-heap.  If  a  man  can't  spell,  how
can  he  have  the  nerve  to  try  to  teach  anything?

Exhibit  D.  This  letter  has  an  engraved  heading,  on  good  sta-
tionery— two  unusual  points  in  its  favor.  But  here  is  a  bad  promise —
bad  when  made,  and  worse  when  carried  out.  The  letter  says:  "Our
Home  Study  Course  is  very  complete,  and  a  student  in  the  correspond-
ence department  receives  upon  graduation  a  certificate  exactly  the  same
as  a  resident  student."  Manifestly,  such  a  guarantee  is  unprofessional,
unfair,  and  unsafe,  a  resident  period  of  instruction  being  absolutely
necessary  to  qualify  any  man  for  the  practice  of  healing.  A  mail  course
is  often  of  great  personal  benefit;  no  diploma  for  practice  should  be


172  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  linijers*  Guide

given,  however,  on  its  teachings  alone — clinical  work  is  always  a  pre-
requisite to  a  real  physician's  calling.

This  letter  also  states:  'The  opportunities  for  earning  a  large  in-
come are  practically  unlimited.  As  a  Doctor  of  Freakopathy  (not  their
title,  but  a  better  description  than  theirs),  you  will  be  respected  by
everyone  and  become  independent  for  life."  Oh  shade  of  Munchausen
and  ghost  of  Ananias,  protect  these  thy  children!  For  if  you  don't,
nobody  else  will.  Yes,  "the  opportunities  for  earning  a  large  income
are  unlimited."  So  are  the  opportunities  for  seeking  the  lost  fortune
of  Captain  Kidd,  or  flying  to  the  moon,  or  precipitating  the  millennium.
Let  me  assure  you,  however,  noble  Doctor  of  Freakopathy,  you  will  not
be  respected  by  everyone — half  your  neighbors  will  probably  call  you
crazy,  and  the  doctors  are  likely  to  maul  you  as  a  public  nuisance.
You  may  become  "independent  for  life" — by  learning  how  to  fast  in-
definitely, and  to  live  in  a  tent  without  freezing.  Ultimately,  the  best
policy  is  always  to  tell  the  truth;  and  if  a  school's  only  object  were
financial  gain,  such  letters  would  be  unprofitable  because  unprovable.
Character  and  commonsense  are  both  greatly  needed  in  our  Naturist
schools,  as  further  exhibitions  in  the  next  chapter  may  demonstrate.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  fiin/ers'  Guide  173


CHAPTER  XIII

IMPROVING  HEALTH  CORRESPONDENCE

The  drugless  doctor  is,  generally  speaking,  a  literary  hobo.

I  pause  here  to  make  this  unwelcome  but  not  unkind  remark,  by
way  of  emphasizing  the  necessity  of  conveying  good  first  impressions
through  letters  to  strangers,  and  the  disastrous  failure  of  most  of  our
Nature  Cure  institutions  to  consider  the  matter  in  its  true  proportions.
Letter-writing  is  a  form  of  advertising.  And  as  I  devoted  several  years
to  the  study  of  advertising,  in  order  to  make  my  reform  work  more
appealing  and  effective,  I  think  I  have  a  right  to  express  an  opinion  of
more  or  less  trustworthy  character.

A  "literary  hobo"  is  a  person  who  does  not  care  how  he  looks  on
paper,  who  asks  for  money  without  giving  a  good  reason  therefor,  and
who  w^anders  aimlessly  around  a  subject  instead  of  working  into  the
heart  of  it.  The  official  letter-writer  in  the  average  Nature  Cure  insti-
tution of  America  is,  I  repeat,  a  literary  hobo.  He  does  not  command
my  respect,  nor  win  my  faith,  nor  get  my  money.  He  may  be  a  noble
character,  but  in  the  epistolary  garb  of  a  tramp  he  disqualifies  himself
at  the  start. I  have  no  time  to  bother  with  him.

Suppose  you  are  comfortably  seated  in  your  home,  busily  engaged,
and  you  hear  a  step  on  the  walk.  You  run  to  the  window  and  you  see
approaching  a  tramp,  or  peddler,  or  gossip,  or  other  individual  not
invited  and  not  wanted.  It  would  be  human  nature  for  you  to  remain
stone-deaf  while  the  visitor  rang  the  bell  out  by  the  roots,  and  to  let
him  depart  as  glum  as  when  he  came.

A  business  letter,  coming  in  your  door,  may  look  like  a  gentleman
—or  like  a  tramp.  In  dress,  demeanor,  salutation,  conversation,  and
general  impression,  a  letter  affects  you  much  as  a  man  does,  whether
you  are  conscious  of  the  fact  or  not.  And  if  you  have  hundreds
of  letters  coming  all  the  time,  as  I  have,  you  know  it  takes  an  important
and  impressive  communication  to  get  itself  read  at  all.  Probably  70
per  cent  of  these  missives  from  Naturist  concerns  would  not  have  been


174  rnii>crs(il  Naturopathic  Dirrctonj  and  Ihujers Guide


read  at  all,  if  I  had  not  wished  to  point  out  their  mistakes,  in  this  series
of  discussions.

Some  one  may  object,  that  such  letters  were  not  written  lor  the  eye
of  an  expert,  nor  intended  for  microscopic  analysis.  Evidently  not;
but  they  should  have  been.  What  sickens  me  in  looking  at  the  average
drugless  healer  is  the  man's  apparent  willingness  to  stay  mediocre,  to
attract  a  cheap  and  ignorant  clientele,  to  avoid  the  helpful  if  humiliat-
ing contact  with  the  social  and  intellectual  leaders  of  the  conununity.
The  Nature  Cure  is  worthy  of  the  finest  business  methods  and  the
noblest  professional  standards  in  America  today.  But  so  long  as  hordes
of  ignorant  people,  unsuccessful  in  ordinary  lines  of  work,  are  allowed
to  get  a  smattering  of  Nature  Cure  ideas  in  a  few  months,  buy  a  diploma
that  means  nothing  in  either  law  or  ethics,  then  turn  themselves  loose
on  a  protesting  community,  how  can  we  expect  the  grinders  of  these
diploma-mills  to  formulate  letters  that  are  convincing,  pleasing  or  even
respectable?

A  few  of  the  modern  schools  for  the  training  of  non-medical  prac-
titioners are  doing  splendid  work;  but  as  for  the  majority,  if  I  were  a
millionaire  I  would  buy  them  up  for  the  sole  purpose  of  burning  them
down.  This  would  be  a  great  help  to  the  cause.  The  obstacle  to  reform
is  the  obtuseness  of  reformers.

Let  us  resume  our  catalogue  of  exhibits,  culled  from  the  specimens
of  letters  written  me  by  the  heads  of  Nature  Cure  establishments,  and
continued  from  the  preceding  chapter.

Exhibit  E.  Here  is  a  philanthropic  letter,  offering  to  make  me  inde-
pendent for  life,  the  assumption  being  that  the  diploma  granted  by  this
college  will  make  every  graduate  rich.  The  letter  was  enclosed  in  a
one-cent  envelope  with  a  loose-end  flap,  the  kind  used  by  cheap  mail-
order concerns  in  selling  patent  medicine  or  shoe-laces.  A  one-cent
stamp  both  hurts  the  professional  dignity  and  destroys  the  personal
tone  of  the  letter  it  carries.  Whether  a  health  institution  is  a  college
desiring  students  or  a  sanitarium  seeking  patients,  it  should  employ
only  sealed  communications.  Evei-y  other  sort  violates  confidence  and
is  apt  to  offend  the  recipient.  Further,  a  one-cent  letter  goes  to  the
waste-basket,  unread,  if  the  man  who  gets  it  is  busy  enough  to  be  worth
while.

Exhibit  F.  The  stamp  on  this  envelope  is  a  third  gone;  and  the  rest
was  drunk  when  it  lit,  judging  by  the  way  it  lops  over.  Imperfect  stamps
should  be  sent  to  people  you  pay  money  to,  and  not  to  people  you  ask
money  from.  When  there  is  money  coming,  the  looks  of  the  envelope
don't  matter;  but  the  recipient  of  an  advertising  letter  is  on  the  defen-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Bui/rrs'  (iuidr  I/")

sive  from  the  start,  and  criticizes  every  least  flaw.  The  address  on  this
envelope  was  done  in  long-hand,  by  a  neurasthenic  school-girl,  witli
anaemic  ink  and  a  heart-broken  pen,  A  first  principle  of  business
correspondence  is  that  the  envelope  be  addressed  by  tyj)e\vrjter;  il  the
concern  is  too  poor  to  afford  a  stenographer,  nobody  with  office  expe-
rience will  look  at  the  letter  twice.

The  enclosures  in  this  communication  are  in  five  colors — brown,
yellow,  red,  black  and  purple.  They  would  befit  the  advertising  of  a
circus,  but  are  supposed  to  announce  a  college.  One  of  these  variegated
chromo-letters  offers  a  number  of  statements  that  are,  indeed,  gems  of
accuracy  and  humility.  "It  is  a  fact  that  there  is  no  professional  course
of  instruction  in  this  country,  today,  which  can  be  so  easily  absorbed  as
this;  and  it  is  a  further  fact  that  there  is  no  other  professional  training,
in  which  you  could  engage,  that  is  so  absorbingly  interesting."  1  always
distrust  a  man  who  starts  out  by  affirming  "It  is  a  fact"  that  so  and  so  is,
or  is  not;  because  I  feel  quite  sure  he  is  lying.  Tlicre  are  hundreds,
probably  thousands,  of  different  professional  courses  of  instruction  now
being  offered  in  this  counti'j';  how  does  any  man  know,  without  having
studied  them  all,  which  is  the  most  interesting,  and  the  most  easily
absorbed?  Such  wild  statements,  unsupported  and  unsupporlable  by
facts,  only  do  harm  to  the  entire  cause  of  rational  healing.

Another  wild  statement.  "The (patent  name  of  treat-
ment) will  put  a  sick  person  on  his  or  her  feet  in  a  few  days.  This
means  a  steady  stream  of  patients.  Then  again,  think  of  the  ease  of  this
treatment,  compared  with  the  tedious  methods  of  massage  and  rul)bing
which  constitute  nine-tenths  of  most  of  the  other  druglcss  healing
methods."  We  observe  only  three  falsehoods,  in  these  three  sentences.
1  would  call  this  a  case  of  inefficient  mendacity.  The  manifest  purpose
of  this  letter-writer  was  to  deceive,  therefore  why  not  put  in  several
more  lies  to  each  sentence?  No  single  treatment  on  earth  will  always,
or  even  usually,  put  a  sick  person  on  his  feet  in  a  few  days,  if  the  ail-
ment is  either  severely  acute  or  stubbornly  chronic.  No  steady  stream
of  patients  can  be  expected  by  one  physician  in  a  hundred,  no  matter
what  system  or  combination  of  drugless  systems  he  employs.  And
massage  and  rubbing  emphatically  do  not  "constitute  nine-tenths  of
most  of  the  other  drugless  healing  methods."  I  refrain  from  further
comment  on  this  letter — it  is  not  worth  such  an  outburst  of  righteous
anger  as  I  feel  approaching,  and  my  stock  of  expletives  could  not  do
justice  to  the  situation.  But  why,  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  fair  and
decent,  are  these  perjurers  allowed  to  run  their  fake  institutions; — why
don't  the  honest  practitioners,  or  the  national  associations,  close  them
up,  for  self-protection  and  the  good  of  the  cause?


176  rniifi'i'sdl  Ndtiiroinithir  Dirrclonj  (ind  nin/rrs'  Guide


Exhibit  G.  This  comiiuinication  opens  with  the  charmingly  familiar
greeting  "Dear  Prospective":— instead  of  "Dear  Mr.  Purinton"  or  "Dear
Sir."  Now  I  most  decidedly  am  not,  never  was  and  never  will  be  the
"dear  prospective"  of  this  word-mixing  college;  and  I  resent  being  called
names.  The  word  "prospect"  is  the  technical,  rather  slangy  and  very
undignified  name  applied  to  a  future  customer  by  straight  commercial
houses.  No  high-class  college  would  even  be  familiar  with  the  word,
to  say  nothing  of  using  it  in  a  private  letter.  This  document,  in  the
course  of  its  arguments,  aims  to  engender  faith  in  the  "dear  prospective"
by  assuring  him  that  "there  is  no  more  lucrative  profession  in  the
world"  than  the  scheme  of  therapeutic  adjustment  explained  in  the
course  enjoined  upon  you.  This  statement  is  entirely  false  and  mis-
leading. I  know  a  man  who  is  making  $200,000  a  year  in  his  profession;
— did  3'ou  ever  know  a  drugless  healer  of  any  kind,  or  all  kinds  together,
who  was  earning  a  quarter  of  that  amount?  A  general  condition  of
misrepresentation  prevails  in  the  business  departments  of  our  Nature
Cure  schools.  Whether  simple  enthusiasm  void  of  knowledge,  or  crim-
inal intent  to  deceive  is  the  motive  and  cause,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say;
1  only  know  that  the  promise  of  quick  and  large  financial  gains  from
the  practice  of  drugless  healing,  no  matter  what  the  method  or  school,
is  likely  never  to  be  realized.  An  unkept  promise  always  re-acts  on  the
maker,  and  every  institution  of  similar  scope  must  share  in  the  blame.
Furthermore,  the  publication  of  this  promise  tends  to  attract  the  unsuc-
cessful and  the  unscrupulous,  instead  of  the  earnest,  capable  and  al-
truistic, among  the  young  people  of  the  community.  Cannot  a  way  be
found  to  make  our  health  schools  give  rock-bottom  facts,  in  preference
to  glittering  generalities,  when  soliciting  patients  or  students?

Exhibit  H.  At  last  we  have  a  shrewd  letter,  accompanied  by  litera-
ture of  description  and  persuasion  evidently  the  work  of  a  mail-order
expert.  But  instead  of  rejoicing,  I  am  led  to  mourn.  For  the  entire
proposition  of  this  "college"  is  bad,  and  the  skill  of  it  only  deepens  the
iniquity.  The  "college"  oflfers  to  teach  you  by  mail,  in  a  course  of  fifty
type-written  lessons,  with  "no  other  text-books  needed,"  how  to  become
a  physician,  merely  by  studying  at  home  in  your  few  hours  of  spare
time!  The  kind  philanthropists  at  the  head  of  this  college  not  only  make
you  a  full-fledged  doctor  in  your  own  home  for  the  small  sum  of  $25,  but
they  also  mention,  grandly  but  nonchalantly,  that  "you  might  as  well
own  a  beautiful  motor  car,  a  well-furnished  home  and  a  liberal  bank
account" — all  through  the  magic  process  of  handing  out  $25  for  a  set  of
"form"  lessons  in  a  secret  way  to  wiggle  the  spine  of  the  sick.  The  most
important  feature  of  the  course  is  the  elegant,  beautiful  and  ornate
diploma  which  rewards  you  for  completing  triumphantly  the  successful
perusal  of  these  typewritten  lessons. You  can  hang  this  brazen  docu-


Universal  Nalinopdlhic  Dircrlorij  and  lUnjcrs'  Guide  1  ^"

ment  in  a  gilt  frame  on  your  wall — and  nobody  would  know  you  aren't
a  doctor,  until  he  read  the  fine  type  on  the  certificate.  Nothing  is  said,
in  the  diploma,  of  the  fact  that  you  were  only  a  mail-order  student,  and
got  your  whole  professional  education  for  only  $25  cash,  or  $5  instal-
ments. Why  not,  therefore,  have  this  perfectly  good  diploma  and  be-
come at  once  a  highly-respected,  highly-paid  physician?

Would  not  such  an  immoral  proposal  make  the  blood  of  any  honest
man  boil  over?  We  talk  about  "malpractice"  among  old-school  doctors;
— here  is  a  drugless  mill  of  malpractice  that  grinds  out  false  diplomas
and  quack  healers  by  the  wholesale,  utterly  destroying  the  reputation
for  skill,  honesty  and  service  that  the  real  Nature  Cure  physicians  arc
trying  so  hard  to  build  up,  and  endangering  health  and  life  wherever
unprotected  by  that  same  "Medical  Trust"  that  we  slander  with  so  much
gusto!  We  have  no  right  to  open  our  mouths  against  the  doctors  and
their  follies  until  we  have  spent  our  last  breath  in  running  out  of  busi-
ness every  drugless  school  that  offers  to  graduate  drugless  physicians
by  a  mail  course  of  study.  When  we  are  as  anxious  to  destroy  quackery
in  our  own  field  as  we  are  to  expose  it  in  others,  we  shall  begin  to  find
that  the  law  is  for  us,  not  against  us.  The  law  is  too  lax,  it  should
impose  a  heavy  fine  on  every  such  commercialized  "school"  that  issues
a  diploma  for  healing,  and  should  bar  the  mails  to  such  frauds,  which
are  as  bad  as  hypothetical  gold-mines  and  other  swindling  schemes.

I  have  remaining  a  large  assortment  of  exhibits,  in  the  way  of  un-
scientific or  unethical  appeals  by  letter,  from  drugless  institutions.  But
1  haven't  the  heart  to  read  any  more  of  them.  They  are  a  tragedy  to  a
lover  of  Nature  and  believer  in  the  real  Nature  Cure.

I  would  only  suggest,  to  the  institution  or  individual  anxious  to  do
honest,  effective  and  remunerative  work,  the  wisdom  of  using  right
methods  in  conducting  correspondence.  Be  sure,  first,  that  every  state-
ment is  absolutely  true,  and  that  you  can  prove  it  by  facts  and  figures.
Understate  your  claims,  rather  than  overstate  them.  Give  as  many
references  as  you  can,  among  influential  citizens — these  are  much  better
than  "testimonials",  which  look  cheap,  and  impress  only  ignorant  people.
Omit  all  criticism  of  rival  institutions,  or  of  other  methods  and  systems.
Have  an  expert  formulate  your  letters  of  appeal;  then  try  them  out  in
small  lots,  100  or  so  at  a  time,  before  having  a  large  order  typed  or
printed.  Buy  a  standard  book  on  Advertising,  Salesmanship,  or  Business
English,  and  locate  for  yourself  the  mistakes  in  your  present  m.ethod  of
argument  by  letter.  Ask  your  friends  to  criticize  the  form  and  substance
of  your  correspondence.  Offer  a  prize  to  any  employee  who  will  suggest
a  way  of  getting  larger  returns  by  mail.  In  short,  give  as  much  atten-
tion to  the  manner,  style,  cost,  character  and  effect  of  your  business


178


(hiivrrsdl  Ndturopdlhic  Dirrclory  atid  Buijcrs Guide


correspondence  as  a  regular  business  concern  would  give.  You  arc  sell-
ing a  commodity — educational  service.  You  must  adopt  scientific
selling  methods,  while  retaining  your  professional  standards  and  pliilan-
thropic  ideals.  Good  work  depends  on  good  business,  and  a  good  letter
is  the  great  producer  of  good  business.  Make  it  honest,  brief,  personal,
convincing,  appealing,  sane,  true.  Then  watch  your  clientele  grow,  and
your  heart  expand  along  with  your  pocket-book!


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Biii/crs'  Guide  179


CHAPTER  XIV

MAKING  IT  PAY


This,  after  all,  is  the  vital  question.  Moreover,  it  is  the  unsolved
problem — financial  trouble  being  the  rule  among  practitioners  of  drug-
less  methods.

Now  there  is  no  spiritual  grace,  no  moral  virtue,  in  being  poor.
The  value  of  poverty  lies  in  the  rapidity  of  our  escape  from  it.  The
beggar  is  usually  a  moral  wreck,  and  poverty  the  outcome  of  ignorance,
laziness  or  folly.

I  have  seen  scores  of  lofty  projects  and  beautiful  endeavors  to  up-
lift humanity  go  to  ruin  for  lack  of  a  few  paltry  dollars  to  support  them.
In  fact,  the  great  need  of  spiritual  power  is  for  material  guidance.  A
sail  without  a  ship  is  no  more  helpless  than  a  dream  without  a  money
base. Your  dreams  are  as  mighty  as  your  dollars  are  many.

Furthermore,  it  is  a  professional  disgrace  to  handle  your  work  in
such  a  manner  that  it  does  not  pay.  The  first  function  of  a  business  or
profession  is  to  supply  a  real  human  need  in  a  way  to  satisfy  the  public.
Whoever  does  this  gains  for  himself  a  proper  and  just  financial  reward
from  the  public.  And  to  be  regularly  short  of  funds  means  to  be  chron-
ically inefficient.

Now  is  it  not  strange  that,  of  all  the  hundreds  of  medical  and  non-
medical institutions  in  America  promising  to  train  a  man  to  be  a  physi-
cian, not  one  teaches  him  how  to  succeed  financially?  What  is  the
matter  with  all  our  high  and  proud  professors  of  the  doctor-schools?
Have  they  rheumatism  of  the  brain,  or  paralysis  of  the  commonsense,
or  only  astigmatism  of  the  greed?  When  everybody  knows  that  the
probable  fate  of  the  young  doctor  is  to  starve  for  a  few  years,  why  in
the  name  of  common  decency  don't  the  schools  that  make  him  a  doctor
tell  him  how  to  keep  from  starving?  You  say  it  can't  be  done?  Oh  yes,
it  can  be  done. Anything  can  be  done  that  should  be  done.

I  have  received  numbers  of  gratifying  letters  from  physicians  who
are  reading  my  magazine  articles. There  is  on«  question  uppermost  in


180  Vnincrsdl  Maliiropafhic  Directory  and  Biiyrrs'  Guide


all  Huso  kllcMs:  "How  can  I  make  it  pay?"  And  in  every  case,  the
brother's  letter  itself  proves  to  an  efliciency  expert  why  the  apostles  of
driigless  i)ractice  fail  to  make  it  pay.

The  (leiiiand  among  physicians  seems  to  be  so  great  for  some  prac-
tical, individnal  suggestions  on  the  financial  side,  that  I  will  here  present
a  concrete  case,  showing  the  method  of  an  efficiency  doctor  in  diagnosing
the  sick  purse  of  a  health  doctor.

The  following  letter,  lately  received,  is  from  a  large  Ohio  town.  1
quote  in  full,  with  slight  modifications  in  orthography.

Mr.  E.  E.  Purinton,  c/o  Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath
New  York  City

Dear  Sir  and  Friend:

I  have  been  reading  your  papers  in  The  Naturopath,  and  am  very  much
interested  in  your  writings.  I  also  noticed  a  comment  in  one  of  the  dailies,
in  which  you  were  complimented  very  highly,  and  in  which  the  fact  was
brought  out  that  you  were  a  Licking  County  boy.  So  I  am  glad  to  introduce
myself  to  you  as  a  Licking  County  brother,  and  hope  some  day  to  have  the
pleasure  of  meeting  you  face  to  face.

I  am  heart  and  soul  for  the  naturopathic  movement  as  promulgated  by
Brother  Lust,  and  am  willing  to  do  all  I  can  to  push  the  national  movement.
You  know  in  union  there  is  strength. United  we  stand,  but  divided  we  fall.

I  am  a  naturopathic  physician.  I  include  osteopathy,  chiropractic,
neuro-magnetism,  and  everything  that  can  be  applied  in  a  rational  way  to
eliminate  the  ills  of  humanity.  I  have  been  practicing  for  about  seven
months.  Understand  my  business  as  to  how  to  give  treatments.  But  the
part  which  does  not  loom  up  right  is  the  money.  Not  that  my  patients  do
not  pay,  as  my  treatments  are  nearly  always  cash  at  the  end  of  the  treat-
ment. The  trouble  is  lack  of  patients,  as  they  are  few  and  far  between.
The  naturopathic  physician  does  not  seem  popular,  for  some  cause  or  other.

Before  I  took  up  this  practice  I  was  with  the  A — Company  in  this

city. Do  you  think  that  this  should  make  any  difference  as  to  establishing
myself  as  a  physician?

Now  what  I  wish  to  get  at  is  this.  How  to  place  myself  before  the
public  in  order  to  get  patients  and  make  my  practice  pay  financially,  so  thai
I  can  live  and  help  push  the  naturopathic  movement  along.

Is  there  any  one  who  puts  up  a  good  pamphlet  on  the  naturopathic
practice?  Or  do  you  do  this  kind  of  work  in  connection  with  your  writings?
I  Mease  let  me  know.

Yours  truly

Dr.

In  answering  your  most  welcome  letter,  I  will  address  you,  dear
brother,  as  Doctor  James  Brown  (because  that  is  not  your  name).

First,  let  me  thank  you  for  enclosing  a  return  stamp.  Many  good
naturopaths  write  me  and  forget  this  small  but  needful  courtesy.  Never
write  a  stranger  asking  for  reply,  without  enclosing  stamp  or  stamped,
self-addressed  envelope.


Universal  Natiiropalhic  Directorij  and  Buijers'  Guide  1^1

I  want  to  congratulate  you,  Doctor  James  Brown,  respecting  a  num-
ber of  things  wherein  you  excel  most  physicians.  You  are  without  per-
sonal pride,  you  realize  your  need  of  help  and  advice,  you  arc  willing  to
learn  from  some  one  outside  your  own  profession.  This  breadth  of  mind
and  beauty  of  spirit  is  rare  among  doctors.  But  you  may  have  to  guard
against  overuse  of  modesty,  and  cultivate  a  larger  self-esteem.  Assur-
ance even  to  the  point  of  pomposity,  goes  a  long  way  in  establishing  a
doctor's  reputation.

You  may  have  to  declare  to  yourself,  many  times  a  day,  that  Doctor
James  Brown  is  able  to  work  wonders,  attract  thousands  of  health-
seekers,  wake  up  the  whole  city  on  hygienic  matters,  lead  a  glorious
crusade  against  sickness,  poison  and  folly,  become  a  great  authority  on
health  of  mind  and  body.  The  fact  of  your  having  been  an  employee
and  taken  orders  from  a  "boss"  tends  to  diminish  the  sense  of  authority
and  supremacy  which  your  patients  will  expect  to  find  in  you.  So  you
should  try  to  develop  this.

The  fact  that  your  patients  like  the  treatments  becomes  a  real  asset,
but  not  the  most  important  one.  How  many  cases  have  you  cared?
What  percentage  have  you  failed  to  cure?  Do  you  know  why  your
methods  have  proved  inadequate,  wherever  the  improvement  has  been
slow  or  doubtful?  Have  you  a  card-file  system  in  operation,  enabling
you  to  keep  track  of  your  old  patients  and  get  in  touch  with  new  ones?

While  the  custom  of  receiving  cash  for  each  treatment  is  good
business,  and  you  were  right  in  establishing  the  custom,  it  tends,  how-
ever, to  make  your  patients  more  independent — less  attached  to  you  as
a  family  physician.  A  customer  at  a  grocery  store  who  keeps  there  a
standing  account  buys  most  of  her  food  there;  hence  the  modern  grocer
aims  at  the  telephone  trade  of  the  community,  which  holds  the  customer
with  fair  security.  The  same  principle  obtains,  in  the  realm  of  healing;
and  you  may  well  devote  some  thought  to  the  question  if  spot-cash  pay-
ments do  not  weaken  your  hold  in  the  position  of  family  doctor.  How
can  you  maintain  the  high  and  close  professional  relationship  of  your
calling  and  yet  be  paid  as  a  business  man — cash  on  delivery?

You  are  a  natural  psychologist,  a  point  greatly  in  your  favor.  You
open  your  letter  with  a  kind  and  gracious  mention  of  mj'  own  work;
and  I,  being  human,  read  on  with  much  avidity,  saying  to  myself:  "Here,
now,  is  a  good  friend!"  We  all  like  a  bit  of  praise  for  good  work  well
done.  So,  when  you  appreciate  my  work,  you  help  me  to  appreciate
yours.  The  psychology  of  human  appeal  is  one  of  the  most  valuable
studies  for  a  merchant,  editor,  minister,  doctor — anybody  and  everybody
engaged  in  the  sale  of  a  commodity — whether  it  be  shoes,  books,  treat-
ments, or  sermons. I  would  recommend  that  every  young  physician


182


Universal  Ndturopathic  Directory  and  Bui/ers'  Guide


take  a  personal  course  in  salesmanship,  if  he  can  spare  the  time  and
money;  or  a  course  in  advertising  and  general  publicity;  or  both  courses.
At  least,  the  library  of  the  doctor  should  include  a  half-dozen  of  the  best
books  on  these  subjects.  However,  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  wise,  do  not
leave  these  books  where  any  of  your  patients  could  behold  them; — if
your  patients  ever  suspected  you  of  being  a  business  man,  they  would
flee  in  a  panic  to  some  occult  flapdoodler  with  a  secret  potion  and  a
mj^sterious  look!

Now  let  us  take  a  few  concrete  points  and  disclose  a  few  manifest
reasons,  Doctor  James  Brown,  why  your  practice  does  not  pay.

First,  as  to  the  professional  card  you  enclose  in  your  letter.  Here
it  is:


Phone,

Main

62835

JAMES  E.
Naturopathic

BROWN
'  Physician

99  LOMBARD  ST.

Member

of  X.

Y. Z. A.

BLANKVILLE,

0.

Of  course,  the  telephone  number  is  fictitious,  and  there  isn't  any
Lombard  Street  in  Blankville  to  my  knowledge,  and  the  initials  of  the
association  to  which  you  belong  are  not  X.  Y.  Z.  But  the  form  of  your
card  is  reproduced,  and  the  impression  of  it  is  distinctly  bad,  in  several
ways.

The  card  is  printed — rather  cheaply.  It  should  be  engraved.  The
plate  for  engraving  will  cost  you  from  $7  to  $10;  but  after  it  is  in  your
possession,  the  cost  of  reprinting  future  cards  is  almost  nothing,  and  the
moral  influence  is  worth  much  more  than  the  price  of  the  plate.  Of
course  the  matter  of  engraving  should  be  postponed  until  you  are  sure
of  a  permanent  office  location,  as  the  plate  cannot  be  altered.

Your  card  should  be  of  the  best  quality  stock,  dull  finish.  A  glazed
professional  card  is  inappropriate  as  a  tinsel  sign  would  be  on  the  front
of  a  bank.  People  who  carry  a  golden  gleam  inside  never  wear  a  cheap
gloss  outside.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


183


The  card  should  state  your  daily  ofRce-hours,  to  remind  old  patients
when  you  are  always  there,  and  to  save  new  ones  the  trouble  of  writing
or  telephoning  you.

Abbreviations  are  undignified,  and  altogether  too  business-like  for
a  physician's  card.  You  should  write  out  the  word  "telephone",  the
word  "street",  and  the  word  "Ohio."

You  announce  your  membership  in  a  State  organization  of  drugless
physicians,  but  not  in  the  American  Naturopathic  Association.  The
latter,  being  a  national  body,  carries  the  impression  of  wider  influence.
If  you  have  not  joined  the  A.  N.  A.,  do  so,  and  put  its  name  first  on
your  card.

I  doubt  the  wisdom  of  using  the  words  "Naturopathic  Physician."
People  are  accustomed  to  seeing  the  names  of  doctors  with  a  degree
tacked  on.  You  say  you  are  a  graduate  of  an  osteopathic  school — then
write  "D.  O."  after  your  name.  Also  if  you  possess  a  naturopathic
diploma,  add  the  initials  "N.  D."  Osteopathy  is  more  widely  known
than  naturopathy  in  the  United  States — the  osteopaths  are  louder  and
shrewder  advertisers.  You  should  make  capital  out  of  this,  and  play
up  your  osteopathic  degree  to  all  possible  advantage.  I  may  be  a  heretic
in  thus  exalting  osteopathy,  when  naturopathy  is  so  much  broader  and
more  fundamental.  But  I  have  been  accused  several  thousand  times
of  heresy,  and  am  likely  to  be  accused  several  million  times  more.
Heresy  and  orthodoxy  are  good,  not  because  either  is  heresy  or  ortho-
doxy, but  because  either  is  efficiency — and  the  other  is  not.

When  your  card  is  revised  on  a  true  efficiency  basis,  3'ou  will  see
it  appear  something  like  this :


Office  Hours-


Telephone,  Main  62S35


JAMES  E.  BROWN,  D.  O.,  N.  D.


99  LOMBARD  STREET


Member  of

American  Naturopathic  Association

and  X.  Y.  Z.  Association


BLANKVILLE,  OHIO


1(SJ  l^nii'crsal  NdlnruijaLliic  Dirrciorii  (uid  lUu/cr.s'  (iuidr

Now  you  may  be  asking  "Why  go  to  all  this  fuss  over  a  little  thing
like  a  professional  card?"  I  assure  you  that, in  Efficiency  work,  there  is
no  such  thing  as  a  little  thing.  A  thing  is  either  right  or  wrong — and
being  right  or  wrong  is  the  biggest  thing  in  the  universe.  If  1  can  find,
on  a  little  thing  like  a  professional  card,  ten  things  absolutely  wrong,
how  many  hundreds  of  things  that  hurt  efticiency  would  I  find  through-
out your  whole  practice?

Your  stationery  is  bad — no  letterhead,  third-rate  paper,  and  the
enveloi)e  not  matcliing.  A  stranger  of  intelligence  and  refinement,  see-
ing this  letter,  would  go  at  once  to  another  doctor.

Furthermore,  you  have  misspelled  nine  common  words  in  a  short
business  communication.  You  wrote  difference  "diference,"  financially
"financhially,"  public  "publice,"  and  popular  "poupulair."  I  did  not
quote  the  misspelling,  because  it  would  have  made  you  ridiculous  at  the
start— and  you  are  too  earnest  and  honest  to  deserve  any  such  fate.  But
a  stranger,  seeing  this  letter,  would  smile  at  your  ignorance — and  no
man  who  did  that  would  ever  seek  your  professional  advice.  Your  bad
spelling  is  no  reason  for  discredit  or  discouragement — but  is  a  reason
for  either  improvement  or  concealment.  Don't  write  messages  until  you
have  learned  English;  hire  a  typist,  and  dictate  them;  or  submit  each
one  to  a  confidential  friend  who  can  spell,  and  have  them  approved
before  mailing.  You  also  mix  up  your  punctuation  marks  with  abandon
worthy  of  a  better  cause,  and  you  have  no  respect  whatever  for  capital
letters.

Now  the  most  famous  physical  culturist  in  the  world  cannot  write  a
grammatical  letter.  Your  chance  is  equal  to  the  chance  he  made  out  of
nothing.  But  he  never  trusts  himself  on  paper — he  is  too  clever  to  let
himself  be  caught  in  a  display  of  ignorance.

We  come  to  a  more  vital  point^that  of  your  choice  of  location.  It
is  my  opinion  that  you  will  never  succeed  in  a  big  way,  till  you  move
to  a  strange  neighborhood.  People  who  knew  you — or  thought  they  did
— as  a  fellow  with  a  mere  job  in  a  commercial  house,  will  never  be
likely  to  seek  you  as  their  physician.  Personal  acquaintance  is  life  to
a  trade  but  death  to  a  profession.  If  you  were  selling  hats,  and  your
Aunt  Jemima  knew  the  second  cousin  of  Jack  Black's  mother.  Jack
Black  would  be  disposed  to  buy  a  hat  of  you.  But  if  you  are  selling
treatments,  you  can't  afford  to  have  an  Aunt  Jemima— whoever  knows
her  will  distrust  you.  It  has  taken  me  fifteen  years  to  gain  the  con-
fidence of  old  companions  in  my  home  town,  after  they  deserted  me  for
showing  up  tlie  crimes  and  follies  of  drugstores,  colleges,  churches  and
other  mossgrown  institutions.  I  didn't  need  their  faith — all  I  needed
was  my  own. But  if  I  had  been  among  them,  depending  for  my  bread


Universal  Naiiiropalhir  Dirrctonj  and  liuijcrs'  Guide  1^')

on  their  money-support,  I  should  have  survived  just  as  long  as  a  man
can  go  without  food.

My  home  town  was  only  a  few  miles  from  the  place  where
you  live.  Move,  brother,  move — the  natives  aren't  ready  for  you.  At
least,  locate  your  office  in  a  section  of  the  city  where  you  are  unknown.
The  population  of  your  city  is  large  enough  for  this,  and  your  real
friends  among  your  old  patients  will  follow  you  to  a  new  location.

Before  going  further,  I  want  to  say  that  the  suggestions  in  this
chapter  are  based  on  experience — not  theory.  I  have  taken  several
courses  in  drugless  therapeutics,  have  had  charge  of  the  diet  and  exer-
cise of  the  patients  of  a  sanitarium,  have  been  manager  of  a  health
home,  have  given  hygienic  advice  by  mail,  have  lectured  and  taught  on
health  subjects  in  various  institutions,  and  have  organized  and  acted
as  president  of  the  largest  Health  and  Efficiency  club  ever  established
in  New  York  City.  Moreover,  I  have  cured  myself  completely  of  a  dozen
chronic  ailments — I  have  met  the  supreme  challenge  of  a  skeptical
world :  "Physician,  heal  thyself!"  So  I  greet  you  not  as  a  mere  efficiency
counsel,  but  first  as  one  who  has  suffered,  and  then  as  one  who  has
healed  sufferers.

In  an  open  letter  such  as  this,  one  cannot  give  all  the  personal
details  of  building  up  a  lucrative  practice;  first,  because  the  special
conditions  of  your  locality  are  unknown;  second,  because  most  of  the
information  is  and  always  must  be  confidential — I  could  no  more  pub-
lish it  than  a  lawyer  could  publish  the  affairs  of  his  client.  But  there
are  a  few  general  facts  and  possibilities,  to  which  I  would  call  your
attention.

You  say  your  patients  are  "few  and  far  between."  Why?  If  your
present  students  and  patients  are  being  helped,  cured,  satisfied — should
they  not  be  spreading  your  fame  abroad,  telling  their  friends  about  you,
serving  daily  as  living  witnesses?  Have  you  thought  of  any  way  to
form  an  endless  chain  of  influence  by  means  of  the  effort  of  those  who
believe  in  you?  The  Great  Physician  needed  no  "advertising"  but  the
marvels  of  sympathetic  intuition  and  unhoped-for  cure  which  were
evident  to  all. How  can  your  patients  bring  you  other  patients?

The  international  Club  of  which  I  have  been  president  was  formed
on  such  a  plan  of  personal  enthusiasm;  a  business  man  was  so  much
interested  he  paid  for  memberships  to  be  sent  25  employees  and  asso-
ciates, a  school-girl  influenced  80  of  her  friends  to  join,  a  pastor  founded
a  branch  in  his  church,  a  society  woman  paid  for  $100  worth  of  mem-
berships every  year  and  asked  the  Club  to  give  them  to  worthy  people
who  could  not  afl'ord  the  regular  fee. Put  your  patients  to  work  for


186  Uninersal  Xntnropathic  Directory  and  Bni/rrs'  Guide

you. How? Ask  your  own  mind  and  heart — you  need  to  perform  a  lot
of  original  thinking,  else  you  would  not  have  wanted  me  to  do  it  for  you.

There  are  many  ways  in  whicli  the  daily  and  weekly  press  of  your
city  and  county  can  he  made  to  advance  your  cause.  All  such  puhlicity
must,  however,  be  indirect  and  void  of  notoriety-seeking.  The  president
of  the  corporation  owning  the  leading  newspaper  in  your  locality  is  a
personal  friend  of  mine;  also,  one  of  my  partners  here  in  New  York
is  president  of  a  newspaper  syndicate  with  connections  throughout  the
United  States.  I  can  thus  give  you  personal  introductions  of  peculiar
value;  hut  I  will  not  do  this  until  you  are  qualified  to  make  good  use  of
them.  At  present,  you  would  only  bungle  things,  and  hurt  my  reputa-
tion with  my  friends.

One  of  your  first  moves  is  to  organize  a  local  branch  of  the  American
Naturopathic  Association  or  of  some  other  hygienic  society,  and  become
an  officer  of  this.  You  need  both  fame  and  professional  standing — a
combination  secured  by  holding  such  an  office.  The  clubs,  lodges  and
fraternities  of  the  large  cities  are  overrun  with  merchants,  doctors,
lawyers,  bootblacks  and  undertakers  who  join  for  the  sole  purpose  of
getting  business. A  bad  motive — but  a  shrewd  method.

To  interest  and  educate  your  neighbors,  you  need  two  kinds  of
literature;  a  general  pamphlet  or  series  of  pamphlets,  with  a  library  of
books  and  magazines,  on  the  principles  and  methods  of  Nature  Cure;
and  a  leaflet  or  group  of  leaflets  expressing  your  own  personal  views  on
the  best  waj^s  of  regaining  and  preserving  health.  I  understand  from
Dr.  Benedict  Lust  that  the  American  Naturopathic  Association  plans  to
issue  a  series  of  popular,  standard  publications,  for  the  use  of  members
in  relation  to  the  public.  If  you  are  a  member  of  the  A.  N.  A.,  you  will
doubtless  be  notified  when  these  publications  are  ready  for  distribution.
Also,  a  method  is  being  considered,  whereby  the  personal  views  and
experiences  of  members  may  be  edited,  for  the  use  of  present  and  pos-
sible clients.

To  make  health  reform  profitable,  you  must  first  educate  the  people
into  knowing  the  truth  about  health,  and  w^anting  it,  and  paying  for
it  as  for  a  daily  necessity.  Before  this,  however,  you  must  educate
5'ourself  into  realizing,  seeking,  learning  and  applying  the  straight  busi-
ness principles  underlying  all  good  professional  work;  so  here,  as  al-
ways and everywhere, the fundamental problem is self-education.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctorij  and  Buyers'  (iuide  1^7


CHAPTER  XV

THE  VALUE  OF  TOLERANCE


Brethren,  I  have  seen  a  great  light,  in  the  presence  of  which  I  do
confess,  here  and  now,  the  follies  of  my  youthful  zeal  in  striving  to
reform  the  world,

A  reformer  is  an  egotist  varnished  with  altruism.  When  I  had
stood  long  enough  in  the  light  of  truth,  my  veneer  of  altruism  melted
off  in  spots,  leaving  my  constitution  of  egotism  bare  to  the  gaze.
Whereupon,  being  surprised  and  ashamed,  I  retreated  for  to  obtain  a
more  durable  psychic  apparel.

Only  an  egotist  can  be  a  reformer.  In  the  very  nature  of  things,  he
must  believe  his  way  the  only  right  way;  and  must  auto-hypnotize  him-
self into  a  frenzy  of  such  belief,  in  order  to  spill  it  around  broadcast
and  inoculate  people  otherwise  sane.  I  have  known  hundreds  of  re-
formers. Almost  without  exception  they  have  been  fanatics.  Whether
they  hoped  to  save  the  world  by  Christian  Science,  New  Thought,
Physical  Culture,  Vegetarianism,  Eugenics,  Osteopathy,  Chiropractic,
Socialism,  Baptism,  or  Buddhism,  each  apostle  was  firmly  convinced
that  he  alone  had  the  truth,  and  was  competent  to  apply  it.

Now  egotism  is  the  root  of  intolerance.  And  after  devoting  fifteen
years  to  matters  bearing  on  efficiency  in  drugless  healing,  I  am  per-
suaded that  intolerance  is  the  greatest  hindrance  to  advancement,  both
inside  the  profession  and  among  the  public  at  large.  This  intolerance
is  like  a  wild,  rank,  growth  of  poison  ivy  that  has  never  been  uprooted,
and  has  spread  over  all  the  available  ground  where  we  invite  the  people
to  gather  and  be  healed.  Of  course  they  won't  gather,  and  of  course
they  can't  be  healed.

We  are  opposed  to  liquors  and  tobacco,  food  adulterants,  hectic
novels,  and  other  poisons  assailing  the  human  body  or  mind.  But  do
we  realize  that  denunciation  is  a  poison,  a  virulent  poison,  and  that
most  of  us  have  been  guilty  of  scattering  it  in  all  directions,  with  no
regard  whatever  for  the  laws  of  common  decency? I  refer  especially


ISS  I'liiurrsdl  Ndluropdlhic  Director ij  und  liiii/rrs'  (iuidr

to  dcnuneialion  of  druggists,  doctors,  surgeons,  and  other  exponents
of  legalized  medicine;  and  I  regard  this  habit  of  such  deadly  force  in
ruining  our  best  work  that  I  would  analyze  it  in  full  detail.

Permit  here  a  word  of  reminiscence  and  confession.  I  used  to  sit
up  nights,  thinking  out  bad  names  to  call  the  doctors.  I  was  so  suc-
cessful in  this  that  I  was  made  the  oflicial  bad-name-callcr  of  the  natu-
ropathic movement.  (It  did  not  need  an  official  of  this  kind,  as  nearly
everybody  in  it  was  unofficially  discharging  the  duties  of  the  position.)
I  have  probably  wasted  a  year  of  my  life,  and  at  least  100,000  pounds
of  nervous  energy,  in  denouncing  every  institution  and  individual  that
had  failed  to  become  glued  and  spiked  to  the  naturist  platform.  Hun-
dreds of  Nature  Cure  apostles  are,  to  this  day,  continuing  such  a  crazy
performance;  the  lunacy  of  which  I  hope  to  demonstrate,  having  been
forced  to  realize  it  by  the  stern  hand  of  Fate,.

I  used  to  consider  that  doctors  knew  nothing  about  health,  and
naturists  knew  everything;  that  drugs  were  wholly  superfluous  and
injurious;  that  drugstores  should  be  banished  along  with  saloons;  that
hospitals  were  public  nuisances;  that  surgeons  should  be  classed  with
butchers;  that  an  invalid's  "symptoms"  meant  nothing  and  should
never  be  taken;  that  every  patient  should  be  able  to  cure  himself;  and
that  all  external  aids  to  recovery  were  unnatural  and  immoral.  This
weird  belief  had  so  much  truth  and  error  commingled  that  a  mental
earthquake  was  needed,  to  shake  the  true  from  the  false.  The  earth-
quake arrived,  in  due  time.

I  was  forced  to  lie  a  year  in  bed,  with  nervous  exhaustion  so  extreme
that  a  doctor  was  required  in  close  call;  to  pass  through  an  operation
for  appendicitis,  and  thus  depend  wholly  on  the  skill  and  honor  of  a
surgeon;  to  undergo  three  hospital  ordeals,  and  thereby  recognize
hospitals  as  places  of  mercy;  and  to  experience  a  few  other  such  trifling
lessons  in  the  proper  way  of  regarding  the  medical  system.  Three  times
I  was  on  the  verge  of  death;  and  in  each  crisis  the  hand  of  a  doctor  held
the  frail  cord  of  life  so  wisely  and  firmly  that  I  was  brought  back  to  this
land  of  weal  and  woe,  having  gained  a  new  perspective  as  my  soul  was
drifting  into  space.  When  a  few  members  of  a  certain  profession  have
saved  your  life,  you  can  no  longer  damn  the  profession  as  a  whole;  and
my  first  lesson  in  tolerance  was  thus  acquired.  Rather  costly,  but  abso-
lutely necessary.

Another  experience,  though  quite  dissimilar,  pointed  in  the  same
direction.  I  look  up  Klliciency  studies  in  connection  with  my  work,  and
was  led  to  consider  the  enormous  waste  of  time  and  strength  involved  in
futile  criticism  of  the  doctors  by  drugless  healers,  writers  and  reformers.


Universal  NaliiropdUiir  Dircctorij  (ind  linijrrs'  Guide  189


Such  condemnation  has  an  edcct  both  paralyzing  on  the  public  and  dis-
integrating on  the  Nature  Cure  movement.  It  is  bad  health,  bad  busi-
ness, bad  psychology,  bad  ethics,  bad  finance.  The  economic  folly  of
denouncing  rivals  has  been  so  clearly  shown  by  business  psychologists
and  efficiency  engineers  that  even  the  commercial  world  is  alive  to  the
fact; — and  surely,  of  all  people,  the  leaders  in  educational  health  reform
should  observe  this  principle.

Before  writing  this  chapter,  I  went  further.  I  obtained  interviews
with  a  number  of  men  who  have  won  great  success  in  various  branches
of  therapeutics;  the  results  of  which  I  would  here  chronicle.

One  of  the  early  students  of  Kneipp  believes  that  a  fundamental
reason  why  the  Nature  Cure  in  Germany  has  progressed  so  much  faster
than  in  America  is  because  the  naturopaths  of  Germany  have  paid  little
attention  to  opposition,  have  wasted  no  time  in  useless  antagonism,  but
have  gone  out  as  a  whole  and  won  the  common  people  by  doing  great
works  among  them.

A  man  at  the  head  of  the  medical  gymnastic  department  of  the  most
famous  health  resort  of  its  kind  in  America  is  a  graduate  of  three
schools  of  physiological  therapeutics.  He  surpassed  our  friend  the
Kneippist  in  deploring  the  fact  of  hostility  between  doctors  and  the
leaders  of  drugless  schools.  He  declared  that,  not  only  should  there  be
no  enmity,  but  there  should  be  fraternity  and  affiliation,  each  depart-
ment or  branch  of  the  Nature  Cure  being  legalized  separately  and  placed
under  the  jurisdiction  of  a  board  of  examiners,  the  majority  of  which
should  be  doctors !  This  mechano-therapist  has  built  up  a  large  practice
through  carrying  out  instructions  of  old-school  doctors  on  patients
whom  the  doctors  sent  him.  He  holds  that,  instead  of  trying  to  be  full-
fledged  healers,  which  they  are  not,  the  graduates  in  osteopathy,  chiro-
practic, or  other  manipulative  sciences,  should  place  themselves  under
the  auspices  of  doctors,  as  nurses  do,  and  thus  add  to  their  prestige  by
recognizing  their  limitations!

The  outrageous  modesty  of  this  drugless  healer  so  flabbergasted
me  that  I  was  on  the  point  of  fainting  dead  away,  and  hurried  out  to  get
the  air,  thus  losing  the  rest  of  his  unique  remarks.

An  old-school  doctor  next  joined  the  symposium.  When  I  asked
him  why  he  was  opposed  to  drugless  methods,  as  I  thought  he  was,  he
answered  by  showing  me  a  set  of  appliances  for  Nature  Cure  treatments,
in  his  own  office,  of  a  kind  that  1  had  never  seen  in  regular  drugless
institutions !  He  went  on  to  explain  that  the  best  physicians  understood
the  principles  of  Kneipp,  Ling,  Lahmann,  Rikli,  Just,  and  the  other


190  Cniifrrsdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujcrs Guide

naturist  pioneers,  and  that  he  himself  used  hydrotherapy,  vibration,
therniotherapy,  suggestion,  and  other  non-medical  systems  in  his  regular
practice.  He  then  made  two  statements,  both  of  which  I  deem  sig-
nificant; first,  that  naturopaths  antagonize  doctors  because  naturopaths
lack  the  education  and  equipment  of  doctors,  and  are  therefore  angered
by  their  own  inability;  second,  that  doctors  antagonize  naturopaths  be-
cause naturopaths  are  allowed  to  buy  a  diploma  and  engage  in  healing
without  the  proper  knowledge  of  anatomy,  physiology,  biology,  histol-
ogy, chemistry,  neurology,  clinical  experiment,  comparative  research,
and  other  vital  subjects  taught  in  medical  schools.  This  doctor  held
that  the  fight  is  not  between  drug  doctors  and  anti-drug  healers,  but
between  the  physiological  knowledge  of  doctors  and  the  physiological
ignorance  of  healers.

By  this  time  I  was  getting  discouraged.  Everybody  agreed  with  me,
and  that  state  of  things  is  fatiguing  and  annoying.  So  I  said  to  myself:
"I  will  find  a  great  surgeon,  and  he  of  all  men  will  surely  start  a  battle
of  words,  to  relieve  this  dullness  of  unanimity."  But  I  was  doomed  to
worse  disappointment — I  came  to  love  the  surgeon!  This  man  is  famous
throughout  the  United  States.  He  has  been  president  of  one  of  the  na-
tional medical  associations,  has  held  high  offices  in  various  colleges  and
hospitals,  and  not  infrequently  takes  in  $500  a  day  from  operations  and
consultations.

He  was  a  revelation  to  me,  and  a  half-hour's  talk  with  him  proved
what  a  childish  ignoramus  I  had  been,  all  those  years  when  I  was  con-
demning surgeons  without  qualification  or  discrimination.  The  face  of
this  surgeon  shone  with  the  Christ-spirit.  He  was  primarily  a  mystic.
He  told  me,  quite  frankly  and  simply,  that  he  had  become  a  doctor,
rather  than  a  teacher  or  a  minister,  because  he  believed  that  the  quick-
est way  to  reach  men's  minds  and  hearts  was  through  service  to  their
bodies.  He  gave  me  a  number  of  instances,  to  show  the  real  aim  and
work  of  his  life.  One  was  this.  A  fine  young  man  had  just  lost  his  wife,
a  lovely  girl  whom  he  had  married  but  a  few  months  before,  and  to
whom  he  was  devoted.  Her  death  came  in  a  most  terrible  and  painful
manner.  The  young  husband's  heart  was  broken,  there  was  nothing
now  to  live  for.  The  surgeon  left,  but  he  could  not  feel  that  his  work
was  done.  He  took  the  sorrow  of  the  young  man  to  the  Great  Physician;
and  out  of  the  silence  came  a  clear  message,  a  beautiful  poem  of  comfort
and  inspiration.  The  surgeon  wrote  it  down,  and  sent  it  to  the  man
bereaved.  A  letter  of  gratitude  showed  how  the  youth  was  bravely
shouldering  the  burdens  of  life  again — and  the  poem  had  given  him  the
strength.  There  were  tears  in  the  eyes  of  the  surgeon,  as  he  told  me.  I
said  to  myself,  "This  is  no  surgeon,  this  is  a  messenger  of  God !"


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Bnijrrs'  Guide  1^>1


When  the  interview  was  over,  he  gave  me  some  of  his  publications.
Imagine  my  surprise  to  find,  in  one  of  his  contributions  to  a  medical
journal,  sentence  after  sentence  of  pure  Nature  Cure  doctrine!  He  ad-
vised against  the  use  of  drugs  and  operations  if  natural  methods  would
avail;  he  cautioned  doctors  against  the  mistakes  of  observation,  deduc-
tion and  prescription  which  their  materialistic  training  tended  to  foster;
he  emphasized  the  duty  of  the  physician  to  be  a  teacher  more  than  a
doctor;  he  urged  the  raising  of  therapeutic  standards  of  ethics  and  of
efficiency,  both  inside  and  outside  the  medical  schools.  I  should  have
thought  1  was  reading  a  Nature  Cure  magazine!

I  discovered,  moreover,  that  the  surgeon  lived  what  he  preached.
Only  a  few  days  before,  he  had  advised  against  an  operation  which
would  have  meant  to  him  a  fee  of  $200,  an  attendant  told  me  at  the
hospital  where  the  surgeon  officiated;  moreover,  he  never  advised  an
operation  unless  it  was  the  last  and  only  means  of  cure.  And  he  cut  his
fees  in  half,  when  the  patient  was  needy  and  worthy;  giving  all  the  time
desired,  in  which  to  pay.

*  *  *

These  are  but  a  few  experiences  out  of  many,  from  which  I  can  say
devoutly.  Praise  the  Lord,  I  have  had  a  change  of  heart.  I  have  learned
that  some  doctors  are  better  men,  apparently,  than  the  majority  of  drug-
less  practitioners;  and  that  many  doctors  employ  rational  methods  to
the  extent  of  their  knowledge  and  ability.  The  mistakes  of  teachers  and
ministers  are  as  prevalent  as  those  of  doctors;  the  diff"erence  is  that
those  of  doctors  are  more  easily  discerned.  A  thinking  man  hasn't
much  use  for  the  kind  of  education  taught  in  most  of  our  schools,  or  the
kind  of  religion  preached  and  practised  in  most  of  our  churches.  But
the  system  is  to  blame — not  the  exponent  of  the  system;  and  for  the
system  the  people  as  a  whole  are  responsible.  A  crusade  against
preachers  would  be  just  as  logical  as  a  crusade  against  doctors;  the
place  to  start  the  reform  is  in  the  medical  or  theological  school,  where
the  wrong  ideas  are  first  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the  young.

As  a  student  of  personal  efficiency,  I  would  urge  upon  all  prac-
titioners, teachers  and  friends  of  the  Nature  Cure  that  everj^  word  of
condemnation  and  hostility,  respecting  old-school  doctors,  be  imme-
diately and  forever  banished,  from  our  health  magazines,  public  meet-
ings, private  conversations,^  and  inmost  thoughts.  At  least  a  score  of
sound  reasons  underlie  this  recommendation.  Let  us  consider  five,  in
our  limited  space.

1.  Wholesale  denunciation  of  the  doctors  is  unfair,  unprofessional
and  unchristian. It  is  unfair,  because  the  best  doctors  are  as  good  men


192  Uninrrsal  Naluropctthic  Dirrctory  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide

as  we  arc,  and  better  practitioners — since  they  know  Nature  Cure  and  a
great  deal  besides.  It  is  unprofessional  because  an  unwritten  law  of
professional  courtesy  forbids  any  member  of  a  humanitarian  class —
whether  theology,  pedagogy',  medicine,  or  a  similar  calling,  from  casting
mud  on  the  reputation  of  any  other  member.  It  is  unchristian  because
we  resent  vigorously  the  sweeping  criticism  of  Nature  Cure  believers
that  ignorant  people  often  express,  and  we  have  no  right  to  inflict  what
we  refuse  to  accept.

2,  Antagonism  toward  the  doctors  keeps  the  fires  of  hate  burning,
and  the  antagonizers  in  everlasting  hot  water.  I  suppose  that  hardly
one  doctor  in  fifty,  the  country  over,  has  ever  taken  active  part  in
jealous  persecution  of  drugless  healers;  but  I  should  judge  that  35  or
40  in  every  fifty  Nature  Cure  specialists  have  hurled  vitriolic,  death-
dealing  language  at  medical  men.  The  only  reason  why  naturists  don't
imprison  druggists  is  because  they  haven't  the  power.  We  are  as  bad  as
our  foes  (?) — and  weak  besides.  I  have  heard  physicians  of  high
repute  say  that  they  would  identify  themselves  with  Nature  Cure
openly,  but  for  the  anarchism  and  unreason  displayed  by  so  many  of
our  anti-drug  fanatics.  Why  keep  on  stirring  the  anger-pot,  when  all
we  do  is  burn  ourselves?

3,  Rancor  showered  broadcast  prevents  remedial  legislation.
Medicine  is  established,  Nature  Cure  is  not.  Every  word  spoken  or
written  against  the  medical  system  only  calls  attention  to  the  newness
and  untriedness  of  non-medical  systems.  Legislators  are  timid,  and  on
seeing  the  established  order  attacked,  they  shy  off.  They  are  hired  by
the  people,  and  they  know  they  must  cater  to  their  master  or  lose  their
job.  Hence  the  folly  of  increasing  hostility,  so  long  as  we  are  out-
numbered, five  to  one.

4,  Distrust  and  dissension  of  any  sort  in  the  minds  of  the  sick
will  retard  cure  and  drive  patients  away.  As  psychologists,  we  know
that  negative  thought  is  depressing,  chilling,  paralyzing.  But  as  re-
formers, we  forget  what  we  know  as  psychologists,  and  vent  our  wrath
upon  drugs,  drug-users  and  drug-dispensers,  right  in  the  presence  of
the  patients  and  students  whom  we  are  trying  to  heal,  teach  and
empower.  I  have  seen  this  happen,  scores  of  times,  in  Nature  Cure
sanitaria.  The  doctors  are  wiser.  They  do  not  argue,  explain  or  ex-
silent  superiority  fills  the  mind  of  the  patient  with  faith,  while  his
mouth  is  being  filled  with  medicine.  The  Nature  Cure  physician,  not
filling  the  sufferer's  mouth,  must  fill  his  mind  twice  as  full; — which  is  a
total  impossibility  while  diatribes  on  doctors  fill  the  air. The  invalid


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  19''

wants  healing,  not  proselyting.  When  you  hear  a  man  in  love,  or  in
business,  or  in  any  other  field  of  competition,  say  bad  things  about  a
rival,  you  instinctively  doubt  the  sincerity  or  ability  of  the  man  who
does  the  calumniating.  So  it  is  in  the  field  of  health  reform.  Bitterness
in  the  mouth  means  emptiness  in  the  purse.  An  occasional  joke  at  the
expense  of  doctors  is  no  crime,  but  the  spirit  must  be  friendly  and  fair.
5.  Every  particle  of  time  and  energy  lost  in  unavailing  censure  is
an  economic  waste,  which  can  never  be  repaired.  A  human  being  pro-
duces a  certain  maximum  of  energy  each  day;  this  may  vary  from  a
few  hundreds  of  pounds  in  a  chronic  invalid,  to  many  thousands  in  the
average  robust  man.  I  should  guess  that  millions  of  pounds  of  nerve
force  are  deliberately  squandered  every  year,  by  drugless  physicians,
who  would  rather  run  down  the  doctors  than  build  up  their  own  prac-
tice. Every  outburst  of  hostile  criticism  benumbs  the  solar  plexus,
poisons  the  secretions  of  the  body,  exhausts  the  brain,  disintegrates  the
nerve-cells,  blurs  the  mental  and  moral  vision,  clogs  the  entire  human
machine,  A  friend  of  mine  engaged  in  Physical  Culture  propaganda
resolved  some  years  ago  to  put  a  stop  to  the  criticism-habit,  especially
concerning  drugs  and  doctors,  and  to  spend  all  his  time  and  strength  in
positive,  constructive  work.  He  earns  now  as  much  in  a  day  as  he  used
to  make  in  a  week,  and  his  influence  for  good  is  ten  times  as  great  as
before.  Would  it  not  pay  every  leader  in  rational  therapeutics  to  ex-
periment along  the  same  line?


The  efficiency  test  for  every  act,  word  and  thought  in  our  lives  is
simply  this:  "What  good  will  it  do?"  Judging  by  straight  efficiency
standards,  I  believe  that  four-fifths  of  the  criticisms  leveled  at  drugs,
doctors  and  surgeons  by  well-meaning  but  ill-controlled  naturists  are
not  only  ineffective  and  wasteful,  but  are  destructive  and  diabolical.
They  proceed  not  from  a  heavenly  desire  to  uplift,  but  from  a  hoydenish
itch  to  uproot.  In  the  plan  of  Mother  Nature,  all  true  physicians  are
brothers.  If  some  have  wandered  from  the  purpose  and  intent  of  Na-
ture, we  must  win  them  back  not  by  ejection  or  ejaculation,  but  by
reason,  skill,  honor  and  affection.  According  as  we  do  this,  our  work
will  prosper,  our  friends  will  multiply,  and  our  self-respect  will  grow.


194  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide

AN  OPEN  LETTER  FROM  RENEDICT  LUST  AND  A  REPLY  THERETO

Mr.  Edward  Earle  Purinton

Woolworth  Rldg.,  New  York  City

Dear  Mr.  Purinton:

In  reading  the  proofs  of  the  latest  chapter,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that
same  deserves  a  rectification  from  the  publisher.  What  you  say  about  medicine
and  Nature  Cure,  may  fit  in  with  your  conception  of  things,  but  not  with  mine.

In  the  first  place,  when  you  were  sick,  you  did  not  have  the  Nature  Cure
facilities,  you  did  not  have  a  Nature  Cure  doctor  or  a  Nature  Cure  institution  to
treat  you.  Your  condition  was  such  that  you  considered  it  best  under  the  circum-
stances to  go  to  a  hospital  under  a  medical  doctor.  On  this  point  I  cannot  agree
with  you.  Nature  Cure  is  better  than  medicine  in  all  cases  and  in  every  condition.
I  have  had  an  experience  in  treating  sick  people  for  over  20  years,  and  I  know
what  I  am  talking  about.  The  Nature  Cure  is  applicable  in  more  than  a  thousand
ways.  You  have  not  yet  the  inside  consciousness  and  are  not  familiar  with  the
therapeutic  possibilities  of  drugless  methods,  therefore  you  are  no  judge  to  give
a  final  comparison  of  the  two  systems.  Naturopathic  and  Medical.

You  also  accuse  the  drugless  doctor  of  lack  of  intelligence  and  knowledge.
You  have  not  met  all  the  drugless  doctors,  and  you  seem  to  form  your  opinion
from  those  you  have  seen  around  New  York.  This  is  not  sufficient.  The  fact  is
that  drugless  physicians  are  of  a  higher  intelligence  than  medical  doctors,  a  good
many  have  studied  medicine  and  got  disgusted  with  it  and  dropped  out,  because
their  intelligence  told  them  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong  between  the  truth
and  the  untruth,  and  so  they  turned  away  from  the  medical  school.

At  several  conventions,  banquets  and  meetings  recently,  regular  medical
doctors  were  present,  amongst  them  Naturopaths,  and  every  one  of  these  doctors
spoke  about  how  long  they  were  deceived  and  how  long  they  were  rooted  in  the
system  of  medicine,  and  that  they  now  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  all
wrong,  that  the  Nature  Cure  is  better  in  all  cases  and  all  conditions.

A  Naturopath,  very  often  a  layman,  has  shown  high  intuitive  understanding
and  reasoning  power  in  adopting  drugless  methods  instead  of  medicine  on  account
of  the  advantages  of  Nature  Cure.

Let  me  say  also  that  if  you  had  lived  up  to  the  Nature  Cure  principles,  you
would  not  have  had  so  unnatural  a  trouble  as  appendicitis,  and  your  statement
about  your  hospital  experience  and  surgical  operation  will  discredit  you  as  a
Nature  Cure  writer.  People  always  look  for  perfect  health  and  strength  in  a
writer  on  hygiene  and  therapeutics,  and  I  am  sorry  you  exposed  yourself  to  the
charge  of  weakness,  by  referring  to  your  time  in  a  hospital.

I  can  say  conclusively  that  most  people  think  you  are  a  very  good  writer,  but
it  is  to  be  regretted  that  you  are  not  a  Naturopath.  Dr.  Carl  Schultz,  Dr.  Lindlahr,
Dr.  Strueh,  and  others  have  expressed  themselve?  in  recent  letters  to  me  that  in
your  efficiency  articles  you  are  not  bringing  out  strongly  enough  the  Naturopathic
Physician's  superior  methods,  intuitive  powers,  unselfishness  and  love  for  the
sick. Tell  me  one  doctor  who  does  what  a  Naturopath  does.

Sincerely  yours,

B.  LUST


Universal  NaluroiHiUiir  Dircclovij  and  Biii/rrs'  Gnidr  1^5


Dr.  Benedict  Lust

110  East  41st  Street
New  York  City

Dear  Doctor  Lust:

I  certainly  have  read  your  letter  with  pleasure.  I  always  enjoy  being  knocked
over  the  head,  by  a  man  as  sincere  as  you  are.  The  kindest  thing  one  can  do  to  a
fellow's  brain  is  to  hit  it  with  a  hammer  encased  in  a  velvet  courtesy.

You  are  as  right  from  your  point  of  view  as  I  am  from  mine.  Which  point,
if  either,  is  absolutely  correct,  will  not  be  known  for  a  hundred  years,  until  both
medicine  and  Naturopathy  have  progressed  far  enough  to  warrant  a  full  com-
parison of  their  respective  potencies  and  limitations.  I  believe  in  drugless
methods  as  intensely  and  thoroughly  as  you  do,  but  I  claim  that  the  medical
system  has  points  of  superiority  in  a  comparatively  few  cases  of  extreme  disease;
and  that  the  present  wild  antagonism  of  doctors  by  naturists  represents  not
efficiency  but  inefficiency,  first,  last  and  all  the  time.

Whether  I  am  a  good  writer  or  not  has  no  bearing  on  the  matter  at  issue.  All
that  counts  is  whether  or  not  I  speak  the  truth.  If  I  do,  every  naturopath  should
take  it,  hurt  or  no  hurt.  If  I  do  not,  every  naturopath  should  personally  and
publicly  challenge  my  position,  which  I  will  acknowledge  to  be  false  when  you  or
anybody  else  proves  it  is  false.  Considerable  time  has  passed  since  I  offered  in
your  magazine  to  debate  any  point  in  question  with  your  readers,  and  no  debater
has  appeared.  Hence  I  withdraw  the  offer,  having  more  important  work  to  do,  and
having  shown  the  willingness  to  arrive  at  truth  by  any  road,  even  that  running
counter  to  mine.

It  may  be  an  error  to  judge  the  Nature  Cure  by  the  majority  of  practitioners
whom  I  have  personally  known.  Certainly  it  is  a  mistake  to  limit  the  wonderful
and  almost  boundless  possibilities  of  drugless  healing  to  the  skill  and  knowledge
of  the  average  drugless  healer  in  America.  And  most  certainly  the  finest  examples
of  cures  without  medicine  have  been  wrought  in  recent  years,  while  I  have
studied  Efficiency  too  deeply  and  constantly  to  keep  in  close  touch  with  your  own
therapeutic  work.  If  I  have  generalized  too  broadly,  and  failed  to  give  credit
where  credit  is  due,  I  apologize  and  recant.

But  I  would  here  call  your  attention  to  a  point  that  seems  to  have  escaped
you;  namely,  that  a  naturopath  can  never  be  competent  to  judge  the  efficiency
side  of  Naturopathy.  A  man  inside  any  trade,  vocation  or  profession  must  always
be  too  close  to  it  for  a  calm,  broad,  impartial  view  of  its  administration.  Hence,
in  the  business  world  we  now  have  experts  on  various  lines  whose  work  is  to
bring  from  the  outside,  a  fresh  vision,  together  with  a  scientific  training  as
specialists.  Every  Nature  Cure  institution,  whether  school,  sanitarium  or  maga-
zine, and  I  am  not  sure  but  every  individual  practice  also,  needs  an  advertising
expert,  an  efficiency  expert,  a  correspondence  expert,  a  psychology  expert,  an
accountancy  expert,  and  several  other  experts;  no  one  of  whom  need  be  familiar
with  the  healing  art  as  an  art,  but  each  of  whom  can  help  to  establish  the  healing
business  as  a  business.

For  generations,  the  brick-layers  of  this  country  thought  they  knew  how  to
lay  brick.  Then  an  outsider  who  never  laid  a  row  of  bricks  in  his  life,  came
along  with  a  set  of  basic  efficiency  principles,  on  which  it  was  claimed  bricks


196  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Hiii/crs'  Guide

should  be  laid.  The  outsider,  one  F.  W.  Taylor  by  name,  was  ridiculed  and
abused  by  the  "regular"  brick-layers,  even  as  I  am  now  being  torn  to  pieces  by
the  regular  naturopaths  (or  some  of  them — those  who  would  rather  be  "regular"
than  right).  When  the  new  efTiciency  methods  were  at  last  applied,  masons
found  they  could  lay  350  bricks  an  hour,  instead  of  their  former  stint  of  120.
And  when  the  naturopaths  get  sense  enough  to  understand  what  I  am  talking
about,  they  will  benefit  to  as  great  a  degree,  they  will  cure  350  cases,  and  make
$350  or  thereabouts,  to  every  120  cases  they  now  cure,  and  every  $120  they  now
make.

The  wonderful  Bethlehem  steel  works  was  able  to  save  $40,000  a  year  when
the  officials  got  over  being  pigheaded  sufficiently  to  employ  a  general  efficiency
expert  who  didn't  know  a  thing  about  steel-making  but  did  know  everything  about
lost  time,  energy  and  money.  A  vehicle  factory  of  national  repute  witnessed  the
reduction  of  the  working  day  from  10%  to  8%  hours  and  the  pay  of  the  workers
and  quality  of  the  work  improved — by  the  application  of  such  principles  as  I  am
suggesting  in  these  articles.

Hundreds  of  other  examples  could  be  cited,  all  showing  that  the  greatest
efficiency  is  attained  in  any  line  of  work  only  when  a  capable  outsider  walks
into  the  profession  and  carries  with  him  a  lot  of  new  ideas.  But  the  naturopaths,
even  the  best  of  them,  are  so  plumb  sure  that  Naturopathy  includes  all  wisdom,
that  neither  I  nor  any  other  efficiency  counsel  may  get  a  chance  to  be  heard  for
another  generation.  It  is  a  matter  for  congratulation  that  I  am  not  a  naturopath.
If  I  were,  I  should  not  know  enough,  or  have  nerve  enough,  to  lay  bare  the  weak-
nesses of  naturopaths.

The  criticism  of  Doctors  Carl  Schultz,  Lindlahr,  Strueh  and  others  would  be
justifiable  if  I  were  writing  for  a  medical  or  a  popular  journal.  Then  I  should
lay  particular  stress  on  "the  naturopathic  physician's  superior  methods,  intuitive
powers,  unselfishness,  and  love  for  the  sick."  One  good  naturist  knows  more
about  health,  its  recovery  and  preservation,  than  ten  ordinary  doctors  know.  But
this,  dear  Doctor  Lust,  goes  without  saying,  and  if  I  didn't  believe  it  I  shouldn't
take  time  to  address  naturopaths  at  all.  A  real  man  doesn't  want  praise,  flattery
and  idolatry.  He  wants  honest  criticism  from  a  capable,  impartial  source.  In  the
past  few  months  I  have  received  more  than  1,000  personal  letters  from  thoughtful
men  and  women — including  college  presidents,  lawyers,  ministers,  manufacturers,
who  asked  my  help  to  increase  their  efficiency.  These  people  are  all  modest
enough  to  know  how  little  they  know,  and  are  eager  to  learn  from  a  man  who  is
not  even  a  member  of  their  own  profession.  Would  that  all  the  naturopaths  were
as  modest,  shrewd,  ambitious.

One  more  statement  in  your  kind  letter  deserves  attention.  You  fear  that  I
shall  be  discredited  as  a  Nature  Cure  writer  because  I  had  appendicitis,  went
through  an  operation,  and  now  mention  the  fact  without  shame.  Alas,  dear  friend,
your  logic  has  holes  in  it.  I  am  living,  am  I  not?  Hence  the  operation  was
effective,  was  it  not?  Hence  we  must  acknowledge  that  operations  do  sometimes
cure,  must  we  not?  I  hope  you  would  not  have  had  me  a  corpse,  just  to  prove
that  surgery  is  bad  for  appendicitis.

I  believe  that  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  surgery  for  appendicitis  is  bad — a
waste  of  time  and  money,  a  source  of  needless  pain  and  probable  danger.  But  I
also  believe  that  mine  was  the  tenth  case,  and  the  fact  of  recovery  would  seem  to
prove  that  my  judgment  was  correct.


Unim'rsal  N(tliu'<>p<tllur  Dirrch/n/  and  liinjcrs'  (iuidc  1^7

Now,  let  nie  go  further  in  the  rankness  of  my  heresy.  I  do  not  consider  that
health  is  the  greatest  thing  in  life,  nor  that  longevity  means  the  nohlest  charactei'.
The  finest,  purest  soul  that  ever  came  to  earth — Jesus  of  Nazareth — died  fifty
years  before  his  time.  Crucifixion  is  not  natural,  but  in  one  form  or  another  it  is
necessary  when  we  reach  the  point  where  we  must  live  the  truth.  You  have
passed  through  your  phase  of  crucifixion,  I  have  passed  through  mine.  You  were
allowed  to  retain  your  health  of  body — without  it  you  could  not  have  done  your
work.  I  was  not  allowed  to  retain  my  health — with  it  I  could  not  have  done  my
work.  Your  work  is  chiefly  for  men's  bodies,  mine  is  chiefly  for  their  minds  and
hearts.  I  have  been  forced  to  learn  mental  saneness  and  spiritual  sweetness  by
enduring  the  most  extreme  bodily  suffering.  God  knew  what  He  was  doing  when
He  put  me  through  it.  The  moral  gains  from  illness  may  so  far  exceed  the  phys-
ical woes  that  only  a  coward  would  try  to  escape.  When  a  man,  to  be  true  to  his
ideals,  has  to  face  even  a  lifetime  of  suffering,  the  part  of  courage  and  strength  is
to  welcome  all  the  pain  that  is  needed — and  then  perhaps  be  "discredited  as  a
Nature  Cure  writer,"  I  am  not  a  writer.  I  am  a  frontiersman  trying  to  open  a  path
of  light  through  a  wilderness  of  error.  Those  to  whom  light  is  first,  will  un-
derstand, even  if  they  do  not  care  to  follow.

Sincerely  yours,

EDWARD  EARLE  PURINTON


198  Universal  Naliiropalhic  Directonj  and  Biiifcrs'  Guide


CHAPTER  XVI

MENTAL  CAUSATION

The  mind  is  the  usual  source  of  chronic  disease.

No,  I  am  not  a  Christian  Scientist,  nor  even  a  "New  Thoughter";
and  I  set  up  no  defense  for  the  hobbies,  theories  and  vagaries  of  a  one-
sided metaphysician  or  "divine"  healer,  whose  only  remedies  are  words.

But  an  efficiency  engineer  is  trained  to  ferret  out  causes.  He  sticks
to  the  trail  of  a  cause,  like  a  fox-hound  on  the  trail  of  a  scent.  His  job
is  the  location,  then  dislocation,  of  the  causes  of  inefficiency.  For  this
job  he  finds  the  chisel  of  cold,  keen  and  ruthless  logic  his  main  tool.

As  an  efficiency  engineer,  armed  with  logic,  I  have  reached  the  con-
clusion, final  and  unalterable,  that  the  mind  is  the  regular,  almost  uni-
versal, source  of  chronic  disease.  This  being  so,  all  your  pills  and
plasters,  foods,  baths  and  exercises,  prescriptions,  gyrations  and  mani-
pulations, are  feeble  and  partial  modes  of  cure  unless  you  also  pene-
trate, heal,  renew  and  empower  the  mind  of  the  patient.

There  are  a  few  exceptional  cases,  such  as  malformations  by  birth
or  accident,  and  malignant  cell  growth  as  in  leprosy  or  cancer.  We  may
reasonably  grant  that  the  mind  is  not  here  the  ultimate  cause  of  disease,
though  even  here  the  mind  may  be  made  to  promote  the  cure.  But  I  am
convinced  that  for  at  least  90  per  cent  of  the  cases  of  deep-seated  physical
troubles,  we  must  hold  the  mind  of  the  sufferer  chiefly  responsible.
The  fact  that  we  fail  to  locate  the  mental  cause  does  not  change  the  fact
of  its  presence.

If  1  had  the  time  and  the  opportunity,  I  would  guarantee  to  pro-
duce from  the  mind  of  the  invalid  the  real,  governing  cause  in  at  least
nine  out  of  every  ten  chronic  ailments  that  any  physician,  allopathic  or
naturopathic,  would  refer  to  me  for  study.  The  external  form  of  the
trouble  might  be  anything,  from  diabetes,  rheumatism  or  asthma  to
insomnia,  neurasthenia  or  anaemia.  I  would  in  every  case  find  an
original,  persistent,  all  powerful,  mental  cause,


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  199

«

The  real  thing  to  look  for  in  treating  disease  is  not  the  cause,  but
the  cause  of  the  cause.  A  drugless  physician  who  merely  ascertains  and
even  removes  a  physical  cause  does  only  half  his  duty — and  the  easier,
less  important  half.  He  must  probe  the  life  of  the  invalid,  not  merely
his  body,  and  reveal  the  mental  cause  of  the  physical  cause;  then  so
change  or  disperse  this  anterior,  subtle  cause  as  to  prevent  the  recur-
rence of  the  posterior,  tangible  cause.  A  few  illustrations  of  this
principle.

You  may  say  that  a  weak  stomach  is  the  cause  of  dyspepsia.  No,  it
is  not.  A  weak  stomach  is  caused  by  a  weak  or  perverse  mind,  as
shown  by  the  transgression  of  the  natural  instincts  and  normal  habits
of  eating  which  keep  the  digestion  of  the  animal  or  the  savage  whole-
some, painless,  rapid  and  powerful.  Hygienic  food  of  itself  never  cured
dyspepsia — there  must  also  be  hygienic  thought,  emotion,  faith,  purpose,
habit  of  life.

You  may  say  that  uric  acid  causes  rheumatism.  No,  it  does  not.
The  uric  acid  is  caused  by  excess  of  meat  and  accompanying  poisons;
by  lack  of  combustion  through  proper  breathing,  exercise,  ventilation,
evacuation,  perspiration  and  skin  hygiene;  also  by  lack  of  inspiration
and  initiative,  to  keep  the  whole  organism  highly  toned  and  fully
electrified.  Now  the  excess  of  meat  products,  the  lack  of  combustion,
and  the  absence  of  inspiration,  all  indicate  a  flabby,  dense,  low,  inert,
state  of  mind;  and  you  cannot  permanently  cure  rheumatism  without
relieving  the  mental  factor  in  the  case.

You  may  say  that  neurasthenia  was  caused  by  a  set  of  flimsy,
faltering,  congested,  pain-racked,  ill-fed  nerves.  No,  it  never  was.  The
real  function  of  the  nerves  proceeds  from  their  point  of  origin,  at  the
brain.  If  a  man  has  nervous  prostration,  you  may  feed  him  on
lecithin,  phosphates,  albumin  and  mineral  salts  till  doomsday — he  will
remain  the  victim  of  exhaustion,  depression  and  horrible  mental  chaos,
till  you  show  him  how  to  grasp,  harness,  guide  and  employ  the  way-
ward thoughts  and  loose  emotions  that  are  subtly  but  constantly  running
away  with  his  nerve-force.

-  This  line  of  reasoning  applies  to  every  form  of  chronic  ailment.
Back  of  the  diseased  organ  lie  the  nerves  which  are  controlled  directly
by  the  brain,  and  the  blood-stream  which  is  controlled  indirectly.
Before  any  organ  of  the  body  can  be  seriously  disturbed,  the  blood  or
the  nerves  or  both  must  have  been  guilty  of  unwholesome  action  for  a
long  time. And  the  mind  is  to  blame.

For  a  doctor,  whether  allopathic,  osteopathic  or  naturopathic,  to
assume  to  heal  a  sick  body  without  a  constant,  careful,  expert  use  of


200  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

psychological  diagnosis  and  treatment,  is  as  foolish  and  criminal  as  it
would  be  for  a  blacksmith  to  take  charge  of  an  electric  power-plant  in
a  state  of  short-circuit.  The  majority  of  the  drugless  healers  whom  I
know  are  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  blacksmiths.  They  can  tinker  up
the  engine  of  the  human  power-plant,  which  is  the  digestion;  they  can-
not even  locate  the  faulty  action  of  nerves,  which  are  the  electric  wires,
nor  of  the  brain,  which  is  the  battery.

Would  that  this  general  state  of  ignorance  and  unadroitness  might
be  corrected.  In  the  daily  course  of  my  efficiency  work  for  various
publications  and  institutions,  I  am  asked  by  hundreds  of  invalids
where  and  how  to  recommend  a  cure.  Though  a  large  proportion  of
these  are  nervous  cases  even  to  a  superficial  observer,  I  never  advise
one  of  this  ilk  to  endanger  his  life  at  the  typical  drugless  resorts  within
my  range  of  knowledge.  The  methods  are  too  material,  the  facilities
too  crude,  and  the  doctors  too  dense.  A  Nature  Cure  sanitarium  with-
out a  trained  psychologist  in  regular  attendance  is  a  joke  on  the  face
of  it  and  a  crime  in  the  heart  of  it.  The  mind  of  man  is  the  crowning
masterpiece  of  Nature;  how  can  we  neglect  this  and  be  safe  or  honest
or  efiective,  as  teachers  and  healers  appointed  by  Nature?

Men  of  divergent  species  of  mind  can  no  more  be  healed  by  the
same  physical  methods  than  a  peach-tree  and  a  potato-vine  could  be
given  healthy  growth  by  the  same  yard-stick  rule.  Bugs  may  attack  the
potato-vine,  birds  or  boys  may  rob  the  peach-tree;  and  bugs,  birds  and
boys  require  separate  and  distinct  modes  of  treatment.  When  a  human
plant  falls  ill,  germs  are  the  bugs,  thoughts  are  the  bad  boys,  desires
are  the  mischievous  birds;  and  the  germs,  thoughts  and  desires  must
all  receive  proper  attention  and  scientific  treatment.

In  positing  the  mind  as  the  source  of  chronic  disease,  and  hence
the  source  of  cure,  we  should  maintain  a  four-fold  conception  of  the
mind,  remembering  it  has  these  departments  or  planes  of  impression
and  expression:  mental,  emotional,  psychic,  spiritual.  The  mental
phase  concerns  the  character,  development  and  use  of  the  cerebrum;
the  emotional  phase  concerns  the  size,  fibre,  expansion  and  control  of
the  cerebellum;  the  psychic  phase  concerns  the  influence  of  astral
entities  and  ethereal  forces  on  the  human  organism;  the  spiritual  phase
concerns  the  dominance  of  the  soul  of  the  man  over  material  con-
ditions, outer  and  inner.  All  four  phases  concern  the  healthy  activity
of  the  solar  plexus,  and  of  the  entire  nervous  system.

Had  we  the  space,  we  could  show  the  exact  physiological  results  on
the  human  body,  of  these  four  factors  of  the  mind.  Such  a  treatise,
however,  would  fill  a  book  in  itself,  and  might  even  then  be  unintelli-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liui/crs'  Guide  201

gible,  save  to  an  expert  phychologist.  We  will,  therefore,  give  concrete
examples  of  disease,  where  the  cause  was  traced  to  one  of  these  four
divisions  of  the  mind;  and  where,  with  removal  of  the  cause,  the  dis-
ease vanished.  We  will  cite  one  case  each,  under  the  four  headings:
mental,  emotional,  psychic,  spiritual.  All  these  cases  I  have  known
personally.

The  iirst  case  was  one  of  dyspepsia,  constipation,  exhaustion  of
nerves  and  brain — the  cause  of  which  was  mental.  The  man  had  been  a
sturdy  farmer,  living  in  ideal  surroundings,  where  a  crystal  brook,  a
sunny  river  and  a  stretch  of  pine  woods  made  the  physical  aspects  of
life  as  wholesome  as  Nature  ever  knew.  But  the  sufferer  could  hardly
eat  the  simplest  food  without  extreme  pains  in  the  stomach,  he  was  so
nervous  he  couldn't  be  still  a  minute  and  would  tramp  for  hours,  back
and  forth,  trying  to  get  peace  of  mind  and  body.  At  last,  when  his  very
sanity  was  threatened,  and  when  all  the  local  doctors  had  failed  to
relieve  him,  a  psychologist  happened  to  visit  him.  At  once  the  horizon
cleared.

It  seemed  that  many  years  before,  the  invalid — who  was  then  a
strong,  husky  fellow — had  been  wakened  in  the  middle  of  the  night  by
the  entrance  of  burglars.  A  panic  ensued,  shots  were  fired,  the  whole
neighborhood  was  roused,  and  for  months  thereafter  sleep  was  almost
impossible  for  the  man  concerned.  The  fright  had  completely  disorgan-
ized the  brain-centers,  and  so  impressed  the  subjective  mind  that  a
horrible  fear  settled  with  nightfall,  and  haunted  the  house  with  ghostly
shapes  and  dreads.  From  the  hour  of  this  acute  shock,  the  man's  phy-
sical degeneration  commenced.  He  is  now  virtually  cured — by  psycho-
therapy, re-enforced  by  naturopathy.  He  would  never  have  been  cured,
the  cause  of  his  troubles  would  never  have  been  located,  by  material
means  alone.

The  second  case  was  one  of  tumor — the  cause  of  which  was
emotional.  A  big-hearted  woman  of  middle  age  had  been  sadly  disap-
pointed and  bereaved  in  the  greatest  love  of  her  life.  She  was  distinctly
a  mother-type  of  woman.  But  she  had  given  up  her  ideal  of  marriage
and  children,  to  care  for  a  helpless  and  appealing  relative,  on  whom
she  lavished  all  the  affection  of  her  strong  woman-nature.  When  the
relative  grew  able  for  self-support  and  independence,  and  the  need  for
the  woman's  devotion  was  suddenly  removed,  an  emotional  upheaval
and  serious  crisis  came  upon  the  victim  of  self-immolation.  She  had
lived  most  abstemiously,  and  no  physical  cause  for  a  tumor  was  dis-
closed. But  the  II  lor  was  there.  It  was  merely  the  focus  of  prolonged
emotional  repression,  bursting  at  the  point  of  readiness,  the  uterus,
where  under  normal  conditions  a  child  w  ould  have  come  forth.


202  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

The  false  growth  has  now  disappeared,  and  the  woman  is  as  near
well  as  a  woman  who  was  a  born  mother  but  never  married  can  hope
to  be.  The  methods  of  cure?  Mostly  naturopathic,  but  fundamentally
psychological.  Our  friend  is  now  the  head  of  a  large  institution,  where
the  growing  numbers  of  young  people  under  her  charge  need  a  lot  of
"mothering,"  that  she  delights  to  give.  How  few  doctors  know  that  the
preponderance  of  tumors,  cancers  and  other  morbid  growths  in  women
are  the  outcome  of  their  unappeased  sex-longings!  Not  sex-cravings,
which  arc  physical,  but  sex-longings,  which  are  emotional  and  spiritual,
it  takes  a  woman  doctor  to  understand  a  woman  because  all  women
have  sex-longings  in  common,  while  most  men,  sad  to  confess,  have  only
sex-cravings.

The  third  case  was  one  of  neuritis  and  insomnia — and  the  cause
was  psychic.  A  man  had  been  well-nigh  crazed  by  sleeplessness.  The
nerves  were  on  fire,  and  the  brain  seemed  almost  ready  to  burst.  The
most  modern  treatments  for  insomnia  had  been  applied,  with  no  per-
manent effect.  The  sufferer  had  resigned  his  position,  and  was  spend-
ing his  whole  time  trying  to  get  well  (a  most  unhygienic  thing  to  do,  by
the  way).  The  man  had  a  very  peculiar  belief,  regarding  his  own
affliction.  He  said  that  when  he  woke  in  the  night,  as  he  always  did
when  he  should  be  in  the  deepest  slumber,  he  felt  that  somewhere  in  the
heavens  a  strange,  uncanny  force  was  pulling  his  soul  away  from  his
body !  He  often  lay  awake  in  fear,  dreading  to  sleep  lest  the  ghostly  rob-
bery might  take  place  and  his  veiy  soul  be  in  the  lair  of  sky-thieves!
Don't  laugh  and  show  your  ignorance,  you  materialistic  readers.  Wait
till  I  tell  how  the  man  was  right.  Of  course  the  dumb,  numb  and
elephantine  doctors  all  ridiculed  the  man's  belief — they  said  he  was  an
unfortunate  victim  of  "obsession"  or  hallucination.  (Definition  of  hal-
lucination: An  obscuration  in  the  doctor).

The  truth  of  the  matter  was  this.  About  six  months  before,  the
dearest  friend  of  the  sufferer  had  died,  under  peculiar  and  terrible  cir-
cumstances. This  friend  had  exerted  an  overpowering  psychic  influence
upon  the  man  who  still  lived,  with  telepathic  or  astral  communication  a
frequent  occurrence.  When  the  psychological  twin  was  taken,  the  effect
was  no  less  severe  on  the  brain  and  soul  of  the  man  who  was  left  than
the  decease  of  one  of  the  Siamese  twins  proved  to  the  remaining  twin,
who  shortly  died,  as  you  may  remember.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  acute
and  painful  ordeals  of  insomnia,  which  began  soon  after  the  death  of
the  sutterer's  mate,  were  actually  induced  by  the  struggles  of  the" un-
willing soul  in  shadow-land  to  return  to  the  side  of  the  friend  here;
and  if  not  to  return,  to  seize  the  soul  of  the  friend  and  bear  it  up  yonder!
In  a  case  like  this,  ponder  the  futility  and  sad absurdity  of  such


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  203

insomnia  "cures"  as  a  hot  drink  or  hot  foot-bath  just  before  retiring!
The  man  was  cured.  He  moved  from  his  accustomed  haunts  to  a  home
a  thousand  miles  away;  he  began  a  wholly  new  kind  of  work,  which
absorbed  him  by  day  and  exhausted  him  so  that  the  physical  urge  for
sleep  was  greater  by  night  than  the  psychic  pull  from  the  sky;  and  he
filled  his  life  with  an  ideal  and  affection  that  bound  him  here  while  his
normal  span  should  run. All  pure  psychology.

The  fourth  case  was  one  of  shallow  breathing,  torpid  liver,  "colds"
and  catarrh,  skin  eruptions  and  poor  circulation — and  the  cause  was
spiritual. A  college  youth  had  all  these  troubles  at  the  same  time. He

was  told  that  the  source  of  the  various  complaints  was  in  the  lungs; not

only  did  the  young  man  fail  to  use  more  than  half  his  lung  capacity,  but
his  method  of  breathing  was  so  wrong  that  his  chest  rose  when  he
exhaled  and  fell  when  he  inhaled!

Of  course,  the  digestive  organs,  heart  and  circulatory  system  had
become  slow  and  defective  in  action,  due  to  the  cramped  position  and
erratic  functioning  of  the  long-abused  lungs.  The  patient  bought  a
couple  of  patent  breathing-machines,  and  blew  in  them  religiously,
night  and  morning.  He  joined  a  college  gymnasium  class,  played  out-
door games,  rode  horseback,  went  swimming,  and  even  led  in  those
lung-bursting  feats  called  "college  yells".  But  his  breath  simply  re-
fused to  adopt  regular  liabits  and  would  almost  stop  when  its  owner
was  not  looking.

Then,  one  day  never  to  be  forgotten,  a  mystic  who  was  also  a
character  analyst  gave  the  boy  a  "reading".  She  told  him  he  was  a  born
poet,  asked  him  why  he  was  training  for  a  hum-drum,  superficial  life
work,  and  suggested  ways  of  seeking  the  muse  of  rhyme.  Then  the
boy  breathed!  And  he  has  been  breathing  ever  since.  The  old  physical
troubles  have  gone,  and  the  present  lung  capacity  of  the  former  weak-
ling is  50  cubic  inches  above  the  average.  The  depth  of  his  respiration
was  according  to  the  height  of  his  inspiration.  Often  this  proves  to  be
the  analogy;  and  always  the  victim  of  shallow  breathing  is  below  par
on  his  normal,  spiritual  plane.

Next  to  the  solar  plexus,  the  lungs  are  spiritual  organs,  demand-
ing spiritual  motive  and  sustenance.  The  habit  of  deep  breathing  is
a  habit  of  deep  feeling.

The  four  cases  mentioned  here,  while  perhaps  unusual,  are  not
rare  at  all.  Any  psychotherapist  of  good  repute  and  long  experience
could  give  scores  of  parallel  or  similar  cases,  all  demonstrating  the
fundamental  principle  that —


204  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


Mental  diagnosis  should  precede  or  accompany  physical
diagnosis  and  treatment  of  any  chronic  disease.  There
is  no  Nature  Cure  without  Mind  Cure.


So  clearly  has  this  truth  been  revealed  to  many  trained  observers  in
psychiatry  and  psychotherapy  that  lists  of  the  varied  thoughts,  emotions,
atieclions,  instincts,  and  desires  have  been  prepared  with  a  view  to
showing  how  the  abuse,  non-use  or  over-use  of  mental  factors  will  re-
sult in  chronic  disease.  There  are  metaphysicians  who  claim  that  a
certain  kind  and  amount  of  erroneous  thought  will  produce  liver
trouble,  another  produce  rheumatism,  another  one  produce  cancer,  and
so  forth.  I  do  not  believe  that  scientific  lines  of  reference  can  be  drawn
so  closely  through  the  realm  of  mental  causation;  and  1  have  observed
that,  as  a  class,  mental  healers  are  as  prone  to  exaggerate  the  power  of
mind  as  doctors  are  to  overlook  it.

Thus,  in  the  four  cases  mentioned  above,  neither  mental  nor  phy-
sical means  alone  would  have  restored  health.  The  order  of  procedure
that  did  the  work  in  each  case  was  this:  (1)  mental  diagnosis,  (2)  phy-
sical diagnosis,  (3)  physical  treatment,  (4)  mental  treatment.  From
a  rational,  impartial  viewpoint,  the  neglect  of  the  proper  physiological
methods  of  treatment,  witnessed  in  so-called  Divine  Healing,  Christian
Science  or  New  Thought,  is  even  more  culpable  than  the  omission  of
psychotherapy  in  most  of  our  Nature  Cure  sanitaria.  Whatever  the
form  of  disease,  the  body  must  be  diagnosed  and  treated.  If  a  scientific
combination  of  hot  baths,  fasting  and  massage  will  cure  insanity — a
frequent  occurrence  nowadays — will  not  such  auxiliaries  be  of  help  in
the  comparatively  mild  cases  of  nervous  and  mental  disturbance?  If
1  were  writing  for  a  metaphysical  magazine,  I  should  emphasize  the
power  of  the  body  to  renew  the  mind — not  the  power  of  the  mind  to
renew  the  body.

How  shall  mental  diagnosis  be  accomplished?  How  shall  the  phy-
sician cross  the  darkened  threshold  of  his  patient's  consciousness,  and
penetrate  the  labyrinthine  chambers  of  the  mystic  human  ego?  The
best  minds  of  the  ages  have  been  focused  on  this  problem — and  the
solution  is  not  yet.  For  me  to  presume  to  instruct  you  would  be  folly.
But  1  do  want  to  suggest  a  few  methods  that  seem  full  of  promise,  and
that  are  now  being  tried  in  various  localities  of  Europe  and  America.
None  of  these  may  be  held  infallible,  and  a  few  of  them  are  perhaps
unsafe  except  in  the  hands  of  doctors  who  combine  skill,  experience  and
honor. But  they  all  are  deserving  of  thoughtful  consideration.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  205


CHAPTER  XVII

MENTAL  DIAGNOSIS


The  first  reason  for  investigating  this  subject  lies  in  the  Scriptures.
Modern  scientific  students  of  the  Bible  claim  that  a  preponderance  of
the  healing  miracles  wrought  by  the  Great  Physician  were  but  super-
normal cases  of  mental,  psychic  and  spiritual  diagnosis.  He  saw  the
unseen  causes.

Where  many,  such  as  Lazarus  and  the  daughter  of  Jairus,  were
pronounced  dead,  there  may  have  been  simply  a  deep  coma  resembling
death;  a  strong  command  of  "suggestion"  was  therefore  powerful  to
break  the  psychic  spell  and  restore  life.  Those  who  were  lame  and
blind  may  have  been  subject  to  nervous  inhibitions  or  psychic  obses-
sions— modern  cures  of  similar  troubles  prove  this  quite  possible.  At
any  rate,  the  supreme  hold  of  the  Nazarene  on  his  followers  lay  in  his
power  to  read,  swiftly  and  accurately,  the  very  thoughts  of  their  inmost
hearts.

Whence  came  this  power?  Some  through  the  marvelous  intuition
of  Jesus;  he  was  probably  the  oldest  and  therefore  wisest  soul  that  ever
passed  into  birth  on  this  planet.  The  experiences  from  hundreds  of
incarnations  had  all  crystallized,  to  form  the  pure  gems  of  intuition
bequeathed  us  in  the  Bible.  No  man  who  is  not  highly  intuitional  should
be  granted  a  physician's  diploma.

But  the  science  of  mental  diagnosis  far  exceeds  the  gift,  and  Jesus
was  a  scientist  more  than  a  seer.  Devout  people  often  wonder  and
speculate  about  those  hidden  years  in  the  life  of  the  god-man.  Experts
in  occult  lore  claim  to  have  solved  the  problem.  They  declare  that
Jesus  went  into  and  through  all  the  mystic  teachings  regarding  health,
psychology  and  religion  afforded  by  the  esoteric  philosophies  of  the
East — India,  Persia,  and  other  so-called  pagan  lands.  The  fact  of  this
training  was  kept  a  secret  providentially — only  misunderstanding  and
distrust  would  have  followed  its  revealment.  But  the  master  was  a
graduate  mystic.


206  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Whether  such  chiini  be  true,  I  do  not  know.  But  1  do  know  that
any  man  with  a  message  will  find  his  greatest  power  in  conveying  it
through  a  long  study  and  effective  use  of  the  very  means  and  men  that
seemed  at  iirst  antagonistic.  On  this  principle,  I  commend  to  the  na-
turist  physician  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  systems  here  named.

1.  Diagnosis  by  Psycho-analysis.  The  work  of  the  renowned  Pro-
fessor Freud  of  Vienna  is  doubtless  familiar  to  you.  A  partial  dream
state  is  induced,  having  features  somewhat  in  common  witli  hypnosis
and  also  with  "twilight  sleep",  but  apparently  without  the  dangers  of
either.  While  the  patient  is  but  dimly  conscious,  he  is  asked  all  manner
of  questions  bearing  on  the  subconscious  depths  of  his  past  and  present
life.  With  the  brain-centres  of  fear,  shame,  caution  and  deceit  inhibited,
the  invalid  tells  things  about  himself  that  he  never  would  or  could  reveal
during  a  state  of  normal  wakefulness.  The  cause  of  many  a  deep-seated
neurosis,  and  ailment  that  "baffled"  the  doctors,  has  been  thus  exposed
and  corrected.

2.  Diagnosis  by  Phrenology.  An  expert  study  of  the  head  and  face
will  show  the  peculiar  weak  spots  and  inherited  predispositions  to  dis-
ease with  which  every  man  is  born.  Thus  a  corpulent  person  with  red
hair  almost  never  has  liver  trouble,  while  a  thin  person  with  black  hair
almost  never  has  Bright's  disease.  Corresponding  tracts  of  the  lungs,
liver,  stomach,  and  other  vital  organs  appear  in  the  face; — and  many  of
the  drugless  pioneers  such  as  Kneipp  and  Kuhne  diagnosed  their  pa-
tients, consciously  or  unconsciously,  by  this  fact.  The  books  of  Fowler,
Sizer,  and  other  phrenologists  and  physiognomists,  explain  these
phenomena.

3.  Diagnosis  by  Experimental  Psychology.  The  nervous,  mental
and  emotional  re-actions  of  a  chronic  invalid  often  lead  to  the  subtle
origin  of  the  complaint,  where  physical  diagnosis  fails.  In  the  labora-
tories of  the  great  universities— Harvard,  Columbia,  Cornell  and  others,
varied  systems  of  research  and  investigation  have  been  carried  on,  after
initial  movements  in  Germany,  France,  England  and  Switzerland.  A
general  idea  of  the  scope  and  method  may  be  gleaned  from  the  works  of
Drs.  DuBois,  Peterson,  Thomson,  Cabot,  Muensterberg,  Schofield  and
Jastrow,  which  may  be  found  in  the  department  of  psychiatry  of  almost
any  large  medical  library.

4.  Diagnosis  by  Astrology.  Here  is  a  field  of  study  where  caution
is  required.  Few  astrologists  are  trustworthy,  and  the  majority  of  them
urge  claims  for  the  system  that  are  not  fully  warranted.  But  there  is  no
question  that  the  planets  exert  a  positive  and  permanent  inffuence  over
human  beings,  according  to  the  ruling  house  and  zodiacal  sign  under


Uninrrsdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  nui/crs'  Guide  207

which  they  were  born.  Thus  a  Mars  man  who  cannot  be  at  war  cannot
be  at  peace — strange  to  say;  and  a  Venus  woman  who  cannot  express
love  cannot  experience  health.  Furthermore,  at  certain  juxtapositions
of  the  planets,  each  individual  is  prone  to  physical  pain,  weakness  and
disorder;  a  knowledge  of  which  probabilities  may  serve  to  ward  off  an
attack  of  a  serious  nature.

5.  Diagnosis  by  Symbology.  Man  vibrates  to  all  the  universal  forces,
and  they  in  turn  re-act  upon  him.  Thus  each  individual  has  a  keynote
of  color,  form  and  tone,  which  must  blend  harmoniously  with  the  people,
things  and  events  of  his  life — or  disease  results.  For  example,  take  two
colors,  light  blue  and  deep  red.  The  blue  means  a  high  degree  of  spir-
itual development  and  a  longing  for  truth  above  all  things;  while  the
red  stands  for  selfish  human  desire  and  lowest  animal  passion.  If  a
sky-blue  character  be  surrounded  by  blood-red  persons  or  house  fur-
nishings, a  mental  disturbance  is  created  which  finally  upsets  the  phys-
ical organism.  The  matter  of  color  correspondence  has  been  explained
by  a  number  of  investigators,  such  as  Dr.  Babbitt,  Mr.  Colville  and  Mr.
Fraetas.  Another  branch  of  symbolism  relates  to  the  given  name.  A
special  quality  and  value  is  said  to  inhere  in  each  letter  of  the  alphabet,
and  to  affect  the  person  whose  Christian  name  includes  the  letter.  Thus,
if  a  Jeremiah  nature  has  been  christened  Archibald,  he  may  likely  have
an  Archibald  manner  glossed  onto  a  Jeremiah  disposition — from  which
combination  the  good  Lord  deliver  us!  Cases  have  been  known  where
people  have  recovered  health  only  after  changing  their  names.  A  still
further  development  of  the  vibration  theory  of  diagnosis  lies  in  the  realm
of  musical  therapeutics,  of  which  a  famous  example  was  the  soothing  of
the  crazed  mind  of  Saul  by  the  harp  in  the  hands  of  David.  Ever\^  man,
particularly  every  woman,  is  a  musical  instrument,  with  a  distinct  and
close  relationship  to  the  tones  of  the  diatonic  scale.  If  you  are  over-
stimulated  your  tone  is  sharp,  if  overexhausted  your  tone  is  flat.  Either
condition  calls  for  harmonization.  The  work  of  Miss  Vescelius  and
others  in  hospitals  and  asylums  proves  that  music  has  a  real  place  in
diagnostics  and  therapeutics.  Every  chronic  ailment  is  the  outcome  of
some  phase  of  inharmony.

6.  Diagnosis  by  the  Aura.  For  centuries  the  mystics  and  adepts  of
the  East  have  held  that  the  soul  of  a  man  shines  through  his  body;  this
emanation  being  visible  under  certain  conditions,  and  extending  from  a
few  inches  to  a  distance  of  several  feet,  according  to  the  physical,  mental
and  spiritual  health  of  the  man.  Most  doctors  have  ridiculed  all  such
beliefs.  Now  comes  Dr.  Walter  Kilner  of  London,  who  says  he  has
photographed  the  human  aura,  has  proved  its  relationship  with  health
and  disease,  and  will  shortly  give  to  the  medical  fraternity  a  new  system


208  UiiiixTsal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


of  diagnosis  based  on  these  conclusions.  For  example,  if  a  person  has
lung  or  liver  trouble,  the  portion  of  the  aura  directly  above  the  lungs  or
liver  will  appear  on  a  sensitized  photographic  plate  either  dull  or  pale
or  spasmodic  or  clouded  or  blotched  or  almost  invisible.  I  have  person-
ally seen  the  aura,  by  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Rebman  of  New  York,  one  of
the  leaders  in  this  line  of  study;  and  have  watched  it  vary  in  quality  and
quantity.

7.  Diagnosis  by  Psychic  Research.  A  considerable  number  of  in-
valids, with  nervous  or  mental  disturbance  the  prime  cause  of  their
physical  derangement,  have  a  "spook"  in  cloudland  to  blame  for  their
troubles.  These  troubles  will  vanish  only  when  the  spook  has  been
exorcized.  At  least  such  is  the  belief  of  a  group  of  scientific,  logical  and
unfanciful  men  who  have  spent  years  in  the  field  of  psychic  research.
One  of  the  firm  supporters  of  this  belief  is  the  executive  head  of  the
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Dr.  James  H.  Hyslop,  with
whom  I  have  recently  talked  on  the  subject.  It  appears  that  a  large
proportion  of  the  cases  of  hysteria,  melancholia,  paranoia,  and  certain
acute  forms  of  insanity,  and  a  smaller  proportion  of  other  nervous,
mental  and  physical  diseases,  may  be  traced  to  obsession  by  a  spirit  in
ghostland.  The  spirit  wants  to  get  back  to  earth  and  tries  to  make
forcible  entry  by  way  of  the  sufferer's  body.  When  this  occurs,  the
vehement  ghost  with  the  guilt  of  invasion  upon  it  must  be  "treated"
forthwith,  and  made  to  depart.  Dr.  Hyslop  holds  that  many  of  the  poor
wretches  who  seem  incurably  insane  could  be  restored  to  health  and
usefulness  by  application  of  this  truth.

8.  Diagnosis  by  Occultism.  The  main  divisions  of  this  branch  are
clairvoyance,  psychometry  and  hypnotism.  When  we  think  of  clair-
voyance, we  conjure  up  the  fakes  and  follies  of  the  ordinary  "seance" —
then  dismiss  the  subject  as  fruitless  and  false.  But  I  know  of  a  man  who
makes  pocketfuls  of  money  by  "seeing  things" — contrary  to  the  usual
custom,  since  men  who  "see  things"  are  mostly  in  the  state  of  losing
money.  This  chap  goes  into  a  man's  club  and  wagers  the  assembly  that
he  can  tell  a  man  how  much  money  the  man's  purse  contains.  Wishing
to  humor  the  escaped  lunatic  and  also  to  clean  up  his  cash,  the  brothers
convivial  proceed  to  bet  lavishly.  Whereupon  the  visitor  puts  his  X-ray
eye  on  each  in  turn,  looks  him  inside  out,  declares  his  wealth  to  a  penny,
cashes  the  bets  in  a  hurry,  and  leaves  before  the  mob  turns  to  rend  him.
A  sad  waste  of  a  marvelous  power.  If  the  few  rare  people  born  with
"second  sight"  were  trained  in  diagnosis,  anatomy,  physiology  and  psy-
chology, the  assumption  is  that  they  could  reveal  the  brain  structure  of
a  sick  man  as  clearly  as  the  X-ray  now  reveals  his  bony  structure.
Another  possible  means  of  subtle  examination  lies  in  psychometry,  the


I


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuijers'  (iuide  209

art  of  reading  character  by  the  sense  of  touch  and  smell.  The  odor,
magnetism  and  electric  force  of  a  person  in  radiant  health  differ  greatly
from  these  emanations  when  he  is  ill.  Thus  an  article  of  clothing  which
he  wears  continually  may  convey  to  one  gifted  in  psychometric  reading
a  very  distinct  impression  of  the  state  of  health.  Even  more  available
and  reliable  should  be  the  potency  of  the  hypnotic  sleep.  It  is  well
known  that  a  hypnotic  subject  of  the  proper  kind  will  develop  a  sixth
sense,  by  which  he  transports  himself  psychically  to  a  distant  point  and
faculty  be  leveled  on  the  inner  mechanism  of  the  sick?  We  are  only
beginning  to  understand  the  helpful  uses  of  hypnotism;  but  I  firmly  be-
lieve that  the  time  will  come  when  the  psychic  forces  liberated  in  the
hypnotic  sleep  will  be  so  trained  and  guided  that  by  their  aid  ever>^  part
of  the  human  body  can  be  diagnosed,  promptly  and  accurately.

9.  Diagnosis  by  Vocation.  Recent  studies  by  industrial  and  socio-
logical experts  reveal  the  fact  that  each  trade  or  profession  carries  with
it  a  tendency  toward  certain  forms  of  physical  deterioration.  A  thor-
ough knowledge  of  the  cause,  nature  and  cure  of  these  "occupational
diseases"  would  serve  any  doctor  well,  not  only  in  diagnosis  but  even
better  in  prognosis  and  prophylaxis.  Furthermore,  about  70  per  cent
of  the  workers  of  this  country  have  fallen  into  the  wrong  job.  They  are
square  pegs  in  round  holes,  and  a  square  peg  in  a  round  hole  finds  room
for  trouble  on  all  sides.  If  you  make  a  born  poet  sell  shoes  for  a  living,
you  will  soon  have  a  sick  poet  on  your  hands — and  a  well  one  is  bad
enough  to  endure.  Heaven  knows.  If,  to  the  contrary,  you  make  a  born
shoemaker  write  poems  for  a  living,  all  the  people  in  the  sound  of  his
voice  will  shortly  be  sick,  down  and  out.  A  doctor  who  cannot  tell  the
diagnostic  difference  between  a  poet  and  a  shoemaker  should  be  com-
pelled to  wear  by  day  shoes  made  by  the  poet  and  to  hear  by  night
poems  made  by  the  shoemaker.  Then,  of  a  truth,  would  the  doctor  be
admonished. Cure  must  rest  on  temperament,  or  be  unstable.

10,  Diagnosis  by  Emmanuelism.  Thirty  years  ago.  Bishop  Samuel
Fallows,  in  his  "church  clinic"  at  Chicago,  began  to  demonstrate  how
closely  a  man's  theology  relates  to  his  bodily  functions.  More  recently,
Drs.  Worcester  and  McComb  in  Boston,  Dr.  Batten  in  New  York,  and
other  influential  clergymen  and  physicians  have  done  remarkable  work
by  a  scientific  union  of  physical,  mental  and  moral  diagnosis — com-
monly known  as  the  Emmanuel  Movement.  A  doctor,  a  nerve  specialist,
a  physical  culturist,  a  psychotherapist,  and  a  minister,  acting  harmoni-
ously together,  can  certainly  reach  more  exhaustive  and  reliable  con-
clusions of  diagnosis  than  would  be  possible  for  any  one  of  them,  pro-
ceeding alone. The  "vicious  circle"  of  etiology  may  proceed  thus: —


210  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

mind  to  brain,  brain  to  nerves,  nerves  to  body.  Or  it  may  reverse  the
order  and  proceed  thus: — body  to  nerves,  nerves  to  brain,  brain  to
mind.  Whether  disease  may  have  been  psycho-physical  or  physico-
psychic,  in  its  formation  and  development,  can  often  be  determined  only
by  a  group  of  specialists  working  as  one.  This  much  is  absolutely  sure :
Every  chronic  invalid  has  somehow,  somewhere,  lost  faith — and  must
have  it  again  before  he  recovers;  the  natural  sequence  of  faith  is,  first
faith  in  God,  then  faith  in  Nature,  then  faith  in  self;  accordingly,  to
renew  and  re-establish  the  consciousness  and  habit  of  faith  by  means  of
the  church  that  most  appeals  to  the  invalid,  seems  a  permanent,  scienti-
fic basis,  for  any  and  every  particular  mode  of  cure.  The  folly  of  the
"faith-cure"  is  not  in  the  faith,  but  in  the  lack  of  reason,  skill  and
action,  to  supplement  the  faith.

Each  of  the  foregoing  ten  systems  of  analyzing  and  probing  the
mental  state  of  a  man  deserves  a  whole  volume  to  itself — not  a  para-
graph or  two,  as  here  given.  But  I  wanted  here  to  present  a  fairly  com-
plete survey  of  the  possibilities  in  mental  diagnosis,  the  actualities  being
yet  largely  a  matter  of  future  achievement.

How  generally  and  acutely  a  survey  of  this  kind  is  needed  through-
out the  health  culture  field  may  be  learned  by  a  study  of  the  advertising
literature  of  our  drugless  schools  and  sanitaria.  I  have  gone  over  the
literature  mailed  to  prospective  students  and  patients  by  a  dozen  of  our
leading  institutions;  and  I  fail  to  discern  that  a  single  one  has  properly
judged  or  adequately  handled  the  psychological  factors.  The  "symp-
tom blanks"  and  examination  questions  are  practically  all  physical; —
to  read  them  over,  you  would  think  a  man  was  a  gob  of  mud  and  blood
thrown  together  by  chance.  The  only  chance  is  the  chance  we  take  in
calling  it  chance.

I  have  a  strong  conviction  on  this  matter.  I  believe  that  a  majority
of  the  chronic,  stubborn,  deep-lying  ailments  that  "baffle"  the  doctors
would  be  found  to  inhere  not  in  the  flesh  but  in  the  mind — if  only  we  had
the  skill  to  discern  mental  causes.  When  a  man  or  woman  has  endured
forty  or  fifty  years  of  civilization,  the  result  is  a  tangled,  muddled  mess
of  spotted,  bruised  and  broken  thoughts,  repressed  instincts,  unex-
pressed or  ill-expressed  emotions,  banged  and  battered  intuitions,
shattered  hopes,  wounded  faiths,  and  spent  ambitions.  Out  of  this
ferment  and  fever  of  the  human  heart,  most  ills  of  the  flesh  arise.  The
troubles  of  childhood  are  quickly  and  easily  cured,  because  children  are
psychologically  frank,  open,  clean,  brave,  simple.  But  the  average
adult  is  psychologically  fearful,  secretive,  soured,  numb,  involved.
And  here  lies  the  source  of  that  long  train  of  debilities  attending  middle
age.


I


Universal  Naturopathic  Directonj  and  Ihnjfrs'  Guide  211

The  first  nulliod  of  diatjnosis  should  be  spiritual,  the  second  emo-
tional, the  third  mental,  the  fourth  psychic,  the  fifth  and  last — physical.
How  reverse  and  perverse  the  present  scheme  is,  may  be  gathered  from
even  a  slight,  superficial  observation; — we  put  physical  diagnosis  first
and  wholly  or  partially  neglect  all  the  others!

One  of  my  long-cherished  dreams  is  that  of  an  American  Diagnostic
Institute.  This  will  be  a  place  where  all  the  known  means  of  diagnosis
are  collected,  collated,  unified  and  utilized.  Here  the  invalid  will  be
taken  for  unprejudiced,  complete,  scientific  and  fundamental  examina-
tion. He  will  be  turned  inside  out,  metaphorically  speaking:  will  be
told  exactly  what  his  trouble  is,  where  it  starts,  and  how  it  may  be  ex-
pelled; will  be  instructed  how  to  handle  himself  in  body  and  mind;  and
will  then  be  referred  to  the  specialist,  or  group  of  specialists,  who  can
properly  administer  the  treatment  or  treatments  required.  Such  an  in-
stitution would  deserve,  and  I  believe  will  have,  a  million  dollar  en-
dowment for  its  research,  investigation  and  experiment.  The  great
hygienic  truth  of  the  coming  century  will  be  known  to  be  this:  The
mental  is  the  fundamental.  To  understand  this  fully  is  not  to  neglect
the  body,  but  to  impel,  vitalize,  and  use  the  body  to  a  higher  degree  of
practical  force.


212  Vnivcrsal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  I^uijers'  Guide


CHAPTER  XVIII

MENTAL  PRESCRIPTION


There  are  five  stages  of  treatment  for  the  sick.  They  depend  not
upon  the  need  of  the  sick,  as  they  sliould,  but  rather  upon  the  evolution
valid, I  first  diagnose  the  doctor.  A  doctor  needs  diagnosing  more  than
the  disease  he  diagnoses.

The  five  stages  of  treatment  are  as  follows:

1.  Incantation

2.  Medication

3.  Manipulation

4.  Education

5.  Transformation

We  are  now  in  the  third  stage — half  way  between  where  we  have
been  and  where  we  should  be.  I  would  here  call  attention  to  the
principle  and  method  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  stages.  Let  us  first  give
a  summary  of  the  initial  three  stages,  hitherto  marking  the  development
of  the  healing  profession.

1.  Incantation.  The  two  most  primitive,  and  most  powerful,  mani-
festations of  the  human  mind  are  fear  of  the  undesirable  unknown
and  faith  in  the  desirable  unknown.  The  incantation  specialist  works
on  both.  First  he  scares  you  into  paying  him  to  wield  his  magic  signs,
then  he  flatters  you  into  believing  that  he  has  placated  the  angi*y  gods,
routed  the  afflicting  devils,  and  nailed  down  for  you  a  reserved  chair  in
perpetuity  on  Olympus.  Among  the  old  incantation  specialists  were
the  voodoo  man,  the  witch  doctor,  the  charm  vendor,  the  "conjurer,"
the  alchemist,  the  fortune  teller,  the  clairvoyant,  the  brewer  of  magic
potions.  They  all  went  on  the  same  principle — or  lack  of  it;  that  the
human  mind  is  a  hot-bed  of  superstition,  and  all  a  doctor  has  to  do  is
tend  it  faithfully.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertonj  and  BiiifPrs'  Guide  213

You  might  suppose  that  incantation  was  a  relic  of  harbarisni,  long
since  passed  away.  But  nay,  not  so — we  still  observe  it  with  us.  We
see  it  in  patent  medicine,  where  a  long  list  of  ghostly  symptoms  and  a
gleaming  array  of  lurid  testimonials  act  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader
as  the  hocus-pocus  of  the  conjurer  acted  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader's
barbaric  forefather.  We  see  incantation  in  Christian  Science,  where
many  devoutly  proclaim  the  exaggerated  power  of  "malicious  animal
magnetism,"  and  unite  in  sending  avalanches  of  "death-thought"  upon
the  helpless,  hapless,  persons  of  their  alleged  enemies.  We  see  incan-
tation in  Mental  Science  and  New  Thought,  where  "absent  healers"
presume  to  treat  all  manner  of  chronic  disease  by  projecting  thought-
waves  of  telepathic,  atmospheric  or  astral  vibration  to  the  distant
bedside  of  the  patient,  and  cure  him  by  cunningly  devised  fable.  (The
mind  of  an  absent  healer  is  always  absent;  this  is  why  he  is  called
"absent" — he  is  not  all  there,  poor  fellow).

We  see  incantation  even  in  Osteopathy — that  seemingly  most  prac-
tical and  materialistic  of  healing  methods.  For,  does  not  every  Osteo-
path in  good  and  regular  standing  aim  to  convince  you,  immediately
after  diagnosing  you,  that  your  spine  was  born  busted,  has  since  become
more  busted,  and  will  soon  be  utterly  and  everlastingly  busted  if  you
don't  let  him  wisely  wiggle  it?  What,  I  ask  you,  is  such  a  procedure
but  a  modern  form  of  incantation?  I  believe  in  Christian  Science,
New  Thought,  Osteopathy — even  patent  medicine  perchance,  for  certain
ailments,  under  certain  conditions  and  restrictions.  But  I  do  not  believe
in  the  subterranean  hypnosis  that  most  of  these  specialists  deal  out.
It  is  only  incantation,  prettily  dressed  in  a  pseudo-science  lingo.

2.  Medication.  The  witch  doctor,  as  intelligence  grew  in  the  minds
of  his  patients,  found  himself  losing  hold  on  their  purse-strings.  A
doctor's  wealth  is  proportional  to  the  ignorance  of  his  patients.  There-
fore, to  keep  the  patient  ignorant  is  absolutely  fundamental  to  a  doctor's
silk  hat  and  three  square  meals  a  day.  When  the  witch  doctor  was
limited  to  psychology  and  a  few  simple  herbs,  he  was  on  a  precarious
footing — the  people  were  constantly  encroaching  on  his  ground  by  study-
ing for  themselves  the  nature  of  their  own  minds  and  of  the  herbs  that
any  one  might  gather  from  the  fields.  Hence  it  became  necessary  for
the  doctor  to  evolve  a  system  of  chemical  therapeutics,  demanding  a
prolonged  course  of  mysterious  training,  that  the  people  at  large  never
would  or  could  undertake.  Here  we  have  the  psychological  reason  for
the  invention  of  drugs.  In  respect  to  medication,  the  chief
difference  between  a  drug  doctor  and  a  witch  doctor  is  that  the  drug
doctor  murmurs  Latin  names  and  wears  a  dark  atmosphere,  instead
of  muttering  barbaric  gibberish  and  wearing  a  mask  of  bright  paint.


214  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide

The  psychology  is  the  same — an  unlimited  supply  of  ignorance  and  awe,
on  the  part  of  the  patient.

I  do  not  wholly  disbelieve  in  materia  medica;  nor  fail  to  recognize
the  devotion,  skill,  bravery  and  beauty  of  the  life  and  work  of  many  a
doctor  or  surgeon.  But  the  system  is  wrong,  that  requires  ignorance
and  deception  in  order  to  flourish.  And  three  fourths  of  the  doctors
and  surgeons  would  starve  to  death  if  ignorance  and  deception  were
to  be  wholly  banished  from  their  daily  practice.  The  primitive  psy-
chology^ of  incantation,  here  in  the  dawn  of  the  twentieth  century,
fills  and  sways  the  minds  of  the  sick.

3.  Manipulation.  The  first  advance  in  healing  came  with  the  grad-
ual awakening  of  popular  intelligence — and  the  substitution  of  medica-
tion for  incantation.  The  second  advance,  by  far  a  greater  one,  resulted
from  the  modern  awakening  of  the  public  conscience;  and  to  this  we
may  trace  the  modern  substitution  of  manipulation  for  medication.
Every  great  reform,  of  a  nation  as  of  an  individual,  is  produced  by  the
careful  blending  of  conscience  and  intelligence.  Most  reform  lacks  intel-
ligence, while  most  objects  of  reform  lack  conscience.  The  leaders  of
health  reform,  a  very  large  majority  of  them,  still  lack  the  required
amount  of  intelligence;  being  satisfied  because  they  have  gained  more
than  their  predecessors,  the  doctors.  But  there  is  a  science  of  manipu-
lation, while  there  is  no  science  of  medication;  herein  we  do  progress,
if  slowly.  We  learn  from  presumed  authorities  that  over  20,000,000
people  in  the  United  States  believe  in  manipulation  as  opposed  to
medication; — and  this  number  of  citizens  have  begun  to  think  for
themselves,  their  own  health,  longevity,  and  prosperity,  all  within  the
past  fifty  years.

Now  manipulation  is  either  physical  or  mental — contrary  to  the
belief  of  most  persons,  who  would  regard  it  as  merely  physical.  Hygiene
is  always  both  physical  and  mental,  and  anything  purporting  to  be
hygienic  which  omits  either  physiology  or  psychology  is  by  so  much  less
than  safe.  Physical  manipulation  comprises  massage,  mechanotherapy,
osteopathy,  chiropractic,  hydrotherapy,  gymnastics,  thermotherapy,
electrotherapy,  diet,  air  and  sun  baths — in  fact  all  drugless  aids  to
elimination,  circulation,  respiration,  and  other  physiological  function-
ings  of  the  body.  Mental  manipulation  comprises  hypnotism,  sug-
gestion, magnetism,  occultism.  New  Thought  and  Christian  Science
"treatments,"  faith  cure,  mesmerism,  laying-on  of  hands,  phrenological
or  astrological  prescription,  psychic  rapport,  instantaneous  "divine"
healing.  All  these  forms  and  systems  of  psychological  therapeutics
manipulate  the  mind,  as  massage  or  hydrotherapy  manipulates  the  body.


Universal  Naturopdthir  Dirrclory  and  Buijrrs'  (inide  ^lij

They  have  little  or  none  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  quality  and  force
that  their  devotees  and  sponsors  claim  for  them.

Up  to  this  time,  we  have  reached  only  the  stage  of  manipulation  as
an  epoch  of  the  healing  art.  Most  of  us  appear  satisfied  with  this,  rather
scorning  and  despising  the  witch  doctor  and  the  drug  doctor,  as  heing
sadly  gross,  numhly  dense,  and  fatally  foolish.  We  have  much  to  learn.
A  thousand  years  from  now,  the  great  health  pioneers  and  reformers
will  regard  us  with  a  combination  of  noble  tolerance  and  amused  pity;
we  shall  seem  to  them  as  hopelessly  antique  and  impossible  as  the  witch
doctor  and  drug  doctor  now  seem  to  us.  I  like  to  look  a  thousand  years
ahead.  The  action  uplifts  my  heart,  stretches  my  mind,  expands  my
faith,  and  makes  me  feel  good  all  through.  The  man  who  never  looks
a  thousand  years  ahead  is  apt  to  lag  a  thousand  years  behind.

4.  Education.  This  will  be  the  next  move  onward  and  upward,  in
the  five  stages  of  therapeutic  progress.  The  universal  need  for  health
instruction  appears  in  the  fact  that  the  customaiy  span  of  human  life  is
now  sixty  years  less  than  it  should  be.  Putting  the  earning  capacity  of
the  average  individual  at  $1,000  a  year — a  low  estimate,  we  have  the
startling  sum  of  .$60,000  lost  to  the  family,  community  and  State  of  each
of  the  100,000,000  people  in  this  country.  This  means  a  total  waste  of
$6,000,000,000,000  in  our  national  earning  power,  due  to  needless
curtailment  of  the  lives  of  our  citizens.  A  few  thinking  people  are  be-
ginning to  realize  the  enormity  of  this  biologic  and  economic  crime;  and
to  attempt  to  provide  some  sort  of  hygienic  and  prophylactic  educa-
tion through  such  agencies  as  the  Health  Committee  of  One  Hundred,
the  Safety  First  Commission,  the  Life  Extension  Institute,  the  State  and
City  Boards  and  Departments  of  Health  in  certain  progressive  localities.
But  the  movement  has  not  yet  begun  to  reach  the  true  source  of  disease —
ignorance  and  negligence  on  the  part  of  both  parents  of  the  children  of
to-morrow.

1  would  have  a  law  passed  to  this  effect:  When  a  child  under  six
years  of  age  has  anything  particular  fundamentally  wrong  with  its
brain  or  body,  a  certain  percentage  of  the  doctors'  fees  and  other  ex-
penses of  treatment  shall  be  paid  by  the  clergyman  who  married  the
child's  parents,  and  another  percentage  by  the  magistrate  who  issued
the  license  of  marriage;  when  the  child  has  any  serious  trouble,  mental
or  physical,  after  six  years  of  age,  a  percentage  of  the  costs  of  treatment
shall  be  paid  by  the  child's  teacher.  A  law  like  this  would  do  more  in
a  year  to  wake  up  our  magistrates,  preachers  and  teachers  to  their  per-
sonal responsibility  on  health  lines  than  a  hundred  years  of  mild  and
gentle  pleading  through  health  publications.


216  {^nincrsal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiiyers'  Guide

The  law  would  be  entirely  fair.  No  minister  has  a  right  to  perform
a  marriage  ceremony  without  making  sure  that  both  candidates  are  free
of  constitutional  weakness  and  venereal  taint,  and  are  taught  in  the
fundamentals  of  eugenics,  physical  culture  and  child  hygiene.  How
can  a  marriage  be  called  holy  when  the  contracting  parties  have  become
too  weakened  or  polluted  to  give  their  children  a  decent  start  in  life?
And  if  the  marriage  isn't  holy,  what  is  a  preacher  doing  at  the  ceremony?
The  teacher  should  take  responsibility  from  the  preacher,  when  the
child  reaches  the  lawful  school  age — six  years.  Before  accepting  any
pupil  in  a  school-room,  the  teacher  or  principal  should  require  an  exam-
ination of  the  child,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  what  the  natural
weakness  or  inherited  predisposition  may  be;  and  should  then  give  the
child,  and  the  parents,  a  set  of  approved  instructions  for  those  exercises,
foods,  baths,  garments,  books,  and  other  essentials  to  modern  prophy-
laxis covering  the  special  needs  of  the  child  in  view.  This  plan  would
be  only  one  out  of  many,  aiming  at  the  rational  and  effectual  banish-
ment of  the  unnecessary  pain,  disease  and  disability  now  prevailing
everywhere.

Even  more  desirable,  however,  is  the  education  of  the  invalid.  I
marvel  that  this  has  never  been  properly  and  adequately  supplied,  in
any  modern  school  or  sanitarium.  Dosing  a  man  with  health  foods  or
metaphysical  suggestions  cannot  cure  the  man.  From  a  standpoint  of
either  morality  or  efTiciency,  the  drugless  colleges  and  resorts  now
claiming  so  much  are  but  slightly  in  advance  of  allopathic  and  surgical
institutions.  Neither  hygiene  nor  psychology  has,  thus  far,  gone  to  the
root  of  disease. Let  us  try  to  make  our  meaning  clear.

When  a  man  gets  drunk,  he  expects  to  be  locked  up;  he  imbibes
with  all  the  risk  of  jail  in  full  view.  But  when  a  man  gets  sick,  he  ex-
pects to  be  coddled,  pampered,  waited  on  and  fussed  over — and  he
feels  personally  aggrieved  if  he  can't  have  the  prettiest  nurse  and  the
wisest  doctor  in  attendance.  Now  being  sick  is  a  crime,  not  much  less
than  being  drunk.  And  when  a  man  is  sick  more  than  once  of  the  same
disease,  he  has  become  a  hardened,  habitual  criminal.

The  most  discouraging  thing  about  an  invalid  is  that  he  wants  to  be
"cured."  Generally  speaking,  he  does  not  deserve  to  be  cured — he  de-
serves to  be  lectured,  spanked,  and  sent  to  bed  without  his  supper.
When  a  child  breaks  a  hole  through  the  orchard  fence,  fills  up  on
green  apples,  and  acquires  a  vociferous  case  of  colic,  we  think  not  of
petting  him,  but  of  punishing  him.  The  chronic  invalid  must  be  pun-
ished— he  has  destroyed  some  fence  of  the  moral  law,  and  has  partaken
of  forbidden  fruit.  He  needs  conversion  more  than  cure.  But  he  does
not  want  convej'sioD,  he  will  not  pay  for  it,  and  up  to  the  present  time


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  217

no  scheme  has  been  devised  for  guaranteeing  liis  conversion  while  he
pays  for  his  cure.  So  great  a  moral  deficiency  must  be  recognized  and
met. How?

The  first  question  a  sick  man  should  ask  himself  is  this:  "When
and  where  and  how  and  why  could  I  have  been  such  a  blamed  fool  as
to  get  in  this  condition?"  And  his  first  order  to  his  doctor  should  be:
"Before  you  start  to  cure  me,  you  must  promise  to  teach  me  how  to
stay  well,  and  to  exact  from  me  a  man's  word  of  honor  that  I  won't  dis-
grace myself  again  by  such  a  lapse  into  weakness."  Did  you  ever  hear
a  sick  person  say  such  things?  I  know  you  didn't,  because  the  shock
would  have  paralyzed  you,  and  you  wouldn't  be  reading  this.  Yet  no
invalid  was  ever  completely  cured,  without  such  a  confession  and  a
resolution  as  I  have  indicated.

Every  normal  patient  of  a  sanitarium  should  be  taught,  before
treatment,  during  treatment  or  after  treatment,  as  to  the  nature,  cause
and  cure  of  his  trouble,  and  the  principles  and  methods  for  obviating
its  recurrence.  I  say  "normal"  patient,  to  exempt  those  who  are  men-
tally deranged  or  so  badly  weakened  and  disordered  physically  that
real  study  seems  temporarily  impossible.  1  would,  indeed,  have  it  under-
stood that  to  be  exempt  from  this  course  of  instruction  is  to  be  consid-
ered feeble-minded.  A  set  of  handbooks  for  the  personal  guidance  of
patients,  during  and  after  treatment,  should  be  prepared  by  a  duly
qualified  and  elected  Board  of  Therapeutic  Instruction;  and  these
handbooks  rendered  available  not  only  to  the  guests  of  a  sanitarium  or
hospital,  but  also  to  the  clients  of  the  individual  healer,  doctor,  physi-
cian and  nurse.  A  patient  should  never  be  discharged  as  "cured"  until
he  has  creditably  passed  a  personal  examination  on  his  organized  and
utilized  knowledge  of  his  own  case.  Without  such  a  guarantee  of
permanence,  any  course  of  treatment  is  a  patch-work  job,  only  a  trifle
better  than  a  make-shift  from  a  drug-store.

A  kind  of  inkling  of  a  realization  of  this  need  is  feebly  and  spas-  .
modically  shown  by  the  attempt,  often  made  in  recent  j'^ears,  to  place
health  books  and  libraries  at  the  disposal  of  sanitarium  guests.  But
this  lazy  excuse  for  instruction  will  not  suffice.  Heaven  knows  it  is  bad
enough  for  a  sick  person  to  be  always  dwelling  on  his  or  her  symptoms,
feelings,  pains,  fears,  and  imaginings;  but  when  you  turn  the  sick
person  loose  in  a  library  of  diagnostic,  therapeutic,  books  and  pictures,
you  fill  the  soul  of  the  poor  unfortunate  with  everybody  else's  troubles
too,  and  give  him  acres  of  woe  to  traverse  in  his  mind,  beyond  the
limits  of  his  own  weary  field  of  introspection.

A  little  knowledge  is  a  dangerous  thing — particularly  when  it  isn't


218  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and^Buyers'  Guide

knowledge;  and  almost  as  many  things  that  aren't  so,  are  published
in  the  health  journals  as  in  the  daily  newspapers.  When  I  see  a  room-
ful of  sanitarium  inmates  poring  sadly  and  pondering  badly  over  a
library  of  health  literature,  puzzling  and  racking  their  poor  brains  as
to  who  is  right  and  who  isn't,  and  if  they  should  or  should  not  do  this,
that  or  the  other  thing — I  feel  a  wild  and  wicked  desire  to  throw  all  the
books  out  of  the  window,  paste  funny  cartoons  over  the  walls  of  the
place,  and  at  the  point  of  a  pistol,  force  every  solemn-looking  guest
to  dance  a  jig,  tell  a  joke,  or  sing  a  merry  song!

Back  to  our  theme — quick!  1  almost  forgot  to  be  dignified,  which
lapse  into  commonsense  and  humanlikeness  would  be  fatal  on  the  part
of  the  author  of  a  therapeutic  dissertation.  Hoping  to  avoid  any  more
peril  of  this  nature,  I  will  hurry  on  to  the  next  and  last  stage  in  thera-
peutic method.

5.  Transformation.  It  is  the  rule  of  a  good  business  man  that
every  species  of  failure  be  turned  to  account,  and  made  an  asset  of
experience  and  resource  in  reckoning  for  the  future.  It  should  also  be
the  rule  of  a  good  health  seeker.  How?  I  will  tell  you.  Every  physical
weakness  is  the  counterpart  of  a  mental  deficiency  or  moral  defect.
Without  an  attack  of  disease  one  hardly  ever  knows  just  where  and
what  the  vulnerable  point  in  his  psychic  armor  may  be;  hence  the  per-
son who  has  never  been  ill  generally  fails  to  estimate  himself  properly,
study  himself  closely,  or  use  himself  fully.  The  real  purpose  of  sick-
ness is  self-analysis.  Take  my  own  case.  Until  my  health  broke  down,
utterly  and  almost  hopelessly,  in  my  senior  year  at  college,  I  had  not
the  slightest  notion  of  where  my  life  work  lay,  what  it  should  mean  to
myself  and  others,  how  to  find,  prepare  for,  and  enter  upon  it.  Only
when  I  was  brought  face  to  face  with  the  order  of  the  gods — "Save  your-
self or  die!" — could  I  realize  the  power  of  the  human  will  to  extricate
a  man  from  the  jaws  of  death,  and  to  lift  him  to  his  own  predestined
place  in  life.  Not  to  any  merit  or  talent  in  myself,  but  to  the  "Do-or-
■  die"  injunction  of  chronic  disease,  may  be  traced  the  fact  that  my
health  and  efficiency  writings  have  had  a  circulation  of  3,000,000  copies—
the  largest  in  the  world  for  publications  of  their  kind.  Are  you  a  vic-
tim of  chronic  disease,  a  daily  sufferer  from  pain  and  weakness?  Then
your  greatest  life  work,  your  highest  boon  and  blessing,  and  your
guarantee  of  permanent  health,  will  be  found  to  lie  somewhere  back  of
your  trouble,  in  the  self-knowledge  and  self-rule  that  God  means  you  to
attain  because  of  your  trouble.  Every  illness  is  God's  invitation  to
larger  usefulness.  Why  complain  or  mope  or  worry — with  great  things
just  ahead?

A  few  concrete  examples  of  the  higher  potentials  of  a  rational  diag-


Universal  Naturopathic  Direr tonj  and  Buyers'  (iuide  219

nosis  and  cure.  A  man  with  liver  trouble  generally  has  a  mind  peculiarly
keen,  often  brilliant  and  original,  but  not  as  yet  focused  on  the  bodily
functions  of  life;  when  you  teach  him  to  regulate  the  action  of  the  liver,
you  may  also  enable  him  to  form  a  habit  of  mental  efficiency  that  will
serve  him  greatly  on  other  lines  of  development.  A  woman  with  neur-
asthenia proverbially  has  finer  sensibilities  and  quicker  perceptions
than  the  average  mortal;  when  you  teach  her  to  gain  poise,  and  to  hold
the  nerves  ready  and  steady  for  actual  events  and  responsibilities,  you
can  make  her  a  more  useful  member  of  the  home  and  the  community
than  the  woman  ever  was  who  could  not  have  a  nervous  breakdown
because  of  being  tough  and  thick  as  a  cow.  Analysis  on  these  principles,
fully  and  carefully  applied  to  every  case  of  chronic  disease,  would  not
only  hasten  recovery  by  cheering  and  strengthening  the  mind  of  the
sick,  but  would  also  tend  toward  a  wonderful  transformation  of  the  life
of  the  man  or  woman  being  taught  while  being  treated.  Affliction  is  the
ante-room  to  exaltation.

How  shall  mental  prescription  and  instruction  be  devised  and  car-
ried out?  Here  we  are  confronted  by  a  difficulty  that  makes  the  prob-
lem one  of  solution  for  to-morrow — we  don't  seem  to  have  enough
sense  to-day.  No  mental  scientist  that  I  ever  saw  is  competent
to  teach  mental  science  to  an  invalid.  No  physical  culturist
that  I  ever  saw  is  competent  to  teach  physical  culture  to  an  invalid.  The
man  to  teach  mental  science  is  a  physical  culturist,  and  the  man  to
teach  physical  culture  is  a  mental  scientist.  Am  I  crazy?  I  am  not —
I  am  beginning  to  arrive  at  sanity.  I  used  to  be  more  or  less  crazy,  first
when  I  was  a  physical  culturist,  then  when  I  was  a  mental  scientist.
Now,  being  both,  and  yet  neither,  I  am  in  a  position  to  see  the  advan-
tages, and  also  the  limitations  of  each  separately  and  both  together.
Only  he  who  has  personally  mastered  a  system  of  therapeutics,  but  is
financially  independent  of  the  practice  of  it,  can  measure  it  fairly  and
utilize  it  sanely.

Our  problem  is  to  find  the  expert  who  knows  all  systems,  but  pre-
that  he  does  not  exist.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  and  absurdity  and  pathos,
a  metaphysician,  occultist  or. psychotherapist  is  likely  to  be  most  un-
psychological  in  his  professional  use  of  psychology.  For  example,  any
kind  of  "treatment"  is  at  best  childish,  at  worst  immoral.  The  reason,
the  instinct,  the  perceptions,  the  aspirations  and  the  will  of  a  normal
man  rebel  at  the  idea  of  "treatment"  by  an  alleged  healer.  God  and
Nature,  these  alone  heal.

A  metaphysician  who  claims  to  possess  a  mystic  power  for  health
which  the  patient  lacks  and  must  lack,  is  preying  on  superstition  as


220  Universal  Naluropalhic  Director]}  and  Buyers'  Guide


grossly  and  greedily  as  the  allopath  does  who  inculcates  belief  in  the
unknown  magic  of  a  pill.  Example:  the  promise  of  "instantaneous"
healing  so  often  made  by  mental  practitioners,  and  even  advertised  in
health  journals.  This  reminds  me  of  the  old-time  doctrine  of  most
"orthodox"  church  members,  that  proclaimed  the  validity  of  "death-
bed repentance."  A  man  could  be  a  devil  all  his  life,  then  by  repenting
just  prior  to  the  advent  of  the  undertaker,  could  be  wafted  straight  up
to  glory  and  live  with  the  angels  forever  after.  A  doctrine  so  barbaric
and  immoral  had  to  die,  of  course;  but  a  worthy  successor  is  the  doc-
trine of  "instantaneous  healing."

Why  should  a  sick  man  expect  to  recover  instantaneously?  Why
should  he  want  to?  He  doesn't  deserve  to,  and  to  want  a  thing  without
deserving  it  is  the  mark  of  an  infant.  Perhaps  the  first  sign  of  moral
health  in  a  sick  man  is  to  endure  suffering  bravely,  sweetly,  patiently,
contritely,  hoping  for  relief  and  working  for  it,  but  willing  to  go  through
the  pain  demanded  by  the  righteous  law  of  cause  and  cf!cct.  This  point
1  mention  as  one  of  many  examples  where  the  typical  metaphysician
is  not  a  safe  guide.  He  lacks  a  working  knowledge  of  body,  of  heart
and  of  soul.  And  of  all  the  different  kinds  of  drugless  treatment,  the
least  profitable  is  mental  manipulation  void  of  everything  else.  For
the  mind,  as  a  purely  intellectual  function,  is  the  least  important  of  any
operation  of  the  human  machine.

However,  some  form  of  mental  therapeutics  applies  in  every  form
of  chronic  disease.  The  problem  is  to  make  the  application.  We  have  a
score  of  different  schools  and  systems,  variously  termed  Psychotherapy,
Mental  Science,  Christian  Science,  New  Thought,  Occult  or  Divine  Heal-
ing, Magnetism,  Hypnotism,  Suggestive  Therapeutics,  Emmanuclism,
Oriental  Mysticism,  Christian  Mysticism,  and  so  forth.  How  shall  we
determine  which  of  these,  if  any,  belongs  in  the  cure  for  a  specified  ail-
ment of  a  given  patient?  We  are  now  limited  to  a  prejudiced,  though
it  may  be  an  honest,  judgment  on  a  case  pronounced  by  the  devotee  of
each  peculiar  system.  No  man  is  to  be  trusted  on  a  scientific  basis  where
the  religious  belief  is  involved.  Religion  overthrows  reason.  Perhaps  it
should  do  so,  as  a  moral  and  spiritual  exercise — but  not  as  a  therapue-
tic  system.  As  religion  is  more  or  less  concerned  with  the  founding  of
every  system  of  mind  cure,  the  practitioner  of  any  system  is  thereby
made  incompetent  to  judge  the  scientific  value  of  the  treatment— though
he  may  refuse  to  acknowledge  this,  even  to  himself.  The  blind  are  not
they  who  cannot  see,  but  they  who  will  not  see.

What  we  should  have  is  an  impartial  tribunal,  composed  of
doubters  and  scoffers,  to  weigh  all  the  facts  and  theories  of  mental


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihnjrrs'  (iuidc  221

practice,  and  be  convinced  of  the  healing  power  of  the  mind  against
their  own  will!  Then  we  should  begin  to  have  material  for  establishing
the  psychology  of  health  on  a  rational,  experimental,  differential  basis.
The  field  of  psychic  research  has  already  been  explored  in  this  way,
and  the  results  have  shown  the  wisdom  of  the  method.  The  principal
investigators — men  like  William  T.  Stead,  Oliver  Lodge,  James  H.  Hyslop
and  Hereward  Carrington — ^have  been  of  a  purely  scientific  turn  of
mind,  not  given  to  theories,  fads  or  vagaries.  Only  by  a  long  series  of
proofs  that  seemed  to  them  incontrovertible  did  they  yield  their  natural
scepticism,  and  affirm  the  truths  of  psychic  research.  I  would  have  a
board  of  psychotherapeutic  investigation  appointed,  with  the  chairman
Jess  Willard  and  the  chairmaness  Madame  Curie!  Now  fling  up  your
hands  in  horror,  ye  pale  sisters  who  vegetate  and  hallucinate  in  "the
silence,"  as  a  pretext  for  being  lazy.

Curative  psychology  must  fit  the  ailment  and  the  invalid — not  the
practitioner.  Example :  New  Thought  appeals  to  a  certain  type  of  mind
and  state  of  unfoldment.  Christian  Science  to  another  type  and  state,
Emmanuelism  to  another  type  and  state,  each  of  a  dozen  other  systems
to  another  type  and  state.  When  a  sufferer  goes  to  a  Christian
Scientist,  we  will  say,  he  is  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  it  and  engages
a  healer;  or,  the  system  does  not  appeal  to  him  and  he  fails  to  give  it  a
trial.  In  the  latter  event,  he  is  apt  to  underestimate  the  possible  value
of  Christian  Science  treatment,  in  the  former  event  to  overestimate  it.
Suppose  the  mind  of  the  patient  yields  to  the  idea,  but  his  body  fails  to
yield  to  the  practice — a  frequent  happening,  shown  by  the  numbers  of
deaths  of  Christian  Scientists  who  refused  to  call  a  doctor.  In  such  a
case,  the  method  works  psychologically,  but  fails  biologically  and  the
patient  dies.  If  another  kind  of  metaphysics  had  been  used,  appealing
with  force  to  his  mind  but  co-ordinated  with  scientific  measures  for  his
body,  the  patient  would  have  lived.  On  the  other  hand,  he  might  still
have  died  if  a  rational  cure  for  his  body  had  not  been  aided  by  a  trans-
cendental cure  for  his  mind.  The  same  line  of  logic  holds  in  every  form
and  species  of  metaphysical  thought.  We  must  have  the  central  truths
in  all  these  systems  brought  together,  and  made  personally  suitable  to
every  disease  and  every  sufferer.  All  invalids  should  be  taught  meta-
physics— few  invalids  should  be  treated  by  metaphysicians;  here,  in  a
sentence,  we  have  the  kernel  of  the  whole  matter.

Sane,  calm,  progressive,  constructive,  enthusiastic,  hopeful,  resolute
thinking  helps  any  sick  man,  woman  or  child  in  curing  the  trouble  and
preventing  its  return,  whatever  the  trouble  may  be.  Somewhere  a  book,
a  school  or  a  system  of  therapeutic  thought  has  been  evolved  specially


222  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

sufl'ers. What  means  are  you  going  to  take  to  find  the  book,  school  or
system  that  will  hasten  health  for  you  and  yours?

Mind  is  the  fate-maker.  No  handicap  or  pain,  weakness,  illness,
or  apparent  misfortune  of  any  kind,  has  a  real  hold  on  the  man  who
wills  for  health  hard  enough,  hopes  for  it  high  enough,  works  for  it  long
enough.  Both  God  and  Nature  want  us  to  be  well.  For  the  daily
support  of  God  and  Nature,  we  have  but  to  think  near  God  and  live  near
Nature. Health  must  follow,  as  day  follows  night.

Nor  should  we  limit  the  bounty  and  beneficence  of  Nature  to  the
healing  of  disease,  the  banishing  of  pain,  the  promoting  of  strength,
longevity  and  happiness.  Nature  speaks  to  the  body  of  the  animal,  but
to  the  mind,  heart  and  soul  of  man.  Whoever  achieves  greatly  in  the
realm  of  mind,  heart  or  soul  is  perforce  a  believer  in  the  wonders  of
Nature,  a  student  in  her  laws,  a  follower  in  her  paths.  The  great  are
always  natural — and  the  artificial  or  superficial  are  always  small.  We
fail  only  wherein  we  are  less  than  ourselves.

He  who  invents  a  marvelous  instrument,  creates  a  beautiful  poem,
or  builds  a  new  empire  of  trade,  has  but  seen,  tapped  and  utilized  the
hidden  streams  of  power  flowing  from  Nature  into  his  mind  and  the
minds  of  his  fellows.

And  he  who  leads  a  great  reform,  conducts  a  great  philanthropy,
or  renders  a  great  public  service,  has  but  found  and  materialized  the
forces  and  energies  of  the  soul,  constantly  though  silently  and  gently
driven  to  and  through  us  by  the  wisdom  and  blessing  of  Nature.

Spiritual  renewal  underlies  physical  relief.  So  the  aim  and  outcome
of  natural  healing  is  divine  helping — helping  ourselves,  helping  our
fellows,  helping  Nature  to  help  us  all,  helping  God  to  do  God's  work  by
doing  our  work  better,  thus  to  make  eternal  improvement  our  watch-
word here  as  hereafter.

Only  on  a  base  of  impregnable  realism  can  we  build  a  tower  of
superb  idealism.  Only  as  Naturism  first  grounds  us  on  the  bed-rock  of
practical  experience,  then  impels  us  to  erect  a  beautiful  and  useful  life
structure  for  the  permanent  housing  of  the  soul,  does  Naturalism  yield
her  full  service  and  do  we  attain  our  full  stature.  Do  great  things,
but  dream  ever  greater;  this  is  the  law  of  sure  and  swift  progress,  in
the  earth  and  in  the  heavens.  To  be  as  real  as  the  soil  yet  as  subliminal
as  the  sky — this  and  this  only  is  to  be  as  natural  and  as  divine,  as  our
character  foretells  and  ovir  destiny  commands.


The  New  Science  of  Healing


or


The  Doctrine  of  the
Unity  of  Diseases


B


By  LOUIS  KUHNL


PART  ONE


WHAT  LED  ME  TO  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  NEO-

NATUROPATHY,  THE  NEW  SCIENCE

OF  HEALING


IT  is  characteristic  of  human  nature  that  anyone  who  thinks  he  has
discovered  something  new  and  original,  feels  an  irresistible  impulse
to  communicate  it  to  his  fellow-men.

Ambition  and  vanity  have,  no  doubt,  a  share  in  creating  this  desire;
but,  fundamentally,  it  is  thoroughly  defensible  and  truly  human.  The
truth  must  be  proclaimed,  even  should  one  in  general  despise  all  show
and  glitter,  and  find  little  but  weariness  and  vanity  amidst  the  bustle
of  daily  life.  To  this  natural  law  I  bow  also,  when  I  now  endeavor
to  communicate  to  you  the  results  of  my  incessant  labors,  extending
over  a  period  of  upwards  of  thirty  years.  True,  it  might  be  wiser  were
I  to  entrust  my  discoveries  to  mute  paper  only,  and  look  to  future
generations  for  the  judgment.  But  in  the  work  to  which  I  have  devoted
my  life,  it  is  not  a  matter  merely  of  knowledge  pure  and  simple;  we
are  here  also  concerned  with  the  actions  derived  from  this  knowledge;
in  other  words,  with  the  practical  realization  of  the  facts  learned.

If,  therefore,  I  would  have  my  teachings  spread  amongst  my  fellow-
men,  and  handed  down  to  future  generations,  if  1  would  not  die  stigma-
tized as  a  quack,  then  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  exhibiting,  proving
and  communicating  to  others,  both  by  means  of  instruction  and  demon-
strations on  living  subjects,  the  truths  I  have  discovered.

The  presentation  of  patients  is  impossible,  and  I  must  therefore  con-
tent myself  with  explaining  my  views  in  words  to  the  best  of  my  ability.
1  shall  relate  to  you  what  led  me  to  the  formulation  of  my  system
of  cure.

I  had  always  felt  a  special  love  for  nature.  There  was  no  greater
delight  for  me  than  to  observe  the  life  of  the  field  and  forest,  and  the
conditions  under  which  plants  and  animals  live  and  thrive;  to  trace
the  workings  of  our  great  mother.  Nature,  on  the  earth  and  in  the
sky,  and  to  apprehend  and  establish  her  immutable  laws.  I  was  ever
desirous  of  hearing  what  able  investigators,  like  Prof.  Rossmassler,  had
discovered;  and  this  long  before  I  had  any  thought  of  devoting  myself
especially  to  the  art  of  healing.  To  the  latter  step  1  was  forced  by  the
strong  hand  of  necessity,  that  teacher  and  educator  both  of  nations  and
individuals.

[225]


220  T'niuersal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Shortly  after  I  had  coinpUtcd  my  twentieth  year,  I  found  my  body
refusing  to  perform  its  functions,  and  I  experienced  violent  pains  in
my  lungs  and  head.  At  first  I  sought  the  aid  of  regular  practitioners,
but  without  result.  Neitlier  did  1,  in  truth,  feel  much  confidence  in
them.  My  mother,  who  had  been  infirm  and  ailing  for  many  years,
had  again  and  again  warned  us  children  against  "the  doctors,"  saying
that  they  alone  were  to  blame  for  her  misery.  My  father,  too,  had
died  of  cancer  of  the  stomach  whilst  under  the  care  of  physicians.
It  was  about  this  time,  in  the  year  1864,  that  I  read  about  a  meeting
of  disciples  of  the  Nature  Cure,*  the  system  of  curing  diseases  by  natural
means.  The  matter  interested  me,  and  on  seeing  the  advertisement
a  second  lime,  1  attended  the  meeting.  It  was  a  band  of  sturdy-hearted
men  who  gathered  round  our  never-to-bo-forgotten  Meltzer.  Very
diffidently  I  asked  one  of  those  present  what  I  ought  to  do  against
shooting  pains  in  the  lungs,  from  which  I  was  then  suffering.  Verj'
diffidently — for  my  condition  of  chronic  nervous  excitement  was  such,
that  I  could  not  possibly  have  spoken  loud  in  the  presence  of  a  number
beneficial  result.  Thereafter  I  attended  these  meetings  regularly.
Some  years  later — it  was  in  1868 — my  brother  became  seriously  ill,
and  the  Nature  Cure,  at  the  elementary  stage  of  development  then
reached,  was  powerless  to  aid  him.  We  happened,  however,  to  hear
of  successful  cures  by  Theodor  Hahn;  my  brother  resolved  to  consult
him,  and  after  a  few  weeks  returned  home  much  improved  in  health.
I  likewise  was  ever  coming  to  see  more  and  more  clearly  the  advan-
tages of  the  natural  method  of  cure,  and  even  at  that  time,  I  felt  fully
convinced  of  the  essential  truth  of  the  system.

Meanwhile  my  own  ailment  had  not  been  quiescent.  The  germs  of
disease  inherited  from  my  parents  had  thriven  apace,  especially  since
new  causes  of  sickness  had  been  added  to  the  older  diseases  by  the
medical  treatment  I  had  formerly  undergone.  My  condition  gradually
grew  worse  and  worse,  till  at  last  it  was  simply  unendurable.  Heredi-
tary cancer  had  appeared  in  the  stomach,  the  lungs  were  partially
destroyed,  the  nerves  of  the  head  were  so  irritable  that  1  found  relief
only  out  of  doors  in  the  fresh  air;  and  as  for  quiet  sleep  or  work,  that
was  quite  out  of  the  question.  To-day  I  can  confess  that  well-fed  and
ruddy  cheeked  as  I  then  looked,  I  was  in  reality  but  a  wretched
Lazarus  through  and  through.  Yet,  1  most  scrupulously  followed  the
packs,  enemas,  douches,  everything,  in  short,  I  employed,  without  at-
taining more  than  an  alleviation  of  the  pain.  At  this  period,  through
observations  made  in  free  nature,  I  discovered  the  laws  upon  which
the  method  of  cure  now  practised  and  taught  by  me  is  based.  I  com-
menced, as  a  trial,  with  a  course  of  cure  for  myself,  and  constructed
the  most  practical  appliances  I  could  for  the  purpose.  The  experiment
succeeded.  My  condition  improved  from  day  to  day.  Others  who
followed  my  advice  and  observed  the  same  course,  were  also  satisfied.
The  apparatus  whicli,  I had made answered their  purpose  capitally.


•For  a  complete  exposition  of  the  Nature  Cure,  read  tlie  baclc  volumes  of  the
Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath.  Price,  $2  a  year.  Single  copy,  25c.  Begin  with
volume  of  year  1!)()2  up  to  now. Naturopathic  Publishing  Co.,  Butler,  N.  J.,  U.  S.  A.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  lini/crs'  Guide  -^7

The  diagnoses  of  actual  diseases  and  the  ])roi»noses  of  coming  ones,  as
yet  unnoticed  by  the  person  affected,  thougli  the  disposition  was  to  be
traced,  invariably  turned  out  correct.  1  felt  assured  that  my  discoveries
were  not  mere  self-deception.  Nevertheless,  when  I  spoke  of  them,
my  views  were  generally  met  with  incredulous  astonisinnent,  apathetic
indifference,  or  scornful  rejection;  and  this  not  only  as  concerned  ortho-
dox medical  men  and  believers  in  the  drug-system,  but  also,  and  indeed
especially,  on  the  part  of  disciples  of  the  Natural  Method  of  Cure,
sometimes  even  from  its  best  known  representatives.  In  the  cause  of
suffering  humanity  I  had  placed  my  apparatus  gratis  at  the  service
of  some  of  these  practitioners.  Without  giving  them  a  serious  trial,
they  were  set  aside  as  useless,  to  moulder  amongst  dust  and  cob-
webs.

I  thus  became  forcibly  aware  that  it  did  suffice  to  establish  a  theory
of  the  origin  and  course  of  disease,  and  its  cure,  and  to  construct
appliances  for  the  treatment  of  the  sick;  that  it  did  not  suffice  to  dis-
cover a  new  and  infallible  method  of  diagnosis  and  prognosis,  founded
on  the  nature  of  the  human  organism  itself;  that  it  did  not  suffice  to
exhibit  the  success  of  the  new  method  of  cure  in  my  own  person,
and  in  the  case  of  my  relatives,  friends  and  acquaintances.  On  the
contrary,  I  perceived  clearly  that  I  should  have  to  appeal  to  the
general  public  itself  and  by  effecting  a  large  number  of  striking  cures,
prove  the  superiority  of  my  system  over  allopath}^  homeopathy  and
the  earlier  hygienic  method.  This  alone  could  secure  for  me  the  con-
viction af  all  classes,  that  my  method  was  the  true  one,  based  upon  the
laws  of  nature.

This  inward  persuasion  gave  rise  to  a  severe  struggle.  For  if  I
decided  to  devote  myself  to  the  practice  of  the  new  art  of  healing,  I
should  be  obliged  to  give  up  my  factory,  which  had  been  24  years  in
successful  operation,  in  order  to  devote  my  undivided  energies  to
another  calling,  which  at  the  outset,  at  all  events,  would  bring  me  but
scorn,  obloquy  and  financial  loss.  For  years  the  struggle  endured
between  reason,  which  deterred  me,  and  conscience,  which  urged  me
on  to  the  fulfilment  of  my  inner  vocation.

On  October  10th,  1883,  I  at  length  opened  my  establishment.  Con-
science had  triumphed.  Exactly  what  I  had  foreseen  came  to  pass.
During  the  first  few  years  my  establishment  was  hardly  visited  at  all,
although  some  successes  were  attained  which  were  remarkable  enough
to  have  attracted  attention.  Then  patients  gradually  began  to  come;
at  first  merely  for  baths,  but  later,  some  for  the  cure.  In  time,  patron-
age increased,  especially  from  other  towns,  for  nearly  everyone  treated
by  me  became  a  voluntary  promulgator  and  agent.  My  new  system  of
diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  and  method  of  curing,
proved  successful  in  thousands  of  cases,  and  I  was  enabled  to  save
many  from  serious  danger  by  foretelling  future  illnesses.  On  this
latter  point  I  lay  special  stress,  for  thus  alone  shall  we  be  able  again
to  rear  a  really  healthy  generation.

The  truth  of  my  discoveries  has  been  confirmed  in  every  instance;
my  experience  has  naturally  been  materially  widened  during  the  past
eight  years;  and  my  own  health,  which  formerly  seemed  past  re-
covery, has  so  greatly  improved  through  a  consistent  observance  of
the  new  method,  that  to-day  I  feel  fully  equal  to  the  exertions  imposed


228  Vniversal  Ndturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

upon  me  by  an  extensive  practice.  This  has  only  been  rendered  pos-
sible, however,  througii  my  thinking  out,  after  long  reflection,  a  new
manner  of  taking  the  sitz-bath.  This  has  proved  so  effective,  that  I
can  with  certainty  atVirm  that  every  disease,  whatever  name  it  may
bear,  is  positively  curable.  /  say,  every  disease,  not  every  patient.  For
when  the  constitution  is  too  far  undermined,  and  in  particular  when
the  system  is  permeated  with  poison  from  long  use  of  medicine,  or  from
the  inability  of  the  organs  to  eliminate  same,  my  method  can,  indeed,
alleviate  the  pain,  but  not  always  save,  or  completely  cure  the  sufferer.

1  am  glad  to  relate,  with  proud  and  joyful  consciousness,  that  after
struggling  against  physical  ruin  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century,
I  have  saved  myself;  and  at  the  same  time,  and  to  the  benefit  of
the  public,  have  found  out  the  real  cure  of  disease,  long  sought  in
vain  by  the  most  eminent  minds.  To  speak  thus  may  seem  vain  and
self-sufTicient.  But  experience  has  proved  in  every  case,  even  where
it  was  not  permitted  me  to  save  the  patient,  that  my  theory  is  abso-
luteh'^  true  and  sound.

What  led  me  to  my  discoveries  was  an  empirical  method,  based
on  the  strictest  and  most  careful  observation  and  research,  and  on
systematic  experiments.  And  though  I  may  be  called  a  quack,  and  be
reproached  for  lacking  the  regular  professional  training  to  qualify  me
for  the  practice  of  my  present  vocation,  I  can  bear  all  with  perfect
tranquility  and  undisturbed  equanimity.  For  even  the  greatest  bene-
factors of  mankind,  and  especially  the  great  discoverers  and  inventors,
have  almost  without  exception  been  so-called  quacks  and  laymen — to
say  nothing  of  the  farmer  Priessnitz,  the  carrier  Schroth,  the  theologian
and  afterwards  forester  Franke  ("J.  H.  Rausse")  and  the  apothecary
Hahn,  whose  clear  minds  and  strong  wills  have  brought  about  a  new
and  better  art  of  healing.

In  what  relation  does  the  New  Science  of  Healing  stand  to  the  tradi-
tionary systems  of  Allopathy,  Homeopathy  and  the  earlier  Natural
Method?

I  propose  to  criticise  these  methods  of  cure  and  to  show  their  failings
and  weak  points  (which  they  have  in  common  with  all  that  is  human),
in  the  proper  light;  but  only  so  far  as  this  is  necessary  for  the  public
good  and  for  a  clear  understanding  of  my  explanations.  Every  one
is  free  to  accept  and  follow  what  he  holds  to  be  best.  But  for  ti  right
understanding  of  my  theory,  it  is  needful  to  know  in  what  particulars
it  agrees  with  the  systems  heretofore  followed  and  where  it  differs
from  them,  so  that  we  may  determine  wherein  its  originality  lies  and
what  is  its  absolute  or  relative  value.

With  Allopathy,  the  new  art  of  healing  without  drugs  or  operations
has  but  one  point  in  common — that  the  subject  of  both  is  the  human
body.  For  the  rest,  their  aims  and  means  are  diametrically  opposed.
In  fact,  I  consider  the  whole  scheme  of  poisoning  patients  by  medicine,
latterly  so  decidedly  on  the  increase,  as  one,  if  not  the  chief,  cause  why
thoroughly  healthy  persons  are  now  hardly  to  be  found,  and  that
chronic  diseases  are  multiplying  with  fearful  rapidity.  The  proper  and
timely  intervention  of  the  new  art  of  healing  will  render  surgery  almost
wholly  superfluous.

Homeopathy  I  welcome  as  a  brave  ally  in  the  crusade  against  the


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Hiu/crs'  Guide  229


fatal  faith  in  medicines.  With  its  minute  doses  wherein  the  chemist  is
unable  to  discover  a  trace  of  the  dru.^,  and  the  stress  which  it  lays  on  the
choice  of  a  proper  diet,  it  forms  a  transition,  a  stepping-stone,  to  the
new  art  of  healing.  With  reference  to  diet,  however,  it  formulates  no
fixed,  clear  principles,  and  my  experience  proves  even  its  minute  doses
of  medicine  to  be  not  altogether  harmless.

The  Natural  Method  as  hitherto  applied,  which  far  excels  the  other
systems,  is  the  foundation  of  the  new  art  of  healing  without  drugs  or
operations.  I  have  found  it  necessary,  however,  to  follow  more  the
great  discoverers  and  founders  of  the  system — Priessnitz,  Schroth,
Rausse  and  Theodor  Hahn — rather  than  its  later  representatives.  The
latter,  in  their  excessive  zeal  for  individualization,  run  the  risk  of  de-
generating into  artificiality  and  of  deviating  from  the  clear  and  simple
paths  of  nature.  The  earlier  Natural  Method  lacks  insight  into  the
character,  the  nature  of  the  morbid  matter,  and  a  knowledge  of  the
natural  laws  according  to  which  such  matter  changes  its  position  in  the
body  and  settles  down  in  certain  parts.  In  other  words,  it  lacks  insight
into  the  true  nature  of  disease  in  general,  and  thus  of  each  form  of
disease  in  particular;  knowledge  of  the  ever  existing,  though  hitherto
unrecognized,  law  of  nature  upon  which  all  my  discoveries  are  based.
Moreover,  it  calls  to  its  aid  the  orthodox  system  of  diagnostics,  although
it  is  well  known  that  it  has  no  need  of  such  "exact"  diagnosis;  thus  it
still  clings  to  old  prejudices.  The  new  science  of  healing,  on  the  con-
trary, teaches  a  wholly  different  kind  of  diagnosis  following  the  nature
of  the  disease  itself,  made  by  simple  examination  of  the  face  and  neck
and  is  known  as  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.

The  Natural  Method  commands  a  wealth  of  forms  in  which  water
may  be  applied:  packs,  enemas,  douches,  shower-baths,  half-baths,
whole-baths,  sitz-baths  and  steam-baths  of  various  descriptions.  These
many  remedies,  however,  prove  in  part  superfluous  when  once  insight
into  the  true  nature  of  disease  has  been  gained.  The  new  art  of  heal-
ing simplifies  the  application  of  water  as  much  as  possible.

Whilst  in  the  ordinary  Nature  Cure  System  the  diet,  at  all  events
very  often,  has  been  wholly  unregulated,  or  arbitrarily  accommodated
non-stimulating  system  of  dietetics  based  on  natural  laws,  and  is  accur-
ately and  clearly  defined.

As  you  see,  the  deviations  from  the  usual  methods  of  the  Nature  Cure
System — which,  I  again  repeat,  has  nevertheless  worked  wonders —
are  so  great  that  1  feel  justified  in  giving  my  theory  and  practice
a  new^  name,  that  of  Neo-Naturopathy,  or  the  New  Science  of  Healing
without  Drugs  and  without  Operations.

I  cannot  enumerate  in  detail  all  the  experiments  I  tried,  before  my
system  was  fully  developed;  that  would  doubtless  be  interesting  to
many,  but  would  not  be  of  practical  value.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  special  ad-
vantage when  one  can  make  straight  for  the  goal  and  avoid  the  many
wrong  paths  which  had  to  be  traversed,  before  the  right  road  was
discovered.

After  these  prefatory  remarks,  let  us  turn  to  the  matter  itself.
The  fundamental  question  which  I  must  first  examine,  and  on  which
the  entire  method  of  cure  js  based,  is  thi§: "What  body  is,  or  is  not,


230  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


healthy?"  Currcnl  opinions  arc  very  diilcront.  Who  has  not  liad  ex-
perience of  this?  One  asserts  that  he  is  quite  healthy,  only  a  little
rheumatism  trouhles  him;  another  suffers  only  from  nervousness,  but
is  otherwise  health  itself.  Just  as  if  the  body  consisted  of  separate
sections,  one  (|uite  separated  off  from  the  other  and  hardly  having  any
connection  with  it  at  all.  Strangely  enough,  this  view  is  supported  by
the  orthodox  method  of  curing.  For  the  latter  in  many  cases  only  re-
gards one  individual  organ,  often  scarcely  noticing  the  neighboring
ones.  Yet,  it  is  an  und()u})led  fact  that  the  entire  human  body  is  li
united  whole,  the  parts  of  which  are  in  constant  reciprocal  relation,  so
that  sickness  in  one  part  must  have  an  influence  on  the  other  parts.
Daily  observation  shows  you  that  such  is  the  case.  If  you  have  the
toothache,  you  are  hardly  capable  of  work,  and  relish  neither  food  nor
drink.  A  splinter  in  the  little  finger  has  a  similar  effect;  pain  in  the
stonuich  robs  us  of  all  desire  for  physical  or  mental  work.  At  first,
this  is  only  the  inmiediate  influence  transmitted  by  the  nerves.  But
we  perceive  how  one  trouble  directly  induces  others.  Should  it  con-
tinue long,  the  consequences  will  be  permanent,  whether  they  are
perceptible  to  us  or  not.  A  body  can  therefore  be  healthy  only  when
all  its  parts  are  in  their  normal  condition  and  perform  their  work
without  pain,  pressure  or  tension.  But  all  the  parts  should  also  possess
the  form  best  adapted  to  their  purpose,  which  likewise  best  corresponds
to  our  ideas  of  beauty.  Where  the  external  form  is  abnormal,  such
state  has  been  caused  by  definite  influences.  But  extended  obsei-va-
tions  are  necessary  to  determine  the  precise  normal  form  in  every  case;
we  have  first  of  all  to  find  really  healthy  persons  as  objects  of  study,
from  whom  to  learn  the  forms.  But  it  has  now  become  well-nigh
impossible  to  find  such.  To  be  sure,  we  speak  of  strong,  health}^  persons,
and  many  declare  that  they  belong  to  this  class;  but  if  we  inquire  more
closely,  each  one  has  some  trifle — as  he  expresses  it — to  mention,  some
slight  pain,  an  occasional  headache,  toothache  now  and  then,  and  so
on,  which  proves  that  absolute  health  is  out  of  the  question.  For  this
reason  comprehensive  study  is  necessary  in  order  to  learn  the  normal
shape  of  the  body.  Nevertheless  something  may  be  done  by  comparing
sick  persons  with  the  approximately  healthy,  and  from  subsequent
explanations  you  will  see  still  more  clearly  how  it  is  possible.

I  have  mentioned  the  fact  that  disease  alters  the  shape  of  the  body;
I  will  now  give  you  some  familiar  instances.  To  begin  with,  let  me
remind  you  of  persons  sufl'ering  from  obesit3%  whose  bodies  take  on  the
well-known  rotundit}^;  and  in  contrast  to  them  of  lean  persons,  on
whose  bodies  hardly  any  fat  is  deposited.  Both  are  undoulitedly  mor-
bid symptoms.  Further,  there  is  the  loss  of  the  teeth,  which  alters  the
whole  face;  gouty  affections,  in  which  knots  are  formed;  articular
rheumatism,  in  which  there  is  a  swelling  of  entire  parts  of  the  body.
In  all  these  cases  the  alterations  are  so  strikingly  apparent  that  the
veriest  novice  recognizes  them.  In  other  forms  of  disease  they  are
less  evident  to  the  eye,  yet  I  can  remind  you  of  many  uKu-e  well-known
cases.  You  know  that  a  healthy  person  has  a  clear,  quiet  eye,  and
that  his  features  are  not  distorted.  But  you  would  find  it  hard  to
determine  when  the  face  gets  the  proper  expression;  and  you  will
unhesitatingly  admit  that  one  person  has  a  sharper  sense  of  observa-
tion in  this  matter  than  anotherr For  instance,  we  often  meet  a  person


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  231

whom  we  have  iiol  seen  lor  years.  We  find  llial  he  has  changed  con-
siderably for  the  worse  during  this  lime,  though  we  are  not  able
accurately  to  define  the  nature  of  this  change.  And,  nevertheless,  these
transformations,  through  which  the  body  gradually  loses  its  beauty,
have  a  deep  significance,  to  which  I  shall  return  further  on.  From  all
this,  it  is  evident  that  diseases  reveal  themselves  by  changes  in  the
body  and  more  especially  in  the  head  and  neck;  and  that  it  is  an
important  matter  to  recognize  and  explain  these  alterations.

Whether  everyone  will  succeed  in  doing  this,  I  will  not  decide;  much
perseverance  and  assiduous  practice  are  needful  for  making  observa-
tions. Those  wishing  to  go  deeper  into  the  Science  of  Facial  Expres-
sion, 1  would  recommend  to  procure  my  handbook,*  entitled  "Facial  Ex-
pression," regular  edition,  $3.60  postpaid,  which  forms  a  clear  guide
to  the  subject.

Now  let  me  call  your  attention  to  another  touchstone  of  health.

Since  the  entire  body  is  atfected  in  every  case  of  illness,  we  are  able
to  test  the  state  of  health  by  examination  of  the  operation  of  any  organ.
We  do  best,  however,  to  chose  those  organs  whose  functions  may  be
most  thoroughly  and  readily  tested  and  such  are  the  organs  of  diges-
tion. Good  digestion  is  a  sign  of  good  health,  and  when  it  continues
in  perfect  operation  day  after  day,  the  body  is  undoubtedly  quite
healthy.  These  observations  can  very  easily  he  made  in  the  case  of
animals.  It  is  from  what  is  left  over,  that  we  can  best  judge  how  the
process  of  digestion  has  been  performed.  The  remnant  matter  should
be  ejected  from  the  body  in  such  form  that  the  latter  remains  perfectly
clean.  This  you  can  observe  every  day  in  the  case  of  horses  and  birds
in  a  state  of  freedom.  Pardon  my  further  elucidating  this  delicate
matter,  but  when  speaking  of  health  and  sickness,  everything  must  be
called  by  its  right  name.

The  end  of  the  rectum  is  most  admirably  formed,  so  that  if  the
excrements  are  of  the  proper  consistency  when  they  reach  it,  they  are
ejected  without  difliculty  and  without  soiling  the  body.  I  have  dealt
with  this  subject  more  in  detail  in  my  little  pamphlet  "Am  I  well  or
sick?"**

So-called  toilet-paper  is  an  acquisition  for  sick  humanity;  perfectly
healthy  people  do  not  in  reality  need  such.  Do  not  mistake  me;  I  do
not  mean  that  anyone  who  is  not  in  really  sound  health  should  imagine
that  by  his  rejecting  this  resource  of  civilization  he  has  achieved  some
wonderful  victory!  On  the  contrary,  it  is  just  for  such  unhealthy
persons  that  it  is  necessary,  so  that  cleanliness  may  be  maintained.
Now,  from  his  digestion  everyone  can  easily  learn  whether  he  is  healthy
or  not.  The  test  alluded  to  is  a  highly  important  one,  and  I  do  not
hesitate  to  assert  this  positively,  undisturbed  by  the  mockery  of  scep-
tics.

Fortunate,  indeed,  is  he  whom  the  above  mentioned  criterion  in-
forms he  is  in  full  health.  A  healthy  person  always  feels  perfectlj^
well;  he  knows  nothing  of  pain  or  discomfort  so  long  as  they  are  not
from  external  causes;  in  fact  he  never  feels  that  he  has  a  bod3\ He


*See  Facial  Diagnosis,  American  edition,  by  Louis  Kuhne. Illustrated. Price,
cloth,  $1.60. The  Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co.,  Butler,  N.  J.

**Published  by  the  Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co.,  Butler,  N.  J. Price,  75c,  postpaid.


232  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers*  Guide

delights  in  work,  and  enjoys  siieli  activity  until  he  grows  tired,  when
he  again  finds  full  haj)i)iness  in  sweet  repose.  For  him  it  is  easy  to
bear  mental  anguish;  his  body  yields  lor  his  assuagement  the  sooth-
ing balm  of  tears,  of  which,  in  such  cases,  even  a  man  need  not  be
ashamed.  A  healthy  man  is  not  troubled  by  family  cares  and  anxieties,
for  in  himself  he  fetls  the  strength  to  provide  for  his  loved  ones.  A
heallhv  mother  finds  happiness  in  bringing  up  her  family,  for  she  can
nourish  her  little  ones  in  the  manner  nature  intended,  and  if  the  darlings
are  healthy  too,  what  a  blissful  life  is  theirs!  Their  faces  are  wreathed
in  happy  smiles;  none  of  that  continual  restlessness,  grumbling  and
crying;  in  short,  the  education  of  such  children  is  a  delight,  especially
as  thej^  will  be  far  more  susceptible  and  obedient  to  their  teacher's
influence.

To  recapitulate  briefly:  Natural  inclination  drew  me  to  science;
severe  sickness  and  experience  with  orthodox  physicians  led  me  to
the  Nature  Cure.  My  perceiving  that  even  the  latter,  as  hitherto  ap-
plied, was  powerless  to  cure  my  serious  chronic  complaints,  forced  me
to  further  researches.  Constant  observation  of  living  nature  revealed
to  me  the  necessary  alteration  which  the  external  form  of  every  organ-
ism undergoes  through  disease;  and  the  manner  in  which  this  altera-
tion takes  place,  and  the  way  in  which  it  again  disappears  when  the
disease  is  cured,  finally  taught  me  what  disease  is  and  Iiow  it  arises.


rniversal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcr.s'  Guide  2.'i3


HOW  DOES  DISEASE  ARISE? WHAT  IS  FEVER?


WHAT  is  disease?  How  does  it  arise?  How  does  it  show  itself?
These  are  the  questions  which  I  propose  to  explain  to  you
herewith.  If  you  have  read  in  the  announcement  the  further
question,  "What  is  fever?"  you  will  soon  see  how  it  is  answered
together  with  the  others.

The  answers  to  the  above  questions  are  important  not  only  from  a
theoretical,  but  even  more  from  a  practical  point  of  view;  for  it  is  not
until  we  have  gained  a  clear  insight  into  the  nature  of  disease,  that
we  are  in  a  position  to  arrive  at  once  at  the  real  method  of  cure,  and
so  obviate  all  empirical  groping  about  in  the  dark.

The  way  which  we  pursue  is  that  in  which  all  natural  laws  are  dis-
covered. We  start  from  observations,  draw  our  inferences  from  these,
and  finally  prove  the  correctness  of  our  inferences  by  experiment.

First  of  all,  our  observations  must  be  extended  to  all  symptoms  notice-
able in  sick  persons;  we  shall  then  have  to  discover  those  symptoms
which  constantly  reappear  and  which  occur  in  the  case  of  everj^
patient.

These  symptoms  are  essential  ones,  and  must  be  taken  as  a  starting
point  in  our  analysis  of  the  nature  of  disease.

In  the  previous  chapter,  I  have  remarked  that  in  certain  dis-
eases, striking  alterations  occur  in  the  form  of  the  body;  and  it  was
this  circumstance  which  caused  me  to  observe  further,  whether  such
alterations  did  not  occur  in  the  case  of  all  patients.

And  this,  as  observation  has  proved  again  and  again,  is,  in  fact,  the
case;  the  face  and  neck  are  especially  affected  by  such  changes,  which
can  therefore  be  most  easily  traced  in  these  parts.

For  years  I  have  made  it  my  study  to  find  out  whether  my  individual
observations  agreed  in  all  cases,  and  whether  with  the  alteration  of
the  outward  form,  the  state  of  the  health  also  changed  in  every  case;
and  thus  it  has  been  invariably.

Thus,  I  came  to  the  firm  conviction  that  there  must  be  a  particular,
normal  form  for  every  body,  which  is  always  to  be  seen  in  health,  and
that  every  change  from  this  normal  form  is  the  result  of  disease.  It
became  clear  to  me  that  from  the  changes  of  form  in  the  neck  and
face,  a  trustworthy  idea  of  the  state  of  health  of  the  individual  could
be  gained;  and  this  led  me  to  the  discovery  and  application  of  my
new  system  of  diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  w^hich  I  have
already  used  in  my  practice  for  over  fifteen  years.

The  alterations  which  we  perceive  in  the  neck  and  face,  take  place  in
the  corresponding  parts  of  the  abdomen  and  rump  in  a  still  greater
degree,  because,  as  we  shall  see  further  on.  they  originate  in  the
abdomen  itself;  so  that  merely  by  examining  the  neck  and  face  of  the
patient,  we  gain  an  exact  idea  of  the  condition  of  his  bodily  condition
as  a  whole.  These  external  alterations  in  the  neck  and  face  are  percep-


231


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


tiblc,  first,  when  the  morbid  matter  has  penetrated  in  between  the  mus-
cular tissues,  whereby  tiie  body,  which  is  as  elastic  as  india-rubber,
becomes  distended  (this  condition  is  the  less  danj^erous) ;  secondly
through  increased  tension,  caused  by  the  induration  of  the  separate
tissues.  You  will  be  most  reachly  able  to  form  an  idea  of  this  state,
if  you  think  of  a  sausage.  FiHed  as  it  usually  is,  it  can  be  bent  in
evei'y  direction.  If  it  be  stuffed  fuller  and  fuller,  as  long  as  tiie  skin  will
hold,  the  sausage  will  become  so  tense  and  hard,  that  il  can  no  longer  be
bent  at  all,  except  by  bursting  the  skin.  Similarly,  the  body  can  expand
only  up  to  a  certain  limit,  when  tension  of  the  tissues  takes  place.
Such  tension  is  very  distinctly  remarked  when  the  patient  turns  his
head  and  neck.  This  stage  is  worse.  If  now  the  room  between  the
tissues  no  longer  suflices  to  receive  deposits  of  foreign  matter,  the  lat-
ter is  deposited  in  lumps  beside  the  muscular  tissues  under  the  skin,
being  then  distinctly  visible  on  the  neck.  Where  we  find  such  lumps
on  the  head  and  neck,  we  do  not  err  in  concluding  from  these  indica-


Fig.  1


Fig.  2


lions,  that  there  is  a  far  greater  number  of  such  lumps  in  the  cor-
responding parts  of  the  trunk.  On  the  abdominal  covering  these  lumps
may  in  such  cases  be  easily  felt  and  seen  in  all  sizes.  For  the  lumps
in  the  neck  are  not  formed  until  after  lumps  are  deposited  in  the
abdomen.  A  precise  exposition  of  the  nature  and  origin  of  these  lumps,
which  until  now  have  never  been  explained,  I  will  give  subsequently
when  dealing  with  diseases  of  the  lungs.  On  the  other  hand,  we
see  in  lean  patients  how  the  normal  tissues  of  the  body  are  actually
displaced  by  morbid  matter,  so  that  only  the  remains  of  the  former,
shrivelled  together  as  it  were,  arc  still  to  be  seen  amongst  the  foreign
matter.

The  various  abnormal  discolorations  of  the  skin  also  form  a  sure
aid  in  the  recognition  of  diseases,  and  in  certain  illnesses  are  never
wanting.

The  two  accompanying  figures,  taken  from  life,  show  you  a  patient
suffering  from  heart  disease  complicated  by  dropsy,  first  as  he  was
when  he  ai)i)lied  to  me,  and  secondly  as  he  api)eared  four  months  after
beginning  my  cure.  You  clearly  see  the  great  changes  in  form  which
took  place  in  the  patient  during  this  period.  He  was,  as  you  perceive,
heavily encumbered with foreign matter, but within three months


I


Universal  Naturopathic  Director]}  and  Bui/ers'  Guide  235

by  the  aid  of  my  iiiclliod  had  cleared  his  system  ol  a  great  ([uantily
of  this  matter  through  the  natural  excretory  organs,  as  may  distinctly
be  seen  from  Fig.  2.  I  cannot  here  do  more  than  touch  upon  the  Science
of  Facial  Expression,  as  to  go  into  details  would  lead  us  too  far  from
the  proper  theme  of  my  discourse.

But  what,  now,  do  these  alterations  in  the  form  of  the  body  leach
us  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  disease?  In  the  tirst  place,  there  is  no
doubt  that  these  elevations  and  swellings  result  from  the  deposit  of
matter  of  one  kind  or  another.  At  tirst,  one  does  not  know  whether
this  is  matter  that  the  system  can  utilize,  and  which  has  simply  been
deposited  in  the  wrong  place;  or  whether  it  is  matter  which  does  not
belong  to  the  body  at  all.  Nor  do  we  know,  at  first,  whether  it  is  the
matter  that  causes  the  disease,  or  whether  the  latter  is  the  cause  of
the  deposit.  Further  observation,  however,  brings  us  nearer  the  truth.
For  the  deposits  almost  iilways  begin  on  one  side  of  the  body,  and  are
then  much  more  abundant  there  than  on  the  other;  and  this  is  invariably
the  side  on  which  we  are  accustomed  to  sleep.  We  thus  see  that  the
morbid  matter  obeys  the  law  of  gravitation,  settling,  as  it  were,  at  the
bottom.  But  this  side  always  being  the  more  diseased,  it  follows  that
the  matter  is  the  cause  of  the  sickness;  otherwise  the  disease  would
assuredly  sometimes  begin  on  the  other  side.  Further  on,  more  proofs
will  be  given  in  support  of  this  theory.

We  may  also  conclude  from  this  that  the  said  matter  must  be  foreign
matter,  that  is,  such  as  does  not  belong  to  the  body,  at  all  events  not
in  its  present  form.  For  we  cannot  assume  that  nutritive  material
follows  the  law  of  gravitation  in  the  body,  otherwise  deposits  on  one
side  only,  would  take  place  in  the  healthy  body  as  well,  if  the  person
were  in  the  habit  of  sleeping  regularly  on  the  same  side.

Besides,  the  system  itself  evidently  endeavors  to  throw  ofT  the  matter.
Ulcers  or  open  sores  are  formed,  or  there  is  violent  perspiration,  or-
eruptions  break  out,  these  being  the  means  whereby  the  system  tries
to  rid  itself  of  the  morbid  matter.  Should  it  succeed,  a  pleasant  feeling
of  relief  follows  that  of  sickness,  provided,  of  course,  that  enough
matter  has  been  expelled.

We  now  come  quite  naturally  to  the  definition  of  disease.  Disease
is  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  the  system.  For  the  correctness  of
this  dclinition  there  is  an  infallible  test.  If  after  that  which  we  have
designated  as  morbid  matter  has  in  a  suitable  manner  been  removed
from  the  system,  the  disease  itself  disappears,  and  the  body  at  the
same  time  regains  its  normal  form,  the  truth  of  our  definition  has  been
established.

This  proof  has  already  been  given,  and  in  the  subsequent  lectures
I  shall  show  you  a  number  of  experiments  which  have  been  made.

But  now  let  us  approach  the  question  as  to  what  may  be  the  nature
of  this  foreign  matter,  and  how  it  gets  into  the  system.

There  arc  two  passages  through  which  matter  can  be  introduced  into
the  body — by  the  nose  into  the  lungs,  and  by  the  mouth  into  the  stom-
ach. Each  of  these  passages  is  guarded  by  sentinels,  who  are  not,
however,  thoroughly  incorruptible,  and  sometimes  let  things  pass  which
do  not  belong  to  the  body.  These  sentinels  are  the  nose  and  the  tongue,
the  one  for  air,  the  other  for  food.

As  soon  as  we  fail  to  promptly  obey  the  senses  of  smell  and  taste,


23G  Vniversal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

lliey  grow  more  lax  in  llic  ruUilnient  of  llieir  duly,  and  gradually  allow
harinlul  nialter  to  pass  unchallenged  into  the  body.  You  are  aware
how  one  can  become  used  to  sitting  in  dense  clouds  of  lobacco-smoke
and  inhaling  it  just  as  if  it  were  healthy  fresh  air.  The  tongue  has
been  still  further  corrupted,  and  we  know  that  it  can  gradually  be
habituated  to  most  unnatural  food.  Need  I  remind  you  of  the  di/Jerent
dishes  and  beverages  which  we  now  think  indispensable,  all  of  which
were  unknown  some  centuries  ago?  To  these  the  present  generation
has  grown  so  accustomed,  that  it  would  rather  renounce  a  natural
diet  than  give  them  up.

Our  lung-diet  is,  on  the  whole,  not  so  degenerate  as  our  stomach-
diet,  as  the  former  admits  of  no  luxurious  outlay.  As  a  rule,  the  purest
air,  even  to-day,  still  suits  us  best,  whereas  a  hearty  dish  of  porridge,
for  example,  such  as  furnished  our  ancestors  with  blood  and  strength,
is  really  relished  by  very  few.

In  order  to  illustrate  still  more  plainly  how  the  digestive  organs  are
slowly  undermined  by  the  unnatural  demands  put  upon  them,  I  will
adduce  the  following  example.  A  dray-horse  that  can  draw  50  cwt.
with  ease,  may  be  made  temporarily,  with  the  aid  of  the  whip,  to  drag
a  much  greater  load,  say  80  cwt.  If  his  master,  however,  having  seen
that  the  horse  could  draw  the  80  cwt.,  were  to  give  him  this  load  daily,
the  animal  might  be  able  to  draw  this  increased  load  for  a  short  time,
but  the  over-exertion  would  soon  prove  injurious.  He  would  drag  the
load  with  increasing  ditficulty,  until  finally  he  could  no  longer  draw
even  50  cwt.  The  animal  has  been  overworked,  which  is  also  out-
wardly apparent  from  his  spavined  legs  and  other  symptoms.  It  is
exactly  the  same  with  the  human  organs  of  digestion.  For  a  long,
vei-y  long,  time  they  will  perform  work  far  exceeding  their  natural
functions,  continually  spurred  on  by  the  stimulants  of  our  times.  But
their  natural  powers  are  gradually  undermined  and  then  they  can  only
partially  perform  the  work  allotted  to  them.  The  transition  from
health  to  disease  goes  on  so  imperceptibly  (often  taking  ten,  or  twenty
years,  or  more)  that  the  patient  does  not  notice  the  alteration  for  a
long  time.

It  is  very  hard  to  say  what  amount  of  food  forms  the  limit  which
may  be  borne  by  a  diseased  stomach.  Often,  for  instance,  one  apple
will  benelit  a  weak  patient,  whilst  tiuo  would  be  injurious.  One
apple  the  debilitated  stomach  can  digest,  two  would  be  too  much.  All
excess  is  poison  for  the  body.  We  must  never  forget  that  everything
we  put  into  the  stomach  has  to  be  digested.  Even  a  healthy  stomach
can  really  digest  only  a  certain  quantity  of  food.  Anything  beyond
this  is  poison  for  it,  and  if  not  excreted  goes  to  form  foreign  matter
in  the  body.  Moderation  in  eating  and  drinking  is  therefore  the  basis
of  lasting  health.

Now  what  becomes  of  such  foreign  matter?  I  call  it  foreign  matter
because  it  is  foreign  to  the  system.  The  system  attempts  to  expel  it,
and  this  in  the  ways  designed  by  nature  for  the  purpose.  From  the
lungs,  it  is  again  expelled  directly  by  exhalation  into  the  surrounding
air.  From  the  stomach,  the  bowels  conduct  it  to  the  outside;  or  it  first
enters  into  the  blood  and  is  then  secreted  as  perspiration,  urine  and
expired  air,  that  is  through  the  skin,  the  kidneys  and  the  lungs.

Thus  the  system  takes  care  in the  most  obliging  manner  that  our


1


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Huyers'  Guide  '^Ti

sins  have  no  evil  elVecl.  01"  course,  we  nuisl  nol  re(|iiire  loo  iniicli.
If  we  overburden  the  system  with  such  secretory  work,  it  becomes
unable  fully  to  perform  its  functions  and  must  lind  room  for  the  for-
eign matter  in  its  own  interior.  But  such  matter  is  useless  for  renew-
ing the  waste  of  the  body,  and  is  in  fact  positively  harmful,  as  it  im-
pedes the  circulation  and  hence  the  digestion.  The  foreign  matter  is
gradually  deposited  in  various  places,  especially  in  the  neighborhood
of  the  secretory  organs,  that  being  the  direction  it  takes.

The  beginning  once  made,  the  deposits  accumulate  rapidly,  unless
tiie  manner  of  living  be  at  once  changed.

Alterations  in  the  form  of  the  body  now  commence,  but  are  at  first
visible  only  to  a  practised  eye.  The  body  in  this  state  is  already  dis-
eased, though  its  disease  is  chronic,  or  latent,  and  unaccompanied  by
pain.  The  disease  develops  so  slowly  that  the  person  affected  does  not
notice  it;  only  after  a  considerable  period  does  he  become  conscious
of  a  disagreeable  change  in  his  condition.  He  no  longer  has  the  same
appetite,  he  is  incapable  of  the  same  amount  of  physical  exertion,  he
cannot  do  so  much  continuous  brain-work,  and  so  on.  His  condition
is  still  supportable,  so  long  as  the  secretory  organs  continue  to  perform
their  work,  that  is,  so  long  as  the  bowels,  kidneys  and  lungs  are  active
and  the  skin  exudes  warm  perspiration.  But  whenever  these  functions
relax,  he  at  once  feels  sadly  dissatisfied  with  his  physical  condition.

The  deposits  themselves  begin,  as  we  have  seen,  near  the  organs
of  secretion,  but  soon  commence  accumulating  in  remoter  parts,
especially  in  the  upper  portions  of  the  body.  This  is  most  distinctly
perceptible  in  the  neck.  There,  in  the  passage-way,  the  alterations
may  at  once  be  seen,  and  at  the  same  time  tension  observed  when  the
neck  is  turned,  from  which  we  can  find  out  from  which  side  the  matter
has  forced  its  way  up.

Before  speaking  further  of  the  consequences  of  this  accumulation
of  matter,  I  must  remark  that  nowadays  the  entire  evolution  of  the
disease  can  but  rarely  be  watched  from  the  beginning,  for  most  human
beings  enter  the  world  laden  with  morbid  matter.  And  just  here,  1  may
add  that  this  is  the  reason  why  hardly  any  child  enjoys  immunity  from
the  so-called  children's  diseases.  These  are,  in  reality,  a  sort  of  cleans-
ing process,  this  being  the  way  in  which  tiie  system  endeavors  to  rid
itself  of  the  foreign  matter.

The  foreign  substances  which  at  first  are  chiefly  deposited  in  the
abdomen,  finally  spread  through  the  whole  body  and  hinder  the  normal
development  of  the  organs.

Even  should  the  organs  respond  sometimes  by  increasing  in  size,
they  can  nevertheless  attain  to  no  perfect  development,  for  wherever
foreign  matter  is  present,  space  is  lost  for  nutritive  material.  Besides,
as  the  circulation  also  is  impeded,  the  process  of  alimentation  is
checked,  and  tlie  organs  become  smaller,  by  reason  of  the  foreign  matter
deposited  in  them.

This  matter  may  for  a  long  time  remain  perfectly  quiescent  or
chronically  latent;  but  under  favorable  conditions  can  also  easily  sud-
denly change  in  form.  This  foreign  matter  consists  almost  exclusively
of  substances  which  are  soluble  and  decomposable;  substances  which
are subject to disintegration, breaking up to yield new formations


238  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  lUu/ers'  Guide

under  the  right  condilions;  substances  which  are  subject  to  rcrmen-
tation.

Now  fermentation  often  really  occurs  in  the  body  and  is  of  the
highest  significance.

In  all  such  lui'mentation,  microscopic  fungi  are  active,  and  a  striking
change  takes  place  in  the  fermenting  matter:  it  increases  markedly  in
bulk.

Warmth  is  always  generated  by  fermentation;  the  more  violent  the
fermentation,  the  greater  is  tlie  increase  in  temperature.  This  warmth
is  pro(hiccd  by  the  friction  of  the  masses  against  each  other  and  against
the  body,  and  likewise  by  the  process  of  fermentation  itself,  and  the
changes'in  the  fermenting  matter  accompanying  it.

Under  proper  conditions,  every  process  of  fermentation  can  be  caused
to  retrogress  upon  its  own  course;  and  this  applies  also  to  all  the
changes  in  form  caused  by  such  fermentation.  This  is  a  fact  which  has
hitherto  never  been  properly  understood.  But  1  need  merely  remind
you  how  in  nature  ice  melts  into  water,  how  the  latter  is  transformed
by  great  warmth  and  wind  into  vapor,  and  how  this,  vaporized  and
invisible,  then  again  condenses  and  appears  to  the  eye  as  a  cloud,
pouring  down  as  rain,  snow  or  hail  to  refill  the  rivers  and  streams,
and  by  severe  cold  to  be  again  congealed  to  ice.  And  all  this  has
been  brought  about  by  mere  differences  in  temperature.  Constantly
increasing  warmth  has  brought  about  the  changes  in  the  state  of  the
Waaler  and  increasing  cold  has  caused  a  retrogression  of  the  process.
A  similar  thing  takes  place  in  the  development  of  foreign  substances
in  the  body,  and  similar  conditions  produce  a  retrogressive  metamor-
phosis and  expel  them  from  the  system.

What  the  exact  nature  of  the  little  vegetable  organisms,  the  ferments,
are,  is  of  but  secondary  interest  for  us,  l3ut  it  is  important  to  know  that
they  can  develop  only  where  there  is  a  suitable  soil,  that  is,  where
substances  are  present  which  are  ready  to  pass  into  decomposition.

Where  such  are  present,  only  the  right  kind  of  weather,  or  some
other  exciting  cause,  is  needed  to  give  rise  to  fermentation.  Such
fermentation  is  also  set  up  in  the  human  system  at  the  first  instigation,
as  soon  as  there  is  suflicient  foreign  matter  ready  to  pass  into  decay
or  decompose.  Such  chance  exciting  cause  as  a  change  of  weather
(hence,  what  is  popularly  known  as  colds),  the  consumption  of  food
specially  apt  to  ferment,  which  remains  longer  than  it  should  in  the
digestive  canal,  anger,  fright,  strong  emotion,  a  shock,  etc.

My  observations  show  that  fermentation  always  commences  in  the
abdomen.  Often  it  only  causes  diarrhea  and  is  gotten  rid  of,  but  fre-
quently, particularly  wliere  there  is  constipation,  the  system  does  not
succeed  in  its  attempt  at  speedy  self-help,  and  fermentation  continues,
especially  in  those  parts  where  foreign  matter  has  accumulated.

The  case  is  like  that  of  a  bottle,  shown  herewith;  the  bottom  admits
of  no  outlet,  and  the  fermenting  matter  therefore  pushes  its  way  up-
wards to  the  mouth.  Thus  we  first  feel  the  effects  in  the  upper  parts
of  the  body;  we  get  a  headache.  The  fermentation  produces  warmth
and  we  are  soon  conscious  of  the  rise  in  the  temperature  of  the  blood.
This  is  what  we  call  fever.  Fever  can  therefore  only  occur  where  for-
eign matter  is  present  and  the  natural  exits  are  stopped;  that  is  (1.)
where  there  is  no  regular  motion  of  the  bowels,  (2.)  where  the  urina-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  -39

tion  is  deficient,  (li.)  wlure  the  pores  are  obstructed,  (1.)  wliere  the
respiration  is  weak.

From  all  this  we  get  a  very  sini])le  explanation  ol'  fever,  which  long
years  of  observation  and  experience  prove  to  be  true.

Fever  is  fermentation  yoing  on  in  the  system.  We  shall,  therefore,
best  comprehend  the  symptoms  exhibited  by  fever,  by  forming  a  correct
I)icture  of  the  processes  of  fermentation,  as  they  may  frequently  be
observed  outside  of  the  human  body.  For  instance,  if  a  bottle  of
freshly  brewed  beer  be  allowed  to  stand  a  few  days,  an  alteration  will
be  noticed  in  the  fluid,  which  is  generally  designated  by  the  term  fer-
mentation. This  much  we  know  of  the  nature  of  fermentation:  it  is  a
decomposition,  a  sort  of  decay,  during  which,  as  already  mentioned,
little  vegetable  organisms  called  bacilli  are  developed.  But  it  must  be
noted  that  these  bacilli  not  only,  as  is  often  assumed,  propagate  them-
selves by  reaching  the  fermenting  mass  from  without  and  then  spread-


ing there  further;  they  are  also  originated  by  the  transformation  of  the
mass,  thus  being  themselves  only  transformed  matter,  or  a  product  of
fermentation.  Through  the  process  of  fermentation,  or  decomposition,
the  original  mass  is  altered  in  form.  Thus,  living  animal  bodies  are
produced  from  food  and  drink,  transformed  by  the  fermentive  process
of  digestion.  That  is,  the  germs  are  the  product  of  the  food  decomposed
by  this  fermentive  process  of  digestion.  In  this  manner,  we  naturally
arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  all  life  is  only  a  continual  change  under
given  conditions,  and  that  without  the  processes  which  I  term  fermenta-
tion, it  could  not  be  imagined  at  all.

There  is  thus  a  malign  species  of  fermentation  that  causes  disease,
and  a  benign  species  that  causes  health.

The  outward  manifestations  of  fermentation  are  the  following:
First,  the  fermenting  matter  separating  from  the  fluid  is  deposited  on
the  bottom  of  the  bottle.  Now,  if  the  bottle  is  shaken,  or  a  change  in  the
temperature  occurs,  the  deposit  at  the  bottom  begins  to  move  and  ex-
hibits a  tendency  to  spread.  In  spreading,  it  moves  upward,  and  always
in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  fermented  matter  deposited  at  the  bot-
tom and  the  temperature.

Let  us  look  more  closely  into  the  cause  of  fermentation. Evervbodv


240  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

knows  that  wine  and  beer  are  bottled  and  put  in  a  cellar  to  prevent
fermentation  as  far  as  possible.  The  cellar  temperature  is  pretty  much
the  same  both  in  winter  and  summer;  no  sudden  changes  of  temperature
occur,  so  that  the  chief  cause  of  quick  fermentation  is  wanting.  Like-
wise, in  the  lumian  organism,  fermentation  takes  place  much  more
(juickly  in  warm  weather.

We  perceive  how  in  the  South  and  the  tropics  various  acute  fevers
are  always  breaking  out,  whereas  in  our  cooler  climes  we  find  chronic
diseases  jprevailing.  This  is  particularly  on  account  of  the  more  rapid
and  greater  changes  of  temperature  in  hotter  climates,  where  by  day
the  thermometer  stands  at  100°  Fahr.,  and  at  night  at  40°;  whereas  in
our  northern  countries,  the  difference  between  the  day  and  night  tem-
perature seldom  exceeds  22°  Fahr.,  and  is  usually  less.  Fevers  often
occur  with  us  in  spring,  the  reason  being  that  then  we  find  the  greatest
differences  in  temperature.  Some  may  find  it  strange  that  children
especially  should  be  subject  to  acute  illnesses,  the  familiar  children's
diseases,  wliile  later  in  life  chronic  forms  of  disease  mainly  prevail.
The  above-mentioned  change  of  temperature  is  here  aided  by  the
greater  vigor  of  the  youthful  organism,  which  is  still  so  great  that  it
needs  but  little  or  no  external  exciting  cause  to  stimulate  the  system  to
make  a  vehement  struggle  for  health,  i.  e.  by  an  acute  disease  to  rid
itself  of  foreign  matter.

Now  the  same  phenomena  which  take  place  in  the  bottle  are  observ-
able in  the  human  body.  Here,  too,  the  fermenting  matter  accumulates
in  the  lower  part  of  the  trunk,  and  is  then  set  in  motion  by  some  change
in  the  weather,  e.rternal  shock  or  mental  excitement.  Here,  too,  the
movement  is  upwards;  the  fermenting  substances  have  a  tendency  to
spread  and  press  against  the  skin  covering  the  body.  As  long  as  the
skin  remains  impervious,  the  pressure  meets  with  resistance.  Thus
friction  arises,  and  consequently  heat  is  developed.  This  is  the  explana-
tion of  the  well-known  fever-heat.

In  the  same  way,  it  is  easy  to  explain  why  a  person  in  a  feverish
state,  lias  a  somewhat  greater  circumference  of  body  than  usual.  For
the  skin,  being  clastic,  yields  to  the  pressure  of  the  fermenting  matter,
and  the  greater  the  pressure,  the  greater  the  tension  of  the  skin.  When
the  skin  has  reached  its  extreme  tension,  so  that  it  can  yield  no
further,  the  fever  is  at  its  height  and  the  danger  greatest.  For  as  the
fermenting  masses  still  have  a  tendency  to  expand  and  are  unable  to
escape  to  the  outside,  they  make  room  for  themselves  inside.  The
body  may  be  said  to  inwardly  burn  and  death  is  the  unavoidable  re-
sult— only,  of  course,  if  the  skin  remains  impervious.  If  we  succeed  in
opening  the  outlets,  the  danger  is  removed,  for  then  the  fermenting
matters  tind  an  exit,  leaving  the  body  in  the  form  of  perspiration.  The
interior  of  the  bodv  is  now  relieved,  and  the  heat  and  tension  of  the  skin
immediately  subside.

No  words  are  needed  to  show  that  the  comparison  between  the
human  body  encumbered  with  fermenting  matter  and  a  bottle  filled
with  such,  does  not  accord  in  every  point.  In  the  bottle  fermentation
has  free  vent,  the  matter  can  expand  in  all  directions  without  resistance,
until  it  reaches  the  surrounding  sides.  In  the  human  body  it  meets
with  impediments  everywhere.  Every  organ  opposes  its  progress  and
iiinders  its  course. Then  it  presses,  pushes  and  rubs  against  the  ob-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  241

strtictive  ofgah  thiis  prochiciilg  heat  in  it  atid  eVfett  destroying  it,  if  tiO
outlet  be  nitlde.  or  its  Course  diverted.  According  to  the  part  principally
afi'fectfcd,  the  disease  is  said  to  be  otiC  of  stomach,  lungs,  heart,  etc.
But  the  part  afifectcd  in  eacli  individual  ease  depends  upon  the  course
tttliGtl  by  the  fermenting  matter,  aild  this  course,  agaitt,  UpoU  the  place
aud  mannei*  of  tlie  deposits.

it  will,  therefore,  be  my  task  latef  oft,  to  show  you  how  the  doftcd
skin  is  to  be  opened.  First,  however,  t  inUSt  speak  of  another  symptom.
Before  the  heat  begins,  we  always  notice  tot*  days^  weeks,  or  even
Inonths  previously,  a  symptom,  apparently  the  exact  opposite  of  thai
very  simple.  It  arises  as  soon  as  the  deposits  have  grown  so  consider-'
able,  that  the  blood  can  no  longer  circulate  properly  in  the  extrcmiiies
of  the  body,  but  is,  so  to  say,  compressed  all  the  more  in  the  inner  parts,
so  that  great  heat  arises  there.

Mattel*  cohtittues  to  be  deposited^-the  time  vai-ylng  accofding  to  the
particular  patient — until  oiic  of  the  causes  already  mentioned,  change
Of  Weather,  outwatd  altoek  oP  menial  excitement  occurs,  thuf*  ca^using
tegmenta tioU  to  set  in.  The  deposited  matter  causes  disturbance**  in  the"
circulation  aud  alimentation.  The  blood-vessels  become  partially  oh^
structcd,  especially  in  their  minutest  branches,  so  that  the  blood  can
ho  longer  reach  the  exterior  skin.  This  is  the  cause  of  cold  feet  and
hands  and  of  a  chilly  feeling  all  over.  Chilliness  is  thus  a  precursor  of
fever,  and  we  should  iiiake  a  grave  mistake  were  we  to  leave  it  un-
noticed. If  proper  treatment  be  ittimediately  applied,  the  fever  cannot
fully  develop,  but  is,  so  to  say,  nipped  in  thd  bud.

When  speaking  before  of  the  nature  of  feriiienialion,  I  rein^tked-
that  in  all  fermentatlotl,  little  vegetable  organisms  called  hacilli,  develop*
spontaneously.  This  is  the  case  with  fever,  and  thus  the  iAuch  de-
bated bacillus  question  finds  a  simple  solution.  Whenever  the  ftiatter'
which  has  settled  in  the  abdomen  begins  to  ferment,  bacilli  de^el-op'
of  themselves  in  the  system;  they  are  the  product  of  fermentati'VA^
and  likewise  disappear  of  themselves  when  fermentation  ceases  an^
the  system  is  restored  to  health,  i.  e.  when  the  process  of  fermentation
retrogresses.

It  is,  therefore,  idle  to  speak  of  infection  through  bacilli,  in  some
mysterious  manner,  without  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  the
system.  The  question  is  not  how  to  kill  the  bacilli,  but  rather  how  to
remove  the  cause  of  fermentation,  the  foreign  matter.  This  do«e,  thesf
little  monsters  which  have  caused  terror  to  so  many  timid  minds,  va'Aish*
as  a  matter  of  course.  Further  on,  I  shall  explain  more  in  detail,  fbe^
dangers  of  infection,

A  few  simple  examples  will  more  clearly  illustrate  my  statements.
Imagine  a  room  left  unswept  and  uncleaned  for  weeks,  notwithstand-
ing the  dirt  that  collects  daily.  Very  soon  vermin  of  all  descrip-
tions will  take  possession  of  the  room  and  prove  so  troublesome  to  the
inmates,  that  every  means  will  be  tried  to  extirpate  them  Now,  it  we
attempt  to  destrov  the  vermin  in  the  old  fashioned  way  by  poison,  we
shall  doubtless  kill  a  large  number,  but  by  no  means  effect  a  perma-
nent alteration  in  the  state  of  affairs;  for  the  dirt  itself  is  the  actual
producer  and  promoter  of  the  vermin  and  will  continually  breed  tresh
swarms. But  we  shall  -attain  quite  a  different  result,  it  we  immediately


242  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

cleanse  the  room  itself  of  all  filth;  and  by  continuing  tliis  process  we
shall  deprive  the  vermin  of  their  proper  elements  and  get  rid  of  them
for  good  and  all.

Anotlier  example.  Imagine  the  swampy  edge  of  a  forest  in  summer.
You  all  know  what  an  annoyance  the  mosquitos  are  in  such  a  place.
It  will  be  evident  to  you  all  that  it  would  be  no  good  using  poison  to
destroy  them.  True,  hundreds  of  thousands  would  be  killed,  but  mil-
lions upon  millions  would  constantly  issue  from  the  swamp.  The
swamp  itself  is  the  breeding  ground  of  the  little  torments,  consequently
one  must  first  do  away  with  it  before  the  mosquitos  can  be  annihilated.
We  know  that  on  dry  heights  hardlj'^  any  mosquitos  exist.  Were  one
to  collect  a  great  number  and  carry  them  up  such  a  mountain  with  the
intention  of  keeping  them  there,  one  would  very  soon  perceive  all
these  insects,  so  laboriously  transported,  flying  back  to  their  native
swamps,  the  dry  mountain  height  being  no  suitable  place  for  them.

A  third  example  will  render  the  matter  still  clearer.  You  are  aware
how,  in  the  tropics,  where  by  reason  of  the  greater  heat  there  is
far  greater  diversification  and  development  to  be  found  in  the  animal
kingdom  than  in  the  temperate  and  frigid  zones,  nature  gives  birth
to  the  most  important  and  largest  number  of  carnivora  and  carrion
feeding  animals.  Whatever  pains  might  be  taken  to  exterminate  them,
new  generations  would  alw^ays  arise  to  take  the  place  of  those  killed.
Thus  you  see  that  these  animals  flourish  only  where,  by  reason  of  the
greater  development  of  life,  there  is  also  more  putrefaction.  If  no
relief  were  at  hand,  the  dead  animals  would  quickly  poison  the  air
with  their  putrescence,  and  render  it  unfit  for  the  living  ones.  It  is
now  plain  why  the  principal  animals  which  live  upon  flesh  and  carrion,
have  their  home  in  the  tropics  and  not  in  the  extreme  north,  where
even  the  reindeer,  which  lives  on  grass  and  moss,  can  hardly  exist.

If,  therefore,  we  should  want  to  exterminate  the  carnivora  and  carrion
feeders  of  the  tropics,  we  would  succeed  only  by  removing  the  condi-
tions of  their  existence;  that  is,  the  swarms  of  otiier  animals  there
present;  the  beasts  of  prey  would  then  disappear  of  themselves.  All
other  means  would  be  useless.  But  the  smaller  the  aninuils  are,  the
more  diflicult  is  their  extermination:  and  of  this  the  bacilli  afford  a
most  striking  example.  In  order  to  exterminate  them,  it  is  of  no  avail
to  employ  medicaments  to  poison  them;  we  can  only  attain  their  end
by  removing  the  cause  of  their  existence,  that  is  by  expelling  all  for-
eign matter  from  the  body.

In  these  examples,  I  have  shown  you  how  Nature  acts  on  a  large  scale;
and  she  acts  in  just  the  same  way  on  a  small  scale,  for  all  her  laws  are
uniform.  Nor  does  she  admit  exceptions  in  the  case  of  disease.  Pre-
cisely as  the  vermin,  mosquitos,  carnivora  and  carrion  feeders  appear,
live  and  thrive  only  where  they  find  favorable  conditions,  so  fever
cannot  exist  without  such  conditions,  that  is,  it  cannot  exist  unless  the
system  is  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.  It  is  only  where  such
matter  is  present,  as  we  have  seen,  that  by  some  cause  fermentation
can  arise,  which  process  we  call  fever.

But  when  we  once  know  what  fever  is,  it  is  not  difficult  to  find  a
remedy.  The  closed  up  pores  of  the  skin,  against  which  the  ferment-
ing masses  press,  must  be  opened,  and  this  can  only  be  done  by  caus-
ing the  body  to  perspire.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  JUu/er.s'  Guide  243

The  instant  the  sweat  breaks  out,  the  fermenting  masses  gain  a  vent,
and  the  tension  of  the  skin  and  febrile  heat  botli  abate.

But  with  the  perspiration,  the  cause  of  the  disease  has  not  yet  been
removed.  For  the  fermentation  in  any  given  case  affects  only  a  part
of  the  matter  deposited  in  the  body;  the  rest  remaining  undisturbed
is  continually  being  increased  by  new  accumulations,  and  thus  forms
an  ever-present  source  of  fever,  which  merely  awaits  a  suitable  oc-
casion to  break  out  afresh.  Our  aim,  therefore,  must  be  to  bring  about
the  expulsion  of  the  matter  still  lying  quiescent  in  the  body.  For  this
purpose  I  have  introduced  the  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  which  1  shall
the  morbid  matter  from  the  body.

At  the  same  time,  everything  must  be  avoided  which  may  disturb
the  body  in  its  work.  The  patient  must  have  ample  rest,  e.  g.  he  must
not  be  excited  by  being  read  to,  or  by  conversation.  Even  the  noise  of
the  traffic  on  the  street  is  injurious,  and  the  chamber  should  be  kept
somewhat  darkened;  also  at  night,  it  should  not  be  illuminated.  There
must  be  free  access  of  fresh  air,  however.

Not  until  there  has  been  a  sufficient  expulsion  of  foreign  matter,  is
the  cause  of  the  fever  removed  and  thus  the  illness  itself  cured.

Let  us  now  briefly  review  the  foregoing,  in  order  to  deduce  some  im-
portant final  conclusions.

In  the  case  of  all  sick  persons,  alterations  in  the  shape  of  the  body
are  perceptible.  These  alterations  are  produced  by  foreign  matter.
The  presence  of  such  foreign  matter  in  the  system  is  disease.  This
matter  consists  of  substances  of  which  the  body  has  no  need,  and  which
remain  in  it  because  of  defective  digestion.  The  foreign  matter  is  first
deposited  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  secretory  organs,  but  graduallj-^
spreads,  especially  when  fermentation  sets  in,  over  the  whole  bodv.
As  long  as  the  organs  of  secretion  continue  to  expel  a  part  of  the  for-
eign matter,  the  physical  condition  is  endurable,  but  whenever  their
activity  becomes  lessened,  greater  disturbances  arise.  The  accumula-
tion of  foreign  matter  is  not  painful,  being  merely  a  latent  or
chronic  process,  which  goes  on  unnoticed  for  a  considerable  period.

We  can  best  designate  the  forms  of  disease  resulting  from  such  ac-
cumulation, as  painless  and  hidden;  they  are  essentially  the  same  as
those  generally  called  chronic  or  lingering.

The  foreign  matter  is  liable  to  decomposition;  it  is  the  real  cause  of
fermentation  and  forms  the  soil  on  which  bacilli  can  develop.  Fer-
mentation begins  in  the  abdomen,  where  most  of  the  foreign  matter
lies,  but  rapidly  spreads  upwards.  The  patient's  condition  changes,
pain  is  felt  and  fever  sets  in.  These  forms  of  disease  we  may  term  pain-
ful inflammatory  diseases;  they  are  what  are  otherwise  termed
acute.

From  the  foregoing  exposition  we  must  now  draw  the  momentous
conclusion:  There  is  orUy  one  cause  of  disease  and  there  is  also  only
one  disease,  which  shows  itself  under  different  forms.  We  therefore
ought  not,  strictly  speaking,  to  distinguish  between  different  diseases
but  only  between  different  forms  of  disease.  It  may  be  remarked  in
passing,  that  direct  injuries,  which  are  not  really  diseases  in  the  above
sense,  are  not  here  included;  I  shall  speak  of  them  in  detail  further
on,  w^hen  dealing  with  the  Treatment  of  Wounds.


244  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

It  is,  therefore,  the  doctrine  of  the  Unity  of  Disease  which  I  teach
and  defend,  on  the  basis  of  the  observations  laid  down  in  the  fore-
going.

I  have  now  indicated  the  way  in  which  I  arrived  at  the  conviction —
a  bold  one,  as  many  may  think — that  there  is  only  one  disease.

Through  observation  and  inference,  we  have  thus  arrived  at  a  state-
ment which  is  of  fundamental  importance  for  the  treatment  of  the
sick — and  1  am  able  to  prove  its  correctness  by  facts.

In  modern  science  there  is  one  kind  of  proof  which  is  preferred  to  all
others  and  regarded  as  almost  the  only  convincing  one,  and  that  is  the
experimental.  In  the  case  in  question,  the  experiment  could  be  carried
out  only  by  tlie  similar  treatment  of  all  kinds  of  diseases,  when,  if  our
statement  is  correct,  uniformly  successful  cures  must  be  the  result.
This  proof  I  have  given  and  continue  to  give.  In  the  reports  of  cures,
contained  in  the  appendix  to  my  book,  you  will  find  the  results  sum-
marized.

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  here  to  advise  and  treat  patients  with  ail-
ments of  all  descriptions,  to  exhibit  the  consequent  changes  in
their  condition,  in  the  forms  of  their  bodies,  and  in  their  capabilities,
and  to  receive  their  reports  on  the  progress  of  the  cure.  Here  I  can
only  engage,  in  the  following  chapters,  to  call  your  attention  to  a  series
of  the  most  familiar,  frequent  and  dreaded  forms  of  disease;  to  ex-
plain in  detail  their  cause,  and  to  follow  the  course  of  the  cure;  at  the
same  time  adducing  as  many  examples  as  possible  from  my  practice,
in  order  in  each  case  to  make  clear  to  you,  how  each  separate  disease
can  be  traced  back  to  one  uniform  cause.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiijcrs'  (inide


245


THE  NATURE,  ORIGIN,  PURPOSE  AND  CURE  OF
DISEASES  OF  CHILDREN,  AND  THEIR  UNITY.


DISEASE  is  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  the  system.  This  was
the  chief  result  at  which  we  arrived  from  the  observations  outlined
to  you  in  the  previous  article.  The  foreign  matter  is  either
present  from  birth,  or  is  introduced  later  by  the  admission  of
injurious  substances.  The  system  seeks  to  expel  this  matter  through
the  bowels,  lungs,  kidneys  and  skin,  and  when  unable  to  do  so,  deposits
it  wherever  it  can.  In  this  way  the  form  of  the  body  is  changed,  as
may  best  be  observed  at  the  narrowest  part,  the  neck,  and  in  the  face.


Explanatory  of  this,  let  us  again  instance  the  bottle  of  ferment  already
mentioned,  as  shown  in  the  illustration.  As  long  as  the  bottle  is
open,  the  fermenting  fluid  linds  free  exit.  But  suppose  a  hollow  elastic
cap  is  drawn  over  the  mouth  of  the  bottle,  allowing  no  gas  to  escape.
The  rubber,  at  first  loose,  will  very  gradually  become  tighter  and
tighter,  the  more  space  the  fermenting  mass  requires.  The  increasing
tension  will  very  soon  lead  to  an  increasing  expansion  of  the  elastic
cap.  You  will  have  a  case  more  nearly  resembling  the  human  body,
if  instead  of  the  glass  bottle,  you  imagine  one  with  elastic  sides,  in  which
the  fermenting  mass  is  clearly  to  be  seen.  Here  you  would  see  how  the
tension  att'ects  the  entire  bottle,  and  how^  changes  in  the  form  of  the
bottle  depend  solely  upon  the  pressure  of  the  ferment.  It  is  the  same
with  the  human  body,  the  only  dift'erence  being  that  the  whole  space
inside  is  not  free  and  open,  there  being  organs  everywhere  which  must
lirst  be  penetrated  or  avoided,  since  they  hinder  the  free  development
of  the  fermentation.  The  source  of  fermentation  in  the  body  is
the  abdomen,  whereas  in  the  bottle  it  is  at  the  bottom. In  other  re-


240)  Vniuersal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Timjcrs''  Guide

spccts,  however,  Ihe  changes  in  form  arc  hrought  ahoul  in  exactly  the
same  way  in  both  cases.

The  foreign  matter  deposited  in  the  body  undergoes  a  change,  it  fer-
ments, and  the  fermenting  mass  spreads  itself  over  the  whole  body.
The  fermentation  also  produces  warmth  and  excites  the  entire  system;
we  call  such  condition  "fever."  If  fermentation  goes  on  mainly  in  the
inner  parts,  the  heat  also  is  chietly  internal,  whereas  the  outer  parts  are
chilly.  This  state  is  more  dangerous  than  the  feverish  one.  Chilliness,
as  we  know,  always  precedes  fever,  and  it  is  an  important  point  to
change  the  chilly  state  into  a  feverish  one,  that  is  to  draw  the  internal
fever  outside  and  bring  the  fermenting  matter  to  the  surface.  If  we
are  unsuccessful,  the  fever  leads  to  serious  illness  or  even  death,  because
the  internal  organs  are  then,  so  to  say,  burnt  up,  or  if  the  fermentation
ceases  before  this  point  is  reached,  are  overladen  with  foreign  matter.

It  has  been  necessary  for  me  to  again  call  your  attention  to  this  matter
and  deal  with  it  in  detail  before  continuing  to  speak  of  the  diseases  of
children.

Under  diseases  of  children  is  understood  a  number  of  feverish  ill-
nesses which  most  commonly  occur  in  childhood.  I  shall  show  you
how  they  all  have  one  common  origin,  so  that  the  question  is  simply
to  understand  fully  the  unity  of  these  diseases.  To  distinguish  each
by  a  special  name  is,  therefore,  for  us  a  matter  of  no  importance,  it  is
even  misleading.  These  diseases,  too,  can  appear  only  wiien  the  body
contains  the  necessary  ferment.  Most  infants  enter  the  world  encum-
bered with  such,  so  that  nearly  everyone  passes  through  one  or  more
of  these  diseases  of  childhood.  Why  children  are  more  subject  to
acute  diseases  tlian  adults,  I  have  already  explained.

But  prevention  is  possible.  1  will  give  you  an  example  of  how  this
is  so.  To  prevent  the  possible  destruction  of  towns  and  villages,  large
stores  of  gunpowder,  or  other  explosive  materials,  are  never  permitted
to  remain  in  them.  We  know  very  well  that  despite  the  utmost  vigi-
lance, the  fatal  spark  might  some  time  or  other  occur.  Now  why,  I
ask,  are  we  not  equally  careful  in  regard  to  our  bodies?  Why  do  we
continually  supply  them  with  foreign  matter,  which  leads  to  violent
eruptions?  Why  do  we  not  rather  take  the  trouble  to  get  rid  of  the
matter  present?'  To  be  sure,  the  eruptions  in  the  body  are  not  always
of  such  a  destructive  character;  yet  they  often  lead  to  death,  especially
when  the  fermentation  linds  no  exit.


Vninrrsdl  Naturopnthic  Dirrcforif  and  nnijcrs'  (inidc  247


MEASLES,  SCARLET  FEVER,  DIPHTHERIA,

SMALL  POX,  WHOOPING  COUGH,

SCROFULA


Now,  let  me  trace  in  detail  the  course  of  the  diseases  of  childhood.
In  doing  so,  1  shall  retain  the  usual  names,  because  although  they
are  no  longer  of  any  special  value  to  us,  they  aptly  designate  the
characteristic  forms  of  disease.

Diseases  of  children  occur,  as  we  are  aware,  in  very  different  forms
and  are  attended  by  various  degrees  of  danger,  so  that  it  does  not
seem  easy  to  find  the  right  remedy  in  every  case.  I  shall  now  try  to  ex-
plain clearly  to  you,  wherein  the  differences  between  these  diseases
consist  and  how  they  may  be  successfully  treated.  But  first  of  all  I
must  remind  you  that  even  with  the  most  dissimilar  forms  of  disease,
there  are  always  two  leading  symptoms:  heat  and  cold.  Be  sure  to  re-
member this  in  following  my  explanation  of  the  individual  symptoms.

Measles.  Let  us  imagine  a  child  suffering  from  the  measles.  First
of  all  we  find  it  restless,  sleepless  with  a  hot,  dry  skin;  in  common
parlance  "the  child  is  feverish."  But  nobody  can  yet  say  what  kind  of
illness  it  is.  Only  the  fact  that  other  children  have  the  measles,  leads
to  the  supposition  that  this  is  a  like  case.  Nevertheless,  we  are  in  a
position  to  proceed  at  once  with  the  cure.  The  method  of  treatment
follows  quite  clearly  from  our  theory  of  fever.

Fever  can  only  be  allayed  in  the  following  way.  We  must  endeavor
to  open  the  pores  of  the  skin,  so  that  the  body  perspires.  In  addition,
we  must  draw  away  the  heat  by  some  cooling  means.  At  the  first  out-
break of  perspiration,  even  the  fever  will  decrease.

With  this  treatment,  the  measles  will  in  most  cases  never  really  make
their  appearance.  That  is  to  say,  the  foreign  matter  will  be  conducted
away  and  expelled  in  a  form  which  cannot  be  given  the  name  of  any
special  disease,  being  discharged  from  the  system  through  the  natural
secretory  organs,  in  the  sweat,  the  urine,  through  the  bowels  and  in
the  breath.  If  we  neglect  to  do  this  soon  enough,  however,  the  measles
break  out,  appearing,  as  we  know,  in  the  form  of  crimson  patches.  The
more  profuse  the  eruption — or  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  the
more  actively  the  fermenting  morbid  matter  is  ejected  through  the
skin — the  less  is  the  child's  life  endangered.  The  less  abundant  and
slighter  the  eruption,  on  the  other  hand,  the  greater  is  the  danger  from
the  heat  developed  in  the  internal  organs,  because  then  the  fermenting
masses  burn  them  up.  Inflammation  of  the  lungs  can  then  very  easily
occur,  and  the  child  dies,  not  because  it  has  the  measles,  but  because
it  has  not  had  them  thoroughly.

To  effect  a  complete  cure  of  the  measles,  w^e  must  thus  try  to  open
the  natural  outlets,  the  skin,  kidneys  and  bowels,  and  cool  down  the
system,  until  the  internal  heat  completely  disappears,  whereby  the  di-
gestion also  will  be  regulated.


218  Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctonj  and  Bui/rrs'  Guide


The  cooling  is  affected  by  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  having  a  deri-
vative action.  Perspiration  can  most  simply  and  easily  be  produced,
if  the  mother  takes  the  cliild  into  her  own  bed  at  night,  and  thus  helps
it  to  perspire  by  the  warmth  of  her  own  body.  Otherwise,  it  often
suffices  to  cover  the  child  up  well  in  a  good  large  bed  with  feather
beds  or  blankets.  Care  must  be  taken  to  let  in  fresh  air  by  night  and
day  by  keeping  the  window  open.  If  we  do  not  succeed  in  tliis  way,
a  steam-bath  must  be  employed.  This  can  be  given  most  conveniently
by  means  of  the  folding  steam  chamber  hath,  which  I  have  designed.
But  where  necessary,  the  bath  can  be  arranged  in  a  different  manner.
After  every  steam-bath  the  patient  must  be  cooled  down  by  being  given
a  friction  hip-bath.

When  we  succeed  in  making  the  child  perspire,  his  condition  will
be  materially  improved.  Should  the  fever  return,  the  cooling  process,
that  is  the  friction  hip  or  sitz-bath,  must  be  repeated  and  the  child
then  put  to  bed,  in  order  that  perspiration  may  be  induced.  This
[)rocess  of  cooling  and  then  again  warming,  must  be  repeated  as  often
as  fever  reappears.

When  there  is  an  especially  strong  pressure  to  the  head,  the  eyes
or  any  definite  part  of  the  body,  we  have  first  of  all  to  seek  to  remove
such  pressure  by  the  application  of  a  merely  local  steam-bath  to  the
organ  encumbered.  As  soon  as  the  skin  begins  to  perspire,  the  part
will  be  inuuediately  relieved,  and  the  danger  that  any  organ  may  be
destroyed  by  the  gathering  ferments,  is  past.  After  ever}-^  such  partial
steam-bath,  a  friction  sitz  or  hip-bath  should  be  given  to  cool  and
soothe  the  system.

Now,  if  you  consider  all  that  1  have  first  said  about  fever  and  measles,
you  will  perceive  that  this  disease  is  simply  caused  by  a  considerable
amount  of  foreign  matter  lying  latent  in  the  system,  which  through
some  cause  or  other  ferments.  Fever  is  thus  caused  and  the  form  of
disease  called  the  measles  is  produced.  You  see,  therefore,  that  measles
originate  in  just  the  same  way  as  any  other  fever,  and  I  shall  show  you
further  on,  how  all  other  forms  of  disease  of  which  I  propose  to  speak
can  be  traced  back  to  the  same  cause. (See  Reports  of  Cures,  Part  IV.)

Scarlet  Fever.  A  child  ill  of  scarlet  fever  shows  essentially  the  same
symptoms  as  one  having  the  measles;  but  the  fever  is  usually  far  more
violent,  so  that  the  parents'  anxiety  is  increased,  and  with  reason.

In  scarlet  fever,  spots  also  appear  on  the  skin,  and  from  their  scarlet
color  the  disease  receives  its  name.  The  spots  themselves  are  at  first
small,  but  gradually  run  together  thus  increasing  in  size.  The  eruption
is  not,  how'ever,  so  general  as  in  measles;  it  often  extends  over  only  a
portion  of  the  body,  appearing  chiefly  on  the  head,  chest  and  abdomen,
whereas  the  feet  remain  more  or  less  free.  The  latter  are  often  cold,
while  the  rest  of  the  body  is  in  a  state  of  violent  fever.  The  head  and
heart  are  most  severely  affected  in  scarlet  fever,  and  it  often  happens
that  children  suffering  from  this  illness  complain  of  pains  in  the  ears
and  eyes.  You  will  now  find  it  easy  to  understand  these  symptoms.
The  condition  alreadv  explained  has  set  in;  the  morbid  matter  in  a
state  of  fermentation'has  forced  its  way  from  the  abdomen  in  an  up-
ward direction  onlv,  towards  the  neck  and  head;  and  only  the  morbid
matter  already  accumulated  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body  has  passed
Into  active  fermentation. The  smaller  that  portion  of  the  skin  which


Universal  Naturopathic  Direcforij  and  fhii/crs'  Guide  249

cooperates  in  expelling  the  morbid  mailer,  by  admitting  an  eruption
to  break  out,  the  greater  the  danger.

But  the  main  question  still  is:  What  can  we  do  to  afford  rapid  and
effectual  aid?  In  the  first  place,  we  must  take  care  to  divert  the  danger
of  permanent  injury  to  the  eyes  and  ears.  This  we  can  accomplish  by
opening  the  pores  of  the  skin  by  thoroughly  steaming  the  head.  (The
quent pages.)  As  soon  as  the  head  has  become  thoroughly  moist,  the  pores
are  opened,  the  pain  ceases,  and  the  iirst  danger  is  over.  But  it  is  often
the  case  that  such  steam-baths  for  the  head  must  be  repeated  several
times,  as  the  pain  frequently  returns  after  a  short  period.  Indeed,  it
will  recur  regularly  at  short  intervals,  if  we  do  not  take  care  that  the
fermenting  matter  is  expelled  in  another  way.  This  is  likewise  ac-
complished by  taking  a  cooling  friction  bath  for  the  abdomen,  in  which
manner  the  matter  is  expelled  through  the  bowels  and  kidneys  and
also  through  the  skin.  The  digestion  has  undoubtedly  been  out  of
order  from  the  commencement  of  the  fever;  nor  could  it  have  been
in  order  before,  whether  the  parents  noticed  the  fact  or  not.  The
fever  deprives  the  digestive  organs  of  their  mucous  secretions;  they
become  dry,  can  no  longer  perform  their  work,  and  constipation  is
the  necessary  result.  The  cooling  and  accompanying  friction,  men-
tioned above,  have  an  excellent  influence  on  the  digestion;  before  long
the  bowels  will  be  loosened,  which  is  always  a  sign  that  the  scarlet
fever  will  take  a  favorable  course.  But  in  the  case  of  scarlet  fever
patients,  considerable  time  and  an  energetic  employment  of  the  reme-
dies stated,  are  nearly  always  necessary  before  success  comes.  This  is
another  proof  that  more  morbid  matter  is  present  than  in  measles.

You  see  that  scarlet  fever,  likewise,  is  produced  only  by  the  fer-
mentation of  foreign  matter  in  the  system  causing  fever.  Only  here,
there  is  much  more  fermented  matter,  the  fever  therefore  being  more
violent  and  the  fermentation  spreading  further  upwards.  The  cause  of
this  disease  is  thus  seen  to  be  that  common  to  all  fevers.  I  will  illustrate
the  treatment  of  scarlet  fever  by  an  example  from  my  practice.

The  daughter  and  son  of  a  Leipzig  manufacturer,  aged  seven  and
two  years  respectively,  were  taken  ill  with  scarlet  fever  and  the  family
physician  characterized  the  case  as  a  very  serious  one,  the  cure  of
which  might  require  six  or  eight  weeks.  Mr.  W.,  w^ho  had  already
purchased  one  of  my  steam  bathing  apparatuses,  for  use  in  his  own
case,  now  consulted  me  about  his  children,  the  cure  the  family  doctor
proposed  effecting  by  physic,  striking  him  as  being  rather  a  tedious  one.
After  examining  the  children,  I  could  give  the  father  the  comforting
assurance,  that  with  my  treatment  the  entire  illness  would  be  over  in
about  one  week.  The  treatment  was  no  other  than  that  which  I  have
by  a  friction  hip-bath  at  70°  to  72°  Fahr.  Whenever  the  violent  fever
reappeared,  a  hip-bath  was  given,  this  having  at  first  to  be  done  every
two  hours.  It  is  evident  that  in  this  case  special  attention  had  to  be
paid  to  the  diet,  as  it  is  certain  that  spiced  and  stimulating  meat-dishes
etc.,  aggravate  the  fever  and  make  it  harder  to  cure.  The  children
were  therefore  kept  on  a  strict  diet  of  bread,  gruel  made  from  whole-
meal, and  raw  or  stewed  fruit,  and  only  allowed  to  eat  when  really
hungry. As  I  had  foretold,  to  the  delight  of  their  parents,  the  children


250  Vniversal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

were  well  again  within  a  week  and  the  family  doctor,  who  had  at  first
asserted  that  such  a  rapid  cure  would  certainly  hring  on  disease  of
the  kidneys,  was  obliged  afterwards  to  admit  that  the  children  were
perfectly  cured.

Diphtheria.  The  word  diphtheria  is  an  alarming  one  for  every  parent,
for  the  great  danger  attendant  upon  this  dread  illness  is  well  known.
The  outward  symptoms  are  somewhat  ditt'erent  from  those  of  the
above  diseases,  but  fever  is  also  an  essential  characteristic.  At  times,
it  is  true,  the  fever  is  apparently  quite  mild,  especially  in  the  case
of  children,  who  lie  listlessly  on  the  sick-bed  and  complain  only  of
dilliculty  in  breathing.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  just  such  children
who  are  generally  the  most  seriously  ill.  In  these  cases  the  fever  rages
all  the  more  internally,  the  skin  is  almost  inactive,  the  bowels  and
kidneys  are  sluggish;  nevertheless,  the  fermenting  masses  press  out-
ward, space  inside  being  wanting.  Such  cases  are  the  most  dangerous.
If  the  system  succeeds  in  expelling  the  morbid  matter  through  the
skin,  as  in  measles  and  scarlet  fever,  all  danger  is  over  at  once,  but
there  is  great  danger  where  fever  is  chiefly  internal.  If  we  do  not
succeed  in  drawing  this  internal  heat  to  the  surface,  there  is  little  hope
of  a  cure.  There  is  then  but  one  outlet  for  the  body,  the  throat,  to
which  the  fermenting  mass  accordingly  rushes  with  all  its  force,  so
that  there  is  often  immediate  danger  of  death  from  suffocation.

Where  this  danger  is  imminent,  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  again  to
apply  local  remedies  and  to  free  the  throat,  even  if  only  for  a  few
moments.  In  diphtheria,  this  is  done  most  speedily  and  efi'ectually  by
steam,  which  lessens  the  pain  and  effects  the  expulsion  of  the  collected
matter.  True,  we  have  not  gained  much  so  far,  but  the  momentary
relief  gives  us  time  to  cleanse  the  principal  source  of  morbid  matter,
which  is  again  to  be  sought  in  the  abdominal  organs.  It  is  astonishing
how  quickly  the  condition  of  the  throat  is  changed  by  my  soothing
baths.  The  friction  sitz-baths,  in  particular,  have  a  most  remarkable
effect,  so  that  the  abnormal  growths  sometimes  disappear  after  only
a  few  baths.  But  another  change  has  taken  place  in  the  throat  by
reason  of  the  pressure;  it  is  swollen  and  inflamed,  and  this  swelling
and  inflammation  is  far  more  dangerous  than  the  fungoid  excrescences.
Before  the  actual  outbreak  of  diphtheria,  the  patient  complains,  as  a
rule,  of  pains  in  the  joints,  for  instance  in  the  knees  or  shoulders.  One
can  endure  even  a  violent  inflammation  in  these  parts  for  a  consider-
able length  of  time,  but  not  an  inflammation  of  the  throat;  against  the
latter,  therefore,  the  most  energetic  steps  possible  must  be  taken.  It
would  be  a  great  mistake  after  the  removal  of  the  fungoid  growth,  to
cease  with  the  treatment  of  the  abdomen.  The  cure  must  be  carried
on  persistently^  until  there  is  easy  motion  of  the  bowels  and  regular
digestion.  Not  till  then  can  the  patient  be  declared  out  of  danger.  As
explained  before,  however,  the  skin  is  also  one  of  the  most  important
secretoi-y  organs;  its  peculiar  function  being  to  expel  the  morbid  matter
which  has  accumulated  near  the  surface.

Imagine,  again,  the  bottle  with  elastic  sides.  As  long  as  it  is  closed,
the  fermenting  matter  cannot  escape  expansion,  and  tension  follows.
But  on  puncturing  the  sides  with  a  needle,  thus  forming  minute  holes
like  the  pores  of  the  skin,  the  fermenting  masses  instantly  escape
through  them,  and  the  bottle  regains  its  original  form. It  is  just  the


k

4


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  -•>!

same  with  the  skin.  Perspiration  is  nothini^  but  foreit^n  matter  forced
out  from  the  interior  by  the  process  of  fermentation.  Digestion  is  a
process  of  fermentation,  and  the  skin  must  therefore  operate  perfectly,
if  the  body  is  not  to  become  diseased.  The  skin  of  all  healthy  persons
is  consequently  moist  and  warm;  a  dry,  cold  skin  is  a  sure  sign  of  disease.

In  the  case  of  diphtheria  patients,  the  skin  is  almost  wholly  inactive
and  needs  powerful  stimulation.  Even  in  this  illness  a  healthy  mother
need  not  be  afraid  to  take  the  child  into  her  bed;  it  may  be  the  means
of  saving  the  child.  Particularly  in  cases  wliere  there  is  no  regular
evacuation  of  the  bowels,  the  system  seeks  to  employ  the  skin  especially
as  a  secretory  organ,  this  being,  indeed,  its  function  always.  Had  the
mother,  directly  the  skin  began  to  grow  dry,  by  her  own  bodily  warmth
induced  the  child's  pores  to  open,  and  at  the  same  time  seen  to  proper
action  of  the  bowels  and  kidneys,  the  diphtheria  would  probably  never
have  broken  out  at  all.

Only  when  it  is  impossible  to  start  the  perspiration  in  any  other


way,  should  artificial  aids  be  employed,  and  the  children  be  given
steam-baths.

You  have  now  learned  that  the  nature  of  diphtheria  is  exactly  the
same  as  that  of  the  before  mentioned  forms  of  disease,  the  difference
being  only  in  the  external  symptoms.  Only  the  most  superficial  can  be
deceived  into  believing  that. these  various  forms  of  disease  have  different
causes.  The  report  of  a  cure  which  occurred  in  my  practice  will
render  the  matter  plainer.

I  was  called  to  a  Mrs.  S.,  whose  son,  aged  nine,  was  somewhat  seri-
ously ill  of  diphtheria.  The  boy  was  first  given  a  steam-bath.  A  steam
bathing  apparatus,  such  as  I  construct,  not  being  at  hand,  one  had  to
be  quickly  improvised.  We  therefore  placed  the  boy  on  a  cane-seated
chair  and  set  underneath  this  a  pot  containing  a  gallon  of  boiling
water.  His  feet  were  placed  over  a  pail  half  filled  with  boiling  water
and  covered  with  two  strips  of  wood.  The  whole  body  had  been
previously  carefully  wrapped  up  in  a  blanket,  so  that  no  steam  could
escape.  After  a  profuse  perspiration  had  broken  out,  the  patient  was
transferred  to  a  friction  hip-bath  at  72°  Fahr.,  in  which  the  abdomen
was  bathed  until  the  heat  disappeared  from  the  head. The  great  diffi-


252  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liui/crs'  Guide

culty  cxperioncod  in  hrealhing  al  the  coninicnrcincnl,  gradually  disap-
peared. It  was  necessary,  however,  to  give  a  fiiction  sitz-bath  for  half
an  hour  every  three  hours,  and  then  also  through  the  night,  so  that  the
fever  should  not  increase.  Naturally,  as  long  as  the  child  was  in  bed,
the  window  had  to  be  kept  open  a  little  day  and  night,  in  order  always
to  have  fresh  air.  By  means  of  the  repeated  baths,  we  succeeded  each
time  in  at  once  allaying  the  fever,  so  that  already  on  the  first  day  of  the
application  of  the  treatment,  all  danger  was  past.  The  cure  being  con-
tinued in  this  way,  in  about  five  days  the  boy  was  fully  restored  to
health.  Thus  is  the  dreaded  diphtheria  cured,  whilst  short-sighted
medical  learning  is  still  seeking  a  remedy.

Small-pox.  Small-pox  occurs  oftener  than  is  generally  supposed.  It
is  true  the  official  statistics  do  not  show  this.  For  any  father  Avho  has
some  little  acquaintance  with  the  natural  method  of  cure,  is  in  no  great
subjecting  himself  and  his  family  to  the  most  unpleasant  restrictions
and  annoyances,  without  any  benefit.  With  proper  treatment,  small-
pox is,  as  a  rule,  an  almost  harmless  process,  as  we  shall  sec.  The  dis-
ease characterized  by  pocks  occurs  in  very  various  forms,  such  as  watcr-
pox,  chicken-pox,  small-pox.  Formerly  all  eruptive  diseases  were
designated  pox.  Small-pox  is  undoubtedly  the  most  dangerous,  for
here  the  fever  is  most  violent,  and  with  wrong  treatment,  death  may  very
quickly  result.  Just  for  this  reason  it  is  so  greatly  dreaded.  Those
diseases  in  which  with  wrong  treatment  death  quickly  ensues,  are  al-
ways supposed  to  be  more  dangerous  than  those,  the  end  of  which  is
preceded  by  a  long  illness.  As  a  fact,  however,  even  where  recovery
is  possible  at  all,  the  latter  are  far  more  difficult  to  cure,  notwithstand-
ing proper  treatment,  requiring  a  much  longer  time  for  their  eradica-
tion. Small-pox  has  become  so  dangerous  simply  because  its  treat-
ment has  not  been  understood,  recourse  being  consequently  had  to  vac-
cination. With  correct  treatment,  the  latter  would  never  have  been
thought  of.

Small-pox  may  easily  be  recognized  when  thoroughly  developed,  but
in  its  early  stages  it  exactly  resembles  the  other  children's  diseases,  as
nothing  but  high  fever  is  observable.  Gradually,  scarlet  spots,  the  size
of  a  small  pea  appear,  like  those  in  the  measles.  They  continue  to
rise  until  they  resemble  a  currant,  with  one  half  in  the  body  and  the
other  projecting.  In  the  middle  a  black  dot  is  formed.  These  pocks
may  spread  over  the  whole  body,  or  be  confined  to  isolated  spots.  Their
cause  is  the  unequal  accumulation  and  distribution  of  foreign  matter
in  the  system,  by  which  the  progress  and  course  of  the  fermentation
is  determined.  The  patient  is  worse  off  in  those  cases  in  which  the
eruption  appears  on  the  face,  as  it  may  then  leave  the  familiar  pock-
marks  behind,  if  the  correct  treatment  is  not  applied.

It  is  no  mere  chance  that  in  one  case  the  eruption  appears  especially
on  one  part  of  the  body  and  in  another  somewhere  else;  or  that  the
head  is  peculiarlv  liable' to  be  affected,  so  that  many  patients  show  few
pock-marks  on  the  body,  while  the  entire  face  is  disfigured.  Again
call  to  mind  the  instance  previously  mentioned,  of  the  bottle  with  the
elastic  cap.  On  that  side  of  the  body  where  the  foreign  matter  has
gathered  most  abundantly,  most  fermentation  takes  place,  and  here
most  pocks  will  be  formed. Now,  if  other  parts  of  the  body  of  limited


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  253

extent  are  encumbered  more  than  the  rest  with  foreign  matter,  more
pocks  will  be  formed  there  than  elsewhere.  Thus,  it  may  happen,  that
a  person  may  have  his  face  pitted  all  over  from  ear  to  ear,  wliilst  on
other  parts  of  the  body  there  are  marks  but  here  and  there.  The  head
is,  so  to  speak,  a  terminus  of  the  body.  When  the  fermenting  masses
are  in  motion,  they  always  find  a  limit  here.  But  as  we  saw  in  the  bottle
over  which  we  drew  tlie  rubber  sap,  the  fermenting  matter  always
presses  upwards,  and  if  in  the  head  it  meets  with  a  hindrance  to  free
fermentation,  it  acts  all  the  more  vigorously  here.

As  soon  as  the  small-pox  rash  is  fully  developed,  vital  danger  is
over  in  most  cases;  for  usually  only  those  patients  die  whose  system  is
incapable  of  expelling  the  fermenting  masses.  It  often  even  happens
that  the  eruption  breaks  out  suddenly  just  after  death;  and  here  too,
one  might  well  say  that  the  patients  died,  not  because  they  got  the
small-pox,  but  because  they  did  not  get  it.  The  patients  always  die
in  a  high  state  of  fever.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  illness  also  must  be  accompanied  bv
violent  fever;  and  it  is  the  fact  we  find  small-pox  patients,  especially
before  the  rash  breaks  out,  in  a  very  high  fever.  In  the  heated  state  of
the  body,  the  pustules  cause  intense  itching  and  burning,  inducing  the
patient  to  scratch  himself.  Thus  the  pustules  are  torn  out  before  they
are  ripe,  and  then  the  disfiguring  pock-marks  remain.  This  was  also
observed  in  former  times,  when  the  poor  patient's  hands  were  often
bound  to  prevent  his  scratching  himself,  A  widely  read  German  ency-
clopaedia still  advises  this  procedure.  What  torture  for  the  unhappy
patients!  But  we  have  a  better  means  of  healing  small-pox,  without
leaving  behind  those  ugly  scars,  and  one  which  removes  all  fear  of  this
otherwise  so  much  dreaded  disease.  We  prevent  the  itching  and
scratching  by  the  same  simple  remedy  which  we  apply  in  the  fevers
already  spoken  of:  we  open  the  pores,  so  that  the  body  perspires,  and
cool  the  abdomen,  where  the  source  of  fermentation  is.  In  the  case
of  wine  or  beer,  everyone  knows  that  fermentation  goes  on  more  slowlv
the  lower  the  temperature.  The  fermenting  matterin  the  system  obeys
the  same  natural  law.  Increased  warmth  favors  all  fermentation;
cooling  hinders,  retards  and  stops  it.

This  is  a  disease  requiring  the  utmost  care  and  attention,  the  system
being  most  violently  excited.  But  my  mode  of  treatment  robs  the
disease  of  its  terrors,  and  one  may  be  sure,  that  with  extremely  few
exceptions,  recovery  will  be  thorough  and  speedv.  The  exceptions
are  found  where  the  system  is  so  overloaded  with  foreign  matter,  that
in  spite  of  the  action  of  the  skin,  it  cannot  be  expelled  fast  enough;  or
it  may  be,  the  body  is  too  weak  to  expel  it.  As  a  rule,  however,  this
will  be  the  case  only  when  the  treatment  is  begun  too  late.  Therefore
I  cannot  often  enough  repeat  the  warning,  that  the  fever  should  be
fought  from  the  verj-^  moment  it  commences;  we  must  never  wait  to  see
what  outward  form  the  disease  may  assume.

You  see  that  for  the  dreaded  small-pox,  we  use  with  success  exactly
the  same  remedy  as  for  the  other  diseases  mentioned.  But  this  can  be
possible  only  on  the  supposition  that  this  disease  has  the  same  cause
as  the  foregoing:  the  encumbrance  of  the  sj'^stem  witli  foreign  matter;
and  this,  as  wt  have  seen,  is  the  case. Nowadays,  when  measles  and


254  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

scarlet-fever  are  no  longer  classed,  as  formerly,  with  small-pox,  and  the
latter  has,  in  consequence,  apparently  become  rarer,  it  is  impossible
for  us  fully  to  picture  to  ourselves  that  period  in  which  they  came  as
a  dread  plague  and  terror.  As  we  now  know  of  the  imity  of  all  dis-
eases, and  how  to  cure  them,  we  naturally  no  longer  have  the  same
fear  of  illness.  Besides,  by  the  aid  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expres-
sion, we  are  in  a  position  to  recognize  years  in  advance,  w^here  there
is  such  a  great  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter,  that
some  cleansing  process  of  the  body,  such  as  small-pox,  may  occur.
And  here  I  will  acquaint  you  with  another  case  of  small-pox  which  I
once  treated.

In  the  family  of  a  mechanic,  three  of  his  five  children,  aged  7,  9  and
13  years,  were  taken  ill  with  small-pox.  The  father,  who  had  also
had  it  and  therefore  knew  the  disease,  soon  perceived  what  danger  his
children  were  in.  At  the  same  time,  he  was  also  aware  of  the  inde-
scribable annoyances  and  difficulties  to  which  he  and  his  family  would
be  subjected,  should  the  authorities  get  wind  of  the  matter.  He  con-
sequently applied  my  method  of  cure  in  all  three  cases  with  the  greatest
secrecy,  using  only  steam  and  friction  hip-baths.  The  children  w^ere
already  in  a  highly  critical  condition.  The  skin  was  covered  with  black
pocks.  To  hide  this  from  notice,  he  had  smeared  the  children's  faces
and  hands  with  ashes,  in  order  to  escape  the  protective  measures  of
modern  hygiene  at  all  hazards.  After  only  four  steam-baths  and  ten
friction  hip-baths  at  71°  Fahr,,  the  fever  was  so  far  overcome,  that
all  danger  was  over  and  the  skin  began  to  peel.  An  unstimulating
diet  and  fresh  air  had  likewise  aided  the  cure.  By  continued  steam
and  friction  baths,  the  children  recovered  so  far  in  a  few  days,  that
they  could  get  up  and  go  out  again,  although  my  method  had  to  be
applied  a  week  longer  in  order  to  attain  a  complete  cure.  The  most
interesting  fact  about  these  three  serious  cases  of  small-pox  is,  that
not  one  of  the  children  has  a  single  pock-mark  to  show.  All  five
children  of  this  family  had  been  vaccinated  repeatedly  and  neverthe-
less three  were  attacked  by  small-pox.  From  these  cases  we  see  how
little  danger  attends  small-pox  when  its  treatment  is  understood,  and
what  very  doubtful  protection  vaccination  affords.  Anyone  who  knows
the  elaborate  and  unnatural  precautions  adopted  by  modern  sanitary
authorities,  when  it  comes  to  their  knowledge  that  small-pox  has
broken  out,  is  the  less  able  to  understand  them  after  vaccination  has
taken  place,  as  the  latter  is  supposed  to  afford  complete  protection.
On  the  reprehensibleness  of  vaccination  I  hardly  need  make  any  special
remarks.  By  vaccination  foreign  matter  is  directly  introduced  into  the
blood  in  an  artificial  manner.  It  is,  indeed,  almost  a  marvel,  how
human  beings  can  so  far  stray  from  nature;  but  where  knowledge  is
deficient,  one  is  prone  to  believe  in  miracles.  I  have  dealt  more  fully
with  vaccination  in  my  little  pamphlet  on  the  "Rearing  of  Children."

Whooping-cough.  Although  whooping-cough  is  not  held  to  be  so
dangerous  as  diphtheria  or  small-pox,  a  good  many  children  die  of  it
and  the  others  suffer  dreadfully,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  from  the  fits  of
coughing.  Respecting  this  point,  1  should  remark,  that  any  cough
must  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  serious  illness,  for  man  is  neither  a
coughing,  nor  a  spitting  animal.  A  cough  never  arises  until  the  pres-
sure of  the  foreign  matter  tends  upwards,  and  the  natural  outlet  below


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  255

is  obstrucled. Either  the  skin operates insufliciently, or the Ijowels
and  kidneys  perform  their  functions  imperfectly.

Children  suffering  from  whooping-cough  also  show  the  familiar
symptoms  of  fermentation,  in  other  words,  they  are  feverish.  The
matter  seeks  an  outlet  at  the  throat  and  head,  though  there  is  no
secretory  organ  there.  Now  it  is  a  question  of  primary  importance,
whether  the  patient  perspires  or  not,  when  seized  with  a  lit  of  coughing.
If  he  does,  he  can  get  well  without  further  remedies.  Hut  if  no  perspira-
tion makes  its  appearance  during  the  fits  of  coughing,  the  patient
grows  blue  in  the  face,  and  the  whooping-cough  leads  to  certain  death
if  no  remedy  be  applied.  At  last,  blood  often  streams  from  the  eyes,
nose  and  ears,  for  all  the  foreign  matter  seeks  an  outlet  there.  At  this
stage  aid  is  usually  no  longer  possible.  If,  however,  the  system  re-
ceives timely  assistance,  it  masters  the  disease  even  in  most  serious
cases.

In  this  illness,  too,  the  treatment  is  the  same — there  can  be  no  other,
as  the  nature  of  the  disease  is  the  same.  The  first  and  chief  duty
is  to  start  perspiration  immediately.  It  is  also  necessary  to  draw
downwards  to  the  secretory  organs,  the  foreign  matter  which  is  press-
ing its  way  upwards  in  the  body.  The  body  has  its  definite  organs  of
secretion,  and  only  through  these  is  it  possible  to  expel  the  morbid
matter  in  a  natural  manner.  We  completely  attain  our  purpose  by
using  the  before-mentioned  baths.  As  soon  as  perspiration  sets  in,
marked  alleviation  of  the  cough  is  apparent,  and  when  the  digestion
improves,  the  coughing  will  altogether  cease.  The  time  required  for
the  cure  is  quite  indefinite.  The  cough  may  vanish  for  good  and  all
in  a  few  weeks,  often  even  within  a  few  days.  It  is  an  error  to  sup-
pose that  it  must  last  two  or  three  months.  I  have  now  shown  you
that  whooping-cough  arises  in  the  same  way  as  the  other  diseases;
that  is,  the  morbid  matter  present  in  the  system  begins  to  ferment,
causing  fever.  After  all  these  expositions,  you  will  now  feel  convinced,
that  all  acute  fevers  are  simply  an  effort  of  the  system  to  regain  health,
by  expelling  the  foreign  matter  which  does  not  belong  there.  We
should  therefore  welcome  every  such  acute  fever.  It  is,  in  reality,
a  curative  crisis;  and  we  have  seen  of  what  great  use  to  the  body  it
may  become  under  proper  treatment,  thoroughly  cleansing  the  system
of  all  foreign  matter.  It  may  be  well  for  me  to  give  another  illustra-
tion of  what  I  mean.

Fever  in  the  system  may  be  compared  with  a  thunderstorm.  Just  as
an  acute  fever  is  preceded  for  some  time  by  chilliness  and  uneasiness,
a  thunderstorm  makes  its  approach  known  by  the  heavy  and  sultrs'^  air,
which  none  can  help  remarking.  We  say  the  air  is  heavy,  we  feel  op-
pressed, and  have  a  feeling  that  relief  must  come  through  a  thunder-
storm, because  it  is,  so  to  speak,  in  the  air.  The  heat  and  sultriness
increase,  until  they  reach  that  state  which  immediately  precedes  a
thunderstorm.  We  feel  the  coming  danger  of  the  approaching  storm;
but  the  actual  danger  begins  only  as  the  storm  breaks  upon  us,  and  is
over  as  the  latter  passes  oft'.  All  is  now  fresh  and  cool,  nature  is  re-
animated, as  it  were.  The  thunderstorm  is  a  process  of  fermentation
of  foreign  matter  in  the  air,  whereby  the  latter  endeavors  to  expel  the
invisible,  floating  vapor  which  in  this  case  is  foreign  matter.  The  storm
is  therefore  a  process  for  cleansing  the  air. By  the  fermentation,  the


256  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

vapor  also  cliangcs  in  appearance.  At  first  invisible,  it  is  now  con-
densed by  tbe  cliange  of  temperature  to  clouds,  and  tlien  falls  as  rain
and  hail.

It  is  similar  in  a  fever  case.  Whenever  fever  breaks  out,  the  body
is  in  danger,  which  is  only  over  when  the  fever  disappears  and  a  re-
freshing reanimation  takes  place.  You  perceive  that  in  these  cases
danger  lirst  arises  through  the  thunderstorm  and  the  fever,  which
afterwards,  however,  cause  reanimation  and  recovery.  Reanimation
and  recovery  are  only  to  be  attained  by  this  dangerous  process,  the
cause  of  which,  in  the  one  case,  is  the  surcharging  and  heaviness  of
the  air;  in  the  other  case,  the  surcharging  of  the  system  with  morbid
or  foreign  matter.  This  example  will  logically  convince  you  of  the
uniformity  of  natural  laws  in  all  phenomena.

Concerning  this  illness  also,  I  will  tell  you  of  a  cure  effected  in  my
institute.

In  the  middle  of  July  1889,  the  four-year  old  son  in  a  Leipzig  family
got  the  whooping-cough.  At  the  beginning  of  August  the  sickness  had
reached  its  height.  Then  the  baby  daughter,  aged  two,  also  took  ill.
For  ten  days  the  illness  became  worse  and  worse,  and  during  this  time
the  child  could  take  no  nourishment.  At  last,  the  parents,  who  till  then
had  been  using  the  natural  method  of  cure  to  the  best  of  their  knowl-
edge, applied  to  me.  I  took  over  the  case.  The  little  girl  had  lost  so
much  strength  that  she  could  no  longer  stand.  I  ordered  four  friction
sitz-baths  daily,  the  children  then  to  be  put  to  bed,  or  given  a  sun-bath
to  bring  out  the  perspiration;  simple  natural  diet  to  be  observed.  The
beautiful  weather  admitted  of  daily  sun-baths  being  taken,  which  in
conjunction  with  the  friction  sitz-baths  worked  wonders.  After  only  a
few  weeks  of  energetic  treatment,  both  children  were  out  of  danger,
and  in  two  months  they  had  fully  recovered.  As  regards  the  diet,  it
was  curious  to  see  how  the  little  girl  refused  to  touch  oatmeal  gruel,
made  without  salt,  sugar  or  butter,  which  would  have  done  her  most
good,  and  would  only  take  her  customary  unboiled  milk  and  chocolate.
From  this,  one  can  see  how  important  it  is  to  habituate  children  to  the
simplest  food  from  the  first.  Nor  was  it  possible  to  keep  her  in  bed
with  her  mother,  although  this  would  have  been  the  best  way  to  make
her  perspire.  Accustomed  to  her  own  little  bed,  she  cried  so  much  for
it,  that  we  were  obliged  to  give  in.  Nevertheless  the  warmth  of  the
human  body  is  the  best  means  to  secure  perspiration  and  repose.  One
need  feel  no  anxiety  concerning  the  ill  effects  of  the  exhalations.  The
lower  animals  are  our  best  model;  to  strengthen  their  weak  and  sickly
young,  they  simply  warm  them  with  their  own  bodies.  While  children
are  well,  accustom  them  to  nestle  on  their  mother's  bosom;  in  sick-
ness they  will  then  find  nothing  strange  in  it.  Of  course,  the  words
"well"  and  "sick"  are  used  here  in  their  ordinary  sense;  for  we  know
that  a  really  healthy  child  cannot  become  sick  at  all  if  brought  up
rationally.

Scrofula.  Scrofula  is  not  a  disease  which  excites  heat,  and  is  not
therefore  commonly  classed  with  fevers,  although  in  reality  it  should
be.  It  is  at  least  as  serious  as  the  others  already  mentioned— I  might
say,  worse.  It  is  one  of  those  latent  chronic  diseases,  which  are  gen-
erally inherited.  The  system  is  not  sufficiently  vigorous  to  bring  about
fever. As I observed heretofore, the temperate and colder  regions


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  lUii/ers'  Guide  257

of  the  earth  are  the  lionie  of  this  disease.  Tlie  (uitward  symp-
toms arc  much  as  follows:  A  large  head,  square  face,  inflamed  eyes,
bloated  body,  weak  legs,  deformed  hands  and  feet,  mental  sluggishness.
Of  these  signs,  however,  we  generally  meet  with  only  one,  or  a  few,
in  any  given  case,  very  seldom  all  at  once.  They  are  accompanied  by
cold  hands  and  feet,  and  a  chilly  feeling  all  over.  It  is  just  this  state
of  chilliness  which  makes  the  disease  a  serious  one.  It  proves  that  the
extremities  of  the  body,  by  reason  of  being  encumbered  with  foreign
matter,  have  in  great  part  lost  their  vigor  and  functional  capacity  and
that  in  the  interior  there  is  therefore  a  wasting  heat.

The  case  must  be  imagined  thus :  The  extremities  of  the  body,
especially  the  hair-like  ends  of  the  blood-vessels,  become  obstructed
by  foreign  matter,  just  as  drain-pipes  clogged  up  with  mud.  The
blood  can  thus  no  longer  circulate  to  the  surface  of  the  skin  and  there-
by the  feeling  of  chilliness  arises.

The  disease  not  being  of  an  acute  nature,  causes  no  pain,  so  that  it
is  only  from  the  general  character  of  the  whole  body  that  we  perceive
it  is  diseased.  Hitherto,  no  one  has  been  really  able  to  say  how  the
disease  arises,  of  what  it  consists,  and  still  less,  how  it  is  to  be
cured.  Usually,  help  is  expected  from  change  of  air,  and  the  patient
is  sent,  when  his  means  admit  of  it,  to  another  part  of  the  country,
or  to  a  watering-place.  But  the  result  is  never  thorough,  even  although
a  change  for  the  better  sometimes  takes  place.

According  to  our  experience,  a  child  suffering  from  scrofula  is  per-
meated through  and  through  with  foreign  matter,  which  it  has  inherited
for  the  most  part  from  its  parents.  This  matter  presses  on  to  the  ex-
tremities in  particular,  and  under  strong  pressure  the  head  gradually
loses  its  round  form  and  assumes  a  square  shape.

Please  remember  in  this  connection,  the  comparison  of  the  bottle
with  fermenting  fluid,  alluded  to  at  the  beginning  of  this  article,  over
the  mouth  of  which  we  put  a  rubber  cap.  Just  as  the  latter  is  filled
out  and  expanded  by  the  fermenting  masses,  so  does  the  body  of  a
scrofulous  patient  swell  out.  By  means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Ex-
pression, however,  we  are  able  to  recognize  the  very  slightest  tendenc}'
to  this  disease.  Of  course,  it  is  necessary  that  one  should  know  exactly
the  form  of  a  normal  body.  Details  on  this  point  will  be  found  in  my
handbook.  The  Science  of  Facial  Expression.

Distortions  of  the  hands  and  feet  arise  from  this  same  cause.  The
skin  is  more  or  less  inactive,  and  cannot  expel  the  masses  of  matter
accumulating  beneath  it.  As  remarked  before,  these  obstruct  the  cir-
culation, for  which  reason  the  skin  in  many  cases  is  always  cold.

In  the  internal  organs,  the  warmth  is  consequently  all  the  greater
and  excites  inwardly  a  feeling  of  uneasiness,  which  we  always  find  in
a  certain  degree  in  the  case  of  scrofulous  patients.  This  is,  in  fact,  a
latent  (chronic)  state  of  fever.  If  it  remains  uncured,  however,  from
the  original  illness  new  stages  of  disease  develop,  which  may  be  still
more  dangerous  and  difficult  to  cure  than  scrofula.  Most  usually,
consumption  follows  upon  scrofula,  where  treatment  has  been  neg-
lected, so  that  in  a  certain  sense  we  may  regard  scrofula  as  only  the
preliminary  stage  of  a  more  serious  ailment.

But  how  shall  we  begin  the  cure?  We  must  proceed  to  transform
the  chill  into  a  fever,  the  chronic  condition  into  an  acute  one — to  bring


^58  Vniversal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

the  internal  fever  to  the  outside.  And  as  wc  have  to  do  with  fever  again,
our  treatment  must  eonseqiiently  be  the  same  as  for  other  fevers;  we
must  open  the  outlets,  in  order  to  gradually  remove  the  mass  of  fer-
menting matter.  We  must,  therefore,  in  the  now  familiar  manner,
excite  the  bowels,  kidneys  and  skin.  The  skin  will  gradually  grow
warm,  perhaps  hot,  but  only  until  perspiration  breaks  out,  when  the
normal  condition  will  then  be  resumed.  At  first,  the  cure  will  onl}'
etiect  a  temporary  improvement;  perseverance  and  energy  alone  lead
to  permanent  results.  How  long  it  will  take  to  effect  a  complete  cure,
it  is  hard  to  say.  Days,  or  even  weeks,  will  not  suffice;  it  requires
months  or  perhaps  years,  and  sometimes  does  not  succeed  at  all,  when
the  body  has  no  longer  sufficient  vitality.

In  a  recent  article,  I  remarked  that  with  sick  persons,  the  chill  arises
from  the  same  source  as  the  excessive  heat;  and  the  same  fact  con-
fronts you  in  scrofulous  diseases.  Two  conditions  of  disease,  ap-
parently quite  dissimilar,  thus  arise  from  precisely  the  same  source,
and  seem  so  different,  only  because  they  present  themselves  in  different
stages  of  development.  In  the  caterpillar,  or  chrysallis,  we  recognize
the  same  insect  which  we  subsequently  see  as  a  butterfly,  of  which
the  first  and  second  are  merely  preliminary  states.  It  is  the  same  with
the  different  diseases.  We  should  laugh  at  anyone  who  asserted  that
the  caterpillar  is  quite  another  being  than  the  butterfly,  and  vice  versa.
And  yet,  it  is  to  be  regretted,  a  quite  similar  belief  obtains  to  the  present
day  as  regards  diseases,  the  unity  of  which  has  as  yet  been  recognized
by  no  one.

I  will  cite  you  a  case  of  scrofula  which  was  cured  in  my  establish-
ment, A  boy  of  five  had  been  so  scrofulous  since  his  second  year,  that
at  five  years  of  age  he  was  quite  unable  to  walk.  He  lay  in  his  baby-
carriage  like  a  log.  His  father  had  had  him  treated  by  the  leading
physicians,  but  all  in  vain.  The  medicaments  applied  had,  in  fact
brought  about  a  decided  change  for  the  worse,  so  that  the  professor
in  charge  of  the  case  declared  that  the  child  would  never  be  able  to
walk.  Medicines,  plaster  of  Paris  dressings,  baths,  electrics,  every-
thing had  been  tried,  but  quite  fruitlessly,  because  the  doctors  con-
sulted had  no  idea  of  the  nature  of  scrofula.  The  child  came  under
my  treatment  at  the  end  of  his  fifth  year.  The  digestion,  which  in  the
former  treatment  had  never  received  due  attention,  was  completely
out  of  order.  The  body  was  distended,  hard  and  lumpy.  During  the
first  week,  the  digestion  improved  decidedly  under  my  treatment,  so
that  a  complete  cure  seemed  probable.  From  week  to  week  the  renewal
of  the  tissues  went  on  more  actively,  and  in  six  weeks  the  patient  was
able  to  stand  without  support.  His  body  was  greatly  reduced  in  bulk
and  was  not  so  hard,  and  many  of  the  lumps  which  could  easily  be  felt
with  the  hand,  dispersed  and  vanished.  After  half  a  year  the  child's
head,  which  had  been  much  too  large,  approached  nearer  the  normal
size,  and  the  bo}'  might  be  regarded  as  cured,  for  he  could  run  and  leap
like  any  other,  and  was  happy  and  merry.

Shall  I  proceed  to  enumerate  all  the  other  illnesses?  It  will  prob-
ably suffice  to  name  a  few:  mumps,  nettle  rash,  spasms,  diarrhea,
thrush,  scald-head,  etc.  They  may  all  be  traced  to  the  same  cause,  all
are  attended  by  more  or  less  fever,  and  the  cure  is  therefore  to  be
effected  on  the  same  lines.


Universal  Naluropalhic  Dirrctory  and  Ihujrrs'  (riiidc  259


DISEASE  A  TRANSMISSION  OF  MORBID  MATTER


IN  all  these  forms  of  disease,  we  always  observe  one  of  two  things:
either  increased  warmth  (heat),  or  increased  chill  (cold).  Both  of
these  symptoms,  as  we  have  seen,  are  fever,  whence  it  follows  that
they  are  both  cured  by  the  same  treatment,  a  fact  which  1  have  proved
in  thousands  of  cases.  All  forms  of  disease  are  to  be  traced  back  to
encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter;  or  in  other  words:
There  is  only  one  disease,  appearing  in  the  most  various  forms;  and
therefore — as  regards  essentials — only  one  method  of  treatment  is  nec-
essary. All  the  various  forms  of  disease  are,  as  we  have  seen,  only
efforts  of  the  body  to  recover  health.  They  must  not,  therefore,  be
suppressed  and  rendered  latent,  as  the  orthodox  medical  school  teaches,
but  the  body  must  be  assisted  to  effect  these  curative  crises  as  quickl}'
as  possible,  in  the  least  dangerous  manner.  Only  in  this  way  can  the
body  really  recover.  Disease  if  repressed  or  rendered  latent,  leads
slowly  but  surely  to  severe  and  wholly  incurable  conditions  of  health.
For  the  morbid  matter  in  such  a  case,  does  not  remain  inactive  in  the
body,  but  is  subjected  to  continual  changes  and  transformations.

One  word  now,  concerning  the  diet  in  all  cases  of  disease.  This
must  be  such  that  no  new  foreign  matter  is  introduced  into  the  system
and  the  fermentation  thus  increased.  As  vigorous  action  is  going  on
in  the  body,  it  should  be  burdened  with  as  little  additional  work  in
digesting  as  possible.  The  first  point,  therefore,  is:  Give  the  patient
but  little  nourishment,  and  never  urge  him  to  take  food  and  drink  when
he  does  not  call  for  such.

And  here  I  desire  to  add  a  few  remarks  concerning  the  danger  of
contagion  by  the  sick.

No  acute  disease  (fever)  whatever  is  imaginable,  which  has  not  been
preceded  by  a  chronic  stage,  consisting  in  the  encumbrance  of  the
system  with  foreign  matter.  For  this  reason  the  chronic  condition  is
the  most  dangerous.  True,  a  transmission  of  this  morbid  condition
takes  place  only  from  parents  to  children;  but  it  occurs  in  every  case
where  the  parents  are  encumbered  with  morbid  matter,  and  is  there-
fore a  sure  way  of  such  matter  being  propagated.  When  we  see  how
children  inherit  the  outward  bodily  form,  the  color  of  the  eyes,  even
the  mental  characteristics  of  their  parents,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that
foreign  matter,  too,  is  transmitted,  especially  from  the  mother.  The
direct  proof  is  found  in  the  fact,  that  the  same  forms  of  disease  usuallj'^
show  themselves  in  the  children  as  in  the  parents.

Infection  has  hitherto  only  been  supposed  to  take  place  in  the  case
of  acute  diseases;  but  as  I  have  shown,  the  transmission  of  foreign
matter  from  parents  to  children  is  nothing  else  than  a  transmission  of
the  disease,  that  is  infection.  The  transference  of  this  foreign  matter,
signifies  the  transference  of  the  cause  of  the  acute  illness.  As  I  have
already  stated,  diseases  of  children  arc  only  to  be  explained  by  assum-
ing the  inherited  encumbrance  of  morbid  matter.


-(»(>  Universal  Nuliiropathic  Dircclonj  and  liuycrs'  Guide

The  question  may  be  asked  whether  acute  diseases  can  be  trans-
mitted, and  it  may  be  answered  both  with  "yes"  and  "no."  Perfectly
licallhy  persons — persons  whose  bodies  arc  free  from  foreign  matter —
cannot  catch  an  illness  by  contagion,  even  were  they  to  swallow  or
inhale  any  number  of  bacilli,  bacteria  or  microbes.  In  the  case  of
persons  whose  systems  are  encumbered  with  morbid  matter,  however,
such  products  of  fermentation  can  act  as  the  exciting  cause  to  fermen-
tation, especially  if  the  temperature  favors  this.  If  there  is  only  little
encumbrance,  there  is  little  danger  of  infection.

In  the  course  of  acute  disease,  foreign  matter  is  continually  ferment-
ing and  being  expelled  by  the  system.  This  is  especially  the  case  while
the  patient  is  recovering,  i.  e.  when  he  is  expelling  the  morbid  matter
by  secretion.  Hence  the  danger  of  infection  is  greatest  from  con-
valescents. How  the  infection  itself  is  brought  about,  1  will  try  to  ex-
plain clearly  by  a  familiar  illustration.

If  wc  set  an  easily  fermenting  substance  in  fermentation,  like  yeast
or  leaven,  and  add  it  in  this  state  to  any  other  readily  fermenting  sub-
stance, as  dough,  milk,  etc.,  everyone  knows  that  fermentation  will
also  quickly  begin  in  the  latter,  if  warm  enough.  Thus,  the  yeast,  itself
a  product  of  fermentation,  produces  again  a  state  of  fermentation  when
added  to  dough  or  milk.  We  say  the  bread  rises,  or  the  milk  curdles.
In  acute  diseases  the  process  is  similar.  The  fermenting  foreign  matter
passes  into  the  air  from  the  breath  or  exudations  of  the  sick  person,
or  from  the  stool.  Should  it  now  enter  into  the  body  of  some  other
individual  encumbered  with  foreign  matter,  and  be  retained  there,
that  is,  not  be  immediately  secreted,  it  works  upon  the  foreign  matter
already  present,  exactly  like  the  yeast  in  the  dough  or  leaven  in  the
milk,  i.  e.  as  a  ferment.  Thus  there  arises  in  the  second  body,  the  same
fermentation,  and  therefore  the  same  disease,  as  in  the  first.  This
whole  process  of  infection  is,  properly  speaking,  nothing  but  an  in-
oculation of  the  fermenting  morbid  matter  into  the  body  of  another
person  in  natural  dilution.  Such  matter  can,  however,  only  work  as  a
ferment  when  it  linds  suflicient  foreign  matter  in  a  latent  state  in
some  other  person.  Only  those  are  in  danqer  of  infection  from  an
acute  disease,  whose  systems  are  already  sufficiently  encumbered  with
foreign  matter:  or,  as  commonly  expressed,  who  are  predisposed  to
such  disease.  Up  till  now  it  has  not  been  known  wherein  this  predis-
position consists.  The  difiference  in  operation  between  this  natural
inoculation  of  morbid  matter,  and  the  unnatural  process  of  inoculating
it  by  vaccination  with  the  lancet,  lies  in  the  difference  in  the  inoculated
matter  and  in  its  dilution.  Homeopathy  teaches  that  all  substances  arc
most  effective  in  a  state  of  dilution,  for  which  reason  the  fermenting
morbid  matter  is  so  highly  efficacious  in  its  natural  dilution,  when  it
linds  a  suitable  soil.  In  allopathic  doses  the  vaccine  virus,  like  all  allo-
pathic remedies,  has  a  paralyzing  effect  on  vital  power;  that  is,  it
deprives  the  body  of  the  vigor  which  it  needs  to  throw  off  the  foreign
matter  in  it  by  acute  disease  (curative  crisis,  fever).  It  increases,  also,
the  quantity  of  the  morbid  matter  and  thus  produces  a  far  more  chronic
state,  as  clearly  proved  by  the  steady  increase  of  all  chronic  diseases
since  the  introduction  of  vaccination.  All  the  other  remedies  against
fever,  such  as  quinine,  antipyrin,  antifibrin,  morphia,  etc.,  have  the
same  effect. They  simply  paralyze  the  efforts  of  the  system  to  regain


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiii/crs'  Guide  ^<'l

m ! !

health,  and  reduce,  or  even  stop,  the  fermentation  of  the  foreign  matter,
but  never  eject  it.  Hence  arise  the  diseases  which  were  formerly  rare,
as  cancer,  intense  nervousness,  insanity,  paralysis,  syphilis,  consump-
tion, scrofula,  etc.  The  system  becomes  more  and  more  encumbered
with  foreign  matter,  but  is  without  ability  to  summon  up  strength  to
throw  it  off  by  some  acute  curative  crisis.  The  encumbrance  reaches
its  highest  limit  in  the  above  diseases,  and  full  relief  is  then  usually
no  longer  possible.  Precisely  those  medicaments  which  possess  the
property  of  most  speedily  suppressing  fever,  as  quinine,  antifebrin,
antipyrin,  plienacetin,  etc.,  have  become  the  favorite  remedies  of  the
physicians  against  fever.  It  is  our  firm  conviction  that  such  are  pre-
cisely the  most  dangerous  means  of  injuring  the  health.

We  have  all  had  experience  how  medical  science  daily  seeks  for  new
remedies  to  apply,  because  the  old  are  no  longer  effectual.  Recollect
the  blind  enthusiasm  for  tuberculin  inoculations  before  a  single  pa-
tient was  even  apparently  cured;  such  a  spectacle  the  world  has  surely
never  seen  before.  At  first,  each  new  medicament  paralyzes  the  vital
powers;  but  in  time,  the  system  grows  so  insensible  to  it,  as  no  longer
to  react.  A  new  and  more  potent  remedy  is  now  required  to  paralyze
the  vitality  further,  until  finally  the  fermentation  of  foreign  matter
cannot  be  longer  prevented  by  any  means  at  all,  and  destruction  of
life  is  the  result. An  illustration  will  render  this  plainer.

Anyone  who  is  learning  to  smoke  has  to  battle  with  his  stomach
until  the  latter  grows  insensible  to  the  poisonous  nicotine.  At  first,  the
stomach  is  vigorous  enough  to  defend  itself  successfully  against  this
poison,  but  very  soon  its  strength  is  weakened,  and  complete  insensi-
bility to  the  poison  is  the  consequence.  We  now  require  a  stronger
poison  than  before,  to  produce  the  first  effect  on  the  stomach.

Those  who  are  beginning  to  smoke  and  cannot  immediately  bear  it,
usually  tell  us,  to  our  astonishment,  that  their  stomachs  are  still  too
weak,  they  must  get  used  to  it,  they  cannot  stand  smoking  as  j^et.  The
very  opposite  is  the  case:  as  long  as  the  stomach  resists  smoking,  it
proves  that  it  still  possesses  enough  vitality,  that  is,  it  is  strong  enough
to  forcibly  expel  the  poison.  When  it  offers  no  resistance,  the  former
natural  activity  is  gone,  it  has  become  weaker.

The  body,  thus  encumbered  with  this  latent  foreign  matter,  requires
a  far  more  powerful  external  exciting  agent,  if  it  is  to  be  roused  to  expel
the  matter,  because  its  vitality  is  diminished.  I  have  already  pointed
out  wherein  such  excitant  consists.  It  is  generally  a  change  in  the
weather  which  is  the  direct  cause,  for  which  reason  we  always  have
great  epidemics  after  unusually  cold  winters.

I  will  add  a  few  mental  illustrations.  If  you  carry  a  bottle  of  beer  into
a  dark,  cold  cellar,  fermentation  will  not  easily  set  in.  But  on  exposing
the  bottle  to  sunshine  and  a  warmer  temperature,  fermentation  begins
at  once,  even  if  the  bottle  is  tightly  closed.  This  fermentation  is  caused
neither  by  bacilli  nor  by  microbes,  but  merely  by  light  and  warmth.
At  the  same  time,  the  outward  appearance  of  the  beer  is  changed;  at
first  clear,  it  has  grown  turbid,  and  if  bacilli  are  now  contained  in  it,
they  are  the  product  of  fermentation.

We  observe  the  same  thing  in  the  air.  One  day  we  have  a  glorious,
clear  summer  day;  the  next,  the  sky  is  overcast.  But  every  one  knows
that the  watery vapor  floating  invisibly  in the air  is condensed to


262  UniDcrsal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

clouds  by  a  change  (in  this  case  a  fall)  of  temperature.  We  also  per-
ceive here,  how  each  specific  degree  of  cooling  produces  its  own  kind
of  precipitation  (dew,  mist,  rain,  hail,  snow) ;  yet  there  is  no  difficulty  in
recognizing  them  all  to  be  simple  products  of  water.

In  marshy,  tropical  regions,  the  atmosphere  is  constantly  filled  with
fermenting  matter  from  the  swamp,  so  that  a  short  stay  suffices  to
bring  on  a  fever  (that  is  fermentation)  in  a  person  encumbered  with
foreign  matter.  The  marshy  ferments  act  upon  the  foreign  matter  in
the  system  like  yeast  in  dough,  producing  fermentation  (fever).  All
stagnant  water  acts  similarly,  but  not  so  violently.  Only  notice  the
difference  between  clear  mountain  lakes,  the  stony  bottom  of  which
admits  of  no  fermentation,  and  other  muddy  land-locked  pools.

Sometimes  the  latter  are  also  fairly  clear,  but  with  every  change
in  the  weather,  fermentation  takes  place  in  the  water,  starting  from
below  and  making  the  entire  lake  turbid,  so  that  one  can  often  recognize
what  bottom  the  water  rests  on.  Standing  water  on  a  muddy  bottom
is  often  set  into  a  sort  of  fermentation  by  a  change  of  weather,  just
like  marshy  water,  and  it  then  operates  as  a  ferment  on  the  other  sub-
stances. This  process  of  fermentation  may  be  clearly  seen  by  com-
paring the  state  in  summer  and  winter.  In  winter,  even  standing
marsh-water  is  comparatively  clear,  because  the  cold  prevents  all
fermentation,  but  in  hot  weather  it  is  nauseously  foul  and  muddy.

The  only  question  is,  what  may  be  the  cause  of  an  epidemic  when  di-
rect contagion  seems  impossible,  for  we  see  the  same  disease  appear-
ing today  in  one  place,  tomorrow  in  another.

Without  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  the  body,  epidemics  are,
as  already  stated,  quite  out  of  the  question.  On  closer  inspection,  we
find  epidemics  every  year,  though  not  always  so  wide-spread  as  the
influenza  at  the  beginning  of  1890.  But  who  is  not  aware  that  every
j^ear  at  certain  times  measles,  scarlet  fever,  diphtheria,  whooping-
cough,  colds,  influenza  appear  epidemically?  It  follows,  in  view  of  the
general,  uniform  mode  of  life  of  the  masses,  that  their  encumbrance
with  foreign  matter,  whether  regarded  quantitatively  or  qualitatively,
likewise  displays  a  certain  uniformit5^  Now,  if  one  and  the  same  exciting
influence  affects  this  matter,  i.  e.  should  the  weather  exert  a  similar  ex-
ternal excitement  on  the  vital  powers  of  the  body,  the  latter  will  also
make  similar  efforts  (fever)  to  regain  health  by  expelling  the  foreign
matter.  And  where  the  encumbrance  in  a  number  of  individuals  is  pretty
uniform,  the  like  cause  will  at  the  same  time  produce  a  like  effect  in
many  of  them,  thus  creating  an  epidemic.  But  one  should  never  for-
get that  even  in  epidemics,  individual  cases  of  sickness  are  never  quite
similar,  always  differing  somewhat  in  their  symptoms  and  course.
When  an  epidemic,  such  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  the  influenza,  appears
here  today  and  there  tomorrow,  the  cause  is  simply  the  weather.  In
this  respect  such  diseases  resemble  thunder-storms,  which  also  at  times
appear  "epidemically,"  today  in  one  region,  tomorrow  in  another.
When  an  epidemic  once  breaks  out  in  a  place,  direct  contagion  does
last  influenza  epidemic.

Widespread  epidemics  have  been  rarer  in  recent  years.  But  ^  as
observed  above,  the  sole  reason  of  this  is,  that  the  medical  profession
has  learned  so  far  to  paralyze  the  vital  powers  of  the  people,  that  in  all


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiijers'  Guide  263

sweeping,  epidemic  curative  crises,  the  system  can  only  rally  the  re-
quisite vitality  when  compelled  under  particular  stress.  The  necessary
consequence  of  this,  however,  is  a  far  more  serious  and  general,  chroni-
cally (latent)  diseased  condition;  and  we  doubt  not  that  the  time  will
come  when  this  will  be  universally  recognized.

Summing  up  the  result  of  these  remarks,  we  find:  (1.)  Unit  in  the
transmission  of  diseases  from  the  chronic  state  (i.  e.  from  parent  to
child),  the  foreign  matter  alone  is  the  cause  of  the  transmission.  Who-
ever is  desirous  of  preventing  such  transmission  must,  therefore,  first
of  all  take  care  to  get  rid  of  this  matter.  Such  transmission  is  the
worst  propagator  of  disease,  because  it  takes  place  in  all  cases;  whereas
infection  through  an  acute  disease,  occurs  only  when  there  is  predis-
position.

(2.)  In  the  case  of  infection  by  acute  diseases,  the  latter  pass  from  one
person  to  another  by  the  transmission  of  fermenting  matter,  usually
through  the  medium  of  the  air.  But  infection  is  impossible  without  the
presence  of  foreign  matter  (predisposition)  in  the  system  of  the  other
person,  as  disease  arises  only  from  the  fermentation  of  such  matter.
Pure  air  is,  therefore,  the  first  condition  in  the  sick-room.  This  is  obtain-
able in  no  other  way  than  by  opening  the  windows,  or  using  proper
ventilating  apparatus.  All  the  perfumes  and  disinfectants  so  often
employed,  do  not  carry  off  the  foreign  matter,  but  simply  help  to  pollute
the  air.  At  the  same  time  they  dull  the  sense  of  that  guardian  of  our
health,  the  nose,  making  it  indifferent  to  even  the  most  ill-smelling
exudations  of  the  patient;  they  operate  exactly  like  the  remedies  men-
tioned above,  not  for  the  better  but  for  the  worse.  All  possible  attempts
may  be  made  to  destroy  the  ferments  in  the  air  by  poison,  but  they  will
never  succeed;  and  as  a  very  little  morbid  matter  suffices  to  set  up  fer-
mentation in  the  system,  disinfection  is  but  a  vain  endeavor.  The  only
proper  remedy  is  one  which  cleanses  the  system  and  drives  out  the
foreign  matter,  the  source  of  predisposition.  You  already  know  it —
the  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  and  the  steam  bath.  In  the  treatment
of  patients  I  have  often  been  obliged  to  inhale  their  frequently  disgust-
ing exhalations.  At  the  next  friction  sitz-bath  which  I  took,  just  the
same  horrible  odor  was  often  given  off  by  my  own  body,  only  it  was
less  intense.  Here  we  have  a  plain  proof  that  the  vital  powers  of  the
body  were  so  much  increased  by  the  bath,  that  it  could  expel  the  virus
of  disease.

(3.)  This  simple  remedy  also  protects  us  from  infection  in  all  epi-
demics, because  the  foreign  matter  (predisposition)  is  thereby  removed
from  the  system,  and  without  it,  no  disease,  and  thus  no  epidemic,  is
possible.

I  have  thus  shown  that  the  transmission  of  disease  and  infection  bj"^
it,  are  only  possible  when  foreign  matter  is  present  in  the  system.
Without  this  no  disease,  and  without  disease  no  infection.  But  any
encumbrance  of  the  body  with  foreign  matter  means  nothing  else
than  its  inner  defilement.  He  who  knows  how  to  keep  his  body  clean
inside  and  not  merely  outside,  is  safe  from  all  infection.  It  is  only
cleanliness  that  cures.  One  ahvaj^s  imagines  that  different  forms  must
conceal  new  and  various  causes,  quite  forgetting  that  nature  very  often
exhibits  one  and  the  same  thing  under  most  varied  forms. This  we  see


264  Univcrsdl  Nalnropalhic  Dirrclonj  and  Ihii/crs'  Guide

in  the  case  of  caterpillar  and  buttcrlly,  and  of  rain,  snow,  hail,  dew,
and  mist.

The  extent  to  which  the  system  is  encumbered  with  latent  foreign
matter  can  be  ascertained  by  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.

If  now,  considering  these  princii)les,  we  think  of  the  preventive  meas-
ures which  the  medical  profession  takes  against  contagion  in  the  case  of
acute  diseases,  e.  g.  diphtheria,  small-pox,  cholera,  one  must  really
be  almost  moved  to  pity.  We  see  whole  houses  carefully  isolated  from  all
communication,  and  everywhere  in  the  dwellings,  the  odor  of  carbolic
acid  and  other  useless  disinfectants,  which  are  supposed  to  destroy
the  contagious  matter.  One  loses  all  patience  when  one  reads  again
and  again  in  the  newspapers,  of  ships  being  kept  without  purpose  for
weeks,  or  even  months  in  quarantine,  in  order  to  prevent  contagion.
Whoever  has  been  so  long  engaged  as  I  in  the  practical  treatment  of
the  sick,  must,  if  he  is  not  blind,  get  quite  a  different  picture  of  the
dangers  of  infection.  I  have  seen  children  suffering  from  diphtheria,
scarlet  fever,  measles,  small-pox,  sleeping  in  the  same  bed  with  their
brothers  or  sisters,  the  family  circumstances  not  admitting  of  other
arrangements.  Yet  there  was  no  contagion,  for  there  was  no  predisposi-
tion on  the  part  of  the  other  children,  i.  e.  they  were  not  encumbered
with  morbid  matter,  which  would  form  a  nutritive  mediimi  for  the
development  of  the  disease.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  seen  in  some
families  all  the  children  one  after  the  other  take  the  illness,  scarlet
fever,  diphtheria,  and  small-pox,  notwithstanding  that  all  the  directions
of  the  physicians  regarding  disinfectants  had  been  most  scrupulously
observed.  In  such  cases,  too,  I  have  often  informed  the  parents  be-
forehand, that  although  only  one  child  was  attacked  at  the  moment,
the  others  would  probably  catch  the  illness  also,  because  the  Science
of  Facial  Expression  showed  me  that  there  was  predisposition  to  such.
We  see,  then,  how  utterly  absurd  the  preventive  measures  of  the  medi-
cal profession  against  contagious  diseases  are.  We  only  have  to  turn
to  nature  to  see  that  this  is  the  fact.  In  the  forest  we  find  the  stump
of  sonie  old  tree,  eaten  up  by  worms  and  insects  and  overgrown  with
fungi,  whilst  close  beside  it  a  3'oung  tree  is  sprouting  up  proudly,  quite
unconcerned,  notwithstanding  the  dangerous  foes  around  it.  Were  the
young  tree  already  infested  by  the  germs  of  disease  and  filled  with
morbid  sap,  it  would  certainly  not  be  proof  against  the  fungi,  insects,
and  worms.  As  it  is,  however,  it  shoots  up  with  vigor;  no  worm  or
insect  attacks  it,  no  fungus  can  take  root  upon  it,  because  for  all,  the
appropriate  nutritive  medium  is  wanting.

May  the  importance  of  what  I  have  said  about  infection  be  grasped
by  the  masses  of  the  people,  so  that  the  superstitious  and  false  teach-
ings of  medical  orthodoxy  may  be  broken  down!  The  public  would
then  no  longer  so  easily  lose  its  head  at  the  outbreak  of  an  epidemic,
but  cool  and  collected  set  about  the  cure.


Universal  Natnropalliic  Dircclorij  and  Bm/crs'  (iuidc  205


RHEUMATISM  AND  GOUT,  SCIATICA,  CRIPPLING:
THEIR  CAUSE  AND  CURE


RHEUMATISM  is  a  disease  so  widely  disseminated,  that  you  will
no  doubt  be  interested  in  hearing  of  the  progress  I  have  made  in
its  treatment.  In  earlier  times  only  elderly  persons,  more
especially  males,  were  troubled  with  rheumatism;  but  nowadays
it  spares  neither  age  nor  sex,  children  even  being  especially  liable  to  it.
It  may  be  confidently  asserted,  that  despite  the  innumerable  remedies
employed  against  it,  the  disease  has  increased.  Any  part  of  the  body
may  be  affected.  Who  has  not  at  one  time  or  another  experienced
those  agonizing  rheumatic  pains  in  legs,  arms,  shoulders,  head  or  teeth.
The  most  feared  of  all  is  probably  that  affecting  the  joints,  or  articular
rheumatism.

People  take  little  trouble  to  discover  the  cause  of  this  complaint.
"I  have  caught  cold,"  that  is  always  the  story.  Indeed,  it  is  astonishing
that  the  inventive  spirit  of  our  century  has  not  tried  to  concoct  some
kind  of  weather  without  the  unpleasant  property  of  making  young
and  old  catch  cold.  But  there  is  something  more  to  be  said  about  this
catching  a  cold.  Suppose  that  in  cold,  wet  weather  a  regiment  of
soldiers  is  sent  out  into  the  open  country,  they  being  picked  men  of
approximately  the  same  age,  and,  in  the  popular  opinion,  of  nearly
equal  health.  On  their  return  the  effects  will  show  in  various  ways.
Some  will  complain  of  coughs  and  colds  in  the  head,  others  perhaps  of
toothache,  or  some  other  rheumatic  pain;  but  most  of  them  will
be  in  the  best  of  health,  or  will  even  have  got  rid  of  some  minor
disposition,  such  as  headache.  Now  all  this  is  set  down  to  the  weather;
and  those  who  assert  this  would  seem  to  be  in  the  right,  for  the  changes
in  the  systems  of  the  men  were,  as  they  themselves  felt,  occasioned  by
being  always  in  the  open  air.  The  first  cause  however  is  sought  in  the
wrong  place.  There  is  hardly  a  more  false  conclusion  in  the  world  than
that  drawn  here:  that  the  same  weather  can  at  the  same  time  make
one  person  ill  and  another  well.

And  it  is  a  fact  that  for  centuries  sick  humanity  has,  indeed,  been  but
little  aided  by  a  theory  of  disease  unable  to  solve  such  contradictions;
on  the  contrary  rheumatic  complaints,  in  particular,  have  spread  very
considerably.

Rheumatism  frequently  affects  only  one  side  of  the  body,  or  only
one  leg,  one  arm,  or  one  shoulder.  This  circumstance  alone,  in  my
opinion,  sufficiently  proves  that  the  weather  is  not  properly  to  blame;
for  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  the  rheumatism  would  then  have
seized  on  only  one  leg  or  one  arm,  when  both  legs  and  both  arms  were
exposed  to  the  same  influences.  It  likewise  often  happens  that  a  person
sits  with  his  right  arm  towards  a  draughty  window,  but  gets  rheumatism
in  his  left  arm,  though  the  latter  was  further  away  and  better  protected
from  the  draught  than  the  other. If,  therefore,  we  would  resist  rheu-


266


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


matism  with  better  success  than  hitherto,  we  must  search  more  care-
fully after  its  cause.

Let  us  iirst  observe  what  this  disease  has  in  common  with  other
disorders.

If  we  carefully  examine  a  rheumatic  patient,  we  shall  find  that  he
also  has  fever,  and  that  the  painful  parts  are  inflamed  and  swollen,
the  digestion  also  being  out  of  order.  We  find  further  that  inflamma-
tion, especially  in  articular  rheumatism,  always  appears  in  certain
places.  The  symptoms  named  at  once  bring  us  a  step  nearer  to  the
cause;  for  the  present  we  must  keep  to  the  three  symptoms:  fever,
inflammation  and  indigestion,  and  seek  to  discover  what  occasioned
them.  I  have  remarked  that  in  rheumatism  of  the  joints  the  pains
always  appear  in  definite  parts.  Strangely  enough  in  my  extended
experience  it  has  not  once  occurred,  that  in  articular  rheumatism  the
principal  pain  was  experienced  in  any  other  spot  than  below  the  joint,
e.  g.  never  above  the  knee,  but  always  below  it.  That  cannot  be  acci-
dental, but  must  have  a  reason.


As  already  explained,  the  spreading  of  foreign  matter  in  the  body
often  takes  place  without  occasioning  fever  to  expel  the  matter  from  the
system.  The  body  then  generally  becomes  encumbered  to  the  fullest
possible  extent.  With  adults  this  is,  in  fact,  generally  the  case,  at  all
events  in  the  temperate  and  frigid  zones.  If  now  a  sudden  fall  in  the
temperature  takes  place,  the  matter  will  begin  to  retreat  to  its  source.
As  we  know,  all  bodies  are  expanded  by  heat  and  contracted  by  cold.
This  universal  natural  law  also  holds  true  in  the  human  body.  We
see  the  expansion  clearly  in  a  case  of  fever,  and  on  the  contrary,  the
contraction  of  the  limbs  within  the  shoes  or  gloves  with  cold.  This
contraction  of  the  limbs  exerts  a  pressure  on  the  foreign  matter  ac-
cumulated within  them,  setting  it  in  motion  and  causing  it  to  retreat
towards  its  source,  the  abdomen.  At  the  joints,  the  foreign  matter  ac-
cumulates, the  course  being  obstructed  by  the  continual  movement  of
the  joints.  By  reason  of  the  pressure  against  the  obstruction,  inflam-
mation is  produced,  causing  violent  pain;  and  as  the  matter  is  on  its
way  back,  the  inflammation  and  pain  always  appear  helow  the  joints,
that  is,  below  the  knee,  the  shoulder  joint,  etc.


I


Universal  Natnropatliic  Directory  <md  Ihujers'  Guide  267

If  we  again  rellcct  upon  the  illiislration  oT  the  soldiers,  the  convic-
tion will  grow  upon  us,  that  the  real  cause  of  illness  must  lie  in  the
body  itself,  and  that  all  the  weather  does  is  to  occasion  a  reaction  of
the  system,  i.  e.  a  transformation  of  the  chronic,  morbid  condition,
into  an  acute,  feverish  one.  The  symptoms  of  disease,  therefore,  ap-
pear only  in  those  parts  of  the  body  in  which  a  certain  quantity  of
foreign  matter  is  present.

To  us,  it  is  quite  clear  how  articular  rheumatism  is  caused.  If  we
undertake  the  treatment  of  a  rheumatic  patient,  an  exclusively  local
treatment  of  the  parts  affected  is,  of  course,  absurd.  To  relieve  the
pain,  to  render  the  matter  fluid,  and  to  open  up  channels  for  it,  a  local
steam-bath  may  be  given;  but  for  a  cure,  the  foreign  matter  must  all  be
gradually  drawn  to  the  natural  organs  of  secretion,  and  there  expelled.

This,  of  course,  is  true  not  only  of  articular  rheumatism,  but  of  rheu-
matism in  general.  Whenever  it  appears:  in  the  shoulders,  back,  side,
neck  or  joints,  it  arises  from  friction;  there  must  be  some  obstruction
or  resistance  to  the  foreign  matter.  Now  in  the  body,  the  fermenting
matter  does  meet  with  resistance,  since  the  fermentation  cannot,  as  in
the  bottle,  proceed  unhindered.  Friction  results  everywhere,  on  account
of  the  obstruction  ottered  by  organs  such  as  kidneys,  stomach,  heart,
lungs  and  joints.  If  there  is  considerable  movement,  pain  is  caused.
But  it  is  evident  that  as  the  foreign  matter  comes  in  contact  with,  ac-
cumulates and  settles  on  the  organs,  the  latter  suff"er  an  alteration  and
become  diseased.

All  pain,  all  rheumatism  (the  specific  term  is  of  no  consequence)
every  twinge,  burning  sensation,  every  pressure,  arises  only  from  fric-
tion, and  friction  comes  only  from  motion.

That  is  what  I  would  say  to  you  first  of  all,  about  the  cause  of
rheumatism.

many -cases  which  so  frequently  occur  in  my  extensive  practice,  and  in
this  way  explain  to  you  the  method  of  cure.

At  the  beginning  of  this  year  I  was  called  to  a  woman  who,  as  her
husband  told  me,  was  suffering  greatly  from  rheumatism,  particularly
in  the  right  leg,  also  further  up,  in  the  joint,  in  the  back  and  neck.
"What  treatment  do  you  intend  employing,  Mr.  Kuhne?"  was  the  ques-
tion she  asked  me.  Previous  treatment,  extending  over  several  weeks,
had  met  with  no  success.  To  such  queries  I  am  accustomed.  I  ex-
plained, in  the  first  place,  in  what  manner  the  pains  were  brought
about:  "According  to  my  experience,"  I  replied,  "it  would  be  purpose-
less for  me  to  undertake  any  treatment  of  the  legs,  neck,  back  or  thighs
(wrapping  them  up  in  wadding  and  the  like).  All  the  pains  of  which
you  complain  are  symptoms  of  internal  fever.  We  must  not  therefore
use  warmth,  but  must  go  to  the  root  of  the  disorder  and  diminish  the
great  heat.  You  will  soon  come  to  see  the  correctness  of  this  method."
As  the  woman  was  quite  helpless,  the  bath-tub  was  brought  close  up  to
the  bed.  The  united  efforts  of  three  persons  were  required  to  get  the
patient,  who  screamed  aloud  at  every  movement,  into  the  water.  I
instructed  a  sick-nurse  to  give  the  helpless  patient  a  friction  sitz-bath.
I  think  it  was  within  scarcely  15  minutes  when  the  patient,  who  at  first
constantly  moaned  and  groaned,  became  quiet.  "Well,"  I  said,  "you
have  grown  very  quiet  all  at  once,"  to  which  she  replied,  "yes,  the  pains


208  Universal  Nulnropnlhic  Di'rrrtonj  and  Ihujrrs'  Guide

have  subsided."  From  this  you  sec  that  the  Irealnient  was  correct.  The
pains  in  the  back,  lliighs  and  neck  arose  in  the  manner  I  iiave  expUiined,
and  could  be  relieved  only  by  such  treatment.  In  a  few  days  tiie  woman
was  able  to  get  out  of  bed  unaided  and  to  take  the  baths  by  herself,
and  in  a  few  weeks  she  could  again  go  about  her  work.

Here  is  another  case.  An  elderly  man,  who  for  months  had  been
treated  unsuccessfully  for  acute  articular  rheumatism,  had  me  called  in,
and  asked  if  I  could  still  help  him.  I  explained,  after  making  a  diag-
nosis according  to  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  that  it  was  not  too
late  to  aid  him.  It  was  the  left  leg  which  pained  him.  Treatment  was
applied,  similar  to  that  in  the  previous  case,  and  two  baths  enabled  the
man  to  go  away  on  foot,  though  he  had  come  in  a  cab.  Now,  why  did
only  the  left  leg  happen  to  be  affected  and  not  the  right?

This  I  will  explain  by  the  following  examples.

In  my  explanation  of  fever,  I  have  explained  the  one-sided  ac-
cumulation of  foreign  matter,  by  showing  like  processes  in  a  bottle.
It  is  probably  evident  to  you,  without  further  explanation,  that  a  one-
sided illness  must  come  from  a  one-sided  accumulation  of  foreign
matter.  Now  you  will  perhaps  ask,  whence  this  latter  arises,  since
it  would  seem  probable  that  the  body  would  distribute  the  matter  as
far  as  possible,  in  order  to  make  more  room.  Well,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  the  accumulations  are,  as  a  rule,  not  entirely  one-sided;  but  they
almost  always  begin  on  one  side,  and  remain  confined  to  that  side
until  it  becomes  overloaded,  whereby  the  matter  is  forced  over  more  or
less  to  the  other  side.  But  the  first  side  has  for  a  long  time  the  larger
deposit.  The  cause  of  this  one-sided  accumulation  is  a  purely  mechani-
cal one,  resulting  merely  from  the  fact  that  matter  obeys  the  law  of
gravitation.  A  few  simple  experiments  will  make  this  plain.  Suppose
we  take  two  glass  bottles,  fill  them,  to  begin  with,  with  pure  water,
close  them,  and  leave  them  so  over  night.  On  examining  them  the  next
morning  we  find  no  alteration,  nor  can  we  see  on  which  side  the  bottles
have  lain.  But  if  we  shake  up  a  little  mud  with  the  water  in  each
bottle  for  the  following  night,  and  leave  the  bottles  again  in  the  same
position,  we  perceive  a  difference  next  morning.  On  carefully  taking
up  the  bottles,  we  immediately  see  in  what  position  they  have  lain
over  night;  for,  on  the  side  upon  which  they  have  lain,  mud  will  be
deposited,  above  which  the  water  will  be  quite  clear.  If  we  add  to  the
mud,  for  the  third  night,  any  quick  ferment,  the  appearance  next  morn-
ing will  at  first  be  the  same;  but  on  opening  the  bottles  and  conveying
them  into  a  warm  place,  fermentation  begins  in  the  interior,  in  the
muddy  sediment.  The  fermenting  mass  rises  and  escapes  on  that  side
upon  which  the  bottle  has  lain.  (See  Figs.  A  and  B).  Thus  it  is  not  an
accident,  that  the  mass  works  out  of  the  bottle  on  one  particular  side;
for  it  will  invariably  issue  from  that  side  upon  which  it  has  collected
in  the  bottle.

The  fermentation  would  have  begun  in  the  mud,  even  without  a
special  ferment,  only  it  would  then  have  depended  upon  the  influence
of  the  weather,  and  we  might  have  had  to  wait  a  long  time  for  it.  You
will  have  an  illustration  still  more  similar  to  the  human  body,  if  you
imagine  the  fermenting  masses  in  a  carefully  closed  bottle  with  elastic
sides.  The  fermenting  masses  need  room,  and  this  they  obtain,  as  the
bottle  is  closed,  by  stretching  its  sides.


Universal  Naturopalliic  Dirrclonj  cind  Ihii/rrs'  Guide


200


These  simple  exi)eriiiienls  illustrate  the  processes  going  on  in  the  body;
the  matter  is  deposited  on  the  lower  side,  and  which  this  is,  depends
chiefly  upon  the  position  which  we  assume  when  sleeping.

On  looking  at  a  perfectly  healthy  person,  one  cannot  see  upon  which
side  he  is  in  the  habit  of  sleeping.  To  him,  also,  it  will  be  quite  the
same  whether  he  sleeps  on  the  right  or  left  side,  for  he  can  lie  as  com-
fortably on  one  as  on  the  other.  When,  however,  tlie  body  is  encumbered
with  morbid  matter,  it  is  very  easy,  according  to  my  new  method  of
diagnosis,  to  remark  at  once  the  greater  or  lesser  deposit  of  matter  on
one  side  than  on  the  other.  When  the  accumulation  of  matter  has
become  excessive,  its  distribution  is  more  regular,  while  the  condition
has  grown  to  be  so  uncomfortable,  that  the  person  affected  can  no
longer  lie  quietly  on  either  side,  but  tosses  about  uneasily.

When  one  side  is  especially  encumbered,  this  side  will  always  be
aff"ected  more  easily,  or  more  intensely  than  the  other.  Thus  you  see
how  it  is  possible  for  a  person  to  sit  with  his  right  arm,  for  instance.


Fig.  A


Fiij.  B


next  to  a  draughty  window,  and  nevertheless,  get  the  rheumatism  in  his
left  arm.

The  one-sided  deposit,  it  is  true,  does  not  take  place  so  quickly  in  the
human  body  as  in  a  bottle.  But  children  are  often  born  with  a  one-
sided encumbrance,  owing  either  to  the  one-sided  position  in  which
the  mother  has  been  accustomed  to  sleep  during  her  pregnane}',  or  to
the  position  taken  by  the  child  within  the  womb.

You  will  now  see  plainly  why  in  the  case  of  the  patients  mentioned
above,  some  of  them  had  the  toothache,  etc.  on  one  side  only;  and  you
will  likewise  perceive  without  difficulty,  why  my  patient  had  the  rheu-
matism only  in  his  left  leg:  he  had  for  years  slept  regularly  on  his  left
side,  hence  the  one-sided  encumbrance.

A  short  time  after  treating  the  last  case,  I  was  called  to  Magdeburg,
to  be  consulted  about  what  was  regarded  as  a  very  exceptional  case  of
rheumatism.  I  went  accordingly  and  found  that  the  case  was  quite  of  the
ordinary  kind,  but  that  the  symptoms  were  very  severe.  The  knee  and
ankle  were  extremely  swollen  and  painful,  and  the  man  could  not  move
his  leg. The  joints  below  the  knee  were  highly  inffamed,  and  the  part


270  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiijers'  Guide

above  the  knee  was  at  the  same  time  much  swollen,  so  that  the  patient
could  not  straighten  out  his  leg.  lie  told  me  that  he  had  sufiered  much
during  his  life,  the  disease  had  attacked  him  every  year,  and  had  grown
worse  every  time.  The  man  was  encumbered  with  morbid  matter  from
head  to  foot.  New  foreign  matter  was  pressing  on  towards  his  knee,
while  the  old  sought  to  return.  Induration  would  soon  have  set  in,  and
then  it  would  have  been  a  case  of  gout.  This  was  partly  due  to  the
fact  that  the  disease  had  hitherto  always  been  treated  locally  with
warmth.  The  condition  had  changed,  it  is  true,  under  this  treatment,
and  apparent  recovery  had  resulted,  but  in  reality  the  disease  had  only
been  changed  to  a  chronic  one;  the  matter  was  quiescent,  but  ready  to
be  set  in  motion  by  every  fresh  fermentation.

The  diseased  parts  were  now  lirst  softened  by  a  steam-bath,  and  the
cold  baths  to  draw  off  the  morbid  matter,  very  considerably  prolonged.

This  treatment  met  with  the  greatest  success  in  a  very  few  days.

I  was  consulted  once  by  a  woman  who  suffered  greatly  from  gout
in  her  hands  and  feet.  She  said  that  all  remedies  hitherto  applied  had
been  unavailing.  I  tried  to  explain  to  her,  that  her  ailment  was  owing
simply  to  imperfect  digestion,  and  that  relief  was  possible  only  when
the  latter  was  got  into  order  and  when  the  bowels  and  skin  performed
their  functions  properly.  I  advised  her  to  take  three  friction  sitz-baths
daily,  and  to  observe  a  suitable  diet,  so  that  no  new  foreign  matter
might  enter  into  the  system.  Some  weeks  later  the  joints  were  no
longer  so  cold  as  before,  but  quite  hot;  at  a  slight  distance  the  heat
could  be  distinctly  felt.  The  cold  baths  had,  therefore,  not  induced
cold  in  the  body,  but  warmth;  their  purpose  is  to  remove  the  foreign
matter  and  thus  produce  a  better  circulation  of  the  blood,  so  inducing
normal  warmth.  In  a  short  time  the  heat  disappeared  from  the  joints
and  the  body  assumed  the  natural  degree  of  warmth — the  patient  had
recovered.

Another  case  of  gout.

In  a  family  where  I  had  treated  the  children  for  some  weeks  with
much  success,  I  was  summoned  to  a  little  chamber  in  which,  I
was  told,  their  grandmother  lived.  She  had  often  expressed  a  desire
to  have  a  word  with  me.  "I  see  how  successful  you  are  with  my  grand-
children," she  said,  "can  you  not  help  me,  too?  I  am  in  great
pain,  and  give  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  all  around  me;  I  have  been
lying  in  bed  for  three  years."  I  answered  briefly:  "It  is  quite  possible,
if  certain  conditions  are  procured;  that  is  to  say,  better  action  of  the
bowels,  kidneys  and  skin.  Your  sickness  has  arisen  from  defective
secretions."  "You  may  be  right  there,  Mr.  Kuhne;  I  have  not  perspired
these  many  years  and  am,  in  fact,  verv  glad  of  it;  formerly  I  used  to
perspire  much.  It  is  the  same  thing  with  the  bowels:  once  every  four,
five  or  six  days;  otherwise  my  digestion  is  good."  One  often  hears
people  saying  that  their  stomach  and  digestion  are  excellent,  only  that
they  suffer  from  constipation.  It  is  sad  proof  how  little  people  under-
stand about  a  good  digestion.  "Yes,  I  replied  to  the  patient,  it  goes  into
the  body  well  enough,  but  does  not  come  out  rcgularlv.  And  what  be-
comes of  substances  that  are  introduced  into  the  body?  Gout  is  nothing
more  or  less  than  a  result  of  imperfect  digestion."  This  seemed  reason-
able to  the  old  lady,  who  was  in  her  70th  year,  and  she  requested  me  to
begin  the  cure  in  a  day  or  two. I  sent  my  bath-woman  to  her  and


Universal  Natiiropalhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  271

tient  had  to  take  three  baths  daily,  alter  which  she  was  put  to  bed,  in
order  to  make  her  perspire  if  possible.  She  began  perspiring  sooner
than  we  expected,  and  alter  each  bath  so  freely  that  her  night-dress  had
to  be  changed  twice  during  the  night.  Within  a  few  weeks  she  was  so
far  restored  that  she  could  rise  without  pain  and  work  about  her  room.
This  patient  had  the  gout.  The  first  cause  was  that  her  digestion  was
out  of  order,  and  one  of  the  lirst  effects  of  her  imperfect  digestion  had
been  rheumatism.  "As  long  as  I  had  my  shop,  I  alw^ays  had  a  great  deal
of  work  to  do,  and  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  my  rheumatic  pains,"
the  patient  explained  to  me  one  day,  "after  giving  up  business,  however,
I  got  the  gout."  In  other  words,  gout  came  on  because  the  rheumatism
had  not  been  attended  to.

Sciatica,  too,  is  nothing  more  than  an  inflammation  of  the  hip-joint,
which  comes  about  in  the  same  manner  as  rheumatism,  and  conse-
quently is  cured  in  the  same  way.  Let  us  hear  what  a  former  patient
of  mine  writes  in  his  gratitude :

"Herewith  I  send  you  my  heartfelt  thanks  for  the  cure  of  my  many
indescribable  sufferings.

"I  was  attacked  in  the  autumn  of  1885  by  violent  pains  combined  with
stiffness  in  my  left  hip,  then  in  the  right  one,  and  in  the  small  of  the
back,  developing  into  general  stiffness  and  rigidity.  The  physician
whom  I  consulted  diagnosed  the  disease  as  sciatica.  His  course  of  treat-
ment brought  on  in  addition  severe  photophobia  (dread  of  light),  nystag-
mus (quivering  of  the  eyelids),  shooting  pains  across  the  face,  heaviness
in  the  head,  dreadful  twinges  and  aches  in  the  left  arm  and  hand,  and
complete  general  debility,  so  that  I  could  neither  draw  off  my  shoes  and
stockings,  nor  even  get  into  bed  without  assistance.  My  hair  turned
quite  gray  in  a  short  time,  owing  to  the  fearful  pain.

"I  was  treated  unsuccessfully  by  more  than  twelve  celebrated  pro-
fessors and  doctors  of  this  town,  and  was  also  exhibited  as  a  remarkable
case  to  the  students  by  some  of  the  University  lecturers.  A  young
physician  used  me  as  a  subject  to  pass  his  examination  for  the  State
medical  diploma.  I  was  often  for  months  at  a  time,  in  the  Municipal
Hospital  and  the  University  Clinic.  Finally  one  professor  and  a  doctor
of  the  Leipzig  University  Polyclinic  advised  me,  in  January-,  1889,  to  con-
sult Mr.  Louis  Kuhne,  who  just  at  that  time  was  giving  public  lectures.
I  did  so  on  January  23rd,  1889.

"On  January  24th,  I  commenced  the  baths.  At  the  very  first  bath,  con-
siderable quantities  of  water  were  passed,  the  abdomen  grew  smaller,
the  head  lighter,  and  for  the  first  time  for  years,  I  was  able  to  walk
without  the  sticks,  hitherto  constantly  used.  On  the  same  day,  I  pre-
sented myself  to  the  professors  of  the  University  Polyclinic,  at  their  re-
quest, to  obtain  their  confirmation  of  the  striking  improvement  in  my
condition.

for  three  weeks,  I  was  enabled  to  report  to  you  on  February  13th  1889,
at  a  public  conference  held  by  you,  in  the  presence  of  some  twenty  or
thirty  students  that  I  was  in  perfect  health,  at  the  same  time  giving
ocular  demonstration  of  my  statement  by  all  kinds  of  movements.

"Since  then  I  have  been  quite  well  and  able  to  work;  I  can  carry  a
hundred-pound  weight  in  each  hand,  whereas  before  I  could  not  move,


272  Universal  NatiiropitUiic  Dircclory  (uid  liinjcrs'  (inidr

lo  say  nothing  of  being  able  to  work  or  carry  weights.  From  the  autumn
of  1885  to  January  23rd  1889,  I  liad  been  treated  by  the  leading  physi-
cians of  Leipzig,  my  condition  steadily  growing  more  wretched  and  mis-
erable. Between  January  23rd  and  February  13th  1889  you  restored  nie
to  health  and  ability  to  work,  by  your  new  method  of  treatment.

I  now  come  to  Distortions.

From  \\\y  exposition,  you  have  seen  that  all  the  forms  of  disease
you  will  possibly  be  surprised  that  I  proceed  directly  from  gout  and
rheumatism  to  alterations  in  the  form  of  the  body,  such  as  high  shoulders,
curvature  of  the  spine,  twistings,  distortions,  etc.  And  nevertheless  these
latter  have,  as  I  shall  show  you,  the  same  common  origin  as  the  diseases
matter  and  the  increased  accumulation  of  such  in  the  various  parts  of
the  body.  These  diseases  frequently  appear  together.  Should  we  en-
quire after  the  cause  of  such,  you  yourself  would  answer:  "The  altera-
tions can  have  been  brought  about  only  by  accumulation  of  foreign  mat-
ter. They  are  to  a  certain  extent  gout  on  a  large  scale."  And  your
answer  would  be  correct.  But  in  what  way  it  was  deposited,  and  how
it  gradually  took  its  course  to  a  special  spot,  I  shall  now  explain  to  you
with  the  aid  of  a  few  illustrations.  Experience  shows  that  it  takes  a
long  time  before  foreign  matter  is  capable  of  producing  great  excres-
cences and  changes  in  the  body:  years  even  are  required  for  this.  Some-
times, too,  the  system  gains  time  through  an  acute  disease,  expelling
so  much  foreign  matter,  that  the  experiences  and  alterations  tempor-
arily disappear,  so  that  years  may  pass  after  the  first  stages,  until  the
deformity  is  fully  developed.  Thus  the  same  foreign  matter  which  in
one  case  produces  small-pox,  in  another  typhoid  fever,  in  a  third  diph-
theria, etc.,  is  the  cause  also  of  these  deformities  and  distortions,  when
the  system  no  longer  has  the  vital  energy  to  get  rid  of  the  matter  by
means  of  an  acute  disease.  The  foreign  matter  generally  accumulates  in
certain  places,  mostly  in  those  in  which  it  is  least  troublesome  to  the
organism  and  as  far  as  possible  removed  from  parts  where  there  is
constant  activity.  The  disease  itself,  therefore,  when  the  deposits  have
collected  in  a  place  where  no  important  organs  lie,  may  cause  but  little
discomfort.  The  external  changes,  however,  gradually  attract  attention,
and  all  possible  explanations  are  sought.  Usually  the  vocation  must
bear  the  blame  as  involving  a  one-sided  employment,  or  some  special
habit,  such  as  not  sitting  erect.  Doubtless,  that  is  particularly  so;  but
such  habits  only  aid  in  determining  the  way.  and  therefore  merely  exert
an  influence  on  the  form  of  the  alteration.  With  perfectly  healthy  per-
sons, curvature  can  never  be  occasioned  by  sitting  crookedly,  as  long  as
they  rest  when  tired  and  give  the  body  time  to  recover  at  intervals.

Thus  I  have  often  noticed  that  countrs^  people,  who  work  all  day  in  a
stooping  posture,  exhibit  a  fine,  straight  figure  when  they  happen  to
stand  upright.  Had  these  people  not  been  healthy,  their  figures  would
assuredly  have  been  influenced  by  foreign  matter.  In  the  beginning,
most  persons  attempt  to  hide  their  growing  deformity  from  the  eyes  of
others  bv  the  aid  of  tailor  and  dressmaker,  but  it  is  impossible  to  do  so
for  any  length  of  time.

There  is  great  variety  in  the  kinds  of  deformity.  It  is  occasioned
by  the  occupation,  habits,  position  during  sleep,  and  in  great  part  by
natural  disposition. There  are  scarcely  two  persons  to  be  found  whose


Universul  Naluropaihic  Directory  and  Ihu/ers'  Guide


273


lorms  are  alike;  slill  cerlaiii  normal  forms  can  be  dislinguishcd,  which
I  shall  show  you  in  the  lollowing  illustrations.

Fig.  A  presents  an  approximately  normally  formed  man;  it  will  be
readily  seen  that  the  members  are  well  proportioned.  Nothing  is  too
short  or  too  long,  nothing  too  thick  and  nothing  too  thin;  all  the  limbs
are  symmetrical.

Fig.  B  gives  a  dill'ercnt  view.  You  will  instantly  perceive  the  altera-
tions on  the  left  side :  a  prolongation  of  the  buttock  both  above  and
below. The  latter  would  be  the  first  of  the  two  to  show  itself,  because


Fig.  A


Fig.  B


the  foreign  matter  starts  from  the  abdomen,  and  the  alteration  there-
fore always  begins  in  this  region;  it  undoubtedly  lasted  years  before
the  shoulder  was  raised.  Had  the  relatives  noticed  the  lower  prolonga-
tion in  time  and  recognized  the  danger,  they  assuredly  would  not  have
delayed  commencing  a  suitable  course  of  treatment.  Of  course,  I  cannot
blame  anj^one  in  such  a  case,  for  the  methods  of  cure  up  till  now  pur-
sued, are  not  in  the  least  capable  of  remedying  such  diseases,  and  for  the
most  part  do  not  even  recognize  them  as  diseases.  The  patient  so  de-
formed is  called  a  cripple,  and  that  is  the  end  of  the  matter.  But  how
this  deformity  has  been  brought  about,  from  what  causes  it  has  arisen,
has  probably  never  been  recognized  before.  My  new  method  of  cure,
when  confronted  by  such  cases,  is  not  so  helpless  as  the  earlier  methods,
and  the  course  of  the  cures  effected  by  this  system  has  proved  its  cor-


274


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


rectness  in  the  most  diflercnt  cases. The  formulation  of  my  theories
has  always  followed  my  practice.

The  foreign  matter  has  accumulated  in  the  body  especially  on  the
left  side,  the  expansion  being  brought  about  here  in  just  the  same  way
as  in  the  bottle  with  elastic  sides,  in  which  the  fermenting  mass  collected
only  on  the  left  side.  The  matter  requires  more  room,  and  finding  no
outlet,  it  sw^ells  out  the  sides  by  continual  pressure.  Now,  if  the  fer-
menting mass  lies,  as  here,  only  on  the  left  side,  it  is  only  this  latter
which  will  be  unusually  distended.


Fig.  A


Fig.  C


By  means  of  my  new  system  of  diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial  Ex-
pression, this  disease  might  have  been  recognized  with  ease  at  its  very
beginning,  and  a  proper  course  of  treatment  adopted  for  ridding  the
system  of  the  cause  of  this  encumbrance,  viz.  the  foreign  matter.  For
years  before  any  prolongation  whatever  of  the  left  side  of  the  buttocks
appeared,  an  increased  encumbrance  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck
might  have  been  discovered.  And  now  that  we  have  learned  the  unity
of  all  diseases,  and  know  that  this  inequality  is  caused  by  the  same
foreign  matter  from  which  typhus,  diphtheria,  etc.  arise  in  other  cases,
it  is  easy  both  to  prevent  and  to  cure  such  distortions.

Now,  you  have  heard  for  the  first  time,  how  crookedness  and  de-
formity of  the  body  come  about.  I  shall  now  show  you,  by  further
illustrations,  that  all  these  forms  spring  from  the  same  cause.


Universal  Naliiropalhic  Dircclory  and  Biujers'  Guide


275


Fig.  C  shows  you  a  body  in  which  the  buttocks  are  lengthened  on  both
sides.  You  may,  perhaps,  at  first  have  only  a  dim  consciousness  that  the
body  exhibited  here  is  wanting  in  true  symmetry.  But  comparison  witli
Fig.  A  shows  immediately  that  in  this  case  the  whole  trunk  is  too  long.
The  lower  part  is  particularly  so,  for  which  reason  the  legs  and  the  neck
have  become  too  short,  the  latter  being  in  part  hidden  between  the
shoulders.  In  this  case,  not  merely  a  one-sided  encumbrance  of  the
buttocks  with  foreign  matter  has  taken  place,  but  one  equally  distrib-
uted;  in  consequence, the entire buttocks are  equally  prolonged  on


Fig.  D


Fig.  E


both  sides  by  the  matter.  In  these  cases  it  also  happens  that  the  matter
presses  up  through  the  neck  into  the  head,  then  causing  an  abnormal
form  of  the  head  in  addition,  as  you  may  often  observe.  I  again  remind
you  of  the  example  of  the  bottle,  over  which  we  drew  an  india-rubber
cap.  The  alterations  in  the  head  are  brought  about  in  a  way  very  simi-
lar to  that  in  which  those  in  the  bottle  are  caused.

But  you  may  also  observe,  often  enough,  just  the  contraiy  of  these
forms,  that  is,  the  legs  and  arms  too  long  and  the  trunk  in  comparison
far  too  short.  The  cause  is  again  the  same,  only  in  this  case,  the  foreign
matter  has  at  an  early  period  penetrated  to  the  extremities,  and  there-
fore the  trunk  has  been  for  many  years  unable  to  keep  pace  with  the
distention  of  the  limbs.

Hardly  anyone  will  suppose  that  by  means  of  our  simple  method  we


27G


Uniucrsal  Nalnropalhic  Direcionj  and  Bni/rrs'  Guide


can  restore  lull  syiiimelry  in  all  such  cases,  ('.ertainly  a  consistent  ap-
plication of  my  cure  for  a  series  of  years  is  usually  needful,  before  the
chronic  state  can  be  readjusted;  and  when  the  organism  is  too  old,
and  the  requisite  vitality  consequently  lacking,  it  is  impossible  to  effect
a  complete  cure.

Fig.  D  shows  us  a  form  unhappily  very  common  at  the  present  time;
the  matter  deposited  has  brought  about  an  elevation  of  the  back,  which
at  the  same  time  prevents  normal  development  of  the  chest,  so  that  the
form  of  the  latter  is  conspicuously  tlattened.  It  looks  almost  as  if  what
has  been  added  to  the  back  has  been  taken  from  the  chest.  The  chest
immediately  expands  when  the  back  is  freed  of  its  burden.  In  this  case,
too,  the  buttocks  have,  of  course,  been  encumbered  for  a  long  time


Fig.  F

previously,  so  that  with  this  form  we  always  find  also  that  the  abdomen
is  either  too  large  or  too  hard.  Sometimes  the  encumbrance  com-
mences in  early  childhood,  or  is  even  present  before  birth  and  thus
it  happens  that  we  see  children  at  the  age  of  only  four  or  five  years
with  rounded  back  and  flattened  chest.  At  this  age  the  evil  can  be
most  readily  and  quickly  remedied,  for  with  our  cure  a  youthful  body
often  makes  as  much  progress  in  a  month,  as  an  older  one  in  a  year.
This  is,  of  course,  owing  to  the  greater  vital  powers  of  youth.  I  have
already  told  you,  how  one  can  succeed  in  discovering  these  deformities
in  their  very  beginning:  it  is  possible  only  by  the  aid  of  my  Science  of
Facial  Expression.

The  foreign  matter  may  also  at  times  take  a  very  irregular  course,
passing  over  from  one  side  to  the  other  and  back  again.  We  see  this
exhibited  in  Fig.  E.  In  this  case,  we  perceive  that  the  matter  has  been
first  chiefly  deposited  on  the  left  side;  but  that  in  the  middle  its  free
passage  has  been  checked  by  one  of  the  organs  in  that  region,  so  that


Universal  Nuturopdthic  Dirrrlorif  (tnd  liiiyrrs*  (iuidc


277


it  has  been  forced  over  to  the  right  side,  hiler  again  passing  over  lo  tlie
other  side.  You  perceive  distinctly  the  i)roh)ngation  of  the  entire  left
side  both  upwards  and  downwards,  and  in  the  middle  Ihe  deflection
to  the  right.  A  curvature  of  tiie  spine  has  already  taken  place  here.
In  the  first  place  this  is  certainly  due  to  an  hereditary  encumbrance.
Should  we  try  to  employ  shoulder-braces  or  other  mechanical  bandages
for  straightening  the  body,  we  should  only  be  torturing  the  patient,
without  effecting  a  cure  at  all.  In  fact,  the  matter  requires  room,  and  in
my  practice  it  has  occured  often  enough,  that  after  a  crooked  back,  for
instance,  had  been  forcibly  pressed  in,  the  foreign  matter  at  once  began
to  collect  on  the  chest.  The  attempt  to  remove  this  matter  from  behind,
had  therefore  been  successful,  but  only  at  the  expense  of  its  reappear-


Fig.  G


Fig.  H


ance  in  front.  The  room  which  the  matter  required,  could  not  be
taken  away  from  it;  one  could  merely  change  the  place  of  deposit.

Fig.  F  shows  a  person  in  whom  the  foreign  matter  has  taken  up  its
station  upon  the  middle  of  the  back  and  forced  the  body  into  a  per-
manently bent  posture.  Such  an  accumulation  is  rarer,  because  the
matter,  as  a  rule,  pushes  on  to  the  extremities.  To  illustrate  this  case,
I  will  give  you  further  on  a  striking  example  from  my  practice,  shown
in  Figs.  G  and  H.

In  this  connection,  j^ou  will  all  be  reminded  of  poor  humpbacks,  who
are  positively  disfigured  by  their  deformity.  Most  often  we  find  a  com-
plete curvature  of  the  spine.  In  the  vast  majority  of  these  cases
hereditary  encumbrance  is  the  cause.  But  before  proceeding  to  the
several  forms  of  disease,  I  must  notice  a  peculiar  kind  of  deformity.

It  often  occurs  that  the  matter  forces  itself  up  through  the  neck  and
collects  in  the  head.  I  have  already  mentioned  how  coldness  of  the
head  arises  from  this. In  children,  it  easily  leads  to  an  unnatural  ex-


278  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

pansion  of  the  head.  A  disproportionately  large  head  is  always  a  sign
of  serious  chronic  disease.  Sucli  an  expansion  of  the  head  often  occurs
before  birth,  and  the  lirst  result  is  dithcult  parturition.  And  it  is  a  matter
of  popular  observation,  that  children  with  large  heads  seldom  live  long.
Your  attention  has  been  called  to  the  reason  for  this,  which  you
will  hardly  have  heard  from  anyone  before.  The  explanation  of  this
encumbrance  1  have  already  given  you  in  the  example  of  the  bottle  with
the  india-rubber  cap.

Proof  of  the  correctness  of  these  statements  can  be  given  only  through
the  cures  based  upon  the  theories  explained.  A  large  number  of  such
cures  have  actually  been  effected  under  my  guidance.  The  treatment
though  it  may  sound  strange  that  I  propose  to  cure  a  crooked  back  by
the  same  treatment  used  for  coughs  and  colds,  how  can  I  act  otherwise,
when  the  cause  of  the  disease  is  the  same?  The  facts  themselves  have
proved  that  I  am  right,  for  all  symptoms  of  disease  disappear  when  the
treatment  is  perseveringly  adhered  to.  The  only  condition  is,  that  the
system  still  possesses  enough  vitality,  and  that  the  nerve  connection  is
intact  throughout,  so  that  the  process  of  healing  can  take  its  course.  I
repeat  what  I  said  before:  All  diseases  (or  rather,  all  forms  of  dis-
ease) are  curable,  but  not  all  individuals.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctonj  and  Buyers'  Guide  279


COLD  HANDS  AND  FEET,  HOT  HEAD:  THEIR
CAUSE  AND  CURE


LET  us  now  consider  the  origin  of  cold  hands  and  feet  and  a  hot  head.
We  all  know  that  the  head  ought  to  be  cool,  and  the  hands  and  feet
warm,  yet  we  very  often  meet  with  just  the  contrary  state.  Now
let  us  see  how  these  symptoms  of  disease  arise.  I  said  in  one  of  my
former  lectures,  that  there  is  no  disease  without  fever,  and  no  fever
without  disease.  Therefore,  according  to  my  assertions,  this  condition
must  also  be  a  feverish  one.  That  this  is  so  in  the  case  of  a  hot  head,
no  one  doubts.  Cold  feet  and  hands  are  less  likely  to  be  regarded  as  in-
dications of  fever.  I  maintain,  however,  that  both — the  hot  head,  and
cold  hands  and  feet — are  caused  in  one  and  the  same  manner.  How
can  that  be?  Every  disease  is  occasioned  by  the.  presence  of  foreign
matter  in  the  system.  By  fever — fermentation— 'this  matter  is  trans-
ported from  the  abdomen  into  the  remotest  parts  of  the  body.  Some  is
deposited  in  these  remote  points,  that  is,  in  the  head,  feet  and  hands.
If  the  fermentation  matter  enters  the  feet  and  hands,  it  finds  there  but
very  slight  resistance.  The  foreign  matter  first  accumulates  in  the  toes,
then  in  the  feet,  and  thus  spreads  gradually  upwards  into  the  legs,  ob-
structing the  circulation  and  consequently  lowering  the  warmth.  It  is
the  same  with  the  hands.  With  many  persons  only  the  finger  tips  are
cold  at  first;  with  others;  only  one  foot;  later  on,  in  the  course  of  years,
they  begin  to  complain  also  of  the  legs,  which  are  cold  up  to  the^knee.
Warm  stockings  are  tried,  but  they,  too,  will  not  help  for  long.  Even  fur
boots  afford  but  temporary  relief;  there  comes  a  time,  when  no  warm
clothing  will  suffice.  The  feet  can  no  longer  be  warmed.  This  makes  it
very  evident,  that,  as  is  well  known,  the  clothing  does  not  warm  the
body,  but  the  body  the  clothing.  And  if,  in  the  beginning,  the  warm
clothing  does  protect  one  against  the  feeling  of  coldness,  the  reason  is
that  there  is  still  a  certain  amount  of  warmth  in  the  limbs,  which  is  com-
municated to  the  thicker  clothes  and  retained  by  them.  But  this  protec-
tion given  by  the  warmer  clothing  does  not  long  avail.  Whenever  the
secretion  of  the  skin  and  the  regular  circulation  of  the  blood  gradually
decrease,  the  warmest  clothing  becomes  useless.

With  the  head  it  is  quite  a  different  matter.  The  brain,  with  its
abundant  supply  of  blood,  is  far  more  capable  of  offering  resistance  to
foreign  matter  pressing  upon  it  than  the  hands  or  feet.  Hence  strong
friction  results,  and  as  a  consequence,  warmth.  Thus  the  riddle  is
solved.  Exactly  the  same  thing  which  makes  the  hands  and  feet  cold,
renders  the  head  hot  at  first.  But  even  the  heat  in  the  head  terminates
sooner  or  later.  In  my  practice,  I  have  met  with  patients  enough  in
whom  the  head  had  already  grown  quite  cold.  Thus  there  is  a  limit
here  also.  When  the  foreign  matter  presses  on  to  the  head  in  great
abundance,  the  resistance  here  also  ceases  after  a  while,  and  the  head
likewise  grows  cold. A  proof  of  the  correctness  of  this  supposition  can


280  Universal  N atiiropathic  Direclonj  and  liuijcrs'  Guide

be  given  only  in  the  cures  resulting  from  a  treatment  founded  upon  it.
If  a  patient  would  be  relieved  from  the  chilliness  in  hands  and  feet  and
the  burning  feeling  in  the  head,  he  must  commence  his  treatment  at  the
l)lace  from  which  the  fermentation  started,  /.  e.,  the  abdomen.  The  diges-
tion must  be  regulated,  and  then  the  hands  and  feet  will  grow  warm
and  the  head  cool.  A  cold  head  will  at  first  grow  warm  again  and  then
attain  its  normal  coolness.  And  this  has  been  observed  in  a  thousand
cases,  fresh  instances  occurring  daily  in  my  practice.  Here  I  will  add,
that  sufl'erers  from  cold  hands  and  feet  are  always  especially  liable  to
rheumatic  attacks.


Universal  Ndliiropalhic  Dirrrlonj  (ind  lUiijcrs (luidc  281


SPECIFIC  CURES  EFFECTED


I  will  now  call  your  attention  to  some  cures  of  such  cases  in  my  practice.
In  the  year  1889,  a  Mrs.  H.  called  during  consultation  hours,  bring-
ing with  her,  in  a  child's  carriage,  her  son,  13  years  of  age.  He  was
sutt'ering  from  a  painful  curvature  of  the  spine,  upon  which  a  con-
siderable protuberance  had  already  formed.  The  boy  could  walk
only  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  with  the  aid  of  two  sticks,  and
usually  had  to  be  wheeled  in  the  carriage.  I  asked  his  mother  what
treatment  had  been  employed.  She  informed  me  that  the  disorder
had  been  so  troublesome  for  over  two  ^^ears  as  to  occasion  her  to
seek  medical  advice.  A  well-known  physician,  a  Leipzig  professor,
had  operated  upon  the  boy  and  tortured  him  frightfully  with  an  exten-
sion bed,  steel  splints  and  other  instruments  of  constraint,  but  with  no
success.  Medical  and  surgical  aid  were  of  no  avail,  as  Mrs.  H  had
clearly  perceived,  for  which  reason  she  tried  household  remedies  for
some  time  before  coming  to  me.  I  explained  to  her  that  the  morbid
matter  had  in  this  case  sought  out  a  place  of  deposit  on  the  back,  and
that  in  order  to  cure  the  disease  the  only  way  was  to  remove  this  matter.
She  understood  my  statements,  and  the  treatment  began  that  same
day.  The  boy  took  three  friction  sitz-baths  daily,  each  lasting  half  an
hour;  the  diet  was  strictly  unstimulating  and  I  insisted  upon  the  child
being  as  much  as  possible  in  the  open  air  outside  the  town.  In  this
still  youthful  body  the  foreign  matter  retrogressed  with  extreme
rapidity,  so  that  the  result  was  surprising.  After  a  week,  the  child
no  longer  needed  to  be  wheeled  about,  but  could  walk  alone
with  his  two  sticks.  A  fortnight  after,  the  latter  also  had  become
superfluous,  and  the  body  was  far  more  erect.  After  two  weeks'  further
treatment,  the  boy  could  again  go  to  school,  which  he  had  been  com-
pelled to  give  up  for  a  long  time.  The  child  followed  this  treatment
for  half  a  year,  and  was  so  far  restored  to  health,  that  he  could  again
carry  his  body  perfectly  straight,  as  Fig.  H,  page  61,  shows.

If  I  assert  that  the  foreign  matter  which  here  produced  the  disease,
was  the  same  as  that  which  produces  small-pox,  scarlet  fever,  diph-
theria, etc.  in  other  cases,  then  it  would  also  be  expelled  from  the  sys-
tem, and  thus  a  cure  effected,  by  the  same  method;  and  this  I  proved
to  these  parents  in  their  son's  case  to  be  a  fact.

The  very  day  on  which  this  boy  was  brought  to  me,  a  woman  whose
menstruations  were  attended  by  an  abnormally  excessive  loss  of  blood,
and  a  girl  9  years  of  age,  afflicted  with  a  dreadful  skin  disease  (tetters),
who  had  in  vain  tried  every  other  method  of  treatment,  also  sought
my  advice.  Both  were  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  the  boy,  due
allowance,  of  course,  being  made  for  the  individual  circumstances,  and
all  three  were  cured.  This,  however,  could  only  have  been  the  case  if
the  cause  of  all  three  diseases  was  the  same,  and  this  fact  the  cures
proved.


282  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


In  another  case,  a  man  50  j'ears  of  age,  succeeded  after  four  years'
consistent  observance  of  my  treatment,  in  reinstating  the  correct  rela-
tion between  the  trunk  and  legs.  The  former  was  proportionally  too
long,  whilst  the  neck  and  legs  were  too  short.  The  patient,  during  the
cure,  observed  that  he  was  gradually  outgrowing  his  trousers,  whilst
his  coat  became  always  more  loose  about  the  shoulders.  Eveiy  few
months  he  had  consequently  to  send  his  clothes  to  the  tailor  for  altera-
tion, until  finally  his  body  very  nearly  regained  its  normal  form.

Now  after  all  these  remarks,  I  hope  that  the  unity  of  all  diseases,  i.  e.
the  uniform  cause,  has  become  plain  to  you.  You  can  daily  meet  with
proofs  of  this  fact  in  my  practice.

Before  concluding  this  subject,  I  will  give  you  some  proofs  of  the
superiority  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  over  the  orthodox  system.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiijers'  Guide  2«3


THE  SCIENCE  OF  FACIAL  EXPRESSION


THE  circumstance  that  many  of  my  patients  first  sought  aid  from  me
in  tlie  last  extremity,  so  to  speak,  after  trying  all  other  methods  of
treatment  in  vain,  has  afforded  me  a  deeper  insight  into  the  diag-
noses of  the  medical  profession  than  many  may  believe.  1  was  once
consulted  by  a  big,  tall  man — a  picture  of  health,  as  people  would  say —
who  complained  that  he  was  quite  unable  to  work.  All  the  physicians
(and  he  had  consulted  many)  had  carefully  examined  him,  as  far  as
rapping,  feeling  and  listening  would  go,  and  finally  pronounced  him  to  be
perfectly  healthy — that  they  could  find  no  disease :  he  merely  imagined
himself  to  be  ill.  The  best  thing  he  could  do  would  be  to  take  a  trip,
so  as  to  divert  his  mind,  and  then  he  would  no  longer  notice  any  illness.
He  followed  their  directions,  but  received  no  benefit  and  therefore  came
to  me.  A  glance  at  his  neck  and  head,  and  an  examination  of  the
former  when  the  head  was  turned  to  the  right  or  left,  showed  me  plainly
that  his  system  was  seriously  encumbered  with  foreign  matter,  the  entire
weeks  he  had  got  rid  of  so  much  of  the  morbid  matter  that  he  could
send  me  the  welcome  news  of  his  ability  to  work  the  whole  day  long.  You
see  which  diagnosis  was  the  more  practical  here.  Cases  like  this,  in
which  the  patients  are  universally  declared  to  be  the  picture  of  health,
although  they  themselves  feel  very  ill,  occur  almost  daily  in  my  practice.
Such  patients  are  often  very  reluctant  to  consult  a  physician,  because
former  unpleasant  experience  leads  them  to  expect  their  disease  to  be
again  styled  "imaginary."  It  is  exactly  here  that  1  have  had  such  good
opportunity  of  observing  how  inadequate  is  the  present  system  of
diagnosis.

Take  again  a  case.  A  girl  of  18  came  to  me,  suffering  from  chlorosis
(green  sickness).  The  doctors  had  said  that  she  was  only  somewhat
chlorotic,  but  otherwise  quite  well;  she  should  take  iron  and  w^ould
then  soon  recover  her  health.  Well,  she  had  taken  iron,  but  the  quality
of  her  blood  had  not  improved  in  any  way.  My  knowledge  of  facial
expression  told  me  that  she  could  not  be  "quite  well"  and  at  the  same
time  be  chlorotic,  for  her  system  was  encumbered  with  much  foreign
matter.  All  the  minutest  blood-vessels,  which  should  convey  the  blood
to  the  skin,  were  obstructed.  The  blood  could  not  reach  the  outer  skin
in  sufficient  quantity,  wherefore  the  latter  assumed  a  pale,  sickly  ap-
pearance. The  cause  of  this  ailment  was  imperfect  digestion  of  many
years'  standing,  as  the  patient  herself  admitted.  And  here  1  will
observe  that  most  people  unfortunately  do  not  know  what  a  really
normal  digestion  is,  the  full  importance  of  such  being  therefore  seldom
recognized.  This  is  a  matter  of  daily  experience  in  my  practice.  I
last  mentioned,  and  in  the  course  of  some  months  the  disorder  was
removed  and  the  patient's  appearance  wholly  changed.  You  see  that  the
diagnosis  of  medical  science  was  again  at  fault  regarding  the  true  state


-^1  Vniucr.scil  Naturopdlliic  Directory  and  Ihiycrs'  Guide

of  the  patient,  lor  the  chlorosis  was  merely  an  outward  symptom
of  the  disease,  which  was  itself  produced  by  the  foreign  matter;  and
tlie  latter,  again,  had  been  left  behind  in  the  system  owing  to  imperfect
digestion.  Now,  I  ascertained  all  this  by  a  glance  at  the  patient's  neck
and  head,  whereas  the  representatives  of  medical  science  had  missed
it  altogether.

Another  case.  I  was  visited  by  a  woman  suffering  from  most  ob-
stinate constipation.  No  remedies  were  any  longer  of  use  and  the
doctor  had  told  her  that  she  should  make  her  mind  easy,  even  per-
fectly healthy  persons  suffered  from  constipation  and  it  must  get  better
of  its  own  accord.  I  ascertained  that  the  woman  was  heavily  encum-
bered with  foreign  matter,  which  produced,  especially  in  the  abdomen,
a  high  chronic  fever  heat,  that  dried  up  all  the  mucous  secretions  of  the
intestines  and  almost  burnt  up  the  faecal  matter,  so  that  it  remained
markably short  time,  after  the  very  first  baths,  the  internal  heat  was
drawn  to  the  outside,  and  the  bowels  opened.  In  this  case,  too,  you
again  plainly  see  the  inadequacy  of  the  usual  method  of  diagnosis.  I
would  almost  assert  that  there  is  no  more  mischievous  and  wide-spread
error  than  this,  that  a  person  can  be  in  perfect  health  and  yet  suffer
from  constipation.  How  far  is  such  an  idea  of  disease  removed  from
the  truth!  It  is  really  nothing  more  than  what  might  be  held  by  any
child,  who  sees  the  mere  external  symptoms  which  it  cannot  account
for. Debilitated  digestion  is,  as  I  maintain,  the  mother  of  all  diseases.

An  able  physician  once  said  to  me,  that  in  many  anatomical  examina-
tions of  bodies,  he  had  often  racked  his  brains  to  find  out  why  the  dis-
eased had  died  of  this  or  that  disease  and  not  of  some  other.  All  parts
of  the  body  and  the  internal  organs  were  in  perfect  order,  and  nowhere
could  a  trace  of  disease  be  seen.  I  answered  that  the  difference  between
his  diagnosis  and  mine  consisted  in  this:  That  the  physicians  chiefly
endeavor  to  learn  by  the  dissection  of  dead  bodies,  whereas  I  attend
only  to  the  processes  going  on  in  living  bodies,  and  study  the  causes
and  interruption  of  such,  all  observation  of  corpses  being  consequently
worthless  to  me.  To  make  my  meaning  clearer  I  adduced  the  following
illustration.

A  person  goes  to  buy  a  sewing  machine.  He  sees  a  great  number  of
first-rate  machines  standing  in  the  salesrooms  and  chooses  one.  He  finds
no  external  defect,  the  workmanship  seems  perfect,  down  to  the  min-
utest details.  A  friend  now  points  out  to  him,  that  the  machine  may
well  look  perfect  when  at  rest,  since  any  defect  will  first  become  ap-
parent when  it  is  set  going.  When  working,  a  defect  not  to  be  remarked
otherwise,  will  render  the  whole  machine  valueless;  and  therefore  he
had  better  test  it  in  operation.  The  case  is  similar  with  the  human
body.  When  inactive — which  here  signifies  dead — it  is  often  impos-
sible to  say  what  is  the  matter.  In  the  living  body  every  regularit^^  is
directly  apparent.  Therefore,  whoever  would  study  these  irregularities
(disease  in  all  forms,  and  its  symptoms)  cannot  attain  his  end  by  the
dissection  of  dead  bodies,  but  solely  through  the  observation  of  living
ones. My  Science  of  Facial  Exi)ression  is  based  on  such  observations.

Having  now,  as  I  believe,  proved  the  unity  of  all  forms  of  disease,  I
may  add  that  the  usual  diagnoses  of  modern  medical  science  for  the
names  and  seats  of  diseases  are  quite  superfluous,  and  as  far  as  cure  is
concerned,  utterly  useless. They  may,  indeed,  easily  lead  to  error. The


Universal  Naturopalhic  Dircclorij  and  linj/crs'  (inide  28.'

only  question  is,  to  decide  whether  a  body  is  healthy  or  diseased;  that
is,  whether  it  is  free  from  morbid  matter  or  encumbered  with  it,  and  in
what  way  this  encumbrance  has  come  about,  and  how  long  it  has  been
going  on,  so  that  we  can  approximately  estimate  the  time  required  for
a  cure,  for  as  soon  as  we  know  that  the  body  is  diseased,  we  also  know
what  steps  to  take  to  render  it  iicalthy,  so  lliat  all  errors  in  the  treat-
ment of  a  patient  are  excluded  from  the  outset.


286


Universal  Natiiropalhir  Direclonj  and  Buyers Guide


MY  REMEDIAL  AGENTS


AFTER  having  had  a  description  of  a  number  of  illnesses  and  their
cause,  it  will  be  necessary  to  become  acquainted  with  the  means
of  curing  the  various  diseases  with  which  mankind  is  afiflicted.
And  here,  again,  we  must  expect  to  find  unity  of  cure,  for  the
very  reason  that  all  forms  of  disease  have  one  common  origin.

First  of  all  come  steam-baths,  of  which  several  forms  may  be  applied.
The  steam-bath  is  the  most  reliable  means  there  is  of  restoring  the  skin
to  regular  action.  And  this  is  an  indispensable  condition  for  all  those
who  desire  to  maintain  their  health,  as  well  as  for  those  who  wish  to
become  healthy.

The  Whole  Steam-bath.  For  a  long  time  I  endeavored  to  find  a  really
simple  and  practical  apparatus  suited  for  general  family  use,  and  also
for  cases  of  serious  illness.  I  was  led  finally  to  construct  my  own  Fold-
ing Steam-bathing  Apparatus.  This  appliance,  when  folded  together,
takes  up  no  more  room  than  an  ordinary  chair  and  can  be  set  up  by
anyone.

The  only  things  required  in  using  this  apparatus  are  a  large  blanket,
a  few  pots  and  one  of  my  hip-baths,  or  a  wash-tub.  A  particular  ad-
vantage of  this  apparatus  is,  that  either  the  whole  body,  or  only  par-
ticular parts,  can  be  submitted  to  the  action  of  the  steam,  just  as
desired.

Having  set  up  the  apparatus  in  the  manner  shown  below  (see  Fig.  A),
boil  some  water  in  three  or  four  pots  on  an  ordinary  fire;  or,  better
still,  employ  my  specially  constructed  steam-pots  with  alcohol  heaters
and  water-compartments.  Three  of  these  steam-pots  are  required  for
a  full  steam-bath. They  render  all  special  assistance  unnecessary.

If  ordinary  pots  are  used,  it  is  better,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,
not  to  fill  them  quite  full.

As  soon  as  the  water  boils,  let  the  patient  lie  down,  quite  unclothed,
upon  the  apparatus,  preferably  upon  his  back  at  first.  He  should  then
cover  himself  up  with  a  woolen  blanket,  letting  it  hang  down  loosely
on  either  side,  far  enough  to  prevent  any  steam  escaping.  It  is  well,
at  first,  to  cover  up  the  head,  too,  with  the  blanket.  Another  person,
lifting  the  blanket  a  little,  places  the  pots  under  the  bench.  The  heat
can  be  regulated  as  required,  by  lifting  the  covers  of  the  pots  more  or
less,  thus  allowing  more  or  less  steam  to  escape.  In  the  case  of  adults,
two  or  three  pots  should  be  used;  for  children  one  will  suffice.  One
pot  should  be  kept  boiling  on  the  fire  as  a  reserve.  The  first  pot — in
the  case  of  little  children,  the  only  one — should  be  placed  in  the  front
compartment  under  the  small  of  the  back,  the  second  under  the  feet,
and  the  third,  when  required,  somewhat  further  up  than  the  first,  under
the  back.

As  soon  as  the  supply  of  steam  begins  to  diminish  (after  about  ten
minutes),  put  the  reserve  pot  from  the  range  in  place  of  the  first,  and
set  the  latter  on  the  fire. As  a  rule,  the  pot  under  the  feet  does  not


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


287


need  lo  be  renewed.  When  my  special  steam-pots  with  alcohol  heating
are  used,  these  directions,  of  course,  do  not  apply.  All  changing  of  the
pots  is  then  obviated,  as  is  explained  in  the  full  and  clearly  worded
instructions  always  supplied  with  the  apparatus.

In  from  ten  to  iifteen  minutes  the  patient  may  turn  over,  in  order
that  the  heat  may  better  reach  the  chest  and  abdomen.  Should  perspi-
ration not  have  broken  out  already,  it  will  now  do  so  most  profusely,
the  head  and  feet  beginning  to  perspire  simultaneously.  In  the  case  of
children,  a  renewal  of  the  pots  of  water  is  often  unnecessary.  Persons
who  do  not  perspire  readily,  should  keep  the  head  covered;  this  will
not  be  found  to  be  so  disagreeable  as  may  at  tirst  be  imagined.

The  perspiration  may  be  kept  up  for  a  quarter  or  half  an  hour,  as
desired,  and  the  pots  renewed  or  not,  at  will.  Those  parts  of  the  body
which  are  especially  encumbered  with  fermenting  matter,  perspire  with
difficulty,  and  the  patient  himself  will  experience  the  desire  for  greater
heat  at  such  places.  His  request  should  always  be  complied  with,  for
this  is  the  very  way  in  which  such  successful  cures  are  effected  by
means  of  these  steam-baths.


Fig.  A

\yeak  persons,  and  such  as  are  seriously  ill,  more  especially  nervous
patients,  should  never  take  steam-baths.  For  such,  the  most  effective
cure  is  attained  by  the  use  of  friction  sitz  and  hip-baths,  w'hich  act
derivatively,  in  conjunction  with  sun-baths.  Persons  who  naturally
perspire  easily,  can  sometimes  dispense  with  steam-baths  altogether.
More  than  two  steam-baths  weekly  should  be  taken  only  if  specially

On  leaving  the  steam-bath,  a  friction  hip-bath  at  from  68°  to  81°  Fahr.
should  be  taken  in  order  to  cool  down  the  body.  The  manner  of  tak-
paratus being  shown  in  Fig.  D.  At  the  commencement  or  conclusion
of  the  bath,  however,  in  addition  to  the  abdomen,  all  the  remainder  of
the  body  (chest,  arms,  legs,  feet,  head  and  neck)  should  be  very  quicklv
washed  over,  so  that  they  likewise  may  be  cleansed  and  cooled  down.
The  warmer  the  body,  the  less  it  feels  the  cold;  on  perspiring,  there  is
no  excitation,  but  only  the  skin  becomes  thoroughly  warm;  there  is  no
reason  to  fear  the  efiects  of  such  a  bath.  Steel,  when  brought  to  white
heat  in  the  fire,  must  be  plunged  into  cold  water  in  order  to  obtain  the
the  requisite  temper.  Similarly  the  human  body  after  the  steam-bath,
on  being  cooled  down  becomes  strong  and  hardy.


288


Uniurrsdl  Ndturojjalhic  Dirrclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


After  the  friction  hip-bath,  it  is  necessary  that  the  bather  should
again  be  warmed,  so  as  to  induce  sHght  perspiration.  Strong  patients
can  attain  this  warmth  by  exercise  in  the  open  air,  especially  in  the
sun.  Weaker  persons  (thougii  such  must  be  very  careful  in  taking
steam-baths  at  all)  should  be  well  covered  up  in  bed,  the  window  being
left  open  a  little.

Steam  is  produced  immediately  water  reaches  212°  Fahr.;  that  pro-
duced in  the  pots,  therefore,  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  developed  in
steam-boilers.  The  only  difference  is  as  regards  the  amount  of  steam
developed;  and  one  trial  will  convince  anyone  that  the  pots  are  quite
sufficient  for  the  purpose.

Where  neither  my  steam-bathing  apparatus,  nor  a  cane-seated  bench,
which  might  be  used  as  a  substitute,  is  to  be  had,  an  ordinary  cane-
seated  chair  can  be  made  to  serve  the  purpose.  The  patient  seats  him-
self upon  it  and  is  completely  covered  up  with  the  blanket. Under  the


Fig.  B


Fig.  G


are  placed  over  a  second  pot  half  full  of  boiling  water,  across  the  top
of  which  two  strips  of  wood  have  been  laid.

My  steam-bathing  apparatus  has  the  great  advantage,  however,  as
already  pointed  out,  that  the  steam  can  also  be  applied  only  to  partic-
ular parts  of  the  body,  if  desired.

Steam-bathing  for  the  Abdomen,  which  is  especiallv  adapted  for  use  in
obstinate  abdominal  complaints  and  in  cases  of  clilorosis,  menstrual
disturbances  and  other  female  diseases,  is  shown  in  Figure  B.

The  manner  of  applying  it  is  clear  from  the  illustration.  Only  one
pot  need  be  used  at  a  time,  being  renewed  as  the  patient  may  desire.

As  the  remaining  parts  of  the  body  also  become  warmed,  the  whole
abdomen  must  be  cooled  down  just  as  after  the  steam-bath.  In  fact,
the  entire  procedure  in  both  cases  is  the  same.  In  many  cases,  especially
in  diseases  of  women,  it  is  well,  after  the  steam-bath,  to  take  a  friction
sitz-bath.  This,  or  the  friction  hip-bath,  must  be  continued  so  long
until  a  feeling  of  coolness  commences  to  be  felt.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide  289

When  carefully  carried  out,  these  steam-baths  have  a  surprising
effect.

A  Steam-bath  for  the  Neck  and  Head,  is  shown  by  Fig.  C.  The  vessel
is  set  on  a  board  laid  upon  the  bench  and  the  head  and  neck  steamed
until  they  perspire  profusely.  When  perspiration  begins,  any  pain  will
always  cease;  this  is  peculiarly  noticeable  in  the  case  of  toothache.  The
head  and  chest,  if  warm,  must  be  quickly  washed  over  with  cold  water
and  a  friction  hip  or  sitz-bath  then  taken  at  once.  Should  the  pains
return  after  a  time,  whole  steam-baths  (particular  attention  being  given
to  thorough  steaming  of  the  abdomen)  and  neck  steam-baths  may  be
taken  alternately.

These  partial  steam-baths  are  of  high  importance,  and  afford  re-
markably quick  relief,  e.  g.  in  troubles  of  the  ears,  eyes,  nose  and
throat,  and  particularly  in  toothache,  and  the  treatment  of  boils  and
carbuncles.

Partial  steam-baths  can  also  be  given,  though  not  so  conveniently,
without  my  special  apparatus.  The  abdominal  steam-bath  can  be  taken
on  an  ordinary  cane-seated  chair;  for  the  head  steam-bath,  a  kitchen-
bench  may  be  used,  the  pot  being  set  upon  it  and  a  chair  placed  in  front
to  serve  as  a  rest  for  the  arms.

The  Sun-bath.  The  method  of  taking  sun-baths,  which  of  course  can
only  be  done  on  very  warm,  sunny  days,  is  as  follows.  The  patient
lies  down,  lightly  dressed,  on  a  spot  well  sheltered  from  the  wind,  and
preferably  on  a  plaid  or  mat.  Shoes  and  stockings  must  be  taken  off,
and  women  and  girls  must  not  wear  a  corset.  Head  and  face  should  be
protected  from  the  rays  of  the  sun,  which  is  best  effected  by  means
of  a  large  green  leaf,  such  as  a  rhubarb  leaf,  or  by  a  number  of  smaller
leaves.  The  naked  abdomen  must  also  be  protected  in  the  same  man-
ner by  a  leaf,  or  where  not  at  hand,  by  a  wet-cloth.

A  sun-bath  should  last  from  1/2  to  1%  hours.  Patients  who  do  not
perspire  easily,  can  lie  still  longer,  provided  they  do  not  feel  too  tired.
On  very  hot  days  the  bath  should  not  be  continued  too  long.

Those  who  at  first  get  a  headache,  or  feel  dizzy,  on  taking  a  sun-
bath,  should  let  the  first  baths  be  of  short  duration.  This  particularly
applies  to  patients  who  either  do  not  perspire  at  all,  or  only  with  the
greatest  difficulty.

After  the  sun-bath,  a  cooling  friction  hip-bath,  or  friction  sitz-bath,
as  shown  in  illustrations,  should  be  taken,  to  carry  off  the  morbid
matter  which  has  been  loosened.  Patients  who  do  not  easily  recover
their  warmth  after  the  cold  friction  hip  or  sitz-bath,  should  sit  again
in  the  sun,  the  head  being  protected;  or  they  may  take  a  walk  in  the
sun.  This  applies  particularly  to  patients  who  are  seriously  ill,  and  to
delicate  persons.  Indeed,  for  such,  the  sun-bath  is  frequently  altogether
too  vigorous  a  remedy  and  should  not  be  used  at  the  commencement
of  the  cure.

The  best  time  for  taking  sun-baths  is  from  10  a.  m.  to  3  p.  m.  They
may,  if  desired,  be  taken  just  after  the  mid-day  meal,  but  it  is  better
to  wait'  half  an  hour,  or  an  hour,  since  digestion  demands  bodily
warmth,  and  the  cooling  baths  following  the  sun-baths  would  cause  too
great  a  diminution  in  the  heat  of  the  body.

Partial  Sun-baths.  I  have  made  use  of  partial  sun-baths  with  the
best  results  in  cases  where  there  is  a  deposit  of  nodules,  for  open  sores,


290


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


induration,  tumors  and  internal  growths,  painful  places  of  all  kinds,
etc.  The  partial  sun-bath  is  taken  in  the  same  manner  as  the  whole
sun-bath,  except  that  in  addition,  that  particular  part  of  tlie  body
which  is  to  receive  the  partial  sun-bath,  is  bared  and  protected  against
the  sun  by  one  or  more  green  leaves.

Concerning  sun-baths  in  general,  it  may  be  remarked  that  with  water
and  diet,  the  sun  is  the  most  important  remedial  agent  we  have;  and
there  is  no  other  way  in  which  we  can  attain  a  like  effect.  In  chronic
cases,  especially,  there  is  no  other  such  effective  and  at  the  same  time
mild  remedial  agent  as  the  sun-bath,  for  exciting  and  expelling  for-
eign matter.  A  comparison  will  make  this  clear  to  the  reader.  It  is
well  known  that  if  soiled  linen  is  laid  in  the  sun,  the  dirt  dries  in  all
the  more.  But  if  we  put  the  linen  alternately  in  sun  and  water,  the
sun  extracts  the  impurities  more  or  less,  and  thus  renders  the  wash
cleaner:  it  bleaches  it.

The  existence  of  all  living  beings  on  the  earth,  depends  upon  the
alternate  action  of  sun,  water,  air  and  earth.  Plants  and  trees  can  only
thrive  if  they  can  get  sun,  water,  air  and  earth;  as  soon  as  these  factors
of  life  are  partly  or  wholly  withdrawn,  the  plant  or  tree  becomes
stunted  or  fades.  It  is  just  the  same  with  all  other  life,  and  therefore
also  with  man.  Unfortunately  most  people  avoid  sun  and  water  far
more  than  is  good.  The  body  becomes  effeminated  and  a  disposition
to  disease  is  the  result.  A  healthy  person  can  bear  the  heat  of  the
sun  without  bad  effect;  a  diseased  or  sickly  person,  on  the  contrary,
avoids  it  instinctively,  because  it  causes  a  feeling  of  uneasiness.  The
rapid  movement  of  morbid  matter  in  the  body,  brought  about  by  the
sun,  naturally  causes  headache,  giddiness,  lassitude  and  heaviness,  if
the  secretory  organs  are  still  too  weak.  These  symptoms,  however,
are  a  sure  indication  that  foreign  matter  is  being  dispersed.  The  sun-
bath  alone,  without  the  subsequent  water-bath,  would  never  enable  us
to  attain  the  desired  result;  the  water  has  the  effect  of  raising  the  vital-
ity of  the  body,  to  increase  which  must  be  our  first  aim.  Plants  also,
only  thrive  under  the  alternate  action  of  sun  and  water,  and  soon
wither  if  exposed  to  the  sun  alone.  When  we  have  once  grasped  the
way  in  which  Nature  works,  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  our  under-
standing how,  as  may  occur  in  chronic  diseases,  the  momentary  dis-
turbances (curative  crises)  called  forth  by  the  sun-bath,  may  be
counteracted  immediately  by  cooling  water-baths.  My  water-baths,  al-
curative  effect.

One  might  imagine  that  the  action  of  the  sun  upon  the  naked  bodj'
would  be  much  more  intensive  than  upon  the  body  when  covered  over
or  dressed.  This,  however,  is  a  great  error.  A  glance  at  nature  suffices
to  convince  us.  Look  at  the  vine,  for  instance:  do  not  the  grapes
always  seek  protection  under  the  leaves  against  the  rays  of  the  sun?
They  ripen  best  if  everywhere  guarded  by  the  leaves;  those  which  are
exposed  to  the  sun  remain  sour  and  small.  The  same  is  the  case  with
cherry  trees,  if  when  the  fruit  ripens,  the  leaves  have  been  all  eaten
by  caterpillars.  The  fruit  does  not  ripen  better  than  otherwise  would
have  been  the  case;  on  the  contrary,  the  cherries  wither  up  without
ever  attaining  their  full  size.  Every  fruit  requires  leaves  for  its  pro-
tection when  ripening. The examples  just  cited  from  nature,  show


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  291

us  most  clearly  what  a  difference  there  is  in  effect  between  the  direct
and  indirect  influence  of  the  sun.

The  action  of  the  sun  upon  the  uncovered  head  is  injurious,  all
kinds  of  troubles  arising  from  such  exposure.  If  we  keep  the  body
covered  with  our  clothes,  the  skin  opens  its  pores  readily,  soon  becomes
moist  and  warm  and  begins  to  perspire.  But  the  action  is  greatly
increased,  if  we  lay  over  the  naked  body  a  cover  containing  mucn
water  in  bound  condition.  Exactly  such  a  cover  is  formed  by  large
green,  succulent,  fresh  leaves.

It  is  well  known  that  through  black  clothing  the  sun's  rays  act  quite
differently  than  through  white.  It  is,  therefore,  not  a  matter  of  indif-
ference whether  we  use  clothes,  or  cloths,  or  green  juicy  leaves  as  pro-
tection. Many  years  of  observation  in  my  establishment  have  con-
vinced me,  that  by  far  the  best  dispersive  action  is  exercised  on  the
morbid  humors  of  the  body,  if  the  sun  shines  through  green  leaves.
Sun-baths,  combined  with  my  other  remedial  agents,  will  thus  be  found
of  extraordinary  value,  especially  in  cases  of  nodular  deposits  in  the
abdomen,  in  green-sickness,  anaemia,  consumption  and  gout.

The  Friction  Hip-bath.  This  is  taken  as  follows :  A  bath  of  the  shape
shown  in  Fig.  D,  is  filled  with  water  just  so  far  as  to  reach  to  the  thighs


Fig.  D

and  navel.  The  water  should  be  at  64°  to  68°  Fahr.,  and  the  bather,  half
sitting  and  half  reclining  should  then  briskly  and  without  stopping,  rub
the  entire  abdomen  from  the  navel  downwards  and  across  the  body
with  a  coarse  moderately  wet  cloth  (jute,  coarse  linen).  This  should
be  continued  until  the  body  is  well  cooled  down.  At  first  5  to  10  minutes
will  suffice;  afterwards  the  baths  may  be  somewhat  prolonged.  For
very  weak  persons  and  children,  on  the  other  hand,  a  few  minutes  are
enough.  It  is  highly  important  that  the  legs,  feet,  and  upper  part  of
the  body  should  not  be  cooled  with  the  rest,  as  they  usually  suffer  from
want  of  blood;  the  former  should,  therefore,  be  wrapped  in  a  woolen
blanket.  After  the  friction  hip-bath,  the  body  must  immediately  be
warmed  again,  this  best  effected  by  exercise  in  the  open  air.  In  the  case
of  patients  who  are  seriously  ill,  or  very  delicate,  warmth  may  be  re-
stored by  their  being  put  to  bed,  well  covered  up.  Should  warmth  re-
turn too  slowly,  a  body  bandage  may  be  used.

Such  friction  hip-baths  can  be  taken  from  once  to  thrice  daily,  and
the  duration  and  temperature  likewise  suited  to  the  patient's  condition.
In  many  cases,  friction  sitz-baths  should  be  taken  instead,  or  both
baths  may  be  taken.

The  Friction  Sitz-bath.  This  is  of  special  importance  in  diseases  of
women,  and  is  taken  in  the  following  manner.

In  the  same  bath  as  last  mentioned,  a  foot-stool,  or  a  wooden  seat  as
made  by  me,  is  set. Water  is  then  poured  in,  but  only  so  much,  that  it


292  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

rises  to  a  level  with  the  upper  edge  of  the  seat,  leaving  the  top  dry.  The
bather  then  sits  down  upon  the  dry  seat,  dips  a  coarse  linen  cloth
(jute  or  a  rough  towel)  into  the  water  and  begins  gently  to  wash  the
genitals  and  abdomen,  always  bringing  up  as  much  water  as  possible
with  the  cloth.  It  is  important  that  only  the  external  lips,  and  never
the  inner  parts  of  the  sexual  organs,  are  washed;  and  they  must  not  be
roughly  rubbed  backwards  and  forwards,  but  only  laved  with  as  much
water  as  can  be  brought  up.  Then  the  patient,  or  nurse,  should  gently
rub  the  back  up  and  down  and  crosswise,  from  the  small  of  the  back  op-
posite the  navel  to  the  hips.  Thus,  it  will  be  seen,  the  legs,  feet  and
upper  part  of  the  body  remain  dry.  Care  should  be  taken  to  restore  the
warmth  of  the  body  again  quickly,  either  by  exercise  or  by  additional
w^raps  and  cover.  The  baths  should  be  discontinued  during  the  periods.
If,  however,  there  should  be  abnormal  menstruation,  they  can  be  con-
by  me  in  each  individual  case.  The  periods  should  not  occupy  more
than  from  2  to  3  days,  or  at  most  4;  a  more  prolonged  menstrual  flow
indicates  an  abnormal  and  morbid  condition.

The  water  for  these  friction  sitz-baths  should  be  at  the  temperature
at  which  Nature  supplies  it  (50°  to  60°  Fahr.),  though  in  special  cases,
water  of  a  slightly  higher  temperature  (up  to  about  66°  Fahr.)  may  be
used.

The  bath  may  last  from  10  minutes  to  an  hour,  according  to  the  age
and  condition  of  the  patient.  The  room  should  be  kept  comfortably
warm,  especially  in  winter.  The  colder  the  water  in  these  friction  sitz-
baths,  the  better  the  result.  But  it  should  never  be  colder  than  the
bather's  hands  can  bear  it.  In  the  tropics  and  hot  countries,  it  is  not  pos-
sible to  get  such  cold  water  as  here;  but  it  can  be  taken  as  cold  as  it  is  to
be  had.  There  need  be  no  fear  as  to  the  working  of  the  bath  in  such
cases,  for  the  relation  between  the  temperature  of  the  water  and  the
temperature  of  the  air  in  those  warm  countries,  very  nearly  agrees  with
such  relation  here  at  home;  so  that  the  effect  of  the  bath  will  be  the
same  in  both  cases.  This  opinion  has  been  confirmed  in  every  way,  by
reports  which  I  have  received  from  tropical  regions.

Where  no  hip-bath  is  to  be  had,  any  wash-tub  whatever  can  be  em-
ployed for  the  friction  sitz-baths.  It  has  only  to  be  large  enough  for  the
reception  of  a  stool  or  some  other  convenient  seat,  and  contain  at  least
from  5  to  6  gallons  of  water,  reaching  up  to  the  edge  of  the  seat.  If  too
little  water  is  taken  for  these  baths,  it  soon  grows  warm,  thus  rendering
the  bath  less  effective.  Soft  water  is  preferable  to  fresh  spring-water.
Where,  however,  only  the  latter  is  obtainable,  it  is  well  to  let  it  stand  a
while,  taking  care  that  it  does  not  get  too  warm.

In  almost  all  better  class  families,  similar  baths  are  taken  over  a
bidet,  simply  for  the  sake  of  cleanliness.  Such  cold  water,  however,  is
not  used;  nor  is  the  bath  taken  for  the  same  length  of  time,  nor  in  the

For  males,  the  bath  is  arranged  in  the  same  way,  and  the  extremity,
that  is,  the  extreme  edge,  of  the  foreskin  is  washed  in  the  cold  water.
The  bather  with  the  middle  and  forefinger,  or  the  thumb  and  forefinger,
of  the  left  hand,  draws  the  foreskin  as  far  as  possible  over  the  tip  of  the
glans  penis,  so  that  the  latter  is  quite  covered  and  protected  against  the
rubbing. He  then,  without  interruption,  gently  washes  the  extremity  of


Universal  Naturopalhic  Directory  and  liiu/ers'  (iaidr  2!)3

the  foreskin,  thus  held  between  the  fingers,  with  a  jute  or  linen  cloth  of
the  size  of  a  handkerchief,  held  in  the  water  in  the  right  hand.  It  is
very  important  to  exactly  follow  these  directions.  Anyone,  therefore,
who  does  not  feel  sure  whether  he  understands  the  correct  manner  of
proceeding,  is  strongly  advised  to  apply  for  special  particulars,  so  as  to
save  himself  needless  trouble  and  loss  of  time,  perhaps  even  positive
injury  to  his  health.

In  the  case  of  patients  suffering  from  inflamed  or  gangrenous  places
in  the  interior  of  the  body;  or  where  there  is  a  change  from  chronic,
latent  disease  to  acute,  the  internal  inflammation  is  very  soon,  frequently
after  the  first  bath,  attracted  downwards,  reappearing  in  the  spot  rubbed,
or  in  its  immediate  neighborhood.  This  is  by  no  means  an  unfavorable
symptom.  In  Part  II,  in  the  chapter  on  cancer,  I  shall  treat  of  it  more
in  detail.  There  need  be  no  anxiety  on  account  of  chafing;  the  baths
should  be  continued  as  before,  a  rather  softer  cloth  being  used,  if  de-
sired.

In  many  cases  a  still  quicker  eff"ect  will  be  obtained  by  letting  the
water  stand  three  fingers  high  above  the  seat.  The  water  in  such  case
should  be  from  63°  to  73°  Fahr.  The  buttocks  are  then  in  the  water;  for
the  rest,  the  procedure  is  the  same  as  before.

It  may  appear  inexplicable  to  many,  that  just  the  particular  part  of
the  body  mentioned,  and  no  other,  should  be  chosen  as  the  place  to  apply
these  baths.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  no  other  part  so  suitable
for  the  purpose.  In  no  other  spot  are  there  so  many  important  nerve-
terminations.  These  are  especially  the  branches  of  many  spinal  nerves,
and  of  the  nervus  sympathiciis,  which,  owing  to  their  connection  with
the  brain,  render  it  possible  in  this  way  to  exert  an  influence  upon  the
nervous  system.  It  is  only  at  the  genitals  that  the  entire  nervous  system
can  be  influenced.  Here  is,  in  a  sense,  the  root  of  the  whole  tree  of  life.
By  washing  in  cold  water,  not  only  is  the  morbid  internal  heat  dimin-
ished, but  there  is  also  a  marked  invigoration  of  the  nerves;  that  is,  the
vitality  of  the  whole  body,  down  to  the  minutest  part,  is  stimulated.
Exceptions  occur  only  where  the  nerve  connection  has  been  interrupted,
for  instance,  by  surgical  operation.

Every  reasonable  person,  not  fearing  a  practical  experiment,  will
the  conditions  requisite  for  the  restoration  of  the  proper  bodily  func-
tions.

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  friction  sitz-bath,  which  has  already
brought  aid  to  thousands,  is  intended  only  for  the  sick  in  health.  Every-
one who  knows  to  what  painful,  as  well  as  disagreeable  and  indecent
operations  the  human  body  is  very  often  subjected  by  orthodox  medical
science,  will  look  upon  the  simple,  yet  surely  curative,  friction  sitz-baths
with  an  unprejudiced  eye.  Least  of  all  is  prudery  in  place  where  it  is
a  matter  of  benefiting  the  suff'ering.  Upon  completely  healthy  persons
the  friction  sitz-bath  has  no  effect,  and  is  moreover  not  recommended
to  such.  They  will  find  it  tiresome,  whereas  the  sick  patient  will  often
continue  it  longer  than  is  required.

Here,  it  is  also  necessary  to  call  attention  to  the  continued  efforts  at
equalization  met  with  in  nature.  These  are  not  limited,  as  is  often
falsely  imagined,  to  physical  processes.  They  are  also  found  in  the
regular  change  of  temperature  of  the  human  body  in  relation  to  that


294  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide

of  its  surroundings.  There  is  a  change  of  temperature  from  within  to
without,  from  without  to  within,  not  incorrectly  designated  as  an  electric
current.  And  as  with  the  purely  physical  current,  there  must  here  be  a
certain  tension.  Now  the  higher  this  increases,  as,  for  instance,  in  the
case  of  the  body  seized  by  fever,  the  more  unbearable  becomes  the  con-
dition of  the  person,  and  the  more  intensive  is  the  symptom  of  disease.
Like  a  storm-cloud  with  its  sultry,  uneasy  oppression,  so  acts  the  en-
cumbrance in  the  human  body.  Now  what  can  be  more  natural  and
more  rational  than  to  bring  about  equalization?  The  higher  temperature
must  be  equalized  with  the  lower;  the  surplus  reduced  to  the  normal.
And  the  bridge,  leading  to  this  end,  together  with  my  other  remedial
agents,  the  friction  sitz-baths,  which  for  the  various  reasons  already  ex-
plained, must  of  course  only  he  taken  with  cold  water.  Their  working
is  incomparable  and  in  numberless  cases  most  effective.  Where  the
desired  result  is  not  attained,  it  is  because  the  body  has  lost  its  vitality.

If  the  body  is  loaded  internally  with  morbid  matter,  so  that  it  may  be
compared  to  a  rusty  machine,  the  debilitated  digestion  will  no  longer
be  able  to  procure  sufficient  vitality  from  the  usual  quantity  of  food
to  maintain  the  person  in  his  former  condition.  Larger  quantities  of  food
are  required  than  before,  and  as  a  rule  particularly  stimulating  food,  in
order  to  keep  him  in  condition  to  work.  But  in  this  case,  naturally,  the
digestive  powers  will  continue  to  decrease  more  and  more.

If  we  wish  again  to  raise  the  vitality  of  the  body,  we  can  only  do  so  by
the  agency  of  some  means  which  improves  the  digestion.  The  best
means  known  to  me  are,  together  with  natural  diet,*  these  cooling  baths.
They  improve  even  the  worst  digestion  (so  long  as  this  is  capable  of
improvement  at  all),  within  a  shorter  time  than  any  other  remedy,  and
moreover  act  in  a  natural  manner.  Furthermore,  these  baths  diminish
the  fever-temperature,  caused  by  the  friction  of  the  morbid  matter,  to
the  normal,  whereby  further  development  of  the  disease  is  prevented.
If  we  wished  to  change  the  steam  rising  from  boiling  water  in  a  room —
to  take  an  example  from  daily  life — back  to  its  original  form,  water,  the
only  way  would  be  to  reduce  the  temperature.  It  is  the  same  with  the
morbid  matter,  that  is,  with  every  disease.  Disease  arises  by  reason  of
increased  temperature  in  the  body,  and  can  only  disappear  if  the  oppo-
site condition  is  produced,  that  is,  by  continued  cooling  and  reduction
of  the  excessive  internal  heat.

But  exactly  as  a  machine  can  only  be  properly  driven  from  one  point,
faster  or  slower  as  the  case  may  be,  so  it  is  with  the  human  body.  The
vital  power  can  only  be  properly  influenced  from  one  point — that  which
1  have  selected  for  the  application  of  the  friction  sitz-baths.

After  this  explanation,  it  will  be  plain  to  all  how  it  is  that  I  success-
fully treat  diseases  of  the  eyes  and  ears  with  the  same  remedy  (adopted,
of  course,  to  the  circumstances  of  each  individual  case)  with  which  I,  in
other  cases,  cure  scarlet-fever,  small-pox,  cholera,  etc.  The  vitality  of
the  entire  body  is  raised,  and  at  the  same  time  there  is  no  possibility  of
one  part  being  more  excited  than  another,  unless,  as  stated  above,  nerve
connections  have  been  interrupted.  How  heightened  vital  power  mani-
fests itself,  is,  however,  quite  unknown  to  most  people,  and  often  pre-


•See  Naturopathic  Cook  Book,  by  Louisa  Lust,  N.  D. Nature  Cure  Publishing
Co.,  Butler,  N.  J.,  U.  S.  A. Cloth,  $1.00;  paper  cover,  75c.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  295

cisely  the  opposite  to  that  which  the  patient  expected,  occurs.  For  in-
stance, it  may  happen  that  smokers  after  using  these  baths  can  no  longer
continue  the  use  of  tobacco  and  are  consequently  inclined  to  think  that
their  stomachs  have  been  weakened,  whereas  just  the  contrary  is  the
fact.  Previously  their  stomachs  were  too  debilitated  to  resist  the  nico-
tine, whilst  now  they  have  regained  the  necessary  vigor  to  rebel  against
the  poison.  Wherever  the  nerves  are  still  capable  of  being  strengthened
by  these  baths,  the  system  will  always  recover  the  power  of  expelling,  by
the  natural  secretory  organs,  the  foreign  matter  which  has  gradually
collected  in  it.

In  addition  to  the  friction  sitz-baths,  earth  (clay)  bandages  round  the
abdomen,  will  be  found  most  effective  in  decreasing  the  external  heat
and  breaking  up  the  morbid  matter.  Such  bandages  are  also  most  bene-
ficial in  cases  of  direct  injuries  and  sores.

No  one  should  suppose,  however,  that  these  remedies  (adapted  to  the
circumstances  of  each  individual  case)  will  infallibly  cure  every  patient.
As  I  have  already  remarked,  I  can  cure  all  diseases  but  not  all  patients.
For  where  the  bodily  vitality  and  therefore,  the  digestive  power,  is  al-
ready broken  down,  these  remedies  will  afford  relief,  such  indeed  as  no
other  means  will,  but  they  cannot  in  such  case  effect  a  complete  cure.

There  are  also  severe  cases  where  my  baths  must  only  be  used  with
the  greatest  moderation,  where  often,  indeed,  they  should  be  temporarily
discontinued.  In  such  serious  cases  it  would  appear  inadvisable  for  pa-
tients themselves  to  proceed  simply  on  the  basis  of  these  directions,
without  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  my  method.  In  such  cases
it  is  better  to  apply  to  me  by  letter,  so  that  no  ill  effects  may  result  from
the  application  of  the  cure.


296  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


WHAT  SHALL  WE  EAT? WHAT  SHALL  WE
DRINK? THE  DIGESTIVE  PROCESS


FROM  the  explanations  given  about  the  friction  sitz-bath  and  human
vitality,  we  have  seen  that  disease  can  only  arise  as  a  consequence
of  wrong  food. It  is  only  through  bad  digestion  that  foreign  matter
can  form  and  disease  develop  in  the  body. Thus  the  questions:
"What  shall  we  eat? — What  shall  we  drink?"  are  of  the  greatest  im-
portance for  us.

As  is  well  known,  in  order  to  produce  electric  power,  or  a  constant
electric  current,  certain  definite  elements  are  necessary.  It  is  only  with
the  aid  of  an  acid  that  we  are  able  through  the  decomposition  or  trans-
formation of  the  zinc  and  carbon  plates,  to  set  free  the  power  which
formerly  was  required  to  retain  the  plates  in  their  original  structure.
This  power  is  then  conducted  as  positive  and  negative  current  through
wires,  to  be  used  as  electricity.  If,  however,  in  place  of  these  elements
(zinc  and  carbon),  we  were  to  substitute  others,  which  resemble  them —
or  consist  of  similar  constituents,  or  even  of  the  same  materials  (zinc
and  carbon),  but  in  another  form,  for  instance,  pulverized — we  should
soon  notice  a  difference.  We  should,  then,  either  get  no  generation  of
electric  power  at  all,  or  it  w^ould  be  essentially  changed,  diminished,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  conditions  may  otherwise  be  exactly  the  same
as  in  the  case  of  the  zinc  and  carbon  plates.  It  is  similar  with  the  gener-
ation of  vital  power  in  the  human  body.  Here,  also,  the  development  of
more  or  less  vital  power,  depends  upon  the  right  choice  of  elements,  in
this  instance,  of  food.  This  is  most  clearly  to  be  seen  in  the  case  of  at-
mospheric air,  our  chief  food.  We  have  only  to  take  a  person  for  some
minutes  away  from  his  normal  air,  and  put  him  into  another  gaseous
atmosphere,  and  we  shall  see  at  once  how  he  dies  in  a  few  minutes,  the
new  element  not  enabling  him  to  maintain  his  vital  power.

The  injurious  effects  of  a  wrong  diet  are  slower  and  less  striking.  The
boundary  between  natural  food  and  deadly  poison  is  very  wide.  The
step  from  the  natural  to  the  unnatural  is  often  so  small  as  to  be  at  first
scarcely  perceptible.  But  as  we  know  that  foreign  matter  only  forms  as
the  result  of  wrong  food,  that  is,  can  only  arise  in  the  body  as  the  result
of  bad  digestion,  it  must  be  our  task  to  avoid  such  wrong  foods  and  such
bad  digestion.

In  order  to  make  clear  this  matter  of  wrong  food  and  bad  digestion,  I
will  here  cite  a  few  instances  which  occur  in  daily  life.  We  meet  stout,
corpulent  people,  who  assure  us  that  they  eat  and  drink  very  little,  but
complain  that  they  nevertheless  are  always  growing  stouter  and  stouter.
Such  persons  suffer  from  over-nutrition.  Others. are  scraggy,  lean,  ema-
ciated, although  they  are  consuming  unusually  freely  what,  in  their
opinion,  are  the  most  nutritious  foods  and  drinks.  Judging  by  the
quantity  consumed,  such  persons  should  be  in  quite  another  condition.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  297

The  food  passes  through  the  body,  but  the  latter  is  unable  to  benefit  by
it.  A  large  part  of  the  food  passes  away  unused,  or  at  all  events  in-
sufiiciently  utilized.  This  proves  that  the  mere  fact  of  foods  and  drinks
passing  through  the  body,  is  no  proof  at  all  of  a  normal  digestion,  as
many  people,  unfortunately,  seem  to  think.

We  thus  have  two  opposite  classes  of  people.  The  one  demonstrates
to  us  how,  by  eating  and  drinking  little,  one  becomes  stouter,  the  other,
how  by  eating  and  drinking  much,  one  becomes  thinner.  In  spite  of
apparent  contradiction,  the  reason  for  the  ailment  is  in  both  cases  the
same;  that  is,  bad  digestion  and  wrong  feeding.  This  premised,  and  we
can  readily  understand  how,  for  instance  a  consumptive  person  can  eat
what  he  considers  the  most  strengthening,  nutritious  food  without  his
body  benefiting  at  all;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  we  shall  no  longer
wonder  about  the  want  of  appetite  on  the  part  of  apparently  strong,  but
nervous  people.

After  these  explanations,  and  remembering  the  remarks  upon  vital
power  in  the  last  chapter,  it  is  not  difficult  for  us  to  find  the  way  to  avoid
over-nutrition.  The  reflective  reader  will  no  doubt  already  have  come
to  the  conviction,  that  the  most  nourishing  and  suitable  foods  and  bever-
ages are  not  flesh-meat,  eggs,  extracts,  wine,  beer,  cocoa,  coffee,  tea,
etc.,  but  only  such  foods  as  can  be  quickly  and  easily  digested.  The
more  rapidly  our  body  can  digest  the  food  presented  to  it,  the  more  it
will  be  able  to  utilize  such,  and  therefore  the  more  vital  power  it  will
be  able  to  generate.  The  degree  of  the  vitality  depends,  therefore,  upon
the  digestibility  of  the  food  consumed.

The  more  difficult  of  digestion  a  food  is,  the  longer  the  time  required
by  the  body  to  perform  the  work  of  digestion.  If  we  consume  such
foods,  then  we  must  at  any  rate,  if  we  will  not  injure  our  system,  wait
before  eating  again,  until  the  first  meal  has  been  properly  digested.  Un-
fortunately, this  is  very  seldom  done,  especially  as  our  daily  habits  are
antagonistic  to  such  apparent  fasting.  The  true  significance  of  fasting
is  thus  practically  unknown  to  us  today.*  Man  disregards  altogether,
as  a  rule,  the  fasts  laid  down  by  nature.  On  the  contrary,  we  see  him  in
winter,  where,  generally  speaking,  he  has  more  time  than  in  summer,
eating  oftener  and  more  than  in  the  latter  season.  We  find  almost  everv^-
where  the  erroneous  opinion  prevailing  that  in  winter  one  should  eat
well  and  consume  plenty  fat,  in  order  to  be  able  to  withstand  the  cold.
This,  however,  is  in  flat  contradiction  to  all  natural  laws.  How  often,
very  often,  have  I  had  occasion  to  observe  the  injurious  eff'ect  of  eating
and  drinking  too  much  during  the  winter.  In  nature,  we  find  every-
where a  certain  period  of  fasting.  We  see  how  snakes  fast  often  for
weeks,  after  having  taken  a  good  meal.  We  see  how  deer  and  hares  for
weeks  and  months  live  most  sparely,  and  yet  overcome  all  the  fatigues
of  a  raw,  cold  winter.  Were  these  animals  in  the  situation  to  obtain  the
same  amount  of  food  as  in  summer,  they  would  without  doubt  become
ill  and  be  unable  to  withstand  the  winter  cold.  Cold  retards,  as  w^e
know,  every  process  of  fermentation,  and  therefore  the  digestion.  Thus
a  quantity  of  food  which  in  summer  would  be  easily  digested,  in  winter


•Foremost  authors  and  best  books  on  Fasting  are:  Purinton,  E.  E.,  "The  Phil-
osophy of  Fasting;"  cloth,  $1.60;  paper  cover,  $1.10.  Ehret.  A.,  "Rational  Fasting
and  Regeneration  Diet,"  50c. Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co.,  Rutler,  N.  J.,  U.  S A


298  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

is  much  more  difficult  to  digest.  Hence  the  reason  for  the  fact  that  our
domestic  animals,  which  for  the  most  part  are  fed  in  the  stall,  almost
always  suffer  from  over-nutrition,  are  unable  to  stand  the  winter  cold
in  the  open;  whilst  animals  in  a  state  of  nature,  can  endure  even  the
fiercest  storm,  for  they  possess  a  power  of  bodily  resistance  unfortu-
nately far  too  little  regarded  to-day.

These  expositions  now  make  it  obvious  to  us,  that  disease  only  arises
through  a  kind  of  over-nutrition.  And  we  come  thus  naturally  to  the
conviction  that  it  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  indifference  what  we  con-
sume, in  which  form  we  consume  it,  and  where  we  consume  it.

To  render  the  matter  clearer,  I  will  again  introduce  some  examples.

If  we  drink  boiled  water,  it  tastes  flat  and  disagreeable.  How  refresh-
ing, on  the  other  hand,  is  a  draught  of  fresh  water,  how  invigorating  an
apple!  Just  so  with  the  air.  Oppressive  and  relaxing,  producing  in  many
a  headache — such  is  the  effect  of  the  stuffy,  used  up  air  of  the  average
room,  especially  if  the  chamber  be  small,  and  a  number  of  persons  have
been  sitting  in  it.  How  one  longs  in  such  a  case  for  the  fresh,  animating
outside  air.

And  of  like  importance  is  it,  where  we  consume  our  food.  That  which
we  eat  in  the  open  air,  is  always  more  easily  digested  than  that  con-
sumed in  the  house;  because  in  chewing,  the  food  is  mixed  with  air,  and
fresh  air  acts  quite  differently  upon  the  digestibility  of  the  food  than
the  bad  air  of  our  rooms  does.

As  already  stated,  those  foods  which  are  most  easily  digestible,  are
exactly  those  which  are  best  suited  to  nourish  the  body.  Over-nutrition,
also,  is  least  liable  to  occur  where  the  food  is  easily  digested.  It  is,  then,
our  first  point  to  determine  what  the  most  readily  digested  foods  are,
that  is,  those  which  supply  us  with  most  vitality.  The  answer  to  this  all-
important  and  much  debated  question  is  as  simple  as  it  is  natural.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiyers'  Guide  299


THE  INDIGESTIBILITY  OF  DENATURED  FOOD


\


THOSE  foods  which  taste  good  in  their  natural  state,  and  tempt  us  to
eat,  are  always  those  which  are  most  easy  of  digestion,  and  which
supply  us  with  the  most  vitality.

All  foods  which  we  have  to  change  by  cooking,  smoking,  spicing,
salting,  pickling,  and  putting  in  vinegar,  lose  in  digestibility,  and  as  re-
gards vitality,  are  far  inferior  to  food  in  its  natural  condition,  even
though  the  above-named  processes  may  enable  the  foods  to  keep  longer.

Of  cooked  and  prepared  foods,  those  are  most  easy  of  digestion,  which
are  most  simply  prepared  or  cooked,  and  least  salted  or  spiced.

Foods  in  fluid  form,  such  as  soups,  and  beverages,  as  beer,  wine,  cocoa,
etc.,  are  much  more  difficult  to  digest  than  those  which  in  their  natural
condition  are  solid,  and  capable  of  being  chewed.  For  this  reason,  con-
tinued use  of  fluid  nutriment  tends  to  dilatation  of  the  stomach  and
disturbances  of  the  digestion.

Those  foods  which  in  their  natural  form  create  disgust  and  nausea,
are  always  injurious  to  the  health,  however  good  they  may  taste  when  in
a  prepared  and  cooked  condition.  And  above  all,  flesh-meat  comes
under  this  class  of  food.  No  one  would  ever  think  of  biting  into  a  liv-
ing ox,  or  eating  raw  sheep's  flesh.  Our  instinct  and  natural  feeling  may
be  misled  by  seasoning  and  dressing;  but  foods  repulsive  to  our  true
instincts,  smell  and  taste,  can  never  be  rendered  wholesome  by  such
means.

For  a  clearer  comprehension  of  the  principles  of  natural  diet,  the
following  points  must  be  remarked.

All  foods  are  easier  of  digestion,  and  more  strengthening,  when  not
fully  ripe,  i.  e.,  in  a  not  yet  fully  developed  state,  than  if  already  over-
ripe. Unfortunately,  the  general  public  has  got  the  erroneous  idea  that
unripe  food  is  unhealthy,  because  it  causes  diarrhea,  flux  and  dysentery.
This  is  quite  a  mistake.  To  be  sure,  a  person  who  is  accustomed  chiefly  to
flesh-foods,  and  who  then,  by  chance,  eats  an  unripe  apple,  or  other  un-
ripe fruit,  gets  diarrhea.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  exactly  here  an
excellent  proof  of  the  easy  digestibility  of  unripe  fruit.  Every  easily
digestible  food  is  rapidly  transformed  by  the  fermentive  process  of
digestion,  in  a  manner  such  as  is  not  the  case  with  foods  which  are  diffi-
cult of  digestion.  If  now  in  the  organs  of  digestion  there  are  foods  which
are  difficult  to  digest,  or  to  transform  by  fermentation,  they  will  be
acted  upon  by  the  quicker  fermentive  process  of  the  unripe  fruit,  in  such
a  way  that  they  also  will  be  set  in  a  state  of  decomposition  and  fermen-
tation. In  this  manner  arises  the  diarrhea  which  is  so  much,  though
wrongly,  feared.  Such  a  crisis  of  diarrhea  often  rids  the  body  in  a
surprisingly  short  time  of  a  great  deal  of  the  foreign  matter  in  it,  and  is
according  to  my  experience,  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  the  organism.

It  will  be  well  known  to  readers,  that  dogs,  which  through  the  over-
attention  of  their  owners  become  too  fat,  very  frequently  eat  grass,  a


300  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

food  which  is  not  properly  intended  for  a  carnivorous  animal.  The
reason  for  this  conduct  is,  that  the  instinct  of  the  dog  teaches  him  that
the  grass,  by  reason  of  its  easy  digestibility,  is  the  best  aid  for  his  diges-
tion, overloaded  with  too  rich  food.

Thus  to  persons  sutiering  from  affections  of  the  stomach,  or  troubles
of  the  digestion,  unripe  fruit  is  to  be  recommended  instead  of  ripe;  and
the  use  of  such  should  be  continued  until  the  stomach  is  so  far
strengthened  as  to  be  again  able  to  digest  the  fruit  ripe.

As  with  fruit  and  other  foods,  so  are  grains  (likewise  of  very  different
degrees  of  digestibility,  according  to  their  preparation,  and  the  manner
in  which  we  eat  them),  always  most  easily  digested  in  their  most  natural
state,  that  is,  as  whole  grains.  Naturally  the  grinding  of  the  grain  gives
the  teeth  much  work,  but  it  is  exactly  the  chewing  and  the  thorough  in-
salivation  thus  caused,  that  mainly  promotes  the  digestion.  Of  course,
only  those  people  who  are  the  fortunate  possessors  of  a  good  set  of  teeth
can  consume  grain  in  this  form ;  those  who  have  lost  their  dental  organs
to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  will  not  be  able  to  perform  the  work.  Such
patients  must  chew  the  grains  previously  ground.  Where  the  circum-
stances permit  it,  ground  corn  is  a  very  important  food  for  the  seriously
ill,  and  should  always  be  used  where  wholemeal  bread  cannot  yet  be
digested.  In  such  a  case,  coarse  ground  meal  with  unripe  fruit  is  of  the
greatest  service,  and  wherever  the  patient  is  capable  of  recovery  at  all,
improvement  will  very  soon  take  place.  In  the  form  of  wholemeal
bread,  the  grains  are  not  so  easily  digestible  as  when  eaten  raw,  as  above
mentioned.  Of  all  kinds  of  bread,  however,  whole  wheatmeal  bread  is
the  easiest  to  digest.  For  most  breads,  only  the  white,  mealy  interior  of
the  grain  is  used,  the  outside  parts  being  nearly  always  utilized  for
other  purposes.  In  this  way  a  fine  meal  is  obtained,  but  the  bread  made
from  it  gives  the  digestion  far  more  work  to  do,  than  does  wholemeal
bread.  It  thus  leads  to  constipation,  the  bran,  the  most  important  part
of  the  grain,  having  been  rejected.

Oats,  as  everyone  knows,  are  an  excellent  food  for  horses.  But  how
much  depends  upon  the  form  in  which  the  oats  are  given,  in  order  that
they  may  prove  a  valuable  food,  every  horse-owner  will  confirm.  If  we
fodder  the  horses  on  oats  mixed  with  chaff,  they  will  be  able  to  digest
them  most  easily  and  will  be  best  nourished.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  give
the  animals  oats  without  chaff,  we  shall  soon  find  that  they  can  no  longer
digest  the  fodder  so  easily.  If,  finally,  we  give  as  fodder  other  grains
such  as  wheat  or  rye,  without  the  addition  of  chaff,  we  shall  see  still
more  clearly  than  before,  from  the  digestion  of  the  horses,  that  those
foods  alone  are  too  heavy.  Still  more  clearly  is  the  difficulty  of  diges-
tion seen,  if  we  supply  the  horses  only  with  oats  from  which  the  husk
has  been  removed.  The  animals  grow  fat  on  them,  but  on  the  other
hand  become  constipated  and  unfit  for  work.

The  easy  digestibility  of  grain  is  due  chiefly  to  its  shell  or  husk;  the
more  shell  or  husk,  the  better  for  the  digestion.  The  oat,  is,  of  all  grains,
that  which  has  the  greatest  amount  of  shell,  and  therefore  much  better
adapted  as  horse-food  than  wheat  or  rye.

Although  in  the  dung,  oat-husks  and  chaff  are  found  apparently  un-
changed, it  is  not  therefore  to  be  assumed  that  these  have  been  worth-
less ballast  as  far  as  the  horse's  digestion  is  concerned.  That  would  be
a  serious  error. This  ballast  is  as  necessary  to  the  horse  for  his  normal


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  301

digestion,  as  the  interior  part  of  the  grain. Food  precisely  in  the  form
nature  gives  it  to  us,  is  always  the  best  for  the  digestion.

For  mankind,  likewise,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  what  form
we  take  our  food.  Often  we  hear  people  saying:  "I  cannot  digest  the
pulses,  they  give  me  llatulence."  But  this  depends  greatly  upon  the
manner  in  which  they  have  been  prepared.  In  the  form  of  a  puree  or
soup,  as  they  are  generally  eaten,  they  certainly  are  difficult  to  digest,  so
that  it  is  no  wonder  if  they  cause  trouble.  As  soup,  especially,  they  are
objectionable,  for  soup  reaches  the  stomach  unchewed,  and  therefore  in
a  state  unprepared  for  digestion.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  boil,  for  in-
stance, the  peas,  in  only  a  little  water,  so  that  when  cooked  they  have  ab-
sorbed nearly  all  the  moisture,  and  appear  in  their  natural  round  form,
we  shall  scarcely  consume  one  third  of  the  quantity  that  we  swallowed
down  as  soup.  Furthermore,  we  shall  notice  that  this  smaller  quantity,
although  eaten  with  the  shell,  causes  no  unpleasantness,  and  is  far  more
strengthening  than  soup.

I  am  reminded  of  a  laborer  who,  from  necessity,  was  obliged  to  live
for  some  three  months  on  nothing  else  than  a  handful  of  raw  peas  daily.
With  evident  delight,  this  man  used  to  relate  to  me  the  episodes  of  that
dreadful  time,  when  he  often  had  for  hours  to  let  the  peas  soak  in  his
mouth,  in  order  to  get  them  soft  enough  to  chew.  Yet  in  spite  of  this
scanty  food,  he  maintained  that  he  felt  in  the  highest  degree  well,  and
was,  in  fact,  never  better  in  his  life.  This  instance  speaks  to  the  high
nutritive  value  of  food  in  its  natural  condition.  It  teaches  us  further,
that  also  when  we  are  dealing  with  nutrition,  the  principle  of  nature,
which  we  recognize  everywhere,  is  again  to  be  found:  to  perform  the
most,  with  the  simplest  and  smallest  means.

My  expositions  may  now  have  made  it  clear  to  my  readers,  how  over-
nutrition  is  to  be  prevented.  Of  course,  I  am  not  able  to  state  exactly
what  and  how  much  every  person,  or  every  patient  should  eat,  in  order
to  avoid  over-nutrition  again.  There  are  scarcely  two  patients  whose
digestive  powers  are  quite  alike,  so  that  the  exact  quantity,  or  kind,  of
food  can  never  be  decided  offhand.  Each  must  find  out  for  himself  what
suits  him  best.  It  must,  therefore,  suffice  to  give  the  relative  digestibility
of  the  various  foods.

As  regards  the  digestive  process  itself,  the  orthodox  school  gives  us  no
certain  basis  to  go  upon.  Even  the  magnificent  discoveries  of  chemistry,
by  the  aid  of  retorts,  balances,  and  all  kinds  of  other  apparatus,  are  of
little  significance  for  the  New  Science  of  Healing.

Digestion  itself  is  a  process  of  fermentation  in  the  body.  By  it,  foods
are  converted  into  quite  difTerent  materials  within  the  human  system.
The  body  appropriates  for  itself  as  much  of  them  as  are  suitable,  that
is,  assimilable.  All  foods,  the  fermentability  of  which  we  alter  by  arti-
ficial preparation,  or  suppress  by  means  of  salt,  sugar  or  cooking,  are
difficult  of  digestion;  that  is,  the  body  can  only  assimilate  them  with
difficulty.  Their  fermentability  being  thus  influenced,  they  require  a
longer  time  than  ordinarily,  before  they  come  into  a  state  suitable  for
digestion.  In  other  words,  in  order  to  reach  the  required  condition,  they
remain  much  longer  in  the  digestive  canal  than  they  should,  whereby  a
higher  condition  of  fermentation  and  consequently  a  higher  temperature
is  caused. The  greater  development  of  internal  heat  caused  by  this


302  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

condition, contributes finally to the firmer consistency and darker
coloration  of  the  faeces  in  the  intestines.

Digestion  begins,  as  is  well  known,  in  the  mouth.  The  foods  then
reach  the  stomach,  where  they  mix  with  the  gastric  juice,  and  are  thor-
oughly acted  upon.  They  thus  come  into  a  state  of  decomposition  or
fermentation  which  essentially  changes  them.  In  the  intestines,  the
process  of  fermentation  increases  in  intensity,  and  the  fermenting  food
is  further  mixed  with  the  secretions  of  the  pancreas,  and  other  digestive

iuices.

That  which  is  useless  for  the  body  is  secreted  again  through  the  in-
testines, kidneys  and  skin.  Sometimes  we  observe  how  animals  com-
pletely digest,  in  a  very  short  time,  such  apparently  altogether  indigest-
ible things  as  tendons  and  bones.  If  now  we  examine  the  excrements  of
such  animals,  we  will  find  absolutely  no  undigested  pieces  of  bone.  With
men,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  that  the  food  often  remains  a  whole  week
in  the  digestive  canal.  This  gives  rise  to  an  abnormal  condition  of  fer-
mentation. The  gases  developed  by  this  fermentation,  which  are  not  at  all
concerned  in  building  up  the  body,  are  conducted  to  the  skin,  and  are
expelled  as  perspiration  and  effluvia,  and  on  the  other  hand  as  wind.
This  wind  should  never  be  suppressed,  since  it  is  highly  injurious  to
the  body.

The  digestion  is  normal  when  the  excrements  are  light  brown,  soft
and  compact,  and  covered  with  a  mucous  coating,  clearly  showing  the
slimy  nature  of  the  various  juices  of  the  body.  They  should  be  of
sausage  form  and  leave  the  body  absolutely  unsoiled.  We  observe  this
in  the  case  of  all  healthy  animals;  and  so  it  should  be  in  the  case  of
healthy  men.  The  end  of  the  rectum  is  of  such  appropriate  form,  that
when  the  digestion  is  normal,  the  excrements  are  exerted  without  the
parts  being  in  any  way  dirtied.  Closet  paper  is  an  acquisition  for
diseased  humanity,  as  I  have  already  remarked;  the  healthy  country
population  does  not  use  it.  Furthermore,  the  excrements  should  never
emit  an  obnoxious,  disgusting  odor.

If  this  is  the  case,  we  must  conclude  that  the  fermentive  process  of
the  digestion  is  here  more  or  less  abnormal.  This  leads  to  constipation
or  costiveness.  The  faeces  stick  firmly  in  the  dried  up  intestines  and  can-
not be  moved  at  all.  The  fermentation  nevertheless  still  goes  on  within.
It  compels  the  hard  faeces  to  change  in  form,  and  causes  an  active  evolu-
tion of  gas,  which  finally  begins  to  penetrate  throughout  the  body.  The
internal  pressure,  and  tension  caused  by  this  condition  of  fermentation,
tends  towards  the  extremities  and  skin.  If  now,  the  latter  no  longer  per-
forms its  functions,  so  that  the  gaseous  foreign  matter  finds  no  exit,  more
and  more  of  it  is  deposited  under  the  skin.  The  latter  now  becomes
still  more  sluggish  and  its  temperature  decreases  below  the  normal.
Its  fine  blood-vessels  become  so  saturated  with  foreign  matter  that
healthy  blood,  which  alone  can  warm  the  skin,  is  no  longer  able  to
circulate  to  the  outside  of  the  body.  Hence,  the  external  temperature
of  the  latter  falls,  and  the  skin  assumes  a  chlorotic  color  of  one  kind
or  another.  Usually,  there  is  a  pale,  corpse-like  appearance  (see  the  re-
marks on  Chlorosis,  Part  II),  but  the  exact  color  differs,  according  to
the  quality  of  the  foreign  matter  and  of  the  blood.  Large  quantities  of
urine  in  the  blood  cause  the  skin  to  appear  red;  in  other  cases  the  skin
may  be  yellow,  brown  or  greenish. The  external  colder  temperature,  in


Universal  Naturopathic  Dircvtorij  and  Buijcrs Guide  303

opposition  to  the  internal  heat,  causes  the  gaseous  foreign  matter  to  be-
come still  harder;  compressed  together  by  the  united  action  of  the  in-
ternal pressure  and  the  low  external  temperature,  it  fills  the  surface
of  the  body.  In  this  way,  a  change  is  gradually  brought  about  in  the
form  of  the  body,  which  we  call  encumbrance  with  foreign  matter.  The
extent  of  such  encumbrance  can  be  ascertained  by  my  new  system  of
diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  all
affections  of  the  head,  such  as  diseases  of  the  eyes,  ears  and  brain,
mental  debility,  headaches,  and  the  like  arise.  With  the  recognition  of
this  unassailable  fact,  we  solve  at  once  one  of  the  most  puzzling  riddles
to  be  met  with  in  the  treatment  of  suffering  humanity,  and  at  the  same
time  perceive  the  utter  futility  of  the  teachings  of  that  medical  school
which  will  cure  disease  by  a  purely  local  treatment.

It  is  really  remarkable  what  opinions  the  public  has  today  concern-
ing normal  digestion.  We  often  hear  people  saying,  for  instance :  "My
digestion  is  capital,  I  can  eat  so  and  so  many  beef-steaks  and  drink  so
and  so  many  glasses  of  wine,  without  experiencing  any  indigestion.
Everything  agrees  with  me;  I  have  a  first-rate  appetite."  All  this  may  be
granted,  yet,  such  habits  are  quite  as  injurious  as  smoking,  say,  ten  cigars
daily.  Tobacco  is,  and  ever  will  be,  a  poison  to  the  body,  and  the  body
which  has  to  occupy  itself  in  the  endeavor  to  expel  nicotine,  must,  as  a
matter  of  course,  suffer  in  consequence.  It  is  just  the  same  with  eating
and  drinking.  A  perfectly  healthy  stomach  will  refuse  to  retain  even
the  smallest  quantity  of  inappropriate  food.  By  such  complaints  as
eructation,  heartburn  and  oppression,  it  indicates  immediately  that  too
much  has  been  exacted.  A  debilitated  stomach,  on  the  other  hand,  toler-
ates apparently  everything,  that  is  to  say,  it  has  not  the  power  to  resist
either  unsuitable  or  superfluous  food.  In  other  words,  the  natural
function,  the  natural  instinct  is  lost.  The  food  leaves  the  body  insuffi-
ciently digested,  without  the  latter  having  received  any  benefit  from  it.
The  nutritive  value  of  the  various  foods,  depends,  it  must  be  specially
mentioned,  solely  and  only  upon  the  digestive  power  of  the  stomach,  and
the  capability  of  the  system  to  assimilate ;  it  is  another  thing  than  the
percentage  of  nutritive  material  which  the  food  may  contain.  Whole-
meal bread,  stamina,  fresh  fruit,  vegetables  and  farinaceous  foods,
boiled  in  water,  and  without  the  addition  of  fat,  sugar  or  salt,
contain,  as  is  well  known,  far  more  assimilable  material  for  the  body
than  the  best  wine,  the  most  expensive  fleshmeat,  eggs  or  cheese.  With-
out doubt,  these  last  named  foods,  according  to  chemical  analysis,  also
contain  those  constituents  of  which  the  human  body  is  composed,  but
this  is  no  proof  at  all  that  they  therefore  afford  us  the  most  appropriate
nutriment.

The  human  body  is  able  to  extract  from  the  simplest  aliments,  such
as  grains  of  corn,  all  those  constituents  which  chemistry  has  pointed  to
as  indispensable  for  its  structure.  Grain,  such  as  we  find  in  wholemeal
bread,  well  chewed  and  insalivated,  becomes  sour  immediately  it  enters
the  stomach.  Through  the  process  of  digestion  it  is  converted  into  im-
portant nutritive  material  for  the  body,  alcohol,  sugar,  etc.,  being
formed.  Such  material  is  readily  assimilated  by  the  body,  because  it  has
been  formed  by  it.  Those  constituents  of  the  grain  which  cannot  be
assimilated,  are  expelled  again  from  the  body  in  a  certain  definite  form
and  of  definite  color.


301  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiijcrs'  Guide

Although  the  proofs  brought  forward  by  me  often  do  not  find  acknowl-
edgment, the  army  of  continually  increasing  diseases  certainly  does  not
exactly  bear  favorable  witness  to  the  progress  of  medical  science.  The
public  has  here  a  gauge  by  which  to  measure  the  results  of  the  practice
of  the  orthodox  medical  school.  How  many  have  allowed  themselves  to
be  led  astray  by  the  false  teachings  of  the  medical  profession;  how  many
have  broken  Nature's  laws  in  the  good  faith  that  they  were  acting  well
and  wisely.  But  every  transgression  brings  its  own  natural  punishment
in  the  form  of  disease  or  sickliness.

I  cannot  refrain  here  from  publishing  part  of  a  letter  received  by  me
from  a  distant  land,  from  an  enthusiastic  missionary  in  Honolulu.  He
wrote:  "The  natives  here,  before  the  whiteman  was  known,  lived  ex-
clusively upon  poi  (the  national  dish  of  Honolulu,  consisting  of  taro
root  beaten  into  a  paste  with  water,  forming  an  exceedingly  nutritious
food),  with  bananas  and  other  fruits.  Their  only  drink  was  pure  water.
They  thus  lived  on  a  purely  natural  diet  and  their  stature  was  gigantic,
they  were  overflowing  with  health  and  strength.  Then  came  the  white-
man  and  taught  the  native  that  only  flesh  could  give  strength  and  only
alcohol,  particularly  gin,  produces  energy.  It  did  not  continue  long  be-
fore the  first  cattle  were  imported  and  gin  was  spreading  its  blessing
through  the  land.  In  the  annals  of  Hawaii,  the  name  is  even  recorded
of  the  Hawaiian  chief  who  first — on  May  18th,  1819 — openly  changed  his
former  manner  of  living.  Pork  has  now  become  the  national  food  and
gin  the  national  beverage;  hut  with  what  results!  The  majority  of  the
natives  (Kanakas)  suffer  from  eruption  of  the  skin,  and  asthma;  sexual
diseases  are  common  and  there  is  a  great  tendency  to  leprosy,  which
reaps  a  rich  harvest  amongst  them."  We  see,  then,  how  the  natives  on
the  new  manner  of  living,  brought  to  them  by  our  much-lauded  civiliza-
tion, at  once  became  diseased.  The  fact  is  another  proof  of  the  utter
falsity  of  the  theory  of  dietetics  taught  by  the  medical  profession.  In
this  case,  naturally,  the  warm  tropical  climate  was  most  favorable  to  the
propagation  of  the  disease  which,  in  a  cold  climate  like  ours,  would  have
been  much  slower  in  making  its  appearance.

Let  us  now  consider  the  theoretical  principles  upon  which  a  natural
system  of  diet  is  based.


Universal  Nalnropalhic  Directory  and  Biiijers'  Guide  305


THEORETICAL  PRINCIPLES  THAT  DEMAND  A
RATIONAL,  NATURAL  SYSTEM  OF  DIET


WE  sustain  our  bodies  through  two  organs:  the  lungs  and  the
stomach.  The  reception  of  substances  through  inoculation  with
fluids  is  contrary  to  nature,  and  therefore  always  accompanied  by
injurious  effects.  The  body  has  a  sentinel  for  each:  the  nose  for
the  former,  and  the  tongue  for  the  latter.  Unhappily,  as  experience
teaches  us,  neither  is  thoroughly  incorruptible.  There  can  hardly  be  a
doubt  that  the  fresh  mountain  air  is  the  best  food  for  our  lungs;  and  in
breathing  such,  our  sense  of  smell  is  fully  satisfied.  He  who  has  always
lived  in  this  pure  air  finds  it  quite  impossible  to  remain  for  hours  in
smoky  rooms,  for  his  sense  of  smell  warns  him  at  each  breath  he  draws.
But  if  he  often  frequents  such  places,  the  warning  voice  gradually
grows  fainter,  until  finally  silenced;  indeed,  the  sense  of  smell  at  last  be-
comes so  accustomed  to  the  bad  air  that  this  even  appears  pleasant.  The
sense  has  been  corrupted  and  time  is  required  before  this  morbid  appe-
tite can  again  be  cured.

But,  as  we  breathe  from  16  to  20  times  every  minute,  the  ill  effects  of
the  direct  absorption  of  foreign  matter  rapidly  make  themselves  ap-
parent, and  thus  it  probably  is  that  our  understanding  soon  assumes  the
guidance,  when  our  sense  of  smell  has  deserted  us.

It  is  even  worse  with  the  tongue,  which  is  unfortunately  corrupted
from  our  childhood,  and  which  can,  therefore,  hardly  be  regarded  as
reliable  at  all.  It  is  well  known,  indeed,  how  the  sense  of  taste  can  be
made  to  conform  to  our  habits.  Nevertheless,  it  is  of  prime  importance
that  the  body  should  receive  the  right  kind  of  nutriment;  for  all  un-
natural foods  contain  substances  which  are  foreign  to  the  body,  and  thus
give  rise  to  disease,  as  we  have  already  seen.

Let  us,  then,  consider  the  question:  "What  diet  is  the  natural  one?"

As  we  can  no  longer  place  full  reliance  on  the  tongue,  we  must  seek
to  obtain  an  answer  to  this  question  by  the  aid  of  careful  observations
and  conclusions  in  other  directions.

Considered  as  a  whole,  the  question  is  a  purely  scientific  one.  For
its  solution,  therefore,  we  must  adopt  the  only  method  admissible  in
science,  the  so-called  inductive  method,  drawing  general  conclusions
from  particular  cases.  We  may  divide  our  task  into  three  parts;  w^e
must  (1.)  Collect  observations;  (2.)  Draw  conclusions  therefrom;
(3.)  Make  experiments.

The  field  of  observation  is  an  extremely  wide  one,  and  it  is  quite  im-
possible for  any  one  person  to  familiarize  himself  with  every  part.  We
must,  therefore,  content  ourselves  with  a  few  excursions,  just  as  one
might  make,  if  one  desired  to  acquaint  oneself  with  the  flora  of  a  country.

The  ground  to  be  traversed,  in  making  a  scientific  enquin^^  into  the
question  of  diet,  is  so  extensive  that  we  must  decide  from  the  very
commencement  to  keep  our  consideration  within  the  closest  bounds.


306  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biu/rrs'  Guide

For,  to  view  the  matter  more  comprehensively,  we  should  have  to  inquire
into  the  food  of  every  organic  heing  whatever.  It  will,  however,  suffice
for  us,  if,  in  order  to  draw  conclusions  and  to  gain  a  foundation  for
systematic  experiments,  we  consider  only  the  higher  forms  of  animals,
that  is,  those  nearer  akin  to  ourselves.  But  to  save  disgressions,  I  shall
assume  that  you  are  familiar  with  all  points  on  which  general  agree-
ment prevails,  and  which  are  evident  from  observation,  or  have  been
proved  beyond  doubt.

A  single  glance  at  life  in  nature  tells  us  that  beings,  in  order  to
maintain  the  transformation  of  material  going  on,  must,  necessarily,
obtain  nourishment,  in  the  choice  of  which,  however,  they  are  decidedly
limited.  A  plant  which  grows  luxuriously  in  the  saliferous  soil  of  the
sea-coasts,  dies  when  transplanted  inland;  one  which  flourishes  in  dry
sandy  ground,  withers  in  the  garden;  and  cultivated  plants  accustomed
to  rich  humus,  on  the  contrary,  cannot  grow  in  sand.

We  observe  quite  the  same  thing  in  the  animal  kingdom,  and  in  such
a  marked  degree,  that  we  can  accurately  classify  animals  according  to
their  food.  The  classification  of  animals  into  those  which  feed  on  flesh
and  those  which  eat  vegetable  food  only,  is  known  to  all;  but  this  divi-
sion is  only  a  superficial  one.  On  examining  the  matter  closely,  we
iind  that  we  must  separate  the  insect-eaters  (insectivora)  from  the  flesh-
eaters  proper  (carnivora) ;  and  that  the  vegetable-eaters  may  be  divided
into  those  which  live  on  herbs,  grass  and  the  like  (herbivora)  and  those
which  live  on  fruit  (f rugivora) .  Besides  these,  we  find  some  few  which
live  on  both  kinds  of  food  (omnivora).  Our  observations  must  also
extend  to  the  organs  which  aid  in  nutrition,  in  the  case  of  each  class.
These  afford  us  so  good  a  clue  to  the  diet,  that  we  can  determine,  even
from  the  skeleton,  to  what  class  the  animal  belongs.  We  will  turn  our
attention  chiefly  to  the  teeth,  the  digestive  canal,  the  organs  of  sense
which  guide  the  animal  to  its  food,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  nourishes
its  young.  Thus,  there  are  four  excursions  which  we  propose  to  make
into  the  "territory  we  have  marked  for  observation.

As  you  are  aware,  teeth  are  divided  into  three  classes:  Incisors  or
cutting  teeth,  canines  or  dog-teeth,  and  molars  or  grinding  teeth.  The
incisors  of  carnivorous  animals  are  little  developed,  and  hardly  used  at
all,  whereas  the  canines  are  of  striking  length.  They  project  far  beyond
the  rest  and  in  the  opposite  row  a  special  gap  is  necessary  for  their
reception.  They  are  pointed,  smooth,  and  slightly  curved.  They  are
in  no  way  suited  for  chewing,  but  especially  adapted  for  seizing  and
holding  the  prey.  In  the  case  of  predatory  animals  we  call  these  teeth
fangs,  "and  can  observe  how  they  really  are  used  as  such.  For  dividing
the  flesh  into  small  pieces,  the  back  teeth  are  employed,  the  surface  of
which  is  covered  with  points.  These  points  do  not  meet,  but  fit  closely
side  by  side,  so  that  in  the  operation  of  chewing  they  only  mechanically
separate  the  muscular  fibres  of  the  flesh.  A  lateral  motion  of  the  jaw
would  hinder  this  process,  nor  is  it  possible  in  the  carnivora.  It  is  there-
fore clear  that  animals  of  this  class  cannot  grind  their  food.  We  see,
for  instance,  how  hard  it  is  for  dogs  to  well  masticate  pieces  of  bread,
so  that  they  have  finally  to  swallow  the  food  nearly  unchewed.

In  the  herbivorous  animals,  the  incisors  are  developed  for  biting  off
grass  and  herbs.  The  canine  teeth  are  usually  stunted,  the  molars  are
broad,  and  well  adapted  for  crushing  and  grinding  herbaceous  food.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  307


MAN  A  FRUGIVOROUS  ANIMAL


THERE  are  not  many  frugivorous  animals;  for  us,  the  anthropoid
(man-like)  apes  are  the  most  important.  It  is  in  the  frugivora  that
we  find  the  teeth  most  evenly  developed.  They  have  nearly  all  the
same  height,  only  the  canines  projecting  a  little  beyond  the  others,
though  not  enough  to  enable  them  to  serve  the  same  purpose  as  in  the
carnivora.  They  are  conical,  but  blunt  at  the  top  and  not  smooth,  so
that  they  could  not  serve  for  seizing  prey.  One  can  see  that  they  are
very  powerful;  indeed,  we  know  that  the  anthropoid  apes  can  perform
astonishing  feats  with  their  teeth.  The  molars  of  these  animals  are
furnished  at  the  top  with  fold  of  enamel,  and  as  the  lower  jaw  admits
of  ample  lateral  motion,  their  action  may  be  compared  to  that  of  mill-
stones. The  circumstance  that  not  a  single  niolar  is  pointed,  is  of
special  significance,  for  thus  we  see  that  they  have  not  one  tooth  in-
tended for  chewing  flesh.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  the
onmivora,  to  which  only  the  bears,  properly  speaking,  belong,  have  both
pointed  and  broad-topped  molars.  Of  course,  bears  also  have  canines,
like  those  of  the  carnivora,  without  which  they  could  not  seize  their
prey;  the  incisors,  on  the  contrary,  resembling  those  of  the  frugivora.

Now,  which  of  these  sets  of  teeth  most  resembles  that  of  man?  There
is  no  room  for  doubt,  for  we  can  perceive  without  difficulty  that  the
human  teeth  are  formed  almost  precisely  like  those  of  the  frugivorous
animals.  In  man  the  canines  do  not  grow  quite  so  long  as  they  do  in
the  frugivora,  and  project  very  little,  or  not  at  all,  beyond  the  others,
but  this  difference  is  not  material.  It  has  often  been  concluded,  from
the  mere  presence  of  the  canine  teeth,  that  the  human  body  is  also
organized  for  a  flesh  diet.  This  conclusion,  however,  would  be  justified
only  if  the  canines  in  man  were  able  to  fulfill  the  same  function  as  the
canines  of  the  carnivora;  and  if,  like  the  bears,  we  had  at  least  a  few
corresponding  back-teeth  for  dividing  the  flesh.

The  conclusions  which  we  must  draw  from  our  observations  are  as
follows:  (1.)  Man's  teeth  do  not  resemble  those  of  the  carnivora,  there-
fore he  is  not  a  carnivorous  animal;  (2.)  Man's  teeth  do  not  resemble
those  of  the  herbivora,  therefore  he  is  not  an  herbivorous  animal;
(3.)  Man's  teeth  do  not  resemble  those  of  the  omnivora,  therefore  he
is  not  an  omnivorous  animal;  (4.)  Man's  teeth  almost  exactly  resemble
those  of  the  anthropoid  frugivora,  therefore  it  is  highly  probable  that
he  is  a  frugivorous  animal.

The  false  deduction  mentioned  above,  is  frequently  brought  forward
in  another  form,  as  follows:  "Judging  by  his  teeth,  man  is  neither  a
carnivorous,  nor  an  herbivorous  animal,  but  stands  in  the  middle  posi-
tion between  the  two,  therefore  he  is  both."  We  need  scarcely  point  out,
that  this  conclusion  is  logically  quite  untenable.  The  notion  of  a  middle
position  is  much  too  general  and  indefinite  to  find  application  where


308  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

scientific  proof  is  required;  only  in  mathematics  does  it  admit  of  a
definite  conception.

Let  us  now  enter  upon  our  second  excursion  through  the  rich  field  of
observation,  and  turn  our  attention  to  the  digestive  canal  of  the  animals.
Predatory  animals  have  a  small,  almost  round  stomach,  and  the  intes-
tines are  from  3  to  5  times  as  long  as  the  body,  measuring  the  latter
from  the  mouth  to  the  root  of  the  tail.  The  herbivora,  particularly  the
ruminants,  have  a  large  compound  stomach,  and  the  intestines  are  from
20  to  28  times  the  length  of  the  body.  In  the  frugivora,  the  stomach  is
somewhat  broader  than  in  the  carnivora,  and  in  the  duodenum  they
The  length  of  the  intestines  is  about  10  to  12  times  that  of  the  body.
In  anatomical  works  it  is  often  stated  that  the  intestinal  canal  in  man
is  from  3  to  5  times  as  long  as  the  body  and  consequently  more  suited
for  a  flesh  diet.  This  is  to  accuse  Nature  of  a  flat  contradiction:  as
regards  the  teeth  she  has  formed  man,  in  the  popular  opinion,  as  an
omnivorous  animal;  as  regards  his  intestines  as  a  carnivorous  one.  But
this  contradiction  is  only  apparent.  In  the  above  comparison,  the  length
of  the  human  body  has  been  measured  from  crown  to  sole;  whereas  to
conform  with  the  other  cases,  only  the  distance  from  the  mouth  to
the  end  of  the  spine  ought  to  be  measured.  The  conclusion  drawn,
therefore,  is  a  false  one.  The  length  of  the  human  intestines  is  from
18  to  28  feet,  depending  upon  the  height  of  the  individual,  and  the  body
from  head  to  end  of  spine  1^2  to  2^/2  feet,  a  division  yielding  a  quotient
of  about  10  or  11.  Hence,  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  MAN  IS  A
FRUGIVOROUS  ANIMAL.

On  beginning  our  third  excursion,  let  us  consult  the  sign  posts  to  our
diet — the  senses.  It  is  chiefly  by  the  senses  of  smell  and  taste  that  ani-
mals are  directed  to  their  food  and  at  the  same  time  incited  to  eat.
When  a  predatory  animal  finds  the  scent  of  game,  his  eyes  begin  to
sparkle,  he  follows  the  trail  with  eagerness,  springs  upon  his  prey  and
greedily  laps  up  the  warm  blood,  all  this  evidently  affording  him  the
keenest  pleasure.  The  herbivorous  animal,  on  the  contrary,  passes
quietly  by  his  fellow  creatures,  and  can  at  most  be  induced  by  other
reasons  to  attack  them,  his  sense  of  smell  would  never  betray  him
into  eating  flesh;  he  will  even  leave  his  natural  food  untouched  if  it  is
sprinkled  with  blood.  The  senses  of  smell  and  sight  lead  him  to  grass
and  herbs,  which  also  gratify  his  taste.  We  notice  the  same  thing  in
the  case  of  the  frugivora,  whose  senses  direct  them  to  the  fruits  of  the
tree  and  field.

But  how  do  the  human  organs  of  sense  act?  Do  the  senses  of  sight
and  smell  ever  entice  us  into  slaughtering  an  ox?  Would  a  child,  who
had  never  heard  anything  of  the  slaughtering  of  animals,  even  if  it  had
already  eaten  meat,  ever  think,  on  looking  at  a  fatted  ox:  "That  would
be  a  tid-bit  for  me"?  Only  when  we  can  associate  in  our  mind  the  con-
nection between  the  living  animal  and  the  roast  as  it  comes  upon  the
table,  are  we  capable  of  sucli  thoughts;  they  are  not  given  to  us  by
Nature.

The  very  idea  of  killing  is  abhorrent  to  our  senses,  and  raw  flesh  is
agreeable  neither  to  the  eyes  nor  the  nose.  Why  are  slaughter-houses
always  being  removed  further  and  further  from  our  towns?  Why  are
there, in many places, laws forbidding the transportation of flesh


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  309

uncovered?  Can  tliis  in  point  of  fact  be  styled  a  natural  food,  when
it  is  so  oilensive  both  to  eye  and  nose?  Before  being  eaten,  it  has,  by
means  of  condiments,  to  be  rendered  attractive  to  the  senses  of  smell
and  taste,  unless  indeed  these  have  already  been  abnormally  deadened.
How  delightful,  on  the  other  hand,  do  we  find  the  fragrance  of  fruit.
It  is  surely  no  accident  that  reporters  at  fruit-shows  almost  invariably
express  their  feelings  in  the  set  phrase:  "The  sight  of  the  fruit  makes
one's  mouth  water."  I  may  remark  that  the  various  grains  also  possess
an  agreeable,  if  faint,  odor,  and  have  also  a  pleasant  taste,  even  in  the
raw  state.  There  is  nothing  repulsive  to  us  in  harvesting  and  in  cooking
grain;  and  not  without  reason  has  the  country-man  been  called  a  happy
and  contented  rustic.  Thus,  for  the  second  time,  we  must  draw  the  con-
clusion:  "By  nature  man  is  decidedly  a  frugivorous  animal."

In  examining,  on  our  third  excursion,  the  arrangements  made  by
Nature  for  the  propagation  of  the  species,  the  observations  are  more
diliicult.  All  animals,  on  their  entrance  into  life,  are  provided  with  a
food  which  favors  their  rapid  development.  For  new-born  babes,  the
mother's  milk  is  undoubtedly  the  only  natural  food.  And  here  we
observe  that  a  ^reat  many  mothers  are  quite  incapable  of  performing
their  sacred  duties,  their  organism  not  being  in  a  condition  to  produce
the  nutrition  for  the  child.  This  is  especially  deplorable,  because  such
children  are  thus  deprived  at  the  very  commencement  of  their  life  of  the
natural  standard  for  sensuous  impressions,  no  artificial  food  resembling
the  natural  one  in  every  respect.  Observation  shows  us  that  the  mothers
of  the  so-called  "better  classes,"  whose  chief  nourishment  is  flesh-meat,
suffer  most  in  this  respect,  and  are  obliged  to  employ  wet-nurses  from
the  country,  where  very  little  flesh-meat  is  eaten.  As  a  rule,  such  nurses
on  securing  a  situation,  then  live  on  the  same  food  as  the  other  inmates
of  the  town  house,  and  as  a  consequence  not  seldom  lose  the  ability  to
suckle  the  child.  On  voyages,  oat-meal  gruel  is  given  to  nursing  mothers;
for  on  the  diet  usually  supplied  on  board  ship,  consisting  as  it  does
largely  of  flesh-diet,  their  breasts  would  soon  dry  up.

From  these  observations  we  draw  the  conclusion,  that  flesh-diet  affords
little  ot  no  aid  in  the  production  of  the  mother's  milk.  (We  do  not  mean
to  say,  that  on  a  vegetarian  diet  every  mother  could  nurse  her  own  child;
for  this,  a  certain  degree  of  health  is  also  requisite,  which  cannot  be
attained  all  at  once.)

Thus,  for  the  third  time,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  man  is
naturally  a  frugivorous  animal.

If  our  conclusion  be  correct,  it  necessarily  follows  that  the  greater
part  of  mankind  has  wandered  more  or  less  from  a  natural  diet.
Creatures  of  Nature  have  turned  aside  from  their  natural  food!  That
sounds  monstrous,  and  needs  still  further  proofs.  Is  it  possible,  then,
that  other  creatures  can  likewise  forsake  their  natural  food;  and  what
consequences  would  this  have?  This  question  must  be  answered  before
we  can  proceed.

We  are  well  aware  that  dogs  and  cats  can  be  accustomed  to  vegetable
diet;  but  can  we  also  adduce  instances  of  vegetable  feeding  animals
having  become  accustomed  to  flesh  diet?  I  was  once  enabled  to  observe
an  extremely  interesting  case.  A  family  reared  a  young  deer,  which  soon
made  friends  with  the  house-dog.  She  often  saw  the  latter  lapping  meat-
broth,  and  soon  attempted  to  take  her  share  at  meal-times. At  first,  she


310  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

always  turned  away  with  signs  of  digust  at  the  mere  taste  of  the  broth;
but  she  repeated  the  attempts,  and  in  a  few  weeks  ate  her  share  with
rehsh.  In  a  few  weeks  more  she  coukl  even  eat  fleshmeat,  which  she  at
length  preferred  to  her  natural  food.  But  the  effects  were  soon  ob-
servable; the  animal  became  ill  and  died  before  it  was  a  year  old.  1  may
add  that  this  deer  was  not  conlined,  but  ran  about  at  will  in  the  garden
and  woods.

We  know,  too,  that  the  frugivorous  apes  can  be  easily  habituated  in
confinement  to  a  flesh  diet,  but  then  as  a  rule,  die  of  consumption  within
a  year  or  two.  This  is  usually  attributed  to  the  climate,  but  as  the  other
denizens  of  the  tropics  thrive  quite  well  in  our  zone,  we  are  justified  in
assuming  that  it  is  the  unnatural  food  which  is  principally  to  blame.
Recent  investigations  also  confirm  this  view.

It  is,  therefore,  certain  that  animals  may  turn  from  their  natural  foodj
and  thus  the  assumption  that  a  great  part  of  mankind  has  done  the  same,
becomes  still  more  probable.  But  if  this  be  the  case,  the  consequences
must  also  be  perceptible  to  us — diseases  must  surely  appear,  or  have  al-
ready appeared.

Should  we  ask  in  sober  truth,  how  many  persons  have  never  required
a  physician,  I  believe  we  would  find  very  few  indeed.  And  how  many
are  there  who  really  die  of  old  age?  The  cases  are  so  rare  that  the
newspapers  usually  record  them.  There  are  extremely  few  persons  to
be  found  who  are  not  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.  In  general,  the
more  frugivorous  country-folk,  though  not  living  strictly  in  accordance
with  Nature,  are  more  fortunate  in  that  respect;  and  though  fresh  air
may  play  its  part,  food  is  here  the  prime  factor.  Although  it  is  certain,
that  the  unsatisfactory  condition  of  our  health  is  partly  the  result  of
other  causes,  we  can  ascertain  by  a  comparison  with  the  animal  king-
dom, that  food  is  the  most  important  cause.  For  instance,  animals  kept
in  the  stable  live  in  the  most  unfavorable  hygienic  conditions  imagin-
able; they  are  forced  to  breathe  continually  the  gases  issuing  from  their
excrements,  and  are  almost  wholly  deprived  of  free  exercise.  They  must
naturally  become  diseased  in  consequence,  and  one  can  take  it  for
granted,  that  such  cattle  are  never  quite  healthy.  But  despite  these  un-
favorably hygienic  conditions,  there  are  not  so  many  diseases  prevalent
amongst  these  animals  as  amongst  men,  who  in  all  these  respects  can  and
do  take  much  better  care  of  themselves.  The  blame,  therefore,  must  be
laid  chiefly  on  the  food  consumed.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  311


PROOF  OF  THE  BENEFICIAL  VALUE  OF
VEGETABLE  DIET


WE  have  now  proceeded  far  enough  to  take  a  last  step,  and  prove  by
experiment  the  tenableness  or  untenableness  of  our  conclusions.
Two  objections,  often  raised,  we  can  examine  at  the  same  time.
The  first  is  that  man,  in  consequence  of  higher  organization,  is
not  subject  to  the  same  conditions  as  creatures  standing  on  a  lower  level.
And  the  second  objection  is,  that  through  long  observance  of  a  flesh  diet,
the  human  system  has  perhaps  adjusted  itself  to  the  new  diet  in  accord-
ance with  the  Darwinian  theory  of  adaption.  This  second  objection  is
again  divided  into  two  parts:  first  that  the  whole  human  race  has
undergone  this  process  of  adaption;  and  secondly,  that  adults,  at  least,
could  not  without  danger  abandon  the  diet  to  which  they  have  become
accustomed.

All  these  questions  can  be  finally  settled  only  by  experiments,  under-
taken both  with  children  and  adults.  And  many  such  experiments  have
already  been  made,  the  results  of  which  I  shall  here  briefly  sum  up.  In
a  number  of  families  children  have  been  brought  up  from  birth  without
flesh-meat,  and  I  have  made  a  special  point  of  watching  their  develop-
ment. I  can  confidently  assert,  that  the  experiments  have  resulted  in
favor  of  a  natural  diet,  z.  e.,  a  diet  from  which  flesh  is  excluded.  The
children  develop  admirably  both  physically  and  mentally,  whether  as
regards  understanding,  will  or  temper.

This  leads  me  to  a  few  special  remarks  on  education  as  regards
morality.  This  question  has  become  a  burning  one,  lamentations  over
the  immorality  of  youth  being  a  matter  of  every-day  discussion.  Now,
what  is  the  worst  enemy  of  morality?  Ask  the  clerg^'^  of  all  religions,  ask
philosophers  and  teachers  of  ethics,  and  you  will  always  get  the  same
answer:  "The  sensual  passions."  Extraordinary  trouble  has  been  taken
to  suppress  the  passions,  but  for  the  most  part  by  means  of  unnatural
remedies,  such  as  excessive  fasting,  scourging,  monastic  confinement,
etc.,  of  course,  therefore  without  much  effect.  But  just  as  a  general  can
conquer  the  enemy  most  auickly  and  surely,  by  nreventing  him  from
drawing  up  his  army  in  order  of  battle,  so  it  is  with  the  educator.  If  he
can  succeed  in  preventing  the  development  of  the  sensual  passions,  the
arch-enemy  of  morality  is  overcome;  one  chief  means  to  this  end  is  the
nourishment  of  children  on  an  unstimulating,  natural  diet.  Experiments
have  proved  the  correctness  of  these  statements,  and  the  fact  is  of  such
high  importance,  that  it  cannot  be  sufficiently  emphasized.

Freedom  from  sensual  passions,  and  the  peace  of  mind  thereby  ob-
tained, likewise  form  a  sure  foundation  for  an  excellent  intellectual
training.  Every  psychologist  knows,  that  a  state  of  contentment  is  by
far  the  most  favorable  to  mental  activity,  to  clear  thinking  and  sound
judgment;  and  this  can  hardly  be  attained  in  any  waj^  so  successfully
as  by  a  vegetarian  diet.


312  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bnijcrs Guide

Though  I  would  willingly  pursue  this  theme  lurlher,  I  regret  that  I
must  break  off  here  for  fear  of  trespassing  too  long  on  your  attention.
We  must,  however,  still  just  consider  the  many  experiments  which  have
been  made  with  grown  persons,  we  advocates  of  the  natural  system  of
living  standing  before  you  as  examples.  What  results  we  have  attained,
can  be  most  readily  gathered  from  the  fact  that  we  have  become,  and
remain,  faithful  adherents  of  this  mode  of  living.  I  would  here  remark
that  you  must  not  forget  that  most  vegetarians  have  been  driven  to
adopt  their  diet  b}^  serious  illness.  While  they  themselves,  therefore,
are  glad  that  they  have  been  able  to  regain  tolerable  health  by  this
means,  one  cannot,  of  course,  expect  all  of  them  to  be  strong  and  ruddy
complexioned;  many  attain  to  such  health,  others  do  not.  For  instance,
take  the  case  of  Theodor  Hahn,  who  at  the  age  of  29  was  on  the  verge  of
the  grave,  and  his  recovery  held  to  be  impossible  by  the  doctors.  By  the
aid  of  a  natural  diet  he  attained  fair  health,  and  was  enabled  to  live
30  years  longer.  The  experiment  assuredly  resulted  in  favor  of  the  flesh-
less  diet,  so  that  it  really  seems  strange  that  our  opponents  should  cry
out  triumphantly: "You  see  he  only  lived  to  be  59  years  of  age!"

The  New  Science  of  Healing  without  Drugs  and  without  Operations
has  proved  the  unstimulating  diet  to  be  the  natural  one,  and  absolutely
essential  for  any  thorough  cure.  Experience,  too,  has  proved  that  the
cure  always  goes  on  more  rapidly  if  a  strictly  unstimulating  diet  is
followed.  Those  who  cannot  make  up  their  minds  to  forsake  the  flesh-
pots  and  give  up  spirituous  drinks,  greatly  retard  their  recovery;  since
they  are  continually  conveying  new  foreign  matter  into  their  systems,
which  has  to  be  again  expelled.  The  disposition  to  disease  is  therefore
never  gotten  rid  of.

Persons  who  are  tolerably  well,  are  better  in  a  position  to  tax  their
bodies  with  such  additional  work,  although  it  is  always  to  their  ow^n  dis-
advantage. He  who  would  regain  health,  however,  requires  all  his  phys-
ical energy  for  expelling  the  morbid  matter;  and  this  strength,  as  ex-
perience shows,  is  only  to  be  obtained  from  an  unstimulating  system  of
diet.  The  prevailing  mixed  diet  is  sufficient  to  explain  to  us  why  sick-
ness and  sickliness  are  to  be  met  at  every  turn.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  313


WHAT  SHALL  WE  EAT  AND  DRINK?


You  will  now  ask  for  details  as  to  exactly  what  to  eat  and  drink.
With  reference  to  beverages,  I  must  return  once  more  to  our  field
of  observation.  Except  man,  we  find  no  animal  that  naturally
chooses  any  fluid  other  than  water  to  allay  its  thirst.  It  is  noted
that  animals  nearly  always  seek  flowing  water,  and  prefer  to  drink  from
rivers  or  brooks,  rather  than  from  springs  gushing  from  the  rocks;  which
accords  with  the  proved  fact  that  water  which  has  been  exposed  to  the
rays  of  the  sun,  and  flowed  over  gravel,  is  preferable  to  fresh  spring-
water.  Animals  which  feed  on  succulent  food,  drink  very  little,  and  man
himself  is  seldom  thirsty  if  he  does  not  neglect  juicy  fruits  in  his  diet.
But  when  he  does  need  drink,  water  is  for  him,  too,  the  only  natural
beverage.  Even  fruit-juices  mingled  with  the  water,  may  easily  occasion
him  to  drink  more  copiously  than  necessary,  at  least  when  they  contain
a  large  admixture  of  sugar.  If  we  would  be  cured  of  disease,  we  must
keep  strictly  to  the  beverage  intended  for  us  by  Nature,  and  must  quench
our  thirst  with  water  only.

But  what  are  we  to  eat?

Nature  points  to  fruits;  and  a  fruit  diet  is,  therefore,  the  best.  All
fruits  and  grains,  all  berries,  and  roots  which  are  attractive  to  the  senses
of  sight,  smell  and  taste,  may  serve  us  for  food.  We  find  such  in
abundance  in  all  regions  and  zones  of  the  earth,  except  perhaps  in  the
coldest.  The  latter  are,  therefore,  not  suited  to  be  the  home  of  man,  and
we  find  their  inhabitants  physically  stunted  and  mentally  but  little
developed.

As  far  as  possible,  the  gifts  of  Nature  should  be  consumed  in  their
natural  form.  This,  of  course,  is  often  practicable,  on  account  of  our
degenerated  condition  of  health,  especially  as  regards  the  teeth.  As  a
rule,  however,  we  do  well  to  avoid,  whenever  possible,  all  artificial  con-
diments and  extracts,  all  concentrated  food  being  unnatural.  Nature
never  off'ers  us  such.  The  addition  of  sharp  spices,  and  if  possible,  of
sugar  and  salt,  is  also  to  be  avoided.

Food  is  now-a-days  often  cooked  very  improperly;  for  instance,  the
water  used  in  boiling,  which  absorbs  a  great  deal  of  nutritious  matter,  is
usually  poured  away,  and  the  washed  out  vegetables  then  brought  to  the
table.  This  is  altogether  wrong.  All  vegetables  ought  to  be  cooked  in
as  little  water  as  possible,  or  in  a  steamer  and  the  water  left  on  them.
Regarding  the  manner  of  preparing  the  various  dishes,  I  must  beg  you
to  consult  some  of  the  many  vegetarian  cookery-books.*

is  to  be  recommended  for  sick  persons.  One  cannot  perform  one's
regular  work  with  an  injured  arm,  neither  can  a  debilitated  stomach


*See  The  Nature  Cure  Cook  Book  and  A  B  C  of  Natural  Dietetics,  by  Mrs.  Alma
Lindlahr.  Published  by  the  Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co.,  Butler,  N.  J.  Price,  cloth,
$2.25  postpaid.


314  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


digest  in  a  normal  manner.  It  speaks  best  itsell"  as  to  what  it  can  digest.
As  soon  as  eructations,  or  pain  in, the  stomach,  or  wind,  or  a  sour  taste,
or  any  other  irregularity  is  experienced,  it  is  a  proof  that  we  have  either
eaten  too  much,  or  have  eaten  something  unsuitable.  The  patient  will
soon  iind  out  what  is  good  lor  him,  if  he  observes  carefully.  The  best
thing  in  most  cases  at  first  will  be  wholemeal  bread,  if  carefully  and
thoroughly  chewed.  If  this  cannot  be  digested,  unbolted  wheatmeal  can
be  eaten  with  good  results,  for  this  admits  of  being  swallowed  only  when
thoroughly  insalivated,  so  that  the  patient  runs  no  great  risk  of  eating
too  much.  Great  moderation  in  eating,  as  well  as  the  choice  of  suitable
food,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  patient.  Even  the  most  suitable
sick-diet  is  injurious  if  the  patient  eats  too  freely.

For  the  sick,  oatmeal  gruel  is  a  most  suitable  food.  It  should  be  made
thick  with  no  addition,  unless  a  little  salt  and  fresh  unboiled  milk.  Milk
should  never  be  taken  other  than  cold  and  unboiled.  First  see,  however,
whether  it  is  unpleasant  to  the  smell,  or  taste,  in  which  case  it  is  unsuited
for  food.  Do  not  imagine  that  it  can  be  improved  by  boiling;  boiled
milk  is  much  more  diflicult  to  digest,  because  it  ferments  more  slowly
and  the  unhealthy  constituents  are  not  expelled  by  the  boiling,  but  still
remain  in  the  milk.  It  has  consequently  little  nutritive  value,  and  at
most  tends  to  render  the  body  stout,  without  strengthening  it.  Fresh
fruit  may  be  eaten  at  meal  times.  In  order  to  afford  some  variety,  al-
though this  is  not  exactly  essential,  we  may  mention  further  rice,  barley,
etc.,  to  which  a  relish  can  best  be  given  by  adding  green  vegetables,  e.  g.
cauliflower  and  asparagus  or  stewed  fruit.  A  great  abundance  of
food  is  at  the  command  of  all  healthy,  or  comparatively  healthy,  per-
sons. A  glance  at  one  of  the  vegetarian  cookery-books  will  convince
anyone  that  he  will  not  have  to  suffer  from  want  of  food.

To  prevent  all  misunderstanding,  I  would  again  call  attention  to  the
fact,  that  a  person  seriously  ill,  in  particular  one  suffering  from  severe
indigestion,  should  eat  only  the  very  simplest  food,  and  only  such  as
must  be  thoroughly  chewed.  The  best  diet  for  such  a  patient  is  whole
wheatmeal  bread  and  fruit;  no  attention  being  paid  to  the  palate  until
improvement  has  set  in.

But  does  it  taste  good?  I  hear  some  ask.  Whence  comes  pleasure  in
eating?  It  is  called  forth  by  the  stimulus  exerted  by  the  food  on  the
gustatoiy  nerves.  This  stimulus  is  compared  with  others  to  which  we
are  accustomed,  and  it  pleases  us  in  the  measure  it  corresponds  with
them.  By  way  of  exception  it  may  be  somewhat  enhanced,  and  then
affords  us  super-pleasure.  But  should  this  be  oft  repeated,  we  grow
used  to  it,  and  are  then  no  longer  able  to  experience  the  increased  degree
of  satisfaction.  Thus,  as  soon  as  we  become  accustomed  to  exquisite
pleasures,  they  afford  us  as  much,  but  no  more  enjoyment  than  the
earlier  ones,  which  were  less  refined  and  costly;  and  these  latter  have  the
advantage  of  there  being  no  need  to  overstimulate  the  nerves,  in  order
to  obtain  a  pleasing  sensation.

And  shall  I  again  remind  you  of  the  consequences  alluded  to  at  the
beginning?  It  was  unnatural  food  which  encumbered  man  with  foreign
matter;  a  natural  diet  does  not  convey  such  into  the  system,  or  at  least
only  in  those  cases  where  it  cannot  be  properly  digested;  or  where
moderation  in  eating  is  neglected.  If  we  are  able  to  get  rid  of  the
morbid  matter,  a  natural  diet  affords  us  a  guarantee  that  we  can  remain


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujers'  Guide  315

healthy,  provided  we  do  not  altogether  ireglect  the  other  conditions  of
health.

May  the  many  blessings,  then,  which  a  natural  manner  of  living  confer
upon  the  individual,  the  family,  the  entire  nation,  soon  become  known
everywhere,  throughout  the  land !

DIRECTIONS  FOR  PREPARING  GOOD  WHOLEMEAL  BREAD
As  adopted  by  Louis  Kuhne

Put  3  lbs.  of  unbolted  wheatmeal,  or  of  unbolted  flour  of  any  other
grain  (in  tropical  regions,  maize  with  wheatmeal  or  rice,  etc.),  in  a  dish,
pour  over  it  about  ly^  pints  of  cold  water  and  mix  thoroughly.  Cold
water  is  to  be  preferred  to  warm,  as  experience  shows  that  warm  water
sets  the  bread  in  fermentation  more  readily  than  cold,  and  though  this
may  render  the  bread  somewhat  lighter,  it  will  be  less  nutritious  and
pleasant  to  the  taste.

Now  divide  the  dough  into  two  equal  parts,  forming  each  into  a  long
shaped  loaf;  lay  them  upon  dry  tiles  (not  bricks)  sprinkled  with  whole-
meal, wet  the  loaves  well  on  the  top  with  water,  and  place  each  with  its
tile  upon  an  empty  flower-pot  in  a  quick  oven.

No  other  articles,  or  dishes,  should  stand  in  the  oven  at  the  same  time.

The  heat  in  the  oven  must  be  kept  up  by  a  steady  fire.

After  half  an  hour,  during  which  the  oven  must  not  be  opened,  turn
the  front  side  of  the  loaves  to  the  back.

After  another  quarter  of  an  hour,  see  whether  the  upper  crust  is  well
and  firmly  baked,  and  then  turn  the  loaves  over,  as  they  are  usually  still
soft  on  the  bottom.

The  loaves  must  now  bake  until  they  sound  quite  hollow  when  tapped
in  the  middle  with  the  finger;  this  usually  takes  half  an  hour  longer.

One  may  then  feel  sure  that  the  bread  is  well  baked  and  the  crust  not
too  hard.

DIRECTIONS  FOR  PREPARING  WHOLEMEAL  GRUEL

For  one  plate  of  gruel,  stir  a  heaped  tablespoonful  of  wholemeal  into
a  thin  paste  with  a  little  water.  Pour  this  into  boiling  water,  and  let  it
boil  some  minutes,  stirring  continually.  Salt  and  butter  should  be  added
very  sparingly,  or  not  at  all.  This  gruel  also  tastes  veiy  good,  when
sprinkled  over  with  currants.

HINTS  FOR  THE  PROPER  SP:LECTI0N  OF  A  NATURAL  DIET

Breakfast:  Wholemeal  bread  and  fruit;  or  wholemeal  gruel  with  bread;
or  oatmeal  porridge  with  fruit  and  bread. Milk  only  unboiled.

Dinner:  If  soup,  it  should  be  thick;  or  cereals,  served  as  thick  porridges
such  as  rice,  barley,  groats,  oatmeal,  made  only  with  w^ater  and  a
little  butter,  or  perhaps  with  the  addition  of  a  little  fruit;  or  pulse,
such  as  peas,  beans,  lentils,  boiled  thick  with  water  only,  and  not
mashed,  seasoned  with  marjoram  or  pepper-wort  if  liked;  or  any
vegetable  that  the  region  affords,  and  that  is  in  season;  or  stewed  or
fresh  fruit,  with  wholemeal  bread.

Supper:  Wholemeal  bread  and  fruit  (fresh  or  stewed);  or  a  gruel  of
flour  or  wholemeal,  boiled  thick,  with  bread  or  fruit.


31(5  Universal  Natiiropalinc  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

SOME  SIMPLE  RECIPES

Red  Cabbage  and  Apples.  A  large  head  of  red  cabbage  is  cut  into
shreds  and  steamed  witli  about  half  a  cupful  of  water  until  half  soft.
Then  add  4  to  6  sour  apples,  cut  into  thin  slices,  with  a  little  salt  and
butter,  and  steam  until  all  the  moisture  is  absorbed.  (Also  tastes  very
good  without  the  salt  and  butter.) For  three  persons.

White  Cabbage  and  Tomatoes.  A  head  of  white  cabbage  is  cut  and
steamed  as  above,  then  add  about  half  a  cupful  of  tomatoe-extract — or
from  4  to  10  (according  to  size)  fresh  tomatoes  passed  through  a  sieve —
with  a  little  salt  and  butter;  lay  6  to  8  raw,  peeled  potatoes,  simply  cut  in
half,  on  the  top,  and  without  stirring,  steam  well  the  whole.  (Also  tastes
very  good  without  the  salt  and  butter.)  Pepper-wort  may  be  used  in-
stead of  tomatoes. For  three  persons.

Spinach  and  Potatoes.  Spinach  after  being  gathered  should  be  twice
washed,  chopped  (in  the  raw  state)  and  steamed  soft  with  very  little
water,  a  small  quantity  of  salt  and  butter  and  some  raw  potatoes.  Should
anj^  liquid  remain,  add  a  tablespoonful  of  wholemeal.

Cabbage  and  Groats.  The  cabbage  is  pulled  into  small  pieces,  washed
and  boiled  wath  about  2  cupfuls  of  water.  When  pretty  soft,  add  a  little
salt  and  butter  and  half  a  cupful  of  groats;  stir  and  boil  until  the  groats
are  soft.

Carrots  and  Potatoes.  Cut  5  to  8  carrots  (according  to  size)  into  long
strips,  and  steam  in  about  a  cupful  of  water.  Then  lay  on  the  top  6  to  8
raw,  peeled  potatoes,  cut  in  half,  and  cook,  with  a  little  salt  and  butter.
(Also  tastes  good  without  the  salt  and  butter.) For  three  persons.

Turnips  and  Potatoes.  Slice  some  large  turnips,  and  steam  in  1  to  IVs
cupfuls  of  water  until  half  soft;  add  a  little  salt  and  butter  and  6  to  8
raw%  peeled  potatoes  and  steam  thoroughly.  Also  tastes  very  good  with-
out the  salt  and  butter.)  For  three  persons.  This  and  the  last  dish  may
be  cooked  together;  they  taste  excellent  so.

Rice  and  Apples.  V2  lb.  rice,  and  4  to  8  apples  cut  in  slices,  with  4
cupfuls  of  water,  boil  slowly  to  a  stitf  porridge.  Very  tasty.  A  little
salt  and  butter  may  be  added,  but  it  is  not  necessary. For  three  persons.

Simple  Rice  Pudding.  To  the  above  rice  porridge,  add  %  lb.  currants
and  bake  in  a  dish  buttered  and  dusted  over  with  bread  crumbs.

Haricots  and  Tomatoes.  %  lb.  haricots  are  placed  the  evening  before
in  cold  water,  and  then  in  the  morning  boiled  with  sufficient  water  added
to  cover  them.  When  soft,  add  about  half  a  cupful  of  tomato-extract,  or
5  to  10  fresh  tomatoes  passed  through  a  sieve,  add  a  little  salt  and  butter,
if  desired.  It  is  best  after  adding  the  tomato  sauce,  to  keep  the  dish
standing  warm  for  1  to  2  hours.  If  there  should  be  liquid  remaining,
then  add  a  spoonful  of  wholemeal  to  thicken  it.  Pepper-wort  or  mar-
joram may  be  used  in  place  of  tomatoes.  Quite  sufficient  for  two  per-
sons.

Green  Beans  and  Apples.  Cut  the  threads  off  the  beans  and  break
each  bean  into  pieces;  put  in  boiling  water  and  then  add  sour  or  unripe
apples  cut  in  slices,  chopped  parsley  or  onions,  and  a  little  salt  and  butter
then  added.  When  the  beans  are  soft,  a  little  wholemeal  should  be
added  as  thickening.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijcrs'  Guide  317

Lentils  and  Prunes.  Soak  VL*  lb.  lentils  the  evening  before,  and  then
boil  soft  over  a  slow  fire,  with  about  30  prunes  and  sufficient  water  to
cover  them.  A  little  salt  and  butter  may  be  added  if  desired.  For  three
persons.

Mushrooms  and  Potatoes.  The  mushrooms  are  well  washed,  and
steamed  soft  with  chopped  parsley  or  onions.  A  little  salt  and  butter  is
then  added,  and  the  liquid  thickened  to  a  sauce  with  two  tablespoonfuls
of  wholemeal.  Potatoes  boiled  in  their  skins,  are  then  peeled,  cut  in
pieces,  and  added  to  mushrooms  in  the  sauce.  The  whole  is  then  boiled
and  finally  kept  standing  warm  for  some  time.

Beetroot  salad.  The  beetroot  is  washed  and  baked  soft  on  a  tile  in  the
oven,  then  peeled,  cut  in  slices,  and  served  wdth  diluted  lemon  juice.

Lettuce.  Wash  the  lettuce  and  prepare  with  a  little  oil,  lemon  juice
(not  essence),  and  a  little  sugar.

Potato  and  Apple-Salad.  Potatoes  well  boiled  in  their  skins  are  peeled
and  cut  in  slices.  A  few  sour  apples  are  likewise  sliced,  and  both  stirred
together  with  a  little  oil  and  lemon  juice.

Peas  and  Lentils  in  the  most  digestible  form.  Unshelled  dried  peas
or  lentils  are  soaked  the  evening  before  in  cold,  and,  if  possible,  soft
water.  The  next  morning  put  in  a  pot  with  only  enough  water  to  cover
them.  A  little  salt  (very  little),  pepper-wort  and  marjoram  may  be
added.  Boil  the  pulse  well,  but  so  that  when  done,  all,  or  nearly  all,  the
water  is  absorbed.  The  peas  or  lentils  thus  keep  their  original  form  and
are  more  nutritious  and  easier  of  digestion  than  when  mashed  up  or
served  with  butter.

Potato  dumplings.  (For  two  persons).  Boil  well  a  quart  of  mealy
potatoes.  Then  peel  and  cool,  and  rub  through  a  grater.  Cut  some
iDread  into  dice  and  fry  in  butter.  Mix  these  well  wath  an  egg,  the
grated  potatoes  and  a  little  wholemeal  or  flour,  and  with  the  hand  form
them  into  balls  about  the  size  of  an  apple.  Then  roll  them  in  wholemeal
or  flour,  and  put  in  boiling  water  for  about  10  minutes.  Care  must  be
taken  that  thev  do  not  become  sodden.  They  may  be  eaten  wdth  any
fruit,  onion,  or  butter  sauce.


318  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


PART  TWO

NERVOUS  AND  MENTAL  DISEASES.
SLEEPLESSNESS


THE  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  diseases  applies  also  to  nervous  and
mental  disorders.  The  nineteenth  century  has  rightly  been  called
the  century  of  nervous  diseases,  for  they  are  now  to  be  found  every-
where in  a  myriad  forms.  Infinite  pains  are  taken  to  give  correct
names  to  all  the  new  diseases,  and  to  determine  their  nature  and  cause,
with  a  view  to  deciding  upon  some,  at  all  events  approximate,  system  of
treating  them.

Nervousness,  Neurasthenia,  Neuralgia,  Hypochondria,  Hysteria,  In-
sanity, Imbecility  and  Paralysis  are  diseases  known  everywhere,  not  to
mention  other  similar  disorders  having  the  same  cause.

With  the  increase  of  these  serious  nervous  complaints,  new  external
forms  are  always  making  their  appearance.  But  such  external  forms
offer  no  definite  clue  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  dis-
eases. If,  however,  we  examine  the  condition  of  nervous  patients  we
always  find  signs  of  some  internal  disquiet  or  uneasiness.  The  patient
has  always  a  certain  unconscious,  indefinable  feeling  of  disease,  without
knowing  the  cause,  and  without  confessing  to  the  disorder  itself.

We  find  one  person  excessively  talkative,  while  another  is  quiet  and
taciturn.  Many  suffer  much  from  sleeplessness,  others  exhibit  restless
activity,  and  others  again  are  remarkable  for  their  unconquerable  lazi-
ness. One  will  go  about  with  the  idea  of  suicide,  because  he  thinks
himself  superfluous,  and  is  dissatisfied  with  the  world.  There  we  see  a
millionaire  daily  tormented  by  groundless  fears  for  the  future  that  never
desert  him.  Others  are  always  trembling  all  over.  Some  lose  the  use  of,
it  may  be  a  limb,  one  side,  or  the  whole  body.  And  then  there  are  the
most  diverse  and  often  contradictory  symptoms  of  insanity,  one  of  the
worst  of  which  is  paralysis.  We  see,  moreover,  that  these  diseases  pre-
vent people,  more  or  less,  from  exercising  their  faculties.  One  loses  the
mastery  over  his  limbs,  another  is  no  longer  master  of  his  thoughts,  his
will,  or  his  words.  Were  we  to  observe  thousands  of  nervous  patients,
we  should  find  scarcely  two  in  whom  the  outward  symptoms  were  ex-
actly alike,  so  various  are  the  form  that  these  diseases  take.  No  one  need
be  surprised,  therefore,  that  amid  so  many  conflicting  symptoms,  the
medical  profession  has  found  no  sufficient  basis  to  go  upon  as  regards
clear  understanding,  nomenclature  and  cure  of  nervous  diseases.  Drugs
have  produced  neither  improvement  nor  cure  in  these  nervous  cases,
even  if  temporary  paralyzmg  of  the  nerves  is  sometimes  attained.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  319

It  is  quite  an  error  to  imagine  that  the  drugs  themselves  ever  effect
any  result.  It  is  really  wholly  and  solely  the  system,  which  seeks  to  get
rid  of  the  injurious  matter  either  with  increased  or  diminished  activity.

In  one  case  there  are  clear  signs  of  increased  activity  of  the  system,
with  a  view  to  forcible  expulsion  of  the  poison.  This  occurs  when  the
medicine  is  given  in  such  small  doses,  that  it  cannot  have  a  paralyzing
effect  on  the  system.  In  the  case;  of  larger  (allopathic)  doses  of
poisonous  drugs,  traces  of  paralysis  arc  clearlv  to  be  observed.  At
the  same  time,  the  efiorts  of  the  body  to  regain  health  (acute  diseases)
and  the  outward  symptoms  of  the  chronic  complaint  are  likewise
paralyzed.  This  circumstance  explains  the  temporary  disappearance
and  regular  recurrence  of  symptoms  under  allopathic  treatment.  At
first  they  are  suppressed  by  the  nerves  being  paralysed;  but  when  the
body  recovers  a  little  they  reappear.  Strong  medicinal  poisons  in  large
doses  paralyse  the  body  to  such  an  extent  that  death  ensues.  In  the  case
of  lesser  doses,  this  paralysis  may  not  cause  death,  but  at  any  rate  it  in-
jures the  entire  system.

It  may  confidently  be  asserted  that  many  nervous  disorders  are  really
caused  by  the  employment  of  drugs,  which  have  at  first  been  ad-
ministered to  cure  some  less  serious  complaint.  In  very  small  doses,
the  effect  on  the  body  is  apparently  just  the  contrary  to  paralysis,  for
instead  of  being  paralysed,  the  body  makes  redoubled  efforts  to  free  it-
self of  the  poison.  The  increased  activity,  however,  is  only  a  pre-
paratory stage  to  paralysis,  and  can  never  be  anything  else.

As  for  the  cure  of  nervous  diseases,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  much
lauded  medical  profession  stands  utterly  helpless.  Indeed,  its  represen-
tatives have  frequently  confessed  their  total  inability  to  aid  in  such
cases.  Change  of  air,  diversion  by  travel,  and  similar  beneficial  meas-
ures of  relief  are  recommended.  But  even  if  temporary  relief  is  thus  at-
tained, we  still  plainly  see  by  such  advice,  how  little  medical  men  know
of  the  cause  and  nature  of  nervous  diseases.  That  which  is  impossible  for
the  orthodox  medical  school,  that  which  has  puzzled  the  brains  of  its  re-
presentatives, has  been  eflt'ected  and  clearly  explained  by  the  New
Science  of  Healing,  My  reports  of  cures,  and  the  accompanying  letters
of  thanks  and  testimonials  from  a  small  number  of  my  many  patients,
speak  more  plainly  and  convincingly  than  all  scientific  and  theoretical
expositions,  I  may  be  permitted,  therefore,  to  limit  myself  here  to  some
of  the  chief  points  of  importance  in  connection  with  these  disorders.

As  is  well  known,  we  possess  two  kinds  of  nerves:  nerves  which  are
controlled  by  the  will,  and  those  which  regulate  the  functions  of  breath-
ing, digestion  and  circulation.  But  when  I  assert  that  all  diseases  aris-
ing from  the  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter,  are  also
nervous  diseases,  many  may  at  first  be  surprised.  The  matter  is  easily
explained.  We  first  become  conscious  of  a  disease  when  it  interferes
with  the  normal  functions  of  the  body,  or  occasions  pain.  This  implies,
naturally  a  more  or  less  advanced  stage  of  the  disease,  which  neverthe-
less the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  enables  us  to  accuratelj'^  diagnose.
We  know,  also,  that  disease  without  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  the
body  is  impossible.  Every  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  mat-
ter not  only  exercises  a  disturbing  influence  on  the  individual  organs,
but  disturbs  equally  the  nerves  which  are  in  connection  with  these
organs  or  parts  of  the  body,  or  which  regulate  their  functions. And  it


320  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

is  not  until  the  nerve-connections  are  also  afTected,  that  we  become
aware  of  the  disease.  The  superlicial  observer  regards  merely  those
nerves  which  are  under  the  control  of  the  will,  and  those  diseases  which
affect  organs  under  the  regular  control  of  these  voluntary  nerves.

Those  disorders  which  interfere  with  the  breathing,  circulation  and
digestion,  make  their  appearance  much  more  gradually.  Here  again,
the  nerves  likewise  become  affected  and  make  us  aware  of  the  disorder.
These  nerves  are  not  under  the  direct  control  of  the  will,  but  upon  their
normal  activity  depends  that  of  the  organs  which  are  not  controlled  by
the  will,  such  as  the  lungs,  heart,  stomach,  kidneys,  intestines  and  blad-
der. We  can  never  become  aware  of  any  digestive  trouble,  or  of  any
disease  of  the  kidneys,  bladder,  heart,  lungs  or  stomach  before  the  nerves
associated  with  them  are  likewise  so  encumbered  by  foreign  matter  that
their  activity  is  no  longer  normal.  Each  of  the  above  named  diseases,
therefore,  always  implies  simultaneous  nervous  disorder;  thus  one  can
never  suffer  from  a  disordered  digestion,  without,  at  the  same  time,
suffering  from  a  disordered  condition  of  the  nerves  regulating  the
process.

As  I  have  already  stated,  a  normal  digestion  is  the  first  condition  to
obtain  a  healthy  body.  For  all  foreign  matter  not  hereditary,  is  first
brought  into  the  system  by  imperfect  digestion.  Every  disease,  and  con-
sequently all  nervous  diseases,  therefore,  either  result  from  a  disordered
digestion,  or  are  inherited.  This  is  the  common  cause  of  all  diseases
whatever.  When  the  system  still  has  sufTicient  vital  power  left,  it  makes
an  effort  to  expel  the  foreign  matter  by  an  acute  disease  (curative  crisis).
When,  however,  the  requisite  vital  power  fails,  those  cronic  (latent)
cases  of  disease  appear.  Such  diseases  never  cease,  they  at  most  change
their  form,  and  finally  reach  their  highest  development  in  those  sad
nervous  and  mental  disorders.  Nervous  diseases  are  simply  chronic
(latent)  physical  disorders,  whatever  their  symptoms  may  be.

In  nervous  diseases,  as  in  all  diseases,  we  notice  as  a  particular  symp-
tom, either  a  feeling  of  chilliness  or  of  increased  warmth  (heat),  which
are  both  the  results  of  a  feverish  state  of  the  body.

We  thus  arrive  at  a  conclusion  of  great  importance:  that  nervous  dis-
eases, also,  simply  indicate  chronic  (latent)  fever.  If  I  thus  assert,  that
nervous  disorders  have  the  same  cause  as  small-pox,  measles,  scarlet-
fever,  diphtheria,  syphilis  and  so  on,  it  follows  that  the  same  remedj^
with  which  these  diseases  can  be  successfully  treated,  must  also  cure
nervous  diseases.  And  this  is  a  fact  which  I  have  proved  in  my  practice
in  hundreds  and  thousands  of  cases,  as  the  testimonials  at  the  end  of
this  work  show.

From  these  elucidations,  we  thus  gain  a  definite  idea  concerning  the
nature,  origin,  and  cure  of  all  nervous  diseases.  No  longer  helplessly
looking  on,  like  the  orthodox  practitioners,  having  learned  the  cause,
we  know  exactly  how  to  render  effectual  aid.

Whoever  now  surveys  the  great  army  of  diseases  from  my  point  of
view,  will  readily  perceive  that  only  he  who  comprehends  the  true
nature  of  symptoms  will  be  in  a  position  to  give  practical  advice  as  to  a
cure.  It  is  just  as  with  an  army,  which  can  only  be  properly  led  by  a
general  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  troops  composing  it.  The  leader
who  is  ignorant  of  the  forces  of  which  his  army  is  made  up,  will  in-
evitably suffer defeat. Similarly it is, with latter-day specialism.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  321

Specialism  in  medical  science  must  necessarily  lead  to  the  ruin  of  the
science  and  to  an  ever-growing  contempt  lor  it.  For  liow  can  a  specialist
serve  science,  if  lie  neglects  tlie  natural  laws  governing  the  human
organism,  and  treats  a  part  without  regarding  the  whole?

All  specialism  in  medical  science  appears  to  us  to  be  a  step  backwards,
a  superlluity,  a  factor  isolated  from  tlie  whole,  and  serving  only  to  ob-
scure our  vision.  Only  he  who  has  a  true  comprehension  of  the  whole,
only  he  who  regards  Nature  as  a  grand  indivisible  unity,  is  in  a  position
to  rightly  interpret  all  the  phenomena  he  sees,  and  prolit  by  the  laws
which  control  them.  How  often  Nature  exhibits  to  us  the  same  material
in  the  most  various  and  dissimilar  forms,  all  being  controlled  simply  by
temperature.  I  need  only  remind  you  again  of  water,  which  we  see  in
various  forms :  as  fluid,  as  mist,  as  steam,  as  cloud.  Temperature  alone
conditions  this;  the  material  is  one  and  the  same  in  each  case.

As  for  the  diagnosis  of  nervous  diseases,  medical  science  is  quite  as
much  at  a  loss  here  as  at  is  concerning  their  cure.  In  many  cases  the
doctors  even  fail  altogether  to  recognize  nervous  diseases  at  all.  How
many  nervous  patients  have  consulted  me  after  having  tried  everywhere
else.  All  such  persons  are  living  proofs  of  the  incompetence  of  the
medical  profession  in  this  direction.  Many  of  these  patients  had  been
declared  perfectly  healthy  by  orthodox  physicians,  who  pronounced
their  disease  to  be  merely  imaginary,  whilst  I,  by  means  of  my  Science
of  Facial  Expression,  could  immediately  ascertain  the  serious  encum-
brance of  the  patient  with  foreign  matter.  All  my  nervous  patients  have
remarked  the  astonishingly  rapid  improvement  in  their  condition
effected  by  my  treatment,  and  how  this  change  for  the  better  was  al-
ways in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  morbid  matter  secreted.  Whoever
has  once  taken  note  of  these  secretions,  and  experienced  the  steady  im-
provement of  his  condition,  can  no  longer  doubt  for  an  instant  the  ac-
curacy of  my  system  of  diagnosis  and  success  of  my  method  of  cure.

My  system  of  diagnosis  assures  the  representatives  of  my  method,  once
and  for  all,  a  favored  position  as  practitioners  of  the  art  of  healing.  By
its  means  alone  is  it  possible  to  diagnose  with  certainty  evei-y  nervous
disorder,  to  observe  even  the  gradual  development  of  such  disorders,
years  before  the  patient  himself  has  any  idea  whatever  of  their  existence.
Encumbrance  of  the  back,  in  particular,  is  a  sign  of  a  nervous  disorder,
as  is  explained  in  my  handbook  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.*

Mental  Diseases.  The  same  obtains  in  the  case  of  all  mental  diseases.
Their  true  nature  is  likewise  wholly  misunderstood  by  medical  men.  It
brain,  but  simply  and  solely  the  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  morbid
matter,  which  has  been  accumulating  for  years.  In  mental  disease  and
so-called  progressive  paralysis,  the  final  and  often  incurable  stage  is
reached.  These  slowly  accumulating  latent  encumbrances  are  caused,
as  %^ave  said  before,  by  a  very  gradual  debilitation  of  the  digestive
powers,  in  consequence  of  an  unnatural  mode  of  life.  Naturally,  since
all  persons  do  not  live  equally  unnatural  lives,  everyone  is  not  found  to
suffer  from  mental  disorder.  It  depends  upon  the  degree  and  develop-
ment of  the  encumbrance. Mental  disease  occurs  only  where  the  body  is


*  Facial  Expression,  bv  Louis  Kuhne. Published  by  the  Nature  Cure  Publishing
Co.,  Butler,  N.  J, Price,  cloth,  $3.60,  postpaid.


322  I'niversdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

seriously  encumbered,  and  then  only  when  with  back  encumbrance
the  head  is  attacked.  Advancing  civilization  is  to  blame  for  the  increase
in  mental  diseases  only  in  so  far  as  it  brings  with  it  the  necessity  for  men
to  break  Nature's  rules,  and  to  act  in  opposition  to  her  immutable  laws.
The  chief  blame  lies  with  the  orthodox  medical  school,  whose  rules  of
health  and  views  generally,  are  absolutely  contradictory  to  what  Nature
teaches.  Water  is  avoided  as  injurious  to  health,  and  beer,  wine  and
other  alcoholic  drinks,  or  mineral  waters  are  drunk  instead.  Men  smoke
so  constantly  that  they  might  be  chimneys,  and  drink  so  much  that  they
might  be  taken  for  beer-barrels.  Physical  debility  and  languor  is  the
natural  consequence.  No  wonder,  if  the  weakened  nerves  have  always
to  be  strengthened  by  stimulants.  Stufl'y  rooms  and  over-crowded
factories  also  play  havoc  with  the  health.

In  the  country,  where  the  population  still  lives  more  or  less  closely  in
accordance  with  Nature,  and  works  regularly  in  the  open  air,  and  where
the  rules  of  health  laid  down  by  the  modern  school  of  medicine  have
not  yet  found  general  introduction,  mental  disease  is  as  good  as  un-
known. If  met  with,  it  is  only  in  the  children  of  habitual  drunkards.
Such  a  child  suffers  from  hereditary  encumbrance,  which  leads  to  mental
disorder  or  some  other  serious  disease,  children  always  being  faithful
copies  of  their  parents'  physical  constitution.

Alcoholic  drinks  impose  such  a  digestive  task  upon  the  system,  that  no
strength  remains  for  any  other  activity.  This  explains  the  excessive
weariness  and  often  preternatural  sleepiness  experienced  by  drunkards,
since  their  stomachs  have  to  undertake  an  abnormal  digestive  work.  The
pressure  on  the  brain,  exercised  by  the  gases  developed  during  the  pro-
gress of  this  digestive  fermentation  causes  the  mental  disorders  of  heavy
drinkers.  A  child  begotten  while  the  father  is  in  a  state  of  intoxication,
or  even  semi-intoxication,  will  nearly  always  be  found  to  incline  to  in-
sanity, if  it  does  not,  indeed,  die  before  it  has  time  to  reach  such  a  state.

Any  mental  disorder,  whether  resulting  from  an  inherited  or  an  ac-
quired encumbrance  of  foreign  matter,  is  always  caused  by  an  abnormal
digestion;  and  therefore  originates,  like  all  other  diseases  in  the  ab-
domen.

The  more  simply  and  naturally  man  lives,  the  healthier  and  happier
will  he  be.  This  explains  why  the  negroes,  when  slavery  still  existed  and
they  were  consequently  forced  to  live  frugally  and  industriously,  were
exempt  from  mental  disease;  whereas  now,  as  free  men,  with  the  ad-
vantage of  a  higher  standard  of  living,  they  are  subject  to  all  the  results
ensuing  from  imbibing  the  poison  of  civilization.

It  is  well  known  that  mental  disease  is  much  less  common  amongst
females  than  amongst  males.  The  reason  for  this  is  doubtless  the  fact
that  women,  in  general,  live  more  moderately  than  men,  especially  as
regards  the  consumption  of  tobacco  and  alcohol.  In  those  cases  where
we  find  a  woman  suffering  from  insanity,  the  disease  can  nearly  al^vays
be  traced  back  to  an  inherited  encumbrance.

It  is  observed  in  many  cases  of  mental  disorder,  that  the  disease  is
preceded,  or  accompanied,  by  increased  physical  and  mental  activity,  a
circumstance  which  our  orthodox  specialists  are  altogether  unable  to  ex-
plain. The  gradual  encumbrance  of  the  body,  and  of  the  brain  in  par-
ticular, with  morbid  matter,  exerts  a  steadily  increasing  pressure  on  the
brain,  and  thus  on  the  nerve  centres,  culminating,  in  the  course  of  years.


Universal  Ncdnropalhic  Direclonj  and  lUu/crs'  (inidr  ^23

in  abnormally  increased  activity  of  these  organs.  This  manifests  itself
very  variously,  as  already  pointed  out  in  the  case  of  nervous  diseases.
Body  and  mind  hasten  from  one  work  to  another  without  rest,  never
able  anywhere  to  find  peace  or  contentment.  This  abnormal  condition
frequently  appears  as  a  special  talent  during  childhood,  the  change  to
the  other  extreme  not  occurring  until  manhood.  Infant  prodigies  seldom
show  marked  abilities  in  later  life.

One  cause  of  mental  disorders  is  a  back  encumbrance  by  which  the
chief  nerves  of  the  abdomen,  the  special  cord  and  the  neruiis  si/mpathi-
cus,  are  seriously  affected,  unless  the  system  can  expel  the  morbid  matter
by  means  of  an  acute  illness.  Through  the  latent  fever,  a  chronically
diseased  condition  may  be  brought  about,  which  reaches  its  climax  in  a
disorder  of  the  mind.  In  acute  diseases,  mental  disorders  often  suddenly
appear  and  disappear,  according  to  the  amount  of  pressure  exerted  in-
ternally by  the  morbid  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  in  many  cases  of  in-
sanity, more  or  less  extended  periods  of  complete  mental  lucidity  have
been  observed,  the  pressure  of  the  morbid  matter  having  relaxed  for  the
time  being.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  pressure  of  the  morbid  matter  be-
comes more  intense  again,  the  temporary  state  of  mental  clearness  dis-
appears.

Progressive  Paralysis  is  nothing  but  an  advanced  stage  of  mental  dis-
ease. When  we  hear  the  medical  profession  assuring  us  that  those  who
fall  victims  to  progressive  paralysis  are  frequently  the  healthiest  and
strongest  persons,  it  simply  proves  how  little  orthodox  medical  men
know  of  real  health.  We  know  better  than  this;  we  know  that  a  serious
disease  like  progressive  paralysis  cannot  come  on  so  suddenly,  but  that
its  preliminary  stages  are  observable  long  before  to  an  expert  in  the
Science  of  Facial  Expression.  We,  therefore,  know  that  it  is  absurd
to  assert  that  the  healthiest  men  can  all  at  once  become  mentally
diseased.

Mental  diseases  can  only  be  cured  by  expelling  the  morbid  matter
which  is  the  cause  of  them.  In  my  practice,  numerous  cases  of  insanity
have  been  cured  by  this  method,  ample  proof  being  thus  afforded  of
the  correctness  of  my  assertions. I  will  here  mention  one  such  case.

A  girl  of  23,  who  had  been  afflicted  for  several  j^ears  with  total  in-
sanity, was  brought  to  me  by  her  parents,  to  whom  she  was  a  constant
source  of  anxiety.  The  position  of  the  encumbrance  being  favorable,  I
could  with  a  good  conscience  advise  the  parents  at  all  events  to  make
an  attempt  with  my  method.  The  condition  of  the  patient  w^as  such  that
she  could  not  even  bathe  herself,  her  mother  having  to  do  it  for  her.  In
four  weeks,  however,  she  was  so  far  improved  that  she  could  take  the
baths  herself,  and  w^as  no  longer  uncleanly  in  her  habits.  Within  half
a  year  she  could  again  be  reckoned  among  the  healthy  members  of  the
family.

This  surprisingly  rapid  cure  w^as  possible  only  because  the  position
of  the  encumbrance  was  fairly  favorably  situated,  in  consequence  of
which  the  digestion  could  be  improved  comparatively  quickly.  The
cure  was  the  easier,  also,  as  the  patient  did  not  rave,  but  was,  on  the
contrary,  apathetic  and  given  to  brooding.

In  those  cases,  however,  where  the  position  of  the  encumbrance  is  less
favorable,  or  where  the  patient's  condition  renders  treatment  according
to  my  method  impossible,  the  disease  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  curable


324  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuijers'  GiiicU


at  all.  For  instance,  I  have  often  seen  cases  where  the  patient  could  in
no  way  be  induced  to  take  a  bath.  Mental  disorder  is,  generally  speak-
ing, like  consumption,  a  final  stage  of  disease,  so  that  the  principal  hope
lies  in  attacking  the  disorder  as  long  as  there  is  yet  time.  Formerly
this  was  impossible,  the  correct  way  to  proceed  being  unknown,  and
the  disease  being  first  discovered  when  it  was  already  "too  late  to  effect
a  cure.  Today,  however,  in  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  we  possess
an  infallible  means  of  observing  the  advance  of  mental  disease  years  be-
forehand, so  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  combat  it  with  certain  success.

Most  mental  diseases  are  held  to  be  incurable  to-day,  but  the  opinion
is  altogether  contrary  to  fact.  In  proof  of  this,  I  will  here  report  the
following  cure.

The  case  was  one  of  severe  progressive  paralysis,  following  upon
syphilis.  The  patient  had  for  many  years  been  suffering  from  a  weak
digestion,  which  in  consequence  of  mental  excitement,  due  to  business
anxieties,  became  always  worse  and  worse,  in  spite  of  every  manner  of
treatment.  In  July,  1897,  the  sufferer,  at  the  advice  of  several  physi-
cians, visited  a  spa  to  drink  the  mineral  waters.  These  had  such  a  bad
eft'ect  that  his  condition  grew  still  more  serious.  His  speech  became  af-
fected, and  he  no  longer  understood  what  he  was  talking  about.  Four
of  the  most  eminent  physicians  were  sent  for,  and  after  a  long  consulta-
tion advised  anointing  with  mercury  (which,  however,  was  only  twice
applied).  The  patient's  condition  finally  became  so  bad  that  when  the
physician  put  a  question  to  him,  he  could  only  repeat  it  but  not  give  an
answer.  All  hope  of  recover}^  in  this  way  being  given  up,  the  patient
was  next  taken  to  Vienna,  in  order  to  consult  a  famous  specialist  there.
The  diagnosis  showed  that  the  patient  was  suffering  from  atrophia  cer-
ebri (atrophy  of  the  brain)  of  luetic  origin,  parahjsis  progressiva,  and
would  have  to  be  confined  in  a  lunatic  asylum  before  long.  An  improve-
ment, in  this  physician's  opinion,  was  no  longer  to  be  hoped  for,  never-
At  the  recommendation  of  a  friend,  the  relatives  now  travelled  with  the
patient  direct  to  Leipzig,  in  order  to  make,  as  a  "last  attempt."  a  trial
of  my  method.  At  the  commencement  of  the  cure  the  patient  did  not
speak  a  word;  he  was  quite  apathetical  and  paid  no  attention  to  the
questions  put  to  him.  Moreover,  he  was  no  longer  able  to  satisfy  his
natural  needs  like  a  human  being,  for  the  body  was  wholly  without
volition.  As  a  result  of  the  cooling  baths  and  simple  natural  diet,  an  im-
provement was  soon  noticeable,  and  in  three  days  the  digestion  had  im-
proved. In  a  week  the  patient  had  recovered  the  use  of  his  lost  sense
and  could  conserve  again.  Improvement  now  went  on  regularly,  so  that
in  8  weeks  he  was  completely  cured,  every  trace  of  progressive  paralysis
having  vanished.

These  two  cases  again  afford  a  striking  proof  of  the  doctrine  of  the
unity  of  disease.  Did  not  mental  disorders  have  the  same  origin  as  the
other  diseases  already  dealt  with,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  cure  them,
as  here  was  the  case  iDy  the  same  means  that  proved  so  successful  in  the
case  of  the  other  diseases.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Binjers'  Guide  -^25


PULMONARY  AFFECTIONS. INFLAMMATION  OF
THE  LUNGS. TUBERCULOSIS. PLEURISY,

LUPUS.


ANOTHER  disease  which  sadly  puzzles  the  medical  profession,  defy-
ing all  the  attempted  cures,  is  pulmonary  phthisis,  or  consump-
tion. This  is  the  great  destroying  angel  of  the  present,  which
terrifies  all  mankind,  demanding  its  victims  irrespective  of  age
and  occupation.

Probably  no  other  disease  is  so  widely  spread  as  pulmonary  consump-
tion in  all  its  various  forms  and  stages.  The  external  symptoms  of
this  dreaded  disease  vary  so  greatly  that  they  are  seldom  the  same  in
any  two  patients.  One  complains  of  difficulty  in  breathing,  asthma;
another  of  headache;  a  third  of  bad  digestion;  a  fourth  notices  nothing
at  all  until,  a  fortnight  before  his  death,  he  is  suddenly  seized  with  in-
flammation of  the  lungs.  A  fifth  also  notices  nothing,  until  he  is  all  at
once  attacked  by  galloping  consumption,  and  dies  within  a  few  daj's.  A
sixth  suffers,  as  he  believes,  from  caries,  whilst  in  reality  his  complaint
is  tuberculosis.  Many  persons  whose  lungs  are  affected  get  pains  in  the
shoulders,  while  others  suffer  from  a  disease  of  the  eyes  or  ears,  which
conceals  the  real  cause.  Often  it  is  disease  of  the  throat,  pharyngeal  ca-
tarrh, bronchial  catarrh,  chronic  nasal  catarrh,  etc.,  which  are  traceable
to  consumption.  Others  again  have  a  chronic  foot  disease,  open  sores
on  the  feet  and  legs;  while  we  find  also  lupus  and  herpes,  which  like-
wise deceive  anyone  not  proficient  in  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression
as  to  the  true  seat  of  the  illness.

It  is  characteristic  of  nearly  all  consumptive  persons  that  they  keep
their  mouths  more  or  less  open  not  only  by  day,  but  also  at  night  when
asleep,  for  the  purpose  of  quicker  respiration.  The  reason  for  this. is
excessive  internal  bodily  heat,  which  demands  a  more  rapid  supply  of
cool  air  from  outside.

It  is  the  function  of  the  lungs  constantly  to  purify  the  blood  circulat-
ing in  the  body,  by  the  agency  of  fresh  air.  When  they  cannot  proper-
ly perform  this  function,  in  consequence  of  their  being  encumbered
with  foreign  matter,  all  the  waste  material  which  would  otherwise  have
been  expelled,  remains  in  the  system,  continually  increasing  in  quantity,
and  augmenting  the  amount  of  morbid  matter  already  there.  The  lungs
are  the  organs  chiefly  here  concerned  and  they  therefore  suffer  most.
The  consequence  is,  that  the  condition  of  the  blood  becomes  altogether
abnormal,  causing  a  diy,  devouring  heat  in  the  interior  of  the  bodv.  As
a  result  of  this  high  internal  temperature,  the  lungs  become  chronically
inflamed  and  gangrenous.  Such  gangrenous  parts  then  become  so-
called  dead  tissue,  which  is  often  expelled  as  phlegm  in  coughing.

Today  all  consumptive  diseases  are  rightly  regarded  with  terror.  The
orthodox  school  of  medicine,  as  cannot  be  disputed,  is  wholh'  unable
to  diagnose  them,  with  certainty,  by  means  of  percussion  and  ausculta-


326


Universal  Natiiropdlhic  Directory  aud  Bm/crs'  Guide


tion,  until  they  have  reached  such  an  advanced  stage  that  cure  is  gen-
erally inipossihlc.  It  is  sad  to  tliink  that  notwithstanding  tlie  fact  "that
the  earlier  stages  of  consumptive  diseases  may  be  ascertained  years  in
advance,  yet  the  medical  profession,  with  its  inexact  system  of  diag-
nosis, is  wholly  unable  to  recognize  them.

It  is  just  as  impossible  to  cure  a  diseased  lung  by  means  of  the  fam-
ous (?)  tuberculin,  as  it  is  to  operate  surgically  upon  it,  as  in  the  recent
attempts  at  excision  of  the  lung  cavities.  There  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
no  remedy  which  is  able  fully  to  neutralize  the  process  of  destruction
of  the  lungs.  But  there  is  a  means  by  which  we  can  cause  the  destruc-
tive process  to  retrogress  on  the  same  path  by  which  it  has  been  grad-
ually— often  for  years — advancing.  By  my  method  I  succeed  in  bringing
about  this  retrogression  of  the  process  of  disease.  The  most  important
matter  in  the  treatment  of  all  pulmonary  complaints,  is  the  timely  rec-
ognition of  their  preliminarij  stages,  which  are  to  be  diagnosed  with
the  aid  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression  for  many  years  in  advance,
often  in  early  childhood.  For  this  reason,  my  method  of  diagnosis  is
of  incalculable  value  to  the  consumptive.  In  point  of  fact,  to  the  ortho-
dox doctor  this  timely  recognition  of  the  disease  is  pretty  much  a  mat-
ter of  indifference,  since  orthodox  medical  science  is  not  in  a  position
to  cure  tuberculosis,  whether  it  be  in  its  earlier  or  later  stages.  The
first  stages  are  such  that  the  patient  himself  generallv  has  not  the  re-
motest idea  of  disease,  wherefore  it  is  often  very  difficult  to  convince
the  patient  of  his  having  a  consumptive  tendency.  Thus  animated  by
the  best  intentions,  I  once  informed  a  domestic  servant  of  mine,  an  ap-
parently strong,  healthy  girl,  that  she  was  suffering  from  pronounced
consumption  and  w^ould  do  well  to  commence  a  cure  on  my  system,  as
otherwise  the  disease  must  certainly  prove  fatal  within  a  year.  The
girl  indignantly  assured  me  that  she  was  perfectly  well,  and  had  no  need
to  undertake  a  cure.  I  said  nothing,  but  four  months  before  her  death
I  repeated  the  warning,  unfortunately  with  the  same  result  as  at  first.
Three  months  later  she  took  to  her  bed,  and  within  four  weeks  fell  a
victim  to  galloping  consumption.

I  will  now  proceed  to  discuss  the  cause  of  pulmonary  diseases.  All
affections  of  the  lungs  are  final  stages  of  some  other  preceding,  not  fully
cured  disease,  which  is  generally  driven  inwardly  by  treatment  with
drugs.  Sexual  diseases  lie  at  the  root  of  most  pulmonary  affections,
this  indirectly  being  also  the  case  wdth  children,  who  inherit  the  predis-
position to  such.  The  foreign  matter  is  accumulated  in  the  system  in  a
chronic  state,  but  at  procreation  reappears  in  the  child,  which  becomes
scrofulous  or  consumptive.  The  seminal  fluid  is  in  reality  a  quintes-
sence containing  all  the  characteristics  of  the  parent  and  transferring
them  to  the  child.  I  have  observed  that  scrofulous  persons  without  ex-
ception become  consumptive  in  later  years,  so  that  the  first  disease
is  but  a  preliminary  stage  of  the  latter.  It  can  thus  be  seen  that  at  first,
i.  e.  in  the  scrofulous  condition,  the  system  still  has  vigor  enough  to  ex-
pel the  morbid  matter  outwards,  and  so  preserve  vital  organs.  It  grad-
ually loses  this  power,  however,  and  is  finally,  z.  e.  when  the  state  be-
comes consumptive,  no  longer  able  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  in-
ternal organs  by  foreign  matter.  It  is  quite  impossible  that  persons  who
are  really  healthy  can  be  suddenly  attacked  by  any  kind  of  tuberculosis
in  case  of  temporary  encumbrance  with  foreign  matter,  however  many


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers*  Guide  327

tubercle  bacilli  they  may  inhale.  For  the  development  ol  tuberculosis
there  must  be  a  high  destructive  internal  temperature,  tubercle  bacilli
only  being  capable  of  development  at  such  abnormal  temperatures.
Such  high,  abnormal  temperatures  of  the  body  are  possible,  however,
only  under  certain  conditions  of  encumbrance,  inherited  through  sev-
eral generations,  or  where  the  patient  by  an  unnatural  mode  of  life  has
completely  ruined  his  constitution.

The  main  thing  is  clearly  to  perceive  that  all  tuny  diseases,  like  all
other  diseases,  have  their  source  in  the  abdomen,  that  is,  in  a  much  de-
bilitated digestion.  For  even  though  in  most  cases  the  disease  may
be  inherited,  we  must  not  regard  the  case  as  one  of  direct  permeation
of  the  lungs  with  foreign  matter.  The  fact  is,  that  in  comparison  with
the  other  organs,  the  lungs  have  not  properly  developed  but  remain
weak  and  delicate;  and  because  thus  capable  of  less  resistance,  the
lungs  then  naturally  become  the  seat  of  the  largest  accumulations  of
morbid  matter.  The  foreign  matter  collecting  in  the  system,  in  conse-
quence of  imperfect  digestion,  guided  by  the  internal  tension,  is  chiefly
deposited  where  it  finds  least  resistance.  It  is,  therefore,  of  high  im-
portance for  all  having  hereditary  predisposition  to  lung  diseases,  to
prevent  any  further  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter.

The  same  cause  which  in  our  zoological  gardens  occasions  the  rapid
death  from  consumption  of  the  tropical  apes,  viz.,  debilitated  digestion
through  change  in  food,  is  also  the  reason  why  they  are  so  soon  attacked
by  consumption  at  all.  The  sole  blame  has  hitherto  been  laid  upon  the
colder  climate.  This,  however,  is  only  right  in  so  far  that  a  cooler  tem-
perature always  renders  the  process  of  fermentation  in  digestion  slower
and  more  sluggish.  This  is  more  especially  the  case  w^hen  the  animals
cannot  even  have  the  food  designed  for  them  by  Nature,  there  then  be-
ing two  conditions  militating  against  them.  I  have  had  frequent  oppor-
tunities of  watching  the  various  stages  of  health  in  apes  after  their  be-
ing removed  from  their  tropical  home,  and  I  have  been  able  by  means
of  my  diagnosis  to  ascertain  exactly  that  at  the  commencement  only
the  digestion  was  abnormal,  until  then  other  disorders  set  in.  With
human  beings  it  is  just  the  same,  except  that  the  conditions  are  usually
more  favorable,  since  we  are  acclimatized.  We  have,  therefore,  prac-
tically only  to  regard  our  diet  and  mode  of  living.

In  the  case  of  consumptive  patients,  I  have  frequently  noticed  that
the  system  is  not  in  a  condition  to  nourish  itself  even  on  the  most  care-
fully selected  food,  being  quite  dried  up  on  account  of  the  excessive
internal  heat.  Alimentation  does  not  depend  upon  the  artificial  com-
position of  foods,  or  on  their  concentration;  it  depends  solely  upon  the
digestive  capacity  of  the  organism.  But  how  much  the  digestive  capa-
city varies,  is  well  known  to  everyone  who  has  had  much  to  do  with
the  sick.  If  the  system  is  already  heavily  encumbered  with  foreign  mat-
ter, the  lungs  will  be  especially  endangered,  on  account  of  their  large
extent,  because  the  foreign  matter  pressing  up  toward  the  head  is  often
obliged  to  take  its  way  through  the  lungs.  When,  now,  the  latter  them-
selves are  in  this  way  once  more  encumbered,  they  frequently  become
the  chief  place  of  deposit  for  foreign  matter,  which  then  no  longer
presses  upwards  towards  the  head  as  before.

When  decomposition  commences  in  the  lungs,  it  is  the  apexes  which
are  usually  first  destroyed. This  happens  because  the  foreign  matter


328  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

in  the  system,  on  its  transiorniation  or  fermentation,  always  presses  up-
wards. The  apexes  of  the  hmgs  terminate  in  the  shoulders;  when  the
state  of  fermentation  sets  in,  the  fermenting  matter  presses  up  to  the
extreme  points,  and  as  it  can  go  no  further,  the  shoulders  opposing
a  barrier  to  its  progress,  these  points  must  necessarily  suffer  most.  This
is  the  cause  of  the  pricking  pain  in  the  shoulders,  so  often  experienced
by  consumptives  before  the  lungs  are  destroyed.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bui/ers'  (iuide  329


THE  CAUSE  AND  CURE  OF  NODULES


I  NOW  come  to  the  explanation  of  the  origin  of  tubercular  nodules.
Tubercular  nodules  are  formed  quite  in  the  same  way  as  hemorrhoids,
cancer  nodules,  and,  in  fact,  all  other  nodules  down  to  the  smallest
pimple.  It  will  be  necessary,  for  a  clear  description,  to  explain  here
somewhat  fully.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  a  healthy  body  has
always  a  moist  skin;  that  the  skin  of  a  chronic  patient,  on  the  contrary,
is  generally  dry  and  inactive.  In  the  former  case,  the  body  has  still  the
full  vital  power,  enabling  it  to  expel  all  injurious  matterf  in  the  latter,
this  is  no  longer  so,  wherefore  much  morbid  matter  which  should  prop-
erly be  expelled,  remains  in  the  body,  there  being'  consequently  a  pre-
disposition to  disease.  You  will  often  have  observed  that  many  people
suffer  periodically  from  boils,  especially  on  the  buttocks,  on  the  neck,
or  on  the  arms.  The  patient  will  have  been  afflicted  with  a  certain
heavy  feeling  over  the  body,  which  only  passes  away  when  the  boils
break.  When  the  crisis  has  thus  passed,  he  feels  as  though  regenerated,
or  at  all  events  much  lighter  and  fresher.  Let  us  examine  further,  es-
pecially as  regards  the  origin  of  such  boils.  We  observe  where  the  boil
is  about  to  form  that  for  some  days,  or  it  may  be  weeks  before,  that  the
spot  is  hard  and  begins  to  look  red.  It  increases  in  size,  and  swells,
until  a  thick  firm  nodule  forms  under  the  skin,  painful  and  inflamed.
The  skin  draws,  and  the  pain  on  moving  is  often  vei-y  acute.  When  the
boil  has  reached  its  crisis,  it  becomes  gradually  softer,  until  finally  the
contents  force  an  outlet  through  the  skin  and  discharge.  In  this  man-
ner the  morbid  matter  which  formed  the  boil  is  directly  expelled  from
the  body.  The  process  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  the  critical  expul-
sion of  morbid  matter,  effected  by  the  body  itself.  It  may  be  asked  why
it  is  that  we  do  not  observe  such  a  process  with  everyone.  I  have  al-
ready stated  that  it  is  the  same  with  the  perspiration:  some  persons
perspire,  others  do  not.  It  depends  upon  the  degree  of  vitality.  Where
the  body  still  possesses  a  large  store  of  vital  energ^^  and  all  the  morbid
matter  cannot  be  expelled  by  means  of  the  natural  secretory  organs,  it
secretes  it  in  the  form  of  boils.  If,  however,  the  body  has  no  longer  the
required  degree  of  vitality  to  produce  such  crises,  e.  g.  if  weakened  by
drugs,  or  during  the  crises,  or  through  unnatural  living,  the  morbid
matter  accumulates  and  there  is  contraction,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the
boil,  but  the  system  cannot  draw  them  to  the  skin  to  form  a  boil.  Hard
places  form,  causing  no  pain;  but  the  process  remains  there,  and  in-
stead of  a  boil  we  have  a  nodule.  This,  therefore,  is  nothing  but  an
undeveloped  boil,  or  a  quantity  of  foreign  matter  drawn  together,  which
in  many  cases  remains  shut  up  in  the  body.  If  the  body  still  possesses
enough  energy,  the  nodules  will  be  brought  up  to  the  skin.  We  can
often  clearly  feel  and  see  such  in  numbers  in  the  neck  and  many  other
parts.  When  the  vital  energy  is  no  longer  sufficient,  the  nodules  are
formed  on  the  interior  of  the  body,  and  are  known  as  hemorrhoids,


330  Universal  Natiiropdtliic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

tubercular  or  cancer  nodules.  If  we  succeed  by  some  means  in  raising
the  vital  cncrgj'  of  the  body,  we  shall  at  once  see  an  alteration  in  these
nodules.  It  has  long  been  observed  in  the  hydropathic  treatment,  that
numerous  boils  form.  The  body,  by  this  method  of  cure,  as  still  used
to-day  by  the  older  school  is  able  to  continue  the  process  which  has
stopped,  and  boils  are  formed.  Where  we  can  still  further  augment  the
bodily  vitality  than  has  been  possible  by  the  means  hitherto  adopted  by
hydropaths,  we  can  even  directly  resolve  and  disperse  these  nodules.
If,  then,  we  can  produce  a  rapid  enough  derivative  action,  such  as  by
means  of  my  baths,  so  as  to  conduct  the  morbid  matter  thus  dispersed
to  the  natural  organs  of  secretion,  at  the  same  time  being  careful  not  to
introduce  new  morbid  matter  through  food,  the  troublesome  boils  never
form  on  the  skin  at  all,  for  the  nodules  are  resolved  in  the  interior  of  the
body  in  the  same  way  as  they  were  formed.  The  older  hydropathic
system  also  succeeded  in  dispersing  the  nodules,  but  was  not  able  to
draw  off  the  foreign  matter,  so  that  where  the  body  still  possessed  the
necessarj^  vitality  boils  an,d  pimples  formed,  which  with  my  method
rarely  occur.  I  succeed  in  drawing  off  the  foreign  matter  in  a  more
natural  and  rapid  manner.  We  see  then  that  tubercular  nodules  are
nothing  more  than  undeveloped  boils  arising  from  the  same  cause  as
all  other  nodular  growths  in  the  body.  The  fact  that  the  nodules  form
in  different  parts  of  the  body  in  different  persons,  depends  solely  upon
the  difference  in  the  encumbrances.

Having  now  learned  .the  cause  and  true  nature  of  all  nodules,  and
therefore  also  of  tubercular  nodules,  the  manner  of  curing  them  is  also
clear  to  us.  We  sec  at  once  that  to  cut  the  nodules,  as  is  taught  by  ortho-
dox medical  science,  is  the  worst  means  possible  of  trying  to  cure  the
disease.  We  thus  get  rid  of  the  symptoms,  but  never  of  the  cause.  The
nodules  can  only  be  cured  by  increasing  the  vitality,  whereby  the  body
is  brought  into  the  condition  to  expel  the  morbid  matter.  By  reason  of
the  pecularity  of  the  vital  powers  and  of  the  conditions  of  existence,  such
nodules,  even  in  a  calcareous  state,  may  be  dispersed  by  being  caused  to
retrogress  upon  their  former  course.  In  this  way,  they  may  be  com-
pletely expelled  from  the  system,  a  process,  however,  which  often  re-
quires the  continuance  of  my  treatment  for  years.

The  directions  taken  by  the  masses  of  foreign  matter  arising  from  the
process  of  fermentation,'  are  not  always  the  same;  it  therefore  occurs
that  in  one  case  the  apexes  of  the  lungs  are  first  affected,  whilst  in
another,  the  fermenting  masses  rise  more  in  the  middle,  or  in  the  front,
causing  asthma,  catarrh,  or  inflammation  in  the  air  passages.  In  fact,
most  consumptive  patients  suffer  from  an  inflammation  of  the  air-pas-
sages, even  if  often  in  a  latent  stage.

The  different  chronic,  latent  states  of  encumbrance  in  the  lungs  also
lead  to  acute  inflammatory  diseases  such  as

Inflammation  of  the  lungs  and  pleurisy.  These  are  feverish  curative
crises  brought  on  by  the  system  in  an  attempt  to  reject  foreign  matter,
and  apt  to  terminate  fatally,  when  their  treatment  is  not  understood.
These  acute  feverish  diseases  are  generally  devoid  of  all  danger,  how-
ever, if  immediately  combatted  by  my  method  of  cure.  In  the  cooling
baths  we  have  the  'means  of  fully  mastering  the  disease,  so  that  it  can
scarcelv  be  said  to  endanger  the  organism,  and  the  cure  of  all  these  acute
crises  is  generally  surprisingly  rapid.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihn/ers'  Guide  331

Explanatory  oi  the  above,  I  may  here  reproduce  some  reports  of  cases
I  have  met  with  in  my  practice.  1  was  once  called  in  to  a  family,  where
a  girl  of  nine  was  prostrate  with  severe  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  The
family  doctor,  an  allopath,  had  already  been  treating  the  patient  with
creosote  for  a  couple  of  months  without  success,  and  had  so  impaired  the
digestion  with  this  poison,  that  the  parents  had  given  up  all  hopes  of
saving  their  daughter.  This  was  the  state  of  things  as  I  was  sent  for  in
the  last  moment.  I  told  the  parents  that  if  they  would  disregard  the
family  doctor's  directions  and  follow  mine  strictly,  improvement  would
probably  ensue  in  a  short  time.  And  so  it  did.  Already  on  the  second
day,  a  turn  for  the  better  was  observed,  and  within  a  week  all  danger
was  past.  In  a  few  weeks  the  girl  could  again  run  about  out  of  doors.
Had  my  treatment  been  adopted  from  the  outset,  in  this  serious  case,  in-
stead of  two  months'  unnatural  treatment  with  creosote,  the  cure  would
have  been  effected  in  a  few  days  as  completely  as  then  in  a  few  weeks.

In  all  pulmonary  diseases,  in  the  interior  of  the  lungs  w^e  find  a  very
high  temperature.  During  inspiration  and  expiration  there  always  takes
place  within  the  lungs  a  very  rapid  process  of  decomposition  of  the
atmospheric  air.  At  the  moment  in  which  we  respire,  our  lungs  de-
compose this  air  into  its  constituent  elements  (oxygen  and  nitrogen).
The  oxygen  remains  partly  in  the  body,  while  the  nitrogen  is  again
expired  with  the  gaseous  impurities  of  the  body.  There  is  thus
an  uninterrupted  process  of  decomposition  (burning)  going  on  in  the
lungs,  a  matter  which  long  engaged  the  attention  of  chemists,  before  the
fact  was  discovered.  This  process  in  itself  causes  a  high  temperature,
which  increases  and  becomes  still  more  abnormal,  wherever  the  for-
eign matter  accumulates,  or  ferments,  in  the  lungs.

As  I  have  explained  before,  the  bacilli  are  merely  products  of  the  fer-
mentation of  foreign  matter  in  the  system,  and  their  capability  of
development  always  depends,  according  to  their  variety,  on  certain
temperatures.  Tuberculosis  being  invariably  attended  by  a  very  high
degree  of  temperature,  we  have  here  the  condition  for  the  development
of  the  tubercle  bacillus.  This  medical  science  likewise  knows,  but  un-
fortunately is  not  aware  how  to  turn  its  knowledge  to  account.  It  only
seeks  for  unnatural  remedies  against  the  bacilli,  whilst  ignoring  their
nature.

The  medical  profession  endeavors  to  explain  each  disease  bj'^  suppos-
ing the  presence  of  a  certain  kind  of  bacillus  in  each  case.  It  is  forgotten
that  just  as  one  and  the  same  plant  varies  in  different  climates;  and  just
as  the  plumage  of  one  and  the  same  species  of  bird  varies  in  different
climates;  so  all  bacilli,  as  regards  size  and  form,  must  be  dependent  on
the  temperature  (climate).

To  anyone  who  has  rightly  comprehended  my  remarks,  it  will  be  easy
to  find  the  way  to  cure  consumptive  diseases.  The  abnormal  internal
temperature  must  be  regulated,  and  at  the  same  time  the  vital  powers
strengthened,  until  there  is  complete  retrogression  of  the  abnormal  con-
ditions in  the  system.  To  attain  this  end,  together  with  observance  of
dietetic  and  other  regulations,  the  use  of  my  baths  is  absolutely  neces-
sary. The  most  difficult  matter  is  to  apply  the  baths  in  right  succession.
The  abnormal  degree  of  temperature  in  the  body  does  not  admit  of  a
diminution  for  a  considerable  time,  so  that  not  only  the  length  of  time
but  also  the  succession  of  the  baths,  must  be  regulated  in  exact  accord-


332  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


ance  with  the  state  of  the  patient.  This  can  be  learned  only  under  the
guidance  of  some  one  familiar  with  my  method,  the  more  so,  as  there  is
much  general  misunderstanding  about  this  point.  The  patient  must  also
be  much  in  fresh,  sunny  air;  this  is  of  great  importance  in  effecting  a
cure  and  must  never  be  overlooked.  Especially  for  consumptives  sun-
baths  have  a  most  beneficial  effect.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  333


TUBERCULIN  INOCULATION  CONDEMNED

CURES  BY  THE  NATURAL  METHOD


As  to  inoculation  with  tuberculin,  I  condemn  it  altogether.  Its  "efli-
cacy"  is  easily  explained.  The  poisonous  matter  with  which  the
tuberculous  patients  are  inoculated  operates  on  the  foreign  matter,
under  certain  conditions,  like  j^east  in-dough,  producing  fermenta-
tion (fever).  In  consequence,  a  change  may  take  place  in  the  original
state  of  fermentation  of  the  foreign  matter,  causing  a  corresponding
change  in  temperature.  The  result  is  that  the  tubercle  bacillus,  capable
of  development  only  in  the  former  temperature,  passes  into  another
stage,  which  is  generally  termed  "extinction."  But  the  foreign  matter
is  never  really  expelled,  nor  the  cause  of  the  disease  really  wholly  re-
moved. Inoculation  is,  and  ever  will  he  merely  a  pseudo-remedy,  the
ruinous  etfects  on  the  health  of  which  will  surely  come  to  light  sooner  or
later.  After  only  a  few  months,  the  outburst  of  joy  called  forth  by  the
tuberculin  process  has  given  way  to  intense  disappointment.  On  all
sides  we  now  hear,  even  from  independent  thinkers  within  the  ranks  of
the  orthodox  physicians,  nothing  but  condemnation  of  the  system.  To-
day the  matter  of  inoculation  with  tuberculin  has  hardly  even  an
historical  interest.  Here  again  we  have  a  proof  of  the  fact  that  vaccina-
tion, or  inoculation  of  any  kind,  is  the  greatest  quackery  which  there  is.
A  real  cure  of  advanced  consumption  can  be  effected  by  aid  of  my
system,  carefully  practiced  for  years,  even  though  in  very  advanced
cases  it  may  be  difficult.  In  any  event  the  condition  of  the  patient  can
be  rendered  bearable  till  the  very  last  moment.  The  cure  of  a  consump-
tive depends  solely  upon  his  vitality,  and  whether  the  digestion  is
capable  of  improvement.  If  we  succeed  in  improving  the  latter  per-
manently, and  rendering  it  normal,  the  patient  will  begin  to  recover  in  a
surprisingly  short  time;  if  we  are  unsuccessful,  cure  is  impossible.  I
have  had  many  consumptive  patients  under  treatment  who  were  cured
in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time,  because  their  digestion  was  open
to  rapid  improvement.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  patients  with
hard  purulent  tubercules  in  the  lungs,  I  have  observed  that  the  retrogres-
sion of  these  tubercules  occupied  years,  and  that  every  time  one  was
dispersed  a  violent  crisis  was  brought  about,  which  although  not  danger-
ous was  often  very  painful.  My  method  enables  us  to  regulate  the  in-
ternal temperature,  whereby,  if  properly  managed,  the  foreign  matter
is  caused  to  retrogress,  so  that  a  cure  is  gradually  effected.

If  the  body  is  strong  enough,  friction  sitz-baths  are  the  best  means  for
expelling  foreign  matter  from  lungs  and  abdomen.  Steam-baths,  which
in  summer  are  better  replaced  by  sun-baths,  are  also  often  to  be  recom-
mended. Careful  diet  and  plenty  of  fresh  air  are  naturally  also  indis-
pensable.


334  l^nivcrsal  Natnropdlhic  Directory  and  Ihujcrs'  Guide

In  cases  where  the  disease  is  ah'eady  very  far  advanced,  these  baths
will  be  too  exciting,  and  mild  friction  hip-baths  are  then  advisable.  The
water  may  be  at  a  temperature  of  about  81°  to  80°  Fahr.  and  must
reach  to  the  shoulders.  The  patient  may  remain  at  lirst  live  minutes,
and  afterwards  longer,  in  the  bath,  according  to  his  condition.  The  bath
should  be  repeated  several  times  a  day.  If  the  body  afterwards  becomes
stronger,  friction  sitz-baths  can  be  taken.  Frequently  however,  the
vitality  and  the  capacity  for  bodily  reaction  will  not  be  suthcient  to  effect
a  cure;  but  in  any  case  the  baths  will  always  alleviate  the  condition.
Wherever  the  digestion  is  capable  of  improvement,  there  is  still  hope  of
some  cures.

I  will  conclude  with  an  account  of  some  cures.

Tubercidosis  (Advanced).  A  woman  of  thirty,  who  was  sulfering
from  advanced  tuberculosis,  put  herself  under  my  treatment.  She
nearly  always  breathed  through  the  mouth,  particularly  when  sleeping.
Her  mother  had  died  of  consumption  at  the  age  of  45,  the  predisposition
to  which  disease  her  children  had  inherited.  In  childhood,  both  my  pa-
tient, her  brothers  and  sisters  had  been  very  scrofulous.  As  a  girl  of  20,
her  face  had  been  round  and  full,  and  the  cheeks  unhealthily  red,  turn-
ing quite  blue  in  winter.  Before  she  was  thirty  she  had  gradually  lost
her  corpulence,  and  the  color  of  the  cheeks,  as  well  as  the  condition  of
the  whole  body,  became  more  normal.  But  towards  the  end  of  the
twenties  predisposition  to  consumption  became  more  and  more  ap-
parent. The  digestion  grew  irregular,  constipation  alternated  with  diar-
rhea, and  the  color  and  smell  of  the  excrements  plainly  showed  how
abnormal  was  the  digestive  process.  Besides  frequent  headache  and
toothache,  she  felt  shooting  pains,  especially  in  the  chest  and  shoulders.
Such  pains  are  felt  only  during  the  process  of  destruction  of  the  lungs.
As  soon  as  parts  of  the  lungs  have  been  actually  destroyed  the  pains
cease.  The  patient's  menstruation  also  was  always  painful  and  ir-
regular, often  ceasing  for  months  and  then  appearing  too  frequently.
All  this  was  attended  by  general  lassitude,  great  anxiety  and  discon-
tent. Anyone  unacquainted  with  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression
would  have  considered  this  woman,  when  she  began  my  treatment,  a
picture  of  perfect  health.  A  fine  ruddy  complexion  and  a  full  figure
deceived  the  uninitiated  as  to  the  really  dangerous  state  of  this  patient.
The  lady  began  my  treatment  fully  aware  of  her  serious  condition.  I
diet  and  prolonged  stay  in  the  open  air.  By  this  means  her  general
health  was  so  far  improved  within  half  a  year,  that  going  upstairs,  and
long  walks  which  had  formerly  completely  exhausted  her,  cost  her  no-
exertion  whatever.  A  satisfactory  digestion  and  a  much  more  con-
tented humor  had  been  attained,  while  the  headaches  quite  disappeared.
It  could  plainly  be  seen,  that  the  encumbrance  had  begun  to  retrogress
back  to  the  abdomen.  Twice  during  the  first  year  of  treatment  violent
crises  occurred,  when  tubercules  in  the  lungs  were  dispersed.  During
these  crises,  which  lasted  two  or  three  weeks,  the  patient  frequently  ex-
perienced a  passing  feeling  of  weakness,  a  curative  crisis,  which  con-
sidering her  chronic  condition  was  not  remarkable.

During  the  second  year  of  treatment,  the  patient's  condition  showed
decided  improvement.  Only  two  crises  occurred,  and  thus  after  about
two  years  her  severe  affection  of  the  lungs  was  cured.


Universal  Naturopdlhic  Directory  and  Bujirrs'  Guide  335

Tuberculosis.  Another  case  worth  mentioning  is  the  following.  The
patient  was  a  gentleman  aged  about  forty,  who,  in  the  opinion
of  several  celebrated  physicians,  was  consumptive,  and  had  been
accordingly  advised  to  reside  permanently  in  the  south  of  Italy.  I  ex-
amined the  patient  by  the  aid  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression  and
found  that  the  disease  was  a  very  chronic  one,  so  that  a  stay  in  a  warm
climate  could  not  possibly  have  prolonged  his  life  for  more  than  a  year.
I  began  with  my  cure  at  once.  After  only  four  weeks'  treatment,  his
general  health  steadily  improving,  a  catarrh  of  the  bladder  and  in-
testines appeared,  from  which,  nine  years  before,  he  had  suffered
severely  for  a  long  time.  The  disease  this  time,  however,  appeared  in
much  milder  form  and  was  cured  within  a  fortnight.  The  vitality  of  the
body  being  raised  by  my  method,  these  chronic  and  formerly  suppressed
disorders  made  their  appearance  again  in  acute  form.  The  patient  also
suffered  from  gonorrhoea,  to  which  he  had  likewise  been  a  victim  several
times  when  in  the  twenties,  but  which  had  always  been  suppressed  by
medical  injections.  This  was  quite  cured  in  two  weeks.  The  lung
complaint  had  now  assumed  an  entirely  different  appearance,  so  that
the  patient  considered  himself  quite  well.  By  my  advice,  however,  he
continued  the  treatment  for  some  time  longer,  and  in  a  year  and  a  half
was  completely  cured.

Tuberculosis  of  the  Bone  and  Caries.  Very  many  patients  afflicted
with  the  above  have  undergone  my  treatment  with  the  best  results.  In
nearly  all  these  cases  the  sufferers  had  in  childhood  had  the  rickets  —
in  a  certain  sense  only  a  preliminary  stage  to  the  later  disease.  From
infancy  their  bones  had  been  unsound,  carious  and  easily  fractured — in
the  most  cases  this  could  be  ascertained  with  certainty.  At  puberty,  or
even  earlier,  caries  appeared,  the  bones  of  the  legs  or  arms  suppurating
and  swelling  like  a  sponge,  the  joints  also  becoming  greatly  enlarged.
In  the  case  of  some,  the  leg  or  arm  had  been  amputated,  and  the
majority  of  the  patients  had  been  declared  incurable  before  coming  to
me  for  treatment.  On  my  system,  retrogression  of  the  disease  began
immediately,  but  amputated  limbs  cannot  be  replaced.  According  to  mv
view,  surgical  operation  in  any  disease  whatever  is  the  most  unsuitable
means  possible  to  adopt  as  a  cure.  I  maintain  that  no  such  unnatural
procedure  has  ever  yet  reallv  cured  such  a  disease,  or  got  rid  of  the
cause.  Only  when  we  understand  how  to  cause  disease  to  retrogress  on
the  same  road  on  which  it  came  can  w^e  cure  it.

I  recollect  the  case  of  a  boy  who  came  for  treatment,  both  of  whose
shins  from  knee  to  ankle  were  open  and  suppurating.  The  doctors  had
proposed  to  amputate  both  legs,  whereupon  the  parents  brought  the
boy  to  me.  The  cooling  baths  and  unstimulating  diet  were  commenced
and  after  only  four  weeks  the  bared  bones  began  to  be  covered  from
within  outward,  the  skin  growing  over  the  sores,  which  were  quite  eight
inches  long,  just  as  on  a  tree  the  bark  grows  over  an  injured  spot.  In
six  months,  both  legs  were  quite  healed,  excepting  two  small  trifling
scabby  places,  which  likewise  disappeared  within  two  months  more.
Moreover,  the  boy's  general  health  was  completely  chansfed,  and  instead
of  his  former  melancholy  disposition  there  was  true  childish  mirthful-
ness.

In  another  case,  a  boy  of  ten  had  a  tuberculous  knee  which  was  like-
wise to  have  been  amputated. This  time  it  lasted  over  three-quarters  of


336  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

a  year  before  the  morbid  matter  was  all  drawn  up  from  the  knee-joint
to  the  seat  of  the  disease,  the  abdomen,  where  it  was  expelled  at  a  sore
on  the  thighbone  suppurating  uninterruptedly  for  three  months.  It  was
more  than  three  months  longer  before  he  could  walk  and  run  like  other
children.

Asthma.  A  lady,  65  years  of  age  was  so  asthmatic  that  the  physician
in  attendance,  whose  creosote  pills  and  powders  had  only  made  her
a  last  resource  a  stay  in  the  South,  there  being  no  remedy  which  could
be  of  any  aid  in  such  an  advanced  stage  of  asthma.  The  patient  could
scarcely  take  10  consecutive  paces  so  great  was  her  difficulty  in  drawing
breath.  Anyone  who  knows  the  remedies  of  orthodox  medical  science,  is
aware  that  sending  the  patient  to  a  warmer  climate  is  only  equivalent
to  saying:  "Nothing  is  to  be  done  for  you.  We  for  our  part  give  you  up.
Now  try  whether  Mother  Nature  can  aid  you!"  This  patient  also  took  it
in  this  sense  and  therefore,  at  a  friend's  recommendation,  put  herself
under  my  treatment,  declaring  to  her  doctor  that  she  would  rather  die
here  than  in  a  strange  country.  At  the  beginning  of  December,  in  bad,
foggy  weather,  she  placed  herself  in  my  hands.  The  upward  pressure  of
the  foreign  matter  in  her  body  was  very  strong.  She  followed  my  in-
structions most  conscientiously  and  it  was  not  long  before  the  upward
pressure  grew  less,  her  digestion  improving  in  a  most  satisfactory
manner.  The  secretions  of  foreign  matter,  in  the  form  of  perspirations,
were  abundant.  The  patient,  according  to  my  instructions,  took  cooling
baths  daily  and  often  a  steam-bath.  Thus  in  a  few  months  the  retrogres-
sion of  the  disease  was  over.  All  the  symptoms  which  had  appeared
from  time  to  time  during  the  progress  of  the  disease,  now  reappeared,
though  the  retrogression  proceeded  about  twelve  times  as  fast  as  the
disease  itself  had  done.  Each  month  of  treatment  removed  an  en-
cumbrance which  had  been  about  twelve  months  accumulating,  so
that  within  three  months  she  was  completely  cured  of  asthma.

Another  interesting  case  of  asthma  may  here  be  mentioned — that  of  a
gentleman  of  about  sixty,  who  had  been  suffering  from  asthma  for
several  years  and  given  up  by  his  doctors.  In  consequence  of  the  medi-
cines he  took  for  years,  he  was  in  an  extremelv  weak  state.  The
very  first  baths  brought  the  patient  relief,  but  as  this  feeling  was  only
experienced  during  the  bath,  or  for  a  short  time  after  it,  the  patient
bathed  oftener  than  I  had  recommended.  Even  during  the  night  he  not
infrequently  took  a  bath,  the  tormenting  cough  not  admitting  him  of
sleep.  Each  time,  after  bathing  for  half  an  hour  he  could  sleep  quietly
for  an  hour,  until  with  the  increasing  fever  the  cough  became  so  violent
as  to  prevent  further  slumber.  During  each  bath  his  system  gathered
so  much  vital  power,  that  he  could  cough  up  a  large  amount  of  sup-
purating matter,  this  always  bringing  relief.  From  month  to  month,
the  patient,  who  had  been  little  better  than  a  living  corpse,  grew  more
vigorous  and  lively.  After  having  applied  the  cure  for  a  little  over  a
year,  he  had  so  far  regained  health  also  in  other  respects,  that  to  the
astonishment  of  all  his  friends,  his  head,  hitherto  almost  bald,  became
covered  with  a  considerable  aftergrowth  of  gray  hair.

Lupus.  The  innumerable  successful  cures  effected  by  my  method,
also  in  the  case  of  lupus,  proves  that  in  this  disease,  as  in  all  others,  my


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide  337

doctrine  of  the  unity  of  disease  holds  true.  I  will  here  cite  a  case  of
lupus,  of  .general  interest.

The  patient  was  a  lady,  41  years  of  age,  and  had  been  perfectly  healthy
until  vaccinated  in  her  second  year;  from  that  time  dated  her  misery.
After  the  vaccination,  obstinate  eruption  of  the  skin  broke  out,  which
in  her  tenth  year  developed  into  lupus  of  the  face.  For  over  thirty
years  this  lady  had  suffered  from  this  painfully  disfiguring  disease,
without  finding  assistance  anywhere,  notwithstanding  that  she  consulted
many  famous  physicians.  Her  face  was  horrible  to  look  at;  in  fact  she
could  go  nowhere  without  people  turning  their  gaze  from  her  with
aversion.  In  this  helpless  condition  she  came  to  me,  all  the  doctors
having  pronounced  her  disease  incurable.  My  diagnosis  showed  an  ex-
tremely favorable  position  of  the  encumbrance,  so  that  I  could  assure
her  of  good  prospects  of  a  rapid  cure.  This  opinion  was  confirmed.
After  only  a  fortnight  the  disfiguring  lupoid  places  on  the  face  had
undergone  considerable  change  and  were  no  longer  quite  so  repulsive.
Her  digestion,  in  particular,  which  had  till  now  never  received  any  at-
tention, had  also  improved  quite  remarkably.  The  result  was  abnormal
evacuations,  whereby  the  morbid  humors  were  expelled.  In  seven  weeks
the  patient's  skin  assumed  the  normal  color.

The  rapid  cure  in  this  case  was  due  solely  to  the  fact  that  the  encum-
brance was  a  front  one.  Readers  of  my  work  on  my  new  system  of  diag-
nosis, the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  will  know  how  to  explain  this.

I  have  had  lupus  cases  also  which,  though  not  nearly  so  deep-seated,
took  a  much  longer  time  to  cure.  The  most  wearying  cases  are,  as  exper-
ience shows,  those  in  which  the  encumbrance  is  in  the  back,  or  left  side.

Many  such  patients  have  stopped  the  treatment  after  only  a  few
weeks,  because  they  could  remark  no  particular  change  in  their  con-
dition, or  at  most  improved  digestion.  Unfortunately  they  did  not  pos-
sess the  perseverance  to  continue  for  the  time  required  to  effect  a  cure
of  their  disease.

My  system  proved  very  successful  in  the  case  of  a  lady  in  Stettin.  The
patient  had  suffered  from  lupus  of  the  face  for  nineteen  years,  and
could  no  longer  show  herself  to  anyone.  She  always  w^ore  a  thick  veil,
in  order  to  conceal  her  disfigured  face.  All  the  remedies  at  the  com-
mand of  modern  medical  science  had  been  tried  unsuccessfully  for
nineteen  years  by  this  lady  before  she  came  under  my  treatment.  Im-
provement at  once  began,  and  a  cure  was  soon  effected.  The  lady  wrote
me  the  follov/ing  unsolicited  letter  of  thanks:

"Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:  "Stettin.

I  feel  it  mj'^  duty  to  express  my  warmest  thanks  to  you  for  the  good
effects  of  your  method  in  my  serious  case.  I  employ  it  with  the  greatest
success  and  now  feel  strong  and  well  again,  and  am  again  able  to  attend
to  my  duties  without  difficulty.  I  feel  all  the  happier,  because  all  the
doctors  whom  I  have  consulted  within  the  last  nineteen  years  have  been
unable  to  help  me  or  even  afford  relief.

For  this  reason  I  recommend  this  method  to  all  sufferers  from  what-
ever cause,  in  the  firm  conviction  that  it  will  aid  them,  and  beg.  Sir,  that
you  will  publish  this  for  the  benefit  of  the  cause,  and  of  all  sufferers.

With  sincere  gratitude,  1  remain, Yours  faithfully,  A.  S."


338  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


SEXUAL  DISEASES


AWAY  with  prudery,  away  with  false  shame,  which  are  but  the  veil
to  mischievously  blind;  the  veil  behind  which,  concealed  to  view,
there  sprouts  and  flourishes  in  all  its  hideous  corruption,  the  evil
which  in  the  light  of  knowledge  and  common  sense  must  fade  and
die.  If  we  would  speak  of  the  hidden  ills  of  mankind,  of  secret  diseases,
it  must  be  openly  and  without  reserve.  So  widespread  and  so  great  is
the  mischief  which  sexual  diseases  cause  to  mankind,  that  it  would  be
nothing  short  of  sin,  were  I  to  remain  silent,  when  my  system
of  cure  has  given  me  such  a  complete  mastery  over  these  com-
plaints. An  immense  amount  of  misery  is  caused  to  mankind  simply
by  the  general  ignorance  which  prevails  concerning  the  nature  of  these
diseases,  and  more  especially  as  regards  their  treatment  with  medica-
ments. For  this  reason  alone,  it  appears  absolutely  necessary  to  speak
openly  on  the  matter.  The  fact  that  to-day  sexual  diseases  are  more
common  than  ever  before,  cannot  be  disputed.  Syphilis,  in  particular,
which  claims  hundreds  of  thousands  of  victims  annually,  brings  with  it
the  most  unspeakable  misery.

The  methods  employed,  except  that  of  the  Nature  School,  are  power-
less against  syphilis;  at  the  most  they  succeed,  the  body  being  smeared
with  mercury  or  the  like,  in  bringing  about  a  temporary  latent  state  of
the  disease,  a  standstill  for  the  time  being,  which  unfortunately  is  often
called  a  cure  and  regarded  by  the  patient  as  such.  But  exactly  for  this
reason,  unspeakableniischief  has  been  wrought.  For  many  patients,  on
the  strength  of  the  doctor's  assurance  that  they  are  cured,  have  married :
only  too  soon  to  find  out  from  the  sad  results  of  the  marriage,  how
greatly  they  have  been  deceived.  The  health  and  life  of  the  wife  are
placed  in  the  greatest  jeopardy  by  cohabitation  with  a  man  in  whose
system  there  is  latent  syphilis.  The  nature  of  sexual  intercourse  is
such,  that  there  is,  in  a  certain  degree,  mutual  compensation  between  the
two  bodies.  Thus  if  the  woman  is  not  vei-y  healthy,  latent  syphilis  is
soon  transmitted  to  her;  having  as  a  result  that  she  falls  a  victim  to  one
disease  or  another.  The  children  of  such  marriages  are  always  unfit,
never  being  properlv  developed.  For  this  reason,  I  maintain  that  the
latent  stage  of  syphilis  is  far  more  dangerous  than  the  acute  one;  for  in
the  latter,  the  person  affected  bears  a  sign  that  plainly  shows  the  true
state  of  affairs.

The  medical  profession  acknowledges  a  latent  stage  of  syphilis,  though
only  able  positivelv  to  ascertain  its  existence,  when  acute  syphilis  again
breaks  out  after  a^  continued  period  of  latency.  Then  when  quite  un-
able to  deny  the  fact,  it  confesses  that  the  disease  has  been  latent  in  the
system  all  the  while.  But  if  the  facts  did  not  speak  so  plainly,  modern
science  even  here  ^vould  certainly  never  admit  the  existence  of  a  latent
state  of  disease.

By  the  aid  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  the  latent  stage  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  339


syphilis  cannot  remain  concealed,  even  in  cases  where  such  acute  re-
lapses have  not  yet  occurred.  And  l)y  its  means  we  are  likewise  enabled
to  ascertain,  long  in  advance,  any  predisposition  to  sexual  disease,  so
that  the  ill  can  he  obviated.  I  need  not  enter  into  details  concerning  the
sexual  diseases:  the  whites,  gonorrhea,  chancre,  bubo,  syphilis,  pollu-
tions, etc.  The  name  of  each  particular  sexual  disease  is  quite  in-
different to  us,  since  we  know  that  all  have  one  common  cause.  The
difference  in  their  form,  we  know,  depends  simply  upon  the  difference
in  the  predisposition,  that  is  in  the  encumbrance  of  the  particular  per-
son with  foreign  matter.

It  is  by  no  mere  chance  that  Nature  has  partly  combined  the  sexual
and  secretory  organs.  The  system  strives  to  direct  the  products  of  secre-
tion toward  these  outlets,  for  which  reason  the  largest  accumulations  of
foreign  matter  are  found  here.  This  is  most  distinctly  observable  in
women,  and  is  therefore  of  importance  in  sexual  intercourse.  It  is
unavoidable  that  these  sharp  secretions  should  be  transmitted  to  the
body  like  an  ointment,  by  reason  of  capacity  of  the  skin  for  absorption.
Thus  the  most  morbid  matter  present  in  the  woman,  is  transmitted  to
the  man,  and  vice  versa.  If  the  man  is  more  heavily  encumbered  than
the  woman,  the  semen,  composed  of  the  fluids  of  his  body,  will  be  in-
corporated in  the  woman's  system  and  make  her  more  diseased  than
before.

There  is  another  circumstance  which  must  be  explained  somewhat
fully.  Sexual  impulse  itself  is  a  fact  which,  although  universal,  has  not
been  satisfactorily  explained,  and  remains  more  or  less  obscure.
Orthodox  medicine  has  little  to  say  about  its  nature,  still  less  as  to  when
it  is  normal,  and  least  of  all  upon  the  causes  rendering  it  abnormal.
Nevertheless  one  finds  in  the  text-books  that  next  to  the  instinct  of  self-
preservation,  the  instinct  of  propagation  is  the  strongest  there  is  in  the
body.  It  is  therefore  inconceivable,  why  the  factor  only  second  in  im-
portance to  life,  should  now-a-days  be  so  despised  as  to  be  considered,
in  a  measure,  as  something  unnatural,  as  extremely  unaesthetic  and'
indecent.  Sexual  impulse,  like  all  other  impulses,  has  a  normal  state
and  an  abnormal  one,  resulting  from  the  encumbrance  of  the  system
with  foreign  matter.  In  the  state  of  the  sexual  impulse,  one  has  a  very
accurate  thermometer  for  the  condition  of  one's  health;  especially  for
any  latent,  chronic  stage  of  disease,  and  for  the  eff"e<ct  of  the  mode  of  liv-
ing on  the  organism.  The  latter  is  only  brought  from  its  normal  con-
dition by  reason  of  increased  pressure  of  foreign  matter  towards  the
natural  secretory  organs,  and  consequent  increased  excitation  of  the
nerves.  This  pressure  also  affects  the  sexual  apparatus,  and  causes  an
increased  sexual  impulse,  accompanied  by  gradually  decreasing
potency.  Normal  sexual  impulse  leaves  man  quite  free  from  any  dis-
turbing lust  of  sense  or  thought.  The  impulse  is  normal  only  in  healthy
individuals,  and  can  only  be  kept  normal  by  a  wholly  unstimulating
diet  and  natural  mode  of  living.  It  becomes  abnormal  whenever  there
is  an  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter,  or  when  a  chronic,
latent  condition  of  disease  begins.

//  is  only  a  person  whose  body  is  already  encumbered  with  morbid
matter,  who  can  get  a  disease  of  the  sexual  organs.  Thus  it  can  be  ex-
plained why  the  transmission  of  the  poison  of  gonorrhea,  chancre  and
syphilis  should  infect  one  person  and  not  another. I  know  of  cases  in


340  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  limjers Guide

which,  of  two  men  exposed  to  the  same  danger  of  infection,  one  re-
mained quite  well,  while  the  other  was  infected,

I  also  know  another  case  in  which  a  woman  had  intercourse  with  but
one  man  for  a  length  of  time,  his  intercourse  being  similarly  only  with
her.  On  his  removal  to  another  place,  his  successor  follow^ed  him  in  the
possession  of  this  woman.  Now  although  neither  of  the  men  was  ill,
nor  had  any  intercourse  with  other  women,  the  second  man  was  at-
tacked by  syphilis  in  a  short  time,  whereas  the  woman  remained  quite
unafifected  by  it.

As  already  observed,  the  foreign  matter  accumulated  in  the  sexual
organs  of  the  one  person,  is  directlj'  transmitted  by  sexual  intercourse,
and  operates  on  the  foreign  matter  in  the  other  person  like  yeast  in
dough,  creating  fermentation,  especially  when  there  is  a  tranquillizing
and  strengthening  effect  on  the  system,  brought  about  by  the  mutual
equalization.  By  this  action,  the  system  gains  so  much  in  vitality,  that
it  is  stimulated  to  an  attempt  to  expel  the  foreign  matter  which  it  con-
tains, by  a  curative  crisis,  like  gonorrhea,  chancre  or  syphilis.  These
facts  also  throw  light  on  those  frequent  cases  in  which  a  husband,  for
instance,  after  living  for  years  in  regular  sexual  intercourse  with  his
wife,  is  infected  with  syphilis  through  chance  intercourse  with  another
presumably  healthy  woman.  The  intercourse  between  the  married
couple  did  not  have  this  effect,  the  systems  of  the  two  persons  having
mutually  compensated  each  other;  whereas  the  new  intercourse  re-
quired an  entirely  different  equalization,  causing  disease,

I  mention  these  cases  only  to  show  in  what  manner  sexual  diseases
arise,  and  what  part  the  direct  transmission  of  the  contagious  matter
plays'  in  the  case.  It  is  far  from  my  intention  to  support  illicit  sexual
intercourse  in  any  way  whatever.  But  here  I  have  only  to  do  with  dis-
ease, its  nature,  cause  and  cure,  and  must,  therefore,  also  adduce  ex-
amples such  as  the  above,  which,  unfortunately,  are  only  too  common.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  341


SEXUAL  DISEASES  ONLY  CURATIVE  CRISES


WE  come,  then,  to  see  that  sexual  diseases  are  nothing  more  than
curative  crises  of  the  system,  by  means  of  which  the  latter  en-
deavors to  expel  the  foreign  matter  burdening  it.  Thus,  to  ef-
fect a  cure,  we  must  get  rid  of  the  cause  of  the  disease,  the  for-
eign matter  encumbering  the  body,  when  all  ills  resulting  from  such
cause  will  gradually  disappear.  The  error  of  the  orthodox  medical
school  is  a  most  mischievous  one.  By  means  of  injections,  medicaments
(most  dangerous  poisons),  such  as  mercury  in  various  forms,  iodine,
iodide  of  potassium,  iodoform,  etc.,*  the  orthodox  doctor  thinks  to  cure
disease,  whereas,  in  reality,  he  is  simply  suppressing  the  curative  action
of  the  body.  This  naturally  can  only  be  at  the  cost  of  bodily  vitality,
which  otherwise  would  have  been  able  to  bring  about  a  curative  crisis.
On  the  introduction  of  the  poison,  all  the  vital  power  is  required  to
render  uninjurious,  so  that  the  organism  may  be  maintained.  It  is  thus
wholly  diverted  from  its  curative  action.

What  the  orthodox  medical  school  calls  a  cure,  thus  discovers  itself
to  be  a  far  more  serious  injury  to  the  system  than  was  the  natural  state
of  disease.  Its  true  character  is  hidden,  however,  for  it  is  clad  in  the
tempting  and  deceitful  garb  of  a  painless  and  delusive,  but  chronic
latency.  Thus,  no  longer  exhibiting  the  acute  symptoms  of  the  earlier
sexual  disease,  it  is  unhappily  mistaken  by  the  many  as  a  true  cure.
Supported  by  irrefutable  proofs,  I  am  justified  in  thus  reproaching  the
much  lauded  medical  profession  with  making  such  grave  errors.  Some
of  these  proofs  I  will  here  produce.

As  we  have  seen,  the  suppression  of  sexual  diseases  by  means  of
drugs  indicates  no  improvement  at  all,  but  only  a  pseudo-cure,  a  mis-
chievous aggravation  of  the  condition.  Should  we  sooner  or  later —
though  it  may  take  years — succeed  in  restoring  the  vital  power  of  a  per-
son whose  organism  has  been  thus  weakened  by  drugs,  it  may  happen
that  all  those  symptoms  which  have  been  suppressed,  reappear  tem-
porarily in  milder  form.  This  has  been  proved  in  a  most  striking  man-
ner innumerable  times  in  my  practice.  The  derivative  action  of  my
baths  enable  us  to  hold  these  diseases  in  such  complete  check,  that  they
altogether  lose  their  dreadful  appearance.  No  one  need  fear  these
harmless  curative  crises.  They  are  a  natural  result  of  the  dispersion  of
the  morbid  matter  in  the  system,  and  of  the  drugs  which  have  been
applied.

With  my  method,  all  sexual  diseases,  even  the  much  dreaded  syphilis,
lose  their  frightful  guise.  I  am  not  exaggerating  when  I  assert  this  dis-
ease which  is  incurable  by  medical  treatment,  can  be  radically  cured  by
my  system  like  any  other  disease,  without  any  injurious  effects  what-
ever on  the  patient's  future  offspring  having  to  be  feared. At  the  same


*The  author,  had  he  lived  until  the  discovery  of  salvarsan,  and  neo-salvarsan,
would  certainly  have  included  such  pseudo  remedies  in  his  list.


342  Vniversal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

time,  I  am  far  from  saying  that  every  syphilis  patient  is  curable,  but  only
those  whose  digestion  is  eapable  of  improvement.  Even  where  the  treat-
ment may  last  very  long,  there  is  always  the  clear  possibility  of  a  cure,
in  proportion  to  the  vitality  and  the  nature  of  the  encumbrance  of  the
patient.

The  appearance  of  a  sexual  disease,  as  already  stated,  is  merely  a  sure
sign  of  a  heavy  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter,  or,  in
other  words,  of  a  latent  disease.  If  not  cured,  however,  such  disease
becomes  the  preliminary  stage  of  other  chronic  and  usually  worse  dis-
ease, such  as  asthma,  pulmonary  affections,  tuberculosis,  cancer,  heart
disease,  dropsy,  gout,  etc.  And  even  if  these  do  not  always  appear  in  the
patient  himself,  the  results  of  the  false  drug-treatment  unfortunately
only  too  often  make  themselves  seen  in  the  offspring.  Many  an  innocent
mother  is  at  a  loss  to  imagine  the  reason  for  the  appearance  of  some
such  disease  as  affection  of  the  lungs,  tuberculosis,  scrofula,  rickets  in
her  children,  because  she  is  ignorant  of  the  true  cause  of  these  com-
plaints, and  cannot  throw  the  blame  upon  herself.  Of  the  husband's
secret  sexual  diseases  and  of  the  effects  on  the  offspring,  she  knows
nothing.  Here  we  see  again,  the  sins  of  the  parents  against  the  children.
The  sick,  weakly  offspring  is  a  mirror  from  which,  equipped  with  my
new^  teachings,  the  physical  condition  of  the  parents  at  the  time  of  pro-
creation may  be  learned  exactly.

On  examining  the  course  of  the  most  common  sexual  diseases,  such  as
the  whites  and  gonorrhea,  we  obtain  fresh  confirmation  of  my  theories
touching  morlDid  matter.  Attended  by  local  inflammation,  the  system
ejects  the  morbid  or  foreign  matter  (pus)  from  the  body.  Through  this
fermenting,  feverish  process,  the  inner  organs  may  also  be  simul-
taneously attacked  and  inflamed,  when  one  does  not  know  how  to
render  the  process  wholly  harmless  to  the  organism.  In  such  case,  the
process  would  be  a  curative  crisis  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  The
larger  the  amount  of  the  morbid  matter  expelled,  the  greater  is  the
cleansing  effect  on  the  sj^stem.  The  chief  point  is  to  render  this  process
of  secretion  as  painless  and  little  disturbing  to  the  body  as  possible,  yet
at  the  same  time  in  no  way  to  interfere  with  its  thorough  working.  By
means  of  my  baths,  suited  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  each  case,
we  attain  the  desired  result  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner.  The  dura-
tion of  the  cure,  naturally,  depends  upon  the  exact  extent  of  the  en-
cumbrance.

Consider  for  a  moment  the  "remedies"  applied  by  orthodox  medical
science  in  sexual  diseases:  corrosive  injections,  with  solutions  of  lead,
mercury,  zinc  and  iodoform  into  the  urethra  or  vagina,  with  the  object
of  forcibly  suppressing  the  excretive  efforts  of  beneficent  nature.  The
very  character  of  the  drug  is  suflicient  to  show  the  utter  perversity  of
such  attempts.  It  is  surprising  that  no  one  has  yet  asked  himself  where
the  pus  goes  to  after  the  suppression  of  suppuration  with  medicaments.
Nature  never  does  anything  without  a  definite  reason.  Natural  pro-
cesses can  only  be  assisted  by  natural  means,  not  by  unnatural  remedies
running  counter  to  all  the  conditions  of  life.

It  is  through  this  gross  mistake  of  medical  orthodoxy  that  we  find
everywhere  lunatic  asylums,  hospitals,  clinics  and  sanatoriums  spring-
ing up  like  mushrooms. If  the  remedies  of  the  medical  profession  were


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide  313

really  beneficial,  one  would,  on  the  contrary  expect  to  find  a  decrease  in
the  number  of  these  institutions.

In  closing  this  part  of  the  present  chapter,  I  will  cite  two  cases  from
my  practice.  Some  years  ago  a  man,  about  fifty  years  of  age,  consulted
me  concerning  a  serious  disease  of  the  heart.  After  I  had  given  him  the
requisite  advice,  and  he  had  followed  my  cure  for  a  fortnight,  there  ap-
peared a  former  affection  of  the  kidney,  and  after  this  was  cured,  just  a
fortnight  later,  an  attack  of  gonorrhea,  from  which  he  had  suffered
eighteen  years  before.  Both  disorders  appeared  in  a  far  milder  form
than  when  he  first  had  them.  Within  a  week,  the  gonorrhea  was  also
healed,  and  the  patient's  general  health  improved  surprisingly,  whilst
his  heart  disease  had  vanished  completely.  During  the  course  of  treat-
ment, the  patient  related  to  me  that  he  had  formerly  first  suffered  from
gonorrhea,  and  had  consulted  two  of  the  most  celebrated  professors,
whose  remedies  had  had  the  desired  effect:  the  disappearance  of  the
gonorrheal  symptoms.  Some  years  afterwards,  the  gonorrhea  re-
turned, but  a  second  time  he  quickly  got  rid  of  the  comnlaint  by  using
medicaments.  Tw^o  years  later  he  was  attacked  by  the  kidney  disease,
which  had  given  him  much  trouble.  This,  after  consulting  eight  weli
known  physicians,  he  at  all  events  so  far  suppressed  by  medicaments
that  the  alarming  symptoms  disappeared.  Not  long  after,  the  heart  dis-
ease began,  which  had  refused  to  yield  to  any  remedy,  threatening
finally  to  pass  over  into  dropsy.  I  explained  to  him  that  the  gonorrhea
had  not  been  cured,  but  simply  forced  back  into  the  system,  and  thus
formed  a  preliminaiy  stage  of  his  subsequent  kidney  disorder,  which  on
suppression  became,  in  turn,  the  cause  of  the  heart  disease,  which,  with-
out my  treatment,  would  have  ended  in  dropsy.  Of  the  connection
between  these  various  symptoms,  he  was  fully  convinced  by  the  cure.

I  may  now  mention  a  case  of  syphilis.

Baron  v.  E.,  aged  47,  consulted  me  some  years  ago  for  syphilis,  from
which  he  had  suffered  for  ten  years.  He  related  how  he  had  four  times
undergone  the  allopathic  treatment  by  mercuricd  inunction,  at  the  hands
of  eminent  doctors.  He  had  likewise  been  dosed  with  potassium  iodide;
but  in  spite  of  all  this  the  syphilitic  symptoms  always  returned,  and
open  sores  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  feet  made  their  appearance.  As  a
consequence,  he  lost  all  faith  in  allopathy,  the  more  so  as  his  general
health  after  the  mercurial  treatment  was  no  longer  nearly  so  good  as
formerly.  More  recently  he  had  suffered  from  a  feeling  of  oppression
in  the  head,  and  he  had  lost  his  clear  memory.  By  means  of  my  Science
of  Facial  Expression,  I  ascertained  that  my  patient  was  suffering  from  a
serious  encumbrance,  besides  which  there  were  distinct  signs  of
medicinal  poisoning.  It  was  quite  clear  that  the  syphilis  had  only  been
rendered  latent  by  the  mercurial  treatment.  I  ordered  two  or  three
baths  daily,  and  simple,  natural  diet.  The  result  was  favorable,  for  in
half  a  year  the  condition  of  the  patient  had  quite  changed;  his  digestion,
above  all,  had  greatly  improved,  and  his  appearance  was  fresh  and
healthy.  With  the  removal  of  the  cause,  the  syphilis  also  entirely  dis-
appeared; nor  will  it  ever  return.  Further  reports  of  cures  will  be
found  in  Part  IV.

Impotence.  There  is  no  more  striking  proof  of  the  degenerate  con-
dition of  the  present  generation  than  the  so  common  disease  impotence.
Medical  science  has,  up  till  now,  been  able  to  find  no  cure  for  this  illness.


344  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

It  stands  absolutely  powerless  against  it,  because  it  is  not  acquainted
with  its  nature.  Medical  orthodoxy  does  not  know,  that  every  diseased
condition  of  a  patient  is  caused  only  by  the  body  becoming  encumbered
with  morbid  or  foreign  matter.  Every  case  of  impotence  may  be  healed,
if  we  can  but  free  the  body  of  its  encumbrance.  To-day,  armed  with
experience  and  the  results  of  my  system  of  cure,  we  are  in  the  happy
position  of  being  able  to  attain  this  end.  With  a  quiet  conscience  I  can
say,  that  in  very  many  cases  a  cure  has  already  been  effected,  and  that
such  cures  will  continue  to  be  effected,  if  my  method  is  intelligently
used  and  the  treatment  persevered  in  with  an  iron  will.  All  irregulari-
ties in  the  functional  power  of  the  sexual  organs  can  be  cured  by
abolishing  the  cause.  In  the  same  way  also  the  sexual  impulse  can  be
normalized,  so  that  the  person  thus  cured  is  in  a  position  to  live  quite
naturally  as  regards  the  sexual  condition.  How  often  do  we  find  that
the  lirmest  moral  principles  are  powerless  to  guard  against  the  most  un-
natural sexual  excesses,  such  as,  for  instance,  onanism.  I  find  comfort-
ing assurance  in  the  many  warm  words  of  gratitude  which  I  have  earned
from  earnest  youths  and  men  of  true  moral  character,  who  through  my
methods  have  been  freed  from  these  fatal  habits.  (See  reports  of  cures.
Part  IV.)

Impotence  in  women  w^e  know  as  sterility.  It  occurs  not  only  as  the
result  of  malformation  or  abnormality  of  the  inner  sexual  organs:
there  may  also  be  complete  insensibility  of  these  organs.  I  have  dealt
with  this  matter  more  in  detail  in  the  chapter  on  Diseases  of  Women,
Part  III.

Sexual  impulse  in  men  is  quite  different  from  that  in  women,  and  im-
potence, therefore,  also  takes  another  form  in  males.  We  may  remark
perfectly  definite  symptoms  years  before  it  actually  occurs;  abnormally
increased  and  nervous  sexual  desire,  the  result  of  chronic  disease.  In
the  case  of  children  and  youths,  there  is  great  irritability,  resulting  from
chronic  inflammtaion  of  the  sex  organs,  whence  proceeds  that  so  much
spread  evil  of  to-day,  masturbation.  In  adults  we  find  the  irritability
taking  the  form  of  unnaturally  increased  sexual  desire;  and  simul-
taneously the  mind  is  more  or  less  captivated  with  wholly  unnatural
erotic  thoughts.  In  youth  there  arises  a  growing  shyness  in  the  presence
of  the  female  sex,  which  in  many  cases  amounts  to  absolute  fear  and  is
nearly  always  accompanied  by  impotence.  If  to-day  we  find  so  many
well  situated  men  unmarried,  the  real  cause  of  the  fact  lies  in  a  certain
shyness  before  women,  arising  from  impotence.  How  many  young
men  in  the  best  years  are  already  quite  unable  to  normally  perform  the
sex  act,  having  become  impotent  as  the  result  of  onanism.  How  many

The  following  interesting  case  may  be  cited  here.

Some  years  since,  a  young  man,  aged  about  23,  the  heir  to  a  large
estate,  consulted  me.  He  had  practised  onanism  since  his  twelfth  year,
and  now  intended  to  try  my  method  of  cure,  which  had  been  warmly
recommended  to  him,  in  order  to  gain  mastery  over  his  vice.  Day  and
ni^ht  he  was  haunted  bv  his  trouble;  he  was  already  quite  incapable  of
learnin.cJ  anything.  Powerless,  as  he  said,  he  was  compelled  to  resign
himself'^to  this  self-abuse,  although  he  strove  with  all  his  might  against
it  A  remedy,  he  had  looked  for  in  vain;  nor  did  his  wall  prove  strong
enough  to  resist  the  impulse. Sometimes,  it  is  true,  with  the  greatest


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  ^45

determination,  he  had  succeeded  in  banishing  the  vice  for  some  months;
then,  overcome  by  an  unresistable  impulse,  he  had  given  himself  all  the
more  to  the  indulgence  of  his  passion.  He  was  possessed  with  the  deepest
feeling  of  inward  dissatisfaction,  felt  himself  useless  in  the  world  and
went  about  with  the  thought  of  committing  suicide.  Now,  his  parents
wished  him  to  marry;  but  he  felt  an  absolute  aversion  to  it,  being  alto-
gether impotent.  He  set  his  last  hopes  in  my  method;  if  that  did  not
succeed,  he  would  refuse  entering  into  matrimony.

An  examination  of  his  condition  by  means  of  my  Science  of  Facial
Expression  showed  that  the  cause  of  his  impotence  was  chronic  dys-
pepsia, to  get  rid  of  which  was  naturally  the  first  task.  His  body — on
account  of  his  early  manhood — would  react  most  favorably  for  the  cure,
so  I  could  assure  him  of  the  best  prospects.  Conscien^ously  and  ener-
getically, he  followed  my  system,  and  after  only  a  few  months  his  con-
dition was  greatly  improved.  My  theory  had  here  again  found  a  brilliant
testimony  to  its  truth.  The  baths,  which  went  right  to  the  root  of  the
disease,  proved  most  effectual,  assisted  by  a  natural,  unstimulating  diet.

After  thirteen  months'  treatment  the  impotence  and  onanism  were
cured  quite  in  the  same  way  as  so  many  other  cases  have  been  success-
fully treated.


34G  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


DISEASES  OF  THE  BLADDER  AND  KIDNEYS. DIA-
BETES. URAEMIA. BED-WETTING. LIVER
COMPLAINTS. GALL-STONES. JAUNDICE.
INTESTINAL DISEASES. SWEATING
FEET. HERPES.


IT  may  appear  very  unsystematical,  and  altogether  unmethodical,  to
thus  class  together  a  number  of  morbid  conditions,  which  at  first  sight
to  the  layman  seem  to  have  nothing  in  common.  In  the  eye  of  the  med-
ical profession  they  are,  it  is  true,  all  quite  separate  diseases,  each
accordingly  having  its  own  special  treatment. Under  the  powerful  lens
of  my  new^  science  of  healing,  however,  we  are  able  to  discover  their
common  origin  and  intimate  relation.

The  origin  of  all  is  again  to  be  readily  explained  by  accumulations  of
foreign  matter;  and  here  we  have  especially  to  do  with  the  accumula-
tions affecting  the  normal  function  of  those  organs  so  important  for  the
secretion  of  waste  matter  from  the  body :  the  kidneys  and  skin.  Here
belongs,  too,  a  consideration  of  the  cause  of  the  gases  which  arise  in  the
stomach  during  digestion — so-called  flatulence.

These  gases  through  their  expansion  in  the  digestive  canal,  together
with  the  vermicular  movement  of  the  intestines,  contribute  on  the  one
hand  to  carry  forward  the  food;  on  the  other  hand,  in  volatile  state,
likewise  by  reason  of  their  expansive  power,  they  pass  directly  through
the  walls  of  the  digestive  canal  into  the  whole  body  and  the  blood.  To
make  this  clear,  I  will  give  you  an  illustration.  The  water  upon  the
earth  is  limited  to  definitely  bounded  seas,  lakes  and  rivers,  so  that  the
earth  possesses  a  system  of  water-veins,  resembling  the  blood-vessels  in
the  human  body.  In  addition  to  this,  however,  in  gaseous  form  the
water  also  fills  the  whole  air  and  all  parts  of  the  earth.  It  is  similar  with
the  food  and  drink  conveyed  into  the  body;  they  are  apparently  limited
to  well-defined  passages  and  organs,  and  yet  they  permeate  the  whole
body,  partly  in  a  gaseous  state.  Hence  alcohol  (beer,  wine,  brandy)  is
felt  soon  after  drinking,  throughout  the  entire  body,  especially  in  the
head,  even  though  the  gases  are  expelled  partly  as  perspiration  and  ex-
halations, if  the  skin  performs  its  function  normally.  They  are  expelled
both  without  perspiration  and  as  perspiration.  This  perspiration  smells
differently  in  the  case  of  almost  every  person.  Whenever  it  becomes
abnormally  saturated  with  old  foreign  matter,  it  smells  disagreeably.
Normal  perspiration,  on  the  contrary,  hardly  affects  our  sense  of  smell
unpleasantly.  Inside  the  body  a  secretion  of  these  gases  also  occurs
through  the  ureters  into  the  bladder.  Perspiration  and  urine  are,  there-
fore, two  nearly  equivalent  and  similar  products  of  secretion.  As  soon
as  the  bladder  is  sufficiently  full,  a  desire  to  pass  water  is  felt,  and  must
be  immediately  gratified,  if  the  system  is  not  to  suflfer  serious  mjury.


Universal  Nalurupatliic  Directory  and  lUii/crs'  (iuidc  '^^^

This  point  is  too  important  to  be  lightly  passed  over.  Unfortunately,
prudery  and  present  day  customs  often  prevent  our  acting  as  we  should
in  this  respect,  so  that  it  is  little  wonder  that  we  find  matter  retained  in
the  bladder  and  kidneys,  which  should  have  been  expelled.  Parents
and  teachers  canot  be  sufficiently  admonished  to  explain  to  children  the
evils  arising  from  retention  of  the  urine  and  faeces.  In  no  case  should
children  (in  whom  the  transformation  of  matter  goes  on  much  more
rapidly  than  in  adults,  and  whose  vitality  is  also  far  higher)  ever  be
kept  from  statisfying  their  needs  in  this  respect,  if  we  would  save  them
from  injurious,  perhaps  dangerous,  consequences.  Should  the  urine  in
the  bladder  not  be  expelled  at  the  right  time,  like  everything  else  in  the
human  body  it  is  subject  to  a  further  constant  alteration,  fermentation
taking  place.  The  temperature  of  the  bladder  is  raised,  and  as  a  natural
consequence,  there  is  evaporation  of  the  fluid  part  of  the  urine,  the  salts
remaining  behind.  By  this  process  the  subsequent  secretions  of  the
kidneys  are  prevented  from  entering  the  bladder  and  likewise  undergo
changes.  If  the  desire  to  empty  the  bladder  or  bowels  is  not  gratified  at
the  right  time,  it  often  passes  and  then  it  is  difficult  to  recall  it  when  we
will.  But  what,  then,  becomes  of  the  urine?  It  has  decreased  in  the
bladder  and  must  therefore  have  in  some  way  reentered  the  body.  Part
of  the  urine,  we  know,  in  consequence  of  its  constant  process  of  decom-
position, has  again  passed  into  a  gaseous  state,  and  has  reentered  the
entire  system  and  the  blood,  just  as  in  the  digestive  process.  In  this
process  of  vaporization,  the  salts  and  other  insoluble  matter  remain  in
the  form  of  minute  yellow  crystals  in  the  bladder  and  kidneys  and  are
afterwards,  though  not  always  wholly,  expelled.  If  the  sediment  in  the
chamber  vessel  is  examined  under  the  microscope,  magnified  two
hundred  times,  we  shall  find  that  it  consists  of  minute,  yellow  crystals,
which  look  yellow  singly,  but  reddish  when  seen  all  together.  This
process,  w^hen  the  bladder  is  particularly  heavily  encumbered,  leads  to
more  in  detail  on  the  following  page.

Stones  form  only  under  abnormal  bodily  conditions,  or  as  the  result  of
an  unnatural  diet.  They  arise  in  the  sanie  way  as  does  the  incrustation
in  steam-boilers,  which  forms  only  at  a  high  temperature,  when  hard
water  has  been  used,  being  much  less  with  soft  rain-water.  The  urine
retained  in  kidneys  evaporates,  and  the  little  crystals  unite.  As  long  as
they  are  very  small,  they  pass  through  the  ureters  with  the  urine  into
the  bladder,  without  causing  disturbance;  but  when  they  grow  larger,
they  cause,  during  their  passage  through  the  ureters,  the  pains  known  as
nephritic  colic,  their  sharp,  crystalline  surfaces  irritating  and  injuring
the  membrance  of  the  ureters.  In  the  bladder  itself  the  same  process
takes  place.  Should  the  urinal  outlets,  by  reason  of  heavy  encumbrance
of  the  abdomen,  become  narrowed  (strictares),  it  may  easily  happen
that  the  stones  can  no  longer  be  expelled  with  the  urine,  and  then  form
the  basis  of  a  larger  crystaUine  mass  in  the  bladder.  By  the  continual
motion  of  the  stone  in  the  bladder  it  assumes  a  rounded  appearance,  but
it  always  retains  a  crystalline  fracture.

That  stones  will  always  form  if  urine  is  retained  does  not  follow.  The
character  of  the  urine  may  be  such  that  the  whole  of  it  is  transformed
and  is  deposited  as  foreign  matter  in  the  body.  In  this  case,  it  niay


348  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide

on  pages  111  to  114.  Some  years  ago,  I  liad  a  boy  under  my  treat-
ment, whose  whole  body  was  covered  with  nodules,  about  the  size  of  a
pea.  These  arose  when,  in  consequence  of  a  cold,  he  could  pass  no  water
for  several  days.  I  explained  that  the  nodules  would  soon  vanish  if  they
were  only  a  result  of  the  retention  of  urine;  our  task  would  be  to  trans-
form them  into  urine  again.  The  boy  thus  commenced  my  cure,  and  in
a  few  days  copious  quantities  of  water  were  passed,  which  continued
for  several  days.  To  the  astonishment  of  the  mother,  the  nodules  dis-
appeared all  of  a  sudden,  as  it  were.  In  this  case  the  foreign  matter
arising  from  the  transformation  of  the  urine,  had  formed  the  nodules,
which  the  body,  having  a  high  vitality,  was  able  to  secrete  again.

Diarrhea  and  Constipation,  as  I  have  already  shown,  arise  from  one
and  the  same  cause:  the  encuinbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter.
It  is  just  the  same  with  urination,  only  that  here  the  obstruction  is  not
directW;  but  only  indirectly  perceptible,  through  abnormal  color  of  the
skin,  abnormal  redness,  herpes,  headache,  tumors,  stone,  etc.  In  a  sense,
we  have  here  only  a  preliminary  stage  of  other  diseases.

Diabetes,  a  disease  resembling  dysenteiy,  is,  on  the  contrary,  directly
perceptible.  The  inflammation  caused  by  the  internal  fever,  to  which
also,  the  tormenting  thirst  of  diabetic  patients  is  due,  does  not  in  this
case  occasion  constipation  and  the  fermentation  of  stone  and  tumors,
but  a  too  rapid  removal  of  matter,  accompanied  by  decomposition  of
the  juices.  The  urine  thus  issues  from  the  body  in  a  morbid,  fermented,
sweetish  state.  Stone  and  diabetes  are  identical  in  character,  differing
only  in  external  symptoms.  To  patients  suffering  from  these  diseases,
my  baths  are  of  the  greatest  value;  they  diminish  the  internal  fever,
thus  relieving  the  great  thirst.

Both  stone  and  diabetes  have  been  cured  by  my  treatment  in  one  and
the  same  manner,  by  getting  rid  of  the  cause.  The  stone  disintegrates
into  granular  particles,  in  which  form  it  is  usually  expelled  with  the
urine.  In  treating  sufferers  from  stone,  it  is  surprising  what  large  quan-
tities of  water  they  are  obliged  to  pass  when  taking  the  baths.  The  pa-
tients always  wonder  where  all  the  water  comes  from,  though  the  ex-
planation is  very  simple.  The  urine  which  formerly  had  evaporated
and  accumulated  as  foreign  matter  in  all  parts  of  the  body,  is  now
brought  back  along  its  old  paths,  finally  leaving  the  body  as  urine.  I
have  had  patients  who  for  some  time  could  pass  water  properly  only
during  the  baths.  The  normal  condition  of  the  bladder  returned
gradually,  step  by  step  with  the  disappearance  of  the  cause  of  the
disease.

In  the  case  of  Emperor  William  I,  we  see  how  old  one  may  become
despite  stone,  for  although  he  suffered  from  a  large  stone  in  the  bladder,
he  attained  the  age  of  90.  This  was  solely  due  to  the  favorable  position
of  the  encumbrance  of  the  deceased  monarch.  The  disorder,  however,
showed  itself  much  earlier  and  in  a  far  worse  form  in  the  case  of  his
son,  the  late  Emperor  Frederick.

Uraemia,  a  condition  in  which  urea  is  found  in  the  blood  and  entire
system,  generally  accompanies  disease  of  the  bladder  and  stone.  For
experts  in  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  this  derangement  does  not
remain  hidden,  even  in  the  very  first  stages,  when  the  patients  them-
selves do  not  yet  have  any  idea  of  it. There  is  no  remedy  which  so


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihujcrs'  Guide  -^49

quickly  cleanses  the  blood,  and  the  whole  system,  of  this  foreign  matter,
as  the  baths  recommended  by  me.

Bed-wetting  is  that  unpleasant  state  in  which  the  patients  cannot  re-
tain their  water,  is  likewise  to  be  traced  solely  to  the  encumbrance  of  the
abdomen  with  foreign  matter.  A  fistula  has  usually  formed  in  the  blad-
der, through  which  the  urine  escapes.  This  condition  is  almost  in-
variably due  to  other  previous,  uncured  diseases,  forced  back  into  the
system  b}'^  medicaments  and  unnatural  treatment.  (See  Reports  of
Cures,  Part  IV).

Both  this  form  of  disease  and  Intestinal  Fistula  have  often  been  rad-
ically cured  in  ni}^  practice  in  a  very  short  time,  frequently  in  a  few  days
or  weeks.  A  longer  cure  is  only  necessary  when  the  disorder  has  al-
ready become  chronic,  and  the  patient  has  been  injured  by  the  drug
treatment.

Catarrh  of  the  Bladder  is  to  a  certain  extent  only  an  acute  preliminary
stage  of  a  serious  bladder  disease  and  stone,  a  critical,  inflammatory-
state  of  the  bladder  and  urinary  passages  attended  by  painful  urination.
Like  all  acute  forms  of  fever,  it  can  be  very  quickly  cured  by  my
method,  its  cause  being  the  same  as  that  of  all  other  diseases.

I  was  called  upon  one  occasion  to  a  patient  who  had  been  suffering
from  catarrh  of  the  bladder  for  already  a  fortnight.  The  prostate  was
much  swollen  and  the  patient  could  only  urinate  with  the  greatest  pain.
Every^  ten  minutes,  also,  there  were  extremely  severe  spasms  of  the
bladder.  As  the  urination  was  becoming  more  difficult  and  painful
every  day,  the  doctor  in  attendance,  on  the  evening  of  the  fourteenth
day,  proposed  to  use  a  catheter — altogether  impossible  considering  the
swollen  condition  of  the  prostate.  The  physician  said  he  would  have
to  chloroform  the  patient,  which  the  latter  would  not  allow,  sending  for
me  the  same  night.  The  first  friction  bath  caused  the  spasms,  which
otherwise  had  come  on  every  ten  minutes,  to  cease;  and  after  half  an
hour's  bath,  the  patient  could  pass  water  without  pain.  Having  taken
the  bath  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  he  got  into  bed  again.  During
the  night  very  copious  perspiration  broke  out,  and  he  passed  large
quantities  of  urine,  without  any  pain  at  all.  In  a  few  days,  in  this  way,
the  catarrh  was  completely  cured.

Liver-complaint,  Gallstones,  Jaundice  principally  occur  in  cases  where
there  is  an  encumbrance  of  foreign  matter  on  the  right  side  of  the  body.
The  secretion  of  the  liver,  the  bile,  which  as  we  know  is  emptied  from
the  gall-bladder  into  the  duodenum,  exercises  an  influence  on  the
digestive  process,  diminishing  fermentation.  Whenever  the  liver  is
affected  bv  an  encumbrance  of  the  right  side,  and  its  normal  secretive
function  is  thus  obstructed,  I  have  noticed  that  an  entirelv  different
amount  of  perspiration  exudes  from  the  body,  than  when  the  encum-
brance is  on  the  left  side.  Thus  arise,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  en-
cumbrance, gallstones,  and  induration  of  the  liver.  All  such  patients
suffer  from  slight,  often  morbid  and  ill-smelling  perspiration,  and  par-
ticularly from  sweating  feet.  The  evaporation,  decomposition  and  fer-
mentation of  the  bile  shows  itself  very  plainly  in  a  dark  color  of  the
skin  the  familiar  liver-spots,  and  leads  in  many  cases  to  jaundice.  (Com-
pare Renorts  of  Cures,  Part  IV).  In  treating  such  diseases  I  have  ob-
served that  with  my  treatment  a  remarkably  rapid  cure  is  effected.

Sweating  Feet. As  seen  from  the  above,  this  complaint  is  very  closely


350


Universal  Naturopalhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


connected  with  disorder  of  the  liver.  It  only  occurs  as  I  have  often  ob-
served, \vhcn  accompanied  by  the  latter,  so  that  excessive  perspiration
of  the  feet  points  years  in  advance  to  tlie  fact  that  an  encumbrance  of  the
right  side  is  developing.  The  perspiration  usually  ceases  in  advanced
stages  of  diseases  of  the  liver  and  gall-bladder.  The  patient's  condition
then  steadily  grows  worse,  because  the  morbid,  fetid  secretions  of  the
feet  remain  in  the  system,  causing  other  and  much  worse  states  of  dis-
ease, such  as  herpes,  cancer,  etc.,  which  are  in  turn  considerably  more
diflicult  to  cure,  and  require  far  more  time.  The  forcible  suppression
of  the  excessive  perspiration  of  the  feet,  by  means  of  medicaments  like
chromic  acid,  inflicts  serious  injury  on  the  health  of  the  patient.  The
injurious  consequences  of  medical  treatment  are  generally  not  observed
for  a  long  time,  even  for  years,  when  some  far  worse  disease  makes  its
appearance.  The  artificial  suppression  of  the  morbid  perspiration  by
drugs  is  just  like  stopping  up  the  main  sewer  of  a  great  city,  into  which
all  the  branch  sewers  lead,  because  at  the  outlet  there  is  an  obnoxious
smell.  Undoubtedly  the  stench  would  be  suppressed  at  the  outlet  of  the
main  sewer,  but  this  would  bring  about  an  infinitely  worse  state  of
aflairs  in  the  city,  which  would  everywhere  be  filled  with  pestilential
odors.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  our  Army  Administration,  following
the  instructions  of  modern  medical  science,  which  is  quite  in  the  dark
regarding  the  nature  of  these  diseases,  recommends  soldiers  to  use
chromic  and  salicylic  acid,  etc.,  to  cure  sweating  feet.  I  urgently  warn
all  against  this  mischievous  remedy.  With  my  treatment,  the  annoying
perspiration  soon  disappears  of  itself,  for  the  good  reason  that  the  cause
is  removed.

Herpes  and  Sldn  Diseases.  These  so  frequent  diseases  have  also  one
common  origin,  no  matter  what  particular  form  the  eruption  may  take.
I  have  treated  very  many  patients  suffering  from  these  complaints,  with
the  best  results,  and  have  nearly  always  found  confirmation  of  the  fact
that  these  diseases  are  a  more  advanced  stage  of  suppressed  perspira-
tion of  the  feet  or  skin.  They  signify  a  chronic  condition,  resulting
from  the  suppression  of  another  illness,  and  therefore  the  treatment
they  require  must  be  longer  and  most  conscientiously  carried  out.

Herpes  may  be  dry  or  attended  by  a  serious  exudation.  The  former  is
usually  more  tedious  to  cure.  Children  often  get  herpes,  which  mav  al-
w^ays  be  traced  back  to  hereditary  encumbrance,  or  suppressed  child-
ren's diseases,  often  to  vaccination.

For  the  sake  of  clearer  explanation,  I  may  here  introduce  two  cases
taken  from  a  large  number  of  such.

The  patient  in  the  first  of  these  cases,  had  suffered  from  eruption  of
the  skin  from  the  date  of  his  being  vaccinated  a  second  time,  and  the
disease  had  spread  itself  all  over  his  body.  He  had  to  put  on  gloves  at
night  and  had  his  hands  tied  in  order  that  he  might  not  scratch  himself.
His  trousers,  and  even  the  pockets  of  his  overcoat,  he  regularly  scratched
through  in  a  short  time.  He  was  unable  to  join  his  playmates  in  their
games  and  endeavored  to  pass  the  time  in  reading,  which  only  increased
his  depressed  condition.  The  older  he  grew  the  worse  became  the  dis-
ease, he  was  quite  broken  down  in  spirits  and  could  think  of  an  early
death  awaiting  him.

Accidentally  he  heard  of  the  older  Nature  Cure  System,  and  soon  after


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertorij  and  Buyers'  Guide  351

of  my  melliod,  through  coming  across  my  text-book  on  the  New  Science
ol"  Healing.  Acting  on  my  advice,  he  took  two  batlis  daily,  adopted  a
moderate,  unstinuilaling  diet  and  soon  to  his  joy  remarked  an  improve-
ment in  his  general  condition,  iollowed  by  a  gradual  healing  up  of  the
erui)tion.  After  some  time  the  herpes,  the  fruits  of  vaccination,  was
completely  cured.

The  other  case  was  one  of  eczema.  A  young  man  24  years  of  age
was  suffering  from  this  dreadful  disease.  The  head  and  neck  were  the
parts  chiefly  attacked.  Ointments  and  drugs  had  proved  anything  but
beneficial,  so  that  he  had  lost  all  faith  in  the  medical  profession.  He
came  to  me  and  commenced  a  cure  according  to  my  special  advice.  1
was  able  to  assure  this  patient  also  that  there  was  the  prospect  of  a  suc-
cessful result;  the  diagnosis  showed  a  front  encumbrance.  In  a  few
days  his  bad  digestion  was  better,  and  simultaneously  the  eczema  im-
proved visibly.  On  the  third  day  the  exudation  ceased,  and  in  16  days
there  was  no  longer  a  trace  of  the  eruption.  During  this  period,  too,
the  neck  of  the  patient,  which  had  been  far  too  thick,  decreased  by
nearly  an  inch  and  a  half.  The  morbid  matter,  which  had  been  the
cause  of  the  enlarged  neck  and  of  the  eczema,  was  carried  off  in  the
copious  excretions  from  intestines  and  kidneys.  Further  reports  of
cures,  including  one  of  sycosis  (eruption  about  the  chin),  will  be  found
in  Part  IV.


352  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


HEART  DISEASE  AND  DROPSY


THERE  is  a  long  list  of  heart-diseases  from  which  humanity  suffers,
which  the  medical  profession  treats  in  very  different  ways,  accord-
ing to  the  particular  symptoms  in  each  case.'  The  disorders  are
divided  into  organic  diseases  of  the  heart  and  cardiac  valves,  and
cardiac  symptoms,  which  have  their  origin  in  more  temporary  causes.
But,  if  we  inquire  without  prejudice  into  the  cause  of  diseases  of  the
heart,  and  seek  their  explanation  in  natural  processes,  we  shall  here  also
certainly  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  source  of  all  heart  diseases  is
the  encumhrance  of  the  heart  with  foreign  matter.  To  divide  these  affec-
tions into  various  kinds.is,  therefore,  wholly  purposeless.  It  is  only  on  the
disposition  of  the  heart  itself,  on  its  more  or  less  developed  capability  to
resist  injurious  influences,  that  the  seriousness  of  any  individual  case
depends.  For  instance,  if  there  is  an  encumbrance  of  the  left  side,  there
is  much  more  probability  of  the  disease  developing,  than  if  the  accumu-
lations are  on  the  right  side.  A  weakly  organized  heart,  perhaps  caused
by  hereditary  predisposition,  naturally  cannot  resist  encumbrance.

In  a  case  of  encumbrance  of  the  heart,  we  find  also  the  general  symp-
toms of  encumbrance.  Not  only  do  the  surrounchng  parts  show  an  in-
creased encumbrance  with  foreign  matter,  often  in  the  form  of  fat,  but
the  heart  muscles  are  frequently  so  permeated  and  swollen  with  the
morbid  matter  that  they  are  quite  unable  to  perform  their  normal  func-
tions. Nor  is  it  necessary  in  every  case  that  the  size  of  the  heart  muscles
should  increase;  the  encumbrance  of  the  muscular  tissues  is  often  shown
only  in  their  becoming  harder,  denser  or  more  tense.  In  this  condition
the  functional  capacity  of  the  muscles  is  lowered.  Everyone  knows  how,
where  there  is  any  swelling  of  the  skin,  the  tension  interferes  with  the
working  of  the  entire  body.  With  the  heart  also,  this  encumbrance  of
the  muscles  exhibits  itself  in  irregular  activity.  Now,  whenever  in-
creased exertion  is  required  of  the  heart — for  instance,  when  we  get  a
shock,  or  when  anything  unexpected  or  exciting  occurs  or  through
severe  bodily  exercise — that  is,  where  an  unusual  quantity  of  blood  flows
to  the  heart,  we  feel  very  clearly  that  this  organ  is  not  fully  equal  to  the
work.  There  may  be  palpitation,  anxiety,  stagnation  of  the  blood,
paralysis,  difficulty  in  breathing,  etc.  This  is  not  usually  attended  by
much  pain,  but  a  dull  pressing  feeling,  constant  or  temporary  only,  is
experienced  as  though  some  foreign  object  were  pressing  against  the
lieart.

Disorders  in  the  function  of  the  valves  of  the  heart  are  caused  in  the
same  way.  When  encumbered  to  a  certain  extent,  these  valves  can  no
longer  properly  perform  their  function  of  closing,  their  surfaces  being
so  deformed  by  the  deposits  of  foreign  matter,  as  no  longer  to  fit  the
openings  of  the  ventricles.  A  defect  of  the  heart  may  also  be  brought
about  by  a  deformation  of  the  contact  surfaces  of  the  ventricles.  In
either  case  the  cause  is  the  same.


TJnivei'sal  Naluropdlhic  Direclonj  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide  353

Nervous  disorders  o!  the  heart  are  really  a  most  original  "invention."
As  I  have  already  stated  in  the  chapter  on  nervous  diseases,  no  indi-
vidual organ  can  be  diseased  without  its  nerves  being  likewise  dis-
ordered. It  shows  a  complete  misconception  of  nature  and  natural  laws,
to  imagine  that  the  nerves  can  be  perfectly  healthy  and  only  this  or  that
organ  diseased;  or  that  the  whole  body  can  be  quite  healthy,  except  the
nerves.  For  me  this  idea  is  a  thing  of  the  past.  We  know  to-day,  for
certain,  that  the  various  diseases  of  the  heart  with  their  hundred  differ-
ent appearances,  and  their  different  external  symptoms,  all  have  but
one  common  cause:  the  encumbrance  of  the  body  with  foreign  matter.

But  if  the  cause  of  the  disease  of  the  heart  is  not  got  rid  of,  or  if  more
foreign  or  poisonous  matter  is  introduced  into  the  body  by  means  of
drugs,  a  worse  condition  will  soon  arise:  dropsy  will  make  its  appear-
ance. Dropsy  is  always  simply  the  linal  stage  of  other  uncured  diseases
which  have  preceded  it.  The  water  found  in  the  body  in  dropsy  is  here
wholly  a  foreign  product.  It  is  clear  from  this  that  the  body  is  no  longer
in  the  condition  either  to  produce  normal  blood,  or  to  sufTiciently  purify
that  which  is  already  there.  What  is  the  result?  The  juices  which
should  produce  blood,  under  the  influence  of  the  foreign  matter  fer-
ment, and  thus  change  form  and  figure.  In  no  other  disease  can  we  so
plainly  trace  the  process  of  the  origination  and  decomposition  of  mat-
ter in  the  body,  and  of  the  changes  of  form  arising  therefrom.  Some
time  ago  I  was  consulted  by  a  dropsical  patient,  whose  body  was  so  full
of  water  that  it  looked  just  like  an  expanded  rubber  tube.  The  internal
pressure  of  the  water  was  so  great  that  it  continually  oozed  through  the
skin  of  the  legs,  so  that  everywhere  where  the  patient  seated  himself  he
left  wet  marks.  The  most  remarkable  thing  about  the  case  was  this.
The  patient  was  a  butter-dealer  and  had  to  sample  a  large  number  of
butters  every  day.  Now  the  water  excreted  through  the  legs  smelt  so
strongly  of  butter,  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  as  to  its  origin.  In  the
course  of  time,  his  stomach  had  become  incapable  of  sufficiently  digest-
ing the  quantity  of  butter  which  he  had,  in  sampling,  to  eat  every  day,
without  bread  or  the  like.  The  butter  was  gradually  left  less  and  less
digested,  finally  becoming  foreign  matter  in  the  body.  The  man  was
accustomed  to  sleeping  on  the  left  side,  and  here  the  butter  accumulated,
quantities  of  fat  being  deposited  in  and  about  the  heart,  and  more  or  less
over  the  whole  body.  The  first  result  was  a  disorder  of  the  heart,  con-
tinuing for  years.  Finally,  the  foreign  matter  passed  over  into  a  further
state  of  decomposition,  and  then  showed  itself  as  water.

The  heart  disorder  had  passed  through  all  stages.  At  first  it  was  called
palpitation;  then  nervous  affection  of  the  heart;  then  fatty  degeneration,
soon  attended  by  a  defect  of  the  cardiac  valves.  Then  pericardial  dropsy
set  in,  ending  with  general  dropsy.  The  patient  had  tried  all  the  various
methods  of  cure,  and  finally,  when  it  was  unfortunately  far  too  late,
came  to  me  for  relief;  but  he  was  already  incapable  of  carrying  out  my
prescriptions  with  full  success.  He  had  been  treated  with  all  kinds  of
medicines  and  poisons,  each  stage  of  his  disease  receiving  some  new
name  and  likewise  some  new  remedy!

The  cause  of  water  accumulating  in  the  body  is  a  certain  gangrenous
state  of  the  abdomen,  which  in  most  cases  is  not  remarked,  because  it
proceeds  so  slowly.  Only  when  the  water  causes  the  breathing  to  be
labored  and  sets  up  oppression  of  the  heart,  is  the  trouble  noticed  at  all.


354  Univrrsdl  Ndiuropdthir  Direct onj  and  Biujers Guide

When  the  body,  however,  eonuiieiices  lo  reael  against  the  disease  and
the  patient  is  able  to  rally  his  vital  power  suilieiently,  the  chronic  dis-
ease appears  as  an  acute  gangrenous  condition.  If  the  disease  of  the  pa-
tient is  already  far  progressed,  this  hot  gangrenous  state  renders  him  so
weak  that  complete  cure  is  no  longer  possible,  he  is  internally  con-
sumed. If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  still  sullicient  vitality  in  order  to
enable  the  system  to  get  the  upper  hand,  it  will  be  able  to  expel  the  in-
llannnation  'from  the  body.  1  will  illustrate  this  by  citing  two  cases
treated  in  my  institute.

I  once  had  a  visit  from  a  gentleman  from  abroad,  who  had  been  suffer-
ing already  for  years  from  dropsy  and  had  got  no  help  from  allopathic
treatment.  The  legs  were  swollen  up  with  water  to  twice  the  normal
size,  and  the  body  also.  In  spite  of  this,  the  patient  only  complained  of
difliculty  in  breathing  and  heaviness  in  the  legs;  he  could  still  walk
quite  well.  I  explained  to  him  that  his  condition  was  too  far  progressed
in  order  to  admit  of  a  cure,  so  that  I  thought  it  better  he  should  not  com-
mence with  my  treatment  at  all.  The  patient,  however,  insisted  upon
it,  and  so  he  began,  filled  with  hope,  despite  any  attempt  at  dissuasion.

In  the  first  weeks,  all  went  on  far  better  than  one  could  have  expected.
Profuse  sweats  and  abundant  evacuations  rapidly  diminished  the
amount  of  water,  so  that  the  patient  felt  very  happy.  So  far,  his  body
had  only  expelled  the  product  of  the  disease,  namely  the  water;  it  now
began  with  the  work  of  getting  rid  of  the  cause  of  the  accumulation  of
water.  This  was  the  internal  gangrene,  which  had  scarcely  been  re-
marked. The  cure  could  only  be  efiected  by  the  body  in  one  way:  the
chronic  gangrene  must  be  changed  into  a  hot,  acute  state.  If  the  body
still  possessed  the  necessary  vitality,  it  would  expel  the  foreign  matter
which  had  brought  about  the  morbid  condition,  and  a  cure  would  be
complete.  In  the  contrary  case,  the  body  would  be  consumed  by  the
internal  heat.  With  my  patient,  matters  took  the  latter  course,  as  1  had
foreseen.  In  the  third  week  the  change  of  the  chronic  gangrene  com-
menced in  the  right  leg.  This  became  more  and  more  inflamed,  until
at  length,  from  the  toes  to  the  middle  of  the  shin-bone,  there  was  an
open  sore,  which  already  on  the  second  day  had  become  quite  black.
The  gangrene  which  had  formerly  been  hidden  within,  was  now  ex-
pelled to  the  outside,  naturally  causing  the  patient  much  pain.  During
the  fourth  week  the  black  matter  separated  from  the  sore  like  a  thick
skin,  and  the  sore  began  to  heal  again.  Now,  however,  the  internal  heat
of  the  patient,  who  was  still  corpulent,  increased  daily,  a  certain  sign
that  transformation  of  the  internal  gangrene  was  still  going  on.  The
first  result  w^as  extreme  thirst.  In  spite  of  the  derivative  action  of  the
treatment,  however,  it  did  not  succeed  in  mastering  the  gangrene  and
overcoming  the  great  heat,  as  was  clearly  to  be  seen  from  the  increasing
weakness  of  the  patient.  Soon  there  was  no  longer  the  strength  neces-
sary for  taking  the  baths,  and  on  the  29th  day  the  patient  became  un-
conscious, death  taking  place  on  the  30th.  This  patient  died  slowly  in
consequence  of  the  intense  internal  heat,  as  I  had  informed  him  from  the
first  would  be  the  case.

I  may  now  mention  a  case  where  there  was  an  altogether  satisfactory'
result.  The  patient  here  had  been  dropsical  for  a  long  time;  his  condi-
tion was  serious,  but  fortunately,  in  consequence  of  having  been  treated
homeopathicallv,  he  had  taken  but  little  medicine. Within  three  weeks.


Universal  Ndluropalhic  Directorij  and  Buyers'  Guide  355


on  my  treatment,  he  lost  the  water,  whereupon  in  the  fourth  week  an
intense  internal  heat  was  felt,  accompanied  hy  remarkable  symptoms.
On  the  second  day  of  the  fourth  week,  for  instance,  there  were  frequent
evacuations  of  most  ahnoxiously-smelling,  yet  black  faeces,  of  choleraic
or  dysenteric  character.  This  continued  for  three  days.  None  of  the
family  could  explain  this,  as  the  patient  had  only  been  taking  very  little
food.  His  wife  came  to  me  in  the  greatest  anxiety  about  it,  when  I  ex-
plained to  her  that  her  husband  was  now  saved,  just  because  of  this
crisis.  The  body  had  thereby  not  only  been  enabled  to  expel  the  internal
gangrene,  but  also  its  cause:  that  is,  the  foreign  matter  which  had  for
years  been  accumulating  in  the  body.  The  patient,  as  a  consequence  of
the  crisis,  was  very  exhausted  and  extremely  thin,  but  soon  began  to
recover,  improving  daily.  To-day  he  is  as  healthy  as  he  was  twenty
years  ago,  and  not  a  trace  of  water  has  again  shown  itself.  In  this  case,
the  body  had  fortunately  been  able  to  endure  the  change  of  the  gang-
rene from  the  chronic  state  into  an  acute  one.

Dropsy  is  really  curable  only  when  the  patient,  while  strictly  observing
my  treatment,  can  perspire  freely  and  unaided  at  the  parts  affected  by
the  dropsy.  It  is  then  possible  that  the  water  and  other  foreign  matter
can  be  excreted,  and  a  more  normal  digestion  restored.  Dropsy  is  no
longer  curable  when  the  bodily  vitality  is  so  low,  that  it  is  unable  to  ex-
pel the  foreign  matter;  it  is  then,  above  all,  impossible  to  permanently
improve  the  digestion.

I  would  here  call  attention  once  more  to  my  new  method  of  diagnosis,
the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  which  offers  us  a  certain  means  of  ob-
serving the  approach  of  dropsy  many  years  in  advance.  Equipped  with
this  new  science,  we  are  not  obliged  to  wait  until  diseases  are  so  far  pro-
gressed as  to  be  incurable;  we  can  begin  a  radical  treatment  at  a  period
when  the  stage  of  the  disease  still  admits  of  a  thorough  and  easy  cure.

Proofs  of  the  correctness  of  the  foregoing  can  be  given  only  by  prac-
tical demonstration;  I  therefore  submit  below  an  interesting  case  of
serious  heart  disease  combined  with  dropsy  and  leprosy.

A  gentleman  from  Batavia,  Java,  had  for  24  years  conducted  an  ex-
port business  at  that  place,  and  had  enjoyed  during  the  time,  as  he  said,
satisfactory  health,  suffering  occasionally,  however,  from  fever,  in-
flamed eyes,  and  sores  on  the  legs.  These  symptoms  suffice  to  inform  us
that  the  system  was  not  healthy,  but  heavily  encumbered  with  foreign
matter.  This  morbid  matter  accumulated  first  in  one  part  of  the  body
and  owing  to  the  tropical  climate,  was  more  readily  set  in  fermentation
than  it  w^ould  have  been  in  our  temperate  zone.  An  acute  state  of  dis-
ease was  thus  brought  about.  For  the  correctness  of  these  assertions,  the
further  course  of  this  highly  interesting  case  gives  us  most  striking  proof.
In  November  1879  the  patient  was  troubled  with  a  large  swelling  at  the
back  of  the  head,  near  the  left  ear.  This  was  suppressed  by  medicinal
poisons  and  forced  back  into  the  system;  whereupon,  after  some  time,
it  made  its  appearance  in  another  form,  one  of  his  fingers  swelling  up
and  suppurating  abundantly,  so  that  even  a  piece  of  the  bone  festered
out.  ^^^

The  finger  was  hardly  healed,  when  there  w^as  an  abnormal  loss  of
blood  through  the  bow^els,  a  sure  sign  that  a  clump  of  piles  had  burst.
Shortly  after  this,  an  open  sore  appeared  on  the  left  foot,  which  re-
mained open  and  suppurating  for  a  long  time.


356  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  patient  suffered  further  from  cold  hands  and  feet,  cold  sweats  and
frequent  feverish  attacks,  all  showing  the  presence  of  some  deep-seated
disease.  In  February  1882,  a  higher  fever  than  usual  set  in,  which  con-
tinued several  days  with  undiminished  violence,  so  much,  that  the
family  physician,  who  took  the  case  for  one  of  leprosy,  strongly  advised  a
journey  to  Europe.  On  April  13th  1882,  the  patient  therefore  left  Ba-
tavia;  on  arriving  in  Europe  he  consulted  Professor  J.,  of  Basle,  who
diagnosed  inflammation  of  the  blood  and  sent  him  to  Bad  Krankenheil
near  Tolz,  in  Upper  Bavaria,  recommending  him  to  the  care  of  Dr.  H.
During  this  treatment  a  red  spot  appeared  on  the  patient's  right  forearm,
which  remained,  in  spite  of  rubbing  with  corrosive  sublimate.  On  end-
ing the  course  of  treatment,  the  patient  felt  somewhat  more  vigorous;
but  in  the  autumn  more  red  spots  appeared  on  his  body.  The  chronic
feverish  condition  thus  increased.  In  April  1883,  he  set  out  on  his  return
to  Java,  where,  in  the  hot  tropical  climate,  the  red  spots  soon  disap-
peared with  the  profuse  perspiration.  On  arriving  in  Batavia  in  May,  a
derangement  of  the  heart  made  itself  felt,  attended  by  such  high  fever,
that  he  again  sought  medical  advice,  and  finally  in  May  1885,  was  once
more  obliged  to  go  to  Europe  for  treatment  for  a  considerable  time.

From  the  above  it  is  quite  evident,  that  the  cause  of  the  disease  had  by
no  means  been  removed  from  the  system  by  the  treatment  in  Bad
Krankenheil.  The  fact  of  the  new  outbreak  of  the  disease,  upon  his  re-
turn to  Java,  was  sufficient  proof  of  this.  Through  the  sojourn  in  the
cooler  climate  of  Europe,  the  disease  had  passed  into  a  chronic,  or  more
latent  stage.  The  patient  was  thus  less  sensible  of  the  presence  of  dis-
ease, acute  outbreaks  being  now  more  seldom.  The  return  to  the  tropics,
however,  at  once  caused  it  to  pass  into  the  acute  condition  again.  His
physician,  nevertheless,  had  regarded  this  apparent  improvement  in
health,  caused  by  change  of  climate,  as  a  sufTicient  cure  under  the  cir-
cumstances.

On  his  return  to  Europe,  the  patient  settled  in  Freiburg,  in  Baden,  de-
voting himself  wholly  to  the  task  of  getting  well,  under  the  advice  of  the
family  physician  and  Dr.  N.,  Physician  to  the  Court.  In  autumn,  the  red
spots  again  appeared  all  over  the  body,  and  far  worse  than  in  1882;  a
sure  sign  that  the  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter  had
still  further  increased.  The  doctors,  not  in  the  least  understanding  the
nature  of  the  red  spots  and  other  symptoms,  informed  their  patient  that
the  cure  must  be  left  to  nature.  A  visit  to  Soolbad  Rheinfelden  in  the
year  1886,  at  their  recommendation,  had  the  worst  results,  however.  The
disease  now  gradually  became  more  and  more  chronic,  and  the  advance
of  his  physical  disorder  was  naturally  attended  by  corresponding  de-
pression of  spirits.  He  had  reached  that  condition  of  chronic  misery
into  which  everyone  gets,  who  vainly  seeks  everywhere  for  health,  man-
ipulated as  depression,  melancholy,  despondency,  nervous  prostration,
lack  of  courage,  and  utter  weariness  of  life.  It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that
the  patient,  who,  during  the  end  of  1888,  had  been  treated  by  celebrated
doctors  without  success,  became  deeply  despondent.  From  hopeful
manhood,  he  had  passed  into  premature  old  age,  weary,  soured,  broken
down.

Urgent  business  now  forced  him  to  journey  back  to  Java  on  Jan.  19th
1889.  His  disease  had  by  this  time  grown  so  chronic,  that  his  skin,  which
had  scarcely  perspired  at  all  for  three  years,  even  under  the  tropical


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


357


sun,  only  incompletely  perlormed  its  function.  On  reaching  Batavia,
the  disease  took  an  acute  turn.  The  earlier  affection  of  the  heart  reap-
peared with  increased  violence.  The  fever  accompanying  it,  visibly
diminished  the  patient's  strength,  and  water  already  showed  itself  in
the  legs.  Moreover,  the  Batavian  doctors  pronounced  his  disease  to  be
leprosy,  and  were  the  more  convinced  of  this,  since  during  the  patient's
last  stay  in  Europe,  the  most  famous  European  specialist  for  leprous
diseases  had  discovered  large  numbers  of  lepra-bacilli  in  his  blood.  On
account  of  the  great  dread  of  infection  from  lepers  prevailing  there,  the
doctors  at  Batavia  advised  their  patient's  immediate  departure,  unless  he
wished  to  be  excluded  from  all  communication  with  the  outer  world.  On
December  19th,  1889,  therefore,  the  patient  once  more  set  sail  for  Europe.
His  travelling  companions  thought  it  hardly  possible  that  he  could
reach  Genoa  alive.  However,  the  cooling  sea-air  stimulated  his  vital
power,  and  he  arrived  safely  in  Europe,  where  his  condition  again
passed  over  from  the  acute  state  into  the  more  chronic  one.  His  medical
attendants  at  Freiburg  gave  up  the  case  as  absolutely  hopeless.


Fig.  1


Fig.  2


Whilst  in  this  deplorable  condition,  the  patient  had  his  attention
drawn  to  my  method  of  healing,  by  an  old  friend  of  his  in  Leipzig,  who
had  formerly  known  him  for  years  in  Java.  On  March  20th  1890,  the
patient  travelled  to  Leipzig  and  four  days  later,  though  almost  without
hope,  he  commenced  my  cure.

This  case  offers  a  most  striking  proof  of  the  correctness  of  my  system
of  treatment,  and  convincing  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  my  Science  of
FaQial  Expression.  Fortunately,  I  had  this  gentleman  photographed  at
the  commencement  of  the  cure,  and  also  subsequently,  Figs.  1  and  2  be-
ing reproductions  from  the  originals.  His  body  was  wholly  altered  by
the  foreign  matter.  There  was  but  little  of  the  neck,  on  which  a  goitre
had  formed,  to  be  seen,  it  being  sunk,  as  it  were,  into  the  trunk,  with  no
proper  boundary  between  the  two.  Upon  the  forehead  was  a  large
swelling  nearly  an  inch  high.  The  parts  around  the  eyes  were  swollen
up,  as  also  the  whole  head,  which  showed  a  most  abnormal  accumu-
lation of  foreign  matter.  The  calf  of  the  right  leg  was  gangrenous;  and
there  was  water  both  in  the  foot  and  ankle,  and  also  above  the
gangrenous  part,  so  that  the  patient  could  only  use  the  leg  with
difficulty. The  accumulations  of  foreign  matter  in  the  trunk  were  in


358  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

proportion  to  those  in  the  head  and  neck.  The  digestion  was  wholly
abnormal.  Neither  bowels  nor  kidneys  properly  performed  their  func-
tions. The  heart  disorder  allowed  no  rest  day  or  night,  and  gave  rise  to
a  feeling  of  uneasiness  and  oppression.  The  patient's  hands  and  feet
were  icy  cold,  and  of  dark  bluish  color.

Satisfactory  results  were  obtained  almost  immediately  after  com-
mencing with  my  treatment.  The  digestion  soon  improved;  the  bowels,
which  formerly  had  only  been  moved  by  enemas,  and  the  kidneys,
operated  regularly  from  the  third  day.  The  urine,  previously  light  and
clear,  now  became  cloudy  and  turbid,  evidently  containing  a  quantity  of
foreign  matter.  Even  on  the  second  day  the  patient  felt  himself  relieved
and  fresher,  though  with  a  certain  sensation  of  weariness,  caused  by  the
energy  required  to  expel  the  foreign  matter  from  the  organism.  Profuse
perspiration  also  materially  assisted  in  the  cure.  A  perceptible  alteration
in  the  external  form  of  the  body  was  very  soon  brought  about,  the  more
so  as  the  excretion  of  foreign  matter  went  on  most  rapidly  in  his  case.

It  was  interesting  to  watch  how  the  gangrenous  band  around  the  calf
disappeared.  This  was  at  first  dark  brown,  then  bluish  red,  and  was
quite  four  inches  broad.  It  dissolved  in  the  form  of  water,  the  leg  simul-
taneously increasing  greatly  in  circumference.  The  right  leg  ultimately
became  enormously  thick.  This  process  was  remarkable  as  showing
the  capability  of  foreign  matter  to  ferment  and  change.

The  crisis  which  the  patient  was  now  going  through  was  a  severe  one,
but  his  great  vital  power  stood  him  in  good  stead.  Although  not  able  to
move  about  much,  my  baths  always  made  him  perspire  freely  at  the
dropsical  parts,  a  proof  of  the  power  of  his  body  to  react.  Within  four
weeks,  all  the  water  was  expelled  from  his  system.  After  this,  the  cure
went  on  extremely  rapid.  The  patient  felt  younger  and  fresher  every
day,  and  after  four  months'  treatment,  attended  by  some  curative  crises,
was  so  changed  in  appearance  (see  Fig.  2)  as  to  be  hardly  recognisable.
The  heart  disease  and  dropsy  had  quite  disappeared,  and  were
really  cured,  while  despondency  had  given  place  to  a  cheerful  and  quite
different  mood,  with  buoyant  spirits.

In  Batavia,  they  could  not  credit  this  happy  result,  but  wrote  that  the
patient  would  not  be  permitted  to  land  in  Java,  until  proved  to  be  quite
free  from  lepra-bacilli.  For  this  reason  he  again  submitted  himself  to
the  inspection  of  the  same  celebrated  specialist  for  leprosy,  now  staying
in  Hamburg,  who  had  formerly  examined  and  treated  him.  After  this
examination,  which  lasted  nearly  four  weeks,  the  patient  received  the
assurance  that  he  was  entirely  free  from  lepra-bacilli.  This  gentleman,
who  returned  to  Java  in  1892,  is  still  living,  and  in  the  best  of  health.
None  of  his  former  troubles  have  shown  themselves  again.

This  case  affords  us  another  excellent  proof  of  the  worthlessness  of
orthodox  medical  science,  its  diagnosis  and  its  system  of  treatment.
Here,  again,  was  a  patient  given  up  by  the  most  competent  authorities,
yet,  by  my  method  of  cure,  he  was  saved  from  death  and  restored  to  his
family  and  friends.


Universal  Naluropdlhic  Dircclorij  and  Ihu/rrs'  (Uddc  -^-''^


DISEASE  OF  THE  SPINAL  CORD. CONSUMPTION

OF  THE  SPINAL  CORD. HEMORRHOIDAL

AFFECTIONS.

THERE  is  always  a  long  period  of  chronic  sickliness  before  one  of  the
dreadful  diseases  of  the  spinal  cord  breaks  out.  By  means  of  the
Science  of  Facial  Expression  we  can,  however,  determine  the  re-
sult years  in  advance,  can  recognize  predisposition  to  the  diseases,
and  point  to  the  causes  contributing  to  morbid  encumbrance  of  the
nerves.  As  regards  the  latter,  pollutions  especially,  frequently  appear,
whether  the  patient  is  married  or  single.  But  these  emissions  always
denote  chronic  inflammation  of  the  nerves,  particularly  of  the  spinal
marrow,  and  of  the  nervus  sympathiciis,  caused  by  severe  encum-
brance of  the  back  with  foreign  matter.  The  inflammation  always  in-
creasing, the  nerves  become  less  capable  of  resistance,  until  the  patient
is  no  longer  master  of  his  limbs,  the  legs  being  the  first  over  which  he
generally  loses  control.  Together  with  the  pollutions,  other  morbid
symptoms  also  make  their  appearance.  With  many  there  is  a  peculiar
feeling  of  constriction  about  the  waist,  varying  very  much,  according  to
the  nature  of  the  encumbrance.  There  is  also  frequently  a  slight  sense
of  chill  just  at  this  internal  girdle  or  band,  as  it  were.  In  a  more  ad-
vanced state  of  the  disease  there  is  often,  also  shooting,  or  sometimes
continual  neuralgic  pains,  and  lumbago  which  may  be  extremely
troublesome  and  painful.

Diseases  of  the  spinal  cord  are  very  various  in  form.  With  uniform
encumbrance,  as  is  the  case  in  these  disorders,  many  other  diseases  also
occur,  such  for  instance  as  St.  Vitus'  dance.

In  a  veiy  advanced  (the  so-called  final)  stage,  it  is  scarcely  longer
possible  to  cure  diseases  of  the  spinal  marrow.  In  such  cases,  the  most
that  can  be  done  is,  at  all  events  to  remove  all  pain  from  the  patient.
This  can  usually  be  effected  in  a  short  time,  if  the  digestion  is  capable  of
improvement,  so  that  there  is  internal  quiet,  sleep  and  appetite.

Fortunately,  by  means  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  as  al-
ready remarked,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  await  this  final  stage  of  the
disease.  We  can  commence  long  before  to  prevent  this,  an  advantage
which  cannot  be  too  highly  valued.  These  disorders  of  the  spinal  cord
in  their  first  stages  are  as  easy  to  cure  as  many  other  insignificant  dis-
eases. If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  disease  is  in  an  advanced  stage,  and
particularly  if  it  has  been  treated  with  drugs,  a  cure  is  much  more  diffi-
cult. A  house  upon  which  the  flames  have  taken  a  firm  hold,  can  also
not  be  saved,  if  once  the  fire  has  spread  too  far.

I  have  had  numerous  patients  suffering  from  spinal  cord  diseases  in
my  treatment,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  cure  all.  Many  have  had  to  be
content  with  an  improvement,  with  an  alleviation,  of  their  sad  condition.
The  latter  have  been  exclusively  such  as  through  long  use  of  medicines,
had  so  far  paralyzed  their  body  as  to  render  it  incapable  of  being  fully


3G0  Universal  Nahiropatliic  Direclonj  ami  Bnijcvs Guide


cuichI,  even  by  the  most  careliil  Ireatment.  To  elucidate  what  has  been
said,  I  will  again  produce  here  some  reports  of  cases  which  1  have
treated  in  my  establishment.

The  lirst  case  was  that  ol  a  young  man  who  suflered  severely  from  dis-
ease of  the  spinal  cord,  and  was  completely  paralyzed  in  both  legs.  For
over  a  year  he  had  been  consulting  specialists,  without  getting  any  bene-
fit from  the  treatment.  He  was  unable  to  make  the  least  movement
with  the  legs,  nor  could  he  stand;  though  only  24  years  of  age,  he  was
obliged  to  lie  helplessly  in  bed,  or  be  wheeled  about  in  an  invalid  chair.
His  digestion  was  the  worst  possible.  The  bowels  never  moved  unless
with  artificial  aid,  the  urine  passed  ofl"  without  the  patient  being  con-
scious of  it.  When  he  was  placed  in  his  chair,  his  legs  had  always  to
be  put  into  the  right  position  for  him.

On  coming  into  my  care,  he  had  at  first  to  take  four  cooling  baths
daily,  and  eat  only  dry,  natural  food.  If  during  the  first  month,  owing
to  the  debilitated  digestion,  there  was  but  little  improvement,  in  the
second  month  one  could  observe  decided  progress.  After  a  further  period
of  two  months,  the  patient  was  again  able  to  retain  the  urine,  and
his  legs  were  so  far  improved  that  he  could  move  them  a  little,  and  with-
out the  help  of  his  attendant  could  stand  for  a  short  time.  Nine  months
of  the  treatment  had  brought  him  so  far,  that  he  could  walk  about  the
room  a  little  without  aid;  and  in  two  months  more  he  had  regained  com-
plete mastery  over  his  legs.  His  disease  of  the  spinal  cord,  which  had
occasioned  these  complaints,  in  consequence  of  the  great  internal  heat
produced  by  the  accumulation  of  foreign  matter,  was  cured,  exactly  in
the  same  manner  as  so  many  other  diseases  have  been  overcome.

This  case  also  shows  clearly  how  difTicult  it  is  to  cure  an  advanced  en-
cumbrance of  the  back.  I  scarcely  imagined  myself,  at  the  beginning
of  the  cure,  that  the  patient's  condition  could  be  improved,  to  say  noth-
ing of  cured,  because  the  digestion  was  so  deplorably  bad,  and  in  the
commencement  showed  no  signs  of  improvement.  Only  to  his  extra-
ordinary perseverance,  was  the  subsequent  cure  due.  Had  the  patient
commenced  my  treatment  earlier,  such  absolute  loss  of  control  over  the
legs  would  never  have  occurred,  and  cure  would  have  been  much  easier.
Another  case  which  I  will  now  give,  is  equally  instructive.  A  gentle-
man in  his  47th  year  had  been  sufi'ering  for  several  years  from  con-
sumption of  the  spinal  cord,  without  being  able  to  get  any  relief.  His
encumbrance  was  very  considerable,  and  he  could  only  w^alk  with  much
trouble.  Frequently,  he  was  attacked  by  lumbago  and  other  shooting
pains.  He  could  not  get  sufficient  sleep,  often  obtaining  no  rest  at  all  for
days  together.  The  digestion  was  abnormal,  and  the  general  condition
bad.  The  very  first  months  of  the  treatment  had  a  good  effect,  the
sleeplessness  being  cured  and  the  various  pains  likewise  disappearing.
The  digestion  also  improved,  although  the  legs  still  remained  very  weak.
For  this  reason  the  patient  scarcely  hoped  for  cure.  He  had  looked  upon
the  pains  and  sleeplessness  only  as  special  disorders  for  themselves,  and
always  held  the  opinion  that  they  had  no  connection  with  his  spinal
cord  disease.  As  he  found  it  extremely  difficult  to  follow  my  dietetic
rules,  he  gave  up  the  treatment  after  ten  months.  His  condition  then
soon  becaine  w^orse  and  altogether  hopeless.

This  patient  should  have  regarded  it  as  a  great  success,  not  only  that
his  disorder  became  no  worse  during  the  cure,  but  that  the  troublesome


Uniifcrsdl  Naliiropalliic  Dircclonj  (iiid  lUujcrs'  (iiiidc  301


accompanying  symptoms  so  soon  disappeared.  With  perseverance  the
other  troubles  would  also  gradually  have  been  overcome.

For  a  further  case  of  consumption  of  the  spinal  cord,  see  Part  IV
(Reports  of  Cures.)

Hemorrhoidal  Affections.  Hemorrhoidal  affections  generally  accom-
pany disease  of  the  spinal  cord  and  the  severe  encumbrance  of  the
back  connected  with  it.  They  point  to  a  serious  chronic  condition  of  dis-
ease, which  like  all  others  has  as  its  cause  a  highly  inflamed  condition  of
the  abdomen.  As  a  matter  of  course,  the  digestion  of  such  patients
must  also  be  irregular.

The  fermentation  of  tumors  in  the  abdomen,  a  symptom  necessarily
implying  severe  encumbrances,  is  a  proof  that  the  vital  and  curative
power  of  the  body  must  be  very  low.

I  will  illustrate  this,  also,  by  an  example  taken  from  my  practice.

A  young  man  in  his  seventeenth  year,  who  from-  his  earliest  j^outh  had
suffered  from  troubles  of  digestion,  came  to  consult  me.  As  he  related  to
me,  since  his  eleventh  year  he  had  been  troubled  with  piles,  hemorr-
hoidal affection  and  intestinal  hemorrhage,  which  had  caused  him  much
pain.  In  his  fifteenth  year,  he  gradually  lost  the  piles  and  hemorr-
hoidal affections;  but,  as  he  further  related,  he  then  became  a  victim  to
the  most  dreadful  headaches,  against  which  no  remedy  had  any  effect.
Finally,  on  the  back  of  his  head,  hard  nodules,  the  size  of  a  hazelnut
could  be  seen  and  felt.  His  whole  head,  at  the  same  time,  began  to
change  in  form  and  increase  in  size,  the  relation  between  the  head  and
body  clearly  altering.  It  was  obvious  to  everyone  who  saw  the  youth,
that  there  must  be  some  matter  encumbering  the  head,  which  ought  not
to  be  there,  and  which  was  not  there  before.  But  no  one  had  any  idea
that  the  clump  of  piles  in  the  body,  in  a  now  much  harder  and  com-
pressed form,  had  affected  the  head,  appearing  as  tubercular  nodules.
To  any  one  familiar  with  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  these  symp-
toms were  naturally  easy  to  be  understood.  The  unbearable  headaches
alone,  were  sufficient  proof  of  the  presence  of  a  deep  cause.  Unfortu-
nately no  one  recognized  this.  The  poor  mother  saw  in  her  still  youth-
ful son,  the  same  dread  disease  which  had  carried  off  the  boy's  father
in  his  39th  year.  None  of  the  methods  of  cure  tried  provided  any
remedy  against  the  disorder.  The  disease  slowly  but  surely  got  the
upper  hand,  and  the  young  man,  in  consequence  of  the  headaches,
finally  became  auite  unfit  for  work,  and  often  had  fainting-fits.  In  this
deplorable  condition  he  was  brought  to  me  by  his  mother.  As  there  was
a  back  encumbrance,  an  outbreak  of  inflammation  of  the  brain  was  any
day  to  be  expected.  My  prescriptions  were  strict  diet,  cooling  friction
baths,  and  plenty  of  exercise,  and  they  were  closely  follow^ed  out  with
good  results.  Already  in  the  first  w^eek,  the  headaches  disappeared.
Only  during  dispersion  of  the  tubercular  nodules  in  the  head,  did  the
pains  temporarily  return  again.  The  digestion  and  appetite  likewise
improved  in  a  most  satisfactory  manner.  A  decrease  in  the  nodules,
which  were  to  be  clearly  felt  on  the  head,  Avas  noticeable  towards  the
end  of  the  cure.  The  nodules  in  the  interior  of  the  head  decreased
simultaneously,  and  the  head  itself  became  relatively  smaller  than  be-
fore. In  another  two  months  the  nodules  had  still  further  decreased,
and  in  half  a  year  there  was  no  trace  of  them  left.

Suddenly  a  change,  apparently  for  the  w^orse,  set  in. As  his  mother


302  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiiijers'  (iuide

informed  mc,  her  son  felt  unwell  since  the  day  preceding,  the  hemorr-
hoidal affection,  which  had  vanished  years  ago,  having  again  made  its
appearance  as  had  as  ever.  1  explained  to  the  anxious  mother  that
this  was  unavoidable.  The  tubercular  nodules  in  the  head  had,  by  the
derivative  action  of  the  treatment,  been  conducted  from  there  into  the
body  and  had  again  taken  the  form  of  a  clump  of  piles,  which,  indeed,
had  been  the  cause  of  the  nodules  in  the  head  appearing  at  all.  Her
son  had  been  cured  of  consumption  of  the  brain  by  this  curative  crisis,
and  in  the  same  way  it  was  now  only  necessary  to  free  him  from  the
hemorrhoidal  affection,  which  was  but  a  preliminary  stage  to  the  tuber-
culosis of  the  brain.  This  explanation  cleared  up  the  woman's  doubts,
and  the  cure  was  continued  with  the  most  happy  results.  After  a  year,
the  hemorrhoidal  affection  had  also  been  perfectly  cured,  and  the  young
man  was  again  healthy.

Further  reports  of  cures  will  be  found  in  Part  IV.


Universal  Nalurnpalhic  Direrlonj  and  Buijcrs'  Guide  363


POVERTY  OF  THE  BLOOD.  CHLOROSIS.


FROM  all  classes  of  society  to-day  we  hear  the  complaint  about
poverty  of  the  blood  and  chlorosis.  Neither  poor  nor  rich,  neither
young  nor  old  are  free  from  these  disorders,  although  there  is  a
whole  host  of  remedies  in  the  field.  It  is  the  upper  classes,  supplied
with  ample  medical  advice,  who  use  these  remedies  most,  and  especially
in  the  form  of  what  is  called  nutritious  diet :  eggs,  flesh-meat,  bouillon,
wine  and  beer,  etc.

Modern  medical  science  boasts  of  the  great  progress  it  has  made;
chemistry  and  physiology  claim  to  have  ascertained  exactly  the  nutri-
tive value  of  all  articles  of  food,  and  their  effect  on  the  human  organism;
yet  in  spite  of  all  this  scientific  knowledge,  the  disorders  are  not  in
the  least  diminished,  but  spread  more  and  more.  They  produce  weak-
ness, debility  and  nervousness,  and  lead  to  abnormal  sexual  impulse.
They  prevent  a  proper  supply  of  milk  in  mothers,  and,  in  short,  they
render  people  mentally  and  physically  unfit,  incapable  to  think  or  to
act.  They  cause  over-sensitiveness,  weariness,  heaviness  in  the  feet,
pains  in  the  muscles.  There  is  loss  of  appetite,  and  the  bowels  no  longer
act  regularly.

What  is  the  position  which  the  medical  profession  takes  up  in  regard
to  these  diseases?  Supported  by  chemical  analysis,  the  doctors  recom-
mend the  use  of  flesh-extracts,  said  to  contain  all  the  constituents  neces-
sary for  eruption,  quiet  prevails  for  a  time,  until  new  tension  is  caused
by  the  processes  of  combustion,  decomposition  and  re-formation  with-
in the  earth.  The  process  is  similar  in  epileptic  fits.  An  encumbrance
of  foreign  matter  forms  within  the  abdomen,  causing  slow,  yet  con-
stant fermentation,  attended  by  the  development  of  gas  and  tension.
The  seat  of  encumbrance  here  being  limited  in  space  by  the  foreign
matter,  there  is  a  constant  increase  in  tension,  assisted  by  the  continual
fermentation.  Finally  there  is  an  eruption,  which  brings  on  the  fits,  and
through  pressure  on  the  brain,  suspends  the  functions  of  the  latter.
When  the  process  of  fermentation  and  the  attendant  pressure  subside,
consciousness  returns,  although  the  entire  body  remains  more  or  less  ex-
hausted after  such  a  violent  attack.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  medical  profession  is  unable  to  cure
epilepsy,  and  still  more  so  that  it  does  not  up  till  to-day  even  know  its
character.  Not  seldom,  it  regards  this  disease  merely  as  a  nervous  dis-
order. Little  does  it  think  that  all  these,  as  it  considers  them,  incurable
and  mysterious  disorders  are  chiefly  its  own  work:  the  fruit  of  misled
science,  wrong  advice  as  to  the  care  of  the  health,  and  the  use  of  in-
jurious remedies,  such  as  potassium  bromide,  etc.

The  course  of  cure  in  epilepsy  differs  much,  according  to  the  encum-
brance of  the  patient.  With  some  the  attacks  gradually  decrease  very
soon  after  beginning  treatment;  with  others  they  at  first  appear  oftener.
Owing  to  the  changes  going  on  in  the  system,  such  temporary  symptoms


304  Universal  Ncituropdlhic  Direclonj  and  Ihiycrs'  Guide

occur  Ircqueiitly;  but  as  soon  as  llic  encumbrance  is  expelled,  they
gradually,  or  even  suddenly,  disappear.  They  become  weaker  and
weaker,  until  there  are  merely  swoons  or  giddiness,  which  quite  disap-
pear on  continuation  ol"  the  cure.  In  advising  patients,  it  is  therefore
well  to  call  their  attention  to  the  probable  course  ot  the  cure.  And  here
again  my  Science  ol"  Facial  Expression  serves  as  an  excellent  means  to
foresee  those  curative  crises  which  may  be  unavoidable,  especially  in  the
case  of  serious  encumbrances.

We  thus  come  to  see,  that  the  curability  of  epilepsy  depends  solely
upon  the  state  of  the  encumbrance  of  the  patient.  In  nearly  all  cases,  a
cure  has  been  effected  by  my  method.  Some  cases  may  have  been
tedious,  or  even  incurable,  when  the  patient's  condition  was  already  too
chronic;  and  when  the  body,  particularly  the  digestion,  had  been  too
seriously  injured  by  the  customary  medicaments,  such  as  bromine.  In
such  patients  the  nerve-connections,  and  the  brain,  have  been  too
seriously  distributed  to  admit  of  retrogression.  In  my  establishment  1
have  had  some  obstinate  cases,  which  have  required  most  careful  treat-
ment on  my  system  for  years,  before  the  attacks  ceased.  Cessation  of
the  fits  must  not  be  looked  upon  as  always  signifying  that  the  patient's
encumbrance  has  been  gotten  rid  of.  For  the  complete  removal  of  such,
a  still  longer  time  is  often  required.

According  to  the  report  of  the  National  Medical  Commission,  for  the
year  1889,  the  number  of  epileptic  school-children  in  Saxony  was,  at
the  end  of  that  year,  795,  or  13.6  in  every  10,000  children.  It  is,  therefore,
much  to  be  wished,  in  the  interest  of  suffering  humanity  that  the  suc-
cessful cures  of  the  New  Science  of  Healing  should  also  become  better
known  in  influential  and  authoritative  circles.

I  cannot  refrain  from  introducing  here,  also,  an  actual  case  which  1
have  treated,  for  the  purpose  of  elucidating  the  subject.

A  girl  of  nineteen  had  suffered  for  six  years  from  severe  epileptic
fits.  Every  week  she  had  at  least  two  attacks.  Her  digestion  was  the
worst  possible,  and  her  menstruation  likewise  altogether  irregular.  Not
once  since  puberty  had  she  had  normal  periods;  sometimes  they  re-
mained away  altogether,  at  other  times  appeared  too  frequently.

By  means  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  I  found  that  she  was
also  highly  chlorotic,  with  a  disposition  to  consumption.  Her  head  was
abnormally  large.  The  state  of  the  encumbrance  was,  however,  favor-
able, so  that  I  could  assure  her  of  a  good  prospect  of  success.  In  order
that  she  might  not  mistake  the  course  of  the  cure,  I  called  her  attention
to  the  fact  that  the  attacks  might  possibly,  during  the  first  fortnight,  be
more  frequent  than  before,  but  then  would  gradually  diminish,  and
finally  cease  entirely.  My  natural  remedial  agents  did  not  desert  me  in
this  case  either.  Steam-baths,  however,  as  in  most  epileptic  cases,  had  to
be  avoided. In  three  weeks  the  patient  was  free  of  all  fits.

The  cure  took  the  exact  course,  which  I  had  foreseen.  In  the  first  days
there  were  two,  three  or  even  more  attacks.  After  sixteen  days  these
gradually  passed  into  swoons,  and  giddiness,  and  finally  ceased  entirely.
Such  speedy  success  was  only  possible  on  account  of  the  patient's  diges-
tion having  fortunately  improved  with  surprising  rapidity  and  the
menstruation  having  soon  become  normal.  In  many  cases,  so  rapid  a
cure  is  not  to  be  effected.  The  quick  cure  here,  was  to  be  attributed
solely  to  the  very  favorable  position  of  the  encumbrance  of  the  pa-


Universal  NaUiropdlhic  Dircrlory  and  Ihujers'  Guide  305


tient.  Other  epileptic  cases  which  I  have  treated,  have  required  two,
three,  or  more  times,  as  long  to  cure (see  Reports  of  Cures,  Part  IV).

Agoraphobia  is  a  condition  in  which  the  persons  afHicted  are  unable
to  go  across  a  broad,  open  space.  This  disease,  also,  is  simply  the  re-
sult of  encumbrance  with  foreign  matter.  The  condition  is  due  to  the
inner  tension  of  the  body  being  no  longer  able  to  ofl'er  sutlicient  counter-
pressure  to  that  exerted  by  the  atmosphere;  or,  it  may  be,  it  exerts  too
high  a  pressure  on  certain  internal  organs.  The  rarer  and  purer  the  air,
the  more  is  the  oppression  felt  by  such  persons.  I  have  had  patients'
under  treatment,  who  could  only  walk  close  to  the  houses,  without  fall-
ing down.  This  comes  from  the  fact  that  the  air  there  is  always  a  little
more  dense  than  in  the  middle  of  the  street;  and  though  the  difference
is  very  slight,  it  is  still  sufficient  to  be  felt  by  the  patient.  Wherever  the
air  grows  purer  and  rarer,  the  patients  feel  oppressed  and  disquieted  in
the  highest  degree. The  inner  pressure  deprives  them  of  all  support.

This  disorder,  like  tuberculosis  and  cancer,  is  always  a  final  stage  of
other  preceding  diseases,  whether  it  appears  directly  or  indirectly
through  being  inherited.  Whether  a  patient  will  recover  depends  al-
together upon  his  condition  and  the  encumbrance.  A  radical  cure,  in
any  case,  can  only  be  effected  by  my  method,  which  removes  the  cause.
The  cure,  it  is  true,  often  requires  a  long  time.


366  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


EPILEPTIC  FITS. AGORAPHOBIA.


THAT  sudden,  malignant  complaint  which  attacks  the  human  organ-
ism, those  morbid  paroxysms  commonly  known  as  epilepsy,  which
overcome  the  body — they  are  but  the  conclusion  of  a  series  of  pre-
ceding diseases  which  have  been  suppressed,  or  are  the  result  of
inherited  disorders,  too  often  to  be  traced  to  the  youthful  folly  of  the
father.  In  the  latter,  the  treatment  of  sexual  disease  with  drugs  has
driven  back  the  foreign  matter  into  the  body,  with  the  natural  result  that
accumulations  of  such  morbid  matter  have  formed  in  the  parents.  The
transference  of  this  matter  to  the  body  of  the  child  is  the  foundation  of
the  disease  which  we  call  fits.

In  the  course  of  my  practice,  I  have  treated  numerous  cases  of  epilepsy
with  striking  success.  How  often  have  I  seen  that  sudden  epileptic  at-
tacks are  nothing  more  than  sudden  ebullitions  of  fermenting  foreign
matter,  which  has  first  developed  in  the  abdomen.  In  many  cases  these
ebullitions  of  fermentation  first  pass  down  into  the  legs,  only  aftei-wards
pressing  upwards.  By  the  outbreak  of  fermentation,  many  persons  are
first  whirled  round,  as  it  were,  several  times,  before  falling;  others,
again,  as  soon  as  the  fermentation  rises  towards  the  head,  lose  con-
sciousness and  fall  to  the  ground.

These  processes  in  the  body  may  be  compared  to  the  outbreak  of  a
volcano,  when  the  expanding  gases  and  masses,  accumulated  within
the  earth,  suddenly  rush  forth.  For  the  building  up  and  maintaining  of
powders,  quinine  and  iron  in  various  forms.  And  what  is  the  result  of
this  treatment?  In  general,  just  the  contrary  of  that  which  was  to  be
attained.  The  blood  becomes  still  poorer,  the  patient  becomes  more
chlorotic,  and  other  troubles  may  set  in  in  addition,  the  sole  cause  of
which  is  the  unnatural  medical  treatment.  Astonishing  though  it  may
sound,  it  is  a  fact  that  to-day  we  can  even  find  new-born  babes  sutfer-
ing  from  poverty  of  blood.

These  observations  bring  us  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  modern  treat-
ment and  diet  in  these  cases  cannot  be  the  right  one.  It  must  also  be  ad-
mitted, that  chemistry  is  not  sufficient  to  prevent  errors  when  dealing
with  the  processes  going  on  in  the  living  body.  According  to  our  ex-
perience, artificial  extracts  of  all  sorts,  and  artificial  preparations  used
for  the  purpose  of  "feeding  up"  the  patient,  are  most  difficult  of  diges-
tion, and  are  often,  indeed,  not  to  be  digested  at  all.  Foods  in  the
natural  form,  unchanged  by  cooking  and  seasoning,  are  always  the
easiest  of  digestion.

My  New  Science  of  Healing  teaches  an  entirely  different  treatment  of
these  diseases.  The  external  symptoms  of  anaemia  and  chlorosis  give  us
no  clear  idea  of  their  nature.  We  know  that  a  normal  skin  never  has
the  pallid  color  of  an  anaemic  patient;  nor  is  ever  too  red,  yellow  or
brown,  but  always  feels  moist  and  warm. Healthy  blood  is  bright  red


Universal  Naturopathic  Dircctorij  and  Buijrrs'  Guide  'M)l

and  thin,  even  in  the  veins;  blood  loaded  with  morbid  matter,  on  the
contrary,  is  darker,  nearly  black,  thick  and  half  coagulated.  In  addition,
where  the  encumbrance  is  very  great,  the  blood  vessels  are  partly  ex-
panded, and  sacs  are  formed  to  contain  the  largest  masses  of  blood.
This  expansion  sets  in  gradually,  in  consequence  of  the  continual  ten-
sion and  inner  pressure  accompanying  the  encumbered  state.  In  all
chlorotic  and  anaemic  persons,  we  therefore  notice,  besides  the  pallid
skin,  conspicuously  dark  veins.  Normal  veins,  fdled  with  easily  flow-
ing, healthy  blood,  shine  but  faintly  through  the  skin,  at  all  events  never
exhibit  the  blue  color  and  distention  seen  in  the  case  of  persons  suffering
from  chlorosis.  Further,  we  see  in  the  case  of  such  persons,  a  pale,
withered  inactive  skin,  which  often  appears  wax-like,  and  of  a  greenish
yellow  color.  In  other  anaemia  patients,  again,  the  face  is  red  and  the
complexion  fresh,  but  notwithstanding  this  there  is  complete  incapa-
bility, debility  and  deficient  chylification.  This  condition,  owing  to  the
apparent  health,  is  often  set  down  by  the  medical  profession  as  an
"imaginary  disease."

In  anaemia  and  chlorosis  there  is  always  too  great  internal  heat,  with
an  external  sensation  of  cold.  And  here  we  have  the  explanation  of
these  diseases,  which  like  all  other  chronic  diseases,  point  to  internal
latent  fever.

Imperfect  digestion  in  conjunction  with  insufficient  activity  of  the  skin
and  lungs,  i.  e.  want  of  good  food  and  air — are  the  sole  causes  of  these
diseases.  In  consequence  of  the  imperfect  digestion,  masses  of  foreign
or  morbid  matter  accumulate,  causing  tension  and  increased  heat  in  the
unhealthy  body.  In  a  state  of  gaseous  fermentation,  they  pass  through
the  whole  body  and  are  deposited  especially  in  the  extremities,  that  is
directly  under,  or  in  the  skin.  The  finest  blood-vessels  of  the  skin  thus
gradually  become  obstructed,  the  blood  is  no  longer  able  to  reach  them,
so  that  there  is  not  the  warm  feeling  which  a  healthy  skin  presents.  The
skin,  on  the  contrary,  appears  pallid  and  withered.

Thus  it  is  imperfect  digestion  which  is  chiefly  to  blame  for  anaemia
and  chlorosis.  Inactivity  of  the  lungs,  with  its  consequences,  is  another
cause,  due  in  turn,  to  the  want  of  fresh,  healthy  air.  Unfortunately  the
fear,  fostered  by  physicians,  of  taking  cold,  keeps  many  people  from
properly  ventilating  their  rooms  and  so  admits  of  the  injurious  in-
fluences of  bad  air  proving  all  the  more  effective.  The  orthodox  medical
school  well  knows,  that  it  is  the  lungs  which  by  the  respiration  of  fresh
air  renew  the  blood;  nevertheless,  in  cases  of  sickness,  the  mistake  is
made  of  keeping  the  patient  confined  to  his  chamber,  and  advising  him
to  avoid  all  contact  with  the  fresh  air.  But  this  also,  so  clearly  char-
acterizing the  imperfection  of  the  orthodox  medical  system,  is  to  be
explained.

Allopathy,  which  does  not  recognize  the  real  cause  of  disease,  makes
no  endeavor  to  remove  the  morbid  matter  from  the  body,  but  only  to
suppress  the  symptoms  of  the  disease.  It  transforms  every  illness  into  a
chronic  state,  not  observed  by  the  uninitiated,  and  calls  this  a  "cure."
But  as  we  shall  see,  such  a  cure  is  only  apparent,  not  real.  Hitherto,  un-
fortunately, no  one  has  possessed  a  certain  and  infallible  method  of  dis-
covering these  pseudo-cures.  Now,  however,  we  have  my  Science  of
Facial  Expression,  which  enables  every  student  of  the  system  to  recog-
nize whether  the  cure  is  real  or  not.


368  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

When  unnatural  medicaments  are  employed  for  the  purpose  of  curing
hloodlessness  and  chlorosis,  the  stomach  is  burdened  with  still  more
indigestible  matter  and  the  condition  rendered  worse.  These  diseases
can  be  cured  only  by  expelling  the  foreign  matter  from  the  system,  but
never  by  medicaments.  By  drugs — including  that  favorite  remedy  for
anaemia :  iron — the  stomach  soon  becomes  so  weakened,  that  the  patient
has  no  appetite  except  for  strongly  seasoned,  piquant  dishes.  Such,
however,  we  are  convinced,  are  as  good  as  altogether  indigestible,  and
operate  solely  to  stimulate  the  system,  until  there  is  finally  no  longer  any
normal  appetite  at  all.  Then  the  doctor  will  recommend  a  highly
nutritious  diet,  "nourishing"  wines,  flesh-meat,  eggs,  aided  by  still
stronger  medicines  than  before.  Then  the  patient,  finding  ultimately
that  his  physicians  do  him  no  good  at  all,  begins  to  despair,  and  only
then,  unfortunately,  when  in  this  sad  condition,  generally  seeks  my
advice.  The  first  week  under  my  treatment  usually  suffices  to  open  the
eyes  of  my  patients  as  to  the  mistakes  of  the  orthodox  medical  school,
and  the  successful  result  of  the  cure  converts  them  finally  into  enthusi-
astic disciples  of  my  New  Science  of  Healing,

As  soon  as  the  foreign  matter  obstructing  the  pores  and  impeding  the
circulation,  is  removed,  the  blood  again  circulates  to  the  surface  of  the
body,  renews  its  warmth  and  restores  to  it  its  normal  color  and  moist
condition.

The  easily  digestible,  unstimulating  foods,  which  I  advise,  are  par-
ticularly suited  for  anaemical  and  chlorotic  patients,

I  repeat,  that  fresh,  natural  air  as  found  outside,  or  in  our  rooms  when
the  windows  are  open,  possesses,  like  water,  the  power  of  aiding  in  a
natural  manner  the  curative  crisis  which  Nature  causes  to  take  place  in
our  bodies.  Unfortunately  our  orthodox  physicians,  on  the  plea  of
avoiding  the  danger  of  colds,  forbid  the  use  of  these  two  important
factors,  fresh  air  and  cold  water — a  proof  of  how  little  they  understand
of  the  nature  of  colds.  Unable,  without  serious  injury  to  the  organism,
to  effectually  combat  chills,  they  endeavor  before  all  things  to  prevent
such  appearing,  and  to  this  end  use  the  means  most  suitable  for  sup-
pressing the  reactionary  power  of  the  body.

But  to  anyone  who  has  studied  my  theory  of  disease  as  previously  out-
lined, a  cold  is  a  quite  harmless  syrnptom:  it  is,  indeed,  to  be  welcomed.
A  really  healthy  person  cannot  catch  a  cold,  because  there  is  no
foreign  matter  in  his  body.  Again,  a  person  who  is  encumbered  with
such  matter,  IduI  who  lives  in  a  natural  way,  knows  that  by  a  suitable  use
of  cold  water,  with  fresh  air  and  an  unstimulating  diet,  he  will  be  en-
abled to  recover  his  health.  He  will  thereby  attain  a  hardiness  and
inner  bodily  purity,  which  he  did  not  before  possess.  He  knows,  too,  that
colds,  caused  especiallv  by  sudden  changes  of  temperature,  can  only  be
brought  about  bv  the  fresh  air  so  strengthening  the  vitality  of  the  body,
as  to  enable  it  to  produce  a  curative  crisis,  which  appears  in  the  form  of
a  cold.  By  means  of  this  crisis  the  body  will  be  enabled  to  expel  a
quantity  of  the  foreign  matter.  Such  a  crisis,  therefore,  so  far  from  do-
ing injury,  assists  the  body  to  return  to  better  health.

The  treatment  of  ansemic  and  chlorotic  patients  must  be  adapted  to  the
particular  individual,  being  mild  or  energetic,  as  the  case  may  require.
Advice  exactly  applicable  to  every  patient,  cannot  be  given.  From  the
following  report,  however,  the  chief  general  principles  may  be  learned.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide  3()9

A  girl  of  nineteen  had  been  under  allopathic  treatment  for  chlorosis
the  form  of  pills,  then  as  a  mixture  with  pepsin  and  other  medicines.
He  had  further  advised  her  to  take  only  the  most  "nutritious"  food:
flesh-meat  and  bouillon,  ham  and  eggs  every  day,  with  one  or  two  glasses
of  Hungarian  wine;  instead  of  tea  or  coffee,  he  recommended  good
boiled  milk.  Water,  he  said,  might  contain  many  dangerous  miasmata,
so  he  advised  her  to  rather  drink  some  "strengthening"  beer.  His  direc-
tions were  conscientiously  followed  for  months  and  years,  but  without
success.  The  girl's  condition  at  first  was  bad  enough,  by  the  treatment
it  was  made  far  worse.  Her  digestion  became  much  weaker,  despite  the
strengthening  diet  she  was  literally  starved;  she  gradually  grew  weaker,
paler  and  more  discontented  in  mind.  She  plainly  felt  that  the  doctor's
prescriptions  did  her  no  good,  yet  she  laid  the  blame  not  on  them,  but  on
her  own  system,  believing  that  she  was  incapable  of  regaining  health.
The  strengthening  food  which  she  ate,  passed  through  her  body,  it  is  true,
in  spite  of  constipation,  but  afforded  no  nourishment  for  the  system,
since  the  stomach  was  altogether  debilitated.  From  puberty,  her  men-
struation had  never  been  normal,  being  always  irregular.  Thus,  after
four  years  of  allopathic  treatment,  her  condition  was  wholly  miserable.
Melancholy  and  weary  of  life,  languid,  distrustful,  and  haunted  by
thoughts  of  suicide,  excessively  nervous,  a  burden  to  others  and  herself,
this  poor  mistreated  girl  came  under  my  hands.  I  immediately  changed
her  diet,  giving  her  entirely  unstimulating,  easily  digestible  vegetarian
food,  prescribing  as  a  beverage  only  pure  water,  and  recommending  be-
sides, abundant  exercise  in  the  open  air.  Further  instructions  were  to
sleep  with  the  windows  open,  and  to  take  three  friction  baths  daily  and
two  steam-baths  weekly.  In  a  week  the  patient's  frame  of  mind  was  al-
ready completely  transformed.  Her  pessimistic  and  morbid  mood  had
changed  to  one  of  joy  and  delight  in  life.  Within  four  months  both
digestion  and  menstruation  had  become  fairly  normal,  and  the  girl  was,
so  to  say,  regenerated.  Her  skin  which  before  could  not  be  brought  to
perspire,  now  became  normally  warm  and  moist.  In  six  months  more
the  girl  developed  in  a  truly  astonishing  manner,  and  within  a  year  she
was  completely  cured.

Further  cases  from  my  practice  may  be  read  in  Part  IV.


370  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide


DISEASES  OF  THE  EYE  AND  EAR


BOTH  of  those  important  organs  of  sense,  the  eye  and  the  ear,  are
suhject  to  serious  diseases.  Generally,  indeed  almost  always,  these
diseases  are  attributed  to  influences  directly  affecting  the  organs
named,  without  any  inquiry  to  see  whether  there  is  a  deeper  cause.
My  method  of  cure,  and  the  experience  I  have  gained  in  the  application
of  it,  leave  no  manner  of  doubt,  that  all  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear,  no
matter  by  what  name  they  may  be  called,  arise  from  internal  chronic
disorders.  They  are  either  to  be  traced  to  such  cases  where  suppressed
disease,  such  as  diphtheria,  measles,  scarlet  fever,  has  left  a  new  exciter
of  disease,  or  they  may  arise  from  vaccination.  My  Science  of  Facial
Expression  fully  confirms  this.  By  its  help  it  can  be  proved  that  ever>'
ophthalmic  or  aural  disease  is  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  general
encumbrance  of  the  body.  That  is  to  say,  it  can  be  shown  that
there  is  an  accumulation  of  foreign  matter  in  the  body,  having  a  direct
relation  to  the  diseases  which  make  their  appearance  in  the  eye  or  ear.
It  is  quite  impossible,  that  a  person  suffering  from  a  disease  of  the
eye  or  ear,  can  be  healthy  in  other  respects.  There  must  have  been
foreign  matter  which  made  its  way  to  the  parts  afflicted,  before  such
disease  could  arise.  Such  process  can  be  remarked  j^ears  in  advance  by
the  aid  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.  Let  us  first  consider  diseases
of  the  ear.

When  the  foreign  matter  has  passed  to  the  ears,  the  first  result  is  ob-
struction of  the  fine  auditory  canals.  The  tympanic  membrane  is  fre-
quently ruptured,  or  grows  relaxed  and  incapable  of  vibration,  /.  e.  un-
able to  transmit  the  sound  waves  in  a  normal  manner.  In  this  way
arises  catarrh  of  the  middle  ear,  indicating  accumulation  of  the  foreign
matter  there.  It  frequently  happens  with  such  accumulations,  that  if
the  pressure  from  below  is  strong,  an  acute  state  sets  in.  Suppuration
than  often  takes  place  in  the  internal  ear,  fermenting  foreign  matter
being  constantly  discharged  outwards,  thus  causing  the  well  known  dis-
ease otorrhea  or  running  from  the  ear.  If  this  acute  condition  is  not
cured  in  time  in  the  natural  way,  still  heavier  encumbrance,  and  often
even  destruction  of  the  organ  of  hearing  is  the  consequence.  This  is
always  worse,  the  more  the  disease  has  been  forced  back  into  the  system
by  treatment  with  drugs.

To  anyone  who  has  followed  my  former  explanations,  it  will  be  clear
that  running  from  the  ear,  and  cold  in  the  head,  on  the  one  hand,  and
gonorrhea  and  the  whites,  on  the  other,  must  have  a  common  cause,
i  maintain  that  all  these  various  diseases  arise  simply  from  foreign
matter,  which  is  lying  accumulated  in  the  body  in  a  latent  condition,
passing  over  into  an  acute  fermentive  state,  thus  forming  pus  or  mucus.
The  fermenting  condition  causes  an  inflammation  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane and  parts  of  the  body  concerned;  and  this  inflammation,  in  a
serious  case,  may  result  in  open,  suppurating  sores,  or  small  ulcers.


Universal  Naliiropalhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  371

This  inllainnialory  slate  may  be  chielly  observed  in  the  inner  parts  of
the  body,  which  iiave  no  direct  communication  with  tiie  open  air.  It  is
of  high  importance  for  us,  because  it  is  the  surest  sign  of  a  severe  in-
ternal encumbrance  of  the  body;  and  further,  a  proof  that  there  is  still
sullicient  bodily  vitality  to  expel  the  foreign  matter  by  means  of  a
curative  crisis.

In  diseases  of  the  eye,  the  case  is  quite  similar.  The  foreign  matter  fills
the  crystalline  humor  in  the  interior,  disturbs  it,  and  thus  weakens  the
power  of  vision.  This  is  the  cause  of  myopia  or  near-sightedness.  In
other  cases,  the  foreign  matter  passes  into  the  inner  ocular  membranes,
whence  it  may  come  that  the  yellow  spot  in  the  eye,  and  its  nerves,  are
displaced  or  covered  over,  causing  the  disease  known  as  black  cataract
(amaurosis) .

Gray  cataract  is  caused  in  a  similar  manner.  Over  the  crystalline  lens
an  opaque  film  forms,  which  is  nothing  but  foreign  matter  that  has
entered  the  eye  and  the  crystalline  lens.  These  are  conditions  which  are
brought  about  generally  only  by  very  long  continued  encumbrance,  and
therefore  usually  occur  only  in  persons  well  advanced  in  years.

Green  cataract  (glaucoma),  extreme  tension  of  the  eyeball,  is  caused
simply  by  the  fermentation  of  the  foreign  matter  in  the  eye.  The  re-
presentatives of  the  orthodox  medical  school,  in  seeking  to  cure  this  dis-
ease by  cutting  out  a  piece  of  the  iris,  only  divert  the  bodily  vitality
from  the  necessary  task  of  healing.  They  mutilate  the  eye,  and  yet  leave
the  original  disease  unchanged.  An  alteration  in  the  condition  of  the
eye  may,  however,  be  brought  about  by  this  operation.

When  we  consider  all  this,  it  becomes  apparent  how  purposeless  all
these  eye-operations  are,  which  are  directed  only  to  the  external  symp-
toms, but  never  to  eradicating  the  cause  of  the  disease.  As  long  as  no
new  encumbrance  of  the  eye  sets  in,  the  operation  is  regarded  as  suc-
cessful. But  whenever  the  foreign  matter,  as  can  hardly  fail  to  be  the
case,  undergoes  changes  in  position  or  condition,  the  former,  or  it  may
be  fresh,  symptoms  of  disease  reappear  immediately,  proving  the  use-
lessness  of  the  "successful"  operation.

Egyptian  eye  disease.  This  disease,  so  common  in  childhood  parti-
cularly, is  nothing  more  than  the  fermentation  of  morbid  matter,  gener-
ally inherited,  by  some  chance  cause  coming  into  a  state  of  violent  agi-
tation, producing  inflammation.  As  a  consequence,  the  cure  is  also  a
very  slow  one,  requiring  the  greatest  patience.  In  many  such  cases,
my  method  has  met  with  the  greatest  success.  The  following  interesting
reports  of  cures  may  serve  as  illustrations.

A  little  boy  of  eight  took  ill  of  Egyptian  eye  disease,  and  was  treated
by  instillation  of  atropia,  and  operation  for  four  years  in  various
clinics  and  private  hospitals,  but  without  success.  The  physicians  at
last  decided  that  the  boy  w^as  suffering  from  hydrocephalus  (water  on
the  brain)  and  that  nothing  more  could  be  done  for  him.  His  mother
therefore  brought  him  to  me.  By  means  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Ex-
pression, I  ascertained  that  the  abnormally  large  head,  and  the  inflam-
mation of  the  eyeball,  were  really  the  result  of  previous,  uncured  dis-
ease. I  further  explained  to  the  mother,  that  in  this  case  a  cure  could
only  be  effected  with  great  perseverance,  since  the  encumbrance  was  in
the  back.  Everj^  day  three  to  four  cooling  baths  had  to  be  taken  and  an
unstimulating  diet  observed. Alreadj'^  by  the  end  of  a  week,  the  in-


372  Universal  NdturoiHilIiic  Dircclunj  and  Buyers'  Guide

flaniniation  had  subsided  considerably,  and  the  boy  could  now  open  his
eyes  a  little,  which  before  had  been  quite  impossible.  The  digestion  also
was  now  nearly  normal,  and  the  bowels  were  well  open.  After  a  fort-
night the  eyes  were  no  longer  irritated  by  light.  During  the  fourth
week,  the  child  took  scarlet  fever  again,  the  body  having  now  regained
so  much  vitality,  that  it  could  continue  the  crisis  of  scarlet  fever,  which
had  commenced  in  the  boy's  fourth  year,  but  had  been  suppressed.
When  the  fever  passed  over,  the  inflammation  of  the  eyes  and  water  on
the  brain  were  also  found  to  be  cured.

Double  vision  is  caused  by  a  deposit  of  foreign  matter  between  the
lens  and  the  yellow  spot,  or  directly  in  or  upon  the  lens  or  pupil.  In
curing  it  by  my  method,  it  often  happens,  that  in  consequence  of  the
retrogression  of  morbid  matter,  and  the  changes  which  thus  take  place
in  the  body,  not  only  double  vision,  but  also  a  temporary  clearness  of
vision,  alternates  with  temporary  partial  or  complete  dimness  of  sight.

Squinting  arises  by  reason  of  encumbrance  of  the  rotator  muscles  of
the  eyeball.  The  foreign  matter  collects,  or  is  stopped  in  its  course,  in
one  of  these  muscles,  thus  rendering  it  firmer,  tenser,  thicker,  and  often
quite  incapable  of  performing  its  function.  It  is  robbed  of  its  elasticity,
and  through  the  tension  ensuing,  the  muscle  grows  shorter  than  the
other  muscles  which  lie  around  the  eyeball,  the  whole  eye  is  gradually
drawn  aside  by  the  encumbered  muscle,  and  so  loses  its  natural  position.
The  orthodox  surgeon  in  such  a  case  severs  this  little  muscle,  thus  again
proving  how  little  the  medical  profession  understands  of  the  nature  of
the  disease  in  these  cases.  Squinting  can  only  be  cured  in  the  proper
and  natural  way,  by  expelling  the  foreign  matter  from  the  muscle  of  the
eye.

As  is  well  known,  the  optic  nerves  run  together  in  a  bunch  and  cross
each  other  within  the  head,  so  that  the  left  optic  nerve  passes  over  to  the
right  side  of  the  head,  and  the  right  nerve  to  the  left.  It  may  thus  happen
that  with  encumbrance  of  the  left  side,  the  right  eye  becomes  diseased,
its  nerve  being  affected  by  the  encumlarance  of  the  left  side,  and  vice
versa.

I  will  not  enter  into  details  concerning  all  the  different  diseases  of  the
eye,  so  carefully  distinguished  by  the  modern  specialist.  They  have  all
only  one  cause:  more  or  less  encumbrance  of  the  part  in  question  with
foreign  matter.  One  thing,  however,  I  w  ould  point  out.  The  state  of  the
encumbrance  of  the  eye  in  almost  every  case  being  different,  it  follows
that  the  symptoms  will  vary.  Moreover,  by  reason  of  the  gradually  in-
creasing encumbrance  of  the  human  race  with  foreign  matter,  new  dis-
eases will  always  be  arising.  This  is  why  the  doctors  are  never  finished
with  their  classification;  for  new  diseases  are  always  making  their  ap-
pearance, each  requiring,  of  course,  a  new  name,  and  generally  speak-
ing, a  new  remedy.

For  us,  the  difference  in  the  symptoms  in  the  various  ophthalmic  and
aural  diseases,  is  a  matter  of  no  significance.  We  know  that  for  the
cure  of  each  of  these  diseases,  there  is  only  one  remedy  which  will  re-
move the  cause,  that  is,  expel  the  foreign  matter.  The  remedy  is  that
which  has  so  often  been  proved  to  be  successful :  all  the  foreign  matter
must  be  caused  to  retrogress  on  its  path,  to  be  expelled  from  the  body
through  the  natural  organs  of  secretion.  For  this  purpose  my  cooling
baths  and  an  unstimulating  natural  diet  must  be  used. Often,  also,  my


Universal  NdliiropaHiic  Dirrclonj  and  Ihii/rrs*  Guide  373


local  stcam-ballis  may  be  taken  with  good  results,  in  tlie  manner  already

As  regards  the  cure  of  eye  and  ear  disorders  by  my  treatment,  where
there  has  been  no  destruction  of  the  organs,  acute  conditions  attended  by
inllammalion  can  be  most  rapidly  cured — often  even  in  a  few  days.  The
pain,  at  any  rate,  will  vanish  in  this  time,  and  simultaneously  the  danger
of  permanent  disorder,  so  that  a  complete  cure  will  follow  generally  in
some  days  or  weeks.  Even  when  there  has  been  partial  destruction  of
the  organs  of  sight  or  hearing,  an  improvement  (though  not  cure)  in  the
condition  may  be  effected  in  the  injured  organs,  which  may  thus  be  re-
tained for  life,  at  all  events  in  a  partially  serviceable  condition.

On  the  other  hand,  to  cure  chronic  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear,  which
are  generally  attended  by  other  serious  disorders,  more  time  and  often
great  perseverance  is  required.  Such  cases  are  usually  traceable  to
diseases  which  have  been  suppressed  when  the  patients  were  children.
The  time  necessary  for  the  cure  of  these  chronic  cases  may  be  months  or
years,  according  to  the  encumbrance.  It  is  thus  to  be  explained,  why  in
two  apparently  quite  similar  cases,  with  the  same  treatment,  one  takes
two  or  three  times  as  long  as  the  other  to  cure.  The  reason  lies  solely  in
the  difference  in  the  encumbrance.

I  will  again  introduce  some  cases  from  my  practice.  Further  reports
of  cures  will  be  found  in  Part  IV.

Eye  disease.  The  patient  in  the  first  case,  was  the  son  of  a  business-
man in  Leipzig,  and  had  suffered  from  syphilis  since  his  ninth  year.
The  left  eye  especially  was  affected,  and  was  threatened  with  destruc-
tion from  severe  inflammation.  The  boy  was  heavily  encumbered  with
foreign  matter,  as  the  abnormally  large  head  plainly  indicated.  This
heavy  encumbrance  was  what  brought  on  syphilis,  with  the  accompany-
ing acute  eye  disease.  In  the  hospital,  the  disciples  of  medical  orthodoxy
had  treated  the  diseased  eye  with  copious  quantities  of  atropia  (a  very
poisonous  remedy  obtained  from  the  juice  of  the  poisonous  stramonium
and  equally  poisonous  belladonna),  against  the  use  of  which  I  would
most  earnestly  warn  everybody.  The  eye  only  grew  worse  under  this
treatment,  new  foreign  matter  being  conveyed  into  it  from  without,
which  in  itself  was  enough  to  weaken  the  eye.  What  was  the  result  of
the  treatment?  After  six  weeks  of  doctoring  with  atropia,  the  eye  be-
came totally  blind.  This  caused  the  father  to  bring  the  boy  to  me.  I
undertook  no  local  treatment  of  the  eye  at  all,  but  simply  stimulated  the
abdominal  organs  of  secretion  by  means  of  cooling  baths;  unstimulating
diet  being,  of  course,  also  necessary.  Within  a  week,  a  decided  improve-
ment was  to  be  remarked,  and  in  six  weeks  not  only  the  syphilis,  but  the
eye  disorder  as  well,  had  completely  disappeared.  No  one  was  able  to
tell  of  which  eye  the  boy  had  been  blind.  His  sight  was  perfectly  re-
stored and  his  general  health  had  become  better  than  ever  before.

Gray  cataract.  A  lady  of  sixty  had  had  the  left  eye  operated  upon  for
gray  cataract,  and  since  this  operation,  which  had,  of  course,  been  "verj^
successful"  was  quite  blind  of  this  eye.  For  the  right  eye  the  same
operation  was  proposed,  as  soon  as  the  cataract  in  that  eye  should  be
ripe  for  operation.  This  case  again  affords  a  striking  proof  of  the
crude  state  of  medical  science,  its  false  teachings,  its  wrong  diagnosis;
especially  characteristic  is  the  deferring  of  the  second  operation  until
the  cataract  should  ripen — waiting  till  the  whole  house  is  in  flames!  To


374  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

extinguisli  the  lire  at  the  lirst,  when  it  is  small  and  can  easily  be  put
out — that  is  a  thing  which  medical  science  has  not  yet  learned.  This
patient  also,  liowever,  alter  the  lirst  operation,  had  lost  all  conlidence
in  the  orthodox  method  of  treatment,  and  therefore  came  to  me  for  cure.
Her  visual  faculty  was  so  far  weakened,  that  she  could  perceive  nothing
but  shadows,  and  could  not  tell  even  whether  a  person  standing  close
before  her,  was  a  man  or  a  woman.  Her  encumbrance  was  very  deep-
seated,  and  traceable  only  to  the  quinsy  in  childhood,  which  had  not
been  cured,  but  simply  suppressed.  Since  that  time  she  had  always
suffered  from  near-sightedness,  cataract  being  the  linal  result.  After
following  my  treatment  for  a  month,  she  was  so  far  recovered,  that  she
could  read  large  print.  Her  general  health  had  improved  wonderfully
at  the  same  time.  Her  depressed  and  melancholy  frame  of  mind  had
changed  to  hopefulness  and  cheerfulness;  she  was,  so  to  say,  rejuve-
nated. Within  the  first  few  days  her  digestion  had  become  much  better.
The  treatment  being  continued,  the  eye  grew  clearer,  brighter  and
stronger  from  week  to  week,  a  thorough  cure  being  effected  within  half
a  year.

This  surprisingly  rapid  cure  was  due  to  the  fact  that  there  was  evident
a  front  encumbrance,  the  back  remaining  comparatively  free.  If  the  en-
cumbrance had  been  at  the  back,  the  cure  would  have  probably  re-
quired as  many  years  as  it  here  took  months.  Alas!  that  the  operated
eye,  blighted  by  the  surgeon's  knife,  must  remain  for  ever  blind.

Left-sided  blindness.  Discharge  from  the  ear.  Ringing  in  the  ears.  My
patient  was  a  gentleman,  37  years  of  age,  who  for  many  years  had
suffered  from  a  troublesome  discharge  from  the  ear,  and  for  the  past
six  months  was  quite  deaf  in  the  left  ear.  The  medicaments  he  had  used
had  been  of  no  use  at  all,  wherefore  he  put  himself  under  my  care.  By
means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  I  found  that  the  disease  was
simply  the  result  of  bad  digestion.  I  ordered  the  patient  two  or  three
friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  daily,  and  natural  diet;  in  addition,  he  was
to  induce  perspiration,  either  by  exercise,  or  by  being  well  covered  in
bed,  and  was  to  sleep  with  the  windows  open.  The  result  was  as  fol-
lows. In  seventeen  days  the  running  from  the  ear  and  left-sided  deaf-
ness had  disappeared,  the  digestion  having  greatly  improved,  even  on
the  first  day  of  the  treatment.  In  another  fortnight  every  trace  of  the
ringing  in  the  ears  had  vanished;  so  that  the  patient  had  been  cured  in

31  days.  ^  ..  ^ .

General  difficulty  of  hearing.  A  gentleman,  twenty-four  years  old,  had
had  the  measles  as  a  child,  which,  in  consequence  of  medical  treatment,
had  not  been  cured.  The  morbid  matter  had  been  driven  inwards
again,  and  was  the  cause,  that  a  chronic  state  of  illness  had  by  degrees
set  in,  including  rheumatism,  general  debility,  etc.  Finally,  owing  to
the  pressure  of  morbid  matter  to  the  head,  the  patient  had  also  become
partially  deaf. All  manner  of  remedies  had  been  tried  by  the  patient,

always  in  vain.  ,  , ^. ,,,.•, ,

On  the  recommendation  of  numerous  acquamtances,  he  finally  decided
to  try  my  system.  Unstimulating  diet,  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  and  my
other  remedial  agents,  including  frequent  local  steam-baths,  were  the
means  in  this  case  too,  by  which  the  desired  result  was  obtained  in  an
unexpectedly  short  time.  This  was  all  the  more  remarkable,  as  the
many  false  remedies  tried  had  done  much  to  injure  the  curative  power


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiijcrs'  Guide  375

of  the  system.  On  the  other  hand,  the  cure  was  aided  by  the  youth  of
the  patient,  and  the  favorable  season  during  which  it  was  made.  As
the  patient  has  written  to  me,  not  only  has  his  hearing  again  become
normal,  but  his  hair,  which  had  been  getting  very  thin,  has  now  become
much  thicker;  the  colds  from  which  he  suffered  whenever  there  was  a
change  in  the  weather,  trouble  him  no  more.  Notwithstanding  his  not
he  has  grown  somewhat  thin,  he  feels  perfectly  fresh  and  equal  to  work,
both  physical  and  mental;  his  sleeplessness  has  quite  left  him.

And  all  this,  again — the  underlying  cause  being  the  same  in  all  dis-
eases— was  brought  about  in  the  usual  way,  without  drugs,  without
operations,  without  any  medical  treatment  whatever.


376  Universal  Naturopathic  Director ij  and  liiu/crs'  (inide


DISEASES  OF  THE  TEETH. COLD  IN  THE  HEAD.
INFLUENZA. DISEASES  OF  THE  THROAT.

GOITRE.


DISEASES  OF  THE  TEETH.  I  have  already  several  times  referred
to  the  causes  which  give  rise  to  all  these  diseases.  Hollow  teeth
and  toothache,  of  all  kinds,  are  certain  signs  of  a  heavy  encum-
brance with  foreign  matter.  They  all  arise  through  foreign  matter
passing  to  the  head,  and  generally  only  with  a  definite  kind  of  encum-
brance, i.  e.  that  in  which  the  foreign  matter  rises  from  the  front  and
the  sides.  Neither  enamel,  nor  bone,  is  hard  enough  to  permanently
resist  the  continual  pressure;  they  soften  gradually  and  moulder  just  like
a  rotten  branch.  The  pain  then  frequently  felt,  is  caused  simply  by  the
excessive  heat  and  friction  during  this  process  of  fermentation.  Tooth-
ache is  sometimes  directly  provoked  by  my  treatment.  It  may  happen
that  persons  who  have  never  had  toothache  before,  suffer  from  tempor-
ary attacks  during  my  treatment,  because  with  the  retrogression  of  the
foreign  matter,  the  teeth  are  also  affected.  We  find  the  same  thing  in
rheumatism.  To  have  the  teeth  extracted  is  very  foolish,  and  is  simply
mutilating  the  body,  but  never  removing  the  cause  of  the  toothache.
My  method  enables  us  to  cure  toothache  just  like  anv  other  disease,  as
innumerable  successful  cases  prove.  Besides  the  friction  baths,  frequent
local  steam-baths  for  the  head,  always  followed  directly  by
friction  hip-baths,  will  be  found  most  effective.  To  re-warm  the  body,
a  good  walk  should  be  taken,  if  possible  in  the  sun.  In  most  cases  one
such  local  steam-bath,  followed  by  friction  baths,  suffices  to  banish  the
toothache;  if  not,  the  baths  must  be  repeated.  Anyone  continuing  my
treatment  for  some  length  of  time,  will  be  troubled  by  toothache  only
until  the  foreign  matter  has  been  drawn  down  from  the  teeth  and  ex-
pelled from  the  system.  •

One  point  I  must  not  pass  over  without  mention;  and  that  is  the  mat-
ter of  cleaning  the  teeth.  A  yellowish  mucus  is  constantly  being  de-
posited on  the  teeth,  which  even  takes  a  hard  form,  known  as  tartar.
It  is  only  sick,  or  encumbered,  persons,  however,  as  I  maintain  who
need  to  clean  their  teeth.  Healthy  persons  require  this  just  as  little  as
healthy  animals.  We  find  that  the  latter  have  dazzling  white,  healthy
teeth,  without  a  trace  of  slime  or  tartar.  But  where  the  body  is  encum-
bered, that  is,  in  other  words,  where  the  digestion  is  no  longer  fully
normal,  there  we  shall  assuredly  find  mucus  and  tartar  on  the  teeth,
both  these  being  the  products  of  abnormal  digestion.  The  mucus  and
tartar  are  simply  foreign  matter  which  has  risen  upward  from  the  ab-
domen and  collected  upon  the  teeth.

The  cure  of  this,  and  all  other  diseases  of  the  teeth,  can  therefore  be
effected  only  when  foreign  matter  ceases  to  form  in  the  system.  When
teeth  are  already  hollow  and  decayed,  i.  e.  destroyed,  they  cannot,  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  377

course,  be  renewed;  bul  it  is  always  well  to  have  such  slumps  in  the
jaw.  Nature  is  far  more  skilHul  than  human  aid  in  rendering  such  a
tooth  harmless  to  the  system.  Teeth  which  can  still  be  saved,  ought  to
be  stopped,  so  that  they  may  remain  serviceable  for  mastication,  as  long
as  possible.  At  the  most,  only  loose  teeth,  which  are  a  hindrance  in
chewing,  should  be  extracted,  and  if  possible  replaced  by  artificial  ones.
That  it  is  precisely  the  teeth  which  soonest  decay  and  ache,  is  a  striking
proof  of  the  correctness  of  my  theory  of  fermentation.  The  teeth  are
the  only  bones  which  project  from  the  body  and  are  not  covered  with
muscular  tissue.  When,  now,  we  remember  the  peculiar  fermentive
process  which  foreign  matter  undergoes,  it  is  obvious  that  these  project-
ing bones  in  particular  will  be  attacked  by  this  process  of  fermentation.
It  is  always  in  the  extreme  parts,  that  any  fermentive  process  begins,
most  energetically,  and  the  teeth  form  precisely  such  extremities.  Were
they  covered  witli  flesh,  the  morbid  matter  would  first  exert  an  influence
upon  this.

Cold  in  the  head.  This  is  a  slight  inflammation  of  the  air  passages,
and  is  generally  attributed  to  "catching  cold."  On  former  pages,  I  have
already  given  some  explanation  of  this  matter.  "Catching  cold"  can
only  cause  illness  in  persons  who  are  encumbered  with  foreign  matter;
never  in  healthy  people.  A  cold  in  the  head,  just  like  toothache,  points
to  a  previous  encumbrance  of  the  organs  concerned,  generally  following
upon  an  encumbrance  of  the  lungs.  It  is,  therefore,  in  a  sense,  a  cleans-
ing process  of  these  latter  organs.

By  following  my  treatment,  including  prolonged  stay  in  the  fresh  air
and  sleeping  with  the  window  open,  colds  soon  loose  their  disagreeable
character.  They  take  their  course  quietly,  quickly  disappearing  alto-
gether. The  same  is  also  true  of  influenza.

Influenza.  The  great  influenza  epidemic  of  1890  will  still  be  fresh  in
the  memory  of  all  readers.  With  a  good  conscience,  I  can  assert,  that
the  numerous  influenza  patients  who  put  themselves  under  my  treat-
ment, experienced  the  best  results,  whether  in  serious  or  slight  attacks.
The  effective  working  of  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths,  and  of  whole  and
local  steam-baths  was  again  thoroughly  proved.  Naturally  a  suitable
unstimulating  diet  had  likewise  to  be  observed.  Bad  digestion  was  the
regular  attendant  of  this  disease  also.  It  was  the  true  cause,  as  in  other
diseases,  and  was  brought  about  by  the  accumulation  of  morbid  matter
in  the  abdomen.  In  this  way,  too,  we  obtain  an  explanation  of  the  fever
which  accompanies  influenza.  After  the  cooling  baths,  an  astonishingly
rapid  improvement  took  place,  the  foreign  matter,  brought  into  a  stage
of  fermentation  through  the  change  in  the  weather,  being  quickly  ex-
creted from  the  system.  So  rapid  were  the  cures,  that  they  often  were
made  even  in  one  day,  without  any  of  the  dreaded  consequent  diseases,
which  follow  upon  the  use  of  drugs. (See  Beports  of  Cures,  Part  IV.)

Throat  diseases.  How  rapidly  diseases  of  the  throat  have  increased
during  the  last  few  years,  I  have  occasion  to  remark,  by  the  great  num-
bers of  patients  who  come  to  me  to  be  treated  for  such  complaints.  The
medical  profession  always  attempts  to  cure  these  diseases  by  local
treatment.  This  causes  the  disorder  to  become  chronic,  since  it  can
never  be  aided  by  driving  the  morbid  matter  inw^ards.


378  Universal  Xatiiropalhic  Direclonj  and  Biiijcrs'  Guide

Diseases  oi"  llic  tluoal  indicate  an  internal  encumbrance,  wherefore  it
is  cliiel'ly  pulmonary  atlections  whicli  are  accompanied  by  them.
Often,  the  tiiroat  disease  may  be  due  to  an  inlierited  encumbrance.

The  morbid  matter  in  these  diseases  in  fermenting,  rises  from  below,
and  as  the  neck  is  in  a  sense  a  narrow  pass  between  the  trunk  and  head,
it  ofl'ers  much  resistance,  so  that  in  atiections  of  the  head,  the  neck  must
necessarily  be  the  first  to  suffer.  For  this  reason  the  character  of  the
neck  is  of  especial  signilicance  for  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.

The  cure  of  throat  affections,  whether  hoarseness,  inflammation  of  the
throat,  of  the  larynx,  or  of  the  pharynx,  or  whatever  they  may  be  called,
depends  entirely  upon  the  nature  of  the  encumbrance.  The  process  of
cure  may  last  for  months,  or  even  years,  in  chronic  hereditary  cases.
My  treatment,  however,  has  met  with  remarkable  success.  (See  Reports
of  Cures,  Part  IV.)

Goitre.  It  is  a  fact,  that  goitre  is  most  common  in  mountainous  neigh-
borhoods, and,  moreover,  generally  in  particular  districts.  This  remark-
able disease  is  usually  attributed  to  the  extremely  heavy  loads  which  the
inhabitants  in  mountainous  parts  are  accustomed  to  carry.  It  is  true,
that  external  pressure  on  the  body — the  repeated  loading  of  it  with
heavy  objects — can  give  rise  to  goitrous  diseases;  nevertheless,  this  com-
plaint has  quite  other  causes.  Often,  for  instance,  water  exercises  an
injurious  effect — fresh  and  apparently  pure,  clear  mountain  water.  In
running  through  masses  of  earth  and  stone,  it  frequently  takes  up
mineral  matter  (lead,  copper,  etc.)  which,  even  though  scarcely  to  be
observed,  is  nevertheless  capable  of  causing  disturbances  in  the  human
body,  particularly  when  the  water  is  regularly  consumed.  This  can  be
explained  by  a  simple  observation.  If  the  apparently  clear  water  is  al-
lowed to  stand  in  the  sun  for  some  time,  a  sediment  will  gradually  form.
This  foreign  matter  if  deposited  in  the  body,  accumulates  in  a  definite
part  and  favors  the  formation  of  goitre.

Naturally,  those  persons  remain  free  from  the  disease  in  whom,  by
reason  of  their  general  individual  bodily  disposition,  the  secretion  of
foreign  matter,  especially  as  perspiration,  goes  on  regularly.  Where,
however,  this  is  not  the  case,  where  there  is  a  wrong  system  of  living,
or  a  bad  digestion,  there  the  natural  excretion  of  the  morbid  matter
ceases.  The  indigestible  substances  in  the  water  cause  fermentive  dis-
turbances, the  foreign  matter  presses  upwards,  and  accumulates  in  the
neck,  causing  the  malformation  known  as  goitre  or  Derbyshire  neck.
When  the  goitre  forms  outwardly,  causing  the  so-called  "thick  neck,"
there  is  no  pain,  and  but  little  inconvenience  from  the  swelling  in  front
and  at  the  side.  The  danger  in  such  a  case  is  very  small.  If,  however,
the  function  of  the  respiratory  organs  is  disturbed  by  the  swelling,  the
matter  is  serious.  Whilst  the  action  of  water  containing  many  injurious
substances  favors  the  formation  of  these  swellings,  in  the  case  of  people
simply  living  and  quietly,  it  causes  nervousness  in  those  subject  to
mental  excitement.

It  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  fresh,  icy  cold  water  is  conducive  to  the
health.  The  hardness  of  the  water  is  sufficient  to  indicate  its  indigestible
character.  Observation  has  taught,  and  sfill  teaches  us,  that  running
water,  warmed  by  the  sun,  and  rain-water,  are  the  most  suitable  and
beneficial  for  man's  consumption.  No  tender  plants,  nor  flowers,  flourish
in hard, fresh water. Such water can only be purified of its in-


Universal  Naliiropalhic  Direclory  and  litii/rrs'  (inidr  379

jurious,  indigestible  foreign  matter,  and  thus  rendered  fit  for  man's  use,
by  the  chemical  action  of  the  sun.

Moreover,  man  is  not  by  nature  compelled  to  drink.  A  simple,  natural
diet  never  creates  thirst.  Where  such,  hov^^evcr,  arises,  fresh,  juicy
fruits  should  be  preferred  to  water.

In  conclusion,  I  would  supplement  the  above  by  mentioning  the  fol-
lowing case,  which  I  once  treated.

The  patient,  a  woman,  had  had  an  affection  of  the  stomach  for  many
years.  Finally  a  goitre  began  to  form,  which  gradually  resulted  in  great
difficulty  in  breathing.  On  the  application  of  my  method  of  treatment,
particularly  the  use  of  the  friction  sitz-baths,  the  breathing  became
much  less  labored,  and  in  a  week  retrogression  had  commenced,  the
swelling  of  the  skin  being  considerably  softer  and  diminished  in  size.
In  another  week  there  was  no  longer  any  trace  whatever  of  the  goitre.


380  Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Buyers'  Guide


HEADACHE,  MIGRAINE,  CONSUMPTION  OF  THE
BRAIN,  INFLAMMATION  OF  THE  BRAIN


AT  first  sight,  it  may  seem  absurd  to  liere  set  together  a  number  of
disorders,  between  whicli  tlie  medical  profession  is  most  careful
to  distinguish.
I  have  already  stated  that  people  are  accustomed  always  to  seek
for  the  cause  of  the  disease,  only  where  the  pain  is  felt.  In  the  case  of
affections  of  the  head  especially,  however,  this  is  a  gross  error,  for  such
always  have  their  cause  in  the  abdomen.  They  only  make  themselves
felt  in  the  head,  j'^ears  after,  having  risen  from  the  abdomen.  Those  ex-
pert in  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression  are  in  a  position  to  watch  the  de-
velopment and  approach  of  such  afl'ections  long  before  they  actually  ap-
pear. Predisposition  to  migraine  in  the  right  or  left  side,  can  be  ascer-
tained in  the  same  way  years  in  advance,  and  similarly  with  inflam-
mation and  consumption  of  the  brain.  As  experience  has  sufficiently
shown,  migraine  arises  with  right-  or  left-sided  encumbrance  of  the  body
with  foreign  matter,  when  the  latter  pressing  towards  the  brain,  reaches
the  head.  The  most  serious  head  affections,  however,  such  as  find
natural  expression  in  inflammation  and  consumption  of  the  brain,  arise
from  a  back  encumbrance.  We  always  find  in  the  case  of  persons
suffering  from  affections  of  the  head,  that  often  for  years  before,  there
has  been  an  abnormal  digestion,  generally  expressing  itself  as  costive-
ness  or  consumption.  Very  often  we  then  find  hemorrhoidal  affections,
piles,  and  the  deposit  of  nodules  of  all  kinds  in  the  abdomen.  To-day,
we  even  find  children  in  this  condition.  Sometimes  the  tumors  in  the
abdomen  suddenly  disappear,  and  the  person  will  then  immediately
suffer  from  affections  of  the  head.  The  attentive  observer  will  remark
in  such  cases  quite  definite  changes  taking  place  in  the  head.  The
tumors  which  were  formerly  to  be  found  in  the  abdomen,  now  appear
in  the  head,  and  are  much  smaller  and  consequently  harder.  In  many
patients  these  nodules  can  be  seen  and  felt  externally,  at  the  back  of  the
head,  on  both  sides.

The  body  is  not  always  able  to  drive  the  foreign  matter  in  these  nodules
to  the  head.  If  the  fermentation  is  not  strong  enough,  the  morbid  mat-
ter remains  at  the  neck,  under  the  arms,  or  on  the  chest,  forming  nodules
in  these  parts.  It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  matter  travels
from  the  abdomen  through  the  body  in  the  form  of  round,  firm  nodules.
On  the  contrary,  the  body  renders  the  morbid  matter  gaseous,  volatile
and  capable  of  moving  from  one  part  to  another.  According  to  the  laws
of  fermentation  in  the  body,  the  foreign  matter  of  the  tumors  presses
towards  the  extremities,  and  henc(-  towards  the  head,  without  being
stopped  by  any  organ  in  the  interior  of  the  body.  If  now  the  matter
again  collects  and  forms  tubercles  in  the  head,  we  get  that  state  known
by  the  doctors  as  consumption  of  the  brain.  Whilst  formerly  there  were
only  hemorrhoidal  or  other  tumors  to  be  found  in  the  abdominal  region


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Binjers'  Guide  381

and  particularly  in  Ihc  groins,  we  now  find  tubercles  in  the  brain.  The
method  by  which  a  cure  is  efTected,  proves  at  the  same  time  the  truth  of
my  statements.  If  the  tubercles  in  the  brain  arc  dispersed  and  brought
into  a  state  of  retrogression  by  means  of  the  derivative  action  of  my
baths,  we  first  remark  a  disappearance  of  these  tubercles  from  the  head.
We  next  find  them  as  piles  or  other  tumors  in  the  abdominal  region —
that  is,  in  their  original  form  again.  And  only  when  these  latter  have
been  completely  dispersed  and  secreted,  do  we  find  that  the  affection  of
the  head  has  been  cured.  Naturally  it  must  not  be  assumed  from  the
above,  that  every  patient  suffering  from  piles  must  have  a  disposition  to
headaches,  or  that  every  hemorrhoidal  affection  must  necessarily  cause
headache.  Sometimes  I  have  had  patients  suffering  from  piles,  who
never  had  had  a  headache  in  their  life,  a  circumstance  which  is  wholly
due  to  difference  in  the  encumbrance.

With  a  front  or  side  encumbrance,  the  tumors  do  not  so  readily  travel
to  the  head.  If  this  should  occur,  however,  they  will  mostly  form  as
nodules  and  tubercules  on  the  neck  and  lungs.  Such  cases  are  generally
more  easily  cured  than  where  the  deposits  are  caused  by  a  back  encum-
brance. By  means  of  my  new  system  of  diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial
Expression,  we  are  now  able,  long  in  advance,  to  find  the  path  which  the
tumors  or  foreign  matter  will  probably  take  to  the  head.  If,  now,  there
is  no  obstruction  met  with  and  the  tubercles  once  form  in  the  brain,  the
predisposition  to  inflammation  of  the  brain  is  there.  When  then,  by
any  chance  cause,  a  sudden  disturbance  (fermentation),  or  dispersions
of  the  foreign  matter  takes  place,  a  high  fever  will  be  the  natural  result.
In  such  a  case,  the  learned  physicians  confirm  inflammation  of  the  brain,
but  stand  by  quite  helpless  as  far  as  cure  is  concerned.  Readers  will
now  clearly  understand  the  connection  between  affections  of  the  head
and  of  the  abdomen.  And  I  maintain  that  not  only  consumption  and
inflammation  of  the  brain  have  their  origin  in  the  abdomen,  but  all  those
minor  cephalic  affections,  down  to  the  slightest  headache.  The  only
difference  is  that  in  the  latter  case  the  abdominal  affection  is  less  serious,
consisting  often  only  in  slight  digestive  troubles.  The  headache  thus
soon  passes.

It  is  particularly  in  affections  of  the  head,  migraine,  headache,  con-
sumption, and  inflammation  of  the  brain,  that  the  success  of  my  system
of  cure  may  be  so  clearly  observed.  All  these  diseases  it  is  therefore
clear,  have  one  common  cause,  traceable  to  the  abdomen.  It  is  other-
wise impossible  that  they  could  at  once  begin  to  disappear,  when  treated
by  means  of  my  friction  baths  and  diet,  without  any  local  application
w'hatever.  It  is  wholly  and  solely  because  my  method  goes  to  the  root
of  the  evil,  that  such  successful  cures  are  made,  especially  in  cases  of
affections  of  the  head.

How  often  have  I  had  occasion  to  observe,  that  headache  and  migraine
have  been  cured  after  one  single  friction  bath,  somewhat  prolonged.
Manv  ladies,  in  whom  I  saw  the  encumbrance  was  favorable,  have
laughed  when  T  have  told  them  that  they  could  expect  such  a  rapid  cure.
After  the  bath  they  were  able  to  understand  what  before  they  could
not  comprehend  at  all.

Old  affections  of  the  head,  which  have  continued  for  years  and  have
been  caused  by  a  severe  encumbrance,  cannot,  of  course,  be  cured  so
quickly. The  foreign  matter  has  to  retrogress,  during  which  process  the


382  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


patient  may  also  have  to  endure  many  of  the  old  headaches  again.  In-
deed, not  infrequently  headache  arises  as  a  consequence  of  the  baths,
since  the  morbid  matter  in  retrogressing  presses  upon  the  cranial  nerves.

As  conclusion  to  the  above,  I  'may  here  be  allowed  to  mention  a  case
confirmatory  of  what  I  have  said.

A  man  was  suffering,  as  the  physician  stated,  from  consumption  of
the  brain.  He  had  tried  the  most  various  cures,  but  instead  of  obtaining
relief,  his  state  was,  if  anything,  worse.  At  first  he  had  had  severe  head-
aches, which  had  been  suppressed  by  drugs;  and  his  condition  had  now
become  unbearable,  consumption  of  the  brain  having  developed.

In  this  miserable  condition  he  came  under  my  treatment.  Naturally
his  digestion  w^as  completely  out  of  order,  but  soon  improved  in  the
natural  diet  and  promotion  of  the  perspiration.  Temporary  curative
crises  were  in  his  state  naturally  not  to  be  avoided,  and  occurred  fre-
quently, particularly  when  tumors  were  dispersed.  After  such  crises,
the  patient  always  felt  extremely  well;  and  finally,  after  two  months'
treatment,  he  was  completely  cured  of  his  serious  afTection.


Universal  Natiiropdthic  Dirpctonj  and  Ihn/ers'  Guide  383


TYPHUS. DYSENTERY. CHOLERA  AND
DIARRHEA


TYPHUS.  Nervous  lever,  or  typhus,  generally  attacks  persons  in  their
best  years,  strong,  robust  people  especially  falling  victims  to  it.
It.is  one  of  the  most  severe  fevers,  and,  therefore,  at  the  same  time,
most  vigorous  curative  crisis  which  there  is.  It  is  a  universally
dreaded  disease  and  with  the  usual  treatment  very  many  persons  die  of
it.  The  New  Science  of  Healing,  how  ever,  entirely  robs  it  of  its  terrible
character.  It  is  only  when  the  encumbrance  is  too  great,  that  it  is  un-
certain w^hether  the  system  can  endure  the  curative  process.  But  if  we
succeed,  on  my  method,  in  making  the  patient  perspire  in  a  natural
manner,  after  the  cooling  baths,  all  danger  is  over.  It  has  frequently
occurred  in  serious  cases  of  typhus  which  I  have  treated,  that  patients
who  would  have  had  to  undergo  a  medical  treatment  for  weeks  or  even
months,  could,  after  the  very  lirst  days  of  application  of  my  cure,  take
exercise  regularly  in  the  open  air.

As  experience  has  proved,  in  all  acute  diseases  such  as  typhus,  in-
fluenza, etc.,  my  steam-baths  are  of  the  greatest  service.  They  must
however,  be  adapted  to  the  condition  of  the  patient,  neither  being  taken
too  often,  nor  for  too  long  a  time.  The  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  must
naturally  be  taken  concurrently.  Typhus,  we  thus  see,  resting  on  the
same  basis,  as  regards  essentials,  requires  the  same  treatment  as  all
other  diseases,  naturally  with  due  individualization.

An  old  adherent  of  my  method  once  wrote  to  me  that  she  had  treated
two  serious  cases  of  typhus  and  small-pox  with  one  steam-bath  and  three
prolonged  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  so  successfully,  that  the  patients
could  leave  their  beds  and  go  out.  Within  six  days  all  traces  of  disease
had  vanished,  without  leaving  a  single  mark.

The  course  taken  by  many  typhus  cases  treated  by  me  has  been
equally  favorable.  Where  the  system  had  been  too  much  weakened  and
injured  beforehand  by  the  use  of  medicaments,  the  cure  was  naturally
much  more  difficult.

Cholera.  Dysentery.  The  same  successful  results  have  also  been  ob-
tained in  dysentery  and  cholera.  Both  are  diseases  which  cause  great
disturbances  in  the  digestion,  attended  by  high  internal  fever.  In
Cholera,  as  I  have  often  observed,  this  fever  is  so  high,  that  the  body  is
internally  burned  quite  black,  as  may  be  plainly  seen  in  the  discoloration
of  the  lips,  nose  and  eyes  of  patients  who  have  died  of  the  disease.

Cholera  and  dysentery  only  attack  those  persons  whose  system  is
heavily  encumbered.  It  is  not,  therefore,  mere  chance  that  one  person
catches  the  disease  and  another  not.  I  have  dealt  in  detail  with  cholera
and  its  related  diseases  in  a  separate  pamphlet,  to  which  I  may  here  call
attention.

As  experience  sufficiently  proves,  all  who  take  ill  of  cholera,  have
long  been  troubled  by  an  abnormal  digestion,  generally  by  constipation.


384  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bmjcrs'  Guide

Thus  in  cases  of  dyscnle'iy  and  cholera,  there  is  generally  also,  before
the  outbreak  of  the  illness,  even  before  there  is  anythini^  to  be  remarked
a  certain  feeling  of  uneasiness  and  heaviness  in  the  body.  This  marks
the  commencement  of  active  fermentation.  In  my  judgment,  cholera
is  the  most  vigorous  cleansing  crisis  which  we  have.  The  foreign  matter,
set  in  fermentation  by  some  external  cause,  such  as  change  of  weather,
chill,  fright,  excitement,  etc.,  begins  a  forcible  retrogression  towards  its
former  starting  point,  the  abdomen,  especially  as  the  skin  is  usually  in-
active. If  the  vitality  is  still  vigorous  enough,  the  severe  crisis  may  be
overcome,  and  the  patient  will  become  one  of  the  healthiest  of  men.  If,
on  the  contrary,  through  doctoring  with  drugs,  at  one  time  or  another,
the  curative  power  of  the  system  has  been  weakened,  the  curative  crisis
cannot  be  endured  by  the  body.  During  the  feverish  process,  whether
in  the  case  of  cholera,  or  the  usually  less  fatal  dysentery,  a  remarkable
process  goes  on,  such  as  we  do  not  elsewhere  find  in  the  same  form.  The
internal  fever  heat  is  nevertheless  here  usually  concentrated  only  in  the
digestive  organs,  so  that  there  is  internally  a  devouring  heat  and  ex-
ternally a  feeling  of  chill.

In  treating  these  diseases,  the  first  thing  is  to  diminish  the  excessive
internal  heat;  and  further,  by  natural  means,  to  make  the  patient  per-
spire. When  the  system  still  possesses  sufficient  vital  power  to  quickly
enough  overcome  the  burning  and  dangerous  internal  heat,  the  cure  will
be  comparatively  rapid.  On  account  of  the  excessive  internal  fever,
many  patients  scarcely  feel  the  external  cold.  Such  patients  are  most
in  danger.  In  the  years  1849  and  1866,  during  the  ravages  of  the  cholera
in  Leipzig,  I  watched  various  cases.  I  remember  exactly  the  course  they
took,  and  am  to-day  able  to  explain  it.  Those  patients  whose  systems
brought  out  the  fever  to  the  outside,  mostly  got  over  the  cholera;  where-
as all  who  exhibited  but  little  fever  externally,  died.  For  instance,  I
saw  a  woman  quietly  walking  up  and  down  the  court-yard  with  her
child  at  11  o'clock  in  the  forenoon;  at  2  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  her
corpse  was  carried  out  of  the  house.  In  her  case  the  system  had  not
shown  the  slightest  attempt  at  reaction  against  the  cholera  fermenta-
tion. The  woman  was  naturally  heavily  encumbered.  The  black  color-
ation of  the  lips,  eyes  and  tip  of  the  nose,  showed  that  the  abdomen  must
have  been  in  a  dangerously  gangrenous  condition.

My  friction  sitz-baths  are  the  best  means  known  of  rapidly — and  that
is  here  the  chief  point — curing  such  severe  cases.  They  also  simul-
taneously greatly  increase  the  vitality.  Abdominal  steam-baths  likewise
often  prove  most  effective;  they  must  always  be  followed  by  a  friction
sitz  or  hip-bath.  If  possible,  a  sun-bath  should  be  taken  to  again  warm
the  body  till  it  again  perspires.  Where  sun-baths  cannot  be  taken,  the
patient  must  be  well  covered  up  in  bed  in  order  to  induce  perspiration.
In  most  cases  a  few  cooling  baths  are  sufficient  to  bring  the  patient  out
of  danger. Naturally  an  absolutely  unstimulating  diet  must  be  observed.

In  cases  of  dysentery,  my  baths,  in  conjunction  with  my  other  remed-
ial means,  likewise  act  most  effectively.  Often  only  a  few  friction  sitz
and  hip-baths,  and  a  single  steam-bath,  are  sufficient  to  cure  diarrhea.

If,  however,  this  is  not  sufficient,  the  following  means  should  be  used;
indeed,  in  severe  cases  it  is  better  to  adopt  it  at  once.  Heat  a  brick,
wrap  it  in  a  woollen  cloth  and  lay  it  under  the  anus.  It  is  surprising
how  quickly  the  evacuations  are  stopped  in  this  manner. After  some


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Fiuyrrs'  Guide  385

liours,  a  rriction  silz-bath  should  be  taken  and  llicn  the  liol  brick  again
applied.

It  is  the  universal  experience  of  all  those  who  have  recovered  from
cholera,  that  they  feci  as  though  they  had  been  freed  from  an  oppressive
burden — for  the  whole  of  the  former  load  of  foreign  matter  has  been
gotten  rid  of.  The  Science  of  Facial  Expression  shows  us  the  striking
decrease  in  the  encumbrance;  it  is,  indeed,  often  quite  remarkable  how,
in  so  few  days,  the  condition  of  the  body  may  quite  change.

But  since  cholera  is  always  a  dangerous  curative  crisis,  one  will  always
do  well  in  paying  the  chief  attention  to  avoiding  catching  the  disease.
Unfortunately  hitherto  it  has  not  been  known  what  step  to  take  in  this
respect.  Only  through  my  discovery  is  it  now  possible  to  determine
every  encumbrance,  even  the  most  dangerous  and  unfavorable  dispo-
sition, which  under  certain  circumstances  may  occasion  curative  crises
such  as  cholera.

From  British  India  and  Further  India,  I  have  received  most  favorable
reports  during  the  last  years,  as  to  the  success  of  my  method  in  cholera
cases.  In  conjunction  with  my  baths,  in  order  to  guard  against  such
disease  in  tropical  countries,  an  unstimulating  diet  is  of  special  signi-
ficance. It  has  a  remarkable  effect  on  acute  fevers,  such  as  cholera,
dysentery,  etc.  Persons  living  in  those  countries,  therefore,  need  have
no  fear  about  introducing  such  a  diet,  if  it  is  not,  indeed,  already  being
followed.  Let  it  only  be  tried!  (Concerning  dysentery,  see  Reports  of
Cures,  Part  IV.)

Diarrhea  is,  ordinarily,  only  dysentery  and  cholera  on  a  less  extended
nothing  more  nor  less  than  cholera.  It  is  generally  only  those  children
who  have  been  brought  up  with  the  bottle,  and  therefore  burdened  with
foreign  matter,  who  suffer  from  it.  The  treatment  should  be  the  same  as
in  cholera;  only  the  child  will  be  caused  to  perspire  easier  by  being
taken  into  the  father's  or  mother's  bed.

Diarrhea  is,  ordinarily,  only  dysentery  and  cholera  on  a  less  extended
scale.  I  have  for  years  remarked  that  vigorous  persons  often  have
periodical  attacks  of  diarrhea.

Diarrhea,  no  matter  how  slight,  is  nothing  other  than  a  more  active
attempt  of  the  system  to  effect  a  cure,  and  is  thus  always  a  favorable
sign.  It  must,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  a  fortunate  occurrence,
provided  it  does  not  continue  too  long.  Such  crises  are  probably
actively  supported  by  the  recently  discovered  power  of  the  electric  ten-
sion of  the  air.  Everyone  who  experiences  such  crises  feels  afterwards
actually  rejuvenated.  We  thus  see  how  the  body  of  itself  periodically
seeks  to  rid  itself  of  its  encumbrance.

Although  diarrhea  and  constipation  appear  as  opposite  extremes,
of  the  digestion,  called  forth  by  abnormal  internal  heat,  caused  by  over-
nutrition.  Just  as  the  same  cause  may  make  one  person  stout  and  cor-
pulent, another  thin  and  lean,  so  it  may  cause  in  one  case  diarrhea  and
in  another  constipation.

If  obstinate  constipation  does  not  give  way  to  the  friction  baths,  one
should  try  to  evacuate  the  bowels  in  the  open  air,  especially  in  a  wood.
It  is  surprising  how  the  fresh  air  acts  upon  the  body,  so  that  what  was
impossible  in  the  dark  closet,  is  easy  in  the  fresh  air.


380  Vniversal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CLIMATIC  AND  TROPICAL  FEVERS,  MALARIA,
BILIOUS  FEVER,  YELLOW  FEVER  AND  AGUE


WHATEVER  name  these  fevers  may  bear,  and  under  whatever
form  we  may  meet  them,  the  reason  for  their  outbreak  and
development  is  always  the  same,  the  fermentation  of  foreign
matter.  When  we  remember  the  climatic  conditions  in  the
tropics  and  the  enormous  differences  of  temperature  day  and  night,  we
can  understand  at  once  the  reason  for  the  severity  of  tropical  fevers,  the
intensity  of  which  increases  proportionately  to  the  more  rapid  and
powerful  fermentive  processes.  It  is  in  hot  climates  that  we  iind  all  the
most  favorable  conditions  for  causing  an  outbreak  of  severe  fever,  even
in  those  cases  where  the  body  contains  comparatively  little  foreign
matter.  In  the  temperate  zones  this  is  never  seen  in  like  degree.  Natur-
ally, tropical  fever  occurs  in  various  forms.  Yellow  fever  is  that  most
feared.  It  owes  its  name  to  the  yellow  color  which  the  skin  gradually
assumes  in  course  of  the  illness — often,  perhaps,  only  as  a  consequence
of  the  drugs  employed.  The  tirst  symptoms  are:  Weariness,  headache,
griping  pains,  thirst,  and  dryness  of  the  skin.  Afterwards  the  faeces  be-
come black,  and  the  patient  vomits  black  masses;  the  whites  of  the
eyes  become  yellow,  and  then  the  skin  assumes  the  same  color,  often,
however,  only  after  death.

The  main  point  is  to  prevent  the  disease  ever  making  its  appearance.
We  have  the  means  always  at  hand.  First,  a  very  moderate,  wholly  un-
stimulating  non-flesh  diet,  selected  from  the  products  of  the  country  in
question;  secondly,  a  thoroughly  natural  manner  of  living,  together  with
the  use  of  my  friction  baths.  Even  though  in  the  tropics  one  cannot
obtain  water  for  these  baths  so  cold  as  one  can  in  the  temperate  zones,
the  relation  of  the  temperature  of  the  water  to  that  of  the  air  is  pretty
nearly  the  same.  Moreover,  the  same  heat  which  has  given  rise  to  the
fermentation  (disease),  likewise  favors  the  process  of  cure,  since  in  those
lands  the  re-warming  and  perspiring  after  the  baths,  ensues  more
rapidly  than  in  temperate  zones.  It  will  never  be  possible  for  medical
science,  by  means  of  quinine,  antipyrin  or  other  means  for  paralyzing  the
nerves,  to  really  cure  any  fever  whatever.  When  a  weak  dose  of  the
remedy  has  done  its  work,  a  stronger  one  will  have  to  be  given;  and
tinally  the  repeated  paralyzing  of  the  nerves  will  cause  the  most  severe
diseases — serious  nervous  complaints,  which  are  then  all  the  more
difficult  to  cure.

In  all  tropical  countries,  my  treatment  has  been  tried  with  the  best
success  in  such  fever  cases,  according  to  the  rules  laid  down  in  the
present  hand-book.  A  Mr.  R.  of  Batavia,  writing  to  me  from  Genoa,
remarked  among  other  things:

"I  have  just  learned  that  my  wife  and  my  book-keeper  in  Batavia
(Dutch  East  Indies)  to  whom  I  sent  your  book,  have  also  employed  your


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  387


treatment  with  extraordinary  success  against  the  climatic  fever  pre-
vailing there."

The  Rev.  Mr.  M.,  of  P.  L.  (Brazil),  wrote  to  me  under  date  of  December
16th,  1890,  as  follows :

"As  for  myself,  I  can  gratefully  inform  you  that  by  the  employment  of
in  a  very  short  time  decidedly  improved.  We  have  some  trouble  with
the  diet  in  this  land  of  coffee,  where  instead  of  wheatmeal,  we  have  to
be  content  with  maize  bread;  instead  of  German  vegetables,  our  beans
and  rice,  manioc,  etc.;  instead  of  pears,  apples,  and  plums,  our  bananas,
sweet  potatoes,  melons,  oranges,  figs,  dates,  chestnuts,  and  the  like."

The  following  is  extracted  from  a  letter,  written  in  1891,  from  one  of
my  disciples  on  the  Gold  Coast  and  in  Cameroon,  Mr.  J.  S.,  a  missionary,
of  B.,  Accra,  Gold  Coast:

"As  far  as  possible,  guided  by  the  publications  sent  us,  we  have  tried
to  apply  your  treatment  in  fevers,  especially  in  bilious  fever.  We  are
happy  to  be  able  to  report,  that  your  method  greatly  mitigates  the  at-
tacks of  fever  that  occur  so  frequentW."

From  a  letter  which  I  received  from  Mr.  M.  H.,  I  extract  the  following :

Stann  Creek,  near  Belize,  British  Honduras,  Central  America,  July
3rd,  1890.  Having  received  your  handbook,  "The  New  Science  of  Heal-
ing," I  beg  to  thank  you  for  your  kind  letter  of  advice,  which  I  have  fol-
lowed as  far  as  existing  conditions  permit.  Every  year  I  have  had  to
fight  our  tropical  fevers,  ague,  and  other  disorders — this  year  /  have  re-
mained free  from  all  these  troubles,  by  the  employment  of  your  method
of  treatment.

In  a  long  letter  to  me  from  Otjimbingue  (Hereroland),  South-west
Africa,  Mr.  F.  M.,  after  describing  the  serious  illness  of  his  wife,  which
was  held  to  be  incurable,  wrote:  "None  of  the  remedies  which  I  had
tried  during  30  years  could  check  the  progress  of  the  disease.  The
digestion  was  also  utterly  prostrate.  Then  came  your  letter,  and  opened
my  eyes.  Now  my  wife  takes  friction  baths.  The  malaria  fever,  which
had  recently  been  added  to  her  other  complaints,  has  already  disap-
peared, the  swelling  of  the  feet  is  subsiding,  and  the  fingers  are  growing
thinner  and  suppler."

Mr.  G.,  a  missionary  at  Dar-es-Salaam  (East  Africa),  who  had  fol-
lowed my  method  of  treatment  in  his  own  case  according  to  my  hand-
book, reports  in  the  "Nachrichten  aus  den  ostafrikanischen  Missionen,"
Berlin,  September  1890,  concerning  the  good  effects  of  the  treatment  in
his  nephew's  illness :

"Sunday,  June  22,  1890.  Last  week,  my  nephew%  Daniel  E.,  was  ill  for
five  days  with  violent  malarial  fever;  neither  <juinine,  antifebrin,  antipy-
rin,  nor  peppermint  tea;  nor  yet  compresses  according  to  the  old  Nature
Cure  method,  afforded  any  relief.  The  fever  remained  at  the  same
height,  or  even  rose  a  few  degrees.  Yesterday  noon,  after  all  our  exer-
tions, our  resources  were  at  an  end.  Only  one  thing  could  save  the  pa-
tient— change  of  place  and  air — but  how?  In  this  extremity  we  be-
thought us  of  the  new  Nature  Cure  method  of  Louis  Kuhne  of  Leipzig,
whose  book,  "The  New  Science  of  Healing,"  I  had  just  sent  out.  We
placed  the  patient,  glowing  with  fever  heat,  and  unable  to  perspire,  into
water,  z.  e.  administered  a  friction  hip-bath  lasting  three  minutes.  As
soon  as  the  thermometer  rose  above  102°  Fahr.,  the  bath  was  repeated,


388  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

and  we  soon  observed  that  the  fever  was  beginning  to  abate.  Overnight
improvement  set  in,  and  in  the  morning,  perspiration  came  quite  natur-
ally. Thus  he  was  saved  in  a  few  hours  by  this  simple  curative  process."

Had  the  friction  baths  been  continued  for  20  minutes,  instead  of  only
for  3  minutes,  improvement  would  have  taken  place  still  more  quickly
and  surely.  The  longer  and  more  frequently  the  baths  are  given  in  such
cases,  the  better  and  more  advantageous  they  are  for  the  patient.

On  his  ow^n  case,  Mr.  G.,  of  Dar-es-Salaam,  writes  as  follows:

"Not  to  repeat  what  I  already  wrote  you  respecting  my  cure  of  various
climatic  fevers  through  your  method,  I  will  mention  briefly  that  your
water  cures  have  had  most  surprising  results  in  my  case.  I  now  employ
them  with  the  natives  (naturalh%  with  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and
sacrifice  of  time),  and  the  results  have  always  been  good.

"Since  last  June,  I  have  used  no  medicines  either  for  myself  or  my
family;  nothing  but  water,  according  to  your  instructions.  We  are  in
the  best  health  possible  in  tropical  regions  well  known  for  their  un-
healthy character.  Would  not  this  water-cure  method  of  yours  be  a
good  remedy  for  yellow  fever  in  West  Africa?"

Mr.  G.  has  apparently  not  fully  grasped  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  dis-
ease— of  the  uniform  interrelation  of  all  diseases,  otherwise  he  could
hardly  have  put  this  question.

Mr.  A.,  a  missionary  at  Kwala  Rongan,  Borneo,  wrote  to  me  under
date  of  January  20th,  1892:

"Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

"I  possess  two  copies  of  your  hand-book,  'The  New  Science  of  Healing,'
and  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my  thanks  to  you  for  the  good  re-
sults of  the  New  Science,  which  I  have  experienced  in  my  own  case,  and
in  that  of  others,  here  on  the  island  of  Borneo.  It  will  soon  be  a  j^ear
since  I  first  heard  of  the  New  Science  of  Healing,  here  in  Borneo.
Shortly  afterwards,  as  I  was  one  day  at  a  friend's  I  had  a  severe  attack
of  Indian  fever,  which  rendered  me  quite  incapable.  Thereupon,  I
tried  your  new  method.  First  I  took  a  steam-bath  on  a  cane-seated
chair,  and  then  a  friction  hip-bath,  according  to  the  directions  contained
in  your  hand-book.  The  effect  was  astounding:  after  the  bath  I  was
even  able  to  leave  my  bed,  which  before  had  been  impossible.  My  friend
and  his  wife  were  equally  astonished  at  the  rapid  success.  Since  that
day  I  have  been  a  strong  adherent  of  your  system.  I  have  also  seen  the
best  results  from  the  New  Science  of  Healing  in  the  Dyaks  here.  The
Dyaks,  who  have  no  physicians,  have  made  use  of  steam-baths  from  the
most  primitive  ages,  they  are  not  acquainted  with  the  friction  baths,
however.

"Were  I  to  relate  to  you  about  all  the  patients  whom  I  have  cured  by
means  of  the  New  Science  of  Healing,  I  should  have  to  write  too  mucli.
Your  book,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne,  is  the  book  for  a  missionary  in  the  wilder-
ness, and  it  never  leaves  one  in  the  lurch.  The  other  doctor-books  which
T  have,  always  direct  one  to  call  in  a  physician.  But  how  is  tliis  going  to
be  done  in  the  wilderness!  I  am  loo  thankful  to  possess  your  text-book
of  the  New  Science  of  Healing.  About  three  weeks  ago,  I  was  called  to  a
woman  whose  hut  in  a  rice-field  burnt  down  in  the  night,  and  she  had
not  waked  up  until  the  fire  had  reached  her  body.  The  woman  presented
a  dreadful  sight,  particularly  the  face  and  arms. I  immediately  ordered


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


389


wet  packs  from  morning  to  evening;  and  in  tlie  evening  I  applied  them
as  directed  in  your  book.  The  next  day  I  again  appHcd  llie  packs,  and
in  a  week  she  was  quite  well  again;  with  the  orthodox  treatment  by
inunction,  I  believe  it  would  have  lasted  weeks,  maybe  months.

"Some  weeks  ago  an  eruption  broke  out  on  my  left  hand.  Here  they
call  it  'Kihis';  it  is  a  very  obstinate  rash  and  forms  in  rings  round  the
body.  Formerly  I  have  always  driven  it  off  by  ointments,  but  it  has  al-
ways returned  again.  One  time  it  would  be  on  the  feet,  next  on  the
face,  then  on  the  back,  and  next  time  on  the  hands.  Now  when  I  saw
the  eruption  appear  this  time,  a  few  weeks  ago,  on  the  left  hand,  I  said
to  myself:  well,  this  time  I'll  drive  you  off  by  means  of  the  New  Science
of  Healing.  I  therefore  first  took  a  steam-bath,  followed  by  a  friction
hip-bath;  the  next  day,  only  two  friction  sitz-baths.  On  the  third  day  of
the  cure,  I  remarked  that  the  eruption  looked  wrinkled,  so  that  it  was
evidently  about  to  disappear.  Also  I  have  steamed  the  hand  alone,  and
then  taken  a  friction  sitz-bath  on  each  occasion.  Now,  on  the  left  hand,
on  the  affected  part,  two  little  ulcers  have  formed,  so  that  I  believe  the
foreign  matter  is  drawing  together  here.  When  they  are  healed,  the
dreadful  itching  will  be  gone.

This  is  the  way  to  get  rid  of  the  dreaded  Kihis.

I  shall  always  use  the  New  Method  of  Healing,  for  till  to-day  I  have
found  nothing  like  it.  I  endeavor  to  get  my  friends  to  give  their  attention
to  the  New  Science."

From  West  Africa,  Australia,  Hither  India,  The  Cape,  West  Indies,
etc.,  I  have  received  numerous  similar  letters,  relating  the  successful
cures  made  by  means  of  my  method — many  accompanied  by  warm  ex-
pressions of  thanks.


390  Uniix'i'sdl  Xdliiropdllnc  Dirccloiy  aiul  lUnfcrs'  (iuide


LEPROSY


OF  leprosy,  that  scourge  of  the  tropics,  we  can  in  our  temperate
climate  form  but  little  conception.  Those  afflicted  have  always
been  doomed  to  death,  there  being  no  known  remedy  against  the
disease.  Shut  off  from  all  communication  with  the  rest  of  man-
kind, generally  confined  on  an  island  or  in  a  special  hospital,  they  were
left  to  await  their  dreadful  end.  For  fear  of  infection,  all  lepers  are
taken  from  their  families,  banished  from  their  homes,  and  left  almost
to  themselves  in  some  remote  place.  At  the  most,  food  is  brought  to
them  from  time  to  time,  but  otherwise  all  contact  with  them  is  avoided.
In  temperate  climates  leprosy  is  seldom  found.  The  same  causes  which
in  the  tropics  induce  leprosy,  in  the  temperate  zones  bring  on  especially
gout  and  dropsy.  Just  as  the  date-palm  flourishes  only  in  the  tropics  and
the  oak  in  a  temperate  climate,  although  there  is  the  same  sun,  the  same
water,  the  same  earth,  so  also  is  leprosy  a  product  of  a  hot  climate.

We  distinguish  between  wet,  running  leprosy,  and  dry  leprosy.  In  the
former,  there  is  a  gradual  decomposition  of  the  body  going  on,  often
for  years,  accompanied  by  dreadful  torment.  The  disease  progresses
uninterruptedly  until,  when  it  has  gone  too  far,  death  comes  as  a  release.
In  dry  leprosy,  as  in  the  former  kind,  there  is  an  increasing  disturbance
of  the  digestion  accompanied  by  the  gradual  formation  of  dark  gang-
renous spots  at  the  extremities,  especially  on  the  hands  and  feet — a  cer-
tain sign  of  a  very  high  internal  fever.  The  flesh  begins  to  disappear,  at
first  at  the  finger  joints  and  then  on  the  remaining  parts  of  the  body,
until  only  the  bare  bones  and  joints  are  left.  The  body  dries  up  pre-
cisely like  a  tree,  and  resembles  a  mummy.  The  bones  and  joints  often
appear  more  or  less  enlarged.  The  flesh  continues  disappearing,  until
the  unfortunate  sufferers  resemble  mere  skeletons,  and  die  of  ex-
haustion.

The  cause  of  leprosy  is,  of  course,  the  same  as  that  of  all  other  diseases :
the  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter. It  may  be  in-
herited; or,  it  may  be  acquired  through  an  unnatural  mode  of  life. The
•  true  seat  of  the  disease  is  in  the  abdomen,  or  in  the  organs  of  digestion,
which  are  in  an  abnormal  condition.  The  great  heat  in  the  tropics,  which
aids  all  processes  of  fermentation,  naturally  causes  most  rapid  decom-
position of  the  foreign  matter  in  the  system. This  foreign  matter  is
forced  with  great  energy  to  the  extremities,  where  it  accumulates  in
firm  masses  on  account  of  the  internal  pressure. By  such  excessive  ac-
cumulations, the  nerves — the  transmitters  of  life — leading  to  these  ex-
tremities are  quite  obstructed,  so that  they  no  longer  perform their
function. This  accounts  for  the  insensibility  of  the  limbs  in lepers.
Such  patients  suffer  from  a  high  internal  fever  heat,  whilst  externally
there  is  a  certain  feeling  of  chilliness. In  diy  leprosy,  the  extremities  are
literally  dried  up  by  this  excessive  inner  heat,  since  owing  to  the  weak
digestion,  in  spite  of  the  usual  so-called  nutritious  food,  it  is  impossible


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijers'  Guide  391

for  the  patient  to  be  really  nourished.  The  food,  it  is  true,  goes  through
the  body,  but  the  patient  starves  in  spite  of  all  that  he  eats.  Here,  again,
we  plainly  see  that  it  is  not  what  one  eats,  nor  that  which  contains,  ac-
cording to  modern  views,  all  the  substances  of  which  chemical  analysis
shows  the  human  frame  to  be  composed,  which  nourishes  and  sustains
the  body,  but  only  such  food  as  the  s}^stem  can  still  really  digest.  In
wet  leprosy  there  is  decomposition  similar  to  that  in  dropsy.  For  here
likewise,  as  experience  shows,  the  formation  of  water  is  preceded  by  an
internal  gangrenous  condition  which  often  lasts  for  years.  The  decom-
position, therefore,  may  in  a  sense  be  regarded  as  the  final  stage  of  the
processes  going  on  in  the  living  body. Furthermore,  there  is  in  wet  lep-


Fig.  I. (15  years  of  age.)

rosy  also  a  watery  decomposition,  though  differing  in  form  from  that  in
dropsy.  The  course  of  disease  in  the  case  of  a  patient  from  Batavia,
who  was,  as  already  mentioned,  affected  with  heart  disease,  dropsy  and
leprosy,  simultaneously,  is  therefore  very  interesting,  as  most  clearly  ex-
hibiting all  these  morbid  processes.  Although  leprosy  does  not  occur  with
us  in  the  same  form  as  in  the  tropics,  we  can,  nevertheless,  sometimes
observe  cases  very  similar.  Consumption  in  particular,  is  much  like  it
in  character;  only  in  this  latter,  the  system  does  not  always,  especially
in  colder  regions,  force  the  foreign  matter  into  the  extremities  with  such
intensity  as  in  the  case  of  leprosy  in  a  hot  climate.  The  foreign  matter
begins  already  in  the  interior  of  the  body  to  ferment  .and  destroy  the
lungs  or  other  internal  organs.

As  regards  the  cure  of  leprosy,  medical  science  candidly  confesses  that
it  knows  no  cure. It  does  not  know  the  nature  of  fever,  and  does  not  re-


392


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


gard  leprosy  as  a  lobiilc  disease.  Leprosy  can  only  be  really  cured  when
the  lever  is  allacked  and  the  foreign  matter  driven  from  the  body.
When  this  is  not  possible,  a  complete  recovery  is  not  to  be  expected — an
improvement  in  the  condition  is  the  most  that  we  can  attain.

The  drug  treatment  only  occasions  still  greater  injury  to  the  system
than  the  disease  itself.  There  can  be  no  more  striking  proof  of  the
correctness  of  this  statement,  than  the  report  of  the  cure  of  the  Batavian
patient  referred  to  on  former  pages.  We  here  see  that  the  inactive
lepra  bacilli  in  this  patient,  the  presence  of  which  was  ascertained  be-
yond doubt  by  a  specialist,  could  in  no  way  be  got  rid  of  by  the  remedies
ne  employed,  neither  by  poisonous  medicines,  nor  by  any  other  means.


Fig.  11. (13  years  of  age.)


Fig.  III. (9  years  of  age.)


Compare  with  this  the  brilliant  success  attained  by  means  of  my
system,  which  absolutely  eradicated,  as  confirmed  by  the  same  physician,
all  the  leprous  bacilli.  Cure  can  be  attained  in  this  disease  only  by  means
of  unstimulating  diet  and  my  friction  baths.  Naturally,  however,  pa-
tients can  be  cured  only  where  the  digestion  and  activity  of  the  skin  are
capable  of  improvement  and  where  vitality  is  sufficient.

With  my  method,  it  has  also  been  clearly  shown  that  all  danger  of
contagion  by  lepers  is  excluded.  This  is  of  the  highest  importance,
particularly  for  those  who  dread  infection.  It  is  only  necessary  to  fol-
low a  natural  mode  of  living,  and  strengthen  and  invigorate  the  whole
body  by  means«of  my  system  of  baths,  which  cleanse  the  system  from
within  of  all  foreign  matter.  They  will  then  not  only  be  safe  from  all
danger  of  infection,  but  will  promote  their  general  health,  and  physical
and  mental  capacity  in  every  way.


Vniucrsal  Ndtiirojxilhic  Dircchn'i/  and  liin/crs'  (iuidr


393


How  little  the  medical  profession  knows  to  value  natural  curative
means,  is  seen  from  the  way  in  which  the  doctors  so  carefully  confine
their  patients  in  sick-rooms  with  closed  windows,  taking  the  greatest
pains  to  keep  away  all  fresh  air,  particularly  at  night.  It  is  thus  natur-
ally unavoidable,  that  the  air  in  sick-rooms  becomes  permeated  with


(Hands  in  Fig.  11.)


the  exhalations  of  the  lepers,  and  with  fermenting  morbid  matter,  so  that
it  is  no  wonder  if  leprosy  proves  contagious  in  such  cases.

the  manner  in  which  everyone  can  surely  protect  himself  against
leprosy,  and  all  other  diseases  (malarial  and  climatic  fevers),  so  that  in


(Hands  in  tig.  111.)


the  worst  case,  the  course  of  the  disease  will  be  attended  by  no  danger  at
all  and  with  but  little  derangement.  As  said  before,  it  is  only  such  per-
sons as  are  predisposed  to  these  diseases,  that  is,  who  are  heavily  en-
cumbered with  foreign  matter,  who  can  be  attacked  by  them.  Any  ex-
citing cause  acting  upon  the  accumulation  of  foreign  matter,  causes  re-


394


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


newed  fermentation  (curative  crises)  and  endangers  life.  The  predis-
position to  such  disease  can  he  recognized  years  beforehand  by  the  aid
of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  But  even  those  who  have  not  studied
this  science,  arc  able  to  experience  this  predisposition  to  a  certain  ex-
tent. Our  all-wise  mother  Nature,  has  provided  us  with  a  sure  means
for  this  purpose — of  which,  however,  most  people,  unhappily,  do  not
understand  the  use — our  instinct.  Natural  instinct  instils  into  all  who
are  encumbered,  provided  they  still  stand  in  harmony  with  nature  at
all,  an  involuntary  dread,  a  secret  horror  of  infection  from  such  diseases.

in  the  cases  of  three  boys,  who  after  having  been  given  up  by  the  medical
authorities  in  Berlin  and  other  cities,  came  under  my  treatment.

The  treatment  of  these  boys  (aged  9,  13  and  15  respectively)  afforded
me  an  opportunity  of  proving  the  superiority  of  my  method,  the  more  so
as  the  orthodox  physicians  had  confessed  their  inability  to  cure.  As
these  cases  might  excite  public  attention,  I  had  seven  photographs  of
the  boys  taken,  which  are  here  reproduced.


Fig.  VI. (Foot  to  Fig.  I.)


The  state  of  the  poor  children,  when  I  began  their  treatment,  was  de-
plorable in  the  extreme.  On  the  hands,  the  tips  and  even  the  second
joints  of  some  fingers  were  much  rotted  off.  The  remaining  stumps  of
the  fingers  were  much  swollen  and  nearly  ready  to  fall  off,  as  Figs.  IV
and  V  show.  The  forefinger  of  the  right  hand  of  the  youngest  child  was
already  rotting  away.  The  feet  of  the  two  elder  brothers  were  in  a  still
more  horrible  state.  (See  Figs.  VI  and  VII.)  They  were  mere  shapeless
masses,  surcharged  with  foreign  matter.  In  several  places  corrosion  had
already  taken  place,  and  from  the  sores,  which  went  right  down  to  the
bone,  there  was  a  discharge  of  pus.  The  hands  and  feet,  arms  and  legs,
as  far  up  as  the  elbows  and  knees  respectively,  had  already  lost  all  sense
of  feeling.  One  of  the  Berlin  physicians,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  degree
of  insensibility  of  the  members,  had  with  a  long  needle  pierced  the  hand
and  up  the  arm  to  the  place  where  pain  could  be  felt.  This  was  found  to
be  at  the  elbow.  A  truly  remarkable  achievement !  The  boys'  condition
was  so  wretched,  that  photographs  could  not  be  taken  until  after  three


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


395


weeks'  treatment,  when  their  state  had  already  essentially  improved.
It  was  quite  impossible  to  illustrate  the  worst  stage  of  the  disease.

The  cure  consisted  of  two  or  three  friction  sitz-baths  daily,  with  fre-
quent friction  hip-baths,  natural  diet,  plenty  of  exercise  in  the  open  air,
and  the  promotion  of  perspiration.  The  eilect  in  this  case  also  was  re-
markable. Although  at  the  commencement  of  the  cure  the  exhalations  of
the  children  were  horrible  enough,  during  the  treatment  they  were  abso-
lutely unendurable,  smelling  strongly  of  decomposition.  For  the  bad
matter  in  the  body  being  set  in  motion,  strove  to  find  an  exit.  This  was
notably  the  case  during  the  baths.

Breakfast  consisted  of  dry  wholemeal  bread  with  a  few  apples;  and
dinner,  of  farinaceous  foods,  vegetables  and  pulse,  boiled  only  in  wa-
ter, with  but  little  butter  and  salt.  All  flesh-meat,  bouillon  and  the
like  were  naturally  prohibited.  The  food  was  boiled  as  thick  as  possible
and  always  eaten  together  with  wholemeal  bread.  Fresh  water  was  the
only  beverage.


Fig.  VII. (Foot  to  Fig.  II.)


Within  a  fortnight  the  running  from  the  open  sores  on  the  feet  ceased,
and  began  to  heal  from  within  outward.  In  the  case  of  the  two  elder
boys,  each  had  still  a  large  sore  which  did  not  heal  over  till  during  the
course  of  the  following  month.  The  hands  also  underwent  a  remark-
able change  during  the  cure,  especially  the  fingers,  which  began  to  get
thinner  even  during  the  second  month  of  the  treatment,  as  might  be
plainly  seen  by  the  folds  formed  in  the  skin.  The  foreign  matter  now
commenced  retrogression  towards  the  abdomen,  in  just  the  same  manner
in  which  it  had  formerly  forced  its  way  into  the  extremities.  This,  the
patients  felt  distinctly  by  the  drawing  pains  in  the  hands,  arms,  feet,  and
legs,  and  especially  in  the  joints.

When  beginning  my  treatment,  the  oldest  boy  could  not  even  wear
the  shoes  which  had  been  specially  made  for  him.  After  four  weeks
treatment,  however,  he  was  able  to  wear  ordinary  leather  shoes.  The
normal  sense  of  feeling,  finally  returned  into  the  previously  insensible


390  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

iiieiiibers.  Naturally  this  result  was  only  possible  owing  to  the  digestion
having  improved.

On  coming  to  me,  the  boys  had  scarcely  any  appetite  at  all,  but  within
a  week  after  commencing  my  treatment,  they  could  hardly  get  enough  to
eat. Their  digestion  was,  as  it  were,  revivified.

Thus  the  condition  of  these  three  boys  was  already  such  as  was  not  to
be  compared  with  their  former  one.  The  miserable  children,  doomed  to
certain  death,  were  now  happy  and  cheerful.

At  any  rate,  these  cases  show  that  leprosy,  though  commonly  believed
to  be  incurable,  can  be  cured  by  my  method  of  treatment,  as  has  also
been  proved  by  the  recovery  of  the  patient  from  Java,  referred  to  on
previous  pages.

Without  hesitation,  I  can  positively  assert,  supported  by  the  successful
results  obtained,  that  leprosy  also  has  the  same  common  cause  as  all  other
diseases.  Only  those  lepers  cannot  be  helped,  whose  disease  is  already
too  far  progressed,  i.  e.  where  vital  organs  have  been  destroyed.  To
such  unfortunate  creatures,  however,  my  treatment  will  at  all  events
bring  relief,  and  admit  of  a  peaceful  and  easy  death.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujers'  Guide  397


SCABIES,  WORMS,  TAPEWORM,  PARASITES,
INTESTINAL  HERNIA


HERE  again  we  have  classed  together  a  number  of  diseases  which,
however  much  they  may  ditler  as  regards  external  symptoms,
have  still  the  same  common  cause.  This  assertion  I  make,  sup-
ported by  incontrovertible  proofs,  viz :  the  cures  attained  in  such
cases  during  my  long  practice.  When  we  set  about  the  cure  of  scabies
and  the  related  parasitic  diseases,  we  have  first  to  get  a  clear  idea  of
how  the  itch-tick  breeds  and  what  is  its  nature.

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  a  single  warm  day  in  spring — that  season
of  the  year  where  nature  develops  the  greatest  vitality — is  sullicient  to
bring  forth  a  myriad  caterpillars  on  the  young  leaves  of  the  trees.  And
much  as  we  are  concerned  at  seeing  the  beautiful,  fresh  leaves  eaten  up
before  our  eyes,  we  are  powerless  to  prevent  it.  Then  follows  a  cold  night
and  all  the  parasites  have  vanished  entirely,  as  suddenly  as  they  ap-
peared. In  a  single  night,  by  a  fall  in  temperature  Nature  has  done  that
which  for  us  it  was  impossible  to  bring  about.  And  all  parasites  are  sub-
ject to  the  same  natural  laws.

From  these  observations  we  must  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  itch-
tick,  worms,  lice  and  other  parasites  can  only  exist  where  they  find  a
suitable  nutritive  medium.  Such,  however,  can  only  be  found  in  the
body  which  is  diseased,  that  is,  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.
Furthermore,  the  capability  of  existence  of  such  animal  life  is  dependent
upon  a  definite  high  degree  of  temperature,  which,  as  experience  every-
where shows,  is  only  to  be  found  in  organisms  which  are  encumbered
with  morbid  matter.  Should  we  succeed  in  reducing  the  abnormal  tem-
perature again  to  the  average  one,  and  at  the  same  time  in  expelling  the
morbid  juices  from  the  system,  the  possibility  of  the  parasites  existing
longer  is  at  once  cut  off  and  they  accordingly  rapidly  vanish.

It  will  be  clear  to  anyone  who  has  attentively  followed  my  explana-
tions, that  the  only  way  to  diminish  the  internal  temperature  is  by
means  of  my  cooling  baths,  an  unstimulating  diet  and  my  other  now-
well-known  prescriptions.  Of  course,  according  to  the  extent  of  the  en-
cumbrance, these  must  be  adapted  to  meet  each  individual  case.  Thus
from  the  stand-point  of  my  New  Science  of  Healing,  since  these  peculiar
diseases  have  the  same  common  origin  as  all  diseases  in  general,  the
same  uniform  cure  must  here  apply,  which  has  never  yet  failed  in  other
disorders  either.  Treatment  with  medicines  only  brings  further  injury
to  the  organism.

I  may  liere  be  permitted,  again,  to  illustrate  these  dry  facts  by  some
interesting  examples.

The  first  case  is  that  of  a  gentleman  who  was  suffering  from  intestinal
worms  of  various  kinds.  Naturally  this  disorder  was  accompanied  by
nervous  and  digestive  troubles,  which  had  brought  him  to  the  brink  of
the  grave. Internally  he  w^as  being,  so  to  say,  consumed;  and  his  ex-


398  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


crements  were  inlesled  with  little  woriiis.  Yet  my  method  brought  him
relief.  In  the  second  month,  already,  the  cause  was  removed  and  hence
the  worms  disappeared.  As  the  patient  continued  the  cure,  his  state
was  soon  changed  from  that  of  chronic  disease  to  one  of  vigorous  health.

Only  by  diminishing  the  internal  temperature  by  friction  hip  and  sitz-
baths,  perspiration  and  uncooked  food,  and  thus  expelling  the  morbid
matter,  was  it  possible  here  to  stop  the  internal  fermentive  process,
which  had  caused  the  worms.

Another  case,  one  of  scabies,  may  be  here  mentioned,  as  characteristic
of  the  orthodox  medical  treatment.  On  account  of  the  disease  men-
tioned, the  patient,  17  years  of  age,  had  been  treated  without  success  in
various  clinics  and  hospitals.  Finally,  one  of  the  professors  ironically
advised  him  to  go  to  me,  as  he  had  no  remedy.  In  his  sore  need  the  pa-
tient took  the  advice,  no  doubt  seeing  that  nothing  was  to  be  experienced
from  the  drug  treatment.  His  hands  and  arms  looked  horrible.  By
means  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  I  ascertained  that  this  patient
had  been  suflering  for  years  from  a  chronic  abdominal  disease,  brought
about  by  weak  digestion.  The  morbid  juices  and  impure  blood  thus  pro-
duced, naturally  formed  an  excellent  nutritive  medium  for  the  scabies.
The  itch-tick  may  very  well  be  compared  to  a  bacillus,  which  thrives
wherever  there  is  decomposition.  Without  an  appropriate  nutritive
medium  it  cannot  exist  at  all.

Here  again,  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths,  natural  diet  and  frequent
steam-baths  proved  an  excellent  remedy.  The  digestion  soon  improved,
the  itch  decreasing  simultaneously,  being  deprived  of  its  nutritive
medium.  Microscopic  examination  clearly  showed  that  the  itch-ticks
were  being  destroyed.  Within  three  weeks  only  a  few  isolated  ticks
were  to  be  seen,  and  in  the  fourth  week  not  a  trace  of  them  w  as  left.  The
patient's  features  had  quite  changed;  one  could  hardly  recognize  him
again,  so  greatly  was  he  altered.  The  patient's  nature  had  of  itself  done
that  which  all  the  art  of  the  state-diplomaed  doctors  could  not  do.  And
this  was  all  effected  by  the  same  process  as  before,  without  the  ap-
plication of  medicaments  and  without  surgical  operation.

Intestinal  Hernia.  The  cause  of  intestinal  hernia  is  a  morbid  internal
encumbrance  of  the  abdomen,  accompanied  by  extreme  tension.  At
those  places  on  the  peritoneum,  where  the  slightest  obstruction  is
offered,  the  intestines,  in  consequence  of  the  great  internal  pressure,
tear  the  peritoneum  and  protrude.  The  exact  place  where  this  rupture
occurs  is  very  different  in  various  cases,  but  the  cause  is  always  the
same.  It  is  therefore  an  error  to  seek  such  cause  in  a  blow,  a  fall,  or  the
like.  They  may  certainly  be  the  immediate  means  of  producing  a  rupt-
ure, but  can  never  be  the  true  underlying  cause.  By  applying  my
method  and  thus  expelling  the  morbid  matter  from  the  body,  such  rupt-
ures are  again  cured.  Wearing  a  truss,  which  is  quite  insufficient  to
remedy  the  complaint,  is  then  wholly  unnecessary.

In  the  case  of  this  trouble,  too,  my  method  of  treatment  has  met  with
the  greatest  success;  my  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  disease,  it  is  again  seen,
never  leaves  us  helpless.  Within  what  time  a  cure  may  be  effected,  de-
pends, of  course,  upon  the  degree  of  encumbrance,  and  whether  the
rupture  is  already  an  old  one,  or  not.  Moreover,  the  cure  in  the  case  of
an  old  person  where  bodily  vitality  is  already  low,  will  not  be  so  com-
plete as  when  the  patient  is  still  in  youth.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuijers'  Guide  39!J


CANCER,  PROUD-FLESH


CANCER,  that  terrible  and  so  universally  dreaded  disorder,  cannot
with  right  be  attributed  to  external  influences  and  the  disorders
which  they  cause.  The  origin  must  be  sought  in  quite  other  pro-
cesses, taking  place  in  the  organism  itself  and  then  forming  the
immediate  cause  of  this  all-destroying  disease.  Like  dropsy  and  tuber-
culosis, cancer  is  the  last  of  a  number  of  other  suppressed,  but  uncured,
diseases  which  have  preceded  it.  Cancer  always  follows  upon  some
former  diseases,  especially  sexual  diseases,  such  as  syphilis.  Whether
such  have  arisen  directly  or  indirectly  is  of  no  import.  The  main  point
is  the  presence  of  foreign  matter,  which  chooses  some  path  through  the
body,  along  which  then  form,  as  a  final  stage  of  the  disease,  those  pro-
liferations, tumors  and  gangrenous  places,  which  are  the  horror  of  man-
kind. The  predisposition  to  cancer  may  be  ascertained  years  in  advance
by  the  aid  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression.  For  long  before  the
actual  cancer  appears,  nodules  and  swellings  are  always  to  be  found  on
the  neck,  which  point  to  the  formation  of  growths  over  the  whole  body,
and  in  particular  to  extensive  hemorrhoidal  tumors  in  the  abdomen.
These  hemorrhoidal  tumors  may  attain  to  such  a  size,  that  they  obstruct
the  digestive  canal,  so  that  the  faeces  can  no  longer  be  expelled  in  the
natural  way.  In  various  serious  cases  of  cancer,  which  I  have  treated,  I
have  observed  that  the  digestion  has  always  been  completely  obstructed.
Without  purgatives  and  enemas  it  was  impossible  for  the  patients  to
evacuate  the  bowels.  I  have  likewise  observed  that  after  a  long  use  of
purgatives,  especially  pills,  an  internal  gangrenous  state  is  always
brought  about,  leading  to  tuberculosis  and  particularly  to  cancer.  For
years  the  system  can  tolerate  the  use  of  such  purgatives,  and  the  irrita-
tion of  the  digestive  and  abdominal  nerves  caused  by  them.  Gradually,
however,  the  nerves  become  so  excited  that  they  are  incapable  of  operat-
ing without  ever-increasing  stimulation,  whereby  such  dreadful  dis-
orders, as  cancer  are  brought  on.  Just  as  in  tuberculosis  and  dropsy,
and  all  the  various  final  stages  of  other  preceding  diseases,  the  cause  of
cancer  is  usually  an  unnatural  mode  of  living,  pampering,  over-feeding,
and  especially  an  over-excitement  of  the  nerves  through  stimulants,  or
by  medicaments.  The  allopathic  school  is  just  as  powerless  here,  as  it
is  against  all  other  final  stages  of  disease.  It  is  sad  to  see  how  the  doctors
strive  to  cure  cancer  solely  by  operating  on  the  proliferations  and
new  growths  with  caustics,  or  the  knife,  such  as  wa^  the  case  with  the
Emperor  Frederick.  They  forget  to  enquire  whence  these  new  forma-
tions arise.  The  nature  of  the  disease  evidently  remains  quite  unknown
to  them,  otherwise  they  would  not,  in  this  disease,  select  as  the  object  of
treatment  merely  the  last  symptom,  the  gangrenous  form,  as  it  were,  of
the  foreign  matter — the  new  growths.  They  would  then  necessarily  have
seen  that  there  must  also  be  a  cause  for  these  growths,  and  that  on  the
removal  of  this  cause  the  attention  must  be  concentrated.


400  Uninrrsdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

As  an  accompaniment  of  a  gangrenous  condition — and  therefore  also
of  cancer — there  are  often  most  unhearahlc  pains  and  unpleasant  sen-
sations. To  bring  relief  to  the  sufferer,  the  orthodox  physician  injects
morphia.  Hereby  the  desired  result  is  attained  temporarily,  but  only
at  the  expense  of  the  whole  body  and  nervous  system,  which  experiences
the  greatest  injury  from  the  after-effects.  Medical  science  proceeds  here
just  like  a  bear,  which  in  order  to  kill  a  fly  on  its  master's  nose,  flings
stones,  with  the  result  not  only  the  fly,  but  the  master  too,  is  killed.

Why  shall  we  use  poisons,  when  in  my  system  of  baths  we  have  a
natural  means  at  hand,  which  alleviates  and  removes  pain  far  more
effectively  than  morphia,  and  at  the  same  time  steels  ^nd  strengthens
the  organs?  Morphinism  then  disappears  of  itself.  There  is  here  a  con-
tinual demand  for  a  narcotic,  just  as  in  dipsomania,  which  is  also  due
to  an  inflamed  or  gangrenous  condition  of  the  body.  It  is  only  by  natural
treatment  that  the  ever-increasing  craving  can  be  gotten  over.

In  Part  III,  in  the  chapter  on  the  Treatment  of  Wounds,  under  "Open
sores"  will  be  found  full  explanation  concerning  the  cause  and  nature  of
cancer.  Here  I  would  only  say  a  few  words  on  the  prospects  of  cure  in
such  cases.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  quite  a  matter  of  indifference  in  what
form  and  in  what  place  the  disease  appears;  it  is  of  quite  secondary  im-
portance whether  it  is  cancer  of  the  tongue,  of  the  breast,  of  the  uterus,
or  of  the  stomach.  The  chance  of  cure  is  in  no  way  influenced  by  the
particular  form  in  which  the  disease  appears,  for  all  the  various  forms
have  but  one  cause.  According  to  the  encumbrance  of  the  afflicted  per-
son, there  is  a  displacement  of  the  mass  of  morbid  matter  in  the  body,
influenced  to  some  extent  by  the  course  of  fermentation,  and  the  greater
or  less  pressure  arising  in  consequence.

Cancer  can  be  cured  by  the  vise  of  my  method.  A  certain  cure  can
nevertheless  only  be  expected  by  such  persons  as  have  a  tolerably  good
digestion,  and  sufficient  vitality  to  overcome  the  severe  crises,  which  are
unavoidable.  It  is  only  those  thoroughly  acquainted  with  my  method
who  will  be  able  to  cure  cancer,  this  being  like  tuberculosis  and  dropsy,
a  most  dangerous  disease.

A  gentleman,  about  50  years  of  age,  was  suffering  from  cancer  of  the
nose,  and  had  consulted  the  most  celebrated  physicians  of  the  orthodox
school.  They  were  able  to  tell  him  that  he  had  cancer  of  the  nose,  but
they  could  not  cure  it,  not  knowing  its  nature  and  cause.  These  phy-
sicians had  one  and  all  applied  sharp  and  poisonous  medicaments  to  the
nose,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  local  symptoms  of  cancer.  But  just  as
a  tree  is  not  decayed  onlj^  where  there  is  a  rotten  branch,  so  in  cancer,
the  external  gangrenous  ulcerating  new  growth  is  not  the  disease  itself,
iDUt  only  the  place  where  it  is  most  advanced.  That  the  rottenness  of  the
bough  is  no  local  disease  of  the  tree,  we  at  once  see  when  the  tree  is
felled.  On  dissecting  a  body,  too,  the  physician  can  ascertain  (if  able  to
recognize  the  fact)  that  the  whole  system  of  the  cancer-patient  was  dis-
eased. But  it  is  certainly  to  the  advantage  of  the  patient  if  this  can  be
recognized  beforehand!

My  patient  had  been  suffering  for  years  from  most  severe  indigestion.
Curiously  enough  this  had  quite  escaped  the  attention  of  the  modern
scientists,  who  occupied  themselves  exclusively  with  the  patient's  nose.
Had  they  had  the  slightest  notion  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,
the  0an£rrenous  condition  of  the  nose  would  have  afforded  them  positive


Vnivrrsdl  Naliiroixdliir  Dircclorij  and  Biujcrs'  (iuidr  101

information  concerning  similar  internal  conditions  in  the  patient's  ab-
domen. The  patient  fortunately  now  recognized  the  iiselessness  of  all
the  local  treatment,  and  being  of  an  optimistic  nature,  full  of  hope,  came
to  me.  The  nose  and  upper  lip  were  completely  eaten  away,  the  tip  of
the  nose  on  the  point  of  disappearing,  and  the  color  of  the  skin  of  the
nose  showed  gangrene.  There  was  obstinate  constipation  and  irregular
urination,  often  attended  by  frightful  pain,  which  however,  liappily  did
not  permanently  affect  the  patient's  spirits.

His  constitution  responded  very  readily  to  my  treatment,  his  vitality
being  still  considerable.  His  digestion  in  particular,  and  consequently
his  entire  condition,  improved  rapidly.  From  week  to  week  the  can-
cerous inflammation  of  the  nose  abated  without  any  local  treatment.
First  it  became  flaming  red,  the  normal  color  of  the  skin  being  restored
after  about  four  months.  The  nose  itself,  together  with  the  upper  lip,
healed  during  this  time  from  within,  without  leaving  any  scars  whatever.

The  means  here  employed  were  wholly  unstimulating,  dry  diet,  espe-
cially suited  to  the  patient's  condition  and  digestion,  my  friction  hip  and
sitz-baths,  and  once  or  twice  in  the  week  a  steam-bath  for  the  whole
body,  or  only  for  the  head,  when  the  pain  and  inflammation  were  no
longer  to  be  borne,  the  baths  were  necessary  every  two  hours.  During
these  baths  the  pains  always  decreased,  so  that  the  patient  felt  most  re-
lieved when  thus  bathing.  Already  on  the  second  day  the  internal  gang-
renous inflammation  began  to  travel  downward,  becoming  apparent  by
the  sore  at  the  part  rubbed  during  the  friction  sitz-bath.  This  caused
the  patient  great  anxiety,  the  condition  being  naturally  attended  by
severe  pain.  I  explained  to  him,  however,  the  cause  of  this,  remarking
that  he  must  choose  between  quietly  going  through  this  derivative  pro-
cess, and  certain  death.  I  also  called  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  the
same  degree  in  which  the  inflammation  had  appeared  at  the  point  of
friction,  it  had  disappeared  from  the  nose;  this  he  perceived,  and  de-
cided to  follow  my  further  directions.  His  only  way  to  freely  get  over
this  painful  condition  was  by  frequent  bathing,  and  he  soon  had  the
satisfaction  of  attaining  his  purpose.

During  the  treatment  the  patient  suffered  at  first  from  a  temporary
return  of  an  old  kidney  complaint,  and  then  from  a  sexual  disorder,  but
both  in  a  far  milder  form  then  previously.  These  diseases  had  not,  as
had  been  imagined,  been  healed  at  their  first  appearance,  but  only  forced
back  into  the  body  by  the  drugs  used.  They  were  the  preliminary  stage
to  cancer  of  the  nose,  but  only  gave  direct  rise  to  it  when  thus  treated
with  medicaments.  The  secretions  during  the  treatment  for  cancer  of
the  nose  left  no  doubt  of  this.  The  pus  secreted  smelt  at  times  exactly
like  the  drugs  which  he  had  taken  for  the  kidnej'  and  sexual  disorders.
As  already  observed,  this  is  because  the  body  envelops  poisonous  medi-
cines in  mucus,  these  mucus-covered  lumps  remaining  in  the  system,
under  the  influence  of  the  inner  heat,  gradually  begin  to  chondrify  and
dry  up.  Under  proper  hydropathic  treatment,  these  firm  and  hardened
masses  of  mucus  dissolve  again,  and  if  the  vitality  is  raised,  are  secreted
from  the  system.  In  my  practice  I  have  seen  confirmation  in  many
thousands  of  cases,  and  have  likewise  observed  how  seriously  the  use
of  drugs  delays  the  real  cure  of  the  disease  by  my  method.  It  is,  more-
over, the  excretion  of  drugs  from  the  system  which  causes  the  sufferer
most  pain. This  my  patient  also  experienced. But  his  steady  improve-


402  Unipcrsdl  Ndturopdlhir  Direclory  and  Bui/ers*  Guide

mcnt  encouraged  him  to  continue  my  treatment  until  he  had  become
perfectly  free  from  his  serious  disorder.

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  place  where  the  friction  is  applied
during  the  friction  sitz-bath  will  in  the  case  of  every  patient,  become
sore,  through  the  gentle  rubbing  with  cold  water.  Sores  arising  from
the  friction  during  the  sitz-baths,  which  arc  especially  observed  in
chronic  diseases  such  as  cancer,  only  occur  in  special  cases  and  in
definite  forms.  If  there  is  no  inner  latent  inflammation,  or  if  the  foreign
matter  is  easily  expelled  in  another  way,  there  will  never  be  a  sore  at
the  point  of  friction.  I  have  had  patients  who  bathed  from  an  hour  and
n  half  to  two  hours  daily  for  two  years,  yet  were  never  troubled  with
soreness.  Others  were  only  temporarily  aftected,  during  the  transforma-
tion of  their  chronic,  latent,  diseased  state  into  an  acute  one,  i,  e.  during
the  critical  period;  and  then  only  for  such  time  as  the  inner  acute  in-
flammation was  in  course  of  being  drawn  downwards.  The  soreness
then  disappeared  during  the  bath,  exactly  as  it  had  come.  In  many  cases
open  suppurating  sores  of  greater  or  less  extent  often  form  at  some
distance  from  the  point  of  friction,  which  continually  throw  ofif  pus,  i.  e.
foreign  matter  in  an  acute  form,  a  state  of  fermentation.  This  pus  does
not  come,  as  many  foolishly  suppose,  from  the  friction,  but  simply  and
solely  from  the  condition  of  the  patient's  body.  It  is  originated  wholly
by  the  inner  latent  or  acute  inflammation,  which  is  brought  about  by  the
foreign  matter  being  in  a  state  of  fermentation.  This  pus,  therefore,  is
nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  cause  of  the  crisis.  It  is  thus  quite  a
mistake,  if  patients  employing  my  method  for  themselves  at  home,  grow
anxious  at  the  appearance  of  such  sores.  It  is  just  this  participation  of
the  body  in  the  cure,  and  the  expulsion  of  the  foreign  matter,  which
proves  most  conclusively,  that  under  the  influence  of  the  baths  recovery
is  taking  place.  Naturally  the  sores  at  the  place  of  friction  and  the
formation  of  pus,  are  worst  when  the  internal  inflammation  has  already
a  gangrenous  condition,  such  as  is  the  case  in  cancer.  The  patient,  when
hot  bathing,  must  then  apply  a  wet  linen  cloth  in  several  folds  wrapped
a number  of  times  around  the  sore,  and  keep  it  as  wet  as  possible.

Another  case  of  cancer  may  here  be  mentioned,  as  being  of  general
interest.  A  woman  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifties  was  suflfering  from
cancer  of  the  breast.  Her  left  breast  had  been  operated  upon,  in  Berlin,
by  the  same  eminent  surgeons  who  attended  the  late  Emperor  Frederick.
Soon  after,  the  right  breast  was  also  attacked  by  cancer.  The  "very  suc-
cessful" operation,  therefore  proved  quite  useless;  indeed,  the  patient's
general  condition  was  decidedly  worse  than  before.  She  then  presented
herself  a  second  time  to  the  above-mentioned  surgeons,  to  consult  them
about  the  re-appearance  of  the  cancer.  After  a  long  examination,  she
was  told  that  in  order  to  effect  a  cure,  the  right  breast  would  also  have  to
be  operated,  but  that  her  body  was  too  weak  to  bear  this,  so  that  she
could  not  survive  the  operation.  There  was  no  other  means  of  cure,
however.  In  her  perplexity,  thus  given  up  by  the  "first  physicians"  of
Germany,  she  came  to  me.  The  right  breast  was  gangrenous,  and
several  hard  tumors,  some  as  large  as  an  egg,  dark  colored  and  gan-
grenous, had  formed,  extending  from  the  breast  to  the  armpit.  The
abdomen,  too,  was  covered  with  tumors  and  abnormally  large  and  hard.
The  digestion  was  bad,  the  bowels  moving  but  once  every  third  or  fourth
day,  and  then  only  by  means  of  enemas. Hard  balls  of  faecal  matter.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/ers'  Guide  403

Tendered  black  hy  the  internal  heat,  formed  the  entire  evacuation.  The
urine  also  was  scanty.  Low  vitality  gave  rise  to  great  anxiety,  especially
as  excessive  headaches  diminislied  it  from  day  to  day.  This  woman
took  up  my  treatment  with  great  |)erseverance.  The  headaches  soon
abated.  The  digestion  also  began  to  improve  slowly  from  week  to  week.
The  number  of  baths  daily  had  to  be  most  carefully  regulated,  accord-
ing to  the  patient's  condition  and  strength.  The  treatment  itself  was
somewhat  painful  during  the  first  six  weeks.  During  its  course,  the
ett'ect  of  the  so  "successful"  operation  in  Berlin,  was  very  plainly
manifested.  In  place  of  the  old,  deep  scar  on  the  left  breast,  there
formed,  during  the  very  first  w^eek  of  treatment,  an  open  gangrenous
sore,  which  constantly  grew  in  size  and  depth  in  the  course  of  the  first
four  weeks,  until  it  was  about  fifteen  square  inches  in  extent.  The
gangrene  of  the  right  breast  decreased  in  like  measure  as  that  of  the  left
increased.  By  operating  the  left  breast,  the  cause  of  the  cancer  had  by
no  means  been  removed,  but  merely  the  extreme  seat  of  the  fermenta-
tion. The  system  was  thus  forced  to  divert  the  progress  of  cancerous
fermentation,  until  at  length  it  was  transferred  to  the  right  breast,  after
hard  tumors  had  formed  from  the  right  breast  and  up  to  the  arm-pit.  By
my  treatment  the  disease  was  compelled  to  retrogress,  so  that  there  was
nothing  surprising  in  the  reappearance  in  the  left  breast  of  the  morbid
matter,  in  the  same  acute  condition  in  which  it  was  at  the  time  of  the
operation.  Here  again,  a  striking  proof  that  Nature  does  not  submit  to
the  violence  which  the  medical  profession  is  so  ready  to  commit.  Every
operation  affords  a  fresh  proof  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  modern  medical
school,  and  of  its  absolute  poverty  as  regards  all  real  curatives.
Operations  are  still  more  unnatural  than  the  use  of  medicaments.  My
of  Healing  not  only  as  "without  medicines,"  but  also  as  "without
operations."

But  to  return  to  the  case.  By  bathing  regularly,  the  pain  which  the
patient  had  to  bear,  in  consequence  of  the  changes  taking  place  in  the
body,  became  more  endurable  after  the  baths.  Nor  was  it  long  before
open  suppurating  sores  appeared  at  the  place  of  friction — a  certain
proof  that  the  great  internal  gangrenous  inflammation  was  being  drawn
off.  Soon  the  other  tumors  under  the  arm-pit  likewise  softened,  and
gradually  dispersed,  being  always  drawn  down  more  and  more  towards
the  abdomen.  During  the  first  two  months  the  patient  had  lived  solely
on  wholemeal  bread  and  fruit.  On  this  diet  it  was  possible  for  her,  by
taking  the  friction  baths  dilligently  for  three  months,  to  so  far  recover,
that  the  open  sores  in  the  left  breast  were  as  good  as  healed  and  she
could  journey  home.

I  have  treated  many  other  cases  of  cancer.  Amongst  them  was  one
of  the  tongue  and  another  of  the  throat,  both  common  enough  diseases
to-day. My  treatment  here  also  proved  successful.

The  hard  cancer  nodules  in  the  throat  became  soft  in  a  few  weeks  and
excreted  pus. The  patient  was  then  able  to  swallow  without  pain.

In  the  case  of  cancer  of  the  tongue,  after  the  application  of  each  fric-
tion bath,  a  brown  coating  disappeared  from  the  tongue.  The  tumors
there  vanished  much  sooner  than  those  in  the  lower  part  of  the  body,
so  that  the  tongue  was  soon  smooth  and  normal.

The  most  dangerous  matter  in  all  these  cases  is  the  immense  hemorr-


404  Unii'rrsdl  Xaturopathic  Dircrtorij  and  Buyers'  Guide


hoidal  tumors  in  the  abdomen.  In  cases  where  the  patients  are  no
longer  able  to  take  solid  food,  it  is  at  all  events  possible  to  banisli  the  un-
bearable pains,  and  so  obviate  morphinism  and  starvation.  In  this
way,  too,  we  can  dissolve  the  tumors  and  cure  the  sleeplessness.  Never-
theless, there  can  be  no  real  cure  for  the  patient,  since  the  continual
liquid  food  does  not  produce  normal  evacuations  of  the  bowels.

The  effects  of  the  friction  sitz-baths  were  most  striking  in  attacks  of
suffocation,  such  as  frequently  occur  in  severe  diseases.  With  patients
I  have  treated,  who  often  had  several  attacks  daily,  the  danger  of  suffo-
cation was  over  only  a  few  minutes  after  the  commencement  of  the
bath.  Whenever  a  tumor  in  the  throat  dissolved,  and  poured  its  pus
into  the  wind-pipe,  or  threatened  to  suffocate  the  patient  by  swelling  up
before  dissolving,  these  attacks  of  suffocation  occurred.  They  were  al-
ways instantly  averted  by  the  friction  baths.  These  processes,  for  the
prevention  of  which  tracheotomy  has  hitherto  been  the  only  means  tried,
are  of  the  greatest  significance.  In  these  dangerous  crises  my  friction
baths  perform  the  same  invaluable  service  as  they  do  in  suffocative
attacks  occurring  in  diphtheria,  to  cure  which,  physicians  unfortunately
know  no  other  remedy  to  try  than  surgical  operations.  Injections  of
serum,  as  the  reports  of  the  hospitals  show,  have  in  no  way  diminished
the  number  of  operations.  We  see  by  this  of  what  small  worth  these
injections  are.

Proud  flesh.  Those  proliferations  and  new  growths  which  take  place
on  injured  parts  of  the  body,  commonly  known  as  "proud  flesh,"  are
far  less  dangerous  than  cancer.  They  can  also  be  much  more  rapidly
healed,  inasmuch  as,  in  the  rule,  the  proud  flesh  can  be  transformed
into  pus  more  quickly.  In  this  way,  the  expulsion  of  foreign  matter
from  the  body  occupies  less  time.  This  has  been  amply  confirmed  by
actual  cases  in  my  practice,  one  of  which  I  here  cite.

The  patient  was  a  woman  of  thirty,  whose  right  forefinger  had  been
in  a  bad  state  for  some  time.  The  tip,  in  consequence  of  an  injury  sus-
tained, had  become  inflamed,  and  got  rapidly  worse,  until  finally  a  large
growth  of  proud  flesh  took  place  at  the  injured  spot.  The  physician  who
was  treating  the  case  immediately  cut  this  away,  cauterizing  with  lunar
caustic  and  similar  corrosives.  This  was  without  success,  for  in  spite
of  repeated  operations,  the  proud  flesh  always  appeared  again.  The
finger  finally  became  gangrenous,  when  the  physician  declared  that  the
disease  had  reached  the  bone,  and  that  an  operation  was  absolutely
necessary  to  prevent  it  spreading  further.  The  patient,  however,  not
being  able  to  reconcile  herself  to  an  operation,  came  to  me.  I  explained
to  her  that  amputation,  such  as  the  doctor  had  advised,  was  not  only
wholly  unnecessary,  but  absolutely  prejudicial  to  the  health.  The  dis-
eased finger,  I  further  explained,  resulted  from  a  definite  cause,  and
only  when  this  latter  was  removed,  could  the  finger  be  cured.  I  pre-
ation. She  was  to  live  on  an  unstimulating,  natural  diet,  and  during
the  first  three  or  four  days  take  a  local  steam-bath  for  the  finger  before
the  friction  sitz-bath.  The  woman  meanwhile  was  lying  in,  and  there-
fore had  some  scruples  about  taking  friction  sitz-baths.  When  I  told
her,  however,  that  I  knew  no  better  advice,  she  decided  at  once  to  fol-
low it  for  otherwise  there  was  nothing  but  amputation.  The  cure  was
most  rapid. Already  after  the  first  bath,  further  growth  of  proud  flesh


Universal  Naliiropdlhic  Dirrrlorij  and  Ihujrrs'  Cniide  405


had  ceased.  On  Hie  third  day  the  llesh  began  to  be  transformed  into
pus,  thus  indicating  a  great  improvement.  Tlie  gangrenous  condition
had  ceased,  and  consequently  all  danger  as  regards  the  bones  and  fingers
was  over.  Within  fourteen  days  the  diseased  finger  was  completely
healed,  nor  was  a  trace  of  a  scar  to  be  seen.


406  Universal  N(ilnrop(it/nc  Directory  and  Bmjers Guide


PART  THREE

TREATMENT  AND  CURE  OF  WOUNDS  WITHOUT
DRUGS  AND  OPERATIONS


IT  is  no  easy  matter  to  overcome  the  deep-rooted  prejudice  in  favor  of
creating  wounds  according  to  the  principles  laid  down  by  surgery.
The  current  belief  is  that  all  kinds  of  injuries,  whether  internal  or  ex-
ternal, as  well  as  wounds,  can  only  be  healed  by  surgical  and  antisep-
tic treatment.  How  erroneous  this  idea  is,  is  proved  b^  the  brilliant  suc-
cess which  my  method  has  met  with.  It  is,  in  fact,  precisely  in  such  cases
that  the  remarkable  healing  power  of  hydropathy  can  be  so  strikingly
demonstrated.  And  there  is  no  more  powerful  means  of  propaganda
for  the  treatment  of  wounds  by  water  and  other  natural  agents  than
my  system  of  cure.

Apart  from  its  painless  character,  my  system  enables  us  to  heal  nearly
every  injury,  in  scarcely  one-third  the  time  required  by  medical,  so-
called  antiseptic,  treatment.  This  statement  is  proved  by  the  large  num-
ber of  patients  whose  injuries  have  been  healed.  There  has  not  been
one  single  unsuccessful  case.  Another  great  advantage  of  my  method  is
that  not  only  are  the  disfiguring  scars,  which  surgical  operations  neces-
sitate, obviated,  but  the  wounds  themselves  leave  practically  no  marks
behind.

Whenever  an  external  injury  is  received — a  cut,  stab,  contusion,
burn,  frost-bite — it  will  be  at  once  remarked  that  the  system  sets  about
healing  it.  The  irritation  of  the  nerves,  caused  by  the  injury,  calls  forth
an  increased  flow  of  blood  and  other  substitute-matter  to  the  wounded
part.  There  is  then  increased  warmth  and  swelling  produced  by  the
friction  of  the  matter  collecting,  a  process  which  in  the  case  of  burns
and  contusions  especially,  is  attended  with  much  pain.

If,  now,  we  assist  the  body  in  the  right  manner  in  its  effort  to  repair
the  ill,  an  extremely  rapid  and  painless  cure  will  result.

The  pains  mentioned  above  usually  commence  only  when  the  body
begins  the  work  of  healing.  They  are  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  local
traumatic  fever — a  local  fever  resulting  from  the  wound.  And  if  we
remember  that,  just  as  in  other  diseases,  so  also  in  the  case  of  wounds,
we  have  to  do  with  fever,  even  though  of  a  different  form,  it  will  not  be
difficult  to  find  the  way  to  cure.

As  we  have  already  learned,  our  first  attention  must  be  devoted  to
subduing  the  fever,  especially  where  the  injury  is  extensive,  so  that  the
local  feverish  condition  may  be  prevented  from  becoming  general.

The  pain  will  at  once  be  taken  away  if  we  succeed  in  stopping  the


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  407

fever.  Nowhere  can  we  more  clearly  observe  how  fever  is  nothing  more
than  a  curative  and  compensatory  effort  of  the  system.  Unfortunately,
it  is  a  matter  of  too  common  occurrence  today  that  the  traumatic  fever
spreads  over  the  whole  body,  the  wounds  healing  much  more  slowlv  in
consequence.  There  is  a  deep  reason  for  this.  The  wounds  of  a  healthy
person  heal  very  quickly  and  easily;  not  so  those  of  a  person  whose
system  is  encumbered  with  morbid  matter,  and  who  therefore  is  already
suffering  from  an  internal  fever.  Here,  the  injury  and  the  accompany-
ing nervous  irritation,  can  very  easily  form  the  exciting  cause  of  a  still
more  extended  process  of  fermentation.  But  even  where  this  is  not
the  case,  the  cure  is  retarded.  The  system  drives  an  increased  quan-
tity of  blood  to  the  injured  parts,  in  consequence  of  which  more  foreign
matter  is  carried  there.  At  such  a  part,  therefore,  an  accumulation  of
morbid  matter  readily  gathers;  or  it  may  develop  into  an  excretory
channel,  in  the  form  of  an  open  wound.

I  have  often  observed  that  in  the  case  of  animals  left  quite  to  them-
selves, without  any  aid  whatever,  wounds  heal  in  an  incredibly  short
time.  In  studying  such  quite  natural  occurrences,  I  have  always  been
struck  by  the  immense  difference  observable  between  these  cures  and
those  of  human  beings.  Nothing  has  more  stimulated  me  to  reflect,  and
to  investigate  the  secrets  of  nature.  Once  I  shared  the  general  opinion,
that  in  event  of  injury  the  poor  animals  were  far  worse  off  than  human
beings,  commanding  all  the  resources  of  science,  and  enjoying  the  af-
fectionate care  of  friends.  Experience  has  shown  me,  however,  that  a
cure  takes  place  much  faster  in  the  case  of  animals  than  in  the  case  of
patients  in  the  hospital.  My  observations  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that
there  could  be  no  mere  chance  in  this  matter,  but  that  there  must  be
deep  underlying  reasons. I  will  produce  some  elucidatory  examples.

A  cat  had  been  caught  in  a  steel  trap,  which  had  broken  the  animal's
right  leg  an  inch  or  more  above  the  hough,  just  where  the  thick  flesh
begins.  In  her  endeavors  to  get  free,  the  cat  had  dragged  the  trap  about,
twisting  the  leg  several  times  around,  and  getting  the  wounded  parts
covered  with  dust  and  chaff.  On  letting  the  animal  out  of  the  trap,
she  rushed  off  with  the  broken  leg  dangling  in  the  air.  Nothing  was
seen  of  her  for  some  days,  so  that  it  was  thought  that  she  had  died.

It  might  have  been  a  week  afterwards  that  a  sick  cat  was  found  in
a  neighboring  barn,  and  it  turned  out  to  be  the  one  which  had  been
caught  in  the  trap.  The  hind  leg  had  meanwhile  fully  healed,  in  an
astonishing  manner,  a  considerable  swelling,  however,  still  remaining
at  the  place  of  fracture.  It  was  evident  from  the  animal's  emaciated
appearance  that  she  had  eaten  nothing  the  whole  week.  Notwithstand-
ing this,  she  absolutely  refused  even  the  daintiest  bits,  nor  would  she
touch  water.  The  injured  leg  she  kept  carefully  stretched  out,  alwaj^s
in  the  same  position,  and  every  now  and  then  she  licked  the  wound  all
over.  This  apparently  eased  the  pain,  for  she  continued  to  lick  the  part
most  perseveringly.  There  was  a  significant  reason  for  the  cat's  fasting.
As  we  know,  the  process  of  digestion  is  one  of  fermentation,  and  is  in-
conceivable without  the  production  of  heat.  Now,  as  the  animal  had
no  water  to  cool  the  wound,  she  dispensed  with  food  altogether,  so  that
no  greater  heat  might  be  generated  in  the  body.  Her  instinct  told  her
exactly  what  to  do.


408  Unincrsdl  NdtiirojMithic  Direrionj  and  liin/rrs'  (iuide

After  a  few  days  the  animal,  now  reduced  almost  to  a  skeleton,  ap-
peared again,  and  after  receiving  some  milk,  soon  became  quite  lively.
After  a  month  the  cat  was  in  a  fully  nonnal  condition,  the  only  sign  of
the  injury  being  a  hard  lump  at  the  place  of  fracture,  which,  however,
in  no  way  impeded  her  motion.

Now,  suppose  a  similar  accident  had  happened  to  a  human  being;
what  course  would  the  cure  have  taken  with  antiseptic  treatment?  An
amputation  would  have  probably  been  unavoidable,  and  the  affair  would
have  lasted  for  months,  until  the  patient  was  so  far  cured  as  to  be  able
to  live  for  the  rest  of  his  life  as  a  cripple.  Even  in  the  best  case,  sup-
posing amputation  to  have  been  avoided,  the  leg  would  under  medical
treatment  always  have  remained  stiff.

I  may  here  mention  another  case,  also  from  the  animal  kingdom,  well
adapted  to  explain  my  treatment  of  wounds.  A  dog  had  been  severely,
but  not  fatally  wounded  by  a  charge  of  shot.  Several  pellets  had  passed
through  the  fore  and  hind  legs,  while  two  had  penetrated  the  neck  from
the  right  side,  lying  embedded  in  the  skin  on  the  left  side.  The  wind-
pipe, the  oesophagus,  and  the  main  arteries  were  fortunately  uninjured.
Whenever  the  wounds  grew  painful,  the  dog  sought  out  a  damp  and
shady  spot,  and  cooled  his  body,  especially  the  wounded  parts,  on  the
fresh  earth,  which  he  always  scratched  up  afresh  as  soon  as  it  became
warm.  He  incessantly  licked  the  wounds  and  refused  all  food.  Twice  a
day  he  went  down  to  a  pond  near  by  to  drink  water,  which  w^as  his  sole
nourishment.  Here  also,  the  cure  was  a  rapid  one.  In  five  days  the  in-
juries in  his  legs,  which  he  would  lick  continually,  might  be  regarded  as
healed,  if  still  somewhat  swollen.  The  neck,  which  the  dog  was  unable
to  lick,  on  the  contrary,  healed  more  slowly,  although  not  so  badly
wounded  as  the  legs.  The  animal  did  not  take  any  food  until  about  a
week  after  the  accident.  Meanwhile  the  wounds  on  the  neck  had  also
quite  healed.  The  pellets  were  now  lying  embedded  between  the  skin
and  muscles.

A  third  case  will  also  interest  readers.  A  large  Newfoundland  dog
had  had  his  right  paw  run  over  and  much  crushed  by  a  coal  cart.  The
skin  was  stripped  off  and  the  bone  splintered.  The  animal  was  unable
to  walk,  and  had  to  be  conveyed  home.  Here  he  crept  to  a  shady  place,
and  licked  his  paw  continually.  Not  until  the  fourth  day  would  the  dog
touch  food,  the  wound  then  being  sufiiciently  healed  to  allow  him  to  go
about  on  three  legs. In  twenty  days  the  animal  was  again  quite  well.

From  these  examples  we  can  gather  many  useful  hints  regarding  the
treatment  of  wounds  in  the  case  of  man.  Cooling  with  water  and
abstinence  from  food,  or  at  all  events  from  all  heating  food,  are  the
natural  remedies  in  this  case  also.

The  surgical  method  as  practised  in  modern  hospitals,  according  to
which  the  most  "nutritious"  foods  such  as  flesh-meat,  beef-tea,  eggs,
false'  one  This  is  the  worst  thing  that  can  be  done  and  is  quite  con-
trary to  the  laws  of  nature.  In  my  opinion,  it  is  best  during  the  first
stage  of  wound  treatment,  not  to  burden  the  body  with  any  work  what-
ever as  this  only  hinders  the  curative  efforts  of  the  system.  In  treat-
ing wounds  in  the  antiseptic  manner  with  carbolic  acid,  iodine  corrosive
sublimate  cocaine,  etc.,  the  medical  profession  shows  how  httle  it  under-
stands even  to-day,  of  the  nature  and  significance  of  the  processes  which


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrrtonj  and  Ihu/rrs'  Cniidp  409

go  on  in  the  luinian  body.  Surgeons,  knowing  nothing  of  the  remark-
able cures  of  hych-opalhy,  deviate  ever  further  and  further  from  the
right  path.  The  natural  way  of  curing  is  a  thing  unknown  to  them.
I  will  now  proceed  from  these  introductory  remarks  to  a  considera-
tion of  the  various  kinds  of  wounds,  relating  some  actual  cases  by  way  of
example.

Incised,  piinctared,  contused  and  lacerated  wounds.  When  the  body
receives  a  wound  through  a  cut,  stab,  bruise,  or  laceration,  the  larger
and  smaller  blood-vessels  thus  opened,  empty  their  blood  outwards,  by
reason  of  the  inner  pressure,  until  this  latter  is  concentrated  by  external
counter-pressure.  As  this  process  plays  an  important  part  in  the  treat-
ment of  wounds,  it  will  be  well  to  consider  it  in  detail.  As  is  well  known,
we  live  under  an  atmospheric  pressure  of  about  15  lbs.  per  sq.  inch.
Our  bodies  could  never  sustain  and  bear  this  pressure,  did  they  not
exert  from  within  a  high  counter-pressure.  In  ascending  mountains
many  readers  have  no  doubt  observed  the  difference  in  pressure.  On
very  high  mountains,  or  during  balloon-voyages,  the  atmospheric  press-
ure is  so  low,  that  sometimes  blood  issues  from  mouth,  nose,  eyes  and
ears,  being  forced  out  by  the  excessive  inner  pressure.  As  soon  as  the
inner  pressure  is  again  counteracted  by  an  equal  one  from  without,  the
bleeding  instantly  ceases.  When  the  body  receives  a  wound,  it  is  de-
prived of  the  walls  which  confine  the  inner  pressure  of  the  blood  within
natural  limits,  and  thus  bleeding  ensues  as  the  immediate  result  of  a
wound.  The  first  thing  to  be  done,  therefore,  is  to  staunch  the  bleeding.
The  pressure  of  the  blood  is  greater  or  smaller,  according  to  the  size  and
depth  of  the  wound,  and  according  as  larger  or  smaller  blood-vessels
have  been  injured.  Whenever  possible,  all  tying  of  blood-vessels  must
be  avoided,  since  by  ligatures  we  impede  the  normal  circulation  and
treat  the  organism  in  a  manner  which  cannot  be  regarded  as  natural.
There  are  other  more  effectual  remedies  which  quite  obviate  ligation.
Only  when  an  injury  of  large  blood-vessels  renders  such  a  loss  of  blood
probable  as  would  endanger  life,  and  the  necessary  compresses  are  not
at  hand,  can  the  application  of  ligatures  to  arteries,  or  to  limbs,  be  re-
garded as  justifiable.

With  the  hemorrhage,  pain  generally  arises,  which  must  be  stopped
simultaneously  with  the  bleeding.

There  is  no  more  suitable  means  to  this  end,  than  to  well  bandage  the
wound  with  a  wet  linen  cloth  folded  several  times,  so  that  the  inner
pressure  of  the  blood,  and  with  it  the  hemorrhage,,  is  counteracted.  If
practicable,  the  wounded  part  should  afterwards  be  held  in  cold  water,
until  the  pain  is  allayed,  which  may  take  several  hours.  If  not  feasible,
the  part  must  be  cooled  by  letting  cold  water  drop,  either  continuously,
or  at  short  intervals,  upon  the  compress,  so  that  the  latter  is  kept  well
cool.

How  thick,  that  is,  in  how  many  folds,  the  coarse  linen  compress  should
be  made,  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  injury,  i.  e.,  on  the  internal  pres-
sure of  the  blood.  For  smaller  wounds,  the  cloth  may  be  folded  2,  4,  or  6
times;  for  larger  wounds  10, 15,  20  or  even  30  times.  If  the  compress  laid
on  a  large  wound  were  too  thin,  it  would  neither  prevent  bleeding,  nor
heal  so  quickly.  On  the  other  hand,  the  compress  should  not  be  too  thick;
cuts  on  the  fingers,  for  instance,  heal  far  more  slowly  under  a  thick


410  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

water  compress  of  say  20  folds,  than  under  a  thinner  one  folded  say  two
to  four  times.

The  linen  compress  must  be  so  folded  as  not  to  project  more  than  an
inch  or  so  beyond  the  edges  of  the  wound  all  around.  In  this  way,  the
circulation  of  the  blood  in  the  adjacent  parts  will  not  be  hindered  during
healing  of  a  wound — a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance.  Over  the  water
compress  only  a  woollen  bandage  must  be  wrapped  round  one  or  more
times.  In  this  way  the  compress  is  held  in  place  and  the  pressure  can
be  regulated;  the  proper  degree  of  bodily  warmth  is  at  the  same  time
thus  attained.  Before  applying  the  compresses,  they  should  be  dipped
in  clear  cold,  if  possible,  soft  water,  and  lightly  wrung  out.  As  long  as
they  cool  the  body,  no  severe  pains  will  arise.  Whenever  the  compress
becomes  warm,  it  must  be  dipped  in  fresh  cold  water  again.  If  pain  is
felt,  it  shows  that  it  is  time  to  apply  a  colder  compress,  and  this  must  be
done  very  frequently  at  first.

It  is,  however,  in  some  cases  not  advisable  to  apply  the  compresses  too
frequently.  It  is  then  better  to  lay  a  compress  of  clay  or  loam  on  the
wound.  To  do  this,  put  some  well  cleaned  clay  or  loam  in  a  pot,  and  stir
it  with  cold  water  into  a  thick  paste.  Spread  this  paste  thickly  on  a
piece  of  linen,  and  then  lay  it  directly  upon  the  wound,  with  the  earthy
side  in  contact  with  the  flesh.  This  compress  can  be  renewed  after  some
hours.  The  same  process  may  be  followed  for  proud  flesh  or  gangrenous
ulcers.

Without  any  real  knowledge  of  hydropathy,  the  representatives  of  the
orthodox  medical  school,  it  may  be  here  remarked,  have  some  time  ago
invented  a  brilliant  "medico-surgical"  improvement  in  water  com-
presses. They  introduce  a  sheet  of  india-rubber  between  the  compress
and  the  woollen  cloth.  Water  compresses  of  this  kind  are  of  little  use,
since  the  rubber  prevents  the  evaporation  of  the  water  in  the  compress
and  the  free  perspiration  of  the  body.  This  kind  of  hydropathy  is
simply  illusory.  Such  a  compress  can  never  have  the  desired  result:  I
must  distinctly  warn  all  against  using  such.

As  already  seen,  an  unstimulating  diet  exercises  a  most  beneficial  in-
fluence on  the  healing  of  wounds.  The  less  food  consumed,  and  the  less
stimulating  the  nourishment,  the  better  the  process  of  healing  goes  on.
Wholemeal  bread,  fruit  and  water,  without  any  addition,  form  the  best
diet.  The  easiest  and  most  quickly  digested  foods  are  the  best,  since  they
engender  the  least  heat  in  the  body.  This  is  a  point  of  great  importance
in  the  treatment  of  wounds.

There  is  another  remedy,  which,  where  it  cap  be  applied,  much  pro-
motes the  healing  process,  and  this  remedy  is  my  friction  and  hip-baths.
By  their  use  the  fever  at  the  wound  is  absolutely  prevented,  or  if  local
fever  has  already  set  in,  they  will  act  derivatively.  At  the  same  time,
the  vital  powers  of  the  entire  organism  will  be  stimulated  so  as  to
greatly  accelerate  the  process  of  healing.  These  baths  are  especially
necessary  for  all  who  are  much  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.  I  will
illustrate  what  has  been  said,  by  some  examples.

In  a  factory,  a  man  of  forty-five  had  had  his  left  hand  injured  by  a
circular-saw,  which  had  torn  the  fleshy  cushion  between  the  forefinger
and  thumb  apart,  the  flesh  remaining  hanging  upon  the  saw.  The  bone
was  fortunately  uninjured.  A  few  minutes  after  the  accident,  the
wounded  man  fell  into  a  swoon,  from v^hich  he  did  not  awake  for


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuyers'  Guide  411

about  half  an  hour.  Meantime,  a  linen  sliirt  had  hcen  folded  several
times,  and  so  firmly  bound  together  around  the  injured  hand,  that  the
bleeding  as  good  as  ceased.  Thus  bound,  the  hand  was  held  in  a  basin  of
cold  water.  Through  this  procedure  the  pain  abated  considerably  with-
in an  hour,  and  in  the  course  of  a  day  quite  disappeared.  The  cooling
process  had  to  be  kept  up  day  and  night  at  first,  but  on  the  fourth  day  it
was  possible  to  lessen  the  size  of  coinpress,  so  that  parts  of  the  hand
could  be  left  free.  A  compress,  folded  about  twenty  times  was  now
laid  upon  the  wound  and  pressed  firmly  against  it  with  a  woollen  cloth
bound  round  the  entire  hand.  The  woollen  cloth  soon  warmed  the  rest
of  the  hand,  thus  promoting  a  proper  circulation  of  the  blood.  The
compress  had  at  first  to  be  wetted  with  cold  water  every  half  hour,  and
then  at  longer  intervals;  and  in  about  a  fortnight,  the  wound  was  so  far
healed,  that  direct  treatment  of  it  was  no  longer  necessary.  In  four
weeks  the  man  could  again  work  with  his  hand.  It  should  be  added
that  from  the  second  day  of  the  treatment,  the  patient  also  took  my
friction  baths  twice  daily,  which  essentially  accelerated  the  process  of
healing.  The  patient's  state  of  health,  it  may  be  remarked,  was  far
from  being  good.

With  the  antiseptic  treatment,  in  all  probability  healing  would  have
been  a  long  and  painful  process.  The  doctor  would  certainly  have  sewn
the  wound,  when  stiffness  and  insensibility  of  the  thumb  would  un-
doubtedly have  been  the  result.

With  my  treatment,  apart  from  the  rapidity,  the  wound  healed  so  as
not  to  leave  the  least  trace  of  a  scar.  Although  at  the  beginning  the
wound  was  a  very  wide  one,  the  body  healed  it  from  within,  the  edges
of  the  wound  falling  oiT  in  time  of  their  own  accord.  Several  important
nerve-connections  having  been  destroyed  by  the  injury,  half  of  the
thumb  for  the  time  being  lost  the  sense  of  touch,  so  that  the  patient  was
unable  for  months  to  grasp  and  hold  small  objects  with  his  thumb.
After  applying  my  friction  sitz-baths  daily  for  some  length  of  time,  the
nerve-connections  were  restored,  so  that  the  normal  sensibility  re-
turned to  the  finger.

Bruises,  contusions,  and  internal  injuries.  The  above  treatment  is
also  suitable  for  bruises.  It  often  happens  in  the  case  of  bruises,  con-
tusions and  internal  injuries  that  blood-tumors  and  blood-cysts  form  in-
ternally and  exercise  a  disturbing  influence  on  the  entire  organism.
In  those  cases  which  cannot  be  reached  from  outside,  my  friction  baths
will  effect  remarkable  cures.  They  cool  the  system  internally,
strengthening  the  nerves  at  the  same  time  in  the  highest  degree.  In
individual  cases  where  my  baths  may  not  quickly  enough  disperse  in-
ternal accumulations  of  coagulated  blood,  or  other  products  of  fermen-
tation, local  steam-baths  may  be  used  with  excellent  results,  but  must
always  be  followed  by  friction  baths.  By  means  of  the  steam  baths  all
morbid  matter  is  rendered  easier  of  excretion.

A  girl  who  had  crushed  and  punctured  the  forefinger  of  her  right
hand  in  a  knitting-machine,  once  consulted  me.  During  the  first  week
she  had  been  treated  by  an  orthodox  physician,  who  had  exhausted  the
resources  of  antiseptic  practice  without  having  succeeded  in  healing  the
wound.  He  had  employed  iodoform  and  carbolic  and  salicylic  acid,  and
had  not  hesitated  to  tell  the  girl  that  amputation  of  the  finger  or  hand
might  be  necessary. The  girl  suffered  dreadful  pain  and  the  finger


412  Vniversul  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

swelled  more  and  more  until  it  was  quite  blue.  In  the  third  week,  the
whole  hand  was  swollen  and  had  assumed  the  same  color.  Finally,  the
doctor  asked  her  if  she  had  courage  to  have  the  hand  amputated.  The
thought  so  frightened  the  girl  that  she  came  to  me.  I  immediately  ap-
plied cold  water  compresses,  and  ordered  two  local  steam-baths  daily,
followed  by  friction  sitz-baths.  After  only  two  hours  treatment,  the
pain  had  almost  completely  disappeared.  Nor  did  it  recur  during  the
entire  course  of  treatment.  The  excessive  swelling  of  the  hand  and
finger  abated  hourly,  so  that  in  two  days  they  had  both  regained  their
natural  form  and  color.  In  from  three  to  four  weeks,  the  girl  could  work
again,  even  though  unable  to  use  the  hand  quite  freely.

In  this  way  an  interesting  scientific  operation  was  no  doubt  pre-
vented, but  on  the  other  hand  the  girl  was  saved  from  being  a  cripple
for  life.

In  a  similar  case,  force  of  necessity  compelled  a  carpenter  to  consult
me.  He  had  crushed  and  wounded  his  left  hand,  both  on  the  palm  and
back.  The  man  had  no  confidence  in  the  antiseptic  treatment,  bj^  reason
of  former  sad  experience.  The  whole  arm  up  to  the  shoulder  was  al-
ready so  badly  swollen  that  he  could  not  move  it.  In  less  than  three
hours  of  my  treatment,  the  pain  was  subdued,  and  after  18  hours,  the
swelling  had  completely  subsided.  In  a  fortnight,  the  man  was  able  to
return  to  his  work.

The  two  following  reports  of  cures  sufficiently  prove  the  fact  that
the  antiseptic  treatment  effects  no  real  cure,  but  simply  produces  an
interim  state.

Two  girls  working  on  the  same  machine  were  injured  in  the  same
manner  on  the  forefinger.  The  bone,  from  the  tip  of  the  first  joint,  was
fractured  and  comminuted,  the  remainder  of  the  finger  being  unin-
jured, however.  The  age  and  constitution  of  the  girls  were  likewise  the
same.  One  girl  went  to  a  physician,  who  soon  applied  the  antiseptic
treatment;  whilst  the  other  was  treated  by  me.  The  doctor  at  once  re-
moved the  splinters  of  bone  and  applied  iodoform  liberally  during  the
operation.  The  girl  had  much  pain  to  endure,  still  in  a  week  the  finger
was  so  far  healed,  that  she  could  work  again,  if  absolutely  necessary.
The  first  joint,  however,  through  the  operation  was  completely  crippled
and  the  whole  finger  disfigured.  With  every  change  of  weather  the  girl
for  years  experienced  great  pain  in  the  old  wound,  caused  by  nothing
else  than  the  wrong  treatment,  whereby  foreign  matter  (iodoform)
had  been  directly  introduced. The  finger  also  remained  with  feeling.

The  other  patient  who  used  my  method,  attained  much  better  results.
My  first  endeavor  was  to  stop  the  pain,  and  I  succeeded  in  the  course  of
means:  wet  linen  compresses  and  friction  baths — the  latter,  because  the
girl  was  much  encumbered  in  other  respects  also.  Without  any  further
application,  the  splinters  of  bone  festered  out  of  themselves  on  the
third  day,  without  the  patient  suffering  any  particular  pain.  On  the
sixth  day  the  second  largest  piece  of  bone  followed;  in  a  month  the  girl
could  return  to  work  again.  In  six  weeks  the  finger  was  perfectly
healed,  without  any  loss  of  feeling,  any  crippling,  or  any  scar.  Nor  have,
up  till  this  day  any  pains  set  in  on  changes  taking  place  in  the  weather.
Who  then  was  the  better  surgeon  here.  Nature  or  Antisepsis?

Another  not  less  interesting  case  was  that  of  a  man,  who  in  1879  had


Universal  Naturopathic  Dircclory  and  Bm/rrs'  (inide  413

suffered  extensive  rnptnrc  of  the  tendinous  ligament  and  muscle  bundle
in  the  left  ankle.  The  patient  had  to  keep  his  bed  for  two  months,  and
was  treated  with  ointment.  After  the  foot  had  healed,  it  was  still  weak,
and  remained  swollen.  This  was  especially  noticeable  in  walking,  the
foot  frequently  turning  over  and  causing  much  pain.  As  the  man  was  in
poor  health,  he  commenced  with  my  system,  in  March  1889,  and  as  he
found  the  treatment  did  him  good,  he  continued  it  for  a  considerable
time.  At  the  beginning  of  1890,  the  feet  became  inflamed  again  at  those
places  where  he  had  suffered  years  before.  The  inflammation  was
accompanied  by  pains  which  lasted  three  days.  By  the  aid  of  my  cure
these  disappeared  on  the  fourth  day,  and  at  the  same  time  the  former
general  debility  and  weakness  of  the  ankle  disappeared.  From  this
case  we  see  how  the  injury  received  eleven  years  before,  and  not
yet  properly  healed,  was  absolutely  cured  by  my  method.

Burns.  Also  for  burns,  cold  water  forms  are  excellent  means  for
quieting  the  pain  which  is  always  experienced.  Often,  to  get  rid  of  the
pain,  the  wound  must  be  held  under  water  for  several  hours.  If  only
held  in  cold  water  for  a  short  time,  the  pain  even  increases;  one  must  put
up  with  it  until  it  has  disappeared.  When  the  burning  pain  has  abated,
compresses  should  be  applied  as  in  the  case  of  wounds.  River  or  rain-
water is  preferable  to  spring-water,  as  the  latter  often  contains  sub-
stances which  hinder  the  process  of  healing  and  increase  the  pain.  It
is  astonishing  how  quickly  even  severe  pains  are  healed  by  this  means;
it  is  certain  that  many  who  have  found  their  death  through  burning  and
scalding,  could  have  been  saved  by  this  method.

When  burns  only  heal  slowly  with  this  treatment,  it  may  be  con-
fidently assumed  that  the  patient's  body  is  heavily  encumbered  with
foreign  matter,  in  other  words,  chronically  diseased.  In  such  cases  a
general  treatment  of  the  whole  body  by  means  of  my  friction  baths,  in
conjunction  with  unstimulating  diet  is  to  be  recommended.  But  even
should  the  cure  take  its  wanted  course,  the  curative  process  will  be
greatly  assisted  by  these  baths,  whenever  the  patient  is  equal  to  them.

A  man  had  received  three  very  considerable  burns,  two  on  the  neck
being  as  large  as  a  five-shilling  piece;  the  third,  the  largest  and  deepest,
was  on  the  foot.  The  patient  was  at  first  under  antiseptic  treatment,  but
on  account  of  the  excessive  pain,  could  not  bear  it  longer  than  a  day.
He  then  began  self-treatment  according  to  the  old  Nature  Cure  system.
This,  however,  likewise  not  affording  sufficient  relief,  after  a  week,  he
consulted  me.  My  first  aim  was  naturally  to  subdue  the  pain,  which  I
succeeded  in  doing  with  cold  compresses  within  two  hours,  after  having
well  cleansed  the  wounds  of  oil  and  pus.  After  two  days  of  this  treat-
ment the  wounds  presented  an  entirely  different  appearance.  The
smallest  burn  on  the  neck  was  already  as  good  as  healed,  and  the  others
were  healing  rapidly.  The  deep  wound  on  the  foot  had  likewise  de-
creased by  half  in  depth.  In  five  days  more  the  patient  could  again  re-
turn to  the  factory.  The  burns  on  the  neck  were  fully  healed,  and  that
on  the  foot  so  far  improved,  that  the  man  could  at  any  rate  walk.

Gun-shot  wounds.  The  treatment  of  these  is  exactly  similar  to  that  of
incised  and  punctured  wounds.  Nevertheless,  on  account  of  their  im-
portance in  war,  it  is  well  to  submit  them  to  a  special  consideration.  For
every  soldier  is  of  great  importance  to  know  precisely  what  to  do  as  a
first  aid  to  the  wounded. When  the  \vounded  must  lie  for  hours  before


414  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuyers'  Guide

any  help  whatever  comes,  it  is  no  wonder  that  with  many  injuries — ■
especially  in  case  of  antiseptic  treatment — gangrene  supervenes,  usually
necessitating  amputation,  if,  indeed,  death  does  not  ensue.  Amid  the
general  helplessness  and  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  life  and  its  condi-
tions, and  of  the  manner  in  which  the  healing  of  wounds  is  effected
through  the  organism  itself,  there  is  no  other  resource  to  be  had  than  to
amputation.  But  amputation  never  heals  wounds,  it  only  inflicts  far
deeper  ones  and  thus  often  turns  the  patient  into  a  cripple  for  life.

The  popular  and  medical  belief  is  that  the  ball  or  fragment  of  the  pro-
jectile, if  it  still  remains  in  the  body,  must  without  fail  be  extracted  to
avoid  injury  to  the  system.  This  is  a  gross  error,  which  has  already  cost
many  thousarids  of  lives.  For  owing  to  the  weight  of  such  shot,  etc.,  it
is  often  most  difficult  to  remove  them  from  the  body  without  injuring  it
still  more.  The  inner  parts  of  the  body  are,  as  is  well  known,  so
coated  with  mucus,  that  the  projectiles  easily  force  their  way  past  them,
and  whenever  they  happen  to  penetrate  them,  make  the  smallest  aper-
ture possible,  which  permits  of  their  passing.  This  is  owing  to  the  fact
that  by  the  pressure  which  the  shot  exerts  upon  the  tissues,  the  latter
expand  somewhat  on  account  of  their  elasticity.  It  is  exactly  as  with
india-rubber  penetrated  by  a  shot.  We  find  that  a  hole  is  produced,
through  which  the  ball  cannot  repass,  except  by  stretching  out  the
rubber.

What  is  it,  then,  that  we  observe  when  the  injured  parts  begin  to
swell?  Generally  the  swelling  very  soon  ceases,  and  the  former  elasti-
city is  also  lost.  The  injured  parts  are  now  surcharged  with  blood  and
other  curative  matter  and  are  therefore  rigid.  If,  now,  we  attempt  to
extract  the  ball  through  the  same  channel  that  it  entered  (as  is  the  usual
practice,  if  there  appears  to  be  any  chance)  we  shall  find  it  impossible.
For  the  entrance  to  the  wound  and  the  whole  passage  is  swollen,  and
moreover  the  tissues  have  lost  their  elasticity.  Hence  the  extraction  of
the  ball  would  involve  further  laceration  and  injury.  What  a  disastrous
effect  this  would  have  on  the  organism  may  be  easily  imagined.  The  ball
itself  is  far  less  dangerous  to  the  body  than  its  forcible  extraction.  The
system  soon  renders  the  great  mass  of  foreign  matter  quite  unin-
jurious,  first  surrounding  it  by  a  watery  accumulation,  changing  in  time
to  a  firm  capsule  enveloping  the  projectile.  Sooner  or  later,  when  not
robbed  of  its  full  vital  power  by  the  poisonous  antiseptic  treatment,  the
system  will  expel  the  foreign  body,  in  the  manner  most  suitable  for  the
organism.  Thus  it  has  often  happened,  for  instance,  that  a  ball  which
had  remained  in  the  shoulder,  festered  out  after  months  or  years  at  the
hip  or  thigh.

The  attention,  therefore,  must  not  be  devoted  to  extracting  the  shot,
but  to  preventing  heat  in  the  wound,  and  to  stopping  the  bleeding.  I
have  already  explained  how  this  is  to  be  done.  It  would,  therefore,  be
well  if  every  soldier  were  to  be  furnished  with  some  linen  and  woollen
bandages,  in  order  to  aid  himself  instantly  in  case  of  need.  In  most
cases,  too,  water  is  readily  to  be  procured — easier,  at  all  events,  than  any
other  remedy.  Where  none  is  to  be  had,  the  soldier  may  take  any  other
cooling  medium,  such  as  grass,  clay,  moist  earth,  or  the  like.  These
also  may  be  used  in  need  to  allay  the  heat,  as  soon  as  the  wound  is
firmly  bandaged.  In  this  manner  many  wounded  soldiers,  who  are
still  able  to  move,  can  apply  the  first  aid  to  themselves;  without  losing
time — so precious in such cases — in waiting until other assistance


Universal  Naturopaihic  Directory  and  liuijers'  Guide  415

arrives.  It  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  prime  importance,  that  every
soldier  should  be  thoroughly  instructed  in  this  method  of  the  natural
treatment  of  wounds  without  medicaments  and  operations.  He  is  then
in  a  position  to  act  promptly  and  usefully,  and  not  lie  helplessly  groan-
ing until  a  surgeon  appears.  The  soldiers  who  are  slightly  wounded,
would  also  be  in  a  position  instantly  to  aid  their  more  severely  wounded
comrades.

From  the  time  of  the  Franco-German  War  of  1870-71,  I  have  had
ample  opportunity  of  gathering  experience  of  the  injurious  effects  of
the  antiseptic  treatment.  I  will  here  report  a  striking  case.  In  the  year
1883  a  gentleman  came  to  me,  who  had  received  a  shot  through  the  ab-
domen in  the  war  of  1870.  The  ball  had  come  out  at  the  back,  close  to
the  spine.  In  spite  of  all  the  antiseptic  treatment,  the  wound  had  "not
fully  healed  up  in  these  thirteen  years,  but  was  continually  suppurating.
At  times  it  had  closed  together,  but  only  to  break  out  afresh  at  the  first
opportunity.  The  patient's  condition  became  worse  and  worse  and  he
was  now  unable  to  walk  at  all.  By  means  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Ex-
pression, I  immediately  perceived  that  the  cause  of  this  difficult  cure  was
simply  the  patient's  heavy  encumbrance  with  foreign  matter,  and  the  ac-
companying chronic  state  of  fever.  I  did  not  apply  any  local  treatment
to  the  wound  at  all,  but  sought  in  the  first  place  to  subdue  the  chronic
fever  by  the  aid  of  my  friction  and  steam-baths  and  a  suitable  diet.
Within  a  week  the  wound  was  healed  and  has  never  broken  open  since.
In  a  fortnight  the  man,  delighted  at  the  rapidity  of  the  cure,  was  able  to
walk  again.  At  my  advice,  he  continued  the  treatment  for  some  time
longer,  until  finally  the  encumbrance  was  completely  removed.

A  similar  happy  result  was  that  attained  in  the  case  of  a  soldier  who
had  had  his  knee-cap  shattered  in  the  war.  The  wound,  despite  the  use
of  all  imaginable  remedies,  had  not  been  healed.  The  leg,  although  not
altogether  stiff,  was  much  impeded  in  its  freedom  of  motion.  This  case
is  the  more  remarkable,  as  the  patient  had  been  treated  for  twenty
years  according  to  the  principles  of  the  old  Nature  Cure,  without  the  de-
sired result  bemg  obtained.  Twenty  years  after  the  accident,  the  man
commenced  with  my  system  of  treatment,  not  on  account  of  his  knee,
but  in  order  to  test  its  value  in  general.  He  was  not  a  little  astonished,
when,  after  some  time,  inflammation  of  the  knee-cap  set  in — a  proof
that  the  injury  had  not  really  been  properly  healed  before.  After  con-
tinuing my  cure  for  a  further  period,  however,  this  inflammation  soon
disappeared.  His  astonishment  was  still  greater  now,  to  find  that  all
stiffness  had  disappeared  from  the  joint,  so  that  he  could  use  his  leg  as
well  as  ever.

Fractures.  Amongst  diseases  which  arise  through  external  injuries
are  fractures,  the  healing  of  which  goes  on  more  or  less  slowly.  The
orthodox  doctor  generally  applies  a  plaster  of  Paris  dressing,  whilst  I
make  use  of  wholly  other  and  much  more  certain  effective  curative
means.  Above  all  things,  my  process  exercises  an  immediate  cooling
effect,  which  will  continue  until  the  swelling  which  follows  upon  a
fracture,  and  the  accompanying  pain,  have  fully  disappeared.  The  use
of  friction  baths  must  also  not  be  overlooked,  as  they  essentially  promote
the  healing.  Anyone  who  discards  the  natural  water-treatment  in  favor
of  plaster  dressings,  is  simply  denying  the  truth  of  definite  natural
laws. If,  for  purely  local  reasons,  that  is,  in  those  cases  where  the  in-


416  Universal  Naturopathic  Direct onj  and  Bnijers'  Guide

jured  limb  cannot  l)c  kept  in  the  necessary  i)()silion  by  means  of  water
compresses,  a  rigid  support  is  necessary,  such  can  be  made  of  wood,
pasteboard,  l)ark  or  other  such  material.  But  a  i)laster  dressing  should
never  be  used.

Those  who  lollow  my  advice  here,  will  lind  how  surprisingly  quick
fractures  heal,  and  how  the  pains  are  reduced  to  a  minimum.

A  gentleman,  thirty  years  of  age,  had  broken  his  right  upper-arm
close  to  the  elbow.  Being  an  adherent  of  the  Nature  Cure  method,  he
innnediately  applied  cold  water  compresses  and  arm-baths.  The  phy-
sician consulted  wished  to  apply  a  plaster  bandage,  at  the  same  time
remarking  that  the  arm  would  probably  always  remain  stiff'.  This
being  no  very  pleasing  prospect  for  the  patient,  he  came  to  consult  me.
I  advised  him  to  put  the  arm  in  a  wire  gauze  and  pasteboard  splint,  and
to  cool  the  fracture  with  compresses  according  to  my  method.  My
friction  baths,  and  a  simple  unstimulating  diet  in  great  moderation,
were  likewise  necessary  conditions.  The  result  was  astonishing.  In
twenty-four  hours  the  pain  and  swelling  were  completely  subdued.  In
a  week,  the  patient  was  already  able  to  write  a  little.  In  another  week,
he  could  lift  a  chair  without  difficulty  and  in  three  weeks  the  fracture
was  completely  healed.

Open  sores.  The  gash,  the  stab,  received  in  war,  wounds  received  in
honorable  fight,  these,  the  result  of  sudden  external  injury,  are  easily
and  quickly  healed.  It  is  quite  otherwise  with  those  disgusting  open
sores  of  various  kinds,  which  invade  all  parts  of  the  body.  The  medical
profession  may  call  the  suppurating  foul  secretions  what  it  will —
syphilistic,  cancerous,  or  tuberculous — the  fact  remains  that  they  are  all
one  and  the  same  thing,  and  indicate  a  condition  of  decomposition  in  the
living  body.  Allopathy  has  not  yet  succeeded  in  really  healing  such
open  sores,  even  if  by  the  aid  of  medicaments,  it  succeeds  in  preventing
the  process  of  decomposition  from  showing  itself;  or  in  transforming
it  into  the  body  again.  To  cure  this  evil,  however,  allopathy  is  not  able.
It  has  neither  the  power  nor  the  means  to  effectively  oppose  the  dis-
ease. Thus  it  is  that  we  see  the  wounds  apparently  healed,  break  out
again  in  another  part  of  the  body — in  other  words,  how  the  secretion
of  morbid  matter  in  the  body  always  continues.  Such  open  wounds
without  external  injury,  it  is  true,  are  not  usually  painful  like  acute  in-
juries; but,  on  the  other  hand,  their  cure — if  such  is,  indeed,  possible —
is  much  more  tedious.  They  always  stand  in  intimate  relation  to  some
deep-lying  chronic  disease.  How  many  of  the  suicides  daily  committed
are  not  to  be  traced  to  such  a  diseased  condition?  Here  we  see  how
systematic  is  man's  opposition  to  our  all-wise  mother  Nature,  in  his
daily  actions  and  mode  of  life.  What  is  the  cause  of  such  sores?  I  reply
that  they  arise  simply  from  the  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign
matter,  and  are  invariably  an  advanced  stage  of  earlier  stages  of  dis-
ease which  have  not  been  cured,  but  merely  suppressed.  In  most  cases
these  final  stages  have  been  brought  about  by  the  saturation  with  so-
called  medicinal  "remedies,"  such  as  mercury,  iodine,  iodide  of  potas-
sium, bromine,  salicylic  acid,  digitalis,  quinine,  etc.,  which  are  always
powerful  poisons  for  the  system.  Vaccination  is  another  system  of  in-
troducing poison  into  the  body,  much  to  be  regretted,  for  through  it  the
human  race  becomes  ever  more  degenerated.  Vaccination  has  the  effect
of  greatly  weakening  the  vitality;  hence  it  is,  that  the  morbid  matter.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  417

which  has  gradually  accuimilatcd  in  the  body,  no  longer  makes  itself
known  through  small-pox  epidemics,  but  through  much  more  horrible,
lingering,  often  incurable  diseases,  such  as  tuberculosis,  cancer,  syphilis,
epilepsy  and  insanity.  Unfortunately,  the  orthodox  school  has  not
sufliciently  grasped  the  nature  of  vitality.  Were  it  otherwise,  the  in-
jurious influences  of  the  poisons  contained  in  the  medicaments  which
are  introduced  into  the  patients,  whether  by  inoculation  or  inunction,
would  not  remain  hidden  to  its  disciples — even  though  such  influences
may  often  only  appear  after  many  years.

Such  medicaments,  regarding  the  whereabouts  and  action  of  which
in  the  human  system,  medical  science  is  often  in  doubt,  lay  the  germs —
often  years  in  advance — leading  to  saturation  of  the  body  with  foreign
matter,  which  is  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  open  sores.

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  medical  science  is  ever  on  the  search  for
new  medicines,  new  disinfectants,  new  antiseptics.  The  remedies  in-
crease in  strength — the  one  more  poisonous  than  the  other;  and  it  must
be  so.  At  the  first  appearance  of  a  disease  (curative  crisis),  the  attempt
is  made  to  so  diminish  the  vitality,  e.  g.  by  antifebrin,  that  it  is  not  able  to
continue  the  crisis,  that  is,  the  disease.  The  latter  now  disappears  as
regards  outward  symptoms,  but  the  cause  of  the  disease  is  not  removed.
Nevertheless,  allopathy  will  call  this  a  "cure."  If,  now,  after  some  time
the  vitality  being  in  some  measure  restored,  the  same  disease,  or  it  may
be  some  other,  should  again  make  its  appearance,  the  antifebrin  will  no
longer  be  able  to  react:  a  stronger,  more  virulent  means  is  necessary  to
produce  the  first  effect.  The  greater  the  vitality  of  the  body,  the  weaker
need  the  medicine  be,  which  will  suffice  to  prevent  a  curative  crisis;  the
lower  the  vital  power,  on  the  contrary,  the  stronger  must  be  the  drug  to
be  capable  of  suppressing  the  crisis.  Every  medicine  is  a  poison —
virulent  matter  foreign  to  the  body.  The  greater  the  vitality  of  the
human  organism,  the  more  intensively  and  more  rapidly  will  it  act  to
render  such  foreign  matter  harmless.  The  poison  becomes  enveloped  in
a  covering  of  mucus.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  vitality  is  weakened,  a
small  dose,  a  weak  poison,  is  insufficient  to  rouse  it.  It  is  more  or  less
insensible,  and  will  only  react,  when  absolutely  compelled.  Moreover,
this  process  of  rendering  the  person  uninjurious,  will  go  on  much  more
slowly.

An  example  from  my  practice  may  serve  to  illustrate  what  has  been
said.  A  physician  believed  he  had  discovered  an  admirable  remedy  for
open  sores  on  the  legs,  and  won  great  celebrity.  The  drug  operated  so
effectively,  that  the  sores  usually  healed  up  in  a  very  short  time,  the
morbid  matter  being  simply  forced  back  into  the  system.  Thus  one
gentleman  who  had  deep  corroding  sores  all  along  the  shin-bone,  was
very  rapidly  cured  by  this  remedy.  But  as  after  two  years  the  old  sores
broke  out  again,  the  patient  went  once  more  to  the  same  physician,
Alas!  the  famous  remedy  failed  altogether  this  time.  The  doctor  in  his
perplexity  explained  that  the  wounds  were  now  of  another  character:
this  was  not  the  original  disease,  and  his  remedy  was  not  able  to  cure
the  new  one;  there  was  nothing  to  do  but  amputate  the  limb.  Pitiable
science!  Unlike  the  undiplomaed  practitioner  of  the  Nature  Cure  system
the  privileged  medical  man  knows  no  better  way  to  aid,  than  to  try  and
protect  against  disease  by  vaccination  with  pus,  such  as  in  the  case  of
small-pox,  and  to  cut  off  limbs,  the  abnormal  condition  of  which  he  does
not  understand.


418  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

In  the  case  of  open,  corroding  wounds,  we  find  the  same  uniform
cause  underlying  all:  the  encumbrance  of  the  body  with  foreign  matter.
Nothing  is  clearer  than  the  fact  that  the  pus,  which  is  continually  being
secreted,  contains  foreign  matter.  We  have  here  always  to  do  with  a
far  advanced  stage,  depending  upon  an  abnormal  internal  temperature.
This  high  abnormal  temperature — fever,  as  I  regard  it — first  creates  a
condition  of  fermentation,  or  decomposition  of  the  foreign  matter,
which  greatly  assists  the  development  of  the  bacilli.  The  foreign  matter
then  changes  its  form  according  to  the  degree  of  temperature.

If  we  bear  this  in  mind,  the  way  which  we  may  alter  the  condition  and
kill  the  dreaded  bacilli,  becomes  quite  clear  to  us.  The  abnormally  high
temperature  must  be  regulated.  My  friction  and  steam-baths,  and  an
unstimulating  diet,  are  the  best  possible  means  of  regulating  the  tem-
perature, just  as  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression  affords  the  most
reliable  thermometer.

I  have  had  innumerable  patients  under  my  care,  suffering  from  sores
of  various  kinds:  cancerous,  tuberculous,  sj^philistic.  In  most  cases
where  the  vitality  was  not  absolutely  too  low,  and  the  body  not  super-
charged with  drugs,  the  sores  healed  in  a  surprisingly  short  time.  Of
severe  one,  where  the  cure  took  from  three  to  six  times  as  long  as  in  the
average  case.

A  gentleman,  fiftj^  years  of  age,  suffered  from  open,  suppurating  sores
on  the  feet  and  legs,  up  to  the  knee.  There  was  a  mass  of  wounds,  one
beside  the  other,  some  thirty  or  forty  in  number,  the  largest  being  fully
four  inches  square.  Watery,  evil-smelling  pus  was  being  continuously
discharged.  They  had  already  been  temporarily  healed,  but  the  places
then  began  to  itch  so  violently,  that  the  patient  could  not  bear  it,  and
through  the  scratching  the  wounds  opened  again.  This  itching  was
caused  simply  by  the  active  internal  fermentation  of  the  foreign  matter
confined  beneath  the  skin,  and  the  excessive  heat  thus  occasioned  in  the
leg.  As  soon  as  the  sores  broke  out  anew,  the  itching  ceased.  The  whole
of  the  lower  part  of  the  leg  assumed  a  dark  brown  color,  a  proof  that  it
was  already  gangrenous.  Some  of  the  sores  went  right  to  the  bone.  All
the  methods  of  cure  which  the  patient  had  tried  proved  fruitless.  There
remained  but  the  choice  of  amputation,  or  dying  through  the  gangrene
spreading  further;  and  in  his  desperation  he  came  to  me,  though  far
from  being  really  a  believer  in  my  system.

By  means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  I  at  once  discovered
thaf  the  digestion  w^as  altogether  out  of  order.  The  stomach  was  unable
to  properly  digest  even  the  lightest  foods,  the  body  consequently  not
being  in  a  position  to  produce  normal  blood.  The  lungs  also  were
irregular  in  their  action.  It  will  thus  be  easy  to  understand  that  there
was  an  enormous,  and  ever-increasing  accumulation  of  foreign  matter
in  the  body.  The  condition  of  the  stomach  and  lungs  was  such  as  to
add  to  the  amount  daily.  The  patient  had  no  idea  that  he  was  suffering
from  this  chronic  encumbrance,  wdiich  was  the  cause  of  the  diseased
legs.  Hence  it  was,  that  he  could  not  comprehend  why  I  should  lay  so
much  stress  on  treating  the  whole  body,  instead  of  only  the  legs.  For
presses, covered  with  a  woollen  cloth.-  I  laid  most  weight  upon  the  pa-
tient using  a  pure,  unstimulating  natural  diet,  getting  plenty  of  fresh
air,  taking  four  friction  sitz-baths  and  daily  promoting  perspiration  by


Universal  Natnropalhic  Directonj  and  Buyers'  Guide  110

natural  means.  The  patient,  however,  from  the  beginning  gave  much
more  attention  to  the  application  of  the  compresses  to  the  legs,  than  to
following  my  instructions  as  to  diet  and  baths,  the  purpose  of  which  he
did  not  understand.  The  consequence  was,  that  for  half  a  year  things
did  not  improve  much.  He  was  finally  persuaded  to  follow  my  directions
exactly,  and  not  his  own  notions.  The  next  six  months  led  to  most  happy
results.  The  sores  had  already  decreased  and  many  of  the  lesser  ones
were  completely  healed;  the  troublesome  itching  had  also  ceased,  wihle
the  suppuration  had  almost  entirely  stopped.  The  general  condition
and  the  digestion  were  now  far  better  than  before,  and  the  affection  of
the  lungs  had  ceased  to  advance.  Encouraged  by  these  favorable  signs,
the  patient  now^  vigorously  pursued  my  course  of  treatment.  In  the
second  year  the  sores  changed  their  place  from  below  the  knee  to  above
it,  those  below  healing  and  breaking  out  anew  higher  up.  The  disease
was  thus  nearer  the  abdomen — a  most  favorable  sign.  Below,  the  state
of  the  leg  grew  more  and  more  normal.  When  the  first  open  sore  broke
out  above  the  knee,  where  one  had  never  appeared  before,  the  patient
believed  my  cure  also  was  of  no  use,  as  the  sores  were  now  coming
nearer  the  body.  I  explained  to  him  that  this  was,  on  the  contrary,  a
great  improvement,  for  the  foreign  matter  was  now  in  process  of  retro-
gression, toward  the  abdomen  whence  it  had  come.  He  saw  the  truth
of  this,  and  continued  the  regular  course  of  treatment.  It  lasted  three
full  years,  however,  before  his  digestion  and  lungs  w^ere  so  far
strengthened  and  improved,  that  the  sores  healed  permanently.  The
normal  color  returned  to  the  skin  simultaneously.  In  this  way  my
method  had  cured  a  severe  semi-tuberculous,  semi-cancerous  disease
which  celebrated  physicians  had  pronounced  to  be  incurable.  Nor  has
there,  up  till  to-day,  been  the  least  symptom  of  the  sores  returning.

Stings  of  poisonous  insects,  bites  of  mad  dogs  and  of  snakes.  Blood
poisoning.  The  corpuscles  of  human  blood  are  of  the  greatest  sensi-
bility. The  blood  reacts  vigorously  on  coming  in  contact  with  foreign
matter,  the  result  being  one  similar  to  the  process  of  fermentation.  The
bite  of  a  poisonous  snake  \vi\\  produce  symptoms  of  fever,  nearly  iden-
tical with  fermentation,  in  the  blood  of  even  the  truly  healthy  man,
notwithstanding  the  sound  condition  of  his  body.

When  the  system  is  already  encumbered  with  foreign  matter,  the
poison,  of  course,  acts  much  more  virulently.  This  is  evident.  The
foreign  matter,  in  itself  a  ready  producer  of  fermentation,  is  greatly  in-
creased if  poison  enters  the  blood — whether  through  the  bite  of  an  in-
sect or  reptile,  dog-slaver,  pus  or  other  product  of  decomposition.  Large
accumulations  of  foreign  matter  thus  form  and  actively  ferment  in  the
organism,  so  materially  increasing  the  danger.  Now  the  more  foreign
matter  that  is  in  the  body,  the  more  active  is  the  fermentation  brought
about  by  such  blood  poisoning.  Hence  it  is  that  the  sting  of  a  bee  in  one
case  may  cause  an  immense  swelling,  wdiereas  it  would  hardly  affect
another  person  more  than  a  mosquito  bite.  I  have  also  seen  how^  one
person  has  got  hydrophobia  through  being  bitten  by  a  rabid  dog,
whereas  another  person,  attacked  by  the  same  animal,  suffered  no  ill
effects  worth  speaking  of.  Snake  poison,  too,  will  cause  death  in  one
case,  and  merely  fever  in  another.  The  danger  does  not  always  lie  in
the  bite,  but  in  the  state  of  the  person  bitten.  It  is  the  same  thing  with
so-called  blood-poisoning,  w^hich  is  of  such  frequent  occurrence  after
"extremely  successful"  operations.


420  Uniuer.sdl  Ndfiiropcithic  Direcionj  and  Buyers'  Guide

My  theon^  of  fermentation  likewise  affords  an  explanation  of  the
peculiar  effects  of  the  bites  of  mad  dogs,  where  the  poison  of  the  saliva
first  induces  a  latent,  prcHminary  stage  of  disease,  the  acute  symptoms
only  appearing  later.  The  poison  first  of  all  influences  the  abdominal
nerves  and  organs,  these  effects  not  being  transmitted  to  the  head  and
brain  until  after  some  weeks.  It  is  only  then  that  the  convulsive  symp-
toms of  so-called  hydrophobia  make  their  appearance.  The  digestion
and  appetite  of  rabid  dogs,  as  I  have  frequently  had  opportunity  to  ob-
serve, will  always  be  found  to  be  quite  abnormal.

The  effect  of  a  snake-bite  will  be  learned  from  the  following  case,

A  boy  was  bitten  on  the  head  by  an  adder,  while  lying  in  a  wood.  The
result  was  a  convulsed  condition  of  the  abdomen,  which  prevented  the
boy  from  urinating  for  fifteen  hours.  His  life  was  in  great  danger.  My
system  was  now  applied,  and  by  means  of  whole  and  local  steam-baths,
the  boy  was  soon  brought  to  perspire  profusely.  At  the  same  time  the
cooling  baths  and  a  strictly  unstimulating  diet  was  necessary.  In  a  short
time  all  danger  was  over,  and  the  lad  had  passed  a  copious  quantity  of
urine.

If  we  now  take  a  review  of  all  the  various  kinds  of  blood-poisonings,
of  whatever  origin,  we  always  find  that  they  begin  with  a  swelling  of  the
injured  part.  There  is  great  heat  experienced  and  high  fever,  even
though  at  first  only  locally.  To  subdue  the  latter  must  be  the  first  task,
a  local  cooling  of  the  part  being  of  the  greatest  service.  In  the  case  of
serious  poisoning,  it  is  frequently  necessary  to  cool  the  wound  directly,
by  putting  it — as  far  as  the  part  admits — directly  in  water,  if  possible
running  water.  If  it  is  not  practicable  to  hold  the  part  into  cold  water,
cold  water  compresses  of  linen  must  be  continuallv  applied.  At  the  same
time,  my  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  must  be  used  alternately.

Slighter  injuries,  such  as  bee-stings,  cause  a  swelling,  which  remains
for  a  time,  and  then  disappears  without  leaving  further  consequences
behind.  It  is  here  to  be  remarked  that  insects  generally  attack  the  parts
of  the  body,  where  there  are  the  largest  accumulations  of  foreign  mat-
ter. Linen  compresses  of  the  kind  mentioned,  will  in  such  cases  be  found
amply  sufficient  to  heal  the  part.  Such  compresses  assist  the  body  in  its
curative  efforts  to  expel  the  poison,  or  to  render  the  matter  uninjurious
by  covering  it  with  mucus.

When  the  swelling  spreads  and  threatens  neighboring  parts  of  the
body,  danger  is  imminent,  and  there  is  no  time  to  lose.  The  part  affected
must  be  put  in  cold  water,  or  should  this  not  be  possible,  wrapped  in  wet
compresses.  When  circumstances  admit,  my  steam-baths  (previously
explained),  followed  by  friction  sitz  or  hip-baths  will  bring  instant  relief.
The  friction  baths  must  also  be  used  separately,  and  if  there  is  danger,
repeated  every  two  or  three  hours.  By  thus  leading  off  the  fever  heat  a
great  step  is  made  towards  a  cure.  It  is  well  to  fast,  or  in  any  case  to
eat  only  a  little  wholemeal  bread  and  fruit.  To  drink  water  is  not  in-
jurious. To  get  warm  after  the  cooling  baths,  it  is  good  to  sit  in  the  sun,
and  if  possible  take  exercise  out  of  doors.  Should  the  injured  parts  also
have  become  hard,  partial  steam-baths  are  particularly  to  be  recom-
mended always  followed  by  a  cooling  friction  bath.  The  steam-bath
promotes  perspiration,  which  carries  off  large  quantities  of  foreign
matter.

From  all  this  we  gather  that  these  injuries  also  induce  a  condition  of
fever;  and  it  is  to  subdue  this  fever,  that  must  be  our  first  endeavor.


Universal  Naluropalhic  Directory  and  liinjers'  Guide  421

A  young  man,  hardly  twenty  years  of  age,  while  in  the  fields,  was  stung
in  the  left  hand  hy  a  poisonous  insect.  The  sting  was  not  so  painful,
and  the  part  but  little  swollen,  so  no  further  attention  was  paid  to  it.
After  some  hours,  however,  rigors  set  in,  and  the  entire  hand  began  to
swell.  Soon  the  whole  arm  was  swollen  up,  and  the  physicians  called
in,  declared  it  to  be  a  case  of  blood-poisoning  and  stated  that  amputa-
tion of  the  arm  appeared  unavoidable.  As  it  happened,  someone  ac-
quainted with  my  method,  was  present,  and  so  my  system  was  applied,
especially  as  amputation  was  not  a  very  inviting  operation  for  the
sufferer.  Local  steam-baths  were  taken,  followed  by  friction  hip-baths,
and  also  the  hip-baths  sometimes  alone.  This  did  not  fail  to  bring  aid
and  prevent  the  swelling  from  increasing.  Between  the  baths,  cold-water
compresses  were  applied.  The  patient  also  had  to  take  plenty  of  exer-
cise in  the  open  air,  and  especially  in  the  sun,  in  order  to  promote  per-
spiration. In  this  simple  manner  every  trace  of  the  sting  soon  disap-
peared, and  the  general  health  of  the  patient  was  greatly  benefitted  at
the  same  time.


422  Universal  Natiiropaihic  Directory  and  Biujers'  Guide


DISEASES  OF  WOMEN


OWING  to  the  complicated  structure  of  the  female  body,  women
are  subject  to  a  large  number  of  complaints  connected  with  the
sexual  organs.  These  ailments  are  frequently  of  an  extremely
distressing  character.
Apart  from  irregularities  attending  the  natural  processes  of  menstru-
ation, pregnancy,  accouchement,  as  also  during  childbed  and  suckling,
there  are  also  certain  other  complaints  often  experienced.  These  are  the
direct  consequence  of  the  errors  of  the  present  age,  with  its  voluptuous-
ness, its  pampering,  its  perversion;  and  these  it  is  that  lay  the  foundation
of  most  injurious,  chronic  derangements  of  the  female  organism.  They
are  the  cause  of  a  whole  series  of  abnormal  conditions,  with  the  cure  of
which  the  medical  profession  for  the  most  part  struggles  in  vain.

Now,  whence  arises  this  host  of  diseases,  these  troubles  peculiar  to  the
female  sex?  They  are  to  be  traced  to  woman's  wrong  manner  of  living,
to  neglect  of  bodily  health,  to  the  want  of  regular  exercise  in  the  open
air,  to  inattention  to  the  natural  and  prompt  satisfaction  of  the  bodily
needs,  to  an  exaggerated  quest  after  pleasure  and  to  numerous  other
more  or  less  important  deviations  from  the  path  of  nature.

All  these  influences,  in  their  many  combinations,  readily  affect  the
wonderfully  delicate  organism  of  woman,  so  that  it  is  not  surprising  that
it  loses  its  power  of  endurance  and  is  afflicted  by  numberless  ailments.
How  can  it  be  otherwise?  A  comparison  between  the  hardy  woman —
even  though  not  always  living  quite  in  harmony  with  nature — and  the
fashionable  town-bred  lady,  is  sufficient  to  prove  the  truth  of  my  state-
ment.

If  then,  the  female  organism  is  so  frequently  the  seat  of  innumerable
diseases,  partly  inherited,  partly  due  to  individual  error,  of  so  much  the
more  importance  is  my  system  of  healing,  which  is  able  to  successfully
combat  all  these  various  complaints.

And  it  is  a  matter  of  congratulation,  that  it  is  precisely  amongst
women  and  girls,  that  my  method  has  found  such  ready  acceptance,
not  the  less  on  account  of  its  simple  and  inexpensive  character.  Re-
stored health  has  offered  them  the  surest  guarantee  for  the  reliability  of
my  system.  Without  long  discussion  of  the  why  and  wherefore  of  the
matter,  it  has  convinced  them  of  the  marvellous  effects  of  this  treatment,
based  upon  natural  assumptions,  and  they  have  at  once  become  most
enthusiastic  disciples.

At  the  same  time,  mv  new  system  of  diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial
Expression,  has  won  a 'large  circle  of  friends.  It  must  the  more  readily
win  the  sympathy  of  women,  since  it  entirely  obviates  all  examination  of
the  organs  of  generation,  so  disagreeable  for  every  female  patient,
whilst,"  nevertheless,  enabling  the  precise  condition  of  the  body  to  be
determined  with  surprising  exactness.
To  discover  the  cause  of  the  complaint,  and  to  discern  any  deep-seated


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/crs'  Guide  423

disease,  is  of  special  iiiiportaiice  with  the  female  sex.  Serious  illnesses
are  not  infrequently  neglected,  solely  hecause  women  and  girls  hesitate
to  submit  themselves  to  a  medical  examination.

And  how  thankful  have  women  shown  themselves,  that  my  method,
as  already  stated,  precludes  once  and  for  all,  those  unpleasant  manipu-
lations of  the  sexual  organs  with  instruments.

My  method  of  treatment,  by  reason  of  its  practical  effects  so  readily
accepted  by  women,  has  met  with  greatest  success.  Thus  it  is,  as  men-
tioned above,  that  amongst  women  and  girls  especially,  my  system  has
found  the  fullest  acceptance — an  adequate  proof  of  its  efficiency.  What-
ever the  disease  by  which  she  is  tortured,  my  method  of  healing  is  able
to  bring  to  the  patient  the  long  wished  for  relief.

Disturbance  in  Menstruation.  Menstruation  signifies  a  continual  state
of  readiness  to  propagate.  As  long  as  there  is  no  conception,  the  men-
strual blood  continues  to  flow,  without  its  purpose  having  been  fulfilled.
In  the  healthy  person,  however,  this  process  should  be  accompanied
neither  by  pain,  nor  other  unpleasantness.  If  such  occurs,  it  may  be
concluded  with  certainty  that  there  is  an  encumbrance  of  the  body  with
morbid  matter.

The  natural  process,  as  here  observed  in  the  female  organism,  is  con-
nected, as  long  years  of  experience  have  shown  me,  with  the  phases  of
the  moon.  In  a  woman  in  full  health,  the  period,  I  assert,  should  ap-
pear at  every  full-moon,  last  3  to  4  days,  and  reappear  exactly  at  the  end
of  29  days.  Women,  who  do  not  have  the  menses  at,  or  about,  this  time,
may  be  assured  that  they  are  suffering  from  an  encumbrance  of  the
abdominal  organs,  which  is  the  greater,  the  further  removed  the  time  of
menstruation  is  from  the  date  of  full-moon.  Still  more  chronic  will  be
the  encumbrance,  if  the  menses  return  at  intervals  of  only  a  fortnight  or
three  weeks,  or  if  the  menstrual  flow  continues  for  some  fourteen  days
— both  symptoms  being,  unfortunately,  of  extremely  common  occur-
rence to-day.

Everything  in  nature  is  subject  to  a  perpetual  change;  and  so  also  we
find  by  the  menstrual  process,  a  continual  rise  and  fall,  a  constant  in-
crease and  decrease.  The  times  of  the  menses  are  of  far  greater  signi-
ficance for  women  and  girls  than  is  commonly  supposed.  Quietness  and
avoidance  of  all  excitement  during  menstruation,  is  strongly  to  be  re-
commended to  every  w^oman  who  wishes  to  avoid  disagreeable,  or  even
serious,  results,  as  I  have  frequently  had  the  occasion  to  observe.  This
is  particularly  the  case,  too,  with  pregnant  women.  All  their  thoughts,
all  their  actions,  greatly  influence  the  development  of  the  foetus.  The  ill-
nesses which  occur  during  this  period  are  usually,  as  experience  has
shown  me,  accompanied  by  most  serious  results.

To  the  attentive  observer,  these  natural  processes  going  on  in  the
female  organism,  bring  other  noteworthy  facts  to  light.  They  supply  a
striking  proof  of  the  wonderful  unity  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  nature.
Upon  this  point,  I  have  dwelt  in  detail  in  my  hand-book  of  the  Science
of  Facial  Expression,  to  which  I  would  refer  all  who  are  interested  in  the
subject.

As  I  have  pointed  out  above,  if  the  menses  are  too  abundant  or  too
scanty,  if  the  menstruation  remains  away,  or  is  irregular,  this  all  forms
an  unmistakable  proof  of  the  presence  of  an  encumbrance  of  morbid
matter.  How  is  this  diseased  condition  to  be  cured?  The  New^  Science
of  Healing  does  not  fail  us  here  either. Imperfect  digestion,  caused  by


424  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

the  accumulation  of  foreign  matter  in  the  abdomen  must  have  preceded
menstrual  trouble;  it  is  the  constant  and  natural  attendant  of  such.  If
we  improve  the  digestion,  see  to  regular  evacuation  of  the  bowels,  and
reduce  of  the  abnormally  high  temperature  in  the  abdomen,  the  dis-
agreeable results  of  such  will  disappear  of  themselves.

My  cooling  baths,  individualized  according  to  the  degree  of  encum-
brance, an  unstimulating  diet,  and  my  other  well-known  curative  means
prove  most  effective  in  disturbances  of  the  menstruation,  as  has  been
amply  proved  by  the  cures  attained.

The  menstrual  blood,  as  I  am  convinced,  represents  a  superfluity  of
the  humors  of  the  body.  Upon  conception  taking  place,  it  is  used  for
nourishing  the  embryo.  And  it  is  a  fact,  that  the  most  critical  days  for
the  development  of  the  embryo,  are  always  those  about  the  time  of  full-
moon,  that  is,  the  daj's  during  which  in  healthy,  not  pregnant,  women,
the  menses  would  appear.

Equally  convinced  am  I,  that  those  diseases  which  are  connected  with
the  uterus,  become  worse  whilst  the  moon  is  crescent,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  grow  better  as  the  moon  wanes.  These  processes  again  prove
most  clearly,  how  intimately  man  is  bound  up  with  nature.

It  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  my  readers  to  hear  particulars  of  some

cases  I  have  met  with,  showing  the  importance  of  the  times  referred  to.

The  first  is  that  of  a  woman  with  child,  who  had  an  indescribable

dread  of  mice. One  day  a  mouse  ran  over  her  bare  arm,  exactly  at  the

time  where  in  other  circumstances  she  would  be  having  her  period.

How  great  was  the  woman's  terror,  may  be  judged  by  the  fact  that
she  could  not  dismiss  the  matter  from  her  mind;  it  even  entered  into
her  dreams  at  night.  When  the  child  was  born  six  months  later,  it  had  a
mouse  on  its  arm,  that  is,  a  place  of  exactly  the  size  and  form  of  a
mouse,  including  a  regular  mouse's  tail,  covered  with  fine  hair.  The
whole  spot,  however,  was  on  a  level  with  the  rest  of  the  arm,  but
covered  with  peculiar  gray  hair,  just  like  that  of  a  mouse.

In  another  case,  a  woman  was  pregnant  with  her  sixth  child.  She
herself,  as  well  as  her  husband  and  five  children  all  had  dark  hair.  Dur-
ing her  present  pregnancy,  a  girl,  to  whom  she  was  very  much  attached,
was  daily  with  her.  This  child  had  luxuriant,  bright  red,  wavy  curling
hair — a  growth  extremely  rarely  met  with.  The  woman  tenderly  loved
this  girl,  and  cherished  the  ardent  hope  that  her  own  child  might  have
similar  hair.  The  wish  became  most  pronounced  at  those  times  at
which  she  usually  had  her  period,  and  frequently  she  dreamt  about  the
matter.  In  five  months  she  was  delivered  of  a  child,  a  girl.  As  regards
its  features,  it  resembled  its  parents,  but  it  had  precisely  the  same  strik-
ing growth  of  red  hair  as  the  child  above  mentioned.

A  third  case,  and  not  less  remarkable,  is  the  following.  A  lady  was
taking  a  carriage-drive  with  her  little  lap-dog.  Suddenly,  the  animal,
attracted  by  some  passing  object  sprang  from  the  vehicle  and  fell  so  un-
fortunately that  the  wheel  passed  over  its  head.  The  lady  was  so
shocked  at  the  accident,  that  she  could  not  forget  the  sight  of  the  dog's
crushed  head.  She  was  just  a  few  months  advanced  in  pregnancy;  and
when  the  child  arrived  six  months  later,  it  was  still-born,  the  head  hav-
ing a  perfectly  crushed  appearance.

I  may  cite  still  a  fourth  case.  A  woman  bore  a  child  having  its  mouth
reaching  from  ear  to  ear.  It  died  soon  after  birth.  The  cause  of  this
malformation  was  a  fright  which  the  mother  suffered  from  the  sudden


Universal  Naturopalhir  Dirrrlorij  and  Buyers'  Guide  125

sight  of  a  muinmcr's  mask  with  an  immense  mouth.  She  had  heen
so  frightened,  that  she  had  been  unable  to  sleep  for  several  nights.
This  had  doubtless  occurred  during  the  time  of  the  menstrual  flow,
otherwise  the  effect  would  not  have  l3ccn  so  pronounced.

My  readers  will  thus  understand  how  the  different  characters  and
dispositions  of  children  are  often  dependent  upon  the  spirits  and  cir-
cumstances generally,  in  which  the  mothers  are  during  pregnancy  at
those  periods  where  the  menses  would  appear.  Should  they  be  sad  and
pessimistic,  this  mood  will  make  itself  apparent  in  the  children  sooner
or  later.  Anger,  timidity,  courage,  kleptomania,  deceit,  avarice  and  all
other  good  and  evil  traits,  may  be  traced  to  the  same  cause.

Hence  we  must  draw  the  conclusion,  that  all  those  external  influences
which  operate  on  our  senses,  that  is  affect  the  mental  organs,  do  not
exert  their  chief  power  there,  but  bj^  transmission  through  the  nerves,
operate  upon  the  abdomen  and  abdominal  organs.  If  the  reader  has
carefully  followed  my  theory  of  fever,  he  will  see  that  I  regard  the
abdomen  as  the  starting  point  of  the  causes  of  all  diseases.  My  theory,
which  always  points  to  the  abdomen  as  the  principal  organ  of  the
human  body,  receives  its  best  and  surest  support  from  the  above  facts,
and  my  system  of  healing  affords  at  the  same  time  the  most  incontro-
vertible proofs.

Falling  of  the  womb.  Use  of  the  pessary.  This  disorder  arises  from
the  same  uniform  cause,  the  encumbrance  of  the  uterus  with  foreign
matter.  The  morbid  matter  here,  also,  causes  internal  heat  and  pressure,
whereby  the  uterus,  in  consequence  of  its  small  power  of  resistance,  is
pushed  outwards. The  case  is  similar  to  that  of  intestinal  hernia.

The  real  cause  of  the  evil  is  unfortunately  unknown  to  orthodox
practitioners.  They  rarely  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  but  simply  insert
a  rubber  ring  or  other  pessary  into  the  vagina,  thus  holding  back  the
womb.  How  very  many  patients  I  have  had  were  wearing  these  pes-
saries; such  may  be  temporary  means  of  relief,  but  they  can  never  re-
move the  cause.

By  using  my  system  of  treatment,  the  internal  pressure,  which  caused
the  relapse,  is  soon  diminished;  the  morbid  matter  removed,  and  thus
the  use  of  the  pessary  rendered  superfluous,  whilst  the  possibility  of  a
renewal  of  the  prolapse  is,  at  the  same  time,  prevented.

Uterine  flexion.  This  is  caused  in  a  quite  similar  manner  by  the  high
internal  tension  in  the  abdomen.  The  latter  becomes  encumbered  with
morbid  matter  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  womb  is  bent  from  its  natural
position,  that  is,  experiences  a  flexion.  This  disorder  demands  the  same
manner  of  cure.  That  this  is  the  correct  treatment,  is  proved  by  the
successful  results  obtained  by  means  of  my  method  of  healing.  Surgical
operations  or  manipulations,  as  experience  shows,  only  result  in  lasting
injury  to  the  organs  concerned.

Sterility.  It  is  lamentable,  the  number  of  women  who  come  to  consult
me,  opening  their  heart  and  pouring  forth  their  grief  at  their  marriage
having  been  unblessed  by  children.  Often  they  think,  too,  that  they  are
so  healthy,  notwithstanding.  This  is  a  gross  error,  of  course  for  sterility
always  signifies  the  presence  of  a  serious  encumbrance,  particularly  of
the  sexual  parts — the  ovaries.  Fallopian  tubes,  uterus,  etc.  In  some
cases — according  to  the  extent  of  the  encumbrance — conception  may
take  place;  the  inflammation  in  the  abdomen,  however,  caused  by  the


426  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiyers'  Guide

accumulation  of  I'orcigii  matter,  is  then  so  great,  that  the  consequent
tension,  or  pressure,  causes  a  miscarriage  or  premature  birth.  Generally
miscarriage  takes  place  within  the  first  four  months  of  pregnancy,  and
is  assisted  by  any  such  chance  cause,  as  emotion  of  any  kind,  by  a  fright
or  blow,  all  of  which  tend  to  bring  the  morbid  matter  into  more  active
fermentation. Tight  lacing  is  another  factor,  favoring  abortion.

In  the  country,  where  women  live  far  more  hygienically  than  in  towns,
miscarriages  are  scarcely  known.  I  have  known  women  who  up  to  the
seventh  month  of  pregnancy,  took  an  active  part  in  dances,  without
suffering  the  least  inconvenience  afterwards.

Miscarriages  can  only  be  prevented  by  removing  their  cause,  that  is,
the  encumbrance  of  the  sexual  parts.  Operations,  injections  and  other
medical  manipulations,  which  so  outrage  female  modesty,  can  never
secure  the  desired  end.  They  may,  indeed,  so  paralyze  the  innate
curative  power  of  the  body,  that  even  by  my  method  a  cure  is  no  longer
possible.

And  here  I  would  mention  a  fact  too  important  to  be  passed  over.  It  is,
as  experience  shows,  no  matter  of  indifference  at  what  time  coition  takes
place.  As  everywhere  in  nature,  so  also  in  the  case  of  human  beings,
the  vitality  is  highest  in  the  morning;  the  morning,  therefore,  is  the  time
most  favorable  for  fecundation.  Coition,  at  any  other  time,  for  instance
at  night,  not  only  excites,  and  thus  weakens  the  nerves  of  both  husband
and  wife,  but  should  conception  take  place  at  all,  the  embryo  will  not
develop  with  the  same  vitality  as  otherwise.

If  the  encumbrance  is  not  too  great  and  the  body  still  has  a  certain
amount  of  vital  power,  sterility  can  be  cured.  I  have  often  been  able  by
my  method  of  cure,  to  put  women  in  the  position  to  gratify  their  in-
most wish.

A  lady  who  had  already  been  married  for  eight  years,  had  the
strongest  desire  to  become  a  mother,  and  yet  had  found  no  aid  even  from
the  first  specialists.  Finally  she  came  to  consult  me.  I  explained  to  her,
that  her  barren  condition  had  its  origin  in  a  serious  encumbrance  of  the
alidomen,  and  that  the  first  thing  would  be  to  remove  this  morbid
matter. Only  in  this  way  could  she  attain  fulfilment  of  her  wish.

My  prescription  was,  two  to  three  friction  baths  daih%  unstimulating
diet  and  a  natural  manner  of  living.  By  this  means  her  encumbrance
was  gradually  diminished,  and  after  a  few  months,  she  could  make  to
me  the  happy  announcement  that  she  had  conceived.  An  easy  birth  and
a  healthy  child  were  the  further  convincing  proofs  of  the  efficiency  of  my
system  of  healing.

Sore  breasts  and  absence  of  milk.  The  best,  because  the  most  natural,
source  of  food  for  the  child  is  the  mother's  breast.  This  is  a  most  im-
portant organ,  the  functions  of  which,  unfortunately,  are  to-day  far  too
often  ignorantly  underrated.  This  leads  to  neglect  of  one  of  the  most
precious  means  for  rearing  a  healthy  race.  How  many  mothers  do  we
find,  who  are  wholly  or  partly  unable  to  suckle  their  children.  In  the
full  sense  of  the  word,  such  mothers  are  not  really  capable  of  propagat-
ing the  species.  Is  such  a  thing  ever  to  be  seen  in  the  case  of  animals?
Do  we  ever  find  one  that  cannot  give  suck  to  its  young,  or,  by  so  doing
ever  get  sore  dugs?  Such  is  never  the  case.  There  must  then  be  very
definite  reasons  which  produce  this  state  of  affairs  in  the  case  of  human
beings. One  such  reason  is  the  abnormally  full  breasts  before  concep-


Universal  Nataropaihir  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  427

tion  and  suckling.  It  is  well  known  that  many  women  whose  breasts  are
thus  highly  developed  are  wholly  unable  to  suckle  a  child,  or  are
troubled  with  sore  nipples  during  suckling.  Such  a  fully  developed
bosom  during  maidenhood  is  never  normal.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  sure
sign  that  the  body  is  considerably  encumbered  with  morbid  matter.

In  the  country,  especially,  we  frequently  have  occasion  to  see  how-
women  bring  children  into  the  world  without  trouble,  and  suckle  them
likewise  without  any  pain,  although  neither  before  their  pregnancy,
nor  during  the  period  of  suckling  do  they  have  large,  full  breasts.  Want
of  milk  can  also  occur  when  a  woman  is  unduly  thin,  a  condition  point-
ing to  a  still  more  deep-rooted  chronic  encumbrance.  In  such  cases,
especially  when  the  mother  is  living  upon  what  to-day  is  considered  a
good,  nutritious  diet,  i.  e.  flesh-meat,  wine,  beer,  eggs,  milk,  etc.,  I  have
noticed  that  women,  because  of  "want  of  milk,"  are  no  longer  able  to
suckle  at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  frequently  made  the  experience
that  an  appropriate,  unstimulating  diet,  and  the  use  of  my  friction-
baths  and  steam-baths,  will  remove  the  inability  to  give  suck,  and  like-
wise cure  sore  breasts.

A  woman  was  delivered  of  her  third  child;  she  had  been  unable  to
suckle  either  of  the  two  previous  ones,  although  she  was  most  anxious
to  do  so.  On  the  present  occasion  for  some  time  before  her  confinement
she  had  used  my  cure,  and  her  wish  was  fulfilled,  there  being  an  ample
supply  of  inilk  for  the  child.

Many  such  cases  have  occurred  in  my  practice.

A  case  concerning  the  cure  of  sore  breasts,  selected  from  many  others,
may  here  be  reproduced.

Some  weeks  after  her  confinement,  a  young  woman  was  troubled  by
serious  swelling  of  the  breasts.  The  family  doctor,  as  a  last  resource,
proposed  slitting  them  on  the  following  day.  The  patient,  however,
could  not  make  up  her  mind  to  undergo  the  operation  and  sent  for  me
late  the  same  evening.  I  explained  to  her,  that  in  my  opinion  an  oper-
ation would  not  only  be  useless,  but  even  very  dangerous,  and  that  I
believed  myself  to  be  able  to  assist  her  in  another  way  within  a  verj'
short  time.  She  gladly  followed  my  instructions,  taking  four  friction
sitz-baths  during  the  night,  each  half  an  hour  in  duration,  in  water  at
a  temperature  of  55°  Fahr.  Next  day  her  condition  was  very  much  im-
proved. In  a  few  days  more,  all  the  pains  had  disappeared;  and  after
some  weeks'  cure,  her  condition  was  wholly  normal,  the  cause  of  the
disease,  the  foreign  matter,  having  been  expelled  from  the  abdomen.

These  cures  speak  more  plainly  than  all  the  scientific  disquisitions  of
medical  men,  and  afford  undeniable  proof  of  the  value  of  my  method  in
cases  of  this  kind  also.

Puerperal  fever.  Thousands  of  happy  mothers  annually  fall  victims
to  this  dread  disease,  pitiless  and  unsparing  in  its  character;  feared  the
more,  since  human  aid  has  hitherto  proved  powerless  to  cope  with  it.

Its  appearance  is  a  certain  sign  that  the  organism  is  heavily  encum-
bered with  foreign  matter.  This  dangerous  fever  can  only  occur  when
such  morbid  matter  is  present  in  the  body  and  commences  to  ferment.
Only  that  woman,  therefore,  can  be  attacked  by  puerperal  fever,  in
whose  system,  after  the  birth,  sufTicient  foreign  matter  has  remained  to
serve  as  exciter  of  disease.  It  is  in  no  way  necessary,  for  instance,  that
blood  which  has  remained  in  the  womb  or  cutaneous  tissue  first  passes


428  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

into  decomposition  (fermentation),  and  then  in  turn  acts  upon  the
foreign  matter  present  to  set  up  fermentation.  If,  then,  \vc  wish  to  cure
puerperal  fever,  we  must  expel  its  cause,  the  foreign  matter,  from  the
body;  and  thus  may  most  readily  be  eftected  by  friction  sitz-baths.

On  the  day  after  her  safe  delivery,  a  lady  was  seriously  attacked  by
puerperal  fever.  The  midwife  had  applied  warm  compresses,  of  course,
without  effect.  She  was  ignorant  of  the  great  internal  heat  which  had
been  created  in  the  body  by  the  fermentation  of  foreign  matter — heat
which  could  naturally  only  be  got  rid  of  by  cooling.  I  informed  the  pa-
tient, that  I  could  certainly  help  her,  but  that  1  feared  she  would  not
reply,  "I  will  do  anything."  I  therefore  ordered  her  to  take  three  or
four  friction  sitz-baths  daily,  each  lasting  from  15  to  30  minutes,  with
water  at  64°  Fahr.

As  it  was  troublesome  for  her,  however,  to  warm  the  water  to  the
temperature  mentioned,  the  patient  took  the  water  just  as  it  came  from
the  tap  (at  a  temperature  of  about  50°  Fahr.  only).  In  other  respects,
my  instructions  were  implicitly  followed.  Nor  was  the  cooler  water  a
disadvantage,  on  the  contrary,  it  accelerated  the  cure,  though  the
warmer  water  would  have  been  more  agreeable  at  first.  Where  the
curative  power  of  the  body  is  not  too  low,  however,  cold  water  is  always
more  effective.  In  eighteen  hours  the  fever  had  abated,  and  the  patient
was  out  of  danger.  In  a  week  she  was  able  to  attend  again  to  her
customary  duties.  Here  again  was  a  proof  of  the  astonishingly  rapid
effect  of  the  friction  sitz-baths.  The  foreign  matter  was  drawn  to  the
natural  organs  of  secretion,  whereby  its  further  fermentation,  as  in  any
other  case  of  fever,  was  prevented.  After  continuing  the  baths  for  some
time  longer,  the  patient  finally  became  far  healthier  than  she  had  ever
been  before.  It  will  be  seen  that  my  treatment  in  this  case  ran  directly
The  medical  men,  as  I  have  frequently  found,  order  that  the  head  be
cooled  with  ice-bags,  and  the  abdomen  on  the  contrary  kept  warm,
whereby  they  simply  increase  that  which  they  wish  to  remove.  It  has
always  been  a  mystery  to  me,  why  the  ice-bag  should  always  be  applied
to  the  head — the  very  way  to  draw  all  the  blood  to  this  part.  And  yet
everyone  knows  that  the  head  is  not  destined  to  expel  the  foreign  mat-
ter; that  can  only  be  done  by  the  natural  secretory  organs.  Hence  the
ice  not  merely  cools,  but  renders  the  brain  torpid.  The  organism  at
once  attempts  to  compensate  for  this  coohng  action,  by  producing
normal  bodily  warmth  by  means  of  an  increased  supply  of  blood.  This
flow  of  blood  to  the  brain,  will,  however,  naturally  cause  a  rise  in  temper-
ature; we  thus  have  externally  a  state  of  torpor,  whilst  internally  there
is  burning  heat.  Unless  now  these  two  states  are  able  quickly  enough  to
compensate  each  other,  death  will  rapidly  take  place.

One  more  case.  I  was  called  one  day  to  a  lady  who,  on  the  day  after
her  delivery  had  been  attacked  by  puerperal  fever.  The  physicians
who  had  treated  her,  professors  and  high  authorities  in  the  profession,
had  not  been  able  to  cure  the  fever,  which  had  now  changed  from  the
acute  state  into  a  chronic  one.  Finally,  after  about  a  week's  treatment,
the  brain  became  affected,  and  the  patient  became  delirious,  so  that  the
medical  attendants  feared  the  worst.  Such  was  the  sorrowful  plight  in
which  I  found  the  patient,  as,  in  response  to  a  telegram,  I  arrived  to  take


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  429

up  the  case.  The  first  work  was  evidently  to  cure  the  latent,  chronic
fever,  which  I  was  soon  able  to  do.  A  few  friction  sitz-baths,  each  of
one  hour's  duration,  were  sufficient  to  subdue  the  heat  in  the  abdomen,
and  bring  the  patient  into  a  normal  mental  condition.

In  this  short  space  of  time,  the  body  naturally  had  not  been  freed  from
the  morbid  matter,  causing  the  fever,  still  the  lady  was  now  out  of
danger.  She  continued  my  baths  and  dietetic  prescriptions  for  some
tmie  longer,  and  has  since  been  in  the  best  of  health,  as  I  have  often  had
occasion  to  learn,  from  the  relatives  residing  in  Leipzig.


430  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


HOW  TO  BRING  ABOUT  EASY  AND  SAFE
PARTURITION


IN  the  kingdom of  nature,  in the  great  world  of  ceaseless  activity,
governed  by  eternal  and  incontrovertible  laws,  the  exact  conditions
under  which  each  individual  creature  may  exist  are  clearly  set  down.
Let  us,  then,  observe  the  circumstances  under  which  those  animals
that  have  not  been  degenerated  by  contact  with  man,  bring  forth  their
young.

If  we  contemplate  a  dog,  a  hare,  a  cat  or  other  animal  in  a  free  state
we  find  that  such  a  creature  never  requires  any  assistance  in  parturition;
and  that  this  proceeding  is  never  painful,  nor  of  long  duration.  No-
where do  we  see  such  animals  exhibiting  any  kind  of  fear,  or  uneasiness,
at  the  approaching  birth.  That  so  often  dangerous  act,  in  the  case  of
human  beings,  in  the  animal  kingdom  passes  by  without  trouble,  caus-
ing no  derangement  whatever  in  the  health  of  the  animals.

Not  rarely  have  I  carefully  observed  such  creatures,  and  I  have  always
found,  that  almost  immediately  after  bringing  forth  the  young  they  re-
turned to  their  usual  manner  of  living,  as  though  nothing  whatever  had
happened,  except  that  they  displayed  the  greatest  possible  care  for  their
offspring.  I  have  never  remarked  that  Nature,  as  seen  in  the  healthy
animal  world,  ever  varied  from  this  course.  I  remember  the  case  of  a
doe-hare,  which  had  just  brought  forth  two  young  and  was  disturbed  in
the  act  by  a  sportsman.  She  rushed  off,  as  though  in  a  normal  bodily
condition,  but  was  shot.  Upon  examining  her,  it  was  seen  that  she  was
with  young,  and  upon  being  cut  open,  the  young  animal  was  removed
from  the  body  in  a  living  state.  The  other  two,  which  had  just  been
born,  were  found  upon  a  search  being  made.

With  women,  on  the  contrary,  easy  parturitions  are  of  most  seldom
occurrence.  When  we  see  such  difiicult,  painful  births,  miscarriages,
and  all  kinds  of  disorders  during  pregnancy  happening  daily,  we  surely
have  reason  to  view  the  matter  gravely.  Parturition  without  the  aid  of
a  midwife  is  a  thing  scarcely  to  be  imagined  to-day;  the  act  of  birth  is,
in  fact,  more  an  artificial,  than  a  natural  proceeding.  Moreover,  in
order  to  avoid  disastrous  consequences,  the  woman  is  obliged  to  keep
her  bed  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  after  the  delivery.

All  these  deviations  from  the  immutable  law  of  nature,  must  neces-
sarily have  a  deep-lying  reason;  the}^  must  arise  from  conditions  which
run  altogether  counter  to  natural  laws.  Nature  never  causes  such  dis-
turbances herself,  her  procedure  is  unchanging.  Man  alone  interferes
with  the  natural  organism,  controlled  by  definite  laws,  and  in  his  ignor-
ance disturbs  the  work  of  nature.  It  is,  then,  not  Nature  and  her  laws,
which  have  become  insufficient  for  man's  well-being;  it  is  man  himself
who  is  always  approaching  nearer  towards  imperfection.

It  is  no  matter  of  wonder,  then,  that  this  rejection  of  natural  laws  is
avenged  by  the  human  race  being  brought  ever  nearer  and  nearer  to  the


Universal  Naturopalhic  Direcionj  and  Buyers'  Guide  431

brink  of  physical  ruin.  Only  when  mankind  began  to  deviate  from  the
course  of  nature  did  it  become  gradually  diseased  and  encumbered  with
foreign  matter.  It  has  soon  discovered  in  what  a  fatal  way  this  trans-
gression of  the  laws  laid  down  by  nature,  has  reacted  upon  the  propaga-
tion of  the  human  species.  Paradise  has  been  lost — that  earthly  happi-
ness, revealed  in  the  consciousness  of  perfect  health,  which  is  only  at-
tainable where  man  lives  in  the  closest  harmony  with  nature  and  in
obedience  to  her  laws.

Summarizing  all  that  has  been  said  above,  we  arrive  at  the  following:
"Really  healthy  mothers  will  always  have  an  easy  time  when  pregnant,
causing  safe  births,  and  healthy  children."  The  word  "healthy,"  how-
ever, must  here  be  understood  in  the  sense  already  explained  in  this
book,  that  is,  the  state  of  absolute  freedom  from  morbid  matter.

The  child  will  only  be  truly  healthy,  however,  when  the  father  is  free
from  all  encumbrance.  Nature  always  endeavors  to  form  the  embryo
developing  in  the  womb,  of  the  best  elements  of  the  parents.  A  direct
inheritance  of  germs  of  disease,  consists,  in  many  cases,  simply  in  certain
organs  of  the  father  or  mother,  which  have  been  diseased  or  encum-
bered at  the  time  of  procreation,  being  defectively  developed  in  the
child;  the  offspring  thus  enters  the  world  in  an  imperfectly  proportioned
state.  If,  now,  there  is  an  encumbrance  of  foreign  matter  in  the  child,
as  is  practically  unavoidable  to-day,  wdth  vaccination  and  artificial
food,  this  morbid  matter  will  always  tend  to  accumulate  and
force  its  way,  where  there  is  least  resistance  offered.  Thus  it  is  precisely
in  the  relatively  weakly-developed  organs,  where  the  largest  accumu-
lation of  foreign  matter  will  take  place.  In  the  child,  therefore,  we  find
the  same  disease  as  in  the  parents.  By  means  of  natural  treatment
and  careful  observance  of  natural  laws,  we  are,  however,  enabled  to  ex-
pel all  such  foreign  matter,  and  thus  gradually  strengthen  and  keep
healthy  those  organs  which  are  weaker  than  is  normal,  or  which  are
especially  exposed  to  encumbrances.  In  this  manner,  it  is  possible  in
time  to  create  a  healthier  and  hardier  race.

Frequently,  it  may  be  seen  how,  where  the  parents  are  heavily  en-
cumbered, the  children  also  enter  the  world  in  the  same  state.  "By  their
fruits  we  shall  know  them,"  may  here  be  said  with  truth.  Tlie  un-
natural manner  of  living  imposed  upon  the  children  has  brought  it
about,  that  the  human  race  becomes  more  and  more  degenerated  from
generation  to  generation.

But  there  are  other  circumstances  which  cause  serious  injur}'  to  the
health.

Nowhere  in  nature  do  w^e  ever  find  that  an  animal  becomes  weaker,
uglier  or  even  deformed  through  bearing  young.  How  different  is  it
with  the  human  race.  It  is  almost  the  rule  that  a  woman,  even  after
the  first  confinement,  begins  to  age  or  become  altered  in  form,  for
instance  by  an  abnorinoUy  large  abdomen.  The  blame  is  always  attri-
buted to  the  pregnancy,  the  parturition  and  suckling  of  the  child.  After
successive  delivery,  the  majority  of  women,  lose  more  and  more  in
beauty,  although  living  under  quite  healthy  conditions  as  regards  occu-
pation and  diet.

I  will  here  point  directly  to  one  cause  of  this.  Never  in  nature,  except
in  the  case  of  mankind,  do  we  see  the  female,  after  having  once  con-
ceived, courting  a  further  copulation;  on  the  contrary  she  will  abso-


432  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bni/crs'  Guide

lutely  refuse  to  allow  it.  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  nature.
Copulation  is  for  the  purpose  of  conception,  and  not  merely  for  pleas-
ure. During  the  act,  there  is  an  increased  flow  of  blood  towards  the
sexual  organs,  which,  if  the  female  has  already  conceived,  always  acts
injuriously  upon  the  embryo  in  course  of  development.  In  particular,
also,  the  female  herself  suffers,  since  nature  always  endeavors  to  keep
the  womb  free  from  everything  injurious  to  the  embryo.  Disobedience
to  this  natural  law  expresses  itself  in  women,  through  the  speedy  decline
of  the  bodily  vitality  and  in  the  numerous  troublesome  diseases  of
women.

Those  troublesome  accompaniments  of  pregnancy,  are  frequently  the
direct  results  of  this  transgression  of  Nature's  laws.  Thus  we  have  morn-
ing vomiting,  nausea,  toothache,  change  of  complexion,  feverishness
alternating  with  chilliness,  inclination  to  melancholy  and  tears,  great
nervous  irritability,  disgust  at  accustomed  foods,  abnormal  appetite.
In  some  cases,  of  course,  these  symptoms  may  be  due  to  an  inherited  en-
cumbrance. The  healthy  instinct  of  every  woman  forbids  her,  as  ex-
perience shows,  to  have  further  coition  after  she  has  once  conceived.  It
is  our  present-day  customs,  and  the  morbidly  increased  sexual  desire  of
men,  caused  by  encumbrance  of  the  system  with  foreign  matter,  that
bring  about  this  unnatural  practice.

It  is  an  old  and  well-known  fact  to  farmers,  that  an  unnaturally  in-
creased sexual  impulse  amongst  cattle,  is  a  sure  sign  of  a  disease  having
broken  out.  And  it  is  the  same  with  man,  as  anyone  can  observe  who
will  look  about  him.  I  need  only  mention  here  the  abnormal  sexual
excitement  on  the  part  of  consumptives.

Sexual  impulse  in  healthy  man  is  something  altogether  different  from
that  unbridled  lust  which  we  see  so  often  to-day.  Free  from  all  erotic
thoughts,  free  from  all  unnatural  passion,  the  sexual  impulse  is  there  in
man  also  only  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  species.  Never  must  it
become  a  necessity,  which  when  not  satisfied  for  a  period  causes  dis-
comfort. Naturally  it  is  only  he  who  is  healthy  and  keeps  his  body  pure
by  unstimulating,  and  natural  diet,  that  is  able  to  judge  correctly  of  this
condition.  Whoever,  then,  would  not  have  his  will  in  conflict  with  that
of  Nature;  whoever  would  control  his  body,  so  that  his  sexual  impulse
is  kept  within  proper  bounds,  so  that  which  under  other  circumstances
would  be  the  severest  constraint,  is  to  him  a  benefit — let  such  a  man  re-
turn to  nature.  If  he  follows  the  rules  of  health  laid  down  by  me,  and
thus  frees  his  svstem  of  the  foreign  matter  encumbering  it,  he  will  attain
that  which  will  render  him  content  and  happy.

Everywhere  to-day  w^e  see  unnatural  births  of  various  kinds.  First
we  have  miscarriages  and  premature  births.  Here  a  breech-birth,  and
here  the  child  reaches  the  vagina  in  a  side  position.  Then  again  we
find  children  with  unnaturally  large  heads,  whilst  the  generative  pas-
sage of  the  mother  is  so  narrow,  that  birth  without  artificial  aid  is  im-
possible. In  other  cases  again,  the  activity  of  the  labor  pains  is  far  too
feeble.  In  short,  a  number  of  unnatural  occurrences  happen  which  can
all  be  explained  by  the  encumbrance,  of  one  kind  or  another,  of  the
mother  with foreign matter, and the inherited encumbrance of  the

child.  , .  , ,

A  wrong  position  of  the  child  in  the  womb  is  always  caused  either  by
the  encumbrance  of  the  mother,  or  through  inappropriate  work  or  oc-


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctonj  and  Biu/rrs'  Guide  483

cupation,  especially  during  the  first  half  of  the  period  of  pregnancy.  The
child  is  simply  pushed  out  of  the  correct  position  hy  such  accumulations
of  morbid  matter,  or  as  the  result  of  some  unsuitable  occupation,
whereby  the  abdomen  is  stretched  and  strained.  When  the  generative
passage  of  the  woman  is  narrowed  by  the  accumulation  of  foreign  mat-
ter, a  difficult  birth  must  certainly  result.  The  child  itself  may  also  be  so
heavily  encumbered  (supposing  the  parents  were  also  in  such  condition),
that  it  is  of  abnormal  size,  at  birth,  especially  as  regards  the  head.  This
also  naturally  causes  difficulty  in  parturition.  An  encumbrance  of  the
generative  passage  consists  in  all  the  muscles,  sinews  and  ligaments  be-
ing so  permeated  with  foreign  matter,  that  they  appear  swollen,  and  lose
considerably  in  elasticity.  An  easy  birth  on  the  other  hand,  demands
that  the  whole  system  be  in  a  perfect  condition  of  health  in  the  true
sense  of  the  word.

Every  muscle  which  is  encumbered,  suffers  considerably  as  regards
its  functional  ability;  and  if,  as  is  the  case  with  the  labor  pains,  it  is  con-
vulsively contracted  and  more  exerted  than  its  encumbered  state  admits
of,  great  pain  will  be  caused.  Thus,  severe  pain  at  birth  always  results
from  an  encumbrance  with  foreign  matter,  or  a  disease,  in  another  sense.
Adhesion  of  the  after-birth  is  due  to  the  same  cause.

Can  we,  then,  wonder  that  all  women  who  are  encumbered,  have  the
greatest  fear  of  child-bearing?  Such  fear,  however,  is  by  no  means
natural,  and  is  simply  the  result  of  the  encumbrance.  A  really  healthy
woman  knows  nothing  of  this  oppressive  feeling.  Anxiety  is  the  voice
of  instinct,  which,  though  often  suppressed,  yet  in  such  crises  as  child-
birth, clearly  shows  us  that  we  have  made  wrong  use  of  the  body  and
health  which  Nature  has  given  us.  But  who  is  able  to-day  to  interpret
this  voice  aright?  If  there  is  anyone  who  still  objects  that  there  are,
nevertheless  doubtless  many  cases  where  operation  or  manipulation  is
a  necessity  in  child-birth,  let  such  read  the  following.

A  woman,  aged  36,  who  was  about  to  give  birth  to  her  second  child,
had  already  passed  two  days  and  two  nights  in  labor  and  yet  the  child
never  moved  in  the  womb.  The  midwife  was  of  opinion  that  medical
aid  was  necessary,  or  the  birth  would  be  impossible.  A  very  skilled  phy-
sician, well-known  as  an  accoucher,  was  therefore  called  in.  For  four
hours  he  operated  with  all  kinds  of  instruments,  and  finally  decided
that  owing  to  the  wrong  position  of  the  child,  it  was  impossible  for  it  to
be  born  without  danger  to  the  mother.  The  poor  woman  would,  as  she
said,  rather  die  than  endure  the  tortures  of  this  obstetric  assistance  anv
longer.  Without  having  accomplished  anything,  the  physician  took
leave,  declaring  that  the  woman  would  die,  since  the  child  could  not
be  got  out.  But  Nature  had  decided  otherwise  than  this  obstetrician.
After  24  hours  of  continued  labor  pains,  the  child  was  born,  wdthout  the
operation  of  any  physician,  but  only  with  the  assistance  of  the  midwife.
Who  had  here  been  of  more  use,  the  famous  physician  or — simple  na-
ture? The  unnatural  surgical  operations,  however,  were  not  without
their  unhappy  results:  the  woman  after  the  delivery  had  to  lie  nine
weeks  ill  and  her  life  was  even  despaired  of.  The  instrumental  manipu-
lations had  nearly  lamed  her  and  it  was  only  her  strong  constitution
that  ultimately  brought  about  her  recovery.

Owing  to  the  general  chronic  degeneration  of  the  human  race,  com-
plications, I  admit,  may  occur  at  parturition,  which  neither  physician.


434  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

nor  obstetrician,  arc  able  to  get  over.  As  the  result  of  my  experience,  I
am  of  the  opinion  that  in  such  cases  it  is  best  to  ([uietly  leave  to  nature.
No  one  can  help  better  than  she.  To  aid  the  inactivity  of  the  labor  pains,
however,  I  know  of  no  better  means,  than  the  friction  sitz-baths.  Earth
bandages  round  the  abdomen  have  proved  to  be  also  a  remedial  and
palliative  agent.  Humid  clay  or  loam  is  spread  not  too  thinly  upon  a
linen  cloth  and  this  with  the  earthy  side  upon  the  abdomen,  a  woollen
cloth  bound  over  the  top. The  clay  may  be  renewed  every  hour  or  two.

Through  over-hastily  undertaking  operations  at  births,  thousands  of
women  have  been  sent  to  an  early  grave.  How  happy  would  so  many
tortured  mothers  be,  and  how  much  misery  would  many  families  be
spared,  if  instead  of  to  the  obstetrician  with  his  mania  for  operating,
everything  at  the  bedside  were  left  to  our  all-caring  mother  Nature.  It
is  always  the  fault  of  the  woman,  if  she  comes  in  a  situation,  where  a
birth  appears  impossible  without  the  use  of  instruments.  She  had  long
enough  the  means  of  preparing  for  a  safe  birth,  since  she  soon  saw  she
was  pregnant.  Certainly  she  must  also  understand  how  to  use  the
means  offered,  and  to  make  the  best  use  of  them  at  the  right  time.
Anyone  knowing  my  method,  understands  what  is  to  be  done  in  order  to
procure  easy  births.  During  the  last  few  years,  a  large  number  of  further
cases  have  occurred  which  most  clearly  confirm  my  teachings.  Neyer
in  one  of  such  cases  have  my  friction  sitz-baths  and  dietetic  regulations
failed  in  their  operation.  Everywhere,  where  my  treatment  was  applied
in  right  time,  astonishingly  easy  births  followed.

In  the  letters  of  thanks  addressed  to  me,  unreserved  acknowledgment
of  the  efficiency  of  my  friction  sitz-baths  is  everywhere  to  be  found.
After  all,  it  must  be  evident,  that  it  is  mucli  easier  to  obviate  a  painful
birth  in  right  time,  than  to  get  aid  only  in  the  moment  of  parturition.
The  continually  increasing  need  of  artificial  aid  at  births,  speaks  only
too  clearly  and  earnestly  of  the  serious  and  steady  spread  of  chronic
disease.

Those  who  would  have  safe  deliveries  and  healthy  children,  must,
before  all,  see  that  their  own  body  is  free  from  foreign  matter,  that  is.
healthy,  at  the  time  of  coition.  And  one  can  only  be  healthy,  if  all
foreign  matter  has  been  expelled  from  the  body,  and  a  renewed  encum-
brance obviated  by  following  the  advice  laid  down  in  my  volume.

I  had  a  woman  under  my  treatment,  who  had  been  suffering  from
articular  rheumatism  for  a  considerable  time.  She  was  pretty  heavily
encumbered  with  foreign  matter,  especially  in  the  abdomen.  She  had
already  had  five  children,  the  circumstances  of  birth  in  each  case  being
most  distressing.  The  delivery  had  always  occupied  from  two  to  three
days,  the  activity  of  the  labor  pains  being  insufficient.  Each  time,  there-
fore, the  woman  had  to  undergo  the  most  horrible  pain,  until  the  ac-
coucher  was  able  to  procure  the  parturition  by  the  aid  of  his  forceps.
During  the  period  of  pregnancy  with  her  sixth  child,  she  had  followed
my  advice  and  taken  two  or  three  friction  siz-baths  daily.  The  result
was,  that  the  sixth  birth,  which  in  other  circumstances  would  certainly
have  been  the  most  difficult,  was  the  easiest.  The  act  of  parturition  itself
lasted  scarcely  an  hour;  the  labor  pains  from  the  first  followed  in  proper
series  and  were  practically  painless.  (See  further  Reports  of  Cures,  Part
IV.)

This  result  was  altogether  incomprehensible  to  the  woman.  When  I


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  435

had  told  her  before  the  birth,  that  I  expected  such  a  result,  she  scep-
tically remarked  that  I  would  not  be  able  to  invent  painless  deliveries.
Afterwards  she  lamented  to  me  that  her  age  was  sucli,  that  she  could
scarcely  count  upon  another  conception.  And  yet,  now  that  she  knew
how  to  bear  without  pain,  she  would  so  like  to  have  more  children.  She
was  also  much  surprised  at  being  able  to  give  the  child  the  breast,  a
pleasure  she  had  never  been  able  to  enjoy  before.

And  all  this  had  a  quite  natural  cause:  the  woman  since  hearing  of  my
system  lived  strictly  in  accordance  with  Nature  and  used  my  baths
regularly.  Her  body,  formerly  heavily  encumbered,  became,  in  conse-
quence, tolerably  free  from  the  foreign  matter;  an  increased  physical
and  mental  capacity  was  the  direct  result.

Similar  happy  results  were  obtained  by  another  ladv,  who  upon  my
advice  used  my  system  during  her  pregnancy.  After  following  the  treat-
ment for  seven  months,  the  delivery  took  place  and  was  likewise  prac-
tically painless,  lasting  about  half  an  hour,  no  midwife  being  present.

A  like  satisfactory  case  was  that  of  a  lady,  who  in  consequence  wrote
me  the  following  letter  of  thanks  in  September  1890:

"I  am  28  years  of  age,  and  was  suffering  from  disorder  of  the  bladder
and  kidneys  since  my  15th  year.  At  first,  I  was  for  eight  weeks  in  the
T — Institute  of  this  town,  with  the  only  result  that  my  catarrh  of  the
bladder  during  this  time  became  more  unbearable.  I  could  only  keep  in
a  lying  posture,  for  to  stand  or  walk  was  impossible  on  account  of  the
most  horrible  pain.

This  went  on  for  four  weeks,  so  I  went  to  the  clinic  in  L street,

where  after  a  considerable  stay  I  secured  a  temporary  alleviation  of  mv
painful  malady.  As,  however,  no  one  had  ever  attacked  the  root  of  my
complaint,  it  returned  again  in  the  course  of  a  year  with  renewed  vigor.
At  the  time,  I  was  staying  in  Chemnitz  and  had  to  go  to  the  hospital
there,  where  I  remained  for  over  three  months,  I  was  treated,  without
the  least  success,  with  salicylic  acid  and  lunar  caustic,  with  compresses
and  electricity.  In  April  1880,  therefore,  I  went  to  Leipzig  and  had  at
once  to  go  to  the  hospital  again.  Here  for  four  weeks  I  w^as  treated  for  a
uterine  complaint,  likewise  without  any  success.  Often  I  scarcely
knew  how  to  get  from  the  hospital  to  my  house,  so  great  was  the  pain.

I  left  the  hospital,  because  I  saw  no  chance  of  recovery  there,  and  for
four  years  sought  aid  at  the  hands  of  Dr.  M. —  of  Leipzig.  He' likewise
cured  me  of  the  catarrh  of  the  bladder  and  inflammation  of  the  womb,
and  sent  me  for  three  years  consecutively  to  Franzensbad,  where  I  took
mud  and  chalybeate  baths  and  drank  the  waters.  But  it  was  all  without
permanent  result.  At  my  last  stay  in  Franzensbad  I  was  even  sent  back
here  by  the  physician,  because  in  his  opinion,  an  operation  was  abso-
lutely necessary.  Dr.  L—  of  Leipzig,  therefore,  operated  me,  and  my
condition  for  the  time  became  bearable.  Nevertheless,  I  still  always  felt
the  presence  of  my  old  complaint  and  clearly  remarked  how  it  had  been
suppressed,  by  the  operative  treatment,  but  in  no  wav  radically  removed
from  the  body.  From  time  to  time  I  was  obliged  to  apply  compresses
and  the  like  to  get  relief,  until  finally  I  was  compelled  again  to  seek
medical  aid.  I  went  to  Dr.  Z—  of  Leipzig,  but  after  a  year's  treatment
felt  no  better.  Dr.  Z—  declared,  at  last,  that  I  was  suffering  from  a
floating  kidney,  and  that  there  was  nothing  further  to  be  done;  in  any
case,  however,  he  would  advise  me  to  consult  Professor  S —  of  the  same


436  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

city.  This  gentleman  examined  me  daily  for  a  whole  week,  at  the  end
of  which  he  likewise  said  that  aid  was  no  longer  possible  and  sent  me
away.

Thus,  bereft  of  hope,  in  July  two  years  ago  I  came  under  your  care.
The  very  first  two  days  of  the  treatment  were  sullicient  to  rid  me  of  my
unbearable  pains,  and  in  four  weeks  I  could  again  work.  I  have,  by  your
method,  been  able  to  keep  health  and  strength  up  till  the  present  time.

Even  during  the  first  year  of  the  cure,  1  felt  so  physically  refreshed
and  strengthened,  that  I  married,  despite  dissuasion  on  all  sides,  and  the
opinion  of  physicians  that  1  would  not  come  through  child-birth  with
safety.  Your  advice  and  my  own  experience  taught  me  better,  and
everything  has  happened  just  as  you  foretold.  I  married,  followed  your
instructions  conscientiously  during  my  pregnancy  and  to  general  sur-
prise had  a  remarkably  easy  and  safe  delivery  without  a  midwife.  All
this  I  owe  to  your  simple  system  of  healing.

Leipzig. "  (Mrs.) Louise  B — .


I


Universal  Natnropalhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  437


CONDUCT  AFTER  BIRTH


FOR  the  really  healthy  woman,  advice  as  to  how  to  manage  after  the
confinement  would,  of  course,  be  superfluous.  Not  only  the  animals,
but  also  the  women  amongst  many  uncivilized  races  are  able,  to
rise  and  go  about  their  customary  duties  almost  immediately  after
the  birth.  It  is  very  seldom,  however,  that  we  find  the  women  of  civil-
ized nations  able  to  do  this;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  custom  to  keep
them  in  bed  for  a  considerable  time  after  delivery.  Formerly  nine  days
was  the  usual  time;  now  many  physicians  order  twelve  days.  It  is  less
the  want  of  strength  on  the  part  of  the  mother,  that  necessitates  this,
than  the  abnormal  slowness  with  which  the  generative  organs  assume
their  former  position.  But  this  long  period  of  lying  in  bed  is  undoubted-
ly in  many  ways  very  injurious  to  the  health.  The  process  of  assimila-
tion becomes  weaker,  for  the  digestion  suffers  from  the  inactivity  of  the
body — a  fact  which  is  proved  by  the  obstinate  constipation  which  nearly
always  occurs  at  this  period.  Nevertheless,  to  rise  before  the  generative
organs  have  returned  again  to  their  usual  position  is  also  injurious,  caus-
ing an  abnormally  large  abdomen,  such  as  is  so  frequently  observed  in
women  who  have  borne  several  children.

I  have  reflected  much  upon  the  best  manner  in  which  to  get  over  this
evil,  without  keeping  the  woman  so  long  in  bed,  and  I  have  found  an  ex-
tremely simple  means,  and  one  which  has  proved  extraordinarily  suc-
cessful.

As  soon  as  the  delivery  has  taken  place,  the  woman  should  rest  as  long
as  she  feels  it  necessary,  and  it  is  very  beneficial  if  she  can  take  a  short
sleep.  Then  she  should  thoroughly  wash  herself,  which  is  best  done  by
taking  a  friction  sitz-bath.  The  water  may  have  a  temperature  of  about
73° — 77°  Fahr.,  and  stand  from  one  to  three  inches  above  the  seat-
board.  After  the  bath,  a  bandage  should  be  tied  firmly  around  the
abdomen.  It  should  be  of  porous  linen  and  be  provided  with  strings
to  tie.  The  method  of  applying  such  a  bandage  will  be  seen  from  the
illustration.  The  strings  are  first  tied  to  the  door-handle :  the  other  end
of  the  bandage  is  then  wrapped  round  the  abdomen  and  held  firmly,
whilst  the  woman  then  turns  herself  round  and  round  until  the  whole
length  of  the  bandage  lies  tightly  around  her,  when  the  strings  can  be
tied.  By  this  means  the  internal  organs  receive  the  firm  support  which
they  require,  and  the  woman  can  then  safely  leave  her  bed,  provided  she
feels  otherwise  strong  enough.  If,  how^ever,  she  feels  anxious,  the
bandage  need  not  be  applied  till  the  third  or  fourth  day.  It  should  be
worn  for  some  three  or  four  weeks  altogether.  If  everything  has  gone
off  well,  notliing  further  than  the  bandage  is  required.  If,  however,
there  should  be  feverishness,  the  baths  as  mentioned  above,  should  be
continued,  alternately  with  earth  bandages.  In  this  way,  the  body  will
soon  be  caused  to  perspire,  so  that  the  fever  will  abate,  and  the  neces-
sary compensatory  action  take  place.


438


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


If  possible,  the  mother  should  give  the  child  the  breast.  The  supply
of  milk  cannot  be  forced  by  means  of  immoderate  eating  and  drinking
or  the  like;  on  the  contrary,  this  will  probably  diminish  the  flow.  The
natural  precept  must  be  observed  here,  as  elsewhere,  only  to  eat  and


drink,  when  ttiere  is  hunger  and  Ihirsl.  As  a  matter  of  course,  the
mother  must  keep  to  a  natural  diet.  In  mothers  who  are  in  any  way
healthy,  this  diet  will  produce  an  ample  supply  of  milk  of  the  best
quality.


Universal  Nctiuropalhic  Dircclori/  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide  439


TREATMENT OF THE INFANT DURING THE
FIRST  MONTHS. BRINGING-UP  OF  CHILDREN


IF  we  attentively  follow  the  course  of  nature,  and  observe  the  relation
of  the  mother  and  child,  we  at  once  recognize  that  for  a  long  time  to
come  there  must  exist  a  close  connection  between  the  two.  Especially
during  the  first  years,  the  relation  of  the  infant  to  the  mother  is  a  most
intimate  one,  necessary,  to  begin  with,  through  the  need  of  warmth.  It
is  a  great  mistake  to  remove  the  infant  from  its  mother,  and  thus  with-
draw from  it  the  warmth  so  beneficial  for  its  health.  Unfortunately  far
too  many  mothers  entirely  overlook  this  extremely  important  point.

1  remember  being  once  called  to  a  family,  where  the  youngest  child,
an  infant  of  three  weeks,  would  no  longer  lie  quiet  in  its  cradle.  The
mother  was  consequently  very  anxious,  the  more  so  as  the  baby's  diges-
tion was  also  altogether  out  of  order.  The  natural  warmth  of  the
mother,  and  three  daily  friction  baths,  secured  the  infant  rest  and
brought  it  into  a  normal  condition  of  health  again.

Rearing  of  children.  As  already  remarked,  most  mothers  nowadays
are  wholly  unable  to  give  suck  to  their  children,  or  have  only  a  limited
supply  of  milk.  Hence  it  is  we  find  so  many  poorly  developed  children.
The  best  substitute  for  the  mother's  milk  is  that  of  a  nurse.  But  un-
fortunately this  by  no  means  affords  a  certain  guarantee  for  the  health
of  the  child,  for  if  the  nurse  is  not  healthy  the  child  becomes  still  further
encumbered  with  foreign  matter,  in  addition  to  that  which  it  has  in-
herited. We  can,  of  course,  judge  of  the  condition  of  the  nurse  by
means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression;  but  a  really  healthy  nurse  is
•most  difficult  to  find.  In  most  cases  the  child  is  fed  artificially,  but
generally  the  food  is  neither  properly  selected,  nor  properly  prepared,
if  cow's  milk  is  given,  this  should  only  be  warmed,  but  not  boiled,  for
boiled  milk  is  far  more  difficult  to  digest.  To  kill  injurious  organisms  is
here  a  matter  of  no  importance,  and  proof  of  this  is  very  easy  to  adduce.

The  most  nourishing  foods  are  naturally  those  which  are  most  easy  to
digest.  As  long  as  the  digestion  is  in  order,  the  digestive  juice  has  quite
sufficient  power  to  destroy  and  expel  all  that  is  injurious  to  the  system.
Whilst  unboiled  milk  is  extremely  easy  to  digest,  boiled  milk  remains
much  longer  in  the  digestive  tract,  and  consequentlj^  occasions  far  more
intense  fermentation,  than  would  be  the  case  with  normal  nourishment.

This  is,  without  the  least  doubt,  the  explanation  of  the  many  infant
diseases  and  ever-increasing  infant  mortality.  Infant-foods  and  ex-
tracts are  simply  a  means  of  increasing  digestive  disorders;  they  distend
the  child's  stomach,  disturb  the  digestion  and  cause  extreme  restless-
ness. Milk  boiled  according  to  the  instructions  of  Professor  Soxhlet,  and
the  sterilized,  preserved  milk,  frequently  recommended  by  parish
authorities  of  late,  are  quite  as  injurious  for  children  as  milk  boiled  over
the  fire.  For  it  is  precisely  that  which  the  learned  professors  try  to  kill
by  boiling,  that  renders  the  milk  easier  of  digestion. As  soon  as  the  milk


440  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihujers'  Guide

reaches  the  digestive  canal  it  sliouhl  commence  to  ferment.  In  nature,
of  course,  we  never  fnid  the  milk  first  coming  in  contact  with  the  air  be-
fore being  sucked  by  the  child.  Milk  is  nothing  else  than  a  nutritive
juice,  and  should  pass  directly  from  the  mother's  breast  into  the  body  of
the  child,  without  ever  coming  into  contact  with  the  air.  As  soon  as  the
latter  occurs,  a  change  takes  place,  which  acts  injuriously  upon  the
digestion  of  the  child.  Where  the  milk,  however,  is  fresh,  the  change  is
of  little  significance.  But  in  anj'  case  caution  should  be  used,  since  the
cow  also  will  probably  be  far  from  free  of  morbid  matter.  It  is  quite  a
mistake  to  imagine,  that  a  fat,  well-fed  cow,  kept  summer  and  winter  in
the  stall,  will  give  the  best  milk.  On  the  contrary,  such  a  cow's  body  is
morbidly  swollen  out,  and  the  milk  correspondingly  deleteriously
affected.

The  world  is,  in  fact,  condemned  to  drink  a  product  saturated
with  morbid  matter,  for  healthy  cows  are  scarcely  to  be  found  at  all  in
civilized  countries.  The  best  substitute  for  cow's  milk  is  oatmeal  gruel.
This  should  be  made  of  good,  coarse,  undried  and  not  bitter  oatmeal,
and  passed  through  a  sieve.  Neither  salt,  butter,  nor  sugar  should  be
added.  Oatmeal  is  everywhere  more  or  less  dried,  in  order  that  it  may
keep  better,  before  coming  upon  the  market.  This,  however,  causes  the
meal  to  lose  in  digestibility,  so  that  it  is  no  longer  fit  for  feeding  infants.
The  oatmeal  should  be  altogether  undried.  Where  such  cannot  be  had,
it  is  best  to  buy  hulled  oats  and  boil  these  to  get  a  gruel.  If  these  also  are
not  to  be  bought,  whole  oats  may  be  taken  and  crushed  in  mortar,  or
ground  in  a  mill  or  any  similar  implement,  and  then  boiled  to  obtain
the  gruel.  This  latter  gruel  is  the  best  of  all  for  children,  but  there  is  the
trouble  of  grinding  the  oats.  Nevertheless,  this  should  not  discourage
anyone,  as  after  a  few  trials,  it  will  be  found  comparatively  easy.  I  have
dwelt  fully  on  this  subject,  as  also  on  the  bringing  up  of  children  in
general  in  my  little  pamphlet,  already  mentioned,  "The  Rearing  of
Children."

It  is  most  regrettable  that  so  many  parents  find  it  such  a  troublesome
thing  to  bring  up  their  children.  The  boys  will  not  learn,  but  have  al-
ways their  thoughts  upon  something  else :  are  ill-mannered,  passionate,
irritable;  and  yet  the  parents  and  teachers  take  the  greatest  pains  with
them.  It  is  regarded  as  inexplicable,  that  the  education  should  be  so
difficult,  and  as  no  reason  can  be  found,  it  is  finally  set  down  to  the
spirit  of  the  age,  wdthout  any  thought  of  there  being  quite  another  cause.
Wherever  the  vouthful  body  is  encumbered  with  foreign  matter,  the
function  of  the*  brain  and  of  the  whole  body  will  be  unnaturally  in-
fluenced and  changed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  encumbrance  is  got
rid  of,  the  full,  natural  condition  of  health  will  be  then  restored.  I  have
frequently  observed  in  my  practice,  that  the  worst  brought  up  children
were  changed  by  means  of  my  cure,  into  the  quietest  and  best  mannered
children  possible.  Boys  who  could  learn  positively  nothing,  who  sat  for
hours  over  the  simplest  task  without  doing  anything,  were  completely
changed  upon  the  foreign  matter  being  expelled  from  the  body.  They
were  again  able  to  learn  and  quickly  comprehend,  were  no  longer
languid  and  tired,  and  were  in  every  way  again  the  joy  of  their  parents.
Anyone  who  knows  what  a  pleasure  it  is  to  bring  up  healthy  children,
and  how  little  care  and  trouble  it  involves,  will  certainly  not  neglect  to
procure  for  his  own  the  first  conditions  for  such  happiness. It  is  a


Universal  NaliiropcUhic  Directory  and  Ihiijcrs'  Guide  ^41

sacred  duty  of  all  parents  to  learn  my  system  of  cure  and  especially,  my
method  of  diagnosis,  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.  In  the  latter  they
have  the  means  of  perceiving  iminediately  and  with  infallible  certainty,
any  encumbrance  of  their  children  with  foreign  matter.

There  is  another  point  which  is  far  too  important  to  be  omitted  on
an}'  account  whatever.  I  refer  to  the  increasing  sexual  desire  in  youth,
and  its  natural  result,  onanism.  It  is  a  sad  fact,  that  the  origin  of  this
youthful  sin  has  never  yet  been  properly  recognized;  on  the  contrary,
misled  by  foolish  prudery,  people  suppress  all  reference  to  such  matters.
The  evil  will  never  be  got  rid  of  in  that  way.  He  who  will  improve  the
world,  must  speak  openly  of  its  errors.  In  the  country,  where  nature  and
practice  still  go  hand  in  hand,  it  has  long  been  recognized,  as  already
stated,  that  undue  sexual  desire  on  the  part  of  animals  is  a  certain
sign  of  a  morbid  condition.  Now  man  is  subject  to  precisely  the  same
laws,  whatever  some  people  may  say  about  his  occupying  an  exceptional
place  in  nature,  and  hence  being  under  exceptional  natural  laws.  Just
as  in  the  case  of  animals  a  morbid  condition  (z.  e.  an  encumbrance  of
the  body  with  foreign  matter),  as  has  been  proved,  produces  an  un-
natural sexual  impulse,  so  also  in  man.  Self-masturbation  is  always  a
clear  sign,  that  the  sexual  organs  are  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.
If  this  morbid  matter  is  gradually  expelled  from  the  body,  the  unnatural
desire  will  disappear  of  itself.  Whipping  the  children,  as  many  parents
do,  for  tampering  with  the  sexual  parts,  is  useless.  The  only  way  to  cure
the  continual  irritation  is  to  remove  the  cause,  that  is,  expel  the  foreign
matter.  Even  if  by  strengthening  the  will  of  the  children,  we  may  get
them  to  stop  the  vice,  nevertheless,  the  inward  compulsion  to  it  still
remains,  and  can  never  be  got  rid  of  until  the  cause  has  vanished.  My
long  experience  in  the  treatment  of  masturbators  has  brought  me  to  the
conviction,  that  there  is  no  more  appropriate  means  of  cure  than  my
friction  baths,  together  with  unstimulating  diet  and  a  natural  manner  of
living.  Thus  my  system  is  an  excellent  means  of  promoting  a  higher
degree  of  morality  amongst  our  children.  And  this  is  a  matter  of  such
immense  importance,  that  everyone  should  look  upon  it  as  his  bounden
duty  to  convince  himself  of  its  truth.


442  Universal  Naturopiithic  Directory  and  Ihujcrs'  Guide


PART  FOUR

REPORTS  OF  CURES  AND  LETTERS  OF  THANKS


IN  order  by  actual  facts  to  show  those  readers  who  may  be  resident  in
more  distant  places,  what  extraordinarily  successful  results  have  been
attained  by  means  of  my  method,  I  here  print  over  100  true  reports  of
cures  and  letters  of  thanks  concerning  all  kinds  of  diseases. The
testimonials  have  for  the  most  part  been  absolutely  unsolicited. May
they  contribute  their  share  in  spreading  the  truths  of  the  New  Science  of
Healing,  to  the  benefit  of  sutlering  humanity!

No.  1. Nervous  debility,  Sleeplessness,  Chronic  inflammation
of  the  bowels.  Gallstone

Mrs.  R.  was  suffering  from  chronic  inflammation  of  the  bowels  and  could  not
obtain  evacuations  without  the  use  of  medicines  and  enemas.  At  the  same  time
she  was 'suffering  from  gallstones.  From  montli  to  month  she  became  more  and
more  corpulent,  until  her  condition  was  no  longer  bearable.  She  was  highly
nervous,  obtained  no  sleep,  and  suffered  from  pains  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  in
consequence  of  the  gallstones,  besides  being  troubled  with  an  absolute  want  of
appetite.  The  physicians  who  were  treating  her  advised  an  operation  for  gallstone
as  a  last  resource.  Having  heard  so  much  about  unsuccessful  operations,  however,
she  came,  in  this  deplorable  condition,  to  seek  aid  of  me.

Two  to  five  friction  baths  daily,  one  or  two  steam-baths  weekly  and  non-flesh
diet — these  were  again  the  remedial  agents  of  my  uniform  system  of  treatment.
During  the  first  week  the  cure  went  on  slowly.  In  the  second  week  the  appetite,
stool  and  sleep  became  normal,  during  the  third  week  the  nervous  disorder  disap-
peared. The  fourth  week  was  marked  by  the  immense  quantity  of  obnoxiously
smelling,  black  (gangrenous)  dysenteric  fseces  which  was  evacuated.  The  body
had  lost  nearly  30  lbs.  during  this  time  and  the  previously  excessively  large  ab-
domen was  now  normal.  After  five  weeks'  treatment  the  gallstones  began  to  dis-
solve, and  were  clearly  to  be  seen  in  the  form  of  gravel  in  the  urine  discharged.
In  seven  weeks  the  patient  was  cured.

No.  2.  Pulmonary  catarrh.  Cold  feet.  Affection  of  the  stomach,
Liver  disease.  Pharyngitis
Mr.  H.  of  L.,  aged  27,  used  my  method  for  the  above  complaints,  giving  special
attention  to  the  friction  hip-baths,  and  subsequently  also  friction  sitz-baths  and
unstimulating  diet.  The  cure  was  most  rapid.  The  digestion  #nd  affection  of  the
stomach  were  already  better  on  the  second  day,  in  consequence  of  which  there
was  a  continual  improvement  of  the  other  attendant  troubles  going  on  during  the
next  days.  After  three  weeks  the  patient  was  cured  of  all  his  complaints,  and
what  surprised  him  most  was,  that  his  feet  had  again  attained  their  normally  warm
condition  without  any  local  treatment  having  been  employed.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bni/crs'  Guide  443

No.  3. Cancer

•

A  Brazilian,  25  years  of  age,  was  suffering  from  cancerous  ulcers  which  had
been  developing  for  8  years  and  now  extended  from  neck  to  stomach.  After  a  meal
they  always  bled,  and  from  the  throat  of  the  patient  there  was  so  offensive  a  smell
emitted  that  no  one  could  come  near  him.  Was  it  a  matter  of  wonder,  then,  that
the  patient  was  haunted  with  the  idea  of  committing  suicide?

Encouraged  by  some  acquaintances  who  had  been  cured  by  means  of  my  method,
he  determined  to  try  it  also.  During  the  first  three  months  he  seemed  to  grow
worse,  as  the  cancer  nodules  dissolved,  causing  great  pain.  He  persevered,  and  at
length  traced  an  improvement  in  his  condition.  At  the  end  of  a  year  the  young
man  was  well  again.  He  is  now  a  strong,  cheerful  man,  and  an  enthusiastic  pioneer
for  the  New  Science  of  Healing.

No.  4. Jaundice,  Debility,  Headaches

In  the  spring  of  1887,  the  young  daughter,  aged  thirteen,  of  Mrs.  L.  of  Leipzig,
complained  of  great  lassitude,  distaste  for  work,  general  debility,  headaches — in
short,  of  feeling  altogether  out  of  sorts.  After  some  days  the  w^hite  of  the  eyes
turned  yellow,  this  sickly  discoloration  spreading  soon  over  the  whole  face  and
neck,  and  finally  all  over  the  whole  body.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  clear  that  the
girl  was  in  a  high  state  of  fever,  which  spread  from  the  abdomen  throughout  the
entire  system,  making  itself  externally  visible,  however,  at  the  head,  in  accordance
with  the  nature  of  the  fermentive  process.  The  treatment  was  unstimulating  diet
and  three  friction  baths  daily,  to  draw  off  the  fermenting  matter  and  open  the
pores  of  the  skin. In  a  fortnight  the  jaundice  was  fully  cured.

No.  5. Tuberculosis  of  the  bone

Mr.  A.  H.  of  W.  was  suffering  from  tuberculosis  of  the  bone,  and  had  been  treated
with  iodoform,  carbolic  acid,  corrosive  sublimate  etc.,  upon  the  allopathic  system,
for  over  nine  months  without  any  success.  Both  legs  had  been  operated  upon  a
number  of  times,  several  pieces  of  bone  having  been  cut  out.  Through  all  this
local  quackery  the  condition  of  the  patient  had  become  so  wretched,  that  he  could
no  longer  walk  at  all.  In  this  condition  I  took  up  the  case.  In  three  months  the
sores  at  the  legs  healed  over,  and  the  spongy,  swollen  bones  became  firmer  and
thinner.  The  patient  was  soon  able  to  walk  again,  and  in  three  months  could  say
that  he  was  fully  cured.

No.  6. Sciatica,  Crippling,  Lameness

Oswald  Z.,  of  K.,  a  boy  of  twelve,  fell  ill  with  sciatica  after  having  suffered  from
severe  cold,  accompanied  by  coughing.  His  complaints  in  consequence  of  the  un-
natural treatment  with  drugs,  extension-bed,  etc.,  by  various  physicians,  became  so
much  worse,  that  the  poor  boy's  hip  grew  perfectly  hard  and  stiff,  and  rendered
him  quite  lame. The  right  leg  was  developed  and  thinner  than  the  left.

I  undertook  no  local  treatment  of  the  stiff,  crippled  leg  at  all,  but  as  chief
curative  agents  ordered  friction  baths  and  unstimulating  diet.  The  results  of
this  treatment  were  soon  felt.  In  a  fortnight  the  boy  was  able  to  walk  again  with-
out either  crutches  or  sticks.  In  a  month  the  hard  hip  had  again  become  normally
soft  and  all  trace  of  crippling  had  vanished.  The  leg  was  now  as  easy  to  move  as
the  left.  Within  six  months  the  undeveloped  parts  of  the  leg  and  foot  were  quite
normal  again.


444  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide

No.  7. General  debility.  Pains  in  the  hack.  Cold  hands  and  feet,
Poverty  of  the  blood,  Easy  parturition  '

Mrs.  E.  of  W.,  near  P.,  suft'ered  from  a  whole  scries  of  illnesses,  and  was  at  the
same  time  enceinte.  The  doctors  had  not  been  able  to  help  her  in  the  least,  and,
friction  sitz-baths  daily,  after  which  she  was  to  warm  herself  in  the  sun.  I  further
ordered  the  simplest  unstimulating  diet.  After  some  months  Mrs.  E.  came  again  to
me  and  reported  as  follows:  She  had  carried  out  my  instructions  exactly  and
within  a  week  remarked  an  improvement  in  health,  which  increased  the  longer
she  continued  the  treatment.  Just  a  month  ago  she  had  been  delivered  of  a  child,
and  this  birth,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  midwife,  had  been  the  easiest  she  had
ever  had.  Whereas  formerly  there  had  always  been  trouble  with  the  after  birth,
the  expulsion  of  which  was  each  time  attended  by  a  flow  of  very  thick,  gangrenous
blood,  on  this  occasion  there  had  been  no  difficulty  at  all.  The  child,  too,  was
perfectly  healthy.  Formerly  she  had  never  had  milk  enough  for  the  baby,  whilst
this  time  she  had  an  ample  quantity.  Her  appetite,  also,  was  much  better  than
before.  She  clearly  saw  that  this  manner  of  living  was  not  only  far  simpler,  but
also  much  healthier  than  the  ordinary.

No.  8. Gland-tumor

E.  K.,  a  girl  of  about  nine  years,  was  afflicted  with  a  swelling  of  the  glands  on  the
daily  friction  hip  and  sitz-baths  each  of  about  half-an-hour's  duration,  and  weekly
two  partial  steam  baths;  I  likewise  ordered  a  suitable  diet."  At  first,  the  tumor
was  dark  red,  turning  bluish  after  a  time.  After  the  process  had  gone  on  for
some  three  weeks,  the  child  found  the  steam-baths  disagreeable,  her  head  being
forced  to  one  side  by  the  tumor,  so  that  she  could  not  move  it.  Instead  of  the
steam-baths,  hot  water  compresses  were  therefore  used,  the  water  being  as  warm
as  the  skin  could  bear.  The  movement  of  the  morbid  matter  could  now  be  clearly
perceived,  for  the  pus  oozed  through  the  skin  and  soiled  the  cloth  wrapped  round
the  neck,  although  there  was  no  open  sore.  At  length  two  small  sores  about  the
size  of  a  pea  appeared,  and  discharged  a  quantity  of  pus.  The  tumor  now  rapidly
decreased  in  size,  a  second  one  forming,  however.  The  latter,  nevertheless,  soon
disappeared,  after  having  discharged  its  matter  through  the  sores  formed  by  the
first  one.  In  a  month  the  disease  was  so  far  cured  that  the  child  could  go  to
school  again.  In  five  weeks  all  the  troubles  were  over  and  the  head  and  neck
could  again  be  freely  moved.

The  girl  had  scarcely  felt  any  pain  the  whole  time,  this  being  prevented  by  the
partial  steam-baths  and  hot  compresses  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  the  friction  sitz-
baths  on  the  other.  No  scars  were  left.

No.  9. Cancer  of  the  breast  and  nose

Mrs.  S.,  the  wife  of  a  butcher  of  Reudnitz,  Leipzig,  had  tried  every  possible
remedy  for  her  serious  disorder,  cancer  of  the  breast  and  nose,  but  all  in  vain.
One  day  someone  called  her  attention  to  my  system  and  desired  me  to  visit  her.
I  did  as  requested  and  found  the  woman  in  a  deplorable  condition.  On  the
breast  was  a  deep  sore,  putrescent  and  corroding,  and  so  large  that  it  could
scarcely  be  covered  by  the  hand.  Half  the  nose  was  already  destroyed,  and  on  the
forehead  two  large  red  cancerous  tumors  had  formed,  which  were  on  the  point
of  breaking.  After  making  an  examination,  I  at  once  gave  the  necessary  direc-
tions for  treatment,  which  proved  most  successful. First  the  tumors  on  the  fore-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Buffers'  Guide  445


head  disappeared,  then  the  breast  healed,  and  finally  the  nose.  As  the  patient,
after  some  months'  treatment,  came  to  report  her  progress,  her  appearance  was
still  most  painful.  To-day  she  is  again  a  comely,  one  may  say,  good-looking
woman.  And  the  miracle — for  so  it  must  seem  to  all  who  saw  this  patient  during
the  worst  period  of  the  disease — was  worked  simply  by  means  of  natural  diet,
hip  and  sitz-baths  and  profuse  perspiration,  without  any  local  treatment  whatever,
whether  of  the  breast,  nose  or  forehead.

disease  in  less  than  nine  months.

No.  10. Open  sores  on  the  legs

Mr.  F.,  a  school-teacher  in  Brazil,  writes  to  me  of  the  astonishing  success  he  had
with  my  method.  He  had  been  suffering  for  seven  years  from  open  sores  on  the
legs,  and  had  been  to  one  doctor  after  another.  His  hard-earned  money  was  be-
ing rapidly  spent  in  chemists'  bills  and  yet  the  sores  were  becoming  ever  larger
and  more  painful.  The  dreadful  agonies  which  he  had  to  undergo  rendered  him
often  quite  unfit  for  work.

By  chance  he  came  into  possession  of  a  copy  of  my  text-book  of  the  New  Science
of  Healing,  and  after  perusal,  decided  to  make  a  trial  with  my  system.  He  only
took  hip-baths,  and  after  about  a  year  he  was  fully  cured.  By  means  of  friction
sitz-baths  he  would  probably  have  got  well  still  sooner.

The  patient  contributed  an  account  of  his  cure  to  a  German  journal  in  Porto
Alegre.

No.  li. Disease  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder,  Dropsy,  Liver  disease

Mrs.  B.  of  P.  had  been  suffering  for  years  from  disease  of  the  kidneys  and
bladder.  The  orthodox  treatment  not  only  brought  about  no  improvement,  but  did
not  even  prevent  dropsy  making  its  appearance.  Mrs.  B.  now  decided  upon  trying
ray  method.  I  ordered  her  two  hip-baths  and  one  friction  sitz-bath  daily,  together
with  natural  diet,  excluding  soups,  however.

Crises  soon  began,  and  for  weeks  the  patient  was  altogether  without  appetite.
She  lost  all  courage  and  would  have  given  up  the  treatment  had  not  her  daughter
persuaded  her  to  continue  it.  She  was  well  rewarded.  In  place  of  the  hip-baths,
dropsy,  kidney  and  liver  diseases  gradually  disappeared.  A  short  time  ago,  Mrs.
B.  presented  herself,  fully  cured,  so  that  no  one  would  ever  imagine  how  ill  she
had  formerly  been.

No.  12. Heart  disease,  Muscae  volitantes  (black  specks  before  the  eyes)

A  most  disagreeable  disorder  is  that  in  which  black  specks  are  seen  floating  be-
fore the  eyes,  although  there  is  no  external  object  there.  The  disease  is  caused  by
foreign  bodies,  cellular  particles  being  deposited  in  the  vitreous  humor  of  the
eye,  and  casting  minute  shadows  on  the  retina.  It  is  obvious  that  by  cleansing  the
system,  these  foreign  bodies  will  disappear  also.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  case  of
Mr.  F.  H.,  a  solicitor  at  B.,  who  reported  to  me,  that  during  the  course  of  the  treat-
ment, which  in  the  first  instance  he  had  commenced  to  cure  an  old  deeply  seated
heart  disease,  his  muscae  volitantes  disappeared  also.

No.  13. Chronic  diarrhea.  Dysentery

Mrs.  \V.,  an  American  lady,  complained  of  dysentery  and  chronic  diarrhea,
which  had  been  going  on  for  four  years.  The  remedies  she  had  tried  at  the
advice  of  numerous  physicians  proved  quite  ineffectual.


446  Universal  Naturopathic^  Direclorij  and  Biii/ers'  Guide

baths  thrice  a  day,  and  three  steam-baths  each  week.  HcV  trouble  had  quite  dis-
appeared after  three  weeks'  treatment.

No.  1^. Liver  disease,  Inflammation of  the  colon.
Perspiring  feet,  Gastric  catarrh

For  a  long  time  Mr.  M.  of  D.  had  been  suffering  from  inflammation  of  the  colon,
which  had  become  chronic,  bringing  on  a  severe  liver-disease.  For  years  the  pa-
tient had  been  under  allopathic  treatment,  without  any  of  the  remedies  tried  being
of  any  assistance.  At  the  beginning  of  September  Mr.  M.  commenced  my  treat-
ment. The  gastric  catarrh  from  wliich  he  was  suffering  at  the  same  time,  disap-
peared in  a  few  days;  the  digestion  became  normal  during  the  first  week.  The
morbid  matter,  which  for  years  had  been  stored  up  in  his  body  was  rapidly  ex-
pelled, and  his  condition  improved  from  week  to  week.  In  two  months,  during
which  time  he  had  lost  15  lbs.  in  weight,  Mr.  M.  was  completely  cured  and  the  dis-
agreeably smelling  perspiring  feet  were  also  again  restored  to  the  normal  condi-
tion.

No.  15. Consumption  of  the  spinal  cord

Mr.  M.,  a  compositor,  of  N.  was  suffering  from  consumption  of  the  spinal  cord,
which  the  physicians  of  the  Leipzig  University  Clinic  pronounced  to  be  incurable.
M.  had  been  treated  for  over  a  year  in  the  above  hospital  without  the  slightest  re-
sult. The  poor  man  was  in  the  most  pitiable  state,  wholly  without  means,  he  had
to  be  supported  bj'  relatives.  The  opinion  of  the  doctors,  moreover,  had  robbed
him  of  all  hope  of  an  improvement  in  his  sad  condition.  Fortunately  he  happened
to  hear  of  the  cures  made  by  my  method,  and  he  made  up  his  mind  to  try  the  New
Science  of  Healing.  He  managed  to  hobble  to  me  with  two  sticks,  in  the  weakest
condition,  despite  the  nourishing  diet  which  had  been  ordered,  and,  as  far  as
possible,  given  to  him.  An  examination  showed  that  he  was  suffering  from  a  back
encumbrance,  accompanied  by  high  internal  fever.

I  ordered  at  first  hip-baths  at  68° — 72°  Fahr.,  alternately  with  friction  sitz-
baths,  the  latter  each  of  one  hour's  duration.  The  diet  was  to  be  a  non-flesh  one:
for  breakfast  and  tea,  wholemeal  bread  and  fruit;  for  dinner,  vegetables.  Every
three  or  four  weeks,  a  steam-bath  was  necessarily  applied  to  the  abdomen,  so  that
the  patient  did  not  have  to  lie  upon  his  back  during  the  bath.

In  three  months  Mr.  M.  could  again  walk  tolerably  well,  and  in  six  months  even
without  a  stick.  The  encumbrance  of  the  back  was  so  far  gone,  that  he  could  again
undertake  light  work,  and  I  was  able  to  let  him  leave  my  establishment.

No.  16. Severe  menstrual  disorder.  Uterine  hemorrhage

Mrs.  W.  of  Leipzig  had  been  suffering  for  eight  years  from  irregular  menstrua-
tion, the  period  sometimes  remaining  away  altogether.  At  other  times  there  were
abnormal  loses  of  blood  which  completely  robbed  her  of  her  strength.  She  at  first
consulted  a  Leipzig  physician,  Dr.  S.,  who  had  treated  her  for  a  long  time,  but
without  any  success  whatever.  The  disagreeable  local  treatment  in  the  Leipzig
Clinic  for  Women  proved  equall]^  unsuccessful.  I  directed  her  to  take  friction
sitz-baths  daily  and  to  follow  the  usual  unstimulating  diet.  The  result  was
astonishing.  In  a  short  time,  Mrs.  \V.  was  not  only  wholly  free  from  the  hemorr-
hage, but  by  continuing  this  simple  and  inexpensive  cure  for  some  months,  her
menstruation  became  perfectly  regular  again.  Her  physical  strength,  which  had
quite  collapsed,  was  likewise  regained.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  447

No.  fl . Erysipelas  of  Hie  face

A  woman  who  was  sudering  from  severe  facial  erysipelas  once  consulted  me.
In  addition  to  my  other  instructions,  friction  baths  liad  to  be  taken,  exactly
adapted  to  the  condition  of  the  patient.  When  the  fever  and  inflammation  of  the
face  became  too  great,  the  friction  bath  had  to  be  prolonged  for  two  hours,  the
water  being  renewed  every  half-hour,  in  order  to  reduce  the  fever  heat.  At  the
same  time  one  or  two  steam  baths  for  the  head,  followed  by  friction  sitz-baths,
were  taken  daily,  and  always  afforded  the  patient  great  relief.  In  less  than  a  week
the  disease  was  perfectly  cured,  and  the  woman  felt  healthier  and  fresher  than
ever  before.

No.  18.  Encysted  tumor,  Ringing  in  the  ears
Mrs.  L.  of  G.  Z.  had  a  large  encysted  tumor,  the  size  of  a  walnut,  under  the
left  ear,  and  suffered  in  consequence  from  ringing  in  the  left  ear.  For  three  years
she  had  been  using  every  possible  remedy  against  it,  but  without  success.  To
undergo  an  operation,  as  advised  by  the  family  doctor,  she  could  not  make  up  her
mind,  and  consequently  she  came  to  consult  me.  Here  also,  the  only  curative
means  used  were  friction  baths,  natural  diet  and  an  hygienic  manner  of  living.
The  ringing  in  the  ears  ceased  after  the  very  first  few  baths;  the  encysted  tumor
was  cured  in  six  weeks.

No.  19. Sycosis,  Spinal  neuralgia

Mr.  H.  had  been  for  years  suffering  from  the  first  named  disease.  All  the  part
about  the  beard  had  become  deep  red  and  was  covered  with  scales  and  tubercles.
The  patient  had  tried  all  the  drugs  at  the  disposal  of  allopathy  and  homeopathy
and  had  also  applied  the  old  Nature  Cure  method,  but  without  any  success.

By  means  of  my  new  method  of  diagnosis,  I  found  that  the  sycosis  was  the  result
of  an  encumbrance  of  the  back.  And  it  was  the  fact  that  the  patient  had  for  some
years  been  troubled  by  pains  in  the  back.  In  consequence  of  the  nature  of  the
encumbrance,  the  cure  went  on  very  slowly.

Several  friction  baths  daily,  suitable  diet  and  two  steam-baths  weekly  were  the
curative  agents  made  use  of  in  this  case  too.  By  this  means  the  patient  was  cured
of  this  chronic  disorder  in  five  months.

No.  20. Impotence
Mr.  G.  of  S.  was  completely  impotent. All  the  remedies  tried  had  availed  noth-
ing. By  means  of  my  treatment  which  he  carried  out  at  home,  consisting  of  alter-
nate friction  sitz  and  hip-baths,  and  a  non-flesh  diet,  his  disorder  was  perfectly
cured  within  six  weeks.

No.  21. Infantile  constipation

The  infant  child  (6  months)  of  Rev.  Mr.  Q.  suffered  from  obstinate  constipation,
which  was  not  removed  by  any  of  the  numerous  medicines  tried.  The  child  was
fed  upon  milk,  which  was  boiled  three  times  when  possible.  The  body  of  the
child  was  laden  with  foreign  matter,  in  consequence  of  which  it  became  ex-
tremely feverish  and  suffered  from  convulsions  which  rendered  it  very  weak.

Against  the  convulsions  the  doctor  ordered  cold  water  compresses,  which  were
to  be  changed  every  two  hours.  This  was  naturally  wholly  inadequate,  and  the
baby  had  convulsions  as  many  as  twelve  times  one  day.  Now  the  father  came
himself  to  the  idea  to  renew  the  compresses  every  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  result
was  surprising,  the  convulsions  disappeared.


448  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  cause  of  the  constipation,  however,  had  not  yet  been  removed.  The  father
read  my  text-book  of  the  New  Science  of  Healing  and  commenced  at  once  to  give
the  infant  hip-baths  twice  a  day,  though  the  water  was  made  too  warm  (88°  to  93°
Fahr.).  The  effect  was  thus  slow,  and  only  after  5  weeks  was  the  child's  digestion
normal  again.  Meanwhile,  however,  the  food  had  also  been  altered;  the  child  was
now  given  unboiled  milk  and  oatmealgrucl,  which  soon  brought  it  forwards.  It
also  became  bright  and  happy,  whereas  it  had  formerly  been  weak  and  sickly.

No.  22. Gland-tumor. Easy  parturition

Mrs.  M.  suffered  from  gland-tumors  on  the  neck,  and  always  had  to  wear  a
neckerchief  to  cover  them.  She  commenced  my  treatment  and  continued  it  with
great  perseverance.  The  hard  tumors  soon  became  soft  and  decreased  in  size,
and  the  whole  condition  of  the  patient  now  became  remarkably  good.

How  much  her  health  had  improved,  Mrs.  M.  could  see  at  her  next  confinement.
She  was  delivered  of  her  seventh  child,  and  was  not  little  astonished  at  the  easy
birtti.  The  baby  came  into  the  world  after  only  three  labor-pains.  The  child
was  certainly  small,  nevertheless  well  formed;  and  as  it  was  not  parted  from  the
afterbirth  for  two  hours,  it  kept  its  rosy  color,  whereas  all  the  former  children  had
become  yellow  soon  after  the  birth.

Mrs.  M.  had  eaten  no  flesh-meat  during  her  pregnancy,  and  she  was  most
pleasantly  surprised  to  find  that  she  could  give  her  child  the  breast  for  three
months,  which  she  had  never  been  able  to  do  at  all  before.

No.  23. Sciatica

Some  years  ago,  I  was  sent  for  by  a  physician.  Dr.  B.,  who  was  suffering  from
sciatica,  which  in  spite  of  all  medical  treatment  only  grew  worse.  Finally  it  be-
came so  bad  that  he  could  neither  stand  nor  lie  down,  and  so  had  to  spend  day
baths, at  from  59°  to  65°  Fahr.  and  a  steam-bath  every  other  day;  and  likewise
suitable  diet.  On  the  fourth  day,  already,  my  bath-attendant  reported  an  im-
povement  in  Dr.  B's.  condition,  saying  the  patient  could  walk  a  little.  In  a  week
the  improvement  had  so  far  progressed  that  the  cure  could  be  continued  without
my  aid. In  four  weeks  the  trouble  was  cured.

No.  24. Diphtheria,  Scarlet-fever

I  was  called  some  time  ago  to  a  Mrs.  S.,  whose  little  boy  of  nine  was  ill  with
rather  severe  scarlet-fever  and  diphtheria.  The  first  thing  was  to  give  a  steam-
bath,  and  one  of  my  apparatus  not  being  at  hand,  we  had  to  improvise  a  bath.  We
placed  the  boy  upon  a  cane-seated  chair  and  set  a  pot  containing  about  a  gallon  of
boiling  water  underneath.  The  feet  also  were  placed  upon  a  pail  half  filled  with
boiling  water  and  having  two  strips  of  wood  across  the  top.  The  whole  body
was  then  carefully  enveloped  in  a  woolen  blanket.  After  the  patient  had  per-
spired profusely,  he  was  given  a  friction  hip-bath  at  50°  Fahr.,  his  abdomen  being
rubbed  so  long,  until  all  the  heat  had  disappeared  from  the  head.  It  was  interest-
ing to  observe  how  the  labored  breathing  gradually  became  normal  under  this
treatment.  All  danger  was  now  over.  Before  going,  however,  I  mentioned  to  the
mother,  that  should  the  fever  return  again  after  some  hours,  the  friction  hip-
baths must  be  repeated  energetically  until  the  heat  again  disappeared.  In  about
5  days  the  boy  was  quite  recovered.  This  is  the  way  to  heal  the  dreaded  diph-
theria, for  a  remedy  against  which  medical  science  is  still  seeking.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  449

No.  25. Deafness,  Laryngeat  polypus,  Hoarseness

Mr.  S.  of  T.  consulted  me  about  his  deafness  in  the  right  ear,  and  a  polypus  in
the  larynx.  His  disease  caused  him  much  trouble  in  speaking.  He  had  visited
numerous  hospitals  and  consulted  many  physicians,  but  nowhere  did  he  get  any
help.  Upon  diagnosing  his  disease  by  means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,
I  found  that  his  encumbrance  was  a  front  one,  so  that  a  favorable  result  could  be
looked  for.  And  so  it  was  in  fact,  just  as  I  had  predicted.  After  following  my
treatment  for  ten  days,  he  informed  me  that  the  sense  of  hearing  had  already  re-
turned to  the  deaf  ear  and  his  hoarseness  and  chronic  roughness  in  the  throat  had
much  diminished.  Four  weeks  more  were  necessary  in  order  to  effect  a  complete
cure.  At  the  conclusion,  the  patient  declared  that  he  had  never  felt  so  well  before
—  not  even  in  his  youth  — -  as  now,  after  getting  rid  of  the  encumbrance  of  for-
eign matter.

No.  26. Neurasthenia,  Chronic  pharyngeal  catarrh

Mr.  K.  of  Leipzig  had  been  a  victim  to  nervous  debility,  which  finally  developed
into  chronic  neurasthenia  and  pharyngeal  catarrh.  The  many  cures  which  he  had
undergone  proved  useless.  The  encumbrance  of  this  patient  was  favorable,  and  I
could  therefore  assure  him  of  a  good  chance  of  recovery.  Nor  did  the  New
Science  of  Healing  desert  me,  for  the  result  was  astonishing.  The  patient  had  to
pass  through  several  crises,  but  finally  every  trace  of  neurasthenia  and  pharyngeal  •
catarrh  disappeared,  and  the  patient  felt  as  he  said  "born  again."

No.  27. Facial  neuralgia.  Sleeplessness,  Dilatation  of  the  stomach

A  Mr.  R,  B.  of  R.,  aged  39,  had  been  suffering  for  over  four  years  from  pecuhar,
spasmodic  neuralgic  pains.  He  had  consulted  a  number  of  physicians  without  get-
ting any  assistance,  and  an  eminent  professor  advised  him  to  undergo  an  oper-
ation. This  idea  the  patient  did  not  like,  and  so  he  came  to  try  my  method.  The
Science  of  Facial  Expression  showed  an  encumbrance  of  the  right  side,  for  which
reason  the  pains  and  spasms  always  appeared  on  the  right  side  of  the  face.  The
source  of  the  disorder  had,  of  course,  to  be  sought  in  the  abdomen;  and  it  was  a
fact  that  the  patient  was  suffering  from  dilatation  of  the  stomach.  My  treatment
brought  the  digestion  into  its  normal  and  regular  condition  within  a  week.  After
three  weeks  Mr.  B.  could  sleep  the  whole  night  through  without  any  pain,  which
for  four  weeks  had  been  impossible  for  him.  In  two  months  Mr.  B.  was  completely
cured  of  his  painful  disease,  and  his  appearance,  also,  had  changed  greatly  for  the
better.

No.  28. Scrofula,  Chlorosis,  Far-sightedness,  Glandular  swelling

Miss  H.  G.,  a  school-teacher,  of  G.,  had  for  some  years  been  suffering  from
scrofula,  followed  finally  by  obstinate  glandular  swelling  and  tumors,  and  also
far-sightedness.  No  curative  means  could  be  found  against  the  disorders.  In
consequence  of  the  presbyopia.  Miss  G.  was  obliged  to  wear  special  spectacles,
which,  however,  soon  no  longer  proved  sufficient,  so  that  in  addition  she  had  to
wear  a  pince-nez.

A  friend  called  her  attention  to  my  method,  and  she  carried  it  out  for  half  a
year  most  conscientiously.  She  took  two  friction  sitz-baths  daily,  each  of  15  to
20  minutes  duration,  and  lived  otherwise  hygienically.  The  result  was  successful.
First  the  digestion  improved  remarkably.  Then  the  glandular  swellings  disap-
peared one  after  the  other,  and  at  the  same  time  the  disposition  to  pulmonary


450  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

afTection.  After  all  trace  of  the  glandular  swellings  had  disappeared,  the  disease
of  the  eye  also  became  better;  and  after  the  lapse  of  a  year,  Miss  G.  no  longer  re-
quired spectacles  at  all.  That  which  the  most  renowned  oculists  could  not  do,  I
was  able  to  accomplish  by  means  of  my  New  Science  of  Healing.

No.  29. Infantile  constipation  and  Sleeplessness.
Inflammation  of  the  eyes

A  Mrs.  H.  of  Mannheim  came  with  her  little  baby  daughter,  aged  two  months,  to
consult  me.  The  child  sufl'ered  from  constipation  and  sleeplessness,  a  proof  that  it
must  have  come  into  the  world  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.  And  as  I  ascer-
tained by  means  of  my  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  the  mother  was  suffering
from  dyspepsia,  and  had,  moreover,  for  a  long  time  previously  been  sulfering  from
inflammation  of  the  eyes.

As  the  mother  suckled  the  child  herself,  the  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  rid
the  mother's  body  from  all  morbid  matter.  This  was  effected  by  her  taking  a  hip
and  friction  sitz-bath  daily,  by  observing  an  unstimulating  diet,  and  by  keeping
much  in  the  fresh  air.  To  promote  perspiration  of  the  child,  she  took  it  into  her
own  bed.  After  two  days'  treatment,  the  baby's  constipation  and  sleeplessness
were  cured;  and  in  a  week  the  mother's  digestive  troubles  and  inflammation  of
the  eyes  had  also  disappeared.

Here  again  was  a  clear  proof  of  how  great  the  influence  of  the  mother  upon  her
child,  exercised  through  the  natural  nourishment,  is.  Direct  treatment  of  so  small
an  infant  would  have  been  far  less  satisfactory.  It  was  the  mother's  encumbrance
with  foreign  matter,  that  was  the  cause  of  the  child's  illness.

No.  30. Cyanosis

From  this  disease,  the  little  daughter,  aged  12,  of  Mr.  E.  H.  of  P.,  was  suffering.
I  explained  to  the  father  that  in  such  an  advanced  case,  especially  where  there
was  so  great  weakness  and  where  so  much  medicine  had  been  administered,  there
was  but  little  chance  of  cure.  Such  would  only  be  possible  if  the  abdomen  and
digestion  were  capable  of  being  influenced.  Thus  with  but  little  hope  the  cure
was  commenced.  In  a  week,  however,  the  patient's  condition  had  so  improved
that  she  had  a  hearty  appetite  and  good  digestion.  In  four  weeks  the  cyanosis  was
completely  cured,  thanks  to  the  vitality  of  the  youthful  organism.

No.  31. Periodical  vomiting.  Pulmonary  affection,  Chlorosis

Mr.  M.  of  L.  had  been  suffering  for  12  years  from  periodical  vomiting,  against
which  he  could  find  no  remedy.  Once  or  twice  every  week,  regularly,  these
attacks  came  on.  The  attack  would  continue  each  time  from  rising  in  the  morning
till  bed-time.  The  result  of  applying  my  hip  and  friction  sitz-baths,  observing  un-
stimulating diet  and  following  my  other  general  instructions,  was  brilliant.  In-
stead of  his  pale,  ashy  features,  the  patient  became  fresh  and  healthy  looking.  His
digestion,  before  wholly  debilitated,  was  now  fully  normal.  The  attacks  of
vomiting  ceased.  Four  weeks  after  the  patient  visited  me  again,  in  order  to  thank
me  for  the  cure,  assuring  me  at  the  same  time  that  he  felt  thoroughly  rejuvenated.

No.  32. Severe  affection  of  the  heart,  Hemostasis,  Sleeplessness,
Protrusion  of  the  cardiac  artery.  Asthma
Mrs.  M.  of  H.,  a  lady  53  years  of  age,  was  suffering  from  all  these  complaints.
During  the  last  years  her  asthmatic  disorder  had  become  seriously  worse. Finally


Universal  Naliirojxitliic  Dirrclorij  and  liiu/crs'  (iuidr  I'^l

pains  were  experienced  in  the  right  breast,  continually  increasing  in  severity.  The
patient  also  suffered  from  palpitulion  and  atUtcks  of  anxiety.  The  tormenting  pain
and  difficulty  in  breathing  left  the  patient  no  sleep  at  all.  She  was  unable  to  walk
ten  paces,  and  she  found  it  most  difficult  to  speak.  Then,  one  day,  on  the  right
breast  not  far  below  the  neck,  an  artery  suddenly  protruded,  as  thick  as  the  finger,
which  pulsated  with  great  violence,  much  more  quickly  than  the  heart.  The  phy-
sicians in  attendance,  amongst  them  a  very  eminent  authority,  were  helpless  at
this  occurrence.  At  last  they  decided  that  this  was  a  protrusion  of  the  cardiac
artery,  and  cautioned  the  patient  that  his  artery,  filled  to  its  maximum  with
blood,  might  burst  at  any  moment,  when  death  might  ensue.  The  five  doctors,  in-
cluding also  one  well-known  hygienic  physician,  had  given  up  the  patient,  so  that
she  no  longer  had  any  hope  as  she  came  into  my  care.  I  diagnosed  her  according
to  my  new  method  and  found  that  the  cause  of  various  disorders  was  an  old  ab-
dominal complaint.  The  immediate  result  of  this  was  the  asthma;  then  the  severe
affection  of  the  heart,  and  the  hemostasis  (stagnation  of  blood).  Three  friction
baths  daily,  and  natural  diet  brought  about  the  best  results,  for  in  a  week  all  the
pain  had  disappeared.  In  a  fortnight  the  pulsation  of  the  protruding  artery  had
abated,  and  in  three  weeks  all  trace  of  the  disorders  resulting  from  the  chronic
abdominal  affection  had  vanished :  a  new  proof  for  the  correctness  of  my  doctrine
of  the  unity  of  disease.

No.  33. Diphtheria

Elsie  B.,  a  girl  of  12,  was  seriously  ill  with  diphtheria.  The  doctor,  an  allopath,
had  used  all  manner  of  medicines  without  any  result.  The  throat  was  much
swollen,  especially  on  the  right  side  and  was  obstructed  internally  wath  a  greenish
coating,  smelling  horribly  and  as  thick  as  the  finger.  The  child  was  accordingly
in  the  greatest  danger  of  being  suffocated.  The  physician  advised  immediate  re-
moval to  the  hospital  that  tracheotomy  might  be  performed.  Fortunately  the
parents  would  not  hear  of  this,  and  so  at  the  last  moment  my  method  came  to  be
employed.  A  prolonged  friction  sitz-bath  was  the  first  thing  ordered,  during
which  the  fever  perceptibly  diminished.  Simultaneously  the  great  tension  in  the
swollen  neck  commenced  to  decrease.  The  friction  sitz-baths  were  now  given  as
often  as  the  situation  demanded,  perspiration  being  promoted  after  each.  The
window  of  the  room  where  the  patient  was,  was  kept  open  day  and  night.  In  12
hours,  all  danger  was  over.  In  four  days  the  tumor  on  the  neck  and  the  internal
coating  had  disappeared.  Within  a  week  the  digestion  was  again  normal:  though
I  insisted  upon  the  child  still  receiving  only  dry,  wholemeal  bread  and  uncooked
acid  fruit.  On  the  tenth  day,  I  instructed  the  parents  to  let  the  child  go  out  in  the
sun. On  the  fifteenth  day,  the  patient  could  be  pronounced  healthy  again.

No.  54. Cancer  of  the  lip

An  old  gentleman,  72  years  of  age,  had  been  treated  for  six  years  by  the  most
famous  allopaths  and  homeopaths  for  cancer  of  the  lip.  The  growths  on  the  lip
continually  developed,  and  there  was  a  troublesome  and  perpetual  flow  of  saliva.
I  diagnosed  the  patient  and  found  that  the  encumbrance  had  risen  more  from  the
front  and  sides  towards  the  head.  The  result  of  my  treatment  was  soon  to  be  re-
marked. Already  on  the  first  day  the  disagreeable  salivation  ceased,  and  the  neiv
growths,  proliferations  and  open  wounds  began  to  diminish.  Within  10- days  the
latter  had  healed  up,  and  the  lip  was  now  but  one  third  its  former  size.  In  eleven
days  the  patient  had  attained  a  result  which  the  former  six  years'  treatment  had
not  been  able  to  produce.  Here  again  was  a  case  of  curing  cancer,  which  the
medical  profession,  as  is  well  known,  declares  to  be  impossible!


452  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bnijrrs'  Guide


No.  35. Disease  of  the  throat,  Scarlet  diphtheria

Carl  B.  of  Styria,  aged  eight  and  a  half  years,  was  brought  to  me  by  his  mother
for  treatment.  The  mother  gave  the  following  report  of  her  son's  health:  Till  the
age  of  two  and  a  half  years  he  had  been  thoroughly  healthy,  but  since  then,  in
consequence  of  vaccination,  had  always  been  ailing.  At  first  as  a  3  year  old  child
he  had  been  suppressed  by  means  of  medicines.  After  this  illness  the  boy  had
never  been  strong  and  had  a  most  noticeably  weak  voice.  White  spots  were  always
to  be  seen  on  the  tonsils.  The  throat  swelled  up  on  the  least  occasion,  just  as  in
diphtheria.  Moreover,  since  this  illness,  the  boy's  digestion  was  much  worse  than
formerly.  In  March  1891,  as  the  result  of  a  fright,  the  child  got  an  attack  of
articular  rheumatism  and  was  lying  ill  for  3  weeks.  After  this,  the  boy  was  so  un-
healthy  that  as  a  last  hope  of  restoring  his  health,  it  was  decided  he  should  go
through  a  cure  at  mij  establishment  in  Leipzig. This  was  commenced  on  April

15th,  1891.  ,  ^  ,, ,.„

The  effect  of  my  treatment  was  surprising.  On  the  second  day,  even  the  diges-
tion improved.  On  the  third  day  the  diphtheria  which  had  been  suppressed  re-
turned pretty  severely.  These  crises  had  to  be  gone  through,  since  so  much  medi-
cine was  lying  latent  in  the  body.  On  the  fifth  day  there  was  an  abnormal  evacu-
ation of  most  foully  pestilential,  dark  looking  fteces,  and  a  discharge  of  similarly
bad  smelling  coffee-colored  urine.  After  expelling  this  morbid  matter,  in  5  weeks
the  boy  was  quite  cured,  and  wholly  transformed  both  bodily  and  intellectually.

No.  36. Polypi,  Indigestion

Mr.  B.  of  Z.,  a  pharmaceutical  chemist,  had  for  20  years  been  a  sufferer  from
poor  and  irregular  digestion.  In  his  large  dispensary  he  had  every  possible  pur-
gative at  hand,  but  notwithstanding  their  liberal  use,  they  no  longer  had  any  effect.
For  a  short  time  a  drug  would  have  the  desired  action,  but  would  soon  prove
wholly  ineffective.  Through  his  bad  digestion  and  this  continual  use  of  medi-
cines nearly  all  his  teeth  were  decayed.  At  the  same  time  in  the  nose  and  air-
passages,  polypi  appeared  and  could  not  be  got  rid  of.  They  were,  indeed,  but
the  natural  result  of  the  chronic  abdominal  complaint.  Twenty-six  times  these
polypi  had  been  removed  by  operation,  but  they  simply  grew  the  more.  One  sees
here  how  difficult  the  physicians — engrossed  in  the  false  teachings  of  orthodox
medical  science — find  it  to  learn  from  the  actual  practice  in  daily  life.  By  apply-
ing my  method  of  treatment,  Mr.  B.  obtained  more  in  a  week,  than  in  all  the  20
years  of  drugging.  The  polypoid  growths  gradually  ceased.  In  four  weeks  the
patient  was  cured.  Mr.  B.  had  thus  experienced  on  his  own  body  the  correctness
of  my  method  of  treatment;  and  was  so  astonished  at  the  result,  that  on  taking  his
departure  he  declared  that  he  could  no  longer  conscientiously  continue  to  keep  a
chemist's  shop.  He  could  see  that  by  so  doing  he  would  only  be  deceiving  and
poisoning  people;  and  therefore  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to  sell  his  business  as
soon  as  possible.

No.  37. St.  Vitus'  dance  and  Sleeplessness

The  little  daughter,  aged  5,  of  Mrs.  G.  of  L.,  was  afflicted  with  these  troubles.
Her  whole  body  in  convulsions,  she  was  able  neither  to  walk,  nor  speak,  unable  to
sleep,  unable  to  hold  anything,  unable  to  digest  her  food.  After  having  tried  all
manner  of  cures,  the  patient  came  under  my  treatment.

Hip  and  friction  sitz-baths,  the  latter  much  prolonged,  exercise  in  the  fresh  air,
suitable  diet — these  soon  had  the  desired  result,  so  that  within  a  week  the  child
\y3!S  ablp  to  walk  again.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide  453

On  the  treatment  being  continued,  a  complete  cure  was  soon  cfFected,  the  diges-
tion, which  had  been  altogether  debilitated,  now  becoming  quite  normal.  All  this
was  brought  about  simply  by  following  my  uniform  system  of  curing  diseases,
without  drugs  or  any  other  medical  application.

No.  38. Nervous  spasms  (fits)

A  Mrs.  G.  was  suffering  from  peculiar  spasms.  These  commenced  in  the  finger
tips  and  passed  to  the  head,  causing  the  patient  the  greatest  trouble.  The  most
eminent  physicians  of  the  place  had  treated  the  patient,  but  without  any  success;
on  the  contrary  she  became  much  worse.  The  doctors  erroneously  regarded  the
symptoms  as  the  real  disorder,  and  overlooked  entirely  the  real  seat  of  the
trouble — the  abdomen.  No  wonder  then  that  the  complaint  only  became  worse.
sitz-baths,  and  the  observance  of  a  natural  manner  of  living.  In  seven  weeks  the
lady  had  fully  recovered  from  the  disorder  from  which  she  had  suffered  for  years.

No.  39. Pollutions,  Consumption  of  the  spinal  marrow,
Sleeplessness,  Neurosis,  Paralysis

A  Mr.  H.,  42  years  of  age,  suffering  from  these  diseases,  came  to  me  for  treat-
ment. Walking  caused  him  the  greatest  trouble,  and  to  rise  after  sitting  was  also
a  matter  of  great  difficulty.  For  years  he  had  been  suffering  from  a  bad  digestion,
sleeplessness  and  want  of  bodily  warmth.  He  was  also  troubled  with  pollutions,
although  married,  a  certain  sign  that  he  had  a  severe  back  encumbrance  and
nervous  disorder.  Medical  science  had  deserted  him — for  he  had  tried  every
remedy  it  had  to  offer!  I  ordered  the  patient  to  take  two  friction  hip-baths  daily
for  the  first  fortnight;  then,  during  the  next  four  weeks  to  take  daily  one  friction
hip-bath  and  two  friction  sitz-baths.  The  success  was  astonishing.  The  digestion
improved  after  only  a  few  baths;  the  paralyzed  legs  in  some  weeks.  The  consump-
tion of  the  spinal  marrow  was  completely  cured  in  two  months.  Again,  a  proof  of
the  correctness  of  my  new  method  of  treating  diseases,  and  of  the  incompetence  of
medical  science.

No.  W. Deaf -dumbness.  Congestion  of  the  brain

The  little  4  year  old  daughter  of  Mrs.  S.  of  L.  was  deaf  and  dumb,  the  result  of
vaccination  as  the  mother  said.  The  numerous  medical  applications  had  proved
of  no  avail.  The  poor  child  had  been  severely  maltreated  by  means  of  operations
and  corrosives,  and  cried  now  whenever  it  saw  a  physician.  On  account  of  its
crying  and  fear,  I  could  not  thoroughly  diagnose  the  child,  but  saw  nevertheless
that  it  was  heavily  encumbered  with  foreign  matter  and  that  the  brain  was  con-
gested. I  ordered  simply  friction  baths  and  a  dry,  unstimulating,  natural  diet,
sleeping  with  open  window  and  plenty  exercise  in  the  fresh  air.  The  result  was
most  favorable  and  in  two  weeks  the  mother  informed  me,  that  her  child  was  al-
ready much  better  and  could  hear  a  little.  In  another  four  weeks  the  little  patient
was  thoroughly  cured:  could  hear  and  speak,  and  was  no  longer  so  shy.

No.  4:/. Severe  constipation

The  wife  of  Dr.  F.  of  A.  had  suffered  for  some  20  years  from  severe  constipation,
which  no  remedy  could  cure.  As  she  came  to  consult  me,  she  openly  confessed
that  after  all  her  experience,  she  really  had  no  hope  being  cured. After  following


454  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

my  advice  for  a  week,  especially  as  regarded  a  strictly  natural  diet,  the  disorder
was  removed,  a  number  of  secondary  complaints  disappearing  at  the  same  time.
As  regards  the  diet,  the  patient  had  to  live  for  some  time  on  wholemeal  and  acid
fruit,  until  she  was  again  in  a  position  to  digest  cooked  food.

No.  42.  Sore  throat.  Disease  of  the  bladder  and  kidneys.  Sexual  diseases
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

The  treatment  which  you  advised  me  in  your  letter  has  proved  most  successful.
The  disorders  of  bladder  and  kidneys  have  become  better;  also  the  sexual  disease,
there  being  but  little  discharge  now.  The  pricking  pain  in  the  throat  (I  noticed  a
yellow  abscess  also,  in  the  throat)  has  disappeared.  I  feel  much  fresher  than  be-
fore. Thanking  you  for  the  advice  contained  in  your  letters,  which  has  proved
of  such  good  service,  I  remain.

Yours  very  faithfully,

Bromberg.  E.  M.

No.  ^3. Inflammation  of  the  knee-joint.  Extreme  nervosity,  Congestion
of  the  brain.  Fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart.  Disease  of
the  liver.  Kidney  disorder.  Intestinal  disease
Dear  Sir:

A  short  time  ago,  on  account  of  inflammation  of  the  right  knee  joint  (circum-
ference of  the  knee  22  inches)  I  visited  your  establishment  and  after  18  days'  treat-
ment, I  am  again  home.  The  strict  diet,  with  friction  hip-baths,  air  and  light-baths,
have  sufficed  to  reduce  the  encumbrance  of  my  knee  to  only  17  inches.  I  owe  this
restoration  to  health  to  your  well-known  book,  "The  New  Science  of  Healing,"
which  I  bought  some  years  ago.  For  some  time  afterwards  I  kept  to  the  diet  you
had  advised  and  the  friction  sitz-baths,  and  on  your  system  got  rid  of  the  follow-
ing further  "trivialities":  extreme  nervousness,  congestion  of  the  brain,  fatty  de-
generation of  the  heart,  diseases  of  the  liver  and  kidneys — though  the  latter  disease
had  been  declared  incurable  by  the  medical  men.  Intestinal  troubles  also  made
their  appearance,  but  have  vanished.

This  unsolicited  testimonial  you  may  use  for  any  official  or  legal  purpose  you
may  wish. With  sincerest  thanks,

Yours  faithfully,

Trautenau,  Bohemia.  Carl  H.

No.  44. Severe  Migraine
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

For  a  long  time  I  have  intended  to  send  you  my  heartfelt  thanks,  but  up  till  now
there  has  always  been  something  to  prevent  me.  Perhaps  you  will  remember  me.
Last  August  I  came,  with  my  daughter,  introduced  by  Mrs.  N.  of  L.,  to  seek  your
aid  on  account  of  my  obstinate  and  severe  migraine.  On  the  second  day  of  my
being  there,  I  had  dreadful  migraine;  you  were  witness  of  it,  as  you  were  kind
enough  to  devote  an  hour  of  your  valuable  time  to  us  when  we  were  sitting  in  your
garden.  Since  then  I  have  never  been  troubled  with  migraine  again,  for  which
after  thanking  God,  I  have  also  to  return  my  thanks  to  you.  I  feel  as  bright  and
free  as  in  my  youth,  and  therefore  find  no  difficulty  in  keeping  to  the  diet  you
single  one.  Only  the  steam-bath  gives  some  trouble  to  prepare,  as  I  do  not  possess
your  apparatus.  I  would  therefore  beg  you  to  kindly  forward  to  me  a  steam  bath-
ing apparatus  together  with  the  necessary  three  pots.


U/u'ix'rsdl  Ndliirojjdlluc  Dircvlonj  (tnd  Biii/crs'  Guide  l'>5


My  daughter  sends  you  her  hest  compliments.  "With  repeated  thanks  and
kindest  regards,  I  remain,

Yours  truly,
Bielefeld.  (Mrs.)  E.  H.

No.  45. Rheumatism,  Gout,  Paralysis,  Sciatica,  Disease  of  the  Eye

I,  the  undersigned,  was  taken  ill  with  the  above  diseases  in  the  autumn  of  1892,
and  after  3V^  years,  not  one  of  the  various  systems  of  cure  tried,  had  been  able  to
restore  me  to  health.  /  had  been  treated  without  success  by  more  than  twelve
celebrated  professors  and  physicians  of  this  city.  At  last  I  was  recommended  by
one  professor  and  by  a  doctor  attached  to  the  University  Hospital  to  consult  Mr.
L.  Kuhne.  I  had  thus,  up  till  now,  been  treated  for  SVj  years  by  the  most  eminent
medical  authorities  in  Leipzig,  but  my  condition  had  only  been  growing  more  and
more  wretched  and  miserable.  In  a  space  of  only  three  weeks  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne,
by  means  of  his  new  method  of  cure,  has  made  me  perfectly  well  and  able  to  work
again.

Anger,  Leipzig.  H.  K.

No.  46. Tuberculosis  of  the  lung.  Defect  of  the  heart.  Caries,  Inflam-
mation of  the  bowels,  Hemorrhoidal  affection.  Hematuria

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

It  was  2  years  ago  last  August  that  my  son,  Rev.—,  ordered  your  book  "The  New
Science  of  Healing."  I  was,  at  the  end  of  July,  lying  at  death's  door,  quite  given
up  by  the  allopaths.  My  son  called  my  attention  to  your  method  and  I  clutched  at
it,  just  as  a  drowning  man  does  at  a  wisp  of  straw.  Your  baths  and  diet  had  a
wonderful  effect.  In  5  months  both  hemorrhoids  and  affection  of  the  lung,  com-
plicated by  discharge  of  blood  with  the  urine  (hematuria)  and  inflammation  of
the  bowels  {enteritis),  were  perfectly  cured.  That  which  the  doctors  could  not
cure  in  twelve  years,  that  which  under  their  treatment  only  became  worse,  you
cured  in  5  months  by  your  ^latural  system  of  treatment.

Mr.  F.,  who  had  your  book  sent,  on  my  recommendation,  has  been  quite  cured
of  a  defect  of  the  heart.  I  have  made  much  propaganda  for  your  system  here,  and
have  cured  several  other  persons.

For  instance,  a  girl  of  16  had  been  suffering  for  6  years  from  caries  and  could
get  no  assistance  anywhere.  Pieces  of  bone  had  already  been  expelled  from  the
back,  legs  and  arms.  The  patient  took  2  whole  steam-baths  and  3  daily  friction
sitz-baths,  and  likewise  followed  a  strict  diet,  precisely  according  to  your  prescrip-
tion. To  my  great  joy,  what  was  practically  a  living  corpse  has  become  a  pretty
and  healthy  girl.

I  send  you  these  lines  only  to  express  to  you,  Mr.  Kuhne,  my  heart-felt  thanks.

Yours  faithfully,

Gross-Hilligsfeld.  — .  — .

(Wife  of  — .  U.,  M.  D.)

No.  47. Paralysis, Constipation,  Gland  disease.  Scrofula.

Dear  Sir:

Feeling  it  to  be  my  duty,  I  have  the  honor  of  herewith  expressing  to  you  my
sincerest  thanks  for  your  sympathetic  assistance  and  excellent  advice  in  my  recent
illness.  Since  1892  I  was  suffering  from  gland  disease  (scrofula),  and  for  several
years  from  indigestion. I  tried  all  manner  of  remedies  and  consulted  the  most


456  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

eminent  specialists,  but  the  disorder  only  became  worse,  so  that  I  had  but  little
confidence  left  in  physicians.  In  this  helpless  condition  I  happened  to  hear  of
your  method  of  cure,  and  started  at  once  for  Leipzig.  My  left  heel-bone  having
been  seriously  operated  upon,  I  could  only  walk  by  means  of  a  crutch  and  stick.
Your  treatment  was  most  successful.  In  a  few  days  I  could  walk  quite  well  with-
out the  crutch  and  only  required  slight  aid  from  the  stick,  which  in  three  days
more  was  also  quite  unnecessary.  I  have  felt  very  well  during  the  cure.  Had  I
come  to  you  in  Leipzig  in  the  first  instance,  I  should  doubtless  have  been  spared
these  disfiguring  scars  on  the  neck,  which  I  now  have,  unfortunately  to  put  up
with.

I  shall  ever  be  grateful  to  you,  Mr.  Kuhne,  and  shall  strive  to  spread  the  prin-
ciples of  the  New  Science  of  Healing  wherever  I  go.

Yours  very  truly,

Burgwindheim.  B.

No.  48. Syphilis,  Sleeplessness,  Affection  of  the  head
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  consider  it  to  be  my  duty,  to  inform  you  of  the  great  benefit  which  I  have
obtained  from  the  use  of  your  method  in  my  serious  complaint  {syphilis),  which

I  have  for  7  or  8  years  undergone  various  treatments  with  mercury  and  2  or  3
times  gone  through  expensive  sulphur  bath  cures.  These  appeared  to  do  me  good,
but  in  reality  only  suppressed  the  disease,  without  bringing  it  out  of  the  body.
Every  year,  after  each  cure,  I  became  weaker,  more  nervous  and  less  inclined  to
work.  Finally  I  sufi"ered  from  headaches,  which  nearly  drove  me  mad.  I  had  for
months  no  sleep;  my  physician  advised  me  to  lake  sulphur  baths  again,  otherwise
softening  of  the  brain  might  set  in.

I  felt  that  it  could  not  go  on  any  longer  in  this  way,  and  knew  that  I  was  being
chronically  poisoned  by  these  allopathic  cures.  In  desperation — I  had  little  hope
left — I  determined  to  try  your  method.  The  results  were  remarkable.  After  only
three  baths,  I  got  rest  and  sleep  again.

How  much  would  be  avoided,  if  all  patients  would  only  adopt  this  easy  and  alto-
gether painless  treatment.  I  cannot  praise  it  too  highly,  and  with  pleasure  I  testify
for  the  benefit  of  other  sufl'erers,  to  the  great  error  of  the  orthodox  doctors,  who
say  syphilis  is  incurable.

With  my  old,  deep-rooted  disorder,  my  cure  was  a  true  miracle.  I  have  con-
tinued the  treatment  for  some  time  longer,  in  order  to  thoroughly  cleanse  the
system,  and  have  become,  so  to  say,  younger  looking.  I  have  got  a  healthy  com-
plexion and  new  spirits.

For  all  this  I  have  only  to  thank  you,  Mr.  Kuhne,  and  I  shall  always  feel  grate-
ful to  you. With  greatest  respect,  I  am,

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  F-  E.

No.  49. Vesical  calculus,  Inflammation  of  the  Kidneys,
Hemorrhoids,  Dropsy
Dear  Sir:

Some  years  ago  I  took  ill,  sufi'ering  first  from  disease  of  the  kidneys,  constipa-
tion, and  sleeplessness. I  had  to  endure  the  greatest  pain.

Three  years  later  wholly  incapable  and  seriously  ill,  I  had  to  be  conveyed  to
the  city  ho.spital. The  diagnosis  showed inflammation  of  the  kidneys, vesical


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bui/ers'  Guide  457


calculus,  hemorrhoids,  and  disposition  to  dropsy.  I  was  treated  with  various
medicines,  but  without  any  success.  From  tlie  liour  when  I  commenced  your  cure,
my  condition  improved.  Anyone  seeing  me  today  could  never  believe  in  what
a  miserable  condition  I  was  in  formerly.  I  would  have  soon  been  in  my  grave.
It  is  to  your  system,  as  I  gratefully  acknowledge,  that  I  owe  my  present  good
health.

Yours  faithfully,
Leipzig.  G.  H.

No.  50. Toothache,  Contusions,  Climatic  Fever
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  have  had  opportunity  of  trying  your  system  of  cure,  both  upon  myself  and
others,  according  to  your  written  advice.  In  cases  of  climatic  fever  and  severe
toothache,  I  soon  found  help  through  your  local  steam-baths  and  cooling  hip-baths.
Also  in  the  case  of  a  serious  contusion  of  the  right  hand,  the  baths  took  all  the
pain  away  immediately.  Amongst  the  Hottentots,  also,  I  have  effected  numerous
cures.  It  has  several  times  been  proposed  to  the  directors  of  the  mission,  to  let  all
missionaries  study  at  your  institute  before  going  abroad.

Your  true  disciple,

Warmbad,  Cape  Colony,  Africa.  C.  W.,  Missionary.

No.  51.  Carbuncle,  Sleeplessness
Mr.  S.,  of  Halle-on-the-Saale,  reports  as  follows:  Early  in  April,  a  hard  tumor
appeared  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  I  experienced  great  lassitude.  At  first,  I
took  little  notice  of  it,  but  the  tumor  increased  in  size.  My  general  health  was  by
no  means  satisfactory;  my  appetite  was  poor,  my  sleep  disturbed  owing  to  a
strong  drawing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Gradually  the  tumor  became  as
large  as  an  egg  and  the  pain  grew  so  intense,  that  sleep  and  hunger  deserted  me
altogether.  In  their  stead  a  violent  fever  set  in,  and  I  decided  now  to  take  up  a
vigorous  course  of  treatment.  I  took  partial  steam-baths,  for  which  Kuhne's  fold-
ing steam-bathing  apparatus  was  a  great  help.  The  steam  baths  were  repeated
whenever  the  pains  became  unbearable,  and  relief  was  always  obtained  through
them,  the  friction  and  sitz-baths.  Between  the  baths  I  protected  the  diseased  part
with  a  clean  moist  linen  cloth,  covered  by  a  woollen  bandage,  in  order  to  prevent
rubbing  and  soiling.  The  carbuncle,  which  had  assumed  a  violet  color,  at  first
remained  very  hard.  The  pains  constantly  returned.  In  4  or  5  days,  little  holes
of  the  size  of  a  pin  appeared  in  various  places.  Their  number  increased  to  20.
They  discharged  blood  and  bloody  water.  The  tumor  was  still  very  gangrenous
and  hard.  In  4  days  more  the  numerous  little  holes  united  forming  larger  ones,
from  which  matter  flowed  freely.  All  at  once  the  whole  surface  collapsed,  and
the  entire  carbuncle  formed  one  hole,  from  which  flowed  blood  and  pus.  This
brought  relief;  the  pains  disappeared,  and  in  a  short  time  a  cure  was  effected.  I
now  feel  better  than  ever  before;  I  have  a  feeling  as  if  a  great  burden  had  been
taken  from  my  body,  and  my  strength  is  such  as  was  before  unknown  to  me.

No.  52. Weakness  of  memory.  Obesity,  Pulmonary  affection.  Severe
nervous  debility.  Deafness,  Disease  of  the  throat,  Violent  fever

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

One  must  be  a  scholar,  I  suppose,  in  order  not  to  be  able  to  understand  that  2  and
2  make  4,  for  as  simple  as  this  arithmetical  exercise,  so  simple  and  clear,  accord-
ing to  my  own  practical  experience,  appears  your  new  and  infallible  method  of
healing.


458  Vniversdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers Guide

Formerly,  in  spite  of  daily  gymnastics,  I  could  not  support  the  slightest  fatigue
whereas  now,  freed,  moreover  from  my  obesity,  I  can  work  for  hours  in  the
garden  and  the  like  without  feeling  tired.  Formerly  I  gasped  with  open  mouth
during  my  walks  (having  weak  lungs),  now  I  breathe  quietly  with  the  mouth
closed.  I  have  been  deaf  for  years  in  the  left  ear,  but  now  I  can,  at  all  events,
again  hear  the  ticking  of  my  watch  if  held  near  the  ear,  the  rumbling  of  carriage
wheels,  and,  to  my  unspeakable  joy,  even  conversation,  if  a  little  loud.

The  fermenting  matter  accumulated  in  my  body  must  have  risen  to  the  head,  for
I  often  experienced  pain  there,  and  was  troubled  also  by  an  affection  of  the  throat,
which  neither  doctors  nor  specialists  were  able  to  cure.  And  now,  for  some
months  past  I  have  not  felt  the  least  feeling  of  discomfort  in  the  throat.  To  tell
the  truth,  that  charming  spectre:  Softening  of  the  brain  (imbecility)  had  smiled
upon  me.  Since  your  treatment  the  horrible  symptoms  have  ceased — Extreme
weakness  of  memory,  unbelievable  nervousness,  true  paroxysms  of  rage  on  the
slightest  occasion,  increasing  want  of  interest  in  everything  that  should  have  in-
spired and  animated  me,  or  which  was  dear  and  near  to  me.  Nothing  in  the  world
would  have  induced  me  (only  my  husband  knew  of  it)  six  months  ago — to  have
spoken  to  anyone  about  my  condition — for  speak  of  the  Devil  and  he  is  sure  to
appear.  I  knew  no  one  could  help  me;  but  now  it  is  as  though  scales  had  fallen
from  my  eyes:  I  feel  as  if  born  again.

Your  miraculous  system  of  cure  saved  me  a  few  months  ago  from  a  vexatious
embarrassment.  I  took  an  apparently  healthy  servant  girl  with  me  to  the  country;
but  in  a  week,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  she  suddenly  declared  she  could  not  work
any  longer.  Her  feet  were  swollen  up,  so  that  she  could  draw  on  neither  shoes
nor  stockings;  she  suffered  from  maddening  headache  and  took  a  violent  fever,
so  that  she  could  not  move.  To  convey  the  girl  to  St.  Petersburg  was  not  to  be
thought  of.  I  accordingly  put  her  to  bed,  well  covered,  and  after  she  had  perspired
for  several  hours  gave  her  a  hip-bath,  exactly  according  to  your  instructions.  I
then  explained  to  her  about  the  friction  sitz-bath,  after  the  first  of  which  she  felt
"so  nice  and  easy!"  The  whole  procedure  was  again  followed  on  the  same  day;  on
the  following  day  twice;  and  on  the  third  day  the  girl  would  not  hear  of  per-
spiring again,  affirming  that  she  was  as  healthy  as  a  fish  in  the  water.

St.  Petersburg.  (Mrs.)  Aug.  E.

No.  53. Headaches
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

On  my  departure  from  Leipzig  I  feel  called  upon  to  express  to  you  my  heartfelt
of  my  chronic  headache  (which  I  had  for  years,  and  which  finally  became  in-
tolerable) solely  to  the  truly  wonderful  effect  of  your  baths.  I  shall,  therefore,
continue  to  use  these  to  the  end  of  my  life.  Wishing  you  a  long  and  untrammeled
exercise  of  your  beneficent  invention,  for  the  good  of  suffering  humanity,  I
remain,

Yours  very  faithfully,

Leipzig.  (Mrs.)  M.  W.

No.  54. Pharyngeal  catarrh. Eruption  of  the  face

Herewith  I  beg  to  certify  to  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne,  that  through  the  employment  of
his  baths  for  several  months,  and  a  special  diet,  I  have  been  completely  cured  of
very  obstinate  pharyngeal  catarrh  and  eruption  of  the  face.

I  shall  be  happy  to  furnish  details  at  any  time.

Leipzig.  Emil  P.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  459

No.  55. Epileptic  fits,  Swoons,  Poverty  of  the  blood
Dear  Sir:

Permit  me  to  liumbly  express  my  gratitude  for  all  that  you,  thanks  to  your  dis-
covery, have  in  such  a  disinterested  manner  done  for  my  daughter,  of  whose  re-
covery we  had  lost  all  hope.

All  that  physicians  and  dearly-bought  medicaments  failed  to  accomplish,  has
been  performed  by  a  "natural  product" — by  water.


When  the  first  signs  of  the  disease  appeared,  she  was  about  nine  years  of  age;  in
the  beginning  we  took  little  notice  of  it.  Slight  fainting  fits  occurred,  but  soon
passed  off.  But  as  they  began  to  return  more  frequently,  we  sought  the  advice  of
a  gentleman  well  known  as  an  able  physician.  He  told  us  that  the  patient  was
suffering  from  poverty  of  the  blood  and  nervous  debility.

made  things  worse.  The  fits  became  more  frequent  and  more  violent.  "We  con-
sulted several  other  physicians,  but  always  received  the  same  medicines.

One  doctor  at  length  told  us  that  the  disorder  was  incurable,  and  we  therefore
put  everything  aside  except  bromide  of  potassium.  We  were  firmly  convinced  that
this  was  the  sole  remedy  for  this  disorder,  until  you  explained  to  us  the  state  of
the  case.  Now  all  trouble  is  over  and  you  will  ever  be  revered  and  esteemed,  as
protector  and  benefactor,  by  my  family  and  myself.  Permit  me  again  to  express
my  sincerest  gratitude,  and  believe  me  to  be

Yours  most  faithfully,

Gablonz,  Bohemia.  F.  H.

No.  56. Colds,  Fever
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  cannot  sufficiently  thank  you  for  the  services  which  you  have  rendered  my
mother  and  myself.  A  violent  cold,  attended  by  high  fever,  induced  me  to  test
the  effect  of  your  method  of  cure  on  my  own  person.  The  extremely  favorable
result  surprised  me  very  much  indeed.  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  yours  is  the
method  of  the  future.

Hamburg.  Chr.  R.  W.,  Ph.  D.

No.  57. Bony  tumor
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  feel  called  upon  to  express  to  you  my  heartfelt  gratitude,  for  I,  too,  have  ex-
perienced the  blessing  of  your  science  of  healing  without  operations.

Eight  times,  while  under  medical  treatment,  was  my  leg  operated  upon.  First
the  toes  were  amputated;  then  the  whole  foot,  so  that  now  I  have  to  go  about  on
crutches.

But  in  spite  of  all  the  operations,  my  leg  did  not  get  well.  There  came  a  dis-
agreeable feeling  of  heaviness,  and  a  new  tumor  formed  as  large  as  the  first,  and
very  painful. I  feared  that  I  should  have  to  undergo  another  operation.

My  attention  having  been  drawn  to  your  new  method  of  healing,  I  sought  your
advice  at  the  beginning  of  March.  After  four  weeks'  use  of  the  friction  baths  and
observance  of  the  other  directions  you  gave,  the  tumor  completely  disappeared,
and  I  was  thus  spared  a  further  operation.

Had  I  submitted  myself  to  your  treatment  at  the  commencement  of  my  disease,
all  operations  would  certainly  have  been  unnecessary,  and  I  should  probably  to-
day be  in  possession  of  all  my  limbs.

Again  thanking  you  heartily  for  the  assistance  afforded  me,  I  remain.

Yours  faithfully,

Reudnitz.  Sophie  W^— ,


460  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

No.  58. Uterine  cancer  and  hemorrhage

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

In  December  my  wife  was  taken  so  seriously  ill  (hemorrhage),  that  I  was
obliged  to  fetch  the  physician,  Dr.  K.,  late  as  it  was  (11  o'clock  at  night).  The
blood  was  temporarily  stopped  by  means  of  cotton-wool,  but  the  next  day  the
hemorrhage  was  worse  than  ever,  so  that  I  now  fetched  a  second  medical  man.
Dr.  D.  He  said  that  the  case  was  one  for  operation.  My  wife  being  no  better,  I
consulted  a  third  physician,  Prof.  H.  He  examined  the  patient,  and  then  stated
that  an  operation  must  be  performed  at  once,  otherwise  it  would  be  impossible  to
save  her;  it  was  a  uterine  cancer  he  said.  I  asked  the  professor  again,  if  there
was  no  chance  of  cure  without  an  operation;  he  declared  that  without  such,  a
cure  could  not  be  expected.

I  then  went  to  you.  You  ordered  hip  and  friction  sitz-baths  and  special  diet.
From  the  time  when  my  wife  commenced  to  follow  your  advice,  she  became  bet-
ter. She  can  now  go  about  her  work  from  5  in  the  morning  till  10  at  night  without
being  tired,  and  has,  indeed,  never  before  been  so  healthy  as  now.

Accept  our  heartiest  thanks.  We  shall  never  neglect  to  recommend  your
method  to  all  sufferers;  without  it  my  wife  would  no  longer  be  living.

Yours  very  faithfully,

Leipzig.  Albert  W.

No.  59. Whooping-cough
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Last  February  I  wrote  to  you  for  advice  as  to  my  child  who  was  suffering  from
whooping-cough.  From  the  exceedingly  valuable  instructions  contained  in  your
letter,  we  noted  particularly  that  we  must  get  the  child  to  perspire  profusely  by
putting  it  to  bed  with  its  mother.  What  else  was  necessary  we  had  already  done,
following  the  advice  given  in  your  book.  The  course  of  the  illness  was  as  follows:
On  Sunday  we  noticed  our  little  one  (then  14  weeks  old)  had  a  shrill,  piping
cough.  We  rightly  surmized  that  our  child  had  caught  the  illness  from  the  nurse-
maid, a  girl  still  attending  the  school,  for  a  great  many  children  in  the  place  were
suffering  from  it.  We  first  sent  the  girl  home.  Our  baby  which  received  the
breast,  and  was  bathed  twice  daily  at  88°  Fahr.,  was  given  a  friction  hip-bath
(81°  Fahr.)  at  noon,  which,  however,  we  had  to  shorten,  to  keep  the  child  from
crying  too  long.  It  proved  effective,  nevertheless,  as  it  caused  the  bowels  to  move.
On  the  third  day,  the  shrill  tone  of  the  cough  changed.  It  was  then  that  we  re-
ceived your  esteemed  letter.  My  wife  took  the  child  to  bed  with  her  and  got  it  to
perspire  profusely.  We  then  stopped  the  midday  bath,  and  in  12  days  the  cough
was  completely  got  rid  of.  I  can,  therefore,  only  confirm  what  you  say  in  your
book  about  whooping-cough.

Again  let  me  thank  you,  both  on  behalf  of  my  wife  and  self,  for  next  to  God  it
is  you  and  your  method,  that  have  restored  our  dear  child  so  soon  to  health  again.
With  best  regards,

Yours  very  truly,

Harzburg.  E.  K.

No.  60. Neurasthenia,  Neuralgia,  Epilepsy
Dear  Sir:

To  your  system  of  cure  alone,  I  owe  my  recovery  from  neurasthenia,  neuralgia
and  epilepsy,  after  having  been  treated  by  two  of  the  most  eminent  physicians  of
Dresden,  for  a  considerable  time,  and  given  up  by  them  as  "irretrievably  lost."


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  46l

The  slate  of  my  illness  was  such,  that  I  was  lying  ill  for  three  months.  As  a  re-
sult, I  was  exempted  from  conscription,  after  having  presented  myself  several
times  for  examination  (diagnosis: Epilepsia  yrcwis).

Yours  faithfully,

Dresden.  Hans  B.

No.  61. Difficulty  of  hearing,  Pain  in  the  back.  Cough,
Suffocative  attacks
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

As  you  desired  to  hear,  from  time  to  time,  how  we  go  on,  I  take  the  liberty  of
sending  you  the  first  report.

Every  day  we  speak  of  you;  every  day  thank  the  Almighty  that  our  child,  by
means  of  your  invaluable  discoveries,  has  been  completely  cured  of  its  chronic
difficulty  of  hearing.  It  had  been  suffering  from  the  complaint  for  a  year  and  a
half;  now  it  has  been  quite  well  since  several  weeks.  That  is  the  principal  success
we  have  attained  till  now;  at  the  same  time  the  swollen  tonsils  are  visibly  decreas-
ing in  size,  and  the  boy  seems,  as  it  were,  really  as  though  he  were  altogether
transformed.  Instead  of  the  little  mortal,  always  crying,  we  have  a  merry,
spirited  boy,  mixing  with  other  children.  He  runs  about  shouting  and  singing,
whereas  formerly  his  voice  was  as  though  suppressed,  he  could  speak  only  in  an
undertone.  Nor  have  the  attacks  of  coughing  and  sufTocative  spasms  returned  so
far.  Every  day  we  have  new  proofs  of  how  well  the  child  progresses,  both  men-
tally and  physically;  every  day  we  sing  your  praises.  In  the  name  of  my  husband
and  myself,  let  me  here  tender  you  our  heartfelt  thanks,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne.

As  for  my  own  health,  I  feel  sensibly  better  and  more  energetic  than  for  years.
A  particular  benefit,  I  find  it,  that  I  am  able  to  cure  the  torturing,  racking  pains  in
the  back  by  such  simple  means  as  a  sitz-bath. I  remain.

Yours  very  faithfully,

(Wife  of  the  Rev.  —  M.  of  P.)

No.  62. Uterine  hemorrhage
Dear  Sir:

Florika  Schellarius,  a  Roumanian  inhabitant  of  this  place,  has  been  suffering
from  severe  hemorrhage  uninterruptedly  for  four  weeks.  According  to  your
advice  she  took  two  weekly  hip-baths,  one  steam-bath,  and  two  or  three  friction
sitz-baths  daily,  and  observed  an  unstimulating  diet.  On  the  sixth  day  after  com-
mencing this  treatment,  her  condition  much  improved,  and  to-day  (the  fifteenth
day)  she  is  again  quite  well.  In  the  name  of  the  poor  woman,  and  of  suffering
humanity,  I  express  my  heartfelt  thanks. With  sincere  good  wishes,

Yours  faithfully,

Z.  (Transylvania,  Hungary.)  Teodore  D.

Greek  Catholic  Priest.

No.  63. Severe  Nervosity,  Neurasthenia. Weak  memory

For  years  my  wife  had  been  highly  nervous.  Then,  in  consequence  of  overwork
in  the  business,  she  became  so  much  worse,  that  it  was  evident  a  thorough  cure
must  not  be  put  off  any  longer.  Of  the  ordinary  remedies  of  the  Nature  Cure
system,  none  had  been  left  untried.  Several  brought  relief,  but  none — not  even
magnetism — brought  a  real  cure.  Also  the  treatment  tried  in  April  1890  at  Mr.
Louis  Kuhne's  establishment  seemed,  at  first,  to  have  no  appreciable  effect,  things


462  Universal  Naturopathic  Dircclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide

seemed  to  go  from  bad  to  worse.  After  about  seven  weeks,  however,  a  change
took  place.  One  crisis  followed  upon  the  other,  this  critical  condition  lasting  for
many  months — a  time  which  we  shall  long  remember.  The  curative  power  of  the
body,  however,  assisted  by  the  Kuhne  sitz-baths,  after  eleven  months'  diligent,
daily  use  of  the  baths,  brought  about  the  best  results.  Whereas  formerly  my  wife,
to  her  great  distress,  had  noticed  a  failure  of  her  memory,  and  faculty  of  think-
ing, her  mental  power  has  now  returned  again  in  a  quite  remarkable  degree;  she
again  feels  energetic  and  fresh  in  a  manner  she  has  not  for  years.  Now  mental
activity  is  to  her  a  pleasure,  formerly  it  was  a  strain.  And  as  mentally,  so  also
physically.  During  the  first  six  months  of  the  treatment  my  wife  was  not  able  to
take  a  walk  of  more  than  a  couple  of  miles  without  resting.  In  the  tenth  month,
however,  she  could  take  a  daily  walk  of  over  twelve  miles,  without  feeling  the
need  of  rest  at  all,  or  even  of  stopping.  All  the  organs  of  the  body  participate
equally  in  this  remarkable  transformation.  In  a  word:  she  has  become  quite
another  being,  formerly  often  depressed,  now  ever  happy.

After  God,  our  heartfelt  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Kuhne  for  his  excellent  advice.
May  it  long  be  granted  him  to  work  for  the  good  of  his  fellow-men,  and  may
he  in  every  patient  win  an  enthusiastic  disciple,  who  will  aid  in  spreading  the
principles  of  his  simple,  yet  so  true,  science  of  healing.

Berlin.  G.  S.

No.  64. Head  affection.  Eye  disease,  Poverty  of  the  blood.  Nervosity,
Extension  of  tendons.  General  debility.  Labored  breathing

An  Expression  of  Thanks

In  my  youth,  I  sufl'ered  periodically  from  headaches,  especially  when  in  school.
Later  they  increased  in  intensity,  and  were  quite  neuralgic.

Then  about  my  fifteenth  year,  through  a  fall,  I  suffered  from  a  severe  extension
of  the  tendons  of  the  foot.  The  physicians  were  unable  to  cure  it,  and  finally  it
became  so  bad,  that  it  was  almost  impossible  for  me  to  walk  at  all.  For  five  years
I  had  to  put  up  with  the  greatest  pain.

The  affection  of  the  head  had  in  the  meantime  so  increased,  that  in  consequence
of  extreme  nervosity  and  poverty  of  the  blood  I  was  brought,  nearly  incurable,  to
the  hospital.  A  short  time  afterwards  I  was  discharged  without  any  improvement
in  my  condition.

My  eyes  had  likewise  become  worse,  I  was  deadened  to  everything,  incapable
for  any  kind  of  work;  my  frame  of  mind  was  such  as  gave  my  friends  the  greatest
concern.  I  suffered  continually  from  internal  gangrene,  from  dreadfully  labored
breathing  and  continual  fever,  and  in  addition  had  the  prospect  of  becoming  quite
blind.

In  this  more  than  bad  condition,  from  which  no  one  could  free  me,  I  came  in
September  of  this  year  to  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne's  Establishment  for  the  Science  of
Healing  without  Medicines.

Immediately  after  the  first  bath  which  was  ordered  me,  I  experienced  a  feeling
of  general  easiness  and  improvement,  which  increased  as  I  continued  the  baths
and  adopted  a  suitable  diet.  In  a  few^  weeks  my  general  condition  was  no  longer
to  be  compared  with  what  it  had  been  previously.  Now,  after  about  five  months'
treatment,  my  sight  has  so  extraordinarily  improved  and  my  general  condition
become  so  good,  that  I  feel  quite  happy,  and  cannot  sufficiently  thank  my  high-
minded  preserver.

I  can  now  again  see  quite  well,  can  look  after  my  household,  feel  strengthened
and  cheerful  at  work. My  foot,  also,  has  so  far  improved;  that  I  can  walk  again


Universal  Naturopdlhic  Dirrrtorif  and  Buyers'  Guide  463

without  (lifTiculty,  in  short  I  feel  as  though  a  wliolly  new  heing,  and  all  this  I  owe
solely  to  this  extraordinarily  eflective  and  yet  so  simple  method  of  cure.  The
treatment  is  now  adopted  in  my  whole  family,  and  everywhere  meets  with  the
same  certain  success.

May  all  sufferers  with  confidence  submit  themselves  to  your  cure!

Leipzig.  (Mrs.)  Marie  R.

No.  65. Articular  Rheumatism
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Filled  with  a  deep  sense  of  duty,  I  have  the  honor  of  expressing  to  you  my
warmest  thanks  for  the  kind  sympathy  which  you  have  shown  me,  through  your
excellent  advice  during  my  illness.  Since  May,  last  year,  I  had  suffered  con-
tinuously from  articular  rheumatism  and  despite  a  cure  in  Teplitz,  had  a  still  more
severe  attack  again  in  the  following  November.  I  was  without  hope  of  recovery.
The  physician  seemed  already  to  have  exhausted  his  pseudo-remedies,  did  not  put
in  an  appearance  for  some  weeks,  and  advised  me  a  stay  in  the  south  as  the  only
means  of  cure. In  her  anxiety  my  wife  then  consulted  you.

You  were  kind  enough  to  impart  me  your  advice  by  letter.  With  the  exception
of  the  diet,  however,  I  was  unable  to  strictly  follow  your  prescription,  being  too
weak,  and  unable  to  move.  At  the  beginning  of  February  I  commenced  with  the
baths,  after  an  improvement  appeared  to  have  set  in.  The  effect  was  soon  ap-
parent; for  after  the  third  bath,  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  appeared  one  after
the  other,  in  a  manner  that  anyone  not  prepared  for  it,  by  a  study  of  your  book,
would  have  been  in  a  state  of  the  greatest  anxiety.  And,  in  spite  of  all  confidence,
a  quiet  anxious  feeling  crept  through  me,  too;  but  all  the  greater,  indeed,  unspeak-
able, was  my  joy,  when  after  the  fourth  bath  I  remarked  a  decrease  in  the  tension
of  the  left  ankle.  The  urine  was  dark  brown.  Now  I  rejoiced  notwithstanding  all
my  other  pains,  as  I  was  firmly  convinced  I  was  using  a  remedy  which  would  go
to  the  root  of  the  disease.  The  morbid  matter  now  began  to  disappear  from  the
body,  in  the  same  order  in  which,  at  the  commencement  of  the  illness,  it  had  been
deposited  in  the  joints  and  muscles,  once  more  producing  pain  and  inflammation.
In  fourteen  days  I  could  again  take  up  my  professional  work.  March  with  its  icy
rain  and  wind  was  not  able  to  touch  me,  and  since  then  I  have  been  happy  and
healthy.  Meran  has  certainly  one  visitor  the  less,  but  your  system  of  cure — a
method  which  cannot  be  overvalued — has  won  an  admirer  and  propagator.

Sincerely  trusting  and  wishing  that  your  natural  system  of  treating  diseases,  may
find  more  and  more  acceptance,  leading  mankind  from  hyper-civilization  back  to
nature,  I  am,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne,  with  deep  latitude.

Very  faithfully  yours,

Julius  S.,  Royal  Certificated  Teacher.

No.  66. Pain  in  the  stomach,  want  of  appetite,  Giddiness,  Defect  of  the
heart.  Hemorrhage,  Pulmonary  affection,  General  debility

A  Public  Expression  of  Thanks

The  wife  of  the  undersigned — in  her  61st  year — had  been  suffering  for  a  number
of  years,  and  particularly  since  1890,  from  fits  of  giddiness,  severe  pain  in  the
stomach,  want  of  appetite  and  general  debility.

In  the  Royal  University  Hospital  here,  where  I  brought  my  wife  in  autumn  1890.
medicines. But  instead  of  better,  my  wife's  condition  became  steadily  worse.


4G4  Universal  Natnropatln'r  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

When  in  addition  to  this  wholly  useless  medical  treatment,  the  physicians  com-
menced with  inoculations  with  Koch's  lymph,  I  removed  my  wife  from  the
hospital,  the  treatment  having  lasted  till  December  1891.

In  February,  1891,  my  wife  completely  broke  down;  the  attacks  of  giddiness  in-
creased, causing  the  greatest  anxiety,  and  the  general  debility  and  inactivity  of
the  organs  of  digestion  so  got  the  upper  hand,  that  the  patient  was  confirmed  for
six  weeks  to  her  bed.

trouble  was  due  to  a  defect  of  the  heart,  which  was  quite  incurable;  he  therefore
soon  ceased  his  visits.

In  April,  1891,  the  pain  in  the  stomach  became  so  much  worse  that  the  patient
could  scarcely  digest  anything,  but  brought  all  food  up  again.  Simultaneously
there  was  great  difficulty  in  breathing  and  pain  in  the  chest,  and,  in  general,  a
derangement  of  the  whole  body.

I  now  made  a  trial  with  homeopathy;  but  the  homeopathic  physician  likewise
declared  that  my  wife's  illness  was  incurable.  Any  appreciable  improvement  in
her  condition  was  not  obtained.

At  length,  after  all  this  straying  about,  fortunately  for  my  sick  wife,  we  came
to  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne's  Establishment  for  Healing  Diseases  without  Drugs  and  with-
out Operations.

There  my  wife  was  ordered  to  take  friction  sitz-baths  twice  daily,  according  to

In  a  week,  even,  a  marked  improvement  in  her  general  health  had  taken  place.
Her  digestion  was  more  normal,  and  in  a  few  weeks  the  pains  decreased.  The
attacks  of  giddiness  and  the  labored  breathing  and  other  troubles  disappeared
completely  and  the  patient's  strength  increased  from  day  to  day,  notwithstanding
the  spare  diet.  Thus  my  wife  felt  better  and  healthier  than  ever  before,  and  all
who  saw  her,  were  perfectly  astonished  at  such  a  complete  recovery.  It  struck  me
also,  that  my  wife's  sight  by  this  treatment  had  become  much  better  than  either
before  or  during  the  illness.  All  that  the  eminent  physicians  could  not  do  in  two
years,  was  done  in  Mr.  Kuhne's  Establishment  in  a  space  of  less  than  eight  weeks.
It  is  natural  that  we  shall  ever  remain  thankful  to  Mr.  Kuhne,  wishing  him  God's
blessing  in  his  humane  work  for  suffering  humanity.  Here  is  at  length  a  phy-
sician who  can  really  cure  and  aid.

Leipzig.  Gustav  P.

No.  67. Incurable  disease  of  the  eye.  Nervous  affection  of  the  head,
Chronic  pharyngitis.  Catarrh  of  the  bladder.  Pains  in  the  back  and  side

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

My  deep  feeling  of  gratitude  does  not  permit  me  to  refrain  from  sending  you  an
exact  description  of  the  course  and  rapid  healing  of  my  severe  disease  of  the  eye,
and  I  beg  you  to  make  free  use  of  it.

Since  earliest  childhood,  I  had  suffered  from  a  chronic  inflammation  of  the
eyes,  which  had  remained  from  the  small-pox.  I  had  consulted  various  physi-
cians in  vain;  for  although  the  trouble  was  temporarily  suppressed,  it  always  ap-
peared again  after  a  short  interval,  worse  than  before.  In  vain  calomel,  mercurial
ointment,  and  zinc  lotion,  were  tried,  but  without  reducing  the  inflammation.  I
must  have  consulted  ten  medical  men  during  these  years,  but  never  met  with
success.

Meanwhile  my  eyes  were  becoming  worse,  until  finally  Egyptian  eye  disease
(trachoma) set  in  and  my  condition  was  deplorable. Always  hoping  for  cure.


Universal  NatiirojHtthic  Dirrdonj  and  Ihiijcrs'  Guide  105

I  went  to  a  Vienna  ophthalmic  clinic,  where  for  fully  six  months  I  was  treated,
though  wholly  without  success,  with  boracic  acid,  caustic  potash,  corrosive  subli-
mate and  iodoform.  Three  operations  were  performed  on  my  right  eye,  causing
me  the  most  dreadful  pain.

In  spite  of  all,  my  condition  was  becoming  worse  and  worse.  When,  finally,  the
doctors  saw  that  they  could  do  nothing,  they  discharged  me,  and  I  would  have
been  condemned  to  blindness,  had  I  not  applied  your  system  of  treatment.  To
this  alone,  I  owe  my  cure  after  strictly  following  your  instructions  (unstimulating
diet  and  friction  baths)  for  six  months.

In  the  course  of  the  treatment  not  only  did  my  eye  disease  improve  from  week
to  week,  but  at  the  same  time  I  lost  my  nervous  affection  of  the  head,  from  which
I  had  been  suffering  for  three  years.  Then,  my  chronic  pharyngitis  and  atony  of
the  bladder  (which  had  remained  from  a  bladder-catarrh  which  the  doctors  had
treated  with  drugs)  wholly  disappeared,  together  with  very  severe  pains  in  the
back  and  sides,  which  had  followed  upon  pleurisy  eight  years  before.

Altogether  my  general  health  has  become  the  best  possible.  Since  the  applica-
tion of  your  system,  I  feel  so  mentally  fresh  as  never  before.

With  the  wish  that  as  many  sufferers  as  possible  may  come  to  use  your  method,
so  that  this,  which  is  the  only  true  means  of  cure,  may  win  the  increasing  attention
of  humanity,  I  remain,

Yours  very  faithfully,

S.  (Transylvania).  Eugen  K.

No.  68. Inflammation  of  the  lungs,  Diphtheria

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  cannot  refrain  from  openly  expressing  to  you  my  heartfelt  thanks  and  acknowl-
edgement for  your  remarkable  success  in  the  treatment  of  my  little  daughter,  nine
years  of  age.

My  family  physician  diagnosed  inflammation  of  the  lungs  and  treated  the  child
for  nearly  two  months  without  success.  My  wife  and  I  prepared  for  the  worst,
for  we  had  no  longer  hope  of  the  child  recovering.  It  was  in  this  distress  that  I
thought  of  you.

I  wrote  you  a  card  begging  you  to  call,  and  you  said:  "If  you  have  confidence,
and  stop  the  treatment  recommended  by  your  physician,  the  child  will  recover  in
a  short  time,  provided  you  carry  out  my  instructions  exactly."  My  wife  and  I
promised,  and  followed  your  advice,  and  the  result  was  that  there  was  a  visible
improvement  even  at  the  very  next  day.  At  the  end  of  a  week  we  could  say,  our
child  is  saved.  To-day  it  is  perfectly  well,  can  run  about,  laugh  and  play.  I  am
convinced,  that  had  you  not  intervened,  my  child  would  now  be  resting  beneath
the  sod.

At  the  same  time  an  old  visitor  paid  me  a  call:  the  much  dreaded  diphtheria,
against  which  we  had  struggled  14  years  before.  It  attacked  my  other  five  children
one  after  the  other,  but  under  your  careful  treatment,  they  have  all  been  cured.
I,  therefore,  express  to  you  again  in  WTiting  my  warmest  thanks,  and  beg  you  to
use  the  above  as  often  as  you  may  desire.

With  sincerest  esteem,  I  remain,

Yours  very  thankfully,

Leipzig.  Karl  I.


466  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

No.  69. Chronic,  gastric  and  inlcstimd  catarrh.  Nervosity, Weakness
of  memory,  Thoughts  of  suicide

Dear  Sir:

I  am  in  the  pleasant  position  of  being  able  to  send  you  a  most  favorable  report.
From  the  account  of  my  illness,  sent  to  you  before  I  commenced  your  treatment,
you  will  recollect  my  condition.

My  complaint  was  a  very  serious  one;  my  nerves,  especially,  had  suffered
severely  from  bad  diet  during  four  years.  It  is,  therefore,  easy  to  see,  that  I  could
not  be  completely  cured  in  a  couple  of  weeks  or  even  months.

I  may  mention,  that  my  memory  has  greatly  improved,  and  that  I  again  feel  quite
cheerful.  Of  suicide  I  think  no  more — not  in  the  least,  nor  do  I  longer  suffer
from  dull  headaches;  these  have  quite  disappeared.  I  have  also  followed  your
good  advice  as  to  sleeping  summer  and  winter  with  open  window,  and  find  it  most
beneficial.

You  see  your  method  has  done  me  excellent  service.  /  wish  from  the  bottom  of
my  heart,  that  many  such  sufferers  may  visit  your  establishment.  I  can  with  cer-
tainty say,  that  I  should  still  have  required  many  years  to  obtain  the  same  result  as
I  have  in  six  months  by  using  your  system  of  cure.

Wishing  every  success  for  the  future  of  your  institute,  I  beg  to  remain  with

many  thanks.

Yours  very  truly,

St.  (Moravia)  Hugo  B.,  Austrian  Postmaster.

No.  70. Suppression  of  the  menses

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

You  will  still  remember,  that  last  autumn  I  wrote  to  you  about  my  wife,  who
since  the  beginning  of  August  was  troubled  with  suppression  of  the  menses.  This
made  me  anxious,  as  I  thought  it  might  be  dangerous  for  my  wife;  hence  my  letter
of  October  10th  begging  for  your  advice,  when  you  replied  that  I  need  not  worry,
as  all  would  soon  come  right.  This  prediction  has  proved  correct  after  using  your
treatment  on  March  19th  1894,  my  wife  having  up  till  then  had  no  menstrual  flow
for  nearly  nine  months.

Here,  again,  a  magnificent  success  for  your  method.  Such  a  result  certainly  is
not  often  met  with,  so  I  will  not  neglect  to  express  to  you  my  great  joy  at  the
astonishing  circumstance.

Yours  faithfully,

Kiel.  H.  H.

No.  71. Whooping-cough

Dear  Sir:

I  have  employed  your  method  of  treatment  on  the  repeated  recommendation  of
acquaintances  with  surprising  success  in  the  case  of  my  three  children,  who  were
all  taken  ill  at  the  same  time  with  that  dangerous  disorder,  the  whooping-cough.
I  completely  cured  them  of  the  trouble  in  three  days,  and  therefore  beg  to  send
you,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne,  my  sincerest  thanks.  May  your  method  of  treatment  prove,
as  I'cannot  but  doubt  it  will,  equally  beneficial  in  all  other  cases;  and  may  the  great
value  of  this  new  Nature  Cure  system  be  more  and  more  widely  recognized.

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  (Mrs.)  Therese  B.


Uniucrsdl  Naluropdlhic  Directory  (ind  liiujcr.s'  Guide  4(37


No.  72. General  debility,  Want  of  appetite
Dear  Sir:

It  gives  me  the  greatest  pleasure  to  be  able  to  inform  you,  that  so  far  I  have
met  with  best  success  in  the  treatment  of  my  daughter  according  to  your  letter  of
instructions.  Even  after  the  use  of  the  first  few  friction  hip-baths  there  was  a
marked  improvement;  the  lassitude  disappeared,  the  appetite  returned,  constipation
was  cured,  and  the  yellow  coloration  of  the  skin  has,  since  using  your  system,
gradually  given  place  to  a  fine  rosy  complexion. With  best  compliments.

Yours  faithfully,

Kleinfalke.  F.  B.

No.  73. Rheumatism,  Liver  disease,  Hemorrhoids

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Nearly  two  years  have  passed  since  my  restoration  to  health  by  means  of  your
system  of  treatment.  There  has  been  nothing  whatever  the  matter  with  me  since
then,  so  that  I  really  seem  like  a  walking  miracle,  both  to  myself  and  to  all  who
knew  me  as  I  was  in  those  days  and  as  I  am  to-day.  You  know  in  what  a  critical
condition  I  first  came  to  you.  I  had  never  been  really  well  all  my  life;  rheumatism,
colds  and  other  disorders  of  all  kinds  followed  one  another  in  constant  succession.
Then,  on  account  of  hemorrhoids  and  a  severe  liver  complaint,  I  for  ten  years  was
in  the  hands  of  numerous  physicians,  both  homeopaths  and  allopaths,  the  last  I
consulted  being  a  celebrated  professor  at  Bonn  University.  During  this  time  I
grew  so  ill  that  I  could  scarcely  follow  my  vocation,  and  had,  so  to  speak,  settled
accounts  with  life.  The  wonderful  success  of  your  treatment  in  my  case  has  in-
duced many  other  sufferers  to  seek  aid  from  you,  and  they  have  not  been  disap-
pointed. I  have  already  informed  you  of  the  gratitude  which  I  myself  and  my
family  will  always  feel  toward  you;  the  purpose  of  the  present  letter  is  simply  to
beg  you,  in  the  interest  of  the  good  cause  and  of  the  host  of  other  sufferers,  to  give
the  widest  publicity  possible  to  the  report  of  my  cure.  I  could  say  much  more  of
the  successes,  which  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  both  in  my  own  and
other  families  through  the  use  of  your  baths  and  a  natural  mode  of  life;  but  this
would  lead  me  too  far.  I  am  now  51  years  of  age,  have  been  for  16  years  the
superintendent  of  the  Evangelical  Mission  in  this  town  of  115,000  inhabitants.
Particulars  are,  therefore,  obtainable  at  any  time. With  kindest  regards,  I  remain,

Ever  gratefully  yours,

Barmen.  Ernst  F.

No.  7k. Affection  of  the  stomach.  Nervous  disease.  Constipation

...  .1  feel  that  I  owe  you  a  deep  gratitude,  you  having,  by  means  of  your  new
method  of  cure  without  drugs  and  without  operations,  brought  me  relief  in  less
than  a  fortnight,  in  my  serious  case  of  gastric  and  nervous  disorder  from  which
I  had  been  suffering  for  some  six  years.

In  five  days  you  performed  what  celebrated  physicians  and  all  imaginable
medicines  could  not  do  for  me,  namely,  regulation  of  the  stool.  Formerly  I  had
always  to  employ  enemas.

v.,  West  Prussia.  Z.,  School  Teacher.

No.  75. Disease  of  the  nerves
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  feel  the  inward  need  of  giving  expression  to  my  feelings.  Your  method  of  cure
is  of  incalculable  value  as  contrasted  with  all  those  where  drugs  are  employed,  and


408  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

which,  as  numerous  cases  attest,  bring  misery  and  destruction  to  suffering
humanity,  even  at  the  hands  of  "scientific"  men.  Almost  everyone  has  experienced
this  in  his  family,  or  in  his  own  person.  It  would  be  willful  blindness,  in  view
of  this  fact,  still  to  delay,  endanger  one's  life  or  the  lives  of  those  dear  to  one,  for
the  sake  of  prejudice  or  habit,  by  knowingly  avoiding  Nature.  I  cannot  close  this
letter  without  again  repeating  to  you  what  I  have  so  often  said:  that  I  consider  the
method  discovered  by  you  for  healing  the  diseased  body  to  be  the  product  of  real
genius;  and  this,  my  opinion  is  not  founded  merely  upon  a  favorable  preposses-
sion, but  upon  the  experience  of  years,  and  the  brilliant  success  which  you  have
attained  in  my  family.  We  can  without  hesitation  say  you  have  saved  my  sister's
life.  The  wonderful  effect  of  your  treatment  on  my  children  also,  whom  you
cured  of  various  disorders  within  the  shortest  space  of  time,  make  me  regard  your
acquaintance  as  one  of  the  most  valuable  acquisitions  of  my  entire  stay  in  Leipzig.
Rest  assured  of  my  grateful  remembrance,  wherever  I  may  be,  and  of  my  zealous
support  of  your  doctrines. With  kind  regards,

Yours  very  truly,

Vienna.  (Mrs.)  Olga  L.

No.  76. Articular  rheumatism
Dear  Sir:

I  am  happy  to  testify,  that  by  the  repeated  use  of  your  steam  and  friction  hip-
baths, I  was  speedily  cured  of  my  severe  articular  rheumatism;  after  only  the
second  bath,  I  could  again  walk  without  assistance.  I  can  thoroughly  recommend
vour  baths  to  all  suffering  from  like  disorders.

Leipzig.  "•  ^•

No.  77. Lame  Arm

My  youngest  son,  by  my  first  marriage,  August  von  B.,  at  that  time  12%  years
old,  complained  early  in  December  1886,  of  violent  pain  and  heaviness  in  the  right
arm.  It  soon  became  so  much  worse  that  he  was  unable  to  use  the  hand  and  arm,
and  had  to  carry  the  latter  in  a  sling.  Various  remedies  tried  proved  ineffective.
By  chance  I  heard  of  Mr.  Kuhne's  treatment,  and  that  he  had  already  cured  similar
cases  successfully,  so  decided  to  place  my  child  in  his  hands.

I  strictly  followed  Mr.  Kuhne's  instructions.

Although  a  considerable  time  elapsed,  and  our  patience  thus  put  to  the  proof,
a  turn  for  the  better  at  length  appeared  in  the  boy's  obstinate  disorder.  Not  only
was  the  lame  arm  quite  cured  by  the  friction  hip  and  sitz  baths,  and  the  unstimulat-
ing  diet  (this,  too,  according  to  instructions),  but  both  the  utterly  prostrate
digestion  and  the  appetite  were  restored.

Dresden.  Edle  K.  (wife  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  K.)

No.  78. Serious  abdominal  disorder,  Leucorrhea

Dear  Sir:

On  my  departure  from  here,  I  feel  the  desire  to  express  to  you,  benefactor  of
mankind,  my  sincere  thanks  for  the  cure  your  treatment  has  brought  me.  I  con-
sulted the  best  physicians  for  years  and  received  more  injury  than  benefit.  They
all  insisted  upon  an  operation,  but  I  have  now,  by  your  aid,  recovered  from  my
disorder  without  anything  of  the  kind.  I  shall  tell  everywhere  of  the  brilliant
successes  you  attain  in  all  diseases,  and  how  it  is  possible  to  regain  health  with-
out doctors  and  without  operations.

With  the  renewed  expression  of  my  deep  gratitude  for  your  kind  attention,  I

remain,

Yours  very  faithfully,
Leipzig.  (Mrs.)  E.  L.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuycrs'  Guide  469

No.  79. Digestive  disorder
Dear  Sir:

I  wish  to  thank  you,  in  my  wife's  name,  for  your  prescription  of  the  baths.  My
wife's  health  had  been  wholly  disordered  for  four  years;  during  all  this  time  she
found  relief  neither  from  allopaths  nor  homeopaths,  and  death  stared  her  in  the
face.  In  our  despair  we  consulted  you.  Now,  after  employing  your  treatment
for  5%  months,  my  wife  is  completely  restored  to  health  and  vigor.  Before  com-
ing to  you  she  weighed  104  lbs.,  she  now  weighs  126  lbs.

With  our  best  thanks  and  good  wishes,

Sincerely  yours,

Kirchhain,  Lower  Lusatia.  T.  W.

No.  80. Easy  pregnancy  and  birth
Dear  Sir;

in  your  letter  has  proved  of  good  service.  My  wife  has  had  till  now  four  con-
finements. The  first  was  a  very  difficult  one;  in  the  second,  the  forceps  were  re-
quired; before  the  third  and  fourth  we  employed  your  treatment.  This  proved
most  satisfactory,  both  deliveries  being  very  easy.  Both  in  my  own  name  and  in
that  of  my  wife,  I  beg  to  offer  you  sincere  thanks.  Such  a  result  deserves  thanks
indeed,  for  a  difficult  birth  is  a  bad  matter. With  best  wishes.

Faithfully  yours,

Munich.  Georg  S.

No.  81. Podagra  and  Gout
Dear  Sir:

Herewith  I  take  the  liberty  of  sending  you  my  heartiest  thanks  for  your  treat-
ment. My  disease  had  been  chronic  so  long,  reaching  back  into  my  school-days,
that  I  scarcely  hoped  for  recovery.  Even  as  a  boy  of  12,  I  had  pains  in  the  great
toe,  which  developed  into  podagra  and  gout.  In  the  course  of  years  my  condition
continually  grew  worse  and  more  intolerable,  especially  as  all  the  numerous  doc-
tors consulted  were  unable  to  help  me.  My  hands  and  feet  were  so  tumefied  and  in-
durated at  the  joints,  that  finally  I  could  use  neither.  For  over  IV2  years  I  led  a
hopeless  life,  wholly  unable  to  move;  my  misery  being  all  the  harder  to  bear  from
the  fact  that  no  physician  could  bring  relief.  I  was  unable  to  do  the  smallest  thing
myself,  and  had  even  to  be  fed  by  another  person.  I  was  as  helpless  as  a  new-born
baby,  and  therefore  all  the  more  difficult  to  wait  on.

Immediately  on  coming  under  your  treatment,  6  months  ago  my  gouty  system
began  improving.  My  feet  and  legs,  in  particular,  in  two  or  three  weeks  became
so  easy,  that  I  was  at  last  able  to  move  my  limbs  and  walk  about.  My  hands  and
fingers,  which  were  dreadfully  bent  and  swollen,  have  also  become  daily  more
supple  and  normal.

Only  those  who  have  known  my  wretched  condition  in  the  past,  can  conceive  the
gratitude  which  I  feel  in  writing  you  these  lines.

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  Emil  W.

No.  82. Chronic  disease  of  the  throat

Herewith  I  beg  to  certify  that  Mr.  Kuhne,  hygienic  practitioner,  Leipzig,  has
cured  me  of  a  chronic  disease  of  the  throat,  which  refused  to  yield  to  the  treat-
ment of  an  eminent  specialist. For  two  years  I  have  employed  the  baths  pre-


470  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

lessons  weekly  without  over-exertion.

Leipzig.  Clara  C.

Teacher  of  Singing.

No.  83. Headache,  Fainting-fits,  Throat  disease

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

In  consideration  of  your  admirable  curative  method,  by  which  I  have  been  freed
from  headache,  fainting-fits  and  throat  disease,  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  send  you
herewith  my  warmest  thanks  for  the  successful  result.  With  the  wish  that  you
may  long  be  spared  to  labor,  with  God's  blessing  for  suffering  humanity,  I  remain,

Yours  truly,
Leipzig.  Caroline  K.

No.  84. Epilepsy

The  undersigned  certifies  with  pleasure  that  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne,  proprietor  of  the
Hydropathic  Establishment,  Flossplatz,  Leipzig,  has  perfectly  cured  of  obstinate
epilepsy  a  boy  named  Golle,  a  former  pupil  of  the  undersigned.

The  epileptic  fits  occurred  several  times  a  day  at  least,  and  as  regards  outward
symptoms,  appeared  really  like  frenzy.  Since  the  cure,  no  other  fit  has  occurred
and  the  boy  has  gained  a  fine  healthy  complexion.

The  undersigned  feels  that  he  should  specially  mention,  even  if  contrary  to  Mr.
Kuhne's  wishes,  that  for  the  complete  cure,  lasting  over  4  months,  Mr.  Kuhne  not
only  took  no  fees,  but  even  financially  supported  the  boy's  widowed  mother,  Mrs>
Ida  Golle,  so  that  she  could  better  attend  to  her  son.  This  fact  has  until  now,
besides  to  Mrs.  Golle,  only  been  known  to  the  undersigned.

He  who  accepts  a  patient  in  such  a  self-sacrificing  manner,  is  certainly  the  man
who  will  prove  a  true  adviser  for  the  sick  under  all  circumstances,

Leipzig.  E.  H.

No.  85. Curvature  of  the  spine.  Nervous  disorder

My  dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

It  is  with  sincere  satisfaction  that  I  beg  to  state  how  pleased  I  am  with  the  re-
sult of  the  treatment  so  far,  both  in  regard  to  its  efl'ect  on  my  son's  condition
{curvature  of  the  spine)  and  my  own  (disease  of  the  nerves).

After  an  experience  of  six  months,  we  are  continuing  the  treatment  with  fullest
confidence.  I  would  have  no  hesitation  whatever  in  expressing  myself  thus,
whenever  asked.

I  leave  it  quite  to  you  to  make  of  us  whatever  you  may  desire  of  this  statement.
With  best  wishes,

Yours  very  faithfully,

Weimar.  B.,  Admiral.

No.  86. Influenza,  Aberration  of  the  mind,  Agitation,  Sleeplessness

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Filled  with  thanks  for  the  invaluable  service  which  you  rendered  my  husband
in  his  severe  illness,  I  must  not  neglect  to  acknowledge  the  blessful  efl'ect  of  your
excellent  method.

About  the  middle  of  December,  1893,  my  husband  fell  so  ill  with  influenza  that
we  feared  the  worst.  The  brain  was  aff"ected  to  such  an  extent  that  his  under-
standing was  quite  clouded.


Universcl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  (iuide  471

To  our  deepest  concern,  we  observed  for  a  whole  fortniglit  a  daily  increasing
aberration  of  the  mind  and  perpetual  agitation  which  rendered  constant  watching
of  the  patient,  day  and  night,  necessary  and  caused  us  the  greatest  anxiety.

The  physician  in  whose  treatment  my  husband  was,  declared  that  there  was
nothing  to  be  done  and  ordered  quiet.  It  was  then,  urged  by  my  friends  who
were  convinced  of  the  marvelous  effect  of  your  method  of  cure,  that  I  decided  to
give  way  and  to  call  in  your  advice,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne.

As  you  were  kind  enough  to  give  the  first  five  baths  personally,  you  had  occasion
yourself  to  observe  that  after  the  very  first  bath  there  was  remarkable  quietude;
that  after  the  second,  sleep  came,  which  in  spite  of  every  kind  of  soporific  had
been  impossible  for  a  fortnight;  and  that  after  every  subsequent  bath  signs  of  re-
turning understanding  were  to  be  remarked.  The  mind  became  hourly  clearer,
and  after  4  days  there  seemed  to  be  a  wonderful  awakening  to  full  consciousness,
as  from  a  dream.

Till  this  day,  thanks  to  God,  nothing  serious  has  occurred  again.

Although  formerly  full  of  doubt,  I  must  now  confess,  that  your  treatment  really
worked  miracles.  The  ceaseless  anxiety  and  care  from  which  you  have  freed  me
and  mine,  compels  me  to  tender  you  my  sincerest  thanks.  And  my  husband  regards
you,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne,  as  having  saved  his  life.  Like  me,  he  is  filled  with  gratitude
and  esteem  for  you  and  your  valuable  system.

I  remain,  with  sincerest  regards  from  my  husband,

Very  faithfully  yours,

Dresden.  Clothilde  W.

No.  87. Severe  headache
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  to  you  my  sincerest  thanks  for  the  cure  of  my
severe  headache,  which  lasted  for  a  fortnight  and  caused  me  much  care  and  anxi-
ety, on  account  of  my  dear  ones.  From  youth  I  frequently  had  headaches;  for
many  years,  at  least  once  a  month,  I  suffered  severely  for  24  hours;  during  the  last
eighteen  months  I  have  been  troubled  with  them  every  week;  and  three  wrecks  ago
my  head  was  so  bad  for  10  to  14  days,  that  I  really  feared  my  whole  brain  was  in
a  state  of  severe  inflammation,  which  had  affected  the  whole  of  the  left  side  of  the
head  and  also  my  eyes. For  the  latter  were  likewise  painful  and  deeply  sunken.

Yet  the  first  bath  in  five  minutes  has  cured  me  of  my  disorder;  and  I  have  be-
come so  much  stronger,  that  I  can  now  walk  again  as  quickly  as  ever,  and  as
though  rejuvenated,  though  I  am  52  years  of  age.  I  have,  however,  not  sat  on  a
board,  but  in  the  cold  water,  and  have  then  followed  your  instructions,  which  have
now  become  so  dear  to  me.  In  five  minutes  the  buttocks  became  warm,  and  this
feeling  increased  during  the  whole  operation,  which  I  continued  for  about  20
minutes.  Afterwards  I  took  a  little  walk  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  I  have
continued  this  now  for  12  days,  always  with  an  equally  good  result — a  comfortable
feeling  over  the  whole  body  and  also  in  the  head.

I  am  therefore  extremely  indebted  to  you.  But  I  should  like  to  do  more  than
merely  thank  you;  I  should  like  to  help  you  by  making  your  New^  Science  of  Heal-
ing known  to  my  neighbors  and  all  over  the  vicinity.  If  you  publish  leaflets,  I  shall
be  happy  to  distribute  same,  especially  among  all  suff'erers.  My  services  are  at
your  command.

Yours  very  truly,

Tubingen.  G.  A.  L.


472  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

No.  88. Easy  pregnancy  and  birth
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Just  returned  from  a  journey,  I  have  heard  with  pleasure  of  your  jubilee,  and
hasten  to  send  you  my  hearty  congratulations.

Exactly  a  year  ago  I  arrived  in  Leipzig,  dead  tired  and  miserable;  my  only  hope
after  God  was  in  you.  After  having  visited  the  most  famous  watering-places  of
the  world,  and  consulted  the  greatest  physicians,  always  in  vain,  I  felt  so  much
better  after  only  three  weeks  of  your  simple  system  of  cure,  that  I  vowed  I  would
not  stop  it  for  the  present.

During  the  winter,  in  the  greatest  cold,  despite  the  fact  that  I  was  enceinte,  I  took
two  friction  sitz-baths  daily  and  lived  according  to  your  instructions.  To  my
great  happiness  I  had  an  easy,  safe  birlh,  and  during  the  whole  period  of  preg-
nancy never  once  felt  unwell.  The  most  remarkable  thing,  however,  is  that
whereas  for  the  two  first  children  I  had  to  engage  wet-nurses,  not  having  any
milk  myself;  my  present  baby  I  have  the  fortune  to  be  able  to  suckle  myself,  and
give  him  in  addition  thick  oatmeal  gruel.  Every  evening  I  give  him  a  hip-bath
for  5  minutes,  his  abdomen  being  too  large;  in  the  morning  I  give  him  a  bath  at
88°  Fahr.  and  douche  him  over  with  cold  water.  I  wish  you  could  see  him,  now
three  months  old,  a  really  strong  and  healthy  child.  The  very  people  who  at  first
laughed  at  me  about  my  cure,  now  confess  openly  to  me,  that  I  look  ten  years
younger,  and  that  my  baby  boy  and  I  look  like  a  picture  of  health.  There  are
fully  12  families  here  in  Ziillichau  who  are  following  your  system  with  enthusiasm.
My  sister,  who  was  with  me  then  in  Leipzig,  and  who  was  likewise  pregnant,  did
not  live  as  I  did,  but  ate  plenty  flesh-meat,  etc.  She  had  a  very  difficult  confine-
ment; has  had  to  give  the  child  to  a  wet-nurse  and  is  now  lying  seriously  ill.

To  all  who  feel  the  least  doubt  about  your  system  of  cure,  I  cry  from  afar;  Re-
pose full  confidence  in  Mr.  Kuhne,  this  man  graced  by  God.

I  write  you  these  lines  on  the  occasion  of  your  jubilee  to  prove  to  you  how
thankful  I  am,  after  to  God,  to  you;  and  how  I  shall  ever  be  one  of  your  most
enthusiastic  disciples.

With  kindest  good  wishes  to  yourself  and  family,  I  remain,

Yours  sincerely,

Ziillichau.  C.  B.

No.  89. Liver  disease,  Gallstones,  Nervousness,  Rheumatic  headache.

Abdominal  disease
Dear  Sir:

You  will  certainly  remember  that  I  was  a  patient  at  your  institute  in  Leipzig
from  June  24th  to  July  13th.  As  you  know,  I  was  suffering  from  liver-disease  and
gallstone.  As  I  left  you,  my  condition  was  greatly  improved,  so  that  you  hoped
by  continuing  my  cure  I  would  soon  be  completely  restored  to  health.  After  I  had
been  back  here  a  few  days,  I  experienced  violent  pains  again,  and  two  more  gall-
stones were  passed.  During  the  pains  I  took  some  hip-baths,  which  did  me  much
good.  Since  then,  however,  all  has  gone  well,  and  I  can  work  all  day  without
feeling  unduly  tired,  the  people  looking  upon  me  as  a  miracle;  I  must  therefore
express  to  you  my  fullest  acknowledgement.  Encouraged  by  the  success  of  your
treatment  in  my  case,  a  poor  widow  here,  who  for  years  had  been  suffering  from
nervousness,  rheumatic  headache  and  abdominal  disease  determined  to  try  your
system.  The  doctor  who  had  been  treating  her  declared  that  her  illness  was  only
imaginary.  She  had  read  your  book  "The  New  Science  of  Healing,"  and  took  two
or  three  friction  sitz-baths  daily. She  was  pretty  corpulent,  so  it  was  noticeable


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  473


how  much  thinner  she  became  in  a  fortnight;  she  said  that  the  abdominal  pains
had  nearly  disappeared.

Yours  faithfully,
Volmarstein.  L.  S.

No.  90. Asthma,  Hemorrhoidal  affection,  Inflammation  of  the  throat

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Towards  the  end  of  October  last  I  wrote  to  you  for  advice,  and  received  your
esteemed  reply  under  date  November  3rd.  Herewith  I  beg  to  communicate  to  you
briefly  the  course  the  cure  has  taken.

My  wife  has  taken  the  friction  sitz-baths  regularly  for  6  months,  three  times
daily,  and  sometimes  oftener  when  she  had  inclination;  and  also  warm  friction
hip-baths  and  steam-baths  alternately.  She  lives  almost  wholely  on  wholemeal
bread  and  apples,  eating  only  now  and  again  vegetables  and  other  light  foods.
She  sleeps  with  open  windows,  is  much  in  the  open  air,  and  feels  better  than  ever
before.  During  the  first  months  of  the  treatment,  large  blisters  formed  in  the
region  of  the  sexual  organs,  and  after  discharging  their  contents,  filled  again.
An  ulcer  had  also  formed  on  the  abdomen,  discharging  much  repulsive-smelling
matter.  The  torturing  asthmatical  affection  and  the  hemorrhoids  have  now  nearly
disappeared.  My  wife  no  longer  finds  walking  troublesome,  and  her  appearance
has,  indeed,  quite  changed.  After  the  friction  sitz-baths  she  always  felt  extremely
cold,  natural  perspiration  was,  of  course,  seldom  to  be  produced.  Now  this
chilliness  has  decreased.  She  has  a  healthy  appetite  and  her  digestion  is  much
improved,  for  what  she  eats  is  now  assimilated  by  the  body.  I  have  great  con-
fidence in  the  cure,  and  find  confirmation  of  the  statement,  that  it  works  slowly
but  surely. All  former  illnesses  return,  but  appear  in  a  less  degree.

I  have  used  the  friction  sitz-baths  and  steam-baths  with  extraordinary  success
in  the  case  of  my  little  3M>  year  old  child  who  was  suffering  from  inflammation
of  the  throat,  and  I  can  fully  confirm  the  statement  that  your  method  is  the  true
one.

With  kindest  regards  and  many  thanks,  I  beg  to  remain.

Yours  faithfully,
Hermsdorf.  P.  L.,  School  Teacher.

No.  91. Rheumatism,  Swollen  feet

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my  best  thanks  to  you  for  the  rapid  recovery
from  my  dreadful  complaint.  Your  simple  sitz-baths  have  freed  me  in  3  months
of  my  terrible  disorder.  I  had  suffered  for  a  long  time  from  rheumatism  in  hands
and  feet.  The  bones  of  the  hands  were  so  prominent  that  my  hands  looked  quite
crippled.  I  could  hold  nothing,  and  had  so  much  pain  to  endure,  that  I  scarcely
knew  what  to  do.  My  feet  were  so  swollen  up,  that  I  was  hardly  able  to  go  up-
stairs at  all.  I  wish  to  express  to  you  my  w^armest  thanks  for  the  rapid  and  inex-
pensive recovery  from  my  serious  complaint.  Everyone  suffering  from  such  a
disease,  I  advise  to  consult  you;  your  treatment  is  most  simple  and  costs  but  little.

I  am.

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  (Mrs.)  T.


474  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

No.  92. Uterine  tumor,  Leucorrhea

One  day  Mrs.  H.  of  M., —  called  upon  me  and  reported  as  follows:  Her  niece  had
undergone  a  most  successful  cure  in  my  establishment  in  the  spring  and  was  not
satisfied  until  her  aunt  had  taken  up  the  same  treatment  in  the  way  in  which  she
had  learned.  "I  have,"  she  continued,  "for  many  years  been  suffering  from  an
affection  of  the  abdomen,  and  have  been  trying  remedies  for  a  long  time  past
without  success.  My  physician  said  that  I  had  a  tumor  in  the  uterus,  which,  he
said,  was  growing  slowiy  but  steadily.  An  operation  would  very  soon  be  neces-
sary. I  myself  felt  so  miserable,  that  I  declared  to  the  physician  that  I  could  not
think  of  undergoing  an  operation.  If  I  had  to  die,  I  would  do  this  without  the
operation,  for  I  felt  much  too  weak  for  such.  With  very  little  hope  I  began  your
treatment  just  as  my  niece  showed  me.  The  stool,  which  for  years  had  been  hard
and  irregular,  began  to  be  quite  normal  from  the  second  day  of  the  treatment,
from  this  day  the  evacuation  from  the  bowels  was  more  regular  than  previously.
I  had  also  to  urinate  three  or  four  times  as  frequently  as  before;  in  short,  I  ob-
served how  the  morbid  matter  in  me  was  daily  being  expelled.  My  abdomen  de-
creased in  size  from  week  to  week,  becoming  much  more  normal  in  size.  Every
night  I  perspired,  such  as  had  never  been  the  case  before,  and  from  day  to  day  I
felt  better  and  stronger.  I  was  most  surprised  to  find  during  the  cure,  that  every
day  after  the  friction  bath  there  was  an  excretion  (leucorrhea),  which  I  had
never  had  until  then.  Such  excretions  took  place  once  or  twice  nearly  every  day
for  four  weeks.  Then  suddenly  one  day  a  prolapse  occurred.  The  physician
called  in  stated,  however,  that  this  was  no  prolapse  but  a  uterine  tumor  having
the  form  of  a  coffee  pot  and  weighing  iVj  lbs.  It  had  forced  its  way  through  the
OS  uteri  and  had  grown  unto  the  interior  of  the  uterus  with  two  pedicles.  This
growth  gradually  freed  itself,  and  having  continued  the  friction  sitz-baths  and
the  diet  for  some  time  longer,  I  now  feel  better  than  ever  before."

No.  93. Complete  lameness  through  leg  being  too  short.
Chronic  hip-disease,  Melancholia

Mrs.  H.,  in  a  letter  of  thanks,  writes  as  follows  about  the  former  condition  of
her  daughter:

"My  daughter  Elsa,  aged  4%  years,  was  attacked  by  hip-disease  in  October  1889.
At  first  she  was  treated  allopathically,  but  without  permanent  success;  for  early
in  February  1890,  the  leg  affected  became  shorter  than  the  other;  indeed  the  child
had  not  been  able  to  walk  for  a  long  time.  A  plaster  bandage  was  used  for  three
weeks,  and  an  extension-bed  for  a  month,  but  also  without  success,  whilst  the
child  was  subjected  to  much  pain.  She  was  then  put  into  the  hands  of  Professor
S.  of  Leipzig  to  undergo  a  several  weeks'  course  of  treatment.  She  had  to  lie  al-
ways in  bed  and  be  rubbed  with  different  embrocations.  The  treatment  could  not,
however,  be  strictly  carried  out,  as  the  patient  was  unable  to  lie  quiet  for  weeks
together;  this  treatment  also,  then,  was  without  result.  At  length  I  took  my
daughter  to  the  Leipzig  Hospital,  where  she  was  treated  unsuccessfully  for  three
weeks  longer.  The  hip,  which  until  then  had  always  been  soft,  grew  quite  hard
and  stiff  after  this  treatment.  The  leg  did  not  grow  at  all,  and  the  child  had  been
unable  to  walk  for  9  months.  But  worst  of  all,  my  child,  through  the  treatment
in  the  hospital  had  become  quite  melancholic,  so  that  I  lost  all  hope  of  her  being
cured  at  all.  Before  the  treatment,  she  could  at  least  stand,  but  this  was  now  no
longer  possible.  In  this  condition  I  entrusted  my  Elsa  to  your  care.  I  scrupu-
lously followed  your  instructions,  and  to  my  unspeakable  joy  the  melancholia
vanished  after  the  first  three  friction  sitz-baths,  and  my  daughter  was  again  able


Universal  Ncdiirojxithir  Dircclonj  and  linyrrs'  Guide  '"5

to  stand.  In  three  days,  to  my  extreme  surprise,  she  could  walk  again  and  was
so  much  improved  in  a  fortnight  that  she  could  mount  the  four  flights  of  stairs
from  the  street  up  to  my  flat  without  assistance.  During  this  time  the  hardened
muscles  about  the  hip  again  became  quite  soft,  and  after  four  weeks'  treatment
one  could  distinctly  see  that  the  shortened  leg  had  grown  longer.  Today,  three
months  later,  all  traces  of  the  disease  have  disappeared,  and  both  legs  are  of  the
same  length  and  can  be  used  equally  well."
Leipzig.  (Mrs.)  Minna  H.

No. 94. Rheumatism, Constipation, Hemorrhoids, Typhus, Prolapse

of  the  uterus.  Whooping-cough,  Scarlet-fever
Dear  Sir:

I  came  into  possession  of  the  second  edition  of  your  text-book,  "The  New
Science  of  Healing,"  at  the  end  of  the  summer  of  1891.  The  correctness  of  your
teaching  was  clear  to  me  from  the  first.  Since  that  time,  with  my  wife  and  the
youngest  children  I  have  lived  in  every  respect  according  to  your  system,  and
obtained  such  benefits  that  I  have  for  long  felt  the  obligation  to  write  you  to  ex-
press my  gratitude.

I  was  then  52  years  of  age,  and  as  the  result  of  my  former  manner  of  living — at
times  most  irregular  and  fast — I  suff"ered  from  intense  nervosity  and  also  rheu-
matism. I  was  quite  unfit  for  work  and  often  felt  tired  of  life.  I  took  friction
sitz-baths  and  once  a  week  a  steam-bath;  lived  on  an  unstimulating  diet,  and  slept
with  open  window,  as  my  wife  and  I  still  always  do.  For  over  IM  years  now,  I
have  been  quite  healthy  and  equal  to  my  work,  and  feel  altogether  happier  and
quieter  than  ever  before.  By  nature  inclined  to  be  quick  tempered,  I  feel  myself
now  quite  changed. Conjugal  happiness  and  peace  have  returned  to  our  home.

My  wife  was  suff"ering  severely  at  the  time  from  a  prolapse  of  the  uterus,  which
an  allopathic  physician  had  been  treating  for  a  year  and  a  half  without  success-
She  began,  at  the  same  time  as  I,  to  take  a  friction  sitz-bath  three  times  daih^  and
in  general  followed  pretty  much  my  system  of  living.  The  result  was,  that  on  the
very  next  day  she  was  able  to  properly  evacuate  the  bowels — she  was  a  victim  to
constipation — and  slept  much  better  at  night.  She  was  quite  restored  to  vigor;
in  six  weeks  her  abdominal  complaint  was  cured,  and  her  hemorrhoidal  affection
nearly  so.  Thus  relieved  of  her  disorders,  she  was  delivered  of  a  son  who,  brought
up  according  to  your  principles,  has  grown  to  be  a  healthy,  lively  child,  far  in
advance  of  many  children  of  his  age.  At  the  same  time  he  eats  probably  but  one
third  of  what  other  children  are  compelled  to  swallow.

Of  puerperal  fever,  ulcerated  breasts,  etc.,  my  wife  has  known  nothing.

About  two  years  ago  my  wife  got  typhus, — possibly  in  consequence  of  the  over-
exertion and  much  worry,  about  my  two  elder  sons.  By  carefully  following  your
prescription  she  was  cured  in  about  a  fortnight.

My  sixth  boy,  then  4%  years  old,  caught  scarlet-fever  and  for  three  days  was  ex-
tremely delirious.  Each  time  the  fever  was  high  we  gave  him  a  hip-bath  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour;  and  as  a  rule  before  this  time  had  elapsed,  his  consciousness
was  fully  restored.  During  the  last  very  bad  day,  we  gave  him  five  of  these  hip-
baths, and  the  following  night  two  or  three.  From  the  next  morning,  the  delirium
disappeared,  and  recovery  was  comparatively  rapid.  At  the  commencement  of
the  fever,  we  had  given  the  child  some  steam-baths  in  the  bed,  by  means  of  hot
bottles,  which  brought  out  profuse  perspiration.  Sometime  afterwards  the  boy
caught  whooping-cough;  we  therefore  gave  him  two  hip-baths  daily  each  lasting  a
quarter  of  an  hour.  Here,  too,  the  illness  passed  off  well,  the  patient  being  quite
cured  in  three  or  four  weeks.


476  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Since  then,  also,  by  following  your  teachings,  we  have  cured  many  less  serious
illnesses,  so  that  I  have  recommended  your  method  of  curing  on  every  occasion.

To  have  had  the  above  cases  treated  by  a  medical  man,  would  have  cost  me  in-
numerable guineas  in  fees,  and  the  results  would  have  been  doubtful.  The  follow-
ing of  your  prescription — as  given  in  your  book — has  cost  me  no  money,  but  only
a  little  trouble,  such  as  one  gladly  undergoes  for  the  sake  of  those  dear  to  one.

Your  so  simple  method  of  curing  diseases  and  the  diet  included  in  the  system,
renders  one  not  only  physically,  but  also  morally  healthier.

You  can  make  any  use  you  like  of  the  above,  just  as  you  consider  well  in  the
interests  of  your  method  of  cure,  which  surpasses  every  other  as  yet  formulated.
With  sincere  good  wishes.

Yours  very  faithfully,

Elberfeld.  B.  H.

No.  95. Calculous  disease
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Herewith  I  take  the  liberty  of  acquainting  you  with  a  remarkable  change  which
has  taken  place  in  my  physical  condition.  Perhaps  it  will  not  be  surprising  to
you,  though  I  have  been  much  astonished,  because  I  was  quite  ignorant  of  the  fact
that  this  part  of  my  body  also  was  encumbered  to  such  an  extent  with  foreign
matter.

For  two  mornings  running  I  had  much  difficulty  in  passing  urine,  and  also
further  pain,  temporarily,  behind  above  the  left  hip.  In  the  afternoon  following,
in  urinating  a  small  stone  (more  properly  a  splinter  of  stone)  was  passed,  and  for
several  days  afterwards  a  turbid  fluid  of  the  color  of  the  stone,  also  with  another
little  firm  stone  splinter,  this  time,  however,  without  pain.

My  surprise  was  a  most  happy  one,  since  this  case  convinced  me  still  more  of
the  curative  effect  of  your  treatment.  I  see  here  a  confirmation  of  the  statement
in  your  volume,  regarding  the  renal  calculi  being  dissolved,  and  severe  illnesses
thus  avoided.

I  feel  it  to  be  my  duty  to  communicate  to  you  the  above  facts,  and  beg  to  remain
with  sincere  thanks,

Yours  very  truly,

Bredstedt.  A.

No.  96. General  debility,  Disease  of  the  eye.  Abdominal  disease

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

A  troublesome  abdominal  disorder,  attended  by  nervousness,  from  which  my
wife  had  suff"ered  for  some  14  years,  refused  to  yield  to  the  treatment  of  the
various  physicians  consulted.

In  the  course  of  years,  her  condition  grew  so  much  worse  that  general  debility
set  in,  and  she  could  not  even  perform  the  lightest  work  in  the  household.  The
attendant  weakness  of  the  eyes  also  rendered  it  next  to  impossible  for  her  to  read.
On  March  17th  1884,  my  wife  began  to  take  the  baths  and  follow  your  other  in-
structions; and  I  am  now  able  to  state,  that  the  above  mentioned  disorders  have
been  cured. I  warmly  recommend  this  treatment  to  all  patients  similarly  afl'licted.

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  G.  F.

No.  97. Serious  nervous  disorder
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  cannot  help  writing  to  thank  you  once  more  for  that  which  you  have  done  for
my  life  and  health. Without  your  help  I  should  probably  never  be  here  now  to


Universal  Naliiropdthic  Dircrlonj  (ind  Ihiyrrs'  Guide  477


speak;  for  as  countless  witnesses  know,  I  have  been  consoled  by  the  most  eminent
physicians  and  then  left  to  my  sufTering.  Let  it  then  be  clearly  proclaimed,  that
you  alone  restored  me  to  life  at  a  time  when  I  had  given  up  all  hope.  That  your
simple,  and  therefore  grand,  discovery  may  become  universally  known  for  the
general  good,  is  the  sincere  wish  and  hope  of

Yours  gratefully,
Vienna.  Emma  P.

No.  98. Digestive  troubles,  Sleeplessness

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

With  great  pleasure  I  am  now  able  to  inform  you,  that  my  health,  after  using  the
friction  hip  and  sitz-baths,  in  conjunction  with  the  steam-baths,  for  some  time,
is  greatly  improved.

The  digestive  derangements  from  which  I  suffered  have  been  cured.  I  feel
invigorated,  and  my  spirits  are  also  much  more  cheerful.  I  must  observe,  further,
that  I  now  sleep  very  well,  which  I  could  not  do  before.  With  sincere  thanks,
I  remain,

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  Amalie  F.

No.  99. Chronic  constipation,  Hemorrhoidal  affection,  Gastralgia
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne :

As  I  informed  you  by  my  card  two  days  ago,  I  am  extremely  satisfied  with  the
results  of  your  "anti-drug  treatment."  I  am  extremely  happy  to  be  able  to  inform
you,  that  the  chronic  constipation,  for  which  I  have  tried  all  manner  of  remedies
without  success,  for  the  past  40  years,  after  I  have  followed  the  instructions  con-
tained in  your  letter  has  been  completely  cured.  The  bowels  move  now  regularly
twice  every  day.  Simultaneously,  the  hemorrhoidal  affection,  which  appeared
at  the  same  time  as  the  constipation,  early  in  the  fifties,  improves  daily.

The  gastralgia  (enlargement  of  the  liver)  has  quite  gone  away,  and  even  a  pain
I  had  on  the  right  side  of  the  stomach  has  now  disappeared,  whereas  three  months
ago,  the  least  pressure  on  the  part  caused  me  dreadful  pain.  In  short,  I  feel  the
effects  of  your  new  method  of  curing  disease  every  day,  for  all  the  troubles  from
which  I  have  suffered  for  nearly  40  years,  and  which  homeopathy,  also,  was
powerless  to  cure,  have  steadily  decreased.  I  have  lived  in  accordance  with  your
advice  on  a  perfectly  unstimulating  diet,  and  in  addition  took  3  friction  hip-baths
every  morning.  With  kind  regards.

Yours  faithfully,

Aibling.  F.  C.

No.  WO. Nervousness,  Toothache,  Headache, 'Sleeplessness,  Hoarseness

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  first  heard  of  your  method  in  1887,  and  by  means  of  it  cured  my  severe
nervous  disease.  Since  then  I  have  frequently  had  occasion  of  proving  the  bene-
ficent effect  of  your  curative  means.  During  one  of  the  last  winters  I  was
tormented  by  dreadful  toothache,  caused  by  a  hollow  tooth — the  furthest  back
one  in  the  upper  jaw.  The  inflammation  was  so  severe,  that  the  whole  of  the
right  side  of  my  face  up  to  the  temple  was  swollen,  causing  a  throbbing  pain,
rendering  sleep  impossible.  Friction  sitz-baths  of  short  duration,  several  of  which
I  took  daily,  only  brought  slight  relief. When,  however,  following  your  advice,  I


478  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

took  a  steam-bath  lasting  over  half  an  hour,  and  then  followed  this  by  a  prolonged
friction  sitz-bath,  my  excited  nerves  were  at  once  soothed,  and  the  pain  gradually
decreased.  Within  a  few  hours  the  trouble  was  over.  Of  late,  I  have  used  a
steam-bath  for  the  head  with  the  best  results  for  headaches,  htncinating  pains  in
the  eye,  etc.

It  will  also  interest  you  to  hear  of  another  success,  which  has  followed  the  use
of  your  friction  sitz-baths.  I  had,  as  one  says,  "caught  a  chill,"  and  was  so
hoarse  that  even  to  whisper  caused  me  difficulty.  This  condition  lasted  two  days,
when  on  the  morning  of  the  third,  still  extremely  hoarse,  I  took  a  friction  sitz-
bath  at  8:30  a.  m.  I  found  that  the  bath  proved  exceedingly  beneficial  to  me  in
my  condition,  and  prolonged  it  until  the  water  became  too  warm.  After  having
renewed  the  water  twice  and  having  bathed  altogether  for  2V2  hours,  I  found  that
my  hoarseness  had  almost  entirely  vanished,  so  that  I  could  speak  and  sing  at  the
utmost  pitch  of  my  voice.  This  extraordinarily  satisfactory  result,  which  would
certainly  not  have  been  attained  by  any  other  method,  filled  me  with  the  greatest
astonishment,  and  made  me  all  the  more  sensible  of  the  gratitude  I  owe  to  you  and
your  valuable  system.

As  it  may  be  of  value  for  many  persons  to  know  of  such  cures  as  these,  I
authorize  you  to  make  any  use  you  may  think  fit  of  this  letter. Believe  me  to  be

Yours  faithfully,

Leipzig.  Karl  L.

No.  101. Easy  parturition
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  feel  it  to  be  my  duty,  though  unsolicited,  to  express  to  you  my  thanks  for  the
successful  treatment  you  recommended,  and  which  my  wife  followed  before  the
births  of  our  second  and  third  children.  The  birth  of  our  first  child,  I  may
remark,  was  a  particularly  difficult  one  and  necessitated  the  assistance  of  a
medical  man.  Indeed,  the  physician  cautioned  us  against  having  other  children,
as  my  wife  was  not  of  normal  structure.  Tlxe  last  two  births,  however,  thanks  to
your  method,  were  over  in  2V-2.  and  1  hour,  respectively,  and  without  any  midwife!
The  last  child,  too,  was  heavier  than  the  others.

Your  very  truly,

Dalbke.  .  Paul  K.

No.  102. Neuralgia

Herewith  I  beg  to  tender  my  heartiest  thanks  to  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne  for  the  relief
which  I  have  attained  through  the  employment  of  his  natural  method  of  cure.
By  its  means  I  have  been  freed  from  chronic  and  violent  neuralgia,  my  general
health  being  also  most  favorably  influenced.  I  therefore  most  warmly  recommend
Mr.  Louis  Kuhne's  Hydropathic  Establishment,  24  Flossplatz,  Leipzig,  to  all
suiferers.  •

Leipzig.  (Miss)  E.  P., Artist.

No.  103. Discharge  from  the  ear,  Pain  in  the  ear,  Climatic  fever

Dear  Sir:

In  receipt  of  your  letter  of  advice,  I  am  happy,  after  scarcely  three  weeks'
treatment,  to  be  able  to  report  to  you  my  complete  recovery  from  my  old
chronic  complaints:  discharge  from  the  ear  (otorrhea)^  pain  in  the  ear  (otalgia),
and  tropical  fever.  I  beg  to  ofl"er  you  my  sincere  and  hearty  thanks  for  your
assistance. I  am  extremely  well,  and  am  only  now  undergoing  an  aftertreatment


Universal  Naliiropathic  Directory  and  liin/ers'  (iuide  47!)

in  the  form  of  a  friction  hip-bath  every  morning  for  five  minutes. Again  express-
ing to  you  my  warmest  thanks,  I  remain,

Very  faithfully,
Puerto  Cabello,  Carlos  L.  B.

Venezuela,  South  America.

No.  10^1^. Chronic  gout
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  am  able  to  inform  you  that  I  have  just  cured  a  man,  Paul  K,,  of  chronic  gout

from  which  he  had  suffered  for  25  years. He  had  been  declared  incurable  by  five

physicians; I  cured  him  in  six  weeks  by  means  of  your  system  of  treatment.

Please  have  the  kindness  to  send  me  per  post  a  copy  of  your  book,  "The  New

Science  of  Healing,"  elegant  cloth,  German  edition. I  remain.

Yours  truly,
Heerdt,  Kreis  Neuss.  Franz  S.

No.  105. Hepatic  colic,  Hysterical  crying

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

As  regards  my  health,  I  can  give  you  the  best  report.  I  have  very  often  had
hepatic  colic,  always  lasting  some  days.  A  week  afterwards  I  had  fits  of  hysterical
crying,  from  which  I  have  always  suffered  much.  By  following  your  prescriptions
I  have  now  cured  myself  of  all  these  old  troubles.  The  greatest  fun  I  have  is  with
the  physicians,  who  have  treated  me  so  long  without  success.  When  I  meet  one
of  them,  he  will  always  stop  me  and  ask  what  I  have  done  with  my  diseases,  as  I
have  now  quite  a  slim  figure  and  such  fresh  youthful  complexion.  There  were
over  30  physicians  in  Bielefeld  whom  I  consulted  during  my  20  years'  illness.  All
that  we  could  have  saved  has  been  thrown  away  in  doctors'  fees  and  chemists'
bills.

Yours  faithfully,

Bielefeld.  M.  H.

No.  106. Diphtheria,  Constipation,  Pain  in  the  back.  Irregular
menstruation.  Headache,  Pain  in  the  eyes

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

Last  autumn  my  son  had  an  attack  of  diphtheria,  which  I  have  cured  by  your
sink.  He  wanted  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  illness  to  have  my  son  taken
to  the  hospital,  as  his  condition  was  serious.

I  have  also  used  your  cure  with  the  greatest  success  in  my  own  case.  I  was
suffering  from  severe  constipation,  pain  in  the  back,  irregular  menstruation,  head-
ache, pain  in  the  eyes,  which  all  soon  disappeared.  Even  the  first  bath  had  the
that  chance  put  your  volume  in  my  way.

Yours  faithfully,

Celle.  (Mrs.)  E.  H.

No.  107. Epilepsy,  Convulsive  attacks
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  feel  it  my  obligation  to  express  my  hearty  thanks  to  you  for  the  quick  recovery
of  my  little  child,  aged  10,  from  epilepsy  and  convulsive  attacks  of  the  worst  kind.
After  we  had  been  using  medicine  for  a  long  time,  and  the  doctor  had  at  last  de-


480  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

clared  that  he  could  not  further  assist,  advising  us  to  consult  Professor  — ,  we
heard  of  your  invaluable  method.  Acting  on  your  advice,  we  gave  daily  baths
and  strictly  natural  diet.  To  our  great  satisfaction  the  condition  of  our  child,  ex-
tremely bad  as  it  was,  improved  at  once.  In  a  week  the  child,  bodily  and  mentally
restored,  was  able  again  to  take  up  the  school-lessons.

I  shall  not  fail  to  recommend  your  valued  method  of  cure  wherever  I  can,  and
with  renewed  thanks  beg  to  remain,

Yours  truly,

Schonefeld.  Franz  Anton  B.

No.  108. Inflammation  of  the  spinal-cord.  Nervousness

Dear  Sir:  I ^

After  having  experienced  what  your  method  of  healing  has  worked  upon  my
body,  I  cannot  refrain  from  writing  to  you.

I  am  28  years  of  age  and  was  suffering  from  extreme  nervousness  and  inflam-
mation of  the  spinal-cord,  which  medical  treatment  had  brought  so  far,  that  I
could  neither  sit  nor  walk,  and  was  at  last  declared  by  the  medical  men  to  be
incurable.  After  using  your  system  of  cure,  which  had  been  recommended  to  me,
for  only  twelve  weeks,  I  was  already  well  enough  to  get  about  with  the  aid  of  a
stick,  and  to-day  I  am  in  the  happy  position  of  being  able  to  walk  ^n  hour  or  more
without  any  stick  at  all. I  tender  you  my  best  thanks,  and  more.

Yours  very  truly,
Berksdorf,  near  Zittau.  Gustav  S.

No.  109. Gastric  catarrh. Cancer  of  the  stomach.  Induration  of  the
liver.  Enlargement  of  the  spleen.  Bladder  and  kidney
complaints,  Constipation,  etc.
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  feel  called  upon  to  offer  you  my  sincerest  thanks  for  having,  through  your
system  of  cure,  freed  me  from  a  most  dangerous  illness.  With  the  aid  of  the
hip-bath,  and  appropriate  manner  of  living  which  you  ordered  me,  I  have  got  rid
of  the  complaints  mentioned  below,  which  fact  I  have  much  pleasure,  without
solicitation,  in  recording,  in  order  to  induce  other  sufl'erers  to  trust  their  cases
to  your  method  of  cure.  I  suffered  for  years  from  gastric  catarrh,  which  was
threatening  to  bring  on  cancer  of  the  stomach,  and  caused  me  the  most  dreadful
torture  and  pain.  In  addition  to  this  I  was  troubled  with  induration  of  the  liver,
enlargement  of  the  spleen,  bladder  and  kidney  complaints,  and  complete  suppres-
sion of  the  stool,  etc.  All  the  medicines  used,  all  the  consultations  of  various
specialists  (Professors  at  the  University  Hospital),  were  not  in  the  least  able  to
induce  regular  motion  of  the  bowels,  much  less  to  decrease  my  other  disorders.
Only  since  I  have  adopted  your  system  has  full  vitality  again  entered  into  my
whole  body. With  a  thousand  thanks,

Yours  very  truly,

Tetschen  on  the  Elbe.  W.  A.,  Imperial  Custom-house  Officer.

No.  110. Advanced  consumption
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

After  having  made  some  very  bad  experiences  with  medical  men,  I  bought  your
text-book  "The  New  Science  of  Healing."  My  child,  which  was  suffering  from  ad-
vanced consumption,  had  been  given  up  by  the  physician,  who  declared  that  it  was


Universal  Naturopathic  Direrlorij  and  lUnjers'  Guide  481

incurable.  I  treated  it  exactly  according  to  y(mr  method  including  strict  natural
diet.  It  is  astonishing — the  child  to  the  surprise  of  everyone  has  recovered.  With
kindest  regards,  I  remain,

Yours  sincerely,
Ludwigslust.  (Mrs.)  P.  E.

No.  Hi. Burns
My  dear  Sir:

My  son,  August,  scalded  his  right  hand  with  boiling  water.  It  was  fortunate
that  I  possessed  your  book,  and  was  thus  in  a  position  to  treat  the  scalds  accord-
ing to  your  instructions.  The  result  was  astonishing:  within  a  week  every  burn
was  healed  and  not  a  single  scar  has  remained  from  the  treatment.  I  feel  the
more  thankful  to  you,  because  a  similar  thing  happened  to  me  some  years  ago,
and  not  knowing  anything  of  your  system  then,  I  consulted  a  medical  man.  Com-
pared with  your  method,  his  treatment  was  like  night  to  day.  I  am,  therefore,
happy  to  publicly  award  you  every  acknowledgement. I  am.

Yours  very  truly,

Tengern.  Heinrich  B.

No.  112. Affection  of  the  stomach.  Weakness  of  the  chest.
Pulmonary ccdarrh

Having  been  restored  to  health  by  Mr.  Kuhne's  method  of  treatment,  I  feel
called  upon  to  publicly  express  my  obligation  to  him.

For  16  years  I  suffered  dreadfully  from  an  affection  of  the  stomach,  the  bowels
never  moved  unless  through  a  purgative,  and  during  the  last  4  or  5  years  I  have
been,  so  to  say,  unable  to  urinate.  I  had  also  a  weak  chest  and  suffered  from
pulmonary  catarrh.  I  consulted  numerous  physicians  in  Freiburg,  Bern  and
Geneva,  who  were  unfortunately  unable  to  help  me,  not  even  being  in  a  position
to  bring  me  a  little  relief.  After  having  followed  the  special  instructions  of  Mr.
Kuhne  for  several  weeks,  I  am  again  perfectly  able  to  attend  to  my  business,  and
to  conduct  my  hotel,  correspondence,  book-keeping,  etc.

I  feel  myself  again  thoroughly  well  and  equal  to  my  work  through  following
the  diet  and  other  prescriptions  of  Mr.  Kuhne  and  this  I  am  pleased  to  certify
wholly  unsolicited.

Schwarzseebad,  Canton  Freiburg,  (Switzerland).  E.  W.  S.

No.  113. Running  from  the  ear,  Headache,  Polypus  in  the  ear  and
throat,  Discharge  from  the  auditory  ossicles

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

My  son  had  been  suffering  for  7  years  from  diseases  of  the  ear  and  throat,  all
medicines  proving  useless.  Last  September  my  child  was  troubled  with  dreadful
running  from  the  ear  and  headaches;  wherefore  I  consulted  a  specialist  for  dis-
eases of  the  ear,  nose  and  throat.  He  diagnosed  polypus  in  the  ear  and  nose  and
advised  operation,  which  was  accordingly  at  once  performed.  After  three  weeks
I  had  my  child  examined  again,  and  this  time  the  physician  stated  that  there  was
a  discharge  from  the  auditory  ossicles,  and  that  a  second  operation  was  neces-
sary. I  consulted  a  homeopathic  physician,  but  he  confirmed  the  diagnosis.

Whilst  on  a  journey,  however,  I  happened  to  hear  of  your  establishment,  and  I
therefore  travelled  to  Leipzig  with  my  son.  After  treating  my  child  for  five  weeks
according  to  your  special  instructions,  he  was  quite  cured.  I  therefore  look
upon  it  as  my  duty,  to  send  you  my  heartfelt  thanks. Not  myself  possessing  a


482  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

copy  of  your  book,  "The  New  Science  of  Healing,"  and  wishing,  however,  to  have
it,  I  beg  you  to  kindly  forward  nie  a  copy  of  the  work.  It  is  a  veritable  household
treasure,  and  should  not  fail  in  any  family. I  remain.

Yours  very  truly,
Vollmarshain.  Bruno  S.

No.  iify. Stone  in  the  bladder,  Easy  parturition,  Pulmonary  affection

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

It  affords  me  much  pleasure  to  be  able  to  report  to  you,  that  I  am  going  on  very
well  and  feel  again  much  better.  And  I  can  give  a  like  report  of  other  patients  who
have  made  the  best  experiences  with  your  method,  when  strictly  followed.  The
young  son  of  a  miller,  for  instance,  was  suffering  from  stone  in  the  bladder,  and
the  treatment  of  the  physicians  was  of  no  avail.  At  length  he  followed  your
prescriptions  exactly  and  in  a  short  time  the  stones  dissolved  and  were  expelled
from  the  body  by  passing  with  the  urine.

A  woman,  37  years  of  age,  who  had  already  had  several  difficult  births,  and
never  been  able  to  give  the  children  the  breast,  likewise  adopted  your  treatment.
The  result  was  that  this  time  she  bore  twins,  and  had  a  very  easy  birth,  without
the  attendance  of  a  midwife.  And  whereas  the  woman  had  never  been  able  to
suckle  any  of  her  former  children,  she  had  now  abundant  milk  for  both  babies.

A  youth  suffering  from  pulmonary  disease  is  now  using  your  treatment,  and  his
condition  is  steadily  improving,  although  he  has  been  declared  incurable  by  the
doctors. Your  method  makes  great  progress  here.

Yours  very  truly,

Germania  Costa  de  Serra,  Brazil.  H.  S.

No.  115. Disease  of  the  eye.  Eruption  of  the  skin  of  the  face,  Disease  of
the  throat.  Diphtheria,  Measles,  Scarlet  fever

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

It  is  still  quite  as  difficult  for  me  to-day,  as  ever,  to  find  sufficient  words  to
thank  you  for  what  I  owe  you.  Although  I  was  nearly  always  rosy  cheeked  and
stout,  I  was  frequently  ill.  Even  as  a  little  child  I  suffered  from  a  painful  disease
of  the  eye,  which,  however,  quite  disappeared  as  I  grew  older.  From  that  time,
however,  I  had  a  perpetual  and  troublesome  eruption  of  the  skin,  especially  of  the
face.  Never  a  year  passed  but  what  I  was  seriously  ill.  Every  year  I  suffered
from  disease  of  the  throat,  diphtheria,  measles  or  scarlet-fever,  often  so  seriously
that  my  recovery  was  doubtful.  When  I  now  reflect  how  wretchedly  ill  I  then  was
The  treatment  you  recommended  me  in  your  letter  was  a  radical  one.  My  relations
told  me  after  I  recovered,  that  my  physiognomy  was  quite  another.  It  is  su-
perfluous to  assure  you  of  my  thorough  belief  in  your  system.  I  warmly  recom-
mend your  method  on  every  occasion.  Thanking  you  again  from  the  bottom  of  my
heart,  I  remain.

Yours  very  sincerely,

Oettingen.  Lina  M.

No.  116. Tuberculosed  knee.  Splinters  of  bone

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  really  do  not  know  in  which  manner,  and  with  what  words,  I  can  best  give  you
a  clear  picture  of  my  present  frame  of  mind,  and  thank  you  for  all  the  good
services  you  have  rendered  me.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  483

I  feel  horrified  now,  when  I  think  how  my  tiiberculosed  knee  was  treated  by  the
doctors  for  5  years,  so  that  finally  the  bone  became  splintered,  and  I  had  to  be
operated  upon.  I  am  always  telling  of  it.  Suffice  it  here  to  say,  that  when,  three
months  after  the  operation,  the  physicians  declared  I  was  quite  cured,  I  myself
felt  miserably  ill.  You  had  the  best  proof  of  this,  when  I  came  to  you  for  treat-
ment. The  knee,  in  spite  of  the  bandage  10  yards  long,  which  I  had  worn  for  5
years,  was  swollen  up  again  and  had  broken  open  at  the  place  operated.  After
the  very  first  day  of  your  treatment,  the  bandage  was  no  longer  necessary.  The
knee  assumed  its  normal  size  again  and  the  wound  became  gradually  smaller  until
it  closed.

To-day  I  am  in  the  happy  position  of  seeing  my  leg  healed,  hence  my  sincere
thanks,  and  my  high  respect  for  you.  May  God  reward  you  for  the  good  services
you  have  performed  for  me  and  so  many  others;  and  may  you,  dear  Mr.  Kuhne,
long  be  spared  to  your  family,  to  work  many  years  for  the  good  of  mankind.

"With  many  kind  remembrances,  Believe  me.

Most  sincerely  yours,

Czernowitz,  Bukowina.  Stefan  S., Theological  Student.

No.  117. Spondylitis,  Easy  pregnancy
My  dear  Sir:

The  lady  who  is  now  my  wife  was  suffering  some  time  ago,  as  the  physician
said,  from  spondylitis  (inflammation  of  a  vertebra).  For  over  two  years  she  had
always  to  keep  in  a  reclined  position  and  was  treated  orthopaedically  with  plaster
bandages,  etc.,  but  without  the  disease  becoming  in  any  way  better.  She  was
finally  given  up  by  the  physicians,  who  expected  the  formation  of  an  abscess  or  the
like.  Just  at  this  time  her  attention  was  called  to  your  book;  she  purchased  it,  and
sent  it  to  me  for  my  advice.  I  read  the  volume  through,  and  advised  the  patient  to
make  a  serious  trial  of  your  system.  The  result  was  an  astonishing  one:  the
abscess  expected  by  the  doctors  did  not  make  its  appearance.  On  the  contrary,
the  patient's  general  condition  improved  considerably,  so  that  she  was  soon  able
to  rise  and — to  the  astonishment  of  the  physicians —  walk  without  assistance.  She
was  also  able  before  long  to  discard  the  spine-jacket  she  had  to  wear.  Last  year
the  patient,  given  up  by  the  physicians,  became  my  wife,  and  I  hope  in  these  days
will  present  me  with  a  healthy  child.  Both  of  us,  my  wife  and  I,  are  convinced
that  it  was  your  system  of  curing  diseases  which  saved  her  life.  I  beg,  therefore,  to
be  allowed  to  express  my  heartfelt  thanks  to  you,  both  in  my  own  name  and  in
that  of  my  wife. With  sincere  good  wishes,  I  remain.

Yours  very  faithfully,

Zurich.  M.  von  S.

No.  118. Tuberculosis
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  came  into  possession  of  your  book,  "The  New  Science  of  Healing,"  two  years
ago,  and  am  now  able  to  inform  you  that  I  have  obtained  such  remarkable  results
in  my  illness,  tuberculosis,  that  I  feel  I  owe  you  life-long  thanks.

The  daughter  of  an  inn-keeper  in  this  neighborhood  is  a  cripple,  and  the
medical  men  say  that  an  improvement  in  her  condition  is  impossible.  Neverthe-
less I  am  convinced  that  something  can  be  done.  Will  you  be  good  enough  to  send
me  your  opinion  and  advice? I  am.

Faithfully  yours,
Obersteinach,  Bavaria.  Joseph  H.


484  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide

No.  119. Trachoma
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

For  five  years  I  was  suffering  from  trachoma  {Egyptian  eye  disease),  and  there
was  no  medical  man  who  could  help  me.  I  was  compelled,  therefore,  to  try  your
method,  and  obtained  extraordinarily  good  results.  Within  two  months  my  eyes
were  quite  clear  and  the  disease  has  not  returned.

If  possible,  I  intend  going  to  Leipzig  next  year  in  order  to  visit  you  and  your
far-famed  establishment.

May  I  beg  you  to  send  me  some  30  German  and  30  Hungarian  gratis-leaflets  with
reports  of  cures?  I  wish  to  distribute  them  amongst  my  friends.  Believe  me  to
be,

Very  truly  yours,

Budapest,  Hungary.  Karl  T.

No.  120. Dropsy,  Swollen  legs,  Headaches,  Constipation

Dear  Sir:

I  have  had  your  book  about  the  New  Science  of  Healing  now  for  a  year.  At
my  recommendation  many  friends  have  procured  it,  and  they  all  find  it  very  good
and  practical.  My  wife,  32  years  of  age,  had  suffered  since  childhood  from
constipation  and  headaches  and  had  been  compelled  to  swallow  all  kinds  of
medicines  and  purgatives.  Since  using  your  cure,  however,  all  these  troubles
have  vanished,  even  her  swollen  legs  and  dropsy — as  diagnosed  by  the  physicians
— have  become  well.  I  have  myself  used  your  baths  with  best  success  against
constipation.

Please  send  me  copies  of  your  other  works,  including  the  volume  on  the  Science
of  Facial  Expression  and  a  cookery  book.

It  will  always  be  my  earnest  endeavor  in  the  future,  as  now,  to  spread  the  prin-
ciples of  the  New  Science  of  Healing. I  remain.  Dear  Sir,

Yours  faithfully,

Bolkenhain,  (Silesia).  Karl  K.

No.  121. Hemorrhoidal  affection,  Sleeplessness,  Paroxysms
of  rage.  Constipation
Dear  Sir:

After  having  dispensed  with  the  services  of  my  physicians  who  had  treated  me
for  three  years  without  accomplishing  anything  at  all,  I  commenced  following  the
advice  you had  sent  me  per  letter.

1  took  the  baths  strictly  according  to  your  instructions,  and  also  the  diet.

My  wife  and  children  have  been  astonished,  when  I  have  laughed  sometimes
recently,  for  that  is  something  which  I  have  not  done  for  3  years.  My  bowels  are
now  in  order,  the  piles  and  also  paroxysms  of  rage,  from  which  I  suffered,  are
both  cured;  I  can  also  sleep  well,  whereas  formerly  I  have  always  suffered  from
insomnia.

Permit  me  to  tender  you  my  sincere  thanks,  and  believe  me.  Dear  Mr.  Kuhne,

Yours  most  truly,

St.  Petersburg,  Russia.  H.  W.

No.  122. Liver  disease,  Constipation
Dear  Sir:

Herewith  allow  us  (Mr.  B.  and  myself)  to  offer  you  our  best  thanks  for  what  you
have  done  for  us.  We  were  in  Leipzig  in  July  1893  and  had  such  success  with  your
cure  that  we  always  feel  happy  to  reflect  upon  it.


Universdl  Natnropdlliic  Direclonj  and  Ihujers'  Guide  485

Mr.  B.  was  suffering  severely  from  the  liver  and  all  friends  here  in  Denmark
look  upon  it  as  a  real  miracle  that  it  was  possible  to  cure  him.  I  suffered  from
constipation  and  likewise  was  quickly  cured.

We  have  many  visitors  coming  and  wishing  to  hear  of  your  system  and  books.
Please  send  me  some  of  your  propaganda  leaflets  in  Danish  and  Swedish,  and  I
will  distribute  them  in  Denmark,  Norway,  and  Sweden.  It  is  then  easier  for  me  to
introduce  your  books  and  to  convince  people.

Yours  very  truly,
Mordrupgaard,  Denmark.  (Mrs.)  H.  B.

No.  123. Consumption,  Cough,  Discharge  of  mucus  from  mouth.
Sputum  containing  blood

Dear  Sir:

Overcome  by  my  feelings,  I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my  sincerest  and
serious  illness.

I  was  suffering  from  consumption  and  cough,  discharge  of  mucus  from  the
mouth,  and  of  sputum  containing  blood.  I  had  had  the  disease  for  8  years  in
severe  form.  Neither  domestic  remedies,  nor  doctors,  nor  chemists  served  any
purpose,  on  the  contrary  I  became  worse.  The  disease  was  chronic,  to  an  extent
no  one  imagined;  my  condition  was  in  every  way  deplorable,  and  my  faith  in
medical  men  vanished  entirely.

On  December  4th,  my  attention  was  drawn  to  your  New  Science  of  Healing.
By  following  your  treatment  I  obtained  relief  already  on  the  second  or  third  day;
my  chronic  complaint  became  better  from  week  to  week  and  now,  after  three
months,  is  completely  cured.  I  feel  fresh  and  healthy,  and  only  wish  that  all
other  sufferers  would  try  your  method  that  it  may  prove  a  perpetual  source  of
comfort  to  sick  humanity.  It  alone  is  the  true  means  of  curing  all  diseases.
I  remain,

Yours  very  truly,

Plotzk,  Gouvernement  Bessarabia,  Russia.  Gottfried  M.

(44  years  of  age).

No.  12^. Dropsy,  Pleurisy,  Pulmonary  consumption

Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  am  only  sending  you  these  lines  to  express  my  sincere  thanks  for  the  excellent
health  which  your  method  has  restored  to  me.  I  have  the  greatest  esteem  for
you,  when  I  consider  what  you  have  done  for  me.  You  are  a  true  savior  to
sufferers.

For  two  years  I  had  been  suffering  severely  from  pleurisy  and  had  to  keep  my
bed.  Dropsy  also  made  its  appearance.  The  doctors  tried  to  alleviate  the  trouble,
but  in  vain,  and  I  at  last  came  to  have  a  regular  horror  of  professors  and  medical
men  generally.  Through  your  prescriptions  alone,  I  have  been  cured.  On  the  very
first  day  of  the  treatment,  even,  I  felt  better,  and  the  tumors  on  the  abdomen
dissolved.

For  my  recovered  health,  I  must  again  offer  you  my  warmest  thanks,  Dear  Mr.
Kuhne,  and  beg  to  remain.

Yours  very  sincerely,

Binzikon,  Switzerland.  (Miss)  Ida  S.


486  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide

No.  125. Glandular  swelling.  Toothache,  Eye  disease,  Pharyngeal

catarrh.  Pulmonary  catarrh.  Shortness  of  breath.

Asthma,  Pollutions

The  writer  of  these  lines,  a  missionary  by  profession,  counts  himself  happy  for
having  come  to  know  and  study  your  New  Science  of  Healing.  It  was  the  simple
fact  that  your  book  has  been  translated  into  25  languages  which  drew  my  atten-
tion to  it.  I  am  now  studying  your  Science  of  Facial  Expression  and  other  writ-
ings; and  everywhere  I  go,  I  will  spread  a  knowledge  of  your  method.

I  suffered  severely  from  toothache,  swelling  of  the  glands  on  both  the  right  and
left  sides,  dullness  of  the  eyes,  and  slimed  throat  {pharyngeal  catarrh).  Here  in
Schonau  I  followed  your  written  instructions  as  closely  as  possible  and  the  result
was  most  happy.  I  have  nothing  whatever  against  your  making  use  of  this  fact
in  your  lectures,  or  where  you  may  wish.  I  should,  without  doubt,  have  died  of
consumption  in  a  few  years;  but,  as  it  is,  have  come  upon  the  right  path  in  time.
My  shortness  of  breath,  pulmonary  catarrh  and  asthma  have  now  been  completely
cured  and  likewise  the  pollutions.

With  greatest  respect  and  best  regards, Yours  very  faithfully,

Schonau.  (Rev.)  —  E.

No.  126. Easy  pregnancy  and  birth
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

As  you  told  us,  so  it  has  come  about.  My  wife  was  safely  delivered  of  a  sturdy
boy  on  April  3rd.  She  had  followed  your  system  with  the  greatest  energy  before
the  accouchement,  exactly  in  accordance  with  your  instructions.

During  pregnancy  all  went  very  well.  At  9:30  the  labor  pains  commenced,  and
at  9:45 — that  is,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour — the  child  was  born.  My  family  phy-
sician, who  attended  at  my  request,  had  gone  away  again  just  an  hour  before  the
delivery,  not  expecting  it  for  two  days.  Contrary  to  his  expectations,  the  child
arrived  soon  after  his  departure,  so  I  officiated  myself  as  accoucheur.  After  the
delivery  my  wife  felt  quite  well  immediately;  her  first  thoughts  were  of  you,  Mr.
Kuhne: "That  is  all  just  as  Mr.  Kuhne  predicted,"  were  her  first  words.

Accept  our  sincerest  thanks  for  your  most  excellent  advice.  Your  book  is,  and
will  ever  remain,  a  holy  gospel.

Our  family  doctor,  who  called  later,  said  that  never  in  his  whole  41  years'
practice  (he  is  65  years  of  age)  had  he  seen  anything  like  this  before.  This  case
was  a  triumph  for  your  system  I With  kind  regards  from  both  Mrs.  S.  and  myself,

I  remain, Truly  yours,

Schloss  L.,  Holland.  A.  S., Captain  of  Horse.

No.  127. Rectal  fistula.  Intestinal  ulcer
My  dear  Sir:

I  am  in  receipt  of  your  further  letter  inquiring  as  to  my  condition  after  follow-
ing your  previous  letter  of  exact  instructions.  With  much  pleasure  I  can  inform  you
that  the  rectal  fistula  and  the  intestinal  ulcer  have  been  cured  a  fortnight  ago.
At  first,  I  was  unfortunately  unable  to  follow  your  instructions  exactly;  but  after-
wards carried  out  all  your  excellent  advice.  During  the  second  week  of  January,
I  commenced  to  take  2  or  3  friction  sitz-baths  daily,  but,  on  account  of  the  severe
cold,  at  a  temperature  of  from  66°  to  68°  Fahr.,  I  likewise  followed  out  the  diet
very  precisely,  and  am  now  thoroughly  well.

Wishing  that  your  excellent  volumes  may  obtain  a  large  circle  of  readers,  I  re-
main, with  many  thanks.  Yours  faithfully,

Holte,  near  Copenhagen,  Denmark.  Julia  L.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  fiuyers'  Guide * ^«/

No.  128. Extreme  nervousness,  Onanism

Herewith  I  beg  to  thank  Mr.  Kuhne  for  the  help  which  he  rendered  me,  through
his  system  of  cure,  during  the  severe  illness  of  my  3  year  old  child.  Neither  threats,
nor  punishment  could  prevent  the  condition.  Friction  sitz-baths  and  strict  diet,
however,  cured  my  child  completely  of  nervousness  and  onanism.  With  all  con-
viction, I  recommend  Mr.  Kuhne's  system  everywhere.

Leipzig.  H.  S.

No.  129. Dropsy  of  the  pericardium.  Chronic  asthma

Dear  Sir:

For  more  than  three  years  I  have  suffered  from  dropsy  of  the  pericardium  and
severe  asthma.  I  have  been  in  the  treatment  of  a  number  of  military  and  civil
physicians,  even  of  the  famous  Professor  P.  of  Cracow,  but  all  in  vain.  It  is  through
your  advice  and  your  text-book  alone,  that  I  have  been  cured,  now  6  months  ago,
from  my  severe  and  dangerous  illness.  For  this  reason  I  beg  to  offer  you  my
heartfelt  thanks,  and  remain.

Very  sincerely  yours,

Rzeszow,  Galicia.  M.  A.,  Clerk  in  the  District  Court  Offices.

• No.  130. Articular  rheumatism,  Cardiac  disease.  Uterine  cancer.
Hemorrhoids,  Disturbance  of  the  digestion.  Indigestion,
Pain  in  the  side  and  back
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

As  president  of  the  Kuhne  Society  of  this  town,  having  a  membership  of  over
300,  and  still  more  as  a  hearty  admirer  of  your  marvellous  genius  and  high  talent,
I  feel  myself  called  upon  to  report  to  you  how  your  system  has  made  even  the
dying  healthy,  for  too  often  are  patients  given  up  as  doomed  by  frivolous  and
unthinking  physicians.  One  patient  cured  by  your  system,  was  suffering  in  the
last  stage  of  articular  rheumatism,  which  had  already  gone  to  the  heart.  A  woman
suffering  from  uterine  cancer  likewise  adopted  your  system  of  cure.  She  had  been
treated  already  by  ten  medical  notabilities  without  success.  Amongst  them  was
the  director  of  the  town  hospital  here,  who  commenced  operating,  but  after
having  laid  open  the  abdomen,  feared  to  complete  the  operation,  the  patient  being
extremely  weak.  The  disease  had  gone  so  far  that  all  the  physicians  stated  the
woman  could  not  live  longer  than  3  months  at  the  most.  In  spite  of  this,  she  has
now  lived  6  months,  and  her  incurable  disease  has  vanished.  /  have  followed  your
prescriptions  myself  for  more  than  a  year  and  have  so  much  improved  in  health,
that  I  may  consider  myself  cured.  My  troubles  were  hemorrhoids  and  dis-
turbance of  the  digestion,  which  caused  very  unpleasant  disorders  of  the  stomach,
pains  in  the  front,  side  and  back.  You  can  make  any  use  you  deem  advisable  of
the  foregoing  unsolicited  testimony.

With  best  compliments  and  thanks, I  am, Yours  very  truly,
Buenos-Aires.  Vincent  D.,

President  of  the  "Kuhne  Nature  Cure  Society."

No.  131. Disease  of  the  eye
Dear  Mr.  Kuhne:

I  owe  you  too  many  thanks  to  omit  to  briefly  report  to  you  the  course  of  the
disease  of  the  eye  which  troubled  my  son,  aged  12  years.  After  receiving  your
esteemed  letter  in  reply  to  my  note  asking  for  advice,  I  strictly followed  the


488 ' Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

of  the  baths  my  boy  was  nearly  cured;  in  a  week  more  he  was  quite  well,  and
since  that  date  nothing  more  is  to  be  seen  of  the  disease.  The  lad  is  perfectly
healthy.  What  the  doctors  were  unable  to  accomplish  in  3  years,  you,  Sir,  have
brought  about  in  4  weeks  by  means  of  your  system.  Accept  my  heartiest  thanks.
I  send  you  these  lines  wholly  upon  my  own  initiative;  you  may  make  whatever
use  of  them  you  may  consider  to  be  in  your  interest.

Yours  faithfully,
Remscheid-Hasten.  G.  F.

No.  132. Stricture  of  the  urethra
Dear  Sir:

It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  take  up  my  pen  to  report  to  you  that  your  method  of
treatment  which  I  have  followed  out  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  instructions
you  sent  me  in  your  letter,  from  August  23rd  to  October  1st,  has  brought  me  good
health.

At  the  commencement  of  the  second  week,  the  inflammation  having  gone  down,
the  stricture  disappeared,  and  today  I  find  no  difliculty  in  urinating  with  a  strong
stream,  such  as  I  was  never  able  to  do  before,  even  when  in  ordinary  health.

Pray  accept  then.  Sir,  my  sincere  and  hearty  thanks.  God  bless  you  and  your
excellent  system;  and  may  the  latter  find  its  way  everywhere  over  the  whole  earth!

has  been  suffering  for  5  years  from  deafness,  and  beg  that  you  will  then  kindly
forward  me  a  letter  of  instructions.  I  hope  to  be  able  to  call  upon  you  personally
at  an  early  date. I  remain.

Yours  faithfully,

Altsohl,  Hungary.  .1.  H.,  Manufacturer.

No.  133. Public  acknowledgement  of  thanks

On  my  departure  from  Leipzig,  I  feel  that  I  cannot  neglect,  wholly  unsolicited,
to  publicly  tender  my  thanks  to  Mr.  Louis  Kuhne,  of  24  Flossplatz,  Leipzig,  for
the  remarkable  cure  which  I  have  obtained  by  means  of  his  approved  system.

1  am  66  years  of  age,  and  suffered  for  a  long  time  from  diabetes  mellitus,
about  which  I  consulted  numerous  physicians,  but  without  any  success.  Some
Barmen  friends  then  drew  my  attention  to  Kuhne's  New  Science  of  Healing  with-
out Drugs  and  without  Operations.  I  accordingly  travelled  to  Leipzig  and  con-
scientiously followed  out  all  Mr.  Kuhne's  special  instructions.

After  a  fortnight's  treatment  the  sugar  had  diminished  from  L85%  to  L10%;
and  after  another  week  it  had  altogether  disappeared.  Other  tests,  made  after  4
and  5  weeks'  treatment,  likewise  showed  no  traces  of  sugar.  All  this  was  certified
to,  quite  independently  of  each  other,  by  the  sworn  analysts  to  the  Leipzig  Law
Courts:  Dr.  Rohrig,  Dr.  Eisner,  Dr.  Bach  and  Dr.  Prager.

With  a  good  conscience,  therefore,  I  can  thoroughly  recommend  Kuhne's  sys-
tem of  treatment  to  all  sufferers,  the  more  so  since  I  have  personal  acquaintances
both  here  and  in  Barmen  who  have  been  cured  by  Mr.  Kuhne.

L.  B.,  of  Barmen,

Leipzig,  August  8th,  1898. '  ,  Manufacturer.


The  Science  of
Facial  Expression


B


By  LOUIS  KUHNE


INTRODUCTION

la

nnHE  Science  of  Facial  Expression  is  the  diagnosis  of  the  New  Science
-^  of  Healing.  It  is  only  those  who  have  thoroughly  mastered  the
principles  of  the  latter,  who  will  be  able  to  fully  understand  the  new
method  of  diagnosis.  I  would  therefore  advise  everyone  intending  to
make  a  study  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  to  first  ask  himself
whether  he  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  doctrines  of  the  New  Science
of  Healing  and  whether  he  has  really  grasped  the  principles  on  which
it  is  based.  I  here  give  the  leading  axioms  of  the  New  Science,  a  sound
comprehension  of  which  is  absolutely  necessary.  For  further  particu-
lars, I  would  refer  the  reader  to  my  hand-book  on  the  subject.

1.  There  is  only  one  cause  of  disease,  although  the  disease  may
manifest  itself  in  various  different  forms  and  in  different  degrees
of  severity.  The  particular  part  of  the  body  in  which  the  disease
chances  to  make  its  appearance,  and  the  external  form  in  which  it  ex-
presses itself,  depend  upon  hereditary  influences,  age,  vocation,  abode,
food,  climate,  etc.

2.  Disease  arises  through  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  the  body.
Such  matter  is  first  deposited  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  orifices  of  the
abdomen,  whence  it  is  distributed  to  the  most  various  parts  of  the  body,
especially  to  the  neck  and  head.  This  morbid  matter  changes  the  shape
of  the  body,  and  from  this  change  the  severity  of  the  disease  can  be
observed.  Upon  this  fact  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  is  based.  To
deny  that  foreign  matter  accumulates  in  this  manner,  is  to  dispute  the
truth  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.  But  the  fact  that  the  state  of
the  body  can  really  be  ascertained  from  changes  in  the  form,  is  scarcely
to  be  seriously  contested;  and  this,  indeed,  is  the  soundest  proof  of  the
correctness  of  my  whole  theory  of  disease.

[490]


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  491

3.  There  is  no  disease  without  fever  and  no  fever  without  disease.
The  entrance  of  foreign  matter  into  the  body  and  the  formation  of  de-
posits there,  mark  the  commencement  of  the  struggle  between  the
organism  and  the  morbid  matter;  and  it  is  through  this  internal  activity
or  friction,  that  fever  is  produced.  Everyone  knows  from  experience,
how  the  smallest  particle  of  an  external  foreign  substance  entering  the
body — e.  g.,  a  little  splinter  in  the  finger — immediately  causes  discom-
fort in  the  whole  system.  A  kind  of  fever  is  set  up  and  does  not  abate
until  the  foreign  substance  is  removed.  In  a  similar  manner,  the  foreign
matter  in  the  interior  of  the  body  causes  fever.  At  first  the  fever  is
often  but  slight,  and  runs  its  course  internally  (chronic  fever);  should
sudden  changes  take  place  in  the  body,  however,  or  violent  fermenta-
tion of  the  foreign  matter,  caused  by  change  in  the  weather,  mental  ex-
citement, etc.,  the  fever  may  break  out  with  great  violence.  It  is  always
erroneous  to  speak  of  any  disease  as  being  unaccompanied  by  fever.

After  this  short  epitome  of  the  principles  of  the  New  Science  of  Heal-
ing, I  will  proceed  to  the  question,  "What  is  the  Science  of  Facial  Ex-
pression ?"

It  is  the  science  of  diagnosing  from  the  external  appearance,  the  in-
ternal condition  of  the  body.  From  what  has  been  already  said,  it  will
be  seen  that  what  we  have  to  do  is  neither  more  nor  less  than —

1.  To  observe  how  far  the  body  is  encumbered  with  foreign  matter
and  in  which  parts  the  latter  is  deposited.

2.  To  draw  conclusions  as  to  the  symptoms  resulting  and  to  those
which  must  result  in  the  future.

It  is  not,  however,  the  task  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  to
determine  the  various  forms  of  disease,  furnishing  each  with  a  special
name  after  the  manner  of  so-called  medical  science.  On  the  contrary,
the  object  in  view  is  to  examine  the  state  of  the  system  as  a  whole,  in
order  to  detect  whether  the  organism  is  healthy  or  diseased;  and,  in
the  latter  event,  to  determine  how  far  the  disease  has  progressed  or  has
still  to  progress,  and  what  chance  of  recovery  there  is.

And  it  is  precisely  in  the  possibility  it  presents  to  us  of  ascertaining
the  condition  of  the  entire  body,  and  of  deciding  whether  we  have  a
severe  case  before  us,  or  whether  the  patient  can  be  cured  with  but  little
trouble,  that  the  high  value  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  lies.

In  order  that  we  may  be  in  a  position  to  clearly  judge  of  its  worth,
let  us  first  submit  the  diagnostic  methods  of  other  systems  of  healing  to
a  short  criticism.


492  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

OTHER METHODS OF DIAGNOSIS

Allopathy,  the  medical  system  recognized  by  the  State,  and  the  one
still  generally  dominating,  sets  a  high  value  on  a  minute  diagnosis.  For
this  purpose,  a  thorough  study  is  made  of  anatomy,  principally  by  dis-
secting dead  bodies,  i.  e.,  corpses.  The  allopath  must  know  the  nan\e  of
every  particle  of  the  body,  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  precise
position  of  every  organ,  and  also  understand  how  to  judge  the  internal
organs  from  their  operation.  He  therefore  percusses,  palpates  and  aus-
culates  the  body,  and  from  his  observations  deduces  the  state  of  the
organs.  In  order  to  assure  certainty,  a  large  number  of  most  ingenious
instruments  have  been  devised;  and  indeed  one  must  really  marvel  at
human  inventive  genius  and  technical  skill,  whereby  all  these  delicate
pieces  of  apparatus  have  been  designed  and  constructed.  In  addition
to  the  thermometer,  the  microscope  has  of  late  played  an  important
part;  for  since  bacilli  have  been  regarded  as  the  cause  of  nearly  all  dis-
eases, scientists  are  diligently  on  the  look-out  for  these  little  organisms.

A  detailed  medical  examination  thus  consists  of  a  number  of  separate
observations,  only  incidentally  connected.  It  is  conducted  somewhat
as  follows.  The  physician  first  puts  all  manner  of  questions  to  the  pa-
tient; then  he  looks  at  his  tongue,  feels  his  pulse,  percusses  and  auscu-
lates  chest  and  back,  to  determine  the  condition  of  lungs  and  heart.  Next
the  region  of  the  liver  and  stomach  is  palpated  and  the  genitals  ex-
amined, those  of  females  if  possible  also  internally  by  means  of  a  spec-
ulum. The  temperature  of  the  blood  is  ascertained  by  the  aid  of  a  ther-
mometer. Blood,  saliva,  sputum,  urine  and  faeces  may  be  studied  under
the  microscope  and,  perhaps,  even  particles  of  skin  and  muscles  ex-
amined in  the  same  manner.  This  general  examination  may  be  fol-
lowed by  a  more  detailed  inspection  of  individual  organs,  such  as  the
eye  and  ear,  though  this  is  usually  referred  to  specialists.  And  what  is
the  doctor's  final  pronouncement?  The  patient  is  told  that  this  or  that
organ  is  perfectly  healthy,  another  slightly  affected,  a  third  perhaps  in
a  still  worse  condition.  Any  opinion  as  to  the  state  or  disposition  of  the
body  as  a  whole,  as  to  the  autopathic  vitality,  is  rarely  given.  Or  should,
as  an  exception,  such  an  opinion  be  expressed,  it  will  be  less  the  result
of  the  examination,  than  of  the  general  impression  produced  upon  the
physician  by  the  outward  appearance  of  the  patient,  and  perhaps  also
by  remarks  made  by  the  latter  himself.  For,  the  physician,  like  every-
one else,  the  nurse,  etc.,  who  is  much  occupied  with  the  sick,  in  the
course  of  years  acquires  a  certain  sharpness  of  subjective  perception.

Of  what  value,  then,  is  this  system  of  special  diagnosis?  I  must
decline  to  admit  that  it  has  the  value  generally  attached  to  it.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  unreliable. It  is  only  necessary  to  be  examined


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  (hiide  493

by  a  number  of  physicians,  and  one  will  be  astonished  to  hear  the  differ-
ent conclusions  arrived  at.  Even  the  most  eminent  authorities  frequent-
ly obtain  extremely  contradictory  diagnoses.  If  the  foreign  matter  in  the
system  has  not  accumulated  to  any  very  great  extent  around  some  par-
ticular organ,  the  physician  often  comes  to  the  astounding  conclusion
that  the  patient  is  perfectly  well,  whilst  the  latter,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
himself  feels  thoroughly  unwell  and  near  breaking  down.  This  is  par-
ticularly the  case  with  neuropathic  patients,  who  might  frequently  be
brought  to  desperation  through  such  pronouncements,  when  themselves
knowing  very  well  that  they  are  extremely  ill.  This  uncertainty  attach-
ing to  medical  diagnosis  is  quite  natural,  for  the  orthodox  physician  has
not  yet  learned  the  nature  of  disease.

In  the  second  place,  the  medical  diagnosis  affords  no  basis  for  rational
treatment,  not  even  in  cases  where  it  can  be  made  with  certainty.  It  can
furnish  no  ground  to  go  upon,  because  the  allopath  starts  with  the  as-
sumption that  individual  parts  of  the  body  are  often  affected  inde-

How  useless  and  often  injurious  such  prescriptions  are,  is  shown  by
numerous  proofs  which  I  possess.  I  will  here  give  two  or  three  charac-
teristic examples.

I.  A  Mr.  A.  was  suffering  from  an  extremely  swollen  tongue.  As  this
was  easily  examined,  the  physician  had  no  difficulty  in  diagnosing.  The
treatment  was  confined  to  the  tongue,  the  doctor  regarding  this  as  the
sole  seat  of  the  disease.  The  result,  however,  was  extremely  unsatis-
factory, for  the  unfortunate  patient  became  cdways  worse  and  his  tongue
continued  to  swell,  until  he  could  no  longer  move  it  at  all.  At  this  junc-
ture Mr.  A  was  diagnosed  by  me,  according  to  the  principles  of  the
accompanied  by  complete  success.

II.  In  a  Berlin  family,  a  child  had  been  lying  ill  for  months  and  the
physician,  a  well  known  professor,  for  a  long  time  was  unable  to  decide
what  the  disease  really  was.  Finally,  as  the  result  of  microscopic  ex-
aminations, he  decided  that  the  disease  was  due  to  the  presence  of  a  cer-
tain kind  of  bacillus,  which  is  said  only  to  be  propagated  on  stalks  of
straw.  It  could,  it  is  true,  be  convincingly  proved  that  the  child  had
never  come  in  contact  with  straw  at  all:  but  the  diagnosis  was  there,  and
the  doctor  considered  that  his  task  was  to  exterminate  the  bacilli  in  the
child's  body.  The  result  was  unfortunate,  the  little  patient  growing
worse  and  worse  and  the  bacilli  increasing  simultaneously.  At  this
period,  the  attention  of  the  family  was  called  to  my  system  of  healing.
I  diagnosed  the  child  likewise  and  gave  my  directions  without  troubling
myself  about  the  bacilli.


494  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

The  physician,  who  had  not  been  told  anything  of  my  treatment,  was
perfectly  astonished  when  he  suddenly  discovered  through  the  micros-
cope that  the  bacilli  had  strikingly  decreased  in  number.  He  thereupon
remarked  that  now  and  again  nature  removed  such  bacilli  itself.

III.  A  Mr.  M.  a  strong,  vigorous  man,  had  for  nearly  ten  years  been
incapable  of  work,  and  was  haunted  by  thoughts  of  suicide  to  such  a
degree  that  he  had  to  be  kept  under  constant  observation.  He  had  been
examined  by  a  number  of  physicians,  who,  strange  to  say,  all  agreed  that
the  patient  was  perfectly  well,  but  without  any  change  in  his  condition
taking  place.  He  now  consulted  me.  By  means  of  the  Science  of  Facial
Expression,  I  soon  ascertained  that  he  was  severely  encumbered  with
foreign  matter.  The  cure  which  I  ordered  proved  most  successful,  for
in  a  few  months  Mr.  M.  was  a  changed  man,  cheerful  and  full  of  spirits,
to  whom  a  revolver  could  be  intrusted  without  any  misgiving.

The  orthodox  method  of  diagnosis  is,  therefore,  of  no  value  at  all,  so
far  as  treatment  is  concerned,  based  as  it  is  upon  wholly  false  assump-
tions and  supporting  the  delusion  that  individual  organs  can  in  some
way  become  diseased  independently  of  the  rest  of  the  system.  It  is  this
error  particularly  which  has  led  to  specialism,  that  has,  indeed,  so  much
increased  of  late  as  to  call  forth  the  protest  even  of  many  physicians.  It
may  now  happen  that  a  patient  suffering,  for  instance,  from  a  disease  of
the  eyes,  ears  and  nose  at  the  same  time,  must  be  treated  by  three
specialists  simultaneously.  Should  he  contract  some  internal  disease,  he
is  perhaps  compelled  to  call  in  a  fourth  physician.  The  remarkable
thing  is,  that  physicians  themselves  admit  that  they  have  not  yet  dis-
covered the  nature  of  disease.  And  we  have  seen  the  quarrel  that  has
been  raging  in  their  ranks  recently,  regarding  the  cause  of  many  morbid
symptoms,  such  as  cholera,  etc.  Yet,  anyone  coming  forward  with  an
explanation,  or  proposing  a  new  method  of  cure,  is  at  once  put  under  the
ban.

If  the  allopath  does  meet  with  success  in  any  instance,  it  is  because,
whole  system.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the  success  is  only  apparent,  be-
ing obtained  merely  through  the  suppression  of  some  particular  symp-
toms. Thus,  for  example,  the  mercury  cure  never  really  cures,  but  on
the  contrary  always  causes  a  far  worse  condition;  nevertheless  by  its
means  certain  symptoms  in  sexual  diseases  can  be  repressed.  Woe  to
the  patient  "cured"  by  mercury  treatment!  And  almost  as  bad  in  their
effects  are  morphia,  iodine,  bromine,  quinine,  antipyrine  and  arsenic.
The  subject  is  further  dealt  with  in  my  hand-book— The  New  Science
of  Healing.

In  the  third  place,  the  diagnosis  only  recognizes  the  disease  when  well


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  495

advanced.  It  cannot  perceive  the  commencement  of  the  disease;  nor  is
it  able  with  certainty  to  foresee  the  future  course  of  development.  And
yet  it  is  of  extreme  importance  to  be  in  a  position  to  recognize  the  dis-
ease in  its  first  stages,  and  to  be  able  to  say  at  once  what  course  it  will
follow.  For  there  is  necessarily  always  a  far  greater  chance  of  cure,  if
the  diseased  condition  is  discovered  in  time.

Homoeopathy  has  sprung  from  allopathy,  and  most  of  its  practi-
tioners hold  to  the  orthodox  system  of  diagnosis.  In  fact,  they  specialize
even  more  than  the  allopaths.  There  is  also,  it  is  true,  a  popular  direc-
tion in  Homeopcdhy,  diseases  being  judged  more  from  the  external
symptoms.  In  many  respects,  indeed,  there  is  an  approach  to  the  diag-
nostic method  of  the  New  Science  of  Heeding.  Nevertheless,  homeo-
pathy possesses  no  clear,  definite  system,  and  often  the  treatment  de-
pends merely  upon  what  the  patient  or  his  family  members  can  say  of
the  illness.

As  regards  the  actual  treatment  of  the  patient,  homeopathy  signifies
a  progress,  for  the  snudl  doses  do  not  paralyze  the  body  as  do  larger
ones,  but  rather  have  an  animating  effect.  Unfortunately  there  are  also
homeopathic  physicians  who  administer  pretty  strong  doses  of  poison-
ous drugs.

Magnetopathy  knows  no  diagnosis.  Its  treatment  is  a  uniform  one,  so
that  properly  speaking  its  practitioners  must  teach  the  unity  of  disease.
The  magnetopath  in  treating  a  patient  also  endeavors  to  find  out  the
seat  of  the  disease,  i.  e.,  that  part  of  the  body  which  is  particularly
affected.  But  since  many  persons  are  insusceptible  to  magnetic  in-
fluence, and  others  only  slightly  so,  the  diagnosis  is  as  uncertain  as  the
treatment,  notwithstanding  that  in  many  cases  excellent  results  may  be
obtained.  This  is  to  be  explained  from  the  whole  nature  of  magnetic  in-
fluence, which  is  only  to  be  experienced  where  there  is  a  difference  be-
tween practitioner  and  patient.  The  mcmner  in  which  the  air  in  a  room
and  outside  adjusts  itself  when  there  is  a  difference  of  temperature,
presents  us  with  a  tolerably  accurate  picture  of  the  action  of  magnetism.

When  finally  we  come  to  the  Nature  Cure  System  as  usually  employed,
we  find  that  it  has  no  particular  method  of  diagnosis.  No  doubt  the
hygienic  practitioner  gradually  acquires  a  certain  quickness  of  percep-
tion enabling  him  in  general  to  judge  the  condition  of  a  patient,  but  it  is
only  a  vague,  subjective  feeling  without  any  clear  basis.  Generally  the
practitioner  is  well  content  if  the  patient  has  already  been  diagnosed
by  an  orthodox  physician,  so  that  he  can  be  informed  by  the  patient
himself  what  he  is  supposed  to  be  suffering  from.  If  the  hygienic  prac-
titioner is  himself  a  regularly  qualified  physician,  he  examines  the  pa-
tient according  to  the  allopathic  method. Other  adherents  of  the  Nature


496  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiiycrs'  Guide

Cure  maintain  that  no  diagnosis  is  necessary,  since  they  treat  the  body
as  a  whole  and  not  particular  organs,  unless,  indeed.  Nature  absolutely
demands  it.  They  are  here  correct,  because  they  make  use  of  a  method
of  diagnosis  which  takes  the  whole  body  into  consideration,  and  where-
by the  state  of  health  of  the  complete  system  can  be  ascertained  and  in-
formation gathered  as  to  the  cause  of  the  disease.  Every  hygienic  prac-
titioner must  have  frequently  observed  how  in  some  cases  his  prescrip-
tions have  met  with  immediate  and  positive  success,  whilst  in  another
case  they  meet  with  little  or  none.  He  would,  however,  no  longer  marvel
at  this,  did  he  understand  how  by  means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Ex-
pression to  judge  of  the  condition  of  the  entire  body.

#

We  now  come  to  consider  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  itself.


Vniuerxut  Ndliiropalhir  Dirrctorij  and  Bui/crs'  (Uiide  497


THE  SCIENCE  OF  FACIAL  EXPRESSION


IT  is  a  mistake  to  attempt  to  gather  the  nature  of  a  thing  merely  from
the  name.  The  appellation  "Science  of  Facial  Expression"  only
designates  one  feature  of  the  new  method  of  diagnosis.  This  is
usually  the  case  when  one  attempts  to  find  a  concise  expression  or  title
to  characterize  something,  and  had  I  chosen  some  Latin  or  Greek  word,
nobody  would  ever  have  remarked  it.  The  Science  of  Facial  Expression
concerns  itself  with  the  whole  organism.  But  as  the  face  is  the  part  most
readily  examined,  and  since  here  not  only  all  mental,  but  also  internal
physical  processes  are,  as  it  were,  reflected,  it  is  the  facial  expression
that  must  before  all  be  observed.  Hence  the  name  given  to  the  new
method  of  diagnosis.

As  already  remarked,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  disease  affecting  solely
one  particular  part  of  the  body.  In  every  case  of  illness,  the  entire  sys-
tem suffers.  The  whole  body  changes  in  form  and  color,  but  this  altera-
tion is  only  sufficiently  pronounced  for  clear  observation  at  certain
places.  The  deportment  also  becomes  another,  but  this  change  is  not
noticed  until  the  alteration  is  very  marked.  A  body  which  is  encum-
bered also  performs  its  functions  in  a  different  manner  from  a  healthy
body,  and  hence  the  state  of  health  can  likewise  be  determined  from  the
bodily  activity.  The  Science  of  Facial  Expression  takes  all  these  facts
into  account:  the  form  of  the  body,  the  carriage,  the  color,  the  move-
ments, all  these  are  carefully  noted.  In  order,  however,  that  we  may  be
able  to  clearly  recognize  deviations,  we  must  first  study  the  healthy  man.

The  Healthy  Man

It  is  no  easy  matter  to  depict  a  healthy  human  being,  for  perfect
health  is  rarely  to  be  found  to-day.  Amongst  wild  animals,  health  is  the
rule  and  disease  the  exception,  and  it  is  therefore  easy  to  discover  the
normal  form;  with  civilized  man,  however,  it  is  just  the  reverse.  It  was
only  by  degrees  that  I  succeeded  in  drawing  a  picture  of  a  normal
human  body.  I  first  of  all  inferred  from  the  bodily  functions  what  the
state  of  real  health  must  be.  For  a  healthy  body  must  perform  all  its
functions — and  properly  perform  them — without  trouble,  without  pain
and  without  artificial  stimulants.  First,  come  those  functions  which  are
necessary  for  maintaining  life,  such  as  the  absorption  of  food  and  the


498  Universal  Xaturopalhic  Dirrclory  and  liiii/crs'  Guide

expulsion  of  refuse  material.  The  healthy  man  experiences  a  feeling  of
real  hunger,  \vhich  is  fully  satisfied  by  the  consumption  of  natural  foods.
The  feeling  of  satisfaction  occiu's  before  there  is  any  uncomfortable  sen-
sation of  fulness,  and  the  process  of  digestion  goes  on  so  quietly  that  one
is  not  conscious  of  it.  All  discomfort  after  eating,  the  desire  for  highly
seasoned  foods  and  strong  beverages  is  unnatural  and  indicates  disease.
To  quench  the  thirst,  the  only  desire  should  be  for  water.

The  urine,  the  secretion  of  the  kidneys,  should  cause  no  pain  on  leav-
ing the  body,  nor  be  of  unduly  high  temperature;  it  should  possess  an
amber  color,  and  never  be  colorless,  bloody,  black,  cloudy  nor  floccu-
lent.  Neither  should  there  be  any  gritty  or  sandy  deposit.  The  odor
should  neither  be  sweetish  nor  sour.

The  faeces  of  a  healthy  person  are  of  cylindrical  form,  firm,  but  not
hard.  They  leave  the  body  without  soiling  it.  As  a  rule  they  should  be
brown  in  color,  not  green,  gray  nor  white.  They  should  never  be  watery,
nor  bloody,  nor  contain  worms.  Thin  evacuations  are  always  a  sign  of
disease,  just  as  are  hard,  spherical  blackish  dejections.

The  skin  in  health  should  not  emit  an  unpleasant  smelling  exhalation,
as,  for  instance,  does  the  skin  of  carnivorous  animals,  and  particularly
that  of  carrion  feeders.  The  skin  should  be  moist,  but  not  wet;  it  should
have  a  warm  feeling  and  a  beautiful,  smooth,  elastic  surface.  The  hairy
parts  should  be  well  covered  with  beautiful,  full  hair;  baldness  is  an
indication  of  a  diseased  body.

The  lungs  in  a  healthy  organism  perform  their  functions  without  any
difficulty.  The  air  should  be  inhaled  through  the  nose,  which  is  their
natural  guardian.  The  custom  of  keeping  the  mouth  open,  whether
during  the  day  or  in  sleep,  is  a  proof  of  disease.

In  any  exertion,  the  healthy  body  always  gives  due  warning,  by  a
feeling  of  fatigue,  of  approaching  excess.  This  sense  of  weariness  is  by
no  means  a  painful  one;  it  is  even  pleasant,  causing  us  to  rest  and  finally
sleep.  The  sleep  of  a  person  in  health  is  soft,  quiet  and  uninterrupted.
On  waking,  such  a  person  is  cheerful,  bright  and  contented;  neither
languid  nor  irritable.

Should  a  healthy  person  experience  deep  mental  suffering,  he  wdll  re-
cuperate quickly.  Not  in  vain  has  Nature  given  us  tears,  the  true  alle-
viator of  mental  anguish.

All  these  indications  can  readily  be  observed  with  the  senses,  most  of
them  being  obvious  to  the  eye,  without  the  use  of  any  artificial  appara-
tus.

The  observations  have  all  been  made  on  livimj  persons  and  can  be
confirmed  at  any  time.  To  make  a  corpse  the  subject  of  observation  is
of  no  real  purpose.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ikii/ers'  (iuide  499

Anyone  proving  to  the  possession  of  perfect  health  by  fulfilment  of
the  above  conditions,  must  necessarily  exhibit  a  correct  bodily  form:
his  body  must  be  free  from  all  foreign  matter.

So  far,  I  have  not  succeeded  in  finding  a  single  person  in  perfect
health.  Tolerably  healthy  persons,  however,  I  have  frequently  met,  and
it  is  on  these  I  have  studied  the  normal  bodily  form.

It  is  characteristic  how  the  form  of  a  healthy  person  is  also  that
which  nearest  approaches  to  our  esthetic  ideal.  The  Old  Greek
sculptors  have  furnished  us  with  truly  beautiful  forms,  and  it  is  these
our  modern  artists  take  as  their  model,  and  not  the  well  fed,  obese  men
and  women,  who  to-day  usually  pass  as  being  of  normal  form.

There  are  certain  definite  features  characterizing  the  normal  figure,
as  will  be  seen  from  Figs.  1,  3,  4,  6  and  14,  which  we  will  now  proceed  to

The  Normal  Figure

I.  Form.  The  normal  form  is  one  of  fine  proportion  throughout.  If
we  compare  Figs.  1  and  2,  we  see  at  a  glance  that  the  former  exhibits
a  beautiful  figure,  whilst  the  latter  displays  an  ugly,  mis-shaped  body.  In
Fig.  2,  the  body  is  distended,  and  the  legs  too  short  in  proportion  to  the
trunk.  The  latter  being  abnormally  long,  the  neck  has  almost  disap-
peared.

In  the  normal  figure,  the  head  is  of  moderate  size;  the  neck  is  round
and  neither  too  short,  nor  yet  too  long.  No  prominences  are  to  be
noticed  on  it,  and  in  circumference  it  is  about  equal  to  that  of  the  calf
of  the  leg.  The  chest  is  arched,  the  abdomen  is  not  prominent,  nor  is
the  trunk  prolonged  downwardly.  The  legs  are  strongly  built  and
bowed  neither  inwardly  nor  outwardly.

The  following  characteristics  of  a  normally  healthy  person  have  also
to  be  remarked.  The  forehead  must  be  free  from  wrinkles,  smooth,  and
display  no  adipose  cushion.  The  eyes  must  be  clear  and  free  from  veins.
The  nose  is  in  the  centre  of  the  face,  is  straight  in  form  and  neither  too
full,  nor  yet  too  thin.  The  mouth  is  alwaj^s  closed,  both  during  the  day
and  when  asleep;  the  lips  are  a  beautifully  formed  covering,  and  must
not  be  too  thick.  The  face  itself  is  oval,  not  angular,  and  there  is  a  clear
line  of  demarcation  exactly  below  the  ear.  It  is  this  sharp  division  that
gives  symmetry  and  grace  to  the  human  visage.  Most  people  remark
instinctively  the  beauty  of  such  a  face,  but  are  unable  to  clearly  explain
wherein  the  handsomeness  consists.

The  chin  must  be  rounded,  by  no  means  angular.  The  back  of  the
head  should  be  divided  from  the  neck  by  a  clear  line.

II.  Color.  The  color  of  the  face  should  be  neither  pale  nor* yellow,
nor  yet  unduly  red. Above  all,  it  should  not  present  a  shiny  appearance.


500  Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Ihiijers'  Guide

The  natural  complexion  of  a  European  is  a  pale  pink.  The  face  should
be  fresh  and  animated,  until  old  age.

III.  Mobility.  In  judging  the  condition  of  the  body,  the  mobility  is
also  of  importance.  If  any  natural  movement  is  arrested,  it  is  a  sign  that
the  body  is  not  normal  and  that  foreign  matter  has  accumulated  in  it,
exerting  an  inhibitory  action.  The  movements  of  the  head  especially,
are  of  particular  significance  in  diagnosing  according  to  the  Science  of
Facial  Expression.  There  should  always  be  the  capability  of  turning
the  head  freely  left  and  right.  There  must  be  no  tension  at  the  nape  of
the  neck  when  it  is  lowered.

It  is,  therefore,  according  to  the  form,  color  and  mobility  that  we
judge  the  physical  condition.

m

Encumbrance  of  the  Body

If  the  form  or  color  of  the  bodj-^  is  no  longer  normal,  or  if  the  mobility
is  arrested,  it  is  a  proof  that  the  body  is  encumbered  with  foreign  matter.
This  encumbrance  must  be  caused  by  matter,  for  it  is  only  such  that
alters  the  bodily  shape.  The  question  now  arises:  how  does  this  mat-
ter— which  does  not  belong  to  the  body,  and  must  therefore  be  desig-
nated as  foreign  matter — enter  into  the  human  system?  It  can  only
find  entrance  into  the  body  in  the  same  way  that  any  other  matter  what-
soever is  admitted.

Matter  enters  the  body  through  the  stomach,  the  lungs  and  the  skin.
Through  the  lungs  and  skin,  we  inspire  air,  through  the  mouth  the  body
takes  in  solid  and  liquid  nutriment  and  conducts  it  to  the  stomach.  So
long  as  we  follow  nature,  foreign  matter  cannot  obtain  access  to  the
body;  or,  if  it  accidentally  does,  it  will  soon  be  again  expelled,  for  nature
has  provided  precautionary'  means  for  removal  of  any  injurious  sub-
stances.

Intestines,  kidneys,  skin  and  lungs  in  a  healthy  body  are  continually
at  work,  removing  from  the  system  everything  that  is  of  no  service,  or
no  longer  of  service  to  it.  If,  however,  too  much  foreign  matter  is  in-
troduced into  the  body,  the  system  is  unable  to  deal  with  it,  and  part  of
the  matter  remains  in  the  body.

Most  persons  are  encumbered  with  foreign  matter  even  in  the  pre-
natal state,  often  to  such  an  extent  that  they  are  sickly  from  birth.  A
large  percentage  of  such  children  die  in  youth.

The  first  food  of  man  is  of  great  importance.  If  this  is  natural,  the
body  also  will  develop  in  a  natural  manner.  The  only  natural  food  is
the  mother's  milk.  Unfortunately,  however,  many  infants  cannot  ob-
tain this,  for  often  the  body  of  the  mother  is  so  encumbered,  that  no
milk  is  produced.  A  substitute  has  then  to  be  found,  though  this  can
never  completely  replace  the  milk  of  the  mother. The  best  substitute


Universal  Naliiropdlluc  Dircctonj  <in<l  lUu/crs'  (iuidc  •><>!


during  the  first  months  is  the  unboiled  milk  of  healthy  goats  or  cows.
Of  the  harmful  influence  of  boiled  milk,  and  particularly  of  milk  steri-
lized in  Soxhlet's  apparatus,  striking  proof  is  afforded  by  Figs.  48-50,
which  are  copied  from  the  original  photographs.

Unnatural  food  can  never  be  thoroughly  digested,  and  if  consumed
daily,  the  state  of  affairs  mentioned  above  occurs,  the  system  being  in-
capable of  properly  excreting  the  effete  matter.  At  the  same  time,  the
body  suffers  from  a  deficiency  of  real  nutritive  material.

The  foreign  matter  accumulates  at  first  at  the  exits  of  the  body,  and
may  be  expelled  for  a  certain  length  of  time  by  means  of  small  crises,
such  as  diarrhea,  profuse  perspiration  and  copious  discharges  of  urine.
In  this  manner,  indeed,  even  large  deposits  of  morbid  matter  are  some-
times excreted.  Nevertheless  there  is  generally  some  residue  left,  or
new  matter  is  deposited.  Intense  heat  arises  at  the  parts  where  the
deposits  are,  this  being  the  direct  cause  of  the  diarrhea  and  also  the
reason  of  a  certain  transformation  of  the  foreign  matter.  Fermentation
ensues,  and  gases  are  generated.  These  latter  are  carried  through  the
body  and  are  partly  excreted  by  the  skin,  but  partly  also  deposited  in
solid  form.  It  is  these  deposits  that  form  the  encumbrance  of  the  body.
The  encumbrance  may  be  of  various  kinds,  depending  upon  the  direc-
tion which  the  deposits  have  taken.

If  stomach  and  bowels  are  once  weakened  and  permeated  with  foreign
matter,  then  even  natural,  wholesome  food  can  no  longer  be  properly
digested.  All  such  insufficiently  assimilated  material,  however,  like-
wise becomes  foreign  matter.  If  once  morbid  matter  commences  to
accummulate  in  this  manner,  the  process  proceeds  rapidly,  and  dis-
turbances of  the  system,  as  above  mentioned,  usually  occur  repeatedly.
This  is  the  explanation  of  the  numerous  diseases  of  children,  the  sole
purpose  of  which  is  to  expel  foreign  matter  from  the  body.

Foreign  matter  also  frequently  obtains  access  to  the  body  through
lungs  and  skin,  and  though  such  is  usually  directly  thrown  out  again,  it
may  in  certain  cases  accumulate,  forming  encumbrances.  In  the  event
of  the  digestion  being  good,  the  system  has  sufficient  energy  to  expel  any
foreign  matter  taken  up  by  the  lungs;  with  a  weak  digestion,  however,
this  is  impossible.  By  living  in  impure  air,  we  introduce  foreign  matter
into  the  body,  quite  as  much  as  we  do  by  consuming  unnatural  foods.

Sometimes  the  body  itself  forms  artificial  outlets  for  the  effete  matter,
such  as  open  sores,  hemorrhoids,  fistulae,  sweating  feet,  etc.  In  such
cases  the  rest  of  the  body  may  appear  to  be  healthy,  since  the  encum-
brance does  not  inconvenience.  These  outlets,  however,  only  form
when  the  body  is  already  considerably  encumbered;  for  they  are,  so  to
say,  self-operations  performed  by  the  system  itself,  and  this  only  hap-
pens when  there  is  an  active  exciting  cause.


502  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig.  1. — Xormul  Figure.
Beautiful  proportion  throughout  the  whole  body,  perfect  symmetry,  everywhere
an  esthetic  roundness  of  the  parts. — Head:  normal  size. — Forehead:  smooth,  no
adipose  cushion. — Eyes:  large  and  free. — Nose:  well-formed. — Mouth:  closed. —
Face:  oval,  clear  line  of  demarcation  below  the  ear. — Neck:  rourid,  normal
length. — Chest:  well  developed. — Legs:  straight,  muscular,  clear  line  of  demarca-
tion at  thighs.


Universal  Natiiropalhic  Directory  and  Ihn/ers'  Guide


503


Fig.  2. — Whole  Body  Encumbered.
Figure:  awkward,  clumsy,  bloated. — Head:  too  thick. — Forehead:  depressed,  with
adipose  cushion,  bald  on  top. — Eyes:  half  closed. — Xose:  swollen. — Mouth:  partly
open. — Face:  no  clear  line  of  demarcation. — Xeck:  too  short  and  too  thick;  no
clear  line of  demarcation at nape of  the neck, — Abdomen: over-nourished. —

Legs:  too  short  and  too  thick.


504


Universal  Noturopathic  Directonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


If  the  outlets  are  suddenly  stopped  up,  the  matter  which  would  flow
out  is  deposited  in  some  part  of  the  body.  Here  a  striking  change  soon
takes  place,  the  part  becoming  inflamed,  swollen  or  perhaps  ulcerated.

I  may  here  recite  some  cases  which  have  come  to  my  notice.


Fig.  3. — Normal  Form.

The  patient  in  one  case,  a  man,  had  been  suffering  for  nearly  10  years
from  internal  hemorrhoids.  These  caused  him  great  inconvenience,  and
finally,  owing  to  the  bleeding  increasing,  he  determined  to  try  a  cure.  At
but  without  success. On  the  advice  of  a  well  known  consulting  physi-


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertorij  and  liiiyrrs'  (iaide


505


cian,  he  then  tried  derniatol,  by  means  of  which  the  hemorrhoids  soon
disappeared,  so  that  the  patient  considered  himself  cured.  In  a  few
days,  however,  he  remarked  a  strange  swelling  at  the  throat,  which  he
could  not  help  thinking  was  in  some  way  connected  with  the  sudden
disappearance  of  the  hemorrhoids.  The  swelling  increased  to  such  an
extent,  that  after  some  months  there  was  danger  of  suffocation,  and  the
patient's  condition  was  critical. The  process  which  had  gone  on  was  a


Fig.  fy. — Normal  Form.


quite  natural  one.  The  foreign  matter  no  longer  finding  an  exit  through
the  intestines  after  the  disappearance  of  the  hemorrhoids,  had  now
selected  the  neck  as  a  place  of  deposit.  Had  the  matter  ascended  at  the
back  up  to  the  brain,  aberration  of  the  mind  would  certainly  have  re-
sulted.

The  patient,  following  the  recommendation  of  some  friends,  now  tried
a  friction-bath,  the  danger  of  suffocation  making  him  ready  to  accept
any  advice  offered. The  very  first  bath  afforded  him  much  relief. This


506  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


was  doubtless  because  the  foreign  matter  having  only  just  accumulated
had  not  yet  hardened;  otherwise  the  progress  would  have  been  slower.
A  second  case  was  that  of  a  woman,  aged  about  30,  who  had  been
suffering  for  a  considerable  time  from  diarrhea.  This  indicated  the
self-attempt  of  the  body,  heavily  encumbered,  to  expel  the  foreign  mat-
ter. The  physician  consulted,  cured  the  diarrhea  by  means  of  medi-
cines, and  next  obstinate  constipation  followed.  The  foreign  matter
now  ascended,  and  within  three  weeks  formed  a  large  swelling  on  the
neck,  similar  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  12.  It  at  once  became  apparent  to
the  patient,  that  it  was  the  medical  prescriptions  which  had  caused  this
tumor  and  her  eyes  were  opened  to  the  real  value  of  drugs.

Had  the  swelling  on  the  neck  formed  more  slowly,  instead  of  im-
mediately after  the  suppression  of  the  diarrhea,  the  patient  would  un-
doubtedly have  been  convinced  of  the  beneficial  effect  of  the  medicines
employed.  Unfortunately  most  people  have  no  idea  of  the  harm  which
medicinal  poisons  may,  and  often  actually  do,  cause.

Suppression  of  sweating  of  the  feet,  also  frequently  results  in  swelling
of  the  neck,  sometimes  also  in  encumbrance  of  the  head,  with  accom-
panying intense  nervosity,  and  even  mental  derangement.  Not  seldom
the  foreign  matter  goes  to  the  lungs  and  heart  or  to  other  internal
organs.  In  fact,  it  may  be  asserted  that  the  majority  of  diseases  of  the
internal  organs,  especially  pulmonary  consumption,  are  brought  about

To  such  symptoms  must  be  counted  coughing,  large  quantities  of
foreign  matter  being  expelled  in  the  mucus  expectorated.  If  by  means
of  pectorals,  and  by  undue  warmth  and  the  exclusion  of  fresh  air,  the
cough  is  suppressed,  there  will  simply  be  a  change  for  the  worse  in  the
bodily  condition,  especially  in  that  of  the  lungs.

Foreign  matter  may  also  enter  directly  into  the  blood,  and  then  do
even  more  harm  than  when  it  finds  access  to  the  body  in  the  ordinary
manner.  A  striking  example  is,  for  instance,  the  bite  of  a  snake.  The
venom,  entering  directly  into  the  blood,  acts  extremely  rapidly,  caus-
ing a  kind  of  fermentation  of  the  blood  and  high  fever.  If,  however,
the  same  quantity  of  the  snake-poison  is  introduced  into  the  stomach,
there  will  be  no  great  injury  done,  as  in  the  stomach  it  is  rendered  in-
nocuous, and  is  partly  expelled  through  the  intestines.  The  same  is  the
case  with  the  bites  of  rabid  dogs.

Not  all  foreign  matter,  thus  directly  introduced  into  the  blood,  acts
either  so  rapidly  or  with  such  fatal  effect;  it  is,  however,  always  in-
jurious. If,  through  accidents,  foreign  matter  enters  the  blood  by  way
of  wounds,  it  is  a  lamentable  occurrence  which  we  must  do  our  best  to
combat.  To  purposely  introduce  such  matter  into  the  blood,  however,
is  nothing  less  than  criminal. The  practice  of  vaccination  and  inocula-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directonj  and  Buyers'  Guide  507

tion  is  a  fatal  error,  such  as  history  has  seldom  to  chronicle.  It  is  a  sorry
memorial  that  the  century  of  enlightenment  has  thus  raised  to  itself.  If
mankind  is  not  to  become  totally  diseased,  and  ever  grow  weaker,  it  is
high  time  that  vaccination  was  discontinued.  A  body  in  some  measure
healthy,  will,  it  is  true,  be  able  to  partly  eject  the  poison  again,  usually
at  the  place  of  injection;  the  part  will  swell  and  a  suppurative  focus
forms,  yet  a  certain  amount  of  the  poison  generally  remains  in  the  body.
If,  however,  there  is  but  little  vitality  in  the  system,  the  latter  will
scarcely  be  capable  of  expelling  the  poisonous  matter,  which  will  there-
fore for  the  most  part  remain  in  the  interior  of  the  body.  It  is  just  such
persons  who  are  then  vaccinated  a  second  or  third  time,  the  first  opera-
tion being  regarded  as  "unsuccessful."  In  reality,  the  "success"  is  here
only  too  great,  but  unfortunately  the  reverse  of  beneficial,  since  to  the
foreign  matter  already  in  the  system  a  new  supply  has  now  been  added.

What  Changes  are  Caused  by  the  Presence  of  Foreign
Matter in the Body?

As  already  mentioned,  the  foreign  matter  seeks  out  suitable  places  to
deposit  itself.  Such  deposition  of  matter  starts  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
neighborhood  of  the  exits.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  process  has  even
commenced,  the  morbid  matter  begins  to  make  its  way  to  more  distant
parts,  such  as  the  head  and  limbs.  In  the  absence  of  any  special  cir-
cumstance, this  distributive  process  goes  on  very  slowly.  The  matter
usually  shows  a  tendency  to  travel  to  the  extremity  of  the  body  and  in
doing  so  must  make  its  way  through  the  narrow  passage  formed  by  the
neck,  where  the  deposits  are  most  easily  to  be  seen.  They  appear  first
as  an  enlargement  of  the  part,  then  taking  the  form  as  swellings  or
lumps.  Later  on,  they  wholly  conceal  the  underlying  organs,  and  there
is  desiccation  and  shrivelling  of  the  parts.  An  unskilled  observer  can
here  be  easily  deceived  and  think  that  there  is  no  encumbrance.  Ex-
amination, however,  will  always  show  hard  streaks  causing  the  neck
especially  to  appear  irregular.  In  particular,  the  movement  of  the  head
in  such  a  case  will  be  abnormal.  The  color  will  also  be  unnatural,  being
usually  gray  or  brown  or  unduly  red.

Frequently,  even  the  general  form  is  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  judge
with  tolerable  exactitude  as  to  the  nature  of  the  encumbrance.  In  other
cases,  however,  every  point  must  be  carefulW  observed  before  the  dis-
ease can  be  clearly  pictured.

The  swellings  form  in  the  neck  and  head,  in  the  same  manner  as  in
the  abdomen,  and  increase  in  both  parts  uniformly.  Sometimes,  how-
ever, the  abdominal  deposits  decrease,  whilst  those  at  the  neck  increase;
the  water  treatment,  on  the  other  hand,  causes  the  cervical  deposits  to
decrease,  those  at  the  abdomen  increasing  correspondingly.


508  Universal  Naluvopdlhic  Directory  and  liiiijcrs'  Guide

The  path  which  the  foreign  matter  follows  in  passing  from  the  ab-
domen to  the  head  is  by  no  means  always  the  same.  It  is  probably  de-
pendent upon  the  vitality  of  the  various  organs  which  have  to  be  passed,
and  also  partly  upon  the  position  in  which  the  person  usually  lies  when
sleeping.  Thus  the  foreign  matter  may  predominate  in  front  of  the
body,  or  at  one  side,  or  at  the  back.  We  accordingly  have  three  kinds  of
encumbrances :

1.  Front  Encumbrance,

2.  Side  Encumbrance  and

3.  Back  Encumbrance.

The  side  encumbrance  can,  of  course,  be  either  at  the  right  or  left  side.

Generally  speaking,  we  do  not  find  one  kind  of  encumbrance  alone,
there  being  usually  a  complication  of  such.  For  instance,  there  may  be
front  and  side,  or  side  and  back,  or  sometimes  general  encumbrance  of
the  whole  body.

In  order,  however,  that  the  different  kinds  may  be  clearly  understood,
we  will  first  consider  each  separately.


A, Front  Encumbrance

(Fig.  5,  7,  et  seq.,  36  and  37)

A  front  encumbrance  is  one  which  either  wholly  or  chiefly  concerns
the  front  of  the  body.  Fig.  5,  etc.,  illustrate  this  kind  of  encumbrance.
In  order  that  a  clear  idea  may  be  gained,  I  have  shown  the  normal  form
in  Fig.  6,  and  the  reader  is  recommended  to  carefully  study  the  various
characteristic  differences  by  close  comparison.

In  cases  of  front  encumbrance  the  neck  is  usually  somewhat  enlarged
in  front  (Fig.  7),  and  the  face  too  large  and  full.  Often  the  mouth  alone
protrudes,  all  the  foreign  matter  having  accumulated  here.  A  very
characteristic  feature  is  the  line  of  demarcation  defining  the  face.
Where  there  is  front  encumbrance,  this  line  usually  runs  further  back
than  normally  (Figs.  7  and  8).  If  the  front  encumbrance  is  very  pro-
nounced, the  face  appears  bloated  and  an  adipose  cushion  forms  on  the
forehead.  We  also  find  this  cushion  in  cases  of  back  encumbrance,
however,  so  that  it  is  no  distinctive  sign;  it  merely  signifies  that  the  en-
cumbrance has  penetrated  as  far  as  the  brain.

In  many  cases,  lumps  form  on  the  neck  (Figs.  13  and  38).  This  shows
that  the  encumbrance  is  already  serious,  and  if  the  foreign  matter  dries
up,  with  atrophy  of  the  muscles,  it  may  even  happen  that  the  line  of
demarcation  at  the  jaw  again  appears  normal.  The  lumps  on  the  neck
and  the  unnatural  color  suffice  to  tell  us,  however,  that  there  is  a  large
deposit  of  foreign  matter.


Uniuersal  N(ttui()j)(ilhic  Directory  mid  liiu/rrs'  (iiiidc


aOO


Fig.  5. — Front  Encumbrance.
Head: size normal. — Forehead: wrinkled. — Eyes: normal. — Nose: normal. —
Cheeks:  in  folds. — Mouth:  normal. — Face:  for  the  person's  age  normal;  line  of
demarcation too far back. — Neck: enlarged in front, line of demarcation

at  nape  normal.


Fig.  6. — Normal  Form.


510


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig.  7. — Front  Encumbrunce.  "

Head',  size  normal, — Forehead:  bald  on  top,  no  adipose  cushion. — Eyes:  dull. —
Nose:  well  shaped. — Mouth:  lower  lip  swollen. — Chin:  enlarged. — Face:  line  of
demarcation  far  behind  the  ear;  lower  half  of  face  too  full. — Neck:  much  en-
larged in  front;  line  of  demarcation  at  nape  normal.


Fiy.  8. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

Head: size normal. — Forehead: smooth, no adipose cushion.^ — Eyes: normal. —

Nose:  normal.- — Lips:  too  thick. — Face:  no  line  of  demarcation;  fuller  and  longer

on  right  side  than  on  left. — Neclx:  much  enlarged  in  front;  somewhat  so  at  side;

line  of  demarcation  at  nape  normal.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrclorij  and  lUujrrs'  (niide  511

Where  front  encumbrance  exists,  the  complexion  is  either  pale  or
unduly  red,  and  the  parts  most  encumbered  show  great  tension  and
present  a  shiny  appearance.

The  mobility  of  the  head  is  a  point  of  great  significance.  In  front
encumbrance,  the  head  cannot  be  freely  thrown  back;  on  this  being  at-
tempted, great  tension  will  be  visible  at  the  neck  (Fig.  38).  In  such
cases,  larger  or  smaller  lumps,  not  usually  to  be  observed,  can  now  be
discerned.

Thus  the  whole  face  uniformly,  or  some  parts  in  particular,  may  be
affected  by  the  deposits.  Sometimes  the  encumbrance  is  only  on  one
side,  so  that  half  the  face  is  fuller  or  longer  than  the  other  (Fig.  8) .

The  resnlts  of  the  encumbrance  depend  wholly  upon  its  nature.

Since  in  front  encumbrance  every  portion  of  the  front  of  the  body,
right  down  to  the  legs,  is  affected,  very  different  parts  must  suffer.
Nearly  every  acute  disease  may  occur:  e.  g.,  measles,  scarlet  fever,
diphtheria,  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  The  front  parts  of  the  body  will
here  always  be  the  most  affected,  as,  for  instance,  is  clearly  shown  by
the  eruption  accompanying  diseases  of  children.

Many  so-called  chronic  diseases  also  result  from  front  encumbrance,
especially  diseases  of  the  throat  and  neck,  less  so  those  of  the  face.
Facial  redness  and  eruption,  the  lay-practitioner  and  medical  man  alike
include  amongst  such.  In  the  earlier  stage,  usually  only  the  chin  is
affected.  The  teeth  decay,  in  front  encumbrance  generally  the  lower
ones  first.  The  persons  shown  in  Figs.  5  and  7  evidently  lost  the  lower
teeth  very  prematurely.  Diseases  of  the  nerves  and  eyes  also  some-
times result;  and  when  the  encumbrance  reaches  the  crown  of  the  head,
the  latter  becomes  bald,  the  hair  of  front  part  especially  falling  out.

Where  there  is  solely  front  encumbrance,  mental  disorders  are  im-
possible.

In  spite  of  front  encumbrance,  the  vital  organs  frequently  remain  long
sound,  the  foreign  matter  accumulating  chiefly  in  the  cheeks  and  fore-
head. There  will  then  be  discomfort  caused  in  those  parts,  especially
headaches  and  eruptions,  sometimes  also  erysipelas  of  the  face.  The
patient  will  be  especially  sensitive  to  changes  of  temperature.

As  has  been  already  remarked,  the  deposit  of  matter  may  progress
very  slowly,  so  that  persons  may  sutler  for  many  j'ears  from  some  dis-
ease such  as  mentioned,  without  any  great  trouble  being  experienced,
until  suddenly  parts  become  affected  which  until  now  have  been  but
little  encumbered.

There  is  but  one  cure  for  all  this,  and  that  is,  to  remove  the  cause;  for
it  is  only  on  expulsion  of  the  foreign  matter  that  the  symptoms  of  dis-
ease disappear. This  point  will  be  further  treated  later.


512


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertoii/  (iiul  lUu/rr.s'  (iuidc


Fig.  9. — Front  Encumbrance.

Head: too  large, especially  the  upper  part (indicating  precocity).— Fore/iearf:

adipose  cushion. — Eyes:  somewhat  compressed. — Nose:  normal. — Month:  normal.

— Face: line  of  demarcation  too  far  behind  ear. — Neck: normal (but  there  is

tension  on  head  being  thrown  back) ;  line  of  demarcation  at  nape  normal.


Fig.  10. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

Head: upper part somewhat too large. — Forehead: adipose cushion at top.

Eyes: normal. — Nose: normal. — Mouth: normal. — Face:  line  of  demarcation  ob-
structed  by lumps. — Neck: uneven. — Back  of  head: free.


Universal  Natiiropalhic  Dirrclory  and  Buijcrs (iuidc


513


I  would  only  remark  here  that  front  encumbrance  is  comparatively
easy  to  cure,  and  that  the  diseases  resulting  from  it  are  not  in  general
dangerous.  The  diseases  of  children  and  other  febrile  diseases  caused
by  front  encumbrance  always  belong  to  the  so-called  benign  cases.

By  means  of  hydropathic  treatment,  front  encumbrance  can  often  be
cured  in  a  few  weeks;  causing  many  to  ask  in  astonishment  why  one


Fig.  11. — Front  Encumbrance.
Figure:  proportions  normal. — Head:  irregular,  especially  on  crown. — Forehead:

adipose cushion. — Eyes: closed (blind). — Nose: normal. — Mouth: normal.

Face:  line  of  demarcation  too  far  behind  ear. — Neck: rigid. — Abdomen:  much
too  large. — Eruption on  body caused  by  vaccination.


514  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  lini/ers'  Guide

patient  will  recover  so  rapidly  tlirough  following  my  system  of  cure,
whilst  another  gets  better  but  slowly.

Thus  in  a  space  of  only  a  few  weeks,  I  was  able  to  almost  entirely
cure  a  patient  suffering  for  18  years  from  barber's  itch  (sycosis),  result-
ing from  front  encumbrance.

Naturally,  organs  which  have  been  totally  destroyed,  cannot  be  again
restored.  Lost  teeth,  for  instance,  are  not  to  be  replaced.  But  even  after
years  of  baldness  the  hair  has  often  been  known  to  grow  again.


Fig.  12. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

Head: almost normal. — Forehead: normal. — Eyes: normal. — Nose: normal. —

Mouth: normal. — Face: line of demarcation normal. — Neck: much enlarged,

swollen,  rigid. — The  encumbrance  has  only  advanced  as  far  as  the  neck,  causing

goitre;  the  head  has  remained  almost  entirely  free.


B. Side Encumbrance

(Figs. 8,  15, et seq.)

Side  encumbrance  shows  a  distinct  enlargement  of  the  neck  on  the
side  affected.  Often  all  the  parts  on  this  side  are  broader,  so  that  the
whole  body  appears  unsymmetrical.  This  is  clearly  seen  in  Fig.  17,
where  the  entire  left  side  is  broader  than  the  right.  In  Fig.  16,  we
observe  how  the  whole  of  the  right  side  of  the  face  is  longer  and  broader


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  (iuide


515


Fig.  13. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

Head:  a  little  too  large. — Forehead:  somewhat  cushioned. — Eyes:  compressed.

Nose: normal. — Mouth: somewhat  open. — Face: line  of  demarcation  normal.

Neck:  enlarged;  goitre. — Encumbrance  in  general  as  in  the  mother,  though  some
of  the  foreign  matter  has  already  penetrated  into  the  head.


Fig.  li. — Normal  Form.


516  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

than  the  left.  This  is  also  very  noticeable  in  the  legs,  wherefore  the
head  is  not  in  the  centre-line  of  the  body.  On  the  side  affected,  there  is
no  sharp  line  dividing  leg  and  trunk  at  the  thigh,  where  much  matter
has  been  deposited.  The  head  itself  is  seen  to  be  growing  gradually
one-sided  and  on  the  neck  and  head,  lumps  may  form.  Side  encum-
brance is  clearly  to  be  observed  when  the  head  is  turned,  there  being  al-
ways tension  at  the  part  of  the  neck  affected.  Usually  regular  cords  are
to  be  remarked,  frequently  clearly  indicating  the  direction  the  foreign
matter  has  taken  and  in  which  it  will  continue.

The  consequences  of  side  encumbrance  are  in  general  more  serious
than  those  of  front  encumbrance,  and  are  more  difficult  to  cure.  Tooth-
ache gradually  makes  itself  felt  at  the  affected  side,  the  teeth  having
decayed.  When  there  is  a  complication  of  side  and  front  encumbrance,
deafness  often  results.  In  such  cases,  a  swelling,  running  up  to  the  ear,
is  often  to  be  noticed.  The  eyes,  also,  readily  become  affected  and  gray
or  black  cataract  may  make  its  appearance,  naturally  always  on  the  en-
cumbered side  first.

Should  the  one  half  of  the  head  become  entirely  encumbered,  the  re-
sult will  be  megrim,  i.  e.,  headache  affecting  one  side  only.  Such  head-
aches may  be  experienced  for  years  without  any  apparent  change  for
the  worse,  until  at  length  the  encumbrance  at  the  part  has  become  so
large,  that  the  matter  is  forced  to  travel  to  another  place.

Thus,  a  lady  acquaintance  had  for  15  years  suffered  from  megrim,
without,  of  course,  being  able  to  obtain  any  relief  from  the  orthodox
medical  practitioners.  Her  family  physician  merely  consoled  her  with
the  assurance  that  it  would  pass  over  in  the  course  of  time.  And,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  the  megrim  did  disappear  after  15  years;  blindness,  how-
ever, making  its  appearance  almost  simultaneously.  No  one  ever
imagined  that  there  was  any  common  relation  between  the  megrim  and
loss  of  sight.  There  was  merely  the  regret  that  a  new  misfortune  had
occurred,  after  the  old  trouble  had  been  got  over.  But  the  case  was
very  simple :  the  foreign  matter  had  now  travelled  up  to  the  eye.  The
remarkably  strong  constitution  had  been  able  to  prevent  this  happening
for  all  the  previous  years.

Left-sided  encumbrance  usually  suppresses  the  activity  of  the  skin,
wherefore  it  is  more  serious  than  that  of  the  right  side,  which,  as  a  rule,
is  attended  by  profuse  perspiration  whereby  the  progress  of  the  en-
cumbrance is  stopped.  Sweating  of  the  feet  is  common,  for  instance,
where  there  is  right-sided  encumbrance.

In  the  latter  kind  of  encumbrance,  the  internal  fever  is  therefore
generally  less  pronounced  than  where  the  left  side  is  affected.  If,  how-
ever, for  any  reason  there  is  a  cessation  of  the  sweating  in  cases  of  en-
cumbrance of  the  right  side,  the  condition  at  once  becomes  earnest.


Universal  Natiiropalhic  Dircclorij  and  Ihiijrrs'  Guide


517


Fig.  15. — Side  Encumbrance.

Head: size  normal. — Forehead: normal.^ — Eyes: normal. — Nose: normal. — Face'.

line  of  demarcation  normal. — Neck: thick  cords on either  side; stiff.


Fig.  16. — Side  Encumbrance  (Right  Side).

Head:  size  normal,  bent  towards  the  left. — Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal. —

Nose: normal. — Mouth: normal. — Face: right side too long; no clear line of

demarcation  on  right  side. — Neck:  much  enlarged  on  right  side;  rigid.


518


Universol  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig.  17. — Side  Encumbrance  (Left  Side).
Figure:  one-sided,  left  side  broader  than  right. — Head:  size  normal,  not  situated
in  centre-line  of  body. — Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal. — Nose:  normal. —
Mouth:  normal. — Face:  line  of  demarcation  normal. — Neck:  much  enlarged  on  the
left. — Shoulders:  left  one  broader  than  right. — Body:  broader  left  than  right;  no
line  of  demarcation  at  left  thigh. — Abdomen:  pronounced  seat  of  deposit  on
left.- — Legs:  left  one  thicker  than  right.


Universal  Naluropalliic  Dircrlonj  and  Buyers'  (iuide


519


Fig.  18. — Pronounced  Side  and  Front  Encumbrance.
Head: somewhat too large. — Forehead: cushioned. — Eyes: compressed. — Nose:
normal, — Mouth: distorted. — Face: no clear  line of demarcation. — Chin: en-
larged.— Neck:  almost  disappeared;  thick  cord  with  wart  on  right.


Fig.  19. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.
Head: too  large. — Forehead: cushioned. —  Eyes: compressed. — Nose: somewhat
too  large. — Mouth: open. — Face: line of  demarcation normal. — Neck: as  thick

as  head,  lumpy  deposits.


520


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


C. Back  Encumbrance

(Fig. 20, et seq.)

Of  the  three  kinds  of  cncumhrance,  that  of  the  back  is  the  most
serious.  It  passes  up  the  back,  causing  various  changes  in  shape.  Some-
times the  matter  may  not  ascend  to  the  head,  but  will  remain  in  the
back,  the  result  being  an  enlargement.  Such  swellings  may  commence
in  any  size  and  pass  through  various  stages  from  round  shoulders  to


Fig.  20. — Back  Encumbrance.

Head: somewhat  too  large. — Forehead: cushioned. — Eyes: dull, compressed. —

Nose:  too  thick  in  front. — Mouth:  somewhat  open (not  to  be  seen). — Face:  no

line  of  demarcation. — Neck:  nape  quite  filled  up;  no  line  of  demarcation  here.

Head  cannot  be  turned  either  to  the  right  or  left. — Back:  shoulders  round.


pronounced  hump-back.  But  in  any  case  it  is  always  to  be  regarded  as
fortunate  if  the  matter  does  not  ascend  to  the  head,  since  it  is  here  that
the  most  dangerous  changes  occur.  If,  however,  the  matter  does  finally
reach  the  head,  the  nape  of  the  neck  will  become  enlarged,  and  the  line
of  demarcation  between  the  neck  and  the  back  of  the  head  will  be  ob-
literated. Gradually,  the  space  here  will  be  quite  filled  with  deposited
matter.  (Figs.  20,  24  and  25.)  The  head  will  grow  broader  towards  the
crown,  and  on  the  forehead  an  adipose  cushion  may  make  its  appear-
ance.


Universid  Ndluropdlhic  Dircclory  and  Buijeis (iuidc


i21


The  face  may  also  become  affected,  but  in  such  case  the  matter  will
descend  from  the  crown  of  the  head.

Back  encumbrance  is  nearly  always  accompanied  by  piles,  and  since
the  hips  are  generally  also  affected,  there  is  frequently  a  staggering  gait.

Shoidd  acute  diseases  occur  in  cases  of  back  encumbrance,  they  are
always  of  a  serious  character,  frequently  proving  fatal.  Usually  the
only  way  for  the  patient  to  save  himself  is  by  the  frequent  use  of  cold-
water  baths,  on  my  system,  and  by  inducing  profuse  perspiration.


Fig.  21. — Back  Encumbrance.
Head:  too  large,  bent  forwards. — Forehead:  cushioned. — Eyes:  somewhat  promi-
nent (not  well  to  be seen). — Nose: normal. — Mouth and chin: somewhat en-
larged.— Face:  no  line  of  demarcation. — Neck:  nearly  as  large  as  the  head;  no
line  of  demarcation  at  nape. — Back:  shoulders  round.


Highly  febrile  diseases  generally  occur  only  in  children.  Adults  suf-
fering from  back  encumbrance  rarely  experience  these  crises.  Besides,
adults  are  exposed  to  all  the  other  results  of  back  encumbrance,  which
are  equally  dangerous.  Once  the  head  has  been  attacked,  nervosity
with  its  accompaniments,  such  as  weakness  of  memorj%  absent-minded-
ness, lack  of  energy,  may  follow.  The  mind  may  even  become  com-
pletely disturbed.  Where  there  is  back  encumbrance,  aberration  of  the
mind  is  always  to  be  feared;  and  it  is  here  in  particular  that  we  see  the
value  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  by  means  of  which  the
threatening  danger  may  be  recognized  from  the  verj^  commencements


522  Universal  Naturopathic  Dircdonj  and  lUiycrs'  Gaidc


Persons  afflicted  with  back  encumbrance  are  in  the  first  stages
mentally  active,  though  there  is  always  a  certain  amount  of  restlessness.
Children  will  be  precocious,  but  later  will  not  fulfil  the  hopes  set  in
them:  they  grow  inattentive  and  absent-minded.  Medical  men,  how-
ever, are  unable  to  discover  any  morbid  symptoms.  Adults  who  are
fully  aware  of  their  nervous  condition  are  told  that  their  disease  is


Fig.  22. — Back  and  Side  Encumbrance.
Head: too  large, especially  at  back. — Forehead: cushioned,  too broad. — Eyes:
normal. — Nose: normal. — Mouth: normal. — Face: line  of  demarcation at  nape;

striking  enlargement  at  side.

merely  imaginary.  Indeed,  on  account  of  their  bloated  body  and  flushed
complexion,  such  persons  are  often  considered  as  specimens  of  health.
Encumbrance  of  the  back  leads  to  premature  awakening  of  the  sexual
instinct,  and  drives  children,  as  well  as  youths  and  young  girls,  to  self-
abuse,  the  result  being  early  impotence  and  sterility.  Persons  suffering
from  back  encumbrance  are  almost  without  exception  incapable  of  pro-
creation. If,  of  the  two  persons  having  congress,  only  one  suffers  from
back  encumbrance,  or  if  the  latter  is  not  far  advanced,  children  may  be


Universat  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liin/crs'  (iiiide


r)2:i


Fig.  23. — Back  Encumbrance.

(Portrait  of  the  person  shown  in  Fig.  22  in  youth.)

Head:  size  almost  normal. — Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal. — Nose:  normal. —

Mouth:  normal. — Face:  line  of  demarcation  normal. — Neck:  somewhat  too  thick;

line  of  demarcation  at  nape  alreadj'^  obliterated.


Fig.  2^1. — Back  Encumbrance  (Bust  of  a  Persian).

Head:  size  normal,  but  too  large  at  back. — Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal.—

Nose:  broken  off  the  bust  found. — Mouth: normal. — Face: line  of  demarcation

normal. — Neck:  too  thick;  no  line  of  demarcation  at  nape.


524


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  lUnjcrs'  Guide


begotten,  but  will  be  weakly  and  indeed,  often  not  viable.  A  woman  so
afflicted  is  liable  to  miscarriages  or  premature  births;  if  she  bears
children,  she  cannot  nurse  them.

If  back  encumbrance  with  its  fconsequences  becomes  general  in  any
nation,  it  is  a  sure  sign  that  the  latter  is  degenerating  and  approaching
its  downfall.  It  is  of  extreme  interest  and  importance  to  observe  that
the  busts  of  the  old  Persians  (Fig,  24)  and  Romans  (Fig.  25)  bear  evi-
dence of  the  existence  of  dorsal  encumbrance.  Thus  the  Science  of
Facial  Expression  reveals  to  us  to-day,  the  reason  of  the  downfall  of
these  nations,  despite  their  high  civilization.


Fig.  25. — Back  and  Side  Encumbrance.

(Ancient  Roman  Bust.)

Head: too large, especially at back. — Forehead: somewhat cushioned. — Eyes:

normal. — Mouth: normal. — Face: line  of  demarcation  normal. — Neck: too  thick;

no  line  of  demarcation  at  nape.


People  who  are  afflicted  with  back  encumbrance,  are  intellectually  in-
ferior, and  are  never  suited,  for  instance,  for  conducting  diplomatic
transactions.  For  example,  the  person  shown  in  Fig.  6  is  without  doubt
mentally  superior  to  those  shown  in  Figs.  20  and  21,  even  though  his
general  education  may  have  been  poor.

Back  encumbrance  is  far  more  common  amongst  the  upper  classes
than  amongst  the  poor,  since  it  is  the  former  who  transgress  most  in
regard  to  diet.

It  is  the  duty  of  everyone  suffering  from  back  encumbrance,  to  im-
mediately set  about  its  cure,  for  the  older  one  grows,  the  more  difficult


Universut  Ndtiiropathic  Dircclori]  and  Buyers'  Guide


wi:>


is  the  trouble  to  cope  with.  The  worst  of  this  kind  of  encumbrance  is,
that  the  person  afflicted  gradually  loses  the  energy  necessary  for  its
cure.  As  long  as  the  foreign  matter  is  soft  and  mobile,  elimination  is
comparatively  easy;  once  the  matter  hardens,  however,  and  so  becomes
more  stationary,  much  trouble  and  perseverance  is  necessary  for  its
removal.  Often,  in  fact,  notwithstanding  the  greatest  exertion,  cure  is
then  impossible.


Fig.  26. — General  Encumbrance,  Chiefly  on  Left  Side.
Head:  too  large,  bent  to  one  side. — Forehead:  too  high,  cushioned. — Eyes:  rest-
less.— Nose:  nearly  normal. — Mouth:  somewhat  open. — Face:  no  line  of  demar-
cation (not  well  to  be  seen).^ — Neck:  too  thick,  especially  on  the  left  side.


D. Mixed  Encumbrance

(Figs.  8,  18,  19,  26,  et  seq.)

As  already  remarked,  one  kind  of  encumbrance  seldom  makes  its
appearance  alone.  Usually  two  or  all  kinds  are  found  simultaneously
and  the  results  of  each  kind,  according  to  its  degree,  appear  together.
Very  frequently  there  is  front  and  side  encumbrance  at  the  same  time
(Figs.  8,  10,  18  and  19),  and  as  often,  side  and  back  encumbrance  (Figs.
22  and  25) ;  sometimes,  even,  we  find  front  and  back  encumbrance
simultaneously.

Naturally,  the  most  serious  cases  are  those  of  persons  suffering  from
general  encumbrance  of  various  parts  of  the  body  (Fig.  26  et  seq.,  and
39,  40).  Such  persons  are  nervous,  restless,  discontented  and  whimsical.
Should  they  be  attacked  by  an  acute  disease — and  to  such  they  are


526  Universal  Naturopathic  Direr iorij  and  Bnijers Gaide

particularly  disposed — there  is  always  great  danger.  On  account  of  the
body  being  full  and  overloaded,  they  are  often  considered  to  be  in  first
rate  health;  and  since  external  fever  is  rarely  to  be  observed  in  them,
people  are  astonished  at  their  sudden  death,  and  wonder  how  such  a
"healthy"  person  can  die  so  unexpectedly.

As  long  as  the  body  is  bloated  (Fig.  28),  there  is  generally  hope  of
cure.  The  case  is  worse,  however,  if  there  is  desiccation  and  withering
up  of  the  body.  There  is  then  little  aid  possible,  and  even  with  the  most
careful  treatment  there  is  small  chance  of  recovery.  In  any  case,  it
depends  upon  the  age  and  vitality;  many  persons  have  sufficient
strength  even  here  to  expel  the  foreign  matter,  whilst  those  having  less
vitality  are  rarely  able  to  do  so.


Fig.  27. — General  Encumbrance.

(Back  view  of  the  person  shown  in  Fig.  26.)

We  here  see  especially  the  square  shape  of  the  head,  and  the  astonishing

thickness  of  the  neck.

Disease of the Internal Organs

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  usual  medical  nomenclature.  It  is  therefore  not
concerned  about  giving  every  disease  a  particular  name;  nevertheless,
it  is  able  to  diagnose  in  general,  which  of  the  internal  organs  are  most
attacked.  We  will  now  enter  somewhat  into  detail  as  to  the  symptoms
which  guide  us,  and  the  inferences  to  be  drawn.


Universal  Natiiropulhic  IJircclorij  and  lUu/crs'  (iaide  527

From  what  has  been  already  remarked  in  this  work,  it  will  be  seen
that  of  whatever  kind  the  encumbrance  may  be,  the  organs  of  digestion
are  always  affected.  It  is  in  these  that  disease  commences,  and  in  pro-
portion as  they  become  saturated  with  morbid  matter,  their  functional
capacity  diminishes.  It  may  happen  that  the  person  afflicted  feels
nothing,  as  chronically  morbid  conditions  of  the  internal  organs  seldom
cause  pain.  The  digestive  organs  should  always  perform  their  work
in  such  manner,  that  we  are  unconscious  of  their  presence. This,  how-


Fig'.  28. — General  Encumbrance.

Head: too large. — Forehead: cushioned. — Eyes: normal. — Nose: too thin. —

Mouth: somewhat  open. — Face: line  of  demarcation  totally  obliterated. — Xeck:

enlarged  all  around,  rigid;  no  line  of  demarcation  at  nape.

ever,  is  rarely  the  case  with  anj'one,  or  at  any  rate  only  with  people  who
spend  most  of  their  time  in  the  open  air.  Most  people  are  subject  to
slight  discomforts  arising  from  stomach  or  intestines,  and  they  consider
themselves  fortunate  if  they  do  not  sufTer  any  great  pain  in  these  parts.
Naturally,  it  is  worst  in  cases  where  the  foreign  matter  has  dried  up,
in  which  event  we  find  the  digestive  organs  becoming  gangrenous;  con-
stipation, or  it  may  be  diarrhea,  perhaps,  resulting.  Both  these  condi-
tions are  caused  by  internal  heat.  Constipation  results  upon  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  intestines  becoming  drj^; the  faeces  cannot  then  be


528


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  (tnd  Binjcrs Guide


Fig.  29. — General  Encumbrance.
Head: too large. — Forehead: shiny. — Eyes: compressed. — Nose: somewhat too
broad. — Mouth:  somewhat  open. — Face:  square,  no  line  of  demarcation  (not  to  be
seen). — Neck:  too  thick,  rigid;  no  line  of  demarcation  at  nape  (not  to  be  seen).


Fig.  30. — General  Encumbrance.

Head: too  large. — Forehead: almost normal. — Eyes: restless. — Nose: normal. —

Mouth:  somewhat  open. — Face:  deformed,  broader  below  than  above;  no  line  of

demarcation (not  to  be  seen). — Neck: too thick.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


)29


Fig.  31. — General  Encumbrance.

(Back  view  of  the  person  shown  in  Fig.  30).

The  immense  swelling  behind  the  ears  can  here  be  seen,  and  the  rigid  and

enlarged  neck.


^^


Fig.  32. — General  Encumbrance.
Head: abnormal, much too wide above. — Forehead: depressed. — Eyes: com-
pressed.— Nose:  no.rmal. — Mouth: normal. — Face: pale. — Neck: rigid,  somewhat

too  thick.


530


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig.  33. — General  Encumbrance.
Head: too large, too wide above, too narrow below. — Forehead: depressed.
Eyes: compressed. — Nose: normal. — Mouth: normal. — Face: pale, distorted.

Neck:  too  thick,  rigid.


Fig.  34. — General  Encumbrance.

Figure:  abnormal,  extremely  sloping  shoulders. — Head:  angular,  back  too  high. —

Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal.— A'ose :  normal. — Mouth:  n,ormal. — Face:  line

of  demarcation  normal. — Neck:  too  thick,  no  line  of  demarcation  at  nape.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/crs'  (inide  531

ejected,  lose  their  moisture  and  form  a  hard  mass.  Diarriiea  occurs
when  the  intestines  still  possess  suflicient  energy  to  expel  the  faecel  mat-
ter remaining  in  them;  the  latter,  however,  is  ejected  before  it  has  as-
sumed the  proper  form.  In  either  case  the  food  is  not  properly  assimi-
lated, and  whilst  being  but  inadequately  nourished,  the  system  is  re-
ceiving a  constant  supply  of  foreign  matter.  The  result  is  poverty  of
blood  and  consumption  of  the  entire  body.  The  symptoms  of  consump-
tion are increasing weakness and emaciation, despite the usual


Fig.  35. — Back  EncumO ranee.
Head:  normal. — Neck:  in  front  normal,  behind  somewhat  too  thick. — Back:  with
a  regular  pouch  of  morbid  matter;  this  is  the  reason  why  the  head  is  but  little

encumbered.

"nourishing"  diet  recommended  in  such  cases.  This  is  a  clear  proof  that
the  functional  condition  of  the  digestive  organs  is  of  more  importance
than  the  diet  itself.  Thus  disturbances  of  the  digestion  may  be  inferred
at  once,  no  matter  of  what  kind  the  encumbrance  is.  In  cases  of  en-
cumbrance of  the  left  side,  it  may  be  assumed  that  it  is  those  parts  of
the  digestive  apparatus  lying  to  the  left,  which  are  most  affected,  and
that  pressing  sensations  or  pains  will  be  experienced  there,  either  inter-
mittently or  continuall5\  Where  the  encumbrance  is  on  the  right  side,
on  the  other  hand,  the  troubles  will  mainly  be  felt  there.  In  back  en-
cumbrance, it  is  principally  the  back  parts  of  the  intestines  which  suffer.


532  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

and,  as  already  stated,  hemorrhoids  are  common.  In  front  encumbrance,
the  digestive  organs  also  are  less  affected  than  in  other  kinds  of  encum-
brance. The  trouble  itself  may  be  just  as  great,  that  is,  there  may  be  the
same  pains  and  discomfort  caused,  but  the  nutrition  will  not  suffer  so
much  and  cure  is  easy  by  means  of  curative  crises,  or  my  system  of
baths  and  careful  living.


Fig.  36. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

(Scrofulous Child)

Head:  too  large. — Forehead:  cushioned. — Eyes:  compressed. — Nose:  too  thick. —

Mouth:  open. — Face:  nearly  square; no  line  of  demarcation. — Neck:  too  short

and  too  thick.


Fig.  37. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

(Scrofulous  Child).

Head:  too  large. — Forehead:  cushioned. — Eyes:  almost  normal. — Nose:  too  thick.

— Mouth:  open. — Face:  nearly  square;  no  line  of  demarcation. — Neck:  too  short

and  too  thick.


IJniversat  Naluropalhic  Directory  and  Ihn/ers'  Guide


533


One  of  the  digestive  organs  is  the  liver,  which  lies  to  the  right,  and
which  in  encumbrance  of  this  side  of  the  body  is  nearly  always  affected.
The  complexion  then  assumes  a  yellow  hue,  the  liver  being  unable  to
secrete  the  bile  from  the  blood.  Encumbrance  of  the  right  side,  when
at  the  same  time  the  skin  is  yellowish,  in  general  indicates  disease  of  the
liver. A  characteristic  symptom  of  disorders  of  the  liver,  as  indeed  of


Fig.  38. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

(Consumptive).

Head:  size  almost  normal,  below  too  broad. — Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal.

— Nose: swollen; chronic  inflammation. — Mouth: open. — Face: square; no  line

of demarcation. — Neck: covered with lumps; rigid.


Fig.  39. — General  Encumbrance.

(Consumptive).

Head: size normal. — Forehead: normal. — Eyes: somewhat compressed, dull. —

Nose: somewhat too thick. — Mouth: open. — Face: square, bloated; no line of

demarcation (not  to  be  seen).


534  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

encumbrance  of  the  right  side  in  general,  is  profuse  perspiration.  All
persons  so  encumbered,  perspire  readily,  which  is  much  to  their  ad-
vantage. Frequently,  they  sufifer  from  troublesome  sweating  of  the
feet,  which,  unpleasant  as  it  may  be,  is  for  such  persons  exceedingly
beneficial,  as  long  as  there  is  foreign  matter  to  be  expelled.  When  this
matter  has  all  been  ejected,  the  sweating  ceases  of  itself,  its  disappear-
ance thus  being  accompanied  by  no  danger.  If  it  is  artificially  sup-
pressed by  drugs,  on  the  other  hand,  the  results  may  be  serious,  as  the
foreign  matter,  which  is  carried  off  in  the  perspiration,  is  then  de-
posited, and  the  place  chosen  may  be  in  some  vital  organ.

The  kidneys  likewise  belong  to  the  organs  of  digestion,  and  are  liable
to  disease  in  all  cases  of  encumbrance  of  the  body.  Their  condition  is
most  readily  ascertained  from  their  secretion,  urine.  Their  con-
dition becomes  critical  in  cases  of  encumbrance  of  the  back  and  also
of  the  left  side,  since  here  the  perspiration  is  inadequate.  Soft,  watery
sacs  or  pouches  then  form  below  the  ej'^es — a  sure  sign  of  the  presence  of
disease  of  the  kidneys.

If  the  digestive  apparatus  is  very  much  encumbered,  the  sexual
organs,  especially  in  the  case  of  women,  also  become  involved.  Usually,
however,  they  only  become  affected  after  a  considerable  time  and  where
the  encumbrance  is  severe.  This  is  evidently  a  provision  of  Nature,  so
that  propagation  may  not  be  so  quickly  influenced.  In  women,  diseases
of  the  sexual  organs  may  arise  in  two  ways:  through  severe  encumb-
rance of  the  intestinal  canal,  the  uterus  may  be  depressed  or  forced
aside,  causing  what  is  known  as  uterine  flexions;  or  the  sexual  parts
themselves  may  become  encumbered.  The  latter  condition,  however,  is
only  found  in  encumbrance  of  the  back.  This  kind  of  encumbrance  in
the  case  of  women  is  the  cause  of  sterility,  troubles  in  pregnancy,  and
difficult  parturition.  The  secretion  of  milk  may  also  be  stopped  or  de-
creased, according  to  the  degree  of  the  encumbrance.  As  already
stated,  dorsal  encumbrance  interferes  with  the  propagation  of  the
species.

If  the  encumbrance  in  the  upper  or  lower  parts  of  the  body  increases,
and  there  is  not  sufficient  sweating  to  remove  it,  rheumatism  is  probable.
This  is  particularly  so  where  the  encumbrance  is  on  the  left  side,  as  the
body  in  such  cases  does  not  perspire  freely.  Thus,  if  there  is  encumb-
rance of  the  left  side,  we  have  always  to  expect  rheumatism.  But  this
will  only  be,  when  the  degree  of  encumbrance  is  very  considerable;  for
it  is  not  until  the  whole  body  is  permeated  with  foreign  matter  to  the
very  extremities,  that  those  painful  symptoms  appear,  which  are  known
as  rheumatism.  This  occurs  usually  when  there  is  a  sudden  fall  in  the
temperature.  The  cold  causes  sudden  contraction,  and  the  foreign  mat-
ter is  consequently  forced  back  and  accumulates  about  the  joints,  giving


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  o35

rise  to  much  pain.  Such  rheumatic  pains  arc  thus  always  beyond  the
joint,  never  within  it.  If  the  pores  are  opened  by  a  local  steam-bath  at
the  part  affected,  and  the  deposits  thus  rendered  mobile,  the  pain  will
disappear,  the  morbid  matter  being  partly  expelled.

Should  the  matter  not  be  expelled,  however,  it  will  gradually  harden,
and  we  have  the  state  known  as  gout,  which  is  solely  the  result  of  un-
cured  rheumatism.  It  results  also  in  cases  where  the  rheumatism  has
been  removed  by  treatment  with  dry  heat.  This  is  no  true  cure,  it  is
merely  a  suppression  of  the  diseased  condition.  Gout  is  naturally  more
difficult  to  cure  than  rheumatism.  Like  the  latter,  it  implies  encumb-
rance of  the  left  side.  Indeed,  whenever  we  find  left-sided  encumb-
rance, we  may  safely  predict  rheumatism  and  gout.  The  most  danger-
ous cases  are  those  in  which  there  is  also  back  encumbrance  and  kidney
disease;  for  the  kidneys  cannot  then  perform  their  function  properly,
wherefore  a  large  quantity  of  matter  remains  in  the  body  which  would
otherwise  have  been  expelled.

In  left-sided  encumbrance  the  heart  is  also  usually  attacked,  particu-
larly where  there  is  a  complication  with  front  encumbrance.

Amongst  the  most  dreadful  of  all  diseases  are  those  of  the  lungs.
When  the  patient  feels  that  the  lungs  are  affected,  and  when  a  pul-
monary affection  is  diagnosed  by  the  usual  method  of  medical  men,  the
body  has  already  been  severely  attacked.  By  means  of  the  Science  of
Facial  Expression,  however,  the  disease  is  diagnosed  much  earlier,  and
if  the  proper  treatment  is  adopted  in  time,  it  may  be  cured  quite  as
easily  as  other  forms  of  disease.  As  will  be  clear  from  what  has  already
been  explained,  the  lungs  are  never  attacked  alone;  the  whole  body
must  first  be  permeated  with  morbid  matter  before  the  lungs  become
appreciably  affected.  Even  impure  air,  as  has  been  before  remarked,
cannot  attack  the  lungs,  unless  the  interior  of  the  body  has  been  en-
cumbered with  foreign  matter.  It  is  probable  that  pulmonary  affections
arise  generally  as  the  result  of  the  medical  treatment  of  some  other  dis-
eased condition,  more  especially  after  fever  has  been  suppressed  by
drugs.  As  long  as  doctors  fail  to  recognize  the  character  of  fever,  so
long  this  false  system  of  treatment  will  continue,  yielding  its  evil  fruits,
one  of  the  most  common  of  which  is  disease  of  the  lungs.

Foreign  matter  deposits  itself  in  the  lungs  from  above,  only  descend-
ing from  the  head  and  shoulders  when  these  have  become  heavily  en-
cumbered. Sometimes  the  head  remains  free  and  the  encumbrance
commences  directly  from  the  shoulders  and  neck  (Fig.  38) .  The  morbid
matter  thus  travels  first  from  below  upwards,  and  then  again  from
above  downwards,  towards  the  internal  organs.  As  the  matter  descends,
it  is  the  apexes  of  the  lungs  that  are  usually  attacked  first.

Persons  developing  consumption,  it  will  usually  be  found,  were  in


536  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


youth  full  and  stout.  One  would  have  been  able  to  remark  even  then
considerable  pressure  upwards,  and  lumpy  formations  in  the  abdomen.
The  face  was  flushed  and  shiny,  and  gradually  assumed  a  square  shape
(Figs.  37,  38  and  39).  Later  on  the  mouth  is  no  longer  kept  closed,
especially  not  in  sleep.  At  first  this  is  scarcely  to  be  observed,  but
gradually  the  amount  the  lips  are  kept  apart  increases.  The  nose  now
becomes  somewhat  inflamed  internally,  and  chronic  nasal  and  bronchial
catarrh  makes  its  appearance.  The  inside  of  the  nose  may  even  become
black,  showing  an  advanced  stage  of  disease.  As  long  as  the  body  is
stout,  the  nose  will  be  enlarged;  it  will  then  commence  to  become  thin-
ner, especially  at  the  bridge.  The  condition  is  now  getting  critical.  In
many  cases  the  head  is  but  little  afl'ected,  the  morbid  matter  being  de-
posited in  the  neck;  the  latter  will  then  increase  in  length  and  the
shoulders  sink.

I  repeat,  therefore,  that  a  person  having  a  predisposition  to  pul-
monai-y  affections,  is  usually  at  first  bloated,  showing  pressure  upwards.
And  it  is  now  already  time  to  commence  to  combat  the  incipient  dis-
ease, particularly  in  the  case  of  children.  All  children  with  large  heads
(Figs.  37,  38,  48  and  49),  that  is,  all  scrofulous  children,  have  the  germs
of  consumption  in  them.  These  may  be  inherited  from  encumbered
parents,  or  may  result  from  wrong  feeding,  or  even  from  treatment
with  drugs  during  the  first  months  or  first  years  of  life.

The  body,  as  a  rule,  endeavors  to  expel  the  foreign  matter,  and  as  a  re-
sult there  are  often  colds  and  coughs.  If  these  occur  very  often,  or  last
very  long,  consumption  is  always  to  be  suspected.  In  adults  also  the
system  attempts  to  expel  the  foreign  matter  in  this  way.  In  frontal  en-
cumbrance, it  is  often  successful  for  a  long  time,  so  that  persons  suffer-
ing from  this  kind  of  encumbrance,  even  though  consumptive,  may  at-
tain old  age.  But  where  the  encumbrance  is  lateral,  and  especially
dorsal,  the  vitality  rapidly  becomes  too  low  to  cause  and  withstand  such
curative  crises.  The  system  may  make  the  attempt  to  expel  the  matter
by  abscesses,  ulcers  and  boils,  and  sometimes  so-called  carbuncles  form
on  the  back  and  chest;  these  if  properly  treated,  will  ease  the  body,  a
large  amount  of  morbid  matter  being  ejected  from  the  organism  in  the
form  of  pus.  In  persons  of  low  vitality,  however,  the  foreign  matter
contracts,  forming  nodules,  and  it  is  these  that  make  up  the  so-called
tubercles  of  the  lungs.  These  latter,  therefore,  are  nothing  more  than
abscesses  which  have  not  become  ripe.  They  only  arise  where  the
vitality  is  low.

Such  tumors  cause  no  pain,  so  that  the  patient  as  a  rule  has  no  idea
how  serious  his  condition  is.  The  decrease  in  the  bodily  powers  may
be  remarked,  but  as  no  physical  pain  is  caused  thereby,  no  one  imagines
how  rapidly  death  is  approaching.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  537

All  other  swellings  arise  in  the  same  manner,  no  matter  what  names
they  may  bear:  hemorrhoids,  encysted  tumors,  cancer  nodules,  etc.
Even  plague  pustules  and  boils  are  no  exception.  In  this  case  likewise,
the  body  is  attempting  to  cleanse  itself  throughout;  the  low  vitality,
however,  does  not  admit  of  success,  hence  the  tumors.

The  commencement  of  that  dread  disease  leprosy,  is  also  marked  by
pronounced  nodular  formations'  at  the  extremities.  These  excrescences
form  first  at  those  parts  where  the  skin  no  longer  perspires.

Nodular  formations  of  any  kind  whatsoever,  are  always  a  sign  that
the  system  is  thoroughly  disordered,  and  that  the  vitality  is  being
lowered,  so  that  the  body  is  partly  or  wholly  unable  to  produce
abscesses  or  ulcers.

It  is  generally  in  severe  dorsal  encumbrance  that  these  symptoms  are
found,  while  in  simple  frontal  encumbrance  they  seldom  occur,  as  the
vitality  in  such  case  is  less  unfavorably  influenced.

If,  now,  we  can  succeed  in  raising  the  vitality,  the  nodules  develop
into  abscesses,  and  the  health  is  improved,  or  the  disease  even  com-
pletely cured.

A  gentleman  had  been  suffering  for  years  from  the  eyes  and  had
become  nearly  blind.  On  the  head  there  were  a  large  number  of  nod-
ules, which  had  been  increasing  from  year  to  year.  He  commenced  a
cure  in  my  institute,  by  which  means  the  bodily  vitality  was  greatly  in-
creased. Large  abscesses  formed  on  both  cheeks  and  discharged  a
quantity  of  pus.  Simultaneously  the  condition  of  the  eyes  much  im-
proved, and  in  short  time  he  could  see  quite  well  again,  not  even  being
shortsighted.

A  young  man,  20  years  of  age,  had  a  considerable  nuinber  of  warts  on
his  hands  and  face.  In  summer,  he  had  a  chance  to  be  much  in  the  open
air.  In  this  way,  his  body  was  strengthened,  so  that  without  having  to
make  any  cure,  a  curative  crisis  occurred.  An  immense  abscess  ap-
peared on  one  arm,  and  for  several  weeks  pus  was  discharged.  To  the
astonishment  of  the  patient  and  his  friends,  the  warts  on  hands  and
face  now  disappeared  of  themselves.  The  body  had  here  taken  the
cure  up  itself,  as  it  were,  with  an  energ3%  such  as  is  seldom  met  with.

Very  similar  to  pulmonary  consumption  in  many  respects,  is  leprosy,
most  common  in  tropical  countries.  This  disease  also  is  the  result  of
heavy  encumbrance,  and  is  frequently  only  the  consequence  of  some
other  diseased  condition — especially  fever  and  sj^philis — which  has
been  treated  with  drugs.  Where  syphilis  has  been  suppressed  in  the
usual  manner,  a  cure  is  rarely  possible,  since  the  mercur\^  which  the
doctors  generally  employ  weakens  the  healing  power  of  the  body  in  too
great  a  degree.

Naturally,  as  has  already  been  stated,  leprosy  is  a  febrile  disease  like


538  Vniversal  Naturopathic  Directonj  and  Biiijrrs'  Guide

any  other;  for  the  body  attempts  to  dissolve  the  nodules  and  expel  the
foreign  matter.  If  it  succeeds  in  producing  ulcers  or  abscesses,  the  nod-
ules disappear  simultaneously,  and  the  skin,  previously  dry  and  shiny,
now  again  assumes  the  normal  moist  and  porous  condition.  If  there  is
not  sufficient  vitality  to  produce  ulcers,  the  nodules  increase  greatly  in
size;  or  dry  up  and  undergo  necrosis  or  decomposition,  while  the  re-
mainder of  the  body  continues  to  live.

Some  of  the  subjects  still  possess  all  their  limbs  in  their  entirety,  but
have  become  emaciated  almost  to  skeletons.  Such  are,  for  the  most
part,  hopeless  cases,  for  no  cure  can  here  take  place  of  itself,  such  as  is
always  possible  where  the  body  is  still  well  nourished  and  the  foreign
matter  has  not  yet  begun  to  dry  up  and  decompose.

Medical  men  regard  this  disease  as  hopelessly  incurable,  but  this  is
because  of  their  absolute  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  fever  and  of  disease
in  general.  In  leprosy,  they  are  unable  even  to  point  to  apparent  cures,
for  the  whole  body  being  encumbered,  there  is  no  part  remaining  to
which  the  foreign  matter  can  be  driven.  Medical  science  so-called,
therefore  exercises  its  power  in  a  different  manner;  it  has  the  leper  torn
from  his  family  and  banished  to  a  desolate  island.  But  in  spite  of  the
removal  of  what  is  regarded  as  the  seat  or  focus  of  the  disease,  leprosy
continues  to  make  its  appearance,  and  the  doctors'  diagnoses  do  nothing
towards  preventing  it.  Certain  bacilli  are  alleged  to  be  the  cause  of  the
disease,  but  nothing  is  known  of  the  encumbered  condition  of  the  body.

Even  a  mere  tyro  in  the  exercise  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,
will  immediately  recognize  the  coming  danger.  It  is,  indeed,  no  difficult
matter  to  observe  the  severe  encumbrance  of  the  body  which  must  pre-
cede the  disease.  As  a  result  of  the  new  diagnosis,  one  is  thus  in  a
position  to  give  the  subject  timely  warning  and  acquaint  him  with  the
result  of  thoughtless  procrastination,  or  total  indifference.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  many  lepers  could  still  be  saved,  if  a
proper  treatment,  according  to  the  New  Science  of  Healing,  were  ener-
getically commenced  in  time.

Many  missionaries  are  meritoriously  taking  up  the  matter  and  mak-
ing my  method  of  cure  known  to  lepers;  and  some  extremely  satis-
factory results  have  been  obtained.  This  disease  comes  about  in  the
same  way  as  any  other,  and  must  therefore  be  capable  of  cure  by  the
same  means,  so  long  as  the  body,  as  explained  above,  still  possesses  suffi-
cient vitality.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  539


THE  DIAGNOSIS  IN  PRACTICE


disease  in  general,  and  special  forms  of  it  in  particular,  may  be
diagnosed.  I  propose  next  to  place  him  in  a  position  to  acquire
suflicient  skill  in  the  application  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  to
enable  him  to  practically  diagnose  patients,  more  especially  himself  and
the  members  of  his  family.

Of  course,  it  is  only  practice  that  can  make  perfect;  but  skill  in  diag-
nosing will  soon  increase  rapidly,  provided  the  practitioner  possesses  a
healthy  eye.  /  would  here  express  the  hope,  however,  that  readers  will
refrain  from  obtrusively  observing  others,  who  do  not  wish  to  be  diag-
nosed. Such  conduct  is  most  objectionable  to  society  in  general,  and
cannot  fail  to  compromise  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression.

I  will  proceed  now  to  detail  a  number  of  cases  which  I  have  diagnosed
in  course  of  my  practice,  reference  being  made  to  the  illustrations  con-
tained in  this  work.  Certain  observations  cannot,  of  course,  be  repro-
duced pictorially:  such  as  complexion  and  tension;  and  frequently  only
the  encumbrance  of  one  part  can  be  illustrated.  The  actual  observa-
tions made  are,  however,  faithfully  recorded.  After  all,  the  principal
point  is  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  in  any  case.

I.  The  gentleman  represented  in  Fig.  2  is  corpulent;  he  approaches
us  with  slow,  short  steps.  His  carriage  is  not  bad,  but  the  com-
plexion indicates  deep-seated  disease,  being  much  too  red,  the  skin  hav-
ing a  conspicuously  shiny  appearance.  The  pronounced  obesity  tells
us  at  once  that  the  patient  is  heavily  encumbered.  The  forehead  is
cushioned  with  adipose  matter,  which  presses  upon  the  eyes  so  that  the
latter  appear  small  and  can  only  be  opened  with  difficulty.  We  at  once
observe  back  encumbrance,  the  pressure  being  from  the  forehead  down-
wards /.  e.,  from  behind.  The  flabby,  hanging  cheeks  show  that  the
head  is  permeated  with  foreign  matter.  The  vacant  stare  causes  .us  to
fear  that  mental  aberration  is  already  commencing.

We  proceed  to  a  close  examination.  The  neck  is  almost  as  thick  as
the  head,  so  that  it  is  scarcely  to  be  distinguished.  It  is  swollen  all
round  and  altogether  rigid.  The  head  cannot,  thus,  be  turned  from  side
to  side,  and  can  only  be  slightly  raised.  The  lines  of  demarcation  are
wholly  absent  both  at  the  nape  and  jaw.

This  is,  we  see,  a  case  of  advanced  general  encumbrance  of  the  whole


540  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcrs Guide

body.  Yet  most  people  would  regard  the  patient  as  a  strong,  healthy
man — so  little  understanding  has  one  to-day  for  the  natural  form.

Evidently,  the  patient  has  long  suffered  from  excitability  and  nerv-
ousness. Since  youth  he  has  been  troubled  with  indigestion  and  es-
pecially constipation.  Without  doubt,  he  also  suffers  from  hemor-
rhoids. He  certainly  never  enjoys  undisturbed,  refreshing  sleep;  prob-
ably the  insomnia  has  continued  for  years.  Although  already  mentally
paralyzed,  he  nowhere  finds  quiet,  there  being  great  pressure  of  matter
upwards  accompanied  by  high  internal  fever.  There  being  encumbrance
of  the  left  side  also,  the  perspiration  is  deficient,  this  increasing  the  up-
w^ard  pressure  of  matter.  He  is  not  able  to  perform  any  task  properly,
although  still  in  his  best  years. He  has  long  been  impotent.

Such  a  person  is  exposed  to  every  form  of  disease.  Unless  a  cure  is
commenced  forthwith,  the  mind  will  certainly  become  completely  dis-
turbed. A  real  cure  is  here  hardly  possible,  especially  as  the  patient
lacks  all  energj'.  It  must  be  considered  a  signal  success  if  even  an  im-
provement is  attained.

II.  The  gentleman  shown  in  Fig.  7,  likewise  has  a  good  bearing.
His  complexion  as  far  as  the  upper  parts  of  the  face  are  concerned,  is
tolerably  normal,  but  the  appearance  of  the  lower  part  of  the  face  is
grayish  and  moreover  heavy.  A  glance  at  the  sides  shows  us  that  here
again  we  have  a  case  of  frontal  encumbrance,  the  facial  line  of  demar-
cation being  wholly  obliterated.  If  the  head  is  directed  upwards,  the
pronounced  swelling  on  the  neck  is  seen,  extending  to  the  chin.  On
turning  the  head  right  and  left,  there  is  no  lateral  tension  to  be  observed,
proving  that  the  sides  are  not  encumbered.  Nor  is  dorsal  encumbrance
to  be  detected.

The  patient  thus  suffers  chiefly  from  the  neck,  and  is  greatly  troubled
by  toothache  on  fall  of  temperature.  Probably,  judging  by  his  age,  he
has  lost  a  number  of  teeth.  The  foreign  matter  has  accumulated  chiefly
in  the  lower  part  of  the  face,  but  has  also  to  some  extent  penetrated  the
upper  part,  causing  loss  of  hair.  There  is  a  certain  amount  of  danger
that  the  eyes  may  sooner  or  later  be  affected.

Since,  however,  there  is  only  front  encumbrance,  the  patient  may  be
assured  of  a  rapid  cure  by  means  of  hip  and  friction  sitz  baths.  He  may
also,, under  ordinary  circumstances,  expect  to  live  to  a  tolerably  old  age.

III.  Suppose  the  girl  represented  in  Fig.  11  comes  to  us  to  be  diag-
nosed. We  first  observe  the  carriage  and  complexion.

The  deportment  is  by  no  means  good,  the  head  being  forwardly  in-
clined. The  complexion  is  pale.  The  half-closed  condition  of  the  e5^es,
caused  by  the  pressure  of  foreign  matter  hither,  strikes  us.  The  girl  is,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  more  or  less  blind.  We  see  at  once  that  our  patient
is  seriously  ill,  the  head  being  already  heavily  encumbered. Let  us  now


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  541

deterinine  what  kind  of  encumbrance  it  is.  A  glance  at  the  head  sufHces
to  show  us  that  we  have  here  a  case  of  severe  frontal  encumbrance,  for
the  line  of  demarcation  of  the  face  lies  far  behind  the  normal  line  at
the  ear.  There  is  but  slight  dorsal  encumbrance,  the  line  of  demarca-
tion at  the  nape  being  almost  normal.  When  the  head  is  held  correctly,
this  can  be  seen  still  more  clearly  to  be  the  case.  We  next  examine  the
case  more  closely  by  making  the  patient  turn  her  head  upwards;  a  pro-
nounced swelling  is  observed,  with  tension  of  the  neck.  On  the  head
being  turned  from  side  to  side,  slight  lateral  encumbrance  is  also  ap-
parent, the  tension,  however,  being  but  trifling.  The  disease  of  the  eyes
has  been  caused  by  the  frontal  encumbrance,  and  we  can  readily  re-
mark with  certainty  that  the  whole  of  the  front  of  the  body  is  encum-
bered, the  abdomen  being  particularly  prominent.  The  lateral  encumb-
rance is  not  sufficiently  pronounced  to  cause  serious  uneasiness.

The  eyes  have  become  affected  as  the  result  of  the  increasing  encumb-
rance of  the  head.  Fortunately,  however,  we  can  console  the  patient
with  the  report  that  her  condition  can  be  cured  comparatively  easily,
her  case  being  mainly  one  of  frontal  encumbrance.

Naturally,  we  must  not  commence  a  local  treatment  of  the  eyes,  such
as  is  usually  done.  On  the  contrary  our  aim  must  be  to  remove  the  ab-
dominal deposits;  improvement  in  the  condition  of  the  eyes  will  go  on
simultaneously  and  in  due  time  the  affection  will  be  cured.

The  eruption  on  the  arm  will  certainly  strike  the  reader.  This  was
caused  artificially,  being  the  result  of  vaccination.  The  child's  blood
had  also  been  thoroughly  poisoned  by  inoculation  with  tuberculin.  This,
of  course,  cannot  be  ascertained  from  examination;  but  as  the  result  of
this  fact  (communicated  by  the  mother),  we  know  that  the  cure  will  be
delayed.

In  spite  of  this,  the  vision  was  restored  in  a  few  weeks,  the  encumb-
rance of  the  head  having  in  this  time  been  partly  reduced.

IV.  The  young  lady  who  is  represented  in  Fig.  16  holds  her  head  in-
clined to  the  left.  From  this,  we  at  once  conclude  that  there  is  encumb-
rance of  the  right  side;  and  closer  examination  shows  this  to  be  the  fact.
The  right  side  of  the  face  is  both  broader  and  longer  than  the  left.  On
the  right  side,  the  skin  of  the  face  appears  shiny;  on  the  other  side,  it  is
of  normal  color.

On  the  head  being  turned,  we  ascertain  that  the  encumbrance  is  only
on  the  right  side  and  slightly  frontal.

We  may  therefore  safely  conclude  that  in  soft  parts  at  the  right  side
of  the  abdomen,  there  are  large  deposits  of  morbid  matter,  causing
pressure  at  the  right  side.  All  the  organs  lying  toward  the  right  side  of
the  body  will  likewise  be  affected,  so  that  we  may  here  expect  to  find


542  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

toothache,  earache,  innainiiiation  of  the  eyes  or  megrim.  In  all  acute
diseases,  such  for  instance  as  inflammation  of  the  throat,  the  right  side
will  certainly  be  first  attacked.  The  perspiration,  however,  being
normal,  the  patient  will  seldom  suffer  severely  from  so-called  colds,

V.  The  skilled  practitioner  will  see  at  once  that  the  carriage  of  the
man  shown  in  Fig.  17  is  abnormal,  the  left  shoulder  being  higher  than
the  right.  We  see  also  that  the  head  is  located  too  much  towards  the
right,  instead  of  being  in  the  centre  line  of  the  body.  The  whole  of  the
left  half  of  the  body,  in  fact,  is  broader  and  stouter  than  the  right,  as
can  be  seen.  The  complexion  is  pale.  The  despondent  mien  of  the  pa-
tient shows  us  that  he  is  heavily  encumbered  with  morbid  matter.

Close  examination  reveals  to  us  an  extremely  severe  encumbrance  of
the  left  side.  The  frontal  encumbrance  is  slight,  whilst  the  back  is  con-
siderably affected. The  right  side  is  unencumbered.

Such  pronounced  lateral  encumbrance  indicates  exceedingly  ad-
vanced encumbrance  of  the  abdomen.  There  must  here  undoubtedly
be  large  swellings,  naturally  chiefly  at  the  left  side,  where  all  kinds  of
morbid  conditions  may  be  expected.  The  illustration  sufficiently  con-
firms this.

The  patient  without  doubt  suffers  from  the  heart.  He  is  inclined  to
rheumatism;  and  on  account  of  the  high  degree  of  encumbrance,  is  con-
sequently exposed  to  a  stroke  of  apoplexy  which  would  occur  at  the
right  side.

In  such  an  advanced  stage  of  encumbrance,  complete  cure  is  seldom
possible,  and  improvement  is  probably  all  that  can  be  expected.

VI.  In  Fig.  20,  we  have  the  portrait  of  a  man  who  appears  strong  and
well  nourished.  We  remark,  however,  that  his  bearing  is  not  upright,
for  he  advances  with  the  head  somewhat  forwardly  inclined.  It  is  easy
to  see  that  he  is  too  stout  and  over-nourished.  The  face  is  flushed  and
shows  signs  of  excitation.  There  is  a  pronounced  adipose  cushion  on
the  forehead.

We  can  already  see  that  this  is  a  case  of  dorsal  encumbrance.  Closer
examination  shows  that  the  nape  of  the  neck  is  quite  filled  up  with
morbid  matter,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  move  the  head  laterally.  On
our  requesting  him  to  turn  his  head,  he  moves  the  whole  body  in  doing
so.  Lateral  encumbrance  is  to  be  traced  at  both  sides.  This  is  clearly
indicated  by  the  already  indurated  swellings  on  each  side  of  the  neck.
There  is  no  frontal  encumbrance.

Our  patient  is  extremely  nervous,  and  probably  no  longer  capable  of
mental  labor,  or  of  prolonged  physical  work.  For  instance,  he  will  be
unable  to  concentrate  his  thoughts  sufficiently  to  follow  a  lecture;  he
will  not  have  the  quietude  to  sit  out  a  concert  or  theatrical  performance,


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide  543

nor,  indeed,  to  remain  long  in  a  room  or  hall  at  all. There  is  great
danger  of  his  becoming  mentally  deranged.

He  also  suffers  from  hemorrhoids,  in  the  form  of  clumps  of  piles  from
which  the  morbid  matter  proceeds  to  the  back.

This  patient  can  only  expect  a  complete  cure  after  a  treatment,  ac-
cording to  my  system,  extending  over  a  number  of  years.  Since  the  de-
posits have  not  yet  become,  much  hardened,  improvement,  however,
may  be  expected  in  a  few  weeks,  as  soon  as  the  head  is  somewhat  freed
from  matter.  For  a  complete  cure,  the  whole  of  the  dorsal  and  lateral
encumbrance  must  be  removed.

VII.  From  a  first  glance  at  the  boy  represented  in  Fig.  38,  we  observe
little  that  points  to  disease;  indeed,  most  people  would  regard  him  as
being  in  good  health.  His  bearing  is  good  and  the  complexion  is  not
strikingly  sickly,  even  though  it  does  not  display  normal  freshness  of
youth.  If,  however,  we  recall  the  normal  figure  to  mind,  slight  ex-
amination is  sufficient  to  show  us  that  the  top  of  the  head  is  somewhat
too  large.

We  proceed  to  a  detailed  diagnosis.  There  is  no  dorsal  encumbrance.
The  line  of  demarcation  of  the  face  is  normal,  so  that  one  is  almost  in-
clined to  say  that  there  is  also  no  frontal  encumbrance.  Yet  inspection
reveals  to  us  lumps  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  which  become  still  more
obvious  when  the  patient  turns  his  head  to  one  side.  If  he  bends  it
backwards,  we  remark  in  the  front  considerable  tension  and  also  swell-
ing. We  thus  see  that  we  have  here  to  do  with  encumbrance  of  the
left  side  and  also  of  the  front  of  the  body.

The  patient,  then,  is  ntore  encumbered  than  we  originally  suspected;
there  is  pronounced  upward  pressure  of  foreign  matter  and  high  in-
ternal temperature.  The  morbid  matter  has  to  some  extent  reached  the
forehead,  partly  it  has  settled  in  the  neck,  forming  tiimors.  These
lumps,  we  may  be  sure,  are  also  to  be  found  in  greater  or  less  number
in  the  abdomen,  particularly  on  the  left  side.

The  boy  without  doubt  suffers  chiefly  from  palpitation  of  the  heart
and  defective  perspiration.  His  digestion  will  consequently  be  poor,
for  this  is  always  influenced  by  the  perspiration.

If  the  morbid  matter  should  ascend  still  higher  on  the  left  side
towards  the  head,  megrim,  earache  and  loss  of  hair  on  this  side  will  be
the  result.  In  the  course  of  years,  nodules  may  form  on  the  head;  and
the  encumbrance  being  left-sided,  rheumatism  may  subsequently  make
its  appearance.  The  chest  is  exposed  to  danger,  since  the  foreign  mat-
ter, as  we  observe,  has  accumulated  about  the  neck.  Whether  the  matter
will  first  pass  to  the  head  or  to  the  chest,  cannot  be  decided,  unless  we
have  some  definite  indication.  A  dry  cough,  for  instance,  would  indi-
cate that  the  lungs  are  already  afFected.


544


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig.  40. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.
(Consumptive).

Figure: emaciated,  head inclined forward. — Head: size normal. — Forehead:

normal. — Eyes:  dull. — Nose:  shape  normal,  inflamed  internally. — Mouth:  open. —

Face: too  lean,  ashy  hue,  line  of  demarcation  normal. — Neck: too  long,  rigid,

with  lumps;  line  of  demarcation  at  nape  normal. — Chest: hollow.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirertorij  and  Bayers'  Guide


545


Our  task  is,  of  course,  to  drive  back  the  foreign  matter,  which  can  be
done  by  reducing  the  internal  temperature  by  means  of  baths  and  suit-
able diet.  The  patient  being  young,  and  there  being  no  back  encumb-
rance, we  can  promise  a  tolerably  certain  cure.  Patience  will,  however,
be  necessary,  as  nodular  deposits  have  already  formed  and  there  is
likewise  lateral  encumbrance  to  be  remarked.  Simple  frontal  encumb-
rance would  not  require  half  the  amount  of  trouble  and  time  to  cure.


Fig.  H. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

Front  view  of  the  person  represented  in  Fig.  40. The  square  shape  of  the  face

and  the  abnormally  long  neck  will  be  observed.


VIII.  Fig.  40  is  the  portrait  of  a  man  some  thirty  years  of  age.  The
head  is  pushed  forward,  the  chest  hollow.  The  complexion  is  pale,  dull,
lifeless. The  face  is  haggard,  and  the  cheek  bones  prominent.

These  symptoms  tell  us  that  the  state  of  nutrition  of  the  patient  is  ex-
ceedingly bad;  his  system  cannot  assimilate  the  food,  and  the  body  is
wasting  away.

Closer  examination  reveals  to  us  the  abnormally  long  neck,  covered
with  lumps  (Fig.  41  shows  a  front  view  of  the  same  person.)  The  en-
cumbrance is  here  frontal,  though  the  facial  line  of  demarcation  has
again  become  normal,  due  to  desiccation  of  the  foreign  matter  and
atrophy  of  the  muscles. On  the  head  being  raised,  however,  we  observe


546  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bnijers'  Guide

pronounced  tension,  and  nodules  become  so  clearly  visible,  that  there  is
not  the  least  doubt  as  to  its  being  a  case  of  front  encumbrance.  The
neck  is  also  highly  encumbered  at  the  sides,  being  much  swollen  and
displaying  tension  there.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  encumbrance  has
not  penetrated  very  far  upwards,  for  the  forehead  is  free  and  the  hair
healthy  and  thick.

There  is  no  encumbrance  of  the  back.  The  foreign  matter  has  settled
chiefly  in  the  neck,  and  thoroughly  permeated  it  both  at  front  and  sides.
The  matter  has  also  been  driven  downwards,  penetrating  the  lungs,
wherefore  the  chest  has  become  hollow  and  the  shoulders  have  sunk.

As  there  is  no  dorsal  encumbrance,  the  patient  is  mentally  normal,
and  the  condition  being  chronic,  he  experiences  no  pain,  the  counten-
ance being  therefore  tranquil.  He  is  one  of  those  patients  who  hope
for  recovery  until  the  last  moment.  We  will  not  rob  the  patient  of  this
hope,  but  we  know  that  for  him  there  is  little  chance  of  cure.  Improve-
ment, however,  can  certainly  be  expected.

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  patient's  condition  has  not  been  recognized
earlier.  A  year  or  two  before,  cure  probably  would  have  been  quite
possible.

IX.  As  the  little  boy,  shown  in  Figs.  49  and  50,  approaches  us,  we  re-
mark at  once  that  his  head  is  abnormally  large  and  inclined  forwards
and  the  face  flushed.  The  neck  is  obviously  too  short.  Exact  examin-
ation reveals  general  encumbrance,  which  has  proceeded  from  all  sides
towards  the  eyes.  The  abdomen  is  also  much  too  large,  as  the  Figures
show.  Many  people  would  consider  him  a  particularly  well  developed
child,  but  we  know  that  he  must  be  diseased  through  and  through.  That
the  eyes  are  seriously  affected  can  be  easily  seen.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
the  child  was  nearly  blind  when  brought  to  me.  He  is  shown  in  the
illustrations  after  a  month's  treatment;  his  abdomen  at  the  commence-
ment was  much  more  prominent  and  the  pressure  towards  the  eyes  far
more  pronounced,  so  that  a  photograph  could  not  be  taken.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  547


REMOVAL  OF  ENCUMBRANCE


THE  removal  of  the  encumbrance,  the  expulsion  of  the  foreign  mat-
ter from  the  body — this  is  the  only  rational  method  of  treating
disease.  To  merely  drive  the  morbid  matter  from  one  part  of  the
body  to  another,  to  confine  it,  and  allow  it  to  dry  up :  all  this  is  no  cure,
but  simply  suppression  of  symptoms.

It  is  this  latter  course  that  is  taken  by  orthodox  medical  practitioners,
as  I  have  already  repeatedly  explained.  The  other  systems  of  cure  are
more  or  less — sometimes  unconsciously — directed  to  really  removing
the  cause  of  disease;  the  success  attained  is  very  variable.

The  most  effective  system,  I  have  explained  in  detail  in  my  handbook
of  the  science  of  healing  diseases  without  drugs  and  without  operations,
and  it  is  to  this  work  that  I  must  refer  the  reader  for  full  particulars.

What  I  would  here  add,  however,  is  first,  a  proof  that  cure  is  always
synonymous  with  disappearance  of  the  encumbrance.  The  sense  of  re-
coveiy,  it  is  true,  will  generally  occur  before  the  encumbrance  has  en-
tirely vanished;  nevertheless,  as  observations  clearly  show,  this  sensa-
tion of  cure  depends  wholly  upon  the  decrease  of  the  foreign  matter.
By  means  of  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression  we  can  ascertain  whether
the  cure  is  complete,  or  whether  there  has  been  only  a  considerable  im-
provement effected.

Figs.  43  and  44  show  a  lady  suffering  from  front  and  side  encumb-
rance. She  had  for  ten  years  tried  all  kinds  of  cures  in  order  to  get  rid
of  the  tumors  on  the  neck.  Finally  she  decided  to  try  my  system  and
had  the  satisfaction  of  attaining  her  purpose  after  2l^  years  treatment.
Fig.  44  shows  the  patient  after  this  cure.  Not  only  have  the  tumors  dis-
appeared, but  also  other  symptoms  of  disease.  Thus  the  face  has  lost
the  anxious  look,  the  cheeks  have  become  fuller,  the  mouth  is  closed,
whereas  formerly  the  patient  habitually  kept  it  open,  the  neck  has  be-
come normally  round  and  smooth.  The  complexion,  formerly  pale,  is
now  fresh.  Until  the  cure,  the  digestion  had  always  been  bad,  whilst  it
now  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.  Instead  of  a  burden,  life  has  become
a  joy,  and  the  features  have  been  greatly  beautified.

Thus  not  merely  those  symptoms,  to  remove  which  the  treatment  was
commenced,  but  also  other  morbid  symptoms  have  disappeared.  Indeed,
it  could  not  be  otherwise,  if  the  morbid  matter  were  once  expelled  from
the  system.


548


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig.  42.
(See  Fig.  43.)


Fig.  43. — Front  and  Side  Encumbrance.

(The  same  person  as  shown  in  Fig.  42.)

Head:  size  normal. — Forehead:  normal. — Eyes:  normal. — Nose:  normal. —  Mouth:

open. — Face: too  lean;  line  of  demarcation  obliterated.— Neck: covered  with

large  lumps;  line  of  demarcation  at  nape  normal.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  549

Figs.  45  and  4G  illustrate  also  a  striking  change  which  a  patient  at-
tained by  iollowing  my  system  of  treatment.  A  letter  from  this  gentle-
man, I  print  below.  I  would  first  remark,  however,  that  Fig.  45  shows
the  patient  suffering  from  general  encumbrance.  He  was  then  troubled
with  intense  nervosity  and  was  in  danger  of  any  day  falling  a  victim  to
some  acute  form  of  disease.  Fig.  46  shows  him  considerably  less  en-
cumbered. He  is  here  somewhat  too  thin,  but  in  time,  in  spite  of  his
age,  the  body  will  no  doubt  acquire  the  necessary  roundness.  Healthy
flesh  will  then  take  the  place  of  diseased,  flabby  masses.


Fig.  ^4. — Normal  Figure.
Represents  the  person  shown  in  Figs.  42  and  43  after  2^2  years'  treatment.

his  own  way  after  reading  my  handbook  already  referred  to.  I  should
have  deemed  the  treatment  too  rigorous  for  a  man  so  advanced  in
years,  but  at  any  rate  the  body  appears  to  have  come  through  all  the
crises  successfully.

The  gentleman  writes:

Dear  Mr.  Kiihne:

For  weeks,  months  and  quarter  years,  my  fingers  have  been  itching  to  write
to  you,  but  what  with  the  constant  treatment,  baths  and  fine  weather,  I  have  not
been  able  to  get  so  far.  My  photograph,  however,  now  affords  another,  and  prac-
tical, reason  why  I  should  write,  and  so  I  will  not  delay  any  longer.


550  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


But  before  yoing  into  details,  1  ivuulcl  mention  two  facts,  otherwise,  perhaps,
you  may  not  be  able  to  call  me  to  mind:

(1.)  I  called  upon  you  about  the  middle  of  February  1890.

(2.)  I  wore  a  full  beard  at  that  time,  so  that  I  naturally  looked  somewhat  other
than  now.

I  have  pleasure  in  forwarding  you  two  photographs,  neither  of  which,  in  order
not  to  alter  the  features  in  any  way,  has  been  retouched  either  in  the  negative  or
positive.  The  first  photograph  was  taken  towards  the  end  of  September  1889,  just
after  I  had  been  dismissed  as  fully  cured  from  Dr.  K.'s  allopathic  sanatorium  in
v.,  after  four  months'  indescribable  treatment. But  who,  but  a  madman,  after


Fig.  ^5. — General  Encumbrance.

Head:  too  large. — Forehead:  cushioned.— ff/e*- : compressed. — Nose:  too  thick. —

Mouth: open. — Face: line of demarcation obliterated. — Neck: too  thick. —

Shoulders: sloping.

looking  at  this  photograph  could  take  me  for  well!  It  is  enough  to  make  one
laugh,  were  the  matter  not  sad  enough  to  weep  over.  The  second  photograph  has
been  taken  after  exactly  3^2  years'  treatment  and  diet,  according  to  Kuhne's
system.  If  anyone  has  ever  strictly  followed  the  Kuhne  cure  and  diet,  it  is  I;  and  I
can  only  express  my  satisfaction  at  the  result.  The  complete  changes  and  the
differences  shown  by  the  two  photographs  are  scarcely  to  be  believed.  The  latter
are  at  your  entire  disposal.  If  you  wish  to  publish  them  in  any  journal,  or  in  a
future  edition  of  your  work,  I  give  my  full  consent,  and  shall  be  glad  to  send  you
a  faithful  report  of  the  course  of  my  Kuhne  cure  and  diet  (the  latter  in  strict  ac-
cordance with  the  principles  set  forth  in  your  handbook),  for  I  have  conscien-
tiously kept  a  diary  throughout.  I  still  take  three  friction  sitz-baths  daily,  each
lasting  30-40  minutes,  the  first  at  about  6  a.  m. From  8-10  a.  m.  I  take  a  walk,  if


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiiijers'  Guide


551


possible  barefoot,  vaiied  ivilh  (fifrnnaslic  exercises  on  Schreber's  system,  in  a
sunny  wood,  clad  only  in  shirt  and  Ironsevs.  From  9  or  10  till  11  o'clock  I  yive
lessons,  sit  tiny  at  an  open  windouK  or  draw  in  the  open  air.  From  11-12  friction
sitz-balh;  12-1  dinner;  1-2  rest  in  garden:  2->i  or  5  teacliing,  or  drawing  outside.
From  5-6  or  7  anollier  walk.  At  7  o'clock  friction  sitz-balh.  At  9  o  clock  to  bed.
On  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  from  7.30-9.30  I  have  to  conduct  an  evening  drawing
class.  On  these  two  days  I  take  a.  friction  sit:-b(dh  (lasting  half  an  i.our)  both
before  and  after  the  class.  Diet  from  January  1890  to  August  1st  1892,  3  meals
doily.  Mornings  and  evenings:  wholemeal  bread,  wholemeal  and  fruit,  principally
apples  and  grapes;  dinner:  vegetables,  farinaceous  foods  and  fruit,  as  in  the  morn-
ing. The  fruit  I  always  ale  raw,  never  stewed.  From  August  1st  1892,  likewise
three  meals daily, but  all  food  uncooked; mornings  and evenings  as  hitherto;


Fig  46".
Represents  the  person  in  Fig.  45,  after  3%  years'  treatment. Particulars  concern-
ing his  case  are  given  in  the  accompanying  account.


noon:  vegetables  of  all  kinds,  uncooked,  except  the  potatoes,  which  were  half
cooked  and  flavored  with  lemon-juice,  in  the  form  of  salad;  instead  of  wholemeal
bread,  raw  wholemeal.  From  January  1st,  1893  to  August  lst,1893  two  meals  daily;
morning:  nothing  (as  I  worked  less);  noon:  raw  vegetables  with  lime-juice,  whole-
meal or,  on  account  of  my  teeth  now  and  again  proving  unequal  to  the  work —
wholemeal  bread  or  cake  and  raw  fruit;  evening:  wholemeal  and  fruit  (raw).
Since  August  1st  1893,  ip  to  the  present  date,  I  take  two  meals  daily:  morning,
wholemeal  and  fruit  or  wholemeal  bread  and  fruit;  noon,  as  above:  raw  vege-
tables, wholemeal  and  raw  fruit;  evening  nothing.

The  result  of  this  cure  can  be  seen  from  the  enclosed  photograph.  I  will  add
nothing  more,  as  the  likeness  speaks  for  itself — except  the  remark  that  I  formerly
was  tolerably  bald;  now  the  hair  has  again  grown  and  entirely  covers  the  part.
My  body  has  changed  so  much,  that  within  the  three  and  a  half  years  I  have  re-


552  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  lUii/ers'  Guide

quired  five  new  outfits,  from  boots  to  hat.  And  what  really  sounds  incredible,  at
the  age  of  55  I  got  a  new  molar  (backmost).  If  it  did  not  remain  long,  i(  came
out,  without  trouble,  after  about  a  year — at  any  rate,  it  grew — which  without  the
Kuhne  cure  and  diet  would  not  have  been  the  case.

During  the  vacation  here  in  A'.,  /  take  a  sun,  air  and  light  bath  every  fine  day,
and  find  it  does  me  much  good.  Unfortunately  I  cannot  continue  this  at  home,  as
'  my  professional  duties  especially  prevent  it.  I  will  now  conclude,  again  remark-
ing that  I  place  the  accompanying  photographs  entirely  at  your  disposal  and  shall
be  most  happy  to  furnish  you  unth  any  further  information  regarding  the  course
of  my  cure.  With  sincere  thanks  for  your  cure,  and  with  kind  regards  to  you  and
your  family,  I  remain,

Yours  sincerely,  N.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujcrs'  Guide  oo3


INCREASING  THE  VITALITY


IN  order  to  procure  for  the  system  the  strength  necessary  for  restora-
tion to  health,  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  utilize  every  factor  which
may  assist  us  in  attaining  our  end.  Every  method  of  treatment
which  aims  at  removing  foreign  matter  from  the  system,  requires  a  cer-
tain amount  of  vitality,  and  my  method  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.
Where  nodular  deposits  are  to  be  found  in  the  body,  it  is  a  sign  that  the
vitality  has  already  been  seriously  lowered,  otherwise  the  matter  would
not  have  thus  become  indurated.  In  attempting  a  cure,  we  must  now  do
everything  possible  to  raise  the  enfeebled  vitality,  and  at  the  same  time
avoid  everything  that  may  tend  to  lower  it.

I  cannot  here  enter  into  an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  vitality;  what
we  have  here  to  consider  is  the  question  as  to  how  we  can  maintain,  or
restore  it.

We  create  new  vital  force  every  day  by  means  of  the  food  we  con-
sume, under  which  must,  of  course,  be  included  the  air  we  breathe.

Thus  food  plays  a  most  important  part  in  maintaining  or  raising  the
vitality,  wherefore  we  must  in  eating  pay  attention  to  every  factor
which  may  exert  an  influence.

I  shall  therefore  treat  the  question  of  nutrition  exhaustively,  answer-
ing four  questions :

1.  In  what  manner  must  our  food  be  assimilated?
^  What  shall  we  eat?

3.  Where  shall  we  eat?

4.  When  shall  we  eat?

/. In  what  manner  must  our  food  be  assimilated?

The  body  endeavors  to  extract  from  the  food  consumed  all  those
materials  which  are  necessary  for  building  up  the  system  and  assisting
the  bodily  activity.  Such  material  is  extracted  from  the  food  and
assimilated  by  the  process  of  digestion.  For  us,  it  is  unnecessary  to  con-
sider the  various  separate  steps  in  the  digestive  process,  since  we  have
to  regard  the  process  as  a  whole.  The  process  is  without  doubt  a  con-
tinuous one,  so  long  as  there  is  material  present  in  the  system  to  be
digested.  It  commences  immediately  we  take  food  into  the  mouth  and
commence  to  chew  it;  it  ends,  so  far  as  one  part  of  the  food  is  concerned,


554  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/ers'  Guide

with  the  ejection  of  such  as  excrement,  whilst  that  part  remaining  in
the  system  is  still  further  assimilated,  in  arteries,  lungs,  liver,  etc.,  the
last  remnants  being  finally  expelled  through  skin  and  kidneys.  The
body  must  regulate  the  activity  itself.  If  this  is  not  so,  it  is  a  mistake  to
try  and  influence  any  part  for  itself.  The  bodily  activity  is  a  whole,  and
any  disturbance  of  it  whatever,  signifies  irregularity  of  the  whole  pro-
cess. A  disordered  digestive  system  again,  like  every  disorder  whatso-
ever, implies  disturbance  of  the  whole  body.

Thus  by  the  digestive  process  the  body  assimilates  all  the  material
necessary  for  health.  The  process  is,  so  to  say,  one  of  distillation,  by
means  of  which  the  extracts  are  obtained.  There  is,  however,  no  other
process  which  can  be  really  said  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  digestion.  All
comparisons  are  more  or  less  imperfect,  the  digestive  process  being  a
most  comprehensive  one.  It  is  wholly  an  error  to  endeavor  to  relieve
the  digestive  organs  of  any  part  of  their  work :  this  is  simply  to  weaken
them  and,  moreover,  human  skill  has  not  yet  succeeded,  and  never  will
succeed,  in  artificially  imitating  the  process  of  digestion.

If  the  digestion  has  been  debilitated,  our  sole  task  must  be  to  provide
the  most  favorable  conditions  possible  for  restoration  of  the  function;
and  more  food  must  not  be  supplied  to  the  system  than  it  can  con-
veniently deal  with.  If  we  regulate  the  digestion  in  a  natural  manner,
we  shall  be  able  in  time  to  strengthen  the  body,  and  the  vitality  will  be
raised  simultaneously.

I  will  now  enter  into  an  explanation  of  the  conditions  to  be  observed.

2.  What  shall  we  eat?

This  question  I  have  dealt  with  at  some  length  in  my  handbook  of  the
New  Science  of  Healing,  but  I  may  here  again  call  attention  to  a  few
points  in  particular.

The  food  we  eat  must  be  that  which  our  nature  demands.  That  which
is  unnatural,  we  must  stringently  avoid.  I  therefore  advocate  a  non-
flesh  diet,  for  flesh-eating  is  unnatural  (see  my  work  "The  New
Science  of  Healing").

The  fact  that  we  have  teeth  for  masticating  our  food,  proves  that  our
diet  should  principally  consist  of  solid  food — though  I  do  not  by  any
means  recommend  the  so-called  "dry-diet" — and  those  suffering  from
indigestion  would  do  well  to  observe  this.  It  is  precisely  dyspeptics  who
cannot  properly  digest  liquid  food,  and  they  are  in  error  in  believing
that  soups,  milk,  coffee,  tea,  cocoa,  wines,  beer,  etc.,  can  be  of  service  to
them.

In  the  course  of  treatment  of  a  large  number  of  dyspeptic  patients,  I
have  gained  much  valuable  experience  which  I  will  here  relate.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  555

Cooked  food  is  always  more  difTiciilt  of  digestion  than  is  raw  food.
Food  in  the  course  of  development  is  the  most  easy  to  digest;  food
which  is  quite  mature,  or  on  the  point  of  commencing  to  decay,  is  much
more  difficult  to  assimilate.  Unripe  fruit  and  young  leaves  are  there-
fore the  foods  which  dyspeptics  will  most  easily  and  quickly  be  able  to
digest.  Much  of  such  food  cannot  be  consumed,  for  the  body  indicates
at  once  when  sufficient  has  been  eaten,  and  it  is  then  time  to  stop.

At  first  unripe  fruit  is  apt  to  cause  diarrhea,  for  being  readily  digested
it  expels  the  other  material  at  the  same  time.  This,  however,  will  soon
pass  over  and  such  fruit  will  then  materially  aid  in  regulating  the  diges-
tion. Unripe  fruit  is  best  when  picked  direct  from  the  tree,  as  through
lying  it  loses  in  value.  For  this  reason,  home  fruits  are  to  be  preferred
to  foreign,  since  the  latter,  through  the  long  voyage,  lose  in  digestibility.

In  general,  we  may  say  that  nature  produces  the  most  appropriate
food  for  people  in  the  locality  where  they  are  living.  For  instance,  the
attempt  has  been  made  to  transport  the  food  of  more  southerly  regions
to  the  Esquimos  for  the  purpose  of  improving  their  general  condition
and  consequently  their  health.  It  was  soon  found,  however,  that  the
imported  food  undermined  their  health  still  more.

If  any  region  produces  no  food  suitable  for  man,  it  is  a  sign  that  such
place  is  unfit  for  human  habitation.  The  regions  of  the  frigid  zones  may
be  reckoned  as  such;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  no  Esquimo  is  ever  really
healthy,  or  ever  attains  any  great  age.

The  group  of  Esquimos  shown  in  Fig.  47  appears,  it  is  true,  to  consist  of
well-nourished  persons;  in  point  of  fact,  however,  they  are  one  and  all
heavily  encumbered.  Unfortunately,  this  cannot  well  be  seen  from  the
illustration,  which  was  taken  by  an  amateur.  The  vitality  of  the  Esqui-
mos is  very  low,  and  at  a  not  very  distant  period  they  will  probably
have  died  out.

And  how  can  it  be  otherwise?  They  are  compelled  to  live  almost  ex-
clusively upon  flesh.  It  is  true,  they  eagerly  consume  any  fresh  plants
which  the  ground  produces,  during  the  short  period  it  is  not  frozen,  but
such  are  not  sufficient  to  counterbalance  the  injury  done  by  the  con-
sumption of  unnatural  food  otherwise,  even  though  it  may  aid  in  im-
proving matters.  Those  Esquimos  who  live  on  the  coast  and  eat  much
fish  are  less  encumbered,  boiled  fish  being  less  injurious  than  other
flesh,  especially  that  of  fattened  cattle.

The  inhabitants  of  the  temperate  zones  are  more  fortunate  and  our
spring  affords  us  opportunity  of  increasing  the  digestive  power,  thus
raising  the  vitality,  by  the  consumption  of  fresh  plants,  leaves  and  fruits.

These  foods  are  usually  regarded  as  being  of  no  value  at  all  to  human
beings;  but  this  view  must  be  attributed  to  total  ignorance  of  the  laws
of  life.


556  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bui/ers'  Guide


3
cr


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  557

One  material  I  must  especially  mention  as  being  apparently  required
by  the  human  body,  a  material  which  would  seem  to  be  wholly  useless
to  the  system,  and  yet  undoubtedly  aids  digestion — this  material  is  sand.
In  their  natural  condition,  there  is  always  a  certain  amount  of  sand  ad-
hering to  foods,  and  this  despite  thorough  washing  is  not  altogether
removed.  Such  washing  is  in  many  respects  beneficial,  but  at  the  same
time  it  deprives  us  of  a  substance  highly  important  to  the  body.

Animals  consume  sand  instinctively  and  become  ill  if  they  cannot  get
it.  We  have  only  to  instance  hens  and  canaries,  etc.,  whose  plumage
soon  becomes  rough  and  ragged  if  they  are  deprived  of  sand.  Ostriches,
with  their  magnificent  feathers,  inhabit  the  desert;  in  ostrich-farms
where  sand  is  not  so  plentiful,  their  feathers  lose  in  beauty.  The  best
food  may  be  given,  but  without  sand  the  condition  of  the  feathers  can-
not be  improved.  And  for  man  also  a  certain  amount  of  sand  appears
to  be  a  necessity.  It  is  therefore  decidedly  better  to  eat  wholemeal,  and
bread  made  from  such,  than  to  consume  fine  flour,  white  bread  and  the
like,  for  there  are  always  small  particles  of  sand  adhering  to  the  outer
covering  of  the  grains  of  corn.

After  carefully  observing  animals,  I  have  commenced  a  series  of  ex-
periments to  ascertain  what  influence  the  consumption  of  small  quanti-
ties of  sand  has  on  human  beings.  The  results  have  been  so  satisfactory',
that  I  feel  called  upon  to  publish  them.  I  first  selected  the  purest  sand
I  could  get,  that  is  sea  sand,  although  probably  good  river  sand  would
have  answered  the  same  purpose.  The  sand  was  procured  from  the
coast  of  the  German  Ocean  and  was  so  fine  that  it  could  be  swallowed
without  difliculty.  It  is  interesting  to  know  that  such  sand  even  has  a
disinfecting  influence.  The  following  experiment  may  be  made:  In  a
room  where  the  air  has  been  fouled  by  burning  cotton-wool,  or  milk,
heat  a  few  handfuls  of  sea  sand  on  a  glowing  iron.  It  is  astonishing
how  quickly  the  smell  will  disappear.  The  window  should  be  kept
closed  during  the  experiment,  in  order  that  the  full  effect  of  the  sand
may  be  better  observed.

In  sandy  regions,  the  air  is  always  pure,  sand  acting  as  nature's  disin-
fectant. If  the  sand  is  to  any  extent  mixed  with  slime,  the  effect  will
not  be  so  great.

We  may  now  ask  whether  sand  may  not  exercise  a  similar  influence
internally  by  destroying  foul  gases  and  matter  generally;  whether  it
may  not,  to  speak  figuratively,  dry  up  the  swamp  in  which  the  dreaded
bacilli  thrive.

The  numerous  experiments  which  I  have  conducted  with  a  view  to
ascertaining  the  eff'ect  of  sand,  all  speak  to  its  high  value.  I  may  here
give  a  striking  instance,

A  lady  had  from  youth  suff'ered  from  constipation,  various  remedies


558  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


having  been  tried  without  effect.  At  50  years  of  age  the  complaint  be-
came so  troublesome,  that  her  condition  was  really  dangerous.  No
purgative  was  of  any  avail  and  sometimes  for  weeks— once  even  for  5
weeks,  as  she  said— the  bowels  failed  to  act.  When  she  came  to  me,  I
ordered  her  4-5  friction  and  hip  baths  daily,  and  a  diet  of  wholemeal
and  acid  fruits.  This  treatment  seldom  fails  in  constipation,  but  here  it
was  insufficient.  I  therefore  experimented  by  administering  two  to
three  times  a  day  a  pinch  of  sea  sand  directly  after  the  meal.  The  re-
sult was  rapid  and  successful  beyond  expectation.  Even  on  the  second
day  the  bowels  opened.  The  stool  at  first  was  in  the  form  of  black,
hard,  spherical  masses,  becoming  in  time,  however,  absolutely  normal.

The  sand,  we  see,  here  exercised  a  most  satisfactory  effect;  and  it  is
certainly  a  natural  means  of  maintaining  the  digestion,  or  aiding  in  re-
storing it.

The  orthodox  practitioner,  of  course,  will  deny  that  sand  can  have
any  effect,  as  it  is  almost  insoluble,  at  most  traces  of  it  being  assimilated.
He  will  endeavor  to  determine  precisely,  by  the  aid  of  chemistry,  the
materials  necessary  for  building  up  the  body.  He  will  finally  decide  the
various  constituents,  giving  amount  and  weight,  and  would  like  to  lay
down  exactly  how  much  of  each  should  be  consumed  daily.  Woe  to
him  who  delivers  himself  to  dietetical  treatment  thus  based  on  theory!
The  attempt  has  even  been  made  to  procure  the  nutritive  con-
stituents of  the  food  as  pure  as  possible,  presenting  them  in  the  form  of
an  extract  to  the  system.  This  is  a  gross  error.  The  body  not  only  re-
quires material;  its  organs  must  also  perform  work,  since  it  is  only
through  their  activity,  that  they  can  become  healthy  and  remain  in
order.  The  organs  of  digestion  must  themselves  obtain  the  extracts
from  the  food,  thus  making  blood,  flesh,  bone,  sinew,  hair,  etc.,  and
digestive  juices,  such  as  acids  and  alcohol.  The  necessary  constituents
are  all  contained  in  sufficient  quantity  in  natural  foods,  and  the  body  has
only  to  possess  the  requisite  power  to  distil  them.  The  body  must  also
generate  gases  to  regulate  the  motion  of  the  foods  and  conduct  them
downwards.  Were  there  no  sufficient  generation  of  gases,  obstructions
would  take  place  and  the  intestines  would  become  wholly  incapacitated,
the  matter  would  then  probably  pass  upwards  and  headaches  would
result.  Such  irregularities,  however,  can  only  occur  when  the  body  is
already  encumbered,  or  when  unnatural  food  is  consumed.

I  must  devote  some  remarks  to  the  feeding  of  children.  For  infants,
the  only  natural  food  is  the  mother's  milk,  and  children  unable  to  get
it  are  under  a  great  disadvantage  and  will  certainly  become  encumbered
with  morbid  matter.  Fig.  48  shows  a  child  who  was  nursed  by  his
mother. Compare  with  this  the  children  shown  in  Figs  49  and  50,  who


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


559


were  brought  up  artificially.  The  head  in  each  case  is  far  too  large  and
the  abdomen  much  too  protrusive.  Such  children  are  nearly  always
precocious.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  times  that  there  are  now  so  many
infant  prodigies,  exhibiting  in  the  most  tender  years  astounding  intellec-
tual capacity.  The  poor  little  creatures  are  greatly  to  be  pitied:  for  a
time  they  serve  as  exhibits,  and  the  deluded  parents  are  usually  quite
proud  of  them.  But  none  of  such  children  fulfil  the  high  hopes  set  in
them,  for  precocity  is  a  morbid  symptom.  Precocity  is  found  when,
through  extreme  pressure  towards  the  brain,  there  is  an  unbalanced


Fig.  48. — Normal  Form.

Figure: harmoniously developed. — Head: size normal for the age. — All other

parts  are  likewise  normal. Observe  especially  the  normal  size  of  the  abdomen.

The  child  was  nursed  by  its  mother  and  could  walk  when  9  months  old. When

photographed,  it  was  a  year  old.


development  of  the  latter.  If  one  or  another  part  is  encumbered,  such  is
stirred  to  activity.  Phrenologists  also  speak  of  such  partial  develop-
ment, but  they  fail  to  recognize  that  it  is  morbid,  since  they  are  ignorant
of  the  cause.

I  have  found  children  who  at  7  years  of  age  would  converse  with  the
understanding  of  a  person  of  twenty;  yet  at  the  latter  age  such  children
will  usually  be  far  behind  their  companions.  This  applies  also  to  music-
al prodigies,  who  at  first  cause  the  greatest  sensation,  but  in  the  course
of  years  disappear  from  memory,  not  having  had  the  necessary  talent
to  become  true  artists.


560


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


3. Where  shall we eat?

This  question  may  appear  superfluous,  but  it  is  not.  As  already  re-
marked, much  depends  upon  the  hmgs  being  properly  fed.  Good,  pure
air  is  quite  as  indispensable  for  life  and  for  raising  the  vitality  as  is
good  food. When  eating,  we  involuntarily  breathe  deeply  and  the  lungs


Fig.  49. — General  Encumbrance.

Figure:  thick  and  clumsy. — Head:  too  large. — Forehead:  cushioned. — Nose:  too
thick. — Mouth:  open. — Neck:  too  short  and  thick;  line  of  demarcation  at  neck
missing. — Abdomen:  much  too  prominent. — Arms  and  legs:  much  swollen. — The
child  was  brought  up  on  sterilized  milk,  and  when  1  year  and  9  months  old,  could

still scarcely  sit  alone.


receive  much  air;  air  is  also  swallowed  and  conducted  to  the  stomach.
Now  it  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  this  air  is  good
or  bad.  It  is  best  to  eat  out  of  doors,  if  the  weather  permits;  at  any  rate,
the  room  should  be  light,  sunny  and  well  ventilated.

This  is  of  special  importance  in  the  case  of  invalids,  who  are  en-
deavoring to  raise  their  lowered  vitality.  Adherence  to  natural  ele-
ments plays  an  important  part  in  the  quest  for  health.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


561


4, When  shall  we  eat?

This  question  must  be  gone  into  in  detail.  In  general,  we  may  say  that
one  should  eat  when  hungi-y.  But  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  so  regulate
our  manner  of  living  that  we  can,  as  it  were,  postpone  our  hunger.  Most
people  live  so  unnaturally,  that  hunger  is  experienced  at  wrong  times,
and  moreover  there  is  not  then  a  healthy  appetite.  If  we  regard  the
animals,  we  find  that  they  nearly  all  show  most  signs  of  hunger  in  the


Fig.  50  Fig.  51

General  Encumbrance.
A  child  of  three  years  seen  from  front  and  side.
Figure:  heavy,  awkward. — Head:  too  large. — Forehead: extremely  cushioned. —
Eyes:  much  compressed,  nearly  blind. —A^ecA-:  line  of  demarcation  missing,  head
scarcely  to be  turned. — Abdomen: hangs down, loaded with foreign matter. —
Arms  and  legs:  thick,  but  stiff  and  inflexible. — This  child  was  also  brought  up

on sterilized milk.


morning  and  take  their  chief  meal  then. There  is  a  very  good  reason
for  this,  traceable  to  the  effect  of  the  sun.

The  day  is  divided  into  two  parts,  an  animating  and  a  tranquillizing
period.  The  period  of  animation  commences  with  the  rising  sun,  which
awakens  the  whole  of  nature  to  renewed  activity.  The  influence  of  the
morning  sun  on  plants  is  well  known  to  eveiy  gardener  and  country-
man. Trees  which  receive  no  morning  sun  bear  little  or  no  fruit.  If  in
the  morning  the  sun  only  shines  upon  some  parts  of  the  tree,  it  will
usually  be  found  that  it  is  only  on  such  parts  that  fruit  will  grow. Nor


562  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bmjers'  Guide


can  man  withdraw  from  the  sun's  influence,  try  as  he  may.  If  he  obeys
the  call  of  nature,  rises  early  and  hastens  into  the  open  air,  he  will  im-
mediately experience  the  beneficent  and  animating  effect  of  the  sun's
rays.

Naturally,  he  must  also  observe  the  monition  of  the  period  of  tran-
quillization,  which  commences  the  moment  the  sun  has  passed  the
meridian,  that  is  at  noon.  The  effect  of  this  period  is  to  gradually  cause
the  activity  to  decrease  and  flag,  until  finally  the  setting  sun  brings  rest
and  quietude,  and  mankind  like  the  animals  yearns  for  sleep.

During  the  period  of  animation,  therefore,  we  are  excited  to  activity,
the  body  is  strengthened  and  invigorated.  The  tranquillizing  period  re-
laxes, the  body  becomes  fatigued  and  there  is  a  desire  for  rest.  This
extends  also  to  the  organs  of  digestion.  In  the  morning,  digestion  is
better  than  in  the  afternoon,  and  towards  evening,  it  will  become  still
weaker.

From  this,  it  follows  that  food  should  principally  be  eaten  in  the  morn-
ing and  early  part  of  the  day,  and  that  in  the  afternoon  only  small  quan-
tities should  be  consumed.  Invalids  especially  must  observe  this,  for
here  they  have  a  means  of  utilizing  their  vitality  as  far  as  possible  and
of  restoring  it  to  the  normal.

It  may  be  objected  that  persons  who  are  ill  rarely  have  any  appetite
in  the  morning,  and  that  without  hunger,  they  cannot  be  expected  to  eat.
Such  absence  of  appetite  in  the  morning,  however,  is  a  sure  sign  that  the
organs  of  digestion  are  either  very  weak,  or  have  been  compelled  to  do
their  work  at  the  wrong  time.  Our  modern  system  of  illumination  has
brought  it  about  that  we  too  often  turn  night  into  day.  So  magnificent
are  the  achievements  of  civilization,  that  we  too  often  use  them  to  our
disadvantage.  It  is  therefore  no  wonder  that  nervosity  has  gained  the
upper  hand  and  caused  the  present  century  to  be  styled  the  "age  of
nervousness."  But  it  is  not  the  age  that  brings  neurasthenia,  but  our
manner  of  living,  which  is  such  as  to  favor  dorsal  encumbrance  in  par-
ticular.

The  meals  are  taken  much  too  late,  and  indeed,  in  many  circles  the
evening  meal  is  taken  at  a  time  when  one  should  properly  long  have
been  in  bed.  Food  consumed  at  so  late  an  hour  cannot  be  thoroughly
digested,  and  taxes  the  digestive  apparatus  to  such  an  extent,  that  the
latter  has  not  recovered  by  the  morning,  so  that  there  is  no  appetite  ex-
perienced. Furthermore,  during  the  night,  the  body  will  not  have  en-
joyed any  real  rest,  as  the  undigested  food  excites  it  to  work,  wherefore
in  the  morning  there  is,  perhaps,  more  fatigue  than  there  was  the  night
before.

It  requires  but  a  little  determination  to  change  all  this,  and  persons
who  are  ill,  must  cultivate  this  energy  if  they  wish  to  be  cured.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide  5(33

Let  anyone  try  going  to  bed  without  supper  one  night,  or,  at  any  rate,
after  but  a  very  light  meal,  and  there  will  certainly  be  hunger  felt  in  the
morning.  Of  course,  it  will  be  necessary,  in  following  this  plan,  to
change  the  entire  manner  of  living.  Many  find  it  difficult  to  accustom
themselves  to  going  to  bed  early.  It  is  all  a  matter  of  custom,
however.  Rise  early  and  do  not  be  hindered  by  any  tired  feeling.  In
the  evening  there  will  certainly  be  the  desire  to  retire  early  to  rest,  and
the  body  will  accustom  itself  to  the  natural  system  of  living  sooner  than
one  would  expect.

We  must  arrange  to  do  all  our  work  as  far  as  possible  during  the
period  of  animation,  this,  and  not  the  period  of  tranquillization  being
that  intended  for  labor.  It  is  during  the  former  period  alone,  too,  that
that  act  should  be  performed,  which  is  of  such  importance  for  the
human  race — the  act  of  procreation.  The  fecundation  will  then  be  more
complete  and  the  fruit  itself  beneficially  influenced.  And  when  we  re-
member that  it  is  a  matter  of  procreating  a  better  and  healthier  genera-
tion, it  should  be  the  endeavor  of  everyone  to  secure  the  best  conditions.
It  has  frequently  occurred  that  men  who  have  believed  themselves  im-
potent, because  in  the  period  of  tranquillization  their  body  had  not  the
necessary  vigor  to  impregnate,  have  found  that  during  the  period  of  ani-
mation they  were  normally  capable  of  begetting.  The  essential  differ-
ence existing  between  the  two  periods  is  here  very  clearly  seen.  But
even  normally  healthy  persons  are  advised  to  abstain  from  performing
the  sex  act  at  night,  as  it  is  then  weakening  for  the  body,  and  the  cares
of  business,  vexation  and  irregular  living  all  exert  an  unfavorable  in-
fluence upon  the  fruit.  And  who  is  not  prepared  to  avoid  all  that  will
be  injurious  to  his  children!  If  those  who  live  unnaturally  only  have
sex  commerce  in  the  morning,  the  results  of  their  false  manner  of  living
will  not  be  transmitted  so  directly  to  the  embryo,  since  the  body  during
the  night  partly  recuperates  its  strength.  Consider,  for  instance,  the
baneful  results  of  alcoholism.  A  child  procreated  in  a  condition  of
semi-intoxication  will  nearly  always  prove  mentally  sluggish  and  may
even  become  imbecile.  Other  offences  against  nature  may  perhaps  be
followed  by  less  disastrous  results,  but  they  are  always  attended  by  evils
of  one  kind  or  another.

I  therefore  repeat  that  the  vitality  can  be  maintained  longer  and  re-
stored more  quickly,  if  we  observe  these  periods  of  animation  and  tran-
quillization. We  must  so  order  our  life  that  we  do  the  most  important
duties  in  the  morning  and  consume  the  principal  meal  then,  so  that  we
may  in  the  afternoon  gradually  relax  our  energy  and  in  the  evening  re-
tire early  to  bed.

Acute  diseases  are  more  malignant  during  the  period  of  tranquilliza-
tion, because  the  body  cannot  then  offer  so  much  resistance. Who  has


564  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


not  remarked  that  fever  always  increases  towards  evening?  This  is  be-
cause the  other  bodily  functions  have  now  become  weaker.

But  also  the  year  as  a  whole,  has  a  period  of  animation  and  of  tran-
quillization.  The  former  commences  as  the  summer  solstice  is  ap-
proached, and  there  appears  to  have  been  an  instinctive  feeling  amongst
various  nations  to  celebrate  a  great  festival  to  commemorate  the  event.

Even  amidst  frost  and  cold  the  period  of  animation  makes  its  in-
fluence felt,  spring  being  the  season  where  its  power  is  everywhere
clearly  experienced.  Its  influence  on  the  trees  is  easy  to  be  remarked.
If  timber  is  felled  in  autumn,  it  is  good  and  strong,  but  if  not  felled  till
February,  or  later,  it  will  not  keep,  but  is  soon  destroyed  by  insects.

During  the  period  of  animation,  we  notice  signs  of  quickening
throughout  the  whole  range  of  nature.  The  animals  become  lively  and
active  and  have  their  breeding  time  at  this  period.  Plants  bud  and
grow  with  vigor.  The  period  of  animation  is  a  time  of  growth  and
progress.

The  flowers,  too,  have  quite  a  different  odor  now  than  during  the
period  of  tranquillization,  and  some  kinds  of  plants,  like  the  rose,
towards  the  end  of  summer  and  in  autumn,  never  produce  such  ex-
quisitely perfumed  flowers  as  in  spring  and  early  summer.

Once  the  sun  has  reached  its  highest  point  and  commences  to  descend,
the  period  of  tranquillization  rapidly  sets  in.  The  animals  become
quieter,  in  the  vegetable  world  there  is  no  longer  such  active  growth,
and  generally  speaking  only  those  fruits  are  ripened  which  were  formed
during  the  preceding  period.

During  the  period  of  tranquillization,  the  so-called  epidemic  diseases
make  their  appearance,  more  often  than  during  the  period  of  anima-
tion; for  fever  now,  as  in  the  daily  period  of  tranquillization,  finds  re-
sistance offered  by  the  body.

Animals  in  a  state  of  nature  now  have  less  desire  for  food,  and  on  the
approach  of  cold,  become  so  weak,  that  such  scanty  food  as  can  then  be
obtained,  suffices  to  sustain  the  body.  The  digestive  power  gradually  be-
comes weaker  during  the  period  of  tranquillization  and  men  also  should
therefore  consume  less  food.  It  is  therefore  quite  correct  to  keep  fasts
in  winter.  Unfortunately,  we  act  just  in  the  contrary  manner:  in  winter
we  celebrate  all  manner  of  festivals,  and  the  doctors  even  preach  to  us
the  necessity  of  consuming  more  food  at  this  season  in  order  that  we
may  be  able  to  withstand  the  cold — an  error  which  is  accompanied  by
grievous  results.  A  glance  at  the  animals  in  nature  ought  to  be  sufficient
to  open  the  eyes  of  everyone.  Keepers  and  foresters  know  well  that  in
winter,  animals  must  not  receive  too  much  food  if  they  are  to  remain
healthy.

In  the  tropics,  where  the  relative  position  of  the  sun  undergoes  but


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  565

little  change,  the  moon  appears  to  exercise  a  stronger  influence.  There
the  period  of  animation  alternates  with  that  of  tranquillization  twice  a
month;  the  daily  change  is  naturally  the  same  as  with  us.  It  has  been
observed  in  the  tropics  that  timber  felled  whilst  the  moon  is  waxing
does  not  keep,  whereas  that  felled  whilst  the  moon  is  waning,  is  greatly
superior  in  this  respect.  We  have  here,  then,  the  same  phenomenon  as
we  observe  with  regard  to  the  course  of  the  year.

What  may  be  the  explanation  of  these  phenomena?

I  have  thought  out  an  explanation;  whether  it  is  correct  or  not,  re-
mains to  be  decided.  I  here  give  it  merely  as  an  hypothesis.  I  repeat
therefore,  that  the  following  is  merely  a  theory,  which  does  not  neces-
sarily belong  to  this  work,  but  which  1  do  not  wish  to  withhold  from  my
readers.

The  phenomena  of  periods  of  animation  and  tranquillization  must
have  the  same  cause  as  those  of  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter.
They  depend,  as  everyone  knows,  upon  the  sun  and  the  motion  of  the
earth.  We  are  all  accustomed  to  regard  the  sun  as  directly  bestowing
light  and  heat.  This,  in  my  opinion,  is  an  error;  probably  the  earth
generates  light  and  heat  itself  through  its  rotation.  Naturally  the  sun
exerts  an  influence,  probably  transmitting  to  us  some  kind  of  magnetic
rays;  and  it  is  through  the  intense  friction  between  these  and  the  earth
that  light  and  heat  are  produced,  which  are  then  radiated  by  the  earth.
It  is  well  known  that  both  heat  and  light  decrease  rapidly,  the  higher
we  ascend.  If  the  heat  and  light  rays  came  directly  from  the  sun,  they
would,  however,  exercise  their  influence  at  elevations  also,  especially
when  a  solid  body  is  there  to  absorb  them.  The  earth  is  quickly  able  to
warm  the  air;  why  should  not  the  sun  be  equally  well  in  a  position  to  do
so,  if  it  really  radiates  heat?

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  earth  itself  generates  light  and  heat,  it  is
clear  that  these  must  be  most  intense  where  the  rotation,  and  therefore
the  friction,  is  greatest,  i.  e.,  at  the  tropics.  At  the  poles,  the  friction  is
practically  zero  and  there  we  find  cold  and  torpor.  The  cold  would  be
even  more  intense,  were  not  heat  transmitted  by  the  air  from  warmer
terrestrial  regions.  In  this  manner,  it  is  also  clear  whj'  we  have  only  one
torrid,  two  temperate  and  two  frigid  zones.

Figs.  52  and  53  represent  the  earth,  the  arrow  showing  the  direction
of  rotation;  a  may  indicate  our  point  of  observation.  The  solar  rays
always  travel  in  the  same  direction  parallel  to  one  another,  but  the
earth  alters  its  position.  Fig.  52  shows  the  position  of  the  earth  when
the  sun  (for  us  at  a)  has  just  risen;  Fig  53  shows  its  position  when  the
sun  is  setting.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  friction  against  the  magnetic  rays  in  the
morning,  when  they  meet  us,  must  be  much  greater  than  in  the  after-


566  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

noon,  when  they  follow  us.  The  action  of  the  rays  meeting  us  will
therefore  be  much  more  pronounced.

The  action  might  well  be  illustrated  by  means  of  a  grindstone.  If  we
hold  the  edge  of  the  blade  being  ground  pointing  against  the  direction
of  rotation,  the  effect  of  the  revolving  stone  will  be  much  greater  than
if  we  turn  the  blade  so  that  its  edge  points  in  the  direction  of  rotation.

The  earth  may  also,  in  respect  to  its  motion,  be  compared  to  an  im-
mense dynamo,  the  rotating  portion  of  which  rubs  against  the  so-called
brushes,  which  conduct  the  electricity  to  produce  useful  results.

Perhaps  some  may  object  that  usually  the  heat  is  more  intense  in  the
afternoon  than  during  the  morning.  The  reason  for  this  is  simply  that
the  heat  generated  is  conserved  and  increased  by  that  which  is  still  be-
ing generated.  The  increase,  however,  when  there  is  absence  of  wind,
will  be  much  less  during  the  afternoon  than  during  the  morning. The


Fig.  52  Fig.  53

wind  may  blow  the  hot  or  cold  air  from  other  regions,  and  so  change  the
conditions;  observations  must  therefore  be  made  on  calm  days.

The  force  of  rotation  of  the  earth  also  makes  its  influence  felt.  During
the  period  of  animation,  the  magnetic  rays,  since  they  meet  us,  exercise
a  greater  effect  than  during  the  period  of  tranquillization,  and  excite  us
to  activity. We  should  order  our  life  accordingly.

With  us  also,  the  effect  continues  for  a  certain  time,  so  that  it  is  not
till  the  afternoon  that  we  gradually'  notice  the  decrease  in  energy.

If,  however,  we  compare  our  vigor  in  the  morning  with  our  capacity
for  work  in  the  afternoon,  we  notice  a  striking  diff'erence.  The  repose
at  night  is  not  the  sole  reason  of  the  matutinal  vigor,  which  enables  us
to  perform  all  kinds  of  mental  and  physical  labor  much  more  easily.
Were  this  so,  then  a  good  sleep  at  noon  would  have  the  same  effect,
which,  however,  is  by  no  means  the  case.  In  my  opinion,  the  cause  is
doubtless  to  be  found  in  the  same  power  which  generates  light  and
heat,  and  it  is  a  grievous  error,  by  artificial  means  to  war  against  the
immutable  laws  of  nature.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  5G7


THE  SCIENCE  OF  FACIAL  EXPRESSION  IN
RELATION  TO  PHRENOLOGY


As  phrenology  also  concerns  itself  with  the  shape  of  the  human
head,  I  will  here  add  a  few  w^ords  concerning  its  relation  to  the
Science  of  Facial  Expression.
Phrenology  starts  with  the  assumption  that  each  part  of  the  brain  is
the  seat  of  some  particular  mental  faculty. If,  then,  any  part  be  ab-
normally prominent,  the  faculty  located  there  is  supposed  to  be  corres-
pondingly developed.

The  brain  is  normally  so  formed,  that  no  single  important  faculty
preponderates,  and  it  is  only  when  the  head  becomes  encumbered  that
this  can  occur.  The  first  result  of  any  encumbrance  is  always  to  stimu-
late, as  can  be  seen  especially  in  case  of  precocious  children;  later,  how-
ever, activity  is  obstructed  by  the  morbid  matter.  It  is  worthy  of  re-
mark that,  in  point  of  fact,  persons  suft'ering  from  frontal  encumbrance,
are  frequently  those  in  whom  benevolence,  reverence,  faith,  hope,  etc.,
the  seat  of  M-hich,  according  to  the  phrenologist,  is  in  the  front  part  of
the  brain,'  are  markedly  developed.  Persons  in  whom  the  encumbrance
is  wholly  frontal,  are  also  just  those  who  have  tact  and  are  fond  of
society.  Those  afflicted  with  back  encumbrance,  on  the  other  hand,
shrink  from  any  calling  in  which  they  are  compelled  to  have  much
social  intercourse  with  others,  and  if  compelled  to  follow  such  an  occu-
pation, are  driven  to  despair.

.  The  phrenologist  has  observed  the  occurrence  of  one-sided  inental
activity,  but  he  does  not  understand  the  reason  of  it.  The  Science  of
Facial  Expression,  however,  can  instruct  him,  at  all  events,  to  some  ex-
tent. Unequal  development  of  the  brain  results  from  encumbrance  of
any  kind.  From  this,  it  follows  that  this  unbalanced  mental  state  may
be  again  rendered  normal  by  removal  of  the  encumbrance.  And  this
is  a  matter  of  great  importance  where  dangerous  passions  or  tenden-
cies have  resulted  from  irregular  mental  development,  e.  g.,  rage,  de-
pression, impulse  to  suicide,  lack  of  energy.  It  is  often  thought  that
these  characteristics  are  the  outcome  solel}^  of  the  age  in  which  we  live,
and  regret  is  expressed  that  they  appear  also  in  children.  This,  how-
ever, is  erroneous;  the  cause  lies  in  the  diseased  physical  conditions
everywhere  prevailing,  and  which,  unfortunately,  are  not  yet  sufficiently
recognized  by  those  persons  who  command  public  attention.


5()8  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CONCLUSION


MANY  readers  may  consider  that  the  explanations  given  in this
work  are  not  sufficiently  scientific. My  aim,  however,  has  been
to  write  plainly  and  practically,  so  as  to  make  myself  intelligible
to  all. This  does  not  render  the  subject-matter  in  itself  unscientific.

What,  indeed,  is  science,  but  a  collection  of  experiences,  which  men
have  reduced  to  order  and  put  upon  a  clear  basis?  But  everybody  is
free  to  gather  experience,  whether  he  belongs  to  a  particular  fraternity
or  not;  and  whether  he  has  been  trained  in  this  branch  or  that.  Indeed,
it  has  often  been  shown  that  the  so-called  amateur  or  layman,  observes
in  a  different  manner  from  the  "specialist,"  and  strikes  out  on  new  lines
to  arrive  at  the  truth.  The  professional  man,  on  the  other  hand,  trained
on  hard  and  fast  principles,  continues  to  jog  along  the  old  familiar
paths.  This  work  is  the  result  of  thirty  years  of  observation,  and  the
conclusions  drawn  have  been  proved  correct  in  thousands  of  cases.  I  am
far  from  asserting  that  I  have  attained  perfection;  but  at  all  events,  I
can  say,  with  a  good  conscience,  that  that  which  I  offer,  has  been  well
tried,  and  has  stood  the  test.


PRINCIPLES


OF


LLLCTRO-MLDICINL
LLLCTRO-5URGLRY


AND


RADIOLOGY


D


By  ANTHONY  MATIJACA,  M.D.,  D.O.,  N.D.


Dr.  a.  Matuaca


PREFACE

'INHERE  are  many  large  volumes  published  on  the  subject  of
Electro-Medicine  and  Electro-Surgery  which  are  very  val-
uable for  reference  to  those  who  are  familiar  with  the  prin-
ciples of  this  subject;  but  as  far  as  the  writer  is  aware,  there
is  no  book  published  which  explains  briefly,  in  a  practical
manner,  all  the  essential  points,  from  which  the  student  and
practitioner  can  easily  acquire  the  knowledge  of  this  compar-
atively new,  but  thoroughly  rational  and  scientific  method  of
treatment,  which  can  assist  the  body  in  the  performance  of  its
physiological  functions.  On  this  account,  the  writer  has  de-
cided to  prepare  this  work.

Although  this  work  is  not  a  complete  treatise  on  the  subject,
realizing  that  a  successful  electro-therapist  must  be  an  expert
electrician,  as  well  as  a  good  physician,  it  was  the  writers  aim
to  make  as  clear  as  possible  the  production  and  the  therapeu-
tical application  of  all  the  different  forms  of  electricity,  and
to  include  all  the  information  which  is  essential  for  the  suc-
cessful application  in  the  relief  and  cure  of  disease.

Those  facts  and  experiments  which  are  of  value  only  to
the  research  worker,  and  are  not  essential  in  the  practice  of
electro-medicine,  electro-surgery  and  radiology,  are  not  in-
cluded, as  that  would  make  this  work  too  large,  complex  and
impractical.

During  several  years  of  study  and  practice,  having  become
fully  acquainted  with  most  of  the  literature  on  the  subject,
which  has  helped  him  in  gaining  the  present  knowledge  and
thereby  enabled  him  to  prepare  this  work,  the  author  ac-
knowledges gratefully  the  value  of  all  the  works  published

[571]


572  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

in  English,  German,  French  and  Italian  languages,  and  con-
siders their  authors  as  pioneer  workers  in  bringing  the  electro-
medicine,  electro-surgerij  and  radiology  to  a  science  which
will,  in  the  near  future,  undoubtedly  supplant  both  present
method  of  surgery  and  treatment  by  drugs.

While  reading  this  work,  if  one  does  not  find  full  informa-
tion upon  some  subject,  the  writer  will  esteem  it  a  favor  if  his
attention  is  called  to  the  fact,  so  that  in  future  editions  he  may
try  to  clear  up  these  points,  thereby  making  the  work  more
practical  and  interesting.

With  the  feeling  that  this  work  will  be  of  service  to  the  pro-
fession, the  writer  sends  it  into  the  world  with  the  earnest  de-
sire that  it  may  kindle  the  spirit  of  research  along  these  lines,
and  serve  to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  humanity.

ANTHONY  M ATI  J  ACA


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  573


INTRODUCTION

Q

HISTORICAL

Although  electricity  has  been  mentioned  by  Thales  (6M  B.  C.)
•^~^  Aristotle,  Pliny,  Largud,  Claudius  Galenas,  and  other  celebrated
Greek  and  Roman  scientists  long  before,  and  after,  the  Christian  era,
the  history  of  the  application  of  electricity  for  the  relief  and  cure  of
disease  did  not  begin  until  1600,  when  "the  father  of  electricity,"  Dr.
William  Gilbert,  physician  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  published  in  England  a
small  treatise  on  the  subject  of  magnets  and  electrones.

In  1672,  Otto  von  Quericke,  a  German  philosopher,  and  a  burgomaster
of  Magdenburg,  invented  the  static  machine.

In  17W,  Jallabert  of  Geneva  published  a  treatise  on  the  medical  use
of  electricity  entitled  "Experimenta  Electrica  Usibus  Medicis  Applicata,"
in  which  he  reported  the  successful  treatment  of  various  muscular  and
nervous  diseases.

Between  1750  and  1757,  cures  of  paralysis  were  reported  by  Brydone,
Sauvages  of  Montpellier,  Bertholn,  Spray  and  De  Hderi,  the  latter  of
whom  also  reported  a  large  number  of  electric  cures  of  spasmodic  and
nervous  affections.  About  the  same  time  also,  Shaeffer  and  Nebel  an-
nounced remarkable  cures  of  rheumatism,  toothache,  paralysis  of  the
eye,  neuralgic  pains,  hypochondria,  etc.  This  caused  such  an  interest
throughout  England  that  in  1767  electricity  was  used  as  a  therapeutic!
agent  at  the  Middlesex  Hospital  (London)  and  a  few  years  later  at
Saint  Bartholomew's  Hospital  (London).

In  1780,  Luigi  Galvani,  an  Italian  physician  and  professor  of  anatomy
at  the  University  of  Bologna,  after  experimenting  with  frogs,  accident-
ally discovered  the  galvanic  current  and  muscular  contractions  pro-
duced by  that  current.  Being  unable  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  these
contractions,  in  1791  he  published  a  treatise  entitled,  "De  Viribus  Elec-
tricitatis  in  Motii  Musculari  Comentarius."

Galvani's  discovery  attracted  the  attention  of  scientists  throughout
the  world,  and  five  years  later  Alessandro  Volta,  professor  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pavia  (Italy)  discovered  that  the  muscular  contractions  in
Galvani's  experiments  were  due  to  the  difference  in  potential  between
the  two  metals  (iron  and  copper,  which  were  used  in  Galvani's  experi-
ments), and  thus  he  gave  his  name  to  the  science  of  Voltaic  electricity,
more  frequently  called  Galvanism.

In  1831,  Faraday  gave  to  the  world  his  discovery  of  "induction,"  or  the
production  of  electricity  by  the  magnetic  influence,  known  today  as  Far-
adic  electricity.


574  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


In  1891,  Nikola  Tesla,  a  Croatian  electro-engineer,  in  a  historic  lecture
before  the  American  Institute  of  Electrical  Engineers,  called  the  atten-
tion of  scientific  men  throughout  the  world  to  the  wonderful  and  pecu-
liar properties  of  alternating  currents  of  high  potential  and  great  fre-
quency (High  Frequency  currents).

In  1895,  Dr.  William  Conrad  Roentgen  of  Berlin  discovered  the  X  (or
unknown)  rays.

PROGRESS  OF  ELECTRO-THERAPEUTICS

Like  most  of  the  great  sciences  and  the  great  religions,  electro-therapy
was  born  among  the  humble  and  lowly,  and  until  the  eighteenth  century
the  leading  authorities  in  electro-therapeutics  were  physicists,  chemists,
priests,  monks  and  others  who,  however  eminent  in  other  walks  of  life,
knew  very  little  or  nothing  of  medicine.

All  the  experiments  and  cures  brought  about  before  the  production  of
galvanic  current  were  made  with  Franklinic  or  '  frictional"  (Static)
electricity.

In  those  early  days,  and  even  later,  the  knowledge  of  physiology  and
pathology  had  not  reached  that  degree  of  strength  and  breadth  of  sure-
ness  to  furnish  good  foundcdion  on  which  to  erect  the  science,  and  in
addition  the  apparatus  for  generating  electricity  was  bulky  and  unre-
liable, and  electrical  measurements  were  not  yet  discovered.  As  a  re-
sult, electricity  was  applied  to  the  symptoms  and  not  to  the  cause  of
disease;  hence,  frequent  failures  were  inevitable.

The  symptoms  most  treated  were  blindness,  deafness,  inability  of  mo-
tion, etc.,  which  are  now  known  to  depend,  in  many  instances,  upon
incurable  pathological  conditions.  Considering  the  .simple  forms  of  elec-
trical apparatus  available  at  that  time,  there  can  be  no  question  that  re-
markable cures  were  effected,  and  although  the  cures  brought  about  by
this  treatment  attracted  crowds  of  invalids,  yet  by  the  ignorant  and  su-
perstitious they  were  considered  either  as  miracles  or  witchcraft.

When  chemistry,  physics,  physiology,  and  later  pathology,  came  to  its
assistance,  electro-therapy  attracted  the  attention  of  scientists  and  pro-
gressive physicians  throughout  the  world,  and  although  it  had  to  fight
its  way,  step  by  step,  in  the  face  of  many  difficulties,  and  the  worst  of
them  all,  the  passive  resistance  of  narrow-minded  physicians  who  could
not  realize  that  all  the  therapeutic  methods  are  more  or  less  limited,  and
that  there  is  some  good  to  be  derived  from  every  method  of  healing,  this
science  has  done  more  in  conquering  ailments  which  were  considered
incurable  than  any  other  branch  of  medicine,  and  it  bids  fair  to  unlock
the  door  to  a  future  medical  era  of  which  our  generation  has  no  reason-
able conception  at  this  time.

FIELD  OF  ELECTRICITY  IN  MEDICINE

Some  have  said  that  electricity  is  life,  and  although  this  is  too  altru-
istic a  statement  to  make,  there  is  no  doubt  that  whenever  the  body  is
highly  electrified,  it  is  at  the  flood  tide  of  vitality.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihujers'  Guide  575

Matter  cannot  exist  as  such  without  the  constant  passage  of  electric
currents  through  the  substance  of  which  it  is  composed,  and  the  "physi-
cian" who  realizes  this,  will  be  better  equipped  to  combat  disease.  To
practitioners  who  Ixiiow  how  to  use  electricity  scientifically,  so  as  to  in-
fluence pathological  conditions  in  the  hun^an  body  in  such  a  way  that
this  force  will  assist  nature  or  call  forth  the  latent  energies  and  thus
hasten  the  restorative  processes,  electro-therapy  becomes  of  real  value
and  gives  satisfaction  to  both  the  physician  and  the  patient.

The  effects  produced  by  electricity  may  be  classified  as  mechanical,
chemical,  thermic,  actinic  and  psychic.

The  field  of  application  of  electricity  in  the  healing  art  is  a  large  one,
and  the  indications  for  its  use  in  therapeutics  are  plentiful,  but  this  is
only  to  the  practitioner  who  is  well  versed  in  this  science,  for  the  prac-
titioner who  is  not  acquainted  with  it  will  seldom,  if  ever,  see  any  indi-
cations for  its  use.

By  means  of  different  electrical  currents  and  modalities,  we  are  able
to  cause  powerful  muscular  contractions  of  voluntary  and  involuntary
muscular  fibres;  stimulate  the  nerves  and  tune  them  to  normal  vibration,
producing  profound  sensory  effects;  relieve  pain  or  over-irritation  and
inflammatory  conditions;  dilate  or  constrict  cutaneous  blood  vessels,
and  increase  or  stop  hemorrhage;  increase  or  decrease  the  blood  pres-
sure without  producing  heart  depression;  correct  faulty  metabolism,
and  hasten  elimination  of  waste  products,  such  as  urea,  uric  acid,  carbon
dioxide,  solidified  lime  deposits,  etc;  harden  or  liquefy  the  tissue;  pro-
duce anaesthesia  and  artificial  respiration;  decompose  and  introduce
through  the  unbroken  skin  various  remedies,  direct  to  the  seat  of  pain
with  a  view  of  obtaining  the  desired  effect,  etc.

Employing  same  in  diagnosis,  we  are  able  to  differentiate  the  forms
of  paralysis — whether  due  to  a  brain  lesion,  or  to  a  lesion  in  the  spinal
cord — test  muscular  degeneration,  etc.;  locate  foreign  bodies,  structural
dislocations  and  malpositions  within  the  body;  differentiate  various
gynecological  conditions,  e.  g.,  pyosalpinx  from  ovarian  neuralgia,  etc.

In  addition  to  the  above  mentioned  therapeutic  properties,  various
electrical  modalities  have  been  found  of  special  value  in  minor  surgery,
while  the  value  of  light,  heat,  ozone,  and  mechanical  vibration  produced
electrically  has  been  exemplified  in  the  successful  treatment  of  various
nervous,  rheumatic,  respiratory,  skin  and  other  affections.  Some  of
the  future  possibilities  of  electricity  in  therapeutics  are  the  abstraction
of  metallic  poisons  from  the  body  by  ionization,  safe  local  and  general
anaesthesia,  with  loss  of  consciousness  and  relaxation,  relief  of  pain
and  the  production  of  sleep,  etc.

Electro-therapy  is  not  a  cure-all,  and  will  not  take  the  place  of  all
other  methods,  but  it  is  a  single  remedial  agent  of  very  wide  range,
leaving  scarcely  a  condition  of  disease  in  which  it  cannot  be  used  in
some  form,  either  as  an  adjunct  or  a  remedy.


All  kinds  of  medical,  naturopathic  and  electrical  equipments,  or
apparatus  mentioned  in  this  work,  drugless  hospital  supplies,  and
medical  publications  of  every  description,  can  be  obtained  at  the
Naturopathic  Headquarters,  110  East  Mst  Street,  New  York  City.
Please  address  all  communications  to  Dr.  Benedict  Lust,  Proprietor.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  o77


CHAPTER  I

VOLTAGE,  AMPERAGE  AND  RESISTANCE


VOLT,  Ampere  and  Ohm  are  the  first  three  measurements  in  elec-
tricity, and  it  is  imperative  to  have  a  proper  idea  of  them  before
it  is  possible  to  apply  electricity  judiciously  for  therapeutic
purposes.

Voltage  {V)  or  Electro  Motive  Force  (E.  M.  F.)  or  Tension  is  the  pres-
sure or  force  produced  by  chemical  or  physical  means  which  overcomes
the  resistance  of  the  electrical  circuit,  and  therefore  maintains  the  cur-
rent. The  unit  of  this  pressure  is  called  a  Volt.

Amperage  (A)  or  Current  Strength  (C)  is  the  rate  at  which  electricity
flows,  or  that  part  of  electrical  energy  which  is  forced  by  the  voltage
over  the  resistance. The  unit  rate  of  current  flow  is  called  an  Ampere.

The  ampere,  being  more  current  than  can  be  used  for  general  appli-
cation to  the  human  body,  is  divided  into  one  thousand  parts  called
milliamperes  (m.  a.).

Resistance — For  the  reason  that  every  substance  off'ers  more  or  less
resistance  to  the  passage  of  electricity,  Ohnj  (R)  is  a  standard  by  which
the  resistance  of  all  material  can  be  measured.

An  Ohm  represents  the  resistance  offered  by  a  copper  ware  two  hun-
dred and  fifty  feet  long  and  one  twentieth  of  an  inch  in  diameter.

The  resistance  of  wires  or  other  conducting  material  changes  directly
as  their  length,  cross  section  and  conductivity,  therefore,  a  long  wire
offers  more  resistance  than  a  short  one,  and  a  thick  one  of  the  same
length  less  than  a  thin  one.

Conductors  and  Insulators

Silver,  copper,  gold,  aluminum,  zinc,  platinum  and  other  metals;
carbon,  acidulated  water,  etc.,  offer  very  little  resistance  to  the  passage
of  electricity  and  are  called  good  conductors,  while  the  human  body,
dry  wood,  cotton,  etc.,  which  offer  more  resistance  and  conduct  but
little  current  are  called  poor  conductors.

Oils,  amber,  shellac,  leather,  rubber,  wool,  porcelain,  glass,  etc.,  offer
very  great  resistance  to  the  passage  of  electricity,  and  are  called  non-
conductors, or  insulators.


578


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujcrs Guide


Table  of  Substances  in  Order  of  Their  Conductivity'

Good  Conductors  Poor  Conductors  Insulators

Alcohol
Ether
Dry  wood
Marble
Straw
Paper
Ice  at  0  degr.  G.


Metals

Coal

Graphite

Acids

Acidulated  water

Fresh  water

Vegetable  matter,

living
Animals
Soluble  salts
Linen
Cotton


Fat

Ice  at  25  degr.  C.

Phosphorus

Chalk

Rubber

Di*y  air

Oils

Porcelain

Leather

Wool

Silk

Mica

Glassi

Wax

Paraffin

Sulphur

A  RHEOSTAT  is  an  instrument  by  which  we  are  able  to  increase  or
decrease  the  resistance,  and  consequently  increase  or  decrease  the
current  strength.

WATT  is  the  unit  of  work,  or  power,  representing  one* seven  hundred
and  forty-sixth  part  of  a  horse  power  (1/746),  and  is  obtained  by  multi-
plying the  voltage  by  the  amperage.

Ohm's  Law

About  the  year  1827,  Dr.  G.  S.  Ohm  discovered  by  experiment  that  the
difference  in  voltage  between  any  two  points  in  an  electrical  circuit,  is
strictly  proportional  to  the  current,  all  other  conditions  remaining  con-
stant, and  on  the  discovery  of  this  law  the  following  formulas  were
elaborated :

Voltage  is  equal  to  the  amperage  multiplied  by  the  resistance

(V=AxR).
Amperage  is  equal to the  voltage  divided  by the  resistance

Resistance  is  equal to the  voltage  divided  bv  the  amperage

V

A

Examples :

1.  What  voltage  is  required  to  produce  a  current  of  10  amperes

in  a  circuit  having  a  resistance  of  10  ohms?
Solution: Voltage=10 (amperes) x  10 (ohms)  =100  volts.

2.  What  amperage  will  be  produced  by  the  pressure  of  100  volts

in  the  circuit  having  a  resistance  of  10  ohms?


Solution : Amperage


100  (volts)
10  (ohms)


=10  amperes.


*  This  table  has  been  prepared  from  a  table  which  appeared  in  the  American  Journal  of  Electri-
city and  Radiology,  Jan.  1917.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijers'  Guide  579

3. What  is  the  resistance  of  a  circuit  producing  a  current  of
10  amperes  at  a  pressure  of  100  volts?

Solution: Resistance= — ^10  ohms.

10  (amperes)

(In  the  above  examples,  same  voltage,  amperage  and  resistance  has
been  used,  so  that  the  reader  may  see  at  a  glance  that  the  above  law  is
correct.)

From  the  above,  we  see  that  in  order  to  increase  the  amperage  or  cur-
rent strength  in  a  conductor,  we  must  either  increase  the  voltage  or  de-
crease the  resistance;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  wish  to  decrease  the
amperage,  we  must  either  increase  the  resistance  or  decrease  the  voltage.


580


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  II

GALVANISM


THE  galvanic  current  is  a  direct,  uninterrupted,  continuous  current,
whicli  can  be  likened  to  a  stream  of  water,  continually  flowing  in
one  direction. (Fig.  7)

For  therapeutic  purposes,  this  current  is  usually  obtained  from
primary  cells,  direct  current  lighting  circuit,  or  from  a  direct  current
generator  which  consists  of  a  small  dynamo,  operated  by  a  motor  con-
nected to  the  lighting  circuit.


Fig.  1 — Laclanche
Cell;  +  represents
positive;  — -  nega-
tive. P.  patient;  ar-
rows sliow  tlie  direc-
tion of  the  current
flow.

Primary  Cell

A  cell  is  a  jar  holding  the  elements  and  the  exciting  fluid  necessary  to
produce  electricity.

There  are  several  kinds  of  cells,  but  the  simplest  form  and  one  best
adaptable  for  therapeutic  purposes,  is  a  Laclanche  cell.

Laclanche  cell  consists  of  a  rod  of  zinc  and  a  plate  of  carbon  im-
mersed in  a  saturated  solution  of  Ammonium  Chloride  (sal  ammoniac),
with  a  little  Manganese  Dioxide  (Mn  O,)  as  a  depolarizer.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


581


Internal  and  External  Circuits

In  order  to  bring  about  a  passage  of  electricity,  it  is  necessary  to
establish  a  circuit,^or  a  path,  in  which  electricity  moves.  This  circuit
consists  of  two  parts,  the  internal  and  external.

The  internal  part  of  the  circuit  consists  of  the  exciting  fluid  and  the
submerged  part  of  the  elements;  while  the  external  part  consists  of  the
conducting  wires,  the  non-submerged  portion  of  the  elements,  and  the
body  which  may  be  in  the  circuit.

When  the  circuit  is  established,  the  chemical  decomposition  takes
place  at  the  rod  of  zinc  (which  is  of  a  higher  potential  than  the  carbon),
and  makes  it  a  generating  plate.  Through  the  electrolyte,  electricity
flows  to  the  carbon,  and  through  it  out  of  the  cell  into  the  conducting
medium,  which  joins  the  carbon  and  the  zinc  together,  returning  again
to  the  starting  point.

As  water  flows  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  level,  so  does  electricity  flow
from  a  higher  to  a  lower  potential  (positive  to  negative  pole) ;  therefore
the  outside  end  of  the  carbon  is  positive  and  the  inside  end  (submerged
end)  is  negative,  while  the  outside  end  of  zinc  is  negative  and  the  inside
end  is  positive.


Fig.  2 — Cells  connected  in  series.

Polarization

All  cells  are  subject  to  polarization;  that  is,  the  formation  of  bubbles
of  hydrogen  upon  the  carbon,  which  in  that  case  will  also  become  the
generating  plate  and  cause  the  current  to  flow  toward  the  zinc,  thus
partly  neutralizing  the  original  flow.  There  are  various  depolarizers,
which  are,  in  general,  substances  capable  of  fixing  the  hydrogen;  e.  g.,  a
small  quantity  of  Manganese  Dioxide  (Mn  O2)  added  to  the  exciting
■fluid  of  the  Laclanche  cell  prevents  polarization.

Battery

Two  or  more  cells,  properly  connected,  constitute  a  battery.

To  treat  the  human  body,  which  offers  great  resistance  to  the  passage
of  electricity,  it  is  necessary  that  a  battery  furnishes  a  high  voltage,  and
a  low  amperage. This  high  pressure  and  low  strength  is  obtained  by


582


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bniiers'  Guide


connecting  the  cells  in  series  by  joining  unlike  elements  together,  that  is
the  zinc  of  one  cell  to  the  carbon  of  the  next,  until  all  are  connected.

If,  however,  it  is  desired  to  use  the  current  for  heating  platinum  elec-
trodes or  cautery  work,  it  is  necessary  to  obtain  a  high  amperage  and  a
low  voltage.  This  is  obtained  by  connecting  the  cells  in  multiple  or
parallel,  by  joining  like  elements  together;  that  is,  zinc  of  all  the  cells
together  and  all  the  carbons  together.

The  voltage  of  a  battery  in  which  the  cells  are  connected  in  series,  is
the  sum  of  the  voltage  of  all  the  cells  connected,  but  the  amperage  out-
put is  equivalent  only  to  the  output  of  one  cell;  while  with  the  cells
connected  in  multiple  or  parallel  it  is  the  opposite.

For  example:  If  we  have  a  five-cell  battery,  and  if  each  of  these
cells  gives  a  pressure  of  IV^  volts  and  a  current  strength  of  5  amperes,
then  by  connecting  these  cells  in  series,  we  will  have  in  the  circuit  a  cur-
rent of  5  amperes  at  lYz  volts  pressure,  while  by  connecting  the  cells  in
multiple  or  parallel,  a  current  of  25  amperes  at  1%  volts  pressure.


Fig.  3 — Cells  connected  in  parallel.

By  arranging  some  of  the  cells  in  series,  and  some  of  them  in  par-
allel, we  are  able  to  obtain  any  voltage  or  amperage  required.

Dry  Cells  are  made  on  the  same  principle  as  the  Laclanche  or  wet
cells,  with  the  exception  that  the  electrolyte  is  in  the  form  of  a  paste  or
cream  instead  of  a  liquid.  Being  more  convenient  than  the  wet  cells,
they  are  extensively  used  in  portable  batteries.


Polar  Effects

The  two  poles  (positive  and  negative)  of  the  galvanic  current  pro-
duce on  the  tissue  of  the  body  certain  physical,  chemical  and  physiolo-
gical effects,  diametrically  opposite  to  each  other  (so  that  if  the  ap-
plication of  the  positive  pole  was  indicated,  the  negative  would  surely
do  harm),  and  the  following  outline  of  the  polar  effects  on  the  tissue  is
the  gist  of  what  the  physician  must  know  before  he  can  administer  it
with  any  degree  of  success:


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  BLiijers'  Guide


583


Positive  Pole:

1.  Accumulates  Oxygen,
Chlorine,  Nitric,  Phosphoric  and
Hydrochloric  acids.

2.  Is  an  acid  caustic  produc-
ing a  hard  and  dry  cicatrix.

3.  Hardens  tissue.

4.  Rendering  the  adjacent  tis-
sue acid,  it  relieves  inflammation
and  tliereby  relieves  pain.

5.  Being  a  vaso-constrictor,  it
stops  hemorrhage.


Negative  Pole:

1.  Accumulates  Hydrogen  and
alkalhydrates  of  calcium,  potas-
sium, sodium  and  ammonium.

2.  Is  an  alkaline  caustic  pro-
ducing a  soft  and  pliable  cicatrix.

3.  Liquefies  and  disintegrates
tissue.

4.  Rendering  the  adjacent  tis-
sue alkaline  over-stimulates  and
irritates.

5.  Being  a  vaso-dilator,  it  in-
creases hemorrhage.


Tests  for  Polarity

Since  the  polarity  of  the  galvanic  current  is  very  important,  in  order
to  apply  the  galvanic  current  judiciously,  it  is  essential  to  be  able  to
distinguish  one  pole  from  the  other,  whenever  necessary.

There  are  numbers  of  tests  upon  which  we  may  rely,  but  the  follow-
ing two  are  most  practical:

1.  Place  the  two  poles  in  a  glass  of  water,  about  one  inch  apart
from  each  other,  and  use  about  10  volt  current,  when  electrolysis  or
dissolution  of  water  will  take  place  and  bubbles  of  hydrogen  will  be
seen  at  each  pole,  but  the  greater  number  will  accumulate  at  the  nega-
tive pole.

2.  Wet  a  piece  of  litmus  paper,  apply  on  it  both  poles  and  use  about
10  volt  current.  A  blue  color  will  make  its  appearance  at  the  negative,
and  a  pink  color  at  the  positive  pole.


Electrodes

All  the  electrical  currents  employed  in  medicine  are  applied  to  the
body  by  means  of  electrodes,  or  instruments,  connected  to  the  apparatus
by  means  of  conducting  cords.  In  the  application  of  galvanic,  faradic,
sinusoidal,  diathermic  and  some  other  forms  of  high  frequency  and
static  currents,  in  order  to  establish  a  circuit,  it  is  necessar\^  to  use  two
electrodes.  These  two  electrodes  are  distinguished  as  active  and  in-
different electrodes.

The  active  electrode  is  one  which  is  brought  near,  or  in  contact  with
the  parts  to  be  treated,  and  is  usually  a  small  electrode  measuring  from
^/4  to  4  inches  in  diameter.

The  indifferent  electrode  is  always  larger  than  the  active  (so  as  to
reduce  the  polar  action  to  a  minimum),  and  may  be  placed  anywhere
over  the  spine,  abdomen  or  chest  (or  opposite  to  the  active) .

The  electrodes  are  made  of  various  shapes,  sizes  and  material,  so  as
to  meet  all  purposes.  Most  of  them  are  made  of  tin,  copper  or  carbon,
and  are  used  bare  or  covered  with  some  easily  sterilizable  material,  the
best  being  absorbent  cotton  or  chamois  leather.

Bare  electrodes  are  used  in  direct  contact  with  the  tissues  in  electroly-
sis (while  removing  superfluous  hair,  warts,  moles,  naevi,  etc.,  treating


584


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bui/ers'  Guide


Milli-ampere  Meter.


cancer;  dissolving  stricture  of  the  mucous  tract,  etc.) and  in  metallic
cataphoresis.

Covered  electrodes  are  used  for  surface  work,  and  should  always  be
soaked  in  a  solution  of  bicarbonate  of  soda  or  sodium  chloride  (normal
salt  solution),  which  offers  very  little  resistance  to  the  passage  of  elec-
tricity.

Size  of  the  Electrodes.  The  larger  the  electrodes,  the  larger  the  part
through  which  the  current  passes.

The  size  of  the  electrodes  govern  directly  the  density  of  the  current
when  a  certain  unit  of  current  is  passing;  for  example,  employing  50
milliamperes  wdth  a  pair  of  electrodes  of  even  size,  3  by  5  inches,  or  15
square  inches  to  each  electrode.  If  we  retain  the  current  strength  of  50
milliamperes,  but  increase  the  size  of  the  electrodes  to  6  by  10  inches,
or  60  square  inches,  our  current  density  would  be  one-fourth  that  which
it  was  before  (because  the  current  will  be  distributed  over  60  square
inches,  instead  of  15  square  inches). The  greater  the  strength  of  cur-


Motor  Generator.


Universal  Naturopalhic  Directory  and  Ihiyers'  (iiiide  585

rent  passing,  and  the  longer  the  time  during  which  the  current  is  flow-
ing, the  greater  is  the  effect.

Application  of  Electrodes.  In  the  application  of  electrodes  to  the
body,  we  refer  to  terms  stabile  and  labile.  Stabile  means  that  one
or  both  electrodes  are  held  stationary  on  the  indicated  part  of  the  body.

Labile  is  opposite  to  stabile,  and  means  that  one  or  both  electrodes
are  moved  over  the  surface.

The  electrodes  shoald  always  be  placed  in  position  prior  to  turnimj
on  the  current,  and  the  current  should  be  turned  off  prior  to  removing
the  electrodes.  They  should  be  applied  in  such  a  manner  that  the
current  must  find  its  way  directly  through  the  part  to  be  treated.  If
we  wish  to  treat  a  knee,  for  instance,  the  electrodes  must  be  applied  to
either  side.

The  terms  anode  and  cathode  are  applied  to  the  electrodes  connected
to  the  positive  and  negative  poles,  respectively.


586  Vnivcrsdl  Ndturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  III

IONTOPHORESIS


ALL  elements  or  ions  have,  by  nature,  a  definite  electrical  charge
(positive  or  negative). These  elements  follow  the  universal  law
that  likes  repel  and  unlikes  attract,  and  combine  in  definite  propor-
tions, according  to  their  electric  attraction  for  one  another;  there-
fore, positively  charged  elements  are  repelled  by  the  positive  (like)  pole,
and  attracted  towards  the  negative  (unlike),  and  vice  versa.

The  positively  charged  elements  or  electro-positive  substances  (hy-
drogen, sodium,  potassium,  calcium,  magnesium,  etc.)  being  repelled  by
the  positive  pole  and  attracted  toward  the  negative,  are  called  cathions;
while  the  negatively  charged  elements  or  electro-negative  substances
(oxygen,  chlorine,  bromine,  iodine,  carbon,  sulphur,  phosphorous,  etc.)
being  repelled  by  the  negative  and  attracted  toward  the  positive,  are
called  anions.

Iontophoresis,  Ionization  or  Phoresis  is  the  generic  term  for  that
property,  possessed  by  an  electric  current,  by  which  it  transports  the
ions  or  elements  of  a  compound  substance  to  the  positive  and  to  the
negative  pole.

Electrolysis

Electrolysis  is  a  separation  of  a  compound  substance  into  its  ele-
ments, or  ions,  by  means  of  a  galvanic  current.

For  instance,  when  the  galvanic  current  passes  through  a  solution  of
Potassium  Iodide  (KI)  it  gives  to  the  potassium  a  positive  charge,  and
to  the  iodine  a  negative  charge.  Following  the  universal  law  of  attrac-
tion and  repulsion,  ions  of  potassium  move  toward  the  negative  pole,
and  those  of  iodine  toward  the  positive.  When  these  ions  arrive  at  the
respective  electrodes,  they  give  up  their  charge  and  form  new  com-
binations.

The  substance  to  be  broken  up  (electrolyzed)  must  be  a  fluid  or  semi-
fluid, a  good  conductor  of  electricity,  and  one  of  its  elements  must  be
a  metal  or  the  salt  of  metal.  Hydrogen  being  considered  a  metal,  it  is
supposed  that  any  substance  containing  water,  which  is  a  compound  of
Hydrogen  and  Oxygen  (H2O),  can  be  electrolyzed.

Fats  and  oils,  although  fluids,  cannot  be  electrolyzed,  because  they
are  non-conductors.

(For  application  of  electrolysis  to  the  human  body,  see  chapter  on
Electro-Surger}'.)

Ionic  Medication

Ionic  Medication  is  the  process  of  introducing  medicines  through  the
unbroken  skin  into  the  tissue  of  the  body,  with  a  view  of  securing  a
local  eflfect.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  587

For  the  reason  Ihal  Ihc  practitioner  who  is  familiar  with  the  ionic
medication  will  undouhtedly  be  able  to  modify  and  apply  this  method
for  the  abstraction  of  metallic  poisons  from  the  body,  this  work  would

On  account  of  the  certainty  of  localization,  a  very  minute  quantity  of
medicine  being  required  to  affect  the  part  under  treatment,  ionic  medi-
cation is  far  superior  to  the  external,  hypodermic  or  general  adminis-
tration of  antiseptics,  anaesthetics,  analgesics,  and  in  fact  all  other
remedies  usually  employed  for  the  treatment  of  local  affections.

Since  every  element  has  by  nature  a  definite  electric  charge,  any  com-
pound which  can  be  electrolyzed,  can  be  also  introduced  by  means  of
the  galvanic  current  directly  into  the  tissues,  where  the  local  effect  is
desired.

In  the  application  of  ionic  medication,  the  first  thing  to  know  is  the
electrical  charge  of  the  ion  which  it  is  desired  to  introduce,  so  as  to  be
able  to  apply  it  on  the  pole  from  which  it  will  be  repelled;  otherwise,  the
effect  may  be  completely  lost,  and  valuable  time  and  patience  be  ex-
pended in  vain.

Bases  and  metals  (zinc,  copper,  bismuth,  iron,  magnesium,  calcium,
lithium,  potassium,  sodium,  quinine,  etc.)  are  electro-positive  elements,
or  cathions,  and  must  be  applied  to  the  positive  pole.

Acids  and  those  substances  which  take  the  place  of  an  acid  (iodine,
bromine,  chlorine,  phosphorous,  sulphur,  etc.)  are  electro-negative  el-
ements, or  anions,  and  must  be  applied  from  the  negative  pole.

The  term  Cataphoresis  refers  to  the  introduction  of  cathions  or
electro-positive  elements  (that  is,  those  substances  which  are  applied
to  the  positive  pole),  while  Anaphoresis  refers  to  the  introduction  of
anions,  or  electro-negative  elements  (that  is,  those  substances  which  are
applied  to  the  negative  pole).

The  ions  most  frequently  used  in  ionic  medication  are :  Zinc,  copper,
chlorine,  iodine,  quinine,  lithium,  salicylic  acid,  magnesium,  cocaine,  etc.

Zinc,  copper,  quinine,  lithium,  magnesium  and  cocaine  are  intro-
duced by  cataphoresis  (from  the  positive  pole),  because  they  are
electro-positive  substances.

Chlorine,  iodine,  salicylic  acid,  etc.,  are  introduced  by  anaphoresis
(from  the  negative  pole).

Zinc  Ionization  (zinc  sulphate)  is  used  in  the  treatment  of  rodent
ulcer,  pustular  eczema,  lupus,  varicose  ulcer,  and  other  superficial
suppurative  conditions.  Also  in  conjunctivitis,  corneal  ulcer,  purulent
keratitis,  rhinitis,  chronic  inflammation  of  nasal  sinuses,  diseases  of
the  middle  ear,  carbuncles,  boils,  epithelioma,  colitis,  fistula,  chronic
urethritis,  gonorrhea,  etc.

If  necessary,  cocaine  anaesthesia  may  be  produced  before  the  zinc
ionization.

Copper  (Copper  Sulphate)  is  employed  chiefly  in  gynecological  con-
ditions, such  as  cervicitis,  endometris,  dysmenorrhea  following  chronic
endometritis,  menorrhagia,  etc. Also  in  ozoena,  ringworm,  etc.

Qtzmme  ((Quinine  Bisulphate)  is  often  employed  as  an  alterative  to
the  salicylic  ionization  in  neuralgias.

Lithium  (Lithium  Sulphate)  is  used  in  the  treatment  of  gout,  rheuma-
tism, arthritis  and  synovitis.


588  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Magnesium  (Magnesium  Sulphate)  is  employed  in  the  removal  of
warts,  papilloma,  etc.

Cocaine  (Cocaine  Hydrochloride)  relieves  pain  and  produces  local
anaesthesia  suitable  lor  minor  surgical  work.  Anaesthesia  thus  pro-
duced will  remain  for  a  period  varying  from  a  few  minutes  to  several
hours,  depending  upon  the  strength  of  the  current,  the  length  of  the
application,  and  the  percentage  of  cocaine  in  a  solution.

Chlorine  (Sodium  Chloride)  promotes  the  absorption  of  newly  formed
tissue,  and  gives  good  results  in  operations  and  severe  burn  scars,  old
ankylosed  and  hypertrophied  joint,  palmar  contractions,  corneal  opaci-
ties, and  apparently  in  sclerotic  changes  in  the  spinal  cord  (rheumatic
scleritis,  peri-scleritis,  etc.).

Iodine  (Potassium  Iodide),  like  chlorine,  promotes  the  absorption  of
adventitious  material. It  is  usually  employed  in  goitres.

Salicylic  Ionization  (Sodium  Salicylate)  is  employed  in  the  treatment
of  sciatica,  neuralgia,  chronic  rheumatism,  rheumatoid  arthritis,  pain-
ful swelling  of  knee  joint,  bruises,  sprains,  migraine,  etc.

Menthol,  thymol,  thiosinamin,  verhascum,  hameamalis,  sulphur,  thuja,
ichthyol,  and  numerous  other  remedies,  are  also  being  introduced  by
means  of  ionization.

The  strength  of  the  solution  suitable  for  ionic  medication  is  one  or
two  per  cent.  In  making  up  the  solutions,  it  is  preferable  to  use  distilled
water,  as  ordinarj^  water  containing  many  different  salts  may  produce
entirely  different  effects  from  those  desired.  If  the  electrode  is  made
of  the  metal  to  be  introduced  (e.  g.,  a  solution  of  zinc  sulphate  applied
at  the  zinc  electrode,  connected  to  the  positive  pole),  a  one  per  cent,
solution  is  sufficient,  as  the  supply  of  ions  is  constantly  renewed  from
the  electrode.  Ordinary  plate  electrodes  of  pure  zinc,  copper  or  carbon,
covered  with  several  thicknesses  of  purest  quality  lint,  or  a  glass  cup
electrode  filled  with  cotton  wool  saturated  with  medicine,  can  be  em-
ployed. The  large  indifferent  electrode  should  be  applied  to  the  skin,
close  to  the  area  which  is  treated  (or  may  be  conveniently  connected
to  the  foot  or  arm  bath,  in  which  one  limb  is  immersed).

The  whole  effect  of  ionization  depends  upon  the  speed  at  which  the
ions  penetrate  the  tissue,  and  this  is  entirely  governed  by  the  current
intensity  (milliamperage).  There  is  no  specified  strength,  but  the
stronger  the  current,  the  quicker  the  effect.  (Usually  from  1  to  40  milli-
ampeVes  is  passed  for  about  10  or  15  minutes,  according  to  the  size  of
the  electrode,  and  the  part  treated.)

The  larger  the  active  electrode,  the  stronger  must  be  the  current
(about  7  m.  a.  of  current  should  be  used  for  each  square  inch) ;  hence,
the  value  of  the  small  electrode.

Metallic  Cataphoresis

If  an  electrode  composed  of  an  oxidizable  metal  (copper,  zinc,  mer-
cury, etc.)  is  used  on  the  positive  pole,  oxygen  that  is  evolved  on  the
same  pole  combines  with  the  metal  electrode,  and  forms  an  oxide  of
the  metal  used  on  its  surface.

This  metal  is  taken  into  the  tissues,  and  there  it  unites  with  the  chlor-
ine (body  fluid) ,  forming  an  oxychloride  of  the  metal.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  589

This  oxychloride,  following  the  law  of  electrolysis  (chlorine  moving
towards  the  positive,  and  the  metal  towards  the  negative  pole),  is  de-
posited into  the  tissues,  where  it  exerts  its  germicidal  and  astringent
properties.

These  metallic  salts  (especially  copper  and  zinc  salts),  are  therefore
of  great  value  in  all  infective  inflammations,  especially  in  the  treatment
of  gynecological  and  skin  affections.

In  applying  this  mode  of  treatment,  in  order  to  avoid  the  sticking  of
the  metal  electrode,  it  is  advisable  to  cover  it  whenever  practicable  with
absorbent  cotton  or  chamois  leather,  and  the  metal  will  be  deposited
into  the  tissues  through  the  covering.


590  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  IV

ELECTRO-MAGNETISM


THERE  are  three  kinds  of  magnets,  viz :  the  natural  magnet,  or  load-
stone, (a  magnetic  oxide  of  iron — Fe304 — as  found  in  nature) ;
tlie  permanent  magnet,  or  a  piece  of  steel  which,  wlien  once  mag-
netized, retains  its  magnetism;  and  the  electro-magnet,  which
is  usually  a  bar  of  soft  iron,  or  a  bundle  of  soft  iron  wires  (as  these
take  and  lose  magnetism  much  quicker  than  the  solid  iron),  sur-
rounded by  a  coil  of  insulated  copper  wire,  in  which  the  electro-mag-
netism is  induced  by  a  flow  of  current  through  the  wire.  When  the
electric  current  passes  through  the  insulated  wire  which  surrounds
the  bar  of  soft  iron,  the  electro-magnet  rapidly  acquires  its  magnetism,
and  as  soon  as  the  electric  current  ceases  to  flow,  its  magnetism  is  im-
mediately lost.

As  we  have  in  electricity  a  positive  and  negative  pole,  so  we  have  in
magnetism  a  north  and  south  pole,  and  all  magnets  possess  a  property
of  attraction  and  repulsion,  magnetism  obeying  the  same  universal  law
that  governs  and  controls  electricity,  viz.,  likes  repel  and  unlikes  attract.

The  truth  of  this  statement  can  be  demonstrated  by  placing  the  like
poles  (north  or  south)  of  two  bar  magnets  together,  when  there  will  be
no  attraction,  and  they  will  actually  repel  each  other;  but  placing  the
unlike  poles  together  (north  of  one  with  the  south  of  the  other),  they
will  hold  each  other.

As  a  current  of  electricity  flows  from  the  positive  to  the  negative
pole,  much  the  same  lines  of  magnetic  force  are  continually  flowing
around  the  magnet  bar  from  the  north  to  the  south  pole,  as  long  as  the
bar  is  a  magnet.

These  magnetic  lines  around  the  magnet  constitute  a  magnetic  field,
and  the  strength  of  this  magnetic  influence  decreases  as  the  square  of
the  distance  increases,  until  a  point  is  reached  where  the  influence  is
lost.

Magnetic  substances  are  not  magnets,  but  bodies  which  are  attracted
by  the  magnets  (e.  g.,  iron,  steel,  nickel).

Di-magnetic  substances  are  bodies  which  are  repelled  by  the  mag-
nets (e.  g.,  bismuth,  zinc  and  copper).

Faradism

In  electro-magnetism,  it  has  been  explained  how  the  magnetic  influ-
ence can  be  produced  by  an  electric  current,  and  in  faradism  it  will  be
explained  how  an  electric  current  can  be  induced  by  a  magnetic  in-
fluence.

Faradic,  or  induced  current,  discovered  by  Faraday  in  1851,  is  a  rough,
interrupted  current,  produced  by  means  of  the  faradic  or  induction
coil.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dircctonj  and  liiiijrrs'  Guide  591

Faradic,  or  induction  coil,  consists  of  a  soft  iron  core,  a  primary  and
secondary  winding  of  insulated  copper  wire,  and  an  automatic  ham-
mer or  interrupter.

A  primary  winding,  which  is  of  a  coarser  wire  tlian  the  secondary,
directly  surrounds  the  soft  iron  core;  a  secondary  winding  surrounds
the  primary,  but  is  entirely  insulated  from  it.

The  interrupter  is  an  automatic  arrangement  used  for  making  and
breaking  the  current.  It  is  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of  the
faradic  coil,  since,  by  means  of  same  the  physiological  effects  of  the
faradic  current  are  controlled.

Generation  of  the  faradic  current

The  current  from  a  galvanic  cell,  interrupted  by  means  of  an  auto-
matic hammer,  passes  through  the  primary  winding  of  the  faradic  coil.


Fig.  6 — Combined  Galvanic  and  Faradic  Battery.

This  current,  called  the  primitive  or  inducing  current,  magnetizes  the
soft  iron  core,  forming  the  magnetic  field,  causing  the  magnetic  lines  of
force  to  permeate  into  the  convolutions  of  the  secondary  winding
(which  is  in  the  magnetic  field),  thereby  inducing  the  secondary  faradic
current.

The  primary  faradic  current,  obtained  from  the  primary  winding  of
the  faradic  coll  is  a  greatly  increased,  interrupted  galvanic  current.

The  secondary  faradic  current,  caused  by  the  magnetic  lines  of  force,
which  permeate  the  convolutions  of  wire  in  the  secondary  winding,
is  obtained  from  the  secondary  winding  of  the  faradic  coil.  This  cur-
rent is  entirely  independent  of  the  primitive  or  inducing  current,  be-
cause the  secondary  winding  has  no  connection  w-hatever  ^^'ith  the
primary. On  account  of  its  Interruptions,  it  resembles,  in  a  manner,


592  Uniucrsdl  Naturopathic  Dircctonj  and  liiii/cr.s'  (tuidc

static  oscillations,  but  has  a  higher  amperage  and  lower  voltage  than
the  static,  and  a  lower  anii)eragc  and  higher  voltage  than  the  galvanic.

Voltage  of  the  Faradic  Current

The  voltage,  or  electro-motive  force,  of  the  faradic  current  depends:
(1)  On  the  number  of  convolutions  of  wire  in  the  secondai*^^  winding;
the  more  turns,  the  higher  the  voltage,  (2)  On  the  voltage  of  the  primi-
tive, or  inducing,  current;  the  higher  the  voltage  of  the  inducing  current,
the  higher  will  be  the  voltage  of  the  induced  current.  (3)  On  the  fre-
quency of  interruptions  in  the  primitive  circuit.  (4)  On  the  presence
or  absence  of  the  electro-magnet;  its  presence,  that  is,  its  magnetic  in-
tUience  increases  the  voltage  of  the  induced  current.  (5)  On  the  dis-
tance between  the  secondary  and  primary  windings.

The  voltage  of  the  faradic  current  can,  therefore,  be  regulated  in
several  ways,  e.  g.,  by  increasing  or  decreasing  the  primitive  current
(employing  one  or  more  cells) ;  increasing  or  decreasing  the  frequency
of  interruptions;  increasing  or  decreasing  the  magnetic  influence,  by
pushing  the  iron  core  in  and  out,  or  slipping  over  it  a  metal  cylinder,
which  acts  as  a  shield  between  the  magnet  and  the  coil  (this  cylinder,
however,  must  be  of  iron,  steel  or  copper,  as  the  inductive  action  of
a  magnet  can  only  be  cut  off  by  a  magnetic  substance) ;  by  means  of  a
series  rheostat,  or  various  other  methods,  according  to  the  make  of  the
faradic  coil.

Application  of  the  Faradic  Current

Faradic  current  produces  a  tingling  sensation.  Being  more  mechan-
ical than  medicinal  in  action,  it  is  beneficial  in  all  functional  paralyses
(where  there  is  no  destructive  lesion  in  the  nerve  tissues),  neuralgias,
headaches,  constipation,  rheumatism,  anaesthesia  (loss  of  sensation),
etc.  With  it  we  can  produce  artificial  respiration  in  drowning,  asphyxia,
opium  poisoning,  shock  from  accidental  contact  with  heavily-laden  elec-
tric wire,  and  in  the  resuscitation  of  the  new-born  infant.

Rapidly  interrupted  current  tetanizes  the  muscles  and  produces  seda-
tive effect,  while  slowly  and  rhythmically  interrupted  current,  by  means
of  a  rheotome,  stimulates  the  voluntary  muscular  fibres,  increases  the
circulation,  assists  metabolic  action,  and  acts  as  a  general  tonic.

Galvano-F  aradization

Galvano-Faradization  is  a  very  useful  combination  for  the  treatment
of  peripheral  paralysis,  nerve  exhaustion,  neuralgias,  spasms,  painful
muscular  affections,  and  most  conditions  in  which  both  galvanic  and
faradic  currents  are  of  benefit.

Galvano-Faradic  current  is  obtained  by  uniting  the  secondary  cir-
cuit of  the  faradic  coil  in  series,  or  in  parallel,  with  the  galvanic  circuit.
This  is  accomplished  in  series  by  joining  the  negative  pole  of  one  with
the  positive  pole  of  the  other;  or  in  parallel  by  connecting  the  positive
galvanic  to  the  positive  faradic,  and  the  negative  galvanic  to  the  nega-
tive faradic.

In  employing  only  faradic  current,  polarity  is  immaterial,  but  in  the
application  of  the  galvano-faradization,  special  attention  must  be  paid


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


593


to  the  galvanic  polarity  in  the  same  manner  as  if  galvanism  was  em-
ployed independently.

As  some  cases  require  more  galvanism  than  faradism,  while  others
more  faradism  than  galvanism  in  applying  galvano-faradization,  it  is
necessary  to  be  able  to  regulate  the  currents  separately.

Low  Potential  Currents  and  Modalities


Combined  Galuamc  and  Far  a  die


7o7n  bincd  Galvanic  and  Sinusoidal 1800  Periods  PerTfTmute.


Rapid  Sinusoidal 1800  Cycles  Per  Minute


Primary  Fcn-a-dic


Secor\<iary  Faradic.


Interrupted  Galvanic 3to  86  InHrruptions  Per  JYIinute.


Cornbined  Galvanic  and  Faradic  Wave  3to33  CyclesPerMin
Su-perim-posedWave 3to88  Cj/clesPer Minute
Sitrging Binusoidal.  6tol76  PeriodsPerJiTinute
Trimary  FarudicWave. 3to88  Cycles  Per  Minute.


Secondary TaradicyVave. 3to88  Cycles  PprMinuie.


Interrupted  Galvanic  \yave.  3to  88  Interruptions  Per  Minute.

Fig.  7 — The  above  tracings  represent  the  rise  and
fall  of  voltage  and  comparative  duration  of  flow  of
the  various  low  potential  currents  and  modalities.
The  zero  line  represents  the  neutral  line;  above  zero
is  the  positive  direction;  below  zero,  the  negative.


594


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  V

STATIC  ELECTRICITY


5TAT1C, or  Franklinic electricity, is a unidirectional current, in
which  the  voltage  is  enormous,  while  the  amperage,  on  account  of
its oscillatory or vibratory character, is intinitesimally small
(usually  only  0.20  to  5  milliamperes).
There  are  two  types  of  machines  producing  static  charges — one  the
friction,  and  the  other  the  influence  machines. The  friction  machines


Fig.  8 — Static  INIacliine  (Holtz  type)  with  Ley-
den  jars,  platform  and  electrodes.

were  the  earliest  type,  and  the  electricity  was  produced  by  rubbing  a
revolving  disc  of  glass  or  sulphur  with  the  hand  or  a  cushion.

At  present,  all  static  inachines  used  for  therapeutic  purposes  are  in-
fluence machines  of  the  Holtz,  Toepler-Holtz,  or  Wimshurst  type,  and
consist  of  two  essential  parts:  one  for  producing  electric  charges  and
the  other  for  collecting  them.

Electric  charges  are  produced  by  means  of  plates,  inductors,  car-
riers and  neutralizing  brushes.  These  charges  are  then  collected  by
collecting  brushes,  and  are  carried  to  the  discharging  poles  or  prime
conductors.

Machines of  the  Holtz  and  Toepler-Holtz type  have a number  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


595


stationary  and  a  number  of  revolving  glass  plates,  while  in  the  Wims-
hurst  machines  all  the  plates  (which  may  be  of  glass  or  mica)  are  re-
volving (some  in  one  direction  and  some  in  another).

The  stationary  plates  in  the  Holtz  machine  are  made  in  two  sections,
while  those  in  the  Toepler-Holtz  are  circular.

On  the  outer  side  of  every  stationary  plate  of  the  Toepler-Holtz
machine,  are  fastened  two  strips  of  metal,  one  on  each  side,  known  as
Held  plates  (which  are  its  inducing  plates),  while  on  every  revolving
plate  to  the  side  opposite  the  stationary  plates,  are  fastened  small  metal
carriers.

Toepler-Holtz  and  Wimshurst  machines  have  neutralizing  brushes,
attached  at  both  ends  of  a  rod,  which  runs  diagonally  throughout  the


Fig.  9 — Charger  used  to  excite  the  Holtz  machine.

center  of  the  plate.  Approximating  brushes  make  a  metallic  contact
with  the  field  plates.

The  Holtz  machine  differs  from  the  Toepler-Holtz  and  the  Wimshurst
by  not  having  metal  carriers  on  its  revolving  plates,  and  no  neutraliz-
ing brushes,  and  consequently  it  is  not  self-exciting,  but  has  a  special
charger  in  the  form  of  a  small  Wimshurst. (Fig.  9.)

The  Wimshurst  machine,  for  example,  has  from  two  to  thirty  or  more
plates  of  glass  (or  other  suitable  material,  e.  g.,  mica  or^  ebonite)
mounted  on  a  horizontal  axis  about  one-sixth  of  an  inch  apart.  These
discs  revolve,  some  in  one  direction  and  some  in  another.  Each  plate
has  a  number  of  sectors  or  strips  of  tin  foil,  which  serve  both  as  induct-
ors and  carriers,  and  a  metallic  rod  with  brushes,  which  make  contact
with  sectors  on  the  opposite  plate. The  electricity  generated  there  is


596  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcrs Guide

collected  by  additional  collecting  brushes  that  rub  against  the  tin  foil
sectors,  and  is  carried  thence  to  the  discharging  poles  or  prime  con-
ductors.

As  soon  as  the  plates  begin  to  revolve,  positive  electricity  collects  at
one  prime  conductor,  and  the  negative  at  the  other.

Static  machines  having  glass  or  mica  plates  are  enclosed  in  a  dust
and  moisture-proof  glass  case,  while  the  machines  having  vulcanite
plates  are  not  enclosed,  because  the  ozone  generated  while  the  machine
is  in  action,  would  set  on  the  plates.

Voltage  of  a  Static  Machine

If  the  prime  conductors  of  a  static  or  other  high  tension  machine  are
suflicicntly  but  not  too  far  apart,  sparks  will  leap  across  the  space  be-
tween them.

To  force  a  spark  across  the  air  space,  which  offers  high  resistance  to
the  passage  of  the  electricity,  it  requires  about  20,000  volts  for  the  first
inch,  and  10,000  volts  for  each  additional  inch;  therefore,  if  a  machine
is  producing  a  ten-inch  spark,  it  indicates  about  110,000  volts.  Knowing
this,  we  can  easily  ascertain  the  approximate  voltage  of  the  static  or
other  high  tension  current  (high  frequency) .

The  Bureau  of  Standards  of  the  U.  S.  Government  and,  also,  that  of
New  York,  give  the  voltage  of  the  high  potential  current  as  about  10,000
volts  to  the  inch  of  spark  gap.  That  has  been  accepted  by  all  manu-
facturers and  physicists.

The  voltage  and  amperage  of  a  static  machine  depend  on  the  size  and
the  number  of  plates  and  the  velocity  of  rotation.

The  greater  the  number  of  revolving  plates  and  the  greater  the  speed,
the  greater  will  be  the  amperage.

The  greater  the  diameter  of  revolving  plates,  the  greater  will  be  the
voltage,  e.  g.,  the  Holtz  machine  will  develop  a  spark  equal  in  length
to  one-half  the  diameter  of  the  revolving  plates.

The  voltage  of  a  static  machine  also  depends  on  the  material  of  the
plates — glass  giving  lower  voltage  than  vulcanite,  while  mica  lower
voltage  than  glass.

Difficulties  in  operating  a  static  machine

Difficulties  in  operating  a  static  machine  are  due  to  several  causes,
most  common  being  moisture  within  the  case,  dirt  on  the  plates  and  a
nitrous  oxide  (produced  by  the  electric  current  within  the  case)  which
affects  the  w^orking  parts  of  the  machine.

Moisture  within  the  case  may  be  overcome  in  several  ways,  most
practical  being  the  following:

1.  Incandescent  lamps  placed  inside  the  case  generate  heat  and  dry
the  air;

2.  Jars  containing  cracked  ice  and  table  salt,  placed  within  the  case,
dry  the  air  by  causing  much  of  the  moisture  to  precipitate  upon  the
sides  of  the  jars;

3.  Four  deep  glass  dishes,  half  filled  with  pure  sulphuric  acid  or
caustic  potash,  placed  one  in  each  corner  inside  the  case,  accumulate
the  moisture.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  597

Dirt  from  the  plalcs  can  be  removed  with  a  clean,  dry  cloth,  or  if  the
plates  arc  very  dirty,  they  may  be  washed  with  gasoline  or  kerosene  oil.

Nitrous  oxide  can  be  collected  by  placing  inside  the  case  a  dish  con-
taining linseed  oil.

Location  of  the  machine

In  order  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  difliculties  due  to  moisture,
the  static  machine  should  be  placed  in  a  sunny  room.  To  avoid  leak-
age, the  position  of  the  machine  should  be  considered  in  relation  to  the
walls  and  furnitiu'e  of  the  room,  and  the  machine  should  be  placed  so
as  to  have  the  prime  conductors  as  far  as  possible  from  walls  and  furni-
ture. Setting  the  machine  at  work  and  darkening  the  room  thoroughly,
leakages  show  themselves  as  brush  discharges,  from  a  part  of  the  ma-
chine, or  from  the  corner  of  an  insulated  platform,  if  it  is  near  a  piece
of  furniture.

Earthing  the  machine

It  is  dangerous  to  earth  the  static  or  any  high  tension  machine  by
means  of  gas  pipes,  which  are  of  a  composition  of  low  melting  point,  and
which  may  run  within  a  short  distance  of  the  live  wires  of  an  electric
lighting  circuit.

The  best  way  of  providing  earth  or  ground  connection  is  to  drive  well
into  the  ground  outside  a  metal  rod,  connect  an  uncovered  wire  to  it,
and  run  it  into  the  room  where  treatments  are  given.  One  of  the  prime
conductors  of  a  static  machine  or  an  electrode  is  often  connected  to  this
wire  by  means  of  a  chain,  and  thus  earthed.  When  both  a  prime  con-
ductor and  an  electrode  are  earthed  at  the  same  time,  they  can  be  con-
nected to  the  same  grounding  wire.

Some  operators  never  earth  their  electrodes,  but  the  advantage  of
earthing  one  electrode  is  that  it  becomes  the  same  potential  as  the
operator,  who  then  can  touch  the  side  of  the  machine  without  getting  a
spark.  This  is,  therefore,  of  very  great  advantage  in  giving  spark  treat-
ment.

Polarity

Since  the  static  electricity  is  a  unidirectional  current,  the  patient  must
be  charged,  or  the  electrode  connected  to  the  positive  or  negative  pole,
according  to  the  desired  effect.

For  the  reason  that  different  conditions  cause  the  static  machine  to
frequently  change  its  polarity,  it  is  necessary  to  be  able  to  identify  the
positive  from  the  negative  pole.

There  are  several  tests  by  means  of  which  it  is  possible  to  ascertain
the  polarity  of  a  static  machine,  most  practical  being  the  following:

1.  If  a  burning  candle  is  placed  between  the  prime  conductors  while
the  machine  is  in  action,  the  flame  of  the  candle  will  be  diverted  toward
the  positive  pole.

2.  A  small  piece  of  ebonite  electrified  (negatively  charged)  b}'  fric-
tion with  a  cloth  or  catskin,  if  suspended  bj^  a  silk  thread  will  be  repelled
by  the  negative  pole.

3.  Looking  at  a  static  machine  in  a  dark  room,  a  star  appears  at  the
positive  and  a  spray  at  the  negative  pole.

Reversing  the  polarity.  The  polarity  of  a  static  machine  can  be  re-
versed by  earthing  both  poles  and  turning  the  plates  a  few  times  in  the
opposite  direction  before  starting  the  machine  in  the  usual  way.


598  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Insulated  Platform  and  Electrodes

In  order  to  be  able  to  use  static  electricity  for  therapeutical  purposes
in  addition  to  a  good  machine,  an  insulated  platform,  a  number  of
electrodes  and  conducting  cords  are  employed.

Insulated  Platform.  The  patient  undergoing  the  static  treatment,  in
order  to  be  charged,  must  be  placed  on  an  insulated  platform,  which  is
placed  about  three  feet  from  the  machine  and  surrounding  objects.
This  platform  is  made  of  a  wooden  floor  (about  5  x  2.5  feet  in  size),  sup-
ported by  four  strong  legs  made  of  some  insulating  material  (glass,
porcelain,  vulcanite,  etc.).

Some  operators  have  a  brass  plate  on  the  platform,  and  on  this  a
footstool  free  from  nails,  to  serve  as  a  seat  for  the  patient.

Electrodes.  In  applying  some  forms  of  static  and  other  high  tension
currents  (high  frequency  from  the  Oudin  resonator,  Tesla  secondary  or
hyperstatic  transformer),  only  one  electrode  is  applied  to  the  patient,
because  these  currents,  on  account  of  the  enormous  voltage,  are  able
to  complete  the  circuit  through  the  air  (in  the  form  of  wireless).

Most  frequently  used  electrodes  in  the  application  of  static  electricity
are  made  of  metal,  glass  or  wood.  The  metal  electrodes  are  of  brass,
sheets  of  lead  or  other  material.  The  glass  electro'des  are  vacuum  made
in  different  shapes,  according  to  the  part  to  be  treated  (same  as  those
used  for  high  frequency  applications).

Dosage

Dosage  (strength)  of  various  static  modalities  can  be  regulated  by
varying  the  speed  of  the  machine,  by  the  size  of  the  terminal  balls  of
the  prime  conductors  (discharging  rods)  and  by  the  length  of  the  spark
gap.  Other  factors  entering  into  the  problem  are  the  size  of  the  elec-
trodes and  the  nature  of  the  grounding.

Leyden  Jar

Leyden  jar  consists  of  a  glass  jar  coated  in  its  lower  half,  inside  and
outside,  with  tin  foil.  It  is  closed  with  an  insulating  material  through
which  passes  a  metal  chain  connected  to  the  inner  coating.

Leyden  jar  is  a  condenser  in  which  the  internal  and  external  tin-foil
surfaces  are  the  conductors,  and  the  glass  between,  the  dielectric  (in-
sulator).

When  the  inner  coating  of  the  jar  is  charged  with  a  positive  electricity,
the  negative  charge  is  induced  on  the  outer  coating,  and  vice  versa.

When  two  Leyden  jars  are  connected  to  the  prime  conductors  of  a
static  machine,  they  collect  the  electricity  and  cause  between  the  dis-
charging poles  a  less  continuous  but  more  vigorous  spark;  and  the
greater  the  capacity  of  these  jars,  the  more  powerful  are  the  sparks  pro-
duced. These  jars  are  made  use  of  in  the  application  of  static  induced,
Morton  wave,  and  friction- treatments.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  599


CHAPTER  VI

APPLICATION  OF  STATIC  ELECTRICITY


LVERY  lime  a  spark  passes  between  the  prime  conductors  of  a
static  machine,  millions  of  oscillations  per  second  are  set  up,  and
when  the  patient  is  included  in  the  circuit,  these  vibrations  are
conveyed  to  the  nerves.

Static  electricity  produces  a  sort  of  tissue  massage,  and  is  an  equal-
izer of  nerve  force.  It  is  a  tonic,  a  stimulant,  a  vaso-constrictor  or
dilator,  according  to  the  polarity  and  the  method  employed.  It  helps  in
the  elimination  of  carbon  dioxide,  urea,  uric  acid  and  all  other  waste
products;  increases  the  arterial  tension;  lengthens  the  diastole;  in-
creases the  frequency  and  regularitj^  of  the  pulse;  stimulates  the  digest-
ive functions;  calms  the  nervous  system  and  causes  the  return  of  sleep.

Contra-indications.  Static  electricity  is  contra-indicated  in  chronic  or
acute  appendicitis,  and  in  some  cases  which  have  gall-stones.

Static  electricity  is  applied  in  the  form  of  static  charging,  head  breeze,
induced  current,  Morton  wave  current,  direct  and  indirect  sparks,  single
or  multiple  sprays,  etc.

Patients  undergoing  the  static  treatment  may  be  fully  dressed,  but
should  remove  all  metal  articles  from  their  bodies  (hat  pins,  hats,
dresses  containing  metallic  braid  or  gauze,  etc.),  as  these  cause  such  con-
centration of  current  locally,  that  they  may  produce  unpleasant  sen-
sation.

Static  Charging

THE  POSITIVE  CHARGE  increases  the  pulse  and  arterial  tension,  the
respiratory  combustions,  and  the  digestive  functions;  it  stimulates  ner-
vous centers,  promotes  sleep,  and  produces  general  tonic  effect;  while
the  NEGATIVE  CHARGE  eliminates  and  disperses  morbid  and  effete
accumulations  (urea,  uric  acid,  etc.).

This  refreshing  and  soothing  treatment,  which  lasts  from  15  to  30
minutes,  is  the  simplest  and  most  pleasant  of  all  forms  of  static  applica-
tions. It  is  indicated  in  all  cases  of  nervousness,  whether  brought  on
by  over-work,  worr^^  trouble  or  anxiety,  neurasthenia,  melancholia,
hypochondriasis,  insomnia;  also  in  depraved  nutrition,  anaemia,  dys-
pepsia, chronic  Bright's  disease,  and  other  conditions.

In  applying  this  treatment,  the  patient  is  placed  upon  the  insulated
platform  which  is  connected  to  one  pole  of  the  static  machine  by  means
of  a  brass  tube  or  a  chain.  The  other  pole  is  earthed.  Prime  conductors
are  separated  beyond  the  sparking  distance,  and  the  machine  is  started.

The  patient  is  charged  positively  or  negatively,  according  to  the  pole
to  which  he  is  connected,  and  feels  an  agreeable  sensation  resembling
a  light  breeze  passing  all  around  him.


600 .  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Operator  must  be  careful  not  to  come  too  close  to  the  patient,  as  a
very  unpleasant  shock  may  be  given.

Head  Breeze

POSITIVE  HEAD  BREEZE,  producing  sedative  effect  and  constrict-
ing the  blood  vessels,  is  indicated  in  migraine,  cerebral  hvpcraemia,  in-
somnia, etc.;  while  the  NEGATIVE  HEAD  BREEZE,  producing  a  stimu-
lative effect  and  dilating  the  blood  vessels,  is  of  value  in  headaches  due
to  anaemia,  neurasthenia,  chronic  Bright's  disease,  etc.

In  applying  this  treatment,  wliich  usually  lasts  from  15  to  20  minutes,
the  prime  conductors  are  drawn  out  beyond  the  sparking  distance.  The
patient  is  seated  on  an  insulated  platform  and  a  few  inches  over  his
head  a  wooden  disc  or  an  electrode,  having  a  number  of  metal  points,  is
suspended  from  the  telescopic  metal  stand  on  the  floor.

For  the  positive  head  breeze,  the  negative  pole  of  the  machine  is  con-
nected to  the  insulated  platform,  and  the  positive  pole  is  earthed  and
connected  to  the  telescopic  stand;  while  for  the  negative  head  breeze  the
connections  are  reversed.

Caution:  Patients  undergoing  the  head  breeze  treatment  should  not
be  allowed  to  wear  metal  hair-pins  which  may  cause  burning  sensation,
or  celluloid  ones,  which  are  inflammable.

Static  Induced  Current

Static  induced  current,  elaborated  by  Dr.  W.  J.  Morton  of  New  York,
in  1881,  is  not  unidirectional  and  resembles  the  faradic  current,  al-
though it  widely  differs  from  this  current  in  physical  and  therapeutical
properties,  producing  muscular  contractions  after  both  faradic  and
galvanic  currents  have  failed.  It  relieves  local  congestion  and  local
pain,  increases  secretions,  produces  local  vibratory  effect  and  is  very
useful  in  ovarian  neuralgia,  neuralgic  sciatica,  constipation,  congestion
of  the  liver,  progressive  muscular  atrophy,  poliomyelitis,  prostatic  hy-
pertrophy, obesity,  etc.

To  produce  this  current,  two  small  Leyden  jars  are  employed  (the
greater  the  desired  effect  and  the  area  of  the  electrodes,  the  larger
should  be  the  jars)  and  the  inner  coatings  of  these  are  connected  to  the
prime  conductors  of  the  static  machine.

By  using  different  sized  Leyden  jars,  by  adjusting  the  spark-gap,  and
by  regulating  the  speed  of  the  machine,  altogether  different  effects  can
be  produced,  from  the  finest  tingle,  which  is  indistinguishable  from  the
faradic  current,  to  a  slowly-discharging  spark  from  the  condensers,
which  causes  powerful  contractions  of  muscular  tissue.

In  administering  the  static  induced  current,  the  patient  need  not  be  on
an  insulated  platform,  and  no  pole  is  earthed.  Sponge  covered,  metal  or
glass  vacuum  electrodes  are  attached  by  means  of  insulated  wires  to  the
outside  coatings  of  the  Leyden  jars,  and  are  placed  on  the  bare  skin  of
the  patient.

When  the  machine  is  started  (at  the  lowest  possible  speed),  the  prime
conductors  are  actually  touching  each  other  and  are  very  slowly
separated  until  the  desired  muscular  contractions  are  produced,  or  un-
til the  patient  receives  the  proper  strength.  (The  prime  conductors  are
usually  separated  from  one-eighth  to  one-fourth  of  an  inch.)

The  average  duration  of  each  application  is  about  20  minutes.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  601


Morton  Wave  Current

The  static,  or  Morton  wave  current,  elaborated  by  Dr.  W.  J.  Morton,  in
1900,  is  without  doubt  tlie  most  useful  form  of  static  treatment.  It  pro-
duces local  vibratory  elfect  and  the  alternate  contraction  and  relaxa-
tion of  muscular  and  cellular  tissue;  increases  secretions  and  the  ex-
cretion of  urea,  and  by  promoting  oxidation,  lessens  the  uric  acid  in  the
system;  dissipates  the  infiltrations;  lessens  hyperaemia  and  conges-
tion, and  often  gives  prompt  relief  from  pain  even  in  cases  in  which
heroic  doses  of  morphine  fail  to  give  relief.  This  current  is,  therefore,
the  most  efficacious  remedy  in  acute  and  chronic  non-infectious  inflam-
mations and  is  of  great  benefit  in  lumbago,  synovitis,  sprains,  rheu-
matoid arthritis,  sciatic  neuritis,  torticollis,  visceroptosis,  congestion  of
the  liver,  constipation,  dysmenorrhea  (due  to  congestion  or  spasm  of  the
internal  os),  congestion  of  the  uterus,  sub-involution  of  the  uterus,
prostatic  hypertrophy,  locomotor  ataxia,  anterior  poliomyelitis,  insom-
nia, etc. It  is  contra-indicated  in  all  suppurative  conditions.

In  applying  this  form  of  treatment,  which  usually  lasts  from  10  to  20
minutes,  the  patient  is  placed  on  an  insulated  platform  (the  platform  is
not  connected  with  the  machine).  The  negative  pole  is  earthed,  and  a
smooth  electrode  of  the  proper  size  and  shape  (composed  of  block-tin,
sheath-lead,  or  pure  silver),  moistened  with  hot  water  connected  to  the
positive  pole  is  placed  on  the  bare  skin  of  the  patient  at  a  point  where
treatment  is  necessary.  When  the  machine  is  started,  the  prime  con-
ductors are  actually  touching  each  other,  and  are  very  slowly  separated
by  the  operator,  who  is  standing  on  the  earthed  (negative)  side  of  the
machine,  until  the  limit  of  tolerance  of  the  patient  is  reached  (usually
from  one-half  to  four  inches,  depending  on  the  sensitiveness  of  the
patient,  the  electrode  employed,  and  the  relative  humidity  of  the  atmos-
phere) .  The  speed  of  the  machine  should  be  regulated  so  as  to  produce
alternate  contraction  and  relaxation  of  muscular  tissue  so  necessary
in  the  relief  of  congestion  and  infiltration.

The  contractions  should  be  slow  enough  to  obtain  the  periodical  con-
traction and  relaxation  of  the  glandular  and  muscular  tissue  of  which
the  organ  is  composed.  This  action  depends  principally  upon  the
length  of  the  spark-gap,  the  size  of  the  terminal  balls,  and  the  size  of
the  electrodes  used  upon  the  surface  of  the  body.

"In  humid  weather,  when  the  capacity  of  the  output  of  spark  from
static  machine  in  wave  current  applications  is  much  diminished,  by  in-
troducing a  low  coated  Leyden  jar  in  series  with  the  negative  ground
connection,  the  volume  and  length  of  spark  gap  can  be  restored  and
frequency  of  the  spark  discharge  controlled  at  will." — Dr.  E.  C.  Titus,
of  New  York.

Static  Sparks

Static  sparks  produce  counter-irritation,  and  are  of  special  value  in
the  treatment  of  sciatica,  neuralgia,  chorea,  locomotor  ataxia,  constipa-
tion, neuritis  of  the  rheumatic  type,  paralysis  of  the  muscles,  and  all
low  and  depressed  conditions  of  the  system  where  a  general  stimulating
and  tonic  effect  is  desired.

Strong  sparks  drawn  over  motor  points  cause  muscular  contractions
with  reddening  of  the  skin  and  burning  sensation.


602  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  IJuyers'  Guide

Caution:  Spark  treatments  must  be  applied  judiciously.  Never  bring
an  electrode  near  the  lace  (especially  the  eyes),  or  treat  a  bony  struc-
ture (elbow,  knee,  etc.)  which  is  protected  only  by  a  thin  covering
of  soft  tissue,  with  any  but  short  mild  spark.  It  is  belter  to  apply  the
sparks  to  the  bare  skin  than  through  the  clothing,  and  as  the  spark
causes  a  sensation  of  a  shock,  it  is  advisable  to  inform  the  patient  be-
forehand where  the  sparks  will  be  administered.

THE  INDUCED,  OR  INDIRECT  SPARK,  is  administered  by  placing
the  patient  on  an  insulated  platform,  connected  to  the  negative  pole,
situated  as  far  away  from  the  machine  as  possible;  while  the  positive
pole  is  earthed.  The  spark-gap  is  wide  open  (5  or  6  inches),  and  a  wood-
en or  metal  ball  electrode,  connected  with  the  floor  or  with  an  earthed
pole,  by  means  of  a  chain,  is  brought  close  enough  to  the  patient  to
cause  a  discharge  of  sparks.  The  larger  the  ball  electrode,  the  sharper
the  resulting  sensation.  The  potential  can  be  regulated  by  the  operator
approximating  one  foot  to  the  insulated  platform,  so  as  to  take  part  of
the  patient's  charge,  or  by  altering  the  speed  of  the  machine.

THE  DIRECT  SPARK  is  administered  in  the  same  way  as  the  indirect,
except  that  the  positive  pole  is  not  earthed,  but  is  connected  directly  to
the  electrode.

The  direct  spark,  being  too  severe  a  treatment,  is  now  very  seldom
employed.

A  STATIC  ROLLER  MASSAGE  is  a  form  of  spark  treatment  applied
with  a  roller  electrode  connected  to  the  top  of  one  Leyden  jar,
while  the  patient  is  on  an  insulated  platform,  connected  to  the  top  of
the  other.  This  treatment  is  applied  through  the  clothing,  and  not  on
the  bare  skin.  The  thicker  the  clothing,  the  more  severe  the  effect.  The
machine  is  started  with  the  prime  conductors  actually  touching  each
other;  these  are  gradually  separated  until  the  resistance  of  the  patient's
clothing  is  overcome.  The  roller  must  be  moved  rapidly,  and  used  for
a  few  minutes  at  a  time.

Using  the  Leyden  jars,  this  treatment  produces  stimulation  of  and
counter-irritation  to  cold  extremities,  while  without  the  jars  it  is  milder,
producing  an  ordinary  massage.

Static  Sprays

Both  single  and  multiple  sprays  relieve  congestion,  lessen  local  swell-
ing, and  diminish  pain.  They  are  applied  by  means  of  a  single  or  mul-
tiple point  electrode  (respectively),  connected  with  the  floor  by  means
of  a  chain,  and  held  by  the  operator  at  a  distance  of- from  five  to  ten
inches  from  the  patient,  who  is  on  an  insulated  platform,  connected  with
the  positive  pole  of  the  machine.  The  negative  pole  of  the  machine  is
grounded.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  fi03


CHAPTER  VII

ALTERNATING  CURRENTS


AN  alternating  current  is  one  in  which  the  rise  and  fall  of  voltage
in  a  positive  direction  is  immediately,  without  break,  followed  by
a  corresponding  rise  and  fall  in  a  negative  direction. This  rise
and  fall  of  voltage  in  both  directions  represents  a  cycle.
In  every  cycle  there  are  two  alternations,  or  curves,  one  positive  and
one  negative;  therefore,  a  60  cycle  current  has  120  alternations.
Period  is  the  time  required  to  complete  one  cycle.
Frequency  is  the  number  of  complete  cycles  occurring  in  one  second
of  time,  and  is  controlled  by  the  velocity  of  the  alternating  current  gen-
erator, or  the  rapidity  of  the  oscillating  rheostat.

Commercially  speaking,  a  current  of  25  cycles  per  second  is  called  a
low  frequency  current,  and  a  current  of  133  cycles  per  second,  a  high
frequency  current.

In  electro-therapeutics,  a  current  having  less  than  1000  cycles  per
second  is  called  a  low  frequency;  one  having  from  1,000  to  10,000  cycles
per  second,  a  medium  frequency;  and  from  10,000  to  many  hundreds  of
thousands  cycles  per  second,  a  high  frequency  current.

Sinusoidal  Currents

A  true  sinusoidal  current  is  an  alternating  current  in  which  the  rise
and  fall  in  voltage  in  the  positive  and  negative  directions  is  gradual,
and  represents  a  sine  curve,  or  a  horizontal  letter  "S"  ("~"-^) .  (See  Fig]
7).  This  current  is  produced  by  means  of  an  alternating  current  gener-
ator, or  by  passing  the  galvanic  current  through  an  oscillating  rheostat.

An  oscillating  rheostat  consists  essentially  of  a  resistance  coil  so  ar-
ranged that  a  sliding  contact  piece  gradually  increases  the  voltage  by
reducing  the  resistance,  until  the  maximum  voltage  is  reached;  then
again  increasing  the  resistance  decreases  the  voltage  to  zero;  the  polar-
ity is  then  reversed  without  break  and  the  second  alternation  is  com-
pleted in  the  same  way.

By  controlling  the  number  of  revolutions  of  the  alternating  current
generator,  or  the  rapidity  of  the  oscillating  rheostat,  it  is  possible  to
produce  either  a  slow  or  a  rapid  sinusoidal  current.

The  slow  sinusoidal  (galvanic  sinusoidal)  current  has  a  frequency  of
from  10  to  120  cycles  per  minute;  v/hile  the  rapid  sinusoidal  from  120
to  2000  cycles  per  minute.

Alternating  current  from  the  lighting  circuit  is  usually  110  volt  and
60  cycle  (per  second),  and  is,  therefore,  a  strong  and  very  rapid  sinu-
soidal current.  This  current  can  be  used  by  lowering  the  voltage  with
a  reliable  rheostat,  but  as  the  frequency  of  this  current  is  controlled  by
the  revolutions  of  the  generator,  at  the  electric  power  plant,  it  is  im-


604


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guidt


possible  to  lower  the  frequency,  and  such  an  arrangement  will  always
deliver  a  very  rapid  sinusoidal  current  of  3600  cycles  per  minute  (or  60
cycles  per  second).

Application  of  the  Sinusoidal  Currents

Sinusoidal  current,  being  of  an  alternating  character,  has  very  little
polar  effects.

The  slow  sinusoidal  current,  due  to  the  gradual  rise  and  fall  in  volt-
age and  a  change  in  polarity,  has  great  stimulating  powers,  producing
painless  rhythmical  contractions  and  relaxations  of  the  involuntary
muscular  fibres.


Fig.  10 — Sinusoidal  Current  Apparatus.

Since  the  action  of  this  current  is  similar  to  the  physiological  function
of  the  involuntary  muscular  fibres,  it  is  an  excellent  remedy  for  the
affections  of  the  involuntary  organs,  especially  stomach,  intestines,
bladder  and  uterus,  and  is  very  soothing  in  excessive  sensibility.

This  current  gives  excellent  results  in  constipation,  diabetes,  gastritis,
gastrectasis,  headaches,  infantile  uterus,  insomnia,  locomotor  ataxia,
lumbago,  melancliolia,  muscular  atrophy,  obesit3%  ovarian  neuralgia,
paralysis,  segmental  analgesia,  prostatic  hypertrojphy,  etc.,  etc.

The  rapid  sinusoidal  current  may  be  employed  in  all  cases  where
faradism  is  usually  emploj'cd,  and  gives  better  results  than  faradism  in
eliciting  vertebral  reflexes  and  stimulating  the  muscular  tissue.

This  current  is  beneficial  in  bronchial  asthma,  insufliciency  of  mam-
marj'  glands,  visceral  neuralgia,  neuritis,  pelvic  diseases,  pleurisy,  vagus
hypotonia,  vomiting  in  pregnancy,  etc.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


605


COMBINED  GALVANIC  and  SINUSOIDAL,  or  UNDULATORY  GAL-
VANIC CURRENT,  is  similar  to  the  true  sinusoidal,  with  the  exception
that  it  is  undulatory  in  one  direction  only  (there  is  no  change  in  polar-
ity). Besides  the  power  of  contracting  the  muscles,  it  possesses  the  polar
properties  of  the  galvanic  current,  and  is  especially  indicated  in  cases
of  optic  atrophy,  anterior  poliomyelitis,  and  various  other  conditions  in
which  both  undulatoiy  and  galvanic  effects  are  of  value.


PS


Fig.  11 — Diagram  of  the  Sinusoidal
Apparatus  shown  in  Fig.  10.  Rolor
is  an  oscillating  rheostat  consist-
ing of  a  porcelain  base  wound
closely  with  resistance  wire,
against  the  surface  of  which  re-
volve two  caibon  brushes.  Rniary
Converter  is  a  current  generator,
hence,  all  currents  obtained  from
this  apparatus  are  free  from
"ground"  connection,  and  may  be
safely  employed  without  fear  of
a  shock.


Contra-indications

Sinusoidal  current  is  contra-indicated  in  the  same  condition  in  which
static  current  is  contra-indicated,  viz.,  cases  of  chronic  or  acute  appen-
dicitis, and  some  cases  which  have  gall-stones.


606  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


CHAPTER  VIII

HIGH  FREQUENCY  CURRENTS


THE  high  frequency  currents  arc  the  alternating  or  oscillating  cur-
rents in  which  the  frequency  rises  up  from  ten  thousand  to  several
millions  of  oscillations  per  second,  and  are  undoubtedly  the  most
popular  currents  of  the  day.

On  account  of  this  high  frequency,  these  currents,  when  passed
through  the  body,  cause  no  pain  or  muscular  contraction,  because  the
sensory  nerves  are  perfectly  insensible  to  stimulations  of  a  higher  fre-
quency than  that  for  which  they  are  organized.  For  the  same  reason,
it  is  impossible  for  the  eye  to  see  very  rapid  motion,  or  the  ear  to  distin-
guish high  sound  vibrations.

These  currents  have  been  named  after  D'Arsonval,  the  noted  French
scientist,  and  Tesla,  the  famous  Croatian  electrical  engineer,  who  have
invented  them,  and  have  done  more  toward  the  production,  perfection
and  possibilities  of  using  them,  than  all  other  persons  combined.

D'ARSONVAL  CURRENT  is  one  of  high  frequency,  high  amperage,
and  not  very  high  voltage.  Originally,  it  was  produced  as  follows
(Fig.  12):

The  direct  current  from  the  lighting  circuit,  interrupted  and  passed
through  the  primary  winding  of,  a  large  induction  coil,  magnetizes  the
soft  iron  core  and  induces  a  current  of  very  high  voltage  (hundreds  of
thousands  of  volts,  according  to  the  size  of  the  coil)  in  the  secondary
winding,  which  is  in  the  magnetic  field.  The  terminals  of  the  secondary
winding  are  connected  to  the  inside  coating  of  the  Leyden  jars.  Be-
tween the  outer  coatings  of  the  jars  is  connected  a  solenoid,  or  a  coil
consisting  of  twelve  to  twenty  turns  of  coarse  copper  wire.

The  Leyden  jars  (or  any  other  type  of  a  condenser  employed)  dis-
charge themselves  through  an  adjustable  spark-gap,  placed  in  the  cir-
cuit between  the  two  inner  coatings  of  the  jars,  causing  several  millions
of  oscillations  per  second  in  the  solenoid  from  which  this  current  is
obtained.

The  frequency  of  the  oscillations  depends  upon  the  capacity  of  the
Leyden  jars. .  When  the  jars  are  small,  the  discharges  are  quicker  than
from  the  large  ones.

TESLA  CURRENT  is  one  of  very  high  voltage,  very  high  frequency,
and  a  low  amperage.  This  current  is  produced  by  means  of  an  appara-
tus consisting  essentially  of  a  step-up  transformer,  a  condenser,  and  a
Tesla  coil,  as  follows  (Fig.  13)  :

The  step-up  transformer  raises  the  electric  lighting  current  of  110  or
220  volts  to  a  current  of  from  two  to  thirty  thousand  volts  (according  to
the  size  of  the  transformer) .  This  high  voltage  from  the  secondary  wind-
ing of  the  step-up  transformer  charges  a  condenser.  The  condenser
discharges  at  a  very  high  frequency  through  the  primary  winding  of  the


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  007


PATIENT  COUCH

OR
nFlESOIMATER


Fig.  12 — Diagram  of  D'Arsonval  Type.


608


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijers'  Guide


r


SfN


ft*


cff


mil


HICMER  voLr/\ce
SAMC  FRfQUeNCy

(60  cvcLes)


C00k0et4SBH


HIGH  VOLTAtE
HIGH  FReQUFNC


tow
mmm


Mi^


A^^


VCRY  HIGH  VOU
VERVHiG-H  FRE


TACE
QU6NCY


Fig.  13— Diagram  of  Tesla  Type.

Tesla  coil  (a  few  turns  of  coarse  wire  wound  around  the  outside  of  a
secondary  winding  consisting  of  a  large  number  of  turns  of  fine  wire)
and  as  a  consequence,  a  current  of  very  high  frequency,  very  high
voltage  and  low  amperage  is  generated  in  the  Tesla  secondary.

The  Tesla  coil  is  particularly  adapted  for  the  alternatmg  current,  and
is  employed  in  most  of  the  portable  high  frequency  machines.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


009


OucUn  Current

A  current  of  high  frequency,  high  voltage  and  a  low  amperage,  re-
sembling the  current  from  the  secondary  winding  of  the  Tesla  coil,  can
be  obtained  from  the  D'Arsonval  apparatus,  by  attaching  and  properly
adjusting  to  the  solenoid  a  large  coil  of  fine  wire,  known  as  the  Oudin
Resonator  (Fig.  14).


Fig.  14 — Oudin  Resonator.

High  Frequency  from  the  Static  Machine

The  high  frequency  currents  can  be  also  produced  from  the  hvper-
static  transformer  (Fig.  15)  connected  to  the  prime  conductors  of  a
static  machine.  The  current  thus  obtained,  does  not  give  a  sufficient
amperage  for  the  satisfactory  application  of  auto-condensation  or
direct  D'Arsonval  method  (Diathermy),  but  possesses  advantages  for
destructive  effect  over  the  coil  or  transformer.

Application  of  High  Frequency  Currents

D'Arsonval  current  is  administered  in  the  form  of  "Auto-condensa-
tion," "Auto-conduction,"  and  the  direct  application  or  "Diathermy";
while  the  currents  from  the  Tesla  secondary',  the  Oudin  Resonator  or


610


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


the  hyperstatic  transformer  in  the  form  of  "Vacuum  tube  application,"
"Efflcuve,"  and  "Fulguration."

Auto-condensation  and  Auto-conduction

Auto-condcnsation  and  Auto-conduction  increase  general  metabolism,
glandular  activity,  temperature  and  bodily  heat,  oxidation  and  hemo-
globin, secretions  and  eliminations,  etc.  These  currents  pass,  by  pre-
ference, along  the  paths  of  least  resistance,  along  the  blood  vessels,  and
along  the  muscles.  On  account  of  the  great  frequency  of  oscillations,
they  heat  the  blood  and  thereby  stimulate  the  great  system  of  vaso-
motor nerves. Exerting an important  influence on the sympathetic


Fig.  15 — Hyperstatic  Transformer. Tills  instrument  used  with  a
Static Machine produces the Higli Frequency Currents.

nervous  system,  they  cause  the  peripheral  dilatation  of  the  blood  ves-
sels, the  increased  activity  of  the  heart,  and  an  increased  depth  of  the
respirator}^  excursions.  As  a  result  of  peripheral  dilatation  of  the  blood
vessels,  the  passive  venous  congestion  of  the  internal  organs  is  relieved,
and  the  digestion  and  assimilation,  to  a  large  extent,  improved.

Dilating  the  blood  vessels,  these  currents  reduce  the  high  blood  pres-
sure when  hypertension  exists,  which  reduction  progresses  from  one
treatment  to  another,  without  being  accompanied  by  the  vicious  cycle
as  occurs  with  drugs,  and  consequently  are  more  effective  and  more
desirable  than  drugs.

Indications:  Auto-condensation  and  auto-conduction  treatments  are
of  great  value  in  all  cases  of  defective  metabolism,  particularly
in  diabetes,  rheumatism,  gout,  asthma,  kidney  troubles (except  acute


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  OH

■

parenchymatous  nephritis), arteriosclerosis,  nervous  diseases, and  all
cases  in  which  hypertension  exists  (unless  compensatory).

Contra-indications :  Tliese  treatments  are  contra-indicated  in  acute
parenchymatous  nephritis  (on  account  of  their  ability  to  liberate  waste
products  more  rapidly  than  the  diseased  kidney  can  carrj'  away) ;
general  arteriosclerosis  with  low  blood  pressure;  syphilitic  and  gonor-


Fig.  16 — Patient  undergoing  auto-condensation  treatment. (Victor  apparatus)

rheal  myocarditis;  cerebral  anaemia,  excitement,  and  in  all  cases  in
which  hypotension  exists.

AUTO-CONDENSATION  is  administered  with  the  patient  (fully
dressed)  on  a  couch  or  a  chair  having  a  large  metal  electrode  under  the
insulated  cushion  (which  acts  as  a  dielectric),  connected  to  one  end  of
the  D'Arsonval  solenoid  (or  other  terminal  of  the  transformer).  The
other  terminal  of  the  apparatus  is  connected  to  a  metal  handle  which
the  patient  holds  in  his  hand.


612


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


Due  to  the  large  amount  of  current  (300  to  1000  milliamperes)  em-
ployed in  this  treatment,  the  patient  feels  a  gentle  warmth  beginning  at
the  wrists,  gradually  extending  up  the  arm  to  the  axilla  and  over  the
entire  body.

The  current  traversing  the  patient  can  be  measured  introducing  a
special  hot  wire  milliamperemeter  in  that  part  of  the  circuit  which  con-
nects the  metal  electrode  which  the  patient  holds  in  his  hand.

In  order  to  demonstrate  the  amount  of  current  with  which  the  pa-
tient is  charged,  while  under  this  treatment,  it  is  only  necessary  to  have
the  patient  illuminate  a  16  candle  power,  110  volt  incandescent  lamp
through  his  body,  by  introducing  it  into  the  circuit  in  the  same  way  as  a
milliamperemeter.

AUTO-CONDUCTION  is  administered  by  placing  the  patient  inside  of
a  large  solenoid,  or  a  cylindrical  wire  cage,  without  connecting  him  in
any  way  with  it. (Fig.  18.)


Fig.  17 — Patient undergoing auto-condensation
treatment


The  cage  is  connected  to  the  apparatus,  and  the  current  travels  com-
completely  around  the  outside  of  the  cage.  Thus  travelling  through  the
copper  wire,  this  current  discharges  itself  from  all  sides  into  the  body
of  the  patient,  who  thus  receives  a  full  body  treatment.

Auto-condensation  and  auto-conduction  treatments  are  usually  ad-
ministered for  from  10  to  30  minutes,  and  are  given  daily  at  first  in
nearly  all  cases,  gradually  decreasing  as  the  patient  improves.

Direct  Application  of  D*Arsonval  Current

Diathermy

D'Arsonval  current  directly  applied  by  means  of  two  metallic  elec-
trodes in  passing  over  a  small  cross  section  through  the  internal  tissue
of  the  body,  generates  a  purely  mechanical  heat,  by  overcoming  the  re-
sistance of  the  tissue,  in  the  same  way  as  electricity  heats  the  resistance
wire  in  passing  through  it.  The  higher  the  frequency  and  stronger  the
current,  the  greater  the  heat  production.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


613


This  method  of  heat  production  recently  elaborated  by  Dr.  Franz
Nagelschmidt,  of  Berlin,  which  will  probably  in  the  near  future  take  the
leading  place  in  electro-therapeutics  is  called  Diathermy,  or  Thermo-
penetration.

Generation  of  Diathermic  Currents

For  the  reason  that  the  heat  effect  of  the  D'Arsonval  current  chiefly
depends  on  the  frequency  of  the  oscillations,  most  of  the  apparatus


Fig.  18 — Patient  undergoing  auto-con-
duction treatment.

generating  this  current  for  diathermic  applications,  have  special  con-
densers (mica-tin-foil,  or  Leyden  jars)  and  a  multiple  spark-gap  (which
causes  a  discharge  of  a  number  of  short  fine  sparks),  so  as  to  increase
the  oscillations  to  a  very  high  frequency.  Therefore,  the  D'Arsonval
current  for  diathermy  differs  from  the  ordinary  D'Arsonval,  in  being  of
a  much  higher  frequency  (100,000  to  many  millions  of  oscillations  per
second),  a  higher  amperage  (up  to  3000  to  4000  milliamperes)  and  a
lower  voltage  (250  to  1000  volts) .


614


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Localization  of  the  current

Since  the  current  passes  directly  from  one  electrode  to  the  other,  and
since  a  small  active  electrode  causes  greater  concentration  of  heat,  with
less  current  in  a  relatively  shorter  period  than  a  large  one,  the  heat  can
be  localized  and  concentrated  at  will,  by  the  position  and  the  size  of  the
electrodes,  e.  g.,  two  large  electrodes  of  the  same  size  applied  on  the
opposite  sides  of  the  part  treated  will  produce  the  same  effect  at  each
electrode  and  the  uniform  effect  between  them;  while  employing  one
small  and  one  large  electrode,  the  heat  will  be  concentrated  only  at  the
small  electrode  (which  is  therefore  called  active).

In  order  to  prove  that  the  heat  produced  by  this  current  is  more  pro-
nounced in  the  center  of  the  tissues  (between  the  electrodes)  than  at
the  points  where  the  electrodes  are  applied,  it  is  only  necessary  to  apply
two  metallic  electrodes  to  the  opposite  ends  of  a  potato  and  to  pass
about  1000  milliamperes  of  current  for  three  or  four  minutes. At  the


Fig.  19 — Application  of  Diathermy.

end  of  this  application,  it  is  found  that  the  outside  of  the  potato,  where
the  electrodes  were  in  contact,  has  remained  unchanged  (raw)  but  on
cutting  the  potato  in  half,  it  is  noticed  that  the  center  is  cooked.  Same
experiment  may  be  performed  on  a  piece  of  beef,  liver,  egg,  etc.

By  means  of  diathermic  currents  being  able  to  raise  the  local  internal
temperature  (without  producing  muscular  contraction  or  ionic  action)
to  a  moderate  warmth,  and  thereby  create  a  suitable  condition  for  heal-
ing of  various  lesions;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to  increase  the  heat  to  such
an  extent  so  as  to  dessicate  or  even  carbonize  the  tissue,  the  field  of
diathermy  is  very  large,  both  in  medicine  and  surgery,  and  its  applica-
tion has,  therefore,  been  divided  into  two  branches,  viz..  Physiological
or  Medical  Diathermy  and  Surgical  Diathermy  or  Electro-Coagulation.

Physiological  or  Medical  Diathermy

The  utilization  of  heat  in  the  treatment  of  disease  dates  back  to  the
very  earliest  days  of  medicine.  Until  the  introduction  of  diathermy,  all
the  applications  of  heat  were  from  without.  This  was  well  enough,  so  far


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  015

as  it  went;  but  such  external  applications  never  succeeded  in  heating
the  blood  structures  within  the  body.  By  means  of  diathermic  current,
we  are,  however,  able  to  heat  the  internal  parts  of  the  body  at  will,  and
thereby  produce  all  the  essential  elements  of  an  inflammation  without
injuring  the  cells  of  the  body  so  as  to  stimulate  them  into  reaction.
Since  the  inflammation  ahd  fever  (one  is  local,  while  the  other  constitu-
tional reaction)  are  Nature's  most  powerful  processes  for  the  produc-


Fig.  20  —  Combination appa-
ratus  delivering X-ray, High
Frequency, Auto  -  condensa-
tion and  Diathermy.

tion  of  a  cure,  diathermy  is,  therefore,  a  truly  phvsiological  measure,
which  does  not  relieve  or  obscure  symptoms,  but  assists  the  body  in  the
performance  of  its  physiological  function.

"The  introduction  of  diathermic  heat  results  in  better  cell  function
and  an  increase  in  the  chemistry  of  the  part.  This  warmth,  introduced
from  without,  is  stored  up  as  energy  in  every  molecule  of  the  cell  proto-
plasm. There  is  neither  any  expenditure  of  the  patient's  reserve  energy,
nor  is  there  any  actual  combustion  of  circulating  nutrient.


616


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Binjers'  Guide


"As  a  secondaiy  eftect  of  this  local  dialhermatization,  we  have  pro-
duced a  local  arterial  hyperacmia,  and  as  a  further  result,  we  have  in-
creased the  vis  a  tergo  on  the  arterial  side,  which,  too,  improves  the
pressure  of  the  little  venules.  Consequently,  wc  have  done  much  to  re-
lieve the  local  venous  engorgement,  and  we  are  directly  aiding  the  re-
moval of  those  used-up  products  resulting  from  tissue  changes,  which
have  a  damaging  effect  on  the  cellular  life,  if  allowed  to  remain."
— Frederick  De  Kraft.


Fig.  21 — Rear  view  of  the  ap-
paratus shown in Fig. 20.

INDICATIONS:  By  raising  the  local  internal  temperature  only  a  few
degrees  above  normal  and  thereby  producing  an  active  hyperaemia  in
deep  structures  (which  lasts  for  several  hours),  dissolving  some  crystal-
line deposits  of  urates,  and  destroying  some  infections  micro-organism,
remarkable  results  are  obtained  in  the  treatment  of  various  local  affec-
tions, particularly  those  due  to  defective  metabolism,  streptococcic  and
tubercular  infections,  uric  acid  deposits,  etc.

Physiological  diathermy  is  therefore  indicated  in  chronic  nephritis,


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  617

cholecystitis,  pancreatitis,  asthma,  pleurisy,  pneumonia,  first  stages  of
phthisis,  certain  heart  diseases  (particularly  in  cases  where  impairment
of  the  muscular  structure  has  taken  place,  as  the  result  of  changes  of  an
arteriosclerotic  nature  in  the  coronary  arteries),  rheumatism,  gout,  lum-
bago, acute  and  sub-acute  arthritis,  synovitis,  neuralgia,  neuritis,  scia-
tica, painful  local  affections,  etc.

CONTRA-INDICATIONS:  This  method  of  treatment  is  contra-indi-
cated in  gastric  ulcer  (as  it  may  cause  violent  hemorrhages),  and  in
cases  where  there  is  possibility  of  the  presence  of  walled  in  pus,  (be-
cause the  staphylococci  and  the  streptococci  contained  in  pus  may  be
stimulated  to  greater  activity  and  more  rapid  multiplication) ,

Method  of  Application

Diathermy  is  applied  either  as  a  strictly  local  or  general  application.
It  is,  however,  advisable  to  limit  the  heat  effect,  wherever  possible,  to
that  organ  or  organs  which  seem  most  likely  to  be  benefitted;  the  heart,
liver,  kidneys,  lungs,  the  splanchic  area,  the  spinal  centers,  etc.  The
object  of  a  general  application  is  to  produce  a  general  hyperthermia
and  to  obtain  those  other  physiological  effects  on  the  sympathetic  nerv-
ous system,  on  the  general  and  especially  the  peripheral  circulation  of
blood  and  lymph,  which  only  a  general  diffusion  of  high  frequency  cur-
rents can  bring  about.

At  the  present  time,  we  have  no  reliable  measuring  device  giving  us  an
exact  idea  of  the  heat  produced  in  the  interior  of  the  tissues,  but  if  we
take  into  consideration  (1)  the  strength  of  the  current;  (2)  the  elec-
trodes; (3)  the  duration  of  the  application;  and  (4)  the  sense  of  tem-
perature of  the  patient,  w^e  will  not  commit  gross  errors  which  may
result  in  burns.

1.  Strength  of  the  Current.  It  is  never  wise  to  begin  a  treatment
with  the  maximum  of  current  that  the  patient  can  bear,  for  if  too  much
current  is  employed,  the  heat  near  the  electrodes  will  become  unbear-
able, before  the  deep-seated  tissues  are  heated  as  much  as  they  should
be.. In  order  to  obtain  the  best  therapeutic  results,  it  is  advisable  to  slow-
ly increase  the  current  up  to  200  or  300  milliamperes  so  as  to  gradually
heat  the  tissues  between  the  electrodes.  After  a  few  minutes,  the  cur-
rent can  be  increased  as  much  as  the  patient  can  bear  with  comfort.  We
must,  however,  be  careful  not  to  exceed  that  degree  of  warmth  whereby
too  much  heat  will  damage  the  cell.  In  other  w^ords,  the  heating  must
not  lead  to  permanent  changes  in  the  protoplasm.

2.  Electrodes.  Diathermy  is  applied  by  means  of  bare  or  covered
metal  electrodes.  The  most  suitable  electrodes  are  of  soft  steel  metal
which  are  flexible  enough  to  permit  an  even  application,  and  good  close
contact.  If  covered  electrodes  are  employed,  they  must  be  saturated
with  a  sodium  chloride,  or  ammonium  nitrate  solution.

In  order  to  produce  the  uniform  heat  effect  between  the  electrodes  in
the  application  of  physiological  diathermy,  both  electrodes  should  be
of  about  the  same  size,  and  to  prevent  unpleasant  sparking  and  burns,
wherever  possible,  these  should  be  securely  fastened  by  means  of  a
roller  bandage.

Size  of  the  electrodes  govern  directly  the  density  of  the  current  when
a  certain  unit  of  current  is  passing. As  we  change  the  size  of  the  elec-


618  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


trodes,  we  not  only  change  the  current  density,  but  also  the  mass  of  the
tissue  which  intervenes.

The  electrode  surface  should  be  of  approximately  three  by  five  inches
(for  each  electrode),  to  one  thousand  milliampcres  of  current  employed.

3.  Duration  of  the  application.  The  resulting  quantity  of  heat  is
proportional  to  the  duration  which  a  certain  current  strength  is  acting.

The  application  should  last  enough  to  get  a  true  physiological  re-
sponse and  no  more.  Too  long  an  application  may  do  harm,  while  one
too  short  may  do  no  good.  As  a  general  rule,  the  application  should  last
from  15  to  30  minutes,  according  to  the  intensity  of  the  current.

4.  Toleration.  If  the  current  is  turned  on  to  the  point  of  comfortable
toleration,  the  danger  of  injuring  the  intervening  tissues  is  practically
nil,  as  the  heat  at  the  surface  application  is  practically  the  same  as  the
heating  of  the  intervening  tissues.

General  Remarks

I.  "It  is  not  always  necessary  to  obtain  an  excessive  rise  of  tempera-
ture in  the  deeper  structures,  nor  even  a  demonstrable  increase  of  heat.
Even  a  very  small  diathermic  effect  may  produce  an  improvement,
both  subjectively  and  objectively,  and  lead  to  functional  changes  in  the
tissues  to  which  it  is  applied."

II.  "One  of  the  most  important  results  of  diathermy  is  hyperaemia."

III.  "Diathermic  currents  appear  to  possess  the  peculiarity  of  in-
ducing a  dilatation  of  the  blood  vessels  within  the  structure  through
which  they  pass.  Co-incident  with  the  dilatation  of  the  blood  vessels,  a
more  rapid  flow  of  blood  to  the  part  occurs,  also  an  increase  in  the  for-
mation of  lymph."

IV.  "Excessive  quantities  of  current  and  too  long  an  application  may
easily  lead  to  a  temporary  paresis  of  the  capillaries,  and  thus  indirectly
to  a  pronounced  local  oedema."

V.  "The  bone  marrow  is  the  least  to  take  part  in  the  general  warm-
ing process,  taking  up  warmth  from  the  surrounding  tissues.  As  a  re-
sult of  its  protected  position,  it  holds  the  heat  longest."

Vacuum  Tube  Applications

Vacuum  tube  applications  promote  local  hyperaemia,  absorption  and
heat;  increase  local  nutrition  and  oxygenation;  liberate  ozone,  which  is
inhaled  by  the  patient  and  is  locally  germicidal;  retard  the  growth  of
parasitic  diseases,  and  decrease  the  virulence  of  the  toxins  produced  by
the  bacteria,  etc.

Local  hyperaemia  produced  by  this  method  usually  lasts  from  10  to  24
hours,  according  to  the  time  of  application,  strength  of  the  current  and
the  physical  condition  of  the  patient.

These  applications  are  indicated  in  all  local  chronic  inflammatory
conditions,  e.  g.,  neuritis,  neuralgia,  constipation,  hemorrhoids,  salpin-
gitis, rheumatism,  herpes,  eczema  and  all  other  skin  affections.

Mild  and  medium  sparks  stimulate  or  soothe,  according  to  the  length
and  character  of  the  application.  Strong  sparks  are  caustic.  Sparks  to
the  spine  and  solar  plexus  increase  the  arterial  tension.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


619


Surface  Vacuum  Electrode.


Vacuum  tubes

Vacuum  tube  treatments  are  administered  by  means  of  glass  elec-
trodes of  different  shapes  and  sizes  (according  to  the  part  treated),  and
are  applied  by  direct  contact,  by  a  fine  spray  (Effleuve)  or  by  sparks.

For  the  reason  that  most  of  the  current  is  discharged  at  the  first  point
where  the  electrode  comes  in  contact  with  the  body,  when  treating  vari-
ous orifices,  in  order  to  administer  a  sufficient  quantity  of  current  mth-
in,  it  is  advisable  to  use  insulated  vacuum  tubes.

These  tubes  are  far  superior  to  the  ordinary  uninsulated  electrodes,
and  consist  of  a  vacuum  chamber,  surrounded  all  its  length  except  the
point,  by  a  chamber  filled  with  air,  which  acts  as  an  insulator.  (Fig.  24.)


Fig.  23 — Vacuum  Electrode  for  covering  large
surface.

Vacuum  tubes  used  in  the  application  of  high  frequency  currents  from
an  Oudin  Resonator,  Tesla  secondary  or  hyperstatic  transformer  consist
of  a  sealed  glass  chamber  exhausted  to  a  vacuum  varying  from  one  five
hundredth  to  one  millionth  of  an  atmosphere.

Tubes  exhausted  at  about  one  five  hundredth  of  an  atmosphere  (V500)
are  called  low;  those  exhausted  at  about  one  thousandth  (Viooo)  of  an
atmosphere,  medium;  while  tubes  which  are  exhausted  at  a  higher
vacuum  are  called  high.

Low  tubes  light  with  a  rose-pink  color  and  give  more  heat  than  those
of  a  higher  vacuum.  These  tubes  produce  sedative  effect  and  are  useful
in  all  acute  inflammatory  and  painful  conditions.

Medium  and  High  tubes  give  blue,  blue-violet,  or  almost  a  blue-white
light,  and  produce  less  heat  and  more  chemical  rays  than  low. These


Fig.  24 — Insulated  Prostatic  Electrode


620


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


tubes  give  better  results  than  low  in  the  treatment  of  skin  diseases  and
various  chronic  afYections.

In  administering  vacuum  tube  treatments  in  order  to  avoid  a  painful
discharge  of  sparks  between  the  patient  and  the  electrode,  the  glass
tube  must  be  in  contact  with  the  body,  prior  to  turning  on  the  current,
and  the  current  turned  off  prior  to  removing  the  tube.

Sterilization  of  Vacuum  Tubes

Although  the  effleuve  from  the  vacuum  tube  is  germicidal  in  action,
in  order  to  prevent  the  spreading  of  infection,  it  is  advisable  to  sterilize
these  electrodes  as  much  as  possible,  particularly  after  treating  specific


Fig.  25 — A  combination of  X-ray  trans-
former and  high  frequency  apparatus.

diseases  (skin  affections,  venereal  diseases,  etc.).  This  is  accomplished
by  washing  them  in  a  strong  antiseptic  solution  (such  as  bichloride  of
mercury,  carbolic  acid,  lysol,  etc.).

Vacuum  Tube  Burns

High  frequency  currents  applied  by  means  of  vacuum  tubes  do  not
cause  dermatitis  comparable  to  that  produced  by  the  X-rays,  but  they
are  capable  of  causing  surface  burns.  These  burns  are  easny  produced
when  mucous  surfaces  are  treated;  therefore,  when  giving  vaginal,
urethral,  rectal  or  nasal  treatments,  never  allow  a  vacuum  tube  to  re-
main in  contact  with  mucous  membrane  for  more  than  seven  minutes
during  one  treatment,  and  rotate  it  frequently,  to  avoid  sticking.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


621


Fig.  26 — ^  Electrical  apparatus  of  extreme
compactness,  delivering  almost  all  num-
bers of  electrical  modalities,  including  the
new  "R-rays"  (X-ray,  High  Frequency,
Cautery, Ozone, Vibration, Suction, etc.)


From "The Electrical Experimenter"


622


Uniucrsdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiycrs'  (iiiidc


CHAPTER  IX

HYDRO-ELECTRO  THERAPY


5INCE  water  moistening  the  skin  increases the  electrical  conduc-
tivity, and  both  hot  and  cold  applications  to  the  skin  diminish  the
electro-sensibility,  by  applying  simultaneously  or  successively  the
two  powerful therapeutic agents — water  and electricity — double
aid  can  be  rendered  in  a  large  number  of  pathological  conditions.

The  hydro-electric  treatments  consist  of  the  application  of  galvanic,
faradic,  galvano-faradic  and  sinusoidal  currents,  in  the  form  of  a  whole
bath,  local  bath  and  electric  douche.


Fig.  27 — Caiilion: If  a  current  from  wall  plates  is  employed,  the

tub  must  not  be  connected  with  filling  or  draining  pipes,  and  great

care should be exercised to avoid accidents.

Whole  Bath

The  whole  electric  bath  is  administered  with  a  patient  in  a  wooden,
porcelain  or  enameled  iron  tub,  half  filled  with  water  at  a  temperature
of  from  85  to  95  degrees  Fahr.  It  is  a  general  body  treatment  and  a
most  efficacious  method  of  applying  electricity  when  tonic  effects  are
desired;  and  may  be  either  mono-polar,  or  bi-polar.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijrrs'  Guide  023

In  a  mono-pdlar  tmth,  tlic  active  electrode  connected  to  one  pole  of
the  generator  is  immersed  in  water,  and  the  indiflerent  electrode  (which
is  a  long  bar  of  iron  covered  with  chamois  leather)  held  in  both  hands
of  the  patient,  is  connected  to  the  other  pole.

In  a  bi-polar  bath,  both  electrodes  arc  immersed  in  water  (one  at
each  end  of  the  tub),  but  the  patient's  body  does  not  come  in  contact
with  either.

The  water,  being  a  conductor  of  electricity,  acts  as  an  electrode  by
which  the  electric  current  is  applied  to  the  body,  while  in  the  hydro-
electric bath.  In  a  bi-polar  bath,  for  example,  the  current  enters  at  one
electrode,  runs  through  the  water  surrounding  the  patient,  and  passes
out  at  the  other  electrode.

Local  Bath

In  a  local  bath,  a  limb  or  a  part  of  a  limb  is  immersed.  The  active
electrode  (metal  or  carbon)  connected  to  one  pole  of  the  current  gener-
ator is  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  cell  (the  vessel  into  which  the  limb
is  placed),  and  the  other  pole  is  connected  to  the  indifferent  (sponge)
electrode,  and  applied  to  some  part  of  the  patient's  body  outside  of  the
water.

Dr.  Schnee  Bath

The  Four-Cell  Bath,  designed  by  Dr.  Schnee,  is  the  most  convenient
method  of  carrying  out  the  local  and  general  electrization,  without  be-
ing necessary  for  the  patient  to  undress.  It  consists  of  two  foot  and  two
arm  cells,  half  filled  with  water.  Two  of  these  cells  are  connected  to
one  pole  of  the  generator,  and  two  to  the  other.  According  to  the  con-
nection of  cells,  the  current  can  be  localized  in  a  desired  part  of  the
body,  and  made  to  travel  in  a  desired  direction,  e.  g.,  employing  the
galvanic  current  and  connecting  the  two  foot  cells  with  the  positive
pole,  and  the  two  arm  cells  with  the  negative,  there  will  be  two  distinct
flows  of  current  through  the  body,  viz.,  one  from  the  right  foot  to  the
right  arm,  and  the  other  from  the  left  foot  to  the  left  arm.  If  the  arm
cells  were  connected  positively  and'  the  foot  cells  negatively,  the  flow
would  be  from  arms  to  feet,  because  electricity  always  flows  from  the
positive  to  the  negative  pole.

Electric  Douche

Electric  Douche  is  used  either  as  a  local  or  general  treatment,  and  is
administered  by  connecting  one  pole  of  the  current  generator  to  a  large
indiff'erent  electrode,  on  which  the  patient  stands,  and  the  other  pole  to
an  insulated  metal  nozzle  from  which  the  stream  of  water  is  directed
against  the  desired  point  on  the  patient's  body.  This  application  is
particularly  suitable  for  hydrotherapeutic  establishments.

Hydro-Electric  Application

The  effects  produced  by  hydro-electric  applications  depend  on  the
current  employed.  The  mono-polar  galvanic  bath  with  the  negative
electrode  immersed  is  stimulating,  while  the  same  application  with  the
positive  electrode  immersed  is  sedative.


624


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  bipolar  galvanic  bath  produces  drowsiness  and  "fatigue,  and  is
useful  in  insomnia.

The  faradic  bath,  stimulating  the  patient  and  improving  general
nutrition,  is  beneficial  in  various  conditions,  such  as  chorea,  paralysis
agitans,  anaemia,  hypochondriasis,  etc.

The  sinusoidal  bath  is  far  superior  in  its  etlects  to  the  efTervescent,  or
so-called  Nauheim  bath,  and  is  of  special  value  in  chronic  intestinal


Fig.  28 — Diagram  showing  a  safe  method  of  applying  bi-polar  bath.

(Faradic  coil  is  operated  by  dry  cells  and  the  current  is  regulated

by  means  of  a  rheostat.)

auto-intoxication,  rheumatism,  gout  and  various  forms  of  uric  acid
diathesis,  gastric  neurasthenia,  arteriosclerosis,-  locomotor  ataxia,  spinal
sclerosis,  many  cases  of  chronic  cardio-vascular  disease,  obesity,  dia-
betes (when  the  patient  is  in  good  flesh),  etc.

General  Remarks

Dr.  Kellogg,  of  Battle  Creek,  gives  the  following  general  rules  in  the
hydro-electro  therapeutic  application.

"First,  increased  movement  of  blood  and  accelerated  functional  activi-
ty of  an  internal  organ  may  be  induced  by  short  vigorous  cold  applica-
tion in  combination  with  electrical  stimulation.  The  latter  may  be  either


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers*  Guide  ^25

simultaneously,  or  may  immediately  follow  the  cold  application.  The
electrical  application  should,  in  general,  be  as  strong  as  the  patient  can
bear  without  pain.

"Secondly,  congestion  and  undue  functional  activity  of  an  internal
organ  may  be  diminished  by  a  prolonged,  moderately  cold  application
(60  to  70  degrees  Fahr.,  continuing  from  thirty  minutes  to  several
hours),  combined  with  a  simultaneous  application  of  a  current  of
moderate  strength."


In  a  galvanic  application,  the  current  may  be  gradually  increased  up  to
130  milliamperes;  in  faradic,  according  to  the  sensation  of  the  patient;
and  in  sinusoidal,  according  to  the  sensation  of  the  patient  and  the  rate
at  which  the  muscular  contractions  are  desired.  The  hydro-electric  ap-
plications should  last  from  ten  to  thirty  minutes,  and  should  be  ad-
ministered two,  three  or  four  times  weekly.  Baths  should  not  be  given
for  at  least  a  few  hours  after  meals.

Apparatus

It  is  dangerous  to  use  the  current  from  the  wall  plates  (which  is  the
current  from  the  lighting  circuit  reduced  by  means  of  resistance)  in  a
tub  connected  with  pipes,  as  serious  accidents  may  result  from  such
practice.  An  absolutely  safe  method  is  to  obtain  difierent  currents  from
a  generator  (Fig.  5),  (in  which  the  current  is  produced  independent  of
the  current  from  the  lighting  circuit),  or  from  the  galvanic  batterA%  or
faradic  cell  operated  by  wet  or  dry  cells  (Fig.  26),  and  to  administer
the  treatments  in  a  wooden  or  porcelain  tub,  which  is  not  connected  in
any  way  with  either  filling  or  draining  pipes.

In  order  to  avoid  unpleasant  shocks  when  administering  hydro-elec-
tric treatments,  the  current  should  always  be  gradually  turned  on  after
the  patient  is  readj'^  in  the  bath,  and  gradually  turned  off  before  the  pa-
tient gets  out  of  the  bath.


626  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Baijers'  Guide


CHAPTER  X

ELECTRO-THERMO  THERAPY— OZONE-
MAGNETIC  THERAPY


Electro-Thermo  Therapy

ELECTRO-THERMO  THERAPY  is  the  electrical  production  and  ap-
plication of  heat  for  therapeutic  purposes. Since  heat  has  been
-'  employed  as  a  therapeutic  agent  from  time  immemorial,  partly  be-
cause pain  can  be  relieved  by  it,  and  partly  because  Nature  herself
teaches  that  to  get  rid  of  some  diseases,  the  temperature  of  the  body
must  be  increased,  this  subject  needs  no  recommendation  nor  much  ex-
planation.

electro-thermo  therapy  embraces  also  the  use  of  thermophores,  super-
heated air  and  some  other  methods  of  heat  production  and  application.

Thermophores

Thermophores,  electro-therm  compressors,  or  electric  heating  pads
are  made  of  all  shapes  and  sizes,  for  different  parts  of  the  body,  and
consist  of  insulated  flexible  resistance  wires  imbedded  in  a  chemically-
pure  asbestos,  or  other  non-inflammable  material.  Maintaining  constant,
desired  heat,  these  pads  are  a  convenient  means  to  treat  various  parts
of  the  body,  and  are  superior  to  and  take  place  of  fomentations,  hot
water  bags,  hot  air  apparatus,  and  other  of  the  inconvenient  appliances
usually  employed.

In  employing  thermophores  for  the  treatment  of  various  conditions,  a
moist  cloth  is  laid  over  the  skin;  over  this  a  dry  cloth,  and  upon  this,  the
compressor  connected  to  the  electric  lighting  circuit.

The  current  passing  through  the  resistance  wire  generates  the  heat,
gradually  increasing  the  temperature  (up  to  300  degrees  Fahr.),  and
may  be  continued  as  long  as  desired.  When  the  heat  becomes  intense,  it
is  only  necessary  to  employ  less  current.

Super-heated  Air

Super-heated  air  is  the  most  simple,  convenient  and  painless  method
of  producing  local  hyperaemia.

Although  it  may  be  applied  externally  for  the  treatment  of  various
painful  affections,  it  is  of  special  value  in  the  treatment  of  ear,  nose,
throat,  teeth,  vagina,  uterus  and  other  body  cavities  to  which  it  is  very
difTicult  to  apply  heat,  and  produce  hyperaemia  by  other  methods.

Apparatus  producing  super-heated  air  consists  essentially  of  air
pressure  (fan  or  pump)  and  a  resistance  wire  heated  by  means  of  an
electric  current.  The  air  is  heated  by  being  forced  through  the  resist-
ance wire.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


G27


Ozone

(O3)

All  the  high  tension  currents  in  passing  through  the  air  produce  large
quantities  of  ozone,  but  the  greater  the  frequency  and  higher  the  voltage,
the  greater  the  production.  Whenever  it  is  desired  to  administer  ozone
for  therapeutic  purposes,  it  is  necessary  to  generate  and  purify  it  by
forcing  the  ionized  air  through  the  oils,  which  absorb,  or  through  a  sim-
ple alkaline  solution,  which  neutralizes  nitrous  and  nitric  acids  liber-
ated with  ozone,  while  the  electricity  is  passing  through  the  air.

This  is  accomplished  by  means  of  a  glass  vacuum  ozone  generator,
connected  to  the  Tesla  secondaiy  (Fig.  29),  Oudin  resonator,  or  one  pole
of  the  Static  machine;  or  by  a  special  ozone  generating  apparatus  of
which  there  are  various  types.


Fig.  29— Ozone  inhalation.

A  very  efTicient  and  pleasant  combination  of  oil  is  one  part  of  oil  of
eucaliptus,  and  two  parts  oil  of  pine  needles.

Application

Since  oxygenation  is  essential  to  life,  the  inhalation  of  ozone  is  bene-
ficial in  all  diseases,  but  in  some  diseases  it  is  of  particular  benefit.
When  inhaled,  it  hastens  the  oxygenation  of  the  blood  and  tissues,  in-
creasing the  number  of  red  blood  corpuscles  (and  decreasing  the
number  of  white  corpuscles),  and  augmenting  the  proportion  of  urea  in
the  urine;  therefore,  it  is  of  value  in  anaemia,  chlorosis  and  all  con-
ditions where  there  is  imperfect  oxidation  and  impaired  nutrition.  Be-
ing a  powerful  antiseptic,  it  is  an  excellent  remedy  in  the  treatment  of
bronchial  and  laryngeal  affections,  catarrh,  hay  fever,  whooping-cough.


628  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

pulmonary  tuberculosis,  and  all  other  diseases  of  the  respiratory
organs,  etc.

Ozone  treatments  should  last  from  ten  to  twenty  minutes  (according
to  an  output  of  the  apparatus  employed),  and  may  be  frequently  re-
peated, but  for  the  reason  that  a  large  amount  of  ozone  may  produce
serious  symptoms,  it  is  advisable  to  give  shorter  treatments  at  more  fre-
quent intervals.

Since  we  must  be  careful  when  using  so  potent  a  remedy,  it  is  the
safest  rule  to  stop  the  treatment  as  soon  as  the  patient  feels  a  slight
sensation  of  lightheadedness,  which  indicates  that  he  has  received  a
sufficient  dose.

The  oils  after  being  used  for  some  time  to  purify  the  ozone,  owing  to
the  large  amount  of  ozone  retained  therein,  may  be  used  as  a  dressing
for  ulcers  and  chronic  skin  diseases.

Magnetic  Therapy

(Bachalet  Magnetic  Wave  Treatment)

When  a  living  body  is  placed  into  a  magnetic  field,  the  magnetic  lines
of  force  permeate  it  to  the  maximum  of  exposure  and  raise  the  electric
potential  as  high  as  thirty-three  per  cent.  The  magnetism  thus  imparted
to  the  living  body  does  not  leave,  but  is  transformed  into  vital  energy,
and  is  used  in  the  vital  processes.  It  is  estimated  that  it  takes,  on  the
average,  seventy-two  hours,  before  this  magnetic  charge  is  completely
absorbed,  and  until  the  body  returns  to  its  normal  potential.  Magnetiz-
ation is  applied  by  means  of  two  co-acting  magnets,  energized  by  the
commercial  current  or  dry  cells,  adjusted  to  either  side  of  a  chair,  couch
or  bed  on  which  the  patient  (who  may  be  fully  dressed)  is  placed.  The
patient  feels  no  sensation  whatever,  and  when  the  full  strength  is  de-
sired, the  magnets  may  be  placed  close  to  the  patient's  body.

Magnetization  dilates  the  blood  vessels,  lowers  blood  pressure  and
reduces  a  too  rapid  pulse,  stimulates  tissue  metabolism,  raises  temper-
ature, increases  oxidation,  accelerates  elimination,  aids  nutrition,  in-
creases the  red  blood  corpuscles  and  hemoglobin;  is  sedative  and  anti-
spasmodic, etc.  It  is,  therefore,  indicated  in  the  treatment  of  anaemia,
arteriosclerosis,  chorea,  convulsions,  hysteria  (with  high  blood  pres-
sure), insomnia,  migraine,  neuralgia,  neurasthenia,  neuritis,  rheuma-
tism, etc.

In  acute  conditions  the  treatment  should  last  about  thirty  minutes,
while  in  chronic,  from  one  to  two  hours.  Three  treatments  per  week
are  sufficient.

If  the  application  is  carried  to  an  excess,  over-stimulation  will  cause
deleterious  results  and  loss  of  weight.

The  patient  should  rest  at  least  fifteen  minutes  after  treatment,  before
going  out  in  cold  weather.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  629


CHAPTER  XI

ELECTRO-DIAGNOSIS


IN  addition  to  Radiography,  by  which  we  can  easily  detect  fractures,
dislocations,  foreign  bodies,  hepatic  and  renal  calculi,  etc.;  and  the
diti'erent  electroscopes  by  which  we  are  able  to  explore  the  body  ca-
vities, electricity  is  of  further  service  in  the  diagnosis,  as  it  enables
us  to  determine  the  degree  of  pathological  excitability,  and  to  distinguish
between  the  different  forms  of  paralysis — central  and  peripheral;  to
tell  whether  disease  is  feigned  or  real;  to  distinguish  between  apparent
and  real  death;  to  differentiate  between  nervous  and  inflammatory
pains  of  the  ovary,  and  thus  prevent  unnecessary  surgery,  etc.

As  this  subject  is  very  broad,  in  order  to  avoid  confusion,  and  to  en-
able the  reader  to  grasp  easily  the  principles  of  electro-diagnosis,  only
those  features  which  are  of  practical  value  to  most  practitioners  will  be

Reaction  of  Degeneration

(R.  D.)

When  the  galvanic  current  is  applied  to  a  muscle  or  a  motor  nerve,
the  contraction  is  produced,  both  on  closing  and  on  opening  the  circuit.
(When  the  current  is  switched  on,  the  circuit  is  closed  or  completed,
and  the  current  is  allowed  to  flow,  while  when  the  current  is  switched  off,
the  circuit  is  open,  and  the  current  flow  is  discontinued.)

The  Normal  Reaction  of  a  Muscle

When  the  galvanic  current  is  applied  to  a  healthy  muscle,  the  con-
traction produced  with  the  active  cathode  (negative  electrode)  is  greater
than  the  contraction  produced  with  the  active  anode  (positive  electrode)
on  closing  the  curcuit;  while  the  contraction  produced  with  the  active
anode  on  opening  the  circuit  is  less  noticeable  than  the  contraction  pro-
duced at  the  same  electrode  on  closing  the  circuit.  This  normal  reaction
of  a  muscle  is  expressed  as  follows :  The  Cathodal  Closing  Contraction
is  greater  than  the  Anodal  Closing  Contraction,  while  the  Anodal  Clos-
ing Contraction  is  greater  than  the  Anodal  Opening  Contraction,  and
is  designated  by  the  following  formula :

C.  C.  C. > A.  C.  C. =a- A.  O.  C.

The  contraction  of  a  healthy  muscle  to  galvanism,  whether  the  muscle
is  stimulated  directly  or  indirectly  through  the  nerve,  appears  very  sud-
denly like  lightning,  while  the  faradic  stimulation  is  always  tetanic.


630  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide

The  Normal  Reaction  of  a  Nerve

In  case  of  a  healthy  motor  nerve,  the  Cathodal  Closing  Contraction
is  greater  than  the  Anodal  Opening  Contraction,  and  the  Anodal  Open-
ing Contraction  greater  than  the  Anodal  Closing  Contraction.  This  re-
action is  expressed  by  the  following  formula:

C.  C.  C. > A.  O.  C. > A.  C.  C.

Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Changes

When  there  is  a  partial  or  total  change  of  the  above  formulas,  e.  g.,
when  the  A.  C.  C.  is  greater  than  the  C.  C.  C,  etc.  (which  is  a  qualitative
change) ;  or  when  tiie  muscle  responds  by  a  slow  and  sluggisn  contrac-
tion instead  of  by  a  sliarp,  quick  jerk  as  in  health  (which  is  a  quantita-
tive change)  ;  or  when  the  muscle  does  not  respond  to  the  direct  stimula-
tion of  tlie  faradic  current  or  to  the  stimulation  of  the  motor  nerve,
there  is  a  Reaction  of  Degeneration.

When  the  Reaction  of  Degeneration  is  coming  on,  at  first  there  is  a
short  period  in  which  there  is  a  hyperexcitability  (increased  excitabil-
ity) of  nerve  or  muscle.  About  two  weeks  later,  reaction  to  the  faradic
current  ceases,  and  for  some  time  (perhaps  six  or  eight  weeks)  the  mus-
cle (but  not  the  nerve)  reacts  only  to  a  slowly  interrupted  galvanic  cur-
rent, until  it  finally  ceases  to  react  to  any  form  of  stimulation.

A  galvanic  hyperexcitability,  therefore,  means  early  degenerative
changes;  while  a  hypoexcitability  (diminished  excitability)  of  a  nerve
to  both  faradic  and  galvanic  currents,  generally  indicates  beginning  of
Reaction  of  Degeneration  which  will  soon  become  complete.

Galvanic  hyperexcitability  is  usually  accompanied  by  faradic  hyper-
excitability, although  it  may  persist  after  the  faradic  excitability  has
been  lost.  Galvanic  hypoexcitability  is  found  in  most  cases  where  far-
adic excitability  is  diminished  or  lost.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  last
stage  of  nerve  and  muscle  degeneration.

Faradic  hyperexcitability  occurs  in  most  cases  where  there  is  exag-
geration of  the  tendon  reflexes.  Thus,  it  is  met  with  in  tetanus,  hemi-
chorea,  recent  cases  of  cerebral  paralysis,  athetosis  and  writer's  cramp.

Faradic  hypoexcitability  is  usually  accompanied  by  rapid  fatigue  of
muscles,  which  after  repeated  faradic  stimulation  soon  fail  to  react,
unless  the  intensity  of  the  current  is  increased.  It  occurs  in  chronic
cases  of  cerebral  paralysis,  long  standing  fabes  dorsalis,  and  primary
myopathy,  where  it  is  associated  with  galvanic  hypoexcitability.

Reaction  of  Degeneration  is  found  in  the  following  conditions:

(a)  "In  any  disease  or  injury  in  which  there  is  a  break  in  the  nerv-
ous link  which  connects  the  end  plate  of  the  muscle  with  its  nucleus
of  origin  in  the  gray  matter  of  the  anterior  cornua  of  the  cord.

"In  any  injury  or  disease  of  the  trunks  of  the  motor  nerves,  of  the  nu-
clei of  the  cranial  nerves,  or  of  the  ganglionic  cells  in  the  anterior  cor-
nua."— Dugan.

(b)  In  neuritis  and  polyneuritis,  where  the  nerve  itself  is  primarily
affected;

(c)  In  acute  and  chronic  poliomyelitis;

(d)  In  myelitis,  if  the  anterior  horns  are  involved;


m.  temporalis


m.  frontal


m. corrug. superc.

Upper  Branch  of
Facial  Nerve


m. orbic. oculi


mm. nasales.

m. zygomatic

Middle  Branch  of

Facial  Nerve

m.  orbic.  oris


m. masseter
m. depr. lab. inf.


m.  lev.  menti

m. depr.  ang.  oris

N. phrenicus

m. omo-hyoid

m. sternohyoid


Lower  Branch  of
Facial  Nerve


Nerv.  hypogloss.


N. fa  ialis (trunk)

m. splenius

m.  sternocleidom.

N.  accessorius

m.  levat.  ang.  soap.

m. trapezius

N.  dorsalis  scapulae


(N. axillaris  and

Plexus)
m.  scalenus  ant.


N.  thoracicus  long.
m. amohyoid


Platysma myoid.


Erb's Point


Nn.  thoracici  ant.


Plate  I


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery"


.jg^A.


m. infraspinat


mm.  teretes


m.  latiss. dorsi


m. triceps brachii


m.  flex.  carp.  uln.

m.  extens.  carp.

uln.
m.  extens.  dig.

min.


mm.  interossei


m. deltoid (post
portion)


m. deltoid (mid-
dle portion)


N.  radialis


m. biceps


ra. supinter  longus

m. extens. carpi
radial, long.


m. extens. digitor.
comm.


m.  ext.  carp.  rad.
brev.


m.  abd.  et  poll,
long.

m. extens. poll,
brev.


m.  extens.  poll,
long


Plate  II

From  King's  "Electricity  iti  Medicine  and  Surgery"


m. deltoid (middle
portion)


tn. biceps


N. meidian


m.  supinator  longus


m. flexor  carp, radial


m.  flex,  pollic. long.

N. medianus

m.  oppon.  poll.

m. abduct, poll,  brevis

m. flex. poll. brev.
m. abduct, poll.


m. deltoid (ant. por-
tion)


N. musculocutaneous


N. ulnaris


m.  pronator  teres


m.  flexor  carp.  ulu.
m.  palmar  long.


m. flex,  digitor.  comm.
subl.


N. ulnaris


muscles  of  the  little
finger


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery"


m.  pector  maj.


m.  rect.  abdom.


m. latiss. dors.


N.  thoracicus  long,
(m.  serr.  ant.  mai.)


m. obliq. abdom.
ext.


Plate  IV


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery"


N. cruralis


m.  tensor  fasc.  lat.


Joint point of the
Quadriceps Extensor


m. rect. fern.


m.  vast.  ext.


N. obturato  ius
m.  pectin

m. sartorius
m.  adduct. long.


m. adduct. magn.


m.  vastus  intern.


Plate  V


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery'


m. gluteus max.


m.  semitendin.
m.  semimembran.


N.  tibialis


m.  gluteus  med.


m.  biceps  fem.


N. ischiadicus


N.  peroneus


Plate  VI


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery"


N.  peronuse


m.  peron.  long,
m.  tibial,  ant.


m.  extens. digitor.
comm. long.


m. peron.  brev.


m. extens. hall. long.


m.  extens.  digitor.
comm. brev.


m.  gastrocnem.


Plate  VII


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery''


N. tibialis


m.  gastrocnem.


N. tibialis


m. soleus


m.  flexor  digitor.
comm. long.

m.  flexor  halluc.  long.


Plate  VIII


From  King's  "Electricity  in  Medicine  and  Surgery"


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  639


(e)  In  ophthalmoplegia,  where  the  anterior  horns  or  the  nuclei  in
the  pons  and  medulla  are  aiiected;

(f)  In  diphtheric,  bulbar  and  lead  paralysis;

(g)  In  diseases  of  the  spinal  cord,  if  muscular  atrophy  is  present.

Method  of  Testing

In  all  electrical  examinations,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  determine
three  factors:

I.  Whether  both  the  motor  nerve  and  the  muscle  react  to  the  faradic
and  the  galvanic  currents;

II.  Wliether  the  reaction  to  either  current  is  increased  or  diminished
(quantitative  change) ;

III.  Whether  there  is  a  partial  or  total  change  in  the  formulas  which
denote  the  normal  reaction  (qualitative  change).

In  testing  motor  nerves  and  muscles,  in  order  to  decrease  the  intensity
of  the  current,  and  to  cause  as  little  discomfort  as  possible  to  the  pa-
tient, a  large  indifferent  electrode  (about  100  to  200  sq.  cm.)  covered  and
moistened  with  warm  water  should  be  placed  upon  the  sternum,  or  the
spine  (at  the  cervical  region  if  upper,  or  at  the  lumbar  region  if  lower
part  of  the  body  is  to  be  tested)  and  moved  about,  so  as  to  avoid  a  burn-
ing sensation.  In  some  cases,  as  in  testing  the  small  muscles  of  the
arm  or  leg,  it  is  better  to  apply  both  electrodes  near  each  other.

In  order  to  condense  the  current,  the  active  electrode  should  be  small
(1  to  2  cm.  in  diameter,  covered  and  moistened)  and  should  have  an
interrupter  for  both  galvanic  and  faradic  currents,  so  as  to  be  able  to
close  and  open  the  circuit,  in  order  to  elicit  with  convenience  the  open-
ing and  closing  contractions.  The  active  electrode  is  applied  at  or  near
a  motor  point  of  the  muscle  or  nerve  to  be  tested,  so  as  to  produce  the
contraction  with  less  current.

MOTOR  POINTS,  determined  by  Erb,  Douchenne,  Ziemssen,  and
others,  are  certain  points  scattered  over  the  surface  of  the  body  (Plates
I  to  VIII),  which,  when  stimulated,  cause  the  best  response  from  a
definite  nerve  or  muscle.  The  motor  point  of  a  muscle  is  usually  w  here
the  motor  branch  of  the  nerve  enters  its  muscle.  Most  motor  points
for  nerves  are  situated  where  the  nerve  lies  superficially,  and  at  some
little  distance  from  other  nerves.

For  electrical  examination,  the  patient  should  be  placed  in  a  hori-
zontal position,  or  in  a  chair  with  the  back  well  supported,  and  should
be  told  to  relax  his  muscles.  The  faradic  current  should  he  used  first
(connecting  the  active  electrode  to  the  negative  pole  of  the  secondary'
faradic),  employing  just  as  much  current  to  produce  the  smallest  notice-
able contraction.  The  strength  of  the  current  should  be  adjusted  grad-
ually by  means  of  a  rheostat,  sledge  coil  or  other  method,  noting  the
point  at  which  the  contraction  has  been  produced.

It  is  very  difficult  to  determine  whether  the  contraction  oversteps  the
normal  limits,  and  if  so,  how  much,  as  the  irritability  of  different  nerves
and  muscles,  also  of  the  same  muscle  or  nerve,  varies  considerabW  in
different  individuals.  The  most  practical  and  most  accurate  method  of
testing  for  quantitative  change  is  to  estimate  the  irritability,  and  then
compare  it  with  the  reaction  of  a  healthy  side,  but  in  such  case  sym-
metric points  and  the  identical  position  must  be  selected.


640  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

If  the  faradic  contractility  is  not  altered,  galvanic  is  probably  normal.
In  some  cases  of  nervous  disorders,  there  may  be  no  faradic  response;
therefore,  if  the  current  is  increased  to  the  point  of  being  painful,  and
the  contraction  has  not  been  produced,  it  means  that  there  is  no  faradic
response,  and  the  galvanic  current  should  be  tried.

In  using  the  galvanic  current,  we  begin  the  test  with  about  two  milli-
amperes  on  the  face  and  about  ten  milliamperes  on  the  body,  gradually
increasing  and  stimulating  iirst  muscle  directly,  and  then  the  motor
nerve.  The  C.  C.  C.  is  iirst  obtained,  and  then,  reversing  the  polarity  by
means  of  a  commutator  (without  changing  the  electrode),  A.  C.  C.  is
produced,  etc.

The  direct  stimulation  of  the  muscle  should  be  compared  with  the
contraction  produced  by  the  stimulation  of  its  motor  nerve,  and  the
strength  of  the  current  required  with  the  character  of  the  contraction,
whether  quick  and  sharp,  or  slow  and  sluggish.

General  Remarks

1.  In  using  galvanic  current,  the  etiect  of  each  pole  must  be  noted.

2.  The  irritability  of  motor  nerves  is  subject  only  to  quantitative
changes,  but  with  the  muscles,  quantitative  changes  are  often  accom-
panied by  qualitative  alterations.

3.  The  quantitative  electrical  irritability  of  a  nerve  or  of  a  muscle  is
tested  by  estimating  how  strong  a  galvanic,  and  how  strong  a  faradic
current  is  required  to  produce  the  smallest  contraction;  therefore,  the
strength  of  the  current  employed  must  be  always  estimated  in  examin-
ing for  quantitative  changes.

4.  If  it  is  desired  to  compare  the  results  of  different  electro-diagnostic
examinations,  it  is  imperative  to  employ  electrodes  of  the  same  size,
because  the  stimulating  effect  depends  upon  the  intensity  of  the  cur-
rent as  well  as  upon  the  strength;  and  it  is  also  necessary  to  employ
the  same  apparatus,  as  the  physiological  action  of  one  induction  coil
cannot  be  compared  with  the  action  of  another.

5.  Apparatus  employed  for  electro-diagnosis  must  be  supplied  with
a  reverser,  so  as  to  be  able  to  quickly  change  the  polarity,  and  with  an
appliance  for  increasing  or  decreasing  the  current  strength  (a  rheostat
or  a  cell  collector).

6.  If  a  muscle  is  cold,  it  takes  more  current  to  institute  a  contraction
than  if  the  muscle  is  warm.  The  colder  a  muscle,  the  more  current  it
takes  to  produce  a  muscular  contraction.  If  we  warm  a  muscle  either
by  friction,  massage,  electric  light,  or  any  other  means,  it  takes  a  great
deal  less  current,  as  the  normal  temperature  of  the  muscle  is  restored,
than  it  would  when  the  muscle  is  cold.

Differentiating  Cerebral  from  Peripheral  Paralysis

To  determine  whether  in  a  case  of  paralysis  the  lesion  is  in  the  brain
or  in  the  motor  cells  of  the  spinal  cord,  use  the  faradic  current,  inter-
rupted with  an  automatic  rhcotome,  as  follows :

Place  a  large  indifferent  electrode  on  the  sternum,  and  a  small  active
electrode  at  the  motor  point  of  some  muscle  on  the  normal  side,  and
employ  sufficient  current  to  cause  a  noticeable  contraction. Leave  the


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  641

indifferent  electrode  on  the  sternum,  and  place  the  small  active  elec-
trode at  the  motor  point  of  the  corresponding  muscle  on  the  opposite
side  (which  is  supposed  to  he  paralyzed) ;  emphjy  the  same  amount  of
current  as  you  did  on  the  opposite  side,  and  note  whether  the  contrac-
tion is  normal,  increased  or  decreased.

If  the  contraction  is  increased,  the  lesion  is  in  the  hrain  or  upper
motor  tract  (in  such  a  case,  the  reflexes  are  also  exaggerated).  If  the
contraction  is  decreased,  the  lesion  is  in  the  motor  cells  of  the  spinal
cord,  or  in  some  other  part  of  the  lower  motor  segment.

Malingering

If  the  muscles  respond  normally  to  the  stimulation  with  the  faradic
current,  after  the  patient  has  complained  for  two  or  three  weeks,  the
case  is  one  of  malingering.

Electro-Bioscopy

(Test  for  Death)

Since  no  disease,  poisoning,  or  asphyxia,  during  life,  abolishes  electric
contractility  in  all  the  muscles  of  the  body,  we  are  able,  by  means  of
electricity,  to  determine  detinitely,  within  two  or  three  hours  after  the
occurrence,  as  soon  as  the  rigor  mortis  sets  in,  whether  the  person  is
really  dead  or  not!

Dr.  Crimotel,  of  Paris,  France,  after  long  experimentation,^  has  come
to  the  following  conclusions:

1.  "Death  is  certain  when  all  the  muscles  have  entirely  lost  their
contractility;"  (although  either  faradic  or  galvanic  electricity  causes
muscular  contractions  until  a  short  time  before  a  rigor  mortis  sets  in)  :

2.  "Faradization  is  an  indispensable  test  whether  life  is  extinct  in
all  cases  of  apparent  death  occurring  suddenly.  When  there  are  sev-
eral victims  of  an  accident,  it  enables  the  attendants  to  distinguish  the
dead  from  the  living,  and  also  the  order  in  which  the  dead  ceased  to
live."  (The  galvanic  current  produces  contractions  in  a  dead  body  for
a  short  time  after  the  faradism  has  failed.  This  enables  us  to  approxi-
mate the  time  elapsed  since  death  occurred.)

3.  "In  new-born  infants,  muscular  contractility,  under  the  influence
of  the  faradic  current,  continues  fifty  to  sixty  minutes  after  the  heart
has  ceased  to  beat.  When  they  have  never  exhibited  signs  of  life,  the
faradic  test  shows  whether  life  is  really  extinct."

4.  "In  some  cases  of  cholera,  electro-muscular  contractions  cease
within  half  an  hour  after  death."

The  Value  of  Electro-Diagnosis  in  Gynecology

Due  to  the  fact  that  the  secondary  faradic  current  completely  relieves
ovarian  neuralgia  in  but  a  few  treatments,  but  that  it  only  affords  a
temporary  relief  (for  a  few  moments)  in  ovaritis  and  other  organic
changes  of  the  uterine  appendages,  and  also  that  strong  galvanic  cur-
rents may  be  applied  to  the  uterus  without  causing  severe  pain  or  reac-
tion when  the  uterine  appendages  are  healthy,  it  may  be  concluded  as
follows :


642  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujers'  Guide

If  a  strong  galvanic  current  (75  to  100  milliamperes),  applied  to  the
interior  of  the  uterus  (with  an  indifferent  electrode  on  the  abdomen),
causes  no  pain  and  is  not  followed  by  febrile  reaction  or  aggravation
of  the  symptoms,  or  if  the  pain  is  relieved  by  the  application  of  the  sec-
ondary faradic  current,  the  uterine  appendages  are  healthy,  and  the
case  is  one  of  ovarian  neuralgia.

If,  however,  the  application  of  a  weak  galvanic  current  (50  to  75  milli-
amperes) causes  severe  pain,  and  is  followed  by  febrile  reaction  and
other  unfavorable  symptoms,  or  if  the  secondary  faradic  current  affords
but  a  temporary  relief  (for  a  few  moments)  the  case  is  one  of  diseased
appendages,  ovaritis;  or  (if  reaction  is  great)  pyosalpinx.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liuyers'  Guide  643


CHAPTER  XII

ELECTRO-SURGERY


IN  surgery,  electricity  is  not  only  valuable  to  arrive  at  a  correct  diag-
nosis (by  means  of  X-rays  and  the  different  electroscopes,  with  which
it  is  possible  to  explore  the  body  cavities,  such  as  urethra,  bladder,
esophagus,  stomach,  etc.)  but  by  it,  we  are  able  to  successfully  coagu-
late the  blood  in  hemorrhage  and  aneurysm;  to  remove  tumors,  hemorr-
hoids, warts,  moles,  naevi,  etc.;  dilate  strictures  (by  absorption);
remove  foreign  bodies  from  the  eye  and  treat  numerous  other  surgical
conditions.  Electro-surgery  embraces  electro-cautery,  fulguration,  high
frequency  desiccation,  surgical  diathermy,  electrolysis,  magnet  opera-
tions, etc.


Fig.  30 — Cautery  electrode  handle.

Electro-Cautery

Electro-cautery,  performed  with  a  platinum  knife  (electrode)  heated
to  a  cherry-red  or  white  heat,  enables  us,  on  account  of  the  obliteration
of  smaller  vessels  and  coagulation  of  the  blood,  to  sever  tissue  without
hemorrhage.

The  greater  the  heat  of  the  electrode,  the  less  pain  is  produced,  but
there  is  greater  liability  of  subsequent  hemorrhage;  therefore,  a  cherry-
red  heat,  which  is  a  temperature  intermediate  between  red  and  white
heat,  is  usually  the  most  satisfactory.

Electro-cautery  is  employed  to  remove  polypi  and  tumors  difficult  to
reach  with  the  knife;  to  cut  through  the  cervix  uteri;  to  remove  growths
in  the  pharynx  and  larynx,  and  to  cauterize  laryngeal  ulcers;  to  destroy
the  nerve  in  a  hollow  tooth;  to  arrest  hemorrhage;  to  treat  some  cases  of
prostatic  hypertrophy;  to  open  an  abcess  in  the  lung  after  a  rib  has
been  resected,  etc.

In  order  to  be  able  to  heat  the  platinum  cautei-y  electrodes  (loops  or
knives)  which  have  a  very  low  resistance,  (varying  from  0.4  to  0.02  of  an
ohm,  or  even  less)  to  a  cherry-red  or  white  heat,  a  current  of  a  low  volt-


644


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcrs Guide


Fig.  31 — Cautery  generator.

age  and  high  amperage  (5  to  30  amperes)  is  required.  This  current  is
obtained  from  a  galvanic  battery  in  which  the  cells  are  connected  in
multiple  or  parallel,  or  from  a  cautery  apparatus  (Fig.  31)  by  which  the
commercial  current  of  high  voltage  and  low  amperage  is  transformed
into  a  current  of  high  amperage  and  low  voltage.

The  strength  of  the  current  is  regulated  by  means  of  a  rheostat  and
is  measured  by  means  of  an  ampere-meter,  which  is  of  great  value,  espe-
cially when  working  in  cavities  when  the  knife  is  not  readily  visible,  as
it  will  warn  us  if  we  are  in  danger  of  fusing  the  wire.

Fulguration

Fulguration  is  a  mono-polar  discharge  from  a  metal  point  electrode
connected  to  the  top  of  the  Oudin  resonator,  Tesla  secondai*y  or  a  hyper-
static  transformer.

By  means  of  this  discharge,  we  are  able  to  cause  destruction  of  certain
cells;  change  the  color  of  pigmented  spots  and  stimulate  new  growth


Fig.  32 — Glass  Fulguration  Electrode.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  fi45

without  producing  any  appreciable  necrosis  of  tissue;  or  to  produce
necrosis  (which  is  perhaps  due  to  a  combination  of  heat,  ionization  and
ozonation)  according  to  the  duration  and  strength  of  the  application.
On  account  of  ozonation,  the  necrosed  tissue  becomes  dry,  without  any
ulceration  or  pus;  remains  for  a  time  and  comes  off  leaving  a  smooth
healed  surface.  Although  fulguration  is  a  powerful  application,  it  pro-
duces a  subsequent  anaesthetic  effect,  and  through  vaso-constriction
causes  cessation  of  surface  hemorrhage.  Fulguration  has  given  good
results  in  the  treatment  of  lupus  vulgaris,  rodent  ulcer,  adenoids  and
similar  conditions,  and  is  far  superior  to  X-rays  and  Radium  in  the
treatment  of  malignant  tumors  of  breast  and  face,  or  to  electrolysis  in
the  removal  of  naevi.

There  are  two  methods  of  applying  fulguration,  viz.,  the  French  or
the  Dr.  De-Keating-Hart  method,  in  which  the  discharge  is  cooled  by  the
cold,  sterilized  air,  a  current  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  or  water,  which  flows
through  the  electrode  during  the  application;  and  the  dry  method,  in
which  the  electrode  is  not  moistened,  and  the  part  treated  is  mped  diy.

For  blanching,  a  wet  method  is  preferred,  and  the  distance  between
the  tissue  and  the  electrode  should  be  about  one  thirty-second  of  an
inch;  for  necrosis,  a  drjj^  method  at  the  distance  of  one  sixteenth  of  an
inch,  while  for  very  deep  action,  a  dry  method  at  a  distance  of  one
eighth  to  one  quarter  of  an  inch.

The  application  usually  lasts  from  three  to  four  seconds,  and  as
the  sparks  are  apt  to  jump  to  the  edges  of  the  wound,  care  should  be
taken  that  the  spark  is  directed  to  the  region  treated.

The  important  rule  always  to  be  observed  in  the  employment  of  this
method  is  that  in  malignant  growths,  the  diseased  cells  should  be  fully
destroyed,  for  otherwise  it  will  stimulate  a  more  rapid  growth  of  the
underlying,  undestroyed,  malignant  cells.

Caution:  Since  sparks  applied  to  the  thorax  have  been  known  to
cause  failure  of  respiration,  and  later  to  stop  the  heart,  fulguration  is
by  no  means  an  absolutely  harmless  treatment,  and  for  this  reason,
in  dangerous  conditions,  should  be  resorted  to  only  when  other  methods
have  failed. The  pneumo-gastric  nerve  should  never  be  fulgurated.

When  electro-cautery,  or  fulguration,  are  to  be  employed  around  the
face,  ether  Con  account  of  its  inflammable  vapors)  should  never  be
administered.

Surgical-diathermy

(Electro-coagulation)

By  employing  a  suitable  (small)  active  electrode,  and  increasing  the
amperage  of  the  D'Arsonval  (diathermic)  current,  it  is  possible  to
elevate  the  temperature  of  the  part  to  the  coagulating  point  (158°  Fahr.)
and  to  carry  out  minor  surgical  operations  bloodlessly,  without  the
danger  from  absorption  of  poisonous  products  or  burns.  On  account
of  a  more  reliable  technic,  more  accurate  dosage,  and  a  perfect  hemo-
stasis,  this  method  is  preferred  to  the  application  of  actual  cauter>\

Electro-coagulation  is  indicated  in  the  removal  of  tumors,  hemorr-
hoids, polypus,  naevi,  furunculosis,  necrosis  of  bone,  ulcerative  tuber-
culosis, suppurating  glands,  warts,  and  other  superficial  lesions.

On  account  of  absolute  asepsis,  it  has  been  successfully  employed  in
combination  with  surgery  in  a  large  number  of  cases  of  deeper  origin.


646


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


As  the  diathermic  current  persists  in  water,  various  diseases,  includ-
ing bleeding  papilloma,  have  been  destroyed  in  the  water  distended
bladder,  and  both  hard  and  soft  species  of  bladder  calculi  have  been  dis-
integrated with  the  spark  applied  by  means  of  an  insulated  steel  wire
through  a  cystoscope.


Fig.  33 — Large  Eye  Magnet.

Electrolysis

Same  electrolytic  changes  that  take  place  in  a  compound  substance
occur  in  the  human  tissue  (which  is  a  semi-fluid)  while  an  electric  cur-
rent is  passing  through  it.

Electrolysis  is  employed  in  the  treatment  of  tumors,  angioma,  carci-
noma, aneuiysm,  hemorrhage,  granulations,  goitres,  fungoid  gi^owths,
keloid;  strictures  of  the  eustachian  tubes,  lachrymal  canals,  and  urethra;
removal  of  superfluous  hair,  moles,  naevi,  warts,  etc.

In  the  application  of  electrolysis,  bare,  active  metallic  electrode  is
employed,  and  the  following  must  be  remembered:

I.  Polarity  is  very  important,  and  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that
the  positive  will  coagulate  fluids,  arrest  hemorrhage,  decrease  inflamma-
tion, etc.,  while  the  negative  will  do  the  opposite.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide  ^47

II.  The  galvanic  current  is  most  adaptable,  because  the  electrolytic
effect  of  a  current  is  in  proportion  to  its  amperage;  (therefore  almost
negligible  in  Faradic,  Sinusoidal,  Static,  or  High  Frequency  currents).

III.  Strong  current  for  a  short  time  produces  the  same  effect  as  a
weak  current  for  a  long  time;  but  as  the  object  of  electrolysis  is  to
absorb,  and  never  to  hurt,  burn  or  cauterize  the  tissue,  weak  currents
should  be  employed.

IV.  Electrolysis  relieves  strictures  by  enlarging  the  caliber  of  the
canal,  through  the  absorption  of  the  fibrous  tissue,  and  not  through  the
dilation  or  a  modified  dilation.

Eye-magnet  Operations

When  a  foreign  body  enters  the  eye  (especially  vitreous  or  retina)
blindness  will  follow^  unless  the  splinter  is  extracted  as  early  as  possible.
Metals  can  be  extracted  from  the  eye  by  means  of  an  electro-magnet.
(Fig.  33)

Diagnosis

Having  the  history  of  the  case,  and  having  examined  the  exterior  and
interior  of  the  eye  (by  means  of  an  ophthalmoscope),  and  by  taking  the
held  of  vision,  having  determined  whether  there  is  any  obscure  area,
the  tip  of  the  magnet  is  applied  to  various  parts  o£  the  eye.  If  pain  re-
sults, it  is  a  positive  indication  that  metal  (steel  or  iron)  is  present
within  the  eye,  but  the  absence  of  pain  is  not  conclusive  evidence  that
no  foreign  body  is  present,  for  it  may  be  too  distant,  or  too  firmly
held  to  move.

Method  of  Operating

Dr.  W.  A.  Fischer  recommends  the  following  method:
"When  a  foreign  body  is  suspected,  and  the  lens  has  become  opaque,
apply  the  tip  of  the  magnet  to  the  center  of  the  cocainized  cornea;  in-
crease the  current  slowly  to  full  force  .  .  .  unless  the  body  appears
with  a  current  of  less  intensity.  If  it  does  appear,  turn  the  current  off,
and  place  the  tip  at  the  edge  of  the  cornea,  and  turn  on  the  current.
If  the  iris  bulges,  change  the  position  of  the  magnet  to  make  the  metal
pass  through  the  pupil.  Apply  the  magnet  to  an  incision  in  the  cornea
until  the  metal  adheres  to  the  magnet,  when  the  operation  is  finished.
If  the  body  does  not  appear  on  the  second  application,  turn  on  the
current,  and  make  and  break  it  several  times,  to  dislodge  the  foreign
body.  If  the  metal  has  entered  the  eye  back  of  the  lens,  some  operators
prefer  an  opening  in  the  sclera  and  removal  at  that  point.  I  am  of
the  opinion  that  all  bodies  should  be  extracted  through  the  anterior
chamber,  although  a  foreign  body  that  has  entered  back  of  the  lens
suggests  removal  through  the  enlarged  original  wound.  The  speculum
and  forceps  and  scleral  retractors  must  be  non-magnetic."

If  the  extraction  is  to  be  made  through  the  sclera,  in  order  to  apply
the  magnet  near  the  foreign  body,  it  is  best  to  determine  its  position
by  radiography  before  the  operation,  but  as  that  causes  delay,  w^hich
favors  infection,  it  should  be  employed  only  in  the  old  cases.


648  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  XIII

RADIOLOGY


RADIOLOGY  embraces  the  therapeutic  use  of  radiant  energy  (ether
vibrations  of  various  wave  lengths  and  frequencies)  from  natural
and  artificial  sources,  viz.,  sun's  rays  (helio-therapy),  radium  rays
(radium-therapy),  and  the  rays  produced  by  various  lamps  (photo
and actino-therapy), and the Roentgen apparatus (radio-therapy or
Roentgenology) .

In  order  to  thoroughly  master  the  subject  of  radiology,  it  is  essential
to  consider  the  spectrum  of  sunlight.

Spectrum  is  a  band  composed  of  various  colors  obtained  by  passing
the  light  through  a  prism.

- Spectrum  of  Sunlight

The  spectrum  of  sunlight  is  composed  of  seven  visible  colors,  viz.,
red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo  and  violet.

Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Indigo Violet

Heat  Light  Chemical

Rays  Rays  Rays

At  each  end  of  the  spectrum  there  are  more  rays;  beyond  the  red
there  are  the  infra-red;  beyond  the  violet  the  ultra-violet,  and  still  fur-
ther, perhaps,  the  X  or  Roentgen  rays.  These  are,  however,  the  invisible
rays.

The  various  rays  and  colors  of  the  spectrum  are  due  to  different  wave
lengths  and  frequencies  of  ether  vibrations,  which  excite  in  the  brain
(through  the  optic  nerve)  the  different  color  sensations,  e.  g.,  the  red  is
due  to  comparatively  long,  infrequent  vibrations  (about  481,000,000,000
per  second),  while  the  violet  is  due  to  short  and  rapid  vibrations  (about
764,000,000,000  per  second).

Refraction  and  Penetration

All  the  rays  in  passing  from  lighter  to  the  denser  (or  from  denser  to
the  lighter)  substances  are  refracted  or  bent,  and  the  greater  the  fre-
quency of  ether  vibrations,  of  which  the  ray  is  composed,  the  greater
the  refraction.

The  penetration  of  various  rays  depends  on  their  respective  refrac-
tion. The  red  rays  (due  to  infrequent  vibrations)  are  least  refracted,
and  consequently  most  penetrative,  while  the  violet  (due  to  rapid  vibra-
tions) are  most  refracted  and  therefore  least  penetrative. The  orange,


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide  649

yellow  and  green  are  more  refrangible  and  therefore  less  penetrative
than  the  red  rays,  but  are  less  refrangible  and  more  penetrative  than
the  blue,  indigo  or  violet  rays.

Thermic,  Luminous  and  Actinic  Rays

The  rays  of  the  spectrum  are  divided  into  three  groups,  viz.,  the  ther-
mic, the  luminous,  and  the  actinic  rays.

The  thermic  or  heat  rays  (radiant  heat)  chiefly  emanate  from  the
orange,  the  red  and  the  invisible  part  beyond  (infra-red).  Being  least
refracted,  these  rays  penetrate  the  tissue  (from  four  to  six  inches)  in-
stantaneously, and  generate  heat  in  the  depths  of  the  tissue  and  the
deep  layers  of  the  skin,  where  its  (heat's)  therapeutic  effects  (increased
metabolism,  nutrition,  phagocytosis,  etc.)  are  desired.  This  heat  is  more
penetrative  than  the  heat  from  any  other  source  (except  diathermy)  and
is  excellent  to  relieve  pain  and  to  improve  the  local  nutrition  of  the  skin.

The  luminous  or  tight  rays  (radiant  light)  emanate  from  green  and
yellow.  Although  more  refracted  than  the  heat  rays,  the  luminous  rays
are  able  to  reach  the  nerves,  nerve  centers,  muscles,  viscera,  and  other
tissues  lying  two  or  three  inches  below  the  surface  of  the  skin.  These
rays  cause  sunburn  and  freckles  when  directed  for  any  considerable
length  of  time  on  the  uncovered  skin.

The  actinic  or  chemical  rays  are  composed  of  blue,  indigo,  violet  and
the  invisible  part  beyond  (ultra-violet).  Being  of  the  greatest  fre-
quency and  refrangibility,  they  are  the  least  penetrative,  but  most  use-
ful. These  rays  produce  fluorescence  of  the  blood  and  serum,  and
thereby  stimulate  the  chemistry  of  the  tissues  (that  is,  they  improve
metabolism),  and  are  highly  bactericidal.

The  actinic  or  chemical  rays,  especially  the  ultra-violet,  do  not  pen-
etrate substances  containing  blood  or  red  coloring  matter,  thin  films  of
glass,  thin  dark  cloth,  or  adhesive  plaster.  They,  however,  readily  pen-
etrate water,  air,  rock  crystal  and  tissue  (from  one  to  four  millimeters),
when  rendered  anaemic  according  to  Prof.  Finsen's  method.

In  considering  the  therapeutic  uses  of  light,  from  whatever  source,
we  must,  however,  not  consider  light  merely  according  to  the  divided
rays  of  the  spectrum,  but  collectively,  and  in  conjunction  with  heat
radiation.

Effect  of  Light  on  Bacteria

With  the  application  of  a  sufficiently  strong  light,  all  portions  of  the
spectrum  are  able  to  restrain  the  growth  of  bacteria,  or  to  kill  them,
but  the  red  rays  possess  the  weakest  bactericidal  power;  this  power  then
increases  as  one  approaches  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  where  it  is
strongest.

orange,  yellow  and  green  rays,  while  to  the  blue,  indigo,  violet  and  ultra-
violet about  96  per  cent,  of  the  effect.

The  light  energy,  aside  of  the  direct  bactericidal  action,  is  destructive
to  organisms  within  the  body  by  the  improvement  in  the  cellular  con-
dition, promoting  the  physiological  resistance  to  the  growth  and  increase
of  bacteria.


650


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Filtration
(Cutting  oti'  rays)

Having  seen  that  each  class  of  rays  produces  distinct  curative  effects,
in  order  to  intensify  these  effects,  it  will  be  of  value  to  know  how  to
cut  off  those  rays  which  are  of  no  value  in  a  given  case.  This  can  be
accomplished  by  various  methods,  the  most  practical  being  by  passing
the  rays  through  colored  ci'jstal  screens,  e.  g.,  the  red  crystal  does  not
appreciably  reduce  the  heat,  but  cuts  off  the  opposite  colored  rays,  viz.,
the  chemical  rays,  w^hereas  the  blue  crystal  (Bordier  tints  1,  2,  4  and  6)


Fig.  34 — 500  candle  power
therapeutic  lamp.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


051


considerably  reduces  the  amount  of  heat — that  is  to  say,  it  effectively
cuts  off  a  good  proportion  of  the  heat  rays,  but  does  not  affect  the  chem-
ical rays.

The  yellow  crystal  (Bordicr  tints  2  and  3,  especially  2)  have  a  great
transparency  for  the  actinic  rays,  but  very  dark  yellow  (Bordier  tint  4)
cuts  off  nearly  all  the  actinic  rays.

Green  crystal,  Bordier  tint  2,  allows  some  actinic  rays  to  pass,  whereas
tints  4  and  5  arrest  all  the  actinic  rays.

Frosted  glass  allows  chiefly  the  heat  rays  of  the  spectrum,  because
the  actinic  rays  are  unable  to  pass  through  such  a  glass.

The  colored  screens  or  lamps  employed  to  cut  off  certain  rays  for
therapeutic  purposes  must  be  of  colored  crystal  through  and  through,
as  painted  screens  or  lamps  are  useless,  since  they  keep  back  the  essen-
tial rays.


Fig.  35-


-Therapeutic  Lamp  suspended  on  a
wall  bracket.


Photo-therapy

Incandescent  Light

The  light  from  an  incandescent  lamp  contains  a  large  percentage  of
the  red  and  yellow  rays.  The  actinic  rays,  especially  the  ultra-violet,
bemg  almost  entirely  cut  off"  by  the  enclosing  bulb,  the  treatment  by
means  of  an  incandescent  light  is  largely  a  radiant  light  and  heat  treat-
ment.

The  treatment  by  incandescent  lamps  is  manifestlv  inferior  to  a  treat-
ment which  utilizes  the  whole  spectrum,  as  does  sunlight,  but  it  is  of
great  value  in  cases  where  the  thermic  effects  are  more  essential  than
the  effects  of  the  chemical  rays.  Due  to  the  penetration  of  the  heat  rays,
it  IS  far  superior  to  other  heating  methods  (except  diathermy).

The  incandescent  light  treatments  are  administered  in  the  form  of
an  electric  light  bath,  therapeutic  lamp,  or  other  appliances  for  the  local


652


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


treatment  of  arms,  legs,  trunk,  etc.,  and  are  indicated  in  all  conditions
in  which  heat  and  light  are  of  value.

Clear  glass  (uncolored)  incandescent  lamps,  are  mainly  used  for  the
purpose  of  promoting  perspiration  in  rheumatism,  obesity,  arthritis,
lumbago,  sciatica,  synovitis,  skin  diseases,  etc.

Red  lamps  or  screens  warm  and  stimulate  tlic  arterial  blood.  They
are  indicated  in  all  cold  and  pale  conditions,  but  contra-indicated  in  all
inflammations  and  hyperexcited  conditions.


Fig.  36 — The  Alpine  Sun  Lump. The

lamp for the electro-therapeutist

and  general  practitioner  who
wishes  to  practice  intensive  Helio-
therapy in  his  office  or  clinic.  An
extensive  literature  records  highly
satisfactory  results  in  all  superficial
skin  affections,  in  surgery,  nervous
and  constitutional  diseases,  also
surgical  and  pulmonary  tuhcrculosis.

Blue  lamps  or  screens  relieve  congestion,  inflammation  and  pain;  re-
duce high  blood  pressure;  cause  better  skin  respiration;  increase  oxy-
genation and  elimination  of  waste  products,  etc.  They  are  superior  to
the  clear  lamps  in  the  treatment  of  arteriosclerosis  and  neuritis,  but  are
contra-indicated  in  cold  and  chronic  conditions,  unless  considerable  ex-
citability exists.

Carbon  and  Tungsten  Filament  Lamps

"Carbon  fdament  produces  a  small  percentage  of  chemical  rays  and  a
large  percentage  of  infra-red  radiations."


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


G53


Fig.  37 — "Under  the  Alpine  Sun  Lamp." Wounded  Ger-
man Soldiers  in  Hospital  in  Baden-Baden. (From  "Atlas
of  the  World  War,"  F.  Bruckmann,  Munich.)


Fig.  38 — Surgical  Clinic,  University  of  Marburg. Scrofulous

children  receiving  last  radiation  before  discharge.  Objective

symptoms  have  entirely  disappeared.


654


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig. 39— "Radio-Vitant" Applicator

for  the  local  application  of  radiant

light  and  heat.


"In  reducing  local  and  superficial  inflammation,  the  thermic  action  of
the  carbon  filament  of  high  candle  power,  added  to  its  luminous  and
tonic  qualities,  renders  it  more  efTicient  than  the  more  luminous  but  less
thermic  tungsten  filament,  or  than  the  action  of  convective  heat."

"Tungsten  filament,  either  in  the  vacuum  or  nitrogen-filled  globe,  gives
a  whiter  light,  and  produces  less  heat.  Its  luminous  penetration  appears
to  be  greater  than  that  from  either  of  the  other  sources.  Radiant  energy
from  the  tungsten  filament  as  a  source,  is  equal  in  therapeutic  value,
to  that  from  the  carbon,  except  in  inflammation,  and  in  the  effect  upon
the  lungs  and  skin."


Fig.


40 — Abdominal application of radiant
and  heat.


light


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


655


Therapeutic  Application

Electric  Light  Bath

The  electric  light  bath  is  either  of  a  cabinet  or  reclining  form,  fitted
with  a  number  of  incandescent  lamps.  These  lamps  are  wired  in  sec-
tions, enabling  the  operator  to  switch  on  all  or  only  some  of  the  lamps,
and  thereby  adjust  the  temperature  of  the  bath  and  concentrate  the
light  according  to  the  patient's  constitution  and  the  state  of  his  health
at  the  time.

The  electric  light  bath  increases  the  surface  circulation,  dilates  lym-
phatic vessels,  and  at  the  same  time  causes  a  diminution  of  the  arterial
pressure  and  augmentation  of  the  pulse  frequency.

Owing  to  the  remarkable  stimulus  of  light  rays,  this  bath  produces  al-
most the  same  sudatory  effects  with  a  thermometer  registering  195  de-


Fig.  41 — Application  of  radiant  light
and  heat  to  the shoulder  and arm.


Fig.  42 — Spinal  application  of  radiant  light  and  heat.
(Applicator  on  stand)


656


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biu/crs'  Guide


Fig. 43 — Spinal application of
diant  light  and  heat.
(Applicator  suspended)


ra-


grees  Fahr.,  as  a  Turkish,  Russian  or  any  other  form  of  obscure  heat
with  the  thermometer  registering  about  300  degrees  Fahr.,  and  the  pa-
tient usually  begins  to  perspire  in  five  or  ten  minutes.

For  the  reason  that  a  profuse  perspiration  can  be  induced  at  a  very
low  temperature,  and  because  the  head  remains  clear  and  unoppressed,
while  the  lungs  breathe  freely  pure  and  fresh  air,  this  treatment  may
be  safely  applied  to  patients  afflicted  with  heart,  head  and  lung  com-
plaints.

The  electric  light  bath  usually  lasts  from  10  to  30  minutes,  according
to  the  etlect  desired  and  the  condition  of  the  patient.


Fig.  44. — Spinal  application  of  radiant  light  and  heat.
(Applicator  on  adjustable  supporters)


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


057


Fig,  45 — Electric  Light  Bath  (open).

Tonic  effects  are  produced  by  a  short  bath  (only  to  the  sweating
point),  followed  by  a  cold  spray  or  vigorous  exercise;  while  sedative  ef?
fects,  by  regulating  the  lamps  and  controlling  the  temperature  of  the
cabinet  so  as  to  induce  sweating  about  15  or  20  minutes  after  the  patient
has  entered  the  cabinet.

Eliminative  effects  are  produced  by  heating  the  cabinet  gradually
(turning  on  the  spinal  lamps  after  the  patient  has  become  accustomed


Fig,  46— Electric  Light  Bath  (closed).


658  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig. 47— Portable

Therapeutic  Ivainp

witli  screen.


to  increased  temperature),  and  giving  the  patient  plenty  of  pure  water
or  lemonade  before  and  during  the  bath.

Local  applications  of  light  b^^  means  of  a  therapeutic  lamp  or  special
appliances  for  the  treatment  of  arms,  legs,  trunk,  etc.,  are  the  very  best
that  is  possible  to  employ,  when  general  effect  is  not  desired.


Fig.  48 — Local  Light  and  Heat  Applicator
(closed),  intended  for  the  intensive  appli-
cations to  the  various  parts  of  the  body,
as the pelvis, chest, hips, knees, etc.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  659


Fig.  49 — Local  Light  and  Heat  Applicator,
shown  in  Fig.  48  (open).


Lumino  and  Actino-Therapy

Electric  Arc

When  the  carbon  points  of  an  electric  arc  are  heated  to  incandescence,
they  give  off  light  which  is  rich  in  blue,  violet  and  ultra-violet  rays;
the  heat  rays  being  decreased  proportionally.  The  longer  the  arc,  the
larger  the  percentage  of  the  actinic  rays.  (Arc  is  lengthened  by  separ-
ating the  ends  of  the  carbons.)

The  electric  arc  has  the  same  luminous  power  and  contains  more  ac-
tinic rays  than  does  sunlight.  It  gives  a  less  steady  light  than  the  incan-
descent lamp,  but  it  gives  a  light  of  greater  intensity  and  bactericidal
power.

If  of  a  sufficient  power,  the  electric  arc  will  produce  sunburn  and
tanning  of  the  skin  more  easily  than  actual  sunlight,  with  the  same  cur-
ative and  stimulative  effects  that  follow  real  sunburn.

Since  the  electric  arc,  in  addition  to  chemical  rays,  gives  off  also  a
large  percentage  of  the  luminous  rays  when  applied  to  the  bod}^  the
brain,  spinal  cord,  stomach,  liver,  lungs,  heart,  bones  or  whatever  tissue
that  lies  beneath  the  skin  upon  which  the  rays  fall,  are  benefitted  by  it.

The  distance  at  which  the  patient  is  placed  from  the  electric  arc  di-
minishes the  percentage  of  chemical  rays  as  they  are  filtered  by  their
passage  through  the  atmosphere.  The  -greater  the  application  of  light,
the  greater,  of  course,  will  be  the  effect  upon  the  deep-lying  tissues.

The  arc  light  treatments  are  specially  indicated  in  cases  which  are
benefitted  more  by  light  than  heat,  such  as  neurasthenia,  anaemia,  lung
complaints,  all  skin  affections,  etc.  A  substitute  for  the  arc  light  is  the
high  candle  power  incandescent  lamp.


660


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Finsen  Treatment

(Actino-therapy)

Most  of  the  apparatus  producing  a  large  quantity  of  chemical  or  ac-
tinic rays  for  the  treatment  of  lupus,  ringworm  and  various  skin  diseases,
according  to  the  method  of  the  late  Prof.  Neils  R.  F'insen,  of  Copenhagen,
consists  of  the  light,  the  cooling  and  the  light-concentrating  apparatus.

Finsen-Reyn  Lamp,  for  example,  consists  of  an  electric  arc  and  a
short  telescope  fixed  to  a  movable  stand.  This  telescope  contains  rock
crystal  lenses,  and.  is  provided  with  a  cold  water  circulation.  This  cool-
ing arrangement  not  only  serves  to  absorb  the  heat  rays  (and  thereby
prevents  the  burning  of  the  patient)  but  also  keeps  the  lenses  cool  and
prevents  them  from  cracking.


Fig.  50 — The  Kromayer  Lamp.  A
powerful  water-cooled  lamp  for  the
application  of  Ultra  Violet  Light  in
the  treatment  of  Lupus,  Nevus,  Acne,
Psoriasis,  Eczema,  Scrofuloderma,
Alopecia,  etc.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


061


Fig.  51 — The  Kromayer  Lamp. Treating  small  lesion  on  face  with
aid  of  Quartz  lens  applicator.


662  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Emerging  Iroin  the  telescope,  the  rays  again  pass  through  a  compress-
or, or  a  pressure-lens,  whicli  consists  of  two  discs  ot  rock  crystal  set  in
a  metal  ring,  separated  Irom  eacli  other,  between  which  Hows  a  second
stream  of  cold  water.  This  compressor,  or  pressure-lens,  is  not  only
used  to  further  absorb  the  heat  rays  and  keep  the  patient  from  burn-
ing, but  also  to  produce  anaemia  of  the  part  treated.

Application  of  the  Finseii  Treatment

In  order  to  prevent  the  blood  from  absorbing  the  chemical  or  actinic
rays,  which  are  most  important  in  this  treatment,  it  is  necessaiy  to  pro-
duce the  anaemia  of  the  part  treated,  so  as  to  allow  the  luminous  rays
to  penetrate  deeper  into  the  tissues.  This  is  accomplished  by  placing
a  compressor  or  pressure-lens  (or  a  piece  of  ice)  against  the  part  to  be
treated,  and  steadily  pressing  lirmer  and  closer  until  all  the  blood  is
driven  out  of  the  part.  In  order  to  keep  the  part  bloodless,  it  is  neces-
sary to  maintain  a  continuous  pressure.  The  cooling  apparatus  (water
circulation)  must  be  put  into  operation  before  the  electric  current  is
passed  through  the  arc,  so  as  to  avoid  breaking  of  the  lenses.

The  light  from  the  apparatus  is  focused  on  the  compressor,  and  the
treatment  is  kept  up  for  an  hour.

If  the  application  has  been  successful,  eight  or  twelve  hours  after  the
blister  will  appear  and  must  be  protected  from  dirt  and  injury  by  a  suit-
able dressing,  which  should  be  changed  twice  daily.  If,  however,  there
is  only  appearance  of  inflammation  (redness,  swelling,  etc.)  without  a
blister,  the  application  has  not  been  successful;  and  when  such  is  the
case,  another  application  to  the  same  area  should  not  be  repeated  until
all  effects  of  inflammation  have  subsided.

Finsen  treatment  cannot  be  applied  to  an  ulcerated  part  until  the  ulcer
has  healed.  When  treating  the  surface  of  the  nose,  the  nostrils  should
be  packed  with  absorbent  cotton  wrung  out  of  boric  solution,  in  order
to  obtain  resistance  to  the  pressure  of  the  compressor.

Since  the  over-exposure  of  the  crystalline  lens  to  the  chemical  or  ac-
tinic rays  causes  an  early  production  of  cataract  when  applying  this
treatment  near  the  eyes,  the  patient's  sight  must  be  protected  by  dark
green  (Bordier  tint  4)  spectacles,  or  by  covering  the  eyes  with  a  double
fold  of  brown  or  red  paper.  For  the  same  reason,  it  is  advisable  that
the  operator,  when  administering  this  or  any  other  actinic  treatment,
protect  his  own  sight  by  wearing  dark  green  spectacles.

If  the  patient  complains  that  the  rays  produce  a  burning  sensation,  it
means  that  the  pressure-lens  is  applied  too  gently.

In  order  to  prevent  spreading  of  infection,  the  pressure-lens  must
be  sterilized  after  each  treatment.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Jhujcrs (inide


663


CHAPTER  XIV

ROENTGEN  OR  X-RAYS


THE  Roentgen,  or  X-rays,  discovered  in  1895  by  Dr.  William  Conrad
Roentgen  of  Berlin,  possess  the  property  of  penetrating  supposedly
opaque  bodies,  but  cannot  be  seen  or  felt  as  they  pass  through
the  body.
These  rays are composed  of  considerably shorter  waves than  the
shortest  ultra-violet  rays  of  light,  representing  a  rate  of  frequency  ap-


Fig.  52 — Diagram  of  an  X-ray  tube.

proximately  one  thousand  times  greater  than  the  higher  frequencies  of
the  visible  spectrum.  They  are  produced  by  means  of  an  X-ray  tube
excited  by  an  induction  coil,  interrupterless  transformer,  high  fre-
quency apparatus,  or  a  static  machine.

The  X-ray  Tube

The  modern  X-ray  tube  (Fig.  52)  is  a  large  glass  bulb,  varjung  from
6  to  8  inches  in  diameter  (out  of  which  lead  two,  three  or  more  short
glass  stems)  exhausted  to  a  vacuum  from  Vjooooo  (one  hundred  thou-
sandth) to  Vioooooo  (one  millionth)  of  an  atmosphere.  It  consists  of  var-
ious parts,  most  important  being  the  cathode,  anti-cathode  or  anode,  bi-
anode  and  a  regulator.

The  Cathode  (1)  is  a  concave  platinum  disc,  which  serves  to  project  a
stream  of  electrified  particles  upon  a  focus  point  or  a  target  (18).


664  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  anti-cathode,  or  the  anode  proper,  consists  generally  of  a  pure
copper  steam  (11)  upon  which  is  a  target  set  at  an  angle  of  45  degrees
to  the  cathode.  When  the  electrilied  particles  from  the  cathode  (ca-
thode rays)  strike  the  target  (at  18),  they  give  rise  to  the  X-rays  (7),
which  are  reflected  from  the  target  and  pass  through  the  walls  of  the
tube,  travelling  in  straight  lines  in  all  directions.

On  account  of  the  heat  produced  by  the  bombardment  of  the  cathode
rays,  only  platinum,  iridium,  or  tungsten  can  be  successfully  used  upon
the  target.  The  advantage  of  using  upon  the  target  tungsten,  which
melts  at  3000  degrees  C,  or  iridium,  which  has  much  harder  density
than  platinum,  and  melts  at  1700  degrees  C,  is  at  once  apparent  where
the  tube  has  to  withstand  veiy  heavy  currents  for  any  appreciable  length
of  time.

The  bi-anode  or  assistant  anode  (3)  is  set  at  an  angle  above  and  con-
nected to  the  outer  terminal  of  the  anti-cathode,  or  the  anode  proper.
It  is  either  a  small  aluminum  rod,  a  flat  circular  disc,  or  a  large  metallic
tube.  The  first  two  forms  of  bi-anode  are  the  only  practical  ones  to  be
operated  upon  a  coil  where  an  interrupter  is  used,  while  for  the  trans-
former the  tubular  form  is  preferred.  The  object  of  the  bi-anode  is  to
assist  in  the  regulation  of  the  vacuum.


Fig.  53 — High  Frequency  X-ray  Tube.

The  Exciting  of  an  X-ray  Tube

When  first  exciting  a  new  tube,  great  care  should  be  exercised,  owing
to  its  delicate  nature,  apart  from  the  fact  that  it  is  constructed  of  thin
glass.  A  tube  may  puncture  from  no  apparent  cause  when  the  current
is  first  switched  on,  and  this  is  an  accident  which  cannot  be  entirely
guarded  against,  although  it  is  not  a  very  frequent  occurrence.  As  a
safeguard  against  this,  it  is  advisable  to  see  that  a  tube  is  as  free  as  pos-
sible from  dust  and  moisture  on  the  surface  of  the  bulb.

It  should  also  be  remembered  that  a  new  tube  is  more  readily  dam-
aged by  overheating  than  an  old  one,  and  care  should  always  be  ta-
ken not  to  over-run  a  tube  so  as  to  heat  it  beyond  the  point  where  a
finger  can  not  be  held  on  it  without  discomfort.

With  an  induction  coil,  a  transformer,  or  static  machine,  the  tube
should  be  connected  by  its  anti-cathode  (5)  to  the  positive  pole  of  the
generator,  and  by  its  cathode  (4)  to  the  negative  pole.

With  a  portable  apparatus  made  with  the  double  Tesia  coil,  it  is


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


OGo


immaterial  which  of  the  two  terminals  are  connected  to  the  apparatus,
but  with  the  apparatus  made  with  a  single  Tesla  coil,  it  is  important
that  the  cathode  of  the  tube  is  conccted  to  the  main  terminal  of  the
Tesla  coil.

The  current  should  be  turned  on  gradually  by  means  of  a  rheostat
or  other  device,  so  that  only  a  very  small  amount  of  current  will  pass.
In  radiotherapeutic  work,  the  strength  of  one  milliampere  or  less  is  em-
ployed (usually  only  from  one-  to  three-tenths  of  a  milliampere) ;  while
in  radiography  up  to  five  milliamperes  may  be  used.

Never  allow  to  spark  across  the  gap  while  exciting  the  tube.

When  the  current  under  three-tenths  of  a  milliampere  is  employed,
the  ordinary  platinum  target  may  be  used,  but  when  it  is  raised  to  four
or  five-tenths  of  a  milliampere,  this  target  is  liable  to  grow  red-hot.
When  the  strong  currents  are  required,  we  must,  therefore,  use  the
tubes  which  are  built  with  the  anti-cathode  and  target  able  to  withstand
excessive currents. The  so-called  "heavy anode," or  "water-cooled"


Fig.  54 — Tungsten  Target  Water-cooled  Tube.

tubes  (Fig.  54),  for  instance,  will  stand  up  to  5  milliamperes  for  thirty
seconds  (150  milliampere-seconds)  or  more,  or  less  current  for  a  cor-
respondingly longer  period,  say  2.5  milliamperes  for  sixty  seconds  (as
this  equals  150  milliamperes  also),  etc.

All  tubes  will  carry  safely  at  least  fifty  per  cent,  more  current  after
they  have  been  "seasoned"  than  the  strongest  current  they  will  take
immediately  after  they  have  been  put  into  service.  The  tube  is  sea-
soned by  passing  about  two-thirds  of  the  full  current  through  it  a  con-
siderable number  of  times  before  working  them  at  full  power.

Penetration

Penetration  of  the  X-rays  depends  on  the  rapidity  (frequency)  of  ether
vibrations,  while  the  rapidity  of  vibrations  depends  on  the  vacuum  of
the  tube  and  the  voltage  produced  by  the  apparatus.  The  higher  the
vacuum  of  a  tube  and  higher  the  voltage  produced  by  the  apparatus,
the  greater  the  rapidity  of  vibrations,  and  consequently  greater  the  pen-
etration. The  greater  the  penetration,  shorter  the  exposure.


666


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Soft,  Medium  and  Hard  Rays

Tubes  are  called  low,  medium  or  high,  according  to  the  degree  of
exhaustion.

Soft  or  low  tubes  are  exhausted  to  about  Viooooo  (one  hundred  thou-
sandth) of  an  atmosphere.  They  give  off  soft  rays,  which,  although  rich
in  photo-chemical  elfccts,  are  unable  to  penetrate  the  tissues  to  any
great  depth.

Medium  tubes  are  more  exhausted  than  low,  and  give  off  medium  rays,
which  penetrate  the  tissues  more  deeply,  retaining  their  photo-chemical
effects.

Hard  or  high  tubes  are  exhausted  to  about  Vjoooooo  (one  millionth)  of
an  atmosphere. They  give  off  very  penetrating  hard  rays.

There  is  no  absolutely  accurate  method  for  estimating  the  relative
vacuum  of  a  tube,  but  since  a  low  tube  oflers  less  resistance  than  a  high
tube,  by  means  of  the  so-called  equivalent  spark-length,  it  is  possible
to  determine  the  approximate  degree  of  its  vacuum. This  is  carried


X-ray  Tube  Rack.


out  by  properly  connecting  the  tube  and  starting  the  generator  with
the  prime  conductors  or  spark  points  actually  touching  each  other,
then  gradually  separating  them  until  the  sparks  cease  to  pass  between
them,  which  means  that  the  resistance  of  the  tube  has  been  overcome,
and  that  the  current  is  now  passing  through  the  tube.  The  distance  be-
tween the  spark  points,  when  the  resistance  of  the  tube  has  been  over-
come, is  the  equivalent  spark  length.

A  tube  is  considered  low  when  its  resistance  is  overcome  with  spark
length  from  one  to  three  inches;  medium  with  spark  length  from  three
to  live  inches;  and  high  when  the  spark  length  is  over  five  inches.

For  the  reason  that  a  tube  which  is  too  high  to  use  with  the  coil  is  often-
times too  low  for  the  static  machine,  and  vice  versa,  the  testing  should  be
alwaj^s  performed  with  the  same  generator  which  is  to  be  used  to  excite
the  tube  for  the  application.

There  are  also  several  instruments  for  measuring  the  vacuum  of  the
tube  and  penetration  of  the  rays.  The  Qualimeter,  for  example,  is  an  in-
strument consisting  practically  of  a  special  form  of  electrostatic  voltme-
ter, which  when  connected  with  a  single  wire  to  the  negative  terminal  of
the  generator,  or  the  cathode  of  the  X-ray  tube,  indicates  any  alteration
in  the  vacuum  of  the  tube  whilst  actually  working.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


667


PENETRAMETERS.  Measuring  of  the  approximate  penetration  of
rays  is  a  veiy  valuable  and  convenient  guide  to  exposure  in  radiographic
work.  This  is  accomplished  by  an  instrument  called  penetrameter,  of
which  there  are  various  forms,  the  most  practical  being  Benoist,  Bauer,
and  Walter.  These  penetrameters  tell  instantly  how  many  inches  of
human  body  the  rays  emanating  from  any  tube  will  penetrate  sufficiently
to  give  a  fully  detailed  negative  when  exposed  to  correct  time.

Regulation  of  Tubes

With  continued  use,  all  X-ray  tubes  tend  to  become  higher  in  va-
cuum, and  eventually  become  so  high  as  to  be  nearly  useless. When  this


Fig.  56 — The  arrangement  of  the  Coolidge  X-ray  tube  and  means
of  regulation  of  the  storage  battery  with  switch,  the  ammeter  and
rheostat.  This  tube  stands  the  strain  of  six  to  eight  milliamperes
for  from  four  to  six  minutes  without  risk  to  the  tube  and  many
times  daily.  It  also  carries  three  to  four  milliamperes  for  ten
minutes w^ith safety and regularity.


occurs,  bright  patches  of  green  can  be  seen  in  different  parts  of  the  tube,
and  the  current  shows  a  disposition  to  the  spray,  on  the  part  of  the  con-
ducting wires.

In  order  to  be  able  to  use  again  these  tubes  the  vacuum  must  be
reduced.  This  is  accomplished  by  means  of  a  regulator  fitted  on  the
tube;  or  if  there  is  no  regulator  by  reversing  the  polarity  and  running
the  current  backwards  for  about  an  hour,  so  as  to  drive  a  sufficient
number  of  corpuscles  from  the  cathode.

There  are  several  kinds  of  regulators  but  most  frequently  used  are  the
automatic  spark  or  the  Queen-Sayen  Patent,  osmosis  and  the  air  valve
regulator. With  whichever  type  of  regulator  and  X-ray  tube  may  be


668


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


fitted,  it  should  be  rcmeiiibered  that  the  tube  will  become  unstable  if
regulated  too  frequently,  and  therefore  the  regulation  should  be  resorted
to  only  when  absolutely  necessary.

The  automatic  spark  or  the  Queen-Sayen  Patent  regulator  is  generally
the  one  most  satisfactory.  When  this  regulator  is  used,  the  X-ray  tube  is
fitted  \yith  another  secondary  tube  (8)  mounted  on  a  short  stem,  having
a  terminal  to  which  is  attached  a  regulating  wire  (9)  capable  of  reaching
the  cathode  terminal  (4).  To  lower  the  vacuum,  the  tube  is  connected
to  a  generator  and  the  current  turned  on.  Then,  with  a  glass  or  ebonite
rod,  the  regulator  wire  is  moved  slowly  toward  the  cathode  until  a  dis-
charge of  sparks  passes  between  it  and  the  cathode.  This  regulating  dis-
charge passes  through  a  bunch  of  mica  discs  or  chemically  prepared  as-
bestos fibre  (8)  in  the  secondary  tube,  heats  them,  and  liberates  occluded
gas,  which  flows  through  the  main  tube  and  lowers  its  vacuum.  After  a
few  minutes  the  current  should  be  turned  off  and  the  tube  allowed  to
rest. If  the  tube  is  still  too  hard,  repeat  the  process.

When  using  transformer  tubes,  it  is  advisable  that  the  regulating  wire
be  removed'  or  cut  ofT,  because  when  the  apparatus  is  turned  on  for  the
exposure  the  current  is  apt  to  jump  from  the  negative  terminal  (cathode)
to  the  regulating  wire,  and  this  may  reduce  the  vacuum  of  the  tube  so
far  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  bring  it  back.

Osmosis  regulator  reduces  the  vacuum  of  the  tube  by  allov^dng  a  small
quantity  of  hydrogen  into  the  bulb.  This  is  accomplished  by  heating  a
little  tube  of  palladium  with  an  alcohol  lamp.

The  Air  valve  regulator  which  allows  a  minute  measured  quantity  of
air  to  pass  into  the  X-ray  tube  although  not  very  practical  for  the  busy
practitioner  is  sometimes  employed.

The  Coolidge  Tube

The  Coolidge  X-ray  tube  is  built  and  operated  entirely  different  from
the  ordinary  X-ray  tube,  and  is  far  superior  to  other  types  having  a
perfect  regulation  of  vacuum  (by  heating  the  cathode  filament  with  a
current  from  a  storage  battery  or  a  step-down  transformer)  so  that  it
can  be  made  soft,  medium,  or  high,  and  therefore  satisfactory  for  fluoro-
scopy, radiography,  or  radiotherapy  (Fig.  56),

Inverse  Current

If  the  current  is  flowing  in  the  right  direction,  the  tube  glows  with  an
apple  green  light,  perfectly  equal  in  intensity  throughout  the  luminous
hemisphere  (7),  (that  half  of  the  tube  through  which  pass  the  rays  re-
flected from  the  target)  and  the  other  half  of  the  tube  "dark  hemis-
phere" remains  darker.

When  a  tube  is  excited  by  means  of  an  induction  coil,  and  specially
when  a  high  voltage  is  used,  it  is  almost  always  found  that  there  is  a
certain  amount  of  current  passing  through  the  tube  in  the  reverse  di-
rection. This  arises  from  the  making  and  breaking  of  contact  in  the
priniary  circuit  of  the  coil.  This  "inverse  current"  which  spoils  the
radiograph  and  seriously  shortens  the  life  of  the  X-ray  tube  can  be
detected  by  the  appearance  of  rings  back  of  and  usually  running  at  an
angle  to  the  luminous  hemisphere,  and  also  by  rings  around  the  bi-anode


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


669


disc,  or  by  means  of  an  Oscilloscope  (Fig.  58)  which  is  a  glass  tube  about
eight  inches  long,  exhausted  to  a  certain  specified  degree  of  vacuum,  hav-
ing two  electrodes  of  aluminum  wire,  connected  in  series  with  the  X-ray
tube.  If  there  is  inverse  current,  both  wires  of  the  Oscilloscope  will
glow;  while  if  there  is  no  inverse  current,  it  will  glow  at  the  negative
electrode  only.

In  order  to  do  good  work  and  to  lengthen  the  life  of  an  X-ray  tube,
this  inverse  current  must  be  eliminated,  and  this  may  be  accomplished
by  means  of  a  Valve  tube  (Fig.  59),  or  a  spark-gap  connected  in  series
with  the  X-ray  tube.

The  spark-gap  for  suppressing  inverse  current  consists  of  a  plate  and
an  adjustable  point,  enclosed  in  a  glass  cylinder. When  only  small  cur-


Fig.  57--X-ray  Tube  Stand.


670


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


...^


QgapjHHWiiiliiiaMM

■^■^vi-.i  /V\ACALA5TER,WIGG1N  CO.


^ss^


Fig.  58 — Oscilloscope.

rents  are  employed,  not  exceeding  about  two  milliamperes,  if  it  is  in  the
circuit,  it  will  effectively  cut  out  the  inverse  current.

The  best  rectifying  action  will  be  obtained  when  an  adjustable  point
forms  the  positive  pole  of  the  gap  and  a  plate  the  negative,  because  the
current  flows  more  easily  from  point  to  plate.  The  spark-gap  is  as  good
as  a  valve  tube  for  most  therapeutic  work,  and  does  not  become  worn
out,  the  only  objection  to  its  use  is  that  it  not  only  offers  a  resistance  to
the  inverse  current,  but  also  to  the  current  which  produces  the  proper
ray  in  the  tube.

Interrupterless  Transformers

Interrupterless  transformers  consist  essentially  of  a  step-up  trans-
former and  a  high  tension  rectifier  which  converts  the  high  tension  al-
ternating current,  generated  by  the  transformer,  into  a  pulsating  direct
current,  which  is  fed  to  the  X-ray  tube.

The  step-up  transformer  is  wound  for  voltages  up  to  160,000,  according
to  the  size  and  make.


Fig.  59— Valve  Tube.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


671


The  high  tension  rectifier  consists  of  a  revolving  disc  mounted  on  the
shaft  of  the  rotary  converter  (if  the  machine  is  to  be  operated  on  the
direct  current),  or  a  synchronous  motor  (if  for  alternating  current).
When  this  disc  revolves  on  the  motor  sliaft,  the  two  metal  contacts  on
the  disc  (which  are  connected  to  the  high  tension  alternating  current)
alternately  pass  the  stationai-y  electrodes  fixed  near  the  revolving  disc.
These  stationary  electrodes  collect  the  converted  current,  which  is  fed
to  the  X-ray  tube. (Fig.  75)


Fig.  60 — X-ray  Protective  Screen.

The  Protection  of  the  Patient  and  Operator

An  overdose  of  the  X-rays  being  injurious,  whenever  using  these  rays
it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  protect  the  patient  and  the  operator  against
indiscriminate  exposure.  There  are  two  w  ays  of  protecting  the  patient :
one,  to  surround  the  tube  with  an  opaque  covering,  limiting  the  exit  of
the  rays  to  a  small  opening,  which  can  be  regulated  as  required;  the
other  is  to  cover,  by  some  opaque  material  all  parts  of  the  patient  and
operator,  which  are  within  the  influence  of  the  rays  and  which  require
protection.  The  X-rays  being  unable  to  traverse  lead  or  any  substance
containing  lead,  the  first  method  is-  carried  out  by  placing  the  tube  in  a
bowl  made  of  glass  which  contains  a  large  quantity  of  lead  (lead  glass),


672


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


mounted  on  a  metal  stand  (Fig.  57).  The  target  of  the  tuhe  is  directed
towards  the  opening  of  the  bowl  so  as  to  allow  the  rays  to  come  out.
The  second  method  consists  in  employing  lead  sheets  with  openings  cut
in  tliem  to  correspond  to  the  area  which  is  to  be  exposed  to  the  rays.

By  the  application  of  plain  vaseline  to  the  part  exposed  directly  to
the  X-rays,  the  burning  of  the  patient  may  be  avoided  or  retarded.  This
substance,  if  applied  before  the  exposure,  retards  the  superficial  irrita-
tion and  is  specially  useful  when  treating  the  deeper  tissues,  and  where
there  is  no  open  ulcer.

The  operator  must  not  expose  himself  to  the  action  of  X-rays  and  it
is  advisable  that  he  protect  himself  by  lead  lined  screens,  lead  glass
spectacles,  lead  lined  glcJves,  or  other  appliances.


Fig.  61— hiduction  coil — X-ray  apparatus


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


673


MILLrAMMETER


SPARK  ROD  SHIELD-
SPARK  ROD  HANDLE:,

SPARK  GAP  CONTROLLERj:
CHEMICAL  REDUCER  CONTROLLER
POS.  SECONDARY  POST
MILLIAMMETER  PEDESTAL-
POS.AUXILLIARYPOST


PRIMARY ^
BINDING  POSTr
SELECTIVE  PRIMARY

INDUCTANCES-
SELECTOR  Pi


Diagram  of  the  induction  coil,  X-ray  apparatus


674  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


CHAPTER  XV

ROENTGENOLOGY

Radiography

THE  X-rays  passing  through  dense  objects  (bones,  bullets,  stones,  etc.)
being  prevented  from  reaching  the. screen  or  photographic  plate
cause  a  shadow  to  appear  on  it,  which  is  proportionate  to  the  den-
sity of  the  object  traversed.
If  an  object  is  interposed  between  the  X-ray  tube  and  the  Fluoroscope
(Fig.  63),  (a  screen  containing  barium-platinum-cyanide,  which  fluor-
esces or  shines  when  exposed  to  the  X-rays)  a  shadow  is  produced  on
the  screen,  and  we  are  able  to  see  deeper  structures  of  the  body.


Fig.  63 — Fluoroscope.

In  order  to  protect  the  patient  and  operator,  fluoroscopy  should  be
performed  with  a  hard  tube,  excited  by  high  voltage,  so  as  to  eliminate
the  proportion  of  soft  rays  which  are  dangerous  to  the  skin,  and  to
reduce  the  current  (milliamperage)  as  much  as  possible.  If  the  photo-
graphic plate  is  substituted  for  the  fluoroscopic  screen  we  are  able  to
obtain  a  picture  called  radiograph,  or  skiagraph,  of  the  image  which
appeared  at  the  fluoroscopic  screen,  because  the  X-rays  act  upon  the
photographic  plate  in  the  same  way  as  ordinary  light.

The  X-ray  plates  have  a  heavier  coating  than  ordinary  photographic
plates.  They  are  the  most  sensitive  of  photographic  plates  and  any
exposure  to  light  or  X-rays  will  spoil  them,  and  consequently  will
spoil  the  nicer  detail  of  the  picture.

The  plates  must  be  placed  first  in  a  black  and  then  in  a  yellow  en-
velope. This,  however,  must  be  done  in  a  dark  room,  using  only  a  good
ruby  light  through  which  no  white  light  will  be  admitted.

In  placing  the  plates  in  the  envelopes,  the  film  side  must  be  toward
the  front  of  the  envelope  so  that  the  fold  is  closed  on  the  glass  side  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buifcrs'  Guide


675


the  plate.  The  glass  side  and  the  film  side  of  the  plate  may  be  distin-
guished, holding  the  plate  at  an  angle  toward  the  ruby  light.  The  glass
side  reflects  brightly  and  the  film  side  is  dull.  If  there  is  no  light  used,
the  surface  is  tested  with  the  wet  finger — the  glass  side  slips  and  the  film
side  sticks.  After  placing  the  plate  in  the  black  envelope,  this  (envelope
containing  plate)  is  then  placed  into  the  yellow  envelope  in  the  same
way  as  in  the  black,  placing  the  fold  of  the  black  envelope  at  the  bottom
of  the  yellow,  so  as  to  prevent  the  leakage  of  light  through  the  folds.
The  plates  enclosed  in  this  manner  may  then  be  handled  in  daylight.


Fig.  64 — Fluoroscopy  of  the  shoulder.

For  the  reason  that  black  envelopes  contain  a  certain  amount  of  sod-
ium hyposulphite,  which  causes  deterioration  of  the  film  if  the  plates  re-
main in  them  for  several  days,  it  is  advisable  to  place  the  plates  in  the
envelopes  only  a  few  days  before  they  are  used.

The  plates  should  be  kept  in  the  dark  room  or  a  safe  and  should  not
be  removed  until  the  machine  has  been  adjusted  and  the  degree  of
vacuum  of  the  tube  has  been  established.  When  the  penetration  of  the
tube  has  been  established,  the  plate  is  placed  film  side  toward  the  target
(of  the  tube)  on  the  table;  the  part  to  be  radiographed  is  resting  on  the
plate  or  is  brought  into  as  close  contact  with  it  as  possible  and  the  tube
some  distance  above,  so  that  the  target  is  directly  over  the  center  of
the  part  to  be  radiographed.


676


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


THE  DISTANCE  from  the  target  to  the  phitc  is  usually  from  16  to  24
inches,  but  the  shorter  the  distance,  the  greater  will  be  the  magnification
of  the  image  on  the  plate.

THE  DURATION  OF  EXPOSURE  is  a  matter  of  judgment,  and  varies
according  to  the  generator  employed,  the  distance  from  the  target  to
the  plate,  the  vacuum  of  the  tube,  the  weight  of  the  patient,  and  the  size
of  the  part  being  radiographed.


Fig.  65 — Universal  Klinoscope. Used  for
Fluoroscopy  and  Radiography


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  677


Fig.  66 — Universal  Klinoscope. Shown  in Fig. 65
(rear  view).


678


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Fig,  67 — Universal  Klinoscope. (Vertical  position),


Sockets  for  holding  fluoroscopic  handles  for  independent

SCREEN WHEN  TABLE IS IN  VERTICAL  POSITION qr  COMBINATION  CONTROL
(SCREEN MOVES  WITH  TUBE)  ^F DIAPHRAGMS

- SPRING FOR OPERATING PLATE ,^^^  movements  OF  THE  TUBE-BOX

CHANGING MECHANISM /are  CONTROLLED  BY  THESE  HANDLES) AU.  FRICTION IS MINIMIZED BY  THE

LIBERAL  USE  OF  THE  HIGHEST


PROTECTIVE  AREA
(LEAD
LATCH FOR  STEREOSCOPIC
PLATE  CHANGING MECHANISI

COUNTERWEIGHT  CABLES
(BALANCES  TUBE  BOX  AT  ANY  ANGLE

THIRD  TERMINAL FOR

ADJUSTMENT  OF  TUBE  VACU

WIRES  CONNECT  HERE

MAKES  BOTH SIDES  OF  TABLE

ACCESSIBLE


QUALITY BALL BEARINGS


STEREOSCOPIC PLATE  CHANGING MECHANISM


PROTECTIVE AREA

(LEAD)

FOOT REST LOCK


COUNTERWEIGHT

ES PROPER BALANCE  TO  Th
TABLE  IRRESPECTIVE  OF  POSI-
TION OF  TUBE  BOX OR
ANGLE  OF  TABLE)


FLOOR LOCK


FLOOR  LOCK


Fig. 68 — Combination Table and  Radioscope.
(Used  as  Horizontal  Radioscope)


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


079


The  duration  of  exposure  is  expressed  in  niilliainpere-seconds,  and
these  are  obtained  by  multiplying  the  amount  of  current  (in  milliam-
peres)  flowing  through  the  tube  with  the  duration  of  exposure  (in  sec-
onds) ;  e.  g.,  if  we  are  using  5  milliamperes  of  current  for  10  seconds,  it
means  50  milliampere-seconds,  and  it  is  the  same  as  if  we  used  10  milli-
amperes for  5  seconds,  or  2.5  milliamperes  for  20  seconds.


Fig.  69 — Combination  Table  and  Radioscope (shown
in  Fig.  68). (Used  as  Vertical  Radioscope)


The  best  method  for  determining  exposure,  without  a  second's  watch,
is  to  count  seven  as  fast  as  possible  for  each  second  of  time.

The  milliampere-meter  is  used  in  connection  wdth  a  transformer  to
determine  the  current  which  passes  through  the  X-ray  tube,  but  is  of
no  value  with  the  portable  coil  or  a  static  machine.


680


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  liiiyers'  Guide


Fig.  70 — Combination  Table  and  Radioscope  (shown  in  Fig.  68).
(Used  as  Radiographic  Table)


Developing  the  Negative

Having  exposed  the  plates,  return  them  to  the  dark  room  and  develop
them  in  the  same  manner  as  if  ordinary  photographic  plates.

The  following  formulae  are  exceptionally  satisfactory  in  developing
Paragon  and  other  X-ray  plates:

Developer

Solution  A  Solution  B

Water 64  ozs. Water 64  ozs.

Metol  or  Motol 60  grs. Sodium  Sulphite,  dry,  3%  ozs.

Hydroquinone 2  ozs. Sodium  Carbonate,  dry,  5  ozs.

Sodium  Sulphite,  dry.  .3%  ozs. Potassium  Carbonate,  2 V2  ozs.

Potassium  Bromide  . .  180  grs.

Mix  equal  parts  of  solutions  A  and  B,  at  a  temperature  of  65  to  68
degrees  Fahr.  Develop  until  the  plates  appear  almost  the  same  on  front
and  back,  or  until  the  ruby  light  will  not  show  through  them.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


681


Fixing  Bath
No.  1  No.  2

Water 120  ozs. Water 80  ozs.

Hypo  Crystals  4  lbs. Sodium  Sulphite,  dry,.  .  4  ozs.

Sulphuric  Acid,  liquid,  V2  oz.
Dissolve  in  the  exact  order  given. Add  No.  2  to  No.  1  while  stirring
rapidly.


Fig.  71 — Switchboard  Type  Interriipterless  Machine

Radiotherapy

Radiotherapy,  or  the  treatment  by  means  of  the  X-rays,  must  be  con-
sidered from  two  points  of  view: Stimulation  and  Inhibition.

Small  doses  (short  or  mild  exposures)  of  the  X-rays  produce  the
stimulation  of  the  tissue  (increase  the  cytolitic  growth  activity  with
more  rapid  mitosis,  and  increase  the  number  of  cells).

Large  doses  (considerably  long  exposures)  produce  an  intensely  in-
hibitory action  (cause  pyknosis  and  nuclear  disintegration,  and  later
vacualization  and  rupture  of  the  cytoplasm,  resulting  in  the  death  of  the
cell),  arresting  all  active  processes,  and  destroying  tissues  of  varying
resistance,  relative  to  the  character  of  the  exposure  and  the  suscepti-
bility of  the  tissue  to  the  overwhelming  influence  of  the  radiations.


682  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

The  cells  of  low  vitality  are  more  susceptible  to  the  action  ot  the  X-rays
than  normal  cells  (which  have  many  times  the  resistance  of  diseased
cells).  Due  to  this  fact,  the  diseased  cells  are  destroyed  and  eliminated
from  the  tissues,  while  the  normal  cells,  being  able  to  resist  longer,  after
discontinuance  of  the  exposure  revive  to  their  normal  condition.  There-
fore, it  may  be  concluded,  that  if  rays  of  a  correct  penetration  are  em-
ployed, and  the  part  is  not  overexposed,  diseased  tissue  will  be  de-
stroyed, and  adjacent  tissue  will  remain  intact.

Indications

Radiotherapy  increases  leucocytosis  and  phagocytosis. It  decidedly

lessens  hemorrhages  and  discharges,  relieves  pain,  is  of  great  value  in

treating  post  operative  cases  to  prevent  recurrence,  and  in  all  hopeless,

inoperable  cases  by  increasing  the  vitality,  prolongs  the  life  of  the  pa-


Fig.  72 — -Portable  X-ray  coil.

tient.  Being  able  to  cause  disappearance  of  malignant  masses,  all  cases
of  malignant  disease  should  be  given  the  benefit  of  any  possible  help
that  may  be  derived  from  it.

In  menorrhagia  and  myomata,  it  should  be  employed  in  any  case  in
which  operation  seems  inadvisable.

In  exophthalmic  goitre,  splenic  leukaemia  and  pseudo-leukaemia,  it
is  a  valuable  adjunct  to  other  methods  of  treatrnent.

It  is  a  remedy  par  excellence  in  acne,  alopecia  areata,  blastomycosis,
cancer  of  soft  internal  organs,  eczema,  epithelioma,  favus,  hyperhidro-
sis,  hypertrichosis,  keloid,  lupus,  pruritis,  psoriasis,  rodent  ulcer,  sar-
coma, sycosis,  trachoma,  tuberculosis  of  the  bones,  etc.

Method  of  Application

Whenever  using  X-rays  for  therapeutic  work,  we  must  endeavor  to
get  sufficient  eftect  with  the  minimum  risk  of  producing  severe  X-ray
burns.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


683


Tube. — It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  tube  be  of  proper  vacuum
(penetration)  to  reach  only  the  afiected  tissues,  as  the  rays  from  a  lower
tube  would  not  reach  them,  while  the  rays  from  a  higher  tube  would
penetrate  undesirably  deeper  tissue.  For  radiotherapeutic  work,  only
tubes  which  allow  perfect  control  of  vacuum  should  be  employed.  The
ordinary  X-ray  tubes,  which  constantly  change  their  vacuum,  are
useless.

Voltage. — When  treating  superficial  lesions,  in  order  to  obtain  a  de-
sired quantity  of  soft  rays,  low  voltage  should  be  employed,  while  for
deeper  lesions  higher  voltage  is  necessary.


Fig.  73 — Interrupterless  Transformer,

Distance. — The  higher  the  vacuum  of  the  tube,  and,  consequently,  the
greater  the  penetration  of  the  rays,  the  further  away  the  tube  must  be
placed  from  the  part  treated.  The  good  working  rule  is  to  place  the  pa-
tient about  five  inches  further  from  the  surface  of  the  tube  than  the
greatest  distance  which  the  tube  can  force  a  spark  across  the  spark-gap.
Therefore,  the  distance  for  a  low  tube  will  be  from  6  to  8  inches;  for  a
medium  tube,  from  8  to  10  inches;  and  for  a  high  tube,  from  10  to  20
inches.

If  there  is  no  evidence  of  reaction,  the  distance  should  be  reduced
with  every  other  treatment  for  one-half  of  an  inch,  until  the  tube  is  at
a  distance  of  about  five  inches.


684


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Duijcrs'  Guide


Duration  of  treatment. — The  duration  of  the  treatment  depends  upon
the  generator  employed.  With  an  induction  coil  or  a  transformer,  three
to  ten  minutes;  Nvith  a  static  macliinc,  five  to  twelve  minutes.  The  best
procedure  is  to  begin  the  treatment  with  the  exposures  not  exceeding
five  minutes'  duration,  and  if,  after  the  end  of  two  weeks'  treatment,  no
symptoms  develop,  the  length  of  exposure  may  be  gradually  increased
up  to  twelve  minutes,  the  maximum  exposure  recommended,  except  in
some  very  rare  cases.


Fig.  74 — Large  Interrupterless  Transformer.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


685


Frequency  of  treatment. — It  is  safer  to  use  low  voltage  and  repeat  the
treatment  several  times,  than  to  use  more  powerful  exposures  less  fre-
quently. With  the  usual  low  voltage,  treatments  may  be  given  daily
for  one  or  two  weeks,  then  every  other  day,  without  danger  of  produc-
ing any  marked  degree  of  dermatitis.

If  the  rays  produce  any  local  inflammation,  second  treatment  should
not  be  administered  to  the  same  area  until  the  reaction  has  subsided.


f?HEO  STAT

Fig.  75 — Diagram  showing  the  com-
mutation of  the  higli  tension  alter-
nating current  into  a  direct  cur-
rent, as  it  occurs  in  the  interrupt-
erless  transformer.


686


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Filtration. — In  order  to  obtain  results  in  the  treatment  of  malignant
diseases,  fibroid  tumors,  and  other  deep-seated  conditions,  it  is  neces-
sary to  employ  large  doses  of  the  penetrating  rays.  Owing  to  the  dan-
ger of  dermatitis,  this  cannot  be  accomplished  with  mixed  radiations,
and  it  becomes  necessary  to  filter  the  soft  or  less  penetrating  rays  of
greater  wave  length,  which  produce  a  destructive  action  upon  the  super-
ficial tissue,  and  to  allow  only  the  more  penetrating  rays  to  reach  the
tissue.


Fig.  76 — Small  Interrupterless  Transformer.


Pf abler  uses  sole  leather  filter,  and  to  this  he  adds  aluminum  from
one  to  three  millimeters  in  thickness.  This  is  about  the  standard,  as  it
is  at  present  used.  The  absorption  power  of  one  millimeter  of  pure
aluminum  is  shown  to  be  equal  to  that  of  a  layer  of  water  or  soft  tissue
of  approxiniately  one  centimeter  in  thickness.

After-treatment. — If  the  treatment  has  been  given  to  a  deep-seated
organ,  or  if  the  skin  is  unbroken,  no  dressing  is  required,  but  if  an  ul-
cerated area  has  been  treated,  a  good  dressing  must  be  applied.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


687


In  order  to  prevent  spreading  of  infection,  the  protective  covering,  or
any  other  appliance  which  comes  in  contact  with  the  patient,  must  be
thoroughly  sterilized  before  further  use.

Dangers  of  the  X-rays

The  Roentgen,  or  X-rays,  if  administered  in  excess,  produce  at  first
dermatitis,  which,  if  the  treatment  is  continued,  may  pass  on  to  ulcer-
ation, and  sometimes  the  ulcerations  may  develop  the  so-called  X-ray


Fig.  77 — Rear  view  of  Fig.  76.

cancer,  when  surgical  assistance  is  required.  This  may  occur  in  either
patient  or  operator.

The  symptoms  of  over-exposure  to  the  X-rays  are:  itching,  burning,
redness,  swelling,  pigmentation,  loosening  of  the  hair,  etc.  If  these  ap-
pear, the  treatment  must  be  immediately  discontinued,  unless  it  is  de-
sired to  produce  dermatitis.

These  symptoms  may  appear  at  the  time  of  exposure,  or  from  a  few
hours  to  several  weeks  after  exposure.  In  most  cases,  however,  the
symptoms  appear  in  from  three  to  fifteen  days  after  exposure.


688


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biii/rrs'  Guide


The  inflammatory  effects  produced  by  the  X-rays  upon  the  tissues  are
divided  into  four  classes:

First:  Dry  dermatitis,  which,  if  properly  produced,  is  harmless  if
the  part  affected  is  not  irritated  with  the  application  of  strong  chem-
icals (especially  carbolic  acid,  which  of  itself  may  cause  gangrene),
and  if  let  alone  will  subside  of  itself;

Second:  Dermatitis  with  the  formation  of  vesicles  and  blebs,  but
without  deeper  envolvement;

Third: Destruction  of  epidermis;

Fourth:  Destruction  not  only  involving  the  entire  epidermis,  but  the
corium  as  well,  and  also  the  underlying  tissue  to  a  great  extent.


Fig.  78 — Portable  X-ray  and  Electro-
therapeutical  outfit.

Prevention  of  Burns  and  Other  Conditions  Arising  from

the  X-rays

All  the  conditions  arising  from  exposure  to  the  X-rays  in  which  the
processes  of  metabolism  have  been  inhibited,  as  when  there  is  sterility,
lowered  vitality  of  tissues,  or  when  the  secretions  or  other  functions
have  been  suspended,  may  be  relieved  by  the  application  of  radiant
light  and  heat  from  either  an  incandescent  or  arc  light.

It  is  safe  to  say  that  there  are  few  cases,  indeed,  who  are  exposed  to
the  X-ray  to  the  extent  of  producing  marked  dermatitis,  that  could  not
be  controlled  by  the  application  of  radiant  light  and  heat  with  requisite
energy.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  stimulating  effect  of  radiant
energy  from  luminous  sources  neutralizes  (corrects)  the  inhibitory  ef-
fect of  the  X-rays.

Employing  the  high  frequency  vacuum  tube  (but  not  strong  sparks)
to  the  point  of  producing  some  reddening  of  the  skin  in  conjunction
with  the  X-rays,  we  are  able  to  use  a  larger  dose  of  the  X-rays  without
the  corresponding  degree  of  danger.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujcrs (iiiide


689


Fig.  79 — Dental  X-ray  and  High
Frequency  Generator.

Idiosyncrasy  to  the  X-ray  Burns

Most  of  the  authorities  agree  that  the  tissues  of  different  individuals
react  to  the  influence  of  the  X-rays  in  different  ways,  certain  individ-
uals developing  a  decided  reaction  after  the  first  treatment,  whereas
others  resisting  the  action  of  these  raj^s,  so  that  we  are  able  to  develop
reaction  only  after  from  one  to  two  months  of  daily  treatments.  In
order  to  exercise  extreme  caution.  Dr.  W.  Franklin  Coleman  gives  three
preliminary  exposures  of  five  minutes  each,  with  the  tube  at  a  distance
of  six  inches,  on  three  successive  days,  and  then  waits  three  weeks  to
see  if  any  reaction  appears.

General  Remarks

"Cross-Fire"  Method. — In  the  treatment  of  deep-seated  conditions,  es-
pecially in  cancer  of  the  uterus  and  fibroids,  "Cross-Fire"  method  should
be  employed. This  is  accomplished  by  passing  the  rays  through  a  num-


Fig.  80 — Views  showing  how  Dental  Indicator
is  attached  to  Tube  Stand,  and  how  same  is
used  in  connection  with  Dental  Film  Tunnel.


690  Universal  Natiiropulhic  Directory  and  Ihiycrs'  Guide

ber  ol"  ditterent  small  squares  of  exposure,  all  more  or  less  concentrated
upon  the  center  of  the  tumor,  so  that  the  tumor  itself  will  receive  a  great
number  of  maximum  doses  (through  the  ditferent  square  surfaces),  and
the  superlicial  tissue  will  not  be  alfected  (because  each  square  surface
will  receive  only  one  maximum  dose) .

The  different  rays  (soft,  medium  and  hard)  produce  different  bio-
logical effects,  and  for  that  reason  many  superficial  lesions,  which  do
not  yield  to  treatment  with  rays  of  lower  or  medium  penetration,  dis-
appear when  rays  of  lower  or  higher  penetration  are  employed.

The  X-rays  injure  the  protoplasm,  or  more  frequently,  the  nuclei  of
the  cells.  This  injury,  however,  differs  quantitatively  in  accordance
with  the  amount  and  character  of  the  rays  absorbed  by  the  cells,  and
the  specific  susceptibility  of  the  cells  to  the  action  of  the  rays.  When
only  slightly  injured,  cells  may  completely  recover,  while  if  the  injury
is  severe,  the  cell  dies.

All  the  tissues  of  the  organism  may  be  killed  by  a  sufficiently  large
quantity  of  rays.

"Any  ray  for  deep  penetration,  or  beyond  eight  or  ten  centimeters  be-
low the  surface,  is  worth  nothing  for  therapeutic  effect,  unless  backed
by  a  parallel  spark-gap  of  at  least  eight  inches."


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  691


CHAPTER  XVI

RADIUM-THERAPY


RADIUM,  a  metallic  radio-active  element,  discovered  in  1896  by
Madame  Curie  of  Paris,  is  obtained  in  small  quantities  from  cer-
tain Bohemian  mines,  where  it  occurs  in  the  pitch-blende.
In  addition  to  heat  and  light  rays,  radium  gives  off  constantly
and  spontaneously  alpha,  beta  and  gamma  radiations.  The  gamma
rays,  which  are  able  to  pass  through  many  substances  opaque  to  light,
are  similar  to  the  X-rays,  and  when  administered  for  a  considerable
length  of  time,  produce  an  intensely  inhibitory  action.  The  beta  rays
have  less  penetrating  power  than  gamma  rays,  and  are  similar  to  the
cathode  rays. The  alpha  rays  possess  very  slight  penetrating  power.

Radium  therapy  embraces  the  consideration  of  both  radium  radia-
tion and  radium  emanation.

The  alpha,  beta  and  gamma  radiations  exercise  remarkable  curative
eftects  when  used  in  the  treatment  of  certain  morbid  processes  of  the
gangrenous,  inflammatory  and  cancerous  orders.

The  action  of  these  radiations  on  the  tissues  is  similar  to  the  action
of  the  X-rays,  and  varies  according  to  the  dosage  and  filtration,  from
a  mere  modification  of  the  cells  without  ulceration  to  a  destructive
effect.

Although  by  no  means  a  specific  for  the  treatment  of  cancer,  sarcoma,
and  other  malignant  and  benign  growths,  as  is  erroneously  claimed,
radium  acts  better  than  anything  else  we  have  at  present  in  a  large
number  of  such  cases;  and  the  more  superficial  the  disease,  the  more
hopeful  the  outlook.

In  too  advanced  and  inoperable,  malignant  cases,  it  alleviates  pain,
lessens  hemorrhage,  discharge  and  fetor,  and  in  many  instances  heals
an  ulcerated  surface.

In  the  treatment  of  rodent  ulcer,  lupus,  parotid  tumors,  cancer  of  the
rectum  and  cervix  uteri,  aft'ections  of  the  ear,  nose,  mouth  or  other  mu-
cous surfaces  where  it  is  difficult  to  reach  an  ulcerated  spot  by  any  other
means,  it  has  proved  of  special  value.

In  non-malignant  conditions,  such  as  naevi,  angioma,  cicatricial  tissue
(resulting  from  burns),  eczema,  psoriasis,  pruritis,  tuberculous  condi-
tions of  the  skin,  mucous  membranes  or  glands,  the  results  are  even  more
gratifying  than  in  the  malignant  conditions.

Since  the  action  of  radium  is  similar  to  the  action  of  the  X-rays,  rad-
ium furnishes  possibilities  of  application  w^here  the  X-raj^s  are  not  us-
able, either  because  it  seems  desirable  to  apply  the  rays  continually  for
a  length  of  time  that  could  not  be  attained  l3y  X-ray  tubes,  or  if  a  tumor
cannot  be  reached  by  the  X-rays.


692  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Application

In  therapeutics,  radium  is  employed  in  the  form  of  pure  radium  bro-
mide, ciiloiiUe,  sulpliale,  carbonate,  or  nitrate  and  radium  barium
(wliich  is  a  compound  with  barium).

In  order  to  avoid  alpha  radiations,  either  of  these  (radium  salts)  is
enclosed  in  a  metal  tube  (the  best  for  this  purpose  being  platinum),
which  absorbs  the  alpha  rays  and  allows  only  those  of  the  highly  pen-
etrative order  to  gain  access  to  the  part  under  treatment.

Protection  of  the  Patient  and  Operator
Since  the  action  of  radium  is  similar  to  the  action  of  X-rays,  the
surrounding  healthy  skin  should  be  protected  from  the  action  of  the
rays  by  a  sheet  of  lead,  paper  or  rubber  laid  over  the  part,  with  an  open-
ing cut  in  it,  over  which  the  radium  is  administered,  and  the  operator
should  not  handle  radium  with  uncovered  hands  more  than  is  abso-
lutely necessary,  otherwise  a  troublesome  radio-dermatitis  may  be  set  up.

Dosage

The  period  of  application  depends  upon  the  individual  case.

The  amounts  of  radium  usually  employed  range  from  5  up  to  200
or  more  milligrams.  The  dosage  of  radium  is  usually  expressed  in
milligramme-hours,  and  these  are  obtained  by  multiplying  the  milli-
grammes of  radium  employed  with  the  length  of  the  application  in
hours;  for  example,  100  milligrammes  of  radium  applied  for  three
hours  would  represent  300  milligramme-hours.

Method  of  Treatment

Radium  is  usually  applied  by  placing  the  end  of  the  tube  (holding
radium  salt)  against  the  part  to  be  treated,  and  keeping  it  in  place  by
means  of  an  adhesive  plaster,  or  a  strip  of  bandage,  from  thirty  min-
utes to  an  hour  or  longer,  according  to  the  effect  desired,  and  may  be
repeated  every  one,  two  or  three  days.

Another  method  of  applying  radium  is  to  place  two  or  more  tubes  at
the  opposite  sides  of  the  tumor,  so  that  the  rays  bombard  the  tissues  in
two  or  more  opposite  directions  simultaneously.  This  method  of  appli-
cation is  called  the  cross-fire  method.  After  the  treatment,  a  dressing
is  applied.  After  an  application,  usually  nothing  is  seen  unless  an  over-
dose has  been  administered,  in  which  case,  two  or  three  weeks  after,  the
patient  may  show  some  reddening  and  itching  of  the  skin  about  the  seat
of  application,  similar  to  that  seen  after  an  exposure  to  X-rays.

According  to  the  reaction  desired,  one  may  produce  further  stages  of
desquamation,  vescication,  and  ulceration.

Asepsis. — In  order  to  prevent  spreading  of  infection  from  one  patient
to  another,  after  each  treatment  it  is  advisable  to  disinfect  the  tube  with
carbolic  acid,  or  some  other  antiseptic  solution.

Radium  Emanation

Radium  is  continually  giving  off"  a  gas  called  its  emanation,  which
can  be  collected  by  special  apparatus  and  enclosed  in  glass  tubes  or
metal  cylinders.  These  tubes  and  cylinders  can  then  be  used  exactly
as  if  they  contained  radium  salts,  for  the  emanation  has  all  the  effects
of  radium,  but  it  loses  these  eff'ects  after  a  few  weeks.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  603

The  emanation  can  be  inhaled  by  patients,  or  it  can  be  absorbed  by
saline  or  otlier  liquids,  and  given  by  mouth,  or  by  subcutaneous  in-
jection.

The  great  advantage  in  making  use  of  the  emanation  is  the  remark-
able fact  that  the  original  radium  salt  sutlers  no  appreciable  loss,  though
constantly  giving  oil"  this  gas.

The  radium  emanation  introduced  into  the  body  by  inhalation,  diges-
tive tract,  or  injection,  leaves  the  body  a  few  minutes  later,  together
with  the  air  given  forth  in  exhalation,  hardly  anything  of  it  being  left
behind.  An  extremely  small  percentage  only  is  excreted  in  the  urine.
A  very  small  quantity  passes  into  and  out  of  the  body  through  the  skin.
So  far,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  perceive  any  injurious  effect  whatever
produced,  even  by  very  large  doses.

The  blood  carries  the  emanation  introduced  into  the  system  as  far  as
the  cells  of  the  organism,  where  the  emanation  and  its  constant  re-
sulting products  of  decomposition  produce  their  biological  effects.

Radium  emanation  not  only  increases  and  accelerates  the  body  fer-
ments (ferment  of  pancreas,  pepsin,  autolitic  ferment,  diastic  ferment,
etc.),  but  performs  further  essential  service  by  converting  insoluble
waste  debris,  such  as  uric  acid  combinations,  into  soluble  compounds
which  are  easily  eliminated  from  the  system  in  the  natural  way.

This  emanation  has  been  used  with  success  in  the  treatment  of  gout
and  diathesis  caused  by  uric  acid;  chronic  and  sub-acute  articular
rheumatism,  muscular  rheumatism  and  all  forms  of  arthritis,  neuritis,
neuralgia,  especially  ischiagra;  bronchial  asthma  and  catarrhal  diseases
of  the  respiratory  organs;  chronic  gynecological  conditions;  arterio-
sclerosis; lanciating  pains  of  locomotor  ataxia;  suppurations,  inflamma-
tions, hypertension,  etc.

Application

Radium  emanation  for  inhalation  is  obtained  from  an  inhaling  ap-
paratus, which  usually  consists  of  one  or  more  cylinders  with  filings  of
radium  or  its  solution,  and  a  ventilator  driven  by  the  electric  current,  or
a  rubber  bulb  for  the  diffusion  of  the  emanation.

For  the  reason  that  the  emanation  inhaled  again  leaves  the  body  a
few  minutes  later  by  exhalation,  without  being  exhausted  into  its  active
eflect,  it  is  necessary  to  place  the  patient  in  an  atmosphere  which  has  a
constant  percentage  of  emanation.  This  is  achieved  Ijv  placing  the  pa-
tient in  a  small  room,  the  doors  and  windows  of  which  are  kept  closed
during  the  treatment,  generally  lasting  about  two  hours.

Radium  is  also  utilized  in  the  form  of  water  baths,  mud  baths,  com-
presses, injections,  drinking  solutions,  etc.

Meso-thorium

Meso-thorium,  a  newly  discovered  radio-active  material,  possesses
chemical  properties  very  similar  to  those  of  radium.  It  emits  alpha,
beta  and  gamma  radiations  not  very  different  from  those  of  radium,
and  from  the  therapeutic  point  of  view,  its  use  should  be  equally  as
serviceable  as  radium  itself.  On  account  of  its  lower  cost,  meso-thorium
bromide  has  been  largely  used,  of  late,  in  place  of  radium,  for  the  treat-
ment of  skin  affections  and  growths,  and  for  superficial  conditions;  it
is  reported  to  be  quite  as  good,  or  even  better,  than  radium.


694  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Unijcrs Guide


CHAPTER  XVII

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION


OF  all  the  apparatus  of  mechano-therapy,  the  vibrator  is  the  only
one  which  accomplishes  something  which  cannot  be  accomplished
by  any  other  means. No  human  hand  is  capable  of  cummunicat-
ing  to  the  tissues  such  rapid,  steady  and  prolonged  vibrations,
and  certain  kneading  and  percussion  movements,  as  the  vibrator.

A  good  vibrator  consists  of  a  motor  rotated  by  means  of  an  electric
current,  which  can  be  regulated  to  produce  slow  and  rapid  vibrations,
as  desired.

There  are  two  types  of  motor  vibrators  employed,  viz.,  pedestal  (Fig.
81)  and  hand  vibrators.  In  the  first,  the  motion  is  conveyed  from  a  mo-
tor to  the  vibrator  by  means  of  a  flexible  shaft  (this  is  the  more  power-
ful, and  more  easy  to  regulate,  but  is  less  convenient).  In  the  second,
or  portable  type,  a  small  motor  is  placed  within  the  vibrator  itself.

Application

Vibration  is  applied  either  centripetally  or  centrifugally.

Centripetal  vibration  is  applied  toward  the  heart,  following  the  course
of  the  large  veins  particularly  (e.  g.,  the  course  of  the  median  vein  on
the  median  line  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  forearm,  and  the  ulnar
along  the  inner  side  of  the  forearm,  both  anteriorly  and  posteriorly,  the
basilic  on  the  inner  and  the  cephalic  on  the  outer  side  of  the  arms.)

Centrifugal  vibration  is  applied  away  from  the  heart  in  a  circular
direction.

Centripetal  vibration  enlarges  the  vessels,  increasing  the  flow  of  blood
and  accelerating  the  circulation  of  lymph  fluid,  thus  very  thoroughly
renovating  the  parts  concerned,  flooding  away  waste  matter  or  debris,
relieving  the  abnormal  condition,  and  permitting  the  continuance  of
normal  circulation.

Centrifugal  vibration  lessens  the  flow  of  blood  and  lymph,  and  pro-
duces soothing  and  derivative  effects  on  organs,  c.  g.,  relieves  oedema.

Slow,  vibratory  stroke  (frequently  interrupted)  applied  for  a  short
period,  is  stimulating,  while  rapid  and  prolonged  vibration  is  inhibitory.

Indications

Mechanical  vibration  is  valuable  as  a  preventative  of  disease,  as  well
as  a  treatment  of  disease.  It  is  indicated  in  cases  where  ordinary  mas-
sage would  be  of  service,  especially  in  the  treatment  of  constipation,
gastric  dilatation,  slow  digestion,  cnteroptosis,  hepatic  and  splenic  con-
gestion; catarrh  of  the  nose,  throat,  larynx  and  stomach;  affections  of
the  heart;  gout,  rheumatism,  lumbago,  sciatica,  neuralgia,  neurasthenia,
obesity,  insomnia,  spinal  curvature,  locomotor  ataxia,  deafness,  head-
ache, female  ailments,  muscular  atrophy,  injuries  to  nerves,  contrac-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directori;  and  Ihii/rrs;'  Guide


095


tiires,  etc. It  is  also  employed  in  the  treatment  of  sprained  muscles,  dis-
tended tendons,  fractured  bones,  etc.

Contra-indications:  Mechanical  vibration  is  contra-indicated  in  an-
eurism, arterio-sclerosis,  acute  inflammations,  erysipelas,  malignant
tumors,  pathologic  changes  in  the  blood  vessels,  purulent  local  condi-
tions and  tuberculosis.

Spinal  Vibration

Vibration  applied  to  the  spine  thrills  every  nerve  center  of  the  spinal
cord,  restoring  them  to  normal  vibration,  and  applied  to  the  abdomen
stimulates  digestion  and  intestinal  activity.

Best  vibratory  effects  are,  however,  derived  reflexly,  applying  vibra-
tion to  the  various  ganglia  of  the  sympathetic  nervous  system.  In  this
connection,  it  is  essential  to  remember  the  following:


Fig.  81— Vibrator
(Pedestal  Type)

I.  That  the  sympathetic  nervous  system  is  largely  inhibitory  in  ac-
tion, while  the  vaso-motor  is  stimulating;

II.  That  the  stimulation  of  the  sympathetic  causes  vaso-constriction
(contraction  of  blood  vessels),  while  the  stimulation  of  the  vaso-motor
causes  vaso-dilation  (dilatation  of  blood  vessels).

A  slow  vibratory  stroke  applied  over  the  posterior  nerve  roots  in
the  intravertebral  spaces  between  the  VII  C.  and  I  D.  vertebrae,  corrects
and  strengthens  the  heart's  impulses  (overcomes  an  irregular  or  inter-
mittent heart  action) ;  opens  the  nasal  passages  and  shrinks  the  con-
gested membranes  (therefore  indicated  in  acute  sinusitis,  acute  cor^'za
and  hay  fever) ;  affects  the  arterial  supply  of  the  thyroid  gland  (indi-
cated in  goitre) ;  lowers  the  blood  pressure,  etc.

When  vibrating  between  the  VII  C.  and  I  D.  vertebrae,  it  is,  however,
necessary  to  carefully  observe  the  effects  on  the  heart,  for  it  is  possible


696  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

to  ovcrstimulate  tlic  cardia  and  produce  depression.  If  there  are  no
signs  of  weakening  observed  at  the  pulse,  or  no  noticeable  dyspnoea,  vi-
bration may  be  continued  up  to  live  minutes.  If  such  a  condition  should
occur,  it  may  be  corrected  by  vibration  for  a  few  minutes  in  the  intraver-
tebral  spaces  from  the  IX  D.  to  XII  D.,  thereby  causing  cardiac  dilata-
tion. Too  long  (over  two  minutes)  or  too  heavy  vibration  between  the
VII  C.  and  I  D.  vertebrae  will  cause  extreme  dryness  of  the  nose,  throat
and  mouth.  Vibration  at  the  intravertebral  spaces  between  the  trans-
verse processes  of  the  VI  D.  and  VII  D.  vertebrae  raises  the  blood  pres-
sure. Slow  vibration  at  the  IV  L.  vertebra  contracts  the  bowels,  bladder
and  uterus.

Vibration  may  be  employed  in  exciting  any  other  reflex  equally  as
well  as  concussion.

General  Remarks

When  treating  an  organ  or  a  group  of  muscles  with  vibration,  the  ap-
plication usually  lasts  about  five  minutes,  and  when  the  whole  body  is
treated,  from  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes.

General  vibratory  treatment  is,  however,  very  rarely  indicated,  but
when  used  should  be  exceedingly  short.  The  patient  should  be  clad  in
a  loose  robe,  and  all  parts  except  that  to  be  treated  should  be  covered.
The  order  preferred  is  that  used  in  general  massage,  viz.,  (1)  Arms;
(2)  Chest;  (3)  Legs;  (4)  Abdomen;  ^(5)  Hips;  (6)  Back;  (7)  Head;
(8)  Neck.  At  the  first  signs  of  fatigue  shown  by  the  patient,  the  app'i-
cation  should  be  discontinued.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrctorij  and  liuijf'rs'  Guide  697


CHAPTER  XVIII

BLOOD  PRESSURE


5  INGE  some  forms  of  electrical  treatment  reduce,  while  others  in-
crease the  blood  pressure,  in  order  to  apply  electricity  judiciously,
the  practitioner  must  be  familiar  with  the  patient's  blood  pressure.
A  complete  examination  of  the  blood  pressure  involves  a  deter-
mination of  the  systolic,  diastolic  and  pulse  pressure,  because  in  many
instances  high  or  low  systolic  pressure  are  compensated,  and  in  others,
what  is  apparently  a  normal  systolic  pressure  may  prove  to  be  patho-
logical when  viewed  in  its  relation  to  diastolic  and  pulse  pressure.

The  information  gained  by  complete  blood  pressure  examinations
indicates  the  proper  treatment,  the  dosage,  and  the  interval  of  admin-
istration.

Systolic  or  Maximal  Pressure  (produced  by  the  contraction  of  the
left  ventricle)  represents  the  total  heart  energy,  and  is  the  highest  blood
pressure  in  the  aorta  after  the  contraction  of  the  left  ventricle.

Diastolic  or  Minimal  Pressure  represents  the  pressure  maintained
solely  by  the  elastic  recoil  of  the  whole  arterial  system  at  the  end  of
diastole.  It  is  the  resistance  which  the  systolic  pressure  must  overcome
before  it  can  propel  the  blood  over  the  body.

Pulse  Pressure  is  the  excess  of  pressure  over  and  above  that  required
to  overcome  the  diastolic  pressure,  and  represents  the  amount  of  force
which  actually  carries  on  the  circulation.

Normal  Blood  Pressure

Under  normal  conditions,  the  vaso-motor  system  maintains  a  recip-
rocal balance  between  the  systolic  and  diastolic  pressures,  while  in
disease  this  relation  is  disturbed.  The  normal  systolic  pressure,  in  male
adults  between  20  and  60,  ranges  from  120  to  140  mm.  Hg.  According
to  Faught,  the  normal  average  systolic  pressure  can  be  determined
for  any  age  by  considering  the  normal  systolic  pressure  of  a  healthy
male  adult  at  the  age  of  20  to  be  120  mm.  Hg.  Then  for  any  two  years
of  life  over  twenty,  add  1  mm.  Hg.

In  females,  the  pressure  is  about  10  mm.  Hg.  lower  than  in  males.  In
children  from  73  mm.  Hg.  at  one  year  to  105  mm.  Hg.  at  twelve  years.

The  normal  diastolic  pressure  equals  approximately  tw^o-thirds  of
the  systolic  pressure,  and  ranges  from  60  to  105  mm.  Hg.

The  Normal  Pulse  Pressure  equals  approximately  one-third  of  the
systolic  pressure,  and  ranges  from  25  to  50  mm.  Hg.

The  normal  blood  pressure  being  modified  by  a  number  of  normal
or  physiological  conditions  (position,  excitement,  digestion,  exercise,
time  of  the  day,  etc.)  is  therefore  subjected  to  some  variations.


698


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Abnormal  Blood  Pressure

Any  sustained  systolic  pressure  below  100  mm.,  or  above  150  mm.,
should  be  considered  pathological.  It  should,  however,  be  remembered
that  as  one  grows  older  the  systolic  pressure  increases,  because  the  har-
dening of  the  arteries  increases  (and  consequently  the  diastolic  pressure
maintained  by  the  elastic  recoil  decreases) ;  therefore,  that  a  person  of
over  60  may  be  comparatively  healthy  with  a  systolic  pressure  slightly
over  150  mm.  Hg.


ta

^

mmBM

^1

1

^

jlP


kB^ IliB'ImB

TMB^ii i^^^^^B

m

n  ,^^

Wk '*^*  q^^B

\

m^

I

j^^

^■^f

l|

K^Niitf

^^PMUl

1

B^

^!^^^

'^■J


Fig.  82— The  Auscultation  Method  with  the
Mercurial  Sphygmomanometer.

A  sustained  diastolic  pressure  of  110  mm.  or  over,  and  a  pulse  pressure
below  25  mm.  or  above  50  mm.,  indicates  a  diseased  condition,  or  at
least  approaching  disease.

It  should  be  remembered  that:

(a)  A  low  systolic  pressure  (110  mm.  Hg.  or  under),  especially  if
accompanied  by  a  low  pulse  pressure  (below  25  mm.  Hg.)  suggests  tu-
berculosis;

(b)  In  nephritis  and  arteriosclerosis,  the  diastolic,  as  well  as  systolic,
pressure  is  ordinarily  increased;


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bm/ers'  Guide


(599


(c)  In  fevers,  usually  the  diastolic  pressure  is  low,  while  the  systolic
pressure  is  more  frequently  high;

(d)  In  disturbance  of  compensation,  systolic  and  diastolic  pressure
are  both  low;

(e)  The  high  pulse  pressure  may  be  due  to  a  fall  of  the  diastolic  pres-
sure, or  to  a  considerable  rise  in  the  systolic  pressure  with  relatively
little  change  in  the  diastolic;

(f)  That  there  is  a  very  intimate  relation  between  the  pulse  rate  and
the  diastolic  pressure,  e.  g.,  in  a  strong  heart  the  pulse  is  slow,  diastolic
pressure  is  low,  and  the  pulse  pressure  is  high,  while  in  a  weak  heart  the
pulse  is  rapid,  diastolic  pressure  is  high,  and  the  pulse  pressure  is  low.

The  abnormal  blood  pressure  is  classified  into  Hypertension  or  High
Blood  Pressure,  and  Hypotension  or  Low  Blood  Pressure.

Hypertension  (High  Blood  Pressure)  is  usually  found  in  Arteriosclero-
sis, Angina  Pectoris,  Aortic  Insufficiency,  Cerebral  Hemorrhage,  Cirrho-
sis of  Liver,  Eclampsia,  Emphysema,  Gout,  Migraine,  Nephritis  (chron-
ic). Lead  Poisoning,  Toxemias,  Uremia.

Hypotension  (Low  Blood  Pressure)  is  usually  found  in  Acute  Dis-
eases, Anaemia,  Chlorosis,  Cardiac  Dilatation,  Cholera,  Delirium  (al-
coholic), Diabetes,  Diarrhea,  Exhaustion,  Hemorrhage  (internal  or  ex-
ternal). Pulmonary  Tuberculosis,  Rheumatoid  Arthritis,  Shock  and
Collapse.

Sphygmomanometry

Method  of  Determining  Systolic,  Diastolic  and  Pulse  Pressure

Systolic,  diastolic  and  pulse  pressure  is  rapidly  and  accurately  ob-
tained by  means  of  an  instrument  called  a  sphygmomanometer,  of  which
there  are  two  principal  types,  viz.,  the  mercury,  and  the  diaphragm  type.

The  action  of  the  mercury  sphygmomanometer  depends  on  opposing
the  pressure  of  a  column  of  mercuiy  in  a  U-shaped  tube,  with  the  pres-
sure of  the  blood  in  an  artery,  while  in  the  diaphragm  type,  the  pressure
of  the  blood  in  an  artery  causes  an  indirect,  internal  pressure  on  sensi-
tive diaphragm  chambers,  and  shows  plainly  every  action  of  the  heart
by  the  hand  on  the  dial.

There  are  two  methods  of  determining  blood  pressure  by  means  of
a  sphygmomanometer,  viz.,  the  method  of  auscultation,  and  the  method
of  palpation.  The  auscultation  method,  originated  l3y  Karatkoff,  of
Russia,  is,  however,  the  only  accurate  one  by  which  the  practitioner
can  exactly  determine  diastolic  pressure.

Directions  for  Examination

Place  the  patient  in  a  comfortable  sitting  or  reclining  position,  with
the  arm  on  a  desk  or  table,  and  the  forearm  semi-flexed  and  supinated,
so  as  to  entirely  relax.  Place  the  band  (sleeve)  containing  a  flat  rubber
bag  over  the  bare  left  arm,  over  the  brachial  artery  (above  the  elbow) ;
wrap  it  around  the  arm  as  if  it  was  a  bandage,  and  tuck  the  last  few
inches  under  the  preceding  fold.  Connect  the  rubber  tubes  leading  from
the  band,  one  with  the  instrument,  and  the  other  with  the  bulb  or  pump,
and  examine  either  by  auscultation  or  by  palpation.


700  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide

Method  of  Auscultation

Place  the  stethoscope  over  the  brachial  artery  just  below  the  line  of  the
band  (Figs.  82  and  83).  On  gradually  inflating  the  band,  the  first  and
second  sounds  of  the  heart  will  be  plainly  heard,  and  as  the  pressure  is
increased,  a  point  is  reached  where  all  sounds  cease.  Gradually  release
the  air  pressure  until  a  loud,  clear  thump  becomes  audible.  At  the  in-
stant the  sound  is  heard,  the  point  upon  the  instrument  marks  the
systolic  pressure.

Having  obtained  the  systolic  pressure,  continue  to  listen  over  the  ar-
tery and  release  gradually  the  air  a  few  millimeters  at  a  time,  and  you


Fig.  83^The  Auscultation  Method  with
Diaphragm  Sphygmomanometer.

will  hear  the  thumping  sound  replaced  by  a  murmur,  which  in  turn  is
followed  by  a  second  thumping  sound,  becoming  louder,  then  fainter,
which  finally  disappears.  At  the  instant  the  second  thumping  sound  is
the  loudest,  the  point  on  the  instrument  marks  the  diastolic  pressure.

Method  of  Palpation

With  one  hand,  locate  the  patient's  pulse  at  the  radial  artery  (Fig.  84),
and  with  the  other,  inflate  the  band  until  the  pulse  is  obliterated.  Grad-
ually release  the  air  pressure  until  you  feel  the  first  pulse  beat  return.
At  the  instant  the  pulse  reappears,  the  point  on  the  instrument  marks
the  systolic  pressure.

Having  obtained  the  systolic  pressure,  in  order  to  obtain  the  diastolic,
gradually  release  the  air  a  few  millimeters  at  a  time.  As  the  pressure
falls,  the  needle  fluctuates  in  rhythm  (oscillates)  with  the  pulse;  after  a
time  this  movement  becomes  less,  and  eventually  disappears.  At  the
instant  after  the  greatest  fluctuations  have  occurred,  the  point  on  the
dial  indicates  the  diastolic  pressure.

Cautions

A  complete  examination  of  the  systolic  and  diastolic  pressure  should
not  last  more  than  two  minutes,  as  prolonged  pressure  affects  the  ac-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buffers'  Guide  701

curacy,  and  causes  disagreeable  sensations.  During  the  examination,
the  patient  must  not  move  the  arm,  forearm  or  body.  In  order  to  deter-
mine accurately  the  progress  of  the  condition,  all  examinations  on  the
same  patient  must  be  taken  with  the  patient  in  the  same  position.

Pulse  Pressure

Pulse  pressure  is  obtained  by  substracting  the  diastolic  or  minimal
pressure  from  the  systolic  or  maximal  pressure.


Fig.  84— The  Palpation  Method  with
Diaphragm  Sphygniomanomeler.

By  pulse  pressure  alone,  it  is  possible  to  determine  correctly  whether
a  diseased  condition  is  compensated  for  or  not,  and  as  soon  as  the  prac-
titioners realize  this  fact,  they  will  also  realize  that  vaso-dilatation  is
not  indicated  in  every  case  of  hypertension.  When  there  is  a  normal
pulse  pressure,  with  a  corresponding  diastolic  pressure,  harm  will  be
done  by  vaso-dilatation,  because  vaso-dilatation  lowers  the  systolic  pres-
sure, while  diastolic  pressure  (due  to  the  rigid  arteries  and  the  in-
creased pulse  rate,  caused  by  the  dilated  heart)  may  remain  high,  and
as  a  result,  pulse  pressure  will  be  very  low  (so  that  the  systolic  pressure
will  not  be  sufficient  to  carry  on  the  circulation).


702


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


&


Neuropathy  Department


13


Address all communications for this department to its editor

Dr.  WILLIAM F.  HAVARD,  525  South  Ashland  Boulevard,  Chicago,  111.

Dean of the Lindlahr College of Nature Cure


m


Q


NEUROPATHY

By  WM.  F.  HAVARD,  N.  D.


Neuropathy  is  a  system  of  mechan-
ical and  thermal  treatment  which  cor-
rects perversions  of  the  human  body
by  regulating-  the  circulation,  the
nerve  mechanisms,  and  by  mechanical-
ly propelling-  the  lymph  through  the
tissues  and  lymphatic  vessels.

History

Neuropathy,  formerly  called  Me-
chano-neural  Therapy,  was  originally
elaborated  by  Drs.  John  Arnold  and
Harry  Walter,  of  Philadelphia.  Its
principles  and  practice  are  the  result
of  extensive  research  work  and  physi-
ological experiment,  which  was  car-
ried on  over  a  period  of  five  years  be-
fore the  results  were  made  known  to
the  profession.  The  system  was  of-
fered to  one  of  the  foremost  medical
colleges  in  the  country,  but  was  at
that  time  rejected.  The  founders  then
realizing  that  therapeutic  reforms
could  never  be  instituted  through  med-
ical channels,  opened  the  first  Drugless
College  in  the  East,  at  Trenton,  New
Jersey.  For  this  purpose,  they  secured
the  mansion  of  a  former  governor  of
the  State.

Numerous  medical  practitioners  be-
came interested  in  the  "new  school,"
College  was  later  moved  to  Atlantic
City,  when  the  partnership  between
Dr.  Walter  and  Dr.  Arnold  was  dis-
solved. Here  in  the  country's  greatest
resort,  the  institute  received  patients
and  students  from  all  parts  of  the
world,  and  for  a  time  the  college  could
not  supply  the  demand  for  its  gradu-
ates. Larger  quarters  and  better  fa-


cilities were  needed  to  accommodate
the  growing  band  of  students,  so  in
the  year  1904,  the  college  was  moved
to  Philadelphia.  The  work  continued
to  attract  men  and  women  of  note,
many  of  whom  are  today  the  most
successful  drugless  physicians  in  this
country.  The  college  grew  under  Dr.
Walter's  direction,  and  in  a  short  time
acquired  a  faculty  of  efficient  instruc-
tors. Among  those  connected  with
the  college  at  that  time,  who  have  since
become  factors  in  the  development  of
science,  might  be  mentioned  Dr.  Rob-
ert Formed.  Dr.  Ella  D.  Kilgus,  Dr.
Sedgwick  Mather,  Dr.  Wm.  F.  Havard,
Dr.  W.  W.  Fritz.

In  the  year  1907,  the  name  of  the
college  was  changed  to  the  American
College  of  Neuropathy,  and  became
the  property  of  the  Alumni  Associa-
tion. Dr.  Wallace  W.  Fritz  was  el-
ected dean,  and  it  is  largely  due  to  his
endeavors  that  the  institution  now  oc-
cupies the  position  as  one  of  the  fore-
most drugless  colleges  of  this  country.

Principles

The  knowledge  of  the  science  and
art  of  Neuropathy  lies  largely  with
its  graduates.  No  authentic  text-
books have  ever  been  issued  dealing
with  its  principles  and  practice;  al-
though there  is  now  one  in  prepara-
tion. We  feel  that  this  is  the  fitting
place  to  make  an  explanation  that  is
long  overdue.  It  is  a  well  known  fact
that  there  is  a  book  in  print  entitled
Neuropathv.  by  Dr.  A.  P.  Davis,  of  Los
Angeles,  Cal.  This  work,  however,
has very little in common with the


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


703


neuropathic  principles  and  practice  as
taught  in  the  American  College  of
Neuropathy,  and  in  the  Lindlahr  Col-
lege of  Nature  Cure.  It  is  unfortun-
ate that  Dr.  Davis  named  his  system
Neuropathy  at  about  the  same  time
that  the  name  of  Neuropathy  was
adopted  in  place  of  Mechano-neural-
therapy,  by  the  institution  in  Phila-
delphia. This  has  led  to  considerable
confusion  upon  the  part  of  students
who  have  had  a  desire  to  learn  the
system  formerly  taught  under  the  head
of  Mechano-neuraltherapy.

Neuropathy  is  not  a  mechanical  sys-
tem in  the  sense  that  the  word  is  usu-
ally employed;  that  is,  the  correction
of  displaced  bones  and  tissues.  Not
that  it  denies  the  existence  of  such,
but  that  it  considers  these  conditions
to  be  the  result,  rather  than  the  cause
of  disease,  except  in  case  of  trauma.  In
this  way  it  can  be  differentiated  from
Osteopathy,  Chiropractic  and  Napra-
pathy.  A  general  consideration  of
these  latter  systems  shows  us  that
they  are  founded  on  the  mechanical
idea  of  disease  causation,  or  what
might  be  termed  the  "pressure  theory."

Neuropathy  is  based  on  the  fact  that
all  changes  in  function  and  structure
are  brought  about  by  alterations  in
circulation,  and  the  further  fact  that
the  activity  of  the  nerves  controlling
the  circulation  of  blood  in  the  vessels
and  fluid  in  the  tissues,  can  be  influ-
enced by  manual  manipulation,  and
thermal  applications.

Good  health  depends  upon  perfect
metabolism,  perfect  respiration  and
perfect  generation  or  internal  secre-
tion. All  of  these  functions  depend  on
perfect  circulation.  The  value  of  a
physiological  remedy  is  in  direct  ratio
to  its  effectiveness  in  "normalizing  the
circulation."

The  great  mistake  that  has  been
made  by  the  founders  and  elaborators
of  practically  all  systems  of  therapeu-
tics, is  that  of  making  their  treatment
too  specific.  Of  all  the  mechanical
systems,  Neuropathy  is  the  one  ex-
ception in  this  respect.  It  is  not  a
specific  treatment,  and  should  never
be  employed  in  a  specific  manner,  even


as  an  adjunct  to  other  treatment,  in  the
process  of  cure.

The  system  known  as  Spondylother-
apy  has  for  its  basis  the  principles  of
Neuropathy,  but  they  have  been  ap-
plied in  a  manner  identical  with  the
practice  of  drug  therapy,  strictly  from
a  symptomatic  standpoint.

Physiological Basis

There  are  three  physiological  laws
governing  the  activity  of  cells  with
relation  to  their  blood  supply.

First  law.  "Every  cell  in  the  body
will  maintain  itself  in  a  perfect  state
of  health  if  it  receives  the  proper  quan-
tity and  quality  of  food  material  and
oxygen,  and  has  its  waste  products
promptly  removed,  provided  it  is  not
subjected  to  extremes  of  temperature
or  injured  by  violence."

Second  law.  "Every  cell  in  the  body
receives  blood  (food  material  and  oxy-
gen) in  proportion  to  the  degree  of
its  activity."  All  cellular  activity  is
governed  by  the  demand  which  the
body  makes  upon  such  cells  for  the
product  of  their  activity — motion,  heat,
secretion,  excretion,  conduction,  etc.

Third  law.  "Cells  are  active  in  pro-
portion to  the  quantity  of  food  material
and  oxygen  which  they  receive."  This
law  pertains  to  abnormal  conditions.
Normally  the  blood  supply  is  gov-
erned by  the  demand  of  the  cells,  but,
it  is  known  that  an  abnorjnal  irritation
of  any  part  of  the  body  will  increase
the  blood  supply  to  the  cells  in  that
neighborhood.  Whether  this  irritation
affects  first  the  cells,  arousing  them  to
activity,  causing  them  to  demand  more
blood,  or  whether  the  irritant  acts  di-
rectly upon  the  afferent  nerves  and  re-
flexly  causes  a  dilation  of  the  blood
vessels  in  the  area  of  irritation  has  not
been  fully  determined.  The  inference
drawn  from  numerous  experiments  and
observations  is  that  the  irritant  acts  di-
rectly on  the  afferent  nerves  and  in-
creases the  blood  supply  by  the  pro-
duction of  direct  reflexes  over  the  vaso-
motor tracts,  the  cells  becoming  ac-
tive in  consequence  of  the  increased
food  and  oxygen  supply.

In  health,  blood  supply  is  equal  to


704


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


the  demand  of  the  cells,  while  under
abnormal  conditions  the  supply  may
become  so  much  in  excess  of  the  de-
mand that  congestion  and  lymph  stag-
nation occur,  or  the  supply  may  be  in-
adequate to  meet  the  demand.  In
either  case,  a  diseased  process  will  be
the  result.

Neuropathic  treatment  is  employed
to  restor.e  a  balance  to  the  circulation
by  mechanical  and  thermal  influence
of  the  vaso-motor  nerves,  and  by  me-
chanically assisting  the  circulation  in
the  tissues,  and  the  flow  of  lymph  in
the  lymphatic  vessels.

The  blood  supply  of  the  entire  body
is  under  the  control  of  the. vaso-motor
mechanism.  This  mechanism  con-
sists of  two  distinct  sets  of  nerves,
one  of  which,  called  the  constrictor  me-
chanism, acts  to  decrease  the  calibre
of  the  arterioles,  and  the  other  the  di-
lator mechanism,  the  opposing  mechan-
ism to  the  constrictors,  acts  to  increase
the  calibre  of  the  arterioles.  The  cells
of  the  body  receive  their  food  and  oxy-
gen supply  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that
the  capillary  blood  vessels  have  minute
holes  in  their  walls,  through  which
part  of  the  blood  plasma  is  allowed  to
pass  into  the  tissues.  Each  cell  in  the
body  is  surrounded  by  a  space,  and  it
is  through  these  spaces  that  the  blood
plasma  flows  from  the  capillaries,  and
from  these  spaces  that  the  cells  select
their  food.  _  The  cells  excrete  their
waste  products  back  into  these  spaces.
For  this  reason  the  flow  of  plasma
through  the  tissues  must  be  continu-
ous. This  material  passes  from  the
tissues  into  the  lymphatic  vessels.

Vaso-motor  nerves  control  the  quan-
tity of  plasma  which  is  allowed  to  leak
from  out  of  the  capillary  tubes,  either
constricting  or  dilating  the  minute  ar-
teries. The  dilation  of  the  arterioles
increases  the  pressure  within  the  capil-
laries, and  causes  a  greater  outflow  of
plasma  into  the  pericellular  spaces.  A
constriction  of  the  arterioles  decreases
capillary  pressure,  and  so  limits  the
outflow  of  the  quantity  of  plasma.

Irritation  always  causes  vaso-motor
reflexes,  which  are  first  manifested  as
a  brief  constriction  of  the  arterioles  of


the  part  under  irritation,  which  is  fol-
lowed by  an  active  dilation  of  the  same
vessels.  So  if  we  draw  a  line  with  a
blunt  instrument  somewhere  on  the
surface  of  the  body,  the  following
phenomena  may  be  noticed :  First,  a
white  line  due  to  mechanically  press-
ing the  blood  out  of  the  .capillaries;
second,  a  white  line  due  to  the  action
of  the  constrictors ;  third,  a  red  line  due
to  the  action  of  the  dilators.

Some  Facts  Regarding  Nerve  Action

Constrictor  nerves  are  always  ac-
tive, maintaining  tone  in  the  blood
vessels.  The  dilators  are  only  active
as  the  occasion  demands  a  greater
blood  supply  to  any  particular  part  of
the  body.  Even  there,  where  the  di-
lators are  called  into  action,  the  con-
strictors continue  to  exert  their  influ-
ence on  these  blood  vessels.  Pro-
longed irritation  in  any  part  of  the
body  results  in  constrictor  fatigue,  in
which  case  the  part  passes  from  an  ac-
tive to  a  passive  condition  and  the  cir-
culation through  the  tissues  of  this
part  becomes  sluggish ;  first,  because
there  is  not  sufficient  force  behind  the
blood  in  the  vessels  due  to  lowered
tonicity ;  second,  because  the  lym-
phatics draining  the  part  are  clogged
up.

Diseased  conditions  progress  in  the
following  manner :  The  cells  being  sub-
jected to  continuous  irritation  are
forced  to  a  high  degree  of  activity.  The
blood  supply  increasing  to  satisfy  their
demand  gradually  produces  an  active
inflammation  which  progresses  to  a
state  of  congestion.  If  the  flow  of
plasma  into  the  peri-cullular  spaces  is
greater  than  the  lymphatic  vessels  can
drain  off,  there  will  be  a  stagnation  of
lymph  in  the  tissues,  which  compels
the  cells  to  live  in  an  atmosphere  pol-
luted by  their  own  waste-products.
Coincident  with  the  fatigue  of  the  cells
occurs  the  fatigue  of  the  constrictor
mechanism  to  the  blood  vessels  of  the
part  under  irritation.  The  vessel  walls
lose  their  tone  and  the  circulation  in
the  tissues  is  practically  obstructed.
It  is  under  these  circumstances  that
structural  changes  take  place  leading


Universal  Nalnropalhic  Direcionj  and  Buyers'  Guide


705


to  cellular  degeneration,  liquefaction,
pus  formation,  connective  tissue  pro-
liferation, foreign  growths,  mineral  de-
posits, etc.

Neuropathic  Treatment

Neuropathic  treatment  is  directed  to
the  nerve  centers  controlling  circula-
tion for  the  purpose  of  restoring  the
normal  activity  to  the  vaso-motor
nerves,  and  of  relieving  either  active
or  passive  congestion  by  establishing
better  lymphatic  drainage.

All  vaso-constrictor  nerves  have
their  centers  in  the  spinal  cord,  and
are  distributed  to  the  walls  of  the
blood  vessels  through  the  sympathetic
nervous  system.  There  are  no  con-
strictor units  in  the  nuclei  of  the  cran-
ial nerves,  although  some  constrictor
units  follow  the  path  of  cranial  nerves
to  their  distribution.

It  might  be  well  to  give  here  a  few
facts  which  will  lead  to  a  better  appre-
ciation of  the  neuropathic  view-point :

Health  depends  on  perfect  circula-
tion in  the  tissues ;

Perfect  circulation  necessitates  the
adjustment  of  blood  supply  to  meet  the
demand  of  the  cells ;

Perfect  adjustment  is  only  possible
through  the  correct  action  on  the  part
of  the  vaso-motor  mechanism  ;

The  vaso-constrictor  nerves  are  the
more  important  of  the  two,  as  the  tone
of  blood  vessels,  the  maintenance  of
blood  pressure,  and  the  tone  of  the
entire  body  depends  on  their  constant
action ;

Increased  functional  activity  must
be  supported  by  increased  circulation,
which  means  that  the  blood  supply
must  be  more  abundant  and  proceed
more  rapidly  through  the  tissues ;

Disease  begins  with  abnormal  irri-
tation, which  leads  to  perversion  of
function  and  structure ;

Functional  perversions,  from  the
standpoint  of  the  nervous  system,  are
of  two  kinds,  central  and  peripheral ;

Central  perversions  are  those  in
which  the  active  irritant  is  located  in
some  part  of  the  nervous  system ;

Peripheral  perversions  are  those  in


which  the  irritant  is  somewhere  out-
side of  the  nervous  system;

Structural  perversions  follow  func-
tional changes,  except  in  trauma;

All  peripheral  irritations  produce
nerve  reflexes ;

All  central  irritations  produce  either
sensory  or  motor  disturbances,  or  both  ;

Irritation  produces  vaso-motor
changes,  so  we  may  say  that  all  physi-
cal diseased  manifestations  are  the  re-
sult of  circulatory  changes ;

Therefore  all  diseased  parts  can  be
returned  to  a  normal  state  by  estab-
lishing perfect circulation ;

Hence  the  fundamental  idea  of  neu-
ropathic treatment  is  to  "normalize  the
activity  of  the  constrictor  mechanism
throughout  the  body."

Neuropathy  recognizes  that  the  first
principle  of  cure  is  the  establishment
of  better  elimination  for  the  purpose
of  cleansing  the  blood  stream  of  irri-
tating waste  products.  Where  this  is
thoroughly  accomplished,  by  means  of
hydrotherapy,  diet,  sun  and  air  treat-
ment, and  exercise,  the  balancing  of
the  circulation  by  means  of  neuropath-
ic treatment  becomes  an  easy  and  sim-
ple matter.  Our  first  law  said :  "Ev-
ery cell  in  the  body  will  maintain  a
state  of  health  where  it  receives  the
proper  quantity  and  quality  of  food
material,  etc."  Naturally,  the  blood
must  be  normal  in  quality  to  restore
health  to  a  diseased  body,  and  if  this
article  were  dealing  with  cure  instead
of  a  form  of  treatment,  we  would  lay
considerably  more  stress  on  quality
than  on  quantity.  There  is  a  vast  dif-
ference between  treatment  and  cure,  as
any  one  must  recognize  who  has  given
the  subject  more  than  superficial  con-
sideration. Too  much  must  never  be
expected  of  a  system  of  treatment  be-
cause it  must  be  remembered  that  that
which  one  individual  can  do  for  an-
other is  limited,  at  best.  The  extrava-
gant claims  which  are  being  made  by
the  various  systems  of  therapeutics
have  yet  to  be  substantiated  by  facts.
Those  wdio  ignore  the  first  principles
of  cure  and  look  upon  disease  in  its
causation  as  an  invasion  of  germs,  or
as  being  entirely  due  to  traumatic  con-


706


riuDcrsdl  Ndtnropdthir  Dirrctorij  and  Biujn's Guide


ditions  resulting'  in  pressure  by  dis-
l)laced  structures  on  delicate  tissues,
will  fail  to  produce  the  results  which
the  more  enlightened  are  coming  to
expect  from  therapeutics.

Natural  diet,  rational  exercise  and
hydrotherapy  are  factors  in  treatment
and  cure  which  the  conscientious  phy-
sician dare  not  ignore,  and  we  would
not  care  to  have  the  reader  think  that
we  believe  diseased  conditions  can  be
"cured"  by  any  form  of  manipulation.

"Treatments"  are  largely  employed
for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  symp-
tomatic conditions,  and  in  themselves
are  not  curative.  Hence,  specific  treat-
ments are  only  valuable  in  regulating
functions,  but  are  not  directed  to  the
basic  cause  of  disease.  Neuropathy
recognizes  the  fact  that  no  part  of  the
body  can  become  disordered  without
causing  disturbances  in  other  parts
often  far  remote.  These  secondary
disturbances  are  the  result  of  direct
nerve  reflexes,  and  while  some  are
compensatory,  others  indicate  a  spread-
ing of  the  disease  process.

It  is  due  to  'the  fact  that  certain  re-
flexes follow  initial  disturbances  that
neuropathic  treatment  becomes  a  pos-
sibility. Irritation  in  any  part  of  the
body  is  carried  over  the  afferent  nerves
to  the  posterial  horns  of  the  spinal
cord, from there reflected to the an-


terior horns,  from  whence  the  motor
message  is  carried  back  to  the  seat  of
disturbance.  In  cases  where  such  ir-
ritation is  ])r()l()ngcd  and  a  perversion
of  function  has  resulted,  the  entire  seg-
ment of  the  spinal  cord  which  has
been  involved  passes  through  about  the
saine  vaso-motor  changes  as  the  part
originally  irritated.  The  blood  supply
to  the  posterior  cord  is  increased  to
meet  the  demands  of  the  cells,  and
there  is  a  tendency  for  every  cell  sup-
plied by  these  vessels  to  increase  their
activity,  causing  a  greater  number  of
reflexes  to  travel  over  to  the  anterior
horn,  and  so  excite  those  cells  to  a
higher  degree  of  activity.  Inflamma-
tion, congestion,  passive  infiltration,
and  constrictor  fatigue  of  the  blood
vessels  takes  place  in  the  spinal  cord
exactly  as  they  would  in  any  other  tis-
sue of  the  body.

The  common  spinal  nerve,  as  it  exits
from  the  inter-vertebral  foramen,  di-
vides into  an  anterior  primary  division
and  a  posterior  primary  division.  The
posterior  primary  division  supplies  the
skin  and  structures  of  the  back,  and  re-
flects to  these  structures  the  condition
of  activity  of  the  segments  of  the
spinal  cord  from  which  it  arises.  By
virtue  of  this  fact,  the  neuropath  is
able  to  make  a  complete  analysis  of
the  spinal  cord,  and  to  determine  the


Naturopathic  Doctor:  "Go  out  there  and
take  a  dip  in  the  surf.  I  am  sure  you  will
feel  better."


Officer:  "1  arrest  you  for  practisin'  medi-
cine without  a  license.  My  friend  Dr.  Pill
will  prefer  the  charge  against  you."


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihiyers'  Guide


101


exact  ccjiulilion  of  each  segment  there-
of. The  degree  of  activity  existing  in
any  segment  of  the  cord  can  be  deter-
mined by  testing  the  reflexes.  These
reflexes  ( vaso,  viscero  and  myo  motor)
are  true  indicators  of  segmental  ac-
tivity, thus  making  possible  a  diagnosis
of  condition  of  parts  supplied  by  the
anterior  divisions  of  the  spinal  nerve.
The  recent  work  on  biodynamic  di-
agnosis, accomplished  by  Drs.  Abrams
and  White,  of  California,  has  been  a
valuable  contribution  to  the  neuro-
pathic work,  as  it  has  provided  a  means
of  measuring  the  reflexes  and  the  en-
ergy exerted  by  any  organ  or  part  of
the  body.

Neuropathic  treatment  is  given  in
accordance  to  the  conditions  which  are
revealed  by  the  reflexes  and  general
physical  examination.  The  treatment
itself  consists  of  simple  manipulations,
which  are  varied  for  the  purpose  of
achieving  three  main  effects.  The  first
is  merely  mechanical,  and  consists  of
propelling  the  lymph  through  the  lym-
phatic vessels  and  glands,  and  of  emp-
tying congested  tissues  of  their  infil-
tration. The  other  effects  are  accom-
plished as  the  result  of  altering  the  re-
flexes by influencing the vaso-motor


mechanisms,  although  the  treatment
may  be  varied  in  such  a  manner  as  to
influence  the  viscero-motor  mechan-
isms, and  even  the  myo-motor.

Accordingly,  as  desired,  the  action
of  a  hyper-active  nerve  may  be  de-
creased or  an  inactive  or  hypo-active
nerve  may  be  brought  to  a  higher  de-
gree of  activity.  Thus  the  neuropath
has  in  his  hands  the  means  of  con-
trolling, within  certain  limits,  the  in-
voluntary actions  of  the  human  body,
and  can  use  his  power  in  such  a  way
as  to  restore  perverted  function  to  nor-
mal, or  to  induce  compensations  in
cases  of  structural  perversion.  .  The
philosophy  of  neuropathy  is  more  in
accordance  with  the  accepted  ideas  re-
garding disease,  its  cause  and  cure,
than  any  other  of  the  mechanical  sys-
tems  of  therapeutics.

It  must  be  understood,  however,  that
Neuropathy  was  not  designed  to  be  a
specific  form  of  treatment,  but  in  ev-
ery instance  must  be  carried  out  with
the  idea  of  restoring  a  balance  to  the
nerve  mechanisms  and  circulation.  The
technique  and  correct  application  of
neuropathic  principles  will  be  fully  de-
subject.


LEFT OUT IN THZ RAIN


AN  INTRINSIC  INTROVERSION.

(an  AT  URAL ADJUSTMENT)


708


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


Dietology  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editors

Dr THOMAS  J.  ALLEN  EUGENE CHRISTIAN, F.S.D.

Eureka Springs, Arkansas  213 West 79th St., New York


MATERIA  ALIMENTARIA

By  THOMAS  J.  ALLEN,  M.  D.,  N.  D.,  D.  O.


Naturopathy,  including  all  means  of
cure,  gives  diet  a  prominent  place  in
its  therapy.  Many  leaders  of  the  old
school  of  medicine  have  declared  that
materia  alimentaria  will  one  day  be  the
principal  means  of  cure.

Ten  years  ago,  the  writer  was  tell-
ing his  students  in  a  medical  school
that  they  would  one  day  be  sending
their  patients  to  the  grocery  store  for
their  medicine.  Probably  all  of  us  have
sent  patients  to  the  grocer  for  "Health
Bran,  for  Medicinal  Use."  We  are
just  beginning  the  study  and  practise
of  dietology,  altho  Hippocrates'  pre-
scription for  tuberculosis  was,  "Go  to
the  hills  and  drink  goat's  milk."

The  largest  post  graduate  medical
school  in  the  country,  in  New  York,
now  has  a  "professor  of  dietology" —
and  the  volume  of  his  published  lec-
tures is  more  amusing  than  instructive,
if  serious  blunders  can  be  amusing.
The  hospitals  are  giving  more  time  to
this  branch  in  the  training  of  their
nurses  (yesterday  I  had  an  application
from  the  nurse  in  charge  of  diet  in  an
Omaha  hospital  for  a  course  of  in-
struction "with  opportunity  for  the
study  of  clinical  cases").

"I  must  follow  them,  for  I  am  their
leader,"  said  an  insurrectionary  lead-
er who  was  haranguing  a  street  mob,
during  the  French  Revolution,  as  he
saw  them  running  off.  The  people
have  begun  to  discover  the  importance
of  diet  as  a  means  of  maintaining  and
of  restoring  health,  and  we  must  either
follow  their  lead  or  "get  left" ;  and  es-
pecially must  the  doctor  who  claims  to
offer  advanced  methods  of  treatment,
be able to meet the demand of  the


most  advanced  patients,  who  are  dis-
covering, not  only  that  drugs  alone
don't  cure,  but  that,  besides,  the  good
mechanical  treatment  of  the  body  ma-
chine, which  the  osteopath,  the  chiro-
practor, the  mechano-therapist  in  gen-
eral offers  to  put  it  in  good  running
order,  there  is  the  proper  fuel  of  the
machine  to  be  considered,  and  the  re-
moval of  its  cinders,  clinkers  and  ashes,
calling  for  knowledge  and  skill  that
the  man  who  understands  the  adjust-
ment and  oiling  of  the  working  parts
often  proves  himself  to  be  ignorant  of.

Probably  there  are  still  non-mixers,
adjusters  who  have  not  yet  discovered
that  their  narrow  instructors  did  not
know  that,  aside  from  injuries,  it
would  be  much  easier  to  prove  that
all  mal-adjustment  is  the  result  of
nerve  irritation  originating  in  bad  ali-
mentation and  bad  elimination,  than
to  prove  that  mal-adjustment  is  the
prime  cause  of  all  disease ;  but  the
majority  of  naturopaths,  who  are  not
prejudiced  in  favor  of  any  one  means
of  treatment,  nor  against  any,  believe
that  diet  must  have  a  large  place  in
the  treatment  of  every  case  that  comes
to  them.

How  shall  the  practitioner  qualify
himself  for  this  part  of  his  work?  Un-
doubtedly the  best  way  is  to  take  a
thorough  and  practical  course  in  a
good  school  where  opportunities  are
offered  for  clinical  demonstration ;  but
if  this  can  not  be  found  in  the  post
graduate  medical  school,  where  can  it
be  found?  Special  courses  are  offered
in  our  schools,  and  these  should  be
supported  by  practitioners,  not  only  for
the  general  good  of  advanced  therapy.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


709


but  because  it  pays  the  individual  stu-
dent to  be  equipped  in  this  department.

But  if  one  can  not  take  advantage
of  such  special  courses,  how  shall  he
equip  himself?  There  are  a  dozen
books  on  diet,  each  of  w^hich,  like  that
referred  to,  contains  a  few  grains  of
truth  of  real  value  buried  in  a  great
mass  of  chafif  and  tares ;  and  by  per-
sistent gleaning,  testing  each  seed,
one  can  acquire  much  useful  knowl-
edge. I  think  I  have  read  or  glanced
thru  nearly  all  of  the  books,  new  and
old,  on  diet,  but  there  is  not  one  that
I  have  seen,  that  does  not  contain
serious  errors  of  omission  and  com-
mission, and  the  most  important
things  have  hardly  been  admitted  to
the  standard  books,  that  are  published
by  conservative  publishers,  who  take
the  advice  of  such  men  as  the  profes-
sor of  dietetics  in  a  post  graduate  med-
ical school,  who  ought  to  know.

It  was  a  long  time  after  the  circu-
lation of  the  blood  was  discovered  by


Harvey  before  it  was  taught  in  the
schools  or  could  be  found  in  any  text
book.  And  the  conditions  are  the  same
today. The  student  must  glean.

If  you  will  examine  yourself,  you
will  find  that  the  most  important
knowledge  and  skill  you  possess,  you
have  learned  from  your  patients,  im-
portant as  the  school  foundation  was.
This  is  especially  true  of  diet.

The  medical  journals,  the  health
journals,  are  constantly  publishing  the
experience  of  practitioners.  This  is
valuable — if  you  can  glean  and  sift
successfully.

Our  own  journal,  The  Naturopath,
is  a  constant  source  of  knowledge  and
inspiration  in  this  department,  as  in
others.

Dietology  is  altogether  the  most  dif-
ficult of  the  therapies,  as  well  as  the
least  investigated,  in  proportion  to  its
resources,  and  it  should  have  the  con-
stant attention  of  every  advanced  prac-
titioner.


MILK  DIET  AS  A  REMEDY  FOR  CHRONIC  DISEASE

By  CHARLES  SANFORD  PORTER,  M.  D.


In  the  treatment  of  chronic,  func-
tional disease,  the  most  potent  remedy
in  use  today  is  the  exclusive  milk  diet,
properly  given.

What  other  remedy  can  always  be
depended  on  to  reduce  the  blood  pres-
sure when  it  is  too  high,  as  well  as  to
raise  it  when  it  is  too  low?

What  other  remedy  is  there  that
will  always  reduce  a  high  tempera-
ture, or  fever,  when  caused  by  disor-
ders of  the  secretory  glands,  or  by
failure  of  the  eliminatory organs?

And  what  will  always  raise  the  sub-
normal temperature  of  the  anaemic  pa-
tient?

What  other  means  will  always  in-
crease the  body  weight  in  the  emaci-
ated, and  reduce  weight  in  the  obese,
and  in  either  case  cause  an  improve-
ment in  the  quality  of  the  flesh?

What other method can be de-


pended on  to  permanently  stop  the
pains  of  rheumatism,  neuritis  and  arth-
ritis?

What  drug  is  able  to  stop  inflamma-
tion and  heal  ulcers  of  the  stomach,
duodenum  and  colon,  in  less  than  a
month,  and  prevent  any  return  of  the
trouble?

What  other  treatment  has  ever  been
devised  that  will  stop  the  formation
of  gallstones  immediately,  and  insure
against  future  attacks  of  biliary  colic?

The  exclusive  milk  diet,  with  the
aid  of  proper  hygienic  measures,  does
these  things,  not  in  a  small  or  large
proportion  of  the  cases  only,  but  in
all  cases  that  are  not  past  human  help.

The  great  majority  of  physicians
believe  in  a  milk  diet  for  many  disor-
ders of  the  system.  Some  recommend
it  for  one  thing,  and  some  for  another,
according to the success they may


710


Universal  Naturopathic  Direct orij  and  Bni^'rs'  Guide


liave  had  with  it.  That  it  is"  not  uni-
versally used  is  due  to  the  fact  that
few  understand how to give it.

It  is  unfortunately  true  that  doctors
of  standing  are  advising  a  mixed  diet
of  milk  and  eggs,  and  even  milk  and
meat  broth,  with  starchy  foods,  for
patients  already  suffering  from  poor
digestion and food poisoning.

And  even  where  a  plain  milk  diet  is
given,  the  patient  is  allowed  to  stop
the  milk  at  the  first  untoward  sign,  be-
cause "the  milk  does  not  agree  with
them."

Many  patients  will  say  that  milk
does  not  agree  with  them,  that  they
have  never  been  able  to  take  it.  Do
not  get  discouraged  at  this ;  they  are
the  people  who  need  the  milk  diet  the
most.

The  fault  is  in  the  stomach,  and  not
in  the  milk,  and  when  the  stomach  and
other  digestive  organs  are  re-educated
to  take  milk,  they  will  benefit  from  it
and  grow  stronger,  and  soon  be  able
to  digest  any  natural  food.

A  hundred  years  ago.  Lord  Byron,
wise  beyond  his  time,  said :  "Many
persons  declare  that  they  cannot  take
milk  as  a  food,  and  the  reason  is  that
they  do  not  take  enough."

In  giving  the  milk  diet  to  anyone
with  digestive  or  circulative  disorders,
the  preliminary  preparation  of  the  pa-
tient is  important.

The  suggestion  of  milk  diet  immedi-
ately brings  up  for  consideration  the
question  of  complete  or  partial  fast-
ing, for  more  or  less  time.  The  two
things  cannot  be  separated.  There
are  many  logical  and  practical  reasons
why  food  should  be  stopped  for  some
time  before  starting  an  exclusive  milk
diet,  if  one  is  not  accustomed  to  it,
and  there  is  no  argument  against  it,
outside  of  the  fact  that  the  patient
may  be  slightly  uncomfortable  through
hunger.  The  short  fasting  period  re-
quired before  commencing  the  diet  has
never  injured  anyone ;  most  of  the  pa-
tients are  immediately  conscious  of
the  benefits  derived  from  it.

For  example :  Dr.  Guelpa,  in  France,
and  Dr.  Allen,  in  this  country,  have
recently demonstrated the fact that,


in  diabetic  patients,  a  short  fast  will
clear  up  the  excess  of  sugar  in  the
blood,  so  that  the  urine  no  longer
shows  the  characteristic  sugar  reac-
tion.

I  have  confirmed  this,  and,  after  this
fact  is  acknowledged,  it  is  easy  to  un-
derstand why  a  fast  is  so  beneficial  in
other  conditions,  and  clears  up  other
abnormal  constituents  in  the  blood  in-
dicated by  indicanuria,  phosphaturia,
oxaluria,  and  bile  pigments  in  the
urine.

After  the  preliminary  fast,  most  pa-
tients should  be  put  to  bed,  and  take
the  milk  diet  while  resting  as  com-
pletely as  possible,  mentally  as  well
as  physically.  The  results  obtained
by  this  method  come  quicker,  are  more
certain,  more  permanent,  and  better
every  way  than  they  are  where  pa-
tients are  allowed  to  exercise  or  go
about  their  vocations.  In  short,  it  is
best  to  make  a  regular  business  of  it
and  allow  nothing  to  interfere.

Milk  for  an  exclusive  diet  should  not
be  rich  in  fat.  The  cream  is  the  least
valuable  portion  of  milk  for  most  in-
valids, and  is  the  most  disturbing  ele-
ment where  any  difficulty  occurs  in
taking  it.  I  prefer  Holstein,  or  sim-
ilar milk,  and  use  it  exclusively  in  my
own  practice.

Milk  with  an  excess  of  butterfat,  like
that  from  Jersey  cows,  can  best  be
used  by  allowing  the  milk  to  stand
a  few  hours,  and  removing  the  layer
of  cream  that  forms.  This  first  rising
of  cream  contains  the  largest  fat  glob-
ules, which  are  the  ones  most  difficult
to  assimilate.  The  smallest  particles
of  fat  remain  longer  in  the  milk,  and  it
is  difficult  to  remove  all  of  them,  even
with  a  centrifugal  separator,  but  they
are  not  so  detrimental,  because  on  ac-
count of  their  extremely  small  size,
they  may  be  taken  directly  into  the
circulation  of  blood  without  having
to  be  digested  or  broken  up.

An  exclusive  milk  diet  must  be  ta-
ken in  quantities  that  will  increase  the
circulation  of  blood ;  a  smaller  amount
will  only  partially  satisfy  the  needs
of  the  body,  will  not  make  the  growth
that  I  regard  as  necessary  to  overcome


Universal  Naiuropalhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


711


disordered  conditions  of  the  system,
and  will  not  be  sufficient  to  neutralize
the  hyperacidity  of  the  stomach  which
is  so  common  an  accompaniment  of
digestive  disturbances,  and,  finally,  the
bowels  seldom  act  satisfactorily  on  a
small  amount  of  milk.

In  order  to  give  the  necessary  quan-
tity of  milk,  it  is  impossible  to  limit
the  number  of  meals  to  three  or  four,
or  anywhere  near  that  number.  Six
quarts  of  milk,  the  average  quantity
required,  divided  in  three  meals,  would
be  indigestible,  except  to  a  powerful
stomach  of  large  capacity,  which  is
never  found  in  a  chronic  invalid.

We  must  go  back  to  babyhood,  the
period  of  frequent,  small  feedings,  and,
on  account  of  the  acidity  and  the
chronically  wrong  condition  of  the
adult  stomach,  we  must  go  even  far-
ther, and  use  smaller  amounts,  and
give  more  frequently,  in  order  to  con-
tinuously neutralize  the  acid,  and  per-
mit some  portion,  at  least,  of  the  milk
to  be  assimilated,  and  start  up  the  cir-
culation, and  make  more  blood,  and
little  by  little  the  stomach  will  im-
prove in  its  work,  until  finally  it  is  di-
gesting and  assimilating  all  of  the
milk.

Fortunately,  milk  by  itself  is  a  ma-
terial which  contains  no  poison,  and
the  undigested  surplus,  if  there  is  one,
causes  no  harm,  and,  if  the  diet  is  kept
up  without  intermission,  except  when
sleeping,  the  bowels  soon  move  na-
turally, and  thenceforth  there  are  no
disturbing  features  to  contend  with,
unless  natural  reactions  occur  incident
to  the  revolutionary  cure  taking  place.

There  are  a  number  of  books  on  the
milk  cure,  and  its  modifications,  some
of  which  are  more  apt  to  confuse  than
assist  the  practitioner  beginning  to  use
the  treatment.  Others  are  really  prac-
tical, and  contain  all  necessary  direc-
tions for  handling  nearly  all  cases  that
may  be  suitable  for  treatment.

The  milk  diet  treatment,  with  rest,
may  be  used  in  the  cure  of  almost  all
chronic  diseases.  In  my  experience
with  it  of  over  32  years,  I  have  found
the  milk  cure  especially  adapted  to  the
treatment of the following diseases,


and  I  place  the  names  somewhat  ac-
cording to  the  availability  of  the  cure;
those  which  are  commonly  the  easiest
to  treat  coming  first,  and  the  more  dif-
ficult toward  the  end  of  the  list:

Anaemia,  auto  -  intoxication,  emaci-
ation, dry,  sallow  skin,  poor  circula-
tion, subnormal  temperature,  catarrh,
acid  stomach,  constipation,  dyspepsia,
indigestion,  obesity,  colitis,  diarrhea,
piles,  ulcer  of  the  stomach,  ulceration
of  intestines,  neuralgia,  neuritis,  rheu-
matism, gallstones,  Bright's  disease,
consumption  in  earlier  stages,  goiter,
hardened  arteries,  high  blood  pressure,
paralysis,  tobacco,  morphine  and  oth-
er drug  habits,  diabetes,  pernicious
anemia,  tubercular  kidney,  consump-
tion in  later  stages,  leukemia,  Addi-
son's .disease.  Locomotor  ataxia  can
be  cured  if  taken  in  time,  and  can  be
ameliorated  even  when  quite  ad-
vanced. Paralysis  agitans  has  proved
difficult,  but  the  few  cases  treated
have  all  obtained  some  benefit.  In
epilepsy,  the  results  are  uncertain,  us-
ually unsatisfactory.  Other  mental
diseases,  or  insanity,  I  have  little  ex-
perience with.


A Toast to Seh'-Destruction


712


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Ihiijcrs'  Guide


m


Chiropractic  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editor

Dr.  F.  W.  COLLINS,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C,  122  Roseville  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.


@


CHIROPRACTIC

By  ARTHUR  L.  FORSTER,  M.  D., D.  C.

Secretary  of  the  National  School  of  Chiropractic, Chicago, Illinois.


Of  all  professional  men,  physicians
are  the  most  prone  to  adhere  tenacious-
ly to  the  teachings  of  their  preceptors.
This  has  made  it  possible  for  a  few
to  become  recognized  as  authorities,
and  the  opinions  of  the  mass  of  the
profession  are  moulded  largely  by
these  authorities.  Naturally,  this  tends
to  discourage  personal  investigation
along  lines  of  thought  alien  to  medical
traditions  of  the  past.  Most  of  us  are
content  to  pursue  the  path  of  least
resistance — the  trail  that  has  been
blazed  by  those  who  preceded  us.  Not
alone  that,  but  one  who  does  attempt
to  swerve  from  this  path  is  frowned
upon  as  a  heretic.  Frequently  he  is
not  even  accorded  an  opportunity  to
demonstrate  the  results  of  any  per-
sonal investigations  he  has  made.  For
corroboration  of  this  statement  con-
sider the  years  that  passed  before
hydrotherapy  and  electricity  were  rec-
ognized as  useful  and  legitimate  ther-
apeutic agents.

But  the  opposition  encountered  by
these  systems  has  been  nothing  com-
pared to  that  which  has  been  met  by
the  science  of  Chiropractic.  And  it
must  be  admitted  that  the  medical  pro-
fession had  good  and  sufficient  rea-
son for  looking  with  disfavor  upon  this
therapy  and  its  votaries.  Why?  Sim-
ply because  the  claims  made  by  its
originators  were  exaggerated  and  un-
founded. When  the  first  chiropractors
witnessed  the  splendid  results  which
they  achieved  in  many  cases,  they  be-
came over-enthusiastic,  and  permitted
themselves  to  believe  that  they  were
in  possession  of  a  curative  measure  ap-


plicable in  all  diseases.  Had  they  been
more  conservative  and  made  no  claims
for  their  therapy  except  where  based
upon  the  results  obtained  in,  let  us  say,
a  thousand  cases,  the  story  would
doubtless  have  been  different.  Fur-
thermore, chiropractic  principles  were
originally  propounded  by  men  of  very
limited  education  along  kindred  lines,
and  who,  while  their  basic  reasoning
was  correct,  made  other  erroneous
statements  in  connection  therewith
which  precluded  the  possibility  of  rec-
ognition from  men  versed  in  the  science
of  disease.  It  is  possible  that  had
these  same  views  been  advanced  origi-
nally by  men  of  superior  intelligence
and  attainments,  speedy  recognition  of
vertebral  subluxations  as  a  possible
factor  in  the  production  of  disease
would  have  been  accorded  them.

And  yet,  the  medical  profession  has
committed  one  grave  error  in  respect
to  Chiropractic,  or  as  it  might  better  be
termed.  Spinal  Adjustment.  Instead  of
condemning  this  new  therapy  in  its  en-
tirety, the  medical  world  should  have
thoroughly  investigated  it  with  a  view
to  ascertaining  any  good  that  there
might  be  in  it.  The  profession  has
failed  to  give  this  field  of  thought  the
slightest  attention.  Men  who  have
not  spent  one  moment's  serious  con-
sideration of  the  subject  of  spinal  ad-
justment, deny  that  there  is  any  truth
or  logic  in  the  claims  made  by  its  ad-
vocates. On  the  contrary,  those  who
do  give  this  subject  serious  thought
and  study,  become  convinced  of  the
soundness  of  its  theoretical  basis.

My  work  in  Chiropractic  dates  from


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcrs'  (niide


713


the  time  that  I  became  connected  with
the  National  School  of  Chiropractic
of  Chicago,  in  the  capacity  of  medical
director.  At  this  time  I  looked  upon
Chiropractic  in  the  same  way  that  oth-
er physicians  do.  My  hospital  service
and  four  years  in  private  practice  had
naturally  blighted  some  of  my  ideals,
just  as  they  do  for  us  all. I  had  come


whom  I  was  unable  to  benefit  by  any
of  the  measures  at  my  command.  Af-
ter trying  everything,  the  patient's
husband  advised  me  that  he  was  going
to  try  Chiropractic.  I  advised  him
against  it,  because  I  had  heard  other
physicians  say  that  it  was  a  fraud.  Per-
sonally, I  did  not  have  the  slightest
idea  wh^t  Chiropractic  was. I  merely


Fig. 1. Palpation of the Cervical \'ertebrae


to  expect  to  fail  in  a  certain  class  of
cases,  but  still  argued  that  nothing  else
could  succeed  where  medicine  failed.
I,  therefore,  had  no  faith  in  Chiroprac-
tic, or  any  other  therapy  which  did  not
conform  strictly  to  medical  standards.
Early  in  my  practice  1  had  a  patient


blindly  and  ignorantly  repeated  what
others  had  said,  who  knew  as  little
about  the  subject  as  I  did.

My  first  afternoon  in  the  clinics  of
the  National  School  of  Chiropractic
of  Chicago  opened  my  eyes.  I  saw  one
patient  who  came  in  complaining  of  a


711


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijrrs'  Guide


headache,  go  away  five  minutes  later,
relieved.  I  saw  another  who  came  in
with  the  aid  of  crutches,  suffering  from
lumbago  and  sciatica,  leave  with  his
crutches  under  his  arm.  I  heard  an-
other, who  had  been  constipated  for
forty  years,  say  that  he  now  has  reg-
ular evacuations.  I  saw  an  epileptic
who  had  not  had  a  paroxysm  since  he
commenced  the  treatments,  five  months
before.

Was  I  convinced?  Certainly  not.  It
takes  even  more  than  that  to  con-
vince a  prejudiced,  dyed-in-the-wool
physician.  But  later,  when  I  learned
to  use  Spinal  Adjustment  myself,  when
I  saw  the  results  under  my  own  hands,
I  began  to  realize.

Having  become  convinced  of  the
clinical  merits  of  Spinal  Adjust-
ment, I  devoted  myself  to  a
thorough  study  of  the  subject.  I
studied  the  body  from  a  mechanical
viewpoint.  I  went  deeply  into  the
study  of  the  spinal  column,  especially
with  reference  to  the  possibility  and
probability  of  vertebral  subluxations.
To  do  this  it  was  necessary  to  become
more  familiar  with  physics  and  me-
chanics as  applied  to  the  shape,  place-
ment and  mobility  of  the  spine.  Orig-
inal dissections  were  made  to  ascertain
the  existence  of  subluxations  post  mor-
tem. Comparative  studies  of  the
spines  of  man  and  of  the  lower  animals
were  then  made.  I  studied  the  anat-
omy of  the  nervous  system,  especially
the  sympathetic  nerve.  The  physiol-
ogy of  the  nervous  system  was  my  next
field,  theoretically  and  experimentally,
with  especial  reference  to  the  nature
of  the  nerve-impulse,  the  conduction
process,  and  the  influence  of  the  sym-
pathetic nervous  system  on  the  struc-
tural integrity  and  functional  activity
of  every  part,  organ  and  system  of  the
body.

The  results  of  a  year's  careful  and
systematic  study  were  to  convince  me
that  vertebral  subluxations  can  and
do  occur.  Furthermore,  that  the  dis-
placed margins  of  the  intervertebral
foramen  of  the  involved  vertebra  pro-
duced sufficient  pressure  upon  the
spinal  nerve  and  sympathetic  rami  to


block  the  conduction  of  impulses  at
that  point.  Lastly,  that  the  with-
drawal of  innervation  from  a  part,
produced  in  this  way,  was  a  factor  in
the  production  of  disease.  Clinically,
it  has  been  made  evident  to  me  that
adjustment  of  such  subluxated  ver-
tebrae is  an  undoubted  remedial  agent
in  a  large  number  of  conditions.

Let  me  give  a  brief  outline  of  some
of  the  results  of  these  investigations,
which  have  demonstrated  that  the
theory  of  Chiropractic  is  based  upon
scientific  facts,  and  that  it  is  of  proven
clinical  value.

Chiropractic  is  founded  on  the
theory  that  vertebrae  may  become  sub-
luxated,  that  is  to  say,  that  a  slight  dis-
placement of  their  opposing  articular
surfaces  may  occur.  As  a  consequence
of  this  subluxation,  there  is  produced
an  impingement  of  the  nerves  which
pass  through  the  intervertebral  fora-
men corresponding  to  the  vertebrae  in-
volved in  the  displacement.  The  pres-
sure upon  the  nerve  blocks  the  con-
duction of  impulses  at  this  point,  and
the  organ  supplied  by  those  nerves
does  not  receive  its  full  quota  of  inner-
vation. Since  the  functional  activity
and  organic  integrity  of  all  parts  de-
pend upon  their  innervation,  with-
drawal of  all  or  a  portion  of  this
nerve-supply  constitutes  a  predispos-
ing cause  of  disease.

The  correctness  of  this  theorem  nat-
urally hinges  upon  satisfactory  and
scientific  answers  to  three  important
questions,  to  wit:  (1)  Do  subluxations
actually  occur?  (2)  Is  enough  pres-
sure exercised  to  block  impulses?  (3)
Will  withdrawal  of  innervation  pro-
duce disease?

Anatomists  have  taught  for  years
that  displacements  of  the  vertebrae,  in
the  absence  of  fracture,  are  practically
impossible.  These  views  have  been
accepted  as  final,  and  no  personal  in-
vestigations have  been  made  which
might  have  previously  overthrown  this
opinion.  In  fact,  there  has  been  dis-
played an  entire  unwillingness  to  even
consider  the  subject.  Medical  students
are  not  required  to  make  dissections  of
the spine ; practitioners have only a


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


715


general  conception  of  the  vertebral
column,  and  these  minor  lesions  of  the
vertebrae  have,  therefore,  gone  unrec-
ognized.

There  are  three  chief  reasons  why
subluxations  of  the  vertebrae  have
hitherto  been  regarded  as  impossible
by  those  who  have  not  investigated
this  subject:  (a)  The  fact  that  the
vertebrae  are  surrounded  and  held  in
position  by  numerous  ligaments,  the
natural  tendency  of  which  is  to  bind
the  vertebrae  so  firmly  in  place  that
any  movement  beyond  that  essential
to  the  normal  mobility  of  the  spine
as  a  whole  is  impossible ;  (b)  The  con-
figuration and  placement  of  the  artic-
ular processes;  (c)  Failure  to  discrim-
inate between  a  subluxation  and  a  dis-
location.

Let  us  briefly  consider  each  of  these
objections  and  see  wherein  they  fail
to  disprove  the  possibility  of  vertebral
subluxations.

Superficially  considered,  the  view
that  the  strength  of  the  ligaments  sur-
rounding the  vertebrae  makes  sublux-
ations impossible  seems  plausible
enough.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind
that  the  ligaments  on  each  side  are
homologous,  and  that  conditions  are
not  always  the  same  on  both  sides  of  a
vertebra.  Were  the  ligaments  inani-
mate and  unyielding  bands,  never
changing,  and  always  of  the  same  de-
gree of  contractile  tonicity  on  each
side,  displacements  of  the  vertebrae
would  certainly  be  impossible.  But
such  a  state  does  not  obtain.  These
ligaments  are  vital  structures,  con-
stantly changing,  now  contracted  and
again  relaxed.  Very  often  the  liga-
ments of  one  side  are  more  contracted
than  those  of  the  other  side,  as  a  re-
sult of  external  or  reflex  irritation.
This  imbalanced  tonicity  of  the  liga-
ments naturally  would  tend  to  draw
the  vertebra  with  which  they  are  con-
nected toward  that  side  on  which  the
contraction  exists.  Were  the  liga-
ments of  each  side  equally  contracted,
there  would  be  a  perfectly  balanced
condition,  and  displacements  of  the
vertebrae  would  be  impossible. It  is


because  of  the  frequent  lack  of  such  a
balanced  state,  however,  that  subluxa-
tions are  made  possible.

We  said  that  contraction  of  liga-
ments is  due  to  external  or  reflex  irri-
tation. As  examples  of  external  irri-
tation in  this  sense,  the  following  may
be  cited :  Cold  air  striking  the  surface
of  the  body  causes  the  tiny  muscles
surrounding  the  pores  of  the  skin  to
contract.  Striking  the  biceps  muscle
and  noting  the  local  contraction  at  the
exact  spot  struck,  also  illustrates  mus-
cular contraction  due  to  external  irri-
tation. As  an  example  of  reflex  irrita-
tion acting  to  produce  muscular  con-
traction, the  spasm  of  the  musculature
of  the  intestine  produced  by  the  pres-
ence of  gas  may  be  noted.  These  same
principles  are  found  applicable  to  the
spinal  muscles  and  ligaments.

The  musculature  of  each  segment  of
the  spinal  column  is  supplied  by  out-
going nerve-fibres  in  the  posterior  di-
vision of  the  corresponding  spinal
nerve._  In  every  reflex  act  that  takes
place  m  this  segment  of  the  spinal  cord,
the  outgoing  impulse  passes  to  this
branch  of  the  spinal  nerve.  When  the
peripheral  stimulus  which  excites  the
reflex  act  is  applied  on  one  side  of  the
median  plane,  the  responses  first  ap-
pear in  the  muscles  of  the  same  side;
and  if  the  stimulus  is  slight,  they  may
appear  only  on  that  side.  The  incom-
ing impulses  are,  therefore,  first  and
most  effectively  distributed  to  the  ef-
ferent cells  located  on  the  same  side
of  the  cord  that  these  impulses  enter.
In  the  peripheral  nervous  svstem  the
impulse,  when  once  started  "in  a  fibre
or  axone,  is  confined  to  that  track,  and
does  not  diffuse  to  other  fibres  running
parallel  with  it,  but  it  does  extend  to
all  the  branches  of  that  axone,  what-
ever their  distribution.  As  a  result  of
this  physiological  fact,  the  first  re-
sponse to  the  outgoing  impulse  of  a
reflex  act  will  be"  a  contraction  of  the
muscles  and  ligaments  of  the  spine  on
the  side  that  the  ingoing  impulse  en-
tered the  cord.  This  is  true  for  the
reason  that  these  ligaments  are  sup-
plied by  the  efferent  fibres  in  the  pos-
terior division of the spinal nerve.


716


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


which  is  the  first  branch  given  off  by
the  spinal  nerve.

Physiologically,  a  muscle  that  is  re-
peatedly stimulated  by  nerve  impulses
finally  reaches  a  state  of  tetanic  con-
traction. That  is  to  say,  if  the  im-
pulses are  continuous,  the  muscle  fin-
ally remains  in  a  permanently  con-
tracted condition. If,  therefore,  a  cer-


ments  and  cartilage  by  virtue  of  which
they  possess  their  function  of  holding
parts  in  position,  and  permitting  of  a
definite  degree  of  movement  between
these  parts,  is  their  elasticity.  Conse-
quently, it  is  the  measure  of  elasticity
of  the  spinal  ligaments  which  deter-
mines the  degree  of  movement  of  the
vertebrae  which they  hold  in  apposi-


Fig.  2. Palpation of the Dorsal Vertebrae


tain  segment  of  the  spine  is  the  seat
of  a  continuous  succession  of  reflex
.acts,  the  ligaments  in  that  vicinity
will  become  contracted  on  one  side,
and  the  vertebra  drawn  toward  that
side.

Again, that property of the liga-


tion. When  any  material  is  stretched
beyond  the  limit  of  its  elasticity  by
any  force,  it  will  not  return  to  its
original  condition  when  the  force  is
removed.  This  physical  axiom,  when
applied  to  the  spinal  ligaments,  means
simply  this :  When,  as  explained  above,


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


1\1


the  several  ligaments  on  one  side  of  a
vertebra  are  contracted,  the  vertebra
is  drawn  toward  that  side.  At  the
same  time,  the  ligaments  on  the  other
side  are  stretched  beyond  the  limit  of
their  elasticity,  and  do  not  return  to
their  former  position,  even  when  the
force  is  removed.  As  a  consequence,
the  contracted  ligament  remains  in  its
contracted  condition,  and  the  displace-
ment of  the  vertebra  becomes  fixed.
The  same  principles  apply  to  the  inter-
vertebral discs.  If  these  cartilages  are
compressed  beyond  their  limit  of  elas-
ticity, they  fail  to  resume  their  for-
mer shape  when  the  force  is  removed,
but  remain  set.

To  go  into  a  detailed  discussion  of
the  various  external  and  reflex  causes
of  subluxations  would  be  impossible  in
the  space  allotted.  Suffice  it  to  say,
that  every  force,  and  by  that  term  is
included  everything  connected  with
our  environment,  has  its  influence  upon
the  spine,  which  is  the  central  axis,  or,
as  it  has  been  termed,  the  "line-shaft"
of  the  body.  Every  jar,  fall,  twist,
jolt,  etc.,  to  which  the  body  is  sub-
jected, if  it  is  excessive,  and  over-
comes the  elasticity  of  the  interver-
tebral discs  and  the  tonicity  of  the  lig-
aments, will  produce  a  subluxation.

The  most  common  external  causes
of  vertebral  subluxations  are,  there-
fore, occupation,  habits,  injuries,  age,
and  exhaustion.  The  reflex  causes  of
subluxations  are  any  and  all  irritations
of  the  peripheral  nerve-endings  which
produce  a  succession  of  reflex  acts  as
tation include  a  great  variety  of  con-
ditions, and  are  present  so  frequently
that  the  ligaments  of  one  or  more  spin-
al segments  may  always  be  found  in
a  state  of  vmbalanced  contraction.  If
this  contraction  on  one  side  is  contin-
uous, the  corresponding  vertebra  must
inevitably  be  drawn  toward  that  side.
I  think  that  the  above  conclusions  are
sufficient  evidence  that  although  the
ligaments  of  the  spine  are  strong
enough  to  hold  the  vertebrae  in  their
proper  position,  still,  if  the  potential
strength  of  the  ligaments  of  one  side
be  increased  by  a  contracted  condition.


the  vertebra  will  be  drawn  toward  that
side.

The  second  of  the  reasons  adduced
by  past  authorities  for  the  impossibil-
ity of  subluxations,  namely,  the  nature
of  the  surface  and  placement  of  the
articular  surfaces,  is  based  upon  a  com-
parison with  the  vertebrae  of  animals
and  a  study  of  the  articular  processes
of  the  vertebrae  of  the  human  spine.

Viewed  from  a  purely  mechanical
standpoint,  the  error  in  these  conclu-
sions becomes  at  once  apparent.  Any
mechanic  on  studying  the  joints  of  the
spine  will  tell  you  that  it  is  constructed
for  the  horizontal  and  not  the  vertical
position.  Look,  for  example,  at  a
group  of  dorsal  vertebrae  and  you  will
see  at  a  glance  how  comparatively  im-
possible it  would  be  for  a  subluxation
to  occur  with  these  vertebrae  held  hor-
izontally, and  how  easily  they  may  be
misplaced  when  held  vertically.  The
upshot  of  the  whole  matter  is  simply
that  the  spine  is  used  as  a  column,
while  it  was  constructed  for  a  beam.

This  I  consider  one  of  the  most  con-
vincing and  conclusive  arguments  in
favor  of  the  existence  of  subluxations.
If  we  admit  that  some  other  diseases
and  conditions  are  due  to  the  fact  that
man  assumes  the  erect  posture,  we
have  no  reason  for  denying  that  an  in-
correct position  of  the  spine  will  tend
to  produce  abnormalities  there.  For
example,  a  study  of  the  points  of  at-
tachment of  the  uterine  ligaments
shows  unmistakably  that  these  liga-
ments hold  the  uterus  in  position  prop-
erly only  when  the  body  is  in  the  hor-
izontal position.  These  "guy-ropes"
were  placed  by  nature  with  the  hori-
zontal, and  not  the  vertical,  position
in  view.  Why  is  anteflexion  so  com-
mon in  young  women?  Why  does  re-
troversion usually  follow  pregnancy?
Why  are  operations  on  the  uterine  lig-
aments for  malposition  so  uniformly
unsuccessful?  Simply  because  of  the
mechanical  imperfections  which  exist.
If  the  above  hypothesis  is  true,  then
it  is  equally  applicable  to  the  vertebral
column.  When'  a  beam  is  made  to
serve  the  purpose  of  a  column,  slight
separation of  its component  parts is


718


Universal  Naturopalliic  Directonj  and  Buijcrs Guide


likely  to  occur.  The  articular  surfaces
are  so  shaped  and  placed  that  they  will
not  permit  of  subluxations  when  the
spine  is  in  the  horizontal  position,  but
they  do  not  lock  perfectly  when  the
spine  is  in  the  vertical  position.

It  may  be  questioned  by  some :  If
the  spine  is  constructed  for  the  hori-
zontal position,  what  is  the  need  of  the
intervertebral  cartilaginous  discs  which
are  considered  to  exist  for  the  purpose
of  preventing  jars  of  the  vertebral  col-
umn? Furthermore,  if  they  were
formed  since  the  spine  has  been  main-
tained in  the  upright  position,  why
have  not  the  articular  processes  also
had  time  to  change  to  meet  the  changed
requirements  put  upon  them?  This  is
readily  answered.  The  discs  have  al-
ways been  present  in  man,  as  they  ex-
ist in  the  spines  of  all  mammals,  but
their  chief  purpose  is  not  to  prevent
jarring  of  the  column.  Their  princi-
pal function  is  that  of  cartilage  lining
any  joint,  namely,  to  afford  a  smooth
surface,  prevent  friction,  and  protect
the  bone.

The  human  spine  has  been  compared
with  that  of  the  cat  by  some  writers.
But  such  comparisons  are  misleading.
In  the  cat  the  articulations  between  the
vertebrae  permit  of  the  greatest  flexi-
bility and  mobility,  not  only  of  the
■  spine  as  a  whole,  but  also  of  the  indi-
vidual vertebrae.  In  man,  on  the  con-
trary, while  the  spine  as  a  whole  is
comparatively  flexible,  movement  be-
tween any  two  vertebrae  is  very  much
restricted.  It  is  evident,  therefore,
that  in  the  cat  slight  displacements  are
automatically  rectified,  while  in  man
they  tend  to  persist.  Comparison  of
the  spine  of  man  with  that  of  the  cat
thus  leads  to  erroneous  conclusions.

The  third  reason  that  subluxations
of  the  vertebrae  have  been  discredited
is  the  failure  of  the  profession  to  dis-
criminate between  the  terms  "Sublux-
ation" and  "Dislocation."  When  the
word  "subluxation"  of  vertebrae  is
used,  it  is  meant  to  convey  the  idea
that  a  slight  change  in  the  relative  po-
sition of  a  vertebra  to  the  contiguous
surfaces  of  the  vertebra  above  and  the
one  below  it  has  occurred. That  is  to


say,  instead  of  the  entire  surface  area
of  a  vertebra  being  approximated,  with
die-like  precision  and  accuracy,  to  its
fellows  above  and  below  it,  it  is  slight-
ly shifted  from  this  position.  There
has  simply  been  a  shifting  in  the  posi-
tion of  one  vertebra  upon  another,  and
the  greater  portion  of  the  surface  areas
of  the  two  vertebrae  still  oppose  each
other.

It  is  freely  conceded  that  complete
disarticulation  of  a  vertebra  is  practi-
cally impossible  without  coincident
fracture.  Chiropractic,  however,  does
not  deal  with  luxations,  but  with  sub-
luxations.

In  concluding  my  answers  to  the
first  question,  "Do  subluxations  actu-
ally occur?"  permit  me  to  add  that  I
have  personally  made  dissections  of
the  human  cadaver,  and  have  found  and
photographed  undoubted  displacements
of  vertebrae  in  the  spines  of  these  ca-
davers. I  realize  that  reproductions  of
these  photographs  would  greatly  en-
hance the  value  of  this  article,  but
space  forbids  their  insertion.  Cuts  of
these  are  contained  in  my  work  "Spinal
Adjustment,"  and  may  be  seen  there
by  those  sufficiently  interested.

Not  only  post-mortem,  but  also  in
the  living  subject  can  subluxations  be
visually  demonstrated.  Thus  on  view-
ing the  spine,  we  may  see  one  spinous
process  not  in  line  with  the  others ;  but
after  application  of  the  proper  thrust,
it  will  be  noted  that  this  spinous  pro-
cess is  in  perfect  alignment  with  the
others.  This  one  fact  should  convince
those  who  believe  only  what  their  eyes
can  see.

Subluxations  can  also  easily  be  pal-
pated by  those  trained  for  this  work.
By  this  means  it  can  readily  be  dem-
onstrated that  conditions  which  existed
before  the  adjustment  of  a  vertebra
supposedly  displaced  do  not  obtain  af-
terward.

Finally,  the  most  valuable  evidence
of  all  in  support  of  the  existence  of
subluxations  is  the  fact  that,  following
adjustment  of  a  subluxated  vertebra,
abnormal  conditions  disappear.

These  are  some  of  the  most  salient
points  in  corroboration  of  the  theory


Vnivpriial  Naturopctlhic  Dircrtonj  and  liuijcrs'  (iiiidr


719


that  subluxations  of  vertebrae  may  oc-
cur. They  have  served  to  convince  me,
and  I  cannot  see  how  anyone  who
views  the  matter  with  an  open  and  un-
prejudiced mind  can  deny  that  these
conclusions  are  correct.

Let  us  now  pass  to  a  consideration
of  the  second  question,  "Is  enough
pressure  exercised  to  block  impulses?"


these  subluxations  actually  produce
sufficient  impingement  of  the  nerves  to
block  impulses?  As  stated  at  the  com-
mencement of  this  article,  I  made  many
investigations  into  this  phase  of  the
subject,  with  the  result  that  I  became
convinced  that  a  subluxated  vertebra
could  produce  sufficient  pressure  upon
the nerves to impair their power of


Fiar.  3. A  Hold  for  Correction  of  Lumbar  Subluxations


During  the  early  days  of  my  investiga-
tion of  Chiropractic  theories,  and  my
effort  to  make  them  square  with  sci-
entific facts,  this  question  presented  a
much  more  knotty  problem  than  the
first.  I  had  become  convinced  that  sub-
luxations are not myths. But, did


conductivity.  Let  me  cite  a  few  of  the
more  important  findings  in  support  of
this  theory  which  I  have  worked  out.
When  displacement  of  a  vertebra  oc-
curs, the  lumen  of  the  intervertebral
foramen  must,  of  necessity,  be  en-
croached  upon by its displaced mar-


720


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biiijcrs'  Guide


gins,  and  its  opening  narrowed.  This
rests  upon  the  physical  axiom  that
any  movement  toward  the  center  of  an
opening  of  its  boundaries  will  dimin-
ish its  area.  Further,  whatever  is  con-
tained in  a  space  so  diminished  in  area
is  either  compressed  or  displaced.  If
it  is  softer  than  the  parts  pressing
upon  it,  compression  will  occur.  This
is  what  takes  place  in  vertebral  sub-
luxations, where  the  intervertebral
foramen  is  narrow  and  where  hard
bone  presses  upon  soft  nerves,  blood-
vessels and  lymphatics.

The  intervertebral  foramen  of  the
adult  human  spine  is  from  1/6  to  1/4
inch  in  diameter,  in  the  living  state.
The  spinal  nerve  measures  1/12  inch
at  its  narrowest  point,  and  1/6  inch  at
its  widest  point.  It  is  placed  in  such
a  position  that  it  does  not  come  into
actual  contact  with  the  bony  boun-
dary of  the  foramen  at  any  point.  But
it  can  be  demonstrated  mathematically
that  its  farthest  distance  from  the  wall
of  the  foramen  is  only  1/8  of  an  inch,
while  only  1/32  of  an  inch  intervenes
between  it  and  the  wall  of  the  fora-
men at  the  point  where  it  lies  nearest
the  bone.  These  figures  do  not  apply
to  microscopic  sections,  with  the  car-
tilage shrivelled,  the  bone  dried  out,
and  the  blood-vessels  and  lymphatics
empty,  but  to  actual  conditions  in  the
living  subject.  When  we  consider
that,"  in  addition  to  the  spinal  nerve,
the  intervertebral  foramen  contains
blood-vessels,  lymphatics,  fat  and  fib-
rous tissue,  it  becomes  apparent  that
not  much  movement  of  a  vertebra  in
any  direction,  is  required  to  produce
sufficient  pressure  upon  the  spinal
nerve  to  seriously  impair  its  power  of
conductivity.

It  has  been  stated  by  some  that
empty  spaces  exist  in  the  interverte-
bral foramen,  as  shown  in  microscopic
sections.  This  is,  however,  incorrect
both  from  an  anatomical  and  a  physi-
cal standpoint.  In  the  first  place.  Na-
ture tolerates  no  vacant  spaces  in  the
body,  and  no  cavity,  canal  or  foramen
is  larger  than  that  required  for  hold-
ing the  structures  which  it  contains.
Thus the intervertebral foramen is


also  only  of  sufficient  size  to  contain
the  vessels  and  nerves  which  it  trans-
mits, and  no  space  is  wasted.  What,
then,  do  the  vacant  spaces  seen  under
the  microscope  contain  when  the  fora-
men is  in  situ?  Distended  blood-
vessels and  lymphatics,  fat,  fibrous  tis-
sue and  cartilage  filled  with  blood.
That  the  nerve  is  surrounded  by  these
soft  structures  affords  it  no  protection,
for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
pressure  which  is  present  is  that  of
hard  bone  on  soft  tissues.

Having  determined  that  pressure
upon  the  nerves  occurs  when  a  verte-
bra is  subluxated,  it  now  becomes  ne-
cessary to  ascertain  if  pressure  of  this
kind  will  block  impulses.  Various
experiments  have  been  made  which
show  that  a  nerve,  when  subjected  to
slight  pressure,  will  not  conduct  im-
pulses; and,  in  the  same  experiment,
as  soon  as  the  pressure  is  removed,  it
again  conducts  impulses.  Probably
the  best  of  these  experiments  was  the
following:  The  sciatic  nerve  and  gas-
trocnemius muscle  of  a  frog  are  dis-
sected out  and  connected  with  an  elec-
tric current.  When  the  nerve  is  stim-
ulated by  the  current,  the  muscle  con-
tracts. If,  now,  pressure  is  made  on
the  nerve,  the  muscular  contractions
cease.  As  soon  as  the  pressure  is  re-
moved, the  muscle  again  contracts.
Since  the  contractions  of  the  muscle
are  dependent  upon  the  nervous  stim-
uli which  it  receives,  it  follows  that
cessation  of  these  contractions  must
have  been  due  to  the  blocking  of  these
impulses  by  the  pressure  on  the  nerve.

This  experiment  demonstrated  an-
other important  fact,  namely,  that  suf-
ficient pressure  may  be  applied  to  a
nerve  to  prevent  it  from  transmitting
impulses  without  injuring  the  nerve  it-
self.

The  effect  of  pressure  to  lessen  the
conduction  power  of  nerves  is  one
which  everyone  may  demonstrate  upon
himself.  For  example,  if  pressure  be
brought  to  bear  on  the  ulnar  nerve
where  it  crosses  the  elbow,  the  region
supplied  by  the  nerve  becomes  numb,
"goes  to  sleep,"  as  it  were.  In  like
manner,  an  organ  when  deprived  of  its


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


721


innervation  "goes  to  sleep,"  and  fails
to  perform  its function.

Now,  it  would  obviously  be  impos-
sible to  test  experimentally  tbe  effect
of  pressure  on  a  nerve  by  a  subluxated
vertebra.  But,  having  ascertained
that  pressure  on  a  nerve  will  impair  its
conductivity  without  injuring  it,  we
certainly  have  a  right  to  conclude  that


must  have  been  due  to  the  subluxa-
tion, or  no  good  effects  would  have
followed  the  adjustment.  This  brings
us  to  a  consideration  of  the  third  ques-
tion, namely,  "Will  withdrawal  of  in-
nervation produce  disease?"

First  of  all,  let  us  consider  the  in-
fluence that  nerves  play  in  the  normal
processes  of  the  anatomy. The  func-


Fig.  4. A  Hold  for  Correction  of  Cervical  Subluxations


similar  pressure  in  a  subluxation  will
produce  a  like  result.  There  is  one
way  to  prove  that  this  is  true,  and  that
is  by  observing  the  effects  of  sublux-
ations clinically.  If  a  patient's  ail-
ments are  relieved  by  adjustment  of  a
subluxation, such disorders evidently


tional  activity  and  organic  integrity
of  every  part,  organ  and  system  of  the
body  are  dependent  upon  proper  in-
nervation. The  medium  through
which  this  state  of  perfect  equilibrium
is  maintained  is  the  sympathetic  ner-
vous system. This  portion  of  the  ner-


722


Vniuersal  Naluropathic  Directorij  and  Buyers'  Guide


vous  system  is  the  mechanism  which
governs  every  unconscious  act  of  the
body.  The  impulses  travel  either  to-
ward the  central  system,  or  from  it.
By  means  of  the  efferent  impulses,  the
proper  relationship  of  all  parts  of  the
body,  individually  and  collectively,  to
their  environment,  is  maintained.  The
functional  activity  of  all  parts  of  the
body  is  made  possible  by  the  efferent
impulses.  These  pass  outward  in  a
constant  stream,  as  shown  by  the  fact
that  the  muscles  are  in  a  state  of
slight  contraction  or  tonus  at  all  times.

We  know  that  the  functional  ele-
ments of  nearly  all  parts  of  the  body
consist  of  tubes  and  tubules.  This  is
especially  true  of  the  gastro-intestinal,
circulatory  and  genito-urinary  sys-
tems, and  of  the  secreting  glands,  not-
ably the  liver.  The  middle  coat  of
these  tubes  and  tubules  consists  of  in-
voluntary muscle  fibres  which  are
governed  by  the  sympathetic  nerve.
The  impulses  which  regulate  the  ac-
tivity of  these  parts  pass  from  the
spinal  nerve  to  the  white  rami,  thence
to  the  ganglia  of  the  gangliated  cord,
and  from  there  to  the  plexuses  in  con-
nection with  the  various  parts  of  the
body.  Hence,  if  the  impulses  are
blocked  at  the  intervertebral  foramen,
they  never  reach  their  destination,  and
the  parts  will  suffer.

Another  evidence  that  innervation
controls  function,  and  that  without
proper  nerve-supply  proper  function  is
impossible  is  this : Authorities  are  all


House  cleaning


agreed  that  the  amount  of  nerve  in-
fluence generated  by  the  brain  must
always  be  commensurate  with  the
amount  of  work  required  of  the  parts.
This  is  excellently  illustrated  by  the
following:  We  have  "the  power  of  de-
termining before  an  act  is  undertaken
the  amount  of  nervous  influence  which
is  necessary  for  the  performance  of
that  act.  Thus,  when  we  lift  a  vessel,
the  force  which  we  employ  in  lifting  it
depends  upon  the  idea  which  we  have
formed  of  its  contents,  when  we  are
not  certain  what  it  contains.  If  it
should  contain  something  much  lighter
than  we  had  estimated,  useless  force
would  be  expended,  and  it  would  be
lifted  with  exceptional  ease;  but  if  it
should  contain  something  much  heavier
than  we  had  anticipated,  we  would  very
likely  drop  it,  because  insufficient  force
was  expended  to  accomplish  the  end
desired.

Just  as  the  response  of  the  muscles
is  proportionate  to  the  amount  of
nerve-force  received  by  them,  so  also
are  the  activities  of  all  parts  of  the
body  dependent  upon  the  amount  of
nerve-impulses  which  they  receive.  If,
therefore,  anything  prevents  the  con-
duction of  these  necessary  impulses  to
any  part  of  the  body,  that  part  will  not
perform  its  function  properly,  or  it  will
suffer  organic  changes.

We  can  learn  from  Nature  herself
whether  pressure  upon  the  nerves
passing  through  the  intervertebral  for-
amina is  frought  with  danger.  That
she  recognizes  the  importance  of
maintaining  the  normal  calibre  of  the
intervertebral  foramina,  she  demon-
strates in  numerous  ways.  For  exam-
ple, examination  of  spines,  post  mor-
tem, shows  how  exostoses  formed  dur-
ing life  are  so  arranged  that  they  will
protect  the  intervertebral  foramina
from  becoming  occluded.  Again,  in
old  age,  when  the  spine  becomes  set-
tled and  the  discs  thinned,  with  possi-
bility of  closure  of  the  intervertebral
foramina,  Nature  recognizes  this  dan-
ger; the  spine  bends  backward,  the
back  parts  of  the  vertebrae  are
thrown  apart,  and  closure  of  the  fora-
mina is  thus  prevented.


Universal  Naturopathic  Dirrrtonj  and  Buyers'  Gnich


723


THE  ANATOMICAL  BASIS  OF  CHIROPRACTIC

By  WILLIAM  CHARLES SCHULZE,  M.  D.,  D.  C.

Dean  of  the National  School  of  Chiropractic, Chicago, 111.


Chiropractic  is  founded  on  the  the-
ory that  vertebrae  may  become  sub-
luxated,  that  is  to  say,  that  a  slight  dis-
placement of  their  opposing-  articular
surfaces  may  occur.  As  a  consequence
of  this  subluxation,  there  is  produced
an  impingement  upon  the  nerves
which  pass  through  the  intervertebral
foramen  corresponding  to  the  ver-
tebrae involved  in  the  displacement.
This  impingement  is  a  direct  result  of
the  pressure  produced  by  the  altered
position  of  the  margins  of  the  inter-
vertebral foramen.

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  go  fur-
ther into  the  anatomy  of  the  parts  in-
volved than  to  recall  that  the  inter-
vertebral foramen  is  bounded  above
and  below  by  the  pedicles,  posteriorly
by  the  articular  process,  and  anter-
iorly by  the  body  and  intervertebral
disc.

Since  the  anterior  surface  of  the  ar-
ticular process  constitutes  the  poster-
ior wall  of  the  intervertebral  foramen,
it  can  be  easily  understood  how  the
slightest  forward  displacement  of  a
vertebra  would  cause  the  articular
process  to  encroach  on  the  antero-pos-
terior  diameter  of  the  intervertebral
foramen,  and  press  upon  the  spinal
nerve  at  that  point.

In  like  manner,  since  the  pedicles
form  the  upper  and  lower  walls  of  the
intervertebral  foramen,  it  is  at  once  ap-
parent how  an  upward  or  downward
displacement  of  a  vertebra  would  cause
the  pedicles  to  encroach  on  the  vertical
diameter  of  the  foramen.  In  such  a
case,  the  spinal  nerve  is  pressed  upon
by  the  pedicles,  either  the  lower  or  the
upper  one,  as  the  displacement  is
either  upward  or  downward.

Lastly,  since  the  body  of  the  verte-
bra forms  the  anterior  wall  of  the  in-
tervertebral foramen,  it.  is  clear  that  a
backward  displacement  of  a  vertebra
would  result  in  the  posterior  surface
of  the  body  encroaching  on  the  an-
tero-posterior  diameter  of  the  foramen,
and press upon the spinal nerve.


Now,  the  intervertebral  foramen
must  not  be  looked  upon  as  a  circular
opening  with  a  nerve  passing  through
its  center.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  en-
tirely occupied  by  the  structures  which
pass  through  it.  Nature  wastes  no
space,  and  no  cavity  or  foramen  in  the
entire  body  is  larger  than  is  required
for_  the  holding  of  the  structures
which  it  contains  or  transmits.  Thus
the  intervertebral  foramen  is  only  of
sufficient  size  to  contain  the  vessels
and  nerves  which  it  transmits,  and  a
decrease  in  the  size  of  the  foramen  re-
sults in  a  diminution  of  the  space  re-
quired by  the  nerves  for  the  exercise
of  their  normal  function.

That  part  of  the  vertebra  which  is
displaced  and  encroaches  upon  the  dia-
meter of  the  foramen,  presses  upon  the
spinal  nerve.  It  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  this  theory  disproves  itself,
for  conditions  are  not  always  equal.
Were  the  ligaments  unyielding,  inani-
mate bands,  never  changing,  and  al-
ways of  the  same  degree  of  contrac-
tion on  each  side  of  the  vertebral  col-
umn, any  displacement  of  the  verte-
brae sufficient  to  produce  serious  con-
sequences would  be  impossible.  But
these  ligaments  are  vital  structures,
constantly  changing,  now  contracted
and  again  relaxed.  At  times,  the  liga-
ments on  one  side  are  more  contracted
than  those  of  the  opposite  side,  as  a
result  of  external  or  reflex  irritation.
This  would  naturally  tend  to  draw  the
vertebra  with  which  these  ligaments
are  connected  toward  the  side  on
which  the  contracted  condition  of  the
ligaments  exists.  Were  the  ligaments
of  each  side  equally  contracted,  there
would  be  a  perfectly  balanced  condi-
tion, and  displacements  of  the  verte-
brae would  be  impossible.  It  is  be-
cause of  this  lack  of  balance  that  sub-
luxations may  be  produced,  and  it  is
this  contingencv  which  anatomists
have  failed  to  take  into  consideration.
As  examples  of  the  production  of  con-
traction  of  muscles by  irritation, the


724


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers'  Guide


following  may  be  cited :  Cold  air
striking-  the  surface  of  the  body  causes
the  tiny  ifiuscles  surrounding  the  pores
of  the  skin  to  contract.  Striking  the
biceps  muscles  a  quick  blow  and  not-
ing the  local  contraction  at  the  exact
spot  struck  also  illustrates  the  produc-
tion of  muscular  contraction  by  irri-
tation. These  are  both  examples  of
external  irritation.  As  an  example  of
reflex  irritation  acting  to  produce
muscular  contraction,,  the  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  musculature  of  the
intestine  produced  by  the  presence  of
gas  may  be  noted.

These  same  principles  may  be  ap-
plied to  the  muscles  and  ligaments  of
the  spine.

The  musculature  of  each  segment  of
the  spinal  column  is  supplied  by  out-
going nerve-fibres  in  the  posterior  di-
vision of  the  corresponding  spinal
nerve.  In  a  reflex  act,  the  outgoing
impulse  passes  to  this  branch  of  the
spinal  nerve.  When  the  stimulus  at
the  periphery,  which  excites  the  re-
flex act,  is  applied  on  one  side  of  the
median  plane,  the  responses  first  ap-
pear in  the  muscles  of  the  same  side ;
and  if  the  stimulus  is  slight,  they  may
appear  on  that  side  only.  The  incom-
ing impulses  are  therefore  first  and
most  effectively  distributed  to  the  ef-
ferent cells  located  on  the  same  side
of  the  cord  as  that  on  which  these  im-
pulses enter.  In  the  peripheral  sys-
tem, the  nerve-impulse,  when  once
started  within  a  fibre  or  axone,  is  con-
fined to  that  track,  and  does  not  dif-
fuse to  other  fibres  running  parallel
with  it,  but  it  does  extend  to  all  the
branches  of  that  axone,  whatever  their
distribution.  As  a  result  of  this  phy-
siological fact,  the  first  response  to  the
outgoing  impulse  of  a  reflex  act  will
be  a  contraction  of  the  muscles  and  lig-
aments of  the  spine  on  the  side  at
which  the  ingoing  impulse  entered  the
cord,  since  these  muscles  and  liga-
ments are  supplied  by  the  efferent  fi-
bres in  the  posterior  division  of  the
spinal  nerve,  which  is  the  first  branch
given  off  from  the  spinal  nerve.

Physiologically,  a  muscle  that  is  re-
peatedly stimulated  by  nerve-impulses


linally  reaches  a  state  of  tetanic  con-
traction ;  that  is  to  say,  if  the  impulses
are  continuous,  the  muscle  finally  re-
mains in  a  permanently  contracted
condition.  We  know  that  the  act  of
defecation  is  reflexly  produced  as  a  re-
sult of  efferent  nerve-impulses  to  the
muscles  of  the  bowel.  These  efferent
impulses  are  first  excited  in  the  cord
in  response  to  afferent  impulses  from
the  bowel,  produced  by  stimulation
of  the  nerve-endings  in  its  walls  by  the
presence  of  feces.  Since  the  efferent
impulses  extend  to  all  the  branches  of
the  efferent  nerve,  each  such  outgoing
impulse  also  produces  a  slight  contrac-
tion of  the  muscle  in  that  segment  of
the  spine,  and  on  the  same  side  on
which  the  ingoing  impulses  entered.

Reflex  action  is  constantly  going  on,
and,  therefore,  the  musculature  of  dif-
ferent segments  of  the  spine  is  seldom
in  a  state  of  balanced  contraction  on
each  side.  If  this  contraction  on  the
one  side  is  continuous,  the  correspond-
ing vertebra  must  inevitably  be  drawn
toward  that  side.  We  find,  therefore,
that  although  the  ligaments  of  the
spine  are  strong  enough  to  hold  the
vertebrae  in  proper  position,  if  the  po-
tential strength  of  one  side  be  in-
creased by  contraction  of  the  liga-
ments, the  vertebra  will  be  drawn 'to
that  side.

As  to  the  second  of  the  reasons  ad-
duced for  the  impossibility  of  subluxa-
tion of  the  vertebrae,  namely,  the  con-
figuration of  the  articular  processes,
this  opinion  is  based  on  comparison
with  animals  and  a  study  of  the  sur-
faces of  the  articular  processes  in  the
human  spine.

Studied  from  a  purely  mechanical
viewpoint,  the  error  in  these  conclu-
sions becomes  at  once  apparent.  First
of  all,  not  only  are  the  articular  pro-
cesses in  quadrupeds  constructed  dif-
ferently from  those  in  man,  they  are
also  placed  in  a  different  plane ;  that
is  to  say,  they  are  placed  in  a  horizon-
tal position  in  animals,  while  in  man
they  are  in  a  vertical  position.
.  Let  us  take  for  example  the  dorsal
vertebrae.  By  studying  a  group  of
these  vertebrae,  it  may  be  seen  at  a


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


725


glance  how  comparatively  impossible
it  would  be  for  a  subluxation  to  occur
there,  while  the  body  is  in  the  hori-
zontal position,  and  how  easily  possi-
ble it  is  for  the  subluxation  to  occur
with  the  body  in  the  vertical  position.

The  human  spine  has  been  compared
with  that  of  a  cat  to  show  that  sublux-
ations are  impossible,  owing  to  the
shape  and  placement  of  the  articular
processes.  The  human  spine  and  that
of  the  cat  are,  however,  very  different.
In  the  cat,  the  articulations  between
the  vertebrae  permit  of  the  greatest
flexibility,  there  is  great  freedom  of
movement,  not  alone  of  the  spine  as  a
whole,  but  also  of  the  individual  ver-
tebrae with  each  other.  In  man,  on
the  contrary,  while  the  spine,  as  a
whole,  is  comparatively  flexible,  move-
ment between  any  two  vertebrae  is
very  much  restricted.  As  a  result  of
this  difference  in  the  mobility  of  one
vertebra  upon  the  other,  it  is  evident
that,  when  a  slight  displacement  of
one  vertebra  upon  another  is  brought
about  in  a  cat,  it  is  at  once  rectified,
while  in  man  it  tends  to  persist.  Many
diseases  peculiar  to  the  human  being
have  been  proven,  beyond  doubt,  to  be
dependent  upon  the  fact  that  during
our  waking  hours  we  assume  the  ver-
tical posture.  Consider,  for  example,
hemorrhoids  and  malpositions  of  the
uterus.  The  same  hypothesis  can  be
applied  with  equal  reason  to  the  ver-
tebral column,  since  a  study  of  its
construction  from  a  mechanical  stand-
point, shows  clearly  that  it  is  origin-
ally designed  for  a  horizontal  position
and  not  for  the  vertical.  Consequent-
ly, when  the  vertebral  column  is  placed
in  the  vertical  position — when  a
"beam"  becomes  a  "column"— slight
separation  of  its  component  parts  is
likely  to  occur.

It  may  be  questioned  by  some :  If
the  spine  is  constructed,  for  the  hori-
zontal position,  what  is  the  need  of
the  intervertebral  cartilaginous  discs,
which  are  considered  to  exist  for  the
purpose  of  preventing  jars  to  the  ver-
tebral column?  Furthermore,  if  they
were  formed  since  the  spine  has  as-
sumed an  upright  position,  why  have


not  the  articular  processes  also  had
time  to  change  to  meet  the  changed
requirements  put  upon  them?  This
can  be  answered  very  readily,  by  call-
ing attention  to  the  fact  that  the  discs
are  far  from  being  merely  for  the  pur-
pose of  preventing  jarring  of  the  spinal
column.  Their  important  function  is
this:  Were  there  no  cartilage  inter-
posed between  the  bodies  of  the  ver-
tebrae, the  slight  movement  between
the  bare  bone  would  soon  cause  the
bones  to  wear  away.  It  has  its  coun-
terpart in  all  joints  (and  the  vertebral
articulations  are  joints)  which  are
lined  with  cartilage.

The  next  question  that  naturally
arises  is :  Does  the  displacement  of
the  vertebrae  produce  pressure  upon
the  structures  passing  through  the  in-
tervertebral foramen?  It  must  be  re-
membered that  it  requires  very  little
pressure  upon  a  nerve  to  destroy  its
power  of  conductivity,  and  that  is  all
that  is  required  to  disturb  the  function
of  the  parts  which  that  nerve  supplies.

That  Nature  recognizes  the  tremen-
dous importance  of  maintaining  the
normal  calibre  of  the  intervertebral
foramina,  she  demonstrates  in  numer-
ous ways.  For  example,  examination
of  spines  in  osteological  collections  of
the  National  School  of  Chiropractic
shows  how  the  exostoses,  where  pres-
ent, are  so  arranged  that  they  protect
the  intervertebral  foramen  from  be-
coming completely  occluded,  as  the
vertebrae  collapse.  Again,  in  old  age,
when  settling  of  the  spine  occurs,  and
there  comes  the  danger  of  complete
closure  of  the  intervertebral  foramina,
nature  recognizes  this  danger,  and  the
spine  becomes  bent  forward,  and  the
back  parts  of  the  vertebrae  are  thrown
apart  to  prevent  this  contingency.

It  is  a  strange  fact  that  medical  stu-
dents are  required  to  make  a  minute
dissection  of  the  peripheral  nervous
system  to  the  minutest  branches  of
the  nerves,  but  a  dissection  of  the
spine  is  not  required.  It  has  remained
for  the  students  of  spinal  adjustment
to  do  this,  and  the  spinal  findings,  post
mortem,  reveal  the  truth  of  the  exist-
ence of  displacements  of  the  vertebrae.


726


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  accompanying  illustrations  are
reproductions  of  i)hotographs  taken  of
a  cada\rr  in  prt)cess  of  dissection  in
the  anatomical  laboratory  of  the  Na-
tional School  of  Chiropractic  of  Chi-
cago. These  illustrations  show  sev-
eral important  things :  First,  that
subluxations  really  exist ;  second,  that
sufficient displacement of the verte-


l)rae  is  present  to  occasion  pressure
upon  the  structures  passing  through
the  intervertebral  foramina;  and  third,
that  these  subluxations  may  be  de-
tected by  palpation  of  the  surface  of
the  back.

These  figures  prove  beyond  any  suc-
cessful denial  that  displacements  of  the
vertebrae,  without  fracture,  are  not
only  possible,
but  actually  do
exist.  These
l)hotographic  re-
productions,
while  showing
the  actual  nar-
rowing of  the  in-
tervertebral for-
a  m  i  n  a,  cannot
show  the  com-
pression of  the
vessels  and
nerves,  as  wit-
nessed directly
on  the  cadaver.
Another  inter-
esting  fact
brought  out  in
the  cadaver  was
the  ease  with
which  the  handle
of  the  scalpel
could  be  intro-
duced into  the
foramina  corre-
sponding to  ver-
tebrae which
were  not  sublux-
ated.  and  the  im-
possibility of  ih-
troducinp"  it  into


foramina

compon-

vertebrae

displaced.

mierht be


Fig. 1.— The back with skin and  superficial fascia removed. The
position  of  the  spinous  processes  is  somewhat  evident  on  inspection,
and  they  were  readily  palpable.


those
whose
e  n  t
were
It

stated  that  there
were  present  at
the  dissection  of
the  cadaver
which  revealed
these  findings,
some  who  had
more  or  less  mis-
givings relative


Universal  Natnropctthic  Dirrctonj  and  Binjrrs'  Guide  727


to  the  actual  existence  of  vertebral  sub-
luxations. No  one,  however,  could  deny
the  truth  of  what  his  eyes  witnessed.
The  third  reason  that  subluxations
are  not  considered  possible  by  some
investigators  is  that  they  have  not,  in
the  first  place,  looked  into  this  sub-
ject thoroughly  enough  ;  and  secondly,
that  they  have  failed  to  discriminate
between  the
terms  subluxa-
tion and  disloca-
tion, which  are
entirely  dissimi-
lar.

It  is  true  that
major  lesions  of
the  spine  have
received  proper
attention.  But
the  possibility
of  the  existence
of  minor  injuries
of  the  spine  has
never  been  thor-
oughly investi-
gated, until  the
results  achieved
by  spinal  adjust-
ment have  made
it  plain  that  mi-
nor spinal  le-
sions are  exceed-
i  n  g  1  y  common,
and  are  followed
by  the  most  ser-
i  o  u  s  c  o  n  s  e-
Cfuences  in  many
instances.  W  e
all  know  that  the
organic  integrity
and  functional
activity  of  every
part  of  the  body
depend  upon
proper  innerva-
tion. The  loca-
tion at  which  in-
terference with
nerve  function  is
most  likely  t  o
occur,  is  natural-
ly there  where
the  nerves  are
most subject to


injury.  Such  a  location  the  interver-
tebral foramina  admirably  furnish,  for
the  nerves  pass  between  movable
bones  which  may  become  displaced,
and  subject  the  nerves  to  pressure.
This  being  true,  the  vertebral  column
becomes  the  most  important  division
of  the  body.  Yet  it  has  received  less
study  than  any  other  portion,  at  least


Fig.  2. — The  back  with  the  fourth  layer  of  muscles  removed,  and
the  fifth  layer  exposed.  The  spinous  processes  are  entirely  un-
covered by  muscles  and  ligaments  and  stand  out  very  prominently.


728


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


t


A^--
6--*


C


Fig.  3.— ANTERIOR  ASPECT  OF
SPINE.  (A  &  B)— Compression  of  the
right  side  of  the  discs  between  the  first,
second  and  third  Dorsal  Vertebrae
with  approximation  of  these  vertebrae
on  that  side  and  narrowing  of  the  inter-
vertebral foramina.  (C) — Lateral  dis-
placement of  the  fifth  Dorsal  Vertebra
to  the  left.  (D,  E,  F) — Compression
of  the  anterior  portion  of  the  discs  be-
tween the ninth, tenth, eleventh and


from  a  mechanical  viewpoint,  and
the  body  should  be  studied  from  that
viewpoint,  since  it  is  in  reality  a  piece
of  mechanism.

Ordinarily  when  the  word  subluxa-
tion is  mentioned,  the  reader  at  once
•pictures  to  himself  a  disarticulation  of
the  vertebrae,  and  since  it  really  is  im-
possible for  a  complete  disarticulation
of  a  vertebra  to  occur  without  frac-
ture, he  discredits  the  possibility  of  a
subluxation.  This  is,  however,  the
wrong  construction  of  the  term,  since
a  subluxation  is  not  a  complete  disar-
ticulation of  a  vertebra  from  the  ver-
tebrae above  and  below  it.  It  is  sim-
ply a  slight  change  in  the  relative  po-
sition of  the  contiguous  vertebrae
above  and  below  it.  That  is  to  say,
instead  of  the  entire  surface  area  of  a
vertebra  being  approximated,  with  die-
like precision  and  accuracy,  to  its  fel-
lows above  and  below  it,  it  is  slightly
moved  from  this  position.  There  is
not  an  absolute  and  entire  separation
of  the  articular  processes  of  two  ver-
tebrae ;  on  the  contrary,  the  greater
portion  of  their  surface  area  still  op-
pose each  other;  there  has  simply  been
a  slight  shifting  of  one  u])on  the  other.
This  movement  takes  place  in  various
directions,  depending  upon  the  config-
uration of  the  articular  processes.
Were  the  vertebrae  absolutely  locked
in  position,  even  the  slightest  move-
ment would  be  impossible,  including
even  normal  movements.  But  the  fact
that  some  movement  between  indi-
vidual vertebrae  is  possible,  is  evidence
that  varying  degrees  of  movement  may
take  place,  depending  upon  the  force
applied.  Anything  that  is  capable  of
some  movement,  is  capable  of  greater
or  less  movement,  and  we  know  that
the  vertebrae  must  move  upon  each
other,  or  there  could  be  no  movement
of  the  spine  as  a  whole.  When  this
movement  exceeds  certain  definite  li-
mits, there  is  present  the  danger  of
inability  of  the  vertebra  to  return  to

twelfth  Dorsal  Vertel)rac.  (G) — Rotary
displacement  of  the  second  Lumbar  Ver-
tebra to  the  right  side.  (H) — Compres-
sion of  the  right  side  of  the  disc  between
the  fourth  and  fifth  Lumbar  Vertebrae.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihii/ers'  Guide


729


its  normal  position.  In  speaking  of
movement  in  this  regard,  very  slight
movement  i  s  i  m-
plied,  since,  as  men-
tioned above,  a
movement  of  one-
eighth  of  an  inch
will  occasion  pres-
sure upon  the  struc-
tures passing  thru
the  intervertebral
foramen  sufficient  to
prevent  the  conduc-
tion of  impulses  to
the  parts  for  v/hich
they  are  destined,
with  derangement  in
the  parts  supplied
by  the  involved
nerves.  Such  func-
tional derangement
of  parts  thus  de-
prived of  their  nerve-
supply  follows,  for
the  reason  that  the
amount  of  nerve-in-
fluence must  always
b  e  commensurate
with  the  amount  of
work  required  of  the
parts  supplied  by  the
nerves.  This  is  ex-
cellently illustrated
by  the  following:
We  have  the  power
of  determining  be-
forehand the  amount
of  nerve  influence
necessary  for  the
production  of  a  -cer-
tain degree  of  move-
ment. Thus,  when
we  lift  a  vessel,  the
force  which  we  em-
ploy in  lifting  it  de-
pends upon,  the  idea
which  we  have
formed  of  its  .con-
tents, when  we  are
not  certain  what  it
contains.  If  it
should,  therefore,
contain  something
much  lighter  than
we had estimated,


useless  force  would  be  expended,  and
it would be lifted with exceptional


Fig.  4.— LATERAL  ASPECT  OF  SPINE.  (A  &  B)— The
anterior  portion  of  the  intervertebral  disc  is  thinned,  with  con-
sequent approximation  of  the  vertebrae  and  narrowing  of  the
intervertebral  foramina.  (C,  D,  E) — Thinning  of  the  discs  and
approximation  of  the  vertebrae.  (F) — The  fourth  Lumbar  is
displaced  posteriorly,  and  encroaches  on  the  entero-posterior
diameter of the intervertebral foramen below.


730


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijers'  Guide


ease;  but  it  it  contained  something
much  heavier  than  we  had  anticipated,
we  would  very  likely  drop  it,  because
insufficient  force  was  expended  to  ac-
complish the  end  desired.

Just  as  the  response  of  muscles  is
proportionate  to  the  amount  of  nerve-
force  received  by  them,  so  also  are  the
functional  activities  of  all  parts  of  the
body dependent on the amount or


strength  of  the  nerve-impulses  re-
ceived by  them.  If,  therefore,  any-
thing interferes  with  the  power  of  con-
duction of  the  nerve,  the  impulses
which  it  normally  conveys  to  the  parts
which  it  supplies  are  not  forthcoming,
and  these  parts  will  suffer.  There  will
])e  either  functional  derangement,  or
changes  in  its  structure.


EVOLUTION  AND  CHIROPRACTIC

By  ANTON  DEININGER,  D.  O.,  D.  C.

Dean The New York School of Chiropractic


Evolution  of  man  as  a  gradual
growth  and  transformation  from
lower  animals  and  a  differentiation  in
intellectual  development  is  now  so
fully  established  as  to  require  no
argument.  Yet,  any  casual  reader  of
science  will  easily  learn  how,  several
years  ago,  it  was  mocked  and
ridiculed.

So  it  is  with  the  Science  of
Chiropractic.  Struggling  in  early
years  against  the  slander  of  those  in-
trenched in  the  old  school,  mocked  by
the  ignorant  laity,  yet,  slowly  but
surely,  it  is  reaching  its  own  position.
It  is  in  plain  fact  the  application  of
the  laws  of  race  evolution  to  indi-
vidual neural  and  brain  evolution.
Through  the  logical  association  of
nerves  and  nerve  impulses,  the  high-
est intellectual  development  is  ascer-
tained. Therefore,  chiropractically
eliminating  all  the  obstacles  in  the
proper  co-ordination  and  association
of  nerve  cells  is  enabling  man  to  at-
tain a  higher  mastery  of  sound  health,
and  will  furnish  new  life  current  to
those  cells,  leading  a  life  of  inactivity.
We  know  to-day,  that  certain  areas  in
our  brain  are  absolutely  undeveloped
and  that  we  know  very  little  of,  for
instance,  the  Post  Central  areas.

By  Chiropractic,  we  can  awaken
these  slumbering  cells  and  bring  them
to  a  greater  development  and  enfold-
ment.  If  a  cell  is  not  nourished
properly  and  has  its  excretions  re-
moved, it  cannot  do  the  work  in  order
to  unfold  its  highest  possibilities.


Several  years  ago,  I  was  treating  a
little  girl  of  about  7  years  of  age.  She
could  neither  walk,  nor  speak.  Her
forehead  was  extremely  narrow  and
flat,  but  the  occipital  portion  of  the
head  was  developed  to  an  enormous
degree.  Her  bearing  was  that  of  an
imbecile.  Eat — she  could  for  three ;
saliva  running  down  her  mouth
steadily.

Whenever  she  heard  music,  she
cried  like  a  dog  and  raved  like  a
maniac.  Her  mother  only  brought
her  here  so  that  she  would  at  least  be
able  to  walk.  It  was  nearly  impos-
sible to  treat  her  and  two  people  had
to  hold  her  to  the  table.

She  received  a  series  of  adjust-
ments and  slowly  and  surely  she  came
within  control.  After  the  twenty-
third  adjustment  she  was  able  to  walk
three  times  the  entire  length  of  the
office;  and  the  old  trouble  of  the  con-
tinuous flow  of  saliva  was  eliminated
and  reduced  itself  to  the  normal  con-
dition. Her  mis-shaped  forehead
slowly  expanded  and  broadened  to  its
normal  size  and  shape.  Upon  hearing
music  she  stopped  crying  altogether.
She  gradually  acquired  the  power
over  her  vocal  organs  and  began  to
speak  and  play  as  a  normal  healthy
child  with  the  other  children.

To-day  five  years  have  elapsed.  She
is  now  normal  and  possesses  all  the
faculties  of  a  healthy  child  of  her  own
age  and  attends  the  Public  School
and  keeps  up  with  her  class  mates.

Taking this case more in detail


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Binjfrs'  (luidi


731


from  tlie  intellectual  standpoint  we
find  that  the  greatest  and  most  im-
portant improvement  was  the  broad-
ening and  awakening  of  the  intel-
lectual faculties  and  portions  of  the
brain.  The  series  of  Adjustments
aroused  and  brought  to  life  again  the
slumbering  nerve  cells,  their  latent
energy  being  transferred  into  poten-
tial power  and  activity.

Thousands  of  cases  similar  to  the
sane Asylums  and  similar  institutions,
the  inmates,  being-  there  for  life,  not  be-
ing able  to  enjoy  the  activities  of
normal,  healthy  life.  To  them,  Chiro-
practic would  be  a  God's  Gift.  Chiro-
practic would  remove  in  their  cases,
those  obstacles  to  the  proper  co-ordi-
nation and association of the nerve


cells  and  nerve  fibres  in  the  brain.
Chiropractic  would,  therefore,  ener-
gize those  impulses  of  the  life  current
that  they  would  produce  the  higher
evolution  and  transformation  of  the
inner  structure.  Similarly  as  in
Evolution  of  man  from  the  horizontal
to  the  erect  position,  from  the  low
groveling  stage  to  the  intellectual
direction,  so,  in  the  future  Evolution,
the  spark  of  life  in  the  future  genera-
tions would  produce  a  Super-man  and
a Super-woman.

It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to
wait  for  nature  to  take  its  time.  We
can  anticipate  this  evolution  of  man-
kind by  principles  as  Chiropractic
which  will  enable  them  to  find  the
proper  balances  of  the  body,  mind  and
soul.


WHAT  CHIROPRACTIC  IS

By  DR.  WILLARD  CARVER

Dean  of  Carver  Chiropractic  College, Oklahoma  City, Okla.


One  of  the  remarkable  things  of  this
period  is  the  number  of  persons  that
will  assume  to  tell  you  what  Chiro-
practic is.

The  great  number  of  persons  that
are  ready  at  all  times,  not  only  to  tell
what  Chiropractic  is,  but  to  fix  its  re-
lation to  all  other  systems  and  its
value  to  society,  disclose  in  their  at-
tempt to  do  so,  their  utter  lack  of  quali-
fication for  the  task.

There  is  a  conception  abroad  that
Chiropractic  is  a  very  simple  and  li-
mited thing,  and  consists  of  a  peculiar
method  of  manipulation  and  that,
therefore,  anyone  that  has  had  a  little
smattering  of  what  is  indifferently
called  "Moves,"  is  competent  to  disser-
tate learnedly,  at  least  comprehen-
sively, on  Chiropractic.

The  general  impression  that  Chiro-
practic is  a  simple  manipulation  and
is  limited  in  its  scope  of  applicatioli,
exists  because  of  specific  intention,
primarily  of  the  medical  profession,
but  generally  by  many  other  systems,
the  practitioners  of  which  have  con-
ceived, unwisely,  that  they  are  in  com-
petition with  Chiropractors.


If  an  individual  wished  to  know
what  the  law  is  on  any  subject,  he
would  go  to  a  lawyer,  and  if  he  wished
to  be  absolutely  certain  about  what  the
law  is,  he  would  go  to  a  good  lawyer.
The;  same  rule  should  apply  to  Chiro-
practic.

If  an  individual  wishes  to  know  what
Chiropractic  is,  he  should  go  to  a
Chiropractor,  not  to  an  individual  that
professes  to  be  every  kind  of  a  doctor,
but  to  one  who  devotes  his  entire  at-
tention and  thought  to  Chiropractic,
and  then,  if  he  wishes  to  be  absolutely
certain  what  Chiropractic  is,  he  will
go  to  a  good  Chiropractor.

If  those  desiring  to  find  out  what
Chiropractic  is  will  follow  the  sug-
gestions so  far  given,  they  will  learn
that  Chiropractic  was  named  in  1895,
and  that  the  name  was  composed  of
two  Greek  words,  the  first  meaning
"hand"  and  the  second  meaning  "done"
or  "performed,"  so  that  Chiropractic,
in  its  original  significance,  means
simply,  done  or  performed  with  the
hand.

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the
name  is  expressive  of  the  qualities  that


732


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


go  with  it  any  more  than  the  name  of
an  individual  represents  his  qualifica-
tions. It  is  within  the  experience  of
all,  that  men  bearing  very  common
names  have  nevertheless  presented
very  uncommon  qualities,  and  the  in-
vestigator must  expect  that  very  re-
sult with  regard  to  Chiropractic.

Chiropractic  consists,  first  of  all,  of
biology.  It  has  presented  to  the  world,
for  the  first  time,  an  explanation  of
life  that  is  universal  in  its  application,
and  stands  behind  and  is  explanatory
of  every  phase  of  living,  whether  in
the  normal  or  the  abnormal.

The  Science  of  Chiropractic  explains
fully  the  origin  of  material,  animate
structures.  It  explains  the  growth  and
maturity  of  such  structures,  their
maintenance,  and,  finally,  fully  ex-
plains their dissolution.

Mankind  has  sought  vainly  in  all
periods  of  the  world's  history  for  a
scientific  explanation  of  the  origin  or
beginning  of  animate,  material  bodies.
Huxley,  Darwin,  Hagel,  Spencer  and
many  others  in  more  modern  times,
have  expended  the  efforts  of  a  life-
time that  they  might  discover  this
fact,  or  the  way  in  which  animate
bodies  began  existence,  with  abject
failure  in  each  instance,  but  the  prin-
ciples of  Chiropractic  render  the  ex-
planation of  the  phenomena  of  animate
beings  beautifully  clear  and  compre-
hensive.

The  Science  of  Chiropractic,  after
having  explained  the  origin  of  mate-
rial, animate  beings,  proceeds  to  teach
the  anatomy  of  human  structure  whol-
ly and  entirely  from  its  biologic  aspects
and,  therefore,  teaches  that  human  or-
ganism is  a  machine  and  that  it  is  a
machine  in  action ;  a  machine  that  may
not  pause  in  its  conduct  but  must  con-
tinually perform  its  machinic  offices  to
the  period  of  its  disintegration.

The  basic  biologic  law  upon  which
the  Science  of  Chiropractic  predicates
its  anatomic  deductions  is  that  the  ra-
diation of  force — usually  called  nerve
stimulus — into  and  through  its  organ-
ized channels — the  Brain  and  Nerve
System — causes  all  animation.

It  is  not  difficult  to see, from  the


standpoint  of  the  application  of  this
biologic  law,  that  if,  after  a  material
start  to  produce  an  organism  has  been
made,  this  force  may  go  on  in  an  in-
telligent manner  and  complete  and
maintain  the  organism,  it  may  just  as
well,  or  just  as  easily,  construct  that
original  part,  and  the  Science  of  Chiro-
practic teaches  that  in  each  biologic
instance  that  force  does  originally
construct  the  beginning  particles,  as
well  as  all  of  the  particles  that  com-
pose the  finished  organism.

The  method  of  deducing  anatomy
from  the  law  of  the  application  of
force  to  matter  is  the  greatest  innova-
tion of  the  last  fifteen  years,  which
seems  to  exceed  for  wonders  of  dis-
covery any  other  like  period  of  the
world's  history.  In  such  anatomic  in-
struction, there  is  no  danger  of  mis-
takes, if  a  proper  concentration  and
consecration  is  brought  to  the  task.

Having  taught  anatomy  Chiroprac-
ticly  or  deductively,  which  is  the  same
thing,  the  Science  of  Chiropractic  pro-
ceeds to  teach  physiology  in  the  same
way.  In  other  words,  if  a  segment,  or-
gan or  part  of  the  body  is  constructed
by  the  application  of  force  moving  the
particles  into  such  relation  as  to  pro-
duce such  segments,  organs  or  parts,
force  then  maintains  such  particles  in
relation  of  construction,  and  also
causes  them  to  act  in  such  way  as  to
maintain  the  segment,  organ  or  part,
and  also  causes  the  relative  segments,
organs  or  parts  to  act  in  the  same  man-
ner, which  means  that  all  of  the  seg-
ments, organs  or  parts  are  caused  to
act  in  co-ordinance  to  produce  that
poise  and  wonderful  co-ordination
which  we  call  "Health,"  or  normal
function.

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  physi-
ology, studied  from  the  standpoint  in-
dicated in  the  preceding  paragraph,
becomes  a  fixed  and  scientific  thing —
not  less  so  than  the  anatomic  structure
from  which  it  springs  and  the  opera-
tion of  which  it  is.  Physiology  from
this  standpoint  could  never  be  a  theor-
etic study,  except  to  those  who  did
not  know  anatomic  structure — for  to
know anatomic structure, Chiroprac-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directorij  and  Bnijcrs'  Guide


733


ticly,  is  to  know  physiolot^ic  action,
for  the  two  are  insei)arable,  physiology
being-  a  sequence  of  anatomy.

The  Science  of  Chiropractic  teaches
that  pathology  and  symptomatology
are  nothing  but  abnormal  physiology,
pathology  consisting  in  the  anatomic
changes  incident  to  interference  with
the  radiation  of  constructive  force,
which  results  in  anatomic  changes
amounting  to  elemental  displacement.
Symptomatology  is  but  the  expression
of  abnormal  physiology,  or  is  but  the
evidences  of  the  anatomic  changes
produced  in  the  processes  of  pathology,
or  is  but  unusual  function,  resulting
from  anatomic  decadence,  resulting
from  interference  with  transmission  of
force,  amounting  to  anatomic  dis-
placement.

In  view  of  what  has  been  said,  Chi-
ropractic is  seen  to  be  a  Science,  and
also  a  system  of  practice.  In  its  sci-
entific aspects,  it  presents  to  the  world
a  wholly  new  biology,  anatomy,  physi-
ology, pathology  and  symptomatology.
In  its  practice  aspects,  it  presents  the
science  of  displacement  with  a  sequel-
lae  of  effects  and  the  art  of  adjustment,
with  its  sequellae  of  effects.

Perhaps  sufficient  has  already  been
said  as  to  the  biology,  anatomy,  physi-
ology, pathology  and  symptomatology
of  Chiropractic.  However,  it  seems
necessary  to  say  further  that  it  is  not
at  all  wonderful  that  a  science  present-
ing at  once  five  entirely  new,  exhaust-
ive and  comprehensive  studies  is  very
likely,  indeed,  to  be  misunderstood  and
to  be  very  unjustly  classified.

This  is  remarkably  true  of  Chiro-
practic.

However,  Chiropractic's  enemies  in
this  respect  are  not  to  any  consider-
able extent,  outside  of  the  profession,
for  those  outside  can  do  but  little  dam-
age. The  misconceptions  of  the  scope
and  comprehensiveness  of  Chiroprac-
tic that  is  doing  the  damage  is  from
within  the  profession,  from  those  who
think  they  are  Chiropractors,  but  be-
cause of  lack  of  opportunity,  have
never  been  in  position  to  know  the
truth ;  that  is,  they  have  never  had  the
vast  scope,  comprehended  by  the  Sci-


ence of  Chiropractic,  suggested  or  ex-
plained to  them.  Your  writer  is  pecu-
liarly desirous  of  overcoming  this  sit-
uation, and  that  is  the  reason  for  this
editorial.

Adjustology  comprehends  the  sitis
of  each  segment,  organ  or  part  of  the
human  body,  and  the  relation  that  each
such  segment,  organ  or  part  sustains
to  its  fellows,  and  that  its  fellows,  in
turn,  sustain  to  other  parts.  In  other
words,  adjustology  treats  of  the  Sci-
ence of  Place,  reckoned  from  the  stand-
point of  relationship.

Adjustology  also  teaches  displace-
ment in  the  sense  of  disrelation  ;  that
is  to  say,  the  distortion  from  the  stand-
point of  relationship  of  segments,  or-
gans or  parts  of  the  body,  results  from
such  disrelation  in  all  of  its  segmental,
organic  and  chemic  details.

Adjustology  also  comprehends  the
art  of  adjusting,  which  consists  in  the
methods  used  to  secure  place  in  the
sense  of  relationship  of  segments,  or-
gans or  parts  of  the  body,  and,  there-
fore, teaches  how  to  secure  the  anato-
mic and  chemic  relationship  which  in
turn  result  in  the  most  complete  co-
hesion which  the  material  involved
permits,  that,  in  turn,  means  the  high-
est state  of  health  that  the  person  or
organism  under  consideration  is  cap-
able of  attaining.

It  is  utterly  impossible  in  one  short
editorial  to  state  what  Chiropractic  is,
and  yet,  in  the  foregoing,  it  is  believed
its  comprehensiveness  is  pointed  out,
and,  it  is  hoped,  discussed  wath  suffi-
cient coherence  that  those  of  inquiring
mind  may  understand  the  almost
boundless  scope  and  limitless  value  of
the  Science  of  Chiropractic.

It  is  hoped  that  those  reading  this
article  will  not  put  it  to  one  side  with-
out thinking,  but  that  they  will  set
themselves  to  ascertain  whether  or  not
the  statements  made  in  this  editorial
are  true,  for  it  is  known  that  if  they
do,  they  will  find  themselves  aston-
ished by  being  compelled  to  change
their  conceptions  upon  almost  every
vital  proposition  of  living,  but  will  in
a  reasonable  time  also  come  to  know
what  Chiropractic  is.


734


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


m


Mechano -Therapy  Department


El


El


Addrt-ss all communications for this department to its eilitors

Dr.  CHESTER  A.  SHEWALTER  Dr. TELL BERGGREN

328  Walch  Block,  Akron,  Ohio  Halsohem,  Coronado,  Cal.

Dr.  D.  R.  WHEELER
813  12th  St.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.


s


MECHANO-THERAPY

By DR. TELL BERGGREN


Mechano-therapy  in  principle  and
practice  today  is  vastly  different  than
it  was  in  ancient  times,  when  they  used
only  the  most  crude  methods,  by  hand
and  water.  In  these  modern  times,
our  noble  science  has  advanced  to  a
very  liberal,  broad  and  complicated
plane.

Mechano-therapy,  as  taught  in  the
Drugless  Schools  of  America,  embod-
ies physical,  mental  and  moral  sugges-
tive theory.

Hydro,  mano,  electro,  mechano  the-
ory for  the  Mechano-therapy  division,
or  that  done  by  the  hand  and  appar-
atus, must  necessarily  have  power  be-
hind to  operate.  With  all  of  these  there
is  needed  to  complete  our  science  and
practice,  proper  food  supply.  So  in  the
care  of  a  patient,  be  it  with  chronic,
nervous,  mental  or  acute  diseases,  the
practitioner  must  use  these  weapons
of  Mechano-therapeutic  Science  to  fight
the  enemy,  in  the  body,  which  brings
on  these  diseases  and  abnormalities
such  as  poor  circulation,  sour  stomach,
sprained  limbs,  abnormal  growths  and
degeneration.

By  destroying  our  opponent,  we  in-
stantly relieve  Nature  of  her  burden,
and  she  soon  takes  up  the  mending
process,  and  the  diseased  part  soon  be-
comes normal  again.  Very  few  peo-
ple realize  that  for  a  patient,  in  order
to  be  reborn  again  in  Nature's  strength,
it  is  necessary  to  have  the  proper  care,
and  return  as  near  as  possible  to  simple
life  and  living  such  as  a  free  country
and  mountain  stillness  can  give,  with
plenty  of  fresh  air  and  sunlight,  where


your  daily  exercise  will  be  a  pleasure,
and  for  your  diet  have  plenty  of  fruit,
vegetables,  eggs  and  milk.

This  method  of  air,  light,  heat,  treat-
ment and  food  produces  within  your
body  a  mighty  reaction.

To  be  a  successful  Mechano-thera-
pist,  you  must  dig  deep  into  your  pa-
tient's past  history  of  life  and  action,
and  try  to  make  a  complete  change  for
him  morally,  physically  and  mentally,
for  only  by  doing  this  can  you  hope
to  bring  your  stubborn  cases  to  a  suc-
cessful cure.

Many  times  the  patient  will  hesitate
to  tell  his  past  history.  So  the  larg-
est part  of  it  must  come  from  your
knowledge  of  the  existing  conditions
and  what  brought  them  about.  The
great  lesson  a  Mechano-therapist  must
learn  is  to  study  human  nature.  For
after  you  have  learned  tlijs  lesson,  the
world  will  be  an  open  book  to  you  in
your  noble  work  and  practice.

Next,  the  thing  to  study  is  Master
Mind,  for  Suggestive  Theory  is  a  part
of  our  noble  science,  and  you  will  find
in  all  nervous  and  chronic  diseases  that
the  mind  plays  an  important  part,  as
the  largest  nerve  in  the  body.  Mind
worry  or  depression  is  the  greatest
disease  of  all,  so.  brother  practitioner,
be  the  Master  Mind,  to  whom  your  pa-
tients may  come  and  receive  from  you
a  healing  thought  and  suggestion.

Next  is  food.  Re  sure  that  your  pa-
tient's diet  slip  is  prepared  correctly,
for  the  patient  depends  upon  his  food
for  strength,  and  his  speed  to  health
will  depend  upon  the  proper  combina-


Universal  Nainropalliic  Director ij  and  Ihiyrr.s'  Guide


735


tion  of  f(jod.  Many  a  death  has  been
caused  by  the  ignorant  use  of  fo(jds
which  will  not  neutralize.  These
foods  soon  poison  the  system,  and
bring  about  a  condition  of  auto-intox-
ication, which  produces  a  food  stupor
destroying"  the body's  equilibrium.

Next,  after  diet,  you  must  map  out
your  treatment;  whether  it  be  manual,
mechanical  or  hydro-therapeutic,  it
must  be  that  which  will  bring  back  a
normal  condition  without  wearing  o.ut
the  patient  either  physically  or  men-
tally. Guard  against  too  long  or  short
a  treatment.  Make  each  case  an  indi-
vidual study.  Also  make  treatment
and  routine  diversified,  and  the  patient
will  respond  quicker  and  look  forward
to  his  treatment  as  one  of  his  pleasures.

Mechano  Therapeutic  science  can  be
divided  into  three  ages :  The  past,
when  it  was  used  in  a  very  crude  way ;
the  present,  when  under  its  many  sub-
divisions, it  has  reached  a  plane  of  lib-
eral application  world-wide  in  its  ben-
efits ;  and  the  future,  in  which  lies  the
greatest  opportunity  for  advance  and
progress.  I  believe  that  Future  Me-
chano-therapy  will  consist  of  Preven-
tive therapy,  and  a  grounding  in  Pre-
natal and  Post-natal  influences.  By
preventing  the  causes  and  educating
the  future  mother  and  father  along
saner  moral,  physical  and  mental  paths,
you  will  have  moved  a  mountain  from
the  path  of  human  progress,  burdened
with  Ignorant  Passions  and  Inherited
Disease.

Simple,  common  sense  methods  in
the  art  of  Manual  Therapeutics  and
Mechano-therapy  are  now  coming  more
and  more  to  the  front.

The  search  of  the  enlightened  physi-
cian, nowadays,  is  not  so  much  for
mysterious  remedies  to  suppress  symp-
toms of  disease,  as  to  find  the  different
causes  and  their  remedies.

For  generations,  most  people  have
allowed  their  bodies  to  grow  into  ab-
normal shapes,  in  that  way  interfer-
ing not  only  with  the  circulation,  but
also  with  all  the  other  vital  functions.

The  great  majority  of  athletes,  as
well  as  people  of  more  sedentary  ha-


bits, are  more  or  less  deformed,  with
collapsed  chests,  unnaturally  curved
backs,  etc.  This  is  often  due  to  one-
sided work,  wrong  sitting  habits,  lack
of  proper  exercise,  irrational  and  exces-
sive exercise,  wrong  dress,  as  well  as
wrong  mental  attitudes.

Physicians,  as  well  as  teachers  of
physical  education,  have  not  in  the  past
given  enough  attention  to  the  articula-
tions of  the  spinal  cord  and  ribs.  It
has  been  left  to  the  Swedish  specialists,
the  osteopaths  and  the  chiropractors  to
actually  demonstrate  the  benefits  from
such  a  general  "limbering  up"  of  the
entire  organism.  All  genuine  practi-
tioners will  do  this  as  a  routine  before
attempting  to  build  up  any  particular
muscle  groups.  They  have  been  doing
this  for  nearly  one  hundred  years,  al-
though the  last  twenty  years  have  seen
the  greatest  advancement  in  these
lines.  Such  do  not  have  to  resort  to
any  kind  of  impostures  in  order  to  get
the  confidence  and  faith  of  their  pa-
tients. Their  absolute  honesty  and
idealistic  tendencies  will  have  a  far
more  beneficial  influence  on  the  mind
of  any  cultured  and  intelligent  patient.

The  rational  combination  of  manual
therapeutics  with  other  branches  of
physical  education — massage,  hydro-
therapy, psychotherapy,  dietetics,  etc.
— is  by  far  the  best  way  of  getting
speedy,  as  well  as  permanent,  results.

An  unprejudiced  comparison  be-
tween the  results  obtained  by  the  spe-


Overcome with the "eat'


736


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


cialist  of  manual  therapeutics,  who
does  not  pay  due  attention  to  other
branches  of  physiological  remedies,
and  those  obtained  when  these  other
rational  principles  are  taken  into  con-
sideration, convinced  the  author  many
years  ago  of  the  great  need  for  a
broader  education  along  these  lines.
Many  wide-awake,  so-called  osteo-
paths, chiropractors  and  mechano-
therapists  are  now  broadening  out  into
a  more  rational  system  of  manual
therapeutics — a  system  simplified  and
perfected,  which  is  neither  exclusively
Swedish,  nor  osteopathy,  nor  chiro-
practics,  yet  including  everything  of
value  in  these  systems.  The  time  for
unreasonable  controversy  and  conflict
between  the  different  schools  of  man-
ual therapeutics  will  soon  be  past,  and
a  new  era  for  the  curative  arts  is  fast
dawning  upon  us.  In  fact,  it  is  already
here;  all  that  is  necessary  for  the
broad-minded  practitioner  is  to  recog-
nize the  changes  which  have  evolved
during  the  last  few  years,  and  step  out
into  the  broader  light.  He  will  then  be
able,  according  to  the  measure  of  his
capacity,  to  give  all  men  their  just  due.
An  unfailing  respect  must  characterize


THE  QUEEN  OFALL  DESSERTS
m  MUCUS  SLIMEAND  PUS  BUILDERS

VTHE  CAUSE"


OFAjipiSfASE.

THE  FOOD  FORTHE

EYERFAlTtlPUL

GEIRMS

NATURES

SCAVENCFR


THE  MEDICAL  MONSTER


the  altitude  towards  all  searchers  after
truth.  A  wide  tolerance  must  be  man-
ifested towards  the  exponents  of  opin-
ions different  from  our  own.

"I  know  too  well,"  says  an  earnest
man  of  science,  "that  no  man  can  think
maturely  unless  he  thinks  in  the  light
of  other  men's  thoughts."  It  is  the  ac-
knowledged duty  of  every  student  to
familiarize  himself  with  the  results  of
the  work  of  experts  in  his  own  chosen
field  of  research.  To  avoid  the  narrow-
ness to  which  specialization  tends,
there  should  also  be  large  general  in-
formation.

It  certainly  requires  a  person  of
idealistic  and  artistic,  as  well  as  sci-
entific tendencies  to  successfully  apply
the  principles  of  the  Art  of  Curative
Gymnastics  and  Mechano-therapy.  The
scientific  knowledge  alone  will  not  ac-
complish much  without  the  enthusiasm
which  comes  from  a  more  idealistic
way  of  comprehending  these  great
truths.  Like  the  sculptor,  for  instance,
he  must  passionately  love  his  profes-
sion, aspiring  with  all  the  best  that  is
in  him  for  a  greater  perfection,  simpler
and  more  effective  methods.  He  will
then  be  a  more  useful  artist,  for  he  will
use.  the  living  material,  the  real  human
being,  instead  of  clay  and  stone,  can-
vas and  pigments.

The  specialist  in  manual  therapeutics
and  other  branches  of  physical  educa-
tion must  understand  psychology  and
pedagogy,  as  well  as  physiology  and
anatomy.  Otherwise  his  work  will  be
a  failure,  no  matter  how  high  his  sci-
entific knowledge.  He  must  be  suffi-
ciently broad  and  liberal  to  accept
truths  in  these  lines,  even  from  those
whom  he  may  consider  far  below  him.
We  may  learn  from  savages  and  ani-
mals ;  how  much  more,  then,  from
peasants,  and  other  natural-minded,
simple  people.  The  great  man  is  he
who  can  simplify  scientific  knowledge,
educational  principles  and  religious
truths  until  a  child  is  able  to  compre-
hend them.  This  is  the  mission,  then,
of  the  future  humanitarian,  to  do  away
with  unnecessary  mysticism,  and  pre-
sent the  highest  truths  in  such  a  way
as  to  make  them  common  property.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


737


UK


m


Osteopathy  Department

A  system  o£  treating  disease  without  drugs,  based  on  the  belief  that  disease  is  caused  by
some  part  of  the  human  mechanism  being  out  of  proper  adjustment,  as  in  the  case  of  misplaced
bone,  cartilage  or  ligament,  adhesions  or  contractions  of  muscle,  etc.,  resulting  in  unnatural
pressure  on  or  obstruction  to  nerve,  blood  or  lymph.  Osteopathy,  through  the  agency  or  use
of  the  bones  (especially  the  ones  which  are  employed  as  levers),  seeks  to  adjust  correctly  the
misplaced  parts  by  manipulation.

Address all communications for this department to its editor

E.  K.  STRETCH,  D.  O.,  N.  D.,  617  Traphagen  St.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.


El


S


OSTEOPATHIC  MEDICINE

By  Dr.  C.  E.  BINCK


Great  strides  have  been  made  during
the  past  twenty-five  years  in  the  prac-
tice of  medicine.  The  relative  posi-
tions formerly  held  by  drug  therapy
and  surgery  have  been  reversed.  The
concoctions  of  the  pharmacopeia,  with
their  vague  and  uncertain  effects  upon
human  tissues  and  functions,  no  longer
entice  the  earnest  seeker  after  medical
truths  to  spend  a  lifetime  experiment-
ing with  substances  which  are  abso-
lutely foreign  to  the  human  body.

There  was  a  time,  not  far  away,
when  that  person  who  treated  diseases
by  manipulation,  water,  diet  and  gen-
eral hygiene,  was  considered  to  be  the
chief  of  imposters.  Go  a  little  farther
back  in  the  history  of  medicine,  and
we  see  surgery  dishonored  because  it
was  mechanical,  not  mystical  enough
for  the  ponderous  minds  whose  forte
it  was  to  deal  with  strange  substances
of  the  animal,  vegetable  and  mineral
kingdoms.

During  all  the  years  in  which  drug-
therapy  flourished,  there  were  a  few
real  scientists  who  devoted  their  time
and  talents  to  the  structure  of  our
bodies,  and  the  function  of  each  part.
Discoveries  came  slowly  along  these
lines,  because  the  majority  of  medical
men  were  concentrating  their  energies
on  ferreting  out  the  effects  of  drugs.
Facts  in  anatomy  and  physiology,
which  are  so  patent  to  us  at  this  time,
remained  obscure  for  centuries,  simply
because  there  was  no  thought  of
studying  the  form  and  action  of  tis-


sues, while  all  nature  outside  of  our
own  bodies  seemed  to  be  a  grand  la-
boratory of  specifics  for  human  ail-
ments.

There  is  one  distinctive  point  about
osteopathic  medicine,  which  should  be
especially  emphasized :  It  is  not  an
empirical  system ;  nothing  is  done  on
the  cut  and  try  plan.  It  has  been  de-
veloped in  a  purely  scientific  way.  We
might  observe  the  action  of  the  hu-
man body  in  health  and  disease  inde-
finitely without  securing  any  exact
data  to  pass  on  to  the  next  generation
of  observers,  if  we  fail  to  know  the
structure  of  the  body.  A  physician
may  learn  many  things  in  an  empiri-
cal way  which  are  very  poor  assets
for  science.

The  strange  part  of  medical  history,
to  the  modern  investigator,  is  the  fact
that  discoveries  in  anatomy  and  physi-
ology, which  are  of  such  vital  import-
ance to  the  successful  treatment  of  hu-
man disease,  were  left  stored  away
between  the  covers  of  books,  not
deemed  of  any  value  except  to  whet
the  mind  of  the  dilletante  in  medi-
cine.

Osteopathy,  as  a  distinct  system  of
medicine,  has  grown  to  its  present
proportions  at  a  time  when  the  oldest
schools  of  medicine  are  making  radi-
cal changes  m  their  therapeutical  pro-
cedures, e.  g..  serum-therapy.  In  spite
of  all  these  so-called  scientific  ad-
vances in  drug-therapy,  osteopathy
has  made  steady  advance  into  public


738


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biujcrs"  Guide


favor,  thereby  showing  that  it  is  fully-
able  to  compete  with  the  older  systems
of  practice.

It  should  be  understood  that  the
Osteopath  believes  thoroughly  in  vis
medicatrix  naturae,  whether  the  indi-
cations are  for  stimulation  or  inhibi-
tion, or  for  the  basic  readjustment.
Generally  speaking,  however,  thera-
peutic philosophy  resolves  itself  (ulti-
mately) into  the  principle  that  a  cure
depends  upon  giving  an  impetus  to
impaired  habitual  and  latent  forces,
which  in  the  osteopathic  field  implies
fundamentally  adjustive  manipulation
whereby  the  resultant  impetus  or  phy-
siological stimulus  is  initiated.

In  a  word,  osteopathy  premises
that  the  body  is  a  vital  and  physical
mechanism,  subject  to  derangements,
structural  alterations,  and  functional
changes,  as  results  of  violence  on  the


mechanical  plane,  as  well  as  disturb-
ances on  the  psychic  and  biochemic
planes.  Hence,  osteopathic  philoso-
phy is  inclusive  of  preventive,  palli-
ative and  curative  measures.  Osteo-
pathy is  the  collective  term  that  means
all  rational  methods  or  systems  of
healing.

REMEDYING  CONSTIPATION
ON  MILK  DIET

Try  soaked  figs  or  soaked  raisins,
along  with  your  milk.  Put  either  in  a
bowl  of  hot  water  and  let  them  soak
for  several  hours,  then  put  them,  after
having  strained  them,  in  your  milk  in
a  bowl,  and  spoon  them  along  with  the
milk  and  chew  thoroughly,  change
from  figs  to  raisins,  then  back  again  to
figs.  This  will  break  up  the  stools  and
prevent  them  from  hardening.


i/M- PROBfiBLy  ATPENDicriS  - \


Turning  the  Tables  on  the  Doctor


. A  Timely  Escape


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


739


IB


Phytotherapy  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editor

Prof.  M.  G.  YOUNG,  4156  Arcade  Bldg.,  Seattle,  Wash.


S


111


s


PHYTOTHERAPY

By  Dr.  M.  G.  YOUNG


I  accept  with  hearty  appreciation
the  opportunity  accorded  me  of  con-
tributing this  article  to  the  year  book,
because  it  shall,  I  trust,  forward  the
interests  of  the  great  cause  I  love  best
— drugless  healing  of  the  sick — and  I
humbly  hope  to  be  helpful  to  every
scion  of  this  great  cause,  as  well  as
to  those  who  are  patrons  of  natural
means  of  healing.

My  brothers  and  co-workers,  I  offer
in  the  spirit  of  brotherhood  the  kindly
suggestion  that  we  draw  closer  to-
gether in  our  efforts  to  accomplish  the
one  great  end,  that  of  lessening  the
suffering  of  this  vast  ocean  of  suffer-
ing humanity.  Sound  men,  women
and  children  should  be  the  objective  of
our  every  effort.  May  it  be  that  we
do  not  fall  into  the  pernicious  habit
which  seems  daily  to  be  increasing  in
the  ranks  of  those  who  so  bitterly  op-
pose us.  By  this  I  mean  that  we  may
never  allow  ourselves  to  overlook  the
sacredness  of  human  life  and  health.
Never  allow  money  to  be  the  princi-
pal object  of  our  efforts.

The  love  of  money  has  despoiled  ev-
erything dear  to  the  human  heart.
In  this  money-mad  age  the  physician
is  too  often  occupied  with  the  thought
of  what  he  can  make  out  of  the  given
case  rather  than  what  he  can  do  to
aid  nature  to  re-establish  the  patient
to  normal  conditions.

Science  has  been  busy  outside  of  the
ranks  of  "regular  medicine."  The
world  is  beginning  to  recognize  this
fact.  Those  of  us  who  have  dared  to
think  and  to  investigate,  have  dis-
covered many helpful agencies and


methods  which  the  author  of  our  be-
ing intended  to  be  used  and  applied
to  prevent  and  to  relieve  suffering.
Some  of  us  have  supposed  after  dis-
covering the  superior  merits  or  vir-
tues of  one  or  more  of  these  helpful
agencies,  that  we  had  discovered  the
one  great  secret  so  long  needed  and
so  much  sought  for  by  those  who  suf-
fer, and  from  this  conclusion,  have  be-
come narrow  and  limited  in  our  much
loved  work.

The  hydropath,  seeing  the  excellent
results  of  his  practice  in  given  cases,
soon  falls  to  the  opinion  that  his  sys-
tem is  the  only  one  worthy  of  the  pat-
ronage of  the  people,  and  vainly  tries
to  treat  successfully  almost  any  ail-
ment with  water  only.  The  same  is
true  in  phytotherapy  or  botanic  ther-
apy, and  electrotherapy,  and  each  of
the  other  drugless  methods  of  treat-
ing the  sick.  Therefore  let  us  hon-
estly try  to  discern  just  to  what  ex-
tent our  chosen  method  should  be  ap-
plied or  used  in  treating  the  sick,  and
then  never  attempt  the  impossible  or
unlikely.  In  this  way,  we  would  have
nothing  but  success,  and  one  real  suc-
cess means  more  financially  than  the
unsuccessful  treatment  of  a  number
of  cases  which  do  not  properly  come
within  the  scope  of  one  means  we
know  and  use.

My  dear  brothers,  is  it  not  a  fact
that  each  of  these  modes  of  treatment
are  simply  units  of  the  one  great  heal-
ing art?  I  think  it  acceptable  to  your
understanding  that  "the  right  use  of
the  proper  means  to  secure  the  de-
sired end,"  is  the  logic  which  should


740


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


be  applied  by  every  would-be  healer.
'I  think  it  is  obvious,  therefore,  to  your
minds  that  we  should  get  together
closely  and  be  cemented  forever  in
solid  compact,  that  we  might  stand  as
a  unit  in  this  sacred  cause, — that  of
properly  adjusted,  rightly  adminis-
tered, harmless,  drugless  treatment  of
the  sick.

I,  as  a  representative  of  phytother-
apy, would  be  only  too  glad  to  con-
tribute any  knowledge  I  possess  to  the
furtherance  of  such  common  cause.

I  trust  I  will  not  be  considered  a
bigot  when  I  assert  that  I  do  know,
from  the  best  means  of  knowing —
that  of  experience  and  analytical  in-
vestigation— much  of  that  which  is
valuable  in  the  treatment  of  disease
with  herbs.  My  experience  is  not  only
that  of  local  practice,  but  is  nation
wide,  and  reaches  to  all  parts  of  the
civilized  world  at  the  present  time.

I  am  sending  to  the  continent  of
Africa  these  helpful  agencies  of  nature,
and  they  are  proving  highly  success-
ful in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of
that  country.  I  am  not  disposed  to
curtail  this  knowledge.  God  being  my
helper,  I  will  gladly  spread  the  knowl-
edge in  every  practical  way.

I  daily  meet  with  the  necessity  of
other  means  of  treating  the  sick  than
that  which  is  implied  in  phytotherapy.
I  believe  a  practitioner  should  have  at
least  a  practical  knowledge  of  each  and
every  system,  or  branch  of  system,  of
healing  extant.  I  greatly  desire  to
broaden  my  field  o^  usefulness  by  ac-
quiring much  more  knowledge  along
these  lines  not  included  in  botanic
medicine.

I  employ  in  my  Pacific  Ocean
Health  Resort  every  means  of  treat-
ing the  sick  known  to  me,  when  the
given  case  indicates  their  necessity.
I  believe  that  the  treatment  of  the
sick  should  first  be  actuated  by  the
motive  of  sympathy  for  the  sufTerer,
that  the  financial  status  of  the  matter
should  be  entirely  secondary.  No
man's  health  is  safeguarded  when  the
question  of  money  is  paramount  in
the  mind  of  the  practitioner.  There
is  a  wanton  butchery  throughout  the


length  and  breadth  of  our  land  to-
day, which  is  prompted  by,  and  due
to  either  the  love  of  money,  bad  edu-
cation, or  sheer  brutality.  Deception,
fraud,  and  false  doctrine  is  rampant,
and  may  I  not  say  that  there  is  a  dan-
ger that  it  is  not  all  confined  to  the
tenets  of  "regular  medicine"?

I  wish  the  time  would  come  when
each  one  of  us  so-called  drugless  heal-
ers would  have  no  temptation  to
stretch  or  strain  the  application  of  any
of  our  systems  beyond  their  legitimate
usefulness.  To  illustrate,  I  wish  that
every  herbalist  would  not  attempt  to
accomplish  with  herbs  that  which
properly  belongs  to  the  scope  cov-
ered by  the  chiropractor,  or  that  the
same  degree  of  absolute  honesty  would
prevail  in  each  and  every  other  depart-
ment or  branch  of  the  drugless  me-
thods.

I  would  like  to  offer  for  the  benefit
of  those  who  may  feel  a  desire  to  know
some  of  the  virtues  of  botanical  medi-
cine a  few  humble  suggestions.  Let
me  suggest  that  those  whose  practise
brings  them  to  realize  in  some  given
case  the  necessity  of  removing  the  pol-
lution from  the  intestinal  or  alimen-
tary tract,  that  they  use  the  follow-
ing infusion  as  the  means  of  enema
in  accomplishing  this  very  necessary
assistance  to  nature.  Doubtless,  every
practitioner  realizes  the  importance  of
the  removal  of  effete  matter  from  the
alimentary  canal  in  nearly  all  chronic
cases.  I  would  suggest  that  you  make
an  infusion  of  nepeta  cateria  (catnip
herb)  by  pouring  a  gallon  of  boiling
water  on  four  ounces  of  this  clean,
fresh  herb,  adding  about  %  teaspoon-
ful  of  capsicum  (cayenne).  Steep
thirty  minutes  covered,  strain  and  add
sufficient  cold  water  to  temper  to
blood  heat,  then  with  the  use  of  a  four
quart  fountain  syringe  use  all  that  the
patient  can  receive  at  three  or  four
consecutive  efforts.  Have  patient  ly-
ing on  right  side  while  taking  unless
a  case  of  inflammation  of  the  secum
or  a  case  of  appendicitis  is  injected.
In  either  of  the  latter  cases,  have  hips
of  patient  well  elevated,  allowing  him
to lie on  back  while  taking  it. The


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


741


results  of  this  treatment  will  be  most
gratifying  to  the  practitioner  as  well
as  to  the  patient.

Do  not  tell  your  patient  to  take
this  treatment,  but  go  and  prepare  it
and  administer  it  yourself,  for  so  few
people  have  the  capacity  to  properly
treat  themselves.  Do  not  hurry  the
treatment,  but  take  plenty  of  time.
I  can  assure  you  that  22  years  of  ex-
perience in  its  use  confirms  me  in  the
opinion  that  it  has  not  a  rival  in  effi-
ciency.

There  are  those  of  us  who  frequent-
ly meet  with  conditions  of  these  much
abused  organs  of  the  body,  the  bowels,
in  which  there  is  evident  shrunken  or
contracted  condition,  and  it  is  evident
that  there  is  much  need  of  assistance
to  nature  in  this  part  of  the  body.  Let
me  suggest  to  you  that  you  prepare
and  give  such  patients  the  following
simple,  though  very  efficient,  aid:
Pour  onto  four  tablespoonfuls  of  elm
bark,  ground,  or  cut  up  fine,  one  quart
of  cold  water ;  let  stand  over  night.
Pour  ofif  through  strainer,  then  slice
one  lemon,  rind  and  all,  into  it,  set
over  fire  and  let  simmer  15  minutes.
Strain  out  the  lemon  and  sweeten  to
suit  taste.  Add  one-quarter  teaspoon-
ful  of  cayenne  pepper;  stir  well.  Dose,
one-half  cup  four  to  six  times  daily.
It  will  require  24  to  36  hours  to  get
noticeable  benefit,  but  this  simple  rem-
edy will  be  found  of  great  value.  I
also  would  earnestly  recommend  to
your  attention  the  use  of  verbascum
(mullein)  leaves.  In  all  cases  of  se-
vere pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,
it  should  be  used.  Four  ounces  of  the
clean  leaves  boiled  in  a  quart  of  water
15  minutes,  strain  and  drink  a  tumbler-
ful of  the  tea  on  retiring  and  arising.
This  will  relieve  congestion  in  the  kid-
neys, and  is  mildly  diuretic,  producing
easy  passage  of  urine.

There  are  other  herbal  agents  valu-
able in  each  of  these  cases  mentioned,
but  these  I  recommend  as  being  in-
fallible. I  would  again  call  attention
to  the  efficacy  of  the  emetic  treatment,
mention  of  which  was  made  in  the
Herald  of  Health,  in  the  department  of
which  I  am  editor;  that  is,  Phytother-


apy. I  have  had  numerous  inquiries
concerning  my  method,  which  I  have
not  been  able  satisfactorily  to  answer,
owing  to  the  accumulation  of  unex-
pected business,  incident  to  the  open-
ing of  my  new  health  resort  on  the
Pacific  Ocean  beach  during  the  past
summer.

As  a  matter  of  news,  I  am  glad  to
say,  this  much  needed  institution  has
been  successful  far  beyond  my  expec-
tation. I  am  now  rapidly  increasing
its  capacity,  and  shall  be  ready  for  a
much  larger  patronage  this  coming
year.  At  this  institution  I  combine,
as  far  as  I  know  how,  each  and  every
helpful  agency  to  aid  nature  to  cure.
My  plans  include  the  building  of  sep-
arate two-room  cottages  with  fire-
places in  each,  thus  enabling  each  pa-
tient to  be  undisturbed,  and  yet  highly
comfortable  in  private  quarters,  care-
ful attention  being  given  to  the  diet,
which  is  supplied  in  the  best  possible
manner.


742


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bnijers'  Guide


I  feel  deeply  gratified  at  the  evi-
dent liberality  existing  in  the  minds
of  the  drugless  healers.  There  seems
to  be  a  general  honesty  and  sincerity
of  purpose  pervading  our  whole  army.
This  is  evidenced  by  their  reaching  out
for  information  concerning  other  sys-
tems which  properly  belong  to  the
class  of  drugless  healers.

As  far  as  I  know,  I  am  the  only
phytotherapist  in  this  country.  I
mean  by  this  that  I  am  the  only  one
w^ho  uses  botanical  remedies  without
admixture  in  the  treatment  of  all  cur-
able diseases  properly  coming  under
medical  treatment.  I  have  vainly  tried
for  some  years  to  find  some  company
in  this  field.  There  are  a  few  physio-
medical  physicians  scattered  over  the
country,  but  that  school  has  digressed
from  the  original  botanical  method,  in
that  they  use  chiefly  fluid  extracts  and
other  derivatives  of  the  plant  rather
than  the  plant  itself.  I  feel  quite  sure
this  is  wrong;  however,  I  am  glad  to
affiliate  with  anyone  who  has  the
slightest  leaning  toward  natural  medi-
cine, and  am  ready  to  do  my  part  to
further  and  advance  the  knowledge  I
have  found  so  helpful  in  the  treatment
of  the  sick  with  herbs.

The  expense  of  getting  out  adequate
explanation  of  my  methods  of  using
the  emetic  treatment  has  hindered  me
in  offering  to  the  profession  a  full  and
explicit  account  of  the  means  and  me-
thods used  in  the  treatment ;  however,


I  hope  soon  to  be  able  to  present  this
very  useful  means  to  every  one  who
writes  for  it.  I  can  see  no  reason  why
drugless  healers  could  not  adopt  the
same  method  in  handling  botanical
remedies  which  I  use,  namely,  making
them  proprietary,  and,  therefore,  cap-
able of  being  used  for  various  ailments
by  any  one  who  could  read.  I  will
gladly  assist  any  one  who  may  desire
it  to  understand  just  how  to  proceed
in  preparing  medicines  to  be  sold
through  the  mails.

I  hope  ere  long  to  prepare  a  corre-
spondence course  of  instructions  teach-
ing my  entire  system  of  botanic  medi-
cine. I  am  revising  and  enlarging  a
botanic  dispensatory,  which  will  be  in-
dispensable to  those  interested  in  this
study  of  medical  botany.  I  should  be
glad  to  hear  from  them,  and  we  might
be  of  mutual  help  to  each  other.  I
have  no  disposition  to  keep  secret  any
of  the  knowledge  I  possess.  I  wish
that  every  man,  woman  and  child  in
the  world  knew  medical  plants  and
their  use.  I  think  it  criminal  to  with-
hold knowledge  which  is  helpful  to
suffering  humanity.

My  brother  practitioners,  we  need
not  fear  the  results  of  giving  to  the
world  broadcast  and  without  stint
what  truth  we  may  know,  for  "there  is
that  which  giveth  and  ever  increaseth,
and  there  is  that  which  withholdeth
more  than  is  meet,  and  it  tendeth  to
poverty."


The  Morning  After  the  Night  Before.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Btnjcrs'  Guide


743


m


El


Apyrtropher  Department

T^ ^x.j »» A„.,-»,^,,v,,r thn ^rtpncp. Art and Practice of Livine on tlie Moral Unfired Diet


Dpvotcd to Apyrtrophy, the Science, Art and Practice of Living on tlie Moral Unfired
for the Perpetuation of Perfect Health and Cure of Disease. It is also
the organ of the Apyrtropher (unfircd-fooder) Society

Address all communications lor this department to its editor

GEORGE  J.  DREWS,  Al.  D.,  1910  North  Harding  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.


El


€1


TROPHOTHERAPY

By  DR.  GEORGE  J.  DREWS


Dr. Drews

Trophotherapy  is  today  the  only
science  that  treats  only  and  fully  on
natural  (unfired,  undenatured  and  un-
processed) food  as  an  efficient  means
of  cure,  based  on  apyrtrophy,  the  prac-
tical science  and  art  of  prophylactic
feeding.  These  are  the  distinct  de-
partments and  fields  of  investigation
into  the  curative  and  preventive  prop-
erties of  our  natural  foods,  without
having  any  energy  applied  to  them
that  change  their  organic,  "god-or-
dained," chemical  nature.  They  are
exact  sciences,  because  they  bear  pre-
diction and  verification.  They  are  also
arts,  because  their  deductions  at  once
become  efficient  rules  for  therapeutics
and  prophylactics.

Any honest investigations for the


purpose  of  contradicting  these  state-
ments are  challenged,  because  they
will  only  prove  favorable  to  these
sciences.

Trophotherapy  and  apyrtrophy
should,  by  no  means,  be  confused  with
those  so-called  "food  sciences,"  which
were  intended  to  cater  to  the  ignor-
ance of  the  world,  dietetic  supersti-
tions, wide-spread  misinformations,
hereditary  habits  and  customs,  fa-
shions and  fads  and  fears ;  nor  with
any  literature  that  is  intended  to  pro-
mote the  use  of  commercial  food  pro-
ducts or  to  find  a  ready  sale  to  a
truth-seeking  public.

The  following  disadvantages  will  be
met  with  in  prescribing  a  specific  un-
fired diet.

It  does  not  find  favor  with  the  pa-
tient that  is  educated  to  the  idea  that
he  must  take  poison  to  destroy  the  ef-
fect of  another  poison.  It  is  not  fa-
vored by  the  patient  who  seeks  relief
more  than  a  cure.  The  idea  that  a
food  direct  from  nature  is  raw  and  un-
fit for  man  is  hard  to  dispell.  The  pa-
tient who  is  put  on  an  unfired  diet  at
home  is  often  very  sensitive  to  the
ridicule  of  members  of  the  family  and
visitors.  It  is  too  often  difficult  to  get
the  patient  to  understand  that  diet
has  anything  to  do  with  the  cause  or
cure  of  the  trouble,  unless  the  aflflic-
tion  is  located  in  the  alimentary  canal.
The  average  patient  is  not  willing  to
await  the  result  of  a  dietetic  cure  un-
less he  has  been  given  up  to  die  other-
wise. Too many patients are more


744


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


afraid  of  the  unaccustomed  flavor  of
the  unfired  food  than  of  the  most  bit-
ter dope.

The  expression  is  often  heard,  "what
was  good  enough  for  my  ancestors  is
good  enough  for  me,"  and  the  people
who  say  this  are  perfectly  willing  to
take  the  consequences  of  their  ances-
tral habits.  These  and  many  other
disadvantages  come  up  with  the  peo-
ple who  are  educated  to  be  ignorant
on  the  subject  of  their  diet.

Likes  and  dislikes  are  controlled  by
education  or  its  absence,  and  the  only
way  to  avoid  the  above  disadvantages
is  to  educate  the  patient;  but  where
that  is  not  possible,  do  the  best  you
can  with  your  other  means  at  hand.

"The  world  do  move,"  and  is  rapid-
ly learning  the  truths  of  the  natural
diet.  The  number  of  people  that  knew
about  the  natural  diet  twenty  years
ago  could  be  counted  on  the  fingers  of
one  hand;  but  now  there  are  many
thousands  that  know  about  it  in  this
country  alone,  and  the  number  who
live  on  the  unfired  diet,  more  or  less,
may  number  about five thousand.

The  unfired  diet  has  done  wonders
for  many.  Cancers  have  been  healed,
tumors  have  disappeared,  consumption
forgotten,  diabetes  and  Bright's  dis-
ease conquered,  rheumatism  and  jaun-
dice cured,  and  all  this  was  done  by
toning  the  blood  and  glands  with  the
organic  salts  of  the  unfired  vegetables,
fruits  and  nuts  which  at  the  same  time
prevented  auto-intoxication  in  the
whole  alimentary  canal.  It  simply
means  to  displace  the  cooked  acid-
forming  foods  by  unfired  foods  which
have  the  organic  basic  salts  in  their
active  and  useful  state.

The  advantages  of  the  unfired  diet
are  the  following:

For  therapeutic  purposes  the  green
leafy  vegetables  are  the  most  import-
ant;  because  their  juices  stimulate  the
peristaltic  nerves ;  they  do  not  fer-
ment in  the  alimentary  canal,  and  of
all  natural  foods,  these  supply  the
greatest  amount  of  basic  salts  to  ren-
der the  blood  and  urine  alkaline.  Auto-
intoxication is  not  possible  with  this
class  of  food,,  for  in  case  they  should.


perchance,  ferment,  the  product  would
only  stimulate  an  elimination  without
doing  any  further  harm.  The  most
useful  vegetables  are  spinach,  lettuce,
endive, dandelion, dock and  cabbage.

In  the  unfired  state  each  leafy  veg-
etable, root  and  fruit  has  a  specific  ac-
tion on  disease  which  does  not  become
manifest  during  health.  For  instance,
parsley  and  carrots  act  on  the  kidneys
when  the  system  requires  their  action ;
but  in  health  they  are  only  nutritious,
inactive  foods.  Dandelion,  tomatoes,
sweet  peppers,  eggplants,  plantain
and  Irish  potatoes  stimulate  and  tone
the  liver;  but  these  activities  are  not
noticeable  when  the  liver  performs  its
normal  functions.  Horseradish,  nas-
turtiums and  celery  cause  the  elimina-
tion of  an  extremely  pungent  sub-
stance in  the  urine,  the  irritation  of
which  causes  a  desire  to  urinate  fre-
quently, with  cutting  pain  as  the
urine  is  passed ;  but  this  activity  only
lasts  for  twenty-four  hours,  no  matter
how  much  is  eaten  after  that.  The
tomato  is  accused  of  causing  cancer,
by  the  Allopathic  profession,  because
it  causes  pain  in  the  cancerous  part.
The  accusation  is  not  true ;  for  to  the
contrary,  its  curative  activity  awakens
the  nerves  to  the  extent  that  pain  is
felt  more  keenly.  People  who  change
from  a  cooked  mixed  diet  to  an  un-
fired vegetable  diet  may  experience  a
sudden  attack  of  some  acute  disease
that  was  suppressed  years  ago.  The
reason  for  this  is  that  the  unfired  veg-
etable stimulates  too  rapid  elimina-
tion ;  for  this  does  not  happen  when  a
proper  proportion  of  nuts  is  com-
bined with  the  vegetables.  Some  peo-
ple, on  the  other  hand,  lose  weight  for
three  or  four  weeks  ;  but  this  can  not
be  stopped  by  the  use  of  nuts,  for  the
elimination  of  bad  accumulations  must
take  its  course  until  the  system  is  pur-
ified. From  that  time,  weight  will  be
gained  until  the  normal  is  reached.

Some  people  have  an  idea  that  green
vegetables  have  so  little  nutriment
that  they  can  not  build  strength  ;  that
they  are  a  starvation  diet.  These  must
be  educated  to  the  fact  that  the  chlor-
ophyll in  the  cells  of  all  leaves  is  pro-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihnjers'  Guide


745


teid  material,  and  that  the  ox builds
his  strono^  sinews  from  this.

A  perfectly  balanced  and  sustaining
meal  can  be  made  of  one  pound  of  let-
tuce and  one  ounce  of  peanuts  or
almonds  for  a  person  who  normally
should  weigh  a  hundred  and  fifty
pounds.  The  proportion  of  other
greens  to  be  used  to  make  the  same
food  value  is  as  follows:


Lettuce.  .  .

.  16  oz.  to

1  oz.  of  peanuts

Celery. .  .  .

.15  oz.  "

Endive  .  . .

.  14  oz.  "

Spinach. . .

.11  oz.  "

Cabbage  .  .

.  8  oz.  "

Dandelion.

. 6  oz.  "

Dock

. 6  oz.  "

Sorrel  .  . .  .

. 5  oz.  "

These  greens  should  be  chopped  so
that  all  particles  are  no  larger  than
half  of  a  dime  nor  smaller  than  one-
fourth  the  size  of  a  dime.  The  pea-
nuts or  other  nuts  should  be  ground
to  a  meal  by  a  special  machine  called
"The  Flaker,"  which  renders  the  nuts
in  a  loose,  flaky  form  without  any  per-
ceptible granular  particles.  The  nuts
thus  flaked  will  mix  evenly  with  any
chopped  greens  and  not  bunch  in
lumps.  Those  who  enjoy  sweets  may
have  an  ounce  or  less  of  honey  mixed
into  this  combination.  Those  who
like  their  food  taste  acid  for  a  change,
may  select  the  dock  or  sorrel.  Re-
member, again,  that  this  makes  a  com-
plete therapeutic  or  prophylactic  meal.
For  therapeutic  ends,  however,  the
vegetables  should  be  chosen  accord-
ing to  their  specific  properties.

To  be  successful  in  trophotherapy
desired  foods  or  their  combinations,  un-
less they  have  first  eaten  them  them-
selves ;  but  they  should  expect  no  spe-
cific action  when  Nature  finds  no  need
for  such  in  that  particular  line.  The
honey  does  not  increase  nor  reduce
the  specific  properties  of  any  vegetable ;
however,  it  may  serve  to  make  the
patient  feel  stronger  at  once  after  the
meal.

Although  the  roots  were  intended,
by  Nature,  for  winter  use  chiefly,  yet
they  have  the  same  value  for  thera-


peutics and  nutrition  in  summer.  For
reasons  of  combination  flavors,  the
proportion  of  roots  to  nuts  is  some-
what different  from  the  proportion  of
greens  to  nuts ;  but  it  approximates  to
the  same  food  value  per  meal.

Radishes ...  .6  oz.  to  li/^  oz.  peanuts

Turnips 6oz.  to  1  oz.  peanuts

Carrots 5  oz.  to  1  oz.  peanuts

Parsnips 5  oz.  to  1  oz.  peanuts

Potatoes 4  oz.  to  1  oz.  peanuts

Beets 3  oz.  to  2  oz.  peanuts

Horseradish  .  .  .2  oz.  to  2  oz.  peanuts

Of  all  the  fruits,  the  vegetable  fruits
are  the  most  important  for  therapeu-
tic purposes ;  but  they  come  after  the
roots  in  their  value  for  making  the
blood  alkaline.  These  fruits  are  classed
under  this  head,  first,  on  account  of
the  quantity  of  basic  salts  they  have,
and  second,  because  they  grow  on  per-
ishable vines  or  stocks.  They  are  to-
matoes, cucumbers,  muskmelons,  can-
teloupes,  watermelons,  pumpkins,
squashes,  sweet  peppers,  eggplants,
bananas  and  dates.

The  melons  and  cucumbers  act
strongly  on  the  kidneys,  and  aid  them
in  their  depurative  function.  The  flesh
of  the  pumpkins  and  squashes  and
their  seeds,  as  well  as  the  seeds  of  all
the  "cucurbita,"  have  the  property  of
correcting  some  of  the  hormones  of
the  blood.  The  seeds  of  these  are  also
much  disliked  by  intestinal  worms.  A
combination  of  ground  pumpkin  or
squash  seeds,  mixed  with  chopped  yar-
row leaves,  has  proven  effective  in  ex-
pelling maw-worms.

All  the  vegetable  fruits  can  be  eaten
with  or  without  nuts,  but  when  you
will  often  hear  from  your  patients  that
the  one  or  the  other  fruit  does  not
agree  with  the  patient.  In  such  cases,
the  trouble  will  be  eliminated  when,
thereafter,  you  advise  such  patient  to
eat  such  fruit  together  with  some  nuts,
masticating  them  together.

Some  patients  will  come  to  you  com-
plaining that  this  or  that  unfired  food
creates  gases  in  the  stomach  or  intes-
tines. Do  not  worry  about  that,  but
tell  them  that  the  particular  food  dis-


746


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


solves  the  catarrlial  elimination  oi  the
stomach  or  intestines  into  gas,  which
is  fortunate.

The  tree  fruits,  as  a  whole,  have  the
smallest  percentage  of  organic  basic
salts,  but  still  they  have  enough  to  bal-
ance the  juices  of  the  body.  The  juices
of  all  juicy  fruits  are  made  up  of  the
best  and  purest  distilled  water  that
can  be  had  in  creation.  Although  these
juices  are  laden  with  dissolved  organic
salts  and  sugar  and  some  protein,  these
are  easily  taken  up  by  the  body,  and
then  the  purest  of  distilled  water  is  left
to  take  up  a  burden  of  poisons  from
the  tissues  to  carry  them  out  through
the  organs  of  depuration.

No  human  mind  can  reproduce  the
chemical  laboratories  of  the  vegetable
kingdom.

The  great  value  in  almost  all  nuts
lies  in  the  fact  that  they  are  so  rich
in  the  most  wholesome  proteins  and
oils.  Beside  this,  all  of  the  nuts  are
disliked by intestinal worms. The


"Say, Doc! Does that M. D. you sign
after  your  name  stand  for  much  dope?"


peanut,  almond  and  pignolia  are  the
best,  when  flaked,  to  combine  with  the
vegetables  and  fruits  in  the  making  of
therapeutic  and  prophylactic  synedes
(apyrtropher  salads).  The  peanut  is
the  chief  of  all  nuts  (being  a  legume)
for  the  making  of  vegetable  synedes,
because  it  has  the  power  to  make  all
harsh  and  strong  vegetables  delightful
to  the  taste.  All  proteid  nuts  have  the
power  to  reduce  the  over  active  cura-
tive properties  of  the  unfired  vegetables
as  well  as  those  of  the  unripe  fruits.  It
is  to  be  remembered  that  unripe  fruits
have  greater  and  more  active  curative
properties  than  the  ripe  fruits.  Also
that  salt  (NaCl),  vinegar  and  cooking
destroy  the  curative  properties.  That
is  the  reason  why  the  unripe  cucumber
is  put  into  brine  and  vinegar.  Do  not,
in  any  way,  take  the  idea  from  the
above  statements,  that  the  nuts  also
destroy  the  curative  properties ;  but
that  they  only  make  them  milder  in
their  first  attack  on  the  inflamed  sur-
face.

Even  the  cereals  have  curative  and
laxative  properties  when  eaten  in  the
unfired  and  dry  state,  so  that  the  saliva
is  the  only  solvent  and  diluent.

Time  does  not  permit  the  author  to
expand  on  this  subject  more  at  this
writing.

Trophotherapy  is  still  in  its  infancy,
and  in  the  future  its  finer  details  are
to  be  compiled.

All  the  doctors  who  are  interested
in  the  scientific  Trophotherapy  are  re-
quested to  send  us  their  new  findings
in  their  case  reports,  so  that  we  can
corroborate  the  similar  actions  and  ef-
fects of  unfired  foods  on  special  dis-
eases, and  compile  the  deductions  into
efficient  rules.  This  can  be  most  suc-
cessfully done  at  one  central  office,  and
we  are  willing  to  devote  our  time  to
this  work.  To  all  who  will  comply
with  this  request,  we  will  send  a  copy
of  the  booklet  resulting  from  such
compilation  free  of  charge  for  their
favors.

All  those  who  have  not  yet  stud-
ied Trophotherapy,  we  advise  to  send
for  our  book  on  "Unfired  Food  and
Trophotherapy."


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


747


THE  FOUNDER  OF
APYRTROPHISM  AND  TROPHOTHERAPY


"An  exclusive  unfircd  diet,  so  prepared  and
combined  that  it  is  tempting,  dainty  and  deli-
cious to  all,  is  the  only  ultimate  means  to
absolute  cleanliness  of  the  intestines,  which
insures  clean  blood,  perfect  health,  inclusive
morals,  clear  mind  and  serenity  of  spirit."
This  is  apyrtrophy !  The  fired  mixed  diet  pro-
duces every  opposite  of  the  above.

It  is  natural  for  those  who  are  interested  in
the  most  fundamental  dietetic  reform,  apyrtro-
phism  and  trophotherapy,  to  desire  some
knowledge  of  the  author  and  how  he  came  to
conceive  such  valuable  idea  for  the  health  of
humanity.

George  J.  Drews,  Jr.,  is  the  son  of  Rev.
George  J.  Drews,  who  was  so  much  interested
in  the  combined  physical  health  and  spiritual
welfare  of  his  flock  that  he  coupled  his  ministry
with  the  practice  of  homeopathy.  His  mother,
in  the  latter  part  of  her  life,  also  took  interest
in  healing  and  practiced  it  successfully  in  co-
operation with  her  husband.  The  practice  of
his  parents  was  an  important  education  for
our  junior,  especially  the  fact  that  he  noticed
the  patients  who  were  successfully  cured  sooner
or  later  came  back  again  and  again  to  be  cured
of  the  same  or  another  affliction.  This  dis-
appointment led  him  to  think  and  search  for
the  defect  in  the  system  of  cure.


In  the  year  1901,  while  fmishing  his  last  year
in  the  Chicago  High  School,  he  procured  "The
Foundation  of  All  Reform,"  by  Otto  Carque,
and  the  study  of  this  led  him  to  the  solution  of
the  problem  that  "Fired  and  processed  food  is
the  first  great  cause  of  all  common  diseases."
Now  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  he  proved  to
himself  that  autointoxication  and  malnutrition
can  not  result  from  natural  unfired  food.
Later  he  also  proved  to  himself  that  natural
unfired  food  can  be  used  as  a  remedy  for  the
diseases  that  result  from  the  use  of  cooked  or
fired  food.  In  this  way  the  sciences  of  apyrtr-
ophy and  trophotherapy  were  created.

In  the  year  1909  he  had  satisfactorily  solved
the  scientific  method  of  combining  unfired
foods  so  that  they  appeal  to  the  palate  and  eye
of  cultured  man  without  reducing  their  health
perpetuating  and  curative  properties.  The
same  year  he  published  his  treatise  on  "Un-
fired Food  and  Trophotherapy."  In  the  year
1910  he  coined  the  following  words  from  the
Greek  for  the  new  sciences,  with  the  exception
of  the  word  "Trophotherapy,"  which  he  had
coined  the  year  previous.

For  further  information  or  circulars  write
to  Dr.  George  J.  Drews,  1910  N.  Harding  Ave.,
Chicago,  111.


Al.  B.  [L.  Alimentaiionis  Baccalaur-
eus\.  Bachelor  of  Alimentation;  a
graduate  in  the  preparation  of
unfired  food:  a  graduate  eutroph.

Al.  D.  [L.  Alimentaiionis  Doctor].
Doctor  of  Alimentation;  instruc-
tor in  dietetics ;  a  specialist  in  the
unfired  diet;  a  natural  food  ex-
pert; a  graduate  tropho therapist.

A-pyr'o-Pie  {a-per'o-py) ,  n.  An  un-
fired pie  of  which  the  crust  is
made  of  nuts  and  raisins,  or  an
other  unfired  combination,  and
the  filling  of  such  a  combination
of  fresh  f  niits  and  flaked  nuts  as  to
make  it  like  the  filling  of  a
custard  pie.  This  unfired  health-
pie  was  first  successfully  com-
bined by  Dr.  Drews  in  the  year
1902. See  Apyrtrophy.

A-p3nr'tro-pher  (a-pe/trof-er  or

a-peer'trof-er),  n.  and  a.  One  who
holds  that  man's  natural  diet
consists  of  luifired  fruits,  herbs,
roots,  nuts,  and  cereals,  prepared
and  combined  so  daintily  as  to
appeal  to  the  palate  and  the
aesthetic  nature  of  cultured  man;


one  who  holds  that  apyrtrophy
is  the  only  moral  system  of  diet-
etics, or  that  there  is  only  one
proper  diet  for  man  and  that  it
consists  of  unfired  food ;  one  who
lives  on  unfired  food  to  prevent  or
cure  disease.
A-pyr'troph-ic  a.  Pertaining  to
Apyrtrophy.

A'pyr-troph'i-cally (a'per-trdf'i-cal-
ly),  adv. According  to  the  custom

or  manner  of  unfired-fooders.
A-pyr'troph-ism  {a-per'trof-izm),  n.
The  practice  of  living  exclusively
on  an  imfired  diet  for  the  purpose
of  maintaining  or  acquiring  health
and  efficiency ;  the  doctrine  of  in-
ternal or  intestinal  cleanliness
for  mental,  physical  and  moral
efficiency.

A-pyr'troph-ize'  v.  t. To  convert
into  apyrtrophers.

A-pyr 'tro-phy ( &-per'trof-y ), n .
[Gr. a,  priv.-f  xupbq, fire4-Tpo<pTf^
nourishment:  unfired  feeding].
The  science,  art  and  practice  of
living  upon  unfired  fruits,  herbs,


748


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


•  roots,  nuts,  and  cereals  (man's
natural  food),  for  perpetuating
health,  for  clearness  and  saneness
of  mind;  also  for  the  prevention
and  cure  of  disease;  proved  to  be
the  only  moral  system  of  diet;
the  science  that  teaches  how  to
prepare  man's  primitive  foods  in
elegant  style  to  suit  the  tastes  of
cultured  man  without  reducing
their  health-perpetuating  prop-
erties.

Brom  (brdm)  n.  [fr.  Gr.6p(I)[jLa,  food.]
An  unfircd  pastry  like  poimd-cake
prepared  by  means  of  a  machine
(called  "bromer"),  without  the
use  of  water.  It  is  more  nutri
tious  and  wholesome  than  any
bread,  for  which  it  is  a  substitute.
It  is  composed  of  sun-dried  fruit,
whole  cereal  meal,  and  nuts.  A
cake  ring  can  be  used  to  shape  the
fresh  pastry  into  loaves.

Brom'ad  (brdm'ad)  n.  An  unfixed
combination  of  seedless  raisins  or
other  sim-dried  fruit  chipped,
whole  wheat  meal,  and  flaked  or
grated  nuts,  served  in  loose  form
and  to  be  eaten  with  a  spoon.  The
word  also  applies  to  honey  and
meal  rubbed  together,  to  grated
brom,  and  to  unmolded  brom
served  in  loose  form  direct  from
the  bromer;  any  unfired  combina-
tions (substitutes  for  breakfast-
foods)  served  in  the  form  of  loose
flakes  or  crumbs.

Brom'er  (brom'er)  n.  A  table  ma-
chine, manufactured  by  Dr.  Drews
for  properly  making  brom  by  the
troph  or  eutroph.

Eu'pos  (u'pos),  n.  [Gr.  eu,  well  or
good+Ttdatq  a  drink].  A  fresh
drink  sweetened  with  honey,
never  with  sugar,  and  flavored
with  fresh  fruit  juices  or  cold  in-
fusions of  dried  sweet,  or  aro-
matic herbs,  such  as — honey-
lemonade,  banana  frappe,  cold
mint  infusion,  therapeutic  eu-
pos — cold  infusion  of  soluble  or-
ganic salts  from  dried  herbs  rich
in  organic  salts ;  a  nectar.

Eu 'troph  (u'irof),  n.  [Gr.  ei3,  well-f
Tpoq)6?,  a  feeder  or  nurse].  One
well  versed  in  the  science  and  art
of  preparing  and  combining  un-


fired foods;  one  able  to  prepare
and  combine  unfired  food  so  as  to
present  it  in  the  daintiest  and  most
aesthetic  fonn  without  reducing
the  health-perpetuating  and  cura-
tive properties;  one  whose  pro-
fession is  to  prepare  food  for  the
table  of  the  aesthetic  unfired-
fooder;  an  unfired  food  expert.

Eu-troph'e-on  (u-trofe-on),  n.  [Gr.
euTpocpelov,  a  feeding  place.]  An
unfired-fooder's  eating  house;  a
house  where  only  dainty  and  aes-
thetic unfired  food  is  served;  an
apyrtropher  eating-shop.

Eu-troph'er  (u'-trof-er),  n.  Same  as
"eutroph,  n."

Eu'tro-phoro-gy  {utro-Jdl'o-jy),  n.
A  treatise  on  the  art  and  science
of  elegant  unfired  table  service ;  a
literary  work  that  treats  of  the
wholesomeness  and  dainty  prep-
aration of  the  unfired  diet;  a
treatise  on,  or  a  course  in,  the  art
of  Eutrophing  or  elegant  trophing
which  is  the  foundation  of  Tro-
photherapy  and  Trophoprophy-
lactics;  a  discourse  on  Apyrtro-
phism.

Eu'troph-y  (u'trof-y)  n.  [Gr.  euTpo(p(a
fr.  su,  well+  Tpefecv,  to  nourish.]
Healthy  nutrition;  the  science
which  treats  of  the  methods  of
preparing  wholesome  food  for  the
moral  unfired  menu  in  a  dainty
and  aesthetic  form  without  re-
ducing the  health  -  perpetuating
and  curative  properties;  the
preparation  of  the  moral,  unfired
diet.

Meri-brom  (mel'i-brdm)  n.  [Gr.
IJLeXt  honey+  Spwixa,  food.]  A
brom  in  which  honey  is  used  as
the  binder. See  brom.

Phys'i-o-ther'a-py  (Jiz't-o-ther'a-py) ,
n.  [Gr.  ?ucjtq,  nature  -|-0epaii:e(a,
aid;  assistance;  cure.]  Nature-
cure;  the  science  which  treats
of,  and  includes  every  natural
and  drugless  system  and  means  of
cure,  opposed  to  surgery.

Syn-ede'  (sin-ed'),  n.  [Gr.  ouv.  to-
gether -f-  ^8etv,  to  eat.]  An  apyr-
tropher dish  composed  of  chop-
ped, chipped,  or  shredded  fruits,
flowers,  greens  or  roots,  to  which
are  added  flaked  or  ground  nuts,


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


749


seasoned  with  either  honey,  lemon
juice,  or  oil,  or  a  combination  of
these.  An  aesthetic  synede  is  one
in  which  the  ingredients  are  not
mixed,  but  are  arranged  in  a  color
scheme,  or  which,  when  mixed,  are
garnished  with  esculent  flowers.
A  vegetable  synede  is  composed
of  vegetable-fruits.greens  or  roots,
and  flaked  nuts,  flavored  with
honey  or  oil,  if  desired.  A  fruit
synede  is  composed  of  one  or  more
chipped,  chopped,  or  diced  fresh
fruits  and  chopped  or  flaked  nuts,
and  if  desired  these  may  be  dres-
sed with  honey.

Tr.  D.  [L.  Trophotheraptae  Doctor]
Same  as  "Al.  D."

Troph  (trof),  n.  [Gr.  Tpo<p6<;.  a
feeder.]  One  whose  occupation
is  to  prepare  and  combine  unfired
food  for  the  table ;  one  who  dresses
fruits,  vegetables,  and  nuts  for  the
unfired  diet;  one  who  prepares
food  without  the  use  of  fire  or  arti-
ficial heat.

Troph  (trof),  v.  t.  [Gr.  Tpl<p6tv  to
feed.],  [imp.  and  p.  p.  trophed
(trofd) ;  p.  pr.  and  vb.  n.  trophing
(trof-ing)].  To  prepare  and  com-
bine provisions  for  the  unfired
diet;  to  make  fruits,  vegetables,,
and  nuts  palatable  to  be  eaten  un-
fired; to  make  an  aesthetic  dis-
play of  wholesome  unfired  food;
to  entertain  with  the  unfired  fare ;
to  serve  unfired  menus.

Troph'er  (trofer)  n.  Same  as
Troph,  n.

Troph'er-y  (trdfer-y),  n.  [Gr.  xpo?^
nourishment].  The  food-room;
the  pabulariimi;  the  room  of  a
house  appropriated  to  the  pre-
paration of  unfired  fare;  a  room
in  which  food  is  prepared  without
the  use  of  fire  or  artificial  heat.

Cool  was  his  trophery,  though
his  brains  were  hot. — Dryden.

Tro-phol'o-gy  (tro-phdl'o-jy),  n.  [Gr
Tpo9oXoi'fa;  Tpo<pT^  nourishment;
"Koyla  discourse.]  The  science
which  treats  of  the  various  kinds
of  natural  foods  for  the  himian
being  and  their  value  in  the  per-
petuation of  health  and  the  pre-
vention of  disease.

Troph'o-proph'y-lax'is (trofo-profi-


l&ks'is),  n.  [Gr.  Tpo^T^,  nourislw
ment-|-i^p^,  before+9uXa;aaetv,  to
guard.]  The  science,  art,  and
practice  of  preserving  from,  or  of
preventing,  disease  by  living  on
moral,  unfired  food;  the  observ-
ance of  Nature's  dietetic  rules,  or
laws,  for  the  prevention  of  dis-
ease; preventive  means  against
disease  through  proper  feeding;
living  on  unfired  food  for  moral
ends.

Troph'o-ther'a-pe-on  {trofo-the/a-
pe-on)  n.  [Gr.  TpoxpoGepaicetov  an
unfired- food-cure  institution.]  An
institution  where  unfired  food  is
used  as  the  fundamental  means
of  cure.

Troph'o-ther'a-py  {trofo-ther'a-py, )
n.  [Gr.  Tp»<pT),  nourishment -|-
Gepaxeta  aid;  assistance;  cure].
The  science  and  art  of  cirring
disease  with  natural  specific  food,
in  Nature's  own  way;  the  prac-
tice of  selecting  specific,  unfired
fruits,  vegetables  or  herbs,  to  aid
Nature  in  the  process  of  cure;
the  system  of  curing  founded  on
the  facts  that  ninety-five  per
cent  of  all  diseases  are  primarily
caused  by  feeding  on  unnatural
or  denatured  food,  and  that  Na-
ture effects  a  cure  when  the  organ-
ism is  supplied  with  the  required
natural  organic  elements.  The
system  of  curing  disease  b}^  re-
moving the  cause  and  supplying
the  wants  in  the  form  of  natural
unfired  food.

Vegetarian  [L.  from — vegetus  =  Live-
ly; active;  sprightly;  vigorous.]  n.
One  who  holds  that  vegetables
and  fruits  are  the  only  proper
food  for  man.  Strict  vegetarians
eat  no  meat,  eggs  or  milk. —
Webster's  Dictionary.

There  is  nothing  in  this  definition  which  indi-
cate that  vegetarians  do  not  eat  denatured  food.
It  is  well  known  that  they  apply  fire  or  artificial
heat  to  almost  all  their  foods.  There  are,  however,
a  few  who.  for  want  of  a  better  term,  call  them-
selves vegetarians,  and  who  have  actually  evolved
into  Apyrtrophers  (strict  unfired-fooders) ,  through
the  progress  of  the  world-wide  tendency  in  that
direction  during  the  last  ten  years.

Some  have  drifted  into  Apyrtrophism  (natural
feeding)  by  daily  reforming  their  diet  to  the  food
that  gives  the  most  lasting  satisfaction,  comfort
and  health;  others  have  acquired  it  by  study  and
research;  while  many  have  been  forced  to  accept  it
through  their  sensitiveness  to  Nature's  prompt
chastisements  for  the  violation  of  her  laws,  and
finding  that  only  comofrt  and  health  follows  the
use  of  food  taken  direct  from  Nature,  chemically
unchanged  and  uncombined  with  other  denatured
food.


750


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Physi-Culture  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editor

Dr.  M.  N.  BUNKER,  Savannah,  Missouri


EI


El


S


THE  FASTING  TREATMENT

By  DR.  H.  B.  GALATIAN


The  history  of  fasting  in  the  treat-
ment of  disease  has  been  written  in
other  articles  and  books  on  the  sub-
ject, and  as  the  object  of  this  article
is  to  give  practical  points  in  its  use  as
a  therapeutic  agent,  we  will  only  say
that  voluntary  fasting  for  the  cure  of
disease  is  the  most  ancient  method  of
healing  known,  and  had  its  beginning
away  back  in  the  infancy  of  the  human
race,  when  the  first  man  or  woman  sur-
feited his  or  her  stomach  and  became
ill.

The  need  for  fasting  from  food  is
entailed  because  our  patients,  or  our-
selves for  that  matter,  have  put  some-
thing into  our  alimentary  tracts  that
did  not  belong  there,  and  because  our
body  warns  us  of  the  fact,  by  taking
away  our  appetite.

Therapeutic  fasting  must  be  consid-
ered both  in  respect  to  acute  and
chronic  disease  conditions.

The  need  for  fasting  in  acute  dis-
ease is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  as
soon  as  the  patient  has  fever,  appetite
ceases.  Usually  also  smell  and  taste
are  inhibited,  and  the  mouth  is  dry
from  the  lack  of  saliva.  Appetite,  sa-
liva, taste  and  smell  are  all  necessary
factors  before  we  can  desire,  relish,  di-
gest, or  receive  any  benefit  from  food,
and  as  long  as  these  are  absent.  Nature
clearly  indicates  the  source  of  proced-
ure for  the  physician and  patient.

In  every  attack  of  acute  disease,  the
indicated  need  of  the  patient  is  so
plainly  shown,  that  it  is  astonishing
that  practitioners  do  not  more  often
take  the  hint  and  keep  food  away  from
the  sick.  Food  undesired  is  food  that
will  be  undigested,  and  the  result  is


the  absorption  of  poisonous  material
which  must  be  eliminated  or  oxidized,
and  very  often  the  already  overtaxed
system  refuses  to  take  care  of  the  bur-
den, and  we  lose  our  patient.

A  sick  person  will  fast  by  instinct,
but  often  the  physician  will  insist  that
food  be  taken  to  keep  up  the  strength
of  the  patient,  and  in  so  doing  the
very  purpose  for  which  the  food  is  pre-
patient  will  lose  in  both  strength  and
weight,  and  often  is  prevented  from
becoming  well,  or  is  made  chronically
ill.  We  beg  all  Naturopathic  physi-
cians, no  matter  what  may  be  their
school,  to  give  their  patients  this  boon
of  Nature,  by  withholding  food  when
it  is  undesired  and  unneeded  by  the
sick  organism,  and  to  give  no  food  un-
til the  acute  condition  has  subsided.

In  chronic  diseases,  fasting  is  used
therapeutically  to  promote  the  "burn-
ing up,"  so  to  speak,  and  the  elimina-
tion of  stored-up  waste  materials.
This  applies  not  only  to  matter  in  the
alimentary  tract,  but  also  to  material
which  may  be  deposited  in  the  body
cells,  which  can  not  be  used  to  advan-
tage, or  which  are  foreign  to  the  cells
and  to  the  body  in  general.  The  sys-
tem catches  up,  as  it  were,  with  its
work  of  elimination,  which  it  can  not
do  when  it  is  being  pushed  to  the  limit
to  get  rid  of  the  ordinary  waste  of
the  body.  We  believe  disease  to  be
due  to  impure  blood,  lack  of  blood  cir-
culation, and  hence  deposits  of  for-
eign matter  in  the  body.  Here  we
have  Nature's  own  way  to  get  rid  of
the  wrong  conditions.  By  fasting,  we
put  no  more  material  into  the  body  to


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


751


be  wrongly  metabolized ;  the  cells
give  up  their  niorbic!  matter  to  the
blood,  the  blood  carries  the  matter  to
the  organs  of  elimination,  and  being
freed  of  the  waste,  circulates  more
readily.

As  to  the  technique  of  fasting,  much
could  be  written,  but  we  will  have
space  for  outlining  only  the  more  prac-
tical points.

Environment. — The  patient  should
be  removed  as  far  as  possible  from
temptation  to  eat.  Keep  away  from
the  kitchen  and  from  the  odors  of
cooking  food.  Keep  away  from  cur-
ious and  would-be  friends,  who  ask
foolish  questions  and  try  to  discour-
age the  patient,  or  who  ofifer  unsought
and  unscientific  advice.  Pleasant  sur-
roundings are  advisable.

Bathing.— At  least  a  warm  sponge,
shower  or  tub  bath  every  other  day.
In  some  cases  a  bath  of  some  kind  may
be  taken  every  day,  as  for  instance,  a
course  of  routine  water  treatments.
These  must  not,  however,  be  very  se-
vere. The  idea  is  to  keep  the  patient
clean  and  promote  elimination.

Water  Drinking. — The  patient
should  drink  water  as  thirst  indicates.
If  there  is  no  desire  for  water,  all
right ;  do  not  force  it,  and  thirst  will
come  naturally  soon  enough.  As  a
rule,  patients  will  very  soon  have  a
very  great  desire  for  water,  and  we
can  safely  wait  until  that  time  comes.
Some  advise  the  drinking  of  large
quantities  of  water,  whether  there  is  a
desire  for  the  water  or  not,  with  the
idea  that  more  elimination  goes  on  in
this  way.  We  have  repeatedly  exam-
ined urine  from  patients  fasting  and
drinking  large  quantities  of  water,  and
.have  found  that  there  was  very  little
waste  eliminated,  and  that  the  specific
gravity  was  often  that  of  water.  We
believe  that  a  certain  concentration
of  the  blood  is  needed  for  the  absorp-
tion of  waste  materials  from  the  cells
by  the  blood,  or  in  other  words,  to
keep  up  the  rapid  oxidation  of  body
waste,  somewhat  as  is  the  case  with
the  Schroth  dry  diet  cure.  At  any
rate,  thirst  can  be  safely  taken  as  the
guide  to  the  amount  of  water  needed.


This,  of  course,  varies  with  the  case.
Ab  a  rule,  if  a  glass  of  water  is  taken
every  two  hours  while  the  patient  is
awake,  enough  fluid  will  be  taken.

Diet. — Nothing  but  water,  as  above.
We  put  in  this  paragraph  for  the  rea-
son that  some  consider  the  taking  of
fruit  juices  or  milk  as  fasting.  In  this
article,  we  are  considering  the  total
fast,  and  not  a  restricted  diet.

Exercise. — Fasting  is  rest  —  rest  of
not  only  the  alimentary  tract,  but  of
every  function  of  the  body.  We  be-
lieve that  this  is  an  ideal  time  to  give
the  entire  body  a  complete  rest  from
all  voluntary  work.  Some  advise  ex-
ercise with  the  idea  that  the  length
of  the  fast  will  be  shortened  thereby,
but  this  is  a  fallacy.  The  length  of  the
fast  may  be  shortened  because  of  the
greater  tissue  waste,  but  tissue  waste
is  not  the  therapeutic  function  of  fast-
ing. By  resting,  energy  may  be  saved
which  is  used  for  elimination  and  re-
pair, and  for  the  upbuilding  which  fol-
lows the  fasting  period.  The  reason
some  patients  are  not  cured  by  the
fast  is  because  they  are  already  in  an
emaciated  condition,  and  can  not  fast
long  enough  to  bring  about  the  cure.
For  example,  in  gastric  ulcer  the  ulcer
vv^ill  heal  more  readily  whilst  the  pa-
tient is  fasting,  than  by  any  other  me-
thod. But  if  the  patient  is  thin  or
wastes  his  flesh  by  exercise,  he  may
not  be  able  to  fast  long  enough  to  heal
the  ulcer.  In  general,  therefore,  ad-
vise your  patients  to  take  no  more  ex-
ercise than  is  necessary.  A  short  walk
is  about  the  best  form  of  exercise  to
advise.

Sleep. — Many  patients  will  sleep  a
great  deal,  but  some  will  be  restless
in  the  beginning.  The  warm  bath,  ta-
ken just  before  retiring,  is  the  best
treatment  to  ensure  sleep.  The  weak
patients  will  sleep  much,  because  they
need  the  sleep  for  restoration,  while
the  strong  will  sleep  but  little.

The  Enema. — Should  be  taken  at
least  every  other  day.  In  some  cases,
every  day  is  not  too  often,  at  least  for
the  first  few  days.  Only  clean,  warm
water  should  be  used.

Fresh  Air. — Pure  air  should  be  al-


752


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


lowed  to  circulate  in  the  room  at  all
times,  and  it  is  best  if  the  patient  can
be  out  of  doors  for  a  few  hours  daily
and  in  good  weather  all  day  long.

Other  treatment. — Chiropractic,  os-
teopathic, neuropathic,  naprapathic,
hydrotherapy,  massage,  or  other  me-
thods of  treatment  may  be  used,  pro-
vided the  treatments  do  not  distress
or  wear  out  the  patient.  The  idea  is
to  conserve  and  not  to  waste  energy.

Treatment  of  Disagreeable  Symptoms
That  May  Arise

Nausea. — Usually  occurs  during  the
first  few  days,  and  is  prevented  by  pre-
paring properly  for  the  fast  by  using
fruit  juices  during  the  first  two  or
three  days,  or  by  the  use  of  the  enema.

Vomiting. — May  occur  at  any  time.
Due  usually  to  regurgitation  of  bile
mto  the  stomach,  or  collection  of  mu-
cus. Use  fruit  juice  or  vegetable  juice
for  the  first  two  or  three  days.  Drink
freely  of  hot  or  cold  water,  and  use
the  enema  freely.  As  soon  as  the  ali-
mentary tract  is  emptied,  the  vomit-
ing usually  ceases.  Gastric  lavage.
Rest  in  bed.  In  some  cases  stopping
the  intake  of  fluid  for  a  few  hours  will
cause  the  vomiting  to  cease.  If  it
continues,  it  is  sometimes  well  to  break
the  fast  and  feed  for  a  few  days,  when,
if  necessary,  the  fast  may  be  con-
tinued.

Headache. — May  be  present  for  the
first  few  days.  Will  usually  disappear
of  its  own  accord,  or  the  usual  treat-
ment for  headache  may  be  applied.
An  enema  often  relieves.

Coldness. — Due  to  the  fact  that  the
blood  is  absorbing  toxins,  and  that  the
circulation  is  slowing  down.  Usually
disappears  as  active  elimination  goes
on.  Keep  the  patient  warm  by  advis-
ing suitable  clothing  and  a  warm  room.
A  warm  bath  will  help.

Pains. — Often  occur  as  the  result  of
the  stirring-up  of  the  morbid  matter
in  the  system. Use  the  hot  bath.

Symptoms  of  Suppressed  Diseases
Will  Recur. — These  must  not  be  inter-
fered with.  Measures  may  be  em-
ployed to  make  the  patient  comfort-


able, provided  they  do  not  interfere
with  the eliminative  process.

Nervousness. — Due  to  the  stirring-
up  process  and  the  entry  of  irritants
from  the  cells  into  the  blood  stream.
Use  the  enema  and  warm  bath  freely
and  massage  the  patient.

Hunger. — As  a  rule  only  present  for
the  first  two  to  four  days.  Relieve  by
taking  plenty  of  water,  or  wait  for  it
to  disappear  naturally.

Bad  Taste  in  Mouth. — Use  the  tooth
brush  and  keep  the  mouth  and  teeth
and tongue clean.

Dizziness. — Do  not  get  up  suddenly
from  a  chair  or  from  the  bed.  Take
a  few  exercises  in  bed  before  arising.
Make  no  sudden  movements.

Rapid  Heart. — Keep  quiet.  Cold
compress  over  the  heart.  Don't  wor-
ry about  the  condition  as  it  is  seldom
of importance.

Slow  Heart. — Never  of  danger  un-
less as  a  complication  of  disease.  Take
warm  sitz  or  tub  bath  or  apply  hot
compress  over  heart.

Fever. — Sometimes  occurs  as  a
crisis.  Don't  stop  the  fast.  That  is
the  best  cure.  Use  the  enema  freely,
drink  freely,  and  sponge  the  body  with
cool  water.

When  the  Fast  Shall  Be  Broken

In  acute  cases,  break  the  fast  only
when  the  fever  is  gone  and  most  of
the  symptoms  have  cleared  up.

In  chronic  cases,  continue  the  fast
until  the  symptoms  of  the  particular
disease  for  which  the  fast  is  being  ta-
ken are  gone,  or  until  the  patient
shows  signs  that  the  fast  is  becoming
tiresome,  or  is  causing  mental  distress..
Never  fast  a  patient  against  his  will,
unless  to  save  his  life.  It  is  not  good
practice  to  determine  the  length  of  the
fast  beforehand.  No  one  can  tell  just
how  long  it  will  take  to  bring  about
the  desired  results.  The  weight  of  the
patient  is  often  the  guide  to  the  length
of  the  fast.  Although  some  very  thin
individuals  have  fasted  for  long  per-
iods, it  is  not  advisable  in  such  cases;
rather  give  a  short  fast,  frequently  re-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


753


peated.  A  series  of  short  fasts  are
often  of  more  benefit  than  a  long  one.
The  idea  that  only  so-called  complete
fasts  are  beneficial  is  not  true,  and  has
often  led  to  much  harm.  Every  time
a  person  fasts  for  a  few  days,  some
good  will  be  done,  and  if  there  is  a
chronic  disease  present,  some  effect
will  be  made  on  the  disease,  just  to
the  extent  of  the  fast.

If  the  patient  has  been  fasting  for  a
few  days,  and  reaches  the  point  where
he  feels  good,  and  has  plenty  of  sa-
liva and  a  desire  for  food,  the  fast
should  be  broken.  If  there  is  no  de-
sire for  food,  the  fast  should  be  con-
tinued.

The  state  of  the  tongue  is  very  sel-
dom a  good  guide  for  breaking  the
fast.  The  white  coat  on  the  tongue
does  not  indicate  the  condition  of  the
stomach,  as  is  popularly  thought,  but
is  an  accumulation  of  epithelial  cells,
which  will  promptly  disappear  upon
the  ingestion  of  some  rough  food.

It  is  a  safe  plan  never  to  put  a  new
patient  upon  a  long  fast,  the  first  time.
Rather  give  him  a  series  of  shorter
fasts,  and  gradually  work  up  to  the
long  fast,  if  it  is  really  needed.  In
many  cases  the  long  fast  is  not  neces-
sary, and  when  other  treatment  mea-
sures are  being  used  along  with  the
fast,  the  length  of  the  fast  is  short-
ened. You  should  know  just  how
much  recuperative  power  your  patient
has  after  a  fast,  how  quickly  he  assi-
milates food,  the  state  of  his  digestion
for  various  foods,  his  mental  calibre,
etc.

How  to  Break  the  Fast. — ^Investiga-
tion has  proved  that  most  of  the  fa-
talities which  have  occurred  in  fasting
have  been  due  to  the  fact  that  the  fast
was  broken  improperly.  The  first
food  taken  after  a  fast  must  be  in
small  amounts,  easily  digested,  taken
at  regular  intervals,  and  preferably
liquid.  Fruit  juices  are  usually  recom-
mended, although  in  many  cases  they
are  irritating  and  cause  disturbances
in  the  stomach.  After  years  of  exper-
ience, we  believe  there  is  no  better
food  to  give  the  fasting  patient  when
he  is  ready  to  eat,  than  milk. This  is


the  first  food  given  the  new  born  babe
and  it  is  the  best  food  to  give  the  re-
born adult.  It  can  be  measured  out
so  that  the  same  amount  of  nourish-
ment is  given  at  a  time;  it  is  easily
digested,  is  non-irritating,  usually  rel-
ished by  all,  and  will  give  a  maximum
amount  of  nourishment  with  minimum
expenditure  of  digestive  energy.  In
some  cases  it  is  well  to  modify  the
milk  at  first,  just  as  is  done  for  the
infant.  A  safe  plan  is  as  follows:  In
fasts  up  to  three  days,  give  a  glass  of
milk  every  hour  on  the  first  day,  and
every  half  hour  on  the  second  day —
then  continue  with  the  milk  diet  or
gradually  return  to  the  regular  mixed
diet.  In  fasts  up  to  seven  days,  give
fruit  juices,  if  desired,  on  the  first  day,
a  glass  every  two  hours,  or  give  the
milk,  a  glass  every  three  hours,  on  the
second  day  one  glass  of  milk  every
hour,  then  every  half  hour,  etc.  In
fasts  up  to  fourteen  days  and  over
seven  days,  give  only  half  a  glass  of
milk  every  two  hours  on  the  first  day,
and  continue  for  a  shorter  period.
In  extremely  long  fasts,  the  milk
should  be  skimmed,  or  modified,  at
first,  and  the  quantity  very  small  and
given  regularly.

The  following  is  a  list  of  foods
which  can  be  used  as  the  first  food
after  a  fast — but  none  of  them  can
take  the  place  of  milk  as  the  ideal :
orange,  grape,  pineapple,  apple,  vege-
table, watermelon,  beef  juices,  malted
milk,  sumik,  skimmed  milk,  albumin
water,  honey  water,  albuminated  milk,
a  mixture  of  orange  juice,  honey  and
white  of  egg  well  beaten  together.

Our  advice  is  to  always  play  safe
and  never  fast  your  patients  too  long,
and  never  try  to  overfeed  when  break-
ing the  fast.  Fasting  is  a  natural
agent  for  the  cure  of  disease,  and  is
always  of  benefit  to  the  patient  when
rightly  conducted.  Simply  because
once  in  a  while  some  one  comes  to
grief  through  a  long  fast,  is  no  reason
why  it  should  be  condemned.

As  with  all  other  forms  of  treat-
ment, fasting  must  be  studied  and  ex-
perience gained  before  the  best  results
can be expected. No preconceived


754


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihujcrs'  Guide


opinions  must  be  held,  and  no  cut  and
dried  rules  followed,  for  each  case  is
a  law  unto  itself.  When  once  the
general  principles  are  thorout^hly  un-
derstood, they  can  be  applied  to  the
individual  case. Rightly  administered,


fasting  is  a  safe  and  effective  thera-
peutic agent,  and  we  advise  practition-
ers of  all  schools  to  secure  every  book
on  the  subject,  and  study  the  matter,
and  try-  it  out  on  their  own  persons
and  with their  patients.


EXERCISE  AND  REST

By  SIGURD  SAMPSON,  N. D.


The  first  law  of  life  is  activity.  Use
or  lose,  is  the  command.  If  any  part
of  the  body  is  allowed  to  remain  idle,
it  will  soon  become  smaller  in  size
and  inferior  in  substance.  This  ap-
plies to  brain  and  muscle,  voluntary
and  involuntary  parts  alike.

All  our  activity,  however,  must
have  a  definite  purpose,  and  may  be
classified  into  four  main  groups,  viz. :

1.  Productive  labor.

2.  Recreative play.

3.  Exercise  for  development.

4.  Exercise  for  eliminating  disease
and  regaining  health.

The  last  two  mentioned  groups  are
the  ones  we  wish  to  discuss  here —
with  addition  of  a  special  physical  ac-
tivity called  rest.

Aside  from  dietetics,  exercise  is  our
most  valuable  therapeutic  agent,  em-
ployed as  massage  and  passive  or  ac-
tive movements.  But  unless  a  per-
son understands  thoroughly  the  way
the  forces  of  the  body  work,  and  the
physiology  of  exercise,  he  should  not
undertake  to  direct  his  own  or  any-
body else's  regime  of  exercise,  either
for  development  or  the  cure  of  disease.

It  takes  vitality  to  generate  vitality.
When  a  person  has  been  using  up  his
surplus  energy  through  mental  or
physical  labor  during  the  day,  and
feels  tired  as  a  result,  no  form  of  ex-
ercise can  possibly  do  any  good.  What
is  needed  in  such  a  condition  is  rest.
Voluntary  exercise  develops  more
energy  only  when  a  person  has  some
surplus  vitality  with  which  to  carry  it
on.

A  body  gets  tired  after  a  day's  la-


bor, because  its  surplus  vitality  has
been  used  up.  A  night's  sleep  will  re-
cuperate the  cells  and  restore  the  used
up  body  forces.

\Mien  a  body  is  clogged  with  waste
material  as  a  result  of  too  much  food,
an  insufficient  amount  of  air  or  over-
work, it  also  feels  tired.  But  this  is  a
tired  feeling  or  condition  which  can
not  be  overcome  by  a  night's  sleep.

The  blood  circulation  is  sluggish,
very  little  energy  is  generated,  there
is  "friction"  in  all  the  body's  move-
ments, which  requires  a  large  amount
of  energy  to  overcome.

No  matter  what  other  name  we  give
the  ailments  present  in  such  a  body,
we  know  that  the  individual  is  suffer-
ing from  low  vitality,  because  the  body
generates  little  vitality,  while  it  re-
quires much  vitality  merely  to  live.

Exercise,  therefore,  in  such  a  condi-
tion must  have  one  purpose  only,  to
increase  the  individual's  vitality.  Ex-
ercise for  the  sake  of  promoting  blood
movement,  and  more  heat  will  be  gen-
erated, more  air  will  be  taken  into  the
system,  the  eliminative  organs  will
soon  become  more  active,  and  meta-
bolism will  be  increased.

Such  exercise  should  be  done  with
as  small  an  expenditure  of  neural  en-
ergy as  possible.  All  moves  should
be  full  and  complete,  but  simple  and
more  or  less  mechanical.  Arms.  legs
and  trunk  should  be  used  in  order  to
act  on  the  large  vessels.

Simple  mechanical  movements  will
promote  and  stimulate  the  circulation
of  blood  just  as  effectively  as  any
complicated  motion,  and  they  require
far  less  energy. This  is  just  wb9,t  we


Universal  Naturoptilliic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


755


wish  to  accomplish,  for  remember  we
are  not  now  exercising  for  develop-
ment, but  for  elimination.  A  sick  cell
is  fighting  for  life ;  it  has  no  vitality
with  which  to  carry  on  development
and  growth.

When  the  body  is  sick,  its  whole
force  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  elimin-
ating the  sick,  morbid  elements.  When
this  has  been  accomplished,  we  may
begin  to  exercise  for  development.

Muscular  exercise  has  a  remarkably
stimulating  and  rejuvenating  influence
on  the  system.  As  an  example,  I  shall
just  mention  the  fact  that  the  blood
leaving  a  muscle  at  rest  is  0.7  of  one
degree  higher  in  temperature  than
that  of  the  blood  supplying  the  muscle,
but  the  blood  leaving  a  muscle  in  ac-
tion may  be  1.4  degree  higher  than
the  blood  entering  the  muscle.  This
shows  the  value  of  muscular  exercise
as  a  heat  developer.

For  people  who  do  mental  work,
muscular  exercise  is  invaluable.  For
the  brain  is  rebuilt  and  rejuvenated  by
the  blood  in  the  same  way  as  all  other
parts  of  the  body.

When  you  feel  blue  and  everything
looks  gloomy  ahead  of  you,  take  off
your  clothes  and  exercise  determined-
ly for  10-20  minutes,  and  you  will  find
your  blues  and  worries  fading  away
as  if  by  magic.

There  is  no  greater  means  of  bring-
ing body  and  soul  together  in  perfect
harmony  than  light  rhythmic  motions,
say  in  the  form  of  dancing,  especially
if  done  to  beautiful  music.  Much  mus-
cular exercise  is  required  by  the  ordin-
ary individual  today  merely  to  work
off  the  surplus  amount  of  food  he  takes
into  his  system.  By  the  time  this  is
accomplished,  he  is  tired  out,  he  has
no  energy  left  with  which  to  carry  on
exercise  for  developing  larger  and
stronger  muscles,  if  this  should  be  his
aim.  This  is  the  reason  why  many
fail  in  their  effort  to  develop  a  better
physique.

If  you  wish  to  develop  large  mus-
cles, be  sure  that  you  do  not  over-eat.

From  a  health  standpoint,  however,
we  look  not  for  size,  but  soundness.  If
the individual is healthy, his body


will  assume  the  proportions  best  fitted
for  his  special  occupation.  Health  and
strength  are  by  no  means  synonymous.

Another  phase  just  as  important  as
exercise  in  eliminating  disease  and  de-
veloping any  part  of  the  body  is  rest.
A  muscle  may  be  rested  by  a  few  min-
utes of  relaxation,  as  its  accumulated
fatigue  poison  may  be  thus  carried  off.

But  the  boy  as  a  whole  can  be  re-
juvenated only  during  sleep.  Vitality
is  generated  in  the  system  during
sleeping  and  waking  hours  alike.  But
the  expenditure  of  vitality  is  always
greater  than  t'he  supply  during  the
waking  state.  Therefore,  exhaustion
must  take  place  sooner  or  later.

During  sleep  all  outflow  of  energy
is  practically  shut  off.  But  as  the
generation  of  vitality  still  goes  on,  the
body  is  soon  recharged.

Sleep  is  not  an  inactive  state.  Sleep
is  a  state  of  activity  of  the  finest  kind
— a  state  of  repair.  Whether  this  re-
pair is  speedy  or  slow  depends  on  the
individual's  condition.  A  sluggish,
slow  body  must,  of  necessity,  require
a  longer  time  for  all  its  functions  than
one  where  everything  functions  with
ease  and  speed.

A  person  whose  vitality  is  low  will
require  much  more  sleep  than  a  per-
son whose  vitality  is  high.  Such  a
person  should  have  periods  of  definite


Milk  has  no  Charms  for  the  real
Vegetarian


756


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


exercise',  and  he  should  sleep  when-
ever there  is  an  inclination  to  do  so.
This  will  invigorate  his  system.

That  restless  condition  which  a  per-
son of  low  vitality  sometimes  feels ;
when  he  is  tired  and  still  unable  to
sleep ;  when  rest  is  not  restful,  is  due
to  retarded  metabolism,  interference
with  the  blood  circulation,  and  the
]:)resence  in  the  system  of  toxic  ele-
ments which  irritate  nerves  and  other
tissues.  These  toxins  are  not  what
we  call  fatigue  poison,  but  poisons  de-
rived from  other  sources,  mainly  from
imbibing  too  much  food. .

Moderate  exercise,  both  passive  and
active,  will  stimulate  the  natural  func-
tion of  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  a
craving  for  rest  and  recuperation  will
soon  manifest  itself.  It  is  now  in  a
position to rest. It  feels  more  rest-


ful,  though in reality it is more act-
ive than  it  was  previously.

Our  activity  during  waking  hours
determines  the  rate  of  activity  during
sleep.  The  amount  of  sleep  needed
by  a  body  can  not  be  determined  by
certain  rules  or  number  of  hours.  It
must  be  determined  solely  by  the  need
of  the  body.  10  to  14  hours'  sleep  per
day  is  none  too  much  for  a  neuras-
thenic. We  generally  advise  rest  for
such  conditions.  But  the  rest  condi-
tion is  more  often  brought  about  by
use  of  the  muscles  than  by  disuse.  For
rest  and  sleep  is  not  a  state  of  inac-
tivity. It  is  a  state  of  activity  of  the
highest  order,  though  not  necessarily
conscious  activity.  But  the  nature  of
this  subconscious  activity  is  deter-
mined entirely  by  our  conscious  ac-
tivity over  which  we  have  full  control.


THE  MILK  DIET

By  DR.  H.  B.  GALATIAN


In  our  article  on  the  fast  cure,  we
mentioned  the  milk  diet  as  the  best  re-
diet  has  a  much  wider  range  of  appli-
cation, however,  and  next  to  the  fast,
is,  we  believe,  the  most  valuable  agent
for  the  relief  of  chronic  conditions.  We
make this statement after observing


My friend, you need mental poise.

The  tin  can  is  non-existent. Try  a

little  Christian  Science


its  use  with  many  cases  during  the
past  ten  years.

There  are  some  who  condemn  its
use  on  the  grounds  that  milk  is  not
suitable  for  human  food.  That  it  is
food  for  the  calf,  etc.,  etc.  This  is  a
nonsensical  idea,  and  is  founded  on
ignorance  of  how  to  use  the  milk  diet
therapeutically  and  inexperience  in  its
application.

In  this  article  we  will  give  the  most
practical  points  in  its  use,  in  the
hopes  that  the  practitioner  will  try  it
out  and  study  more  deeply  the  ques-
tion.

The  Kind  of  Milk  to  Use.— Holstein
milk,  if  it  can  be  secured.  If  not,  any
good  milk,  provided  it  does  not  con-
tain too  much  cream,  in  which  case  it
should  be  reduced.  The  milk  should
be  unpasteurized,  and  certified.  If
not  this,  then  milk  from  as  clean  a
dairy  as  possible.  Otherwise  use  the
milk  pasteurized.  Better  results  are
secured  by  using  the  unpasteurized
milk,  but  in  cities,  other  than  pasteur-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


757


ized  milk  cannot  be  secured  except  by
special  arrangement,  which  is  not  al-
ways possible  to  the  private  household.

The  Temperature  of  the  Milk.— Or-
case  of  weak  digestion,  or  during  cold
weather,  warm  milk  may  be  used,  but
never  boiled  milk.

How  Often  to  Take  the  Milk.— The
best  results  are  secured  if  the  patient
will  take  one  glass  (6  to  8  oz.)  every
half  hour  while  awake.  This  is  the
ideal,  but  may  be  modified  to  suit  the
condition  of  the  patient,  the  physician
always  keeping  in  view,  and  trying
to  work  up  to  the  ideal,  viz.,  every
half  hour.

What  Shall  Be  Taken  with  the  Milk.
— Absolutely  nothing,  except  in  the
instances  related  below.  Milk  is  the
one  food  which  should  be  taken  alone.
In  the  case  of  the  infant,  no  other  food
is  taken  naturally,  and  in  the  attempt
to  change  or  modify  milk  for  the  babe,
much  harm  is  often  done.  It  is  the
same  with  the  adult,  and  it  is  because
of  this  that  many  people  say  that  milk
does  not  agree  with  them.  The  rea-
son is  because  they  have  not  been  tak-
ing the  milk  diet,  but  a  mixed  diet.
When  we  say  the  milk  diet,  we  mean
milk  and  nothing  else  whatever.

In  Case  of  Hyperchlorhydria. — Give
more  milk  to  neutralize  the  acid.
Those  with  acid  stomachs  are  good
milk  drinkers.  If  little  milk  is  ta-
ken in  such  cases,  hard  irritating
curds  are  formed.  If  more  is  taken,
the  curds  are  softer  and  easily  broken
up.

In  Case  of  Hypochlorhydria. — Give
lemon  juice  with  the  milk.  That  is,
advise  the  patient  to  sip  the  lemon
juice  after  each  glass  of  milk.  In
many  cases,  after  a  few  days  this  will
be  unnecessary,  as  the  glands  of  the
stomach  become  better  nourished,  and
perform  their  function.

For  Constipation. — Many  say  they
cannot  take  the  milk  diet  because  of
constipation.  Yet  milk  is  the  best  cure
for  constipation  that  we  know  of.  The
cause  of  constipation  is  chiefly  in
atonic  intestinal  walls,  and  the  milk
will  in  time  build  these  up. The  best


plan  is  to  use  a  small  amount  of  warm
water  in  an  enema  daily  until  the
bowels  move  of  their  own  accord,
even  though  it  takes  some  time.  This
is  better  than  mixing  laxative  foods,
such  as  bran,  figs,  etc.,  with  the  milk.
Other  foods  taken  with  the  diet  may,
of  course,  make  free  bowel  movements,
but  the  patient  runs  chances  of  spoil-
ing the  desired  efifect  of  the  treatment.
The  milk  diet  means  milk,  as  we  have
said  before.  However,  in  some  cases
bran  gems,  figs,  or  prunes  may  be  used,
provided  they  do  not  disturb  digestion.
Only  the  least  amount  of  these  neces-
sary should  be  used,  and  they  should
be  discontinued  ^as  soon  as  possible.

For  Diarrhea. — ^This  is  at  times  a
common  symptom.  It  occurs  some-
times on  the  first  or  second  day,  es-
pecially after  a  fast.  It  is  also  due  to
collections  of  mucus  on  the  walls  of
the  intestines  and  stomach,  preventing
the  absorption  of  the  liquid  part  of
the  milk.  It  may  also  be  due  to  rapid
peristalsis.  The  rule  should  be  to  keep
up  the  milk  for  three  days,  at  least,
when  if  it  continues,  the  milk  may  be
stopped  for  a  day,  and  then  renewed.
If  it  still  continues,  take  less  milk  and
at  longer  intervals.  If  still  there  is
diarrhea,  give  some  dates  with  the
milk,  two  or  three  with  each  glass,
well  masticated.  Or  a  piece  of  zwie-
back may  be  eaten.  In  some  cases,
even  this  will  not  help,  and  the  milk
may  have  to  be  discontinued  and  some
taken.  In  many  cases  we  have  then
been  able  to  return  the  patient  to  the
milk  without  the  diarrhoea  recurring.
Here  is  a  point  which  will  be  found  in-


LIF£  AND  POWER
ARE  SCATTERfD
WITH  All:
ITSBEA^fS


0iMMS:M:!^-''


THE  DARK'

EST  SHAOOWA
MAKES  15  5TAND,
IN  HIS  OWN  LIGHT.,


758  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


teresting  and  of  help.  In  every  case
where  there  has  been  previously  a
gonorrhoeal  infection,  it  may  be  many
years  previous,  diarrhea  while  on  the
milk  diet  may  be  expected.  We  have
not  the  space  in  this  article  to  explain
why.

Exercise. — \'ery  little  should  be  ta-
ken. Those  low  in  digestive  ability  or
very  emaciated  should  rest  in  bed.
Those  fairly  strong  may  be  up  and
around,  but  no  exercise  should  be  ta-
ken except  a  walk  and  a  few  calis-
thenics early  in  the  morning  before
taking  the  milk.  All  the  energy  possi-
ble must  be  saved  for  digesting  the
milk,  and  making  ne\y  blood.

Baths. — A  warm  sponge,  shower,  or
tub  bath  daily.  If  routine  water  treat-
ments are  being  given,  they  should  be
mild  in  character.

Treatments. — Very  few  should  be
given.  Spinal  manipulations  and  mas-
sage are  of  benefit  if  not  taken  too  of-
ten at  first.  Later  on  in  the  diet,  or
about  when  to  go  off  the  diet,  more
treatments  may  be  given,  if  necessary,
but  they  are  often  not  needed,  as  the
milk  will  have  done  the  work.

Fresh  Air. — Needed  at  all  times,  as
with  any  other  treatment.  The  more
fresh  air,  the  better  the  milk  will  be
digested,  but  the  patient  must  be  kept


:^-


{:m^l^filMEmf<^^^^'^'


^jtf^-^TVON


..#


warm.  This  is,  however,  not  a  diffi-
cult task,  as  circulation  is  soon  stim-
ulated, and  the  quality  of  the  blood  im-
proves so  rapidly  that  the  patient
keeps  warm  very  easily.

Nausea  and  Vomiting. — Give  less
milk  if  due  to  lack  of  peristalsis.  If
due  to  formation  of  hard  curds,  give
more  milk.  If  the  milk  is  too  rich,  take
out  some,  or  all,  of  the  cream.  Use
the  enema.  Have  the  patient  rest.
Take  at  longer  intervals.  This  seldom
occurs,  if  nothing  but  milk  is  taken.

Cautions. — In  arterio  sclerosis,  the
amount  of  milk  should  be  limited  at
first,  but  later  on  it  may  be  increased,
as  the  improved  circulation  and
strengthened  arteries  will  obviate  any
danger.

In  heart  diseases,  the  amount  must
be  limited,  as  the  increased  amount  of
fluid  raises  the  blood  pressure,  and
also  crowds  the  work  of  the  heart.
Milk  is  not,  however,  contra-indicated,
but  must  be  taken  with  caution.

In  tuberculosis,  where  there  has
been  hemorrhages,  smaller  amounts
should  be  given.  A  good  plan  is  to
sour  the  milk,  and  remove  some  of  the
water,  then  beat  up  the  clabber  and
feed this.

In  some  diseases,  the  symptoms  are
aggravated  at  first,  but  if  the  milk  is
continued,  the  symptoms  will  clear  up
and  the  patient  receive  the  desired
benefit.

To  Sum  Up. — The  above  are  but  a
few  of  the  points  to  be  observed  in
prescribing  the  milk  diet  in  disease,
but  they  will  serve  to  bring  the  diet
to  the  notice  of  the  practitioner.  It
is  only  by  study  and  experience  with
many  cases,  in  all  kinds  of  diseases,
that  dietetic  treatment  can  be  uniform-
ly successful.  A  few  half-hearted  at-
tempts at  prescribing  the  milk  diet,
without  benefit  to  the  patient,  will  of-
ten discourage  further  investigation.
A  scientific  investigator,  however,  will
not  condemn  without  experience  with
many  cases,  over  a  long  period  of  time.
That  is  the  way  in  which  we  wish  you
to  investigate  this  form  of  treatment,
and  we  feel  sure  you  will  be  well  re-
paid for  the  eflforts  put  forth.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


759


PHYSCULTOPATHY

By  DR.  H.  B.  GALATIAN


The  old  interpretation  of  the  term,
"Physical  Culture,"  was  that  it  con-
sisted of  muscular  movements  done
with  the  idea  of  strengthening  and
developing  not  only  the  muscles  them-
selves, but  the  entire  functional  sys-
tem.

Even  at  the  present  there  are  some
who  believe  that  this  is  all  there  is  to
Physical  Culture,  and  never  for  a  mo-
ment think  of  associating  the  term
with  a  system  of  health  restoration.
They  will  say  that  exercise  is  very
good  for  a  well  person,  but  not  es-
pecially beneficial  for  a  sick  one.  This
idea  of  Physical  Culture  prevails  to
some  extent  also  among  practitioners
of  various  schools.

To  Bernarr  Macfadden  must  be  giv-
en the  credit  for  adding  to  the  mean-
ing of  Physical  Culture,  so  that  today
it  stands  for  a  complete  system  of
healing.  Physical  Culture  now  means
the  doing  or  following  of  measures
which  will  bring  about  the  most  per-
fect state  of  physical  health  possible
to  the  individual.  This  also  includes
the  moral  and  mental  health  and  de-
velopment of  the  individual.

It  is,  then,  obvious  that  Physical
Culture  does  not  mean  simply  exer-
cise, but  must  include  all  of  the  meas-
ures necessary  for  preserving  the
health  and  life  of  mankind,  and  for
developing  the  individual  to  the  high-
est physical,  mental  and  moral  state
possible,  during  his  journey  from  birth
to  the  grave.  If  we  include  eugenics,
it  has  to  do  with  prenatal  development
also.

To  Bernarr  Macfadden  must,  also,
be  given  credit  for  coining  a  word  ap-
plicable to  Physical  Culture  in  its  new
meaning,  and  also  applicable  to  its
new  and  enlarged  field  in  therapeutics.
The  term  Physcultopathy  designates
a  system  of  therapeutics  which  aims
to  prevent  illness  by  teaching  proper
living,  to  restore  health,  when  lost,  by
measures  in  accord  with  the  physio-
logical processes  of  the  body,  and  to


develop  the  body  and  all  its  functions
to  as  near  perfection  as  possible.

Physcultopathy  uses  diet,  water,
sun  and  air,  breathing,  exercise,  fast-
ing, rest,  joint  manipulation,  sugges-
tion, etc.,  etc.,  as  may  be  indicated  in
the  patient's  case.  Many  of  these  are
used  in  other  systems  of  healing,  but
Physcultopathy  has  combined  many  of
them,  and  made  an  application  of  them
that  is  unique  to  this  system.

As  the  space  allotted  to  this  depart-
ment is  limited,  we  have  selected  for
discussion  several  of  the  most  import-
ant and  characteristic  measures  used
by  practitioners  of  this  method,  viz.,
Exercise  and  Rest,  Fasting,  and  the
Milk  Diet.

We  hope  that  practitioners  of  all
schools  will  freely  use  the  methods  de-
expositions,  the  aim  is  to  give  a  work-
ing basis,  and  to  stimulate  study  and
experiment  along  the  lines  mentioned.


Messrs.  Virus  Induction,  Incorporated,  and
their  victim.


760


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


s


: j-v


Ophthalmology  and I
Optometry  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editor

EDWARD  J.  PERKINS,  N.  D.,  Oph.  D.,  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.


S


OPHTHALMOLOGY  AND  OPTOMETRY

By  Dr.  EDWARD  J.  PERKINS


Subject:  Retinitis

The  editor  of  this  department  is  a
drugless  specialist  in  diseases  of  the
eyes  and  refraction,  therefore  his  work
lies  along  different  lines  than  that  of
the  general  practitioner.  However,
there  is  no  disease  of  the  eyes  which
occurs  more  often  by  reason  of  consti-
tutional disease,  and  is  treated  more  of-
ten on  the  basis  of  constitutional  causes
than  retinitis,  so  in  contributing  an  ar-
ticle to  this  publication,  the  editor  has
deemed  this  subject  of  practical  inter-
est to  the  drugless  profession.

Syphilitic  Retinitis

One  of  the  commonest  causes  of
retinitis  is  syphilis.  This  is  often  a
secondary  retinitis,  arising  along  with
disease  of  the  choroid,  and  a  local  man-
ifestation of  the  constitutional  disturb-
ance. Syphilitic  retinitis  also  occurs
primarily,  in  which  the  most  prominent
sign  is  syphilitic  endarteritis.  It  is  an
old  observed  fact  that  there  is  no  more
potent  pathological  condition  than  sy-
philis ;  it  respects  no  part  of  the  human
organism.  In  syphilitic  retinitis,  there
are  opacities  in  the  vitreous  humor,  es-
pecially in  the  posterior  portion ;  there
is  cloudiness  of  the  retina,  more  con-
spicuous about  the  optic  disc,  which
latter  is  usually  hyperaemic.  The  ma-
cular region  shows  white  spots,  with
white  and  yellowish  pigment  bounded
spots  at  the  edge  of  the  fundus. The


blood  vessels  are  usually  degenerated
with  whitish,  chalky  exudations  along
their  course ;  hemorrhages  seldom  oc-
cur. The  patient  complains  of  defec-
tive central  vision,  blindness  in  dim
light,  irregular  and  concentric  con-
traction of  the  visual  field  with  often-
times central,  ring  or  paracentral  sca-
toniata,  and  metamorphopsia.

In  the  great  majority  of  cases  the
amount  of  organization  which  takes
place  at  the  sites  of  the  inflammatory
deposits  of  syphilitic  retinitis  is  very
small,  but  sometimes  there  is  a  well
marked  tendency  toward  new  blood
vessel  formation.  The  ophthalmoscope
shows  some  very  prominent  and  char-
acteristic changes.

In  the  acquired  form  of  syphilis  the
retinitis  generally  appears  from  one  to
two  years  after  the  primary  infection :
both  eyes  are  usually  involved,  but
rarely  at  the  same  time.  Sometimes
the  macular  area  is  afifected  alone,
showing  a  gray  or  yellowish  deposit,
or  a  number  of  small  yellow  spots  and
dots  of  pigment.  Relapses  are  frequent
in  such  cases.

In  congenital  syphilis,  we  often  find
retinitis ;  in  such  cases  the  ophthalmo-
scopic picture  shows  a  dusty,  peppery,
discrete  pigmentation  of  the  edges  of
the  retina,  along  with  a  tigroid  condi-
tion of  the  fundus.  To  differentiate
this  condition  from  normal  is  to  take
note  of  the  greater  aggregation  of  the
pigment. Where  the  case  is  more  de-


Uniuersal  NaLiiropalliic  Direclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


7G1


Unite,  there  are  yellowish-red  and  black
spots  at  the  periphery,  or  larger  gray
or  white  patches  may  be  seen.  Very
often  the  case  may  present  all  the  char-
acters of  the  acquired  form.  Treatment
is  the  constitutional  one  for  syphilis ;
the  retinitis  is  a  sequel  and  a  symp-
tom ;  local  treatment  aside  from  rest
and  protection  of  the  eyes,  is  of  little
avail.

Albuminuric  Neuroretinitis

This  is  a  typical  form  in  which  the
ophthalmoscopic  result  is  pathognomo-
nic; the  only  condition  it  is  likely  to
be  confused  with  is  intracranial  tumor.
The  general  signs  of  retinitis  are  pres-
ent, but  the  distinguishing  feature  is
the  presence  of  brilliant  white  spots
and  patches  in  the  retina,  the  earlier
deposits  being  cloudy,  with  soft  edges,
while  the  later  are  brighter,  more
sharply  defined  and  punctate ;  the  disc
is  surrounded  by  large,  white  patches,
or  by  a  continuous,  so-called  snow-
band.  The  white,  silvery,  round  dots
and  patches  around  the  macula  are
character  signs  pre-eminent.  The  steel-
ate  figure  is  made  up  of  spokes  of  white
dots  or  fine  lines,  radiating  from  the
forea,  but  the  forea  is  not  involved,
and  the  star  is  often  incomplete  in  one
direction  or  the  other;  however,  the  re-


tinal vessels  show  very  definite  degen-
erative changes.  There  are  exceptions
to  these,  as  in  every  case.  Sometimes
albuminuric  retinitis  shows  a  different
picture.  Sometimes  there  is  a  neuro-
retinitis, which  shows  no  charac-
teristic features  especially  associ-
ated with  inflammation  of  the  kid-
neys. In  such  cases,  there  is  moderate
swelling  of  the  optic  disc — rarely  so
much  as  in  the  choked  disc  of  intra-
cranial disease — more  or  less  wide-
spread edema  and  hemorrhage.  It  is  a
cardinal  point  that  the  urine  should  be
examined  in  every  case  of  retinitis,  re-
gardless of  the  subjective  and  objec-
tive symptoms.

The  white  spots  seen  in  albuminuric
retinitis  are  mainly  composed  of  exud-
ates, often  fibrous;  they  occur  in  the
inner  layers,  but  may  be  present  in  all
these.  Some  leucocytic  infiltration,  and
peculiar,  swollen,  nucleated  structures
— the  so-called  cytoid  bodies — are
found  in  the  nerve  fiber  layer,  which  are
spoken  of  by  some  as  varicose  nerve
fibers.  Practically  all  the  exudates  and
neurotic  retinal  elements  undergo  fatty
degeneration.  The  peculiar  arrange-
ment of  the  spots  in  the  macula  is  sup-
posed to  be  the  radial  disposition  of
Muller  s  fibers,  but  it  is  not  impossible
that  when  the  edema  is  considerable.


Medical  Trust: If  you dare to consult
anybody  else,  you  will  get  a  good


calling  down.


762


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


there  may  be  actual  radial  folds  in  the
retina,  within  which  the  exudates  ac-
cumulate. The  blood-vessel  changes
are  those  common  to  vasculitis  in  other
small  vessels,  consisting  of  endo-  and
pexi-vasculitis  and  hyaline  degenera-
tion of  the  walls.

Albuminuric  retinitis  may  occur  in
all  forms  of  nephritis,  including  the  ne-
phritis of  scarlatina  and  the  puerperal
state,  but  by  far  the  greater  number
of  cases,  the  inciting  disease  is  chronic
interstitial  nephritis.  This  latter  fact
establishes  the  reason  for  the  small
quantity,  or  even  total  absence,  of  al-
bumin in  the  urine  of  some  cases.

The  retinal  changes  may  be  the  first
evidence  of  renal  disease,  therefore  it
is  extremely  important  that  a  positive
diagnosis  be  made  immediately.  When
retinitis  occurs  in  puerperal  cases,  the
prognosis  is  worse  the  earlier  the  re-
tinitis is  made  out,  but  fortunately  it
generally  commences  in  the  late  stage
of  pregnancy.  Artificial  induction  of
abortion  is  advocated  by  some  author-
ities, for  which  they  claim  prompt  ben-
eficial effect.  The  cases  need  the  most
careful  consultation — a  point  to  be  re-
membered.

The  only  symptom  complained  of  in
albumino-neuroretinitis  is  gradually  di-
minishing acuteness  of  vision,  head-
ache accompanies  the  condition,  and
both  eyes  are  almost  always  affected


A  September  Morn


;^'^^


Dr.  Pill:  "By  heck!  If  I  get  hold  of  that
mut  who  ran  off  with  my  clothes,  I'll  per-
suade him  that  he  has  appendicitis,  and  then
perform  an  unsuccessful  operation."


simultaneously.  Transient  blindness
may  occur  in  cases  of  nephritis,  and
especially  is  this  possible  when  the  dis-
ease is  complicated  by  uremia.  These
cases  are  often  puzzling,  as  no  apparent
abnormality  of  the  retina  appears.  A
differential  diagnosis  between  uremic
blindness  and  albuminuric  retinitis  is
made  in  that  in  the  former  there  is
sudden  total  blindness,  while  in  the
latter  the  defective  vision  is  progres-
sive and  never  complete.  Sight  gen-
erally returns  in  one  or  two  days,  how-
ever ;  other  symptoms  may  accompany
the  attack,  such  as  vomiting,  headache,
convulsions,  or  coma,  these  latter  be-
ing symptoms  of  the  true  uremia.

This  disease  is  another  manifesta-
tion of  constitutional  affection,  and,  of
course,  treatment  must  be  directed  to
the  nephritis.  We  can  accomplsh  noth-
ing by  treating  symptoms  in  this  case.

Diabetic  retinitis

It  is  not  often  that  retinitis  compli-
cates diabetes,  but  such  cases  do  occur,
so  it  is  well  to  mention  it  here.  It
appears  in  the  late  stages  of  diabetes,
and  is  likely  missed  by  many  in  at-
tendance upon  such  cases,  owing  to
the  peripheral  position  of  the  lesions,
opacities  of  the  lens,  and  greatly  de-
bilitated condition  of  the  vascular  sys-
tem. It  is  always  bilateral,  and  in  its
commonest  form  irregularly  scattered ;
small,  bright,  white  spots  are  seen  in
the  macular  region,  the  steelate  ar-
rangement so  characteristic  of  nephri-
tis is  generally  absent,  but  we  must  re-
member that  albuminuria  is  a  frequent
companion  of  the  late  stages  of  dia-
betes, and  the  ophthalmoscopic  picture
of  "renal  retinitis"  may  be  present.  The
white  spots  may  coalesce  into  larger
plaques,  with  crenated  edges,  which  in-
dicate their  mode  of  formation.  The
optic  disc  and  remainder  of  the  retina
may  be  normal.  Treatment  is  that  of
diabetes,  and  the  prognosis  of  the  ret-
inal condition  depends  upon  the  sever-
ity of  the  diabetes.

Leucaemic  retinitis
During  the  course  of  an  attack  of


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


763


leucaemia,  a  retinitis  may  develop
which  gives  an  ophthalmoscopic  pic-
ture of  its  own.  The  retinal  vessels
are  much  distended,  the  blood  within
them  being  much  paler  than  normal ;
the  whole  fundus  is  pale  and  yellow-
ish. The  white  spots  and  patches  are
surrounded  by  a  red  rim,  which  makes
them  very  typical  of  this  affection.
These  spots  consist  of  leucocytes,  sur-
rounded by  red  corpuscles.  The  blood
should  be  examined  in  every  case,  and
treatment  based  upon  the  pathological
findings.

Purulent  retinitis

This  form  of  retinitis  is  most  al-
ways due  to  a  septic  perforating
wound,  which  may  result  in  general
infection  of  the  eye.  Sometimes  it  is  a
metastatic  condition  occurring  in  py-
aemia, most  likely  starting  in  a  septic
embolus.  During  the  early  stages  there
is  severe  retinitis,  with  hemorrhages,
followed  by  suppuration  involving  the
vitreous,  so  that  a  decided  yellow  re-
flex is  obtained.  The  case  generally
passes  in  general  eye  affection,  but
less  commonly  than  in  cases  of  exo-
genous infection.  Adopting  bacteriol-
ogy as  a  basis  for  explaining  the  dimin-
ished virulance  of  micro-organisms,  we
might  say  that  pyogenic  organisms  are
attenuated  in  the  blood  stream  and
body  tissues  and  the  infection  subsides,
which  it  does  in  many  cases,  with  re-
storation of  useful  vision.  Treatment
is  directed  toward  building  and  keep-
ing up  a  pure  condition  of  the  blood
stream ;  local  treatment  must  also  be
instituted,  in  which  case  alternate  heat
and  cold,  preferably  moist,  care  being
used  with  moist  heat ;  careful  massage,
occlusion  of  the  eyes,  cautious  use  of
galvanism  unless  infection  is  general
and  there  are  no  ulcers  complicating
the  case,  each  of  which  demands  ex-
pert assistance,  if  the  eye  or  both  eyes
are  to  be  saved.


Retinitis  proliferans

This  is  a  combination  disease  which
has  baffled  opthalmologists  for  many


years,  and  a  description  of  the  main
features  may  be  explained  as  an  aid  in
understanding  this  subject:  When  a
hemorrhage  occurs  into  the  vitreous,
the  blood  clot  is  generally  almost  com-
pletely absorbed,  this  being  due  to  the
absence  of  fibroblasts  in  the  vitreous,
and  their  scarceness  in  the  retina,  as
the  retinal  connective  tissue  consists
of  neuroglia,  an  epiblastic  structure
which  probably  takes  no  part  in  fibrous
tissue  formation,  there  being  no  meso-
blastic  tissue  in  the  retina  except  that
forming  and  surrounding  the  retina
blood  vessels.  There  have  been  cases
where  a  blood  ^lot  has  organized,  giv-
ing rise  to  masses  of  fibrous  tissue  in
the  vitreous,  vascularized  by  newly
formed  blood  vessels  derived  from  the
retinal  system.

Now,  this  is  the  condition  known  as
"retinitis  proliferans."  The  tissue  is
most  commonly  situated  near  the  disc,
and  the  vessels  spring  from  this  neigh-
borhood, probably  owing  to  the  fact
that  there  is  more  mesoblastic  tissue
here  than  in  other  parts  of  the  fundus.

There  seems  to  be  some  special  fac-
tor necessary  to  stimulate  organization
from  the  blood  clot,  and  this  is  found
in  some  general  diathesis.  In  nearly
all  these  cases,  there  is  either  a  history
of  syphilis,  or  the  patient  is  suflFering
from  nephritis,  diabetes,  or  some  other
constitutional  disorder.  Vision  is  gen-
erally much  impaired,  and  often  lost.
Treatment,  is  very  unsatisfactory,  but
a  general  constitutional  plan  should  be
mapped  out,  and  especially  if  the  case
is  seen  early,  some  results  may  be
looked  for.


OFFICIAL  MEDICINE  PLACES
THEGARTBEFORE  THE  HORSE,

NATUROPATHY  REMOVES rtiy^  M.D.REM0VE5
THE  CAUSE  BY  NATURAL  T^A $YM  PTOM  $

METHODS _/w a(^h^~---k^?^^i f


764


Universal  Naturopathic  Directonj  and  Bui/rrs'  Guide


@


Hydrotherapy  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editor
JOS.  A.  HOEGEN,  N.  D.,  334  Alexander  Avenue,  New  York


s


HYDROTHERAPY

By  JOS.  A.  HOEGEN,  N.  D.


Hydrotherapy !  Greatest  of  all  heal-
ing factors!  Most  beneficial  system  of
treatment  for  human  ills !  And  how-
much  still  abused,  and  how  little
understood !  Many  systems  of  heal-
ing have  sprung  up  in  late  years.
Many  with  much  good.  But  where  is
there  one  to  compare  with  the  water
cure?  Where  is  one,  that  produces
such  wonderful  results,  leaving  no
harmful  after-efifects,  provided  the
treatment  is  applied  in  the  proper
manner?

If  I  were  to  choose  between  all  the
systems  of  drugless  healing,  having
studied  nearly  all,  and  knowing  what
results  I  can  get,  I  would  select  the
water  cure  as  the  most  beneficial  of  all.

Great  indeed  is  the  value  of  a
thorough  knowledge  of  this  science.  I
call  it  science,  because  it  is  proven  to
be  an  exact  science,  properly  applied.
I  have  time  over  and  again  impressed
in  my  lectures  and  writings,  the  abso-
lute necessity  of  knowing  how  to
apply  this  science.

Every  physician,  no  matter  what
other  good  system  he  may  use,  must
use  water  to  get  best  results,  and
I  am  profoundly  sorry  that- there  are
many  schools,  who  during  their  whole
term  of  instruction,  do  not  touch  the
subject  of  hydrotherapy.  Our  medical
schools  go  over  it  slightly,  but  do  not
impress  the  student  sufficiently  as  to
the  great  value  of  this  simple  remedy.

Water  is,  without  any  doubt,  the
oldest  and  most  ancient  method  of
treating  disease.  Several  centuries  be-
fore Christ,  there  are  records  of  it
Chinese  physician,  who  then already


used  the  wrapping  up  in  linen  sheets,
similar  to  our  pack.

Water  was  always  used  in  the  treat-
ment of  disease  by  the  ancient  He-
brews, Greeks  and  Egyptians,  and  it
is  still  used  by  them  up  to  the  pres-
ent day.  The  cold  bath  has  been  in
use  in  Japan  nearly  1,000  years.  Even
old  Hippocrates,  the  famous  Greek
physician,  born  460  B.  C,  and  called
the  "Father  of  Medicine."  had  an  ex-
cellent knowledge  of  the  physiologi-
cal properties  of  water,  which  he  em-
ployed in  the  treatment  of  fevers,  ul-
cers, hemorrhage,  and  various  other
ills.

In  Europe,  Hydrotherapy  is  not
new,  and  Father  Kneipp,  the  great
Bavarian  water  apostle,  simply  revived
some  of  the  crude  methods  that  were
used  by  English  peasants  almost  two
centuries  ago.

In  this  country,  in  the  17th  century,
we  had  a  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  who
was  very  successful,  and  achieved
wonderful  results  with  the  water  cure
for  the  treatment  of  rheumatism,  gout,
measles  and  yellow  fever.

Within  the  last  century,  great  'and
gifted  men  have  taken  up  the  nature
cure  method,  principally  the  water
cure.  These  men  are  Priessnitz,
Schroth,  Graham,  Rausse,  Kneipp,
Kuhne,  Just,  Rickli,  and  many
others.  Priessnitz  was  one  of  the
first  to  organize  the  use  of  water  into
a  system,  for  which  he  deserves  great
credit.  Winternitz,  of  Vienna,  did
much  in  bringing  and  establishing
Hydrotherapy  upon  a  sound  and  sci-
entific basis.

As  I  said  in  the  beginning,  this  won-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buijcrs'  Guide


7G5


derful  agent,  water,  demands  a  thor-
ough and  practical  knowledge  of  physi-
ology. It  will  yield  bad  results  in  the
hands  of  one  not  experienced  in  its  use,
and  one  of  the  reasons  why  many  phy-
sicians are  still  against  recommending
the  use  of  water  in  treating  disease,  is
that  there  are  too  many  who  are  in-
experienced in  giving  this  treatment.

Too  many  hydropaths  apply  one  and
the  same  treatment  for  nearly  all  pa-
tients, which  is  a  dangerous  procedure.
No  two  cases  are  alike,  and  the  full-
blooded  patient  surely  does  not  need
the  same  treatment  that  an  anaemic
patient  would  require.

A  good  Naturopath,  as  a  rule,  is  a
good  Hydropath,  becaose  he  has  stud-
ied all  the  fundamentals  necessary  to
enable  him  to  apply  water  in  diseased
conditions  of  the  body  in  the  proper
manner.

Water  applied  to  the  body  should
have  the  purpose  of  aiding  the  body  to
bring  back  and  restore  sick  parts  to
health,  and  also  to  bring  back  proper
functions  to  the  organs  which  are
working  imperfectly,  or  it  should  make
abnormal  conditions  normal.  Water
is  a  great  and  powerful  means  of  re-
storing normal  functions  to  the  body.

An  impaired  circulation,  due  to  lack
of  oxygen  and  muscular  activity,  can-
not be  cured  by  Hydrotherapy  alone.
Neither  will  cases  of  dissipation,  over-
work, improper  partaking  of  food,  etc.,
respond  to  Hydrotherapy  alone.  Un-
less the  patient  gives  up  the  causes  of
his  ailments,  hydrotherapy  or  any  oth-
er therapy  will  not  be  of  much  use.

We  use  water,  in  giving  treatments,
ranging  from  very  cold  to  very  hot,
from  32°  to  104'  Fahrenheit  and  over,
all  applications  made  suitable  to  the
condition  of  the  patient.  Cold  applica-
tions, as  a  rule,  are  always  of  short  dur-
ation, thereby  hastening  the  reaction.

In  using  water,  we  get  an  action  and
a  reaction.  The  latter  gives  the  im-
portant efifect  which,  we  need.  When
we  try  to  relieve  pain  by  the  use  of
hot  water,  of  course  we  do  not  look  for
a  reaction.  Always  adjust  and  suit
the  water  to  the  body,  not  the  body  to
the  water,  otherwise  instead  of  increas-


ing your  patient's  vitality,  you  decrease
it.  It  would  be  folly  to  give  a  cold
bath  to  a  person  who  had  been  work-
ing hard,  and  was  tired  and  sleepy.
While  it  may  make  him  feel  very  spry
for  the  moment,  it  would  draw  too
much  on  his  reserve  force,  acting  like
exercise,  and  causing  the  body  to  gen-
erate more  energy,  which  in  reality  is
only  stored  up  during  sleep.

The  results  we  wish  to  obtain  in
Hydrotherapy  depend  almost  entirely
on  the  bodily  temperature  of  the  pa-
tient, and  the  mode  of  treatment  em-
ployed. Also  upon  the  length  of  time
or  the  duration  of  the  application,  its
suddenness,  and  the  sensibility  of  the
patient.  That  is  where  the  true  Hydro-
path  must  show  his  knowledge  of  this
science,  in  order  to  get  the  proper  re-
sults. I  will  give  a  few  of  the  most
common  water  applications  used  :

The  High  Bath  is  used  chiefly  in
cases  of  neurasthenia,  hysteria,  various
nerve  pains  ;  also  in  cases  of  sleepless-
ness, etc.  This  is  a  tub  bath,  in  which
the  patient  is  seated,  and  the  water
should  reach  above  the  shoulders.  The
patient  usually  remains  in  this  bath
from  15  to  20  minutes,  and  the  temper-
ature should  be  from  95  to  100  degrees.
After  the  bath,  the  patient  may  have
someone  rub  him  down  gently.

The  Cold  Full  Bath,  in  which  the
patient  lies  down,  should  not  be  given
more  than  one  minute,  and  the  short-
est duration  is  about  three  seconds.
This  short  immersion,  as  a  rule,  is  the
best.  Active  movements  should  be  en-
gaged in.  The  reaction  following  the
bath  is,  in  most  cases,  rapid  and  ac-
curate. The  skin  becomes  reddened,
the  circulation  and  respiration  are  stim-
ulated, and  the  cutaneous  vessels  be-
come dilated.  These  cold  baths  are
used  chiefly  when  metabolism  is  re-
tarded, and  also  where  excretory  activ-
ity is  to  be  greatly  increased,  as  in
obesity,  syphilis,  scrofulosis.  in  chronic
metallic  poisoning,  and  whenever  gen-
eral stimulation  is  desired.  It  is  given
at  a  temperature  of  from  40  to  60  de-
grees Fahrenheit,  and  on  account  of  it
being  powerfully  sedative,  is  employed
for  its  tonic  effects. If  the  vital  pow-


766


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


ers  are  low,  or  the  individual  remains
in  it  too  long-,  the  reaction  is  slow,  and
its  effects  injurious.  While  it  is  highly
invigorating  to  robust  persons,  those
who  have  a  low  standard  of  vitality
should  be  cautious  in  its  employment.

The  Warm  Full  Bath,  given  at  a  tem-
perature varying  from  92  to  98  degrees
Fahrenheit,  is  always  agreeable  and
refreshing.  It  is  used  for  equalizing
the  circulation,  softening  the  skin,  and
removing  impurities.  It  moderates
pain,  and  soothes  the  whole  system
without  weakening  or  debilitating.  It
is  an  efficient  agent  in  many  chronic
diseases,  convulsions,  spasmodic  af-
fections of  the  bowels,  rheumatism,
and  derangement  of  the  urino-genital
organs.  In  this  bath,  one  may  remain
25  to  30  minutes.  It  is  always  prefer-
able to  take  a  cool  rub-down  after  get-
ting out,  in  order  to  increase  skin  ac-
tivity and  promote  circulation.

The  Half  Bath  is  one  used  very
much,  but  should  be  used  still  more.
Patient  sits  in  the  water,  which  must
reach  the  level  of  the  umbilicus.  This
is  a  bath  that  all  well  persons  should
take  for  strengthening  the  abdomen
and  the  lower  organs.  If  these  baths
were  used  more,  we  would  have  less
cases  of  piles,  colic,  hysteria,  prolapsus
of  the  rectum,  etc.  The  duration  of
the  bath  should  not  be  more  than  one-
half  to  two  minutes.  While  in  the  wa-
ter, rub  the  abdomen  well,  and  have
someone  give  good,  vigorous  friction
on  back  and  shoulders.  This  is  very
beneficial.  Of  course,  these  treatments
must  all  be  used  with  care,  especially
in  diseased  conditions.  For  instance,
in  Typhoid  Fever,  it  would  be  a  dan-
gerous procedure  to  manipulate  the  ab-
domen, although  excellent  otherwise.
Have  the  temperature  from  84  down  as
low  as  68  degrees  Fahrenheit.  Used  in
this  manner,  half  baths  constitute  a
good,  general,  stimulating,  refreshing
measure.  In  diseases  of  the  spinal  cord
these  baths  should  always  be  given  a
little  warmer,  about  85  to  90  degrees.

The  Tepid  Bath  is  used  for  cleansing
the  body,  and  is  given  at  a  temperature
of  from  85  to  92  degrees  Fahrenheit.  It


tory affections  for  its  cooling-  effects.
The  temperature  should  always  be  reg-
ulated according  to  the  vitality  of  the
patient,  and  the  bath  may  be  repeated
two  or  three  times  a  day.  It  removes
superfluous  heat,  and  keeps  the  skin
in  a  condition  favorable  for  excretion.

The  Shower  Bath  produces  a  shock
to  the  nervous  system  by  coming  in
contact  with  the  skin.  Streams  of  cold
water  fall  upon  the  neck,  shoulders,
and  the  body  of  the  patient,  who
stands  beneath  the  hose  or  shower.
When  the  patient  is  full-blooded,
feeble  or  nervous,  or  when  some  in-
ternal organ  is  diseased,  the  cold  show-
er bath  should  not  be  employed.  In
plain  debility,  hot  accompanied  by  in-
flammation or  symptoms  of  internal
congestion,  its  use  is  beneficial.  The
most  delicate  persons  can  endure  this
procedure,  if  the  force  of  the  shower
is  moderated,  and  tepid  water  used.
The  usual  means  for  inducing  a  good
reaction,  namely  friction  and  exercise,
should  be  employed.

The  Douche  Bath  consists  of  a
stream  of  water,  dashed  or  thrown
upon  the  patient  from  a  moderate
height  or  distance,  with  considerable
force.  The  size,  temperature  and
force  of  the  stream  may  be  modified
to  suit  the  case.  Locally,  it  is  much
used  for  sprains,  weak  or  stiff  joints,
old  swellings,  etc.  The  cold  douche
bath  is  much  more  powerful  than  the
shower  bath,  and  should  always  be
given  with  great  care  and  precaution.

The  Sponge  Bath  may  be  used  ex-
tensively in  acute  or  chronic  diseases.
It  consists  in  a  general  or  local  appli-
cation of  water  at  any  desired  tem-
perature. In  acute  diseases  it  is  ap-
plied at  a  temperature  agreeable  to  the
patient.  It  is  a  pleasant  mode  of  treat-
ment, and  may  be  repeated  as  often
as  necessary.  It  is  well,  in  many
cases,  to  take  one  {)art  of  the  body  at
a  time,  then  quickly  drying  same,  thus
avoiding  exposure  to  cold.  Excessive
animal  heat  is  thereby  removed,  the
capillaries  are  relaxed,  the  c-irculation
is  equalized,  and  comfort  and  sleep
are produced.


Universal  Nalnropalhic  Direrlonj  and  Biiyrrs'  Guide


7G7


The  Salt  Rub  or  Glow  is  splendid
for  patients  not  too  ill,  and  is  without
a  peer  in  its  effects  upon  the  skin  and
complexion.  With  all  its  virtues,  it  is
the  simplest  and  most  easily  managed
of  all  similar  measures,  and  can  be  ta-
ken very  easily  at  home.  Put  a  few
pounds  of  coarse  salt,  the  coarsest  you
can  get,  in  an  earthen  jar,  and  pour
enough  water  on  it  to  produce  a  sort
of  slush,  but  not  enough  to  dissolve  the
salt.  This  should  be  taken  up  in  hand-
fuls,  and  rubbed'  briskly  over  the  en-
tire person.  Any  one  in  normal
health  can  do  it  for  himself  very  eas-
ily. It  is  a  tonic  for  feeble  patients,
who  have  little  blood  circulation,  or
where  the  skin  is  inactive.  It  is  also
good  in  cases  of  Bright's  Disease  and
Diabetes.  It  should  never  be  used  in
cases  of  eczema  or  skin  diseases,  and
is  not  of  much  value  in  acute  diseases.
Rub  one  part  of  the  body  after  an-
other, and  use  friction  movements,  but
not  too  much  pressure.  After  the  ap-
plication, use  shower  or  spray  to  re-
move any  salt  on  the  body.  Then  rub
and  dry  quickly.

The  Foot  Bath  is  frequently  used  as
a  means  of  causing  diaphoresis  in
colds,  attacks  of  acute  diseases,  and
also  to  draw  the  blood  from  the  head
or  some  internal  organ.  It  is  a  pow-
erful auxiliary  in  the  treatment  of
those  chronic  diseases  in  which  in-
flammation, congestion  and  a  feeble
circulation are prominent symptoms.

The  Alternate  Foot  Bath  is  used  by
placing  both  feet  in  hot  water  for  2  to
3  minutes,  then  in  cold  water  for  half
a  minute.  Then  back  into  the  hot,  and
then  the  cold,  repeating  the  procedure
a  number  of  times.  This  alternate  foot
bath  is  excellent  in  chilblains,  cold  and
sweating  feet.

The  Hot  Foot  Bath  should  be  104
to  120  degrees,  beginning  with  about
102,  and  gradually  increasing  until  120
degrees  is  reached.  The  duration  is
from  5  minutes  to  half  an  hour,  and  the
feet  should  be  completely  under  wa-
ter. I  believe  it  is  the  bath  most  used.
It  is  excellent  in  cases  of  sprained
ankle,  neuralgia  and  gout.  May  be
made  2  to  3  times  daily. This  bath


IS  also  given  patient  when  in  the  cold
sitzbath.

The  Cold  Foot  Bath  is  given  from
45  to  55  degrees,  and  from  one  to  five
minutes'  duration,  and  is  not  quite  as
useful  as  the  hot  foot  bath,  but  pro-
duces reflex,  revulsion  and  other  ef-
fects. Always  have  feet  previously
warmed,  then  place  in  tub,  in  which
have  water  3  to  4  inches  deep.  Use
friction  on  the  feet  while  in  the  bath
by  rubbing  the  feet  together.  In  cases
of  cerebral  congestion,  use  the  bath
very  short,  in  fact,  all  cold  applica-
tions should  always  be  used  quick  and
short.

The  Leg  Bath  requires  a  deeper
tub  and  more  water,  and  its  uses  are
about  the  same  as  the  foot  bath.  It
is  recommended  in  the  treatment  of
insomnia,  pulmonary  congestion,  pain-
ful menstruation,  suppressed  menses,
and  ovarian  congestion,  in  which  con-
ditions the  hot  leg  bath  is  used.

The  Sitzbath  is  something  that
should  be  in  every  home  where  health
is  valued.  It  is  one  of  the  most  useful
of  water  procedures.  A  tub  is  so  ar-
ranged that  the  patient  can  sit  down
in  it  while  bathing,  leaving  the  feet
outside  and  placed  in  a  smaller  vessel
during  the  application.  The  sitzbath
is  given  cold,  tepid  or  warm,  as  the
condition  requires.  The  lower  part  of
the  hips,  abdomen  and  upper  part  of
the  thighs  are  immersed  in  the  sitzbath.
It  should  be  large  enough  to  permit  a
thorough  rubbing  and  kneading  of  the
diseased  parts.

The  Cold  Sitzbath  is  given  at  a  tem-
perature from  55  to  65  degrees  Fahren-
heit, and  while  some  keep  their  pa-
tients in  the  tub  as  long  as  15  minutes.
I  believe  from  my  experience  that  1
to  2  minutes  is  quite  enough,  when
the  water  is  used  cold.  It  is  an  ex-
cellent tonic  in  cases  of  relaxed  tissues
of  the  pelvis,  in  debility  of  the  urino-
genital  organs,  in  piles,  prolapsus  of
the  rectum,  and  constipation.  It  pro-
duces active  dilatation  of  the  vessels
of  the  lower  abdomen,  increasing  the
blood  supply  through  these  parts.  It
is  an  excellent  bath  for  those  suflFering
from  congestion  of  the  brain,  conges-


768


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


tion  of  the  prostate,  in  gleet,  and  in
the  atonic  forms  of  seminal  weakness.
It  should  not  be  used  where  there  is
acute  inflammation  of  the  pelvic  or  ab-
dominal viscera,  in  sciatica,  in  acute
cases  of  pulmonary  congestion,  neither
in  painful  conditions  of  the  bladder  or
genital  organs,  as  in  cystitis,  ovaritis,
colitis,  appendicitis,  peritonitis,  neur-
algia of  the  ovaries,  bladder,  testicles,
and  is  decidedly  harmful  in  sperma-
torrhea or  -frequent  losses.  I  always
use  a  hot  footbath  in  connection  with
the  cold  sitzbath.  Rubbing  the  whole
surface  while  the  patient  is  in  the
cold  sitzbath  is  a  powerful  means  of
stimulating  cerebral  activity.

The  Tepid  Sitzbath  is  given  at  a
temperature  from  80  to  90  degrees,
and  the  duration  is  usually  from  20
to  30  minutes.  It  has  a  calming,  quiet-
ing effect  upon  the  viscera  of  the  pel-
vis and  lower  abdomen,  and  there  is
really  no  condition  in  which  this  bath
may  not  be  given.  It  is  especially  use-
ful in  cases  of  nervous  irritability,
bladder  catarrh,  neuralgia  of  the  fal-
lopian tubes  or  the  testicles,  pruritus
of  the  anus  and  vulva,  and  in  exces-
sive sensitiveness  of  the  urethra;  also
in  all  cases  of  pelvic  diseases  where,
on  account  of  pain  or  infllammatory
conditions,  cold  applications  would  be
harmful.

The  Hot  Sitzbath  is  an  effective
remedial  adjunct  in  menstrual  suppres-
sion and  painful  menstruation,  gravel,
spasmodic  and  acute  inflammatory  af-
fections generally.  The  temperature
is  from  105  to  115  degrees,  and  the
duration  from  3  to  10  minutes.  The
footbath  taken  with  it  may  be  of  the
same  temperature.  The  hot  sitzbath
is  a  most  powerful  measure  of  reliev-
ing pain.  It  is  excellent  in  cases  of
vaginismus,  uterine  colic,  and  in  all
cases  of  a  non-inflammatory  character
where  the  viscera  of  the  pelvis  and
lower  abdomen  is  involved.  It  is  cer-
tainly one  of  the  most  useful  meas-
ures that  can  be  employed  for  the  var-
ious neuralgias  of  the  genito-urinary
organs,  from  which  women  and  men
suffer  so  much.  To  get  a  good  effect,
the  hot  sitzbath  should  be  followed  by


a  cold  application,  but  very  short.  The
cost  of  a  sitzbath  is  so  reasonable,
compared  with  the  unlimited  good  de-
rived from  its  use,  that  no  family
should  be  without  it.

The  Wet  Sheet  Pack  is  the  most
powerful  and  best  blood  cleanser
known.  It  is  without  a  peer,  wher-
ever feverish  conditions  exist.  Spread
upon  the  bed  a  woolen  blanket;  then
take  a  bed  sheet,  wring  it  out,  not
too  tight,  in  cold  water,  and  spread  out
smoothly  on  the  woolen  blanket.  Have
patient  lie  down  on  this  wet  sheet,
arms  extended,  then  wrap  him  closely
and  tightly  and  as  quickly  as  possible.
Each  arm  may  be  covered  in  this  man-
ner by  the  wet  sheet,  or  may  be  cov-
ered separately  by  wet  towels  in  the
same  manner  as  with  the  sheet.  Then
cover  well  with  blankets  and  comfort-
ers, making  sure  that  there  is  no  place
unwrapped.  After  the  first  shock  of
the  chill  is  over,  the  pack  is  very  sooth-
ing, pleasant  and  refreshing,  and  proof
that  the  pack  has  a  beneficial  and
quieting  elTect  upon  the  whole  nervous
system  is,  that  nearly  every  patient
falls  asleep  while  in  it.

The  ordinary  time  for  a  patient  to
remain  in  a  pack  is  about  an  hour;
however,  if  the  patient  is  in  a  feeble
condition,  a  half  hour  is  sufficient.
After  the  pack,  I  usually  give  a  warm
bath,  with  gradual  cooling,  followed  by
massage.  It  is  surprising  to  see  how
a  pack  like  this  throws  off  impurities
from  the  body,  by  examining  the
sheet  after  the  patient  is  taken  out  of
it.  It  is  one  of  the  most  efficient  meas-
ures in  fevers,  breaking  up  cold,  grip,
insomnia,  and  a  valuable  remedy  in
most  chronic  diseases,  helping  to  re-
move the  causes  which  depress  bodily
functions.

The  Nauheim  Bath  consists  of  a  salt
water  bath,  properly  carbonated.  The
body  of  the  patient  is  covered  with
minute  bubbles  of  carbonic  acid  gas,
that  form  rapidly  on  the  immersed  sur-
face, and  when  disturbed,  are  quickly
replaced  by  new  ones.  The  efferves-
cing carbonated  bath  produces  a  sen-
sation of  warmth  to  the  skin,  caused
by  the prickling  of  the  gas  bubbles.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers Guide


769


and  the  body  of  the  patient  resumes  a
healthy  red  color,  due  to  the  distension
of  the  cutaneous  capillaries.  The  pulse
becomes  full  and  strong,  the  heart
beat  is  regular,  and  the  breathing  eas-
ier and  more  composed.  Metabolism
is  increased  by  the  improved  circula-
tion, which  means  improved  cell  nu-
trition, greater  cell  activity  throughout
the  body,  and  thus  the  toxic  products
of  circulatory  stagnation  are  quickly
eliminated.

I  generally  begin  the  baths  with  a
temperature  of  95  degrees  Fahrenheit,
keeping  the  patient  in  the  bath  from
8  to  10  minutes,  believing  that  a  short
immersion  stimulates  and  a  long  one
depresses.  The  next  day  the  bath  is
reduced  one  degree,  and  then  for  two
or  three  days  the  bath  is  omitted.  The
temperature  is  gradually  reduced  to
78  degrees,  not  over  a  degree  at  a
time,  and  the  duration  of  the  bath  is
gradually  prolonged,  until  nearly  a
half  hour  is  reached.  Care  should  be
taken  to  have  the  patient  completely
immersed  up  to  the  neck.  A  series  of
baths  consists  of  about  twenty,  and
sometimes  more  are  given. No  exer-


tion should  be  made  by  the  patient
in  preparing  for  the  bath  or  in  leav-
ing it.

A  rest  for  half  an  hour  is  es-
sential after  the  bath,  and  no  massage
or  exercise  is  advisable  immediately
after  the  bath,  but  may  precede  it.

The  Nauheim  Bath  is  indicated  and
of  great  value  in  cases  of  compensa-
tory heart  failure,  dilatation  in  conse-
quence of  overexertion,  diseases  of  the
heart  muscle,  heart  neurosis,  nutritive
disturbances,  fatty  degeneration,  val-
vular deficiency,  disorders  of  the  peri-
cardium, arterio-sclerosis,  etc.  The
favorable  action  of  the  baths  on  the
nervous  system  has  caused  their  suc-
cessful application  in  hysteria  and  all
kinds  of  nervous  derangements,  sci-
atica, neurosis  of  the  sensory  nerves,
neuralgia  of  all  kinds,  especially  of
traumatic  and  rheumatic  origin,  neur-
itis, motor  neurosis,  peripheral  paraly-
sis, tabes,  myelitis  and  neurasthenia.

There  are  many  and  numerous  other
water  applications,  and  I  have  just
mentioned  a  few  to  show  what  a  won-
derful remedial  agent  we  have  in  so
simple  a  thing  as  water.


First  doctor: "Our  patient  is  not dead  yet. His  pulse  is  quite  vigorous."
Second doctor: "No wonder; it is my  pulse  you are feeling."


770


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


s


Orthopedics  Department


A.Mi-cs


ininunications for this department tn its editor


GUSTAVE  W.  HAAS,  N.  D., 407  Pacific  Electric  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.


®


ORTHOPEDICS

By  GUSTAVE  W.  HAAS,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.


The  scope  of  orthopedics  is  by  no
means  limited.  The  human  body
with  its  bony  framework  is  subject  to
many  ailments  and  that  same  bony
framework  has  many  complaints
peculiar  to  itself.  While  glancing  over
my  case  sheets  lately  the  thought
struck  me  that  there  was  quite  a
diversity  of  cases  and  I  have  made  a
rough  tabulation  of  the  last  150  or  so
and  will  present  them  to  you  with  a  few
side  remarks  that  will  illustrate  some-
what the  daily  work  of  the  ortho-
pedist. Contrary  to  the  opinion  of
some,  the  work  of  the  orthopedist  is
not  strictly  confined  to  the  spine,  but  is
wherever  the  bony  framework  is  in  a
condition  of  departure  from  normal,
either  from  troubles  arising  with  or
within  the  bones  themselves,  or  from
lesions  that  are  strictly  from  the  cord,
or  from  those  causes  that  we  class  as
systemic.

As  might  be  expected,  those  of  the
first  class  predominate,  105  cases  being
noted  where  the  cause  and  effect  were
originating  in  the  bones  themselves.
Of  these  105,  31  were  lateral  curvatures
being  still  further  divided  into  13  right,
12  left,  3  double  and  3  incipient.  The
proportion  here  varies  from  any  text-
book classification  I  ever  saw,  most  of
the  authorities  agreeing  that  right
lateral  curvature  is  of  50%  more  fre-
quent occurrence  than  left,  but  the^
fewness  of  the  cases  probably  explains
the  apparent  difference.  Next  follows
vertebral  displacements  to  the  amount
of  30  mostly  of  single  vertebrae  and  in
all  sections  of  the  spine.  These  are  by
no  means  to  be  confounded  with  the
ordinary luxations we hear so much


about,  but  I  mean  real  displacements
that  result  in  a  visible  deformity  from
lack  of  alignment.  Next  in  frequence
was  flat-foot,  with  10  cases.  These
cases  were  solely  flat-foot  and  un-
complicated. As  you  all  know,  flat-foot
is  almost  an  invariable  accompani-
ment of  lateral  curvature  but  these  10*
cases  were  from  other  causes  that  led
to  breaking  down  of  the  arches,  in  some
excessive  weight,  in  others  illness  long
continued,  in  some  lack  of  attention  to
the  feet  of  growing  children.  Next  in
the  list  is  lordosis  with  9  cases  to  its
credit,  and  racked  spine  with  6  cases.
This  latter  class  of  cases  you  will  not
find  under  any  authority  in  the  text-
books but  is  a  term  used  by  ortho-
pedists to  define  a  condition  of  bunch-
ing together  of  the  vertebrae  generally
from  violence  and  resulting  in  wasting
of  the  intervertebral  cartilages  produc-
ing shortening  of  the  spinal  column
and  but  little  visible  deformity  but
plenty  of  cord  troubles.  Then  follow
4  cases  of  acute  hip  disease,  tubercu-
lous, of  course,  in  origin,  and  3  cases  of
hip  dislocations,  2  of  which  were  con-
genital. There  were  4  cases  of  un-
compensating kyphosis,  i.  e.  simple
forward  curvature  of  the  spine  without
a  compensation  in  the  lumbar  curve  to
offset  it.  One  of  these  was  cervical  and
the  other  three  dorsal,  the  three  latter
being  occupational,  1  tailor  and  2  seam-
stresses. Then  follows  one  each  of  in-
jury to  knee,  fracture  of  the  vertebra,
fracture  of  the  scapula,  talipes  varus
and  2  cases  of  plain  rotation  or  twist-
ing of  the  spine  and  1  case  of  Pott's
disease.  Compared  with  the  balance  of
the  record  it  seems  almost  impossible


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers Guide


Til


there  could  be  so  few  cases  of  this
trouble  as  it  is  common  but  I  am  giv-
ing you  the  cases  just  as  they  come  and
probably  had  I  selected  another  150  it
would  show  probably  10  to  15  cases
but  I  am  taking  them  just  as  they  came
to  the  examination  room.

Of  the  second  class,  cases  depending
upon  cord  lesions,  chronic  anterior
poliomyelitis,  or  infantile  paralysis,
heads  the  list  with  15  cases,  which
represent  every  degree  of  deformity
from  complete  loss  of  power  of  both
arms  and  legs  to  simple  paralysis  of
single  sets  of  muscles.  The  propor-
tion here  is  rather  weak,  as  it  has  been
several  years  since  an  epidemic  raged
here,  but  there  was  a  time  when  it
seemed  that  fully  50  per  cent,  of  our
work  was  with  this  class  of  cases
alone.  Now  comes  paraplegia  with  7
cases,  where  the  resulting  contrac-
tions produce  deformity  to  a  greater
or  less  degree.  There  were  3  cases
of  simple  atrophy  and  2  cases  of  tabes
dorsalis,  the  latter  two  being  both  from
specific  causes  and  therefore  hopeless.
Then  came  one  each  of  monoplegia,
miningeal  congestion  and  concussion
of  the  spine.  Of  the  cases  arising  from
systemic  troubles,  three  were  from
chronic  arthritis  with  extreme  deform-
ity, one  from  paresis  from  specific
causes,  and  one  sciatica  with  resulting
paralysis.  The  odds  and  ends  of  the
balance  were  nine  spinal  neurasthenias,
two  cases  of  marasmus,  and  three  men-
tally deficient,  which  completes  the  list
with  the  exception  of  one  case  of
typhoid  spine,  which  is  yet  rather  a
pathological  curiosity.

I  recite  these  cases  that  you  may
get  an  insight  into  the  daily  work  of
the  orthopedist,  and  also  that  you  may
see  how  his  work  supplements  the
work  of  the  general  practitioner.  You
will  observe  that  there  was  never  an
acute  case  in  all  the  list,  but  also  that
every  case  had  first  been  through  the
hands  of  some  other  physician  before
it  reached  me.  So  far  as  the  body  and
its  framework  is  concerned,  the  ortho-
pedist bears  the  same  relation  to  the
physician  as  the  surgeon  and  the  oph-
thalmologist, i. e., a bringer of new


resources  when  those  of  the  physician
are  exhausted.  Modern  orthopedics  in
its  practice  is  also  largely  mechanical.
We  think  mechanics  and  speak  me-
chanics. The  human  body  is  the  most
wonderful  machine  that  was  ever
made,  and  every  function  within  it
works  upon  some  mechanical  princi-
ple. If  you  walk  or  if  you  run,  if  you
sit  down  or  if  you  stand,  still  you  do
so  in  the  use  of  some  mechanical  law,
and  if  disease  or  habit  or  posture
cause  deformity,  nothing  but  a  strict
application  of  mechanical  law  will
ever  reduce  that  deformity.  The  or-
thopedist, then,  must  be  a  profound
student  of  mechanics,  as  well  as  of  all
the  other  things  the  physician  must
know,  and  the  more  he  studies  into
the  intricacies  of  mechanical  princi-
ples, the  better  equipped  will  he  be
for  service  in  his  calling.  His  relation
to  the  practitioner  should  be  more  in-
timate than  at  present  exists,  and  the
practitioner  should  avail  himself  of-
tener  of  the  advice  of  a  competent  or-
thopedist. Especially  do  I  find  this
necessary  in  the  case  of  growing  chil-
dren, when  tendencies  to  deformity
can  so  easily  be  changed  if  the  proper
advice  is  followed.  Time  and  again
there  have  come  to  me  cases  of  begin-
ning angular  curvature,  where  the
touch  of  an  orthopedist's  fingers  would
have  revealed  the  trouble,  and  in  most
cases  the  proper  treatment,  strictly
followed,  would  have  prevented  break-
down and  resulting  curvature.  I  have
seen  laterals  daily  get  worse  under  the
very  eyes  of  the  family  physician,  be-
cause he  never  took  the  trouble  or  the-
pains  to  strip  the  child  and  make  a
critical  inspection.  Had  there  been  a
visual  defect  or  an  abnormal  tissue
growth,  both  the  surgeon  and  the  op-
tical man  would  have  been  called  quick
enough.  Then  why  wait  until  all
chance  to  avoid  a  deformity,  except  by
slow  and  costly  treatment,  has  ex-
pired before  allowing  an  expert  ex-
amination?

I  feel  quite  strongly  in  this  matter;
not  from  any  personal  feeling,  but  tak-
ing cntirelv  an  altruistic  view  of  it  and
hope  our  Naturopathic  brethren  will  be


772


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


progressive  enough  to  allow  their  pa-
tients welfare  to  be  their  first  con-
sideration and  if  there  is  a  competent
orthopedist  at  command  to  consult
him  where  there  is  any  doubt  regard-
ing a  growing  child  especially.  The
orthopedist  will  thank  you  for  it,  for
it  is  ever  more  of  a  pleasure  to  him  to
bring  one  case  away  from  a  pending
deformity  than  to  attempt  the  cure  of
a  dozen  cases  of  well  defined  de-
formity. Especially  is  this  true  of  so
many  of  the  tuberculous  troubles  that
affect  the  spine  in  children,  where  the
symptoms  go  on  unrecognized  by  the
general  practitioner  for  months  until  a
breakdown  in  the  bone  tissue  is  im-
minent. This  class  of  cases  would
perhaps  benefit  more  than  any  other
by  an  expert  examination  from  the
orthopedist  provided  his  experience  is
such  as  to  qualify  him  -to  make  an
opinion.  Here  the  proverbial  "stitch
in  time"  saves  many  times  more  than
nine  and  it  is  not  stitches  only  but
often  years  of  dreadful  suffering  and
always  a  deformity.  I  take  the  high
ground  that  there  is  little  necessity  in
.these  days  of  accurate  diagnosis  and
preventative  treatment  for  deformity
to  exist  provided  the  practitioner  will
work  closer  in  touch  with  the  ortho-
pedist and  take  his  advice  in  cases  be-
fore it  is  too  late  to  prevent.  The  old
saying  "the  child  will  probably  out-
grow it"  has  been  responsible  for  more
humpbacks  and  incurable  laterals  than
almost  any  other  agency.  The
gardener  walks  through  his  garden
.  and  sees  a  plant  or  shrub  growing
crooked.  His  first  thought  and  act  is
to  get  a  stake  and  some  twine  and
give  that  plant  the  necessary  support
and  treatment  to  make  it  grow-
straight,  but  many  a  mother  has  come
to  me  bringing  her  daughter  with  a
pronounced  lateral  and  told  me  she
had  never  noticed  it  and  then  would
not  have  known  unless  her  dressmaker
called  her  attention  to  it  on  account  of
the  difficulty  of  fitting  her  clothes.
Where  were  the  eyes  of  her  family
nhysician  all  this  time?  He  was  the
xardener  and  supposed  to  be  watching
ihe  plants  grow,  but  I  very  much  doubt


if  he  ever  saw  that  girl's  spine.  He
probably  took  it  for  granted  that  be-
neath her  loose  clothing  all  was  right
and  never  took  the  trouble  to  see  for
himself.  If  you  want  vigorous,  upright
children,  you  must  be  prepared  to  pay
the  price  and  that  price  is  careful  and
constant  vigilance,  and  no  symptom
connected  with  the  spine  is  too  trivial
for  investigation.  That  is  why  I  ap-
peal so  strongly  to  my  Naturopathic
brethren  to  keep  in  the  vanguard  of
that  progress  upon  which  we  pride
ourselves  as  a  school.  The  world  is
tired  of  haphazard  methods  and  for-
tuitous results  and  is  rapidly  coming
to  the  Naturopath's  standpoint,  a  posi-
tion to  which  years  of  careful,  pains-
taking effort  has  brought  us.

The  rapid  advancement  all  along
the  line  in  Naturopathic  science,  in
manual  therapeutics  and  in  ortho-
pedics has  made  it  possible  to  speak
more  assuringly  to  our  patients  than
ever  before.  Conditions  that  had  be-
fore been  regarded  as  hopeless,  are  be-
ing removed  by  the  aid  of  newer  and
better  methods  of  procedure.  Only  a
few  years  ago,  had  any  medical  man
even  so  much  as  hinted  at  nerve
anastomosis  in  sclerotic  conditions  he
would  have  been  held  up  to  ridicule
and  hooted  out  of  the  profession.  I
know,  for  I  was  about  the  first  to  ad-
vocate that  idea  and  I  well  remember
the  smiles  of  derision  the  theory
brought  forth.  But  no  one  is  smiling
about  it  to-day.  The  relief  of  nerve
pressures  by  manual  therapy  was  for
years  a  joke  to  all  the  profession,  but
thousands  of  satisfied  patients  testify
to  its  success.  Those  who  once
strenuously  voiced  their  opposition,
are  now  forced  to  either  use  these  me-
thods or  send  their  patients  where  they
can  receive  such  treatment.  The  ortho-
pedist has  profited  greatly  by  all  these
things,  but  his  complaint  is  not  so
much  any  lack  of  methods  as  the  in-
diflference  of  the  public  to  the  warn-
ings he  sends  out  regarding  the  wrong
things  they  do.  Of  course,  these
wrongs  make  business  for  him  but  he
would  not  be  true  to  himself  or  his
calling  if  he  neglected  to  give  warning


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


773


and  call  attention  to  them.  I  am  go-
ing- to  call  the  reader's  attention  to  just
one  instance,  what  I  term  for  want  of
a  better  name  the  "go-cart"  spine  in
small  children.

During-  that  i)ortion  of  an  infant's
life  when  he  is  dependent  upon  others
for  locomotion,  he  is  peculiarly  liable
to  torsions  of  the  spine.  Many  a  child
has  received  the  beginnings  of  a  lateral
from  being  held  over  its  mother's  arm
while  she  did  her  house-work.  Many
others  receive  it  from  the  go-cart,  be-
ing placed  in  such  a  contrivance  before
it  is  able  to  properly  hold  itself  up.  The
old  fashioned  baby-buggy  was  not  so
bad  as  it  gave  lateral  support  to  the
child  with  its  high  sides;  but  the  go-
cart,  being  only  a  skeleton  at  best,
accordingly  puts  all  the  responsibility
on  the  child.

If  the  little  one  gets  tired,  it  slumps
into  such  a  position  as  will  most  favor
postural  troubles.  The  danger  to  a
healthy  child  is  not  so  great,  but  the


danger  to  a  cachectic  child  grows  with
the  daily  repetition.

I  daily  see  tender  infants  with
weak  spines  recline  for  hours  in
a  go-cart  in  postures  that  a  grown-up
could  and  would  not  endure,  while  the
mother  was  shopping  or  visiting.  Al-
ready the  signs  begin  to  show  in  an
increasing  number  of  children  brought
to  us  with  incipient  laterals  at  an  age
when  it  should  never  show.  We
fought  the  school-desk  and  piano-stool
evil  until  the  public  took  notice  and  it
is  time  that  the  go-cart  was  being  con-
sidered. Go  out  and  see  for  yourself
any  pleasant  day,  the  conditions  that
exist,  consult  with  your  orthopedist
and  then  give  your  patients  the  proper
advice.  After. all,  the  true  aim  of  any
physician  should  be  to  prcA-ent  first,  to
correct  evil  tendencies  of  the  body
where  he  sees  them,  and  thus  fulfil  the
obligations  laid  upon  him  by  the
founders  of  our  science.  Could  any
Naturopath  do  less?


IF  YOU  DOUBT  THE


MERITS  OF  NATUROPATHY


it  is  because  you  have  not  begun  right.  It  is  both  unsatisfactory  and  unsafe  to
experiment  in  any  line  of  Naturopathic  treatment.  This  is  peculiarly  true  of
Pliysical  Culture,  Water-Cure,  Dietetics  and  Fast-Cure.

We  have  established  a  Bureau  of  Advice  through  which  beginners,  learners
and  all  hesitant  folk  may  know  before  they  act.  To  be  most  beneficial,  any
healing  force  must  be  applied  so  as  to  delight  the  patient — not  dismay  him.
And  our  first  object  is  to  make  the  change  from  your  old  artificial  existence  to
your  new  natural  life  so  gradual,  gentle  and  pleasurable  as  to  win  your  volition
Natureward  as  well  as  your  vitality.

Exact  prescription  in  the  use  of  air,  sun,  water,  vapor  and  similar  Baths,
Vegetarian,  Fruitarian  and  Lahmannian  Diet,  Herbal  applications  and  all  meas-
ures of  Natural  Healing  and  Living.  Fee  $1  single  letter  with  detailed  pre-
scription, $5  monthly  treatment.

All  others  must  enclose  $1  with  symptomatic  letter.  State  nature  of  your  dis-
ease, duration  and  kinds  of  medication  employed.


Naturopathic  Bureau  of  Consultation,  Butler,  N.  J.,  U.  S.  A.


774


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


E^


Pathology Department


El


Address all communications for this department to its editor

J.  F.  G.  LUEPKE,  M.  D.,  Sc.  D.,  Welga,  111.


El


GENERAL  PATHOLOGY

The  Importance  of  this  science ;  what  it  means ;  and
advantages  arising  from  its  study

By  J.  F.  G.  LUEPKE,  M.  D.,  Sc.  D.,  Welga,  111.

Formerly  Professor  of  Pathology  and  Allied Sciences  at  the  N.  Y. Chiropractic College


S


1.  Of  the  various  branches  of  the
healing  art,  none  to  the  physician  is  so
attractive  as  a  study,  none  so  import-
ant in  its  results  as  General  Pathology
— the  science  and  study  of  diseases,
their  nature  and  their  treatment.  It  is
a  centre  around  which  are  disposed — as
the  stars  in  our  planetary  system
around  the  sun — at  unequal  distances,
the  other  natural  sciences.  The  study
of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  of
Chemistry  and  Physics,  of  Botany  and
Materia  Medica,  afford  tlie  student
but  an  introduction  and  foundation  to
that  of  Pathology ;  he  regards  those
sciences  of  far  less  importance,  as  soon
as  Pathology  becomes  the  object  of
his  special  study,  and  begins  to  view
them  rather  as  "accessory  and  auxili-
ary sciences"  and,  most  naturally,
among  the  numerous  facts  presented
by  them,  he  notes  .only  those  which
are  nearly  connected  with  the  knowl-
edge of  disease  and  its  appropriate
methods  of  treatment.

We  would  not,  however,  exalt  the
science  of  Pathology  at  the  expense  of
the  other  branches  of  Natural  History  ;
whatever  be  its  importance,  and  the
dignity  of  its  aim ;  we  claim  for  it  no
superiority  over  the  other  sciences.
Physiology,  Physics,  Chemistry,  etc.,
are  entitled  to  an  equal  consideration,
we  cannot  deny  it.  Intimately  con-
nected as  are  all  these  sciences,  they
reciprocally  aid  in  the  elucidation  of
each  other,  and  none  among  them
should be allowed the pre-eminence,


although  in  his  estimation,  who  makes
it  his  particular  study,  either  will  ap-
pear of  paramount  importance.

Pathology,  like  the  other  sciences
just  mentioned,  is  without  limit,  while
Botany,  Physics,  Chemistry  and
Mineralogy  are  daily  extending  their
domain,  the  science  of  disease  also,  to
the  observer,  appears  to  be  rapidly
advancing.  Without  here  referring  to
the  ever  new  and  infinite  varieties  of
disease,  this  must  be  evident,  whether
we  consider :  the  more  careful  study
of  causes — Etiology — the  more  ac-
curate description  of  symptoms —
Symptomatology — the  more  critical
examination  of  the  circumstances
which  extend  a  favorable  or  unfavor-
able influence  upon  the  progress  of  dis-
eases, the  discovery  of  affections  pre-
viously unknown  or  imperfectly  de-
new  methods  of  exploration — (a*^  viz
Percussion,  Auscultation,  Vertebral
Palpation  or  Iridological  Inspection)  —
to  the  phenomena  of  disease.

To  cite  only  one  instance  in  Phys-
ical Diagnosis,  has  not  the  discovery
of  Palpation  and  Iridological  Inspec-
tion or  that  of  Auscultation  added  to
the  history  of  thoracic  or  any  other  dis-
ease— a  multitude  of  phenomena  and
valuable  diagnostic  signs,  of  which  we
were  previously  ignorant?

2.  Pathology  presents  for  con-
sideration a  mass  of  facts,  all  the  de-
tails of  which  it  is  beyond  the  power
of  the  human  mind  to  comprehend ;  it


Universal  Ndturopatluc  Directory  and  Buijcrs Guide


llh


may  even  be  asserted  that,  throwing
aside  its  theories  and  its  systems,  no
one  is  possessed  of  all  the  knowledge
contained  in  the  records  of  pathological
science.  This  want  of  correspondence
between  the  extent  of  the  science  of
Pathology  and  the  capacity  of  the
human  mind,  has  consequently  led  to
results  which  are  comprehensible.  It
being  impossible  to  increase  the
mental  powers,  it  is  therefore  necessary
to  make  a  division  of  the  science  to
several  parts  which  should  be  within
reach  of  our  intellectual  capacity.
Hence  the  numerous  divisions  of
Pathology.  Of  these  the  two  main
divisions  are  those  distinctive  of  In-
ternal or  Medical,  and  External  or  Sur-
gical Pathology ;  the  former  I  would
define  as  the  Pathology  of  disorders
the  treatment  of  which  generally  does
not  call  for  manipulative  or  mechano-
therapeutical  interference,  while  the
latter,  viz  the  Pathology  of  surgical
diseases,  etc.,  calls  for  such.  There  is
another  division,  which  would  help  to
specify  our  subject,  namely  the
division  into  General  and  Descriptive
Pathology.  The  term  "General
Pathology,"  includes  all  diseases  under
the  same  head,  studies  their  general
characteristics,  causes  and  develop-
ment, the  succession  and  connection  of
their  phenomena  observed  during  life,
post  mortem  appearances,  and  the
circumstances  which  modify  their
progress  or  induce  the  changes  taking
place.

Descriptive  Pathology  includes  all
of  groups,  with  the  appearances  pecu-
liar to  them,  which  serve  to  distinguish
them  from  each  other.  This  division
of  Pathology,  the  limits  of  which  are
the  most  clearly  defined,  is  preferred
by  the  writer  in  hi^  lectures  and  "Mail
Course  on  Rational  Therapeutics."
The  consideration  of  all  the  phenom-
ena, common  to  diseases,  belongs  to
General  Pathology,  while  whatever  re-
lates to  the  history  and  description  of
peculiar  diseases,  falls  within  the
province  of  Descriptive  Pathology. —
There  are  some  subdivisions  of  which
we need to know  onlv the most  im-


portant: Local  Pathology  refers  to
diseases  either  of  individual  parts  or
organs  or  to  climate  and  other
geographical  conditions  (also  called
Geographical  or  Endemic  Pathology).

Special  Pathology  is  the  study  of
"particular"  diseases,  as,  for  instance,
those  referring  to  sex,  childhood,  the
nervous  system,  etc.,  (Gynecology,
Pediatrics,  Orthopedics,  Neuropath-
ology), while  Neuropathy  refers
to  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.

Experimental  Pathology  has  been
defined  by  Prof.  Dr.  Bonley  in  Paris  as
a  study  of  diseases  by  means  of  obser-
vation of  pathological  conditions,
spontaneous  or  artificial,  in  the  lower
animals  or  in  vegetable  organisms.  In
short,  I  would  define  it  as  the  study  of
diseased  conditions  that  have  been  in-
duced intentionally  for  experimenta-
tion, as  by  the  abominable  vivisection
of  animals.

The  "Humoral  Pathology"  of  Hip-
pocrates is  an  old  dogma  which  was
based  on  the  supposition  that  diseases
depend  on  an  abnormal  condition  of
4  Humors,  viz.,  yellow  and  black  bile,
the  blood  and  mucus  (or  phlegm),  this
was  succeeded  by  a  pathological
system  called  Solidistic  Pathology,
which  we  mention  for  curiosity's  sake,
it  attributed  diseases  to  the  widening
or  narrowing  of  the  pores  in  the  solid
parts  of  the  body.  The  Humoral
Pathology  of  Rokitansky  and  other
modern  writers  is  based  on  the  theory,
that  all  changes  produced  by  disease,
are  the  result  of  a  blood-dyscracia.

The  "Cellular  Pathology" of  Prof.  Dr.
Virchow,  (Berlin),  the  latest  of  all,  is  a
doctrine  which  is  based  on  two  propo-
sitions, viz.,  (a)  that  all  vital  processes
issue  from  cellular  forms,  and  (b)  that
every  cell  both  in  normal  and  abnormal
(i.  e.,  pathological  conditions)  origin-
ates from  some  pre-existing  cell.  Vir-
chow's  theory  is  the  foundation  of
Modern  Pathology,  and  of  all  scientific
research  work.

3.  There  are  numerous  advantages
attending  the  study  of  General
Pathology:  It  gives  scope  to  con-
siderations, favorable  to  the develop-


776


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


ment  of  the  reasoning  power,  and  an
enlargement  of  the  views  of  the
student.  It  briefly  points  out  to  him,  at
the  commencement  of  his  career,  the
path  he  should  pursue,  the  objects
which  claim  his  attention,  and  the
dangers  to  be  avoided ;  it  also  indicates
the  course  which  should  be  adopted  in
the  investigation  of  particular  dis-
eases; and  lastly,  by  grouping  together
these  various  affections,  it  aids  in  the
elucidation  of  their  history  (Anam-
nesis).

This  is  more  clearly  shown  by  an
illustration  from  Pathological  Ana-
tomy, a  section  of  General  Pathology,
although  a  most  important  one.  Patho-
logical Anatomy  enables  the  surgeon
to  decide  whether  a  suspicious  tumor
is  malignant  or  benign,  i.  e.,  harmless),
and  in  many  other  ways  is  of  the
greatest  importance,  and  although  at
first  sight  it  might  appear  to  be  of
minor  value  in  relation  to  "Rational
Therapeutics,"  this  is  not  in  reality  the
case.

Scientific 'treatment  demands  an  ac-
curate knowledge  of  the  material
changes  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of
the  various  morbid  symptoms.  Hence
Pathological  Anatomy  not  only  forms
a portion of the positive basis of


Rational  Therapeutics,  but  it  also
points  out  the  processes  by  which  the
different  altered  parts  may  be  gradual-
ly restored  to  their  normal  condition.
It  not  only  merely  indicates  what  re-
quires healing,  but  in  many  cases  also
the  course  that  must  be  adopted  in
order  to  aid  the  curative  tendency  of
the  powers  of  Nature.

It  likewise  serves  as  a  check  on
therapeutics,  exposing,  in  a  most  con-
clusive manner,  the  absurdit)^  of  many
pretended  cures  or  methods  of  cure.
It  points  out,  for  example,  that  in  a
certain  stage  of  pneumonia,  a  fibrinous
fluid  separates  from  the  blood,  and  by
its  coagulation  renders  a  portion  of  the
tissues  of  the  lung  impermeable  to  air;
and  further  that  it  requires  several
days  for  this  coagulated  matter  to  re-
sume the  fluid  condition  and  to  be
removed.

If  any  one  should  assert, — and  such
assertions  have  often  been  made  by
Medical,  as  well  as  Non-Medical,
practitioners, — that  in  this  stage  of  the
disease  he  would  be  able  to  cure  the
patient  in  a  few  hours, — a  very  slight
knowledge  of  Pathology,  or  Patho-
logical Anatomy  in  this  particular  case,
—would  show  the  folly  of  such  an  as-
sertion.


Some  People's  Idea  of  a  Vacation

The start: "Well, good-bye, old^  man.
Have  a  good  rest  and  enjoy  yourself."


The  return:  "Yes,  I  had  a  ripping  time.
Danced  every  night.  Card  parties,  shows;
all  the  eating,  drinking  and  smoking  I
wanted.  Grand!  Feel  a  little  tired  out,
but  I  will  be  all  right  pretty  soon."


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


111


S


Natural  and  Divine  Healing


Address all communications for this department to its editor

CHAS.  ZURMUHLEN,  M.  D.,  440  Ludlow  Arcade,  Dayton,  O.


^


THE  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  AND

DIVINE  HEALING

By  CHARLES  ZURMUHLEN,  M. D.,  D.  C.


During  the  winter  of  1901-2,  I  de-
livered a  course  of  lectures  on  pharma-
cology to  a  class  of  medical  students
in  Pulte  Medical  College.  Toward  the
close  of  the  course,  the  students  asked
me  to  give  them  several  lectures  on
the  dynamic  action  of  drugs.  The  re-
quest was  prompted  by  the  study  of
Hahnemann's  theory  that  disease  is
due  to  the  dynamic  disturbance  of  the
equilibrium  of  the  vital  force ;  that  the
equilibrium  is  restored  by  the  dynamic
action  of  drugs.

Hahnemann  simply  recognizes  the
effect;  he  fails  to  state  the  cause  that
produces  the  dynamic  disturbance ;  he
fails  to  explain  how  the  dynamic  action
of  drugs  restores  the  equilibrium  of
the  vital  force.  He  leaves  it  for  future
generations  to  discover  the  cause  of  the
disturbance  and  how  drugs  restore  the
equilibrium  of  harmony.  Hahnemann
gave  us  all  that  could  be  given  in  the
elementary  state  of  physics,  chemistry
and  physiology  of  his  time.  His  theory
is  the  result  of  profound  inductive
reasoning,  based  upon  the  exhaustive
provings  of  more  than  sixty  drugs.

When  I  found  that  Homeopathy  is
not  a  complete  system  of  natural  heal-
ing, but  simply  the  first  attempt  in  the
history  of  medicine  to  found  a  science
and  philosophy  of  medicine,  I  turned  to
Allopathy  for  a  scientific  explanation
of  the  healing  action  of  natural  drugs.

Alas  and  alack!  I  simply  "jumped
from  the  frying  pan  into  the  fire."

While  pursuing  my  medical  studies
in a  homeopathic college, I attended


clinical  lectures  at  the  Cincinnati  Allo-
pathic Hospital  from  8:20  to  10:20
A.  M.,  six  mornings  in  the  week  for
twelve  months.  I  was  well  acquainted
with  the  allopathic  theory  and  practice.
I  searched  the  extensive  allopathic
literature  in  the  Cincinnati  Municipal
Hospital  and  in  the  Public  Library.  I
found  that  claims  of  the  allopathic  doc-
tors that  Allopathy  is  a  scientific
system  of  medicine,  are  false  and  with-
out foundation.

It  is  my  purpose  to  show  that  no  sci-
entific system  of  medicine  nor  healing
exists ;  what  men  now  call  "scientific
medicine"  is  empiricism.  I  shall  state
the  principles,  methods  and  natural
law  that  can  give  us  a  science  and  phil-
osophy of  natural  and  divine  healing.

We  must  make  a  sharp  and  clear
distinction  between  the  terms  "empiri-
cism" and "science." The term "sci-


Health  is  the  glory  of  the  nations.  Natu-
ropathy leads  away  from  drug  medication,
and  shall  eventually  supersede  this  un-
natural practice.


778


Universal  Naturupalltic  Dircdonj  cuid  Buyers'  Guide


ence"  is  now  used  in  a  vague  and
haphazard  manner  where  we  should
use  the  term  "empiricism."

Empiricism  is  mere  experience
without  knowledge  of  first  principles
and  universal  laws.

Science  is  the  accumulated  knowl-
edge of  past  g'enerations,  obtained  by
the  comparative  study  of  the  ])heno-
mena  of  nature.  The  carefully  verified
facts  obtained  by  experience  and  ex-
periments are  arranged  in  logical
sequence  that  leads  to  the  inductive
discovery  of  fundamental  principles
and  universal  unchangeable  laws.  In
other  words,  science  aims  to  discover
the  fundamental  principles  and  uni-
versal laws  by  the  ordered,  systematic
study  of  the  phenomena  of  nature.
Scientific  healers  arrange  all  the  facts
gained  at  the  bedside,  in  the  clinics,
laboratories  and  postmortem  rooms,  by
all  schools  of  medicine  and  healing,  in
a  logical  sequence,  and  from  them  they
induce  the  universal  law  of  healing —
the  law  of  harmony.

Neither  the  allopaths,  nor  homeo-
paths, nor  eclectics,  nor  Christian
Scientists,  nor  any  other  school,  has
collected  all  the  facts  that  can  be  ob-
tained, and  induced  a  universal  law
from  them.  Each  and  all  are  narrow
one-sided  schools,  therefore,  no  scienti-
fic schools  of  medicine  or  healing  exist.
All  schools  of  medicine  or  healing  are
mere  empiricism.

I  will  make  a  brief  comparative
criticism  of  all  the  leading  schools  of
medicine and healing and prove the


Simple Fare means Happy Life


preceding  statement.  By  this  com-
parative method  and  by  elimination
we  will  arrive  at  the  fundamental  prin-
ciple of  all  healing.  In  my  criticism  I
will  be  guided  by  the  laws  of  logic  and
the  laws  of  nature.  In  them  we  have
an  unchanging  .standard  of  comparison.
Whatever  does  not  conform  to  these
laws  is  false  and  worthless  and  must  be
cast  away  as  so  many  old  and  ragged
garments.

Allopathy  is  the  oldest  school  of
medicine.  It  is  the  survival  of  the
crude  methods  practiced  by  primitive
men  in  a  vague,  haphazard  manner.
The  work  of  the  allopathic  doctors  is
pure  empiricism.  Every  prescription
written  by  an  allopath  is  an  experi-
ment. When  he  mixes  5-20  drugs  in
a  prescription,  he  is  not  guided  by  a
natural  law.  He  simply  selects  the
in  the  same  haphazard  manner.  These
guessing  contests  are  doomed  to  al-
most constant  failure.  The  almost  con-
stant failures  with  natural  drugs,  have
led  the  allopaths  to  denounce  them  as
worthless  and  to  sing  the  praise  of  the
unnatural  and  unscientific  serums.

In  Homeopathy  we  have  the  first
and  only  attempt  to  produce  a  science
and  philosophy  of  medicine.  Hahne-
mann taught  that  disease  is  due  to  a
dynamic  disturbance  of  the  vital  force ;
the  equilibrium  is  restored  by  the
dynamic  action  of  natural  drugs  made
from  plants,  metals  and  mineral.  He
introduced  the  method  of  triturating
metals  and  other  insoluble  drugs  with
sugar  of  milk,  until  they  become
soluble.  He  introduced  the  scientific
method  of  proving  drugs  upon  healthy
human  beings.  These  great  dis-
coveries are  Hahnemann's  permanent
contribution  to  medicine.

But  Homeopathy  has  its  serious  de-
fects and  these  prevent  it  from  becom-
ing a  universal  system  of  healing.
Hahnemann's  work  was  limited  to
drugs ;  he  ignored  mechanotherapy,
hydrotherapy,  electrotherapy,  psycho-
therapy and  dietetics.

Eclecticism  is  Allopathy  under
another  name.  Eclectic  doctors  com-
bine their  drugs  in  a  haphazard  man-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


779


iier;  Ihcy  deny  llic  existence  ul  a
natural  law  that  g-ovcrns  the  healipL;'
action  of  their  vegetable  drugs.  This
is  the  great  defect  that  ])revents  lu:-
lecticism  from  i)eing"  a  scientific  school
of  medicine.

But  Eclecticism  has  done  much  good.
Eclectic  doctors  adhered  to  the  natural
vegetable  drugs  while  allopaths  were
unbalanced  by  the  serum  craze.  The
eclectics  have  done  much  empirical
work  that  has  added  much  valuable
information  to  our  knowledge  of  vege-
table drugs.  Their  tincttire  made
from  fresh  green  drugs  are  superior  to
the  allopathic  fluid  extracts  and
homeopathic  tinctures.

Osteopathy,  Chiropractic,  Si)ondylo-
therapy  and  massage  may  be  united
and  studied  as  mechanotherapy.  The
fundamental  principle  of  these  various
systems  is  the  same — the  treatment  of
disease  by  mechanical  or  physical
methods.  They  have  the  same  com-
mon defect.  The  enthusiastic  prac-
titioners of  each  system  claim  all  dis-
ease can  be  healed  by  their  own
peculiar  method.  The  public  has
through  experience  learned  that  these
claims  are  not  true.  Mechanotherapy
ignores  the  mental  and  spiritual  man.
It  claims  that  it  can  cure  mental  and
psychic  disorders  by  pure  physical
methods.  This  error  is  the  opposite  of
mental  and  psychic  healers  who  claim
to  cure  all  physical  disorders  1)y  mental
and  psychic  methods.

Christian  Science,  New  Thought,  the
Emmanuel  movement  and  psycho-
therapy are  all  based  upon  the  same
principle — the  healing  of  disease  'by
mental  or  psychic  methods.  They
ignore  and  denounce  the  natural  drugs
and  natural  methods  as  useless.

But  mental  and  psychical  healing
has  done  much  good ;  it  has  emphasized
the  mental  and  spiritual  part  of  man
and  demonstrated  the  great  value  of
psychic  healing.  It  recognizes  no  uni-
versal law  of  healing.  The  treatments
are  given  in  an  emperical  manner.
They  are  guilty  of  the  same  error  com-
mitted by  the  mechanical  healers ;  they
believe  that  every  human  ill  can  be
cured by their one-sided method.


I  loth classes of extremists do not
cure.

Our  critical  analysis  of  the  numer-
ous systems  of  medicine  and  healing
has  given  us  a  number  of  valuable  facts
and  much  that  is  false  and  worthless.
We  are  now  prepared  to  add  all  that
is  true  in  each  system  and  develop  a
new  and  universal  scientific  system  of
healing.  They  must  be  guided  by  the
laws  of  logic  and  the  laws  of  nature  in
our  selection.  Whatever  is  in  harmony
with  them,  we  can  retain,  the  balance
we  must  discard.

I  am  now  prepared  to  present  the
principles  of  a  Science  and  Philosophy
of  Natural  and  Divine  Healing.  A
system  that  is  based  upon  the  natural
and  moral  laws;  that  can  use  mechano-
therapy, drug-therapy  and  psycho-
therapy when  they  are  indicated  by  the
physical  condition  and  the  subjective
symptoms  of  the  patient.

The  principles  of  this  system  are
given  in  the  following  concise  state-
ments :

1.  (jod  is  the  maker  and  ruler  of
all  things  and  beings  in  the  spiritual
and  material  world.  He  rules  all
spiritual  and  material  things  bv  His
will.

2.  The  moral  and  natural  laws  are
the  modes  of  God's  will.  The  natural
laws  govern  matter,  motion  and
energy,  all  plants,  animals  and  men.
7'he  moral  laws  govern  our  spiritual
life,  our  relations  to  God  and  man.

3.  All  diseases  are  due  to  dis-
obedience to  the  natural  and  moral
laws.


"Wrong  again! No  virus  shall  enter  the
body  of  my  child."


780


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Ihnjcrs (iaide


4.  In  acute  diseases,  the  vibrations
in  the  cells  of  the  organs  and  tissues
are  accelerated;  in  chronic  diseases  the
vibrations  are  retarded.

5.  In  physical  disease,  there  is  dis-
cord between  cells  and  organs  of  the
body.  In  spiritual  diseases  the  finite
s])irit  in  man  is  out  of  harmony  with
the  infinite  spirit,  God.

6.  To  restore  the  harmony  is  the
task  of  the  scientific  healer.  He  is
guided  in  this  work  by  the  universal
law  of  harmony.  The  law  of  harmony
may  be  stated  in  the  following
formula:  All  the  vibrations  in  a
system  act  in  unison  to  produce  a
common  effect.

By  natural  healing  we  mean  the  use
of  natural  drugs  and  natural  methods.

By  divine  healing  we  mean  the  use  of
the  divine  plan,  as  given  by  God  to
man.

Long  before  God  made  man,  He
knew  that  man  would  disobey  Him  and
sufifer  from  disease  as  a  just  punish-
ment. So  God,  in  His  goodness  and
mercy,  put  healing  powers  into  plants,
metals,  minerals,  mineral  waters,  pure
air  and  sunshine ;  also  into  the  various
systems  of  mechanotherapy  and  into
electricity.  He  endowed  man  with
certain  divine  powers  and  attributes.
These  are  intelligence,  knowledge,  and
the  power  to  act.  He  made  the  law  of
harmony  that  is  our  guide  in  the  selec-
tion of  natural  drugs,  mechanical  and
psychic  methods.  When  we  use  this
plan,  the  means  and  the  law  that  God
has  planned  for  us,  then  we  practice
Natural  and  Divine  Healing.


F5^3*ijiS=


Each,  from  the  master  of  ceremonies,  has
a  finger  in  the  pie.


In  the  brief  space  assigned  to  me,  I
cannot  enter  into  a  complete  explana-
tion of  the  application  of  all  the  three
methods  of  healing,  but  can  give  a
few  cases  from  practice  that  will  show
how  one  or  two,  or  all  three  methods
may  be  combined  to  treat  the  whole
man,  body,  mind  and  spirit.

Case  1.  Arthur  Gurklis,  aged  9,
came  under  my  professional  care
twelve  years  ago.  He  was  afflicted
with  arthritis  deformans,  and  had
been  sufifering  for  eighteen  months.
During  this  time,  he  had  been  treated
by  eight  regular  doctors  who  failed  to
give  him  the  slightest  relief.  When  I
began  to  treat  him.  he  suffered  excru-
ciating pains  every  moment  of  time.
The  pains  were  promptly  relieved  by
apis  mellifica,  and  later  by  rhus  toxi-
codendron. His  spinal  column  was
rigid  as  a  stick,  all  muscles  and  ten-
dons were  contracted,  all  joints  in  the
body  were  enlarged  and  rigid.  He
was  a  helpless  cripple  and  could  not
put  a  spoon  into  his  mouth.  After  the
drugs  had  cured  the  disease,  I  began  to
treat  the  contractions  and  the  rigid
points  by  mechanical  methods.  I  gave
him  a  tri-weekly  general  massage  and
passive  exercise  for  eighteen  months.
The  contraction  of  the  tendons  of  the
right  leg  were  partly  overcome  by  an
extension  brace.  Under  the  combined
medical  and  mechanical  treatment,  a
useless  cripple  was  transformed  into
a  useful  person.

In  June  1915,  Arthur  graduated
from  the  commercial  department  of
Stiver's  High  School.  He  can  now
make  an  honest  living  and  is  a  useful
member  of  society.

Case  2.  Job  Hill,  aged  60,  has  been
afflicted  with  arteriosclerosis  for  many
years.  During  the  summer  of  1915,  he
had  many  chiropractic  adjustments ;
they  failed  to  give  him  the  slightest  re-
lief. When  he  came  under  my  care,  I
gave  him  daily  general  massage.
Under  this  treatment,  he  grew  worse
from  day  to  day.  Then  I  discontinued
the  mechanical  treatment,  and  began
to  give  him  drugs.  He  had  numerous
violent  spasms,  from  6-20  in  24  hours.
I  controlled  the  spasms  with  five-grain


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


781


doses  of  a  trituration  of  magnesia
phosphate  every  three  hours.  For  the
arteriosclerosis,  I  gave  him  three  grain
doses  of  a  trituration  of  plumbum.  The
magnesia  phosphate  has  controlled  the
spasms  and  he  can  now  lie  down  in  bed
and  sleep.  Before  he  received  the
magnesia  phosphate,  he  could  not  lie,
but  was  compelled  to  sleep  in  a  chair.
The  plumbum  is  softening  his  arteries
and  kidneys.  He  is  now  passing  three
pints  of  urine  in  24  hours,  instead  of
8  ounces.

Case  3.  Mrs.  J.  A.  G.,  aged  75,  has
suffered  with  rheumatism  for  more
than  three  years.  She  went  to  the
spring  at  Martinsville,  Ind..  where  she
had  baths  and  massage  for  several
weeks — without  the  slightest  relief.
Then  a  serum  quack  gave  her  five  in-
jections of  serum,  which  almost  killed
her.  It  was  November  3rd,  1916,  that
found  her  suffering  from  severe  pain  in
her  badly  swollen  knees  and  hands.
The  symptoms  of  the  patient  indicated
rhus  toxicodendron.  This  drug  gave
some  relief  in  24  hours,  and  to-day,
after  the  brief  period  of  six  days,  she
is  entirely  free  from  pain  at  times.  The
swelling  of  the  knees  is  going  down
and  she  gets  a  fair  night's  rest.

Case  4.  Miss  Annie  Jones,  aged  35,
has  suffered  from  general  ill  health  for
ten  years.  She  has  suffered  much  from
indigestion,  constipation  and  a  goitre.
The  goitre  has  disappeared  under  the
internal  administration  of  a  dilution  of
the  tincture  of  iodine.  Her  mental  con-
dition has  somewhat  improved  under
psychic  treatment ;  but  she  has  never
been  well.  She  always  complained  of
severe  pain  between  the  shoidders,
which  extended  down  both  arms  to
the  fingers  and  up  into  the  neck.

When  she  came  under  my  care  six
weeks  ago,  she  said,  'T  do  not  see  why
I  can  not  get  real  well,  I  improve  up  to
a  certain  point  and  there  I  stop."  T
made  an  examination  of  the  spine  and
found  a  subluxation  of  the  fourth
dorsal  vertebra.  Three  adjustments
have  relieved  the  pain  between  the
shoulders  and  in  the  arms.  Now  she  is
in  good  health,  her  digestion  is  good
and  she  has  not  felt  so  well  for  vears.


Before  closing,  I  must  relate  a  good
joke,  although  I  am  the  victim.  I
studied  Chiropractic  and  bought  a
chiropractic  table,  and  I  am  prepared
to  give  adjustments.  Now  patients
constantly  come  to  me  and  state  that
they  have  taken  a  course  in  chiro-
practic treatment  without  the  slightest
benefit.  They  frankly  say,  "You
understand  Chiropractic  and  drugs,
that  is  why  I  come  to  you.  Now  I
want  medicine."  They  think  that  I
understand  their  case  better  because
I  have  made  a  study  of  both  forms  of
treatment.  I  get  no  opportunity  to
give  adjustments,  but  I  get  the  busi-
ness and  the  money.

We  are  standing  on  the  threshold  of
a  new  era  in  healing.  The  people  are
disgusted  with  the  crude  and  un-
natural methods  of  the  regular  doctors ;
with  their  haphazard  concoctions,
tonics  and  serums.  They  are  eagerly
seeking  for  a  scientific,  natural  system
of  treatment.  They  have  learned
through  bitter  experience  that  the  one-
sided systems  of  psychotherapy  and
mechanotherapy  are  no  better  than
regular  medicine.

Naturopathy  is  a  system  of  healing
that  is  paving  the  way  for  a  universal
scientific  system  of  natural  healing — a
system  founded  upon  the  moral  and
physical  laws,  that  can  use  drugs,
mechanotherapy  and  psychotherapy,
when  they  are  indicated — a  system
that  can  treat  man  in  body  and  in
spirit.


The  important  purpose  of  this  famous  jour-
ney will be recalled with pride.


782


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


IB


w


Astroscopy Department

Adilress all communications for this ilepartmcnl tn its editor

E.  G.  BRADFORD,  Member  Am.  Astrological  Soc,  73  Sixth  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


ill


ASTRO-MEDICAL  DIAGNOSIS

By  E.  G.  BRADFORD


s


Statistics  prove  that  a  very  large
percentage  of  diagnosis,  made  by  old-
school  methods,  are  wrong.  The  dead-
ly significance  of  this  fact  must  be  ap-
parent to  anyone  when  it  is  consid-
ered that  ordinarily  treatment  is  based
upon  diagnosis.  This  being  so,  wrong-
diagnosis  logically  leads  to  wrong
treatment — with  consequent  menace
to  the  patient  and  loss  of  prestige  to
the  physician.

The  newer  schools  of  practice,  ad-
vocating the  so-called  natural  methods
and  making  little  or  no  use  of  toxic
drugs  and  surgery,  of  course  escape
much  of  this  danger  in  its  most  ag-
gressive form.  Yet  even  they  cannot
hope  to  obtain  the  uniformly  best
results  of  which  they  are  capable,  if
they  neglect  to  utilize  every  available
source  of  information  and  guidance.
And  as  for  the  old-school  doctor,  it
surely  ought  not  to  require  much  "argu-
ment to  convince  him  that  he  owes  it  to
his  clients,  if  not  to  himself,  to  wel-
come any  discovery,  whether  recent
or  ancient,  that  will  help  him  to  com-
prehend and  alleviate  his  patients'
maladies.

The  writer  of  this  article  holds  no
prejudice  and  feels  no  hostility  against
any  school  of  practice  that  is  sane  in
its  principles  and  beneficent  in  its  min-
istrations. But  he  would  like  to  bring
to  the  attention  of  everyone  interested
in  rational  methods  of  treatment,
whether  conservative  or  progressive,
])ractitioner  or  patient,  the  fact  that
Astro-Medical  Analysis,  judiciously
employed,  can  and  should  play  its
legitimate  part  as  a  contributing  fac-
tor of  knowledge  and  safety  in  the  un-


derstanding of  diseased  conditions,  and
the  scientific  cultivation  of  health.

What  the  ancient  observers  discov-
ered as  to  the  correspondence  between
planetary  positions  and  aspects  and
the  human  mind  and  body,  modern  in-
vestigators have  essentially  verified.
In  some  particulars  present-day  astrol-
ogers have  added  to  the  mystic  lore
of  the  stars  handed  down  to  us  from
past  ages ;  but  our  progress  in  the
purely  mechanical  and  physical  phases
of  astronomy  has  been  so  tremendous
as  to  dwarf  into  insignificance  every
other  achievement  in  this  vast  field  of
research.  In  fact,  to  the  great  major-
ity of  our  orthodox  leaders  in  science,
astrology  is  a  sealed  book.  But
while  this  is  true  of  orthodox  science
and  its  leaders  as  a  whole,  astrology
itself  is  today  very  much  alive  and
growing  in  fame  and  influence.  It
does  not  have  to  appeal  for  justifica-
tion to  the  illustrious  names  of  the
past  that  have  been  associated  with
its  history.  It  has  numerous  adher-
ents in  every  civilized  land,  among
them  many  of  our  keenest  minds.  It
is  stated  on  good  authority  that  well
on  toward  a  million  copies  of  the  astro-
logical ephemeris  are  printed  and  sold
annually.  This  alone  is  significant  of
the  widespread  interest  in  the  subject.

Like  every  other  department  of  sci-
ence, medical  astroscopy  in  its  entire-
ty is  a  study  requiring  of  those  who
would  master  it  not  only  some  natural
aptitude  but  much  earnest  application.
Without  derogation  to  the  domain  of
subtile  knowledge  which  we  are  dis-
cussing, it  may  be  said  that  to  desig-
nate astrology  as  a  scientific  art  would


Universal  Nuluropatliic  Directory  and  Bmjers'  Guide


783


probably  be  more  nearly  correct  ihau
to  style  it  a  science  pure  and  simple.
Therefore  it  demands  of  its  genuine
devotees  a  certain  intuitive  type  of
mentality  not  necessary  to  the  pursuit
of  the  merely  physical  sciences.  Nev-
ertheless, the  elementary  and  more
generally  useful  facts  and  rules  of  as-
trology can  be  learned  by  any  person
of  intelligence,  and  it  is  that  phase  of
it  that  particularly  interests  the  pres-
ent writer,  especially  as  elucidating
problems  in  health  and  disease.  By
sketching  the  subject  in  large  outline,
I  think  it  can  be  made  both  compre-
hensible and  interesting  to  even  the
casual  reader  of  this  page.

The  zodiac  is  the  broad  belt  of  space
in  w^hich  the  sun  and  planets  seem  to
travel  round  the  earth. It  is  divided
into tw^elve segments, each of  which
corresponds  to  and  sympathizes  with
some  part  of  the  body. Thus  the  first
segment, or division, called Aries,
corresponds  to  the  head ;  the  second,
Taurus,  to  the  neck ;  and  these  divi-
sions follow  in  regular  order  down  to
the twelfth and last, called Pisces,
which  corresponds  to  and  sympathizes
with the  feet. Any  one  or  more  of
the  planets  can  occupy  these  various
portions  of  the  zodiac,  depending  upon
where their orbital revolutions bring
them  at  any  given  moment  and  upon
their  aspect  to  the  stirface  of  the  earth
as  the  earth  turns  on  its  axis ;  and  ac-
cording  as each planet thus located
combines its rays favorably or ad-
versely with other planets, so it is
found  is  an  influence  for  good  or  for
bad manifested through the anatomy
and  physiology  corresponding  thereto.
In  astro-pathology,  special  importance
attaches to the so-called malefics.
Thus  the fiery Mars has to do with
fevers  and  acute  diseases,  etc. ;  while
the  chronic  Saturn  is  coldly  obstruc-
tive. Uranus  spasmodic,  etc.

Of  course,  all  these  details  have  to
be  figured  out  accurately  from  data
collected  at  firsthand  by  the  astronom-
ical observatories,  and  then  interpreted
in  accordance  with  the  accepted  rules
of  astrology.  By  so  figuring  from  the
date, place and time of a person's


birth,  we  get  a  map,  or  picture,  of  the
heavens,  from  which  it  is  possible  to
infer  the  fundamental  astro-vital  forces
at  work  in  that  person's  system.  If
there  are  any  weak  parts  or  organs,
such  a  map  is  likely  to  indicate  them.
Constitutional  tendencies  are  thus  dis-
coverable, and  can  be  reckoned  with.
By  further  and  more  complicated  fig-
uring, we  can,  when  desirable,  also  es-
timate the  astral  influences  operative
for  any  given  year.  Thus  by  one  or
both  of  these  ways,  it  is  possible  to
check  up  and  corroborate  our  judg-
ment as  to  the  nature  and  significance
of  the  patient's  symptoms  as  other-
wise gained  by  the  usual  methods  of
physical  examination.

And  this  to  me — this  aid  that  star-
science  gives  in  confirming  or  refuting
the opinion we may arrive at as to
the  location  and  nature  of  an  ailment
(as derived from the patient's testi-
mony, history,  and  the  evidence  of  our
own  five  senses),  is  the  super-eminent
worth  of  astro-medical  analysis. When
human health and life are at stake,
how  much  better  to  make  ''assurance
doubly  sure"  by  all  legitimate  means
than to take unnecessary chances !
But  not  to  the  practitioner  only  is  as-
troscopy  useful,  as  in  helping  him  to
decide  between  conflicting  symptoms,
or  in  supplying  a  needed  clue  in  ob-
scure cases. To  parents,  the  insight
and  foreknowledge  to  be  gained  from
the  study  of  a  child's  star-map  is  often
of  inestimable  value.


Mister Dope (M. D.) is  down on  his  last
legs  ...  to  the discard.


784


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


&


o


Phrenology  Department

Address all communications for this department to its editor

JESSIE  ALLEN  FOWLER,  1358  Broadway,  New  York  City


l±|:


@


MODERN  PHRENOLOGY

By  JESSIE  ALLEN  FOWLER


Probably  at  no  period  of  the  world's
existence  has  Phrenology  been  so
thoroughly  accepted  as  at  the  present
day,  and  according  to  the  evolutionary
theory  such  should  be  the  case,  as
scientists  to-day  are  working  along  the
lines  established  by  Dr.  Gall,  the
founder  of  Phrenology.

All  scientists  who  are  experimenting
with  galvanic  batteries  or  electroids
are  seeking  to  prove  the  localization  of
mental  functions,  and  it  is  rational  to
suppose  that,  as  Phrenology  presents
the  best  theory  of  mental  localization,
in  time  the  deductions  of  scientists  will
merge  on  to  the  lines  of  the  phrenolo-
gists in  all  of  the  centres  that  have  yet
been  located.  Evidence  comes  to  us
that  Phrenology  is  becoming  more  and
more  accepted  through  the establish-


The Kneipp Water Cure
Terrorizes  Death


ment  of  cerebral  centres,  such  as  the
Gustatory  Centre,  the  Speech  Centre,
the  Centre  for  Fright,  etc.

Phrenology  is  being  used  more  and
more  among  our  business  men  to-day
than  at  any  other  period  in  the  history
of  commerce,  and  managers  of  business
firms  are  consulting  phrenological  ex-
perts when  engaging  new  employees.
Men  entering  business  and  seeking
partners  are  equally  anxious  to  obtain
advice  concerning  the  adaptability  of
their  associates.  The  late  Marshall
Field,  one  of  the  most  scientific  busi-
ness men  of  his  age,  said  that  he  be-
lieved in  looking  at  the  head  and  face
of  an  individual,  when  engaging  him,
more  than  at  his  dress.

We  hear  much  to-day  on  the  subject
of  vocational  guidance  and  training  for
efficiency  in  our  schools  and  colleges,
and  many  methods  have  been  sug-
gested for  carrying  out  this  idea.
Phrenology  is  the  most  reliable  and
scientific  method  of  applying  this  sub-
ject of  vocational  guidance.  In  fact,
it  was  one  of  the  first  promoters  of  this
idea  and  has  been  endorsed  by  some  of
the  greatest  educators  of  the  day.

The  late  Prof.  Muensterberg  once
said  that  "divorce  between  a  man  and
his  occupation  is  often  more  urgently
needed  than  divorce  between  a  man
and  wife ;  a  man  and  his  vocation  are
seldom  one,  as  they  ought  to  be,  and
the  waste  of  energy  in  the  lives  of
those  who  have  merely  drifted  into
their  occupations  is  a  great  national
misfortune.  A  vocation  should  be  the
greatest  source  of  happiness,  but  it  is
more  usually  the  first  cause  of  unhap-


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


785


piness.  The  boy  who  shifts  from  one
line  of  work  to  another  is  wasting
national  labor  and  energy.  Did  he
know  before  he  started  to  earn  his  liv-
ing just  what  sort  of  work  would  best
suit  his  mental  and  physical  make-up,
he  would  be  able  to  find  his  place  at  the
outset."  He  attributed  this  careless-
ness in  the  choice  of  a  vocation  to  the
American  idea  that  everyone  is  fitted  to
undertake  anything,  but  he  prophesied
that  "  an  awakening  is  coming."

This  is  what  we  firmly  believe  that
Phrenology  is  going  to  do.  namely :
help  the  scientific  study  of  children
along  educational  lines  and  guide
them  into  the  right  vocations,  which
will  double  their  success  in  life.

Aristotle  believed  that  the  brain  was
capable  of  analyzation,  and  succeeded
in  working  out  in  a  small  degree  what
has  been  more  fully  developed  in  the
present  age.  In  1840,  George  Combe,
in  Edinburgh,  did  considerable  work  to
promote  this  system,  in  and  out  of  the
schools,  and  convinced  the  hard-headed
Scotchmen  of  its  truth.  In  1844,
Herbert  Spencer  wrote  extensively  of
this  method  of  psychologizing  a  per-
son, and  prepared  many  articles  on  the
faculty  of  Wonder,  and  other  faculties,
for  "The  Zoist"  published  at  that
time,  and  later  absorbed  many  of  Dr.
Gall's  principles  in  his  writings  on
Psychology.

Horace  Mann  gave  up  a  lucrative
law  practice  in  order  to  uphold  the
broader  principles  of  education,  and
thoroughly  endorsed  the  above  named
system,  in  1850.

The  late  Alfred  Russell  Wallace,
author  of  "The  Wonderful  Century,"
was  a  great  believer  in  this  system,
and  expressed  the  opinion  that  it  ought
to  be  endorsed  bv  educationalists,  in
1899.

Luther  Burbank,  the  scientist  of
plant  life,  said  that  it  had  long  been  his
dream  to  apply  to  the  training  of
children's  minds  the  scientific  ideas  he
had  so  successfully  employed  in  trans-
forming and  perfecting  plant  life,  by
making  a  study  of  the  individual  char-
acteristics of  each  child ;  and  as  he  has
been so successful in the scientific


study  of  plant  life,  he  is  equally  anxious
to  see  similar  principles  applied  to
mankind.

One  Swedish  student  of  the
American  Institute  of  Phrenology  has
succeeded  in  converting  three  hundred
and  sixty  thousand  people  to  become
advocates  of  this  system,  in  Norway,
.Sweden,  Denmark  and  Finland,  since
1898.

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  author  of
"Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast  Table,"
(1874)  in  the  later  years  of  his  life,  said
of  Phrenology :  "We  owe  Phrenology
a  great  debt ;  it  has  melted  the  world's
conscience  in  its  crucible  and  cast  it  in
a  new  mould,  with  features  less  like
those  of  Molloch  and  more  like  those
of  humanity.  Even  if  it  had  failed  to
demonstrate  its  system  of  correspond-
ence, it  has  proved  that  there  are  fixed
relations  between  organization,  mind
and  character.  It  has  brought  out  that
great  doctrine  of  moral  equity,  which
has  done  more  to  make  men  charitable
and  to  soften  legal  and  theological
barbarisms  than  any  one  doctrine  I  can
think  of  since  the  message  of  "Peace
and  Good-Will  to  men."

We  believe  the  time  is  coming  when
every  teacher  will  make  out  a  chart  of
the  individual  characteristics  of  each
child  belonging  to  his  class,  for  the
purpose  of  better  understanding  him.
Teachers  Avill  then  be  able  to  crystal-
lize talent  on  sound  scientific  principles
for  of  their  own  accord  they  will  per-
ceive where  a  child  is  defective  and
where  he  is  proficient,  and  help  him
accordingly.

* * *

How to Be Happy! — that is the

question.  How  to  experience  uninter-
rupted physical  well-being  and  mental
enjoyment ! — that  is  our  great  concern.

Phrenology.  Character  Analysis,  the
Science  of  Human  Nature — call  it
what  you  will — it  is  the  especial  prov-
ince of  this  kingly  science  to  disclose
to  human  beings  the  laws  of  their  own
nature,  in  order  that  they  may  avoid
the  misery  of  violating  those  laws,  and
enjoy  the  benefits,  the  happiness,  of
keeping  them.

Self-knowledge  must  be  the  founda-


786


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


tion  upon  Which  shall  rest  whatever
we  may  acquire  of  lasting  good.  Self-
knowledge  only  this  science  affords.

What  is  character?  It  is  the  very
man  himself!  Reputation  is  merely
what  the  man  is  thought  to  be.  Repu-
tation is  at  the  mercy  of  one's  fellows.
But  character  is  that  thing  which  is
our  very  own,  and  which  no  man  may
take  from  us.

To  acquaint  you  with  your  real  self,
— that  is  what  this  science  does  for  you.
It  warns  you,  encourages  you,  directs
you.  exalts  you.  Without  it,  you  floun-
der in  uncertainty,  but  with  the  self-
examination  it  makes  possible  to  you,
you  do  go  on  to  the  formation  of  ster-
ling character,  real  strength,  sure  poise,
increased  power,  genuine  success !

Make  self-knowledge  your  own.
Make  yours  that  degree  of  success  your
talents  fit  you  for!  This  Science  of
Analysis  of  Human  Nature  shows  you
the  wav  how.


Because  this  is  human  service — be-
cause it  is  work  that  needs  to  be  done,
and  the  doing  of  it  is  so  fascinatingly
interesting,  Jessie  Allen  Fowler,  of
New  York  and  London,  (herself  the
daughter  of  L.  N.  Fowler,  the  world's
foremost  phrenological  scientist)  has
given  her  lifetime  to  the  examination
and  advice  of  more  than  forty-five
thousand  persons.

For  what  do  your  talents  fit  you?
What  should  your  life  work  be?  Whom
should  you  wed?  What  is  the  real
nature  of  your  children?  How  can
you  best  manage  and  hold  them?  All
these,  and  other  vitally  interesting  dis-
closures, this  Science  yields  you  an
understanding  of.

Because  to  delay  is  to  chance  never
doing  it,  it  has  come  to  be  recognized
that  "now  is  the  accepted  time"  for  ac-
quiring the  knowledge  of  self,  which
knowledge  alone  confers  Power,
Health,  Success,  Happiness.


"As  You Sow,  So  Shall  You  Reap"


The  mind,  through  the  nervous  system,  con-
trols the  bod}'. . . . Guard  3-our  thouglits!


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


787


PHYSIOLOGIC  THERAPEUTICS

By  JAMES  MONTGOMERY  IRVING,  M.  D.,  N.  D.,  Ph.  D.


If  there  are  still  any  lingering
doubts  in  the  minds  of  those  whose
eyes  may  glance  over  these  pages  as  to
the  efficacy,  the  last-
ing benefits,  or  sanity
resulting  from  care-
fully graded  and  ju-
therapeutic  exercise,
physical  education,
physiologic  re-educa-
tion, or  physiologic
therapeutics,  then  let
these  doubting  souls
ask' themselves  these
questions :

Why  do  the  govern-
ments of  every  en-
lightened power  on
earth  insist  upon  their
soldiers,  sailors,  po-
licemen, firemen,  civil
service  men,  students
in  miltary,  naval  and
public  schools  • —  even
their  prisoners — •  tak-
ing a  certain  amount  of  regular  physi-
cal training?

The  answer  is :

For  the  purpose  of  acquiring  bodily
power.  For  the  purpose  of  creating  a
storehouse  of  energy.  For  the  estab-
lishment of  greater  resistive  force  for
warding  ofif  disease.  To  give  tone  to
the  nerves,  a  quick  eye  to  see,  and  a
brave  heart  to  fight  for  and  protect
those  weaklings  who  are  unable  to  fight
or  protect  themselves.

If  this  answer  is  true- — and  it  is,  I
believe,  gospel  truth — then  I  say  to  the
doubter,  to  the  drug  taker,  to  the  pill
swallower:  What  license  have  you  to
think  that  you  should  enjoy  the  same
physical  vitality  and  muscular  strength,
or  the  same  success  in  life  as  the  men
spoken  of  above  without  any  effort  on
your  part  to  procure  it,  save  by  taking
drugs,  counter  irritants,  instead  of  do-
ing away  with  the  cause  by  merely
helping  Nature,  in  Nature's  own  way,
to  help  herself?


Here


Dr.  James  Montgomery  Irving


Neither  health  nor  strength  can  be
purchased in bottles or packages,
what I consider the health
alphabet :

A,  F,  C,  E,  B,  R.
Meaning:  Air  (pure),
food  (of  proper  qual-
ity and  combination),
clothing  (suitable),
exercise  (physiologi-
cal), bathing  (inside
and  out),  rest  (eight
hours  or  less).

Let  us  see  how  this
works  out,  by  taking
the  first  letter,  A.  At
birth,  the  lungs  con-
tain no  air ;  the  bron-
chioles collapse  and
touch  each  other ;  the
trachea  and  large
bronchial  tubes  are
open,  but  contain  fluid
and  no  air.  When
the  chest  expands
with  the  first  breath
taken  (the  breath  of  life),  the  inhaled
air  has  to  overcome  the  adhesions  ex-
isting l^etween  the  walls  of  the  bron-
chioles and  the  air  sacs,  and  the  lungs
•  thus  filled  with  air  upon  birth  are  never
completely  emptied  again  until  after
death.

These  facts  taught  me  the  important
lesson,  more  than  25  years  ago,  that
breathing  should  be  the  first  and  last
thought  of  the  Physiologic  Therapeut-
ist when  prescribing  or  giving  treat-
ment. It  takes  but  a  few  minutes  and
is  highly  efficacious.

Nasal  breathing  should  always  be
practised.  In  this  way,  the  air  is  first
warmed,  then  moistened,  particles  of
foreign  matter  removed,  and  the  sense
of  smell  so  improved  that  bad  odors
are  easily  detected.

The  importance  of  air  to  the  body
cannot  be  overestimated.  I  have  seen
men  who  fasted  for  forty  days;  men
who  have  been  without  water  for  more
than  two  days,  but  I  have  never  yet


788


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Bayers*  Guide


seen  the  man  or  woman,  alive,  who  has
been  deprived  of  air  for  a  full  period  of
two  minutes — though  I  have  witnessed
many  try  for  this  strange  record,  by
diving  under  water,  in  many  parts  of
the  world,  none,  to  my  knowledge,
have  ever  succeeded.

During  ordinary  respiration,  as  we
know,  our  lungs  are  not  fully  dis-
tended— perhaps  little  more  than  the
middle  third.  I'ut  by  j^roperly  pre-
ercises, and  other  treatment  known  to
the  Physiologic  Therapeutist,  the  up-
per and  lower  apices  of  the  lungs  are
brought  into  activity  through  the  addi-
tional amount  of  air  taken  in.  which
by  many  is  called  complemental  air.

It  is  estimated  that  the  lungs  contain
6,000,000  of  air  sacs  (though  I  have  not
counted  them),  all  of  which  should  be
brought  into  activity  during  the  intake
of  atmospheric  oxygen  and  the  outgo
of  carbon  dioxide.

Oxygen  is  the  greatest  friend  known
to  man,  and  carbon  dioxide  the  great-
est enemy.

Since  it  is  through  the  intake  ui  oxy-
gen that  the  blue  carbon-laden  l)l()od
is  oxygenated
and  changed
to  the  red  fluid
organ,  arteri-
al blood,  upon
which  our
very  life  gen-
e  r  a  11  y  d  e  -
l)ends,  it  nat-
urally follows
that  the  heart
has.  d  u  r  i  n  g
scientific,  o  r
proper  breath-
ing, received
due  attention,
as  all  the
blood  has
accordingly
passed
through  it.
and  consider-
able exercise
of  the  organ
indulged  in
when we use


our  lungs  properly.  Not  only  does  prop-
er deep  breathing  inflate  the  6,000,000
of  air  sacs  in  the  lungs,  but  strength-
ens them,  enlarges  them,  and  auto-
matically prepares  a  deep,  roomy,  well-
arched  thorax  to  hotise  them  and,  as  1
haye  said,  increases  the  power  of  the
heart  muscle  itself  to  a  marked  degree.
If,  however,  a  cardiac  case  presents
itself  for  treatment,  we  would  pre-
breathing,  and  sometimes  certain  baths,
though  I  have  good  reason  to  believe
that  the  latter  can,  in  a  great  many
cases,  easily  and  safely  be  dispensed
with.  This,  at  least,  has  been  my
experience.

Other  treatment  indicated  for  the
greater  number  of  cardiac  cases  con-
sists of  resistive  movements,  and  these
are  accomplished  by  slight  pressure
against  the  patient  when  he  is  told  to
go  through  all  the  movements  the  ar-
ticulations are  capable  of  making,
namely :

Flexion,  extension,  abduction,  adduc-
tion, rotation  and  circumdtiction,  omit-
ting the  seventh,  or  gliding  movement.
Great  care  and  gentleness  should  be
the  watch-
word  in  these
cases.  The
object  in  view-
is  that  physi-
ological re-
education
tends  to  re-
store the  nor-
m  a  1  activity
of  the  muscu-
lature of  the
c  ire  ulatory
system.

The  field
open  to  the
carefully
trained  Physi-
ologic Thera-
p  e  u  t  i  s  t  or
Naturopath
who  is  suffi-
ciently inter-
ested in  the
great  work
before  him,  is


Universal  Naluropathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


780


no  less  a  place  than  the  universe  itseli.
Speaking'  of  other  cases  and  treat-
ment, the  following  exanij)le  may
l)rove  interesting"  to the reader:

Case  A  was  a  young  man  of  go(j(l
family,  30  years  of  age,  and  a  constant
polo  player.

In  making  a  drive  at  a  ball,  his  op-
ponent "hooked"  him,  which  resulted
in  a  rather  severely  injured  wrist.
The  attending  physician,  who  hap-
pened to  be  a  friend  of  the  patient,  im-
mediately applied  a  plaster  cast,  which
the  patient  endured  for  four  weeks
with  great  discomfort  and  i)ain.  The
case  came  to  me  on  the  fifth  week  (un-
known to  his  physician,  as  I  heard
afterwards),  and  when  the  cast  was  re-
moved, the  carpus  presented  a  per-
fectly rigid  condition,  with  motor  and
sensory  nerves  apparently  dormant.

The  treatment  for  the  first  few  days
consisted  of  thermo  application,  pas-
sive movements  of  the  articulations,
the  breaking  down  of  adhesions,  and
firm  pressure.  At  the  end  of  a  week
the  patient  was  able  to  indulge  in
slight  general  voluntary  activity.  At
this  stage  the  patient  again  saw  his
physician,  who  was  delighted  with  the
progress  made,  and  the  following  day
brought  his  patient  to  me  personally
and  addressed  me  in  these  words :

"Professor,  my  friend  here  has  got  a
'wrist,'  and  I  can't  cure  it ;  what  can
you  do  for  him  ?"

After  I  explained  my  intended
course  of  treatment,  the  doctor  be-
came so  interested  that  he  turned  pa-
tient himself.  He  discussed  the  possi-
bility, of  "putting  some  life  into  his
lungs  and  building  up  a  very  pro-
nounced deflated  thorax,  and  the  de-
velopment of  the  lower  limbs,  from  the
popliteal  space  down."  Let  us  take  the
two  cases  briefly.

Case  A  presented  himself  for  treat-
ment daily.  The  treatment  consisted
of  passive  pronation,  supination,  ex-
tension, flexion,  rotation  and  circum-
duction of  the  forearm  and  carpus,
pressure  on  the  metacarpus,  separating
and  closing,  active  extension  and
flexion and firm grip movements of


the  ])halanges — all  under  water,  at  a
temperature  of  95  degrees  F.

This  treatment  was  continued  for  a
week,  at  the  end  of  which  time  active
days  later,  a  dumb-bell  weighing  three
pounds  was  used  to  excellent  advan-
tage. On  the  fifth  week  the  patient
was  again  playing  i)olo,  and  has  since
become  a  champion.

Case  1^,  age  40  years,  was  given
one  hour's  attention  daily.  Always  be-
ginning with  inspiratory  movements,
both  in  the  erect  and  recumbent  posi-
tions, using  the  arms  at  times  as  levers,
both  to  enhance  the  intake  of  oxygen,
the  elimination  of  carbon  dioxide,  and
to  more  readily  raise,  broaden  and
deepen  the  thorax,  and  add  greater
activity  to  the  intercostal  muscles.
Superficially,  we  paid  special  attention
to  the  latissimus  dorsi  by  actively  for-
cing the  arms  backwards  and  down-
wards, and  forward  in  line  with  the
mouth  and  back  level  with  the
shoulders.

These  are  the  parts  which,  when  de-
A'cloped.  together  with  the  deeper  lay-
ers of  muscles,  will  greatly  assist  to
give  the  required  increase  of  chest
measurement.  For  the  lower  limbs,  we
had  the  patient  raise  and  lower  his
body  on  the  toes  for  full  five  minute
sessions  ;  walk  on  the  toes  for  a  like
amount  of  time  ;  skip  the  rope  one  hun-
dred times  ;  sit  on  a  chair  with  his  feet
elevated  and  the  heels  on  another  one :
then  forcefully  go  through  all  the
movements  the  articulations  are  cap-
able of  making.  W'e  also  suggested
that  the  doctor  should  go  through  the
latter  movements  when  g'oing  his
daily  rounds  in  his  car.

When  w^e  again  applied  the  caliper
and  tape  measure  at  the  end  of  three
months,  we  found  that  the  circumfer-
ence of  the  thorax  had  been  increased
four  inches,  and  the  lower  limbs,
around  the  g-astrocnemius,  two  inches.

Case  C.  a  man  of  50  years  of  age ;
5  feet  6  inches  in  height :  weight.  315
pounds :  suiTered  with  a  bad  case  of
obesity  for  ten  years,  and  had  been  un-
mercifully drugged  for  more  than  one-
third of  his life. The patient  was a


790


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


mail  well  known  Ironi  Maine  to  Cali-
fornia. His  friends  knew  him  to  have
been  attended  by  many  well-known
physicians  with  little  or  no  results,  and
were  much  worried  about  his  condition
generally.  I  at  first  felt  that  I  had  not
sufiicient  time  at  my  disposal  to  han-
dle the  case,  but  remembering  that
"great  men,"  for  a  greater  fee  had
failed  to  obtain  any  results  whatsoever,
I  resolved  to  take  the  case  in  order  to
find  out  what  it  was  possible  to  do
with  Physiologic  Therapeutics.  llie
patient  promised  to  obey  my  instruc-
tions at  all  times,  and,  greatly  to  his
credit,  I  am  bound  to  confess  that  he
kept  his  word.  This  case  is  cited,  (1)
because  of  the  seriousness  at  the  be-
ginning, (2)  the  simple  method  of
treatment  given,  and  (3)  the  magnifi-
cent results  obtained  in  so  short  a
period  of  time.

The  treatment  consisted  of  a  suitable
diet,  reduction  of  fluids,  a  variety  of
breathing  exercises,  with  and  without
arm  action  ;  light,  general  Physiologic
therapeutical  exercises,  baths  of  90  de-
grees F.,  followed  by  shower  baths  at
a  temperature  of  70  degrees  F.  Daily
treatment  was  given  of  from  one  to  one
and  a  half  hour's  duration. Result:

Within  six  months  we  had  reduced
the  patient  exactly  148  pounds,  which
I  have  good  cause  to  believe  is  the
record  for  the  United  States,  and  a
great  achievement  for  Drugless  Ther-
apy, an  agreeable  surprise  to  the  pa-
tient's friends,  and  of  sufficient  interest
to  cause  one  of  New  York's  leading
newspapers  to  devote  a  full  page  to
the  case  in  the  magazine  section  of  a
Sunday  issue.

It  is  now  five  years  since  the  patient
came  to  me,  and  today  he  states  that
he  has  never  felt  better  in  his  life.

Were  it  not  for  the  green-eyed  mon-
ster, jealousy,  and  the  habit  of  follow-
ing the  changes  of  the  moon  with  fresh
suspicion  on  the  part  of  the  political
doctors  who  rivet  an  ear  to  the  ground,
listening  to  the  steps  of  scientific  ad-
vancement of  the  no-drug  physician,
with  the  set  purpose  of  delaying  his
wonderful  progress  with  barbed  wire
entanglements, deep trenches or pit-


tails,  bombing  him  with  any  and  every-
thing, and  finally  causing  asphyxiation
with  the  vilest  stench  of  political  gas-
too  vile  to  allow  them  to  practise  their
chosen  profession  themselves.  I  re-
peat, were  it  not  for  these  barriers,  the
properly  qualified  progressive  physi-
cian of  the  better  class  of  Drugless
schools  might  be  handling,  at  this
present  time,  the  thousands  of  sad  lit-
tle victims  of  the  recent  anterio-polio-
myelitis  epidemic  of  which  a  well-
known  physician  said,  a  short  time
ago  "is  their  rightful  field  of  action  in-
stead of  leaving  them  to  women  nurses
and  the  laity."

Among  God's  chosen  noblemen,  and
in  the  front  ranks,  there  have  always
been  eminent,  brave,  self-sacrificing,
godly  physicians,  ready  and  willing  at
all  times  to  give — most  anxious  to  give,
as  they  always  have  given — their
valuable  lives  in  the  execution  of  their
sacred  duty ;  but  there  are  others  to
whom  the  metallic  chink  of  golden
discs  is  the  sublime  music  which  urges
ihem  on  to  do  deeds  which  makes
heaven  weep  and  all  earth  amazed,  and
can  be  profitably  cast  from  our  minds
with  these  words  of  charity :  "Father,
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what
they  do."

To  sum  up,  Physiologic  Therapeu-
tics is  a  science  of  healing  differing
from  the  medical  art  through  employ-
ing for  the  care  of  diseases,  physical
and  other  means,  instead  of  chemical
agencies.

Pife,  as  I  was  taught  in  my  stttdent
days,  is  the  sum  total  of  reactionary
forces  acting  on  a  dynamic  basis ;  the
two  cardinal  factors  being  mind  and
matter.  The  various  processes  affect-
ing the  phenomena  of  evolution  and
maintenance  of  life  involve  physical
and  chemical  changes.

If  we  view  the  body  in  its  material
aspect,  we  will  discover  that  it  consti-
tutes the  most  complete  machine  for
the  transformation  of  energy,  which
transformation  is  being  effected
through  motion.

Irregularity  of  motion,  natural,  vol-
untary motion,  which  in  turn  acts  upon
involuntary muscles, or vital organs.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


791


means  stagnation,  suboxides,  and  im-
perfect metabolic  changes.

Cessation  of  motion  means  death.

Te  regulate  thr  various  functions  of
the  body  depending  upon  motion — the
complete  motion  of  the  body's  entire
mechanism,  to  maintain  normal  and
correct  abnormal  conditions,  is  the
l^rovince  of  the  Drugless  physician.

His  methods,  measures  and  treat-
ment are  aimed  to  effect  correction  of
luxations,  sub-luxations,  and  contrac-
tures ;  the  removal  of  irritants  affecting
the  nervous  system ;  the  removal  of
impediments  to  the  passage  of  the
fluids  of  the  body,  blood  and  lymph  ;  a
perfect  control  of  the  blood  supply  to
every  organ  and  every  tissue  of  the
body,  through  the  medium  of  the  vaso-
motor system  ;  the  increase  or  decrease
in  activity  of  the  glandular  system.

The  Physiologic  Therapeutist,  or
Drugless  physician,  no  matter  Avhat  his
true  title  may  be,  who  treats  diseases
without  drugs,  is  a  teacher  of  sound
health.  He  uses  plain  English  to  his
patient;  has  no  cause  whatever  to  use
Latin  terms,  and,  although  the  patient
may  not  understand  the  effects  desired
or  results  to  be  obtained  through  su-
perficial treatment,  he  can  at  least  see
and  feel  what  is  being  done  for  him.
He  presents  himself  for  treatment
without  the  slightest  fear  of  being
poisoned  or  dug  into  with  the  surgeon's
knife.

He  knows  what  the  words  pure  air
mean  ;  plain,  wholesome  food  ;  exercise,
wise  living  and  repose.  Even  if  he
lacks  the  knowledge  of  their  value,
he  soon  learns  through  the  daily  ad-
vice given  to  him  by  his  physician,  and
thus,  when  completely  recovered  from
his  ailment,  is  quite  able  to  take  care
of  himself  in  the  future.

Can  this  be  said  of  drug  treatment?

It  would  be  highly  interesting  to
learn  of  how  many  physicians  the
reader  knows  who  are  less  attractive
than  himself  (physically)  :  of  "dirty"
complexion,  protruding'  fat  abdomen,
slovenly  habits  and  manners,  and  lack-
ing, generally,  all  the  exterior  attrac-
tiveness which  a  doctor  of  health
should  possess.


The  "muddy"  or  "dirty"  complexion,
as  we  know,  usually  means  a  mal-
condition  of  the  vascular  system.  A
protruding  abdomen  (which  frequently
})rompts  a  feeling  of  disgust  on  the
part  of  the  observer,  indicates  a  condi-
tion of  obesity,  brought  about  through
indiscretions  in  diet ;  gluttony,  lazi-
ness, indifference,  lack  of  exercise,  or
the  proper  knowledge  of  how  to  take
care  of  one's  self.

Would  you  consult  such  a  man  as
this  for  your  ailments?

For  my  part,  I  would  feel  much  safer
and  more  sure  of  good,  sound  advice  by
going  farther  afield  and  revealing  my
troubles  to  the  normal,  clean-cut  man
who  partakes  freely  of  his  own  (Drug-
less) medicine,  and  presents  that  pic-
ture of  health  (irrespective  of  good
looks  or  age)  which  encourages  the
patient  and  creates  within  him,  (1)
hope,  (2)  longing,  (3)  determination,
and  finally,  (4)  belief  that  by  follow-
ing the  advice  given  to  him  by  so  wise
a  man  as  the  "clean-cut"  physician
standing  before  him,  will  ultimately
create  in  himself  a  like  "picture  of
health"  for  others  to  look  upon  with  the
same  amount  of  agreeable  pleasure  as
had  been  his  own  experience.

First  impression,  as  most  of  us  are
aware,  is  the  keynote  to  most  things
'worth  while.

To  make  good  in  all  things  is  no
easy  task ;  but  to  continually  aim  to
make  good  under  great  difficulties,  or
along  proper  or  scientific  lines,  by  per-
severance, patience  and  endless  prac-
tise, earns  for  us  confidence  in  others,
and  makes  better  men  of  us  all.


I  am  asked  to  give  a  few  hints  and
some  advice  to  the  Drugless  profes-
sion. Truly,  it  can  only  be  a  few  hints,
for  to  attempt  to  cover  the  entire
field — though  I  have  worked  in  it  for
nearly  30  years — would  exhaust  the
powers  of  any  man.

The  field  is  too  big,  too  gigantic ;  it
stands  up  in  bold  relief  like  Mount
Olympus,  defying  the  world  to  refute
the  fact  that  its  massiveness  stands
upon  the  solid  foundation  of  gospel
truth.


792


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


The  drugless  field  of  operation  and
endeavor  may  be  likened  to  a  huge
wheel,  the  hub  of  which  is  here  in
New  York,  and  the  rim  surrounding
the  entire  world.

There  is  no  end  to  it.  It  has  caught
up  with  itself,  so  to  speak,  and  now
stands,  as  I  have  said,  like  mighty
Olympus,  impregnable,  immovable,  a
lasting  monument  of  man's  best  ef-
forts to  make  mankind  whole,  by  the
known  science  of  assisting  Nature  to
help  herself.

But  there  was  a  beginning  to  all
this,  and  that  beginning  was  in  the
days  of  our  noble  aboreal  ancestors,
who  were  the  first  to  live  in  "sky-
scrapers," or  high  trees.  It  was  then
they  first  learned  enough  to  climb  up
out  of  the  wet,  to  prevent  wet,  cold
feet — and  here  is  a  good  point  for  the
Drugless  profession  to  remember :
never  get  cold  feet.

Now  wc  skip  to  the  Fire  Age,  when
our  same  noble  ancestors  were  clothed
only  in  the  shadows  of  the  fighting  im-
plements carried  in  their  hands,  or  a
small  mole  on  the  back  of  their  necks.

If  these  people  discovered  any  dif-
ficulty in  breathing,  or  had  caught
what  some  people  are  pleased  to  call
a  cold,  or  slight  congestion  of  the
lungs,  they  did  not  immediately  retire
to  their  downy  beds  of  dried  leaves
and  fagots  to  recover,  but  dug  a  hole
in  the  ground,  and  after  huge  stones
were  dropped  in,  a  fire  was  kindled,
and  while  these  stones  were  becoming
heated,  they  would  set  ofif  at  a  fast  run
-of  several  miles.  On  their  return,  the
fire  having  spent  itself,  they  would
jump  into  the  hole  and  pull  branches
of  small  trees  and  underbrush  over
them  in  order  to  encourage  a  profuse
or  complete  perspiration,  which  was
followed  by  a  cold  plunge  into  the  sea
or  stream  close  by,  and  thus  were  their
colds  cured.

We  now  know  who  were  the  first
cabinet  bath  inventors,  hydropaths
and  Drugless  physicians.

We  now  skip  a  few  thousand  years,
and  land  in  the  East  Indies,  whose
people  were  considered,  at  one  time,
the  most  progressive  and  enlightened


in  the  then  known  world.  The  natives
of  India  taught  the  Egyptians  the  art
of  massage,  and  how  to  anoint  that
"Serpent  of  ye  old  Nile,"  Cleopatra,
with  perfumed  oils,  to  make  her  body
beautiful  and  strong,  that  she  may  be-
dazzle the  eyes  and  hearts  of  Csesar,
Marc  Antony  and  Pompey — three  of  a
kind,  so  to  speak.

Thus  do  we  see  that  the  natives  of
India  were  the  first  masseurs.  These
men  are  past  masters  in  massage  and
mechano-therapeutical  methods.  It  is
a  science  with  them,  but  not  as  we  un-
derstand science,  for  with  them  the
same  treatment  is  made  to  do  for
everyone.

Now,  if  we  cut  down  the  Red  Sea
from  India  to  what  is  now  known  as
Port  Suakin — but  which,  as  I  remem-
ber, was  only  a  barren  coast  line  when
I  landed  there  some  years  ago,  we  will
find  that  we  are  in  the  Eastern  Soudan,
or  desert,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are
nearly  as  wild  today  and  quite  as
naked  as  the  before-mentioned  aboreal
men,  and  brave  to  a  fault.

I  have  seen  one  lone  warrior  with  his
poisoned  spear  and  cruel  ham-string-
ing knife,  charge  hundreds  of  soldiers,
without  the  slightest  fear.

What  makes  them  so  brave  and  self-
confident,  you  mie-ht  ask?  The  answer
is :  health.  Bountiful  human  power  ac-
quired through  Nature's  own  physi-
cian—the outside  world  and  what  they
glean  therefrom.

These  men  will  set  out  for  a  hun-
dred mile  tramp  across  the  desert  with
no  more  consideration  than  you  would
have in walking  twenty  blocks.

The  strange  thing  about  these  wild
sons  of  the  desert,  who  look  like  itiner-
ant statues  carved  from  polished
ebony,  is  that,  when  they  feel  out  of
sorts  for  any  reason,  they  do  not  show
it  as  do  our  own  people,  who  usually
remain  at  home  or  take  to  their  beds ;
but,  on  the  contrary,  become  strangely
more  active,  and  go -through  a  most
strenuous  manoeuvre  with  spear  and
shield,  at  times  jumping  so  high  in
the  air  that  they  can  actually  turn
three  times  before  again  striking  the
ground.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Biu/ers'  Guide


793


These  wild  and  diflicult  movements
always  last  to  semi-exhaustion,  and,
when  this  is  over,  they  lie  face  down
on  the  sand  while  an  endless  chain
of  other  warriors  tramp  over  the  spines
from  the  sacreni  to  the  prominens.
Bathing-  always  follows  this  strange
procedure,  and  the  cure  is  completed.
And  so  we  see  that  these  Fuzzy-
Wuzzies,  so-called,  knew  something
about  Chiropractic  thrusts  and  adjust-
ments.

May  we  not  safely  say  then  that
these  barbarians  were  the  creators  of
Natural  Healing,  who  thrived  on  food
from  the  earth,  pure  water  to  drink,
rich  and  pure  oxygen  to  breathe,  sun-
light baths  and  natural  exercise  ob-
tained by  long  marches,  the  climbing
of  trees  and  over  mountain  tops,  down
again  to  the  springs,  and  still  further
down  to  the  sea,  to  earn  these  wonder-
ful gifts  of  Nature,  this  Nature  Cure,
this  Naturopathy,  for  that  is  exactly
what  it  was,  even  in  those  unen-
lightened days.

But  Naturopathy  in  these  days,  as
far  as  I  have  seen,  read  and  studied  it,
is  one  of  the  great  natural  sciences ;
one  of  God's  choicest  blessings,  giving
health,  strength,  happiness  and  lon-
gevity to  more  than  thirty  millions  of
people,  and  is  growing  by  leaps  and
bounds,  and,  what  is  very  important,
is  here  to  stay  till  the  end  of  re-
corded time.

Now  just  a  word  about  the  term
physical  culture.  This  term,  or  name,
was  first  coined  by  the  laity  with  the
set  purpose  of  bringing  before  the
public  a  sort  of  superior  method  of
physical  training  other  than  gymnastic
exercises,  as  a  means  of  building  up,
or  improving  the  body  as  they  saw
it,  which,  unfortunately,  was  only
superficial.

The  laity  did  not  know — thought  it
unnecessary  to  know — nor  were  the
means  open  to  them  to  find  out  the
secrets,  the  sublime  secrets  of  the
great  complex  body  machine  within.

The  one  desire  then,  as  it  is  now,
with  them,  was  to  create  large,  power-
ful muscles, principally those of the


arm  and  chest,  at  the  expense  or
neglect  of  the  heart  and  lungs  and
other  vital  organs,  through  which  ig-
norance many  thousands  of  health  en-
thusiasts have  been  permanently  in-
jured. Therefcjre,  it  is  my  belief  that
the  term  physical  culture  can  profit-
ably be  eliminated  by  the  scientifically
trained.

Physical  education,  physiologic
therapeutics,  or,  better  still,  physio-
logic re-education — since  you  are
called  upon  to  re-create  physical  vi-
tality and  muscular  strength — are  bet-
ter terms,  and  possess  the  ring  of
scientific  understanding — but  the  term
Naturopath  covers,  fortunately,  every-
thing.

Your  studies  and  progress  in  the
essentials  of  anatomy  and  dissection,
and  the  lectures  you  were  called  upon
to  give  at  that  time,  must  have  left  a
wonderfully  sublime  picture  in  your
mind's  eye  of  what  takes  place  in  our
bodies,  both  in  health  and  disease,
when  your  patients  are  instructed  to
take  certain  forms  of  physical  exer-
cise for  any  specific  reason.  You  see
the  beneficial  results  these  movements
have  on  the  heart  and  blood  vessels ;
the  strengthening  of  the  former,  and
the  increased  activity  in  the  return  of
the  carbon-laden  blood  in  the  veins  to
the  lungs  for  purification  in  the  six
millions  of  air  sacs,  its  meeting  with
the  oxygen,  its  oxygenation  and
change  of  color  from  a  dark  blue  to  a
lively  red,  life-sustaining  fluid  organ,
which  is  pumped  around  the  cycle,  so
to  speak,  in  the  course  of  physical  ac-
tivity, at  the  rate  of  three  feet  per
second ;  all  this  you  know,  and  see  in
your  mind's  eye.  You  know,  besides,
how  to  increase  vaso-motor  activity  in
the  cervical  region  by  judicious  ex-
ercise, and  that  more  care  should  be
taken  here  than,  for  instance,  the  great
pectorals,  deltoids,  or  latissimus  dorsi,
on  account  of  difference  of  power  of
origin,  insertion,  nerve  and  blood
supply.

Exercise,  you  will  please  remember,
is  one  of  the  paramount,  if  not  the
paramount  point  in  preventive  medi-
cine.


794


Universal  NaluropaHiic  Dircclorij  and  Biiijcrs'  Guide


Every  soul  on  this  earth  requires  a
certain  amount  of  carefully  graded  ex-
ercise, and  the  Drugless  physician  can
it  is  his  specialty;  for  without  it,  we
cannot  even  properly  assimilate  and
use  the  best  oxygen,  expect  complete
digestion,  nor  the  proper  elimination
of  the  feces.  If  I  could  emphasize
this  point  twice  as  strong,  I  willingly
would.

If  more  proof  is  required,  please  re-
fer to  the  daily  papers  and  you  will
learn  of  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of
young  men  who  have  been  refused
military  service  owing  to  the  low
standard  of  their  physical  condition ;
but  don't  forget  that  those  who  have
been  accepted  "will  bring  home  the
bacon."

Hand  over  these  physically  unfit
young  men  to  the  Naturopaths,  and  I'll
be  bound  that  within  a  few  months
they  will  be  doing  duty  in  the  ranks
with  their  brothers.

If  you  are  to  interest  the  public  to
the  fullest  in  this  great  progressive
work  of  yours,  you  must  set  the  ex-
ample yourselves ;  you  must  show  that
you  are  the  scientific,  physical,  mental,
moral,  spiritual,  hygienic  equals  of  all
men,  and,  nulli  secundus,  or  second  to
none.

Armchair  theories  do  not  always
work  out  as  intended.  The  man  who
takes  ofif  his  coat  and  practices  what
he  would  have  his  patients  do — and
frequently  do  it  with  them,  can  with


quick  dispatch  sift  the  fallacies  from
the  facts.  You  may  practice  on  your-
selves to  a  certain  degree,  or  be
practised  upon  by  fellow-practitioners ;
take  your  own  medicine,  so  to  speak,  as
I  have  always  done,  and  with  lasting
benefit,  I  hojje,  to  myself.

Like  the  great  actor,  we  must  not
only  thoroughly  know  our  parts,  but
be  able  to  deliver  them  intelligently  to
the  understanding  and  benefit  of
others,  and,  which  is  half  the  battle,
look  the  part,  if  you  would  be  appre-
ciated and would prosper.

Let  us  be  sure  to  keep  these  facts  in
mind :  There  are  only  seven  varieties
of  motion  which  the  articulations  are
capable  of  making — the  same  number
as  there  are  letters  in  music.  Now,  a
well-trained  musician,  by  his  musical
ear,  and  the  scientific  grouping  of
notes,  can  write  a  grand  opera,  while
the  musical  hack  is  usually  only  quali-
fied to  write  a  ragtime  tune,  not  a
melody,  mind  you,  which  to  the
trained  ear  is  nothing  but  noise,  while
the  former  is  sublime  music  which
gladdens  the  senses  and  sways  the
soul.

This  also  applies  to  exercise,  but  if
the  wrong  grouping  of  muscles,  action,
for  certain  nial-conditions,  only  dis-
cord of  motion  will  result,  and  the
contrary  will  produce  physical  har-
mony of  far  greater  value  to  health
than  the  most  sublime  opera  ever
written  by  mortal  man.


Coffee  drinking  is  one  of  the  causes  of
Physical Degeneration


706  If|il\er«Hl Natiirupnthlc Oireolory and lliijor.s' Ciiuide

The  Original  Nature  Cure  Resort  and  Recreation  Home

One  hour  from  New  York  on  the  Susquehanna  li.  li. Ten  minnles  from Railroad  Station


Located  in  the  most  beautiful  part  of  the  Ramapo  Mountains.
Splendid  scenery.  Bracing  mountain  air.  Nature  lovers  will  find
here  all  the  charms  of  forest  and  stream.  The  Institution  is  provided
with  everything  necessary  for  Natural  Healing  in  the  winter  as  well
as  in  the  summer.  Fine  houses  with  all  modern  improvements;
beautiful  sun  parlors;  splendidly  equipped  baths.

Kneipp  Water  Cure,  all  branches  of  Hydro-therapy,  Massage,
Swedish  movements,  Mechano-therap3%  Fasting,  Rest,  Outdoor  Life
Cures.  Chronic  Diseases,  even  those  pronounced  hopeless,  success-
fully treated.

LIGHT-AIR  COTTAGES,  for  living  outdoors  in  the  summer;  placed
in  the  midst  of  the  forest  and  on  thickly  w^ooded  hills  where  one  can
enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  ozone-laden  air  at  all  times  of  the  day  and
night.

SUN,  LIGHT  and  AIR  BATHS  are  taken  in  two  large  and  beautiful
parks  (one  for  the  men  and  another  for  the  women)  in  secluded
valleys  surrounded  by  the  thick  woods  insuring  absolute  privacy.
Through  each  runs  a  charming  mountain  stream,  delightful  for
bathing.

WALKING  BAREFOOTED:  This  healthful  practice,  one  of  the
best  means  known  of  hardening  the  body  and  absorbing  the  life-
giving  currents  from  the  earth,  is  strongly  recommended  to  patients
at  the  Yungborn  where  the  best  opportunity  is  afforded  for  walking
barefoot,  not  only  in  the  Light-Air  parks  but  in  any  part  of  the  ex-
tensive grounds  of  the  Institution.

EARTH  and  CLAY  PACKS:  Earth  and  Clay  applications  are  exten-
sively used  at  the  Yungborn  in  the  shape  of  bandages  and  packs  for
various  external  and  internal  ailments,  having  been  instrumental  in
effecting  the  most  astonishing  cures.

VEGETARIAN  and  FRUITARIAN  DIET:  Special  attention  is  given
to  the  table,  proper  diet  having  been  the  subject  of  long  and  careful
study  by  the  management  of  the  Yungborn.  The  variety  and  excel-
lence of  our  bill  of  fare  are  unexcelled.

Fine,  large  GYMNASIUM,  splendidly  equipped  with  everything
necessary  for  all  manner  of  physical  culture.

LECTURES  from  time  to  time  on  the  true  Natural  Life  and  Natural
Healing,  together  with  entertainments  and  excursions  to  various
points  of  interest  in  the  surrounding  country  combine  to  make  life  at
the  Yungborn  both  pleasant  and  instructive.

TERMS  for  Boarders,  Vacationists,  Convalescents  and  Invalids:
$80.00  per  month;  $20.00  per  week,  and  upwards.  Visitors,  $3.00  per
day,  including  use  of  the  Light  and  Air  parks.  Patients  $25.00  a  week;
$100  a  month  and  upwards.

This  is  the  Parent  Institution  of  Naturopathy  in  America.


lor  Further  Information  Address

I  BENEDICT LUST, BUTLER, NEW JERSEY  ,


Naturopathic  Colleges,  Schools  and  Institutions


797


COLLEGES,  SCHOOLS  and  INSTITUTIONS


Astro-Medical
N. Y.


ASTROSCOPY

School, Brooklyn,


CHIROPRACTIC

American  Chiropractic  Association,
Aurora,  Mo.

American  School  of  Naturopathy,
Butler, N. J.

American University (Chiropractic

Correspondence), Chicago, 111.
Buddenberg  System,  Jackson Bl  !g  .

Pittsburgh, Pa.
California Chiropractic College,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Canadian College of Chiropractic.
Hamilton, Ont.

Carver Chiropractic College,
Wichita, Kans.

Carver College of Chiropractic,
Oklahoma  City, Okla.

Chicago  University ,  of  American
Sciences,  College  of  Chiroprac-
tic, Chicago, 111.

Chiropractic Bulletin, Chicago, 111.

Chiropractic  College,  The,
San  Antonio, Tex.

Chiropractic  Institute  of  Kansas
City, Mo.

Chiropractic Sanitarium, Cedar
Rapids, la.

Columbia  College  of  Chiropractic,
Elgin, 111.

Darling  &  Baker's  Chiropractic  Col-
lege, Wichita, Kans.

Davenport  College  of  Chiropracfc
Davenport, Iowa.

Davenport  College  of  Chiropractic'.
Cedar  Rapids, Iowa.

Detroit Chiropractic Institute
School, Detroit, Mich.

Eclectic  College  of  Physiological
Therapeutics, Chicago, 111.

Empire  School of  Chiropractic,
New York, N. Y.

Indiana School of Chiropractic,
Anderson,  Ind.

International  College  of  Drugless
Physicians, Chicago, 111.

International  Theosophical  Head-
quarters, Point Loma, Cal.

Langworthy  School  of  Chiropractic
and  Nature  Cure,  Cedar  Rapids,  la.

Lindlahr  Health  Resort,
Elmhurst, 111.

Los  Angeles  College  of  Chiroprac-
tic, Los Angeles, Cal.

Mecca  of  Chiropractic,  New  Jersey
College, Newark, N. J.

Mecca  College  of  Chiropractic,  The,
Wilmington, Del.

National  Eclectic  Institute,  School
of  Osteopathy  and  Chiropractic,
New York, N. Y.

National School of Chiropractic,
Chicago, 111.

Nebraska Chiropractic College,
Lincoln, Neb.

New  England  College  of  Chiroprac-
tic,  Boston, Mass.

New  Jersey  College  of  Chiropractic,
Newark, N. J.

New  York  Academy  of  Chiropractic
Research,  New  York,  N.  Y.

New York School of Chiropractic,
Inc., 39th St. and Broadway,
New York, N. Y.

Pacific Chiropractic College,
Portland, Ore.

Palmer-Gregory  School  of  Chiro-
practic, Oklahoma,  Okla.

Palmer School of Chiropractic,
Davenport,  la.


Pittsburgh College of Chiropractic,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Progressive Chiropractic College,

Fort Smith, Ark.
Ratledge System of Chiropractic

Schools, Los Angeles, Cal.
Ross  College  of  Chiropractic,

Fort Wayne, Ind.
Spinal Health System,

Bristol,  Conn.
Standard School of Chiropractic,

Cedar  Rapids, la.
Stone College of Chiropractic,

San Antonio, Texas.
St. Louis Chiropractic College,

St. Louis, Mo.
St. Paul College of Chiropractic,

St. Paul, Minn.
United College of Chiropractic,

Marion,  Ind.
Universal Chiropractic College,

Davenport, la.
Washington School  of  Chiropractic,

Boston, Mass.
Washington School  of  Chiropractic,

Washington, D. C.
Wells Academy of Chiropractic,

Lansing, Mich.

CORRESPONDENCE
SCHOOLS

American University, Chiropractic

School, Chicago, 111.
Murray School of Osteopathy and

Chiropractic, Elgin, 111.
Nature and Life University,

Box 74, Tangerine. Fla.
Universal Naturopathic Academy,

Box 185, Butler, N. J.

CURATIVE GYMNASTICS

Czukor  School  of  Curative  Gym-
nastics,  New  'S'ork, N. Y.

Montgomery Irving Institute of
Physical  Education,  200  5th  Ave.,
New York, N. Y.

\'ew  York  School  of  Medical  Gym-
nastics and  Massage,  New  York,
N. Y.

DIETETICS

Beuhl's Institution and Health
Foods, Los  Angeles. Cal.

Brinkler's Diet  Institute,

^  Atlantic City, N. J.

Christian  School  of  Applied  Dietet-
ics,  New York, N. Y.

I^evanzin Scientific Dietarium,
(College of Dietology and Psy-
chotherapy), San Diego, Cal.

Lust's  School  of  Dietetics,  Tanger-
ine, Fla.

Schroth System of Teaching.
Chicago, 111.

Taber School of Dietetics,
Evanston, 111.

Vienna Dietetic Institute, Port-
land, Ore.

ELECTROPATHY

College  of  Neurology  and  Electro-
Therapeutics, Salem, Ore.

Freeman  Electric  Institute,  Cincin-
nati, O.

Matijaca,  Anthony,  413  Cass  St.,
Joliet, 111.

Montgomery  Irving  Institute,  200
Sth  Ave., New York, N. Y.

N'ational  College  of  Electro-Thera-
peutics,  Lima, Ohio.


GYMNASTICS

Yanamach Co., Jude, (Jiu Jitsu
System), Los Angeles, Cal.


HEALTH CULTURE

Hraun School of Health Culture,

Courtenay, Fla.
Camp Waldheim for Boys, West

Barnet, Vermont.
College of Medical Evangelists,

Loma Linda, Cal.
iJuggan Health  Institute,

Columbus,  S.  C.
Harlem Health Institute,

New ^■ork, N. Y.
"Keep Well Club," East Cleve-
land, O.
Macfadden, Bemarr, Healthato-

rium, Chicago, 111.
Psycho-Physiological Health Club,

(Dr. Paul Bauer), Los Angeles,

Cal.


HEALTH RESORTS

Biniini Hot Springs and Health

Resort. Los Angeles, Cal.
Crescent Villa Health  Resort, Bath
Beach,  Brooklyn,  N. Y.
1 Duggan Health Institute,
Columbus, S. C.
Florida  Yungborn,  The

(Qui-si-sana),  Tangerine,  Fla.
i  Glendale  Sanitarium,  Glendale,
I Cal.

i  I^indlahr Health Resort, Elmhurst,
111.
Long Island Home,
Amityville, N. Y.
Lust's Recreation Resort (Yung-
I born), Butler, X. J.

.MncLevv Health Farm.
I Babylon, N. Y.
i .Miller's Health Farm,
I Jacksonville, Fla.
I  Nature and Life Colony,
I Palm  City, Cuba.
: Xorth Shore Health Resort,
Winnetka, 111.
Physical Culture Health  Resort,

Pasadena,  Cal.
Pratt's Rest Home.

Virginia Beach, Va.
.Strueh's Health Resort.
McHenry, 111.
I  White Sulphur Mineral Springs
I Mountain Resort, Los Angeles,
I Cal.
"Yungborn," Butler, N. J.


HEALTH  STUDIOS

Bieri,  Robert,  "The  Little  Carls-
bad," West Hoboken, N. J.

Grambow,  Emil,  Hempstead,  L.  I.,
N. Y.

Pearce  Studio,  The  Way  of  Life
System,  Los  Angeles.  Cal.

Roycroft Health Home, East
Aurora (Erie County), N. Y.

HYDROPATHIC

American  School  of  Naturopathv.
110  East  41st  St.,  New  York,
N. Y.

Cumming's  Norfolk  Hydro  Sani-
tarium, Norfolk, Va.

Harlem  Hvdriatic Institute, The,
New York. N. Y.


798


Naturopathic  Colleges,  Schools  and  Jiistitutioiis


Hoegen's Institute, 334 Alexander

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Hotel Chamberlain, Old Point

Comfort, Va.
Hydropathic Institute,

Hartford, Conn.
Saratoga  Cure,  Tlie,

Saratoga Springs, N. Y.
Steinjann's Baths, Brooklyn. N. Y.
St. Francis Health  Resort (Kneipp

\Vater Cure), Denville, N. J.
Summit  of  the  Ozarks,

Eureka  Springs, Ark.
Water Cure and Massage,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
West  New York  Baths, West  New

York, N. J.
Weissrnann's Hydropathic Insti-
tute, Los Angeles, Cal.

IRIDOLOGY

American School of Iridology,

Rockford, 111.
Lahn School of Iridology, 1386

West  Randolph  St.,  Chicago,  111.

MECHANO-THERAPY

Blunier  College, Hartford, Conn.

MENTAL SCIENCE

Krotona Institute (Theosophy)
Hollywood, Los Angeles, Cal.

Post,  Helen  Wilmans,  Mental  Sci-
ence Institute,  Seabreeze, Fla.

Raja-Yogo  College  (Thcosophical),
Point  Loma, Cal.

Weltmer  School  of  Suggestive  The-
rapeutics,  Nevada, Mo.

MISCELLANEOUS

Buffalo  Restorium  (Alcohol  and
Drvig  Habits),  Buffalo, N. Y.

Burleson & Stone, Buffalo, N. Y.

Clinton Institute, Newark, N. J.

Deutsches  Electro-Medical  Insti-
tute,  New ^'ork, N. Y.

Dr. Pierce's  Invalids' Hotel,
Buffalo, N. Y.

Institute  of  Science, Chicago, III.

Keeley Institute, Buffalo, N. Y.

Lamb School for Stammerers,
Pittsburgh, Pa.

Life Extension Institute, New
York, N. Y.

McMichael's Sanatorium (Alcohol
and Drug Habits), Buffalo,
N. Y.

National  Association  for  the  Study
and  Prevention  of  Tuberculosis,
New York, N. Y.

National  Eclectic  Institute  (Re-
gistered), New Y'ork, N. Y.

Parkside  Sanitarium,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

Reinecke's Institute,
New  ^'ork,  N. Y.

Sancal  System, The,
San Francisco, Cal.

Sprague Institute, The,
New  York, N. Y.

Weltmer  Institute  of  Suggestive
Therapeutics, Nevada, Mo.

NAPRAPATHY

Chicago College of Naprapathy,
Chicago, 111.

NATURE CURE

Lindlahr  College  of  Nature  Cure
and  Osteopathy,  ."525-529  S.  Ash-
land Boulevard, Chicago,  111.

Nature  Cure,  The,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.

NATURE  CURE  HEALTH  RE-
SORT (Yungborn),  Butler,  N.  J.


NATURE  CURE  RECREATION
RESORT  (Qui-si-sana),  Tan-
gerine, Fla.

Nature  Cure  Institute,  Riverside,
Cal.

Nature Cure Sanitarium, River-
side, Cal.

Nature Cure Sanitarium (J.
Frank), Detroit, Mich.

Natura  y  Vida  (Nature  and  Lite
Colony), Palm City, Cuba.


NATUROPATHIC SOCIETIES
AND ASSOCIATIONS

AMERICAN NATUROPATHIC
ASSOCIATION

An  International  Association  for
the  advancement  of  the  Interests
of  the  Drugless  Professions  and
Schools  of  Naturopathic  Therapeu-
tics ;  recognition  of  their  constitu-
tional and  moral  rights  and  legal
defense  thereof;  Medical  Freedom,
and  Education  of  the  Public  in
Natural  Healing  and  Rational  Life-
Conservation.
General  Offices:
110 E.  41st  St., New  York, N. Y.

Official Organ:

THE HERALD OF HEALTH

AND NATUROPATH

Officers

B.  Lust,  N.  D.,  M.  D.,  President
and Manager.

Wm.  F.  Havard,  N.  D.,  Vice-Pre-
sident.

Anton Deininger, N. D., D. C,
M. D., Secretary.

Wm. K. Bretow,  N. D., M. D.,
Treasurer.

Fred Hartwell, Nat'I Counsel,
Linker Block, La Crosse, Wis.

Honorary Presidents  :
H. Lindlahr, N. D., M. D., Presi
dent, Lindlahr  College  of  Nature
Cure, Chicago, 111.
F.  W.  Collins,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C,
Former Dean, New Jersey Col-
lege of Chiropractic, Newark,
N. J.

C.  Schultz,  N.  D.,  M.  D.,  Dean,
California  School  of  Naturo-
pathy, Los Angeles, Cal.

B.  J.  Palmer,  D.  C,  Ph.  C,  Presi-
dent, Palmer  School  of  Chiro-
practic, Davenport, la.

W.  Carver,  L.  L.  B.,  D.  C,  Pre-
sident, C^arver  College  of  Chiro-
practic, Oklahoma City, Okla.

W. H. Fusch. N. D., M. T. D.,
President, Kansas Institute of
Naturopathy, Topeka, Kans.

Vice-Presidents and State Repre-
sentatives
Arkansas — Thos.  J.  Allen,  N.  D.,

M. D., Eureka Springs.
California— G. W. Haas, N. D.,

Los Angeles.
Colorado— Julia  M.  C.  Wey,  N.  D.,

Denver.
Connecticut — W. H. Stippich,

N. D., M. D., Meriden.
District of Columbia — H. N. D.

Parker, N. D., Washington.
Florida— H. Dux, N. D., M. D.,

Jacksonville.
Idaho— C. G. Burt, N. D., D. C,

Boise.
Illinois — J. W. Wigelsworth,

N. D., Chicago.
Indiana— W. C. Ross, D. C, Fort

Wayne.
Iowa — S. Earl Daughenbaugh,

N. D., Anita.


Kansas — A. G. Sonntag, N. D.,

Palmer.
Kentucky — Sarah C. Warder,

N. D., Louisville.
Louisiana — L. Bourgonjon, N. D.,

M. D., New Orleans.
Massachusetts — Carry E. Stanley,

N. D., Winchendon.
.Michigan — J. W. Freas, N. D.,

Detroit.
Minnesota— H. A. Zettel, N. D.,

St. Paul.
Montana — J. G. Carlson, D. C,

Plentywood.
Nebraska — A. S. Nelson, N. D.,

Omaha.
Nevada — Ed. C. Galsgie, N. D.,

M. D., Reno.
New Jersey — L. Hubner, N. D.,

D. C, Union Hill.
New York — A. Deininger, N. D.,

D. C, New York.
North Carolina — A. C. Biggs,

N. D., Asheville.
North  Dakota— S. D. Reed, D. C,

Valley City.
Ohio— A. I. Cordon, N. D.,

Cleveland.
Oklahoma— E. C. Rice, D. P.,

Norman.
Oregon — Augustus  S. Vehr,  N. D.,

D. O., Portland.
Pennsylvania — V. Barth, N. D.,

Pittsburgh.
.South Carolina — ^R. G. Wilson,

N. D., D. M. T., Darlington.
South Dakota — J. J. Engbrecht,

N. D., Freeman.
Tennessee — E. Hoffmann, N. D.,

Chattanooga.
Texas — L. Dupre, N. D., Orange.
Utah — J. Neuburger, N. D.,

Logan.
Virginia— A. L. Pratt, N. D.,

Virginia Beach.
Washington— P. Rudolph, N. D.,

Seattle.
Wisconsin — J. Riese, N. D.,

La  Crosse.


CHIROPRACTIC AND DRUG-
LESS COLLEGES

.Amalgamated Chiropractors' As-
sociation of Western N. Y.

Christian  Dietetic  Society,  New
York, N. Y.

Citizens'  Medical  Rights  Alliance
of  California,  616  Homer  Laugh-
lin Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.

Empire  State  Association  of  Chi-
ropractors,  New  York,  N. Y.

International Alliance of Physi-
cians and Surgeons, New Y'ork,
N. V.

tnternational  League  for  Rational
Healing and Living.

tnternational Medical Freedom
Association, Kansas City, Mo.

Life  Culture  Society,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.

Mechano-Therapeutic  Corporation,
New Y'ork, N. Y.

National  Association  for  the  Study
and  Prevention  of  Tuberculosis,
New York, N. Y.

National Association of Drugless
Practitioners, N. A. D. P. Secre-
tary, 5831 Haverford Ave.,
Philadelphia, Pa.

National Association of Osteo-
therapeutic Practitioners, New
York,  N.  Y'.

National  Chiropractic  League,
1415  Broadway,  New  York,
N. Y.

New  York  State  Association  of
Mechano-Therapists,  New  York,
N. Y.


ITiilversnl  Natiiroi»a»tliic  Directory  and lliijors'  (;iiiil<-


7»»


!  Become  a  Doctor  of  Naturopathy  I


-which  Mill  qualify  you  at  tlie  same  time  a.s  Osteopath,  C'liiropraotor,  Hydropath,  Dieti-
tian, Eleetropiitli, Rleeliaiiotlierapist, IVeuropatli, ZoiietherapiMt, .Mental Soientlst, etc.


O)"


0)-<


K)4


KX


XATUROrWTIIY  iticludes  all  Drualess  Methods
of  Healing:  Water  Cure  iUpdrotherapu),  Mas-
sage, Swedish  Movements,  Chiropractic,  Mechano-
Therapy,  Klectropalhy,  (Jsteopathi),  Kneipp,
Lahniann,  Kuhne,  liilz  and  Schroth  Systems,
I'hylotherapij.  Phototherapy,  Heliotherapy,  San,
Light,  Air,  Diet,  Fasting,  Earlhpower,  Milk,
Work,  and  Rest  Cures;  Physical  Culture  and
Life  Conservation.  Every  student  receives  prac-
tical demonstrations,  attends  practical  lectures
and  does  practical  work  under  competent  in-
structors. Courses  for  laymen,  doctors  and
graduates  of  all  schools  of  healing.

Regular  courses  of  1,  '2.  '.i  and  'f  years  of  'J
months  each,  begin  first  Monday  of  October.
Preparatory  Home  Course,  preparatory  for  be-
ginners, by  studying  the  Naturopathic  Library.
Post-Graduate  Residence  Course  for  'i  weeks,
beginning  the  first  of  every  month,  ^100.  Special
Residence  Reginners  and  Post-Graduate  Courses
are  also  given  at  the  Florida  Winter  Rranch  of
the  Naturopathic  College  at  Tangerine,  Fla..  and
at  the  Summer  Rranch  at  "Yungborn,"  Rutler.
X.  .J.  Degree  Doctor  of  Naturopathy  or  Doctor
of  any  single  Rranch  of  Drugless-Therapeutics  awarded  those  who  graduate
successfutllJ- Send  25c.  for  Prospectus  and  Application  Rlank.


LUST, N. D., D. O., M. I
FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT
ESTABLISHED 189G


i


►o^


KO


^(O


i  AMERICAN SCHOOL OF NATUROPATHY  i

▼  BENEDICT  liUST,  Pf.  D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  >I.  D.,  Founder  and  President  "

i


(Incorporated  in Three  States)


O)'


110  EAST  41st  STREET


NEW  YORK,  N.  Y. I


Planning  a  Vacation . . .


is  a  good  deal  like  wooing  a  woman —
whichever  way  you  choose  the  other
_  would have been better.

Nature  is  mostly  woman.  That's  ^^  hy  Xaturists  are  so  slow  to  learn  wisdom — they  don't
allow  for  a  woman's  swift  reversal  of  opinion  and  lightning  change  of  heart.

Childlikeness  is  the  magic  word  of  admittance  to  the  bounty  of  Nature — and  the  largest  of
a  woman.  Simplicity,  spontaneity,  frankness,  trust,  freedom,  realness.  And  if  people  were  only
childlike  on  their  vacations,  they  wouldn't  have  such  a  hard  time  recovering  from  recuperation.
Is  there  a  sorrier-looking  spectacle  than  a  Coney  Island  crowd  huddling  back  at  midnight  Sunday
after  a restful day of  mad hulla-baloo?

There  aren't  any  "blue  Mondays"  at  our  place.  Blue  Mondays  come  to  match  red  Sundays.
But  all  our  days  are  as  Nature  made  them — the  color  of  the  sky  and  the  hills,  the  grass  and
flowers  and  fruits  and  radishes  and  human  faces.  Our  business  is  painting  the  dawn  and  mould-
ing smiles.  We  have  studied  a  long  while  and  learned  to  do  it  pretiy  well.  Bainbows  of  prom-
ise are  our  specialty — maybe  you'd  like  to  examine  one.  Life  is  r«:,i  endless  glory  of  realization
when  our  eyes  are opened  and  our  hearts  attuned. This is  too  much  poetry.

We  want  you  to  come  to  Butler  foi-  your  next  vacation — and  the  first  relentless  item  is  cost.
Here,  then,  is  what  we  offer  you:  A  camping  expedition,  a  tour  of  the  Alps,  a  sojourn  at  a
health  resort,  and  a  family  picnic-party  all  combined,  for  the  insignificant  sum  of  sixteen  dollars
a  week.  This  includes  everything  necessary  to  wholesome  living — food,  lodging,  amusements,
library  privileges,  bath  facilities,  advice  and  instruction  en  Natural  Healing.  If  you  bring  your
family,  the  expense  would  be  even  further  reduced.  Most  of  us  live  in  cottages — with  houses  for
the  very  aged  or  infirm.  If  we  haven't  any  Alps  we  have  the  next  thing  to  it — the  highest  moun-
tain in  New  Jersey  with  no  grander  view  in  a  dozen  states.  The  food  here  tastes  like  picnics,
but  the  cooking  makes  for  health — you  know  picnics  usually  end  in  .lamaica  ginger  and  calls
for  the  hot-water  bottle.  Fruits,  vegetables  and  cereals  grow  on  our  own  place  or  surrounding
farms,  with  nuts,  extras  and  goodies  from  the  store  make  a  table  that  looks  like  Thanksgiving
Day  seven  times  a  week.  The  air  is  delightfully  fragrant  with  dense  balsam  and  woodland
bloom — to  make  you  breathe  more  of  it  we've  laid  out  a  croquet  plat,  a  tennis  court,  a  bowling
alley,  and  beautiful  rambles  past  romantic  nooks  of  calm  retreat.  The  ground  is  so  high  and
dry  that  an  April  shower  runs  away  almost  before  you  can  walk  a  little  barefooted  in  the  wet
grass.  Yet  a  lavish  brook  within  a  stone's  throw  lazes  in  restful  pools  or  leaps  through  in-
spiring cascades.  There's  fishing  for  the  men  and  boating  for  the  women  just  far  enough  off  foi-
a  good  tramp  before  and  a  fine  appetite  after.  Diversions  of  all  kinds  arranged  by  the  guests
and  the  management.  Post  office  a  mile,  in  the  village  below.  Telephone  in  the  house.  Clothes
not  much  thought  of — comfort  here  is  second  to  nothing  but  modesty.  Freedom  to  be  and  e.v-
press  and  enjoy  one's  self  as  Nature  intended;  this  is  our  aim,  invitation  and  achievement.
Think  it  over  and  write  us.

Butler  is  about  an  hour's  ride  from  New  York,  via  New  York,  Susquehanna  and  Western
from Jersey  City,  Erie  Railroad  Depot. Twelve  trains  daily. Ask  for  schedule  and  prospectus.

BENEDICT  LUST,  "YUNGBORN"  RECREATION  RESORT, BUTLER,  N.  J.


800


Naturopathic  Colleges,  Schools  and  Institutions


Ohio  Nature  Physicians'  Associa-
tion, Secretary,  1088  Neil  Ave.,
Columbus, O.

Pennsylvania Drugless Therapeutic
Association, Secretary, 405
Magee Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.

Phi Alpha Mu Fraternity, 14
Washington St., East Orange,
N.  J.

Progressive Chiropractic Society,
1415 Broadway, New York,
N. Y.

Sunrise Club, Edwin C. Walker.
Secretary. 211 West 138th St.,
New York, N. Y.

Universal Chiropractors' Associa-
tion,  La Crosse, Wis., Dr. B.  J.
Palmer, Secretary, Davenport,
la.

Affiliated  With

Chiropractors'  Association  of  Penn-
sylvania.

Federated  Chiropractors  of  Cali-
fornia.

Indiana Chiropractors' Association.

Minnesota Chiropractors' Ass'n.

Nebraska Chiropractors' Ass'n.

North Dakota  Chiropractors'  Ass'n.

Ohio Chiropractors' Association,

South Dakota Chiropractors'  Ass'n.

State Chiropractics Society of
New Jersey.

Washington  Chiropractors'  Ass'n,
Washington, D. C.

Wisconsin Chiropractors' Ass'n.

NATUROPATHIC COLLEGES
AND INSTITUTIONS

American  Strength  and  Body  Build-
ing Institute, New York, N. Y.

American  School  of  Naturopathy,
110  East  41st  St.,  New  York,
N.  Y.

American  School  of  Naturopathy
(Yungborn), Butler, N. J.

American  School  of  Naturopathy
(Qui-si-sana). Tangerine, Fla.

American  School  of  Naturopathy,
Palm City, Cuba.

Biopathic Institute, Chicago, III.

Blumer  College  of  Natureopathy,
Hartford, Conn.

Buddenberg's  Hygienic  Institute,
Cincinnati, O.

Cummins',  Dr.,  College  of  Naturo-
pathy, 120  N.  10th  St.,  E.,  Cedar
Rapids, la.

Flint Collcpfe. Cleveland, Ohio.

International  Naturopathic  Alli-
ance, 110  East  41st  St.,  New
York,  N. Y.. U.  S.  A.

La  Crosse  Naturopathic  Jungborn,
La Crosse, Wis.

Lindlahr  Health  Resort,
Elmhurst, 111.

Lindlahr  Sanitarium,  525  S.  Ash
land Boulevard. Chicago. III.

National  Hospital  and  Sanitarium.
Chicago. 111.

National Society  of Naturopaths.
Hartford. Conn.

Naturopathic  College  and  Sanita-
rium of  California,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.

Naturopathic  Institute,  Youngs-
town, O.

Naturopathic Sanitarium,
Newark.  N.  J.

Ohio College of Naturopathy,
Youngstown, O.

Page  System  of  Natural  Treatment.
Boston.  Mass.

Rest  Home,  The,  Virginia  Beach,
Va.

Schultz, Dr. Carl, Nature Cure.
1319 S. Grand Ave., Los
Angeles, Cal.

Sonntag's  Naturopathic  Hospital
and .Sanitarium, Fowler. Kans.


Staads,  Dr.  S.  W.,  Hillside  Sani-
tarium, Siou.x City, Okla.

Uez,  Gustav,  Naturopathic  Insti-
tute, West Hoboken, N. J.

Wilson  Educational  System,  Port-
land, Ore.

Yungborn  Naturopathic  Sanita-
rium, Butler, N. J.


NEUROPATHY

American College of Neuropathy,
Philadelphia, Pa.

"Bright Side" Naturopathic Sani-
tarium, Teneyck, N. J.

Chicago College of Neuropathy,
Chicago, III.

Davis College of Neuropathy,
Los Angeles, Cal.

Dr. Lust's College of Neuropathy,
110  E.  41st  St.,  New  York,  N.  \.


NURSES'  TRAINING  SCHOOL

Chautauqua  School  for  Nurses,

Jamestown, N. Y.
Illinois  Post  Graduate  and  Training

School for Nurses, 544 Garfield

Ave., Chicago, 111.


OSTEOPATHY

American  School  of  Naturopathy
(Department  of  Osteopathy),  110
East  41st  St., New York, N. Y.

American School of Osteopathy,
Kirksville, Mo.

Eclectic  Osteopathic  Institute,
110  W.  90th  St.,  New  York,
N. Y.

Essex  County  Osteopathic  Asso-
ciation,  Newark, N. J.

International  College  of  Osteopathy,
Elgin, 111.

Metropolitan  College  of  Osteopathy
and  Spondylotherapy  (Correspon-
dence Course). Chicago. 111.

National Eclectic Institute,
Lincoln Arcade Bldg., New
York, N. Y.

New  York  Osteopathic  Clinic,  141
E.  32nd  St.,  New  York,  N. Y.

New  York  State  Society  of  Osteo-
Therapeutics, New York, N. Y.

Philadelphia  College  and  Infirmary
of Osteopathy, Philadelphia, Pa.

Vetus  Academia,  Old  Physio-ther-
apy, Osteo-therapeutics  and  Ec-
lectic College.  110  W.  90th  St.,
New York, N. Y.

Vetus  Academia,  Osteo-therapeutic,
120  Palisade  Ave.,  West  Hobo-
ken. N. J.


PHRENOLOGY

American Institute of Phrenology,
1358  Broadway.  New  York,  N.  Y.

Fowler. Jessie Allen, Phrenologist,
1358  Broadway,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Tope's School of Phrenology,
Bowerstown, O.


PHYSICAL CULTURE

American  College  of  Physical  Edu-
cation, Chicago,  111.

Augusta  Sanitarium,  The,  Cincin-
nati, O.

Cincinnati  Sanitarium,  The,  Cin-
cinnati, O.

Grandview  Sanitarium,  Cincinnati,
O.

Neal  Institute  Co.,  The,  Cincin-
nati, O.


Physical Culture Courses, Atlantic
City, N.  J.

Rockville  Sanitarium, Indian  View,
O.

Sargent School for Physical Edu-
cation, Cambridge,  Mass.

Snell's Private Sanitarium, Cin-
cinnati, O.

I'nited  Schools  of  Physical  Culture,
The, Chicago, 111.


PHYSICAL THERAPEUTICS,

MECHANO-THERAPY

AND MASSAGE

Battle  Creek  Methods  (Massage),
Pittsburgh, Pa.

Eclectic  School  of  Physio-Therapeu-
tics, Chicago, 111.

McDonald  Sanitarium  (Massage),
Central Valley, N. Y.

New  \ork  School  of  Massage  and
Physiologic  Therapeutics,  New
York.  N. Y.

Old  Physio-Medical  College,  Inc.,
Charleston, W.  Va.

Vetus Academia, Old Physio-thera-
py, Osteo-therapeutics and Chi-
ropractic College of New York,
110  W.  90th  St.,  New  York,
N. Y.


POST GRADUATE SCHOOLS
NATUROPATHIC

American  School  of  Naturopathy,
Butler, N. J.

American  School  of  Naturopathy,
Tangerine, Fla.

Havard  Post  Graduate  Courses.
American  Naturopathic  Associa-
tion, 110  East  41st  St.,  New
York, N. Y.

Lindlahr  College  of  Nature  Cure,
525  So.  Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago,
HI.

SANATARIA

Battle  Creek  Sanitarium,

Battle  Creek. Mich.
Bay  Ridge Sanitarium, Inc.,

Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Bedford Sanitarium, Brooklyn,

N. Y.
Bella  Tubercular Sanitarium,

Tennessee  City.  Tenn.
Berkshire  Hill  Sanitarium,

North  Adams. Mass.
Bethesda Sanitarium, Brooklyn,

N. Y.
Biggs' Sanitarium,  Asheville, N. C.
Blechschmidt's Naturopathic Sani-
tarium,  North Bergen, N. J.
Broughton's .Sanitarium,

Rockford. 111.
Brown's  Mills  Sanitarium.

Mills-in-the-Pines, N. J.
Burke Corporation (Sanitarium),

Burke. Cal.
Butler. N. J., Naturopathic Sani-
tarium.
Cancer  Sanitarium,  Jamaica. L. I.,

N. Y.
Channing  Sanitarium,

Brookline. Mass.
Chiropractic Sanitarium.

West New York. N. J.
Crane Sanitarium. Area, III.
Damrau. Emma, Sanitarium,

Brooklyn, N. ^'.
Diamond Lake  Sanitarium,

Are,!. 111.
Dr. Bond's House, (Sanitarium),

Yonkers-on-Hudson. N. Y.
Dr. Combes' Sanitarium, Corona,

L. I.,  N.  Y.
Dr. Harrison's Sanitarium,

Whitestone, N. Y.


Naluropalhic  Colleges,  Schools  and  Inslilufions


801


Dr. D. Evan Lawler's Sanitarium,

Omaha, Nebr.
Dr. Sonntag's Naturopathic

Hospital and Sanitarium,

Fowler, Kans.
Ferri Sanitarium, Chicago, 111.
Fisk Hospital, Orlando, Fla.
German  Sanitarium,

1ms  Angeles, Cal.
filendale Sanitarium, Glendale,

Cal.
(iray Gables Sanitarium,

Mount Clemens, Mich.
Halsohem-by-the-Sea,

Coronado,  Cal.
Hamilton Sanitariiun, Brooklyn,

N. Y.
Homes Sanitarium for Hebrew

Children, Seaside, Brooklyn,

N.  Y.
Interpines, The, Goshen, N. Y.
Kindred's Sanitarium, Astoria,

L. I., N. Y.
La  Crosse  Naturopathic  Sanitarium,

La Crosse,  Wis.
Lakeland Sanitarium,

Lakeland, Fla.
Lakeview Sanitarium, Troy, N
Lindlahr Sanitarium, Chicago,
Lindlahr Sanitarium, Elmhurst,

111.
Long Beach Sanitarium,

Long Beach, Cal.
Marshall Sanitarium, Troy, N.
McDonald Sanitarium, Central

Valley, N. Y.
McMichael's Sanitarium,

Buffalo, N. Y.


Y.

111.


Y.


Mclba Sanitarium, Brooklyn,
N.  Y.

Millwood Sanitarium, Brooklyn,
N. Y.

Millet  Tuberculosis  Sanitarium,
East Bridgeport, Mass.

Muncie Sanitarium, Brooklyn,
N. Y.

Naturopathic Hospital, Butler,
N.,J.

Naturopathic Hospital and Sanita-
rium, Fowler, Kans.

Naturopathic Sanitarium and Insti-
tute, Los Angeles, Cal.

Newark Sanitarium-Hospital,
Newark, N. J.

Newman Sanitarium, East New
York Section, Brooklyn,  N. Y.

New England Sanitarium,
Melrose,  Mass.

Normyl Association, New York,
N. Y.

Overlook, Sanitarium, New Wil-
mington, Pa.


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


Petty & Wallace Sanitarium,
Memphis, Tenn.

Porter Sanitarium, Burnet, Cal.

Qui-Si-Sana,  Sanitarium  for  Nature
and Life, Tangerine, Fla.

Ridgewood Sanitarium, Brooklyn,
N. Y.

River Crest Sanitarium,
Astoria, L. I., N. Y.

Sacred Heart Sanitarium,
Milwaukee,  Wis.

Sahler Sanitarium, Dr. C. O.,
Kingston-on-Hudson, N. Y.

Sanitarium for Hebrew Children,
Seaside,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Saratoga Springs Medical Sanita-
rium, Saratoga  Springs, N. Y.

Schwei-Kert Drugless Sanitarium,
The, Spotwood, N. J.

Sharon Sanitarium, Sharon, Pa.

Skene  Sanitarium,  Brooklyn, N. Y.

St. Helena Sanitarium, St. Helena,
Cal.

Still-Hildreth Osteopathic Sanita-
rium,  Macon, Miss.

Strueh's Sanitarium,
McHenry, 111.  _

Swedish Sanitarium, New Castle,
Pa.

Town's Sanitarium, New York,
N.  Y.

Walter  Sanitarium,  The,
Walters  Park, Pa.

Washington Sanitarium, Washing-
ton, D. C.

West Hill Sanitarium,
New  York,  N.  Y.

Winter's  Sanitarium, Dr.,
Cornwall, N. Y.


MONTGOMERY  IRVING  INSTITUTE
OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION

PHYSIOLOGIC RE-EDUCATIOiV

Of  the

NERVOUS, CIRCULATORY  AND MUSCULAR SYSTEMS.

SCIENTIFIC  EXERCISES WITH AND WITHOUT  APPARATUS

OUTDOOR— GYMNASIA— INDOOR
HAND  BALL  COURTS

, ELECTRIC  CABINET,  TUB  AND  SHOWER  BATHS— EXPERT  MASSEURS,

VIBRATORY  AND  ELECTRICAL  EXERCISERS

ELABORATE  REDUCING  EQUIPMENT


k#i


I 200  FIFTH  AVENUE— At  Broadway  and  Twenty-third  Street

<J  SUITE 1502 — 1503 — 1504 — 1505  FIFTH AVENUE BUILDING

iA  Telephone 125  Grainercy


80::


ViilverMiiI Xuturui>n(lilc Directory :iiid BuyerN* Guide


RECREATION  RESORT
for  NATURE  AND  LIFE


DR.  B.  LUST'S

Florida  "Yungborn"


4 OD  Atlantic  Coast  Line  QUl-M-bAN  A^  I  ANuLKlNL, T  L A. on  Seaboard  Air  Line


*


Natural  Life  and  Rational  Cure Health  Home  for  Dietetic-Physical-  f

Atmospheric  Regeneration  Treatment. Fount  of  Youth,  and  Neiv  Life  %

School for those in need of Cure and Rest, for the ph^sicall^  %

and  spiritually  Tveaf(ened,  for  those  overtporked,  and  for  the  convalescent.  $

OPEN  ALL  THE  YEAR  I


«>


^


(>niii(jv  (iihI  J'lilin  Irees  in  the  Florida  "Yungborn'


TX  the  vicinity  of  the  most  beautiful
lakes  in  I-lorida,  and  country  town  of
Mount  Dora,  there  spreads,  in  incom-
parably ideal  beauty,  surrounded  by
majestic  pine  forests,  orchards  and
parks,  the  Health  Resort  of  YUNG-
BORN (born  young  again),  "QUISISANA"
(place  where  you  get  Health).  The  estab-
lishment was  called  Yungborn  by  reason
of  the  rejuvenating  and  strength-endowing
effects  of  its  Regeneration  Cures;  and,  in-
deed, these  extensively  known  Yungborn-
Regeneration  Cures  are  not  only  health-
restoring,  but  also  Rejuvenating  and
Strength-giving  Cures.  Already  during,
and  particularly  after  the  treatments  are
completed,  the  strength  and  vitality,  for-
merly low  and  broken,  rise  with  astonish-
ing "assurance.  Vital  energy  and  vital
strength  return;  increased  nerve-elasticity
and  an  undreamed-of  sensation  of  power-
ful health  make  themselves  felt,  and  with
the  new  creative  poN\cr,  there  asserts  it-
self a  feeling  of  spiritual  and  physical
rejuvenation  and  unlimited  elliciency  in
the  human system.

Yunst>orn  ReKcneration  Ciire.s — The  dietetical  Regeneration  Cures  which  are  applied  in
their  particular  gradations  as  required  for  the  various  diseases  and  conditions  of  weakness,
are  fully  adapted  to  the  case  in  hand  and  modifled  correspondingly.

The  most  peculiar  and  most  intense  forms  of  these  Cures  are  the  Schroth  Treatment,  so
called  after  its  founder,  the  genial  Johann  Schroth,  and  the  combined  Diet,  Light-Air  and
Wahr  Treatments  in  \Ahich  the  experiences  of  Kuline,  Kneipp,  Riclcli.  Lahmann.  Ehret,
Just,  Engelhard! .  etc.,  are  resorted  to  individually.  Furthermore,  Fruit  Cures,  Herb  Cures
Vegetal  and  Mixed  Diet,  l-"asting,  Diet  Cures  in  combination  with  Fruit  Diets,  and  so  forth,
are  employed. Diet  requires  adapted  physical  treatment,  such  as  packings,  bandaging,  baths  and

gushes  of  various  descriptions,  barefoot
walking,  light  sun  and  air  baths,  steam,
electricity,  massaging,  and  Osteopathy,
Chiropractic,  Mechanotherapy,  Neuropathy,
etc.  Special  attention  is  given  to  the  de-
velopment of  humid  warmth  treatment —
one  of  the  most  important  curative  factors.

Aid in Obsolete, Inveterate Cases — The

Yungborn  Regeneration  Cures  will  help
even  in  the  most  deep-seated  superannu-
ated conditions  of  sutfering  and  weak-
ness, where  other  cures  failed,  except  in
cases  of  organic  new  growth  and  destruc-
tions Hike  cancel-  and  consumption)  or
marasmus.  It  need  hardly  be  mentioned
that  not  only  those  requiring  cure,  but
also  those  in  need  of  rest — the  weakened
and  convalescing — derive  the  best  possible
benefits  of  lasting  effect  from  a  sojourn  at
Boating  on  beautiful  Lake  Ola  the  Yungborn — home of  health.


1


qo|q  ;

OzgCi

! O  «J


S04


Universal .\:if iiro|»:i(lii<- l)ir«T(orv and Ilii.vtT.s' (iiiiilo


*


^


■■■3 '-^ x9C  ]  itf^

MV

f~ '^'  fffiir  ■

^ ^S

< |fci^4?^^g3  'ME^'

wBm^p  uJkjJiM^JB

.1  cozy  corner  in  the  Librunj


Pall, SprliiK ami AVInter Cures — We

\\isli  to  call  tlu-  rciulci's  attention  par-
ticularly lo  llic  lad  that  the  \unghorn  is
splcndidh/  sniled  for  a  slat/  in  winter
lime.  Not  only  the  Hcgcncration,  hut  also
the  SIrengthcninK  Cures  are  Innnensely
successful  in  winter.  In  addition,  the
mild,  delightful  forest  and  niuunlain  air,
so  rich  in  ozone  and  oxygen,  is  of  extra-
ordinary vivifying,  refreshing  and  stienglh-
ening  effect  upon  the  entiii'  organism
(wliich  is  true  of  every  season  of  tfie  yeat)-

ViinKborii's  Forest  Cliarnt — A  promi-
nent %\riter  likened  Yunghorn  to  a  legend
of  the  forest  wilh  an  unspeakably  wond-
rous charm  which  draws  every  visitor
irresistibly  into  its  embrace.  A  dreamlike
panorama  of  Lake  Ola  and  the  Hill-
framed  valley  and  numerous  other  en-
chanting views  make  every  visitor's  heart
rejoice  with  gladness.  Large  Air  and  Sun
Baths  and  charmingly  situated  ,1  ir  Huts  close  to  the  forest,  playgrounds  and  recreation  lawns
for  the  children  and  youth,  bring  a  harmonious  note  of  change  into  this  picture  of  peaceful
retreat.  For  those  inclined  to  exhilarating  walks,  the  nearby  and  farther  surroundings  offer
numerous  interesting  points  of  excursion  and  sights  of  the  most  varied  character.
Stillness  of  the  Forest — In  one  minute's  time,  you  find  yourself  in  forest's  deepest
peace.  Directly  adjoining  the  orchards  and  parks,  spread  the  woods  with  their  guiet  resting
places  and  panoramic  view-points.  All  around  you  reigns  a  wonderful  tranquillity.  You  see
the  pine-woods  stretch  out  for  miles  and  miles,  and  you  can  stroll  through  them  in  every
direction  on  dry,  convenient  trails.

Elevation  — 350 feet  above sea level ; the surrounding  heights rise up to over 400 feet.
Climate — The climate is extremely mild. The pure, clear air, free from dust and rich in
oxygen,  acts in  a soothing  and strengthening  manner  upon  the  nervous system, furthering  the
blood  circulation,  and  creating,  as  a result,  a  vital condition  of  health.

The  Home  in  Ynnsborn — A  number  of  houses  and  villas  stand  ready  to  receive  the  guests
arriving  from  many  directions,  even  from  abroad.  Very  attractive  drawing-room  and  parlor,
equipped  cosily  in  the  most  modern  fashion,  make  a  sojourn  particularly  pleasant.  It  is  a
peculiarity  of  Yungborn  that  everybody  feels  himself  at  home  and  at  ease  very  quickly,  and
this  is  enhanced  constantly  and  extraordinarily  by  the  unconstrained  and  even  intimate  tone
which  quickly  develops  among  all  the  members  of  the  Yungborn  family,  thus  making  life  in
Yungborn  doubly  pleasant  and  greatly  beneficial  to  the  general  visitor.  It  may  be  stated  here,
tliough,  that  Y'ungborn  is  not  a  place  of  luxury,  but  a  strictly  curative  resort,  with  the  sole
purpose  of  really  improving  health  and  assuring  certain  success  in  life,  by  means  of  the  cures
and  treatments  applied  at  this  Resort.

Yungborn  Regeneration  Cures  Have  Stood  the  Test — The  uniqueness  of  our  Regenera-)
tion  Process  ami  its  extremely  manifold  capability  of  modification  made  it  possible  for  us  to
use  it  with  success  for  all  sicknesses  and  conditions of  weakness.  I

During  the  time  that  the  Y'ungborn  has  been  in  existence,  patients  suffering  from  the  fol-
lowing  diseases and conditions have received treatment and have, as a result, been cured:

Diseases  of  the  digestive  organs:  Inflammation  of  stomach  and  intestines,  catarrh  of
mucous  membranes,  dysentery,  ptomain  poisoning,  typhoid  fever,  appendicitis,  colitis,  enteritis,
hemorrhoids (piles),  ulceration  of  stomach  and  intestines.

Diseases  of  the  lungs,  respiratory  organs,  nose  and  throat:  Rhinitis,  croup,  hayfever,
whooping  cough,  tonsilitis  and  adenoids  (without  surgery),  bronchitis,  pneumonia,  asthma
and  tuberculosis.

Diseases  of  the  heart  and  circulation:  Valvular  heait  disease,  endocarditis,  pericarditis,
enlargement  of  heart,  dilation  and  fatty  degeneration  of  heart,  dropsy,  acites,  lymphatic
stasis,  hardening  of  arteries (arterio-sclerosis).

Diseases  of  the  Blood:  Scrofula,  hereditary  disease  taints,  uric  acid  diathesis,  vaccine
and serum  pollution..

Disorders  of  metabolism  resulting  in
gout,  rheumatism,  arthritis,  obesity,  mal-
nutrition, anemia,  diabetis,  bright's  dis-
ease and other conditions.

Skin  diseases:  Acne,  eczema,  tetters,
boils, carbuncles.

Nervous  disorders:  Neurasthenia,  and
other  diseases  coming  from  sexual  weak-
ness, insomnia,  St.  Vitu^'  Dance,  epilepsy,
failing  memory  and  brain  functions,  im-
potence, sterility,  palsies,  paralysis  and
locomotor-ataxia,  as  well  as  the  conse-
quences of  poisoning  from  drugs — mer-
cury, arsenic,  lead,  io(iine,  vaccine,  serums,
etc.  In  fact,  we  have  treated  all  ail-
ments of  mankind,  except  those  of  a
contagious or infectious character.

Many  a  man  who  had  already  given  up
all  hope  and  came  to  Yungborn  as  to  a  last
anchor  of  emergency,  regained  complete
health  and  strength,  and  is  to-day  happy,
active  and  efficient  in  every  respect.  Many
a  husband  who  for  various  reasons  was
lacking  his  best  vital  powers,  has  become
a  happy  father  through  our  regeneration
cure.  Many  a  wife,  formerly  unhappy — if
not despairing — is now a liappy mother.


Light  and  Air  Ilnl  for  nnlili


4>^4>^4>^»l>2><?*(JK?K|t(Sjt*JfJ««>(f><?>ft.H|K|Ht><?>(|Hjt<J,.


Univerisnl Xadiroitiithic  Diroetory  and  Buyers'  Guide


805


All  those  who  sufTer  from  any  of  the
above-mentioned  illnesses  or  ■weaknesses
may  come  to  Yungborn  with  full  con-
fidence, not  only  that  they  will  be  treated
carefully,  conscientiously,  and  with  sure
success,  but  they  will  find  here  also  a
complete  undei-standing  and  true  com-
passion  in the most  extreme sense.

Rates — The  costs  of  cure  and  board  are
very  modeiate,  and  depend  on  the  room
and  the  treatment.  I'.oard  for  guests,
^^ith  or  without  general  out-door  treat-
ment, light  and  air  park  use,  .s2.").00  per
week,  or  .'*;1(I().00  per  month  up;  with  full
individual  treatment,  •'i;.'5.').flO  per  week,
or  .$12.5.00  per  month  up.  Reception
and first examination, .t;r).0() up.

Rates  for  Sunday  guests:  Sunday
dinner  with  light-air  and  swimming
baths  privilege,  itsl.25.  Visitors,  $1.00
per  day,  with  room  or  cottage,  board,
and  light  and  air  bath  park  privilege.
Life  with  Nature  at  Tangerine,  Tla.,  has
its compensations.


Side  view  of  Florida  "Yiingborn"  Resort


Communication — From  New  York  by  Atlantic  Coast  Line  Railroad.  (New  York  City  ticket
oflice,  corner  of  Twenty-ninth  Street  and  Broadway.)  Buy  ticket  to  Mount  Dora,  Florida
and  leave  New  York,  Pennsylvania  Station  9:15  A.M.;  change  at  Sanford,  Florida,  5-04  P  m'
next  day  for  Mount  Dora.  Due  in  Mount  Dora  at  6:33  P.M.  Auto  can  be  had  at  or  near
depot,  or  our  automobile  will  meet  you,  if  notification  is  given  us  a  day  or  two  ahead,  by
mail.  By  Seabord  Air  Line  Railroad.  (New  York  City  ticket  office,  1184  Broadway,  near
Twenty-eighth  Street.)  Buy  ticket  for  Zellwood,  Florida,  and  leave  on  any  suitable  train  for
Jacksonville,  Florida.  Leave  Jacksonville  9:30  A.M.;  change  at  Wildwood  2:05  P.M.,  and
arrive  at  Zellwood  3:,")t  P.  M.  Automobile  for  Tangerine  can  be  had  at  depot,  or  our  auto-
mobile will  meet  you,  if  notification  is  given  us  a  day  or  two  ahead,  by  letter,  or  on  the  same
day  by  telegram  from  Jacksonville  or  Ocala,  en  route.  There  are  many  other  trains
for  Mount  Dora  or  Zellwood,  but  these  given  above  are  the  only  two  that  are  usually  on  time,

and are besides, comfortable for tourists and guests from the North. By Automobile Good

Road  from  Ocala,  Tavares,  Leesburg,  Eustis,  St.  Augustine,  Palatka,  Daytona,  De  Land  and
Sanford,  via  Mount  Dora.  From  St.  Petersburg,  Tampa,  Lakeland,  Dade  City  and  other  places
south  via  Orlando  and  Zellwood.  By  Boat — via  Clyde  Line  to  Sanford;  tben  by  Atlantic  Coast
Line  to  Mount  Dora.  Motor  and  other  pleasure  boats  traveling  over  the  lakes  will  stop  at
Tangerine  landing  on  Lake  Eau  Claire.


^


BENEDICT  LUST,  N.D.,M.D.

Proprietor

TANGERINE

Orange  County,  Fla.

Telegraph and Telephone Address: Dr. B.
Lust, Tangerine, Fla.. via Zellwood. —
Express and freight, care of Dr. B.
Lust, Zellwood, Fla. — Detailed in-
formation on  all  questions ;  also  in
cases of sickness; the shortest
traveling  routes and  other  ad-
vice  will be  gladly  given by
the management at all
times. — Prospectus and
booklet. "Where to
Find Health." will
be mailed for 5c.
for postage.
Previous Xotification Requested.


NKW YORK CITY ADDRF.SS  :

BENEDICT  LUST'S  NATUROPATHIC  CENTRE
110 EAST FORTY. FIRST STREET

Telephone, 5796 Mirray Hill


suiiMER  address:

BENEDICT  LUST,  N.D.,  D.O.,  D.C.,  M.D.
EASTERN  YUNGBORN,  BUTLER.  N.  J.

Telephone, 31R, Butler, N. J.


806  UniverMul Xaturopnthic Directory  iind Buyers' Guide


Lindlahr  Nature  Cure  Institutes

Lindlahr  Health  Resort  Lindlahr  Health  Home,

Elmhurst,  Illinois  Chicago,  Hlinois


To  the  Drugless  Physician,

Dear  Doctor:  *■

Minimize  Your  Percentage  of  Failures
by  placing  your  chronic  cases  in  a  health-giving  environment  that
provides  every  item  necessary  to  the  patient's  welfare.

Monotony  Breeds  Disease

A  life  lime  in  the  same  place,  with  the  same  associations,  eating  the
same  kinds  of  food  day  after  day,  subject  to  the  same  habits,  spells
d-i-s-e-a-s-e.

Change  Starts  the  Cure
Change  of  habits,  change  of  scene,  change  of  climate,  change  of
food,  change  of  association  are  absolute  essentials  to  effect  a  speedy
recovery.

The  Lindlahr  Health  Institutes,
one  in  Chicago  and  one  in  the  country,  provide  the  ideal  environ-
ment for  the  -health-seeker.  Fresh  air,  sunlight,  regular  hours,
systematic  exercise,  pure  food,  and  treatment  made  up  of  various
combinations  of  hydrotherapy,  massage,  Swedish  movements,  Chiro-
practic, Osteopathy,  Neuropathy,  Naprapathy,  Spondylotherapy,  in
fact,  every^  up-to-date  method  is  employed  to  enhance  the  Process
of  Cure.

Co-operation

between  the  intiividual  practitioners  and  an  institution  which
adheres  strictly  to  the  principles  of  natural  healing  will  build  a
stronghold  for  your  profession  which  none  can  assail.  A  profession
cannot  long  exist  unless  it  has  behind  it  the  proper  representative
institution.  Count  over  how  many  cases  you  could  not  hold  because
the  home  did  not  provide  the  needed  facilities  and  right  environ-
ment to  induce  a  cure.  How  many  of  these  patients  have  drifted
away  from  drugless  treatment  to  end  in  a  medical  institute  or  on
the  operating  table?  They  would  still  be  your  friends  and  count  you
their  benefactor  had  you  sent  them  in  time  to  a  health  resort  that
provides  a  curative  environment,  wliere  your  inethods  of  treatment
are  strietlv  followed.


The  Lindlahr  Health  Resort  and  the  Health  Home ^^d  ^o''h.Xi?e

your difTlcuIf chronic cases. The appreciation of  this is shown in the fact that Drugless
Physicians  all  over  tlie  United  States  and Canada  are  patronizing  these  Institutions.

0--„  /^ro/r/  id  f  m '**  *"  establish  Drugless  Healing  on  a  sound  basis,  to  give  health  to
"' Vjrctlc  f\lTn humanity  and  to  help  you  gain  the  recognition  as  a  physician  which
you  so  rightly  deserve.


Write  today  for  our  proposition  to  Drugless  Physicians  and  for  our  free  booklets

LINDLAHR NATURE CURE INSTITUTES

OFFICE,  525  SOUTH  ASHLAND  BOULEVARD  CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS


iWdluropaUiic  Colleges,  Schools  and  Institutions


807


NATUROPATHIC COLLEGES,  SCHOOLS,
:: INSTITUTIONS  AND  SANITARIA ::


Aid to Xature Co., Oakcs, \. D.
Allen's (Miss) Home for private

patients, 26 W. 61st St., New

Vork, N. Y.
American Academy of Chiropractic

Research, New York, N. V.
American Chiropractic Association,

Aurora, Mo.
American Institution of Chiro-
practic, Waynesboro, Pa.
American College  of  Neuropathy,

New ^'ork. N. Y.
American College  of Physical Edu-
cation, Chicago, 111.
American Institute of Mentalism,

Los Angeles, Cal.
American Institute of Phrenology.

New Vork, N. V.
American Naturopathic Association

(International),  New  York,  N.  ^
American School of Iridology,

Rockford, 111.
American School of Naturopathy,

"Yvmgborn,"  Butler,  N.  J.
American  School  of  Naturopathy,

New York, N. Y.
American  School  of  Naturoyjathy,

Tangerine, Fla.
American  School  of  Naturopathy,

Palm City, Cuba.
American School of Naturopathy.

Inc., Denver, Colo.
American  Strength  and  Body-Build

ing  Institute,  New  York,  N. ^'.
American University (Chiropractii

Correspondence), Chicago, 111.
Astro-Medical  School,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Audubon Sanitarium, 8 St. Nicho

las Place, New York, N. Y.
Battle Creek Sanitariiuii,

Battle Creek, Mich.
Bella  Tubercular  Sanitarium.

Tennessee City, Tenn.
Berkshire Hill Sanitarium,

.Vorth  Adams,  Mass.
Beuhl's Institution and Healtl

Foods, Los Angeles, Cal.
Biggs' Sanitarium,  Asheville, N. C
Bimini Hot Springs and Healt!

Resort, Los Angeles, Cal.
Biopathic Institute, Chicago. 111.
Blechschmidt's Naturopathic Sani

tarium. North Bergen, N. J.
Blumer College of Naturop.Ttiiy,

Hartford, Conn.
Bond's House Sanitarium,

'S'onkers-on-Hudson, N. ^".
Boyce Sanitarium, 21 \\'. 121st

St., New  York, N. Y.
Braun School of Health Culture.

Coiirtenay, Fla.
Brinkler's  Diet Institute,

Los Angeles, Cal.
British Society of Naturopaths,

Section of the Internationa

Naturopathic Alliance, Dr. J

Allen Pattreiouex. Official Eng

lish Representative. Therapeutit

Institute, King's Road, Sedgle;

Park, Manchester. England.
Broberg's Naturopathic Institute,

45 W. 34th St., New York,

N. Y.
Bronx Sanitarium, 1259 \Vashing

ton Ave., New York, N. ^'.
Broughton's Sanitarium.

Rockford,  111.
Brown (Bertha) School, 220 East

S7.r<\ St  , New York, N. Y.
Brown's Mills Sanitarium, Mills-in-

the- Pines, N. J.
Brunor's Sanitarium. ,12S W. 137th

St., New York, N. Y.


Buddeubcrg System, Jackson JUdg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Burke Corporation (Sanitarium),

Burke, Cal.
California Chiropractic College,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Canadian College  of  Chiropractic,

Hamilton, Ont., Can.
Carver College of Chiropractic,

Oklahoma  City, Okla.
Carver College of Chiropractic,

Wicliita,  Kans.
(."banning  Sanitarium,

Brookiine, Mass.
Chautauqua  School for  Nursing,

Jamestown, N. \'.
Chicago  College  of  Naprapathy,

Chicago, III.
Cliicago College of Neuropathy,

Chicago, 111.
Chiropractic College, The,

.San  Antonio,  Tex.
Chiropractic College, Wichita,

Kans.
Chiropractic Sanitarium.

400 16th St., West New York,

N. J.
Christian School of Applied Die-
tetics,  New Vork, N. Y.
Clinton Institute, Newark, X. J.
College  of  Fine Forces,

San Francisco, Cal.
College of Neurology and Electro

Therapeutics, Salem, Ore.
College of Physiological Therapeu-
tics, Chicago, 111.
Columbia College of Chiropractic,

Douglas  Ave., Elgin, 111.
Conrad, Dr. C, Sanitarium, 110

W. 90th  St., New York, N. Y.
Conroy, Mrs. W. N., Sanitarium.

265 Edgecombe Ave., Bronx.

N. Y.
Cornwall Sanitarium Co., 232 W.

22nd St., New York, N. Y.
Cummings', Dr., Norfolk Hydro-
Sanitarium, Norfolk, \'a.
Cummins', Dr., Cpllege of Naturo-
pathy, Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Czukor School of Curative Gym-
nastics, New York, N. Y.
Darling & Baker's Chiropractic

College, Wichita, Kans.
Davenport College of Chiropractic.

Cedar  Rapids,  la.
Davenport College of Chiropractic.

Davenport, la.
Davis College of Neuropathy,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Denver Sanitarium, J. C. R., 230

Grand St.. New York, N. Y.
Deutsches  Electro-Medical  Institute.

New York, N. Y.
Diamond Lake Sanitariiim,

Area, 111.
Duggan Health Institute,

Atlantic  City, N.  J.
Duggan Health Institute,

Cokimbus, S. C.
Eclectic Osteopathic Institute,

New ^'ork, N. Y.
Eclectic  School  of  Physio-Therapeu-
tics, 1.5.53 West Madison St.,

Chicago, 111.
Empire School of  Chiropractic,

New York, N. Y.
Ferri Sanitarium, 15 N. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Ferri Sanitarium, Wheaton, III.
Kisk Hospital, Orlando, Fla.
Flint College, Cleveland, Ohio.
Florida Yungborn, The

(Qui-si-sana),  Tangerine,  Fla.


•  icruiaii Sanitarium,

I^os  Angeles, Cal.
(iraham, K. L., Sanitarium, 1056

Lexington Ave., New York,

N. Y.
(irambow Health Studio,

Hempstead, L. I., N. Y.
Gray Cables Sanitarium,

Moinit Clemens, Mich.
("Pressman, Dr. H., Naturopathic

Home, Atlantic City, N. J.
Halsohtm-by-the-Sea,

Coronado, Cal.
Harlem Health Institute,

New York, N. Y.
Harlem Hydriatic Institute, The,

New Vork, N. Y.
Harlem Italian Sanitarium, 281

Pleasant  Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Harrison's. Dr., Sanitarium,

Whitestone, N. Y.
Hill's Sanitarium, 317 W. 126th

St., New York, N. Y.
Hoegen's Institute, 334 Alexander

Ave., New  York, N. Y.
Hydriatic  Institute,  Hartford,  ConrL
Illinois  Post  Graduate  and  Training

School for Nurses, 546 Garfield

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Indiana  School  of  Chiropractic,

Anderson, Ind.
Institute of Science,

Chicago, iVi.
International  College  of  Osteopathy,

Elgin. 111.
International Correspondence

Schools, Scranton, Pa.
International Theosophical Head-
quarters,  Point  Loma, Cal.
Interpines, The, Goshen,  N. Y.
Krotona Institute, Hollywood,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Lahn School of Iridology,

Chicago, 111.
Lakeland Sanitarium,

Lakeland. Fla.
Lamb, Robert B., Sanitarium, 55

W.  55th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Langworthy School of (Chiroprac-
tic and Nature Cure,

Cedar Rapids, la.
Levanzin Scientific Dietarium,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Lexington Sanitarium, 863 Lexing-
ton  Ave., New Vork, N. Y.
Lindlahr College of Nature Cure,

525 S. Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

111.
Lindlahr  Health  Resort,

Elmhurst, 111.
Long  Beach  Sanitarium,

Long Beach, Cal.
Long Island Home,

Amityville, N. Y.
Los  Angeles College of Chiroprac-
tic, Los Angeles, Cal.
Lust's, Dr. Benedict, College of

Neuropathy, 110 E. 41st Street.

New York, N. Y.
Lust's Recreation Resort ("Yung-
born"), Butler, N. J.
Mac Levy Health Farm,

Babylon, N. V.
Manhattan Square Sanitarium, 36

W.  77th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.  _
Marshall  Sanitarium,  Troy,  N.  Y.
Maternity Aid Sanitarium, 110 W.

90th  St., New York, N. Y.
McMichael's Sanitarium,

Buffalo,  N. v.
McMillan, Mary, 137 E. 63rd St.,

New York, N. Y.


808


Xaliiropallu'r  Colleges,  Schools  and  Inslihilions


Mecca t'ollcge of Chiropractic,
Wiliiiiiigton, Del. (Amalgamated
with the New Jersey College of
Chiropractic, Newark, N. J.)

Metropolitan  College  of  Osteopathy
and Spondylotherapy, Chicago.

Miller's  Health  Home,
Jacksonville, Fla.

Millet  Tuberculosis  Sanitarium,
East Bridgeport, Mass.

Minzesheimer, C. L., Sanitarium,
HO E. 61st St., New York,
N. Y.

Mulderig,  K.  R.,  Sanitarium,  2366
7th Ave., New York, N. Y.

National  College  of  Electro-Thera-
peutics,  Lima, Ohio.

National Eclectic Institute,
West Hoboken, N. J.

National  Eclectic  Institute  (regis-
tered).  New York, N. Y.

National School of Chiropractic,
Chicago, 111.

National University of Naturo-
pathy, New  York, N.  Y.

Nature Cure, The, Syracuse, N. Y.

Nature  Cure  Health  Resort  (Yung-
born), Butler, N. J.

Nature  and Life Colony,
Palm City, Cuba.

Naturopathic College and Sanito-
rium of California, Inc., Los
Angeles, Cal.

Naturopathic  Hospital  and  Sanita-
rium, Fowler, Kans.

Naturopathic Institute,
Youngstown, Ohio.

Naturopathic  Sanitarium,
Newark, N.  J.

Naturopathic  Sanitarium,  Syracuse,
N. Y.

Neal Institute, 137 E. 63rd St.,
New York, N. Y.

Nebraska Chiropractic College,
Lincoln, Neb.

Newark Sanitarium-Hospital,
Newark, N. J.

New  England  C^ollege  of  Chiroprac-
tic, Boston,  Mass.  (Amalgamated
with  the  Washington  School  of
Chiropractic, Washington, D. C.)

New England Sanitarium,
Melrose, Mass.

New  Jersey  College  of  Chiropractic,
577  Warren  St..  Newark,  N.  J.
(Amalgamated  with  the  Mecca
College  of  Chiropractic,  Wilming-
ton,  Del.)

Newman,  R.,  Sanitarium,  240  East
S8th St., New York, N. Y.

New  York  Academy  of  Chiropractic
Research, New York. N. Y.

New  York  Osteopathic  Clinic,  35
E. 32nd St., N. Y.

New York School of Chiropractic,
Inc.,  39th  St.  and  Broadway,
New  York, N. Y.

New  York  School  of  Massage  and
Physiologic  Therapeutics,  New
York, N. Y.

New  York  School  of  Medical  Gym-
nastics and Massage, New York,
^N. Y.

New ^'ork Society for Medico-
Literary Research and Physiolo-
gic  Therapeutics, Inc., New
York, N. Y.

New  York  State  Society  of  Osteo-
_  Therapeutics, New York, N. Y.

North Shore Health Resort,
Winnetka, 111.

O'Brien, M. E., Sanitarium, 156
W. 74th St., New  York, N. Y.

Old  Physio-Medical  College,  Inc.,
Charleston. W. Va.

Oregon  College  of  Naturopathy,
Inc.,  340-43  Pittock  Block,  Port-
land, Ore.

Osteopathic  Department,  American
School  of  Naturopathy,  110  East
41st St.,  New  York, N.  Y.


Pacific Medical College, 804

Block Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Page  System  of  Natural  Treatment,

Boston, Mass.
Palmer-Gregory School of Chiro-
practic, Oklahoma, Okla.
Palmer School of Chiropractic,

Davenport, la.
Pcarce Studio, The Way of Life

System, I>os Angeles. Cal.
Petty  and Wallace Sanitarium,

Memphis, Tenn.
Philadelphia College and Infirmary

of  Osteopathy,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Physical  Culture  Courses,

Atlantic  City, N.  J.
Physical Culture Health Resort,

Pasadena, Fla.
Pine Crest  Sanitarium, Budd Lake,

N. J.
Pittsburgh College  of Chiropractic.

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Plaza Sanitarium. 629 Lexington

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Poggenburg, The, 73 Nassau St.,

New York, N. Y.
Porter Sanitarium, Burnet, Cal.
Pratt's Rest Home,

Virginia  Beach.  Va.
Private Hospital Association, 57

E. 50th St., New York, N. Y.
Radium Sanitarium. 215 W. 75th

St., New York, N. Y.
Raja-Yoga  College,

Point Loma, Cal.
Ratledge System of Chironractic

Schools, Los Angeles, Cal.
Rebeau Sanitarium, The, 156 W.

74th St., New  York,  N. Y.
Reinecke's  Institute,

New  York, N. Y.
Rest Home, The,

Virginia Beach, Va.
Riese Naturopathic Sanitarium and

Youngborn, La Crosse, Wis.
River Crest Sanitarium,

Astoria, N. Y.
River Crest Sanitarium, 616

Madison Ave., New York, N. Y.
Riverdale Sanitarium, Riverdale,

N. Y.
Riverside Sanitarium, Inc., 2512

Broadway, New York, N. Y.
Ross College of Chiropractic, 227

W.  Jefferson  St.,  Ft.  Wayne,  Ind.
Ryan, Geraldine, Sanitarium, 26

W. 61st  St.,  l^ew  York,  N. Y.
Sacred Heart Sanitarium,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Sahler Sanitarium, Dr. C. O.,

Kingston-on-Hudson, N. Y.
Sancal System, The,

San Francisco, Cal.
Sanitarium for Hebrew Children,

224  W. 34th  St., New  York,

N. Y.
Saratoga  Cure,  The,

Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.
Saratoga Springs Medical Sanita-
rium, Saratoga Springs, N. Y.
Sargent  School for  Physical  Educa-
tion, Cambridge, Mass.
School of Medical Gymnastics and

Massage, New ^'ork, N. Y.
Schroeder's Sanitarium, 240 E.

58th St., New York, N. Y.
Schroth Sj'stem of Teaching, Inc.,

546 Garfield Ave., Chicago, 111.
Schultz, Carl, Sanitarium, 1319 S.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.


Praclilioners  are  reqiiesled  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
(liscrcpancu's  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


Schwarz Naturopathic Sanitarium,

Syracuse, N. Y.
Schwei-Kcrt Drugless Sanitarium.

The, Spotwood, N. J.
Sherwood Eye  and Ear  .Sanitarium,
[ 2064  5th Ave., New ^■ork, N. Y.

Sprague Institute, The, 141 W.
I 36th St., New York, N. Y.
Standard School of Chiropractic,

Cedar Rapids, la.
.Stark Naturopathic Institute, 406
I Evergreen  Ave., Brooklyn,  N. Y.

Stieger Sanitarium, Brooklyn,
I ^  N. Y.

'  Still-Hildreth Osteopathic Sanita-
j rium, Macon, Miss.
I  .St. Louis Chiropractic  College,

St. Louis, Mo.
Stone College of Chiropractic,

San  Antonio, Texas.
.Stony Wold Sanitarium, 1974

Broadway, New York, N. Y.
St. Paul College  of  Chiropractic,

St. Paul, Minn.
Strueh's Health  Resort,

McHenry, III.
Strueh's Sanitarium,

McHenry, III.
Summit of the Ozarks Institute,

Eureka Springs, Ark.
Sunshine Sanitarium and Rest

Home, Bath Beach, Brooklyn,

N. Y.
Taber  School  of  Dietetics,

Evanston, 111.
Tope's School of Phrenology,

Bowerstown, O.
Town's, Charles B., Hospital, 292

Central Park W., New York,

N. Y.
Tuberculosis Preventorium for

Children, 105 E. 22nd St., New

York. N. Y.
Universal  College  of  Chiropractic,

Davenport,  Iowa.
United College  of  Chiropractic,

Marion,  Ind.
United  Schools  of  Physical  Culture.

Chicago. 111.
United Schools of Scientific Physi-
cal  Culture, Chicago, 111.
Walter Sanitarium, The,

Walters Park, Pa.
Washington  School  of  Chiropractic.

Washington, D. C. Amalgamated

with the Boston School of

Chiropractic, Boston, Mass.
Water  Cure  and Message, Dr. Ger-
trude  Stark, Brooklyn. N. Y.
Weissman, Dr. B., 3081/^ Broome

St., New York, N. Y.
Wells  Academy  of  Chiropractic,

Lansing, Mich.
Weltmer's School of Suggestive

Therapeutics, Nevada, Mo.
West Hill Sanitarium, Riverdale,

N. Y.
Willis Sanitariums, Brooklyn,

N.  Y.
Wilson Eilucational System.

Portland, Ore.
Wilson Ideal Institute of Healing

and College of Masteropathy,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Winter's Sanitarium,

Cornwall, N. V.
Vetus  Academia,  Old  Physiotherapy,

Osteo-therapeutics and Eclectic

College of New York, 110 West

90th St., New York, N. Y.
Vetus Academia (O. P. M. Col-
lege), 120 Palisade Ave., West

Hoboken, N. J.
Vanamach  Co.,  Jude (Jiu  Jitsu  Sys-
tem),  Los  Angeles, Cal.
Ysberg's Sanatarium, 44 E. 65th

St., New York, N. Y.
Yungborn  Naturopathic  Institute.

Butler, N. J.
Zander  Institute,  110  W. 40th  St.,

New  York, N. Y.


l/iiivcrsnl IViidiroiiatliic Directory and Kilmers'  (<iil<lc  800


LINDLAHR  COLLEGER/NATURE  CURE

CHICAGO  ::  ILLINOIS

To  Dnigless  Physicians;  of  All  Schools:

HOW  WELL  ARE YOU  PREPARED

to  meet  the  growing  demand  of  the  people  for  Cure  rather  than
treatment?  Yesterday's  demand  was  for  fads,  fancies  and  illusions.
Today  the  people  are  clamoring  for  truth.  Yesterday  they  were
chasing  phantoms,  but  the  rising  intelligence  has  caused  these  ghosts
to  vanish  into  thin  air.  Yesterday  the  cry  was  for  relief  from  pain
and  suffering — today  the  demand  is  to  be  made  whole  and  efficient.

IF  YOU  ARE  LIVING

in  todaij,  filled  with  today's  hopes,  ambitions  and  desires,  ready  to  meet  the
demands  of  a  people  whose  intelligence  has  been  aroused  to  an  understanding
of  what  they  have  a  right  to  expect  of  a  physician,  you  must  follow  the  course
of  progress.  THE  BUSY  PRACTITIONER  is  too  apt  to  get  into  a  rut,  to  run  in
a  groove,  and  so  find  himself  behind  the  times  unless  he  keeps  in  touch  with
the  institutions  that  are  active  in  research  and  development  work.

THE  LINDLAHR  COLLEGE

maintains  a  department  of  research  and  investigation  in  which  every  old  idea
and  method  of  diagnosis  and  therapy  has  been  thoroughly  investigated,  elabo-
rated and  improved.  Every  new  idea  cmd  method  is  subjected  to  the  most
painstaking  analysis  and  tests  and  must  be  passed  upon  by  a  group  of  experts
before  being  adopted  into  the  practice  of  Natural  Therapeutics.

THE  COLLEGE  offers  the  results  of  its  research  work  to  Practitioners  in

POST  GRADUATE  COURSES

Four  Weeks  and  Six  Weeks  Courses  in  the  latest  methods  of  Diagnosis  and
Therapeutics  with  clinical  practice.  Nothing  compares  with  these  courses  in
any  college  in  this  country.

Some  of  the  Methods  included  in  Nature  Cure  Practice:

Diagnosis: Physical, Spinal, Basic, "From the Iris" and Biodynamic.

Therapeutics: Dietetics,  Hydrotherapy, Thermotherapy,  Phototherapy,
^  ' Chromotherapy, Mechanotherapy, Osteopathy, Neuro-

pathy, Chiropractic,  Naprapathy,  Spondylotherapy ,  Mas-
sage, Swedish  Movements,  Curative  Gymnastics,  Zone-
therapy,  Pressure  Anesthesia,  Mental,  Psychic  and  Mag-
netic Healing,  Obstetrics,  and  Accidental  Surgery.

The  LINDLAHR  COLLEGE  also  offers  a  four  months'  course  in  practical
nursing,  including  Dietetics,  Hydrotherapy,  Swedish  Movements  and  Massage,
Lymphatic  Treatments,  Curative  Gymnastics  and  Physiological  Anatomy.
The  regular  College  Course  is  of  two  years'  duration,  or  three  years  on  the
Exchange  Plan.  Students  receive  board,  room,  tuition  and  salary  in  exchange
for  services.  An  education  and  practical  experience  without  cost  in  either
nursing  or  Nature  Cure  (Drugless  Healing).

FOR  DETAILED  INFORAIATION  WRITE  TO

LINDLAHR  COLLEGE  OF  NATURE  CURE

525 SOUTH ASHLAND BOULEVARD :: :: :: CHICAGO, ILLINOIS

President,  Henry  Lindlahr,  M.  D.,  N.  D.  Dean.  William  F.  Havard,  N.  D.


I'nlvorNnl Nntiiropnthic l)lpo«'lory nnci Buyers' Cjiiide

m  .  (5

new  Vork  School  of  Chiropractic

BROADWAY  and  39th  STREET  BUILDING
1416  Broadway  New  York  City


The  Pre-eminent  Chiropractic  School
of the Empire State of America

OUR  CRY  IS: EXCELSIOR!

The  New  York  School  of  Chiropractic  was  founded  upon  the  fundamental
principles  of  educational  psychology  which  places  it  upon  equal  standard  with  the
leading  professional  and  scientific  institutions  of  the  highest  rank.

THE  SCHOOL: A  RESUME
/. Location:

In  the  Broadway  and  39th  Street  Building,  occupying  an  entire  floor
area  of  over  4,000  square  feet,  facing  the  world  famous  Metropolitan
Opera  House,  and  within  easy  access  of  all  surface,  elevated  and
subway  transit  lines.

2.  Equipment  and  Classes:

Large,  commodious,  airy  and  well-ventilated  class-rooms.  All  the
modern  devices  essential  to  every  phase  of  chiropractic,  selected  with
eclectical  judgment,  are  used  and  illustrated.

3.  Laboratories:

The  school  possesses  a  modern,  scientific  collection  of  apparatus  for
the  proper  teaching  of  Physics,  Physiological  Chemistry,  Biology  and
Osteology.

4.  Faculty:

The  faculty  consists  among  others  of  the  following:  Anton  Deininger,
N.  D..  D.  O.,  D.  C;  S.  Gerschanek,  A.  B.,  A.  M.,  D.  C. ;  Benedict
Lust.  M.  D.,  D.  O.,  N.  D.  ;  John  R.  Schwinzer,  L.  L.  B..  D.  C. ;
Ferdinand  A.  Pinz,  M.  D.,  D.  C. ;  Eugene  L.  Maines,  Ph.  C,  Ph.  D.

5.  Curriculum :

A  Two-year  course  of  9  months  each,  leading  to  the  Degree  of  Doctor
of  Chiropractic  is  given.  The  subjects  include:  1.)  The  Art,  Science
and  Philosophy  of  Chiropractic:  2.)  Anatomy,  including  Dissection;
3.)  Physiology  and  Physiological  Chemistrv;  4.)  Physics;
5.)  Biologv;  6.)  Psvchologv  and  Neurology;  7.)  Diagnosis  and
Symptomatology;  8.) Electrotherapy;  9.) Dietetics; 10.) Urinology.

6.  Clinical  Practice:

Ample  practice  is  given  daily  in  our  Clinic,  wherein  innumerable  men,
women and children are  treated.

7.  Sessions:

Day  Session: From  9 A.  M. to 3 P.  M. Evening  Session: From

7  to 10:30  P.M.

Send for  Catalogue: Anton Deininger. D.  C, D.  O., N.  D., Dean
5.  Gerschanek,  A.  B.,  A.  M.,  D.  C,  Associate  Principal  and  Registrar


IJiiivor.tiil Naturo|>iitlilo l)lr«'«'<«>r.> iiiiil Uuj«tm' f^iildc


811


13


S


Chiropractic  Sanatorium  of
West  New  York,  New  Jersey


THE  Chiropractic  Sanatorium  of  West  New  York,  New  Jersey,  was  founded  by  those
pioneers  of  Chiropractic;  Drs.  Anton  Deininger,  and  Elvira  A.  Deininger.  It  was
founded  on  the  iirm  principles  of  Chiropractic  treatment,  whereby  the  ills  of  mankind
may be adjusted to sound  Health.

At the junction of two important streets of West New York. New Jersey;
Palisade Avenue and 16th Street, there is located a modern, three story building, whose
entire  structure is  admirably  adapted  to  giving  bist  attention  and care  of  patients  desiring  treat-
ment and  to  remain  away  from  the  multitudes  and the  annoyances  of  the home.

In  the  short  period  it  has  been  in  existence  it  has  already  made  a  marked  note  in  the
community.  Many  of  the  newspapers  of  the  City  praise  it  highly.  In  connection  with  the
Sanatorium,  the  public  spirited  owners  and  managers  Drs.  Deininger  have  added  a  free  Clinic,
and  are  giving  part  of  their  time  to  eliminate  the  misfortunes  of  illness  among  the  poor.  By
their  self-sacrifice  they  have  shown  that  they  are  not  seeking  only  the  silver  dollar  but  giving
both  their  time  and  attention,  not  only  to  those  who  have  the  means,  but  also  to  those  who  do
not  have  them.


Address :


CHIROPRACTIC  SANATORIUM

Dr.  a.  Deininger,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  Chief  of  Staff

400  16th STREET,  WEST XEAV  YORK, XEAV  JERSEY


m


m


[  Take  the  Chicago  and  North  Western  R.  R.  at  Madison  and  Canal  Sts.,  Chicago. Trains

every hour. Also the Chicago, Aurora and Elgin Electric R. R. at Fifth Avenue near
Jl Quincy St., Chicago. Trains every half hour.

1  r^iii-a Nnfiival^ (Nature Cure) recognizes all the practical and useful

L^a,  \..^Ura  ildLUralC  systems  of  rational  and  drugless  healing.  It  is  a  com-
l)ination  of  the  best  elements  in  the  Nature  and  Natural  Life,  arranged  systematically
and  presented  in  a  comprehensible  manner  to  the  public.  This  is  the  book  for  the
beginner,  as  well  as  for  the  advanced  student  or  the  practitioner  in  the  Nature  Cure  and
Natural Life. Price,  postpaid, .$2.20.

I a MA#1i/<ino Nafiifalo ^ monthly review for the propagation of natural

^  l-a IVieuiClIie I'^dLUrdie. nf^ and natural cure. This review-treats on all

, the  problems  concerning  diseases  and their  cure,  hygiene,  natural nutrition,  common  sense

preventive medicine, and gives new view-points on the new and congenial life for the

natiirist. It discusses the vital questions of the day, exposes medical follies and errors,

stands for medical freedom, justice, and all popular home treatments for the prevention

I and cure of  disease. Price, $1.00, payable in advance, per year; 15c per copy. Address

La  Medicine  Naturale.  152  N. Ashland Rlvd., Chicago, 111., or Nature Cure Centre, 110 E.

I 41st Street,  New York, N.  Y.


Other  publications  in  the  Italian  Language.

Return  to  Nature,  by  Adolph  Just,  English,  Italian  or  German $3.20

The  New  Science  of  Healing,  by  Louis  Kuhne,  Italian,  English  or  Spanish 3.20

[ Natural  Methods  of  Healing,  by  Bilz,  in  two  volumes,  covering  any  and

!  all  systems,  a  reference  work  for  home  treatments  as  well  as  for

the drugless doctor, price, $10.00; postpaid 10.50

The Five  Kneipp  Books, in Italian, cloth bound, each 1.75

By Seb. Kneipp: La Mia Cura Idroterapica. — Cosi Dovete Vivere. — //

i  Mio  Testamento. — Codicillo  al  Mio  Testamento. — La  Cura  dei  Bam=

I  bini.

La  Nuova  Cura  del  Sangue,  by  Dr.  C.  Criscuolo. — Treatment  and  preven=

'•  tion  for  all  diseases  without  Drugs. Italian  Edition  $1.50;  English 1.10

All  mentioned  books  in  Italian,  as well  as  Subscriptions to  Italian  Nature  Cure  Magazine,
i  can  also  be  ordered  from  Nature  Cure  Centre,  Butler,  N.  J.

i<


812  Unlvcr.snl  Naturopathic i)ir«M-(ory :iii<l Buyers'  Guide

I  FERRI  SANITARIUM !

WHEATON, ILL.,  and 152 N. ASHLAND  BLVD., CHICAGO, ILL.  j

{ Telephone,  Wheaton  51  Telephone,  Chicago  Office,  West  2827 |

For  Physiological  Therapeutics  and  Nature  Cure j

in  all branches for the cure of  all diseases. Methods followed:  {

Yungborn  Regeneration  Cures.

The  dietetical Cures which are applied in their particular gradations as required for
tlie  various  diseases  and  conditions  of  weakness,  are  fully  adapted  to  the  case  in  hand  and
i modified correspondingly. The most peculiar and inost intense forms of these cures are
i the  .Sdiroth  Treatment,  so  called  after  its  founder,  the  genial  Johann  Schroth,  and  the  com-
l)ine(l Diet, Light-Air and Water treatments in which the experiences of Kuhne, Kneipp,
Hickli, Lahniann, Ehret,  Just, P'ngelhardt, etc.,  are resorted  to individually. Furthermore,
I'ruit Cures, Herb Cuies, Vegetarian and Milk Diet, Fasting Cures, and so forth. Diet '
treatment also requires individually adapted  physical treatment, such as packings, band- '
aging,  baths,  and  gushes  of  various  descriptions,  light  sun  and  air  baths,  steam,  electricity, '
massaging and Osteopathy, Chiropractic, Mechanotherapy, Neuropathy, etc. Wonderful |
results secured in  chronic  and  acute  diseases.  |

A  NATUROPATHIC  INSTITUTION

using all forms of natural treatment which have proved to be scientific and safe. We
have investigated all systems of healing and have taken from each the best and most
effective  measures  for  the  treatment  of  acute  and  chronic diseases. The  results  have  been i
wonderfully successful and satisfactory in all cases treated, as a long list of benefitted
patients  can  testify.
'  THE SANITARIUM is located in  the  country, occupying  two  buildings situated in the

'  midst  of  lawn,  garden,  orchard,  and  grove.  Pure  water  from  a  deep  well,  out-door  sleep-
ing facilities,  sun-bath,  opportunity  for  games  and  sports,  and  a  beautiful  country  for
walking.  ,

We  serve  pure  unpasteurized  milk  direct  from  a  neighboring  dairy.  Fresh  fruits
and  vegetables  in  season  from  our  own  gardens.  All  rooms  are  light  and  well  ventilated,
all  receiving  sunlight  at  some  time  of  day.  We  encourage  in  every  way  the  out-door  life
A  definite daily regime is followed.

HOW  TO  GET  THERE


Alphabrlicdl  Index


813


GENERAL  DIRECTORY


OF


DRUGLESS  PHYSICIANS


IN


ALPHABETICAL  ORDER


EVERY  known  method  of  Drugless  Therapeutics  has  herein  received  con-
sideration. The  names  of  practitioners  have  been  gathered  from  all  avail-
able sources,  and,  as  far  as  possible, the addresses have been verified.
The  particular  method  or  methods  practiced by each individual is indicated
by  initials  placed  after  the  name,  such  as  N.D., D.O., D.C. A  key  to  these
designations is herewith given.


KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS


A.


A.M.A.

A.N.A.

As.

B.

Ch.

Cr.
D.

D.C.


D.D.
D.M.T.


D.O.


D.P.T.
D.S.T.


E.
E.H.


El.


H.
He.


Her.  =


Apyrtropher — Apyr
trophy, Unfired Food
Apyrtrophic .Agriculture
and Horticulture. Rais
ing  and  perfecting  phys
iological, natural foods
Member  American  Med
ical Association
Member  American Nat-
uropathic Association
Astroscopy — Astro-
medical Diagnosis
Biochemist — Tissue
Salts, Spagyretic Ther-
apy.

Chiropodist  —  Chiro-
pody —  Treating  feet
by hand

Christian  Science  Prac-
titioner

Drugless  doctor  using
any  single  or  several
naturopathic  or  drugless
methods

Chiropractor.  Chiro-

practic as  defined  by  its
founder  and taught and
practised by the recog-
nized schools
Doctor of Divinity
Mechano  -  Therapist —
Mechano-Therapy — Na-
tural  Healing.  Using  all
mechanical and manual
methods. Dietetic and
Physiological Therapy.
Osteopath  — •  practising
Osteopathy as taught
by  the standard schools
of  Osteopathy
Physio Therapy
Doctor of Suggestive
Therapeutics. Psycho-
therapy

Eclectic  —  Eclecticism
Electro  -  Homeopathist
—  Electro-Homeopathy
Electro  -  Therapist  —
Electro-Therapy  in  all
its  branches,  including
X-Ray  work  and  Radio-
Therapy

Doctor of food science,
or Dietician. Natural
Alimentation
Homeopath  — Homeo-
pathy

Health  Director,  Teach-
er  of Natural Life and
Prevention of  Disease
Herbalist. Botanic Sys-
tem,  or  Phytotherapy


Hi.  =


Hy.


Hyg.=
Hyp.=

I.  =

I.M.F.A.  =

L.  =

Ma.  =


Mag.


M.D.


Me.


N.  =


Nap.  =


N.D.  =


OF PROFESSIONAL

Heliotherapist,  sunlight
and  air  cure ;  Photo-
therapy, colored  light
cure,  or  Chromopathy
Hydropath  —  Water
and  Nature  Curist.  Hy-
dropathy of  all  kinds.
Water  Cure  Systems.
Balneotherapy  and  Drug-
less Physiological  Me-
thods

Hygiotherapist  —  Hy-
giotherapy

Hypnotism,  Psychother-
apy and  Suggestive
Therapeutics
Iridologist  —  Iridology
— ■  Science  of  the  Diag-
nosis of  Diseases  from
the  Eye

International Medical
Freedom  Association
Life  Conservationist  and
Physiological Engineer
Masseur, Masseuse,
Swedish  Movements,

Massotherapy ;  medical,
resistive,  corrective  and
orthopaedic  gymnastics.
Vibration  Therapy.  Mas-
teropathy

Magnetopath  —  Magnet-
opathy  — ■  Science  of
Curing  Disease  by  Life
Magnetism

Regular  Physician,  us-
ing naturah  drugless
methods,  and  medicines
to  a  limited  extent
Mental  Science,  Mental
Healing,  and  New
Thought.  Metaphysist.
Psychology,  Science  of
God,  Freedom  and  Im-
mortality

Neuropath,  practising
Neuropathy  according  to
the  established  schools
of  Neuropathy
Naprapath,  practising
Naprapathy  as  defined
by  its  discoverer  and
taught  by  the  College
of  Naprapathy.  Con-
nectivology,  Chartology
Naturopath,  or  Nature
Cure  Physician,  using
one,  several  or  all  ra-
tional, dietetic,  physio-
logical, mental  and  spir-
itual methods  of  pre-
venting and curing hu-


DESIGNATIONS

man  ailments.  —  Nat-
uropathy: the  science  of
natural  healing,  and  art
of  natural  and  efficient
living.  Life  Conserva-
tion, Life  Extension,
Sacredness  of  Life.  Edu-
cation and  Eugenics
based  on  Natural  and
divine  laws
Ne.  =  Neurologist  —  Neu-
rology is  the  science
which  treats  of  the
nervous  system.  This
;  science is for the anal-

ysis of  the  causes  of
human  ills  and  provides
how  to  abolish  them
without  drugs  or  oper-
ations
Oph.  =  Ophthalmologist —  Oph-
thalmology is  the  science
of  the  eyes,  their  defects
]  and the relation of

I  those defects, as causa-

tive factors  to  human
ills.  Errors  of  refrac-
tion discovered  without
"drops."  Cross  eyes
straightened  without

Operation

Optometrist.  Optics.

Optometry,  the  Drug-
less System  of  Eye
Cure

Orificial Surgery
Physical Culture, Phys-
ical Training. Physi-
cultopathy, Autology,
Autotherapy, Physian-
tropy.
P.E.  =  Physiological Engineer.
Ph.  =  Phrenologist. Character
Delineation and Voca-
tional  Guidance
P.M.  =  Physiomedic
Pn.  =  Pneumotherapist  —

Pneumotherapy :  Science
of  correct  and  rhythmic
breathing. Yogi : At-
mospheric cure
R.  =  Regritlar Physician and

Surgeon. Allopathy
S.  =  Spiritual and Divine
Healing
Sa.  =  Sarcognomy
So.  =  Somopathy. Body Suf-
fering. Improvement  on
Osteopathy
Sp.  =  Spondylotherapy  •

Tal.  =  Talosophy, the art of
making happiness


Opt.


Or.S.
P.


814


Al])Ii((h('lic(il  I  rider


Aaders
Allen


Lippitt
Wash.


Tekoa, Wash.


AADERS, H. J.. Moody Blk.,

I^ong Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
AARONSON,  PHILIP  V..  Row-
ell Building, Fresno, Cal.
ABBOTT,  C A.,  Oskaloosa, la.

ABBOTT, C. I-., WiUiani.ston,
Mich. (D.C.)
Geo.  B.,  712  Union  Oil  Bldg.,

Los  Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Dr.  G.  C,  Exeter,  Mo. (S.T.)
Dr. Geo. M., Saranac Lake,

N. Y. (M.D.)
Guy, Williamston, Mich.

Hester L., Union Oil Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
Leo, Williamston, Mich.

Liin.sford,  212  K.  Gordon  St.,
Kingston, N. C. (D.O.)
ABDILL,  J.  D.,  7092  S.  Chicago

Ave., Chicago.,  111. (D.C.)
ABEGGLEN, C. E..
Building, Colfax,
Walter E.,
ABELL,  A.  H.,  1539 W.  Adams
St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
W.  P.,  Princeton,  Ind. (D.O.)
VV. T., Cardinal Block, W.
S. W. Square, Monroe,
Wis. (D.C.)
ABERLY  &  WATERS,  MISSES,
220 S. State St., Chicago.
111. (Ma.)
ABERNATHY,  G.  H.,  267  Stuy-
vesant Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (D.C.)
ABERNETHY, GEORGE H.
411-a Hancock Street,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
ABILD, ISABEL, Beresford,

S. D. (D.O.)
ABLE, NELLIE, 160 N. .5th
Ave., Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
ABRAMS, HARRY, 608

Andrews Bldg., Cincin-
nati, O. (D.C.)
ABRAMSEN, ELMER C, 603
Case St., St. Paul, Minn.
ABRAMSON, CHARLOTTE,
120 S. State St., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)
ACHORN, ADA  A., 687  Boyls-
ton St., Boston, Mass.
Clinton  E., 6 E. 37th Street,

New  York,  N. Y. (D.O.)
Kendall  L.,  687  Boylston  St.,
Boston, Mass. (D.O.J
ACKLEY, CHAUNCEY W.,
431 S. Wabash Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
,Tos. A., 17 Erie County
Bank  P.ldg.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
ADAIR, ROSELLA, 26 North
Monroe  St.,  Titusville, Pa.
S.  P.,  Tixton,  Mo., (S.T.)
ADAM, I. M., 313 Church St.,
San Francisco,  Cal. (D.C.)
.M^AMOP, ALBERT. 2057 W.
Van Buren St., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)
ADAMS, MRS., 1348 Madison
St., Denver, Col. (D.C.)
Bert  Lee, Newman, HI.

Celia P., 1318 Beacon St.,
* Brookline, Mass. (D.O.)
Chas. .  E., 220 S. State St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)


Dora E., 348 Franklin St.,

Bloomfleld, N. J. (D.C.)
E. P., 15 Williams Street,

Hammond, Ind. (D.C.)
Flora  M., Galliton, Mo.

Florence, Cherokee, Ks.

Herbert  S., North Salem,

Ind. (N.D.)
J.  A., r.  O.  Box  253, Atwood,

111. (N.D.)
J. A., 807 State St., States-

ville, N. C. (D.C.)
J. Lester, Auditoiium Bldg.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.O.)
L.  M.,  c/o  Bullis  Sanitarium,
32nd St., Oakland, Cal.
Margaret, 13 Bank Street,

Ashtabula, O. (D.C.)
Margaret  C, Sterling, Mich.

Dr.  McGregor,  1701-03  Chest-
nut St., Philadelphia, Pa.
W. I., Mc  Kees Rocks, Pa.

William J., Ventura, Cal.
ADELBERT, F. X., Kalispell,

Mont. (D.O.)
ADLON, L. K.. c/o Abbott
Hospital, Oskaloosa, la.
L. K., 404 E. 5th St., Des
Moines, la. (D.C.)
AERNI,  CLARA  R.,  Columbus,

Nebr. (D.C.)
AGEE, PURL M., Clinton
Bldg., Independence, Mo.
AGNEW, B. I., Brophy Bldg.,

Douglas, Ariz. (D.O.)
AGUILERA, RAPHAEL D.,
261 33rd St., Milwaukee,
Wis. (N.D.)
AHLGREN, MATHILDE,
4009 Sheridan Road,
Buffalo, la. (Ma.)
AHLQUIST, O. P., 604 Con-
gress St., Portland. Me.
AHLSTROM, GOSTA M. J.,
408 Penn. Avenue, Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (Ma.)
AIREY, GRACE STRATTON,
Scott Bldg., Salt Lake
CAty, Utah. (D.O.)
j^-IRS, W. A., Newport, Tex.

AKB, MARION. 22 W. 7th St.,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
AKIN,  MABEL, Corbett  Bldg.,
Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
Otis  F.,  Corbett  Bldg.,  Port-
land,  Ore. (D.O.)
ALBERT & ALBERT, 115
Towle Ave., Mishawaka,
Ind. (D.C.) and 426 S. 8th
St., Terre Haute, Ind.
ALBERT, PHILLIP, 116 East
Market  St.,  Lima,  O. (Ch.)
ALBERTS, CORA F., Nevada,
O. (N.D.,  D.C.)
Mabelle  V.,  1104  N.  Harrison
St., Davenport, la. (D.C.)
ALBERTSON, B. E.. 217 San
Marcos Building, Santa
Barbara, Cal. (D.C.)
W. H., Hirsh Bldg., Austin,
Minn. (D.O.)
ALBRBCHT, C.  W.,  La  Grange,
Texas. (S.T.)
F. C, 1531 Congress St.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)


ALBRIGHT, A. T., Jackson,

Minn. (D.C.)
A. T.. 110 S. 4th St., Lyons,

la. (D.C.)
ALBRIGHT, CHESTER W.,

220 S. State St., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
E.  L., 1291 S.  Pearl St.,

Columbus. O, (D.M.T.)
Edward, 267 W. 79th St.,

New  York  City (D.O.)
William H., Jasper Blk.,

Edmonton, Alberta (D.O.)

■VLBRO, LEANDER S.,

Oswego County Savings

Bank, Oswego, N. Y.

VLBU, DUMTRU, 418 Caxton

Bldg., Cleveland, O.

ALDERS, ELIOT, 310 Kings-
ley Drive,  Bakersfield,  Cal.

ALDERSON,  J.  J.,  Lockesburg,

Ark. (S.T.)
ALDORETTA, HENRY  W., 82

Monroe  St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.

ALDREN, JOHN A., 427 South

Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
John  A., 804 Bryson St.,

Youngstown, O. (Ala.)
ALDRICH, WILLIAM H. 449

The  Arcade, Cleveland, O.

ALEXANDER, CHARLES J.

Machovia Bank Building,

Winston-Salem, N.  C.

Geo. A., Glenwood, Minn.

ALEXSON, A. W., Granite

Falls,  Minn. (D.C.)
.ALGOOD, Dr., Lucas, Kans.

VLKIRE, Margaret M., 103

Cemetery St., Yoakum,

Tex. (D.O.)
VLLABACH, FRIEDA F.. 62

Hoyt St., Brooklyn, N.  Y.

L.  D.,  62  Hoyt  St.,  Brooklyn.

N. Y. (D.O.)
Louise B.. 62 Hoyt Street.

Brooklyn.  N.  Y. (D.O.)
.VLLCOTT, E. Burton, Truell

Court, 1 Madison Ave.,

Plainfield, N. J. (D.C.)
.ALI^COTT, Dr. E. Burton.

Truell Court, Plainfield,

N. J. (N.D.)
.VLLBN  &  ALLEN,  Boone  Nat.

Bldg., Boone, la. (D.C.)
.VLLEN, ALICE  M. C, 6253

Dorchester Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
Arthur B., Andrus Bldg.,

Minneapolis, Minn. (D.O.)

A.  L., 205 Summit Avenue,
Hoboken, N. J. (D.C.)

B.  J., Mc  Pherson, Kansas.

Carolyn, First Nat'l Bank

Bldg., The Dalles, Ore.

Chas. W., 1104 E. 47th St.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
Clifford H., 61 Columbia  St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.C.)
D. Scott, N. Court Street,

Athens,  O. (D.O.)
Mrs. E. B., 1017 S. 36th St.,

Omaha, Neb. (D.C.)


Unlvermnl JViitiiroi>iiUii<> l)lro«'tor> niwl itiiyfrN* (^iililt-


The  BIGGS  SANITARIUM

ASHEVILLE, NORTH  CAROLINA


815


Dr. a. C. biggs, Director

Seventeen  years'  experience  in

the practice of naturopathic

methods


HK BIGGS  SANITARIUM is  sit-
uated in  one  of  the  most  desirable
residential  sections  in  the  metrop-
olis of  "The  Land  of  the  Sky," — a
Cit}'  famous  for  its  scenic  beauty  as  well  as
for its healthfulness.

This  region  is  favored  with  the  best  all-
the-year-round  climate  to  be  found  in
America.  Many  thousands  of  residents  of
tlie  Northern  States  and  Canada  spend  the
fall  and  winter  months  in  Asheville,  because
of  its  healthful  climate.

At  the  Biggs  Sanitarium,  all  the  various
successful  forms  of  physiological  drugless
treatment  are  emploj'ed:  massage,  remedial
gymnastics,  mechano-therapeutics,  spon-
dylotherapy,  electricity,  hj'drotherap}',  high
frequency,  electric  light  baths,  arc  light.
X-ray,  vibration,  with  special  treatment  in
certain  ailments,  such  as  asthma,  catarrh,
paralysis,  etc.  Psychological  treatment  and
mental  training  in  indicated  cases.  Scien-
tific regulation  of  diet  is  an  important  factor  in  our  plan  of  cure.

Our  teachings  and  practice  in  all  matters  of  hygiene  and  correct
living  are  in  perfect  accord  with  the  advanced  principles  of  THE
HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND  NATUROPATH.

Our  patrons  are  almost  exchi-^ively  from  tliat  large  c'as-;  of  chronic  snfferer?  which
ordinary  methods  of  treatment  fail  to  cure.  We  treat  successfully  asthma,  bronchitis,
catarrh,  dyspepsia,  rheumatism,  neuritis,  neurasthenia,  nervous  debility,  insomnia,
melancholia,  paralysis  (including  paralysis  in  children),  and  special  diseases  of
men  and  women.

We  do  not  accept  cases  of  tiiberoilosis,  cancer  or  insanity:  vet'thcr  do  tc'<-  accept
any case  that  we  consider  incurable, or  for  any  reason undesirable.

SPECIAL  ADVANTAGES:  Thoroughly  scientific  diagnosis.  Carefu'ly  arranged
plan  of  treatment  to  meet  the  reouii  ements  of  the  individual  case.  Personal  care
and  attention.  All  the  comforts  of  home:  pleasant  rooms,  electric  light,  steam  heat.
Congenial environment. Moderate  charges.

Every  patient  accepted  for  treatment  is  allowed  one  week  in  which  to  become
acquainted  with  us  and  to  become  familiar  with  our  methods,  zcith  the  distinct  under-
slajjdiiia  that  if  in  a'ly  li'ay  dissai'sficd,  treatment  may  be  discoititiucd  at  the  end  of
the  trial  week,  and there  will  be  no  charge.

Illustrated  pamphlet  describing  ou'-  methods,  a  diagnosis  blank,  testimonials  and
case  records,  and  the  names  of  physic'ans.  clergymen,  lawyers,  editors  and  others
who endorse our methods, will be sent free on request.

If  vou  are  not  satisfied  with  your  physical  condition,  write  us.  and  learn  of  these
new and better  methods of cure.


The  BIGGS  SANITARIUM  t^i.^^Idi^^.l


81G


Alphabcticdl  Index


Allencter
Apthorpc


Mrs E.  E.,  758 Omaha  Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Omaha, Neb.

E. W., 209 Fir  St.,  La

Grande, Ore. (N.D.)
F W.. 367 10th Ave.,

raterson,  N. J. (N.D.)
Edgar, Lowell, Mich. (D.C.)
Edna  M.,  Lowell,  Mich.

Dr. Francis W., 367 10th

Ave., Paterson, N. J.

Geo J., 1029 N. 2nd Street,

Clinton, la. (D.C.)
Harry W., De Lendrecie

Blk.. Fargo,  N.  D. (D.O.)
Horace P., 15 Bicknell St.,

Dorchester, Mass. (D.O.)
Prof.  J.  H.,  Luyston,  Mo.

(S  T.)
.Tames', 4200 S. Grand Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
r., L., 89 Linden Ave.,

Davton, O. (D.M.T.)
L. p!, 312 Security Bldg.,

Dubuque, la. (D.C.)
L. P., Independence, la.

L. P., 312 Security Bldg.,

Dubuque, la. (D.C.)
L W., Davenport Bldg.,

Greenfield, Mass. (D.O.)
M. Ahie, 366 E. 47th Street,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Margaret H., 64 7th Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
Marie Elise, 3511 30th St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

Nellie  A., Chico,  Cal. (D.O.)
S , 244 N. Atheni Street,

Wichita.  Kans. (D.C.)
Jr , S. E., 282 Lawrence St.,

Paterson, N.  J. (D.C.)
T. B., Warren, Pa. (N.D.)
Thos. J., Eureka Springs,

Ark. (N.D.)
W. Burr, Goddard Bldg.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
William Eton, Box 13-a,

Beaumont, Cal. (D.O.)
AVilliam H., 42 S. 7th St.,
Allentown, Pa. (D.O.)
ALLENDER, J. E., 306- Nat'l
Exchange Bank Bldg.,
Steubenville, O. (D.M.T.)
ALLISON & ALLISON, 300
Tuscarawas St., Canton,
O. (D.C.)
ALLISON, ETHEL P., Pratt,
Kans. (N.D.)
G.  C,  330  E.  Tuscarawas  St.,

Canton,  O. (N.D.)
Miss M. Lila, 1328 N. La
Salle St., Chicago,  111.
ALPERT,  A.,  391  Clinton  Ave.,

Newark, N. .1. (N.D.)
ALSPACH, MARY E., The
Mills  Bldg.,  Tppeka,  Kans.
ALTENBERN, A. W., 711
I.,ocust St., Galesbern, 111.
ALT  WATER, WINPRED,

Kent, O. (D.M.T.)
AMARANDOS, G. N., 500 W.
171.st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(D.M.T.)
AMBERGBR, MISS. 1236 11th
St. N.  W., AVashington,
D.  C. (D.M.T.)
AMDERSON, MRS. W. E., 619
Arizona Ave., Trinidad,
Colo. (D.C.)
AMEN, CHAR. F., 302 13th

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
AMERIGE. DR. C. W., 212
Huntington Ave., Boston,
Mass. (D.C.)


AMENT. LENA D., Ypsilanti,

Mich. (D.C.)
AMES, DR. CHARLES F., 302

13th St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

AMHERS,  F.  L.,  2019  S.  Grand

Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.

AMINO, PROF., 733 Madison

Ave., New York, N. Y.

(P.)
AMMRRMAN-HILL, Dr.

MARGARET, 101 States

Ave., Atlantic City, N. J.

AMOS, JNO.  H,  Boonville,  Ark.

(D.C.
Virginia, Lancaster Hotel,

Georgetown, Ky. (D.O.)
AMSBAUGH, A. S., 1202-4 S.

Main  St.,  Goshen,  Ind.

AMSBAUGH, ALFRED S.,

1464 E. Rich St., Colum-
bus,  O. (D.C.)
AMSDEN, C. ETHELWOLFE,

2 Bloor St., E., Toronto,

Ont. (D.O.)
AMSPOKER, S. D., Cutler

Bldg., New Haven, Conn.

ANDERBURG, L. N., 1302

11th St., Modesto, Cal.

ANDERS, AUG., 313 S. Pine

St., Newton, Kan. (M.D.)
ANDERSON & ANDERSON,

Cottonwood, Minn. (D.C.)
ANDERSON & ANDERSON,

Sterling, Kans. (D.C.)
Olina,  Minn. (D.C.)
ANDERSON & ANDERSON,

Park  Citv,  Utah. (D.C.)
ANDERSON & SJOGREN, 220

W. 114th St., New York,

N. Y.. (Ma.)
ANDERSON, A., Trinidad,

Colo. (D.C.)
Mrs. C. A., 721 Penn Ave.,

Des  Moines,  la. (D.C.)

C.  A., P.  O. Box 261, Mt.
Vernon,  la. (D.C.)

Carl A., 1619 High St., Des

Moines, la. (D.C.)
ANDERSON,  CARL  F., 726  W.

Marquette  St.,  Chicago,  111.

(Ma.)
Carl J., 27 Fields Ave.,

Youngstown, O. (N.D.)
Carrie Parenteau, Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Clara H., Gothenburg, Neb.

Clara,  Stanton,  la. (D.C.)
Darl, Andovei-, O. (D.C.)
Darl, Alliance, O. (N.D.)

D.  C, Andover, O. (D.C.)
E., Box 623, Canby, Minn.


E.  L.. Lennox, S. D. (D.C.)
E. W., Box 113, 3rd Street,

Tracy, Minn. (D.C.)
G.  "F., 412 Main St., Oregon

City, Ore. (D.C.)
J.  E.,  The  Dalles,  Ore.  (D.O.)
J. Henry, 605 Main Street,

Middletown, Conn. (D.O.)
J. W.,  Wheaton, Minn.

Johanna A., 4554 Cottage

Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.

(Ma.)
Lewis H., 1336 Morse Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
Mary  E., Bee  Bldg., Omaha,

Neb. (D.O.)
Susie M., Clarinda, la.

Susie  M.,  Prescott,  la.  (D.C.)
Miss T., 3850 Indiana Ave.,

Chicago, III. (Ma.)


T.  v..  167  Front  St.,  Sarnia,

Ont. (D.O.)
Victoria, Pittsburgh Bldg.,

St. Paul, Minn. (D.O.)
W. E., 619 Arizona Ave.,

Trinidad, Colo. (D.C.)
W.  L.,  Iroquois,  S.  Dak.

W.  L.,  Bridgewater,  la.
(D.  C.)
ANDOVER,  Alliance,  O. (N.D.)
ANDREN. OLGA, 152 Colum-
bus Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(Ma.)
ANDRES, GEO., 410 W. 4th
St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
ANDREWS, C. L., 36 E. 23rd
St., New  York, N. Y.
D.  C,  Mobile, Ala. (D.C.)
Emma, 712 Locust Street,

Pasadena,  Cal. (D.C.)
H.  L.,  701  Atlanta  Trust  Co.,

Atlanta,  Ga. (D.C.)
Mabel B., Security Savings
Bank Bldg., Perry, la.
C. L., 4 Madison St., Cort-
land,  N. Y. (D.C.)
ANDRUS, RACHEL B., Paw-
huska,  Okla. (D.C.)
W. H., 904 Main St., Hart-
ford, Conn. (D.O.)
ANDRUSS, FLORA, 136 4th
Ave. S., St. Petersburg,
Fla. (D.C.)
ANGER, ARTHUR, Fergus
Falls,  Minn. (D.M.T.,  D.C.)
ANLEPP, W. C, c/o W. J.
Lamp  Brew  (jo.,  St.  Louis,
Mo. (D.C.)
W.  C,  c/o  W.  J.  Lamp  Brew.
Co., St. Louis, Mo. (D.C.)
ANNE, MAGDALENE, 3415 N.
Tripp Ave., Chicago, 111.
ANNEN, MARY V., 1383 East
89th  St.,  Cleveland,  O.  (M.)
ANNIS, J. BRUCE, Huron,

S.  Dak. (D.C.)
ANSBROOKS. W. P., 1-2 & 7
Lewin Bldg., Live Oak,
Fla. (D.C.)
ANSTROM, B. R., Coeswell,

Mich. (D.C.)
ANTES,  F.  L.,  617-618  Farwell
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
F. L., Broadwav Market
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
(D.O)
ANTBVERP, ELIZABETH, St.
Johns Bldg., Rocky Ford,
Colo. (D.C.)
ANTHONY,  G.  M.,  Manchester,
O. (D.C.)
Gertrude M., Boone Natl.
Bank Bldg., Boone, la.
ANTIGA, Juan S., San Miguel
130 B, Havana, Cuba.
(M.D., D.O., N.D.)
ANTISDALE, E. S., Chicago,

111. (M.D.)
ANTON,  MRS.  M.,  100  W. 67th
St., New York, N. Y.
(Ma.)
APLIN, ANNA K., Stevens
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
APPLE,  C.  E.,  Otis  Bldg.,  16th
and Sansom Sts., Phila-
delphia,  Pa. (D.C.)
APPLEBY, ANNA, Jex Bldg.,

Marton,  Kan. (D.O.)
APPLEGATE,  C.  F.,  9  E.  State

St.,  Trenton,  N.  J. (D.C.)
APTHORPE, WILLIAM, 198
Main St., Oneonta, N. Y.


Universal Naturoi»a(hic  Directory and lliiycrs'  <;ui<le  817


Two- Year  Course  in  Nursing

BE  A  NURSE

Follow  a  vocation  that  will  create  for  you
an  income  that  is  above  the  average.

High School Education desirable, but not necessary.

EARN  WHILE  YOU  LEARN

Our  nurses  earn  more  than  their  living
expenses  and  tuition  before  they  gfradu-
ate.

Address  Dept.  J  for  Free  Booklet


Free  Information

WE  NEED  NURSES

Graduate  and  under-graduate,  for  private  cases  and  hospital  posi-
tions. Proficient  under-graduates  are  employed  at  a  salary  of  $15  to
$20  per  week.

AFTER  GRADUATING,  our  nurses  earn  $25  to  $35  per  week.
Our  graduates  are  not  required  to  take  a  State  Board  Examination.

TRAINING  IS  THOROUGH  AND  EASY.  No  drudgery  is  re-
quired of  our  nurses,  as  is  required  of  the  hospital  nurses;  hence,  our
course  is  shorter.

DIVISION  OF  TWO-YEAR  COURSE.  Eight  months  of  the
two-year  course  is  spent  in  a  hospital,  which  is  sufficient  time  for  the
student  nurse  to  learn  the  hospital  routine.  Eight  months  is  spent  in
the  lecture  room,  during  which  time  the  nurse  receives  more  technical
and  practical  knowledge  than  the  hospital  nurse  receives  in  three
years,  and  has  the  mornings,  Saturdays  and  Sundays  to  herself.
Eight  months  is  spent  on  private  cases,  during  which  time  the  student
can  earn  more  than  enough  to  pay  her  tuition  and  entire  expenses
while  in  training,  and  have  several  hundred  dollars  besides.

TIME  CREDIT.  Any  student  may  receive  two  months  time
credit  in  the  lecture  room  or  hospital,  if  her  ability,  recitations  and
examinations  entitle  her  to  same.  She  must,  however,  complete  a
two-year  course.  If  a  nurse  receives  two  months  credit  in  a  hospital,
she  then  receives  ten  months  private  case  training,  which,  of  course,
is  an  advantage,  as  she  is  earning  $15  to  $20  a  week  during  this  time.
If  a  student  also  completes  her  class  work  in  six  months,  she  then
spends  twelve  months  on  private  cases.

Doctors  desiring  nurses  who  are  not  antagonistic  to  their  form
of  practice  can  secure  them  from  our  school.  Phones,  Lincoln  2155,
and  Diversey  2990.

The  Illinois  Post  Graduate  and  Training  School  for  Nurses

Office:  546  Garfield  Avenue  Chicago,  Illinois


818


Alphabetical  Index-


Aptekinun
Ay  res


APTEKMAK.  H.. 673  Jefferson

St., Gary. Ind. (D.C.)
ARAND,  CHARLES.  A..  Adarns

BldpT.. Sault Ste. Mane.

Canada. (D.O.)
VRBOTHNOT.  MISS  R.  ELSIE.

334  N.  Maryland  St.,  Glen-
dale, Cal. (D. C.)
ARCHER. MADAME, 45 W.

34th St.,  Ne\v ^  ork. ^. Y.
ARCHER, ELLSWORTH A.,

First Natl. Bank Bldff..

Pullman, AVash. (D.^j
E F, 415  J Brand Blvd..

Glendale,  Cal. (D.O.)
Isaac E., The Ellington.

Cleveland, O. (El.)
Wm. Reed, 140 S. 13th St..

Lincoln.  Neb. (D.O.)
ARCHIBALD. ALICE. 818 E.

21st St.. Oklahoma City,

Okla. (D.C.)
ARDOUIN. ERNEST .7..  . o9

Van  Duzer  St..  Tompkms-

viUe. N. Y. (D.C.)
ARGUST, T. A., c/o Lurlin

Baths, Bush and Larkm

Sts , San Francisco, Cal.

ARISMAN, G. W., 401

Mathews Bldpr.. Milwau-
kee. Wis. (D.C.)
\RMOND. R.  E.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal. (DC.)  ^ -r^ A

ARMOND,  RICHARD  H..  Ford
Bldg-.. Great Falls. Mont.

VRMOR?'  GLADDIS,  502  Con-
stitution St.,  Emporia.
Kan. (D.O.)  ^^^^

VRMSTRONG  &  ARMSTR()NG,
600-1  Green  Bldg.,  New
Castle, Pa. (D.C.)

ARMSTRONG, C. D., 4505

Clinton St., Cleveland, O.

VRMSTRONG. Cleveland,

Okla. (D.C.)  .

Ella  S.,  c/o  Kinsey  &  Pans,
Mount Auburn, Cincin-
nati, O. (Ma.)
Ernest C, Elks' Temple,

New  Bern,  N.  C.  (D.O  )
F H , Lock Box 55, Wood-
burn, Ore. (D.C.)

ARMSTRONG,  Dr.  G.  N.,  and
BULLOCK,  R.  N..  6  La-
fayette  St., Albany. N. Y.

Mrs.  Georgie  D.  C.  Toronto,

Ont.. Canada. (D.  C)
I M 165 Lvnn St., Seattle,
'  Wash. (D.C.)
J D., North  Mill Street.

New Ca.stle. Pa. (D.C.)
.Tanet M.. Box 15, Coburg.

Ont. (D.O.)  , ■ „,^

T Telford.  4-5  Wilson  Bldg..

Brighton Ave., Rochester.

Pa. (D.C.)
Sarah, North  Mill Street,

New Castle, Pa. (D.C.)
W E  , The Markeen,

Buffalo, N.  Y. (Cr.)
ARNAN. H. VICTOR. 412 N.

Manle St., Charlotte, N.  C.

(D.M.T.)
ARNOLD, ALICE. 100 Grace

Court. Elvria, O. (N.D.)
Alma C. 9 West 67th St..

New York. N. Y. (D.C.)
D.  J..  Eldora.  la. (D.C.)
G E.. Post-Offlce Bldg.,

Albion,  Mich. (D.O.)
Ruth S.. 23-24 Woodburn

Ave.,  Cincinnati,  O. (D.O.)
W. H., U. S. Bank Bldg.,

Vancoucer, Wash. (D.O.)


1406
City.


Y.


ARXOTT, NELL. 3 Bucking-
ham  Gate. London, S. W.

England. (D.O.)
ARPS. HENRY J.. R. No. 1

.Tewell, O. (D.M.T.)
ARQUELLES, DR. M. G

10th Ave., Ybor

Tampa. Fla. (ND.)
ARTELT. FRED. 534-5

Security Bldg.. Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
ARTHUR. James B. McKee.

740 West End Ave., New

York. N. Y. (D.O.)
ASAY, LILLIAN. 117 N. 2  7th

St.,  Camden.  N.  J. (D.C.)
R. S., 119 N. 27th Street.

Camden, N. J. (D.C.)
ASH  &  ASH.  Monroe  and

Division Aves., Grand

Rapid.s, Mich. (D.C.)
ASH, C. C. 767 Humboldt

Parkway. Buffalo, N.

C. E.. 476 Glenwood Ave..

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
Geo.. 214  Main  St.,  Orpheum

Bldg.,  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y.

ASHCROFT, ELMER, High

St.. Fort  Recovery, O.

(D.M.T.)
Robert G., 136 Wellington

St., Kingston. Ont,

Canada. (D.O.)
ASHE. D. Raymond. Lillis

Bldg.. Kansas City, Mo.

AVayne E., 118 E. Fulton

St.. Grand Rapids, Mich.

ASHFORD.  J.  A.. 1674  Gratiot

Ave..  Detroit.  Mich. (D.C.)
ASHLAR, MAJOR, Cass St.,

Roseberry. Ore. (N.D.)
ASHLEY. E. M., Mendota, 111

ASHMORE,  EDYTHE. 161  At-
kinson Ave.. Detroit.

Mich. (D.O.)
Margaret D. C. Clinton, la.

ASHTON, F. HOWARD. 49

Deansgate, ^Manchester,

England (D.O.)
ASHWORTH, SYLVIA, 401 S.

14th St., Lincoln, Neb.

Svlvia  L.,  345  S.  14th  St.,

Lincoln.  Neb. (D.C.)
ASKEAV.  HORACE.  25 i  "U^ash-

ington St.. Green Castle,

Ind. (D.C.)
ASPLIN. A. M.. Hastings,

Minn. (D.C.)
ASTROM, ALGOT, 200 West
• 72nd  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(P.)
ATHERTON. BESSIE, 510-11

Wheelock Bldg., Peoria,

111. (D.C.)
Carrie, Twin Falls. Idaho.
ATHERTON, FREDERIC. 101

Tremont St., Boston,

Mass. (D.C.)
N.  W.,  421  South  Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  wili
be made in subsequent issues


\V. R.. Twin Falls. Idaho.

(DC.)
ATKINS. J. D.. Exchange

Bldg.. Los Angeles. Cal.

W. A.. Ohio Bldg., Clinton.

111. (D.O.)
ATKINSON. DR.. 2393 Mission

St.. San Francisco, Cal.

A. J.. Pittsburerh Life Bldg..

Pittsburgh, Pa. (El.)
John T., Dominion Trust

Bldg.. Vancouver. B. C,

Canada. (D.O.)
Orrin. Hutchinson. Kans.

ATTILA & BAUMANN. 4  9 VV

38th St.. New  York, X. V.

ATTINGER. S. F.. Box 57.

Mansflelfl. O. (D.M.T.  i
ATTY.  NORMAN  B..  Court  Sq.

Theatre  Bldg.. Springfield.

Mass. (D.O.)
ATWOOD. H. C. El Centro

Natl. Bank Bldg.. El

Centro. Cal. (D.O.)
ATZEN. C. B.. Omaha Natl.

Bank Bldg., Omaha, Neb.

ATZERT. EDW. 182 Cornelia

St  . Rrooklvn.  N.  Y. (Ont.)
AITBERY. EMMA. "\A'eeping

Water. Neb. (D.C.)
Emma. Broken Bow. Neb.

AUER. JACQUES.  Massage

Institute. Hotel Biltmore,

New  York, N.  Y. (Ma.)
AUFDERHEIDE, WM., 806  J

I St. N. W., Washington.

D.  C. (D.C.)

AUGIER.  F.  L.,  710  Tecumseli
St., Toledo. O. (D.M.T.)

AUGUST.  DR.  H.  W..  86  Hut-
ton  St..  Jersey  City,  N.  J.

AUGUSTA SxVNITARIUM,

THE, 1633 Freeman Ave.,
Cincinnati. O. (P.D.)

AULT, MARGARET H., 942

E.  130th St.. Cleveland,  O.
(Ma.)

AUPPERLE. G. A.. Suther-
land, la. (D.O.)
AITRELIUS, J., Fremont,

Kans. (M.D.)
AUSTIN. I. M., Morgantown.

W.  Va. (D.O.)
Isabel E., Seftnn Block. San

Diego. Cal. (D.O.)
J. N.. 19 Porter Bldg.. San

Jose, Cal. (N.D.)
J.  W.,  Alma,  Mich. (D.  C.)
AUTSCHBACH. CARL. 333 S.

Dearborn St.. Chicago.

111. (N.D.)
AVERY, FRANK E.. Masonic

Temple.  Erie.  Pa. (D.O.)
Herbert. Thomson Bldg.,

Oakland. Cal. (D.O.)
AXFORD. AMELIA J.. 473

Duffenin Ave.. I^ondon.

Ont.. Canada. (D.C.)
AXTELL. S. W.. St. Regis

Hotel, "Winnipeg. Man..

Canada. (D.C.)
AYE. ANNA H.. Box 554,

Loup City. Neb. (D.C.)
AYER. ED. J., R. F. D.  No. 1.

Box 39. Abbvville. Kan.

AYRES. ELIZABETH. 74

Central  Ave.,  Hackensack,

N. J. (D.O.)
S.  H.,  Curryvllle,  Mo. (D.C.)
AYRES, T. E., Goltry, Okla.


UiilverHUl Nilturopntlilf Director) iiikI lliijern' <;iil«l«'


Newark's  Motto: "Newark  Knows  How."
Our  Motto: "The  College  that  Graduates  Experts."

"Mecca  of  Chiropractic"

DR.  FRANCIS  W.  ALLEN,  Dean


Be  a  Drugless  Physician  and  Bloodless  Surgeon.

Become  a  Doctor  of  Chiropractic.

Write  for  a Prospectus.


"THE  SHRINE  OF  DRUGLESS  PHYSICIANS"

The  New  Jersey  College  of  Chiropractic

Incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  New  Jersey
as  an  Institution  of  Learning

122  ROSEVILLE  AVE.  NEWARK,  NEW  JERSEY


//  you  are  sick  and  have  tried  everything  else  with  no  lasting
results,  try  Chiropractic  (spinal)  adjustments  and  get  well.

WHAT  IS  CHIROPRACTIC?

(  Ki-ro-prak-tik)

CHIROPRACTIC  is  a  scientific  method  of  removing  the  cause  of  disease
(acute  or  chronic)  without  the  aid  of  drugs,  surgery  or  appliances.  The  science  of
Chiropractic  is  based  upon  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  brain,  spine,  spinal  cord  and
nerves  emanating  therefrom.  Pressure  on  a  nerve  at  the  opening  where  it  leaves
the  spine  will  cause  disease  in  that  organ  or  tissue  at  which  the  nerve  ends.  The
Chiropractor,  after  locating  the  place  of  the  pressure  (by  vertebral  palpation  and
the  tracing  of  the  tender  nerves)  adjusts,  by  hand,  the  subluxated  (displaced)
vertebrae  which  relieves  the  pressure  and  enables  "Nature"  to  restore  normal  con-
ditions—HEALTH.

EDISON'S  OPINION

"The  doctor  of  the  future  will  give  no  medicine,  but  will  interest  his  patients
in  the  care  of  the  human  frame,  in  diet,  and  in  cause  and  prevention  of  disease."


820


.\lj)h(iht'lic<il  Iixh'.r


lUihl?
liarber


B


BABB, H. J., 2125 N. 18th  St.,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.C.)
BABCOCK, O., Warsaw, N.  Y.

W.  P.,  Uongmont,  Colo.

BABENZIEN. M. F., 2301

Mvitle Ave., Brooklyn,

N."  Y. (Opt.)
BACH. JAMES S., Temple

Bldg., Toronto, Ont.

BACHMAN, M. E., Hippel

Bldg., Des Moines, la.

BACHMAN, O. K., Genoa,

Neb. (D.C.)
BACHMANN. O. K., Platts-

mouth. Neb. (D.C.)
BACKER, V. I.., 410 S. 6th

St., Sjjrinstteld. 111.
BACKUS. LORETTA, Stock-
ton, 111. (D.O.)
BACKUS. WM. VERNON, 734

Euclid Ave., Cleveland,

O. (I>  S.T.)
BACON .TEANETTE, Phoenix,

Ariz. (D. C.)
BADDERS, J. I., 236 S.

Ashland  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

BAER, FRED. J., 214 Wash-
ington St., E. Strouds-

burg, Stroudsburg and

Delaware  Water  Gap, Pa.

BAGLEY, MISS I. E., Kenois

Bldg., Washington, D. C.

(Ma.)
BAGLEY,  R.  A.,  P.  O.  Box  264,

Westfield,  N.  J. (D.O.)
BAHEKE & BAHEKE:, (Jrand

Forks,  N.  D. (D.C.)
BAHNER. FRED B.. 78.53

Carpenter St., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
BAHRINGER. S.  E., Sherrard,

111. (D.C.)
BAIEEY, ALBERT N., 1116

Santrus St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)
De  Forrest C, 739 N. 40th

St.. Philadelphia, Pa.

E.  Marvin,  Kress  Bldg.,
Houston, Tex. (D.O.)

Edw.  P.,  c/o  Bimini  Baths,
Los  Angeles.  Cal. (D.C.)

F.  T.,  178  B  St..  Salt  Lake
City, Utah. (D.C.)

Homer Edward, Frisco
Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  (D.O.)

T. C, Gridley, Kan. (M.D.)

J.  R.,  Masonic  Temple,  Ash-
land, Wis. (D.O.)

John  H.,  Empire  Bldg.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)

J.  R.,  Masonic  Temple,  Ash-
land, Wis. (D.O.)

Raymond  W.,  Franklm
Bank  Bldg.,  Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)

S.  L.,  Opera  Blk.,  Lamar,
Mo. (D.O.)

Simon  W.,  Meyer-Chapman
Bank  Bldg.,  Red  Lodge,
Mont. (D.O.)

Walter Edw., Frisco Bldg.,

St.  Louis,  Mo. (D.O.)

BAILIFF, J. O., 4803 W^est

Madison St., Chicago, II..


BAILOR, BLANCHE, Geneva,

Neb. (D.C.)
BAILY,  J. F., Boshan, O.

(D.M.T.)
BAIR, F. E., 224 Ash Ave.,
Findlay, O. (D.C.)


B.MIl,  F.  E.,  Lcipsic,  o. (N.D.)

Fred E., Fostoria, O. (D.C.)

Roy R., 214i S. Main St.,

BAIRD, ANNA  E., 320 7th St.,

Elyria, O. (Ma.)
BAIRD, GEO. R.. 921 College
St.,  Toronto,  Ont.,  Canada.
John  W..  Battle  Creek,  Mich.

Minerva, 105 Sayre St.,

Montgomery, Ala. (D.O.)
Nora B. Phcrigo. Weissin-
ger-Aulbert Bldg., Louis-
ville. Ky. (D.O.)
R. W., 12 Vine St.. Sharon,

Pa. (D.C.)
G. R., 421 College Avenue,
Toronto, Ont., Canada.
BAIRSTOW, W. R., Warren
Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,  Warren,
Pa. (D.O.)
BAISTER, F. A., Houston,

Tex. (S.T.)
BAKER,  ADAM,  B. &  I.  Bldg.,
Dubuque, la. (D.O.)

C.  L., 1772 Peabody Ave.,
Memphis, Tenn. (D.O.)

Chas., Lindsey, O. (D.M.T.)

D.  L., Hebron, Nebr. (D.C.)

E.  H., 29 E. Madison St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

Emma, Ellwood City, Pa.

F., 20 S. State St., Chicago,

111. (Ma.)
Frederick Dunton, 76 Har-
denbrook Ave., Jamaica,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
Gongianna, River Falls,

Wis.  (D.C.)
Geo.  W.,  101  S.  Franklin
St.  Greenville,  Mich.  (D.C.)
H.  N.,  Cameron,  Mo.  (D.O.)
J.  E.,  Citizens  Natl.  Bank
Bldg.,  Brazil,  Ind.  (D.O.)
John W., 282 Leroy Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
N.  B.,  832  Ohio  St.,  Wiccuta,

Kan. (D.C.)
R. N., Portland, Ore. (N.D.)
R. P., 215 N. Broad St.,

Lancaster, O. (D.O.)
Ruth E., 3219 Cleveland
Heights, Cleveland,  O.
B.4KER & BAKER, Carrol-
ton.  Greene  Co..  111. (D.C.)
BAKER & WIEHN, 5716
Euclid Ave., Cleveland, O.
BALBIRNIE, C. D. B.. 4308
Walnut St., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O)
BALDWIN.  F. GUY.  Main  and
Chopin Sts.. Canandaigua,
N.  Y. (D.C.)
Fred, Antigo, Wis. (D.C.)
Helen M., Liberty Natl.
Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.O.)
J. R.. Butler, Pa. (D.C.)
Dr. Z. L., Kalamazoo, Mich.
BALDY, JAMES B., Fidelity
Bldg., Tacoma, Wash.
BALE,  E.  W., 8  Victoria  Ave.,
South Hamilton, Conn.
BALES, GRACE M., 210| N.
Douty St., Hanford, Cal.
BALFE.  ANNA  B..  Hotel  Ells-
worth. Denver, Colo.


lOlinor  M., Ma.soii Kldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
Sarah Ijouise. lOUsworth
Hotel, Denver, Colo.
Susan, Mason Bldg., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
BALIZER, I., 483 Knicker-
bocker Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (Opt.)
BALL,  EDITH  E.,  R.  D.  No.  1,
Box 48, Galloway, O.
(D.M.T.)
J. F., 20 E. Broad St.,

Columbus, O. (Ch.)
Walter T., Detroit, Mich.
BALL,  WM.  F.,  Wamego,  Kan.

BALMAT, D. W., Murfrees-  ■

boro, Tenn. (D.O.)
BALOW, A. H., 4121 Pine St.,
Michigan  City,  Ind. (D.C.)
BALSE, J. A., 43 N. Main St.,

Sheridan, Wvo. (D.C.)

BALSER & BALSER, 15 S.

Euclid Ave., Pasadena,

Cal. (D.C.)

BALLARD, A. E., 139 Main

St.,  Herkimer,  N.  Y.  (D.C.)

BALLERT. JR.. A. K. Ohio

Bldg., Toledo. O. (D.O.)
BALZER & BALZBR, DRS.,
467 N. Fair Oak, Pasa-
dena,  Cal. (D. C.)
BANCROFT, CLAUDE M.,
Finley Blk., Canandaigua
and  Penn  Yan,  N.  Y.
BANDEL, C. F., 148 Hancock
St.. Brooklyn, N Y. (D.O.)
BANDURANT, L.  G.,  Vandalia,

Mo. (D.C.)
BANGHBR, L. GUY, 229 N.
2nd St., Harrisburg, Pa.
BANKER, CHARLES F., 184
Albany Ave., Kingston,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
Gene C, 526 W. Hotter St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
J. Birdsall, 112 W. 72nd
St., New York, N. Y.
Minerva Kellogg, 184 Al-
bany Ave.,  Kingston,  N.  Y.
BANKS. EDWARD G., 204
Northampton St., Easton,
Pa. (D.O.)
McLerd  M.. 114  N.  Nebraska
St., Marion, Ind. (D.C.)
BANKS, JOHN J., 1122 West
4th  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.  (Ch.)
BANNING, JOHN W., 65
Halsey St., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (D.O.)
BANTA, S. S., Winchester,

Ind. (D.C.)
BARBBE, LOTTIE CATRON,
31 Maple St., Springfield,
Mass. (D.O.)
BARBER, ANDREW,  Lansing,
Mich. (D.C.)
B., Wolseley, Sask., Canada.

Chas. AV., Flanders Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Isabel Olive, First Natl.
Bank Building, Allegan,
Mich. (D.O.)
BARBER, G. A., 207 South

California Ave., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)
Morton, Carthage, Ind.


UnU'oi-siil \)i(iiro|>:iHii<- Dircolory >iii(1 Iliiyors' (itiUto


821


H-


Washington  School  of
Chiropractic,  Inc.


THE  School  That  Creates  its
Record  on  the  Merits  of  its
Works.  Its  Students  are
equipped  for  the  best  in  life;  given
the  Best  in  Chiropractic  and  Kin-
dred Spondylotherapy  Methods,
with  fullest  courses  in  Anatomy,
Physiology,  Pathology,  Diagnosis,
Dissecting,  etc.

Courses  lead  in  two  years  of  six
months  each  to  Degree  of  Doctor
of  Chiropractic,  to  which  is  added
Degree  of  Philosopher  of  Chiro-
practic.

Washington,  the  City  Beautiful,  with  its  rapidly  growing  population,  which  has
already  reached  the  half  million  mark,  has  advantages  which  no  other  city  on  earth
possesses  or  can  possess;  splendidly  healthful,  wondrously  beautiful,  inestimably
educational.

To  name  all  these  advantages  would  require  more  space  than  this  page  would
permit,  and  we  therefore  name  but  a  few,  such  as  the  Library  of  Congress,  where
every  old  or  new  book  ever  published  on  drugless  therapy  or  any  other  subject
may  be  found  and  used;  the  Smithsonian  Institute,  with  its  Manikins,  Torsos,
Skeletons,  and  thousands  of  other  Physiological  and  Anatomical  specimens  and
objects  of  immense  importance  to  students;  other  Museums,  Libraries,  Monuments,
Government  Buildings,  Zoological  Gardens,  etc.,  etc.

The  School  itself,  with  commodious  quarters  on  Washington's  best  business
street,  has  the  most  thorough  equipment  that  could  be  furnished.  Good  library,
nicely  furnished  offices,  neat  and  well  furnished  adjusting  parlors,  commodious
lecture  and  clinic  rooms,  static  and  X-Ray  machine,  all  other  desirable  apparatus,
the  best  of  skeletons,  articulated  and  disarticulated,  all  charts  ever  published  that
we  know  of,  large  and  small  manikins,  etc.,  etc.

We  are  determined  that  no  advancement  in  Chiropractic  and  Kindred  Sciences
shall  escape  our  notice.  Our  students  must  and  shall  have  the  best.  Whatever
advancements  naturally  come  to  the  sciences  taught  in  this  college,  our  student
body  shall  receive.

Rates  of  Tuition  as  Follows: —

Complete  Course  Leading  to  Degree  of  Doctor  of  Chiropractic $150.00

Same  Course  for  Husband  and  Wife,  if  taken  at  same  time 200.00

Other  two  Members  of  same  Family,  if  taken  at  same  time 250.00

Course  Leading  to  Degree  of  Philosopher  of  Chiropractic,  Additional.  . 100.00

Post  Graduate  Course  for  Physicians,  lasting  about  two  months 50.00

Course  for Graduate Nurses 100.00

•€>-

For  catalog  and  all  further  information,  call  on. or  address,  the  college

J.  S.  RILEY,  M.  S.,  D.  M.  T.,  D.  P., D.  O.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C,  Dean

ROSALIA  M.  SIMPSON,  D.  C,  Secretary  and  Treasurer


822


Alphaheticdl  Index


Barb  era
Baumyardner


BARBERA, ANTHONY, 120

8th Ave., Newark, N. J.

BARBERICK. HENRY  F., 522

\V. Chiekasaw, Oklahoma

City. Okla. (D.C.)
BARBIER, E. A., 201 Park

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.

BARCHITE. AUGUSTUS C,

27  Madison  St.,  Rochester,

N. Y. (N.D.)
BARCO, VIOI.A, 15 Owens

Bldg.,  Independence,  Mo.

BARCUS, KMMA M., 903 Oak

St., Columbus, O. (Ch.)
BARGER, EVA L., 84 Park

Ave., Rutherford, N. J.

Maude F., Succasunna, N.  J.

BARK,  B.  A., 344 E. llGth  St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
BARKER, ALBERT, S., 23

Flatbusli Ave., Brooklyn,

N.  Y. (Opt.)
Alex. E. W., 50 Church St.,

New York, N. Y. (P.)
Prof. Anthony, 127 W. 42nd

St., New  York,  N. Y.

(P.)
Fred M., 2830 Prospect

Ave., Cleveland, O. (El.)
BARKER, EDWARD H., 34

Rodney  St.. Liverpool  and

20  St.  Ann's  Square, Man-
chester,  England. (D.O.)

B.  F.,  Henderson,  Ky. (D.C.)
Francis  M., Wellman, la.

Jesse  S.,  La  Harpe,  111.

BARKLIE, R. C, Cor. Maple

and Talbot Sts., London,

Canada, (D.C.)
BARLAR, MISS CARRIE,

Elmwood, Okla. (S.T.)
BARLETT, CLARENCE E.,

Clarion, Pa. (D.C.)
BARLOW, DAISY D., 24

Townsend St., Walton,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Geo. Grant, Neenah, Wis.

BARMBY, MARTHA, Alta

Vista Bldg., Berkeley,

Cal. (D.O.)
BARNARD, LENA, Chagrin

Falls, O. (Ch.)
BARNES, A. B., Byron, Mich.


C.  A.,  Galesburg  Natl. Bank
Bldg., Galesburg, 111.

C. A., 401-2 Holmes Bldg.,

Galesburg, 111. (D.C.)
F.  E.,  Mitchel  Blk.,  Charles-
ton, 111. (D.O.)
Joanna, Grier Park Bldg.,

Greenwood, S. C. (D.O.)
Lora K., Loveman Bldg.,

Chattanooga,  Tenn. (D.O.)
Sam'l Denham, 280 Bere-

tania St., Honolulu, T.  H.

W. O., Sheridan, Wyoming.

BARi\i:.fc>, F. F., Couer  de

Lane,  Idaho (D.C.)
H., 729 Manhattan Avenue,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (Opt.)
BARNETT, E. M., 11 Park

Ave.,  Meadville,  Pa. (D.C.)
J. A., Oskaloosa, la. (D.C.)
John Ambrose, Citizens'

Trust Co., Boonville, Mo.

J.  M., Oskaloosa, la. (D.C.)
J. W., Amer. Mechanics

Bldg.,  Trenton,  N.  J. (D.C.)


BARNHART, FLORA, 431 J N.

Main  St., Delphos, O.

Dr., Saloin Bldg., c/o Dr.

Campbell, Pasadena, Cal.

BARRETT, GEO, A., 81G E.

45th St., Seattle, Wash.

Gordon W., Bank of P. B.

Bldg., Poplar Bluff, Mo.

H. Lester, Morgan Bldg.,

Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
Michael. 187 Plainfield Ave..

Grand Rapids, Mich.

Onie A., 1423 Locust St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
IIARRETT, MRS. J., 103.X 3r()

Ave., New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
BARROWS, FLORENCE J.,

Kingman, Kan. (D.O.)
BARRY, JOANNA, 242 Bryant

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
-^ARSKY, NATHANIEL, 211

Main St., Conneaut, O.

(D.M.T.)
BARSTON, MRS. E. A., 1117

Tyler St., Houston, Tex.

BARSTOW,  MYRON  B.,  44  Mt.

Everett St., Dorchester,

Mass. (D.O.)
BARTELL, F. W., Middle-
town,  O. (D.C.)
BARTEL, FRED. ^V., 1412

Nord Ave., Milwaukee,

Wis. (D.C.)
BARTH, JOS., 318 5th Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
BARTH, VICTOR, 318 5th

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
BARTHOL, ERNEST,

Stamford and S. Norwalk

Sts  .  Stamford,  Conn.  (DC.)
BARTHOLOMEW, 6221 South

Hal.stoad St., Chicago, 111.


E.  J., 39 S. State Street,
Chicago, 111. ((D.O.)

F.  H., 708 Davton Ave.,
Wichita, Kan. (D.C.)

H. H., 301 E. Park, Okla-
homa Citv, Okla. (D.C.)
W. C, 128 W. 12th St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.C.)
BARTHOLOMEW, H. H., 331

W. 63rd St., Chicago, 111.

H.  H.,  Harriman,  Tenn.

BARTLET. MAUDE E., 3709

Colorado  Ave., Chicago,

Til. (N.D.)
BARTLETT.  L.  P.,  1524  Chest-
nut St., Philadelphia, Pa.

Leonard. P.. 1542 N Felton

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

BARTLETT, WM. G. W., 110

W.  84th  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
BARTO, IDA  E,, 565  Main  St.,

Bast Orange, N. J. (D.O.)
BARTOSH, WILLIAM, 1421 E.

49th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

BARTRAM & DOUTT, West-

inghouse Bldg., Pitts-
burgh,  Pa. (D.C.)
BARTSCH, WALTER F.,

Watertown, Minn. (D.C.)
BARUCH, SANDER. 59 West

105th St., New Yoik,

N. Y. (N.D.)
BASELER, A. W., R. No. 1,

Box 116, Cardington, O.

(D.M.T.)


BASHAW. J. P., 34 E. Main
St., North East. Pa.  (D.O.)
BASHLINB,  O.  O.,  5040  Locust
St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Orrin O., Bioad St.. Grove
City. Pa. (D.O.)
BASHOR, H. A., Vincent Blk.,

Portland. Ore. (D.O.)
BASS. JOHN T., Central Sav-
ings Bank Bldg., Denver.
Colo. (D.O.)
Elizabeth C, Central Sav-
ings Bank Bldg., Denver,
Colo. (D.O.)
BASSETT, LINA, Peever, S.
D. (DC.)
Mrs.  Mattie  C,  405  Delaware

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y. (Cr.)
Dr. Norman H., 214 E.
Broad  St.,  Salem,  N.  J.
BASYB, A. A., Wilson, N. C.
(DO.)
E. E., de Lendrecie Bldg..
Fargo, N. D. ((D.O.)
BATEMAN  &  BATEMAN,  Drs.,
D. D, O. F. Bldg., Gutten-
berg, la. (N.D.)
BATEMAN,  C.  E., Elkport, la.
Dr. Geo., Coffeyville, Kan,

(S. T.)
Joseph  S., Hazleton, Pa.
BATEMAN, LOUISE, 1414 W
Si. N. W., Washington,
D. C. (D.M.T.)
John  E.,  Geneseo,  111. (N.D.)
L. v., 403-4 Wheat Bldg..
Fort Worth, Tex. (D.C.)
R.  C,  401  Main  St.,  Alliance,
O. (N.D.)
BATES, Estelle P., Lake

Preston, S. D. (D.C.)
BATES, LENORA  K.,  Box  102,
Hollywood Sta., Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.O.)
Sarah, Modesto, Cal. (D.C.)
Z. C, Giand Rapids, Mich.
BATESON, .1. C, Scranton,

Pa. (M.D.)
BATHRICK, ROSE, 110 W.
9th St.. Austin. Tex.
BATTLE CREEK METHODS,
Keenan Bldg., Pittsburgh.
Pa. (M.A.)
BAUDENDISTEL, C, 729

Polk  St.,  West  New York,
N. J. (N.D.)
.5AUER,  GEO.  A., 707-8  Union
Nat'l Bank Bldg.,
Columbia,  S.  C. (D.C.)
G. W., Lexington, Ky.

H.  J.,  403  Bridge  St.,  Brook-
lyn,  N. Y. (Opt.)
;3AUGHMAN, J. H., 512 Cen-
tral Ave., Connersville,
Ind. (D.O.)
J. S., 523 Division St., Bur-
lington,  la. (D.O.)
BAUM, JOHN D., 117 E. 6th
St., East Liverpool, O.
BAUM  AN, C, Aberdeen, S. D.
C.  A.,  1667  Main  St.,  Buffalo,
N. Y. (Ma.)
BAUMAN, GEO., Aberdeen,

S. Dak. (D.C.)
BAUMANN,  ATTILA  A.,  49  W.
38th St., New York, N. Y.
(P.)
BAUMANN, GEO., P. O. Box
62 Lethbridge, Ala. (D.C.)
BAUMGARDNER, J. A., Ne-
braska  City, Neb. (D.C.)


UnlverHfil  Nntiiropathlc  Directory  and  Buycrit'  Guide

lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllllH


823


RIEDMULLER

NATUROPATHIC  INSTITUTE


Established  1895


Telephone,  Lenox  5486 m


ALL  DRUGLESS  METHODS  USED.  BEST  NATUROPATHIC  EQUIP-
MENT in  New  York  City.  Kneipp's  Water  Cure.  Steam  Baths,  Electric
Liglit  Baths,  Packs.  Douches,  Pine  Needle  and  Herb  I'aths.  Electrotherapy
in  all  branches.  Massage,  Vibrations,  Swedish  Movements,  Curative  Gymnas-
tics, and  other  Manual  Methods.  Diet  and  Physical  Culture.  Men  and
Women  Departments.  Graduated  Naturopath  Lady  in  chars;e  of  Women's
Division.  Rates  reasonable.  Regular  Physician  for  E.xamination  and  Diag-
nosis. Highest experiences from Patrons and the Medical Profession.

J.  RIEDMUELLER,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  D.  O.

Graduate  of Father  Kneipp's Hydropathic College 1894, American School of Naturopathy 1898,
Osteotherapeutic College 1906
Licensed in New  Jersey  and New York City

Charter Member of American Naturopathic Association
Member  of  N.  Y.  State  Society  of  Naturopaths  since 1896

117  East  86th  Street  New  York,  N.  Y.

P>et\veen Lexington  and I 'ark  .Avenues

and  637  Livingston  St,,  Elizabeth,  N.  J.


=iiiiiiiii


THE

20th  Century

Method  of  Regaining

LOST  HEALTH

NATUROPATHY

Naturopathy  is  to-day  restoring-  vigor  and
vim  to  those  suffering:  from  run-down,  debili-
tated conditions  of  the  system  when  drugs  fail
to  have  any  effect.  Our  fees  are  exceedingly
reasonable  and  outside  patients  may  come  and
take  treatment  between  the  hours  of  8  to
12  a.  m. and 2 to  8 p.  m. Treatment  consists  of

MASSAGE.  OSTEOPATHY,  CHIROPRACTIC,  SPOlVnVI.OTHERAPY,  ORTHOPEHIC
SURGERY,  SUGGESTION,  HYDROTHERAPY  in  nil  brandies,  ELECTRIC  LIGHT,
HOT  AIR,  A'APOR,  SUN,  HERBAI-,  PINE  NEEDLE,  N.4UHEIHI  nnd  all  other  MEDI-
CATED BATHS,  OUR  TREATMENT  ROOMS  AND  ROOMS  FOR  RESIDENT  PA-
TIENTS  ARE SUNNY  AND STEAM  HEATED.

Naturopathic  Institute  and  Sanitorium


Naturopathy  is  the  Natural
Way  of  Treating  Disease


OP  CALIFORNIA (Incorporated)

DR.  CARL  SCHULTZ,  President


1319 S. GRAND AVENUE


LOS  ANGELES,  CAL.


^


Phonest Home  20903;  Broadway  2707


r:^


824


Alphahclicdl  Index


Hanmgardncr
Tiell


BAUMGARDNER,  J.  A.,

Manistee. Mich. (D.C.)
J. A., 3529 Gilbert Ave.,

Cincinnati, O. (N.D.)
BAUMGART, C. H.. 1093 2Gth

St., Milwaukee, Wis.

BATJMGRAS, GEORGE O.,

Central Natl. Bank Bldg.,

St. Petersburg:, Fla.

BAUMI.ER, CHARLES, 15 E.

15 St., Paterson, N. J.

BAUREGARD, MISS LIL-
LIAN, 57  Worchester  Ave.,

Pasadena, Cal. (N.D.)
IJAUTSCH, R. N., 4045 Calu-
met Ave., Chicago, 111.

BAYER,  CARL, Harlem  Hy-

diiatic Inst., 55 West

113th St., New York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
BAYLESS, B. M.. 832 Oak-
wood  Ave.,  Toledo,  O.

BAYMILLER, MINNIE M.,

104 N. Washing-ton St.,

Abingdon. 111. (D.O.)
BAYNE, DAISY, Harper, Kan.

BAYS, ALBERT J., Indiana

Bldg., Oklahoma City,

Okla. (D.C.)
BAXTER, A. F., Chenney,

Kan. (D.C.)
BAZEAN. FRANK, The Dal-
les, Ore. (N.D.)
BEACH, NANCEY A., 2983

Mayfield Road, Cleveland,

O. (Ch.)
BEAL, ROY  WILSON, 2403

Bi'oadway, New York,

N. Y. (P.)
BEALE, EDNA F., 5127 Cen-
ter Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.

BEALL, CLARA P., 474 S.

Salina St., Syracuse, N.  Y.

Francis  J.,  474  S. Salina  St.,

Syracuse, N. Y. (D.O.)
BEAM, WILSON, 60 N. 3rd

St.,  Easton,  Pa. (D.O.)
BEAMAN, K. W., 1437 W.

35th Place, Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
BEAN,  ALBERT,  C,  Le  Claire,

la. (D.C.)
BEAN,  A.  S.,  34  Jefferson  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
C.  D.,  5th  St.  and  Broadway,

Lorain, O. (N.D.)
Chas.  R.,  Grinnell,  la. (N.D.)
Clarence, 932J Market St.,

Akron, O. (D.C.)
.1.  P.,  81fi  Turk  St.,  San

Francisco, Cal. (N.D.)
Arthur  S.,  34  Jefferson  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
C. D., 216 College Ave.,

Akron, O. (N.D.)
E. H., Hayden Clinton

Bank Bldg., Columbus, O.

Mervin S., Mai-quette, Mich.

BEARD, MARTHA  D., Chero-
kee Bldg., Hopkinsville,

Ky. (D.O.)
BEARSE, ADA  M.,  Livingston

Road, Bar Harbor, Me.

BEATH,  T.,  Victoria  Hospital.

Winnipeg, Man., Canada.

BEATTY, BLANCHE, E., 875

Colonia Road, Elizabeth.

N.  J. (D.C.)
Mary, Lindsey, Okla. (D.C.)


Mary  E.,  Lurey,  Kan. (D.C.)
BEAULIEU,  J.  A.,  Room  34-35,

Commei'cial Bldg.,

Woonsocket, R. I. (N.D.)
BEAUVERD. A. A., 27 P St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

BEAVEN, E. H.. Granby  BIk.,

Cedar Rapids, la. (D.O.)
Leslie  M., I^ebanon,  Ind.

BEAVER, EDITH  B., 297

Champion  Ave.,.  (Columbus,

O. (Ch.)
Mrs.  E.,  Anamosa,  la. (D.C.)
W. O., 409 Mass Ave.,

Indianapolis,  Ind. (D.C.)
BEBOUT, ESTHER M.,

Hamilton  Bldg.,  Akron,  O.

E. R., People's Bank Bldg.,

Waynesburg, Pa. (D.C.)
BECH, CLAUDE G., 205-7

Natl. Safety Vault Bldg.,

Denver, Colo. (D,C.)
BECHTOL,  F.  M.,  P.  O.  Box  12;

Sta.  D,  Cleveland,  O.  (N.D.)
BECK, MISS A. L., 171  Union

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  (Ch.)
Leonora, 718 Roscoe St.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
BECK,  DUVALS,  4711  E.  King

St., Hamilton, Ont., Can.

E. P., 1622 California Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
I. E., Fortville, Ind. (D.C.)
M. Anna, 110 S. Home  Ave.,

Oak Park, Chicago, 111.

Mrs. W. X., 404 Van Buren

St.,  Auburn,  Ind. (D.C.)
Mary, Seattle, Wash. (D.C.)
May, 404 S. Van Buren St.,

Auburn, Ind. (D.C.)

May,  Perry,  la. (D.C.)

BECKER,  ARTHUR  D.,

Masonic Temple, Minne-
apolis,  Minn. (D.O.)
Chas. F., 82 Main St. W.,

Rochester, N. Y. (D.C.)
Ethel L., Preston, Minn.

Geo., Cochrane, Wis. (D.C.)
Gustave, 5 N. La Salle St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Jackson, H., 29 Pine Grove

Ave.,  Summit,  N.  J.  (D.C.)
Julius, 88 N. Bonnie Brae

Ave.,  Pasadena,  Cal.  (D.C.)
Roy  D.,  Oakland,  Md.  (D.C.)
Roy D., 216 E. King St.,

Lancaster, Pa. (D.C.)
Mrs. V. L., 412 6th St.,

Springfield, 111. (D.C.)
BECKER, GOTTFRIED. 64^

Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Ma.)
Dr.  Gustav,  5  N.  La  Salle

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Dr. Herbert  S.,  Staunton,

Va. (M.D.)
Jennie, 215 E. Hickory St.,

Arcadia, Fla. (N.D.)
Mary, Camas Valley, Ore.


Praclilioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


R. C, lOt; K. Dute St..

Riverside, Cal. (N.D.)
BECKET, JULIUS, 88 N.

Bonnie  St., Pasadena, Cal.

BECKETT, LINDA HARDY,

Colby, Kan. (D.O.)
O. F., Colby, Kan. (D.O.)
BECKHAM, JAMES  J., Chem-
ical Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.

BECKLER, E. J., 1553 V.".

Madison St., Room 706,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Herbert S.. Witz Bldg.,

Staunton,  Va. (D.O.)
Jennie  K., 16  N. Market  St.,

Staunton,  Va. (D.O.)
BECKMAN. HJALMAR, 12S K.

57th  St., New  York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
Jerome W., Ferdinand, Ind.

BECKWITH, ANN, Sheridan,

Wyo. (D.O.)
BECKWITH, ANNETTE H.,

1223 Columbine Street,

Denver, Colo. (D.O.)
Herman E., Ferguson Bldg.,

Los  Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
BEDELL, MINNIE MILLER,

Glasgow, Mo. (D.O.)
BEDFORD. ELIZABETH J.,

27  E.  Monroe  St.,  Chicago,

in.  (D.O.)

BEEBE,  M.  K., 1116  15th  Ave.,

Minneapolis, Minn. (N.D.>
BEECHER, W. W., 1548 3rd

Ave.,  Detroit.  Mich. (D.C.)
BEEKER. ROY  D.,  Lancaster,

Pa. (DC)
BEEMAN, E.'  E., 500 5th  Ave..

New York, N. Y". (D.O.)
L. Mason, 2131 Broadway,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
Roy Herbert, 462 Jersey

Ave., Jersev City, N. J.

BEERS, C. S., 73 Spring St.,

New Haven, Conn. (D.C.)
BEERY", J. K., Augusta,

W. Va. (N.D.)
BEETS, MERRITT J., 110 S.

Washington Ave., Wel-
lington, Kan. (D.O.)
Rutherford  H.,  Bethany,  Mo.

William E., Logan Bldg.,

St. Joseph,  Mo. (D.O.)
BEGELL, S. E., 771 Main St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
BEGGS,  JAS.  H.,  1026  W. 36th

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

BBHNCKE, F. H., 525 S.

Ashland Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
BEIK, HAROLD J., West

Liberty.  la. (D.C.)
BELD, A. J., 1518 Roosevelt

Ave.,  Grand Rapids, Mich.

BELDON,  C.  B.,  1232  Main  St.,

Racine, Wis. (D.C.)
BELINCKE, A., Manitowa,

Wis. (D.C.)
BELITZ. A., Monroe, Utah.

BELJCAN, A. J., 502 W. 141st

St., New York,  N. Y.

(Ma.)
BELKNAP, H. L., 813 Word

St., Wilkinsburg. Pa.

BELL, ADELINE, 309 S.

Franklin St., Kirksville,

Mo. (D.O.)
Annie W.. First  Natl. Bank

Bldg.,  Harrisonburg,  Va.

Custer.  Smithfield,  O. (D.C.)


Univcrsiil N:il  iiropiil  liic l)iro<'<orj iiinl Ilu.vers' (^niilo


An  Institution for the Treatment of Diseases by NATURAL METHODS
An Ideal Place for REST and RECREATION

DR.  CARL  STRUEH'S

SANATORIUM

AND  HEALTH  RESORT


McHENRY,  ILL.


Long Distance Phone:
McHenry 92-M.


Only  1  hour's  ride  from  Chicago,  on  the  Chicago-Northwestern  Ry.  Easy  to  reach  by  auto-
mobile from all directions.

Located  in  the  beautiful  Fox  River  Valley.  Healthful  rural  surroundings.  No  city  atmo-
sphere. No dvist. Very home-like. No conventionalities.

20  acres  of  Park  and  Orchard,  shrubs,  flowers  and  grapes.  Fine  bathing  beach.  Large
lawns  for  barefoot  walks.  Colony  of  open  air  cottages.  All  out-door  games.  Delightful
motor boat excursions and cross country walks.

Splendid  Results  by  our  Regeneration  Cure

All  various  Diets  (mixed,  vegetarian,  grape,  raw  food  diets).  Fasting  and  Milk  Cure
(Milk supplied from Holstein cows).

Special  diets  in  Gastric  and  Intestinal  afflictions,  Diabetes,  Obesity,  Gouty  and  Rheu-
matic  conditions.

Complete  Water  Cure  system.  Sun  and  Air  Baths  in  the  open.  Curative  exercises  (Gym-
nastics). Mud Packs. Massage. Rest Cure for  physical and  nervous  breakdowns.

Splendid  opportunities  for  those  who  wish  to  spend  their  vacation  for  the  benefit  of  their
health.  Moderate  rates.  Circular  and  information  upon  request.  Consultation  at  Chicago  by
appointment.


YUNGBORIV


FIRST
NATURE

CURE  RESORT  IN  FLORIDA.  Tangerine,  Orange  County.
Station  on  Seaboard  Air  Line  R.  K.,  ZELLWOOD,  Station
on  Atlantic  Coast  Line  R.  R.,  MOUNT  DOKA.  Located  m
the  highlands  of  Florida,  this  beautiful  resort  offers  the  best
opportunity  for  those  seeking  health,  rest  and  recreation.
Healthful  climate;  pure  air;  free  from  fogs  and  dampness.
Outdoor  sports;  swimming,  boating  and  bathing.  Every  ad-
vantage for  carrying  out  the  true  Natural  Life  and  Natural
Healing  Jfethods.  .Management  the  same  as  at  the  famous
Yungborn  at  Butler.  New  Jersey.  Sun,  Light  and.  Air  baths :
lothanin  baths,  clay  packs,  all  branches  of  Hydro-therapy.
Massage,  Swedish  Movements,  Mechano-therapy,  Chiropractic
etc.  Vegetarian  and  fruitarian  diet.  Special  facilities  for
fasting.  For  further  information,  address,  B.  LUST,  N.  u.,
Nature Cure Resort, BUTLER, N. J.


N  ^^^^^^*U:^ CHARTOLOGY

IMaprapatnic a  new  book  just

written  by  Dr.  Oakley  Smith,  founder  and  de-
veloper of  Naprapathy.  A  book  every  Osteo-
path,  Chiropractor  and Naturopath will  want.

A  Book  that  Sizzles  with  New  Truths

175 Illustrations on 271 pages 6"x9"

$5.50. Ten  days' approval

College  catalog  and  sample  "chart  book"  Free

CHICAGO  COLLEGE  OF  NAPRAPATHY
1428  W.  Jackson  Blvd. :: Chicago,  Illinois


li3l$obetii  by  tbe  Sea

The California Yungborn

CORONADO, CAL.

An Out-of-door Health Home and

School of Health

Located  on  beautiful  San  Diego  Bay,
near  Coronado  Tent  City.  We  use  only
genuine  Naturopathic  Methods,  such  as
Natural  Diet,  Fast  and  Milk-cure,
Open-air  Sleeping,  Boating  and  Swim-
ming, Psychotherapy,  etc.  Our  Open-
air  Gymnasia  and  Corrective  Treat-
ments  unexcelled in America.

We  have  lately  started  a  Physical
Culture  Colony  and  Tubercular  Pre-
ventorium in  the  mountains  near  Ja-
cumba  Hot  Springs — over  3,000  feet
elevation — under  the  same  management
as Halsohem. Write *

DR. TELL BERGGREN
"Halsohem  by  the  Sea,"  Coronado,  Cal.


826


A  Ipliabclical  liulc.v


EeU

Betziwr


D., Plattesville, Wis. (D.O.)
De Lano H., 83 King- St.,

Chatham. Ont. (D.O.)
Ella R., 1415 O'Farrell St.,
San Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)
Hanev H., Mechanics Bldg.,

Petersburg-, Va. (D.O.)

H.  R.,  Marinette.  Wis. (D.O.)

John  A.. Hannibal  Trust  Co.

Bldg., Hannibal, Mo.


J. I>., 1527 W. Augustana

St.,  Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
Mrs. Jane M., 1308 W. 3rd

St., Waterloo, la. (D.C.)
T.I. J., Sulomtin  Bldg.,  Helena.

Ark. (D.O.)
Mary, 200 McLennan Ave.,

Syracuse,  N.  Y. (D.C.)

R. G., Sapulpa. Okla. (D.C.)

R. W.. 219 W. Myrtle St..

Independence.  Kan.  (D.O.)

Tom. Smith Blk., Hartford,

Ind. (DC.)
W. J.. 792 15th Ave.. East
"Vancouver, B. C, Canada.
BELL. ALBERT, Woodward
Bldg., Washington, D. C.
J. H., 1452 West  Chicago

Ave., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
J. M.. Mount Gilead, O.

(D.M.T.)
John, 838 Altgeld St..
Chicago, 111. (D.M.T.)
BELLE. JOSEPHINE, 31 S.
40th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
BELLINGHAM,  T.  W.,  Bangor,

Mich. (D.C.)
BELMONT, J. J., 318 First
Natl. Bank Building,
Syracuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
BELT, W. E., Dodge Center.

Minn. (D.C.)
BELTON, CLARENCE.

Peapack. N. J. (D.C.)
BELYEA, JAMES A., Box 316,

Toledo, O. (D.M.T.)
BEMIS, FRANK E., St.

Albans. Vermont. (D.C.)
BEMIS. J. B., Janesville, Wis.

BENADOM, W. A., c/o

Standaid School  of  Chiro-
practic and Naturopathy,
Davenport. la. (M.D.)
BENCKE,  ■  HARRY C. 1334
Throop St.. Chicago, 111.
BENDER. W. F.. 10308 Euclid
Ave., Cleveland. O. (N.D.)
BENECKE, W. E., 400 Main
St., Braddock, Pa. (N.D.)
BENEDICT. A. MAY, 2513 N.
Main Ave., Scranton, Pa.
G. A., 244 Wood-ward Ave..
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
"BENFEIEL, CARRIE A., Old
National Bank Building,
Spokane. Wash. (D.O.)
BENHAM, L. O.. Odd Fellows
Bldg., 36 N. Main St.,
Waterburv.  Conn. (D.C.)
BENTON, MARTHA VERNON,
Flanders Bldg.. Philadel-
phia. Pa. (I).r).>
BEN.JAMTN. "\V. BERT, 21 W.
129th St.. New York,  N.  Y.
BENNETT,  Dr.  B.  G..  Madison-
ville, Ky. (S.T.)
Carrie A., Temple Court
Bldg.,  Denver,  Colo. (D.O.)
Charles A.. Stevens Bldg.,
Detroit. Mich. (D.O.)
BENNETT, C. M.. 1339 Wash-
ington Ave., Springfield,
111. (N.D.)


G.. 854 Temple
Minneapolis, Minn.


BENNETT, E. D., Husted
Bldg., Kansas City. Kan.
I. O.. Blanchester, O. (D.C.)
Silas M., Farmers Savings
Bank Bldg., Marshall, Mo.
T. L.. First Natl. Bank
Bldg.. Montgomeiy, .\la.
BENNING. LILLTE M.. 2901
16th St.. N. W., Washing-
ton.  D.  C. (D.O.)
BENSLV EBOLD, Prospect.

O. (D.C.)
BENSON, F. L., 34  6 N.  Main
St.. Springfield, Mass.
Pauli S.. 78 W. 82nd Street,

New  York,  N. Y. (Ma.)
Richard C, Paterson, N. J.
(DO.)
BENSON, L. R., 81 Centre
Ave., New Rochelle, N. Y.
O.  S.,  Memphis,  Mo. (D.C.)
R. C. Colt Bid., Paterson,

N. J. (D.C.)
W. R.. 612 4th Ave., Long-

mont, Colo. (D.O.)
Wm. S., 76 16th Avenue,
Newark.  N.  J. (D.C.)
BENTLEY. LILLIAN L,. 1533
Chestnut  St.,  Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
Wm.  A., 3493  Eagle St., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
BERG, E. C, Winona, Minn.
Walter
Court,
BERG,  GEORGE,  c/o  Chase

House.  Chicago,  111. (N.D.)
BERGE. EMIL, Arcadia. Wis.
H. A.. Carrington, N. Dak.
BERGEN, J. A., 1708 Warren
Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Jacob A., 704 S. Central
Park Ave., Chicago, 111.
BERGEN. M. V., 522 Greene
Ave.. Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Ma.)
BERGENER. ORZA, Decatur,

Ind. (D.C.)
BERGER. ARNOT>D. Park St  .
Dayton.  O. (Hy.)
C. G., 1421 W. Adams St.,

Chicago,  111. (N.D.)
Edward, 16 Bunn St..

Amsterdam. N. Y. (N.D.)
Lina, Park St., Dayton, O.

(Hy.)
P. O., Waukegan, 111.
BERGER. GRACE C. 2626
B'way, New York. N. Y.
(DO.)
BERGIN, FAY, Hughes  Bldg..
Moose Jaw, Saskatche-
wan. (D.O.)
P. J., 512 Woodland Ave..
Kansas  City,  Mo. (D.O.)
BERGINES. HERMAN, 84
Capitol Ave., Hartford.
Conn. (N.D.)
BERGLAND. 17211 Second
Ave.. Rock Island, 111.
BERGGREN, TELL, 624

Glorietta Blvd., Coronado.
Cal (KID.)
BERGSTROM, H. S.. 1101
State St.. Schenectady.
N. Y. (D.C.)
BERHALTER. A. K., 1423
Clark St., Chicago, 111.


BERHENKE, F. H., 506 N.

Main St., Fremont, Neb.

BERNARD. CURTIS, McGrory

Bldg.,  N(iiwich.C<)nn.(  IXO.)
Emma, 146 W. 105th St..

New York. N. Y. (D.C.)
H. E.. Fine Arts Bldg..

Detroit, Mich. (D.O.)
BERNHART, FLORA. Red-
ford, Mich. (D.C.)
BERRANG, H. P., 700 E St.

S. E., Washington, D. C.

BERROW,  A. W., 610 Central

Ave., Hot Springs, Ark.

BERRY, A. B.. 506 Florida

Ave., Tampa. Fla. (D.O.)
Clinton D., Rochester, N.  Y.

Gertrude S.. Granite Bldg.,

Rochester, N. Y. (D.O.)
John M., Marshall Bldg.,

Marshall, Mo. (D.O.)
BERRY, BENJ. F.,  c/o  The

Weltmer  Institute of

Sviggestive Therapeutics.

Nevada. Mo. (M.D.)
BERSCHEID. F. C, 8 Illinois

St.. Chicago  Heights,  Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)
BERTHOLF, MRS. E. L.,

Millersburg, O. (N.D.)
BERTI, N. J., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
BERTON, J. A., 1101 Dewev

St.. Sapulpa. Okla. (D.C.)
BERTRAND,  S.  D.,  Bird  Bldg.,

Mansfield, O. (N.D.)
L. D., 12 Blumerich Ave..

Grand Rapids. Mich.

BERTSCHINGER, A., 340-43

Pittock Block, Portland,

Ore. (N.D.)
BERTSON.  C.  S..  1115  Legonier

St., Latrobe, Pa. (D.C.)
BERUTH, MRS. E., 371 E.

183th  St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
BESLIN, ANNA M., 1528 E.

3rd St., Duluth, Minn.

BESSERDICH, K. J., Enter-
prise  Bldg., Kewanee,

Wis. (D.C.)
BESSEY, MABLE M., 108 S.

Beatrice, Toronto, Ont.

BESSIS, P. N., 428 Oakland

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.

(Ma.)
Peter  N..  1001  Keenan  Bldg..

Pittsburgh, Pa. (Ma.)
BEST, ARTHUR E.. Masonic

Temple. Newark, O.

R. C, Ingersoll. Ont.. Can,

(D.C,  D.O.,  D.M.T.)
BETHGE, H. E., c/o Tremont

Hotel. Indianapolis, Ind.

BETTNER. FRED., Page,

N. D. (D.C.)
BETTS.  V. STEELE,  Huron.  S.

Dak. (D.O.)
Ednah, Security Building.

Miami. Fla. (D.C.)
F. L.. 203 German Natl.

Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (DC)
W. P., Abvord, Tex. (S.T.)
BETZNER, CLARENCE W'..

2627 Vine St., Cincinnati,

O. 4P.C.)
Hugh L. M., Greencastle,

Ind. (D.O.)


UiiirerNul  J\uturoputhic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Gul<l4-  827


Dr.  Sonntag's  Naturopathic  Hospital  and  Sanitarium

A  quiet  HOMELIKE  SANITARIUM  with  all  conveniences  and  fully
equipt  to  care  for  and  treat  all  kinds  of  acute  and  chronic  diseases

We  are  beautifully  situated  in
the  thriving  city  of  Fowler,
with  its  excellent  schools,
churches,  electric  lights  and
waterworks,  on  the  edge  of
the  Artesian  Valley  of  Meade
County,  Southwestern  Kansas,
with  a  good  climate,  2495  feet
above  sea  level,  ideal  for  those
suffering  with  lung,  throat,  or
bronchial  trouble,  and  not  too
high  for  those  with  heart
trouble.

We  use  Herb  Baths,  vSun  Baths,
Cabinet  Baths,  Packs,  Kneipp
Cure,  Dry  hot  air  ovens,  Mas-
sage, Electricity,  Hydrothera-
py, Violet  rays,  freeing  nerves
biy  adjusting  the  bony
structures  and  manipulating
the tissues. Rational fasting

tific  combining  of  foods.  Symptom,  Spinal  and  Diagnosis  from  the

nates  mistakes  in  Diagnosis.


and
eye.


scien
elimi


Dr.  Alf.  G.  Sonntag,  N.D.D.C.

FOWLER,  KANSAS


Mrs.  M.  H.  Sonntag,  N.D.

p. O.  box  356


<>


*


f


<?>


m


SYRACUSE  NATUROPATHIC
INSTITUTE  and  SANITARIUM

HERMAN  C.  SCHWARZ,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  D.  O.

Member A. N. A., N. Y. State Society of Naturopaths, International Alliance, etc..

Graduate  American School  of Naturopathy

Osteotherapeutic College (Vetus Academia),

National Austrian Nature Cure College, etc.

1228  E.  Genesse  St.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.

Well  equipped  Naturopathic  Sanitarium  with  all  modern  appliances.  Hydro-
therapy in  all  its  branches.  System:  Kneipp,  Kuhne,  Just,  Bilz,  and  others.
Electrotherapy  on  a  scientilic,  new  basis.  Phototherapy  with  the  latest  and
best  apparatus.  Heliotherapy  and  Athmospheric  Cure.  Rickli.  Lust,  and
Lahmann  Methods.  Mechanotherapy.  Massage,  Swedish  Movements,  Chiro-
practic, Osteopath}'. Orthopedics, Neuropathy, etc.

Dietology:  Ehret,  Kuhne  and  Lust  Systems.  Vegetarian,  Fruitarian  Non-
nuicous Diet. Fasting  Cures.

Metaphysical,  Mental  and  Spiritual  Healing,  Suj*:estion  Therapy  and
Mental Science.

Elegant  and  comfortable  accommodations  for  resident  and  transient  patients,
guests  and  visitors.  First-class  appointments  and  management.  Rates,
moderate. Prospectus free. Correspondence invited.


illliiiillllilllllillilllllllilljll^


828


Alphabetical  Index


Beuchler
Bland


BEUCHLER, J. R., 154 W.

121st St., New York,  N.  Y.

BEUCHEER, J. R., 1122 13th

St. N. W., Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
BEVER,  W.  O.,  400  Mass  Ave.,

Indianapolis, Ind. (D.C.)
BEZINGUE, ARTHUR, R.  F.

D. 8, Pittsburgh, Kan.

BEZLER. G. H., Wymore,

Neb. (D.C.)
BIBLER, JOHN J., 906 State

IJfe Bldg-., Indianapolis,

Ind. (D.C.)
Mabel  Foster,  906  State  Life

Bldg., Indianapolis, Ind.

BICK, H., 4 W. 117th Street,

New York,  N. Y. (M.D.)
BICKELHAUPT, G. E., Free-
port, 111. (D.C.)
H. Earle, Freeport, 111.

BICKLE, ISABELLA, 270

King- St., Hamilton, Ont.,

Canada. (D.C.)
BICKMEYER, O. F., Colorado

Springs, Colo. (D.C.)
O. F.,  Meteor, Wis. (D.C.)
BIDDISON, T., 1016 2nd St.,

Perry, la. (D.C.)
BIDDLE, J. RUSSELL,

Robertsdale, Ala. (D.O.)
BIDWELL, HUDSON, 2194

7th  Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

BIEBL,  ANDREW  J.,  821  East

Main St., Columbus, O.

(D.M.T.)
BIEGLER, ALMA, Zanesville,

O. (N.D.)
BIEL. 127 N. Gene.see Street,

Waukegan, 111. (N.D.)
BIEL,  J.  R.,  294  Medbury  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
BIELSKIS, ,T. J., Hartford,

Conn. (N.D.)
BIENEMANN, JOSEPH C.

La Salle Theatre Bldg.,

La Salle, 111. (D.O.)
BIERBOWER, ALICE, 114 N.

Ashland Ave., La Grange,

111. (D.O.)
BIERI, ROBERT, The Little

Carl-sbad, 336 Palisade

Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.

BIGELOW, F. F., Moore,

Montana. (N.D.)
Frances, Elkhart, Ind.

BIGELOW, MARY F., 401 N.

Main St., Elkhart, Ind.

BIGGS, MR. & MRS. A. C,

Biggs Sanitarium,

Ashevillp, N. C. (N.D.)
W.  A.,  Baker.  Ore. (D.C.)
BIGLER, SIDNEY A., Ashta-
bula,  O. (D.M.T.)
BIGSRY,  DR. F.  L.,  Head-
quarters of  A. S.  O.,

Kirksville, Mo. (M.D.,

D.O.)
BILBY, RAY, Skidmore, Mo.

BILLET, MARY L, 477 Main

St., Orange, N. J. (D.C.)%
BIIvLHIMKR, J., State St.

Pitt.sbnrgh, Pa. (N.D.)
BILLINGHAM, ALICE, 1103

Nott St., Schenectady,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Alice, 1103 Nott Street,

Schenectady,  N.  Y. (D.  C.)
BILLINGS, C. W., 303 Linz
* Bldg., Dallas, Tex. (D.C.)


BILLINGHAM, SAMUEL, 20

Cioighton Bldg., Omaha,

Neb. (D.C.)
BILLINGTON, H. T., Twin

Falls, Idaho. (D.O.)
r.ILLMAN, J. M., Sullivan,

Ind. (M.D.)
BINCK,  C.  E.,  130  E.  Pearl  St.,

Burlington, N. J. (D.O.,

D.C.)
BING.VMAN, MRS. H. C, 516

5th St., Hastings, Neb.

r.lNGESSER, ANNA,

A\'ac()nda, Kans. (N.D.)
BINGESSER. C.,N  c/o Sani-
tarium, Waconda Springs,

Kan. (D.C.)
BINGHAM, LEWIS J., 133 E.

State  St.,  Ithaca,  N.  Y.

BINGHAM, WILL, 1931

Broadway, New  York,

N. Y. (P.)
BINGS, MISS J. O., Baker

City, Ore. (D.C.)
BINN,  H.  G.,  St.  Charles,  Minn.

BINTE & BINTE, 606

Mathews Bldg., Milwau-
kee, Wis. (N.D.)
BIRBECK, A. F., Sta. 2,

North Side, E. Liverpool,

O. (D.C.)
BIRD, C. J., 306 W. 12th St;,

Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)
C. J., 306 W. 12th St.,

Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)
J. F., 181 Summer Avenue,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
BIRD, MISS JOSEPHINE,

617 Bloomfield Ave.,

Montclair, N. J. (Ma.)
L. L., Plant City, Fla.

BIRDI,  F.  C,  1319  S.  Grand

Ave.,  I.,os  Angeles, Cal.

BIRDSALL & BIRDSALD,

Creston, la. (D.C.)

Anderson, Ind., (D.C.)
BISCHOFF. FRED., Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
BISHOP, GEORGE N., 888

Massachusetts Ave., Cam-
bridge, Mass. (D.O.)
J. Clifford, 555 Somerset

St., Ottawa, Ont. (D.O.)
Lewis M., 208 Highland St.,

Worcester, Mass. (D.O.)
R. B., 509 Splittog Ave.,

Kansas City, Kan. (D.C.)
S. B., 210J St. Bishop St.,

Jackson, Me. (D.C.)
S. B., 2101 Capito St., W.,

Jackson, Me. (D.C.)
BISHOP, R. B., Kansas City,

Mo. (M.D.)
BISSONETTE, CORENE J.,

700 W. 180th St., New

York, N. Y. (D.O.)
BITTINGER,  JOS.  E., 123 13th

St.,  Toledo.  O. (D.M.T.)
J. F., Cludister Bldg.,

Bowling Green, O.

(D.M.T.)
BIXLER, W. IRVING, Trot-
wood,  O. (D.C.)
BJORNEBY, A. G., 426 Main

St., Peoria, 111. (D.C.)
BJORKMAN, MARTIN E., 213

5th Ave., New York, N.  Y.

(Ma.)
BLACK, A. LINCOLN, Frisco

Bldg., Joplin, Mo. (D.O.)
Campboll, 26 Front St.,

Hamilton, Bermuda.

C. A., Masonic Temple,

Lima, O. (D.O.)


Chailes L., Lincoln Bldg.,

Johnstown, Pa. (D.O.)
Ellen, Adrian, Mo. (S.T.)
Emma, Box 125, Oregon,

Mo. (D.O.)
Fred  H., 327 Stratford  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
John J.. 41 N. 18th St.,
Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
BLACK, F. A., 702i Indiana
St., Wichita Falls, Tex.
John J., 41 North 18th St.,
East  Orange, N. J. (N.D.)
BLACK LER, RONALD,

Springfield, Mo. (N.D.)
R. C, 525 S. Ashland Blvd.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
BLACKMAN, A. C, Miami,
Okla. (D.C.)
Charles J., Bluffton, Ind.

(D.O.)  ^ .

W. Wilbur, Robertson  Sani-
tarium, Atlanta, Ga.
BLACKMER & BLACKMER.
260  Washington  St.,  Bing-
hamton. N. Y. (D.C.)
BLACKMORE, WALTER W.,
Grover Hill, R.  2, O.
BLACK  WELL, GEORGE A.,
8 Black Bldg., Regina,
Sask., Canada. (D.C.)
BLADE, v., 1233 W. Adams

St.,  Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
BLAICH.  ANNA  MAE,  Marion,

O. (Ma.)
BLAIN, H., Cor. Front and
Scott Sts., Toronto, Ont.,
Canada. (D.C.)
BLAIR, C. B., Casey, 111.
Francis W., 199 Main St.,
Hackensack, N. J. (Opt.)
BLAIR, F. W., 1123 B'way,
New York, N. Y. (D.C.)
JeiTiona A., Kingston, Ont.,

Canada. (D.C.)
J. S., Ward Bldg., Battle

Creek, Mich. (D.O.)
John, 31 Epprit St., East

Orange, N. J. (D.C.)
L. L., Findlay, O. (D.C.)
Raymond S., Parkersberg,
la. (D.O.)
BLAKE, EDWARD,  Marinette,
Wis. (D.C.)
W. O., 202 E. Main St.,
Ottumwa, la. (D.C.)
BLAKELEY, CHAS. M., 801
Schmidt Building, Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (E.G.)
BLAKEMAN, L. J., 64 E. Van
Buron St., Chicago, 111.
BLANCHARD, CHAS. A.,

Fraternity Bldg., Lincoln,
Neb. (D.O.)
E. R., General Delivery,
Mountain View, Cal.
J. H., 1955 Webster St.,
Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
BLANCHARD, JUDSf^N N.,
Elyria, O. (D.M.T.)
J. W., 360 E. 195th  Street,
New York, N. Y. (N.D.)
Mrs. L. D., 133 Lexington
Ave., Buffalo, N. Y. (Cr.)
BLANC HAT & BLANCHAT,
Conroirtia, Kans. (D.C.)
BLANCHAT, AUGUST,

Mountain, Ark. (D.C.)
Aug., Medicine Lodge, Kan.
BLAND, MYRTABELL, 231 E.
Colorado St., Pasadena,
Cal. (D.O.)


Universal IVutiiroiMitliic Directory and Unycrs' Guide


829


Naturopathic  College  and
Sanatorium  of  California

(Incorporated)

Training  School for Nurses  and

School  for  Teaching  All  Natural

Methods  of Healing

All  methods  of  Natural  Healing,  Includ-
ing Hydrotherapy  in  all  its  branches,  Os-
teopathy, Chiropractic,  Massage,  Swedish
and  other  Gymnastics,  Orthopedic  Sur-
gery, Electricity  in  various  forms.  Elec-
tric Light,  Steam,  Herbal,  Medicated,  Clay
and Nauheim Baths.

In  connection  with  the  Sanatorium  is  a
Training  School  for  Nurses,  Hydrothera-
pists  and  Masseurs.  We  train  all  our
assistants.

New  students  may  enter  at  any  time.
There  is  an  active  demand  for  graduated
hydrotherapists  and  masseurs  by  public
and  private  hospitals,  and  other  institu-
tions. Nurses  receive  thorough  training
in  all  branches,  including  Hydrotherapy,
Massage,  Diet,  etc.

Prospectus  free


— :  rr


DR. CARL SCHULTZ,
President  and General Manager

1319  South  Grand  Ave.
LOS  ANGELES,  CAL.


^


Uetu$  Jlcadcmia

(O. p. M. COLLEGE)

INCORPORATED  1904
Legally Registered in Pennsylvania
and  New  Jersey
Afflllated  with  the  Kclcctic  ONteoputlilc
Institute, the IVntioiial lOtrleotic, tlic
I'lnten  Institute, Incoriiorated  in  >'.  V.
State in lOO-, :in(l «ttlier Oesree (Jon-
ferrin^ Institutions. An Institution
for prepsirinff Students for Aca«ienrjlc
and Professional Decrees. Also I'ost-
Graduate Courses in all departments.

Director's  Private  Office,
110  West  90th  St.,  New  York  City

New  Jersey  Registered  Branch,

120  Palisade  Ave.,W.  Hoboken,  N.J.

Pennsylvania  Branch,

3219 Powalton Ave.,

Philadelphia,  Pa.

Post  Graduate  Department

Rooms  32  1  -325  Lincoln  Arcade  Bldg.
1947  Broadway :: New  York

Address all Communications to

Director's  Private  Office,
110  West  90th  St.,  New  York  City

Director's  Office  Hours,  11  to  2  and  7  to  8  p.  m.

Sundays  and  other  hours  by  appointment  only

Teleplione 4401 Riverside


BECOME  A  DOCTOR  OF  NEUROPATHY

The  best  there  is  in  Drugless  Healing.  Contain
ing  the  principles  of  all  Mechanical  and  Thermal
Treatment — Osteopathj',  Chiropractic,  Naprapathy,  as
well  as  Hydrotherapy,  Electrotherapy  and  Dietetics.
This  college  gives  Residence,  Semi-Correspondence
and  Post-Graduate  Courses.  Any  intelligent,  pro-
gressive, ambitious  man  or  woman  ought  to  take
advantage  of  this  noble  profession.  Write  at  once
for  particulars.  Ask  for  the  "4  Easy  Plans"  of  be-
coming a  Neuropath.

CHICAGO  COLLEGE  OF  NEUROPATHY

Dr.  L.  Bucelctti,  Prcs.
1002 Blue Island  Ave., Chicago, 111.


CHIROPRACTIC

rhoroiig'hly  and  scientifically  taught  by
competent  professors  at  The  Empire  School
of  Chiropractic,  the  oldest  established
school  in  New  York  City.  Classes  now
forming.

For full information, inquire of

WALTER Li. VAUGHAN, D. C, Regrlstrar
206 West lOeth Street, New York

Telephone, Academy 2135


Become  A  Doctor  Of  Naturopathy

>vhich  ^vill  qualify  you  at  the  same  time  as  Osteopath,  Chiropractor,  Hydropath,  Dieti-
tian,  Electropath, ;>Iechanotlierapist, Neuropath, Zonetherapist, >Iental Scientist, etc.

NATUROPATHY  includes  all  Prugless  Methods  of  Healing:  Water  Cure  (Hydrotherapy),  Massage.  Swedish  Move-
ments. Chiiopiactic,  Mechano-Therapy,  Electropatliy,  Osteopathy,  Kneipp,  Lahmann,  Kuhne,  Bilz  and  Sehroth  Systems,
Phytotherapy,  Phototherapy,  Heliotherapy,  Sun,  Light,  Air,  Diet,  Fasting.  Earthpower.  Milk,  Work,  and  Rest  Cures:
Physical  CiUtm-e  and  Life  Conservation.  Every  student  receives  practical  demoustrations,  attends  practical  lectures
and  does  practical  work  under  competent  instructors.  Courses  for  laymen,  doctors  and  graduates  of  all  schools  of
healing.

Regular  courses  of  1.  2,  3  and  4  years  of  9  months  each,  beginning  first  Monday  of  October;  Preparatory  Home
Course,  preparatory  for  beginners,  by  studying  the  Naturopathic  Library.  Post-Graduate  Residence  Course  for  4
weeks,  beginning  the  first  of  every  month,  $100.  Special  Residence  Beginners  and  Post-Graduate  Courses  are  also
given  at  the  Florida  Winter  Branch  of  the  Naturopathic  College  at  Tangerine,  Fla.,  and  at  the  Summer  Branch  at
"Yungborn,"  Butler,  N.  J.  Degree  Doctor  of  Naturopathy  or  Doctor  of  any  single  Branch  of  Drugless  Therapeutics
awarded  those who graduate  successfully. Send 25c. for  Prospectus and Application Blank.


AMERICAN  SCHOOL  OF  NATUROPATHY


no  EAST  41st  STREET


{I ncort^orated in Three  States)

EST.\BLISHl;ii IS'^G


B. LUST. N. D., D. O.. M. D.

FOU.VDER AND PRESIDENT

NEW  YORK  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


830


Alphabetical  Index


Hlankenbeker
fioth


BLANKENBEKER, GRACE,

R. R. 9. Box 49, Ottawa,

Kan. (M.D.)
BLEAN, ALBERT C, Le

Claire. la. (D.C.)
C.  A.,  210  Main  St.,  Streator,

111. (D.C.)
R. B., General Delivery,

Mystic, la. (D.C.)
BLEAN, R. B., Strawberry

Point, la. (D.C.)
BLECHSCHMIDT, R., 920

Savoye  St.,  North  Berg-en,

N. J. (D.C.)
John R., and Peter Rohr,

504 Clinton Ave.. West

Hoboken, N. J. (D.C.)
BLEDSOE, MME., 240 Adams

Ave. E., Detroit, Mich.

BLEE, W. B., 1245  i Fulton

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (Opt.)
BLIGH, T. R., 521 Fullerton

Ave., Chicag-o. 111. (D.C.)
T. R., 920 Slater Bldg-.,

Rochester, Mass. (D.C.)
T. R., Witewater, Wis.

BLIGH, WM., 10,605 Superior

Ave., Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
Luther S., 1.339 E. 47th St.,

Chicag-o, 111. (D.C.)
BLISS, ASA POTTER, Mer-
chants' Natl. Bank Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Charles W.. 44 Court St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
Edna  M., 1536 E. 86th St.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Mrs. Edna M., Davenport,

la. (M.D., D.C.)
BLISS. MRS. J., 1536 E. 86th

St., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Luther S., 1339 E. 47th St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Pearl A., Merchants' Natl.

Bank Bldg., Los Ang-eles,

Cal. (D.O.)
BLOCKER, IRA, 320 Wis-

con.sin Ave., Wahpeton,

N. D. (D.C.)
BLOCHWITZ, MAX T.,

Teaneck,  N.  J. (N.D.)
BLODGOOD, DELLA,

Colorado Spring-s, Colo.

BLOOM, ESSIE U., 1114

Market St., Sunbury, Pa.

I.,  New  Hebron,  Miss. (D.C.)
BLOURT,  JOHN  S.,  Lexing-ton,

Ky. (D.C.)
BLOXHAM, HARRY P., 1050

Hawthorne Ave., Port-
land, Ore. (DO.)
BLOYD. CLARENCE, Hills-

boro.  Ore. (D.C.)
BLUM, H. A., 326 Grand  St.,

New  York.  N.  Y. (Opt.)
BLUMER, LOUTS, 97 Ann St.,

Hartford, Conn. (D.C.)
BOATMAN. PETER, Black

River  Falls,  Wis. (D.C.)
BOATSWAN. P., Black River

Falls, Wis. (D.C.)
BOAZ. E. R., 1321 N. Shortell

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.

H. C, 213 N. Green St.,

Henderson, Ky. (D.O.)
BOBB, HENRY H., 2125 N.

18th St., Philadelphia, Pa.


BOBBITT, S. M., Corslcana,

Tex. (S  T  )
BOBO, R.,' 236 20th Ave.,

Minneapoli.s, Minn. (D.C.)


BOCK, F. FREI^., East

Aurora, N. Y. (N.D.)
BOCK, HELEN, 501-2 North-
west  Bldg., Portland,  Ore.

BODE, H. E., 719 5th St.,

Marietta. O. (D.C.)
BODE, HERBERT E.. P. O.

Box 102, Merrill, Wis.

BODOT, J. N., 209 Gertrude

St., Syracuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
BOEHM, F., 317 Lexington

Ave., Elkhart, Ind. (D.C.)
BOESE, J. A., 43 N. Main St.,

Sheridan, "VVyo. (N.D.)
BOETTCHER, H. N., 1138 N.

Leavitt  St., Chicago,  111.

BOGENRIEP,  Dr. R. E.,

Northwood. Ta. (N.D.)
BOGGESS, EMMA BRONK,

1664 Larkin St., San

Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
BOHANNON, EUNICE B.,

Goodwyn Inst., Memphis,

Tenn. (D.O.)
BOHNHOFF, BERTHA, 1116

Masonic Temple, Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
BOHNSACK, ANITA  E., H. H.

Bldg-., Cape Girardeau,

Mo. (D.O.)
BOHRER,  LONA,  North  Loup,

Neb. (D.C.)
BOIS,  L.  F.,  Tyler,  Tex. (D.C.)
BOISEAU, MISS IDA P., 223

2nd  St.  S.  E.,  Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
BOJUS,  G.  H..  26  Vesey  St.,

Ne-w*  York, N. Y. (P.)
BOLAM, JULIA S., Owsley

Blk., Butte, Mont. (D.O.)
BOLAN, HARRY R., 36

Princeton St. E., Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
Lincoln R., 34 Bow St.,

Somerville,  Mass. (D.O.)
BOLGER, E. A., 3102 Perkins

Ave., Cleveland, O.

(D.M.T.)
BOLHIUSE, JACOB, Jackson,

Mich. (D.C.)
Jno. A., 130 S. Main St.,

Elkhart, Ind. (D.C.)
Leonard B., 501-2 Dean

Bldg-., South Bend, Ind.

BOLIHUSE, L. B., Elkhart

Water Co. Bldg., Elkhart,

Ind. (D.C.)
BOLLES, JENETTE HUB-
BARD, 1459 Ogden St.,

Denver. Colo. (D.O.)
BOLLINGER,  G.  W.,  R.  6,  Box

13, Battle Creek,  Mich.

BOLMANTEER, L.  E.,  Water-

vliet, Mich. (D.C.)
BOLT, BEN H., 215 E. Main

St.,  Troy,  O. (N.D.,  D.C.)
BOLTE, BERTHA, 328 Sum-
mit Ave., West Hoboken,

N. J. (D.C.)
BOLTINGHOUSE. MRS.  CHAS.

Lenox, la. (D.C.)
BOLTON, MRS. NETTIE P.,

157 Huntington Avenue,

Boston, Mass. (D.C.)
BOLZER,  GUY  H.,  Iron  River,

Mich. (D.C.)
BON,  LUCY  E.,  108  Park  Ave.,

Charlevoix, Mich. (D.C)
BOND, ERNEST C, Wells

Bldg., Milwaukee, Wis.


Robert W.. Wolcott, Ind.

Robt. W., P. O. Box 243,

Winfleld, la. (D.C.)
BOND, G. E., Guthrie Center,

Ta. (D.C.)
BONE, JOHN F., Rathburn

Bldg., Pontiac, 111. (DO.-)
BONER, A. C, Kankakee, 111.

A. C. 629 1st St., La Salle.

111. (D.C.)
F.  G.,  Box  581,  Crown  Point,

Ind. (D.C.)
BONHAM.  CLYDE  LAU-

RENCE, University State

Bank Bldg-.,  Seattle,  Wash.

BONNELL, DR. LE  ROY,

Chir-kasba. Okla. (M.D.)
BONNER, EDGAR  J.. Room

10, Morrison Bldg., Jack-
sonville,  111. (N.D.)
BONSMAN. M. E., Davton,

Ind. (D.C.)
BONSHIRE, MAUDE C, 165

E. Fulton St., Grand

Rapid.s. Mich. (D.O.)
RONTON.  L.  C,  1188 Main  St.,

Bridgeport, Conn. (D.C.)
BOOHER, S. D., Nevada, la.

BOOMELL, HATTTE M., 1308

W. 3rd St., Waterloo, la.

BOONE, C. O., c/o  The  Chiro-
practic College. San

Antonio, Tex. (D.C.)
BOONE,  MAYME  A.,  35  Emery

Arcade, Cincinnati, O.

Oliver C, Portales, N. M.

S. L., Cloris, N. M. (S.T.)
BOONER.  JAS.,  Marilton,  Ark.

BOORN. E. J„ Parsons, Kan.

BOOTH, ETHEL, Nobleville,

Ind. (D.C.)
BOOTH,  E.  R.,  Traction  Bldg-.,

Cincinnati, O. (D.O.)
W. C. Nobleville, Ind.

W. F.. Sacramento, Cal.

BORARD, JEFFREY W.,

Burr  Oak, Kan. (S.T.)
BORDEAU, M. Ii;., 805 Monroe

St., Valparaiso, Ind.

BORGMAN,  AUGUST,  76

Hamburg-  Ave., Paterson,

N. J. (D.C.)
BORGMANN. A., 142 Waverly

St., Yonkers, N. Y. (N.D.)
BORING,  MARY  E.,  599  Rock-
dale Ave., Cincinnati, O.

(D.M.T.)
BOROUGH.  North  Manchester,

Ind. (D.O.)
BORTON, SAMUEL, Golden,

111. (D.O.)
BORUP, GEORGIA W., Pitts-
burgh Bldg-., St. Paul,

Minn. (D.O.)
BOSEMER. CHAS., 1319 N.

Hamlin Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
BOSLEY, M. E., Guthrie,

Okla., (D.C.)
BOSTON, GEO. B., Branch-

ville, N. J. (N.D.)
BOSTON, GEORGE R., 49

High St., Newton, N. J.

BOTH, E. R., 601-3 Traction

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.


IJiilverstul Miituroputlilf l>ircM-(ui-} iiiiil Itii.x-rN* <>iiltl<.-


831


A  Rational  Medical  School

The  Vetus  Academia  (O.  P.  M.  College),
formerly  known  as  the  Old  Physio  Medical
College  was  organized  in  1898  by  Dr.  C.  F.
Conrad,  who  later  organized  the  affiliated  in-
stitutions, the  Eclectic  Osteopathic  Institute
and the National Eclectic Institute.

The  Vetus  Academia  fO.  P.  M.  College),
was  incorporated  in  1904  and  is  registered
with  the  Secretary  of  State  in  Pennsylvania
and  New  Jersey.  The  Director's  private
office  is  located  at  110  West  Ninetieth
Street.  For  many  years  a  New  Jersey
Branch  has  been  successfully  conducted  at
120  Palisade  Avenue,  West  Hoboken.  The
system  taught  is  eclectic,  which  means  the
best  chosen  from  every  branch  of  nature-
healing,  combined  with  the  teachings  of
Europe's  greatest  naturopaths.  Instruction
in  English,  German  and  Swedish.  The
officers  of  the  College  for  1917-1918  are  H.
Morgenbesser,  B.  S.,  M.  D..  President;  J.  B.
Praegr,  M.  D.,  Secretary;  Dr.  F.  Pfau,
Treasurer;  Vice-Presidents  are:  J.  Safian,
M.  D.;  H.  Bick,  M.  D. ;  E.  Carroll,  D.  O.  and
C. E. Binck, D.  O.

A  successful  future  is  expected  for  all  who
graduate  from  this  and  the  affiliated  insti-
tutions.


mini
of


*  Dry  Heat,
J  Nauheim,

^  and

Jj  Electric  Light  Baths


H_,-^_  . DAILY —
ours  . SUNDAYS  —


8-12


334  ALEXANDER  AVE.

*i> Between 141st  and 142nd St. NEW YORK
Telephone: 8453 Melrose


"Rritrllt Sif1#>"  Naturop. Sanitnri
Ijrigni. Oiae for  the  treatment

EPILEPSY
Tel.  Haekensack  2140 Teaneek,  N,  J.

Situated  amid.st  quiet
and  beautiful  surround-
ing's, commanding'  superb
views,  several  acres  of
g'roiind,  tennis  court,
cong-enial  environments,
our  own  farm  products,
all  modern  appliances,- —
an  ideal  quiet  and  re-
served home  for  epileptic
cases.  All  patients  are
imder  the  p  ersonal
supervision  of  the  super-
intendent, who  has  ob-
tained remarkable  re-
sults and  who  will  gladly  furnish  testi-
monials  on request.

Rates moderate; number of patients
restricted.

MAX T. BI.OCHWITZ, JS.  D., Dir.

formerly  connected  with  the  famous'  European

Epileptic Institution, Augustusbad.


I HOEGEN'S INSTITUTE |


THE LA CROSSE NATURO-
PATHIC SANITARIUM

402  S.  Seventh  St.  &  Cameron  Ave. ,  LA  CROSSE,  Wis.

JOSEPH  RIRSK,  i\.  D.,  D.  C,  D.  C,  Dir.  and  Prop.
Original  Pioneer  Institution  for  Natural  Healing
in  La  Crosse.  .Ml  drugless  Methods  used.  Hydro-
therapy: Kneipp.  P>ilz,  Lahmann,  Just,  Kuhne  Me-
thods, etc.  Mechanotherapy :  Massage,  Swedish
Movements,  Osteopathy,  Chiropractic,  Vibration,
Naturopathic  Ordopaedics,  etc.  Electrotherapy:  Sinu-
soidal, Static  and  other  currents.  Phototherapy:
Heliotherapy,  Sun  Light  and  Air  Baths.  Physical
Culture.  Regeneration  Diet.  Specific  Cures  for
Special  Ailments.  All  diseases  treated.  First-class
accommodation  for  residence  patients.  Depot  for
Herb  Teas,  Bath  Additions,  Special  Home  Remedies,
goods  and  Nature  Cure  Supplies  of  all  kinds.  Pros-
pectus and  Price  List  free.  Correspondence  invited.
Rates moderate.


I
t


For  Health


For  a  Vacation


Come  to
DR.  H.  GRESSMAN^S

NATUROPATHIC
RECREATION  HOME

Atlantic  City,  N.  J.


Pleasant Rooms — All the Com-
forts of Home — Steam Heat


^


PR. H. GRESSMAN

22  South  Kentucky  Avenue

Atlantic  City,  N.  J.

Open  all  the  Year Moderate  Charges


tt:^^T«$^$$vi^«$$^^v$$^v$i^^$v^$^ lf^$v^^vvvvf-$$$v^v*9^#v$^$^vvir^


832


Alpluihclicdl  Index


Ttnlhner
liredford


BOTHNER, GEORGK, 250 W.

42nd St., New York, N.  Y.

(P.)
BOTTTNELLT, ANGELO, 2229

Murray Hill Road,

Cleveland. O. (D.M.T.)
BOU,  LUCY  E..  108  Park  Ave.,

Charlevoix, Mich. (D.C.)
BOUGHTON & BOUGHTON,

533 O'Niel Bldp., Bing-

hamton. N. Y. (D.C.)

B.  J.,  507  Press  Bldg-..  Bing-
hamton. N. Y. (D.C.)

BOULWARE, F. A., 186 8th
Ave. N., Nashville, Tenn.

BOURGERJON,  LEON,  1847"
West  Pico,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)

BOURNE, HATTIE E., 3493
Stranton Road, (Z^leveland,
O. (D.M.T.)

BOUTON,  L. C.  1118  Main  St.,
Newfleld Bldg-., Bridge-
port,  Conn. (D.C.)

BOUTON,  LOUTS  C,  339  At-
lantic St.,  Stamford,  Conn.

BOWEN, MARGARET E.,

Pounding Mill, Va. (D.O.)

William D., 1 West Grace

St., Richmond, Va. (D.O.)

C.  H., 2 Lowe Building,
Dayton, O. (D.C.)

J. H., N. T. Armijo Bldg.,

Albuquerque,  N. M. (D.O.)

Mary,  Hazel  House,  Pawnee,

Neb. (D.O.)
R. A., Collins Blk., Eureka,
Kan. (D.O.)
BOWEN, T. H., Bridgeton,

N.  J. (N.D.)
BOWERS, Henry  M., Masonic
Temple,  Las  Cruces,  N.  M.
Homer D., 110 E. 71st St.,

N., Portland. Ore. (D.O.)
Leroy H.. Room 6-7, 150
Main St., Oneonta, N. Y.
A. L., 45 N. 4th St., Zanes-

ville, O. (D.C.)
W. L., General Delivery,
Zanesville,  O. (D.C.)
BOWERS & FEIGHTNER,

Huntington, Ind. (N.D.)
BOWERSOX, U. S. G.,  Kistler
Bldg., Longmont, Colo.
BOWLBY, LEWIS M., Mills
Bldg.,  El  Paso,  Tex.  (D.O.)
BOWLES.  L.  J.,  Clifton  Forge,
Va. (D.C.)
L. .Tean, Clifton Forge, Va.
BOWLING,  R.  W.,  618  Fremont
Ave. S., Pasadena, Cal.
Willett Lee, Kendall Bldg.,
Pasadena, Cal. (D.O.)
BOWMAN, ADA M., Garnet,
Kan. (S.T.)
Lucy, Dand Bldg., Fort

Dodge,  la. (D.C.)
Lucy, Winfleld, la. (D.C.)
R. F., Packwood, la. (D.C.)
T. W., 31 Bayswater Road,
New  Castle  on  Tyne,  Eng.
BOWMAN, .lOHN, Madison,

Wis. (D.C.)
BOWSHER, J. S., Adelphi, O.

(D.M.T.)
BOYCE, L. M., Box 134,
Menton,  Ind. (D.C.)


BOYD & BOYD, Rushville,

Pa. (D.C.)
BOYD  &  HALL,  Scranton,  Pa.

BOYD, AGNES, 200 Glen-
caldor  St.,  Pittsburgh, Pa.
Agnes E., 133 Larimer  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (DC.)
A. J., Holdenville, Okla.

A. J., Navina, Okla. (D.C.)
C. A., Saogerstown, Pa.

C. A., 407 Wyoming Ave.,

Scranton. Pa. (D.C.)
Clara  M., Navada, Okla.

Ethel,  Spencer,  la. (D.O.)
Lydia,  Box  173,  Halsev,  Ore.

Richard H., Tullahoma,
Tenn. (D.O.)
BOYD, FRANK L., Robinson.
111. (D.C.)
Headley. 601  W. 168th  St.,
New  York,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
BOYER, D. D., Provo, Utah.
G. R., Jefferson Building,

Peoria, 111. (D.O.)

Thomas A., Post Bldg.,

Battle  Creek,  Mich. (D.O.)

BOYERS, D. D., 313 Sharon

Bldg., Salt Lake City,

Utah. (D.C.)

BOYES, E. H., 222 Putnam

St., Marietta, O. (D.O.)
BOYESEN, MRS. KATHINKA,
3206 W. North Ave.,
Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
BRACKER, JOHN, 14,820

Detroit Ave., Lakewood,
O. (N.D.)
BRADBURN, MISS GRACE,
Grand Island, Neb. (S.T.)
BRADENBURG, A. L., 810
Perry St., Davenport, la.
BRADFORD, DR. GEO. H.,
New London, Conn.
BRADFORD, EDGAR G., 73
6th Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Ast., N.D., D.C.)
Horace, 1400 W. 25th
Oklahoma City, Okla.
Pearl, 3213 N. Floride,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
Randall  P.,  Stockport,  la.
BRADFORD & BRADFORD,

Joffer.son, Wis. (D.C.)
BRADFORD & BRADFORD,
Pauls  Valley,  Okla. (D.C.)
BRADLEY, C. E., 32  Prospect
St., Jamestown, N. Y.
Geo. A., 614 Haws  Building,
San Francisco,  Cal. (D.C.)
Geo.  A.. 508 Haws  Building,
San Francisco, Cal.  (D.C.)
Geo.  A., 995  Market  St.,  San

Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)
Oscar Evans, Ellwood City,
Pa. (D.O.)
BRADLEY, O. M., Danville,

III. (N.D.)
BRADTMULLER, J. W., 60
Prospect PL, New York,
N.  Y. (D.C.)
BRADY, E. F., St. Louis, Mo.
Lillian, 4303 Cottage Grove
Ave., Chicago, 111. (Ma.)


St.,


BRADY. T. N., Mingo, W. Va.

BRAINARD, ANNA, St. Paul,

Ark. (D.C.)
BRAND & BRAND. Drs.. 405

Hippodrome Bldg., Cleve-
land,  O. (N.D.)
BRAND. ELIZABT-:TH F.. 405

Hippodrome Bldg.. Cleve-
land. O. (D.C.)
Frederick C, 3156 Pine

Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.

BRAND-RUSSELL. Ke.sner

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
BRAND, LUCILLE S., 7465

Vlncennes/ Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
BRANDEN, MRS. JULIA R.,

590 California St., San

Francisco, Cal. (N.D.)
BRANDENBERG,  A.  L.,  Room

2, Mercantile Place, IjOS

Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
H. C. .  28 Elwood Place,

Newark, N.  J. (D.C.)
BRANDENBURG. O. C, 207

Talumet, East Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
BRANDLE, G. E., 5938 Calu-
met Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

G. E., 1761 Washington St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
BRANDMAN, R. E., 547 W.

142nd  St..  New  York,  N.  Y.

BRANDMAN. R. E., 311

Terminal Bldg., Hoboken,

N. J. (N.D.)
BRANDT, CARLOS, 213 W.

123rd  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Wm. F., 463  Dodge  St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
BRANN, EDWARD C, 409  i

Commercial St., Oswego,

Kan. (D.O.)
BRASINGTON,  J.  D.,  228  Eagle

Rock Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
BRATCHI. KARL S.. Main

St., Akron, O. (D.C.)
BRATCHI, C. L., 3 I. O. O. F.

Bldg., Akron, O. (D.C.)
BRAUN, ALFRED, 345

Seneca  St., Alliance,  O.

(D.M.T.)
BRAUN, MAX GERARD, 28

Monmouth St., Newark,

N. J. (D.C.)
BRAUNER, LOUISE MAE, 39

S. State St., Chicago, 111.

BRAY, EDWIN W., Denckla

Blk., Philadelphia, Pa.

Jewett P., Box 305, Way-
cross, Ga. (D.C.)
BRAZEAU, FRANKLYN R.,

600-6  Dekum  Bldg.,

Portland, Ore. (D.C.)
BRAZEAU, M. E.. 368 9th

Ave..  Spokane,  Wash.

BREAKER, JOHN, 14,820

Detroit Ave., Cleveland,

O.  (D.C.)
BREARLEY,  PETER  H.,

Flanders Bldg., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.O.)
BRECKENRIDGE, KARL, 105

Centre  St., Bath,  Me.

BREDFORD, WM.. Herman

Blk.,  O.shkosh,  Wis. (D.C.)


Ndlurojxilhic  Biof/niphicdl  Notes


833


1  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES  1


ANGER,  ARTHUR,  D.  C,  42-44  Manhattan
Building,  Fergus  Falls,  Minn.

Dr.  Anger  was  born  in  1863,  in  Germany,
and  has  been  in  practice  continuously  for
13  years.  He  graduated  at  the  National
School  of  Chiropractors  and  St.  Paul
School  of  Chiropractic  in  1903  and  1914  re-
spectively; at  the  American  College  of
Mechano-Therapy  in  the  year  1910;  and  at
the  American  School  of  Naturopathy  in
1912.  He  began  the  study  of  Chiropractic
and  Natural  Healing  in  1904  at  the  St.  Paul
Institute  of  Chiropractic  and  Natural  Heal-
ing, now  non-existent.  Dr.  Anger  is  a
member  of  the  Minnesota  Chiropractors
Association,  the  National  Association  of
Drugless  Physicians,  and  the  American
Naturopathic  Association.  He  has  always
attended  the  various  Conventions  and  is  a
representative  practitioner.


ANTIGA,  DR.  JUAN, San  Miguel  130  B,
Habana.

Dr.  Antiga  is  a  great  doctor  of  renown
and  a  true  naturopath.  In  Cuba  he  has  al-
ways been  a  leader  in  progressive  and  ra-
tional medicine.  He  is  connected  with  all
branches  of  reform  work,  and  his  contri-
butions to  the  local  newspapers  on  infan-
tile paralysis,  cancer,  etc.,  have  been  copied
in  the  newspapers  of  Spanish-speaking
countries  all  over  the  world.  Dr.  Antiga's
name  is  known  throughout  South  America
and  even  in Spain. He  is  a  regular  contri-


Dr. Juan Antiga


butor  to  the  well-known  magazine  "La
Nueva  Ciencia,"  as  also  to  the  publication
called  "Pro  Vida."  His  practice  is  very
large  and  he  is  successful  not  only  as  a
doctor,  but  he  also  takes  a  great  part  in
constructive  politics,  as  well  as  in  civic  mat-
ters, being  a  citizen  and  leader  in  the  Cuban
Republic.  He  raised  a  large  family  of  seven
children  and  all  are  being  brought  up  ac-
cording to  the  principles  of  natural  life.
At  his  "Clinica  Homeopatica,"  San  Miguel
No.  130  B,  Havana,  Dr.  Antiga  devotes  his
attention  exclusively  to  the  treatment  of
chronic  ailments  by  homeopathic  means,
such  as:  diseases  of  the  skin,  syphilis,  asth-
ma, ailments of the nervous system, etc.


ANTIGA, DR. JUAN,  San  Miguel 130  B,
Habana.

El  Dr.  Antiga  es  un  medico  de  gran  re-
nombre  y  un  verdadero  naturopata.  En  Cu-
ba ha  sido  siempre  un  "leadjr"  en  la  prac-
tica  de  la  medicina  racional  y  progresiva.
Esta  relacionado  con  todas  las  ramas  de  las
reformas  medicas  y  sus  trabajos^  en  los
periodicos  locales  acerca  de  la  paralisis  in-
fantil,  cancer,  etc.,  han  sido  reproducidos
en  los  periodicos  cientificos  3^  populares  de
todos  los  paises  del  mundo  de  habla  caste-
liana.  El  nombre  del  Dr.  Antiga  es  muy
conocido  en  los  paises  Sur  Americanos,^  por
los  cuales  ha  viajado,  y  aun  en  la  misma
Espana.  Forma  parte  del  cuerpo  de  redac-
cion  de  varias  publicaciones  medicas  y  tra-
bajos  suyos  se  han  publicado  en  el  bien
conocido  periodico  titulado  "La  Nueva
Ciencia,"  como  en  "Pro-Vida"  que  se  edi-
tan  en  la  Habana.

Su  practica  medica  es  de  las  mas  exten-
sas  y  su  popularidad  extraordinaria,  porque
el  ha  tornado  participacion  interesantisima
en  los  acontecimientos  politicos  }•  sociales
de  su  pais.  Posee  una  numerosa  familia  y
actualmente  tiene  siete  ninos  que  estan  edu-
cados en los  principios de  la  vida  natural.

En  su  "Clinica  Homeopatica,"  San  Mi-
guel 130  B,  Habana,  dedica.su  atencion  ca-
si  exclusivamente  al  tratamiento  de  las  en-
fermedades  cronicas,  empleando  como  me-
todo  terapeutico  exclusive  el  homeopatico
y  dedicandose  con  especialidad  a  las  enfer-
medades  de  la  piel,  sifilis,  asma,  sistema
ner\ioso, etc.


ARNOLD,  ALMA C.

Dr.  Arnold  was  born  in  1871,  in  Germany,
and came to America while very young.


834


Aljthdhctical  Index


Breed
Brown


ARTHUR M.
St., Corning-,


126
Y.


DAN H.,
M., 463
Detroit,


Val-


Con-
Mich.


68 E.
, N. Y.


93rd


Zanesville,


BREED,
Pine
BREEDI.OVE,
dosta, Ga.
BREENAHAN
gress St.,
BREHL.  I.,.  J.,  1912  Broadway,

Lorain, O. (D.C.)
BREIBER. MARTIN. 1711
Marshall Feld Building,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
BREITENBUCHER. ANTON
E., 1911 Main  St.,  Jackson-
ville,  Fla. (D.C.)
BREITENSTEIN. ROSE E.,
62 Rowlev St., Rochester,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
BREITHAUPT & BREIT-
HAUPT, Berlin, Wis.
(DO.)
BRETTI.TNG, GEO. S.. Royal
Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Geo. S., 422 Marquan Bldg.,
Portland, Ore. (D.C.)
BREITZMAN, ED"\VARD J.,
69  Macv  St.,  Fond  du  Lac,
Wis. (D.O.)
BRENNAN,  JOS.  P.. 68  E.  93rd
St., New York, N. Y.
BRENNAN, J. P..
St., New York
BRENNEL, L. H.,

O. (N.D.)
BRENT, J. v.. 522 Park Ave.
W., Man.'jfield, O. (D.M.T.)
BRENZ, LOUIS EDWARD,
Summit and 5th Aves.,
Arkansas City,  Kan.  (DC.)
BRESNAHEN, M., 637 Con-
gress St., Detroit, Mich
BRETOW,  W.  C.  M.,  621  Bush-
wick  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
BREVARD, MAY, 422 Burton
St., Murfreesboro, Tenn.
BREVEL, MRS.
Hamburger
Angeles, Cal
BRE\VER. J. C, Jefferson,

Wis. (D.O.)
BREWER, The

3rd Floor, 92 Broadway,
Detroit, Mich. (Ch.)
J. E.. Guthrie,  Okla. (D.C.)
BREWINGTON, O. M., 127 S.
Main St., Wichita, Kan
BREWSTER. GEORGE A.,
24  Laurel St.,  Buffalo,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
BRICE, ANNA  C, 168 Lennox
Bldg., Cleveland, O.
(Ch.)
BRICKER, EDWIN GOWDY.
Sterling Bank Building,
Winnipeg, Manitoba.
BRICKER. MISS SARA  L.,
Kenois Bldg.. \Vashing-
ton, D. C. (Ma.)
BRICKMEYER. O. F., Colo-
rado  Springs, Colo. (D.C.)
BRIDGEFORD. A. J.. 30 E.
26th St., Oklahoma City.
Okla. (D.C.)
BRIETI-:R, M. H., Marshall
Field Bldg.. Chicago, 111.
BRIGGLE. MRS. A. C, Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
BRIGGS, A. N., 6th and Mor-
rison  Sts.,  Marquan  Bldg.,
Portland, Ore. (D.C.)


M.  J.,  403
Bldg.,  Los


Chiropodist,


H.  L.,  Spencerville,  O. (N.D.)
M.  J.,  Potsdam, N. Y. (D.C.)
M. J., 175 Washington St.,
Binghaniton. N. Y. (D.C.)
BRIGHAM, FREDERICK, A.,
Drawer G., Topeka, Kan.
W. Curtis, Ferguson Bldg.,
Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.O.)
BRIGHT. CORRINK E.,
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
S. H., Royster Bldg., Nor-
folk,  Va. (D.O.)
BRILL. BKLVA,  Spitzer  Bldg..

Toledo. O. (Ch.)
BRILL,  MORRIS  M.,  18  E.  41st
St., New York, N. Y.
BRINK & BUTLER, 511 N.
Main  St.,  Santa  Anna,  Cal.
BRINK,  BLANCHE, 207  Ocean
Front, Ocean Park, Cal.
BRINKERHOFF, V. W., Ohio  I

B'dg.. Toledo, O. (D.O.)
BRINSON, M. M., 216-17  !
Georgia Life Building.
Macon, Ga. (D.C.)
M. M., 1224 S. Court St.,
Montgomery, Ala. (D.C  )
M. N., 216-17 Georgia Life
Bldg., Macon, Ga. (D.C.)
BRISCOE, W. S., 821 Kansas
Ave., Topeka, Kan. (D.O.)
BRISTOL, T. D., 746 Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, O.
(Or.S.)  I

BRTTT,  FLORENCE  SHAEPE,
Box 142, Odessa, Mo.
BRITTAIN. ETHEL, Decherd,

Tenn. (D.O.)
BRITZELLE, ALBERT C,
215  W.  51st  St.,  New  York.
N. Y. (D.C.)
BROACH. ELIZABETH L..
Hearst Bldg., Atlanta Ga
BROADHURST. LILA M..
Goldsboro,  N. C. (D.O.)
BROBERG, MANFRED, 45 W.
34th  St., New  York,  N. Y.,
and  2000  Central  Ave.,
Madison,  N.  J. (N.D..  D.C.)
BROCHER. JOHN, 14820

Detroit Ave., Cleveland,
O. (D.C.)
BROCK. W.  W., 134 State  St.,

Montpelier. Vt. (D.O.)
BROCKER. ELLEN E., More-
land, Kan. (D.C.)
BROCKWAY. ARTHUR W..
Frame Bldg., Waukesha,
Wis. (D.O.)
BRODERTCK, KATHERTNB
A., 59 S. Main St., Tor-
rington.  Conn. (D.O.)
BRODTKORB, NILS W., 50
E.  29th  St.,  New  York,
N.  Y. (Ma.)
BROEDLING, JOHN, Jr.. 41
Jasper St., Dayton, O.
(D.M.T.)
BROKAW, MAUD, Stevens
Bldg.. Detroit, Mich.
Dr.  Maud, 413  Stevens  Bldg.,
Detroit. Mich. (D.O.)
BROLENE, A. C, 430 W. 34th
St., New York, N. Y.
BROOKE, B. H., 277 B'way,
Brooklvn, N. Y. (Opt.)
I., 868 Flatbush Ave..
Brooklvn, N. Y. (Opt.)
BROOKE, S. N., Waukon, la.


S.  N..  Wanton.  la. (D.C.)
BROOKBR, ELLEN E.. 841 N.
Topeka Ave., Wichita,
Kan. (D.C.)
BROOKINGS,  J.  E.,  Lone  Stai,

Tex. (M.D.)
BROOKS, MRS. C. R.. 26
Lake St., Oswego, N. Y.
E.,  Burr  Oaks,  Kan. (D.C.)
Elizabeth,  757  E.  Adams  St..

Phoenix, Ariz. (D.C.)
Ethel, 118 Washington St..

Hoboken. N. J. (D.C.)
L. C, 26 Lake St., Oswego,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Maud A., 16 Gould Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
M.  N..  Hume. Mo. (S.T.)
BROSENNE.  DORA,  The

Toronto,  Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
BROSS.  HENRY, 645 Lion St.,
San  Francisco,  Cal. (D.C.)
BROUN,  DANIEL  T.,  10  Brey-
non Bldg., Salem, Ore.
Henry C, 517 Sucotland
Bldg., Portland, Ore.
I. W. B.. Denver, Colo.

Fulton,  Ky.


Robert,  D.,

Una, 214  i
Findlay,


S. Main Street,
O. (D.C.)
Virginia  E., Fulton,  Ky.
BROWDER, J. jM., c/o Stand-
ard School of Chiroprac-
tic and  Naturopathy,

Davenport, la. (M.D.)
BROWELL, HATTIE M., 1308

W. 3rd St., Waterloo, la.

BROWER,  G.  H.,  E.  Palestine,

O. (N.D.)
Jno., Thomas. Okla. (D.C.)
BROWMAN, T. W., New

Castle on Tyne, England.

BROWN & HANLIN, 4-5

Wilson  Bldg.,  Aurora,  Mo.

BROWN, A. A., 657 S. State

St., Salt Lake City, Utah.

Alice  A.,  1704  5th  Ave.,  Troy

and Saratoga  Bank  Bldg.,

Saratoga Springs, N. Y.

Allen M., 315 Columbia

Trust Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
A. S.. Billings, Mont. (D.C.)
Blanche, Pecos, Tex. (D.C.)
C. E., Gowfle, la. (D.C.)
C. Osborne, 916 Federal St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Dale, 359 Boylston Street,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
Edith M., ^Vhite Blk.,

Charleston, 111. (D.O.)
Ernest H., Hooper, Neb.

(D. O.)
Frank E., Box 25, Brook-

ville, Ind. (D.O.)
G. P., 195 W. Brookline St..

Boston, Mass. (D.C.)
G. P., 128 Brookline St.,

Boston, Mass. (D.C.)
H., 811 N. Brauer St,.

Oklahoma City, Okla.

BROWN, B. M., 352 W. 63rd

St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
Geo. B., 424 Iowa Bldg.,

Sioux City. la. (N.D.)
H.  A.,  885 Flatbush  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (N.D.)


Nalnropalhic  Bioyrapliical  Notes


835


As  a  widow,  disappointed
with  the  medical  metliods
as  employed  by  the  differ-
ent schools  in  her  family,
she  soon  looked  for  some-
thing better,  and  began  the
study  of  the  different  Na-
ture Cure  methods,  espe-
cially the  constitutional  sys-
"^  tems  as  laid  down  by  our
Dr.  A.  C.  Arnold  S/ ^  a  t  masters:  Louis
Kuhne,  Father  Kncii^p,  h.
E.  Bilz,  Platen,  Lahmann,  Ehret  and  oth-
ers. She  acquired  an  education  in  these
methods  and  graduated  from  the  American
College  of  Chiropractic  and  Nature  Cure
in  1903,  under  Dr.  Langworthy,  who  at  that
time  ran  one  of  the  foremost  colleges  for
Chiropractic  and  Nature  Cure.  In  the  year
1911  she  graduated  from  the  College  of
Medicine  and  Surgery  of  Chicago.  She  is
also  a  graduate  of  the  Old  Physio-Medico
College.  Department  of  Osteopathy,  of  the
year  1913.  She  is  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can Naturopathic  Association  from  its  in-
ception, and  she  has  always  been  a  willing
and  liberal  supporter,  financially  and  mor-
ally, of  the  work  of  the  A.  N.  A.  More-
over, Dr.  Arnold  is  a  member  of  the  Inter-
national Alliance  of  Physicians  and  Sur-
geons, and  of  the  New  York  State  Society
of  Osteo-Therapeutics.  Her  practice  as  a
naturopath  and  chiropractor  has  been  most
successful;  she  enjoys  a  national  reputation,
and  her  patients  are  among  the  highest  in
the  social,  business  and  intellectual  class.
Dr.  Arnold  never  advertised;  all  her  pa-
tients come  by  recommendation,  and  the
number  is  always  so  large  that  she  has
to  turn  down  a  good  many,  as  she  could
not  take  care  of  them  all  personally.-  Her
individual  accomplishments  consist  princi-
pally of  Chiropractic  research  work,  such
as  the  famous  Arnold  spine  treatment  for
general  health  and  prevention  of  disease.
The  fact  is,  she  is  one  of  the  few  doctors
who  have  among  their  clientele  a  large
number  of  healthy  people  who  have  intelli-
gence enough  to  take  preventive  Naturo-
pathic treatment.  This  work  alone  keeps
her  very  busy,  and,  so  far  as  high  fees  in
drugless  work  are  concerned,  she  receives
the  highest  of  any  one  in  practice  in  the
United  States  today.  Dr.  Arnold  has  been
giving  lectures  and  demonstrations  at  sev-
eral of  the  Eastern  drugless  colleges,  such
as  the  Old  Physio-Medico  College,  the
American  School  of  Naturopathy,  the  New
York  College  of  Chiropractic,  the  New
Jersey  College  of  Chiropractic.  She  gave
demonstrations  at  different  Conventions,
such  as  the  1915  Convention  of  the  N.  A.
D.  P.  at  Atlantic  City,  which  was  a  great
revelation  and  surprise  for  all  present:  at
three  Conventions  of  the  American  Naturo-
pathic Association  which  were  held  at  the
Yungborn,  P.utler,  N.  J.,  in  the  j^ears  1913,
1914'and  1915.  At  a  graduation  of  the  1914
class  of  the  American  School  of  Naturo-
pathy, she  gave  a  special  clinic  at  the  Col-


lege, where  some  of  the  foremost  practi-
tioners and  professors  of  the  drugless  me-
thods were  present,  and  all  agreed  that  Dr.
Arnold  cannot  be  beat.  Her  untiring  en-
thusiasm, love  and  sympathy  for  the  drug-
less methods,  particularly  chiropractic,  have
been  the  key  to  her  great  success.  Dr.
Arnold  was  subject  to  many  persecutions.
Already,  while  carrying  on  her  practice  in
Washington,  D.  C,  she  was  followed  up
by  the  "stool  pigeons,"  sleuths,  and  dirty
emissaries  of  the  still  dirtier  Society  which
sent  them,  and  although  she  was  found
guilty,  she  held  up  her  effort,  paid  her  fine,
and  kept  on  practicing.  In  spite  of  all
prosecutions,  she  never  wavered,  but  kept
up  her  work.  One  day,  she  told  the  Editor
of  the  Herald  of  Health  that  she  would
rather  go  to  jail  for  life  than  give  up
lier  chosen  work  of  relieving  and  min-
istering to  suffering  mankind.  Her  repu-
tation is  so  deeply  rooted  that  there  is  no
combination  among  her  adversaries  that
can put her out of  practice.

BELAIS,  MRS.  DIANA.

President  of  the  New  York  Anti-Vivi-
section Society.

The  glory  of  a  nation  does  not  consistin
its  military  or  naval  prowess,  nor  in  its  in-


Mrs. Diana Belais


836


Alphabelical  Index


Brown
Buell


H.  L,., 1347  W.  Adams  St..

Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
H. O., 215 Columbia Bldg-..

Portland, Ore. (D.C.)
James, Room 712 Westbank

Bldg-., 830 Market St.,

San Francisco, Cal. (Ch.)
James B., 14th and Champa

Sts., Denver, Colo. (Or.S.)
John J., 5230 Superior  Ave.,

Cleveland,  O. (Ma.)

0.  L..  401  Flat  Iron  Bldg.,
Akron, O. (D.C.)

Sam'l A., Ridley Park,
Delaware  Co.,  Pa. (N.D.)

\Vm.  J.,  5  W.  fifith  St..  New
York,  N.  Y. (P.)

BROWN.  H.  I..  Scotts  Bluff,
Neb. (D.C.)

H.  M.,  504  Brushton  Ave..
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)

H.  O.,  415  Kellogg  St.,  St.
Johns, Ore. (D.C.)

H. S., 501 W. Grand St.,
Oklahoma Citv, Okla.

Jno.  A.,  Lyceum  Bldg.,  Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)

1.  W.  B.,  Denver,  Colo.  (DC.)
John R.. 404 Lyceum Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (El.)
L. A.. Sidney. Neb. (D.C.)
L. C. Ft. Scott. Kan. (S.T.)
L. G.. 131* N. fith Avenue,

Quin.cy. 111. (D.C.)
L. G., Currayville. Mo.

T. G.. 131i N. 6th Ave..

Quincy, 111. (D.C.)
Marcu.s E.. E. & W. Cloth-
ing  Bldg.. Sioux City, la.

Mary, 3004 S. 12th St.,

Tacoma,  Wash. (D.C.)
M. P., 828 Bradv St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
Niles. 671 Broad Street,

Providence, R.  I. (D.O.)
O. L., 403 Flat Iron Bldg.,

Akron. O. (D.C.)
O. L.. 401 Flat Iron Bldg..

Akron, O. (D.C.)
Robert, 124 N. Potonmc St..

Waynesboro, Pa. (D.C.)
Robert  B.. Fulton, Ky.

Rolla H., 218 N. 5th Street,

Atchison, Kan. (D.O.)
Sam'l A.. 135 S. Arkansas

Ave.. Atlantic City. N. J.

Sam'l  Agnew, 1112  Chestnut

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

Una, 2141 S. Main Street,

Findlay, O. (D.C.)
Virginia  E., Fulton,  Ky.

William Clare, 182 Main

St.,  Waterville,  Me. (D.O.)

BROWNE,  CORNELIA  J.,  57
Harrison  St..  East  Orange,
N. J. (D.C.)

E.  M..  Triole  Bldg..  Gales-
burg. 111. (D.O.)

F.  Grantham.  97  Mortimer
St..  Regent  St.,  London
W. England. (D.O.)

BROWNE. DR. D. T., 317

Abington Bldg.. Portland,

Ore. (D.C.)
BROWNELL, JAMES W.,

10,217 Olivet Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
May E., Yankton, S. D.

O.  D.,  9  Ind.  Loan  and  Tru.st

Bldg., Warsaw, Ind.


BROWNING, H. C, Casville,

Ark. (S. T.)
Dr. Martin P., 619 Farwell

Bldg., Detroit,  Mich.

O. M., St. Paris, O. (N.D.)
Olive,  Kite  Bldg.,  St.  Marys,

O. (D.C.)
Wm. N., 402-a E. High St.,

Jefferson City, Mo. (S.T.)
BROYI>ES. SAMITEL D.. 13

Forester Building, Fort

Collins, Colo. (D.C.)
BRUCE, A. MILLER, Mount

Penn., Reading, Pa.  (D.O.)
Will H., Binz Building,

Houston, Tex. (D.O.)
BRUCH, CLARA, Carroll, la.

BRUCK, C. E., 26 Scott St.,

Riverside, N. J. (D.O.)
BRUCKNER, CARL D., 1731

Arch  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Carl D., Flanders Building,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
BRUEK,  RAYMOND  J.,

Weightman Bldg., Phila-
delphia,  Pa. (D.O.)
BRUEN,  L.  B.,  1402  I  St.  N.W..

Washington. D. C. (N.D.)
BRUETT. H., Pasadena, Cal.

BRUGGER. F. A., 918 Ave K,

Galveston, Tex. (D.M.T.)
S. A., 119 New St., Newark,

N. J. (D.M.T.)
BRUGH,  H.  A.,  N.  Warren,  Pa.

BRUHN, MRS. TORSTEN, 121

Vermilyea Ave., New

York, N. Y. (Ma.)
BRUIN, MRS. L. B., West-
land Ave., Boston, Mass.

BRUNDAGE. ISA L., Sault

Ste. Marie. Can. (D.C.)
BRUNB, JOHN H., 3545

Montrose Ave., Chicago,

111. (M.D.)
BRUNER, AGNES, 3655 Adir

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.

Leanora S., Powers Bldg.,

Helena. Mont. (D.O.)

M. T..  Aurora. 111. (D.O.)

BRUNINGHAUS.  CHAS. W. A.

B..  Park  Bldg.,  Worcester.

Mass. ((D.O.)
BRUNNER.  H.  L., 214  E. 11th

St., Coffeyville, Kan.

M. W., 121 S. 9th Street,

Lebanon,  Pa. (D.O.)
BRUNNER, J. T., Woodward

Bldg.,  Washington,  D.  C.

(D.M.T.)
BRUSTEIN, MAX, 2410 E.

40th St., Cleveland, O.

BRUTUS,  CHAS.  J.,  80  N.  Neil

St., c/o Dr. Replogle,

Champaign, 111. (D.C.)
BRUTUS, CHAS. J., 105 S.

State St., Champaign, 111.

BRUYNE. Dr., 561 19th Ave.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
BRYAN,  A., 242 E. Fair  St.,

Atlanta,  Ga. (N.D.)
BRYAN. A. L., Gainesville,

Tex. (D.O.)
Chas. A., Coffeyville, Kan.

Charles T.. 421 E. I7th St..

Santa Ana, Cal. (D.O.)


D., 485 Broad St., Mt.

Holley.  N.  J. (D.C.)
F. J., 38 W. 32nd St.. New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)
H. A., 116 Diggen Blk..

Kendallville, Ind. (D.C.)
BRYAN  &  BRYAN,  38  W.  32nd

St.,  New  York,  N.Y. (D.C.)
BRYANT, DELLA D., 514 S.

Figueroa St., Los Ange-
les,  Cal. (D.C.)
Delia,  403  Hamburger  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
F. H..  Court  House, Cotton-
wood Falls, Kan. (M.D.)
Ward C, Masonic Blk.,

Greenfield, Mass. (D.O.)
W. H., 236 24th  St.,  Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
BRYANT,  R.  A.,  The  Burding-

ton Apts., Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
BRYCE, H. P., Hot Spring.s,

Ark. (D.C.)
BRYNER, AGNES, 3665 Adir

St., Los Angeles, Cal.

BRYSON. IDA B. KARTO-

WITZ. Colfax. Wash.

BUCALETTI, LOUIS. 1002

Blue  Island  Ave.,  Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
BUCEY. HOWARD, L.. 5642

Rippey St.. Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
BUCHANAN, O. H., 387 Pros-
pect Ave.. Perth Amboy,

N. J. (D.C.)
BUCHANAN, PORTER  D., 907

Euclid Ave., Cleveland, O.

(D.M.T.)
BUCHHOLZ, Merced, Cal.

BUCHNER, MAXIMILIAN A.,

29th and Church Sts.,

San Francisco, Cal.

BUCK, J. D.. Traction Bldg.,

Cincinnati, O. (M.D.)
BUCK, MRS. R. H., 49 West

St., Ilion, N. Y. (D.C.)
R. J., 125 N. Jefferson Ave.,

Peoria,  111. (D.C.)
BUCKLEY, JOHN W., 774 E.

24th  St.,  Paterson, N. J.

BUCKMASTER, R. M., Whid-

den Bldg., Arcadia, Fla.

(D. O.)
R. P., 132 S. Orange Ave.,

Orlando, Fla. (D.O.)
BUDDE, MRS. M.,  Box 183,

Great Falls, Mont. (N.D.)
BUDDECKE, BERTHA A.,

Third Natl. Bank Bldg.,

St. Louis. Mo. (D.O.)
BUDDENBERG, H. C. 2139

Clifton Ave.. Cincinnati.

O. (N.D.)
H. H.. 6th and Penn. Aves..

Pittsburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
BUDDENBERG  SYSTEM,

Jackson Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
BUEHLER, EMMA M., R. 7,

Box 70, Monroe, Wis.

John Benjamin, 080 St.

Nicholas Ave., New York,

N. Y. (D.O.)
BUELER, C. MERWIN, Tu-

cunicaii. N. Mex. (D.O.)
BUELL,  MRS.  M.  J., 403  Ham-
burger Bldg.. Los Ange-
les.  Cal. (D.C.)


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


837


dustrial  progress,  but,  instead,  in  the  work
of  its  citizens  of  noble  character  who  give
higli  and  unpurciiasable  examples  of  self-
sacrificing  loyalty  to  great  reforms,  who,
with  sweetness  and  sternness,  offer  an  in-
domitable i:)ridc  of  service  in  the  cause  of
justice  and  humanity.  As  one  of  the
original,  staunchest,  and  fearless  advocates
of  medical  humanity  and  medical  freedom,
this  book  should  at  least  contain  a  brief
account  of  the  work  done  by  Mrs.  Diana
Belais,  who  has  during  the  last  ten  years
carried  on  an  uncompromising  war  against
medical  tyranny,  realizing  as  she  did,  even
before  the  formation  of  the  National
League  for  Medical  Freedom,  that  freedom
from  the  dictum  of  the  medical  man,  with
his  subtle  influence  in  the  family  and  the
individual,  was  and  is  the  cornerstone  of
anti-vivisection.  M.rs.  Belais  founded  the
New  York  Anti-Vivisection  Society  in
1908,  and  has  been  its  president  from  that
time  to  the  present.  Previous  to  that  time
anti-vivisection  activity  in  New  York  State
had  been  sporadic  and  impermanent,  no
organization  being  in  existence,  although
there  were  sincere  souls  who  had  ■interested
themselves  in  the  cause.  In  1908,  began  the
present  energetic  campaign,  the  first  gun
fired  being  the  incorporation  thereof,  and
the  second,  a  mighty  one,  being  the  splendid
daily  support  by  the  New  York  Herald  of
the  New  York  Anti-Vivisection  Society  and
the  movement  in  general.  The  Herald  car-
ried on  a  magnificent  campaign  for  many
weeks,  assisting  Mrs.  Belais  in  every  way.
Also  the  magazine  Life  has  been  of  untold
service  to  the  cause,  and  to  which  we  must
add  The  New  York  American  as  an  able
co-adjustor.  In  1910,  the  unrest  and  appre-
hension occasioned  by  the  legislative  en-
croachments of  the  medical  profession,  in-
stigated by  the  American  Medical  Associa-
tion, culminated  in  the  formation  of  the
National  League  for  Medical  Freedom.  Mrs.
Belais  being  among  the  first  to  be  re-
quested to  co-operate  with  this  organization
by  becoming  one  of  its  directors,  in  which
capacity  she  remained  during  the  entire
period  of  the  League's  existence,  becoming
in  turn  Vice-President  and  then  President.
During  this  time,  Mrs.  Belais  zealously  ad-
vocated the  principles  of  medical  freedom
in  the  pages  of  her  magazine  The  Open
Door,  the  National  Anti-Vivisection  and
Animal  Magazine,  which  she  founded  in
1911  to  fight  vivisection,  devoting  quite  as
much  space  to  the  former  propaganda  as  to
the  specific  object  for  which  the  magazine
was  founded.  The  continued  exposes  made
in  The  Open  Door  of  the  baleful  doctrines
and  deeds  of  the  vivisectors  has  awakened
the  wrath  of  these  malefactors  and  their
supporters  among  the  medical  fraternity,
who  do  not  hesitate  to  wish  that  Mrs.
Belais  and  her  co-workers  should  be  com-
mitted either  to  jail  or  the  asylum,  their
only  fault  being  the  assertion  of  their  right
to spend their treasures of love and


sympathy  in  the  attempt  to  check,  or  re-
move one  of  the  world's  foulest  wrongs.
The  most  recent  development  of  Mrs.
Belais'  activities  has  been  the  formation  in
1917  of  a  National  Anti-Vivisection  Federa-
tion, which  is  comprised  of  the  New  York
Anti-Vivisection  Society,  the  Maryland
Anti-Vivisection  Society,  the  California
Anti-Vivisection  Society  and  the  Pennsyl-
vania Anti  -  Vivisection  Society  and  the
National  Anti-Vaccination  League,  of
which  the  President  is  Mr.  George  Arliss,
Mrs.  Diana  Belais,  Vice-President,  Miss
Katharine  Nicholson,  Corresponding  Secre-
tary, Mrs.  Jessica  L.  C.  Henderson,  Record-
ing Secretary,  Mr.  Claude  M.  Spaulding.
Treasurer,  Miss  Nellie  C.  Williams  and
Mr.  H.  D.  Lewis  are  the  remaining
directors.  To  this  aggregation  of  Societies,
other  organizations  in  sympathy  with  it
will  very  quickly  be  added.  Its  objects  are:
To  call  public  attention  to  vivisection  and
to  stimulate  public  discussion  and  con-
sideration of  measures  for  the  abolition  of
the  same;  to  disseminate  information  and
literature  with  respect  thereto;  to  organize
Anti-Vivisection  Societies  in  all  states
where  none  exists;  to  organize  and  hold
meetings  for  the  discussion  of  propositions
pertaining  to  vivisection  and  kindred  sub-
jects; to  present  arguments  with  respect  to
all  legislative  measures  dealing  with  the
subject;  to  facilitate  closer  acquaintance
and  co-operation  among  those  who  are  op-
posed to  vivisection;  to  inspire  and  arouse
general  public  support  for  measures  to
abolish  vivisection;  to  advance  the  prin-
ciples of  Medical  Freedom  and  oppose  en-
croachments upon  the  same.  But  in  sum-
ming up,  not  the  least  of  her  efforts  is  to
expose  the  machinations  of  the  American
Medical  Association  to  crush  out  those  en-
lightened methods  of  healing,  drugless  and
other,  which  are  undoubtedly  a  God-send
to  the  community,  and  are  every  day  prov-
ing themselves  to  be  of  the  greatest  value
to  humanity.  In  short,  Mrs.  Belais  has  be-
come more  and  more  profoundly  impressed
with  the  dangers  of  medical  tyranny  from
every  point  of  view — that  of  civic  iibert3\
of  constitutional  rights,  of  bodily  and
mental  health,  and  of  the  ultimate  welfare
of  the  race.  For  that  reason,  her  magazine
is  now  and  always  will  be  devoted  largely
to  the  great  humanitarian  work  of  Medical
Freedom.

BERHALTER.  DR.  ANTHONY  A.,  and
DR.  KATHERINE  BERHALTER.

Dr.  Anthonv  A.  Berhalter  was  born  on
October  30th,  1878,  at  Ellenberg.  Kingdom
of  Wiirttemberg.  Germany.  Born  on  the
farm,  he  enjoyed  the  benefit  that  comes
from  frugal  and  out-of-door  living  until  at
the  age  of  fourteen  he  decided  to  go  to
America.  This  he  did,  without  anyone  ac-
companj'ing  him.  Being  by  nature  a
searcher  and  investigator,  and  having  read
and  heard  a  great  deal  of  that  rich  and  free


838


Alphabetical  Index


Euenan
Burton


BUENAN.  PETER  J.,  71
Central Ave., Albany,
N. Y. (Opt.)
BUEREN, DR. A.. 309 State
Natl. Bank Bld&.. San
Antonio,  Tex. (D.C.)
BUETTNER. JOS. A., 65

Clinton Ave., Jersey Cit>.

N. J. (N.D.)

BUFPALOW, O. T., Gregory

Bld&.. Beloit, Wis. (D.O.)

BUFFHAM, A. T., Kalamazoo,

Mich. (D.C.)

Edna P., Kalamazoo, Mich.

Margaret,  Kalamazoo.  Mich.
BUGHIE,  JULIA  A.,  164  Rem-
sen St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
BUHL, P. A., 419 Fulton St.,

Brooklyn. N. Y. (Ch.)
BUIS, C.  L..  Sullivan,  Ind.
C. O., Fairfield, 111. (N.D.)
BUIS. LEMUEL, 203 E. Ok-
mulgee St., Muskog-eo,
Okla. (S.T.)
BUJAN, H. A., 116 Diggen
Block, Kendallville, Ind.
BULL, FRANK, 3644 W. Polk
St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
W. D., Vandalia, Mo. (D.C.)
W. D.. Hannibal, Mo. (D.C.)
BULLARD, JOHN R., 28 E.
Main St., Marshalltown,
la. (D.O.)
BULLAS, GRACE, Biloxi,

Miss. (D.O.)
BULLIS,  B.  S..  812  Green  Ave.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
B. S., 812 Green Ave.. Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
B. S., 732 34th  St., Oakland,

Cal. (D.C.)
E. S., 812 Green Ave., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
BULLOCK, B. A., 211 Stevens
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
BULSTER. DR. HERMAN G.,  |
1112 Chestnut St., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (N.D.)  i
BUMPUS. CLYDE W., Empire  l
Bldg., Denver, Colo.
J. F., 406 Market Street,
Steubenville, O. (D.O.)
BUMSTEAD, LUCIUS A., 16
E. Winter St., Delawrare,
O. (D.O.)
BUNCH, S. J., Davenport, la.

BUNDE, Wm. G., 236 Endi-
cott  Bldg., St.  Paul,  Minn.
BUNDY, IRA M., Y. M. C. A.,

Duluth,  Minn. (N.D.)
BUNDY, JOS., 1715 California

St., Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
BUNKER, BLANCHE C, Van
Slyke Bldg., Aberdeen,
S. Dak. (D.O.)
BUNKER,  M. N., Colby,  Kans.

BUNKERS,  H..  2002 25th  Ave.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
BUNN & BUNN, Oxford,
Neb. (D.C.)

611-15 Mack Building,
Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
BUNN, BESSIE, Bertrand,
Neb. (D.C.)
Mrs. C. R., 1415 Broadway,
Denver. Colo. (DC.)


H.  G., St. Charles.  Minn.
BUNN, DAISY, Clay City, 111.

T.,  3011  Vincent
Louis, Mo.


BUNTING,  E
Ave., St.
H. S., 9
Chicago,


St.,


S. Clinton
111. (D.O.)
BURBAGE, THOS. T., R. F.
D. 1, Esbon, Kan. (M.D.)
niTRCH & BURCH, Tarkio,

Mo. ((D.C.)
BURCH, G. H., 684 Blvd.,
Bayonne,  N.  J. (D.C.)
Oun, 21 S. Pickney Street,
Madison, Wis. (D.C.)
BURrHILL, J. E.. Coulter
Block, Aurora. 111. (D.C.)
BURD. WALTER C, Security
Saving.s Bank Building,
Cedar Rapids, la. (D.O.)
BURDETTE, GABRIEL F.,
401 W. Main St., Cen-
tralia, ^Vash. (D.O.)
O., 418 G St., Washington,
D.  C. (D.C.)
BURDICK & BURDICK, 319
Broad  St., Waverly, N. Y.
BURDICK. ELWOOD H.. 319
Broad St.. Waverly. N. Y.
(D.C.)  /

BURDIN. F. A., Antigo, Wis.

BURFTELD. M. A.. Benton-

ville. Ark. (S.T.)
BURFORD. D. E., Colchester.

111. (N.D.)
BURGE, J. B., Crown Point,
Ind. (D.C.)
Mrs. J. E., 116 S. 29th St.,
Lincoln, Neb. (S.T.)
BURGENER, ORGA L.. 610
Elm St.,  Decatur, Ind.
BURGESEN, ELIN F., 55
Wabash Ave., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)
BURGESS, R. C, 1103
Southern Blvd., Oak
Park, 111. (D.C.)
BURGY. M.ABLE RTMPLE,
I  Denver, Colo. (D.C.)

BURHORN. FRANK F.
Rose Bldg., Omaha,
BURKE. AGNES E., 5


414
Neb.


Ox-
ford Terra,ce. Boston.
Mass. (D.C.)
E. W.. 59 J N. B'way, Peru,

Ind. (D.C.)
Helma, Brooklyn. la. (D.C.)
Isaac, 133 Gearv St.. San

Francisco. Cal. (D.O.)
Lula, Perry, Okla. (S.T.)
M. E., Univer.sity Place,
Beaver Dam, AVi.<5, (DC  >
Ravmond .T.. "Woightman
Bldg.. Philadelphia, Pa.
(DO.)
Wilfrid
Trowel
W. E..
Ind. (D.C.)
BURKHARDT. E. M.. Dickie
Bldg..  Albion.  Mich. (D.O.)
BURKHARDT, F. G.. Idaho

Falls, Idaho. (D.C.)
BURKHOLDER, H. L,

Carlisle, Tex. (D.M.T.)
BURLING, MRS.  H.. 177 E.

75th St., New York, N.  Y.
(Ma.)
BURMETSTER. LOUIS,

Macksville, Kan (ST.)


L., Sun Building,
. Ma.s.« (D.O.)
591 B'way, Peru,


BURLINGAME,  CHAS.  L.,  112
E.  Broad  St.,  Columbus,
O.  (Mn.)
BURLINGHAM,  JAMES  P.,
University  Blk.,  Syracuse,
N.  Y.  (D.O.)
BURLSON, J. D., Lockney,

Tex. (D.C.)
BURNARD, H. W., Elmhurst,

L.  I.,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
BURNARD. HAROLD W., 47
W. 34th St., New York,
N. Y. (DO.)
W.  L.,  York,  Neb. (D.O.)
BURNER, ETHEL LOUISE,
Unity Bldg.,  Bloomington,
111. (D.O.)
John Clawson, 19 Walnut
St., Newark, N. J. (D.O.)
BURNETT, FRED G., PH. B.,
Inskepp Bldg.. Belle-
fontaine. O. (D.O.)
J. A.. Marble City, Okla.

(D.O
John Clawson, 19 Walnut
St., Newark,  N.  J. (D.O.)
BURNETT, S. M., 1030 Park
Place.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
BURNHAM, LILLIAN, 315
Maple St.. Ft. Atkinson,
Wi.s. (D.C.)
BURNS, A. & W., 926 Main
St., Hartford, Conn.
BURNS, GUY WENDALI>, 49
W. 57th St., New York,
N. Y. (DO.)
Louise, 122 S. Ashland
Blvd., Chicago, 111. (DO.)
Marion I>., Baker-Detwiler
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
(DO.)
Sarah A., Tulsa,  Okla.

(DC.)
Sarah A.,  Bartlesville, Okla.
BURNS & BURNS 320  J
Bradv St., Davenport, la.
926 Main St., Hartford,
Conn. (D.C.)
'  BURNSTDE, MINETTA, 1315

Polk St., San Francisco,
!  Cal. (N.D.)

BURNSIDE.  MISS  MINNETTE,
c/o Surlin Baths, Bush
j  and Larkin Sts.. San

Francisco, Cal. (N.D.)
BURRELL. EMILY. 729 May-
berry St., Detroit, Mich.
1  (D.C.)

BURRUS, Madison Cooper.
I  New Franklin, Mo. (D.O.)

BURT. C. G., Hotel Brand,

Boise, Idaho. (N.D.)
BURT, L. D.. 4813 2nd St..
Hazelwood. Pa. (D.C.)
Thomas G., Groton, S. Dak.
(DO.)
BURTHWICK, I. M., 2 Steele
Blk.. Winnipeg, Man.
BURTHWICK, L. M., Souris,

Man., Canada. (D.C.)
BURTUNC. WM., Elmwood.

Okla. (S.T.)
BURTON, CH.XRLOTTE M.,
218 W. Olive St., Fort
Collins. Colo. (D.O.)
George F., Story Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
S^arah A.. 9th St., Eugene.
Ore. (D.C.)
BURTON, WM. P., 13 W.

Federal St., Youngstown,
O. (Ch.)


NaturojHilhic  liio(/raphical  Note.'


839


country,  America,  his  conscience  directed
him  to  leave  home  and  country  and  f?o  to
the  great  land  of  the  far  west,  the  United
States  of  America.  After  arriving  here,  he
settled  down  with  relatives  in  Iowa,. on  the
farm.  After  four  years  of  all-around  farm
life,  working  in  suinnicr  and  going  to  school


living  habits  of  the  patient,  which,  of  course,
as  in  nearly  every  case,  only  made  matters
worse.

After  many  sleepless  nights  and  the
endurance  of  innumerable  pains  under
which  life  was  more  of  a  hell  than  anything


Antliony A. Berhalter, N. D.

in  winter  and  living  on  the  so-called  rich
food,  such  as  meat,  potatoes,  pie  and  cake,
five  times  a  day,  along  with  plenty  of  good
strong  coffee  sweetened  with  white  sugar,
the  young  man  Berhalter  commenced  to
experience  constipation  and  from  the  one-
sided diet,  severe  pains  in  the  stomach
made  themselves  known.  Advice  was
asked  from  the  good  farm  folks  in  regard
to  these  troubles,  and  pills  and  patent
medicines  were  suggested  to  relieve  all  such
troubles,  wdiich  the  young  man  tried  at
length  with  illusory  results.  The  removal
of  the  causes  of  such  disorders  no  one
knew  anything  about  and  cared  less.  After
four  years  of  farm  life  in  this  country,  the
young  man  Berhalter  decided  to  go  to  the
Cit}'  and  learn  photography.  He  procured
a  position  in  a  studio  and  started  in  at  once.
Now  came  (in-door)  life  after  eighteen
years  of  out-door  life.  The  eating  habits,
however,  were  not  changed — thinking  like
most  people  that  the  richer  the  food  and  the
more  we  eat,  the  better  for  us,  because  that
poor  body  of  ours  must  be  well  nourished.
Following  up  this  indoor  method  of
living,  with  plenty  of  so-called  good
nourishing  food,  new  and  more  severe
disorders  presented  themselves,  and  the
young  man  entrusted  himself  in  the  care  of
an old school physician, who, however,


Katherine Berhalter, N. D.

else,  the  investigating  Berhalter  spirit
commenced  to  assert  itself,  and  after  some
reflection  he  decided  that  back  of  every
existing  thing  there  must  be  a  cause.  He
commenced  to  search  for  knowledge  of  the
laws  of  life.  Sincerity  and  diligence  in
searching  led  the  young  man  to  the  right
road.  Every  book  that  could  be  obtained
on  causes  and  effect  of  disease  and  health
was  sent  for,  until  the  young  man  had  a
veritable  library  on  health.  Among  the
leading  books  were  the  ones  published  by
Dr.  Benedict  Lust  of  New  York.  His
magazine  was  eagerly  read  and  studied
every  month.  After  studying  and  practis-
ing out  of  these  health  books,  all  troubles
commenced  to  leave  and  after  a  few  years
vigorous  health  was  enjoyed  and  per-
manently maintained.  But  now,  a  new
problem  confronted  the  young  man,  and
it  was  this.  It  is  true  that  he  has  abundant
health  now  and  life  is  an  endless  joy,  but
we  canot  fulh'  enjoy  things  alone.  We  must
pass  them  along.  As  he  saw  that  there  are
hundreds,  yea  thousands  who  are  daily
suffering  from  the  result  of  wrong  living,
he  reasoned  with  himself  to  devise  some
means  of  spreading  the  knowledge  of  right-
full  living,  in  a  practical  way.  After  much
thought  on  the  subject,  he  decided  that
food manufacturers all over the land are


840


Alphabetical  Index


Tiurtrum
Campbell


BURTRUM, CRABILL M.,

1404 L St. N. W., Wash-
ington,  D. C. (D.C.)

BURWIG.  WM., 870  Humboldt
Parkway. Buffalo, N. Y.

BUSBY  &  BUSBY,  Jefferson,
la. (D.C.)

BUSBY,  MRS.  D.  W.,  Jeffer-
son, la. (D.C.)

BUSER,  F.  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
(Hy.)

BUSH, C. M., 902 Main St.,
Hartford, Conn. (D.O.)
Earl A., 902 Main St.,

Hartford. Conn. (D.O.)
Ernest W., Southern Pines,
N. C. (near Pinehurst),
and  Bethlehem, N. H.
Evelyn R., 83fi S. 4th Ave.,

Louisville, Ky. (D.O.)
Ida Ellis, 317 Laura Street,

Jacksonville,  Fla.  (D.O.)
J.  W.,  233  Columbus  Sav-
ings and  Trust  Co.,
Columbus,  O.  (D.C.)
Lucius  M.,  15  Exchange
Place.  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,

BUSHART,  B.  E.,  Sullivan.  111.

BUSHAW.  A.  WM.,  130  Main
St., Bane-or. Me. (D.M.T.)

BUSKIRK,  MRS.  S.  E.,  1820
Penn  St.,  Kansas  City.
Mo. (S.T.)

BUST,  LAURA  C,  542  Steiner
St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.


BUSTER, WILL L.. 139 Rich

Ave., Mt. Vernon, N. Y.

BUSWELL, 85 Park Ave.,

Winthrop Highlands,

Mass. (N.D.)
Arthur T., 56(5 Massachu-
setts Ave., Boston, Mass.

BUTCHER, FRANCES  M., 126

N. Elmwood Ave., Oak

Park, 111. (D.O.)
O.  L.. 657  Mt.  Pro.spect  Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.O.)
BUTCHER, FRANCES. 81 E.

Madison St., Chicago, 111.

BUTLER & SCHMIDT,

213-14 Ruben Building,

McKeesport, Pa. (D.C.)
BUTLER, EDW^VRD, General

Delivery, San Mateo, Cal.

F.  E.,  Los  Catos,  Cal. (D.C.)
Gunning, Santa Ana, Cal.

R. Earl, 341 Ormond  St.,

Rochester,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
Ruby, Jefferson, O. (D.O.)
W. H., 701 Hazel St., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
W.  P.,  Keokuk,  la. (D.C.)
George F., 323 Euclid Ave.,

Cleveland.  O. (Ma.)
L. Pearl, 627  Barr  St.,

Cincinnati. O. (Ch.)


93 Amity St.
Brooklyn, N.


Y.


Miss M. E.,

Flushing,

(Cr.)
W.  B., 4328  Lake  Park  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.]>.)
Wm. H., Ruben Bldg., 5th

Ave. and Walnut St.,

McKeesport, I'a. (D.C)
BUTLSAR, J. B., Lockney,

Tex. (D.C.)
BUTTERMAN, W. F.. 3341

Osgood St.. Chicago. 111.

BUTTUS, D. D., 365 Hunt

St., Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
BUZZARD, JACOB D., 407 E.

Ohio St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

BYARS, W^ R., U. S. Grant

Bldg., San Diego. Cal.

BYBEE &  BYBEE. 440

Fairfax  Ave.,  Norfolk.  Va.

BYBEE & BYBEE, Commer-
cial Bldg., Richmond, Va.

BYNUM,  H.  R.,  Hotel  Alcazar,

Clarksdale, Miss. (D.O.)
BYRD, R. L., 233 Main St.,

Meyersdale, Pa. (D.C.)
BYRKIT, ANNA W.. Summit

Road. Wellesley, Mass.

Francis

Copley

BYRNE. JOSEPH F., Osborn

Bldg.,  Cleveland,  O. (D.O.)
BYRON, JAMES B.. Great

Falls. Mich. (D.C.)


K., Pierce Bldg.,
Sq., Boston, Mass.


CADWALLADER, JESSE A.,

Lansing, la. (D.C.)
CADWELL, E. WILLIAM,

Acme Bldg., Canon City.

Colo. (D.O.)
CADY, DARWIN F., Union

Bldg., Syracuse, N. Y.

James D., 30 Court Street,

Cortland, N. Y. (D.O.)
CAHAIL & CAHAIL, Exeter,

Neb. (D.C.)
CAHILL, C. A., Friend, Neb.

CAIN, CORA H., 112 W. 4th

St., Oklahoma  City, Okla.

CAIN. MISS KATIE. 716 7th

St. N.  W., Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
Philip R.. 609-a Broadway,

Hannibal, Mo. (D.O.)
CAINE, ALLEN B., Iroquois

Bldg.. Marion, Ind. (D.O.)
CALDER,  A.  B..  Boreing.  Ore.

CALDWELL, CLARA A., 404

W. Main St.. Troy, O.

Delia B., Flynn Bldg., Des

Moines, la. (D.O.)
Fannie, Dougherty Shea

Bid., Santa  Rosa, Cal.

CALDWELL, D. E., Durham,

N. C. (M.D.)
CALE, CHARLES A., 1012 W.

Pico  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

Charles A., 931 S. Hill St.,

Los Angeles. Cal. (DO.)
CALE, MRS. LINNIE A., 931

S. Hill St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)


CALHOUN,  DAISY  D..  Wel-
lington, Kan. (D.C.)

CALLAHAN,  JAMES  H.,  421  S.
Ashland Blvd.. Chicago,
111. (N.D.)

CALLAN, M. J., 6200 Penn.
Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa. (P.)

CALVERT,  CORA,  Stockton.
Cal. (D.C.)

CALL.  CHAS.  A..  1012  Pico  St.,
Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
Linnie  A..  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

CALVERT, E. H., Harrison

Bldg.,  Columbus.  O. (D.O.)

E. J., Stockton. Cal. (D.C.)

CALVIN.  EMMA,  Douglas,
Ariz. (D.C.)

CALWELL,  HENRY  E.,  4200
Grand  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
D.C.)

CALWELL,  H.  E.,  436  E.

42nd Place, Chicago, 111.
Wm. A., 4200 Grand Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Wm. A., Bolivarrah, Vic-
toria, Australia. (N.D.)
Wm. A., 424 Bowen  Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

CALIFORNA  CHIROPRAC-
TIC COLLEGE,  2301  S.
Hope  St.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)

CALLAHAN, B. O., 511 J
Lincoln Ave., York, Neb.
J. L., J. M. S. Bldg., South

Bend.  Ind. (D.O.)
Kate T.. J. M. S. Bldg..
South  Bend.  Ind. (D.O.)

CALLSCH,  H.  F..  Chamber  of
Commerce  Bldg.,  Rich-
mond, Va. (D.O.)


CALLIS. G. T., Russelville,

Ark. (D.C.)
G. T., 1214 E. 40th St.,

Kansas  City,  Mo. (D.C.)
CALLOWAY, DR.. Independ-
ence,  Ore. (D.C.)
CAMBELL,  V.  A.,  1101  Marsh-
Strong Bldg., Los Ange-
les,  Cal. (D.C  )
CAMERON,' EDWARD M.,

Richmond, Mo. (D.O.)
CAMP, CHARLES D., Powers

Bldg., Rochester, N. Y.

Agnes,  Lakeport,  Cal. (D.C.)
M. v., 259 S. Division St..

Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
CAMP, M. v., 186 Seneca St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
R. E., Burlington, Colo.

R.  E..  Red  Cloud,  Neb.  (D.C.)
CAMPBELL & CAMPBELL,

402-5 Pantages Bldg.,

Seattle,  Wash.  (D.C.)
CAMPBELL,  A.  D.,  828  N.  63rd

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

A. D.. 1524 Chestnut Street,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
Agnes,  Lakeport.  Cal. (D.C.)
Chas.,  Geneseo,  111. (D.C.)
C. A., Room 5, 112 7th St.,

Terre Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
C. A., Washington, Ind.

C. G., 44 Somerset Apts.,

Indianapolis, Ind. (D.C.)
C. P., 2316 Warren Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
C. T., 1634 Rock Island St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
Charles A., Broadway.

Larned. Kans. (D.O.)


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


841


to a great extent responsible for the ill
health prevalent. Through his studies,
Mr.  Berhalter  found  that  some  of  the  most
staple  foods  were  also  the  most  abused — the
main  one  being  our  daily  bread  and  drink.
It was found that white bread was the
main  cause  of  constipation  and  that  drinks
by  being  fermented  and  otherwise  wrongly
prepared, caused drunkenness and ill
health  and  all kinds  of  other  miseries. In
his search for health, he found that the
wheat  berry  used  in  its  entire  form  was  the
natural way to use it — that unfermented
drinks are the natural drinks for man.
While dwelling on these things, they
brought about  a condition of  mind  which
formed  the  ideal  to  become  a  manufacturer
of  food, especially  of  bread  containing  all
the natural food principles and without
adulteration  and  to  spread  these  food  pro-
ducts broadcast  throughout  the  land. And
so,  a  few  years  later,  after  working  hard  in
studying and experimenting, the time ar-
rived when the  enthusiastic Berhalter  was
ready  to  start  his  food  factory. This  was
started,  and  he  worked  with  a  friend  of  his,
Mr.  Victor  Simon,  for  one  year. Then  Mr.
Berhalter was married to Miss Katherine
Novak,  who  was  born  in  Chicago,  on  April
4th,  1878,  and  who,  like  Mr.  Berhalter,  had
nursed  herself  back  to  health  by  rightful  liv-
ing and  also  gained  much  knowledge  in  re-
gard to  preparing  proper  food. Mrs.  Berhal-
ter stepped in and took  the place of Mr.
Simon  and  together  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Berhalter
started  in  to  face  the  world  in  introducing
new  kinds of  food  and bread  which were
destined to reform the entire old time
menu  and  be  the  means  of  doing  away  with
the disease caused by  eating  wrong food.
After much hard work, long hours and
much educating, the little place at 309
North  Ave.,  Chicago, III.  became  crowded
with eager buyers of their new kinds of
food  and  bakery  goods. Every  thing  was
made of  whole wheat. Rye, Oats, Barley,
Rice, etc. Along with these foods, they
gave away and sold all kinds of Health
Literature, and right here is where Dr.
Benedict  Lust's  publications  did  good  work
to  relieve  people  of  their  mental  and  phys-
ical ailments. Their  business  grew  rapidly
and  after three  years  they  started another
Health Food Store  at 132 E. 43rd Street.
Chicago,  and  two  years later  they  built a
good-sized  bakery  at  1423  N.  Clark  Street.
Lectures on healthful living  were held in
these  new  quarters  and  their  food  shop  be-
came a  great  center  of  education  for  right-
ful living, which became known in every
state  in  the  Union. Literature  was  sent  all
over  and  it  started  a  new  impetus  for  this
new  way  of  living  everywhere. Responses
came so overwhelmingly that it became
necessary  to organize  a  great stock  Com-
pany  and to build a great factory with a
capacity sufficient to supply a hundred
thousand whole wheat breads a day, and
thousands of dozens of whole wheat


cookies,  muffins,  whole  wheat  pies  and
many  other  good  things  prepared  simply
and  wholesomely.  Their  new  Health  Food
plant  is  located  on  Diversey  Parkway  and
Lincoln  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.  Thousands  and
thousands  of  people  will  herald  the  good
tidings  that  they  can  buy  good  clean
healthful  food  all  over  Chicago,  and  a
little  later,  all  over  the  land,  as  it  is  the  in-
tention of  the  Berhalters  to  have  their  food
sold  in  every  city  in  the  United  States  be-
fore very  long,  and  hope  that  by  so  doing,  a
great  evil  will  be  overcome  and  a  possibility
of  better  men  and  women  with  cleaner
minds  and  bodies,  resulting  therefrom.

BERGGREN,  TELL,  N.  D.,  M.  D.

Dr.  Tell  Berggren,  director  and  proprietor
of  the  Health  Home  known  as  "Halsoneni-
by-the-Sea,"  at  Coronado,  Cal.,  is  one  of  the
most  successful,  most  enterprising,  most
learned,  and  most  successful  of  American
Naturopaths.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can Physical  Education  Association,  of  the
Therapeutic  Gymnastic  Society  of  America,
and  is  also  lecturer  and  teacher  of  Swedish
gymnastics,  orthopedics,  gymnastic  nomen-
clature and  kinesiology  at  the  Normal
School  of  Physical  Education,  Battle
Creek,  Mich.  He  is  the  author  of  several
works,  explanatory  of  mechano-  therapy
and  the  Swedish  system.  A  graduate  of
Swedish  colleges,  he  became  connected  with
Battle  Creek  Sanitarium  on  his  arrival  in
America,  where  he  studied  the  merits  of  the
various  methods  of  natural  healing  adopted
at  this  well-known  institution.  Later  he
made  several  visits  to  Europe,  stopping
long  enough  at  the  various  Natural  Cure
resorts  to  learn  their  varying  modes  of
health  culture.  Thus,  fully  equipped  for
operating  as  a  Naturopath  on  his  own  ac-
count, he  finally  settled  at  Coronado.  Cal.,
where  he  established  his  well-known  "Hal-
sohem-by-the-Sea."  Here  he  employs  man-
ual therapeutics  with  other  branches  of
physical  education — massage,  hydropathy,
heliotherapy,  psychopathy,  dietetics,  etc.,
as  the  best  way  of  getting  speedy  as  well
as  permanent  results.

The  editor  has  visited  Hiilsohem,  which
he  regards  as  the  only  genuine  Yungborn
on  the  Pacific  Coast.  The  progressive  and
undoubtedly  curative  methods  employed
combine  the  virtues  of  the  Swedish  and
other  rational  systems  of  active  and  passive
therapeutics  and diet.

Many  years  ago,  Dr.  Berggren  saw  the
necessity  for  a  Yungborn  for  consumptives,
and  has  established  a  sanitarium  in  the
mountains  in  the  extreme  southern  part  of
California,  where  he  is  doing  a  great  work
for  suflfering  humanity.  He  treats  his  pa-
tients with  rational  methods,  instead  of  the
irrational  methods  of  the  drugging  system.

Dr.  Berggren  is  very  fortunate  in  possess-
ing a  wife  learned  in  all  the  methods  of
Naturopath}', who is at the same time a


842


Alphabetical  Index


Campion
Carter


Chas.  D..  Parkersburg,  West

Va. (D.C.)  ,,^ ^

Chas. W., Nanton, Alberta.

D l!, Lakeport, Cal. (D.C.)
Esther, 1447 E. 8th Street,

Oklalioma City, Okla.

(D.C.)  „ ^^.

F 202.") 4th Ave. S.. Minne-
apolis, Minn. (D.C.)
F'rank, 432 S. Syracuse St.,

Wichita, Kan. (D.C.)
F. R., 1015 W. 11th Street,

Waterloo, la. (D.C.)
Ida S., Manwaring Blag.,

New  London,  Conn. (D.O.)
J D., Box No. 346, Biloxi,

Miss. (N.D.)
J.  D.,  Dayton,  O. (D.C.)
J L 200 W. Madison St.,

Franklin, Ind. (D.C.)
L., 6th and Perry Sts.,


J.


2, Norfolk,


Davenport, la
.T. R., Box No.

Neb. (D.C.)
J R., Norfolk, Neb. (D.C.)
John J., 290-292 Arcade

Bldg.. Dayton, O. (N.D.)
Mrs. Mary W., 310 Barnes

Ave., Wichita, Kan.

P D., 1121  Kearsley  Street,

Flint, Mich. (D.C.)
R.  H., Sebring, O. (N.D.)
R H  ,  130  Tuscarawas  St.  E.,

Canton, O. (N.D.)
R.  M., Oneill.  Neb. (D.C.)
R. M.,  Norfolk, Neb. (D.C.)
R. N., Cozad,  Neb. (D.C.)
V A., 403  Hamburger  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Wm., 34 Arnot St., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
"Werner A., 1101 Marsh-
Strong  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
W J. 7132 Bennett Street,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Winifred P., Galipolis, O.

Winifred P.. 918  N. High
St., Columbus, O. (D.C.)
CAMPTON, WM. B., 615 Cor-
dova St., Los Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
CANADIAN COLLEGE OF
CHIROPRACTIC, Hamil-
ton,  Ont.. Canada. (DC.)
CANARY, DR. ELLA, Clinton,

Wis. (D.C.)
CANFIELD. CARL B., Coil-
bran, Colo. (D.O.)
CANFIL, A. W., c/o The
Chiropractic College,
San Antonio, Tex. (D.C.)
CANNARD,  MRS.  E.,  Whittier,
Cal. (N.D.)
Wm.  M.,  1279  Bellevue  Ave.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (DC.)
CANNON. M. E., Leichtfield,
Ky. (DO.)
P.  .!.,  Farmington,  Mo.  (D.O.)
CANNATT, ALICE N., Bryan,

O. (D.C.)
CANON,  FRED.  A.,  13  W.  Main
St., Greenville, Pa.
CANOVER, E. H.,
Washington St.
Colo. (D.C.)
CANTRELI>, S. E. CARRO-
THERS, Roswell, Ga.
CAPEK, NORBERT F., 169
Milford Ave.,  Newark,
N. J. (N.D.)
CAPSHAP, Sherman. Tex.

(DO
CAPSHAW, E. F., 219 First
Natl.  Bank  Bldg..  Colorado
Springs.  Colo.  (D.C.)


CARBERRY, HUGH, 504

Park  St.,  Manitowoc,  Wis.
CARD,  ELIZABETH,  310

Huntington Ave., Boston,
Mass. (D.C.)
F.  C. 629 3rd St.. Ft. Madi-
son,  la. (D.O)
CARDAMONE, PHILIP  J., 326
E. Price St., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
CARDER, BERT E., 206-7
Bankers Trust Bldg.,
Little Rock. Ark. (D.C.)
Bert E., 2002 Riegler Blk.,

Little  Rock,  'Ark. (D.C.)
Chas.  L.,  1008  Morengo  Ave.,

Pasadena,  Cal. (D.C.)
Maude E., 1008 Morengo
Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
CARDWELL, W. A., Plant

City, Fla. (D.C.)
CAREY,  FRANK  L.,  10  W.  8th
St,, Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)
H.  F.,  Ill  E.  Washington  St.,

Alexandria, Ind. (D.C.)
Miss  S.  I.,  Majestic,  Colo.
CAR  FORD, C. H., 116 Calvin
St., Youngstown, O.
(D.M.T.)
CARGILL, F. S., 129 5th St.,

Union  Hill,  N.  J. (D.C.)
CARLETON, FANNY T., 24


Johns-


886 S.
Denver,


Summer St., St
bury, Vt. (DO.)
Margaret  B.,  Postofflce  Blk.,
Keen, N. H. (D.O.)
CARLIN, F.  W., 307-8  Connice
Bldg.,  Pittsburg,  Kan.
W.  R.,  Dwight,  111. (D.O.)
CARLISLE, HARDY  WM., 242
Summer Street, Paterson,
N.  .1. (D.O.)
CARLOW, EVA MAINS, PH.
B.. Garnet-Corey Bldg.,
Medford. Ore. (D.O.)
Frank G., Garnet-Corey
Bldg.,  Medford,  Ore.  (D.O.)
CARLS()N, A. N., McKinnie

Bldg., Moline, 111. (D.C.)
CARLSON, BEATA M.. 3502
I.,exington Ave., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)
C.  E.,  N.  Platte,  Neb. (S.T.)
C. J., 23 Foster St., South

Manchester,  Conn.  (D.C.)
Chas. J., 75 Pratt  St.,  Hart-
ford, Conn. (D.C.)
Charles  J..  56  E.  Central St.,
South Manchester, Conn.
Chas. H.. 804 Bryson St.,

Youngstown, O. (D.)
Chas. M., 55 Morris Street,

Rochester,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
Harold,  Jamestown,  N.  Y.

(DC.)
H.  E.,  9i  Park  Ave.,  Warren,

O. (D.C.)
John C, East  Jordan, Mich.

(D. C.)
Susan. 307 Lee Building,
Vancouver, Canada (D.C.)
CARLSTROM, CHAS. O., 108
N. State St., Chicago, 111.
(Ma.)
Miss  Ida, 405 B. 63rd  St.,

Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
John G.. Plentywood, Mont.
CARMAN, ELIZABETH F.,
Cor. 3rd and Hill Sts.,
Gallup,  N.  Mex. (D.C.)
Harriett. 529 Patton St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
Sallie B.. The Portner.

Washington, D. C. (Ma.)


CARMICHAEL, T. H., 7127
Germantown Ave., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.C, M.D.)
CARMONIOY. FRANK, 301-2
Myers Bldg., Muncie, Ind.
CARNEY, EDWARD B., IJ S.
Main St., Ft. Scott, Kan.
CAROTHERS, J. C, 1447 N.
Redfield St., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
CARPENTER, DR., Omaha,
Neb. (D.C.)
C. H., 407 E. 43rd Street.

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Fannie E., Goddard Bldg.,

Chicago.  111.  (D.O.)
George H., Goddard Bldg.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
Irvin D., 1104 Main Street,

Iowa Falls, la. (D.O.)
Julia B., Old Bridge, N. J.

J. H., Baldwin,  Kan. (S.T.)
L. N., 23 Continental Bldg.,

Omaha,  Neb. (D.C.)
Mark C, 666 Woodward
Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.O.)
W. A., 10 Baudinot Street,
Newark,  N. J. (D.C.)
CARPENTER, W. A., 189
Summer  Ave., Newark.
N. J. (N.D.)
CARQUE, OTTO, 1605 Mag-
nolia Ave., Los Angeles,
Cal. (N.D.)
CARR, EDSON, 4200 Grand
I  Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

CARR, MRS. ANTOINETTE
I  "W.. 24 Commercial Ave.,

Buffalo. N. Y. (Cr.)
I S.  v.,  Eudora,  Kan. (D.O.)

CARREIRO, ERNEST, 67
i  AVestlandt Ave., Boston,

1  Mass. (D.C.)

CARRKLL, O. G., 530

Burkeye Ave., Spokane,
Wash. (N.D.)
CARRELL,  R.  L.,  Monte  Vista,

ro\n. (D.C.)
CARRICK, A. W.. 502 Millner

St., Ottumwa, la. (D.C.)
CARRINGTON. DR. J. S..
Thomas, N. M. (M.D.)
CARROLL, EDTTH, Lawton,
Okla. (D.C.)
Grace M., 9154 Commercial
Ave., S. Chicago, 111.
(N.D., D.C.)
CARROLL. GROVE, McKees-
port, N. J. (N.D.)
J. C, 1904 Chicago Ave.,
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.C.)
L.  A..  Hortonville,  Wis.

Margaret L., Reserve Bank
Bldg., Kansas City, Mo.
Max,  1269  Boston  Road,  New
York,  N. Y. (D.C.)
CARROLLTON,  E.  D.,  Encanto,

Cal. (D.C.)
CARSON, E. J., 304 Hav St.,
Fayetteville, N.  C. (D.O.)
Henry, 32 I^afayette Street.

Greenwich, Conn. (D.O.)
L. R.. Hopedale. O. (D.C.)
Merl J.. Southern Building.
Wilmington. N. C. (D.O.)
R.  L.,  Uniontown,  Pa. (D.C.)
R. L., 801 W. Main Street,
Connellville. Pa. (D.C.)
CARTER, A. D., 2104 East
Michigan Ave., Indiana-
polis,  Ind. (D.C.)
Anna W., 6131 Woodlawn
Ave., Chicago. 111. (DC.)
Bertha  E., 729 Bovlston St.,
Boston, Mass. (D.O.)


Naturopdthic  Bioiiraphical  Notes


843


Tell r.erggren, \. D., M. D.


business  woman — a  rare  combination  in  a
helpmate.  The  great  success  of  Dr.  Berg-
gren  is  as  much  the  outcome  of  the  ability
of  his  wife  as  it  is  to  his  own  merits.  The
loyalty,  enthusiasm,  initiative,  and  supreme
faith  in  natural  methods  of  cure  exhibited
by  Drs.  Berggren  are  in  strong  contrast  to
the  lukewarmness,  sectarianism  and  fault-
finding proclivities  of  an  extensive  section
of  Drugless  practitioners.


BIERI,  R.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Bieri  is  the  proprietor  of  the  Carlsbad
Institute,  located  at  336  Palisade  Avenue.
West  Hoboken.  N.  J.,  which  he  has  equipped
with  every  modern  appliance  for  Naturo-
pathic work.  He  has  had  a  long  and  suc-
cessful experience  in  the  treatment  of  both
acute  and  chronic  diseases,  and  has  become
the  possesser  of  a  rich  experience  in  the
Nature Cure method of healing which is


844


Alphabetical  Iiulr.v


Carter
Charles


Charles, Arcade Building-,
Danville, Va. (D.O.)

D.  W.. Solomon, Kan.

CARTER,  DR.  FRED.  H.,
Cambridge.  Vt. (M.D.)

E.  M., 302  IJncoln Building,
Johnston, Pa. (D.C.)

Elmer W., 72 White Street.

Haverhill. Mass. (D.O.)
Georgia, 413 E. Capitol

Ave., Springfield, 111.

H. v., 326 N. Charles St.,

Baltimore, Md. (D.O.)
Isabelle D., 44 Court St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (Cr.)
.lanet F., Ellis, Kan. (D.C.)
J. G., Texarkana. Ark.

Lillian L.. Bleckley Bldg.,

Anderson, S. C. (D.O.)
W. A.. 306  E. 6th  St.,

Davenport, la. (N.D.)
CARTER, VIVIAN D., Kear-
ney, Neb. (D.C.)
Vivian D., Holdridge, Neb.

W. A.. 701  Houser  Buildmg-.

St. Louis. Mo. (S.T.)
Walter C, 413 E. Capitol

Ave., Springfield, 111.

CARTER'S SANATORIUM.

313 W. Ash St., Salina,

Kan. (D.C.)
CARTWRIGHT, F. A., 857

Fort W., Detroit, Mich.
CARTY, WM. A., Bowerston,

O. (D.M.T.)
CARUTHERS, IVA M.. 1251

Wilson Ave., Chicago, 111.

CARVER  CHIROPRACTIC

COLLEGE, Wichita, Kan.

Oklahoma City, Okla.

CARVER, FRED, Vera Cruz.

Mo. (D.C.)
Fred J., Thornburg, la.

Willard, L. L. B., Majestic

Bldg.. Oklahoma City,

Okla. (D.C.)
CARVIN, J. E. & S. P., 144

Washington St., Sandus-
ky.  O. (D.C.)
Ralph H.. Thornburg, la.

GARY. D. C. Holbrook Bldg.,

Brookton. Mass. (D.C.)
Frank L., Freeport, 111.

Frank L.. 96 W. 8h Street.

Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)
Una W.. Hagelstein Bldg..

Sacramento, Cal. (D.O.)
CASE, GEO., 421 Elm Street,

Antigo, Wis. (D.C.)
J. E., 917 E. 62nd Street,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
.John Morton, 330 Ord St.,

Kansas City, Mo. (S.T.)
W.  E.,  Box  133,  The  Dallas,

Ore. (N.D.)
CASEY. B. M., Security Mu-
tual Bldg.. BinghamTon,

N. Y. (D.O.)
H. M., 117 S. Fulton Street,

Auburn, N. Y. (D.C.)
.T., Hotel Toorey, Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)
CASH, MARGUERITE, Edge-
water, Colo. (D.C.)
CASHIN, JOSEPH P., 2138

64th St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

(P.)
CASPARY,  F.,  1403  Sautee  St..

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)


CASPER,  WM. v.. 2S75 B'vvay,

New York. N. Y. (D.C.)
CASS & CASS, 505 N. Wolfe

St.. Baltimore. Md. (D.C.)
CASS. F. W.. 517 3rd Ave.,

Clinton, la. (D.C.)
CASSADY, MAMIE B.. 430

Clay  St.. Thomasville. Ga.

CASS, M. HAZEL & R. B.

Box 234. Bainbridge.  N.  Y.

Mr. & Mrs. Ralph. 278 E.

Main Street. Waterbury.

Conn. (D.C.)
CASSBL. G.. 80 Charles St.,

Altoona, Pa. (N.D.)
CASSELL, M. B., 1530 Chest-
nut St., Philadelphia, Pa.

CASSELMAN, E. F., 2039

Ogden Ave., Chicago. 111.

CASSILE, Dr. W. Koll, 1336

Bristow St., New York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
CASSLBMAN, E. F., 1711

Monroe St.. Sta. D.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
CASTER, H. B., Old Natl.

Bank Bldg., Spokane,

Wash. (D.O.)
L. B., Liberty, Neb. (D.C.)
CASWELL, GLADYS, 611

Canby Bldg., Dayton, O.

CATALANO, ANTONIO, Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (N.D.)
GATE, E.. Box 231, Finlay

City, Mich. (D.C.)
Philip. Grand Valley Bank

Bldg., Grand Junction,

Colo. (D.C.)
CATHEART,  R.  J.,  400  Frank-
lin St., Watertown, N. Y.

CATHEN, J. D. O.. 1332

Oxford St., Canton, O.

CATRON, HOWARD B.,

Payette, Idaho. (D.O.)
CAULK. MRS. M. B., Eagle,

Colo. (D.C.)
CAVE. EDITH STOBO. 30

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
Francis A.. 30 Huntington

Ave., Boston,  Mass. (D.O.)
CAVBNS, H. S., Coffeyville,

Kan. (D.C.)
CAWSTON. MARGARET I.,

3 Albemarle St.,  Piccadilly

W., London, Eng. (D.O.)
CECIL, D. L.. P. O. Box 406.

McCarty Bldg., 9th and

Idaho Sts., Boise, Idaho.

CEIL  &  CEIL,  DRS.,  Box  1091.

Salt Lake City. Utah.

CHADWICK, F.. 501 N. 9th

St., Coshocton, O. (N.D.)
Fletcher, 717 Edwards  Ave.,

E. Liverpool, O. (D.C.)
Fletcher, 501 N. 9th St.,

Coshocton, O. (D.C.)
CHADWICK, G. L.. Arimo

Bldg., Logan, Utah.

(DC.)
CHAFFEE, ALICE B., Hol-

lingsworth Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
CHALUS. FRANK J., 4825

Fleet St., Cleveland, O.

CHAMBERLAIN, DAIDA,

Chippewa Falls, Wis.


Liberty, la.


G. L., 412
Atlantic, la.


E. H., 635 W. 15th Street,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
G. L., 612 Elm  St., Atlantic,
la. (D.C.)
CH.XMBBRLAIN, INA, 202

Smith  St.,  Akron.  O. (Ch.)
J. A., Asiiland, O. (N.D.)
J.  A..  Ashland.  O. (D.C.)
Sadie. Chippewa  Falls, Wis.

Svlvan, North
CHAMBERLEIN,
Chestnut St.,
CHAMBERLIN. I. I.. 21 West
College St., Oberlin, O.
I. I., Burlington, la. (D.C.)
CHAMBERS, ETTA O.. 115
W. 2nd St., Geneseo. 111.
J. M.. Rydal Bank. Ontario,

Canada. (D.C.)
T.  H.,  Georgiana,  Fla. (D.C.)
CHAMPLIN, CHAS. A.. 118
West  Ave.. B.,  Hope.  Ark.
Etta B., 404 S. Elm St.,
Hope.  Ark. (D.O.)
CHAN. G. S.. 913 S. B'way.
Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
CHANDLEB.  Wm.  B., 11-12-13
Gross Bldg., Eureka, Cal.
W. S., 252 Second Street,
Elyria, O. (N.D.)
CHANDLER, A. B., 33 Gross
Bldg., Eureka, Cal. (D.C.)
Chas. H., McCormick Bldg.,

Cherryvale, Kan. (D.O.)

Cliff, Jasonville, Ind. (D.C.)

L. B., 306-7 Masonic

Temple, Denver, Colo.


Louis  C,  321  S.  Hill  St.,  Los

Angeles,  Cal. (D.O.)
W. S., 252 Second Street,
Elyria, O. (D.C.)
CHANDLES, ALLEN B..

Eureka, Cal. (N.D.)
CHANNELL, LEO R.. Wulfe-
kuhler Bank Building.
Leavenworth. Kan. (D.O.)
CHAPLIN, W. T., 110 Martin
St., Morgantown, W. Va.
CHAPMAN, ADA  HINCKLEY,
Holmes Bldg., Gale.sburg,
111. (D.O.)
Geo. W., Prlmghar, la.

J. A.. Kendallville, Ind.

J. G., Kingsley, la. (D.O.)
Leo., 630 Woodland Park,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
M.  W., 130 S. Sandusky St.,
Bucyrus. O. (D.C.)
CHAPMAN, W. A., Austin,

Minn. (D.C.)
CHAPPELL, B. E., Clear
Lake, la. (D.O.)
George G., Sidney, la.

Nannie J., Central Natl.
Bank Bldg., St. Louis,
Mo. (D.O.)
W. F.. Surety Building.
Muskogee, Okla. (D.O.)
CHAPPLE, DR. A. J.. 602
Hempell St.. Fort Worth,
Texas. (S. T.)
CHARLEBOIS, ELMER, J.,
Box 148, Alexandria, Ont.
Canada. (D.C.)
CHARLES, ELMER, Pontiac,
Mich. (D.O.)


Naliiropalhic  Biograplu'cal  Notes


845


the  foundation  of  his  success.  Jealous  ol
his  work  and  reputation,  tlic  New  Jersey
Medical  Association  aided  and  abcttecl  by
his  brother  Osteopaths,  have  given  Dr.  Bieri
some  professional  trouble,  but  he  has  sur-
mounted their  machinations,  and  is  now
freely  at  work  at  his  congenial  task  of  re-
lieving sick  humanity  of  its  ailments.

BIGGS,  A.  C,  N.  D.,  Asheville,  N.  C.

Born  October  4,  1876,  at  Gambler,  Ohio.
Son  of  William  and  Martha  E.  Biggs.  Two
brothers  and  many
other  relatives  re-
side there.  He  was
educated  at  Ohio
Wesleyau  Universi-
ty, Buchtal  College,
Kenyon  College  and
other  Ohio  schools,
taking  special  work
in  history,  philoso-
phy, psychology  in
various  schools,  in
addition  to  the  regu-
lar classical  course,
commenced  the
stud}^  of  rational
therapeutics  under
Dr.  Marmaduke,
Nevada,  Mo.,  1897-
189S,  the  work  in-
cluding osteopathy,  hydrotherapy  and  electricity.
In  Nevada  Dr.  Biggs  became  associated  with
the  Weltmer  Inst.,  practicing  the  Weltmer
method  of  psycho-therapeutics.  On  returning
to  Ohio  in  1898,  he  purchased  an  interest  in  a
non-medical  institute  and  sanitarium  conduct-
ed by  Dr.  Hunter  and  Prof.  E.  H.  Anderson.
A  large  and  successful  practice  had  already
been  established.  A  school  was  opened  and
placed  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Biggs.  The
course  of  instruction  covered  anatomy,  phv-
siology,  diagnosis,  pathology,  psychology,
mental  therapeutics,  electricity,  massage,  os-
teopathy and  medical  jurisprudence.  In  ad-
dition to  the  owners  of  the  institute,  several
other  physicians  and  teachers  were  employed,
among  them  R.  H.  Biggs,  M.  D.,  B.  F.  Martz
L.L.  D.  and  Prof.  R.  S.  Davis.  The  latter
subsequently  purchased  a  half  interest  in  the
institute,  and  he  and  Dr.  Biggs  became  sole
owners  and  assumed  full  control.  Dr.  Biggs
and  Prof.  Davis  then  purchased  the  Ohio
Institute  of  Osteopathy  with  a  view  to  com-
bining it  with  a  larger  institution,  but  found
it  impracticable,  and  some  time  later  sold  the
Ohio  Institute  of  Osteopathy  to  Dr.  Stone,
who  continued  the  work  for  a  number  of
years.  A  very  extensive  practice  was  con-
ducted at  the  sanatarium,  often  as  many  as
one  hundred  patients  being  treated  daily.  Dur-
ing several  years  spent  at  Columbus,  Dr.  Biggs
continued  studies  in  various  branches  of  the
healing  art,  especially  in  diagnosis,  experimen-
tal psychologv,  osteopathv.  various  branches
nf  naturopathy  and  medical  electricity.  In
1900,  Dr.  Biggs  devoted  some  time  to  special
study  of  suggestive  therapeutics under  J". T.


Hudson,  author  of  The  Law  of  Psychic  Phe-
nomena. In  1901,  Dr.  Biggs  passed  the  exam-
ination of  the  American  School  of  Naturo-
pathy and  was  granted  a  diploma'  from  that
institution.  Dr.  Biggs  has  always  been  a
lover  of  the  South  and  had  a  desire  to  live
in  that  section;  so  in  1903,  after  disposing
of  his  interests  in  Columbus,  he  considered
various  cities  as  fields  for  practice,  and
decided  upon  Greensboro,  N.  C.  A  new
iron-clad  medical  law  had  just  gone  into
effect,  and  after  only  three  days'  practice
in  Greensboro,  Dr.  Biggs  was  arrested  for
the  practice  of  medicine  and  surgery  with-
out permit  from  the  Board  of  Medical  Exa-
miners. He  offered  to  go  before  the  board
and  take  examination  in  every  branch  con-
nected with  his  practice,  but  this  privilege
was  denied  him.  So  the  only  recourse  was  a
light.  The  final  result  w^as  a  complete  vic-
tory in  the  North  Carolina  Supreme  Court
for  Dr.  Biggs  and  for  naturopathic  meth-
ods. The  decision,  written  by  Chief  Justice
Clark,  was  a  masterpiece  in  logic  and  sar-
casm directed  toward  the  medical  associa-
tion of  the  state.  The  decision  in  the  "Biggs
Case"  was  the  first  notable  victory  for  ra-
tional therapeutics,  and  has  had  great  influ-
ence in  securing  freedom  of  practice  for  non-
medical practitioners  in  other  states  in  the
last  twelve  years.  The  opposition  of  the
medical  association  (not  the  profession,  for
man}'  of  the  best  physicians  openly  rejoiced
at  this  victory  and  were  the  first  to  tender
congratulations)  did  good  rather  than  harm,
and  practice  grew  rapidly.  Soon  a  sanita-
rium was  opened  and  patients  came  from
nearly  every  state  in  the  Union.  In  1909,
the  sanitarium  in  Greensboro  was  destroyed
by  fire;  and  later  in  that  year  the  sanitarium
now  conducted  in  Asheville  was  opened.  The
decision  to  go  to  Asheville  rather  than  re-
open in  Greensboro,  where  so  extensive  a
practice  had  been  established,  was  made
l)ecause  of  the  unexcelled  advantages  of
the  Asheville  climate.  Nearly  all  the  patients
in  the  sanitarium  at  Greensboro  at  the  time
nf  the  destruction  of  the  building  went  to
Asheville,  and  reported  for  treatment  the
first  day  the  new  institution  -was  opened.
Its  methods  are  fully  explained  in  a
pamphlet.  Special  attention  to  diseases  of
the  nervous  S3'stem is  given.

BINCK,  C.  E.,  M.  D.,  D.  O.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Binck  is  a  practising  licensed  osteo-
path of  Burlington.  N.  T..  and  first  saw  the
daylight,  as  he  expresses  it.  50  years  ago,
in  Germany.  He  has  attended  school  and
college  both  in  Germany  and  the  United
that  the  public  does  not  want  to  be  shep-
herded by  medical  tyranny-,  legalized  mo-
nopoly, paternalism  and  compulsory  offi-
cial medicine,  but  that  the  science  and  art  of
healing  should  be  in  harmony  with  the  laws
of  Nature,  the  treatment  to  be  given  in  each
case  congenial  to  Nature  and.  in  accordance
with  her  unerring  instinct  for  health. This


846


Alphabetical  Index


Charleuille
Cleary


CHARLEVILLE.
Hamburger
Angeles,  Cal.

CHARTIER, T.,
rey St. N. S
Pa. (N.D.)

CHASE, JOHN


JOS.,  401
Bldg.,  Los

1207 Monte-
, Pittsburgh,


P.,


Rochester,


Wilder

N. Y.


Bldg..

Julia Jane, 42 Middle St.,

Portsmouth, N. H. (D.O.)
CHATTERTON, W. A., 1712

Las Lumas, Pasadena,

Cal. (D.C.)
CHATWIN, H. W., 709 Duns-

muir St., Vancouver, Can.

CHENEY, HENRY S., 1507 S.

Figueroa  St., Los  Angeles,

Cal. (D.O.)
CHERRTLL, KATHERINE

Carthage, 111. (D.O.)
CHERRY, J. E., 168 N. Main

St.. Wilkes Barre, Pa.

CHESEBROUGH, EDNA, 171

Westminster St., Provi-
dence, R. I. (D.O.)
CHEW, DR. THOMAS S.,

Pleasantville,  N.  J. (N.D.)
CHEYNEY, DR. ANNA M.,

Real Estate Trust Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (N.D.)
CHILCOTT. DR., Osborne,

Tex. (S.T.)
CHILD, B. W., 1705 Cedar

St., Alhanibra, Cal.

CHILD, ISA  COBURN,  Purcell,

Okla. (D.C.)
Mrs. J. M., Carthage. Me.

CHILDRESS, T. E., 525 Com-
mercial St., Emporia,

Kan. (D.O.)
CHILDS. BESSIE CALVERT,

Goldsmith Bldg., Mil-
waukee, Wis. (D.O.)
Harrv L, 466 Main St.,

Orange, N. J. (D.O.)
Isa  Coburn, 2305 Park  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
William S., Roach Building,

Salina. Kan. (D.O.)
CHILSON. MAUD I., Uplands,

Cal. (D.C.)
CHIROPRACTIC BULLETIN,

1124  Foster  Ave.,  Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
CHIROPRACTIC COLLEGE,

536 S. Emporia Ave.,

Wichita, Kan. (D.C.)
CHIROPRACTIC INSTITUTE

OF KANSAS CITY,

Kansas City, Mo. (D.C.)
CHIROPRACTIC INSTITUTE

of NEW YORK, 39th St.

and B'way, New York,

N. Y. (D.C.)
CHIROPRACTIC  SANITA-

RIUM, 834  1st  Ave.,  Cedar

Rapids, la. (D.C.)
CHISM, C. M., Argonia, Kan.

CHITTENDEN, ALBERT E.,

415  Court  St.,  Auburn,  Me.
W. C, 33 S. Main Street,

Newark, N. Y. (D.O.)
CHIVERTON, M. L., 31 Em-
press Ave., London, Ont.,

Canada. (D.C.)
CHORNE, PROF. C. A..
Fayetteville, Ark. (S.T.)
CHRESTENSEN, C. J., Y. M.

C. A. Bldg., Keokuk, la.
CHRISTE, DR. M. J., 135

Noble St., Brooklyn, N.  Y.


CHRISTENSEN, C. P., Main
St., Humboldt, la. (D.O.)
E. W., Long Beach Natl.
Bank Bldg., Long Beach,
Cal. (DO.)
CHRISTIAN, A, T., 608
Stewart Bldg., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
Eugene, 213 West 79th St.,
New  York,  N.  Y. (F.)
CHRISTIAN, F. A., 406 S. 7th
St.,  St. Louis,  Mo. (N.D.)
Viola, Room 412, 7 W. 6th
St., Cincinnati, O. (D.C.)
CHRISTIE, M. J., 135 Noble
St., Greenpoint, Brooklyn,
N. Y. (D.C.)
CHRISTOFFERSON, HULDA,
6553 S. Robey St.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
CHRISTOPHERSON, MISS H.,
2728 Broadway. New
York, N. Y. (Ma.)
CHRZAN, JOHN, 2926 Wisner
Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
CHUBB, CATHERINE MAY,
People's Bldg., Delaware,
O. (D.O.)
CHURAN, FRANK  O., 5853

Thomas St., Chicago, 111.
CHURCH. GEORGE W., 1380
E. 110th  St., Cleveland,  O.
Jas.  L., 4847  N. Albany
Ave.,  Chicago,  111. (M.D.)
CHURCH,  JOHN  M.,  Lewiston,
Idaho. (D.O.)
J. W., Harlowton. Mont.

Gordon  W.  B., Warren, R.  I.
CHURCHILL, GEO. S., Nicol-
let House. Minneapolis.
Minn. (D.C.)
CHURCHILL, MYRON L..
Sanitaria Springs. N. Y.
CINADR, J. L., Wilson, Kan.
J. L., 508 Miss. Avenue.
Davenport, la. (D.C.)
CINCINNATI SANITARIUM,
THE, 5642 Hamilton  Ave.,
Cincinnati, O. (D.P.)
CIVLIN, MARCUS B., 3841
Cottage Grove Ave.,
Chicago, 111: (N.D.)
CLAASSEN, THEODORE G.,
511 E. 162nd St., New
York, N. Y. (N. D., D.C,
M.D., D.O.)
CLANTER, E. T., 313 Elyria

Blk., Elyria, O. (D.C.)
CLAPP, CARL D., Mayro
Bldg., Utica, N. Y. (D.O.)
CLARK, A. B., 341 MadiSon
Ave., New York, N. Y.
A. C, Byron, Mich. (D.C.)
Anna Stow, Auditorium
Blk., Los Angeles, Cal.
Casey, 3738 Calumet Ave.,

Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
C. E., 30 E. Broad St.
Chamber of Commerce,
Columbus, O. (D.C.)
C. E., 315 W. 8th Ave.,

Columbus, O. (D.C.)
Charles E., Claremont, Cal.

Clyde A., 18 Asylum St.,
Hartford, Conn. (D.O.)

C.  G.,  Columbus,  Neb. (D.C.)

D.  L.,  Empire  Bldg.,  Denver,
Colo. (D.O.)

CLARK, E. H., 27 E. Monroe
St., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)


Edward Kennedy. Wash-
ington, Mo. (D.O.)
Everett E., Forsyth Bldg.,

Atlanta, Ga. (D.C.)
Frank  C,  Auditorium  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
Fred  M.,  Collins  Bldg.,  Fond

du Lac, Wis. (D.C.)
G. E., Kansas  City,  Mo.

H. A., Clarinda, la. (D.C.)
Homer  M., El Paso, 111.

I. H., 231 Potomac Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
John F., Greenville, Tex.

J. H.. 247 S. 13th Street,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C.)
Julia  V.  Frey,  Empire  Bldg.,

Denver, Colo. (D.O.)
Mrs. Mary, 1432 Dote St.,

San  Diego,  Cal. (D.C.)
O. G., 522 W. 13th St.,

Columbus, Neb. (D.C.)
O. N., Lawrence, Kan.

O. N., 2417 Forrest Ave.,

Kansas City, Mo. (D.C.)
P. R., Marysville, Kans.

Dr. R. T.,  Jackson,  Miss.

Sophia E., Liberty, Mo.

Theo., 2504 Harrison St..

Kansas  City,  Mo. (D.C.)
T. N.. Sioux  City, la. (D.C.)
W. F., 326 Indiana Ave.,

Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
CLARKE, C. L.. 1468 Ken-
wood Ave., Camden, N.  J.

Emily M., Miles City, Mont.

George Burt F., University

Bldg., Detroit. Mich.

Olive. 805 W. Pico St.. Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
CLARKE. ROBT.. 1104 East

47th St.. Chicago, 111.

CLASS. DR. F. L., Huron,

S. D. (M.D.)
CLASSEN, CARRIE C, First

Natl. Bank Bldg., Ann

Arbor, Mich. (D.O.)
Wm. G.. Hebron, Neb.

CLASSON, CARL A., Hotel

Watson,  Los  Angeles, Cal.
CLAUSAN, J. A., Walnut, 111.

H.  Klinkwort,  2041  5th  Ave,

New  York,  N. Y. (Ma.)
CLAUSSEN. B. C. Indianola.

la. (D.O.)
Pauline  M.,  Indianola  Bank-
ing Co. Bldg.. Indianola.

la. (D.O.)
CLAUSER. EVERETT T.. 313

Elyria  Bank  Bldg.,  Elvria,

O. (D.C.)
CLAUTER, E. T., 313 Elyrin

Block, Elyria, O. (D.C.)
CLAYSON. RALPH L.. Carl-
ton Court,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

CLAYTON, MRS. E. A., 818

Brady St., Davenport, la.

Mrs. E. E.. 200  Star-Courier

Bldg., Kewanee, 111.

(DC.)
CLEARY, C. STUART, 431 S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


847


doctrine  absolutely  precludes  the  implanting
of  foul  and  morbid  matter  into  the  l)odies
of  either  healthy  or  diseased,  the  very  mat-
ter which  Nature  is  trying  to  expel  from
diseased  organisms,  as  incompatible  with
her benign care of living beings.

BLUM,  HENRY  A.,  Opt.

Dr.  Blum  was  born  in  1874  and  is  a
graduate  of  the  Manhattan  School  of  Op-
tometry (1905).  He  is  a  member  of  the
New  York  City  and  State  Optometrical
Societies,  also  of  the  National  Society.  Dr.
Blum  specializes  in  Scientific  Eye  Examina-
tion without drugs.

BRADSHAW,  WILLIAM  RICHARD.

Lecturer  to  the  New  York  Anti- Vivi-
section  Society.

One  of  the  most  redoubtable  of  modern
knights  errant  is  the  subject of  our  notice,


William R. Bradshaw

his  specialty  being  a  war  to  the  death
against  that  phase  of  pseudo  medical
culture,  known  as  vivisection.  Mr.  Brad-
shaw has  been  for  the  last  six  years  the
Lecturer  for  the  New  York  Anti-Vivisec-
tion Society,  an  organization  that  has  for
its  propaganda  the  awakening  of  the  mind
and  conscience  of  the  body  politic  to  the
fact  that  vivisection  is  an  immoral  and  un-
scientific pursuit  of  knowledge.  It  seeks
to  give  practical  shape  to  its  efforts  by  pro-
moting a  bill  at  Albany  known  as  The
Open  Door  Bill,  which  will  legalize  free
entry  into  the  medical  laboratories  of  the
State  on  the  part  of  State-appointed
humanitarian  inspectors.  Mr.  Bradshaw
has  made  three  humanitarian  pilgrimages
throughout  the  State  of  New  York,  to  ex-
pose and  combat  scientific  torture,  accom-
panied by  a  stereopticon  outfit,  with  which
he  illustrates  laboratory  horrors. He  is  an


eloquent  speaker  and  shows  how  medical
science  staggers  beneath  the  intoxication  of
a  monstrous  and  bloody  dream,  which  has
become  the  dream  of  the  majority  of  physi-
cians and  the  greater  number  of  our  doped
and  duped  citizens,  that  by  cursing  animals,
human  beings  can  be  blessed  with  such
curses.  His  arguments  are  to  the  last  de-
gree a  convincing  exposition  of  the  truth,
that  "a  corrupt  tree  cannot  bring  forth
good  fruit."  He  exhibits  vivisection  as  the
most  merciless  exploiter  of  flesh  and  blood
the  world  has  ever  seen.  He  makes  bare
the  fact  that  no  scruple,  no  moral  con-
sideration, no  feeling  of  humanity  can  re-
strain its  atrocious  destruction  of  animal
life  and  such  human  lives  as  it  can  surrepti-
tiously make  use  of.  in  accordance  with  its
infamous  doctrine  that  might  is  right.  Its
frenzied  logic  asserts  that  the  more  barbar-
ous and  inhuman  it  is.  the  better  it  will
fulfil  its  aims.  He  exhibits  the  undying
barbarity  of  human  nature  that  contends
that  our  civilization  can  be  uplifted  and
glorified  by  man's  reason  trampling  on
moral  law,  that  the  supremacy  of  violence
over  justice,  immorality  over  morality,
blind  impulse  over  reason,  or  cruelty  over
compassion,  can  lift  mankind  to  higher
planes  of  being.  He  shows  the  misrepre-
sentations, the  sophistications  that  char-
acterize all  the  statistics  that  seek  to  prove
the  value  of  serums,  vaccines  and  inocula-
tions, prepared  for  the  cure  or  prevention  of
disease.  He  shows  the  uselessness  of
these  so-called  remedies,  and  the  vast  array
of  damaging  facts  that  are  carefully  hidden
from  sight  and  absolutely  denied.  The
effect  of  his  lectures  has  been  to  awaken
an  enthusiasm  for  the  abolition  of  vivi-
section, and  as  proofs  of  the  success  of  his
mission,  he  possesses  over  a  hundred  reso-
lutions unanimously  adopted  by  as  many
different  meetings  he  has  addressed,  en-
dorsing the  Open  Door  Bill,  which  has
been  presented  to  the  New  York  State
Legislature  by  the  New  York  Anti-Vivisec-
tion Society,  and  strongly  recommended
its  early  adoption  as  law  by  the  said  legis-
lature. Mr.  Bradshaw  is  a  strong  advocate
of  drugless  healing  and  believes  in  Natu-
ropathy as  the  medicine  of  the  future.  He
believes  that  allopathy  is  being  drowned
in the  blood  of  its  victims.

BRETOW,  WM.  M.,  N.  D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C.

Dr.  William  M.  Bretow  is  the  foremost
Naturopath  in  the  East.  His  institution  in
Brooklyn  from  the  verj'-
beginning  was  a  great  suc-
cess, and  although  he
never  advertised,  he  had
always  more  patients  than
he  could  take  care  of.  The
fact  that  Dr.  Bretow  has
become  independent  and
wealth}',  shows  that  he  is
one  of  the  few  Drugless
doctors who have really


848


Al])}iabcli('(il  ludc.v


C.lceland
C.olman


Rapids, Neb.
Iowa City,


CI.ERLAND. F. W.. Lyceum

Bldgr.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.

(D.C.)  ^ ,,

n^EFISCH, I.. M., Gutten-

burg-, la. (D.C.)  ^ ,

CLEI-AND, A., Citizens Bank

Bldg., South Bend, Ind.

C T Spurgeon  Bldg.,  Santa

'Ana. Cal. (D.C.)
n T 1014 Nelson Street,
Vancouver, B. C.  >  Can.

CT^EMlSk JENNIE U

Beardstown. HI- Cj-C.)

CLEMENT,  ALICE,  275  War-
ren St.. Roxbury, Mass.

He?r5'Nv., 43 Blackstone
Blvd., Providence, K. i-

CLeSiER, dr., 15 Howland
Ave., Toronto, Ont.,
Canada. (D.C.)
CLEVELAND, C. F., 1014
*^^ N^son St., };ancouver.
B. C Canada. (D.C.)
Edward W., 305 S. Ash-
land Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
(D.O.) ^
M H., Cedar

(S. T.)
Mabel Lewis

la. (D.O.)  ^ .

W E, 930 Elmwood Ave.,]
Buffklo, N. Y. (D.C.)
CLEVELAND. W. E. M., 187  j
N.  Pearl  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

CLIFFORD.  .lAMES  RAY^  .42
N  Brady  St..  Du  Bois.
Pa. (D.O.)  „^^ ^^ ,

CLIFTON,  Robt.  N.,  807  State
St., Camden, N. J. (D.C.)

CLINCH. .T. H. M., Danville,

CLINE,  CO.,  Dighton  Bldg.,
Monticello, 111. (D.O.)

CLINTON,  MARY  W.,  Keenan
Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.

CLOSE, P. H.. Jackson, Mich.

CL0USE;^D. H.. 120 W Pine

St., Lodi, Cal. (D.O.)
CLOVER,  J. C,  West  Blootar,

Ala. (D.C.)
Thomas H., First National

Bank Bldg.. Hays City,

Kan. (D.O.)
CLUETT, F. G., Security

Bldg.. Sioux City, la.

CLUFF,  ARTHUR  C,  Liggett
Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.  (D.O.)

COADY  JOHN  H.,  Alden  Blk.,
Anna,  111. (D.O.)

COATES,  E.  J.,  75  Sixth  Ave.,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)

COATES.  FRED'K  G.  W.,  27
Bond  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
(Opt.)

COBB, ABNER J..
Bldg., Denver,
Abner J., 1548
St., Suite No.
Colo. (D.C.)
G. A.. 539 Proctor St.
Arthur, Tex. (D.O.)

COBBLE,  WILLIAM  HOUS-
TON, Fremont  Natl.  Bank
Bldg., Fremont, Neb.

COBURN,  D.  WENDELL,  100
High  St.,  Newburyport,
Mass. (D.O.)

COCHRAN,  A.  D.,  Morrison,
111. (D.C.)


623 Mack
Colo.

California
2, Denver,


Pqit


A. D., Clinton. la. (D.C.)
Harry. 625 S. Glen Street.

Wichita. Kan. (D.C.)
Maude, Central City, Neb.

COCHRANE, ALBERT B.,

39 S. State St., Chicago,

111.  (D.C.)  ;

Philip S., 191 Huntington
Ave.,  Boston,  Mass. (D.O.)
COCKRELL, CHARLES C,
Economv Bldg., Evans-
ville. Wis. (D.O.)
Irvin, 505-5th Ave., New
York, N. Y. (D.O.)
CODY &• CODY, 716 18th St.,
Oakland,  Cal. (D.C.)
J.  Alfred. 600 Woodland
Ave.. Conneaut, O.
(D.M.T.)
COFFEE, EUGENE M., Col-
lingwood, N. J. (D.O.)
W. O., 1445 W. 84th St.,
Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
COFFER, G. T., 2540 Blvd.,
Jersey City, N. J. (D.O.)
COFFEY. EVA KATE, 551 S.
Grand Ave., Los Angeles,
Cal. (D.O.)
COFFEY, N. B., Box 111,
LeRoy, 111. (N.D.)
Opal  E.,  Oakland,  111. (D.O.)
COFFIN, J.  N.,  Mulvane, Kan.

COFFLAND,  FLORENCE,  1432
Franklin Ave., Columbus,
O. (D.O.)
Florence, 1432 Franklin
Ave., Columbus. O. (D.O.)
COFFMAN. J. MARVIN, 324
i  St. Ann St., Owensboro,

I  Ky. (D.O.)

COHALAN, JOHN A., Stephen
Girard Bldg., Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.O.)
COHAN, A., 320 E. 15th St.,
New York, N. Y. (D.C.) j
COHAN, MRS. MAE, Kenois
Bldg., Washington, D. C.  \
(Ma.)
COHEN,  D.,  No.  1  Ferry  Road,
Niagara Falls, Canada.
COHN,  RICHARD,  San

Antonio, Tex. (S.T.)
COHROD, HAL, Corning, la.

COKP:. RICHARD H.. 411 W.
Chestnut St., Louisville,
Ky. (D.O.)
COLBORN, R. M., 810 Broad
St., Newark, N. J. (D.O.)
COLBY,  IRVING,  Marsh  Bldg.,
New  London,  Conn. (D.O.)
COLDWELLS. JOSEPH A..
Homer I^aughlin Bldg..
Los Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
COLE. ARTHUR E.. Mitchell
Bldg.. Springfield, O.
COLE, ERNEST I., 98 S.
Highland Ave.,
Ossining. N. Y. (N.D.)
Ernest I., 340-1 N. 1st St..
St. Petersburgh, Fla.
Mrs. Grace  P., 1301  W. 25th
St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
John A., 429 10th Street,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
John A., 1247 First Ave.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
J. B., Iladen Building,

Columbia,  Mo. (D.O.)
Julia Mowery, 2602 N. 12th
St., Philadelphia, Pa.
L. L., Lawton, Okla. (S.T.)


M'Tton K., 38 Pearl Street,
Framingham, Mass.
Omer C, Lewistown Trust
Co. Bldg.. Lewistown, Pa.
O.  O.,  Pendleton,  Ore. (D.C.)
Dr. S. L., Lawton, Okla.
COLEMAN, ANDREW,

Froude, Sask., Canada.
B.  A., 20  Linden  Ave.,  Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
(X3LE]\L-\.N, E. E., 432 W.

Madi.son St., South Bend,
Ind. (N.D.)
E. H., 4345 Agnes Ave.,

Kansas  City,  Mo. (D.C.)
Will H., 1546 W. 7th  Street

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
Will  H.. 1231  W. 8th  St..

Los Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
Willard H., 1319 State St.,
La Crosse, Wis. (D.C.)
COLGAN. C. E.. 5 Theatj'e
Bldg., Fairmount, Ind.
E. C, Arcadia, Ind. (D.C.)
COLLARD, ELOIS, 312 W

58th St., New York, N  Y
(P.)
COLLEGE OF DIETOLOGY
AND PSYCHOTHERAPY,
265 22nd St., San Diego,
Cal. (N.D.)
COLLIER, E. & L., "VVest
Bldg., Decatur, 111.
(N.D's.)
COLLIER, HIX F., 133 W
Main St., Waterbury,
Conn. (D.O.)
Jennie E., 118 W. 6th St.,

Cincinnati, O. (M.A.)
J. Erie, Stahlman Building,
Nashville, Tenn. (D.O.)
COLLINS, A. B., Linesville,

Pa. (M.D.)
COLLINS, ALICE L., 10 S
i  18th St., Philadelphia, Pa.

'[ Charles O., 16 Gould Ave.,
I  Newark, N. J. (D.C.)

Clyde  I..  Pitcairn.  Pa.  (D.C.)
!  Clyde  I.,  484  3rd  Street,
1  Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)

Clyde I., 400 Center Ave.,

Pitcairn, Pa. (D.C.)
Edw.  W.,  122  Roseville  Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Emma Hazel, 424 S. 42nd
St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Ethel Nora. 16 Gould Ave..

Newark. N. J. (D.C.)
F. W., 16 Gould Ave.,
Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
H., 411 Jefferson St.,
Olympia, Wash. (D.C.)
, H. F., 400S Grand  Blvd..
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
H. L., 122 S. Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Mrs. Hattie M., 552 Colum-
bus Ave., Boston, Mass.
Henry. 316 Alisky Bldg..
Portland. Ore. (D.P.T.)
Jean Hough. 69 Piccadilly
W.. London. Eng. (D.O.)
Louisa J.. Century Bldg.,

Evanston. 111. (D.O.)
Orrville. Box 45. Gardner.

Mont. (D.C.)

Paul R.. Meguire Bldg..

Dougla.s. Ariz. (D.O.)

COLLYER. FRANK A., Pope

Bldg.,  Louisville.  Kj'.  (D.O.)

COLMAN. W. H., 1319 State

St./  La  Crosse,  Wis. (N.D.)


Naluropdlhic  liioffrdphical  Notes


849


financially  and  professionally  succeeded.
The  reason  was  that  he  was  broad-minded
and  liberal;  and  would  not  tolerate  thera-
peutic fences  around  himself,  and  used  the
good  of  all  the  methods  in  Drugless  heal-
ing; but  without  getting  away  with  any  one
of  them,  he  put  his  first  attention  in  every
case  to  constitutional  regeneration,  using
the  methods  of  the  great  masters,  such  as
Johann  Schroth,  Louis  Kuhne,  Sebastian
Kneipp,  Bilz,  Adolph  Just,  Arnold  Ehret
and  others.  The  Bretow  Institution  shows
an  equipment  that  is  practical  and  up  to
date,  where  hydropathic  provisions  exist
to  suit  all  cases  and  conditions.  The  great
service  that  Dr.  Bretow  has  done  to  the
Naturopathic  profession  is  not  realized  at
present,  but  he  was  the  first  influential  man
who  was  really  active  in  legislative  work.
His  prestige  is  so  great  and  so  well  founded
that  the  medical  society  dared  not  attempt
to  persecute  him,  and  their  sleuths  left  him
severely  alone.  His  connection  with  politics
gives  him  great  political  influence.  He
came  very  near  having  a  bill  passed  to  give
Naturopathic  practitioners  full  liberty  of
exercising  their  profession  in  New  York
State;  but,  strange  so  say,  the  very  people
who  should  have  aided  in  this  enterprise,
the  Chiropractors,  aided  and  abetted  the
enemy  so  well  that  the  bill  was  killed.

In  face  of  such  opposition  to  the  spread
of  drugless  healing  from  enemies  both
within  and  without  the  cult,  a  fearless  per-
sonalitj^  such  as  Dr.  Bretow  possesses,  is
of  the  highest  value  to  the  cause  of  drug-
less therapy.

BUTLER,  RAYMOND  E.,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Dr.  Raymond  E.  Butler,  of  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  has  recently  completed  a  post-gradu-
ate course  at  the  Lindlahr  College  of  Nature
Cure  and  Osteopathy.  Dr.  Butler  is  a
graduate  of  the  two  year  course  of  the
Eclectic  College  of  Physiological  Thera-
peutics, and  for  the  past  eighteen  months
prior  to  taking  the  Lindlahr  course,  has
been  associated  with  Dr.  Ellis  E.  Halbert,
at  Rochester,  New  York.

Dr.  Butler  is  also  an  active  and  in-
fluential spirit  in  the  Mazdaznan  Association
in  his  locality,  and  is  now  preparing  to
organize  a  new  class  in  Mazdaznan  Birth
Culture  which  will  be  free  to  all  who  may
be  interested.  Dr.  Butler  became  interested
in  nature-cure  at  an  early  age,  because  of
the  dismal  failure  of  drug  therapy  in  his
own  case.  At  the  age  of  nine  years  he  was
stricken  down  with  poliomyelitis,  and  after
the  failure  of  "medical  science"  to  restore
health,  a  rigorous  regimen  of  physical  and
health  culture  was  adopted  with  the  result
that  Dr.  Butler  is  now  as  robust  a  speci-
men of  health  as  could  be  desired.

CARVER,  WILLARD,  D.  C.

Willard  Carver  was  born  at  Allen's  Grove
road,  near  Davenport, Iowa,  July 14, 1866.


in  the  Spring  of  1868,  his  parents  moved  to
Pleasant  Grove  township,
Mahaska  County,  Iowa,
near  where  the  parents  re-
sided until  their  death.
Willard  Carver  was  edu-
cated in  the  district
schools,  finally  attended
Oskaloosa  College,  which
was  at  his  county  seat  and,
afterward  completed  his
course  at  Drake  University,
graduating  from  the  law  department  in
June  1891,  with  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  In
the  fall  of  that  year,  he  became  cashier  of
a  bank  in  Barnes  City,  la.,  which  position
he  held  until  1894,  attending  incidentally  to
such  law  practice  as  came  his  way,  when
he  left  the  bank  and  went  to  Northwestern
Iowa,  where  he  engaged  exclusively  in  the
law  business,  which  business  he  success-
fully followed  until  October  of  1905 — when
he  quit  the  law  business  to  take  up  the
fight  for  the  science  of  Chiropractic.  At
seventeen,  he  became  acquainted  with  Dr.
D.  D.  Palmer,  the  father  of  chiropractic.
He  knew  him  intimatelv  until  his  death,  in
1913.  In  December,  1895,  Dr.  Palmer  wrote
a  letter  to  Mr.  Carver,  announcing  his  dis-
covery of  moving  vertebrae  to  release
nerves.  Mr.  Carver  had  been  an  invalid
practically  all  his  life  and  was  deeph'  in-
terested in  the  communication  from  Dr.
Palmer  and  immediately  began  studying
and  developing  along  the  line  of  the  re-
lease of  nerves  to  remove  interference  with
stimulus.  It  will  be  seen  that  Willard
Carver's  study  and  development  began  but
three  months  later  than  that  of  Dr.  D.  D.
Palmer,  and  has  continued  without  inter-
ruption until  the  present  day.  In  June
1906,  Willard  Carver  was  graduated  from
Parker  School  of  Chiropractic.  Ottumwa.
la.,  to  which  place  he  had  gone  previous  to
that  year  to  be  adjusted  for  a  threatened
general  paralysis.  LInder  the  proposition
of  Dr.  Charles  Ray  Parker,  that  Willard
Carver  would  teach  Dr.  Parker  the  Science
of  Chiropractic  while  he  taught  Willard
Carver  the  Art  of  Adjusting,  as  he  had
learned  it  from  Dr.  D.  D.  Palmer.  In
August  1906,  Dr.  Carver  located  at  Okla-
homa City,  where  he  has  since  been  and,
in  October,  founded  Carver  College,  which
was  first  chartered  as  Carver-Dennj-  Chiro-
practic College,  but  afterward  changed  to
Carver  Chiropractic  College,  which  it  still
is.  Dr.  Carver  had  received  the  title  of
"Doctor"  while  a  boj'  on  the  farm,  not  yet
fourteen  years  of  age.  because  of  his  close
attention  to  animals,  and  his  very  persistent
effort  to  ascertain  ho^v  animals  lived  and
what  made  them  die.  At  the  close  of  his
academic  studies,  he  was  recognized  as  a
first  class  anatomist  and  took  great  inter-
est in  legal  jurisprudence.  Because  of  this
fact,  he  always,  since  boyhood,  has  been
looked  upon  by  his  friends  as  particularly
able  in  anatomy  and  physiology. Early  in


850


Alphiiheticid  Index


C.olson
Corbion


COLSON.  CLARENCE,  Odd
Fellows  Bldg-.,  Reno,  Nev.
(D.C.)  1

Francis M., Odd Fellows
Bldg-.. Reno, Nev. (D.C.)
COLTRANE, ELLA D., Union
Natl. Bank Bids.. Man-
hattan,  Kan. (D.O.)
COMBS, J. H., 515 S. Robin-
son St., Oklahoma City.
Okla. (DC.)
COMMERFORD. MARY ELI-
ZABETH, 5179 Delmar
Blvd.. St. Louis. Mo.
COMPOPIANO.  ANTHONY.

90 Center St., Orange,
N. J. (D.C.)
COMPTON,  CATHERINE,

Beeville. Tex. (DO.)
C. F.. 509 S. Olive St.. Los

Angreles. Cal. (D.C.)
Claude O.. 407 N. Green-
leaf Ave.. "WTiittier. Cal.
Emma M.. Pittsburg-h Life
Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Jas. P., 509 S. Olive .Street.
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Wm.  B., fil5  Cordova  Street,
Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
COMSTOCK. EDGAR S.. God-
dard Bldg.. Chicago. 111.
CONABLE,  MRS.  A.  C.  Axtell.

Kan. (DC.)
CONALL, W. J.. Axtell, Kan.

CONANT & CONANT, Cor.
State  &  Church  Sts.,
Carter Bldg., Rochester,
N. Y. (D.C.)
CONANT, B. REES, 1039
Massachusetts Ave., Cam-
bridge. Mass. (D.O.)
CONARD, S. E., 1573  Charles-
ton Ave., Mattoon, 111.
CONDON, HELEN C. Okla-
homa City,  Okla. (D.C.)
CONEI>LY. MRS. G. W.. Box

124, Redfield. Ta. (D.C.)
CONEY, GRACE L.. Bowling
Green, O. (D.C.)
Grace L., Bremen, O. (N.D.)
CONFREY, HUBERT, 1700  W.
Jackson Blvd., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
CONGER, A. L.. Irving  Lawn,

Akron. O. (D.O.)
CONGER, CARL H.. Nasby
Bldg.. Toledo, O. (D.C.)
W. Millard, Wither.spoon
Blvd.. Philadelphia. Pa.
(DO.)
CONKLIN.  A.  P..  1308  N.  High
St.. Columbus.  O. (N.D.)
A. P.. 582 N. High Street.

Columbus, O. (N.D.)
Hiram Lewis, 29 Grove
Terrace, Passaic, N. J.
(DO.)
Hugh  \V..  Ward  Blk.,  Battle
Creek, Mich. ((D.O.)
CONLEY,  GEORGE  .1.,  Shukert
Bldg-., Kansas (jity. Mo.
CONNELL. MARY C, 4fi34

Vincennes Ave., Chicago.
111. (M.D.)
CONNELLY, MRS. G. W., Box
124, Redfield, la. (D.C.)
G. W., Humboldt, Neb.
CONNER. C. H.. Albuquerque,
N. Mex. (D.O.)
D.  L..  Natl.  Bank  of  Arizona
Bldg.. Phoenix. Ariz.
(DO.)


H. L.. Central Natl. Bank
Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Mary A., Neave Building,

Cincinnati, O. (D.O.)
R. W.. Hennen Bldg., New

Orleans, La. (D.O.)
Sallie M., Chalfant Blk.,

Bellefontaine,  O. (D.O.)
W. J., Commerce Bldg.,
Kansas City, Mo. (D.O.)
CONNERS, MRS. EMMA C,

Lexington, Neb. (S.T.)
CONNOR, R. F. & MARY H.,
431 S. Wabash Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
CONNOR,  ROSWELL  F..

Auditorium  Building,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Wm. E.,  431 S. Wabash

Ave.. Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
William E., 35 Auditorium
Bldg.. Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
CONOVER, E. H.,.  509 Honore
St., Chicag-o, 111. (D.C.)
Fred. E., 412 Twelfth St.
West  New  York,  N.  J.
(D.C,  N.D.)
CONRAD, ANNA J., 92i

Carvlon Road, Cleveland,
O. (Ma.)
C. F., 110 W. 90th St., New

York, N. Y. (M.D.)
Charles F., 120 Palisade
Ave., West Hoboken,
N. J. (DO.)
Mrs. E. M., 2630 Capitol
Ave., Omaha, Neb. (S.T.)
Marv, Arkansas City, Kan.
(D.C.)  i

CONTRERAS, RALPH, 4060
Oakenwald Ave., Chicago,  ',
111. (N.D.)
CONWELL, W. P., 806 N. 7th

St., St. Louis, Mo. (N.D.)
COOK  &  COOK,  8  Grove  St.,

Oneonta, N. Y. (D.C.)
COOK,  A.  C,  Georgetown.  Ky.

(N.D.) ■
COOK. ALEXANDRIA N.. 651
State St.. Bridgeport.
Conn. (D.C.)
Anna I., Osboi-n Bldg..

Cleveland. O. (Ch.)
Charles C, Graebuer Bldg..

Saginaw. Mich. (D.O.)
C. D.. West Springfield. Pa.

C.  F.. 88  Market  St,.  Pough-

keepsie, N. Y. (D.O.)
Mrs.,  Park  Hill,  Okla. (D.C.)
Geo., 806 N. 7th St..

Buffalo, N. Y. (N.D.)
Geo. T., 32 Glenwood Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.O.)
H.  E.,  De  Soto,  Mo. (D.C.)
Harriet L., 1364 E. 81st St.,

Cleveland, O. (Ch.)
Hazel, 259 Lincoln Ave.,

Detroit. Mich. (D.C.)
Herbert F., 1311 New Eng-
land Bldg., Cleveland, O.
COOKE, MRS. E. D., Smith
Center, Kan. (S.T.)
Herbert T.. Reibold Bldg-.,
£)avton, O. (D.O.)
COOL.  E.  C.  1510  Millard  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
COOLEY & COOLEY, 222-24
Chamber of Commerce,
Enid, Okla. (D.C.)
A. R., 13  West  31st  St.,  New
York, N. Y. (Opt.)
COOLEY, ALVAH R., 13 W.
31st St., New York, N. Y.
(DC.)
Mrs. E., San .Joaquin Bldg.,

Stockton, Cal. (D.C.)
E. .Jr.. San Joaquin Bldg.,
Stockton, Cal. (D.C.)


'."OOLIOY, ED. L., 301-2 Beld-
ing Bldg., Stockton, Cal.
Mrs.  Gertrude  M.,  301-2  Beld-
ing Hldg., Stockton, Cal.
''OOMI5S. F. R., 88 W. Main
St.,  New  Britain. Conn.
(N.D., D.C.)
COON. A. S., Garfield, Wash.
.1. Franklin, Baker Boyer
Bldg.,  Walla  Walla,  Wash.
Mary B., Garfield, Wash.
COONEY, GRACE L., Bremen,

O. (D.C.)
COONFIELD, GEORGE W.,

Dodge City, Kan. (D.O.)
COONS. JESSIE M., Magnolia
Hall. Hamilton. Bermuda.
COONS. M. E.. The Weltmei-
Inst, of Suggest. Therap..
Nevada,  Mo. (D.S.T.)
W. N., Medina, O. (D.O.)
COOPER, ANNE E., 502 Mer-
cantile Library  Bldg.,  Cin-
cinnati, O. (Ch.)
COOPER,  C.  R.,  Suite  5,  109-11
S. Superior St., Albion,
Mich. (D.C.)
Emma S., Waldheim Bldg.,
Kansas City, Mo. (D.O.)
Geo. W.. 183 Richmond St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (Cr.)
Imogene B., CJreenville,

Miss. (D.O.)
K. L., UU S. Kickapoo St..

Lincoln. 111. (D.C.)
K. L., 417 N. McLean St..

Lincoln, 111. (D.C.)
Mrs. Minerva, Ada, Okla.

Hamilton, Mont.


Olive  M.,

R.  G.  C,
Halifax,


St.,


26 N. Bland
N. S. (N.D.)
Sarshal De Pew, 133 Geary
St., San Francisco, Cal.
Wm., 7 Harley St., Caven-
dish Sq.,  London,  W.,  Eng.
W. H., 17 Sarah St., Brant-
ford, Can. (D.C.)
COPELAND & COPELAND,
Galveston, Ind. (D.C.)
601 State Life Building,
Indianapolis, Ind. (D.C.)
COPLAN,  A.  G., 116  Laflin  St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
COPLON,  A.  G., 2240 W.  Divi-
sion St.,  Chicago,  111.  (N.D.)
COPPALA,  Modestino,  1353

Central  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
(D.M.T.)
COPPER, LYDIA N., Elks
Arcade Bldg., Warsaw,
Ind. (D.O.)
COPPERNOLL,  ORIENNIE,

Opera House Blk., Alli-
ance, Neb. (D.O.)
CORBETT, C. L., 435 Collins
St., St. Paul, Minn. (D.C.)
CORBIN, GRACE E., 520
Clapp Bldg., Des Moines,
la. (D.C.)
Grace E., 1503 School St.,

Des Moines, la. (D.C.)
M. E., Columbia
The  Dalles,  Ore.
S. W., Lincoln

St.  Joseph,  Mo. (Or.  S.)
W. S., First Natl. Bank
Bldg., Chickasha, Okla.
CORBION, H. A., Perry, Okla.


Hospital,


Building,


NalurojKithir  /iiogniphical  Notes


851


life,  because  of  his  sickness  and  his  conse-
quent desire to be well, he became at-
tached  to psychologic questions, and very
soon thereafter l)ecamc recognized as an
unusual student of psychology. In 190*J,
Dr. Carver  published Carver's Chiropractic
Analysis, which contained an entirely new
chiropractic physiology, all of the physics
of chiropractic under the subheadings —
Principles of Chiropractic — Chiropractic
Symptomatology and Diagnosis. This
book  was  revised  and  re-published  in 1915.
The revision required the enlargement of
the  book  to  almost  double its  original  size
and his developments in  the meantime re-
quired that he re-write the entire book,
which he did. In 1914, Dr. Carver pub-
lished  his work on psychology, under the
title, "Applied Psychology," which book
has  received  the  most  flattering  complimen-
tary recognition from the most eminent
psychologists, jurists, and analysts. The
books published by the subject of this
sketch  do  not  meet  with  so  rapid  a  sale  as
might be expected, because they are pro-
found and unusual, and students, unpre-
pared for  that  kind  of  literature,  find  it  very
difficult  indeed,  to  understand  them. It  is
but just, however, to say that when the
worth of his publications shall have be-
come known, the chiropractic world will
very gladly possess itself of them. Dr.
Carver is fifty-one years of age, and has
entirely overcome the various phases of
abnormality  of  his  youth. He  is  a  powerful  .
man, physically and mentally, and is
younger to-day in all his aspects, objects
and  ability  than  at  any  period  in  his  career.
He is democratic by nature and instinct,
living  fully  in  the  thought  that  all  men  are
created equal — giving willingly of his
energy and substance that the world at
large  may become educated. Carver Col-
lege,  under his care and supervision, has
grown the most rapidly of  any college of
chiropractic that was ever founded — is
large  for  its  age,  and  has  a  far  greater  repu-
tation than  any  other  college  of  chiroprac-
tic that  has  been  in  existence  as  long. Dr.
Carver  is  the father  of  independent chiro-
practic legislation  and  is  the  author  of  the
first chiropractic bill ever successfully in-
troduced in  a  legislature. All  of  the  laws
that have been passed, recognizing chiro-
practic, are substantially copies of his
original bill, which was introduced in the
legislature  of  Oklahoma, in 1908, with the
exception  of  the  law  of  Oregon. The  law
just  passed  in Connecticut  is  practically  a
verbatim copy  of  the chiropractic bill Dr.
Carver  had  introduced  in  the  last  session  of
the legislature of Oklahoma. Dr. Carver
is  now,  and  always  has  been,  very  fearless
in telling the truth. He believes that no
opportunity  should  be  lost  to  let  the  world
know what the science of chiropractic is
and  what  it  will  do. Because  of  these  facts
and, because of his unmerciful exposures
of  the  ignorance  of  the  medical  profession,


he  has  become  an  object  of  the  secret
enmity  of  the  American  Medical  Associa-
tion to  such  extent,  that  through  its  in-
fluences during  the  last  session  of  the  Okla-
homa Legislature,  he  was  incarcerated  for
ten  days  in  the  Oklahoma  County  jail  and
fined  $500.00,  because  he  wrote  an  article,
entitled,  "Was  the  Oklahoma  Senate
Bought?"  There  were  no  charges  in  the
article,  but  the  attention  of  the  public  was
called  to  the  fact  that  the  .American  Med-
ical Association  had  raised  a  very  large
sum  of  money  for  some  purpose  and,  that
the  Senate  had  passed  a  bill  that  had  for
its  one  purpose  the  prohil^ition  of  chiro-
practic in  Oklahoma.  When  the  article  was
published.  Dr.  Carver  knew  there  would
be  serious  results,  but  published  the  article
to  attract  the  attention  of  the  friends  of
chiropractic  to  the  fact  that  unfair  advan-
tage was  being  taken  in  order  that  they
would  come  to  the  rescue,  which  they  did,
by  the  House  refusing  to  attach  the
"emergency  cla:use";  and,  under  the  con-
stitution, since  the  adjournment  of  the
legislature,  the  chiropractors  of  Oklahoma,
under  the  supervision  of  Dr.  Carver  as  their
legislative  counsel,  have  referred  the  med-
ical amendment  to  the  votes  of  the  people
by  a  petition  of  thirty  thousand,  five
hundred  and  ninety-two,  w^hereas,  sixteen
thousand  was  the  required number.

Dr.  Carver  became  a  public  speaker  of
some  reputation  when  but  seventeen  years
of  age.  He  has  continually  been  a  public
speaker,  has  lectured  and  spoken  in  many
states  of  the  Union,  and  is  always  very
active  in  the  dissemination  of  the  truth  of
chiropractic.  His  time  for  lectures  is  now
engaged  for  nearly  two  years  ahead.  It  is
expected  that  within  five  years,  he  will  have
to  entirely  abandon  his  work  as  a  teacher
in  Carver  College,  where  he  now  and  for
the  past  five  years  has  averaged  four  hours
a  day,  entirely  for  the  chiropractic  lecture
field.  It  is  recognized  wherever  Dr.
Carver  is  known,  that  he  is  the  leading  in-
structor of  the  chiropractic  world.  It  is
becoming  more  and  more  recognized  that
he  should  not  confine  his  attention  to  any
one  institution,  but  should  let  the  chiro-
practic world  at  large  have  the  benefit  of
his  carefully  accumulated  and  thoroughly
demonstrated  knowledge.

COLLINS, F.  W.,  M.  D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Dr.  F.  W.  Collins  began  his  career  in  the
healing  art  by  taking  a  course  in  The  First
Aid  to  the  Injured,  graduating  in
1893.  In  1897,  he  graduated  from
the  Philadelphia  School  of  Prac-
tical Anatomy  and  the  Philadel-
phia School  of  Surgery.  For  many
years  he  was  assistant  instructor
in  First  Aid  on  the  Lackawanna
Railroad  between  Scranton  and
Hoboken.  He  also  instructed  in
the  gymnasium  and  became  in-
terested  in Naturopathy, taking a


852


.  \  Iphdhptical  Indr.v


Corbo
CrawfonI


CORBO. ALFONSO, 74 Jack-
son St.,  Orange,  N.  J.

CORBY, MARIE MAGILL,

1006 W. Lake Ave., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
CORDON, ANNA J., ;i33  7

Hough St., Cleveland, ().

CORENZ, \V. C, Box 166,

Beloit,  Wis. (D.C.)
CORGI  LL, F. S., West W in-
field, N. Y. (D.C.)
CORK, FLOYi:), I^allas, S. D.

CORK, L. B., Paxton, S. Dak.

CORKILL, LENA C, 122 W.

24th St., Kearney, Neb.

CORK  WELL, F. E.. Avalon

Bldg., Newark, O. (D.O.)
CORMKNY, HOWARD J., 50

E. Market St., York, Pa.

CORNELIUS, CHARLES, 485

Sherbrooke St., Winnipeg

Man. (D.O.)
M. B., 485 Sherbiooke St.,

Winnipeg, Man. (D.O.)
CORNELL, F. W., 22 3rd St.

E., Dauphin, Man., Can.

Leon L., Falls City, Neb.

(D.  O.)
Murray, Prince Albert,

Sask. Can. (D.C.)
M.  E.,  Humboldt,  Sask.,  Can.

CORNETT, JESSIE WIL-

LARD, 3331 E. 13th Ave.,

Denver, Colo. (D.O.)
Mrs.  Stella, 528  Gilbert  Ave.,

Terre Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
CORNWALL, C. A., 19-20

Nampa  Bldg.,  Nampa,

Idaho (N.D.)
CORNWALL, CHARLES AD-
DISON, 423 S. Spring St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
CORP, MRS. H. A., 22 W. B.,

Hutchinson, Kan. (S.T.)
CORRICK, A. W., 502 Millner

St., Ottumwa, la. (D.C.)
A. W. 907 N. Jefferson St.,

Ottumwa, la. (D.C.)
CORVIN, GEO. D., Chateau,

Mont. (D.C.)
CORWIN, G. P., 2665 Sulphur

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

CORY, E. Ray, Austin, Minn.

CORYELL, ROLAND S., Natl.

Bank of  Brookville  Bldg.,

Brookville, Pa. (D.O.)
COSNER,  E.  H.,  Reibold  Bldg.,

Dayton, O. (D.O.)
COSS, L. E. Willmer, Minn.

COTA, ROSE, 10 Clark St.,

Burlington. Vt. (D.O.)
COTNER,  DR.  J.  W.,  Lebanon,

Kan. (S.T.)
COTTAM, Mr. and Mrs. N.,

Salt  Lake City,  Utah
COTTON, W. F., Bradford,

Ont., Canada. (D.C.)
COTTRELL, MEAD K., 10308
Euclid Ave., Cleveland,

O. (D.O.)
COUGHLIN, M. E., 508-9
Spitzer Bldg., Toledo, O.
COUGHLIN,  M.  Ethel,  Bascom,

O. (D.C.)
COULSON,  L.  P.,  Weatherford,
Okla. (D.C.)


COULTER.  ROBERT  P.,  i

Weatherford, Tex. (D.O.)
COULTRUP. ALFRED J., 214

E. Pikos Peak Avenue,

Colorado Springs, Colo.

Chas. E., 214 E. Pikes  Peak

Ave., Colorado Springs,

Colo. (D.C.)
COUNCIL, M. T., Crosbyton,

Tex. (D.C.)
COUNTER, A. E., 4923 Pensa-

cola  Ave., Chicago, 111.

COUR, Andrew A., 7043 N.

Clark St., Chicago, HI.

COURGUME, H., 34 Eagle St.,

Geneva, O. (N.D.)
COURSUME, HARRY, 3228

Carnegie Ave., Cleveland,

O. (N.D.)
Mrs. H., Geneva, O. (D.C.)
COURTNEY,  PERCY  E.,  Gage,

Okla. (D.C.)
COURTS, LILLIAN JOSE-
PHINE, Pontiac, Mich.

COVELL, FRED, Brandon,

Ore. (D.C.)
Martha A.. Lindley Blk..

Minneapolis, Minn. (D.O.)
COVERT.  CLARE  S..  819  Main

St., Rapid City, S. Dak.

Martin, Chagrin Falls, O.

O. W., Zanesville, O. (M.D.,

D.C.)
COVERT, Wm. M., Chester-

ville, O. (D.M.T.)
COVEY, FLORENCE A., The

Somerset, Portland, Me.

COVIGILL, JESSIE F., 116 S.

2nd  St.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

COVINGTON. R. L.. Clinton,

Mo. (S.T.)
COWDIN, GLEN I., 1416 W.

8th St.. Oklahoma City,

Okla. (D.C.)
COWMAN, John J., 6902 St.

Lawrence Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
COX & cox, 525 W. Church

St.,  Elmira,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
COX, C. W., 101 S. 8th  St., So.

Fargo,  N.  D. (N.D.)
COX, DAVID J.. 408 Charles

St.. Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Eugene L., 231-4 Gilmer

Bldg., Winston-Salem,

N. C. (N.C.)
Henry  G.,  411  "W.  Water  St.,

Elmira, N. Y. (D.C.)
Howard,  506  Noble  Building,

Ardmore, Okla. (D.C.)
J. A., Pullman, W. Va.

Martha S.. 910 W. 7th St.,

Joplin. Mo. (D.O.)
Robert,  118  S.  Virginia  Ave.,

Atlantic  City, N. J. (D.O.)
Robt. C. 1524 Chestnut St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Robt. C. 1339 S. 52nd St.,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
COX.  ROBERT  O.. 213  Summit

St.. Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
W. T., 113 Main St., Bidde-

ford, Me. (D.O.)
COY, D. C, 37 Davis Bldg.,

Dayton,  O. (D.C.)
COZATT. J. B.. Jacksonville,

Fla. (D.C.)
CRABBE,  Edna  A., 2553  Glen-
more  Ave.,  Columbus.  O.

(Ma.)


(mABILL, M. B., 1404 L SI.

N. W.. Washington, D. C.

CRABTREE,  H.  C, 1523  O  St.,

Lincoln, Neb. (S.T.)
CRAFFT, MARCIA C, 114

Cedai-  St.,  Anaconda  Mont.

CRAIG,  A.  S.,  3030  Tracy  Ave.,

Kansas City, Mo. (D.O.)
Mrs. Edith, Farmland, Ind.

H. T., 20 E. Jackson Blvd..

Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
J. H., Farmland, Ind. (D.C.)
(MiATG, Stephen A.. 1105 Fail-

Ave., Columbus, O. (N.D.)
William, Ford St.. Ogdens-

burg, N. Y. (D.O.)
CRAIN, CORAL, 68 North

Morengo Ave., Pasadena,

Cal. (D.O.)
C. J., Box 5, Union City,

Ind. (D.O.)
Festal. 68 N. Marengo  Ave..

Pasadena, Cal. (D.O.)
CRAMB, LULU  LYNDE, Fair-
bury. Neb. (D.O.)
CRAMER. MYRTLE A., Pro-
ducers' Savings Bank

Bldg., Bakersfleld, Cal.

Oliver H., 13 S. Church St.,

West Chester, Pa. (D.O.)
CRAMMER, CATHERINE, E.,

130 W. Southern Ave.,

Williamsport. Pa. (D.C.)
CRAMPTON, CHARLES C,

217 Court St., Kankakee,

111. (D.O.)
CRANDALL, H. P., 917 Col-
lege Ave., Racine, Wis.

CRANDELL, S. GERTRUDE,

Bealle Ave., Wooster, O.

CRANE, ALLEN B., 32 Man-
hattan Street, Rochester,

N. Y. (D.C.)
F. L., 725 W. 23rd St., Los

Angeles. Cal. (M.D., D.C.)
CRANE, H. J., Richter Hotel,

La  Porte, Ind. (N.D.)
Jessie M., 1012 4th St.,

Norfolk, Neb. (D.O.)
P. L., 2316^ S. Union Ave.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Ralph M., 18 E. 41st St.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
CRANK. L. MAE. Stapleton

Bldg.. Billings. Mont.

CRAPO, J. EDWIN. 288 W.

92nd St., New York, N. Y.

(M.T.D., D.C.)
CRAVEN, J. H., Davenport,

la. (D.C.)
CRAVEN, JANE WELLS,

Arrott Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
Merritt B.", 605 Davis St.,

Evanston, 111. (D.O.)

CRAWFORD,  A.  D.,  1458  Penn

St., Denver.  Colo. (D.C.)
B., 303 Bergenline Ave.,

Union Hill. N. J. (D.C.)
C.  B..  Shenandoah,  la.  (D.C.)
CRxVWFORD, C. H., 2100

Warren  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

Geo. S., 411 Ringford Ave.,

McKeesport, Pa. (D.C.)
Geo.  S., 411  Ringgold  Street,

Pittsburgh,  Pa. (D.C.)
H. T., 673 Boylston St.,

Boston, Mas.s. (D.O.)
John S., Denton Co., Natl.

Bank Bldg., Denton, Tex.


Natiiropdlliic  Biogntpliical  Notes


853


course  under  that  Master  of  Teachers,
Dr.  Benedict  Lust,  jafraduatinp;  from  the
American  School  of  Naturopatliy  in  June,
1907.  In  1909,  he  graduated  from  the
New  Jersey  College  of  Osteopathy.
In  1912,  he  graduated  .  from  the  D.  D.
Palmer  School  of  Chiropractic  and  was
one  of  Dr.  D.  D.  Palmer's  favorite  pupils.
He  has  taken  Post  Graduate  work  from
Dr.  J.  Stone,  of  the  Stone  College  of  Chiro-
practic of  San  Antonio,  Texas,  also  under
Dr.  A.  E.  (jregory,  of  the  Palmer-Gregory
School  of  Chiropractic,  of  Oklahoma,  Okla.
In  1914,  the  American  College  of  Neuro-
pathy conferred  on  Dr.  Collins  the  Honor-
ary degree  of  Doctor  of  Neuropathy  and
the  Honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  (Doctor  of
Medicine).  In  1915,  he  graduated  from  the
American  Academy  of  Science,  receiving
the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Psychology.
Dr.  Collins  has  lately  taken  a  special
Post  Graduate  Course  in  the  Phila-
delphia College  and  Infirmary  of  Osteo-
pathy, in  advanced  Osteopathic  practice,
medicine,  obstetrics  and  surgery,  attending
the  operations  and  lectures  in  the  Jefferson
and  Pennsylvania  Hospitals,  passing  two
State  Board  examinations  with  high  honors.
Dr.  Collins  is  the  Editor  of  and  has  been
conducting  the  Chiropractic  Department  in
the  Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath  for
a  number  of  years,  has  written  many  book-
lets and  theses  on  the  cause  and  cure  of  dis-
ease by  drugless  methods,  and  has  world-
wide reputation  as  an  authority  on  the
healing  art.  He  founded  the  American
Academy  of  Chiropractic  Research,  which
is  destined  to  become  the  greatest  of  its
kind  in  the  world  for  the  benefit  of  suffer-
ing humanity,  having  as  a  contemporary
the  Rockefeller  Foundation  of  research  for
the  cause  and  cure  of  disease  by  medicine,
toxines,  vaccines,  serums  and  vivisection.
In  1910,  Dr.  Collins  founded  the  New
Jersey  College  of  Chiropractic.  The  Col-
lege was  incorporated  as  an  institution  of
learning,  in  1913  by  Dr.  F.  W.  Collins,  Dr.
Andrew  Victory  and  Dr.  G.  E.  Harley,  and
since  its  incorporation,  it  has  attracted  men
and  women  from  all  parts  of  the  globe.  On
account  of  its  strict  curriculum  and  require-
ments, it  has  been  well  nicknamed  the
"Mecca  of  Chiropractic,"  the  shrine  where
all  drugless  physicians  must  worship.  This
College  has  grown  to  such  a  large  extent,
that  a  building  of  thirty-two  rooms  has
lately  been  purchased  at  577  Warren  St..
Newark.  N.  J.,  part  of  which  will  be  used  "
for  College  work,  and  part  for  the  Hospital
and Clinics.

CRISCUOLO, TERESA CIMINO, N.  D.

Dr.  Criscuolo,  qualified  in  Italy  and  grad-
uated from  the  American  School  of  Naturo-
pathy, 1909,  is  a  naturopath,  as  well  as  a
specialist  in  Magneto  Therapy  and  all  kinds
of  Drugless  Methods.  Member  A.  N.  A.,
Section  New  York  State.  Her  address  is:
339  Leonard  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


Ill


COOMBS,  FRANKLIN  R.,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Dr.  Coombs^  whose  offices  arc  located  in
e  Fox  Theatre  Building,  88  West  Main
Street,  New  Britain,  Conn.,
is  thoroughly  versed  in  all
phases  of  naturopathic
practice  and  has  all  the
necessary  equipment  such
as  is  required  for  the  giv-
ing of  chiropractic  painless
adjustments,  electric  light
baths,  vapor  cabinet  baths
(and  all  other  hydropathic
applications),  mechano-

therapy and  psychotherapy.
Dr.  Coombs  has  made  a  thorough  and
comprehensive  study  of  Bio-chemistry  and
has  accomplished  gratifying  results  by
means  of  this  system,  having  studied  the
application  of  the  tissue  remedies  for  the
past  14  years  under  Dr.  Schaftsbury,  of
Washington,  D.  C.  He  is  also  a  regular
graduate  of  the  Blumer  College  of  Naturo-
pathy and  the  National  School  of  Chiro-
practic. Dr. Coombs  was born in 1873.


CUMMINS, JOSEPH EDWARD, N. D.,
D.  C.

Dr.  Cummins,  Naturopath,  of  Cedar  Rap-
ids, la.,  was  born  in  Columbus,  Ohio.
February  13.  1867.  He  informs  us  that  he
is  still  living.  He  attended  common  schools
in  early  life  and  became  a  teacher  in  cen-
tral Ohio  in  1884.  He  subsequently  taught
in  Iowa  and  Missouri.  He  graduated  in
pedagogy  in  1894.  and  in  the  scientific
course  in  1895  in  Avalon  College,  Trenton.
Mo.,  He  served  for  three  years  as  principal
of  the  Decatur,  la.,  high  school.  He  was
subsequently  elected  county  superintendent
of  Decatur  County,  la.,  at  the  general  elec-
tion of  1895  on  the  Republican  ticket,  and
was  re-elected  to  the  same  office  in  1897.
Was  appointed  census  enumerator  of  the
county  seat  in  1900,  having  attained  the
highest  civil  service  in  the  Eighth  Iowa
Congressional  District  over  600  competi-
tors, and  has  been  in  the  government  serv-
ice practically  ever  since.  Dr.  Cummins
is  exceptionally  well  read  in  Naturo-
pathic literature,  having  become  acquainted
with  chiropractic  in  1902.  and  graduated  in
chiropractic  July  15,  1912.  He  also  post-
graduated  in  chiropractic  (Ph.  C.)  in  1913.
He  began  teaching  the  science  of  drugless
healing  in  1913.  and  has  continued  it  ever
since.  He  has  tested  many  of  the  theories
and  suggestions  of  the  various  Naturo-
pathic authors  and  has  been  an  original
thinker  and  experimenter  himself.  Dr.
Cummins  married  Miss  Ruby  Stedman.  one
of  his  county  teachers,  in  1897,  and  has  a
family  of  three  daughters  and  one  son.
Young,  active  and  in  fine  health,  he  has
lived  the  temperate  life  and  has  no  per-
sonal knowledge  with  alcohol  or  tobacco
in  any  form. He  also  abstains  from  meat.


S54


A  Iphabelical  Index


Cray
Curnoyn


Mrs. M. C, 24 Bowman St.,

Rochester, N. Y. (D.C.)
Nell C. 22 Hancock Street,,

Lexingrton, IMass. (D.O.)
S. Virginia. 10 Library

Place,  Danbury,  Conn.

W.  A.,  928  Main  St.,  Buffalo,

N.  Y. (D.O.)
"W. F., 1300 McAllister St.,

San Francisco,  Cal. (D.O.)
CRAY,  MARY  H.,  28  W.  Utica

St., Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
CREASY. J. C, 303 Jefferson

St.. Roanoke. Va. (D.C.)
J. G.. 308 Jefferson St.,

Roanoke. Va. (D.C.)
L.  D., 806  Pierce  St.,  Lynch-
burg. Va. (D.C.)
CREATORE, TOMMASO, 762

S. 51st St., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
Tommaso, Widener Blvd.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
CREBORE, MARY ALICE.

4237 Olive St., St. Louis,

Mo. (D.O.)
CREESE,  L.  D.,  Kramer  Bldg.,

Elizabeth City, N. C.

CREIGHTON.  B.  E.,  54  Hudson

Ave., Newark, O. (D.C.)
Frank, 114-15 The Johnson,

Muncie, Ind. (D.C.)
CREMINS,  E.  F.,  5  Wadsworth

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
CRERIE,  MAUDE  A.,  28  May-
wood St., Worcester,

Mass. (D.O.)
CRESWELL,  LENA,  American

Natl. Bank Bldg., San

Diego, Cal. (D.O.)
CRICHTON, FRANCIS, Moos-
jaw, Ont., Canada. (D.C.)
CRISCUOLO, Teresa Cimino,

339  Leonard  St.,  Brooklyn,

N.  Y. (N.  D.)
CRISLER & CRISLER, Bush-

nell, Fla. (D.C.)
CRISLER, CHAS. E.,

Kissimnie, Fla. (D.C.)
Mrs. Mary, Kissimme, Fla.

CRISS, J. D., 626 Warrmgton

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.

CRISSMAN, JOHN, Lamar,

Colo. (D.C.)
CRISSMAN & WALLACE.

Lomar, Colo. (D.C.)
CRIST, GENERAL G., 406 I.

W. Hellman Bldg., Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
CRISTIAN,  VIOLA.  412  Green-
wood Bldg., Cincinnati,  O.

CRITCHER.  CARMA.  Box  226,

Degroff, O. (D.C.)
CRITCHTON, FRANCIS,

Moose Jaw, Sask.. Can.

CRITESER. W. T., 744 Cleve-
land St., Woodland, Cal.

CROFOOT, FRANK A., 77

Williams St., Lyons, N.  Y.

CROFTON. HENRIETTA,

Leary Bldg.. Seattle,

Wash. (D.O.)
CRONE, J. O., The Weltmer

Inst, of Suggest. Therap..

Nevada. Mo. (D.S.T.)
CRONK. BERTHA HARMON,

Andover. Allegany Co.,

N.  Y. (D.C.)
Otis E.. Davenport, la.


CROSBY & CROSBY, 143

Wood St., Monroe, Wis.

CROSBY, A. J.. Adams. N. Y.

CROSBY,  C.  A., 1533  W.  Jack-
son  Blvd., Chicago, 111.

E. M., Wortliington. Minn.

Gordon Keith, San Diego,

Cal (ST)
M.  Ella. Clyde, O. (D.C.)
W.  H.,  Jonesboro.  111. (N.D.)
CROSIER, Winfield C, 44

Court  St., Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,

(Cr.)
CROSKEY, J. C. Box 243,

Loveland, Colo. (D.C.)
CROSS & CROSS. Mad.sen

BldpT..  Menomonie, Wis.

CROSS.  MRS.  CHAS.,  Standish,

Mich. (D.C.)
CROSSBY, W., 4200 Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
CROSSLAND, EMMA  CATHE-
RINE. McCormick Bldg.,

Twin Falls, Idaho. (D.O.)
CROSSLEY, May, Oswego,

Kan. (D.C.)
GROUSE. MINNIE R., 1031 E.

Colfax St., Denver, Colo.

GROUSE, MINNIE R., Brady

Island, Neb. (D.C.)
CROW, Clyde M., Suite 112,

Oak Hall Bldg., Duluth,

Minn. (D.C.)
CROW, E. C, Second and

Franklin Sts., Elkhart,

Ind. (D.O.)
Ivouise P., 5311 Monte  Vista

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

Margaret, Suite 112, Oak

Hall Bldg., Duluth, Minn.

CROWE,  I. B., 2032 Cleveland

Ave.. Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
CROWELL, Edgar G. 309-10

Snyder Bldg., Elmira,

N. Y. (D.C.)
CROWELL. GLADYS L., Van

Court Inn, Roselle, N. J.

CROWLEY. W. W.. 141-42

Forsyth Bldg., Fresno,

Cal. (D.C.)
CRUIKSHANK, OMAR T.,

8148 Jenkins Arcade,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
CRUM. J. W.. Bartow. Fla.

CRUMPACKER, E. K., c/o

Standard  School  of  Chiro-
practic and Naturopathy.

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
CRUSIUS. E.  L.. 500 5th Ave.,

New  York.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
CRUTCHFIELD,  WILLIAM

E..  McAdoo  .Bldg..  Greens-
boro. N. C. (D.O.)
CRUZAN, ALBERT,  1046

Vermont St., Lawrence,

Kan. (D.O.)
E. L., Gushing, Okla. (D.C.)
V.  W.,  Gushing.  Okla. (D.C.)
CRYSLER, HARRIET, 351

River Rd., Niagara Falls,

Ont., Can. (D.O.)
CUDMORE. E. E.. 1134 4th

Ave., N. W.. Moose Jaw,

Sask.. Can. (D.C.)
CUFF. AMY S., Dewey. Okla.
J. R.,  Dewey,  Okla. (D.C.)


CULBERTSON, E. F., Seattle,

Wash. (D.C.)
CULBERTSON, ELIZA M.,
Post  Bldg.,  Appleton,  Wis.
Retta, Kenton, O. (Ch.)
CULLEMS, Geo., 421 Walnut
St., Philadelphia,  Pa.
CULLEY,  ALBERT  B.,  Central
Natl. Bank Bldg., St.
Louis, Mo. (D.O.)
Edgar W., 450 Collins St.,
Melbourne, Australia
D.O.)
CULLOUGH, Wm. G., Broad
St. Bank Bldg., Trenton,
N. J. (D.C.)
CULMYER, J. Chester,

Manitowoc, Wis. (D.O.)
CULVER, CELIE, 1415 E.
Colfax  Ave.,  Denver,  Colo.
CUMMINGS.  H.  D.,  Macon,  Ky.
L., Arkansas Natl. Bank
Bldg., Hot Springs, Ark.
CUMMINGS', DR.. NORFOLK
HYDRO SANITARIUM,
719 Washington Ave.,
Norfolk, Va. (M.D.. D.C.)
CUMMINGS, S. A., 373 Ocean
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
W. F., Dr., 719 Washington
Ave., Norfolk, Va. (N.D.)
CUMMINGS,  Miss  A.  M.  506  W.
113th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(Ma.)
J.  E.,  Davenport,  la. (D.C.)
James. 676 Fulton Street,
Brooklyn. N. Y. (H.)
CUMMINGS, W. S.. 6 Clifton
Ave.. Lakewood, N. J.
CUMMINS, RUBY S., Allison
Hotel,  1st  Ave.  and  4th  St.,
Cedar  Rapids,  la. (D.P.T.)
CUNNINGHAM. ARTiPUR B.,
Leary Bldg., Seattle,
Wash. (D.O.)
Chas. J., Villa Grove, 111.

C. G., West Bldg., Jackson-
ville, Fla. (D.C.)
Ella F., 727 Indian Pythian
Bldg., Indianapolis, Ind.
Mrs. E. F., 220 S.  Green  St.,
Crawfordsville,  Ind. (D.C.)
E. Lewis, Ferguson Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
G. H., 810 Liberty Bldg.,

Waterbury,  Conn. (D.C.)
J. D., Livingston Building,

Bloomington. 111. (D.O.)
J. R., Moore Bldg., San

Antonio. Tex. (D.O.)
R. D., Sumner, la. (D.C.)
R. E., Himmelberger-Har-
rison Bldg., Cape Girar-
deau,  Mo. (D.O.)
S. R., 425 E. 3rd St., Okla-
homa City, Okla. (D.C.)
CUPP, H. C Bank of Com-
merce Bldg., Memphis,
Tenn. (D.O.)
CURLAND. Miss Fannie, 130
W. llfith St., New York,
N. Y. (Ma.)
CURLISS. E. S., 811 Lyric
Theatre Bldg., Cincinnati,
O. (D.C.)
CURNOYN, L. H., 2341 Kem-
fer Lane. Cincinnati, O.


Naliiropalhic  Biographical  Notes


855


tea,  cofifee  and  condiments,  as  becomes  a
loyal  Naturopath.  Dr.  Cummins  is  an  orna-
ment  to  his  profession.


CZUKOR,  DR.  EUGENE  JACQUES

Professor Czukor was born in Losoncz,
Hungary,  and,  as  is  usual  in  the education


Dr.  Eugene  Jacques  Czukor

of  youth  in  his  country,  he  became  proficient
in  gymnastics  during  his  stay  in  school.
When  an  infant  an  ailment  in  his  bones
was  cured  by  exercises,  both  active  and
passive,  and  this  fact  became  a  tradition
modifying  his  after-life.  He  came  to  Amer-
ica with  his  family  at  the  age  of  13  and
went  to  school  here,  and  in  two  years  be-
came so  far  advanced  that  he  skipped  High
School.  He  learned  French,  German  and
English  besides  his  native  Hungarian
tongue.  He  afterwards  took  a  course  in
Columbia  University  studying  Anatomy  and
Philosophy.  He  also  studied  music  and  is
an  expert  player  of  the  piano.  All  his  family
are  musical,  an  older  brother  being  first
violin  in  the  Russian  Ballet  that  toured  the
United  States  last  winter.  Some  three  years
ago  he  opened  a  studio  in  New  York  for
the  practice  of  curative  gymnastics  in  cer-
tain forms  of  disease.  His  theory  is  that
exercise,  both  active  and  passive,  controls
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  reduces  excita-
tion of  the  nervous  system,  strengthens  the
heart  and  other  internal  organs,  quiets  the


emotions,  eliminates  waste,  and  adjusts  the
body  to  its  environment.  In  the  mental
status,  he  aims  to  prevent  mental  confusion,
strain  and  indecision,  and  create  optimism,
that  sense  of  mental  freedom  and  power
that  attracts  inliuences  that  belong  to  up-
lifted states  of  mind.  He  invigorates  the
will,  without  whose  activity  success  in  life
is  impossible.  ()ne  of  his  latest  patients
was  a  salesman  who  had  lost  his  mental
grip  in  his  business.  After  ten  treatments
he  went  out  and  easily  quadrupled  his  or-
ders. His  greatest  success  is  with  patients
whose  mental  development  has  gone  ahead
of  the  powers  of  the  body  to  obey  the  in-
junctions of  the  will.  He  restores  the  dis-
turbed equilibrium  with  the  resources  of
breathing,  exercise  and  hygiene.  Professor
Czukor  has  treated  some  of  the  best  known
people  in  New  York,  restoring  semi-invalids
and  the  really  prostrated  to  perfect  health,
by  utilizing  the  forces  of  nature.  At  the
present  time  he  is  treating  his  patients  at
their  own  homes,  pending  the  establishing
of  an  institute  where  he  will  have  all  the
apparatus  of  curative  gymnastics,  such  as
are  employed  in  the  best  curative  gymna-
siums of  Europe.  His  present  address  is
No.  100  ^\^  124th  St.,  New  York.  Dr.  Czukor
will  shortly  publish  a  book  on  the  philoso-
phy  and practice of Curative Gymnastics.

DAVID,  T.  H.,  D.  C,  N.  D.,  M.  T.

Dr.  David,  of  Williston,  N.  D.,  enjoys  a
great  reputation  as  a  Naturopath  amongst
a  clientele  of  merchants,
priests,  bankers,  judges,
court  officers,  farmers  and
laboring  men,  and  others.
He  is  a  young  man  of  great
energy,  and  is  a  graduate  of
the  American  School  of  Na-
tuTopathy,  and  several  other
colleges  of  Drugless  meth-
ods. He  is  one  of  the  prom-
inent members  of  the  Syrian
Colony  in  his  territory,  and  is  secretary  of
the  Syrian  Relief  Committee  of  North  Da-
kota, that  is  directing  a  relief  fund  cam-
paign in  North  Dakota  to  save  the  starv-
ing non-combatant  people  in  Syria  and
Lebanon.  Dr.  David  is  an  adept  in
mechano-therapeutic  methods,  as  he  be-
lieves that  vibration  is  the  first  need  of
life,  and  that  through  carefully  applied
measures  of  molecular  movements,  the  sick
organism  can  achieve  growth,  health  and
comfort  just  in  proportion  as  it  is  devi-
ated from  deformity,  disease  and  death.
Dr.  David  does  not  minimize  the  impor-
tance of  proper  diet,  fresh  air,  physical  and
mental  culture  as  powerful  adjuncts  to
his  methods,  and  all  taken  together  cer-
tainly promotes  and  secures  normal  evolu-
tion, long  and  useful  life  and  happiness  by
recognizing  the  normal  processes  of  life
and  natural  laws.  IMember  of  the  A.N. A.,
and  the  North  Dakota  State  Society  of
Naturopaths.


856


Alj)li(tlu'li((il  Index


Curran
Davidson


CURRAN, CECILIA  G.,

Empire Bldg., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.O.)
Harriet E.. 4532 Clifton
Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

CURRENCK, B. C, 50 East
Perry  St.,  Tifflin,  O.  (D.O.)

CURREY, Wm. W., 4fi7 War-
ren Ave., Detroit, Mich.

CURRIER, D. M., Newport.
N. H. (M.D.)

CURRIER. SOPHIE. Ashland.
Kan. (D.C.)
W. H.. 307-9 Huron Ave.,
Port Huron, Mich. (D.C.)

CURRY,  Arthur  B., 3207

Jjexinslon Ave., (Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
M. E., 603 J Market Street,
Parkersburg-, W.  Va.


CURRY, H. B.. Harrisville,

W.  Va. (D.C.)
CURTIN, KATHERINE E.,

Empire Bldg.. Denver,

Colo. (D.O.)
CURTIS, MRS. A. F..  Notting-
ham Hotel. Boston. Mass.

Frederick G., Pace Bldg.,

Mount Vernon. 111. (D.O.)
Jay L.. Fergus Falls,

Minn. (D.O.)
L.  C,  West  Union.  la. (D.C.)
CURTIS  &  CURTIS.  240  S.

Court St.. Sullivan, Ind.

CURTIS  &  CURTIS. 828  Brady

St.. Davenport, la. (D.C.)
CURTIS, EDWARD .7.. 736

Palmwood Ave., Toledo,

O. (D.M.T.)
L. R., Canton, O. (D.C.)


CURTICE,  Mary  B..  Rochester,

N.  Y. (N.  D.)
Viola F.. West Union. la.

CUSHMAN.  Ch.,  E..  Auditorium

Bldg., Chicago. 111. (D.O')
Chas. R., t; N. Mich. Av«^.

Chicago. III. (Nap.)
CUTBURG. F. R., 2348 Tele-
graph Ave.. Oakland. Cal.

CUTUER,  Al-FRED.  304  N. .Tth

St.. Harrison, N. J. (N.D.)
CUTLER. I.. LYNN, Berlin

Savings Bank Building.

Berlin. N. H. (D.O.)
CUTTY. THOS.. 1200 Poplar

Grove  Blvd..  Baltimore,

Md. (N.D.)
CZUKOR.  EUGENE  JACQUES,

100 W. 124th Street, New-
York,  N.  Y. (Ma.)


D


DAERDION. ALFRED, New

Philadelphia,  O. (D.C.)
DAGLEY.  J.  B..  Lockney,  Tex.

DAHL, & DAHI., Cottonwood.

Minn. (D.C.)
DAHI.BERG,  AUGUST.  1910  E.

73d  St..  Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
DAHLSTROM.  MISS  T.,  357  W.

23rd St.. New York,  N. Y.

(Ma.)
DAHMROW,  E.  H.,  418  N.  Bluff

St..  Janesville.  Wis. (D.C.)
DAILEY.  C.  J..  94  N.  Pearl  St..

Albany. N. Y. (Opt.)
DAILY. C. E., Colcord Bldg.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

J.  A., 10  N.  Webb  St.,  Okla-
homa City, Okla. (D.C.)
Lillian  B..  Granite  Building,

Rochester,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
DAKE,  W.  A., 321  Hayes  Blk.,

Janesville, Wis. (D.O.)
DAKIN, RUSSELL S., Depot

St.. Shelbyville. Tenn.

DALE, W. J., 6236 Lexington

Ave., Chicago, HI. (D.C.)
DALE, WALTER J., 6236

University Ave.. Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
D'ALMAINE, C. Helen. 510

Firemen's  Ins. Bldg.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
DALMER  &  DALMER.  Box  19

Creston. la. (D.C.)
DALTON. D. R.. Parker. S.

Dak. (D.C.)
I^eo R.. Washington, la.

Leon. Racine. Wis. (D.O.)
DALY,  M.  F.. 6  E.  Church St.,

Nanticoke,  Pa. (N.D.)
W. C. 22 N. Second Street.

Vincennes. Ind. (N.D.)
DALZELL. JAS. G. Grundy

Center, la. (DC.)
DALLMAN, WM. R., Tyndall,

S.  Dak. (D.C.)
DAM.  Myrtle  M.,  5461  Hill

Ciest  Ave.,  I'ittsburgh,  Pa.
(Ma.)
DAMON. W. H., 1029  W. 22nd

St.. Los  Angeles. Cal.
DANA. Prances, 81 E. Madi-

.son  St.,  Chicago,  111.  (D.O.)
.lav W., I'ineluu-st, N. C.

L. A., 506 Grossman Bldg..

Lynn. Mass. (D.C.)


DANA. JAY W.. 308 Flanders
Bldg.. 15th and Walnut
Sts.. Philadelphia, Pa.
DANFORTH. WILLARD  J.,
2(58  Jersey  St..  Buffalo.
N.  Y. (D.C.)
DANIEL.  A.  L.,  506-8  Security
St., Oklahoma City. Okla.
B. Monroe, 39 S. State St..

Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
O. L.. Olds, Alberta. (D.O.)
DANIELS.  Mrs.  B.,  5129  Engle-
side Ave.. Chicago. 111.
Elve v., Moscow, Idaho

Harry, Lisbon, N. D. (D.C.)
DANIELS. HARRY, Strom-
bery. Neb. (D.C.)
Henry, Times Building.

Brockton. Mass. (D.O.)
J. O., 528 Minnesota Ave.,
Kansas City, Kan. (D.C.)
Melville.  Sheldon Ave..

Grand Rapids. Mich.
Lester R., Fornum Bldg.,

Sacramento. Cal. (D.O.)
James O.. 710 Minnesota
Ave., Kansas City, Kan.
R. R., Majestic Building,
Denver,  Colo. (D.O.)
DANN, H. .7., Bliss Bldg..

Sandusky. O. (D.O.)
DANNEL. B. M., 39 S. State

St.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
DARLAND, G. T.. La Grande
Natl. Bank Bldg.. La
Grande. Ore. (D.C.)
DARLING & DARLING. 536
S. Emporia  Ave,, Wichita.
Kan. (D.C.)
DARLING, MRS. W.  A.. 127  S.
Main St., AVichita, Kan.
DARLING & BAKER'S CHI-
ROPRACTIC COLLEGE,
Wichita. Kans.
Frank S.. Indianapolis. Ind.
DARNELL. J. J.. 429 16th St.,
Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
J. J., 420 16th St., Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)
Laura P... 1315 Broadway,
Denver. Colo. (D.(3.)


DARRAH, L. C, 737 S. Har-
rison St.,  Pocatello.  Idaho.

DARRAH, MAUDE, Mount

Vernon. O. (Ma.)
DARRAH. LINDELL C, 339

N. Main St., Pocatello,

Idaho. (D.C.)
DART,  O.  L.,-Graysville,  Tenn.

DASH, CLEMENS R.. 109

Park  Ave..  Dunkirk, N. Y.

DASHIELL. ELEANOR R..

Murray Hill, Annapolis,

Md.  (D.O.)
DAUGHENBAUGH.  F.  A.,

Route  2,  Massena.  Iowa.

S. Earl. Anita. Iowa (N.D.)
DAUGHERTY. A. E.. People's

Bank Bldg.. Bloomington,

111. (D.O.)
Isaiah and C. H.. Phillippi.

W. Va. (D.C.)
M. J.. Lima. O. (N.D.)
Martha J.. Lansing. Mich.

DAUGHERTY. I. W., 301^ N.

Federal  Ave.,  Mason  City,

Iowa (D.C.)
Martha,  Xenia,  O. (D.C.)
DAUMLER, MISS MAME, 519

S. 4th St., Columbus. O.

DAUSCH. PHOEBE. 35 Ayers

Ave..  Dayton,  O. (N.D.)
DAUST,  O. L.,  R. F. D. 9,

Kent, O. (D.M.T.)
DAVEY, FLORA M., 375 E.

Grant St., Minneapolis,

Minn. (D.O.)
DAVENPORT. BERT M.,

Sabetha, Kan. (D.O.)
DAVENPORT COLLEGE OF

CHIROPRACTIC. Daven-
port, la. (D.C.)
Harry  Lewis,  1117  13th  Ave.,

Altoona,  Pa. (D.O.)
R. E.. 504 New York Ave.,

Whiting. Ind. (D.C.)
DAVID.  T. Henry. Pittsburgh.

Kan. (D.C.)
T. H., Scobey, Mont. (N.D.)
Tanous  H..  P.  O.  Box  708,

Williston. N. D. (N.D.)
DAVIDSON. A. & H. A.,

Lamont, la. (D.C.)
C.  R.,  Rimel  Bldg.,  Portland.

Ind. (D.C.)
M E.. Brockton, Mass.


Naliiropaihic  Biographical  Motes


857


DE  CILLA,  A.,  N.  D.

Dr.  A.  De  Cilia,  Naturopathic  physician
of  New  Haven,  Conn.,  believes  in  incor-
porating what  is  best  from
the  various  approved  sci-
entific and  natural  mcth-
ods  of  healing  and
correlating  such  into  one
uniform  system  of  cure.
This  is  sound  philosophy.
To  be  more  exact,  Dr.  De
Cilia  has  adopted  the  sci-
ence and  art  of  mechano-
therapeutic  adjustments,
and  at  the  same  time  applies  mental  science
to  induce  a  healthy  outlook  on  life,  to-
gether with  dietetics,  or  the  supplying  of
the  organism  with  its  imperatively  needed
food  elements.  Dr.  De  Cilia  is  a  member
of  the  National  Society  of  Naturopaths.
He  is  a  wide-awake,  progressive  practi-
tioner of  Italian  descent,  and  enjoys  a  high
reputation,  both  as  a  practising  physician
and  an  intiuencial citizen.

DEININGER, MRS. ELVIRA A., D.  O.,
D.  C,  N.  D.

Mrs.  Elvira  A.  Deininger,  D.  O.,  D.  C,
N.  D.,  wife  of  Dr.  A.  Deininger,  is  a  grad-
uate of  the  Universal  Chi-
ropractic College,  Daven-
port, Iowa,  and  is  a  licensed
Osteopath  of  the  State  of
New  Jersey.  For  many
years  she  has  been  con-
nected with  Dr.  A.  Dein-
inger in  all  his  earnest  la-
bors on  behalf  of  Chiro-
practic, and  has  been  of
great  assistance  in  teach-
ing in  the  New  York
School  of  Chiropractic.  At  present,  she  is
his  Associate  in  conducting  the  Chiroprac-
tic Sanitarium  of  West  New  York,  N.  J.,
and  of  the  free  Clinic  attached  to  it.  She
also  aids  in  the  instruction  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  Chiropractic  in  the  New
York  School  of  Chiropractic.  Her  genial
nature,  her  ever-pleasant  countenance  and
her  sympathetic  interest  in  each  and  all
the  students,  have  made  her  popular  and
beloved  by  all  the  graduates  and  students
of the New York School of Chiropractic.

DEININGER,  ANTON,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  N.  D.

Anton  Deininger,  D.O.,  D.C..  N.D.,  Dean
of  the  New  York  School  of  Chiropractic,  is

one  of  the  pioneers  of  the

Chiropractic  profession.
His  name,  fame  and  re-
putation are  known
throughout  the  country.
He  is  a  graduate  of
Father  Kneipp's  Water
Cure  Institute,  Woeris-
hofen,  Bavaria;  Rickli  In-
stitute, Veldes  Krain,  Aus-
tria; Universal  Chiroprac-


tic College,  Davenport,  Jowa;  Old  Physio-
Medical  College,  New  York;  Osteopathic
and  Naturopathic  College,  Berlin,  Germany.
He  is  also  chief  of  staff  of  the  Chiropractic
Sanitarium  of  West  New  York,  N.  J.,  and
holds  an  Osteopathy  license  in  the  State  of
New  Jersey.  His  personal  skill  in  adjust-
ments of  a  numljer  of  patient.^  afYccted
with  infantile  paralysis,  brought  him  great
fame  throughout  tlie  State.  His  classes  in
Chiropractic  are  well  attended,  for  no
student  would  care  to  miss  his  recitation.
His  mastery  of  his  subject;  the  clarity  of
iiis  lectures;  his  wonderful  technic  in  prac-
tical illustrations  and  his  skill  in  bringing
various  phases  of  Adjustment  and  Palpa-
tion place  him  upon  an  elevation  that  few
can  reach.  Personally,  he  is  regarded  not
only  as  a  professor  but  as  a  personal  friend
and  counsel  to  each  and  all  the  students.
By  his  patients  he  is  regarded  with  the
highest  respect  both  for  his  personality
and  his  professional  skill.

DISNEY,  J.  LAMBERT,  N.  D.

Dr.  Disney,  who  is  at  present  located  in
-Scranton, Pa.,  first  studied  Natural  healing
— —  in Bernarr Mac-

fadden's  institu-
tion, in  Helmetta.
N.  J.,  in  1902.
where  he  became
assistant  manager.
He  was  one  of  the
early  pioneers  of
Naturopathy,  it  a
time  when  students
had  no  facilities  to
speak  of  to  obtain
a  good  Naturo-
pathic education.
As  a  student,  he
showed  exceptional
qualities  of  courage  and  steadfastness  to
studying,  became  a  professor.  Those  were
the  days  when  students  learned  their  pro-
fession by  teaching  one  another,  and  as  a
professor  of  this  type,  he  exhibited  in  a  high
degree  the  exceptional  qualities  of  enthusi-
asm, loyalty  and  self-sacritice.  The  man
who  won  a  diploma  under  such  circum-
stances was  a  hero.  He  was  a  man  who
faced  facts  as  they  were,  and  was  ready  to
go  to  jail,  if  need  be,  in  defense  of  medical
liberty.  Dr.  Disney  has  developed  a  large
home-curing  method  of  treatment  bj-  mail,
and  his  correspondence  institute,  in  Phila-
delphia, was  the  headquarters  of  this  system.
The  great  success  that  he  achieved  in  this
direction  was  largely  due  to  the  able  as-
sistance of  his  wife.  Pearl  Disnej',  who  was
and  is.  an  enthusiastic  student  of  Naturo-
pathy. Dr.  Disney  is  now  a  regular  M.  D.
in  Pennsjdvania,  using  Drugless  methods
exclusively.  For  several  years,  Dr.  Disney
most  ably  edited  a  special  department  for
physical culture in the Naturopath and


<sr)8


Alphdbciirdl  Index


Davidson
Dekker


Rebccoa  R.,  887  Greene  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
Wm., 240 \'irg-inia Ave.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J. (D.C.)
DAVIDSON, B. E., Kan.sa.s

City, Mo. (M.D.)
James,  4200  So.  Grand  Blvd.,

Cliicaso. 111. (N  I). )
H. J., 127 E. Carfield Ave.,

Chicag-o, III. (D.O.)
DAVIES, CATHERINE E., 15

S. Franklin St., Wilkes-

Barre, Pa. (D.O.)
F. T.. 319 Besse Bldg-.,

Springrfleld. Mass. (D.C.)
Samuel, St. Louis, Mo.

DAVIES,  Wm.  M.,  32.5  Mercan-
tile Bldgr.,  New  Castle,  Pa.

(D.M.T.)
DAVIS, A. H., Whitewright,

Tex (ST)
A. H.,'  Elderfield  and Harts-
horn Bldg-.,  Niagara

Falls, N. Y. (D.O.)
A. P., 154 W. 23rd Street,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Amy Reams. 59 E. 59th St..

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Belle C. Schersue l^ldg., 4

W. 7th St., Cincinnati, O.

Mrs. Callie, 154 W. 23rd St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
Clara, E. Wooster Street,

Bowling Green, O. (D.O.)
Dr., \Voonsocket, S. Dak.


D.  W..  Weiss  Bldg.,  Beau-
mont, Tex. (D.O.)

E.,  120  S.  Grand  Blvd.,  Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

E.,  315  E.  7th  St.,  Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

E.  T..  319  Besse  Building,
Springfield, Mass. (D.C.)

F.  C,  Tonkawa,  Okla. (D.O.)
H'enry  M., fi20J  Nicollet  Ave.,

Minneapolis, Minn. (D.O.)
Jas. E., 768 Poplar Street,

Macon, Ga. (D.C.)
J. E., Oskaloosa, la. (D.C.)
J. F., Lindsay, Ont., Can.

J.  J.,  Newbury,  Tex. (S.T.)-
■ J. Morrison. Hale Bldg..

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
J. P., Lindsay, Ont„ Can.

O. B., 1141 E. Main Street,

Bellevue, O. (D.C.)
Paul R., St. James Bldg.,

Jacksonville, Fla. (D.O.)
Russell. Orilla, Ont., Can.

S.. 50ti Fair St., Kittanning,

Pa. (D.C.)
Samuel, 421 Reynolds Ave.,

Kittanning. Pa. (DC  >
Sam'l, Altoona Trust Bldg.,

Altoona, Pa. (D.C.)
Sarah M., Putnam House,

Palatka, Fla. (D.O.)
T. A., Dayton Beach. Fla.

T. E., 202 I. O. O. F. Bldg.,

Calgary, Alb., Can. (DC.)
Thomas Ij., Chronicle Bldg.,

Augusta, Ga. (M.D.)
Willard  C, 237  W.  Main  St.,

Bozeman, Mont. (D.O.)
W.  E.,  719  Water  St.,  Corpus

Christi,  Tex. (D.O.)
W.  L.,  Funke  Bldg..  Lincoln,

Neb. (DO.)
Wm..  Broken  Bow,  Neb.

W. W., Hedrich, la. (D.C.)
W.  W., 2609 Hickory  Street,

Dallas, Tex. (D.C.)


Wm., Claremore, Okla.  (S.T.)
DAVIS, C. H., 39 S. State St..
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Chas. H., 3405 Monroe St.

Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
Edw.  G.,  4601  Evanston  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
Grace H., 33 W. State St.,

Columbus,  O. (Ch.)
J. B.. 25 New Street.

Newark. N. J. (D.C.)
J. H., 34 Euclid Ave.
Ludlow, Ky. (D.C.)
John M., 504 Neave Bldg.

Cincinnati, O. (Ch.)
Samuel,  York, Pa. (D.C.)
DAVIS  COLLEGE  OF  NEURO-
PATHY, 154 W. 23rd St.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
DAWES,  Richard,  Racine,  Wis.

DAM'"ES, WILLARD C. 237
Main St., Bozeman, Mont.
DAWSON, B. E., 101 E. 30th
St., Kansas  City,  Mo.
(Or.  S.)
DAWSON,  B. E., 1398  Pythian
Ave., Springfield, O.
Frances, 1007 Pierce St.,

Omaha. Neb. (D.C.)
Nellie, 229 W. State Street,
Wellsville, N. Y. (D.C.)
DAY. BEATRICE, Hallstead,
Pa (D  C )
E. F., Mayfield, Ky. (D.O.)
J. O., 1026 S. 4th Avenue,

Louisville. Ky. (D.O.)
Lawrence E., Warren and
Avery Sts., Detroit, Mich.
Lawrence E.. 359 Lincoln
Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.O.)
Mary Warren, New Baxter
Bldg., Portland, Me.
DAY, J. Warren, 80 Granite
St., Portland, Maine
(D.M.T.)
DAYTON,  FRANK  E.,  3259  W.
Madison St., Chicago, 111.
DAZEY,  Chas.  A.,  1005  Market

St., Young.stown, O. (D.)
DEAN & WHITMORE. DRS.,

Asheville. N. C. (D.C.)
DEAN, CLAY L., 615 Grand
Bldg., Atlanta, Ga. (D.C.)
Clav L.. Moultrie, Ga.

G. D. 5th and Market Sts..
East Liverpool. O. (D.C.)
H. S., First Natl. Bank
Bldg., Durango, Colo.
James R., Box 35. Winter

Haven, Fla. (D.C.)
W. E., Michigan Bldg.,

Bozeman, Mont. (D.O.)
W. K., Berrien Springs,
Mich. (D.C.)
DEAN, T. A., Caspei-, Wyo.

DEAN, W. K., Birmingham,

Ala. (D.C.)
DEANE. DR. ALICE M., 607
P^arwell Bldg., Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
John W^., Beresford, S. Dak.
DEARDEN. ALFRED. 335 E.
Hight St., New Philadel-
phia, O. (D.C.)
Jno., 318 Saginaw Street,
Flint, Mich. (D.C.)
DEARDEN, JOHN, Battle
Creek,  Mich. (D.C.)


Conn.


111. (D.C.)
R., Whittier,


DE ARMOND, R. E., 230 S.
Soto  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

DEARTH,  C.  E.,  Box  28.  Fair-
view, Okla. (D.C.)
DEASON, J., Goddard Bldg..
Chicago, 111. (Ph. G..  D.O.)
DE BAUN, HARRY C. 141

Myer St., Hackensack,
N.  J. (D.C.)
Harry C, 134 Washington
St., Paterson, N. J. (D.C.)
DE  BELLA, JOSEPH. 4164

Drexel Bldg., Chicago,  111.

DE CARLO, P. R., 797 Cass

Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.C.)
DE  CARNO, E., Davenport,

la. (D.C.)
DE  CILLA,  A.,  73  Lyon  Street,

New Haven,

(D.M.T. , N.D.)
DECKER, Bert D., 1064 Dorr

St., Cleveland,  O. (D.M.T.)
DECKER, R. D., 639 W. 18th

St., Chicago,
DECKER, MRS.

Cal. (N.D.)
DECKMANN, W., Plymouth

and Penn Aves., North

Minneapolis, Minn. (N.D.)
DEDINSKY, Louis, 4201

Mapledale  Ave.,  Cleveland,

O. (D.C.)
DEDRICK, S. C, Natl. Bank

Bldg., Ronneby, Minn.

DEE, K. M., Bozeman, Mont.

DEEKS, J. H., 529 Call St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
J. Harley, Somerset Blk.,

Winnipeg, Man., Can.

J. H., 529 California Street,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
DEEM, E. E., 5521 Perkins

Court, Cleveland, O.

E. E., 1945 E. 69th Street,

Cleveland. O. (D.C.)
DEEMING, "W.

Mo. (D.O.)
DEERIN, MR.

Broad St.,

DEFTER.  J.  N.

Philadelphia, Pa. (N.D.)
DEETER, RUTH  A.. 132 Wal-
nut St., Harrisbui-g, Pa.

DE  FOREST,  Florence  S.,  1548

K. 82nd St., Cleveland, O.

(Ch.)
DE FRANCE, JOSEPHINE,

Coniinercial Bldg;, St.

I>ouis, Mo. (D.O.)
DE GROOT, FRED B., Safety

Bldg., Rock Island, 111.

(DO.)
DEININGER,  A.,  Broadway

Bldg.. X. K. Cor. 3i)th St.

and Broadway,  New  York,

N. V. (DC.)
DE JARDINE C, 99 N. Court

St.. Port Arthur, Ont.

(DO.)
DE  JONGUB.  JACOB,  Zeeland,

Mich. (D.C.)
DE  JONGE,  Jno.  J.,  Zeeland,

Mich. (D.C.)
DEKEN, R. A., 120 West

Kibby  St.,  Lima,  O. (N.D.)
DE  KEYSER, A. P., 704 De-

kiin Bldg., Portland, Ore.

Amanda P., Columbia  Bldg.,

Portland, Ore. (D.C.)
DEKKER. B. M., 456 West

Jefferson  St.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)


J., Brookfield,

& MRS., 964
Newark, N. J.

315  N.  3.5th  St.,


Natiirofntlhic  Biographical  Notes


859


Herald  of  Health.  He  is  the  author  of  sev-
eral books  on  rational  living  and  Nature
Cure,  and  a  member  of  the  A.  N.  A.,  and  the
Pennsylvania  State  Society  of  Naturopaths.

DUX,  HENRY  M.,  N.  D„  D.  O.,  M.  D.

Dr.  Henry  M.  Dux,  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,
a  regular  licensed  physician,  was  a  Naturo-
path in  Germany  before  locating  in  Florida.
He  was  president  of  the  Naturopathic  As-
sociation for  Rhineland  and  Westphalia,
was  a  recognized  naturopath  and  lecturer
and  was  a  great  fighter  for  medical  free-
dom. The  intelligence  of  the  Florida
legislators  has  not  yet  risen  to  the  level  of
granting  the  members  of  the  most  potent
cult  of  healing  in  the  world:  Naturopathy
— the  privilege  to  practice  their  profession
without  persecution  from  the  minions  of
official  medicine.  The  State  presumes  to
sit  as  judge  and  declare  one  school  of  medi-
cine as  orthodox  and  regular  and  another
heterodox,  or  irregular  and  worthless.  If  a
man  or  woman  know  that  they  can  be
healed  by  the  use  of  Nature's  forces  much
more  readily  and  satisfactorily  than  they
can  by  the  poisonous  practice  of  drugging,
the  State  has  no  right  to  prevent  such  heal-
ing process  by  the  use  of  "the  coarse  ma-
chinery of  the  law,  a  practice  that  savors  of
the  ignorance  and  brutality  of  the  Dark
Ages,  an  age  in  which  we  really  dwell  at
present  as  far  as  things  medical  are  con-
cerned. Dr.  Dux  is  the  head  of  the  Dr.  H.
Dux  Co.,  Inc.,  manufacturing  chemists,  and
is  interested  with  two  brothers  in  this  enter-
prise. He  is  a  loyal  member  of  the  A.  N.
A.,  and  State  representative  for  Florida.

ERZ,  A.  A.,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Dr.  Erz,  of  San  Francisco,  Cal..  is  not
only  a  Naturopathic  practitioner  of  great
ability  and  reputation,  but
he  is  an  author  of  great
prestige  in  the  field  of  na-
tural healing.  His  best
known  work  is  entitled
"The  Medical  Question,
the  Truth  about  Official
Medicine,"  which  is  a  pow-
erful argument  for  medical
freedom.  "What  is  needed
most  in  the  medical  world,"
he  says,  is  toleration  of
the  rights  of  others  to  live  their  own
lives,  think  their  own  thoughts,  come  to
their  own  conclusions,  and  give  all  honest
investigators  and  students  of  medical  mat-
ters a  fair  chance  to  be  of  service  to  suf-
fering humanity.  Official  medicine  needs  a
lesson  in  tolerance  and  justice  towards
others  who  dare  to  differ,  because  they  rec-
ognize the  necessity  of  knowing  the  laws
of  nature  and  observing  them.  And  that
is  what  the  Natural  system  stands  for.
which  recognizes  the  fact  that  there  is  one
real  duty  that  confronts  all  students  of  na-
ture, life and science, which cannot be


ignored,  and  that  is  to  decide  just  what
means  of  help  are  most  beneficial,  not
only  to  their  own  advancement,  but  also
those  which  bring  the  greatest  amount  of
practical  help  to  suffering  humanity."  "The
Medical  Question"  covers  so  many  aspects
of  Drugless  Healing  that  it  may  be  right-
fully regarded  as  the  bible  of  Naturopathy.
It  consists  of  585  pages  and  sells  for  $4.00;
cloth,  $5.00  The  other  works  of  Dr.  Erz
are  "What  Medicine  Knows  and  Does  Not
Know  About  Rheumatism."  "What  Consti-
tutes the  True  Science  and  Art  of  Healing,"
"A  Message  to  All  Drugless  Systems."  Dr.
Erz  is  a  successful  practitioner  of  Chiro-
practic and  Naturopathy,  as  well  as  an
author,  and -enjoys  an  important  patronage
in  the  Queen  City  of  the  Pacific  Coast.
He  is  daily  proving  that  the  superstitious
faith  in  the  healing  power  of  nauseous,
poisonous  drugs,  is  a  serious  menace  to
the  health  and  life  of  mankind,  by  virtue
of  the  fact  that  drugs  only  temporarily
stifle  the  symptoms,  of  disease  whereas  his
natural  remedies  alleviate  pain,  stimulate
vitality  and  eliminate  the  cause  of  the  ail-
ment. He  is  destroying  retrogressive
medicine  by  the  greater  power  of  pro-
gressive medicine.  Retrogressive  medicine
is  simply  drug  medication  which  is  unsci-
entific and  irrational  and  which  violates
the  laws  of  life  and  health  since  all  chemical
drugs  are  more  or  less  poisonous  and  as
such injurious to the human system.

EDWARDS,  L.  S.;  M.  T.,  N.D.

EDWARDS,  LILLIAN,  M.  T.,  N.D.

Supt.  of  the  Hydropathic  Institute,  420
Main  Street, Hartford,  Conn.


Dr. L. S. Edwards


860


Alplidbelicdl  Inde.v


De  La  Mater
Dillabough


DE  LA  MATER, F.  NEWTON.

McAllister, Okla. (S.T.)
DELAPIvAXE, Dorotliy, 371 10.
Long  St., Columbus, O.
(Ch.)
DE LAPP. SIDNEY L., Per-
kins Bldff.,  Roseburg:.  Ore.
I1E  LENDRECIE.  HELEN,

607 S. Kingsley Drive,
Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.O.)
DELK, J. W., 514 Brady St.,

Davenport,  la. (D.O.)
DELK,  L.  P.,  c/o  Stand.  School
of  Chiropractic  and  Natu-
ropathy, Davenport, la.
DE LONG, L. H.. 1.52 S. Bur-
dick St.. Kalamazoo,
Mich. (D.C.)
L. H., Vicksburg-, Mich.

Laura, 96 Eagle St., Engle-

wood. N. J. (D.O.)
Raymond L., Bank of
Holden  Bldg.,  Holden,  Mo.
DE MALLIE, BERTHA, 159
Berkeley St., Rochester,
N. Y. (D.C.)
DEMAREST, E. M., West-
minster. Md. (D.O.)
DE MARSA, CLARENCE, 4th
and  Center  Sts.,  Taft,  Cal.
DEMING. LEE C, Box 154,

Anaheim. Cal. (D.O.)
DEMMENWALD. G. A., 4823
W. Congress St., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
DEMMITT. S. T.. Hutchinson,

Kan. (D.C.)
DE MOTTE, A. G., 2720 N.
Richmond St., Chicago,
ni. (D.C.)
DENEEN. MARY, Larchwood,

la. (D.C.)
DENIS. GEO., Erskine, Minn.

DENIS. T. B. W,, 325 S.
Lawrence Ave., Wichita,
Kan. (M.D.)
DENTSON, R.  REUBEN.  Dillon
Bldg., Hartford, Conn.
Harold  B.,  Orpheum  Theatre
Bldg.. Michigan City, Ind.
DENLINGER & DENLTNGER.
1317  Ifith  St.,  Two  Rivers.
Wis. (D.C.)
DENLINGER, J. H.. 109 S.
Riverside Drive, Elkhart,
Ind. (D.C.)
Dr. J. H., Davenport, la.

.1. H., Elkhart Water Co.
Bldg..  Elkhart.  Ind. (D.C.)
DENNETT. F. A., 138 Hun-
tington Ave., Boston.
Mass. (D.O.)
Dr. Herbert E„ 151 Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
(D.C, D.P., D.D.S.)
DENNING,  L.  B.,  1130  Main  St.,

Dubuque. la. (N.D.)
DENNIS, HARRY, 9 Odd
Fellows Bldg., Greens-
burg, Ind. (D.C.)
DENNIS, HERBERT C, 9710
Laird Ave., Cleveland, O.
(Sp.)
DENNY, T>. E., 3446 D St.,
San Diego, Cal. (D.C.)
L.  L.. 908  Broadway  Central
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
DENON.  L.  G., 30th  and  Divi-
sion Sts., Portland, Ore.


DENTON, H. A., 517 N. Sante
Fe Ave., Pueblo, Colo,
W. N., Loveland, Colo.
DEOGNEY, P. A., Milford.

Nebr. (M.D.)
DEPEAV. D. M., Prole, la.


DEl'UTY,  H.  E..  1251  Main  St.,

Riverside. Cal. (D.O.)

Anna W., 1251 Main Street.

Riverside, Cal. (D.O.)

DERCK.  .1.  E..  Bass  Blk..  Fort

Wayne, Ind. (D.O.)
DERMITT, S. W., 318 Woods
Bldg., Evansville, Ind.
DERMOTT. MISS M., 3211
Chestnut  St.,  Kansas  City,
Mo. (S.T.)
DERNER, RUDOLPH A..
Battle  Creek.  Mich. (DC.)
DERR, VERA E.. Masonic

Blk.. Fostoria, O. (D.O.)
DERSAM,  KATHRYN  E.,  Folk
Bldg., Chillicothe, Ohio.
DESCHAUER, Thos., 718 W.
63rd St., Chicago, 111.
DESHAZER. J. DALTON,
Carson  Bldg.,  Eureka,  Cal.
DESHLER, ALICE BEEMAN,

Degroff, O. (D.C.)
DE TIENNE, J. A., 1198
Pacific  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Harry D., Central Blk.,
Pueblo, Colo. (D.O.)
DETROIT  CHIROPRACTIC

INSTITUTE SCHOOL, 886
Trumbull Ave., Detroit,
Mich. (D.C.)
DETWILER. SARA B., Medi-
cine Hat, Alberta, Can.
E. S., 477 Colborne Street,
London, Ont., Can. (D.O.)
DEUTSCHBR, J. L., 430 Heed
Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
DEVENS,  LENA,  Black

Mountains,  N. C. (D.C.)
DE  VENY, CATHARINE, 304
S. Wabash Ave., Chicago,
111. (M.D., D.O.)
DEVINE & DEVINE, Athol,
S. Dak. (D.C.)
Redfleld, S. Dak. (D.C.)
DEVINE, A. G., Oregon, Wis.
A. G., Evansville, Wis.

A. G., 843 Wellington Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
DEVINNY,  GEO. M., 200 Lark
St., Albany, N. Y. (D.C.)
Minnie S., 200 Lark Street,
Albany, N. Y. (D.C.)
DEVINS, ALBERT  G., 521J  N.
B'way, Oklahoma City,
Okla. (D.C.)
DEVITT, DELIA E., 1030
Nicollet Ave., Minneapo-
lis.  Minn. (D.O.)
DE  VITT,  ELLIS, 603  West

St., Hillsboro, O. (D.M.T.)

DEVORE, BURNISE E., 202

West Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)

DE  VRIES, EMMA. Farragut

Apts., Washington, D. C.


DEWEY,  MRS.  SYLVIA.

Orlando, Montana. (S.T.)


St.,


12
O.


DBWITT, C. W., 183 Nelson
Ave.. St. Paul, Minn.
Emma  Good, 277 Monument
Ave.,  Wyoming,  Pa.  (D.O.)
J.  O., Port  Huron,  Mich.
DEWITT,  F. E., 505 Chestnut
St., Burlington, Wis.
Orla, 202 South Lincoln
Chicago, 111. (N.D.) .
DE  WOLF, BLANCHE E..
Endley Blk., Elyria,
(N.D.. D.C.)
Dr. Winifred, 504 Fine Arts
Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.  (D.O.)
Blanche,  Altoona,  Pa. (D.C.)
DE  WOLF, WM., 502 Masonic
Temple,  Chicago,  111. (Opt.)
DEXTER, MRS.  EI>LEN, Burr

Oak, Kan. (S.T.)
DE YOUNG, Dr. S. J., Saint

Charles, 111. (D.C.)
DICK, E. F., 1710 Highland
Blvd.. Milwaukee, AVis.
P. F., 2710 Highland Blvd.,
Milwaukee,  AVis. (D.C.)
DICKENSCHER, V., 3700 5th
Ave., Washington, D. C.
DICKEY, OTTIS L., Frisco
Bldg., Joplin, Mo. (D.O.)
DICKIE. W. A., Purcell, Mo.
• (D.C.)

DICKINSON, C. B., 338
Chamber of Commerce
Bldg., Columbus,  O. (D.C.)
E. AA^, 5 Kreason Bldg.,
Hornell, N. Y. (D.C.)
DICKSON, J. HOMER, Har-
rison Blk., Canon City,
Colo. (D.O.)
N. E., 338 Security Bldg.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
DIECKMANN, LOUISA, 415
Vermont Street, Buffalo,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
DIEGO.  VINCENT  A., San

Diego. Cal. (D.C.)
DIEHL. J. M., Hulett Bldg.,

Elmira, N. Y. (D.O.)
DIERKS & DTERKS, Wahoo,

Neb. (D.C.)
DIETZ, A., 1428 Vliet Street,
Milwaukee, Wis. (D.C.)
Dr. Herbert H., 1725 W.
Norris St., Philadelphia,
Pa. (N.D.)
H. Lewis, Physician Bldg.,
Oakland, Cal. (D.C, M.D.)
Phineas, 500 Broad Street,

Newark, N. J. (D.O.)
W^ S., 94 S. 18th Street,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
DIKERMAN,  K.  M.,  Hippo-
drome Arcade, Youngs-
town.  O. (Ch.)
DILATUSH. F. A., Traction
Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
DILEOS, M., 472 Fulton St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
DILIWORTH, C C, P. O.
Box 672, Payne, O.
(D.M.T.)
DILL,  EMMA  B.,  Mason  Bldg.,
Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.O.)
Heber M., 21 Broadway,
Lebanon, O. (D.O.)
DILLABOUGH, A. H., 7
Roberts St., Middletown,
N. Y. (D.O.)
W.  J.  E.,  Hotel  Buckingham,
New  York,  N. Y. (D.O)


Naliiropalhic  niof/idplncal  N<jte.s


8r,]


Both  Doctors  are  graduates  of  Mechano-
therapy and  The  Blumer  College  of  Natu-
ropathy. Dr.  h.  S.  Edwards  is  Professor  of
Hydrotherapy  and  Osteology  and  Dr.  Lil-
lian is  Professor  of  Food  Science,  First
Aid,  and Hygiene in The Rlumer College


Dr. Lillian Edwards

of  Naturopathy,  of  Hartford,  Conn.  At  the
Hydropathic  Institute  disease  is  treated  by
the  various  successful  forms  of  drugless
treatment,  such  as  hydrotherapy,  electric
light  baths,  mechano-therapy,  spondylo-
therapy,  massage,  remedial  gymnastics,  food
science.  Food  is  an  important  factor  in  the
treatments.  The  diagnosis  is  complete  and
thorough.  Each  patient  receives  treatment
according  to  individual  requirements.  The
Institute  is  home-like,  with  pleasant  rooms,
electric  lights,  heated  wnth  hot  water,
charges  moderate.  Particulars  sent  free
upon  request.

FISCHER, F. L.; D. O., D. C, Clinton
Health  Institute,  Newark,  N.  J.

Dr.  Fischer  is  a  graduate  of  the  Academy
of  Arts  and  Science  (1894),  Belgium,  Amer-
ican School  of  Naturopathy,  American  Uni-
versity, Chicago,  and  College  of  Osteopa-
thy, Elgin,  111.  He  is  a  member  of  the
American  Academy  of  Chiropractic  Re-
search and  the  Chiropractic  Society  for  Re-
search and  Education,  as  well  as  honorary
member  of  Academy  of  Arts  and  Science,
La  Louviere,  Belgium.  Dr.  Fischer,  who
was  born  in  1867,  is  also  a  member  of  the
A.  N.  A.,  section  New  Terse3^

FERGUSON,  E.  W.,  D.  C.

.Slowly,  but  surely,  a  great  school  of
Natural Healing  is  taking shape  under  our


very  eyes  i)y  those  who  will  not  bow  the
knee  to  the  Baal  of  Official
Medicine.  This  school  has
many  different  cults,  and  their
co-ordination  is  as  yet  some-
what inchoate,  as  become  a
new  institution  in  the  making,
but  the  future  will  regard
this  age  with  great  veneration
as  having  successfully  com-
l>atted  a  system  of  therapeutics  that  fairly
reeks  with  egotism,  vainglory,  intolerance,
ignorance,  selfishness  and  persecution.  Dr.
Ferguson  is  one  of  those  apostles  of  this
new  Academy  of  Healing,  and  his  metier
is  that  of  chiropractor.  Born  in  Bridge-
port, Conn.,  he  is  a  graduate  of  the  public
schools,  the  Park  Avenue  Institute,  and  of
Ihe  Palmer  School  of  Chiropractic  of
Davenport,  Iowa.  He  attended  lectures  in
several  medical  colleges,  and  although  re-
garded as  a  student,  he  never  graduated
from  any  of  them.  He  had  his  own  views
of  medical  science  and  kept  his  mind  free
to  choose  its  own  medical  belief.  His
medical  travels  and  his  knowledge  of  the
merits  of  the  different  medical  schools  led
him  to  choose  a  method  of  healing  that  is
the  very  antipodes  of  the  unscientific  and
fanciful  usage  of  serums  and  vaccines  that
poison  the  blood  and  subvert  the  functions
of  the  organism.

As  a  chiropractor,  he  is  busily  engaged
in  setting  the  forces  of  health  flowing
through  the  bodies  of  his  patients,  instead
of  exploiting  the  deranged  ideas  of  the
grafting,  political  drug  doctors.  The  suc-
cess that  has  attended  his  ministrations  is
the  best  possible  proof  of  the  correctness
of  his  theory  of  cure  and  of  his  skill  in
applying  such  theory  to  the  varying  phases
of  human  ailments.

FOWLER,  J.  A.,  1358  Broadway,  N.  Y.  C.

Miss  Jessie  .\llen  Fowler  is  a  native  of
New  York  City,  and  is  the  daughter  of
Lorenzo  Niles  and
Lydia  Folger  Fow-
ler. Her  father,  to-
gether with  his
brother,  O.  S.  Fow-
ler, wrote  man}'
liooks  and  deliver-
ed a  multitude  of
lectures  on  the  sub-
ject of  Phrenology,
neglecting  no  op-
portunit}-  to  spread
a  knowledge  of  the
science,  especially
in  fhe  circles  of
education  and  refinement.  To  him  mainh'
belongs  the  honor  of  having  re-estab-
lished the  Science  of  Phrenology  in  Great
Britain,  where  he  resided  for  manj^  years.
Lorenzo  N.  Fowler  was  sixth  in  descent
from  William  Fowler,  who  came  over  from
England, in 1676, and settled in Guilford,


862


Ali)h(tbetical  Index


Dillev
r>owd


DILLEY. A. E., 905 S. Grand

Ave., I-.OS Angeles, Cal.

(DO.)
DII.I.KY,  .T.  C,  62  Main  St.,

Duncan Falls, O. (D.M.T.)
DILDING, G. W., Ponca City,

Okla. (D.O.)
DILLINGHAM.  R.  C.  Lansing,

Mich. (D.C.)
DILLMAN. LEO. E.. 401-2

Daily  News  Bldg.,  Canton,

O. (D.C.)
DILLON, DOT, Rock Rapids,

la. (D.O.)
Geo.. Rushville, Neb. (D.C.)
Geo., North Platte, Neb.

John F., 279 Berkeley Ave.,

Bloomfleld, N. J. (D.C.)
DIMICK, FRANK  C, 732 Ohio

BklK-., Toledo, O. (D.M.T.)
DINSMOOR, LAURA B., 214

Centennial Ave., Sewick-

ley.  Pa.  (D.O.)
DIPPO, ANNA E., 933 S.

Adams St., Marion, Ind.

DIRKES, C. M., Palace

Theatre Bldg-., Danville,

III. (D.C.)
DIRKES, CLEMENT M., 156

S. Vermilion St.,  Danville,

111. (N.D.)
DISHONG. MYRTLE D., 342

Huron St., Toledo, O.

(D.M.T.)
DISKELL. GEO. \V., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
DISNEY, Dr. J. LAMBERT,

1149  N. 63rd St..  Philadel-
phia.  Pa. (N.D.)
J.  Lambert.  1149  N.  63rd  St..

Philadelphia,  Pa. (S.T.)
DISQUE, ANDREW A., 2706

Folsom  St.,  St.  Joseph,

Mo. (Opt.)
DITTMAN.  WM. C, 962 Buffin

St.. Milwaukee, Wis.

DITTO, J. F., Breen Block,

Great Falls, Mont. (D.C.)
Eva, 135 9th St., Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)
J. F., 16-17 Breen Blk.,

Great FalLs. Mont. (D.C.)
Wm. L., Glasgow, Mont.

Wm. L., Brady Island, Neb.

Wm. L., 14 Breen Blk.,

Great Falls, Mont. (D.C.)
DITTRICH, F. W.. 3140 W.

90th  St.. Cleveland, O.

John J., 60 Hudson Place,

Weehawken, N. J. (D.C.)
DIXON, EDITH. Hanover,

Ont.. Can. (D.C.)
Edith, St. Leatherines, Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)
G. B., 510 Grand Ave., Mil-
waukee, Wis. (D.C.)
DIXON, L. M.. Wabash, Minn.

Reba L.. Rockville, Ind.

Walter A.,  •  Cor. Gay and

High Sts., Mount Vernon

O. (D.C.)
DIZMOND. WM., 550 W.

Matilda St., Huntington,

Ind. (DC.)
DOANE, ADELE, 1720J Main

St., Parsons, Kan. (D.O.)
DOBLTNS, CHLORA, Rogers.

Ark, (DC.)


DOBSON, W. D.. Century

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  (D.O.)
DODD, F. T.. Raymondville.

Tex. (D.C.)
J. E., 36 Kearney Street,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Miss Lorain, Box 125,

Mineralwells. Tex. (S.T.)
Lorenzo. 122 4th Street,

Newark. N. J. (D.C.)
DODGE,  A.,  Ill  Grand  St.,

Waterbury, Conn. (N.D.)
DODGE. F. CHANDLER. 53

Parkis Ave.. Providence.

R.  I. (D.O.)
DODSON, CHARLES AUG.,

State Natl. Bank Bldg.,

Little Rock, Ark. (D.O.)

J. T., Kirksville, Mo. (D.O.)

DOE, ALBIN  H., 523  Main  St.,

Racine, Wis. ((D.O.)
DOERR,  JOHN  P..  413  Klrkby

Bldg.,  Saginaw,  Mich. (D.C.)
DOGSTRON, J. R., 110

Everett  Bldg., Akron, O.

DOLE,  ALMEDA GOOD-

SPEED, New Bank Bldg.,

Winnetka,  111. (D.O.)
Emily C. Alta Vista Apts..

Berkeley, Cal. (D.O.)
DOLL, MARY BATES.

Chillicothe, O. (Ch.)
DOLLINGER. G. W.. 245

Grove St., Battle Creek,

Mich. (D.C.)
DOLSEN. ROBT. J., 93 Biddle

Ave., Wyandotte, Mich.

DOLSON, ROBT., 113 Biddle

St..  Wyandotte,  Mich.

DOMINGO, M., 154 Martin St.,

Milwaukee, Wis. (N.D.)
DONAHUE, GLENN. Peabody,

Kans.  (D.C.)
J. E., Berkeley Natl. Bank

Bldg.,  Berkeley.  Cal.  (D.O.)
J.  J., 404 Federal  St., Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (DC.)
J. J., 1306 Federal St.,

Pittsburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
DONE,  DR..  Lucas,  Kan.  (S.T.)
DONEGHY, A. I., 1323 Chap-
line  St.,  Wheeling.  W.  Va.

DONNEL.  W.  O..  241 J  Main  St.,

Ashtabula, O. (D.C.)
DONNELLY, EMMA E., 54 S.

El  Molino  Ave., Pasadena,

Cal. (D.O.)
John, 1625 W. Adams St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Rose, Durant, la. (D.C.)
Sarah, 155 William Street,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
DONOVAN, D. D., Ferguson

Bldg.,  Springfield,  111.

Donald.  938  Van  Nuys  Bldg..

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
DONTON, H. A., 517 N. Santa

Fe Ave., Pueblo. Colo.

DOOI-TTTLE, HARRIET M..

535 N. Main St.. Pomona,

Cal. (DO.)
DORANN, M., 136 Broadway.

Brooklyn, N. Y. (Ma.)
DORON. CHARLES B., Pearl

Bldg.. Bangor, Me. (D.C.)
Chester L., 2nd Natl. Bank

Bldg., Bucyrus. O. (D.O.)
DOROSH, P. J., 533 Security

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.


Main Street,
la. (D.C.)
S. Dak.

Washington
York, N. Y.


Dak.

Ave.,
Lin-
Street.
Street.
Street.


DORRANCE.  HAROLD  J.,
First  Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.O.)

DOVEY,  C.  A.,  1005  Market  St..
Youngstown. O. (D.C.)

DOTHAGE. E. A.. 223 S
William St..  Moberly,  Mo.
E. A.. New Franklin. Pa.

E.  A.. 325J Thomas Ave.,
Shenandoah. la. (D.C.)

DOTTIEL. AUGUSTA W.,

4601 Forbes St.. Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
DOTY, C. F., 228 N. Main St.,

Niles, O. (D.M.T.)
Slanton W., Massillon, O.

(D.M.T.)
DOUGHERTY.  D.  L..  Phillippi.

W. Va. (D.C.)
J.. Ijyman  County.  Highland.

S. Dak. (D.C.)
J. W.. 217i Main Street,

Mason City, la. (D.C.)
J. W.. 303 J N.

Mason City,
John. Winner.

L. & C. 56 Ft

Ave., New

J. F.. Springfield, S.

M. J.. 26 S. Detroit

Kenia. O. (D.C.)
DOUGHTY. Frank A.,

worth. O. (D.C.)
Jno.. 23 S. 52nd

Philadelphia, Pa.
John. 22 S. 52nd

Philadelphia. Pa.
W. E.. S. Prospect

Marion O. (D.C.)
W. W.. 131 S. Prospect St..

Marion, O. (N.D.)
DOUGLAS, A. S.. 338 Union

Avenue N., Portland, Ore.


F.  H., 1820 Maxwell Street,
Cheyenne, Wyoming.

Wm. A., Lamberton, Minn.

DOUGLAS, F. S., 600 E. 16th

St., Cheyenne, Wyoming.

Mr.  &  Mrs.  J.  E.,  San  Angelo,

Tex. (S.T.)
Rosere S., 501 Catherine  St.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
DOUGHERTY & DOUGHER-
TY, 56 Ft. Washington

Ave., New York, N. Y.

DOUTT, EDWIN S., 516

Federal St., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
DOUTTIEL, A.

and Craig  Sts.,  Pittsburgh.

Pa. (D.C.)
DOVE, C. E., Dion Blk.,

Glendive. Mont. (D.O.)
Geo. S., 3767 W. 14th St.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
DOVER, MARY A., 123 Nes-

mith St.. Lowell, Mass.

DOW, EMMA  L., 87 Hunting-
ton Ave., Boston, Mass.

(DC.)
Lvdia S., Cowley Blk..

Central Point. Ore. (D.O.)
DOW. W. J.. Warren. O.

DOWAN. D.. Los Angeles.

Cal. (D.C.)
DOWD,  E.  L., Sebeka,  Minn


W., Forbes


Ndluropathic  liiof/niphiral  Notes


863


Connecticut.  Her  great-grandfather,  Eli-
phalct  Fowler,  fought  in  the  Revolutionary
War.  Miss  Fowler's  mother,  who  was  one
of  the  first  American  women  to  receive  the
M.  D.  degree  in  this  country,  was  descend-
ed from  John  Folger,  who  died  in  1666,  and
on  the  maternal  side  was  related  to  Benja-
min Franklin,  whose  mother  was  a  Folger
from  Nantucket,  Mass.  In  early  life  Miss
Jessie  Fowler  attended  a  public  school  in
New  Hampshire,  and  she  received  a  liberal
education  while  abroad  with  her  parents,
traveling  through  France,  Italy  and  the
British  Isles,  finishing  her  studies  in  a  pri-
vate academy  in  Lincoln,  England,  the
home  of  her  ancestors.  Inheriting  from
her  parents  a  leaning  toward  the  exact
sciences,  she  took  up  the  study  of  Anatomy
and  Physiology  at  the  Medical  College  for
Women  in  London,  intending  to  follow  her
mother's  profession — -Medicine.  But  upon
her  mother's  death,  in  1879,  she  changed
her  plans  and  became  identified  with  her
father's  phrenological  work  in  connection
with  his  Phrenological  Institute.  She  took
complete  charge  of  the  Examination  De-
partment in  the  Summer  of  1879  and  1881,
upon  her  father's  return  to  the  United
States,  and  examined  many  persons  of  note.
In  1884  she  studied  brain  dissection  at  the
London  Medical  College  for  Women,  and
in  1887  traveled  through  Australia  where
she  lectured  on  Phrenology  and  Physical
Culture  in  all  the  principal  cities.  She  also
conducted  classes  in  these  subjects  at  the
State  Schools  of  Melbourne,  and  through  a
special  permit  of  the  Victorial  Board  of
Education  was  allowed  to  introduce  her
own  system  of  gymnastics  in  the  State
Schools.  Returning  to  London  in  1889,  she
assumed  editorial  charge  of  the  "Phreno-
logical Magazine,"  and  organized  weekly
classes  for  the  Fowler  Phrenological  Insti-
tute. She  also  started  a  Correspondence
Course,  and  taught  Phrenology  to  citizens
of  many  countries  through  the  mail.  In  1896
she  returned  to  the  United  States,  with  her
father  and  sisters,  for  the  purpose  of  unit-
ing the  English  and  American  Institutes
of  Phrenology  and  the  English  and  Amer-
ican Phrenological  Magazines.  The  death
of  her  father  in  1896,  Prof.  Sizer  in  1897.
and  Mrs.  Wells  in  1901  threw  large  respon-
sibilities upon  her  in  the  continuation  of
the  dissemination  of  Phrenology.  She  has
been  Vice-President  of  the  American  Insti-
tute of  Phrenology  since  1896,  and  became
editor-in-chief  of  the  "Phrenological  Jour-
nal'' in  1897.  The  American  Institute  of
Phrenology  was  established  in  1866,  by
special  charter,  and  its  students  are  gather-
ed from  all  parts  of  the  world.  Such  a  mul-
tiplicity of  duties  and  responsibilities  would
prove  a  tax  on  some  women,  but  such  is
Miss  Fowler's  enthusiasm  that  in  the  midst
of  all  her  activities  she  took  up  the  study
of  Law.  in  the  Woman's  Law  Class  of  the
New York University, where she was


graduated  in  1900,  and  followed  this  with
a  course  in  Psychology  at  Columbia  Uni-
versity in  the  Summer  of  1901.  As  a  writer
Miss  Fowler  was  associated  with  her  father
in  the  compilation  of  a  "Phrenological  Dic-
tionary," in  1895,  and  is  the  author  of
"lfandl)ook  on  Mental  Science,"  in  1896,
whicli  aims  to  link  I'hrenology  with  mod-
ern Psychology;  "Life  of  Dr.  Francois  J.
Gall,"  1896;  "Intuition,  or  the  Organ  of
Human-Nature,"  1897;  "Brain  Roofs  and
Porticoes,'  1909;  "The  Natural  Language  of
the  Faculties,"  1910;  and  "Personality  in
Ijusiness,"  1910;  besides  contributing  a
number  of  important  articles  to  the  leading
journals  and  magazines.  She  has  lectured
in  many  of  the  leading  cities  of  the  United
States,  Canada  and  Great  Britain,  on  the
subjects  of  Phrenology,  Vocational  Guid-
ance, Hygiene,  etc.  In  1898  she  invented
and  introduced  a  five-part  Plaster  Bust,
showing  the  brain  divided  into  hemispheres
and  convolutions  numbered  according  to
phrenological  designations,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  she  introduced  to  the  educa-
tional world  a  new  Phrenological  Chart.
She  has  been  prominently  connected  in
England  with  the  Anthropological  Insti-
tute, the  British  Association  of  Science,  the
Writers'  Club  and  the  British  Women's
Temperance  Union,  of  which  she  was  Hon-
orary Secretary  for  nine  years;  and  in
America  she  has  been  affiliated  with  the
Woman's  Press  Club,  the  West  End
Woman's  Republic  Club,  the  Portia  Club,
the  Legislative  League,  the  Mother's  Club,
the  Anti-Vice  Association,  the  Orange
V\'oman's  Club,  the  Woman's  Peace  Circle
of  New  York,  and  the  New  York  Woman
Suffrage  Society,  among  others.

FLETCHER, W. H. A., N. D., Physical
Director  of  the  Athletic  Club.

Dr.  Fletcher  is  a  splendid  example
of  Naturopathy.  His  health  wrecked  as
the  result  of  medical  and  surgical  mal-prac-
tice,  he  lay  at  the  point  of  death  for  many
weeks,  and  was  saved  by  Nature's  simple
methods at the "Yungborn," Butler, N. J.

From  a  condition  of  being  an  athlete,  he
lost  hearing,  seeing,  and  his  skin  peeled.
He  lay  on  the  ground  in  a  state  of  coma
for  six  weeks,  a  helpless  wreck.  But  such
were  the  vivifying  effects  of  air-power,  sun-
shine, diet  and  water  applications,  that  his
recover}^  to  health  rapidly  became  complete.
He  afterward  rebuilt  his  body  so  splendid-
ly, that  he  attracted  the  attention  of  Ber-
narr  Macfadden  and  posed  for  many  of  the
Physical  Culture  exercises.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  Naturopathic  Asso-
ciation, Section  New  York  State  Society
of  Naturopaths,  and  Secretary-  of  the  New-
York  State  Pedic  Society.  He  saved  dozens
of  lives  by  his  skill  at  Far  Rockaway
Beach,  where  he  conducts  a  Physical  Cul-
ture  Institute during  the summer.


8C4


Alphahelical  Indr.r


Uowd
Dunn


J'^iist Nafl
Webstor,


Panora, la.


L., 40 E.
Pasadena,


E.  I^.. Wanbay,  S.  Dak.

DO  WD, ROY I...

Bank Bids..

S. D. (D.(\)
DOWLER, A. S.,

DOWLIN, MAE

Colorado St.

Cal. (D.O.)

DOWMAN, JUANITA, 503-5

^Union Hldg., Anderson,

Ind. (D.C.)
DOWNER, S. W., Mt. Pleas-
ant, Mich. (D.C.)
DOWNEY, ANDREW J., 1330

Wood St., Wilkinsburg,

Pa. (D.C.)
DOWNING, EDWIN M., Riipp

Bldg-., York, Pa. (D.O.)
J. T., Board of  Trade  Bldg.,

Scranton, Pa. (D.O.)
J. R., Box 15, Ellisville,

Miss. (D.C.)
I... S., Pawhuska, Okla.

W.  J.,  Hiawatha.  Kan.  (S.T.)
DOWNING,  R.  B.,  North  Webb

City, Mo. (D.C.)
DOWNS & DOWNS, Babcock

Bldg-., Billing-s, Mont.

DOWNS, ALBERT VICTOR,

Glendale, Cal. (D.C.)
Henry A., 18 State Street,

Oil City, Pa. (D.O.)
L. Irene, Midland City, 111.

DOWNS, L. IRENE, Midland

City, 111. (N.D.)
DOZIER, J. K., ni Howe St.,

New Haven, Conn. (D.O.)
W. R., Grand Opera Bldg-.,

Atlanta, Ga. (D.O.)
DRAIN, JAMES R., Scott

City. Kans. (D.C.)
Jas. R., Russell, Kans.

DRAKE, EDWARD V., 44 N.

Pearl St., Buffalo, N. Y.

DRAKE, JAMES T., Metoalf

Bldg-., Auburn, N.  Y.

J. A., Cawker City, Kan.

Mrs. W. L,., Warrensburg-,

Mo. (S.T.)
DRAKEFORD,  JAS.  H., 809

Ocean Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Opt.)
DRAPER, C. L., 535 Majestic  i

Bldg., Denver, Colo.

I>. L.,  Aeolian  Hall,  33  West

42nd St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

DRASER, ANDREW, 233 W.

Jefferson St., Los Ange-
les,  Cah (D.C.)
DRENNAN, DR. ANNA M.,

899 Woodward Avenue,

Detroit, Mich. (O.O.)

DRESHER,  A.  S.,  1341  Walnut

St., Boulder, Colo. (D.C.)

Albert C, Box 2fi2, W.

Kiowa Ave., Ft. Morg-an,

Colo. (S.T.)

DRESSED,  WALTER  S.,

Kergher  Bldg-.,  Carroll-
ton, 111. (D.O.)

DRESSER,  B.  A..  1907  Van
Buren St., Chicago, 111.


B. A., 519

Lynchburg,


Cluuch St.
Va. (D.C.)


B.  J.,  407  Humboldt  Street,
Union Hill, IjT. J. (D.C.)

C.  W., Caldwell. Idaho.

V.  A.,  601  Church  Street,
Lynchburg, Va. (D.(\)

Walter  P.,  Temple  Audi-
torium, Los  Angeles,  Cal.

DREW,  EDWARD  G.,  1228
W.  Lehigh  Ave..  Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.O.)

Howard  A.,  Browning,  Mo.

Ira  W.,  I>and  Title  Bldg.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)

DREWS, GEO. J., 1910 North

Harding Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C, N.D.)
DRINKALL, EARL J., 1421

Morse Ave., Rogers Park

Sta., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
DRINKALL, EARL J., 11,331

S. Michigan Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
DROAGE, MRS. LENA, Flat

River, Mo. (S.T.)
DROBNY, T., 502-4 South

Chapin St., South Bend,

Ind. (D.C.)
DROLL, MRS. V., 58  W. 128th

St., New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
DRUMM, CARL  C, 18 Arcade

St.,  Newark, O. (D.C.)
DRUMMET,  G.  N., 215  N. 24th

St., Lincoln, Neb. (D.C.)
Sylvia J., 99 E. Main St.,

Somerville, N. J. (D.C.)
DRUMMIT, S. J., Fremont,

Neb. (D.C.)
DRYDEN, W. X., Oskaloosa,

la. (D.C.)
DUBOIS, ELIZABETH B.,

Sault Ste. Marie, Canada.

DUBOIS, L. J., 44 Court St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (Cr.)
DUCAMP, D. R., 813 12th St

N. W., Washington, D. C.

(D.M.T.)
DUCK,  M.  B.,  Stone  Mountain,

Ga. (D.C.)
DUCKWELL, E. D., Bunker

Hill, Ind. (D.C.)
DUCKWORTH, J.« A., 831

Union Trust Bldg., Cin-
cinnati,  O. (N.D., D.C.)
Jas.  A., 59  Perin Bldg., Cin-
cinnati, O. (D.C.)
DUCLOS, WILLIAM, 1027

State St., Bridgeport,

Conn. (N.D.)
DUDNEY, M. W., 1729 W.

Walnut St., Chicago, 111.

DUDNEY, MAUSEL, Jackson-
ville, 111. (D.C.)
DUEK, M. E., Mineral Park

Springs, Tenn. (D.C.)
DUERINGER,  H.,  B'way,  East

Coi-. 34th St., New York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
DUESTERWALi:), FRANK  W.,

1575  E.  12th  St.,  Brooklvn,

N.  Y. (Opt.)
DUEY, E. J., 406 Erie Bldg.,

Cleveland,  O. (D.C.)
Fred J., 621.'-) Hough Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
W. P., 624 N. Electric Ave.,

Alhambra, Cal. (D.C.)
DUFF, H. J., 1428 W. Wash-
ington  Blvd., Chicago, 111.


DUFUR,  J.  IVAN,  Penna
Bldg.,  I'hiladelphia,  Pa.

DUFFIELD,  BESSIE  A.,

Hitchcock Bldg., Nash-
ville, Tenn. (D.O.)
W., 2 Steel P>lk., Winnipeg,

Manitoba. Can. (D.C.)
DUFFIN, MRS. NELLIE, 215

W.  3rd  St.,  Monmouth,  111.

DUFFY. MARY J., 13th and

Bremen Sts., Cincinnati,

O. (Ma.)
DUGAN, R. C, 225 E. Center

St., Marion, O. (D.O.)
DUGDALE, G. W., Boston,

Mass. (M.D.)
DUGGER  &  DUGGER, 313  W.

Monroe St., Springfield,

111. (D.C.)

621 Walnut St., Spring-
field, O. (D.C.)
DUGLAY, H. A., Waldheim

Bldg., Kansas City, Mo.

DUKES & DUKES, 204 First

Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,  Corning,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Hart, Mich. (D.C.)
DUKES, LLOYD E., Fostoria,

O. (D.C.)
DULATUSH, FRANK A., 607

Traction Bldg., Cincin-
nati, O. (D.O.)
DULLA, B., 3529 Harper St.,

St. Louis, Mo. (D.C.)
DUNBAR,  R.  J.,  620  California
DUMBAULD, Dr. B. A., Webb

City,  Mo. (M.D.)
DUMORE, W. K., Sterling,

111. (N.D.)

Ave.,  Avalon,  Pa. (D.O.)
DUNCAN, A. N., 205 East

Ontario St., Chicago, 111.

DUNCAN, CHAS. H., 2612

Broadway, New York,

N. Y. (M.D.)
DUNDER, RUTH  E.,  Wauneta.

Neb. (D.C.)
DUNHAM, GEO. P., 151 Hun-
tington Ave., Boston,

Mass. (M.D., D.C.)
DUNHAM, JAY, 7 Shaftsbury

Sq., Belfast, Ireland.

Jno. D., Burgaw, N. C.

DUNHAM, M. M., Norwich,

Conn. (N.D.)
DUNLAP, J. A., Garden City,

Kan. (D.C.)
A. T., First Natl. Bank

Bldg., Woodward, Okla.

DUNN, ERNEST W., Elks

Temple, New  Berne,  N.  C.

Frank. Luddington, Mich.

J.  D.,  106  W.  Park  St.,  Port-
land, Ore. (D.C.)
Geo. W., 313 Woolner  Bldg.,

Peoria,  111. (D.C.)
Geo. W., 1003 Gaby Ave.,

East St. Louis, 111. (M.D.,

Geo.  W.. 264  McKinley  Ave.,

Salem, O. (D.C.)
Mrs.  L.,  Salt  Fork,  Okla.

Raymond, Greenwood, Ark.

Ray O., Creighton, Nebr.


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


865


Dr. W. H. A. Fletcher


As  a  professor  of  physical  education,  he
has  adopted  a  fixed  program  of  principles
to  ensure  the  best  results.  He  has  his  pu-
pils begin  by  assuming  a  correct  attitude,
an  absolutely  vertical  pose.  Then  follow
exercises  of  the  arms,  legs,  exercises  in
creeping  on  hands  and  toes,  exercises  of  the
trunk,  walking,  climbing,  running,  balan-
cing exercises,  leaping,  swimming,  climbing
ropes,  throwing  the  medicine  ball,  boxing
and  wrestling,  and  jiu  jitsu.

The  movements  that  permit  the  flexibility
of  the  spinal  column  are  the  most  vital  of
all  exercises,  by  reason  of  the  freedom  they
allow  of  nervous  influence  in  the  spinal
nerves  that  perforate  the  vertebrae  to  give
life  to  the  bodily  organs.  The  forward
flexion  of  the  trunk  is  accompanied  by  a
forward  and  downard  flexion  of  the  head.
The  lateral  flexion  of  the  trunk  is  accom-
panied by  a  lateral  flexion  of  the  head  in
harmony  with  that  of  the  trunk.  The  back-
ward bending  of  the  trunk  is  accompanied
with  a  backward  flexion  of  the  head.
Finally,  the  rotation  of  the  trunk  is  accom-
panied by  a  rotation  of  the  head.  Not  onlv
is  nervous  energy  enhanced  by  such  move-
ments, but  the  circulation  of  the  blood  is
more  vigorous,  and  the  whole  system  is
more  highly  energized  than  by  the  most
elaborate  muscular  exercises  that  ignore
spinal  movements.


FRITZ,  WALLACE  W.,  M.  D.,  D.  D.  S.,
N.  D.  Dean  of  the  American  College
of  Neuropathy,  Philadelphia,  Pa.  For-
mer Dean  of  the  Philadelphia  Dental
College.  Proprietor  and  Dean  of  the
Philadelphia  College  of  Anatomy  and
Surgery.  President,  National  Asso-
ciation  of  Drugless Physicians.

Dr.  Fritz  is  one  of  the  all  too  few
medical  practitioners  who  recognize  the
Truths  of  Drugless  Healing.  Dr.  Fritz
has  accomplished  great  things  for  the  ad-
vancement of  Drugless  Healing  in  Penn-
sylvania and  New  Jersey.  He  has  always
come  to  the  front  with  funds  and  personal
effort  when  required.  Dr.  Fritz's  testi-
mony was  a  factor  in  winning  the  Brinkler
case.  Dr.  Fritz  severed  his  connections
with the medical colleges and societies.


Dr. Wallace W. Fritz

and  allied  himself  on  the  side  of  Drugless
Healing  at  a  critical  moment.  He  as-
sumed the  leadership  of  the  Neuropaths
and  rescued  their  college  at  a  time  when
it  seemed  doomed  to  fail  for  lack  of  an
organizer  and  capable  executive  head.


8(JG


Mplntbi'licdl  Indc.i


hunning
Edwards


W. A., 2519 West B'way,
Louisvilk'. Ky. (NT.D.)

DUNNINO.  JOHN  J.,  791  Main
St..  Wcstbrook,  Me. (D.O.)

DT7NNINGTOX.  KART.  V..  Ste-
phen Oirard  Bldgr.,  Phila-
delpliia.  Pa.  (D.O.)
Marpraret  B.,  Real  Estate
Bids:..  Philadelphia,  Pa.
R. H.. Real Estate Bldg-.,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
Robt.  H..  Jr..  218  S.  50th  St..

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
NVesley P.. Stephen Girard
Bide:.. Philadelphia. Pa.

DUNSMOOR.  H.  V..  176  Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

DUPLESSIS, J. T.. 525 S.
Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago.
HI. (N.D.)

DUPRE,  LOUISE,  Box  111,
Orange. Tex. (X.U.)

DURANT.  GRACE.  Zanesville.
O. (N.D.)

DI'RBIX.  B.  E..  201  i  W.  Cen-
ter. Warsaw, Ind. (D.C.)

DT^RKEE.  H.  V.,  4001  Parish.
Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)


Mapletun.


, 96
Buffalo,


DURHAM, A. 1).. Fir. St Natl.

Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.O.)
DURNAN, W. I... 2 Bloor St.

E. Toronto. Ont. (D.O.)
DURRETT. CARRIE E.. 821

PJ. 12th St., Westcllffe,

Colo. (D.O.)
DURSTON, C. .J.

la. (D.C.)
Dl'TCHER, E. M.

Chenango St.,

N. Y. (D.C.)
DUTRO. R(JV. Chandlersville,

O. (Mag.)
DUVAL. ERNEST  R.. 471% E.

King St., Hamilton, (5nt.,

Canada. (D.C.)
DUVALL, Dr. O. N., Balti-
more. Md. (M.D.)
DU VALLE, BEATRICE. 601

State Life Bldg., Indian-
apolis.  Ind. (D.C.)
DUX. H.. 112 E. 41st  St., New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)
DUX,  H., Swan &  Cantee  Sts.,

Jacksonville, Fla. (N.D.)
DWELLS. IDA, 2244 Gaylord

St., Denver, Colo. (D.C.)


DYE, A. AUGUST, New York
American Bldg., New
York City. N. Y. (D.C.)
Julia H.. 710 Park Ave.,
Weehawken. N. J. (D.C.)
W. Walter. 5243 Chestnut
St.. Philadelphia, Pa.
W. Walter. 734 Morgan
Ave.. Palmyra, N. J.

DYE. CHAS. T.. 104 S.

Michigan Ave.. Chicago,
HI. (D.C.)

DYER.  BETTIE  ROSS,  Cor.
Chuioh  and  Lafayette
Sts.,  Jackson,  Tenn. (D.O.)

DYER, NANNIE, 424 6th
Ave., New York, N. Y.
(Ma.)

DYKES,  A.  L.,  20  4th  St.,  Bris-
tol, Tenn. (D.O.)
L. M., 2161/4 Main St.. John-
son City, Tenn. (D.O.)

DYMEXT. Dr. PHILLIP.
Savannah, Ga. (M.D.)

DYMOND,  E.  C,  1422  Locu.st
St.,  Des  Moines,  la. (D.O.)

DYSART,  R.  S..  Equitable
Bldg..  Des  Moines,  la.


EACHESTOX. H., Chickasha.

Okla. (D.C.)
EAGAX. J. H.. 81 E. Madison

St., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
EAGLE, R. O., 522 Genessee

St., (Dep't 12) Saginaw,

Mich. (D.O.)
EALES, I. J., 5681 S. Boule-
vard, Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
EAMES, MELVILLE J.. 4  7.^9

Broadway, Chicago. 111.

EARHART. EMOGENE M.,

702 Peach St., Erie, Pa.

EARL. J. C. 201 Pontages

Theatre. Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
J. Cornelius, Pasadena,

Cal. (D.C.)
EARLE. EDXA, 1520  South

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

HI. (Ma.)
Robert Lee, 2283 105th St.,

Cleveland, O. (Ch.)
EASTON, C. W., 19 Lorain

Blk.. Lorain. O. (D.C.)
Miss Mav Blanche, 436 W.

30th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

Melroy W., Lay Blk., Oil

City. Pa. (D.O.)
EASTW^OOD,  H.  W.,  State  and

Hohman Sts., Hammond,

Ind. (D.C.)
EATAN,  A.  C, 1017 Hall  St.,

Hood  Rivei-.  Ore. (N.D.)
EATON, A. C, Box 251, Stay-
ton, Ore. (N.D.)
EATON, C. W., Lorain. O.

Chas.  R..  3850
Oakland.
R..  4824
Oakland,
Walker,


Telegraph
Cal. (D.C.)

Telegraph
Cal.  (D.C.)
Stoneleigh


Ave.
Chas.

Ave.
Mary

Court.

EAVES. J.

EHELING. MRS. F.. 67 Sutton

St.. Brooklyn, N. Y.  (Ma.)


Washington, D. C.
E.. Cass, Texas.


EBELL, ANNA, 1541 West

Adams St., Chicago, 111.

EBERHARDT, G. A., 2840 S.

41st Ave., Chicago, HI.

Gustave  A., 3952 W. 22d  St.,

Chicago, 111. (DC.)
Gustave A., 2840 S. Karlov

Ave.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Wm. C, 1664 Wisconsin St.,

Racine. %Vis. (D.C.)
EBERHARDT, NOBLE M.. 25

E. Washington St.,

Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
EBERHART,  EMMA  M.,  New-
ton. Kans. (D.C.)
EBLE,  H.  A., 738  Broad  St.,

Newark.  X.  J. (D.C.)
ECHARD. HARRY. 304 Mc-

Clymonds Blk.. Massillon,

O. (N.D.)
ECHOLS,  R.  McRAE,  New  Do-
minion Xatl. Bank Bldg.,

Bristol, Va. (D.O.)
ECKARD. HARRY L.. 303-4

McClymonds Bldg., Mas-
sillon, O. (D.C.)
ECKERMAN. GEO., Prince

Rupert, Ore. (D.C.)
ECKERT, W. H., Century

Bldg.. St. Louis, Mo.

ECKLES. J. E.. 1601 Ruth  St..

Glendale, Cal. (D. C.)
ECKLEY. WILLIAM H., Am.

Natl.  Bank Hldg..  St. Paul.

Minn. (D.O.)
ECKLUXD. A, Charlevoix,

Mich. (D.C.)
ECKSTROM. E. A.. Suite 32.

Astor Couit Bldg.. Xow

York. X. V. (X.D.)
EDDOX. ELIZABETH M.,

Story Bldg.. Los Angeles.

Cal. (D. O.)
EDDY, C. E., 188 Water St..

Santa Cruz. Cal. (D.C.)
Chas. E.. 137-38 Edgerly

Bldg., Fresno, Cal. (D.C.)
Guy G.. 4404 Sheridan Rd..

Chicago. 111. (D.O.)


G. R.. 1022 Spruce St.,  Phil-
adelphia.'Pa. (D.C.)
John  Theodore,  14  The  Cres-
cen. Montclair, N. J.

EDEL, R. E., Boston,  Mass.

EDELBACH,  MRS.  ROSA.  119
Jefferson  St.,  Waupaca,
Wis. (D.C.)

EDELBERG,  10,740  Superior
Ave., Cleveland, O. (Ma.)

EDGAR.  T.  H.,  Sabetha,  Kan.

EDMISTON.  J.  HARPER.  122
S.  Ashland  Blvd..  Chicago.
III. (D.O.)

EDMUND  &  EDMUXD.  Ames,
la. (D.C.)

EDMUXDSOX, J., 1818 Wash-
ington Blvd.. Chicago,
HI. (X.D.)

EDMOXDSOX,  MRS.  ETHEL.
Hotel  Adair.  Ellis  St..  San
Francisco. Cal. (N.D.)

EDMUXDSOX.  F.  P..  Box  271,
Kiowa. Kans. (D.C.)

EDSALL,  E.,  454  Central  Ave..
Jersey Citv, X. J. (D.C.)

EDWARD, H. A., Lafayette,
Ind. (D.C.)
I^. R., 410 Bumiller Bldg.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

EDWARDES,  ARTHUR  W.,
1147  Lake  St..  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal. (N.D.)

EDWARDS. ALFRED, Cen-
tury  Bldg.. St. Louis, Mo.
Dr., care Chicago Dental
Parlor. Peoria. 111. (D.C.)
Eliza, 601-3 Traction Bldg.,

Cincinnati, O. (D.O.)
E. B., 309 S. Jefferson Ave.,

Peoria, 111. (D.C.)
Mr.s. E. C, 715 E. 8th St..
Oklahoma City, Okla.
E. v., Knoxville, Tenn.

Frank. Wagoner, Okla.


NatiirojHtthic  Hiogrdphicdl  Notes


807


FROUDE,  CHAS.  C,  B.  Sc,  D.  C,  N.  D.

Author  of  "Simplified  and  Practical
Dietetics,"  Y.  M.  C.  A.  Bldg.,  Kingston,
N.  Y.

Dr.  Chas.  C.  Froude  is  a  graduate  of  a
western  college;  received  his  D.  C.  degree
from  the  Universal  Chiropractic  College,
N.  D.  degree  from  the
American  School  of  Natu-
ropathy, and  has  taken
special  work  in  other
schools.  Dr.  Froude  is
rapidly  coming  into  promi-
nence as  a  food  specialist.
His  work.  "Simplified  and
Practical  Dietetics,"  al-
ready in  its  third  edition
has  had  an  enormous
sale  in  this  as  well  as  foreign  countries.
Doctors,  societies,  and  associations
are  ordering  as  many  as  500  at  a  time
for  distribution,  because  it  handles  the
subject  of  diet  in  a  practical  manner;  is  free
from  technical  terms;  and  presents  to  the
lay  and  professional  reader  of  the  simplici-
ty of  food  coml)ination.  Menus  are  out-
lined and  foods  arc  classified.  Leading
food  authorities  have  been  loud  in  their
praise  of  this  work,  regarding  it  as  one  of
the  very  best  published.  Dr.  Froude  is  a
practical  man;  is  enthusiastic  in  his  work;
has  a  charming  personality,  and  inspires
confidence  at  once  in  those  who  meet  him.
He  is  a  member  of  tlie  firm  of  Froude  &
Mac  Kinnon.

GERSCHANEK,  SINAI,  A.  B.,  A.  M.,  B.C.

S.  Gerschanek,  A.  M.,  is  a  graduate  of  the
College  of  the  City  of  New  York  with  the
degree  of  A.  B.;  a  gradu-
ate of  Columbia  University
with  the  degree  of  A.  M.;
in  addition,  lie  attended  for
one  year  the  New  York
Law  School;  he  was  the
founder  and  principal  of
Harlem  Preparatory
School  from  1902  to  1912.
Since  1912  he  has  been  a
member  of  the  stafT  of  the
New  York  Public  Library,
42nd  Street  and  5th  Avenue.  His  studies
and  career  have  given  him  a  marked
reputation  in  New  York  City  in  both  the
professional  and  administrative  fields.  His
personal  labors  embrace  a  number  of  fields
as  indicated  in  the  following:  He  has  been
a  teacher  of  modern  and  classic  languages;
of  psychology,  mathematics;  and  methods
of  teaching.  For  a  number  of  years  he  has
been  a  director  of  the  Political  Educational
League;  and  associations  of  clubs  of  young
men  to  study  the  theory  and  practice  of
Municipal  Government.  For  a  period  of
time  he  was  chief  editor  and  business  ad-
visor of  the  Highland  Film  Corporation  of
Cincinnati.  Ohio;  for  a  number  of  years  he
lias  been associated with Dr. .\ntoii Dcin-


inger  of  the  New  York  School  of  Chiro-
practic as  his  general  secretary  and  regis-
trar and  as  professor  of  Physiology,  Biolo-
gy, and  Physiological  Psychology.  For
years  he  has  guided  thousands  of  people
through  the  Art  Collection  of  the
Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art;  and  the  col-
lection of  the  Museum  of  Natural  History.
In  the  early  part  of  the  year  1916  he  was
elected  as  the  Executive  Secretary  of  the
National  Chiropractic  League.  In  connec-
tion with  the  said  League  he  has  been  em-
powered to  carry  out  all  its  plans  and
devise  means  and  methods  for  the  expan-
sion of  Chiropractic  and  the  spread  of  the
Gospel  of  Chiropractic  among  the  laity.
He  is  a  member  of  many  social  and  histo-
rical societies  of  the  City  of  New  York.

GRAMBOW,  DR.  EMIL

Dr. Emil Grambow was born in Schwe-
rin,_  Mecklenburg, Germany, in 1878. He
exhibited symptoms  of  consumption  at  the
age  of  17,  but  by  strenuous
devotion to physical cul-
ture, he subdued the ail-
ment. This led him to
study the philosophy of
health and disease, and he
determined to devote his
life  to  the  physical  upbuild-
ing of the human species.
The first radical step in
this worthy cause was his
emigrating to America in
1893. He settled in Hempstead, New
York, where he first of all founded the
Turnverein of  the Eastern Department, as
a measure of bodily upbuilding. He next
founded the Physical Culture Association
for the investigation of body and mind-
building, and the prevention and cure of
disease  by  natural  methods  of  life  and  drug-
less healing. His enthusiasm for phvsical
culture  led  him  further  to  become  a  director
of St. George's Athletic Club, Hempstead.
He  also  became  a  member  of  the  Fire  De-
partment of Hempstead and Freeport.
Having  arrived  at  the  belief  that  the  treat-
ment  of  disease with poisonous drugs  was
a  survival  of  the  Dark  Ages,  and  that  it  is
only by intelligent co-operation with the
natural constructive healing forces on the
part  of  both  physician  and  "patient  that  the
cure  of  disease  is  really  effected,  he  deter-
mined  to become a Naturopath, and took
a  special  two  years'  course  in  the  American
School of Naturopathv. also two years'
practical work  in the Chiropractic College
of  the  Empire  State  Society,  and  the  Palmer
-Gregorv soecial course. He is a gradu-
ate of  the  Eclectic  and  Old  Physio-Medical
College  of  New  York  in Osteopathy.  He  is
an instructor in the .-Vmerican School of
Naturopath}' on Physical Culture, Medical
and Corrective Gymnastics. He is also a
Charter member of  the American Naturo-
patliic  Association,  of  the  New  York  State


868


Alphabetical  Index


Ed  will
Emmon.s


E. O., 198 Martin Ave., San

Jose. Cal. (D.O.)
H. A.. La Fayette, Ind.

H W., 1237 Linden Ave.,

Long Beach. Cal. (D.C.)
James, Century Bldg-.. St.

Louis, Mo. (D.O.)
J. C, Suite 445, Hayes
Block, Brainerd, Minn.
James D., Suite 408

Chemical Bldg-., St. Louis,
Mo. (D.)
John, 1109 Sherman Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Jos.  M.,  Climax  Springs,  Mo.

L.  S.,  420  Main  St.,  Hartford,

Conn. (N.D.)
L.  W.,  24th  and  Farnam  Sts.,

Omaha. Nebr. (D.C.)
N. E.,  Box  102,  Sanford,  Cal.

Phebe A., Wagoner, Okla.

^Vm. B., 7th and Washing-
ton  Sts., Concordia, Kans.
EDWIN,  E.  S.,  1432 West

Jackson St., Chicago, 111.
EFFORD, Wm. M., 11215
Longwood Drive, M. Pk.,
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
EGAN, F. W.. Masonic Bldg.,
Fremont, O. (D.C.)
H. M.. 308  Nosby  Bldg., To-
ledo. O. (D.C.)
T. W., 1121 Front St.. Fre-
mont,  O. (N.D.)
Joseph M., 52 Front St.,

Munroe, Mich. (D.C.)
Junta, Liberty, Ind. (D.C.)
Keran F., 312 Predden Blk..  I
Lansing. Mich. (D.C.)  i

EGBERT, ELLIS, 18 Seneca

St., Alliance, O. (D.C.)  !

EGGARS,  HARRIET  &  MARIP:,
1155  South  Ave.,  Wilkins-
burg. Pa. (D.C.)  |

EGGERS, CARL, Hammond,

La. (D.C.)
EGLESTON,  J.  L.,  Wadena,

Minn. (Opt.)
EGLINTON. LAURA B., 100
N. C St., Arkansas City,
Kans. (D.C.)  !

EHLER, PROF. J. C, Belton,

Tex. (S.T.)
EHLERT.  A.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.  ,
(N.D.)  !

EHRET, A.. 413 S. Raymond
Ave.,  Alhambra,  Cal. (N.D.)
EICHHORN, EDWARD L.,

Salisbury, Mo. (D.O.)
EIDE, A. T., 4017 Milv^^aukee

Ave.. Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
EIKLER. LILLIE, 221 W.
Euclid Ave.; King Fisher,
Okla. (D.C.)
EILER,  ISABEL  G., 5 S. Cen-
tre St., Cumberland, Md.
EILERSFICKEN, F. B.. 1550
3d St., San Diego, Cal.
EIMERT. FREDERICK J.,
Miles Bldg., Miles City,
Mont. (D.O.)
EISENBACHER, PAUL, Wes-
ley, la. (D.C.)
Paul, West Brooklyn, 111.
EISENMAN, L. E.. 314 Lyric
Bldg., Cincinnati,  O.  (D.C.)
EISIMINGER, J. W.. 1907
Avenue  I,  Galveston,  Tex.
I.ienia,  Savannah,  Mo. (D.O.)


EITMAN & KIRKPATRICK.

Lancaster,  Cal. (D.C.)
EKDALL, A. B., Cheyenne,

Wyo. (D.C.)
EKLUND, ALICE C, Lyon &

Healy Bldg., Chicago, 111.

ELBE, HAROLD A., 1419

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)
ELDER, ADRIAN, Wahoo.

Nebr. (D.O.)
ELDER, MARY E., Millers-
burg, O. (N.D.)
ELDON, JAS. B., 1741 N. 13th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

ELDREDGE, GEO. W., 64

Gluck Bldg.. Niagara

Falls. N. Y. (D.C.)
ELDRIDGE & MOORE, 365

Shalley  Ave.,  New  Haven,

Conn. (D.C.)
ELDRIDGE, FRED., 63 Main

St., Brockton, Mass.

(Ph.C.)
Rov Kerr, Land Title Blk..

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
Rov Kerr, 5858 Spruce St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Roy Kerr, 4928 Woodland

Ave., W^est Philadelphia.

Pa. (D.O.)
W. B., 365 Whelley Ave.,

New  Haven,  Conn. (D.C.)
W. B., 29 N. Colony St.,

Meriden, Conn. (D.C.)
W. B.. 212 S. Union St.,

Clean, N. Y. (D.C.)
ELFRINK,  BLANCHE  MAYES,

27  E.  Monroe  St.,  Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
ELFRINK, WALTER E., 27

E. Monroe St., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
ELGARTEN, M., 406 Kearny

St., San Francisco, Cal.

M., 2313  Alameda  Ave.,  Ala-
meda, Cal. (N.D.)
ELIZABETH, MADAME,

1329 Hancock St.,

Brooklvn, N. Y. (Ma.)
ELKINS, GEORGE S., Still-
well Bldg., Pleasant Hill,

Mo. (D.O.)
Harry D., Rooms 305-7

Johnson Bldg., Muncie,

Ind. (DC.)
ELLIOTT. DAVID  H., Spreck-

els Bldg., San  Diego, Cal.

G. G., 1685 Dundas St. W.,

Toronto. Ont.. Can. (D.O.)
ELLIOT, FRANK W., 828

Brady St., Davenport, la.

G.  E..  Elk  City,  Okla. (D.C.)
J.  A.,  32  North  State  St.,

Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
J.  T., 209  E. 42nd  St.,  New

York,  N. Y. (P.)
ELLIOTT, J. W., Cordele, Ga.

ELLIS, EDWARD N., 114 V.

St. N. E., Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
Howard  I., 452 Bowen  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


ELLIS. EGBERT, Main &  Se-
neca Sts.,  Alliance,  O.  (D.C.)
E.  Adelyn,  561  Central  Ave.,
St.  Petersburg,  Fla. (D.O.)
H. B., 11 S. Warren St.,

Trenton, N. J. (D.C.)
Howard G., 6240 Cottage
Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.
Thos. W., 5236 Vine, Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Irene Harwood, 112 Lan-
caster  Terrace, Brookline,
Mass. (D.O.)
Leo E., 137 Joralemon St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
S. A. 687 Boylston St., Bos-
ton, Mass. (D.O.)
Theodore, Bank Block,
Keene, N. H. (D.O.)
ELLISON, Eugene E., Main

St., Fostoria, O. (D.C.)
ELLISON, EUGENE, 150
Perry St., Fostoria, O.
ELLWOOD, MARY  A., 346 W.
47th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
ELLYSON, S. M., Vinton, la.

ELLYSON, S. M., Issenbush

Blk.,  Redfleld, S.  D. (D.C.)
ELMER,  DR.  FRANK  A.,  55  S.
Pearl  St.,  Albany,  N.  Y.
(Opt.)
ELMORE,  NANNIE,  Roth  Blk.,

Raton, N.  Mex. (D.O.)
ELRIGHT, J. E., 216 Hogan
St., Jacksonville, Fla.
ELSASSER,  MRS.  M., 5003

7th Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Ma.)
ELSMAN, E., R. No. 1, Elvin,
Mo. (D.C.)
E. H., Spencer, la. (D.C.)
ELTON,  E.  J..  Matthews  Bldg.,

Milwaukee, Wis. (D.O.)
BLWOOD, E. W., 1150 Pros-
pect Ave., Cleveland, O.
Mary  A.. 346  W. 47th  Place,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
ELY, A. R., Waynesboro, Va.
A. R., 308 Safety Bldg.,

Rock Island, 111. (DC.)
Alfred Wm., 1002 Atlantic
Ave., Atlantic City, N. J.,
ELY,  BLONDINE  ^V.,  Waynes-
boro, Va. (D.C.)
EMBREE, J. S., Fremont,

Nebr. (D.C.)
EMERSON, D. A., 17 E. King
St., York, Pa. (D.C.)
D. A., 316 George  St.,  York.

Pa. (D.C.)
Sarah  O.. The  Beacon,  Man-
chester, N. H. (D.O.)
EMERY, MRS. FLORA,  Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Mary. 53 Adams  St.. Winter
Hill Sta.. Boston. Mass.
R.  D..  Baker-Detwiler  Bldg..

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
Willard D.. Kennard Bldg.,
Manchester, N. H. (D.O.)
EMMONDS & EMMONDS,
Washington Court House,
O. (D.C.)
EMMONS, E. J., Westville,
Okla. (D.C.)
G. Clyde, Burr Oak, Mich.

(DC.)
G. E., Washington Court
House,  O. (D.C.)


Ndiiiropdiliic  Biographical  Notes


869


Society  of  Naturopaths,  the  Empire  State
Society  of  Chiropractics,  and  the  Inter-
national Alliance  of  Physicians  and  Sur-
geons. Dr.  Grambow  is  a  physician  of
forceful  practice,  and  has  been  eminently
successful  in  the  prevention  and  cure  of
disease.  He  has  never  had  any  trouble
with  the  allopaths,  for  they  recognize  the
great  merit  of  his  work,  and  are  conscious
of  the  fact  that  he  is  proving  his  knowledge
by  his  splendid  results  in  healing  the  sick.
As  a  physical  culture  expert,  he  gives  many
public  lectures  and  demonstrates  on  the
platform  his  able  views  on  natural  thera-
peutics.

GREENEWALD,  PROF.  V.,  M.  T.

Professor  \'.  Grcenewald,  of  Jacksonville,
Fla.,  adopted  the  profession  of  Natural
Healing  as  the  result  of  being  himself
cured  of  nervous  prostra-
tion, the  result  of  severe
business  troubles — by  that
method.  Being  unable  to
obtain  a  cure  under  the
ministrations  of  several
allopaths  employed  for
that  purpose,  he,  after  a
trial  of  five  years  under
their  care,  resolved  to
visit  various  sanitariums
to  learn  the  methods  of  treatment  therein
employed  while  endeavoring  to  obtain  for
himself  a  lasting  cure.  Learning  the
rationale  of  the  Kneipp  hydropathic  treat-
ments, he  afterwards  studied  physical  and
mental  health  culture  as  a  student  of  The
American  School  of  Mechano-Therapy  and
other  schools  of  Natural  Healing  of  which
he  is  a  graduate.  He  is  conducting  a
sanitarium  of  drugless  healing  which  he
has  established  at  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  and  is
giving  lessons  in  Physical  and  Mental
Health  Culture  to  students  of  the  Nature
Cure  as  a  special department.

GRESSMAN,  HERMAN,  N.  D.,  Natu-
ropathic Recreation  Home,  20  So.  Ken-
tucky Avenue,  Atlantic  City,  N,  J.

Emigrated  June  1905,  practised  Naturo-
pathy, chiefly  Nature  Cure,  Hydrotherapy,
Heliotherapy,  Diet.  Mecha-
no-Therapy, Massage,  Elec-
tropathy, Swedish  Move-
ments, Magnetotherapy,
Physical  Culture,  Natural
Living;  when  necessary.
Osteopathy,  Chiropractic.
Active  10  years,  office  prac-
tice. His  record  shows  up
to  date  1667  cases  cured,  19
improved,  18  discontinued,
1  died,  1  not  yet  decided.
These  cases  include  all  kinds  of  diseases  and
ailments,  also  the  so-called  incurable  ones
and  150  confinements.  This  Naturopathic
Recreation  Home  at  Atlantic  City,  N.  j..
is  the  Mecca  of  the  sick  from  all  parts  of
the  United  States,


HARLEY, GEORGE E., A.  M., M.  D.,
D.  O.,  D.  C,  N.  D.

liorn  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  1870.  J'.ducated  in
Albany  and  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  Pioneer
American  Naturopath,  19(X).
Naturopath  Research  Camp
on  the  banks  of  the  Pictur-
esque Ballston  Lake,  near
Saratoga,  experimenting
with  Earth,  Sun-light,  Air,
Food,  etc.,  in  the  natural
open  air  with  tents  for
housing  during  very  bad
weather.  All  patients  at-
tending are  alive  and
healthy.  Secretary  for  three
years  of  the  Physical  Culture  Association
of  America.  Favorite  exercises;  Wrestling
and  Swimming,  expert  at  both.  Secretary
of  New  Jersey  College  of  Chiropractic.  Se-
cretary Special  Post-graduate  Class  1916-
17,  Philadelphia  College  of  Osteopathy.
Member  Versalian  Anatomical  Society  at
The  Philadelphia  College  of  Osteopathy.
Office  in  Hoboken  for  past  six  years,  now
at  189  Sherman  Avenue,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.

HOEGEN,  JOSEPH  A.,  N.  D.,  334  Alex-
ander Ave.,  New  York.
Dr.  Joseph  A.  Hoegen  was  born  in  Ger-
many in  1871.  He  has  been  a  practitioner  in
Massachusetts,  Connecticut,
New  Jersey  and  New  York,
for  over  23  years.  He  has
been  assistant  in  the  Hy-
dropathic Department  of
the  Post  Graduate  Hospi-
tal, New  York  City,  for
three  years;  is  at  present
professor  in  Masso-  and
Hydrotherapy  in  the  Vetus
Academia,  (O.  P.  M.  Col-
lege) and  Eclectic  Osteo-
pathic Institute,  was  for  two  years  instruc-
tor in  anatomy  and  physiology  in  the  "Em-
pire School  of  Chiropractic,"  Editor  of  the
Hydrotherapy  Department  of  "Herald  of
Health,"  and  also  writes  for  many  other
journals.  Delivered  many  lectures,  espe-
cially in  the  New  England  states,  where  he
is  connected  with  several  Naturopathic  so-
cieties. Graduate  of  the  Eclectic  Osteo-
pathic Institute,  Old  Physio-Medico  Col-
lege, the  American  School  of  Naturopathy,
the  Palmer-Gregory  Chiropractic  College,
the  Empire  School  of  Chiropractic,  and  the
American  College  of  Mechano-Therapy.
Meml^er  of  the  International  Alliance  of
Physicians  and  Surgeons.  Secretary  and
Treasurer  of  the  National  Association  of
Osteopathic  Practitioners,  honorary  mem-
ber of  the  American  Naturopathic  Associa-
tion, member  of  New  Jersey  and  Connecti-
cut  Naturopathic  Associations.

IRVING,  JAMES  MONTGOMERY,  P.  T.

Dr.  James  Montgomery  Irving  traces
his  ancestors  back  to  the  old  Montgomery
and  Irving  families  of  early  American  hjs-


870


A  Iphabetical  Index


Emmons
Falk


EMMONS,  GEORGE  C,  Wasli-

iriRton C. H  . O. (D.C.)
ENEBOE. J. P., Van Eps

Block, Sioux Falls, S. D.

Lena,  Canton,  S.  D. (D.O.)
ENESTVEDT, S., 2321 Mil-
waukee Ave., Clucago,  111.

Sophia, 2337 Milwaukee

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
ENGBRECHT, .JOHN J.,

Freeman, Hutcliinson

County. S. IX (N.n.)
ENGEIvl^RETSOX. MRS.

AGNES. 6423  S.  Mackinaw

St., Cliicago, 111. (Ma.)
ENGELDRUM, H. C, 39 S.

State St., Chicag-o, 111.

ENGLAND, ARCHIE, Salida,

Colo. (D.C.)
ENGLE, EDWARD, 403 Ham-

buig-er  Bldg-.,  Los  Ang-eles,

Cal. (D.C.)
Isaiah.  F..  Canton,  O. (Magr.)
ENGLEHART, FRANK A.,

127  V. W. Main St., Okla-
homa City, Okla. (DO.)
Georg-e, Chicag-o, O. (N.D.)
Wm. F., Central Nat. Bank

Bldg-., St. Loui.s, Mo.

ENGLERT, A. M., 71 Broad

St..  Red  Bank,  N.  J. (D.C.)
ENGLISH, C.  FORREST,

Speed, Mo. (S.T.)
T. H., 11 Perry St., "Wood-
stock, Can. (D.C.)
Merton A., Colorado Bldg-.,

Washington, D. C. (D.O.)
Ross, 508 Summerfleld Ave.,

Asbury  Park,  N.  J., (D.O.)
ENGLISH, JESS S., 175 N.

Main St.. Bowling- Green,

O. (D.M.T.)
T.,eonard H., Woodward

Bldg., Washington, D.  C.

Margaret  !>.,  I.,eadpr  News

Bldg., Cleveland, O. (Ch.)
ENGSTROM, BEDA E., St.

.Joseph. Mich. (D.C.)
ENNIS. EMERY. Ferguson

Bldg-.. Springfield, 111.

ENOS. J. W., Jeserville, 111.

ENSCH. LEON, New Rock-
ford, N. D. (D.C.)
ENSIGN, MRS. A. G., How-

arden,  la. (D.C.)
EPERLY. PEARL, Montrose,

Colo. (D.C.)
EPPLEY, ADAM, Amelia, O.

(Ch)
Clark  S., 55 Louis  Block,

Dayton,  O. (Ch.)
ERDALL, A. B.. Key City

Hotel, Cheyenne, Wyo.


ERTCKSON, EMMA. 316% W.
2d St.. Los Angeles, Cal.
O., Sioux Falls, S. Dak.

P. E.. 234 Constitution
Bldg., Salt Lake City,
Utah (D.C.)

ERICSON, ERICA, 183 Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
John, 1603 Clark Ave., Spo-
kane, Wash. (D.C.)

ERICSON, JOHN A., Youngs-
town, O. (D.)
Miss  M., 434 E. 149th St..
New  York.  N. Y. (Ma.)

ERLING, DR. ARNOLD E.,
Milwaukee, Wis. (M.D.)

ERVIN,  CHARLES  H.,  Grant
Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

ERVVIN.  R.  J.,  Northern
Crown  Bk.  Bldg.,  Van-
couver, B.  C,  Canada.

ESCHER.  EMMA  S..  Victor,
la. (D.C.)

ESKIN, S. B., 275 Kingston
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Opt.)

ESPELAND, OLE N., 2620 W.
North Ave., Chicago, III.

ESPINGA, 1124 Ave. J, Flat-
bush, Brooklyn, N. Y.

ESPLIN. 4200 Grand Blvd.,
Chicago, III. (N.D.)

ESSER, ALBERT, 6050

Woodlawn Ave., Chicago.
Til. (D.O.)

ESSER,  ALBERT  C.  H.,  5050
Woodlawn  Ave.,  Chicago,
111. (D.O.)

ESTES, GEO R., Kirksville,
Mo. (D.O.)
J.  C, 2016 E. 15th St., Oak-
land, Cal. (D.C.)

ETESON.  ARTHUR  D.,  49
Aughton  Rd.,  Berkdale,
Southport. Eng. (D.C.)

ETTINGER, Cl>TLER, East
Broad St., R. F. D. No. 1,
Elvria, O. (D.M.T.)

EUBERT,  FRED,  1221  Broad-
way, Denver, Colo. (D.C.)

EUSTACE,  H.  E.,  Beloit,  Kans.

EA^'ANS,  A.,  New  Fasum  Bldg.,
Miami, Fla. (D.O.)
A. R., 160  N. 4th St.,  .

Newark, O. (D.M.T.)
T.  Thomas,  1347  L  St.  N.  W.
Washington, D. C.
(D.M.T.)

EVANS  &  EVANS,  227  N.
Howard  St.,  Union  City,
Ind. (D.C.)

EVANS, 333 S. Dearborn St.,
Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
A. L., New Tatum Bldg.,
Miama,  Fla. (D.O.)


Cecelia  Hackney,  209

Louise-Anna  Ave.,  Monroe,
La. (D.O.)

David Lee, Adair, la. (D.O.)

Geo.,  20  Dodson  Bldg.,  25
Hastings  St.  E..  Van-
couver,  B. C. (D.C.)

George,  309  Blower  Blk.,
Vancouver,  B.  C,  Canada.

First Nafl Bank
Chickasha, Okla.


G.  W.,
Bldg.,

.Jennie  L.,
Miami


,  New  Tatum  Bldg.,
Fla. (D.O.)
Jno., 49 S. Main  St.. Wilkes-

Barre, Pa. (D.C.)
John  G., 308% S. Broadway,

Rochester, Minn. (D.O.)
Margaret. 623  Madison  Ave..
Scranton, Pa. (D.O.)


Marshall

Marshall

Nellie M


Hackett. Ark..
O., Midland, Ark.


Amer. Bk. Bldg.,
Seattle,  Wash. (D.O.)
Mrs. Nora J., 7107 Idlewild
St.. Pittsburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
Oscar. Midland, Ark. (D.C.)
W. Samuel, 211 Wallace
Bldg., Pittsburgh. Pa.
Wm., 280 Smith St., Winni-
peg. Manitoba, Canada.
EVERITT, E. C, State Bank
Bldg., Little Rock, Ark.
EVERS,  HENRY, 840  E. 105th
St., Cleveland, O. (D.M.T.)
EVERSON,  GEO.  PRICE,  P.  O.
Box 822, Cincinnati. O.
BVERTZ, OSCAR, N.  E. Coi-.
Ashland Ave. and Madi-
son St.. Chicago, 111. (M.I
EVOY,  .JOBLING,  Asselin  Blk..
Camulet.  Mich. (D.C.)
J. U.. Sault  Ste.  Marie. Can.
EWALD. EMILIE.  2300  Prairie

Ave.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
BWIN, C. H., 32 W. Market

St..  Xenia,  O. (D.M.T.)
EWING.  A.  H..  205  Scott  Bldg..
Salt I>ake City, Utah.
A.  W.,  Latrobe,  Pa.  (D.C.)
Ernest, 1071/2 E. Woodson
St., El Reno. Okla. (D.O.)
Mary Matthews. Morgan
Blk.. Clinton, Ind. (D.O.)
EWING, J. H., Forest,  O.

(D.M.T.)
EYNN, JOHN, 308 Market St.,
Steubenville, O. (D.C.)
John.  Market  Square,  Steub-
enville, O.  (N.D.)
EYNON, JOHN, Market Sq..
Springfield, O. (D.C.)
John,  Steubenville,  O. (D.C.)


I'^ABER. li. 10., Cui-. Chui-ch

and Main Sts., Ashland,

O. (N.D.)
FACE, MRS. MARGARET E.,

506-7 Citizens' Sav. Bank

Bldg.. Pasadena, Cal.

FADDIS, C. E., 305 W. Main

Street. Alhambra,  Cal.

(.1X0.)


FAGER. EMMA C. Havana.

III. (D.O.)
FAILING, NELSON, 514

Fulton St., Brooklyn.

N. Y. (Opt.)
Wilson  R.. 2709  Jamaica

Ave.. Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)
FAIRBANKS. A. E.. Ratan,

N. M. (S.T.)


FAIRLEY.  J.  M..  Arrott  Bldg.,

Pitt.sburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
FAIRLIE. J. M.. 512 Todd St..

Wilkinsburg, Pittsburgh.

FATRWEATHER. W.  E.,

Deadwood. S. Dak. (N.D.)
FALK. MARY. 117 Congress

St., Rumford Falls, Me.


Xdluropdlluc  lUofirapliicdl  Notes


871


tory,  who  came  to  America  from  England
and  Scotland  when  the  greater  part  of  our
countr}^  was  a  strugglin^^  liiritish  Colony.
One  of  his  ancestors  fell  while  opposing
Wolf  at  Quebec,  and  another,  General
Richard  Montgomery,  "took  San  Francisco
from  the  Spaniards."  The  doctor  has  had
a  University  education  and  has  written
many  courses  of  Physical  Education  for
Colleges  and  other  places  of  learning  both
in  this  country  and  aljroad.  Some  years
ago,  in  a  spirit  of  adventure,  he  joined  one
of  the  famous  British  Guards  Regiments
of  London,  and  while  there,  went  through
a  strenuous  course  of  Applied  Physical
Education, at the Royal Military Gymna-


l^r. James Montgomery Irving

sium  at  Aldershot,  the  most  famous  school
of  its  kind  in  Great  Britain — if  not  in  the
world — and  won  the  first  (and  only)  prize
for  general  efficiency.  Later,  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  Duke  of  Cambridge.  Staf¥
Director  of  Physical  Education  to  the
forces.  Thousands  of  the  famous  Guards
Brigade  who  were  trained  to  physical  per-
fection by  the  doctor,  were  chosen  for
the  "Great  Eastern  Soudan  Campaign"  (in
which  the  late  Lord  Kitchener  took  part),
and  were  accompanied  by  their  director,
who  fought  by  their  side  from  the  Red  Sea,
through  the  Eastern  Soudan  Desert,  to
Africa  and,  at  the  conclusion  of  hostilities,
was  decorated  by  Queen  Victoria  with  a
silver  war  medal  and  clasp,  and  by  the
Khedive  of  Egypt  with  a  bronze  star  for
distinguished  service.  Doctor  Montgomery
Irving  was  formerly  Physical  Director-in-
Chief  to  the  Honorable  Artillery  Com-
pany. Hosts  College.  Free  Masons  Col-
lege, English Gymnastic Society, British


Railways  Institute,  Y.  M.  C.  A.  (Head-
quarters London,  England),  Imperial  Gym-
nasium for  training  Physical  Directors,  the
l)ublic  schools,  Men's  Guild  of  Physical
liducation.  West  Indies,  Irving  Institute
of  Physical  Education,  West  Indies,  Mili-
tary Staff  Officers,  Royal  Yacht  Club,
Hospital  for  Deformities,  etc.  At  present,
he  occupies  the  chair  of  Physiologic  Thera-
peutics in  the  College  of  Osteotherapeutics
and  Vetus  Academy  {O.l'.M.  College),
N.  J.,  and  is  Director  of  the  Montgomery
Irving  Institute  of  Physical  Education,
New  York,  and  of  our  troops  now  in  pre-
paration for  their  journey,  some  day,
abroad.  The  doctor  has  been  twice  around
the  world,  visited  most  of  the  larger  cities,
and  has  had  ample  opportunities  of  study-
ing the  health  question  of  the  natives  at
first  hand,  and  may  be  relied  upon  as  a
tireless  student  and  sincere  friend  of  the
Drugless Profession.


KANTHARIAKER,  MAHADEV  B.,  N.  D.

The  vast  empire  of  India  is  not  wholly  in-
habited by  a  race  of  metaphysicians  who
are  mere  transcendentalists,  who  sit  in
silent  contemplation,  or  actively  specu-
late on  the  problems  of  time  and  eternity,
the  why  and  the  wherefore  of  human  life,
or  who  pose  in  adoration  of  their  ten
thousand  gods.  No,  the  leaven  of  western
thought  is  working  mightily  in  the  vast
population  of  Hindostan,  being  injected
into  the  slumbering  masses  by  the  printing
press,  the  railway,  the  steamship  and  other
engines  of  progress,  so  that  the  most  pro-
gressive ideas,  the  ideas  that  are  the  ir-
resistible monitors  of  physical  and  mental
well-being,  are  moulding  the  thought  and
lives  of  the  races  of  that  realm  as  they
have  never  been  moulded  before.  Among
its  ranks  of  modern  medical  science,  the
young  and  enormously  vital  science  of
Naturopathy,  that  is.  Natural  Healing,  a
school  of  medicine  that  is  rapidly  sup-
planting the  superstitions  of  the  school  of
pills  and  poisons,  one  of  its  best  known
and  most  successful  pioneers  is  Dr.
Mahadev  B.  Kanthariaker,  a  doctor  of
Naturopathy  of  Ahmedabad.  He  is  a
professor  of  hydropathy-,  electro-therapy,
mechano-therapy,  massage.  photopathy,
medical  gymnastics,  and  of  physical  cul-
ture in  general.  The  fact  that  he  has
thrown  aside  the  allopathic  school  that
merely  treats  the  symptoms  of  disease,  and
has  enthusiastically  adopted  the  school  of
medical  practice  that  removes  the  cause,
that  pulls  disease  out  of  the  s}-stem  by  the
roots,  proves  Dr.  Kanthariaker  a  man  of
great  energy  of  mind  and  a  conscience  that
will  not  let  him  do  otherwise  than  pro-
vide the  best  means  of  curing  disease  for
his  patients.  He  makes  use  of  the  most
modern  ideas  and  appliances  to  combat
the ailments of  humanitv  and his work is


872


Alph(thetic(tl  Index


Falkner
Fete


Lansing,


FALKNER,  J..  Texarkana,
Ark. (D.O.)

FALLON.  M.  M..  1614  La  Salle
Ave.. Chicag-o, 111. (D.C.)

FALLOTT.  J. F. Barnes  Bldg-.,
Suite 309, Wichita, Kans.
J. F.. Sammes Bldg-.. Wi-
chita. Kans. (D.C.)

FANCHETT,  D.,  Angola,  Ind.

FANSHAWE. MRS. MARY,
903  Sterling  Place.  Brook-
lyn.  N. Y. (Cr.)

FARBER,  CHARLES  V.,  903
14th,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.O.)

FARBER.  PETER.  1727  Elm
St..  Cincinnati,  O. (D.M.T.)

FARGO, F. H.. Racine, Wis.

FARIS,  L.  E.,  Chemical  Bldg.,
St. Louis,  Mo. (D.O.)

FARKASCH, J., Tough
Renamon, Pa. (N.D.)

FARLEY,  R.  M.,  Gurney
Bldg.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.

FARMER, E. C,
Mich. (D.C.)
Frank C, 14 W. Washing-
ton St., Chicago, III.
G. C, 1815 Morgan PI.,
Hollywood, Cal. (D.O.)

FARNAND,  C.  J.,  Finley,  N.  D.
M. P., 52 Security Bldg.,
Grand  Forks,  N.  D. (D.C.)

FARNHAM, D. C, Elkan-
Gunst  Bldg., San Francis-
co, Cal. (D.O.)
James McKay, St. Cloud,

Minn. (D.O.)
Margaret H., Elkan-Gunst
Bldg., San  Francisco, Cal.

FARNSWORTH. A. M.. Bar-
ing, Mo. (D.O.)
John, 637 Chamber  of  Com-
merce, Los Angeles, Cal.
John C, 1420 Bond Street,

Los Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)

L. E., Auerbach Bldg., Salt

Lake City, Utah (D.C.)

FARNUM,  C.  EDWARD,  13
Bull  St.,  Newport,  R.  I.

FARQUHARSON,  GERTRUDE,
Schweiter  Bldg.,  Wichita,
Kans. (D.O.)

FARR,  A.  E.,  852  Oakwood  St.,
Toledo, O. (D.C.)
A. E., 836 Woodland Ave.,

Toledo, O. (D.C.)
A. W., 852 Oakwood Ave.,

Toledo, O. (D.C.)
Mary Noyes, Wynoka PI.,
Pierre. S. D. (D.O.)

FARR,  DR.  B.  H.
Smyrna,  Fla.
D.C.)

FARRAND,  F.  C
Philadelphia,

FARRAR.  WALTER  E.,  Val-
paraiso, Ind. (D.C.)

FARREN.  M.  E.,  715  W.  Pierce
St.. Kirksville, Mo.

FARRINGTON,  J.  L.,  320  Ma-
rion Blk.,  Marion,  Ind.

FARRIOR,  JESSIE  B.,  Selling
Bldg.,  Portland.  Ore.

FARRIS,  ROBERT  L..  Brown-
wood, Tex. (D.O.)
W. Buford,  Merchants' Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Fort Smith,
Ark. (D.O.)


New
(M.D., D.O.,


11  S.  52d  St.
Pa. (D.O.)


FASH. G. F., Metamora, O.

FASSETT & FASSETT. DRS.,

Youngstown,  O. (D.C.)
FARTHING,  OLLIE  C,  Rosen-

baum Bldg., Meridian,

Mis.s. (A.B.)
FARWELL, MRS. LITTLE  A.,

335 Landon St., Buffalo,

N. Y. (Cr.)
FAUCET. NORA, 310 W. 65th

St.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
FAULK, MINNIE I., Masonic

Temple, Crowley, La.

FAULKIN, H. J., Jefferson

Bldg., Peoria, 111. (D.O.)
FAUST. MRS. B. CHALLIS,

130 S. 15th St.. Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.C.)
Mrs.  Clara  A..  305  N.  5th  St.,

Watertown, Wis. (D.O.)
FAUX, THOS., Box 111.

Bountiful,  Utah. (N.D.)
FAVELL, ERNEST J.. Board

of Trade Bldg., Superior,

Wis. (D.O.)
FAWCETT,  Nora, 310  W. 65th

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
PAY, LEON  E., 6  Union  Ave..

Pramingham,  Mass. (D.O.)
FEAR. LOIS MABEL. Pittock

Blk.,  Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
FEARDON. T. J., 4 E. Worth

St.. Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
FBARON, E. T., 421 7th Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
FECHTIG. F. R.. 86 Harden-

brook Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (D.O.)
FECHTIG. LOUIS  R., 86 Har-

denbrook Ave., Jamaica,

N.  Y. (D.O.)
St.  George,  37  Madison  Ave.,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
FEDING. JONES, 801 6th St..

Greeley, Colo. (D.C.)
FBGLEY, GEORGE W., Car-
roll, la. (D.C.)
FEHL.  CARRIE,  145  South  St.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J. (D.C.)
FEHR. E. P., 135 N. 10th St.,

Cambridge,  O. (N.D.)
E. P., 5803 Superior Ave.,

Cleveland,  O. (D.C.)
FBIDLER, F. J., People's

Bank Bldg., Seattle,

Wash. (D.O.)
FEIGE,  E.  W.,  Woonsocket,  S.

Dak. (D.C.)
FELLOWS. HELEN H., 560

Franklin St., Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
FELPER, J. N.. 833 S. State

St., Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
FELLRATH. BASIL, North

Shore Health Resort.

1634 N. La Salle St.,

Lincoln Park Sta.,

Chicago,  111. (N.D.)
FELLRATH, BASIL. Lo.s An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)
FELSNER. GUS., Little Rock,

Ark.  (S.T.)
FELT, A. F., 1801 Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
FELTUS  &  BENDER, 106-7

McDiarmed State  Bldg.,

Aberdeen,  S. D. (D.C.)
FELUMLEE, MRS. C. V., 1128

Gamber Ave., Cambridge,

O. (D.C.)
FELZER, DAVID, 826 S.

Marshfield Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
FEMULLE, C.  M.,  1128  Corner

Ave.,  Cambridge,  O. (D.C.)


38 Main St., Hor-

Y. (D.C.)
Federation Bldg.,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Main St., Hornell,


FENAIL, FRANK, 194

Riverside Drive, New
York, N. Y. (N.D.)
FENNEL. F.  S., 25 W. 65th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.  (D.C.)
FENNELL. ELIZ.. 15 Mont-
gomery Ave., Pittsburgh,
Pa (DC)
FENNER,  "Harold A.. 321 S.
Hill St.,  Los  Angeles, Cal.
.7. I^ewis,
nell, N.
J. L., 33
Hornell,
J. L., 304

N. Y. (D.C.)

FENNIMORE, B. B., 50th and

Market Sts., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.C.)

FENTER & FENTER, DRS.,

Merchants Bk. Bldg.,

Springfield Mo. (D.C.)

Landers Theatre Bldg.,

Springfield, Mo. (D.C.)
Mrs. L. M.. Nat'l Bk. Bldg..
Springfield. Mo. (D.C.)
FENTON, EVA I., St. Cather-
ines, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
Laura E., 632 E. Main St.,
Washington,  la.  (D.C.)
FERGUSON, DR. DONALD.
469  E.  143d  St..  New  York
City, N. Y. (N.D.)
E. Bertella, 2503 Channing
Way,  Berkeley,  Cal.  (D.O.)
E. Gertrude, Gittings  Bldg.,

Neosha, Mo. (D.O.)
Ethel S. P., Paw Paw, 111.


Hugh, Guthrie, Okla. (D.C.)

M.  B..  Rooms  10  and  12, 111

Jefferson St., Roanoke.

Va. (D.C.)

R. B., Citizens' Bank Bldg.,

Aberdeen,  S.  D. (D.O.)

S. K., Moville, la. (D.C.)

FERGUSON. E. W., 115 York

St., New Haven, Conn.


•Julius  A.,  New  River,  Fla.

J. A.. Jacksonville, Fla.

Wm.  F.,  Sivan  St.,  Wash-
ington,  D. C. (D.C.)
FERNALD, EDW. L., 3527

W. Madison St., Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
FERRAND, C. L.,  Creston, la.
R. L., T. A. Work Bldg.,
Pacific Grove. Cal. (D.O.)
FERRI, N. A., 152 N. Ashland
Blvd., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
FERRIER, DR. JAMES, Suite
32, Astor Court Btdg.,
New York City, N. Y.
FERRILL, I. W., Elk City,

Okla. (D.C.)
FERRY, NELLE, Nevada.

Mo. (D.O.)
FESSEL. DR. E., Manning,

la. (D.C.)
FESSEL,  PHENA,  Wild

Horse, Colo. (D.C.)
FESSENDEN, ERNEST A..
35 Avon St.. Wakefield.
Mass. (D.O.)
Wendell W.. 244 Cabot St.,
Beverly, Mass. (D.O.)
FESTA,  F. P., 1510  Werster
Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
FETE,  LUTHER  B.,  1407

Allison St., Washington,
D.  C. (D.C.)


Xalurojxitlu'c  Biographical  Notes


873


highly  successful  and  widely  appreciated.
No  finer  mission  could  be  given  to  a  man
than  to  show  to  India  the  supreme  value
of  removing  the  causes  of  disease  by
rational  living  and  congenial  treatments
that  render  similarly  superfluous  the  knife
of  the  surgeon  and  the  poison  of  the
apothecary.  Dr.  Kanthariaker  is  nobly
living  up  to  the  requirements  of  his  self-
appointed task.

KLAWITTER,  WM.  C,  N.  D.

Born  in  La  Crosse,  Wis.,  in  1890,  he  made
La  Crosse  his  home  during  his  whole  life.
He  took  up  the  study
of  Naturopathy  seven
years  ago  and  is  a
graduate  from  the
American  School  of
Naturopathy.  He  has
been  with  Dr.  Josef
Riese  from  the  time  he
took  up  Naturopathy.
Very  often  the  suc-
cess of  an  Institution
is  not  only  due  to  the  proprietor  and  to  the
initiative  of  the  head  of  the  Institution,  but
depends  in  a  large  measure  on  the  as-
sistants. Dr.  Klawitter,  who  has  been
with  Dr.  Riese  for  so  many  years,  is  cer-
tainly a  great  asset  to  the  La  Crosse  Natu-
ropathic Institute  and  Sanitarium,  and  his
congenial  cheerfulness,  the  personal  mag-
netism with  which  he  attracts  and  holds
patients,  have  in  a  large  measure  contri-
buted to  the  great  reputation  of  that  in-
stitute. Dr.  Klawitter  is  an  able  and
promising  disciple  and  scholar  of  Dr.  Riese,
and  no  doubt  will  some  day  be  promoted
from  the  managership  of  the  institute,  and
become  his  successor.

KRtJGER, WM. F. H., Ph. G., Ph. D.,
N.  D.,  D.  O.

An  ardent  advocate  and  practitioner  of
Naturopathy  since  the  year
1895.  Some of his

best  writing  for  rational
progressive  medicine  was
published  in  "Am.  Kneipp-
Blaetter."  volumes  1896-
1902.  Member  A.  N.  A.
Section,  New  York  State.
When  a  practitioner  like
Dr.  Kriiger  can  unite
theory  with  practice  in  so
perfect a manner as he

does, the most surprising curative results

follow  as  a  matter  of  course.

KURZ,  ROBERT  F.,  D.  C,  36  High  Street,
New  Haven,  Conn.

Dr.  Kurz  graduated  at  the  Palmer  School
in  1914  and  is  a  member  of  the  Connecticut
Chiropractic  Association  and  the  Delta
Sigma  Chi.  He  was  born  in  Germany  in
1892.


aid of Health.


LATSON,  DR.  W.  R.  C.

Tin-  late  Dr.  Latson  was  the  editor  of
Health  Culture,  a  well-known  journal  of
I  progressive  m  e  d  i  -
cine.  He  was  not  only
an  editor,  but  a  Na-
turopath as  well,  and
the  author  of  several
books  on  Natural
healing.  He  con-
ducted, for  several
years,  an  educational
institution,  teaching
people  how  to  live,
and  articles  on  this
subject,  from  his  pen,
have  appeared  in  the
Naturopath  and  Her-
He  also  conducted  a  hy-
gienic institution  on  the  West  Side  of  >'ew
York  City,  but  many  of  his  big  plans  were
in  advance  of  the  age,  and  his  death  cut
short  others  that  were  assuredly  practical.
His  devotion  to  the  cause  of  progressive
medicine  will  keep  his  memory  green,  and
his  name  deserves  to  be  engraved  on
tablets  of  granite  to  awaken  the  respect
and  imitation  of  future  generations.  The
editor  and  Dr.  Latson  were  personal
friends,  and  the  former  must  confess  that
from  his  association  with  this  true  apostle
of  medical  light  and  liberty,  he  received  an
uplift  that  could  only  radiate  from  a  spirit
of  health  and  humanity  that  is  characteris-
tic of  all  true  advocates  of  physical  edu-
cation.

LOBAN,  JOY  M.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.  By  Dr.
Russell  H.  Skeels,  ex-President,  Inter-
national Chiropractic  Association.

Dr.  Joy  M.  Loban  was  born  in  1887,  and
at  the  age  of  20  was  actively  identified  with
Drugless  healing,  being  a  student  at  the
Palmer  School  of  Chiropractic.  Dr.  Palmer,
dedicating  a  Chiropractic  text-book,  in  1908,
writes:  "To  one  small,  wiry,  sincere  and
conscientious  man,  whose  whole  object  is
the  uplifting  of  this  philosophy,  is  this  vol-
ume dedicated.  He  was  more  than  a  stu-
dent under  the  author.  He  is  more  than  an
acquaintance  or  friend — he  is  a  companion
such  as  gives  backbone  to  a  philosophy  as
good  as  this.  It  is  a  case  of  the  philosopher
thoroughly  absorbing  the  philosophy  which
met  his  ideals.  His  assistance  to  my  re-
search, his  help  to  the  author  personally
and  professionally  during  the  past  year  is
considerably  remembered.  Appreciation  in
this  substantial  way  is  the  least  compliment
that  the  author  can  give  to  Joy  M.  Loban.
D.  C.  Ph.  C."  Dr.  Loban's  service  to  Drug-
less  healing  is  limited  strictly  to  the  Chiro-
practic field.  He  is  a  graduate  of  the
Palmer  School  of  Chiropractic,  and  of  the
Universal  Chiropractic  College,  in  both  of
which  institutions  he  has  been  an  instructor.
In  the  former,  he  had  charge  of  palpation
and  adjusting. He  was  the  first  teacher  in


874


Alphabetical  Index


Fellennun
Fleming


FETTERMAN. A. L.. Central

Citv. Nebr. (D.C.)
FETTERS. M. B., Rooms 3

and 4. Hester Blk., Vee-

dersburg, Ind. (D.C.)
FETZER. J. L., DaltcJh, Mo.

FEWALI.. A. B.. r,04 Watson

St.. Ripen. Wis. (D.C.)
FEWEI.L. A. B., 256 Ridean

St., Ottawa. Ont.. Can.

K B 844 Watson St.,

Ripon. Wis. (D.C.)
FEY L M.. Weldon Springs,

Mo. (D.C.)  ^ ^ ,

L. M.. Chancellor, S. Dak.

FIELD. A. E., 532 Altman
Kansas City, Mo.


Ma-
st..


St.


Pittsburg-h.
Parkston. S.
Dak.


Bldg.,

D J.', 208 W. Main St.,

rion, O. (N.D.)
Nora, 208 W. Main

Marion,  O. (D.C.)
p T 115Vo W. Main
■(^alion, O. (D.C.)
FIELD, VIOLET L., 208 Nafl
Exchange Bank Bldg.,
Steubenville, O. (D.M.T.)
FIELDING, OWEN, 968

Anderson  Ave.,  New  lork,
N. Y. (Ma.)
FIELDS, J., 30 W. 132nd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (Ma.)
FIERSTEAD, J. F., Summit,

S. Dak. (D.C.)
FILLINGER,  C.  A., 630  Wood
ward Ave.
Pa. (D.C.)
FINCH, FRED,
Dak. (D.C.)
F. E., Parkston

J F 6213 Vine, Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.O.)
J. T.. Urban Bldg., 122 4th
Ave.,  Louisville,  Ky. (D.C.)
J. T., 806 Republic Bldg.,
Louisville, Ky. (D.C.)
FINEMAN, HARRY, 1338 N.
Franklin St.. Philadel-
phia, Pa. (M.D., D.C.)
FINGERIE. CHAS., First  Nat.
Bk. Bldg., Covina, Cal.
FINK, CHAS. A., 39 S. State

St., Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
FINK, G. A., Headrick, Okla.

FINKEL, Dr. I. N., 536 W.

145th  St.,  New  York,  N.  \.
(Ch.)
FINKELSTEIN. A. A., 97 Ann
St,  Hartford,  Conn. (D.C.)
FINKELSTEIN. SAM'L. 207
W. 110th St., New Lork
City. N. Y. (D.C.)
FINKHOUSEN. F. W., S
Washington St., Van
M^ert, O. (D.C.)
W F 22% Monroe St., De-
catur, Ind. (D.C.)
F W., Keneck Blk., S.
Wa.sh. St., Van Wert, O.
(D.C.)  ^ .

FINLBY.  E.  I'.. 203  E.  Mam
St., Dvesville, O. (N.D.)
FINLEY,  CHAS.  D.,  608  Chest-
nut St., Atlantic, la.
E. P., Rvesville. O. (D.C.)
Vyla M., Box 807, Barric,
Ont.. Canada. (D.C.)
FINN. L. E.. Saint .Joseph.
Mich. (D.C.)
Louis E., 30  V.. S. 7th St.,
Terre Haute, Ind, (DC.)


FINNEN, E., 45 W. 34th St.,

New York,  N. Y. (l^.C.)
FINNERAN, MARGARET T.,
359 Bovlston St.. Boston.
Mass. (D.O.)
FINNERTY, FRANCIS A., 40
Park St., Montclair, N. J.
FINNEY, MRS. MARY, Rus-

.sell, Kans. (M.D.)
FINSETH, ANNA  M., Kenyon,
Minn. (D.C.)
Anna M., Silverton, Ore.
FINTON, DARIUS  S., 353 E.
Lincoln St.. Findlay,  O.
(D.S.T.)
FIRTH, A. P., 28 Clinton St.,
Newark, N. J. (D.O.)
J.  N.,  828  Brady  St.,  Daven-
port, la. (D.C.)
John W., Realty Bldg.,
Cadillac, Mich. (D.C.)
FISCHER, CLARA  E., Vinton,
la. (D.C.)
Frank L., 94 Ridgewood

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. (N.D.)
Dr. Geo. F., 221 E. 53rd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (M.D.)
H.  M.,  Vinton,  la. (D.C.)
Rav  L., 306 Feiry  St.,  Hart-
ford, Conn. (D.C.)
FISCHER, .JOHN A., Otis
Bldg,. 16th and Sansom
Sts., Philadelphia, Pa.
FISER, MRS. A. E., 328 Clin-
ton St.,  Findlay,  O.  (D.M.T.)
FISH,  H.  .7., 882  Pulton  St..

San Francisco, Cal. (N.D.)  !
FISH. S. ELLA, Garner, la.  i
(D.C.)  1

FISHER, ALBERT. 6340  ,

Stewart  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.  :
M.  K.,  9  W.  Sugar  St.,  Mount
Vernon. O. (D.M.T.)
FISHER, DR., State Sav, Bk.
Bldg., Butte, Mont. (D.C.)
Dr., care of Fisher Sani-
tarium, Denver, Colo.
Alice E.. 416% S. Main St.,

Findlay, O. (M.D.)
Bruce E., Ida Grove, la.

Charles S.. Majestic Bldg.,

Milwaukee, Wis. (D.C.)
Clvde .T., Vicksburg, Mich.

H. Wallace. 512 5th Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.X
Mvrtle N.. Vicksburg, Mich.

.Joseph. Davenport. la.

(DC.)
Nellie M.. 239 Waywatosa
Ave.. Waywatosa, Wis.
Capt. Noah, Ft. Smith, Ark.

Rav  L., 306  Ferry  St.,  Hart-
ford, Conn. (D.C.)
FISKE. FRANT<T>IN, 1 W.
34th St., and Riverside
Drive at W. 116th St.„
New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
FITCH (Sr GRUNEWALD. 5  N.
Wabash Ave.. Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
I  FITCH, MILTON B., 4725

Lincoln A^e.,  Chicago, 111.
!  (D.O.)

'  FITCH, R. Jj., 4940 W. Kinzie
St., Chicago, Til. (D.C.)
Stewart .T.. 1175 N. Roblea
Ave., Pasadena, Cal.


211
Ik,


1-;.


W^arren,
Mich.


Lak


FITE, LEWIS, 3335 Paseo St.,
Kansas City. Mo. (D.O.)
M.  S.,  405%  Main  St.,  Lewis-
ton, Idaho. (D.C.)
FITHEROFF. WM., 902 Kim
St., Cincinnati, O.
(D.M.T.)
FITTS. F., IIOJ E.  Gordon  St..

Kinston.  N.  C
FITZ, CHAS. B., 839 Freeland
St. IMttsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
FITZGERALD, BESS, Green-
wood, Ark. (D.C.)
Frank W., Casey, la.

J.  A.,  Tonkawa,  Okla. (D.O
.1. W., Antlers. O. (D.C.)
Jno.. Hackett, Ark. (D.C.)
FITZGERALD, E. .L.
33id St., New Yo
N. Y. (Ma.)
FITZSIMMONS, W.
Grand  Rapids,

FITZSTAl). T. E., Rice

Wis. (D.C.)
FITZSTAD, T. E.. R. No. 2,

Barr.on, Wis. (N.D.)
FITZWATER, William  D., 178
Prospect  Park  W.,  Brook-
lyn,  N. Y. (D.O.)
F.JERESTAD, .J.. Sisselton,

S. D. (N.D.)
FLACK. ARTHUR M.. 3414
Bearing St., Philadelphia.
Pa. (D.O.)
M^illiam O., B'way Bldg.,
Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
FLAGEL, L. H., Osterdock,
la. (D.C.)
Louifs, 714 N. 8th Ave., She-
boygan, Wis. (N.D.)
FLAHARTY. W. T.. 305-6
Howe's Blk.. Clinton. la.
FLAMHOLTZ, ISAAC M., 509
Rumiller Bldg., Los An-
geles, Cal. (N.D.)
FLANTGAN, A. L., 128 17th
Ave., Paterson, N. .J.
FLANAGAN, CHAS. D., 146
W^estminster St., Provi-
dence, R. J. (D.O.)
Francis, Piudden  Blk., Lan-
sing, Mich. (D.C.)
FLANIGAN. G. L., 524 Penna.
Ave.. Pittsburgh, Pa.
FLANNIGEN, HAZEL,

Mendota, Til. (N.D.)
FT-ANSBURGH, R. D., The
Richardson. I.,eominster,
Mass. (D.O.)
FTjAWITH.  F., 223  W. 2nd St.,

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
FLAAVS, ROBERT, 448 Ridge
AVav. Los Angeles, Cal.
FLEATC. GERTRUDE. 62 Ox-
ford St.. Hamilton. Ont..
Canada. (D.C.)
:  FI>ECK, C. E., 247 5th .\vo.,
I  New York City. (DO.)

FLEGTOL, L. H., 913  N. Sth St..
'  Shebovgan, Wis. (D.C.)

j  FLEISCHER, KARL, 503 5th
!  Ave.. New York, N. Y.

i  (D.C.)

FLEMING. EVALINE S, C.
i  1524 Chestnut St.. Phila-

delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
! Evaline S. C, 535 Hans-
berry St., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
F. B.. Keller Bldg., Mont-
rose, Colo. (D.O.)


Ndlurojxilhic  Jiiofjraphical  Notes


875


the Universal, planned its curriculum, and
put it into operation, Icavinj? two years
later  to  practice  in  Atlanta,  Ga. In  1913  he
organized another school in Washington,
but  soon returned to the Universal Chiro-
l)ractic Colleye as instructor in anatomy,
remaining till the present year, vvlien he
became  dean  at  tlie  Pittslnirgh  Chiropractic
College. As a teacher. Dr. Loban is
especially  successful,  having  the  ability  to  so
correlate the work in its logical sequence
that the more difficult points are easily
grasped  by  the  ordinary  student. He  pos-
sesses a highly analytical mind, and the
happy faculty of expressing it logically.
This,  naturally,  has  led  him  into  other  lields
than  teaching. He  is  a  lecturer  of  note,  on
subjects  jjertaining  to  Chiropractic,  and  his
text-book,  "Technic  and  Practice  of  Chiro-
practic"  (The Loban  Publishing  Co.,  Pgh.,
Pa.),  which  has  reached  its  third  edition,  is
universally accepted as the only scientific
work  on  the subject,  and  is  used  wherever
Chiropractic  is  taught. In  the  effort  to  se-
cure legislative recognition of Drugless
methods of healing, Dr. Loban has been
ever  active,  using  his  influence  at  all  times
for  laws that  provide for  the licensing  of
practitioners of each of the various
schools  of  healing,  under  separate  examin-
ing boards.  In  this  he  is  consistent,  for  he  is
a staunch advocate of  complete separation
of  the  different  methods.  In  his  private  prac-
tice he  emi)loys  only  the  purest  Chiroprac-
tic, and  in  his  classes.  Chiropractic  alone  is
taught. The  vast  majority  of  the  Drugless
healers  differ  from  him  in  that  they  rarely
confine their treatment to any one of the
healing  methods,  but  combine  the  treatment
of several schools. Dr. Loban limits his
teachings and practice to "pure and una-
dulterated" Chiropractic,  and  because  of  his
consistent attitude toward "mixing," has
won  the  admiration  of  the  profession. Not
only is he the leading technical writer of
his  profession,  but  is  recognized  as  a  talented
writer  of  fiction. His shore stories  are  in
demand,  and  have  appeared  in  some  of  the
more  prominent  monthlies. His  style  is  the
style  of  Irvin S. Cobb  and Ring  Lardner,
and,  like  both,  he  is  a  baseball  enthusiast.
No  one  individual  in  the  Chiropractic  ranks,
probably, has done as much constructive
work for the profession and for Drugless
healing  as  has Dr. Loban,  although at  no
time has he permitted himself to be con-
sidered as  the  leader  of  the  school  of  spinal
adjustment. He  works  because  his  heart  is
in  the  work,  and  his  satisfaction  comes  from
the  knowledge that he daily  does his  part
to  place  Chiropractic  on  a  firmer  scientific
basis,  and  not  through self-aggrandizement
or  oersonal  glory. The  honors  which  his
profession  deem  to  be  his  due,  come  to  him
earned,  but  wholly  unsought. He  is  one  of
the  leading  lights  of  the  chiropractic pro-
fession and  a  member  of  the  International
Chiropractic  Association.


LONG,  I.  W.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Long  is  a  manufacturer  and  dealer
m  therapeutic  appliances,  publisher  of  books
and  charts  relating  to  Naturopathy.  His
emporium  at  101  North  High  Street,  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  is  supplied  with  electric  light
cabinets  (Burdick's)  and  pandiculators,  sinu-
soidal apparatus,  vibrators,  therapeutic
lamps,  hand  concussors  and  abdominal  sup-
porters, manufactured  by  himself.  He  car-
ries books  on  every  phase  of  Naturopathy
particularly  Hydropathy,  Chiropractic,  Os-
teopathy, Naprapathy,  Spondylotherapy,
Neuropathy,  Spinal  Adjustment,  Diagnostic
Therapeutics,  Zone  Therapy,  etc.

LUEPKE,  JOHN  F.  G.,  M.  D.,  S.  D.

John F. G. Luepke, M. D., S. D., native
of Germany, was born April 14th, 186.3.


John  F. G.  Luepke, M. D.,  S. D.

The  foundation  of  his  classical  education
was  laid  at  a  German  gymnasium  and  high
school,  and  finished  at  the  University  of
Berlin.  In  this  country,  he  attended  the
Eclectic  Medical  College  of  New  York
City  and  the  Creighton  University  and
Medical  College  at  Omaha,  Neb.,  re'ceived
a  license  as  physician  and  surgeon  from
N.  Y._  University  in  1906.  and  is  registered
both  in  New  York  and  New  Jersey  as  such.
At  different  periods,  Dr.  Luepke  w^as  con-
nected with  the  Vanderbilt  Clinic  and
Roosevelt  Hospital  Dispensary,  N.  Y.  City
the  N.  Y.  Post  Graduate  Surgical  Depart-
ment and  the  Lying-in-Hospital  of  N.  Y.
City.  During  the  time  of  his  practice,  he
was  examining  physician  for  a  German-
American  Veteran  Soldiers'  Society,  and
different  fraternal  organizations,  as  of  the
I.  O.  O.  F.  (Bliicher  and  Wallenstein).  the
F.  O.  A.  (Courts  Humboldt  and  Sam  H
Bailey),  the  Workingmen's  Sick  and  Death
Benefit  Association,  Branch  31,  the  Amt
Freudenberger Verein. and many others


876


Alplidbelical  Index


I'lelcher
Francis


Irving, Knill Blk.. Port

Huron. Mich. (D.C.)
J. H.. 1603 Marshall St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)  1

S D., Knill Block, Port  i

Huron. Mich. (D.C.) _ |
FI.ETCHER. MRS. ALEX., R.

F. No. 2, Orange, Cal.

Cla?ke'  F.. 143 W. 69th St..

N.  Y.  City. (D.O.)
Marv  M., Central Ex. Bldg.,

Worcester. Mass. (D.O.)
W H., Unionville, Mo.

FLETCHER. DR. W. H. A.,

203 W. 52nd St.. New

York. N. Y. (Ch.)
FLICK,  JAS.  R.. 724  Hamilton

St., Allentown, Pa. (D.C.)
FLICK.  GERVASE  C,  Greens-
burg. Ind. (D.O.)
Elizabeth, 204 Scribner St.,

Du Bois, Pa. (D.C.)
James R.. 46 Washington

Ave., Collingswood, N. J.

FLINK,  G.  A.,  Headrick,  Okla.

FLINT,  EFFIE  A..  1636  N.
15th  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
(D.O.)  . ,

George  C.  Huntmgton
Chambers,  Boston,  Mass.
(D.O.)  , „

Ralph W.. 1636 N. 15th St.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
FLORY,  CHAS.  M.,  311  Vesper
St., Ashland. O. (Ch.)
William O., Medical Block,
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.O.)
FLOWER, ANDREW G., 3622
Lorain  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.

Dr. A.' H., 101 St. Botolph

St., Boston, Mass. (D.C.)
M E.. 501 Farmers' Trust

Bldg., South Bend, Ind.

FLOYD, AMBROSE B., Elli-

cott Sq., Buffalo, N. Y.

FLUEGEL, A. B., Charles

City, la. (D.C.)
FLUSH,  Mme. B., 250  W. 94th

St., New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
FLYNN, J. P., 255

St., Alliance, O.

FOEHL, DR. P.
Baltimore Ave.,
phia. Pa. (N.D.)

FOGARTY, JULIA --..

land  Bldg.,  Michigan  City,
and  First  Nat.  Bk.  Bldg.,
La Porte, Ind. (D.O.)

FOGG,  CLINTON  O.,  121
Madison  Ave.,  Lakewood,
N. J. (D.O.)

FOLEY, HORACE P.. 3J9
4th St., Davenport,
Horace P., 519 W. 4th
Davenport,  la. (D.C.)
Wm. R, .272 Main Street,
New  Britain, Conn. (D.C.)

FOLTS  &  FOLTS,  2639  Peach
St., Erie, Pa. (D.C.)

FOLTZ, MRS. C. 3343 Tejom
St., Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
Mrs.  C,  3349  Tejon  St:,  Den-
ver, Colo. (D.C.)

FOORD,  E.  J.,  327  E.  Spruce
St.,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Mich.

FOOTE,  ARTHUR  M.,  509
Bradbury  Bldg.,  Lo.s  An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)


E. Main
E.. 5405
Philadel-

A., Star-


W.
la.

St.,


FOOTE,  HARVEY  R.,  Hare-
wood  House,  Hanover  Sq.,
London  W.,  England.

FORALE.  J.  J.,  Ionia,  Mich.

FORBES,  AGNES  B.,  115  N.
Perry St., Dayton, O.
(Ma.)

FORBES,  H.  W.,  318  Clay  St.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)

FORCE,  WILBUR,  Jackson,
Mich. (D.C.)

FORD. A. B., Hoge  Bldg., Se-
attle, Wash. (D.O.)
Charles F., Whittell Bldg.,
San  Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
Helene C, Thayer, Nebr.

Roberta  Wimer,  Hoge  Bldg.,

Seattle, Wash. (D.O.)
Walter  J.,  Hoge  Bldg.,  Seat-
tle, Wash. (D.O.)  I
W.-W.,  731-2  Colonial  Sav.  &
Trust Co. Bldg., Colum-
bus, O. (D.C.)

FORD, MISS ALBERTA, 328
Jarvis St., Toledo, O.
(D.M.T.)
Eva  M., 712 E. Dong St.,

Columbus, O. (Ch.)
Huscher  C, 44  E. Broad St.,
Columbus,  O. (Ch.)

FORDYCE,  H.  A.,  Washing-
ton,  D. C. (N.D.)

FOREMAN,  OLIVER  C,  God-
dard  Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.

FORGRAVE, L. R., Logan
Bldg., St. Joseph, Mo.
(Oph.)

FORQUER.  JAMES  W.,  Os-
born  Bldg.,  Cleveland,  O.

FORREST,  WM.  J.,  Beiter
Bldg.. Carroll, la. (D.O.)

FORRESTER,  J.  I.,  Holtville,
Cal. (D.C.)

FORRISTER.  RAY  M.,  935
Militarv  St.,  Port  Huron,
Mich. (D.O.)

FORSEE,  EDWARD  W.,

Brookings, S. D. (D.O.)

FORSTOT, SAMUEL, 57
Union St., Montclair,
N.  J. (M.D.)

FORSYTHE, L. C, Box 62.
Lewistown, O. (D.M.T.)

FORTIER,  J.  B.,  Davenport,
la. (D.C.)

FORTIN, EDWIN  C.
Cresco, la. (D.C.)

FOSS,  MARTHA  M.,  4217
Chambers  St.,  Cincinnati,
O. (D.O.)

FOSSLER,  WELLINGTON,  C,
New  Lawrence  Bldg..
Sterling, 111. (D.O.)

FOSTER & FOSTER, St.
Clair, Minn. (D.C.)
C. E., 337 St James Bldg.,

Jacksonville,  Fla. (D.C.)
Chas. L., Patterson Bldg.,

Flint, Mich. (D.C.)
Frank A., Box 706, St. Au-
gustine, Fla. (D.C.)
F. A., Masonic House,

Springfield, O. (D.C.)
H.  J.,  Hastings,  Nebr. (D.C.)
J. C. Stein Bldg.. Butler,

Pa. (D.O.)
Julia E., Stein Bldg., But-
ler, Pa. (D.O.)
Mrs. Pearl, Washington,

Okla. (D.C.)
Mrs. R. A. MoUie, Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)

FOSTER  &  KELLOGG,  Hast-
ings, Nebr. (D.C.)


FOSTER, LOUIS, Syracuse,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Miss  Nora  D.,  R.  F.  D.  No.

Box 10, Conneaut,  O.

(D.M.T.)
FOURSHE, MAY. 3913

Cottage Grove Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
FOUT, GEO. E., Chamber


of


Commerce Bldg., Rich-
mond, Va. (D.O.)

FOUTS,  I>.  H.,  733 Ms  Garrison
Ave..  Ft.  Smith,  Ark.

FOUTY.  HENRY  M..  Moun-
tain Grove, Mo. (D.O.)

FOWLE,  J.  J.,  Ionia,  Mich.

CORA M.,
Bucklib,


Smith
Kans.


Warren, Ark.


Y.


FOWLER.
Bldg..
Rebecca.

FOWLER, MISS F. I., 1226
D St. N. E., Washington,
D. C. (D.C.)
Jessie  Allen, 1358 B'way,
New  York,  N. Y. (Ph.)
FOWLER & WELLS, 27 E.
22nd  St., New York, N.
(Ph.)
FOWLEY, WM. R.. 272 Main
St., New Britain, Conn.
FOX & FOX, 414 Dryden
Bldg., Flint, Mich. (D.C.)
FOX, LOUIS, 343 Leroy Ave.,
Buffalo, N. Y. (N.D.)
Warren F., 786 Sunset  Ave.,
Pasadena, Cal. (D.C.)
FOY, ADDIE L., Goodland,
Kans. (S.T.)
Anna M., Pres't, Kansas
State  Board  of  Chiroprac-
tic  Examineis, Denison.
Kans. (D.C.)
Mrs.  E..  127  W.  Circular  St.,

Lima, O. (N.D.)
Harry  L.,  674  Hillman  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
H. L., 7391/2 Lake St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
J. A., Wingham, Ont., Can-
ada. (D.C.)
Jefferson,  Alliance,  O.  (M.D.)
Raymond C, 217 San Mar-
cos  Bldg.. Santa Barbara,
Cal. (D.C.)
FOY & FOY, DRS., 716 Kan-
sas Ave., Topeka, Kans.
FRADSHAM, W. F. B., 220 S.
State St.. Chicago, 111.
W. F. B., 718 W. 63d
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
FRAIZER. HUGH M..
Savings  Bank  Bldg.,
land, Cal. (DO.)
Miller, U. S. Bank
Oakland, Cal. (D.O.)
FRAKER, FRANKLIN, Gal-
vin Bldg., Eau Claire,
Wis. (D.O.)
FRAME, IRA SPENCER, 472
Herkimer St., Pasadena.
Cal. (D.O.)
PRANCE, BERT C, Ashland,
O. (D.C.)
W. N., Cor. Church and
Main Sts., Ashland, O.
FRANCIS,  G. R., 18  New  Zim-
merman Bldg., Spring-
field,  O. (D.C.)
G. R., 10221 Prospect Ave.,
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)


St.,

Union
Oak-

Bldg.,


Wttiirojxilhic  BioqntpUirdl  Notes


877


He  is  still  an  active  member  of  the  New
York  Plivsicians'  Association,  the  Society
of  Naturopathic  Physicians,  and  the  Inter-
national Alliance  of  Physicians  and  Sur-
geons, and  holds  a  certificate  of  member-
ship in  the  Society  of  Chiropractic  Phy-
sicians of  New  Jersey.  He  also  is  Medical
Adviser  and  Food  Expert  for  the  Tropon
Works,  N.  Y.  City.  The  Doctor  is  a  strong
adherent  of  Drugless  Healing  and  Rational
Dietetics,  in  which  sense  he  successfully
conducted  the  Naturopathic  Sanitarium  at
Paterson,  N.  J.,  and  the  Therapeutic  Insti-
tute of  Brooklyn,  N.  ¥.,  where  he  was
cleverly  assisted  by  Mrs.  Luepke,  who,  a
former  school-teacher,  is  a  graduate  of  the
N.  Y.  School  of  Massage  and  Maternity
Hospital.  Due  to  an  accident  in  his  labora-
tory, Dr.  Luepke  was  obliged  to  lay  down
his  practice  for  a  while  and  is  at  present
located at Welga, 111.

LUNTZ,  HARRY,  D.  O.,  N.  D.,  M.  D.

Dr.  Harry  Luntz,  of
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  has  per-
fected a  health  food
combination  which  he
calls  Flaxolyn.  It  is  the
result  of  many  years  of
study  and  experiment.

Dr.  Luntz  deserves
great  credit  for  produ-
cing from  natural  foods  a  real  remedy  for
stomach,  liver  and  kidney  troubles,  con-
stipation and  gall  stones.  It  is  scientifi-
cally compounded  from  fruits,  roots,  herbs
and  flaxseed,  and  contains  nothing  harmful.
It  is  a  good  food  tonic  and  promotes  tissue
building.

Dr.  Luntz  is  a  Naturopath  with  a  broad,
liberal  education  and  has  achieved  an  en-
viable reputation  as  an  osteopath  in  three
States.  He  has  been  a  close  student  of
therapeutics  for  the  past  25  years,  having
graduated  successively  from  the  American
College  of  Osteopathy,  Kirksville,  Mo.,
Old  Physio  Medical  College  (Osteopathic
and  Post  Graduate  Departments),  Chicago
College  of  Medicine  and  Surgery  and  the
Philadelphia College of Osteopathy.

LYTLE,  ALFRED  Y.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Lytle  has  been  actively  engaged  for
the  past  five  years  as  a  Naturopath,  in
Hartford,  Conn.  The  fact
that  he  is  a  progressive
practitioner  is  an  indication
that  after  serious  consider-
ation, he  decided  to  regard
Nature  and  not  supersti-
tion, as  his  authority  in  the
noble  art  of  healing  sick
humanity.  He  is  not  am-
bitious to  be  known  simply
as  a  pain-killer,  but  rather
as  a  pain  eradicator.  His  inquiring  mind
seeks  to  get  at  the  root  of  things.  He  early
discovered  that  of  the  two  opposing  schools


of  medicine,  that  of  the  Allopaths  was  a
deteriorating  treatment,  adding  an  extra
load  to  the  efforts  of  Nature  to  cure  disease,
whereas  Naturopathy  was  a  sworn  yoke-
fellow with  Nature,  pulling  at  least  an  equal
load  and  relieving  Nature  of  half  her  ef-
forts to  restore  natural  functions  to  their
normal  state  of  well-being.  The  success
that  has  naturally  come  to  a  dispenser  of
joy,  hopefulness  and  health,  by  methods
wholly  at  variance  with  the  administration
of  filthy  poisons,  has  created  a  deservedly
successful  business  for  Dr.  Lytle.  His  rep-
utation stands  as  high  among  his  fellow
practitioners  as  it  does  with  the  general
public,  and  he  is  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can Naturopathic Association.

MACFADDEN,  BERNARR,  Author,  Edi-
tor, and  Physical Culturist.

Bernarr Macfadden, who nineteen years
ago  founded  the  Physical  Culture  Magazine,


Bernarr Macfaclilen

may  well  be  called  "Father  of  Physical  Cul-
ture" in  America.  He  is  especially  entitled
to  this  distinction  in  view  of  the  fact  that  it
has  been  largely  through  his  work  that
physical  culture  principles  have  become
popularly  recognized  as  methods  of  treat-
ment and  cure,  as  well  as  of  merely  build-
ing bodily  strength.  More  than  thirty
years  ago,  Mr.  Macfadden,  then  a  frail  and


878


.A  Iphahclicdl  Index


h'rcui  k
Fuller


J. E.. Bliss Bide., Tulsa,

Okla. (DO.)
Thos., 94 E. Washington
St South Norwalk, Conn.
FRANK.  G.  H., San Jose, Cal.
G. H., Alva, Okla. (D.C.)
FRANK, HENRV J., 2.'j(; Dix
Ave.,  Detroit.  Mich. (N.I>.)
L, Wilson, 423 Exchange
Bldg-., Los Ang-eles, Cal.
Mme. L., 540  W. 112th St.,
New York, N. Y. (Ma.)
FRANKE, MARIE L., All.
Na'l Bank Bldg"., Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (D.C.)
Mrs M., 775  S. Somerset  St.,

Ottawa, Ont. (D.C.)
Sade. Riis.sell, Kans. (D.C.)
Sade  H.,  Utica,  Kans. (D.C.)
FRANKOWSKY, ERICH,  3550
^V. Monroe St.. Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
FRANKS, SIMON MERL, N.
Main St., Findlay, O.
(D.M.T.)
FRANTZ, GLEN F., North
Side Sauare, Moblesville,
Ind. (D.C.)
ERASER, AGNES, 5 Albion
St., Lawrence, Mass.

Charles F., 3209 Grim St..

San Diego, Cal. (D.O.)
E L Brookfield,  Mo, (N.D.)
.Tames M., 1939 Sherman

Ave.,  Evanston,  111. (D.O.)
Lillian, Glick Blk.. Berlin,

Ont., Canada (DC.)
Lillian M., Weber Blk., 96

King  St.,  Berlin,  Ont.,  Can.

W P.  24  Alex  Ave..  Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
FRASER, LILLIAN. 535

Beldon Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
FRAVEK, MILDRED, Kings-
ley, Kans. (D.C.)
FRAZER, F. C, 117 Division

St., Elkhart, Ind. (D.C.)
FREDERICK, R. W., West-

cott Bldg.. New Philadel-
phia, O. (D.C.)
FREDERICKS, EGBERT, 35

B 8th St., Holland, Mich.

FREDERICKSON, MRS.

PETRA, Rugby, N. D.

FREDERIKSEN, F. E., Van-

dalia. Mo. (D.O.)
FRBDLING & FREDLING,

901 6th St., Greeley, Colo.

Drs., 801 6th St., Greeley.

Colo. (D.C.)
FREEBORN, THOS. J., 405

May Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
Thos. J., 527 Jarvella St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
FREEL,  J. E., 748  S. 15th St.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Jas. S. F., Littleton Ave:,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)

FREEMAN,  A. E.,  West Palm
Beach, Fla. (D.O.)
A. M.. Macks Creek, Mo.

E. A., Osgood Bldg.. Lewis-
ton, Me. (D.O.)


Howard  M.,  2082  E.  .Jeffer-
son Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.

FREENOK, !•'. .1., Ogdtn,

Utah. (D.C.)
FREESE, BEN.T. J., Greshani,

Ore. (D.C.)
FREESE, REN.I. .1., 4!)13 -X.
Robe.\- St., Cliicago, 111.
(N.D., D.C.)
FREEZEN, I. H., Henderson.

Nebr. (D.C.)
FREMAN ELECTRIC INSTI-
TUTE. 2d floor. 635 Wal-
nut.  Cincinnati. O., (M.A.)
FREMAN, M. E., 403 Market

St.,  Sandu.sky,  O. (Ch.)
FRENCH, AMOS G., 125 E.
Onondaga St.. Syracuse,
N. Y. (D.O.)
J. A., 1127 W. 18th St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
S. C, Birnamwood, Wis.

W. G., 1610 Mailers Bldg.,
Chicago,  111.  (D.C.)
FRENCH, LESLIE, 3975

Vernon Ave., Chicago, 111.
(N.D.. D.P.. D.C.)
Leslie  H.,  315  N. 35th  St.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (N.D.)
FRESCA. ETTORE. 137 East
4  3  rd St., New York,  N. Y.

FRESS, J. W.. 47 McGraw
Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich. (N.D.)

FREY, HUGH, Linesville, Pa.
W. H., R. 5, Box 8. Paole,
Kans. (M.D.)

FRIEBEL,  ANNA, San
Antonio, Fla. (N.D.)

PRIEDLEIN,  N.  F.,  Dubuque,
la. (D.C.)

FRIEDLEIN,  N.  F.,  760

Locust St., Dubuque, la.

FRIEND. .1. H.. Grinnell, Pa.
Lillian, Wray, Colo. (D.O.)

FRIESEN,  I.  H.,  Henderson,
Nebr. (D.C.)  !

FRINK, ADELAIDE W., 7
Mitchell PI., E. Orange,
N. J. (D.O.)
Elizabeth, 1704 5th Ave.,
Troy, N. Y. (D.O.)

FRISBY,  EARL  E.,  Butler,
Ind. (D.C.)

FRITH,  G.  H.,  Grand  Turk,
Turk  Island,  British  West
Indies. (D.C.)

FRITSCH,  A.  W..  113  Elliott
Ave..  Syracuse,  N.  Y.

FRITSCHE,  EDWARD  H.,
1832  W.  Girard  Ave.,  Phil-
adelphia, Pa. (D.O.)

FRITZ & FRITZ, 64 First
Nat'l Bk. Bldg., Colorado
Springs,  Colo. (D.G.)
208  Masonic  Temple,  Den-
ver, Colo. (D.C.)
Ada C, 329-331 Mercantile
Bldg., Rochester, N. Y.
A. E., 315 Del Monte St.,
Colorado Springs, Colo.
Matilda J.. 329-331 Mercan-
tile Bldg., Rochester,
N. Y. (D.C.)

FRITZ, W. WALLACE, 1600
Summer St., Philadelphia,
Pa. (N.D.)


W. Wallace, 1600 Summer
St., Philadelphia, Pa.
I'^KITZEN, MRS. MINNIE,
Pine  City,  Minn. (N.D.)
FROGGE, GEORGE B., City
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Padu-
cah,  Ky. (D.O.)
FRONT, WM. B., Van Weit

O. (D.M.T.)
FROST, E. M.. P. O. Blk..
Glenwood Springs, Colo.
FROST. H. MARGARET,

Brandie.s Theatre Bldg..
Omaha, Nebr. (D.O.)
Harold P., Slater Bldg.,
Worcester. Mass. (D.O.)
FROST, HENRY, 1337 Central
Ave.. Cincinnati, O.
(D.M.T.)
H. P.. 920 Slater  Bldg.,
Worcester, Mass. (D.O  )
FROUDE, CHAS. C, Box 244.

Kingston, N. Y. (D.C.)
FROUDE  &  MACKINNON,  260
Fair St., Kingston. N. Y.
FRUMOFF,  L.,  910  N.  Western

Ave.,  Chicago,  111. (N.D.)
FRUTIGER. E. C, Greenfield,
la. (D.C.)
Ernest, Ottoway, 111. (D.C.)
G.,  Carroll,  la. (D.C.)
FRUTIGER. E. C. Carroll,

la. (D.C.)
FRUTINGER, E. C, Green-
field,  la. (D.C.)
PRY, B. C, Decatur, Ind.
B. C, Huntington, Ind.

FRYETTE, HARRISON  H.,
27  E.  Monroe  St.,  Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
Myrtle W., Goddard Bldg.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
S. J., Washington Bldg.,
Madison, Wis. (D.O.)
PUCHS. L.. Box 185, Butler.

N. J. (D.C.)
PUES, 2314  B'way,  New  York.
N. Y. (N.D.)
Francis,  Morris  Plains,  N.  J.

FUGATE. E. P., Argos, Ind.

FULFORD, HARLIE J.. Box

9, Chelsea, Mich. (D.O.)
FULHAM. C. v.. People's  Life

Ins.  Bldg.,  Frankford,  Ind.

FULKERSON, PERRY, 840

North  25th  St.,  St.  .Toseph,

Mo. (Oph.)
PULL, LEO, Mendota, 111.

PULLER, O. K., 4126 S. Hal-

stead St., Chicago, 111.

(D.M.T., D. O.)

PULLER, CHAS. H.. Harbor
Springs, Mich. (D.C.)

Karl E., 813 Peter Smith
Bldg.. Detroit, Mich.

L.  C,  525  Meridian  Life
Bldg.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.

Leroy  E.,  511  Meridian  Life
Bldg.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.

Victor,  39%  Queen  St.,  Ni-
agara, Canada. (D.C.)

Victor.  204  St.  Paul's  St..
St.  Catherines,  Ont. (D.C.)


Naturopathic  liiof/raphical  Notes


879


delicate  j'outh,  was  tlireatencd  witli  con
sumption.  It  was  in  the  family,  lie  had
lost  one  of  his  parents  through  this  disease.
Following  the  general  and  approved  pro-
gram of  going  from  doctor  to  doctor  and
consuming  medicines  of  all  kinds  and  in
large  (|uantities,  he  found  his  condition
steadily  growing  worse.  The  case  seemed
hopeless.  Finally,  in  desperation,  he  threw
away  his  medicines,  avoided  the  doctors,
and  instead,  entered  a  gymnasium,  in  the
hope  of  building  strength  like  that  of  the
young  men  whom  he  saw  there.  His  ef-
forts were  not  disappointing.  He  gradual-
ly gained  strength.  With  increasing
strength  came  enthusiasm — an  enthusiasm
which  has  not  left  him  to  this  day.  He
l)egan  to  study  subjects  pertaining  to  food,
hygiene,  physical  training  and  the  needs
of  the  body  in  general.  In  the  course  of
a  couple  of  years,  he  had  liecome  a  superl)
example  of  vigorous,  athletic  manhood.
A  little  later  he  took  up  professional
wrestling.  For  years  he  was  one  of  the
best  wrestlers,  not  only  of  the  Middle
West,  but  of  America,  winning  many  cham-
pionship matches  at  his  weight,  149  pounds,
and  holding  his  own  successfully  with
many  of  the  best  wrestlers  in  the  heavier
classes.  Indeed,  he  was  never  thrown  even
b}'  the  best  heavj'weight  champions  in  his
own  preferred  style  of  wrestling,  the
Graeco-Roman.  Mr.  Macfadden's  studies
were  very  early  devoted  to  questions  per-
taining to  diet  and  fasting.  Although  by
no  means  an  originator  of  the  theory  of
fasting  as  a  cure  for  disease,  Mr.  Macfad-
den  has  done  more  than  anyone  else  in
the  world  to  bring  this  form  of  remedial
treatment  to  the  attention  of  the  public,
and  to  establish  it  with  more  or  less  popu-
larity as  a  curative  measure.  Not  long
after  the  founding  of  the  Physical  Culture
Magazine,  Mr.  Macfadden  undertook  a
seven  days'  fast,  and  demonstrated  his  su-
perb physical  condition  on  the  seventh  day
by  some  severe  feats  of  strength.  He  used
the  magazine,  "Physical  Culture."  as  a
medium  through  which  to  teach  the  many
lessons  of  hydrotherapy,  massage,  exercise,
diet,  fasting,  fresh  air.  and  other  forms  of
drugless  treatment.  He  wrote  many  books
of  a  practical,  instructive  character,  aiming
at  the  physical  regeneration  of  his  readers,
and  including  the  remarkable  "Macfadden's
Encyclopedia  of  Physical  Culture,"  in  live
large,  beautiful  volumes,  now  in  its  fourth
edition.  More  than  nine  million  of  his
books  have  been  sold.  He  has  established
and  conducted  various  "health  homes"  and
sanitariums,  in  which  his  methods  of  treat-
ment have  been  used  with  phenomenal  and
practically  unfailing  success.  Many  years
ago,  he  organized  a  training  school  for  the
preparation  of  physical  directors,  and  es-
tablished a  college  for  the  training  of  drug-
less  practitioners.  After  conducting  a  large
sanitarium  at  Battle  Creek  some  years  ago,


be  d>.-cided  that  Chicago,  wliicii  is  a  more
central  point  in  the  United  States,  was  a
better  U)cation.  Mr.  Macfadden  established
a  large  institution  at  4200  (irand  Boulevard,
which  he' then  called  "The  Healthatorium."
iMfteen  years  ago,  Mr.  Macfadden  estab-
lished a  chain  of  pure  food  restaurants  for
the  benefit  of  those  searching  for  strength-
building  foods,  healthfully  and  properly
l)rcpared.  These  restaurants  are  now  in
successful  operation;  six  ijeing  located  in
Xew  York  City,  with  branch  restaurants  in
Philadelphia.  Detroit  and  Toronto.  .Aside
from  his  work  both  in  England  and  Amer-
ica as  author,  editor,  publisher  and  health
director  in  his  sanitariums,  Mr.  Macfadden
'has  had  a  remarkable  career  as  a  business
organizer.  He  has  more  recently  organized
and  supervised  the  work  of  The  Washed
Air  Cooling,  Heating  and  Ventilating  Co.,
Inc.,  and  The  Physical  Culture  Photo  Plays
Co.,  Inc.,  the  latter  engaged  in  the  produc-
tion of  motion  lectures  dealing  wnth  physi-
cal culture  sul)jects.  both  in  a  monthly
"screen  magazine"  and  in  feature  produc-
tions of  from fi\e to seven reels.

MAC  KINNON,  JOHN  L.,  D.  C.

Dr.  John  L.  Mac  Kinnon  was  graduated
from  the  Palmer  School  of  Chiropractic,
with honors.  Me  is  a  man  of  exceptional  per-


John I^. Mac  Kinnon, D. C.

sonality,  and  has  proven  himself  a  remark-
able genius  and  expert  in  the  Science  of
Chiropractic.  With  Dr.  Froude.  he  is  fast
coming  into  prominence  as  a  specialist  in
stomach  and  kidney  troubles.  Their  local
practice  has  grown  phenomenally,  and  their
special  work  is  attracting  many  patients
from  other  States.  Their  office  at  260  Fair
Street,  Kingston,  New  York,  is  one  of  the
most  splendidly  equipped  Chiropractic
office?  to  be  found.


880


Alphabetical  Index


Fuller
Garmait


FULLER  &  ZANDEEN.  Plain-
view, Nebr. (D.C.)

FULRATH.  WESLEY,  Farm-
ers' State  Bank  BIdg.,
Waukesha, Wis. (D.C.)

FULTON  &  EDWARDS,  10
New  Sharp  Blk.,  La  Fay-
ette,  Ind. (D.C.)

FULTON & FULTON, Kla-
math Falls, Ore. (D.C.)
108 S. Church St., Salem,
Ore. (D.C.)
.Tames, La Fayette, Ind.

Margaret E., Denair, Cal.

Robt., Saint Joseph, Mich.

FULTON. HANNAH R., 323
Euclid  Ave., Cleveland, O.
(Ch.)
Dr. N. J., 114 Seventeenth
Ave.  N.,  Seattle,  Wash.


Margaret  E.,  Turlock,  Cal.
(JXC.)

N. J., P. O. Box 984, Port-
land. Ore. (N.D.)
FUNK, H. F., fi351 Ellis Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

H.  F.,  1138  E.  63rd  St.,
Chicago,  111.  (D.C.)
FUREY,  BLANCHE  COSTEL-
LO,  Real  Estate  Trust
Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Chas.  A.,  Jr.,  2501  S.  Cleve-
land Ave.,  Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)

Wm. J., 1240 S. Broad St.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
PURGUSON, E. W., 115 York
St., New Haven, Conn.


FURLONG, PAULINE, 111 5th

Ave., New York, N. Y.

<V.)
FURMAN, MATTIE, 607 W.

25th St., Kearney, Neb.

FURNISH, W. M., Tipton, la.

FURRY, FRANK I., Theatre

Blder.. Cheyenne, "V^'■yo.

FURRY. ])r. L.. Cheyenne,

Wvo. (M.D.)
FURST, O. J.. 1335 W. 37th

Place. Los Angeles, Cal.

FUSAY. HENRY. M., 50 W.

82nd St.,  New  York,  N. Y.

(Ma.)
FUSCH, AUGUSTA  L., 1630 E.

3rd  St.,  Topeka,  Kans.

FUSCH,  W.  H.  A.. 1630  E.  3rd

St., Topeka, Kans. (M.D.)


GAARD. CARL B.. Fort

Dodge.  la. (D.C.)
Chris.,  Estherville,  la.  (D.C.)
GABBERT, A. J., Paris, Mo.

Harrv. New London, la.

GABLE, CLYDE A.. 4545

B'way,  Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
GABLE, FONDA M.. 322 E.

51st St., Chicago, 111.

John A.. Renig Bldg.. Ma-
honey  City,  Pa. (D.C.)
Rov  J., 322 E. 51st St.,

Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
GABLER, J. F., 234 S. Blvd.,

Oak Park. 111. (D.C.)
GABRIEL. DR. EMMA. 1713

Mt. Vernon St.. Philadel-
phia.  Pa. (N.D.)
J. H., 718 Kansas Ave.,

Topeka, Kan. (D.C.)
GACRENBACH, F. A.. 125 S.

Main St.. Wichita, Kan.

GADBORS, L. F., 422 E. 40th

St., Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
GADBOIS, LEON T., 90 Dia-
mond Lake  San..  Area,  111.

GADDIS. CYRUS J.. First

Natl. Bank Bldg.. Oak-
land. Cal. (D.O.)
GADSON, THOMAS H., 403

Mining  Ex.  Bldg.,  Denver,

Colo. (I.)
GAGE. FRED W., Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
H. W., 20 Durand Street,

Platt.sburg. N. Y. (D.C.)
Lyle Ellsworth, 6th Street,

Hillburn, N. Y. (D.O.)
GATR. E. FLORENCE. 120

New York Ave., Brook-
lyn. N.  Y. (D.O.)
GALATIAN, H. B., 152 North

Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
GALATIAN, H. B.. 3700

Chicago Ave., Chicago, ^

111. (N.D.)
GALAVAN, JAMES E., 318

Euclid  Ave., Cleveland, O.

(Ch.)
GALBRATTH  &  GAL-

BRAITH. DRS.. 623  Bath-

ur St.. Toronto, Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)


GALBRAITH,  A., 130 S. Fair-
mont Ave., Pittsburgh,
Pa (DC.)
D.. 623 Bathhurst Street,
Toronto, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
J. C, Clarion. Pa. (D.C.)
Lafayette. Tippecanoe, O.

(D.M.T.)
Sarah & Jane. 80 Notta-
wasaga, Ont.. Can. (D.C.)
W. G.. Orilla. Ont., Can.

W. J., 411 Somerset Street,
Ottawa, Ont.. Can. (D.C.)
GALBREATH, ALBERT
LOUIS, Oakland, 111.
J. Willis, Penna. Bldg.,

William Otisi, Land Title
Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Wm. Otis, 805 E. Washing-
ton St., Philadelphia, Pa.
GALE, MINNIE, 2715 Stevens
Ave.. Minneapolis. Minn.
GALEANER. ELSIE B.. 500
W. 9th St.. Oklahoma
City. Okla. (D.C.)
GALENA. STELLA, 211 Baird
Bldg., Mansfield. O. (Ch.)
GALES, A. A.. Sank Center,

Minn. (D.C.)
GALLAGHER. DOLLIE

HUNT. The Vendome
Hotel. Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
GALLAHER. ERNEST,

Charlestown, Ark. (D.C.)
Harry, Greenwood. Ark.

Harry, 2401 Scott  St., Little

Rock. Ark. (D.C.)
Dr. Harry. 221 E. 8th St..
Oklahoma City, Okla.

GALLAGHER & LONG, 401-2

Frisco Bldg., Joplin, Mo.

GALLAMORE, J. T., Pritchett

Bldg., Fairbury,  Nebr.

GALLEGLEY. HARVEY A.,

2249 Bissell St., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)


GALLIVAN, C. L., Ivesdale,

111. (D.O.)
GALOP, JOHN, Searles Bldg.,

Monmouth, 111. (D.C.)
GALSGIE, EDWARD C, Odd

Fellows'  Bldg.,  Reno,  Nev.


GAMBLE & GAMBLE, Gandy,

^ Neb. (D.C.)
GAMBLE, GUSTA\njS A.,

Mclntyre  Bldg., Salt  I^ke

City, Utah. (D.O.)
Harry W., Missouri Valley,

la. (D.O.)
Mary E., Templeton Bldg.,

Salt Lake City, Utah.

GANOUNG, FLOYD J., Olean,

N. Y. (D.O.)
GANTS, S. L., 721 Broad St.,

Providence, R. I. (D.O.)
GARBISH,  HENRY,  410

Brown  Bldg.,  Washington,

Pa. (D  C  )
GARBREATH, CONRAD V.,

5 N. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
GARCIA, ALBERTO E., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
GARCIA,  ALBERT  E.,  Tecato,

San Diego County, Cal.

GARDINER, WARREN L.,

Corning, la. (D.O.)
GARDNER, CHAS. A., 1597  E.

93rd St., Cleveland,  O.

(D.M.T.)
GARDNER.  J.  A.. 965  Jackson

St.. Oakland. Cal. (N.D.)
William. 702 W. 4th St.,

Sterling, 111. (D.O.)
GAREY,  C. M.,  Lemmon. S. D.


M. S.. 1159 E.
Brooklyn,  N. Y.


GARFINKEL,

Parkway,

(Opt.)
GARIVAN. J.

Mich. (D.C.)
GARLINGHOUSE.

S. Main St.,

Mich. (D.O.)
GARLOCK, 4  24 Bowen Ave.,

Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
GARMAN. DELBERT. 1111

Liidington St.. Escaneo,

Mich. (D.C.)


W., Muskegon,


A. J., 134J
Charlotte,


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


881


MATIJACA, ANTHONY, M. D., N. D.,
D.  O.

Author  of  "Principles  of  Electro-Medi-
cine, Electro  -  Surgery  and  Radiology";
author  of  "Electro-therapy  in  the
Abstract";  Associate  editor  of  the
Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath;
Member  of  the  Illinois  State
Society  of  Naturopaths  and  the
American  Naturopathic  Associa-
tion; formerly  physician  in  charge
of  the  Hindhead  Nursing  Home  in
Surrey,  England,  and  the  Electro-
Curative  Institute  in  Nelson,  Lane.
England;  formerly  lecturer  of
Electro-Medicine  at  the  College
of  Physiological  Therapeutics;  Licentiate,
Illinois  State  Board  of  Health,  etc.

Dr.  Anthony  Matijaca  was  born  Septem-
ber 16th,  1889,  in  Trappano,  Dalmatia  (on
the  Adriatic).  In  1900,  he  entered  the  Im-
perial High  Gymnasium  in  Spalato,  Dal-
matia, where  he  obtained  his  high  school
education.  From  1908  to  1915  he  studied
various  branches  of  the  healing  art  both  in
America  and  in  Europe,  and  graduated  in
Medicine  (M.  D.),  Osteopathy  (-D.  O.),
Chiropractic  (D.  C.),  Naturopathy  (N.  D.),
Ophthalmology  (O.  G.),  etc.  Having  wit-
nessed numerous  remarkable  results  ob-
tained with  electro-medication  in  several
London  hospitals,  in  1912  he  devoted  him-
self particularly  to  the  study  and  practice
of  electro-medicine  and  electro-surgery.
His  first  article  on  this  subject  appeared  in
the  British  Physio-Medical  Journal  (The
Herb  Doctor)  in  October  1913,  and  during
the  year  1916  he  contributed  valuable  arti-
cles to  every  issue  of  the  Herald  of  Health
and  Naturopath.  Since  November  1915,  he
is  successfully  practicing  this  science  at
413  Cass  Street.  Joliet,  Illinois,  U.  S.  A.

MILDENBERGER, CHARLES, D. O..
D.  C,  68-70  Hudson  St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.

As  an  osteopath  and  naturopath,  doctor
Charles  Mildenberger,  of  room  305-7  Ter-
minal Building,  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  has  always
had  a  good  name.  From  his  very  start  in
Brooklyn,  using  principally  osteopathic
and  hydropathic,  as  well  as  the  so-called
bio-chemic  methods,  he  has  been  very  suc-
cessful. His  convictions  on  progressive
therapy  were  so  strong  that  he  did  not
shirk,  but  kept  up  his  practice  in  spite  of
persecution,  which  at  one  time  was  carried
on  in  Greater  New  York.  The  sleuths  and
spies  of  the  Medical  Trust  also  hunted  him
up,  but  he  never  wavered  for  a  moment.
He  stuck  to  the  work  and  finally  trium-
phed in  spite  of  opposition.  He  opened  a
branch  in  Hoboken,  where  he  uses  the  very
latest  methods  such  as  osteopathy,  chiro-
practic, electricity,  vibration,  ultra  violet
rays,  radio  thermo-light.  pandiculator,  as
well  as  internal  medication  by  biopathy.
He  specializes  in  the  following  diseases:
nervousness,  neurasthenia,  St.  Vitus  Dance,
female  ills  of  every  description;  heart,  liver,


kidney  and  bladder  troubles,  rheumatism,
gout,  etc.  We  take  pleasure  in  introducing
Dr.  Mildenberg  as  at  once  a  conservative
and  progressive  practitioner.  He  holds  a
License  as  osteopath  in  New  Jersey.

MUCKLEY,  FERDINAND,  A.  N.  V.,  115
East  59th  Street,  New  York  City.
Dr.  Muckley  is  a  well-known  naturopath,
who  has  for  many  years  specialized  in  in-
troducing a  natural  mineral  water  known
as  "Aqua  Nova  Vita."  The  results  obtained
by  him  with  this  water  in  cases  of  cancer
and  high  blood  pressure,  arterio-sclerosis
and  syphilis  are  quite  remarkable.  His
methods  are  used  by  many  doctors  in  the
drugless  field,  and  the  water  is  also  used  in
a  good  many  institutions.  It  has  the  en-
dorsement of  some  of  the  best  doctors  of
all  schools.  Dr.  Muckley  is  a  member  of
the  A.  N.  A.  and  a  staunch  supporter  of  all
movements  for  progressive,  rational  medi-
cine, its  protection  and  the  education  of  the
public  in  the  art  of  natural  living.

MUNRO,  W.  D.,  N.  D.,

Dr. Munro,  of New Haven, Conn., is a
successful  practitioner  of  Drugless  healing.


Dr. W. D. Munro

When  he  set  out  on  his  career,  he  weighed
the  respective  powers  and  advantages  of  the
two  opposing  schools  of  medicine,  the  offi-
cial school  that  revels  in  the  guess  work
of  drugs  and  serums,  and  the  more  scien-
tific and  congenial  school  that  makes  use
of  simple  natural  forces;  in  a  word,  the
claims  of  the  medical  reactionaries  and
those  of  the  progressives,  and  he  wiselj-
adopted the progressive program. This.


882


Alphabetical  Index


Gamer
Gibson


GARNER. K. B., Brownwood,

Texas. (S.T.)

GARXES, MOSES, R. F. D. 1.

Box 44, Richmondale, O.


S. Ella. Garner. la. (D.C.)

GARNETT. ADDIE K, White

Salmon. Wash. (D.O.)
GARREN. W.. 220 S. Green
St., Crawfordsville, Ind.
GARRETT. S. .T., 210 N. .\nn

St., Chicago. Til. (N.IX)
GARRETT. CARI-OS K., 811
Church St., Lynchburg,
Va. (D.O.)
.T. C, Ypsilanti Saving's
Bank Bldg., Ypsilanti,
Mich. (D.O.)
M.  E.,  Valpcv  Bldg:.,  Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
GARRIGUES, LOUTS L., Old
Natl.  Bank  Bldg-.,  Spokane,
Wash. (D.O.)
GARRIHART, EDWARD R.,
2333 Milwaukee Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
CrARRISON,  ELEANOR,  229  E.
Main St., Plymouth, Pa.
(JARSAGE.  H.  P..  1100  Kansas
Ave.. Topeka, Kan. (D.C.)
GARSTICK. JOE, Cor. Main
and Mill Sts., Niles, O.
Jos., 22 Maple Ave., Niles,
O. (DC.)
GARTNER,  I.  C,  Moffatt,  Colo.

GARTRELL,  T.  D..  Speed.  Kan.
Seymour C, Lake City, Ta.
GARVIN, JAMES E., 703
Osborn St., Sandusky, O.
Sophia P., 1114 Washing-
ton  St., Sandusky. O.
Jas. E.. Box 135, Grant
Vallev, Ont.. Can. (D.C.)
GARWIN.  DR.,  Paradise

A'allett Sanitarium.
National City, Cal. (D.C.)
GASKTLL, A.. R. F. D. 1,

Midland  City.  O.

GASS. C. A.. 10513 Lee Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)

P. Y., Beatrice. Neb. (D.O.)

GATES. B. A., 617 John St.,

Little Falls. N. Y. (D.C.)

Bertha M.. 31G Main St.,

Ames, la. (D.O.)
E. H., 322 Percy St.. Flush-
ing, L. L, (D.C.)
Gertrude Lord, Corbett
Bldg., Portland, Qre.
.T. Meuso, 702 Carrie Street,
Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.
Leslie, General Delivery,

Gary, Tnd. (D.C.)
Mable, Saginaw,  Mich.  (D.C.)
Marie L., 222 Percv Street,

Flu.shing. L. T. (D.C.)
Mary A., Box 180. T>eon, la.

(DO.)
Menzo. Sault Ste. Marie,
Mich. (D.C.)
O. B.. Ciapo P.Ik., Bav Citv,
Mich. (DO.)
Roy T., Ayrshire, Ta. (D.C.)
GAUGHAN, P. W., 309-10
Clarenc<> T^ldg.. (512 TOucMd
Ave., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
P. W., 8424 Hough Ave.,
Cleveland. O. (N.D.)
GAT'MTOR. H. \V., Blackfoot,
Idaho (D.C.)


.M.


C, If) 7 State
Me. (D.O.)


GAUNER. H. W.. inackfocl.

Idaho. (D.C.)
GAUNT, P. D.. Kechi, Kan.

Dr.  P.  D..  Kansas  Citv.  Kan.

GAUTSCHIM. FREDERICK.

Napoleon,  O. (D.O.)
GAWIN, S. P.. MRS.. 1114

Washington Street, San-

duskv. O. (N.D.)
S. E.. 733 O.sborne Street.

Sandusky, O. (N.D.)
GAY, HOWARD

O. (D.M.T.)
GAY. VIRGINIA

St.. Augu.'sta.
GAYLE, B.  L., 515 N. 12th  St

Waco, Tex. (D.O.)
GAYLOR, ETHEL GER-
TRUDE, 11122  S.  Michigan

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
GAYLORD, BERTHA J., 61

Park Blvd., Detroit, Mich.

Bertha  J., 132  Church  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
Ida, 2244 Gaylord Street,

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
.1. S., Barnwell, Ala. (D.O.)
(lAYLORD, C. M.. Montpelier,

Idaho (D.C.)
GEARHART, L. L.. 52 W.

Chippewa  St., Buffalo,

N. Y.
GEARHART, L. L., 114 King

St. W., Brackville, Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)
I.,. I.,., 54 Ketchum Place,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
W. H., Spreckles Theatre

Bldg., San  Diego. Cal.

GEARY, ALICE L.. 191

Genesee St.. Utica, N. Y.

GEBHART, ANNA, 29 N. 1st

St.. Davton. O. (D.M.T.)
GEPHARDT. ARTHUR. 221

Laflin St., Chicago, 111.

Arthui-, Fond du Lac, Wis.

GEBHARDT. MARY O., Med-
ical Blk.. Minneapolis,

Mich. (D.O.)
GBBLER. J. F.. 23'4 S. Blvd.,

Oak Park, 111. (D.C.)
GEDDES, PAUL W., Hut-
chinson  Bldg., Shreveport,

la. (D.O.)
GEDDIS, L., Valentine, Neb.

GEDGE, EDNA, 2714 Nor-

mandi Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
GEESE, C. S., 5531 Main St.,

Coshocton, O. (N.D.)
GEESE, C. S., Old Washing-
ton, Ohio (D.C.)
GEHL,  A. F., 1550  Claybourne

Ave.,  Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
GEHMAN,  Miss  S.,  W.  C.  T.  U.,

Canton, Ohio (D.M.T.)
GEHRIG. F. W.. 3519 Harper

St.. Oakland. Cal. (N.D  )
GEHRS. JOHN G. O., 221

Angelique Street, Wee-

hawken, N.  J. (D.C.)
GEIGER,  J.  J.,  549  Canada  St.,

St. Paul, Minn. (N.D.)
GEISER, J. STEPHEN, 39

North  Ave.,  New^  Rochelle,

N. Y. (N.D.. D.C.)
GEISSE. CHAS. E.. 19 She-

bovgan St.. Fond du Lac,

Wis. (D.O.)
GELANDER. ANNA E.,

Manilla, la. (D.O)


GEORGJ:, MRS. HELEN. 1126
C of C. Detroit, Mich.
Mrs. Marion, Columbus, O.

F. E., 601 Columbia Bldg.,
Cleveland, O. (N.D.)

GEORGER,  F.  A.  M.,  Cor.  14tli
and  I  St.,  N.W.,  Washing-
ton, D.  C. (N.D.)

GERARD,  FRANK,  Marion,  O.
(D.M.T.)

GERBER  &  GERBER,  625  Co-
lumbia Bldg.,  Cleveland,
O. (N.D.)

GERBER. FRED. B., 122-24
Colonial Arcade, Cleve-
land,  O. (D.C.)

GERCKE,  GEO.  A.,  7101  Tulip
St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

GERDINE,  L.  VON  H..  Kirks-
ville. Mo. (D.O.)

GERKING, S. D., U. C. C,  ^
Davenport, Iowa (D.C.)

GERLACH, Dr. A. J., Los
Gatos, Cal. (N.D.)

GERMAN,  GEO.  C,  146  Sixth
St., Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)

GIORMAXJC. C. D., Moscow,
Idaho (D.C.)

GERMANN  FRANK  A.,  612
Syms  St.,  W.  Hoboken,
N. J. (D.C.)

GERMANY,  PROF.  W.  J.  C,
San  Angelo,  Tex. (S.T.)

GERNHARDT. 72fi E. Adams
St.. Los Angeles, Cal.

GERNHARDT, EDWARD R.,
2333 Milwaukee Ave.,
Logan Sq., Chicago, 111.

GERRIE, WM. ALFRED, 210-
211 Boston Bldg., Pasa-
dena,  Cal. (N.D.)
W. M., 222 Boston Bldg.,
Pasadena, Cal. (D.C.)

GERRISH,  CLARA  THOMAS,
Auditorium  Bldg.,  Minne-
apolis, Minn. (D.O.)

GERSCHANEK, DR. S., c/o
New York School of Chi-
ropractic, 39th St. and
B'way, New York, N. Y.

GESNER,  C.  E.,  103  Atwater
Terrace,  Springfield,  Mass.

GETCHELL,  CHAS.  ELLS-
WORTH, Reinking  Bldg.,
Baraboo. Wis. (D.O.)

GETTER,  D.  W..  Chillicothe.
O. (D.M.T.)

GEYER.  ELIZABETH  J.,
Hawks-Gortner  Building,
Goshen, Ind. (D.O.)

GHOSTLEY,  RAYMOND  C,
Mcl^eod  Bldg.,  Edmonton.
Alberta. (D.O.)

GIBBONS.  J.  E..  Concordia.
Kan. (D.O.)

GIBBS, JOHN  P., 2750  Fuller-
ton Ave., Chicago, 111.

GIBSON, FRANK E.. 927 I
St. N. W.. ^Vashington.
D. C. (D.C.)
H.  R.,  Clovis,  N.  Mex. (DO.)
J. H., 1911 W. 3rd St.,

Dayton, O. (N.D.)
Mrs. Margaret. Lindbarg.

Kan. (D.C.)
P.  W.,  Fuller  Building,  Win-
field, Kan. (D.O.)
W. A., New Haven, Conn.

W. D., 938 Chapel St., New
Britain, Conn. (D.C.)


Nalnrojxilhic  lii()(/r<ij)hi((il  Notes


883


indeed,  is  the  proper  snluti(Hi  of  the  medi-
cal question.  Its  practices  and  precepts,
vvlien  faitlifuUy  observed,  make  for  relief,
cure,  development,  progress,  and  the  at-
tainment of  aboundin.n  vitality.

NEAGLEY,  ASIA  L.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Neagley  is  president  of  the  Pittsburgh
Health  League,  which  has  espcnised  the
cause  of  natural  drugless
treatment  as  the  most  efifi-
cient  method  of  curing  the
ailments  of  mankind.  The
league  has  discovered  that
poisonous  drugs  are  no
remedies  for  disease,  but
only  make  things  worse,  and
that  to  really  cure  disease,
the  progressive  physician
must  apply  the  essentials  of
life,  such  as  mind,  air,  light,  heat,  water,
rest,  exercise,  diet  and  electricity,  all  con-
genial intensitications  of  the  restorative
l)Owers  of  Nature,  the  only  true  physician.
All  this  is  in  obedience  to  a  mighty  wave
of  spiritual  impulse  that  is  sweeping  over
humanity  at  present,  by  virtue  of  which
mankind  has  conceived  a  loathing  for
poisonous  drugs  and  filthy,  animalized
serums,  vaccines  and  inoculations  with
which  retrogressive  medicine,  sodden  with
custom  and  tradition,  and  smeared  with  the
slime  of  the  Dark  Ages,  is  continually
striving,  in  defiance  of  hygiene  and  sanita-
tion, to  corrupt  and  poison  the  bodies  of
its  victims.  But  even  within  the  ranks  of
the  true  healers  are  dissentient  voices  loud-
ly claiming  all  the  virtues  of  the  whole  of
Naturopathy  for  a  part  thereof.  As  an
active  organizer  of  Naturopathic  associa-
tions, she  now  and  then  experiences  a  set-
l)ack  that  is  disconcerting.  Having  ob-
tained 30  charter  members  for  a  local
branch  of  the  American  Naturopathic  Asso-
ciation in  Pittsburgh,  Dr.  Neagley  learned
that  the  Pittsburgh  College  of  Chiropractic
instructed  its  students  that  they  should  not
connect  themselves,  with  the  Naturopaths,
but  that  they  should  live  and  talk  chiro-
practic only.  "The  West  View  League"  and
"Rose  Health  League  No.  1  of  Allegheny"
are  Dr.  Neagley's  recent  creations.


NESMITH,  L.  M.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C,  B.  So.

The  Rev.  Dr.  L.  M.  Nesmith,  of  Custar,
Ohio,  is  a  graduate  of  many  schools  of
Naturopathy, but is not a practising phy-

sician. He is a lecturer

and  entertainer,  and  his
wise  counsel  and  co-oper-
ation with  drugless  prac-
titioners make  him  a
._  ,^  tower of strength in the

Wl^^^  cause  of  progressive
^^^gj^^H  medicine.  He  believes
J^^Bj^^H  with  all  naturopaths  that
^^^BIHHr medical freedom is one


of  the  greatest  needs  of  the  hour.  Political
freedom,  religious  freedom  and  medical
freedom  are  the  three  most  sacred  rights
of  mankind.  We  have  achieved  political
and  religious  freedom,  but  we  suffer  frotn
deprivation  of  the  right  to  choose  our  own
physician  \)y  men  who,  unsuccessful  in  their
professional  venture,  have  abandoned  us
and  pronounced  us  incurable.  This  seems
to  be  something  in  the  line  of  slavery  that
could  only  belong  to  the  Dark  Ages,  but,
in  reality,  such  slavery  exists  here  and
now,  and  drugless  practitioners  who  have
responded  to  the  call  of  a  dying  human
creature,  and  have  saved  the  life  of  such,
are  arrested  and  imprisoned,  by  virtue  of
laws  created  by  the  influence  of  the  Medi-
cal Trust,  which  declares  that  a  man  pro-
claims himself  a  criminal  by  saving  the
life  of  a  fellow  creature!  Dr.  Nesmith,
in  championing  the  cause  of  medical  free-
dom, is  acting  on  strictly  humanitarian
and  democratic  American  lines.  His  prin-
ciples are  based  on  justice  and  equity.
Possessing  a  high  moral  character  and  a
conscience  both  sensitive  and  strong  in  its
adherence  to  duty,  as  well  as  a  humani-
tarian spirit,  he  is  equipped  for  his  work  as
a  reformer,  which  is  to  diagnose  our  sick
civilization  and  point  out  where  it  is  ail-
ing, both  here  and  there,  and  at  the  same
the  disease.

PARKER,  PROF.  H.  N.  D.,  M.  D.,  N.  D.

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in
Jefferson  County,  State  of  New  York,  in
1840.  His  father  was  an  early  student  and
practitioner  of  Thomson's  Botanic  System
of Herbal Medicine, which was the fore-


Dt. H. N. D. Parker


884


Alphabetical  Index


Giddings
(ionyer


GIDDINGS. HELEN MAR-
SHALL, New England
BIdg.,  Cleveland,  O. (D.O.)  \
Mary, New England Bldg.,  i
Cleveland, O. (D.O.)
GIDLEY, J. B., F. P. Smith
Bldg-.. Flint, Mich. (D.O.)
GIES, F. A., O. Beirne Bldg..

Elgin,  111. (D.O.)
GIBSEN. ARMIN. 1362 Pros-  ,
pect Ave., Bronx, New
York City. N. Y. (N.D.)
GIFFEY. OTTO E., Owosso,
Mich. (D.O
R. E.. 228 W. High Street,
New Philadelphia, O.
GILBERT, CLYDE C. 7-8
Rice  Blk.,  Caldwell. Idaho
H. Arnitt B., 28 S. 7th St.,

Allentown. Pa. (D.O.)
J. E., Carter, Okla. (S.T.)
J.  T..  Citv  Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,
Paducah, Ky. (D.O.)
GILCHRIST. ELIZABETH L..
337 Lincoln Ave., Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
GILDERSLEEYE, J. ELLEN,
Amicable Bldg., Waco,
Tex. (D.O.)
GILES. JOEL P.. Enid, Okla.
Mary E., Morgan Bldg.,
Portland. Ore. (D.O.)
GILKERSON. J. E.. 403 Ham-
berger  Bldg..  Los  Angeles.
Cal. (D.C.)
J. K., 1101 Marsh-Strong
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
GILKEY, MRS. L.. 122J S.
Market St.. Wichita, Kan.
GILL. MRS. C. Lohrville. la.
Mrs.  O..  Lohrville.  la. (D.C.)
GILLAM,  JAMES.  Russellville.

Ark. (D.C.)
GILLBERT, CLYDE C. 78
Rich Bldg.. Caldwell,
Idaho. (D.C.)
GILLER. WM. E.. Perry, la.

GILLESPIE. GEO. D., 601
Elkan-Gunst Bldg.. San
Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)
GILLESPIE, GEORGE D.,
335 Stockton St., San
Francisco. Cal. (N.D.)
Harriet M.. 133 Geary St..
San  Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
GILLET. SPENCER, 1631
Brush St., Detroit, Mich.
GILLIAM, J. P., Hartford,
Ark. (D.C.)
William B., Lewisburg, Ky.
GILLIAR,  JOSEPH,  190

Sherman Ave., Jersey
City. N. J. (D.C.)
GILLIN, J. J., 53 S. 3rd St.,

Brooklyn. N. Y. (D.C.)
GILLINGHAM, W. P.. 11th
and Central Sts., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
GILLIS. N., 920 Bedford Ave.,

Brooklyn. N. Y. (Opt.)
GILMORE. G. H., Red Wing,

Minn. (D.C.)
GILMORE. S. J., Ridgeway,

Mo. (D.O.)
GILMOUR,  ELLA  R.. Security
Bldg., Sioux  City,  la.
GINN, DORA, 328  Va S. High

St., Columbus, O. (Ma.)
GINSBURG, S., 251 W. 111th
St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.  (Ma.)


GINSBURG,  JOEL,  193  Co-
lumbia Rd..  Dorchester,
Mass. (D.O.)  I

N., 2607 W. Division St.,  '

Chicago,  111. (D.O..  D.C.)
Samuel M.. 60 W. 7r)th St..  i
New  York,  N.  Y. (Ma.)
GIRAUX, ELIZABETH J.,
Marsh  Blk.,  Pontiac,  Mich.  '
GIRKES, Dr. LOUIS, 2073  |

66th St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Ch.)  I

GIRLING. MINNIE, Great

Bend, Kan. (D.C.)
GIROUX. E. G.. 28 W. Utica

St.. Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)  '
GISS,  A. J., 208  Loury  Annex.
St. Paul. Minn. (D.C.)
GITZEN. G. R.. 1198 Gratiot
Ave.,  Detroit.  Mich. (D.C.)
GLADMAN, DAVID V., 62
Queen St., Niagara Falls,
N. Y. (D.O.)
Julia M.. Niagara Falls,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
GLAESCHER. ALMA. 2058
Elm St.. Norwood, O.
(D. C.)
GLASGOW, A. M.. Minnehaha
Bldg.. Sioux Falls, S. D.
Joseph C. Reedley. Cal.
GLASGOW,  J.  RUPERT.  Wood
Block. Manitowoc, Wis.
GLASSBURN. H. D..

Macedonia. la. (N.D.)
GLASSCO.  GEO.  M.,  Jr.,  Rock-

ville, Ind. (D.O.)
GLASSCOCK, HAROLD. Ma-
sonic Temple, Raleigh,
N. C. (D.O.)
GLATFELTER, Mrs. C. W.,

Riverside. 111. (N.D.)
GLAUS. G. D., 522 Germania
Bldg., Milwaiikee. Wis.
GLEASON, ALSON H., 765
Main St.. Worcester,
Mass. (D.O.)
B. L.. Edwards Bldg.,
Larned, Kan. (D.O.)
GLEASON.  JOHN  H.,  20  E.

46th St., New York,  N. Y.
(Ma.)
:}LEDHILL, T. R., Richfield,
Utah  (M.D.)
W.  J.. 1419  N. 7th  Street,
Philadelphia, Pa. (N.D.)
GLEICHMAN, WM.. Brokaw
Bldg.. 1457 B'way. New
York,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
GLENDINNING.  H.. East  Chi-
cago.  Ind. (N.D.)
GLENN, J. O., Santa Monica
Blvd., Santa Monica, Cal.
GLEZEN, R. A., Kalamazoo
Natl. Bank Bldg.. Kala-
mazoo.  Mich. (D.O.)
GLIDDEN,  DURELLE  E.,  1550
3rd St., San Diego, Cal.
j-LIDER, W. H., Onawa, la.

GLOCKLER, A. C, Marion,
S. Dak. (D.C.)
A.  G..  Menno,  S.  Dak. (D.C.)
GLODEN. J. N., Hubbard,

Iowa (N.D.)
GLOVER. J. C, Poteau, Okla.
J. C, West Blockton, Ala.
I J. David. Amer. Natl. Bank
Bldg., San Diego, Cal.


Norman  C,  14th  and  Clifton
Sts. N. W.. Washington.
D. C. (D.O.)
Wm.,  304  N.  Ave.  A.,  Canton.
111. (D.C.)
(iLOVER, N. C, Wardman

Courts  West,  Washington.
D. C. (D.C.)
GLUFF. ARTHUR G., 505
Liggett Bldg.. Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
GLURLEY, J. T., Paragould.

Ark. (D.C.)
GOBEL. BERTHA A., 364-a
Arsenal St., St. Louis,
Mo. (D.O.)
GOBLE & GOBLE, Beaumont.

Texas (N.D.)
GODFREY, FRANCIS M..
Newman Bldg., Holton,
Kan. (D.O.)
H. S., 105 N. State Street.

Belvedere, 111. (D.C.)
Nancy  J.,  Holton,  Kan.
GOEHRING, FRANK L.,
Nixon Bldg., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.O.)
Harry M., Diamond Bank
Bldg.. Pittsburgh, Pa.
GOELZ. W. C. Box 1046,

Pensacola, Fla. (D.C.)
GOETTLER,  MARGARET.

467  N.  Fair  Oak  St..  Pasa-
dena, Cal. (D.C.)
GOERGER. P.  A.  M.. 14th  and
I Sts. N.W., Washington,
D. C. (D.O.)
GOETZ.  HERMAN  P.,  Century
Bldg.. St. Louis, Mo.
GOFF. MARY. 1629 N. Mc-
Kinley  St..  Oklahoma  City,
Okla. (N.D.)
Mary. 1600 N. McKinley  St.,
Oklahoma City. Okla.
GOGEL, W., 7 N. Main St..
Marshalltown, la. (D.C.)
GOIN. C. F., 4226-a Virginia
Ave.. Saint  Louis,  Mo. (C)
GOIN. FRANK. 636 Wayne
Ave.. St.  Louis,  Mo. (S.T.)
Frank. 4447 S. Nebraska
Ave.,  St.  Louis,  Mo. (D.C.)
GOI^DBERG,  A. M., 647  Euclid
Ave.. Cleveland, O. (Ch.)
Bernard  M.. 628  National
Bank Bldg.. Akron. O.
(Ch.)
GOLDEN, MARY E.. Citizens'
Nat'l Bank Bldg.. Des
Moines, la. (D.O.)
GOLDING.  JAS.. 5604  S.  Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
GOLDMAN,  A..  1146  Washburn
Ave.,  Chicago.  111. (N.D.)
Miss Anna, 25 Cooper St.,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (Cr.)
GOLDSTEIN, ISAAC. 4001

Grand Ave.. Chicago, 111.
GOLDSTEIN,  ISRAEL  A., 1  E.
117th  St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.
GOMEZ,  H.  VON,  Jacksonville,

Fla. (N.D.)
GONCKER, JOHN F., 5308
Gertrude St.. Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.C.)
GONGER, C. H.. 222-224
Nasby Bldg., Toledo, O.
GONYER, C. H.. 222 Nasby
Bldg.. Toledo, O. (N.D.,
D.C.)
C. H.. Bowling  Green,  O.
(DC.)


N(ilur()})(tlhic  Biographical  Notes


88")


runner  of  Eclectic  Medicine.  During  the
Civil  ''War,  he  enlisted  in  response  to
FVesident  Lincoln's  first  call  for  volunteers,
and  for  two  years  served  with  his  regiment
in  every  engagement.  He  was  lionorably
discharged  in  June,  1863.  After  every  engage-
ment he  was  "detailed  to  assist  the  surgeons
in  the  care  of  the  wounded  and  sick.  The
knowledge  he  gained  then,  together  with  the
infomation  acquired  while  assisting  his  fa-
ther, was  of  much  value  to  him  in  his  college
course  and  later  in  life.  He  graduated  in
Eclectic  Medicine  in  1864,  and  began  the
])ractice  of  medicine  in  December  of  the
same  year.  In  1867  he  became  acquainted
with  the  Vacuum-Neuropathic  (the  nerves)
treatment,  and  combining  it  with  eclectic
medical  treatment,  met  with  unusual  suc-
cess, which  he  soon  discovered  was  entirely
due  to  the  potency  of  the  Vacuum-Neuro-
pathic treatment,  the  truth  of  which  he  was
so  convinced,  that  in  1876  he  publicly,  in
Chicago,  announced  through  the  press  and
to  his  medical  associates,  that  all  diseased
conditions,  if  taken  in  any  reasonable  time,
could  be  cured  (eliminated)  without  drugs,
by  the  Vacuum-Neuropathic  (treating  the
nerves)  treatment  and  its  accessories,  name-
ly, massage,  Turkish  baths  and  other  means
of  promoting  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
aided  by  a  liberal  diet  of  appropriate  foods
that  contained  all  the  elements  for  body
l)uilding  and  sustenance,  in  gestation,  child-
hood, health  and  disease.  While  he  pre-
eat  only  when  hungry,  he  also  paid  strict
attention  to  deep  breathing  and  cleansing
the  intestinal  tract.  For  this  purpose,  Ep-
som salts  are  given  in  one  ounce  doses,  in
one  pint  of  water,  taken  on  an  empty  stom-
ach and  continued  daily,  or  every  other  day,
long  enough  to  clean  the  system  of  the
toxines,  which  result  from,  or  are  the  cause
of  disease,  such  as  fevers  and  eruptive  ail-
ments. Prof.  Parker  was  the  pioneer  of
Drugless  healing  in  the  United  States.  He
was  the  first  (in  1876)  to  publicly  announce
and  advertise  that  diseased  conditions  could
be  eliminated  by  rational,  natural  methods
without  the  use  of  dangerous  and  habit-
forming  drugs  of  mutilating  (and  worse
than  useless)  operations.  The  principal  in-
centive to  these  is  that  the  victim's  physi-
cian eventually  receives  one-half  of  the  fee
that  is  paid  the  operating  surgeon.  It  is
more  often  than  otherwise  that  it  is  this
one-half  of  the  fee  that  makes  the  operation
necessary.  For  corroborative  proof,  read  the
editorial  in  "Medical  Council,"  published  at
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  July,  1914.  The
vacuum  treatment  restores  blood  circulation
and  by  its  masterly  control  of  the  circula-
tion of  the  blood  and  essential  fluids  of  the
])ody  to  the  diseased  parts,  operates  effec-
tively as  a  cure  for  locomotor  ataxia,  hard-
ening of  the  arteries,  heart  disease,  and  all
forms  of  paralysis,  Bright's  disease,  epilepsy,
rheumatism, asthma, insomnia, hardening


and  sclerosis  of  the  spinal  column  and  cord,
arterio-sclerosis,  vertigo,  and  the  desperate
ailments  of  the  digestive,  circulatory,  re-
si)iratory  and  nervous  system;  neurasthenia,
neuritis,  nervous  exhaustion  and  break-
down, curvature  of  the  spine,  and  the
chronic  incurable  (so-called)  diseases  for
which  the  medical  world  has  no  remedy.
The  legislature  of  Illinois,  in  1876,  passed
the  Medical  Practice  Act.  which  prohibited
the  practice  of  medicine  (except  by  licensed
physicians),  which,  in  the  words  of  the  act,
included  everything  one  could  do  to  relieve
human  suffering.  Dr.  Parker  could  have
qualified  under  two  of  the  regulations,
namely,  diploma  and  ten  years'  practice,
when  threatened  with  prosecution  and  with
being  put  out  of  business  unless  he  regis-
tered. He  refused  to  qualify  and  continued
the  practice  without  being  molested,  until
about  1883,  when  prosecution  commenced
and  continued  at  intervals  until  1894,  when
they  ceased,  during  which  time  he  was
prosecuted  thirteen  times,  and  in  every  in-
stance he  admitted  that  he  was  guilty  of
everything  charged,  but  that  he  had  not
done  wrong.  He  was  charged  with  treating
people  in  violation  of  the  law,  the  prose-
cuting witnesses  being  former  patients  (not
detectives  who  will  perjure  themselves),
who  testified  that  they  were  relieved  and
cured,  after  famous  medical  men  of  this
country  and  Europe  had  failed  to  do  so.  In
defence  he  stated  to  the  court  and  jury  that
his  effort  to  relieve  human  suffering  and
restore  to  health  persons  who  had  been  de-
nied relief  from  every  other  source  was  not
wrong,  and  that  as  criminal  laws  were  en-
acted to  punish  people  who  have  done
wrong,  and  not  right,  and  when  they,  the
laws,  prohibited  one  from  doing  right,  the
law  was  wrong,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  the
court,  and  more  especially  the  jury,  to  take
notice  of  the  wrong,  and  convict  the  law  by
acquitting  the  defendant,  which  they  did  in
every  case;  and  prosecution  thereafter
ceased.  He  was  the  first  person  prosecuted
under  the  law  in  Illinois  and  was  always
acquitted.  Here  he  continued  his  extensive
practice,  often  employing  as  many  as  four
assistants,  usually  medical  graduates.  Al-
wajs  having  a  preference  for  Washing-
ton as  a  place  to  live,  he  moved  there  in
1903  and  opened  an  office,  where  he  prac-
ticed his  method  without  molestation  until
1913,  when  he  was  arrested  at  the  behest
of  the  medical  men.  After  a  trial  lasting
two  days,  the  jury,  after  being  out  twenty
minutes,  brought  in  a  verdict  of  "Not
guilty."  The  Health  Department,  under  the
fraudulent  advertising  law,  passed  in  May,
1916,  attempted  to  interfere  with  his  prac-
tice, but  as  his  advertisements  contain  truth-
ful statements  onl}%  they  have  so  far  aban-
doned their  persecutions.  Prof.  Parker  is
an  active  member  of  various  associations  of
Drugless  physicians,  and  is  an  able  advo-
cate of  Drugless  therapy. Fourteen  prose-


886


Alphahclical  Index


Goiiz
(ireen


GONZ. MICHAEL, 36 Mygatt

St.. Binghamton, N. Y.

(DC.)
GOOCH,  GEO.  J..  Althea  Bldff.,

Knoxville,  Tenn. (D.O.)
Lucy, Rupert. Idaho. (D.O.)
GOOD. E.. Manning Bldg.,

Plainfield, N. J. (D.O.)
J. F.,  Conway  Springs, Kan.

Mary,  Conway  Spring.s,  Kan.

Ruth. Kaw City, Okla.

S.  L.,  Duncan,  Okla. (S.T.)
GOOD. KMIL  J., 707 Patterson

St.. Canton, O. (D.M.T.)
GOODE, GEO. W.. 687 Boyl-

ston St., Boston, Mass.

GOODFELLOW, W. V., Fer-
guson  Bldg., Los  Angeles,

Cal. (D.O.)
GOODHART, Geo. J., 209

Medburv Ave., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
M. H., 221 N. 6th Street,

Coshocton, O. (D.C.)
GOODHEART, GEORGE J.,

35 Harper Ave., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
M. H., 221 N. 6th Street,

Coshocton, O. (D.C.)
GOODIN, HERMAN, New

Lexington. O. (D.M.T.)
GOODIS, LOUIS, Valentine,

Neb. (D.C.)
GOODLOVE, PAUL C, B'way

Central Bldg., Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
GOODMAN, M. H., 5451 S.

Ashland Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
Wm. A., 506-8 Robinson

St., Tulsa, Okla. (D.C.)
GOODPASTURE, C. O., Colo-
rado Bldg., Washington,

D. C. (D.O.)
GOODRICH, J. K., 300 Grand

Rapids, Wis. (D.O.)
L. J., San Marcos Bldg.,

San Barbara, Cal. (D.O.)
GOODRICH, J. R., 16 N.

Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

(Nap.)
GOODSELL, FLOYD, 119 W.

9th St., Michigan City,

Ind. (D.C.)
F. S., 627 Sinburn Street,

Grand Rapids, Mich.

GOODWIN, Dana, Mento, la.

I. L., Fallerton, Cal. (D.C.)
GOODWIN, ROY, Electric

Bldg., Buffalo, N. Y. (Cr.)
GORBY, W. R., llli W. Main

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.

GORDES, H. C, 67 Walworth

Ave.,  Delevan,  Wis. (D.C.)
GORDON,  JAMES  A.,  Phoenix,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Joseph,  Rockford,  111. (D.C.)
L. E., Fairfield, la. (D.O.)
LeRoy, M., 514 Brady St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)

W. C, Newton, la. (D.O.)

GORDON,  LEROY  M.,  Box  120,

Montpelier, O. (D.C.)
GORDON, W..  I.. 2236 Ea.st

15th St., Cleveland, O.

GORE,  M.  E., 600  Main  St., E.

Orange,  N.  J. (D.C,  N.  D.,

M.D.. D.O.)
GORHAM, MARIE, Moscow,

Idaho (D.C.)


GORIN, J. W., 247 Bull St..

Savannah, Ga. (D.O.)
GORTON, M. H., Lerov, N. Y.

GOSDEN,  FANNIE,  Farley,  la.

GOSHEN, DR., Goshen. Ind.

GOSNELL, FRANK T., Fort

Smith, Ark. (D.C.)
GOSS, CHAS. A., 10513 Lee

Ave., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
GOSS, CHAS. A.. 531 E. lltth

St., Cleveland,  O. (D.M.T.)
GOSSMAN, W.  A.,  167  Downie

St., Stratford. Ont. (D.O.)
GOTHAM, THOMAS BARRY,

Elsinore,  Cal. (D.O.)
GOTTLIEB, Dr. N. A., 367

Fulton  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

(Ch.)
GOTTSCHALK, L. R., 12

Kingston Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Ma.)
GOTTSHALL, MOLLIE E.,

403-404  Schmidt  Blvd.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (N.D.)
GOUL, J. M., 273 Clifton St.,

Springfield. O. (D.M.T.)
GOULD.  FLOYD  C,  2  Hancock

St., Binghampton, N. Y.
GOULD. W. C, Hicksville,

O. (D.C.)
GOUR. ANDREW A., 49 S.

State St., Chicago, III.

GOURDIER, CHAS. H., Free-
port, 111. (D.O.)
GOURLEY, J. T., Paragould,

Ark. (D.C.)
GOVE, JOHN  MC  CLURE, 7 S.

State Street. Concord,
I  N. H. (D.O.)

i  GOWEN,  JULIA, 1630  Main

St., Denver, Colo. (Faith

Healer)
GOWRLEY, JAS., Collin.sville,
i  Okla. (D.C.)

GRACK, MISS  W., 1247 Hust-
ings St.. Chicago, 111.

GRADWELL, CHAS. C, 715

Wall  St.,  Elmira,  N. Y.
GRAF,  JOHN  F., 1039 E. 19th

St. N., Portland, Ore.

GRAHAM,  ALFRED  G.,

London, Ont.. Can. (D.C.)
Artie May, 242 Powell St.,

San Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)
Charles D.. London. Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)
Chas. E., Ferguson, Ont.,

Canada. (D.C.)
Frank F., Choate Bldg.,

Winona. Minn. (D.O.)
F. W., 217i Liberty St.,

Morris, 111. (D.O.)
George G.. 309 N. 10th St.,

Centreville. la. (D.O.)
George  W.,  Masonic  Temple,

Marshalltown, la. (D.O.)
Herbert C, Santa Monica,

Cal. (D.C.)
H. C, 2146 Duane St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Jno.  D.,  Box  93,  Argyle,  Wis.

J. F.,  Marion,  Ind. (D.C.)
Robert H., Batavia and

Leroy Sts., N. Y. (D.O.)
GRAHAM, CAROLINE E.,

Sewickley, Pa. (D.C.)
Mrs. E., 180 Franklin St.,

Buffalo,  N. Y, (Ma.)
GRAMBOW, DR. EMIL, 37

Lent Ave., Hempstead,

Tv. T., N. Y. (N.D.)


GRAINGER,  LAURA L..

Union  Bank  Bldg.,  Colum-
bia, S. C. (D.O.)

GRAN. MRS. NELLIE F.,

133 Sycamore St., Pitt.s-

burgh. Pa. (D.C.)
CRANBERRY, D. W., 408

Main St., Orange, N. J.


GRANDVIEW SANITARIUM,

Glenway Ave., Cincinnati,

O. (P.)
GRANK, OTIS E., Viroque,

Wis. (D.C.)
GRANNIS. JOSEPHINE, 6214

Superior Ave., Cleveland,

O. (D.C.)
GRANT, LEANORA, Okano-
gan, Wash. (D.O.)
Roswell  D.,  207  Mt.  Prospect

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  .T.  (D.O.)
Wm.,  Lancaster,  Pa.  (D.C.)
W. W., 536 Boston Blk.,

Minneapolis. Minn. (D.C  )
GRAPEK, CHAS., 3211 W

Madison St., Chicago, 111


GRAVES,  FRANCES,  Hunt-
ington Chambers,  Boston,
Mass.  (D.O.)
Geo.  B.,  Hutchinson  and
Lehigh  Sts.,  Philadelphia,
Pa.  (D.O.)
Miller Estelle. Bank 'Bldg.,

La  Grange, 111. (D.O.)
Murray, Svmes Building,

Denver, Colo. (D.O.)
W. Armstrong, Park and
Alleghany Aves., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
GRAVETT, H. H., Orr-Flesh
Bldg., Piqua, O. (D.O.)
W. A., Reibold Bldg., Day-
ton,  O. (D.O.)
GRAY,  CLYDE,  Horton,  Kans.

GRAY.  CLYDE,  1520  S.  Wash-
ington St.. Pocatello,
Idaho. (D.C.)
C. W., 3 Hakes Ave.,

Hornell,  N.  Y. (D.O.)

E. J., 557 Talbot St.. St.

Thomas, Ont., Can. (D.O.)

Emma J., 802 S. Painter

Ave.. Whittier,  Cal. (D.C.)

Frank. 1509 Glenn Avenue,

Kansas Citv, Kan. (M.D.)

Geo. W.. 463 S. Forest  Ave..

Youngstown, O. (D.C.)
Geo.  W.,  216  E.  Franklin  St.,

Warren, O. (D.C.)
Geo. W., 921i Market St.,

Youngstown, O. (N.D.)
H. Mary, 28 W. Utica St..

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
Mary  H., 735 Prospect  Ave..

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
Mary H., 409 Porter Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
Miss Maud, 11 S. Euclid
Ave.,  Pasadena,  Cal.  (D.C.)
Mrs. Sarah S.. Box 56,
Alpena, S. Dak. (S.T.)
GREATHOUSE, PAUL A.,
Conover Bldg., Dayton,
O. (D.O.)
GREAVES, G. H., 1107 Bed-
ford Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
(Opt.)
GREEDY, FRANK A., 625
Commonwealth Bldg.,
Denver, Colo. (Or.S.)
GREEN & GREEN, Stafford,

Kan. (D.C.)
GREEN,  MRS. CHAS..  Tecum-
seh.  Neb. (DC.)
C. D., May Bldg.. Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


887


cutions  have  failed  to  destroy  his  useful-
ness to  mankind.  Thanks  to  the  intelli-
gence of  the  various  juries  before  whom  he
defended  himself,  lie  was  never  found
guilty  of  wrong-doing.  His  present  ad-
dress  is Washington, D. C.

PATTREIOUEX, J. ALLEN, N. D.

J.'  Allen  Pattreiouex,  N.  D.  (pronounced
Pat-re-o),  was  born  at  Manchester,  Eng-
land, of  English  parents.
He  was  educated  at  the
Manchester  Central  School
and  became  ijie  winner  of
a  Science  and  Art  Scholar-
ship under  the  Manchester
Hoard  of  Education.  He
is  the  holder  of  advanced
Jj^  ^H  certificates  in  the  Govern-
^^m*k-'^^^  ment  Department  of  Sci-
-^^™  '^  ^^^1  ence  and  Art.  London,  on
Physiology,  Hygiene,  In-
organic Chemistry  (Theoretical  and  Prac-
tical), Mathematics,  Light,  Heat,  Mag-
netism and  Electricity,  etc.  He  is  the
holder  of  the  Medallion  of  the  St.  John
Ambulance  Association.  He  has  been
trained  and  certificated  in  various
branches  of  Naturopathy,  of  Electro-
Therapeutics,  Osteopathy,  Hydrotherapy,
Radiant  Light  and  Heat  which  he  studied
at  the  Oldham  Hydro-  and  Electro-
Therapeutic  Establishment,  Oldham,
Lane.  He  is  also  a  Certificated  Licensee
of  the  Dowsing  Radiant  Heat  and  Light
Company,  London.  In  addition  to  his
private  practice,  he  is  now  busily  engaged
in  treating  wounded  soldiers  from  the
Red  Cross  Hospital,  on  Naturopathic
lines.  Dr.  Pattreiouex  is  interested  in  all
kinds  of  Natural  Therapy,  especially  in
Food  Reform,  Dietetics  and  Chromo-
therapy.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Vege-
tarian Society,  compiler  of  "First  Lessons
in  Chromoscopy.  the  New  Color  Science,"
and  a  member  and  English  representative
of  the Universal Naturopathic Alliance.

PAYNE,  A.  v.,  D.  C,  M.  D.

Chiropractor.  Fi^e  consultation.  Lady
attendant.  Address:  Marbridge  Building,
Broadway  and  34th  Street.  New  York.
Office  hours.  8  A.  M.  to  8  P.  M.

PRILLWITZ,  A.  VON,  N.  D.

Dr.  Prillwitz  began  his  public  life  as  a
lieutenant  in  the  German  army,  but  he  re-
signed this  career  to  settle
in  South  America  as  a  Na-
turopath. He  was  im-
pressed with  the  virtues  of
such  a  method  of  healing,
both  in  the  case  of  himself
and  his  wife,  and  began  to
teach  the  public  the  health-
ful theories  promulgated  by
Priessnitz.  Kuhne.  Kneipp.
Just, Bilz and Ehret, who


boldly  rejected  the  pernicious  system  of
])oisonous  drugs,  the  only  weapons  of  de-
generate medicine.  Later  he  settled  in
Marlin,  Texas,  a  State  in  which,  unfortu-
nately, the  Drugless  system  of  medicine  is
not  yet  recognized.  But  free  America  is  no
country  for  medical  feudalism  and  slavery.
The  irresistible  tendency  of  absolute  power
to  abuse  its  authority  is  so  well  known  that
in  time  democratic  authority  will  assert  it-
self against  the  tyranny  that  enslaves  pro-
gressive medicine,  not  only  in  Texas,  but  in
too  many  other  States  of  this  republic.  As
a  nation.  America  ought  to  rise  above  the
degraded  status  of  medical  autocracy  as  it
exists  in  most  States  of  the  Union,  where
Medical  Trust  ferocity  flourishes.  He  has
succeeded  in  building  up  a  fine  business  by
an  accurate  diagnosis  and  true  apprecia-
tion of  the  cause  of  disease,  and  the  appli-
cation of  the  only  remedial  treatments  that
can restore his patients to health.

REILLY, HAROLD JOHN, Naturopath
and  Physical  Culturist.

Dr.  Reilly  has  been  a  devotee  of  Phys-
ical Culture  and  Athletics  since  he  w^as
sixteen years of age. He appreciated at

an early age, what the

Greeks  discovered  two
thousand  years  ago.  that
exercise,  rightly  indulged
in,  is  the  foundation  of
bodily  vigor  and  supreme
vitality.  He  has  a  fixed
opinion  that  modern  men
and  women  are  rapidly  de-
generating for  lack  of
such  exercise,  and  he  was
determined  that  so  far  as  he  himself  was
concerned,  and  those  of  his  friends  whom
he  could  influence,  mankind  would  enjoy
fine  bodily  development  and  perfect  health.
He  has  competed  with  zest  in  many  ath-
letic contests  and  possesses  trophies  for
running,  jumping,  throwing  weights  and
wrestling.  He  began  the  study  of  Naturo-
pathy two  years  ago  in  Dr.  Conrad's
School,  the  old  Physio-Medical  Academj'.
His  studies  were  interrupted  bj-  being
called  to  take  part  in  the  military  expedi-
tion into  Mexico,  as  a  member  of  the  New
York  State  Militia.  While  in  Mexico,  he
won  the  wrestling,  championship  of  this
contingent  for  all  comers,  and  otherwise
occupied  his  time  as  a  professional  mas-
seur with  great  success.  On  his  return
from  Mexico  he  again  took  up  the  study
of  Physiological  Therapeutics  in  the
National  Institute  and  graduated  there-
from in  Maj'^  1917.  Dr.  Reilly  is  at  present
athletic  instructor.  track  captain  and
wrestling  instructor  of  the  Bronxdale  Ath-
letic Club.  Bronx,  New  York.  He  is  also
an  active  member  of  the  National  Associa-
tion of  Osteopathic  Practitioners.  His
private  office  is  located  at  1804  Mulliner
.\ve., Bronx, New York. He thinks that


888


Alphabetical  Index


Green
Guentherman


Charles S., Vanderbilt Ave.

Bldff.. New York, N. Y.
Ch.  W.,  Stafford.  Kan. (DC.)
Genevra W., 241 E. Wash-
ington St.. Ionia, Mich.
J. M.. 712 Jefferson Ave.,

Detroit. Mich. (D.C.)
Loren, Sac City, la. (D.O.)
GREEN, I^. A., .319 2nd Ave.,

New Yorlv. N. Y. (N.D.)
GREENAT.. C. D.. First Natl.

Bank Bldj?-, Long- Beach.

Cal. (D.C.)
C. P.. First Natl. Bank

Bids-., Long- Beach, Cal.

(DC.)
GREENE. CURTIS W.,

Grinnell, la. (D.C.)
Frank .T., Snyder Building,

Elmira. N. Y. (D.O.)
G.  C  201 First  St.,  Jackson,

Mich. (D.O.)
H. A., Orubb Bldg.. Salis-
bury,  N. C. (D.O.)
GREENER, TVAN, Benton

Countv, Rounby, Minn.

GREENEWALD.  V..  31  So.  (Jth

St., Covington, Ky. (N.D.)
GREENLEAF, W. D., Coles-

ville,  Sussex  County,  N.  J.

GREENLEE, \V. D., 235 E

5th St., Long Beach, Cal.

GREENSIDE,  "W.  B., 314  Indi-
ana  Ave., Spokane, Wash.

GREENWOOD, EDNA M., 213

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mas.'^. (D.O.)
Emilie, Farinington, Me.

GREFE. H. F., 1249 South

Brook St., Louisville, Ky.

GREGG.  W.  B.,  Onoway,  Mich.

GREGGS, PHILLIP, Sullivan,

111. (D.C.)
GREGORY, A., 506 W. 12th

St., Oklahoma  City, Okla.

GREGORY, A. A., G09 Camp-
bell Bldg.,  Oklahoma  City,

Okla. (D.C.)
David N.. 92 Colorado Ave.,

Bridgeport, Conn. (D.C.)
W.  E., 113  Poplar  St.,  Mari-

anna. Ark. (D.C.)
GREGORY, ALVA  B.,  The

Palmer-Gregory  School of

Chiropractic (M.D., D.C,

Ph.C.)
W. E., 716 Louisiana St.,

Little Rock, Ark. (D.C,

N. D.)
GREINER, M. M., 775i Wil-
liams  Ave., Portland, Ore.

Mathilda M.. 41.'; Mill St.,

Portland,  Ore. (D.C)
GREINER, M. M.. 6th and

Van  Buren  Sts.,  Gary,  Ind.

GRELLS, M. L., St. Marys, O.

GRESCHIK, ERNEST. .'507

Hackensack Plankroad.

West Hoboken. N. J.

GRESHIK. lORNST, West

Hoboken, N. J. (D.C)


GRESSMAN,  H.,  22  So.  Ken-
tucky Ave.,  Atlantic  City,
N. J. (N.D.)

GRETH,  AUGUST,  87G  S.  Hill
St..  I.,os  Angeles,  Cal.
(M.D., D.C.)

GRIFFIN.  CAROLINE  I.,
Hartford  Nat.  Bk.  Bldg.,
Hartford, Conn. (D.O.)

E.  B.,  Hastings,  Ncbr. (D.C.)
Fred. C. 2.''i0 W. Dominick

St., Rome, N. Y. (D.C.)
TjOViise,  A^oegtle Bldg.,  Boul-
der. Colo. (D.O.)

GRIFFING,  C  M.,  3964  Drexel
Blvd., Chicago, 111. (M.D.)

GRIFFITH.  E.  A.,  82  E.  Wal-
nut St.,  Titusville,  Pa.
(D.C)

F.  R.,  San  Diego,  Cal. (D.C)
GRIFFITHS, E. E., W. Wal-
nut St., Pittsville, Pa.

GRIFFITHS, EARLE A., 310-

11 Commercial Bank

Bldg.,  Titusville,  Pa. (D.C.)

Geo. A., Banner Bldg.,

Mount  Airy,  N.  C. (D.O.)

GRIGGS, HENRY R., Harper,
Kans. (D.O.)
Lizzie O., 143 S. Harvey
Ave.,  Oak  Park,  111. (D.O.)
W. S.. Sac City. la. (D.C.)

GRIGSBY,  Dr.  EDW.  S.,
Tonapah. Nev. (M.D.)

GRILLS, L. M., First Nat'l
Bank Bldg., St. Marys, O.
M. S., New Castle, Ind.

GRIM,  DR.  ROXA,  709  S.  2d
S.. Muskogee, Okla. (S.T.)

GRIMES, IDELLA A., Frank-
lin Bank Bldg., Philadel-
phia., Pa. (D.O.)
Idella. 2009 Chestnut St..

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Mrs. Amanda L.. Dixon,
Nebr. (S.T.)

GRIMM, ELLA MAY. 483
Buchtel Ave., Akron, O.
(Ch.)

GRIMM.  LYDIA  B..  87  Sey-
mour Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.

GRIMMER, A. H.. 3842 Grand
Boulevard, Chicago, 111.
(Or.S.)

GRIMSLEY.  F.  N.,  Powers
Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

GRISE, H. M., 1432 W. Jack-
son St., Chicago, IH.

GRIST,  N.  M.,  508  Kansas
Ave..  Topeka,  Kans.


GRIST,  N.  M.,  607  Kansas  Ave.,
Topeka,  Kans. (M.D..  D.C.)

GRISWOLD. MRS. HATTIE,
613 2d St., Clinton, la.
Katherine M.. 213 N. State
St., Painesville,  O. (D.C.)

GROENEWOUD. JENNIE K.,
1339 E. 47th St., Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
John  C, 37 S.  Wabash  Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

GROENWOUD,  J.  C,  Pow-
ers Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.

GROSS,  ALBERTINA  M.,  Bar-
ber Bldg.,  Joliet,  111.

GROSS, CORA B., 133 Peter-
borough St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Henry, 315  W. Pico  St., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)


James  H.,  95  Columbia  Ave.,

North  Bergen.  N.  J. (D.C.)
GROSS,  H.,  1257  So.  Hoover

St., Los Angeles, Cal.

(JROSSHAUSER, FRANK, 308

Fi-eeman Ave., Long Is-
land  City, N. Y. (D.C.)
GROSSMAN, A., Rivercrest

Manor, Haddam, Conn.

A..  7  E.  116th  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
D., 343 3rd  Ave., New  York,

N. Y. (Opt.)
GROSSMAN, DR., 1014 S.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
•  GROSSMANN,  FRED'K  N.,  460

E. 141st St., New York,

N. Y. (M.T.)
GROTHAUS.  EDMUND, 140  E.

Main St., Van Wert, O.

GROTHUS, H. A., 2000 Mo-
hawk St., Chicago, 111.

H.  A.,  Ft.  Madison,  la.  (D.C)
GROTHUS, HERMAN  A., 2000

Mohawk St., Chicago, 111.

(D.  C.)
GROUT,  IDA  L.,  412  Exchange

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

GROVE, E. H., 144 Carr St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
J.  O.,  Ft.  Wayne.  Ind. (D.C.)
GROVEM. E. H.. 144 Carr St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
GROVER,  SAMUEL  F.,  310-317

Alisky  Bldg.,  Portland,

Ore. (N.D.)
GROVER, SIDNEY  L., 628 So.

Burlington St., Los

Angeles.  Cal. (D.C.)
GROVER. S. L.. 201 Pacific

Bldg..  Oakland.  Cal.  (D.C.)
Wm..  Spokane,  Wash.  (D.C.)
Dr. Sarah E., 1113 Spruce

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

GROVES. SARAH ETHEL.

Ill Spruce St., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (DC.)
Sidney L., 628 Burlington

St., Los Angeles, Cal.

GROW, WILL  W.,  Logan

Bldg., St. Joseph, Mo.

(D.O..  D.C.)
GRUBB, "WILLIAM L.. Pitts-
burgh Life Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.O.)
GRUBER, CHAS. J.. Jr., Wid-

ener Blk., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
GRUENE,  FRANCIS,  614  West

Franklin St., Baltimore,

Md. (D.C.)
GRUGGEL, CARL A., 54 E.

59th St.. New  York,  N. Y.

GRUNEWALD, MARIE B.,

5  N.  Wabash  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
GRUSENICK, J. F., 79  Hamil-
ton  Place, New York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
GUENGERICH, S. D., Well-
man, la. (D.C.)
GUENTHER,  CLIFFORD  E.,

R.  F.  D.  4,  Box  131,  Berca,

O. (D.M.T.)
Ernst,  222  W.  140th  St.,  New

York.  N.  Y. (Ma.)
GUENTHERMAN, W. C, 1312

I^eonard St., Davenport,

la. (D.C.)


Wiliiropdlltic  Iii(>(/r(ij)lii(al  Notes


880


a  combination  of  active-  massage  work,
with  general  physical  culture  training,  is
the  best  possible  combination  for  i)hysical
development.  He  has  no  use  for  drug-
medication  which  so  far  from  curing  dis-
ease is  really  its  disseminator,  for  it  is  one
of  the  chief  causes  of  idiocy,  imbecility,
epilepsy, feel)le-mindedness and insanity.

RENCHER,  GOTTLIEB  JULIUS,  N.  D.,
D.  C,  D.  O.

Dr.  Rencher,  of  68  Greene  Ave.,  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  has  been  practising  Naturo-
pathic methods  for  eight
years.  His  methods  in-
clude hydropathy,  Swed-
ish methods  in  massage
and  movements,  chiroprac-
tic, electropathy  and  me-
chano-therapy.  He  is  a
graduate  of  the  Yungborn
School  of  Naturopathy,  in
Stockholm,  Sweden,  in
1906,  and  of  the  Na-
turopathic School  of  New
York,  in  1914.  He  has  taken  clinical  cour-
ses both  in  Sweden  and  New  York.  He
holds  the  degree  of  Chiropractic  from  the
Palmer-Gregory  College  of  Oklahoma,  ob-
tained in  1913.  Dr.  Rencher  is  a  very  in-
telligent and  conscientious  practitioner,
professor  of  chiropractic  at  Dr.  Conrad's
College  for  chiropractic  and  osteo-therapy,
and  is  doing  splendid  work  in  his  chosen
field  of  operation.  He  is  Professor  of
Chiropractic  at  Dr.  Conrad's  College  for
Chiropractic  Osteopathy.  He  is  a  member
of  the  American  Naturopathic  Association,
New  York  State  Society  of  Naturopaths,
Chiropractic  League,  etc.

RIEDMtJLLER, JACOB, N. D., D. O.,
D.  C.

Dr.  Riedmiiller  is  one  of  the  pioneers
of  Naturopathy  in  the  United  States.
He  was  born  in  Germany,  and  when
he  had  arrived  at  the  age
when  he  should  decide
what  his  life  work  should
be,  he  was  att-racted  to  the
medical  profession  whose
aim  is  to  strive  to  cure  our
suffering  brethren  .  of  the
ills  of  the  flesh.  But  the
idea  of  preventing  disease
seemed  to  be  nobler  still,
and  he  resolved  not  to
associate  himself  with  that  branch  of  the
profession  that  simply  waits  until  disease
has  overcome  its  victim,  and  then  try  to
exorcise  the  demon  with  an  attack  of
pills,  poisons  and  inoculations,  which  may,
and  often  do,  kill  the  patient  rather  than
drive  away  the  ailment,  but,  instead,  to
treat  the  ailing  by  teaching  and  practicing
according  to  the  natural  laws  of  health.  He
spent  the  years  1892  to  1895  at  Woeris-
hofen  in  studying  under  the  great  teacher.


Father  Kneipp  himself,  the  Kneipp  hydro-
pathic cure,  and  subsequently  studied
Osteopathy  and  General  Naturopathy,  and
on  coming  to  the  United  States  located  at
117  !•:.  Sotii  Street,  New  York.  He  also
maintains  an  ofiiice  at  637  Livingston  Street,
Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  since  1906  and  holds  a
license  as  Osteopathic  Physician  in  that
state.  In  New  York  State  he  has  a  license
as  a  chiropractist  and  is  a  member  of  the
Pedic  State  Society.  He  is  a  charter
member  of  the  American  Naturopathic
Association,  and  is  a  graduate  of  class  1899
to  1902  of  the  American  College  of  Naturo-
pathy, and  was  a  student  and  is  a  graduate
of  the  Vetus  Academia,  Old  Physiotherapy,
Osteotherapeutics  and  Eclectic  College  of
New  York  City,  Class  1904  to  1907.  A  firm
believer  in  the  true  and  congenial  remedies
supplied  by  Nature,  such  as  water  in  its
various  forms  and  applications,  air,  sun-
shine, diet,  exercise,  rest,  and  mental,  or
psychic  forces,  which  are  the  very  essen-
tials of  life,  but  which  agencies  are  most
frequently  excluded  from  drug  and  serum-
therapy.  Dr.  Riedmiiller  has  transmitted
his  belief  to  his  many  patients  with  the  re-
sult that  he  has  built  up  a  most  successful
practice,  whose  drug-eliminated  treatments
have  produced  some  wonderful  cures.  He  is
a  member  of  the  A.  N.  A.,  International
Alliance  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons,  Osteo-
Therapeutic  Society,  and  the  New  York
State  Society  of  Naturopaths.

RIESE,  JOSEPH,  N.  D.,  La  Crosse,  Wis.

Dr.  Joseph  Riese  was  born  in  Austria,  Jan.
26th, 1852,  and  immigrated  to  the  U.  S.  in


Dr.  and  Mrs.  Joseph  Riese

1864.  He  made  his  home  in  La  Crosse.
After  many  years  of  strenuous  concert-work,
his  health  failed  him  and  he  was  obliged  to
give  up  his  musical  career.  After  spending
a  small  fortune  trying  to  get  well,  his
thoughts  went  back  to  his  native  country,
where  at  one  time  he  had  gathered  much
information and experience at a Nature-


890


Alplidhelical  Index


(•llgficnhcini
Hall


GUGGENHEIM, Dr. MAX. 208

Palisade  Ave.,  Hoboken,

N. J. (M.D.)
Victor,  Dallas,  Tex. (N.D.)
GUICE, J. W., 639 Chamber

of Commerce, I^os Ange-
les, Cal. (D.C.)
<a;il.,D, \V. A.. Des Moines.

Iowa (M.D.)
CrUINKSS, RACHEL M., 506

Halsev  St..  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

GUI.MYER, J. CHESTER,

Teitgen Blk., Manitowoc,

Wis. (D.O.)
GUMP.  C.  R.. 1116  South  Ave.,

Wilkinsburg-, Pa. (D.C.)
GUNN, C. Mattawan, Mich.

Glen, 109 S. Burdick St.,

Kalamazoo.  Mich. (N.D.)
GUNSAUL. IRMINE Z.. 120

Market St.. Harrisburg-,

Pa. (D.O.)
GUNSOLLV,  J.  A..  2084  E.  46th

St.,  Cleveland.  O. (Ma.)
GUNTEN. RUFUS VON, Ur-

bana. O. (D.O.)


GUNTHERMAN,  W.  G.,  1312
Leonard  St.,  Davenport,
Ta., (D.C.)

GUNZRNHAUSER,  DR.  ANNA,
4i;  S.  13th  Ave..  Mt.  Ver-
non. New  York  City,  N.  Y.

GURLEV. l)v. E. \V., Cleve-
land.  O. (M.D.)

GUSTAFSON. CLARENCE A.,
410 W, State St.. Rock-
ford. 111. (D.C.)
E. M., Cumberland Thomas
Circle, Washington, D. C.
G.. 3007 S. Tripp Ave.. Chi-
cago. 111. (D.C.)
.1. F.. 711 13th Ave.. Mun-

hall. Pa. (D.C.)
W. A.. 627J Cass  St., .Toliet,
111. (D.C.)

GUSTAFSON, Miss M., The
Cumberland, Thomas
Circle  and  Mass.  Ave.,
Washington. D. C. (D.C.)

GUSTAFSON,  MARIE,  14  W.
W^ashington  St..  Chicago.
111. (Ma.)


GUTHRIDGE.  WALTER,  B.
Di  M.  Dl-Kuhn  Blk.,  Spo-
kane. Wash. (D.O.)

GUTHRIE.  MRS..  L.  S.,  Ames,
la. (D.C.)

GUTZMANN,  F.  A..  Mav  Bldg..
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)

GUY, ED.. Magazine. Ark.
Ralph. Pocatello. Idaho.

GUYER.  R.  A.,  809  Exchange
Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Mrs.  Sarah  L.,  609  Exchange
Bldg..  Los  Angeles.  Cal.

GUYON.  ALICE  H..  Sault  Ste.
Marie, Can. (D.C.)

f^WIN, H. M.. Suite 202. Ben-
nett Bldg., Colorado
Springs, Colo. (D.C.)
H. M., Petersburg,  O. (D.C.)

GWINN,  H.  M.,  Petersburg,  O.

GWINS,  V.  R.,  Brounville,
Mo. (D.C.)


H


HAAG,  PAUL.  1296  Myrtle
Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

HAAS. BERNARD. Box 24,
Hot Springs, S. Dak.
Edw. G.. 5418 Lorain Ave..

Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
Gustave W., 407 Pacific
Electric Bldg., Los  Ange-
les,  Cal. (N.D.)

HABENICHT,  H.  W.,  Parkers-
burg, Iowa (D.C.)

HABOR, W. A., 838 N. Rock-
well St.. Chicago, 111.

HACKETT & HACKETT,

DRS., Crawford Co. Trust

Bldg.. Meadville, Pa.

HACKETT. MRS. H. A.. Trust

Bldg.. Meadville, Pa.

HACKETT, J. N.. Ceris, N. Y.

HACKNEY. J. B.. R. R. 7,

Box 250, Fresno, Cal.

HADDOW & HADDOW, Elm

St.. River Falls, Wis.

IIADLEY. .TOHN W., Aurora,

Mo. (S.T.)
HAEHIvEN, C. G.,  West  Allls,

Wis. (D.C.)
HAFFNER, G. C. P., 202 S.

Broad  St.,  Penn  Grove,

N.  J. (D.C.)
HAFNER, W. H., Los Indies,

Isle  of  Pines,  Cuba. (D.C.)
HAGAN, FRANCES McKEY,

316  Park  Ave.  W.,  Prince-
ton,  111. (D.O.)
HAGELGANS. WALTER C,

Merchantville,  N.  J. (D.C.)
HAGER. L. B.. P. O. Box 33,

Wausaw. Wis. (D.C.)
HAGEMANN. ANNA A., 50

Perlin Bldg.. Cincinnati,

O. (D.C.)
Anna W.. 800 Union Trust

Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.


HAGER. L. E., Noblesville,
Ind. (D.C.)
Wm., Ft.  Worth.  Tex. (S.T.)
HAGENBOOK. GERTRUDE
L., 2323  W.  Main  St., Par-
sons, Kans. (D.C.)
HAGERTY, Mrs. M., 215 W.
142nd  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(Ma.)
V.  C,  519  Medical  Block,
Minneapolis. Minn. (D.C.)
HAGBWANIG. H. B.. Hening-

ton, Kans. (M.D.)
HAGG, EDITH M.. 424-425

Holmes Bldg., Galesburg.
111. (Nap.)
HAGMON, ANNA, 830 Union
Trust  Bldg..  Cincinnati,  O.
JIAGSTROM, JOHN R., 101

Everett Bldg., Akron, O.
Jules A., 101 Everett Bldg..

Akron. O. (D.M.T.)
Richard. 101 Everett Bldg..
Akron,  O. (D.M.T.)
HAHN  &  HAHN,  Casper,  Wyo.

HAHN, C. F.. Box 112. Mari-
etta.  O. (D.C.)
C. F., Wooster, O. (N.D.)
C. F.,  Wooster, O. (D.C.)
BYed M., San Diego, Cal.'

Dr.  H., Casper,  Wyo. (D.C.)
HAHN, CLAUS. 8814 Wade

Park Ave.. Cleveland, O.
(Ma.)
C. F., 8811 Detroit Ave.,

Cleveland.  O. (N.D.)
Max,  Box  357,  Amboy,  Minn.
HATGHT, DR. E. A., 2285
Woodward Ave., Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
HAIGHT, J. FRANK, 2123
Pasadena Ave., Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.O.)
L. Ludlow, Wright & Cal-
lendar  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.O.)
Nettie  Olds. R. F. D.  2,  Box
602, San Gabriel, Cal.
T. G., Ottumwa, la. (D.C.)
Thos. G.. 315 Blondeau St..
Keokuk. la. (D.C.)


HAIGIS. EDWARD S.. Box
121. Rochester. N. H. (D.O.)
HAIN, GRACE ESTELLA.
2251 Telegraph Ave.,
Berkeley, Cal. (D.O.)
H. S., 206 Ohio St., Sedalia,
Mo. (D.O.)
HAINES, CYRUS A.. Forum
Bldg., Sacramento, Cal.
HAINES, FLORENCE BRICK,
Ocean City,  N.  J. (D.M.T.)
HALBERT, E. E., 268 Alex-
ander St.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.
HALCOMB,  AMBROSE  L.,  Vic-
tor, Colo. ((D.O.)
HALE,  MRS.  GEO.  W.,  Woods-
ton. Kans. (S.T.)
Mary E., Merced, Colo.

Dr. Nora, Cherokee, Okla.

Walter  Keith, 115|  W.  Main
St., Barnesville, O. (D.O.)
HALES,  DR.  GEORGE  W.,  124
S. 11th St.. Philadelphia,
Pa. (N.D.)
G. W.. 715 Bldridge Ave.,
Collingswood,  N.  J. (D.C.)
HALEY, STANLEY M., 16
Cruz St., San Juan. Porto
Rico. (D.O.)
HALIMAN, W. O.. 205 State
Merc. Bldg., Ft. Collins,
Colo. (D.C.)
HALIN, MAX, 1513 Jackson
Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
HALL & HALL, Scott City,

Kans. (D.C.)
HALL & HALL. Dodge City,

Kans. (D.C.)

HALL,  AUGUSTUS,  228  N.  Lee

St., Fitzgerald, Ga. (D.C.)

A.  L.,  Prairie  City,  la. (D.O.)

Belle Jane, Gorge Bldg.,

Clarksburg. W.  Va. (D.C.)

Belle  Jane,  care  of  Farmers

Bk., Clarksburg, W. Va.


C. P., 6-7 Sherwood Bldg.,

Lima, O. (D.C.)
C. L., Dodge City, Kans.

E. C. Garden City. Kans.


Naturopathic  Hiograplural  Notes


«91


Cure  Sanitarium  near  his  old  home.  He
bethought  himself  of  the  various  treat-
ments given  there  and  applied  these  to  him-
self. He  was  finally  restored  to  health  by
long  and  persistent  natural  treatments,  and
from  this  time  on  became  an  ardent  nature-
cure  follower.  He  devoted  many  years  to
the  study  of  human  ailments  and  their  cure,
and  later  on,  graduated  from  the  American
School  of  Naturopathy.  His  natural
ability  and  love  for  this  work  have  made
him  an  unusually  successful  Naturopath,
with  hundreds  of  wonderful  cures  to  his
credit  all  over  the  country.  Dr.  Joseph
Riese  is  also  a  member  of  the  American
Naturopathic  Association  from  its  very
inception  and  has  acted  as  State  representa-
tive for  Wisconsin  for  the  last  12  years.
His  institution  is  not  only  known  in  La
Crosse,  but  throughout  the  Central  States.
He  never  advertised  to  any  extent,  but  has
always  had  more  to  do  than  he  cared  for;
the  patients  he  cured  built  up  for  him  his
reputation.  As  a  citizen  of  La  Crosse  he
is  beloved  and  respected  by  everybodj'.
Our  opponents  and  the  local  servants  of
the  Medical  Trust  had  several  times  con-
spired against  him,  but  his  reputation  and
standing  in  the  community  as  well  as  in
the  county  were  a  little  too  much  for  them
to  come  up  against.  He  has  triumphed
gloriously  for  a  period  of  many  years
without any interference, and he enjoys


Dr. Riese's  Naturopathic  Sanitarium.  La  Crosse,  Wis.

more  than  a  license  or  protection.  He  is  a
man  people  would  be  willing  to  stand  up
and  fight  for  at  any  time.

His  patients  and  patrons  are  among  the
very  best  in  the  city  of  La  Crosse,  from
the  Mayor  and  officials  down  to  the
humblest  citizens.  They  all  know  Dr.
Riese,  in  fact  he  is  one  of  the  pioneers  and
early  settlers  of  the  city  of  La  Crosse  and
saw  two-thirds  of  the  residents  of  that  cit}^
come  in.  In  Mrs.  Dr.  Riese,  he  has  a  very
able  and  practical  help.  She  superintends
the  household  of  the  Institvition  and  is  also


helpful  in  the  ladies'  department.  No  doubt,
a  good  deal  of  the  success  and  satisfaction
the  patients  receive  at  this  Institution  is
due  to  the  home-like  and  cheerful  atmos-
phere, which  is  always  created  by  the
presence  of  Mrs.  Dr.  Riese.  The  Editor  of
the  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  con-
siders Dr.  Riese  a  pillar  one  can  always
depend  on in Wisconsin.

RILEY,  JOE  SHELBY,  M.  S.,  D.  M.  T.,
D.  P.,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Lecturer,  Teacher,  and  Developer,  Dean
of  New  England  and  Washington  Schools
of  Chiropractic,  Dr.
Riley  has  been  one
of  the  busiest  prac-
titioners, teachers,
and  developers  of
the  science  in  the
country.  A  student
of  Medicine,  Osteo-
pathy, and  all  me-
chanical therapies,
he  found  in  Chiro-
practic the  most
potent  factor  to  his
liking,  and  while  a
genuine  mixer  of
all  good  methods,
he  makes  his  great-
est cures  particularly  in  the  line  of  Chiro-
practic, 1116  F  St.  N.  W..  Washington,
D.  C,  she  engages  actively  in  the  regular
more  Chiropractic  adjustments  than  any
other  living  man,  and  while  this  claim  is  open
to  dispute,  no  one  can  deny  that  he  is  the
busiest  man  ever  met  from  early  morning
until  late  at  night,  a  continual  stream  of
patients  passing  through  his  adjusting  par-
lors under  his  care.  His  memoranda  shows
he  has  made  or  given  more  than  a  quarter
million  courses  of  treatments,  aggregating
more  than  two  million  actual  Chiropractic
thrusts.  While  being  the  busiest  man  in  this
way  you  could  imagine,  he  has  found  time
to  do  a  great  deal  of  teaching,  lecturing,
writing,  and  developing  the  science.  Many
of  the  best  methods  of  spinal  adjustment
are  due  to  his  careful  study  and  trial.
Dr.  Riley's  headquarters  are  now  with  the
Washington  School  of  Chiropractic.  Wash-
ington, p.  C.  1116  F  Street  N.  _W.,  where
every  visiting  Chiropractor  receives  a  wel-
come hand.

RICKLI,  ARNOLD,  N.  D.,  Founder  of  the
Light  and  Air  Cures  (Atmospheric
cure).

Dr.  Rickli  was  one  of  the  foremost
exponents  of  natural  living  and  heal-
ing. In  1848,  he  established  at  \^eldes.
Krain,  Austria,  the  first  institution  for
light  and  air  cure  or  as  it  was  called  in
Europe  the  "Atmospheric  Cure."  In  a
limited  way  (rather  very  late)  his  ideas
have  been  adopted  by  the  medical  profes-
sion  in .\mcrica for  the cure of  consump-


892


Alphabelicul  Index


Halluday
Ilargett


Elmer L,.. 248 W. Main St.,

Barnesville. O. (D.O.)
Frank A.. Suite 2, 17i W.
Market, Indianapolis, Ind.
(M.D.. D.C.)
Glenn. Winterset, la. (D.C.)
Harrv. 5th Floor, Forsyth
Bldg., Atlanta. Ga. (D.C.)
H.  G.,  Winterset,  la. (D.C.)
Harry I^., 1116 N. 3d St.,

Harrisburg, Pa. (D.C.)
.T. A., Eldorado. la. (D.C.)
I.. B., Scott City, Kans.

Mabel. Tuttle St., Syracuae,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Marion K., 249 George St..
Glasgow, Scotland. (D.O.)
Marv D.. 428 E. 3rd St.,

Newton. Iowa (D.C.)
Mittie. Sac City, la. (D.C.)
Roval F., Mooreland, Okla.

R. G., Box 378. Marysville,

Kans. (M.D.)
S. A., Harrison Bldg., Co-
lumbus. O. (D.O.)
William Campbell, Fletcher
Savings  &  Trust  Co.  Bldg.,
Indianapolis,  Ind. (D.O.)
HALI.ADAY,  H.,  316  S.  Frank-
lin St., Kirksville, Mo.
HALLBECK. T. E., AVest

Salem, 111. (N.D.)
HALLER. J. H., Palisades,

Colo. (D.C.)
HALLER, J. J., 596 Mill St.,
Conneaut, O. (D.M.T.)
J.  L..  Palisades, Colo. (DC.)
HALLET. H. DE  VEAN,  Madi-
son  Bldg.,  Montclair,  N. J.
HALLIGAN. NINA GILLTAR,
45 "\V. 34th St.. New York
City, N. Y. (D.C.)
HALLIKER.  G.  A.,  Big  Rapids,

Mich. (D.C.)
HALLMAN, V. H., Hot

Springs, Ark. (M.D.)
HALT>OCK. WM. J., 160 Sum-
mit Ave., Jersey City,
N. .1. (D. C.)
HALI>STEAD, W. B., Quick
Theatre Bldg., Fulton,
N. Y. (D.C.)
HALRONSON, H. J., 4641
Easton Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
HALSTED, CORA F.. 1528 W.
Jackson  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
HALVORSEN, H. JOHN, 1018
Wilson Ave., Chicago, 111.
HAMANN, A. W., 11322 S.
Michigan Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
HAMBY, WM. H..  132  W.  48th
St., Los Angeles, Cal.
HAMGARTNER,  J.  C.  Garber,

Okla. (S.T.)
HAMILTON & HAMILTON.
237 Magnolia Ave., Long
Beach,  Cal. (D.C.)
HAMILTON, HUBBR W.. 543
Pacific Ave.. Long Beach,
Cal. (D.C.)
Amanda N., 222 Coronado

St., Greeley, Colo. (D.O.)
A. T., Willow Springs, Mo.

Beatrice.  249  W.  George  St.
Glasgow, Scotland. (D.O.)
D. E., 101 S. Mill St., Lead,

S. Dak. (DC.)
Dwight E., 44 High St.,
New Haven, Conn. (D.C.)


F W., 107i N. Cross St.,

Robinson. 111. (D.O.)
J. L. B., 120 N. Flower St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
Mabel. 543 Pacific Avenue,

Long  Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
R. A., Whitehall, 111. (D.O.)
R. Emmet, A. S. O.. Kirks-
ville. Mo. (D.O.)
R. J., care of Progressive
Chiropractic College, Ft.
Smith. Ark. (D.C.)
R. J., 1118 Main St., Great

Bend, Kans. (D.C.)
R. J.. 1416 Kansas Ave..
Great Bend, Kans. (D.C.)
Susan  Harris,  1080  Bush  St.,
San Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)
HAMLIN,  P.  F.,  314  N.  Lee  St.,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
HAMMER. MILTON C, Flynn
Bldg., Des Moines, la.
HAMMETT, ELMA M., Mary-

ville. Kans. (D.C.)
HAMMON. A. S.. 151 E.  Beth-
une Ave.. Detroit. Mich.
HAMMON. FRANK S.. 205
W^ashington St.. Owosso,
Mich. (D.C.)
HAMMON. I. F.. 2  7 E. Monroe
St., Chicago. 111. (D.C.) •
HAMMOND, E. W.. 100 Char-
lotte Ave.. Detroit. Mich.
R. W., Broadway Central
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
HAMPSHIRE,  D..  Brady,  Tex.

HAMPTON. ANNIE P., De-
troit, Mich. (D.C.)
David C, 24 Mechanics
Bldg., Pueblo, Colorado.
David. 24 Masonic Bldg..

Pueblo. Colo. (D.C.)
Elsie R.. 1821 Walnut St.

Boulder, Colo. (D.C.)
H. L.. 215 E. Main  St..  Alli-
ance. O. (D.C.)
H.  L.,  First  Nat'l  Bank,  Cor.
Main and Erie Sts.. Mas-
sillon. O. (D.C.)
Wm.. Pueblo, Colo. (D.C.)
HANAVAN. L. C, 6122 Ingle-
side Ave.. Chicago. 111.
HANCOCK. J. L.. Gothen-
burg. Nebr. (D.C.)
HANDY.  Boise. Idaho (D.O.)
HANDY, F. W., 101 Gordon
Ave., Svracuse. N. Y.
HANES. E. J.. Calais, Mo.
Edward N., Arrott Bldg.,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.O.)
HANEY.  EDWARD,  848

Barry Ave., Chicago, 111.
(D.C, Ph.C.)
Dr.  W.  J.,  10600  Euclid  Ave.,
Cleveland,  O. (D.C.)
HANFORD, IRA L., Chicago
College  of  Naprapathy,
108 N. State St., Chicago,
111. (Nap.)
HANKS, HARVEY J.. 1914
California St., Omaha,
I  Neb. (D.C.)

HANLIN, F. P., Liberal,
Kans. (D.C.)
P F., Talmage. Nebr.
HANN, GEO. W.. 512 Newton
St.. Goodland. Ind. (D.C.)


HANNA. H. O., Oakland, Cal.

HANNA, MRS. J. E., Arkan-
sas City. Kans. (D.C.)
HANNAH, ALBERT, Burns-
ville, Ark. (D.C.)
Albert W., Burnsville, Ark.
HANS, F. S., Jamestown,
Mercer Co., Pa. (D.C.)
F. S.,  Greenville, Pa. (D.C.)
HANS, FRED. S.. Greenville,

Pa (DC)
HANSEN. ALBERT N.. Ar-
rott Bldg., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.O.)
H. E., Barons. Alta., Can.

(DC.)
H. E., 2120 Cleveland Ave..
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
HANSEN,  ALLEN,  Idaho  Falls,

Idaho (N.D.)
HANSEN, CARL T., 108 N.
State  St.,  Chicago,  111.
(Ma.)
Geo., 2329 84th St., Brook-
lyn, N.  Y. (Ma.)
M., 768 Flatbush Ave.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (Opt.)
M. G.. Cor. First and Main
Sts.. Brigham City, Utah
HANSON & HANSON, 516 S.
Topeka Ave.. Wichita,
Kans. (D.C.)
567 Elmwood Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Frank O., 246 W. Utica St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
H. C, Barons, Alta. (D.C.)
Sten, Pioneer Life Bldg.,
Fargo, N. D. (D.O.)
HANSON, Miss B. N., Walter
Reed Hospital. Washing-
ton. D.  C. (D.C.)
HANSSLER,  E.  H.,  332  N.  Jef-
ferson Ave.,  Peoria,  111.
HARD. MARY E., 355 West
Grand Blvd., Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
Mary E., Stevens Bldg..
Detroit, Mich. (D.O.)
HARDIE, DAVID H., Main
I  St.. Galena. 111. (D.C.)

Jessie B., 224 Laurier Ave.
W., Ottawa, Ont. (D.O.)
HARDIN, FERGUSON A.,
1204 Marsh-Strong Bldg..
Los Angeles. Cal. (N.D.)
M. C, Grand Opera House.

Atlanta, Ga. (D.O.)
Mary C, Walsh Bldg.. Mc-
Cook, Nebr. (D.O.)
HARDING, A. C, 189 Wash-
ington Ave., Vandergrift,
Pa. (D.C.)
A. C, 118 Sherman Ave.,

Vandergrift, Pa. (D.C.)
E. F.. Bethany. Mo. (D.O.)
Vera. Butler, Pa. (D.C.)
HARDING & SUNSTAD.
I  Guaranty Safe Deposit &

Trust Bldg.. Butler. Pa.
1  (D.C.)

;  HARDISON, FRANCIS B.
FAIRFAX, 298 King St.,
Charleston, S. C. (D.O.)
HARDY, A. C. Lockhart.
Tex. (D.O.)
Clara B.. Consolidated
Realty Bldg.. Los An-
1  geles, Cal. (D.O.)

I J. H.. La  Plata. Mo. (D.O.)
Marie, Amherst, N. H.
HARGETT,  E.  E.,  Fort  Worth,
;  Tex.  (D.C.)


Naturopathic  liioyra pineal  Notes


893


tion.  He  was  an  ardent  disciple  of  tlie
vegetarian  diet  and  exemplified  the  prin-
ciples of  natural  living  in  his  own  life.
This  photograph  shows  him  at  the  age  of
97,  when  he  was  still  active  and  healthy.
He  has  since  passed  on  but  his  work still


Dr. Arnold Rickli

lives  as  a  testimonial  of  his  untiring  eflforts.
He  was  the  founder  and  for  over  fifty
years  the  President  of  the  National
Austrian Vegetarian Association.

ROESSELL,  PAUL  E.,  N.  D.

Prof.  Paul  E.  Roessell,  of  Miami,  Fla.,  is
a  graduate  of  the  American  School  of
Naturopathy,  Butler,  N.  J.,
and  also  of  the  Battle
Creek  Sanitarium,  Battle
Creek,  Mich.  He  is  a  pro-
fessor of  hydropathy,  diet,
massage,  chiropractic  and
osteopathy.  He  is  in
physique  alert  and  muscu-
lar— a  most  intelligent
practitioner,  and  is  the
very  ideal  of  a  mechartb-
therapist.  Visiting  New  York  in  September,
1917,  as  a  member  of  the  22nd  Convention  of
the  American  Naturopathic  Association,  he
has  widened  his  knowledge  of  curative
therapeutics  to  a  high  degree,  and  declares
that  the  exchange  of  Naturopathic  ideas
with  the  Naturopathic  leaders  that  he  be-
came personally  acquainted  with,  has
opened  up  wider  vistas  of  usefulness  in  his


profession,  and  he  foresees,  in  consequence,
a  great  increase  of  reputation  and  business
connections.  As  a  purveyor  of  health  in
Miami,  he  has  for  patients  some  of  the
finest  people  in  the  United  States,  who
visit  that  genial  health  climate  in  the  win-
ter months.

RUEGG,  PROF.  JOHN  J.

Professor  Ruegg  was  one  of  those
pioneers  in  progressive  healing  whose  name
deserves  lasting  remembrance.  His  theory
was  that  the  best  way  to  treat  disease  was
to  treat  the  patient  indirectly,  by  supply-
ing him  with  vegetable  foods  that  were
grown  in  lava  as  a  fertilizer,  and  not  in
the  composts  discharged  by  animals.  He
claims  that  lava  is  the  best  of  all  fertilizers,
for  it  contains  all  of  the  sixteen  elements
required  by  the  human  body  to  maintain
health.  His  theory  is  founded  on  that  of
Julius  Hansel,  physicist  and  agricultural  re-
former, who  has  written  a  book  on  the
chemical  virtues  of  lava.  Professor  Schuess-
ler,  who  supports  the  view  of  cell  satis-
faction, advocates  lava  as  a  fertilizer  also,
and,  following  these.  Professor  Ruegg  lec-
tured to  farmers  on  how  to  avoid  the  mis-
takes and  failures  of  general  farming.
His  motto  was:  "If  you  want  to  cure  a
patient  or  animal,  treat  the  soil,  and
Mother  Nature  will  transform  the  inor-
ganic shape  so  the  assimilative  powers  of
the  system  will  appropiate  such  elements.
If  the  organism  lacks  salts,  give  it  such
salts  in  the  form  of  nuts,  vegetables,  salads
and fruits that  possess such salts."

Professor  Ruegg  wrote  two  books  on
this  subject.  The  work  styled  "Boll  Wee-
vil" (The  Law  of  Nature  and  Mankind)
($1.00),  and  "The  Secret  of  Health  and  Dis-
ease (SOc).  In  these  works  the  author
shows  that  the  ravages  of  the  boll  weevil
insect  in  the  cotton  plant  are  solely  due  to
the  acidity  of  the  juices  of  the  plant,  for
where  the  juices  of  the  plant  are  alkaline,
there  are  no  boll  weevils.  The  acidity  of
the  cotton  plant  is  due  to  the  use  of  wrong
animal  fertilizers.  The  plant  should  be  fed
with  lava  fertilizer,  which  renders  the  plant
alkaline,  and,  therefore,  immune  to  the  de-
vastation of  the  boll  weevil.

This  story  of  the  boll  weevil  is  used  to
enforce  the  necessity  of  mineral  salts  in
human  foodstufifs,  which  are  to  be  provided
by  a  proper  fertilizing  of  the  soil  in  which
they  grow.  Professor  Ruegg  established
an  American  health  farm  at  Clifton.  N.  J.,
where  he  carried  on  experiments  on  plants
with  various  fertilizers,  notably  lava,  im-
ported direct  from  volcanoes.  He  also
established  a  manufacturing  plant  for
crushing  rocks  and  manufacturing  fertil-
izers, using  a  mixture  of  lava  and  swamp
mud,  saying  that  the  Lord  had  provided
food  for  the  world  by  means  of  swamps
and  volcanoes  and  rocks.  Professor  Ruegg
experimented  at  Yungborn,  Butler,  N.  J.,  on


894


Alphabetical  Index


Hargruvc
Haslem


Brunswick,
Jersey City,


HARGRAVE. C. K.. R. F. D.

No. 40. Dale, Ind. (D.C.)
HARIMER, JOHN A., 322

Spring- St.. I^os Angeles,

Cal. (S.T.)
HARKER. WADE C, 200 S.

Lincoln St., Chicagro, 111.

HARKTNS, MARIE H., St.

George Apts., Londonj

Ont. (D.O.)
HARKNESS, THOS., 8 Park

St.. Cortland. N. Y. (D.C.)
HARROW, Mmo. O. E.. 475
Monroe St., Brooklyn. N. Y.

(Ma.)
HARLAN, FREDERICK J.,

Flint P. Smith Bldg-.,

Flint, Mich. (D.O.)
HARLAN. WILLIAM F., Ar-

buckle. Cal. (D.O.)
HARLEY & HARLEY, 1228

Carpenter St., Bruns-
wick, Ga. (DC.)
G. E. M. T., 199 Cambridge

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.

G. E., 158 Cambridge St.,

Jersey  City.  N. J. (D.C.)
Mr. & Mrs. Wni., 1228 Car-
penter St.,

Ga. (D.C.)
HARLEY, G. E.,

N.  J. (M.D.)
HARLOW, A., R. F. D. No. 1,

Box 80B, Redlands, Cal.

HARMER, WALTER, 1108

Altha St., Burlington, la.

(D.C.)  I

HARMOLIN,  MAX  S., 30  Tay-  '

lor Arcade, Cleveland, O.  '

(Ch.)
HARMON & HARMON, 93

Genessee St., Aiiburn„

N.  Y. (D.C.)
C. M., 19 Burt St., Auburn.

N. Y. (D.C.)
HARN.G.  F.,  Barrie.Ont.  (D.C.)
HARPER, CHAS. S., Greeley,

Colo. (D.O.)
Mrs. F. M., 512 B'wav, Lit-
tle Rock, Ark. (S.T.)
Ida M., 1629 Marion St.,

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
R. T., Rexford, Kans. (S.T.)
HARPER.  CLAUDE  B.,  Old

Colony Club. Hotel Wal-
dorf-Astoria, New York.

N. Y. (P.)
G.. 2151 N. Clark  St.,

Chicago.  111. (N.D.)
HARRIMAN, E. J.. 197| Can-

fleld Ave.. Deti'oit, Mich.

(  D.C.)
Mrs. Lucy C, Suite 1 10

Dana St.. Cambridge,

Ma.es. (D.C.)
HARRINGTON. ALICE E..

3fi3 S. Bovl.'Jton St.. Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)

E.  B.. Findlav. O. (D.C.)
Ellen E.. 202 Wellington

St.. Bradford. Ont.. Can-
ada. (D.C.)

F.  C, Orillia. Ont., Canada.

HARRINGTON. SHELBY A.,

4322  Vernon  Ave.,  Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
HARRIES. S. OSWALD, 446

E. 40th St., Chicago, 111.

HARRIS & HARRIS. Swartz

Creek. Mich. (D.C.)
D. S., Wilson Bldg., Dallas.

Tex. (DO.)
Edwin L., fiOC Church St..

Marietta, Ga. (D.O.)


Elijah G., 1656 Park Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (DC.)
Ella E., 7400 Coles Ave.,

Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
Francis W., 1007 Grant St.,

Carthage, Mo. (D.O.)
John F., 322 Fegler Blk.,

Edmonton, Alta., Can.

Katherine, 1101 Ets St.,

Sodalia, Mo. (D.O.)
Lucius A., Conrad Block.

Kalispell. Mont. (D.O.)
Neville E.. 450 Collins St..

Melbourne. Victoria.

Australia. (D.O.)
W. E.. 1010 Massachusetts

Ave.. Cambridge, Mass.

HARRIS. ELIJAH  G., 1553  AV.

Madison St., Chicago. 111.

(Or.S.)
HARRIS.  EULA  L.,  Lawrence-
burg, Ky. (N.D.)
Fred., 1520 Washington St.,

Toledo,  O.  (Ma.)
Henry, Jersey  City,  N.  J.

H.  E.,  1515  W.  Monroe  Street

Chicago,  111. (N.D.)
J.,  45  W.  34th  St.,  New  York,

N.  Y.  (N.D.)
M. H., 1007 B'way, Brook-
lyn, N. Y. (Opt.)
Mae  S.,  St.  Louis,  Mo. (M.D.)
O. O., 299 Richmond Ave..

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
Sarah N., 846 East 47th St.,

Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
W. A.. Ill S. Curtis St.,

Alhambra. Cal. (N.D.)
HARRISON. DAVID A., 202

Wellington St., Bradford,

Can. (D.C.)
Mrs. E. B., Hallstead, Pa.

Frank D.. 193 E. Main St.,

Balding, Mich. (D.O.)
John H., Goodwin Inst.,

Memphis. Tenn. (D.O.)
W. J., Melfort, Sask., Can-
ada. (D.C.)
HARRISON, J. C, 16 Central

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. (D.C.)
Kathryn  M.. 901 Sixth  Ave.,

Seattle, Wash. (D.O.)
HARSEN, M., 768 Flatbush

Ave.. Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)
HARSTE, WM.. 127 Shenkle

St.. Findlay, O. (D.M.T.)
HART. MISS ANNA. 402

Wash. St.. Greensburg,

Ind. (D.C.)
Aubrey Warren, 64 Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
Edward B.. 385 Clinton

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.(D.C.)
Mrs. Emma, Berlin. Wis.

Flora. 420 N. High St..

Marshall, Mich. (D.C.)
H. E.. Ferguson Bldg.. Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
H. S.. 2 Raymond St
Katherines, Ont.,
I. Sylvester, 1540 N.

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Lawrence. W.,
mont  Ave.

Wash. (D.O.)
Mae V. D.. 140 State St..

Albany, N. Y. (D.O.)
Mary E., Stevens Bldg.,

Detroit. Mich. (DO.)
Mina S., McAlestor, Okln.


, St.
Can.


15  th


3502 Fre-
Seattle,


Sidney, Hartford, Ark.
HART, EDW. B., 385 Clinton
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
HARTE,  EMMA  I.,  1374  Spruce
Place, Minneapolis. Minn.
HARTFORD. W. I., Gibson

City, 111. (D.O.)
HARTMAN, R. A.. Wood-
ward and Forest Aves.,
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
HARTNER. CHAS., Madison,

Nebr. (D.O.)
HARTSOCK, W. E., Oakdale,
Wash. (D.C.)
W. T.. Maries. Idaho. (D.C.)
HARTSOUGH, LEROY, R. F.
D. No. 1, Salem, O. (D.C.)
Leroy, 525 S. Claredon,
Canton, O. (N.D.)
HARTWELL, D. E. W., 284
Scribner St., Grand Rap-
ids, Mich. (D.C.)
Henry Edward, 243 Bruce
St., Lawrence, Mass.
HARTZELL, H. C, 52 Good-
bar Bldg., Memphi-s,
Tenn. (D.C.)
HARVEY & HARVEY,
Superior, Nebr. (D.C.)
2104 21st St., Falls City,

Nebr. (D.C.)
Earle A., Hebron, Nebr.


Eleanor Stuart, Stevens

Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.O.)

Dr. Eleanor Stuart 413-15

Stevens Bldg., Detroit.

Mich. (D.O.)

Fred. Gandy, Nebr. (D.C.)

Fred., Wakeeny, Kans.

Mrs. Henry M., Superior,

Nebr. (D.O.)
Herbert L., I'ayette. Idaho.

K. G., 816 Mulberry St.,

Scranton, Pa. (D.O.)
Leslie V., 9th and Euclid
Aves., Upland, Cal. (D.O.)
Lloyd C, Maple Ridge,

Mich. (D.C.)
Sylvester, P. O. Bldg., Mc-
Kees Rocks, Pa. (D.C.)
HARVEY & HARVEY,

Le  Mars,  Iowa. (D.C.)
HARVEY, F. F., Candy, Nebr.
H. W., 4452 Sheridan Road,

N. Y. (N.D.)
Olive  Kendall,  4452  Sheridan
Road. Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
HARWELL, W. A., R. No. 1,

Mena. Ark. (D.O.)
HARWOOD. MARY E., Hotel
Kupper, Kansas  City, Mo.
HASCALL, H. F., 461 Spitzer

Bldg.,  Toledo,  O. (D.C.)
HASBMAN,  WM.  J.,  2215  B.
71st  St., Cleveland, O.
HASBMEIER, ALBERT A.,

Hamilton, O. (Ma.)
HASKINS, E. C. COVERLY,
20.S3 Sansom St., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
J. D., Trimble, O. (N.D.)
HASKINS, Mrs. M. E., 43

Schundt Bldg.. Toledo, O.
(D.M.T.)
HASLEIN, WM., Big Rapids,

Mich. (D.C.)
HASLEM, WM. H., 212 Mer-
cantile Blk., Aurora, 111.


Xaliu'ojxilliic  lUixiniphical  Nolea


805


l'r..i. loliii T. R


the  invitation  of  the  editor.  Peach  and
other  trees  were  planted  in  finely  ground
lava  fertilizer,  with  the  result  that  the
peaches  that  grew  on  such  trees  would  keep
three  or  four  weeks,  and  w'ere  of  a  richer
flavor  than  ordinary  ones.  Cows  that  were
fed  on  lava  fertilized  grass  gave  a  milk
richer  in  organic  chemical  elements,  and
children  fed  on  such  milk  were  extremely
liealthy  and  good-natured.  Professor
Ruegg  is  now  deceased,  but  his  idea  is  a
vital  one,  and  will  bear  rich  fruit  in  the
future.

SCHAEFER,  JOSEPH.

Mr.  Josei)h  Schaefer,  publisher  and  dealer
in  Catholic  and  Naturopathic  books,  of  23
Barclay  .Street,  New  York  Citj%  was  one  of


the  first  friends  Dr.  Lust  made  on  his  arrival
in  the  United  States  in  November,  1892.
For  pure  piety  and  uprightness,  no  one  in
the  city  of  New^  York  is  more  highly  re-
spected. Natural  healing,  especially  Kneipp
methods,  is  a  subject  that  strongly  appeals
to  his  generous  instincts.  He  believes  that
the  law  should  not  discriminate  in  favor  of
an)-  school  of  medicine,  but  permit  all
schools  to  stand  strictly  on  their  merits.  To
legislate  in  favor  of  official  medicine  (as
the  law  has  done)  works  to  the  injur)-  of
all  other  schools  and  to  the  official  school
also.  The  regular  practitioner  does  not
have  to  rely  on  his  skill  for  his  success,  but
because  he  occupies  a  preferred  position.
He  is  coddled  by  the  legislature  to  an  ex-
tent  that lowers his eflficiencv. He leans


896


Alph(ihctic(tl  Index


Hass
Hedgpatli


HASS, E. G.. 13425 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland. O. (N.D.)
Edwin G., Andover, O.

HASSELL, NELLIE, 305 Ave.

D., San Antonio, Tex.

HASSELQUIST, T. A., 32 W.

Washingrton St., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
HASTAD. MISS AMANDA,

Aeolian Hall, 33 W. 42nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.  (Ma.)
HASTINGS, FRED E., Pratt,

Kans. (D.O.)
Howard E., Lougheed

Bldg-., Calgary, Alberta.

HASWELI^ GEORGE A.,

Central Chambers, Cen-
ter St., Northampton,

Ma.ss. (D.O.)
HATCH, CHARLES G., 236

Bruce St., Lawrence,

Mass. (D.O.)
HATFIELD, W. M., P. O.

Box 387, Moscow, Idaho.

HATHAWAY,  CHAS.  E.,

Grand  Ledge,  Mich. (D.C.)
HATSFIELD,  Mrs.,  c/o  Powell

Sanitarium, Third St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
HATTEN, J. O., 616 N. Tay-
lor Ave., St. Louis, Mo.

HATTON, ELIZABETH, 3207

Michigan Blvd., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
HAUGHEY, AVILLA, Route

6, Wichita, Kans. (M.D.)
HAULEY, P. K., 6600 Lafay-
ette Ave., Chicago, 111.

(D. C.)
HAUPT, GRACE, Barker,

N. Y. (D.C.)
HAUPT,  W.  H.,  607  O  St.  N.W.,

Washington, D. C. (Ma.)
HAUSMANN, A., 241 W. 42nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y. (Ma.)
HAUSSLER, Joseph H., 332

14th  St.  N.E.,  Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
HAVARD, WM. FREEMAN,

525  S.  Ashland  Boulevard,

Chicago,  111.,  and  110  Bast

41st St., New York, N. Y.

HAVEN, C. H., 609 S. 11th

St., Salt Lake City, Utah.

C.  Margaret, 114 1 S. Broad-
way, Rochester, Minn.

HAVEN & HAVEN, Box 116,

Phoenix, Ariz. (D.C.)
HAVERIN, C. F., 28 Lincoln

St., Newark, N. J. (N.D.)
HAVERLAND  &  HAVER-
LAND, Twin Falls, Idaho

HAVERON, R. H., Passaic,

N.  J. (N.D.)
HAWES.  LEON  B.,  Nafl  Bank

of Commerce Bldg., Ad-
rian. Mich. (D.O.)
Norman C. Main St., Gouv-

erneur, N. Y. (D.O.)
William F.. R. E. Trust

Bldg.. Philadelphia, Pa.

Wm. F., Real Estate Trust

Bldg.. Philadelphia,  Pa.

HAWEY, Mrs., 1452 Sheridan

Road, Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
HAWK, MERVINB B., Opera

House Bldg., Augusta,

Me. (D.O.)


HAWKES, CHARLES L., Tod

Blk., Great Falls, Mont.

HAWKINS. CHARLES R..

Minneapolis, Kans. (D.O.)
E. W.,  Gladstone  Bldg., Red

Wing, Minn. (D.O.)
Laura I., The Farragut,

Washington, D. C. (D.O.)
HAWKINS, D. B. Belmond,

Iowa (D.C.)
.1. (I., Upper Sandusky, O.

(Ch.)
Laura, Washington, D. C.

HAWKINSON, J. W., Arcade

Bldg., Luverne, Minn.

HAWLEY, A. S.. c/o  The

Chiropractic College, San

Antonio, Tex. (M.D.)
HAWLEY, BLANCHE, 430 W.

9th St., Oklahoma City,

Okla. (D.C.)
R. E., 215 New Rosenbloom

Bldg., Syracuse, N. Y.

R. E., 86-88 Everson Bldg.,

Syracuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
S. L., Cedar, Kans. (M.D.)
HAY, HARRY, Belle Plaine,

la. (D.C.)
James C. S., 224 E. 6th St.,

Long  Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
Ruth N., Sisseton, S. Dak.

Ruth  N.,  Humbolt,  la. (D.C.)
HAYCK, F. J., 324 E. 12th

St., Oakland. Cal. (D.C.)
HAYDEN & HAYDEN, Cedar

Rapids, la. (D.C's)
HAYDEN, BRUCE L., Merrill

Bldg., Saginaw, Mich.

HAYEK & HAYEK, 1028

Mariposa Ave., Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)
Mrs. F. J., Mariposa Ave.,

Los Angeles, (jal. (D.C.)
HAYES, BERTHA, 1008 W.

8th St., Wilmington, Del.

James F., 404 Hamburger

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

Lutie Kreigh, Northern Bk.

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.

M. D., 719 Cottonwood St.,

Independence, Kans. (M.

D.)
Orville, Sterling, Kans.

P. G., Bristol Savings

Bank, Bristol, Conn.

Wm., 138 Leonard St., Jer-
sey  City, N.  J. (N.D.)
HAYES,  P.  G.,  Hartford,  Conn.

Wm., 276 Maple St., Secau-

cus, N. J. (N.D.)
W.  S.,  2050  Amsterdam  Ave.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
HAYMAN, GEO. T., Real Es-
tate Trust Bldg., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Geo. T., 148 E. State St.,

Doylestown, Pa. (D.O.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
he made in subsequent issues


HAYNBR, BERTHA, Paw-

huska, Okla. (D.C.)
HAYNES, T. O., 30 4th Ave.,

Hutchinson, Kans. (D.C.)
HAYNES,  T.  O.,  Dcnison,  Kans.

HAYNIE, NELLIE, Portland,

Ore. (D.C.)
HAYS, J. E., 403 Hamburger

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

L. C, Bee Bldg., Omaha,

Nebr. (D.  C.)
HAYWOOD, ALFRED P., 515

Utah Street, Toledo, O.

HAZEL, A. E., Liberty and

9th Sts., Pittsburgh, Pa.

A. E., Second Nafl Bank

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.

(El.)
I. H., 234 N. Soto St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
HAZZARD, CHAS.. 20 W.

34th St., New York, N. Y.

HEAD, RALPH D., Agricul-
tural Bk. Bldg., Pitts-

fleld, Mass. (D.O.)
HEAG, W. G., Berkshire Co.

Sav. Bk. Bldg., Pittsfleld,

Mass.  (D.C.)
HEALEY, ROBERT D., 19

Main St., Petaluma, Cal.

HEALEY, S., Hamburg, Iowa

HEARD, MARY A., The

Warren, Roxbury, Mass.

W. J., 109 Maple Ave., Oak

Pk., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
HEARST, ETHEL L., 136 S.

Santa Fe St., Salina,

Kans. (D.O.)
HEALEY, F. H., Braymer

Bee Bldg., Braymer, Mo.

J.  J.,  201  AV.  Main  St.,  Beld-

ing, Mich. (D.O.)
HEATH, DAISY E., Mt. Car-
roll,  111. (D.O.)
Helen, Marcus, la. (D.C.)
Jas.  A.,  Millica,  Minn. (D.C.)
J. A., Lowars, la. (D.C.)
Jas.  A.,  Melasa,  Minn. (D.C.)
J. E., Baker Blk., Walla

Walla, Wash. (D.O.)
Minnie C, Boyce-Greely

Bldg., Sioux  Falls, S.  D.

W. L., 828 Brady St., Da-
venport, la. (D.C.)
W. L.,  Orlando, Fla. (D.C.)
HEATH, Dr. L. F.. George-
town, Kv. (M.D.)
HEATWOLE, WEBSTER S.,

Masonic Temple, Salis-
bury, Md. (D.O.)
HEBB, FLORA E., 645 E. St..

San Bernardino, Cal.

HECK, J. AUSTIN, 1907 So.

Clinton Ave., Trenton, N.

J. (N.D.)
HECKER,  G. E., Box 15,  Con-

nersville,  Ind. (N.D.)
HECKMAN, D. J.. Heckman

Sanitarium, Ottumwa,

Iowa (N.D.)
Eugene, 155 B. 33rd St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.M.T.)
HECKMANN,  GUSTAVE

HERBERT, 110 Main St.,

Mt. Holly, N. J. (D.O.)
HEDGPATH, T. H., Logan

Bldg., St. Joseph, Mo.


Nulnropdlhic  liiognipltical  Notes


897


against  the  artificial  protection  he  pos-
sesses, and  is  inclined  to  depend  on  super-
stition  rather than ahility for  a livelihood.


Mr. Joseph Schaefer

Mr.  Schaefer  is  a  philanthropist.  As
president  of  St.  Raphael's  Society  and  Leo
Haus,  a  Catholic  organization,  he  has
brought  comfort,  cheer  and  protection  into
the  lives  of  Catholic  immigrants  who  need
such  attentions  when  first  landing  in  a  new
world.  Mr.  Schaefer  is  also  an  honorary
patron  of  the  Kolping  Association  (Katho-
lischer  Gesellenverein),  a  society  of  Catholic
mechanics,  an  organization  devoted  to  the
social,  educational  and  spiritual  betterment
of  the  lives  of  its  members.  In  the  naturo-
pathic world  Mr.  Schaefer  is  the  agent  of  the
late  Father  Kneipp's  works  on  hydropathy,
that  are  published  by  Joseph  Koesel,  of
Kempten,  Bavaria,  and  importer  and  manu-
facturer of  Kneipp  articles,  such  as  herbs,
teas,  oils,  powders,  tinctures,  remedies,
health  foods,  malt  cof¥ee,  whole  wheat  flour,
apparatus,  linens,  and  other  Kneipp  and  Na-
ture  cure  supplies.

SHEWALTER,  CHESTER  A.,  N.  D.

Chester  Albert  Shewalter  was  born  Feb-
ruary 12,  1889,  at  Eureka,  Greenwood
County,  Kansas.  When  12  years  of  age,
his parents moved to Galena, Kansas.


There,  after  finishing  public  school,  he  en-
gaged in  the  drug  business,  which  he  gave
up  after  three  years,  because  of  the  con-
fining conditions.  Leaving  for  California,
he  became  connected  with  the  United  States
.Vrmy  Post  liosjjital  Service  at  Presidio,
San  Francisco.  While  there,  he  received
practical  training  in  the  art  of  Naturopathy,
or  the  curative  use  of  diet,  manipulation,
hydro  and  electro  therapy  and  scientific
exercise,  and  ui)on  leaving  the  service,  en-
gaged in  further  study  of  the  subject  at
Livermore,  California.  After  a  short  period
here,  he  took  up  work  at  the  L.  C.  McLain
Sanitarium.  St.  I^ouis,  Mo.,  where  he  was
placed  in  charge  of  the  Mechano-Thera-
peutic  department,  and  at  that  time  was  the
youngest  member  on  the  stafif.  Deciding  to
continue  the  study  of  Naturopathy,  he  took
up  the  course  at  the  American  College  of
Mechano-Therapy,  Chicago,  111.,  and  re-
ceived his  degree  in  1912.  After  practic-
ing in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  for  a  year  he  left
for  Hot  Springs,  Arkaiftas,  to  gain  further
experience  in  the  wonderful  work.  Practic-
ing for  three  years  in  the  BuckstafT  bath
house,  on  the  government  reservation,  one
of  the  best  equipped  bath  houses  in  the
world,  he  gained  a  wide  experience,  and
then  decided  to  return  to  Ohio  and  again
take  up  private  practice.  Here  he  estab-
lished offices  in  Akron  and  Cuyahoga  Falls,
Ohio.  He  was  one  of  the  charter  members
of  the  National  Association  of  Drugless
Physicians,  and  their  first  representative  in
Arkansas.  After  returning  to  Ohio,  he
resigned  from  this  association  and  became
a  member  of  the  stronger  organization,
the .American Naturopathic Association.


Dr. Chester A. Shewalter


898


Alplidhrlicdl  Index


Hedges
Herman


HEDGES.  A.  R.,  Medford,  Ore.

HEDIN,  GUSTAV.  1224  Pacinc
St., Brooklyn. N. V. (Ma.)

HEDLEY,  JOSEPH,  213  How-
ard St.,  Detroit,  Mich.

HEDSPETH. R. I.. Tecum.seh.

Olila. (D.C.)
HIOKLKK. Di-. C. A., N.-\v

York, N. V. (Ma.)
HEFPNER,  ELIZABETH,

14-18 E. 66th Pla., Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)

HEFT,  C.  G.,  337  Main  St.,
Racine, Wis. (D.C.)

HEGADORN,  C.  S.,  320  Sum-
mitt  Ave.,  West  Hobo-
ken, N. J. (D.C.)

HEGEMAN, Mis. A. O., 1130
Ocean  Ave., Brooklyn.
N. Y. (Cr.)

HEGGEN,  ANFIN  S.,  Madi-
son, Wis. (D.O.)

HEIGERIEK,  b.  D.,  2539  N.
Kenzie  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
(Nap.)

HEILBRON. LOUISE, Union
Bldg-., San Diego, Cal.

HEILEMANN,  .1.  .  GEORGE,
North  St.,  Goderich,  Ont.

HEILMAN, FRED.. 2 Kings-
bury Bldg., Xenia, O.

HEIM,  FRED,  1905  Lanie  St.,
St. Louis, Mo. (S. T.)

HEINE  FRANK  R.,  Commer-
cial Bk.  Bldg.,  Charlotte,
N. C. (D.O.)

HEINSTETN,  Mrs.  A.  L.,  270
Bowdoin  St.,  Dorchester,
Mass. (N.D.)

HEINTZE. ARTHUR, 1318
Spruce St., Philadelphia,
Pa., (D.C.)
A. C, 721 Federal St., Cam-
den, N. J.. (D.C.)
C. A., 5 Goff Bldg.. 23
B'way, Camden, N. J.
(D. C.)

HEINZE,  E.,  408  N.  Cicero
Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

HEINZE, B. P., Au.stin, 111.

HEIRMAN,  R.  F.,  3801  \V.  Har-
rison  St., Chicago, 111.

HEISLER, C. F., Ridgewood,
N. J. (DC.)
M. L., 405 S. 13th St., Har-
risburg. Pa. (D.C.)

HEISS,  JOHN  E..  2117  Wash-
ington Blvd.,  Chicago,
111. (D. C.)

HEISSER,  J.  H.,  3012  Hum-
boldt Ave.  S.,  Minneapolis,
Minn. (N.D.)

HEIST, ALBERT D., Geneva,
N. Y. (D.O.)
Edgar D., 61 King St. W.,

Berlin, Ont. (D.O.)
Ijcnore M., Bariet & Mar-
tin Block. Gait, Ont.
Mary Lewis, 61 King St.
W., Berlin. Ont. (]~).0.)

HEITZ.  J.  J.,  2030  Lincoln
Ave.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

HEIZMAN, J. J., 181 East
Ave.. Rochester. N. Y.

HEIZMAN.  JNO.  JACOB,  348
University  Ave.,  Roches-
ter, N.  Y. (D.C.)

HELD,  LILLIE  M..  Le  Mara,
la. (D.O.)

HELD. WM., Chicago, 111.


HELFRICH & HELFRICH,
1915 N. 9th St., Terre
Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
Ed.. 1915 N. 9th St.. Terro

Haute. Ind. (D.C.)
R. E., Terope, Ariz. (D.C.)

HELGAN, CLARA A., 93
State St., Hammond, Ind.
(DC.)
Geo. D., Hammond, Ind.

HELGEN, G. D., Suite 4, O.
K. Bldg., 636  Hohman  St.,
Hammond. Ind. (D.C.)
G. D., 93 State St., Ham-
mond. Ind. (D.C.)

HELGIN.  GEO.  D.,  Ruteven.
la. (D.C.)

HELLAM, LYDIA, Morris-
ville. Mo. (D.C.)
Lydia, Columbus Junction,

la. (D.C.)
Lydia, Ford City, Pa.

HELLAM,  LYDA, 205 1/2 W.

Washington  St.,  Washing-
ton, Iowa (D.C.)

HELLAN,  LYDIA,  125  Mc-
Klau  St.,  Kittanning.  Pa.

HELLER,  A.  G.,  1537  B'way,
(at  45th  St.),  New  York,
N. Y. (Ch.)

HELM,  ORA  B..  Cedar  Falls,
Iowa (N.D.)

HELMER, GEO. J., 187  Madi-
son  Ave., New York City,
N. Y. (D.O.)
Jessie Blaine, 429-41 Gran-
ite Bldg..  Rochester,  N.  Y.
John N., 187 Madison Ave.,
New York City, N. Y.

HELMUTH,  WM.,  3251  N.  Troy
St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

HELPIAN,  A.,  Newton,  Kans.

HEMES,  LEON,  1244  Walnut
Ave., Cleveland. O. (N.D.)

HEMINWAY,  GERTRUDE  F.,
Ridley Park, Pa. (D.C.)

HEMMING.  EARL  J.,  Kear-
ney, Nebr. (D.C.)

HBMMINGER,  H.  J..  25  Je-
rome St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
(Opt.)

HEMMINGHAUSEN, 88 Dear-
born St.. Chicago, 111.

HEMPHILL,  ETHA  B.,  323
Geary  St.,  San  Francisco,
Cal. (D.O.)

HEMSTREET,  CORA G.,

Holmes Bldg., Galesburg,
III. (D.O.)

HENDERSHOT,  C.  D.,  Box  39,
Vincent,  O. (D.M.T.)

HENDERSON, CLARA FT.,
Stanton, la. (D.C.)
E.  A., Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Can.

J. A., 321 York  St., Hamil-
ton,  Ont., Can. (D.C.)
J. H., 33 River St., Sala-
manca, N. Y. (D.O.)
Jennie M., Cherokee, Okla.

Jos. W., First Nafl Bank
Bldg., Berkeley, Cal.
J. W., 141 Eaton St.. Buf-
falo,  N. Y. (D.C.)
Lucy v., Stronghurst, III.

M. W., Murfreesboro, Tenn.


Robert B., Dominion Bank
Bldg., Toronto, Ont.

HENDERSON.  GUSTAVE.

Schadt Block, Fergus

FalLs, Minn. (D.O.)
Dv. A. ()., Pres.  Chii'opractic

Board of Examiners,

Mandan, JvT. D. (Ch.)
HENDIUCK, C, 935 lioard-

walk, Atlantic City, N. .1.

HENDRICKSON,  JESSE W..

Lawrence, I.,. 1., N. Y.

(Ma.)
HENDRICKSON, M. L., 10

Hinsdale Place, Newark,

N. J. (D.C.)
M. L. & J. W., 548 Broad

St., Newark, N. J.

HENKE, CRESCENSE, 163

S. Orange Ave., S. Or-
ange, N. J. (D.O.)
HENKEL, H. M., Kenyon,

Minn. (D.C.)
HENNEY,  MAE  MURRAY,  110

S. Portland Ave., Brook-
lyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
HENNING, E. J., 2208 F  Ave.,

Kearney, Nebr. (D.C.)
HENRUEM, G. N., Barnes

Bldg., Chanute, Kans.

HENRY, A., 317 Fulton St.,

Peoria, 111. (D.C.)
Aurelia S., 201 Sanford

Ave., Flushing, I.,. I.

Chas., 16 Carver St., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
F. H., Diagonal, la. (D.C.)
F.  M.,  Blairstown,  la. (D.C.)
Jno. L., Security Bldg.,

Denison. Tex. (D.O.)
Mary Elizabeth. 1654 N.

12th St.. Philadelphia.

Pa. (D.O.)
Percy R.. 476 Clinton Ave..

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
HENRY, AURELIA S.. 201

Sanford Ave., Brooklyn,

N.  Y. (D.O.)
HENRY. J. D., Moxahala, O.

(D.M.T.)
HENRY, JAMES T. 27 Todd

I.,ane, Youngstown, O.

HENRY, PERCY  R., 476 Clin-
ton  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

HENZEL, FRANKLIN  M..

3149 N. 15th St.. Philadel-
phia, Pa. (N.D.)
HEFNER, J. Q., Covina, Cal.

HERBERT. C. C, 1334 O St..

Lincoln. Nebr. (D.C.)
C. L. T., Dickinson, N. D.

Lulu J.. Kress Bldg.. Tren-
ton, Mo. (D.O.)
HERBING. PAUL C. 1042

Argyle St., Chicago, 111.

HERBST, EDW. G., 378 Elm-

w^ood Ave., Buffalo. N. Y.

HERCHE, JEANNETTE B..

Parker's Landing, Pa.

HERKIMER,  G.  R.,  Dowagiac,

Mich. (Or.S.)
HERKT, V. B., 1055 Colorado

St..  Chicago.  111. (N.D.)
HERMAN, ARTHUR M., Os-

born Bldg., Cleveland, O.

John C, 20 Valucia Ave.,

Daytona, Fla. (D.O.)


Nalnropalhic  liiuyrapliical  Notes


899


At  the  Chicago  convention  in  1916,  held  in
Hottl  Sherman,  he  was  made  electoral
committeeman,  and  suggested  the  re-elec-
tion of  Dr.  Benedict  Lust,  our  most  honor-
able president,  and  four  new  honoraiy
presidents.  Returning  to  Ohio,  he  worked
up  enthusiasm  amongst  the  Ohio  men  and
held  a  convention  at  Hotel  Portage,  Akron,
at  which  time  the  Ohio  State  Society  of
Naturopaths  was  formed,  Dr.  Shewalter  be-
ing appointed  secretary.  He  was  also  ap-
pointed chairman  of  the  National  Photo-
Play  Department  and  assistant  chairman
of  the  National  Lyceum  Bureau  of  the  so-
ciety, through  which  agencies  it  is  hoped  to
make  great  advances  in  Naturopathic  work.
In  1914,  Dr.  Shewalter  was  appointed  edi-
tor of  the  Mechano-Therapy  Department
of  the  Herald  of  Health.  He  is  also  con-
tributing editor  of  the  Practice  Builder.
Being  chairman  of  the  proposed  Ohio  State
Yungborn  College  and  Sanitarium,  and
also  chairman  of  the  membership  commit-
tee of  the  Ohio  State  Society  of  Naturo-
paths, he  hoped  to  still  further  enrich  the
cause  of  Natural  healing.  Dr.  Shewalter  is,
bv  reason  of  his  great  intelligence,  his
initiative  and  enthusiasm  for  physiotherapy,
one  of  the  foremost  pillars  of  the  new
school  of  healing.  He  is  a  man  with  a
conscience  that  is  not  satisfied  until  he  has
explored  the  ultimate  facts  of  the  particular
department  of  Naturopathy  that  engages
his  attention.  He  does  not  pin  his  faith  or
practice  to  but  one  phase  of  the  healing  art.
He  believes  that  diet,  exercise  and  natural
therapeutics  should  go  hand  in  hand,  so
that  the  patient  maj'  receive  the  fullest  aid
that  Naturopathy  can  give.  We  have  rea-
son to  know  that  his  work  as  a  healing
force  has  been  extraordinarily  successful,
and  from  time  to  time  has  been  made  the
subject  of  commendation  in  the  press.  A
particular  achievement  lately  recorded  was
the  cure  of  a  Mrs.  W.  S.  Hassler,  of  Cuya-
hoga Falls.  Ohio,  the  city  in  which  Dr.  She-
waiter  is  located.  Mrs.  Hassler  had  been
confined  to  bed  for  four  years,  by  reason
of  paralyzed  limbs,  and  was  a  hopeless  in-
valid when  Dr.  Shewalter  took  charge  of
the  case.  He  cured  her  completely,  the
cure  being  regarded  by  the  patient  and  her
friends  as  nothing  short  of  a  miracle.  We
will  allow  Mrs.  Hassler  to  tell  the  story
in  her  own  words:  "I  have  been  a  sufiferer
from  inflammatory  rheumatism  for  years."
Mrs.  Hassler  says.  "No  medical  help
would  benefit  me.  I  changed  doctors  and
changed  medicines,  trying  everything  that
ofifered  itself  in  the  way  of  medicine,  in  the
vain  hope  of  getting  on  my  feet.  But
my  trouble  got  worse  and  worse  until  I
was  completely  crippled  and  paralyzed
from  my  hips  downward.  When  I  had
practically  given  up  all  hopes  of  ever  get-
ting well  again,  a  friend  of  ours  spoke  to
me  about  Dr.  C.  A.  Shewalter,  who  has  a
Naturopathic Institute here. I sent for


him,  hoping  against  hope  that  he  might
give  me  some  relief.  He  came  to  see  me
and  impressed  me  with  his  method  of  heal-
ing without  any  medicines  and  drugs  by
those  means  only  that  the  laws  of  nature
sage and  similar  natural  methods.  1  gave
him  a  chance  as  he  had  inspired  confidence
in  me,  and  I  trusted  him  and  his  methods.
And  1  shall  ever  bless  his  name,  as  long  as
I  live.  It  was  due  to  his  treatment  only
that  my  condition  began  to  improve.  1
felt  new  life  blood  course  through  my  dead-
ened limbs  and  it  was  a  wonderful  sensa-
tion when  the  paralyzed  muscles  began  to
move  as  I  wanted.  Appetite  increased,  I
grew  stronger  and  finally  decided  to  leave
my  bed.  It  did  not  take  long  when  1  be-
gan to  move  about.  Now  I  am  getting  as
strong  as  ever  and  feel  happier  than  words
can  express.  I  cheerfully  refer  all  suffer-
ers to  Dr.  Shewalter."  Dr.  Shewalter  is  at
present  engaged,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.
Allen  of  Eureka  Springs.  Arkansas,  in  pro-
ducing a  movie  film  representing  the  cure
of  a  child  that  has  been  stricken  with  in-
fantile paralysis  by  the  energetic  agency  of
Nature  Cure  treatments.  The  film  shows
little  Dorothy  lying  ill,  tired, .listless,  pulse
94,  temperature  103  degrees.  Dr.  Blake,
Osteopath,  Chiropractor,  is  called  and  re-
duces the  temperature  by  manipulations.
He  pronounces  the  case  one  of  infantile
paralysis,  and  advises  that  she  be  taken  at
once  to  Dr.  Allen,  a  well-known  Naturo-
path of  Eureka  Springs,  Ark.,_  some  thirty
miles  away.  Dorothy  is  put  into  an  auto
that  flies  along  the  roads  to  Eureka
Springs.  A  stop  is  made  at  a  hotel  on  the
way  for  refreshments,  but  the  owner  re-
fuses to  allow  Dorothy  to  be  brought  into
the  building,  fearing  contagion.  Dorothy
arrives  at  Dr.  Allen's,  and  is  put  to  bed
where  she  cannot  move  hand  or  foot.  She
is  fed  on  w^hole  wheat  bread,  raw  milk,
brown  rice,  rye-krisp,  black  figs,  honey
and  prunes.  An  X-ray  diagram  of  her
spine  is  taken,  and  several  subluxations  are
discovered.  Traction  on  the  pandicular
with  manipulations  correct  these.  Exer-
cise, diet  and  correct  postures  are  pictured.
The  use  of  water,  electricity,  cupping,  dry
air,  manipulation  and  spinal  traction,  ex-
hibited. Plaster  cast  for  straightening  legs
adjusted,  proper  feeding  and  constant  care
makes  serum  treatment  unnecessary-
Goats  that  yield  goat  milk  are  shown.  Fin-
ally Dorothj^  is  shown  standing,  cured,  on
the  porch  of  her  home  amid  other  children.
Her  mother  is  sitting  down  in  a  happy
mood.  The  main  object  of  the  exhibit  is
to  show  the  superiority  of  Naturopathy  in
curing  infantile  paralysis.

Dr.  Shewalter  must  be  credited  with  an
investigating  mind.  His  absolute  faith  when
throwing  his  energies  into  new  paths  of
action,  is  refreshing,  and  is  invariably  just-
ified by  the  success  that  attends  his  eflforts.


900


Alphabetical  Index


Hermann
Hilton


HERMANN. J. E.. 743 Cen-
tral Ave., Sandusky, O.
HERMEI.ING, W. H., 4456
Marg-aretta Ave., St. Louis,
Mo. (D.C.)
HERR, A. W., 381 Arcade
Bldpr., Cleveland, O.
(DC.)
HERRICK. W. EDWIN, Wat-

seka.  111. (D.O.)
HERRIGEL, RUTHELM, 60
Somerset St., Garfield,
N.  J. (D.C.)
HERRING, ERNEST M.. 170
W. 73d St., New York
City, N. Y., (DO.)
Geo. D., 159 Crescent Ave.,
Plainfleld. N. J., (D.O.)
HERRINGTON, ELLEN, 117i
S. Dubuque St., Iowa
City, la. (D.O.)
Lon  H., 108 Dakota  St., San

Antonio, Tex. (D.C.)
S. A., Plummer, Idaho.
HERRODER. DR. T. L., 212
Stevens Bldg., Cor. Grand
River and AVashington
Aves.. Detroit, Mich.
HERROLD, S. ALLETTA, T.
O. O. F. Bldg-., Shelbv-
ville. 111. (D.O.)
HERRON, H. J., Albia, la.

HERT, MISS ANNA, 402
Washington St., Greens-
burg-, Ind. (D.C.)
HERWIG, DR. ALINE, 1713
Mt. Vernon St., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (N.D.)
HESS, A. NORINA, 702 N. 2d
St., Phoenix, Ariz. (D.C.)
C. F., 336 W. Tuscarawas

St., Canton, O. (D.O.)
Carrie M., 195 Colborne St.,
Brantford, Ont., Canada.
Elmer C, 1118 W. Lehigh,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Harriet L., Phoenix, Ariz.

E. A., 2101 W. Adams St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Lawrence T., Masonic
Temple, Zanesville, O.
Norina A., Phoenix, Ariz.

Norina A., 403 Hambur.^er
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
W.  G.,  3115  S.  Main  St.,  Los
Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
HESS, H. McCLELLAN, 14 E.
.Tackson Blvd., Chicago,
111. (Nap.)
HEUBR, F., 1292 Park Place,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
HEUFEL,  GEO.,  1907  So.  Clin-
ton Ave., Trenton, N. ,T.
HEWINS,  B.  A.,  1001  W.  State
St., Clean, N. Y. (D.C.)

B.  A., 28 River St.. Sala-
manca, N. Y. (D.C.)

C.  S., 40 Niagara St., Ni-
agara Falls, N. Y. (D.C.)

C.  S.,  57  Congress  St.,  Brad-
ford, Pa. (D.C.)
S. P., 228J N. Union St.,

Clean,  N.  Y. (D. C.)
S. P., 1001 W. State St.,
Clean, N. Y. (D.C.)
HEWINS, C. S., 795 Main St.,
E. Rochester, N. Y. (D.C.)
HEWITT & HEWITT, White
Cloud, Mich. (D.C.)


L. E., Corvallis, Ore. (D.O.)
HEYDT, HENRY W., 60
Hudson Place, Weahaw-
ken, N. J. (D.C.)
HEYER, FERDINAND C,
Ohio Bldg., Toledo, O.
HEYLER, CHARLES A., 67
I.,incoln St., Jersey City,
N. J. (D.C.)
HEYNE,  H. P., 3d Ave., Ran-
kin,  Pa. (D.C.)
HIATT, E. C, Payette, Idaho.

HIBBARD, CAROLINE S.,
Max Joseph Str., 2-111
Munich, Germany.
HIBBE, LEOPOLD H. R., 154
East 49th St., New York,
N. Y. (M.D.)
HIBBETS, U. M., 721 Broad

St.,  Grinnell,  la. (D.O.)
HIBEL, H. E., Hillsboro Ore.

HICKMAN, WARREN E.,
130 S. Fairmount, Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
HICKMAN, W. H., Pasquith
Bldg., Mexico, Mo. (D.O.)
HICKOX. OLIVER, Burling-
ton, Wis. (D.C.)
HICKS, ANNA L., Vaughan
Hall, Portland,  Me. (D.O.)
Betsv B., Ward Bldg., Bat-
tle Creek, Mich. (D.O.)
Ella Y., 226 Sutton St.,

Maysville, Ky. (D.O.)
Frederick Thomas, Oregon,

111. (D.O.)
J., 3872 3d Ave., New York

City, N. Y. (D.C.)
Rhoda Celeste, 573 Com-
mercial St., Astoria, Ore.
HICKSON, F. C, Gaffney,

S. C. (D.O.)
HIEBEL, Benj., Waterloo,
HIESERICK, J. H., 293 Main
St., Biddeford, Me. (D.C.)
Wis. (D.C.)
HIGADOM, DR., 320 Summit
Ave., West Hoboken,
N. J. (D.C.)
HIGBB, D. N., 15 N. Lincoln

St., Chicago, III. (N.D.)
HIGGINBOTHAM, M. W^

Bentonville, Ark. (D.O.)
HIGGINS,  SHELLEY E.,

Whitewater, Wis. (D.O.)
HIGH, JAS. H., 2088 Emerson
St., Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
J. H., 2740 W. 32nd Ave.,
Denver, Colo. (D.O.)
HIGINBOTHAM, CARRIE M.,
1205 East St., Honesdale,
Pa. (D.O.)
Lillian G., 307 W. 6th  Ave.,
Pine Bluff, Ark. (D.O.)
HILDEBRAND, H. C, 136
4th St. S. W., Canton, O.
Harry C, 206 N. 6th St.,

Canton, O. (D.C.)
Dr. Julia I., 1112 Chestnut
St., Philadelphia, Pa.
HILDEBRANT, GUY, Two

Rivers. Wis. (D.C.)
HILDRETH. A. G.. Macon,
Mo. (D.O.)
C. Green, 1528i Rockland
Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
G. G., 347 5th Ave., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)


HILDRETH. C. G., 405 Magee

Bldg.. Pittsburgh, Pa.

HILF. HELEN. 246 W. 128th

St..  New  York,  N.  Y. (Ma.)
HILF. S. R.. 108 S. Jefferson

St.. Dayton. O. (N.D.)
HILGARTNER,  L.  E.,  Prospect

St.. Pitt.sburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
Carrie. 701 High Street.

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
E. E., 6654 S. Maishfteld

Ave..  Chicago.  111. (D.I'.)
Emma  B.,  Mason  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
HILIMAN, W. O., DePere.

Wis. (D.C.)

HILL,  B.  M.,  Ponca  City,  Okla.

Carl, Plate, S. Dak. (D.C.)
C. E.. 16 N. Maine St.,
Hutchinson, Kans. (D.C.)
Herbert, 16 Gould Ave.,

Newark, N.  J. (D.C.)
Herbert H., 1113 Washing-
ton St., Hoboken, N. J.

J. C, Rockland, Me. (S.T.)
J. J., Bishop, Cal. (D.C.)
John West, 2032 Cleveland

Ave.,  Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
Mrs. L. E., 901 N. Main St.,

McPherso'n, Kans.. (M.D.)
Lester  M., 106i E. Choctaw,

McAlester, Okla. (D.C.)
Lester M., 402 Donaghey

Bldg., Little Rock, Ark.

Margaret Ammerman, 101

States Ave., Atlantic

City, N. J. (D.O.)
R., Eliza, Tex. (S.T.)
Wm.  E., 2121  Master, Phila-
delphia,  Pa. (D.O.)
W. F., 39 S. State St.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
W. F., Hart, Mich. (D.O.)
HILLABRANT, CORA L., 652

Park PI., Elmira, N. Y.

HILLARD, MARGARET C,

211 20th St., West New

York, N. J. (D.C.)
Wm. F., Main St., Hailey-

bury, Ont. (D.O.)
HILLERY, GRACE H., 570

Spadina Ave., Toronto,

Ont. (D.O.)
HILLIG. O.. 1867 Cornelia St.,

Ridgewood, Brooklyn,

N.  Y. (N.D.)
HILLIKER, GEO., Tecumseh,

Mich. (D.C.)
HILLMAN, GUSTAV, Illmo,

Mo. (D.C.)
HILLMAN, H. W., 1716 44th

St.,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y. (D.O.)

HILLS. CHAS. WHITMAN.

Masonic Temple, Dover,

N. H. (D.O.)
J. D., care of Gen. Del.,

Cairo, 111. (D.C.)
J. D., 213 14th St., Cairo.

111. (D.C.)

HILSING.  E.  A.,  106  N.  Ash-
land Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.

HILTON,  BERTHA,  46  W.
First  Ave.,  Denver,  Colo.
(DO.)
D.  A.,  206-7  Bankers'  Trust
Bldg.,  Little  Rock.  Ark.


Ndtnropalhir  liiof/raphical  Notes


901


SCHLATHOLTER,  REV.  LOUIS,
Moberly,  Mo.

A man of high character and standing,
who has taken up the cause of Druglcss


Rev. Louis Schlatholter

Healing,  Father  Schlatholter  has  written
a  book  entitled  "Hypnotism,"  which  has
been  translated  into  the  German  language,
and  is  considered  as  the  real  exposition
of  all  that  is good and  bad  in Hypnotism.

SCHULTZ, CARL, N. D., D. O., M. D.,

President  and  General  Manager,  Natu-
ropathic Institute  and  Sanitarium  of
California.

The  story  of  how  a  man,  single-handed,
has  fought  and  won  out  in  converting  the
world  to  see  the  value  of  a  great  and
humane  idea,  against  tre-
mendous odds,  is  always  an
inspiring  story,  and  that  is
the  story  of  the  subject  of
our  sketch,  Carl  Schultz,  M.
D.,  N.D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  M.  E.
Bachelor  of  Law,  etc.,
whose  Institute  of  Healing
is  located  at  1319  S.  Grand
Ave.,  Los  Angeles,  Gal.
Let  us  consider  for  a
moment  the  forces  that  are  responsible  for
the existence of so great a humanitarian


and  healer  as  Dr.  .Schultz.  In  Germany,  for
over  half  a  century,  The  Nature  Cure  has
enjoyed  the  greatest  vogue.  Everywhere  in
that  country  men  and  women  are  being
physically  regenerated  by  scientific  treat-
ments in  Nature  Cure  establishments,  with
natural  forces,  instead  of  pills  and  potions,
by  water  applied  externally  and  internally,
by  air  and  sun  baths,  by  breathing  exer-
cises, curative  gymnastics,  spinal  mani-
pulations, electricity,  massage,  mental  sug-
gestion, dietetics,  etc.  Physicians  of  the
regular  school  are  sending  their  patients,
those  that  they  cannot  cure,  to  these  sana-
taria  and  they  do  not  disdain,  as  is  often
done  in  the  United  States,  to  avail  them-
selves of  any  curative  method  even  if  intro-
duced by  a  "layman."  The  names  of
Kneipp,  Just,  Bilz,  Kuhne,  Hahn,  Ehret.
Ling,  Brandt,  Rikli,  Hensel  and  Lahmann
are  household  words  in  Europe.  Born  in
Saxony,  Germany,  in  the^  year  1850,  Dr.
Schultz,  after  leaving  High  School,  occu-
pied various  positions  of  trust,  prior  to
making  a  study  of  medicine.  He  had  the
good  fortune  to  study  under  Prof.  N.  von
Ziemsen,  the  first  physician  and  professor
of  a  University  to  put  Hydropathy  on  a
scientific  basis.  He  also  studied  chemistry
and  later  Homeopathy,  which  was  at  that
time  in  its  infancy.  Then  hearing  of  the
many  cures  of  Schroth,  Bilz  and  Kneipp,  he
studied  Hydrotherapy,  Massage  and  Elec-
tricity. These  subjects  were  followed  by
the  study  of  Chromotherapy,  Orthopedic
Surgery,  and  finally  all  the  other  branches
of  Naturopathy.  After  having  had  the  mis-
fortune of  losing  his  wnfe  and  fortune  in
Germany,  Dr.  Schultz  determined  to  settle
in  California  and  introduce  so  benign  and
efficacious  a  school  of  healing  on  the  Paci-
fic coast,  which  at  the  time  of  his  arrival
in  1885,  was  virgin  territory  as  far  as  Natu-
ropathy was  concerned.  He  opened  an
establishment  known  as  the  Naturopathic
Institute  and  Sanitarium  of  California  in
Los  Angeles,  a  beautiful  city  situated  half
way  between  the  coast  and  the  mountains
in  a  latitude  known  to  invalids  and  con-
valescents as  the  paradise  of  California,  and
here  he  met  with  immediate  success.  Dr.
Schultz  was  one  of  the  first  Naturopaths
who  studied  Osteopathy  and  Chiropractic,
being  of  a  very  investigating  nature  and
always  hospitable  to  new  ideas.  But  the
representatives  of  official  medicine,  the
State  allopaths  in  particular,  were  not  in-
clined to  allow  a  Naturopath  to  invade
their  territory  with  new  and  strange
theories  and  practices  that  cured  patients,
where  their  own  nostrums  had  failed,  and
they  immediately  declared  war  on  Dr.
Schultz  and  such  other  Naturopaths
throughout  the  State  as  had  followed  his
example  in  establishing  sanitariums  for
drugless  healing.  For  over  six  years,  he
fought  the  allopaths  almost  single-handed
at  a  cost  of  thousands  of  dollars.  The
Medical Trust had the finest attornevs at


902


Alphabetical  Index


Ilimmel
Holbrook


RU-
Ave.,


Dal-


D. A., Box 103, Hutchinson,

Kans. (D.C.)
Dee  A.,  Box  103,  Mena.  Ark.

Dee A., 2401 Scott St.,

Little Rock, Ark. (D.C.)
John  P., 21  E.  20th  St.,  Pat-
erson,  N.  J. (D.C.)

HIMMEl., MISS,  l.ockport,
N.  Y. (DC.)

HINCHMAN. A. W., lllj Jef-
ferson St., Vinton, la.

HINCKLEY.  DON  H.,  3<)04  Cot-
tage Grove  Ave.,  Chicago,
111. (M.D.)

HINKLE, C. R., Sig-ourney,
la. (D.C.)
J. D., 4104 Independence
Ave., Kansas City. Mo.

HINKLEY, A. B., Delphi, lud.
A. Burton, San Joaquin
Vallev. Selma, Cal. (D.C.)

HINKLEY.  FRANK,  Huron,
S. Dak. (D. C.)

HINMAN,  CHAS.,  Glenwood
Springs, Colo. (D.C.)

HINNAH,  LOUISE  C,  Math-
asville. Mo. (D.C.)

HINSCH,  HENRY  &
DOLPH,  912  Grant
Bronx. N. Y. (D.C.)

HINTON,  M.  M.,  Box  62
las, Tex. (S.T.)

HINZEY,  A.  A.,  Council  Bluff,
Kans. (D.C.)

HIPPLE, J. E., 500 Broad St.,
Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
S. A., 199 Broad St., New-
ark N. J. (D.C.)
S.  N.,'59i Warren St., New-
ark, N. J. (D.C.)

HIRSCHFELD,  S.,  72  Fair-
fields  Ave.,  Johnstown,  Pa.
(Opt.)

HIRSH,  ARTHUR  S.  W.,  137
Summit  Ave.,  W.  Hoboken,
N. J. (N.D.)

HISEY,  J.  B.,  Supply,  Okla.

HISS,  JOHN  M.,  Harrison
Bldg., Columbus, O.  (D.O.)

HITCHCOCK.  C.  C,  First
Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Milwau-
kee, Wis. (D.O.)

HITZ, WM., 1(;2 Bergenline
Ave.,  Union  Hill, N.  J.
(Opt.)

HIVELY. J. L., 39 S. State
St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
J.  S.,  156  Wabash  Ave.,  Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)

HIXSON, INA F., 505 Union
Bldg., Anderson, Ind.

HOAG, W
Bldg.,
W. G., Arlington, la. (D.C.)

HOAGLAND, MRS. GEO.. 13
Dartmouth St.. Warren,
Pa. (D.C.)
Lydia Ellen, Claremont,
Cal. (D.O.)

HOAGLAND, NETTIE E.,
3465 Larimore Avenue,
Omaha. Neb. (S.T.)
N. J.. Hord Blk., Central
City, Nebr. (D.O.)

HOARD,  AGNES  A.,  1932  Ash-
land Ave.,  Toledo,  O. ((^h.)

HOARD,  MARY  A.,  Cherokee,
la. (D.O.)

HOARE.  AV.  J..  Broadway
Central  Bldg.,  Los  An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)

HOBAN,  HARRIE,  Erie,  Pa.


G., Savings Bank
Plttsfleld. Mass.


HOBBS. R. S.. Chicago, 111.

(DC.)
HOBSON. ANCIL B., Stevens

Bldg.. Detroit. Mich.

HOBSTADT,  M. F.. 633 Morris

Ave.,  Topeka,  Kans.  (N.D.)
HODAK, JOS., Antigo, Wis.

HODES, DR. ROBERT. 214

E. 41st St.. Chicago, 111.

HODGE, G. EDGAR, 10 S. 3d

St.. Grand Forks, N. D.

HODGE.  J. W..  Niagara  Falls,

N. Y. (N.D.)
HODGE, Mis. M. J., 122 E.

Capitol  St.,  Washington,

D.  C. (Ma.)
HODGES.  L.  P..  The  Northum-

beiland Apts., Washing-
ton, D. C. (D.C.)
V. C, Kansas City, Mo.

HODGES, LENA R., Seaside,

Ore. (D.O.)
P. L., 1504 H. St. N. W..

Washington. D. C. (D.O.)
HODGESON. B. R.. 382

Boylston St., Boston,

Mass. (D.C.)
HODGSON. E. R.. R. No. 1.

Hutchinson. Kans. (D.C.)
E. R.. 328 Boylston St.,

Boston. Mass. (D.C.)
J. E., Old Nat. Bk. Bldg.,

Spokane. Wash. (D.O.)
W. W., care of Alemana,

Blueflelds, Nicaragua.

HODGKINS, A. A., 1440 R St.

N.W.. AVashington, D. C.

Mrs. June, 1440 R St. N.W.,

Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
HODGSON, GEO. L,, 542 Bird

Ave., Iroquois Bldg., Buf-
falo,  N. Y. (Cr.)
Mrs. Myra W., Iroquois

Bldg.. Buffalo. N. Y. (Cr.)
HOE. A. E., 110 Pattison St.,

Rankin. Pa. (D.C.)
HOECKER, MARY, Stan-
berry. Mo. (D.O.)
HOEFFER, A. F. H.. 3131 E.

Washington, Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
P. T.. 1908 S. Main St., Los

Angeles, Cal., (D.C.)
HOEFFLER, J., 2017 E. 104th

St., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
HOEFNER, J. HENRY, 1330

liberty St., Franklin, Pa.

Victor C, 215 Madi.=!on St.,

Waukegan, 111. (D.O.)
H0EGP:N. JOS. A., 334 Alex-
ander  Ave., New York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
HOEHN, MRS. EMMA, 720 E.

Diamond St., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (M.A.)
HOELLIG, ANNA, 1564 E.

51st  St.,  Los  Angeles.  Cal.

HOERLEIN, H. K., Hood

River, Ore. (N.D.)
HOEYE, GEORGE, Oregon

City, Ore. (D.C.)
HOFEDITZ & HOFEDITZ.

Visalia, Cal. (D.C.)
H. W., Los Angeles, Cal.

H. W., Visalia, Cal. (D.C.)
Miss Mabel, 503 Main St..

Visalia, Cal. D.C.)
HOFER, A. L., Rov, N. M,

A. L.,  Trinidad, Colo. (D.C.)


HOFER, A. L., Clayton, N.

Mex. (D.C.)
HOF^, F. T., 228 S. Main St.,

Ft. Atkinson, Wis. (D.C.)

F.  T.. Daily Blk.. Grand
Rapids, Wis. (D.C.)

HOFF, FRED. H.. 2036 St.

Paul Ave., Chicago, 111.

F. T., 215 Com. Nafl Bank

Bldg.,  Raleigh,  N.  C.  (D.C.)
HOFFMAN, MISS ESTHER.

2717 Lake Street. Ocean

Park,  Cal. (D.C.)
Esther E., 403 Hamberger

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

E. J., 539 Fairfield Ave.,

Akron, O. (D.C.)
E. S., 33 W. Adams St..

Jack.sonville, Fla. (Oph.)
Harry  C,  1406  North  Second

St.. Harri.sburg, Pa. (Ma.,

P.,  D.M.T.)
Haxel P., McKinnville, Ore.

Herbert. 1118 Chestnut St..

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
R. E., 1718 E. 55th Street.

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Stanley A., 2425 Milwaukee

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Wm. A.. 723 Third St.. Mil-
waukee, Wis. (D.C.)
W.  A.,  1230  Wright  St.,  Mil-
waukee, Wis. (N.D.)
Wm. C, McKinnville, Ore.

HOFORD.  LEONARD.  Beaver-
ton, Ore. (D.C.)
HOFSESS. MARY M.. Benton

City, Mo. (D.O.)
HOFSTADT, J. P., 64 E. Van

Buren St., Chicago, 111.

HOFSTETTER, M., 555 West

151st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

HOGAN. F. E.. Oxford. Che-
nango Co.,  N. Y. (D.C.)
HOGAN.  W. 4200  Grand Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
HOGEBOOM, S. B., 1309 N.

Charles St., Baltimore,

Md. (D.C.)
HOGEWONIG, NEAL COR-
NELIUS, Horton, Kan.

HOGGINS. JOSEPHINE H.,

U. American Biiilding,

Frankfort, Ky. (D.O.)
HOGMAN. ANNA. 830 Union

Trust  Bldg.,  Cincinnati,

O. (D.C.)
HOGSTRON.  J.  R..  101  Everett

Bldg., Akron, O. (D.C.)
HOGUE, \V. A., 1435 W.

Adams St., Chicago, 111.

HOHNE, G. W., 670 State St.,

Bridgeport, Conn. (N.D.)
HOISINGTON, BERTHA, 713

Wheeling Ave., Cam-
bridge, O. (N.D.)

G.  S.,  Pendleton,  Ore. (D.O.)
HOJM,  JNO.,  Union  Block,  Mt.

Vernon, Wash. (D.C.)
HOLADAY, E. R.. 1739 Fifth

Ave., Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
HOLBROOK, B. F., Sheridan.

Wyo. (N.D.)
HOLBROOK, GRACE C, 501

Beacon St., Boston, Mass.

HOLBROOK,  F.,  319  E.  Works

St.. Sheridan, Wyo. (D.C.)


Naturopalhir  liiographiral  Nofrs


003


its  command,  and  had  the  authority  and
aid  of  the  American  Medical  Association
behind  it.  In  order  to  better  lielp  him-
self and  other  similar  practitioners  against
medical  oppression.  Dr.  Schultz  studied
law  at  night  for  three  years  and  gained
the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Law,  and  is  at
I)resent  acting  as  Counsel  in  the  Supreme
("ourt  of  the  United  States.  Hut  he  says
he  is  first  of  all  a  physician  and  only  prac-
tices law  when  compelled  to  do  so  by  the
oppression  of  his  fellow  physicians.  The
crowning  .triumph  of  Dr.  Schultz's  life  as
naturopath  and  lawyer,  was  the  passage  of
a  bill  at  the  instigation  of  himself  and  his
associates  that  legalized  the  standing  of
Naturopathy  in  1907,  in  the  State  of  Cali-
fornia, one  of  the  triumphs  of  modern
civilization.  Nearly  every  Naturopath  in
California  and  many  in  Oregon  and  the
State  of  Washington,  are  graduates  of  his
institution.  In  1901,  he  organized  the  As-
sociation of  Naturopathic  Physicians  of
California.  He  was  for  six  years  secretary,
in  which  time  he  did  all  the  legislative
work,  often  working  until  late  at  night,
after  a  hard  day's  work  in  his  practice,
treating  as  many  as  sixty  patients  in  a  day.
He  then  became  president,  occupying  this
office  for  eight  years,  when  he  was  again
elected  secretary,  after  he  had  positively
declined  to  be  a  candidate  for  president.
He  is  a  hard  and  conscientious  worker  in
everything  he  sets  out  to  do.  When  asked
once  by  a  younger  member  of  his  staff  how
he  could  stand  such  hard  work  and  long
hours,  his  answer  was,  "Young  man,  make
your  work  a  pleasure."  He  celebrated  his
sixty-sixth  birthday  last  December,  and
looks  like  a  man  of  forty-five,  and  still  does
the  work  of  a  young  man.  Honors  have
fallen  thick  upon  Dr.  Schultz.  He  is  an
Honorary  President  and  life  member  of  the
National  Association  of  Naturopaths  of
America;  a  member  of  the  Association  of
Physicians  and  Surgeons  of  America;  is  a
member  of  the  Los  Angeles  Bar,  a  member
of  the  Los  Angeles  Chamber  of  Commerce
and  a  member  of  the  National  Geographical
Society  (U.  S.  A.).  He  has  served  for
three  years  on  the  Board  of  Examiners  of
the  Naturopathic  Physicians  of  California.
Dr.  Schultz  is  the  uncompromising
champion"  of  medical  freedom,  of  the  right
of  the  patient  to  select  the  physician  of  his
own  medical  belief,  and  of  the  legal  recog-
nition of  all  approved  drugless  healing
methods.


SONNTAG,  ALFRED  G.,  N.-D.

Dr.  Alfred  G.  Sonntag,  who  conducts  a
hospital  and  sanitarium  in  Fowler,  Kansas,
where  a  fine  climate  prevails,  has  gained
an  enviable  reputation  as  a  physician  who
cures  by  drugless  methods,  which  alone
can  abolish  disease  from  the  human  sys-
tem. He  makes  a  specialty  of  employing
a  combination  of  the  central  truths  of  cura-


Dr.  Alfred G. Sonntag


tive  psychology,  hydropathy  (Kneipp
methods),  packs,  herb  baths.,  sun  baths,
cabinet  baths,  hot  air  ovens,  electricity,
fasting,  dietetics,  osteopathy  and  chiro-
practic, to  suit  the  needs  of  the  individual
case.  Dr.  Sonntag  is  a  progressive,  en-
thusiastic, hopeful  physician  whose  work  is
crowned  with  success.  He  sends  us  a  leaf-
let containing  excerpts  from  letters  re-
ceived from grateful patients, telling the


Mrs. Alfred G. Sonntag


004


Alphabetical  Index


Uolcoin
House-


HOLCOM, HARLOW. 3213 6th
St., Spokane, Wash.,
HOLCOMB, ANNA T.., 108 N.
State St., Chicago. 111.
(D.O.)  _

HOIvCOMB,  DAYTON D.,

Stewart Bldg-.. Chicag-o,
Til. (D.O.)
Maude B., Carter Blk.,
Jackson, Mich. (D.O.)
HOI.COMBE. CHAS. D., 1268
Pacific  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
(Cr.)
TIOLDEN.  B. F.,  Charles  City,
la. (D.C.)
Peter  A.,  Eugene,  Ore.  (D.C.)
IIOLDEN, MARION G.. 267
Park PI., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Ma.)
HOIJ3T.  EDGAR,  Pearl  River,

N.  Y. (N.D.)
HOLIMAN, W. O., 1015
Masonic Temple, Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
W O., 235 Pecan St., San
Angelo, Tex. (D.C.)
•  HOLLAND, Mrs. E. M., 1313
Mass. Ave., Washington,
D. C. (D.C.)
Wm. H., 1313 Mass. Ave.,
Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
HOLLAND, S. O., Wallace
Bldg., Salisbury, N. C.
HOLLAPETEN, MRS. LEILA,
115 N. Detroit Avenue,
Xenia.  O. (D.C.)
HOLLIDAY, C. THOMAS
Broken Bow^, Neb. (D.C.)
Colin, 40 St. Anne Street,
Quebec City, Province
Quebec. (D.O.)
Phillip, 122 Stanley Street,

Montreal, Que. (D.O.)
Thos. C, Broken Bow, Neb.
HOLLIS,  ARTHUR  S.,  Farwell
Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.  (D.C.)
HOLLISTER, B. C, 358
Harbor St., Conneaut, O.
B C, 1536  E.  86th  St.,  Cleve-
land, O. (D.C.)
H. R., Avoca, la. (D.C.)
J R., Pawnee, Neb. (D.C.)
M Cebelia, 1250 Pacific St.,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
HOLLOCK, H., 160 Summit
Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
HOLLOWAY, JAS. L., Wilson
Bldg., Dallas, Tex. (D.O.)
Lucy Prindle, R. F. D. 1,
Princess  Anne, Va. (D.O.)
HOLM, P. O., Bee Hive Blk.,

Butte, Mont. (D.C.)
HOLME, E. D., Ballinger
Bldg., St. Joseph, Mo.
HOL^vlES, E. C, Buchanan
Bldg., Portland, Ore.
O. W., 272 Circular  St., Tif-
fin,  O. (D.M.T.)
HOLMES,  E.  R., 27  E.  Monroe
St., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Frank,  Eagle  Blk.,  Spokane,

Wash. (D.O.)
H. R., 27 E. Monroe Street,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
M.  A., Rickreall, Ore. (D.C.)
TTOLMSTROM, C, 213 First
Natl. Bank Bldg., Long
Beach, Cal. (D.C.)


HOLT, G. EUGENE. First

Natl. Bank Bldg.. Bur-
lington, N. C. (D.O.)
W. Luther, Rus.sell Bldg..

Pullman, Wash. (D.O.)
HOLTAN. A. O., 606 Hamilton

St.,  Stoughton,  Wis.  (D.C.)
HOLZBACH, J. H., Niles, O.

(D.M.T.)
HOLZER.  J.  L.,  Appleton,  Wis.

HOMANN. AUGUST W., 8928

Corul Ave., Chicago, 111.

HOMMEL, JOHN. 21 Manhat-
tan Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
HONES,  LOUISE  A.,  301  Hulet

Bldg., Minneapolis, Minn.

HOOD, EDWIN S., 167

Marianna St., East Lynn,

Mass. (D.C.)
Mrs.- & Mr. J. S., 10538

Helena Ave., Cleveland,

O. (D.C.)
John  S., 733  B.  105th  Street,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Lizzie M.. 733 E. 105th St..

Cleveland. O. (D.C.)
HOOK.  ALBERT  E..  Brummer

Blk., Cherokee, la. (D.O.)
J. Henry, Grand Valley

Bank Bldg., Grand Junc-
tion,  Colo. (D.O.)
Rolla,  Hansen  Bldg.,  Logan,

la. (D.O.)
Virgil  A.,  Second  Natl.  Bank

Bldg., Wilkes-Barre, Fa.

HOOPES, CHAS. L., 1524

Chestnut St.. Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.O.)
H.  C.  Fairfield,  la. (D.C.)
HOOPWOOD, I. S., Norton,

Kan. (D.C.)
HOOVEN, H. E., 47 S. Main

St., Akron, O. (N.D.)
HOOVER, F. U., 425 Arbor

Road N.E., Cleveland, O.

(D.M.T.)
HOOVER, G.  L., 119  Mills  St.,

Fair  Oaks. Pa. (D.C.)
H. R.. 25 N. Potomac St.,

W^aynesboro. Pa. (D.C.)
M. W.. CJlenwood, la. (D.O.)
HOPKINS, R. H., Coquille,

Ore. (N.D.)
HOPKINS. RALPH W., 139

Broad St.. Claremont,

N.  H. (D.O.)
W. R.. Helena, Mont. (D.C.)
Wm. R., Franklin, Neb.

HOPPER, MARY SHAFTER,

Troy, Kan. (S.T.)
Harriet Chandler, 401 W.

Briggs St., Fairfield, la.

HORA, FRANK, 3739 Lowell

Ave.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
HORANDT, C, 120 Jasper  St.,

Paterson. N. J. (D.C.)
HORMELL. S. L.. 817 S. Olive

St., Los Angeles, Cal.

Mrs. Sophie Lee, 1912 S.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)
HORN & HORN, DRS., Guth-
rie. Okla. (D.C.)
HORN, A. T., Wentworth

Ave., Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
F. B., 221 S. Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (D.P.)
M.  J.,  295 Plymouth  Ave.,

Buffalo. N. Y. (D.C.)
HORN,  F.  J.,  1  Hay  Hill,  Ber-
keley Sq.  Q.,  London,  Eng.


Geo. F.. Barril, Ont.. Can.

Mary B., 64 Main Street,

Haverhi\l, Mass. (D.O.)
P. B., 1415 E. Colfax Ave.,

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
HORNBECK, E. G., Phillips

Bldg., Rocky  Mount, N.  C.

HORNBERG. CARL H., 408

Penn. Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (Ma.)
HORNB, MRS. F. S., 1314 W.

Cotteral St., Guthrie,

Okla. (D.C.)
Nellie, 1415 E. Colfax Ave.,

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
Tracy B., Littlefield, Bldg.,

Austin, Tex. (D.O.)
HORNER, J. C, Homestead,

Pa. (D.C.)
J. C. 5155 Penn. Avenue,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
HORNER, L. M.,  Niagara

Falls.  N. Y. (N.D.)
HORNING.  J. E., 80  Bloor  St.,

W., Toronto, Ont. (D.O.)
HORSINGTON, B., 713 Wheel-
ing Ave., Cambridge, O.

HORSTMAN,  H.  C,  213  Pacific

Bldg.,  San Francisco,  Cal.

H. C, 405 Whitney Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

H. C, Portland, Ore. (D.C.)

HORSTMAN,  H.  C, 213  Pacific

Bldg., Sacramento,  Cal.

HORTON, H. H., 218 Grand

Ave., Laramie, Wyoming.

J. C, 208-9 Black Bldg..

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

Waldo, 500 Boylston Street,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
HORTON, W. M., 218 Grand

Ave., Laramie, Wyoming.

HORTSMAN,  H.  C,  213  Pacific

Bldg., San Francisco, Cal.

HOSACK, FRANK E., Route

3, Fredericktown, O.

(D.M.T.)
HOSELTON, NANCY A., 1711

Gervais St., Columbia.

S. C. (D.O.)
HOSKINS,  1441  Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
HOSKINS, GEO. W., c/o Cin-
cinnati Nat'l  League

Baseball Club. Cincinnati,

O. (D.M.T.)
HOSKINS, J. E., Orr-FIesh

Bldg.. Piqua. O. (D.O.)
HOSPERS.  MATHEL G.,

Orange City. la. (D.O.)
HOTELLING. A. L., Rock

Valley, la. (D.C.)
HOUCK, DELLA, 1814 Reil

Ave., Lorain, O. (D.C.)
HOUGH, CLARA E., 69

Piccadilly, London, W..

Eng. (D.O.)
Frank  T., 222 S. Fifth  Ave.,

Mt. Vernon, N. Y. (N.D.)
HOUGHTON,  ELIZABETH,

2820 Pi St., Galveston,

Tex. (D.C.)
Jas. M., Jr., 986 Summit

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.

HOURIET, ELSIE, Second

Natl. Bank Bldg., Akron.

O. (D.O.)
HOUSE, ETHEL, Coral, Mich.


Alphabetical  Index


905


View  of  Dr. Sonntag's  Sanitarium  in Fowler, Kans


story  of  their  cures  from  the  most  distress-
ing complaints.  Cases  of  stomach  and
liver  trouble,  rheumatism,  heart  trouble,
appendicitis,  nervous  breakdown,  consump-
tion, paralysis,  night  sweats,  lumbago,  etc.,
tliat  ordinary  physicians  could  not  cure,
have  been  completely  cured  by  Dr.  Sonn-
tag's treatments.  His  cures  advertise
themselves,  and  for  this  reason  his  busi-
ness in  healing  is  in  a  very  flourishing
condition.  We  print  portraits  of  Dr.
Sonntag  and  his  amiable  wife,  who  is  a
most  valuable  assistant  to  her  husband,  in
conducting  the  sanitarium,  of  which  we
herewith give an illustration.


SUMMERBELL,  A.  E.  P.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Summerbell,  of  North  Sydney,  New
South  Wales,  Australia,  is  an  active,  highly-
educated  Naturopath  —  the
best  that  Australia  has  pro-
duced. He  is  carrying  the
Iianner  of  medical  progress
along  natural  methods,  as
opposed  to  the  medical
superstition  of  the  regular
school,  and  is  doing  a  large
business  with  the  former
victims  of  the  medicos,  who,
by  their  irrational  drug
treatment,  have  simply  depleted  the  vital
forces  of  their  patients  without  effecting
cures.  We  look  to  Australia  to  inaugurate
legislation  that  will  make  poisoning  the
sick  with  drugs  a  penal  oflfense.  Dr.  Sum-
merbell advocates  replacing  drug-poisons
with  simple  living,  suitable  diet,  plenty  of
sun,  plenty  of  fresh  air  and  exercise,  with
such  other  treatments  as  simply  intensify
Nature's  processes  of  cure.  As  a  professor
of  natural  therapeutics,  he  is  an  invaluable
citizen, worthy of higher prestige in the


healing  art  than  any  of  his  opponents  who
are  devoted  to  drug  therapy.  The  only
reason  on  earth  why  sick  people  go  to
drugging  doctors  to  get  cured,  is  because  the
mind  of  the  average  man  feels  it  must  be
supported  by  something  outside  itself,  by
superstition,  by  custom,  by  leaning  against
the  corpses  of  its  predecessors,  or  the  fact
that  a  given  institution,  or  method  of  heal-
ing, is  sanctified  by  history,  even  though
it  is  a  curse  to  humanity.  W^hen  the
average  man  takes  sick,  he  goes  to  a  drug
doctor  to  be  treated  because  his  father  and
grandfather  did  the  same.  He  opens  his
mouth  and  shuts  his  eyes  at  the  word  of
command,  and  swallows  the  poisonous
stuf¥,  and  pays  his  good  money  for  some-
thing that  has  neither  science  nor  common
sense  to  commend  it.  The  ministry  of
healing,  as  far  as  Dr.  Summerbell  can  com-
mand it,  is  antipodeal  in  the  Antipodes  to
that  which  has  formerly  prevailed,  the  un-
speakable horrors  of  drug  medication.


STADEN,  LUDWIG,  N.  D.  ■

A  pioneer  of  Naturopathy  in  America,
educated  along  the  lines  of  Natural  Heal-
ing in  Europe.  Dr.  Staden  came  to  this
country  in  the  early  nineties,  and  estab-
lished a  Nature  Cure  Institute  in  Brook-
lyn. He  constructed  one  of  the  first  elec-
tric-light bath  cabinets  in  America.  He
has  done  much  toward  the  advancement
of  naturopath}-  in  New  York  and  has
suffered  his  share  of  medical  persecution.
However  his  Institute  is  still  in  operation,
and  welcomes  all  the  sincere  seekers  after
health.  For  several  years  he  served  as
department  editor  of  the  Free  Adviser
Section  of  the  Amerikanische  Kneipp-
Blatter  (1896-190n.  Der  Naturopath
(1902-1914) and Der Hausdoktor (1915-


900


Alphabetical  Index


Houseiiiim
Hiilander


HOUSKMAX, MRS., 504 2nd

St., Marietta. O. (D.O.)
HOUSTON. EDWIN A., 1520

Federal St., Pittsburgrh,

Pa. (D.C.)
E A.. 2344 Perrysville  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
HOUTENBRINK. ANTHONY,

407 S. Ashland lUvd.,

Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
HOVERIN, A. A. & C. F., 28

IJncoln Ave., Newark,

N. J. (DC.)
C E.. 867 S. 19th Street,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
HOVEY, E. B,, Cape Flats.

Greensburg-, Pa. (D.C.)
E B.. 409 4th Ave., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Mrs. Lydia M., 1835 Dime

Bank Bldg., Detroit.

Mich. (D.C.)
W G., 810 Marbridge Bldg.,

New  York.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
Wm G., 47 W. 34th Street,

New York, N. Y. (D.C.)
HOWARD & NAPPER, 333 S

Dearborn St., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
HOWARD, A. F., Owosso,

Mich. (D.C.)
A. W., Genessee, Idaho.

Chas. G., 36 Walnut Street,

Canton. 111. (D.O.)
Edward  W.  S..  235  W.  102nd

St.. New York, N. Y.

Ella  C, 341 Pacific  Avenue,

Long  Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
Hosea, Ferguson,  Mo. (S.T.)
John J., 229 Berkeley St.,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
Kathrvn C, 503 Spruce St.,

Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.

L. R., Clvmer, N. Y. (D.C.)
M. E., 137  Springhurst  Ave.,

Toronto, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
M. J., Eraser Blk.„ Pem-
broke. Ont. (D.O.)
R B  , Mt. Clemens, Mich.

W.  W..  Garnett-Corey  Bldg.,

Medford, Ore. (D.O.)
HOWARD, E. S.. The Farra-

gut, Washington, D. C.

.1 F., 333 S. Dearborn St.,

Chicaffo, 111. (N.D.)
HOWD.  ALBERT  O.,  Augusta.

111. (D.O.)
HOWE, A. J.. Victor Ave.,

Toronto, Can. (D.C.)
Bert F.. 522 Main Street,

(Room 11), Joplin, Mo.

Gracia W., Allison, Colo.

L. E., Gold, Pa. (D.C.)
Mabel J., Weysses, Pa.

HOWE, R. .1., 35 Victor Ave.,

Toronto, Ont. Can. (D.C.)
HOWELL, C. C, 302J E. 22nd

St., Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
J. (ilorwin, Orlando, Fla.

Mollie. llli S. Washington

St., Wellington, Kan.

O. W., 5606 Michigan Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
HOWELL, J. SULLIVAN, 220

S.  State  St..  Chicago,  111.

HOWELLS. ALLAN F., First

Savings Bank Bldg.,

Albany, Ore. (D.O.)


Anna  Gerow, 459 Mt. Pros-
pect Ave., Newark, N. J.

Clifford, 459 Mt. Prospect

Ave., Newark, N. J.

Elizabeth I..ane, Masonic

Temple, Corvallis, Ore.

Mary  S.,  Albany,  Ore. (D.O.)
HOWENSTINE, FRANK F.,

310 Mason Bldg., Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
HOWERD, L. M., 503 Spruce

St.,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Mich.

HOWERTON, MATTIE  COLE-
MAN. Hurdland, Mo.

Thomas J., Southern Bldg.,

Washington, D. C. (D.(J.)
HOWERTON, T. .1.. 2812 Con-
necticut Ave. N. W..

Washington,  D.  C. (D.C.)
HOWES.  L.  A.,  Ord,  Nebr.

HOWES, LUTHER ALAN,

Mortensen Blk., Ord,

Neb. (D.O.)
HOWEZ, EVA B., 2312 Bull

St., Savannah, Ga. (D.O.)
HOWICK, A. B., North

Yakima, Wash. (D.O.)
HOWLAND, C. A. W., 290

Westminster Street,

Providence, R. I.

Luther H., Selling Bldg.,

Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
HOWLAND. HELEN N., 510

Penn.  St.,  Reading,  Pa.

HOWLEY, EDWARD, Union

Blk.. Mt. Vernon, Wash.

HOWZE, EVA B., 2312 Bull

St., Savannah, Ga. (D.O.)
HOXEY, M. A., 533 Bloor St.,

Toronto, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
M. A., 215 Wallace Blvd.,

Ypsilanti, Mich. (D.C.)
HOXEY & GARLAND, DRS.,

240 Brunswick Avenue,

Toronto, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
HOY, H. A., Winterset, la.

Harry, Belle Plaine, la.

Jas., 224 E. 6th St., Long

Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
HOYGARD, T. G., 215 7th St.,

Rockford, 111. (DC.)
HOYM.  .7.  C.  S.,  Delphos, Kan.

HOYT. PAYSON W., Hoopes-

ton.  111. (D.O.)
HRADBK,  MRS. J.  J., Hotel

Bon Ray. New  York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
HUBBARD. J. C. Greenwood,

Ark. (D.C.)
J. C. 614 Herskowitz Bldg.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

J. C. 1224 W. 27th Street.

Oklahoma  City,  Okla.

•Tohn C, 1400 W. 25th St.,

Oklahoma  City,  Okla.

HUBBARD.  JOHN  C,  26th  and

Wyandotte Sts., Kansas

City,  Mo. (D.C.)
HUBBEL, D. A., Ill  N.

Jackson  St., I.,onia,  Mich.

(D.M.T.)
Eugene. St. Paul, Minn.


HUBBELL.  PRESTON  R., 1664

Woodward Ave., Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
HUBER, BERTHA, Dillon,

Mont. (D.C.)
Chas.  E.,  1227  Main  St.,  Cin-
cinnati, O. (M.A.)
Harry, 5195 Hudson Blvd.,

West New York, N. J.

HUBER. MRS. T., B'way  and

44th St., New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
HUBNER, DR. LOUIS, 130

4th St.. Town of Union,

N. J. (D.C.)
HUBNER, HARRY, 5197

Hudson Blvd., North

Bergen, N. J. (N.D.)
HUBOR, W. A., 967 N. St.

John's Ave., Highland

Park. 111. (D.C.)
W. A., 838 W. Rockwell St..

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
W. A., 3940 Southport Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
HUCKEBY. MISS  ORA. Read-

ville. Mo. (D.C.)
HUDSON, FRANKLIN, 12

Lansdowne Ci'escent. Ed-«

inburgh, Scotland. (D.O.)
Harry R., 816-17 James

Bldg., Chattanooga, Tenn.

Stephen  W.,  c/o  S.  M.  Long,

Valentine Stage, Grass

Range,  Mont. (D.C.)
HUEY, C. P., 230 N. 5th St.,

Clinton, la. (D.C.)
C. P., 207 Weston Bldg.,

Clinton, la. (D.C.)
C. P., 230 Fifth Avenue,

Clinton. la. (D.C.)
HUFF, ADAM L., Fresno, O.

HUFFER, L. R.. Westport,

Ind. (D.C.)
HUFFMAN, J. E.. Box 622.

Orange, Cal. (M.D., D.C.)
J. E., Box 622, Orange, Cal.

HUFFMAN, JOHN  W.. 629 W.

9th St.. Cincinnati, O.

(Ch.)
HUFFMAN, THOMAS P..

Loan and Trust Building,

I^afayette, Ind. (D.O.)
HUFFNER,  SUSAN  E., 335 W.

Ferry St.. Buffalo, N. Y.

HUGH, RAY W.. Rochester.

Mich. (D.C.)
HUGHES. ALICE, 325 Center

St., Williamsport, Pa.

Arthur L., Trust Building.

Bloomfleld. N. J. (D.O.)
H. A., 12 Imperial Bank

Bldg.,  Medicine Hat,

Alberta, Can. (D.C.)
J. H., Lockney, Tex. (D.C.)
T. A..  Hennessey,  Okla.

T. H., Lockney, Tex. (S.T.)
T. H., Apache, Okla. (D.C.)
HUGHES,  J.  H..  Douglas,  Ga.

John W., North Baltimore,

O. (D.S.T.)
Mary, 26 College  St..

Dayton,  O. (Ma.)
Sarah E., Yellow Springs,

O. (D.S.T.)
HUGHSON, JEAN M., Orono.

Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
HUGININ, MARY, Boyero,

Colo. (S.T.)
HULANDER, HY. N., 127

Halsey St., Brooklyn,

N.  Y. (Ma.)


X(tlnroj)(ithi('  Bioqraphicdl  Notes


907


Luflwig Staden, N. D.


1918).  He  was  one  of  the  Charter  Mem-
bers that  constituted  the  first  Society  for
Drugless Physicians in America in 1896.

SIMPSON,  ROSALIE  M.,  D.  C,  Secretary
and  Treasurer  Washington  School  of
Chiropractic.

Dr.  Simpson  became  convinced  only  a
few  years  ago  that  Chiropractic  was  a
great  means  in  restor-
ing health  in  her  own
case,  and  she  witness-
ed and  gave  it  to
others  as  well,  and
while  not  in  the  field
as  long  as  the  older
practitioners,  she  has
nevertheless  become
thoroughly  proficient
in  spinal  adjustment.
While  holding  the  of-
ficial position  noted
above  in  the  Washing-
ton School of Chiro-


practic, she  engages  actively  in  the  regular
work  and  practice  of  the  institution,  where
many  patients  pass  regularl}-  under  her  care.
She  is  more  inspiring  and  faithful  in  the
work,  and  has  the  rare  power  of  imparting
lier  knowledge  and  faith  to  others,  and  her
patients  speak  of  her  in  terms  of  highest
praise.

TUCKER,  FRANK  L.,  D.  C.

Frank  L.  Tucker,  D.  C,  is  a  prominent
member  of  the  faculty  of  the  New  York
School  of  Chiropractic  with  which  he  has
been  associated  for  quite
a  period.  He  conducts  the
special  course  in  First  Aid
to  the  Injured,  which  at-
tracts immense  classes  to
his  recitation  periods.  He
is  treasurer  of  the  National
chiropractic  League,  the
strongest  organization  of
Chiropractors  of  the  coun-
trv. He is a well-known


boH


Alphdht'licul  Index


iliilandev
Ingram


HUI.ETT.  C.  M.  T..  122  S.  Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.

M F., 8 E. Broad Street,

Columbus. O. (D.O.)
M. lone, Alamogordo, New

Mex. (D.O.)
HULICK, HARRIET C,

509 N. Newstead Avenue,

St. L,ouis, Mo. (Me.)
Hin.Ii, ET.Ti.\, Coleman, Mich.

Wm. Philo, 51 S. Jefferson

St., lola, Kan. (D.O.)
HUI.I., MARCUS E., Hickory,

N. C. (D.C.)
HULTGREN, ALBERT, 5059

N. Clark St., Chicago, 111.

(Ma.)
HUMFIELD, WM. C, Wash-
ington, Mo. (D.C.)
HUMISTON, SARAH G., 106|

E. 4th St., Santa Ana,

Cal. (D.O.)
HUMMEL, A. F., 119 North

Columbu.s St., Lancaster,

O. (D.C.)
HUMMEL, ABRAHAM, 406 N.

Broad St., Lancaster, O.

Nellie, 119  N.  Columbus  St.,

Lancaster, O. (N.D.)
HUMMON, EMMA, 27 E.

Munroe St., Chicago,

HUMMON. IRVIN F.,

Maple Ave., Berwyn,

HUMPHREY. C. S., Moravia,

N. T. (D.C.)
G. B., Earkham, la. (D.C.)
S. B., 321 Union St., Em-
poria, Kan. (D.C.)
HUMPHRIES, ERNEST R. A.

B., 293 Maple Street,

Holvoke, Mass. (D.O.)
HUNFIELD. JULIUS S., 240

S. Maine St., St. Charles,

Mo. (D.C.)
HUNSAKER, E. D., 918 Bel-
mont Ave., Chicago, 111.

HUNT, ALBERT T., McCugue

Bldg., Omaha, Neb. (D.O.)
Miss Clara, Logan, Okla.

David  J.,  Ionia,  Mich. (D.O.)
Harold  A.,  Port  Jerris,  N.  Y.

John O., Baker-Detwller

Bldg., I.1OS Angeles, Cal.


111.


3402
111.


.M. H., Pauls Valley, Okla.

R. C, Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
HUNT, DR. .lOHN H..

Glenaire, Mont. (M.D.)
Sam'l  C, 14  E.  Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (Nap.)
HUNTER, GEO. S., Hotel

Florence, Ogden and

Adams  Sts.,  Chicago,  111.

HUNTER, J. A., 5 Wesley

Blk..  Columbus,  O.  (D.C.)
L.  S.,  Springfield,  Mo.  (D.C.)
Stanley M., Mason Bldg.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.  (D.O.)
V. D., Citizens' Bank Bldg.

Sikeston, Mo. (D.O.)
W. W., Highland Building,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
HUNTING, ALBERT, 649

Deming Place, Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
HUNTINGTON.  C.  L.,  Citizens-
Savings Bank Building,

Pasadena, Cal. (D.O.)
HUNTLEY, W. S., What

Cheer, la. (D.C.)
HUPP & HUPP. Second Natl.

Bank Bldg., Oswego,

N. Y. (D.C.)
HUPP, CHARLES M., Second

Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,  Oswego,

N.  Y. (D.C.)
HURD, M. C, Citizens' Natl.

Bank Bldg., Houghton,

Mich. (D.O.)
Nettie M., Goddard Bldg.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Orville R., 512 S. Mathews

Ave., Urbana, and Ran-

toul.  111. (D.O.)
HURLBERT, G. W., Guthrie,

Okla. (D.C.)
HURLBUT, E. F., 467

Fargo  Ave., Buffalo,  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
HURLEY, HELEN, 1504 13th

Ave.,  Altoona,  Pa.  (D.C.)
John L., 103 S. 5th Street,

Reading, Pa. (D.C.)
Jno. L., 1217 S. Broad St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C.)
HURRY, E. M., 816 W. 11th

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.

HURST, ANNA HOLMES,

Ballinger  Blk.,  St.  Joseph,

Mo. (D.O.)
HURT,  F.  L.,  First  Natl.  Bank

Bldg., Hamilton, O. (D.C.)


HURT,  F.  L., 1304  Stuart

Ave., Roanoke, Va. (D.C.)
HURWITZ, S., 830 B'way,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (Opt.)
HUSK, NOYES GAYLORD,

28  Main  St.,  Bradford,  Pa.

HUSTED & HUSTED, 519 E.

Warren  St.,  Detroit, Mich.

HUSTED, J. W., 57-58 Uni-
versity Bldg., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
HUSTON, GRACE, First Natl.

Bank Bldg., Sunbury, Pa.

HUTCHINS, C.  E., Pough-

keepsie,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
HUTCHINS, HARRY MEL-
VILLE, 95 Vinton St.,

Providence, R. I. (D.O.)
HUTCHINSON, A. W., 514

5th St., Marrietta, O.

Chas. B., Providence Bldg.,

Duluth, Minn. (D.O.)

C. E., Pomona, Cal. (D.C.)

H. F., Aurora, Mo. (D.O.)

C. E., Pomona, Cal. (D.C.)

HUTTS,  C.  A., 530 S.  Emporia

Ave.,  Wichita,  Kan. (D.C.)
HUXALL, H. P., Owensvllle,

Mo. (D.C.)
HUXMAN, H. W., Box 29,

Utica, Kan. (M.D.)
HYATT, Rexburg. Idaho.

HYATT, A. M., 2800 Q St.,

Lincoln, Neb. (D.C.)
Frank  E., Joliet  Natl. Bank

Bldg., Joliet, 111. (D.O.)
Inez, Lodi, O. (D.C.)
Inez, 7624 Quincy Ave.,

S.  E., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
J. E., 116i Vine St., Macon,

Mo. (D.O.)
HYBART, NORA CHAPMAN,

Purdue Hill, Ala. (D.O.)
HYDE, MRS. C. B., 58 Ea.st

18th  St.,  Chicago.  111.

(Ma.)
HYDE, LESLYE, 814 Mesa

Ave.,  El  Paso, Tex. (D.O.)
HYDROPATHIC INSTITUTE.

420 Main St., Hartford.

Conn. (Hy.)
HYNES, J. F., 2203 Madison

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
W. J., Lacon, 111. (D.C.)
W. J., Pontiac, 111. (D.C.)
HYRE, S.. St. Cloud, Fla.


IHLE, BEN, Paris, Ark.  ;

(D.C.)  j

IHNE, R. E., Newkirk, Okla.

(D.C.)  I

Walter W., Room 8, Inter-  ]

state  Bldg., Cedar  Rapids,  ;

la. (D.C.)
W. W., 546 Garfield Ave.,  }

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
IHRIG,  J.  M.,  140  W.  Jefferson  |

St., Springfield, O. (N.D.)  I
IKERMAN, J. W., 431 Bast

Market St., Warren, O.

.7. W., Natl. Bank Annex,

Kent, O. (D.C.)
TLIFF, LANA, 1715 25th  Ave.,

Gulfport, Miss. (D.C.)
IMLAY, J. N.. 413 6th St..

Springfield. 111. (D.C.)
TMLAY,  J.  N.,  Janesvllle,  Wis.


INA, MADAME, 1440 R St.

N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.

(Ma.)
INDIANA  SCHOOL  OF

CHIROPRACTIC, 1303 S.

Meridian St., Anderson,

Ind. (D.C.)
INGALLS & INGALLS, 301-4

Wvsor Bldg., Muncie,

Ind. (D.C.)
28 Miller St., Cortland,

N. Y. (D.C.)
21 Clinton Ave., Cortland,

N. Y. (D.C.)

INGALLS. C. B., Griggsville,

111. (D.O.)
Mrs. H. B., 21 Clinton St.,

Cortland. N. Y. (D.C.)
Julia N., 22 Washington

Street, Cortland, N. Y.


Murray  E.,  301  Wysor  Bldg.,

Muncie, Ind. (D.C.)
INGEBRITSEN, H., 97 East

Main  St.,  Shelby,  O. (D.C.)
H., Kimball Blk., Cedar

Rapids, la. (D.C.)
INGERSOLL*. F. E., Box 282,

Howell, Mich. (D.C.)
INGERSOLL, FRANK B., B.

441,  Guarantee  Trust

Bldg., Atlantic City, N.  J.

INGOBRISTEN. H., 97 East

Main  St.,  Shelby,  O. (D.C.)
INGRAHAM, DR. E. H., 1181

Harold Ave., Portland,

Ore. (N.D.)
Elizabeth M., 41 Saragosa

St., St. Augustine, Fla.

INGRAM, A. P., 615 Ivanhoe

St., St. Johns, Ore. (D.C.)


NalurojHilliir  /iiographical  Notes


909


Scout  Master  of  the  Boy  Scouts  of  West
New  York,  N.  J.,  and  conducts  a  vast  num-
ber of  the  boys  of  West  New  York  in  their
tours  and  studies  of  nature  and  First  Aid  to
the  Injured.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the
staff  of  the  Chiropractic  Sanitarium  of
West  New  York,  N.  J.,  and  in  charge  of  the
Clinic  attached  to  it.

TUNISON, EMORY HOWARD, N. D.,
D.  C.

For the past twelve years, Doctor E.
Howard Tunison has been a student and
investigator of the great truths of Drug-
less Healing. Starting at

^^^^- 1 first  with  the  study  of  diet,

4^^^^^^^  upon  which  he  is  an
Jj^^^HI^  authority,  he  has  in  turn
jm^J^m  I  reviewed,  one  by  one,  each
y^^^m'  I  of  the  other  branches  of
t^^B  •  this  healing  science,  until
(^S^JF  now he is a thoroughbred

H^^^^^^  Naturopath.  Each  year  that
^^^1^^^^  has  passed,  has  served  to
^^^^^^^^1  convince  Doctor  Tunison
of  the  increasing  import-
ance of  the  principles  of  Natural  Healing,
and  the  utter  uselessness  of  drug  and  serum
remedies.  He  is  of  the  unalterable  opinion
that  nothing  under  the  sun  but  Naturo-
pathy can  free  suffering  humanity  from  its
diseases.  Doctor  Tunison  spent  two  years
studying  Medicine  at  Columbia  University;
studied  under  Doctor  Charles  E.  Page,  of
Boston,  America's  only  living  pioneer
healer;  studied  at  the  New  York  School
of  Naturopathy  and  Chiropractic;  and  is
completing  a  course  in  Advanced  Thera-
peutics at  the  New  York  School  of  Physio-
logic Therapeutics.  Doctor  Tunison  is  at
present  lecturing  on  Dietetics  at  the  New
York  School  of  Chiropractic,  and  at  the
New  York  School  of  Massage  and  Physio-
logic  Therapeutics.

UEZ,  GUSTAV,  N.  D.

Dr.  Gustav  Uez  was  born  in  1877,  and
graduated  from  the  American  School  of
Naturopathy,  Class  1903.
He  first,  for  two  years,
was  assistant  in  Dr.  Bene-
dict Lust's  Naturopathic
Hospital,  New  York  City,
and  afterwards  in  the
"Yungborn,"  Butler,  N.  J.
Afterwards,  he  purchased
the  Kneipp  Nature  Cure
Institute  of  Dr.  Pfau  at
596  Clinton  Avenue,  West
Hoboken,  N.  J.,  where  he
is  still  located,  practicing  all  branches  of
Naturopathy,  his  treatments  including  steam
baths,  dry  baths,  dry  hot  air  baths,  loh  tanin
baths,  electric  baths,  Kneipp  water  cure,
massage,  Swedish  movements,  chiropractic,
physical  culture,  and  the  diet  cure.  Dr.
Uez  is_  a  strong,  well-built  personality,  and
is  inspiring  to  his  patients. His  personality


and  work  are  so  well  known,  that  local
priests  have  referred  to  him  in  commenda-
tory terms  from  the  pulpit  in  their  churches.
Dr.  Uez  is  a  member  of  the  National
American  Naturopathic  Association,  and
also  of  the  New  Jersey  State  Society  of
Naturopaths.

WAGNER,  OTTO,  N.  D.

A  lecturer  and  organizer.  Dr.  Wagner
has  done  more  than  any  other  individual  to
establish Natural Healing in Germany,


Dr. Otto Wagner

Austria,  Russia,  Switzerland,  where  he  or-
ganized more  than  one  thousand  Nature
Cure  societies.  It  might  be  said  that  Dr.
Wagner  is  the  one  reason  why  Nature
Cure  has  not  suflfered  from  medical  perse-
cution in  Middle  Europe.  For  a  number
of  years,  Dr.  Wagner  conducted  the  Bilz
Institute  at  Dresden,  Radebeul.  Oberwaid  at
St.  Gall,  Switzerland,  and  Teutoburgerwald
Institute  in  Westphalia,  and  is  at  present
operating  a  large  Nature  Cure  Sanitarium
in Chiemsee. Bavaria.

WELTMER,  SIDNEY,  D.  S.  T.

Prof,  Weltmer  is  today  the  foremost
apostle  of  mental  healing.  He  is  the  founder
of  the  Weltmer  Institute  of  Suggesto-Ther-
ap^^  at  Nevada,  Mo.,  that  has  an  interna-
tional reputation.  Outside  of  the  works  by
the  late  Helen  Wilmans  Post,  Mental  Heal-


910


Alphabetical  Index


Inks
Jennings


A. P., 401-2 First Natl.

Bank Bldg-., The Dalles,

Ore. (D.C.)
A. P., Baird Bldg-., Coquille,

Ore. (D.C.)
F. H., Grants Pas.s, Ore.

Silas, 9 Riddle Blk.,

Ravenna, O. (N.D., D.C.)
INKS, F. M.. 53 Hawthorne

Ave.. Pittsburgh, Pa.

INMAN, I. 1., Millgrave, Ind.

INWOOD, GARFIELD. 27 E.

Monroe St., Chicag-o, 111.

IPCAR, AARON, 1.348 Milli-

cent  Ave.,  Young-stown,  O.

IRANI, ARDESHIR BEHE-

RAN, Colorado Bldg.,

Washington. D. C. (D.O.)


IRISH, A.  M.. 859 Crane  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
Harrv L., Marshall. Mich.

IRELAND, HARRY M., 1163

27th St., Des Moinea, la.

IRVINE, S. W.. 903 8th Ave.,

Beaver Falls, Pa. (D.O.)
IRVING, BRYNE Hamilton,

Mont. (D.C.)
Josephine, 1569 Beacon St.,

Brookline, Mass. (D.C.)
Jo.sephine, 74 Boylston St..

Boston, Mass. (D.C.)
IRVING, MONTGOMERY. 200

5th  Ave..  New York, N. Y.

IRWIN,  CHRISTINE,  46

Nelson St., Brantford,

Ont., Can. (D.O.)
Grace Gould, Maplo Shade,

N. J. (D.O.)


R. J., Northern Crown
Bank Bldg., Vancouver,
B. C. (D.C.)
Wm. M., Penna Blk., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)

ISCH,  GEO.  A..  Washburn,
111. (D.C.)

ISRAEL, BEN.J., Holly, Colo.

IVES, VIOLA, 912 N. B'vvav,
Oklahoma City, Okla.

IVERSON,  FRED.  W.,  Ridge-
land.  Miss.,  Chicag-o,  111.

IVIE.  WM.  HORACE.  First
Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,  Berke-
ley, Cal. (D.O.)

IWERSON, FREDERICK W.,
1553 W. Madison St.,
Chicago 111. (N.D.,  D.O.,
D.C.)


JACKMAN, D. M., 316 North
Michigan St., Plymouth,

Ind. (D.C.)
J. M., Plymouth, Ind. (D.C.)
L M., Eau Claire, Mich.

Mable, 5242 Michigan Ave.

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
.lACKNOWlTZ, C, 407

Bergenline Ave., Union

Hill. N. J. (Opt.)
JACKSON,  B.  L., 60  Mountain

St., Eureka Springs, Ark.

(D.C.)  _ .

Charlotte M.,  Tussing

Bldg., Lansing, Mich.

C v.. La Porte, Ind. (D.C.)
Ernest, Clinton Corners,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Foster, Broken Bow, Neb.

(S. T.)
Fred. Box 173, Stromburg,

Neb. (D.C.)
H.  H.,  206  West  Ave.,

Medina, N. Y. (N.D.)
John A., 253 W. 42nd St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
J. R., Brookings. S. Dak.

Mrs. Lillie. Dunnville. Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)
Mrs. Lily, Selkirk, Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)  ^ ^^

Mary K., 1533 Diamond St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
N., 1741 Washington Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Richard H., 5211 Knox St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C.)
R L.. Eureka Spring.'^, Aik

JACOBOWITZ, HENRY M.,

West 18th St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
JACOBS, C. W., Gravette,

Ark., (D.C.)
Frederick V., 195 Virginia

Ave., Jersey City, N.. J.

(D.C.)  . .

Julian M.. 195 Virginia

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.,
W. A., 1544 Larrabee St.,

Chicago, 111. (DC.)
JACOBS. SAMUEL, 163 Lud-
low St., New York, N. Y.

Samuel, 29 Halsey St..

Newark. N. J. (N.D.)
W.  A.,  1544  Larrabee  Street,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.. D.O.)


JACOBSON, MRS. JOHN, 247

W. 123rd St., New York,

N.  Y. (Ma.)
JACOBSON, MAX, 447 E. 44th

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
JACOBY, E. W., Waterloo, la.

Earl W., 407 McMillan

Bldg., La Crosse, Wis.

JACOBY, JOHN, 186 Blvd.,

Marion.  O. (D.M.T.)
JACQUEMIN, THEO. J., 141

E. 44th St., New York,

N. Y. (M.D.)
Theodore J., 411 Franklin

St.,  Union Hill,  N. J.

JACQUES, MRS. ALLIE M.,

800 S. 7th St., Terre

Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
JAEGER,  GUSTAV,  602

Payton St.. Moberly, Mo.

Mr. & Mrs. Gustav. 17 S.

7th St., Columbia, Mo.

JAHN, DR. FRANCIS  M., 1631

Chestnut St., Philadel-
phia, Pa. (N.D.)
JALAS, ANNIE, 535 W. 163rd

Street, New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
JALORARA, A, V. S., 85 Main

St.. Mattewan, N. J.

(N.D.)  . .

JAMES, ANNA L., Higgins

Blk., Missoula, Mont.

F. K., 4465 Woodlawn Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
F. L., 407 Lincoln  Bldg.,

Champaign, 111. (N.D.)
I.  L.,  Holland  Bldg.,  Spring-
field, Mo. (D.O.)
J. H., Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)
J. W., Whiting, Ind. (D.C.)
L. Olive. 4463 Woodlawn

Ave.,  Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
JAMISON, CHARLES E.,

Chadakoin Bldg., James-
town,  N. Y. (D.O.)
JAMISON, H., Sedan, Kans.

JANSEN, ALBERT, Antigo,

Wis. (D.C.)
J., Box 312, Emmetsburg,

la. (D.C.)
JANSHESKI, O. A., 124 N.

Wayne St., Piqua, O.


JANSHESKI, SIMON R., 124
Wayne St., Piqua, O.

JAQUITH,  H.  C,  Confedera-
tion I^ife  Bldg.,  Toronto.
Ont., Can. (D.O.)

JARCHOW. CHAKL1'..S .\.
Toledo, O. (D.C.)

JAROS.  JOHN,  3002  S.  Central
Park  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

JASPER, LENA, Edgewater
Beach Hotel, Chicago, III.

JASTER,  E.  J.,  Arcade,  N.  Y.

JAUSS,  GEO.,  Butler,  Pa.

JAYNES, TONY, 116 S. Logan
Street, Denver, Colorado.

JEFFERSON, ALPHA A.,
Lincoln, Cal. (N.D.)

JEFFERY,  JAMES  C,  Main
and  Spring  Sts.,  Belle-
ville,  111. (D.O.)

JEFFRIES, ANNE L., 938
Henderson Ave., Decatur.
111. (D.C.)
J. K.. 17 E. 7th Street,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
Okla. (D.C.)
Wm. H., Chetope, Kan.
'  (M.D.)

I  JEFFRIES,  MISS  M.  C,  1752
17th  St.  N.  W.,  Washing-
ton, D. C. (Ma.)

JEINSON,  ELLA,  Eugene,
Ore. (D.C.)

JELKS, ALBERT A., Georgia
i  Life Bldg., Macon, Ga.


JELLEY,  GEO.  A.,  632
Wabash  Bldg.,  Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)

JENGLEY,  W.  J.,  305  E.  8th
St., Homestead, Pa. (D.C.)

I  JENKINS, D. J., 1400 W. 25th
St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
D. Janet, Maysville, Okla.

1  (D.C.)

D.  Janet,  112  W.  12th  St.,
Oklahoma  City,  Okla.

JENKINS.  JESSIE  C,  Wash-
ington,  D.  C. (Ma.)
JENKINS, W. C, Sterling,

Mich. (D.C.)
JENNINGS, THEODORE T.,
295  Springfield  Ave.,
Newark, N. J. (N.D.)


Nahiropalhir  liuH/niphical  iXolcs


911


Prof. Sidney Weltmer


ing  would  lie  unknown  except  that  Dr.
Weltmer  has  kept  it  alive.  Like  all  men
and  women  with  something  new,  he  has
been  persecuted,  because  official  medicine
wants  no  reform  of  its  disastrous  treat-
ments, and  lights  every  attempt  to  enlighten
the  public  as  to  the  true  method  of  curing
disease.  Prof.  Weltmer  and  his  colleagues.
Helen  Wilmans  Post,  Brinkler,  and  others,
all  fought  nobly  against  post  office  inter-
ference fomented  by  the  Medical  Trust.  It
is  to  be  regretted  that  the  Post  Office  De-
partment lends  itself  to  the  advocacy  of
any  one  system  of  medicine  to  the  sup-
pression of  any  other  system,  that  it  sits
as  judge  of  matters  that  are  beyond  its
jurisdiction.  If  the  methods  of  cure
adopted  by  medical  tradition  and  supersti-
tion, which  it  favors,  were  of  paramount
importance  in  the  cure  of  disease,  we  could
understand  its  action.  But  it  supports  the
assaults  on  the  body  and  conscience  made
by  official  medicine,  and  suppresses  so  far
as  it  can,  the  illuminating  literature  sent
out  by  the  practitioners  of  Natural  Healing,
containing  the  most  progressive  knowledge
regarding  the  nature  and  treatment  of  dis-
ease. The  progressive  practitioners  are  cur-
ing, and  have  cured,  thousands,  who,  with-
out ministrations,  and  having  only  the
ministrations  of  official  medicine  to  depend
upon,  would  today  be  resting  in  their
graves.

The  Weltmer  Institute  is  the  parent
school  of  psychological  methods  of  healing,
including  Weltmerism,  magnetic  healing,
laying  on  of  hands,  mental  science,  and
other  drugless  methods,  known  as  sugges-
tive therapeutics.  Regular  physicians  are
constantly  employed in the  sanitarium  and


.school,  and  nearly  all  cases  arc  cured  with-
out the  use  of  drugs  or  surgery.

WILBER,  C.  H.,  N.  D.

Dr.  Wilber,  of  Ansonia,  Conn.,  is  one  of
those  reliable  practitioners  of  the  natural
method  of  healing
whose  first  care  is  to
Itase  his  treatments
on  a  thoroughly  sci-
entific diagnosis.  He
tiien  arranges  a
carefully  planned
program  of  treat-
ment to  meet  the  re-
quirements of  the
individual  case.  His
patients  are  drawn
from  that  large  class
of  sufferers  whom
ordinary  methods  of
treatment  fail  to
cure.  He  treats
successfully  cases  of  asthma,  catarrh,  dys-
pepsia, rheumatism,  neuritis,  neurasthenia,
insomnia,  nervous  debility,  melancholia,
paralysis  and  cognate  ailments.  All  his
treatments  and  teachings  are  in  harmony
with  the  principles  of  Naturopathy,  and
more  patients  are  cured  by  such  a  method
than  by  any  other  known  system  of  cure.
He  is  a  member  of  the  National  A.  N.  A.,
and  the  Connecticut  State  Society  of
Naturopathy.

WILSON,  REESE  G.,  M.  T.,  D.  C,  D.  O.

Dr.  Reese  G.  Wilson,  mechano-therapist,
chiropractor  and  osteopath,  of  Darlington,
S.  C.  is  a  graduate  of  the  American  Col-
lege of  Mechano-Therapy.  He  makes  a
specialty  of  the  vibratory  methods  of  Na-


Dr. Reese t-i. Wilson


!>12


AlphahcHcal  Index


Jciiks
Johonnoll


JENNINGS. J. H.. Carbon-
dale, Pa. (D.C.)
J H.. 441 Kirby Bldg.,

Sa&inaw. Mich. (D.C.)
JENKS. CHAS.. Box 1094,

Pittsfleld, Mass. (D.C.)
JENNINCxS, LOUISE F., 108i

N. Locust St., Centralia.

111. (D.O.)
Sarah V., lOfil Flower St.,

Los  Angeles.  Cal. (D.C.)
Theo. T., 7 Belmont Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
.JENSEN, CHAS. L.. S27 W.

24th  St.,  New York, N. '\  .

P. C, Manistee, Mich.

.lENSON.  JAS., 220  S. State

St.. Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
.TENSON, THOS. A., Eugene,

Ore. (D.C.)
W M., ^V^^itehall, Mich.

.1  EPSON, ALOIN  N., Rozell

Bldg-., Clarksville, la.


Amanda
.TEPSON,


R., Clark.sville, la.


BEEBE RUTH,

301 Woodward Avenue,

Detroit, Mich. (D.O.)
Lelia, Grand Rapids, Mich.

JERGENS,  C.  M.,  Little

Falls, Minn. (D.C.)
JEWELL,  C.  O.,  Ryland  Bldg-.,

San Jose, Cal. (D.O.)
J. W.. Lenawee Co. Bk.

Bldg-.,  Adrian,  Mich.  (D.O.)
M B., 613 Tacoman Bldg.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
JEWETT. JOSEPHINE A.,

Berkeley, Cal. (D.O.)
Nicholas, 411 W. 3rd St.,

Jamestown, N. Y. (D.C.)
JOBE, GEO.  THEO., 6423

Beaver  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.

(D.M.T.)
JOBES & JOBES, 68 Green

St.. Fredonia, N. Y.

JOBE. W. H., 401-3 Century

Blk., Des Moines, la.

JOBLTNG, R., Asselin Blk.,

6th St., Calumet, Mich.

JOHANSEN, MISS A., 7902

13th  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
JOHANSON,  ELIDA,  51  W.

84th St., New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
JOHANSON, PETRUS E., Box

4.57, Evanston, Wyo.

(D.O)
JOHLER,  L.  G.,  148  Adams

Ave., Scranton, Pa.

JOHN, GLENN V., 407 Sav-
ings  Bank Bldg., Lima,

O. (D.C.)
,L Ralph, 1513 Linden Ave..

Baltimore, Md. (DC.)
JOHNERSON, ALFRED L..

Maddock, N. Dak. (D.C.)
JOHNS, A. L., W. Berry St.,

Fort Wayne, Ind. (D.C.)
M.  E.,  Lansing  Place,  Upper

Montclair, N. J. (D.C.)
.JOHNS,  JONES. 3928 .'■)th Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
JOHNS, OSCAR \V., 8009

Wade Park Ave. N. E.,

Cleveland, O. (D.M.T.)
JOHNSON  &  JOHNSON,

Edgar, Neb. (D.C.)
118 N. Main St., Ulrichs-

ville, O. (D.C.)


JOHNSON, A. H., Myei-s Blk.,

Buffalo, Minn. (D.C.)
A. O., Warren, Ind. (D.C.)
Dr. A. R., Edgar, Neb.

A. S., Struthers, O. (D.C.)
Burdsall F., 1016 Lehigh

Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.

C. E., Sapulpa. Okla. (DC.)
Cecil  F.,  6-7  Chevalier  Bldg.,

Parker-sburg, W. Va.

C. H., Schuyler, Neb. (D.O.)
Call ,T., Equitable Building,

Louisville, Kv. (D.O.)
C. P., 130 Wadsworth Ave.,

New  York.  N.  Y.  (N.D.)
Clare P., 200 W. 72nd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.  (D.C.)
David W., 3241 N. 15th St.,

Philadelphia,  Pa.  (D.C.)
David  W., 2335  Nicholas  St.,

Philadelphia,  Pa.  (D.C.)
E. E., 409J Main Street,

Vincennes, Ind. (D.C.)
E. L., 511 Meridian Life

Bldg., Indianapolis, Ind.

E. L., 2116 E. 4th Street,

Marion, Ind. (D.C.)
Mrs. E. M., Bertrand, Neb.

Floyd J., 118 N. Main St.,

Ulrlchsville, O. (D.C.)
Francis D., Cokato, Minn.

Francis D., 711 Hancock

Ave., Holdrege, Neb.

G., 210 Market St., Pater-
son, N. J. (D.C.)
Geo. L., St. James, Minn.

H. A., Gunn Blk., Breckin-
ridge, Minn. (D.C.)
H. C, Wells Bldg., Quincy,

111. (D.O.)
Homer L., Oskaloosa, la.

Henry T., 623 Appleton St.,

Wis. (D.O.)
Jessie P., Dollar Savings

Bank Bldg., Youngstown,

O. (D.O.)
John K., Jefferson, la.

Julia A., .506 Monroe Ave.,

Asbury  Park,  N.  J.  (D.O.)
J. F., 108 E. Choctaw St.,

McAlester, Okla. (D.C.)
J. R., 247 7th Ave., Clin-
ton, la. (D.O.)
J. Stanley, First  Natl. Bank

Bldg., Hagerstown, Md.

J. T., 51 N. First St., Du-

quesne. Pa. (D.C.)
J.  T., 385 West  Main  Street,

Battle  Creek.  Mich.  (D.C.)
Jackson,  Kent,  Wash.  (D.C.)
Lulu, 1729 W. Walnut St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Mrs. Mamie R., Kansas

City, Mo. (S.T.)
Melissa,  Struthers,  O. (N.D.)
N. A.. 33 W. Main St.,

Fredonia, and Masonif

Temple. Dunkirk, N. Y.

O. A., Warren, Ind. (D.C.)
Oscar E., Box 102, Prince-
ton, Mo. (D.O.)
Mrs. O. R.. 130 W. 6th St.,

Cincinnati, O. (D.C.)
P. H., Morrison, 111. (D.C.)
P. H., Colville, Wash.

P. H.. Sterling, Alb., Can.


.JOHNSON, .MK.S. ANNA B.,
1614 l.'ith St. N. W.,
Washington,  D.  C. (Ma.)

Dr.  A.  J.,  Muskogee, Fla.

A. J., Gooding, Idaho.

Clara, 1004 E. 105th St.,
Cleveland, O. (N.D.)

D.  W., 14,507 Detroit Ave.,
Lakevvood, O. (N.D.)

Edward, 22 Varet St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (Ch.)
Emmet D., 114 Detroit St.,

Kenton, O. (D.C.)
Frank, 808 Summit St.,

Aberdeen, Wash. (N.D.)
Frank A., 1555 W. Madi-

.son St., Chicago, III.

H. L., Oskaloosa, la. (N.D.)
.1. Ford, Siloam Springs,

Ark. (D.C.)
Mrs. I^ydia, 1138 Connecti-
cut Ave. N. W.,

VVa.shington, D. C. (Ma.)
Maria  S., 11 E. Woodland

Ave., Youngstown, O.

(D.)
Martha,  Custar,  O. (N.D.)
P. E., 121 N. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
P. W., 418 N. Main  St.,

Hutchinson, Kans. (D.C.)
Ru.ssell W., 47 E. 5th  St.,

Chillicothe, O. (D.M.T.)
T. A., Box 156, Gooding,

Idaho. (D.C.)
T. D., 1004 E. 105th St.,

Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
W. L., Portales, N. M.

JOHNSTON, D. B., Kenton,

O. (D.C.)

E.  J., 349 Walnut Street,
Trenton, N. J. (D.C.)

Francis D., Cokato, Minn.

Hugh, Port Burwell, Ont..

Can. (D.C.)
J. Ford, Siloam Spring.s,

Ark. (D.  C.)
Dr. I>eonard B., 628 N. 52nd

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

N. L., Chicago. 111. (M.D.)
P.  S.,  Marionville,  Pa. (D.C.)
P.  S.,  Box  38,  Glady,  W.  Va.

P.  AV.,  Hoke  Bldg.,  Hutchin-
son, Kans. (D.C.)
R. M., 218 Culbertson Bldg.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

R. M., 1447 E. 8th Street,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

Sam., Hawarden, la. (D.C.)
Thos. D., 1004 E. 105th St.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Ula, 2401 Scott St., Little

Rock, Ark. (D.C.)
W. A., 413 22nd Street,

Birmingham, Ala. (D.C.)
Mrs. Wm. H., Room 3,

Springfield, Mo. (S.T.)
W. H., Shoaff Bldg., Ft.

Wayne, Ind. (D.O.)
W.  H.  H., 914 E. 0th  Street,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

Mrs. W. v.. Wood Lake,

Neb. (S.T.)
JOHNSTONE, EMMA C, 206

E. B'way, Denison, la.

JOHONNOTT, W. W., 277

Cirand St., Newburgh,

N. Y. (D.O.)


Naturopathic  liiot/rapliicat  Notes


913


turopathy  such  as  are  i)roduced  by  chiro-
practic, osteopathic  and  mechano-therapic
treatments.  With  these,  he  combines  a
si)ecial  dietary  as  indicated  in  individual
cases,  and  has  had  great  success  by  these
methods  in  restoring  ailing  systems  to  nor-
mal conditions.  He  fills  a  place  of  great
responsibility  with  an  honesty  of  purpose,
a  fidelity  to  the  principles  he  advocates  and
iiappy  results  from  his  manipulations  that
have  won  for  him  a  great  reputation  among
his  own  people  as  a  healer  of  the  highest
rank  in  the Naturopathic  profession.

YOUNG,  M.  G.,  N.  D.,  Phytotherapist.

The  late  Professor  Young  was  the  pioneer
.Naturopath of  the Pacific Northwest, and

his  place  of
business  was
in  Seattle,
Wash.  H  e
was  a  young
man  of  great
promise  in
h  i  s  profes-
sion, for  the
readers  of
the  Herald  of
Health  and
Naturopath
will  remem-
ber his  very
lucid  articles
on  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  a  cold
that  appeared  in  the  January,  1916,  and
February,  1916,  issues  of  that  magazine.
mind us  that  he  made  a  specialty  of  Phyto-
therapy, or  the  herb  cure,  for  botanical
remedies  for  disease  was  a  cardinal  belief
with  this  phytotherapist.  Prof.  Young
built  an  airy  bungalow  on  the  grounds  sur-
rounding his  home,  with  a  view  of  teaching
by  example  the  benefits  of  sleeping  in  fresh
air.  The  house  was  built  of  wood  with  a
large  porch  in  front  and  an  outside  chim-
ney of  concrete.  He  would  range  the
woods  in  the  vicinity  of  his  home  for  bo-
tanical specimens,  which  he  greatly  prized.


Prof. Young's Fresh Air  Bungalow


His  bungalow  was  also  his  herbarium.
Shortly  before  lie  died,  in  1917,  he  estab-
lished the  Northwestern  "Yungborn"  on
the  Pacific  Coast.

Address  by  Elmer  Lee,

Editor of HEALTH CULTURE,

Delivered  at

21st  Annual  Convention  of  A.  N.  A.

No  applause  and  no  guns;  no  band,  no
musicians;  time  is  too  precious.  The  world
is  at  war,  medically,  savagely,  mentally,
physically and economically.

I  am  an  old  doctor  of  the  Old  School,  in
good  standing  with  medical  society;  an  old
member  of  the  Medical  Society;  seven  times
an  officer  in  the  Medical  Association.  I  have
more  friends  among  ni}'  old  sect  than  I  have
among  your  sect;  but  we  are  not  true  to
human  nature  if  we  restrict  our  associations
to  any  limited  sect.  We  are  only  growing
in  fullness  and  usefullness  in  our  individual
lives  as  well  as  helping  other  lives  when
we  mingle.  No  group  of  human  beings  is
too  humble,  too  vicious,  too  low,  that
I  will  not  go  among  them  and  learn  from
them  as  well  as  try  to  benefit  by  teaching
them.

I  did  not  learn  to  be  a  drugless  physician
through  your  society  or  by  commingling
with  anyone  of  you.  I  learned  it  accidentally
a  long  time  ago;  more  than  25  years  ago.
I  exhausted,  as  far  as  I  had  knowledge
and  strength  to  exhaust,  the  capabilities  of
the  medical  world.  I  would  as  leave  send  a
patient  to  a  liquor  store  as  to  a  drug  store.
I  have  not  used  drugs  for  20  years.  There
is  no  need.  It  is  better  not  to  use  them.
If  3^ou  do  not  wish  to  practice  shams,  you
have  no  need  then  to  resort  to  drugs.  We
have  only  need  to  resort  to  what  is  natural;
to  what  is  universal,  api^licable  and  suitable
for  human  texture  and  human  lives,  and  if
we  wisely  apply  that  which  Nature  has  sup-
plied us  in  abundance,  we  have  all  we  need
in  order  to  cure.  Some  people  will  die.
some  will  go  to  the  mad  house,  some  will
go  to  war,  but  we  all  have  the  requirements
at  first  hand  if  we  have  the  intelligence  to
realize  it.

I  walked  through  Central  Park  today;  I
sat  on  the  ground;  I  stretched  out  on  the
ground  with  my  eyes  to  the  sky,  and  one
thought  came  to  my  mind  which  I  thought
I  would  reoeat  to  you.  If  you  will  go  and
lay  yourself  in  the  right  spirit,  hijmbly,
sprawled  out  on  the  great  mother  earth,
and  think,  you  can  devise  all  the  thera-
peutic schemes  that  are  necessary.  You
do  not  have  to  go  to  Europe  to  learn
phototherapy,  electrotherapy,  etc.  Lay
yourself  on  the  ground,  close  your  ej-es,  and
think,  then  open  them  and  look  at  the  sky.
and  if  you  have  any  power  of  origination;
if  you  have  not  lost  your  individuality.  Na-
ture will  teach  you.  Nature  will  teach  you
in  her  abundance  and  in  her  own  way  the
essential treatment of  vourself, and when


914


A  Iphdbclical  Index


Joiner
Kassmir


JOINER. MRS. UNA. Sey-
mour, Tex. (S.T.)
JOLITZ. MISS MARION, 1015

P. St., San Diego, Cal.

JOLLEY, JOHN F., I.os

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
JOI.I.Y, F. W., Dayton, ().

(DO
JOLTZ, MRS. C. 3349 Tejon

St.. Denver. Colo. (D.C.)
JONES, A. E., 1 W. 34th St.,

New York, N. Y. (Ma.)
A. E., 2319 Monroe St.,

Toledo. O. (D.M.T.)
Anna U., 6412 Belvedere

Ave., Cleveland. O.

(Ma.)
B.. 3928 .5th Ave.. Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (N.D.)
C. M.. 436 Ochsner Bldg.,

Sacramento, Cal. (D.C.)
Clifton R., Sawyer Sani-
tarium, Marion,  O. (Ma.)
D 524 S. Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago, Til. (N.D.)
E. A. D., Taft, Cal. (M.D.)
Eli G.. 879 W. Ferry St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (N.D.)
Francis, 517 E. Oriental

Ave., Atlantic City, N. .1.

J. A.. 821 High  St., Young.s-

lown, O. (D.M.T.)
J. S., Kleine and High Sts.,

Girard, O. (D.M.T.)
Laila, 517 E. Oriental Ave..

Atlantic  City,  N. J. (D.O.)
Margaret M., Chicago, 111.

Dr Oscar,  Indianapolis, Ind.

W.  Stanley,  1320  L  St.,  N.W.,

Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
JONES, DR., Bloomfield, Neb.

A.  M.,  El  Reno.  Okla. (DC.)
Burton J., 20 E. Front St.,

Monroe, Mich. (D.O.)
Caroline, 1512 W. Madison

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
C A., 143 Roberts Ave.,

Syracuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
C.  M., Albuquerque,  N. Hex.

C. M., 355 E. 8th Street,

Portland, Ore. (D.C.)
E. E., 906 Chapala Street,

Santa Barbara, Cal.

(DC.)
C.  M., 436  Ochsner  Building,

Sacramento, Cal. (D.C.)


Street,


Street,


St.,
St.,


E. Clair, 20 E. Orange St.,

Lancaster, Pa. (D.O.)
E. D., 201 N. Tremont Ave..

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
E. E., 835 Delevina, Santa

Barbara, Cal. (D.C.)
Effie C, 1601 Wilson Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Etha Marion, Bethlehem

Trust Bldg., Bethlehem,

Pa. (D.O.)

E.  R., Eldora, la. (D.C.)

F.  A., 401-3 Bunn Ji'dg..
Waycross, Wis. (D.C.)

F.  C, 2218 E. 4th Street
Los Angeles, Cal.

Frank F., 354 2nd

Macon, Ga. (D.O.)
Freding, 801 fith

Greeley, Colo. (D.C.)

G.  M.. Wayland, la. (D.C.)
J., Hamilton, 17th and

Lincoln  Sts.,  Denver,  Colo.

Jas. K.. Sunshine, Colo.

J. T., Mvstic, la. (D.C.)

J. W., Ill N. Charles
Baltimore, Md. (D.O.)

J. Walter, 1411 Walnut
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)

Louise, Hulft Blk.. Min-
neapolis. Minn. (D.C.)

L. M.. 625 Home St.. Ham-
mond, Ind. (D.C.)

M.  A..  709  Merchant  St..  Em-
poria, Kans. (D.C.)

Martha E., 108 North Ave.,
Fairmont, Minn. (D.O.)

Mary J., London, Ont., Can.

O. B., Hamilton, Mont.
(DC.)

Ralph M.,  Mack Bldg., Den-
ver, Colo. (D.O.)

Ray M., 108 North Ave.,
Fairmont, Minn. (D.O.)

Sarah E.. 465 Elli.son St.,
Paterson. N. J. (D.O.)

S.  M.,  London,  Ont.,  Canada.

T. D., Mermod & Jaccard
Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.

William Henry, 200 Main
St..  Marlboro.  Mass. rnO.)

W. Stanley, Southern Bldg.,
AVashington, D. C. (D.O.)
JORDAN, GEORGE, Long
Beach, Cal. (D.C.)

J. B., Stockton Springs,  Me.


JORGENSEN, P. M., Burwell,

Nebr. (D.C.)
JORRIS, A. U.. McMillan

Bldg.. La Crosse, Wis.

F. E., Lindley Blk., Minne-
apolis. Minn. (D.O.)
JORSTAD, EZRA O.. 101 6th

and Moore Sts.. Blue

Earth, Minn. (D.O.)
JOSEPH, ALFRED, 224 \V.

52nd St.,  New York,  N. Y.

(Ch.)
Joseph J., 3033 W. 23rd St.,

Coney Island,  N.  Y. (Opt.)
JOSEPHS. M. L., 1020 Atlan-
tic St.,  Appleton, Wis.

JOSEPHSON, MORRIS. 3220

Dawson St., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
JOSLIN, J. H.. 119 State St.,

Alpena. Mich. (D.C.)
O.  W.,  Dodgeville,  Wis.

JOVEN, B., 430 E. fi5th St..

New  York.  N. Y. (N.D.)
JUCHOFF. EDWIN  T.. 464 E.

41st St.. Chicago. 111.

JUDD. ARTILLA, Waterloo,

la. (D.C.)
Mrs. J. I., 2241 W. 24th St.,

Waterloo, la. (D.C.)
Lorenzo, San Ysirdo. San

Diego, Cal. (D.C.)
JUDIvANDER  &  JUDLANDER.

707 E. Locust St., Des

Moines. la. (D.C.)
JUDSON. M. BLANCH ARD.

534 W. Broad St., Elvria,

O. (D.M.T.)
JUDY,  WILSON. 505  Main St.,

Toledo, O. (D.M.T.)
JULIAN,  J., Sanbuiy,  O.

(D.M.T.)
JULTEN, E. A., Turlock, Cal.

JUNE, ELSIE E., Y. W. C. A.,

Davton, O. (Ma.)
JUNGERMAN, MISS EMMA,

Waverly,  Mo. (S.T.)
JURESCIN,  DAVID  I., 2358

E. 49th St., Cleveland, O.

(D.M.T.)
JURVA, O. O.. 178 E. 60th St.,

Portland, Ore. (N.D.)
JUSTICE. DR. CRAWFORD

T.. 4037 Ogden St., Phila-
delphia. Pa. (N.D.)
Dorothy, 3901 Montrose

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)


K


KAGAY. LORENA. 404 E.

Center St., Marion, O.

KAHLER. CHAS. E., 998

Franklin Ave., Columbus,

O..  (D.M.T.)
KAHN. H. I., Box 25, Liberty,

N. J. (N.D.)
KAISER,  A.  A..  Shukert  Bldg..

Kansas City. Mo. (D.O.)
Chas. A.. F.  &  M. Bk. Bldg.,

Lockport. N. Y. (D.O.)
Edward C. 573 Panke Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (El.)
KAISER, ARTHUR J., 171 E.

81st  St.,  New  York,  N. Y.

(Ma.)
Frank, Plllegar, Minn.

(D.M.T.)
KALB. CHARIiES E.. Fergu-
son Bldg.. Springfield, Til.


KALTWASSBR.  H..  908  Wil-
low Ave.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.
(DC.)

KAMBISH  &  KAMBTSH,  Ra-
cine, Wis. (D.C.)

IvAMPF, E. J., Traders Bk.
Bldg., Lexington, Mo.

KANDIORBR, J.. 600 B'way,
Williamsbridge, L. I.,
N. Y. (Opt.)

KANE,  JOHN  E.,  Ohio  Bldg.,
Toledo,  O. (D.O.)

KANE, M., 17 S. Fiftli Ave.,
La Grange, Til. (N.D.)

KANI,  P.  F.,  Paxton  Bldg.,
Omaha, Nebr. (D.O.)

KANKLKR, 504 Columbia
Bldg., Duluth, Minn.

KANN,  FRANK  P.,  315  N.  2d
St.,  Harri-sburg,  Pa. (D.O.)


KAPLIN, ELWOOD S., 3241
W. 65th St., Cleveland, O.
(D.M.T.)

KAPPLEMAN,  H.  A.,  Lexing-
ton, Mo. (D.C.)

KARCHER.  EDWARD  W.,
1010  Mass.  Ave.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass. (DO.)

KARPEN, HENRY, 16 W.

36th St., New York,  N.  Y.

IvARPF,  LESTER,  4  Fourth
St..  Dayton,  O. (Ch.)

KASIK, W. J., 301 Woodward
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.

KASPER,  ALFRED  C,  585
11th  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

KASSMIR, M. Z., 969 Liberty
Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
(DC.)


Naturopdlhic  liior/raplnral  Notes


915


Elmer Lee, M. D.

Editor of Health Culture.


Harold Wells Turner

Publisher of Health Culture.


you  know  how  to  treat  yourself,  you  will  be
worth  something  to  others.  We  know  more
by  our  own  suffering  than  by  our  teachers.
VVe  all  have  plenty  of  opportunity  to  learn
how  to  heal  because  we  all  have  physical
ailments  in  the  course  of  our  lives.

I  am  here  also  because  I  am  in  sympathy
with  all  persons  who  are  trying  to  benefit
tliemselves  physically  and  mentally,  and  also
those  who  are  trying  to  benefit  others.  I
am  teaching  and  printing  in  the  magazine.
Health  Culture,  of  which  I  am  the  editor,  all
that  I  can  get  that  is  constructive.  The
magazine  is  not  essentially  in  the  interest
of  any  set  or  any  propaganda.  It  is  not  a
fighting  magazine;  it  is  a  magazine  of  con-
struction— not  opposition.  At  the  same
time,  it  is  a  magazine  of  mild  protest  against
all  that  is  wrong  in  human  society.  It  is  a
protest  against  institutions  such  as  the
Rockefeller  Institute  of  Research;  it  is
against  all  vivisection  in  the  world;  it  is  a
protest  against  all  kinds  of  vaccination.  I
have  not  seen  any  human  being,  not  one
person,  who  was  benefited  by  vivisection
or  vaccination.  I  have  seen  those  who  were
harmed  by  vaccination.

I  was  a  doctor  with  the  War  Department
during  the  Spanish  war.  There  were  more
doctors  than  were  required.  I  had  oppor-
tunities to  see  the  workings  of  tlie  medical
departments  of  the  United  States  Govern-
ment. I  cannot  comment,  I  cannot  praise,
I  do  not  even  wish  to  criticize  what  I  saw.
It  was  not  very  creditable  either  to  in-
telligence or  method.

I  do  not  think  we  need  to  boast  of  our
own  intelligence.  I  have  long  since  past
the  boastful  age  and  period.  When  you  get
to  that  point  you  will  be  better  doctors
yourselves.  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  pa-
tients to  tell  them  frankly  that  you  are  hu-
man like  themselves,  and  we  must  trust  to
great  Nature,  and  great  Nature  is  our
source  of  strength.  The  light  and  sun  is
the  great  healing  influence,  and  there  is  no
substitute for it and no medicine.

We  must  nrove  ourselves. If  we  do  not


prove  ourselves,  why  should  we  ask  to  be
justified  in  the  world  of  endeavor  to  help
others?  It  takes  a  long  time  to  prove  our-
selves. It  takes  a  long  time  to  master  the
medical  system.  We  are  so^badly  taught;
we  are  so  misinformed,  and  the  reason  is,
we  try  to  teach  too  much  and  we  try  to
learn  too  much.  We  have  too  many  kinds
of  svstems,  and  consequently  we  have  too
much  diversion  of  opinion.  We  are  not
frank  and  honest  and  wholesome  to  each
other.  We  are  jealous  of  each  other.  All
medical  men  stand  aloof  from  each  other.
VVe  pretend  we  are  frank,  but  we  are  not
frank  to  each  other  because  we  are  com-
petitors. Can  we  overcome  that  and  relieve
ourselves  of  being  competitors?  You  want
popularity,  you  want  precedence,  you  want
recognition,  and  you  think  you  are  going
to  get  it.  If  you  can  produce  votes  that  will
induce  politicians  to  give  you  a  fair  hear-
ing and  a  just  consideration,  you  will  get
it.  Dr.  Benedict  Lust  is  a  practical  exhibi-
tion of  the  broad  spirit  that  is  among  you.
He  sees  the  necessity  for  practical  work.
A  good  many  of  you  reside  in  New  York
or  in  the  neighborhood  of  New  York.
Do  you  realize  that  in  a  short  time  you
will  have  a  new  administration?  Do
you  realize  that  in  the  present  adminis-
tration you  have  no  hope;  your  only  hope
is  in  a  new  administration,  and  j'our  only
hope  in  a  new  administration  is  to  make
friends  with  the  new  candidates  that  are  to
be  elected.  I  am  in  favor  of  voting  for  a
new  mayor  for  this  city.  You  have  no
chance  of  being  favorably  considered  by
the  present  Department  of  Health  of  New
York,  because  they  are  determined,  as  you
may  be,  that  they  will  not  allow  you  to
take  their  places  and  wield  the  power  over
3'our  city,  even  to  a  small  degree.  You
will  have  to  be  on  your  guard,  because  they
will  not  allow  you  any  consideration.  I
would  like  to  see  a  change  in  the  methods
of  our  departments  of  Health  in  all  cities,
and  you  cannot  get  them  unless  you  become
friends of  the political leaders. They  are


916


Alphubelicnl  Index


Kales
Kerr


KATES. GEORGE W., 600
Pennsylvania  Ave.  S.  E.,
Washington.  D.  C.
Mrs. G. W.. 600 Pennsyl-
vania Ave. S. E.. Wash-
ington. D.  C. (D.C.)

K\TTMAN.  BERTHA,  518  E.
Forest Ave.. Brazil. Ind.

KAuFi^^lAN.  ELIZABETH.

4021 Reed St.. Moberly.

Mo. (D.O.)
KAUFFMAN. K.  S.. R. F D.

Mo. 1, Wadsworth, O.

KAUFM^vi^MRS.  ALICE 2126
High  St..  Denver,  Colo.

KAUFMAN, SYLVIA, 27
Arch St., Alliance, O.

KAULBACH. MRS. VIOLA
C.,  221  E.  Erie  St.,
Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
Viola C, Mendota, 111.

K\Y  EDITH,  7530  Sangamon
St.,  Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

KAY  MRS.  EDWINA.  Buena
Park,  Cal. (D.C.)  ,

KAYNOR,  MADAM.  1420  Last
55th  St.,  Chicago, HI.

KAyS  F.  t!.  673  E.  216th
St.. New York,  N. Y.

KEA.^'JOHN  WESLEY.  201
Olive St.. Monroe, La.

KEALLAR, miss CLARA R..
313 S. West St., Bellevue.
O. (D.M.T.)
KE4NE W. E., 179 Franklin
^ St. Buffalo,' N.  Y. (D.CJ
KEARNS, LEO, 509-11 Wa-
bash Bldg.. Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.C.)  „.,,

L M, 347 5th Ave.. Pitts-
burgh.  Pa. (D.C.)
Deo. Smithfield St.. Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
KEAT, M. C, Eaton, Ind.

KECK.*~^E. W., Suite 2 Gas
Bldg., Eau Claire, Wis.
(S  T  )
N B 9110  Wade  Park  Ave.,
Cleveland. O. (D.C.)
KEEPER. FRED E., Garbot-
Donovan Bldg., Fitzger-
ald.  Ga. (D.O.)
KEEL & KEEL. 452 Fulton
St..  Troy.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
Anna. 450 Fulton St., Troy.

N.  Y. (D.C.)
Jas.  E.,  450  Fulton  St.,  Troy,
N. Y. (D.C.)
KEELER, CLYDE M., Ana-
darko. Okla. (DC.)
Mary N.. Loveland. Colo.

KEENAN,  WM.,  724  Market
St., Sandusky, O. (D.C.)

KEENE  &  KEENE,  State  St.,
Rochester, N.  Y. (N.D.)

KEENE.  GEO.  W..  62  State
St., Rochester, N. Y.

R. C.', 612 Meisel Blk., Port

Huron, Mich. (D.C.)
W B, 1530 Chestnut St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
KEEP.  F.  A., 1045 Lincoln  St.,

Denver,  Colo. (N.D.)
KEESHAN, MARGARET H.,

Hotel Linton, Cincinnati,

O. (Ma.)
KEETHLER, A. M., Memphi-s,

Mo. (D.O.)


KEIFER. FRANK. 912 W.

30th St.. Davenport, la.

Dr. F. O., I'"lk City, Okla.

Jas. D., 1043 W. 31st St.,

Los Angolo.'^, Cal. (N.D.)
KEITZER,  W.  E.,  McKeesport,

Pa. (D.C.)
KELDSEN, J. M., Alpena,

Mich. (D.C.)
KELLAM, H. B., 1409 1st

North St., Syracuse,  N. Y.

KELLAR,  JOHN  G.. 38 Court-
land  St.,  Bridgeport,  Conn.

KELLER, DAVID, 632 14th

St..  Denver. Colo. (D.C.)
F. B., 413 W. Jersey St.,

Elizabeth, N. J. (D.O.)
Harry  T., 5320  Walton  Ave.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C.)
John A., 1115 Main St.,

Bridgeport,  Conn.  (D.C.)
Mrs. J. M., 169 State St.,

Hammond, Ind. (D.C.)
L. A., 246 Plummer Ave.,

Hammond, Ind. (D.C.)
O. C, Keller. New Idaho

Trust Bldg., Lewiston,

Idaho. (D.O.)
Wm. G.. 508 Taylor St..

Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
KELLER, G. T., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.C.)
KELLERMANN, ANNETTE,

12  W. 31st  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (P.)
KELLBT, M. MAUDE. 145

Hampshire St.. Auburn.

Me. (D.O.)
KELLEY. MISS ADAH, 301

W.  55th  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
MRS. ANNIE  M., 1161 6th

St. N. E., Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
KELLEY. MISS M., Coleman,

Mich. (D.C.)
Elizabeth Flint, 35 Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

J.  D.,  882  14th  Ave.,  Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
John A., 1115 Main Street,

Bridgeport,  Conn.  (D.C.)
Roger  P.,  Albert  Lea,  Minn.

Sam  W.,  St.  Elmo,  111. (D.C.)
KELLOG, H. W., Hastings,

Nebr. (D.C.)
Joseph, Chrlstman Blk.,

Wabash, Ind. (D.C.)
KELLOGG,  P.  G., 39  State  St.,

Seneca  Falls.  N.  Y.  (D.C.)
H.  W.,  Hastings',  Nebr.  (D.C.)
O.  J.,  c/o  L.  Taylor,  R.  F.  D.

No.  1,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.

O J., Christian Blk., Wa-
bash, Ind. (D.C.)
Reid, 139 Mathewson St.,

Providence, R. I. (D.O.)
S., Rogers, Tex. (S.T.)
W.  E.,  Sterling,  Colo. (D.O.)
KELLY,  A.  N.,  North  Bend,

O. (N.D.)
O. G., 507 Schwind Bldg.,

Dayton, O. (N.D.)
E. R.. 47 E. 3rd St., Brook-
lyn. N.  Y. (Ma.)
J D.. 11 Madison Avenue,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
Lawrence J., Penna. Bl.,

Philadelphia,  Pa.  (D.O.)
Miss M., Coleman. Mich.

Roger  P., Albert  Lea.  Minn.


Sam'l W., Saint Elmo, Til.
KELSEY, C. C, Blooming

Grove,  Tex. (D.O.)
KELSO, JAMES, 246 W.  State
St., Columbus,  O. (N.D.)
Sophronia B., Hill City.
Kans. (D.O.)
KEMMELHAR, MRS.. 742 N.
Bell Ave., Hastings,  Nebr.
KENAGY, PAUL J., Bern,

Kans. (D.C.)
KENDALL. J. PRUDENCE,
Presque Isle, Me. (D.O.)
Marion E., Agr. Bk. Bldg.,
Pittsfleld, Mass. (D.O.)
KENDERDINE, CLARENCE.
1537 Chestnut St., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
KENNAN. J. S., 1033 Wash-
ington St., Hoboken,  N.  J.
KENNARD & KENNARD, 312
Currier Bldg., Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)
Drs.,  Peoria, 111. (D.C.)
KENNARD, ALTA  M., Whit-
tier,  Cal. (N.D.)
KENNARD, WM., 312-13 Cur-
rier Bldg., Los Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
KENNEDY, ARTHUR J., 150
W. Main St., Newark, O.
(Ma.)
KENNEDY. C. S., Room 1010,
414 Walnut, Cincinnati,
O. (D.O.)
C. S., Mercantile Library
Bldg.. Cincinnati. O.
E. A., 808-9 E. End Trust
Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
E. W., Merc. Library Bldg.,

Cincinnati, O. (D.O.)
Ralph v., 222 King St.,

Charleston, S. C. (D.O.)
Seth Y., 54 First St., Glov-

ersville, N. Y, (D.O.)
T. W., Sullivan, Ind. (M.D.)
Wm. F.  X., 19 Central Ave.,
Albany, N. Y. (Opt.)
KENNEL, F. J., 16 S. Clair

St.,  Dayton,  O. (D.M.T.)
KENNEY,  CHAS. F.,  707  Con-
vent Ave., Laredo, Tex.
Dwight J., Andrus Bldg.,
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.O.)
KENNEY,  EDWIN  T., 1553  W.
Madison St., Chicago, 111.
M.  F.,  1785  Amsterdam  Ave.,

New  York,  N. Y. (Ma.)
W. L., Commercial Bldg.,
St. Joseph. Mo. (Opt.)
KENT, ELMER F., 255 Colo-
man  St.,  Bridgeport,  Conn.
J. A., 177 N. State St., Chi-
cago. 111. (D.C.)
M.  C,  Eaton,  Ind. (D.C.)
KEPFORD,  L.  H..  Alva,  Okla-
homa. (D.C.)
KEPNER. B. F.. Genoa, 111.

KEPPERLING,  IRA  L.. 445
Miltmore St., Reading,
Pa. (N.D.)
KERR, MRS. r. A., R. F. D.
No. 1,  McOraw, N. Y.
C. B., 114J Dubuque St.,

Iowa  City.  la. (D.C.)
C. v., Lennox Bldg., Cleve-
land. O. (DO.)


Naturopathic  Biographical  Notes


017


.ippruachable  and  common  like  the  rest  ot
ns;  you  only  have  to  go  with  them  and  as-
sociate with  them,  and  become  familiar  with
them  to  have  their  influence.  You  cannot
hope  to  get  anywhere  by  presentation  of
facts  to  a  disinterested  audience  of  poli-
ticians, even  if  your  facts  are  wholesome
or  true.  It  is  how  much  power  you  have
behind  you.

I  read  in  the  paper  about  two  young  sur-
geons, friends  of  mine,  who  had  given  $1,-
500,000  to  the  State  of  Minnesota  to  be  used
by  the  State  to  preserve  the  Mayo  Society
of  Aggressive  Surgery.  That  is  another
power  that  prevents  you  from  getting  rec-
ognition publicly  under  our  laws,  and  these
conditions  of  endowment  are  going  on  all
the  time,  until  there  are  millions  of  dollars
behind  the  present  medical  world;  so  if  you
expect  to  make  any  progress  you  must  make
friends  with  your  politicians.  It  is  not  dif-
ficult and  does  not  take  money,  it  only  takes
a  friendly  attitude  to  beget  a  friendly  atti-
tude in  the  politicians;  become  interested,
show  yourselves  often  enough  so  they  will
recognize  you,  and  use  your  influence  among
those  that  you  know  to  secure  votes  for
them.

The  New  York  Department  of  Health
spends  three  million  dollars  per  year.  That
is  a  good  deal  more  power  than  you  can
ever  hope  to  get,  and  they  are  asking  every
year  for  more.  It  goes  up  about  half  a  mil-
lion every  year.  Were  I  the  Health  Com-
missioner of  the  City  of  New  York,  I  would
be  content  were  the  city  to  allow  me  three
or  five  hundred  thousand  dollars,  and  every-
one of  you  in  this  audience  would  have  a
just  and  fair  and  continuously  fair  hearing
— a  thing  which  you  have  never  had.  Every
citizen  is  entitled  to  representation  in  a
government  of  democracy.  We  say  this  is
a  government  of  democracy.  Your  efforts
should  be  recognized  in  all  the  city  depart-
ments. Were  I  the  Health  Commissioner
of  New  York,  I  would  grant  a  hearing  to  all
of  you;  I  would  administer  the  law  of  the
city  or  State,  not  of  the  ruling  set;  I  would
not  constrict  my  conduct  to  any  sectari-
anism.

I  think  that  many  of  you  are  overconfi-
dent. I  think  many  of  you  attach  more  im-
portance to  your  specialties  than  they  de-
serve. I  think  you  ride  them  to  death.  I
do  not  think  that  they  are  such  wonderful
discoveries;  that  they  are  so  wonderful  as
you  think  they  are.  I  do  not  think  there
are  many  in  the  audience  as  old  as  I  am.
I  do  not  think  that  judgment  is  ripe  at  40
or  50  years;  I  think  it  takes  30  or  40  years
of  medical  activity  and  constant  application
in order to get a clear vista of medical


(juestions.  I  think  many  of  you  are  only  in
the  formative  stages.

There  are  many  kinds  of  wrongs  that  we
practice  among  our  patients.  There  are
very  few  of  us  who  are  out-and-out,  morn-
ing-until-night,  open  and  frank  and  smcere
with  our  patients.  I  hope  everyone  of  you
in  this  room  is  sincere  and  frank.  I  hope
there  is  no  imposter  in  this  room,  for  that
brings  upon  you  discredit  in  the  long  run.
Patients  are  not  asking  for  the  impossible;
patients  are  asking  for  somebody  that  is
frank  and  simple  and  natural  and  free.
They  are  not  asking  for  extra  surgical  treat-
ment. You  can  make  all  the  money  that  is
coming  to  you,  if  you  follow  the  plan  of
utter  frankness;  abandon  every  kind  of  pre-
tense and  overconfidence  in  your  society,
and  just  be  fair  and  square  and  be  open  with
every  patient.  You  can  then  make  all  the
money  you  need.

I  did  not  intend  to  say  these  things  when
I  stepped  on  the  platform,  but  I  am  old
enough  to  feel  a  little  bit  like  a  father  to
those  in  the  profession.  The  greatest  sys-
tem of  medicine  that  I  know  of,  whether  it
is  of  European  or  American  origin,  whether
it  is  old  or  modern,  the  greatest  that  I  know
of  is  not  phototherapy — it  is  heliotherapy.
It  is  the  sun  with  the  earth  as  the  back-
ground. It  do  not  think  there  is  one  in  this
audience  who  can  carry  it  too  far,  and  it
is  so  powerful,  and  it  is  so  satisfying,  it  is
so  wonderful  that  we  misuse  it  all  the  time,
and  employ  inferior  methods  of  treatment.
With  a  simple  diet,  and  almost  any  diet  is
appropriate  at  times,  because  when  people
are  sick  even  the  most  refined  diet  will  be
rejected,  you  will  surely  get  results.

There  is  hardly  the  possibility  of  any  dan-
ger of  offending  patients  by  teaching  them
the  use  of  sunlight;  teaching  them  the  use
of  sunlight  in  the  open  air.  Let  them  lie  on
the  ground;  let  them  sit  on  the  ground;  let
them  walk  on  the  ground,  and  you  will
have  the  most  healthful  and  wholesome  sys-
tem that  can  be  devised,  and  you  will  never
be  questioned  by  any  jury  or  by  any  judge,
so  you  can  hold  up  your  head  and  prove
you  are  right.

Were  that  plan  generally  followed  there
would  be  no  need  of  the  Rockefeller  Insti-
tute or  the  Mayo  Institute,  to  accumulate
$2,000,000  by  doing  operations  on  people  in-
stead of  employing  heliotherapy  and  diet.
We  have  never  fully  employed  the  natural
methods.  It  is  only  comparatively  recently
that  we  are  conscious  of  them.  When  you
use  the  natural  treatment  you  will  get  more
than  from  any  invented  system  that  j'ou
think  may  have  been  made  by  a  great  dis-
coverer.


918


Alphabetical  Index


Kerr

Kitson


F. Austin, Mclntyre Bldgr.,

Salt Lake City. Utah.

George Asbury, Benton, III.

J. A., Woodbine, la, (D.C.)
J. A., Wavne  Blk., Wooster,

O. (D.O.)
Janet M.. 24 La Plaza, Cor.

Charles & Jarvis Sts.,

Toronto, Ont. (D.O.)
KERR,  C. B., R. R. No. 1,

Washington, la. (D.C.)
Robert  E.. 439 Main St.,

Mansfield, O. (D.M.T.)
KERRIGAN, L. M., Citizens'

Bank Bldg-. Tampa. Fla.


B.


C. F.,


Centralia,
Salem,


KESLER. G.

Mo. (D.O.)
KESSELMIER,

O. (D.C.)
KESSLER, KARL, c/o Mc-
Donald Sanitarium, Cen-
tral  Valley,  N. Y. (Ma.)
KESTER, DR. EUGENE,

Spring-field.  Ore. (M.D.)
KETCHAM, ANNA MARIE.

1806 H St. N. W.i Wash-
ington,  D. C. (D.O.)
KETTENRING, W. F., Idaho

Falls,  Idaho. (Ch.)
KETTLER. CARL, 1710 H St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

KEUCK,  MARTIN,  201  N.  Hill

St.,  South  Bend.  Ind.  (D.C.)
KEW, ARTHUR, First Nafl

Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.O.)
KEYES, LESLIE S., Andrus

Bldg., Minneapolis. Minn.

KEYMBR, SIGRID, 3808

Clinton Ave., Cleveland,

O. (Ma.)
KIDDER,  ALBERT  A.,  1111  S.

Olive, Los Angeles, Cal.

Edith Florence,  42  High  St.,

Belfast, Me. (D.O.)
KIDDER, EDWARD F.,

Harmony, Minn. (N.D.)
KIEFER. F. H., 912 W. 3rd

St., Davenport, la. (D.C.)
KIEFER, F. H., 2624 Le

Claire St., Davenport, la.

KIEFERLE, J. A., 212

Granger Block, San

Diego, Cal. (Opt.)
KIEFFERLE,  MISS  ROSE,  221

W. 12th St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
KIELBLOCK, MISS HELEN,

Watertown, W^is. (D.C.)
KIES,  HENRY  J.. 1112 De

Kalb Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Opt.)
KIETZER, REGINALD, 207

Claremont  Ave.,  Jersey

City, N. J. (N.D., D.O.,

D.C.)
KIGHTLINGER, CRAIG M.,

9 Wavne Ave., East Or-
ange,  N. J. (D.C.)
KILBERG, N., .525 S. Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.

KILBORNE, J.  M., Magoun

Block, Cor. 4th and

Douglas  Sts.,  Sioux  City,

la. (Or.S.)
KILBOURNE, CLARA, 321

Queens  Ave.,  London,  Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)
KILGORE, J. M.. 105 6th St.,

York,  Nebr.  (D.O.)


KILGUS,  DR.  ELLA  D.,  45  De
Long  Bldg.,  Philadelphia,
Pa.  (N.D.)
KILLEEN,  J.  FRANCIS.  2161
Sutter  St..  San  Francisco,
Cal.  (N.D.)
KILLEEN,  J.  J.,  118  Grand  St.,

Newburgh, N. Y. (D.C.)
KILT>IGAN, MRS. F., Falls

City, Nebr. (D.C.)
KILTON, A. A., Empire Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
KILTS, WILLIAM H., 982
Woodward Ave., Detroit,
Mich. (DO.)
KILVARY. R. D., 6359 Ken-
wood Ave., Chicago, 111.
KIMBALL,  W.  F.,  706  Edmond
St., St. Joseph, Mo. (Opt.)
KIMMEL, J. P., 231A Front
St., Belleville, Ont. (D.O.)
KINCAID, ABIGAIL E., Citi-
zens' Nat'l Bank Bldg.,
Newport, N. H. (D.O.)

Julia  Nay, Forrest  Goodw^in
Blk., Skowhegan, Me.
KINDER, M., 69 Central
Ave., Ridgefleld Park,
N.  J. (N.D.)
KING,  A.  B.,  Third  Nat'l  Bank
Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  (D.O.)

Miss  Bernice,  Petaluma,
Cal. (D.C.)

Edward  Douglas,  Wood-
ward Bldg..  Detroit.  Mich.

F.  E..  237  Penna.  Ave.,  War-
ren,  Pa. (D.C.)

Floyd  E.,  Knapp  Bldg.,
Warren, Pa. (D.C.)

Gertrude,  Roseland,  La.

Helen,  516  Harvard  St.,
Brookline, Mass. (D.O.)

Ida  M.,  Medical  Museum,
Washington, D. C. (D.C.)

Lillian  B.,  110  N.  Los  Robles
Ave., Pasadena, Cal.

Dr.  (Mrs.),  Buena  Park,  Cal.

Mrs.  S.  L.,  722  3d  St.,  Mus-
catine, la. (D.C.)

T.  M..  Landers  Bldg..
Springfield. Mo. (D.O.)

Wm.  G.,  239J 2nd  St.,  Jersey
City, N. J. (D.C.)
KING. CORNELIUS E., 955
10th Ave., Long Island
City, N. Y. (D.M.T.)

Edward C, Coffeyville,
Kans. (N.D.)

Fred, 4200 Grand  Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

J. W., Bradford, Pa. (M.D.)

Mary  L., New Field

Laboratory, East Chat-
tanooga, Tenn. (M.D.)

R. F., Haverstraw, N. Y.

Wallace Edward. 225 Main
St.. Ashtabula. O.
(D.M.T.)
KINGSBURY. CHARLES W..
Idaho Bldg., Boise. Idaho.

Frank D.. 313 Hugenot St..
New  Rochelle.  N. Y.

L.  W..  904  Main  St..  Hart-
ford,  Conn. (D.O.)

Walter »., Idaho Bldg.,
Boise, Idaho. (D.O.)
KINGSBURY, HENRIETTA,

East Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
KINGSLAND, JENNIE B., 82
Beverly St., Newark, N.J.


KINKAID. D. L., 1006 Belle-

fontaine St.. Indianapo-
lis, Ind. (S.T.)
KINLEY, C. H., 541 Ammon

St.,  Homestead,  Pa. (D.C.)
KINNETT, W. E., 401-2

Masonic Temple Bldg.,

I'eoria, 111. (Or.S.)
Lecta  Fay, 39  S.  State  St.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
KINNEY, BLANCHE E., Sa-

lida, Colo. (D.O.)
C.  D., Austin.  Tex. (D.C.)
J. E., Astoria, Ore. (D.O.)
Kenneth  F.,  101  Fox  St..  La-
peer, Mich. (D.O.)
KINNIBURG & KINNIBURG.

1903 3d Ave., Huntington,

W.  Va. (D.C.)
Drs., 825 4th Ave., New

Kensington, Pa. (D.C.)
KINSINGER,  J.  B.,  228  W.  5th

St., Rushville, Ind. (D.O.)
KINSMAN, ADA R., 182 Up-
land Rd., Cambridge,

Mass. (D.O.)
KINTNER, P., Star Route 1,

Box 29, Kinsley, Kans.

KINZ,  GEO.,  409  Halsey  Bldg.,

Portland.  Ore. (D.C.)
KINZ, GEO. J., Camas, Wash.

KINZLEY.  MABEL  ALBERTS,

Nevada, O. (D.C.)
KIPLINGER, C. E., Ashburn,

Ga. (D.C.)
KIPLINGER, Lawyers' Bldg.,

Miami, Fla. (D.C.)
KIRBY,  GEO.  W.,  Bogard,  Mo.

(S.  T.)
KIRK, DR. J. W., Philadel-
phia. Pa. (M.D.)
KIRK, MORRIS G., 210i N.

William St., Moberly, Mo.

KIRKBRIDE, HARRY C, 814

De Kalb St., Norristown,

Pa. (D.O.)
KIRKHAM, C. L., New

Castle, Pa. (D.O.)
KIRKHAM, CHARLES L., L.

& M. Bldg., New Castle.

Pa. (D.O.)
KIRKLAND, J. E., Sioux

Falls, S. D. (D.M.T.)
KIRKPATRICK, ALOHA M.,

319 N. Charles St., Balti-
more,  Md. (D.O.)
George D., The Farragut,

Washington,  D.  C. (D.O.)
J.  E.,  202  Ward  Bldg.,  Battle

Creek, Mich. (D.C.)
Minnie A., 1332J Broad St..

New Castle, Ind. (D.C.)
.1. R., 221 Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
KIRSCH, F.  W., St. Louis,

Mo. (M.D.)
KISH, F. G., 301 Chapin St.,

South Bend, Ind. (D.C.)
KISSINGER, L. A., Beloit,

Kans. (D.O.)
KISSLING, H. J., 2723 Ocean

Ave., Dermont, Pitts-
burgh,  Pa. (N.D.)
KISTLER,  A.  J.. 919  N.  Broad

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

KITCHELL,  ARTHUR  WARD,

72 Elizabeth Ave., New-
ark, N. J. (D.O.)
KITCHEN, GEORGIANA, 201

Pavonia  Ave.,  Jersey  City,

N. J. (D.C.)
KITCHENS. W. P., Pioneer,

Tex. (S.T.)
KITSON,  MATIE  R.,  Osage,  la.


Kjellberg
Kri'tner


Alphabetical  Indrx


919


KJELLBERG.  DR.,  624  S.

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

111. (Ma.)
Mrs T. Folke, 10 E. Huron

St., Chicago, Til. (Ma.)
KJERNER,  SAMUEL H..

Waldheim Bldg., Kan.sas

City,  Mo. (D.O.)
KLAWITTER, WM., 821 S.

5th St., La  Cros.se, Wis.
KLERER, ERNEST A., E. A.

Kleber Sanitarium,

Alpena. Mich. (N.D.)
KLECZYNSKE, A., 413 Can-

fleld Ave., Detroit, Mich.
KLECZYNSKI, A.,  1560  Michi-
gan Ave., Detroit, Mich.

KLEIN, CLIFFORD S., 2401

Fillmore St. and City of

Paris Bldg., San Fran-
cisco,  Cal. (D.O.)
Geo.  W.,  110  Washington  St.,

Ironton, O. (D.C.)
J., Room 20, Iseman Bldg.,

Kenosha,  Wis. (D.C.)
J. S., 48 33rd St., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
KLEINER.  J.  C,  319  Hamburg

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.(Opt.)
KLEMA,  J. W., 20 Iserman

Bldg., Kenosha, Wis.

KLIMAN, WINONA. Mltchel

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.

KLIMECK. A. J., 1313 Tower

Ave., Superior, Wis.

KLINCK, G. M.. Ill W.

Chicago Ave.. Chicago,

111. (M.D.)
KLINE. D. M., Malvern, la.

Emmer H., 18 Graham St.,

Harrisburg,  Va. (S.T.)
L.  C.  Tarentum,  Pa. (D.O.)
KLINE, HARRY B  , 633

Breckenridge Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (Cr.)
KLIPPELT, J. R.,  Lingsweiler

Bldg.,  Lebanon,  Mo. (D.O.)
KLOCKLE, MRS., SOPHIE,

702 Bottner  St., St.  Louis,

Mo. (N.D.)
KLOMAN, WINONA, 8-10

Mitchell Bldg., Cincinnati,

O. (N.D.)
KLOMANN, WINONA. Room

8,  9  W.  4th  St.,  Cincinnati,

O. (D.C.)
KLONE. F. M., 1204 15th St..

Rock  Island,  111. (D.C.)
KLOPFERSTEIN, W^ A.,

Detroit, Mich. (N.D.)
KLOTBACH. OSCAR, 746

Euclid Ave., Cleveland,

O. (Ch.)
KLOVE, FREMONT, 309 La

Fayette St., Waterloo, la.

KLUG, RUDOLPH .1., 323

Monmouth St., Gloucestei-

City, N. .L (N.D.)
KLUGHERZ, W. L., 16 Bank

St., Batavia, N. Y. (D.O.)
KLUMPH. C. C, 27  N. Monroe

St.. Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
KLUNDER, PAUL C. 1866

Liberty  St.,  Davenport,  la.

(DC.)
KNAPP, H. L., Masonic Tem-
ple,  Elyria,  O. (D.O.)
Lester  I..  Sherman  Sq.  Hotel.

New York  Citv, N. Y.


., 37 Monti-
Jersey City,


Sturgis,


KNAUEL & KNAUEL, 1618

State St., Ea.gt St. Louis,

111. (D.C.)
KNAUEL, WM. H., 1618  State

St., East  St. Louis, Mo.
KNAUER, F. F., Lynn. Ind.

KNAUSS, S. M

cello Ave.,

N. J. (D.O.)
KNECK, G. W.; South Bend,

Ind. (D.C.)
Martin, South Bend, Ind.

KNEIBES, B.

Mich. (D.C.)
KNIBBS,  THOS..  Merrick.  L.  I.

KNIELING, L.. Willoughby,

O. (D.C.)
KNIERMANN,  L.,  R. 3, India-

nola,  Nebr. (D.C.)
KNIGH, GEO. S.. 3003 E.

Grand Blvd., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
KNIGHT, DELIA G., 234 W.

44th St., New York City.

N. Y. (D.O.)
KNIPE.  J. B.,  85 Franklin  St..

New  York,  N.  Y. (P.)
KNOLL. A. F.. 1921 Bridge

Ave., Davenport, la.

A.  v..  Rooms  1  and  2,  Back-
man Bldg., 1st  St. and 3d

Ave., Cedar Rapids, la.

A. v., 729 College Ave..

Davenport,  la. (D.C.)
A.  v..  508  Miss.  Ave.,  Daven-
port, la. (D.C.)
KNOPE, J., Pourmont Hotel.

Miami, Fla. (Hv.)
KNOPF, OSCAR, 236 S. Ash-
land  Blvd., Chicago, 111.

KNOPP. LOUIS. 3329 1st St..

Minneapolis,  Minn. (D.C.)
L,. Eldorado Springs. Mo.

KNOTT,  J.  C.  8  Cooley  Block,

Hartford City, Ind. (D.C.)
KNOWLES, C. H.,  406  N.  Union

Ave., Alliance, O. (D.C.)
A. Pitcairn, "Riposo," St.

Helen's Park, Hastings,

England. (N.D.)
J. H., 305 St. Cloud Bldg.,

New  Castle.  Pa. (D.C.)
Jerome. 3006 West Ave.,

Newport  News,  Va. (D.O.)
KNOWLES, CORDELIA B.,

Cleveland, O. (Ch.)
C. H..  Riddle Blk.,  Ravenna.

O. (N.D.)
Leonard, Cleveland, O.

(DC.)
KNOWLTON, C. P..  N. Y. Life

Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.

Harold C, 19 Home St..

Worcester,  Mass. (D.C.)
KNOX, JAMES EDWIN. Har-

persville, Broome Co..

N. Y. (D.C.)
KNUTSON. CHRISTENA, Cal-

lender. Ta. (D.C.)
KOBEL. LOUIS, 379 E. 155th

St., New York, N. Y.

KOCH, MARGARET, 819

Masonic  Temple.  Minne-
apolis,  Minn. (Or.S.)
Otto W., Alvin. Tex. (D.C.)
KOEHL. JOSEPH F., P. O.

Box  18.  Akron.  O. (D.M.T.)
KOEHLER. MRS. E., 1320 L.

S. St., Little Rock, Ark.


W.. 429 N. 6th and
Sts., Salt Lake
Utah. (D.C. Ph.C.)
GEO.. Park Falls.


108-12 Stet-
Logansport,

H., Duluth.


KOER, J.

West

City,
KOEPP.

Wis. (D.C.)
KOFFEL, ROY,

tiner Bldg.'.

Ind. (D.C.)
KONKLER. W.

Minn. (D.C.)
KONT. S. A.. Karcher Bldg
,^^  Kalispell. Mont. (D.C  )
KOONS, WM.  M.. 11 S. B'way
^^^ Herington, Kana. (D.O.)  '

O  Tb  O  f^^^ ^' ^'°"^'^"-
KOOPMAN.'  FRANK, Her-

mosa. S. D. (D.C.)
KOOPMAN.  P.  E.,  6432  N Her-

rmtage Ave., Chicago, 111.

KOOSE,  ■  MISS EDNA, Grand

Mound.  la.  (D.C  )
KOPP, M. S., Colonial Hotel
T,^  fayton, O. (D.M.T.)

34th St., New  York N Y
(Ma.)
KORAN, MISS ELEANOR

mJ. T^dY^ ^'- '''''^^^^
KORTE,  H.  G..  5479  Dor-

TlV^NDt'^"- ^^'^^^*''
KOSKE, S. H., 805 King St..
Hamilton. Ont.. Canada.

KOST  'august, 423 Union

St., Union Hill, N. J

(Opt.)
I^OSTNER, ED.. 605 Clinton
■r^^  Alley. Akron, O. (DMT)
KOTTLER, A. P., 81 E

Madison St.. Chicago.

111. (D.O.)
KOUTH, MISS  T., 3912 Cot-

Tf,^^i!?'"°7®  -^^<"- Chicago.
111. (Ma.)

KOYNER. ROBERT L St

Elmo,  111. (D.C.)  ■'

KOZINCKI. L. C. 8800 Hous-

(d"c  )^^^^" *^^''=^^°' I"-
^^^^^'^f:^^^  J- First Nat.

FdO? ■' ^^'^'"'e'- Cal.
^^^JKER  FREDERICK

™.. 1201 W. Alleghenv

tDO) ^^"^'^^'Phia. Pa.
KRAMER. NELLIE, 1240

¥ch\ '^^'^■' *^^®^'®'and, O.

KRANTZ, C. J.. 203 Superior

xs^^T ^i^^%°^  "^'ty. la. (D.C.)

^VpJ'.^^^A*^-' Spitzer Blk.,

Toledo, O. (N.D  )
Henry 308 Stilzer Bldg.,

Toledo, O. (D.C.)
Josie, 203 Superior St

Mason  City,  la.  (DC)
Wm.  J.,  3061  4th  St.,  Logans-
port, Ind. (D.C.)
KRATZ. J. C. 1415

St., Chicago, 111.
KRAUS, EUGENE

Broad'wav, New

N. Y. (D.O.)
KRAUSE. EDITH, 31st and

S  Sts..  I>mcoln.  Neb. (D.C.)
H.  A.,  811  S.  Marshfleld  Ave

Chicago, 111. (D.C  )
KRAUSS, E. R.. Edgemere

L. I., N. Y. (D.O.)
KREDER. MISS E. S., 1911

Westminster St.. Wash-
ington.  D. C. (D.C.)
KREMER. HERMAN, 63

25th St., Elmhurst, L. I


Monroe
R.. 2345
York.


920


Alphabetical  Index


Kr  colic
Lang


KREOLIC, BENJ., 11th and

Broadway, Gary, Ind.

KRESON, A. R., 406 Home

Trust Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
KRESS & KRESS, 204 Hodpe

Bldg., Lockport, N. Y.

George  P.,  24  Harrison  Ave.,

I.ockport, N. Y. (D.C.)
Mable  T., 24 Harrison Ave.,

I.ockport. N. Y. (D.C.)
KRETSCHUMAR. HOWARD.

Powers Bldg., Chicago,

111. ((D.O.)
KRETZER, REGTNAI>D I..,

207 Claremont Ave., Jer-
sey  City, N. J. (D.C.)
KREUZER, C, 236 E. 69th

St., New  York,  N. Y.

(Ma.)
KREWSON, A. L., German

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
KRILL, JOHN F., Box 357,

Kirksville, Mo. (D.O.)
KRILL, JOHN F., Ellicot

Sq., Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
J. F., 193  Woodward  Ave.,

Buffalo. N. Y. (D.C.)
KRITCH, BESSIE L., 431-32

Chamber Bldg., Oil City.

Pa. (D.C.)
KRITZER.  J., 1310  Consumers

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
KROGALL, ANNA J., 11-17

Elizabeth W., Detroit,

Mich. (Ch.)


KROHN, A.  H., 1002  Michigan

Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.C.)
G. W., 209 N. Hanover St.,

Carlisle, Pa. (D.O.)
KROMO. DR.. North Yakima,

Wash. (D.C.)
KROTTSE, H. G., Nyack, N. Y.

KRUDOP, D. T., 218 Wright

and Callendar Bldg., IjO.s

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
KRUEGER, AY. F. H., 139

Irving Ave.. Brooklyn,

N. Y. (N.D., Ph.D.)
KRUGER, KATHERINE, 608

S.  Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago,

Til. (N.D.)
KRUSE,  EDITH  L.,  428  N.  31st

St.. Lincoln Nebr. (D.C.)
KUCBRA,  V.  F.,  Sidney,  Nebr.

KUECK, MARTIN, 201 N.  Hill

St., South  Bend, Ind.

KUEHNE,  C. F.,  Eagle  Grove,

la. (D.C.)
KUEHNER, FRANK O., 49

Delavan Ave., Newark,

N. J. (D.C.)
KITGEL, ARTHUR C. L.. 491

Delaware Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y. (D.O.)
KUHI>EWEIN. LEONARD,

116J S. Main St., Marion,

O. (Ch.)
KUHLMAN. E.. 121 N. fith  St..

Terre Haute. Ind. (D.C.)
KUNA. A.. 31 Lincoln St..

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)


KUHLOW, ANNA, 1397 Gid-

dings Road, Cleveland, O.

S. J., 6115 Linwood Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
KUNERT. W. FRANK, La

Cros.se, Wis. (DO.)
KUNKLE. R. H.. 2041 E. 90th

St., Cleveland,  O. (N.D.)
KUNZE, DR. EMMA, 2057

Ridge Ave., Philadelphia,

Pa. (N.D.)
Dr. Louis, 379 E. 155th St.,

New  York  City,  N.  Y.

KLTPFERSCHMTED, 168-70

East 81st St., New York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
KURCHE, A. G., 1714 Berlin

St.,  La  Crosse,  Wis., (D.C.)
KURTH. GEORGE, 225 W.

68th St., New York, N. V.

(Ma.)
KURTH, WALTER, Somerset

Blk., Winnipeg, Manitoba.

KURTIS, ISAAC M., 1028

B'way, Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)
KURTZ,  F.  A.,  Cambridge,  111.

IvURZ,- ROBERT F., 36 High

St.,  New  Haven, Conn.

KVITRUD, HENRY, Crook-

ston,  Minn. (N.D.)
KYLE, CHARLES T., Arcade

Bldg., Menomonle, Wis.


L'AMI, C. J.. 401 Connaught

Blk., Saskatoon, Sask.,

Can. (D.C.)
LA  BERGE,  G.  H.,  610  Stewart

Bldg.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
LA COUR, CARL, Dixon, 111.

LA CROSSE, ALBERT J..

2004 Ella Court, Mari-
nette,  Wis. (D.C.)
LACY,  HAMMETT  N.,  Morgan

Bldg., Portland, Ore.

LADD, C. F., Marshalltown,

la. (D.C.)
LADD, MRS. LOUISA, 1105

Georgia St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
LADMAN,  GEO.,  Portland,  Mo.

(DC.)
LADWICK, MISS MARY, An-

tigo.  Wis. (D.C.)
LAFFER, HENRY. 356-7

Wells Bldg., Quincy, 111.

LAFFERE, GEO. C, R.  No. 4,

Box 56, Thorndale, Tex.

LAFGRON, A. J.. Richvale,

Cal. (D.C.)
LA FRENIERE. .ARTHUR E,

18 Hazel St., Hartford,

Conn. (N.D.)
LA GRANGE, ALDEN. Paris,

Til. (D.C.)
LA  HAND,  JOSEPH. Logan.

O. (D.M.T.)
LAIRD, A. D., 2513 Farnam

St., Omaha. Nebr. (D.O.)
Jennie Smith, 2513 Farnam

St.,  Omaha, Nebr. (D.O)
John S., 5 Garfield Place,

Cincinnati, O, (D.M.T.)


LAIST, OTTO, 402 Haight St.,

San  Francisco,  Cal. (D.C.)
LAJOIE, W. L., 9-10 Ziegler

Blk., Spokane, Wash.

LA  JORE  &  JOHNSON,  418-21

Mohawk Bldg., Spokane,

Wash. (D.C.)
LAK, RAY, 1261 N. La Salle

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
LAKE, C. A., 1128 Bedford

Ave., Brooklyn, N. T.

F. Borune, 178 Huntington

Ave., Boston, Mass.

(DO.)
F.  W.,  950  W.  27th  St.,  Cam-
den,  N. J. (D.C.)
Joshua.  La  Grand  Apts..  At-
lantic  City.  N. J. (D.C.)
LA LONDE, J. W., Belleview,

Mich. (D.C.)
LAMB,  JOSEPH  J.,  1252

Franklin  St.,  Pittsburgh,

Pa. (N.D.)
C. R., Spokane, Wash.

LAMB, S., 400 Van Brunt St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (Opt.)
LAMBEAU, V. E. J., People's

Bank Bldg., Bloomington,

111. (D.C.)
LAMBERT, P. P., Lamberts-
1  ville. Pa. (D.C.)

!  LAMENT, E. K., 1638 Mesa

Ave.,  Los  Angeles, Cal.

LA MONT, LILLIAN, 121 Shi-

lints PI., Cincinnati, O.

(Ma.)
LAMPRECHT, K., c/o The

Chiropractic College, San

Antonio. Tex. (N.D.)


LAMPTON,  WILSON  E..  Farm-
ers Bk. Bldg., Butler,  Mo.

LAMT. CHAS., 5237 Martin

Blk., Spokane, Wash.

LANCASTER, M. ESTELLE,

Poxcroft, Me. (D.O.)
LANCE, P. C, 1531 W. Adams

St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
LANDAN, MRS., 611 S. Pearl

St.,  Denver,  Colo. (D.C.)
LANDES, AGNES, 3802 Pine

Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.

Samuel R., 16 Monroe St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.

LANDGROFF, E. J., 213-15

Moran-Corbett Bldg., De-
catur, 111. (D.C.)
LANDIS, H. L., Curtis Blk.,

Elkhart, Ind. (D.O.)
liANE, ARTHUR  MINER, 420

Boylston St., Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
Charles Allen, Albany, Mo.

E.  H.,  Plainfleld,  Wis. (D.C.)
Mrs. Mae, Comosdin, Kans.

S. C, Woodlandville, Mo.

LANE, HENRY. 1386 West

Randolph St., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
LANEY, A. T., Clinton, Mo.

LANG, ALLAN, Hubbard, O.

LANG, BUELAH. 529 W. 9th

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.


t.  a  11(1
Lear


Alphabetical  Index


021


J.. 80 Sauer St., Patprson.
N.  J. (D.C.)
F.ANG  &  THORNELL, S.. Lee-
brick St., Burlington, la.
I.ANOAK, P. M., 454 Fair-
mount Ave.,  Oakland,  Cal.
LANGDALE,  H.  R.,  Pittsburgli,
Kans. (D.C.)
H. R., McPherson, Kans.
LANGE, CHAS. E., Nas.sau
Bldg-.,  Burlington,  la.
Chas. E., Frederick, Okla.

Chas. E., 58 Parsons Blk.,

Burlington, la. (D.C.)
Lydia  E., 925 Danielson St.,
North Bergen, N. J.
LANGEHAGEN & I.ANGE-
HAGEN, DRS., 830 Le
Claire, Davenport, la.
LANGENHAGEN, W. W.,

Greene, la. (D.C.)
LANGKAMP. WALTER,

Beach  City, O. (D.M.T.)
LANGLEY,  JOS., 232 South
Ashland Blvd., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
LANGLEY, MABEL A.. 483
Beacon St., Boston, Mass.
LANGLOIS, F. L., 256 Ridean
St.,  Ottawa,  Ont.,  Can.
LANGUM, HENRY, Box 53,
Sheridan, Wyo. (D.C.)
Henry,  Volga,  S.  Dak. (D.C.)
Henry, Story City, la.
LANGUM, HENRY, 2520

Commercial Ave., Minne-
apolis,  Minn. (D.C.)
LANGWORTHY, MITCHELL,
834 1st St., Cedar Rapids,
la. (D.C.)
S. M., 500 1st St., Cedar
Rapids,  la. (D.C.)
LANKFORD, M. C, 1531

Congress St., Chicago, 111.
Morris C, 76 Grant St.,
Atlanta.  Ga. (N.D.)
LANSEN, G. C. W., 23 Polk
St.,  Guttenberg,  N.  J.
LANSING,  H.  L.,  80-82  N.  Pearl

St.,  Albany.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
LANTATT. JAMES E., 13
Eugene Place, Silver
Lake.  N.  J. (N.D.)
LAPIN, H. J., 206 E. 54th St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
LA  PLANT,  G.  J.,  Suite  30,  327
Main  St..  Springfield.  Mass.  ;
(D.C.)  i

LA PLOUNT, O. W., Albert  I
Lea, Minn. (D.O.)  |

LAPP.  IRENE  KATE.  Granite
Bldg., Rochester, N. Y.
LARIMORE, L. S., State  Bank
Bldg., Caldwell, Kans.  '
(D.O.)  I

LARKINS, EARL E.. Galves-  i
ton, Tex. (D.O.)
Fred  B..  R.  T.  Daniels  Bldg.,  I
Tulsa,  Okla. (D.O.)  j

LARKINS, J. W., Sioux Falls,  i

S. D. (N.D.)
LARMOYEUX, JULIA A.. St.  |
James  Bldg..  Jacksonville,
Fla. (D.O.)  '

LARRABEB, T. B.. Webster  i
City.  la. (D.O.)


I.,ARROWE. MISS. 87 W.

Huron  St.,  Buffalo.  N.  Y.
(Ma.)
LARSEN, CARL A., A.shland,
Wis. (D.C.)
L. A.. 200 E. Walnut St..
Denison, la. (D.C.)
j Payne  P.,  37  E.  28th  St.,  New
York  City.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
Robt.. Neenah. Wis. (D.C.)
Robt..  219  Main  St.,  Kenosha,
Wis. (D.C.)
LARSEN, K013T., 827 College
Ave., Appleton, Wis.
LARSH.  M.  M.,  212  Daisy  Ave..

Long  Beach,  Cal.  (D.O.)
LARSON & LARSON, DRS.,

Caro,  Mich. (D.C.)
LARSON, A. C, Caro. Mich.
Albin J.. P. O. Bldg.. Lud-

ington,  Mich. (D.C.)
A. J.. 166 W. Western Ave.,

Muskegon,  Mich. (D.C.)
C. L., Zumbrota, Minn.

E. T., 2349 Gilpin St., Den-
ver,  Colo. (D.C.)
E.  T.,  1540  Madison  St..  Den-
ver, Colo.  (D.C.)
G. M., 1930 Bissell St., Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)
J. D., 234 Albert Ave.,
Rockford. 111. (N.D.)
J.  E.,  716  S.  16th  Ave..
Maywood, 111. (N.D.)
J. E., Rockford Health
Home, Rockford. 111.
(Irid.)
Jennie W.. 2535 N. Califor-
nia Ave.. Chicago, 111.
L. A., Denison. la. (D.C.)
Minnie,  Gilbert,  Mich. (D.C.)
Nelle. 308-9 Metropolitan
Bldg.. Sioux City, la.
LARTER. E. R., Silberberg
Bldg..  Niagara  Falls.  N.  Y.
LA RUE. CHARLES M..
Kirn Bldg., Lancaster, O.
J. Byron, Kirn Bldg., Lan-
caster. O. (D.O.)
LASHETT.  W. L.. 40  Hastings
St., West Roxbury, Mass.
LATHAM, P. J., North Platte,

Nebr. (D.C.)
LATHAN, P. J., Sheridan,

Wyo. (N.D.)
LATHROP, GUY F., 621-23
Stevens Bldg., Detroit.
Mich. (Or.S.)
LATOURETTE. RUTH, Ma-
sonic Bldg., Oregon City,
Ore. (D.O.)
LAUB. J. B.. Chapman, Nebr.

LAUBY, GEO. E., 311 Hall

Blk., Howard and Market
Sts., Akron, O. (N.D.)
LAUDENSCHLAGER, G., 2254
N. ClarTc St., Chicago, 111.
LAUDERWASSER. H., 251
Littleton Ave., Newark,
N. J. (D.C.)
LAUFFENBERGER, EDYTH.
Prairie Du Sac, Wis.
Edyth, 2120 Cleveland Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
LAUFFENBERGER, EDYTH
A., 2919 N.  Clark St.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
LAUGHLIN, E. H.. Kirk.'iville.
Mo. (D.O.)


George M., Kirksville, Mo.

Harry  T..  Great  Falls.  Mont.

(DO.)
W. R., Fay Bldg., Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.O.)
LAUGHREN, J., 2212 E. 79th

St., Cleveland. O. (DC.)
LAURENCE, J. C, 2322 How-
ard St., Omaha, Nebr.
r>AUSER,  F..  Osceola.  la.  (D.C.)
Frank.  Columbus  City,  la.

Mrs. Minnie, Aurora, Nebr.,
LAUTENSCHLAGER, GEO.,
2254  N.  Clark  St.,  Chicago,
111. (Ma.)
LAUTERWASSER,  CHARLES,
252 Littleton Ave., New-
ark,  N. J. (D.C.)
G. Wm., 144 Ridgewood
Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. (D.C.)
LAUTERWASSER,  CHAS..  25:i
Littleton Ave., Newark,
N.  J. (N.D.)
LAVALLEY. J. E.. 207 Alia-
key Bldg., Portland. Ore.
LAVALLEY. J. E., 495

Buchanan  Bldg..  Port-
land.  Ore. (D.C.)
Thos. P., 403-4 Buchman
Bldg.,  Portland,  Ore.  (D.C.)
LAVERTY, E. L., Bryan. O.

LA  VINE.  S.  H..  Rochester.

N. Y. (N.D.)
LAWLER. D. EVAN, 713 X.
Cherry St., Winston-
Salem, N. C. (D.P.T.)
LAWLER'S (Dr. D. E. Van)
SANITARIUM, 2726 South
10th St., Omaha, Nebr.
LAWRENCE, JOSEPH C, 1
Baird  Bldg.,  Omaha,  Nebr.
J. C, 2322 Howard. Omaha,

Nebr. (D.C.)
J. L., 133 Geary St.. San

Francisco. Cal. (D.O.)
M. Ernestine, 513 S. Salina
St.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
^V.  T.,  Paris,  Tenn. (D.O.)
LAWRIE.  A.,  Forest,  Ont.

LAWSON & LAWSON, 210 S.
Jefferson St., Kittanning,
Pa.  (D.C.)
Herbert B., Celeron, N. Y.

H.  L.,  Homestead,  Pa. (D.C.)
LAWTON, DR.,  c/o  S.  R.  Jan-
sheski. Cor.  Congress  and
Washington Sts., Ypsilan-
ti. Mich. (D.C.)
Chas. G., Jefferson, la.
LAYMAN  &  LAYMAN,  Room  8,
over P. O., Tulsa, Okla.
LAYNE, A. C, 223 W. Col-
lege St..  Griffin,  Ga. (D.O.)
LEACH. CLARENCE W.. 52
W. Raynard St., Denver.
Colo. (D.C.)
LEADER, GENEVRA E., 606
Kansas Ave.. Topeka.
Kans. (D.O.)
LEAHY, FRANCIS  J.,  St.

Joseph Sanitarium. Mount
Clemens. Mich. (N.D.)
LEAN, DORA SUTCLIFFE.
120 Lord St., London Sq.,
Sportport, Eng. (D.O.)
LEAR, FRED. W., 121

Auglaize  St.,  Wapakoneta,
O. (D.M.T.)


022


Alphabetical  Index


Leartl
Lewis


I.EARD. A. W., Nicodemus

Bldg..  Spencer,  la. (D.O.)
LEARNER, GRACE C, 111

Bidwell Parkway, Buffalo.

N. Y. (D.O.)
Harry W., Ill Bidwell

Parkway. Buffalo, N. Y.

LEARY, MATHILDA V., 74

Eaton  Place,  East  Orange,

N.J. (D.C.)
LEARY, \V.  J.,  11  Maple  St..

Chicag-o, 111. (M.D.)
LEAS. LUCY,  Hamilton  Bldg.,

Akron. O. (D.O.)
LEASURE. GEO.. 127 S. Main

St.,  Wichita,  Kans.  (D.C.)
LEAVITT, SHELDON. 4665

Lake Park Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
LECKERT.  THEO. A.. 1210

Florida  Ave.  N.  E.,  Wash-
ington, D. C. (Ma.)
LECKLIDER, CLYDE, 2029

Vermont Ave., Toledo, O.

(D.M.T.)
LECLAIR, HARRY, 314 Howe

Bldg.. Los Angeles. Cal.

Harry. 430 S. Broadway,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
LE COULTRE, EMIL, 1402 I

St. N. W., Washington,

D.  C. (D.C.)
LEDELL, J. A.. Litchfield,

Minn. (D.C.)
LEDSWORTH, J. P.. 417 W.

5th St., Los Angeles. Cal.

LEE. C. H., Peru, 111. (D.C.)
C. J., 506 Security Bldg.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

Curtis  J.,  Capitol Hill,  Okla.

G.  T.,  625  N.  2d  St.,  Arkansas

City, Kans. (D.C.)
Luther, 605 7th St., E.

Hutchinson,  Kans. (M.D.)
Lyndon  E., 112  Crescent  PI.,

Yonkers, N. Y. (D.C.)
Mary Cornelia, Manhattan,

Kans.  (S.T.)
Minnie  R..  Power  Bldg.,  He-
lena. Mont. (D.O.)
Vernon R., Owl Drug  Bldg..

San Diego, Cal. (D.O.)
LEE, ELMER, 125 W. 58th

St., New York, N. Y.

(M.D., N.D.)
LEEANA,  A.  L., Arnold,  Nebr.

LEECH, WILLIAM C, Eau

Claire, Wis. (D.C.)
LEEDS, GEORGE T., Yon-
kers, N. Y. (D.O.)
LEEPER,  O.  L..  109J  W..  Okla-
homa Ave.. Guthrie,
,  Okla. (D.C.)
LEFFINGWELL, A. M. E..

514  Walnut  St..  Muscatine.

la. (D.O.)
LEFFLER, WM. H.. 5 West

St.,  Utica. N. Y. (D.O.)
LEHEW, EMMA, Kenton, O.

(Mag.)
LEHMAN, F. O., 317 Abing-

ton Bldg., Portland,  Ore.

LEHMAN, HERMAN, 1874

Avon St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
H. S..  Fort  McKinzie,  Sheri-
dan, Wyo. (D.C.)
LEIBER. AGNES, Lafayette.

Ind. (D.C.)
LEIDHEISER, MRS. J. W.,

Vermilion, O. (N.D.)


LEIGH, EMMA HOYE. 142

W. 18th St., University

Place. Nebr. (D.O.)
LEINBACH. HANNA. Reserve

Bank Bldg., Kansas City,

Mo. (D.O.)
Sara  J.,  3336  Woodland  Ave.,

Kansas City. Mo. (D.O.)
LEIST, JOS. D., 5ti Richard

St., Columbus. O. (D.C.)
LEISTENFELTZ,  CLARA,  605 J

Main St., Elkhart. Ind.

LEISURE,  CLARA  B.,  c/o  Mrs.

John Porter, Montezuma,

la. (D.C.)
LE KITES, RUE, The Beacon

Apts., Washington, D. C.

LELAND. A.  L..  Arnold.  Nebr,

A.  L..  Malta,  Mont. (D.C.)
LELAND, CLINTON W., 409

Center St., Findlay. O.

(D.M.T.)
Fayette A., 409 Center St.,

Findlay. O. (D.M.T.)
LEMBKE, HERBERT C,

4200 S. Grand Blvd..

Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
r.EMLY, CHAS. C, 522 Peer-
less Bldg.,  Waco, Tex.

LEMON, A. E., Sault Ste.

Marie,  Mich. (D.C.)
LEMON, EUPHEMIA,

Sanduskv. O. (Ch.)
LENSER,  W.  M.,  Aurora,  Nebr.

LENZ,  L.,  Hawkeye,  la.  (D.C.)
LENZ, MARIA, 3808 Prospect

Ave., Cleveland, O. (Ma.)
LEONARD & LEONARD,

Callawav, Nebr. (D.C.)
LEONARD  & LEONARD,  Mil-
ton, la., and Merna, Nebr.

Ellsworth  Harry,  The  Flan-
ders, Philadelphia, Pa.

H. Alfred,  Franklin Bk. Bl.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Hubert F., Morgan Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
L. W.. Excelsior Springs,

Mo. (S.T.)
S. L., Redwood  Falls,  Minn.

W. C, 611 Carondelet St..

Los  Angeles.  Cal. (D.C.)
LEONARD  & LEONARD,

Winner. S. D. (D.C.)
r.EONARD, B. B.. Hillsboro,

O. (N.D.)
H. N.. 1347  W.  Adams  St..

Chicago,  111. (N.D.)
J. O.. Box 347, Middleport,

O. (D.M.T.)
P. I., 710J Felix St., St.

Joseph. Mo. (Opt.)
LEONHART.  HERMAN  C.  509

Merchant St., Ambridge,

Pa. (D.C.)
LEONNIG  '&' MELDRUM, c/o
Arnold  Hotel.  Spanish  Fork,

Utah. (D.C.)
LEOPOLD, MINNIE S. DICK-

inson. Lansdowne. Pa^

LEOPOLD, WM. C, 1351 3rd

St., Milwaukee. Wis.

LB PLANT. G. L., 1216 Perry

St..  Davenport.  la. (D.C.)
LE POMPADOUR, FRANK S.,

27  Cune  St.,  St.  Augustine,

Fla. (N.D.)
LESNICK,  WM.. 5108  5th

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)


LESLIE.  GEORGE  W..  Marsh-
field, Ore. (D.O.)
LESSENGBR, M. L., 2950 W.

10th St.. Oklahoma City.

Okla. (D.C.)
LE TRBEMAN, MISS ADA

MAY, 702 S. Spring St..

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
LETSON,  SAMUEL  B..  El  Cen-

tro, Cal. (D.C.)
Samuel  B..  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

LETT, ESTER, Marion, O.

(Ma.)
D. W., Marion. O. (Ma.)
LETTRELL, A. R., 304-8  Con-

roy Bldg., San Antonio,

Tex. (D.C.)
LEUBUSCHER, A. L., 345 W.

70th St., New York, N. Y.

LEUBKE, OTTILIB, 6733

Stonv Island Ave.,

Chicago, III. (N.D.)
LEUPHE. J. F. G.. 401 Ber-
gen St., Newark, N. J.

LEUT, GEO. P., 417 Corbett

Bldg., Portland, Ore.

LEUTHOLZ, C.  H..  Mancelona,

Mich.  (D.C.)
LEUTZ,  MRS.  AMANDA,  Guth-
rie,  Okla. (D.C.)
LEVANZIN, A., A.B., Ph.D.,

T>L.B., M.E.T.. 265 22d and

K Sts., San Diego, Cal.

LEVE, A. H., 154 East Ave.,

Rochester.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
J.  C.  154  East  Ave.,  Roches-
ter. N.  Y. (D.C.)
LEVEGOOD, ROBERT R.. 133

N. 52d St.. Philadelphia.

Pa. (D.O.)
LEVERS, M. E., Woolner

Bldg.. Peoria. 111. fN.D  )
LEVI. MRS. GUSSIE R., Elk

City, Okla. (D.C.)
LBVINE, FRANK  C,  New

Philadelphia, O. (Ma.)
r.EVY, A. M., 124 Graham

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)
J., 1882 Fulton Ave.,

Brooklvn, N. Y. (Opt.)
LBWEAUX, VIRGINIA V..

Morgan Bldg., Portland,

Ore. (D.O.)
LEWIS. AGNES, Farmers

State  Bk. Bldg.,  St.  Cloud,

Minn. (D.O.)
A. D., Wavne, Nebr. (D.C.)
Burt, 1303 S. Meridian St.,

Anderson. Ind. (D.C)
C.  A.,  Glenwood,  la. (D.C.)
Cora M., 7909 Euclid Ave..

Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
Edith  J.,  Clyde  Blk.,  Hamil-
ton,  Ont. (D.O.)
Emma A., 205 N. Cedar St.,

Owatonna, Minn. (D.O.)

F.  S., 642 12th St., Oakland,
Cal. (D.C.)

G.  H., Cameron Mills, N. Y.

H., Kalona. Ta. D.C.)

Mrs. H. H., Pana, Christian

Co., 111. (D. C.)
Dr. J. H., Comanche, Tex.

J. L., Bank Bldg., Colorado

Springs, Colo. (D.O.)
J. R., 307-8 Mahoning

Bldg., Youngstown. O.

J. R., 205 W. Federal St..

Youngstown. O. (D.C.)
Lee  A.,  Collv  Bldg..  Everett,

Wash. (D.C.)


Lewis
Livers


Alphabetical  Index


923


Y.

St..


o.

G.,

Los

St.,


L. G., Nafl Bank Bldg.,

Galesburg^. 111. (D.C.)
L. G., Bainbridge, N.

Muriel E., 26 Broad

Lvnn, Ma.ss. (D.O.)
W.  A.,  Galveston,  Tex. (S.T.)
W.  O.,  172  E.  Main  St.,  Ham-
ilton, Ont. (D.O.)
LEWIS, CORA  N., 73 E.

Evergreen St., Young.s-
town, O. (N.D.)
John W., 225 Allen St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (Cr.)
Lucille, 119 St. Botolph St.,

Boston, Mass. (N.D.)
L. E., 119 St. Botolph St.,

Boston, Mass. (N.D.)
P. E., Tigard, Ore. (N.D.)
S. \V.. Tunkhannock, Pa.


Velda, Downs, Kans. (N.D.)

LEWY, MORRIS, 19 W. 31st

St., Bayonne, N. J. (D.C.)

LEYLAND, HENRY, Utica, O.

(D.M.T.)
LICATA, FRANCIS, 119

Guernsey St., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (N.D.)
LTCHBY, E. L.. 726 Pacific
Bldg., San Francisco,  Cal.
LICHTENWAGNER, .1. A.,
2307 Elm St., Toledo,
(Ch.)
LICHTENWALTER, D.
1748 W. 41st Drive,
Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
LIGHTER. S.. 1028 Brown

Peekskill, N. Y. (D.O.)
LICHTY, ELSA, Pacific  Bldgr.,
San Francisco, California.
LIDDLE,  R.  L.,  928  Armstrong,
Kansas  City,  Kans. (D.C.)
LIDEN, E. .!.. 608 S. Ash-
land Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
LIDY,  I.  HENRY,  22  S.  Centre

St., Pottsville,  'Pa. (D.O.)
LIEBAN, JOHN, 64 E. Van
Buren St., Chicago, 111.
LIEBER, AGNES  V., La Fay-
ette, Ind. (D.C.)
LIEBGOLD, LOUIS, 3604
B'way,  New  York,  N. Y.
(Ma.)
IJECHTY, LEONIA,
ter St., Clifton
LIEDERBACH, J. L.,
Ave., New York,
(Opt.)
LIESS. JOHN, 528

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.  (D.C.)
LIESTENFELTZ, CHAS. L.,
Bunker  Hill, Ind. (D.C.)
Clara, 605i Main St., Elk-
hart, Ind. (D.C.)
LIFFRING, L. A., Second
Nafl Bank Bldg., Toledo,
O. (D.O.)
LIGGENS. MALINDA F.,

Locust St., Coshocton, O.
LIGHT, NELLIE, 223 College
St.,  Winfield,  Kans. (D.O.)
LIGHTFOOT, OTA P., c/o
Chicago College of Nap-
rapathy, Chicago, 111.
(Nap.)
LIGHTHALL. HENRY D., 112
N. 5th Ave., Chicago, 111.
LIGON,  ELLEN  B.,  430  Spring
Hill Ave., Mobile, Ala.


J., Clarinda, la.


771

N. Y


1143 N.
Chicago,


24 Cen-
N. J.


343 3i

N. Y.


Garfield


HI.
132


LIKEN, F

LILLIBRIDGE, R. A
Main St., Buffalo
LILLIE, ARTHUR,
Lawndale Ave.,
111. (DC.)
LILLY, MME., 875 Flatbush
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
'  (Ma.)

LIMPBRTCK, 414 Jefferson

St.. Joliet, 111. (N.D.)
LIMPUS. EDWARD F.. I. O
O. F. Bldg., Mt. Vernon
Ind. (D.C.)
LINANDER, ALVILDE E., T^r.
State St., Chicago,
j  LINCOLN, CLARA B.,
i  Payne Ave., N. Tona-

wanda, N.  Y. (D.O.)
j Fred. C, Ellicott Square,
Buffalo, N. Y. (D.O.)
LIND, A. E., 603 Overland
I  Building, Boise, Idaho.

<  (D.C.) •

G. M. E., Lincoln Trust
Bldg., Broadway and
72nd St., New York,
i  N. Y. (D.C.)

LINDAHL,  ALFRED  K.,  Doug-
las.  N. D. (D.C.)
A. K., New Rockford, N. D.
LINDBERG,  DAVID,  Richvale.

Cal. (D.C.)
LINDBERG, FOLKE, 167
W. Washington St.,
Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
LINDE, H. F., P. O. Box 44,
Wadena, Sask., Can.
LINDEHAN,  F.  A..  Hankinson,

N. D. (D.C.)
LINDELL, C. DARRAH. 3339
N. Main St.. Pocatello,
Idaho. (D.C.)
LINDER, CHAS. O., Spokane,

Wash. (M.D.)
LINDERFER, MARY E., 813
6th St., Canton, O.
(D.M.T.)
LINDGREN, E., 1757 K St.

N. "W., Washington, D. C.
(Ma)
LINDHOLM, WM.. 66 Maple-
wood Ave., Bridgeport.
Conn. (N.D.,  D.C.)
LINDLAHR, H., 525 S. Ash-
land  Blvd., Chicago. 111.
LINDON, H. L.. 556 Dover
Court Road, Toronto,
Ont.. Canada. (D.C.)
LINDROTH, C, 1240 Califor-
nia  St., San Francisco,
Cal. (D.C.)
LINDSAY.  CAROLINE  Z., 78
St. Marks Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (Ma.)
LINDSAY,  J.  H.,  Pedro  Miguel,

Canal Zone. (D.C.)
LINDSEY. E. L., 603 Madison
Ave., Scranton,  Pa. (D.O.)
LINDSEY. J. H., Pittsfleld,

111. (D.C.)
LINDSTROM. E. C. 143

Waverly  Place,  New  York.
N. Y. (Ma.)
Jos. W., 166 E. 67th St.,
New  York. N. Y. (Ma.)
LTNEBARGER, C. A., Council
Bluffs. la. (D.C.)
H.  A..  Chrisman,  111.  (D.O.)
LINEKER, CHAS., 547 Tele-
graph St., Oakland, Cal.


Charles W., 3235 Telegraph

Ave., Oakland, Cal. (D.O.)

LINENBERGBR, FRED,

Salem, S. Dak. (D.C.)
LINES.  .1. E., li. F. D. No. 2,

Cah-donia,  O. (D.M.T.)
LINGO, MRS. L.  B.,  The
Woodworth, 10th St.
N. W., Washington. D. C.
LINHART,  ERNEST  W.,

Charles  City,  Conn. (D.O.)
LINIKER, CHAS. W., 2123
Telegraph Ave.. Oakland,
Calif. (D.C.)
LININGER, W. J., 409 i Main
St., Mavville. Mo. (D.C.)
LINK, E. C, 87 Broad St.,
Stamford, Conn. (D.O.)
W. F., Empire  Bldg., Knox-
ville, Tenn. (D.O.)
LINLEY,  R.  H.,  Mineral
Wells, Tex. (M.D.)
LINN. WM. R., Logan, O.

(D.S.T.)
LINNELL,  J.  A.,  37  S.  Wabash

Ave., Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
LINNENBERGER, F., Salem,

S. D. (D.C.)
LINSEY, PEARL ALICE, Na-

vina, Okla. (D.C.)
LINTON, MINNIE, Kingdon

Springs, Ark. (S.T.)
LINVILLE, W. B., 121 S.
Main St.. Middletown. O.
LIPPERT. HENRY. 371

Stoddart Ave., Columbus,
O. (DM.T.)
LIPPHART, W. F., Great

Bend,  Kans.  (D.C.)
LIPPINCOTT, LYDIA E.. 243
W. Main St., Moorestown,
N.  J. (D.O.)
LISLEY.  J.  E.,  153i  N.  Elm  St..

Warren, O. (N.D.)
LIST, ADOLPH, Cape Gir-
ardeau, Mo.  (S.T.)
LISTENFELT, CHAS  M'., 605i
S. Main St., Elkhart. Ind.
LISTENFELZ. CLARA M..

Hoffman, Okla. (D.C.)
LITTELL, U. G., ^V. H. Spur-
geon Bldg., Santa Ana.
Cal. (D.O.)
LITTLE,  CLARA  ULMER,  The
Imperial. Washington, D.
C. (D.O.)
F.  J.. Standish,  Mich. (D.C.)
J.  A..  57  W.  Main  St.,  Battle

Creek, Mich. (D.C.)
J. A., 19 Boardman Ave.,
Battle  Creek,  Mich. (D.C.)
W. D., Kiowa, Kans. (D.C.)
LITTLEFIELD,  CHAS.  W..  244
Woodward Ave.. Detroit,
Mich. (D.C.)
LITTLEJOHN & SHORT, 159
N. State St., Chicago, 111.
LITTLEJOHN, EDITH W..
64 E. Van Buren St.,
Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
LITTLEJOHN,  J.  B.,  401  Stein-
way Hall, Chicago, 111.
J.  Martin. 69  Piccadillv,  Lo^h-
don, W., England. (D.O.)
LITTRELL, A. R., 304 Conroy
Bldg., San Antonio, Tex.
A. R., Sherman,  Tex. (M.D.)
LIVENGOOD, B. L., Bay  Citv.

Tex. (D.O.)
LIVERS, LOUIS S.. S13 6th
St., Canton, O. (N.D.)


924


Alphabetical  Index


Livesey
Lubberl


LIVESEY.  HENRY.  P..  56
Johnson  Ave.,  Kearny,
N. J. (D.C.)

I.IVESEY. HENRY P., 138

Kearney Ave.. Arling'ton,
N. .1. (N.D.)

I.IVINGER  &  LIVINGER,
DRS..  Mvers  Blk.,  Sharon.
Pa. (D.C.)

LIVINGSTON. INA PATTER-
SON, Ridge  Bldg.,  Kansas
City. Mo. (DO.)
L. R.. Ridg^e Bldg:.. Kansas
City.  Mo. (D.O.)

LLOYD  &  LLOYD,  332 i  State
St.,  Sharon,  Pa. (D.C.)

LLOYD,  JAMES  W.,  605  Ave-
nido  de  Mayo,  Buenos
Ayres.  Argentine  Republic,
S. A. (DO.)

T>OBAN, MISS ELSIE. 1516

Michigan Ave., Elmhurst.

Cal. (DC.)

J. M.. 1509 13th St. N. W.,

Washington, D. C. (D.C.)

LOBAN,  J. M., 130 S. Fair-
mount Ave., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (N.D.)

LOBDELL, HARRIET. Great
Bend, Kans. (D.C.)
Harriet W., 785 Academy

St.. Chico. Cal. (D.C.)
Harriett  W., 303  W. 5th  St.,

Chico. Cal. (D.C.)
Harriet W., Great Bend,
Kans. (D.C.)

LOCKART,  E.  L.,  Lake  St.,
Petoskey, Mich. (D.C.)

LOCKBRIDGE, C. D.,

Mishavvaka, Ind. (D.C.)

LOCKE, ORELLA, Cumber-
land Bldg., Cincinnati,
O. (D.O.)
Ellis L., 433J North Grand
Ave., Los Angeles. Cal.

LOCKWOOD. JANE E., S.
Dennis, Mass. (D.O.)
R. J., Arleta. Ore. (D.C.)
T. D.. 51 E. 42d St., New
York City,  N.  Y. (D.O.)

LOEFFLER, CHAS., Minne-
apolis. Minn. (M.D.)

LOEFFLER.  KATHERINE

A., Lindley Blk., Minne-
apolis. Minn. (D.O.)

LOEHR.  MRS.  A.  R..  Welling-
ton.  Kans. (S.T.)
Chas. J., 476 Clinton Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
H. C. La Grange, Tex.

LOEHR. CHARLES J., 476
Clinton Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (D.C.)

LOFLAND,  W.  F.,  1514  Lin-
den Ave..  Baltimore,  Md.
(D.C)

LOFGREN,  A.  J..  Richvale,
Cal. (D.C.)

LOFQUEST,  H.  A.,  White
Blk.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.

LOFTIN, C. W., Lavernia,
Tex. (D.C.)

LOGAN.  D.  R.,  Cul  de  Sac,
Idaho. (D.C.)
Charles L., 3825 Ellis Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Hugh B., 504 Commercial
St..  Atchison,  Kans. (D.C.)
S. W., Waldheim Bldg.,
Kansas City, Mo. (D.O.)

LOGAN,  R.  S..  Cul  de  Sac,
Idaho. (D.C.)

LOGIC, GEO.. 9181 Monroe
Ave.. South Milwaukee,
Wi.s. (D,C.)


LOGUE. FRANK  W.. Nicholas

Bldg., Toledo. O. (D.O.)
J.  Stanislaus.  N.  Y.  Ave.  and

Boardwalk, Atlantic City,

N.  J. (D.O.)
LOGUE. JAMES. 4 McCrorey

Apta.. Atlantic City, N. J.

LOHNE. MISS I., 664 Lexing-
ton Ave..  New  York,  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
LOIZEAUX, C. L., Dubuque.

la. (M.D.)
LOMAS. KATHRYN M.. 1405

Hinman Ave.. Evanston.

111. (D.O.)
LONEK. MRS. SARAH, Ar-
kansas City, Kans. (D.C.)
LONEY. A. M., 821 W. L.

HoUingsworth Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
LONER, FRANK E.. 20 East

.lackson Blvd., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
LONG, ALBERT  E.,  Cam-
bridge, O. (D.M.T.)
Robt. H.. 309 Shelton Ave.,

.lamaica,  L.  I.,  N.  Y.

Ruth, 421 S. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
LONG. BERTHA R., Gould,

Okla. (D.C.)
Frank W., Nicholas Bldg.,

Toledo, O. (D.O.)
George  Percy, 6 E. 37th  St.,

New York City, N. Y.

I. W., 5 Desley Block. Co-
lumbus,  O. (D.C.)
J. D.. Penn Bldg.. Butte,

Mont. (D.C.)
Jacob, 45 Ward St., Pater-
son, N. J. (D.C.)
L. v., Detroit, Minn. (D.O.)
Louis, 1044 E. Tremont

Ave., New York City,

N.  Y. (M.D.)
M. C, Blanchard, la.

M. C. Mechancsville. Ga.

Robert  H..  309  Shelton  Ave.,

Jamaica. N. Y. (D.O.)
S., Alexandria, La. (D.C.)
Sol. L., 927  Easton  St..  Alton.

111. (D.C.)
LONGPRE. E. L., 194 Court

St.. Kankakee, 111. (D.O.)
LOOKER, WM., 1243 N. 60th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.

LOOMIS, ALICE RASS.

Jefferson, O. (D.M.T.)
LOOSE. E. ELLSWORTH,

Niles Bldg., Findlay, O.

LOPE, FREDK. A., 301 West

139th  St., New York.

N. Y. (Ma.)
LOPER.  MATHILDA  E.,

Third  Na'l  Bank  Bldg..  St.

Louis, Mo. (D.O.)
LOPEZ, FRANCIS, Bowling

Green, Fla. (M.D.)
LOPIN,  WM.  J.,  Wausau,  Wis.

LORANGER,  J.  E.,  Detroit.

Mich. (N.D.)
LORANT, DR., Ft. Towson,

Okla. (D.C.)
LORBEERS. THOMAS LORD,
Freeman Bldg., Riverside,

Cal. (D.O.)
LORENZ, CHARLES E., Ma-
sonic Temple. Columbus.

Ga. (D.O.)
LORIMER. THOS. S.. 406 W.

Exchange St.. Akron, ().


LORING, MARGARET, Polo.

111. (DO.)
LORMAN. L. L., 316 Pearl

St., Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
LOS ANGELES COLLEGE OF

CHIROPRACTIC, 931 S.

Hill St., Los  Angeles,  Cal.

LOSTETTER,  C.  F.. 715  Madi-
son St., Covington, Ky.

LOUCKS. W. E., 12-14 Rose-
miller Bldg., 37 Market,

York, Pa. (D.C.)
LOUDON, GUY E.. 199 S.

Union St., Burlington, Vt.

Harry M., 153 S. Union St.,

Burlington, Vt. (D.O.)
LOUGHLIN. J. P., Ottawa,

Ont., Can. (D.C.)
LOUIS. JOEL, 307 Mahoning

Bank Bldg., Youngstown.

O. (D.C.)
LOURVAN, DR. A. S.. North

Powder, Ore. (D.C.)
LOVE, E. BLANCHE, 218

Detroit  Ave., Columbus,

O. (Ch.)
W. P., Charlotte, N. J.

LOVE, HELEN, 522 W. 112th

St., New York. (D.O.)
LOVEGROVE, M. B., Des

Moines Still College. Des

Moines. la. (D.O.)
LOVELESS, MRS. FLORA.

831 Cott St.. Emporia,

Kans. (S.T.)
LOVBLL, JUDSON C, First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Long

Beach. Cal. (N.D.)
Judson  T..  Pacific  Ave..  Long

Beach. Cal. (D.C.)
LOVETT, A. F., Utica, Kans.

LOVING, A. S., Brown Bldg.,

Rockford,  111.  (D.O.)
Frank  A., (Z'ommercial Bank

Bldg.. Sherman. Tex.

(D.O.) .
William B., Murphy Bldg.,

Sherman, Tex. (D.O.)
LOVITT, J. F., Utica, Kans.

Jas. M., Larned, Kans.

LOVRANIEH, JOHN. Stevens

Bldg., Portland. Ore.

(Ma.)
LOWE, FRANCES C, 1

Baker Ave., Dover, N. J.

James L., Woolf Bros.

Bldg., Kansas City,- Mo.

Louis F., 1542 Glendale

Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.

Mrs. L. J., Des Moines, la.

LOWES,  A.  J.,  Grayson,  Sask.,

Can (ST)
LOWMAN, A.' S., North Pow-
der, Ore. (D.C.)
LOWN, ANNA B., Bradford

Court. Newton Center,

Mass. (D.O.)
LOWRIE, A.. Forest. Ont.

Can. (D.C.)
LOWRY.  BELLE  P.,  401  Knox

St.  W.,  Ennis,  Tex. (D.O.)
Dorothy B., Ann Arbor,

Mich. (D.C.)
LOY, GEO.. 1006 Woodland

Ave.. Kansas City, Mo.

LUBBERT, E., 327-9 Com-
monwealth Bldg., Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)


Loyd
Mac  Kau


Alphabetical  Judex


925


Dr., P., 1221 Broadway,

Denver, Colo.  (D.C.)

LOYD, FOX  E., Athens. Mich.

LUCAS, JOHN H., Goddard

Bldg., Chicag-o, 111. (D.O.)
J. N..  Junkin  Blk., Fairfield.

la. (D.O.)
T. C, 1206J Main Street,

Columbia,  S.  C. (D.O.)
LUCK. .JOSEPHINE A., 958

8th  Ave..  New  York,  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
LUDDEN. RAYMOND, 541 N.

8th  St.,  Colton,  Cal. (D.O.)
LUDTKE, C. W., Markesan,

Wis. (D.C.)
LUEDICKE, F. A., Empire

Bldg-.,  Denver,  Colo. (D.O.)
LUEE, J. W., Indianola, la.

LUEKE,  A.  W.,  333  Darsie  St.,

Pittsburg-h, Pa. (N.D.)
LUEPKE, J.,  Welg-a,  111.

J. K., Wel^a, 111. (M.D.)
LUFT, CHRISTIAN G., 218 S.

Front St., Fremont, O.

LUHRING, ROLLO A., Ed-
wards  Apts., Orange, Cal.

LUMM,  A.  W.,  753J  S.  Hill  St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.C.)
LUND, BOB, 6006 Linwood

Ave., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Paul S., 190 Grant Street,

Perth  Amboy,  N.  J. (D.C.)
LUND, RICHARD, 804 Bryson

St., Youngstown, O.

LUNDBERG, ANNA M., 908

6th Ave., New York,

N.  Y. (Ma.)
LUNDE, THORWALD,  Box

266, Walker, Minn. (D.C.)
LUNDGREN, GURLIE, 5 S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago,

111. (Ma.)
LUNDQUIST, NELLIE O.,

Stanton, la. (D.O.)
LUNDY, PROF., Bergen

Point, Bayonne, N. J.

(As.)
LUNDY, F. C, Koenig Bldg.,

Marshfield. Wis. (D.C.)


LUNGMUS,  B.,  1740 W.  Adams

St., Chicago, III. (D.C.)
LUNN,  A. W., 753J  S. Hill St.,

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
LUNPERICH, H. E., 414

Jefferson St., Joliet, 111.

LUNT, R. W., 6006 Linwood

Ave., Cleveland. O. (N.D.)
LUNTZ. DR. HARRY, 37

Vernon Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (N.D., D.O., M.D.)
LUSK, CHARLES M., JR.,

Kress Bldg., Houston,

Tex. (D.O.)
Leo L., First Nat'l Bank

Bldg., Eaton, Colo. (D.O.)
LUST,  BENEDICT, 110  E.  41st

St., New York, N. Y.

(D.C, N.D., D.O.)
LUSTED, C. B., 502 E. 2nd

Ave., Olwein, la. (D.C.)
LUTES. MRS. A. L., Daven-
port,  la. (D.C.)
LUTES, O. R., Madison, Ind.

LUTTEMBERGER,  J.  C.  M..

404 Tacoma Bldg.,

Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
LUTZ. C. L., Wichita, Kan.

N. A., Chatfleld, O. (D.C.)
N.  A..  P.  S.  C,  14  Gross  Blk.,

Tifflin,  O. (D.C.)
S.  A., Bucyrus,  O. (D.C.)
Phil. J., 808 Macon Street,

Brooklvn, N.  Y. (Ma.)
LYALL,  IDA  A.,  Masonic  Blk.,

Alpena, Mich. (D.C.)
LYCETT, TOWNSEND, 2414

Pine St., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.C.)
LYCHENHEIM,  MORRIS,

Mentor  Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
LYDA, E. R., Story Building,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
LYDON, EDWARD J., DR.,

310 Auditorium, Spokane,

Wash. (S.T.)
LYKE, CHAS. H., 700 B'way,

Camden, N.  J. (D.O.)
LYMAN, ELVA JAMES. 213

N. Hamilton St., Madison,

Wis. (D.O.)


LYMAN,  N.,  Ballinger  Bldg.,

St.  Joseph,  Mo. (Opt.)
LYNCH, ALICE E., St. James
Bldg., Jacksonville, Fla.
Chas. F. M. D., 1839 North
Marshfield Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
Delia Adeline, Woodmen of
World Bldg., Omaha,  Neb.
Ed., Temple  Court  Building,
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.C.)
Jno. J., 113 Clinton Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
Louis A., 37 Pearl Street,
Wellsboro, Pa. (D.O.)
LYNCH, MISS  B.. 1101  Lex-
ington Ave.,  New  York,
N.  Y. (Ma.)
R.  E., 628  Walnut  Street,
Coshocton, O. (D.C.)
LYND, W. BRUCE, 514 Ridge
Arcade, Kansas City, Mo.
LYNE, SANDFORD T., Allen-
town, Pa. (D.O.)
LYNN, HARRISON H., 1377
Main St., Buffalo, N. Y.
LYON  &  LYON,  Glenwood,  la.

LYON, BLANCHE, Coral.
Mich. (D.C.)
Chas. L. H.. 206 Kirby St.,

Saginaw, Mich. (D.C.)
Chas. A.. Huston Blk.,
Tawas City. Mich. (D.C.)
Ernest  R., 2961 Farnam St..

Omaha, Neb. (D.C.)
Louis A., 37 Pearl Street,
Wellsboro, Pa. (D.O.)

LYONS, S.  O., 15  J  N.  Main  St.,
Hutchinson, Kan. (D.C.)

LYTLE,  ALFRED  J.,  904  Main
St., 404-6 Dillon Building,
Hartford, Conn. (D.C.)
R. D., 311 Exchange Place
Bldg.. Rochester, N. Y.
Ray D., 16 State Street.
Rochester, N. Y. (D.C.)


M


MACAULEY, DANIEL B., 27

E.  Monroe  St.,  Chicago.

111. (D.O.)
MAC  BRIDE, MILDRED E..

37 S. 10th St., Newark,

N. J. (D.C.)
MAC  CARDIF, N. B., 33

Stratford Place, Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
MAC  CARTHY, Dan., 132 N.

Wabash Ave., Chicago,

III. (D.O.)
E.  N.,  100  N.  Hamlin  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
E.  v., 216  S.  Laflin  St.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
M., 216 S. Laflin St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
P. N., 100  N. Hamlin  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
MAC  COLLUM, EDNA M..
. Miners' Bank Building,

Wilkes-Barre, Pa. (D.O.)
MAC  COMBER, F. J., 230 W.

11th St.. Anderson, Ind.

MACCRACKEN, F. E.. Box

5, Beatrice, Neb. (D.O.)


MAC  DONALD,  D.  M.,  Box  906,
Collingwood, Ont., Can.
John A., 160 Newbury St.,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
M. D., North Mara, Canada.

MAC DONALD, HARRIET,
3335 Carnegie Ave..
Cleveland, O. (Ma.)

MAC  DOUGALL,  GERTRUDE.
Fairbury, 111. (D.C.)

MACE,  MINA  B.,  919  E.  55th
St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

MAC  EWEN,  MARGARET,

410 S. 9th St., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.O.)

MACFADDEN, BERNARR,
Flatiron  Bldg.,  New  York,
N.  Y. (P.C.)

MACFADDEN, CHARLES,
Suite 5-6, Temple  Bldg.,
Bad  Axe, Mich. (N.D.,
D.O., F.)

MACFARLAND,  M..  211

Meyers  Arcade,  Minneapo-
lis, Minn. (D.C.)


MACGREGOR. G. W.. God-
dard Bldg., Chicago, 111.

P. J.. O. T. & B. Building,

Olney, 111. (D.O.)
MAC GREGOR, GEORGE W..

431  S.  Wabash  Ave.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
J. B., 5 S. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
W. C, 27 E. Monroe St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
MAC  GREGOR  &  MAC  LEAN,

431 S. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
MACHER, M. B., 204 E. 35th

St.. Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
MACHIN, MARY. 525 North

Cleveland Ave., Canton.

O. (D.C.)
MACK, RAESLEY S.. 114

Broad St., Chester. Pa.

Warren B., 32 Lewis St..

Lynn, Mass. (D.O.)
MAC KAY. THOS. J., 826

York St., Camden, N. J.

(D.M.T.)


926


Alphabetical  Indc.v


Mac  Keller
Markwell


MAC  KELLER,  PETER,

Chilllcothe, O. (El.)
MACKEY, JOHN R., N. 5th

St., Martins Ferry. O.

(D.M.T.)
MACKIN & MACKIN, 525 N.

Cleveland Ave., Canton,

O. (D.C.)
R., 525 Cleveland Ave.,

Canton, O. (D.C.)
MACKIN. BESSIE G.. 130 E.

North St.. Lima, O. (El.)
Elmer, 130  E.  North  St.,

Lima, O. (El.)
MAC  KINNON.  BARBARA,

Marsh-Strong Bldg-., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
John L., 2H0 Fair Street,

Kingston. N.  Y. (D.C.)
MACKLIN,  MARY  C,  225

Cleveland Ave., Canton,

O. (D.C.)
MAC  LENNON, MARGARET

J., 529 "W. 111th St., New

York, N. Y. (D.O.)
MAC LEVY, 352 Fourth Ave.,

New York. N. Y. (P.)
MAC MICKLE. Portland, Ore.

MAC NAUGHTON, HELEN,

121  E.  29th  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
MACONKEY. JEPSON, 1539

Adams St., Chicago, 111.

MADDOX, H. H., 1705 B'way,

Mattoon, 111. (D.O.)
MADDUX, WALTER S., Cen-
tral Blk., Pueblo, Colo.

MADELEING. MISS HILMA,

220 Wisconsin Ave.,

Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
MADER, EDITH, 1602 20th

St., Rock Island, 111.

MADER, GEO., 9807 Ave. L.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
MADISON, RODNEYi. 311-13

Grant  Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)

Exchange Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
MADLIN,  M.  G.,  644  Pine  Ave.,

Long Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
MAESCHER.  ELLA.  Levergne,

Bldg., 4 W. 7th Street,

Cincinnati, O. (M.A.)
MAGARRELL,  DR.  T.  Z., 2726

S. 10th St., Omaha, Neb.

MA  GEE. F. E.. O'Neill Bldg.,

Webb  City,  Mo. (D.O.)
MAGERS, J. A., Moravia, la.

MAGILL,  EDGAR  G..  "Woolner

Bldg., Peoria, 111. (D.O.)
MAGNER & MAGNER, 280

Forest Ave., Oshkosh,

Wis. (D.C.)
MAGNER,  ELLEN,  1030  Nicol-
let Ave.. Minneapolis,

Minn. (D.O.)
MAGUIRE, A. P., Salem, O.

E. J., 354 Lincoln Avenue,

Salem, O. (D.C.)
W. W., 208 N. 10th Street,

Lebanon, Pa. (D.C.)
MAHAFFAY, CLARA A.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

J. H., 926 3rd St., Huron.

S. Dak. (D.O.)
Charles W., Pittsburgh

Bldg., Helena, Mont.

MAHAN,  HELEN,  1329

Waverly St., Kansas

City. Kan. (D.C.)


Pro-
Ind.


Van


MAHLER, C. H.. 200  W. 72nd

St., New York, N. Y.

MAHONY, S. P., Genessee,

Kans. (D.C.)
MAISEL. FRED. H., 122 W.

Fifth Ave., Gary, Ind.

Marie  E..  122  W.  Fifth  Ave.,

Gary, Ind. (D.C.)
MAISON. GEORGE F., Belle-

fontaine, O. (Ch.)
MALCOLM, HARRY, 931 lltli

St. N. E., Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
MALCOLM, ROBERT C. The

Savoy, Washington, D. C.

Zander E., Studebaker

Bank Bldg., Bluffton. Ind.

MALCOM. Z. E.. Over

gress  Store, IBluffton

MALI, HARRY E., 64 E.

Buren St., Chicago,  111.

MALIN. G. P., 211 Zweig

Bldg.. Bellaire. O. (N.D.)
James P., 1122 W. 17th St..

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Mrs. Jennie, San Diego,

Cal. (D.C.)
MALISKEY, MRS. W. C.

Owosso. Mich. (D.C.)
Mrs.  W.  C.  St.  Joseph.  Mich.
W.  C.  Rockwall.  Tex. (D.C.)
MALLORY. W. E.. 312-17

Swetland Bldg.. Portland.

Ore. (El.)
MALMQUIST, MISS HILDA,

10 E. Delaware  Place,

Chicago.  111. (Ma.)
MALONE, J. AXTON. Carter

Bldg., Houston, Tex.

Lillian, Mills  Bldg., Topeka,

Kan. (D.O.)
MALONEY  &  MALONEY, 227-

28  First  Natl.  Bank  Bldg..

Long Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
MALONEY. H. C, 227-28 First

Natl. Bank Bldg., Long
Cal. (D.C.)
B., Omaha. Neb.


S., The Hamp-
Hampton, la.


Beach.
Mrs. C.

MANATT, E.

ton Clinic,

MANCHEE, HELEN. 6351

Ingleside Ave.. Chicago.

111. (D.C.)
MANCHESTER. F. P., 653

Ave. C, Bayonne, N. J.

MANDEVILLE, J. E., Lock-
hart Bldg., Sayre, Pa.

MANDT, AMY, Waterloo, la.

MANG, CHAS. J., First Natl.

Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh.

Pa. (M.D.)
MANLEY, CORA O., The

Imperial,  Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
MANN, MRS. E. E., Box 386,

Liberal, Kan. (M.D.)
Peter, 348 Franklin St..

Bloomfleld, N. J. (D.C.)
MANNING, CARRIE E., 718

Main  St.,  Osage,  la. (D.C.)
MANNING,  ELIZABETH

MAY, 712 S. 5th Street,

Leavenworth, Kan.

MANNIX. PROF. JOE, 2242

Washington Boulevard,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)


MANRICAN,  O.  B.,  1421
Adams  St.,  Chicago,  111.

MANSEN,  J.,  4450  N.  Camp-
bell Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

MANSFKLDT. MRS. O. C.
1654 Farwell Ave..
Chicago.  111. (N.D.)

MANSOLILLO,  FRANK,  174
Summit  Ave.,  West  Ho-
boken, N. J. (D.C.)

MANSTER,  ANDREY  S.,  125
Shippen  St.,  Weehawken
Heights, N. J. (D.C.)

MANTES,  LOUISE  A.,  Lurline
Baths,  San  Francisco,
Cal. (D.C.)

MANTLE,  PAULINE  R..

Pierik  Bldg.,  Springfield,
111. (D.O.)

MANUEL,  K.  JANIE,  Masonic
Temple,  Minneapolis,

Minn. (D.O.)

MAPES,  N.  J.,  318  Euclid  Ave.,
Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
8801 Walker Ave., Cleve-
land,  O. (D.C.)

MARBLE, E.  L., 745  Inde-
pendence Blvd., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)

MARCEY,  H.  E.,  43  N.  9th
St..  Mt.  Vernon,  N.  Y.

MARCHAND, A. W., N. E.

Corner  Broad  and  Chest-
nut Sts.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

MARCHAND.  A.  W..  710
Liberty  Bldg..  N.  E.  Cor.
Broad  and  Chestnut  Sts..
Philadelphia.  Pa.  (D.C.)
Chas.  E.,  56  W.  Hanover  St.,
Trenton, N. J. (D.C.)

MARCHANT, F. B., 23 Flat-
bush Ave.. Brooklyn,
N. Y. (Opt.)

MARCY, NETTIE L., 105 1 W.
State St., Sharon, Pa.

MARGAH, N. L., 214i W.
Main St.. Bellevue, O.

MARGOH,  L.  NORMAN,  Belle-
vue.  O. (D.C.)

MARION. JENNIE M., Kala-
mazoo, Mich. (D.C.)
Rov G., Kalamazoo, Mich.

MARKEL, PROF. M., 39 West
Adams  St., Chicago,  111.
(Ma.)

MARKEL,  T.  K.,  1022  Spruce
St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

MARKEY,  MARY  A.,  Stewart
Bldg.,  Okmulgee,  Okla.

MARKLE. T. K., 1332J Broad
St.. New Castle, Ind.

MARKLTN,  DR.  R.,  328  Walsh
Blk., Akron, O. (D.C.)

MARKLIN,  RUDOLPH.  1528
Estes  Ave..  Chicago,  111.

MARKO,  519  E.  78th  St.,  New
York, N. Y. (Ma.)

MARKS, LOUIS E., 1465

B'way,  New  York,  N. Y.

MARKWELL,  J.  A.,  New
Orleans, La. (D.C.)  •

MARKWELL. J.  A.,  Sternberg
Apts., Houston, Tex.
J. A.. 484 6th Street.

Alexandria,  I.ia. (N.D.)
P. W., Leesville. la. (D.C.)


Markwetl
Maxwell


Alpluihelicdl  Judex


927


p. H., 5 W. Locust Street,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
P. W., Blackfoi-t, Iriiilid.
MARKWKLI., J. A., 1921 Ave.
M, Galveston, Tex. (D.C.)
MARLER, C. E.. lllj N.
Washing^ton St., Craw-
fordsville, Tnd. (D.C.)
MARLOW, K. S., 504 Eager
St., Sail Antonio, Tex.
MARQUARD. HENRY,
Chamois, Mo. (S.T.)
MARRINER, L. C, Denckla
Bldg-., Philadelphia, Pa.
MARRIOTT, H. H., Burling-
ton, Kan. (D.C.)
MARROW. MRS. ALBERTA,
Arkansas City, Kan.
MARSDEN. ROY C, 325 3rd
St., Newburgh, N. Y.
fD.C.)
MARSEN, FRED H., 94 Main
Street. Everett, Mass.
MARSH, C. C, General Del.,
Zanesville, O. (D.C.)
E. J., 405 N. Main Street,

Condersport, Pa. (D.C.)
Jennie, 32 Erie Ave.,
Niagara  Falls,  Can. (D.C.)
.John  D.,  Hornell,  N.V.  (^^D.)
Roy W., First Natl. Bank
Bldg., Uniontown, Pa.
U. G., Clarkson, Wash,
MARSHALL, AGNES, 36 E.
Clapier St., Germantown,
Pa. (D.C.)
A. J., 36 E. Clapier Street,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C.)
Elizabeth J. B., 326 W. 8th

St., Erie, Pa. (D.O.)
H. J., Hippee Bldg., Des

Moines, la. (D.O.)
J. S. B., 503 W. 3rd Street,
Jamestown, N. Y. (D.O.)
Mary, Madera, Cal. (D.C.)
Thos., 432 Rebecca Street,
Wilkinsburg, Pa. (D.C.)
Tom, Alpine and Iowa Sts.,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
MARSHALL, ALBERT R.,

301  E.  85th  St.,  New  York,
N.  Y. (Ma.)
Mrs. M. E.. 1432J K St.
N. W., Washington. D. C.
(Ma.)
R.  H.,  844 Home  Ave.,  Oak
Park, Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
MARSHLAND, K., 13 Clark
St., Paterson, N. J. (D  r- )
MARSHTON, A. E., Sac Citv,

la. (D.C.)
MARSLAND, MME. F., 79 S.
7th St., Newark, N. J.
MARSLAND,  KATHERINE,

721 4th Ave., Paterson,
N. J. (D.C.)
MARSLIN, R., 328  Walsh

Block, Akron, O. (N.D.)
MARSTELLAR, CHAS. I..
Dollar Savings Bank
Bldg., Youngstown, O.
MARSTON, A. E.. Sac City,
la. (D.C.)
A. E., Henry, 111. (D.C.)
Dr. A. E., Wellington, Kan.

A.  E., Logan,  la. (D.C.)
MARTENS,  THEODORE

HENRY, Cutler Building,
Rochester, N. Y. (D.O.)


MARTIN,  A.. Inc., 56 Flat-
bush Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Opt.)
H. B., 77 Whitostone  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
J., 1963 Erie St., Toledo,

O. (D.M.T.)
J. P., 1761 Sedgwick St.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
Stuart  T., 56 Flatbush Ave.,

Brooklvn,  N. Y. (Opt.)
MARTIN, BLANCHE W.,

4026 Dalton Ave., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Chas., Britton, Okla. (D.C.)
Charles C, Central City,

Ky. (D.O.)
Claude  W.,  Commerce  Bldg.,

Kansas City, Mo. (D.O.)
Mrs. E. Blanche, 4035 Dal-
ton Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
Earl P., Britton, Okla.

Elmer,  Powers  Bldg..

Decatur. 111. (D.O.)
F. D.. 305 Bronson Bldg..

Columbus, O. (DC.)
Frank, Richmond, Ind.

Frederick H., 481 N. Park

Ave., Pomona, Cal. (D.O.)
F. H., Powers Building,

Helena, Mont. (D.O.)
George W., 104 N. Stone

Ave., Tucson, Ariz. (D.O.)
Harry B., 287 E. 18th St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
H. E., Pine Bluff, Ark.


, John M., 949

Pittsburgh,

L. D., Miles

Barre, Vt.

Wm. J., St.

Toledo, O.

MARTINDALE,


Middleton St.,
Pa. (D.C.)

Granite Bldg.,

Claire Bldg.,

S. W., Box


867,  Nanaimo,  B.  C. (N.D.)
MARTINELLI, ARNOLD, 213
Summit  Ave.,  West
Hoboken, N. J. (Opt.)
MARTNER, E. A., Minne-
apolis, Minn. (D.C.)
MARTZ, DEL, O'Keefe Bldg.,

Moberly, Mo. (D.O.)
MARVIN, D. C, Over Jen-
nings and  Ramsdell,
Albion, Mich. (D.C.)
Jennie M., 813 Davis St.,
Kalamazoo, Mich. (D.C.)
Roy G., Kalamazoo, Mich.

W. H., Shipping Port, Pa.
MARX, CORA WEED, 385 S.
Belmont Ave., Newark,
N. J. (D.O.)
Zeno, Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
MARX,  ELLEN,  I^afayette,  La.

MASON, ELTA, Munising,
Mich. (D.C.)
G. E., Filley, Neb. (D.C.)
Geo. E., 302 N. 27th Street,

Lincoln, Neb. (D.C.)
Hubert R., City Natl. Bank
Building, Temple, Texas.
J. Louise, 183 Huntington
Ave.,  Boston,  Mass. (D.O.)
L. B., Somerset Building,
Winnipeg, Man. (D.O.)
MASSANGER, LELLA M.,

Simms,  Mont.  (D.C.)
MASSEY,  WM.,  218  N.  Hun-
tington Ave.,  Medina,  O.
MASTERSON,  WM.  P.,  Wide-
ner  Bldg.,  Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)


MATHER,  A. R., 1115 W.  54th

St., Los Angeles, Cal.

E., 228 Gratiot Ave., Mount

Clemens, Mich. (M.D.,

D.O.)
MATHEWS, ELLEN, 200 N.

Los Angeles St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
E. G., Waterloo, la. (D.C.)
S. E., 24 West  Ave., Nunda,

N. Y. (D.C.)
MATHEWS, JOSEPH M., 319

Lexington Ave., Colum-
bus,  O. (D.M.T.)
R. W., 464 Bowen Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.S.T.)
MATHIAS, G. L., Central

Office Bldg., Akron, O.

G. L., 404 Hamilton Bldg.,

Akron, O. (D.C.)
MATHIAS & YOUNG, 420
Hamilton Bldg., Akron,

O. (D.C.)
MATHIES. HENRY F., 491
Palisade Avenue, West

Hoboken, N. J. (D.C.)
MATHIESON, CHAS. O..

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
MATHIS, BERTHA, Sterling,

111. (D.C.)
J. A.. Rock Island, 111.

R.  E.,  Texarkana,  Ark.  D.C.)
MATIJACA. ANTHONY, 413

Cass St., Joliet, 111.

MATSON, JESSE E., Ply-
mouth  Bldg., Minneapolis,

Minn. (D.O.)
MATSONE, HULDA M., Pen-
water, Mich. (D.C.)
MATTERN, FRANK G., 68

W. 69th  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
MATTHEWS, Texarkana.

Ark. (N.D.)
S. C, 1816  Albemarle Road,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
S. C, 500 5th Ave., New
- York, N. Y. (D.O.)
MATTHIAS, GEO. L.. 1010

Rhodes Ave., Akron, O.

.MATTHIES, 122 Roseville

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. (D.C.)
MATTLER, A. E., 240 Wood-
ward Ave., Detroit, Mich.

(Ch.)
MATTWIG, JNO., 2316 E.

Washington St., Indian-
apolis, Ind. (D.C.)
MAULBETSCH, GEORGE W.,

74 S. 9th St., Newark,

N. J. ((D.C.)
MAURER, E., 3124 Fredonia

Ave.,  Cincinnati,  O.

(Ma.)
MAUSSERT. O., 1854 Fillmore

St., San Francisco, Cal.

MAVITY, BERTRAM J., 130

N. Cedar St., Nevada, Mo.
MAWSON, GERTRUDE R.,

24  ^V.  59th  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (D.O.)
MAXEY, C. N., Watts Bldg.,

San Diego, Cal. (D.O.)
MAXFIELD, GEO. ^V., 925

Broad St., Grinnell, la.

MAXON, C. H., 1294 Jefferson

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
MAXON,  C.  H.,  880  Tona-

wanda St., Buffalo, N. Y.

MAXWELL. B. C, 6802

Carnegie Ave., Cleveland,

O. (D.O.)


028


Alphahelical  Indrr


Maxwell
McCracken


Bertha M., 234 W. 4th St..

Williamsport, Pa. (D.O.)

E.  O..  Amoskeg  Banlt  Bldg-..

Manchester. N. H. (D.O.)

Herman I.., 136 N. 5th St.,

Reading-. Pa. (D.O.)
H. Thurston. 29 Morris St..
Morristown. N. J. (D.O.)
Leo. Box 33, Candor. N. Y.
MAXWEI.U CHAS. W., 1712
E. Jtth St., Cleveland, O.
(Ma.)
G. E., 27 E. Monroe St..

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
I.eo,  Box  33,  Candor,  N.  Y.
MAY, GLADYS E., 2050
Roberts Ave., Hollywood,
Cal. (D.C.)
Sarah A., Flanders Bldg.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
MAYER, B., 1127 Chestnut

St., Richmond Hill, L. I..
N. Y. (N.D.)
MAYER. ERNEST J., 1131
Rockland St., Philadel-
phia.  Pa. (D.C.)
MAYER,  J.  H.,  Chateau,  Mpnt.

MAYER-OAKES, F. T., 115
Huntington Ave., Boston,
Mass. (D.D., D.C.)
MAYERS,  REBECCA B.,

Valpey Bldg., Detroit,
Mich. (D.O.)
MAYES, M. T., 289 State St..
Springfield, Mass. (D.O.)
MAYHUGH. CLYDE W., 300
N. 4th St., Atchison, Kan.
MAYNARD, H. M., 558 4th
St., San Bernado, Cal.
MAYO, KATHLEEN, Jackson,
Tenn. (D.O.)
R. Clarence, Drumheller
Bldg.,  Walla  Walla,  Wash.
MAYRONNE,  DELPHINB,

1539 Jackson Ave., New
Orleans. La. (D.O.)
MAYS, MRS. J. C, Canisteo,
N. Y. (D.C.)
Jessie C. 36 Lillian Ave.,
Providence. R. I. (D.C.)
W. P., 301 Commerce  Bldg-.,
Erie, Pa. (D.C.)
MC  ADAMS. C. R.. Lake City,
la. (D.C.)
Frederick, Milton Junction,
Wis. (D.C.)
MC  ALESTER. J. C, Harris-

ville, O. (D.C.)
MC  ALINDON. JAMES. 2456
Superior Ave. N. W..
Cleveland. O. (D.M.T.)
MC  ALLISTER, BYRON F.,
225  N.  Block St., Fayette-
ville. Ark. (D.O.)
Joan C, Telephone Bldg.,
Guelph, Ont., Can. (D.O.)
MC  ALPIN. D. E., Boone, la.

MC  ANDREW, C. A., I. O. O.
F.  Temple, W.  6th  St..
East Liverpool, O. (D.C.)
MCANNICH. C. G., Newton,

la. (D.C.)
MC  ARTHURS, Eckel Theatre
Bldg., Syracuse, N. Y.
MCAVOY, ELIZABETH, 426
N. 3rd St., Hamilton, O.
(D.M.T.)
MCBEATH, THOMAS L., 35
Limerock St., Rockland,
Me. (D.O.)


MC  BRIDE & MC  BRIDE.

First Natl. Bank Bldg.,

Fairbury, Nebr. (D.C.)
MC  BRIDE. BESSIE, Marion.

Kan. (D.C.)
MCBTJRNEY. M. R.. 018

B'way Central Bldg., Los

Ang-eles, Cal. (D.C.)
MCBURNIE. THOS., 1215

Bedford Ave., Brooklvn,

N. Y. (Opt.)
MC  CABE, JOHN A.. Alexan-
dria, Minn. (D.O.)
MC  CADLIN, ANNIE, 204

N. Negley Ave., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.O.)
MC  CALL, A. C, 818 W. 21st

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.

F.  H.,  Penn  Ave.  and  Board-
walk, Atlantic Citv, N.  J.

T. Simpson, The Spurling,

Elgin, 111. (D.O.)
J. P., Mystic, la. (D.C.)
J. P., 2211 W. 4th Street,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
J. P., Box 155, Mystic, la.

John A., 314 Pacific Bldg.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
MC  CARL, J. F., De Witt, la.

MC  CARTHY, GEO., 121 W.

3rd St., Jamestown, N. Y.

J. P., Grangeville, Cal.

W. H.,  Oskaloosa,  la. (D.C.)
MCCARTNEY, GEO., 121 W.  •

3rd St.. Jamestown, N. Y.

MC  CARTNEY, L. H., Hoxie,

Kan. (D.O.)
MC  CARTY & MC  CARTY,

Springfield. Mo. (D.C.)
MC  CASKEY, LAURA, Falls

City, Neb. (D.C.)
Laura, Mound City, Mo.

MC  CASLAND. H. E., Fosston,

Minn. (D.C.)
MC  CASLIN, ANNIE, 204 N.

Negley Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.O.)
J. A., 311 Center Street,

Ridgway, Pa. (D.O.)
MC  CAUGHAN, RUSSELL C,

210 N. Market Street,

Kokomo, Ind. (D.O.)
MC  CAULEY,  ANDREW,

Peterson Bldg., Fairmont.

Minn. (D.O.)
MC  CLAIN, GRACE,  5204

B'way,  Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
Hattie R., La Belle, Mo.

Warren,  740  Will  St.,  Mount

Washington, Pittsburgh,

Pa. (N.D.)
MC  CLANAHAN, J. L., Paola,

Kan. (D.O.)
MCCLATCHIE, MISS A., 3119

Colfax Ave. S., Minne-
apolis, Minn. (D.C.)
MC  CLEERY, BEN H., Man-

kato, Min. (D.O.)
MC  CLELLAND, Paterson.

N. J. (D.C.)
MC  CLENNY, D. CLAYTON.
Hinton Bldg., Elizabeth

City. N. C. (D.O.)
MC  CLIMANS,  W.  A., 39  S.

State  St.,  Chicago,  111.

MC  CLOSKEN. I. R., 705

Schmidt Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)


MC  CLOSKEY, LOMERY, 301
Schmidt Bldg., Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (D.C.)
L. R.. Schmidt Bldg.. Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (D.C.)
MC  CLURG. DR., Swissvale,

Pa. (DC.)
MC  COBB, M. ELSIE, 418
Idaho Bldg., Boise, Idaho.
M. Elsie. 622 1st Street,
Loveland. Colo. (D.C)
MCCOLE. GEORGE M., First
Natl. Bank Bldg., Great
Falls, Mont. (D.O.)
MCCOLL, A. C, [Ll.B.] Ma-
jestic Bldg., Oklahoma
City, Okla. (D.C,  M.C)
MC  CONNEL, F. J.,  St. Marys,

O. (D.C.)
MC  CONNELL  &  FARMER,
14 W. Washington St.,
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
MC  CONNELL. CARL P.. 14
W. Washington St.. Chi-
cago, 111. (D.O.)
F.  J.. 24  Metropolitan  Bldg.,

Lima.  O. (D.C.)
W. F.. First Natl. Bank
Bldg.. Waitsburg, Wash.
MCCORD, ANDREW S.. 112J
Benton St.. Woodstock,
111. (D.O.)
MCCORKLE, ZULE A., 4951
Kenmore Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
MC  CORMACK, A., 4210

Wilcox St., Chicago, 111.
E.  E.,  1168  Seneca  St.,
Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
J.  N.,  Sheboygan,  Wis.  (D.O.)
MC  CORMACK, HAZEL, 3131
Carthage  Ave.,  Cincinnati,
O. (D.C.)
J. J., 629 N. 8th Street,
Sheboygan, Wis. (D.O.)
MC  CORMICK, DR. CHAS.,
McCormick Medical Col-
lege. 2100 Prairie Ave.,
Chicago,  111. (M.D.)
MC  CORMICK. MRS. CHAS.
Aledo, 111. (DC.)
Chas., Aledo. 111. (D.C.)
Chas. E.. 402 Pearl Street.

Napa. Cal. (D.O.)
E. E., 1168 Seneca Street,
Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
MC  CORMICK, JOHN T., 7603
Stemivog Bldg., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
J. Porter. 94 Clinton Street,

Greenville. Pa. (D.O.)
John, 905 Steinway Hall
Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Dr.  John  T..  905-64  East
Van Buren St., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
John T., Waukegan, 111.

L.  L.,  Guthrie, Okla. (D.C.)
MC  COWAN,  DON.  C,  210  Burr
Oak  Ave.,  Blue  Island, 111.
Ij. C, Paul Gale  Greenwood
Bldg., Norfolk, Va. (D.O.)
MCCOY, FRANK, 309-19
Citizens'  Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
L. C, Paul Gale  Greenwood
Bldg., Norfolk, Va. (D.O.)
MC  CRACKEN.  Rev.  A.,

Webster City, la. (D.C.)
Earl, Commercial Natl.
Bank Bldg., Shreveport,
La. (D.O.)


^tcCl■ea
McMains


Alj)hab<'iical  Index


920


MC  CREA. C. T.. 1272 Euclid

Ave.. Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Clifford  T., 203  Euclid  Point

Bldg-.,  Cleveland,  O. (D.C.)
MC  CREADY, B. T., 215

Masonic Temple, Cedar

Rapid.s, la. (D.C.)
MCCROSKY. .JOHN A., 4200

S. Grand Blvd., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
MCCUBREY. E. E., Kalispell,

Mont. (D.C.)
MCCULLUM,  EDNA ~M.,

Miners'  Bank  Bldg.,

Wilkes Barre, Pa. (D.O.)
MC  CURDY, CHAS. W., 1411


Walnut St.. Philadelphia.
Pa. (D.O.)
Chas. W., 838 Rosser Ave.,
Brandon, Man. (D.O.)
MC  CUSKEY, CHARLOTTE,
619 First Ave., Council
Bluffs. la. (D.O.)
MCDALE. G.. University PI..

Lincoln, Neb. (D.C.)
MC  DANIEL, A. C, Union
Savings Bank Bldg.,
Oakland. Cal. (D.O.)
Ida. 851 Sunset Blvd., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
MC  DERMOTT, MISS. 3211
Chestnut Ave., Kansas
City, Mo. (S.T.)
Mary  X.,  1312  Lamar  Street,
Wichita  Falls,  Tex. (D.C.)
MC  DONALD, New Bruns-
wick,  N. J. (D.C.)
C.  J., 12  Allen  St.,  Buffalo,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Dr. Joseph & Anne, James-
town, N. D. (D. C.)
D., York, Neb. (D.C.)
E. E., Hillsboro, O. (N.D.)
H. W., Jr., Hillsboro. O.

J. R., 225 Cleveland Ave.,

Canton, O. (N.D.)
J. R.. 27 E. Monroe Street,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
S. E., Bushnell, 111. (N.D.)
DR. MC  DONALD'S SANITA-
RIUM,  Central  Valley,
N. Y.
MCDOUGAL, DONALD D.,

121 Shillite Place, Cincin-
nati, O. (D.M.T.)
MC  DOUGALL, GERTRUDE,
Fairbury, III. (D.C.)
J. R., 27 E. Monroe St..
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
MCDOWELL. J. H.. 102 3rd
St., Troy, N. Y. (D.O.)
J. O., Odd Fellows BIk.,

Brunswick, Me. (D.O.)
Louise, Washington Bank
Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa
MCDUFFIE. J. G., Mattoon,

111. (D.C.)
MC  ELHINEY, ANNA, Ohio

City, O. (D.S.T.)
MCELREA. F. B., Sidnev

Man., Can. (D.C.)
MC  ELROY,  CECIL. P. O. Box

136, Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
MC  ELVANY, WM. F., 702
Warrington St., Allen-
town, Pa. (D.C.)
MC  EWIN.  MARGARET.

Delaware Co.. Linwood
Sta.. Pa. (N.D.)
MC  FADDEN, GEO., 51 E

59th St.. New York, N Y
(P.)
MC  FADDEN, J. CLINTON.
Cam  rose. Alberta, Can.

MC  FETRIDGE. E. L., Derbv I
•  Conn. (D.C.)  "  '  '


MC  FETRIDGE, M. J., Derby,

Conn. (D.C.)
MC  GARVEY, E. S  . 5626
Philips St.. Pittsburgh.
Pa (DC)
E. S'.. 406' Trust Building.
Pitt.sburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
MCGAVOCK. ANNE H.. 894
Woodward Ave., Detroit.
Mich. (D.O.)
R. E.. Wiechmann Building.
Saginaw. Mich. (D.O.)
MC  GILVEY.  MRS.  ELLA  M.,  3
Temple Court. Los Ange-
les.  Cal. (N.D.)
\  MC  GINNIS. F. J„ Rockwell
City. la. (D.C.)
MC  GINNIS. J. C. Mercantile
Bank Bldg., Aurora. 111.
MC  GINNTS. JAMES F..

Maquoketa. la. (D.C.)
MC  GOWAN. FRED. H., Saf-

ford, Ariz. (S.T.)
MC  GOWAN. MRS. J. A,.

Toledo, la. (D.C.)
MC  GRANAHAN.  J.  C.  Hadley.

Pa (DC)
MCGRATH. JOS. D.. Kendal-

ville, Ind. (D.C.)
MC  GREEVY. GEO. O., 650
650 Congress St., Port-
land, Me. (D.O.)
MC  GREGGOR,  GREGORY,

1355 S. Grand Ave., Los
Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
MCGUIRE, ADA. 132 S. Main
St.. Butler. Pa. (D.C.)
Chas. A.. 306 Main Blk..

Marion. Ind. (D.C.)
Cynthia. Scheron. Kan.

Frank  J.. 26 Fayette Street.  1

Binghamton. N. Y. (DO.)
Harriet. 501 Mathews  Bldg.,

Milwaukee. Wis. (D.C.)
H..  Honey  Creek,  Wis.  (D.C.)
W. W.. 914 Cumberland St..
Lebanon, Pa. (D.C.)
MCINTIRE, CHAS.. Ypsilanti.
Mich. (D.C.)
Jessie. Ypsilanti. Mich.

Lucile. Maple St., Marion,
Ind. (D.C.)
MC  INTYRE,  ADELBERT,

Wolcott, N.  Y. (D.C.)
Mrs.  Ella, 182 Exchange  St.,

Freeport, 111. (N.D.)
Ella. 825 N. Dearborn St..

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
G. M., Grosvenor Building,

Kenosha, Wis. (D.O.)
H.  M.,  32  Ontario  St.,  Brant-
ford, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
John. State St.. Chicago.

111. (D.C.)
Orrin R., 110 Poultnev St.,
Geneva, N. Y. (D.C.)
MCIVER, J. M., Box 191,

Weir, Kan. (M.D.)
MC  KAY. ARCHIBALD.
Shawano.  Wis. (D.C.)
Chas. P.. 509 Markham St..  I
Toronto. Ont., Can. (D.C.)  ^
MC  KEE, MARY. 99 Broad

St., Newark, N. J. (N.D.)
MC  KEEVER.  O.  G..  406 Glass
Blk.. Marion. Ind. (D.C.)
MC  KELLIN, WM., 403 Colt  ,
Bldg,. Paterson, N. J.
(D.C.)  I

MC  KELVEY, ANDREW, 29  I
W. Smith St., Corry, Pa.
MC  KELVEY. ANDREW S.. 2
Park Place, Corry, Pa.
Mary  E.. Villisca. la. (D.C.)


MC  KENDREE. M. G., 14

Reed and Murray Block,
Bowling Green, O.
MC  KENNA, MAURICE, 1888
Majestic  Bldg.. Quincy.  III.
(D.M.T.)
M(.'  KENZTE. LILLIAN V.,
Bryant Bldg.. Kansas
City, Mo. (D.O.)
Jesse. 326 S. Main St..
Delphos. O. (D.M.T.)
MC  KEON, DR., Native Sons
Bldg., Woodland, Cal.
Ada H., 1501 K St., Sacra-
mento, Cal. (D.C.)
Ada H., Woodland, Cal.
MC  KIDDEN, BLANCHE E.,
4740 Lorain Ave., Cleve-
land,  O. (D.C.)
MC  KILLIGAN.  BIRDIE,

Falls City, Neb. (D.C.)
MC  KINLEY, D. H.. 1619

Green St.. Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.C.)
MC  KINNEY, CLARA DE-
GRESS, Room 510. 18 E.
4th St.. Cincinnati. O.
Lula Ireland, Rock Port,
Mo. (D.O.)
MC  KNIGHT, H. F., Walled
Lake, Mich. (D.C.)
Isadora, 305 N. Walnut St..
Creston. la. (D.O.)
MCLACHLAN. BEN. N., 330
Norwood Ave., Grand
Rapids. Mich. (D.C.)
MCLAIN. D. R.. 515 B'wav.

Toledo. O. (N.D.)
MC  LAREN. DR.. 907 Bath-
hurst St.. Toronto, Can.
MC  LAUGHLIN, ELIZABETH
A., Mason Bldg., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
E. T., I. O. O. F. Bldg.,

Knoxville, la. (D.O.)
Jennie L., 186 Pine Street,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
S. C, 3 Harvard Street,
Newtonville, Mass. (D.O.)
MC  LEAN & MC  LEAN, DRS..
328 Palmerston Blvd..
Toronto. Ont. (D.C.)
MC  LEAN, A. E.. Gauld.
Quebec. Can. (D.C.)
D'Arcy B.. 328 Palmerston
Blvd., Toronto. Ont., Can.
W. R., 717* Franklin St.,
Michigan  City,  Ind.

MCLEAN, W. R., 808  Madison

St..  La  Porte,  Ind. (D.C.)
MCLENNON.  M.  L., Palestine,

111. (D.C.)
MCLEOD. W. A., 606 Joliet
Nat'l Bank Bldg.. Joliet.
111. (D.M.T.)
MC  LOUTH. C. LOUIS, 5328 S.

Park Ave.. Chicago. 111.
MCMAHAN. B. S., Woodward
Bldg.. Washington, D. C.
M. H.. 595 4th  St.,  Portland,
Ore. (D.C.)
MCMAINS, GRACE RAMSAY.
Union  Trust  Bldg..

Baltimore, Md. (D.O.)
Harrison. Fidelitv Bldg.,

Henry A.. Union Trust
Bldg.. Baltimore. Md.


930


Alpluihetical  Indr.r


McManis
Merrel


MCMANIS,  J.  v.,  Pres.  Mc-
Manis  Table  Co.,  Dayton,
O. (D.O.)

MCMANUS.  F.  E.,  1829
Niag-ara  St..  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

MCMEEKIN, HAZEL, 2935
Prairie Ave., Chicago, Til.

MCMILLAN,  A.  F.,  143  E.
Fernando  St.,  San  Jose,
Cal. (D.C.)

MC  MILLEN, A. R., River-
dale. Md. (D.M.T.)

MC  MILLEN,  J.  W.,  Stockton,
Kan. (D.O.)

MCMILLIN,  FRANK.  Arkan-
sas  City, Kan. (D.C.)

MCMULLAN,  EDITH,  58  W.
Bayard  St.,  Denver,  Colo.
Walter  M.,  229  E.  Common-
wealth St.,  Fullerton,  Cal.

MC  MULLIN  &  MC  MULLIN,
DRS.,  Ponca  City.  Okla.

MCMURLEN,  WM.,  718  W.
63rd  St.,  Chicago,  111.

MC  NABB,  ADELINE  M.,
Southampton,  Ont.,  Can.

C.  M., St.  Joe,  Ark. (D.C.)
MC  NAMARA. R. E., 307

W. 18th St., Cleveland, O.

111. (N.D.)
MC  NAMARA, R. E., Baldwin

Park, Cal. (D.C.)
MRS. R. E., 528 Brady St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
MC  NARY, J. F., Matthews

Bldg., Milwaukee, "Wis.

William  D.,  Matthews

Bldg., Milwaukee, Wis.

(M.D., D.O.)
MC  NAUGHT, C. E., Lake

Park, la. (D.O.)
MC  NEAL. MISS ETHEL,

Mulhall, Okla. (D.C.)
MCNEER, VALENTINE,

Lissie, Tex. (N.D.)
MC  NELIS, ANTHONY J.,

Real Estate Trust Bldg-.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
MCNICOL, A.  M.,  Dallas, Ore.


D.  ELLA, Coulter Blk.,
Frankfort, Ind. (DO.)

MC  NITT, Leslie, 121 E. Main
St., Benton Harbor, Mich.
Wm. S., Watervliet, Mich.

MCPHAIL,  D.,  Fayetteville,
Mo. (S.T.)

MC  PHERSON,  GEORGE  W.,
414  Mackay  St.,  Mon-
treal. Quebec. (D.O.)

MC  PIKE,  JAMES  K.,
Steward  Building',
Okmulgee. Okla. (D.O.)

MC  QUIRK,  PHIL  S.,  Spirit
Lake, la. (D.O.)

MC  ROBERTS,  SARAH  EL-
LEN, 130  N.  Negley  Ave.,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.O.)

MC  RYE,  DR.  M.,  Fifth  and
Okmulgie  Aves.,  Musko-
gee,  Okla. (S.T.)

MC  SHERRY, THOMAS,
B'way, Long Branch,
N. J. (D.O.)

MC  SLOY,  H.  M.,  Humboldt,
Sask., Can. (D.C.)

MC  VICAR, ELIZABETH.
Evanston, 111. (D.C.)


MCWAY, SARAH A.,

Ravenna, O. (N.D.)
MC  WILLIAMS, DR., Ana-
conda, Mont. (D.C.)
Alex  F.,  Huntington

Chambers, Boston, Mass.

Royal A., Manufacturers

Bank  Bldg.,  Lewiston,  Me.

R. M., Rook Rapids, la.

R. M., Pueblo, Colo. (D.C.)
R.  M., Princeton,  Mo. (D.C.)
MEACHAM, W. B., Legal

Bldg., Asheville, N. C.

MEAD, CLYDE D., Viroqua,

Wis. (D.O.)
MEADE, ALBA, Exchange

Bldg., Memphis, Tenn.

MEADER, EMMA LAURA,

48-a Estes St., Lynn,

Mass. (D.O.)
MEADOWS, E. C, Melfort,

Sask., Can. (D.C.)
L. F., 122 E. 2nd Street,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

MEARS, O. BENTON, 6 N.

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

111. (Nap.)
"MECCA OF CHIROPRAC-
TIC," New Jersey Col-

legre, 577 Warren Street,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
MECHLING, BESSIE, 417 S.

Michigan  St.,  South

Bend, Ind. (D.C.)
MECKER, G. W., Thermo-

polis. Wyo. (D.C.)
MEDARIS. C. E., Masonic

Temple, Rockford, 111.

"Will O.. A. S. O. Hospital,

Kirksville, Mo. (D.O.)
MEDDER, CHAS. B., 926

Gladstone Ave., Portland,

Ore. (D.C.)
MEDES, E. HAROLD, 15

Rickard St., Cortland,

N. Y. (D.C.)
MEDLAR, S. AGNES, 1112

Chestnut St., Philadel-
phia.  Pa. (D.O.)
MEDLEY, MINNIE P., Chilli-

cothe. O. (Ch.)
MEDLIN, M. G., 411 Opera

Blk., Long Beach, Cal.

MEEKER, G. D., 10 Mitchell

Bldg^.,  Cincinnati, O.

G. W., Thermopolis, Wyo.

MEEKER & KLOMANN, 8-ia

Mitchell Bldg-., Cincin-
nati, O. (D.C.)
MEGATHLIN, VIOLET M..

133 Peterborough Street.

Boston, Mass. (D.C.)
MEIER.  H.  W..  13  Bank  Bldg.,

Main St., Ashtabula, O.

H. W., Ashtabula, O. (D.C.)
Louise  C, Nashua,  la.

MEINHARDI.  ED..  New

Smyrna. Fla. (D.C.)
E. J., Whitehall, Mich.

MEISSNER. CHAS. L., 81

Arch Ave., Ridg-ewood,

N. J. (D.C.)
MEKEMSON.  ELVINA,

Bigg-sville, 111. (D.O.)
MELAIK, MRS. N., 306 W.

3rd St., Williamsport,

Pa. (D.C.)


17 E.
N. Y.

St..


Woonsocket,


Chest-
Chicag-o, 111.


Y.  (D.C.)
NELLIE,


MELANDER, THEO. A.,

59th St., New York.

(Ma.)
MELEON, N. F., 135 12th

Portland, Ore. (N.D.)
MELESKI. MARY M.. 604

Lion St., Dunkirk, N. Y.

MELLBYE, N.,

S.  D. (D.C.)
MELLEY,  C.  J.. 116  W.

nut St.

MELLOR, JOSEPH, 2305 E.

57th St.. Cleveland. O.

(D.M.T.)
MELLOTTS MECHANICAL,

6 W. North Ave.. Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (Ma.)
MELSON, L. C, 198 Delaware

•  Ave., Buffalo,  N.
MELTON, MRS.

Anadarko, Okla.
MEMMERT, A., Smith and

Church Sts., Centredale,

R. I. (D.O.)
MENDENHALL, LOUIS,

Marion, O. (Ma.)
MENEGAY. J. E., Greens-
burg, Kans. (D.C.)
MENEGOY, J. E., 622 Ren-

kert Bldg-., Canton, O.

MENGES, A. B., 1304 E. 91st

St.. Cleveland. O. (D.C.)
MENOUGH & MENOUGH. 521

Main St., Peoria, 111.


6300 Euclid Ave., Cleve-
land, O. (D.C.)
MENSINK, J. H., 8  Center  St.,
Pa (DC)
306'  W. '3rd Street,
Pa. (D.C.)
MENZ. EDWARD A., 87

Corbet St., Dorchester,

Mass. (D.C.)
MERCER, ALICE, 513 San-
dusky  St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

William L., Salem, Ore.

MERCK, MARY  A., Putnam,

Okla. (D.C.)
MEREDITH. ORTIZ R., De-
partment Store Blk.,

Nampa, la. (D.O.)
MEREDITY,  HARRY J.,

Cripple  Creek.  Colo.  (D.C.)
MERENDINO, JOSEPH, 2255

B'way, New York, N. Y.

MERKLEY, E.  H., 36  W. 35th

St., New York, N. Y.

G. H., Hotel Martinique,

Broadway and 32nd St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
W. A.. 487 Clinton Avenue.

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
MERKLEY, GEO. H., 273

Sanford A^'e., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (D.O.)
MERRELL & MERRELL. 606

W. Henley St., Olean.

N. Y. (D.C.)
MERREL, EDITH F., 52

Maryland St., Rochester,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Roy N., 52 Maryland St.,

Rochester, N. Y. (D.C.)
MERRILL. CHARLES R., 46
St., Stratford, Ont.


Corry,

Mrs. N.,

Corry,


Albert
(DC.)
Edward
Bldg.,


Strong, Ferguson
Los Angeles, Cal.


Merrill
Miller


Alphabetical  Index


931


MERRILL, JOHN H., Yale,

Mich. (D.C.)
R. C, 1555 N. La Salle St..

Chicag-o, 111. (D.C.)
Ray C, 366 Atlantic Street,

Stamford, Conn. (D.C.)
R. C, 562 Cong-ress Street,

Portland, Me. (D.C.)
Ray C, 504 Baxter Bldg.,

Portland, Me. (D.C.)
MERRIMAN, GEORGE, 713

Armandale Ave., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
MERRITT, J. P., Tekannah,

Neb. (D.O.)
MERRY, MARIAN. 1528 E.

3rd St.. Duluth, Minn.

MERRYMAN, H. L.. 1524 8th

Ave.,  Greeley,  Colo.

(DC.)
MERVINE, I. W., Ballinger

Bldg-., St.  Joseph,  Mo.

MERVY. L. A.. 675 11th St.,

Oakland. Cal. (D.C.)
MESSENGER.  M.  LILA,

Simms, Mont. (D.C.)
MESSICK. CHAS. W., 1030 E.

47th St.. Chlcag-o, 111.

Orville W.. 954 E. 43rd St.,

Chieag-o, 111. (D.O.)
MESSICK, MARGARET E.,

1030 E. 47th St., Chicag-o,

111. (D.O.)
MESSINGER. J. A., 212 East

Adam St.. Phoenix, Ariz.

MESSMER. J. G.. Keystone

Bank Bldg.. Pittsburgh.

Pa (DC)
METCALF.'  J. O.. 306 Schultz

Bldg.,  Columbus,  O. (N.D.)
W. E. E., Los  Angeles, Cal.

METCALFE, Dr. F. A.. West

Point. S. Dak. (S.T.)
METHOD. J. D.. 1234 E. Nor-
wood St.. Toledo, O.

METSKAS. M.. 6258 Archer

Ave.. Argo. 111. (N.D.)
METZGER, CHAS., I. O. O. F.

Bldg.. Goshen^ Ind.

METZGER. F. B., Topeka,

Kans. (D.C.)
METZNER. F.. 142 Woodbine

St., Brooklyn. N. Y.

(Opt.)
MEYER. A., 399 E. 155th St.,

New York, N. Y. (Ma.)
MEYERS, A. M., 1312 Wavne

Ave., Dayton, O. (D.M.T.)
Gustave, 1125 "Washington

St.,  Hoboken.  N.  J. (As.)
John  W.  H.,  112  W. 69th  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (N.D.)

D.C.)
Joseph E., Carey. O. (D.C.)
Julia  A.. 858 Hamilton

Ave.. St. Louis. Mo.

Wm. F.. 725 New York St..

Toledo, O. (D.C.)
MEYER & MEYER. 1330 E.

Market St.. Huntington,

Ind. (D.C.)
MEYER. F. J.. St. Louis Co.

Bank Bldg.. Clayton. Mo.
C.  W.. 1131  W. Mulberry  St.,

Kokomo. Ind. (D.C.)
Geo. W., 7 Courtland Blk.,

Kokomo.  Ind. (D.C.)
Mrs. J. E., Urban, Ind.

(DC.)
James  E., 38  W. Market  St.,

Huntington, Ind. (D.C.)
J.  H.,  Chauteau,  Mont.  (D.C.)


J. P., 412 Jefferson St.,

Huntington, Ind. (D.C.)
Ree W., Redondo Beach,

Cal. (D.C.)
Richard L., 1297  Market  St.,
San Francisco,  Cal. (DO.)
S. P., 1116 S. 6th St., Terre

Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
S. P., 153 Pipestone St.,
Benton Harbor, Mich.
S. P.. 202-4 Arcade Bldg.,

Terre Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
Wm., 1456 Ridgley St.,
North  Bergen,  N.  J. (D.C.)

MEYERS, FRED., 725 Swedes
St.,  Norristown,  Pa. (D.C.)
G. L., 3827 14th St., Wash-
ington, D. C. (D.C.)
O. D., Majestic Hotel, Pu-
eblo, Colo. (D.C.)
O. P.. 155 2d Ave.. S. Sas-
katoon.  Sask.. Can. (D.C.)
Stephen B.. 306 N. 6th St.,
Terre  Haute,  Ind. (D.C.)

MEYRAN, LAWRENCE SAN-
FORD, Baker, Mont.

MEYSTRICK,  J.,  204  2nd  Ave.,
Astoria. L. I., N. Y.
(DO.)

MICHAEL.  A..  701  Schmidt
Bldg-..  Pittsburg-h,  Pa.

MICHELHENAY.  MRS.  H.
(Ohio  City),  Lima,  O.

MICHIGAN  COLLEGE  OF
CHIROPRATIC,  108  Jef-
ferson Ave.,  Grand  Rap-
ids, Mich. (D.C.)

MICKLE,  GEORGE  E.,  Metz
Bldg-.,  Grand  Rapids,
Mich. (D.O.)

MIDDLEDITCH,  EMMA  C,
1245  O'Farrell  St.,  San
Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)

MIDDLETON,  DELLA,  James
Blk.,  Eag-le  Grove,  la.

MIEDIKING,  F.  W.,  307  Nich-
ols Bldg.,  Spokane,  Wash.

MIHAH,  JNO.,  3184  W.  44th
St., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)

MILAN,  THOS.,  La  Salle,  111.

MILDENBERGER, C, 62

Woodbine Street. Brook-
lyn,  N. Y. (D.O.)
Chas., Terminal Bldg., 68
Hudson St., Hoboken,
N. J. (N.D.)

MILER,  T.  M.,  2507  Ashwood
Ave., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)

MILES, ELLA E., 125 Alfred
St., Bradford. Ont., Can.
Robt.  W..  5300  W.  41st  Ave.,

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
Stanley, Ironwood, Mich.

MILINE,  MAE,  1228  Colorado
Ave.,  Colorado  Springs,
Colo. (D.C.)

MILLARD, F. P., 12 Rich-
mond St.  E.,  Toronto,  Ont.
H. B,. 488  Nostrand  Ave.,
Brooklyn. N.  Y. (Ma.)

MILLAY. E. O., 1664 Wood-
ward Ave., Detroit. Mich.
E. O.. The Maples, Romeo,
Mich. (D.O.)

MILLER, AGNES M., 785 E.
105th St., Cleveland, O.
A. L., New England Bldg-.,
Cleveland, O. (D.O.)


Chester  L.,  27  E.  Monroe
St., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

Clara  Macfarlane,  Paradise,
Cal. (D.O.)

C.  W.,  209-10  Miners  B.  R.
Bldg., Joplin, Mo. (D.C.)

D.  F., Baylor, Mont. (D.O.)

D.  S.,  210  Cincinnati  Bldg-.,
Lima, O. (D.C.)

Earl  A.,  Luddington,  Mich.

E.  E.,  1321  Edgeware  PI.,
Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

Rev.  Eva  Kinney,  Peoria.
111. (S.T.)

E.  \V., Auburn, Ind. (D.C.)
Frank, 218 E. Mountain

Ave., Ft. Collins, Colo.
Frank,  217  E.  7th  St.,  Plain-
field, N. J. (D.O.)

F.  L.,  R.  D.  No.  3,  Cortland,
N. Y. (D.C.)

Frank  L..  318  Cahill  Bldg.,
Syracuse,  N. Y. (D.C.)

Frank  L.,  Rothsay,  Minn.

F.  W.,  109  S.  Academy  St.,
Janesville, Wis. (D.C.)

F.  W.,  409-10  Jackman
Bldg.,  Janesville,  Wis.

Frank  W..  218  E.  Mountain
Ave..  Ft.  Collins,  Colo.

Fred  W^.,  Madison  Co.  Trust
&  Deposit  Bldg-.,  Oneida,
N. Y. (D.O.)

Geo.  H.,  Bredenbury,  Sask.,
Can. (D.C.)

Geo.  H.,  1219  Perry  St.,
Davenport, la. (D.C.)

Geo.  H.,  Byron,  Okla. (D.C.)

Grace  E.,  Jeffords-Smoyer
Bldg.,  Clearwater,  Fla.

H.  L.,  New  Farmers  Bank
Bldg-.,  Monticello,  Ind.

H.  L..  15  Hobart  Ave..  De-
troit,  Mich. (D.C.)

Harry  I..  Farmers  &  Mer-
chants' Bank  Bldg.,  Fes-
tus. Mo. (D.O.)

Harry  T..  Hanlon  Bldg-.,
Canton. 111. (D.O.)

H.  W..  1630J  Second  Ave.,
Rock Island. 111. (D.C.)

H.  ^V..  B.  &  A.  Bldg..  Mis-
soula. Mont. (D.C.)

Mrs.  Iowa.  Fairfield,  la.

Ira  L.,  36  Balto.  St.,  Han-
over, Pa. (D.C.)

I.  S.,  1639  W.  18th  St.,  Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)

I. v., Fairfield, la. (D.C.)

Jas.  A.,  134  State  St.  W.,
Marshall. Mich. (D.C.)

James  B.,  Waukomis.  Okla.

J.  P.,  N.  Platte.  Nebr. (N.D.)

J.  R..  Arcade  Bldg.,  Rome,
N. Y. (D.O.)

J. ^V.. Bellaire, Kans. (S.T.)

John  AV.,  226  Market  Sq.,
Sunbury. Pa. (D.O.)

Joseph  Donley,  87  Beech-
hurst  Ave.,  Morgantown,
W. Va. (D.O.)

Kate  R..  Meisel  Bldg..  Port
Huron. Mich. (D.O.)

L..  1155  Defrees  St..  Los
Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)

L.  Janie.  6026  Washington
Ave.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

O. A.. Ionia. Kans. (S.T.)

O.  S.,  8109  Garische  Blvd.,
St. Louis, Mo. (D.C.)

P.  H.,  Mt.  Morris,  Pa. (D.O.)


932


Alphabetical  Index


Miller
Montgomery


R. C, Aurora. Nebr. (D.C.)
R.  I.ee,  Holston  Bank  Bldg.,

Knoxville. Tenn. (D.O.)
Samuel B., Granby Blk.,

Cedar  Rapids.  la.  (D.O.)
AV.  A..  Newton.  Kans.  (D.C.)
"\V. D.. Charles City, la.

Wm. E.. Perry, la. (D.C.)
Mrs. "W. R., Fairfield. la.

MILLER. B. CURTIS. 710

Bond Bldg-., Washington,

D. C. (M.D.)
Bessie R., Fairview. La.

C. A.. 10,111 North Blvd.,

Cleveland. O. (D.M.T.)
Chester  L.. New Gensland

Bldg-.. Elmhurst, 111.

Delia  L.. 307  S.  Perry  St..

Davton, O. (Ch.)

F.  E., Battle Creek, Mich.

G.  O.. 207-8  Markel  Bank
Bldg-.. Hazelton, Pa.

.lohn  T..  1319  S.  Grand  Ave..

Los Angeles, Cal. (Me.)
Linnie B., The Atlantic

Apts., Washington, D. C.

L.  B., 10th  and  N  Sts.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.

(D.M.T.)
L. H.. Danbury, Conn.

L. S.. 421 S. Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
M.. 86r. Duluth Ave.,

St. Paul. Minn. (-D.M.T.)
Margaret, Hillsboro, O.

MILLERS, J. A., Cor. Summit

and  Cherry  Sts.,  Toledo,

O. (D.M.T.)
MILLHIZER, ROBT., Hanni-
bal, Mo. (D.C.)
MILLIGAN.  A. LEE,

Mulberrv. Ind. (N.D.)
MILLIKEN, CHAS., Whittier,

Cal. (D.O.)
MILLS, ANNA M., Star Store

Bldg.,  Tuscola,  111.  (D.O.)
Carroll J.. Second Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Warren, O.

David A., 1422 ^V. Monroe

Ave..  Chicago,  111.  (D.O.)
Ella E., 125 Alfred St.,

Bradford, Ont., Canada.

Ernest P., fi07 E. 47th St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
.1. W., S. Warren St., Syra-
cuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
M. L., 404 Dillaye Bldg.,

Syracuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
Maud S., Robertsdale, Ala.

W. S., First Nat'l Bank

Bldg.. Ann Arbor, Mich.

MILLS,  C. E.,  1432  Jackson

Blvd.. Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
MILLS,  ROY,  303  N.  Osage  St.,

Girard, Kans. (M.D.)
T. M., 2507 Archwood,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
MILTENBERGER, R., Ter-
minal Bldg., Uoboken,

N. J. (D.C.)
MINER, E. FRANK, 4 W.

Newell Ave., Rutherford,

N. .T. (D.O.)
MINGO, MRS. EFFIE. 3741

Dlrr Ave.. Cumminsville,

O. (D.M.T.)


MINNECK. J. EARL. Sharps-

viiif^.  Pa. (^^r'^
MINTEY, HERBERT. Bran-
don, Man. (D.C.)
MINTHORNE, RICHARD, 49
Delevan Ave., Newark,
N. J. (D.C.)
MINTON. W. H.,  King  Hill
Bldg.. St. Joseph. Mo.
ront.)
MINTZ. HERBERT. Rocan-
ville. Sask. (D.C.)
H. E.. 231 11th St.. Bran-
don. Man.. Can. (DC.)
H. W.. Lake Preston. S.
Dak. (D.C.)
MIRAGE. O. A.. Broadway.
Council Bluffs, la. (D.C.)
MISUNAS, FRANK, 825

Milton Ave., Chicago, 111
(Ma.)
MITCHEL. Dr. JOHN.
Whieten, Mo. (S.T.)
Dr.. 300 Columbia Bldg..

Duluth, Minn. (D.C.)
Andrew, c/o The Kallam

Bldg., Tama,  la. (DC.)
Mrs. A. J., Hutchinson,

Kans. (D.C.)
Charles G., Los Angeles.

Cal. (D.C.)
Chas. R.. Blount  Bldg.. Pen-

sacola. Fla. (D.O.)
Eugene.  815  N.  Topeka  Ave..

Wichita. Kans. (M.D.)
Harry L., 71 Orange St..

Brooklvn. N. Y. (D.C.)
Jennie. 823 State St.. Tex-

arkana, Tex. (D.O.)

K. E., 1337 California St.,

Denver.  Colo. (R.  N..  D  G  t

K. E.. Hotel Belvidere. 15th

and Geyarm Sts., Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)

Minnie  B.. Park  Citv.  Mont.,

Pearl. Ames. Okla. (D.C.)
R. M., Texarkana Nat'l
Bank Bldg.. Texarkana.
Tex. (D.O.)
Warren B.. 738 Broad St..
Newark N. J. (D.O.)
MITCHELL. C. c/o Adam
Brothers Printing C^..
Topeka. Kans. (D.C.)
H. L.. 71 Orange St..

Brooklyn.  N.  Y. (N.D.)
Joseph  R..  4654  N.  Racine
Ave.. Chicago. 111. (Or.S.)
MITCHENER, H., Wichita.

Kans. (M.D.)
MITTERLTNG. EDWARD S..
Webster City. la. (D.O.)
MITTS. J. W.. 3542 Pierce

Ave.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
MIZI.  G.  W..  325  14th  St..  Oak-
land. Cal. (D.C.)
MOAT. ^V. S.. 3332 N. 17th
St.. Philadelphia. Pa.
MOATES, CHAS. H., 208 East
Santa  Clara  St., San  Jose.
Cal. (N.D.)
MOCHRIE. ELIZABETH
ERASER, 121 Barclay St..
New York. N Y (Dr.>
MOCK. RAYMOND D.. Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (D.C.)
MOCKRIDGE. LESLIE V.,
326i  E. 6th  St.,  Los  Ange-
les, Cal. (D.C.)
MOCKRIDGE, DR., 415 Cen-
tral Ave.. East Orange.
N. J. (D.C.)
L.  v.,  2860  E. 14th St., Oak-
land.  Cal. (D.C.)


MODERWELL, ROBT., 516
Ashland St., Buffalo,
N. Y (Cv.)

MOELLERING,  BERTHA  W.,
Munchnerstrasse  8.  Dres-
den. Germany  (D.O.)
Herman  H.,  256  Kurfurst-
endamm.  Berlin,  Ger-
many. (DO.)

MOFFAT. DR. EDGAR V.,
Orange, N. J. (M.D.)

MOFFATT, CHAS. M., 618
.Sheridan Ave., Shenan-
doah, la. (D.O.)
George. Hanover, 111. (D.O.)
Lillian May, Providence

Bldg., Duluth, Minn.
. (D.C.)

MOFFETT, EVERETT D.,
R.  F.  D.  No.  4.  West
Mansfield. O. (D.M.T.)

MOGAARD. JOHN. 2820 West
North Ave.. Chicago, 111.

MOHR.  J.  M.,  229  Walnut  St..
Jeffersonville, Ind. (D.C.)

MOLINE.  E..  633  S.  Hill  St..
Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)

MOLS. J. P.. 469 Best  Street,
Buffalo. N. Y rN.D.)

MOLYNEUX.  ALBERT  J..  2844
Blvd.,  Jersey  City  Heights,
N.  J.  (D.O.)
Cora  Belle,  2844  Blvd.,  Jer-
sey City  Heights,  N.  J.

MONAHAN,  E.  P.,  843  Jud-
son  Ave.,  Evanston,  111.

MONCE,  E.  A.,  Canal  Dover.
O. (D.C.)

MONCE.  E.  A..  St.  Bank
Bldg..  Canal  Dover.  O.

MONCE. EARNEST E..
Cambridge. O. (D.C.)

MONCK. O. L.. 3711 W. 42nd
St.. Cleveland,  O.
(D.M.T.)

MONK, HELEN LOUISE, 125
East Girard Avenue,
Englewood, Colo. (D.C.)

MONKS, HARRY, P. O. Bldg..
Shelbvville. Ind. (D.C.)
James C. 122 Broad St..
Bridgeton, N. J. (D.O.)


W. H.,

Bldg.,


MONROE,


-9-10 Miller
Rushville,


Law
Ind.


C. E., 10507 Su-
perior  Ave., Cleveland, O.
Daisy M., 10507 Superior
Ave., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
E. C. 8113 Melrose Ave..
O. (D.C.)
Superior Ave..
O. (N.D.)
Silver Springs,


Cleveland,
E. C, 10507

Cleveland,
George T.,

N. Y. (D.O.)
MONROE, SARAH S.,

Barr  St., Cincinnati

(Ch.)
MONTAGUE, H. A., Guthrie

Okla. (D.C.)
H. C, Phoenix  Bldg.,  Musk-
ogee, Okla. (D.O.)
William C. American

Bldg.. Evansville,

MONTAN  &  MONTAN.

tow,  Fla.  (D.C.)
MONTGOMERY, HERMAN,

Huntington, W. Va.

W. C, 204 Morrison St.,

Johnstown. P. (D.C.)
MONTGOMERY. JAMES D..

159 W.  Main  St., Newark,

O. (D.M.T.)


25
O.


Trust
Ind.


Bai


Moil  toy  a
Morrow


Alphabetical  Index


933


MONTOYA, DR. JOSE, Wi-
chita, Kans. (S.T.)
MOODIK & MOODIE,  33
Brookside Ave.,
Amsterdam,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
MOODIGH, MISS AI.PHILD,
1026 6th Ave., New York,
N. Y. (Ma.)
MOOHR, CLARA M.. 423
Byrne  Bldg-., I^os  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
Clara M., Los Angeles, Cal.
MOOMAW, MARY C. 172 W.
79th St., New York City.
MOON, C. E., Front St., Sar-
nia,  Ont. (D.C.)
C. E., Chelsea, Mich. (D.C.)
C. E., Front St., Sarnia,

Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
E. C. Port Huron, Mich.

E. F., Emmett, Ida. (D.C.)
Irma lone. Union Savings
Bank Bldg-., Oakland, Cal.
MOON,  FLOYD  S.,  Defiance,

O. (D.C.)
MOONEY, FRANK W., 1516
E. 64th St., Chicago, 111.
MOORE, A., 6 Wellington St.,
Worcester, Mass. (D.C.)
Claribel, 44 Bleecker St.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Miss  D., 127 E. 26th St.,

Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
Fred. P., Suite 410, Fern-
well Bldg., Spokane,
Wash. (D.C.)
L. L., 305-6 Equity  Bldg.,

Muskogee,  Okla.  (D.C.)  I
Mary  G.,  Marion,  O.  (Ma.)  •
Riley D., Wardman

Courts West, Washing- '
ton, D. C. (D.O.)  !

MOORE & DUNLAP, 110| E.
6th St., Bloomington,
Ind. (D.C.)
MOORE & MOORE, DRS.,

Lincoln, Nebr. (D.C.)
MOORE, DR., Post-Standard
Bldg.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Mrs.  A.  A., 107  Horton  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
Audrey C, 1527 Sutter St.,
San Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
A. I., Medford, Okla. (D.C.)
A. I., Norden, Okla. (D.C.)
A. J., 339 Main  St.,  Worces-
ter,  Mass. (D.C.)
Agnes J., 127 Horton Ave.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
Claribel, 2802 Western  Ave.,

Mattoon, 111. (D.C.)
Coyt, Raymond Bldg., Ba-
ton  Rouge, La. (D.O.)
D.  v.,  Iowa  Falls.  la. (D.O.)
Edw. L., 220 Woodward
Ave., Detroit, Mich. (Ch.)
Ernest A., People's Nafl
Bank Bldg., Belleville,
Kans. (D.O.)
Ernest Melvin, Box 311,

Shelbina. Mo. (D.O.)
Etna,  110  E. 6th  St.,  Bloom-
ington, Ind. (D.C.)
Etna.  Des  Moines,  la. (D.C.)
F. E., Selling Bldg., Port-
land,  Ore. (D.O.)
F. F., Four Lakes, Wash.

F. .1., Arlington, la. (D.C.)
F.  J.,  ior.2  Wesley  Ave.,  Cin-
cinnati, O. (D.C.)
Frank  R.,  Real  Estate  Trust
Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
(D.O.)  i


F. S., 222.; Clinton St., De-
fiance, O. (D.C.)
George E., Equitable Bldg.,

Des Moines, la. (D.O.)
Geo. Washington, Rl. Est.
Tr. B)., Philadelphia, Pa.
Geo. Washington, 34 Dela-
ware  St., Woodbury, N. J.
H. B., 821 18th St., San

Diego,  Cal. (D.C.)
Hezzie Carter Purdom, Sell-
ing Bldg., Portland, Ore.
H. B., 821 18th St., San

Diego, Cal. (D.C.)
Miss  Jessie E., 101 Edgehill
Road, East Milton, Mass.
J. L., 156 University Ave.,

Palo Alto, Cal. (D.O.)
Myrtle J., Crete, Nebr.

Newton, Hershey Ave.,

Muscatine, la. (D.C.)
R. A., Caldwell, Tex. (S.T.)
R. E., 624 Washington  Ave.,
West Haven, Conn. (D.C.)
R. E., 10 Maple St., Sala-
manca, N. Y. (D.C.)
R. E., Miami, Fla. (D.C.)
Sara  A.,  People's  Nat'l Bank
Bldg.. Rock Hill, S. C.
W. P., Globe Bldg., Pitts-
burg,  Kans. (D.O.)
MOORES, CARRIE E., 2453
Gilbert Ave., Cincinnati,
O. (D.O.)
MOOS, OSCAR, 1566 Franklin
Ave., San Diego, Cal.
MORALES, MIGUEL, 911

Security Bldg., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)

MORAR, CHAS. J., 701 Hous-  I
er Bldg.. St. Loui.s, Mo.

MOREHEAD, H. I., Kensing-
ton, Kans. (D. C.)  i

MORELAND, CASSIE C,  j

Bacon Blk., Oakland, Cal.
(D.O.)  I

MORELAND-BALLARD, IDA  ''
I., 118 S. Johnson St.,  Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)  i

MORELLI, LOUIS, Richmond,

Cal. (D.C.)
MORGAN, ARTHUR, 58 Pike  '
St., Port Jervis, N. Y.
Frank, Morgan, Minn.

J. E.. 914 E. Belknap, El

Paso, Tex. (D.C.)
Lallah, 290 Westminster  St.,
Providence, R. I. (D.O.)

Sedgwick, Colo.


McClain

McLain,  Jefferson,  la.
Sarah, 19 Park Way,

burgh. Pa. (D.C.)
Sarah A., 220 Tavlor

Pittsburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
Sylvia, Adel, la. (D.C.)
MORGAN, J. D., 37 Steele

Eureka Springs, Ark.

(N.D  )
N. A. C, Chautauqua, N.

(D.C.r
Sylvia, 520 Clapp Bldg.,
Des  Moines,  la. (D.C.)
Wm. C, Chautauqua, N.

MORGENBESSER. H., 931

Fox St., New York, N


Pitts-

St,


St.


MORIARTY, J. J.. Maloney

Bldg., Ottawa, 111. (D.O.)
.\TOHlSS, I^. H., 47 VV. :U\.h St.,

New York, N. Y. (Ch.)
MORKERT, M. D., over

Thrasher's Store, Frank-
fort,  Ind. (D.C.)
M. D., Rossville, Ind. (D.C.)
Owen, 230 Cason & Neal

Bldg., Lebanon, Ind.

MORLIAN. v., Troy, N. Y.

rN.D.)
MORRAL,  J. E., Thomas  Blk..

T  ,ea  venwoith.  Kans. (D.C.)
MORREIM. GERRARD. M..

299 Snelling Ave.. St.

Paul, Minn. (D.C.)
MORRELL, ADA E., 125

Dover St., Lowell, Mass.

S. Phillip, Chicago, 111.

MORRIS, CHESTER H., 37 S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
D. D,, Ceral Spring.s, 111.

D. D., Ozark, 111. (D.C.)

F.  I>.,  Gunnison,  Colo. (D.C.)
Fred W.. 316

Paterson  &
Trust  Bldg.,
N. J. (D.O.)

G.  E.. 239 3d
burg, W. Va.


Broadway,
Ridgewood
Ridgewood.

St., Clarks-
Hon. Thos., La  Crosse. Wis.


L.  L..  Gunnison.  Colo. (D.C.)

1 Margaret, 10506 Euclid

Ave.. Cleveland. O. (DC.)

Paschall, Flanders Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Philip, 332 E. 72d St., New

York, N. Y. (M.A.)
Thos., La Crosse, Wis.
j  (D.C.) "

! T. C, Fernwell Bldg., Spo-

t  kane.  Wash. (D.O.)

MORRIS. ELIZA, R. F. D. No.

1, Gloucester, O. (D.M.T.)

John B.. 37 S. ^Vabash  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
S.  v.. 121 Madison  Ave..
New York. N. Y. (M.D.)
MORRISON. DANIEL N.. 120
E. 34th St.. New York,
N. Y. (D.O.)
James G.. Terre Haute
Trust Bldg„ Terre Haute.
Ind. (D.O.)
James H.. Port Jefferson.
Long Island. N. Y. (DO.)
Kate. Sterling. 111. (D.C.)
L. A.. Box 405. Nappanee.

Ind. (D.C.)
Martha A., 1315 E. 13th
Ave., Denver,  Colo. (D.O.)
Myrtle Pleasant, 5?.t Com-
mercial St., Emporia,
Kans. (D.O.)
Thomas H.. Port
Long Island. N.
Wm.  I..  17  N.  State  St.

cago.  111. (D.C.)
W. L., Aurora. 111. (D.C.)
MORRISON,  S.  B..  1402  I  St..
^Vashington. D. C. (N.D.)
■\Vm.. 16 N. "Wabash Ave.,
ChiPMaro. 111. (Nar..)
MORROW, A. W., Box
Kewanee, 111. (D.C.)
Clara  E.,  Main, cor. E.
mond St., Butler,
Elberta, Arkansas

Kans. (D.C.)
Mabel, 525 W. Church St.,
Elmira.  N. Y. (D.C.)


Jefferson,
Y.  (DO.)
Chi-


lis


Dla-
Pa.

City,


934


Alphabetical  Index


Morse
Mytroszesky


Interstate
Rapids, la.


Walnut


St.


M. H.. 196 Genessee St.

Utica. N. Y. (D.C.)
MORSE, HERBERT F., Cen-
tral Bldg:., Wenatchee,

Wash. (D.O.)
Ida B., Denver. Colo. (DC.)
Park A.. Joshua Green

Bldg.. Seattle, Wash.

MORTEN, J. W.. 570 Wash-
ington St.,  Akron,  O.

(D.M.T.)
MORTENSEN, J. C, Frank-

ville. Wis. (D.C.)
MORTON.  E.  A.,  126  E. 6th  St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
Sadie F., 8-9

Bldpr. Cedar

MOSELEY, F. H.,

Rockport, 111.
MOSELEY. MADELINE, Clav

City, 111. (D.C.)
MOSER,  E.  S., 133  7  W.  Adams

St., Chicag-o, 111. (N.D.)
Fritz. Nordheim, Tex.

MOSHER, ALEX H., Water-
town, N. Y. (D.C.)
MOSIER, MRS. B. R., Kins-
ley, Kans. (S.T.)
MOSS,  FLORA,  1130  N.  Walnut

St., Danville. 111. (N.D.)
J. J., Winnifield, La. (N.D.)
MOSS, JOSEPH M., Ashland,

Nebr. (D.O.)
MOST, LOUIS H., Monaghan

Bldg-., Coeur d'Alene, Ida-
ho. (D.O.)
MOSTAD, RACHEL E.. 3

Shine St., Deadwood, S.

Dak, (D.C.)
MOTHERSILL, W. D., 127 N.

Francisco, Chicago, 111.

MOTSCH, R. J., 1021 W.

oust St., Davenport

MOUCK, MRS. ANNA

Hamburger Bldg.,

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
MOUL, FLORA L., 4026 Dal-

ton Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
MOUNT, R. C, 336 S. Main

St., Marion O. (D.M.T.)
MOUSE. A. B.,.Elkins,  W.  Va.

MO  WAT, KENNETH G., 17

Cleveburn St., Buffalo,

N. Y. (N.D.)
MOYER. G. L., 3827 14th St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

C. E., 26 Bogg St., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
G. L., 178 Colburn Place,

Detroit. Mich. (D.C.)
J. G., Still-Hildreth San.,

Macon, Mo. (D.O.)
MUCKLEY, F.. 330 E. 21st

St., Lorain, O (N.D.)
MUDGE,  C.  L.,  12  Otter  Creek

PI., Cortland, N. Y. (D.C.)
C. L., R7 E. Biidge St., Os-
wego, N. Y. (DC.)
C. I^., McGraw, N. Y., (D.C.)
Charles R.. Box 262. Gault,

Ont., Canada. (D.C.)
O. A., Broadway, Council

Bluffs. la. (N.D.)

MUEHLENBEIN, M. L., 218
E. 55th Place, Chicago,
111. (M.D.)


Lo-
la.


M.,
Los


G. S., 386 Atlan-
Stamford, Conn.


MUELLER, CARL  W.,  Box  65,

Birnamwood, Wis. (D.C.)
E. A., 72 New St., Newark,

N. J. (D.C.)
E.  A., 591 Warren  St.,  New-
ark, N.  J. (D.C.)
Jennie, St. John, Kans.

MUENCH,  G.  A.,  1806  Franklin

St., Tampa, Fla. (M.D.)
MUHME, GUSTAV A., 415

Summit St., Toledo, O.

(Ch.)
MULFORD,

tic St.,

MUIR, MISS A. S., 4200

Grand Blvd., Chicago,

III. (N.D.)
MULL, MARGARET, 2748

Hayden  Ave.,  Chicago, 111.

MULLEN. MRS. WM., Lenox,

la.  (D.C.)
MULLENBROOK, J. L., St.

Maries, Idaho. (D.O.)
MULLER, JOHN, 64 W. Oak

St.. Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
MULLER, RAYMOND, 424

Samson Ave., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.C.)
MLTLLINER, R. H., 333 Rich

St., Syracuse,  N. Y. (D.C.)
MULRONY, W. J., 341 Second

St., Yuma, Ariz. (D.O.)
MUMPER, C. A., 501 Everett

Bldg.. Akron, O.
C. H., 230 Bluff St.

O. (D.C.)
MUN,  M.  L.,  521  S.  Market  St.,

Wichita, Kans. (S.T.)
MUNCIE, CURTIS H., 119

Macon St., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (DO.)
MUNCIE, CURTIS HAMIL-
TON, Macon St., cor.

Marcy Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (D.O.)
MUNDELL, OLIVER, Clavton,

N. Mex. (D.C.)
MUNDIE, CARRIE M.. Cor.

Illinois Ave. & Jefferson

St., Mendota, 111..  (D.O.)
MUNGER,  WILLIAM  R.,

Carlsbad, N. Mex. (D.O.)
MUNHALL, GEO. M., 225 E.

15th St., Homestead, Pa.

MUNLEY, MICHAEL L., Car-

bondale. Pa. (D.C.)
MUNN, ALLEN, Bellingham,

Wash. (D.O.)
MUNRO, H., 2 Steele Blk.,

Winnipeg, Man. (D.C. )
R. P., Encanto, Cal. (D.C.)
MUNRO, W. D., 1044 Chapel

St., New Haven, Conn.

MUNS, MRS. JENNIE C, St.

John, Kans. (S.T.)
MUNSELL, MRS. CLARA S.,

Cameron,  Mo. (S.T.)


, Akron,


Pruclilioiiers  are  rcqiiesled  lo  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
diserepuueies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made ii> siibsetiiienl issues


MUNTZ, GLENN F., Hunting-
ton Chambers, Boston,
Mass. (D.O.)
MURCHINSON, H. L., 210
Feick Bldg., Sandusky,  O.
MURPHY, ANNIE R., 39  S.
State St., Chicago, 111.

E. J., Young Bldg., EUwood
City, Pa. (D.M.T.)

J. L., 220 S. State St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
MURPHY, CHARLES, 918
Paterson Ave., North
Bergen, N. J. (D.C.)

Chas. S., Rm. 947, Worces-
ter, Mass. (S.T.)

E. C, Ingram Bldg., Eau
Claire, Wis. (D.O.)

J. W., Bremerton, Wash.

Mrs. Mae, Johnstown, Pa.
MURRAY, C. H., Prior, Okla.

John H., 212 E. Hanover
St., Trenton, N. J. (D.O.)
MURRAY, FREDERICK,
826 Hennepin Ave.,
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.C.)

J. H., 1105 S. Portland
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

MUSCHYNSKL THOMAS F.,

Butler,  N.  J. (N.D.)
MUSSLER, F. C, Andrew, O.

MUTCHMOOR, J. T. O., 642

12th St., Oakland, Cal.

MUTSCHLER, O. C, 31 W.

Orange  St.,  Lancaster,  Pa.

MUTTART, C. J., Widener

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.

Chas.  J.,  Widener  Bl.,  Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
MYERS & KELLY, Foley

Block, La Grande, Ore.

MYERS, DONALD, 526 E.

Douglas Ave. Wichita,

Kans. (D.C.)
Ella Lake, 214 W. 92d St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)

E.  W., Mamunta, Sierra  Le-
one, "SVest Africa. (D.O.)

F.  G., 619 Edgemont Ave.,
Chester, Pa. (D.C.)

G.  L., 3827 14th St., Wash-
ington, D. C. (D.C.)

John B., 108 Vine St., St.
Louis, Mo. (S.T.)

Katherine Stott, Journal
Bldg., Portland, Ore.

Lewis  A., Birks  Bldg.,  Van-
couver,  B. C. (D.O.)

Ollie H. P., 114 W. Second
St., Ottumwa, la. (D.O.)

O. P., Sacatoon, Sask., Can.

Paul J., K. of P. Bldg.,
Crawfordsville. Ind.  (D.C.)

M\  F.,  725  N.  York  Ave.,  To-
ledo, O. (N.D.)

J. F., Sioux  City, la. (S.)

F. P., Davenport, la. (D.C.)

MYLES, ANN CRAWFORD,

Munn and Central Aves.,

E. Oiange, N. J. (D.O.)

MYRICH, DR. J. F., Ft.

Worth, Tex. (S.T.)
MYTROSZESKY, JOSEPH, 52
16th Ave., Newark, N. J.


Nah.iledt
Newton


Alpliahrtical  Index


935


NABSTEDT,  J.  M.,  1789  B'way,

New Vork,  N. Y. (D.C.)
J. M., r,14 W. 149th Street,

New Yoik, N. Y. (D.C.)
NACHBAR, M., 431 5th Ave.,

New Yurk, N. Y. (N.D.)
NAIDL, A. R., Marinette,

Wi-s. (D.C.)
NAIMANN, H. A., 1531 West

(^ongres.s St., Chicagro,

111. (N.D.)
NAIR,  HUGH  E.,  Jr.,  R.  No. 1,

Niles, O. (N.D.)
NAISH, WM., 14(; Katharine

St., Hamilton, Ont., Can-
ada. (D.C.)
NARMON, U. Margoh, Belle-

vue, O. (D.C.)
NASH, DEO. A., Carthage,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Victoria A., Spitzer Bldg-.,

Toledo, O. (D.O.)
NASH, RUBY  D., 3059

Euclid Ave., Cleveland,

O. (Ch.)
NATHAN, ALBERT, Victoria

Apts., Washington, D. C.

NATHIS, J. A.. Rock Island,

111. (D.C.)
NATION, MRS. E. LAVENDA,

Anaheim, Cal. (D.C.)
John D. S., Anaheim, Cal.

NATIONAL  SCHOOL OP

CHIROPRACTIC, 421 S.

Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
NATIONAL SOCIETY  OF  NA-
TUROPATHS, 97 Ann St.,

Hartford, Conn. (N.D.)

NATUROPATHIC  INSTITUTE,
Gustav  Uez,  596  Clinton
Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.

NAY,  WILLIAM  F.,  Chamber
of  Commerce  Bldg.,  Enid,
Okla. (D.O.)

NEAFIE, ELON, 1301 Fern-
wood Ave., Toledo, O.
(D.M.T.)

NEAGLEY. ASIA L., 16

Fargo  St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

NEAGLEY,  JAS.  K.,  615
Sickles  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,
Pa. (M.D.)

NEAL  INSTITUTE  CO.,  THE
601  Maple  Ave.,  Cincin-
nati, O. (P.)

NEALE,  J.  W., 601 W. 6th  St.,
Topeka, Kans. (D.C.)
J. W., 674 -6 I. W. Hellman
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

NEAME,  JOSEPHINE  E.,  114
S.  Illnois  Ave.,  Atlantic
City, N. J.( D.O.)

NEARY,  J.  F.,  487  Kosciosko
St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (N.D.)

NEBEL, JOHN, 116 Laflin St
Chicago, 111. ( D.C.)

NEBRASKA CHIROPRACTIC
COLLEGE, 1525 O St
Lincoln, Nebr. (DC)

NEDDEN,  ALBERT,  Tiger-
ton, Wis. (D.C.)

NEELEY,  J.  B.,  Anadarko
Okla. (D.C.)

NEENAN, R. J., 6th St. and
B'way, Los Angeles, Cal.


N

NEFP", 333 Dearborn St., Chi-
cago,  111. (D.C.)
Mrs. J. L., 2202 Sherman
Ave., Omaha, Nebr. (S.T.)

NEHR,  C.  E.,  Butler,  O. (D.C.)

NEIDHARD. J. F., 216 S.
Main St., Marion, O.

NEILL,  A.  H.,  818  W. 55th  St.,
Chicago, 111. (D. C.)
J. E., Memphis, Tex. (S.T.)

NEILSEN & NEILSEN, 11
Mohawk Place, Amster-
dam, N. Y. (D.C.)
DRS., Washington Bldg.,
Madison, Wis. (D.C.)

NEILSON, ALBERT, George-
town, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
A. J., Beatrice, Nebr. (D.C.)
Norman J., Bronson, Kans.

NEIS, W^  ALTER, 77 Circular
St., Tiffin, O. (D.C.)
710 Nat'l Union Bldg.,
Toledo, O. (D.C.)

NELDEN & NELDEN, 61 N.
Washington St., Wilkes-
Baire, Pa. (D.C.)

NELDON. FRANK P., Nobles-
ville, Ind. (N.D.)

NELLIS, CHAS. M., 275 W^est
Main St., Meriden, Conn.

NELSON,  A. E., 1167  Montello

St., Campello, Kans.

C. E., Centerville, la. (D.C.)
David, 103 W. Center St.,

North Manchester, Conn.

Ella, San  Diego, Cal. (D.C.)
Frank C, 506 Highland

Ave.,  Maiden,  Mass. (D.O.)
Geo., Independence, la.

Mrs. H., Lindsborg, Kans.

Harriet  A.,  Essex  Blk.,  Min-
neapolis,  Minn. (D.O.)
Laura Bingham, 1733 N.

Western Ave., Los Ange-
les, Cal. (D.O.)
Loretta B., Conrad Blk

Great Falls, Mont. (D.O)
N. P., 1 N. Broadway,

Fargo, N. Dak. (D.C  )
Swen, 101  W.  189th  St.,  New

York, N. Y. (D.O.)
W. H., Rhinelander, Wis.

W. H., Smith Center, Kans.

NELSON & FRANK, West

Liberty, la. (D.C.)  •

.XELSON, AXEL  S., 1830  N.

22nd St.. Omaha, Nebr.

Miss Bertha, 121 Vermilyea

Ave.,  New  York,  N Y

(Ma.)
C. A., Clara Citv, Minn

Clara  K.,  4200  S.  Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (ND)
Melissa J.. 318 E. State St

Columbus,  O. (Ma  )
M. P., 405 8th St., Fargo,

N. D. (N.D.)
N.  F.,  135 12th  St.,  Portland,

Ore. (N.D.)
P., 610 S. 12th St., Burling-
ton, la. (N.D.)
Per. 281 Wethersfield Ave.

Hartford, Conn. (N.D.)


Joseph, General Delivery,

Youngstown, O. (N.D.)
NENNO, MRS. CARRIPJ, 49

VVoodlawn Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y. (Cr.)
NEOVTUS,  GEO. F., 30  N.

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
NESBIT, E. W., Santee, Cal.

Smith, 750 Lansdowne Ave.,

Toitmto, Ont., Canada.

NESBIT. EDITH V., Dayton,

O. (Ch.)
NESMITH, L. M., Custar, O.


NESS, W. F., 619 Elmwood

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
NETH, GUSTAVE A., 1012

W. Berendo St., Los An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)
NETHERSOLE, A., 164 Pali-
sade Ave., Garfield, N. J.

NETSGLE. CHAS., c/o I. O.

O. F. Bldg., Goshen, Ind.

NETTY, J. W., 3040 W.

North Ave., Chicago, 111.

NEUBERGER, F. A., 594 N.

Main  St.,  Logan,  Utah.  (S.T.)
NEUMAN, AL., Rm. 3, 827

16th St., Denver, Colo.

VEUMANN,  A.  J., 303 Stone

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Carl. 510 W. 133rd  St..

New  York, N.  Y. (Ma.)
.VEUMEIER, CHAS., Delphos,

O. (D.M.T.)
NEUWIRTH,  J., 329  Center

St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
NEVE, FLORA, Benkelman,

Nebr. (D.C.)
F. F., Box 58, Werner,

Nebr. (D.C.)
Flora K., Kingston, Ont.,

Canada. (D.C.)
NEVILLE,  MARY,  4662  Broad-
way St., Chicago, 111.

VEVIUS, ZENIA A., Tacoma.

Wash. (D.O.)
NEW, DR. JNO. F., Seattle,

Wash. (S.T.)
Ruth, E, 348 Franklin St.,

Bloomfield, N. J. (D.C.)
NEWCOMER, J. E., 44

Sparling Bldg., Elgin, 111.

J. J.. 836 S. Arch St.,

Alliance.  O. (N.D.)
NEW-COMER & G  E  R-

HARDT, Bryan, O. (D.C.)
NEW ENGLAND COLLEGE

OF CHIROPRACTIC, 552

Massachusetts Ave., Bos-
ton, Mass. (D.C.)
NEWITT & NEWITT, White

Cloud.  Mich. (D.C.)
NEW JERSEY COLLEGE OF

CHIROPRACTIC,  122

Roseville Ave., Newark,

N.  J. (D.C.)
NEWSALT, GEO. A., Savings

& Loan Bldg., Fargo, N.

Dak. (D.C.)
NEWTON, E. D.  B., 431  Cajon

St., Redlands, Cal. (D.C.)
J. H., 4200 Grand Blvd.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
J. H., Toulon, 111. (N.D.)


93C


Alplnihclicdl  Iiidr.v


S\ifpdcr


Winfeld  .1., 121 Fulton  St.,
Younprstown, O. (D.M.T.)

NEW  YORK  SCHOOL  OF
CHIROPRACTIC,  Broad-
way BldK.,  N.  E.  Cor.  39th
St.  and  B'way,  New  York,
N. Y. (D.C.)

NICCA,  MARGARET.  1553  \V.
Madi-son  St.,  Cliicago,  111.

NICE.  H.  WARREN,  Grant's
Pass, Ore. (D.O.)

NICHEI.SON,  N.  H.,  1444
Washington  Blvd.,  Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)

NICTni,SOX. HATTIE N.,

Wilsonville. Nebr. (D.C.)

NICHOLAS.  REBECCA.  205
W.  85th  St..  New  York,
N. Y. (D.O.)

NICHOLL.  THOS.  H..  Frank-
lin Bank  Bldg..  Philadel-
phia. Pa.  (D.O.)
Charles  H..  134  Wyoming
Ave..  Scranton,  Pa.  (D.O.)
William  S.,  R.  E.  Trust
BldPT.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

NICHOLS, Rowe's Bath Par-
lors. Jamestown, N. Y.
Adrian D.. Frisco Bldg-., St.

Loui.s, Mo. (D.O.)
Arthur  N., Polo. 111. (D.C.)
F. S., 3-4 Spies Bldg., Me-
nominee. Mich. (D.C.)
.Toe H., 4138 N. Newstead
Ave., St. Louis. Mo. (S.T.)
Paul S.. People's Bldg-.,

Delaware, O. (D.O.)
Robt. H.. 15 Beacon St.,
Boston, Mass. (D.O.)

NICHOLS.  W^.  Hvde Park.
Cincinnati, O. fD.M.T.)

NICHOLS  &  NICHOLS,  DRS.,
fi-8  Wheelock  Building-,
Sayre, Pa. (D.C.)

NICHOL.SON, F. H.. R. No. 3,
Abilene. Kans. (D.C.)
F. M.. 122 S. Ashland Blvd..

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
H. H., Lincoln, Nebr. (D.C.)
Miss J. D., Antlgo, Wis.

J. R.. Beaver City, Nebr.

NICK, P., P. O. Box 1743,
Los  Angeles,  Cal. (N.D.)

NICKERSON,  H.  R.,  Galveston,
Tex. (D.C.)

NICKLIN. \y. E.. U. C. C.
Davenport, la. (D.C.)

NICOLA,  MRS.  BERTHA,  Si-
gourney, la. (D.C.)

NICOLA, STEPHEN, 16

Bia\-(T St.. New York,
N. Y. (N.D.)

NIDA,  R.  EUGENE,  700  W.
9th  St.,  Oklahoma  City,
Okla. (D.C.)

NIEDARD,  J.  F.,  216  S.  Main
St.,  Marion,  O. (N.D.)

NIELSEN, A. M.,  Georgetown,
Ont., Can. (D.C.)
Andrew, Beatrice, Nebr.

Hans, 52 Elliott Ave., Yon-

kers, N. Y. (D.O.)
Julie K.. 116 E. 58th St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
P. A., Box 630, Clear  Lake,
la. (D.C.)

NIELSON  &  NIELSON,  245-
247  Wa.shington  Avenue,
Madison, Wis. (D.C.)

NIELSON  &  NIELSON,  11  Mo-
hawk Place,  Amsterdam,
N. Y. (D.C.)


NIELSON, .ll'Ll]': K.. 12(i !•;.

34th St., .\ew York,

N. Y. (DC, D.O.)
Lynn, 300 Clinton St.,

Lvons, la. (D.C.)
NIEMAN, LOUIS. 2412 Ames

Ave., Omaha, Nebr. (D.C.)
NIEMANN, J., 1902 Ned  res

St., Austin, Tex. (D.O.)
NIERMAN,  MARY,  Polk.

Nebr. (D.C.)
NIERMANN,  L.,  1023  West  St..

Grinnell, la. (D.C.)
NIKOLAS, KATHRYN, Bee

Bldg.,  Omaha.  Nebr. (D.O.)
NILES, T. M., 2.S(I7 Arch-

wood Ave., Cleveland,

O. (N.D.)
NIMS. HERBERT J., Ryland

BIk..  San  Jose.  Cal. (D.O.)
NTRRIONGARTEX. A. S, 18(19

Hiiriiod St.. Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Opt.)
NISBET. SMITH. 750 Lans-

downe  Ave.,  Toronto,  Ont.,
. Can. (D.C.)
NISCHEL,  GEO.  C, 2421  Pier-
son Ave., Indianapolis,

Ind. (D.C.)
NIX. P. M.. 2128 N. Kevstone

Ave.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
NIXON, H. E., 133 Mt. Ver-
non St.. Grand Rapids,

Mich. (D.C.)
Mrs. Mary A.. Carter, Okla.

NOACK, BARBARA E.. 5762

Portage Ave., Cleveland,

O. (N.D.)
NOBLE, NELSON G., Dalziel

Bldg.,  Oakland,  Cal.

N0DP:R, MISS EDITH. 1602

20th St., and 1920 20th

Ave., Rock Island, 111.

NOEL, EDWARD JOHN, 418

E. Long St.. Columbus, O.

(D.M.T.)
NOLAND,  LOU  T.,  Baker  Blk.,

Springfield, Mo. (D.O.)
NOLL, JOHN, 23i Steuben  St.,

Albany, N. Y. (Opt.)
NOLLING, GEO. D.. 1107

Chestnut St., Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.O.)
NOODING & GIBSON,

Malley  Bldg.,  New  Haven,

Conn. (D.C.)
NOONAN, M. A., 67 W. 90th

St.. New Yor. N. Y. (D.C.)
NOORDHOFF. L. H., 187

Main St., Oshkosh, Wis.

NOPS, W. J.. Kenland. Ind.

NORA. T. E., Chicago, 111.

D. E., 361 E. 30th St.,
, Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
NORD, RAGNA, 1138 N. Lea-

vitt St., Chicago, I11.(D.C.)
NORDELL,  C.  A.,  Valley  Junc-
tion,  la. (D.C.)
NORDLIE,  J.  J.,  2552  Wright-
wood Ave., Chicago, 111.

NOREN, HILDUR, 562 E. 2d

St., Jamestown, N. Y.

N70RF0LK HYDRO SANITA-
RIUM, 719 Washington

Ave.. Norfolk. Va. (N.D.)
NORG. A. T.,  E. 55th  and Eu-
clid. Cleveland. O. (N.D.)
NORMAN. DR., Paris, Ark.

Arthur, Cor. N. Lawndale

and Hirsch Sts., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)


Frank, Orient, la. (D.C.)
F. J., Lenox, la. (D.C.)
Geo. E., 122 Monroe St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.(D.C.)
P. K., Central Bank Bldg.,

Memphis. Tenn. (D.O.
N'ORRIS, C. E., Bowling

Green, O. (D.C.)

D.  L., (Lock  Box  305),  Coon
Rapids, la. (D.C.)

H. D., Marion, 111. (D.O.)
Kate Louise. 703 Greene

Ave.. Brooklyn, N. Y.

NORTH, DR., 619 Spadina

Ave., Toronto, Ont., Can.

Mrs. Alice, Mt. Zion, Mo.


E.  M., 7901 13th St., Brook-
lyn.  N. Y. (D.C.)

NORTH, FOSTER, 30 N.

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

Til. (Ma.)
NORTHERN, ROBERT J.,

First Nat'l Bank Bldg,,

Hagerstown, Md. (D.O.)
NORTHRUP, ROBERT B..

Morgan Bldg., Portland,

Ore. (D.O.)
Anna Elvira, A. S. O. Hos-
pital.  Kirksville. Mo.

NORTON, CARLTON C, 1

Madison Ave., New York,

N. Y. (DO.)
Horace. 1225 L St. N. W..

Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
NORWOOD, JAMES N.. Ill

8th  St.,  Cincinnati.  O.  (Ch.)
NORAVOOD. ROBERT R.,

Mineral  Wells,  Tex. (D.O.)
NOTHNAGEL, J., 941 E. 14th

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

NOTHNAGEL, J., 2 Bloor St.

E.,  Suite  64,  Toronto,  Ont.,

Can. (D.C.)
NOVEY, ANNA, E. 55th St.

and Euclid Ave., Cleve-
land,  O. (D.C.)
NOVINGER. W. J., Cor.

Academy and Mont-
gomery Sts., Trenton,

N. J. (D.O.)
NOVY, A. T., 201 Pennsyl-
vania Square Bldg.,

Cleveland, O. (N.D.)
NOWLIN, J. A., Osteopathy

Bldg.. Farmer City, 111.

NOYER. S. A., Atlantic, la.

NOYES,  H.  W., 416  Crown St.,

New Haven, Conn. (D.C.)
Mary E., Maloney Bldg.,

Ottawa, 111. (D.O.)
NUCKLES, GEO. T.,  Marshall,

Mo. (D.O.)
NUCKOLS. J. A., R. No. 65.

Greenfield, O. (N.D.)
NUENNICH, FRANK. 10,355

Western Ave., Cleveland,

O. (D.M.T.)
NUEST,  MARY,  Sterling,  Kan.

NUNVAR. A. G., 363 Old

Arcade, Cleveland,  O.

NUSSBAUM, J. L., Box 52.

Concordia. Kan. (M.D.)
NUTTER, J. O., Morrowville,

Kan. (M.D.)
NYE, DR.. Osborne, Kan.

Car-los. 1157 Avenida de

Mayo. Buenos Ayres,

-Argentine  Republic.  (D.O.)
NYFPELER, EDWIN, Berne,

Tnd. (D.C.)


Oakes
Oshinske


Alphabetical  Index


937


o


OAKES, GEO. C. 257 H St

San  Bernardino,  Cal.  (U.C)
OAKES, JOHN H., 32 N. State

St., Chicap:o, lH. (D.O.)
OAKLEY. NELSON 1S50 3d

St., San  Diego,  Cal. (D.C.)
O'BANION, E. C, 43 Emeiy

Arcade, Cincinnati,  •  O.

(DC.)
Thomas, 43 Emery Arcade,

Cincinnati, O. (Ch.)
OBERG, MISS I., 49 Delmond

St  , Portland, Ore. (D.C.)
O'BRIEN, FRANCIS R., Flan-
ders Bldg-., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
Henry P., Appleton, Wis.

O'BRYAN, M. E., Columbia,

Tenn. (D.O.)
OCHS. LOUIS, Adams Bldgr.,

Merrimac St., Haverhill,

Mass. (D.C.)
OCKSNER, B. O., 144 Main

St., Oneida,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
O'CONNOR, E. A., New

Albany. Ind. (D.C.)
Jessie, 4836 Winthrop Ave.,

Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
ODLE,  I.  C,  Johnson  City,  111.

O'DELL, ESSIE A., 14 Mam

St., Batavia, N. Y. (D.C.)
O'DONNELL, WM., 241|

Main St., Ashtabula, O.

(D.M.T.)
OEHLECKER, ANNA, Brook-
lyn, N. Y. (N.D.)
Louis  N. R., Brooklyn, N.  Y.

OELLECKER, LOUIS M.,

Highland Sanitarium,

Mount Dora, Fla. (N.D.)
OELRICH, EDW., Ellicott

Square, Buffalo, N. Y.

OFFIELD, J. HARRY, Okla-
homa City, Okla. (D.C.)
OGDBN,  H. F., Port  Jefferson,

O. (D.C.)
C K., 13 Academy St.,

Wilkes-Barre, Pa. (D.C.)
C R 221 S. Main St.,

Wilkes-Barre, Pa. (D.C.)
C. R., Gen. Del., Bingham-

ton, N. Y. (N.D.)
H F., Port Jefferson, O.

H W., 233 N. 32d St., Cam-
den, N. J. (D.C.)
Vara A., 240 Prospect St.,

East Orange, N. J. (D.C.)
OGG, ROBT.  M., Canadian  Bk.

of Comm. Bldg., Brant-
ford. Ont., Can. (D.C.)
OGLE. JOHN M.. The Empire

Blk.. Main St., Moncton,

N. B. (D.O.)
R. W.. Anadarko, Okla.

OGLESBY, First Nat'I Bank

Bldg., Latrobe, Pa. (D.O.)
O'HANLON. W. F., 6904

Holmes  Ave.,  I^os  Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
OHMAN, HENRIETTA C.

Kenton, O. (Ma.)
OHNEMULLER. CATHERINE

C. 204 N. Evergreen. Lo.s

Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
OHNSTEAD, W. E., 1318 .^)th

Ave.. Seattle,  AVa,'5h.  (DC.)
OIUM. F. N., Bent Blk.. Osh-

ko.'^h. AVis. (DO.)
O'KEEFE. M. L.. 1 Franklin

Ave.. Morristown, N. J.


OKERMAN, J. W., Ashtabula,

O. (D.C.)
OLDEG, HARRY W., Mermod

&  Jaccard  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,

Mo. (D.O.)
OLDENBORG,  HUGH  AD., 122

S. Michigan Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
OLDENBURG, HUGO, 1427

People's Gas Bldg., Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)
OLDHAM. J. S.. Jett Bldg..

Cvnthiana. Ky. (D.O.)
Jas. E.. 705 S. Clay St.,

Hopkinsville, Ky. (D.O.)
W. H., E. Main St., Elkton,

Ky. (D.O.)
OLDS, E. M., Caswell Blk.,

Milwaukee, Wis. (D.O.)
M. T., 1009i W. 11th St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
OLDS. E. O.. 120 W. Chestnut

St.. Washington, Pa.

(Ne.)
OLIPHANT, LORNA ALICE,

Virginia, 111. (D.O.)
Pearl. Santa Cruz, Cal.

OLISON.  K.  P.,  Brodhead,  Wis.

OLIVANT, MARGARET,

Sault Ste. Marie, Can.

OLIVER,  CLIFFORD  C,  Medi-
cal Blk.. Minneapolis,

Minn. (D.O.)
OLIVER, I. M., The Toronto

Apts., Washington, D. C.

Mada, First Nat'I Bank

Bldg., Newton, Kans.

OLMSTED. HARRY J., Co-
lonial Bldg.,  Boston,  Mass.

S. I^ouisa. 220 5th Ave.,

Clinton. la. (D.O.)
OLSEN. GEO. W., Palmer,

Nebr. (D.C.)
OLSEN, MRS. L., 157 W. 9Sth

St., New York, N. Y.

(Ma.)
Melvin C. Mount Pleasant,

Utah. (D.C.)
OLSON. A. H.. Suite 10-11.

IJbertv Bldg., Cleveland,

O. (D.C.)
B. H., 401 S. Monroe St.,

Francis Bldg., Brookfleld,

Mo. (D.C.)
OLSON, B. H., Gasely  Bldg.,

Pawtucket, R.  I. (D.C.)
G. W.. First State Bk. St.,

St. Paul. Minn. (DC.)
Hendrik. 314 W. Park St..

Rochester. Pa. (DO.)
Herman. 1508 Main Ave.,

Spokane, Wash. (D.C.)
Herman, 501 Diamond Bank

Bldg.. Pittsburgh, Pa.

(Ma.)
J. B., 1401 Williamson St.,

Madison,  Wis. (D.C.)
J. Edgar, Bushnell, 111.

Mrs. Minnie, 1106 7th St.,

Sioux City, Ta. (D.C.)
M. O., 1256 Haight St., San

Francisco, Cal. (D.C.)
Peter, 945 AV. 7th St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
OMAN. MRS. E.. 17 E. 89th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.  (Ma.)
OML.\R, JOHN T., 721 Tray

St., Davton, O. (DAt.T.)
O'NEAL, G. M., 849-850 Ohio

Bldg., Toledo, O. (D.C.)


O'NBIL & O'NEIL, 847-50

Ohio Bldg., Toledo, O.

O'NEILL, ADDISON, 9 No.

Beach St., Daytona, Fla.

Mrs. M. E., 1050  Am.ster-

dam Ave., New York,

N. Y. (N.D.)
T. H., 419 Central Ave..

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
Thomas H., 507 5th Ave.,

New York City. (D.O.)
W. H., 210 Parkway Bidg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (N.D.)
ONELAND, SARAH C, Rock-
well Bldg.. Union City,

Pa. (D.O.)
OPDYCKE, FLORENCE M.,

167 State St., Augusta,

Me. (D.O.)
OPLANJ3,  DR.,  228  S.  Wood  St.,

Chicago, III. (D.C.)
Martha  B., 1117 Marshall

Ave., Mattoon. 111. (N.D.)
Nelson H., 1117 Marshall

Ave.,  Mattoon,  HI. (N.D.)
OPPENHEIMER, H. H., 108

Villa Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.

H. O., 255 W. 108th St.,

New York City. (D.C.)
OPSHAL & OPSHAL,

Decorah, la. (D.C.)
O'QUINN, C. A., Alton, Fla.

C. A., PePry, Fla. (M.D.,

ORCUTT. J. M.. 159 Hiler St..

Conneaut. O. (DM.T.)
ORD. L. GARNET. 210 Bloor

St..  Toronto,  Ont.,  Canada.

ORDWAY.  K.  S.,  273  Pearl  St.,

Providence, R. I. (D.C.)
Kesley Sanborn, 57 Eddv

St., Providence, R. i.

ORLIK, ANNA, Flat 43, St.

Leg-er Flats, Cincinnati,

O. (Ma.)
ORLOFF, ALEXIS S.. 4520

Abbot Ave. S., Minne-
apolis, Minn. (N.D.)
ORMOND, WM. E., 52 Orm-

walt St., Atlanta, Ga.

ORMSBEE, C. B., Moneta,

Cal. (D.C.)
ORR, ARLOWYNE, Central

Nat'I Bank Bldg., St.

Louis, Mo. (D.O.)
ORRISON,  LOWELL  A., 421  S.

Morris St., Waynesburg,

Pa. (D.O.)
ORTELL. REA'. C. R., Santa

Fe Isle, Depends, N. I.,

Cuba. (D.C.)
ORTMEYER, A. H., 115

Edgar St., Evansville,

Ind. (N.D.)
OSBORj:. H. M., 1432 Jackson

St., Chicago. HI. (N.D.)
Harry C, 926 N. Charles

St., Baltimore, Md. (D.O.)
R. Randle, Shannon, 111.

OSCHNER,  B.  O.,  144  Main  St..

Oneida.  N. Y. (D.C.)
OSGOOD, Helen J., 1325 E.

Colfax  Ave.,  Denver,  Colo.

Lizzie E., 150 North St.,

Pittsfleld,  Mass. (D.O.)
OSHINSKE, ,TNO., 2735 N.

Central Park Ave., Chi-
cago, HI. (D.C.)


938


.1  Iphabctical  Index


Ostberg
Parker


OSTBERG,  CHAS.  J..  1007  Bel-
mont Ave., Chicago, 111.
Chas. J.,  Pub. Service  Bldg.,
Kenosha, Wis. (D.C.)

OSTKOPATHIC  INSTITUTE
N.  PHTI.A.,  Woipriitnian
Bl.,  Philadolpliia.  Pa.

OSTNESS.  GEO.  M.,  Rcdfleld,
S. D., (I.)

OSTROOT.  A.  E.,  1002  3d
Ave.  W.,  Kalispell,  Mont.

OSTTBERG,  CHAS.  J.,  Ken-
osha, Wis. (D.C.)

OSTWAl.T,  JOHN,  302  E.
Market  St.,  Warren,  O.

OSWAI/r,  JOHN  H.,  Warren,
O. (DC.)

OTTAWAY,  GEO.,  6  W.
Adams  St.,  Detroit,  Mich.

OTTERMAN,  J.  H.,  Manette,
Mo. (S.T.)


OTTO,  G. H., Winnipeg, Man.,
Can. (D.C.)
G. M., fi-7 Ijivingston Bldg.,

WaiKsau,  Wi.s. (D.C.)
Geo. M.. 528-30 Brady St.,
Davenport,  la. (D.C.)

OTTOFY, L,OUlS, Manila, Pa.
I^. M., St. Louis, Mo. (M.D.)

OTTS,  EDGAR  B.,  C^)mmer^•ial
Bank  Bldg.,  Shreveport,
I>a. (D.O.)

OUREN,  IRENE  BISSON-
ETTE,  Cll  10th  Ave..  Min-
neapolis, Minn. (D.O.)

OVENS,  Al.r.ERT  N.,  Ridgely
Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Spring-
field, 111. (D.O.)

OVEREND,  GENEVE  A.,  2058
Elm  Ave.,  Norwood,  O.

OVERFELT,  L.  B.,  Boulder,
Colo. (D.O.)

OVERHOETZER,  B.  J.,  Co-
vina, Cal. (D.C.)

OVERHOLZ,  D.  J.,  Covina,
Cal. (D.C.)


OVEKHOEZER, D. J., Covina,

(^al. (D.C.)
0\'EKSTREET, C. M., Hast-
ings,  Mich. (D.O.)
OVFRTON, J. A., Tuscola. III.

(1). O.)
O VI  ATT & OVIATT. Masonic

Bldg., Aberdeen. Wash.

OW'ION,  ED..  Coffeyvillc.  Kans.

Goo..  181  S.  Nafl Ave., Fort

Scott,  Kans. (M.D.)
Hearl E.. Ban Bldg.. Sara-
toga  Springs. N. Y. (D.O.)
Jas.  E..  Indianola. la. (D.O.)
Josephine.  Harding.  S.  Dak.,

OWENS, T. J.. 828 Brady St..

Davenport.  la.  (D.C.)
OYER. ST. ELMO C. 230

Laurel St.. Buffalo. N. Y.

OYLE. E. J., Kimball, Nebr.

OZIAS, CHAS. A., Kansas

City, Mo. (M.D.)


P\CHETT,  E.  E.,  290  Carman
St.,  Camden.  N.  J.  (R.CO

PACIFIC  CHIROPRACTIC

COLLEGE. Portland. Ore.

PACZKOWSKI.  .THADDEUS,
194  Broad  St.,  Bloomfield,
N. J. (D.C.)

PADBERG.  BLANCHE  M..-
4205  Sansom  St..  Phila-
delphia. Pa. (D.O.)

PADLEY.  MRS.  E..  1113  N.
Dearborn  St.,  Chicago.
111. (D.C.)

PAELILLO, ANTONIO, 381 E.
Main St.. Bridgeport,
Conn. (D.M.T.)

PAGE,  G.  RALPH.  147  Han-
cock St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

W B.,  Goshen,  Ind.  (D.C.)
Mrs. W. B., Goshen, Ind.

PAGELER,  DR.  J.  ,  H.,  2514
Grant  St..  Omaha.  Nebr.
(ST)

PAINE,  ■  CAROLINE  L.,  Or-
ange. Cal.  (D.O.)

PAINE.  JOSEPHINE  H.,  4731
Lake  Park  Ave..  Chicago,
111. (D.O.. M.D.)

PAINTER. CARRIE. 2359 N.
California Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.C.)
E.  M.,  Unionville,  Mo. (D.O.)
S.  W., 1038  Acoma  Ave.,  Den-
ver, Colo. (D.C.)
S.  W..  Bettendorf,  la. (D.C.)

PAINTER.  MR.  &  MRS. S. W.,
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
W. J.. 517 Medical Block,
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.C.)

PAINTER  &  PAINTER.  2359
N.  Calif.  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

PALASKIM,  J.  B..  1710  Wine-
wood  Ave..  Detroit.  Mich.
rD.C.)

PALM. Thermopolis. Wyo.
(DO.)

PALMBORG. MRS. AUGUSTA,
1840 Wells  St., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)

PALMER.  B.  J..  828  Brady  St..
Davenport,  la. (D.C,
Ph.C.)


Mrs. Chas.. 756 S. Balsh St..

Akron.  O. (D.C.)
Chas. R.. Chamber of Com-
merce. Pasadena, Cal.
Edward  B..  Hagelstein  Bldg.,

Sacramento.  Cal. (D.O.)
Robert I.. Main St.. Silver
Creek.  N.  Y.  (D.O.)

PALMER  SCHOOL  OF  CHI-
ROPRACTIC, Davenport,
la. (D.C.)

PALMETER, MONROE. 145 i
W. Main St.. Lancaster.
O. (D.M.T.)

PALOTAY. J. A., 421 Broad-
way Central Bldg.. Los
Angeles. Cal. (N.D.)

PANARS.  FREDERICK  G.,
992  Gratiot  Ave.  and
Mack  Ave..  Detroit.  Mich.

PANZER. HENRY. 200  West
72nd  St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
(P.)

PAPATHOPULOS, N. P., 14
E. 38th St., New York.
N. Y. (M.D.)

PARADIS.  REGINA  D..  201
W.  120th  St.,  New  York.
N.  Y. (Ma.)

PARCELS, M. L.. Katz Blk.,
San Bernardino. Cal.

PARCHEN, G. H., Anita, la.
H. C, Guttenbeurg, la.

PARE,  J., 2310  Valentine
Ave., New York, N. Y.

PARENTEAU. CARRIE P., 27
E. Monroe St., Chicago,
111. (D.O.)

PARFITT,  JOHN  WILLIAM
Pembroke  Bldg.,  Man-
chester,  N. H. (D.O.)

PARISH.  CHESTER  W.,  Com-
mercial Bank  Bldg.,
Whitewater.  Wis. (D.O.)

PARISH.  J.  D..  140  N.  State
St.. Chicago. 111. (Ma.)

PARK. CHAS.  C. 816 N. Wal-
nut  St.. lola. Kans. (S.T.)
R. L..  Trenton. Tenn. (D.O.)
W. G.. 8J Young St.. Tona-
wanda,  N.  Y.  (D.C.)


PARKER & PARKER. Gen.

Del., Geneva, N. Y. (D.C.)
PARKER  & PARKER, 519

N. Monroe St.. Peoria,

111. (Or.S.)
PARKER, C. R.. 508 S. Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago. 111.

Dr.. Market St.. Warren.

Pa (DC)
Emerson'  R.. 411 W. 3d St..

Jamestown.  N.  Y. (D.C.)

E.  Tracy. Corbett Bldg.,
Portland,  Ore.  (D.O.)

F.  A., Ill W. Park Ave.,
Champaign, 111. (D.O.)

F. D., New  York  Life  Bldg.,

St. Paul, Minn. (D.O.)
F. W.. 225 N. M^ater St.,

Gault,  Ont..  Can. (I>.C.)
George  W..  Cor.  Main  St.  and

Broadway, Madisonville,

Ky. (D.O.)
Gordon L., 63 AVashington

Blvd.,  Detroit,  Mich.  (Opt.)
H.  R.,  Mt.  Carmel,  111.  (S.T.)
Ira L.. 10502 St. Clair Ave.

N.  E..  Cleveland.  O.  (D.O.)
James G.. 85 Ford St.. Og-

densburg. N. Y. (D.C.)
J. Page. Bradentown, Fla.

Jas.  W..  Peoria,  111. (M.D.)
John Watts, New Ridge

Bldg., Kansas City. Mo.

Mark  C.  Southwest  Harbor.

Me. (D.O.)
M. U.. 508 S. Ashland Blvd..

Chicago.  111. (D.C.)
Olive B.. 12 Bellingham St..

Everett.  Mass. (D.C.)
R.,  508  S.  Ashland  Blvd.,  Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)
R. E., Theo. De Orsay. 411

W. 3rd St.. Jamestown,

N. Y. (D.C.)
R. Emerson. 16 Cherry St..

Cherry. N. Y. (D.C.)
Robt. Poulkner, Listowel.

Ont. (D.O.)
T. Theophilus. 53 Frederick

St.. Port-of-Spain. Trini-
dad,  B. W. L (D.O.)
Wm. H., 12 Bellingham St.,

Everett,  Mass.  cD.O.  )


Parkesx
Perrin


Alphabetical  Index


939


PARKESS,  JULIUS  H.. Salina,

Kan.s. (S.T.)
PARKS  & PARKS, Tecumseh,

Nobr. (DO.)
PARKS. B. F., Room 20-21,

Turkey Rldg-., Ports-
mouth, O. (D.C.)
Fannie Springniire, 303

Jefferson St., Winterset,

la. (D.O.)
Geo. P., 1127 14th St., Bed-
ford, Ind. (D.C.)
L. R., 31 McAlli.'^ter Bldg.,

Grand Island, Neb. (D.C.)
L. R., Red Cloud, Nebr.

Mrs. P. D., Room 2, Turkey

Bldg-., Portsmouth, O.

P. D., 205 Masonic Temple,

Portsmouth,  O.  (D.C.)
Mrs. P. D., Michigan, N. D.

PARLIN, RALPH B., 124 Mill

St., New Bedford, Mass.

PARLSER,  ALICE  J.,  3  Fargo

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  (D.C.)
PARMALEE, CORA G., Pogo-

sa Springs, Colo. (D.O.)
PARSEN, DR., 42li King St.,

London,  Ont.,  Can.  (D.C.)
PARSONS & PARSONS, 808

Alworth Bldg., Duluth,

Minn. (D.C.)
PARSONS, C. L., Roswell. N.

Mex. (D.O.)

F.  \V., Gallupville, N. Y.

PARSONS, GEO. AV., 203?

Park Road, Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
The Alworth Bldg., Duluth,

Minn. (D.C.)
PARTRIDGE, C. E., Los Ani-
mas,  Colo. (D.C.)
PARTRIDGE, G. M., 928 I St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

(D.M.T.)
PATCHEN, G. H., 13 Central

Park West, New York,

N. Y. (M.D.)

G.  H., 147 W. 23d St., New
York  City,  N.  Y. (D.C.)

PATCHETT, E. E., Camden,

N. J. (D.C.)
PATERSON,  C.  VERNON,  Sla-
ter Bldg.,  Worcester,  Mass.
PATTEN,  L.  L.,  Guthrie,  Okla.
R. E., 131  W. 18th St., Brie,
Pa. (D.C.)
PATTERSON, ARTHUR, 923
Jefferson St., Wilmington,

Del. (D.O.)
C. F., Mexico Citv, Mex.

E. W., Paul Jones Bldg.,

Louisville,  Ky. (D.O.)
S. R., Springfield, O. (N.D.)
W. S., 306 Good Blk., Des
Moines,  la. (D.C.)
PATTERSON, WRIGHT L.,
374 Buffalo St., Conneaut,
O. (Ma.)
PATTON, FLORA M., 418-19
Idaho Bldg.. Booise City,
Idaho. (D.C.)
PATTON, R. EDWIN, 131 W.
18th St., Erie, Pa.
PAUGHARN, E. C, R. F. D.
No. 1, Cortland, O.
(D.M.T.)
PAUL,  ARTHUR  H.,  Court  Ex-
change  Bldg., Bridgeport,
Conn. (D.O.)
PAUL,  J. W., Eureka  Springs,
Ark. (D.O.)
Theodore,  Tarkio,  Mo.  (D.O.)


W. O. Henry, 120-30 East
Jackson St., and 324 S.
2nd St., Mankato, Minn.
(D.)
PAULS, PETER D., Mountain

Lake, Minn. (D.O.)
PAULSSEM,  W.  O.  F.,  Box  184,

Manhattan,  Katis. (D.C.)
PAULY,  G. W., DeGraff  Bldg.,
Colorado Springs, Colo.
Walter Frank,  Myres  Bldg.,
Kahoka, Mo. (D.O.)
PAUWELS, ROBT., 110 W.

40th St., New York, N. Y.
PAY,  J.  W.,  Milbank,  S.  D.

PAYNE & PAYNE, Craig,

Colo. (M.N., D.C.)
PAYNE & PAYNE, 101 Pope
Blk., Pueblo, Colo. (W.M.,
D.C.)
PAYNE, A. v., Marbridge
Bldg-., B'way and 34th
St., New York, N. Y.
(D.M., D.C.)
PAYNE, ALLEN E., 309 W.
7th  St.,  Flint,  Mich. (D.C.)
Eva C, 46 Masonic Bldg.,

Pueblo, Colo. (N.D.)
P. C, Sturgeon Bay, Wis.

Geo. H., First Nat'l Bank
Bldg-., Columbus, Mont.
L. P., Cooler, Mo. (S.T.)
M.  U.,  Craig,  Colorado  (D.C.)
PAYTON, W. L., Gen. Del.,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
PEARCE, JIRAH J., Mills
Bldg.,  El  Paso.  Tex. (D.O.)
N. F., State Bank Bldg-.,
Benton Harbor, Mich.
FEARING, W. C. 5011 Holly-
wood Bldg., Los Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
PEARSON,  B.  H.,  Craftonville,
Cal. (DC.)
Chas.  S.,  Sea  View  House,  3
Tyne Terrace, North
Shields, Eng. (D.C.)
Chas. Smith, Sea View
House, Northumberland,
Eng. (D.O.)
R., 47 Pexey Park, Tvne-
mouth, Eng-. (D.C.
PEASE, CARRIE B., Gales-
ville. Wis. (D.C.)
W. W., 30 N. 2nd St.,
Harrisburg, Pa. (D.C)
PEASE, H. L., Bradley Bldg-.,

Putnam, Conn. (D.O.)
PEBLER, C. P., R. F. D. 4,

Oberlin.  Kans. (M.D.)
PECINOVSKY, ALBERT E.,
Valley Falls, Kans. (D.O.)
PECK, EBER K. I., Brock
Bldg., Brockville, Ont.
John  F.,  Cobb  Bldg-.,  Kanka-
kee, 111. (D.O.)
PECK,  M.  C,  Belle  Fourche,
S. D. (D.C.)
Martin W., 36 Cherry St.,

Lynn, Mass. (D.O.)
Mary E., Hicks Bldg-., San

Antonio, Tex. (D.O.)
Paul M., Hicks Bldg., San

Antonio,  Tex. (D.O.)
Vernon W., First Nat'l
Bank Bldg-., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.O.)
PEDICORD, C. A., Dean St.
Paul College of Chiro-
practic, 303 Baltimore
Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.
(D.C, Ph.  C.)


PEDMAN, WALTER  J.,  Cor.

Market and Delaware

Sts., Youngstown, O.

(D.M.T.)
PEEBLES, ROY A., 419 Wel-

don St., Latrobe, Pa.

R. B., K. Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Kalamazoo, Mich. (D.O.)
PEEL, I'ETER  J.. 20  W.

.lackson Blvd., Chicago,

HI. (Ma.)
PEERY, MARY AV., Sumter,

S. C. (D.O.)
PEET, H. C, Monticello, la.

PEFFER, GEO. M., 140 Ber-
tha St., Pittsburgh, Pa.


J. W., Perry, la.


PEFLEY,

PEIRCE,
Gunst


CHAS. E., Elkan-
Bldg., San Fran-
ciso, Cal. (D.O.)
Clarence M., Cambridge

City, Ind. (D.C.)
Josephine Liffring-, New
Savings Bldg-., Lima, O.
PEITHMANN, E. C. H.,
71,  Webster,  S.  Dak.
(Ph.D.)
PELLETTE, EUGENE
People's Bank Bldg.,
eral, Kans. (D.O.)
PELOUBET, HELEN R.,

Vasse,  Mo. (D.O.)
PEMBERTON, S. D.,


Box


F.,
Lib-

Aux


. 1187
Dean St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
PENGEL,  WILLIAM, 168  W.
95th  St.,  New York, N. Y.
(Ma.)
PENGRA,  C.  A.,  Selling  Bldg.,

Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
PENLAND, HUGH E., Berk-
eley Nat'l Bank Bldg.,
Berkeley, Cal. (D.O.)
PENNINGTON, H. A., 1379 W.
Randolph  St.,  Chicago,  111.
J. L., 1505 O St., Lincoln,

Nebr. (D.C.)
J.  L., 712 Maun Ave., Canon
City. Colo. (D.C.)
PENNOCK, D. S. B., Land
Title Bldg., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
Lewis N., Amarillo, Tex.

P.  H.,  Plattsburg,  Mo.  (D.O.)
PENROSE.  JANET  N.,

Weightman Bl., Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.  O.)
J. T., 216 N. Bright Ave.,

Whittier, Cal. (D.O.)
Josephine, 114 E. 59th St.,
New York, N. Y. (Ma.)
PEPPERCORN, MRS. NOR-
MA, Spearville, Kans.
PERDUE, E. M., Kansas

City, Mo. (M.D.)
PERKINS,  EDAV.  J.,  Platts-
burg.  N. Y. (N.D.)
PERKINS. HELEN F., 1830
Columbia  Road, Washing-
ton,  D. C. (D.O.)
H. J., 8 S. 52d St., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)
J. W.,  Beimower,  Mo. (D.C.)
W. J., Lincoln Ave., Car-
bondale. Pa. (D.O.)
PERRETT, MARY E., Old
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Spo-
kane. Wash. (D.O.)
PERRIER. MARY A., Sault

Ste. Marie, Can. (D.C.)
PERRIN, GEO. AV., Empire
Bldg.,  Denver, Colo.

I  (D.O.)


940


A IphabaUcal  Index


Perry
Pierce


I'KRRY, DAVID C. Chula

Vista, Cal. (D.O.)
Florence Jarman, 851 Dor-
chester St. W., Montreal,

Quebec,  Can. (D.O.)
Grace I.. Plainview, Minn.

Jennie, Mt. Vernon, Mo.

M. A., Pine City, Minn.

Maud, Humboldt, la. (D.C.)
Minnie A., 817 Main St.

Minot. N. D. (D.C.)
Mrs. Nellie F., Los  Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)
W. A., 717 San Fernando

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

PERSON, G. H., 91 W. Mam

St., Unlontown, Pa.
PESCHKAR, J., 521 Main St.,

Union  Hill,  N.  J.  (D.C.)
Joseph, 331 Main St., Union

Hill. N. J. (D.C.)
PESTAUER, JOAQUIN F.,

174 W. 97th St., New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)
PETERMAN,  C  M., 308 East

Colorado  Ave., St. Joseph,

Mo. (D.C.)
George, Wanko Sanitarium,

Sioux City. la. (D.C.)
PETERS,  A.  G.,  308  Albert  St.,

Kingston, Ont. (D.C.)

F.  E.,  147  S.  Sante  Fe,  Sa-

lina,  Kans. (D.C.)
PETERS, CHAS. F., 2167

Bedford Ave., Brooklyn,

N.  Y. (D.O.)
Henry, 617 Mark Bldg.,

Denver.  Colo. (D.C.)
J. M., Lebanon, Kans.

Richard, 61st St. and Uni-
versity PI., Chicago, 111.

Wm. Timothy, Jacksboro,

Tex. (S.T.)
PETERSON, DR., 5913 S.

Halsted St., Chicago, 111.

A. M,, Central Hospital,

Jacksonville.  111.  (N.D.)
Albin,  Sedan,  Kans.  (S.T.)
Alma. 326 S. Highland Ave.

Pittsburgh. Pa. (Ma.)
A.  W.,  Hawarden,  la. (D.O.)
Byron S., Brandies Bldg.,

Omaha, Nebr. (D.O.)
C. A., 6321 St. Lawrence

Ave.,  Chicago.  111.  (D.C.)
Chas. J. R.. Elkan-Gunst

Bldg., San Francisco, Cal.

F. A..  Mt. Forest,  Ont.,  Can.

F.  J..  Opera  House  Blk.,  Al-
liance, Nebr. (D.O.)
H. L.. 1801 Lawrence Ave.,

Chicago.  111. (D.C.)
H. S., 6131 S. Maplewood

Ave.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
Herbert  S.. 1507  E. 55th  St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
I. F.. 621 Commercial St.,

Emporia,  Kans. (D.O.)
M. B.. 1103 S. Boots St..

Marion. Ind. (D.C.)
M. B., Phys. Def. Bldg.,

Fort Wayne, Ind. (D.C.)
M. B.. 3203 W. Harrison St..

Chicago,  111. (M.D.)
P. D., Spring Valley. Minn.

R. H., 7600 Hough Ave..

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
R. H., 10526 Superior Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)


R. H.. 10600 Superior Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
PETERY, WM. E., 1536 Dia-
mond St.. Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
PETIT. A. J., Winfleld, Kan.s.

PETRA. ALMANDA C, 53

Parnell Ave., Dayton, O.

PETREE. MARTHA. Agricul-
tural Bank Bldg., Paris.

Ky. (D.O.)
PF:TRISCH.  W.  J.. 1928  Brady

St.. Davenport, la. (D.C.)
PETRITSCH, E. J., 1928

Brady St., Davenport, la.

J. F., Thomas Bigelow

Bldg., Reno, Nev. (D.C.)
PETTEFER,  A.,  Holland

Bldg., Springfield, Mo.

BETTER. A. J.. Brack Shops.

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
PETTIFORD. O. B.. Piqua. O.

(Ch.)
PETTIT. C. B.. Lyons. Kans.

PETTY. E. F.. Mount Carmel.

111. (D.C.)
PETTY.  E.  I..  208  Claus  Bldg.,

Ottawa. 111. (D.C.)
E. I.. 404 Tarbox Bldg..

Freeport, 111. (D.C.)
Ernest L., Delevan. Wis.

PETTYPIECE, M. H.. 123 Ne-

pean St.. Ottawa. Ont.

Can. (D.O.)
PETZOLD. M.. 1562 Milwau-
kee Ave., Chicago. 111.

PETZOLD, M., 3007  S.  Tripp

Ave., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
PFARRIUS, WM. H.. 1110

Hudson St.. Hoboken.

N.  J. (D.C.)
PFAU. F., 120 Palisade  Ave.,

West Hoboken, N. J.

(DO  )
PFEIFER. CHARLES, 56 Fa-

byan PI.. Newark. N. J.


Hans. 1412

Bronx. N.
PFEIFER. I..

Newark,
PFBIFFER,


Prospect Ave.,

Y. C. (DC.)

882 S. Ifith St.,

N. J. (N.D.)

G., 7 Fabyon

N. J.


Place, Newark,

PHEILS,  ELMER  T.,  Athe-
naeum Chambers,  71
Temple  Row,  Birming-
ham. Eng.  (D.O.)
Ervin  H.,  Second  Nat'l  Bank
Bldg.. Toledo, O. (D.O.)

PHELAN. JENNIE E., Shel-
don, la. (D.O.)

PHELPS. A. B., 1952 E. 97th
St.. Cleveland. O. (D.M.T.)

PHELPS. ADALINE, Hannah
Blk.. Lafayette, Ind.
Fannie J., First Nat'l Bank
Bldg., Bscondido, Cal.
(DO.)
L. W., Fostoria. O. (D.C.)
L. W.. Hannah Blk.. La-
fayette. Ind. (D.C.)

PHILIPS.  A.. Room 3456, over
P.  O  ,  Chawnee,  Okla.
Elizabeth, 1052 Mountain
St.. Cincinnati, O. (Ch.)
Wm.  F..  Bohman  and  Young
Sts., Cincinnati. O.
(D.M.T.)

PHILLIPS. Frisco Bldg.,
Joplin. N. J. (N.D.)


L.  W..  Taylor  Block.  Elwood

Ind. (D.C.)
T. G.. N. Washington St..

Chillicothe, Mo. (D.O.)
Mrs. W. J.. 103 Anderson

Place. Buffalo. N. Y.

(Cr.)

PHILBRECK.  N.  W..  326  Cons.

Realty  Bldg..  I.,os  Angeles.

Cal. (N.D.)
PHILBRICK. H. L., Hill's

Bldg., Hartford, Conn.

(DO.)
PHILBROOK, N. W., 327

Cores Realty Bidg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
PHILLION, THOS. E.. 2602

Harrison St.. Davenport,

la. (D.C.)
PHILLIPPE. H. T.. 418 Main

St..  Vincennes. Ind. (D.O.)
PHILLIPS  &  PHILLIPS.  DRS..

Cutcheon. Mich. (D.C.)
PHILLIPS, C. G.. Siloam

Springs, Ark. (D.C.)
Mrs. E.. 163 Independence

Ave..  Quincy,  Mass.  (D.C.)
E. Helen. 485 Porter Ave..

Buffalo.  N.  Y. (D.C  )
E. J.. 961 Great River  Ave..

Detroit. Mich. (DC.)
Grant E.. 607 State St.,

Schenectady,  N.  Y.  (DO)
Harry. Atlas Bldg.. Salt

Lake  City.  Utah. (D.O.)
Helen E.. 107 Wariner St..

Buffalo. N. Y. (D.C.)
Ida. Wellington, O. (D.C.)
Ida B. H.. Buttes Building

Wichita, Kans. (D.C  )
J. Marshall, De Soto, Mo

Keene  B., Hansleman Bldg,

Kalamazoo,  Mich.  (D.O  )
Lloyd A., 911 E. Belknap

St.. Fort Worth. Tex

O.  L..  Ill  W.  Waterman  St.,

Wichita, Kans. (D.C.)
W. M.. 225 Dick Bldg.. De

Land. Fla. (D.C.)
W. M., 416-18 Strickland

BldfT..  Voldo.sta,  Ga.  (DC.)
W. M.. 216-19 Strickland

Bldg.. Valdosta. Ga.

PHINNEY. CARL H., Fergu-
son Bldg.. Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.O.)
PICHEL.  C.  L.. 1547  Broadway.

New  York. N. Y. (DO)
PICKARD  &  PICKARD. No. 3

P. O. Bldg., Canon City.

Colo. (D.C.)
PICKENS. H. M., Berwvn.

Nebr. (S.T.)
PICKLER,  E.  C.  Palace  Bldg..

Minneapolis. Minn. (D.O.)
PICKUS.  EVELYN.  2464  Diana

St., Chicago, III. (D.O.)
PICON, .1. A.. 312 Columbia

Trust Bldg., Los Angeles.

Cal. (N.D.)
PIELEMEIR. E. F.. 518 Main

St.. Vincennes, Ind. (D.C.)
PIERCE, MRS., Universitv

Park,  Denver,  Colo.  (D.C.)
Chas.,  Louisiana,  Mo.  (S.T.)
C. M., Cambridge City. Ind.

Geo. A., 117 Vine St., Wil-

liamsport. Pa. (D.C.)
Geo. A., 22J W. 3d St., Wil-

liamsport. Pa. (D.C.)
G. Chester, 1615 E. 33d St.,

Indianapolis,  Ind.  (D.C.)
Geo. O., 196 Oak St., Bing-

hamton, N. Y. (D.C.)


Piercu
Powell


Alphabetical  Index


941


J. i^lwood, 1030 Wolf St.,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.C.)
Nellie M., Sefton BIk.. San

Dieg-o,  Cal. (D.O.)
Willard.  Milfoid,  Del. (M.D.,

D.C.)
W. R., Spring-port, Mich.
PIERCY. GEO. F., Superior,

Nebr. (D.O.)
PIERSON, F. R., 1231 Stevens
Bldg-., Chicag-o, 111. (D.C.)
F.  R., 16 N.  Waba.sh Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (Nap.)
PIETSCH, ALBERT, 834 N.
Lavergne Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.O.,  D.C.)
PIGOTT, ADALYN  K.,  College
St. Branch, Dominion
Bank Bldg-., Toronto, Ont.
PIKE, ARTHUR E., 221 W.
4th St., Long- Beach, Cal.
PILLION, THOMAS E., 2602
Harrison St., Davenport,
la. (D.C.)
PILSTROM, DAVID, South
Side Bank Bldg., Struth-
ers,  O. (D.C.)
David, 124 Bridge St.,
Struthers,  O. (D.C.)
PINE, FRANK A., Post Falls,
Idaho. (D.C.)
Linnae, May, 1705 Sherman
Ave., Evanston, 111 (D.O.)
PINKHAM, C. B., Sacramento,

PINNEY, L. PRESTON, Clif-
ford Bldg-., Jamestown,
N.  Y. (D.C.)
L. Preston, 63 S. Main St.,
Jamestown, N. Y. (D.C.)
PINZ. FERDINAND  A., 416 E.
77th St., New York, N. Y.
PIPER, FREDERICK A., 108
Soledad St., San Antonio,
Tex. (D.O.)
F. J., Box 39, Summer, 111.
PIPPENGER, CORA, First
Nat'l Bank Bldg-., Glas-
gow, Mont. (D.O.)
PIPPERDA, BENJ., Cuba,

Wis. (D.C.)
PITCHER, ALONZO, Clover-
dale, O. (N.D.)
PITTS, BARTON, 8th and

Francis Sts., St. Joseph,
Mo. (Oph.)
PITTS, EUGENE, Eddy Bldg.,
Bloomington, 111. (D.O.)
L. M., 4  7 W. Alexandria
Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Mrs. O. H., 7505 Melrose
Ave., Cleveland, O.
(D.M.T.)
PITTSBURGH COLLEGE OF
CHIROPRACTIC.  320

Pittsburgh Life Bldg.,
Pittsburgh,  Pa. (D.C.)
PIXLEY. ANNA D., Ecken-
rode Bldg., Olney, 111.
PIZARRO, EVELIO  V.,  Vallev

Stream. L. I. (D.C.)
PLACE & PLACE, Madison,

Wis. (D.C.)
PLAMBECK. H. W.. 2004 14th
St.. Moline. 111. (N.D.)
L.. 2004 14th St., Moline. 111.
PLANK. HOWARD T.. 1812
Heyworth Bldg., Chicago.
111. (D.C.)


PLANTER. MRS. L. M., Ogal-
lala, Nebr. (N.D.)

PLATNER,  L.  M.,  Joliet,  Mont.
L.  M..  6-7  Wanamaker  Bldg.,
Billings, Mont. (D.C.)

PLATT, FRANCES, Kalama-
zoo,  Mich. (D.O.)
H. F., Pontiac, Mich. (D.C.)
H. F., Belding, Mich. (D.C.)
Reginald, 1770 Hennepin
Ave.. Minneapolis, Minn.

PLATTO, H. M.. 60 B'way,
New  York  City. (D.C.)

PLEAK, J. J., Hillsboro, 111.

PLOTNEKOFF, EVEN E.,
362 Kearney St., San
Francisco, Cal. (N.D.)

PLUMB, GERALD S., Kala-
mazoo,  Mich. (D.C.)

PLUMMER. F. MYRELL, 462
Main St., Orange, N. J.
G. A.. 107 Cameron Ave.,
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)

POAGE, EVA, Texola, Okla.

POBANZ, ARTHUR G., Cam-
bridge, 111. (D.C.)

POCHET, VIRGINIA  G.


346
Garfield Ave., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)
POCOCK, EVA E., Crestline.

O. (D.M.T.)
POCOCK, HUBERT JOHN, C.
P. R. Bldg., Toronto, Ont.
POE, F. E.. 322-323  La  Plants
Blk., Vincennes, Ind.
POEET, BERNICE C. 310 E.
I  Concord St., Vinton, la.

POGUB, GARRETT O., 107 N.
7th St., Camden, N. J.
Garrett C, 116 Dudley St.,
I  Camden. N. J. (D.C.)

i  POHL. IRWIN H., Columbus,

O.  (Ma.)
I  POHS, HARRY L., 315 De-
catur St., Brooklyn,  N. T.
!  (D.C.)

!  POHS, JACOB, 315 Decatur
'  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (Opt.)

POLE, S. J., Galena, Kans.

POLLARD. C. E.. 1515 Monroe

St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
POLLEY, A. A., Long Beach
Bank Bldg., Long Beach,
Cal. (D.O.)
Mabel A.. Long Beach
Bank Bldg., Long Beach,
Cal. (D.O.)
POLLOCK, ANNA, 2006 Co-
lumbia Road. Washing-
ton. D. C. (D.O.)
C. S.. Pittsburgh Bldg., St.
Paul. Minn. (D.O.)
POLLOCK, H. S., 3610 Vesta
Ave.. Cincinnati. O.
(D.M.T.)
W. D., 154 27th St., San
Francisco. Cal. (N.D.)
POLMANTEER, L. E., Water-
vliet,  Mich. (D.C.)
V. L., 802 Mercantile

Library Bldg., Cincinnati,
O. (N.D.)
PONGER.  EDAV..  132  Coles  St..

Jersey Citv. N. J. (D.C.)
PONTING, CHAS. H.. Prosser,

Wash. (D.O.)
PONTIUS. ARTHUR R., Har-  ,
bor Springs, Mich. (D.C.)  I
E.  F.,  Harrison,  Nebr., (S.T.)  |


PONTONE, HENRY, 281

Grove St., Jersey (Ility,

N. J. (D.C.)
I'OOL. ARNOLD A.. 433 West

Central Ave., Toledo, O.

(D.M.T.)
POOL, W. O., Wynne  wood,

Okla. (D.O.)
POOLE, I. CHESTER, 204

High  St., Fall  River,  Mas.s.

Lanche M., New Paris, Ind

I'OORE, H. R., 361 N. Galena

St., Freeport, 111. (N.D.)
POORTEN, B. A., 68 E. Main

St., Newark,  O. (D.C.)
POPE, H. F.. 107  Meigs  Bldg.

Bridgfpoit. Conn. (N.D.)
POPE, ORA, Frederick, Okla.

PORET,  ■  E.,  Hessmer,  La

PORTER  &  PORTER,  DRS
Petoskey, Mich. (D.C.)

PORTER, CHARLES SAN-
FORD, Long Beach, Cal.

PORTER,  GEO.,  137-38  Edg-
erly  Bldg.,  Fresno,  Cal.

E.  J., Milwaukee, Wis.

F.  J., 74 E. 96th  St.,  New
York, N. Y. (Ma.)

Alameda, Cal.


E.,

G., Petoskey, Mich.


M.,

Sts.


Wentworth and
Chicago, 111.


George
Mrs.  R.
Rev.  T.
24th

W. Wilson, Box 240. Osha-
wa, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
POSEGATE, F. AI., Jr., Neb-
raska Bldg., Tulsa, Okla.
POSEY, T. W.,  Bowling  Green,

Ky. (D.O.)
POSSON, G. W., Glens Falls.

N. Y. (D.C.)
POST, E., Citizens' Trust
Bldg.,  Paterson,  N.  J.
POTTER, MRS. L. F., 69th  St.
and Broadway, The Ne-
vada, New York. N Y
POTTER, LA FOREST, The
Nevada. 70th St. and
B'way.  New  York,  N. Y
(M.D., D.C.)
Minnie F., Pioneer Bldg.,
Seattle. Wash. (D.O.)
POTTS.  R.  A..  14-15  W.  News-
paper Union Bldg.. Okla-
homa  City, Okla. (D.C.)
POULSON, R. J., 10 Spedarth

St., Astoria, Ore. (D.C.)
POWELL, ANNA. 409 Com-
monwealth Bldg., Port-
land.  Ore. (D.C.)
Anna.  424  W.  8th  St.,  Cincin-
nati, O. (P.)
Ernest A., New York Life
Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.
Horace R., Poughkeepsie,

N.  Y. (M.D.)
F. D., First Nat'l Bank
Bldg., Corning, N. Y.
L. M.. Groton,  Mass. (N.D  )
N. W., Warsaw, Ind. (S.T.)
W. O., 409 Commonwealth
Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Wilbur S., BlufEton, Ind.


042


Alphabetical  Index


Powers
Quinn


V. E.,  Clarion, la.


POWERS. ALEXANDER A.,
Rutland, O. (D.M.T.)
\Vm. S., 371fi Drake Ave.,
Cincinnati, O. (D.M.T.)
TOWERS  &  DELANEY,

19fi8i E. 1st St., Los An-
geles. Cal. (D.C.)
J D. 1021 Olive St., Long

Beach. Cal. (N.D.)
Mrs. M. A. E., 1702 Park
Ave , Shreveport. La.
POWLEY.

PRACTORIUS.  CONRAD,  926
17th  St.  N.  W..  Washing-
ton, D.  C. (D.O.)

PRAEGR,  J.  B.,  110  W.  90th
St., Newr York,  N. Y.
(M.D.)  ^ ^ .

PRATER,  LENNA  K.,  Spring-
ville, N. Y. (D.O.)

PRATHER,  MRS.  MATTIE,
Little Rock, Ark. (S.T.)

PRATT, A. A., Box 907,

Binghamton, N. Y. (N.D.)
Miss  A.  L.,  Rest  Home,
Virginia Beach, Va.
(N.D., M.D.)  ^ ^

E H., Suite 1708, 25 East
Washington  St., Chicago,
111. (Or.S.)  ^ ^ ^^ ^

PRATT EDWIN J., Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

Edwin J., 27 E. Monroe St.,

Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
Frank  P.,  255  Bath  St.,  Glas-
gow. Scotland. (D.O.)

PREA,  DR.  FREDERICKSEN,
Ke'nmore, N. D. (S.T.)

PRECHTEL,  FRED.  H.,  Led-
erer-Hene  Bldg.,  Elwood,
Ind. (D.C.)

PRENTICE,  H.  H.,  201  Knick-
erbocker Bldg., Ports-
mouth,  O. (D.C.)
H. H.. Rm. 201. 8311 Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, O. (N.D.)

PRESCOTT,  ALLEN  Z.,  Ma-
jestic Bldg.,  Loraine,  O.

PRESGRAVES, A. H., 117
Putnam Ave., Zanes-
ville, O. (D.M.T.)

PRESTON,  F.  E.,  Salina,
Kans. (D.C.)

PRESTON, F. M., Park Place,
Johnstown, O. (D.M.T.)
Frances R., 132 Blackwell
St., Dover, N. J. (D.C.)

PRETZEL, BERTHA, Opera
House, Michigan City,
Ind. (D.C.)
Wm.  J.,  Opera  House,  Mich-
igan City, Ind. (D.C.)

PRICE,  A.,  291  Main  St.,  West
Hamilton, Can. (D.C.)
Addie  Fish,  210 E. First  St.,

Moscow, Idaho. (D.O.)
A. L., 291 Main St., West

Hamilton, Can. (D.C.)
Mrs. B. M., 820 Ohio  St., St.

Paul, Minn. (D.C.)
Emma Hook, 1st and Main
Sts.. Hutchinson, Kans.


Houston A., Comm'l Bank
& Trust Co. Bldg., Alex-
andria,  La. (D.O.)
J. A., State Nafl Bank
Bldg., Oklahoma City,
Okla. (D.O.)
PRICE.  J,  RUSSEL.  Chicago,
111. (M.D.)
Kenneth V.. Orange Ave.,

Monrovia. Cal. (D.O.)
Lavenia. 1002 Everett St.,

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
R. L.,  Merchants  Bank  Bldg.,

Jackson, Miss. (D.O.)
Vivian H., Walker Bldg..

Covington, Tenn. (D.O.)
W. L.. 291 Main St. W..
Hamilton, Ont., Can.
PRIESTER, LAURA, 5804
Hollywood Blvd., Los  An-
geles, Cal. (D.C.)
PRINDLE, RICHARD H.,

Henderson, S. C. (D.O.)
PRINGLE, R. J., Lurline
Baths,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
PRINTY. SYLVIA. Avery
Bank Bldg., Ft. Collins,
Colo. (D.O.)
PRITCHETT. NETTIE C,
529 Griesham Bldg..
Bloomington,  111. (Nap.)
PROCTOR. ARTHUR C, Ash-
ton Blk., Rockford, 111.
Burton H., 15 Beacon St.,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
C.  M..  Columbus,  Wis. (D.C.)
Clark M., 316 Main St.,

Ames. la. (D.O.)
C. W., Ellicott Square,  Buf-
falo,  N. Y. (D.O.)
Ernest  Richard, 27 E. Mon-
roe St., Chicago, 111.
Florence B., 6543 Ingleside

Ave.,  Chicago,  111. (D.O.)
Glenn J., 27 E. Monroe St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
PROELICHER, CLARA, 3556
Main St., Evanston. Cin-
cinnati. O. (D.C.)
PROGRESSIVE CHIROPRAC-
TIC COLLEGE. Ft. Smith,
Ark. (D.C.)
PROSSER. W. C, Gen'l Del.,

Wichita, Kans. (S.T.)
PROUD, W. C, Tottle-
Lemon  Bank  Bldg.,  St.
Joseph,  Mo. (Opt.)
PROVINCE. MME. B. P., 1416
S St. N. W., Washington,
D. C. (Ma.)
PROVOST,  A. B., 45 Pearl St.,
Grand Rapids, Mich.
PROWSE, E. W., Suite 426-
427 Duncan Bldg., Van-
couver,  B. C. (D.C.)
PRUDEN,  W. F., 5033 71st
St.  S.  E.,  Portland,  Ore.
PRUETT BROS., 46 Masonic
Bldg.,  Pueblo,  Colo. (D.C.)
PRUETT,  Paris,  Tex. (D.C.)


PRUETT BROS.. 525 E. 18th

St.. Denver,  Colo. (D.C.)
PRUSENDORFER. ADAM J.,

Custar. O. (D.M.T.)
PRUYNE. A. L.. 420 Main St..

Towanda. Pa. (D.C.)
PRYKE, A. EDW.. West Side

Y. M. C. A.. Chicago, 111.

PUDDICOMB. ROBT. A.. 500

Main N., Burlington, la.

PUDDICOMBE. R., 410  E. La-
fayette St., Tampa. Fla.

Raymond. 508 Mirabeau

Bldg., Green Bay, Wis.

Robert A., 500 Main St.,

Burlington, la. (D.C.)
PUDERBACH, PETER, 998

Putnam Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (N.D.)
PUE, JOHN T., Hicks Bldg.,

San Antonio, Tex. (D.C.)
PUGH, J. M.. Am. Nafl Bank

Bldg.. Everett, Wash.

J. Thurman, 4716 Melrose

Ave.. Los Angeles, Cal.

Mrs. Maggie, Soldier, Kans.

Sarah Frances, Forsythe

Bldg., Fresno, Cal. (D.O.)
PUMPHREY, W. A.. Adair

Bldg., Portland, Ind.

PUNK, H. F., 6351 Ellis  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
PUOTT, F. F., Ephriam,

Utah. (D.C.)
PURDOM, T. E., Westover

Bldg., Kansas City, Mo.

Zudie P., Westover Bldg.,

Kansas  City, Mo. (D.O.)
PURDY, VICTOR  W., 4 Frost

Blk.. Stevens Point, Wis.

PURINTON, E. E., Morgan-
town. W. Va. (N.D.)
PURNELL, EMMA, Wool-
worth Bldg., Lancaster,

Pa. (D.O.)
PURSER, DR. JOHN L.,

New Orleans, La. (M.D.)
PUSHECK,  C,  220  W.  Ontario

St., Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
PUTNAM, ERNEST, Wil-

liamston, Mich. (D.C.)
PUTT. LEWIS  O., Toronto, O.

PUTZKE.  DR.  HELENA  E.,  R.

No. 2. Box 1. Humboldt,

S.  D. (S.T.)
PYATZKI. ERNEST, Hortin,

Kans. (D.C.)
PYLE, DR. HENRY  G., 537  E.

Ocean Ave.. Long Beach,

Cal. (D.C.)
PYLE, HENRY  G.. 332 N.

Jefferson St., Peoria, 111.
R. M., Harold, Tex. (S.T.)


QUELLE, R. J., Burlington,

la. (D.O.)
QUICK,  MRS.  M.,  711  Summitt
Ave., Clinton. la. (D.C.)
Roy  T., Onawa, la. (D.O.)
Walter J., Roanoke, Va.


QUIGLEY,  J.  E.,  826  10th  Ave.,

Munhall, Pa. (D.C.)
W. J., 501 Pittsburgh Life

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.

W. J., 305 E. 8th Ave.,

Homestead,  Pa. (D.C.)


QUINN, BERNARD. 56

Public Square, Carrollton,
O. (D.C.)
W.  M.. Casper, Wyo.

QUINN BERNARD,  2050  Penn
Ave., Alliance, O. (D.C.)


Quinn
Rector


Alphabetical  Index


943


QUINN. ELLA X., Jefferson
Theatre RuildiiiR-, St.
Aiig-ustine, Florida.


W. A.. Cheyenne, Wyoming:.

W. W.. Lookout, Wyo.


QUISKNUERV. MARY, Lyon,

Kans. (D.O.)
QTJITTRUD. E. F., Crookston.

Minn. (D.C.)


R


N. Y.

L., Sydney,

H., 112 W.
York, N. Y.


RABENSTEIN, WM. M., 512

Race  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.

(Ch.)
RABINOVICH, H., 1326 South

I^awndale Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
H., 206  Second  Ave.,  New

York,  N.  Y. (N.D.)
RACE, H. L., 258 Hancock

St., Brooklyn,

RADCLIFFE, C.

Nebr. (D.C.)
RADDLEY, JAY

71st St., New

RADEMACHER, CAROLINE,

373 Woodlawn Ave., Buf-
falo,  N. Y. (D.C.)
RADER, GEO. B., 14 W. Sec-
ond St., Seymour, Ind.

RADICE,  S.  S.,  45  Elmwood

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N. Y. (D.C.)
JRADKE, FRANK, 2932

Indiana  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

(Ma.)
RADLEY,  JAY  H.,  113  W.  71st

St., New  York,  N. Y.

RAFFENBBRG, MINA G., 10

New Moffet Blk., Wey-

burn,  Sask. (D.O.)
RAFFERTY, M. H., Dakota,

N. D. (D.C.)
RAHR, GOLDIE, J., 253 N.

Broad St., Norwich, N. Y.

(D.O-
RAINB, L. M., 2248 W. 95th

St., Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Lulu M., Merritt Bldg-.,

Jackson, Mich. (D.C.)
W. H., 6509 Detroit Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Wm. H. O., Merritt Bldg-.,

Jackson, Mich. (D.C.)
RAINEY,  HOWARD  E.,

Owosso, Mich. (N.D.)
RAIRDEN, N. B., 4618 S. Fi-

gueroa St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)
RALFF,  -H., 554 Figueroa St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Harry, 209 Merchants  Trust

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

RALPH, GERBER, Wallace,

Idaho. (D.C.)
RALSTON, CORA

Sherman Ave.,

ville, O. (D.C.)
John I>., Carrington Bldg.,

Glencoe, 111. (D.O.)
RAMIREZ, JOSE A., 152 East

47th St., New  York, N. Y.

RAMIS, ROY E., 1177 Taylor

St.. Akron, O. (D.M.T.)
RAMONS, HATTIE E., Post

Offlce Blk., Canon City,

Colo. (N.D.)
RAMSDALL, GLADYS, 4124

Vincennes Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
RAMSEY, H., 301 Evanston

Bldg.. Minneapolis, Minn.

Hazel, 228 S. Court Street,

Sullivan, Ind. (D.C.)


RAMSEY, MRS. MARGARET
P., 1347 Pacific St.,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (Cr.)

RAND. CARRIE ELLS-
WORTH, 146 Massachu-
Boston, Mass.


E., 922
Steuben-


setts Ave.
N. Louis,
Wellesley,


Waban Hotel,
Mass. (D.O.)
RANDALL, EDWARD B., 776
Tremont Street, Boston,
Mass. (D.C.)
RANDELL, G. J., 215 W. 51st
St., New York, N. Y.
RANDOLPH, HARRIETT, Los
Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
Mrs. Jessie K., R. F. D. 2,

Nashville, Kans. (Ma.)
J. R.. Gen. Del., Springfield,
O. (D.C.)
RANKEN, ELIS. Colonial
Arcade,  Cleveland, O.
(Ma.)
Inez, 1428 E. 80th St.,
Cleveland, O. (Ma.)
RANKIN. FLORENCE, Wash-
ington Court House, O.
RANNEY, A. W., 9 Sylvan
Ave., New Haven, Conn.

GOODWIN, Bank
Middleboro, Mass.


N


28th
Va.


RANSDEN

Bldg.,

RASCHER, MISS J., 2119

St. N.W., Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
RASMUSSEN. MRS. MEDA,

Garrett, Ind. (D.C.)
RASSMBR, MURKEE J., 969

Liberty Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
RATH,  DR. F.  A., 651  W.

St. Newport News,

Frederick A., 506 Silsby
.Bldg., Newport  News, Va.

Frederick A.. S. Fallsburg.

N.  Y. (D.C.)
RATHBURN & RATHBURN,

30-32 Zimmerman Bldg.,

Springfield, O. (D.C.)
RATHBURN, B. P., Spring-
field. O. (N.D.)
RATHBURN. MRS.. M. E.,

Lucas,  Kans. (S.T.)
RATLEDGE SYSTEM OF

CHIROPRACTIC

SCHOOLS. Los Angeles.

Cal. (D.C.)
Lillian F., 217 St. Marcus

Bldg.. Santa  Barbara, Cal.

RAUEK.  E.  H.,  Newburg,  Ore.

RAUFFS, FRED. F., 305

Flatiron Bldg., Akron, O.

RAWLINS. WM. E.. 46

Irving Place, Brooklvn,

N. Y. (Ma.)
RAWSON, GUY ALLISON,

1549 Echo  Park  Ave..  Los

Angeles. Cal. (N.D.)
RAY, A. D., Cleburne, Tex.


Charles Dennis, First Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Le Mars, la.
Chas. P., Monroe, Wis.

C. R..  Stockton, 111. (D.C.)
M. G.. 225 N. Water St.,

Gault. Ont., Can. (D.C.)
C. R.,  Monroe, Wis. (D.C.)
C. R.,  Stockton, 111. (D.C.)
Edd., Altus, Okla. (S.T.)
Edwin C. Stahlman Bldg..

Nashville. Tenn. (D.C.)
H. F., Realty Bldg., Char-
lotte, N. C. (D.O.)
Jno. A., Lewiston, 111. (S.T.)
L.  William,  New  Grand  Cen-
tral Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Mary L., 419 South Ave.,

Westfield. N. J. (D.O.)
T.  L.,  Fort  Worth  Nafl  Bank
Bldg.. Ft. Worth, Tex.
RAY,  ALLEN  L., 3021  North
Spaulding Ave., Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
RAYLE, MINNIE D., 207J W.
Center  St..  Marion.  O.
(El.)
RAYMOND, A. C, 1408 Ply-
mouth Ave., Minneapolis,
Minn. (D.C.)
Margaret T., Fri.sco Bldg.,
Joplin, Mo. (D.O.)
RAYMOND, BERTHA  C.

Chicago, 111. (M.D.)
RAYNOR, EUGENE E
Dwight Bldg., Jackson,
Mich. (D.O.)
READ. CHAS. G., 153 River-
side Ave.,  Buffalo,  N. Y.
(Cr.)
READ, RACHEL, 23 Reinan-
zaka St., Tokyo, Japan.
Miles S., Weightman Bl.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O  )
Miles S., Franklin, Va.
READFIELD. SALLIE Ed-
wards, Miss. (D.C.)
READING, L. W., 15th and
Pine Sts., Philadelphia,
Pa. (M.D., D.C.)
R. W., 711 Ocean Front,
Ocean Park, Cal. (D.C.)
REAGAN, A. E., 118 Coolage
Ave., Syracuse, N. Y.
REARDEN, ANNA, Locust
Ave.. Long Beach, Cal.
REBER. CHAS. G., 411 Main
St., Johnstown, Pa. (D.C  )
REBMAN. F. B., Youngstown.

O. (M.D., N.D.)
RECKEWELL, AIRS. MARY,
200 "SV. 72nd St., New-
York. N. Y. (Ma.)
RECORD. BLANCHE B.. 754
17th St.. Rock Island. Ill
RECORDS. W. P., Wilburton.

Okla CS  T  )
RECTOR. ALBURN PARKS.
6161 Broadway, Chicago.
111. (D.O.)
Emma. E. Main St., Benton
Harbor,  Mich. (D.O.)


944


Alphabetical  Index


RedcUtf
Rice


Charles A.. Odd Fellows
Bldff.. Indianapolis, Ind.,

REDCl'.IFF.  CLAYTON  L.,
Sidney. Nebr. (D-C)

REDRT.SHKTMER.  MAX.  80
Washinprton  Ave.,  Detroit,
Mich. (Opt.)

REDIFKR. CI.ARA  M

Toime-stown.  O. (We) _„

REEBMAN.  FRED.  B..  402
Stamboush  Bldff..  Youngs-
town, O. (D.C.)  . ^

REECR.  WM.  R.,  Huntington
raik.  Cal. (N.D.)

REED,  D.  S.,  Chiropractic
Board  of  Examiners,
Vallev  City,  N.  D. <T).C.)

REED. RICHARD HORATIO,
5900 Magnolis Ave., Chi-
cago, 111. (D.O.)
R. O., 204 Passaic Ave..

Hackensack. N. .1. (D.C.)
Robert V., 1034 Broadway,

Denver,  Colo. (D.C.)
Spencer D., Valley City,

V D  .  Vreeland  Bldg.,  Hugo,

Okla. (DC.)  , ._^.

W D,  Boonville,  Ark. (D.C.)

REEHL,  W.,  828  Broad  St.,
Newark, N. J. (D.C.)

REES, .JOHN T., 404 E. Colo-
rado  St., Pasadena. Cal.

REESE, A. C, 1325 Greenbay
Ave.. Milwaukee, Wis.

REESE, D. H., The Nicholas,
Toledo, O. (D.O.)
Julia  D.,  Woodbine,  la.

Julia D.. 1029 Omaha Nat.
Bk. Bldg., Omaha, Neb.
"VV E  ,  The  Nicholas,  Toledo,
O. (DO.)

REESMAN.  BURTHEL  F.,
Carlinville. 111. (D.O.)

REEVE  E.  E.,  522  2d  Ave.,
North Troy,  N. Y. (D.C.)

REHFEED.  J.,  1817  N.  9th  St.,
PViilndelnhia, Pa. (N.D.)

REHFIELD,  HUGO  A..  Martin
County  Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,
Fairmount,  Minn. (D.O.)

REIROT.D, HENRY. Spring-
field, O. (D.O., Ma.)

REICHERR.  DOROTHEA  S.,
117  Ridge  St.,  Crown
Point,  Ind. (D.C.)

REICHMANN. H., 2011 Madi-
son  Ave., New  York.
N.  Y. (N.D.)

REICHTER,  Crown  Point,
Ind. (N.D.)

RETCKIE,  HARRY  C.  14(;fi
Kelton  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.C.)

REID,  A.  J., 7001  N.  Paulina
St.. Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
W. A., Standard School of
Chiropractic and Naturo-
pathy, Davenport, la.
(N.D.. D.O.)

REID, CHAS. C, Majestic
Bldg.. Denver, Colo.
Geo. W., Slater  Bldg., Wor-
cester,  Mass. (D.O.)
R., Grand Haven, Mich.

J. F., Trumbull Blk., War-
ren.  O. (D.O.)
R., Grand Haven, Mich.

Marietta  Putnam, 114  New-
tonville Ave., Newton,
Mass. (D.O.)


Pa.


700 La-
Angeles,


M..


Mrs.  Vita  M.,  524  Consolid-
ated Realty  Bldg.,  Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

REIER,  MARTIN  A.,  1823  W.
Dean  Bldg.,  Spokane,
Wash. (D.C.)

REIF, THEODOR, 4901 Strat-
ford Road, Los Angeles,
Cal. (N.D.)

REILEY, F. H., 724 Market
St., Sandusky, O. (D.C.)
P. S.. Bailey, Mich. (D.C.)

REILLY, H. J., 1804 Mulliner
Ave., Bronx, N. Y. (P.)
M. J., 535 Plum St.,

Youngstown, O. (D.M.T.)

REIN,  CLARA,  7  Sharp  Bldg.,
Lafayette, Ind. (D.C.)

REIN. CLARA, 118 S. Mary-
land Ave., Atlantic City,
N.  J. (D.C.)

REINER,  NETTIE  A.,  617
Traphagen  St.,  ^Vest  Ho-
boken, N. J. (D.C.)

REINHART,  C. R., 418  Jeffer-
son Bldg., South Bend,
Ind. (D.C.)
C.  "W.,  Monroe,  Mich. (D.O.)
Matilda V., 1524 Chestnut
St.. Philadelphia,

REINHOLD.  A.  M.,
guna  St.,  Los
Cal. (N.D.)

REINHOLD. MRS. ALICE
700 I^aguna St.. Los
Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)

REINSCHREIBER.  EMMA,

1517 S. Spaulding Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

REISDORF,  J.  H.,  211  Wood-
ward Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
J.  H.,  Market  Bldg.,  315
B'wav,  Detroit,  Mich.

REISENWEBER, F.  W.. 213
E. 15th St., Olympia,
Wash. (N.D.)

REISER,  MRS.  SOPHIA,  1930
Logan  Ave.,  Youngstown,
O. (D.M.T.)

REITER.  D.  H.,  R.  F.  D.,
Youngstown, O. (D.C.)

REITMEIER,  J.  H.,
Box 23,  Minster,

REMSBURG.  G.  W.,
la. (D.C.)

REMMERS, FREDERICK L.,
440  Somerset  St.,  Glou-
cester City, N.  J. (N.D.)

RENAUD, E C. 803 i Franci.s
St.. St. Joseph, Mo. (Opt.)

RENCHER, G. J., 68 Greene
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(N.D.,  D.C.)
Rose, 68 Greene Avenue,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)

RENE,  MRS.  JESSIE.  4200  S.
Grand  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.

RENFREW, D. RHODES,

1404 Tremont St., Denver,
Colo. (D.C.)

RENO. INEZ, Woodbine, la
Inez  F.,  Dolores,  Colo. (D.C.)
O. E., Guide Rock, Nebr.

RENSHAW, DELLA, 218 S.
Chestnut St., Clarksburg,
W.  Va. (D.O.)
Dr., 855A Mvrtlo St., Oak-
land, Cal. (D.C.)


R.  No.  1.
O.  (N.D.)
Lamont,


RENSLEY,  HARRY.  2150
Cleveland,  Ave.,  Chicago,
111. (D.C.)

REPLOGLE. K. M., Cham-
paign, 111. (N.D.)
P. S., Champaign, 111.

RERUCHA,  VICTOR  V.,

O'Neill, Nebr. (D.O.)

RESSLER,  J.  M.,  10729  Good-
ing Ave.,  C^leveland,  O.

REST,  HAVEN,  2941  Broad-
way, Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

RESTORFF,  C,  145  W.  Center
St., Paxton,  111. (D.C.)

REUDOLPH, C. A., 3800
B'wav,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(Ma.)

REUTER,  KATHRYN,  Selling
Bldg.,  Portland,  Ore. (D.O.)

REXFORD.  S.  E..  1028  Bloom-
field  St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.

REYNARD,  DR.,  1314  Tele-
graph Ave.,  Oakland,  Cal.

REYNOLDS, ARLENE B., 30-
31 Jefferson Bldg.,
St. Augustine, Fla. (D.C.)

REYNOLDS,  C.  E.,  New  Shar-
on,  la. (D.C.)

E.  R., Souders Bldg., Au-
burn, Nebr. (D.O.)

Geo. H., R. R. 1, Box 461,

Hazelton, Kans. (Ma.)
H. D., Beaver Falls, Pa.

H. D., Shaffmaster Bldg.,

Conneaut, O. (D.C.)
Miss Ida, Sun Prairie, Wis.

R. H., San Bernardino, Cal.

R. H., Wheatridge, Colo.

W. H., 486 Allison St., A.sh-
land. Ore. (D.C.^
REZNER, LIJRENA, Lahann
Bldg., Monmouth, 111.
REZNIKOV. ANNA, Sullivan

St.. Miami, Ariz. (D.O.)
RHINEHART, A. W., 37
North St., Oneida, N. Y.
RHOAD, IRA D., New Wash-
ington,  O. (D.M.T.)
RHOADES, H. B., Mantua,

N.  J. (D.C.)
RHODES, B. H.. West Palm
Beach, Fla. (D.C.)

F.  A.. 308 Northland Ave.,
Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)

RICE. ALICE H.. Las Vegas,
N. M. (M.D.)
E. C, Norman, Okla. (N.D.)
Eula, 1723 Freeman St.,

Cincinnati, O. (Ch.)
Oscar, 2118 W. North Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
RICE. BERT H., A'inton, la.

C.  M., 506 Tussing Bldg.,
Lansing,  Mich. (D.C.)

D.  A.,  Storm  Lake,  la. (D.C.)
Helen Elizabeth, 500 W.

12th St., Oklahoma Citv,

Okla. (D.O.)
Mary J., 304 S. Market St.,

Wichita,  Kans. (D.C.)
Roy L., 917 Gerritt St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Steve A., 326i E. 35th St.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Wm. C. 3959 Lincoln Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Wm. C, 1951 Irving Pk.

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)


liich
Robertson


Alphabetical  Index


945


RICH, JAMIOS H.. 830 Market

St., San F'rancisco, Cal.

RICHARD,  LAWRENCE  E.,  59

Fort W., Detroit, Mich.

(Opt.)
RICHARD, S. .7. DE NIORD,

2(!2 Summer  Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y. (El.)
RICHARDS & RICHARDS, 9

Franklin St., Warren, Pa.

RICHARDS, ADDIE, Findlay,

O. (Ma.)
Chas., Valparaiso, Ind.

(D. C.)
C.  B., 509  Innis  St.,  Oil  City,

Pa. (D.C.)
C. B., 77 W. Central Ave.,

Titusville, Pa. (D.C.)
C. H.,  222 3d  St.  Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
Chas. D., 310 Penn. St..

Huntins-ton, Pa. (D.C.)
M. F., 3242 Monroe St.,

Toledo, O. (N.D.)
Ralph A., Lock Box,  137.

Nepon.set, 111. (N.D.)
S. D., National Bank Bldg.,

Savannah, Ga. (D.O.)
Wm. H., 121J W. Sandusky

St., Findlay.  O. (Ma.)
Winifred, Davison, Mich.

RICHARDSON,  A.  P.,  La  Salle,

111. (D.C.)
A. W.,  511  Washing-ton  Bldg-.,

Los  Ang-eles, Cal. (D.C.)
A.  W.,  Opera  House,  Los  An-
geles,  Cal. (D.C.)
A.  W.. 1143  S. Olive  St.,  Los

Ang-eles,  Cal. (D.C.)
C.  E., 2fi9 S.  8th  St.,  Newark,

N.  J. (D.C.)
C. E., 854 S. Orange Ave.,

Newark,  N.  J. (D.C.)
Ernest E., Arnstein Bldg-.,

Knoxville, Tenn. (N.D.)
Flora May, Auditorium

Bldg., Minneapolis, Minn.

G. A., 152 Virginia Ave.,

Jersey  City, N. ,1. (D.C.)
Geo. Art., 511 Washington

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

Horace  J., 824 N. Tejon St.,

Colorado Springs, Colo.

H. L.. 58 Main St., Winter

Hill,  Mass. (D.O.)
H. S., 45  2 W. 7th St., Long

Beach, Cal. (D.O.)
Ira F., fith and Park Sts.,

Fremont. Nebr. (D.O.)
Mrs. Mae, 15(!56  W. 45th St.,

Los  Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Martyn I.,.. Paul Gale-
Greenwood Bldg., Nor-
folk. Va. (D.O.)
Mrs. Isa B.. 1731 S. Ver-
mont Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (N.D.)
R. H.. 343J B. Grand Ave.,

Beloit. Wis. (D.C.)
T. B., 214 N. Lawrence St..

Wichita,  Kans. (D.C.)
William H., 34 St. Austin's

Place., West New Bright-
on, N.  Y. (D.O.)
RICHARDSON, EMMA. 935

Baymiller St.. Cincinnati,

O. (Ch.)
E. E., 620 Mack Bldg.,

Denver, Colo. (N.D.)
H.. 217 12th St., Miami,

Pla. (D.O.)
RICHES, C. W., 2832 2d Ave.

S.. Minneapolis, Minn.


RICHEV, S. H., Kokomo, Ind.

RICHIE,  CHAS. A..  210 Equit-


able Bldg.

Del. (M.D.,
RICHMAN, R.

la. (D.C.)
RICHMOND, I.


Wilmington,
D.C.)
A., Brooklyn,

M., 92 Broad-
way,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.C.)
RICHTER, BENJ. R., Free-
port, Pa. (D.C.)
Clarence, Holyrood, Kans.

T.  F.,  37  12th  St.,  Minneapo-
lis, Minn. (D.C.)
RICHTON. FRANCIS. Moose

.Jaw. Sask., Can. (D.C.)
RICHWOURN, I. M.. 207

Greenwood Ave., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
RICKERSON,  ALVAH  C,  Buf-
falo St., Rushford. N. Y.

RICKMERS. N. W., 9fi02

Parnelia Ave., Cleveland,

O. (D.M.T.)
RIDDELL, ROSS, 29 Monroe

Ave., Detroit, Mich. (Ch.)
RIDER. C. L., 521 Stevens

Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.

RIDGWAY, KATHRYN B.,

Securities Bldg., Des

Moines. la. (D.O.)
RIECHERS, DOROTHEA,

Crown  Point,  Ind. (D.C.)
RIEDL, WENZL, 2179 Tele-
graph Ave., Oakland, Cal.

RIEDMUELLER, ,1., 117 East

86th St., New York, N. Y.

RIESE,  .JOSEPH,  402  S.  7th  St.,

La  Crosse,  Wis. (N.D.)
RIFENBARK.  LLOYD  I.,  Gro-

ton, S. Dak. (D.O.)
RIGGLE, A. C, 921 F St.

N. W.. "Washington. D. C.

(D.M.T.)
RIGHTMAN, NACHMAN, 270

Rochester Ave., Brook-
lyn,  N. Y. (D.C.)
RILEY,  BENJ. F.,  1150  Chapel

St., New Haven, Conn.

Chloe  C,  14  E.  31st  St.,  New

York, N. Y. (D.O.)
Geo. P., 212  Main  St.,  Dans-

ville. N. Y. (D.C.)
Geo. W., 14 E. 31st St.,

New York Citv. (D.O.)
H. L., Boulder, Colo. (D.O.)
J. Shelby, 11 16 F St. N. ^V.,

Washington. D. C. (N.D.)
Laura  B.. 552  Massachusetts

Ave., Boston. Mass. (D.C.)
Laura B., 151 Huntington

Ave., Boston, Mass. (D.C,

D.P.)
Nannie B., West Bldg.,

Rome, Ga. (D.O.)
RILEY.  LORA  B.,  1116  F  St.

N. ^V., Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
RIMOL, ANNA, Concordia,

Kans. (D.O.)
RINABARGER, J. WARREN,

Keosauqua,  la. (D.O.)
RINDERKNECHT, GEORGE.

H.. 1522 Franklin Ave.,

Columbus, O. (Hy.)
RINEHART, M. V., 1524

Chestnut  St.,  Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.C.)
RING,  J.  G.,  1012 22nd St..

Milwaukee, Wis. (D.C.)


RiNOKL, E. C., 208 Dechman

Ave., Peoria, 111. (D.O.)
RINGESEIN, H. W.. 5

Superior  St.,  Toledo,  O.

(D.M.T.)
RINGLE, RALPH, 2055

Cornell Place, Cleveland,

O. (Ch.)
RINGLER, SANFORD, Neville

Bldg., Omaha, Neb. (D.O.)
RISCH, GERTRUDE, Oelwein,

la. (D.C.)

RITCHIE, CHARLES  A., Wil-
mington,  Del. (M.D., D.C.)
J. J., 1344 Oak St., Los  An-

gele.s, Cal. (D.C.)
M. Aymer, 13 St. Ann St.,
Manchester, Eng. (D.O  )

RITTER.  J.  M.,  Eastern  Ave.,
Ashland, O. (D.M.T.)

RITTMEYER, 1127 Washing-
ton St., Hoboken, N. J.

RITTMEYER,  F.  W.,  1137
Washington  St.,  Hoboken,
N. J. (D.C.)

ROACH,  JEANETTE,  45

Hague  Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.

ROADES, FLORENCE G.,

Richmond, Ind. (D.O.)
ROANE, JAS., 4025 Arcade

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.

ROARK, H. ALTON, 787 Main

St.,  Waltham,  Mass. (D.O.)
ROASTER, W. T., 206 4th St.,

Red  Oak,  la. (D.C.)
ROBB, W. J., Denison, Kans.,

ROBBERSON, SUSIE BELLE,

1204 N. Jefferson St.,

Springfield, Mo. (D.C.)
ROBBINS, E. MARIE, Santa

Barbara. Cal. (D.C.)
E. U., 1140 S. Grand Ave.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
E.  U.,  1407  Eldorado  St.,  Los

Angeles Cal. (D.C.)
E. W.. 1321 S. Union Ave.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (N.D.)
W. J., 341 W. Portage St.,

Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.

ROBERTS, A. C, Milwaukee,

Wis. (N.D.)
C. S., 723 Lexington Ave.,

New York, N. Y. (M.D.)
E. H., Y. M. C. A., Tampa.

Fla. (Ph.D.)
H., Box 654, Milwaukee,

Wis. (N.D.)
ROBEN, M. G., Nat. Shoe &

Leather  Bk.  Bldg.,  Auburn,

Me. (D.O.)
ROBERTS. ARTHUR. Ander-
son  Bldg., Taylorville, 111.

Frederick S.. Lyric Theatre

Bldg., King City, Mo.

Helen  D.,  Kent,  Conn.  (D.C.)
I. M., Marysville, O. (D.O.)
Kathryn.  Bedford,  la. (D.O.)
Mary E.. Tarlton, O. (D.O.)
W. L., 150  W. Chelton  Ave.,

Germantown, Pa. (D.O.)
ROBERTSON, H. L., 120 E.

Main St., Marshall  town.

la. (D.C.)  •

H. L.. Box 26. Haverlock.

Nebr. (D.C.)
L. D., lOh N. Chestnut St.,

Seymour, Ind. (D.O.)
O. C, 225 Allen St., Owens-

boro,  Ky.  (D.O.)
R. W., 13-14 Masonic Bldg..

Hutchinson, Ivans. (DC.)


046


.4  lj)lt(ibeliv(il  Iiulr.r


Robeson
Ross


ROBl'::SON. C. S., D;invillc. O.
David I.oian, Commerce
Bldp:.. Kansas City. Mo.
ROBKSON. C. S  . Knox Co.,
Danville. O. (N.D.)
H.  A.. Sac  Citv. Ta. fD.C.)
ROBINETT. JOHN H., First
Nat'l Bank Bldp:.. Hunt-
inpton. W. A'a. (D.O.)
ROBINSON. B. N.. Prairie
Du  Chien.  "VVis. (M.D.)
Mme. D. V. .T., 1906 6th
St  ,  Washington.  D.  C.
(Ma.)
T. J.  T.,  1987 Ravina  Ave.,

Flint. Mo. (D.C.)
Wm.. 810 S. A  St.,

Richmond, Ind. (D.C.)
ROBINSON. CHARI.KS E.,
First Nat'l Bank Bldg.,
Oakland. Cal. (D.O.)
Chas. F., Unionville, Mo.

C. S., Danville, O. (D.C.)
Earl A., Arkansas City,

Kans. (D.C.
Georg-e. 219 Merchants
Trust Bldg-., Los Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
Geo.  342  S.  Hill  St.,  Los  An-
geles,  Cal. (D.C.)
Geo.  H.,  North  Branch,  Mich.

H.  E.,  1909J  Maine  St.,  Pratt,

Kans. (D.C.)
J. T..  Uvalde.  Tex. (N.D.)
J. W..  147  W. 11th  St.,  Erie,

Pa. (D.O.)
Llovd A., Fort Pierce, Fla.

Mathew  H.,  11  Milford  Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Mina  Abbott.  Wright  &  Cal-
lender  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.O.)
Thos. F..  5.3 Lexington Ave.,

Passaic, N. J. (D.C.)
Wm.,  Brookville,  Ind. (D.C.)
ROBISHAW. C. E.. Mount

Vernon. O. (Ma.)
ROBISON. ALICE A., 42
Dartmouth St., Spring--
field. Ma.«.=!. (DO.)
ROBSON. EDWARD. 4200
Grand Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Ernest W., 12 E. 31st St.,
New  York.  N.  Y. (D.O.)
ROBUCK, S. v., Goddard
Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
S.  v.. Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
ROCHAT, LOUIS A.. L-iS
Newark Ave.. Jersey
Citv. N. J. (Ont.)
ROCHE,  HAZEL.  438  State  St.,

Trenton. N. J. (D.C.)
ROCKVILLE SANATORIUM.
909-11 Union Central
Bldg..  Indian  View.  O.  (P.)
ROCKWELL. LOULA  A..

Legal Bldg., Asheville,
N. C. (D.O.)
RODDEN, JANE, 246 Echo
Place,  New  York,  N.  Y.
(Ma.)
RODDY, ROBERT. Cor. Tre-
mont  and 2nd  Sts., Kewa-
nee. 111. (D.O.)
RODERICK, JOHN S., Hamil-
ton,  111. (D.O.)
RODES, T. T., Paris, Mo.

RODGERS,  E. R.. 61.'i Elm  St.,

St. Joseph. Mich. (D.C.)
RODIBAUGH. LORETTA,

Cuba, N. Y. (D.C.)
RODMAN, ISAAC. Port  Berry,
Ont., Can. (D.C.)


Warren A., Washington St.,
Wellesley Hills, Mass.
ROEBER. ERNST, 1560

Myrtle Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (N.D.)
ROEMER, J. F., 122 N.

Genesee St., Waukegan,
111. (Or.S.)
ROESNER. W". H., Johnston

City, 111. (DC.)
ROESELL & EVERSOLE, 408
12th St., Miami, Fla.
ROESELL.-  PAUL E., 408 12th

St., Miami, Fla. (N.D.)
ROESTI, MRS. O. G.. c/o
Y. M. C. A., La  Crosse,
Wis. (Ma.)
ROGERS, A. G., Cooke Bldg.,
Oshkosh, Wis. (D.C.)
Alfred W., 1091 Boylston
St., Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
C.  E.,  Callaway,  Nebr. (D.C.)
Cecil R., 544 W. 157th St.,

New York Citv. (D.O.)
Chas.  E.,  Idaho  Falls,  Idaho.

E. E. O., 615 Elm St., Saint

Joseph, Mich. (D.C.)
Ida M., Mound City, Mo.

J. E., 452 Nicholas Bldg.,

Toledo, O. (D.C.)
J.  E.. 342  Nichols  Bldg.,  To-
ledo, O. (D.C.)
L., Lowell, Mich. (D.C.)
Leaman. 612 Meiset Bldg.,

Lowell. Mich. (D.C.)
M. S.. 259 Forest Ave., De-
troit,  Mich. (D.C.)
Robert  W., 144 W.  Main  St.,

Somerville, N. J. (D.O.)
Wm. Leonard, 14 De Hart
St., Morristown, N. J.
ROGERS.  BERTHA  C,

Nichols Bldg., Toledo, O.
J. E., Toledo, O. (D.C.)
L. D., 546 Surf St., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)
ROGGIE, Thermopolis, Wyo.

(D.C. )
ROHACEK, WM.. 208  N.  Main
St.,  Greensburg,  Pa. (D.O.)
ROHEABAUGH. D.  H.,  Box
13, Kalida. O. (D.M.T.)
ROHR,  PETER  .L, 504  Clinton
Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.
ROHRBECK, GUSTAV, 619
John St., West Hoboken,
N. J. (D.C.)
ROE, DR. W. H.. 9 Jefferson
Ave., Grand Rapids,  Mich.
ROKSOWSKY. ALEX., 2571
Main St.. Buffalo, N. Y.
ROLANDOW, G. W., 2291

B'way, New York, N. Y.
(P.)
ROLLER,  B.  T.,  166  W.  72nd
St.. New York, N. Y.
ROLLEY & TERRY, 140 W.
42nd St., New York. N. Y.
(Ma.)
ROLF. HARRY G.. McPher-

son, Kans. (D.O.)
ROLLINS, WALTER H., 176
Springfield St., Boston,
Mass. (D.C.)
ROMIG, KATHRYN A., Com-
monwealth Bldg., Phila-
delphia. Pa. (D.O.)
RODLEDGE, T. F., 403 Bam-
berger Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)


ROOMAN. D. G., c/o Y. M. C.

A., Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
ROOT. CLAUDE B., Green-
ville, Mich. (D.O.)
! Frank E., 143 W. 9th St.,
j  Erie, Pa. (D.O.)

Frederick, Rose Bldg.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Frederick J., Park Hotel,
Chardon, O. (D.C.)
ROPER & ROPER. 403-5
Citizens' Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Evansville, Ind. (D.C.)
ROPER. DORA  C. L.. R. F. D.
1. Box 188, Oakland, Cal.
RORBACHER, J. C, 108
Park Avenue, Charlevoix,
Mich. (D.C.)
J. G., 2241 Larrabee St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
ROSCH. FANNIE MESSER-
I  SMITH. 29 Grand St.,

White  Plains,  N.  Y. (DO.)
ROSCOE, PERCY E., New
England Bldg., Cleveland,
0.(D.0.)
ROSE, A. F., 1968 Milwaukee
!  Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

I Chas. A., Fairview, 111.
I  (D.O.)

C. P., Junction City, Kans.

(Ma.)
Mrs. Emma, Newkirk, Okla.
[ Robert, 24  Jefferson  St.,  Pat-
i  erson,  N.  J. (D.C.)

ROSE, F. C, 350 W. 29th St.,
New  York, N. Y. (N.D.)
Harris. 3575 Indiana Ave.,
I  Chicago,  111. (Ma.)

I  ROSEBOROUGH,  A.  L., 209 3d
I  St.,  Anconda,  Mont. (D.O.)

ROSEBROOK,  SOPHRONIA

I  T., The Somerset, Port-

land, Me. (D.O.)
ROSEGRANT, ELLA M., Peo-
ple's  Bank Bldg., Wilkes-
Barre, Pa. (D.O.)
ROSENBLATT, A., 2618 Ger-
min St., Philadelphia, Pa.
;  ROSENDOHL, C, 3801 Alta
I  Vista Terrace, Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
ROSENSTEEL. B. S., 3014
Wadlow St., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (N.D.)
ROSENTHAL, H. H., Room 3,
Snowdon Bldg., Browns-
ville. Pa. (N.D.)
ROSHER, D. K., Wichita,

Kans. (S.T.)
ROSIEKY. WM.. Davenport,

Ta. (D.C.)
ROSKE.  S.  H.,  805  King  St. E.
Hamilton, Ont., Can.
ROSS, MRS. BERTHA, 3030
Vernon Ave., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)
ROSS, CATHERINE, Minot,
N. Dak. (D.O.)
Cha.s. A., Rm. 506, 104 W.
4th, Cincinnati, O. (D.O.)
C. A., Neave Bldg., Cincin-
nati, O. (D.O.)
Mr. and Mrs. Herbert, 82
Roseville Ave., Newark,
N. J. (D.C.)
J. A., Colcord Bldg.. Okla-
homa  City, Okla. (D.O.)
Marie  Antoinette,  1019  Tem-
ple St., Los Angeles, Cal.
M. C, 227 W. Jefferson St.,

Ft. Wayne, Ind. (D.C.)
Mary Antoinette, 1019  Tem-
ple St., Los Angeles, Cal.


Ross
Sallee


Alphahelical  Indr.r


947


Simon P.. Land Title Bldg-.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)

ROSS  COLLEGE  OF  CHIRO-
PRACTIC, 227  W.  Jeffer-
son St.,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.

ROSSMAN,  WALTER  F..  133|
Broad  St.,  Grove  City,  Pa.

ROTH, AMELIA. 3932 Spring-
Grove Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Anna.  Stuttgart,  Ark. (D.C.)

ROTH, C. L.,  Chenos. 111.
R. W., Main and  Market
Sts.. Columbia City. Ind.
(DC.)  _

ROTHFUSS,  carl  W..  Dear-
born. Mich. (D.O.)

ROTHFUSS,  B.  LLOYD.  835
Woodward  Bldg-.,  Wash-
ington, D. C. (D.C.)

ROTHROCK,  MARY  B.,  426  N.
Grand  Ave.,  Los  Ang-eles.
Cal. (D.C.)

ROUNDS. EARL, 4200 South
Grand Blvd., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)

ROUSE,  J.  M.,  State  Nat'l
Bank  Bldg.,  Oklahoma
City. Okla. (D.O.)

ROVIDEN,  NELSON  BLACK-
BURN. 461  S.  Figueroa
St..  Los  Angeles.  Cal.

ROWB.  EVA  FRANCES.  109 i
S.  Olive  St..  West  Palm
Beach,  Fla.  (D.O.)
Willard  S.,  109|  S.  Olive  St.,
West  Palm  Beach.  Fla.

ROWE,  ROMIE,  Rubicon  St..
Davton, O. (D.C.)

ROWELL,  MRS.  FLORA,  2810
4th  Ave.,  Kearney,  Nebr.

ROWLAND,  R.  J.,  Elk  City,
Okla. (D.C.)

ROWLEY  &  ROWLEY,  Nat'l
Bank  Bldg.,  Autbury,
Kans. (D.C.)

ROWLEY & ROWLEY, Lock
Box 44, Sulphur Springs,
Ark. (D.C.)
A. H., Idaho Bldg-., Boise,

Idaho. (N.D.)
Etta W., 407 Snvder Bldg.,

Elmira,  N. Y. (D.C.)
P. S., Wellsboro, Pa. (D.C.)
W. Orlando, 407-8 Snyder
Bldg.,  Elmira,  N.  Y. (D.C.)

ROWLINGSON,  C.  B.,  615
Davis  St..  Evanston,  111.

ROYCROFT HEALTH HOME,
THE. Bast Aurora, Brie
County. N. Y. (N.D.)


ROYER,  .1.  A.,  732  St.  Denis
St.,  Montreal,  Que.,  Can.
(M.D., N.D.)

RUBENS,  H.  M.,  372  Amhurst
St., Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)

RUBIN.  H.,  1689  Pitkin  Ave.,
Brooklvn, N. Y. (N.D.)

RUBY.  EUGENE  EDWIN,
Masonic  Temple.  Troy.  O.

RUDDY. J. R., Owosso. Mich.
T. J.. 321 S. Hill St.. Los
Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)

RUDESILL,  CLARK.  Char-
lotte, Mich. (D.C.)

RUDLEDGE.  T.  F.,  403  Ham-
berger  Bldg-.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)

RUDY, ALBERT L.. 5708

Longfellow Ave., Cleve-
land, O. (D.M.T.)

RUBHLMANN,  W.  F.,  U. C.

C, Davenport. la. (D.C.)

RUEHLMAN.  W.  F.,  207-8
Meyers  Arcade,  Minneapo-
lis, Minn. (D.C.)

RUGGIERO, F., 632 Mercan-
tile Bldg., Rochester,
N. Y. (D.C.)

RULE,  J.  C.  Belding  Bldg-.,
Stockton,  Cal. (D.O.)

RUNBLUM, E., 558 Mercer
St., Jersey City, N. J.

RUNDALL.  NAPOLEON  B.,
Schluckebier-Gwinn  Bldg.,
Petaluma, Cal. (D.O.)

RUNGB, HARRY L.. 208
Hunnington Ave..
Boston. Mass. (D.C.)

RUNION, WM. P., Shepard,
O. (N.D.)

RUNK,  MRS.  ELLEN  B.,  2938
A  St.,  San  Dieg-o.  Cal.

RUNNELLS  &  RUNNELLS,
1002  Ninth  Ave..  Greeley,
Colo. (D.C.)

RUNNELLS,  W.  I.,  Valley
Ave., Baker, Ore. (N.D.)

RUNSY,  O.  v.,  71  S.  Saginaw
St., Pontiac, Mich. (D.C.)

RUPE,  LOUISE  v.,  2161  Sutter
St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

RUPP,  SARAH  W..  Common-
■w'ealth  Bldg-.,  Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.O.)

RUSH,  G.  C.  713  H  St.  N.  W..
Washington, D. C. (D.C.)

RUSHBROOK,  DR.,  61  Lake-
view  Ave.,  Toronto,  Ont.,
Can. (D.C.)

RUSK,  FLORENCE  T.,  Grand
Island, Nebr. (D.O.)

RUSSELL,  CHAS.  G.,  Citi-
zens' Bank  Bldg.,  Clin-
ton. Mo. (D.O.)


RUSSEL, E. J., 214 E. State
St., Columbus, O. (N.D.)
E. J., Na.shville, O. (D.C.)
E. J., 214 E. State St., Co-
lumbus, O. (D.C.)
Dr. Flora, 548 Massachu-
setts Ave., Boston. Mass.
H. E.. Kalamazoo. Mich.

Hugh  L.,  780  Elmwood  Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.O.)

Lena, Duncan, Okla. (S.T.)

Margaret, 78 W. Milton

Ave.,  Rahway,  N.  J. (D.C.)

Maud G., Burk Burnett

Bldg., Ft. Worth, Tex.


Saiah  E.,  780  Elmwood  Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.O.)
W. E.. 214 E. State St., Co-
lumbus, O. (D.C.)
RUSSELL. ELMA E., 522

Woodland Ave., Youugs-
town, O. (El.)
Lucille S. Brand, 7465 Vine
St., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
RUTH, D. O., 410 W. Bridge
St., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Wm. H., Jr., 159 Orange
Ave., Irvington, N. J.
RUTENBECK, CARL W., 422
Garfield Bldg., Cleveland,
O. (D.M.T.)
RUTHENBERG. F. W., 420
12th St., Niagara Falls,
N. Y. (D.M.T.)
RUTHERFORD, G. S., Box
495, Bainbridge, N. Y.
G. S., Sidney,  N. Y. (D.C.)
RUTHLEDGE. C. C, Pember-

ville, O. (D.C.)
RUTKOWSKI. J. M., 2571
Main St.. Buffalo, N. Y.
RUTLIDGB, C, Pemberville,

O. (N.D.)
RUTSCHOW, HENRY A., 829
Booth St., Toledo, O.
RUTZEL, A. J.. Cedarhurst,

L.  I.,  N. Y. (Ma.)
RYAN, GEO. S., 517 Liberty
St., Schenectady. N. Y.
John P., 9128 Commercial
Ave., S. Chicago, 111.
RYDELL. HELMA K., Ellen-
dale, N. Dak. (D.O.)
John S., 1700 3d Ave., Min-
neapolis, Minn. (D.O.)
RYBL, JENNIE ALICE, 191
Burton Ave.. Ha.«brouck
Heights, N. J. (D.O.)
RYER, H. SCOTT, East Falls
Church, Va. (D.C.)


SAAK, H. A., Marthasvile,

Mo. (D.C.)
SACKETT, E. W.. Bushnell

Bldg., Springfield, O.

Edith F., 185 Main St., Or-
ange, N. J. (D.C.)
SADLER, FRANK S., 222 W.

123rd St.. New York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
Miss Harriet Staelev, 322

W. 3rd St., Mansfield, O.

(D.M.T.)
SAGE, J. B., 5227 W. Adams

St., Chicago,  111. (D.C.)


Norman L., Hayes Blk.,
Janesville, Wis. (D.O.)

SAGBR, E. T., Magnetic
Springs, O. (N.D.)

SAGER, MRS. EMMA, Find-
lay, O. (D.C.)

SAHR, LOUISE, 2 Ave. East.
Williston. N. D. (N.D.)
N. H. C. 54 Main Street,
Williston, N. D. (N.D.)

SAILE,  JOSEPH  C, 182  Broad
St.,  Bloomfield.  N.  J. (D.C.)

SALAK,  GEORGE, 1550
Holmes Ave., Racine,
Wis. (N.D.)


SALAS, ALBERT M., 1112

Chestnut  St..  Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
SALBSBURY, C. C, Box 45,

Panama,  N. Y. (D.C.)
SALISBURY, C. C, 52 Main

St.,  Bradford.  Pa.  (D.C.)
E.  S.,  Adrian,  Mich.  (D.C.)
Eva T.. Meadville, Pa.

SALLE, CHAS. E., 117 St.

Botolph  St.,  Boston, Mass.

SALLEE, J. H., Lincoln, Ark.


948


Alphabetical  Index


Salters
Schaus


SALTERS,  BERTHA,  Carmon,
Okla. (D.C.)

SAMPSON,  MRS.  ANNIE  K.,
St. Genevieve. Mo. (S.T.)

SAMPSON. S.. 850 E. 47th St..
Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
Rov, Peter-sburp. 111. (N.D.)

SAMSE,  MRS.  I..  P.,  7250  La-
fayette Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

SAMUELS,  HUGH  R..  207  Col-
lege St..  Toronto,  Ont.
Can. (D.O.) „^,„^. „

SAMUELSON.  HENR\  D.,
2328  Coblentz  St.,  Chi-
cago. 111. (D.C.)

SANBORN, GENON A.. 145
Hamp.«;hiie St., Auburn,
Me. (D.O.)
R W., Hamilton Bldg.. Ak-
ron. O. (D.O.)

SANDERS. L. J.. 13 Sycaniore
Ave.. Washington, D. C.
(Ma  )
Katherine, 1011 N ^}}\^\-

Terre Haute, Ind. (D.C.)
W. H., 825 S. 6th St., At-
chison, Kans. (D.C.)
Wm., Box 433, Appleton,
Minn. (D.C.)

SANDERS  &  SANDERS  613
Sycamore  St.,  Terre

Haute.  Ind. (DC.)

SANDERUS, H. J 2230 Fill-
more Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

SANDFORD. HARRY L..
Seattle, Wash. (D.C.)

SANDGREEN,  GEO.  E..  441  N.
1st  St.,  Prove  City,  Utah.
(DC.)

SANDIFUR, ADA L., 409
Hanna St., Greencastle,
Ind. (D.C.)

SANDLES.  T.  ISADC>RE,  222
Hewes  St.,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.

sands',  C.  M.,  1497  W.  Fort

St Detroit, Mich. (N.D.)
SANDS, ORD  LEDY-ARD, 6 E.

37th St., New York City.

SANDSTROM, ELLEN, 804

Bruson Bldg.. Youngs-
town, O. (Ma.)
SANFORD & SANFORD, 3031

Arcade Bldg.. Seattle,

Wash. (D.C.)
C F , Hvde Blk., Pierre, S.

Dak. (D.O.)  ^ ^,

Dr. E. P., Center St., South

Saginaw, Mich. (D.C.)
Mrs. Fannie, 1447 S. Union

Ave.. Los Angeles, Cal.

J. W., Sanford's Studio,

North  Adams,  Mass.  (D.C.)
Vernon T., Cheney, Kans.

W. R., 16 Dudley Ave..

Ocean Park, Cal. (D.C.)
W. R., c/o M. M. Sanford's

Photo Studo, North Ad-
ams, Mass. (D.C.)
SANGRENN,  GEO. ED., 441  N.

1st St. E., Provo, Utah.

BANNER, EUGENE E., 114i

W. 5th Ave., Corsicana,

Tex. (D.O.)
SANPBRT, REV. THOS. A.,

Napoleon. O. (D.M.T.)
SANTURELLO. PETER, 84

N. High St., Columbus. O.

(Ch.)
SARETZKI, WM. Putnam,

Conn. (D.C.)


SARGENT,  ANDREW,  St.
Charles  Court,  Hopkins-
ville, Ky. (D.C.)

E.  M., Idaho Falls, Idaho.

F.  W., 803  N. M'ater  St., El-
lonsburg. Wash. (D.C.)

Fred. W., Red Wing. Minn.

W.  L..  3349  30th  Ave..  S.  Min-
neapolis. Minn. (D.C.)
SARGENT, ,1. W.. 424 Bowen

Ave., Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
SARTON. M. H.. 202J Iowa
Ave.. Wa.shington. la.
SARTWELL, J. OLIVER, 221
Essex St., Salem, Mass.
SARVER, PEARL  M., 100

Huffman Ave., Columbus,

O. (D.C.)

SASH. ELIZABETH. Masonic

Bldg.. Meadville, Pa.


Ida  M..  Salisbury-Earl  Bldg.,

Idaho Falls, Idaho.  (D.O.)

SASVIL. E. M., Anniston, Ala.

SASWELL, GLADYS, 222 W.
Main St., Greenfield, Ind.
SATTERLEE, NETTIE E..
Mills Bldg.. El Paso. Tex.
SATTLE}MBYBR. MRS. HAR-
RIET.  416 Good Blk., Des
Moines.  la. (D.C.)
SAUCHELLI. FRANCESCO.
200 W. 72nd St., New
York, N. Y. (D.C.)
SAUDBR,  C.  H.,  Temple  Bldg.,

Brantford,  Ont. (D.O.)
SAUER. ALBERT, Box 322.
Arcadia, Wis. (D.C.)
Albert, 6 I^ivingston Bldg.,

Wausau, Wis. (D.C.)
A. G., Over Lubricating
Bldg., Arcadia,  Wis.  (D.C.)
SAUNDERS, MISS CORA E.,
Greenham Place, Wash-
ington, D. C. (D.C.)
SAVAGE. JAMES  A.. Barnard
Bldg.. Wallace, Idaho.
W^  S.,  102  Coyean  St.,  Wind-
sor,  Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
SAVAGE. DR. WATSON L.,
Private Exercise and
Health  Studio, 56  W. 45th
St., New York,  N.Y. (P.C.)
SAVERCOOL. GENEVIEVE,

Groton, S. D. (D.C.)
SAWREY, L. S., Fayetteville,

Ark. (S.T.)  I

SAWTELL & SAWTELL, P.

St..  Pocatello,  Idaho. (D.C.)  \
SAWYER. BERTHA E.,
Rhodes-Fanlow  Bldg.,

Ashland, Ore. (D.O.)
Geo. H., Jr.. 5 Wilson St..

Irvington. N. J. (D.O.)
H. W.. Main Ave. N.. Twin

FalKs. Idaho. (D.O.)
T. J.. 3314 Washington St.,

Wilmington,  Del.  (D.C.)
W' illis Frank, Still Hildreth  I
San., Macon. Mo. (D.O.)
SAWYER. GEO. H.. 5 Wil.son  |

St.,  Irvington.  N.  J. (N.D.)
SAXBY, GEO. O., 198^ Main
St., Ashtabula, O. (D.C.)
G. O., Austinburg, O. (D.C.)
SAXE & SAXE, 5148 Page
Blvd., St. Louis, Mo.
SAXE. ARTHUR, Princeton,
Ind. (D.C.)


Mary, 218 E. Broadwav,
Princeton, Ind. (D.C.)
SAXER, C. R., 51st and Wal-
nut Sts.,  Philadelphia, Pa.

SAPERSTEIN. MORRIS, 325

Franklin St.. Union Hill.

N. J. (D.C.)
SAXMAN. R. B.. 833 Sheridav

Road. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SAXTON, ELLA I.. Ledge

Farm.  Basom,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
SAXTON. ELLA I.. Hillsdale

Ranch, Grand Island,

Colusha Co., Cal. (D.C.)
SAY. W. F.. 1041 Genesee St..

Buffalo. N. Y. (D.O.)
SAYERS, N. R., 132 Franklin

Ave.. Sidnev. O. (D.C.)
SAYERS, WM. R., Sidney, O.

(D.C)

SAYRE.  C.  EDWARD.  29  Bast
Madison  St.,  Chicago,  111.
(Or.S.)

SCATFE,  MARTHA  B.,  Ridge-
\u  ^^^^  B'dg.,  Springfield,

SCALLAN.'  ■  AGNES  WAL-
TRUDB,  Cable  Bldg..  Chi-
cago. 111. (D.O.)

SCALLON.  .7.  W..  57  B.  Jack-
son Blvd..  Chicago.  Ill

SCAMMON. EARL. 100 Boyls-
ton St.. Boston. Mass.

SCARBOROUGH  &  SCARBOR-
OUGH. Lakeland. Fla.

SCARBOROUGH.  J.  L..  Lake-
land. Fla. (D.C.)

SCHADE, W. J., Lancaster.
Wis. (N.D.)

SCHAEFFER,  LAURA.  1926
Chestnut  St.,  Philadelphia.
Pa. (D.O.)

SCHAEFER. JOSEPH, 23

Barclay  St., New  York.

N. Y. (N.D.)
SCHAFFER.  A.. 203  S.  5th  St.,

Columbus, O. (D.C.)
SCHAFFER, B. B.. Auburn

Nebr. (D.C.)
SCHALOW. L. C, 151 W. 8th

St.. Auburn. Ind. (D.C.)
SCHANNE. F. B.. 44 Bleeker

St., Newark, N. J. (D.C  )
SCHANNE, FRANK  B., 204  W

70th St.. New York,

N. Y. (D.O.)
SCHANNON, H. A.,  New

York, N. Y. (N.D.)
SCHARF, E. E., 1004 Dakin

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SCHARFF, A. O.. Kemp &

Kell Bldg., Wichita Falls,

Tex. (D.O.)
SCHARNHORST, L. C, 12th

and  State  Sts.,  Milwaukee,

Wis. (D.C.)
L. C, 184 13th St., Milwau-
kee, Wis. (D.C.)
Martin, Dikon, Ills. (D.C.)
M. H., 1005 Hennipin Ave.,

Dixon,  Ind. (D.C.)
M. H., 122 W. 3d St., Mus-
catine, la. (D.C.)
SCHARSMITH. WM., 115 E.

27th St., New York, N. Y.

SCHAUB, MINNIE, Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg., St.

Louis,  Mo. (D.O.)
SCHAUS, GEO. E., 1132 Wal-
nut St., Green Bay, Wis.


Schuumburo
Schupp


Alpliabelical  Index


949


SCIIAUMBURG. H. K.. 28 l.'Uli

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. (D.C.)

SCHBEK. WM.  J.,  516  Federal

St., Pittsburg-h, Pa. (El.)

SCHEETZ. EARL J., Dallas,

Ore. (D.C.)
Orville O., GO fith St.. Port-
land. Ore. (D.C.)
SCHEIBUER, C, 1462 W. 3rd

St., Cleveland, O.
(D.M.T.)
SCHEID, HENRY EDW., 9

Virginia Ave., Jersey

City, N. J. (D.C.)
SCHEID, H. S., 421 Sassafras

St.. Erie, Pa. (D.C.)
SCHEIFLER, CHAS. A., 357

Main St., Orange, N. J.
SCHELTENBACH, THEO. E.,

139 York Ave., Paterson,

N. J. (N.D.)
SCHENCK. ALETTA, 74 N.

Arlington Ave., East Or-
ange, N. J. (D.O.)
SCHENK, .JOHN C, 513 San-
dusky St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

J. H., Cor. 4th and 2d  Ave..

Cedar  Rapids,  la. (D.C.)
SCHENKELBERGER, P. C,

22 E. Washington St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
SCHER, BERTHA, Hotel

Palm Beach, Palm Beach,

Fla. (D.O.)
SCHEUDER, T. H. 4401

Prairie Ave., Chicago, 111.

SCHIED, WALTER J., 58

High St., Belleville, N. J.


St.. Belleville.  N.  J. (D.C.)
SCHIED.  HENRY  E., 9  Vir-
ginia Ave., Jersey City,

N. J. (D.C.)
SCHIEFLER.  CHAS.  A.,  4

Humboldt St., Newark,

N. J. (D.O.)
SCHIESSLER, FRED., Wal-
ton,  N. Y. (D.C.)
SCHIFFER. MRS. M., 88 Ibis

St., Brooklyn, N. Y. (Cr.)
SCHILDGEN, HUGO, P. O.

Box 916, Portland, Ore.

SCHILDKRAUT, H., 198 E.

Broadway. New York.

N. Y. (N.D.)
SCHILLIG, G. J., Case Blk.,

Norwalk. O. (N.D.)
Joe. Case Block, Norwalk,

O. (N.D.)
Joe.  Oberlin.  O. (N.D.)
SCHILLING, C. E.. 106 W.

Pearl St., Chicago Junc-
tion, O. (D.C.)
Frederic. Traders Bank

Bldg.  Toronto,  Ont. (D.O.)
SCHIRMER. H. J., Gutten-

berg. O. (N.D.)
SCHIRMER, J. F., 107  Capitol

Ave.,  Atlanta,  Ga. (D.C.)
SCHLASSER, ELLA, 1613

Pearl St., Denver, Colo.

SCHLATTER, REV. FRAN-
CIS. 339 W. 34th St.. New

York. N. Y. (D.D.)
SCHLEICHER, EUGENE, 52

Parsons Blk., Burlington,

la. (D.C.)
SCHLEIFER, MRS. E. M.. 933

Rhode Island St., Law-
rence,  Kans. (Ma.)
SCHLEUSER, DOROTHEA,

Rock Island, 111. (D.C.)
Freda, Wilton, la. (D.C.)


SCHLEUSNER,  RICHARD  R.,
76  Hamburg  St.,  Pater-
son, N.  J.  (D.C.)
SCHMEICKEL,  J.  M.,  1129  N.
Lang  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,
Pa.  (N.D.)
SCHMID, EDWARD L., 125 N.

Market St., Frederick,

Md. (D.O.)
F. R., 814 1st St., Merrill,

Wis. (N.D.)
Walter W., 19 Roland Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
SCHMIDT, A. P., 1947 B'way.

New York, N. Y. (P.)
A. S.. Braddock, Pa. (N.D.)
John C. 109 Shillito Place,

Cincinnati, O. (Ma.)
SCHMIDT, F. R.. Lancaster,

Wis. (D.C.)
J. J., Turner Bldg., Tulsa,

Okla. (D.O.)
SCHMIEDING, A., Mount

Olive, 111. (D.C.)
SCHMITT, FREDERICK L.,

5733 S.  Blvd., Chicago,  111.

SCHMOLL, S., 2615 Potomac

St., St. Louis, Mo. (S.T.)
SCHMUNK, P. B., Snitger

Bldg., Beaver, Pa. (D.O.)
SCHNACKE. A. J., Cleveland,

O. (D.C.)
SCHNASE, MRS., Curtis, Neb.

SCHNEIDER, BERTHA E.,

Room  409,  414  Walnut  St.,

Cincinnati,  O. (Ma.)
SCHNEIDER, JOHN D., 1592

Clay  St., Dubuque, la.

SCHNITGER, PAUL E., 1632

St.  Peters  Ave.,  New  York

N. Y. (D.C.)
SCHNURRENBERGER, L. H.,

Austintown, O. (D.C.)
SCHOELLER. JULIUS, c/o

Lafayette Hotel, Albany,

N. Y. (N.D.)
Jules W., 1112 Main Street,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.  N.D.)
SCHOENTHALER. WM. F.,

144 S. West St., Geneva,

N. Y. (D.C.)
SCHOERS, J. G., 148 Market

St., Paterson, N. J. (D.C.)
SCHOETTLE. M. TERESA,

678 N. Cottage Street,

Salem, Ore. (D.O.)
SCHOFFER,  A., 203  S. 5th  St.,

Columbus, O. (D.C.)
SCHOFIELD, CASSIE L.,

Allison, Colo. (D.C.)
T. M., 208 Washington St.,

Mendota, 111. (D.O.)
W. J., 199 Hodge Avenue,

Buffalo,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
SCHOFIELD, JENNIE M.,

199 Hodge Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y. (D.O.)
SCHOLL. WALTER H., Lin-
ton. Ind. (D.C.)
SCHOLZ & SCHOLZ, DRS., 30

Valentine St., Mt. Vernon,

N. Y. (D.C.)
SCHOLZ, H. B., 3312 Madison

St.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SCHOOLCRAFT,  C.  E..  Water-
town, S. Dak. (D.O.)
E. E. Mrs.. North Man-
chester, Ind. (D.C.)
SCHOOLMAKER, AMY B.,

Warden Bldg.. Macon.

Mo. (D.O.)
SCHORDER. J. S., West

Point, Neb. (D.C.)
SCHORNICK, HARRY L.,

Union Blk., Prescott,

Ariz. (D.O.)


SCHORR,  H.,  1401  E.  Murdock

Ave., Wichita, Kans.
SCHRADER, MRS. B. V.,

Moscow Mill.s, Mo. (S.T.)
SCHRAMM, MARGARET E.,

Stevens Bldg., Chicago,
111. (IXO.)
SCHRANKEL, W. P., 5008

I'enn. Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (D.C.)
SCHRETNER, JOHN S., Webb

City, Mo. (D.O.)
SCHREUDER, T. H., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
SCHRIECK, W. J., 516 Fed-
eral St., Pittsburgh. Pa.
SCHRIER. L., 92 Lexington

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
SCHRIMER,  J. F., 107 Capitol

Ave., Atlanta. Ga. (D.C.)
SCHROCK, JOSEF B., Scotts-

bluff. Neb. (D.O.)
SCHRODER, KURTE A.' 2843

N. Clark St.. Chicago, 111.

(Ma.)
SCHROEDER, ENUDE. 2843

N. Clark St., Chicago, 111.

SCHROTH. R. G., 546 Garfield

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SCHRYER,  W.  A.,  531  Lincoln

Ave..  Detroit.  Mich. (D.C.)
SCHUBERT. D.. Townly

Bldg., Miami. Fla. (DC.)
G. H., 30 Zimmerman Bldg.,

Springfield, O. (D.C.)
Geo.  H.,  505-6  Masonic  Tem-
ple. Jacksonville. Fla.

Geo. H., 305-7-9 Atlantic

Natl. Bank Bldg., Jack-
sonville. Fla. (D.C.)
SCHUELER. F. D.. 344 Wal-
nut St., Lawrenceburg,

Ind. (D.C.)
J.  J., 35 Louis  Blk.. Dayton.

O. (D.C.)
SCHUESSLER, MRS. CON-
RAD,  Iowa City, la.

SCHUGE, W. C, Chicago, 111.

SCHULTZ, ARTHUR C. A.,

426 Prescott St., Toledo,

O. (D.M.T.)
Otto, 48 Central Ave.,

Jersey City, N. J. (D.C.)
SCHULTZ, C. A., 1317 S.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
Dr. C. 643 40th St., Rock

Island. 111. (S.T.)
Emil,  335  23rd  St.,  West  New

York, N. J. (D.C.)
F. A., Elkader, Iowa. (D.C.)
H., 2318 Cortland Street,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Karl, 744 W. 4th St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.D., D.C.)
Otto, Jr., 810 Perry Street,

Davenport. Iowa. (D.C.)
R. J., 361 Hudson Building,

Ogden, Utah. (D.C.)
SCHULZ. OTTO, The Norfolk

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.

SCHULZ, WM. H., Washing-
ton Bldg., Madison, Wis.

SCHUMACHER, ERWIN L..

5155 Haverford Avenue,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
SCHUPP, EMIL, 162 E.  Center

St., Akron, O. (Hy.)
Emma, Cleveland, O. (Ma.)


050


Alpliahclical  Index


Schuster
Semple


SCHUSTKR, MISS  E.. 20 W.

65th St., New York.  N. Y.

(Ma.)
G..  43  N.  Phelp.s  St.,  Youngs-

town, O. (N.D.)
John Romigrius. 611 Oloyd

St.. Davton. O. (D.M.T.)
SCUT 'ST  10 R,  .JOHN  K..

Stephenson Bldgr., Mil-
waukee, Wis. (D.O.)
SCHWAB, A. O., 27 East

Maiimee St.,  Adrian,

Mich. (D.C.)
F. .1., 352 Harrison Ave.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
L.  W.,  Merrison  Blk.,  Sarnia,

Can. (D.C.)
SCHWARTZ, CHAS., 182 Ex-

chang-e St., Monmouth,

Til. (D.C.)
Chas., 35 S. Dearborn St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Julius, 133 E. 84th St.,

New York, N Y. (P.)
H. C, 1228 E. Genessee St.,

Syracuse, N. Y. (N.D.)
N.  D., 346 B'way,  New  York,

N. Y. (D.C.)
SCHWARTZ,  MR.  and  MRS.  J.,

282 South Second St.,

Brooklyn. N. Y. (Ma.)
SCHWARZ. R. B., 93 High-
land  Ave., Jersey City,

N. J. (D.Ch.)
SCHW^ARZEIv, FREDERICK

M., 431 S. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
SCHWEGLER,  EMIL  J.,

Janesville, Wis. (D.O.)
SCHWIEGER. JAMES SCOTT,

Sun Bldg., Jackson, Mich.

SCHWIETERT, A. W., Mar-

shalltovvn, la. (D.C.)
SCHWINZER, JOHN R., 347-

55 Madison Ave., New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)
SCOBEE, JEPTHA D., Proc-
tor Bldg.. Monroe City,

Mo. (D.O.)
SCOBIE. MISS E., 3850

Indiana Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
SCOFIEI.D, CASSIE L., Alli-
son, Colo. (D.C.)
SCOTHORN, SAMUEE L.,

Wilson  Bldg.,  Dallas,  Tex.
SCOTT,  A.  B.,  224  W. 18th  St.,

Erie, Pa. (D.C.)
Miss Addie, 1200 S. Ewing

St., St. Louis, Mo. (S.T.)

C.  W., 324 E. 15th Street,
Davenport, Ta. (D.C.)

D.  C, Bleaklev Blk., New-
castle, Pa. (D.C.)

D. D., Bleakley Blk., New

Castle, Pa. (N. D.)
George D., 323 Geary St.,

San Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
.H. A., Illinois Building,

Champaign, 111. (D.O.)
H. H.,  Spencer,  la. (D.C.)
H. P., Clinton, Ind. (D.C.)
H. S., Marquette Hotel,

Hartford, Mich. (D.C.)
^ I. W., 23 Crozier Street,

Akron, O. (N.D.)
Jane, Franklin Bank Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
J. C, Dewey, Okla. (D.C.)
J. E., 128 N. 1st Street,

Arkansas City, Kan.

J.  E.,  Newton,  Kan. (D.C.)
J. H., Merchantville, N. .1.

J. H. B., New First Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Columbus,

O. (D.O.)


J. S., 621 South Avenue,

Wilkinsburg, Pa. (D.C.)
J. S., Schultes Building,

Butler, I'a. (D.C.)
John T., Baltimore Bldg.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.

J. v., 69 W. Main Street,

Newark, O. (D.C.)
J. Wesley, Broadway Cen-
tral Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.O.)
John W., 110  W. Newell  St.,

Syracuse, N. Y. (D.C.)
Kathei'ine Mcr>., New First

Natl. Bank Bldg., Colum-
bus, O. (D.O.)
l^eila Gordon, Petersburg,

111. (D.O.)
Nellie B., 206 W. Church

St.,  Champaign,  111. (D.O.)
Mrs. N. E., Nickerson, Kan.

O. L., 406-8 Nafl Savings

Bank, Salem, Ore. (D.C.)
O. L., 313-4 1.  O.  O. F.  Bldg.,

Eugene, Ore. (D.C.)
W. E., Wallace Building,

Greenville, S. C. (D.O.)
W. I., 22 E. Crosier Street,

Akron, O. (D.C.)
W. I., 527 Park Avenue,

Canton, O. (D.C.)
Wm. O., Great Falls, Mont.

Wilson, 714 Walnut Street,

Allentown, Pa. (D.C.)
3COTT, H. H., Estherville, la.

Dr. John S., 453 3rd St.,

Pitcairn, Pa. (N.D.)
Wilson, 6 N. Center  St.,

Pottsville, Pa. (D.C.)
SCOVELL, L. I., 223 Cherry

St., Green Bay, Wis.

Ijizzie. Rockford, Mich.

3COVER, A.  G., 148 S. 6th St.,

La Crosse, Wis. (D.C.)
SCULBIRD, MARY, 607 Mack

Bldg., Denver, Colo.

SEABORN, R. A., 336 Baynes

St., Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
SEAMAN, DIMON, R., 8

Park St., Cortland. N. Y.

Geo. H., Garvey Bldg.,

Utica, N. Y. (D.C.)
Kent L., Shoaff Bldg., Fort

Wayne, Ind. (D.O.)
^EARS,  CHAS., 740 West

End  Ave..  New  York,  N.  Y.

=;EARS. CHAS. A., Lebanon,

Ore. (D.O.)
Daniel  M.,  Mayo.  Fla. (D.C.)
Harriet,  Ontario,  Ore. (D.O.)
Pauline, Vale, Ore. (D.O.)
SEARY, SILAS F., 159 Ber-
keley  St.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.

SEAVY, S. F., Saegertown,

Pa. (D.C.)
SEBOLT, ELLINE M. E.,

Beaver St., Pittsburgh,

Pa. (DC)
PEERING, J.M., 623 Mercan-
tile Bldg., Rochester,

N. Y. (D.C.  N.D.)
;ECKLER, C. a., Manson, la.

^ECREST, wm. B., Logan,

Utah. (N.D.)
-!EE. JOHN D., Logan, la.

".EED, SIRSON T., 125

Cleveland Ave., Canton,

O. (N.D.)


SEED, SUSAN T., Canton, O.

SEEKLER, C. A., Manson,

la. (D.C.)
SEELEY, A. J., 522 2nd Ave.,

Troy, N. Y. (D.C.)
Wm. A., Perrv, la. (D.C.)
Wm. A., Vinton, la. (D.C.)
SEELEY, JEANETTE. 1117

E. 89th St., Cleveland, O.

(D.M.T.)
SEELEY & REEVES. 522

2nd  Ave.,  Troy,  N.Y.  (D.C.)
SEELMAN, CORNELIUS M.,

Conklin, Mich. (D.C.)
SEELY, WM. A., 318 Syndi-
cate Bldg., Waterloo, la.

SEELYE, E. A., Prudden

Bldg., Lansing, Mich.

SEFICK, JOHN J., 76 Public

Square, W^ilkes  Barre, Pa.

SEGUR, F. B., 712 Postal

Telegraph Bldg., Chicago,

III. (D.C.)
SEIBERT, MRS. J. M., 367

Martin St., Youngstown,

O. (D.C.)
SEIDES, N. M., 235 W. 75th

St., New York, N. Y.

SEIFERT, E. F., 437J W.

Park St., Oklahoma City.

Okla. (N.D.)
SEIGRIST, C. C, Downes,

Kan. (D.C.)
SEITZ, ANNA E., 333 W. 4th

St., Greenville, O. (D.O.)
SELBERT.  ELIZABETH

GRIMES. 802 N. 41st St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
SELCIK, JOHN J., 36 West

Market St., Wilkes  Barre,

Pa. (D.C.)
SELFRIDGE, MRS. ELIZ.,

Newton, Kan. (S.T.)
.SELIN, OSCAR, Enterprise,

Kan. (S.T.)
SELLARDS & SELLARDS, 24

Peterboro St., Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
SELLARDS, DOROTHY D.,

24 Peterboro St., Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
Dr. T. M., 24 Peterboro St.,

Detroit, Mich. (D.O.)
SELLARS, A. H., Citizens-
Bank Bldg., Pine Bluff,

Ark. (D.O.)
D. Frances, Berkeley Natl.

Bank Bldg., Berkeley,

Cal. (D.O.)
SELLARS, P., Pine Bluff,

Ark. (D.O.)
SELLEN, GEO. V., 165 Ever-

gieen Ave., Woodbury,

N. J. (D.C.)
SELLENBRITTER, W. A.,

Chamois, Mo. (D.C.)
SELLERS. G. W., 1626 Pearl

St., Joplin, Mo. (D.C.)
SELLEW, MRS. F. L., 392

Lafayette Ave., (Cr.)
SELLS.  W. E., 3919 Nevll St.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.C.)
SELTZER, HARRY, 100 S.

18th St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

H. W.. 1723 Sarah Street,

Pittsburgh. Pa. (D.C.)
SEMON.  RAYMOND  R.,

Hitchcock Bldg., Port

Clinton, O. (D.O.)
SEMONES. HARRY. Mac

Bain Bldg.. Roanoke. Va.

.SEMPLE, SYDNEY G., 207

Elm St., Westfleld, N. J.


Sennotf
Sherman


Alphabelical  Index


951


William, Eastern Trust

Bids'., Bangor, Mo. (D.O.)
SKNNOTT, N. .T., 521 W.

152nd Street, New York,

N. Y. (D.C.)
SP^RVICE. EMMA R.. 609 Ex-
change  Bldg., I..OS

Ane-ele.s, Cal. (N.D.)
.SKSI.,EY, .T. E., 103i N. Elm

St., Warren, O. (D.C.)
SETON, JULIA, St. T^ouis,

Mo. (M.D.)
SETTEE, WM. A., Berlin,

Wis. (D.O.)
SEUBOLD, F. H., 17 N. State

St., 1430 Stevens Bldg-..

Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
SEUBOLD, F. H., 908 Bel-
mont  Ave., (Chicago, 111.

(D.C, Ph.C.)
F. H., 526 Brady St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
SEVERY.  FRANK,  Providence,

R. I. (D.C.)
Charles L.. 409 Stevens

Bldg., Detroit,.  Mich.

(DO.)
SEXTON, WM. H.,  .  R. E.

Trust Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
Wto. H., 218 S. 50th St.,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
SEYMOUR,  ARTHUR T..

Elks Bldg., Stockton,

Cal.  (D.O.)
SHACKLEFORD, E. H.,

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg.. Richmond. Va.

J. R., Jackson Bldg., Nash-
ville, Tenn. (D.O.)
J. W., Ardmore, Okla.

SHADDUCK, RALPH. 3841

Cottage  Glove  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SHAEFFER. LAURA, 1926

Chestnut St.. Philadel-
phia. Pa. (D.O.)
SHAFER. AUGUST. 63 E.

Town St.. Columbus, O.

Orland. 60i Monroe St.,

Tiffin, O. (D.M.T.)
SHAFER. CLEM. L.. Holtes

Bl.. Helena. Mont. (D.O.)
SHAFFER. JOSHUA B., West

Unitv. O. (D.M.T.)
SHAFFER. WILL IVERN.

1330 N. Normandie Ave.,

Los  Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
SHALLER.  J.  M., 1011 E. 17th

St.. Denver. Colo. (D.C.)
J. M.. 616 Commonwealth

Bldg..  Denver.  Colo.

J. M.. 314 Mercantile Bldg..

Cincinnati, O. (D.C.)
SHAMBAUGH, D. ALLEN.

Coleburn Bldg., Nor-

walk. Conn. (D.O.)
SHANAHAN, R. A., Shanahan

Court, .  Grand Rapids,

Mich. (D.C.)
R. E.,  Gallon,  O. (D.C.)
SHANDE, L. W., Box 124,

Keytesville, Mo. (N.D.)
SHANK, EDITH M., Crow

Bldg.. Mitchell, S. Dak.

SHANNON. ELEANOR. 391

W. Main St., Brookville,

Pa. (D.C.)
Eleanor, Kamerdell, Pa.

Eleanor, 28 11th Street,

Franklin, Pa. (D.C.)
SHARKEY. MISS  JOSEPH-
INE.  Carnegie  Hall. New

York,  N.  Y. (P.)


SHARP. FRED J., Fourtnet

Blk., Crookston, Minn.

Mrs. Ida, 1125 W. 10th St.,

Denver. Colo. (D.C.)
J. B., Duffer  in St., Sault

Ste. Marie, Ont., Can.

J. L., Davenport, la. (D.C.)
Omer L., Fergu.son Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Sarah Jane, Sault Ste.

Marie, Can. (D.C.)
SHARON, THOS. LEWIS, 126J

Main St., Davenport, la.

SHAUERS, C. L., Cambridge,

Nebr. (D.C.)
Julius A. Nite, 2338 Far-

nam  St.,  Omaha,  Nebr.

SHAVER, B. C, Charlotte,

Mich. (D.C.)
B. C, Bryan, O. (D.C.)
SHAW, ALLEN B., 10605

Euclid Ave., Cleveland, O.

D., 120 N. Front Street,

Cuyahoga Falls, O. (N.D.)
E., 250 22nd Ave. E., Van-
couver,  B. C. (N.D.)
Ernest, 307 Lee Bldg.. Van-
couver. B. C. Can. (D.C.)
J. B., 200 Franklin St.,

Richmond, Va. (D.C.)
J. G.. 510 Chamber of  Com-
merce Bldg., Richmond,

Va. (D.C.)
J. G.. Murry & Jones  Bldg.,

Modesto, Cal. (D.C.)
Jno., 81-83 San Joaquin

Bldg., Stockton, Cal.

John,  Eureka,  Cal. (D.C.)
L. L., 941 Vermont Ave.,

Lawrence, Kan. (D.C.)
Robert  V., 15 Morton Place,

Jersey City, N. J. (D.C.)
SHAW, FRED., 218 S. Front

St., Cuyahoga Falls, O.

Herbert, Box G., Hurley,

N. M. (D.C.)
O. L., 1443 W. 5th St.,

Muncie, Ind. (D.C, Mag.)
Robt. J.. 15 Morton Place,

Jersey City, N. J. (N.D.)
SHEA, F. W.. 7 Sixth.  St.,

Derby, Conn. (D.C.)
SHEAKFORD, MRS. E., 347

45th St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Ma.)
SHEARDOWN. INEZ A., 14

I^angdon Crescent, Moose

Jaw, Sask..  Can. (D.C.)
SHEEDY. MRS. M. L., 2445  N.

Halsted St., Chicago, 111.

SHEEHAN, DR. EDW. P.,

Marshfield Center, Mass.

(D.C)
Helen G., 687 Boylston St.,

Boston. Mass. (D.O.)
SHEEHAN. JASON P..

Freedom Sta.. O. (D.M.T.)
SHEERIE. E.. Wheeling,

W.  Va. (D.C.)
SHEERING, ELIZABETH,

Cambridge, O. (D.C.)
SHEETS,  ANNA DILLA-

BOUGH, Farran Point,

Ont. (D.O.)
SHE  FEE  RM  AN, N. W., 719

11th St. N. W.. Washing-
ton, D. C. (D.C.)
Mrs. N. W., 719 11th St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

SHEFFLER. K. A.. 7 East

.Tackson Ave., Sullivan,

Ind. (D.C)


S. Dak.


J. A., 306
Rockford,


N. W.,
St., Wau-


SHEGETERO.  MORIKUBO,

326 Skiles Bldg., Minne-
apolis, Minn. (D.C.)
SHEHY, JOSEPHINE M.,

Montevideo. Minn. (D.C)
SHELDON, BERT L., Madi-
son, S. Dak. (D.C)
Rex  B.,  South  Branch,  Mich.

T. W., 323 Geary St., San

Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
W. W., Miller,
SHELLENBARGER,
E. State St.,
HI. (D.C)
SHELLENBERGER,
229 N. Genesee
kegan. 111. (D.O.)
SHELTENBACH, T. E., 139
York Avenue, Paterson,
N. J. (D.C)
SHENTON, A. W., 734 Real
Estate  Trust  Bldg.,  Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.C.)
A. W., 15th and Poplar'
Sts.. Philadelphia, Pa.
Lillian P., 15th and Poplar
Sts., Philadelphia, Pa.
SHEPARD & SHEPARD, 6200
Penn Ave., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.C)
F. M., 113 E. 8th Ave.,

Homestead, Pa. (D.C.)
William Burt, 146 West-
minster St.. Providence,
R. I. (D.O.)
W. P., 652 Philadelphia St.,
Indiana, Pa. (D.C.)
SHEPHARD, GEORGE, 627
Penn St., Denver, Colo.
George. Goshen, Ind. (D.C)
SHEPARDSON, G. BYRON,

Huntington. Ind. (D.O.)
SHEPHERD. B. P.. Morgan
Bldg.. Portland, Ore.
L. K., Groton Bldg., Cin-
cinnati. O. (D.O.)
SHEPHERDSON. IDA JEN-
KINS. 40.-.2 Garfield Ave.,
Minneapolis. Minn. (D.O.)
W. v.. 4052 Garfield Ave.,
Minneapolis. Minn. (DO.)
SHEPPARD. GEO. T., 1003
Galveston Ave.. Pitts-
burgh^ Pa. (D.C)

606 Southern
Pittsburgh. Pa.


E.


F.. 211 McKinley
Pittsburgh, Pa.


Sandusky, O.


Geo.
Ave..
(DC.)
Harry H.
Ave..
R. A.. Upper
1  SHERBURNE. F. W.. 382
Commonwealth Avenue.
Boston. Mass. (D.O.)
H. K.. Mead Bldg.. Rut-
land. Vt. (D.O.)
SHERDEN, DR.. Cairo. 111.

(DC.)
SHERDOWX. INEZ A.. Moose

Jaw. Ont.. Can. (D.C.)
SHERIDAN.  MARGARET.

Rose Bldg., Cleveland.
O. (D.O.)
A. Maude. 406 E. Ave..
Koldredge. Xeb. (D.O.)
SHERIFFS. MARY. 10  Suffolk
St. W.. Guelph, Ont.
Can. (D.O.)
SHERMAN. C C. Chagrin

Falls.  O. fX^D.)
SHERMAX^. C. C. 612 Euclid
Ave.. Cleveland. O. (X.D.)
F. J.. 886 Trumbull Ave.,
Detroit. Mich. (D.C.)


952


Alphabetical  Index


Slierr
Sims


Harriet K., 524 Plymouth

Ave., Rochester, N. Y.

Martvle L., Dover, Okla.

(D.C.)  , ^

Rav \V., 524  Plymouth  Ave..

Rochester.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
SHERR. BERTHA, 500 5th

Ave., New York, N. Y.

SHERWIN. REV. B. A.,

Tippecanoe City. O.

(D.M.T.)
SHERWOOD, AUSTIN J.,

22 3rd Ave. S. E., Dau-
phin. Man., Can. (D.C.)
AVarren  A.. 142  N. Duke  St..

Lancaster, Pa. (D.O.)
SHEWALTER. C. A.. 120

N.  Front  St.,  Cuyahoga

Falls, O. (N.D.)
SHIRLEY. ALICE PATTER-
SON, 18(59 Wyoming- Ave.,

Washing-ton. D. C. (D.O.)
•SHIEF. HENRY. Maple Hill.

Kan. (S.T.)
SHIELDS. J. D.. 432 Mercan-
tile Bldg..  Rochester,  N.  Y.

J. D.. 5405 Calumet Ave.,

Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
Susan. 1777 B'way, New

York. N. Y. (D.C.)
SHIFLET, R. J., Watervliet,

Mich. (D.C.)
SHIMER, C. S., 35 Harper

Blk.. Lima. O. (D.C.)
SHINE, CHAS., Remington,

Ind. (D.C.)
Chas., 203 Ruff  Bldg.,  Ham-
mond, Ind. (D.C.)
SHINES, CHAS., 5307 N.

Clark St., Chicago, 111.

SHIPMAN, R. L.. 734 Terri-
torial Ave.,  Benton

Harbor, Mich. (D.C.)
SHOEMAKER, ALMA C, 36

Colvin St., Rochester,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Alma C, 22 Vick Park B.,

Rochester. N. Y. (D.C.)
Franklin. T.. 500 W. 64th

St., New York, N. Y.

Mrs. L. J., Lansdowne.

Delaware Co., Pa. (D.C.)
Paul A., Porter Blk.. Grand

Rapids. Mich. (D.O.)
C. E.. 36 Colvin Street.

Rochester.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
SHOEMAKER, W. Portage

St., Cuyahoga Falls, O.

John  R., Hudson Falls. O.

(D.M.T.)
Lester E., Ashley, O.

(D.M.T.)
SHOREY, J. L., 129 E. Ridge

St., Marquette, Mich.

SHORT, G. W^, 3110 Logais

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Thos. J., 851 Manhattan

Ave., Brooklyn. N. Y.

SHORT, G. W., 159 N. State

St.,  Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
Thos. J., 25 W. 42nd St.,

New  York.  N. Y. (D.C.)
SHORTRIDGE.  ROSETTA.

Sand Point. Idaho. (D.O.)
SHOVE. FLORENCE I., 4204

Oakenwald Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
SHREEVE, GERTRUDE M..

Ohio Bldg., Toledo, O.

(Ch.)


SHREVE. RALPH W.. 525 S.

Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
SHRUM, MARK, 180 Lewis

St.. Lvnn. Mass. (D.O.)
SHUGRUE. LAURA FEN-
WICK, Beacon Apts.,

Washington, D. C. (D.O.)
SHULTZ,  A.  C.  A., 425 Pres-

cott  St., Toledo, O.

(D.M.T.)
SHULTZ, R. W., Garner, la.

SHUMAN, LOUISE D.,. Colo-
rado Bldg., Washington,

D. C. (D.O.)
SHUMATE,  CHAS. R.,  Medical

Bldg., Lynchburg, Va.

SHUMATE, MARY L.,

Sebring, Fla. (D.C.)
SHUMATE. MARY L.. Hold-

redge.  Neb. (D.C.)
SHUPERT, J. C, Gary, Ind.

J. C, 201-4 Sawyers Bldg..

Miami. Fla. (D.C.)
M. Elizabeth. 314 N.

Church St.. Rockford, 111.

SHUTE, FURMAN R., 1516

Mt. Vernon St.. Philadel-
phia. Pa. (D.C.)
SHYNE. FRANCIS T., 30-31

Gardner Bldg., Utlca.

N. Y. (D.C.)
SIBLE. PEARL. 212 W. 2nd

St., Davenport, la. (D.C.)
SICKLES, E. H.. 22 Chapman

St..  Orange.  N. ,T. (D.C.)
Norman  I.. 5118 Chester  St..

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
N. ,1.. 1411 Walnut Street,

Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)
SICKERT. CLARIBEL. Black-
foot, Idaho. (D.C.)
SIDWA. S., 7 Stagers Street,

Nutley. N. J. (D.C.)
SIEGEL. GEO. H.. Wichita.

Kans. (M.D.)
SIEGERT,  ANNA  MAE.

Macon, Mo. (D.O.)
SIEGRIST, O. E., Portis,

Kans. (D.C.)
SIEHL, WALTER HERMAN,

Coppin Bldg., Covington,

Kv. (D.O.)
SIEKER,  A.  J.  C.  Strong  City,

Kans. (Ma.)
SIEMENS.  WILLIAM  J.,

Goldfield. la. (D.O.)
SIEMER. L. F.. 309 E. 47th

St.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SIEVER. J. L.. N. Main St.,

Marcus. la. (DC.)
J. L., N. Main St.. Mt.

Plea.sant. la. (D.C.)
SIFTON. NATE. Over  Thrash-
er's Store. Frankfort,  Ind.

SIGLBR, CHAS. M., 130 W.

State St., Trenton, N. J.

W. D., 8 Lincoln Ave.,

Salem, O. (D.O.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  piihlisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
he made in subsequent issues


SIGRIST, CAVOLISK, 7029 S.

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
SIKORA, F. M., 300 River

St., Hoboken, N. J. (D.C.)
SILVERMAN, CHARLES,

Savannah, Ga. (M.D.)
SILVERSON, PAUL, 231 C

St. N. W., Washington,

D. C. (D.M.T.)
SIMCOX, LAWRENCE. 103

W. Walnut Lane, Phila-
delphia.  Pa. (M.D.. D.C.)
SIMMER, L. F., 309 E. 47th

St., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
SIMMER.  LOUIS.  Ports-

mouth. Va. (D.C.)
SIMMON, J., 522 Hickman

Ave., Cincinnati, O. (D.C.)
SIMMONS,  CARRIE  M..

Cashion, Okla. (D.C.)
Carrie M., Reading, Okla.

Clayton, Byron, First Natl.

Bank Bldg., Milan, Mo.

(DO.)
C. W., 1628 N. 18th St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (M.D..

D.C.)
F. H.. 914 Highland St..

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
H. F., Schenck Bldg., Pitts-
burgh,  Pa. (D.C.)
James C. 301 State St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.

Margie D., 647 E. 26th St.,

Paterson, N. J. (D.O.)
N. J., Cashion. Okla. (N.D.)
W. P., 817 Haddon Ave.,

Collingswood,  N. J. (D.C.)
SIMMONS. L., 642 Sutter

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)
SIMON, E. A., Hastings,  Mich.

H. S., 308-10 Green Bldg.,

Johnstown, Pa. (D.C.)
Leo H., 524 Cons. Realty

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

James C, 301 State St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.

N. G., 647 Franklin St.,

Johnston,  Pa. (D.C.)
SIMON, J. P., La Grange, 111.

SIMONDS,  W.  E.,  2  Second  St.,

Troy, N. Y. (Ma.)
SIMONSON. MARY DORA-

THEA, McMinnville. Ore.

SIMPSON, FLORENCE K.,

379 Forest Ave., Colum-
bus, O. (Ch.)
Raymond C, 115 Kentucky

Ave.,  Washington,  D.  C.

Rosalie M.. Washington

School of Chiropractic,

Boston. Mass. (D.P., D.C.)
Rosalie. 1116 F  St. N. W.,

Washington,  D. C. (D.C.)
SIMPSON, C. E., 478 Ella St.,

Wilkinsburg, Pa. (D.C.)
C.  E.,  722  South  Ave.,  Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Maida.  Muscatine, la. (D.C.)
Martha B., 148 Maple Ave.,

Montclair. N. J. (D.C.)
Robt. H., Independence, la.

S.  G., 408  McGee  St.,  Winni-
peg, Can. (D.C.)
SIMS. MARY LYLES, 1711

Gervais St., Columbia,

S.  C. (D.O.)
R. S.. Ladysmith, Wis.


Siiicl'iir
Smith


Alpluihclicdl  Index


953


R.  S.. 133, Weed  St.,  Antigo,

Wis. (D.C.)
R. S., Weyauwega, Wis.

W.  B.,  Grangcville.  Idaho

SINCLAIR. ARTHUR D., 290

Danforth Ave., Toronto,

Ont., Can. (D.O.)
Julia Sarratt, Provident

Bldg-., Waco, Tex. (D.O.)
Neil, Elks' Bldg-., Santa

Rosa, Cal. (D.C.)
Wilhelmine. Britton, Okla.

Wilhelmine, 805 N. Laird

St.. Oklahoma City, Okla.

SINCLAIR, SARAH C, 807 H

St. N. W., Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
SINDEN, HARRY  E., Bank of

H. Chambers, Hamilton,

Ont. (D.O.)
SINDONI, F. M., 1308 Pacific

Ave.,  Atlantic  City,  N.  J.

SINGER, DR. O. U., 234 Park

Ave., Plainview, N. J.

SINGLETARY, DORA, 1506

16th St., Denver, Colo.

M. A., 1506 16th Ave., Den-
ver, Colo. (D.C.)
SINGLETON, R. H., The Ar-
cade,  Cleveland. O. (D.O.)
Robt. O., Mineral Wells,

Tex. (D.O.)
SIPES, R. A., 528 Wall St.,

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
SIPPLE, J., 354 Lansing  Ave.,

Detroit. Mich. (D.C.)
SISLEY, J. E.. 107 N. Elm St.,

Warren, O. (D.C.)
SISSON, ADA B., Santa Rosa

Bank Bldg., Santa Rosa,

Cal. (D.O.)
Ernest, First Nat'l Bank

Bldg., Oakland, Cal.

SISSON, J. H., Louisiana,

Nebr. (D.C.)
SIVENY, FRANK. 402 West-
minster St., Providence,

R.  I. (D.C.)
J. F., S2 Washington St.,

London, Conn. (D.C.)
SIVER, MAUDE, Garfield,

Nebr. (D.C.)
SIZE, P. F.. The Alberta. 226

8th Ave., Calgary. Alta..

Can. (N.D.)
SIZER, F. R.. 2410  Oak  St..

Williamette,  Ore. (N.D.)
SJOGREN, DR. OTTO. 2 E.

33rd St.. New York, N. Y.

SKAW. MISS OLENA, Hor-

nick. la. (S.T.)
SKEELS, R. H.. Delaware, O.

R.  H..  15^  High  St..  Mt.  Ver-
non.  O. (N.D.)
Russel H.. Bridgeport. O.

R. H.. 521-22 German Bank

Wheeling. W. Va.. (D.C.)
Russell S.. Moundsville, W.

Va. (D.C.)
SKEBN. MRS. MATT, Hand-
ley, Tex. (S.T.)
SKIDMORB, J. WALTER,

1171 E. Lafayette St.,

Jackson. Tenn. (D.O.)
May. 235 S. Poplar St.. Wi-
chita, Kans. (D.C.)
W. J.. Skidmore. Mo. (D.C.)
SKINNER & SKINNER. 37

Market St., Amsterdam,

N. T. (D.C.)


Mrs.  B.  F.,  Peoria,  111.  (D.C.)
P. D., 508 Spring St., Cof-

feyville, Kans. (Ma.)
SKIDWELL. MAY  VAN,

Jackson. Miss. (N.D.)
SKINNER,  M.  G.,  Alabama

Apts., Washington, D. C.

(D.M.T.)
SKIPI'EN, DR. ALFRED,

Sweet. Idaho. (M.D.)
SKONNARD, R. E., Over

American Nat'l Bank

Bldg.,  Valley  City,  N.  D.

SLABAUGH, I. C, Arlington,

Nebr. (N.D.)
SLACK, ANNETTE M.. 1515

Madison  St., Denver,  Colo.

Annette W., 1515 Madison

St., Denver. Colo. (D.C.)
Annie R., 146 Westminster

St., Providence, R. I.


Mont Clair


Colo.


NELLIE, 409
E., Newton,


First
la.


Nettie

SLAGHT,
Ave.

SLAKER,  HELEN  M.,  347
Pennsylvania  Avenue,
Aurora, 111. (D.O.)

SLATER,  ANNA, 39 S. State
St., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Gertrude, 704 North St.,

Logansport. Ind. (D.C.)
Thos. C. 502i Broadway,

Logansport, Ind. (D.C.)
Thos. C, 704  N  St.,  Logans-
port, Ind. (D.C.)
Walter E., 11621 Union
Ave.,  Portland,  Ore.

W.  E.. 410 Church  St., Port-
land. Ore. (D.C.)
Wm.  F.,  39  S.  State  St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

SLAUGH.  J.  HARRY.  922  W.
Lehigh  Ave.,  Philadel-
phia, Pa.  (D.O.)
J.  Harry,  703  W.  Cumber-
land, Philadelphia,  Pa.

SLAUGHTER, JAMES T.,
Leary Bldg., Seattle,
Wash. (D.O.)
Kate C, 133 Geary St., San

Francisco, Cal. (D.O.)
M. S., P. O. Bldg., Webb
City, Mo. (D.O.)

SLAUGHTER,  LAURA,  1018
Greenlawn  Ave.,  Cleve-
land,  O. (N.D.)

SLAVIN,  J.  L.,  214  N.  4th  St..
Danville, Ky. (D.O.)

SLAWATYCKI,  L.  J.,  986  Fill-
more Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

SLAWSON.  E.  B.,  University
Place,  Lincoln,  Nebr.

SLAYTON, CARLTON, La
Porte,  Ind. (D.C.)
S. M.. La Porte. Ind. (D.C.)

SLEBURG.  C.  G.  E..  Kaptens-
gatan  13.  Stockholm.
Sweden. (D.O.)

SLIDER  &  SLIDER,  lola.
Kans. (D.C.)

SLIFE.  C.  A.,  Hawarden,  la.

SLIFER,  CHAS.  P.,  5613  Ger-
mantown  Ave.,  Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.C.)

SLOANE.  MRS.  M.  J.  .E.,  Capi-
tol Hall.  Oklahoma  Citv.
Okla. (D.C.)

SLOLAN.  CELIA.  1658  Front
St..  San  Di(?go,  Cal. (D.C.)

SLOUGH.  H.  S..  Grove  Citv,
Pa. (D.C.)


John  S.,  531  E.  Allegheny  St..
Philadelphia, Pa. (DO.)

SMAKAL.  MRS.  MARY,  3250
E.  49th  St.,  Cleveland,  O.

SMALL,  MARY  A.,  Garrison
Hall,  Garrison  St.,  Bos-
ton, Mass. (D.O.)

.SMALL, DR. SHERMAN M.,
Wapello, Fla. (D.C.)

.SMALLFIELD,  AUGUST  C,
Arkansas  City,  Kans.

SMALLWOOD,  G.  S.,  815

Lincoln Place, Brooklyn,
N. Y. (D.O.)

SMALLWOOD,  GEORGE  S.,
110  W.  34th  St.,  New  York
City. (D.O.)

SMALTZ.  MRS.  ALICE.  Tra-
verse City. Mich. (D.C.)

SMART.  D.  M..  4200  Grand
Blvd.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

SMEDLEY. E. D.. Camden,
N. J. (N.D.)

SMELLIE, A. B., Box 85,
Eureka. 111. (D.C.)
A. v.. 615 "The  Grand," At-
lanta,  Ga. (D.C.)

SMELSER.  NELLIE.  Selkirk.
Ont..  "Can. (D.C.)

SMILEY, M. S., c/o Sherman
La Junta, Colo.


Annex,

M. S., Rm.

Bldg..

W^m. M.,


14, Y. \Y.
Riverside,


C. A.
Cal.


136 Washington
Ave.,  Albany,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
SMITH  &  SMITH, 206 S.  Gen-
eva St.. Ithaca, N. Y.
SMITH & SMITH, Guaranty
Bldg.. Mishawka, Ind.
SMITH & SMITH, Indianola,

la. (D.C.)
SMITH & SMITH, 222 West
Wayne St., South Bend.
Ind. (D.C.)
SMITH. MRS. A. E. B., 1216
I  T St. N. W., Washington,

I  D. C. (Ma.)

I Ben. v., 50 N. Pearl St.,
j  Albany, N. Y. (Opt.)

C. C. Watertown, Conn.
I  (N.D.)

j Chas. E., 16 N. Wabash
I  Ave., Chicago. 111. (Nap.)

Chas. J., 1227 Superior  Ave.
N. E.,  Cleveland.  O.
(D.M.T.)
I Chas.  Oscar,  717  9th  Ave..

North Vallev Citv. N. D.
,  (N.D.)

I C. R.,  Washington.  D.  C.
C. X., Box  130, Gaston, Ind.

(Co.S.)
Mrs. E. N., Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
F.  B., 1024  Main  St., Bridge-
port, Conn. (N.D.)
Frank C. 122 Bigelow St.,

Newark. N. J. (N.D.)
F. D.. Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
F. J., 447 W. 62nd St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
F. P., 473 ^Vashington Ave..

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
Geo. E., 30 Huntington

Ave.,  Boston,  Mass. (N.D.)
Geo. R.. 711 Nat'l Realty
Bldg.. Tacoma, "Wash.
Grace Leone. 27 E. Monroe

St., Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
H. L., Kewanee, Ind. (D.C.)
J. J., 809 3rd St.,  Milwau-
kee.  Wis. (D.C.)


954


Alphahelical  Index


Smith
Snow


J.  J..  701  5th  St.,  Water-
town. Wis. (D.C.)
J. W., Waukesha. Wi.s.

Laura M., Princeton. 111.

Lawrence  J.,  Millersburg,

O. (D.M.T.)
Leslie D.. 1060 Wilson Ave.,

Chicagro,  111. (D.O.)
Lyle E., 301 W. Federal St.,

Younpstown, O. (D.M.P.)
Dr. Milton L. & Dr. Myrtle

L.. 220 S. State St.,

Chicago. III. (D.C.)
Mrs.  Minnie  D.,  1439  R  St.,

N. W., Washington, D. C.

M. O., Pottstown, Pa.

Oakley, 6 N. Michigan Ave.,

Chicago, Til. (Nap.)
P. C, Canton, O. (D.M.T.)
R. P., Standard School of

Chiropractic and Naturo-
pathy, Davenport, la.

(D.C, Ph.C.)
R. J., 295 Plymouth Ave,,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
Vincent A., San Diego, Cal.

Virgil B., Tampa, Fla.

V.  White, 1024 Oakdale

Ave., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
W. M., 628 E. Long St.,

Columbus. O. (D.M.T.)
Walter R., 20 Davidson

Bldg., Sioux City, la.

Wilbur  L.. 1527 I St. N. W.,

Washington, D. C. (D.O.)
SMITH. DR., Lucas, Kans.

Alexander, 1851 W. Adams

St.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
A. Minetree. 109 W. Tabb

St.. Petersburg. Va.

A. M.. Charlestown, W. Va.

Arthur N.. 52 Elizabeth

St.,  Dansville.  N.  Y. (D.O.)
A. T., 4124 Vincennes Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Alexander H., Ifi Hartwell

St., Fitchburg, Mass.

Allie M., Cherry Bldg., Eu-
gene, Ore. (D.O.)
Annie. Titusville, Pa. (D.C.)
Arthur N.. 52 Elizabeth St.,

Dansville, N. Y. (D.O.)

A.  W.,  554  Elmwood  Ave.,
Buffalo. N. Y. (D.C.)

B.  K.,  6th  and  Locust  Sts.,
Des  Moines,  la. (D.C.)

Mrs.  Bush  K.,  933  Ifith  St.,
Des Moines. la. (D.C.)

C.  E.,  3124  Logan  Blvd.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

Caryll  E.,  Finch  Bldg.,
Aberdeen, Wash. (D.O.)

Chas.  E..  1708  Warren  Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

C.  R..  1433  Spruce  St..  Phil-
adelphia. Pa. (M.D.. D.C.)

Chas.  S..  Post  Bidg..  Battle
Creek, Mich. (D.O.)

Clarence  L.,  Elsart,  Ind.

Donald,  Midland,  Ont.,  Can.,

Elmer.  Rosendale,  Mo.


Etta,  819  Potomac  Ave.,  c/o
Mrs.  E.  F.  Buckley,  Buf-
falo, N. Y. (D.C.)

Earl  B.,  No.  4,  1st  Nat.  Bk.
Bldg.,  Colorado  Springs,
Colo. (D.C.)


10. A.. 54 Hendrio Ave.. Do-

tioit, Mich. (]).C.)
E. Claude. Mills Bldg.. To-

pcka. Kans. (D.O.)
Elizabeth K.. American

Nafl Bank Bldg., Ashe-

ville,  N. C. (D.O.)

E.  Gertrude,  1438  Lafayette
St., Alameda, Cal. (D.O.)

Elmer H., Hillsboro Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Hillsboro,

Ore. (D.O.)
Etta S., 22 E. Main St., Le

Roy, N. Y. (D.C.)
Mrs. Frances B.. 1537

Wright St., Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.O

F.  C,  207J  W.  Center  St.,
Marion, O. (D.O.)

Frank H., Kokomo, Ind.

Frank  P.,  Caldwell  Com-
mercial Bank  Bldg.,  Cald-
well. Idaho. (D.O.)

Fred, Onowa, la. (D.C.)

Furman  J.,  447  N.  62d  St.,
Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

F.  W.,  1433  Spruce  St.,  Phil-
adelphia, Pa. (M.D.. D.C.)

Geo., Seymour, Mo. (D.C.)
Geo. E., Huntington  (ihamb,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
Geo. F., S. Side Sq., Sey-
mour,  Mo. (D.C.)

G.  H.,  408  E.  Main  St.,
Streator, 111. (D.C.)

G. H., 106 Sumner St.,

Streator, 111. (N.D.)
G. H., 206 N. Sterling St.,

Streator, 111. (D.C.)
Geo. L., Streator, 111. (D.C.)
Geo. M., 50 S. Gratiot St.,

Mt. Clemens, Mich. (D.O.)
Geo. W. B., Walla Walla,

Wash. (D.C.)
Georgiana B., 905 W. 56th

St.,  Los  Angeles.  Cal. (D.O)
Grace Leone, 27 E. Monroe

St., Chicago. 111. (D.O.)
G. W.. Guthrie, la. (D.C.)
Helen,  1108  N.  Lee  St-.  Okla-
homa Citv, Okla. (D.C.)
Helena Ferris, 50 Park St.,

Montclair, N. J. (D.O.)
Hvrum, Snowlake, Ariz.

H. .1., 2418 N. Spaulding St..

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
H.  N.,  Canton,  S.  Dak. (D.C.)
Dr. Jas.. 134 Dupont St.,

Toronto, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
J. H., 208 W. 6th St.,  Grand

Island, Nebr. (D.C.)
J.  H.,  Garfield,  Nebr. (D.C.)
J. J., 113 Washington St.,

Beaver Dam, Wis. (D.C.)
J. Louise, Masonic Temple,

Missoula, Mont. (D.C.)
J.  M.,  Carrollton,  Mo. (D.O.)
Karl K., West  Mason Bldg.,

Ft. Dodge, la. (D.O.)
Lillian A., 1426 Kellam St.,

Los Angeles. Cal. (D.C.)
L. D.. Grand Island. Nebr.

Lloyd  F.,  Minneapolis,

Kans. (D.C.)
Lovina. P. O. Bldg.. Okla-
homa  City. Okla. (D.C.)
L. R., Cassville. Mo. (S.T.)
M. L.. 112 4th Ave., St.

Cloud, Minn. (D.C.)
M. L., 4014 Washington

Blvd. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Mary Pearl, Fredonia,  Kans.

Milton L., Suite 69, 39 W.

Adams St., Chicago, 111.

Miss N., 305 N. 5th St.,

Watertown, Wis. (D.C.)


Nelson.  602  Spreckles  Bldg.,
San Diego, Cal. (D.C.)

Orron  E.,  Traction  Ter-
minal Bldg.,  Indianapolis,
Ind. (D.O.)

O. G., Chicago. 111. (D.C.)

Miss  R.  E.,  405  6th  St.  S.,
St.  Petersburg,  Fla.


Ralph  Kendrick,  19  Arling-
ton St.,  Boston,  Mass.

Ruby, Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)

R.  O.,  3416  4th  St.,  Des
Moines, la. (D.C.)

R. O., Monroe, Wis. (D.C.)

S.  P..  206  S.  Geneva  St.,
Ithaca, N. Y. (D.C.)

S.  W.,  205J  E.  2d  St.,  Mus-
catine, la. (D.C.)

T.  C,  Cornwall,  Ont.,  Can.

T.  C,  Midland.  Ont..  Can.

T.  C,  Collingwood,  Ont.,
Can. (D.C.)

Thad.  T.,  Yalpey  Bldg.,  De-
troit, Mich. (D.O.)

Theo.  N..  Windermere  Bldg.,
East Cleveland, O. (D.O.)

Van  B..  Oliver  Theatre
Bldg.,  Lincoln,  Neb. (D.O.)

Violet,  1024  Oakdale  Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

W.  Arthur.  313  Huntington
Ave.. Boston,  Mass. (D.O.)

W. Dean, .loplin. Mo. (D.C.)

W.  D.,  117  East  Lincoln
Wav,  Mishawaka,  Ind.

Wm.  E.,  544  Elmwood  Ave.,
Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)

W.  F.,  702  Genessee  St.,
Saginaw, Mich. (D.C.)

W.  F.,  117  Franklin  St.,
Saginaw, Mich. (D.C.)

W.  H.,  Aqua  Calients,  Ariz.

Walter  S.,  300  Coleman  St.,
Maiiin, Tex. (D.O.)

Wilbur L., 1527 I St. N. W..
Wa.shington, D. C. (D.O.)
.SMITHSON, MISS M. B., 940
Highland St., Columbus,
O. (D.M.T.)
SNAPE Sz SNAPE, 1509 13th
St. N. W., Washington,
D. C. (D.C.)
SNAPP,  .1. W..  Mahoney  Bldg..

Bristol, Tenn. (D.O.)
SNARE, J. P., Hurd & Hus-
band Bldg., Modesto, Cal.
SNAVELY. C. M.. Urbana.

111. (D.C.)
SNEDEKER. O. O.. 92 Broad-
way.  Detroit.  Mich. (D.O.)

O.  O.. 406  Broadway  Central


Detroit,


Mich.


Bldg.

SNEDIKER,  R.  T.,  415  Ever-
ett Ave.,  Kansas  City,
Kans. (Ma.)

3NELL, DR. ALBERT F., 16
Garfield Place, Cincinnati,
O. (S.T.)
Daniel E., Perkins Bldg.,

Roseburg, Ore. (D.O.)
Mark M., Navina, Okla.

SNELL'S  PRIVATE  SANA-
TARIUM,  1054  Wesley
Ave., Cincinnati, O. (P.)  .

SNODGRASS, V. L., 401 N.
Penn Ave., Independence,
Kans. (D.C.)
V. L., 401 N. Penn Ave., In-
dependence, Kans. (D.C.)

SNOW,  G.  H.,  Hanselman
Bldg.,  Kalamazoo,  Mich.


Snowden
Squiers


Alphabclical  Index


955


M. J., 4637 N. Robey St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Raymond C, 10.31fi Ostend

Ave., Cleveland. O. (D.C.)
SNOWDKN, CORA, 323 Geary

St., San Francisco, Cal.

SNYDER, B. J.,  Box  577, Ful-
ton,  111. (D.O.)
Cecil Paul, 64 N. Washing-
ton St., Titusville, Pa.

Clarence W., Oakland, 111.

Claude H., Leary Bldg.,

Seattle, Wash. (D.O.)
E. C, 301 Ewing- Bldg.,

Findlay. O. (D.C.)
Harvey, Commercial Ave.

and 92d St., Chicago, 111.

Ida  F., 350  Broad St., Wav-

erlv, N. Y. (D.C.)
J. C, Pa. Bldg-., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.O.)
O. J., Witherspoon Bldg-.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
SNYDER, DAN, Kendallville,

Ind. (N.D.)
H. H., 1553 W. Madison St.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
O. W., 1118 W. High St.,

Lima, O. (D.M.T.)
SODERSTOM, OLGA, 1012

McMillen St., Cincinnati,

O. (Ch.)
SOEROS, SIGURD S., 4200 S.

Grand Blvd., Chicago, 111.

SOFRANEC, JOS., 113 Wil-
liams Ave., Youngstown,

O. (D.C.)
SOGER, EMMA D., Ewing

Block, Findlay, O. (D.C.)
SOLBERG, A., Mitchell, S.

Dak. Cd.C.)
SOLDNER. W. H., 516 S. Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.

SOLEM, HAROLD, Fergus

Falls, Minn. (N.D.)
SOLLARS, G. W., 1501 Joplin

St., Joplin, Mo. (D.C.)
SOLOM, HAROLD, Oakes,

N. D. (N.D.)
SOLOT, M., 1784 Pitkin Ave..

Brooklyn,  N. Y. (Opt.)
SOLOTER,  MRS.  V.  P., 940

Simpson  St.,  New  York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
SOMERS, EDITH, Reinbeck,

la. (D.C.)
Edith, 123 E. Boulder St.,

Colorado Springs, Colo.

S.  B.,  Traer,  la. (D.C.)
Sylvester, 1372 Merryman

St.,  Marinette,  Wis. (D.C.)
SOMERS & SOMERS, 123 E.

Boulder St., Colorado

Springs, Colo. (D.C.)
SOMERVILLE, DAVENA P.,

10 Clay St., Rochester,

N.  Y. (N.D.)
SOMMACAL, J. P., Arnstein,

Ont., Can. (D.C.)
S  O  M  M  E  R  S, ELIZABETH

PREISS. R. F. D. No. 4,

Box 21-a. Madison. Wis.

SONDEREGGER. MISS

HILDA, 812 Highpoint

Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N. J.

SONES, .J. C, 46 Broadwav.

Toledo. O. (D.C.)
Mrs. .L C. Toledo. O. (D.C.)
J.  C,  1602  N.  Saginaw,  Flint,

Mich. (D.C.)
J.  C,  Julietta,  la. (D.C.)


J. C, Stayton, Ore. (D.C.)
SONES, J. C, 111 2nd St.,

Moscow, Fla. (D.C.)
SONNICHSEN, A. A., 972

Willoughby Ave., Brook-
lyn, N.  Y. (N.D.)
SONNTAG, ALFRED G.,

Palmer, Kans. (N.D.)
Alfred G., Fowler, Kans.

Miss Clara, 1109 14th St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

(Ma.)
SORENSON, JOHN, 313 Eitel

Bldg.. Seattle. Wash.

Louis  C. Second  Nat'l Bank

Bldg.. Toledo.  O. (DO.)
SORECHEK. WM.. 146 S Ave.

and 18th, Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
SORG,  MRS. MARIE,

Durango. Colo. (D.C.)
SORMSEN, DR. M. C, Sioux

Falls, S. D. (M.D.)
SOUDER. ALBERT. Box 255,

Clifton Forge. Va. (D.C.)
SOULE. E. C, Fowlerville,

Mich. (D.C.)
SOULES, ADELAIDE E., Osh-

awa,  Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
J. S., Oshawa, Ont., Can.

SOUTHERLAND, C. B., Lone

Tree, la. (D.C.)
SOUTER, J. W., Grinnell, la.

SOWERS, HOMER E., Ham-

ory Bldg., Sharon, Pa.

SPALDING, J. LUCENA, Box

677,  Asheville,  N.  C. (D.O.)
SPANG, B. W., 1st and Ed-
wards Sts., Newberg,

Colo. (D.C.)
Durnard, 29th and Belmont

Sts.. Portland. Ore. (D.C.)
SPANGLER, CLYDE B.. Mait-

land. Mo. (D.O.)
H.. 638 E. 14th St., New

York. N. Y. (D.C.)
H. L.. 145 German St.. St.

John. N. B. (D.O.)
SPANGLER, H., 117 Avon

Ave.,  Newark.  N.  J. (N.D.)
SPATES,  AUGHEY  A'IRGINIA,

216 S. W^alnut St., Sher-
man,  Tex. (D.O.)
Edwin M., Black Bldg., Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
SPATH, ALFRED, 118 W.

Wash. St., Bloomington,

111. (D.C.)
SPATZ, CHAS., 162 N. High

St  ,  Columbus,  O. (Ch.)
SPAUNHURST, J. F., State

Life Bldg., Indianapolis,

Ind. (D.O.)
SPEAR, MRS., L. E., Guthrie,

Okla. (D.C.)
SPEARING. HERMAN A.,

1072 W. Ashley  St., Jack-
sonville. Fla. (D.C.)
SPEARS, MRS. JAS. D., Suite

S, 1822 Chicago St.,

ha, Nebr. (S.T.)
SPECKERT. A. J., 309

Blk.. Cor. 2d Ave.,

tie.  Wash. (S.T.)
SPEGAL. F. M..  Bridlev  Bldg.,

Milton.  Ore. (D.C.)
F.  M.,  Freewater.  Ore. (D.C.)
SPEICHER. W. N., 1343

Wright St.. Los Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
SPEITH. PERRY  A.. 353 W.

8th St.. Elvria. O. (D.C.)
SPENCE, HUGH DAVIS. 220

N. Market St.. Frederick,

Md. (D.O.)


Oma-


Burke

Seat-


Thomas  H.,  16  Central Park

West,  New  York,  N. Y.

SPENCER, B. M., Fehl Bldg.,

Lancaster, Pa. (D.O.)
Chas. H., 318 Clay St., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
Elizabeth A., 133 Geary St.,

San Francisco,  Cal. (D.O.)

F.  M.. 116 VV. Long Ave.,
Du  Boi.s, Pa. (DC.)

Jennie C, HoUingsw^rth

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

Piatt Rogers, 437 Main St.,

Racine, Wis. (D.O.)
SPERBECK. H. C, Sunburv,

Pa. (D.C.)
H. C, R. F. D. No. 3, Sum-

merville, N. J. (D.C.)
SPERLING, D. W., Chadron,

Nebr. (D.O.)
SPERLING. F. J. E., Wilkes-

Barre, Pa. (M.D.)
SPERRY, MYRA ELLEN, 21

W. Victoria St., Santa

Barbara,  Cal. (D.O.)
SPICER, D. F., Marion O.

SPIEGLE, ANDREW A., 290

Oak St., Palestine, Tex.

SPIES, L. ELIZABETH, 3600

Troost-Ave., Kansas  City,

Mo. (D.O.)
SPILL, WALTER E., 2509

Perrvsville Ave., Pitts-
burg, Pa. (D.O.)
SPINAL HEALTH SYSTEM,

176 Main St., Bristol,

Conn. (D.C.)
SPITLER, FLORENCE W.,

Eaton, O. (N.D.)
H. Riley. Eaton,  O. (D.C.)
SPITLER. H. R., Brooksville,

O. (D.C.)
H. Riley, Eaton, O. (D.C.)
Harry R., Spitler Sanita-
rium, Crab Orchard, Ky.

Harry R., Union City, Ind.

J.  F.,  Stevens  Bldg.,  Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
SPOHR, t. B., White Sul-
phur Springs,  Mont.

SPONGES,  J.  C,  46  Broadway,

Toledo. O. (N.D.)
SPOON, NANNIE, Luray,

Kans. (D.C.)
Nannie C., Lindsev, Okla.

SPRAGUE, B. R., Hemet, Cal.

SPRINGER.  A.  J.,  Crooksville,

O. (N.D.)

G.  L., 152 N. Marengo Ave.,
Pasadena,  Cal. (D.C.)

Victor L., Valparaiso, Ind.

SPRING, DR. ALTON J.,
Crooksville, O. (D.C.)

SPRINGER, A. L.. Crooks-
ville, O. (D.C.)
Alexander, Hamilton, O.
(Mag.)

SPRING-RICE.  THEODORIS
M.,  46  W.  P6th  St.,  New
York City. N. Y. (D.O.)

SPROVIERO,  PATRICK,  268-
70  Atlantic  St.,  Stamford,
Conn. (D.C.)

SPRYSZYNSKI.  DR.  S.  M.. 222
Stanislaus St.. Buffalo.
N. Y. (N.D.)

SQUIERS. MABEL. 2119 Ash-
land Ave.. Toledo. O.


956


Alphabetical  Index


Squire
Stewart


SQUIRE.  MABEL,  Cary,  O.

Rof?er N.. 904 Main St.,
Hartford, Conn. (D.O.)

SROFE,  BESSIE  M.,  5  Mel-
rose Bldg..  N.  E.  C.  Mc-
Milan  and  Melrose  Aves.,
Cincinnati, O. (D.O.)

STAADS.  DR.  S.,  Sioux  City,
la. (N.D.)

STACHT.ER,  F.  C,  154  King.s-
land  Ave.,  Corona,  I^.  I.
(DC.)

STACY.  J.  W.,  The  Chateau,
Springfield, Mass. (D.C.)

STADEN, CAROI>INE. 937

Bushwick Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (N.D.)
Dr. L., 937 Bushwick Ave.,
Brooklyn. N. Y. (N.D.)

STADIUS,  OTTO,  78.5  7th  St.,
St. Paul, Minn. (D.M.T.)

STAEBI>ER, F. C, 154  Kings-
land Ave.. Corona,  L. I.,
N. Y. (N.D.)

STAFF,  L.  E.,  (509  "W.  Jordan
St.,  Jacksonville,  111.
(DO.)

STAHL, FRANK  J., 1264 Lex-
ington Ave., New York
City. N. Y. (D.C.)
G.  W., 102  Main St.,  Council
Bluffs, la. (D.C.)

STAHL,  J.  C, 10827  Olivet
Ave., Cleveland; O.
(D.M.T.)

STAHLSCHMIDT, OSKAR,
Comfort, Tex. (N.D.)

STAHR,  D.  M..  Orr  Flesh
Bldg., Piqua, O. (D.O.)

STAINES, P.  S.,  West  Point,
Miss. (D.C.)
Robt. W., Aberdeen, Miss.

STAMAN,  MRS.  E.,  Delnlar,
la. (DC.)

STANDART,  N.  K.,  Washing-
ton Arcade,  Detroit,  Mich.
(Opt.)

STANDIFERD,  R..  Reading,
Kans. (ST.)

STANDISH, LULU, 2103 3fith
St., Cleveland, O. (Ma.)
Margaret A., I.,ong Island,
Ala. (N.D.)

STANFORD,  ELPZABETH,

453 W. fiSrd St., Chicago,
111. (D.O.)

STANCE,  J.  H.,  7  W.  Madi-
son St., Chicago, 111.
(Ma.)

STANGEN, DR. ERNEST, 657
Classen Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y. (N.D.)

STANLEY,  ALTA,  Melchor,  la.
A. E., Exchange Bldg., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

STANLEY,  CARRIE  E., 151
Pleasant St., Winchendon,
Mass. (N.D.)

STANSBURY.  L.  A.,  Jollet.  111.

STARBECK,  C.  E.,  607  Grove-
land  Pk.,  Chicago,  111.
(DC.)

STARBUCK, DR. S. H.,
Seattle, Wash. (M.D.)

STARK, GERTRUDE, 406
Evergreen Ave., Brook-
lyn,  N. Y.  (D.C,  D.O.,  N.D.)
R. A., Coutier Bell Blk.,
Hamilton,  Mont. (D.O.)

STARKEY,  T.  S.,  Holland
Bldg.,  Hobart,  Okla.
(DC.)

STARKS,  FRANCES,  Mullett
Lake, Mich. (D.C.)

STARKWEATHER,.  LOUISE
A.,  Brighton  Apts.,  Wash-
ington, D. C. (D.O.)


R.  L.,  Jefferson  Bldg.,  Go.sh-
en.  Ind.  (D.O.)
STARR,  MISS  BERTHA  E.,
1835  Dime  Bank  Bldg.,
Detroit,  Mich.  (Cr.)
George  R.,  45  W.  34th  St.,
New  York  City,  N.  Y.
(DO.)

Bloomfield Ave.,
N. J. (D.O.)
B., Wells, Minn.


Faribault,  Minn.

584  Delaware

Blair,

Wash-


J. F., 71

Passaic,
STATE, J.

STATE,  J.  B
•  (D.C.)
Walter  W.

Ave.,  Buffalo, N. Y.
STATES & STATES,

Nebr. (D.C.)
STAUFFER, C. E., 65J

ington  St..  Tiffin,  O
Grace  H., 281 Wohlers  Ave.

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.O.)
STAYTON, CARLTON, La

Porte, Ind. (D.C.)
ST.  CLAIR  &  HELFRICH,  216-

17-18 Fay Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
ST. CLAIR, HARRY, 1012 W.

Pico  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

Harry, 218 Fay Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
STEARNE, JOHN J., 3124 N.

15th St., Philadelphia, Pa.

STEARNS, C. H., 1504 H St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

Maus W., 226 State St.,

Schenectady, N. Y. (D.O.)
STEBBINS, J. EDW., Agra,

Kans. (D.C.)
J. E., Wichita, Kans. (D.C.)
T. J., Waco St., Wichita,

Kans. (D.C.)
STEEL-BROOKE, LOUISE H.,

Box 263, Sheridan, Wyo.

STEELE, FREDERICK A.,

JR., 107 Summit- Ave.,

Summit, N. J. (D.O.)
James, 405 Metcalfe Bldg.,

Auburn, N. Y., (D.C.)
W. W., 5  60 Delaware Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.O.)
STEENBERGEN, S. V., 522

Samison Bldg., Seattle,

Wash. (N.D.)
STEENROD, SARAH  H., 31

Illinois Ave., Dayton, O.

STEBVES, HERBERT O., 30

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
STEFFEN, EDWARD E. B.,

Dole Bldg., Beatrice,

Nebr. (D.O.)
STEIN, AARON, 1226 Boston

Road, New York City,

N.  Y. (D.C.)
Herbert, 235 W. 103d

New York City, N.

R. I., 831 Monroe

Scranton,  Pa. (D.C.)
STEIN,  E.,  Saticoy,  Cal. (Nat.)
STEINBACH, LEO J.. U. C. C,

Davenport, la. (DC.)
STEINBERG, S. E., 1201

B'way, Brooklyn, N. Y.

(Opt.)
STEINBURG, PAUL, Midland

Ave., Syracuse, N. Y.

STEINER, O. R., 230 Akron

Savings & Loan Bldg.,

Akron, O. (N.D.)
STEINER, DR. O. R., 230

Akron Savings and Loan

Co. Bldg., Akron, O.


St.,
Y.


Ave.,


STEINFADT, A. O., 1115
Main St., Bridgeport,
Conn. (N.D.)
STEIN  J  ANN. WM., 57  i Sum-
ner  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
STELLE, TRUMAN Y., Safety
Bldg., Rock Island, 111.
STEM, HAROLD L., Lewis
I  Bldg., Canton, Pa. (D.O.)

STEPHENS, FRANCIS, 293
Park  Ave.,  Bradford,  Ont.,
Can. (D.C.)
Genoa D., Century Bldg.,
St. Louis, Mo. (D.O.)
STEPHENSON, C. L., 509
Main St., Alamosa, Colo.
Jennie, Garden City Bank
Bldg., San Jose, Cal.
Leah M., 1023 E. Jefferson
!  Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.O.)

I Troy  C,  523  Main  St.,  Cedar
I  Falls, la. (D.O.)

STERN,  G. M., 409 Lowry  An-
nex, St.  Paul,  Minn. (D.O.)
H., Davenport, la. (D.C.)
Harry, fi Stuyvesant Place,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
Harry,  952  Broadway,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
STERNER, M. G., 281 Natl.
Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich. (D.O.)
STERTZBACH, C, Box 83,
:Mechanicsville, la. (D.C.)
STETSON, A. G. C, 1825
Chestnut  St.,  Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
STEURK, A. K., Y. M. C. A.
Blk., 53 Court St.,
Auburn, Me. (D.C.)
STEVENS,  ARTHUR  D.

Aughton Road, Birkdale,
Southport, E«g. (D.O..
D.C.)
B. E., 50 Valpey Bldg., De-
troit, Mich. (D.C.)

B.  E., 304  W. Hancock  Ave.,
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)

Bertram  E.,  80  Valpey  Bldg.,
Detioit, Mich. (D.C.)

C.  Allen, 1361 Park St.,
Alameda, Cal. (D.O.)

C. B., 16  Hague  St.,  Detroit.

Mich. (D.O.)
Dr. C. Burton, 617-18 New

Farwell Bldg., Detroit,

Mich. (D.O.)
Delia Kevil, Fulton, Ky.

Dorothy J., Auditorium

Bldg., Minneapolis, Minn.

E. S., 1964 N. Bronson St.,

Hollywood, Cal. (D.C.)
Olinda  K., 387  S.  Park  Ave.,

Pomona, Cal. (D.O.)
S., 5th St., Middletown, Ind.

STEVENS, L. R., 11 Thomas

St., Newark, N. J. (N.D.)
STEVENSON, ELIZ. M., 31

Bayview Avenue. Jersey

City, N. J. (D.C.)
G., 1715 California  St., Den-
ver, Colo. (D.C.)
H. A., 36 Kingman St., St.

Albans, Vt. (D.O.)
J. F., 205 W. Church St.,

Lock Haven, Pa. (D.O.)
STEVICK, L. S., Elyria, O.

(Ma.)
STEWARD, DR. C. E., Gas-

wald Bldg., Springfield,

O. (D.C, N.D.)
STEWART, DR. CARRIE B.

TAYLOR, 421 Stevens

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.


Stewart
St  rati  on


Alphabetical  Index


957


C. E., CA Illinois St., Chi-

cag-o Heights. 111. (D.O.)
Frances G., Exchang-e Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Coeur D'Al-
ene, Idaho. (D.O.)
Frank, 20fi Clair Ave., De-
troit, Mich. (D.C.)
Frank J., 7 W. Madi.son St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Frank V.. 20f> Claremont
Ave., Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
Miss Helen, Enid, Okla.

H. D., Clandon Bank Bldg-.,

Fairbury, 111. (D.O.)
H. D. I.loyd, Dist. Nat'l
Bank Bldg-., Washington,
D. C. (D.O.)
John, 20fi Claremont Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich. (D.C.)
J. H.. McKinnville, Colo.

J. H., McMinnville, Ore.

.lohn R., Solomon, Kans.

W. S., Stevens Point, Wis.

Dr. Walter  W., 421 Stevens
Bldgr., Detroit, Mich.
STEWART, CHAS. E., Wash-
ington,  O. (D.M.T.)
Fannie  D., 516 Hatman  St.,

Yoiingstown, O. (Ma.)
Frank  L., Youngstown, O.

(Ch.)
H. D., Lloyd Dist. Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Washington,
D.  C. (D.O.)
Lloyd, 27 E. Monroe St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Margaret W., Park Ave.,

Youngstown,  O. (Ch.)
Myra  Cain,  Dist.  Nat'l Bank
Bldg., Washington, D. C.
Robt., 6553 Langlev Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
STICKLES. ALBERT, Sangus,

Cal. (D.C.)
STIEBER, FRANZ, Perry-

ville. Mo. (S.T.)
STIEKLE, MARY, 79 Halsey

St., Newark, N. .1. (N.D.)
STIERS, W. M., Cadiz, O.
Wm. W., Cadiz. O (D.C.)
STILES, J. A., Cottingham
Bldg., Morganfleld, Kv.
W.  E.,  1440  Broadwav, Oak-
land, Cal. (D.C.)
STILL, ANDRE^V T., Kirks-
ville. Mo. (D.O.)
Benj. F., 428 N. Broad St.,

Elizabeth,  N. J. (D.O.)
C. E., Kirksville, Mo. (D.O.)
Ella D.. Kirksville, Mo.

Geo. A., Kirksville, Mo.

(DO.)
Harry M., Kirksville, Mo

Jennie A., 1338 E. Grand
Ave., Des Moines, la.
Mabel J., Matthews Bldg.,

Milwaukee, Wis. (D.O.)
S. S., Kirksville. Mo. (D.O.)
STILLMAN, CLARA JUDSON.
388J E. Colorado St.,
Pasadena, Cal. (D.O.)
STIPPICH, WM. H., 222 E.
Main St., Meriden, Conn.
(M.D., N.D.)
ST. LOUIS CHIROPRACTIC
COLLEGE, New Grand
Central Bldg., St. Louis,
Mo. (D.C.)


STOCK,  C. E., 1563 Fairmount
Way, Los Angeles, Cal.
Lena, 1874 E. 86th St.,
Cleveland, O. (D.M.T.)
STOCK, W. F., 225 Cleveland

Ave., Canton, O. (N.D.)
STOCKFIBLD. I. H. A.. Fre-
mont, Nebr. (D.C.)
STOCKTON, DR., Greenwood,
Ark. (D.C.)
J. W., 515 N. Douglas St.,
Oklahoma City. Okla.
Mrs. W. C, 217 E. 10th St.,
Little Rock, Ark. (S.T.)
STOCKTON,  W.  I.,  New
Albany, Ind. (D.C.)
STOCKWELL, CHAS. H., 103
Temple  Blk., Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
Ida B.  • Mason Bldg., Los
Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
STODDARD, BERTH.A., Neil

.'Vve.,  Columbus.  O. (D.C.)
STODDARD, GEO. J.. 307
Howard  St..  Detroit.  Mich
Kate. Richards Blk.. Lin-
coln, Nebr. (DO.)
STOECKEL, FLORENCE P.,
5332 Wayne, Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
STOEL. HARRY M., Torrey
Bldg.. Duluth, Minn.
(DO.)
STOERLEMEYER,  MRS.

HARRIET. 566  W. 7th  St.,
Des Moines, la. (D.C.)
STOEVER. HARRY. 5426
Walnut St.. Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.C.)
STOKES. PAHL S.. Mount

Vernon, O. (N.D.)
STOKEY, LAURA E.. 210
High Ave. N. W., Canton.
O. (DO.)
STOLL, ^VM. E., Arcade An-
nex.  Seattle. Wash. (D.C.)
STOT-TENBERG, ANNA L.,
3816 Troost Ave.. Kansas
City. Mo. (D.O.)
STONE, ANNA L., 4045 Calu-
met Ave.. Chicago. 111.
C.  M.,  525 So.  Ashland  Blvd..

Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
C. M.. Gen'l Del.. Marion.

la. (D.C.)
C. M.. Reinbeck. la. (D.C.)
E. W.. 280 Richmond Ave.,

Brooklyn. N. Y. (D.C.)
Francis  M..  Akron.  O. (N.D.)
H.  S.. 1633S  E.  13th  St..  Sell-
wood, Ore. (D.C.)
Harry S.. Nat'l Bk. Bldg..

Salem. Ore. (D.C.)
J. C. Tipton. Ind. (D.O.)
J. M., Central Office Bldg..
San Antonio. Tex. (D.C.)
J.  M..  Box  935.  Phoenix,  Ariz.

Dr. J. M.. The Menger. San

Antonio. Tex. (D.C.)
Jno. N.. 68 Hudson St.. Ho-
boken. N. J. (DC.)
STONE,  E.  W., Kingston.  N.  Y.
Hugh F„ Box 25, Salem. O.

(D.M.T.)
L. R.,  1215 Rhode  Island
Ave., Washington, D. C.
(D.M.T.)
W. W. T., 40J Grant St.,
Utica, N. Y. (D.C.)
STONER. A. B., Chandler  i
Court, Mesa, Ariz. (D.O.)  ,
St. ONGEY, D. J., Seattle, |
Wash. (D.C.)  '

STOPPE.  H.  M.  &  W.,  St.  Paul.
Minn. (N.D.)


STORER, ELBERT, Mer-
chants' Bank Bldg., In-
dianapolis, Ind. (D.O.)
STOREY, ROBERT  J., 1118 N.
40th St.. Philadelphia. Pa.
STOREY, ROBERT  J., Villa
Nova Hotel, Atlantic
City, N. J. (D.O.)
STORSETH, MARIE, 4653

Grand Blvd., Chicago. 111.
(Ma.)
STORM, H.. Fairview,  N.  J.
Mollie, 357 W. 63rd St.,
Chicago, 111. (Ma.)
STORY, THOS. H., 1503 Reid
St., Los Angeles, Cal.
STOTENBERG, ANNA L.,
3816 Troost Ave., Kansas
City,  Mo. (D.O.)
STOUGHT, MISS BESSIE, 157
E. 4th St., Ashland, O:
(D.M.T.)
STOUT. ELMER S.. Arapaho,
Okla. (D.C.)
Elmore S.. 408 Kennedy
Bldg., Ft. Smith, Ark.
Lora  K., Yore  Bldg..  Benton

Harbor.  Mich. (D.C.)
Oliver G., Conover Bldg.,

Davton, O. (D.O.)
Stella M.. 408 Kennedy
Bldg., Ft. Smith. Ark.
STOVER. O. O.. Harrison
Bldg..  Columbus.  O. (D.O.)
S. H.. Northfield. Minn.
(DO.)
STOVER, ORLANDO O..

Columbus, O. (D.M.T.)
STOW, ELLA K.. 201 S. Ken-
wood St.. Glendale. Cal.
John  B..  78  N.  11th  St..  New-
ark. N. J. (D.O.)
STOWE, H. E.. 243 I-ake St.,

Elmira, N. Y. (DC.)
ST. PAUL COLLEGE OF
CHIROPRACTIC 183 Nel-
son Ave., St. Paul, Minn.
STRAHL, G. B., Middleton, O.

STRAHLER. RALPH G..

Alliance. O. (Ma.)
STRAIN, PHILIP S. J., 560
Forest Ave., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (D.C.)
STRAND &  '  STRAND, Boon-

ville. Mo. (S.T.)
STRAND, CHAS. E., 1014  J
Pine St., Seattle, Wash.
Mrs. Francis S., 252 Mer-
riman Blk.,  Council  Bluffs,
la. (D.C.)
Glen, 252 Merriman Block,
Council Bluffs, la. (D.C.)
Ida E., 501 Dollar Bank
Bldg., Youngstown, O.
Joe,  Thief  River  Falls,  Minn.

Jos. H.. Ayrshire. la. (D.C.)
Paul. 501-2 Dollar Bk.
Bldg.,  Springfield.  0.(D.C.)
P. H., 501 Dollar Bank
Bldg.. Youngstown, O.
STRAND. J., 447  Loeb Arcade
Bldg., Minneapolis. Minn.
STRATER. J.  EDWARD,

368 Westminster St.,
Providence, R. I. (D. O.)
STRATTON. C. FIXLEY, Box
49. Mingo, O. (D.M.T.)


958


Alphabetical  Index


Straub
Sivem


STRAUB,  MAURICE,  Bellevue,

O. (D.C.)
STRAUN, A. E.. Ifi04 Jackson

St., Amarillo, Tex. (D.C.)
STRAUSBAUGH. N. \V., 720

15th  St.  S.  E..  Washington,

D. C. (D.C.)
STRAYER. W. G. Berkeley

Hotel, Long Beach, Cal.

H. R., 226 Strayer St.,

Johnstown, Pa. (D.C.)
STRAYER, WM., Nampa,

Idaho. (D.C.)
^V. A., 329J 12th  St.,  Miami,

Fla. (N.D.)
STREB, J. H.. E. Federal St.,

Youngstown, O. (N.D.)
STREETER, WILFRID A.,

255 Bath St., Glasgow,

Scotland. (D.O.)
STREHL. G. B., Middleton,

O. (N.D.)
J.  B..  Petoskey,  Mich. (D.C.)
STRETCH, EDW., 617 Trap-

hagen  St., West  Hoboken,

N. J. (D.C, D.O.)
STRICKERT, GEO. T., 228-a

Palmetto St., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (N.D.)
STRICKLAND, O. M., 702

Main St., Joplin, Mo.

STRICKLER, D. T., 112 E.

Broad  St.,  Columbus,  O.

STRINGER, GROVER L., Ab-
ingdon, Va. (D.C.)
Jno. D., Drummond, Okla.

(D. C.)
Mary S., Abingdon, Va.

Mary S., Green Cove, Va.

STROBEL, ALBIN, 520 Pater-
son Plank Rd., Jersey

City. N. J. (D.C.)
F. A., P. O. Box 414,

Thomasville, Ga. (D.C.)
Richard, 3702 Hudson Blvd.,

Jersey City, N. J. (D.C.)
STROCK,  W.  F.,  225  Cleveland

Ave.,  Canton,  O. (D.C.)
STROEK,  W. F., 30fi  N.  Cleve-
land Ave., Canton, O.

\V'. F., 225 Cleveland Ave.,

Canton, O. (D.C.)
STROM. C. REBECCA, Sioux

Falls, S. D. (D.O.)
STRONG & STRONG, R. D.

24. Akron, O. (D.C.)
STRONG & STRONG, 210  Otis

Bldg.. Akron, O. (D.C.)
STRONG, BESSIE E., Ionia,

Mich. (D.O.)
Leonard V., 25 7th Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
STRONGFORT, LIONEL, 274

Park  Bldg., Newark. N. J.

(P.)
STROTHER.  J. O., Firgt  Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Winfield,

Kans. (D.O.)
STROUD, IDA E., 501 Dollar

Bank Bldg., Youngstown,

O. (D.C.)
STROUSE, ETHEL, Kalama-
zoo, Mich. (D.C.)
STRUBLE, CARL K., First

Nafl Bank Bldg., Hast-
ings, Nebr. (D.O.)
STRUCK. JOSEPH F., 2312

Iowa St., Chicago, 111.
STRUBH,  CARL, 32  N.  State

St.,  Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

Carl, McHenry. 111. (N.D.)

STRUM, CHARLOTTE, Moore

Bldg.. San Antonio, Tex.


STRUPE,  CLARENCE  H.,  1213

Indian Ave., Spokane,

Wash. (N.D.)
STRIJVE, F. W., Plainview,

Tex. (S.T.)
STRYKER, ANNA K.. Hotel

Endicott, Columbus Ave.

and 81st St., New York

City, N. Y. (D.O.)
Wm. R., Hennessy Bldg.,

Butte, Mont. (D.O.)
STUART, CHARLES. 4602

Frankfort Ave., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.C.)
Charles, 2067 Margaret St.,

Frankfort, Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.C.)
Mary V.,'  1728 Franklin St.,

Oakland, Cal. (D.O.)
STUART, FANNIE. 4200 S.

Grand Blvd., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
H. C, Paynesville. O. (D.C.)
STUCKER, HOWARD, Shaw-
nee.  Okla. (D.C.)
Howard. Holdenville. Okla.

STUDLEY, HARVEY L., C. &

W. Bldg., Eugene, Ore.

STUPNICKI, M., 3109 South

Morgan St., Chicago, 111.

STURGES, A. B., 113 S. Main

St., Wallingford, Conn.

STURLA, LOUIS, 1342 West

Congress St., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
STURS, W. W., Harris Co.,

Cadiz, O. (N.D.)
STUVER. WILLIS N., State

Bank Bldg., Marceline,

Mo. (D.O.)
STYLES, JOHN H., Jr., Pit-

tock Blk., Portland, Ore.

SUCHOLTZ, R. E., San An-
tonio,  Tex. (D.C.)
SULLIVAN, Broad St.,

Newark, N. J. (Hy.)
Eugene  P., 29 W. 1st  St.,

Dayton, O. (D.C.)
M. J., 564 Pacific Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)
SULLIVAN, CLARA E., 1142

Eoff  St.,  Wheeling,  W.  Va.

F. P., Naugatuck. Conn.

H. B.. 87 Valpey Bldg., De-
troit, Mich. (D.O.)
J. H., Goddard Bldg., Chi-
cago, 111. (D.O.)
P. F., 49 Water St.. Tor-

rington. Conn. (D.C.)
Rebecca  E.,  20  Kearny  Ave.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J.  (D.C.)
R.  K.,  Wausau,  Wis.  (D.C.)
Richard, New Bodinson

Bldg., Kearney, Nebr.

Svlvan, Brady, Neb. (D.C.)
Tom v., 1142 Eoff St.,

Wheeling. W. V. (D.O.)
.SUMMER, FRANK H., Ports-
mouth.  Va. (D.C.)
SUMMERS, L. A., Battle

Creek, Mich. (N.D.)
Louis A.. Chicago, 111.

(D.P.T.)
Lome N., 1204 E. 47th St.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D., D.O.)
SUMMERS, DR. LORNE A.,

5411 Ellis Ave., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
SUMMERVILLE, A. W., Ben-
ton Harbor, Mich. (D.C.)
.SUMMONS,  CARRIE  M.,

Reeding,  Okla. (D.C.)


SUNSTEAD, O. H., Guaranty

Bldg., Butler, Pa. (D.C.)
SUPLER,  A.  J.,  116  i  W.  Grand
Ave.. Oklahoma City,
Okla. (D.C.)
SURLES. J. H.. Putnam, Tex.

SUTHERLAND, JNO. W.,
3857 18th St., San Fran-
cisco,  Cal. (D.C.)
Wm. G., Box 345, Mankato,

Minn. (D.O.)
W. H., 3363 Shan St., Char-
lotte, Mich. (D.C.)
SUTORIUS. L., 1129 Addison

St., Chicago. 111. (N.D.)
SUTTON, BMILIB VICTORIA,
1350  Sutter  St.,  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal. (D.O.)
W. R., Mt. Pleasant, Tenn.
SVETCOFF,  GEO., 327  E. 66th
St. N. E., Cleveland, O.
(D.M.T.)
SWAIN, ALFRED,  L.  77 Wee-
quahie Ave., Newark, N.
J. (D.C.)
SWAN, ELLA, Traverse City,
Mich. (D.C.)
Wm.  A.,  Central  Bldg.,  Kan-
sas City, Mo. (D.C.)
William E., King Bldg.,
Johnson  City,  Tenn. (D.O.)
SWANSON & SWANSON, 710
(George St., Norristown,
Pa. (D.C.)
SWANSON, GUSTAF, 322 W.
Liberty, Pittsburgh, Pa.
John, Suite 705, Commer-
cial Tribune Bldg., Cin-
cinnati, O. (D.O.)
Ralph,  Creston,  la. (D.C.)
R. A., 156 N. Cherry St.,
Galesburg, 111. (D.C.)
SWART, GEO. D., Kitchener,
Ont., Can. (Ma.)
Joseph, 650 Minnesota  Ave.,
Kansas City, Kan. (D.O.)
SWARTHOUT, H. C, 260 W.
State St., Wellsville, N.  Y.
H. C, 24 Cummings Place,
Wellsville,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
SWARTOUT, H. C, Canisteo,

N. Y. (D.C.)
SWARTZ, MRS. E. B., White
City,  Kan. (Ma.)
I^aura E., Carbondale, 111.

R. E., "White City, Kans.

(Ma.)
W. C, Adams Bldg., Dan-
ville,  111. (D.O.)
SWARTZ,  J.  L., 6  N. Michigan
Ave., Chicago, 111. (Nap.)
SWEARINGER. PEARL, 14
Canopy Bldg., Muncie,
Ind. (DC.)
SWEENEY, MRS. S. S., 718
Rose Ave., Wilkinsburg,
Pa. (N.D.)
SWEET, B. v., Rockland, Me.
B. W., 136 W. 10th Street,

Erie, Pa. (D.O.)
F. T., 30-31 Lyman Blk.,
Muskegon, Mich. (D.C.)
H.  D.,  Glens  Falls  Insurance
Bldg., Glens Falls, N. Y.
Ralph A., 146 Westminster
St., Providence,  R.I.  (D.O.)
Ralph C, 214 W. Maine St.,
Battle  Creek, Mich. (D.C.)
SWEM, D. D., 607 Webster
Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Guy, 401 J. M. S. Bldg.,
South Bend, Ind. (D.C)


Swensnii
Thomas


Alj)h<ih('lir(il  hidcv


959


SWENSON, MISS A. G., Roy-
den Apartment House,
^Vashinston. D. C. (Ma.)

SWENSON, GUSTAF, 322
Lilly Ave., W. Liberty,
Pittsbuig-h, Pa. (D.C.)
J. E., 4124 Vincennes Ave.,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

SWENSON  &  OMAN,  17  E.

89th St., New York, N. Y.
(Ma.)

SWIFT, A. A., Claremore,

Okla. (D.O.)

Ellen G., 292 Park Ave.,

Bradford, Ont.,  Can.  (D.C.)

Irvin H., Otten Block,

Snohomish, Wash. (D.O.)


SWINGLE,  M.  P., 1770  Del-

mont Ave., Cleveland, O.

SWISHER, MRS. A., Nicker-

son, Kan. (S.T.)
SWITZER, C. R., Rood Bldg-.,

Evanston, 111. (D.O.)
R. H., 5229 Spruce Street,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
SWOPE. CHESTER D., The

Farragut,  Washington,

D. C. (D.O.)
SYLER, HARRY B., R. 1,

Paris, Mo. (D.O.)
SYMONDS, WESLEY E., 227J

N. Washington Avenue,

Lansing, Mich. (D.O.)


SYMONS,  W.  C,  505  Mercan-
tile Library  Bldg.,  Cin-
cinnati, O.  (N.D.)
W.  v.,  807  •  Mercantile
Library  Bldg.,  Cincinnati,
O. (D.C.)

SYNN, H. H., Summit Bldg.,
Cadiz, O. (N.D.)

SYRCHER,  ERNEST  V.,  5  W.
Genesee  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
(Opt.)

SYSTEM, MARINELLE, 723
11th St. N. W., Washing-
ton,  D. C. (Ma.)

SZEKERES, LOUIS L., 53

Porter Bldg., San Jose,
Cal. (N.D., D.C.)


TABER  &  TABER,  DRS.,  3051/2

Jefferson  Street,  Portland,

Ore. (D.C.)
TAINER, S. W., Supply, Okla.

TAIT,  BEULAH  LONG,  Joplin,

Mo. (D.C.)
TALBERT, HORACE, Box 31,

Wilberforce, O. (D.M.T.)
TALLANT. KATHARYN G.,

359 Bovlston St., Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
TANNA, ROSE, Omaha Bank

Bldg.,  Omaha, Neb. (D.O.)
TANNER, J. H., 3 Reeve St.,

Woostock,  Can. (D.C.)
O.  J.,  5910  Wayne  Ave.,  Ger-

mantown, Pa. (D.C.)
O. J., 8234 Frankford Ave.,

Holmesburg, Pa. (D.C.)
TANNER, MRS. MARY W.,

126 Bedford Ave.,

Buffalo,  N. Y. (Cr.)
TAPLIN, GEORGE C, 581

Boylston Street, Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
TAPPAN, HARRY G., 26 Os-

bourne St., Bloomfleld,

N. J. (D.C.)
TARBELL, H. E., 1515 West

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.

TARR, ALFRED J., Wilson

Bldg., Dallas Tex. (D.O.)
Delford, Cropsey, Ind.

Joseph W., Lidgerwood,

N.  D. (D.O.)
TASKER, ANNA E., 2010 Le-

nioyne St., Las Angeles,

Cal. (D.O.)
Cora N., Auditorium Bldg.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal. (D.O.)
Dain L., Auditorium Bldg.,

Los  Angeles.  Cal. (D.O.)
TATE, EDWIN W., Kinney

Bldg., Newark, N. J.

Phillip, Grand Valley Bank

Bldg., Grand Junction,

Colo. (D.C.)
TATTERSDILL, 61 W. 37th

St., New York, N. Y. (P.)
TAYLER, C. B., 119 V^ Wash-
ington St., Tiffin, O.

TAYLOR, A. A., Smith Bldg.,

Hudson Ave., Newark, O.

Andrew^,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Arthur, Torinus Blk.. Still-
water, Mmn. (D.  O.)
C. B., 1191/2 Washington St..

Tiffin. O. (D.C.)
Chas.  E..  Hawley  Blk..  Bea-
ver Dam, Wis. (D.O.)
Ella  J.,  Box  253,  Sanger,  Cal.


Fred,  Lewistown,  Mont.

Harry, Nevinville, la. (D.C.)
John C, R. P. xviis.sioii. i'a-

tiala. North India. (D.O.)
Lily F., Northlield, Minn.

M. E., Woonsocket, S. Dak.

Mrs. Mollie, Alamasa, Colo.

Nellie, 119 1/2 Washington

St.. Tiffin, O. (D.C.)
S. L., 541 43rd St.,

Des Moines, la. (D.O.)
S.  P.,  Norfolk  Ave.,  Norfolk,

Neb. (D.O.)
TAYLOR, CHAS. E., 2801

Garden Ave. S. W.,

Cleveland, O. (D.M.T.)
E. J., Tomah, Wis. (D.C.)
J. E., 256-68 Main St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (Opt.)
Louise  W., 635 W. 6th St.,

Cincinnati, O. (Ch.)
TEAL, J.  T., Chicago,  111.

TEALL, CHAS. C, Fulton,

N. Y. (D.O.)
TEBEAU, Hunter Bldg., Hen-

dersonville, N. C. (D.O.)
TECKNER,  I.  L.,  202  Columbia

Bldg., Portland, Ore.

TEDFORD, A. C, Kelley &

Moyer  Bldg., Bluefleld,  W.

Va. (D.O.)
TEDRICK, C. A., Greensburg,

Kans. (D.O.)
TEED, E., 2236 Estes Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
TEEL, WILLIS, R. No. 4, Box

38, New Concord, O.

(D.M.T.)
TEEM, D. B., Hugo, Okla.

TEER, DR. WM., Corpus

Christi,  Tex. (S.  T.)
TEETER.  ELMINA  H.,  Locke,

Cayuga Co., N. Y. (D.C,

D.P.)
TEETERN, D. W^, Forney,

Idaho. (D.C.)
TEEVES, WM., 3975 Vernon

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.P.)
TEG, WILHELM. 145 E. 52nd

St., New York, N. Y.

TEIGAN. EDWARD, 4344  N.

Winchester  Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
TELFORD.  S.  P.,  7291/2  Second

St..  Ft.  Madison,  la. (D.C.)
TELGEN, EDWARD, Ante-
lope,  Mont. (D.C.)
TEMPLE, STEPHEN, Mills
Bldg., Topeka, Kans.


TEMPLETON,  W.  F.,  Bramble

Blk., Havre, Mont. (D.O.)

TENNEY, C. F., Bement, Ills.

TENNIES, HELEN  BETTIE,

Sparta,  Wis. (D.C.)
TENNSLEY, L.. 2016 Valley

St., Omaha, Neb. (D.C.)
TERP,  J.  A., 221  N. Washing-
ton  St., Green Bay, Wis.
TERRY, BESSIE, New York
City,  N. Y. (D.C.)
Frederick C, 35 Schermer-
horn St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
J. Y., 829 Jackson St., Oak-
land, Cal. (D.C.)
Lottie S., 805 N. Court St.,

Rockford, 111. (D.C.)
Lottie S., Watertown, S.
Dak. (D.C.)
TERRY, J. Y., Nampa, Idaho.

TETER,  FRED  B.,  Davenport,

Wash. (D.O.)
TEUFEL, F. A., 5513 Drexel
Blvd.. Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
TEUTEBERG, I. J., 198 27th
St.. Milwaukee, Wis.
THAISON, ADELLINA, 1820
W. Houston St., Laredo,
Tex. (D.O.)
THAWLEY.  EDGAR  Q..  ^Vool-
ner  Bldg.,  Peoria,  111.
THAXTON, E. E., Raton,

N. M. (D.C.)
THAYER, E. B., 435 Buffalo
St., Conneaut, O. (N.D.)
Odessa H., 307 Fernwell
Bldg.. Spokane, Wash.
THAYER, H. A., 200 Park
Ave., Rochester, N. Y.
THEE. ^VM., 3127 Gloss Ave.,

Cincinnati, O. (D.C.)
THELLMAN, J. D., 6402

Franklin Ave., Cleveland,
O. (N.D.)
THEURER, J. C, Brecken-

ridge,  Minn. (N.D.)
THIELE,  F.  G.,  Holmes  Bldg.,

Galesburg,  111.  (D.O.)
THIESSEN & THIESSEN,

DRS.,  Carroll,  Iowa.  (N.D.)
THIESSEN,  Mrs.  R.  J.,  Carroll,

Iowa. (D.C.)
THIESSEN,  R.  G.,  Eagle  Grove,

Iowa. (D.C.)
THIRION, RENE V., 126 Bid-
well Parkway, Buffalo,
N.  Y. (N.D.,  M.D.)
THOMAS,  ARTHUR,  Turnbull,
Fla. (D.C.)
A.  L., 4424  Indiana  Ave.,  Chi-
cago, 111. (D.C.)


0(i()


A  Iphabciicdl  Index


Thomas
Timpe


Alice R., 2290 Sfn.<-a St.,

Buffalo, X.  Y. (D.C.)
W. Arthur, 14 Glonam Tl.,

Denv(M-. Colo. (D.C.)
Arthur  W., 1440  Glenam PI.,

Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
C. A., Coleman, Tex. (D.C.)
C. A., I-ock Box (124.

Knisht.stown, Ind. (D.C.)
F.  A.,  1308  Glenarm  St.,  Den-
ver,  Colo. (D.C.)
Flora v., 704 Walnut St.,

Terre  Haute,  Ind. (I>.C.)
Fianoi.s, Clear Lake, Iowa.

Jame.s A., 301 Venetian

Hldgr., Chicag-o, 111. (D.C.)
.Jennie, Lake View, Tex.

Julia  A.,  223  Third  St.,  Terre

Haute,  Ind. (N.D.)
Lloyd E., 141,1. IMain St., P't.

Scott,  Kan.s. (D.O.)
M., 704 Walnut St., Terre

Haute,  Ind. (D.C.)
M. & F. v., 201-2 Odd Fel-
lows Bldg-., Terre Haute,

Ind. (D.C.)
Paul Revere, Real Estate

Trust Bldg.. Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
Robert  M., 3-4 Winklespeck

Bldg.,  Brazil,  Ind. (D.C.)
R.  M., 14  Vi So.  Main St.,  Ft.

Scott, Kans. (D.O.)
W. Arthur, 1440 Glenam

Place,  Denver,  Colo.  (D.C.)
\V. J., 405 Crescent Ave.,

Grand  Rapids,  Mich.  (D.C.)
Walton T., Fidelity Bldg.,

Tacoma, Wash. (D.O.)
THOMAS. FRED. B.. 128

Butler  St.,  Peoria,  HI.  (D.C.)
THOMASSON, WM. S., Rose

Dispensary Bldg., Terre

Haute, Ind. (D.O.)
THOMPSON & THOMPSON,

DRS., Covino, Cal. (D.C.)
THOMPSON  & THOMPSON,

DRS., Wevburn, Sask.,

Canada. (D.C.)
THOMPSON & THOMPSON,

DRS.,  Downey,  Cal. (D.C.)
THOMPSON & THOMPSON,

DRS., Los  Angeles, Cal.

THOMPSON,  ALMEDIA  E.,

Pomeroy,  Wash.  (D.O.)
A. M., Anaheim, Cal. (D.C.)
C. E., Utica Bldg., Des

Moines,  la. (D.O.)

C.  L., Citizens' Bank Bldg-.,
Alameda, Cal. (D.O.)

Clyde L.. Citizens' Bank
Bldg.,  Alameda,  Cal.  (D.O.)

Daisy, Elvira Bldg., Colum-
bia, Mo. (D.C.)

D.  Orval, Sycamore, 111.

Mrs. E. D.. 952 R  St, N. W.,

Washington, D. C. (Ma.)
Elizabeth M., 211 E. 4th  St.,

Ottumwa, la. (D.O.)
Emma Wing, OOli State St.,

Schenectady, N. Y. (D.O.)
Etta L., 1108 f;2nd St., Chi-
cago,  111. (D.C.)
F. L., Herrington, Kans.

Garrett  E.,  Central  National

Bank  Bldg.,  Peoria,  111.

Geo. W., 22 Savoy Bldg.,

Cleveland, O. (D.CT.)
H. B., Walla Walla, Wash.

.7. W., Charlebois Bldg.,

W;itertown. N. Y. (D.O.)
L., Woodward, Okla. (D.C.)
Lillian, Salem, 111. (D.O.)
L. C, Protection, Kans.


L.  E.,  51  Broad  St.,  Salaman-  i

ca,  N. Y. (D.C.)
L.  E.,  621  Prendergast  Ave.,

Jamestown,  N. Y. (D.C.) 1
L.  O.,  31t;  Coolbaugh  St.,  Rod

Oak,  la. (D.O.)
M. M., 8-9 Kokomo Trust
Co.'s New Bldg., Kokomo,
Ind. (N.D.)
Mrs. M. Florence, 24 Hunt-
ington Ave., Buffalo,
N. Y. (Ma.)
Margaret  .S., t;8 Ransom St.,
Grand  Rapids,  Mich.  (D.O.)
Nickolie, Sheyenne, N. D.

Nora Lee, P. O. Block, Lit-
tleton,  N. H. (D.O.)
Mrs.  O.  A.,  Covina,  Cal.

(DC.)
O. A., 311  Bitting-  Bldg.,

Wichita,  Kans. (D.C.)
O. A., Arkansas  City, Kans.

O. A., Wichita, Kans.

Rudolph, 2205 Central Ave.,

Cleveland,  O. (D.M.T.)
S. T., 851 E. 40th St., Chi-
cago, 111.  (D.C.)
T. P., Elvira Bldg., Colum-
bia,  Mo. (D.C.)
T. J., 503 Hill Ave., Elgin,

111. (D.C.)
Theo. G.. Mercantile Bldg.,

New Castle, Pa. (D.O.)
W. A., 3-4 Wilson Block,

Marion, Ind. (D.C.)
W. A., 406 Marion Block,

Marion, Ind. (D.C.)
W. F., 212 E. 5th St.,  Cin-
cinnati, O. (D.M.T.)
Wm.  H., 813 12th St. N.  W.,
Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
Wm.  L., 816 N.  8th St.,  She-
boygan,  Wis. ((D.O.)
Wm. P.,  Fairmont  Hotel,
San Francisco,  Cal. (D.C.)
THOMSEN. DR., 4th Floor,
EVanston Bldg., Minnea-
polis, Minn. (D.C.)
THOMSON, D. B., 204 Scherer
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
(Opt.)
THOMURF:,  MRS.  SOPHIE,  St.

Genevieve, Mo. (S.T.)
THORBURN, THOS. R., 801
West  End  Ave.,  New York,
N.  Y. (D.O.)
THORE, CHRISTOPHER D.,
100 Boylston  St.,  Boston,
Mass. (D.O.)
THORESEN, HELEN, Lake

Mills. la. (D.C.)
THORESON & THORESON,
Box 463, Lake Mills, la.
THORESON,  ANNA  O.,  Philips
Alt Bldg., Red Wing,
Minn. (D.C.)
Frank  M.,  25  E.  Grand  Ave.,
Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
THORESON, JOHN, Box 5,

Glenwood, Minn. (D.C.)
THORMAHLEN, CONRAD,

420  Market  St.,  Zanesville,
O. (Ma.)
THORMAN, ARTHUR  J., Cin-
cinnati,  O. (Ch.)
THORN,  HENRY,  R.  201,  1012
Baltimore  Ave.,  Kansas
City,  Mo.  (D.C.)
Howard, 1012 Baltimore
Ave.,  Kansas  Cit.\-,  Mo.
THORNBURN, THOS. R., 34
Jefferson Ave.. Brooklyn,
N. Y. (D.O.)


THORNBY, J., San Jose, Cal.

THORNE. F. H.. 325 Mercan-
tile Bldg., New Ca.stle,
Pa. (D.M.T.)
THORNELL, A. M., 60

I'aisons Block, Burling-
ton, la. (D.M.T.)
THORNHILL, J. B., 2410 Oak

St., Baker, Ore. (N.D.)
THORNLEY, HARRY  EARIE,
State College, Bellefonte,
I'a. (D.O.)
J., 502-3 Bank of San Jose,
San  Jose,  Cal. (D.C.)
THORNTON, F. R., South
Range, Wis. (D.O.)
P". W., 18 Teresa Place,
Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
THORP, HUGH, 211 Seymour
Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. (D.C.)
THORSEN,  MARIE,  Wright  &
Callendei- Bldg., Los  An-
geles, Cal. (D.O.)
THRAILKILL, W. L., Black-
well,  Okla. (D.C.)
THROOP, HERBERT G., 407
Pacific-Electric Building-,
Los Angeles. Cal. (N.D.)
THUB,  EDWIN,  2120  N.  Clarke

St.,  Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
THUL, FERDINAND, New

Sholem Bldg., Paris. 111.
THUNA, M. B., 433 Sutter
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
THURMAN,  E.  L.,  285  Jackson
St.,  Americus,  Ga. (D.O.)
M.  R.,  Claremore,  Okla.

Stella  C, 285 Jackson  St.,

Americus,  Ga. (D.O.)
W.  R.,  Pahuska,  Okla.  (S.T.)
THURMAN, MRS. M., 203 E.
61st St., New York, N. Y.
(Ma.)
W. R., Tahlecuah, Okla.
THURSTON, J. M., Lincoln,

Neb. (S.T.)
TIBBALS, FLORENCE, Ster-
ling, Kans.  (D.C.)
TIBBETS, WALTER.

Sheridan, Wyo. (N.D.)
TIBBITTS,  R.  M.,  17  N.  Valley
St.,  Kansas  City,  Kans.
TICI<:, ELBERT  A., Shukert
Bldg., Kansas City, Mo.
TICKLER, FRANK, Edge-
water  Beach  Hotel,
Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
TIEKE, E. M., 414 Washing-
ton  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
(D.O)
TIEMANN, WILBUR F., Ava-
lon Bldg., Newark, O.
TIERMAN, ALBERT I., 322
Mason  Bldg-.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.  (N.D.)
TILDEN, J. H., 3209 W. Fair-
view Place, Denver. Colo.
TILLATSON,  GLADYS, Cas-
cade Springs, S. Dak.
TILLEY, CHAS. E., Landover

Bldg-.,  Lincoln,  111.  (D.O.)
TILLYER, BELLE, Bozeman,

Mont. (D.O.)
TIMBERS, R. S., Henry,  Neb.

TIMM, RICHARD, Hinsdale,

•Mont. (D.C.)
TIMMONS, ERNEST, Village,

Aik. (D.C.)
TIMPE, Dr. F. R., Box 165,
Mag^uoketa. la. (D.C.)


Tiiidall
Truitt


Alphabetical  Index


961


TINDAI.L, AMOS AVILLARD,

Masonic  Temple,  Hartford

Citv, Ind. (D.O.)
TINGES, GEO. H., Stephen

Girard Bldg-., Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.O.)
TINSLEY, C. R., 221 Pacific

Ave., Long Beach, Cal.

C.  R.,  Indio,  Cal. (D.C.)
Minnie  L., Indio, Cal. (D.C.)
TIPPETT. HENRY W. 1Q04

Ea.st  Capitol St  , Wash-
ing-ton, D. C. (D.C.)
TIPRON, 629 Creston Ave,,

Marion, O. (D.M.T.)
TIPTON, GEORGE, 029 Cran-
ston  St., Marion, O. (Ma.)
TISCHLER, HELEN W.. 4.3.5

Race  St.,  Cincinnati,  O. (Ma.)
TiSDALE, H., 214 Security

Block,  Grand  Fork.s,  N.  D.

R. F., 3.329 Grove St., Oak-
land, Cal. (D.O.)
TITSWORTH, R. F., 400 W.

Cumberland  St.,  Knoxville,

Tenn. (D.O.)
TITTERINGTON, FRANK L.,

620  W.  3rd  St.,  Davenport,

la. (D.C.)
TITTERINGTON, T. W

Marion, O. (D.M.T.)
TITUS, FRED. B., 113 Flat-

bu.sh Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y. (Opt.)
H. W., 58  Cooper  Square,

New York, N. Y. (P.)
Margaret S., 3279 W. 98th

St., Cleveland, O. (Ch.)
TITUS,  MARY  W.,  7  Wash  St.,

Bradford,  Pa. (D.C.)
TJERNAGIE, G. A., Story

City,  la. (D.C.)
T.IOMSAAS, KAREN, 2728

Bway New  York,  N.  Y.

(Ma.)
TOBEY, H. C, As-s't Sec't'y

U.  C.  A., 828-34 Brady  St.,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)

W.  B.,  Allen,  Okla. (ND.)

TOBIN,  GEO.  F.,  640  N.  Tope-

ka St., "W^ichita, Kans.

TOBIN,  .1.,  4876  Armitage  Ave.,

Chicago,  111.  (D.C.)
TODD,  ELIZABETH  H., 819

Kansas Ave., Topeka,

Kans. (D.O.)
TODD, G. F., 11 Keene Bldg.,

Main  &  Utica  Sts.,  Buffalo,

N.  Y. (D.C.)
G.  F.,  9  E.  Utica  St.,  Buffalo,

N.  Y. (D.C.)
G. F., Swartz Creek, Mich.

TOEL, HARRY  M., Torrey

Bldg.,  Duluth,  Minn.  (D.O.)
TOLPUTT,  ANNA  T.,  516  Fed-
eral St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

TOMLIN, R. T., 45 Main Ave.,

Ocean  Grove,  N J. (M.D.)
TOMLINSON,  G.  R.,  4025  Sheri-
dan  Road, Chicago, 111.

TOMS, FRANCIS, 122 W. 3rd

St., Muscatine, la (D.C.)
TOMSON, ALFRED, Lyric

Theatre, Omaha, Neb.

TONKIN, JOHN, 2121 15th St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.

(Ma.)
TOREN. LUCY E., 6165

Rudge Ave., Cincinnati,

O. (D.M.T  )
TORKELSON, IDA G., AVells,

Minn. (D.O.)
TORRENCE, G. \V., 23 West

Montgomery Ave., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)


TOSKEY, C. M., 8548 Lake
Park  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
C.  M.,  Antigo,  Wi.s. (D.C.)
C. M., 239 First St., Hins-
dale, III. (D.C.)
TOSKEY, C. M.. 3155 Lincoln
Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Paul J., West Salem, 111.
(DC.)
TOUN, W. T., Sioux Center,

la. (D.C.)
TOVEY, MISS VERONA, 635
S.  Flower  St.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
TOVIL, FRANCIS, Lancaster,

O. (D.M.T.)
TOWNER,  A. H., New Phila-
delphia, Pa., Box 223.
(D.M.T.)
TOWNS  SANITARIUM,  CHAS.
B.,  293  Central  Park  West,
New York City, N. Y.
TOWNSEND, EDGAR E.,
Richmond,  Ind. (D.C.)
Geo. A., Chico Hot Springs
Hotel,  Emigrant,  Mont.
Gertiiide, 884 Mass. Ave.,

Cambridge,  Mass. (D.O.)
Kate R., 12 E. 9th St.,
Shawnee, Okla. (S.T.)
TOWNSEND, I. R., 20 Glen-
dale Place, Brooklyn,
N. Y. (N.D.)

J. A., Kirkwood
Pittsburgh, Kans.


TRABUE,
Bldg.,

TRACE  Y,


C. H., Cheltenham,

Pa. (D.C.)
Elvire, 78 Warburton Ave.,

Yonkers, N. Y. (D.O.)
Emily F., 2124 Arch St.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
H. La Monte, Pontages

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.

TRACY & TRACY, Trenton,

Mo. (D.C.)
TRACY. PAUL  URBAN, 493

Epler Bldg., Seattle,

Wash. (N.D.)
TRADSHAM, F. B., 718 W.

63rd St., Chicago,  111.

TRAIMIS, K.  G., 3301 S.  Hal-

sted St., Chicago, 111.
!  (D.C.)

j  TRAINER, M. L., Suite 412.

Lincoln Bldg., 14 West

Washington St., Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
TRAMM, GEO. A., Hall &

Lewis Block, Meriden,

Conn. (D.C.)
TRASH, LARKIN

Jefferson St.

Ind. (N.D.)
TRASK,  Dr.  H.  D.

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.

TRASPBR, MINNIE L., Chel

sea, Okla. (D.C.)
TRAUGHBER, WM.

lingsworth  Bldg.,

geles, Cal. (D.O.)
TRAVER, ETHEL K

85th St., New York, N. Y.

TREAT, A. R., Antigo, Wis.

Clara Leila, Bank Bldg.,

Herinosa  Beach,  Cal.

TREBLE, JOHN M., 102

William St., Bath, N.

TRECHMAN, FREDERIC W.

301 Lafayette St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)


C, 609  East
Kokomo,


603  Scherer


F., Hol-
Los  An-


203 W.


E.
Y.


TREDER,  WM.,  2231  W.  4th
St. Waterloo, la. (D.C.)

TREGO,  .lOHX  W.,  Columbus,
O. (D.C.)

TREICHLER,  C.  LANDIS,
Horn  Bldg.,  Corry,  Pa.

TRENARY,  J.  M.,  110  McLeon
Bldg., Kewanee, 111.
J.  M.,  1757  Walton  St.,  Den-
ver, Colo.  (D.C.)
J. M., Arvada, Colo. (D.C.)

TRENKLE, K. MAY, 965 New-
York Ave  , Flatbush,
Brooklyn, N Y. (N.D.)

TRESEDER,  F. W.,  4533 Wil-
ton Place, T.,os Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)

TRESHMAN, FREDERIC W.,
301 Lafayette Ave.,
Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.O.)

TRESTLER,  E.  B.,  7-8  Jay-
cox  Bldg.,  Walla  Walla,
"Wash. (D.C.)

TRETHEWEY, FLORENCE,
J'Jrnpire Bldg., Philadel-
phia, Pa. (D.C.)
Florence, 2819 Broad St. N.,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C.)

TREVITT,  CORA  W.,  Monroe,
Wis. (D.O.)
Edith, Commercial & Savs.
Bank Bldg.,  Monroe,  Wis.

TREWIN,  SAMUEL,  Dewey,
Okla. (D.C.)

TRIEBER,  MME., 149  W. 66th
St., New  York, N. Y.
(Ma)

TRIECE,  J.  H.,  c/o  The
Chiropractic  College,
San Antonio, Tex. (M.D.)

TRIGG,  OLIVER  S.,  Broken
Bow,  Neb. (D.O.)

TRIMBLE, GUY C, Montezu-
ma, la. (D.O.)
H. H., Commercial Bldg.,
Moultrie,  Ga. (D.O.)

TRIMMER, JUNA M., Para-
dise, Kans. (S.T.)

TRIPLETT, A. T., 502 West-
ern Nat'l Bank Bldg..
Fort  Worth,  Tex. (N.D.)
L. D., 964 Main St., Akron,

O. (N.D.)
L. B., 10 Chestnut St..

Springfield, Mass. (D.O.)
Neva T., 601 W. Main St.,
Enid,  Okla. (D.O.)

TRIPP,  N.  v.,  150  E.  Broad
St.. Columbus.  O. (N.D.)

TRITT,  H.  P.,  Pasadena,  Cal.

TROESTER,  OTTO,  Hampton,

' Neb.  (D.C.)

TROSETH,  N.  A..  3977  Vernon
Ave., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)

TROTT, ELZE D., 422 Green-
field Ave., Canton, O.

TROTTER,  FRANK,  Devlne,
Tex. (D.C.)

TROUTEN, M. G., 404 Pitts-
burgh Savings  Bank  Bldg.,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Dr.  Mae  G.,  1307  E.  33rd  St.,
Kansas Citv, Mo. (D.C.)

TROWBRIDGE,  L.  R.,  Dixon,
111. (D.O.)

TRUE,  W.  F.,  892  Avenue  C,
Bayonne,  N.  J.  (D.O.)

TRUEBLOOD,  JOHN  O..  Wil-
helm  Elder..  Traverse  Citv.
ISIich. (D.O.)

TRUITT,  H.  v..  Box  B,  Middle-
port, O. (D.M.T.)

TRUITT, W. T., 567 Summit
Ave., Jersey City, N. J.


962


Alphabetical  Index


Truxell

Van  Bushkirk


TRUXELL & TRUXELL,
Suite 4, Union Block,
Thief River Falls Minn.
(DC.)

TUCCIO,  CAJETAN, 111 Hud-
son  St., Hoboken,  N. J.

TUCHLER. A. S., San Fran-
cisco, Cal. (M.D.)

TUCKER  &  TUCKER,  906  22d
St.,  San  Diego,  Cal. (D.C.)

TUCKER, A. R., Citizens'
Bank  B\dg.,  Raleigh,  N.  C.
lOrne.st E., A. S. O., Kirks-

villo.  Mo. (D.O.)
E. J., 80 Grand St., New-
burgh,  N. Y. (D.C.)
E. .T., 1875 Glenwood Ave.,

Voung-.stown,  O. (D.C.)
I'rvin  J.,  fi7  Grand  St.,  New-
burgh, N. Y. (D.C.)
Mis.  Nora  Mae,  ItOH  22nd  St.,

San Diego, Cal. (N.D.)
S. \V., Durham,  N.  C. (D.O.)
\Vm. R., 908 22nd St., San
Diego, Cal. (N.D.)

TUCKER,  E.  J.. 35 Ford  St.,
Ogdensburg;, N. Y. (D.C.)

TULL, GEORGE, Greenfield,
Ind. (D.O.)

TULLIE, A. M.. 714 E. Main
St, Crestline, O. (D.M.T.)

TULLY, F. E., Cedar Rapids.
Neb. (S. T.)

TUNISON,  E.  HOWARD,  99
Doscher  St.,  Brooklyn,
N. Y. (N.D., D.C.)

TUNNELL,  H.  E.,  Clyde,  Kan.

TUPPER,  ANNIE  LAURIE,
Holly  Springs,  Mis. (S.  T.)
G. W., Kittanning, Pa.

TURFLER,  F.  A., Rensselaer.
Ind. (D.O.)

TURK,  ,T.  E.,  1102  W.  Main  St..
Enid,  Okla. (D.C.)


TURKINGTON. JOS. C, 2811

N.  9th  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

TURLEY, H. I., 302 W. Mon-
roe St., Mexico, Mo.

TlTRNBULTi, .7. M., Woods &

Hallani Rldg., Monmouth,

111. (D.O.)
TURNP:R, ANNIE S.. 305

Bellevue St., N. Seattle,

Wash. (D.O.)
Arthur  R., 424  Central  Ave.,

St. Petersburg, Fla.

Burt, 405 i Ave. C, Lawton,

Okla. (D.C.)
Dan, 405J Ave. C, Lawton,

Okla. (D.C.)
Effie, Lawton, Okla. (D.C.)

E.  H., Eldorado Springs,
Mo. (D.C.)

Everett J., Eldorado

Springs, Mo. (D.C.)
TURNER, GEO. H., 734

Euclid  Ave., Cleveland,

O (Ch.)
TURNERS, EUGENE A 608

S.  Gilbert  St.,  Ada,  O.

(D.M.T.)
TURNEY, DAYTON, Mason

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

Dudley Breed, Linneus, Mo.


F.  H., 597 S. Iowa Street,
Grand  Rapids,  Mich.  (D.C.)

F. Muir, 24 Jones  Street  E.,

Savannah, Ga. (D.O.)
Grover G., Franklin, Pa.

H. F., Murray, la. (D.C.)
H.  F.,  Hillinger  and  Larimer

Blk., Chariton, la. (D.C.)
Jane, 1416 16th St., Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)
L. C, 673 Boylston St.,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)


Melvin, 127 E. Cherry St.,

Walla Walla, Wash. (D.C.)
Nettie C, Land Title Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
T. E., Land Title Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Thomas E., Land Title

Bldg.. Philadelphia, Pa.

TUTTLE, ARTHUR H., 1124

Central Ave., Wilmette,

111. (D.O.)
A. Marsh. 248 Cajon Street,

Redlands, Cal. (D.O.)
Lamar K., 18 E. 41st St.,

New York, N. Y. (D.O.)
Mayme K., Ford Bldg.,

Great Falls, Mont. (D.O.)
R. E., Hicksville, O. (D.O.)
TUTTLE, DR. LOUIS N.,

Holland. Mich. (M.D.)
TWADELL, A. B., 15i W.

Madison St., lola, Kan.

TWEEDIE DICK. 4008

Fraud Blvd., Chicago, 111.

TWITCHELL,  IONIA  C,

Taylor Bldg., Morris-
town, Tenn. (D.O.)
TWOMBLEY, T. C, Lynch,

Neb. (S.T.)
TWOMBLEY & TWOMBLEY,

Rainge Bldg., Omaha,

Neb. (D.C.)
TYERNE, L. H., 1003-4 Stein-
way Hall Bldg.. 64 East

Van Buren St  , Chicago

111. (N.D.)
TYLER, BYRON, 616 Wyan-
dotte  St , Kansas City,

Mo. (N.D.)
Parker R., 103 Park Ave.,

New York, N. Y. (P.)
TYREE, JULIA A., Mulvane,

Kan. (D.C.)
TYSON. JAS. W., Ideal, Colo.


u


UEZ, GUSTAV, 596 Clinton

Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.

UFER, WM., 3858 Division

St., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
ULAM, W. W., 214 S. Taylor

St., Van Wert, O. (D.C.)
ULAN, WM. W.,  Van  Wert.  O.

(DC.)
ULMER, HERBERT, 525 S.

Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago,

111. (N.D.)
ULMER, IDA, Valdosta, Ga.

(DO.)
ULRICH & ULRICH, 160

Washington St., Beavei-

Dam, Wis. (D.C.)
ULRICK & ULRICK, 2651

Best Ave., Chicago, 111.

UNDERLANDER, J. L., 3315

S. Oakley Blvd., Chicago,

III. (D.C.)


UNDERWOOD, EVELYN K.,

347 Fifth  Ave.,  New  York,

N. Y. (D.O.)
J. A., Realty Bldg., Elmira,

N. Y. (D.O.)
Ralph E., 1 Main St., New

Milford, Conn. (D.O.)
Horton  Fay,  44  Court  St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y (D.O.)
UNGER, DR. J. W, West

Point, Miss. (M.D.)
UNITED  COLLEGE  OF

CHIROPRACTIC, Marion,

Ind. (D.C.)
UNIVERSAL CHIROPRACTIC

COLLEGE, Davenport, la.

UNTERLANDER, J. L., 325

Ashland Ave., Chicago,

111. (ND.)
UPHAM, L M., Stone Block,

Warren, O. (N.D.)
Lawrence W. W. Main St.,

Shelby, O. (D.C.)


UPTON, CHARLES A., New

York Life Bldg., St. Paul,

Minn. (D.O.)
URBAN, H. L., West Water

St., Decorah, la. (D.O.)
URE, WM. R., 910 Quarrier

St., Charleston, W. Va.

USHER, JENNIE M., 71

Haight  St.,  San  Francisco,

Cal. (D.O.)
USSING, AGNES, Cranford

Trust Bldg., Cranford,

N. J. (D.O.)
UTLEY, RALPH E., 820 S.

Blvd., Oak Park, 111.

UTT, DR. VIOLA, 618 S.

Hope St., Los Angeles,

Cal. S.T.)
UTTER, GERTRUDE, 215

Spitzer Bldg., Toledo, O.

(Ch  )


VADEN,  W.  F.,  202  W. 5th  St.,

Hutcliinson, Kan. (D.C.)
VAHLE, WM. G., Coffeyville,

Kan. (D.C.)
VAIL, R. O., 204 W. Scribner

St.,  Du  Bois,  Pa. (D.C.)
VALENTINE, G. M. 1430

Linden Ave., Baltimore,

Md. (D.C.)


Josephine  M., De  Graff, O.

(D.M.T.)
VALK, DR. E. GORDON,

Bundick, Va. (N.D.)
VALLIER, A. E., Columbus,

Neb. (D.O.)
VAN ARSDALE, CHAS. O.,

27 E Monroe  St., Chicago,

111. (D.O  )


VAN  ANTWERP  &  VAN
ANTWERP,  St.  John's
Bldg.,  Cor.  S.  Main  and
Maple  Sts.,  Rocky  Ford,
111. (D.C.)

VAN BUSHKIRK, VIOLA,
12i South Barstow St.,
Eau Claire, Wisconsin.


Vance
Volz


Alphabetical  Index


963


VANCE,  A. T., Smith &  Groto

Bldg., Orange, Cal. (D.O.)

E. O., Fayette Natl. Hank

Bldg-., Lexington, Ky.


VAN CORST, BERTHA. 46 E.
Montcalm St.. Detroit.
Mich. (D.C.)
.T. R.,  Dolton,  Ark. (D.C.)

VANDERGRIFF,  J.  R.,  Lock-
ney. Tex. (D.C.)

VANDENBERG, 1303 N St.,
Washing-ton, D. C. (DC.)

VAN  DER  PUTTEN,  J.  H.,
New  Philadelphia,  O.
(Mag)

VANDERVOORT,  JOHN  H..
825  E.  Duval  St..  Jack-
sonville, Fla. (D.C.)

VAN  DE  SAND.  120  S.  Honore
St., Chicago, 111. (M.D  )

VAN  DE  SAND,  W.  B.,  Mont-
rose. Pa. (D.O.)

VAN  DEUSEN.  HARRIET  L..
Sanford  Bldg.,  Bridgeport.
Conn. (D.O.)

VANDEVBNTER. LEW,
Loveland, Colo. (D.C.)

VANDOERN, H.. 565 Madison
Ave.. Elizabeth,  N.  J.

VAN  DOREN.  MAE  HAWK,
700  W.  North  Ave.,  Pitts-
burgh. Pa. (D.O.)

VAN  DUSER,  A.  B..  c/o  E.  J.
Van  Duser.  Kendaia,
N. Y. (D.C.)

VAN  GELDER,  J.  B.,  Ingle-
wood, Cal. (D.C.)

VAN HISE, RALPH, 857 N.
Sacramento Boulevard,
Chicago. 111. (D.C.)

VAN  HORN,  MRS.  M.  P..
Coal City. Ind. (D.C.)

VAN  HORNE,  HELEN,  14  AV.
Washington  St..  Chicago.
111. (D.O.)

VAN  HOUTEN.  JOHN  R.,  156
Virginia  Ave..  Jersey  City,
N. J. (D.C.)

VAN KEUREN. F. H  . R. No.
1, Sowona. New York,
N. Y. (N.D  )

VAN  KOLKEEN,  F.  D..  Moose
Jaw, Sask.. Can. (D.C.)

VAN  OSDOL.  OSCAR,  Junc-
tion City, Kan. (D.O.)

VAN MIDDLESWORTH, J. S..
425  Morris  Ave., Eliza-
beth,  N. J. (N.D  )

VAN  PATTEN.  E.  M.,  First
Natl.  Bank  Bldg..  Fort
Dodge.  la. (D.O.)

VAN  RONK,  CHAS.  J..  640  E.
Chelton  Ave..  Philadel-
phia.  Pa. (D.O.)

VAN  SCHOONHOVEN,  Lock-
ney. Tex. (D.C.)

VAN  SCHOONHOVER.  Mana-
cas. S. C, Cuba. (D.C.)

VAN  SLYKE.  CLIFFORD.
1108  Republic Bldg..

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)

VAN  TILBURG  &  VAN  TIL-
BURG,  427-28  Occidental
Bldg.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.

VAN  VBLSOR,  MRS.  M.  C,
6435  Jackson  Avenue,
Chicago, 111. (S.T.)

VAN  VELZER.  KATHRYN.  1
Washington  St.,  Hinsdale,
111. (D.O.)

VAN  VLECK,  A.  E.,  Paw  Paw.
Mich. (D.O.)

VAN  VLIET  OPTICAL  CO.,
242  Griswold  St.,  Detroit,
Mich. (Opt.)

VAN  WINKLE.  ARTHUR  J.,
Phillipsburg, Kan. (D.O.)


VARGO, JOSEPH, 720 Illu-
mination Bldg., Cleve-
land,  O (D.M.T.)
VARNEY, EDGAR D., 4610

Boardwalk, Wildwood,

N. J. (D.C.)
V^ARSBY,  G.  E.,  12  Cherry  St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.

Geo. E., 612 Court Street,

Fremont, O. (D.C.)
VARSBY. GEO. W., 612 Court

St., Fremont, O. (D.C.)
VASSBLIN, W. J., Blossburg,

Pa (DC)
VASTlisTB,  ' HARRY M., 109

Locust St., Harrisburg,

Pa. (D.O.)
Herbert. 523 Franklin St..

Reading. Pa. (D.O.)
VATTBRBDT.  J.  A.,  Vandalia,

Mo. (D.C.)
VAUGHAN, FRANK M.. 359

Boylston St., Boston.

Mass. (D.O.)
VAUGHAN. WALTER L..

206 W. 106th St.. New

York. N. Y. (DC.)
VAVRUSKA, WM., 904 E.

Water St., Austin, Minn.

VAVRUSKA, W. M. 227 East

3rd St., Winona, Minn.

VAWTER, W. H., 421 Main

St., Lafavette, Ind. (D.C.)
VEATCH, PAUL J.. 413 Car-
teret St., Camden, N. J.

VBAZIE, ELLA B., Com-
merce Building, Kansas

City, Mo. (D.O.)
VEDDER, H. F., 828 Brady

St., Davenport, la. (D.C,

Ph.C.)
VEHR, A. SPENCER, 312

Rothschild Bldg., Port-
land, Ore. (N.D.)
VENN, MISS LOUEY. 1748 M

St. N.  W..  Washington,

D. C. (Ma.)
VENTRESS. K.  C,  Monmouth.

111. (D.O.)
VERDEN. C. W.. 422 First

Natl. Bank Bldg., Long

Beach. Cal. (D.C.)
VEREEN, FRANKLIN, Fort

Meade, Fla. (M.D.)
VERHOFF, EDWARD A., 512

Walnut St., Des Moines,

la. (N.D.)
VERMILLION. J. B.. 6th and

C Sts.. San Diego. Cal.

J. B., 307 Scripps Building,

San  Diego,  Cal. (D.C.)
VERNER, ROBINSON, 425

12th  St.. West  New  York.

N. J. (D.C.)
VERNON,  ALONZO  AV.. 8  Tib-

bitts Ave., Bradford, Pa.

VERNON, PROF, and MRS.

A. A , 10 Barlow Place,

Buffalo. N. Y. (Ma.)
J. B., 909 Cabin Block,

Rocky Ford. Colo. (N.D.)
J. W. Fowler, Kans (N.D.)
VESBY, L. S., 135 5th St  ,

Elizabeth, N. J. (N.D.)
VEST, L. L., 1513 Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
VETTER, HENRY, 124 West

90th St., New York, N.  Y.

VEYET, L. J., 321 S. Cicero

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Leo J., Sault Ste. Marie,

Mich. (D.C.)


VIA, HUGH S., 503 W. Main

St., Charlottsville, Va.

VICKSTROM, ALFRED, 26th

and Princeton Sts.

Chicago,  111. (D  C.)
VICTOR BROS., Oliver Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (Ma.)
VICTOR, CARL, 6017 Penna

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.

VICTORY, ANDREW, 498

Broad St.. Elizabeth, N.  J.

VIEHE. H.. Randolph Bldg.,

Memphis, Tenn. (D.O.)
VIERSEN, P. A., 607 Webster

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
VILETA,  CHAS.  A,  4235  West

21st St., Chicago, 111.

VILLARI, N. 368 Central

Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.

VINCENT, A. L., Felt Bldg.,

Salt Lake City, Utah.

VINCIBNT,  JENNIE  C,

Argonia, Kan. (D.C.)
VIOLETTE, MISS  S. N., Hotel

Oxford, Boston, Mas.s.

VIRGIL. Portland,  Ore. (N.D.)
VIRMBDGE, C.  A., 2050 West

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.

VISHOLM, THOS. N., 1100

State St., Racine. Wis.

VISSBR, P. J., Conneaut, O.

Peter J., Hippodrome Ar-
cade Bldg., Youngstown,

O. (D.C.)
VIZ, HUGH D., 503 W. Main

St., Charlottsville, Va.

VOGEL, MISS  MARY,  Argenta,

Ark. (S.T.)
W. B., Reinbeck, la. (D.C.)
Walter,  N.  3rd  St.,  Marshall-
town, la. (D.C.)
VOGBNITZ, LORIN, New-

comerstown, O. (D.M.T.)
VOGT, H. C, 8-9 Lahr Bldg.,

St. Cloud, Minn. (D.C.)
H. C, 49 Ocean  Place, Long

Beach, Cal. (D.C.)
H. C, Aurora, Neb. (D.C.)
I. W., David  City,  Nebr.

VOGT, JOSEPH A.. 102* Ash

St., Piqua. O. (Ch.)
VOLCHMAN. C. 40 Zobruhis

St.. Jersey City, N. J.

VOLD. O. A., 8 X. State St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
VOLEN, G. A., 1556 3rd St.,

San Diego, Cal. (D.C.)
Mav, 1550 3rd St., San

Diego, Cal. (D.C.)
VOLGMAN,  F.  C,  214  AViscon-

sin St., Kenosha, Wis.

Frank, 1542 W. Adams St.,

Chicago,  111. (D.C.)
VOLKMANN, T. J. O., 5608

Monte Arista St., Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
VOLTAIRE, JOS., 1139 North

State  St  , Chicago, 111

VOLZ, C. C, 141.7 Iowa St..

Davenport, la. (DC)
VOLZ,  JOS.  A.,  61  Madison  St.,

New  Britain, Conn.


964


Alphahelical  Index


Von  Arfmann
Walsh


VON ARFMANN, E., Buffalo,
N. Y. (N.D.)

VON  BOECKMANN, PAUL,

110  W.  40th  St..  New  York.
N.  Y. (P.I

VON BRANDENSTEIN, E..
Cuero, Tex. (N.D.)

VON DE SCHOEPPE. PAUL,
Nelson P>lock, West
Diiluth.  Minn (N  D.)

VON DRESKY. Davenport,
la. (D.C.)

VON FOREOOER. R., New
York,  N.  Y. (M.D.)

VON  GOMERZ H.,  Jackson-
ville. Fla. (N.D.)

VON GUNTEN, RUFUS,
Urbana,  O. (D.O.)

VON IMHOFF. MARTHA,

1812 Euclid Ave., Cleve-
land. O (Ch  )


VON MILLER, MISS LEE.

414 Jefferson St., Muncie,

Ind. (N.D.)
VON PRILLWITZ. OTTO,

Marlin, Tex. (N.D.)
VON  WEIN.  MAURICE,  2472

Fulton  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

(ND  )
VOORHEIS. A. H.. 509 Sey-
mour  St., Syracuse, N. Y.

(DC.)
VORHEES, J. MARTIN, 114

Allegan St.. \V. I^ansing,

Mich. (D.O.)
VOSBURGH, H. D.. Box 349.

Pipestone.  Minn. (D.O.)
VOSE. F. G.. Machias,  Me.


VOSS, CARL, 397  7 Vernon

Ave.. ChicapTO. 111. (N.D.)
VOSSELI>ER. CLARENCE D.,

Arg-us Bldg-.. Greenfield,

111. (D.O.)
VOUGHT, MRS.  A B, 347 5th

Ave.,  New  York.  N.Y.(Ma.)
VRADENBITRG, DR. H.  L.,

York, Nebr. (M.D.)
VREEI.AND. JOHN A.. Agri-
cultural Bank Building.

Pitt.«5field and Great Bar-

rington. Mass. (D.O.)
VREELAND. W. H., 211

I^owry Annex, St. Paul,

Minn. (D.C.)
VYE. AMY J., Boston, Mas.s.

VYVERBERG. KRYN T..

Taylor Bldg., Lafayette,

Ind. (D.O.)


w


"WADE, G. M.. Andrus Bldg..
Minneapolis, Minn. (D.O.)
WADSWORTH,  JAMES  S.. 776
Congress St., Portland,
Me. (DO.)
L. v.. Abilene. Kan. (D.C.)
WAELTI, CHRIST.. 528 Gar-
field Ave., Chicago, 111.
WAGNER. AMELIA, Crescent
City, Fla. (D.C.)
Anna. 510-11 Meisel Bldg..
Port Huron, Mich. (ND.)
A.  A.,  Vineland.  N.  J. (D.C.)
A. R., Tampa. Fla. (D.C.)
A. R.. 443 B'way. Camden.

N. J. (D.C.)
E. R.. 2029 Farnum Street,

Davenport, la. (D.C.)
Edward V., Urbana, O.

(Ch.)
Henry, 57 W. Delaware St.,

Chicago, 111. (DC.)
Lucetta, 249 Kingsland
Ave.. Brooklyn, N. Y.
(DC.)
WAGONER, ELIZABETH E
Cherry Flats. Jackson-
ville.  111. (D.O.)
WAGONER. GEO F,
Cresto, la. (N.D.)
WAHL. ADOLPH P.. 942
Savoy St.. North Bergen.
N. J. (D.C.)
WAHT,ENMATER & ■W'V.H-
LENMATFR. Phoenix,
Ariz. (DC.)
Sallie,  Urbana.  O. (Ch  )
WAHI>ENMATER, GEO., Ar-
kansas Citv. Kan. (S  T  )
WATT. S.  D..  Eldon. la. (DC)
WAITE. E. R.. 2901 Wash-
ine-ton Blvd.. Chicago. Ill
S.  D.. Alva,  la. (D.C.)
Wenrtoll D., Marseilles, 111.


B'wav.
Okla.


(DC.)
Wendell D.. IflOfi N.

Oklahoma Citv.

(DC.)
WAITS .TOHN  F..  Elkins,  Ark.

(ST.)
WAKEFIELD. Union Savings

Bank Bldg.. Oakland, Cal.

(DO.)
WAKEHAM. JESSIE A.. 1049

Rush St., Chicago, 111.

(DO.)
WAKEHAM.  JESSIE  A.. 48

"W. Division St. Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
WAI>BERG, GENEVA O.,

Eagle Rock and Oak

Grove Ave., Lo.s .\ngele3

Cal. (D.C.)


WALBURN. F. S., 210 West

Jefferson St., Ft. Wayne,

Ind. (DC.)
WAI>DO. WM. E... Northern

Bank and Trust Bldg.,

Seattle,  AVa.sh. (D.O.)
WALKER, A. E., 3401 West

Monroe St , Chicago, 111.

Edith  D.,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.

E. K. 413 Lieley Bldg,

Waterburv, Conn. (N.D  )
Emilv M.. 133 S. Broad St.,

Trenton, N. J. (N.D  )
J. W.. 309 l.f^th St, Buffalo

N. Y. (Cr.)
Olivia  F.,  308  Century  Bldg.,

Evanston. Ill (D.C.)
Peter E., 309 S Ashland

Blvd. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Peter E., 203 W. 122nd St..

New  York, N. Y. (DC)
W. "W.. Commercial Bldg..

St. Joseph, Mo. (D.C.)
WALKER, CLIFFORD E.,

Forest Grove Natl. Bank

Bldg., Forest Grove, Ore.


A., Hotel Mar-
New York, N. Y.


Cornelia
tinique,

Daisy E.,
Quincy,


Bldg.,


23rd
Cal.


Mercantile
111. (D.O.)
Mrs. Elizabeth, 236 W

St.. Los Angeles,

E. K., Jacksonville, Fla.

Eva Snider. 124 E. 24th St.,

N. Portland, Ore. (D.O.)
Frank P., Ballinger Bldg.,

St. Joseph. Mo. (D.O.)
G. W., 737 Prospect Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
J. Jav.  Medina,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
Joseph Nelson, 102 S.

Marshall St., Burlington,

la. (D.O.)
L. E., Fairbury,  111. (D.C.)
L. H.. Olympia Building.

Ellensburg. Wash. (D.O.)
L. Willard. 24 Stone Road.

Belmont.  Mass. (D.O.)
Mrs. M. L., Oxford. N. Y.

Mary W.. 283 Union Street,

New  Bedford.  Mass. (D.O.)
O. M.. 92 W. Blackwell St.,

Dover, N. J. (D.O.)
R., Athens. Mich. (DC.)
R. H.. 1928 Oregon Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)
Robert T.. 288 Union St..

New Bedford, Mass.  (D.O.)


S.  W..  1033  Packard  St..
Ann Harbor. Mich. (D.C.)

W. W.. 1220 O St., Lincoln,

Neb. (D.C.)

WALKLEY, R. H., Bank

Bldg..  Athens,  Mich.


WALKUP, MARY B., Hardy,

Bedford Co., Va. (D.O.)
WALL, CLARENCE H.. 184
Elwood Ave., Providence,
R. L (D.O.)
WALLACE & WALLACE. 71
Grove St., Freeport. 111.
WALLACE, G. G., Box 31,
Ordway, Colo. (D.C.)

Hilie, Braman, Okla. (DC.)

Herbert  Chase.  S.  W.  Osteo-
pathic Sanitarium,  Black-
well, Okla. (D.O.)

H.  H.,  515  W.  Pierce  St.,
Kirksville, Mo. (D.O.)

Iva  Still,  Rowell  Bldg.,
Fresno. Cal. (D.O.)

J.  C.  Washington.  la. (D.C.)

John  W..  1703  N.  17th  St.,
Philadelphia. Pa. (D.O.)

M.  R..  1401  First  Ave.,  Oak-
land, Cal. (D.O.)

Ralph  C,  Benedict  Rlk.,
Brockport,  N.  Y. (DO.)

Sarah  A..  71  Grove  St..
Freeport. Ind. (DC.)

T.  F..  Bradford,  Ont..  Can.
CDC.)

Wilford  Hall.  Pythian

Temple,  Brockton,  and  43
Centre  St.,  Nantucket,
Mass. (DO.)

Zilla M.. Grand Bldg.. Mc-
Pherson, Kan. (D.O.)
WALLER. OLIVE C. Cocker-
line  and  Wetherbee  Bldg.,
Eugene, Ore. (D.O.)
WALLIN, A. CAROLINA,

Sussex, N. J. (D.O.)
WALLING. BESSIE B.. 21
Whittlesey  Ave.,  Norwalk.
O. (D.O.)
VVALLSCHLAGER, F. A., 56
W. Parade Ave., Buffalo,
N. Y. (N.D.)
VVAIvMSLEY. ASA GORDON.
Sun Life Bldg., Peter-
borough. Ont., Canada.

R.. Thatcher Blk., Pueblo,
Colo. (D.O.)
WALSH.  PAUL  W.,  1343  105th
St.,  Cleveland,  O. (Hy.)

Thos.  B.,  119  E.  76th  St.,
New  York,  N. Y. (Ma.)


Walsh
Weaver


Alphabetical  Index


965


WALSH, A. F.. 1813 Warren

St., University Place,

Neb. (D.C.)
A. F., 1814 N St., Union

Place. Neb. (N.D.)
John, Alleghany Co., Mun-

hall. Pa. (D.C.)
WALTENBAUGH, DR.  C.  C,

Canton, O. (M.D  )
WALTER,  F.  PETE,  Napoleon,

O. (DM.T.)
WALTERS. H. S., 37 Madison

Ave., New York, N. Y

WALTERS, FLOYD, North

Manchester, Ind. (D.C.)
WALTHER & WALTHER,

235  S.  Main  St., Salt  Lake

City, Utah. (D.C.)
WALTHER & WALTHER,

639 S. Grand Ave., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
WALTHER, A. E., Lamar,

Colo. (D.C.)
A. E.. 235 S. Main Street,

Suite 303, Salt  Lake City,

Utah. (D.C.)
Lillian, Lamar, Colo. (D.C.)
WALTERS. .TAS., Lafayette,

Ind. (D.C.)
WALTINGTON, FRANK,

Belleville, O. (N  D.)
WALTON, ALFRED, 512

Flanders Bldg., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (M  D., D.C.)
Dollie. 697 N Hiph St..

Columbus, O. (Ch.)
WALTON, R. W., U. S. Natl.  |

Bank Bldg., Salem, Ore.

WALZ. MARIE, New York, 1

N. Y. (N.D.)  I

Marie A.. 427 S. Asliland I

Blvd., Chicago, 111.

WAMELY, D. D., Box 594,

Idaho Falls, Idaho. (D.C.)
WAMSLEY, M. F., 900 Pros-
pect St., Cleveland, O.

(DM.T.)
WANAMAKER. MRS. J. H.,

Smith Center, Kan. (S.T.)


M. H., 509 Central Bank
Bldg.,  Oakland,  Cal.

Robert  Merrltt,  c/o
C^lub,  Oakland,  Cal.
WARDELL,  EVA  R,,
B'way,  New  Yoik,

Sarah C, 510 2nd Avenue,
Asbury  Park.  N. .1. (DO.)
WARDEN, ALICE .1
Worcester


Elks


2131

N. Y.


Slater
Mass.


MADISON, R. F.
9, Ottumwa, la.


WANER, ANNA, Clinton,

Mich. (D.C.)
WANLESS, RICHARD, 347

5th  Ave., New  York,  N.  Y.

WARBURTON, OTIS C, 56

Charlotte St., Rochester,

N. Y. (D.O.)
WARD, C. E , Hartford,

Conn. (D.C.)
Chas.  W., 1031  Osborn  St.,

Sandusky, O. (D.M.T.)
E. Thayer, 406-11 Erie

Bldg., Prospect and East

9th Sts., Cleveland, O.

Olive M. 965 Davids St.,

Marion, O. (DC.)
WARD, DANIEL C, 3150

liOgan Blvd., Chicago, 111.

E. T., 135-37 Euclid Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (D.C.)  ,

Thayer  E.. 213 N. State St.,  i

Painesville, O. (D.C.)
H.  C.  Canton,  S.  Dak. (D.C.)
Harriet Frederick, Wau-

komis. Okla. (D.O.)
H. G., 37  Marshall St., Mus-
kegon. Mich. (D.(3.)
James H., 309 Columbia  i

Trust Bldg., lios Angeles,

Cal. (D.C.)
John  E.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Maude Elizabeth. 632 Davis

St., Evanston, 111. (D.O.)


Bldg.,
WARDER,
D. No.

Sarah  Cord,  311  Tyler  Bldg.,
Louisville, Ky. (D.C,
N.D.)
WARING, G. P., 122 W. Main
St., Alhambra, Cal. (D.C.)
WARMUTH. H. M., Stanwood,
la. (D.C.)
M., Tinton, la. (D.C.)
WARNER, G. F., 6565 Yale
Ave., Chicago, 111 (D.O.)
Harold M., Paulding, O.

Mrs. Marion, 32 1 Vine St.,

Ashtabula, O. (D.M.T.)
Maude L., 2712 Woodburn
Ave.,  Cincinnati,  O. (D.O.)
WARNER, M., 326 W. 8th St.,

Erie, Pa. (D.C.)
WARRACK,  ALEXANDER,

146 Pearl St., Bradford,
Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
WARREN & WARREN, Cas-

novia, Mich. (D.C.)
WARREN, E. D., Savonburg,
Kan. (DO.)
Geo. S., 18 Pearl St., King-
ston, N. Y. (D.O.)
James B., 319 West Center

St. Marion, O. (D.C.)
S. F.. 1112 Chestnut Street,
Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
WARRINER, CHAS. O., Stig-
ler, Okla. (D.C.)
Corinne. Stigler, Okla.

O. C, Mansfield, Ark. (D.C.)
Owen C, Greenwood, Ark.
(DC.)
WARRINGTON. W. F., 203
Yarnell Theatre Building,
'Wabash. Ind. (D.C)
WARTHINGTON. B. W., 216
"West Park St., Anaconda,
Mont. (D.C)
WARWICK. ^V. J., Alden,

Minn. (D.C.)
WASCHKA, F.. 707 Wash St.,

Marion,  Ind. (D.C.)
WASCHKE. W. E., 15-17
Bryant and Klote Bldg.,
Bartle.«!ville,
WASHBURN,  A,
Washington
111. (DO.)
B. A., Paducah, Ky. (M.D.)
WASHINGTON, ALICE M.,
3450 Reading Road,
Cincinnati. O. (Ch.)
John, 6221 Quincy Ave.,
Cleveland, O. (Ch  )
WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF
CHIROPRACTIC,  1509

13th St. N. W.. Washing-
ton, D.  C (D.C.)
WASICO, G. G., Milwaukee,

Wis. (D.C.)
WATERS, CLARA SHER-
WOOD, 2233 18th St.
N. W., Washington, D.C.
(DO.)
Nellie  N., 108  N. State  St.,
Chicago, 111. (Nap.)


Okla. (DC.)
S., 14 West
St., Chicago


WATERS, EUGENE C, Foulk

Bldg., Chillicothe, O.

Lillian E. F., 8909 Lowe

Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Lulu I., Fontanel Court,

Washington, D. C (D.O.)
O., 603 First Natl. Bank

Bldg., Long Beach, Cal.

Richard J., 123 W. 33rd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (D.C.)
WATKINS, EDWIN PHIL-
LIPS, Union Bldg., San

Diego. Cal. (D.O.)
Homer  Earle,  43  W.  Western

Ave., Muskegon, Mich.

John, 208 Myrtle Avenue,

Jersey  Citv,  N.  J. (D.C.)
I-ewis, 149 N. 52nd Street,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
Mark, 225 Jewett Ave.,

Jersey City, N. J. (D.C.)
Pauline, 208 Myrtle Ave.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J. (D.C)
WATKINS, HATTIE C, 1264

Grant Ave., Columbus, O.

(Ch.)
J. J., 2127 E. 30th St.,

Lorain,  O. (D.M.T.)
WATROUS,  ALLEN  B.,  Larch-

mont, N. Y. (D.C  )
WATSON & ^YATSON, Paola,

Kan. (D.C.)
WATSON,  CARL  L.,  166  Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

Cora A., 1130 Locust St.,

Cincinnati, O. (M.A.)
Georgian, 2 Harewood PI.,

Hanover Square, "W. Lon-
don. England.'  (D.O.)
P. E., 24 Schimel Bldg.,

Geneva, N. Y. (D.C.)
Paul E., 34 Rimel Bldg.,

Portland, Ind. (DC.)
Ruth. First Natl. Bank

Bldg.. Virginia, Minn.

S. Gertrude. 53 Central St..

Lowell. Mass. (D.O.)
T. J..  Hotel  Woodward.  New

York, N. Y. (D.O.)
T.  Oren.  Gardena.  Cal. (D.C.)
T. Oren, Northern Bank

Bldg.. Seattle, Wash.

WATSON, S. J.. 515 Polk

Bldg.,  5th  St.,  Des  Moines,

la. (N.D.)

WATTERS, ISABELLA, 577

AT'p..,-p,^ St., Newark. N.J.

WATTERS, NELLE M., 108

N. State St.. Chicago, 111.

(Nap.)
Raymond E  , 321 E. 8th St.

North Portland, Ore.

(D.C)
WATTS, J. M.. Sonne Bldg.,

Boise. Idaho. (D.C)
WAU, JAS. W., 1234 S. Main

St., Akron, O (D.M.T.)
WAUGH. R. H.. 81 Forest

Ave. "W.. Detroit. Mich.

R. H.. 50 Lothrop Ave..

Detroit. Mich. (D.C.)
WEATHERLY. CARRIE. Box

544, Henry, 111. (DO.)
WEAVER, CALVIN R., Deca-
tur, Ind. (D.O.)
E. B., 1028 Elmwood Ave..

Buffalo, N. Y. (D.C.)
H. Buck, 44  7 Linden Ave..

Miamisburg, O. (D.O.)
Julia Blanche, Storv Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (DO.)


966


Alphabetical  Index


Weaver
Werner


519-20 Occidental
Indianapolis, Ind.


c/o Torbett  Sana-
Marlin, Tex.


H. S.. 1433 Spruce. Street,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.C..

M.D.)
Ida  M.  Jayne,  People's  Bank

Elder-. Seattle, Wash.

J. Ray,

Bldg.,

WEAVER- WINGERTER,

CHARI.OTTE, 186 South

Union St., Akron, O.

WEBB,  ALBERT  E.,  318  West

57th St., New York, N.  Y.

(Ma.)
WEBB. EDITH M., 6846 Sun-
set Blvd.,  Hollywood,  Cal.

H. D.. 408  Main  St.,  Orange,

N. J. (D.O.)
Jessie, Coffeyville, Kan.

Mary I^.

torium,

Victorine W., Greene, N. Y.

W.  S.,  Hope,  Ark. (D.C.)
WEBER, ARTHUR B., 806

Belmont Ave  , Toledo, O.

(D.M.T  )
J., 110 W. 40th St., New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)
WEBER, J. B.. 832 W. 81st

St., Los Angeles, Cal.

M A., 1915 E. 10th Street,

Kansas City, Mo. (N.D.)
WEBER, CAROLINE L., Cen-
tury  Bldg-., St. Louis, Mo.

Emil, 255 Waverly Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Helen,  1021  Springfield  Ave.,

Irvington, N. J. (D.C.)
J. N., 1980 7th Ave., New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)
WEBLEY, F. D., Box 398,

Santa  Rosa,  Cal. (D.C.)
WEBSTER & WEBSTER,

West Winfield, N. Y.

WEBSTER, F. D., 5817

Central Ave  , Cleveland,

O. (D.M.T.)
Mrs. M. E., 320 N. Division

St.,  Buffalo.  N Y. (DC.)
WEBSTER, FREDERICK A.,

47 E. 34th St.,  New  York,

N.  Y. (D.O.)
Geo. v., Strickland Bldg.,

Carthage, N. Y. (D.O.)
Minnie B., West Windfield,

N. Y. (D.C.)
Morton E., Frondale, Wash.

WEED, DANA L., Calexico,

Cal. (D.O.)
Loring, Haverhill Natl.

Bank Bldg., Haverhill,

Mass. (D.O.)
O. G., Corby Forsee Bldg.,

St.  Joseph,  Mo. (D.O.)
Traca E., Leadletter Bldg.,

Michigan  City,  Ind. (D.C.)
WEEGAR, PERCY I>., 1721

Main St., Buffalo, N. Y.

WEEKS, C. H., Jupiter, Fla.

G. S., Leon, la. (D.C.)
R. E., Lansing,  Mich. (D.C.)
Rowland -F.. Parrott &

Smith Bldg., Owatonna,

Minn. (D.O.)
WEHOFFER. AUGUSTA V.,

1169 Davison St., Port-
land. Ore. (DC.)
WEHRLE,  L.  G., 1230 E. 63rd

St., Chicago, 111. (M.D.)


WEHRWEIN, John. 210

Francas  St.,  Calwyn,

Delaware Co., Pa. (N.D.)
WEIDENHOEFT, A. A.,

Kalona, la. (D.C.)
WEIDLICH, R. C, 304  Madi-
son Ave., New York,

N. Y. (Ma.)
WEIERSHAUSBN, GEO., 23

Polk  St.,  Guttenberg,  N.  J.

WETGERT, H. C, Waterloo,

la. (D.C.)
WEIMAN, ELIZABETH, 1524

Chestnut St., Philadel-
phia,  Pa. (D.C.)
WBINMANN. LOUIS A.. 1873

Amsterdam Ave., New

York, N. Y. (N.D.)
WEIMAR. Estero. Fla. (N.D.)
WEIMAR. LOUIS CHARLES,

516 Bergen Ave., Jersey

City,  N.  J. (D.C.)
WEINBERG, I. H., 1333 N.

La Salle St., Chicago. 111.

WEINMAN. .TOHN. San Ber-
nardino. Cal. (N.D.)
WEIR. MME. HELENE

BARKELL, 101 W. 126th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y. (Ma  )
WEIR, T. P., Winterset, la.

WEISER, A. W., 158 N.

Hanover St., Pottstown,

Pa. (D.C.)
WEISS, GEO., 420 E. 61st St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.  (P.)
Hilda  H., 941 E. 14th St  ,

Brooklyn, N. Y. (D.C.)
Oscar E., 153 Institute PI.,

Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
WETSSBERG. E. B.. 515

Spruce St., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
WEIST, R. S., 28 Lake St.,

Oswego, N. Y. (D.C.)
R. S., Newark  Valley, N.  Y.

WEIST, R. S., 23 Lewis St..

Johnson  City,  N.  Y. (DC.)
WEITZEL, WALTER J., 374

N. 20th St., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
WELANDER. BESSIE C. 908

Belmont Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
WELBOURNE, ANNA C,

Sparta, Mich. (N.D.)
WELCH,  CHAS.  E.,  Mount

Vernon. O. (N.D.)
Mrs Mav E., 138 Mariner

St., Buffalo, N. Y. (Cr.)
W. C  , 407 S.  Ashland  Blvd.

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
WELCH, J. S., Liberal, Kan.

O. F., 724 N. 20th Street,

Philadelphia, Pa. (D.O.)
R. R., 222 S. Randolph St.,

Macomb, 111. (D.O.)
WELLS & WELLS, 10 Chase

Blk., Kalamazoo, Mich.

WELLS, A B., Georgetown,

O. (D.M.T.)
B. F, 2636 E. 75th St.

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
WELLS  ACADEMY  OF

CHIROPRACTIC, Lansing,

Mich. (D.C.)
WELLS, CHAS. H., 1619

W^ashington St., Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)
Geo. A.. Ft. Collins, Colo.

G.  W.,  513  W.  134th  St.,  New

York, N. Y. (D.C.)


Hugh E., Grenola, Kan.

L., Andover, S. Dak. (N.D.)
Minnie  E., 1619 Washington

St.. Denver, Colo. (D.C.)
WELSH,  HUGH  S.,  Datto,  Ark.

P. W., 7909 Euclid Ave.,

Cleveland, O. (F.)
WELSH, P. W., 7909 Euclid

Ave., Cor. 79th  St., Cleve-
land, O. (Hy.)
WELSTEAD,  MRS.  ALICE  W.,

2116 Dime Bank Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich. (Cr.)
WELTMER, ERNEST, c/o

The  Weltmer  Institute

of Suggestive Therapy,

Nevada. Mo. (D.S.T.)
J. E. c/o The Weltmer

Institute of Suggestive

Therapy,  Nevada, Mo.

(D.S.T)
Sidney  A., c/o  The  Weltmer

Institute of Suggestive

Therapy, Nevada, Mo.

(D.S.T.)
T. C, c/o The Weltmer

Institute of Suggestive

Therapy, Nevada, Mo.

(D.S.T.)
WELTY.  CLARA  M.,  Hicks-

ville. O. (D.C.)
WELTY. JESSE N.. 3032 W.

North Ave., Chicago, 111.

WENDEL, REV. DR. H. R..

Trenton,  N.  J. (N.D.)
WENDEL, WM., Long Beach,

Cal. (Ma.)
WENDELL, CANADA, Wool-

ner Bldg., Peoria, 111.

WENDELSTADT, EDWARD

F. M., Ferguson Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
WENDORFF, HERMAN A.,

Wells Bldg., Quincy, 111.

WENDT. REIDL. 2179 Tele-
graph St., Oakland, Cal.

WENGER, H. U.. 804 Court

St.. Fulton. Mo. (D.O.)
Joseph. 19 E. Vine Street.

Mt. Vernon, O. (D.O.)
WENTWORTH, DAISY B.,

Navina, Okla. (D.C.)
Geo., Arkansas City, Kan.

Guv  De Witt, Navina,  Okla.

Lillian P., The Thorbus

Apts., San Diego, Cal.

De Paul .L, 1509-11 East

Superior Street, Duluth,

Minn. (D.C.)
WENTWORTH, DR. PAUL  J.,

1509-11  E. Superior  St.,

Duluth, Minn. (D.C.)
WENZEI>.  ALFRED,  417

Palisade Ave., Jersey

City,  N. J. (D.C.)
WENZL, REIDL, 2327 Tele-
graph Ave., Oakland, Cal.

WERBES, HENRY C. Room

No. 4. Buffalo, Minn.

WERE. ARTHUR E., GO S.

Swan St.. Albany. N. Y.

WERLES. HENRY C, Park-
ers Prairie. Minn. (N.D.)
WERNER. ERNST G., 244 PJ.

61st St.. New York, N. Y.

E. H., 121 Madison Ave.,

New  York,  N Y. (M.D.)


Wernelle
Wiberg


Alplnihelicdl  Index


967


WKRNETTI'A J. J.. Port

Huron. Mich. (D.C.)
WERNK^vIO, Cr.ARA, Flat  54,
SIIS Koading- Road, Cin-
cinnati. O. (D.O.)
Clara, Haddon Hall, Cin-
cinnati. O. (D.O.)
WKRTENBERGKR, W. W.,
Corby-F. Bldg., St.
Joseph, Mo. (Oph.)
WEST, ARCHIBALD, Steel -

ton, Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
WEST.  JOHN, 3rd  and  Hill
Sts., Los Angreles, Cal.
(N.D)
L. J. 410 Masonic Bldg .
Chicag-o, 111. (Opt.)
"VVEST, MRS. D. G., 340 Oua-
chita Ave., Hot Spring.s,
Ark. (S.T.)
Geo., Brainard,  Minn. (D.C.)
G. B., Hartwick, la. (D.C.)
H. C, 10 Hig-hland Ave.,

Yonkers, N. Y. (D.O.)
Harry H., 524 Cons. Realty
Bldg-., Los Angeles, Cal.
Jesse A., 303 Georgia St.,

I.iOuisiana, Mo. (D.O.)
Ralph L., 47 Hertford St.,
London W., England.
William. 75 Park Ave.,

New  York,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
W. R., Opera House Blk.,
Danbury, Conn. (D.C.)
WESTLAND, O. W., 506

Columbia  Bldg., Duluth,
Minn (N.D.)
WESTLUND, CARL E., 514fi
Liberty Ave., Pittsburgh,
Pa. (Ma.)
WESTMAN, MISS ANNA M.
108 N. State St., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)
Carl, 108 N. State St.,
Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
WEST NEW YORK BATHS.
Berg-enline Ave. and 13th
St., West  New  York,  N. J.
WESTFALL, E. H., Nile.s
Bldg., Findlay, O. (D.O.)
De Witt C, Munn Bldg-.,
Coshocton, O. (D.O.)
WEST-HILL, JOHN, Box 409,
R. F. D. 14, Los Ang-ele.s,
Cal. (D.C.)
WETCHE, C. FREDERICK,
30 Church St., New York.
N. Y. (D.O.)
AVETHERBE. E. T., 107

Meig-s Bldg , Bridgeport,
Conn. (N.D.)
WETHERBY, M., Box 123

Oshkosh. Neb. (S.T.)
WETHERELL, C. B., Jack-
sonville, Fla. (N.D.)
G. M., Detroit. Mich. (M.D.)
WETMORE, FRANCIS W
Oak Hall, Pawtucket.
R.  L (D.O.)
WETTERSTRAND, SAM, lUC
Tremont Place, Denvei
Colo. (D.C.)
WEY, DR. JULIA MAY
COURTNEY, 1633 Court
Place. Denver, Colo.
(N.D)
WEYLAND. CHAS. E., 3  38
Cumberland St., Lebanon,
Pa (DC)
WHALLEY, ■  IRVING, Land
Title Bldg:., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
WHEATCROFT, DR., Smith

Center, Kan. (D.C.)
WHEATON,  F. L., U. C.  C,
Davenport, la. (D.C.)


WHEELER & WHEELER,

Twin Fall.s, Idaho. (D.C.)

WHEELER, A., Cincinnatus,

N. Y. (D.C.)

Mi.s.s A., Cincinnatus, N. Y.

Miss  Alma,  1  Roseville  Ave.,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
Arlie, Eddyville, la. (D.C.)
C. G., 32 N. Main Street,

Brattleboro, Vt. (D.O.)
Elvin, 600 Grand Opera
House Bldg., Atlanta,
Ga. (D.C.)
Fred  H., Twin Falls, Idaho.

Mrs. Fred H., Twin Fall.*?,

Idaho. (D.C.)
G. A., 416 Marlboroug-h St.,

Boston, Mass. (D.O.)
Glenn B., Huston Bldg-.,

Ludingrton, Mich. (D.O.)
G. D., 101 W. Emerson St.,

Melrose, Mass. (D.O.)
H.  A.,  Eddyville,  Neb. (N.D.)
Howard M., Ames, Okla.

Howard M., Drummond,

Okla. (D.C.)
R. A., Toronto, Ont., Can.

Sarah E., Lakeland, Fla.
WHEELER, ALMA, Cortland,
N. Y. (D.C.)
Fannie, Twin Falls, Idaho.

Mrs. D R. 813 12th St.
N. W., Washington, D. C.
WHELAN, R. L.,  Belle  Plaine,

Iowa. (D.C.)
WHELER, A. S., 14 Mifflin
Ave., Edgewood Park,
Pittsburgh, Pa. (N.D.)
WHIBLEY, G. MORRISON.
700 Cong-ress St., Port-
land, Me. (D.O.)
WHISLER, C. A., Denton,

Md. (D.O.)
WHITACRE. H. S., Martins-
burg-, W. Va. (D.O.)
L. R., 687 Boylston Street,

Boston, Mass, (D.O.)
R. T.. Joplin. Mo. (S.T.)
WHITCOMB, C. H., 392 Clin-
ton Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
WHITE, ANNETTE M., 514
W. 114th St., New York,
N. Y. (D.O.)
Bert H., 355 N. Capitol St.,

Salem,  Ore.  (D.O.)
Claude  V.,  Carl  Building,
Independence,  Mo.  (D.O.)
Elleb.,  Meno,  Okla.  (D.C.)
E.  C.  287  W.  North  Ave..
Ea.st  Palestine,  O.  (N.D.)
Ernest  C,  505  5th  Ave.,  New

York, N. Y. (D.O.)
Grace C, Mt. Vernon, Mo.

Ivan O., Hartwick, la.

J.  S..  Chamber  of  Commerce
Bldg., Pasadena, Cal.
M., Patterson Bldg., Mobile,

Ala. (D.O.)
Pearl E.. Sioux City, la.

T. Harrison, 1114 Kansas
Ave., Topeka, Kan. (S.T.)
Wm. Al., Brighton, la.

W. F., P. O. Box 294, Shel-
ton. Conn. (D.C.)
WHITP:,  DR.  CHAS.  I., 427
Main St., Riverside, Cal.
(N.D)


Edwin  C, East Pale."5tine,

O. (DC.)
Dr.  Geo.  Starr, I>os  Angf-les,

Cal. (N.D  )
Mary N., 473 Washington

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.(D.O.)
Nellie Connor, 431 South
Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
W. F., 282  Main St., Derby,
Conn. (D.C.)
WHITEHEAD. HARRIET A.,

Wausau, Wis. (D.O.)
WHITEHOUSE, GEORGE F.,
27  E.  Monroe  St.,  Chicago,
111. (D.O.)
WHITEIS.  C.  E., 150  E Broad

St., Columbus, O. (N.D.)
WHITEIS.  U.  K..  112  E.  Broad
St., Columbus, O. (D.C.)
WHITENBERG, MRS. C,
Geneseo, 111. (D.C.)
C. E., Knoxville, la. (D.C.)
WHITSELL, JOHN C, Com-
mercial Bldg., St. Joseph,
Mo. (Oph.)
WHITESELL, N. JEAN, 319
Union Ave., Elizabeth,
N. J. (D.O.)
WHITESIDE, SUNORA L.,
255 University Avenue,
Lebanon,  Tenn. (D.O.)
WHITESTINE, O. G., 230
Washington St., Hunting-
ton,  Ind. (D.C.)
WHITFIELD, HENRY A.,
Granite Bldg., Rochester,
N. Y. (D.O.)
I. Jay, Still-Hildreth Sani-
tarium, Macon,  Mo. (D.O.)
WHITING, ANNA E., Audi-
torium Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.O.)
Lillian  M.,  S.  Pasadena,  Cal.
WHITLEIGH, GEO. A., 156 N.
5th St., Newark, N. J.
WHITMAN. JOHN E., Mt.
Holly, Neb. (D.C.)
W. S., 932 New York Ave.,
Washington, D. C. (D.C.)
WHITMORE. J. L., Grand
Opera House Bldg., At-
lanta, Ga. (D.C.)
J. P., Savings Bahik Bldg.,

Marquette, Mich. (D.O.)
O. M., MacBain Bldg.,
Roanoke,  Va. (D.O.)
WHITNELL, H. W., Cape

Girardeau, Mo. (S.T.)
WHITNEY, 932 S. Georgia
St., Los Angeles, Cal.
A. E., Anderson, Ind. (D.C.)
WHFfTACKER, FRED. 616
McKinley Ave., Canton,
O. (D.C.)
WHITTEMORE, A. C, 427
Main  St.,  E.  Aurora,  N.  Y.
F.  G.,  Hamburg,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
WHITTENBERG,  C.  E.,  Knox-
ville. 111. (D.C.)
WHITTENBERG. O. W.,
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)
WHITTINGTON, 141 ^V. 36th
St., New York, N. Y.
fN.D.)
Julia E.. Xenia, O. (D.S.T.)
WHITTY, MICHAEL. New

York. N Y. (M.D.)
WIBERG, A., R. 1, Box 16,
S. Denver Sta., Denver,
Colo. (N. D.)
Miss  A.  S.,  Denver  Sta.  R.  2,
Box  16,  Denver,  Colo.


968


A  Iphcibeticiil  Itulc.v


Wiceiia
Williams


WICENA. A. W.. 2635 S.

Homan Avenue. Chicagro,

111. (D.C.)
WICHMAN. H. T.. 503 S.

Florence  St..  El  Paso,  Tex.

WICHNER, CLARA, R. F. D.

No. 1, North Baltimore,

O. (DM.T.)
WICKER, I.. I., 982 Wood-
ward Ave.. Detroit, Mich.

WICKS, C. H.. 1709 Grand

Ave.,  Davenport,  la.  (D.C.)
VVICKSTROM, EDLA M., 4318

Cottage Grove Ave  ,

Chicago. 111. (Ma.)
WIDELL, WM. P., Madison

Ave., Toledo. O. (Ma  )
WIDEMAN, DR., Delphos, O.

WIDMAN,  WM., 432 Wood  St.,

Pittsburg-h, Pa. (D.C.)
WIDMANN.  ELIZABETH,

Box 71, Rosalia, Wa.sh.

WIEBE,  J.  J.,  Box  121,  Lehigh,

Kans. (Ma.)
WIEDENHOFT, A. A.,

Kalona, la (N.D.)
WIEDER, HANNA G., 2142


Cleveland Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.C.)
Nanna  G., 546  Garfield  Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
WIEDER. WILLIAM,

Buffalo, N. Y. (ND.)
WIEDERMUTH, H. E., Ben-
nington, Mich. (D.C.)
WIEGAND, WM., 3129 B'way,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
WIEGERT, H. C, Waterloo,

la. (D.C.)
WIELAND,  CLARA  G.,  A.  S.  O.

Hospital, Kirksville, Mo.

WIEMANN, ELIZABETH, 516

Weightman Bldg., Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.C.)
WIESJAHN, W. H., Sehrage

Bldg., Whitting, Ind.

(D.C)
WIESNER,  B.  J., 2116 Russell

Ave.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  (Or.S.)
S., 72  W 116th  St.,  New

York, N Y. (Ma.)
WIEST, RAY S.. 26 Lake St.,

Oswego, N. Y. (D.C.)
WIGAMOOD, R. V. King

Bldg., S'^ringfleld, O.

(D.ST.)
WIGELSWORTH, J.  W., 32

N State St., Chicago 111.

WIGGINS, W. HAROLD.

Boonton,  N.  J. (D.O.)
WIGHT. ALICE M., 1460

Pearl St., Denver, Colo.

WIKANDER, G. "SV., 58

Madison Ave., Detroit,

Mich. (D.C.)
WILBER, G. H., 403 N. Main

Street, Sheridan, Wyo.

(DC.)
WILBER, G. H., 7-9-11 Opera

House Blk., Ansonia.

Conn. (D.C.)
WILBERG.  MISS  A..  S.  Denver

Sta., R. No. 2, Denver,

Colo. (D.C.)
WILCOX, C. F., 21 13th St.,

Troy.  N.  Y. (D.C.)
C. W., 117 Travis St.,

Houston, Tex. (D.C.)
Dayse T., Box 629. Colfax.

la. (D.C.)
F. F.. Keenan Bldg.. Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)


I Frank  F., 108  Crescent  Ave.,

Plainfield,  N.  J. (D.O.)

WILCOX,  MART  M., 293  West

7th  St  ,  Columbus,  O.  (Ch.)

WILCOXEN, G. C, 3.^ S. 11th

St., Richmond, Ind. (D.C.)

Leon A., Keenan Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
Mai-gery, Sault Ste. Marie,

Can. (D.C.)
Nell Sigler, 108 Crescent
Ave., Plainfield, N. J.
O. W., 404 Commercial
Bank Bldg., Houston,
Tex. (D.C.)
W.  H.,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Can.

W. H., 1253 6th Ave., Owen

Sound, Ont., Can. (D.C.)
W. J., Keenan Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
WILCOXON, G. D., 375 Mult-
nomah St., Portland, Ore
WILDBRSON. W. H., Circle--

ville,  O. (D.O.)
WILDMAN, ELIAS, Haddon
Heights, N. J. (M.D  )
F.  E. 325  E Main St.,'
Norwalk, O. (D.M  T.)
WILDSMITH,  THOS.  E.,  Park-
way Blvd., Philadelphia,
Pa. (D.O.)
WILES. A. M.,  Jerseyville,  111.

WILEY, ANDREW S., Bris-
bane Bldg., Buffalo, N. Y.
WILHABER, PROF., 4521 St.
Lawrence Ave., Chicago,
111. (N.D.)
WILHELM,  A.  C,  Exeter,  Mo.

WILKENING, G., 1262 Leland
Ave., Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
WILKENS, .7. H., McMinn-

ville. Ore. (D.O.)
WILKERSON, MRS. M. L.,

Woodlawn, Cal. (D.C.)
WILKE, GEO. C, 146 S. Col-
lege Ave., Ft. Collins,
Colo. (D.O.)
Grace E. Stott, Box 304,
Seattle. Wash. (D.O.)
WILKEY.  S.  C, 525 S.  Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.
WILL. MRS. LILLIE C  . 274
North St., Buffalo, N. Y.
(Cr.)
Wm. E., 274 North St.,
Buffalo, N Y. (Cr.)
WILLARD, ALICE N., The
Homestead, Hot Springs,
Va. (D.O.)
Asa. First  Natl.  Bank  Bldg.,

Missoula, Mont. (D.O.)
Earl S., 21 Camp Street,

Newark, N. J. (D.O.)
W. L., Viroque, Wis. (D.C.)
WILLARD, CH. E., 306 2nd
St. S. E., Washington
D.  C. (D.C  )
WILLBANKS. E. J., Farni-

ington. Mo. (D.O.)
WILLCOX, SYLVESTER W.,
Bacon Blk., Oakland, Cal.
WILLETT, MABEL. Royal
Bldg., Le  Mars, la. (D.O.)
Nora E., Mercantile Blk.,
Aurora, 111. (D.O.)
WILLIAMS,  Hot  Springs.  Ark.
Archie,  Sandwich,  Til. (N.D.)
Chester E., Bowling Green,

O. (D.M.T  )
Mrs.  Cora Belle, Scipio
Siding, O. (D.M.T.)


D. A., Nettleton Block.

Ashtabula. O. (D.C.)
Gerald R. 144 Monroe  St..

Brooklyn, N. Y. (Ma.)
Kate J  , 51 E Jackson

Blvd.. Chicago. 111. (D.C.)
I>loyd, 510 Franklin St.,

Buffalo, N. Y. (Ma.)
Louis, 1523  Center  St  ,

Racine, Wis. (N.D.)
L. v., Daniels  Block, Rice

Lake, Wis. (D.C.)
M. G., 3977 Vernon Ave.,

Chicago, 111. (ND.)
Nellie E.. 43 Emery Arcade,

Cincinnati, O. (Ch.)
R. B.. 2215 Cleveland Ave..

New  Orleans La. (Ch.)
S.  B.,  Sheridan,  Wyo. (N.D.)
Mrs. V. O., Rensselaer, Ind.

WILLIAMS. A. J., Citizens'

Bank Bldg., Wilmington,

O. (D.O.)
A. J., 921J Market Street,

Youngstown, O. (D.C.)
C. A., 282i 4th St., San

Pedro, Cal. (D.C.)
C. Arthur, 41 W. Chicago

St., Coldwater. Mich.


C.  B.,  San  Diego,  Cal. (N.D.)
Calvert B., 19 Trescony St.,

Santa Cruz, Cal. (D.C.)

Clara H., 822 Wood Street,

Wilkinsburg, Pa. (D.O.)

D.  A.,  Box  206.  Homing,
Okla. (S.T.)

Evan, 1024 4th St., Santa
^Monica, Cal. (D.O.)

E.  D.,  201  E.  Sunbury  St.,
Shamokin. Pa. (D.O.)

Mrs.  E.  M.,  Arkansas  City,
Kan. (D.C.)

F.  A.,  205  J  Public  Square,
Clinton, 111. (D.C.)

F.  A.,  213-15  Moran-Corbett
Bldg., Decatur, 111. (D.C.)

Miss  Harriet,  18  Hunting-
ton Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

H.  R.  H.,  Grand  Island,
Neb. (S.T.)

I.  A.,  101  Court  St.,  Hot
Springs, Ark. (D.C.)

Kate,  State  Life  Bldg.,
Indianapolis, Ind. (D.O.)

Kate  G.,  57  E.  Jackson
Blvd., Chicago. 111. (D.O.)

L..  Flanders  Blvd.,  Phila-
delphia, Pa. (D.O.)

L.  v.,  Rice  Lake,  Wis.  (D.C.)

Mary  A.,  1115  Chartiers
Ave.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.

Maude G.. 78 Main St..
Northampton, Mass.

Orville  R.,  Vlnta,  Okla.

O.  W.,  Majestic  Bldg.,  Mil-
waukee, Wis. (D.O.)

Ralph  H.,  Chamber  of  Com-
merce Bldg.,  Rochester,
N. Y. (D.O.)

Robert  H.,  New  Ridge  Bldg.,
Kansas City, Mo. (D.O.)

Robt.  K..  103-9  Bdgerly
Bldg., Fresno, Cal. (D.C.)

R.  R.,  7605  Superior  Ave.,
Cleveland, O. (D.C.)

S.  B.,  Paul's  Valley,  Okla.

S.  B.,  Hot  Springs,  S.  Dak.

Spencer  T.,  Trinity  Court
Chambers,  Boston,  Mass.

T.  E..  LTnion  Savings  Bank,
Eau Claire, Wis. (N.D.)


WilUanisoii
Wolotira


Alphabetical  Index


9f39


T.  H.,  10th  and  Wash  Sts.,
Columbus, Tnd. (D.C.)

W. Miles. Hitchcock Bldg:..
Nashvlllp, Tpnn. (D.O.)
WILLIAMSON, A. M., 400-16
Faiiev Bldgr., Birmlng--
ham, Ala. (D.C.)

J.  C,  Hig-g-insville,  Mo.

Mary  I.,  Colonial  Building',
Toronto, Ont., Can. (D.C.)

W. T., 3 Colonial Apts., nSi
Palmerston Blvd., Toron-
to,  Ont.,  Can. (D.C.)
WILTJAMSON, KXJ S., 29.3

Hoyt St., Buffalo, N. Y.
(Cr.)
WILLIS, FRED E., 6717
Sheridan Road, Chicago,
111. (D.O.)

G.  F.,  616  Chamber  of  Com-
merce, Pasadena,  Cal.

Mrs. Isabelle, Missouri
Vallev. la. (D.C.)
WILLIS, .1. GRANT, Manhat-
tan, Kans. (ND.)
WILLISCROFT, \V. H., Tale-

quah.  Okla.  (S.T.)
WILLISTAEDT,  J.  L.,  406
AV.  18th  St.,  Kansas  City,
Mo.  (S.T.)
WILLSON.  MRS.  .1.  A.,  Craw-
ford Co.,  Epsyville,  Pa.

Minnie,  95  W.  3rd  St.,  Mans-
field, O. (DC.)
WILT-SON, MINNIE E., 138
W. 3rd St., Mansfield, O.
WILMOT,  JOHN  A, 1230  East
63rd St., Chicag-o IlL
(Ma.)
WILMOTH,  CLARK  L.,

Elkins, W. Va. (D.C.)
WILSON, MRS., Sheridan,
Wyo. (ST.)

H.  Le  Rov, 501 Fairfield
Ave., Akron, O. (D.M.T.)

K.  P.,  Box  123,  Ithaca,  N  Y.

L. R.,  Portland, Ore. (N.B.)

M.  S.,  347  5th  Ave.,  New
York,  N. Y. (Ma.)

Reese G., Darlingrton, S C.
WILSON, DR. T. B., Rocky
Ford, Colo. (D.C.)

Bertha  R..  Bryant  Bldg-.,
Kansas  City,  Mo. (D.O.)

Chas.,  1403  E.  111th  Street,
Evansville, Ind. (D.C.)

Chas..  Broken  Bow,  Neb.
(DC.)

E.  C.  Brooklvn.  D.  C. (D.C.)
Emily G., 229 Berkeley St.,

Boston,  Mass.  (D.O.)
Estelle, 1458 Court Place,

Denver.  Colo.  (D.C.)
Everett.  Brooklyn.  la. (D.C.)

F.  H.,  Edwards  Bldg.,  New-
berg, Ore. (D.O.)

Frank  L..  423  Exchange
Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

George.  Black  Bldg..  I>os
Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)

G.  S.  Hodder.  55  Cork  St..
Guelph. Ont., Can. (DO.)

J. E., 68 9th St. N. W..

Washington, D. C. (D.O.)
J. G., 206 N. Main Street,

Wichita,  Kan.  (DC.)
John  H..  Ohio  Bldg.,  Toledo,

O. (DO.)
L. H.. Box 204, Dunlap, 111.

(DC.)
La Roy, 484 N. 4th St.,

Eugene,  Ore.  (D.C.)
Margaret E., Oldham Bldg.,

Sidnev, O. (D.O.)


Minnie E., 138 W. 3rd St.,

Mansfield, O. (D.C.)
O. K., Chariton, la. (D.C.)
O. K., Washington, la.

R. C, Empire Bldg., Bart-

lesville. Okla. (D.C.)
T. B., Rocky Ford, Colo.

(D.C,  O.P.)
W. B., 1441 Monroe Street,

Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Wm. C, 216 N. Main St.,


St. Charles,
WINBIGLRR,  C.

Washington,
WINBIGLBR.  C.


Mo. (D.O.)

F.,  The  Cairo,

D. C. (D.O.)

F.,  1104  West

35th  St,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

(S.)

WINCHESTER, AUGUSTA S..
229 Berkeley St., Boston,
Mass. (D.O.)
WINCKLER, OSCAR, 817 W.
9th St., Davenport, la.
Oscar H., 502 Trelawney
Bldg., Portland, Me.
WINEGARDNER, J., Morgan
Plant. Alliance. O (N.D.)
WINEGARDNER. JOS.. Calla-
han Bank Bldg., Dayton,
O. (DC)
WINGATE, D. M., 702-3 Real
Estate Bldg., Washing-
ton, D.  C. (D.C.)

D.  M.. 825 14th St. N. W.,
Washington, D. C. (D.C.)

WINGFIELD. PORTIA J.,

Hutchinson Bld.er., Golds-

boro. N. C. (D.O.)
WINKELMAN. ALBERT P.,

Grant Bldg., Goldsboro,

N. C. (DO.)
Louis, 437 Palisade Ave.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J. (B.C.)
WINKELMAN, R. A., 2703

Hoagland Ave., Fort

Wavne, Ind. (N.D.)
WINKELMANN, L., 248 Cam-
bridge Ave., Jersey City,

N. J. (D.C.)
WINN. CHARLES V.. 2032

Dime  Bank  Bldg.,  Detroit,

Mich. (C.S.)
WINN. R. J., Springfield, O.

(Ch.)
WINNB, J. EDGAR. 940 State

St.. Schenectady, N. Y.

WINNER. CHARLES F.. 739

Bovlston St., Boston,

Mass. (D.O.)
WINST-OM''.  CARL  G..  Goddard

Bldg.. Chicago. 111. (D.O.)

E.  S.,  "^Vaterville, Me. (D.O.)
Fred E.. 5 Clinton Avenue,

Newark, N. J. (D.C.)
WINSTEAD, JNO. A., Nash-
ville. N.  C. (D.C.)
WINTER. J. ^VM.. Fair
Haven,  Pa. (D.C.)
W. J., Rahni Ave., Pitts-
burgh, Pa. (D.C.)
\VINTERS. E. E.. Chambers
St.. Galesburg. 111. (D.C.)
P. B., 236-8 Cason Neal
Bldg-..  Lebanon,  Ind.

WIRE & WIRE, Rochester.

Ind. (D.C.)
WIRE. A. v., Urbana, Ind.
A. v., Cherokee, la. (D.C.)
A. v., 5503 E. Washington
St., Indianapolis. Ind.
Nina  A..  Urbana.  Tnd. (D.C.)
Percy J., 13 Clinton Street,
Morristown,  N. J. (D.C.)


WISE, F. P., R. F. D No. 2,

Wellston, O. (D.M.T.)
WISE, FREDERICK H., 505-7
Masonic Bldg., Auburn,
N. Y. (D.C.)
Hugh Thomas, Main Street,

Rockford, 111. (D.O.)

Z. W., Holland Blk., Lima,

O. (D.C.)

WISHART,  JAMES,  828 Bradv

St., Davenport, la. (D.C.)

Mrs. J. C, Davenport, la.

Jessie  L.,  1403  4th  Ave.,  Bay
City, Mich. (D.C.)
WIS  WALL,  THOMAS  A.,  Main
St., Falmouth, Mass.
WITHERS. AVIS MARTIN,

Umatilla, Fla. (D.O.)
WITMAN, JOHN E., 43 Main
St, Mount Holly, N. J.
(D.C, Oph  )
Wm.  U.,  102  Halsey  St.
Newark, N. J. (N.D)
WITMARS, J. E., Box 613,

Mt. Holly, N. J. (N.D.)
WITTY. C  E.,  Vincennes,  Ind.

WOERKUM, A. VAN. 734 W.
Fulton St.. Grand Rapids,
Mich. (D.C.)
WOLD, A. O., Langdon, N. D.


WOLF, DR. FREDERIC, 1222

Organ Ave., Fort Wavne,

Ind. (D.C.)

G. B., Ottawa, Kans. (D.O.)

Roy M., Big Timber, Mont.

Truman. Carthage. Mo.
WOLF-HEINEMANN. MRS.
M. 242  W.  38th  St.,  New
York, N. Y. (Ma  )
WOLFE, ALICE. 130 W.
Kirwin  Ave., Salina, Kan.
Andrew H., 102 "Wisconsin
Ave., Neenah. Wis. (D.O  )
C  C.  Carter,  Okla. (D.C.)
J. Meek, MacBain Bldg..

Roanoke. Va. (D.O.)
M. .7., 322 S. Bunker Hill
Ave.. Los Angeles, Cal.
(DC)
WOLFERT, WILLIAM  JLTLES

Red  Bank.  N.  J. (D.O.)
WOLFF. C T.. 754 Claude  St..
Hammond. Ind. (D.C.)
C  T.,  414  119th  St.,  Whiting,

Ind. (D.C.)
C W., 764  Claude  St.,  Ham-
mond, Ind. (D.C.)
Mary  J., East  Aurora, N. Y
WOLFF. M v., 135 Park

Place,  East  Aurora,  N.  Y.
WOLFRAM.  MARION  L.,  3
The  Norfolk  Bldg.,  8th
and  Elm  Sts.,  CTincinnati,
O.  (D.C.)
Wilhelm  H  ,  Cincinnati,  O.

"\V. H.. University Hospital.
Columbus.  O (N.D.)
WOLFRAM. WM. H.. 125 W.
9th St.. Cincinnati, O.
(N.D..  D.C,  M.T.D.)
Wilhelm H.. 20 Norfolk
Bldg.. Cincinnati. O.
(DC)
WOLOTERA. J.. Main St.,

Ashtabula.  O.  (N.D.)
WOLOTIRA.  J.,  49  i  S.  Main
St..  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.
John  E..  45  Warburton
Ave..  Yonkers.  N.  Y.


970


Alphabetical  Index


yXomcUlurf
Wynhoff


WOMEI.DURF. H. B., Bay

City. Mich. (D.C.)
WONDRACEK, WM. J., 4403

Arce Ave, St. Louis, Mo.

(DC.)  , ^ ,

WOOD, A. M., Ozark. Ark.

ChSiotte  G.. 10  S. 18th  St..

Philadelphia, Pa. (pO)
D B., Wagon Mound.

N. Mex. (D.C.)
T> E. 1131 Stevens Bldg.,

Chicago, 111. (D.C  )
D J., c/o The Hoffman,

Lewiston. Mont. (D.C.)
Eldred. Don. 69 Dexter

Bldg.. Chicago, 111. (D.C.)
Elsie H. Boath. St. Paul  s

Manse, 10 Laurel Bank

Dundee. Scotland. (D.O.)
Emma Greene. 37 Kidge-

wood Road. Maplewood,

N. J. (D.O.)
F. P., Century Bldg., bt.

'Louis, Mo. (D.O.) ,
Geo. F.. Peconning, Mich.

G.^a. Minot. N. D. (DC)
Geo. H., 808 St. Johns PI.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  (DO.)
Geo T., 501 Adams Street,

Bay  City.  Mich.  (D.C.)
G  T..  Marietta,  O.  (D.C.)
G W 304 Putnam Street,

Marietta, O. (N.D.)
Harold T.. Vinton. la.

J Fred, 26 W. 3rd Street,

Williamsport, Pa. (D.O.)

J. M., New^ Sharon, la.

Lena M., Avoca, la. (D.O.)
Lillian J.. Minot, N. D.

Louis M.. 218 S. Bridge St..

Belding, Mich. (N.D.)
Mary  L.. Belding, Mich.

R.  b!,  Fulton,  Mo. (D.O.)
Tracv E., Ledbetter Bldg.,

Michigan City, Ind.

WOOD,  FRANK  M.,  209 South

State St., Chicago, 111.

Henry Chas., 404  West

Federal St., Youngstown,

O. (Ch.)
Jessie, 44 Court St., Brook-
lyn,  N. Y. (Cr.)
Thos. C. 238 S. Wood St.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
Wm. P, 625 Stahlman

Bldg., Nashville, Tenn.

(D.C.)  _. ^

AVOODALL, PERCY H., First

Natl. Bank Building,

Birmingham, Ala. (D.O.)
WOODARD, B. A.. 200 N.

Main St., Galena, 111.

F. O., Massena, la. (D.O.)

AVOODARD, L. A., Belling-
ham, Wash. (D.C  )

WOODBRIDGE,  KATHER-

INE, 1302 North B'way,
Oklahoma City. Okla.
Katherine. 441 AV. 12th St..
Oklahoma City, Okla.

AVOODEI>L,  J.  E.,  Union,  Ore.

WOODFORD.  N.  C,  436  Com-
monwealth Ave.,  Detroit.
Mich. (D.C.)

WOODHAM, M. SAXE,

Mediapolis. la. (D.C.)


AA^OODHULTv, FREDERICK

AV.. 101 S. 5th St., Al-

hambra, Cal. (D.O.)
WOODING & GIBSON,

Chamber of Commerce
Bldg., New Haven. Conn.

(ND.)
WOODING. C. Booth Bldg..

New Britain, Conn. (D.C.)
Ralph A., New Britain,

Conn. (D.C.)
Ralph A.. Kensington,

Conn. (D.C.)
^VOODLEA^ ROY, Hamilton,

Ont. (D.C.)
WOODMAN,  M.  SAXE,

Mediapolis, la. (D.C.)
WOODRUFF, CHAS. HOMER,

Richmond. Cal. (D.O.)
WOODRUFF & JENTSCH,

c/o Newport Sanitarium,

Lee Co.. Estero, Fla.

WOODRUFF, J. K.. 1212

Fulton St., Brooklyn.

N. Y. (Opt.)
WOODS, A. M., Ft. Gibson,

Okla. (D.C.)
H. B.. Pulver Bk., Newark,

N. Y. (D.C.)
I..eva, 215 Alexander Street,

Rochester. N. Y. (D.O.)
WOODSIDEi. R. H., Council

Grove, Council Grove,

Kan.s. (Ma.)
WOODAVARD, E. G., 7  Wash-
ington St., Bradford, Pa.

(DO.)
P. O., Massena, la. (D.O.)
VV^OODWORTH, W. R., 120 S.

8th St  , St.  Jo.seph,  Mo.

(Opt.)
WOODY, AVORTH AV., 505^

Commercial St., Atchi-
son, Kan. (D.C.)
WOOLGER, W. C, 1233

Michigan Ave., Buffalo,

N.  Y. (D.C.)
WOOSTER, R.  L, 525 S. Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.

AA'ORK, L. C. & M. J., 85

Hicks  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

WORK, L. COOKE, 85 Hicks

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. (D.O.)
WORLEY,  AV, 814 AVabash

Ave., Terre Haute, Ind.

VA'ORRALL, CLEMENTINE  L.,

56 College Ave., Pough-

keepsie, N. Y. (D.O.)
WORRELL, BBNJ., Excelsior

Springs, Mo. (D.C.)
F. C. 541 Cons. Realty

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

WORRELL. MINNIE B., 332

Superior St., Toledo, O

(Ch.)
WORTHINGTON,  HENRY,

287 Main St., Norwich,

Conn. (D.C.)


Praclilioners  arc  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
liscrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
■if  printing.  Rectification  ivill
'>e made in subsequent issues


WOITLFK. M. J., 322 S.
Bunker  Hill,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)
Martin J., San Diego, Cal.
(DC.)

WREN,  AVM.  E..  308  Wash-
ington Ave.,  Scranton,
Pa. (D.C.)

WRIGHT,  ANNA  A.,  Theatre
Bldg.,  San  Jose,  Cal. (D.O.)
Clarence  C.  514  Fallow-
field  Ave.,  Charleroi.  Pa.
Eugenia  M.,  30  Amherst  St.,
Detroit, Mich. (D.C.)

E.  R., 403 State St., Bel-
videre. 111. (D.O.)

F.  A., 94 S. Main St., Fond
du Lac, Wis. (D.O.)

Frank  J., 907-10 Law  Bldg..

Indianapolis, Ind. (D.C.)
George, Fay  Blk., Bay  City,

Mich. (D.O.)
Herbert E., 226 Clifton St.,

Maiden, Mass. (D.O.)
H.  F.,  6404  Hollywood  Blvd.,

Los Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
Dr. J. F., Monticello. Ark.

J.  Merrill. 2610 Hartzell St..

Evanston. 111. (D.O.)
Kay & Co.. 207-211 AVood-

ward Ave.. Detroit. Mich.

(Opt.)
lA'dia H.. Jackson Bldg..

Providence, R. I. (D.O.)
Olive E., 1 Arcade, Sara-
toga Springs, N. Y.

Peter J., 1144 River St..

Hyde Park. Mass. (D.O.)
Ruth M., Ellis Bldg.,

Charles City, la. (D.O.)
Sadie, 2 Beacon Building,

Stratford, Ont., Con.

S. Ellis, Grant Trust Bldg.,

Marion, Ind. (D.O.)
Wm. H., Sumner, 111. (D.C.)
VRIGHT, JANE A. Ill East

56th St., New York,  N Y.

(P.)
VUERZINGER. HENRY, 405

Temple Court, Minne-
apolis, Minn. (S.T.)
VUNDRACK, H. J., Odd Fel-
lows Bldg., AVaterbury,

Conn. (D.C.)
J. W., Odd Fellow Bldg.,

Waterbury, Conn. (D.C.)
VURSMER, HERBERT  L.,

309 Masonic Bldg., Lima,

O. (D.C.)
WURTH, Wm. F., Kenton,

O. (D.O.)
WYATT. BEN.L F.. Kirks-

ville. Mo. (D.O.)
WYATT, S. C, Buhl, Idaho

WYCKOFP, A. B., Alton. 111.

Grace, Storv Bldg.. Los

Angeles. Cal. (D.O.)
Louis E., Story Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.O.)
WYGAL. AA^ D., 63 S. Main

St., Gloversville, N. Y.

WYIvAND, SAMUEL I., Santa

Rosa, Cal. (D.O.)
WYLTE, JOHN M., 5252

Spruce St., Philadelphia,

Pa. (DO.)
VYLY. T. E., Chicago 111.

(ND.)
"VYNHOFF,  BERNARDUS.

445 Eastern Ave.. Grand

Rapid*. Mich. (D.C.)


Y under  X
Zwicker


AlphaheLirul  Index


971


YANJ)10KS,  H.  H.,  Nolle  Bldg.,

Wooster, O. (D.O.)
YARUllOUGH, REV. GEO.,

Reeds, Mo. (S. T.)
YARMAN & YARMAN, 114-15

Mohican Bldg., Mansfield,

O. (D.a)
YARMAN, C. E., Cor. Main

and 3rd Sts., Mansfield,

O. (D.C.)
YATES, I^. C, 421 S Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (N.D.)
YATES, WILBUR S., 701 E.

31st  St.,  Los  Ang-eles,  Cal.

YEAMANS, E. D., 717 Elmor

St., St. Joseph, Mo. (S.T.)
YEARONT, VILAS J., Box 10,

Dunlap, Kans. (Ma.)
YEATER.  I.  F.,  1213  8th  Ave.,

Altoona, Pa. (D.O.)
YERG, LINLEY H., 1 Bacon

St., Glens Falls, N. Y.

YERGER & YERGER, 320

River St., Troy, N. Y.

YERKES, C. C, 1598 Gratiot

Ave., Detroit, Mich.

YOCUM, I. W., 3102 Univer-
sity  Ave., Des  Moines, la.

YODER, F. S., Meyers Cane,

Va. (D.C.)


I.iissa A., Newton, Kan.

Mary, Stuttgart, Ark.

S. B., Wauseon, O. (D.C.)
YOHANN, WM., Hartford,

Wis. (D.C.)
YOHO, J. W., 1504 W. 11th
St.,  Coffeyville,  Kan.  (S.T.)
YORK, EFFIE E., Elkan-
Gunst Bldg., San Fran-
cisco, Cal. (D.O.)
Geo. v., Miami, Fla. (D.C.)
YORKE, JOHN F., Knicker-
bocker Annex Bldg.,
New York, N. Y. (D.C.)
YOST, C. M., Pittsburg, Kan.

YOST, DR. H. S., Fairmount,

W.  Va. (M.D.)

YOUNG, A. HOWARD, 510

Commercial St., Astoria,

Ore. (D.O.)

Alfred Wheelock, Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)

C. W., Pittsburg Bldg.,

St. Paul, Minn. (D.O.)
David D., McMinnville, Ore.

Fred V.. Chatham, N. J.

H. C, 500 Flat Iron Bldg.,

Akron, O. (D.C.)
H. C, 308 Second Natl.
Bldg., Akron, O. (N.D.)


Harry, 17 S. 5th Ave, La

Grange, 111. (D.C.)
Jame.s Tilton, Fremont,

Neb. (D.O.)
John R., Goodwin Bldg.,

Beloit, Wis. (D.O.)
Luna Kerr, 11-14-15 Keller

Bldg., Columbu.s, Ind.

Mrs.  L.P.,  Holden,  Mo. (S.T.)
Simeon, Grant Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal. (D.C.)
Wallace E., 47 Richmond

Road, Cardiff, Wales.

VOUNG,  A.  LEWIS,  Box  44,

Egg  Harbor  City,  N.  J.

Jacob  P. Huntington,  Ind.

CN.D)
Jas.,  1224  Pacific  St.,  Brook-
lyn,  N. Y. (Ma.)
YOUNGQUIST, IDA  W., 42

Auditorium Bldg.,

Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
YOWELL, ELIZABETH J.,

Hamilton Natl. Bank

Bldg., Chattanooga, Tenn.

Otto Y., Hamilton Nafl

Bank Bldg., Chattanooga,

Tenn. (D.O.)
YUNG, GERTRUDE CARRO-

THERS, P. O. Bldg.,

Sanford, Me. (D.O.)


ZACHARY, B. J, Wichita

Falls, Kans. (D.C.)
ZANDEENI, HELMA, Hotel

Wahoo, Wahoo, Neb., and

Plainview, Neb. (D.C.)
ZANDER, STANLEY CLAR-
ENCE, 822 Valley Road,

Montclair, N. J. (D.C.)
ZANDER,  WM  ,  Fort  Meade,

Fla. (ND.)
ZAPEL, OTTO.  Jr., West  12  th

and South 56th Avenues,

Chicago,  111. (Ma.)
ZAPF, S. D., 4305 S. Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111. (D.O.)
ZAPHYRIADES, S. D., God-
dard Bldg., Chicago, 111.

ZEALY, A. H., Ill Chestnut

St., Goldsboro, N. C.

ZEBELLE,  REUBEN, St.

Joseph, Mich. (D.C.)
ZECHMAN, J. E., Fleming

Bldg., Des Moines, la.

J. E., 327 Good Blk., Des

Moines, la. (D.C.)
J. Hass, Fleming Blk., Des

Moines, la. (D.C.)
J. Hass, 327 Good Blk., Des

Moines, la. (D.C.)
ZECKMAN, J. C, Kansas

City, Mo. (D.C.)
ZEIGLER,  INEZ  L., 431  South

Wabash Ave., Chicago,

111. (D.O.)
ZEIGER,  ALMA  M., Zanes-

ville, O (Mag.)


Robert S., 815 Main St.,
Zanesville, O. (Mag.)

ZEITLER & ZEITLER,
Everett Bldg., James-
town,  N. Y. (D.C.)

ZELLER,  HELEN,  Fullerton,
Neb. (D.C.)

ZEMAN, OTTO, 3002 South
Central Park  Ave  ,
Chicago,  HI. (N  D.)

ZENK,  OTTO  JOHN,  Brad-
dock, Pa. (D.C.)

ZENKEL, WM. M., 14 W.

Washington St., Chicago,
111. (Ma.)

ZETTEL,  HERBERT  A.,  204
Schiffman  Bldg.,  St.  Paul,
Minn. (N.D.)

ZIEFEL,  J.  W.,  163  Clay  St.,
Morgantown,  W.  Va.

ZIEGLER,  D.  E.,  528  Wyan-
dotte St.,  Findlay,  O.

ZIFFEL,  I.,  Windham  House.
Corner  Main  and  Church
St.,  Willimantic,  Conn.

ZILLEGEN,  A.,  1103  W.
Roscoe  St.,  Chicago,  111.

ZIMMER, MORRIS, 976 Home
St., Bronx, N. Y. (M.T  )
O.  M.. 419 W.  65th  St.,
Chicago, 111. (DC.)

ZIMMERMAN,  EMMA,  533  S.
Flower  St.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal. (D.C.)


F. H.,  Colfax, la. (D.O.)

J.  C,  The  Wadsworth,  Suite

33, Portland. Me. (D.C.)
ZIMMERMANN, New London,

Conn. (D.C.)
ZINBAR, REBECCA, Ord,

Neb. (D.C.)
ZINDEL, FRANK E., 2019 N.

21st St., Philadelphia,

Pa. (D.O.)
ZINKAN, M. A., 4303 Cottage

Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.

ZINKEN, R. A., Ord, Neb.

ZINSSER,  H., 219  W.  34th  St.,

New York, N Y. (ND.)
Marg., 219 W. 34th  St., New

York N. Y. (N.D.)
ZUCK, JANET E., 512 2nd

St., Pittsburgh, Pa. (D.C.)
ZUGIR, C. C, Columbiana, O.

(D.M.T.)
ZUGLER, D. E., 528 Wvan-

dotte  St., Findlay,  O.


ZURMUHLEN, DR CHAS.,

Ludlow  Arcade, Dayton,

O. (M.D.)
ZWELBKE,  HARRY  F.,

Oconto, Wis. (D.C.)
ZWERNEMAN, GEO., 601

Pavonia Ave., Jersev

City, N. J. (D.C.)
ZWICKER, EDW., Sherrard,

111. (D.C.)
F. J., Baraboo, Wis. (D.C.)


07::  UuiverctuI  Nuturoputtilc  Directory  uud Buyeru' Guide


O-

o


JOIN  THE


American  Naturopathic  Association


Established  1896

by  BENEDICT  I.UST,  N.


Incorporated  under

Federal  and  Eighteen  State  Charters.


The  American  Naturopathic  Association  is  non-sectarian,  comprised  of  Graduates
from  Nature  Cure,  Hydrotherapy,  Diet,  Chiropractic,  Osteopathy,  Mechanotherapy,
Neuropathy,  Electrotherapy,  Mental  and  Suggestive  Therapeutics,  Phototherapy,  Helio-
therapy, Phytotherapy  and  other  rational  and  progressive  schools  of  Natural  Healing.

Definition of Naturopath}): Dietetic and Physical Therapy.
Our  members  are  free  to  think,  act  and  practice  as  the^  please.

Oldest,  most  liberal,  active  and  efllcient  international  society  of  progressive  and
rational  physicians  in  America.  Is  not  a  Dictator  or  family  affair.  Is  organized
in State Sections.  —  Each State a Federation of  Local Drugless Societies  for Itself.


Results  and  benefits  obtained: Further Aims and Objects:


Killed  167  noxious,  vicious  medical
bills  interfering  with  Drugless  Doctors'
rights  and  the  constitutional  liberties
of  the  people;

Passed  laws  for  Drugless  Doctors  in  9
states;

Drove  a  wedge  in  for  partial  recogni-
tion in  14  states;

Brought  about  better  standard  of  edu-
cation for  the  Drugless  Profession  and
Schools;

Publishes  an  official  magazine  for  20
years  on  the  advantages  of  drugless
therapy,  sane,  rational  prevention  of
disease  and  Medical  Freedom;

Educated  18  million  people  through
books,  magazines,  lyceum  lectures,
moving  pictures,  etc.;

The  only  National  Practitioners  Asso-
ciation that  has  a  membership  auxili-
ary for  the  Public  at  Large.


To  organize  all  Drugless  Societies,
Cults,  Schools,  Institutions  and  Prac-
titioners of  Natural  Healing  into  one
big  united  front  for  defence,  offence
and  actual  war,  if  necessary,  against
Medical  Monopoly  and  discrimination
against  new  Schools  of  Healing;

To  oppose  contemplated  Class  Legisla-
tion and  abolish  all  laws  of  discrimi-
nation against  Drugless  Doctors;

To  restore  Medical  Freedom  to  the
people  by  wiping  from  the  Statutes  of
the  States,  the  unconstitutional  laws
which  were  made  only  by  the  Medical
Trust  for  its  members'  benefit  only,
and  never  for  the  benefit  of  the  people;

To  raise  the  standard  of  education  of
Drugless  Practitioners  everywhere  and
maintain  an  Educational  Propaganda
for  the  public;

To  facilitate  the  establishment  of
Drugless  Schools;

To  protect  the  future  of  Natural
Healing;

To  keep  Drugless  Boards  and  regula-
tion of  Drugless  Doctors  entirely  free
from  Medical  Trust  interference.


Fill  in  the  attached  application  coupon  and  send  in  with  Initiation  Fee  and  First  Year's
Dues  and  receive  the  beautiful  membership  certificate  and  card,  constitution  and  by-laws.


Application  for  membership  in  the  AMERICAN  NATUROPATHIC  ASSOCIATION

Name Address

I Graduate  of

Systems practiced

References

T  A^^t^^ active  membership  and  enclose  Ten  Dollars  ($10.00)  for  Initiation  fee  and

1  aesire associate
J first  year's  dues.

T AMERICAN  NATUROPATHIC  ASSOCIATION,  110  B.  41»t  St.,  NBIiV  YORK,  N.Y.,  IT.  S.  A.


Geographical  Index


973


GENERAL  DIRECTORY


OF


DRUGLESS  PHYSICIANS
GEOGRAPHICALLY


-ARRANGED


OWING  to  the  difficulty  of  communication  during  the  present  war,  it  has
been  impossible  to  compile  a  complete  list  of  the  many  practitioners  in
foreign  countries,  with  the  exception  of  the  British  Isles  and  possessions.
In  this  geographical  arrangement,  practitioners  are  listed  according  to  country,
state  and  town,  or  city.  The  method,  or  system,  of  therapeutics  practiced  by
the  individual  is  indicated  by  the  initials  following  the  name  or  address,  such
as  N.  D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C,  etc.,  a  key  to  which  abbreviations  is  herewith  given.


KEY  TO  ABBREVIATIONS


A.  =


A.M. A.

A.N.A.

As.

B.

Ch.  =

Cr.
D.

D.C.=


D.D.

D.M.T.


D.O.


D.P.T.
D.S.T.


E.
E.H.  =


El.


F.

H.
He.

Her.  =


Apyrtropher,  — Apyr-
trophy, Unfired Food.
Apyrtrophic Agriculture
and Horticulture. Rais-
ing and  perfecting  phys-
ioiogical, natural foods.
Member  American  Med-
ical Association
Member  American Nat-
uropathic Association
Astroscopy — Astro-
medical Diagnosis
Biochemist — Tissue
Salts, Spagyretic Ther-
apy.

Chiropodist  —  Chiro-
pody —  Treating  feet
by  hand

Christian  Science  Prac-
titioner

Drugless  doctor  using
any  single  or  several
naturopathic  or  drugless
methods

Chiropractor.  Chiro-

practic as  defined  by  its
founder  and  taught  and
practised  by  the  recog-
nized schools

=  Doctor  of  Divinity
Mechano  -  Therapist  —
Mechano-Therapy — Na-
tural Healing.  Using  all
mechanical  and  manual
methods.  Dietetic  and
Physiological Therapy.

=  Osteopath  —  practising
Osteopathy as taught

by the standard schools
of  Osteopathy
Physio Therapy
Doctor of Suggestive
Therapeutics. Psycho-
therapy

=  Eclectic — Eclecticism

■■  Electro  -  Homeopathist
— Electro-Homeopathy

=  Electro  -  Therapist  —
Electro-Therapy  in  all
its  branches,  incliiding
X-Ray  work  and  Radio-
Therapy

:  Doctor  of  food  science,
or  Dietician.  Natural
Alimentation

=  Homeopath  —  Homeo-
pathy

=  Health  Director,  Teach-
er  of Natural Life and
Prevention of  Disease
Herbalist, Botanic  Sys-
tem,  or  Phytotherapy


OF  PROFESSIONAL
Hi.  =  Heliotherapist,  sunlight
and  air  cure ;  Photo-
therapy, colored  light
cure,  or  Chromopathy
Hy.  =  Hydropath  —  Water
and  Nature  Curist.  Hy-
dropathy of  all  kinds.
Water  Cure  Systems.
Balneotherapy  and  Drug-
less Physiological  Me-
thods

Hyg.  =  Hygiotherapist  ■ —  Hy-
giotherapy

Hyp.  =  Hypnotism,  Psychother-
apy and Suggestive
Therapeutics
I.  =  Iridologist — Iridology
—  Science  of  the Diag-
nosis of Diseases from
the  Eye
I.M.F.A.  =  International Medical
Freedom  Association
L.  =  Life  Conservationist  and
Physiological Engineer
Ma.  =  Masseur, Masseuse,

Swedish  Movements,

Massotherapy ;  medical,
resistive,  corrective  and
orthopaedic  gymnastics.
Vibration  Therapy.  Mas-
teropathy

Mag.  =  Magnetopath  —  Magnet-
opathy  —  Science  of
Curing  Disease  by  Life
Magnetism

M.D.  =  Regular  Physician,  us-
ing natural,  drugless
methods,  and  medicines
to  a  limited  extent
Me.  =  Mental  Science,  Mental
Healing,  and  New
Thought.  Metaphysist.
Psychology,  Science  of
God,  Freedom  and  Im-
mortality
N.  =  Neuropath,  practising
Neuropathy  according  to
the  established  schools
of  Neuropathy

Nap.  =  Naprapath,  practising
Naprapathy  as  defined
by  its  discoverer  and
taught  by  the  College
of  Naprapathy.  Con-
nectivology, Chartology

N.D.  =  Naturopath,  or  Nature
Cure  Physician,  using
one,  several  or  all  ra-
tional, dietetic,  physio-
logical, mental  and  spir-
itual methods  of  pre-
venting and curing hu-


DESIGNATIONS

man  ailments.  —  Nat-
uropathy :  the  science  of
natural  healing,  and  art
of  natural  and  efficient
living.  Life  Conserva-
tion, Life  Extension,
Sacredness  of  Life.  Edu-
cation and  Eugenics
based  on  Natural  and
divine  laws
Ne.  =  Neurologist  —  Neu-
rology is  the  science
which  treats  of  the
nervous  system.  This
science  is  for  the  anal-
ysis of  the  causes  of
human  ills  and  provides
how  to  abolish  them
without  drugs  or  oper-
ations

Oph.  =  Ophthalmologist —  Oph-
thalmology is  the  science
of  the  eyes,  their  defects
and  the  relation  of
those  defects,  as  causa-
tive factors  to  human
ills.  Errors  of  refrac-
tion discovered  without
"drops."  Cross  eyes
straightened  without

Operation

Opt.  =  Optometrist.  Optics.

Optometry, the Drug-
less System of Eye
Cure
Or.S.  =  Orificial Surgery

P.  =  Physical  Culture^  Phys-
ical Training.  Physi-
cultopathy,  Autolo'gv.
Autotherapy.  Physian-
tropy.

P.E.  =  Physiological Engineer.
Ph.  =  Phrenologist. Character
Delineation and Voca-
tional  Guidance

P.M.  =  Physiomedic
Pn.  =  Pneumotherapist  —

Pneumotherapy :  Science
of  correct  and rhythmic
breathing. Vogi : At-
mospheric cure
R-  =  Regular Physician and

Surgeon. Allopathy
S.  =  Spiritual and Divine
Healing
Sa.  =  Sarcognomy
So.  =  Somopathy. Body Suf-
fering. Improvement  on
Osteopathy
Sp.  =  Spondylotherapy

Tal.  =  Talosophy, the art of
making happiness


974


Geographical  Index


Alabama
Arkansas


UNITED  STATES


ALABAMA

AnnLston: Sasvil. EM (DO-)
Biriiiiii»(l»ti"< Boath, E., JO^l
H. Ave. (D.O.)
Cecil, D. L., 2426 5th Ave.

CeS', M. M., 2426 5th Ave.

piSil^Jas.  R.,  809-10  Farley

Bldgr. (D.O.)
Dean. Walter K 808-10

Farley Bldg. (D.C.)
Johnson. W. A., 413 22n(l

wfuiamsJn. A. M. 400-16
Farley Bldg. (D-O

Woodall, Percy H.. Fust
Natl. Bank Bldg.  ,  (D.O.)
Long  Island.  Standish,  Marga-
ret A. (N.D.)
Mobile.  Andrews. D. C (D.CJ

I^ieron. Ellen L. ^••^*'*"
ipHng Hill Ave. (D.O.)

AVhite. M., Patterson Bldg.

Montgomery, Baird Minerva,
105 Sayre  St. (D.O.)
Bennett, T. L- First Natl.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Brincon, M. M., 1224 S.

Court St. (D.O.)

Purdue Hill: Hybart, Nora

Chapman. (DO-) , -r.

Robertsdale. J^'^^'^A.^' ^■

Mills. Maud S. (DO.)
Tuscaloosa. Kennedy. t±. f.
(D.O.)  ^,  _ ^

West  Brockton. Glover,  J. *^

Glover, Frank. (D.O.)
Glover. Tom. (D.C.)


ARKANSAS

Argenta. Gregory, W. E.

Vogels'Miss Mary. (S.T.)
Bentonville. Burfleld. M. A.
(ST)

Higginbotham,  M.  W. (D.O.)

Morman. P. E. (D.O.)
Booneville.  Amos. J. H. (D.O.)

Amos. Jno. H. (D.O.)

Reed. W. D. (D.C.)
Burnsville. Hannah. Albert.

Stansfleld, Meda L. (D.O.)
Casville: Browning. H. C.

(ST)
Chariest  own:  Gallaher.  Ernest

Clarksville. Booner, Jas.
Tawne, Letitie. (D.O.)
Clyde: David. T. Henry.

(DO)
Corning: Barrnette. Amy.

Datto:'  Welsh,  Hugh S. (S.T.)
Delton: Vandergrift. J. R

ne Queene: Roberts, Chas.

l^ldorado: Endicott. S. J-

Elkinst Waits.  John  F. (S.T.)
Rureka Springs: Allen. E.
Allen, Thos. J. (N. D.)
Bracon, Jos. W.. 4 Douglas

St. (D.O.)
Jackson, R. S. (D.O.)


Morgan. J. D.. 31 Steele St.

Paul.  J. W. (D.O.)
Jackson. R. U. (D.O.)
Falrplay: Wilmuth, J. H.

Payetteville: Chorne. Prof.
C. A. (S.T.)
McAllister. Byron F.. 225

N. Block St. (D.O.)
Miller. May. (D.O.)
Sawrey. D. S. (S.T.)
Wheeler, Harold E., R. 4.
Fiippiii: Floppin, Oscar.

Ft. Smith: Ecker, Dr. A., 20
N. 6th St. (D.O.)
Edmondson. F. P. (D.O.)
Farris. W. B., Merchants'

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Fisher. Capt. Noah. (S.T.)
Fouts. Dr. (D.O.)
Gosnell. Frank  I. (D.C.)
Hamilton. R. J. (D.O.)
Stout, Elmore S., 408 Ken-
nedy Bldg. (D.C.)
Stout, Stella M.. 408 Ken-
nedy Bldg. (D.C.)
Wright, S. J. (D.O.)
Yoder. Elizabeth. (D.O.)
Gravette: Jacobs. C. W.

Green-»vood: Dunn. Raymond.
Fitzgerald. Bess. (D.C.)
Gallaher, Harry. (D.C.)
Redwine. Mrs. D. C. (D.O.)
Hubbard. J. C. (D.C.)
Stockton. Dr. (D.C.)
Warriner, Owen C. (D.C.)
Yarborough. Isie. (D.O.)
Hachett: Evans. Marshall
Fitzgerald, Jno. (D.C.)
Harrison. Akers.  L. F. (D.O.)
Hartford: Gilliman, J. R.
Gilliam. .T. P. (D.C.)
Hart. Sidney. (D.C.)
Havana: Winsett,  J.  C. (D.O.)
Helena: Bell, L. J.. Solomon

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hockett: Roberts. J. T.

Hope: Champlin, Chas. A..
118 W. Ave. B. (D.O.)
Champlin. Etta E.. 404 S.

Elm St. (D.O.)
Webb. W. S. (D.O.)
Hot Springs: Berrow. A. W..
510 Central Ave. (D.O.)
Bishopp. I. F.. Alhambra

Baths. (D.O.)
Brown. (D.O.)
Bryce. H. P. (D.C.)
Cuminings, L.. Ark.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Ferguson. H. D.. Imperial

Baths. (D.O.)
Frisk. F..  Hale  Bath.
Hallman, Dr. V. H.
Hanmans, S. .1., 410

ington St. (D.O.)
Helwing. Chas. J..

Northern Baths. (D.O.)
Krueger. L. M. (D.O.)
Krueger. S. T. (D.O.)
Lewis, R. J.. Moody Hotel

Baths. (D.O.)
Oden. A. F. B.. Majestic

Hotel. (D.O.)
Smyres, Ella  D. (D.O.)
Thirman.  W. R.. 710  Central
Ave. (D.O.)


Damas  Baths.


Tvvyford, H. H.. 910 W.
Grand Ave. (D.O.)

Van  Passen,  Barbara,  Buck-
stoff Baths. (D.O.)

Wellman. P. M. (D.O.)

West. Mrs. D. G., 340 Qua-
chita Ave. (S.T.)

Westly. M.. Woody Hotel.

Whittle,

Williams, I. A.,

Williams, (N.D  )
St. (D.O.)

Willman. P. M., Buckstoff
Baths. (D.O.)

Wilson. C. C. (D.O.)

Wisley, M.. Moody
Baths. (D.O.)

Zimmermann. A. F., Rock-
feller Baths. (D.O.)

Zimmermann, T. C, Rock-
feller Baths. (D.O.)
Jonesboro: Hofner, L,.

Hollenbeck. M. L.
Kingdom Springs:

Minnie. (S.T.)
Lincoln. Sallee. J. H. (S.T.)
l-ittle Rock: Barron. (D.O.)

Carder. B. E. (D.O.)

Cummins. (D.O.)

Dodson. Charles Augustus.
Natl. Bank Bldg.


101 Court


Hotel


S.


Linton.


State

Everitt.
Bldg.

Felsner.


Nafl


Whit-
Great


E. C. State Bank
(DO.)
Gus. (S.T.)
Gallaher. Harry. 2401 Scott

St. (D.C.)
Green, A. H. (D.O.)
Gregory. Dr.  W.  E.. 1216  W.

4th St. (D.O.)
Gregory. W. E.. 716 Louisi-
ana St. (N.D.)
Harper, Mrs. F. M., 512

B'way. (S.T.)
Hill, Dr. (N.D.)
Hill, L. M. (D.O.)
Hilton. D. A. (D.C.)
Johnston, J. Ford, 2401

Scott St. (D.C.)
Johnston, Ula, 2401 Scott

St. (D.C.)
Jones, N. D. (D.O.)
Koehler, Mrs. E., 1320 L. S.

St (S  T  )
Lellers. W. W. (D.O.)
Lyman. Laura. (D.O.)
Nast. M. (D.O.)
Prather. Mrs. Mattie. (S.T.)
Rogers. E. E. (D.O.)
Skinner, S. Stanley. 33nS

Marshall  St.  (D.O.)
Spinner,  L.  L.  (D.O.)
Stockton, Mrs. W. C. 217

E. 10th  St. (S.T.)
Webb. William S.. 210

Masonic Temple. (D.C.)
Lockesburg: Aldersan. J. J.

Marked Tree: McMainnis. yv.

M. (D.O.)
Magazine: Guy. Ed. (D.C.)

Troy. W. H. (D.O.)
Mansfield: Warriner. O. C.

Mnrilton: Booner. Jas. (D.C.)
Marianpa: Gregory, W. E.,

113 Poplar  St. (D.C.)
Markley, H. H. (D.O.)
Mena: Harwell. W. A.. R.

No. 1. (S.T.)
Hilton. D. A., Box 103.

Lyman.  Laura  B. (D.O.)


A  rizoiia
California


(ieographical  Index


975


Whitsan, James C. M.. 1219
Church  Ave. (D.O.)
Midlnnil! Evans, Marshall O.
Evans, Oscar. (D.C.)
Monticello: Kimbro, W. C.
Wrig-ht, Dr. .T. F. (S.T.)
Montrose: .Tones, Madison,

Box 94. (D.O.)
Mountain Home: Blanchat,

August. (D.C.)
Murelln: Reoes. M. C. (D.O.)
Oznrk! Gosnell, F. I. (D.O.)
Huckleberry, J. A. (D.O.)
Wood, A. M. (D.C.)
Wood, A. W. (D.C.)
PnrnKould: Glurley, J. T.

Paris: Big-gs, Thos. (D.O.)
Ihle, Ben. (D.C.)
Norman, Dr. (D.C.)
Peel: Treadway, Porter.

Pine BliitT: Martin. H. E
Higginbotham, Lillian G.,

307 W. 6th Ave. (D.O.)
Sellars, A. H., Citizens'

Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
Sellars, P. (D.O.)
Rogers: Doblins, Chlora.
Jacobs, C. W. (D.O.)
Russelville: Callis, G. T.
Gillam, Jim. (D.C.)
St.  Joe: McNabb,  C.  M. (D.C.)
Slloani  Springs:  Jfohnson,  J.

Ford. D.C.)
Silvan Springs: .Johnston, J.
Ford. (D.C, D.O.)
Phillips, C. G. (D.C.)
Springclale: Bird, L. I. (D.O.)
St.  Paul:  Brainard,  Anna.

Stuttgart: Roth, Anna. (D.C.)
Yoder. K. C. (D.O.)
Yoder, Mary. (D.C.)
Sulpliur Spring.s: Ro\vlev &

Rowley. (D.C.)
Texarkana: Carter, J. G.
Falkner, J. (D.O.)
Mathis, R. E. (D.O.)
Mathews, (N.D.)
A'andale: Palmer, W. H.

Village: Timmons, Ernest.

AValdron: Hannah, A. W.

AVarren: Fowler, Rebecca.

AVilliford: Nasson, L. D.


ARIZONA

Aqua Caliente: Smith, W. H.
Agnew, E. I., Brophy Bldg.

Collins, Paul R., Meguire
Bldg-. (D.O.)
Dougla.«i: Calvin, Emma.

Mesa: Allan & Allan, Drs.
Stoner, A. B., Chandler
Court. (D.O.)
Miami:  Reznikov,  Anna,

Sullivan St. (D.O.)
Phoenix: Bacon, Jeanette.
Bradbury, Charles C, 117
W. Monroe St. (D.O.)


Brooks, Elizabeth, 757 E.

Adams St. (D.C.)
Brown, I.. M. (D.O.)
Conner,  D.  T.,.,  Natl.  Bank  of

Arizona Bldg. (D.O.)
Glaze, R. (D.O.)
Haven & Haven, Drs., Box

llfi. (D.C.)
Hess,  Harriet  T>. (D.C.)
Hess, A. Norina, 702 N. 2nd

St. (D.C.)
Stone, J. M.,  Box  93.5. (D.C,

D.O.)
Wahlenmaier & Wahlen-

maier,  Drs., 381  N.  Second

Ave., (D.O., D.C.)
Messcinger, J. A., 212 East

Adams St. (N.D.)
S'rescott: Shornick, Harry L.,

Union Block. (D.O.)
Saflford: McGowan, Fred H.

Snowlake:  Smith, Hiram.

(D.C, D.O.)
'i'eupe: Helfrich, R. E. (D.O.,

D.C.)
Tucson: Martin, Geo. AV.,

104  N.  Stone  Ave. (D.O.)
Vuma: Mulrony, W. J., 341

2nd St. (D.O.)


CALIFORNIA

\lameda: Elgarten, M., 2313
Alameda Ave. (N.D.)
Porter, Georg-e E. (D.C.)
Smith, Gertrude E., 1438

Lafayette St. (D.O.)
Stevens,  Allen  C,  1361  Park

St. (D.O.)
Thompson, Clyde L., Citi-
zens' Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
VllLimbra: Child, B. W., 1705
Cedar  St. (N.D.)
Duey,  W.  P.,  624  N.  Electric

Ave. (D.C.)
Ehret,  A.,  413  S.  Raymond

Ave. (N.D.)
Paddis, Council E., 305 W.

Main St. (D.O.)
Harris, AV. A., Ill S. Curtis

St. (N.D.)
Waring-, G. P. (D.C.)
Woodhull, Frederick W.,
101 S. Fifth St. (D.O.)
Vnnheim: Deming, Lee C,
Box 154. (D.O.)
Nation,  John  D. S. (D.C.)
Thompson, A. M. (D.C.)
Vrbuekle: Harlan, Wm. F.

Italdwin Park: McNamara,

R. E. (D.C.)
3akersfleld: Alders, Eliot,
310 King-sley Drive.
Cramer, Myrtle A., Pro-
ducers Savings Bank
Bldg-. (D.O.)
Hanson, H. L., 629 16th St.


i'raciilioners  are  reqiiexled  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
liscrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
■•hange  of  address  in  the  course
■if  printing.  Rectification  will
'»(• made in subsequent issues


Moore, L. M., 631 16th St.
Barn>%-ell: Gaylord .1. S.

Beaumont: Allen, Wm. G.,

Box  13. (D.O.)
Berkeley: Barmby, Martha,
Alta Vista Apts. (D.O.)
Dole, Emily C, Alta Vista

Apts. (D.O.)
Donahue, J. E., Berkeley

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Fergusson, E. Bertella,
2503 Channing Way.
Hain, Grace Estella, 2251

Teleg-raph Ave. (D.O.)
Henderson, .Tos. W., First
Natl. Bank Bldg-. (D.O.,
M.D.)
Ives, Wm. Horace, First

Natl. Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Jewett, Josephine A., Ache-
son Bldg. (D.O.)
Penland, Hugh E., Berke-
ley Natl. Bank Bldg.
Sellars, D. Frances, Berke-
ley Natl. Bank Bldg.
(D.O.)  ^

Bishop: Hill, J. J. (D.C.)
Bridgeport: Smith, F. B.

Buena Park: Kay, Mrs. Ed-
wina. (D.C.)
King, Mrs., Dr. (D.C.)
Calexico: Weed,  Dana  L

Grand Island, Colusa Co.:
Saxton, Ella I., Hillsdale
Ranch. (D.C.)
Chioo: Allen, Nellis A. (D.O  )
Lobdell, W. Harriett, 303
W. 5th St. (D.C.)
(■hula Vista: Perry, David C


Claremont:


Hoagland,


Colorado: Pliillips, Albert C,
306 S. Wabsatch Ave.
Colton: Ludden, Ravmond,
541  N. Eighth St rD.O.)
Calvert, Cora. (D.C.)
Coronado: Bergren, Tell, 624

Glorietta Blvd. (N.D.)
{'ovina: Fingerle. Charle.s,
First Natl. Bank Bldg.
Hepner. ,T. Q. CD. CI
Overholtzer, B. J. (D.O
Overholzer, D. .T. (DC')
Thompson, O. A. (D.C)


Clark, Chas. E.
Lydia Ellen.


Thompson,  Mrs. O.  A. (D.C  >
Thompson & Thompson,
Dis. (D.C.)
Craftonville: Pearson, B. H.

Denair: Fulton. W. F. (D.C)
Fulton, Margaret E. (D.C.)
Oo-wney:  Thompson  &  Thomp-
son,  Drs. (D.C.)
El Centro: Atwood. H. C,
National Bank Bldg.
Letson. Sam'l B. (D.C.)
Clmhur.st: Loban, Miss Elsie.
1516 Michigan  Ave. (D.C.)
ICIsinore: Gotham, Thomas

Barry. (D.O.)
Encanto: Munro, R. P. (D.C  )

Carrollton, E. D. (D.C.)
li^soondido: Phelps, Fannie .J
First Natl. Bank Bldg!
Eureka: Chandler, A. B., 33
Gross Bldg. (D.C.)
Chandler, VTm. B., 11-1'^-13
Gross Bldg. (D.C.)


976


Geographical  Index


Califurnia


DeShazer. J. D,, Carson

Bide. (D.O.)
Shaw, John. (D.C.)

Fresno: Aaronson, Philip V.,

Rowell Bldg. (D.O.)
Crowlev. W. H.. 141-42

Forsyth Bldg. (D.C.)
Eddv, Chas. E.. 137-38

Edgerly Bldp. ((D.C.)
Hackney, J. E.. R. R. 7,

Box 2. 'SO. (DC.)
Porter, Geo.. 137-38 Edger-

Iv Bldg:. (D.C.)
PuiErh. Sarah Frances, For-

svthe Bldg-. (D.O.)
Wallace, Tva Still, Rowell

Bldg:. (DO.)
Williams, Robt. K.. 303-9

Edgrerly Bldg. (D.C.)
Frultvale: Utterback, Geo.

FuUerton: Goodwin, I. I...

McMullen,  Walter  M.,  229  E.

Commonwealth St. (D.O.)

Oarileiia: Watson, T. Oren,

Glentlale:  Arbuthnot,  R.

Elsie, 334 N. Maryland

Ave. (D.C.)
Archer, E. F., 415* Brand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Downs, Albert Victor.

Eckles, J. E. (D.C.)
Hooeland, W. P. (D.O.)
Nelson, M. N., 9th and

Adams St. (D.O.)
Stow, Ella K., 201 S. Ken-
wood St. (D.O.)
Sudden, Raymond, 345 S.

Orange St. (D.O.)

Grand  Island:  Saxton, Ella  F.,

HilLsdale Ranch. (DC.)
Oranffoville; McCarthy, J. P.

Hanford: Baker, C. W. (S.T.)
Bales, Grace M., 210i N.

7:)oiitv St. (D.O.)
Edwards, H.  AV., 109  W. 8th
St. <D.O.)

Hemet: Sprague,  B. R. (D.O.)
Hermosa Beach: Treat, Clara
Leila, Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

HollyATood: Farmer, G. C.

1815  Morgan  Place. (D.O.)
Haight, L. Diidlow, 5600

Hollvwood Bldg. (D.O.)
Lynd,  N.  D.,  6058  Hollywood

Bldg. (D.O.)
Mav, Gladys E., 2050

Roberts Ave. (D.C.)
Perkins, Vera, 509 N. Alex.

Ave. (D.O.)
Stevens, E. S., 1964 N.

Bronson St. (D.C.)
Webb, Edith M.. 6846 Sun-
set Blvd. (D.C.)
Holtvillc! Forrester, .1. I.


Hot Sprlnpcs: Riede, D. W.

Huntlnffton  Park:  Reece,  Wm.

R. (N.D.)

Indio: Finsley, C. R. (D.C.)
Finsley, Minnie L. (D.C.)
Inglewood: Van Gelder, J. B.

Lakeport: Campbell, Agnes.
(DC.)
Campbell, D. L. (D.C.)

Lincoln: Jefferson, Alpha A.,


Long
Bldg.

Lin-


S., 452 W.
., Berkeley


221 Pacific
221


First


Babcock, W. P.


lions' Beach; Aaders, H. J.,

Moody  Blk.  (D.C.)
Christensen, E. W.,

Beach Natl. Bank

Edwards, H. W., 123

den Ave. (D.C.)
Greena, C. D., First Natl.

Bank  Bldg.  (D.C.)
Greenlee, W. D., 235 E. 5th

St. (D.C.)
Hamilton, Hubner W., 543

Pacific Ave. (D.C.)
Hamilton & Hamilton, 237

Magnolia Ave. (D.C.)
Hamilton, Mable, 543 Paci-
fic  Ave. (D.C.)
Holmstrom, C. 213 First

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Howard, Ella  C, 341 Pacific

Ave. (D.C.)
Hoy, Jas., 224 E. 6th St.

Jordan, George. (D.C.)
Larch,  M.  M.,  212  Daisy  Ave.

I..ovell, Judson C, First

Natl. Bank Bldg. (N.D.)
Lovell, Judson T., Pacific

Ave. (D.C.)
Madlin,  M.  G., 644  Pine  Ave.

Medlin, M. G., 411 Opera

Blk. (D.C.)
Maloney, Chas. H. (D.C.)
Maloney, H. C, 227-8 First

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Maloney, Mrs. H. C, 227-8

First Natl. Bank Bldg.

Maloney & Maloney, 227-8

First Natl. Bank Bldg.

Pike, Arthur E., 221 W. 4th

St. (D.O.)
Policy, Mabel A., Long

Beach Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Porter, Charles Sanford.

Powers, J. D., 1021 Olive  St.

Pyle, Dr. Henry G., 537 E.

Ocean  Ave.  (D.C.)
Rcarden, Anna, Locust  Ave.

Richardson, H

7th St. (D.O.)  i

Straver, W. A

Hotel. (D.C.)
Tinsley, C. R.,

Ave. (D.C.)
Tinsley, Minnie I.,.,

Pacific  Ave.  (D.C.)
Waters, O., 603 First Natl

Bank  Bldg.  (D.C.)
Wendel,  Wm.  (M.D.)
Verden, C. W., 422

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Vogt,  H.  C,  49  Ocean  Place

TiOnK'mont

liO.s AnRolcs: Abbott, George

B., 301  Cons. Realty  BMg.

Abbott,  Hester  L.,  Union  Oil

Bldg. (D.O.)
Adams, J. Lester, Audito-
rium Bldg. (D.O.)
Ankers,  F.  L.,  2019  S.  Grand

Ave. (D.C.)
Armond,  R.  E. (D.C.)
Artelt, Fred., 535 Security

Bldg., (N.D.)
Artelt, Fred, 240 S. Grand

Ave. (D.C.)
Atkins, J. D.. Exchange

Bldg. (D.C.)
Bailey, Albert  N., 1116 San-

trus St. (N.D.)


Bailey,  Edw.  P.,  c/o  Bimini
Baths. (D.C.)

Balfe,  Elinor  M.,  Mason
Bldg. (D.O.)

Balfe,  Susan,  Mason  Bldg.

Bartosh,  Wm.,  1421  E.  49th
St. (D.O.)

Bastrys,  M.  A.,  1071  Euclid
Ave. (D.O.)

Bates,  Ivcnore  K.,  Box  102
Hollywood Sta. (D.O.)

Bauer,  Paul,  1139  W.  7th
St. (D.O.)

Beaman.  K.  W.,  1437  "W.
35th Place. (D.C.)

Beckwith.  Hernion  E.,  Fe-
guson Bldg. (D.O.)

Beggis,  Jas.  H.,  1026  W.
35th St. (D.C.)

Bentley,  Wm.  A.,  3493  Eagle
St. (D.C.)

Bercander,  A.,  219  Fay
Bldg. (D.O.)

Berti, W. J. (D.C.)

Birdi,  F.  C,  1319  S.  Grand
Ave. (N.D.)

Bischoff,  Emil,  943  N.  12th
St. (D.O.)

Bliss,  Asa  Potter,  Mer-
chants' Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.

Bliss,  Peral  Auman,  Mer-
chants' Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.

Bohrenberg,  D.,  455  S.
B'way. (D.O.)

Bourgerjon,  Leon,  1847  W.
Pico St. (D.C.)

Brandenberg,  A.  L.,  Room
2, Mercantile PI. (D.C.)

Brasington,  J.  D.,  228  Eagle
Rock Ave. (D.C.)

Brevel,  Mrs.  M.  J.,  403
Hamburger Bldg. (D.C.)

Briggle,  Mrs.  A.  C. (D.C.)

Brigham,  W.  Curtis,  Fer-
guson Bldg. (D.O.)

Brook,  Harry  B.,  2129  Else-
wire Ave. (D.O.)

Blown, Allen M., 315
Columbia Trust Bldg.

Bruner.  Agnes,  3655  Adir
St. (D.C.)

Bryant,  Delia,  403  Ham-
burger Bldg. (D.C.)

Bryant,  Delia  D.,  514  S.
Figueroa St. (D.C.)

Buell,  Mrs.  M.  J.,  403  Ham-
burger  Bldg. (D.C.)

Bullis,  B.  L. (DO.)

Bullis.  E.  S.,  812  Green  Ave.

Burns,  Marion  L,  Baker-
Detwiler Bldg. (D.O.)

Burton,  Geo.  F.,  Story  Bldg.

Cale,  Chas.  A.,  1012  W.  Puo
St. (D.O.)

Cale,  Mis.  Linnie  A.,  931  S.
Hill St. (D.C.)

California  Chiropractic  Col-
lege, 2301  S.  Hope  St.

Cambcll,  V.  A.,  1101  Marsh-
Strong Bldg. (D.C.)

Campton,  Wm.  B.,  615  Cor-
dova St. (D.C.)

Cannard,  Wm.  M.,  1279
Bellevue Ave. (D.C.)

Carey,  W..  P.  O.  Box  293.

Carman,  Harriet,  529  Patton
St. (D.C.)

Carque,  Otto,  1605  Magnolia
Ave, (N.D.)

Caspary,  F.,  1403  Santee  St.


California


Geucjrdphicul  Index


\)11


Chaffee, Alice B., Holling-

worth Bldg. (D.O.)
Chamberlain. F. E., 114 E.

4th St. (D.O.)
Chan, G. S.. 913 S. B'way.

Chandler, I.ouis C, 321 S.

Hill  St. (D.O.)
Charlcville, Jos., 401 Ham-

burpTcr Bldg-. (D.C.)
Cheney, Henry S., 1507 S.

Fig-ueroa  St. (D.O.)
Classon, Carl A., Hotel

Watson. (D.C.)
Clark, Anna Stow, Audito-
Bldg-. (D.O.)
Frank C, Audito-
Bldg. (D.O.)
Olive, 805 W. Pico


51 S.


1546 N.
509 S.


506
Bldgr.


rium
Clark,

riuni
Clarke,

St. (D.O.)
Coffey, Eva Kate,

Grand Ave. (D.O.)
Coldwells,  Joseph  A.,  Homer

Laug-hlin Bldg-. (D.O.)
Cole,  Grace  T., 1301  W. 25th

St. (D.C.)
Coleman,  Will  H.,  1231  West

8th St (N.D.)
Coleman, Will H.,

7th St. (D.O.)
Compton, Jas. P.,

Olive St. (D.C.)
Compton, Wm. B., 615 Cor

dova  St. (D.C.)
Cook, Frederick

Majestic Theat

Corby, Marie Mag-ill, 1006

W. Lake  Avenue. (D.O.)
Cornwall, Charles Addison,

423 S. Spring- St. (D.C.)
Corwin, G. P., 2665 Sulphur

St. (D.C.)
Crane, F. L., 725 W. 23rd

St. (M.D.)
Crane, P. L.. 2316* S. Union

Ave. (D.C.)
Crist, General G., 406 I. W.

Hellman  Bldg. (D.C.)
Crow,  Louise P., 5311 Monte

Vista St. (D.O.)
Cunningham, P.  Lewis,  Fer-
guson  Bldg. (D.O.)
Damon, W. H., 1029 W.

22nd St. (D.C.)
Darvau, D. (D.C.)
Davis, 4724 Figueroa Ave.

Davis.  A.  P.,  154  W.  23rd  St.

Davis, Mrs. Callie, 154 W.

23rd St. (D.C.)
Davis.  E.,  120  S.  Grand  Ave.

Davis College of Neuro-
pathy, 154 AV. 23rd St.

DeArmond. R. E.. 230 S.

Soto St. (D.C.)
Deeks, J. H., 529 California

St. (D.C.)
Dekker. B. M.. -15  6 Jeffer-
son St. ((D.C.)
DeLendrecie, Helen,

S. Kingsley Drive. __ _
Denny, \j. L., 008 Broadway

Central Bldg. (D.C.)
DeVaug-her. Thos. J., Box

332. (D.C.)
Devore, E. Burnsie, 202 W.

Ave. 52. (D.C.)
Dickson, N. E., 338 Securitv

Bldg. (D.C.)
Dill. Emma  B., Mason Bldg.

Dilley, A. E.. 005 S. Grand

Ave. (D.O.)
Donald, Donovan. 917 Van

Nuys  Bldg-. (D.C.)
Dorosh. P. ,T.. 533 Security

Bldg. (D.C.)


695-97


Dorsey, Anna E., 150 W.

33rd St. (D.C.)
Draser, Andrew, 233 W.

Jefferson Ave. (D.C.)
Dresser, Walter P., Temple

Auditorium. (D.O.)
Driskee, Geo. W. (D.C.)
Earl, J. C, 201 Pontajes

Theatre. (D.C.)
Easton. Miss May Blanche,

436 W. 30th St. (D.C.)
Eddon, Elizabeth M., Storv

Bldg. (D.O.)
Edmiston,  S.  Cameron.

Washington Bldg. (D.O.)
Edwards. L. R., 255 Kings-
ley Drive. (D.O.)
Edward, L. R., 410  Bumiller

Bldg. (D.C.)
Elble, H. A., 609 Title

Guaranty  Bldg. (D.O.)
Electro Surgical Appliance

Co., 411  S. Main St. (D.O.)
Ellison, Elward, 128 E. 35th

St. (D.O.)
Elwood, Marv A., 346 W.

47th Place.  ^  (D.C.)
Emery. R. D., Baker-Det-

wiler Bldg-. (D.O.)
Engel, Edward, 403 Ham-

burgrer Bldg. (D.C.)
Erickson, Miss Emma, 316J

W. 2nd  St. (D.C.)
Ervin.  Chas.  H.,  Grant  Bldg:.

Farnsworth, John, 637

Chamber of Commerce  |

Bldg. (D.C.)
Fellrath, Basil. (D.C.)  I

Fenner, Harold A., 321 S.

Hill St. (D.O.)
Flaws. Robert. 448 Ridge

Way. (D.C.)
Flamholtz. Isaac M., 509

Rumiller Bldg. (N.D.)
Foote.  Arthur  M.,  509 Brad-
bury  Bldg-. (D.C.)
Forbes. H. W.. 318 Clay St.

Foster. Mrs. R. A. Mollie,

Foy. Harry L.. 674 Hellman

Bldg. (D.C.)
Frank. L. W^ilson, 423 Ex-
change Bldg-. (D.C.)
Freeman. Miss  Ada  Mav  Le,

702 S. Spring  St. (D.Ci.)
French, J. A., 1127 W. 18th

St. (D.C.)
Furst. O. J.. 1335 W. 37th

Place. (D.C.)
Garcia,  Alberto  E. (D.C.)
Garrison. G., 314 "W. 4th St.

Gedge, Edna. 2714 Norman-
die Ave. (D.C.)
German Remedy Co., 224

San Fernando Bldg.

Gernhardt. J. F., 720 E.

Adams St. (D.O.)
Gilkerson, J. E., 403 Ham-
burger Bldg. (DC.)
Gilkerson, J. K., 1101

IMarsh-Strong Bldg.
Gilkerson,  J.  K.,  Marsh-
Strong Bldg. (D.C.)

Gillingham, W. P., 11th St.

and Central Ave. (D.C.)
Glendale Sanitorium. 424

S. Broadwav. (D.O.)
Goff, E., 533 Blod Ave.

(DO.)
Goodfellow, "W. V., Fergu-
son Bldg. (D.O.)
Graham. H. C, 2146 Duane

St. (D.C.)
Gressman,  L., 1012 S. Grand

Ave. (D.O.)


Greth, Aug., 740 W. 7th St.

Gross, H., 1257 S. Hoover

St. (N.D.)
Gross, Henry, 315 W. Puo

St. (D.O.)
Grossman, Dr., 1014 S.

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Grout, Ida  Ij.,  412 Exchange

Bldg. (D.C.)
Grove, E. H., 144 Carr St.

Groves, Sidney  L., 628 Bur-
lington St. ((D.C.)
<:juom, J., 7710 S. Figueroa

St. (D.O.)
Guice, J. W., 639 Chamber

of  Commerce  Bldgr. (D.C.)
Guyer, R.  A. (D.C.)
Guyer, Mrs. Sarah L., 609

Exchange Bldg-. (D.C.)
Haas, Gustave W., 407

Pacific  Elect. Bldg-. (N.D.)
Haig-ht, J. Frank, 2123

Pasadena Ave. (D.O.)
Haight, L. Ludlow, Wrigrht

& Callender Bldg. (D.O.)
Hamby, Wm. H., 132 W

48th St. (D.C.)
Hamilton, J. L. B. 120 N.

Flower St. (D.C.)
Hammond, R. W^, Broad-
way Central Bldg. (D.C.)
Hardin. Ferguson A., 1204

Marsh-Strong- Bldg-.

Hardy. Clara E.. Cons.

Realty Bldg. (D.O.)
Harimen, John A., 322

Spring- St. (S.T.)
Harrington, Alice E., 363 S

Boylston St. (D.O.)
Hart,  H. E., Ferguson  Bldg-.

Hatsfield, Mrs. c/o Powell

Sanitarium, West 3rd St.

Hayek, R. T., 1028  Mauposa

Ave. (D.C.)
Hayek & Hayek, F.  J., 1028

Mariposa Ave. (D.C.)
Hays. J. E.. 403 Hamburger

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hazel. I. H., 234 N. Soto St.

Hernsworth, J. C., 1420-2''

Bond St. (D.O.)
Hess.  M.  G.,  3115  S.  Main  St.

Hess. Norina A.. 403 Ham-

burg-er Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hill, John W^est. Box 409,

R. F. D. 14. (DC.)
Hoare, W. J., Broadwav

Central Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hobeditz. H. W.. (D.C.)
Hoeffer. A. F. H., 3131 E.

AVashington St. (DC.)
Hoeffer. P. T., 1908 S. Main

St. (DC.)
Hoellig. Anna. 1564 E. 51st

St. (D.C.)
Hoffman, Esther E., 403

Hamburger Bldg. (D.C.)
Hormell. Mrs. Sophie Lee.

1912  S. Grand Ave. (N.D.)
Hormell. S. L., 827 S. Loive

St. (D.O.)
Horstman. H. C. 405 "VA^hit-

ney  Bldg. (D.C.)
Horton, J. C, 208-9 Black

Bldg. (D.C.)
Howell. S. J., 306 Mason

Bldg. (D.O.)
Howenstine. Frank F., 310

Mason Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hunt. John O.. Baker-Det-

■wiler Bldg-. (D.O.)
Hunter, Stanlev M., Mason
Bldg. (D.O.)


978


Geof/rapliicdl  Index


Colifornin


Hutchinson, W. W..  1282  W.

23rd St. (D.O.)
.Tacobowitz, Henry M. D.,

West 18th St. (D.C.)
.Tenning's, Sarah \'., lOfil

Flower St. (D.C.)
Jolley. John F.. (D.C.)
Jones,  E.  D.,  201  N.  Tremont

St. (DC.)
Jones, F. C. 2218  E. 4th  St.

(D.O., M.D.)
Keifer,  Jas.  D.,  1043  W. 31st

St. (D.C.)
Keniston & Root, 432 S.

Hill St. (D.O.)
Kennard, W.  M., 212  AV. 3rd

St. (D.O.)
Krnnard,  Wm.,  312-13

Currier Dldg-. (D.C.)
Kessler, Anna C, 520 E.

2.';th St. (D.O.)
Kidder, Albert A., 1111 S.

Ohio  St. (D.C.)
Kiefferle, Miss Rose, 221

W. 12th St. (D.C.)
Krudop. D. T., 218 Wright

and Callendar Bldg.

Kuschel. Otto F., 1306 W.

92nd  St. (D.C.)
Ladd, Mrs. Louisa, 1105

Georgia St. (D.C.)
Lambert, E. K., 1638 Mesa

Ave. (D.C.)
Laug-hlin, Wm. R., Fay

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Ledsworth, D. T., 417 W.

5th St. (D.C.)
Lehman, Herman, 1874

Avon St. (D.C.)
Leonard, F., 2102 N. B'way.

Leonard, W. C, 611 Caron-

delet St. (D.C.)
Letson. Samuel B., 248 S.

Olive St. (D.C.)
Lichtenwalter, D. G., 1748

%V. 41st Drive. (D.O.)
Lockhart, Ellis L.. 433| N.

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Loney, Mrs. Carrie, 821 W.

L. Holling-sworth Bldg-.

Los Angeles College or

Chiropractic, 931 S. Hill

St. (D.C.)
Ijowe, Louis F.. 1542 Glen-
dale  Ave. (D.C.)
Lumm, A. W., 753^ S. Hill

St. (D.C.)
Lyda, E. R.. Story Bldg.

Mace, Mina B.. 919 B. 55th

St. (D.C.)
IMacKinnon, Barbara.

Marsh-Strong Bldg.

Madison. Rodney. 311-13

Grant Bldg. (N.D.)
Malin, James P., 1122 W.

17th St. (D.C.)
Marston School of Meta-
physics. (S.T.)
Marston. Luther, 2299 W.

20th St. (D.O.)
Martin, Blanche AV.. 4026

Dalton Ave. (D.C.)
Mather,  A.  R..  1115  W. 54th

St. (D.C.)
Mathevi^s, Ellen. 200 N. Los

Angeles St. (D.O.)
Mitchell, Charles G. (D.C.)
McBurnev.  M. R.. 918  B'way

Central Bldg. (D.C.)
McCormick. Chas. E.. 402

Pearl St. (D.O.)
McCoy, Frank, 309-19 Citi-
zens' Natl. Bank Bldg.


McDaniel. Ida. 851 Sunset

Blvd. (D.C.)
McGilwey, Mrs. Ella M., 3

Temple Court. (N.D.)
McGreggor, Gregory. 1355

S. Grand Ave. (D.C.)
McLaughlin, Elizabeth,

Mason Bldg. (D.O.)
McNaughton. Kate P., 2215

Huron St. (D.O.)
Merrill, Edward Strong,

Ferguson  Bldg. (DO.)
Metcalf, W. E. E. (D.C.)
Miller,  E.  E.,  1321  Edgeware

Place. (D.C.)
Miller, .L T., 1319 S. Grand

Ave. (D.O.)
Miller, John T., 1319 South

Grand Ave. (Me.)
Miller.  L., 1155  De  Frees  St.

Miller, Nellie, 615 N.

Alexandria Ave. (D.C.)
Mockbridge. Leslie V., 326i

E. 6th St. (D.C.)
Moline. Emile, 633 S. Hill

St. (D.C.)
Moohr, Clara M., 423 Byrne

Bldg. (D.C.)
Moreland-Ballard, Ida I.,

118-b S. Johnston St.

Mouck,  Mrs.  Anna  M.,  Ham-
burger  Bldg. (D.C.)
Moul, Flora L., 4026 Dalton

Ave. (D.C.)
Neal, J. W., 674 Hillman

Bldg. (D.C.)
Neenan,  R.  J., 6th  St.  and

Broadway. (N.D.)
Nelson, Lui-a  Bingham, 1733

N. Western Ave. (D.O.)
Nelson. Blackburn Roriden,

4618  S.  Pigueroa  St. (S.T.)
Neth, Gustave A., 1012 W.

Berendo  St. (D.C.)
Nick. P, P. O. Box 1743.

O'Hanlon. W. F., 6904

Holmes Ave. (D.C.)
Ohnemuller. Catharine C,

204 N. Evergreen Ave.

Olds. M. T., 10091 W. 11th

St. (D.C.)
Olson. Peter, 945 W. 7th St.

Pacific Medical College, 804

Block Bldg. (D.O.)
Palotay, J. A., 748 W. 7th

St. (D.C.)
Paleboy, Julian A., 421

B'way Central Bldg.

Palotay,  J A., 421  Broad-
way  Central Bldg. (N.D.)
Pearce. Earl W., Dept. B.

Pearing, M. C, 5011 Holly-
wood Bldg. (D.C.)
Perry, Mrs. Nellie F. (N.D.)
Perry, W. A., 717 San Fer-
nando Bldg. (D.C.)
Better, A. J., 540 S. Spring

St. (D.O.)
Philbrook. N. W.. 327 Cores

Realty Bldg. (D.C.)
Phinney, Carla H., Fergu-
son Bldg. (D.O.)
Picou. J. A., 312 Columbia

Trust Bldg. (N.D.)
Powei-s  &  Delanev, 1968i  E.

1st St. (D.C.)
Powell, Thomas, 303  W. 3rd

St. (D.O.)
Price,  Lavenin. 1002 Everett

St. (D.O.)


Priester, Laura. 5804  Holly-
wood Blvd. (D.C.)
Pugh. J. Thurman. 4710

Melrose Ave. (D.C.)
Rairden, N. B., 4618 Figu-

eroa  St. (D.C.)
Ralff, H.. 554 S. Figueroa

St. (D.C.)
Ralff,  Harry,  209  Merchants"

Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Randolph, Harriet. (D.C.)
Ratledge System of Chiro-
practic Schools. (D.C.)
Rawson. Guy Allison. 1549

Echo Park Ave. (N.D.)
Reid. Mrs. Vita M., 525

Cons. Realty Bldg. (D.C.)
Reif, Theodor, 4901 Strat-
ford Road. (N.D.)
Reinhold, Mrs.  Alice  M.,

700 Laguna  St. (N.D  )
Reinhold. A. M., 700 La-
guna  St. (N.D.)
Rice, Steve A., 811 W. Pico

St. (D.C.)
Richardson, A. "W., 511

Washington Bldg. (D.C.)
Richardson. Geo. Art.. 511

Washington Bldg. (N.D.)
Richardson, Mrs. Mae,

15656  W. 45th  St. (D.C.)
Richardson, Mrs. C)sa B.,

1731 S.  Vermont  Ave.

Ritchie, J. J., 1344 Oak St.

Bobbins, E. U., 1140 S.

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Bobbins, E. W., 1321 S.

LTnion Ave. (N.D.)
Robinson, Mina Abbott,

Wright  &  Callendar  Bldg.

Robinson. George, 219 Mer-
chants' Trust  Bldg. (D.C.)
Robinson. Geo., 342 S. Hill

St. (D.C.)
Ross, Mary Antoinette,

1019 Temple St. (D.C.)
Ross, Mary Antoinette,

805 S. Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Rothrock, Mary B., 426 N.

Grand Ave. "(D.C.)
Ruddy. T. J., 321 S. Hill St.

Rudledge, T. F.. 403 Ham-
burger  Bldg. (D.C.)
Sanford, Mrs. Fannie. 1447

S. Union Ave. (D.C.)
Schultz. Carl, 1319 S. Grand

Ave. (D.O.)
Scott, J. Wesley, Broadway

Central Bank Bldg.

Service. Emma R., 609 Ex-
change Bldg. (N.D.)
Shaffer, Will Ivern, 1330 N.

Normandie Ave. (D.O.)
Sharp,  Omer  L., 2001  AV. 1st

St. (D.C.)
Simon, Leo H., 524 Cons.

Realty Bldg. (D.C.)
Sipes, R. A., 528 Wall St.

Smith. Mrs. Frances B.,

1537 Wright St. (D.C.)
Smith, Georgiana B., 905

AV. 56th St. (D.O.)
Smith. Lillian A., 1426 Kel-

1am  St. (D.C.)
Souchek, AA'm., 146 S. Ave.

18. (D.C.)
Spates, Edwin M., Black

Bldg. (D.O.. M.D.)
Speicher, AValter N. (D.C.)
Spencer, Chas. H., 318 Clay

St. (D.O.)
Spencer, .Tennir^ C, Hol-

lingsworth Bldg. (D.O.)


(California


(i('()(/r(ij)Iii(((l  Index


07!)


Stanley, A. 10., JOxohaiij;"-

Bider. (ij.c.)

St.  Clair, Harry, 218 Fay

Bldg-. (D.C.)
St.  Clair & Helfricli, 21<;-]8

F. P. Fay Bldg-. (D.C.)
Stock, C. E., 1563 Fair

Mount Way. (N.D.)
Stockwell, Chas. H., 103

Temple Blk. CD.C.)
Stockwell, Ida B., Mason

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Story, Thos. H., ir.03 Reid

St. (D.C.)
Tasker, Anna E., 2010

Lemoyne St. (D.O.)
Tasker, Cora Newell, Audi-
torium Bldg. (D.O.)
Tasker,  Dain  !_,.,  Auditorium

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Thompson & Thompson,

Thorsen, Marie, Wright &

Callendar Bldg. (D.O.)
Throop, Herbert G., 1212 S.

Grand Ave. (N.D.)
Tierman, Albert I., 322

Mason Bldg-. (D.C.)
Tovey, Miss Verona, 635 S.

Flower St. (D.C.)
Traughber, W. F.,  Hollings-

worth Bldg. (D.O.)
Ti-escott,  H.  M., 1311 S. Hill

St. (D.O.)
Treseder. F. W., 4533 Wil-
ton Place. (D.C.)
Turney, Dayton, Mason

Bldg. (D.O.)
Uricsol Chemical Co., 300

N. Los Angeles St. (D.O.)
Volkmann, T. J. O., 5608

Monte Vista St. (D.O.)
Walberg-, Miss Geneva O.,

6517  Crescent  St. (D.C.)
W^alberg-, Geneva O., Eagle

Rock  and  Oak  Grove  Ave.

Walker, Elizabeth S., 236

W. 23rd  St. (D.C.)
Walther & Walther, 639 S.

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Ward, James H., 300

Columbia Trust Bldg.

W^atson, G., 930 Vermont

Ave. (D.O.)
Watts, A. P., 315 Mason

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Weaver, Julia Blanche,

Story Bldg. (D.O.)
Webber, J. H.. 407 Colum-
bia  Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Webber, J. H., 832 W. 18th

St. (D.C.)
Weinmann, John, 811 W.

Puo St. (D.O.)
Wendelstadt, Edward F. M.,

Ferguson Bldg. (D.O.)
West, Harry H., 524 Cons.

Realty Bldg-. (D.C.)
West John, 3rd and Hill

Sts. (N.D.)
White, Ada C, 1149 S.

Burlington St. (D.O.)
White,  Dr.  Geo.  Starr  (M.D.)
Whiting-, Anna E., Audito-
rium Bldg-. (D.O.)
Whitney,  A. A., 932 Georgria

St. (D.C.)
Wilson, Frank Lamb, Ex-
change Bldg. (D.C.)
Wilson, George, Black

Bldg-, (D.C.)
Wilson, L. R., 2707 Harvard

Ave. (D.O.)
Winbigler,  C.  F.,  1104  ^V.

35th  St. (S.)
Worrell, F. C, 541 Cons.

Realty Bldg. (D.C.)
Woulfe,  M.  J.,  322  S.  Bunker

Hill Ave. (D.C.)


Wright, 11. F., 6401 n<;lly

wood Blvd. (D.O.)
W.vckoff, Grace, Story  Bldg.

Wyckoff, Louis F., Story

Bldg. (D.O.)
Yates. Wilbur S., 701 East

31st St. (D.C.)
Young, F. R. (D.O.)
Young-, Simeon, Grant  Bldg.

Zimmerman, Emma, 533 S.

Flower St. (D.C.)
liancaMter: Eitman & Kirk-

patrick. (D.C.)
Arwine, James T. (D.O.)
I.ainar: Crissman, John.

I.odi: Clouse, D. H., 120 W.

Pine St. (D.O.)
I,os Gatos: Butler, F. E.

Gerlach,  Dr.  A.  J. (N.D.)
I.oveland: Denton, U. N.

Madera: Marshall,  Mary.

Merced: Buchhplz, Charles.

Hale, Mary E. (D.O.)
.Modesto: Anderburg, L. N.,

1302 11th St. (D  C.)
Bates, Sarah. (D.C.)
Cody & Cody, 716 18th St.

Snare, J. P., Hurd & Hus-
band Bldg-. (D.O.)
Moneta: Ormsbee, C. B.

Monrovia: Price, Kenneth V.,

Orange Ave. (D.O.)
Mountain View: Blanchard,

E. R., Gen'l. Del. (D.C.)
National City: Garwin, Dr.,

Paradise Valley Sanato-
rium. (D.C.)
Oakland: Adams, Luther M.

Adams, L. M., c/o Bullis

Sanitarium, 32nd St.

Avery, Herbert, Thomson

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Blanchard, J. H., 1955

Webster St. (D.C.)
Bruyne, Dr., 561 19th Ave.

Bullis, Dr. B. S., 732 34th

St. (D.C.)
Bullis, Sarah, 732 34th St

Bunkers, H., 2002 25th Ave.

Cain,  J.  D. (D.O.)
Cale,  J.  A., 469 10th  St.

Cody & Cody, 716 18th St

Cole, John A., c/o Hote'

Sutter. (D.C.)
Cole,  John  A., 1247 1st  Ave.

Cole, Jno. A., 429 10th St.

Cutburg, F. R., 2348 Tele-

g-raph Ave. (D.C.)
Daemer,  A. (D.O.)
Dietz, Lewis H., Phvsicians

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Dove, Geo. S., 3767 %V. 14th

St. (D.C.)
Eaton, Chas. R., 3850 Tele-
graph Ave. (D.C.)
Eaton, Chas. R., 4824 Tele-

g-raph  Ave. (D.C.)
Estes,  J.  C,  2016  E. 15th  St.


ForbfjH. E. (Jj.O.>

Fraizer, Hugh M., Union

Savings Bank Bldg.

Frazier, Miller, U. S. Bank

Bldg, (D.O.)
Gaddi.s,  Cyrus  J.,  First  Natl.

Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
Gardner, J. A., 965 Jackson

St. (N.D.)
Gehrig-, F. W., 3519 Harper

St. (N.D.)
Grover, S. L., 201 Pacific

Bldg. (D.C.)
Hanna, H. (D.O.)
Hanna, H.  O. (D.C.)
Hunt, Hattie. (D.O.)

''sf^(D^C.)-'' ''' ^- ^'^^

Holaday,  E.  R.,  1739  5th
Ave. (D.C.)

Lang-an,  P.  M.,  454  Fair-
mount Ave. (D.C.)

Lewis^ F. S., 642 12th St.

Lineker,  Chas.  W^,  3235
Telegraph Ave. (D.O.)

Lineker,  Chas.,  547  Tele-
graph Ave. (D.C.)

McCarl,  John  A.,  314  Paci-
fic  Bldg-. (D.C.)

McDaniel, A. C, Union
Savmgrs Bank Bldg.

Mervy, L. A,, 675 11th St.

Mizo, G. W., 325 14th St.

Mockridg-e, L. V., 2860 E

14th St. (D.C.)
Moon, Irma lone. Union

Savmgs Bank Bldg.

Moreland, Cassie C, Bacon

Bldg-. ((D.O.)
Mutchmoore, J. T O 64-^

12th  St. (D.C.)  ■'

Noble, Nelson G., Dalziel

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Raynard, H. D., 1314 Tele-

g-raph Ave. (D.O.)
Renshaw, John W., 855 W

Myrtle St. (D.C.)
Reynard, Dr. 1314 Tele-

g-raph Ave-. (D.C.)
Riedl, Wenzl, 2179 Tele-

g-raph Ave. (D.C.)
Robinson, Chas. E., First

Natl. Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Roper, Dora C. L., R. F D

No. 1, Box 188. (D.O.)
Sells, W. E.. 3919 Nevil St.

Sewis, J. S. (D.O.)
Sisson, Ernest, First Natl

Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
Stiles, W. E., 1440 B'wav.

Stua.rt, Mary V., 17''8

Franklin St. (D.O.)
Terry, J. Y., 829 Jackson

St. (D.C.)
Tisdale, R. F., 3329 Grove

St. (D.O.)
Wakefield, Wm. H., Union

Savings Bank Bldg.

Wallace, M. R., 1401 1st

Ave. (D.O.)
Waltan, David B. (D.O.)
Ward, H. (D.O.)
Ward, M. H., 509 Central

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
W^ard, Robert Merritt, c/o

Elks Club. (N.D.)
Wenzl, Riedl, 2327 Tele-
graph St. (D.C.)
Willcox, Sylvester W.,

Bacon Blk. (D.O.)


OSO


(ieuyruphical  Index


C.iiliforniu


Ocean Park: Brink, Blanche,

207 Ocean Front. (D.C.)
Hoffman, Miss Esther, 2717

Lake St. (D.C.)
Reading-, R. W., 711 Ocean

Front. (D.C.)
Sandford, W. R., 16 Dudley

Ave. (D.C.)
Oooan.slde: Kelly, Alice.

OrniiKe: Fletcher, Mrs. Alex.

R.  F.  D.  No.  2. (D.C.)
Huffman, J. E., Box 622.

(D.C, M.D.)
Luhring-, Rollo A., Edwards

Apts. (D.C.)
Paine, Caroline L. (D.O.)
Vance,  A. T.. Smith  &  Grote

Bids. (D.O.)
Pacific  Grove: Ferrand, R. L.,

T.  A.  Work  Bldgr. (D.O.)
Palisades: Haller, J. L.

Palo Alto: Moore, J. L., 156

University Ave. (D.O.)
York, Effle E., 705 Cowper

St. (O.O.)
Pasadena: Andrews, Emma,

712 Locust St. (D.C.)
Balzer,  J.  P., 11  Euclid  Ave.

Balser & Balser, 15 S.

Euclid Ave. (D.C.)
Balzer & Balzer, Drs., 467

N. Fair  Oaks  Ave. (D.C.)
Barnhart, Dr., Salvin Bldg.,

c/o Dr. Campbell. (D.C.)
Bauregard, Miss Lillian, 57

Worchester Ave. (N.D.)
Becket, Julius, 88  N. Bonnie

St. (D.C.)
Bland, Myrtabell, 231 E.

Colorado St. (D.O.)
Bowling, Willett Lee, Ken-
dall Bldg. (D.O.)
Bruett, H. (D.C.)
Caldwell Health Home, R.

1, Box 236. (D.O.)
Carder, Chas. L., 1008

Moreng-o Ave. (D.C.)
Carder, Maud E., 1008

Morengo Ave. (D.C.)
Chatterton, W. A., 1712 Las

Lumas. (D.C.)
Crain,  Coral, 68  N. Marengo

Ave. (D.O.)
Crain, Festal, 68 N.

Marengo Ave. (D.O.)
Donnelly, Emma E., ^A S.

El Molino  Ave. (D.O.)
Dowin, Mae L., 40 E. Colo-
rado St. (D.O.)
Earl, J. Cornelius. (D.C.)
Evarts, Rowe E., 1641

Spruce St. (D.O.)
Face, Mrs. Margaret E.,

506-507 Citizens' Savings

Bank Bldg. (N.D.)
Fitch, Stewart J., 1175 N.

Los Robles Ave. (D.O.)
Fox, Warren F., 786 Sun-
set Ave. (D.C.)
Frame, Ira S., 472 Her-
kimer St. (D.O.)
Gerrie, Wm. Alfred, 210-211

Boston Bldg. (N.D.)
Goetler, Margaret, 467 N.

Fair Oaks Ave. (D.C.)
Goettler. Gertrude, 464 N.

Fair Oaks Ave. (D.O.)
Gray, Maud, 11 Euclid St.

Hinds, Harriet E., 388J E.

Colorado St. (D.O.)
Huntington, Geo. Ij., Citi-
zens' Savings Bank Bldg.

King, Lillian  B., 110 N.  Los

Robles Ave. (D.O.)


Palmer, Chas. R., Chamber

of  Commerce  Bldg. (D.O.)
Rees, .John T., 464 E Colo-
rado  St. (N.D.)
Springer. G. L.. 152 N.

Morengo Ave. (D.C.)
Stillman, Claia Judson,

.S88J East Colorado St.

Tritt, H. P. (D.C.)
White, J. Strothard,

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg. ((D.O.)
Willi.s. G. F., 616 Chamber

of Commerce Bldg-. (D.C.)
Paradise: Miller, Macfarlane.

Petalunia; Healey, Robert  D.,

19 Main St. (D.O.)
King, Miss Bernice. (D.C.)
Rundall,  Napoleon  B.,

Schluckebier-Gwinn

Bldg. (D.O.)
Pomona: Doolittle, Harriet

M., 535 N. Main St. (D.O.)
Hutchinson, C. E.. (D.C.)
Martin, Frederick H., 481

N. Park Ave. (D.O.)
Stevens, Olinda K., 387 S.

Park  Ave. (D.O.)
Redlands: Harlow, A., R. F.

D.  No. 1, Box 80-b. (D.C.)
Newton, E. D. B., 421  Caion

St. (D.O.)
Tuttle, A. Marsh, 248 Cajon

St. (D.O.)
Redondo Bcacli: Meyer, Ree

W. (D.C.)
Reedley: Glasg-ow, Jos. C.

Ricliniond: Morelli, Louis.

(DC.)
Woodruff, Chas. Homer.

Rielivale:

Lofgren, A. J. (D.C.)
River.side; Becker. R. C.

E.  Dote  St. (N.D.)
Deputy,  Anna  W.,  1251  Main

St. (D.O.)
Deputy,  H.  E.,  1251  Main  St.

I.,obeers, Thos. Lord, Free-
man Bldg. (D.O.)
Smiley, M. S., Room 14, Y.

M. C. A. Bldg-. (D.C.)
White, Dr Chas. I.. 427

Main St. (N.D.)
Roclty Ford: Van Antwerp,

H. S. (D.O.)
Sacramento: Booth, W. F.,

2616 N St. (D.O.)
Gary, Una W., Hagelstein

Bldg. (D.O.)
Daniels, I^estcr

Bldg. (D.O.)
Haines, Cyrus

Bldg. (D.O.)
Horstman, H. C, 213  Pacific

Bldg., (D.C.)
.Jones, C. M., 436 Ochsner

Bldg. (D.C.)
Mclveon, Ada H. (D.C.)
Palmer, Edward 13., Hag-el-
stein Bldg. (D.O.)
Pinkham, C. B. (DC.)
San Bernardino: Hebb, Flora

E., 645 East St. (D.O.)
Maynard, H. M., 558 4th St.

Oakes. Geo. C,

Parcels, M. L.,

Reynolds, R. H. (D.C.)
Weiman, John. (N.D.)


Lindberg, David,


106


R., Forum
A., Forum


257 H St.
Katz Blk.


San Ule^o: Austin, Isabel E.,

Sefton Bldg. (D.O.)
Byars, W. R., U. S. Grant

Bldg. (D.O.)
Clark,  Mrs.  Mary, 1432  Date

St. (D.C.)
College of Dietology and

Psychotherapy, 265 22nd

St. (N.D.)
Creswell, Lena, Amer. Natl.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Crosby, Gordon Keith.

Cuffmann.  Osborn, 3559 30th

St. (D.O.)
Denny, L. E., 3446 D St.

Diego, Vincent  A. (D.C.)
Eilersficken, 1550 3th St.

Elliott, David H., Spreckels

Bldg. (D.O.)
Frazer, Chas. F., 3209 Grim

St. (D.O.)
Garcia, Albert E., Tecato

Gearhart, W. H., Spreckles

Theatre Bldg. (N  D.)
Glidden, Durelle, 1550 3rd

St. (N.D.)
Glover, J. David, American

Natl. Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Griffith. F. R. (D.C.)
Guymer,  G.  A., 1256 10th St.

Hahn. Fred. M.. (D.C.)
Heilbron, Louise, Union

Bldg. (D.O.)
Jolitz, Miss Marion, 1015 F

St. (D.C.)
Jones. J. N.. 1629 Maine St.

Judd, Lorenzo, San Ysidro.

Kieferle, J A. 212 Granger

Block. (Opt.)
Runk,  Mrs. Ellen  B., 2938  A

St. (D.C.)
Lee, Vernon R., Owl Drug

Bldg. (D.O.)
Levanzin, A., 265 22nd St.

(N.D.. A.B., Ph.D., LL.B..

M.E.T.)
I^evanzin Scientific Dieta-

rium. 265 22nd  St.  (N.D.)
Lindenmever, C. A., Spring

Valley. (D.O.)
Malin, Mrs. Jennie. (D.C.)
Maxey, C. N., Watts Bldg.

Moore, H. B., 821 18th Ave.

Moore, W. B., 1205 Univer-
sity Ave. (D.O.)
Moos, Oscar, 1566 Franklin

Ave. (D.C.)
Nelson, Ella. (D.C.)
Oakley, Nelson C, 1550 3rd

St. (D.C.)
Pierce, Nellie M., Sefton

Blk. (D.O.)
St. .Joseph's Sanitarium.

Slolan. Celia, 1658 Front  St.

Smith. Nelson, 602 Spreck-
les Bldg. (D.C.)
Smith, Vincent A. (D.C.)
Stanley. S.. 2603 National

Ave. (DO.)
Tucker, Wm. R., 908 22nd

St. (N.D.)
Tucker, Mrs. Nora  Mae, 906

22nd St. (N.D.)
Tucker, W. R.. 906 22nd St.

Vermilion. J. B., 6th and C

Sts. (D.C.)
Vermillion, J. B.. 307

Scripps Bldg.. 6th and

C  Sts. (D.C.)


California


Geograpliical  Index


!)H1


Volen, G. A.. 1556 3rd St.

Volen.  Mary  H.,  1550  3.rd  St.

Watkin.s, Edwin Phillips,

Union Bldg-. (D.O.)
Wentworth. Lillian P., The

Thorbus Apts. (D.O.)
Williams, C. 13. (N.D.)
Williams, S. L., 1103 Na-
tional Ave. (D.O.)
Williams, Stanley S.. 2603

National Ave. (D.O.)

Woulfe, Martin J. (D.C.)

San Franoiseos Adam, I M.,

313 Church St. (D.C.)
ArgiKst, T. A., c/o Lurlin

Baths, Bush and Larkin

Sts. (N.D.)
Argust, T. J. (D.O.)
Atkinson, Dr., 2393 Mission

St. (D.C.)
Bean,  J.  P.,  816  Turk  Street.

Bell, Ella R.. 1415 O'Farrell

St. (D.C.)
Boggess, Emma Bronk,

1664 Larkin St. (D.O.)
Bradley,  Geo.  A., 508  Hewes

Bldg. (D.C.)
Bradley, Geo. A., 995


R., 2023

1632 Califor-


Cali-


St.


Market St.
Brandon, J.

fornia St.
Brandow, R.,

nia Ave. (D.O.)
Brown,  James,  Room  712,

West Bank Bldg-, 830

Market St. (Ch.)
Bross, Henry, 645 Lion

Buchner, Maximilian A.,

29th and  Church  Sts.

Burnside, Minetta, 1315

Polk St. (N.D.)
Burnside,  Miss  Minnette,  c/o

Lurlin Baths, Bush and

Larkin Sts. (N.D.)
Burke, Isaac, 133 Geary St.

Bust, Laura C, 542 Steiner

St. (D.C.)
Cooper, Sarshal De Pew,

133 Geary St. (D.O.)
Crawford, W. P., 1300 Mc-


, 745 Market


Mrs. Ethel,
Ellis  St.


W., 1147


Allister St.
Czarra, M. L

St. (D.O.)
Edmondson,

Hotel  Adair,

Edwardes, Arthur

Lake St. (N.D.)
Electric Hygienic Bake

Shop.  1411 Polk  St. (D.O.)
Elg-arten, M., 362 Kearny

St. (D.C.)
Erz. A. A., 1774 Sutter St.

Erz, A. A., 4168 24th  St.

Farnham, D. C, Elkan-

Gunst Bldg. (D.O.)
Farnham, Margaret H.,

Elkan-Gunst Bldg. (D.O.)
Fellrath,  Basis, Hotel

Panama, 176 4th St.

Fish, H. J., 882 Fulton St.,

Ford. Chas. P., Whittell

Bldg. (D.O.)
Gillespie, Geo. D.,

Stockton St. (N.D.)
Gillespie. Harriet M..

Geary St. (D.O.)
Graham, Artie Mav.

Powell St. (D.C.)


335
133


242


Hamilton, Susan Harris,
1080 P.u.sh  St. (D.O.)

Hamphill, Etha B., 323
Geary St. (D.O.)

Hortsman. H. C, 213 Pacific
Bldg. (D.C.)

Kammeior. Marie. 1008
^Vashington St. (D.O.)

Killeen,  .1. Francis 2161
Sutter St. ^N.D.)

Klein, Clifford S., 7401 Fill-
more  St. (D.O.)

402 Haight St.


J. Lovell. 133

Pacific Bldg.


1297
1245


1527


Lai  St. Otto,

Lawrence.

Geary St.
Lichty. Elsa,

Lindroth, C, 1240 California

St. (D.C.)
Mantes, I.,ouise A.. Lurline

Baths. (D.C.)
Maussert, O., 1752 Fillmore

St. (N.D  >
Meyer, Richard L.,

Market St. (D.O.)
Middleditch, Emma D,

O'Farrell St. (D.C.)
Moore, Andrey C,

Sutter St. (D.O.)
Olson, M. O., 1256 Haight

St. (D.C.)
Peirce, Charles E., Elkan-
Gunst Bldg. (D.O.)
Peterson, Chas. J. R., El-
kan-Gunst Bldg. (D.O.)
Plotnekoff, Even E. 362

Kearney St. (N.D  )
Pollock, W. D., 154 27th St.

Pringle. R. J., Lurline

Baths. (D.C.)
Rich. James  H.. 830 Market

St. (D.C.)
Rupe, Miss Louise V., 20

Franklin St. (N.D.)
Scott,  Geo.  D.,  323  Geary  St.

(DO.)
Sheldon. T. W.. 323 Geary

St. (D.O.)
Slaughter.

Geary St.
Smith. Mrs.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Snowden. Cora. 323

St. (D.O.)
Spencer. Elizabeth A

Geary St. (D.O.)
Sutherland. Jno. W., 3857

18th  St.  (D.C.)
Sutton, Emilie

1350  Sutter  St.
Taylor,  Andrew.
Thompson,  Wm.
Tuchler, A. S..

Ness Ave. (D.O.)
Usher.  Jennie  M., 71  Haight

St. (D.O.)
Ward, John E
York,  Effie E.,

Bldg. (D.O.)
Taylor, Ella

San Gabriel: Haight, Nettie

Olds, R. F. D. 2, Box 602.

San Jose: Austin, J. N., 19

Porter Bldg. (N.D.)
Edwards, F. O.. 198 Martin

Ave.  (D.O.)
Frank.  G.  H.
Jewell, C. O.,


McMillan. 143 E. San Fer-
nando St. (D.C.)

208  E. Santa  Clara  St.

Moates, Chas. H., 208 East

Santa Clara St. (N.D.)


Kate
M., 651


C,  122
Pacific
Geary


133


Victoria,
P. (D.C.)
703 Van


Elkan-Gunst


J., Box 253


R>'land


Bldg. S


Nims, Herbert J., Ryland

Bldg. (D.O.)
Shoults, R. G., Safe  Depo.sit

Bank Blk. (D.O.)
Stephenson, Jennie, Garden

City Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Thornby, J. (D.C  )
Thornley. J., Bank of San

Jose Bldg. (D.C.)
Wright, Anna A., Theatre

Bldg. (D.O.)
San .Mateo: Butler, Edward,

General Delivery. (D.C.)
San Pedro: Williams, C. A

282J 4th St. (D.C.)
Santa Ana: Brink & Butler,

511 N. Main St. (D.C.)
Bryan, Charles T., 421 E

17th St. (D.O.)
Butler, Gunning. (N.D.)
Cleland, C. T., Spurgeon

Bldg. (D.C.)
Humiston, Sarah  G.,  106*  E.

4th St. (D.O.)
Littell, U. G., W. H. Spur-
geon Bldg. (D.O.)
Santa Barbara: Albertson, B

E., 217 San Marcos Bldg.

Eddy, C. E., 188 Water St.

Foy, Raymond C, 217 San

Marcos Bldg. (D.C.)
Goodrich, L. J., San Marcos

Bldg. (D.O.)
Jones, E. E., 835 Delevina

St. (D.C.)
Jones, E. E., 906 Chapala

St. (D.C.)
Ratledge, Tulhan F., 217

San Marcos Bldg. (D.C.)
Robbins, E. Marie. (D.C.)
Sperry, Myra Ellen, 21 W^

Victoria St. (D.O.)
Santa Cruz: Oliphant, Pearl.

Williams, Calvert B., 19

Trescony St. (N.D.)
Santa Monica: Dabu, W. G

937 N. 2nd St. (D.O.)
Glenn, J. O., Santa Monica

Blvd. (D.O.)
Graham, Herbert C. (D.C.)
Williams. Evan, 1024 4th

St. (D.O.)
Santa Rosa: Caldwell. Fan-
nie. Dougherty Shea

Bldg. (D.C.)
Sinclair. Neil, Elks Bldg.

Sisson. Ada B., Santa Rosa

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Webley. F. D., Box 398

Wyland, Samuel I. (D.O.)
Sanford: Edwards, N. C, Box

102. (N.D.)
San;;er: Taylor, Mrs. Ella J.


Sangus: Stickles, Albert.

Santee: Nesbit, E. W. (D.C.)
Saticoy:  Stein,  E. (Nat.)
Selma:  Hinkley,  A. Burton.

San Joaquin Vallev.

South Pasadena: Bowling. R.

M'., 618 Fremont  Ave.


Lillian M. (D.O.)
Calvert, E. J.


Whitin
Stockton :

Cooley


.. Edw., 81-83 San

Joaquin Bldg. (D.C.)

Cooley,  Mrs.  E..  San  Joa-
quin Bldg. (D.C.)

Cooley,  Ed.  L..  301-2  Belding
Bldg. (D.C.)


982


G('()(/r(ij)l)ic(iI  Index


Colorado


Couloy, Mrs. Gertrude M.,

301-2 Belding Bldgr.

Rule, J. C, Belding Bldg.

Saymour. Arthur T., Elks

Bldg. (D.O.)
Shaw, Jno., 81-83 San

Joaquin Bldg-. (D.C.)
TaftJ DeMar.sa, Clarence, 4th

and Center Sts. (D.C.)
Jones. E.  A.  D. (M.D.)
Turloek: Fulton, Margaret E.

Julien, E. A. (N.D.)
Upland: Chilson, Maud I.

Harvey, Leslie V., 9th and

Euclid Ave. (D.O.)
A'eiitiira: Adams, Wni. J.

A'i.sniin: Hofeditz, H. W.

Hofeditz & Hofeditz. (D.C.)
Hofeditz. Miss Mabel, 503

Main St. (D.C.)
Jones, Jno. (D.C.)
A\  hittier: Cannard, Mrs. E.

Compton, Claude O., 407 N.

Greenleaf Ave. (D.C.)
Decker, Mrs. R. (N.D.)
Gray, Emma J.,* 802 S.

Painter Ave. (D.C.)
Kennard, Alta  M. (N.D.)
Kraft, Mary J., First Natl.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Milliken, Chas. (D.O.)
Penrose, J. T., 216 N.

Brig-ht Ave. (D.O.)
AVoodland: Criteser, W. T.,

744 Cleveland St. (D.C.)
McKeon, Ada H. (D.C.)
McKeon, Dr., Native Sons'

Bldg. (D.C.)
"Wilkerson, Mrs.  M. (D.O.)


COLORADO

Alaniosn: Stephenson, C. I.,
509 Main St. (D.O.)
Taylor, Mrs. Mollie. (S.T.)
Alli.son: Howe,  Gracia  W.
Schofield, Cassie L. (D.C.)
Arvado: Trenary,  J.  M. (D.C.)

Trenary, W. (D.C.)
Boulder: Dresher, A. S., 1341
Walnut St. (D.C.)
Griffin, Louise A., Voegtie

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hampton, Elsie. (D.O.)
Hampton, Elsie R., 1821

Walnut St. (D.C.)
Hopf, Geo., 2132 14th St.

Overfelt, L. B. (D.O.)
Riley, H. L. (D.O.)
Boyoro: Huginin  Mary. (S.T.)
Brusli: Sutten,  B.  J. (D.O.)
BurlinKton: Camp, R. E.
Castor, Shirley. (D.C.)
Cafion  City:  Cadwell, E. Wm.,
Acme Bldg. (D.O.)
Dickson, J. Homer, Har-
rison  Blk. (D.O.)
Pennington, J. L., 712

Mawn St. (D.C.)
Peckard & Peckard. (D.O.)
Pickard & Plckard, No. 3

P. O. Bldg. (D.C.)
Ramons, Hattie E., P. O.
Block. (N.D.)
Colorado City: Smith &
Smith. (D.O.)


Colorado S|trinK-**: Blodgood,

Delia. (D.C.)
Brickmeyor, O. F. (D.C.)
Capshaw, E. F. (D.O.)
Coultrup, Alfred J., 214 E.

Pike's Peak Ave. (D.C.)
Coultrup,  C.  A.,  Pike's  Peak

Ave. (D.C.)
Fritz  & Fritz,  Drs.,  64  First

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Fritz, A. E., 315 Del Norte

St. (D.C.)
Gwin,  H.  M.,  Suite  202,  Ben-
nett  Bldg. (D.C.)
Hampton, Wm. (D.O.)
Lewis, J. L., Bank Bldg.

Miline, Mae, 1228 Colorado

Ave. (D.C.)
Pauly, G. W., DeGraff  Bldg.

Phillips, A. C, 306 S. Wah-

satch Ave. (D.O.)
Richardson, Horace J., 824

N. Tejon St. (D.O.)
Smith,  Earl  B.,  4  First  Natl.

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Somers, Edith, 123 E.

Boulder St. (D.C.)
Somers & Somers, 123 E.

Boulder St. (D.C.)
Surredin, F. A., 824 N.

Spruce St. (D.O.)
Collbran: Canfleld, Carl B.

Craig: Payne, M. U. (D.C.)
Craig City: Payne & Payne,

Cripple Creek;  Meredity,

Harry  J. (D.C.)
Caulk: Caulk, Mrs. M. B.

Denver: Adams, R., Kaiser-

hof  Hotel. (D.O.)
Adams, Mrs., 1348 Madison

St. (N.D.)
Albson, Ellsworth, 1854 W.

46th Ave. (D.O.)
Balfe, Anna B., Ellsworth

Hotel. (D.O.)
Balfe, Sarah L., Ellsworth

Hotel. (D.O.)
Banna, Otto J., 1707 Gilpin

St. (D.O.)
Barnes, Chas. T., 328 17th

St. (D.O.)
Bass, John T., Central

Savings Bank Bldg.

Bass, Elizabeth C, Central

Savings Bank Bldg.

Beck, Claude  G.. 205-7 Natl.

Safety  Vault Bldg. (N.D.)
Beck, Claude G., 1536 Wel-

ton St. (D.C.)
Beckwith, Annette H., 1223

Columbine St. (D.O.)
Behm, S. L., 1355 Lafayette

St. (D.O.)
Bennett, Carrie A., Temple

Court Bldg. (D.O.)
Bennett, Mary, 2524 Emer-
son St. (D.O.)
Bolles, Jennette Hubbard,

1459  Ogden St. (D.O,>
Bowdy, J. D., 711 17th St.

Broun, I. W. B, (D.C.)
Brown, James B., 14th and

14th and Champa Sts.

(Or.S.)
Bumpus, C. W., 624 Empire

Bldg. (D.O.)
Bundy, Jos., 1715 California

St. (D.C.)
Bunn,  C.  R., 611  Mack  Bldg.

Bunn & Bunn, 613 Mack

Bldg. (D.O.)


Casey, J., Hotel Tooney.

Chandler,  J.  C,  307  Masonic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Clark, D. L., Empire Bldg.

Clark, Julia V. Frey, Em-
pire Bldg. (D.O.)
Cobb. Abner J., 1548 Cali-
fornia St., Suite  No. 2.

Cobb,  A.  J., 622  Mack  Bldg.

Conover, E. H., 886 S.

Washington St. (D.C.)
Cornett, Jessie Willard,

3331 E. 13th Ave. (D.O.)
Cramb, J. L., 312 Masonic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Crause, Minnie R., 1231 E.

Colfax Ave. (D.C.)
Crawford, A. D., 1458 Penn

St. (D.C.)
Culver, Celie, 1415 E. Col-
fax Ave. (D.C.)
Curtin, Katherine E., Em-
pire Bldg. (D.O.)
Curtiss, Katherine E., 530

Empire Bldg. (D.O.)
Daniels. R. R., Majestic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Darnell, Laura B., 1315

B'way. (D.C.)
Darnell. J. J., 420 16th St.

Ditto. Eva. 135 9th St.

Draper, C. L. 535 Majestic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Dwelle. Ida, 2244 Gaylord

St. (D.C.)
Eubert, Fred, 1221 B'way.

Pishei', Dr., c/o Fisher

Sanitarium. (S.T.)
Poltz, Mrs. C. 3349 Tejon

St, (D.C.)
Fritz & Fritz, 208 Masonic

Temple. (D.C.)
Gadson. T, H.. 806 Sante

Drive. (D.O.)
Gadson, Thomas H.. 403

Mining Exchange Bldg.

(L)
Gowen, Julia, 1630 Main

St. (D.H.)
Graves, Murray, Symes

Bldg. (D.O.)
Greedy, Frank A , 625

Commonwealth Bldg.

(Or.S.)
Harper,  Ida  M., 1269  Marion

St. (D.C.)
High,  Jas.  H.,  2088  Emerson

St. (D.C.)
High. J. H., 2740 W. 32nd

Ave. (D.C.)
High.  James  H., 618  Central

Savings Bank Bldg.

Hilton, Bertha, 46 W. First

Ave. (D.O.)
Home, Nellie, 1415 E. Col-
fax  Ave. (D.C.)
Home, P.  B..  1415  E. Colfax

Ave. (D.C)
Howell, C. C, 3022 22nd

St. (D.C)
Hunt,  R.  C, (D,C,)
Jaynes, Tony, 116 S. Logan

St. (D.C)
.Taltz, Mrs. C, 3349 Tejon

St. (D.C.)
Jones, J, Hamilton, 17th

and  Lincoln Sts. (D.C.)
Jones, J. P., 49 S. Lincoln

St. (D.C)
Jones. Ralph M., Mack

Bldg. (D.O.)


Colorado


Geographical  Index


983


Kaufman, Alice, 2126 High

St.  (D.C.)
Keep, F A. 1045 Lincoln

St.  (N.D.)
Keller, David J., 632 14th

St.  (D.C.)
Landan, Mrs

St.  (D.C.)
Lang-e, Dr. Chas.

Masonic Tennple


611 S. Pearl

E., 208

1540 Madison


B.


1817


l.arson, E. T.

St. (D.C.)
Larson, E. T., 2349 Gilpin

St. (D.C.)
I^each, Clarence W., 52

Ravnard St. (D.C.)
Lubbert, P., 327 Common-
wealth  Bldg-. (D.O.)
lAibbert,  Dr.  F., 1221  B'way.

Ijiiedicke, F. A., Empire

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Mathie.sen, Chas. O. (DC.)
McMullan, Edith H., 58 "W.

Raymond Ave. (D.C.)
Miles. Robt. W., Barth Blk.

Miles. Robt. W., 5300 W.

41st Ave. (D.C.)
Mitchell, K. E., 1337 Cali-
fornia St. (D.C.)
Mizo, Geo. W., Pierce Hotel

(DO.)
Morrison, Martha A., 1315

E. 13th Ave. (D.O.)
Morse, Ida  B. (D.C.)
Mullan, Edith  H. W., 58 W.

Raynard  St.  (D.C.)
Neuman,  827  16th  St.
Osg-ood, Helen .T., 1325

Colfax  Ave.  (D.C.)
Painter. S. W., 1038 Acoma

Ave. (D.C.)
Payne, Mabel C, 507 Cen-
tral Savings Bank Bldg-.
Payne, Mary
Glenarm St.
Perris, Geo. W.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Peters, Henry,

Bldg-. (D.C.)

Pierce, Mrs..

Park. (D.C.)

Powell, R. P..

Bldg. (D.O.)

Pruett Bros.,

St. (D.C.)
Reed, Robert
B'way. (D.C.)
Reid, Chas. C, Majestic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Renfrew, D. Rhodes, 1404

Tremont St. (D.C  )
Rhodes,  R.  D.,  1443  Glenarm

St. (D.O.)
Rians, J. C, 1028 Washing--

ton St. (D.O.)
Richardson, E. E., 620

Mack  Bldg-.  (N.D  )
Roberts, Grace Mae, 2760

Vine St. (D.O.)
Rose, ^V. S., 328 S. Logan

St. (D.O.)
Schlasser. Ella, 1613 Pearl

St. (D.C.)
Shaller. J. M., 1011 E. 17th

St. (D.C.)
Shaller, J. M., 610 Common-
wealth Bldg. (D.C.)
Sharp, Mrs. Ida, 1125 W.

10th St. (D.C.)
Shepard, Geo., 627 Penn St.

Slack, Annette M. 1310

Welton  St.  (D.C.)
Singletary, Dora, 1506 16th

St. (D.C.)
Singletary, M., 506 16th St.


C,
516 Empire

, 617 Mack

University

324 Empire

525 E. 18th

1034


Stevenson, G., 1715 Cali-
fornia St. (D.C.)

Stevenson,  Geo., 1543  Clark-
son St. (D.O.)

Stewart,  5048  Quitman  St.

Thomas,  F.  A.,  1308  Glen-
arm  St. (D.C.)

Thomas,  W.  A.,  1440  Glen-
arm  St. (D.O.)

Tilden,  J.  H.,  3209  W.  Fair-
view Place (N.D.)

Trenarv,  .1.  M.,  1757  Welton
St. (D.O.)

Turner,  Jane,  1416  16th  St.

Walker,  W.  R.,  511  Majestic
Bldg. (D.O.)

Warren,  Matthew  B.,  1861
W. 12th Ave. (D.O.)

Wells,  Chas.  H.,  1619  Wash
St. (D.C.)

Wells,  Minnie  E.,  1619  Wash
St. (D.C.)

Wetterstrand,  Paul,  14  36
Tremont St. (D.O.)

Wey, Dr. Julia  May Court-
ney,  1633  Court  Place.
1633 Court Place. (N  D.)

Wev,  Julia  May  Courtney,
1633 Court  Place. (D.O.)

Wheeler,  E.  M.,  448  S.
Washington St. (D.O.)

Whitehead  &  Vayl,  316
Colorado Bldg. (D.O.)

Wiberg,  Miss  A.  S.,  Denver
Sta.  R.  No.  2,  Box  16.

Wight,  Alice  M.,  1460  Pearl
St. (D.C.)

Wihug,  A.,  R.  1,  Box  16,  S.
Denver Sta. (N.D.)

Wilson,  Chas.  A.,  622  13th
St. (D.O.)

Wilson,  Estelle,  1458  Court
PI. (D.O.)

"Wright,  Alia  M.,  1418  La-
fayette St. (D.O.)

Wright,  J., 826  15th  St.
Oolores: Reno,  Inez.  F. (D.C.)

!)urnngo: Dean, H. S., First
Natl. Bank Bidg. (D.O.)
Sorg, Mrs. Marie. (D.C.)

Kagle: Caulk,  Mrs.  M.  B.

roaton:  Lux,  Leo  L.,  First
Natl.  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)

Edgrewater: Cash, Marguerite.

I^ng^lewood: Monk, Helen

Louise, 125 E. Girard St.
(DC.)
IT't. Collins: Broyles, Sam'l,
13 Forester Bldg. (D.C.)

Burton,  Charlotte  M..  218
W. Olive St. (D.O.)

Foster  & Foster. (D.O.)

Haleman & Reynolds.

Holiman,  "W.  O.,  205  State
Mercantile  Bldg. (D.C.)

Miller,  Frank  W.,  218  E.
Mountain Ave. (D.C.)

Miller,  Lesh,  218  E.  Moun-
tain Ave. (D.C.)

Printv,  Svlvia,  Avery  Blk.

"VVells, Geo. A. (D.O.)

Wilke,  Geo.  C,  146  S.  Col-
lege  Ave. (D.O.)

Ft.  MorKan:  Dresher,  Albert
C,  Box  262,  "W.  Kiowa
Ave. (S.T.)

Fowlort Meredith, H. J.


Ci]eii\%'oo(i SprinKHt Frost, E.
M., P. O. Bldg. (D.O.)

Hinman, Chas. (D.C.)
Grand .Tiinction: Cate, Pliilip,
Grand Valley Bank Bldg.

Hook,  J. Henry,  Grand  Val-
ley  Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Tate, C. (D.O.)

Tate, Philip, 210-11 Grand
Valley Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

(Jreeleyi Banner, Howard.

Draper, F. A.. Opera House

Blk. (D.O.)
Friedling & Friedling, 801

6th  St. (D.O., D.C.)
Hamilton, Amanda N., 222

Coronado St. (D.O.)
Harper, Chas. S. (D.O.)
Jones, Freding, 801 6th St.

Merryman, H. I.,., 1524 8th

Ave. (D.C.)
Reno,  O.  E. (D.O.)
Runnells & Runnells, 1002

9th Ave. (D.C.)
''Unnison; Morris,  F.  I.,. (D.C.)
flolly: Israel, Benj. (N  D.)

?Ioward: Hamilton, Dr. D. D.

Ideal: Tyson, Jas. W. (S.T.)
lia Jnnta: Smiley, M. S., c/o

Sherman Annex. (D.C.)

Larimer: Crissman, John.
Walther, A. E. (D.C.)
Walther, Lillian. (D.C.)
J-as Animas: Partridge, C. E.

!-omar: Crissman & "Wallace.

I^onjs-mont: Babcock, "W. P.
Benson,  W. R.

Bowersox, U. S.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Denton, V^. N. (D.C.)
^oveland: Croskey, J. C,
Box 243. (D.C.)
Keeler, Marv N. (D.O.)
Denton, "W. N. (D.C.)
Denton, W. W. (D.C.)
McCobb, Elsie M., 622 1st

St. (D.C.)
Vandeventer, Lew. (D.C.)
'lajestio: Carey, Miss S. I.

■^IcKinney: Stewart, J. H.

^loifath: Gartner,  I. C. (D.C.)
"lonte A'i.sta: Carrell, R. L.

■"lont Clair: Slack, Nettie.

"^Fontro.se: Flei-ning, F. B.,
Keller Bldg. (D.O.)
Wallace, S. S. (D.O.)
Veuberg: Spang, B. 'W., 1st

and  Edward  Sts. (D.C.)
Ordwayj AVallace, G. G., Box

31. (D.C.)
I'agosa Spring's: Parmelee,

Cora  G. (D.O.)
Palisade: Haller, J. H. (D.C.)

Holler.  J. L. (D.O.)
Pueblo: Denton, H. A., 517
N. Sante  Fe  Ave. (D.C.)
De  Tienne. Harry G., Cen-
tral  Blk. (D.O.)
Fisher, Carl L., Erickson
Bldg. (D.O  )


612 4th  Ave.
G., Kistler


!)84


Geographical  Index


Connecticut


Hampton, David C. 24

Mechanics Bldg. (D.C.)
Hartsell. (DO.)
Hampton, David, 24  Mason-
ic Temple. (D.O.)
Hampton, Wm., 24 Masonic

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hatzel, George, 720 Main

St. (D.O.)
I.annon, 106 Central Bldg:.

(DO.)
Maddux, Walter S., Central

Blk. (D.O.)
McWilliams, R. M. (D.C.)
Medcliffe, Pearl, P. O.

Bids. (DO.)
Mevers, O. D., Majestic

Hotel. (D.C.)
Pavne & Payne. 101 Pope

Blk. (D.C, W.M.)
Pueblo: Payne, Eva  C, 46

Masonic Bldg. (D.C.)
Pruett Bros., 46 Masonic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Stewart,  R.  C,  W.  &  D.  Blk.

Walmslev, R., Thatcher

Blk. (D.O.)
Rocky  Ford: Antwerp. Eliza-
beth,  St. .Johns Bldg-.

Antwerp. H. S.. St. Johns

Bldg. (D.C.)
AVilson. T. B. (D.C, O.P.)
Reickenbough, D. (D.O.)
Wilson. Dr. T. B. (D.C.)
Vernon, .T. B., 909 Moore

Gobin Blk. (D.O.)
Snlidn: England, Archie.

Sedsrwick: Morgan, McClain.

Sterllns: Kellog,  W.  F. (D.O.)
Siin.shine: .Tones, Jas. K.

(ST.)
Trinidad: Anderson. A. (D.C)
Anderson, Mrs. AV. E., 619

Arizona Ave. (D.C)
Ander.son, W. O., 627 Ari-
zona  Ave. (D.O.)
Carev, Stella I. (D.O.)
Kofer, A. I.. (D.C.)
Marshall. "Wade  H., Masonic

Bldg. (D.O.)
Thomp.son. T. F. (D.O.)
I'icfor: Halcomb, Ambrose Iv.

(DO.)
^^'csfoIifro: Durrett, Carrie

F. (D.O.)
AVIieatridsre: Reynolds, R. H.

(D.C)
Wild Horse: Fessel, Mrs.

Phena. (D.C.)
AVray: Friend, T^illian. (DO.)


CONNECTICUT

Andover: Franklin, .1. H.,

Ca.se Sanitarium. (D.O.)
Ansonin: Wilbur, G. H., 7-11

Opera House Blk. (D.C)
Bo.ston: Zimmerman, J. O.,
50.'') Huntington Ave.
(DO.)
Bridgeport  t Bonton, L. C,
1188 Main St., Newfleld
Bldg. (D.C.)
Cook, Alexander, 651 State

St. (D.C.)
Duclos, Wm., 1027 State St.

Gregory. David  N., 92 Colo-
rado Ave. (D.C.)
Hohne, G.  W., 670 State St.
(N.D.)  1


Kelley,  .John  A.,  1115  Main
St. (D.C.)

Llndholm,  Wm.,  66  Maple-
wond Ave. (N.D.)

Paolillo,  Antonio.  381  East
Main St. (D.M.T  )

Pope, H. F., 107 Meigs
Bldg. (D.C.)

Smith, F. B., 1024 Main
St (N.D.)

Sproviero,  Patrick,  1188
Main St. (D.C.)

Stoinfadt.  A.  O  ,  1115  Main
St. (N.D.)

Wetherbe, E. T., 107 Meigs
Bldg. (N.D.)
Bristol: Hayes, P. G.. Bristol
.Savings Bank Bldg.

Keller.  Jno.  A.,  1115  Main  St.
(DC)

Keller.  John  A..  .38  Court-
land  Ave. (D.C.)

Keller.  John  A.,  604  Securi-
ty Bldg. (D.O.)

Lent,  Elmer  F..  255  Cole-
man  St. (D.O.)

Paul,  Arthur  H.,  Court  Ex-
change Bldg. (D.O.)

Paul,  Oster  A.  H.,  211  State
St. (DO.)

Smith,  F.  B.,  1024  Main  St.,
Room 501. (D.O.)

Spinal  Health  System,  176
Main  St. (D.C.)

Steinfadt,  A.,  115  Main  St.
(DO.)

Thouberrv,  Oster  H.  A.,  612
Securitv  Bldg.,  1115  Main
St. (D.O.)

Van Densen. Harriet L., 78
Washington Ave.. 404
Security Bldg. (D.O.)
Danbiiry: Crn^vford, S. Vir-
ginia. 10 Tvibrary Place.
(DO.)

Erickson, Edna E. (D.O.)

Miller,  L.  H. (D.C.)

West, W. R., Opera House
Blk. (DC)
Derby:  McFetridge,  E.  L.,
fn.Ct

McFetridge, M. J. (D.C.)

Shea. F.  W., 7 Sixth St.

White. W. F., 282 Main St.
(D.C)
Oreonwieh: Carson, Henrv. 32
T>afavette Place. (D  O  )

Mulford, G. S.. 350 Green-
wich Ave. (D.O.)
Haddntn:  Grossman. A.,

Rivercre.st Manor. (N.D.)
Hartford: Andru.s. W. H., 904
Main St. (DO.)

Bergines,  Herman.  84

Capitol Ave. (N.D.)

Bil.skisn.  J.  J.,  40  Capitol
St. (D.O.)

Bltimer.  Tvouis.  97  Ann  St.

Burnes,  A.  &  W.,  926  Main
St. (N.D  )

Burns  &  Burns,  926  Main
St., Room 44. (DC.)

Bush.  Earl  A.,  902  Main  St.


Practitioners  arc  requested  to  in-
form the  vublisher  of  probable
(iitcrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
chanae  of  address  in  the  course
of  nrintinq.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


Carlson, C, 75 Pratt St.

(DO.)
Charles, J. M., 41 Wlnthrop

St. (D.O.)
Clark, Clyde A., 18 Asylum

St. (D.O.)
Denison,  E. Rheuben,  Dillon

Bldg. (D.C.)
Duclos, Wm., 07 Ann St.

Edwards. L. S., 420 Main

St. (D.O.)
Finkelstein, A. A., 97 Ann

St. (D.C.)
Fisher. Ray L., 306 Ferry

St. (D.C)
Griffln, Caroline E., Hart-
ford Natl. Bank Bldg.

(DO.)
Hayes. P. G., Sage Allen

Bldg. (D.C.)
Hydropathic Institute, 420

Main St. (Hy.)
Kingsbtiry. L. C. 904 Main

St. (D.O.)
La  Freniere, Arthur  E.

Lytle, Alfred J., 904 Main

St. (ND.)
National Society  of  Naturo-
paths, 97 Ann St. (N.D.)
Nelson, Per, 281  Wethers-
field Ave. (N.D.)
Philbrick,  H.  L.,  Hill's  Bldg.

(DC)
Riley. M. D., 158 Vine St.

Squire. Roger N., 904 Main

St. (D.O.)
Ward, C. E. (D.C.)
Kensington: Wooding. Ralph

A. (D.C.)
London: Siveny. .7. F., 62

Washington St. (D.C.)
Meriden: Eldridge, "VV. B., 29

N. Colonv St. (D.C.)
Nellis, Chas. M., 275 West

Main St. (N.D.)
Stippich, Wm. H., Box 847.

(DO.)
Tramm, Geo. A., Hall and

Lewis Blk. (DC.)
Uliddletoivn: Anderson. .T

Henry. 605 Main St.


Nau>rnt"oki Sullivan, F. P.

(D.C)
Ne'w Brit:tin: Coombs, F. R.,

88  W.  Main St. (N.D.)
Foley. %Vm. R., Nat'l Bank

Bldg. (D.C.)
Fowley. Wm. R., 272 Main

St. (DC)
Gibson. W. A., 938 Chapel

St. (D.C.)
Volz, Jos.  A., 61  Madison

St. (N.D.)
Wooding, C, Booth Bldg.

(DC)
Wooding, Ralnh A. (D.C)
Wooding & Gibson, Booth

Bldg. (D.C.)
New  Haven: Amspoker, S.  D..

Cutler Bldg. (D.C)
Beers. C S., 73 Spring St.

Cilia, A. De, 73 Lyon St.

Dozier. J. K., 51 Howe St

(DO.)
Dwie-ht, Hamilton E., 44

Hie-h St. (D.C.)
Eldrtdge  &  Moore. Drs., 365

Whnlley Ave. (DC.)
Eldridge, W. B.. 365 Whal-

ley  Ave. (DC)
Ferguson. E. W., 115 York

St. (D.C)


helaivatc [Dial,
of Columbia


(ieographical  Index


1)8;


306 Ferry


E., 3fi
High
CFiapel
Drs.,


Fisher. Ray

St. (D.C.)
Gibson.  W.  A. (D.C.)
Hamilton. Dwight

High St. (D.C.)
Kurz, Robert F., 36

St. (D.C.)
Munro. W. D., 1044

St. (N.D.)
Nooding' & Gibson.

Malley Bldg-. (D.C.)  1

Noyes. H. W., 416  Crown St.  i

Ranney, A. \V., 9 Sylvan

Ave. (D.C.)
Riley, Benj. F., 1150 Chapel

St. (D.O.)
Wooding & Gibson,

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg. (N.D.)
Ne^v London: Bi'adford, Geo.

H. (M.D., D.O.)  I

Campbell, Ida S., Manwar-

ing  Bldg. (D.O.)
Colby, Irving, Marsh Bldg.

Zimmerman, Dr. (D.C.)
!Vcw Itlilford: Underwood,

Ralph E., 1 Main St.


IVorwalk:  Shambaiigh,  D.  Al-
len,  Coleburn  Bldg. (D.O.)

Norwich: Bernard, Curtis,
McGrory  Bldg. (D.O.)
Dunham, M. M. (N.D.)
Worthington, H., 287 Main
St. (D.C.)

North  >Ianchester:  Nelson,
David,  103  W.  Center  St.

Putnam: Pease, H. L., Brad-
ley Bldg. (D.O.)
Saretzki,  Wm.  (D.C.)

Rockville: Schreiter,
Market St. (D.O.)

Shelton: White, W. F.,
Box 294. (D.C.)

South Manchester: Carlson,

Charles  J., 55  Central and

23 Foster  St. (D.C.)
South Nor^valk:  Francis,

Thomas, 94 E. Washing-
ton St. (D.C.)
Stamford: Barthol, Ernest,

Stamford and S. Norwalk

Sts. (D.C.)
Bonton, Louis, 339 Atlantic

St. (D.C.)
Link. E. C, 87 Broad St.

Merrill. Ray C, 366 Atlan-
tic  St. (D.C.)
Mulford. G. S., 386 Atlantic

St. (D.O.)
Sproviero. Patrick, 268-70

Atlantic St. (D.C.)
South Norwalk:  Francis,

Thos.. 94 E. Washington

St. (D.C.)
TorrinKton: Broderick, Kath-

erine A., 59 S. Main St.

Sullivan, P. F., 49 "Water

St. (D.C.)
VVallingford: Sturges, A

113 S. Main St. (N.D.)
AVaterbury: Benham, L.

Odd Fellows Bldg., 36

Main St. (D.C.)
Cass,  Mr. &  Mrs. Ralph, 278

E. Main St. (D.C.)
Collier,  Hix  F., 133  W.  Main

St. (D.O.)
Cunningham, G. H., 810

Liberty Bldg. (D.C.)


Alvin,


P. O.


B.,


O.,

N.


Dodge, A., Ill Grand St.

Walker, E. K.. 413 Lilley
Bldg. (D.C.)

Wundrach, J. W., Odd Fel-
lows Bldg. (D.C.)
Watertown: Smith, C. C.

West Haven: Moore, R. E.,
624 Washington Ave.

^Villimantio:  Ziffel,  I.,  Wind-
ham House,  Corner  Main
and Church Sts. (D.C.)


DELAAVARE

Milford: Pierce, Willard.

(D.C, M.D.)
Wilmington: Hayes, Bertha,  i

1008 W. 8th  St. (D.C.)
Hitchcock, L., 908 King St.  |

Patterson, Arthur,  923

Jefferson St. (D.O.)  '

Richie, Chas. A., 210 Equit-  i

able Bldg. (D.C.)
Sawyer, T. J., 3314 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Vanderheid, H. J., Carnegie

University. (D.O.)


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

Pougrhkeep.sie: Hutchins, C.

E. (D.C.)
AVashington: Allen, Marie

Blise, 3511 30th  St. (D.C.)
Amberger, Miss, 1236 11th

St. N.  W. (D.M.)
Aufderheide.  Wm.,  806|  I  St.

N. W. (D.C.)
Bagley, Miss I. E., Kenois

Bldg. (Ma.)
Bateman,  Louise,  1414  W  St.

N. W. (D.M.)
Beauverd, A. A., 27 P St.,

N. W. (D.C.)
Bell, Albert, Woodward

Bldg. (D.C.)
Benning,  Lillie  M.,  2901 16th

St. N. W.

Berrang, H. P., 700 E St.

S. E. (D.C.)
Boiseau, Miss  Ida F., 223

2nd St. S. E. (Ma.)
Bouchler, J. R., 1122 13th

St. N. W. (D.C.)
Bricker, Miss Sara  L.,

Kenois Bldg. (Ma.)
Brosenne,  Dora, The  Toron-
to. (D.C.)
Bruen, L. Blanchard. 1402 F

St. N. W. (N.D.)
Brunner, J. T., Woodward

Bldg. (D.M.)
Bryant, R.  A., The Burling-
ton Apts. (D.C.)
Burdette, O., 418 G St.

Burtrum, Crabill  M., 1404 L

St. N. W. (D.C.)
Cain, Miss  Katie, 716 7th

St. N. W. (Ma.)
Carmen,  Sallie  B.,  The

Postner. (Ma.)
Clark, W. F.. 326 Indiana

Ave. (D.C.)


Cohan, Mrs.  Mae, Kenois
Bldg.  (Ma.)

Crabill,  M. B., 1404 L  St.
N. VV. (D.C.)

DeVries, Emma, Farragut
Apts. (D.C.)

Dickenscher.  V..  3700  5th
Ave. (D.C.)

Jnicamp,  D.  li.,  813  12th  St.

Eaton,  Mary  Walker,  Stone-
leigh Court. (D.O.)

Ellis,  Edward  N.,  114  V  St.
N.  E. (Ma.)

English,  Leonard  H.,  Wood-
ward Bldg. (D.C.)

lOnglish,  Merton  A.,  Colo-
rado Bldg. (D.O.)

Evans,  T.  Thoma.s,  1347  L  St.
N. VV. (M.D.)

Ferguson,  Wm.  F.,  Sivan  St.

Fete,  Luther  B.,  1407  Allison
St. (D.C.)

Fordyce,  H.  A. (N.D.)

Fowler,  Miss  F.  I., 1226  D
St. N. E. (D.C.)

Georger,  F.  A.  M.,  Cor.  14th
and  I  Sts.  N.  W. (N.D.)

Gibson,  Frank  E..  927  I
St. N. W. (D.C.)

Glover,  Norman  C,  14th
and  Clifton  Sts.  N.  W.

Goodpasture,  C.  O.,  Colo-
rado Bldg. (D.O.)

Gustafson, E. M., Cumber-
land Thomas Circle.
(D.C, Ph.C)

Gustafson,  Miss  M.,  The
Cumberland, Thomas
Circle and Massachusetts
Ave. (D.C.)

Hanson,  Miss  B.  N.,  Walter
Reed Hospital. (D.C.)

Haupt,  W.  H., 607  O  St.
N.  W. (Ma.)

Haussler,  Joseph  H., 332
14th  St.  N.  E. (Ma.)

Hawkins,  Laura  I.,  The
Farragut. (D.O.)

Hodge, Mrs.  M. J., 122 E.
Capitol St. (Ma.)

Hodges,  L.  P.,  The  North-
umberland Apts. (D.C.)

Hodges,  P.  L.,  1504  H  St.
N. W. (D.O.)

Hodgkins,  A.  A.,  1440  R  St.
N. W. (D.C.)

Hodgkins, Mrs. June, 1440
R  St. N. W. (D.C.)

Holland, Mrs. E.  M., 1313
Massachusetts  Ave. (D.C.)

Holland, Wm. H., 1313
Massachusetts  Avenue.

Howard,  E.  S.,  The  Farra-
gut  Apts. (D.C.)

Howerton. T. J., 2S12 Con-
necticut Ave. N. W.

Howerton,  Thos.  J.,  South-
ern Bldg. (D.O.)

Ina, Madame, 1440 R  St.
N. W. (Ma.)

Irani,  Ardeshir  Beheram,
Colorado Bldg. (D.O.)

Jeffries, Miss  M. C, 1752
17th  St. N.  W. (Ma.)

Jenkins. Jessie C. (D.C.)

Johnson,  Mrs.  Anna  B.,  1614
ISth St. N. W. (Ma.)

Jones, W. Stanley, 1320 L
St. N. W. (D.C.)

Jones,  W.  Stanley,  South-
ern Bldg. (D.O.)

Kates, George ^\'., 600
Pennsylvania  Ave.  S. E.


nsfi


Cicogr(ij)hic<il  Index


Florida


Kates. Mrs. \\ ., r.OO I'cnn-

sylvania  Avo. S. 10. (D.C. )
Kelley, Mrs. Annie M., llfi]

6th St. N. K. (Ma.)
Ketcham. Anna Marie, 180''

H  St. N. W. (D.O.)
Kettler, Carl, 1710 H St.

N. W. (D.O.)
Kins', Ida M., Medical

Museum. (D.C.)
Kirkpatrick, Georg'e D..

The Farragut. (D.O.)
Kreder, Miss  E.  S., 1911

Westminster St. (D.C.)
I.eckert, Theo. A., 1210

Florida Ave. N. E. (Ma.)
Le Coultre, Emil, 1402 I

St. N.  \V. (D.C.)
I.ie Kites. Rue, The Beacon

Apts. (D.O.)
Lindgren,  E., 1757  K  St.

N. W. (Ma.)
Lingo,  Mrs.  L.  B.,  The

Woodworth, 10th St.

N.  W. (D.C.)
Little, Clara Ulmer, The

Imperial. (D.O.)
Loban, J. M.. 1509 13th St

N. W. (D.C.)
Malcolm, Harrv. 931 11th

St.  N.  E. (D.C.)
Malcolm, Robert C, The

Savoy. (D.O.)
Manley, Cora O., The Im-
perial. (D.C.)
Marinelle System, 723 11th

St.  N.  W. (Ma.)
Marshall, Mrs. M. E., 1432J.

Q St.  N.  W. (Ma.)
McMahan, B. S., Woodward

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Meyers, G. L., 3827 14th St.

N. W. (D.C.)
Miller, B. Curtis, 710 Bond

Bldg. (M.D.)
Miller,  L.  B.,  10th  and  N  Sts.

N. W. (M.D.)
Moore, Riley D., Wardinan

Courts, West. (D.O.)
Morrison, S. B., 1402 I  St.

N. W. (D.C.)
Moyer, G. L., 3827 14th St

N. W. (D.C.)
Nathan, Albert, "\'ictoria

Apts. (D.C.)

lantic  Apts. (D.O.)
Norton, Horace, 1225 L St.

N. W. (D.C.)
Oliver, I. M., The Toronto

Apts. (D.C.)
Parsons,  Geo.  W.,  2037  Park

Road. (D.C.)
Perkins, Helen F., 1830

Columbia Road. D.O.)
Partridge, G. M., 928 I St.

N.  W. (M.D.)
Perkins, Helen F. (D.O.)
Pollock, Anna, 2006 Colum-
bia  Road. (D.O.)
Practorius,  Conrad,  926 17tli

St. N. W. (D.O.)
Province, Mme. B. P., 141C

S  St.  N.  W. (Ma.)
Rascher, Miss  J., 2119 N St.

N. W. (Ma.)
Riggle, A. G., 921 F St.

N.  W. (M.D.)
Riley, J. Shelby, 1116 F St.

N.  W. (N.D.)
Riley, Lora, B 1116 F St.

N. W. (N.D.)
Robinson, Mme. D. V. J.,

1906 6th St. (Ma.)
Rothfuss, E. Lloyd, 835

Woodward Bldg. (D.C.)
Rush.  G.  C,  713 H  St.  N.  W.


Sanders, L. .1., 13 Sjcamorc

Ave. (Ma.)
Saunders, Miss  Cora  E., 618

Grcsham Place. (D.C.)
Shefferman, N. W., 719 lltli

St. N. W. (D.C.)
Shefferman, Mrs. N. W.,

719 11th St. N. W. (D.C.)
Shibley, Alice Patterson.

1869 Wyoming Ave.

Shugrue, I.,aui-a Fen  wick.

Beacon  Apts. (D.O.)
Shuman, I^ouise D., Colo-
rado Bldg. (D.O.)
Silverson,  Paul,  321  C  St.

N. W. (M.D.)
Simpson, Raymond  C, 115

Kentucky Ave. (D.C.)
Simp.son, Rosalie, 1116 F  St.

N. W. (D.C.)
Sinclair. Sarah C. 807 H

St.  N.  W. (D.C.)
Skinner, M. G., Alabama

Apts. (M.D.)
Smith, Mrs. A.  E. B., 1216

F  St.  N. W. (Ma.)
Smith,  C.  R. (D.C.)
Smithy Mrs. E. N. (D.C.)
Smith, Mrs. Minnie D.,

1439 R St. N. W. (D.C.)
Smith, Wilbur L., 1527 I

St.  N. W. (D.O.)
Snape & Snape, 1509 13th

St. N. W. (D.C.)
Sonntag, Miss Clara, 1109

14th St. N. W. (Ma.)
Starkwather, Louise A..

Brighton Apts. (D.O.)
Stearns, C. H., 1504 H St.

N. W. (D.O.)
Stewart, H. D. Lloyd, Dis-
trict Natl. Bank Bldg.

Stewart,  Myra  Cain,  District

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Stone, L. R., 1215 Rhode

Island  Ave. (M.D.)
Strausbaugh, N. W., 720

15th  St. S. E. (D.C.)
Swenson,  Miss  A.  G.,  Royden

Apt. House. (Ma.)
Swope, Chester D., The

Farragut. (D.O.)
Thompson,  Mrs. E.  D., 952

R  St.  N.  W. (Ma.)
Thompson,  Wm.  H.,  813  12th

St. N. W. (D.C.)
Tippett, Henry W., 1004

East  Capitol St. (D.C.)
Tonkin, John, 2121 15th St.

N. W. (Ma.)
Van  den  Berg, 1303  N  St.

Venn, Miss Louey, 1748  M

St. N. W. (Ma.)
Washington  School  of

Chiropractic, 1509 13tl)

St. N. W. (D.C.)
Waters,  Clara  Sherwood,

2233 18th  St.  N.  W. (D.O."*
Waters, Lulu I., Fontanel

Court (D.O.)
Wheeler, Mrs. D. R., 813

12th St.  N. W. (D.C.)
Whitman. W. L., 932 New

York Ave. (D.O.)
W^hitman. W. S., 932 New

York Ave. (D.C.)
Willard, Ch. E., 306 2nd St.

S. E. (D.C.)
Wilson, J. E., 68 9th SL.

N. W. (D.C.)
Winbigler, C. F., The

Cairo. (D.O.)
Wingate, D. M., 702-3 Real

Estate Bldg. (D.C.)


Wingate. D. M., 82,"^ 14tli
St. N. W. ((D.C.)


FliORIDA

Alton: O'Quinn, C. A. (D.C.)
Arcndin: Becker, Jennie, 215

E. Hickory St. (D.O.)
Arcadia: Becker, Jennie, 215
E. Hickory St. (N.D.)
Buckmaster, R. M., Whid-
den Bldg. (D.O.)
Bartow: Crum, J. W. (D.O.)

Montan & Montan. (D.C.)
Bowlint:: Green: Lopez,

Francis. (M.D.)
Bradentown: Parker,  J.  Page.

Bu.shneII: Crisler & Crisler.

Clear^vater: Miller, Grace E.,
Jeffords-Smoyer Bldg.
Crescent City: Wagner,

Aurelia. (D.C.)
Daytona: Duck, M. E. (D.O.)
Herman, John C, 20 Valu-

cia Ave. (D.O.)
O'Neill, Addison, 9  N. Beach

St. (D.O.)
Walker, E. K. (D.O.)
Dayton Beach  t Davis, T. A.

De  Land: Phillips,  W.  M., 225

Diet Bldg. (D.C.)
E}.stero: Weimar. (N.D.)

Woodruff & Jentsch, c/o
Newport Sanitarium, Lee
Co. (D.C.)
Fort  Meade:  Vereen,  Franklin.
Zander, Wm. (N.D.)
Ft. Pierce: Robinson, Lloyd

A. (D.O.)
Georffiana: Chambers, T. H.

Jacksonville: Abrano, J. ~M.
Breitenbucher, Anton E.,

1911 Main St. (D.C.)
Bush, Ida Ellis, 317 Laura

St. (DO.)
Bush  &  Bush, 317 Laura  St.

Collard, Arthur de, 512

Clark Bldg. (D.O.)
Cozatt, J. B. (D.C.)
Cunningham, C. G., West

Bldg. (D.C.)
Davis, Paul R., St. James

Bldg. (D.O.)
Dux, H., Swan and Cantee

Sts. (D.O.)
Elright, J. E., 216 Hagan

St. (D.C.)
Ferguson, J. A., 2018 Perry

St. (D.O.)
Forker, Carl Fritz, Box

213. (D.O.)
Foster, C. E., 337 St. James

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hoffman, E. S.. 33 West

Adam St. (Oph.)
Larmoyeux, Julia A., St.

James Bldg. (D.O.)
Lynch, Alice E., St. James

Bldg. (D.O.)
Mayell, E. W., 508 Clark
Bldg. (D.O.)


UnivcrHiil  Nntiiro'patlilc  Dirootory  iiiiil IliiyorM' Ciulde


98:


t


YUNGBORN


TANGERINE,  FLA.

(Orange  County)

Florida  Nature  Cure  Resort  and  Recreation  Home

Station  on  Seaboard  Air  Line  R.  R.,  ZELLWOOD
Station on Atlantic Coast Line, MOUNT DORA

Carrying  out  the  principles  of  the  genuine  Nature  Cure  as  practiced  at  the
famous  Yungborn  at  Butler.  N.  J.,  this  FLORIDA  YUNGBORN  offers  splendid
advantages  to  those  seeking  relief  and  cure  by  the  Natural  Methods.  Located  at
an  elevation  above  Lake  Ola,  in  the  midst  of  the  most  glorious  natural  scenery.
Commands  a  superb  view  of  the  Lake  and  surrounding  country.  The  dry  climate,
freedom  from  fogs,  malaria,  mosquitoes  and  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  have
long  made  this  locality  famous  as  a  health  resort.  Fine  bathing  and  swimming.
An  ideal  place  for  convalescents.  For  those  seeking  health  and  recreation,  the
FLORIDA  YUNGBORN  offers  an  ideal  spot  for  a  holiday  playground.  The
management  of  the  Institution  being  the  same  cis  that  of  the  Yungborn  at  Butler,
N.  J.,  every  facility  is  afforded  for  carrying  out  the  true  Natural  Life  and  Healing
Methods.  Sun,  Light  and  Air  baths,  clay  packs,  lothannin  baths,  all  branches  of
Hydro-therapy,  Massage,  Swedish  Movements,  Mechano-therapy,  Chiropractic.
Vegetarian  and  fruitarian  diet.  Special  facilities  for  fasting.  Good  roads  for  auto-
mobiling  and  driving.

Rates  for  patients,  with  niassage  and  full  treatment,  $35  per  n^ee^,  $125  per  month,

and  upwards. — Rates  for boarders, convalescents and invalids, $60 per month,

$25  per  Week- Visitors,  $3.50  per  Jap.

For  further  information,  address

B.  LUST,  RECREATION  HEALTH  HOME,  BUTLER,  N.  J.

Illustrated  prospectus  sent  on  receipt  of  4  cents  for  postage


988


Geographical  Index


Georgia


Offlop of Manipulative Sur-
prerv, 512 Clark Bldg:.
(DO.)
Schubert. Geo. H., 305-7-9
Atlantic  Natl. Bank  Bldg.
Schubert. G. H., 505-6

Masonic Temple. (D.C.)
Shubert. S. H.. Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Vandervoort. .Tno.. 825 E.

Duval St. (D.C.)
Walter, E. K. (D.C.)
Wpthoroll. C. B. (X.D.)
Jupiter: Week.s, C. H. (D.O.)
KisHtmniee: Crisler, Chas. E.
Crisler. Mrs. Mary, (D.C.)
Lakeland: Scarborough, J. L.
(DC.)
Scarborough  &  Scarborough.

Whelcr. Sarah E. (D.O.)
Laurel Hill: Axelson, Eric

Van. (D.O.)
Live Oak; Au.sbrooks, W. P.,
1-2 and 7 I.,ewin Bldg.
Lynn Haven: Sandes, N. E.

Mayo: Sears, Daniel  M.
Sears, Daniel. (D.C.)
Miami: Betts. Ednah, Securi-
ty Bldg. (D.C.)
Evans, A. I^., New Tatum

Bldg. (D.O.)
Evans. .Tennie L.. New

Tatum Bldg. (D.O.)
Hoffmann, Miami Bank and

Trust Co. Bldg. (D.O.)
Kiplina-er. Lawyers Bldg.

Knope. ,T., Pourmont Hotel,

(Hy.)
Richardson, H.. 217 12th St.

Roessell. Paul E., 408 12th

St. (N.D.)
Schnbprt, Dr.,  Townly  Bldg-.

Strayer. W.  A., 329J 12th
St. (N.D.)
Mount Dora: Oellecker, Louis
M., Highland Sanitarium.
Muskos:ee: Johnson, Dr. A. J.  i
Moore. R E. (D.C.)
Shupert,  J.  C,  Ave.  C,  201-4

I^awyers Bldg. (D.O.)  !

York, Geo. V. (D.C.)  I

Ne-\v River: Ferguson, Julius

A. (N.D.)  I

Ne^v  Smyrna: Farr,  B.  H.  |

(M  D.. D.O., D.C.)  I

Meinhardi. E. J. (D.C.)
Orlanflo: Buckmaster, R. P.,
132 S. Orange Ave. (D.O.)
Heath. W. L. (D.C.)
Howell, J. Corwin. (D.O.)
Florida Sanatorium. (D.O.)
Palm  Beach:  Scher,  Bertha,
Hotel Palm Beach. (D.O.)
Pensacola: Goetz, W. C, Box

1046. (D.C.)
Palatka: Davis. Sarali M.,
Putnam Hou.se. (D.O.)
Mitchell, Chas. R., Blount
Bldg. (D.O.)  i

Perry: O'Quinn, C. A. (D.C.)
Plant City: Bird, L. L. (N.D.)

Cardwell, W. A. (D.C.)
San  Antonio: Friebel, Anna.

SanforH: Crosbv, Wm. H.,

101 9th St. (D.O.)
.Sebrln^i  Shumate,  Mary  L.


41
S.,


B..  30-31


Andruss,
Ave. S.


, 405 6th
424  Cen-
E., 506


St. AuKUNtine: Foster, Frank

A., Box 706. (D.C.)
Ingraham, Elizabeth M.

Saragossa St. (D.O.)
Le Pompadour, Frank

27  Cune  St.  (N.D.)
Moseley,  J.  R.  (D.O.)
Quinn, Ella X., Jefferson

Theatre Bldg
Reynolds, Arlene

Jefferson  Bldg.
St.  (loud:  Hyre.  S
St.  Peter.sburs;:

Flora. 136 4th

Baumgras. Geo. O., Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Cole, Ernest I., 340 1st St.

N. (N.D.)
Douglas, Mrs. E. L. (D.O.)
Ellis, E. Adelyn, 561 Cen-
tral Ave. (D.O.)
McCardell, C. J. (D.O.)
Mitchell, C. G. (D.O.)
Olliff, I. S. (D.O.)
Smith. Miss R. E

St. S. (S.T.)
Turner, Arthur  R.,

tral  Ave.  (D.O.)
Tampa: Berry, A.

Florida Ave. (D.O.)
Clerke,  E. P., 103  W.  Michi-
gan  Ave. (D.O.)
Eychanger, K. K. (D.O.)
Ferguson, J. A. (D.O.)
Hohn. A. (D.O.)
Kerrigan, L. M., Citizens'

Bank  Bldg.  (DO.)
Mohawk, Dr. O. W., 100

Lafayette-Warren Bldg.

(DO.)
Morris, J. K., 1411 Orange

St. (D.O.)
Munch,  G. A., 1806 Franklin

St. (M.D.)
Nerlin. J., 331-32 Citizen

Bldg. (D.O.)
Puddicombe, Raymond, 410

E.  Lafayette St. (D.O.)
Roberts, E. H., Y. M. C. A.

Smith & Smith, 914 Frank-
lin  St. (D.O.)
Smith, Virgil B. (D.C.)
Stepps, \Vm., 2203 Florida

Ave. (D.O.)
Wagner, A. R. (D.C.)
Tangerine,  Orang-e  County:
Brunner, Charles. (N.D.)
Fuchs, Louis. (N.D., M.D.)
Goreham, E. R. (N.D.)
Lust, Benedict. (N.D., M.D.)
Lust, Louisa. (N.D., D.O.)
Mushynski, Thomas. (N.D.,

D.C.)

George


Shurtleff,

Turnbiill:

Umatilla:

West I'alm Beaeh

A. E. (D.O.)


Thomas,
Withers,


Box 74.
Arthur.


Avid M.
Freeman


The  publisher  of  this  Directory
will  consider  it  a  great  favor  if
the  users  will  send  in  correct
addresses  of  practitioners  wher-
ever they  find  the  wrong  ones
listed,  also  names  and  addresses
of  known  practitioners  who  are
not  listed  in this  edition.


East Fair

E., Forsyth

615 Grand


Rhodes, B. H. (D.C.)
Rowe, Eva Frances, 109J S.

Olive St. (D.O.)
Rowe, Willard S., 109i S.

Olive  St. (D.O.)
West Tampa; Alonso, Jose.

2105 Francis Ave. (D.O.)
Winter Haven: Dean, James

R., Box 35. (D.C.)
Woodrow: Robins, F. W.,

Box 78. (D.O.)
Ybor  City, Tampa: Arguelles,

Dr. M. G., 1406 10th Ave.

Zepherhills: Holmes,  A.  (D.O.)


GEORGIA

Arion: Cummings, H. D.,
Mcintosh Academy.
Americus:  Thurman,  E.  L.,  285
Jackson St. (D.O.)
Thurman, Stella C, 285
Jackson St. (D.O.)
A.shburn: Kiplinger, C. E.

Atlanta: Andrews, H. L., 701
Atlanta Trust Co. Bldg.
Blackman, W.  Wilbur,

Robertson  Sanitarium.

Broach, Elizabeth L., Hurt

Bldg. (D.O.)
Bryan, A., 242

St. (N.D.)
Clark, Everett
Bldg. (D.C.)
Dean, Clay L.,

Bldg. (D.C.)
Dozier, W. R., Grand Opera

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hall,  Harry,  5th  Floor,  For-
syth  Bldg. (D.C.)
Hardin, M. C, Grand Opera

House. (D.O.)
Lankford, Morris C, 76

Grant St. (N.D.)
Ormand, Wm. E., 52 For-

malt St. (D.C.)
Schrimer, J. F., 107 Capitol

Ave. (D.C.)
Smellie. A. V., 615, The

Grand. (D.C.)
Wheeler, Elyin, 600 Grand
Opera House Bldg. (D.C.)
Whitmore, J. L., Grand
Opera House Bldg. (D.C.)
A.ugu.«ita: Davis, Thomas L.,
Chronicle Bldg. (D.O.,
M.D.)
Bogart: Thompson, Grace.

Brun-swiek: Harley &  Harley,
1228 Carpenter St. (D.C.)
Harlev, Mr. & Mrs.
1228 Carpenter St.
Carrolltnn; r?ringhurst,

Columt)us: Lorenz, Chas. E.,

Masonic Temple. (D.O.)
Cordele: Elliott, J. W. (D.O.)
Dalton: Seebold, F. (D.O.)
nouK^la.s:  Hughes, J.  H. (D.C.)
FitzR-erald; Hall, Augustus,
228 N. Lee St. (D.C.)
Keefer, Fred E., Garbot-
Donovan Bldg. (D.O.)
Griffin; Layne, A. C, 223 W.

College St. (D.O.)
Macon: Brinson,  M. N., 216-17
Georgia Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Davis, Jas. E., 768 Poplar
St. (D.C.)


Wm.
E. S.


Idaho
Illinois


Geographical  Index


98!)


Jelks, Albert A., Georgia

Life Bldg-. (D.O.)
Jones, Prank F., 354 2nd
St. (D.O.)
Marietta: Harris, Rdwln I..,

606 Cliurch St. (D.O.)
Moultrie: Trimble. II. H.,
Commercial Bldg-. (D.O.)
Dean, Clay I.. (D.C.)
Rome: Riley, Nannie B.,

West Bldg:. (D.O.)
Ro!«well: Cantrell, S. P. Car-

rothers. (D.O.)
Savnnnali: Barrows. (DO.)
Dyment, Philip. (M.D.)  [

Gorin. J. W., 247 Bull St.

Howze, Eva B., 2312 Bull

St. (D.O.)
Richards, S. D., Natl. Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Silverman.  Charles. (M.D.)
Turner, P. Muir, 24 Jones
St. E. (D.O.)
Stone Mountain: Duch, M. E.

Thoniasville: Cassady, Mamie
E.. 430 Clay St. (D.C.)
Strobel. P. A., P. O. Box
414. (D.C.)
Valdosta: Breedlove, Dan H.
(DO.)
Olliff, I. S. (D.O.)
Park, W. L. (D.O.)
Phillips, W. M., 216-19

Strickland Bldg-. (D.C.)
Ulmer,  Ida. (D.O.)
Waycross: Bray. Je-w^ett P.,
Box 305. (D.C.)
Husrhes, W. H., Phoenix

Hotel. (D.O.)
Jones. Frank A., 401 Bunn
Bldg-. (D.C.)


IDAHO


T..


W.


Smith, Frank P., Caldwell  j
Commercial Bank Bldg-.  I
(DO.)
Steetle. H. M. (D.O.)
Thornhlll, 1014 Jeff St.

Coeur d'Alene: Barnes, F. F.
Most, Louis H., Monaghan  i
Bldg. (D.O.)  i

Stewart, Frances G., Ex-  I
change Natl. Bank Bldg.
(D.O.)  I

Cul de Sac: Logan, R. S.

Bniniett: Moon, E. F. (D.C.)
Farney: Teetern, D. W.  '

Genessee:  Howard, A. M.

Gooding: Johnson, A. J.
Johnson, T. A.. Box 156.
Granffeville: Sims, "W. B.

Idaho  Falls: Burkhardt, P. G.
Hansen. Allen. (N.D.)
Kettenring, W. P. (D.C.)
Rogers, Chas. E. (D.O.)
Sargent. E. M. (D.C.)
Sash,  Ida  M.. Salisbury-Earl

Bldg. (D.O.)
Scarborough. H. H., 112
Crow & Changnon Bldg.
Wamslev, D. D., Box 549.

Sones, J. C. (D.C.)
Springs: Schwartz.


Ashton: Stephens, C

Blnokfoot: Gaumer, H
Markwell. P. W. (DC.)
Sickert, Clairbell. (D.C.)
Caldwell: Burkhardt, S., 5

P. O. Blk. (D.O.)
Boise: Burt. C. G., 3-4 Brand
Hotel Bldg. (D.C.)
Cecil, D. L., P. O. Box 40fi
McCartv Bldg., 9th and
Ida Sts. (D.C.)
Handy. (D.O.)
Kingsburv, Chas. AV., Idaho

Bldg. (DO.)
Kingsbury, Walter S.,

Idaho Bldg. (D.O.)
Lind. A. C. 603 Overland

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lind, A. E., Overland Bldg.

McCobb,  M. Elsie, 418  Idaho
Bldg. (D.C.)

Flora M.. 418-19

Bldg. (DC.)

A. H., Idaho Bldg.


Juliaetta:
Lava Hot

lje-*viston :

Fite, M

Keller,


Patton,
Idaho

Rowley.

Rowley


Church,

S., 405*

O. C,


Jno.  M.
Main  St.
Idaho


& Hazel. A. H.,
Idaho Bldg. (DO.)
Watts,  J.  M.,  Sonnie  Bldg.
Buhl: Wyatt, S. C. (D.C.)
Caldwell: Dresser, C. W.
Glllbert, Clyde C, 78 Rich
Bldg. (D.C.)


New-
Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Maries: Hartsock, W. T.

Montpelier: Gaylord, C. M.

Moseoiv: Daniel.?, Elve V.
Germane, C. D. (D.C.)
Gorham, Marie. (D.C.)
Hatfield, W. M., P. O. Box

387. (D.O.)
Price, Addie Pish, 210 E.

1st St. (D.O.)
Sones, J. C, 111 2nd St.
Nampa:  Cornwall,  C.  A., 19-20
Nampa Bldg. (N.D.)
Meredith, Ortiz R., Dept.

Store Blk. (D.O.)
Straver, Wm. (D.C.)
Terry, J. Y. (D.C.)
Payette: Cairon, Howard B.
Hiatt, E. C. (D.O.)
Harvey, Herbert L. (D.C.)
I'luninier: Herrington, S. A.

I'ooatello: Darrah, L. C, 737
S. Harrison Ave. (D.O.)
Gray, Clvde. 1520 S. AYash

St. (D.C.)
Guy, Ralph. (D.C.)
Lindell, C. Darrah, 3339

Main St. (D.C.)
Sawtell  & Sawtell,  P. S.
Post Falls: Pine, Frank A.,
McClain Bldg. (D.C.)
I  Rexburg:  Hyatt. (D.C.)
Rupert! Gooch, Lucy Owen.


Sand Point: Shortridge, Ro.s-

etta. (D.O.)
St. Marvm: Mullenbrook, J. L.

Sweet: Skippen, Dr. Alfred.

Twin Falls: Atherton, Carrie.
Atherton, W.  R. (D.C.)
Billington,  H.  T. (D.O.)
Haverland & Haverland

Crossland, Emma Cathe-
rine. McCormick Bldg.
Sawyer, H. W., Main Ave.

N. (D.O.)
Wheeler, Fannie. (D.C.)
Wheeler, Fred. H. (D.C.)
Wheeler & Wheeler. (D.C.)
>Vallace: Ralph, Gerber.
Savage, James A., Barnard
Bldg. (D.O.)


IliLINOIS

Abinjfdon: Baymiller, Minnie

M.,  104  N.  Washington  St.
.4.1edo: McCormick,  Chas. F.

Alexis:  Donnelly, John  A.

Alton:  Long, Sol. L., 927 Eas-
ton St. (D.C.)
Wyckoff, A. B. (D.O.)
Anna: Coady, John H. (D.O.)
Area: Diamond Lake Sanita-
rium (D.O.)
Gadbois. Leon T., 90
Diamond Lake San.
Argo: Metskas, M., 6258

Archer  Ave. (N.D.)
.Vtwood:  Adams. J. A., P.  O.

Box 253. (N.D.)
Augusta: Howd, Albert O.

Aurora: Bruner,
Burchill, J. E.,

Cory, Wm.  M. (D.O.)
Haslem, \Vm. H., 212 Mer-
cantile  Bank (D.C.)
McGinnis, J. C, Mercantile

Bank (D.O.)
Morrison, 'W. L. (D.C.)
Pvle,  Henrv  S.,  212  Mercan-
tile  Bank (D.O.)
Slaker, Helen  M. (D.O.)
.Vustin:  Heinzp. E. P. (N.D.)
■Wheeler. Clayton E., 7

Downer Place. (D.O.)
Willett, Nora  E.,  Mercantile
Bank (D.O.)
Avon: Wenchell, A. M. (D.O.)
Beardstown: Clemmens, Jen-
nie M. (D.C.)
Belleville: Eales, Irving J.
Jeffery, Jas. C. Main and
Spring Sts. (D.O.)
Belvidere: Godfrey. H. S.. 105
N. State  St. (D.C.)
Wright. E. R., 403 S. State
St. (D.O.)
Bement: Tenney, C. F. (D.C.)
Benton: Kerr,  George Asbury

Ber-wvn: Hunimon, Irvin F.,

3402 Maple Ave. (DO.)
BlKgsville: Mekenson, Elvina


M. T. (D.O.)
Coulter  Blk.


1)90


Geographical  Index


Iltiiioi.t


BIooniiii;a;toni  LamBeau,  V.
E.  J.,  People's  Bank  Bldg.

Burner, Ethel  Louise,  Unity
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Cunningham, J. D., Living-
ston Bldg-. (D.O.)

Daugherty, A. E., People's
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Pitts, Eugene, Eddy Bldg.

Pritchett. Nettie C, 529
Griesheini  Bide-. (Nap.)

Spath,  Alfred,  118  W.  Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)

Blue Island: McCowan, Don
C. 210 Burr Oak Ave.
Brookport: MacClinchee, Mrs.

Robert (D.O.)
BiLslinell: McDonald, S. E.
Olson, .T. Edgar. (D.O.)
Cniro: Hill.«. J. D. (D.C.)

Sherden, Dr. (D.O.)
Cnmhridg^e:  Kurtz,  F.  A. (D.C.)

Pobanz. Arthur  G. (D.C.)
Canton: Beehmer, S. F. 14
Sweringer Bldg. (D.O.)
Glover,  Wm., 304 N.  Ave.  A.

Miller, Harry T., Hanion
Bldg. (D.O.)
Carbondale: Swartz, Laura  E.

C'arllnville: Roseman, Burthel

F. (D.O.)
Carrollton,  Greene Co.: Baker
&  Baker. (D.C.)
Dressel, Walter S., Kergher
Bldg. (D.O.)
Carthage: Cherrill,  Katherine.

Casey: Blair. C. B. (N.D.)
Champaign:  Bonner,  Edgar  J.,
Box 51 (N.D.)
Brutus. Ch. J., 105 S. State

St. (D.O.)
James, F. Tj.. 407 Lincoln

Bldg. (N.D.)
Parker, F. A., Ill W. Park

Ave. (D.O.)
Replogle, K. M. (N.D.)
Replogle. P. S. (M.D.)
Scott, H. A. Illinois Bldg.

(DO.)
Scott, Nellie B.. 206 W.
Church St. (D.O.)
Charleston: Barnes, F. E.
Mitchell Blk. (D.O.)
Brown, Edith M., White
Blk. (D.O..)
Cheno.s: Roth. C. L. (N.D.)
Chicago:  Abell,  A.  H., 1539  W.
Adam.s St. (N.D.)
Aberly  &  Waters,  Misses,
220 S. State St. (Ma.)
Able.  Nellie, 160  N.  5th  Ave.

(Ma.)
Abramson, Charlotte, 120 S.

State St. (Ma.)
Acklev,  Chauncey  W.,  431  S.

Wabash Ave. (D.O.)
Adamop. Albert. 2057 "West

Van Buren St. (N.D.)
Adams. Chas. E., 159 N.

State St. (D.O.)
Adbill,  J.  D.,  7092  S.  Chicago

Ave. (D.C.)
Ahlgren, Mathilde, 4009
Sheridan Road. (Ma.)
Albert, Henry, 4200 Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Albrecht, F. C, 1531 Con-
gress  St. (N.D.)
Albright,  Chester  Lee,  220  S.

State  St. (DO.)
Aldren,  John  A., 427  S.  Ash-
land  Blvd. (N.D.)


Allen, Alice M. C, 6253

Dorchester  Ave. (D.C.)
Allen, Chas. W., 1104 East

47th St. (D.O.)
Allen,  Chas.  W.,  208  S.  State

St. (D.O.)
Allen, James, 4200 S.  Grand

Blvd. (N.D.)
Allen, M. Alice, 366 E. i7th

St. (D.C.)
Allen, W. Burr, 22 E. Mon-
roe St. (D.O.)
Allison, Miss M. Lila, 1328

N.  La  Salle  St. (D.C.)
Anderson, Carl F., 72fi West

Marquette St. CMa.)
Anderson,  Carrie  Parenteau,

Goddard  Bldg. (D.O.)
Anderson, Johanna A., 4554

Cottage  Grove  Avenue.

(Ma.)
Anderson. Lewis  H., 1336

Morse  Ave. (N.D.)
Anderson, Miss T., 3850

Indiana  St. (Ma.)
Antisdale, E. S. (M.D.)
Atherton, N. W., 421 South

Ashland Ave. (N.D.)
Autschbach, Carl, 333 South

Dearborn St. (N.D.)
Badders, J. O., 236 S. Ash-
land Ave. (D.C.)
Bailiff, J. O., 4803  W. Madi-
son  St. (D.C.)
Baker, E.  H.,  29  E.  Madison

St. (D.C.)
Baker, F., 20  S. State  St.

(Ma.)
Balmer, Frederick B., 7853

Carpenter St. (D.C.)
Barber, G. A., 207 South

California Ave. (N.D.)
Bark,  B.  A.,  344  E.  116th  St.

Bars,  Ray  R.,  2150  Cleveland

Ave. (D.O.)
Bartholomew, 6221 S. Hal-

sted St. (D.C.)
Bartholomew & Wood, 6221

S. Halsted St. (D.C.)
Bartholomew, E. J., 39 S.

State St. (D.O.)
Bartholomew,  H.  H., 331 W.

63rd St. (N.D.)
Bartlet, Maude E., 3709

Colorado Ave. (N.D.)
Bautsch, R. N., 4045

Calumet Ave. (N.D.)
Becher,  V.  L.,  412  St.  6th  St.

Beck, Leonora, 718 Roscoe

St. (D.O.)
Beck,  M.  Anna,  110  S.  Home

Ave., Oak Park (D.C.)
Beck,  E.  P.,  1622  N.  Califor-
nia Ave. ((D.C.)
Beck, Lenora, 718 Roscoe

St. (D.O.)
Becker, Gustav, 5 North  La

Salle St. (D.O.)
Becker, Dr. Gustav, 5 N.

La  Salle  St. (D.C.)
Becker,  Gustav,  612  Tacoma

Bldg. (D.O.)
Beckler, E.  J., 1553  Madison

St., Room 706 (D.C.)
Bedford, Elizabeth  J., 27 E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Behncke, F. H., 525 South

Ashland  Ave. (N.D.)
Bell,  J.  B.  1527  W.  August-
ana  St. (N.D.)
Bell, John, 838 Altgeld St.

(D.M.T.)
Bell,  J. H., 1452 W.  Chicago

Ave. (N.D.)
Bencke,  Harry  C,  1334

Throop St. (D.C.)
Berg, George, c/o Chase
House. (N.D.)


Bergen,  Jacob  A.  704  S.  Cen-
tral Park Ave. (D.C.)
Berger, C. G., 1421 West

Adams St. (N.D.)
Berhalter, A. K., 1423 Clark

St. (N.D.)
Bischoff, Fred., Goddard

Bldg. (D.O.)
Blackler, R. C, 525 South

Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)
Blade, V., 1233 W.  Adams

St. (N.D.)
Blakeman, L. J., 64 E. Van

Buren  St. (D.O.)
Bligh, T. R., 521 Fullerton

Ave. (D.C.)
Bliss,  Luther  S.,  1339  E.  47th

St. (D.C, D.O.)
Boettcher, Herman, 1138 N.

Leavitt  St. (D.C.)
Boffenmeyer, Geo. E. 3801
Alta  Vista  Terrace. (D.O.)
Bohnhoff, Bertha, 852 Bel-
mont Ave. (D.C.)
Bosemer, Chas., 1319 N.

Hamlin Ave. (D.C.)
Bower, T. J., 59 East Van

Buren St. (D.O.)
Bovesen, Mrs. Kathinka,

3206  W. North  Ave. (Ma.)
Brady,  Lillian, 4303 Cottage

Grove Ave. (Ma.)
Brand, Frederick C, 3156

Pine  Grove  Ave. (N.D.)
Brand, Lucille S., 7465 Vin-

cennes  Ave. (N.D.)
Brand-Russell, Lucille S.

Kesner  Bldg. (D.O.)
Brandle, G. E., 1761 Wash-
ington  St. (D.C.)
Branner, Louise Mai, 39 S.

State St. (D.O.)
Branner, S. M., 6433 Ingle-
side Ave. (D.O.)
Braun.  D.  E.,  525  S.  Ashland

Blvd. (D.O.)
Breiber, Martin, 1711 Mar-
shall  Field Bldg. (D.C.)
Briefer,  M. H., Marshall

Field Bldg. (N.D.)
Brouner, Louise May, 39 S.
State St. (D.O.) „ ,,  ,
Brown, B. M., 352 W. 63rd

St. (N.D.)
Brown, H. L., 1347 West

Adams St. (N.D.)
Brune, John H., 3545 Mont-
rose Ave. (M.D.)
Bucaletti, Louis, 1002 Blue

Island Ave. (D.C.)
Bull, Frank, 3644 W. Polk

St. (D.C.)
Bunting, H. S., 9 S. Clinton

St. (D.O.)  ^ ^^

Burgesen, Elm F., 55
Wabash  Ave. (Ma.)
Burns, Louisa, 122 S. Ash-
land  Blvd. (D.O.)
Butcher, Francis, 81  E.  Ma-
dison St. (D.O.)
Butler, W. B., 4328 Lake

Park Ave. (N.D.)
Butterman, F., 3341 Osgood

St. (D.O.)
Butterman, W. F., 3341

Osgood St. (M.D.)
Calwell, H. E., 436 East

42nd Place. (N.D.)
Calwell, Henry  E., 4200

Grand Blvd. (DC.)
Calwell, W. A.. 424 Bowen

Ave. (N.D.)
Calwell,  Wm.  A.,  4200  Grand

Blvd. (D.C.)
Campbell, C. P., 2316
Warren Ave. (D.C.)
Carlson,  Berta  M..  3502  Lex-
ington  Ave. (Ma.)
Carlson,  Miss  Ida,  1105  East
63rd  St. (Ma.)


Illinois


flrogidpliicdl  Indcr


\m


Oarlstrom, Chas. O., 108 N.
State St. (Ma.)

Carpenter, Fannie E., God-
dard  Bldg-. (D.O.)

Carpenter,  C.  H.,  407  E.  4.Srd
St. (D.C.)

Carpenter,  Ceo.  H.,  Goddard
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Carr, Edson, 4200 Grand
Blvd. (D.C.)

Carter,  Anna  W.,  fil63  Wood-
lawn Ave. (D.C.)

Caruthers,  Iva  M. 1251  Wil-
son Ave. (D.O.)

Case, J. E., 917 E. 62nd St.

Cassleman,  E.  F.,  1711  Mon-
roe  St., Sta. D. (D.C.)

Castle, O. W., 638 E. 42ncl
St. (D.O.)

Chapman, Leo., 630 Wood-
land Park. (N.D.)

Chezan, John, 2926 Wisner
Ave. (D.C.)

Chiropractic Bulletin, 1124
Foster  Ave. (D.C.)

Christian,  A.  T.,  608  Stewart
Bldg-. (D.C.)

Christofferson, Hulda, 655"
S.  Robey  St. (N.D.)

Churan, Frank O.. 58.53
Thomas St. (N.D.)

Church, Jas. L., 4847 North
Albany Ave. (M.D.)

Civlin, Marcus  B., 3841 Cot-
tag-e Grove Ave. (N.D.)

Clark, Casey, 3738 Calumet
Ave. (D.C.)

Clark, E. H., 27 E. Monroe
St. (D.O.)

Clark, Geo. H., 5460 Green-
wood Ave.  '(D.O.)

Clarke, Robt., 1104 E. 47th
St. (D.O.)

Cleary, C. Stuart, 431 South
Wabash  Ave. (D.O.)

Cleveland, Edward W., 305
S. Ashland Blvd. (D.O.)

Cochrane, Albert B., 39 S.
State St. (D.O.)

Cochrane, Albert B., 39 S.
State St. (D.C.)

Collins, H. F., 4008  Grand
Blvd. (N.D.)

Collins, H. L., 122 S. Ash-
land Blvd. (D.O.)

Collinson, W. A., 1717 S.
Western  Ave. (D.O.)

Comstock,  Edg-ar  S.,  Goddard
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Connell, Mary C, 4634
Vincennes Ave. (M.D.)

Connor, R. F. &  Mary H.,
431  S.  Wabash  Ave.  (N.D.)

Connor, Roswell F., Audi-
torium Bldg-. (D.O)

Connor, William E., 431 S.
Wabash  Ave. (D.O.)

Confrey, Hubert, 1700 W.
Jackson Blvd. (D.C.)

Conover, E. H., 509 Honore
St. (D.C.)

Contreras, Ralph, 4060
Oakenwald Ave. (N.D.)

Cook, Sam, 2733 Lexing-ton
St. (D.O.)

Cool, E.  C, 1510  Millard

Ave. (N.D.)
Coplon, A. C, 2240 West

Division St. (N.D.)
Coplon,  H.  A. G., 116 Saflin

St. (D.O.)
Cornstock, E. S., 27  Monroe

St. (D.O.)
Counter, A. E., 4923 Pensa-

cola Ave. (N.D.)


Cour,  Aiidi-evv,  7043  N.  Olark
St. (D.O.)

(bowman, .Jolm .1., 6902 St.
Lawrence Ave. (D.C.)

Craig-, H. T., 20 E. Jackson
Blvd. (D.C.)

Crawford, C. H., 2100
Warren Ave. (D.C.)

Crosby,  C.  A.,  1533  W.  Jack-
son Blvd. (N.D.)

Crossby, W., 4200 Grand
Blvd.  (D.C.)

Crowe, I. B., 2032 Cleveland
Ave. (D.O.)

Curran, Harriet E., 4532
Clifton Ave. (D.C.)

Curry, Arthur B., 3207 Lex-
ington  Ave. (D.C.)

Cushman, Chas. E., Ande-
borium Bldg-. (D.O.)

Cushman, Chas. R., 6 Noith
Michigan Ave. (Nap.)

Dafter, H., Goddard Bldgr.

Dahlberg-,  August, 1910  East
73rd St. (Ma.)

Dale, Walter J., 6236 Uni-
versity Ave. (D.C.)

Dana, Frances, 81 E. Madi-
son St. (D.O.)

Daniel, B. Monroe, 39 So.
State  St. (D.C.)

Daniels, Mrs. B., 5129
Engleside Ave. (N.D.)

Davidson,  H.  J., 127  E. 55th
St. (D.O.)

Davidson, James, 4200 S.
Grand  Blvd. (N.D.)

Davis, Amy Reams, 59 E.
59th  St. (D.O.)

Davis, C.  H., 39 S. State St

Davis, Edw. G., 4601
Evanston Ave. (M.D.)

Dayton, Frank  E., 3259
Madison S. (D.O.)

Deason, J., Goddard Bldg-.

De Bella, Joseph, 4161
Drexel Bldg-. (N.D.)

Decker, R. D., 639 ^W. 18th
St. (D.C.)

Demmenwald,  G.  A.,  4823  W.
Cong-ress  St. (D.C.)

DeMotte, A. G., 2720 N.
Richmond  St. (D.C.)

Deschauer, Thos., 718 West
63rd St. (N.D.)

De Veny, Catharine, 304 S.
Wabash  Ave. (M.D., D.O.)

Devine, A. G., 843 Welling-
ton Ave. (D.C.)

De Witt, Orla, 202 S.  Lin-
coln St. (N.D.)

Dirkes, C. M., 150 N. Ash-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Doack, L. M., 2025 Roscoe
St. (D.O.)

Donnelly, John, 1625 W.
Adams St. (D.C.)

Don  Wood,  Eldred,  LI.  B.,  69
Dexter  Bldg. (D.C.)

Dorrance,  R.  P.,  525  S.  Ash-
land Ave. (D.O.)

Dorrance, R.  R.,  4005 Grand
Blvd. (D.O.)

Downing, R. B., 1549 Ogden
Ave. (D.C.)

Dresser, B. A., 1907 Van
Buren St. (D.C.)

Drews, Geo. J.. 1910 North

Harding  Ave. (N.D., D.C.)

Drinkall, Earl J., 11,331 S.
Michigan Ave. (D.O.)

Drinkall, Earl  J.,  1421  Morse
Ave., Rogers Park Sta.


Dudney, M. \\  .. 1729 West
Walnut St. (N.D.)

Duff,  H.  J.,  1428  W.  Wash-
ington Blvd. (D.C.)

Duggan,  U.  T.,  4200  Grand
Blvd. (D.C.)

Duggan,  W.  W.,  4200  Grand
Blvd. (D.O.)

Duggan,  W.,  4217  Calumet
Ave. (D.O.)

Duncan,  A.  N.,  205  East
Ontario St. (D.C.)

Du  Plessis,  J.  T.,  525  S.  Ash-
land Blvd. (D.O.)

Dye, Chas. T., 104 South
Michigan Ave. (D.C.)

Dye,  Chas.  T.,  104  S.  Michi-
gan  Ave. (D.O.)

Eagan,  J.  H.,  81  East  Madi-
son St. (D.O.)

Eales,  I.  J.,  5681  South  Blvd.

Eame.s,  M.  J.,  4759  Broad-
way (D.C.)

Eames,  M.  J.,  4759  Evanston
Ave. (D.C.)

Earle, Edna, 1520 South
Michigan Ave. (N.D.)

Earnes,  M.  J.,  4759  Broadway

Ebell,  Anna,  1459  Ashland
Ave. (D.O.)

Ebell,  Anna,  1541  W.  Adams
St. (N.D.)

Eberhardt,  G.  A.,  2840  S
41th  St. (D.C.)

Eberhardt,  Gustave  A.,  3952
W. 22nd  St. (D.C.)

Eberhardt.  Noble  M.,  25  E.
Washington Blvd. (M.D.)

Eddy,  Guy  G.,  4404  Sheridan
Road (D.O.)

Edmiston,  J.  Harper,  122  S
Ashland Blvd. (D.O.)

Edmundson,  J.,  1818  Wash-
ington Blvd. (N.D.)

Edwin,  E.  S.,  1432  W.  Jack-
son St. (N.D.)

Efford,  William  M.,  11215
Longwood  Drive,  M.  Park

Eide,  A.  T.,  4017  Milwaukee
Ave. (M.D.)

Einarson,  H.  F.,  1442  W
Monroe  St. (D.O.)

Eklund,  Alice  C, Lvon  &

• Healy Bldg. (N.D.)

Elfrink,  Blanche  Mayes,  27
E.  Monroe  St. (D.O.)

Elfrink,  "^Valter  E.,  27  E
Monroe  St. (D.O.)

Elliot.  J.  A.,  32  N.  State  St.

Ellis,  Howard  G.,  6240  Cot-
tage Grove  Ave. (D.C.)

Ellis,  Howard  I.,  452  Bowen
Ave. (N.D.)

Enestvedt,  S.,  2321  Milwau-
kee  Ave. (D.C.)

Enestveldt,  John,  2337  Mil-
waukee  Ave. (D.C.)

Enestveldt,  Sophia,  2337  Mil-
waukee Ave. (D.C.)

Engelbretson, Mrs. Agnes,
6423 South  May St. (Ma.)

Engeldrum,  H.  C,  39  South
State  St. (D.O.)

Esklund. Alice. (N.D.)

Espeland,  Ole  N.,  2620  West
North Ave. (N.D.)

Esplin, D., 4200 Grand
Blvd. (N.D.)

Esser,  A.  H.,  6050  Woodlawn
Ave. (D.O.)


Geographical  Index


Illinois


Esser, Albeit, 6050 Wood-
lawn Ave. (D.O.)
Evans, 333 S. Dearborn St.

Evertz, O., 145G W. Monroe

St. (D.O.)
Kvertz, Oscar, N. E. Corner

Ashland and Madison Sts.

(Me.)
Ewald, Emilie, 2300 Prairie

Ave. (D.C.)
Fallen. Howard J.. 333 S.

Dearborn St. (D.O.)
Fallon, M. M., 1614 La  Salle

St. (D.C.)
Farmer,  Frank  C,  14  W.

Washington St. (D.O.)
Fawcett. Nora, 310 W. 65th

St. (D.C.)
Felper,  J.  N.,  833  S.  State  St.

Felzer,  David,  926  S.  Marsh-

fleld  Ave. (D.C.)
Fellrath, Basil, 1634 North

La Salle St. (N.D.)
Fernald, Edw. L., 3527 W.

Madison St. (D.O.)
Ferri, Dr. Nicandro A., The

Ferri Sanitarium, 152 N.

Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)
Fett, A. F., 1801 Jackson

Blvd. (D.C.)
Fink, Chas. A., 39 S. Stat^

St. (D.O.)
Fisher,  Albert, 6340  Stewart

Ave. (D.O.)
Fitch  &  Grunewald, 5  North

Wabash  Ave. (D.O.)
Fitch, Milton B., 4735

Lincoln Ave. (D.O.)
Fitch, Ross L., 4940 Kinzie

St. (N.D.)
Foreman, Oliver C, God-

dard Bldg. (D.O.)
Fourshe, May, 3913 Cottage

Grove Ave. (Ma.)
Fradsham, W. F. B., 220 S.

State St. (D.C.)
Fradsham, W. F.  B., 718  W.

63rd St. (D.O.)
Francis, G. R., 10221 Pros-
pect Ave. (D.C.)
Frankowsky, E. 3550 W.

Monroe  St. (D.O.)
Eraser, Lillian, 535 Beldon

Ave. (D.C.)
Freese, Benj. J., 4913 North

Robey St. (N.D., D.C.)
French, I^eslie, 3975 "Vernon

Ave. (N.D., D.P., D.C.)
French,  W.  G., 1610  Mailers

Bldg. ((D.C.)
Frumoff, L., 910 North

Western Ave. (N.D.)
Frvette,  H.  H.,  27  E.  Monroe

St. (D.O.)
Fryette,  Myrtle  W.,  Goddard

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Fuller, O. K., 4126 South

Halsted  St. (D.M.T.)
Funk,  H. F., 1136 E. 63rd

St. (D.C.)
Funk,  H.  J.,  1138  E.  63rd  St.

Gable,  Clyde  A.,  4545  Broad-
way (D.C.)
Gable. Fonda M., 322 Bast

51st St. (D.O.)
Gable, Roy J., 322 E. 51st

St. (D.O.)
Gadboise,  L.  T., 4200  Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Gadboise, L. F., 422 E. 40th

St. (D.C.)
Gage,  Fred.  W.,  Goddard

Bldg. (D.O.)
Galatian. H. B., 3700

Chicago Ave. (N.D.)
Galbreath, Conrad V., 5 N.

Wabash Ave. (D.O.)


Gallagher, Dollie  Hunt,  The
A'endome  Hotel (D.O.)

Gallegley, Harvey A., 2249
Bissell  St. (D.O.)

Garlock, 424 Bowen Ave.

Garrett. S. .1., 210 N. Ann
St. (N.D.)

Garrihart, Edward R., 2333
Milwaukee  Ave. (D.C.)

Gaylord,  Ethel  Gertrude,
1122  S.  Michigan  Ave.

Gebhardt,  Arthur,  221  Laflin
St. (D.C.)

Gehl,  A. F.,  1550  Claybourne
Ave. (Ma.)

Gernhardt, Edward R., 2333
Milwaukee Ave. and
Logan Square. (N.D.)

Gibbs, John  P., 2750 Fuller-
ton Ave. (M.D.)

Gleitsman,  E.,  550  Fullerton
Blvd. (D.O.)

Golding, Jas. 5604 S.  Boule-
vard (D.C.)

Goldman, A., 1146 Wash-
burn  Ave. (N.D.)

Gold.stein,  Isaac, 4001 Grand
Ave. (N.D.)

Goodman, M. H., 5451 S.
Ashland  Ave. (D.C.)

Goodrich, J. R., 16 North
Wabash  Ave. (Nap.)

Gordner, Wm. (D.O.)

Gour, Andrew A., 39 S.
State  St. (D.O.)

Grack, Miss W., 1247 Hust-
ings St. (D.C.)

Grapek,  Chas.,  3211  W.  Mad-
ison  St. (D.C.)

Grathies, Herman A., 2000
Mohawk St. (D.O.)

Griffing, C. M., 3964 Drexel
Blvd. (M.D.)

Grimmer, A. H., 3842 Grand
Blvd. (Or.S.)

Grise, H.  M.. 1432 W.  Jack-
son  Blvd. (N.D.)

Groenewoud, .Jennie K.,
1339 E. 47th St. (D.O.)

Groenewoud, John C, 37 S.
Wabash Ave. (D.O.)

Grothus, Herman A., 2000
Mohawk St. (D.C.)

Grothus, W. A., 2000
hawk  St. (D.O.)

Grunewald, Marie B., E
Wabash Ave. (D.O.)

Gustafson,  G., 3007 S. Tripp
Ave. (D.C.)

Gustaf.son. Marie. 14 "^Vest
Washington Blvd. (Ma.)

Halin, Max, 1513 Jackson
Blvd. (D.C.)


Mo-


N.


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


Halsted,  Cora  F., 1528  W.

.lack.son Blvd. (N.D.)
Halvorsen, H. John, 1018

Wilson  Ave. (N.D.)
Halverson, H. J., 4641

Evanston St. (D.C.)
Hamman, A. W. 8928 Com-
mercial Ave. (D.O.)
Hammon, I. F., 27 East
Monroe St. (D.O.)

Hanavan, L. C. 6122 Ingle-
.side  Ave. (N.D.)

Haney, E. G.. 848 Barry
Ave. (D.C.)

Hanford, Ira L., 108 .NToith

State St. (Nap.)
Hanford, L. I., 92 State St.

Hanlev. P. K., 6600 Lafay-
ette Ave. (D.C.)

Hansen, Carl T., 108 North
State St. (N.D.)

Hansen. H. E.. 2120 Cleve-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Harker,  Wade  C,  200  S.  Lin-
coln St. (D.O.)

Harper, C. 2151 N. Clark
St. (N.D.)

Harries, S. Oswald, 446 E.
40th St. (D.C.)

Harrington, Shelby A., 4322
Vernon  Ave. (N.D.)

Harris,  Elijah  G., 1553  West
Madison St. (Or.S.)

Harris,  Elijah  G.,  1656  Park
Ave. (D.C.)

Harris, Ella E., 7400 Coles
Ave. (D.O.)

Harris,  H.  E., 1515 West
Monroe  St. (N.D.)

Harris, Sarah N., 846 East
47th St. (N.D.)

Harvev, H. AW. 4452 Sheri-
dan Road. (N.D.)

Harvey, Olive  Kendall, 4452
Sheridan Road. (N.D.)

Hasselquist, T. A., 32 W.
Washington  St. (D.C.)

Hatton, Elizabeth, 3207
Michigan Blvd. (D.C.)

Havard, Wm. Freeman, 525
S. Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)

Hawev, Mrs. H., 1452 Sheri-
dan Road. (N.D.)

Heard, W. J., 109 Maple
Ave.,  Oak  Park. (D.C.)

Heffner, Elizabeth, 1448 E.
66th Place. (D.C.)

Heigerick, L. D.. 2539  North
Kenzie St. (N.D.)

Heinze, E., 408 N. Cicero
Ave. (D.C.)

Heiss. John E., 2117 Wash-
ington Blvd. (D.C.)

Heitz, J. J., 1609 Wells St.

Held, Wm. (M.D.)

Helmutli, Wm., 3151 North
Troy St. (N.D.)

Hemminghausen. 88 Dear-
born  St. (D.C.)

Herbing, Paul C, 1042
Argyle St. (N.D.)

Herkt, V. B., 1055 Colorado
St. (N.D.)

Hess, E. A., 2101 W.  Adams
St. (D.C.)

Hess, H. McClellan, 14 East
Jackson Blvd. (Nap.)

Higbe, D. N., 15 N. Lincoln
Ave. (N.D., M.D.)

Hill, E. E., 6645 S. Marsh-
field Ave. (D.P.)

Hill,  John  West,  2032  Cleve-
land  Ave. (D.C.)

Hill, W. F., 39 S. State St.

Hilsing, E. A., 106 N. Ash-
land Blvd. (D.C.)


Illinois


(iciKjiaphicul  Index


903


Hinckley, D. Jl., 3904 Cot-
tage  Grove Ave. (M.]>.)

Hinman, R. F., 3801 W.
Harrison St. (D.O.)

Hively,  J.  S., 142-39  S.  State
St. (D.C.)

Hobbs, R.  S., 333 S.  Dear-
born St. (D.C.)

Hoff, Fred. H.. 2036  St.  Paul
Ave. (N.D.)

Hoffman,  R.  E.,  1718  E.  55th
St. (D.C.)

Hoffman, Stanley A., 2425
Milwaukee  Ave. (D.C.)

Hofstadt, .1. P., 64 E. Van
Buren St. (D.C.)

Hog-an, W., 4200 Grand
Blvd. (N.D.)

Hog-ue, W.  A., 1435 West
Adams St. (N.D.)

Holcomb, Anna L., 108 N.
State St. (D.O.)

Holcomb, Dayton B., Ste-
wart Bldg-. (D.O.)

Holiman, W. O., 1015 Maso-
nic Temple. (D.C.)

Holmes.  H.  R.,  27  E.  Monroe
St. (D.O.)

Homann, August  W., 8928
Commercial  Ave. (D.C.)

Honey, Edward, 848 Barry
Ave. (D.C.)

Ad-


P., 3212
3739 Lowell


36 Wal-
S. Dear-

333  S.


Hoppstadt, J
dison Ave.

Hora, Frank
Ave. (D.C.)

Horn,  A.  T.,  3044  Wentworth
Ave. (M.D.)

Horn, F. B., 221 S. Ashland
Blvd. (D.P.)

Hoskin.s, 1441 Jackson
Blvd. (D.C.)

Houtenbrink, Anthony, 407
S.  Ashland  Blvd. (N.D.)

Howard, Chas. G.,
nut St. (D.O.)

Howard, J. F., 333
born St. (N.D.)

Howard  &  Napper,
Dearborn  St. (D.C.)

Howell,  J. Sullivan, 220  S.
State  St. (N.D.)

Howell, O. W., 5606 Michi-
gan  Ave. (D.C.)

Huboi, Carl, 4509 N. St
Louis Ave. (D.O.)

Huboi,  W. A.,  838  W. Rock-
well St. (D.C.)

Hubor, W. A., 3940 South-
port  Ave. (D.C.)

Hughes, 4200 Grand Blvd.

Hulett,  C.  M.  T.,  122  S.  Ash-
land Blvd. (D.O.)

Hultgren, Albert, 5059 N
Clark  St. (Ma.)

Hummon, Emma, 27 East
Monroe St. (D.O.)

Hunsaker, E. D., 912 Bel-
mont Ave. (D.O., DC
N.D.)

Hunt, Sam'l C, 14 E. Jack-
son Blvd. (Nap.)

Hunter, Geo.  S., Hotel
Florence, Ogden and
Adams  Sts.  (M.D.)

Hunting, Albert, 649 Dem-
ing Place. (D.O.)

Hurd, Nettie M., Goddard
Bldg. (D.O.)

Hurlburt & Lightfoot, Ft.
Dearborn Bldg. (D.O.)

Huwely, J. L., 142-39 S
State St. (D.O.)

Hyde,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  58  East
18th St. (Ma.)


Hynes, J. F., 2203 Madison

St. (D.C.)
Ihne, W. W., 546 Garfield

Ave. (D.C.)
Inwood, Garfield B. A., 27

E. Monroe St. (D.O.)
Iwerson, r<"'rederick W., 155.'i
W. Madison St. (N.D.,
D.O.. D.C.)
.Tackman, Mable, 5242 Mi-
chigan Ave. (D.C.)
.Jackson,  N.,  1741  Washing-
ton Blvd. (D.O.)
Jacobs.  W.  A.,  1544  Larrabee

St. (N.D., D.O.)
Jacobson, Max, 447 E. 44th

St. (D.C.)
James, F. K., 4463 Wood-
lawn Ave. (D.O.)
James,  L.  Olive,  4463  Wood-
lawn  Ave. (D.O.)
Jaros, John, 3002 S. Central

Park Ave. (D.C.)
Jasper, Lena, Edgewater

Beach  Hotel. (N.D.)
Jennings, Louise F., lOSJ

N. Locust St. (D.O.)
Jenson, Ingle, .4200 Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Jenson, Jas., 220 S. State

St. (D.O.)
Jewell, M. B., 613 Tacoma

Bldg. (D.C.)
Johnson. Frank R., 1555 W.

Madison St. (D.O.)
Johnson, N. La Doit, 200
State St., Cor. Adams St.
John.son, Lulu, 1729 W.

Walnut St. (D.C.)  ,

Johnson, P. E., 121 N.
Wabash  Ave. (N.D.)
Johnston, N. L. (M.D.)  I

Jones, Caroline. 1512 W.

Madison St. (D.C.)
Jones, Efhe O., 1601 Wilson

Ave. (D.O.)
Jones. D., 524 S.  Ashland

Blvd. (N.D.)
Jones. Maigaret M. (M.D.)
Juchoff, Edwin T., 464 E.

41st St. (D.C.)
Justice,  Dorothy.  3901

Montrose Ave. (D.C.)
Kaulbach. Mrs. Viola C,

221 E. Erie  St. (Ma.)
Kay, Edith, 7530 Sangamon

St. (N.D.)
Kaynor. Madame, 1420 East

55th St. (Ma.)
Kean,  John, P. O. B. 14.

Kelley, M., 1611 Jackson

Blvd. (DO.)  '

Kelping, Theo., 4200 Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Kenney, Edwin T., 1553 W.

Madison St. (D.O.)
Kent, J.  A., 177  N.  State  St.

Kilberg. N., 525 S. Ashland

Blvd. (N.D.)
Kilvary, R. D.. 6359 Ken-
wood  Ave. (D.O.)
King, Fred., 4200 S. Grand

Blvd. N.D.)
Kinney,  Lecta  Fav, 39 State

St. (D.O.)
Kirkpatrick, J. R., 221 S.

Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)
Kirkwood, C. A., 1562 Mil-
waukee  Ave. (D.O.)
Kjellberg. Dr.. 624 South

Michigan Ave. (Ma.)
Kjellberg, Mrs.  T. Folke, 10

E.  Huron St. (Ma.)
Klinck, G.  M.. Ill West

Chicago Ave. (M.D.)  i


Klumph, Cyrus C, Godard

Bldg. (D.O.)
Knopf, Oscar, 236 S. Ash-
land Blvd. (N.D.)
Koopman, P. E., 6432 N.

Hermitage Ave. (D.C.)
Korte, H.  G., 5479 Dor-
chester Ave. (N.D.)
Kottler, A.  P., 81 E. Madi-
son St. (D.O.)
Kouth, Miss T., 3912 Cot-
tage Grove  Ave. (Ma.)
Kozincki. I.,. C, 8800 Hou.s-

ton Ave. (D.C.)
Kratz, J. C, 1415 Monroe

St. (N.D.)
Krause,  H.  A.,  811  S.  Marsh-
field Ave. (D.C.)
Kreitzer, J., 512 S. Ashland

Blvd. (D.O.)
Kritzer, J., 1310 Consum-
ers Bldg. (D.C.)
Kret.schmar, Howard, Pow-
ers  Bldg. (D.O.)
Kronberg, Tonv, 4303 E.

State St. (D.O.)
Kruger, Katharine, 608 S.

Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)
Kuppe,  Lena,  2415  N.  Lawn-
dale Ave. (D.O.)
La Berge, G. H., 610 Stew-
art Bldg. (D.C.)
Lance, P. C. (N.D.)
Landes, Agnes, 3802 Pine

Grove Ave. (D.O.)
I>ane, Henry, 1386 W. Ran-
dolph St. (N.D.)
Lane, Henry, 1386 W. Ran-
dolph St. (N.D.)
Langley, Jos., 232 South

Ashland Blvd. (D.C.)
Lak, Ray, 1261 N. La Salle

St. (D.C.)
Lankford, M. C, 1531 Con-
gress  St. (N.D.)
Lapin, H. J., 206 E. 54th

St. (D.C.)
Larson, Ida, 4200 Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Larson, Jennie W., 2535 N.

California Ave. (N.D.)
Lauffenberger. Edyth A.,

2919 N.  Clark St. (N.D.)
Lauffenberger, Edvth, 2120

Cleveland  Ave. (D.C.)
Lautenschlaeger, G., 2254

N. Clark St. (D.C.)
Leary,  W.  J.,  11  Maple  St.

Leavit, Sheldon, 4665 Lake

Park Ave. (N.D.)
Leghall, Henry D., 112 N.

5th Ave. (D.O.)
Lemke. Herbert C, 6319 S.

Halsted St. (D.O.)
Leonard, H.  N., 1347  West

Adams St. (N.D.)
Leubke, Ottillie, 6733 Stonv

Island  Ave. (N.D.)
Liden, E.  J., 608 S. Ashland

Blvd. (N.D.)
Liebau, John, 64 E. Van

Buren St. (N.D.)
Liess, John, 528 Garfield

Ave. (D.C.)
Lightfoot, Ota P. (Nap.)
Lighthall, Henrv D.. 112 N.

5th Ave. (D.C.)
Lillie. Arthur, 1143 N.

Lawndale Ave. (D.(I!.)
Linander, Alvilde E., 55

State  St. (D.O.)
Lindberg. Folke, 167 "SVest

Washington  Blvd. (Ma.)
Lindlahr. Henrv, 525 S.
Ashland  Blvd. (M.D., D.O.,
N.D.)
Linnell,  J.  A.. 37  S.  Wabash
Ave., (D.O.)


994


Geogniphical  Index


Illinois


Littlejohn, Edith W.. (54 E.

Van Buren St. (D.O.)
Littlejohn, J. B., Steinway

Hall. (D.O.)
Littlejohn  &  Short, 159 N.

State St. (D.O.)
Logan,  Charles  L.,  3825  Ellis

Ave. (D.O.)
Loner,  Frank  E.,  20  E.  Jack-
son  Blvd. (D.C.)
Long, Ruth, 421 S. Wabash

Ave. (Ma.)
Lucas, John H., Goddard

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Lundgren,  Gurlie,  5  South

Wabash Ave. (Ma.)
Lunginns, B., 1740 West

Adams St. (D.C.)
Luttemberger, J. C. M., 404

Tacoma Bldg. (M.D.)
Lynch, Chas. F., 1839 N.

Marshfield Ave. (M.D.,

D.C.)
Lynchenheim, Morris, Men-
tor Bldg. (D.O.)
MacCardie,  N.  D.,  633  Strat-
ford Place. (N.D.)
MacCarthy, Dan, 132 North

Wabash  Ave. (D.O.)
MacCarthy,  E.  N.,  100  North

Hamlin Ave. (N.D.)
MacCarthy, E.  V., 216  South

Laflin St. (N.D.)
MacCarthy,  P.  N., 100  North

Hamlin  Ave. (N.D.)
MacCauley,  Daniel  B., 27  E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
MacDonald, Worth, 1442  W.

Monroe  St. (D.O.)
MacGregor  & MacLean, 431

S. Wabash Ave. (D.O.)
MacGregor, G. W., Goddard

Bldg. (D.O.)
MacGregor,  J.  B.,  5  South

W^abash  Ave. (Ma.)
MacGregor, W. C, 27 East

Monroe St. (D.O.)


Macher,  M
St. (Ma.)

Maconkey,
Adams  St


B., 204 E. 35th
1539


Jepson,

Madeling, Miss Hilma, 220
Wisconsin Ave. (Ma.)

Mader,  Geo.,  9807  Ave.  L.

Magdalene, Anne, 3415 N.
Tripp  Ave. (D.C.)

Mali,  Harry  E., 64  E.  Van
Buren St. (D.O.)

Malmquist,  Miss  Hilda, 10
E. Delaware Place. (Ma.)

Manchee,  Helen, 6351  Ingle-
side Ave. (D.O.)

Mannix, Prof. Joe, 2242
Washington Blvd. (D.C.)

Manrican,  O.  B.,  1421  Adams
St. (D.C.)

Mansen, J., 4450 N. Camp-
bell  Ave. (D.C.)

Mansfeldt, Mrs.  O. G., 1654
Farwell Ave. (N.D.)

Marble, E.  L.. 745 Inde-
pendence  Blvd. (N.D.)

Markel,  Prof. M., 39 West
Adams St. (Ma.)

Marklin, Rudolph, 1528
Estes  Ave. (N.D.)

Marshall, R. H., 844 Home
Ave., Oak Park. (N.D.)

Martin,  J.  P., 1761 Sedg-
wick St. (N.D.)

Marx,  Zero  (D.C.)

Mathews, R. W., 464 Bowen
Ave. (D.S.T.)

Matthlesen,  C.  D.,  525  South
Ashland Blvd. (D.O.)


Maxwell, G. Edward. 27 E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Mayer, Oscar A., 1945 Mo-
hawk St. (D.O.)
McClain, Grace, 5204 B'way.

McClellan,  H.  Hess,  126  State

St. (D.O.)
McClimans, W. A., 39 South

State St. (D.O.)
McConnell  &  Farmer, 14

Washington Blvd. (D.O.)
McConnell, Carl P., 14 W.

Washington St. (D.O.)
McCorkle,  Zuie  A..  4951  Ken-
more  Ave. (D.O.)
McCormack,  A.,  4210  Wilcox

Ave. (N.D.)
McCormick, Dr. Chas.,
McCormick Medical Col-
lege, 2100 Prairie Ave.
McCormick, Dr. John T.,
905-64 E.  Van Buren
St. (D.C.)
McCormick,  John,  905  Stein-
way  Hall Bldg. (D.C.)
McCrosky, John A., 4200 S.

Grand Blvd. (N.D.)
McDougal,  J.  R.,  27  E.  Mon-
roe St. (D.O.)
McElroy, Cecil, P. O. Box

136. (D.C.)
Mclntyre, Ella, 825 Dear-
born St. (N.D.)
Mclntyre, John, State St.

McKenzie, Collin R., 451

Bowen  Ave. (D.C.)
McLouth, C. Louis, 5328 S.

Park Ave. (N.D.)
McMeekin, Hazel, 2935
Prairie Ave. (N.D.)
McNair,  525  S.  Ashland  Blvd.

McNurland, G. N., 718 W.

63rd St. (D.O.)
Mears, O. Benton, 6 North

Michigan  Ave. (Nap.)
Meier, L. C, 525 S. Ashland

Blvd. (D.O.)
Melley, C. J., 116  W. Chest-
nut St. (D.C.)
Merrill. R. C, 1555 N. La

Salle  St. (D.C.)
Messick, Chas. W., 1030 E.

47th St. (D.O.)
Messick, Margaret E., 1030

E. 47th  St. (D.O.)
Messick, Orville W., 954 E.

43rd St. (D.O.)
Meyer, Wm., 2517 Cortland

St. (D.C.)
Miller, C. L., 27 E. Monroe

St. (D.O.)
Miller, L S., 1639 W. 18th

St. (D.C.)
Miller,  L. Janie,  6026  Wash-
ington Ave. (D.C.)
Miller, L. S., 421 S. Ash-
land Ave. (N.D.)
Millis,  R.  H., 525  S. Ashland

Blvd. (D.O.)
Mill.s. C. E.. 1432 Jackson

Blvd. (N.D.)
Mills, David, 1422 W. Mon-
roe St. (D.O.)
Mills,  Ernest  P.,  607  E.  47th

St. (D.C.)
Misunas, Frank, 825 Milton

Ave. (Ma.)
Mitchell, Joseph R., 4654 N.
Racine Ave. (Or.S.)


Mitts, J. W., 3542 Pierce

Ave. (D.C.)
Mogaard, John. 2820 West

North  Ave. (D.O.)
Monroe, Daniel Bert, 39 S.

State St. (D.O.)
Mooney, Frank W., 1516 E.

64th St. (N.D.)
Moore, Miss  D., 127 E. 26th

St. (Ma.)
Morales, Miguel, 911

Security Bldg. (N.D.)
Morrill, S. Phillip. (D.C.)
Morris, Chester H., 37 S.

Wabash Ave. (D.O.)
Morris, John B., 37 South

Wabash  Ave. (D.O.)
Morrison, Fred R., 17 N.

State  St. (D.C.)
Morrison, Wm., 16 North

Wabash  Ave. (Nap.)
Moser,  E.  S.,  1337  W.  Adams

St. (N.D.)
Mothersill, W. D., 127 N.

Francisco St. (D.C.)
Muehlenbein,  M.  L.,  218  E.

55th Place. (M.D.)
Muir,  Miss  A.  S.,  4200  Grand

Blvd. (N.D.)
Mull, Margaret, 2748 Hay-
den Ave. (D.C.)
Muller,  John, 64  W. Oak  St.

Murphy, Annie  R., 39 South

State St. (D.O.)
Murphy, J. L., 220 S. State

St. (D.O.)

Murray, Kathryn, 209 State

St. (D.O.)
Naimann, H. A., 1531 West

Congress  St. (N.D.)
National School of Chiro-
practic. 421 S. Ashland

Blvd. (D.C.)
Nebel, John, 116 Laflin St.

Neff, 333 Dearborn St.

Neill. A.  H., 818  W. 55th  St.

Nelson,  Clara  K.,  4200  South

Grand  Blvd. (N.D.)
Neovius, Geo. F., 30 North

Michigan Ave. (N.D.)
Netty,  J. W., 3040 W. North

Ave. (D.O.)
Neuwirth, J., 329 Center  St.

Neville, Mary, 4662 Broad-
way (D.C.)
Newton,  J.  H.,  4200  S.  Grand

Blvd. (D.C.)
Nlcca, Margaret, 1532 W.

Adams  St. (N.D.)
Nicholson.  F.  M.,  122  S.  Ash-
land Blvd. (D.O.)
Nicholson, N. H., 1444

Washington Blvd. (D.C.)
Nix,  P.  M.,  2128  N.  Keystone

Ave. (D.C.)
Nora, D. E., 361 K. 30th St.

Nord, Ragna, 1138 N. Lea-

vitt St. (D.C.)
Nordlie, J. J., 2552 Wright-
wood Ave. (D.C.)
Norman, Arthur, Cor. N.

Lawndale & Hirsch Sts.

North, Foster, 30 North

Michigan Ave. (Ma.)
Oakes, John  H., 32 N. State

St. (D.O.)
O'Connor, Jessie, 4836 Win-

throp Ave. (D.O.)


Illinois


(reoyiapliical  Index


995


Oldenborg.  Iluprh  Ad., 122  S.

Mlchig-an  Ave. (Ma.)
Oldenburg, Hugo, 1427
People's  Gas Bldg- (D.C.)
Osborn, H. M., 1432

Jackson Blvd. (N.D.)
Oshinske, Jno., 2735 N.
Central Park Ave. (D.C.)
Cstberg", Chas. J.. 1007 Bel-
mont Ave. (D.C.)
Padley, Mrs. E.. 1113 N.

Dearborn  St. (D.C.)
Paine,  Josephine  H., 4731
Ijake Park Ave. (M.D.,
D.O.)
Painter,  Mr.  &  Mrs.  S.  W.,

Painter & Painter, 2359 N.

California  Ave. (D.C.)
Palmborg-, Mrs. Aug-usta,

1840 Wells  Ave. (Ma.)
Parenteau, Carrie P., 27 E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Parish,  J.  D., 140  N.  State

St. (Ma.)
Parker, C. R., 508 S. Ash-
land  Blvd. (D.C.)
Parker, M. N.. 508 S. Ash-
land Blvd. (D.C.)
Peel, Peter J., 20 W. Jack-
son Blvd. (Ma.)
Pennington, H. A., 1379 W.

Randolph  St. (D.C.)
Perkins, Ed. J., 1958 Byron

St. (D.O.)
Peters, Richard, 61st and

University Place. (D.C.)
Peterson, C. A., 6321 St.

Lawrence Ave. (D.C.)
Peterson, H. S., 6131 S.

Maplewood Ave. (D.C.)
Peterson, Herbert S., 1507

E. 55th  St. (D.O.)
Peterson, 5913 S. Halsted

St. (D.C.)
Peterson, M. B., 3203 West

Harrison  St. (M.D.)
Petzold, M., 3007 S. Tripp

Ave. (N.D.)
Petzold. M., 1562 Milwau-
kee Ave. (D.O.)
Phillipi, Guy. (D.O.)
Pickens, Evelyn, 2464

Diana St. (D.O.)
Pierson, P. R., 16 North

Wabash  Ave., (Nap.)
Pierson, F. R.. 1231 Stevens

Bldg. (D.C.)
Pietsch,  Albert  C,  834  North

Lavergne Ave. (D.O.)
Plank, Howard T., 1812

Heyworth Bldg. (D.C.)
Pochet, Virginia G., 346

Garfield Ave. (N.D.)
Pollard, C. E., 1515 Monroe

St. (N.D.)
Porter, Rev. T. M., Went-

worth and 24th Sts.

Pratt, E. H., Suite 1708, 25

E.  Washington St. (Or.S.)
Pratt, Edwin J., Goddard

Bldg. (D.O.)
Price, J. Russel. (M.D.)
Proctor, Ernest R., 27 East

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Proctor, Florence  B., 6543

Ingleside Ave. (D.O.)
Proctor, Glenn J., 27 E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Pryke, A. Edw., West Side

Y.  M. C.  A. (N.D.)
Punk,  H.  P.,  6351  Ellis  Ave.

I'usheck, C, 220 W.  Ontario

St. (M.D.)
Rabinovich, H., 1326 South

Lawndale Ave. (N.D.)


Radke, Frank, 2932 Indiana

Ave. CMa.)
Ramsdall,  Gladys, 4124 Vin-

cennes Ave. (N.D.)
Ray,  Allen  L...  3021  North

Spaulding  Ave. (D.O.)
Raymond, Bertha C. (M.D.)
Rector, Alburn Parks, 6161

Broadway. (D.O.)
Reed, Richard  Horatio, 5900

Magnolia Ave. (D.O.)
Reid, A. J., 7001 N.  Paulina

St. (N.D.)
Reinschreiber, Emma, 1517

S. Spaulding  Ave. (D.C.)
Rene, Jessie A., 4200 South

Grand Blvd. (N.D.)
Rensley,  Harry, 2150  Cleve-
land Ave. (D.C.)
Rest, Haven, 2941 B'way.

Rice, Oscar, 2118 W. North

Ave. (N.D.)
Rice, Wm. C, 1951 Irving

Park  Blvd. (D.C.)
Rice, Wm. C, 3959 Lincoln

Ave. (D.O.)
Robson,  Edward,  4200

Grand  Blvd. (D.C.)
Robuck, S. v., Goddard

Bldg. (D.O.)
Rogers, L. D., 546 Surf St.

Rooman, D.  G., c/o  Y.M.C.A.

Rorbacher, J. G., 2241 Lar-

rabee  St. (D.C.)
Rose,  A.  F.,  1968  Milwaukee

Ave. (D.C.)
Rose, Harris, 3515 Indiana

Ave. (Ma.)
Rosenthal, C, 3801 Alta

"Vista Terrace. (D.C.)
Ross, Mrs. Bertha, 3030

Vernon Ave. (Ma.)
Rounds, Earl, 4200 South

Grand Blvd. (N.D.)
Russell,  Lucille  S.  Brand,
7465 Vincennes Ave.
Ryan, John P., 9128 Com-
mercial Ave. (D.C.)
Sage. J. B., 5227 W. Adams

St. (D.C.)
Sampson, S., 850 E. 47th St.

Samse,  Mrs.  L. P.,  7250 La-
fayette Ave. (D.C.)
Samuelson, Henry D., 2328

Coblentz St. (D.C.)
Sargent,  J.  W., 424  Bowen

Ave. (N.D.)
Sayre, C. Edward, 29 East

Madison St. (Or.S.)
Saxman,  R.  B.,  833  Sheridan

Road. (D.C.)
Scalian, Agnes Waltrude,

Cable Bldg. (D.O.)
Scallon,  J.  W.,  57  E.  Jackson

Blvd. (D.C.)
Scharf, E. E., 1004 Dakin

St. (D.C.)
Schenkelberger,  P.  C,  22 E.

Washington  St. (D.O.)
Scheuder,  T.  H.,  4401  Prairie

Ave. (D.C.)
Schmitt, Frederick L., 5^33

South  Blvd. (D.O.)
Scholz, H. B., 3312 Madison

St. (D.C.)
Schroeder, Ennde, 2843 N.

Clark St. (D.C.)
Schramm, Margaret E.,

Stevens  DBldg. (D.O.)
Schreuder, T. H. (D.C.)
Schroder, Kurte A., 2843 N.
Clark St. <Ma.)


Schroth, R. G., 546 Garfield

Ave. (D.C.)
Schuge,  W.  C. (M.D.)
Schulze, W. C. (M.D., D.C.)
Schultz, H., 2318 Cortland

St. (D.C.)
Schwartz,  Cha.s.,  35  S.  Dear-
born  St. (D.C.)
Schwarzel, Frederick M.,

431 S. Wabash Ave.

Scobie,  Miss  E.,  3850  Indiana

Ave. (N.D.)
Seefert, E., 4200 Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Segur. F. B., 712 Postal

Telegraph  Bldg. (D.C.)
Seubold,  F.  H.,  908  Belmont

Ave. (D.C, Ph.C.)
Seubold, F. H., 17 N. State

St.. 1430 Stevens Bldg.

(Ph.C, D.C)
Shadduck. Ralph, 3841 Cot-
tage Grove Ave. (D.C.)
Sheedy, Mrs. M. L., 2445 N.

Halsted St. (D.C.)
Shields, J. D., 5405 Calumet

Ave. (D.C.)

Shines,  Chas., 5307  N. Clark

St. (D.C.)
Short, G. W., 159 N. State

St. (D.O.)
Short, G. W.. 3110 Logan

Blvd. (D.O.)
Shove, Florence I.. 4204

Oakenwald  Ave. (D.O.)
Shreve,  Ralph  W.,  525  South

Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)
Siemer,  L.  F.,  309  E.  47th  St.

Sigrist, Cavolisk. 7029 S.

Michigan  Ave. (D.C)
Simmer, L. F., 309 E. 47th

St. (D.C.)
Simmer, L. F., 309 E. 47th

St. (D.O.)
Skleba,  L.  F..  525  S.  A.shland

Blvd. (D.O.)
Slater, Anna, 39 S.  State  St.

Slater,  Wm. F., 39 South

State St. (D.O.)
Smart, D. M.. 4200 Grand

Blvd. (D.C.)
Smith.  A.  F..  4124  Vincennes

Ave. (D.C.)
Smith. Alexander. 1851 W.

Adams  St. (D.C.)
Smith, C E., 3124 Logan

Blvd. (D.C.)
Smith,  Chas.  E.,  16  North

Wabash Ave. (D.C.)
Smith, Chas. E., 16 N. Wa-
bash  Ave. (D.O.)
Smith, F. D. (N.D.)
Smith,  F.  J.,  447  W.  62nd  St.

Smith, Geo. W., 525 S. Ash-
land Blvd. (D.O.)
Smith, Grace Leone, 27 E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Smith, H. J., 2418 N.

Spaulding  St. (D.C.)
Smith, Leslie D.. 1060

Wilson  Ave. (D.O.)
Smith,  M.  L.,  4014  Washing-
ton  Blvd. (D.C.)
Smith, Milton L., Suite 69,

39  W.  Adams  St. (D.C.)
Smith, Dr. Milton L. & Dr.

Myrtle  L., 220  S.  State  St.

Smith.  N.  L..  17  N.  State  St.


!)<)G


(ipoqruphical  Index


Illinois


Smith.  Oakley, 6  North

Michigan  Ave. (Nap.)
Smith, O. G. (D.C.)
Smith. V. White. 1024 Oak-
dale  Ave. (N.D.)
Smith, Violet, 1024 Oakdale

Ave. (D.C.)
Snow, M. .1., 4637 N. Robey

St. (D.C.)
Snvder,  H.  H., 1553  West

Madison St. (N.D.)
Snyder, Harvey, Commer-
cial Ave. and 92nd St.

Soeros.  Sig-urd  S.,  4200  South

Grand Blvd. (N.D.)
Soldner, Wildas H., 516 S.

Ashland Blvd. (D.O.)
Stanford. Elizabeth, 453 W.

fiSrd St. (DO.)
Starbeck. C. E.. fi07 Grove-
land Park. (DC.)
Steinge,  J.  H.,  7  W.  Madison

St. (Ma.)
Stewart. Fanny, 4200 S.

Grand Blvd. (D.O.)
Stewart, Frank J., 7 W.

Madison St. (D.O.)
Stewart, l.loyd. 27 Ea.st

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Stewart.  Robt.,  6553  Langley

Ave. (D.C.)
Stone. Anna L., 4045 Calu-
met Ave. (N.D.)
Stone.  C.  M..  146  N.  Ashland

Blvd. (D.C.)
Storseth, Marie, 4653 Grand

Ave. (Ma.)
Storseth,  Mollie, 357  West

63rd St. (Ma.)
Struck. Joseph P., 2312

Iowa St. (D.C.)
Strueh, Carl, 32  N. State  St.

Stuart,  Fannie,  4200  South

Grand Blvd. (N.D.)
Stupnicki,  M., 3109 South

Morgan St. (N.D.)
Sturla, Louis, 1342 W.  Con-
gress St. (N.D.)
Sullivan, J. H., Goddard

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Summers, Dr. Lome A.,

5411 Ellis Ave. (N.D.)
Summers, Loine N.. 1204 E.

47th St. (N.D., D.O.)
Summers. Louis A. (D.P.T.)
Sutorius, L., 1129 Addison

St. (N.D.)
Swanberg, Harold, 1428

Jackson Blvd. (D.O.)
Swartz, .Toseph L., 6 North

Michigan Ave. (Nap.)
Swem. D. D., 607 Webster

Bldg. (D.C.)
Swenson, J. E., 4124 Vin-

cennes Ave. (N.D.)
Tarbell, H. E., 1515 West

Monroe St. (D.C.)
Teal,  J.  T. (N.D.)
Teats,  M.  E..  544  E. 42nd  St.

Teed, E.. 2236  Estes  Ave.

Teeves,  Wm., 3975  Vernon

Ave. (D.P.)
Teigan, Edward, 4  344  North

Winchester  Ave. (D.C.)
Teufel,  F.  A.,  5513  Drexel

Blvd. (N.D.)
Thomas. A.  L., 4424 Indiana

Ave. (D.C.)
Thomas, James A., 301 Ve-
netian  Bldg. (D.C.)
Thompson, Etta L., 1108

62nd St. (D.C.)
Thompson,  S.  T.,  851  E.  40th

St. (DC.)
Thoreson, Frank M., 25

R. Grand  Ave. (D.C.)


Thub, Edwin, 2120 N.

Clark St. (D.C.)
Tichler, Fi-ank, Edgewatcr

Beach Hotel. (N.D.)
Tobin, J., 4876 Armitage

Ave. (D.C.)
Tomlinson. G. R., 4025

Sheridan Road. (D.C.)
Tosky, C. M.. 3166 Lincoln

Ave. (D.O.)
To.'^kev, C. M.. 3166 Lincoln

.\vo. (D.C.)
To.'skev. C. M.. 4548 Lake

Park Ave. (DC.)
Tradsham, W. F. B., 718 W.

63rd St. (D.C.)
Traimis.  K. G.. 3301 S. Hal-

sted St. (D.C.)
Trainer,  M.  L.,  14  W.  Wash-
ington St. (N.D.)
Troseth, K. A., 3977 "Vernon

Ave. (N.D.)
Tweedie, Dick, 4008 Grand

Blvd. (N.D.)
Tverne,  L.  H., 64 E.  Van

Buren St. (N.D.)
Ufer,  Wm., 3858  Division  St.

Ulmer, H. D., 525 S. Ash-
land Blvd. (D.O., N.D.)
Ulrick & Ulrick, 2651 Best

Ave. (D.C.)
Underlander, J. L., 3315 S.

Oakley Blvd. (D.C, N.D.)
Van  Arsdale,  Chas.  O., 27  E.

Monroe St. (D.O.)
Van  de  Sand,  G.  F.,  120  S.

Honore St. (M.D.)
Van Hise, Ralph, 857 North

Sacramento Blvd. (D.C.)
Van  Home,  Helen  M., 14  W.

Washington St. (D.O.)
Van Slyke, Clifford, 1108

Republic Bldg. (D.C.)
Van  Velsor,  Mrs.  M.  C,  6435

Jackson Ave. (S.T.)
Veyet, L. J., 321 S. Cicero

Ave. (D.C.)
Vest, L. L., 1513. Jackson

Blvd. (D.C.)
Vickstrom, Alfred, 26th and

Princeton  Sts. (D.C.)
Viersen, P. A., 607 Webster

Bldg. (D.C.)
Vileta, Chas. A., 4235 West

21st  St. (N.D.)
Virmedge, C. A., 2050 West

Monroe  St. (N.D.)
Void, O. A., 8 N. State St.

Volgman, Frank, 1542 W.

Adams St. (D.C.)
Voltaire,  Jos., 1139 N. State

St. (D.C.)
Voss, Carl, 3977 Vernon

Ave. (N.D.)
Waelti, Christ, 528 Garfield

Ave. (D.C.)
Wagner,  Henry,  57  W.  Dela-
ware St. (D.C.)
Waite, E. R., 2901 Wash-
ington Blvd. (D.C.)
Wakeham, Jessie A., 1049

Rush St. (D.O.)
Wakeham, Jessie A., 48 W.

Division St. (D.O.)
Walker, A.  E., 3401 W.

Monroe St. (N.D.)
Walker,  Peter  E., 309 South

Ashland Blvd. (D.C.)
Walz, Marie A., 427 South

Ashland Blvd. (N.D.)
Ward,  Daniel  C,  3150  Logan

Blvd. (D.O.)
Warner, G. F., 6565 Yale

Ave. (D.O.)
Warren, R. D., 525 S. Ash-
land  Blvd. (D.O.)
Washburn,  A.  S.,  14  West

Washington  St. (D.O.)


Waters. Lillian E. F., 8909
Lowe  Ave. (D.C.)

Watter, Dale J., 6236 Uni-
versity  Ave. (D.O.)

Watters, N. M., 92 State  St.
(DO.)

Watters, Nellc M., 108 .V.
State St. (Nap.)

Wehrle, L. G., 1230 E. 63rd
St. (M.i:).)

Weinberg, I. H., 1333 N. La
Salle St. (D.C.)

Weiss, Oscar E.. 813 N. La
Salle  St. (D.C.)

Welander. Bessie C, 907
School St. (D.O.)

Welch, W. C, 407 South
Ashland Blvd. (D.C.)

Wells, B. F., 2636 E. 75th
St. (D.O.)

Welty, Jesse N., 3032 W.
North  Ave. (D.O.)

We.st, L. .!.. 410 Masonic
Bldg. (Opt.)

Westman, Miss Anna M.,
108 N.  State  St. (Ma.)

Westman,  Carl, 108  N. State
St. (M.D.. Ma.)

Whipple, M. T., 6432 Ren-
wood  Ave. (D.C.)

White, Nellie Connor, 431 S.
Wabash Ave. (D.O.)

Whitehouse, George F., 27
E.  Monroe  St. (D.O.)

Wicena, A. W., 2635 S. Ho-
man  Ave. (D.C.)

Wickstrom. Ella M., 4318
Cottage  Grove  Ave.  (N.D.)

Wieder. Hanna G., 2142
Cleveland Ave. (D.C.)

Wieder, Nanna  G., 546 Gar-
field Ave. (D.C.)

Wiegand, Wm., 3129 B'way.

Wigelsworth, J. W., 32 N.
State St. (N.D.)

Wilhaber, Prof., 4521 St.
Lawrence Ave. (N.D.)

Wilkening. G., 1262 Iceland
Ave. (D.C.)

Wilkey, S. C, 525 South
Ashland  Ave. (N.D.)

Williams, Chas. F., 1615
Ogden  Ave. (D.O.)

Williams, Kate G., 57 East
Jackson Blvd. (D.C.)

Williams, Kate G.. 57 E.
Jackson Blvd. (D.O.)

Williams, M. G.. 3977 Ver-
non Ave. (N.D.)

Willis, Fred. E., 6717 Sheri-
dan  Road. (D.O.)

Wilmot, John A., 1230 East
63rd St. (Ma.)

Wilson, W. B., 1441 Monroe
St. (D.C.)

Winslow, Carl G., Goddard
Bldg. (D.O.)

Wolf, Wm. De. 502 Masonic
Temple. (Opt.)

Womble, F., 4200 Grand
Blvd. (D.O.)

Wood, D. E., 162 N. Dear-
born  St. (D.O.)

Wood, D. E., 39 W. Adams
St. (D.C.)

Wood, Frank M., 209 South
State St. (N.D.)

Wood, M. A., 4200 Grand
Blvd. (D.O.)

Wood, Thos. C, 238 South
Wood St. (D.O.)

Woodward, Chas.. 2219
Madison St. (D.O.)

Wooster, R. L.. 525 S. Ash-
land Blvd. (N.D.)

Wylv, T. B.. 421 S. Ashland
Blvd. (N.D.)

Yanzer, H. A., 525 S. Ash-
land  Blvd. (D.O.)


Illinois


(ir(}(/raphical  Index


097


Yates, L.  C, 421 S. Ashland

Blvd. (N.D.)
Young', Alfred Wheelock,

Goddard  Bldg. (D.O.)
Youngquist, Ida W., 42

Auditorium Bldg-. (D.O.)
Zapel,  Otto,  Jr., 12th  and

■'56th Aves. (Ma.)
Zaph, S. D.. 430.5 Grand

Blvd. (D.O.)
Zaphyriades, S.  D., Goddard

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Zeigler,  Inez  L.,  431  South

Wabash Ave. (D.O.)
Zeman,  Otto,  3002  S.  Central

Park  Ave. (N.D.)
Zenkel. Wm.  M.. 14 W.

Washington  Blvd. (Ma.)
Zilligen. A., 1103  W. Roscoe

St. (D.C.)


Zimmer, O. M., 419 W. fi.5th

St. (D.C.)
Zinkan, M. A., SSO.^ Indiana
Ave. (D.C.)
Chicago Helprhfs! Berscheill,
F. G., 8  Illinois St. (D.O.)
Stewart, C. E., 64 Illinois
St. (D.O.)
Chicago  Junction; Schillig, C.
E., Suite 3, Masonic
Temple. (D.C.)
Cliristmnn: I^inebarger, H. A.

Clay City: Biinn, Daisy.
Mosely,  Madeline. (D.C.)
Clinton: Atkins, W. A., Ohio
Bldg. (D. O.)
Williams, P. A., 205J Public
Square. (DC.)
Colchester:  Burford, D. E.
Gardner, Chas. (N.D., D.O.)
Coral Spring.s: Morris, D. D.

Danville: Bradlev, O. M.
Clinch, J. H. M. (M.D.)
Dirkes, Clement M., 156 S.

Vermilion St. (N.D.)
Moss,  Flora,  1130  N.  Walnut

St. (N.D.)
Swartz, W. C, Adams  Bldg.
Decatur:  Collier,  E.  &  L.,  West
Bldg. (N.D.)
Grimsley, F. N., Powers

Bldg. (D.O.)
Jeffries, Anne L., 938 Hen-
derson Ave. (D.C.)
LandgralY. E. J., 213-15
Moran-Corbet Bldg.
Martin, Elmer, Powers

Bldg. (DO.)
Williams. F. A., 213  Moran-
Corbett Bldg. (D.C.)
De  Kalb: Meyers,  H.  W.  (D.O.)
Dixon: I.a Cour, Carl. (N.D.)
Scharnhorst, Martin. (D.C.)
Trowbridge,  L. R. (D.O.)
Dunlap: Wilson, L. H., Box

204. (D.C.)
Dupo: Taylor, S. H. (D.O.)
Dwightt Carlin, W. R. (D.O.)
East Chicago: Brandenburg,
O. C, 207 Calumet Ave.
East St. Loulst Dunn, Geo.  i
W., 1003  Gaby  Ave. (M.D..  I
D.C.)
Knauel & Knauel, 1618
State St. (D.C.)
Elgin: Gies, F. A., O. Beirne
Bldg. (D.O.)


McCall, T. Simpson, The

Spurling. (D.O.)
Newcomer,  .7.  E.,  44  Sparling

Bldg. (D.C.)
Thompson. T. J., 503 Hill
Ave. (DC.)
EInihurst: Eindlahr, Henry,
M.D., D.O., N.D.)
Miller, Chester L., New
Gensland  Bldg. (D.O.)
El Paso: Clark, Homer M.

Eureka: Smellie, A. B., Box

85. (D.C.)
Evan.ston: Collins, I.iOuisa C,
Century Bldg. (D.O.)
Craven. Merritt B., 665

Davis St. (D.O.)
Fraser, James M., 1939
j  Sherman Ave. (D.O.)

Ijomas, Kathryn M., 1405

Hinman Ave. (D.O.)
McVicar, Elizabeth. (D.C.)
Monohan, E. P. (D.O.)
Pine, Linnae May, 1705
Sherman Ave. (D.O.)
I Rowlingson,  C.  B.,  615  Davis
St. (D.O:)
Switzer, C. R., Rood Bldg.

Walker, Olivia F., 308 Cen-
tury Bldg. (D.C.)
Ward, Maude Elizabeth,

632 Davis St. (D.O.)  !

Wright, J. Merrill, 2619
Hartzell St. (D.O.)
Pairbury: McDougal, Ger-
i  trude. (D.C.)

Stewart, H. D., Clandon

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)  i

Walker, L. E. (D.C.)
Fairfield: Buis, C. O. (N.D.) I
Falrview: Rose, Chas. A.

Farmer City: Nowlin, .7. A.,

Osteopathy Bldg. (D.O.)
Forrest: Espeland, O. N.
1  Freeport: Bickelhaupt, G. E.
Bickelhaupt, H. Earle.  i

(D.C.)  '

Cary, Frank L. (D.C.)
Gourdier, Chas. H. (D.O.)
Mclntyre, Mrs. Ella, 182

Exchange St. (D.C.)
Petty, E. I., 404 Tarbox  ,

Bldg. (D.C.)
Plambeck, L., 2004 14th St.
!  (D.C.)  I

Poore, H. R., 361 N. Galena

St. (N.D.)
Wallace & Wallace, 71
Grove  St. (D.C.)
Fulton: Snyder, B. J., Box

577. (D.O.)
Galena: Hardie, David H.,
Main St. (D.O.)
Woodard, B. A., 200 N.
Main St. (D.O.)
Galeshurg: Altenbern, A. "W.,
711 Locust  St. (D.C.)
Barnes, C. A., Galesburg

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Browne, E. M., Triole Bldg.

Chapman, Ada Hinckley,

Holmes Bldg. (D.O.)
Hagg, Edith M., 424-25

Holmes Bldg. (Nap.)
Hemstreet, Cora  G.,  Holmes

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lewis, L. G., Nafl Bank

Bldg. (D.C.)
Swanson, R. A., 156 N.
Cherry  St. (D.C.)


Ingalls. C. B.
Roderick, John S.


Moffett, George.
Goddard, H. R.


Thiele, F. G., Holme.s Bldg.

Trask. A. E. (D.O.)
Winters, E. E., Chambers
St. (D.C.)
(Jeneneo: Bates, John E.
Campbell, Chas. (D.C.)
Chambers, Etta O., 115 W.

2nd St. (D.O.)
Whitenberg, Mrs. C. (D.C.)
Genoa: Kepner, B. F. (DC.)
GibHon City: Hartford, W. L.

Glencoet Ralston, John L.,
Carrington Bldg. (D.O.)
I  Golden: Borton, Samuel.
j  (D.O.)

Goshen: Metzger, Dr. (D.C.)
[  Greenfield: Vosseller, Clar-
ence D., Argus Bldg.
rJriggsvllle:


Hamilton:


Hanover:


Harvard;

Harvey: Stewart,  C. E., 15426

Turlington Ave. (D.O.)
Havana: Fager,  Emma  C.

Henry: Marston, A. E. (D.C.)
Weatherly, Carrie, Box  544.
Highland Park: Brand. S. S.,
505 Belle Ave. (D.O.)
Craig, H. T., 4706 Cottage
Grove Ave.. Hyde Park
Station. (D.O.)
Huboi.  W.  A., 967  St. John's
Ave. (D.C.)
Hillsboro: Plaek, J. J. (D.O.)
Hinsdale: Velzer, Kathryn
Van, .1 ^Vashington St.
Toskev, C. M., 239 1st St.
Hoopeston: Hoyt, Payson W.

Ivesdale: Gallivan, C. L.

(DO.)
Jacksonville: Dudney,  Manuel
Peterson, A. M., Central

Hospital. (N.D.)
Staff, L. E., 609 W. Jordan

St. (D.O.)
Wagoner, Elizabeth E..
Cherry  Flats. (D.O.)
Jerseyville: Enos.  J.  W.  (M.D.)

Wiles,  A.  M. (D.O.)
Joliet: Bell, Francis, 303 Ot-
towa  St. (D.O.)
Bruning, A. W., Joliet Nat'l

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Matijaca,  Anthony, 413  Cass
St. (D.O., D.C, N.D.)
Johnson  City: Odel, I. C.
Roesner,  ^V.  H. (D.C.)

Crosby, ^V. H. (N.D.)
Cushan. Chas. E., Cutting

Bldg. (D.O.)
Gross, Albertine M., Wood-
ruff Bldg. (D.O.)
Gustafson, IV. A. (D.C.)
Hyatt, Frank E., Joliet
Nat'l  Bank  Bldg. (DO.)


!)08


Geographical  Index


Illinois


Leonard, John T.. Audi-
torium Bldg. (D.O.)
LImperick,  H.  E.,  414  Jeffer-
son St. (N.D.)
McLeod, W. A., Joliet Nat'l

Bank  Bldgr. (D.O.)
Schwarzee, Fred. M., 406

Cutting Bldg. (D.O.)
Stantan. J.  W., Joliet  Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Svvanbund Sanitarium,

Ottawa  St. (D.O.)
Stansbury, L. A., Barber
Bldgr. (D.C.)
Jonenboroi  Orosby,  W.  H.

Knnknkeei Boner, A. C.

Cha.s. C
L., 194


217


Court


Crampton,

Court  St.
Ivongpre, E.

St. (D.O.)
Peck, John F., Cobb B\dg.

Kevraneei Clayton, Mrs. E.

E., 200  Star-Courier  Bldg-.

Morrow,  A.  H.,  McLean

Bldg. (D.O.)
Morrow,  A.  W.,  Box  118.

Roddy, Robt., Cor. Tremont

and 2nd Sts. (D.O.)
Trenary, J. M., 110 McLeon

Bldg. (D.C.)
Knoxvillei Whltenberg, C. E.

Lacons Hynes.  W.  J. (D.C.)
I^a Gransrei Bierbower, Alice,

114 N. Ashland Ave.

Graves,  Millie  Estelle,  Bank

Bldg". (D.O.)
Kane,  M.,  17  S.  5th  Ave.

Simon. J. P. (N.D.)
Young-.  Harry,  17  S.  5th  Ave.

lia  Harpet Barker, Jesse S.

IjB Sallei Bienemann, Joseph

C,  La  Salle  Theatre  Bldg.
(D.O.)  -

Bower. A. C. (D.O.)
Milan, Thos. (N.D.)
Richardson, A. P. (D.C.)
I.eRoy:  Coffey.  N.  B.,  Box  111.

I..ewistont Ray,  Jno.  A. (S.T.)
liincolni Cooper,  K.  L.,  417  N.
McLean St. (D.C.)
Tilley. Charles E., Lando-
ver Bldg. (D.O.)
Macombt  Gardner, Chas.
(N.D., D.O.)
Welch, R. R., 222 South
Randolph St. (D.O.)
i^Iarioni Norris, H. D. (D.O.)
MarHellleMi Waite, Wendell

D.  (D.C.)

IVIattoont Conrad, S. E., 1573
Charleston Ave. (D.O.)

Maddox,  H.  H..  1705  B'way.

McDuffle. J. G. (D.C.)

Moore,  Claribel,  2802  Wes-
tern  Ave. (D.C.)

Opland, Martha B.. 1117
Marshall Ave. (N.D.)

Opland, Nels. H., 1117
Marshall Ave. (N.D.)
Maywoodi Howard, J. F. A.,
1814  S.  2nd  Ave. (D.O.)

Larson, J. E., 716 S. 16th
Ave. (N.D.)
Mendota:  Ashley, E.  M. (D.C.)

Flannigen, Hazel. (N.D.)

Mundie,  Carrie  M.,  Cor.  Illi-
nois Ave.  and  Jefferson
St. (D.O.)


Kaulbach,  Viola  C.  (D.C.)
Schofleld, T. M., 208 Wash-
ington St. (D.O.)
Metropolis  I Morris,  Dennis  D.

(DC.)
Midland Cltyi Downs, L.
Irene. (D.C.)
Downs, L. Irene. (N.D.)
Molinet Carlson, A. N., Mc-
Kinnie  Bldg. (D.C.)
Plambeck, L., 2004 14th St.
Monmouthi Duflln,  Nellie, 215
W. 3rd Ave. (D.C.)
Galop, John, Searles Bldg.

Rezner, Lurena, Lebanon

Bldg. (D.O.)
Schwartz, Chas., Suite  301-2

Searles Bldg. (D.C.)
Schwartz. Chas. 182 Ex-
change Bldg. (D.C.)
Spearman, J. (D.O.)
Turnbull, J. M., Woods &

Hallam Bldg. (D.O.)
Ventress, K. C. (D.O.)
Monticellot Cline, C. O.,

Dighton Bldg. (D.O.)
DIorrlsi Graham. F. W., 217i

Liberty St. (D.O.)
MorrLson: Cochran, A. D.
Johnson,  P.  H. (D.C.)
Mt. Carmelj Heath, Daisy E.
Parker, H. R. (S.T.)
Petty,  E.  L (D.C.)
Mount Olivet Schmieding, A.

Mt.  "Vernon J Curtis,  Frederick

G.,  Pace  Bldg. (D.O.)
Naperville: Bautsch. Rudolph.

(N.D., D.O.. D.C.)
Neponset: Richard.s. Ralph  A.,

Box 137. (N.D.)
Newman i Adams,  Bert  Lee.

Norwalki Schillig, G. J., 101

E. Main  St. (D.C.)
Oakland  t Coffey,  Opal  E.
Galbreath, Albert Louis.

Snyder, Clarence W. (D.O.)
Oak Parkt Beck, Anna, 114
Home  Ave. (D.C.)
Burgess, R. C, 1103 South-
ern Blvd. (D.C.)
Butcher, Frances  M., 126 N.

Elmwood Ave. (D.O.)
Gebler, J. F., 234 South

Blvd. (D.C.)
Griggs, Lizzie O., 143 S.

Harvey Ave. (D.O.)
Utley, Ralph E., 820 South
Blvd. (D.O.)
OIneyi MacGregor, P. J., O.
T.  &  B.  Co.  Bldg. (D.O.)
Pixley, Anna D., Ecken-
rode Bldg. (D.O.)
Oregont Hicks, Frederick

Thomas. (D.O.)
Ottawa* Frutiger, Ernest.
Moriarty, J. J., Maloney
Bldg. (D.O.)


The  publisher  of  this  Directory
will  consider  it  a  great  favor  if
the  users  ii'ill  send  in  correct
addresses  of  practitioners  wher-
ever they  find  the  wrong  ones
listed,  also  names  and  addresses
of  known  practitioners  who  are
not  listed in this  edition.


Noyes, Mary E., Maloney

Bldg. (D.O.)
Petty,  E.  I.,  208  Clauss  Bldg.
Ozark i Morris, D. D. (D.C.)
PaleNtinei McLennon, M. L.

Pnna,  CliriNtian  Co.i  Barth,  A.,
R. R. 5. (D.O.)
, Lewis. Mrs. H. H. (D.C.)
:  Paris! La  Grange, Alden.
i  (D.C.)

! Thul, Ferdinand. New
j  Sholem Bldg. (N.D.)

Paw  Paw  I Ferguson, Ethel S.
I  P. (D.O.)

Paxtoni Restorff, C. 145 W.

Center  St. (D.C.)
Peoria: Atherton, Bessie. 510-
11 Wheelock Bldg. (D.C.)
Bjorneby, A. G.. 426 Main

St. (D.C.)
Boyer,  G.  R.,  Jefferson  Bldg.

Buck, R. J.. 125 N. Jeffer-
son  Ave. (D.C.)
Dunn,  Geo.  W., 313  Woolner

Bldg. (D.C.)
Edwards, E. B., 309 S.

Jefferson  Ave. (D.C.)
Edwards, Dr.. c/o Chicago

Dental Parlor. (D.C.)
Estelle. B. Emily. (D.O.)
Faulkin, H. J., Jefferson

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hanssler, E. H., 332 North
t  Jefferson Ave. (N.D.)

1 Henry, A., 317 Fulton St.
Kennard &  Kennard. (D.C.)
Kinnett, W. E., 401-402
Masonic Temple Bldg.
(Or.S.)
Levers,  M.  E.,  Woolner

Bldg. (N.D.)
Magill, Edgar G., Woolner

Bldg. (D.O.)
Menough & Menough, 521

Main St. (D.C.)
Miller, Rev. Eva Kinney.

Parker  &  Parker. 519  North

Monroe St. (Or.S.)
Paiker, Jas.  W. (M.D.)
Pyle,  Henry  C,  332  North

Jefferson St. (M.D.)
Ringel, E. C, 208 Dechman

Ave. (D.O.)
Skinner,  Mrs.  B. F. (D.C.)
Thawley, Edgar Q., Wool-
ner Bldg. (D.O.)
Thomas, Fred. B., 128

Butler St. (D.C.)
Thompson, Garrett E., Cen-
tral  Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Wendell, Canada, Woolner
Bldg. (D.O.)
Peru: Lee,  C.  H. (D.C.)
PetersburKt Sampson. Roy.

Scott, Leila  Gordon. (D.O.)
Pittsfleld: Lindsey, J. H.

Polo  I Loring. Margaret.
Nichols. Arthur  N. (D.C.)
Pontiac: Bone.  John  F..  Rath-
burn Bldg. (D.O.)
Hynes, W. J. (D.C.)
Princetons Hagan, Frances
McKey, 316  Park  Ave.  W.
(DO.)
Smith, Laura  M. (D.C.)
Qulncyi Brown,  L.  G..  131i  N.
6th  Ave. (D.C.)
Freese, BenJ. J., 627J Llnd

St. (D.C.)
Johnson. H. C, Wells Bldg.


Indiana


Ci  cfKjrapIi ical  Index


990


I.affer. Hp'iiry, 356-57 Wells

BIdg:. (D.C.)
McNaniara. R. E., 307

Majestic Bldg-. (N.D.)
Walker, Daisy E., Mercan-
tile Blk. (D.O.)
Wendorff,  Herman  A.,  Wells
Bldg. (D.O.)
Rantoul: Hurd, Orville R.

Riverside: Glatfelter, Mr.s. C.

W. (N.D.)
RobliLsoii! Boyd, Frank L.
Hamilton, F. W., 107i N.
Cross St. (D.O.)
Rockfordi Gordon, Joseph.
(D.C.)  .
Graham, M. C, 309 N. Main

St. (D.O.)
Gustafson, Clarence A., 419

W. State St. (D.C.)
Hoygard, T. G., 215 7th St.

I.arson, J. E., 234 Albert

Ave. (N.D.)
Larson, J. E., Rockfoi'd

Health Home. (N.D.)
Loving, A. S., Brown Bldg-.

Medaris, C. E., Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Proctor, Arthur C, Ashton

Blk. (D.O.)
Record,  Blanche  B.,  754  17th

St. (D.O.)
Shellenbarg-er, J. A., 306 E.

State  St. (D.C.)
Shupert, M. Elizabeth, 314

N. Church St. (D.O.)
Stelle, Truman Y., Safety

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Syman, B. C, 719 Chestnut

St. (D.O.)
Terry, Lottie S., 805 N.
Court  St. (D.C.)
• Wise, Hugh Thomas, Main

St. (D.O.)

Rock  Island: Berg-land,  V.  A.,  '

17211 2nd Ave. (D.O.)  I

De  Groot, Fred B., Safety  !

Bldg. (D.O.)  i

Ely, A. R., 308 Safety  1

Bldg. (D.C.)
Klore, F. M., 1204 15th St.

(D.C.)  i

Mader, Edith, 1602 20th St.

Mathis, J. A. (D.C.)
Miller,  H.  W.,  1630i  2nd  Ave.  !
(D.C.)  I

Noder, Miss Edith, 1920

20th  Ave. (D.C.)
Schleuter, Dorothea. (D.C.)
Schultz, Dr. C, 643 40th St.
Rockport:  Moseley,  F.  H.,

Walnut St. (N.D.)
Saint Chariest De  Young, Dr.

S. J. (D.C.)  j

Saint Elmo: Kelly, Sam'l W.  j
Koyner,  Robert  L. (D.C.)
Salem: Thompson, Lillian.  1

Sandwich: Murrav, W. F.
Williams,  Archie. (N.D.)
Shannon: Osborne, R. Randle.

Shelby\'ille: Herrold. S. Al-
lette, I. O. O. F. Bldg.
Sherrard: Bahringer, S. E.
Zwlcker, Edw. (D.C.)
South  Chlcag^ot Carroll,  Grace
M., 9154 Commercial Ave.


SprluKfleid: Backer, V. L..
410 S. fith St. (D.C)
Becker, Mrs. V. L., 412 oth

St. (D.C.)
Bennett, C. M., 1339 Wash-
ington St. (N.D.)
Carter, Georgia, 413 E.

Capital  Ave. (D.O.)
Carter, Walter C, 413 E.

Capital Ave. (D.O.)
Donovan, D. D., Fergu.son

Bldg. (D.O.)
Dugger & Dugger, 313 W.

Monroe St. (D.C.) •
Dugger  &  Dugger,  621  Wal-
nut  St. (D.C.)
Ennis, Emery, Ferguson

Bldg. (D.O.)
Imlay, J. N., 413 Cth St.

Kalb, Charles E., Ferguson

Bldg. (D.O.)
Mantle, Pauline R., Pierik

Bldg. (D.O.)
Ovens, Albert N., Ridgeley

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Scaife, Martha E., Ridgely
Nat'l  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Sterling: Dumore, W. K.
Mathis, Dr. J. A. (D.C.)
Fossler, Wellington  C,  New

Lawrence Bldg. (D.O.)
Gardner, Wm., 702 W. 4th

St. (D.O.)
Mathis, Bertha. (D.C.)
Morrison, Kate. (D.C.)
.Stockton: Backus, Loretta.
Ray,  C.  R. (D.C.)
Streatort Blean, C. A., 210
Main  St. (D.C.)
Smith, G. H., 408 E. Main
St. (D.C.)

Stronghurstt Henderson,

Lucy  V. (D.O.)
Sullivan: Greggs, Phillip.

Bushart,  E.  E. (D.O.)
Sumner: Cunningham, R. D

Piper,  F.  J.,  Box  39. (D.C.)
Wright,  Wm. H. (D.C.)
Sycamore: Thompson, D. Or-

val. (D.O.)
Taylorsville: Roberts,  Arthur,

Anderson Bldg. (D.O.)
Toulon: Newton, J. H. (N.D.)
Tuscola: Mills,  Anna  M., Star

Store  Bldg. (D.O.)
Overton, J. A. (D.O.)
Urbana: Hurd,  Orville  R.,  512

S. Mathew.s Ave. (D.O.)
Snavely,  C.  M. (D.C.)
Villa Grove: Cunningham,

Chas.  J. (D.O.)
Virginia: Oliphant, Lorna

Alice. (D.O.)
Walnut: Clausen, J. A. (N.D.)
AVar.saw: Bell, C. E. (D.C.)
Washburn: Isch,  Geo.  A.


AVatseka: Herrick, W. Edwin.

Waukegan: Berger, P. O.

Biel, 127 N. Genesee St.

Hoefner, Victor C, 215
Madison St. (D.O.)

McCormick, John T. (D.C.)

Roemer, J. F., 122 N.  Gene-
see  St. (Or.S.)

Shellenberger, N. W. (D.O.)
Welsa: Luepke. J. F. G.
(M.D., X.D.)


West Brooklyn: Eisenbacher,

Paul. (D.C.)
West Salem: Hallbeok, T. E.

Toskey, I'aul J. (D.C.)
Whitehall: Hamilton, R. A.

W^llmette: Tuttle, Arthur H..

1124 Central Ave. (D.O.)
Winnetka:  Dole, Almeda

Goodspeed, New Bank

Bldg. (DO.)
W^oodstockt McCord, Andrew

S., 112i Benton St. (D.O.)


INDIANA

Alexandria: Carey, H. F., Ill

E. Wash. St. (D.C.)

Anderson: Bird, C. J., 306 W.

12th St. (D.C.)

Carey,  F.  S.,  Indiana  School,

1303 S. Meridan  St. (D.O.)

Cary, Frank J.. 21 W. 11th

St. (D.O.)
Cary, Frank L., 16 W. 8th

St. (D.C.)
Bowman. Juanita, 503-5

Union Bldg. (D.C.)
Hixon, Ina F., 505 Union

Bldg. (D.C.)
Indiana School of Chiro-
practic. 1303 S. Meridan
St. (D.C.)
James, J. H. (D.C.)
Lewis, Burt, 1303 S. Meri-
dan  St. (D.C.)
Macomber, F. J., 230 W.

11th St. (D.C.)
Smith, Ruby. (D.C.)
Whitney, A. E. (D.C.)
Angola: Fanchett, Dr. (D.C.)
Arcadia: Colgan. E.  E. (D.C.)
Argos: Fugate, E. P. (D.C.)
Auburn: Beck, May, 404 S.
Van  Buren St. (D.C.)
Miller, E. W. (D.C.)
Schalow, L. C, 151 W. 8th
St. (D.C.)
Bedford: Parks, Geo. P., 1127

14th St. (D.C.)
Berne: Nyfpeler, Edwin.

Bicknell: Osborn. R. E.,  P. O.

Box 192. (D.C.)
Bloomington: Moore, Etna,

110 E. 6th St. (D.C.)
Blufrton: Blackman, Chas. J.
Malcom, Z. E., 1127 14th St.

Powell. Wilbur S. (D.O.)
Brazil: Baker,  J. E., Citizens'
Nat'l Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Huffer, Mrs. Leila, Brazil

Hotel. (D.C.)
Kattman, Bertha, 518 S.

Forest Ave. (D.O.)
Thomas, Robert M., 3-4
Winklespeck Bldg. (D.C.)
Brookville: Brown, Frank  E.,
Box 25. (D.O.)
Robinson, Wm. (D.C.)
Bunker  Hill: Duckwell,  E. D.
Liestenfeltz.  Chas.  L. (D.C.)
Butler: Frisby,  Earl  E. (D.C.)
Cambridge  City: Pierce, Clar-
ence M. (D.C.)


1000


Geoqrapliicdl  Index


Indiana


Carthni^e: Barber, Morton.

Clinton: Evving, Mary Mat-
thews, Morg-an Blk.
Coal City; Van  Horn, Mrs. M.

P. (D.C.)
Coiiiniltia City: Roth, R. W.,
Main and Market Sts.
Coliimltu.s: Williams, Thomas
H.. 329i Washington St.
Young-, Luna Kerr, 11-15
Keller Bldg-. (D.C.)
Conner.sville: Baug^hman, J.
H., .512 Central Ave.
Hecker, G. E., P. O. Box 15.

Scott, H. P. (D.C.)
Crawford.sville:  Cunning--

ham,  Mrs.  E.  F. (D.C.)
Oarren, Earl G., 220 S.

Green St. (D.C.)
Garren.  W.,  220  S.  Green  St.

Marler,  C.  E.,  111|  N.  Wash-
ing-ton St. (D.C.)
Myers, Paul J., K. of P.
Bldg. (D.C.)
Cropsey: Tara, Belford.

Crown Point: Boner, T. J.,
Box 581. (D.C.)
Burge, J. P. (D.C.)
Riechers, Dorothea. (D.C.)
Reichter. (N.D.)
Dale: Hargrave, C. B., R. F.

D. No. 40. (D.C.)
Dayton: Bonsman, M. E.

Decatur: Bergener, Orza.
Finkhouser,  "\V.  F.,  22 J  Mon-
roe St. (D.C.)
Frey, B. C. (D.C.)
Weaver, Calvin R. (D.O.)
Delphi: Hinkley, A. B. (D.C.)
Dixon: Scharnhorst, M. H.,
100 Hennipin Ave. (D.C.)
E:a.st  Chicago:  Glendinnlng,  H.

E^aton: Kent,  M.  C. (D.C.)

Keat, M. C. (D.C.)
Ellchart: Bigelow, Mary F.,
401 N. Main St. (B.O.)
Bigelow, Frances. (D.C.)
Boehm, F., 317 Lexington

Ave. (D.C.)
Bolhiuse, Jno. A., 130 S.

Main St. (D.C.)
Crow^,  E.  C,  2nd  and  Frank-
lin Sts. (D.O.)
Denlinger, J. H., Elkhart

Water Co. Bldg. (D.C.)
Fiazer,  F.  C, 117 Division

St. (D.C.)
Landis, H. L., Curts Blk.

Liestenfeltz, Clara, 605  J

Main St. (D.C.)
Leistenfeltz, Chas. L. (D.C.)
E^l.sart: Smith, Clarence L.

OUvood: Phelps, L. W..
Taylor Blk. (D.C.)
Prechtel, Fred. H., Lederer-
Hene Bldg. (D.C.)
Evansville: Dermitt, S. W.,
318 Woods Bldg. (D.C.)
Gatlin, Mary T,, 412 Wash-
ington St. (D.O.)
Montague, Wm. C, Ameri-
can  Trust Bldg. (D.O.)


Shoaff
W.


Ortmeyer, A. H., 115 Edgar

St. (N.D.)
Roper & Roper, 403-5 Citi-
zens' Natl. Bank Bldg.
Wilson, Chas., 1402 E. 111th
St. (D.C.)
Fnirniount: Colgan, C. H., 5

Theatre Bldg. (D.C.)
Farmland: Craig, Mrs. Edith.
Craig, Strod H. (D.C.)
Ferdinand: Beckinan, .Terome

W. (X.D.)
Fortville: Beck, I. E. (D.C.)
Ft. Wayne: Derek, J. E.,
Bass Blk. (D.O.)
Goebel, C. J., 1618 E. Lewis

St. (D.O.)
Grove, J. O. (D.C.)
Insles, Mary, 426 E. Ponti-

coe St. (D.O.)
Johns,  A.  L.,  716  Jackson  St.

Johnston, W. H., Shoaff

Bldg. (D.O.)
Koerber. Robt. (D.O.)
Patterson, M. B., Pys. Def.

Bldg. (D.C.)
Ross, N. C, 227 W. Jeffer-
son St. (D.O.)
Ross College of Chiroprac-
tic, 227 W. Jefferson St.
Seaman, Kent

Bldg. (D.O.)
Walburn, F. S., 210

Jefferson St. (D.C.)
Winkelman, R. A., 2703

Hoagland Ave. (N.D.)
Wolf, Fred., 129 E. Main

St. (D.O.)
Wolf, Dr. Frederic, 1222
Organ Ave. (D.C.)
Frankfort: Fulham, C. V.,
People's Life Ins. Bldg.
McNicoll, D. Ella,

Blk. (D.O.)

Morkert, M. D.

Thrasher's Store.

Sifton, Nate, Over

er's Store. (D.C.)

Franklin: Campbell,  J.  L.,  200

W. Madison St. (D.C.)
Frceport: Wallace, Sarah A.,

71 Grove St. (D.C.)
Galveston: Copeland & Cope-
land. (D.C.)
Garrett: Rasmussen,

Meda. (D.C.)
Gar-v: Aptekman, H.,
Jefferson St. (D.C.)
Gates, Leslie, General

Greiner,  M.  M.,  6th  and  Van

Buren  Sts. (D.C.)
Kreolic, Benj., 11th St. and

B'way. (D.C.)
Maisel, F.  H., 122  W.  5th

Ave. (D.C.)
Maisel, Marie E., 122 West
5th  Ave. (D.C.)
, Shupert, J. C. (D.C.)
Gaston:  Smith,  C.  X. (Co.S.)
Goodland: Hann,  Geo.  W., 512

Newton St. (D.C.)
Go.shen: Amsbaugh, A. S.,
1202-4 S. Main St. (D.C.)
' Gever,  Elizabeth  J.,  Hawks-
Gortner Bldg. (D.O.)
Metzger, Chas., I. O. O. F.

Bldg. (D.C.)
Page, Mrs. W. B. (D.C.)
Shepard, Geo. (D.C.)
Starkweather, R. L., Jeffer-
'  son Bldg. (D.O.)


Coultei

Over
Thrash-


Mrs.
673


Del.


Greenca.stle: Askew, Horace,

25 i Washington St.

I?otzner, Hugh L. M. (D.O.)
Sandifur,  Ada L., 409 Hanna

St. (D.C.)
Greenfleid: Saswell, Gladys,

222 W. Main St. (D.C.)
Tull, Geo. (D.O.)
Greensburg: Dennis, Harry.

9 Odd Fellows Bldg.

Flick, Gervase C. (D.O.)
Hart,  Miss  Anna,  402  Wash-
ington  St. (D.C.)
Hammond: Adams, E. P., 15

Williams St. (D.C.)
Eastwood, H. W., State and

Hohman Sts. (D.C.)
Helgan, Clara A., 93 State

St. (D.C.)
Helgen,  G. D.,  Suite  4,  O.  K.

Bldg., 636 Hohman St.


M., 625 Home St.


Jones, L.

Keller, J.

Keller, L.


M., 169 State St.
A., 246 Plummer


Ave. (D.C.)
Shine, Chas. (D.C.)
AVolff, C. T., 754 Claude St.

Wolff, C. W. (D.C.)
Hartford City: Bell, Tom,

Smith Blk. (DC.)
Knott, J. C, 8 Cooley Blk.

Tindall, Amos Willard,

Masonic Temple. (D.O.)
Huntington: Bowers &

Feightner. (D.C.)
Dizmond, Wm., 550 W.

Matilda St. (D.C.)
Fry, B. C. (D.C.)
Young, Jacob P. (N.D.)
Huntingburd: Hunt, B. F.

Meyer, J. P., 412 Jefferson

St. (D.C.)
Meyers, J. E., 1335 E. Mar-
ket  St. (D.O.)
Mever & Meyer, 1335 E.

Market St. (D.C.)
Shepardson, G. Byron.

Whitestine, O. G., 230

Washington St. (D.C.)
Indianapolis: Beaver, W. O.,

409 Mass Ave. (D.C.)
Bethge, H. E., c/o Tremont

Hotel. (D.C.)
Bibler, John J.. 906 State

Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Bibler, Mabel Foster. 906

State Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Brineman, J. H. (D.O.)
Campbell. C. G., 44 Somer-
set  Apts. (D.C.)
Carter, A. D., 2104 E.

Michigan St. (D.C.)
Clark, M. E., Board of

Trade Bldg. (D.O.)
Copeland, Florence K., 601

State Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Copeland & Copeland, Drs.,

601 State Life Bldg.

Cunningham, Ella F., 727

Indiana Pythian Bldg.

Darling,  Frank  S.,  738  K. of

P. Bldg. (D.C.)
Du Valle, Beatrice, No. 601

State Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Fuller, L. E.. 511 Meridian

Life Bldg. (D.O.)
Hall, Frank  A., Suite 2, 17*

W. Market St. (D.C.)


Indiana


(icAHfvaph iced  Index


1001


Hall.  Win.  Campbell.  Flet-
cher Saving's  &  Trust  Co.
Bld^. (D.O.)

Jones.  Oscar.  1821  W.
Washing-ton St. (D.O.)

.Tohnson.  C.  L..  333  N.  Illi-
nois  St. (D.O.)

.Johnson.  E.  L.,  511  Meridian
Life Bldg. (D.C.)

Kinkaid,  D.  L.,  1006  Belle-
fontaine St. (S.T.)

Matturg-.  Jnc,  231fi  E.
Washington St. (D.C.)

Pierce.  G.  Chester,  1615  E.
33rd St. (D.C.)

Rector.  Chas.  A..  Odd  Fel-
lows Bldg. (D.O.)

Smith,  Orren  E..  Traction
Terminal Bldg. (D.O.)

Spaunhurst.  J.  F..  State
Life Bldg. (D.O.)

Storer,  Elbert,  Merchants
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Van  Tilburg  &  Van  Til-
burg,  427-28  Occidental
Bldg. (D.C.)

Urschel,  Geo.  C.  2421  Pier-
son Ave. (D.C.)

Weaver.  .1.  Ray.  519-20
Occidental Bldg. (D.C.)

Williams.  Kate.  State  Life
Bldg. (D.O.)

Wire,  A.  V.,  5503  E.  Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)

Wright, Frank J.. 907 Law
Bldg. (D.O.)
Jnsonville: Chandler. Cliff.

Jeffer.sonville: Mohr, J. M.,

229 Walnut  St. (D.C.)
Keiidnllvillc: Bryan, H. A.,
116 Diggen Blk. (D.C.)

McGrath. Jos. D. (D.C.)

Snyder, Dan. (N.D.)
KentlnncI: Nops, W. J. (D.C.)
Ke^vanee: Smith, H. L.

Kniehtstown: Thomas, C. A..

Lock Box 624. (D.C.)
Kokomo: McCaughan, Rus-
sell  C, 210 N. Market St.

Meyer,  G.  W.,  103  N.  Mul-
berry St. (D.O.)

Meyer,  Geo.  W.,  No.  7
Courtland Blk. (D.C.)

Richey, S.  H. (D.C.)

Smith. Frank H. (D.O.)

Thompson.  M.  M.,  8-9
Kokomo  Trust  Co.,  New
Bldg. (D.C.)

Trash, Larkin C, 609 East
Jefferson St. (N.D.)
Ijafayette: Edwards, H. A.

Huffman,  Thomas  P.,  Loan
&  Trust  Bldg. (D.O.)

Fulton, James. (D.C.)

Fulton  &  Edwards,  10  New
Sharp Blk. (D.C.)

Lelber, Agnes  V. (D.O.)

Phelps,  Adaline,  Hannah
Blk. (D.C.)

Phelps,  L.  W.,  Hannah
Blk. (D.C.)

Rein.  Clara.  613  Ferry  St.

Vawter. W. H. (D.O.)

Vyverberg.  Kryn  T.,  Taylor
Bldg. (D.O.)

Walton.  Jas. (D.C.)
La Porfe: Crane. H. J..
Richter Hotel. (N.D.)

Fogarty,  Julia  A.,  First
Nat'l Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)

Jackson,  C.  V. (D.C.)

McLean.  W.  R.,  808  Madison
St. (D.C.)


Slayton, Carlton. (D.C.)
Slayton. S. M. (D.C.)
Ijawrenceburj?: Schuller,  F.  D.,

344 Walnut St. (D.C.)
IiCl>aiion: Beaven, Leslie M.
Morkert. Owen, 230 Cason

& Neal Bldg. (D.C.)

Winters, P. B., 242 Cason &

Neal Bldg. (D.C.)

IJberty: Egan. Junia. (D.C.)

Lo^^ransport: Koffel, Roy. 108-

12 Stettiner Bldg. (D.C.)

Krantz. Wm. J., 306i 4th

St. (D.C.)
Slater, Gertrude, 704 North

St. (D.C.)
Slater, Thos. C. 5021

B'way. (D.C.)
Slater. Thos. C, 704 North
St. (D.C.)
liynn: Knauer. F.
Madison: Lutes, O


F. (D.C.)
R. (D.C.)
E.


Manchester: Schoolcraft,

E. (D.O.)
Marion: Banks. McLerd M.,

114  N.  Nebraska  St. (D.C.)

Caine. Allen B.. Iroquois
Bldg. (D.O.)  ^

Dippo, Anna E.. 933 S.
Adams St. (D.C.)

Farrington. J. L., 320
Marion Blk. (D.C.)

Graham. J. F. (D.C.)

Johnson. B. L.. 2116 E. 4th
St. (D.C.)

McGuire. Chas. A., 306
Marion Blk. (D.C.)

Mclntire, Lucile. Maple St.

McKeever. O. G.. 406 Glass
Blk. (D.C.)

Peterson, M. B.. 1103 S.
Boots St. (D.C.)

Thompson. ^V. A.. 406
Marion Blk. (D.C.)

Thompson, W. A.. 3 Wilson
Blk. (D.O.)

Titterington, T.  W. (D.C.)

United College of Chiro-
practic. (D.C.)

Washka, F., 707 Washing-
ton St. (D.C.)

Wright, S. Ellis, Grant
Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Menton: Boyce, L. M., Box

134. (D.C.)
Michigan City: Amspoker, S.
D.. 5 Grand Opera  House.

Balow. 412i Pine St. (D.C.)

Denison, Harold B.. Or-
pheum Theatre Bldg.

Fogarty. J. P., Starland
Bldg. (DO.)

Goodsell, F., 119 N. 9th St.

McLean,  W.  R.,  717i Frank-
lin  St. (D.C.)

Pretzel, Bertha, Opera
House. (D.C.)

Pretzel, Wm. J., Opera
House. (D.C.)

Wood, Tracy E., Ledbetter
Bldg. (D.C.)
Middletown: Stevens, S., 5th

St. (D.C.)
MillRrave: Inman, I. I. (N.D.)
Mishavralca: Albert and Al-
bert, 115 Towle Avenue.

Lockbridge, C. D. (D.C.)

Smith, W. D., 117 E. Lin-
coln Way. (D.C.)

Smith & Smith, Guaranty
Bldg-. (D.C.)


.Montlcpllo: Miller,  H.  I,.,  New

Farmfis Bank Bldg.

Mount Vernon: Limpus. Ed-

^fi-d. 9-10 Odd FelIow.s

Bldg. (D.C.)
Mull>err>': Milligan, A. Lee.

Muncie: Carmody. F D 30''

Wy.se Bldg. (D.O.) '
Carmoney, F. D., 307 John-

son Blk. (D.C.)
Creighton Frank, 114-15

rhe Johnson. (D.C.)

^n?''7 ?t"^ ^- Rooms
rn' Johnson Bldg.

Tngails  &  Ingalls.  391-4
Wysor Bldg. (D.C.)

IngalLs.  Murray  E  "ini
Wysor Bldg. ^(D.C.) ^^

fn  ^°-^^' \^*3  W. 5th  St.

(D.C, Mag.)
bwearingen.  Pearl  14

Canopy Bldg. (D.C.)
Von Miller, Miss Lee. 414

Jefferson St. (N  D  )

^^*'m"c7 ^'"^'^>'- A. B.

'^■(Dic?' ^- ^^- ^'"'^ 405.
"^*^"rn"'""'' O'^'onnor, E. A.

Stockton, W. I (DC)

Maxim Bldg. (D.O.)
Grills, M. L. (D.O.)

^*'^\dc")''' ^'''''''' ^"che M.

IVoblesville: Hager, L E
(D.C.)  & . • -n..

Booth, Ethel, (DC)
Boothe, W. c. (D.C)
Frantz, Glen F.. North Side
Square. (D.C.)
Xoblesvine! .Veld on, Frank P.

^"''s' (*^"5''j''«'"*^'-- Borough.
Schoolcraft. F. E (DC)
Watters, Floyd. (D.C.)

^*'**S fNo")' -^^^'"■'^- Hf-'bert

Peru: Burke. E. W oQi x
Broadway. (D.C.) ^ ' '  ■
CDoY' ^' ^^ Broadway.
Market, M. D. (D.O.)

Plymouth: .Tackman, L M
fDP^" ^^'^^'S"^" St.

Portland: Davidson. C R
Rimel Bldg. (D.C.)
Pumphrey, ^V. A \dair

Bldg. (D.C.)
Watson, Paul E., 34 Bureil
Bldg. (D.C.)
Princeton: Abell. W P
Saxe, Arthur. (D.C  )
Saxe, Mary, 218 E. B'wav
Reminsrton: Shine, Chas

Rensselaer:  Tufler.  F \
(D.O.) ■ '  ■

Williams,  Mrs. V.  O. (DC)

Richmond:  Martin,  Frank.

RoadeS, Florence G. (DO)
Robinson, Wm., 810  S \  St

Townsend, Edgar E. (D.O)


1002


Geographical  Index


Iowa


Dixon, Reba Ij.


Wilcoxen, G. C, 35 S. 11th
St. (D.C.)
Rochestert Wire & Wire.


Hockvillet


Glassco,

Rodsvllle:

KuNhvlllet

228 W.


Geo., Jr.
Morkert,


M. D.


B..


Kinsinger, J.
5th St. (D.O.)
Monks, W. H., 8-10 Miller
Law Bldg. (D.C.)
Rome City: Kneipp Sanita-
rium. (D.O.)
Pulskomp, B., c/o K. Sani-
tarium. (D.O.)
Seymours Rader, Geo. B.
Robertson. L. D., lOi N.
Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Shelbyvllle: Manks, Harry,

P. O. Bldg. (D.C.)
South Bendj Bolhiuse
501-2 Dean Bldg.
Callahan, J. L.. J. M.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Callahan, Kate T., J.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Cleland, A., Citizens'

Bide. (D.O.)
Coleman, E. E., 432
Madison St. (N.D.)
Drobnv, T., 235 S. Michigan

St. (D.C.)
Flower, M. E., 501 Farmers

Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Keuk, Martin, 201 N. Hill

St. (D.C.)
Kish, F. G.. 301 Chapin

Kneck, G. W. (D.C.)
Mechling, Bessie, 417 S.
Michigan St. (D.C.)
Salllvant  Billman,  J.  M.  (M.D.)
Buis,  C.  L. (N.D.)
Curtis  &  Curtis,  240  South

Court St. (D.C.)
Kennedy, T. W. (M.D.)
Ramsey, Hazel, 228 South

Court  St. (D.C.)
Rpinhart, C. R.. 418 .Teffer-

son Bldg. (D.C.)
Sheffler, K. A., 7 E. Jack-
son St. (D.C.)
Smith & Smith, 222 W.

Wayne St. (D.C.)
Swem, Guy, 401 J.
Bldg. (D.C.)
Terre Haute* Albert
bert, 426 S. 8th St.
Campbell, C. A., Room
112 7th St. (D.C.)

Mrs. Stella, 528
Ave. (D.C.)
Archibald, 108 S.

E., 30i S


, L. B.,
S.

M. S.

Bank

West


St.


M. S.

&  Al-
5.


7th


Cornett,

Gilbert
England,

7th St.
Finn, Louis

St. (D.C.)
Helfrich, E. V.. 1915 N. 9th

St. (D.C.)
Helfrich & Helfrich, 1915

N.  9th  St. (D.C.)
Jacques, Mrs. Allie M.,

800  S. 7th St. (D.C.)
Kuhlman, E., 121  N. 6th St.

Meyer, S. P., 202-4 Arcade

Bldg. (D.C.)
Meyers, Stephen P., 306 N.

6th St. (D.C.)
Morrison, James G., Terre

Haute Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Sanders, Katherine, 1011 N.

4th St. (D.C.)
Sanders & Sanders, 613

Sycamore St. (D.C.)


Thomas, M. & F. V., 201-2
Odd Fellows Bldg. (D.C.)
Thomas, Flora  V., 704 Wal-
nut  St. (D.C.)
Thomas, Julia A., 223 3rd

St. (N.D.)
Thomas, M., 704 Walnut St.

Thomasson, Wm. S., Rose

Dispensary Bldg. (D.O.)
Worley. W., 814 Wabash
Ave. (D.C.)
Tipton: Gill, Helen, Far-
mers  Loan & Trust  Bldg.
Stone, J. C. (D.O.)
Union CItyt Evans & Evans.
227 N. Howard St. (D.C.)
Grain,  C. J.,  Box  5, (D.O.)
Spitler, Harry R. (D.C.)
Urban  I Meyers, Mrs. J. E.
Wire.  A.  V. (D.C.)
Wire, Nina A. (D.C.)
Valparaiso:  Bordeau,  M.  E.,
805 Monroe St. (N.D.)
Farrar, Walter  E. (D.C.)
Richards, Chas. (D.C.)
Springer, Victor L. (D.O.)
Van Bnren: Storts, ^. F.

Veedersburgt Fetters, M.  B.,
Rooms 3-4 Hesler Bldg.
Vincennesi Daly, W. C, 22
N. 2nd St. (N.D.)
Johnson, E. E., 409i Main

St. (D.C.)
Phillips, H. T., 418  Main  St.

Pielemeir, E. F., 518 Main

St. (D.C.)
Poe,  F.  E., 322-23  La  Plante

Bldg. (D.C.)
Stone, G. (D.O.)
Witty.  C.  E. (S.T.)
Wabash: Kellogg, Joseph,
Christman Blk. (D.C.)
Warrington, W. F., 203
Yarnell Theatre Bldg.
AVarreni Jones Ray. (D.C.)

Johnson, A. O. (D.C.)
Warsaw! Brownell, O. D.
Copper, Lydia N., Elks

Arcade Bldg. (D.O.)
Durbin,  B.  E.,  201i  W.  Center

St. (D.C.)
Powell, N. W. (S.T.)
Washington: Campbell, C. A.
i  (D.C.)

I  Westport't Huffer, L. R.
I  (D.C.)

Whitinf?: Davenport, R. E.,
504  New  York  Ave. (D.C.)
James, J. W. (D.C.)
Wiesjahn, W. H., Schrage

Bldg. (D.C.)
Wolff. C. T.. 414 119th St.
AVinchesten Banta,  S. S.

Wolcottt Bond, Robert  W.


IOWA

Ackleyi Wright, H. L. (D.C.)
Adair: Evans,  D.  L. (D.C.)
Adel: Morgan, Sylvia. (D.C.)
Albla: Herron, H. J., 322 S.
Main St. (D.C.)


Alva:  Wait, S. D. (D.C.)
Ames: Edmund & Edmund.
Gates, Bertha M.. 316 Main

St. (D.O.)
Guthrie,  Mrs.  L. S. (D.C.)
Proctor, Clark M. (D.O.)
Anamo.sa: Beaver, Mrs. E.

Anita:  Daughenbaugh, S.  Earl
Parchen,  G.  H. (D.C.)
Arlington: Hoag,  W.  G. (D.C.)

Moore, F. J. (D.C.)
Atlantic: Chamberlain, G. I.,.,
412 Chestnut St. (D.C.)
Finley, Chas. D., 608 Che.st-

nut St. (D.O.)
Noyer, Samuel. (D.C.)
Audubon: Kingsbury, M. O.

Avoca: Hollister,  H.  R. (D.C.)
Lewis, C. A. (D.C.)
Wood, Lena M. (D.O.)
Ayrshire: Gates, Roy T.
Strand, Jos. H. (D.C.)
Belle  Plaine: Hoy,  Harry.
Whelan, R. L. (D.C.)
Bellevue: Dickhut, C. W.

Belmond:  Hawkins, D.  B.

Bettendorf: Painter, S. W.

Blairstown: Henry, F. M.

Blanohard: Long,  M.  C. (D.C.)
Boone: Allen & Allen, Boone
Nat'l Bank Bldg. ((D.C.)
Anthony, Gertrude M.,
Boone  Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Frutiger, G. (D.C.)
McAlpin, D. E. (D.O.)
Bridgewater: Anderson, W.

L. (D.C.)
Brighton: White, Wm. Al.

Brooklyn: Burke,  Hilnia.
McAnnich. C. S. (D.O.)
Richman. R. A. (D.C.)
Wilson, Everett. (D.C.)
Bryant:  Nelson.  P.  A. (D.O.)
Burlington: Baughman. J. S.,
523 Division St. (D.O.)
Chamberlin, I. I. (D.C.)
Harmer,  Walter, 1108  Aetha

St. (D.C.)
Lang & Thornell, S. Lee-
brick St. (D.C.)
Nelson, P., 610 S. 12th St.

Puddicomb, Robt. A., 500

Main  St. (D.C.)
Quelle, R. J. (D.O.)
Schleicher, Eugene, 52 Par-
son  Blk. (D.C.)
Thornell. A. M., 60 Parson.s

Blk. (D.O.. D.M.T.)
Walker. Joseph Nelson, 102

S. Marshall St. (D.O.)
Wormer, Walter H., 312
Jefferson  St. (D.O.)
Callender: Knutson, Chris-

tena. (D.C.)
Carroll: Bromert, Jos. F.
Bruch, Clara. (D.C.)
Fegley, George  W. (D.C.)
Forrest, Wm. J., Belter
Bldg. (D.O.)


Iowa


Geoqraphical  Index


1003


Frutiger, K. C (D.C.)
Frutig-er. Godfrey. (D.C.)
Thiesspn & Thiessen, Dr.s.

Thiessen. Mr.s. R. J. (D.C.)
<  asey: Fitzgerald, Frank W.

(ediir  FalLsi  Helm, Ora  B.

Roth,  Wm.  J.,  315  i  Main  St.

Stephenson, Troy C., 523

Main  St. (D.O.)
Cedar  Rapld.si Beaven, E. H.,

Granby  Blk. (D.O.)
Burd, Walter C, Security

Savings Bank Bldg.

Cummins, J. E., 120 N. 10th

St. (D.C.)
Cummins. Ruby S. (D.P.T.)
Hayden  &  Hayden. (D.C.)
Hayden &  Hayden, 1220 6th

St. (D.O.)
Holmes,  W.  J..  1254  4th  Ave.

Ihne, Walter W., Room 8,

Interstate Bldg. (D.C.)
Ingrebitsen, H., Kimball

Blk. (D.C.)
Johnson, Edith, Masonic

Temple. (D.C.)
Knoll, A. v., Rooms 1-2,

Backman  Bldg.  1st  St.  and

3rd  Ave. (D.C.)
Langworthy. Mitchell, 834

1st  St. (D.C.)
Langworthy, S. M., 500 1st

St. (D.C.)
Lindsay,  Dr.  F.  P.  W. (M.D.,

D.C.)
McCready, B. T., 215 Maso-
nic Temple. (D.C.)
Miller, Samuel B., Granby

Blk. (D.O.)
Morton, Sadie F., 8-9 Inter-
state  Bldg-. (D.C.)
Schenck,  J.  H.,  Cor. 4th  and

2nd Aves. (M.D., D.C.)
Smith, Dr. (D.C.)
Centervlllei Graham, Geo. G.,

309  N. 10th  St. (D.O.)
Nelson,  C.  E. (D.C.)
Norman,  F.  J.,  P.  O.  Box  136

Charlton: McCanon, M. H.,

Over Post Office. (D.C.)
Merryman, Harry L., 627

Osage Ave. (D.C.)
Turner, H. F., Hillinger &

Larimer Blk. (D.C.)
Wilson, O. K., 331 N. Main

St. (D.C.)
Cliarle.s City: Holden, B. F.

P'hregal, A. B. (D.C.)
Linhart, Ernest W. (D.O.)
Miller, W. D. (D.C.)
AVright.  Ruth  M.,  Ellis  Bldg.

Cherokee: Hoard,  Mary  A.

Hook, Albert E., Brummer

Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith, Lloyd. (D.C.)
Wire, A.  V. (D.C.)
Shope, R. F. (D.C.)
Clarlnda: Anderson, Susie M.

Clark,  H. A. (D.C.)
Liken,  F.  J. (D.C.)
Clarioni Powley, V. E. (D.C.)

Meyers,  J.  A. (D.C.)
ClarksTille: Jepson, Alvin N.

Rozell Bldg. (D.C.)
Jepson, Amanda  R. (D.C.)
Clear Lake: Chappell, E. E.


Nielson, P. A., Box 630.

Thomas, I'Vancis. (D.C.)
Clinton:  Allen,  Geo.  J.,  1029  N.
2nd St. (D.C.)
Ashmore, Margaret. (D.C.)
Cass, F. W., 517 3rd Ave.

Cochran, A.  D. (D.C.)
Flaherty, W. T., 305-6

Howe's Blk. (D.C.)
Griswold, Mrs. Hattie, 613

2nd  St. (D.C.)
Huey, C. P., 230 Fifth Ave.

Johnson, J. R., 247 7th  Ave.

Omsted, S. Louisa, 220 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Quick, Mrs. M., 711 Summit
Ave. (D.C.)
Colfax: Wilcox. Dayse T.,
Box 629. (D.C.)
Zimmerman, F.  H. (D.O.)
Columbus City: Lauser,

Frank. (D.C.)
Columbus Junction: Hellam,

Lydia. (D.C.)
Coon Rapld.s: Norris, D. L.,

Lock Box 305. (D.C.)
Corning:: Gardiner, Warren
L. (D.O.)
Cohrad, Hal. (D.C.)
Corydon: Swan, S. Howard,

Rea Blk. (D.C.)
Council Bluffs: Linebarger,
C. A. (D.C.)
McCuskey, Charlotte, 619
1st Ave. (D.O.)

A.,  Broadway.


W., 102 Main St.
252 Merrlman


19.


N.


Mudge, O

Stahl, G.

Strand, Glen,

Blk. (D.C.)
Strand, Mrs. Frances S., 252

Merriman Blk. (D.C.)
Cresco: Fortin, Edwin C.

Crestont Birdsall & Birdsall.

Dalmer & Dalmer, Box

Ferrand,  C.  L. (D.C.)
McKnight, Isadora, 305

Walnut St. (D.O.)
Riley, C. J. (D.C.)
Swanson, Ralph. (D.C.)
Wagoner, Geo. F. (N.D.)
Davenport: Adams, R. M.

Alberts, Mabelle V., 1104 N.

Harrison (D.C.)
Armstrong, J. T. (D.C.)
Ballman, Meta. (D.C.)
Beaver, Mrs. E., 1020 Main

St. (D.C.)
Benadom,  W.  A.,  c/o  Stand-
ard School  of  Chiropractic

and Naturopathy. (M.D.)
Bliss,  Mrs.  Edna  M. (D.C.)
Bodot, J. N., 907 Le Claire

St. (D.C.)
Brandenberg, A. L. (D.C.)
Brehmer, Louis F., c/o P.

S.  C. (D.O.)
Browder,  J.  M.,  c/o  Standard

School  of  Chiropractic  and

Naturopathy. (M.D.)
Brown's Sanitarium, 1005

Brady St. (D.O.)
Brown, M. P.. 828  Brady St.

Brown, H. B., 1518 Ripley

St. (D.C.)
Burich, S. J. (D.C.)
Burns & Burns. Drs., 320J

Brady  St. (D.C.)


Campbell. C. F., 1634 Rork

Island  St. (D.C.)
Campbell, J. L., 6th and

Perry St.s. (D.C.)
Carter,  W.  A., 306  E.  6th  St.

Chamberlin, Sadie, 2023

Rock Island St. (D.O.)
Chapman,  W.  A. (D.C.)
Cinadr, I. L., 508 Miss. Ave.

Clayton, Mrs. E. A., 818

Brady  St. (D.C.)
Cravin, J. H. (D.C.)
Cronk, Otis E., c/o P. S. C.

Crumpacker,  E.  K., c/o

Standard School  of  Chiro-
practic and Naturopathy.

Cummings,  J.  E.  (D.C.)
Curti.s  &  Curtis,  828  Biady

St. (D.C.)
Davenport College of Chi-
ropractic. (D.C.)
De  Carno,  Ed.  (D.C.)
Delk,  J.  W., 514  Brady  St.

Delk, L. P.,  c/o  Standard

School  of  Chiropractic  and

Naturopathy. (M.D.)
Denlinger. Dr. J. H. (D.C.)
Dougherty, W., 301  N. Main

St. (D.O.)
Elliot, Frank  W., 828  Brady

St. (D.C.)
Firth, J. N., 828 Brady St.

Fisher, Joseph. (D.C.)
Fleming, J. H., 1603 Mar-
shall  St. (D.C.)
Foley, Horace P., 379 W.

4th  St. (D.C.)
Fortier, J.  B. (D.C.)
Fullmer, Ettie, 1015 Brady

St. (D.O.)
Gamble, Harley  E. (D.C.)
Gerdes. (D.O.)
Gerking, S. D.,  U.  C.  C.

Gordon, James A. (D.C.)
Gordon, Le Roy M., 514

Brady St. (D.C.)
Guentherman, W. C., 1312

Leonard St. (D.C.)
Hart,  Fred.  L.,  818  Le  Claire

St. (D.O.)
Harrington, S.  A. (D.C.)
Heath,  W. L., 828  Brady  St.

Heintze, Arthur C, 1719 Le

Claire St. (D.O.)
Hewins, S. P. (D.C.)
Hill.  John  West. (D.C.)
Ihne, R. E., 1032 W. 14th

St. (D.C.)
Keifer, Prank, 913 W. 3rd

St. (D.C.)
Kennedy, Chas. (D.C.)
Kiefer.  F.  H.,  2624  Le  Claire

St. (D.C.)
Klunder, Paul E., 1866

Liberty St. (D.C.)
Knoll, A. F., 1921 Bridge

Ave. (D.C.)
Knoll. A. v., 508 Miss. Ave.

Knoll, A. v., 729 College

Ave. (D.C.)
Lamb, Charles. (D.C.)
Langehagen & Langehagen,

Drs., 830  Le  Claire  St.

Le Plant. G. L.. 1216 Perrv

St. (D.C.)
Lutes,  Mrs.  A.  L. (D.C.)
McCall, J. P., 2211 W. 4th

St. (D.C.)
McNamara, Mrs. R. E., 528

Brady St. (D.C.)


loot


Geo(/r(t pineal  Inde.r


Iowa


6  th
14th
Lo-


Miller, Geo. H.. 1219 Perry

St. (D.C.)  „ ^

Millman. H. I.. 1113 Brady

Mlore!°S^'^F.. S. C. Brody

St.  (D.O.)
Morton, E. A., lib i^^-

St  (D  C  )
Motsch.  Riid.  J..  032  W.

M^tsch^'-R.^  J.. 1021 W.

cust  St. (D.C  )
Moyers,  C  E. (D  C  )
Myers.  E.  P- (DC.)
Nicklin.  W.  B..  U.  C.  C.

OtS' gIo.  W.. 528-30  Brady

Oweni^T:-^J.. 828 Brady St.

ralmer?  B.  J..  828  Brady  St.

PaC?"  School of Chiro-

PeS'ci?w''j:N928  Brady

Ph'i^ii^?''Vho. E.. 2602

Harrison ??  A^aV

Raidt. E. P.. 1764 Noble St.

Reidi^W. A., c/o Standard
School of Chiropractic
and Naturopathy. (D.O.)

Reimer, J. A.. 423 W. 7th
St. (D.C.)

Ro.sieky,  Wm (D.C.)

Ruehlmann, W. 1'., U- »-• '^•

Schuitz!  Otto,  Jr..  810  Perry

Scott.  ''C.'W.,  324  E. 15th  St.

ShS)^?  Thos. L.. 1261 Main
St. (D.O.)

i!l,1e%' a^l. 'S2%. 2nd St.

Smith,' R. T., Standard
School of Chiropractic
and Naturopathy. (D.C,

Steinbach, Leo. .1., U. C. u.

Stern. H. (DC.)
Titterington. Frank L.. bZO

W. 3rd St. (D.C.)
Tobey. H. C. 828-34 Brady

St. (D.C.)  ^. ^  ,

Universal Chiropractic Col-
lege. (D.C.)
Vedder,  H.  F..  828  Brady  St.

(Ph.C, D.C.)
Volz. C. C. 1417 Iowa St.

Von Dresky (D.C.)
Wagner, E. R.. 2029 Far-

num St. (D.C.)
Wheaton. F.  1...  U.  C.  C.

Wicks.' C. H.. 1709 Grand

Winckler.  Oscar.  817  W. 9th

St. (D.C.)
Wishart. James. 828 Brady

Brady St. (D.C.)
Wishart.  Mrs.  J.  C. (D.C.)
Decorahi Opshal & Opshal

Urban.'  H. L.. West Walter
St. (D.O.)
Delinar: Staman. Mrs. E. A.

Deni.sont Larsen.  L.  A.,  200  E.
Walnut St. (D.C.)
Johnstone, Emma C, 206
K.  Broadway. (D.O.)
DCS  Moines: Adlon,  L.  K., 404
E. 5th St. (D.C.)
Anderson. Carl A.. 1619
High St. (PC.)


Anderson. Mrs. C. A., 721

Penn.  Ave. (D.C.)
Bachman, Dr. M. E., 411

Hippes Bldg. (D.C.)
Caldwell, Delia B., Flynn

Bldg. (D.O.)
Corbin, Grace E., 520 Clapp

Bldg. (D.C.)
Corbin, Grace E.. 15Q3

School St. (D.C.)
Davis, Frank L.. 242-244 K.

of P. Bldg. (D.C.)
Drapier,  D.  E.  Los  Taft,  707

High St. (D.C.)
Dudlev, Isabel H., 1503 20th

St. (Ph.C, D.C.)
Dudley. O. Philip, 1503 20th

St. (D.C.)
Drymond,  E.  C,  1422  Locust

St. (D.O.)
Dyart,  R.  S.,  Equitable  Bldg.

Golden, Mary B., Citizens

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Guild, N. E. (D.O.)
Guild, Dr. W. A. (M.D.)
Hammer, Milton C. Flynn

Bldg. (D.O.)
Ireland, Harry  M..  1163  27th

St. (D.O.)
Jobe. W. H., 401-3 Century

Blk. (D.C.)
Judlander & Judlander. 707

E. Locust St. (D.C)
Julander, S. E.. 310 Gord

Blk. (D.C.)
Julander. Frances. (D.C.)
King. F. L. (M.D.. D.C)
Lovergrove, M. R., Des
Moines Still College.
Lowe, Mrs. L. J. (D.C.)
Luce, J. W..  406  Shops  Bldg.,
8th and Walnut Sts.
Marshall, H.  J.,  Hippes  Bldg.

Moore. George E.. Equi-
table Bldg. (D.O.)
Moore, Etna. (D.C.)
Morgan. Sylvia, 520 Clapp

Bldg. (D.C)
Patterson, W. S.. 306 Good

Blk. (D.C.)
Ridgeway. Kathryn, But-
tinger-Securities Bldg.
Sattlem'eyer. Mrs. Harriet,

416 Good Blk. (D.C)
Scott. Lewis. 1216 E. Grand

Ave. (D.C.)
Slottlemeyer. Mrs. Harriet,

566  W. 7th St. (D.C.)
Smith,  B.  K.,  6th  and  Locust

Sts. (D.C.)
Smith, Mrs. Bush K., 933

16th St. (D.C.)
Smith. R. C, 3416 4th St.

Still. Jennie A.. 1338 East

Grand  Ave. (D.O.)
Taylor. S. L., 541 43rd St.

Thompson.  C  E.,  Utica  Bldg.

Verhoff, Edward A.. 512

Walnut  St. (N.D.)
Watson.  S.  .1.. 515 Polk
Bldg. (5th St.) (N.D.)
Yocum, I. W., 3102 Univer-
sity  Ave. (D.C)
Zechman, J. E., Fleming
Bldg. (D.C.)
De  Witt  J McCarl.  J. F. (D.C)
Diagronalt Henry,  F.  H. (D.C.)
Dubuque: Allen. L. P.. 312
Security Bldg. (D.C.)
Baker. Adam, B. & I. Bldg.
(DO.)


Denning, L. B., 1130 Main

St. (N.D.)
Friedlein, N. F., 760 Locust

St. (D.C.)
Friedlein,  N. F. (D.C.)
Loizeaux. C  L. (M.D.)
Schneider. John D.. l.';92
Clay St. (N.D.)
Durant: Donelly.  Rose. (D.C.)
Engrle Grove: Kuehne, C. F..
(D.C)
Middleton. Delia, James

Blk. (D.O.)
Thissen, R. J. (D.C)
Karlham: Humphrey, Mattie
E. (D.O.)
Humphrey, G. B. (D.C)
Elldont Waite, S. D. (D.C.)
Eddyville: Wheeler, Arlie.

Eldora: Arnold, D. .1. (DC.)
Hall,  J.  A. (D.C)
Jones. E. R. (D.C.)
Glkader: Schuitz.  F.  A. (D.C.)

E}nimet!sl)urK: Jansen. J., Box
312. (DC.)
Janssen. M.  J. (D.C.)
Elkport: Bateman. C E.

(D.C)
Sussex: Hultine. L. C (D.C.)

E.sthervllle: Gaard, Chris.

(Dr.)

Scott. H. H. (D.C.)
E)xira:  Drake, O. M. (D.C.)
Schoonover. Anna C. (D.C.)
Schoonover. L. A. (D.C.)

Fairfleld: Gordon. L. E.

Hoppes. Harriet Chandler.

401  W.  Briggs  St. (D.C.)
Lucas. F. N.. Junklin Blk.

(DO.)
Miller, Mrs. Iowa. (D.C.)
Miller, Mrs. W. R. (D.C.)
Farley: Gosden, Fannie.


Ft. DodKe: Bowman, Lucv,
Dowd Bldg. (D.C.)
Gaard, Carl B. (D.C.)
Garner, Mrs. R. J., 504

Snell Bldg. (D.C.)
Patten, E. M. Van, First

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith,  Karl  K.,  West  Mason
Bldg. (D.O.)
Ft. Madison: Card. F. C. 629
3rd St. (DO.)
Grothus. H. A. (D.C.)
Seeley. Purne A. (D.C)
Telford. S. P.. 729| 2nd St.
I  Garner: Fish, Ella  S. (D.C)

Garner, S. Ella. (D.C)
\ Shultz, R. W. (D.O.)
Glenivood: Hoover,  M.  W.
Lewis, C A. (D.C)
Lyon &  Lyon. (D.C.)
Lyon. H.  L. (D.C)
Goldfleld: Siemens. William

J. (D.O.)
Gowple: Brown. C E. (D.C.)
Grand Mound: Koose, Edna.

Greene: Langenhagen, W. W.

Greenfleld: Frutinger, E. C

Grinnell:  Bean,  Chas.  R.
Friend,  J. H. (DO.)


(own


(}r<>(fi'(t plural  liidr.r


lOOo


Greene, Curtis W., Suite 5,

Preston Bids. (D.C.)
Hibbets, U. M., I'JH Broad

St. (D.O.)
Maxfleld,  Geo.  W.,  925  Broad

St. (D.O.)
Nieimann, L.. 1023 West  St.

Souter, J. W. (D.C.)
(iruiuly Center: Dalzell, Jas.

G. (D.C.)
Giitliriet Smith, G. W. (D.C.)
Ciiithrie Center: Bond, Glenn

E. (D.C.)
Guttenberji: Bateman  &  Bate-
man, Drs., D. O. O. F.
Bldgr. (D.C.)
Cleflsch, L. M. (D.C.)
Parchen,  H.  C. (D.C.)
Hamburg: Healey, S. (D.C.)
Hampton: Manatt, E. S., The

Hampton  Clinic.  (D.O.)
Hnrlan:  Miller,  C.  A.  (D.C.)
Hartley: Fi&gt, W. L. (D.C.)

Parker, F. S. (D.C.)
Hartwick: West,  G. B. (D.C.)

White, Ivan O. (D.C.)
Hnwarden: Ensign, Mrs.
A.  G. (D.C.)
Johnson, Sam. (D.C.)
Hawkeye: Lenz,  L. (D.C.)
Peterson, A. W. (D.O.)
Slife, C. A. (D.C.)
Hedrick: Davis,  W.  W. (D.C.)
Hornich: Skaw, Miss Olena.

Hubbard: Gloden,  J.  N. (N.D.)
Humboldt: Christiansen, C.
P., Main St. (D.O.)
Hay, Ruth N. (D.C.)
Perry, Maude. (D.C.)
Scoville,  D.  W. (D.C.)
Ida Grove: Fisher, Bruce E.
Lyon, E. R. (D.C.)
Independence: Allen, L. P.
Nelson, Geo. (D.C.)
Simpson, Robt. H. (D.O.)
Indianola: Claussen, B. C.
Claussen, Pauline M., In-
diana Banking Co. Bldg.
Luce, J. W. (D.C.)
Owen, Jas. E. (D.O.)
Smith & Smith. (D.C.)
Smith,  H. J. (D.C.)  j

Iowa  City: Buck,  G.  E. (D.C.)  '
Cleveland, Mabel Lewis.  !

Herrington, Ellen, 1111 S.

Dubuque St. (D.O.)
Kerr, C. B., 1141 Dubuque

St. (D.C.)  I

Schuessler, Mrs. Conrad.
(D.C.)  j

Iowa Falls: Carpenter, Irvin
D., 1104 Main St. (D.O.) ■
Moore, D. V. (D.O.)
Tangeman, Harvey  W., Box
601. (D.C.)
Jefferson: Busby  &  Busby.
Busby,  Mrs.  D.  W. (D.C.)
Johnson, Jno. K. (D.O.)
Lawton, Chas. G. (D.C.)
Morgan, McLain. (D.C.)
Kalena:  Wiedenhoft,  A.  A.

(N.D.)  I

Kalonn: Guengerich, G. J.
Lewis, H. (D.C.)
Weidenhoeft,  A.  A. (D.C.)
Keokuk: Ayres, S. H., 323
Blondeau St. (D.C.)
Butler, W. P. (D.C  )


Christensen, C. J., V. M. (".

A. Bldg. (DO.)
Haight, Tlio.s. (J., 31.">
Blondeau St. (D.C.)
Keosauqua: Rinabarger, J.

Warren. (D.O.)
KlnK-sley: Chapman,  J. G.

(DO.)
Kno.x'ville: McLaughlin, E.
T.. I.  O.  O. F. Bldg. (D.O.)
Whitenbeig. C. E. (D.C.)
Lahrville: Gill, O. (D.O.)
Lake City: Gartrell, Seymour
C. (D.O.)
McAdams, C. R. (D.C.)
Liiike Mills: Thoreson &
Thoreson, Box 463. (D.C.)
Thoreson, Helena. (D.C.)
Lake Park: McNaught, C. E.

Lamont: Davidson,  A.  &  H.  A.
Remsburg, G. AV. (D.C.)
Lansing: Cadwallader, Jessie

A.  (D.C.)
Larchwood: Deneen,  Mary.

Wood, S. S. (D.O.)
LeClaire: Bean, Albert  C.

Leesville: Markw^ell,  P.  W.

Le  Mars:  Harvey  &  Harvey.
Harvey, H. E. (D.C.)
Heath, J. A. (D.C.)
Held, Lillie M. (D.O.)
Ray, Chas. Dennis, Fir.s!

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Willett, Mabel, Royal Bldg.
Lenox: Boltinghouse, Mrs.
Chas. (D.C.)
Mullen, Mrs. Wm. (D.C.)
Nelson, C. E. (D.C.)
Norman, F. J. (D.C.)
Leon: Gates, Mary A., Box
186. (D.O.)
Weeks,  G.  S. (D.C.)
Logan: Hook,  Rolla,  Dr.  Han-
sen Bldg. (D.O.)
Marston,  A. E. (D.C.)
See, Jno. D. (D.C.)
Lohrville: Gill, Mrs. O. (D.C.)
Lone Tree: Southerland, C.

B.  (D.C.)

Lyons: Albright, A. T., 110
S. 4th St. (D.C.)
Nielson, Lynn, 300 Clinton
St. (D.C.)
Macedonia: Glassburn, H. D.

Malvern: Kline, D. M. (D.O.)
M:iniIIa: Gelander, Anna E.

Manning! Fessel, Phena C,
Fessel,  Dr.  E. (D.C.)
Manson: Seckler, C. A. (D.C.)
Mapleton: Durston, C. J.

Maquoketa: McGinnis, James
F. (D.C.)
Timpe, Dr. F. R., Box 165
Marcus: Cooper, Chas. (D.O.)
Health, Helen. (D.C.)
Siever, J. L., N. Main St.
Marion: Stone, C. M.,  General

Delivery. (D.C.)
Marshalltown: Bullard, John
R., 28 E. Main St. (D.O.)
Gogel. W., 7 N. Maine St.

Graham, Geo. W., Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)  i

Ladd, C. F. (D.C.)  |

Robertson, H. L., 120 E.
Main St. (D.C.)


A.

S.


K.


Schwietert, A. W., Box 412.

\ogel. Walter, N. 3rd St

Maxon  Cltyi  Daugherty,  I.  W..

:u\-['. N. Federal Ave

Douglierty, J. W., 303J N

Main  St. (D.C.)
Esslinger, E. E. (D.C  )
Krantz, C. J., 203 Superior.

St. (D.C.)
Massen;i: i Jaughenbaugh, F.

A. (N.D.)
Woodard, F. O. (D.O.)
Mechanicsville:  Howard.  Luna

Co. ^DC?"'^^'" Nursery
Long,  M.  C. (D.C  )
Stertzbach, C, Box 83.

Melchor: Stanley,  Alta. (D.C )
MediapoUs: Wilson, Bessie

Woodman, M. Saxe. (D.C.)
Menlo: Goodwin,  Dana. (D  C  )
^""?D  C  ^®°"^''^ ^ Leonard.

Missouri Valley: Gamble.

Hariy W. (D.O  )

Rosicky, William. (D.C  )

Willis, Mrs. Idabelle. (D.C.)

Montezuma: Leisure, Clara

B^ c/o Mrs. John Porter.

McWiliiams, R. M. (DO)
Trimble, Guy C. (D.O  )
Monticello: Bosley, C. W
Peet, H. C. (D.O.)
Moravia: Magers,  J.
Moville: Ferguson,

Mt.  Ayr: Trotter,  Eldon  A.

Mt. Pleasant: Silver, J. L N
Main St. (D.C.)
Silver, J. L., 109 E. Wash-
mgton St. (D.O.)
Mt. Vernon: Anderson, C. A

P. O. Box  261. (D.C.)
Murray: Turner, H. F. (D.C.)
Muscatine: King. S L 122
3rd St. (D.O.)
Leffingwell, A. M. E., 514

Walnut St. (D.O.)
Moore, Newton, Hershey

Ave. (D.C.)
Scharnhorst, M. H l'''> w

3rd St. (D.C.)
Simpson, Maida M., Nat'l
Bank Bldg., 204 Iowa St.
Smith, F. W., 205  J

St. (D.C.)
Toms, Francis E.,
3rd  St. (D.C.)
Mystic: Blean, R. B.,
Delivery. (D.C.)
Jones, J. T. (D.C.)
McCall.  J. P., Box  155.  (D.C.)
Nashua:  McCormick, Chas.
Meier,  Louise  C. (N.D.)
Xevada: Booher, S. D. (D.C.)
Xevinvillc: Taylor, Harry

Xew  London: Gabbert, Harrv.

Xew Sharon: Revnolds. C E
Wood, J. M. (D.C.)
Newton: Gordon, W. C.
Hall,  Mary  D.,  428  E.  3rd  St.

McAnnich, C. G. (D.C.)


E. 2nd
122 W.

General


1006


Geographical  Index


Iowa


Slaght, Nellie, 409 Ist Ave.

E. (D.O.)  ^ , .

North Liberty  t Chamberlain,

Sylvan. (D.C.) . , ,^ ^

Northwood: Bogenrief, Dr. K.

E. (X.D.)
Odeboiti Lyon, Sam O. (D.C.)
Oelweint  Lusted,  C. B., 502 B.
2nd Ave. (D.C.)
Risch, Gertrude. (D.C.)
Onawut Glider, W. H. (D.C.)
Smith, Fred. (D.C.)
Quick, Roy T. (D.O.)
Orange  City* Hospers,  Mathel

G. (D.O.)
Osnget Kitson, Matie R.

Manning, Carrie E., 718
Main  St. (D.C.)
Orient  I Norman, Frank.

Osceolai Lauser, F. (D.C.)
Oftknloosai Abbott, C. A.

Adlo'n,'  L. K., c/o Abbott

Hospital. (D.C.)
Barnett. J. M. (D.C.)
Davis,  J. E., 106  E. 1st  Ave.

(Ph.C. D.C.)
Dryden, W. X. (D.C.)
Johnson, Homer  L. (N.D.)
McCarthy, W. H. (D.C.)
Osterdock: Flagel, L. H.

Ottum>vai Blake, W. O., 202
E. Main St. (D.C.)
Corrick, A. W., 907 North

Jefferson St. (D.C.)
Haight,  T.  G. (D.C.)
Heckman, D. J., Heckman

Sanitarium. (N.D.)
Myers, Ollie H. P.. 114 W.

2nd St. (D.O.)
Thompson, Elizabeth M.,

211 E. 4th St. (D.O.)
Warder, Madison, R. F. D.
No. 9. (D.C.)
Panorat Dowler, A. S. (D.O.)
Parkersbure: Blair,  Raymond
S. (D.O.)
Habenicht, H. W. (D.C.)
I»«rkwood: Bowman, R. F.

Perryi Andrews, Mabel E.,
Security Savings Bank
Bldg. (D.O.)
Beck, May. (D.C.)
Biddison, T., 1016 2nd St.

Miller,  Wm.  E. (D.C.)
Peflev.  J.  W. (D.C.)
Seeley,  Wm.  A. (D.C.)
Pocahontas! Matthews,  Sarah.

(Ph.C, D.C.)
Prairie Cityi Hall, A. L.

Prcscottt Anderson, Susie M.

Primehart Chapman, Geo. \v.

Prole! Depew, D. M. (D.C.)
Redfleld! Connelly, Mrs. G.

W.. Box 124. (D.C.)
Bedford! Roberts, Kathryn.

Red Oak! Connelly, Mrs. G.
W.,  Box  124. (D.C.)
Racster, Rose L., 410 Joy

St (D  C  )
Roaster,'  W. T., 206 4th St.

Thompson, L. O., 316 Cool-
baugh St. (D.O.)
Reinbeck! Somers, Edith E.
Stone, C. M. (D.C.)
Vogel,  W.  B. (D.C.)


Rock  Rapld.0! Dillon,  Dot.
McWilliams,  R.  M. (D.C.)
Rock Valleyi Hotelling, A.

L. (D.C.)
Rockwell City! McGinnis, J.
F. (DC.)
Hotelling, A. L. (D.C.)
Ruthvent Helgen,  Geo.  D.

Sabiilai Stockton, Minnie B.

Sac  City! Green,  Loren. (D.O.)
Griggs.  AV. S. (D.C.)
Hall,  Mittie. (D.C.)
Marshton, A. E. (D.C.)
Robeson, H. A. (D.C.)
Seymour! Phebus, W. A.

Sheldon! Phelan, Jennie E.

Sheffield! Nelden, Frank P.

Shenandoah! Bower, A. C,
116 E. Clarinda Ave.
Crawford. C. B. (D.C.)
Dothage,  E.  A.,  325|  Thomas

Ave. (D.C.)
Moffatt,  Chas.  M.,  618  Sheri-
dan  Ave. (D.O.)
Sidney! Chappell, George G.

Sigourney! Hinkle, C. R.
Nicola,  Mrs.  Bertha. (D.C.)
Sioux Center! Tonn, W. T.

Sioux  Cityi  Brown,  Georgia  B.,
424 Iowa Bldg. (N.D.)
Brown,  Marcus  E.,  E.  &  W.

Clothing Bldg. (D.O.)
Clark, T. N., 502 Davidson

Bldg. (D.C.)
Cluett, F. G., Security  Bldg.

Gilmour, Ella R., Security

Bldg. (D.O.)
Kilborne, J. M., Magoun
Block,  Cor.  4th  and  Doug-
las Sts. (Or.S.)
Larson, M., 308 Metropoli-
tan Bldg. (D.C.)
Meyers, F. J., 116 Cook St.

Olson, Mrs. Minnie, 1106

7th 9t. (D.C.)
Peterman, Geo., Wanko

Sanitarium. (D.C.)
Smith, Walter  R., 20  David-
son Bldg. (N.D.)
Staads, Dr. S. (N.D.)
White, Pearl E. (D.C.)
White, I. O. (D.C.)
Spechts  Ferryi Hanssen,

Theo. (D.O.)

Spencer! Boyd, Ethel. (D.O.)

Chretien, John I., W. 4th

St., near Main St. (D.C.)

Elsman, E. H. (D.C.)

Leard, A. W., Nicodemus

Bldg. (D.O.)
Scott, H. H. (D.C.)
Spirit Lake! McQuirk, Phil.

S. (D.O.)
Stanton! Anderson, Clara.
Lundquist, Nellie O. (D.O.)
Stanwood! Warmuth,  H. M.

Stockport! Bradford, Ran-
dall  P. (D.C.)
Storm Lake! Rice, Daniel A.,
,  527 Lake  Ave. (D.C.)


Story City! Langmu, Henry.
Fjernagel. G. A. (D.C.)
Strawberry  Point! Blean, R.

B. (D.C.)
Stuart! Parchen,  G. H. (D.C.)
Sutherland: Aupperie, G. A.

Tama! Hardman,  R.  D. (D.C.)
Mitchell, Andrew, c/o The
Kallam Bldg. (D.C.)
Thornburg! Carver, Fred. J.
Carver, Ralph  H. (D.C.)
Tinton! Warmuth, M. (D.C.)
Tipton: Furnish,  W.  M. (D.O.)
Toledo: McGowan, Mrs. J. A.

Traeri Somers,  S.  B. (D.C.)
Valley Junction: Nordell,
Clarence A., Cor. 6th and
Elm  Sts. (D.C.)
Victor: Escher,  Emma  S.

Villisca: McKeloy,  Mary  E.

Vinton: Ellyson, S. M. (D.C.)
Fischer,  Clara  E. (D.C.)
Fischer, H. M. (D.C.)
Hinchman, A. W., llli

Jefferson St. (D.O.)
Poeet, Bernice C, 310 Con-
cord  St. (D.C.)
Rice,  Bert  H. (D.O.)
Seeley, Wm.  A. (D.C.)
Wood, Harold T. (D.C.)
Wapello: Small, Sherman M.

W^ashington: Dalton, Leo R.
Fenton, Laura E., 632 Main

St. (D.O.)
Hellam, Lyda, 205  i West

Washington  St. (D.C.)
Kerr,  C.  B., R.  R.  No.  1.

Sartor, M. H., 202 J E. Iowa

St. (D.C.)
Wallace, J. C. (D.C.)
Wilson, O. K. (D.C.)
AVaterloo: Bell,  Mrs. Jane  M.,
1308 W. 3rd  St. (D.C.)
Browell, Hattie  M.. 1308 W.

3rd St. (D.C.)
Burnell. F. M., 3015 W. 4th

St. (D.C.)
Campbell, F. R., 101.''. W.

11th St. (D.C.)
Jacoby, Earl W., 922 Reihl

Ave. (D.C.)
Judd. Artilla. (D.C.)
Judd, Mrs. J. I., 224  i W.

4th St. (D.C.)
Klove, Fremont, 309 Lafay-
ette St. (D.C.)
Mandt, Amy, 403-4 Syndi-
cate Bldg. (D.C.)
Mathews, E. G. (D.C.)
Seeley. Wm. A., 318 Syndi-
cate Bldg. (D.C.)
Treder, Wm., 223i W. 4th

St. (D.C.)
Vogel, Wm. J., 203 Fisher

Bldg. (D.C.)
Wiegert, H. C. (D.C.)
Waukon: Brooke. S. N., First

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
^Vayland: Jone.s, G. M. (D.C.)
Webster City: McCracken,
Rev. A. (D.C.)
Larrabee,  T.  B. (D.O.)
Mitterling, Edward S.
VVeinberset: Hall, G. (D.O.)
Wellmani Barker, Francis  M.
(DO.)


Kansas


Geographical  I  tide. v


007


Guengerlch.  S.  D. (D.C.)
AVesleyi Eisenbacher, Paul.
Miller,  Geo.  H. (D.O.)
Riche, Frank. (D.O.)
Theesen, R. J. (D.O.)
West  Liberty:  Beik, Harold  J.
Nelson & Frank. (D.C.)
Went  Union: Curtis, L. C.
Curtis. Viola F. (D.C.)
AVhat Cheen Huntley, W. S.
.Tohnson,  T. B. (D.C.)
AVheatland: Minar, E. S.

AViltont Schleuser, Freda.

AVinfleld: Bond, Robt. W.,
P.O. Box 243. (D.C.)
Bowman, Lucy. (D.C.)
AVinterseti Hall, Glen. (D.C.)
Hoy, H. A. (D.C.)
Parks. Fannie Spring-mire,

303 Jefferson St. (D.O.)
AVeir. T. P. (D.O.)
AVoodblne: Kerr, J. R. (D.C.)
Reese.  Julia  D. (D.C.)
Reno, Inez. (D.C.)


KANSAS

Abilene: Clevenger, H. J.

Drake.  J.  A. (D.C.)
Rhoades, L. B. (D.C.)
Nicholson, F. H. (D.C.)
Wadsworth, L. V. (D.C.)
Abbyville: Ayer, Ed. J., R. F.

D. R. 1. Box 39. (M.D.,

N.D.)
Agra: Stebblns, J. Edw.

Anthony: Rowley & Rowley,

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Argonla: Chism, C. M. (D.C.)

Vincient. Jennie C. (D.C.)
Arnold, Ness Co.: Peters, O.

H. (D.O.)
Arkansas City: Brenz, Louis

Edward, Summit and 5th

Aves. (D.O.)
Conrad,  Mary. (D.C.)
Davidson, Elmer. (D.O.,

D.C.)
Eglinton. Laura B.. 100 N.

C  St. (N.D.)
Hanna. Mrs. J. E. (D.C.)
Lee. G. T., 625 N. 2nd St.

Lonek. Mrs. Sarah. (D.C.)
McMillen. Frank. (D.C.)
Morrow.  Mrs.  Alberta.  (D.C.)
Hanna. Isabella Phillips.

Robinson.  Earl  A. (D.C.)
Scott. J. E., 128 N. 1st St.

Smallfield, Aug-. C. (D.C.)
Thompson, O. A. (D.C.)
Touneki, S.  K. (D.O.)
^Vahlenmaier, Geo. (S.T.)
Wentworth, Geo. (D.C.)
Wentworth, Kate, 203 E.

Chestnut  St. (D.C.)
Williams, Mrs. E. M. (D.C.)
Ashland: Currier, Sophia A.

Atchison: Brown, Rolla H.,

218 N. 5th St. (D.O.)
Logan, Hugh B., 504 Com-
mercial St. (D.C.)
Mayhugh, Clyde W., 300 N.

4th St. (D.O.)
Murphy, A.  S. (D.O.)


Sanders. W. H., 825 S. 6th

St. (D.C.)
Woody. W. W., 505J Com-
mercial  St. (D.C.)
AuKusta: Rice,  Mary  J.  (D.O.)

Rice, William C. (D.O.)
Axtell: Conable,  Mrs.  A.  C.
(DC.)
Conable, W. J. (D.C.)
Bald^Tin: Carpenter,  J.  H.

Bellaire: Miller, J. W. (S.T.)
Belleville: Moore, Ernest A.,
People's  Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Belolt: Blanchat, August.
Eustace.  H.  E. (D.O.)
Kissinger, L. A. (D.O.)
Bern: Kenag-y, Paul J., 512

Court  St. (D.C.)
Blue Rapids: Peters. O. H.

Bronson: Neilson. Norman J.

Bucklln: Fowler. Cora M..

Smith Bldg. (D.O.)
Bnhler: Friezen. I. H. (D.C.)
Burling^ton: Evans,  Lena  May.
Marriott, H. H. (D.C.)
Burr  Oak: Bovard,  Jeffrey  W.
Brooks, E. (D.C.)
Dexter,  Mrs.  Ellen. (S.T.)
Caldwell: Good,  Mary  A.
Larlmore.  L. S., State  Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Rose,  Emma. (D.O.)
Campbell: Nelson,  A. E., 1167

Monticello St. (D.C.)
Cattomood: Bryant, F. H.,

Court  House. (D.O.)
Cawker  City: Drake,  J.  A.

Cedar: Hawley, S. L. (M.D.)

Stebbins,  Ed.  J. (D.O.)
Chanute: Henrie, C. N.,
Barnes Bldg. (D.C.)
Henrie, B. F. (D.C.)
Cheney: Baxter, A. F. (D.C.)

Sanford, Vernon T. (D.O.)
Cherokee: Adams, Florence.

Cherryvale: Chandler. Chas.
H.. McCormick Bldg.
Trewin,  S. (D.C.)
Chetope: Jeffries, Wm. H.

Clay  Center:  Swenson,  Emma.
Swenson,  Benj. (D.O.)
Clearwater: Henrie,  L. (D.O.)
Clyde: Tunnell, H. E. (D.O.)
Coffeyvllle: Bateman, Dr.
Geo. (S.T.)
Bruner.  H.  L.  F.,  314  E.  11th

St. (D.C.)
Bryan, Chas. A. (D.C.)
Cavens,  H. S. (D.C.)
King.  E.  C. (D.O.)
King,  Edward  C. (N.D.)
Owen. Ed. (D.C.)
Skinner, P. D.. 508 Spring

St. (M.D.)
Trewins. S. (D.C.)
Vahle, Wm. J., 806 Spruce

St. (M.D.)
Webb. Jessie. (D.C.)
Yoho. J. W., 1504 W. 11th
St. (S.T.)
Colby: Beckett, Linda  Hardy.
Beckett.  O.  F. (D.O.)
Bunker,  M.  N. (D.C.)


Coldwater: 'i'lionipson, I>. C.

Concordia: JJlancliat & Blan-
chat. (D.C.)
Edwards, Wm. B., 7th and

Washington  Sts. (D.O.)
Gibbons, J. E. (D.O.)
Lane. Mrs. Mae. (M  D

D.O.)
Nussbaum. J. L., Box 52

Rinol, Anna. (D.O.)
Sutton, N.  M. (D.C.)
Weard, Ida. (D.O.)
Conway Springs: Good, J. F.
Good, Mary. (D.C.)
Rhoades, B. H. (D.O  )
Corey: Bell, R. G. (D.C.)
Corning: Wilcox,  O.  W. (D.C.)
Cottonwood Falls: Brvant, F.

H., Court House. (M.D.)
Council Bluffs: Hinzey, A. A

Council Grove: Hinzey, A. A
Woodside, R. W. (D.C.)
Delphosi  Hoym,  J.  C.  S. (D.C.)
Denison: Foy. Anna M.. Pres.
Kansas  State Board of
Chiropractic Examiners.
Haynes,  T.  O. (D.C.)
Robb,  W.  J. (D.C.)
Dodge City: Coonfleld, Geo.
W. (D.O.)
Hall & Hall. (D.C.)
Downes: Lewis, L. Velda.
Seigrist, C. C. (D.C.)
Dnnlop: Curtis, Henry S.,
Box 5. (M.D.)

V. J., Box


10.

Darling, A. J.
Darling, Arthur.


Tearnot,
E^d-wards:

Eldorado:

Wilson, J. G. (D.C.)
Ellis: Carter,  Janet  F. (D.C.)
Hall, Blanche E. (D.O.)
Hall, Claude L. (D.O.)
Ellsworth: Martin, Edmond

J. (D.O.)
Emporia: Armor,  Gladdis, 502
Constitution St. (D.O.)
Childress. T. E.. 525 Com-
mercial St. (D.O.)
Humphrey,  Mattie  E. (D.C.)
Humphrey, S. B., 821 Union

St. (D.C.)
Jones, M. A.. 617 Merchant

St. (D.C.)
Jones, O. C. (D.O.)
Loveless. Flora. (D.C.)
Morrison, Myrtle Pleasant.
525 Commercial  St. (D.O.)
Peterson, I. F., 621 Com-
mercial St. (D.O.)
Enterprise: Selin, Oscar.

Esbon: Burbage, Thos. T.. R

F. D. 1 (M.D.)
Endora: Carr,  S.  V. (D.O.)
Eureka: Bower. R. A., Col-
lins Blk. (D.O.)
Ft.  Scott: Brown,  L.  C. (N.D.)
Carney, Edward B., IJ S

Main St. (D.O.)
Moon, J. W. (D.O.)
Owen, Geo., ISi S.

Ave. (M.D.)
Thomas. Llovd E.

Main St. (D.O.)
Thomas. R. M., 14J S. Main
St. (D.O.)
Fowler: Sonntag, Alf. (D.O.,
N.D.)


National
14J S.


1008


(icogrnphical  Index


Kansas


Vernon, J. W. (N.D.)
Fredonin: DafCon, R. M.

Smitii.Mary Pearl (D.O.)
Freeniont: Aurelius,  J. (M.D.)
<;nrdeii Cltj: Dunlop, H. K-
Dunlap. J. A. (D.C.)
Hall, K. C. (D.O.)
Shaw, Burton E. (IJ.O.)
(;nlena: Pole,  S.  J. (S-T.)
Onniet: Bowman, Ada M.
Cutlibertson,  W.  A. (D.C.)
f;enes«*o! Mahoney, S. P.

Giraril! Mills. Roy, 303 N.

Osase St. (M.D.)
Goodlniul: Fox,  Addie  I..

Great Bend: Girling, Minnie.

HamiUon. R. J.. 1416 Kan-
sas Ave. (D.C.)
Mpphardt.  N..F (D.C))
T.obdell,  Harriet  W. (D.C.)
GreenslnirK: Gary. Chas.

(D.C.)  ., „

Greensburg: Menegay, J. i^-

Tedriciv, C. A. (D.O.)
Grenola: Wells,  Hugh  E.

Gridi^:  ■  Bailey, T. C. (D.O.)

Harper: Bayne, Daisy. (p.C)

Fitzgerald. John Andrew.

Griggs,  Henry  B. (D.O.)
Havs City: Clover, Thomas
H..  First  Nafl  Bank  Bldg.

Hazelton: Reynolds Geo. H..

R. R. 1, Box 461. (M.D.)
Hcrrlngtoii: Hagewanig. H.
B. (D.O.)  11 c

Koons. Wm. M.. 11 b-

Broadway. (D.O.)  .

Smith.  Ray  W..  103  W.  Main

St. (D.C.)  ^^^^

Thompson,  F.  L. (D.O.)
Hiawatha: Downing. W. J.

(S.T.)  ^ ^

Hill City: Kelso. Sophronia
B. (D.O.)
Seigrist, C. C. (D.O.)
Hillsdale: Watson. J. A.


Hoisington: Barnes. Kathe-

rine  F. (D.O.)

Mitchell.  Pearl  W. (D.O.)

Holton: Godfrey, Francis M.,

Newman Bldg. (D.O.)

Godfrey, Nancy J. (D.O.)

Holvrood! Richter, Clarence.

Horton: Gray, Clyde. (D.O.)
Hogewonig, Neal Cornelius.

(M.D.)  _  ^  ^

Pyatzki, Earnest. (D.C.)

Hovie: McCartney. L. H.

Hutchinson: Atkinson, Orrin.

Demmitt.  S.  T. (D.C)
Havnes. F. O.. 30 4th Ave.

Hill. C. E., 16 N. Main St.

Hilton, D. A.. Box 103.

Hodgson. E. R. (D.C.)
Johnson. P. W., 118 E. xVve.

A. (D.C.)
Johnson,  P.  W.. 418  N.  Main

St. (D.C.)
Johnston, E. W.. 416 N.

Main St. (D.C.)


Lvons, S. O.. l^h N. Main

"St. (D.C.)
Mitchell, Mrs. A. .T. (DC.)
Pierce. G. H. (DC.)
Price. Emma Hook. First

and Main Sts. (D.O.)
Robertson. R. W.. Masonic

Bldg. (D.C.)
Vaden. W. F., 202 W. fith

St. (D.C.)
East  Hutchinson:  I^ee,  lAither,

60."; 7th St. (M.D.)
Independence: 15ell, Robt. W.,

219  W.  Myrtle  St. (D.O.)
Mitchell. H. (D.O.)
Snodgrass, Edna B., 207J

Penn. Ave. (D.C.)
Snodgrass, V. L., 401 N.

Penn. Ave. (D.C.)
lola: Hull, Wm. Philo, 5i S.

Jefferson St. (D.O.)
Park, Chas. C. 816 N. Wal-
nut St. (S.T.)
Perry, F. M., 102  J Jackson

St. (N.D.)
Slider & Slider. (D.C.)
Twadell,  A.  B.,  15S  W.  Madi-
son St. (D.O.)
Miller, O. A. (S.T.)
Isabell: West, S. I.. (DC.)
Jackson  Dexter: Ford,  Kathe-

rine L. (D.O.)
Junction City: Carter, W. E.,

Pres. of I. C. A., Spencer

Blvd. (D.C.)
Osdol, Oscar Van. (D.O.)
Rose, C. F., 105 W. 5th St.

Kansas City: Bennett, E. D.,

Husted Bldg. (D.O.)
Bishop, R. B., 509 Splittog

Ave. (D.C.)
Clark,  S.  E. (D.O.)
Cramer, Clark A. (D.O.)
Daniels, J. O., 528 Minne-
sota Ave. (D.C.)
Daniels, J. D., 710 Minne-
sota  Ave. (D.O.)
Field, E. A. (D.O.)
Gaunt, Dr. P. D. (D.C.)
Gray, F., .1589 Glenn St.

Harris, I^uther H., 1804

Central Ave. (D.O.)
Hurst, Katheryn M. (DO.)
Lawrence, C. O., 350 Front

St. (D.C.)
Liddel. Robt. E. (D.O.)
Liddle,  R.  L..  928  Armstrong

Mahan.  Helen.  1329  Waverly

St. (D.C.)
Miller.  G.  H. (D.O.)
Phillips, Ida B. H. (D.O.)
Rickey, F., 540 Elizabeth

Ave. (D.O.)
Roberts, Mary E. (D.C.)
Smallfield. Augusta A.

Snediker, R. T., 415 Everett

Ave. (M.D.)
Stebbins,  T.  J. (D.O.)
Swart, .Joseph. 650 Minne-
sota  Ave. (D.O.)
Tibbitt.s. R. M.. 17 N.

Valley (S.T.)
Tyler. Z. M. (D.O.)
AVilson. J. S. (D.O.)
Kechi: Gaunt, P. D. (D.C.)
Kensington: Morehead, H. I.

(DC.)
Keystone: Drain, James R.

Kingman: Barrows, Florence

Judd. (D.O.)
Quene, M. B. (D.O.)
Kinsley: Cotner, Jennie S.

Fravek, Mildred. (D.C.)


Kintner, P., Star Route 1,

Box 29. (M.D.)
Mosier, Mrs. B. R. (S.T.)
Klown: Edmundson, F. P.,
Box 271. (D.C.)
Little,  W.  D. (D.C.)
I.a  Crosse: Hall,  C. W. (D.C.)
Lovitt, A. F. (D.C.)
Mitchell, Eugene D. (D.O.)
Lane: Carver, Ralph  H.  (D.C.)
Lamed: Campbell, Chas. A.,
Broadway. (D.O.)
Gleason, B. Ij., Edwards

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lovitt, Jas. M. (D.C.)
Painter, S. W. (D.C.)
LaTPrence: Clark,  O.  N. (D.C.)
Cruzan, Albert, 1046 Ver-
mont St. (D.O.)
Schleifer,  E.  M.,  933  R.  I.  St.

Shaw, L. L., 941 Vermont

Ave. (D.C.)
Welch,  L. D.,  1104  New  Jer-
sey  St. (D.C.)
Leavenworth: Chanaell, I^en
R., Wulfekuhler Bank
Bldg. (D.O.)
Gould, Floyd C. (D.O.)
Horrall, J. E.. 520 Shawnee

St. (D.C.)
Manning. Elizabeth Mav,
712  S. 5th  St. (D.O.)
Lebanon: Cotner, Dr. J W
Peters, J. M. (S.T.)
Lehigh: Wiebe,  J.  J.,  Box  121

(Ma.)
Liberal: Hanlin, F. P. (D.C  )
Mann,  E.  R.,  Box  386. (D.O.)
Mann, Mrs. E. E., Box 386

Pellette,  Eugene  F.,  People's

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Welch. J. S. (D.C.)
Lincoln: Spencer.  B. F. (D.O.)
Lindsborg: Carter. Dora F.
Carter, N. E. (D.C.)
Gibson, Margaret E. (D.O.)
Nelson, Mrs. H. (M.D.)
Lucas: Algood, Dr. (S.T.)
Done, Dr. (S.T.)
Rathburn, Mr.s.  M. E (ST)
Smith, Dr. (S.T.)
Luray: Russell Co.: Beatty.
Mary E. (D.C.)
Spoon,  Mannie  E. (D.O.)
Lyons: Darling, Ivan F.
Pettit, C. (D.O.)
Quisenbery, Mary. (D.O.)
Maple  Hill: Shief. Henry.


Burmeister,  Louis.


IWacksville:

Manhattan: Coltrane, Ella  D.,

Union Nat'l Bank Bldg.

Hanlin. E. L.. 931 Fremont

St. (D.O.)
Lee. Mary Cornelia. (S.T.)
Paulsen, O. W., 1208 Lara-
mie St. (D.O.)
Paulson, A. W. F. (D.O.)
Paulssem, W. O. F., Box

184. (D.C.)
Willis,  J.  Grant. (N.D.)
mankato: Seigrist,  O.  E.

Marion: Appleby, Anna, Jex

Bldg. (DO.)
McBride, Bessie. (D.C.)
McBride, N. L. (D.O.)
Marysville: Clark, E. L.


Kansas


Geographical  Index


1009


Clark,  P. R. (DO.)
Hall, R.  G.. Box 378. (M.D.)
Hammett. lOlma M. (D.C.)
McPherson: Allen,  B.  J. (D.C.)
Hill.  Mrs.  I.. E.,  901  N.  Main

St. (M.D.)
T.an^dale, H. R. (D.C.)
Rolf, Harry G. (D.O.)
Wad.sworth. I.. O. (D.O.)
Wallace, Zilla M.. Grand
Bldg. (D.O.)
medicine Lodge: Blanchat,
Aug-. (D.C.)
Blanchat, I.ola. (D.C.)
Minneapolis: Hawkins, Chas.
R. (D.O.)
Kelley, A. N. (D.O.)
Smith, Lloyd F. (D.C.)
Morelnnd: Brocker, Ellen E.

Morrowville: Nutter,  J.  O.

Miilvane: Coffin, J. N. (D.C.)
Gibson, Mr.<^. G. A. (D.C.)
Tyree, Julia A. (D.C.)
Nashville: Randolph, Mrs.
Jessie  K., R. F. D. 2.
Newton: Anders, August, 313
S. Pine St. (M.D.)
Eberhart, Emma M. (D.C.)
Heffelbower, E. Austin.

Helpian, A. (D.C.)
Kenag-y, Paul J., 6201 Main

St. (D.C.)
Miller, W. A. (D.C.)
Oliver, Mada, First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Scott, J. E. (D.C.)
Selfridge, Mrs. Eliz. (S.T.)
Yoder, Lissa A. (D.C.)
Nickerson: Scott, Mrs. N. E.
Swisher, Mrs.  A. (S.T.)
Norton: Hoopwood, I. S.

Oberlin: Pebler,  C.  P.,  R.  F.  D.

4. (M.D., D.O.)
Oklahoma: Allen, S. E. (D.O.)
Olathe: Post, H. A. (D.C.)

Wehr, Ch. (D.O.)
Osborne: Nve, Dr. (S.T.)
Peters, J. N. (D.C.)
Seig-rist, O. E. (D.C.)
O.s^vesro: Brann, Edward C,
409J Commercial St.
Crossley,.  May. (D.C.)
Ottawa: Atwood, E. J. (D.C.)
Blankenbeker, Grace, R. R.

9, Box  49. (M.D.)
Brewing-ton,  O. M. (D.O.)
Carter. V. S. (D.C.)
Carver, Fred. J. (D.O.)
Burgy, M. Kimple. (D.O.)
Wolf,  G.  B. (D.O.)
Palmer: Sonntag, Alf. G.

Paola: Frey,  U. H., R. 5,  Box
8. (M.D.)
McClanahan.  J.  L. (D.O.)
Watson &  Watson. (D.C.)
Paradise: Trimmer, Juna M.

Parker: Cavinee, H. S. (DO.)
Parsons: Boorn, Edward J.,
306 Strasburg-er Bide-.
Boorn, Mrs. Surelda. (D.C.)
Doane, Adele, 1720i Main

St. (D.O.)
Hagenback, Gertrude L..
Suite 1, Steele Bldg.
Robinson,  H. E., 1908* Main
St. (D.C.)


Peabody:  Donahue, Glenn.

Phillipsburg: Van Winkle,

Arthur J. (D.O.)
PIttsbnrK: Atwood,  J. F.
Atwood, Neva E. (D.C.)
Bezingue, Arthur, R. F. D.

8. (M.D.)
Carlin, F. W., 307-8 Com-
merce Bldg. (D.C.)
David, T. Henry. (D.C.)
Dunlop,  Nora  K. (D.O.)
Langdale,  H.  R. (D.C.)
Moore, W. P., Globe Bldg.

Trabup, Jo.sephine  A., Kirk-
wood Bldg. (D.O.)
Yost, Chas. M. (D.C.)
Plainville: Henrie,  S. N.

Portis: Sigrist, O. E. (D.O.)

Siegrist. O. E. (D.C.)
Pratt: Allison, Ethel P.
Hastings, Fred E. (D.O.)
Robinson,  H.  E..  19091  Maine
St. (D.C.)
Protection: Thompson, L. C.

Russell: Drain, Jas. R. (D.C.)

Finney,  Mrs.  Mary. (M.D.)
Putnam: Surles, J. H. (S.T.)
Reading: Standiferd,  R. (S.T.)
Rexford: Harper, R. T. (S.T.)

Frank, Sada. (D.C.)
Sabetha: Davenport, Bert M.
Edgar, T. H. (S.T.)
Salina: Carter, D. W., 137J
S. Santa  Fe  Ave. (D.C.)
Carter's  Sanatorium, 313 W.

Ash  St. (D.C.)
Childs, William S., Roach

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hearst, Ethel L., 136 S.

Santa Fe St. (D.O.)
Parkess, Julius H. (S.T.)
Peters, F. E., 147 S. Sante

Fe Ave. (D.C.)
Pettit, C. B. (D.O.)
Preston, F. E., 144 S. Sante

Fe  Ave. (D.C.)
Wolfe, Alice, 130 W. Klr-
win Ave. (D.O.)
Savonburg: Warren, E. D.

Scott City: Drain, James R.
: (D.C.)

Hall  &  Hall. (D.C.)
Sedan: Jameson,  H. (S.T.)
Peterson, Albln. (S.T.)
Sharon: McGuire, Cynthia.

Smith Center: Cooke, Mrs. E.
D. (S.T.)
Nelson,  W.  H. (S.T.)
Wanamaker,  Mrs.  J.  H.

Wheatcraft, J. B. (D.C.)
Soldier: Pugh, Mrs. Maggie.

Solomon: Carter, D.  W.  (D.C.)

Stewart, John R. (D.C.)
Spearville: Peppercorn, Mrs.

Norma. (D.C.)
Speed: Gartrell,  I.  D. (D.O.)
Stafford: Green,  Chas. W.
Green, Mabel I. (D.C.)
Sterling: Anderson & Ander-
son. (D.C.)
Cuthbertson, Nina, Box 452.

Nuest, Mary. (D.C.)


Orville, Haynes, 131i N.

6th Ave. (D.C.)
Rhodfs, B. H. (D.C.)
TibbaU-, Florence. (DC.)
St. Independence: Hayes, M.

D., 719 Cottonwood Ave.

St.  John: Bayne,  Daisy.

Mueller, Jennie. (D.C.)
Muns, Mrs. Jennie C. (S.T.)
Xida, R. E. (DO.)
Stockton: McMillen,  J. W.

Strong City: Sieker, A. J. C.

S.  Haven: Williams,  M. (D.O.)
Topeka: Alspach, Mary E

Mills Bldg. (D.O.)
Brigham, Frederick A.,

Drawer  G. (S  T.)
Briscoe, W. S., 821 Kansas

Ave. (D.O.)
Foy, A. C, 716 Kansas  Ave.

Foy, Anna M., 716 Kansas

Ave. (D.O.)
Fusch, Augusta L., 1630 E

3rd  St. (N.D.)
Fusch,  W.  H.  A.,  1630  E.  3rd

St. (M.D.)
Gabriel, J. H., 718 Kansas

Ave. (D.C.)
Gabriel, Madge, 718 Kansas

Ave. (D.C.)
Garsage, H. P.. 1100 Kansas

Ave. (D.C.)
Grist, N. M., 508 Kansas

Ave. (D.C.)
Grist, N. M., 607 Kansas

Ave. (M.D.. D.C.)
Hargis, Arthur. (D.O.)
Heinze,  A.  A. (D.O.)
Hobstadt. M. F., 633 Morris

Ave. (N.D.)
Leader, Generva E., 606

Kansas  Ave. (D.O.)
Luddington, Chas. Foster.

Malone, Lillian, Mills Bldg.

Metzger, F. B. (D.C  )

Mitchell, C, c/o Adam

St foo) ^■' "'^^ -^dams

Morris.  Walter  G.,  525  Mon-
roe  St. (D.C.)

Nash,  Chas.,  607  Kansas
Ave. (D.C.)

Nash,  Robt.  E..  607  Kansas
Ave. (DC.)

N'eall, .L W., 601 W. fith St.

Paine,  R. (D.O  )
Reichstadt. Paul. 1219 Sew-
ard Ave. (D.O.)
Robb, W. J., R. Xo 2

(D.C.)  ■

Saunder.-?. W. H., 700 Kan-

sas Ave. (D.C.)
Smith, E. Claude, Mills

Bldg. (D.O.)
Temple, Stephen, Mills

Bldg. (DO.)
Todd, Elizabeth H., 819

Kansas  Ave. (D.O.)
Tyler, W. H.. 612 Monroe

St. (D.C.)
Tyler, Zetta, 1007 W. 6th

St. (D.C.)
White. T. Harrison. 1114

Kansas  Ave. (S.T  )

^Td'c)^" ^■' ^'"^ ^'''^•

T'oyt Hopper, Mary Shafter.


1010


Geographical  Index


Kentucky


E.

N.
St.
St.
708
708


Utlcai Frank Sade  H (D.C )
Haxmann. H. W., Box iV

(M.D.)  _^^

Lovltt.  J. F. (DC.)
Taylor.  S.  Frank. (D.O.)
Valley  Falls: Pecinovsky. Al-
bert E. (D.O.)
Waoondai Bingesser, Anna.

(N.D.)  „.

Waconda Sprlnprsi Bingesser

C. c/o Sanitarium. (D.C.)
■\Vakeeneyi Frank, Sadie.

Harvey, Fred. (D.C.)
AVameeo: Ball,  Wm.  F. (M.D.)
Waverlyi Carter.  V.  D^  (D  (D.)
Welri Mclver,  J.  M..  Box  191.

(M.D.)  ^ ,^ ,_ _

Wellington  t Beeta Merritt  jT.

1101 S. Washington Ave.

(DO.)  ^ ,-r^/^^

Calhoun. Daisy D. (D.C.)
Howell, Mollie. lllj S.

Washington St. (D.O.)
T.oehr. Mrs. A^  R. (S/r_)
Marston. Dr. A. E. (b.  1.)
Westphalia! Burton. A. E.

White CItyt Swartz. Mrs.

B. (M.D.)  ^  ^

Swartz, R. E. (M.D.)
Wichita: Allen, S 244

Atheni  St. (D.C  )
Baker, M. B., 1253 N.

Francis  St. (D.O.)
Baker. N. E.. 832 Ohio

(D.C.)  _ „

Bartholomew, F. H.,

Dayton Ave. (D.C.)
Bartholomew, Pearl.

Davton  Ave. (D.C.)
Beekman E. A. (DO)
Brewington. O. M.. 127 b

Main  St. (S.T.)
Brooker, Ellen E.. 841 N.

Topeka  Ave. (D.C.)
Brown.  A.  C,  126  Penn.  Ave.

Calvin, .T. T.. (D.O.)
Campbell. Mrs Mary W.

310 Barnes Ave. (D.C.)
Campbell. Frank. 316 S.

Oak  St. (D.C.)
Cantrell. M. (D.(D.)
Carver  Chiropractic  College.

(D.C.)  ^  „  ,,„

Chiropractic College, 53b
S.  Emporia  Ave. (D.C.)

Clavs.  Eva  F.,  801  S.  Market
St. (D.O.)  ^„^ _

Cochran, Harry. 625 S.
Olen St. (D.C.)

Colvin.  Cora  B., 700 S. Em-
poria  Ave. (DC.)

Darling & Darling. 536 S.
Emporia Ave. (D.C.)

Darling. Delia M. (D.O.)

Darling.  W.  A.. 128  N.  Main
St. (D.O.) ■  , ^^.

Darling & Baker's Chiro-
practic College. (D.C.)

Denis. J. B.. 325 S. Law-
rence Ave. (D.O.)

Detrich. Nellie M.. 260 B.
Charles St. (D.C.)

Fallot. F. F.. Suite 309-11
Barnes Bldg. (DO.)

Fallot. J. F.. Samuels Bldg.

Farquharson, Gertrude,
Schweiter Bldg. (D.O.)

Oackenbach, F. A., 125 S.
Main St. (M.D.)

Gilkey,  Mrs.  L.,  122i  S.  Mar-
ket  St. (D.C.)

Gilmore. Nina  A. (D.O.)

Girling. W., 201 S. Main St.
(DC.)


Gotherman, C. W., 636 S.
Emporia  Ave.  (D.C.)

Groom, Mary  S. (D.O.)

Hansen,  Grace. (D.O.)

Hanson & Hanson, 516 S.
Topeka Ave. (D.O.)

Harrison, P. N., 516 S. To-
peka  Ave. (D.O.)

Haughey, Avilla, Route 6.

Heliums. N. C, 1338 S. Em-
poria Ave. (DO.)

Hill. Barnett M., 520 Bal-
timore St. (D.O.)

Hutts, C. A., 530 S. Empo-
ria  Ave. (D.C.)

Juayne, Mary B.. 536 S.
Emporia Ave. (D.C.)

Katz,  C.  L..  231  N.  Main  St.

Leasure, Geo., 127 S. Main
St. (D.C.)

Leasure, Ida, 536 S. Em-
poria  Ave. (D.C.)

Lutz. C. L. (D.C.)

Mitchell, Eugene. 815 N.
Topeka  Ave. (M.D.)

Mitchell, E. J., Washington
St. (D.C.)

Mitchener,  H. (Or.S.)

Montaya.  Dr.  Jose. (S.T.)

Mun. M. L., 521 S. Market
St. (S.T.)

Myers, Donald, 526 B.
Douglas Ave. (D.C.)

Perkins, W. O., 506 S. Oak
St. (D.O.)  I

Phillips, Ida B. H., Butts
Bldg. (D.C.)  I

Phillips,  O.  L.,  Ill  E.  Water-
St. (D.C.)

Prosser, W^. C, General
Delivery. (S.T.)

Rice, Mary J., 304 S. Mar-
ket St. (D.C.)

Richardson, T. B., 214 N.
Lawrence St. (D.C.)

Rosher, D. K. (S.T.)

Schorr, Henry, 1401 E.
Murdock St. (D.O.)

Shoemaker, Susie B., 536 S.
Emporia Ave. (D.CJ.)

Siegel, Geo. H. (M.D.)

Skidmore,  May. 235 S. Pop-
lar St. (D.C.)

Stebbins. T. J., Waco St.

Thompson,  F. B. (D.C.)

Thompson. O. A., 311 Bit-
ting Bldg. (D.O.)

Tobin, Geo. F.. 640 N. To-
peka St. (S.T.)

West, T. A. (D.O.)

Wilson. J. G., 206 N. Main

St. (D.C.)
Yozel. H. I. (D.O.)
W^lchita Falls: Zachary, B. J.

Wilson: Cinader, J. L. (D.C.)
Winfield:  Gibson,  P.  W., Ful-
ler Bldg. (D.O.)
Light, Nellie, 223 College

St. (D.O.)
Pettit, A. J. (D.C.)
Post,  Mary  A. (D.O.)
Strother. .1. O.. First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Thompson, Leslie  C. (D.O.)
Wood.ston: Hale. Mrs. Geo.
W. (S.T.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


KENTUCKY

Ashland: Searson, W. C.

Bowling Green: Bash. Nolin
A., 201-2 McCorinack
Bldg. (D.C.)
Posey, T. W. (D.O.)
Carlisle: Mohney,  S.  P. (D.C.)
Central  City: Martin, Charles

C. (D.O.)
Covington: Baynes, William
B.. 1515 Madison Ave.
Giles, J., 330 Madison Ave.
Greenewald, V., 31 S. 6  th

St. (N.D.)
Lostetter, C. F.. 715 Madi-
son Ave. (D.C.)
Siehl, Walter Herman,
Coppin Bldg. (D.O.)
Crab Orchard: Spangler, Ollie

Wade. (N.D.)
Cynthiana: Oldham, J. S..
Jett Bldg. (D.O.)

Danville: Slavin, J. L., 214 N.

4th St. (D.O.)
Elkton: Oldham, W. H., E.

Main St. (D.O.)
Flemingsburg: Lambert, Geo.

P. (D.C.)
Frankfort: Hoggins, Jose-
phine H., U Am. Bldg.
Fulton: Brown,  Robert  B.
Brown. Virginia E. (D.C.)
Thomson. (D.C.)
Georgetown: Amos,
Hotel Lancaster.
Cook,  A.  C. (N.D.)
Heath, Dr. L. F.
Henderson: Barker,
Boaz, H. C, 213 N. Green

St. (D.O.)

Medcalfe, D. W., 431 2nd

St. (D.O.)

Hopklnsville: Beard, Martha

D.. Cherokee Bldg. (D.O.)

Oldham, Jas. E., 705 S.

Clay St. (D.O.)
Sargent,  Andrew,  St.

Charles Court. (D.C.)
Lawrenceburg:  Harris, Eula

L. (N.D.)
I.ebanon: Carroll, W. C.

Lewisburg: Gilliam, Wm. B.

Lexington: Bauer, G. A.,
Rooms 335-37 McClelland
Bldg. (D.C.)
Bauer,  G. W. (D.C.)
' Blount, John S. (D.C.)

Vance. E. O.. Fayette Natl.
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Litchfield  I Cannon, M. E.

LouLsvllle: Johnson, Carl J.,
Equitable Bldg. (D.O.)
Baird, Nora  B., Weissinger-

Gaulbert Bldg. (D.O.)
Baw S. W.. 1321 Morton

Ave. (D.O.)
Bush, Evelyn R., 826 S. 4th

Ave. (D.O.)
Coke. Richard H.. 411

W. Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Collyer, Frank A., Pope

Bldg. (D.O.)  , ,

Day, J. O., 1026 S. 4th Ave.

(DO.)  „ ^

Dunn,  W.  A.,  2519  W.  Broad-
way. (N.D.)


Virginia,

B. F.


Louisiana
Maruland


Geographical  Index


Kill


Finch. J. T.. 122 4th Aye-
Urban Bldg. (D.C.)
Grefe, H. F.. 1249 S. Brook

St. (D.C.)
Patterson, R. \V.. Paul
.Tones BhlR-. (D.O.) ,
I.ikIIow: Davi.s, .John Heniy,

34 Euclia Ave. (D.C.)
.Mncun: Cumming-s, H. D.

i»In«li.soiivIIIe! Bennett, Dr. B.

Cr. (S.T.)

Hall, R. M. (D.O.)
Parker, Georg-e W. (D.O.)
Ma^-flcldf Day, E. F. (D.O.)
Maysville: Hicks, Ella Y.,

226 Sutton St. (D.O.)
Milton: Leasure, Laura B.
(D.C.)  ^ .

Morgranflelil ! Myer, Louise.
Stiles. .T. A.. Cottingham
BIdg-. (D.O.)
Owen.sboro: Coffman, J. Mar-
vin,  324  St.  Ann  St. (D.O.)
Hardie, G. W., 120* 2nd St.

Robertson, O. C. 225 Allen
St. (D.O.)
Paducah: Black, A. B.. 309^
Broadway St. (D.C.)
Frog-g-e, Geo. B., City Natl.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Gilbert, J. T., City Natl.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Washburn, B. A. (M.D.)
Paris: Petree, Martha, Agri-
cultural Bank  Bldg.  (D.O.)
ShelbyvlUe: Funk, Otto.
Hvatt, .Terome, Smith-Mc-

kenney Bldg. (D.C.)
Hvatt, Rov N., 309 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
AViiichester: Marshall, Lil-
lard  T.,  406-7  McEldowney
Bldg. (D.C.)


liOUISIANA

Alexandria: Long, S. (D.C.)
Markwell, J. A., 404-6 6th

St. (D.C.)
Price, Houston A., Com-
mercial Bank & Trust
Co. Bldg-. (D.O.) •

Baton Roii«e: Moore, Coyt,
Raymond Bldg. (D.O.)

Crowley: Faulk, Minnie L.,
Masonic Temple. (D.O.)

ne Kidder: Markwell, P. W.

Kairview; Miller, Bessie R.

Hammond: Eggers, Carl.

Hartwiok: White, Evan O.

lle.smer: Poret, E. (D.C.)

I>afitte: Marx, Ellen. (N.D.)

I.ee.sville: Markwell, J. A.

Monroe:  Evans.  Cecelia

Hackney, 209 Louise-
Anna Ave. (D.O.)
Kea, John Wesley, 201
Olive  St. (S.T.)

New Orleans: Connor, R. W..
Hennen Bldg. (D.O.)
Fichenor. G. H. (D.O.)
Markwell, J. A. (D.C.)
Mayronne, Delphine, 1539
Jackson Ave. (D.O.)


Purser, Dr. John L. (M.D.,

N.D.)
Williams, R. B. (Cli.)
Roneland: King, rjertrude.

King,  M. (D.O.)
Shreveporti Gedde.f, Paul W.,

Hutchinson Bldg. (D.O.)
McCracken, Earl, Com-
mercial Natl. Bank Bldg.

Otts, Edgar B., Commercial

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Powers, Mrs. M. A. E., 1702

Park Ave. (S.T.)
Winnifield: Moss, J. J. (N.D.)


MAINE

Auburn: Chittenden, Albert
E., 415 Court St. (D.O.)
Kellet, M. Maude, 145

Hampshire St. (D.O.)
Roben. M. G., Natl. Shoe &
Leather Bank Bldg.
Sanborn, Genoa A., 145

Hampshire St. (D.O.)

Steurk, A. K., Y. M. C. A.

Bldg-., 53 Court St. (D.C.)

Augusta: Gay, Virginia C,

167 State St. (D.O.)

Hawk, Mervine E., Opera

House Bldg-. (D.O.)
Opdycke, Florence M., 167

State St. (D.O.)
Perry, C. W., 219 Water St.
Bangor:  Bushaw, A.  Wm., 130
Main St. (N.D.)
Doron,  Chas.  B.,  Pearl  Bldg.

Semple, William, Eastern
Trust Bldg-. (D.O.)
Bar Harbor: Bearse, Ada M.,

Livingston Road. (D.O.)
Bath: Brackenridg-e, Karl,

105 Centre St. (D.O.)
Belfast: Kidder, Edith F.,

42 Higrh St. (D.O.)
Biddefordi Cox, W. T., 113
Main St. (D.O.)
Hleserick,  J.  H.,  293  Main  St.
Bruns-»vick: McDowell, J. O.,
Odd Fellows Bldg-. (D.O.)
Calais: Hanes, E. J. (D.O.)
Carthagret Child, Mrs. J. M.

Farmington:  Greenwood.

Emilie. (D.O.)
Foxoroft: Lancaster, M. Es-

telle. (D.O.)
Lewiston: Bridges, Edmund
M., 129 Lisbon St., Os-
good  Bldg. (D.C.)
Freeman, F. A., Osgood

Bldg. (D.O.)
McWilliams, Royal A.,
Manufacturers' Bank
Bldg. (D.O.)
Maohias:  Vose, F. G. (D.C.)

Vose,  Dr.  V.  G. (M.D.)
Portland: Ahlquist, C. P., 604
Congress St. (D.O.)
Covey, Florence A.. The

Somerset. (D.O.)
Day, J. Warren, 80 Granite

St. (D.M.T.)
Dav, Mary Warren, New

Baxter Bldg. (DO.)
Hicks, Anna Louise,
Vaughan Hall. (D.O.)


McGreevy. George O.. 650

Congress St. (D.O.)
Merrill, Ray C. 504 Baxter

Bldg. (D.C.)
Rosebrook, Sophronia T.,

The Somerset. (D.O.)
Wadsworth, Jas. S., 776

Congress St. (D.O.)
Weeks, Dan S., 778 Con-
gress St. (D.C.)
Whibley, G. Morrison, 700

Congress St. (D.O.)
Winckler. Oscar H., 502

Trelawney Bldg. (D.C.)
Zimmermann, J. O., The
Wadsworth, Suite 33.
I're.sque Islei Kendall, J

Prudence. (D.O.)
Rockland: Hill, J. C. (S.T.)
Mawry, M. W. (D.O.)
McBeath, Thos. L., 35

Limerock St. (D.O.)
Sweet, B. V. (D.O.)
Rumford: Falk, Mary, 117

Congress St. (D.O.)
Sanford: Young, Gertrude C,

P. O. Bldg. (D.O.)
Skowhegan: Kincaid, Julia
Nay, Forrest Goodwin
Blk. (D.O.)
Thomas, W. S. (D.O.)
Southwest Harbor: Parker

Mary  C. (D.O.)
Stockton Springs: Jordan. J.

B. (D.C.)
Waterville: Brown, William
Clare, 182 Main St. (D.O.)
Winslow, E. S. (D.O.)
AVestbrook: Dunnin, John J.
791 Main St. (D.O.)


MARYLAND

Annapolis: Dashiell, Eleanor

R., Murray Hill. (D.O.)
Baltimore: Bovles, J. A

Fidelity Bldg. (D.O.)
Carter,  H.  V.,  326  N.  Charles

St. (D.O.)
Cass & Cass, 505 N. Wolfe

St. (D.C.)
Cutty, Thos., 1200 Poplar

Grove  Blvd. (N.D.)
Duvall, O. N., 1817 N. Ful-
ton St. (D.O., M.D.)
Gruene. Francis. 614 West

Franklin St. (D.C.)
Hogeboom,  S.  B.,  1309  North

Charles St. (D.C.)
John, J. Ralph, 1513 Linden

Ave. (D.C.)
Jones,  J. ^X., 111 N. Charles

St. (D.O.)
Kirkpatrick, Aloha X, 319

N. Charles St. (D.O.)
Lofland, W. F.. 1514 Linden

Ave. (D.C.)
McMains. Grace Ramsav,

Union Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
McMains, Harrison, Fidelitv

Bldg. (D.O.)
McMains. Henrv A., Union

Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Osborn, Harrv C, 926 N.

Charles St. (D.O.)
Peil,  Charles  G..  1305  Linden

Ave. (D.C.)
Valentine, G. M.. 1430

Linden Ave. (D.C.)
Whiting, H. A., 33 W. Mt.

Royal. (D.O.,  N.D.)
Cumberland: Eiler, Isabel G.,

5 S. Centre  St.


1012


G('<)<fi<t}>hi<al  Indi'.v


M'issacliusrilx


Thomson, Thos. M.. 95 N.

Mechanic St. (D.O.)
Denton: Whisler,  C. A. (D.O.)
Frederick  t Schmid, Edward

I... 125 N. Market  St.

Spence. Hugh David, 220 N.

Market St. (D.O.)
HiiKerstown: Crissman,  A.  E.,

Colonial Theatre Bldg.

(D.C.)  „. ^

Johnson. J. Stanley, First

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Northern. Robt. J., First

Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Oakland t Becker, Ray D.

(DC.)
Rlverdalei  McMillan,  A.  R.

Sali.shurys Heatwole,  Webster

S.. Masonic Temple.

AVe.stniinster: Demarest, E.

M. (D.O.)


MASSACHUSETTS

Attleboroi Buchegger, Ed-
ward, 13-a Mechanic St.
Belmont: Walker. L. Willard,

24 Stone Road. (D.O.)
Beverly: Fessenden, Wendell

W., 244 Cabot  St. (D.O.)
Biloxi: Iliff, Lena, Biloxi

Health Resort. (D.C.)
llo.ston: Achorn, Ada A., 687
Bovlston St. (D.O.)

Achoin, Kendall L., 687
Bovl.ston St. (D.O.)

Amerise. Dr. C. W.. 212
Huntington Ave. (D.C.)

Atheiton. Frederic.  101  Tre-
niont St. (D.C.)

Bolton, Mrs. Nettie P.. 157
Huntington Ave. (N.D.)

Brown. Dale. 359 Boylston
St. (D.O.)

Blown, Gil. P., 128 W.
Broukline St. (D.O.)

Bruin, Mrs. L. B.. Westland
Ave. (D.C.)

Burke, Agnes E., 5 Oxford
Terrace. (D.C.)

Buswell, Arthur T., 566
Massachusetts Avenue.

Bvikit. Francis K., Pierce
Bldg.. Copley Sq. (D.O.)

Card. Elisabeth, 310 Hun-
tington Ave. (D.C.)

Carreiro, Ernest, 67 West-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Carter, Bertha E.. 729
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Cave, Edith S.. 30 Hunting-
ton Ave. (D.O.)

Caven, Francis A., 30 Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

Cochrane. Philip S.. 191
Huntington Ave. (D.O.)

Collins. Mrs. Hattie M., 552
Columbus Ave. (D.C.)

Crawfoid, H. T., 673 Boyl-
.ston St. (D.O.)

Crawford, Walter Howard,
819 Beacon  St. (D.O.)

Curtis, Mrs. A. F., Notting-
ham Hotel. (D.C.)

Dennette. F. A.. 138 Hun-
tington .\vo. (D.O.)


Dennett,  Herbert  E.,  151
Huntington Ave. (D.C.)

Dow,  Emma  L.,  87  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.C.)

Dugdale. G. W. (M.I>.)

])unham.  Geo.  P.,  151  Hunt-
ington Ave. (M.D., D.C.)

Dunsmoor,  H.  V..  176  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

Edel. R. E. (N.D.)

Ellis,  S.  A.,  687  Boylston  St.

Emery,  Mrs.  Flora,  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.C.)

Emery,  Mary,  53  Adams  St.,
Winton Hill Sta. (D.O.)

Ericson,  Erica.  183  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

Fagg.  F.  P.,  33  Concord  St.

Finneran,  Margaret  T..  350
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Flint.  Geo.  C.  Huntington
Chambers. (D.O.)

Flower.  A.  H..  101  St.
Botolph St. (D.O., M.D.)

Goode,  George  W.,  687
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Graves.  Frances,  Hunting-
ton (Chambers. (D.O.)

Greenwood,  Edna  M.,  213
Huntington Ave. (D.O.)

Gross,  Dr.  Cora  B..  109
Peterborough St. (D.C.)

Hart.  Aubrey  Warren,  64.
Huntington Ave. (D.O.)

Hodgeson,  E.  R.,  382  Boyl-
ston St. (D.C.)

Holbrook,  Grace  C,  501
Beacon St. (D.C.)

Horton,  Waldo,  500  Boyl-
ston  St. (D.O.)

Howard,  John  J.,  229  Ber-
keley  St. (D.O.)

Irving,  Josephine,  74  Boyl-
ston  St. (D.C.)

Kelley,  Elizabeth  Flint,  36
Huntington Ave. (D.O.)

Lake,  F.  Bourne.  178  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

Lane.  Arthur  Miner,  420
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Langley,  Mabel  A.,  483
Beacon St. (D.O.)

Laslett.  W.  L..  673  Boyl-
ston  St. (D.O.)

Lewis.  L.  E.,  119  St.  Botolph
St. (N.D.)

Long,  A.  G.,  483  Massachu-
setts Ave. (D.O.)

MacDonald.  John  A.,  160
Newbury St. (D.O.)

Mason.  J.  Louise.  183  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

McWilliams.  Alex.  F.,  Hun-
tington Chambers. (D.O.)

Megathlin,  Violet  M.,  133
Peterborough St. (D.C.)

Muntz,  Glenn  F.,  Hunting-
ton Chambers. (D.O.)

New  England  College  of
Chiropractic,  552  Massa-
chusetts Ave. (D.C.)

Nichols,  Robt.  H.,  15  Beacon
St. (D.O.)

Olmsted,  Harry  J.,  Colonial
Bldg. (D.O.)

Pago.  Chas.  E.,  120  Tremont
St. (D.O.)

Proctor.  Burton  H.,  15
Beacon St. (D.O.)

Rand. Carrie  Ellsworth, 146
Massachusetts Ave.

Randall,  Edward  B.,  776
Tremont St. (D.C.)

Riley,  J.  S.,  552  Massachu-
setts  Ave. (D.O.)


Riley, Laura B., 552 Massa-
chusetts Ave. (D.C.)

Rogers, Alfred W.. 1091
Bovl.ston St. (D.O.)

Rollins, Walter H.. 176
Springfield St. (D.C.)

Rungo. Harry !.,., 208 Hun-
tington Ave. (D.C.)

Russell. Dr. Flora. 548
Massachusetts  Ave. (D.C.)

Salle, Chas. E., 117 St.
Botolph St. (D.C.)

Scamman, Earl. 100 Bovl-
ston St. (D.O.)

Sheehan, Helen G.. 687
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Sherburne. F. W., 382 Com-
m.onwealth Ave. (D.O.)

Simpson, Rosalie M., Wa.sh-
ington School of Chiio-
practic. (D.P., D.C.)

Small. Mary A., Garrison
Hall. Harrison St. (D.O.)

Smith, George E., Hunting-
ton Chambers.  (D.O.,  N.D.)

Smith, Ralph Kendrick, 19
Arlington St. (D.O.)

Smith.  W.  Arthur, 313  Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

Steeves, Herbert O., 30
Huntington Ave. (D.O.)

Tallant. Katharvn G., 359
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Taplin,  Geo.  C,  581  Boylston
St. (D.O.)

Thore. Christopher D., 100
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Turner, L. C, 673 Boylston
St. (D.O.)

Vaughan. Frank M., 359
Boylston St. (D.O.)

Violette, Miss S. N., Hotel
Oxford. (D.C.)

Vye, Amy J. (D.O.)

Watson, Carl L., 166 Hun-
tington Ave. (D.O.)

Wheeler, Oilman A.. 416
Marlborough St. (D.O.)

Whitaker. L. R., 687 Boyl-
ston  St. (D.O.)

Williams. Miss Harriet. 18
Huntington Ave. (D.C.)

Williams, Spencer  T., Trini-
ty Court  Chambers. (D.O.)

Wilson, Emily G.. 229 Ber-
keley  St. (D.O.)

Winchester. Augusta  S., %29
Berkeley St. (D.O.)

Winncy. Chas. F.. 739 Boyl-
ston  St. (D.O.)
Brockton: Gary, D. C, Hol-
brook Bldg. (D.C.)

Daniels.  Henry, Times  Bldg.

Davidson, M. E. (D.C.)

Eldridge, Fred. B., 43 N.
Warren Ave. (D.O.)

Eldridge, Fred., 63 Main St.

(P.)
Wallace. Wilford Hall.

Pvthian Temple. W. Elm

St. (D.O.)
Brookllne: Adams, Celia P.,

1318 Beacon St. (D.O.)
Ellis, Irene Harwood. 112

Lancaster Terrace. (D.O.)
Irving, Josephine, 1569

Beacon St. (D.C.)
King, Helen, 516 Harvard

St. (D.O.)
Cambridge:  Bishop.  George  N.,

888 Massachusetts Ave.

Conant, B. Rees, 1039 Mass.

Ave. (D.O.)
Fuhrmann. Theo., 64 W.

Rutland St. (D.O.)


Massficluisclts


Crcogntphical  Iiuhr


1013


Harriman, Mrs. Lucy C, 10

Dana St., Suite 1. (D.C.)
Harris, W. E., 1010 Massa-
chusetts Ave. (D.O.)
Karcher.  E.  W., 1010  Massa-
chusetts Ave. (D.O.)
Kinsman, Ada R., 182 Up-
land Road. (D.O.)
Townsend, Gertrude, 884
Massachusetts Ave.  (D.O.)
Campelle: Nelson, A. E., 1167

Montello St. (D.C.)
Dorchester: Allen, Horace P.,
15 Bicknell St. (D.O.)
Barstow, Myron B., 44 Mt.

Everett St. (D.O.)
Oinsburg-, Joel, 193 Colum-
bia  Road. (D.O.)
Giotun: I'owell, L. M.
Dorchester:  Hein.stein,  Mrs.  A.
L., 270  Bowdoin  St. (N.D.)
Menz, Edward  A., 87 Corbet
St. (D.C.)
East Boston: Bolah, Harry
R.,  36  Princeton  St. (D.O.)
East Gloucester: Lake, F.
Borune, Harbor View
Inn. (D.O.)
Etkst Lynn: Hood, Edwin S.,

167 Marianna  St. (D.C.)
East Milton: Moore, Miss
Jessie E., 101 Bdgehill
Road. (D.C.)
Everett: Harvey, M. P., 444
B'way. (D.O.)
Marsen, Fred. H., 94 Main

St. (D.C.)
Parker,  Olive  B.,  12  Belling-
ham St. (D.C.)
Fall River: Poole, I. Chester,

204 Hig-h St. (D.O.)
Falmouth: Wiswall, Thomas

A., Main St. (D.O.)
Fitchburg: Smith, Alexander
H., 16 Hartwell St. (D.O.)
Frnmingliani: Cole, Merton
K., 38  Pearl  St. (D.O.)
Fav, Leon E., 6 Union Ave.
(ilouoester: Smith,  W.  Arthur.

Great Harrington: Vreeland,

Jno. A. (D.O.)
Greenfield: Allen, L. W.,
Davenport Bldg-. (D.O.)
Bryant, Ward C, Masonic
Bldg. (D.O.)
Groton: Powell, L. M. (D.O.)
Haverhill: Carter, Elmer W.,
72 White St. (D.O.)
Horn, Mary B., 64 Main St.

Ochs, Louis C, Adams

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Weed, Ijoring, Haverhill
Natl. Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Holyoke: Humphries, Ernest
R., 293 Maple St. (D.O.)
Donner, Dr. John A. (M.D.)
Hyannis: Cave. Francis A.,

Crowell Bldg. (D.O.)
Hyile I'iirk: Wright, Peter  J.,

1144 River  St. (D.O.)
Kenyon: Fenseth, Anna M.

Ija-wrence; Eraser, Agnes,
5 Albion St. (D.O.)
Could, Frederic Le Roy, 26

Abbott St. (N.D.)
Hartwell, Henry Edward,

243 Bruce St. (D.O.)
Hatch, Chas. C, 236 Bruce
St. (D.O.)
licominster: Flansburgh, R.
D., The Richardson.
Lexington: Crawford, Nell
Cutler, 22 Hancock St.


Lowell: Burke, Wilfrid 1.,
Sun Bldg. (D.O.)
Dover, Mary A., 123 Nos-

mith St. (D.O.)
Morrell, Ada E., 125 Dover

St. (D.O.)
Watson, S. Gertrude, 53
Central St. (D.O.)
liynn: Dana, I>. A., 506

Grossman Bldg. (D.C.)
Lewis, Muriel E., 26 Broad

St. (D.O.)
Mack, Warren B., 32 Lewis

St. (D.O.)
Meader, Emma Laura, 48-a

Estes St. (D.O.)
Mendelsohn, S., 445 Essex

St. (D.O.)
Peck, Martin W., 36 Cherry

St. (D.O.)
Shrum, Mark, 180 Lewis St.
Magnolia: Stamp, Harley.

Maiden: Nelson, Frank C,
506 Highland Ave. (D.O.)
Wright, Herbert E., 226
Clifton St. (D.O.)
Marlboro: Jones, William
Henry, 200 Main St.
Mar.shfield Center: Sheehan,

Dr. Edw. P. (D.C.)
Melrose: New England Sani-
tarium. (D.O.)
Wheeler, G. D., 101 W.
Emerson St. (D.O.)
Middleboro: Ransden, Good-
win, Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Nantucket: Wallace, Wilford
Hall, ¥8 Centre St. (D.O.)
New Bedford: Parlin, Ralph
B.. 124 Mill St. (D.O.)
Walker, Mary Wheeler, 288

Union  St. (D.O.)
Walker, Robt. I., 288 Union
St. (D.O.)
Newburyport: Coburn, D.
Wendell, 100 High Street.
Newton: Reid, Marietta Put-
nam, 114 Newtonville
Ave. (D.O.)
Newton Center: Lown, Anna
B., Bradford  Court. (D.O.)
Newtonville: McLaughlin, S.

C, 3 Harvard St. (D.O.)
North  Adams: Sanford,  J.  AV.,
Sanford's Studio. (D.C.)
Williams, Maude G., 78
Main St. (D.O.)
Northampton: Haswell, Geo.
A., Central Chambers,
Center St. (D.O.)
Oak BlufTs: Parlin, Ralph B.,

157 Circuit  Ave. (D.O.)
Pittsfield: Head, Ralph D.,
Agricultural Bank Bldg.
Hoag, W.  G., Savings  Bank

Bldg. (N.D.)
Jenks, Chas., Box 1094.

(DC.)
Kendall, Marion E., Agri-
cultural Bank Bldg.
Osgood, Lizzie E., 150

North St. (D.O.)
Vreeland, John A., Agri-
cultural Bank Bldg.
Plymouth: Cave, Edith  Stobo,

151 Sandwich St. (D.O.)
Quincy: Phillips,  Mrs. E., 163
Independence Ave. (D.C.)
Rochester: Bligh, T. R., 920
Staten Bldg. (D.C.)


Roxbury: Clement, Alice, 275
Warren St. (D.C.)
Hoard, Mary A., The War-
ren. (D.O.)
Salem: Saitwell, J. Oliver,

221 Essex St. (D.O.)
Somervlllc: Bolan, ].,incoln

R., 34 Bow St. (D.O.)
Springfield: Atly, Norman B.,
Court .Sq. Theatre Bldg.
Barbff, I>ottie Catron, 31

Maple  St. (D.O.)
Benson, F. L., 346 N. Main

St. (N.D.)
Gary, David C, 310 Carr

Bldg. (D.C.)
Davi.s,  E.  T.,  319  Besse  Bldg.

Gesner, C. E., 103 Atwater

Terrace. (D.C.)
La Plant, G. J., 327 Main

St., Suite 30. (D.C.)
Mayes, M. T., 289 State St.

Robison, Alice  A., 42 Dart-
mouth  St. (D.O.)
Stacy, J. W., The Chateau.

Taylor, Gladys F., 9 Syca-
more St. (D.O.)
Triplett. L. B., 10 Chestnut

St. (D.O.)
Weitzel, Walter J., 374

Main St. (D.O.)
Zinn, E. R., 375 Central St.
S. Dennis: Lockwood, Jane

E. (D.O.)
Stoughton: Mayer-Oakes, F.

T. (D.C.)
^Valden: Sampson, Clifford

A., 554 Salem  St. (D.O.)
Walthani: Roark, H. Alton,

787 Main St. (D.O.)
Wakefield: Fessenden,  Ernest

A., 35 Avon St. (D.O.)
Wellesley: Byrkit, Anna ^V..
Summit Rd. (D.O.)
Rand, N. Louise, Waban
Hotel. (D.O.)
Wellesley Hill: Rodman,
Warren A., Washington
St. (D.O.)
W^est Newton: Rand. N.
Louise, 247  Austin St.
West Roxbury: Laslett. W.
L., 40  Hastings  St. (D.O.)
Winchendon: Stanlev, Carrie
E., 151 Pleasant St.
AVinchester: Whitaker, L. R..

43 Church St. (D.O.)
Winter Hill: Richardson, H.

L., 58  Main  St. (D.O.)
WInthrop Highlands: Bus-
well, 85 Park Ave. (N.D.)
Wollaston: Zwicker, J. A., 79

Freeman St. (D.O.)
Worcester: Bishop, Lewis  M.,
208 Highland St. (D.O.)
Bligh, T. R., 920 Slater

Bldg. (N.D.)
Bruninghaus, Chas. AV.,

Park Bldg. (D.O.)
Crerie, Maude A., 28 Mav-

wood St. (DO.)
Fletcher, Mary M., Central

Exchange Bldg. (D.O.)
Frost,  H.  P.,  920  Slater  Bldg.

Gleason,  Alson  H.,  765  Main

St. (D.O.)
Knowltown, Harold C, 19

Home St. (D.C.)
Moore. A., 6 Wellington St.

Moore, A. J., 339 Main St.
(DC.)


1014


Geographical  Index


Michigan


Murphv.  (Mias.  S.,  Room  917

Paterson, C. "Vernon, Slater

Bldg. (D.O.)
Reid. Geo. W., Slater Bldg.

Warden, Alice J., Slater

Bldg-. (D.O.)


MICHIGAN

Adrians Hawes,  Leon  B.,  Nat'l

Bank of Commerce Bldg.

Jewell. J. W., Lenawee

County  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Salisbury, E. E., 6 Toledo

St. (D.O.)
Sohwab, A. O.. 27 E. Mau-

mee St. (D.C.)
Thedger, F. M., 7 Wesley

Blk. (D.C.)
Albion: Arnold, G. E., Post-

offlce Bldg. (D.O.)
Burkhardt, E. M., Dickie

Bldg. (DO.)
Cooper, Clara R., 109 S.

Superior St. (D.C.)
Guvselman, Chas. M., 409

N. Superior  St. (D.C.)
Markle,  T.  K. (D.C.)
Marvin, D. C, Over Jen-
nings & Ramsdell. (©.C.)
Marvin, Roy G. (D.C.)
Alleennt Barber,  Isabel  Olive,

First  Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.

Alma: Austin.  J.  W. (D.C.)
Keene, J. R., 620 State St.

Keene, S. W.. 218 W. Supe-
rior St. (D.O.)
Alpena: Joslin, J. H., 119

State St. (D.C.)
Keldsen,  Georgina,  116  Park

Place. (D.C.)
Keldsen, J. W., 116 Park

Place. (D.C.)
Kleber.  Ernest  A.,  E.  A.

Kleber  Sanitarium. (N.D.)
Lyall, Ida A., Masonic Blk.

Ann Arbor: Classen, Carrie

C, First  Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.

Ivowry, Dorothy B. (D.C.)
Mills, W. S.. First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Walker, G. W., 1033 Pack-
ard  St. (D.C.)
Athens: Lloyd, Fox E. (D.C.)
Walkley, R. H., Bank Bldg.

Bad Axe: Angstrom, G. H.,

1st  door,  N.  N.  Hubbard  &

Co. (D.C.)
Macfadden. Charles, Suite

5-6 Temple Bldg. (N.D.,

D.O.,  F.)
Bailey: Reiley, P. S. (D.C.)
Bangor: Bellingham, T. W.

Baragro: Dahlberg,  A.  W.,  Box

53. (D.O.)
Battle  Creek: Baird,  J.  W.

Blair,  J.  S.,  Ward  Bldg.

Bollinger, G. W., 245 Grove

St., Room 6, Box 13.

Boyer, Thos. A., Post Bldg.

(DO.)
Conklin, Hugh W., Ward

Bldg. (D.O.)


Doarden, John. (D.C.)
Dorner, Rudolph A. (D.C.)
Foster,  Pearl,  Normal

School of Physical Edu-
cation. (D.O.)
Hicks.  Betsy  B.,  M'ard  Bldg.

Johnson, J. T.. 385 West

Main  St. (D.C.)
Kirkpatrick,  J.  E.,  202  Ward

Bldg. (D.C.)
Little, J. A.. 19 Boardman

Ave., 57 Main St. (D.C.)
Miller, F. E. (N.D.)
SkllHnger, W. R., Suite 22,

Arcade. (D.C.)
Smith. Charles S., Post

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sweet, R. C, 214-16 W.
Main St. (D.C.)
Bay  City: Gates,  O. B., Crapo
Blk. (D.O.)
Keene. G. W.. 904 B'way.

Wishart.  Jessie  L..  1403 4th

Ave. (D.C.)
Womeldurf. H. B. (D.C.)
Wood. Geo. S.. 501 Adams

St. (D.C.)
Wright. George. Fay Bldg.
Beldlns: Harrison. Frank D.,
103 E. Main St. (D.O.)
Healy. J. J.. 201 W. Main

St. (D.C.)
Piatt. H. F. (D.C.)
Wood. Louis M.. 218 S.

Bridge  St. (D.C.)
Wood. Mary  L. (D.C.)
Belleview: La Londe. J. W.

Bennlni;ton: Wildermuth, H.

E. (D.C.)
Benton: Rector. Emma. B.

Main  St. (D.O.)
Benton Harbor: Meyer, S. P.,
153  Pipestone  St. (D.C.)
McNitt. Leslie. 121 E. Main

St. (D.C.)
Pearce. N. F.. 11-10 B. H.
State Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Shipman. R. L.. 734 Terri-
torial Ave. (D.C.)
Stout. Lora K., Yora Bldg.

Summerville. A. W. (D.C.)
Berrien Springes: Dean W. K.

Big  Rapids: Haslein, "VVm.
Hilliker. Geo. A.. Nisbett
Bldg. (D.C.)
Boody: Merwin. Louis  F.

Buchanan:  Post.  I.,.  S. (D.C.)
Burr  Oak: Emmons,  G.  Clyde.

Byron: Barnes, A. B. (D.C.)

Clark. A. C. (D.C.)
Cadillac: Firth. John. Realty

Bldg. (D.C.)
Calumet: Jobling, Evoy, As-
selin Blk. (D.C.)
Jobling, Richard. (D.C.)
Caroi Larson,  A.  C. (D.C.)
Larson. A. O.. 127 West
Bush St. (D.C.)
Casnovia: Warren  &  Warren.

Chambers: Howard. R. E.

Charlevol-x: Bon. Lucv E..
108 Park  Ave. (D.C.)
Ecklund. A. (DC.)
Rorabacher, J. C, 108  Park
Ave. (DC.)


Richards, Winifred.
Rothfuss, Carl W.


Charlotte:  Garlinghouse,  A.  J..
134J S.  Main St. (D.O.)

Rudesill.  Clark  O..  524  S.
Main St. (D.C.)

Shaver.  B. C. (D.C.)

Sutherland. W. H.. 3363
Shaw St. (D.C.)
Chatham: Davis. Lloyd R.

Cheboygan: Allard. A. S.

Moore.  Agnes  J..  Dodd  Bldg.
Chelsea: Fulford. Harlie J..
Box 9. (D.O.)

Moon. C. E. (D.C.)
Clinton: Wagner, Anna.

Coidwater: Williams, C. Ar-
thur, 41 W. Chicago St.
Coleman: Hull, Ella. (D.O.)

Kelley, Miss M. (D.C.)
t'onklin: Seelman, Cornelius

M. (D.C.)
Coral: House, Ethel. (D.C.)

Lyon, Blanche. (D.C.)
Cross  Village: Bliss, A. W.

Crossweil: Anstrom, B. R.

Custer: O'Connors, Peter.

Cutcheon: Phillips, F. J.

Davison:


Dearborn:


Detroit: Antes, F. L., 617-18
Farwell Bldg. (D.O.)

Aplin,  Dr.  Anna  K.,  406
Stevens  Bldg.,  Cor.  Grand
River  and  Washington
Aves. (D.O.)

Apple,  Alice,  230  National
Ave. (D.O.)

Alberts,  John  H.,  157  Beres-
ford Ave. (D.C.)

Ashford,  J.  A..  1674  Gratiot
Ave. (D.C.)

Ashland.  James  A.,  1598^
Gratiot  Ave. (D.C.)

Ashmore,  Edythe,  161  At-
kinson Ave. (D.O.)

Ball,  Walter  T. (D.C.)

Barbier, Ed. A., 201
Bldg. (D.C.)

Barbier,  Lucie  E.,  201  Park
Bldg. (D.C.)

Barnhart,  Flora,  78  Daven-
port  St. (D.C.)

Beecher,  W.  H.  W.,  1548
3rd Ave. (D.C.)

Benedict,  G.  A.,  244  Wood-
ward Ave. (Ch.)

Bennett,  Dr.  Chas.  A.,  212
Stevens  Bldg.,  Cor.  Grand
River  and  Washington
Ave. (D.O.)

Bernard,  Herbert,  504  Fine
Arta  Bldg. (D.O.)

Bielby,  Richard,  123  Oak-
land  Ave. (D.O.)

Bile,  J.  R..  294  Medbury
Ave. (D.C.)

Bledsoe,  Mme..  240  Adams
Ave.  E. (Ch.)

Breenahan,  M.,  463  Con-
gress  St. (D.C.)

Bourget.  Arthur  G.,  515
Turnhall Ave. (D.C.)

Bresnahen.  M..  637  Con-
gress  St. (D.C.)

Bright. Corrine E. (D.C.)

Brokaw.  Dr.  Maud.  413
Stevens Bldg. (D.O.)


Park


Michigan


Geo(/r(ij)hi('(il  Index


1015


Brewer, The Chiropodist.

3rd Floor, 92 Broadway.

(Ch.)
Browning-,  Dr.  Martin  P.,  619

Farwell Bldg-. (D.O.)
Bryant, W. H., 23fi 24th St.

Bullock, B. A., 211 Stevens

Bldg. (D.O.)
Burrell,  Emery  A., 729  Mar-

biirv St. (D.C.)
Burnell, Royal O., 729 Mar-
bury  St. (D.C.)
Button, D. D.. 42B Helen

Ave., and 365 Hunt St.
•  (D.C.)
Campbell. Wm., 34 Arnot

St. (D.C.)
Carmoney, F. D., 2524

Jefferson Ave. (D.C.)
Carpenter, Ethel Cook, 666

Woodward Ave. (D.O.)
Cai-penter, Mark C, 666

Woodward Ave. (D.O.)
Cartwright. F. A.. 857 Fort

W. (D.C.)
Cherry, J. S., 226 Holcomb

Ave. (D.O.)
Clarke, Dr. G. B. F., 51-56

University Bldg-. (D.O.)
Cluff, Arthur C, Liggett  |

Bldg. (D.O.)
Cook, Hazel, 259 Lincoln

Ave. (D.C.)
Copatesen, J. O., 857 Fort

Avenue. (D.O.)
Cray,  Mary.  327  E.  Jefferson

Ave. (D.C.)
Crofts, Myron R., 1166 Mt.

Elliott Ave. (D.O.)
Currey, Wm. W., 467 War-
ren  Ave. (D.C.)
Day, Lawrence E.. Warren

and  Avery  Sts. (D.O.)
Deane, Dr. Alice M.,, 607

Farwell Bldg. (D.O.)
DeCarlo, P. R.. 797 Cass

Ave. (D.C.)
Detroit  "Chiropractic Insti-
tute School, 886 Trumbull

Ave. (D.C.)
DeWolf, Dr. Winifred, 504

Fine Arts Bldg. (D.O.)
Douglas, Roscoe S.. 501

Catherine St. (Ch.)
Drennan, Dr. Anna M., 899

Woodward Ave. (D.O.)
Dutton, D. D., 385 Hunt St.

Farber,  Charles  V.. 903 14th

St. (D.O.)
Fellow.s, Helen H., 560

Franklin St. (D.O.)
Frank. H. J., 258 Dix Ave.

Eraser, W. P., 24 Alex  Ave.

(D.O., D.C.)
Freeman, Dr. H. M., 2082

Jefferson St. (D.O.)
Fress, J. W., 47 McCJraw

Bldg. (N.D.)
Fudoyson,  D.  A., 271  Wood-
ward Ave. (D.O.)
Fuller, Karl E., 813 Peter

Smith  Bldg. (Ch.)
Garrett. M. E., 60 Valpey

Bldg. (D.O.)
Gaylord, Bertha J., 132

Church  Ave.,  and  61  Park

Blvd. (D.C.)
George, Mrs. Helen, 1126

C.  of  C. (Ch.)
Gilbert,  Spencer,  1631  Brush

St. (D.C)


Gilchrist,  Elizabeth,  337
Lincoln Ave. (D.O.)

Gitzen.  G.  R.,  1198  Gratiot
Ave. (D.C.)

Gluff.  Arthur  G.,  505  Liggett
Bldg. (D.O.)

Goodheart,  Geo.  .T.,  35  Har-
per  Ave. (D.C.)

Goodlove,  Paul  C.  502-4
Broadway  Central  Bldg.,
Cor.  .Tohn  Road  and
Broadway. (D.O.)

Green,  J.  M.,  712  Jefferson
Ave. (D.C.)

Haight,  Dr.  E.  A.,  2285
Woodward  Ave. (D.O.)

Hammon,  A.  S.,  151  E.  Be-
thune Ave. (D.C.)

Hammond,  E.  W.,  100  Char-
lotte Ave. (N.D.)

Hampton, Annie P. (D.C.)

Hanson,  A.  Ch.,  526  John
R  St. (D.O.)

Hard,  Mary  E..  355  W.
Grand Blvd. (D.O.)

Harriman,  E.  J.,  197i  Can-
field Ave. (N.D.)

Hartman,  R.  A.,  Woodward
and  Forest  Ave. (D.C.)

Harvey, Dr. Eleanor  Stuart,
413-15 Stevens Bldg.

Healey,  Joseph,  213  Howard
St. (D.C.)

Herroder,  Dr.  T.  L.,  212  Ste-
vens Bldg.,  Cor.  Grand
River  and  Washington
Aves. (D.O.)

Herroder  &  Bennett,  212
Stevens Bldg. (D.O.)

Hobson,  Ancil  B.,  313  Ste-
vens  Bldg. (D.O.)

Hollis,  Dr.  Arthur  S.,  519
Farwell Bldg. (D.O.)

Hovey,  Mrs.  Lydia  M..  1835
Dime  Bank  Bldg. (Cr.)

Hubbel,  Preston  R..  1664
Woodward Ave. (D.O.)

Husted  &  Husted,  519  E.
Warren St. (D.C.)

Husted,  J.  W.,  56  Warren
Ave. (D.C.)

Husted,  Mrs.  L.  G.,  Smith
Ave. (D.C.)

Irish.  A.  M..  859  Crane  Ave.

Jepson.  Beebe  Ruth.  301
Woodward Ave. (D.O.)

Kasik,  W.  J.,  301  Wood-
ward Bldg. (Ch.)

Kelly.  J.  D.,  882  14th  Ave.

Kilts.  Wm.  H..  982  Wood-
ward  Ave. (D.O.)

King.  Dr.  Edward  D..  501
Woodward  Bldg. (D.O.)

Kleber,  E.  A.,  147  Adams
Ave. E. (D.O.)

Kleczynske,  A..  413  Canfleld
Ave. (D.C.)

Klopferstein,  W.  A. (N.D.)

Knigh,  Geo.  S.,  3003  E.
Grand Blvd. (D.C.)

Krause,  J.  AV.,  294  Medbury
Ave. (D.C.)

Krogall.  Anna  J.,  11-17
Elizabeth St. W. (Ch.)

Krohn.  A.  H..  1002  Michi-
gan Ave. (DC.)

Lathrop, Guy F.. 621-23
Stevens Bldg. (Or.S.)

Littlefield,  Chas.  W..  244
Woodward Ave. (D.C.)

Loranger,  B.  G.,  302  Hodges
Bldg. (D.C.)

Loranger, J. E., 506
Hodges Bldg. (N.D.)

Market,  S.  J.,  147  Adams
Ave. E. (DO.)


Mattler,  A.  E.,  240  Wood-
ward Bldg. (Ch.)

Mayell,  Ed.  W.,  354  Ferdi-
nand Ave. (D.O.)

Mayer.s, Rebecca }'... Suite
42, 213 Woodward Ave.

McGavock,  Anne  H.,  894
Woodward Ave. (D.O.)

McLaughlin,  Jennie  L..  186
Pine St. (D.C.)

Mercer,  Ada,  54  State  St.

Mercer,  Edwin,  244  Wood-
ward Ave. (D.C.)

Merrill,  Frank  J.,  313  5th
St. (D.C.)

Millay,  E.  O.,  1664  Wood-
ward Ave. (D.O.)

Miller, H. L.. 15 Hobart,
Ave. (D.C.)

Mills,  M.  H..  508  Healey
Bldg. (D.O.)

Moore,  Mrs.  A.  A..  127  Hor-
ton  Ave. (D.C.)

Moore,  Edw.  I.,.,  220  Wood-
ward Ave. (Ch.)

Movement  Cure  Inst.,  The,
224  B'way,  Market  Bldg.

Moyer.  C.  E.,  1224  Wood-
ward Ave. (D.C.)

Movers,  G.  L.,  178  Colburn
Place. (DC.)

Nichols,  Frances,  685  4th
Ave. (D.O.)

Ottaway,  Geo.,  6  W.  Adams
St. (D.C.)

Paloski,  J.  B..  1710  Vine-
wood Ave. (D.C.)

Panars,  Frederick  G..  992
Gratiot  Ave.,  and  Mack
Ave. (D.O.)

Parker.  Gordon  L..  63
Washington Blvd. (Opt.)

Phillips.  E.  J.,  961  Great
River  Ave. (D.C.)

Pitts,  L.  M.,  47  "U'.  Alexan-
dria Ave. (D.C.)

Plummer,  G.  A..  107  Came-
ron Ave. (D.C.)

Poole,  T.  L..  536  Mavburv
Grand. (D.C.)

Redelsheimer, Max,  80

"Washington Ave. (Opt.)

Reisdorf,  J.  H..  315  B'wav
Market Bldg. (D.C.)

Richard,  Lawrence  E.,  59
Fort W. (Opt.)

Richards,  AVinifred. (D.C.)

Richmond,  J.  M.,  92  B'wav
Room  208. (D.C.)

Riddell,  Ross,  29  Monroe
Ave. (Ch.)

Rider,  C.  I>.,  521  Stevens
Bldg. (D.O.)

Roach,  .Teanette,  45  Hague
Ave. (D.C.)

Rogers,  Laban,  259  Forest
Ave. (DO.)

Rogers.  M.  S.,  259  Forest
Ave. (D.C.)

Ross.  Elizabeth,  1245  Wood-
ward Ave. (D.O.)

Sands.  C.  M..  1497  AV.  Fort
St. (N.D.)

Sands,  Madeline.  1499  Fort
St. W. (D.O.)

Schrver.  W.  A.,  531  Lincoln
Ave. (D.C.)

Schwab,  F.  J.,  352  Harrison
Ave. (D.C.)

Sellards  &  Sellards,  24
Peterboro  St. (D.O.)

Severy,  Charles  L.,  409
Stevens Bldg. (D.O.)


1016


Gcoqraphical  Index


Micliiyan


Sherman.  B.  E.,  886  Turn-
bull Ave. (D.C.)

Sherman.  F.  J..  886  Turn-
bull  Ave. (D.C.)

Sipple.  .1..  354  Lansing  Ave.
(D.C.)  , .

Smith.  E.  A..  54  Hendrie
Ave. (D.C.)

Smith.  L.  O..  239  Van  Dyke
Ave. (D.O.)

Smith.  Thaddeus  T.,  Valpey
Bldff. (D.O.)

Snedeker.  O.  O.,  406  B  way
Central Bldg. (D.O.) ,

Spitler.  J.  F.,  Stevens  Bldg.

Standart,  N.  K..  Washmg-
ton Arcade. (Opt.)

Starr,  Miss  Bertha  E.,  1835
Dime  Bank  Bldg. (Cr.)

Stephenson.  Leah  M..  1023
E. Jefferson Ave. (D.C.)

Sterner.  M.  S..  281  National
Ave. (D.C.)

Stevens.  Bertram  E..  Trau-
gott  Schmidt  Bldg..  213
Woodward  Ave.,  and  50
Valpey Bldg. (D.C.)

Stevens. Dr. C.  Burton. 617-
618  New Farwell  Bldg.
(D.O.)  „

Stewart,  Dr.  Carrie  B.
Taylor. 421 Stevens Bldg.

Stewart.  Frank,  206  Clair
Ave. (D.C.)

Stewart,  John.  206  Clare-
mont Ave. (D.C.)

Stewart.  Dr.  Walter  W.
421 Stevens Bldg. (D.O.)

Stoddard,  Geo.  J.,  307
Howard St. (D.C.)

Sullivan.  H.  B..  87  Valpey
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Sutton.  James  B.,  759  Wood-
ward Ave. (D.C.)

Thomson.  D.  B..  204  Sher-
er  Bldg. (Opt.)

Trask.  Dr.  H.  D.,  603  Shar-
er Bldg. (D.O.)

Van  Corst.  Bertha.  46  E.
Montcalm St. (D.C.)

Van  Vliet  Optical  Co..  242
Griswold  St. (Opt.)

Van  Wagoner,  L.  A.,  92
Calumet Ave. (D.C.)

Waugh,  R.  H..  50  Lothrop
Ave. (D.C.)

Welstead. Mrs. Alice \V..
2116 Dime Bank Bldg.
(Cr.)

Wetherell, G. M. (M.D.)

Whittenberg, O. W. (D.C.)

Wicker,  L.  I.,  892  Woodward
Ave. (D.C.)

Wikander,  G.  W.,  58  Madi-
son Ave. (D.C.)

Williamson,  Margaret.  1466
W. Elliot Ave. (D.C.)

Winn.  Charles  V.,  2032
Dime Bank Bldg. (Cr.)

Wolverine  Optical  Co..  701-
709 Stevens Bldg. (Opt.)

Woodford.  N.  C.  436  Com-
monwealth Ave. (D.C.)

Woodford.  Willard  C,  436
Commonwealth Ave.

Wright. Eugenia M.. 30

Amherst St. (D.C.)
Wright. Kay & Co.. 207-11

Woodward Ave. (Opt.)
Yerkes. C. C. 1598 Gratiot
Ave. (D.C.)
Do>vnKiac*t  Herkimer, G.  R.

(Or.S.)
Diirnnd! Campbell, Phillip.

East  Jordan: Carl.son,  John  C.


Eau Claire: Jackman, L. M.

Elsie:  Marwedel,  H. F.

E.Hcnnnl>a: Garman. Debert.

1111  Luddington  St.  (D.C.)
Fibre:  Everet.  Chas.  E.  (D.C.)
Flint: Campbell. P. D., 1121

Kearsley St. (D.C.)
Dearden, Jno,, 318 S. Sagi-
naw St. (D.C.)
Foster, Chas. L., Patterson

Bldg. (D.C.)
Fox & Fox, Drs.. 414 Dry-
den Bldg. (D.C.)
Gidley. J. B.. F. P. Smith

Bldg. (D.O.)
Harlan. Frederick J.. Flint

P. Smith Bldg. (D.O.)
Nulk. Mrs. A. C. 423J De-
troit  St. (D.C.)
Payne, Allen E., 309 W.

7th  St. (D.C.)
Sones, J. C, 1602 Saginaw

St. (D.C.)
Woodruff & Jemtsch, 124

B. Court St. (D.O.)
Fovvlerville: Soule. E. C.

Fremont: Gilbert. Orrie L.

Monks, Harry. (D.C.)
Gilbert: Larson, Minnie.

Grand Haven: Adams. Chas.

F. (D.C.)
Reid. R. (D.C.)
Grand Ledse:  Hath  way.

Chas. E. (D.C.)
Shane, O. D. (D.O.)
Grand Rapids: Ash & Ash,

Monroe and Division Sts.

Ash. Wayne E., 118 E.

Fulton  St.  (D.C.)
Ash. Mrs. Wayne E.,  118 E.

Fulton St. (D.C.)
Baker. Geo. W. (D.C.)
Barrett. Michael. (D.C.)
Bates, Zeroah C. (D.C.)
Baumgartner, Henry. (D.C.)
Beld, A. J., 1518 Roosevelt

Ave. (D.C.)
Bertrand. L. D., 12 Blume-

rich Ave. (D.C.)
Bonshire. Maude C. 165 E.

Fulton St. (D.O.)
Boo. Dr. W. H.. 9 Jefferson

Ave. (D.C.)
Brackel,  Walter  M. (D.C.)
Bradfleld. O. D. (D.C.)
Britton.  Maud E. (D.C.)
Brucato, Ignatio. (D.C.)
Carroll, Fay. (D.C.)
Caster. S. S. (D.C.)
Clark. Jed. C. (D.C.)
Connell. James. (D.C.)
Connell. Margaret F. (D.C.)
Daniels. Melville. Sheldon

Ave. (D.C.)
Dorr. Mrs. C. (D.C.)
Eberly. G. B. (D.C.)
Eld.  Tracy  E. (D.C.)
Fitzsimmons. W. Warren.

Garbowsky. David. (D.C.)
Golden. Julia. (DC.)
Goodsell. F. S.. 627 Sen-

brun Ave. (D.C.)
Grant, William E. (D.C.)
Green, R. J. (DC.)
Hall, Frances. (D.C.)
Hartwell, D. E. W., 284

Scribner St. (D.C.)
Hathway, Chas. E. (D.C.)
Heuman, Mrs. John. (D.C.)
Hoenicke,  Henry  J. (D.C.)


Huling, Ernest C. (DC.)
Husted, Norah. (D.C.)
Inslee, Mrs. Mary. (D.C.)
Jopson, Lelia. (D.C.)
Kellogg, O. J., c/o L. Tay-
lor,  R. F. D. No. 1. (N.D.)
Krass, D. A. (D.C.)
Kruse, Wm. (D.C.)
Landes. Samuel R.. 16 Mon-
roe St. (D.O.)
Lillie. L. D. (D.C.)
Lindley. Bessie. (D.C.)
Lofquest, H. A., White

Blk. (D.C.)
Mallette, Frank E. (D.C.)
McLachlan, Ben N.. 330

Norwood Ave. (D.C.)'
Michigan College of Chiro-
practic.  108  .Jefferson  Ave.
Mickle, G. E.. Metz Bldg.

Muncie. F. (D.C.)
Neumann, M.. Tlie Burle-
son Hotel. (D.O.)
Nixon. H. E.. 133 Mount

Vernon St. (D.C.)
Norman, George. (D.C.)
Norman, Viola. (D.C.)
Polaski, Joseph. (D.C.)
Provost, A. B., 45 Pearl St.

Roe. Dr. W. H.. 9 Jefferson

Ave. (D.C.)
Ruth. D. O.. 410 W. Bridge

St. (D.C.)
Shanahan, R. A.. Shanahan

Court. (D.C.)
Sheardown. Inez L. (D.C.)
Shery. .L J. (D.C.)
Shoemaker, Alma C. (D.C.)
Shoemaker. Paul A.. Porter

Blk. (D.O.)
Simons. J. C, 301 State St.

Soys. A. J. (D.C.)
Stinson. Sara. (D.C.)
Strehl. Gideon B. (D.C.)
Sweet. Chas. (D.C.)
Taylor. Ina. (D.C.)
Thomas.  W.  J. (D.C.)
Thompson. Eva  A. (D.C.)
Thompson. Margaret S..
68 Ransom St. (D.O.)
Thompson. Mark B. (D.C.)
Turner. Frances. (D.C.)
Van Horn, Mrs. Peter.

Varsey, G. E., 12  Cherry  St.

Wernette, J. J. (D.C.)
"Woerkum, A. Van, 734 W.

Fulton St. (D.C.)
Wynhoff. Bernardu.'s, 445
Eastern Ave. (D.C.)
Greenville: Baker, Geo. W..
101 S. Franklin St. (D.C.)
Root. Claude B. (D.O.)
Harbor SprinK.*i: Fuller. Mrs.
Chas. H. (D.C.)
Pontius. Arthur  R. (D.C.)
Hart: Dukes & Dukes. Drs.
Hill.  W. F. (D.O.)
Hartford: Scott, H. S., Mar-
quette Hotel. (D.C.)
Grilles, M. L., Stebben's
Bldg. (D.C.)
Hastings: Overstreet, C. M.
Simon. E. A. (D.C.)
Holland: Fredericks. Egbert.
62 E. 8th St. (D.C.)
Tuttle. Dr. Louis N. (M.D.)
HoiiKhton: Hurd. M. C, Citi-
zens' Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Howard City: Scoville, G. G.


Michigan


(i  cof/raplu'cal  Index


1017


Hcivell: Ingeisoll, F. E., Box  [

282. (D.C.)  I

Inila.v: Gate, E., Box 231.  j

(D.C.)  !

loiiiii: Fowle,  J.  J. (D.C.)  j

Oreen, Genevra W., 241 E.

Washing-ton St. (D.O.)  i

Hunt. David J. (D.O.)
Strong-, Bessie E. (D.O.)
Iron  Itivers Bozler,  Guy  H.

Iron>voo<I: Miles, Stanley.

Javkson: Bolhiuse,  Jacob.  ]

(D.C.)  I

Close,  Patrick  H.,  Sun  Bldg.

Greene, G. C, 201 First St.

Holcomb, Maude B., Cartel-

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Raine, Lula M., Merritt

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Raine, Wm. H. O., Merritt

Bldgr. (D.C.)
Raynor, Eug-ene E., Dwig-ht

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sclrwieger,  James Scott,  Sun

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Wilbur, Force. (D.C.)
Kalaninzoo: Baldwin, L.
Baldwin,  Z. I.. (N.D.)
Buff  ham, A. T. (D.C.)
Buffham, Edna P. (D.C.)
Buffham, Marg-aret. (D.C.)
Caverley,  W.  J. (D.C.)
Cooper, Clara, 4 Kalamazoo

Ave. (D.C.)
De  Long, L. H., 134 S. Bur-
dick St. (D.C.)
Glezen, R. A.. Kalamazoo

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Gunn, Glenn, 109 S. Bur-
dick St. (D.C.)
Hamilton, W. A. (D.O.)
Marion, Jennie M., 707 W.

Main St. (D.C.)
Marvin, Roy G. (D.C.)
Ohrne,  Aug-.,  734  W.  Willard

St. (D.O.)
Peebles, R. B., Kalamazoo

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Phillips, Keene B., Hansel-
man Bldg. (D.O.)
Phillips, Lloyd A., 154 S.

Burdick  St. (D.C.)
Piatt, Frances, Kalamazoo

Nat'l Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
Plumb, Gerald S. (D.C.)
Raine, IaiIu M., Blackstone

and Main Sts. (D.O.)
Russell, H. E. (D.C.)
Russell, Rose Day. (D.C.)
Show, G. H., Hanselman

Bldg. (D.O.)
Strouse, E. J., 607 Hansel-
man Bldg. (D.C.)
Warskow,  Bertha,  610

Doug-las Ave. (D.O.)
Wells. Alice S., 109 S. Bur-
dick  St. (D.C.)
Wells, Chas. L., 109 S. Bur-
dick St. (D.C.)
liaii.sin^: Barber, Andrew.
Bryan,  Harrison A., 913  Le-
nawee  St. (D.C.)
Dillingham, R. C. (D.C.)
Dougherty. Martha. (D.C.)
Egan,  K.  F., 310-12  Prudden

Bldg. (D.C.)
Farmer, Earl C. (D.C.)
Flanagan, Frank N. (D.C.)
.lackson, Charlotte M., Tus-

sing Bldg. (D.O.)
Rice, C. M.. 506 Tussing
Bldg. (D.C.)


Monroe


C. H.
Bldg.


Seelye, E.  A.,  Prudden  Bldg-.

Shane, W. S. (D.O.)
Symmond.'!, Wesley E., 277i
N. Washington Ave.
Vorhees, J. Martin, 114 Al-
legan  St. W. (D.O.)
Weeks, R. E. (DC.)
Wells Academy of Chiro-
practic. (D.C.)
Ijapeer: Kinney, Kenneth F.,
101 Fox  St. (D.O.)
Stuart, B. F., 110
St. (D.C.)
liauriuni: Shelters,
First Nat'l Bank
I.oiiia: Hubbell, D. A., Ill N.

Jackson St. (D.M.T.)
Lowell: Allen, Edgar. (D.C.)
Allen, Edna  M. (D.C.)
Rogers, L. (D.C.)
liiidin^ton: Augstron, G. H.,
508 E. Donahue  St. (D.O.)
Dunn, Frank. (D.C.)
T..annon, 111 W. I.,udington

Ave. (D.O.)
Lar.son, A. J., P. O. Bldg.

Miller, Earl A. (D.C.)
Wheeler, Glen B., Huston
Bldg. (D.O.)
Manoelona: Leiitholz, C. H.

Blanehe.ster: Arnott, Ella A.

Mani.stee: Baumg-ardner,  J.  A.
Burgomaster, J. A. (D.C.)
Jensen, P. S. (M.D.)
Soule, E.  C. (D.C.)
Maple Rid^e: Harvey, Lloyd

C. (D.C.)
Marquette: Bean, Merwin S.
Shorey, J. L., 129 E. Ridge

St. (D.O.)
Whitmore, J. P., Savings
Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
I  Marshall: Hart, Flora, 420 N.
High St. (D.C.)
Irish, Harry L. (D.O.)
! Miller, Jas. S., 134 State St.
W. (D.C.)
!>Iatta-»vaii: Gunn,  C. (D.C.)
Ulenoniinee: Nichols, F. S.,

4 Spies  Bldg. (D.C.)
Monroe: Egan, Joseph  M.
Jones, Burton J., 20

Front  St. (D.O.)
Reinhart, Clarence W.
Mt. Clemens: Howard, R.
Leahy,  Francis  J.,  St.  Joseph

Sanitarium. (N.D.)
Mather, E., 228 Gratiot

Ave. (D.O.)
Smith,  George  M.,  50  S.  Gra-
tiot St. (D.O.)
Mt. Pleasant: Downer, S. W.
McFarlane, Wm. J. (D.C.)
Reeves, Ernest E. (D.C.)
Mullett Lake: Starks, Fran-
ces. (D.C.)
Munsing-: Mason, Etta. (D.C.)
Muskegon: Garman, J. W.
1  (D.C.)


3-


E.


E.


Larson, A. J., 166 West

Western Ave. (D.C.)
Sweet, Frank I. (D.C.)
Ward, G. H. (D.C.)
Watkins, Homei- Earle, 43
W. Western Ave. (D.O.)
North  Branch: Robinson,  Geo.

H. (D.C.)
Onoway: Gregg, VV. B. (D.C.)
Owosso: Giffey,  Otto  E.  (D.C.)
Hannon, Frank S., 205

Washington St. (D.C.)
Howard, A. F. (D.C.)
Lesperenco, A. W. (D.C.)
Maliskey, Mr.s. W. C. (D.C.)
Rainey,  E.  Howard. (D.C.)
Ruddy, J. A. (D.C.)
Sheppard, C. L., 321 N.
Washington St. (D.O.)
Paw Paw; Van Vleek, A. E.

Pentwater: Matson, Hulda  M.

Petoskey:  Lockart,  E.  L.,  Lake
St. (D.C.)
Porter, Mrs. R. G. (D.C.)
Strehl, J. B. (D.C.)
I'enoonning: Wood, Geo. G.

Pontiac: Bark, Wm., Box 34.
Bauregard, Lillie V. (D.C.)
Courts, Lillian Josephine.

Charles, Elmer. (D.O.)
Giroux, Eliz. J., Marsh Blk.

Hale, Frank V., Crawford

Bldg. (D.O.)
Pratt, H. F., Oakland Ave.

Rumsev, O. V. (D.C.)
Strouse, E. J., 101 N. Sagi-
naw St. (D.C.)
Port Huron: Currier, W. H.,
307-9 Huron Ave. (D.C.)
De  Witt, James O. (D.C.)

Irving, Knill Blk.


D., Knill Blk.
935 Mili-

Meisel


Scoville, Lizzie.


Fleming,

Fleining,

Forrister, Rav  M.

tarv St. (D.O.)
Keen, R.  C. (D.C.)
Miller, Kate R.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Moon, E. C. (D.C.)
Wagner, Anna, 510-11 Mei-

sel Bldg. (D.C.)
Wernette, J. J. (D.C.)
Redford: Barnhart, Flora.

Rochester: Hughs,  Ray  "^V.

Roekford:

Romeo: Millay, E.

Maples. (D.O.)
Wright, Arthur J. (D.C.)
Sagrinaw: Cook, Chas. C,

Graebner  Bldg. (D.O.)
Doerr, Jno. P., 411-13 Kir-

by Bldg. (D.C.)
Eagle, R. O., 522 Genesee

St., Dept. 12. (D.C.)
Gates, Mable. (D.C.)
Hayden, Bruce L., Merrill

Bldg. (D.O.)
Jennings, J. H.,

Bldg. (D.C.)
Lyon, Chas. A.,

Blk. (D.C.)
McGavock, R.

mann Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith, W. F., 117 Franklin

St. (D.C.)


O., The


441 Kirby

206 Kirby

E.. Wiech-


1018


(ieographical  Index


Minnesota


Saint Joseph! Engetrom,

Beda  B. (D.C.)
Finn, L. E. (D.C.)
Fulton, Robt. (D.C.)
Maliskey, Mrs. W.  S. (D.C.)
Rogers, E. E. O., 615 Elm

St. (D.C.)
Zebelle, Reuben R. (D.C.)
Snult Ste. Maries Abrand,

Chas. A., Adams Bldg.

Barnes, H. M., Comb Bldg.,

Ashmon St. (D.C.)
McCall, Chas. (D.C.)
Foord, E. J., 327 E. Spruce

St. (D.C.)
Gates,  Mabel  C. (D.C.)
Howard. L.  M., 503 Ashmon

St. (D.C.)
Howard, Katherine C, 503

Ashmon  St.  (D.C.)
T.emon,  A.  E.  (D.C.)
Robbins, Genevieve, 341 W.

Portage  St.  (D.C.)
Robbins, William J.. 341  W.

Portage St. (D.C.)
Veyet, Leo. J. (D.C.)
Sheboygan: Moore, Agnes,

Main St. (D.C.)
South Branchi Sheldon, Rex

B. (D.C.)
South Saginaw: Sanford, Dr.

E.  P. (D.C.)

Sparta: Welbourne, Anna C.

SprinKPort: Pierce,  W.  R.

StanflLsh: Cross, Mrs. Chas.
Little, F. J. (D.C.)
Sterling:: Adams, Margaret C.
Ferth,  Jesse. (D.O.)
Jenkins, W. C. (D.C.)
Sturgrlsi Knabes,  B.  J. (D.C.)
Swartz  Creek: Harris  &  Har-
ris. (D.C.)
Todd, G. F. (D.C.)
Tawas City: Lyon, Chas. A.,

Huston Blk. (D.C.)
Tecumseh: Hilliker, Geo.

Traverse City: Smaltz, Mrs.
Alice, 247 Washington
St. (D.C.)
Swann, Ella. (D.C.)
Trueblood. John O., Wil-
helm Bldg. (D.O.)
Vickaburg: DeLong,  L.  H.
Fisher, J. Clyde. (D.C.)
Fisher, Myrtle N. (D.C.)
Walled I.akei McKnight, H.

F.  (D.C.)
AVatervllet: Clauser,  E.  T.

McNitt, Wm. S. (D.C.)
Polmanteer. L. E. (DC.)
Shiflet, R. J. (D.C.)
AVhite Cloud: Newitt & Ne-

witt. (D.C.)
Whitehall: Jensen,  W.  M.
Meinhardi, E. J. (D.C.)
AViliianiMton: Abbott, C. L.
Abbott, Guy. (D.C.)
Abbott. Leo. (D.C.)
Putnam, Ernest. (D.C.)
^Vyandotte: Dolson, Robt.

113 Biddel St. N. (D.C.)
Yale: Merrill. John H. (D.C.)
Ypsilanti: Ament, Lena D.
Garrett, J. C. Ypsilanti
Savings Bank Bldg.


Hoxey, M. A., 215 Wallace

Blvd. (D.C.)
Jansheski, S. R., Union

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lawton, Dr. c/o S. R. Jan-
sheski,  Cor. Congress and
Washington  Sts. (D.C.)
Major, Cordelia. (D.C.)
Mclntire, Chas. (D.C.)
Mclntire, Jessie. (D.C.)
Zeland: De  Jonge, Jno. J.


MINNESOTA

Adrian: Schoeberl,  J.  M.

Albert  Lea: La  Plount.  O.  W.
Kelley, Roger  P. (D.C.)
Wigglesworth. F. (D.O.)
Alden: Warwick,  W.  J. (D.C.)
Alexandria: McCabe, J. A.
Welton, A. M. (D.O.)
Appleton: Sanders, Wm., Box

433. (D.C.)
Au.stin: Albertson, W. H.,
Hirsh Bldg. (D.O.)
Chapman, W. A., 315 N.

Main St. (D.C.)
Cory, E. Ray, 407 N. Main

St. (D.C.)
Vavruska, Wm.. 904 E.
Water  St. (D.C.)
Bemidji: Dannenberg, A.,
First Natl. Bank Bldg.
Benson: Danelz. G. B. (D.O.)
Blue Earth: Horstad, Ezra
O., 101 6th and Moore
Sts. (D.O.)
Brainard: West. Geo. (D.C.)
Edwards. J. C, Suite 445
Hayes  Bldg. (D.C.)
Breckenridge: Johnson, W.
A., Gunn  Block. (D.C.)
Theurer, J. (D.C.)
Buffalo: Johnson, A. H.,
Myers Blk. (D.C.)
Werbes, Henry C, Route
No. 4 (D.C.)
Canhy: Anderson.  E.,  Box  623.
Cook. Phillip H. (D.C.)
Clara  City:  Nelson, C.  A.

Clements: Douglas, Wm. A.

Cloquet: Kinney.  M.  M.  (D.C.)
Cokato: Johnston, Francis

D. (D.C.)
Cotton-wood: Anderson &
Anderson. (D.C.)
Dahl & Dahl. (D.C.)
Crookston: Albertson, B. E.,
Room 20, Polk Co. State
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Kvitrud. E. F. (D.C.)
Kvitrud,  Henry.  Opera  Blk.,

Rooms  7-8. (N.D.)
Sharp. Fred J., Fournet
Blk. (D.O.)
Detroit  City:  Long.  L.  V.
Kankler, W. H., 505 Co-
lumbia Bldg. (D.C.)
Merry, Marian, 1528 E. 3rd

St. (D.O.)
Mitchell, Dr., 300 Columbia

Bldg. (D.C.)
Moffatt, Lillian May. Pro-
vidence  Bldg. (D.O.)


Riesland. D. W.. 707 Fal-

ladio Bldg. (D.O.)
Schoeppe, Paul von de,

Nelson Blk. (D.O.)
Stoel, Harry M., Torrey

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wentworth, Dr. Paul J.,
1509-11 E. Superior St.
Westlind, O. W.. 30 E.
Superior St. (D.O.)
DodKe Center: Belt, W. E.

Duluth: Beslin. Anna M..
1528 E. 3rd  St. (D.O.)
Bundy, Tra M., Y. M. C. A.

Crow, Clyde M., Suite 112,

Oak Hall Bldg. (D.C.)
Crow. Margaret, Suite 112,

Oak  Hall  Bldg. (D.C.)
Graham. Alexander, 500

Columbia Bldg. (D.C.)
Hutchinson,  Chas.  B..

Providence Bldg. (D.O.)
Parsons & Parsons. 808
Alworth Bldg. (D.C.)
Edvrards: Readfield, Sallie.

(D.C.)  ^ ^

Ellisville: Downmg, J. R.,

Box 15. (D.C.)
Emmons: Martin, Miss E. L.

Erskine: Denis. Geo. (D.C.)
Eveleth: Lorentzen, O. E. C.

Fairmont: Jones, Martha E.,
108 North  Ave. (D.O.)
Jones, Ray M., 108 North

Ave. (D.O.)
McCauley, Andrew, Peter-
sen Bldg. (D.O.)
Rehfeld. Hugo A., Martin
Co. Natl. Bank  Bldg.
Faribault: State, J. B., 629

Central Ave. (D.C.)
Fergus Palls: Anger, A.
Curtis: Jay L. (D.O.)
Forgeman. (D.O.)
Henderson, Gustave. Schadt
I  Block. (D.C. D.O.)

Solem. Harold. (N.D.)
FoKston: McCasland, H. E.,

Box 387. (D.C.)
Glenwood: Alexander,  Geo.  A.
Thouson, John, Box 5.
Granite  Falls: Alexson,  A. W.

Harmony: Bidder. E. F.

Hoffman: Hegna, Hans A.

Hutchinson: Wingfleld, Por-
tia J. (D.O.)
Jackson: Albright, A. T.
Bishop, S. B., 210 W.
Capitol St. (D.O.)
Jasper: Kickland, J. E.

Jordan: Metzner, Alf. (D.O.)
Ivenyon: Finseth, Anna M.
Henkel, Herbert M.. Box
302. (D.C.)
I.aniberton: Douglas, Wm. A.

liltohfleld: Ledell,  J.  A. (D.C.)
I.lttle Falls: Jergens, G. M.,
Security Bldg. (D.C.)


Minnesota


Geographical  Index


1010


Liivernei Hawkinson. J. W.,

Arcade Bldg-. (D.O.)
Hoy, Harry. (D.C.)
Kickland, Earle. (D.C.)
>Iankatot Jame.s, Juliet K.

James.  N.  G. (D.C.)
James, Fred. W., Kruse

Bldg-. (D.C.)
McVleery, Ben H. (D.O.)
Nerbovig^, C. H. (D.O.)
Paul, W. O. Henry, 126-30

E. Jackson  St.,  and 324 S.

2nd  St. (D.)
Sutherland. AVm. G., Box

345. (D.O.)
Solverud, Solief (D.C.)
Melrose: Borgett. Geo. V.

Million: Heath. Jas. A. (D.C.)
Minneota: Unzen. Henry.

D.C.)
Minneapolis: Allen. Arthur

E., Andru.s Bldg-.,  (D.O.)
Anunsen. Edward. 3019

I.yndale St. (D.C.)
Bartsch. Stella B.. 1031

25th Ave. N. E. (D.C.)
Bartsch. Walter P.. 1031

25th Ave. N. E. (D.C.)
Becker. Arthur D.. Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Beebe. M. K., Landour

Hotel. 1116 15th Ave.

Berg.  Walter  S.. 654  Temple

Court. (D.O.)
Bobo. R., 236 20th Ave.

Campbell, F., 2025 4th Ave.

S. (D.C.)
Carroll. J. C. 1904 Chicago

Ave. (D.C.)
Churchill. Geo. S.. Nicollet

House. (D.C.)
Covell. Martha A.. IJndley

Blk. (D.O.)
Davey. Flora M.. 375 E.

Grant  St. (D.O.)
-  Davis. Henry M.. 6205

Nicollet Ave. (D.O.)
Deckmann, W.. Plymouth

and Pennsylvania Aves.

North. (N.D.)
Devitt.  Delia  E.. 1030 Nicol-
let  Ave. (D.O.)
Flory, Wm. O., Medical

Blk. (D.O.)
Gale. Minnie. 2715 Stevens

Ave. (D.C.)
Gebhardt, Mary O., Medical

Blk. (D.O.)
Gerrish. Clara Thomas.

Auditorium Bldg. (D.O.)
Grant. W. W.. 536 Boston

Blk. (D.C.)
Hagerty, V. Clinton. 314

Medical Blk. (D.C.)
Halvorsen. Helen S., Medi-
cal Blk. (D.O.)
Harte, Emma F., 1374

Spruce Place. (D.C.)
Heisser,  J.  H.,  3012  Hum-
boldt Ave. S. (N.D.)
Hilmer. E. R.. 1835 Bryant

Ave. (D.O.)
Hones. Louise A., 301

Hulet Bldg. (D.C.)
Johnson.  J. H.. 603  Main St.

N. E. (D.C.)
Jones. Louise, Hulet Blk.

Jorris. F. E.. Lindley Blk.

Keck. Eli W., 402 Loaming-

ton Hotel. (D.C.)
Kenney. Dwight J.. Andrua

Bldg. (D.O.)
Keyes, Leslie S.. Andrus

Bldg. (D.O.)


Knopp, Louis, 3329 lat St.

Koch, Margaret. 819

Masonic Temple. (Or.S.)
Langum, Henry. 2520

Como  Ave. (D.C.)
Larson, J. D.. 3225 Calhoun

Blvd. (D.O.)
Loeffler. Katherine A.,

Lindley Blk. (D.O.)
Loffler,  Chas. (M.D.)
Lynch. E. W.. 620 Temple

Court. (D.O.)
MacFarland. M.. 211 Meyers

Arcade (D  C  )
Magner, Ellen, 1030 Nicollet

Ave. (DO.)
Manuel. K. Jane. Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Martner. E. A. (D.C.)
Matson, Jesse E.. Plymouth

Bldg. (D.O.)
McClatchie, Miss A.. 3119

Colfax Ave. S. (D.C.)
Mitchell, W. H.. 12th St.

Mornkoba, S., 109 S. 9th St.

Murray, Frederick, 826

Hennepin Ave. (D.C.)
Nelson, Harriet A., Essex

Blk. (D.O.)
Oliver, Clifford C, Medical

Blk. (D.O.)
Orloff. Alexis S., 4520 Ave.

S. (N.D.)
Ouren. Irene Blssonette, 611

10th Ave. S. (D.O.)
Painter, W. J., 517 Medical

Block. (D.C.)
Paxton, Charle.s. 208 E.

Lake St. (D.C.)
Pickler. E. C, Palace Bldg.

Piatt. Reginald, 1770 Hen-
nepin Ave. (D.O.)
Pueblmann, W. F.. Meyers

Arcade. (D.O.)
Ramsey, H., 301 Evanston

Bldg. (D.C.)
Raymond. A. C. 1408 Ply-
mouth Ave. (D.C.)
Richardson, Flora May,

Auditorium Bldg. (D.O.)
Riches.  C.  "V\''.,  2832  2nd  Ave.

S. (D.O.)
Richter, T. F.. 37 12th St.

Ruehlmann. Mrs. W. F.,

Myers Arcade. (D.C.)
Rydell, John S., 1700 3rd

Ave. (D.O.)
Sargent. W. L.. 3349 30th

Ave. (D.C.)
Shegetero. Morikuba. 326

Skiles Bldg. (D.C.)
Shepherdson. Ida Jenkins.

4052 Garfield Ave. (D.O.)
Shepherdson. W. V., 4052

Garfield Ave. (D.O.)
Stevens. Dorothy J.. Audi-
torium Bldg. (D.O.)
Strand. J., 447 Loeb Arcade

Bldg. (D.C.)
Strand, O. F., 2445 Lvndale

Ave. S. (D.C.)
Strands, The, 447 I>oeb Ar-
cade  Bldg. (D.O.)
Sullwold, R., 521 Mar-
quette Ave. (D.O.) •
Thomsen, Dr., 4th Floor

Evanston Bldg. (D.C.)
Toffer. Chas., 527 Utica

Bldg. (DO.)
Vreeland. W. H.. 307 New-
ton Bldg. (DC.)
Wade, G. M., Andrus Bldg.

Wuerzinger, Henry. 405

Temple Court. (ST.)


Montevideo: Bates, Albert.

Shehy,  Josephine  M.  (D.C.)
Moorehead: Ellis, S. E. (D.C.)
Morsani Morgan, Frank.

Mountain I.,akei Pauls. Peter

D. (DO.)
Xorthfleld: Stover, S. H.

Taylor. Lily  F. (D.O.)
Olivia: Anderson  &  Anderson.

Owatonna: I^ewis, Emma A.,

205  N. Cedar  St. (D.O.)
Weeks. Holand F.. Parrott

& Smith Bldg. (D.O.)
Parker'.s Prairie: Werles,

Henry C. (N.D.)
Plllesar: Kaiser. Frank.

Pine City: Fritzen, Mrs.

Minnie. (N.D.)
Perry, M. A. (D.C.)

Pipestone: Vosburgh. H. D.,

Box 349. (D.O.)
Plainview: Perry, Grace I.

Pre.ston: Becker, Ethel L.

Red  TVIngr:  Gilmore. C.  *H.
Hawkins. E. W., Gladstone

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sargent. Fred. W. (D.C.)
Thoreson. Anna O., Phillips
Art Bldg. (D.C.)
Red-wood  Falls: Leonard  S.  L.

Rochester: Evans, John G.,
3085 S. B'way. (D.O.)
Haven. C. Margaret. 1145
Broadway. (D.C.)
Ronnebys Dedrick. S. C, Nat'l
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Greener. Ivan N., Benton
Co. (D.C.)
Sank  Center:  Gales, A. A.

Sebeka: Dowd, Ella  M. (D.C.)
Sleepy Eye: Butt, John H.,
Main St. (D.C.)
Butt, Mrs. Pauline, Main
St. (D.C.)
Sprinja:  Valley:  Petersen,  P. D.

St.  Charles: Bunn, H. G.

St. Clair: Foster & Foster.

St. Cloud: Farnham, James
McKay. (D.O.)
I.,ewis, Agnes. Farmers

State Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith. M. L. (D.C.)
Vogt. H. C. (D.C.)
St. James: Johnson. Geo. L.

Stillwater: Taylor. Arthur,

Torinus Blk. (D.O.)
St.  Paul:  Abramsen,  Elmer  C.,
603 Case  St. (N.D.)
Anderson. Victoria, Pitts-
burgh Bldg. (D.O.)
Beckstrum. J. A.. 321 Am.

Nafl Bldg. (D.O.)
Borup. Georgia W., Pitts-
burgh Bldg. (D.O.)
Bunde, Wm. G.. 236 Endi-

cott Bldg. (D.C.)
Chamberlin. I. A.. 85 Delos

St. (D.O.)
Corbett. C. L.. 435 Collins

St. (D.C.)
DeWitt. C. W.. 183 Nelson
Ave. (D.C.)


1020


Geof/raplu'cal  Indc.r


Mississippi
Missouri


Eckley,  Wm.  H.,  American
Nat'l Bank Bldff. (D.O.)

Fredburg-.  O.  B.,  1035  Mar-
shall  Ave. (DO.)

GeiKer,  .T.  .1.,  549  Canada  St.

Giss,  A.  J..  208  I.,oury  An-
nex. (N.D.)

Hammerle,  P.  W.,  Phoenix
Block. (D.C.)

Ho.stPtt,  M.  J..  341  Dale  St.

Hubbell, Dr. Eugene (M.D.)

Know] ton.  C.  P.,  N.  T.  Life
Bldg:. (DO.)

Loffler, Chas. (M.D.)

Miller,  M..  8fi6  Duluth  Ave.

Morreim,  Gerard  M.,  299
Snelling- Ave. (D.C.)

Olson,  G.  W.,  First  State
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

Parker,  F.  D.,  N.  Y.  Life
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Pedicord, C. A., Dean, St.
Paul College of  Chiro-
practic, 303 Baltimore
Bldg. (D.C, Ph.C, D.)

Pollock,  Clifford  S.,  Pitts-
burg  Bldg. (D.O.)

Powell,  Ernest  S.,  N.  Y.
Life  Bldg. (D.O.)

Price,  Mrs.  B.  M.,  820  Ohio
St. (D.C.)

Stadius. Otto. 785 7th St.
(D.M.T.)

Stein, Minnie. (D.C.)

Stern.  G.  M.,  409  Lowry
Annex. (D.O.)

Stoppe,  H.  M.  &  W. (Ma.)

Stoppe,  W.  W.,  301  Lowry
Annex. (D.C.)

St.  Paul  College  of  Chiro-
practic, 183  Nelson  Ave.

Upton,  Chas.  A.,  N.  Y.  Life
Bldg. (D.O.)

Vreeland,  W.  H.,  211  Lowry
Annex. (D.C.)

Young,  C.  W.,  Pittsburg
Bldg. (D.O.)

Zettel, Herbert A., Schiff-
man Bldg. (N.D.)

Zettel, H. A., 611 Ashland
Ave. (D.O.)
Thief  River  Falls:  Strand,  Joe.

Truxell & Truxell. Suite 4,
Union Blk. (D.C.)
Tracy: Anderson. E. (D.O.)
A'irKinia:  Watson,  Ruth,

First Nat'l Bank Bldg.
AVabash:  Dixon,  L.  M. (D.C.)
AVadena: Egleston, .T. L.

(Opt.)
"Walker; I>undc, Tliorwald,

Box 266. (D.C.)
Watertowii: Bart.sch, .Waltei-

F. (D.C.)
Wells: State. J. B. (D.C.)
Torkelson, Ida G. (D.O.)
Went Duluth: Von De
Schoeppe, Nelson Blk.
>\'hea4oii: Anderson. .T. W.

Willmer: Coss. L. E. (D.C.)
Winona: Berg,  E.  C. (D.C.)

Graham.  Frank  F.,  Choate
Bldg. (D.O.)

Vavruska, W'm., 227 E. 3rd
St. (D.C.)
W'orthlnstoni Crosbv, E. M.

/umbrotai Hall, S. P. (D.O.)

Larson,  C.  L. (D.O.)


MISSISSIPPI

Aberdeen:  Staines,  Robt. W.

Arnold:  Lcland,  A. L. (D.C.)
Bellflo^ver: Perkins, J. W.

niloxl: Bullas, Grace. (D.O.)
Campbell, J. D., Box 346.

Iliff, Lena, Biloxi Health

Resort. (D.C.)
Brookfleld: Trasier, E. L.

Brookhaven: Chamberlain, I.

L (D.O.)
Broivnvllle: Givens,  V. R.

(DC.)
Carry vllle: Ayers. S. H.

Chamois: Sellenscheutter, W.

Clarksdale: Bynum, H. R.,

Hotel Alcazar. (D.O.)
Climax Sprinifs: Edwards,

Joseph M. (D.C.)
Columbia: Jaeger.  Mr. &  Mrs.

Gustave. 17 S. 7th St.

Thompson, Daisy, Elvira

Bldg. (D.C.)
Thompson, T. F., Elvira

Bldg. (D.C.)
Columbus: Roberts, J. F.

(DO.)
Pennington, H. A. (D.C.)
Edtvards: Redfield, Sallie.

Elll.sville: Downing, J. R.,

Box 15. (D.C.)
Greenville: Cooper, Imogene

B. (D.O.)
Gnlfport: Iliff, Lena. 1715

25th Ave. (D.C.)
Holly Sprinprs: Tupper, An-
nie  Laurie. (S.T.)
Jackson: Bishop.  S.  B.,  210  W.

Capitol St. (D.O.)
Clark, R. T. (D.C.)
Price. R. L.. Merchants'

Bank Bldg. (DO.)
Skidwell,  May  Van. (D.C.)
Meridian:' Farthing. Ollie C,

Rosenbaum Bldg. (D.O.)
New  Hebron: Bloom,  I. (D.C.)

Griffith, L. L. (D.O.)
West Point:  Staines, P. S.

Unger. J. W. (M.D.)
Yazoo  City: Shipp,  J. D., Box

338. (D.C.)


MISSOURI

Adrian: Blach, Ellen. (S.T.)
Albany: Lane, Charles Allen.

Aurora: Hadlej'. .John W.

Brown & Hanlin. 4-5 Wil-

-son Bldg. (D.C.)
Hutchinson, H. F. (D.O.)
Au.v Vasse; Peloubet, Helen

R. (D.O.)
Ava: Burford, D. E. (D.C.)
Barlne: Farnsworth,  A.  M.

Bellflower: Perkins,  J.  W.

Benton City: Hofsess, Mary

M. (D.O.)


Rutherford


201


L.


Bethany: Beets,
H. (D.O.)
Harding,  H. F. (D.O.)
Boi^ard: Kirby, Geo. W.

Boonvllle: Barnet, John Am-
brose, Citizens' Trust Co.
Bldg. (D.O.)
Humfcld, Julius S., 223J

Main St. (D.C.)
Strand & Strand. (S.T.)
Bowline Green: Fitzgerald.

F. W. (D.C.)
Braymer: Healy.  F.  H.,  Bray-

mer Bee Bldg. (D.O.)
Brookfleld: Deeming, M'. .T.
Olsen, B. H., Francis Bldg.

401  S. Monroe  St. (D.C.)
Trasier, E. L. (D.C.)
Browning: Drew, Howard A.

Butler: Lampton, "Wilson E..
Farmers' Bank  Bldg.
Cameron: Baker,  H.  N. (D.O.)
Munsell, Mrs. Clara S.
Cape Girardeau: Bohnsack,
Anita E., H. H. Bldg.
Cunningham. Rex E.. Him-
melberger-Harrison
Bldg. ((D.O.)
List. Adolph. (S.T.)
Whitnell.  H.  W. (S.T.)
Carrollton: Foster, B. W
S. Main St. (DC.)
Smith, J. M. (D.O.)
Carthase: Chamberlin, G.
Harris, Frances W., 1007

Grant St. (D.O.)
Moore, H. B., 6th and  I>yon

Sts. (D.O.)
Wolf, Truman. (D.O.)
Cas-sville: Smith, L. R. (S.T.)
(^entralia: Kesler. G. B.

Chamois:
Saak, H. A. (D.O.)
Sellenschuetter, W
Chillicothe: Harwood, H
Seiser Bldg. (D.C.)
Phelps. T. G.. Washington

St. (D.O.)
Rodgers, Rav W.. 618
Washington  St. (D.C.)
Clayton: Meyer, F. J., St.
Louis County Bank Bldg.
Climax Springs:
Jos.  M. (D.C.)
Clinton: Black, L.
C^Jovington: R. Tj.
Laney,  A. T. (S.T.)
Russell, Chas. G., Citizens'
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
rolumbia: Cole, J. B., Haden
Bldg. (D.O.)
.Jaeger, Mr. & Mrs. Gustav,

17  S. 7th  St. (D.O.)
Thompson, Daisy. (D.C.)
Thompson. T. F., Elvira
Bldg. (D.C.)
•footer: Payne. L. P. (S.T.)
'^urry^'ille: Ayers, S. H.
(DC.)
Brown,  L. G. (D.C.)
Pennington,  H. A. (DC.)
Dalton: Fetzer, J. L. (D.O.)


Marquard, Henry.


A.


H.


Edwards,


M. (D.C.)


Missouri


Gpogntphicdl  Indr.v


1021


I>o  Soto:  Cook, H. K. (D.C.)
Phillips, J. Marshall. (D.O.)
Saak, H. E., 304-a S. Main
St. (D.C.)
KiiNt  St.  liouis:  Emanuel,  Wm.

H., 1(110 State St. (D.C.)
KIdorndo SpritiK^^s Knopp, I.i.
Turner, Everett  J. (D.C.)
E}lvin: Elsman, E., R. No. 1.

E.voelsior Springs: McCaskey,
Ijaura, 115 Saratoga St,
Leonard, L. W. (S.T.)
Worrell, Benj. W. .T. (D.C.)
Exetert Abbott, Dr. O. C.
Wilhelm,  A.  C. (S.T.)
FnrniinKtont Cannon,  P. J.
Wilbanks, B. J. (D.O.)
Wood, R. B. (D.O.)
Fayette: Simpson, E. C.

Faycttevllle: McPhail, D.

Festus: Miller,  Harry  I.,  Far-
mers & Merchants Bank
Bldg-. (D.O.)
Flat River: Droage, Mrs,

Lena. (S.T.)
Flint:  Robinson,  T.  J.  T., 1987

Ravina Ave. (D.C.)
Fulton: Weng-er, H. U., 804

Court St. (D.O.)
Galliton: Adams, Florence.

Glasgo-»v: Bedell, Minnie Mil-
ler. (D.O.)
Hannibal: Bell,  John  A.,  Han-
nibal Trust Bldg:. (D.O.)
Bull, Martha  A., 617 B'way,

Fidelity Bldg-. (D.C.)
Bull, Wm. D., 617 B'way,

Fidelity Bldg. (D.C.)
Cain,  Philip  R.,  609-a  B'way

Millhizer, Robt. (D.C.)
Harris: Craigie, Margaret

Anne. (D.O.)
Hi^einsville: Williamson, J,

G. (D.O.)
Holden: De  Long, Raymond
L., Bank of Holden Bldg.
Young,  Mrs.  L,  P, (S.T.)
Hume: Brooks, M. N. (S.T.)
Hurdland: Howerton, Mattie

Coleman. (D.O.)
Illmo: Hillman, Gustav,

Independence: Agee, Purl M.,
Clinton Bldg. (D.O.)
Barco, Viola, 15 Owens

Bldg. (D.C.)
White, Claud V., Carl
Bldg. (D.O.)
Jefferson City: Browning,
Wm. N., 402-a B. High
St. (S.T.)  i

Hendrix, C.  E. (D.C.)
Thompson, Th. Fra., Mer-
chants' Bank  Bldg. (D.C.)
Walker, Edith D. (N.D,)
Joplln: Black, A. Lincoln,
Frisco Bldg. (D.O,)  <

Cox, Martha S.. 910 W, 7th

St. (D.O.)  1

De  Cardoville, A, V. (D.O.)
Dickey, Ottis L., Frisco

Bldg. (D.O.)  !

Gallagher & Long, Drs.,
401i Frisco  Bldg. (D.C.)


, Flor-

B'way.

Lillis

Wood-


E. 40th
L., Re-


Howe, Bert. F., 522 Main

St., Room 11. (D.C.)
Miller, C. W., Miners Bank

Bldg. (D.C.)
Raymond, Margaret T.,

Frisco  Bldg. (D.O.)
Sollars, G. W., 1.'501 Joplin
St.,  and 162G Pearl St.
Smith, W. Dean, Bartlett

Bldg. (D.C.)
Strickland, O. M., 702 Main

St. (D.O.)
Tait,  Beulah  Long. (D.C.)
Tait, ,T. B. (D.O.)
Whitaker, R. T. (S.T.)
Kahoka: Pauly, Walter F.,

Myres Bldg. (D.O.)
Kansas City: Adams,
ence M. (D.C.)
Aldero, H. J., 1209

Ashe, D. Raymond,

Bldg, (D.O,)
Bergin, P. J., 512
land Ave. (D.O.)
Bishop,  R.  B. (M.D.)
Britt, Florence C. (D.O.)
Buskirk, Mrs. S. E., 1820

Penn. St. (S.T.)
Callis, G. T., 1214

St. (D.C.)
Carroll, Margaret

serve Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Case, John Morton, 330 Ord

St. (S.T.)
Chiropractic Institute of

Kansas City. (D.C.)
Clark, G. B., 2456 Tracy

Thos. F. (Ph.C,  D.C.)
O. N., 2417 Forrest


Coleman, E. H., 4345 Agnes
Ave. (D.C.)
Geo.
W. J
Emma S., Wald-
heim Bldg. (D.O.)
Craig, A. Still, 3030 Tracy

Ave. (D.O.)
Crosby & Reid

St. (D.O.)
Davidson, B. E
Dawson, B, E.,

St, (Or.S.)
Duglay, H. A.,

Bldg. (D.O.)
Field, A. E., 308 Dearborn

Bldg. (D.C.)
Fite, Lewis, 3335 Paseo St.

Harwood, Mary
Kupper. (D.O.)
Hinkle, J. D.,
pendence Ave
Hodges, V. G. (M.D.)
Hubbard, John C. 2t;th

and  Wyandotte  Sts. (D.C.)

Johnson, Mrs. Mamie R.,

General Delivery. (S.T.)

Johnson, Ora Alexander,

Raymond Bldg. (DO.)
Kaiser, A. A., Shukert

Bldg. (D.O.)
Kjerner, Samuel H., M'ald-

heim Bldg. (DO.)
Lane, S. W., 202 Missouri

Bldg, (D.O.)
Leinbach. Hannah, Reserve

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Leinbach, Sara J., 3336

Woodland  Ave. (DO.)
Livingston. Ina Patterson,

Ridge Bldg. (D.O.)
Livingston, L. R., Ridge

Bldg. (D.O.)
Logan. S. W.. Waldholm
Bldg. (D.O.)


Ave.
Clark,
Clark,

Ave.


Conley,
Bldg.

Conner,
Bldg.

Cooper,


J., Shukert
., Commerce


222 E. 11th

101 E. 30th

Waldheim


E., Hotel


4104 Tnde-


Lowe, .Tames L., Woolf

Bros.  Bldg.  (D.O.)
Loy, Geo., lOOfi Woodland

Ave. (S.T.)
Lynd, W. Brucf-, .'14 Ridg<-

Arcade, (N.D.)
Martin, Claude W., Com-
merce Bldg. (D.O.)
McDermott. Mi.ss,  3211

Chestnut Ave. (S.T.)
McKenzie, Lillian V., Bry-
ant  Bldg. (D.O.)
Ozias, Chas. A, (M.D.)
Parker, John Watts, New

Ridge  Bldg.  (D.O.)
Paynter, John E., 3309

Troost  Ave.  (D.C.)
Perdue,  B.  M.  (D.O.)
Purdom, T. B., Westover

Bldg. (DO.)
Purdom. Zudie P., West-
over  Bldg. (D.O.)
Robeson, David Loran,

Commerce  Bldg. (D.O.)
Spies, L. Elizabeth, 3600

Troost  Ave.  (D.O.)
Stottenberg, Anna L,, 3816

Troost  Ave.  (D.O.)
Swan, Wm. A., Central

Bldg. rD.C.)
Thorn, Henry, Room 201,
1012 Baltimore Ave.
Thorn, Howard, Room 201,
1012 Baltimore Ave.
Tice, Elbert A., Shukert

Bldg. (D.O.)
Trouten, Mae G., 1307 East

33rd St. (D.C.)
Tyler, Byron, 616 Wvan-
dotte St. (N.D.)
j Tyler, Byron Bryant, 618

Wyandotte St. (D.O.)
I Veazie, Ella B., Commerce
Bldg. (D.O.)
Webber,  M.  A., 1915 E. 10th
St. (D.C.)
i Williams, Robert H., New
i  Ridge Bldg. (D.O.)

I Willistaedt, L., Jr., 406 W.
I  18th St. (S.T.)

i Wilson, Bertha H., Brvant

Bldg. (D.O.)
; Yarema, S. B., 2612 Inde-
pendence Ave. (D.O.)
Zeckman, J. C. (D.C.)
Keytesville: Shande, L. W.,

Box 124. (N.D.)
King: City: Roberts, Frede-
rick S., Lyric Theatre
Bldg. (D.O.)
Kirksville: Bell, Adeline R.,
309 S. Franklin St. (D.O.)
Bigsby, Dr. F. L., Head-
quarters  of  A. S. O.
(M.D., D.O.)
Dodson, J. T. (D.O.)
Estes,  Geo. R. (D.O.)
Farren,  M.  E.,  715  "W.  Pierce

St. (D.O.)
Gerdine,  L.  Von H. (D.O.)
Halladay, H. Virgil, 316 S.

Franklin  St.  (D.O.)
Hamilton, R. Emmett, A. S.

O.  Hospital.  (D.O.)
Krill. John F., Box 357.

(DO.)
Laughlin, E. H. (D.O.)
Laughlin, Geo. M. (D.O.)
Medaris, Will O., A. S. O.

Hospital. (D.O.)
Northup, Anna  Elvira,  A. S.

O. Hospital. (D.O.)
Still,  Andrew  Tavlor. (D.O.)
Still, Chas. B. (D.O.)
Still, Ella  D. (D.O.)
Still. Geo. A. (D.O.)
Still, Harrv  M. (DO.)
Still, S. S. (D.O.)


1022


Geoyraphical  Index


Missouri


Tucker, Ernest E.. Ameri-
can School  of  Osteopathy.
(DO.)
Wallace. H. H., 515 W.

Pierce St. (D.O.)
Wieland, Clara G.. A. S. O.

Ho.spital. (D.O.)
Wyatt. Benj. F. (D.O.)
I>a Belle: McClain, Hattie R..

Lnninr: Bailev, S. L., Opera
Blk. (D.O.)
Thomson. Jas. C. (D.O.)
I-n Platnt Hardy.  J.  H. (D.O.)
I.ebnnon: Klippelt. J. R.,

IJng-.'^weiler Bldg-. (D.O.)
L<exini;ton: Kampf, E. J.,
Trader.s Bank  Bldg-.
Kappleman,  H.  A. (D.C.)
A\'a!.sh. .Taines, Ludeson
Clark, Sophia E.


Turner,
Bishop, S.  M.

Pierce, Clias.


Bldg-.
l/iberty:

l.inneusi  Turner, Dudley

Breed.
Iioek^vood;

Ijoulsianni

Sisson, J. H. (D.C.)
West, Jesse  A., 303 Georg-ia
St. (D.O.)
I/iiystoni Allen, Prof. J. H.

Mneks  Creek: Freeman,  A.  M.  i
(S.T.)  I

Itlaeon: Black, Byron I>.  I

Griffith, A. V. (D.O.)  '

Hildreth, A. G. (D.O.)
Hyatt. J. E.. 116| Vine St.

Moyer, J. G., Still-Hildreth

Sanatorium. (D.O.)
Sawyer, "Willis  Frank. Still-  ;
Hildreth Sanatorium.
Schoonmaker. Amv B.,

Warden Bldg-. (D.O.)
Siegert, Anna  M. (D.O.)
^Vhitfield. J. Jay, Still-Hil-
dreth Sanatorium. (D.O.)
Mnitland: Spang-le, Clvde B.

llanette: Otterman,  J.  H.

Marceline: Oyler,  Thos.  C.
Stuver, Willis N., State
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Mar.«liall: Bennett. Silas M.,
Farmers Saving's Bank
Bldg-. (D.O.)
Berry, John M., Marshall

Bldg. (D.O.)
Murdock. Herman. (D.C.)
Nuckles, Geo. T. (D.O.)
Scherer.  John,  312  N.  Jeffer-
son  St. (D.C.)
Marthaavilie: Hinnah. I>oui-
se C. (D.C.)
Morhaus, F. C. (D.C.)
Saak. H. A. (D.C.)
Maryvllle: I.ining-er. W. J  .

409J  N.  Main  St. (D.C.)
MemphiHi Benson, O. N.
Keethler. A. M. (D.O.)
Mexico: Hickman,  W.  H.,  Pas-
quith  Bldg. (D.O.)
Turley.  H.  T.,  302  W.  Monroe
St. (D.O.)
Milan: Simons. Clavton By-
ron. First Nat'l Bank
Bldg. (D.O.)
Swift. E. H. (D.C.)
Moberly: Dothage. E. A., 223
S. \Villiams St. (D.C.)


Jaeger, Gustav, 602 Payton

St. (D.C.)
Kauffman, Elizabeth, 402J

Reed St. (D.O.)
Kirk. Morris G., 210i N.

Williams St. (D.O.)
Martz. Del. O'Keefe Bldg.

Monroe  City:  Scobee.  Jephta
D., Proctor Bldg. (D.O.)

-MontKomeryi  Lealie,  James
T. (M.D., DC.)

Morrl.svllle:  Hellam,  I.,vdia.

Mosco^v  Mills;  Schrader,  Mi-s.
B. V. (S.T.)

Mound City: McCaskey,
Laura. (D.C.)
Rogers. Ida M. (D.O.)

Mountain Grove: Pouty,
Henry M. (D.O.)

Ml. Vernon: Perrv. Jennie.
White.  Grace  G. (D.O.)

Mt. Zion: North, Mrs. Alice.
MavTty, Bertram J., 130
N.  Cedar  St. (D.O.)

Neosbia: Ferg-uson, E. Ger-
trude, Gitting^s Bldg.

Nevada: Berry, Benj. F., c/o
The Weltmer Institute
of Suggestive Therapy
Coons.  M.  E.,  c/o  The  Welt-
mer  Institute of Sug--
gestive Therapy. (D.S.T.)
Crone, J. O., c/o The Welt-
mer Institute of Sug-
gestive Therapy. (D.S.T.)
Ferry,  Nelle.  (D.O.)
Koran, Miss Eleanor, 327

W. Arch St. (N.D.)
Weltmer, Ernest, c/o  The
Weltmer Institute of
Suggestive Therapy.
(D.S.T.)
Weltmer, J. E., c/o The
Weltmer Institute of
Sug-g-estive Therapy.
(D.S.T.)
Weltmer,  Sidney  A.,  c/o  Tlie
Weltmer Institute of
Suggestive Therapy.
(D.S.T.)
Weltmer, T. C, c/o The
Weltmer Institute of
Suggestive Therapy.
(D.S.T.)

Ne-w  Franklin: Burrus,  Madi-
son  Cooper. (D.O.)
Dothage,.  E. A. (D.O.)

IVe-^v  Haven:  Kappleman,  H.
A. (D.C.)

'Sew  Mllle: Rukmers, Irene.

Xorth  Webb  City:  Downing.
R. B. (D.C.)

Odes.sa:  Britt,  Florence

Schaepe, Box 142. (D.O.)

Oregon:  Black,  Emma,  Box
135. (D.O.)

Owensville: Huxall, H. P.

Paris: Gabbert, A. J. (S.T.)
Rodes, T. T. (S.T.)
Svler, Harry B., R. No. 1.

Perry^'ille: Stieber, Franz.

Plattsbura-: Pennock. P. H.

Pleasant  Hilli  Elkins.  Geo.
S.. Stillwell Bldg. (D.O.)

Poplar  Bluff:  Barrett.  Gordon
W..  Bank  of  P.  B.  Bldg.

Portland: I..adman, Geo.


Princeton: Johnson, Oscar

E., Box 102. (D.O.)

Mc Williams,  R.  M. (D.C.)

Purcelli Dickie. W. A. (DC.)

Readville: Huckeby,  Miss  Ora

Reeds: Yarbrough, Rev. Geo.

Republic: Fike, F.  J. (D.O.)
Richmond: Cameron, Edward

M. (D.O.)
Ridge^vay: (^ilmore,  S.  J.

Rock Port: McKinney, I>ula

L. (D.O.)
Rosendale: Smith, Elmer.

Salisburj-: Eichhorn, E. 1j.

Savannah: Bunker, M. N.
Eisiminger.  Lenia. (D.O.)
Sedalia: Hain,  H.  S..  206  Ohio
St. (D.O.)
Harris. Katherine, 1101 Ets

St. (D.O.)
Hentges. Herman H., 321 J

S.  Ohio  St. (D.C.)
O'Bryan, C. L.. 611 W. 4th
St. (D.O.)
Seymour: Smith, Geo. F., S.

Side Square. (D.O.)
Shelbina: Moore, Ernest  Mcl-

vin, Box 311. (D.O.)
Sikeston: Hunter,  V. D.,  Citi-
zens' Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
Skidmore: Bilby. Ray. (D.C.)

Skidmore, W. J, (D.C.)
Slater: Smith,  J.  W.,  Box  858,

Speed: Eng-lish, C. Forrest.

Springrfleld: Blackler, Ronald.
Fenter, Mrs. L. M., Nat'l

Bank  Bldg. (D.C.)
Hunter, L. S., 518 Baker

Bldgr. (D.C.)
James, I. L., Holland Bldg.

Johnson, Mrs. Wm. H.. R.

No. 3. (S.T.)
King. T. M.. Landers Bldg.

McCarty & McCarty. (D.C.)
Noland.  Lou  T.,  Baker  Bldg.

Pettefer, A.. Holland Bldg.

Robberson, Susie Belle,
1204 N. Jefferson St.
Stanberry: Hoecker. Mary.
Zachary, B. J. (D.C.)
St. Chariest Humfeld, Julius.
Ritter. H. C, 516-a  Clay  St.

Wilson,  Wm.  C,  216  N.  Main
St. (D.O.)
St. Genevieve: Sampson, Mrs.
Annie K. (S.T.)
Thomure, Mrs. Sophie.
St.  Joseph: Beets.  William  E..
Logan Bldg. (D.O.)
Corbin,  S.  W., Lincoln Bldg.

(Or.S.)
Disque, Andrew A., 2706

Folson St. (Opt.)
Forgrave. L. R.. Logan

Bldg. (Oph.)
Fulkerson. Perry, 840 N.

25th St. (Oph.)
Groh. Will W.. Logan

Bldgr. (D.O.. D.C.)
Hedgpath, T. H., Logan

Bldg. (D.O.)
Holme. E. D., Balllngrer
Bldg. (D.O.)


Montana


Geoqrdphical  Index


1023


flurpit. Anna Holmo, Ballin-

f?ei- Bldg. (D.O.)
Kenny, W. L., Commercial

J^ldg. (Opt.)
Kimball.  W.  F.,  706  Edmond

St.  (Opt.)
l.eonaid,  P.  I.,  710i  Felix  St.

l.vman, N., Ballinger Bldg.

(Opt.)
Morvine, I. W., Balling-er

BIdg-. (D.C.)
Minton,  W.  H.,  King  Hill

Hldg. (Opt.)
IVterman,  C.  M., 308  Bast

Colorado Ave. (D.C.)
Pitt.s, Bardon, 8th and

Francis Sts. (Oph  ■>
Proud, W.  C,  Tottle-Lemon

Rank Bldg. (Opt.)
Reese, Julia. (D.C.)
Renaud, K. C, 803 i Francis

St. (Opt.)
Walker,  Frank  P.,  Ballinger

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Walker, W.  W., Commer-
cial  Bldg. (D.C.)
Weed, O. G., Corby Forsee

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wertenberger, W. W.,

Corby-F Bldg. (Oph.)
Whitsell. John C, Com-
mercial Bldg. (Oph.)
AV^oodworth, W. R., 120 S.

8th St. (Opt.)
Worden, F. V., 615 N. 22nd

St. (D.O.)
Yeamans, E. B., 717 Elmon

St. (S.T.)

St. IjOuLs: Anlepp, W. C, c/o

W.  J.  Lamp  Brew.  Co.

Bailey, Homer Edward,

Frisco  Bldg. (D.O.)
Bailey, W^alter Edward,

Frisco  Bldg. (D.O.)
Beckham, Jas. J., Chemical

Bldg. (D.O.)
Boerger, P. H., 2116 Harris

Ave. (D.C.)
Brady, Edw. Francis, Fide-
lity  Bldg. (D.C, N.D.)
Christian, F. A., 406 S. 7th

St. (N.D.)
Buddecke, Bertha A., 3rd

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Bunting,  E.  T.,  3011  Vincent

Ave. (S.T.)
Carter, W. A., 701 Houser

Bldg. (S.T.)
Chamblin, Bayliss, 2427 N.

Grand Ave. (D.O.)
Chappell,  Nannie  J.,  Central

Nat'l Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Commerford, Mary Eliza-
beth, 5179 Delmar Blvd.

Conner, H. L., Central Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Conwell, W. P., 806 North

7th St. (N.D.)
Crehore, Mary Alice, 4237

Olive St. (D.O.)
Culley, Albert B., Central

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Davies,  Samuel. (D.C.)
De  France, Josephine, Com-
mercial Bldg. (D.O.)
Dieckmann, J. E., 1705-a

Union  Ave. (D.C.)
Dobson, W. D., Century

Bldg. (D.O.)
Douglas, Tj., 1317 Prairie

Ave. (D.C.)
Dulla, B., 3529 Harper St.

Eckert. W. H., Century

Bldg. (D.O.)
Edwards, Alfred, Century

Bldg. (D.O.)


Edwards,  James,  Century
Bldg. (D.O.) ^ ^ ..

Edwards,  James  D.,  Suite
408, Chemical Bldg.

Englehart. W. P., Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Farris, L. E., Chemical

Bldg. (D.O.)
Fullmer, Jacob, 3511 S.

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Gobel, Bertha A., 3fi4-a Ar-

.senal  St. (D.O.)
Goetz, Herman F., Century

Bldg. (D.O.)
Goin, C. F., 4226 Virginia

Ave. (D.C.)
Goin, Frank. 636 Wayne

Ave.,  and  4447-a  Nebraska

Ave. (S.T.)
Hafner, L. S., 221 Detmer

Bldg. (D.O.)
Harris, Mae S. (M.D.)
Hatten, J. O., 616 N. Taylor

Ave. (D.O.)
Heim, Fred., 1905 Lanie St.

Hermeling, W. H., 4456

Margaretha Ave. (D.C.)
Hulick, Miss Harriet C,

509  N.  Newstead  Ave.

(Me.)
Jones, T. D., Mermod &

Jaccard Bldg. (D.O.)
King, A. B., Third Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Kirsch, Francis M., 2860

Union Blvd. (D.O.)
Klockle, Mrs. Sophie, 702

Bittner St. (D.C.)
Koch. E. F., 3605 Delmar

Blvd. (D.C.)
Kohlbusch,  E.  W., 3605  Del-
mar Blvd. (D.C.)
Kuester. F. L.. 3514  Morgan

St. (D.C.)
Loper. Mathilda E.. 3rd

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Meyer, Julia  A., 858 Hamil-
ton Ave. (M.D.)
Miller. O. S., 8109 Garische

Blvd. (D.C.)
Morar. Chas. J.. 701 Hou-
ser Bldg. (S.T.) '
Mundorff. J. J., 615 Locust

St. (D.O.)
Myers. Jno. B., 108  Vine St.

Nichols, Adrian D., Frisco

Bldg. (D.O.)
Nichols, Joe H., 4138 N.

Newstead Ave. (S.T.)
Oldeg, Harry W., Mermod

and Jaccard Bldg. (D.O.)
Orr.  Arlowyne,  Central  Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Ottofy, L. M. (D.O.. M.D.)
Rav.  L.  William,  New  Grand

Central Bldg. (D.C.)
Rohlflng. Charles. 4049 St.

Louis Ave. (N.!D.)
Saxe  & Saxe, 5148 Page

Blvd. (D.C.)
Schaub. Minnie, Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (DO.)
Schmoll, S., 2615 Potomac

St (ST)
Schwenker,  L.  H.,  4307  Man-
chester Ave. (D.C.)
Scott, Miss Addle, 1200 S.

Ewing St. (S.T.)
Seton, Julia. (M.D.)
Stephens,  Genoa  D.,  Century

Bldg. (D.O.)
St. Louis Chiropractic Col-
lege. (D.C.)
Trowbridge,  C.  W..  St.  Louis

College. Cor. Jefferson St.

and  Gamble Ave. (D.C.)


Weber,  Caroline L., Century

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wiesner, B. J., 2116 Russell

Ave. (Or.S.)
Williams, Dorothea E. J.

Wondrackek, Wm. J., 4403

Arce Ave. (D.C.)
Wood, F. P., Century Bldg.
Steedniant Bezler,  Guy. (D.C.)
Tnrkio: Burch & Burch.
Burch, Harley  R. (D.C.)
Paul, Theodore. (J^.O.)
Tipton t Adair, S. P. (S.T.)
Trenton:  Carrier,  W.  A. (D.C.)
Herbert, Lulu J., Kress

Bldg. (D.O.)
Tracy, D. S., Trenton Trust

Bldg. (D.C.)
Tracy, Mrs. J. L.. Trenton
Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Unionvillet Fletcher. W. H.
Painter, E.  M. (D.O.)
Robinson, Chas. F. (D.O.)
Vandaliat Ash, M. E. (D.C.)
Bondurant,  L.  G. (D.C.)
Bull,  W.  D. (D.C.)
Fredericksen,  F.  E. (D.O.)
Moore. L. J. (D.C.)
Vatteredt. J. A. (D.C.)
Vera Cruz: Carver, Fred.

Warren.sbnrg: Black, Clar-
ence  H. (D.C.)
Drake,  Mrs.  W.  L. (S.T.)
AVashington: Clark, Edward
Kennedy. (D.O.)
Humfeld, Wm. C, Box 353.
Waverly: Jungermann. Miss

Emma. (S.T.)
Webb City: Dawning, R. B..
1221 N. Webb  St. (D.C.)
Dumbauld. Dr. B. A. (M.D.)
MaGee, F. E., O'Neill Bldg.

Schreiner.  John  S.  (D.O.)
Slaughter,  M.  S.,  P.  O.  Bldg.
AVeldon Springs: Fev,  L. M.

AVIiieten: Mitchel, Dr. John.

Willow  Spring.s: Hamilton,  A.

T. (S.T.)
Wright City: Scharnhorat,

Martin. (D.O.)
AVoodlandville: Lane. S. C.  *


MONTAXA

Anaconda: Craft. Marie C.
114 Cedar St., (D.O.)
Roseborough, A. L.. 209 3rd

St. (D.O.)
Sawtell, Reat D., 120i E.

Park St. (D.C.)
Warthington. B. W., 216 W.

Park St. (D.C.)
Williams, Dr. Mc. (D.C.)
Antelope: Telgen, Edward.

Auensta: Brackett, Mary L.

Balcer: Meyian, Lawrenc*

Sanford. (D.O.)
Baylor: Miller, D. F. (D.O.)
Wolf, Roy M. (D.O.)


ll)2J


(icogrdphicdl  Index


Nebraska


Billings: Brown, A. S.. 405 N.

.'Ust St. (D.C.)
dank, Jj. Mae, Stapleton

Bldg. (N.D.)
Downs *: |)<)\\ns, l!abcock

Bids. (D.C.)
Downs, Lewi.s Fi-ancis, Yel-
lowstone Co. (D.C.)
riatner, I.. M., 6-7 Wana-

maker Bldg. (DC.)
Bozemnii; Dawes, Willard C.,

237 W. Main St. (D.O.)
Dean,  W.  E.,  Michigan  Bldg.

Dee,  K.  M. (N.D.)
Tillyer, Belle. (D.O.)
Butte: Bolain, Julian S.,

Owsley Block. (D.O.)
Fisher, Dr., State Saving-.?

Bank  Bldg. (D.C.)
Holm. P. O., Bee Hive Blk.

Long, J., 106 Penn. Bldg.

Stryker, Wm. R., Hennessy

Bldg. (D.O.)
Chatenu: Corvin, Geo. D.

Mayer, J. H. (D.C.)
Colunibus; Payne, George H.,

First Nat'l Bank Bldg.

union: Huber, Berta. (D.C.)
Emisrrant: Townsend,  Geo.  A.,

Chico Hot Springs Hotel.

Gardner: Collins, Orrville.

Box 45. (D.C.)
Gla.sffo-w: Blackmun, E. A..

Valley  Co.,  301  4th  Ave.  S.

Blackmun, Eva  L. (D.C.)
Blackmun, Wm.  L. (D.C.)
Pippenger, Cora. First  Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Glendive: Dove. C. E.. Dion

Blk. (D.O.)
Hunt, Dr. John H. (M.B.)
Great Falls: Adams, C. T.,

Room 4, Foley Hotel.

Armond, J. F., 16-17 Breen

Blk. (D.C.)
Armond, Richard H., Ford

Bldg. (D.O.)
Armond, Wm. L., 14 Breen

Blk. (D.C.)
Hawkes. Chas. L.. Tod Blk.

I.aughlin. Harry T. (D.O.)
McCole. Geo. K.. First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Nelson, Loretta B., Conrad

Blk. (D.O.)
Scott, Wm. O. (S.T.)
Tuttle. Mavme K.. Ford

Bldg. (D.O.)
Gra.s.s Rang;e: Hudson. Ste-
phen W.. c/o S. M. I^ong,

Valentine Stage. (D.C.)
Great Falls: Budde, Mrs. M.,

Box 183. (N.D.)
Hamilton: Cooper. Olive M.

Irving, Bryne. (D.C.)
Jones, O. B. (D.C.)
Stark, R. A., Coutier Bell

Blk. (D.O.)
Harlotvton: Church, J. W.

Havre: Templeton, W. F.,

Bramble Blk. (D.O.)
Helena: Bruner, Leanora L.,

207-9  Ramers  Bldg. (D.O.)
Bruner. Deanora S.. Powers

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lee, Minnie R., Powers

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hopkin.s. W. R. (D.C.)


Richard.

M. (D.C.)
Adelbert. F. X.

A.. Conrad


Mahaffay, Chas. W., Pitts-
burg Bldg. (D.O.)
Martin, F. H  . Powers Bldg.

Shafer. Clement I^.. Holtes
Bldg. (D.O.)
Hin.xdale: Timm,

.Toilet: Platner. L.
Kalispell:
Harris. Locious

Bldg. (D.O.)
Kont, S. A.. Karcher Bldg.

Ostroot.  A. E.. 1002 3rd  Ave.

W. (D.C.)
McCubrey. E. E. (D.C.)
Laurel: Meeker, Glenn.

Lewi.iifon: Wood, B. J., Room
205 Crowley Bldg. (D.C.)
Taylor, Fred. (D.O.)
Livin^.ston: Murphy, J. L.

Malta: Leland. A. L. (D.C.)
Mlle.s City: Clarke. Emily  M..
Elmert. Frederick J.. Miles
Bldg. (DO.)
^  l^Ii.ssoula: James, Anna L.,
I  Higgins Blk. (DO.)

Miller. H. W., B & A. Bldg.

Smith. .T. Louise. Masonic
I  Temple. (D.O.)

Hudson.  Stephen  W.,  B.  S.  A.
I  Bldg. (D.C.)

Willard. Asa, First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)

j  i>Ioore: Bigelow. F. F. (N.D.)

'  Oranilo: Dewey, Mrs. Sylvia.


Park City: Mitchell. Minnie

B.  (S.T.)

Plent  y^vooii : Carlson, John

a. (N.D.)
Poison: Carlin.  F.  W. (D.C.)
Red Lojje: Bailey. Simon W..

Mever-Chapman Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Scobey:  David.  T.  H. (N.D.)
Simni.s: Messenger. M. Lila.

White  .Sulphur  Sprln^.s: Spohr.

C.  B. (D.O.)


XFBRASKA

Alliance: Coppernoll. Orie-
annie. Opera House Blk.
Jeffrey. Joseph. Butte Ave.

Petersen.  F.  J.,  Opera  House

Blk. (DO.)
Slabaugh, I. C. (S.T.)
Arnold: Brown. E. A. (D.C.)

Leland. A. L. (D.C.)
Ashland: Moss. Joseph  M.

Auburn: Reynolds. E. R.,
Souders Bldg. (D.O.)
Schaffer,  B. B. (DC.)
Aurora: Lauser, Mrs. Min-
nie. (D.C.)
Lenser, W. M. (D.C.)
Miller, R. C. (D.C.)
Vogt, H. C. (D.C.)
Beatrice: McCracken, F. E.,
Box 5. (D.O.)
Gass, P. Y. (D.O.)
Nielson, J. Andrew. (D.C.)
Steffen. Edward B., Dole
Bldg. (D.O.)
Beaver  City: Nicholson, J. R.
Walsh. J. M. (D.C.)


Benkelnian: Nere, Flora.

Benson: Billingham, Mrs. S.,

609 Main St. (D.C.)
Bertrand: Bunn. Bessie.
Bunn. Daisy. (D.C.)
Johnson. Mrs. E. M. (D.C.)
Berwyn: Pickens,  H.  M.  (S.T.)
Blair: States & States. (D.C.)
Bloonifield: Jones. Dr. (D.C.)
Brady: Sullivan, Sylvia.

(DC.)
Brady Island: Crouse. Minnie
R. (DC.)
Ditto. Wm. L. (D.C.)
Broken Bow: Aubery. Emma.
Connelly.  G.  W. (D.C.)
Davis, AVm. (S.T.)
Holliday. C. Thomas. (D.C.)
Jackson. Foster. (S.T.)
Trigg, Oliver S. (D.O.)
AVilson, Chas. (D.C.)
Biirwell: .Jorgensen.  P.  M.

Callaway;  Leonaid  &  Leonard.
Rogers. C.  E. (D.C.)
CanibridKe: Shauers. C. I...

Chadron: Sperling. D. "W.

Chapman: Laub. J. B. (D.C.)
Cedar Rapids: Cleveland. M.
H. (S.T.)
Tulley. F. E. (S.T.)
Central City: Bachman. O.
Carl. (D.C.)
Bachman & Bachman. Drs.

(DC.)
Cochran. Maude. (ST.)
Fetterman, A. L. (D.C.)
Hoa  gland. N. J., Hord Blk.
(DO.)
Columbus: Aerni, Clara R..
Telegram Bldg. (DC.)
Clark. Mabelle. 522 W. 13th

St. (D.C.)
Clark.  O.  G..  522  W. 13th  St.

Vallier.  A.  E. (D.O.)
Cozad: Campbell.  R.  N. (D.C.)
CraiK: Bovee, Mabel. (D.C.)
CreiRhton: Dunn, Ray O.

Crete: Moore, Myrtle .T.

Curtis: Schnase,  Mrs. (S.T.)
David  City: Vogt.  John  W.

Dixon: Greres, Mrs. Amanda

L. (S.T.)
Eddyville: Wheeler.  H.  A.

(DC.)
Edgar: Johnson, A. R. (D.C.)
Johnson & Johnson. (D.C.)
Elgin: Geddis. L.. Box 207.

Enstis: Hauserman. J. (D.O.)
Thuere. S.. c/o Wm. Baur.
Exeter: Cahail  &  Cahail.

Falrbury:  Cramb.  Lulu  Lynde.
Gallamore. J. T., Pritchett

Bldg. (D.C.)
Lyon. E. R. (D.O.)
McBride & McBride. Drs.
First Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Wurth. W. F. (D.O.)
Falls City: Cornell. Leon L.
Harvey  &  Harvey,  2104 21st

St. (D.C.)
McKilligan, Birdie. (D.C.)


Nebraska


Grogniphicdl  Index


1 02:


S., Lock  Box

T., r.08 Main

50fi Main St.

6th and


Killigan. Mrs. F. (D.C.)
McCa.skey, Laura. (D.C.)
Fllley: Mason, G. R. (D.C.)
Friinkliii! Hopkin.s, W'ni. R.

Fremont: Boihenkc, 1"'. H.,
50fi  N. Main St. (D.C.)
Cobble, William Hoii.'^ten,
Fremont  Nat'l  F.ank Bldg-.
Drumint, S.  J.
Embrel, Jes.sie

276. (D.C.)
Gallamore, J.

St. (D.C.)
Pavne, Mary,

Richardson, Ira F.

Oak  Sts. (D.O.)
Stockfleld, Jas. H. A. (D.C.)
Young:,  .James  Tilton. (D.O.)
Friend: Cahill, C. A. (D.C.)
Fullerton: Zeller, Helen.

(inble.s: Zinkon, R. (D.O.)
Gandy: Gamble &  Gamble.
Gamble, James S. (D.C.)
Harvey, Fred. (D.C.)
G.-irfield: Siver, Maude. (D.C.)

Smith, J. H. (D.C.)
Geneva: Bailor, Blanche.

Genoa: Bachman,  O.  K. (D.C.)
Gothenburg: Anderson, Clara
H. (D.C.)
Hancock, J. L. (D.C.)
Grand  Island: Bradburn,  Miss
Grace. (S.T.)
Kuhr, H. C, 2 Dolan Bldg.

Parks, L. R., 31 McAllister

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Rusk, Florence T. (D.O.)
Smith, J. H., 208 W. 6th  St.

Smith. L. D., 2 Dolan Bldg-.

Williai-ns
Guide  Rock

Hampton: Troester, Otto.

Harrison:
Harvard: Kellog-g-, Henry  W.,

Clay Ave. (D.C.)
Hastings: Bing-aman, Mrs. H.
C,  516 5th  St. (S.T.)
Foster, H. .T. (D.C.)
Griffin, E. B. (D.C.)
Foster  &  Kellogg. (D.C.)
Kellog-g-, H. W. (D.C.)
Kemmelhor, Mrs., 742 N.

Bell Ave. (S.T.)
Struble, Carl K..  First  Nat'l
Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
Haverlock: Robertson, H. Iv.,

Box 26. (D.C.)
Hebron:  Baker, D.  C. (D.C.)
Classen,  "Wm.  G. (D.O.)
Harvey, Earl A. (D.C.)
Henderson: Friesen,  I.  H.


Henry; Timbers. R. S. (D.C.)

Holdrege: Carter, Vivian D.


.lohnsoix, Francis D. (D.C.)

Sheridan, A. Maude, 406 E.

Ave. (D.O.)
Shumate, Mary  L. (D.C.)
Hooper; Brown,  Ernest  H.

Connelly, G.  W.


H.  R.  H. (S.T.)
Reno,  O.  E.


Pontius, E. F.


122  W.  24th


607 W.


2810


Bo-


("(irkill,  Lena  C

St. (DO.)
Furman, Mattie,

25th  St. (D.O.)
Homing:, Earl  .T. (D.C.)
Rowell, Mrs. Flora,

4th Ave. (S.T.)
Sullivan, Richard, New
dinson Bldg. (DO.)
Kimball: Moss, A. E. (D.C.)
Oyle,  E.  J. (D.C.)
Pyle, E. J. (D.C.)
Lebanon: Nicholson,

(Ph.C, D.C.)
I^e.vin^ton: Conners
Emma C. (S.T.)
liiberty: Caster, L.
Lincoln; Archer, Wm. Reed,
140 S. 13th St. (D.O.)
Ashworth, S. L., 560 Fra-
ternity Bldg., 401 S. 14th
St. (D.C.)
Blanchard,  Chas.  A.,  Frater-
nity Bldg. (D.O.)
Brookman, Frank Leroy,

2036 Vine St. (D.C.)
Burge, Mrs. J. E., 116
29th St. (S.T.)
J. T.,


J. L.


Mrs.


B. (D.C.)


Humboldt;

Indianola:

No.  3.
Kearney;


Niermann, L.,
Carter, Vivian D


R.


S.
St.


Callmore, J. T., 1525 O

Cowgill, Jessie F., 116 S.

2nd St. (S.T.)
Crabtree, H. C, 1523 O St.

Crabtree, Rosalie, 1523 O

St. (D.C.)
Davis, W. L., Funke Bldg.

Drummet, Mrs. G. N., 215

N. 24th St. (D.C.)
Hanson, H. H., Christian

Church. (D.C.)
Herbert, C. C, 1334 O St.

Hyatt, A. M., 2800 Q St.

(D.C.)  ^ ^

Krause, Edith, 31st and S

Sts., 428  N. 31st  St. (D.C.)
McDale, G., University PI.


Mason, Geo.

St. (D.C.)
Moore, Mrs.


E.. 302 N. 27th


H. S. (D.C.)
Moore &  Moore, Drs. (D.C.)
Nebraska Chiropractic Col-
lege, 1525  O  St. (D.C.)
Nicholson, H. H. (D.C.)
Padgett, E. (D.C.)
Pennington,  J.  L.,  1505  O  St.

Slawson, E. B., University

PI. (D.C.)
Smith, Van B., Oliver

Theatre Blk. (D.O.)
Stoddard. Kate, Richards

Blk. (D.O.)
Thurston, J.  M. (S.T.)
Walker. W. W., 1222 O St.
Loup  City; Ave,  Anna  H.,  Box

554. (D.C.)
Lynch; Twombee & Twom-
bee, Rainge Bldg. (D.C.)
>Iadison: Hartner, Chas.

McCook: Hardin,  Mary  C.
Sutton, H. P. (D.O.)
Merna; Leonard & Leonaid.
Neve, F. F., Box 58. (D.C.)
Milford: De Ogney, Dr. P. A.

Minden: Hamilton, Martha  A.
Sutton, W. R. (D.C.)
Mi.  Holly; Whitman, John E.


Campbell, .J.


A. (D.C.)
J.  R.,  Box

112 S. 4th


Ware
2630


1007


IVebranka City;

R. (D.C.)
Baumgardner, J.
Norfolk; Campbell,
No. 2. (D.C.)
Craine,  Je.s.sio  M.,

St. (D.O.)
Tavlor, S. P., Norfolk Ave.
(DO.)
North Loup: Bohrer, Lena.

North Platte; Carlson, C. E.
Dillon, Geo. (D.C.)
Latham, P. J. (D.C.)
Miller,  J.  P.,  Box  531. (D.C.)
Of?allala; Clifton,  A. J. (D.C.)

Planter, Mrs. L. M. (D.C.)
Omaha: Allen, Mrs. E. E.,
1017 S. 36th St. (D.C.)
Anderson, Mary E., Bee

Bldg. (D.O.)
Atzen, C. B., Omaha Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Billingham & Billingham,
20 Creighton Bldg.
Burhorn, Frank F., 114-18

Rose  Bldg. (D.C.)
Carpenter, L. N., 23 Conti-
nental Bldg. (D.C.)
Clevitt, M. L., 401

Blk. (D.O.)
Conrad. Mrs. E. M.,

Capitol  Ave. (S.T.)
Dawson, Frances,

Pierce St. (D.C.)
Edwards. Lee W., 2238

Farnam St. (N.D.)
Frost, H. Margaret, Brand-
els Theatre Bldg. (D.O.)
Hanks, John Harvey, 1914

California St. (D.C.)
Havs,  L.  C,  Bee  Bldg.

Hoagland, Nettie E.. 3465

Larimore Ave. (S.T.)
Hunt, Albert T., McCugue

Bldg. (D.O.)
Kani, P. F.,

Laird, A. D..

St. (D.O.)
Laird, Jennie Smith,

Farnam St. (D.O.)
Lawler, Dr. D. Evan,

S. 10th St. (N.D.)
Lawler's Sanitarium, Dr.
D. Evan, 2726 S. 10th St.
Lawrence,  Joseph  C,  1  Baird
>  Bldg. (D.C.)

Lvnch,  Delia  Adeline,  Wood-
t  "men  of  World  Bldg.  (D.O.)

1 Lvon, Ernest R.. 2961 Far-
nam  St. (D.C.)
Malonv, Mrs. C. E. (S.T.)
Margarrell. Dr. T. Z., 2726

S.  10th  St. (S.T.)
Neff, Mrs. J. L.. 2202 Shu-

mann Ave. (S.T.)
Nelson, Axel S.. 1830 North
22nd St. (N.D.)
i Nierman, Louis, 2412 Ames
!  Ave. (DC.)

I Pageler, Dr. J. H., 2514
I  Grant St. (S.T.)

i Peterson, B. S.. Brandeis
Bldg. (D.O.)
Rane, P. F.. 122 Old Boston

Store. (D.O.)
Reese, Julia D., 1029 Oma-
ha Nat'l Bank Bldg.
(DC.)
Ringler. Sanford, Neville

Blk. (D.O.)
Ruchstadt. E.. 1224 N. 45th

St. (D.O.)
Shaners, Julius A.. 2238
Farnam St. (D.C.)


Paxton  Bldg.
2513  Farnam
2513


2726


1020


(ieograpliical  Index


Nevada
Xein  Jersey


Shauers, Julius A. Xitp,

2333 Farnam St. (DC.)
Spears, Mrs. Jas. D., Suite

8, 1822 Chicagro St. (S.T.)  I
Tanna, Rose, Omaha Bank

BldR. (D.O.)
Tennsley, L., 2016 Valley

St. (D.C.)
Thornbey & Thornbey,

Raingre  Bldg-. (D.C.)
Tomson,  Alfred,  Lyric

Theatre. (S.T.)
O'Neill  t Campbell, R. M.
Rerucha, V. V. (D.O.)
Ord« Howes, Luther Alan,
Mortensen  Blk. (D.O.)
Zinben, Rebecca. (D.C.)
Oshkoxhi Wetherby, M., Box

123. (S.T.)
Oxford! Bunn & Bunn, Drs.

Palmer! Olsen, Geo., Lake

View. (D.C.)
Pawnee! Bower. Mary, Hazel
House. (D.O.)
Hollister, J. R. (D.C.)
PlnlnvleM! Fuller  &  Zandeen.
Quincy. Louis .L, Box 127

Zandeeni. Helma. (D.C.)
Plattsmouth: Beekmann, O.

K., Box 90. (D.C.)
Polk: Xierman, Mary. (D.C.)
Red  Cloud! Camp,  R.  E.  (D.C.)

Parks,  S. R. (D.C.)
Republican City! Pennington,

J. L. (M.D., D.C.)
Ru.shville: Dillon, Geo. (D.C.)
Schuyler! Johnson, C. H.

Scotts  Bluff: Brown,  H.  I
Schrock,  Joseph  B.  (D.O.)
Sidney! Brown,  L.  A. (D.C.)
Kucera, V. F. (D.C.)
Radcliff, Clayton L. (D.C.)
StrombergT! Daniels, Harry.
Jackson, Fred., Box 173.
Superior: Harvey & Harvey,
Drs. (D.C.)
Harvey, Mrs. Henry M.

Piercy, Geo. F. (D.O.)
Reno, O. E. (D.C.)
Talmnfre: Hanlin,  P.  F. (D.C.)
TecumKeh!  Green, Chas.
Parks & Parks. (D.C.)
Parks, Pearl  H. (D.C.)
Parker, L. R. (D.C.)
Tekamah: Merritt, J. P.

Thayer: Ford, Helene C.

ITnlverslty Place: Greene,
Mrs. Chas. (D.C.)
Leig-h, Emma Hoye, 142 W.
18th St., University PI.
Slawson, E. B. (D.C.)
Walsh, A. F., 1813 Warren
St. (D.C.)
Valentine: Geddie, Mrs. L.,

Box 123. (D.C.)
AVahooi Dierks, George  W.
Dierks  &  Dierks. (D.C.)
Edmund &  Edmund,  Drs.

Elder. Adrian. (D.O.)
Zandeeni,  Helma,  Hotel
Wahoo. (D.C.)


AVaiineta: Dunder, Ruth E.

(DC.)
"Wayne: Jones, J. T., Whit-
man Bldg-. (D.O.)
Lewis, A. D. (D.C.)
\Veepins Water:  Auberv,

Emma. (D.C.)
West Point: Schorder, .L S.

AVlI.sonvilie: Nichol.son, C. O.
(Ph.C, D.C.)
Nicholson. Hattie H. (D.C.)
Wood liake: .Johnson, Mrs.

W.  V. (S.T.)
AVood River: Sherrerd, E. S.

Wymore: Beyler, Guy. (D.C.)
York! Burnard, W. L. (D.O.)
Callahan, B. O., 511| Lin-
coln Ave. (D.C.)
McDonald. D. (D.C.)
Kilg-ore, J. Mark, 105 6th

St. (D.O.)
Vradenburg-, Dr. H. L.


XEVADA

Panaca: Eilersf icken, F.  B.  C.

(D.C, N.D.)
Reno: Beau, (D.O.)

Colson, Clarence, Odd Fel-
lows  Bldg-. (D.C.)

Colson, F. M., 44 Mill St.

Galsgie, E. C, 112 Odd Fel-
lows Bldg-. (D.O.)

McCormick, Myrtle, 469 S.
Virginia St. (D.O.)

Petritsch,  J. F., Thomas  Bi-
gelow Bldg. (D.O.)
Tonapah: Grigsby, Dr. Edw.
S. (M.D.)


NEAV HAMPSHIRE

Amher.st: Hardy, Marie.

Berlin: Cutler, L. Lynn, Ber-
lin Savings Bank Bldg.

Bethlehem: Bush, Ernest W.

Clarcmont: Hopkins, Ralph

W., 139 Broad St. (D.O.)
Concord: Gove.  John  McClure,

7 S. State  St. (D.O.)
Dover: Hills. Chas. Whitman,

Masonic Temple. (D.O.)
Keene: Carleton.  Margaret  B.,

Post  Office  Blk. (D.O.)
Ellis, Theodore, Bank Blk.

Littleton: Thompson, Nora

Lee, P. O. Blk. (D.O.)
Manchester: Emerstjn, Sarah

O., The Beacon. (D.O.)
Emery, Willard D., Kenard

Bldg. (D.O.)
Maxwell, E. O., Amoskeg

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Parfitt, John W., Pembroke

Bldg. (D.O.)
Philbrick. H. L.. 967 Elm

St. (D.C.)
Newport: Kincaid.  Abigail  E.,

Citizens'  Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.

(DO.)
Currier, Dr. D. M. (M.D.)


Portsmouth !  Chase,  Julia
Jane. 42 Middle St. (D.O.)

Rochester:  Haigis,  Edward
S., Box 121 (D.O.)


XEW^ JERSEY

Arlington: Livesey, Henry P.,

138  Kearney  Ave. (N.D.)
Asbury Park: English, Ross.

508 Summerfleld Ave.

Herring, Ernest  M., 510 6th

Ave. (D.O.)
Johnson. Julia, 506 Monroe

Ave. (D.O.)
Warden, Sarah Corliss, 510

2nd Ave. (D.O.)
Atlantic City: Ammerman-

Hill, Dr. Margaret, 101

States.  Ave. (N.D.)
Brown, Sam'l A., 135 South

Arkansas  Ave. (D.C.)
Cox. Robert Cornelius, 118

S. Virginia  Ave. (D.O.)
Ely, Dr. Alfred Wm., 1002

Atlantic Ave. (N.D.)
Gressman, H., 22 South

Kentucky  Ave. (N.D.)
Hendrick. C, 935 Board-
walk. (D.O.)
Tngersoll. Frank B.. 441

Guarantee Trust Bldg.

Jones, Francis, 517 East

Oriental Ave. (D.O.)
•Tones, Laila, 517 East

Oriental Ave. (D.O.)
Lake, Joshua, La Grand

Apt.s. (D.C.)
I>ake, Gertrude, La Grand

Apts. (N.D.)
Logue, James, Suite 4, Mc-
■ Crorey  Apts. (D.O.)
McCall, F. H., Penn  Ave.

and Boardwalk. (D.O.)
Neame, Josephine E., 114 S.

Illinois  Ave. (D.O.)
Rein,  Clara,  118  S.  Maryland

Ave. (D.C.)
Sindoni, F. M., 1308 Pacific

Ave. (D.C.)
Storey, Robert J., Villa

Nova  Hotel. (D.O.)
Bayohne: Burch, G. H., 684

Blvd. (D.C.)
Lewy, Morris, 19 W. 31st

St. (D.O.)
l.iindv. Prof., Bergen Point.

(As.)
Manchester, F. P., 653 Ave

C. (D.O.)
McNeille, Horace S., 27 W.

43rd St. (D.C.)
Mildenberger, Ch., Terminal

Bldg., 68 Hudson St.

True,  W. F.,  892  Ave.  C.

Belleville: Schied, Walter J.,

58 High St. (D.C.)
Bloonifleld: Adams, Dora E.,

348 Franklin St. (D.C.)
Dillon, John F., 279 Berke-
ley Ave. (D.C.)
Hughes, Arthur L., Trust

Bldg. (D.O.)
Mann, Peter, 348 Franklin

St. (D.C.)  „ ^ ,

New, Ruth E., 348 Frank-
lin  St. (D.C.)
Paczkowski, Thaddeus, 194

Broad St. (D.C.)


ITnlvernal Nnturu|iii<hlo Dlrrvtory niiil IliiyerH' Guide

gjllllllllllilllll

I Telephone, 1 957  Union


1027


G.E.HARLEY,M.D.,D.O.

Osteopathic  Methods
187  Sherman  Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.

Telephone  I Webster 500-


DR. ANDREW KUNA

Osteopathic Physician

Satiire Cure, Hydrotherapy,
Chiropractic, Electrotherapy

Hours: 8  to  10  A.M., G  to  8  P.M.

31 Lincoln  St.. Nkwark,  N.  J.

First  Door  from Mercer  Street

Telephone: 553  Mulberry


I'lioiie. 1678  Union

Office Hours: 9 to 12 a.


DR. GUSTAVE UEZ, Naturopath
596 Clinton Avenue.  West Hoboken, N. J.

All acute and chronic diseases permanently cured.

Blood, skin, kidney, nervous, digestive, circulatory,

respiratory and constitutional diseases.

Health Without Drugs

Kneipp Cure, Steam. Dry Hot Air, Medicinal and

Electric Baths. General and Special Massage, etc.


DR.  R.  E.  BRANDMAN

Natural  Methods

311 TERMINAL  BUILDING

Phone  18!tf)  Hoboken  Hobokkn,  N. .1.


FRANK B. SCHANNE. M.P., M.D., D.O.

Consulting Physician

New York  New Jersey  Pennsylvania

Address  all  communications  to

44 Bleecker Street, Newark, New  Jersey


MEN  AND  WOMEN

Commonly  enter  upon  the  marriage  part-
nership ignorant  of  the  most  elementary
facts  concerning  the  sex  relation.  What
wonder  that  there  are  suffering  and
heart-break in so many  homes !

"The  Abuse  of  the

Marriage  Relations"

points  the  way  back  to  the  lost  Eden  of  health
and  happiness.  It  is  written  by  a  physician  of
standing  whose  experience  in  chronic  diseases  as
a  consequence  of  marriage  enables  him  to  show
how  these  diseases  may  be  avoided  and  health
regained.  An  invaluable  book  to  those  who  are
married or contemplate marriage.

The book  is sent prepaid on receipt of
25c. IN STAMPS OR COIN.


B.  LUST.  N.  D.
Butler  New  Jersey


Established 1902
2 to 8 p. m.


DR. FRIEDA PFAU

(OSTEOPATH!


120 PALISADE AVENUE  |

West  Hoboken,  N.  J. |


Tiii.EPHO.NE, Union 11()9


RICHARD  BLECHSCHMIDT

D.  C, N.  D., I'H.  C.

CHIROPRACTOR
Scientific  Baths


020  SAVOYE  ST.


NORTH  BERGEN,  N.  J.


DR.  CHAS.  MILDENBERGER'S  Institute
for  progressive  methods  of  healing  for  chronic
diseases,  68-70  Hudson  Street,  rooms  30S-6-7.
Terminal  Building,  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  phone  818
Hoboken;  office  hours  10  a.  m.  to  1  p.  m.  and
2-7 p. m., Sunday by appointment.


r-


Throw  the  Pill
Box  Away


Consign  the  medicine  chest  to  the  flre
where  it  belongs.  Stop  taking  poisonous
drugs.  Be  reasonable;  use  natural  methods;
cure  your  ills  by  Nature's  own  remedies.
Read  the  pamphlet:

A  Plea  for
Physical  Therapy

A  scholarly  treatise  on  Medicine  without  Medi-
cine. The  vagaries  and  guess  work  of  medical
so-called  science  are  giving  away  before  the
more  rational  and  satisfactory  methods  of
Physical  Therapy.  "Drug"  doctors  are  the
descendants  of  the  magicians  and  fakirs
\\  ho  sought  to  cure  disease  by  strange  con-
coctions and  incantations  and  the  driving
out  of  devils.  Physical  Therapy,  or  Na-
ture Cure,  is  the  child  of  Nature's  own  ways.
It  will  pay  you  to  find  out  more  of  this
great  question.  If  you  are  seeking  health
and  are  tired  of  drugs  and  poisons,  this
pamphlet  points  a  true  and  natural  way.
Send  for  it  to-day. Price  15  cents  postpaid.

Benedict  Lust,  N.  D.,  Publisher
Butler, New Jersey


1028


(icoyraphical  Index


\en'  Jersey


Saile, Joseph C, 182 Broad

St. (D.C.)
Tappan, Harry G.. 26 Os-

bourne St. (D.C.)
Boontont Wiggins,  W.  Harold.

Bountl Brook  I McDonald,

Ethel, 108 Hamilton St.

Brnnolivllle:  Bo.ston,  Goo. B.

Bri<1f;etont Bowen, T. H.

Heintze, A. C, 214 Atlantic

St. (D.C.)
Monks, James  C, 122 Broad

St. (D.O.)
Brouohville: Boston, Geo. B.

Burlingtont Binck, C. E., 130

E. Pearl St. (D.C.)
Butler!  Franz,  Lilian. (N.D.)
Fuchs, L., Box 185. (D.C,

N.D.,  M.D.)
Marringrer,  C.  J. (N.D.,  M.D.)  |
Mayer, Carolina. (N.D.)  j

Muschynski, Thomas F.  1

(N.D.)  i

Lust, Benedict. (N.D., D.O.,

D.C, M.D.)
Lust, Louisa. (N.D., D.O.)
Camdeni Asay,  Lillian  M., 117

N. 27th St. (D.C.)
Asay, R. S., 117 N. 27th St.

(D.C)
Banzhof, W. C, 1454 Had-

dow Ave. (D.C.)
Clarke. C L., 1468 Ken-
wood Ave. (D.C.)
Clifton, Robt. N., 807 State

St. (D.C.)
Heintze, C A., 5  Goff  Bldg.,

23  B'way,  and  721  Federal

St. (D.C.)
Lake, F. W., 950 W. 27th

St. (D.C.)
Lyke, Chas. H., 700 B'way.

Mackay, Thos. J., 826 York

St. (D.O.,  D.M.T.)
Og-den, Harold W., 233 N.

32nd St. (D.C.)
Patchett. E. E., 2900 Car-
man St. (D.C.)
Pogue, Garrett C. 116

Dudley  St..  and  107  N. 7th

St. (D.C.)
Smedley,  E.  D. (N.D.)
Veatch,  Paul  J.,  413  Carteret

St. (N.D.)
Wagner, A. R., 433 B'way.


Cnrbondnlet Munley, Michael

L. (D.C.)
Charlotte: Love, W. P. (D.C.)
Chatham: Davis, Jas. B., La-
fayette  Ave. (D.C.)
Young, Fred. V. (D.C.)
Clifton: Liechty, Leonia, 34

Center St. (D.C.)
Colesville, Sussex County:
Greenleaf, W. D. (N.D.)
Collingswoodt Coffee, Eugene
M. (D.O.)
Flick, James R., 46 Wash

Ave. (D.C.)
Hales, G. W., 715 Eldridge

Ave. (D.C.)
Simmons, W. P., 817 Had-
don Ave. (D.C.)
Cranford: Ussing, Agnes,
Cranford Trust Bldg.
Doveri Lowe, Francis C, 1
Baker  Ave. (D.C.)


Neis, Walter, c/o Dr. F. R.
Preston, 132 Blackwell
St. (D.C.)
Preston, Frances R., 132

Blackwell St. (D.C.)
Walker,  O.  M.,  92  W.  Black-  ;
well St. (D.O.)  !

E}H.st Oranpre: Barto, Ida E.,
565  Main  St. (D.O.)
Black, John J., 41 N. 18th

St. (N.D.)
Blair, Jno., 31 Eppritt St.

(D.C)
Browne, Cornelia J., 57

Harrison St. (D.C, N.D.)
Frink, Adelaide AV., 7 Mit-
chell PI. (D.O.)
Gore, M. V.., 600 Main St.

Kightlinger, Craig M., 9

Wayne  Ave. (D.C.)
Leary,  Mathilda  V.,  74  Eaton

Place. (D.C.)
Mockridge, Dr., 415 Central

Ave. (D.C.)
Munroe, Milbourne, 215

Main St. (D.O.)
Myles, Anna Crawford,
Munn and Central Aves.
Ogden, Vara A., 240 Pros-
pect  St. (D.C)
Schenck, Aletta, 74 N. Ar-
lington Ave. (D.O.)
Young,  A.  L.,  Box  44. (D.O.)
EIgg  Harbor  City:  Young,  A.

Lewis,  Box  44. (N.D.)
Elizabeth: Beatty,  Blanche  E.,
875 Colonia Road. (D.C.)
Keller, F. B., 413 W. Jersey

St. (D.O.)
Still, Benj. F., 428  N. Broad

St. (D.O.)
Doren, H. Van, 565  Madison

Ave. (D.C.)
Middlesworth,  J.  S.  Van, 425

Morris Ave. (D.O.)
Vesey, L. S., 135 5th Street.

(D.O.,  N.D.)
Victory, Andrew, 498 Broad
St.,  and  49  S.  Broad  St.
Whitesell, N. Jean, 319
Union St. (D.O.)
Elizabetbport: Vecsy, L., 515

Broadway. (D.O.)
Qn^lewoodi De  Long, Laura,

96  Engle  St.  (D.O.)
Fairview: Storm, H. (N.D.)
Garfleld: Herrigel, Ruthelm,
60  Somerset  St. (D.C.)
Nethersole, A., 164 Palisade
Ave. (D.C.)
Gloucester: Remmers, F. L.,

440 Somerset St. (D.O.)
Glouee-ster City: Klug, Ru-
dolph J., 323 Monmouth
St. (N.D.)
Guttenberg:  Lansen,  G.  C.  W.,
23 Polk St. (N.D.)
Welershausen, Geo., 23

Polk  St. (D.C.)
Remmers, Frederick L.,
440 Somerset St. (N.D.)
Hackensack: Ayres, Eliza-
beth,  74  Central  Ave.
Blair, Francis  W., 191 Main

St. (D.C, Opt., N.D.)
Campbell, C L. R., 86 State

St. (D.C.)
De  Baun, Harry C, 141

Myer St. (D.C.)
Reed, O. R., 204 Passaic
Ave. (D.C.)
Haddenfield: Hoopes, Chas. L.


Iladdon Heights: Wildman,

Elias. (M.D.)
Harrison:  Cutler,  Alfred,  304

N. 5th St. (N.D.)
Hasbrouck Heights: Ryel,
Jennie Alice, 191 Burton
Ave. (D.O.)
Ha'wthorne: Shea, Gertrude
V. R., 286 Lafayette Ave.
Hazelton: Bateman, Joseph

S. (D.C.)
Hoboken: Aldoretta, Henry
W., 82 Monroe St. (D.C.)
Allen, A. L., 205 Summit

Ave. (D.C.)
Brandman, R. E.. 311 Ter-
minal Bldg. (N.D.)
Brooks, Ethel, 118 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Hill,  Herbert  H.,  1113  Wash-
ington  St. (D.C.)
Kaltwasser, H., 908 Wilhnv

Ave. (N.D., D.C.)
Kennan, J. S., 1033 Wash-
ington  St. (D.C.)
Meyer, Gus., 1125 Wash-
ington St. (D.O.)
Mildenberger, Chas., Tei-
ininal Bldg., 68 Hudson
St. (N.D.)
Pfarrius,  Wm.  H.,  1110  Hud-
son St. (D.C.)
Predeblch, Peter. (D.O.)
Rexford. S. E., 1028 Bloom-

fleld St. (D.C.)
Rittmeyer, F. W., 1127
Washington St. (D.C,
D.O., N.D.)
Sikora, F. M., 300 River St.

Stone, Jno. N., 68 Hudson

St. (D.C)
Tuccio, Cajetan, 911 Hud-
son  St. (D.C.)
Harpersvllle, Broome <'o. :
Knox, James Edwin.
Irvington: Ruth, M. Eliz., 159
Orange  Ave. (D.C.)
Ruth, Wm. H.. Jr., 159

Orange  Ave. (D.C.)
Sawyer, Geo. H., 5 Wilson

St. (D.C, N.D.)
Weber, Helen, 1021 Spring-
field Ave. (D.C.)
Jersey City: August, Dr. H.
W.,  86  Hutton  St. (D.C.)
Beeman, Roy Herbert, 462

Jersey Ave. (D.O.)
Buettner, Jas. A., 65 Clin-
ton  Ave. (D.C, N.D.)
Bush, I.,. M., 15 Exchange

PI. (D.O.)
Coffer, George T., 2540

Blvd. (D.O.)
Davidson, Wm., 246 Virgi-
nia  Ave. (D.C.)
Edsall. E., 454 Central Ave.

Fehl, Carrie, 145 South St.

(D.C,  N.D.)
Ganzke, T. T., 579 Jersey

Ave. (D.O.)
Gilliar, Joseph, 190 Sher-
man Ave. (D.C,  N.D.)
Hallock, H.. 160 Summit

Ave. (D.C.)
Hallock, M'ni. J., 160 Sum-
mit  Ave. (D.C.)
Harley, G. E., 158 Cam-
bridge St. (D.C, D.O.,
N.D.)
Harris, Henry. (N.D.)
Haughton. Jas. M., Jr., 98C

Summit Ave. (D.C)
Haves, Wm., 138 Leonard
St. (N.D.)


New  Jersey


Geographical  Index


1029


Heyler, Charles A., 67 Lin-
coln St. (D.C.)

Jacobs, Frederick V.. 195
Virginia Ave. (D.C.)

Jacobs. Julian M., 195 Vir-
grinia Ave. (D.C.)

King-, Wm. G., 239J 2nd St.

Kitchen. Georgiana, 201
Pavonia Ave. (D.C.)

Knauss, S. M., 37 Monti-
cello Ave. (D.O.)

Kreutzer, Reginald L., 207
Claremont  Ave. (D.C.)

Ponger, Edw., 132 Coles St.

Pontone, Henry, 281 Grove
St. (D.C.)

Richardson, G. A., 152 Vir-
ginia  Ave. (D.C.)

Richmond, Ralph P., 95 Sip
Ave. (D.O.)

Rochat, Louis  A., 155

Newark Ave. (Opt., D.O.)

Runbloom. E., 558 Mercer
St. (D.O.,  N.D.)

Scheid, Henry Edw., 9 Vir-
ginia  Ave. (D.C.)

Schultz, Otto, 48 Central
Ave. (D.C.)

Schwarz, Dr. R. B.. 93
Highland Ave. (Ch.)

Shaw. Robert V., 15 Mor-
ton  Place. (D.C, N.D.)

Stevenson,  Eliz.  M., 31  Bay-
view Ave. (D.C.)

Strobel, Albin, 520 Pater-
son Plank Road. (D.C.)

Strobel. Richard. 3702 Hud-
son  Blvd. (D.C. N.D.)

Sullivan. Rebecca E., 20
Kearney  Ave. (D.C)

Truitt, W. T., 896 Summit
Ave. (D.C)

Van Houten, John R., 156
Virginia Ave. (D.C)

Villari, N., 368 Central Ave.

Volckman. Harold, 40 Za-
briskie  St. (D.C.)

Watkins, J. C, 208 Myrtle
Ave. (D.C.)

^Vatkins. Mark. 225 Jewett
Ave. (D.C.)

Watkins,  Pauline,  208

Myrtle Ave. (D.C.)

Weimar, Louis Charles, 516
Bergen Ave. (D.C)

Wenzel, Alfred, 417 Pali-
sade  Ave. (D.C)

Winkelmann, L., 248 Cam-
bridge Ave. (D.C.)

Zwerneman, Geo. 601 Pa-
vonia  Ave. (DC.)
Jersey City Heights  i Moly-
neux,  Albert  J.,  2844  Blvd.
(DO.)

Molyneux, Cora Belle, 2844
Blvd. (D.O.)
Joplin: Phillips, Frisco Bldg.

Kearney: Livesey, Henry P.,

56  Johnson  Ave. (D.C.)
rnkewood: Cummings, W. S.,
6  Clifton Ave. (D.O.)

Fechtig,  St.  Geo.  (D.O.,  N.D.)

Fogg, Clinton O., 121 Madi-
son Ave. (D.O.)
lilberty: Kahn, H. I.. Box 25.

Long: Branch:  McSherrv,

Thos., Broadway. (D.O.)
Madison  I Broberg, Manfred,

2000 Central Ave. (N.D.,

D.C.)
Mantnai Rhoads, H. B., Main

St. (D.C.)  I


Maple .Sliadct Irwin, Grace

Gould. (D.O.)
Maple^vood: Wood, Emma

Greene, 37 Ridgewood

Road. (D.O.)
Matteawant Jalovaara, A. E.

S., 85 Main St. (D.O.)
McKeeHporti Carroll, Grove.

(N.D.,  D.O.)
Merchantvllle:  Hagelgans,

Walter C (D.C.)
Scott,  J.  H. (D.C.)
Montclalr: Bird, Miss Joseph-
ine. (Ma.)
Eddy, John T., 14 The

Crescent. (D.O.)
Finnerty, Francis A., 40

Park St. (D.O.)
Forstot, Samuel, 57 Union

St. (M.D.,  D.O.)
Hallett. H. De Vean, Madi-
son Bldg., 10  Park  St.

Simpson, Martha B., 148

Maple  Ave. (D.C.)
Smith, Helena Ferris, 50

Park St. (D.O.)
Zander, Stanley Clarence,

822 Valley Road. (D.C.)
>Iorrls Plain.s: Fues, Francis.

Morrlstowni Cassell, M. E.,

140  E.  Main  St. (D.O.)»
Lippincott,  Lydia  E.,  243  W.

Main  St. (D.O.)
Maxwell, H. Thurston, 29

Morris  St. (D.O.)
O'Keefe, M. L., 1 Franklin

Ave. (D.C.)
Rogers, William Leonard,

14  DeHart  St. (D.O.)
Wire, Percy J., 13 Clinton

St. (D.C)
Mt. Holly: Bryan, D., 485

Broad  St. (D.C.)
Hackmann, Gustave Her-
bert,  110  Main St. (D.O.)
Witman,  J.  E.,  Box  613

Witman, John E., 43 Main

St. (D.C,  Oph.)
Newark: Alpert  A., 391 Clin-
ton Ave. (D.O.,  N.D.)
Barbera, Anthony, 120 8th

Ave. (D.C.)
Belton, Clarence C, 484

Broad St. (D.C.)
Benson, Wm. S., 76 16th

Ave. (D.C.)
Bird, J. F., 181 Summer

Ave. (D.C)
Black, John J., 41 N. 18th

St. (D.C.)
Brandenburg, H. C, 28 El-
wood Place. (D.C)
Braun, Max Gerard, 28

Monmouth  St. (D.C.)
Brooks, Maud A., 16 Gould

Ave. (D.C)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues  '


Biugger,  S.  A.,  119  New  St.
(D.M.T.)

Bryan,  D.  R.,  485  Broad  St.

Burnett,  J.  C,  19  Walnut  St.
(DO.)

Butcher,  O.  L.,  657  Mount
Prospect  Ave. (D.O.)

Capek,  Norbert  F.,  169  Mil-
ford Ave. (N.D.)

Carpenter,  W.  A.,  10  Boudi-
not St. (D.C.)

Carpenter,  W.  A.,  189  Sum-
mer Ave. (N.D.)

Colborn,  R.  M.,  810  Broad
St. (D.O.)

Collins,  Charles  O.,  122
Roseville  Ave. (D.C.)

Collins,  Ethel  Nora,  16
Grand Ave. (D.C.)

Collins,  F.  W.,  122  Rose-
ville Ave.  (D.C,  D.O.,
N.D.)

D'Almaine, Mrs. Cornelia,
510 Fireman's Bldg.

Davis,  F.  B.,  25  New  Street.

Davis.  J.  B.,  25  New  Street.

Deerin,  Mr.  &  Mrs.,  964
Broad St. (D.C.)

Dietz,  Phineas,  500  Broad
St. (D.O.)

Dodd.  J.  E.,  36  Kearney  St.

Dodd,  Lorenzo,  122  4th  St.

Donnelly,  Sarah.  155  Wil-
liam St. (D.C)

Eble,  H.  A.,  738  Broad  St.

Firth,  A.  P.,  28  Clinton  Ave.

Fischer,  Frank  L.,  94  Ridge-
wood  Ave. (N.D.)

Freel,  J.  E.,  748  S.  15th  St.
(D.C)

Freel,  J.  S.  P..  379  Little-
ton  Ave. (D.O.)

Grant,  Roswell  D..  207  Mt.
Prospect Ave. (D.O.)

Grimm,  Lydia  B.,  87  Sey-
mour Ave. (D.C.)

Harrison,  J.  C,  16  Central
Ave. (D.C)

Haverin,  A.  A.  &  C.  F.,  28
Lincoln Ave. (D.C.)

Haverin,  C  E.,  867  S.  19th
St. (D.C,  N.D.)

Haverin, C. F., 28 Lincoln
St. (N.D.)

Hendrickson,  M.  !>..  10  Hins-
dale Place. (D.C,  N.D.)

Hendrickson,  M.  L.  &  J.
W, 584 Broad St. (D.C.)

Hill, Carrie, 701 High St.

Hill,  Herbert.  16  Gould
Ave. (D.C.)

Hippie,  J.  E..  500  Broad  St.
(DC)

Hippie.  S.  A.,  199  Broad  St.
(D.C)

Hippie.  S.  N..  591  ^Varren  St.

Howells, Anna Gerow. 459
Mount Prospect  Ave.
Howells.  Clifford, 459  Mount

Prospect Ave. (DO.)
Jacobs, Samuel. 29 Halsev

St. (N.D.)
Jennings,  Theo. T.. 76 Mon-
mouth St. (D.C.)
Jennings. Theodore T.. 295

Springfield Ave. (N.D.)
Kingsland. Jennie B., 82

Beverlv St. (D.C.)
Kitchell. Arthur Ward. 72
Elizabeth Ave. (DO.)


1030


Geographical  Index


New  Jersey


Knight, R. A.. 785 Clinton

Ave. (D.C.)
Kuehner, Frank O.. 49

Delevan Ave. (D.C.)
Kuna, A., 31 Lincoln St.

(D.O.. D.C.)
I.auterwasser, Charles, 252
Littleton  Ave. (D.C.  N.D.)
Lauterwasser, G. \Vm., 144

Ridgewood Ave. (D.C.)
Lee. Ruland W., 95 Halsey

St. (D.C.)
Luepke.  J.  F.  G..  401  Bergen

St. (D.C.)
MacBride, Mildred E., 37 S.

10th St. (D.C.)
Mac  Quarrie,  Mrs. Laura  N.,

55  Nelson  Place. (D.C.)
Marsland, F., 7th St. (DO.)
Mar.sland,  Mme. F..  79  South

7th  St. (N.D.)
Matthies,  122  Roseville  Ave.

Marx. Cora  B. Weed. 385 S.

Belmont Ave. (D.O.)
Maulbetsch. George W.. 74

S. 9th  St. (D.C.)
Maxfleld, J. Harris. 4

Mvrtle Ave. (D.O.)
McKee, Mary, 99 Broad St.

(N.D., D.O.)
"Mecca of Chiropractic,
New Jersey College, 122
Roseville  Ave. (D.C.)
Minthorne, Richard, 49

Delevan  Ave. (D.C.)
Mitchell. Warren B.. 738

Broad St. (D.O.)
Moore.  Claribel.  44  Bleecker

St. (D.C.)
Mliller, E. A., 591 Warren

St.. 72  New St. (D.C.)
Mvtros25esky. Joseph, 52

16th Ave. (D.C.) ^ ,  .
New*  Jersey College of Chi-
ropractic, 122 Roseville
Ave. (D.C.)
Pfeifer. Charles, 56 Fabyan

Place. (D.C.)
Pfeiffer,  G.,  7  Fabyan  Place.

Pheifer, I., 882 S. 16th St.

(D.O., N.D.)
Reehl, W., 828 Broad St.

Richardson,  C.  E..  269  S.  8th
St..  and  854  S.  Orange  Ave.
Robinson. Mathew H.. 11

Milford  Ave. (D.C.)
Ross, Mr. & Mrs., 82 Rose-
ville  Ave. (D.C.)
Rowland, Edward J., 1

Branfoid Place. (D.C.)
Schaumberg, H. E.. 28 13th

Ave. (D.C.)
Schanne, F. B., 44 Bleecker

St. (D.C.)
Sidwa, S., 39 Rutgers  St.

Smith, Frank C, 122 Bige-

low St. (D.C, N.D.)
Spangler, H., 117  Avon  Ave.

(D.O.. N.D.)
Stevens,  L.  R., 11  Thomas

St. (N.D.)
Stickle,  Mary,  79  Halsey  St.

(D.O., N.D.)
Stow.  John  B.,  78  North  11th

St. (D.O.)
Strongfort,  Lionel, 274 Park

Bldg. (P.)
Sullivan, Broad St. (DO.,

Hy.)
Swain, Alfred L., 77 Wee-

quahie  Ave. (D.C.)
Tate, Edwin W., Kinney

Bldg. (D.O.)
Thorp, Hugh, 211 Seymour
Ave. (D.C.)


Waters, Isabella, 577 War-
ren St. (D.C.)
Weber, Emil. 255 Waverly

Ave. (D.C.)
Wheeler, Miss Alma, 1

Roseville Ave. (D.C.)
Whitleigh. Geo. A., 156 N.

5th St. (D.C.)
Willard, Earle S., 21 Camp

St. (D.O.)
Winslow, Fred. E., 5 Clin-
ton Ave. (D.C.)
AVitman,  Wm.  W.,  102  Halsey

St. (N.D.)
Witman,  Wm.  M..  671  Broad
St..  Suite  414-15. (D.C.)
New Brunswick: McDonald.
H. W.. 336 George St.
Newton: Boston. George R..

49  High  St. (D.O.)
New York: Sennolt. J.. 1075

Blvd. East  W. (D.C.)
North Bersen: Blechschmidt.
R., 920 Savoye St. (D.C,
N.D., Ph.C)
Blechschmidt's  Naturopathic
Sanitarium, 920 Savoye
Street.
Gross. James  H.. 95 Colum-
bia Ave. (D.C.)
Hubner,  Harry,  5197  Hudson

JBlvd. (N.D.)
Lange, Lydia E.. 925 Dan-

ielson St. (D.C.)
Meyer, Wm., 1456 Ridgley

St. (D.C.)
Murphy,  Charles, 918  Pater-
son Ave. (D.C.)
Wahl.  Adolph  F.. 942  Savoy
St. (D.C.)
Nutleyi Sidwa, S., 7 Stagers

St. (D.C.)
Ocean Cityi Haines, Florence

Brick. (D.M.T.)
Oeoan Grove: Tomlin, R. T.
45 Main  Ave. (M.D..  D.O.)
Old Bridge: Carpenter, Julia

B. (D.C.)
Orange: Billet, Mary I., 477
Main  St. (D.C)
Chiles. Harry L., 466 Main

St. (D.O.)
Compopiano,  A., 47 Cone St.

Compopiano, Anthony, 90

Center  St. (D.C.)
Corbo, Alfonso, 74 Jackson

St. (D.C.)
Granberrv, D. Webb. 408

Main St. (D.O.)
Moffat,  Dr.  Edgar  V. (M.D.)
Oelachlajel,  W.  A..  55  Ouim-

by Place. (D.O.)
Plummer. F. Myrell. 462

Main St. (D.O.)
Sackett, Edith F., 185 Main

St. (D.C.)
Sands. Ord li.. 408 Main St.

Schiefler.  Chas.  A.,  357  Main

St. (D.C.)
Sickles, E. H., 22 Chapman

St. (D.C.)
Starr. Geo. R.. 466 Main St.

Webb, H. D.. 408 Main St.

Palisade Park: Schultz. Emil.

Palmyra: Dye. W. Walter,

734 Morgan St. (D.O.)
Passaic: Askenberg, Mrs. G.,

189  Main  Ave. (DC.)
Church, Chas. (D.O.)
Conklin, Hiram Lewi.s 29

Grove  Terrace. (D.O.)


Haveron, R. H. (D.O., N.D.)
Robinson, Thos. F., 53 Lex-
ington Ave. (D.C.)
Starr, J. F.. 71 Bloomfleld
Ave. (D.O.)
Paterson: Allen. Francis W..
367 10th Ave. (D.C,  N.D.)
Allen. S. E., Jr., Z82 Law-
rence St. (D.C.)
Baumlcr.  Charles.  15  E.  15th

St. (D.C.)
Benson, Richard C, Room

504, Cott  Bldg. (D.C.)
Borgman, August, 76 Ham-
burg Ave. (D.C.)
Buckley, John W., 774 East

24th St. (D.C.)
Carlisle, Hardy Wm., 242
Summer St. (D.O.)
' De  Baun, Harry C, 134
Washington  St. (D.C.)
Flanigan.  A. L.. 777 E. 26th
St.,  and 128 17th  Ave.
Hilton. John F.. 21 B. 20th

St. (D.C)
Horandt. C, 120 Jasper St.

Johnson, G.. 210 Market St.

Jones, Sarah  E.. 465 Ellison

St. (D.O.)
Lang, Jacob, 45 Ward St.

Marsland, Katherine, 721

4th Ave. (D.C.)
McClelland. (D.C.)
McFarlan, Geo. D., 276

Carrol St. (D.C.)
McKellin. Wm. H., 403 Colt

Bldg. (D.C.)
Morris, Fred. W., 316

B'way. (D.O.)
Post, E., Citizens' Trust

Bldg. (D.C.)
Post, Alfred H., 307 Citi-
zens' Trust  Bldg. (D.C.)
Rose, Robert, 24 Jefferson

St. (D.C.)
Scheltenbach, Thco. E., 139

York  Ave. (N.D.)
Schleusner, Richard R., 76

Hamburg  St. (D.C.)
Schoers, J. G., 148 Market

St. (D.C.)
Simmons, Margie  D., 647 E.
26th St. (D.O.)
Peapack: Belton, Clarence.

Penn  Grove:  Haffner,  G.  C.

P., 202 S.  Broad  St. (D.C.)

Perth Aniboy: Buchanan, O.

H.,  387  Prospect  Ave.,  and

146 Smith St. (D.C.)

Lund, Henry P., 393 Park

Ave. (D.C.)
Lund,  Paul  S., 190  Grant  St.
Plainfleld: Allcutt, E. Burton,
Truell Court, 1 Madison
Ave. (D.C.)
Good, E., Manning Bldg.

Miller,  Frank,  217  E.  7th  St.

Singer,  O.  N.,  234  Park  Ave.

Wilcox.  Frank  F.. 108 Cres-
cent  Ave. (D.O.)
Wilcox, Nell Sigler, 108
Crescent Ave. (D.O.)
Plalnvlewi Singer, Dr. O. U.,

234 Park Ave. (N.D.)
Pleasantvllle: Chew, Dr.

Thomas S. (N.D.)
Princeton: Sigler, Chas. M.,
42 Mercer St. (D.O.)


Neu)  Mexico
New  York


Geoqrdphicnl  Indrr


10.31


Rnhway: Russell, Margaret,

78  W.  Milton  Ave. (D.C.)
Red Banki Eng-lert, A. M., 71

Broad St. (D.C.)
Wolfert, William Jules.

Ridgrefleld  Parki  Kinder,  M.,

69  Central Ave. (N.D.)
Rlversldei  Binck,  C.  E.,  26

Scott  St. (D.O.)
Rid^ewoodi Hammond, Ralph

S., 2 Wilsey Square,

Osmun Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hei.sler, C. F. (D.C.)
Meissner, Chas. L., 81 Arch

Ave. (D.C.)
Morris, Fred. W., Ridge-

vi^ood Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Rosellet Crowell, Gladys L.,

Van  Court  Inn. (D.C.)
Roselle Parkj  Gomerz,  H.  Von,

33 Colfox  St. (D.O.)

Rutherford: Barger, Eva L.,
84  Park  Ave. (D.O.)
Miner, E. Frank, 4 West
Nevv^ell  Ave. (D.O.)
Salem  I Bassett, Dr. Norman
H.,  214  E.  Broad  St. (N.D.)
Secaucust  Hayes, Wm., 276

Maple St. (N.D.)
Silver  Lakei Lintott,  J.  E.. 13

Eugene PI. (D.O., N.D.)
South Oranse: Henke, Cres-
cence, 163 S. Orange Ave.
Somervllle: Drummet, Sybil
J.,  99  E.  Main  St. (D.C.)
Rogers, Robt. "W., 144 W.

Main St. (D.O.)
Sperbeck,  H.  C, R.  F.  D.  No.
3 (D.C.)
St. Petersburgh: Cole, Ernest

I., 340 1st  St.  N. (D.C.)
Succasunnat Barger, Maude

F. (D.O.)
Summitt Becker, .Jackson H.,
29  Pine  Grove  Ave. (N.D.)
Becker, Jessie E., 29 Pine

Grove  Ave. (D.C.)
Steele,  Frederick  A.,  Jr.,  107
Summit  Ave. (D.O.)
Sussex: Wallin, A. Carolina.

Teaneck: Blochvvitz. Max T.

Trenton: Applegate, Dr. Geo.
F., 9 E. State St., and 84
Hillcrest Ave. (N.D.)
Barnett, J. W., American

Mechanics  Bldg. (D.C.)
Cullaugh, Wm. G., Broad
Street Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Ellis, H. B., 11 S. Warren

St. (D.C.)
Heck.  J. A.. 1907 S. Clinton

Ave. (D.O.)
Heufele,  Geo.,  1907  S.  Clinton

Ave.  (N.D.)
Johnston, E. J., 349 Walnut

St. (D.C.)
Marchand, Chas. E., 56 W.
Hanover St., and 145
Perry  St. (D.C.)
Murray, John H., 212 E.

Hanover  St. (D.O.)
Novinger, W. J., Cor. Aca-
demy and Montgomery
Sts. (D.O.)
Roche, Hazel, 438 State St.

Sigler, Chas. M., 130 S.

State St. (D.O.)
VI let, Chester B., 47 West
State St. (D.C.)


Walker,  E.  M..  133  S.  Broad
St. (D.O.)

Wendel. Rev. Dr. H. R.,
Union Hill: Acknowitz, C. J.,
407  Bergenline  Ave. (D.O.)
Cargill, F.  S., 129 5th  St.

Crawford,  B.,  303  Bergen-
line  Ave. (D.C.)

Dresser,  B.  J.,  407  Humboldt
St. (D.C.)

Hitz, Wm., 162 Bergenline

Ave. (D.O.)
Hubner, Louis, 140 4th  St.
(N.D.. D.C.)

Jacknowitz,  C,  407  Bergen-
line Ave. (Opt.)

.Tacquemin, Theodore  J.,
411 Franklin  St. (M.D.)

Kost, Aug., 423 Union St.

Peschkar,  Joseph,  331  Main
St. (D.C.)

Saperstein, Morris, 325
Franklin St. (D.C.)
Upper  Montclalr: Johns,  M.  E.,

I>ansing Place. (D.C.)
Vineland: Wagner, A. A.

W^ashington: Collins, Edward

AV. (D.C.)
Weehawken : Dittrich, John
J., 60  Hudson  PI. (D.C.)

Dye, Julia H., 710 Park
Ave. (D.C.)

Gehrs,  John  G.  O.,  221  An-
gelique  St. (D.C.)

Heydt,  Henry  W.,  60  Hud-
son Place. (D.C.)

Manster, Andrey S., 125
Shippen  St. (D.C.)
Westfield: Bagley, R. A., P.
O.  Box  264. (D.O.)

Ray,  Mary  L.,  419  South
Ave. (D.O.)

Semple, Sydney  G.,  207  Elm
St. (D.O.)
West  Hoboken:  Blech-

schmidt,  John  R.,  and
Peter  Rohr,  504  Clinton
Ave. (D.C.)

Bieri,  Robert,  The  Little
Carlsbad,  601  Spring  St.

Bolte,  Bertha,  328  Summit
Ave. (D.C.)

Conrad,  Chas.  F.,  120  Pali-
sade Ave. (D.O.)

Germann,  Frank  A.,  612
Syms  St. (D.C.)

Greschik.  Ernest,  507

Hackensack  Plankroad.

Guggenheim,  M.,  208  Pali-
sade  Ave. (M.D., D.O.)

Hagedorn,  C.  S.,  320  Sum-
mit  Ave. (D.C.)

Hirsh,  A.  S.  W.,  137  Summit
Ave. (D.O.,  N.D.)

Martinelli,  A.,  213  Summit
Ave. (D.O.)

Mathies,  Henry  F.,  491  Pali-
sade Ave. (D.C.)

Naturopathic Institute,
Gustave Uez, Prop., 596
Clinton Ave. (N.D.)

Pfau,  F.,  120  Palisade  Ave.
(N.D., D.O.)

Reiner,  Nettie  A.,  617  Trap-
hagen St. (D.C.)

Rohr,  Peter  J.,  504  Clinton
ton Ave. (D.C.)

Rohrbeck,  Gustav,  619  John
St. (D.C.)

Sonderegger, Miss  Hilda,
812  Highpoint  Ave. (N.D.)


Stretch, Edward K., 617
Traphagen  St. (N.D., D.O.,
D.C.)

Uez,  Gustav,  596  Clinton
Ave.  (N.D.)
West  New  York:  Baudendistal,
C. 729 Polk St. (NMJ.)

Conover, F. E., 720 12th St.

Hillard, Margaret C, 211
20th St. (D.C.)

Hubner, Harry, 5195 Hud-
son Blvd. (D.C.)

Hubner, I.,ouis, 5195 Hud-
son Blvd. (D.C.)

Verner, Robinson, 425 12th
St. (D.C.)

West  New  York  Baths,  Ber-
genline Ave. and 13th St.
WlldvFood: Varney, Edgar O.,

4610 Boardwalk. (D.C.)
Woodbury:  Moore,  Geo.

Washington, 34 Delaware
St. (D.O.)

Sellen, Geo. V., 165 Ever-
green Ave. (D.C.)


NEW MEXICO

Alamog^ordo: Hulett, M. lone.

Albuquerque: Bower, J. H.,
N. T. Armijo Bldg. (D.O.)
Conner,  C.  H. (D.O.)
Jones, C. M. (D.C.)
Carlsbad: Munger, Wm. R.

Clovis: Boone, S. L. (S.T.)

Gibson,  H. R. (D.O.)
Clayton: Hofer,  A.  L. (D.C.)

Mundell, Oliver. (D.C.)
E. Gallup: Carrman, E. F.,

Cor. 3rd and Hill Sts.

East Galley: Carmen, Eliza-
beth F.,  Cor.  3rd  and  Hill

Sts. (N.D.)
Hurley:  Shaw,  Herbert. (D.C.)
Las Cruces: Bowers, H. M.,

Masonic  Temple. (D.O.)
Las  Vegas:  Rice,  Alice  H.

Portales; Johnson, "W. L.,

Box 322 (D.C.)
Boone, Oliver C. (S.T.)
Raton: Elmore, Nannie, Roth

Blk. (D.O.)
Fairbanks, A. E. (S.T.)
Raton:  Thaxton, E. E. (D.C.)
Roswell: Parsons,  C.  L. (D.O.)
Roy:  Hofer,  A.  L. (D.C.)
Thomas: Carington, Dr. J. S.

Tuccumcari: Bueler, C. Mer-

win. (D.O.)
Wagon Mound: Wood, D. B.


XEAV  YORK

Adams: Crosby,  A. J. (D.C.)
Albany:  Armstrong,  Dr. G.  A.,
and  Bullock,  R.  X., 6
Lafayette St. (D.C.)
Buenan, Peter  J., 71  Central

Ave. (Opt.)
Dailey.  C.  J.,  94  W.  Peai'l
St. (Opt.)


i(l32


(leocfraphical  Indox


Xi'ir  Vorl;


Ilevinny. George ^^.. 200

Lark  St. (D.C.)
iJevinnv, Minnip S., 200

Lark St. (D.C.)
Klmor, Dr.  Frank  A.,  .')5  S.

rearl  St. (Opt.)
Kennedy, Wni. F. X.. 19

Central Ave. (Opt.)
Lansing-. H. L., 80-82 N.

Pearl St. (D.C.)
Noll, John, 23J Steuben St.

(Opt.)
Schoeller,  Julius,  c/o  Lafay-
ette  Hotel. (N.D.)
Smiley, Wm. M., 136 Wash-
ington  Ave. (D.O.)
Smith. Ben. V., .50 N. Pearl

St. (Opt.)
Were,  Arthur  E.,  60  S.  Swan
St. (D.O.)
Alliance: Egbert, Ellis, Cor.
Main & Seneca Sts.
Gage, W. A., 49 Dover St.

Hart, Mae V. D., 140 State
St. (D.O.)
Amsterdam: Berger, E. E., 16
Burns St. (D.O.)
Moodie  &  Moodie, 33  Brook-
side  Ave.  (D.C.)
Neilson & Neilson. 11 Mo-

hawk Place. (D.C.)  !

Phillips, Grant B., Blood  ,
Bldg. (D.O.)  1

Skinner  & Skinnei-, 37 Mar-
ket  St. (D.C.)
Andover, Allegany Co.:
Cronk, Bertha Harmon.
Arcade: Jaster, E. J. (D.C.)
Athens: Greenleaf, W. D.

Astoria,  Long  I.sland  City:
Mevstrick, J., 204 2nd Ave.
Auburn: Casey,  H.  M. (D.C.)
Drake, James T., Metcalf

Bldg. (D.O.)
Harmon, C. M., 19 Burt

St. (D.C.)
Harmon & Harmon, 93

Genesee St. (D.C.)
Rowley,  P. S. (D.C.)
Steele, James, 403-6 Met-
calfe Bldg. (D.C.)
Wise, Frederick H., 505-7
Masonic Bldg. (D.C.)
Aurora: Nield, A. E. (D.O.)
Bainbridge:  Hazel,  M.,  &  Cass,
R. B., Box 234. (D.C.)
Lewis. L. G. (D.C.)
Rutherford, G. S., Box 495
Barker: Haupt, Grace. (D.C.)
Basoni: Saxton,  Ella  I.,  Ledge

Farm. (D.C.)
Bntavla: Abbott, C. L. (D.C.)
Abbott, Guy. (D.C.)
Graham, Robt. H. (D.O.)
Hough,  J.  B. (D.O.)
Klugherz, W. L., 16 Bank

St. (D.O.)
O'Dell,  Essie  A.,  14  Main  St.
(DC.)
Batli: Treble, John  M., 102 E.

William St. (D.O.)
Binghamton: Blackmer, Mil-
dred W., 260 Washington
St. (D.C.)
Blackmer, I..ouis E., 260

Washington St. (D.C.)
Boughton & Boughton, 533

O'Neil Bldg. (D.C.)
Briggs, Mrs. E. A. (D.C.)
Briggs,  W.  J., 175  Washing-
ton  St. (D.C.)
Casey, B. M., Security  Bldg.
(D.O)


H.,

and


62


F., 2301
(Opt.)

Knicker-
(Opt.)

148 Hancock

65 Hal-


Gonz, Michael, 36 Mygatt

St. (D.C.)
Gould, Floyd C, 2 Hancock

St. (D.C.)
McGuire. Frank J., 26 Fay-
ette St. (D.O.)
Ogden, C. R., General Del.

Pierce, Geo. O., 196 Oak St.

Pratt,  A.  A.,  Box  907. (N.D.)
Brockport: Adair, Rosella E.

Wallace.  Ralph  C,  Benedict

Blk. (D.O.)
Bronx:  Reilly,  H.  J.,  1804  Mul-

liner Ave. (P.)
Brooklyn: Abernathy, G.

411-a Hancock St.,

267 Stuvvesant Ave.

Allabach, Frieda F.,

Hovt  St. (D.O.)
Allabach,  L.  B.,  570  Prospect

Ave. (D.O.)
Allabach, Louisa B., 62

Hoyt  St. (D.O.)
Allabach, L. D., 62 Hoyt  St.

Allen, Margaret H., 64 7th

Ave. (D.O.)
Ames. Dr. Charles F., 302

13th St. (N.D.)
Atzert, Bdw., 182 Cornelia

St. (Ont.)
Babenzien, M.

Myrtle  Ave.
Balizer.  I., 483

bocker  Ave.
Bandel, C. F.,

St. (D.O.)
Banning. John W.

sey  St. (D.O.)
Barauch, M., 1296 Myrtle

Ave. (D.O.)
Barnes,  H.,  729  Manhattan

Ave. (Opt.)
Bauer. H. J., 403 Bridge St.

(Opt.)
Bean. Arthur S., 34 Jeffer-
son Ave. (D.O.)
Beck. Miss A. L.,

St. (Cr.)
Becker, Gottfried,

bush  Ave. (Ma.)
Bergen. H.. 57 Lorimer St.

(DO.)
Bergen,  M.  V.

Ave. (Ma.)
Blee, W. B.. 1245J Fulton

St. (Opt.)
Bliss, C. W., 44 Court St.

Bradford, Edgar G., 73 6th
•  Ave. (D.C.)
Bretow, M.. 621 Bushwick

Ave. (D.C, N.D.)
Britzelle, Albert C, 116 St.

Marks Place. (D.C.)
Brooke, B. H.

(Opt.)
Brooke, I., 868

Ave. (Opt.)
Brown, H. A.,

Ave. (N.D.)
Bugbee, Julia A.. 164 Rem-  i

sen St. (D.C.)  !

Buhl. P.  A., 419 Fulton  St. '

(Ch.)
Burnett, S.  M.,  1030 Park

Place. (N.D.)
Butler, Miss M. E.. 93

Amity  St. (Cr.)
Carter, Lsabelle D., 44

Court St. (Cr.)
Cashin, Joseph P., 2138

64th  St. (P.)
Chanin, M. J.. 1447 Herki-
mer  St. (D.O.)


93 Amity
64i Flat-


523  Greene


277  B'Way.
Flatbush
885 Flatbush


Christie,  M.  J.. U.S Noble
St."  Greenpoint. (D.C.)

Coates, Ernest .1., 75 Sixth
Ave. (D.C.)

Coates, Frederick G. W., _"
Bond St. (Opt.)

Cooper, Geo. W.. 183 Iti.-li-
mond St. (Cr.)

Cox.  Geo.,  1055 Dean Street.

Criscuolo, Teresa Ciniino,
339 Leonard St. (N.D.)

Crosier, Winfleld C, 44
Court  St. (Cr.)

Cummings, James, 676 Ful-
ton St. (H.)

Cummings, S. H., 373 Ocean
Ave. (D.C.)

Daniels, H. A., 526 Bush-
wick Ave. (D.O.)

Davidson, Rebecca R., 887
Greene Ave. (D.C.)

De  Tienne,  Jno  A..  1198  Paci-
fic St. (D.O.)

Dileos, M., 472 Fulton St.

Dorann. M., 136 Broadway.
(Ma.)

Drakeford. Jas. H., 809
Ocean Ave. (Opt.)

Du Bois, L. J.. 44 Court St.
(Cr.)

Duesterwald, Frank W..
1575  E.  12th  St.  (Opt.)

Ebelings,  Mrs. F., 67 Sutton
St. (Ma.)

Elizabeth, Madame. 1329
Hancock  St. (Ma.)

Ellis, Leo.  L.,  137  Joralemon
St. (D.C.)

Elsasser, Mrs. M., 5003 7th
Ave. (Ma.)

Eskin, S. B.. 275 Kingston
Ave. (Opt.)

Espinga, 1124 Ave J., Flat-
bush. (N.D.)

Failing, Nelson, 514 Fulton
St. (N.D.)

Failing, W. R.. 2709
Jamaica  Ave. (Opt.)

Fanshawe, Mary, 903 Ster-
ling Place. (Ma.)

Fechtig, F. R., 86 Harden-
brook St. (D.O.)

Fitzwater, Wm. D., 178
Prospect Park W. (D.O.)

Flick, Jas. R., 93 St. Marks
Ave.,  and 408  Dean  St.

Gair, E. Florence, 120 New
York  Ave. (D.O.)

Garflnkel, M. S., 1159 East-
ern Parkway. (Opt.)

Gildmacher.  W.  H.,  55  Doug-
las St. (D.O.)

Gillin, J.  J., 53 S. 3rd St.

Gillis, N., 920 Bedford Ave.
(Opt.)

Girkes. Louis, 2073 66th St.

Goldman, Miss Anna, 25
Cooper St. (Cr.)

Gottlieb, Dr. N. A.. 367 Ful-
ton  St. (Ch.)

Gottschalk,  L.  R.,  12  Kings-
ton Ave. (Ma.)

Greaves.  G. H.. 1107  Bed-
ford Ave. (Opt.)

Guiness. Rachel M.. 506
Halsey St. (D.C.)

Haag, Paul, 1296 Myrtle
Ave. (D.O.)

Hambert, 317 Leonard St.

Hansen, Geo.. 2329 84th St.

Harkow, Madame  G. E.. 475
Monroe St. (Ma.)


UnlvcrNal  Naturoi»nthl«' Dlredory  nnti Buyers' Guide


1033


IMione, Bushwick 4318

Dr.  Gertrude  Stark

Osteopath and Naturopath

KoiTian and Russian
Batha,  Sun  and  Electric
l.ipht Baths, Static
Electricity, High Fre-
quency, Violet Rays,
Chiropractic Massage,
Hydrotherapy, Kneipp
Cure, Diet Cures, etc.
Health Studioi
lot; Evergreen Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
near  Bleecker  Street
New Jersey Office:
124 Poplar St., Jersey City Heights,
New  Jersey


EMIL  GRAMBOW

N. D., D. O., D. C.
37  Lent  Ave.,  Hempstead,  L.  I.,  N.  Y.

Established 1901

Member American Naturopathic Association

ALL,  NATUROPATHIC  METHODS  USED

Hydropathy,  Diet,  Massage,  Chiropractic,
Osteopathy,  Physical  Culture,  etc.  Pa-
tients also  treated  at  their  residence.
Best  endorsement  from  Physicians  of  all
schools  and  cured  patients.


FLORIDA
RESORT

"Natural  Life"

Tangerine, Florida


PONCE  DE  LEON,  seeking  for  the  myth-
ical Fountain  of  Youth  in  the  sands  of  Florida,
did  not  know  that  all  around  him  the  true
fountain  of  youth  existed  in  the  succulent  and
health-restoring  juices  of  tropical  food  plants
that  grow  in  that  sun-kissed  clime.  Salads
for  dinner,  salads  for  luncheon,  card  party
salads,  salad  sandwiches  and  salad  dressings
made  of  the  oranges,  pineapples,  mangoes,  ba-
nanas, sapodillas,  kumquats,  loquats,  tangerines,
palmettoes,  grape  fruit,  and  mammee-sapotas  of
Florida,  varied  with  strawberries,  apples,
cherries,  lettuce,  spinach,  peanuts,  walnuts,
pecans  and  almonds,  frozen  in  lemon  and
tomato  jelly,  are  not  only  gustatory  delights
that  rejoice  the  soul  of  the  gourmet,  but  are
the  most  healthful  of  foods  that  raise  the
vitality  of  the  body,  all  of  which  can  be  par-
taken of  freely  and  abundantly  at  the  well-
known  Health  Resort  and  Nature  Cure  Estab-
lishment of  Yungborn,  Tangerine,  Fla.,  which
is  located  within  four  miles  of  Mount  Dora,
Fla..  on  the  Atlantic  Coast  Line  and  three
miles  from  Zellwood,  on  the  Seaboard  Air
Line  Railroad.  This  famous  Resort  of  Natural
Healing  is  open  all  the  year.  For  terms,  apply
to the  proprietor

DR.  BENEDICT  LUST
110  East  41st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


Rencher,  Gottlieb  J.,  N.D.,  D.C.
Rencher,  Rose  G.,  N.  D.,  D.C.

(thiru^irartora

'ill  Sixth  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Telephone,  476:!  South


OFFICE HOURS: l'> <•» ^- »•••"•
1 to 5 |i.  m.

and by appointment.


WATER  CURE  AND  MAS-
SAGE INSTITUTE

<;ertrude  stark,  n.  d.,  d.  o.,  d.  c.

HIGH FREQUENCY, VIOLET RAY

AND  STATIC  ELECTRICITY, CHIRO^

PR  AC  TIC, HYDROTHERAPY,

OSTEOPATHY

Institute  thoroughly  equipped  for  water,
steam, air and light baths.

406  Evergreen  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

(near  Bleecker  St.  and  Gates  Ave.)
Telephone, Bushwick 4.318


William  F.  H.  Krueger,  N.  D.


139  IRVING  AVENUE

Brooklyn,  N. Y.


All Year Round Sivlmming School
96th St. and Broad^Tay  Xew  York,  X.  Y.


lO.'M


Geographical  Index


New  York


Harris. M.  H.. 1007 B'way.

(Opt.)
Harsen, M.. 7fi8 Flatbush

Ave. (Opt.)
Hart. Edward B.. 385 Clin-
ton Ave. (D.O.)
Hedin, Gu.stav, 1224 Pacific

Ave. (Ma.)
Hegeman. Mrs. A. O.. 1130

Ocean Ave. (Cr.)
Hennev, Mae M., 110 South

Portland Ave. (D.O.)
Henrv, Aurelia S., 201 San-
ford  Ave. (D.O.)
Henry, Percy R.. 47(5 Clin-
ton Ave. (D.O.)
Heiinning-er, H.  .T., 25

Jerome  Ave. (Opt.)
Heuer, F., 1292 Park Place.

Hillman,  H.  V.. 1716 44th

St. (D.O.)  , „,

Hinze,  E.  C,  792  Park  PI.

Hoffman.  E. S.. 401  State

St- (N.D.)  ^^^^

Holcombe. Chas. D., 1268

Pacific  St. (Ma.)
Holden, Marion G., 267

Park Place. (Ma.)
Hollister,  M.  Cebelia,  1250

Pacific  St. (D.O.)
Hulander, Hy. N.. 127 Hal-

sey  St. (N.D.)
Hurwitz, S., 830 Broadway.

(Opt.)
Ittleman. Geo. H.. 611 Wil-

loughby  Ave. (DO.)
Johansen, Mis.s A.. 7902

13th  Ave. (Ma.)
Johnson, Edward. 22 Varet

St. (Ch.)
John.=!on, R. W., 318 Bain-

brid&e St. (D.O.)
Kasper. Alfred C. 585 11th

St. (D.C.)
Kelly,  E.  R., 47 E. 3rd  St.

(Ma.)
Render,  M..  95  S.  9th  St.

Kies, Henry J., 1112 De

Kalb Ave. (Ont.)
Kleiner, J. C, 319 Hamburg

Ave. (Opt.)
Krueg-er,  W.  F.  H.,  139  Irv-
ing Ave. (N.D., Ph.D.)
Kurtis, Isaac M.. 1028

Broadway. (Opt.)
Lake. C. A.. 1128 Bedford

Ave. (D.C.)
T.andauer.  E.  F.,  571  46th  St.

Laub, S., 400 Van Brunt St.

(Opt.)
Lee, H. C, 20 Hancock St.

(DO.)
Lesnick,  Wm.,  5108  5th  Ave.

(Opt.)
Levy.  A.  M.. 124  Graham

Ave. (Opt.)
Lew. J., 1882 Fulton Ave.

(Opt.)
Lewis.  H., 232 President  St.

Licata, Francis. 119 Guern-
sey  St. (N.D.)
Lilly. Mmc., 875 Flatbush

Ave. (Ma.)
Lindsay, Caroline Z., 78 St.

Marks Ave. (Ma.)
Loehr, Chas.  J., 476 Clinton

Ave. (D.C.)
Luntz. Dr. Harry, 647 Wil-

loughby Ave., and 37

Vernon Ave. (D.C.)
Lutz, Phil. J., 808 Macon

St. (Ma.)
Lynch, Jno. J., 113 Clinton

Ave. (D.C.)
Marchant,  F.  B.,  23  Flatbush

Ave. (Opt.)


Marcus,  M.,  1344  Gates  Ave.

Martin,  A.,  Inc., 56  Flatbush
Ave. (Opt.)

Martin, H. B., 77 White-
stone  Ave. (D.O.)

Martin. Harry B., 287 E.
18th St. (D.O.)

Martin. Stuart T., 56 Flat-
bush Ave. (Opt.)

Matthews, S. C, 1816 Albe-
marle Road. (D.O.)

Mayfack.  S..  92  Liberty  Ave.

McBurnie, Thos., 1215 Bed-
ford  Ave. (Opt.)

Merkley. Geo. H., 273 San-
ford  Ave. (D.O.)

Merkley, W. A., 487  Clinton
Ave. (D.O.)

Metzner, F., 142 Woodbine
St. (Opt.)

Mildenberger, C, 62 Wood-
bine St. (D.O.)

Millard, H. B., 488 Nostrand
Ave. (Ma.)

Miller,  J.  Wm. B., 988 Lori-
mer  St. (D.O.)

Mitchell, H.  L., 71 Orange
St. (N.D.)

Muncie, Curtis H., 119
Macon St. (D.O.)

Murray, J. H., 110 South
Portland  Ave. (D.C.)

Nachman, Rightman, 270
Rochester Ave. (D.C.)

Neary, J. F., 487 Kosciosko
St. (N.D.)

Neumann,  A.  J., 303 Stone
Ave. (N.D.)

Nirrengarten,
Himrod St.

Norris, Kate
Green Ave


M.,


A. S., 1869
(Opt.)

Louise, 703
7901 13th St.


941 E. 14th
556 E. 28th
, 415 9th St.


North, E.

Nothnagel, J
St. (D.C.)

Nowka, W. S.,
St. (D.O.)

Nyman, Adolph

Oehllecker, Anna. (N.D.)

Oehllecker, Louis  N.  R.

O'Neill,  T.  H.,  419  Central
Ave. (D.O.)

Page. G. Ralph. 147 Han-
cock St. (D.O.)

Parker, Albert  S.,  23  Flat-
bush Ave.  (Opt.)

Pemberton,  S.  D.,  1187  Dean
St. (D.O.)

Pestaner, J. F., 829 Union
St. (D.O.)

Peters, Chas. F.. 2167 Bed-
ford Ave. (D.O.)

Pohs.  Harry  L..  315  Decatur
St. (D.C.)

Pohs, Jacob, 315 Decatur
St. (Opt.)

Puderbach. Peter. 998 Put-
nam Ave. (N.D.)

Race.  H.  L.,  258  Hancock
St. (N.D.)

Ramsey, Mrs. Margaret P.,
1347  Pacific  St. (Cr.)

Rawlins, Wm. E., 46 Irving
St. (Ma.)


Pracliliftners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discreixineies  found  herein,  or  of
chant/e  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


Reeves,  Clara,  1468  E.  17th
St. (D.O.)

Rencher,  G.  J.,  68  Greene  St.,

Rencher,  Rose.  68  Greene  St.

Rightman.  N..  1505  Lincoln
Place. (D.C.)

Roeber,  Ernst,  1560  Mvrtle
Ave. (N.D.)

Rubin,  H.,  1689  Pitkin  Ave.

Rubin,  H.,  1689  Pitkin  Ave.

Sandles,  Isadore,  222  Hewes
St. (D.C.)

Scheidermann,  H.,  24  St.
Nicholas  Ave. (D.O.)

Schiffer, Mrs.  M., 88 Ibis
St. (Cr.)

Schrier, L., 92 Lexington
Ave. (N.D.)

Sellew,  Mrs.  F.  I^.,  392  La-
fayette  Ave. (Cr.)

Sheakford,  Mrs.  E.,  347  45th
St. (Ma.)

Short,  Thos.  J.,  851  Manhat-
tan  Ave. (D.C.)

Simmons,  L.,  642  Sutter  Ave.
(Opt.)

Smallwood, G. S., 815 Lin-
coln  Place. (D.O.)

Smith,  F.  P..  473  Washing-
ton  Ave. (D.O.)

Smith.  Wm.  A.,  46  Fountain
Ave. (D.O.)

Solot,  M.,  1784  Pitkin  Ave.
(Opt.)

Staden,  Caroline,  937  Bush-
wick Ave. (N.D.)

Staden,  Ludwig,  937  Bush-
wick  Ave. (N.D.)

Stark  &  Rencher,  Health
Studio,  406  Evergreen
Ave. (D.O.)

Stark,  Gertrude,  406  Ever-
green Ave.  (D.C,  N.D.,
D.O.)

Stangen,  Dr.  Ernest.  65,7
Classon Ave. (N.D.)

Steinberg. S. E. (Opt.)

Steinjann,  Wm.  571  Sumner
Ave. (Baths,  Massage.)

Steinjann,  Wm.  57J  Sumner
Ave. (N.D.)

Stern,  Harry,  6  Stuyvesant
Place,  and  952  Broadway.

Stone,  E.  W.,  280  Richmond
Ave. (D.C.)

Strickert,  F.,  228-a  Palmetto
St. (D.O.)

Strickert, Geo.  T., 228-a
Palmetto  St. (N.D.)

Strong,  Leonard  V.,  25  7th
Ave. (D.O.)

Stuth, F., 271 Halsey St.

Sullivan,  Mary  J.,  570  Paci-
fic St.,  and  119  Montague
St. (D.C.)

Terry,  Frederick  C,  35
Schermerhorn St. (D.C.)

Thiena,  M.  B.,  433  Sutter
Ave. (D.O.)

Thornburn, Thos. R., 34
Jefferson Ave. (D.O.)

Thuna, M. B., 433 Sutter
Ave. (N.D.)

Tieke,  E.  M.,  414  Washing-
ton  Ave. (D.O.)

Titus,  Fred.  E.,  113  Flat-
bush Ave. (Opt.)

Townsend,  I.  R.,  20  Glendale
Place. (N.D.)

Trenkle,  K.  May,  965  New
York Ave. (N.D.)

Treshman,  Frederic  W.,  301
Lafayette  Ave. (D.O.)


New  York


Geographical  Index


1035


Trope, Alex., 126 Martense

St. (D.O.)
Tuck, Dora, 878 Lafayette

Ave. (D.O.)
Tunison, K. Howard, 99

Doscher  St. (N.D.,  D.C.)
Underwood, Horton Fay, 4  4

Court St. (D.O.)
Von Wlen, Maurice, 2472-a

Pulton St. (N.D., D.O.)
Wag'ner,  Lucetta,  249

King-sland Ave. (i).C.)
Weiss,  Hilda  H., 941  E. 14th

St. (D.C.)
Weniarenroth, J., 570 Paci-
fic St. (D.O.)
Whitcomb, C. H., 392 Clin-
ton  Ave. (D.O.)
White, Mary N., 473 Wash-
ington Ave. (D.O.)
Wieser, E. F., 400 Logan

St. (D.O.)
Williams, Gerald R., 144

Monroe St. (Ma.)
Wood, Geo. H., 808 St.

Johns PI. (D.O.)
Wood,  Jessie, 44  Court  St.

(Cr.)
Woodruff, J. K.. 1212

Fulton  St.  (Opt.)
Work.  L.  C.  &  M.  J.,  85

Hicks St. (D.O.)
young-, Jas., 1224 Pacific

St. (Ma.)
Ruffaloi  Ackley,  Jos. A., 17

Erie  County  Bank  Bldg-.

Armstrong-,  W.  E.,  The  Mac-
Keen. (Cr.)
Ash,  C.  C, 767  Humboldt

Parkway. (N.D.)
Ash, C. E.. 476 Glenwood

Ave. (D.C.)
Baker, John W., 282 Leroy

Ave. (D.C.)
Banfleld, A. H., 391 Dela-
ware Ave. (D.O.)
Barry, Joanna, 342 Bryant

St. (D.O.)
Bassett, Mrs. Mattie C, 405

Delaware  Ave. (Cr.)
Bauman,  C.  A.,  1667  Main
• St. (Ma.)
BeGell, S. E., 771 Main St.

Blanchard,  Mrs.  L.  D., 133

Lexing-ton  Ave. (Cr.)
Brandt, Wm. F., 463 Dodge

St. (D.C.)
Brewster, George A., 24

Laurel St. (D.O.)
Burwig,  Wm.,  870  Humboldt

Parkway. (N.D.)
Camp, M. v., 186 Seneca

St., and 259 S. Division

St. (D.C.)
Carr,  Mrs.  Antoinette  W..

24 Como Ave. (Cr.)
Clark, I. H., 231 Potomac

Ave. (D.C.)
Clayson, Ralph L., Carlton

Court. (D.C.)
Clayson, Ralph L., 1569

Hertel Ave. (D.C.)
Cleveland, W. E., 930 Elm-
wood Ave. (D.C, N.D.)
Cook,  Geo., 806  N.  7th  St.

Crawford, W. A., 928 Main

St. (D.O.)
Cray, Mary H., 28 "\V. Utica

St. (D.C.)
Cremins, E. F., 926| Main

St. (D.C.)
Cook, Geo. T., 32 Glenwood

Ave. (D.O.)
Danforth, Willard J., 268

Jersey  St. (D.C.)
Dieckmann, T.,ouisa 415

Vermont St. (D.O.)


Drake, Edward  V., 44  North

Pearl  St. (D.)
Dutcher,  E.  M.,  96  Chenango

St. (D.C.)
Edel, R., 439 Oak St. (D.O.)
Farwell, Mrs. Little A., 335

Landon St. (Cr.)
Floyd, Ambrose B., Ellicott

Square. (D.O.)
Fox,  Louis,  343  Ijerov  Ave.

Gearhart,  L.  L.,  52  W.  Chip-
pewa  St. (D.C.)
Gearhardt, L. L., 54 Ket-

cham Place. (D.C.)
Gilmour, Harry C, 163

Dearborn St. (D.C.)
Giroux,  E.  G.,  28  W.  Utica

St. (D.C.)
Goodwin, Roy, Electric

Bldg. (Cr.)
Graham,  Mrs.  E.,  180  Frank-
lin St. (Ma.)
Gray,  H. Mary, 28 W.  Utica

St.  (D.C.)
Gray, Mary H., 735 Pros-
pect Ave. (D.C.)
Hagen, Ch., 189 N. Pearl

St. (D.O.)
Hanson, Frank O., 246 W.

Utica St. (D.C.)
Hanson & Hanson, 567

Elmwood Ave. (D.C.)
Harris, O. O., 299 Richmond

Ave. (D.C.)
Henderson, J. W., 141

Eaton St. (D.C.)
Herbst, Edw. G., 378 Elm-
wood  Ave. (D.O.)
Hodgson,  Geo.  L.,  542  Bird

Ave.,  Iroquois  Bldg. (D.C.)
Hodgson, Mrs. Myra W.,

Iroquois Bldg. (Cr.)
Horn, M. J., 295 Plymouth

Ave. (D.C.)
Huffner, Susan E., 335 W.

Ferry St. (D.C.)
Hurlbut, E. F., 467 Fargo

Ave. (Ma.)
Jones, Eli G., 879 W. Ferry

St. (N.D., M.D.)  '

Keane, W. E., 179 Frank-
lin St. (D.C.)
Kester, M. T., 245 Ontario

St. (D.O.)
Kline, Harry  B.. 633 Breck-  ,

enrldge St. (Cr.)  |

Kowal, N. B., 577 Fillmore  i

Ave. (D.O.)  I

Krill, John F., Ellicot Sq.  ^

Kugel, Arthur C. L., 491

Delaware Ave. (D.O.)
Larrowe, Miss, 87 W.

Huron St. (Ma.)
Learner, Grace C, 111

Bidwell Parkway. (D.O.)
Learner, Harry W., Ill

Bidwell Parkway. (D.O.)  \
Lewis, John \V., 225 Allen  ;

St. (Cr.)
Lillibridge, R. A., 771 Main  '

St. (D.C.)  I

Lincoln, Fred C, Ellicott  |

Square. (D.O.)
Lomar, L. L., 316 Pearl

St. (D.C.)
Lynn, Harrison H., Henkel  |

Bldg., Main and Utica i

Sts. (D.C.)
Maxon, C. H., 880 Tona-

wanda  St. (D.C.)
Maxon, C. H., 1294 Jeffer-  |

son St. (D.C.)
McCormick, E. E., 1168

Seneca St. (D.C.)
McDonald, C. J., 12 Allen

St. (D.C.)
McManus, F. E., 1829

Niagara St. (D.C.)


Mehson, L. C, 198 Delaware
Ave. (D.C.)

Moderwell, Robt., 516 Ash-
land Ave. (Cr.)

Mols,  J. P., 469 Best  St.

Mowat, Kenneth G.. 17
Cleveburn Place. (D.C.)

Nenno, Mrs. Carrie, 49
Woodlawn Ave. (Cr.)

Ness, W. F.. 619 Elmwood
Ave. (D.O.)

Oelrich, Edw., Ellicott Sq

Oppenheimer, H. H., 108
Villa  Ave. (D.C.)

Oyer, St. Elmo, 230 Laure]
St. (D.C.)

Parker, Alice J., 3 Fargo
Ave. (D.C.)

Parker,  N. D., 3 Fargo  Ave.

Phelps,  Mrs. W.  J., 103
Anderson Place. (Cr.)

Phillips, E. Helen, 485 Por-
ter Ave. (D.C.)

Plnney, L. P., 3 Fargo  Ave.

Proctor, C. W., Ellicott
Square. (D.O.)

Rademacher, Caroline. 373
Woodlawn Ave. (D.C.)

Radice, Samuel S., 45 Elm-
wood  Ave. (D.C.)

Read, Chas. G., 153
Riverside Ave. (Cr.)

Rhodes, F. A., 308 North-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Richard,  S.  J.  de  Niord, 262
Summer St. (El.)

Rubens, H.  M., 372  Amhurst
St. (D.C.)

Russell, Hugh L., 780 Elm-
wood Ave. (D.O.)

Russell, Sarah E., 780 Elm-
wood Ave. (D.O.)

Ruthenberg, F. W. 51 Te-
mon St. (D.O.)

Rutkowsky, Alex., 2571
Main St. (N.D.)

Rutko-W'ski,  J.  M..  2571  Main
St. (D.C.)

Rosse, Ed., 182 Masten St.
. (D.O.)

Sanderus, H. J., 2230 Fill-
more St. (D.C.)

Say, W. F.. 1041 Genesee
St. (D.O.)

Schofleld, Jennie M., 199
Hodge Ave. (D.O.)

Schofield, \V. J., 199 Hodge
Ave. (D.C.)

Seaborn. R. A.. 336 Barnes
St. (D.C.)

Slawatycki. L. J.. 986 Fill-
more Ave. (D.C.)

Smith, Etta, 819 Potomac
Ave., c/o  Mrs. E. F.
Buckley. (D.C.)

Smith, Richard J., 295 Ply-
mouth  Ave. (D.C.)

Smith. 'Wm. E.. 544 Elm-
wood Ave. (D.C.)

Spryszynski. Dr. S. M., 2"''
Stanislaus St. (D.C.)

State. ^Valter W.. 584  Dela-
ware Ave. (D.O.)

Stauffer. Grace H.. 281
Wohlers Ave. (D.O.)

Steele,  "Walter  W..  560  Dela-
ware Ave. (D.O.)

Stone, E. ^V.. 280 Rich-
mond  Ave. (D.C.)

Syrcher, Ernest V., 5 "\V.
Genesee St. (Opt.)

Tanner, Mrs. Marv W., 126
Bedford Ave. (Cr.)

Taylor, J. E., 256-68 Main
St. (Opt.)


m.-^d


Geographical  Index


Sew  York


Tliiiion.  Rpnp  V.,  12t^  Bid-
well Parkway. (N.D.)

Thomas,  Alice  R..  2299  Se-
neca St. (D.C.)

Tlionipson. Mis. M. Flor-
ence, 24 Huntington Ave.
(Ma.)

Thornton.  Fred  W..  18_Te-
resa Place. (Ph.C. D.C.)

Todd.  G.  F.,  11  Keene  Bld&.,
1  Maine  and  9  E.  Utica
Sts. (D.C.)^ „ ^^ ^ ^

Vernon,  Prof.  &  Mrs.  A.  A.,
10 Barlow  Ulace. (Ma.)

Von  Arffmann,  E.,  633  West
Delaware Ave. (N.D.)

Walker,  .1.  W.,  309  15th  St.
(Cr.)

Walls'chlager,  F.  A.,  56  W.
Parade Ave. (N.D.)

Weaver,  E.  B.,  311  W.  Ferry
St  The  Victoria  Theatre
Bldg., and 1028 Elmwood

Webster,  Mrs. M. E.. 320 N.

Division St. (D.C.)
W^eegar, Percy L., I'^l

Main St. (D.O.)
Welnfurtner, J.. 821 Best

St. (D.O.)
Welch, Mrs. May E., 138

Mariner St. (Cr.)
Wendell, Wm. H., 27* S.

Genesee St. (D.O.)
Weser, G., 41 Hickory St.

Wieder, Wm.. 476 Glen-
wood Ave. (D.O.)
Wieder. William. (N.D.)
Wiley. Andrew S., Brisbane

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Will, Wm. E.. 274 North

St. (Cr.)
Will, Mrs. Lillie C, 274

North  St. (Cr.)
Williams,  Lloyd, 510  Frank-
lin St. (Ma.)
Williamson. Eli S., 293

Hovt St. (Cr.)
Woolger,  W.  C. 1233
Michigan Ave. (D.C.)
rnmeron Mill.ss Lewis. G. H.

Caniindai»;un: Baldwin, F.
Guv, Main and Chapin
Sts". (D.C.)  _. ,

Bancroft. Claude M.. Fmley

Blk. (DO.)
Maxwell, Leo.. Box 33.
Candor: Maxwell, Leo.. Box

33. (D.C.)
Canlsteo: Barkalow. Bert-
rand S., Box 519. (D.C.)
Mays, Mrs. J. C. (D.C.)
Swartout. H. C. (D.C.)
Carthase: Nash, Leo. A.
Webster. Geo. V., Strick-
land Bldg. (D.O.)
Cato: Hurd, A. M. (D.C.)
Cedarlnir.st,  L.  I.:  Rutzel.  A.  J.

(Ma.)
f'eleron: Lawson, Herbert B.

Central .Valley: McDonald
Sanitarium. (M.A.)
Kes.sler, Karl, c/o McDon-
ald Sanitarium (M.A.)
Cerl.s: Elackett.  J.  N. (N.D.)
Charlotteville: Grunliaf, W.

S. (D.O.)
(  haiitaiMiiia: Morgan, Wm. C.

ClnelnnatUH: Wheeler, Mrs.
A. (D.C.)


Clinton Corner.«<: .Tackson,

Ernest. (D.C.)
Clymerj Howard.  L.  R. (D.C.)
Coney  Island,  Brooklyn  t

.Toseph, .Joseph .T., 3033 W.

23rd St. (Opt.)
Cornlnp:: Breed, Arthur M.,

126 Pine St. (D.O.)
Dukes & Dukes. 204 First

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Powell. F. D.. First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Treble. John M.. 142 Pine

St. (D.O.)
Warren, H. F.. 403 Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Warren. Nellie B.. 403

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Corona, L. I.: Saehler. F. C.

154  Kingsland  Ave. (D.C.)
Staebler, F. C. 154 Kings-
land Ave. (N.D.)
Cortlandt Andrus. C. L., 4

Madison St. (D.C.)
Cady. Jas. D.. 30 Court St.

Harkness.  Thos.,  8  Park  St.

and 112 Tompkins St.

Ingalls. Mrs. H. B., 21

Clinton St., and 28 Miller

St. (D.C.)
Ingalls, Julia N., 22 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Maxwell. Leo C. 9 Croton

Ave. (D.C.)
Medes. E. Harold, 15

Rickard  St. (D.C.)
Miller, F. L.. R. D. No. 3

Mudge. C. L.. 12 Otter

Creek Place. (D.C.)
Seaman. Dimon R.. 8 Park

St. (D.C.)
Sherman. Ray  W..  12  Pleas-
ant  St. (D.C.)
Wheeler, Alma. (D.C.)
Cuba: Rodibaugh. Loretta.

Dan.svlllet Rilev, Geo. P., 212

Main St. (D.C.)
Smith. Arthur N.. 52 Eliza-
beth St. (D.O.)
Dunkirk: Dash, Clemens R.,

109 Park Ave. (D.C.)
Johnson. N. A.. Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Meleski. Mary M., 604 Lion

St. (D.O.)

Bast  Aurora  I  Bock.  Frederick.

Nield. Arthur E. (D.C.)
Roycroft Health Home.

The. (D.C.)
Whlttemore.  A. C. 427  Main

St. (D.O.)
Wolff, M. v.. 135 Park PI.

East  Rochester:  Hewins,  C.  S.,

795 Main St. (D.C.)
Edgemere,  L..  I.j  Krauss,  E.  R.

EInihnrst, L.. I.t Burnard,

Harold W., 47 Whitney  |

Ave. (D.O.)  ;

Kremer, Herman, 63 25th t

St. (N.D.)  I

Elmira: Cox & Cox, 525 W.

Church St. (D.C.)
Cox, Henry G.. 411 W.

Water St. (D.C.)  I

Crowell, Edgar G., 309-10  \

Snyder  Bldg. (D.C.)  !

Diehl. J. M.. Hulett Bldg.


Garman, Delbert. (DC.)
Gradwell, Chas. C. 71.')

Wall St. (D.C.)
Green. Frank J., Snvder

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hillabrant, Cora L., 652

Park PI. (D.O.)
Morrow, Mabel, .')2.' W

Church St. (D.C.)
Reed,  S.  De  Welt,  L. B. 342,

Rowley, Etta W., 407 Snv-
der Bldg. (D.C.)
Rowley, Orlando W., 4  07-8

Snyder Bldg. (D.C.)
Stowe, H. E.. 243 Lake St.

Underwood. J. A., Realty

Bldg. (D.O.)
Endicott: Bishop. Edward.'

34 Washington Ave.

Briggs & Briggs. 60 Wash-
ington  Ave. (D.C.)
Falrport: Hutchinson. H., 6

Prospect St. (D.O.)
Payetteville: Doyle, J. (D.O.)
Flusliin;;: Gates, E. H., 222

Percy St. (D.C.)
Gates. Marie L., 222 Percy

St. (Ph.C. D.C.)
Henry. Aurelia S.. 201 San-
ford Ave. (D.O.)
Mochrie. Elizabeth Frazer.

121 Barclay St. (D.O.)
Fredonia: Jobes & Jobes, 68

Green St. (D.C.)
Johnson. N. A.. 33 W. Main

St. (D.O.)
Fulton: Hallstead. W. B,

Quirk Theatre Bldg.

Teall. Chas. C. (D.O.)
Gain.sville: Sisson, Guy.


Gallupville: Parsons, F. W

Geneva: Heist, Albert D.
Mclntyre, Orrin R., HO

Poultney St. (D.C.)
Parker & Parker, General

Delivery. (D.C.)
Posson, F. W., 19 Elm St.

Schoenthaler, Wm. F., HI

S. West St. (D.C.)
Watson, Paul. (D.C.)
Glens Falls: Sweet. H. D..
Glens Falls Insui-ance
Bldg. (D.O.)
Posson.  G.  W. (D.C.)
Terg, Linley H., 1 Beacon
St.  D.O.)
Gloversville: Kennedy. Seth
Y.. 54 First Ave. (D.O.)
Wetherbe, E. T., 31 Wash-
ington St. (D.O.)
Wygal. Walter D., 63 S.
Main  St. (D.C.)
Gouverneuri Hawes, Norman

C, Main St. (D.O.)
Greene: Webb, Victorine "W.

Hantburg: Jerry, Edmund
W., East Main St. and
Hunt Ave. (D.C.)
Whittemore. F. G. (D.O.)
Harpersville: Knox, .1. E.

Hnverstraw: King, R. !<"'.

Hempstead: Grambow, Dr.
Emll,  37  Lent  Ave. (D.C.)


Uiilversnl NiiliiroiMiHilo l)Iro«'<ory iiml Iliiy«'rs' <;ui«I«'


lO.'jr


ALMA  C.  ARNOLD

Chiropractic,  Dietetics,
Hygiene and Hydrotherapy


Member
American Naturopathic Association

National Association of Drugless
Physicians

National  Association  of  Osteothera=
peutics

International  Alliance  of  Physicians
and Surgeons

Women's  Press  Club

American Association for the Ad=
vancement of Science


9  W.  67th  St. New  York,  N.  Y.

Office  Hours: 9 A.  M.  to 1  P. M.


Don't  Read  This  Unless

You  Are  Reasonably

Miserable;  because

JESSIE  ALLEN  FOWLER

.helps  the  misfits^to  find  their'proper  place  in  life

What  are  your  Talents?  She  tells  you.
What  should  be  your  Vocation? She

tells  you.
Whomshould  youniarry?She  tellsyou.
These  things,  and  much  more  of  vital
concern  to  you,  this  expert  in  Scien-
tific Character  Analysis  can  disclose
to  you  in  an  examination  of  your  self
or  of  your  photographs.
Literally,  you  do  not  know  your  self
until  you  have  had  Miss  Fowler's  in-
valuable service.

Don't deny  yourself the luxury

of  Success;  for  the  only  lasting

Success  isthe  product  of  genuine

Self-Knowledge!

Examination.s,  and  Advice  that  Fit.s;
Instruotioii  in  this  Science,  in  cla.ss  or
by  mail;  Books  on  Character  Annlysi.s.
Thi.s  .service  is  for  you — RIGHT  XOW

JESSIE  ALLEN  FOWLER

1358  Broadway  New  York  City

(At  36th  St.)


STEREOSCOPIC

STUDIES  of  ANATOMY

Teaches  from  the  most  wonder-
ful, actual  dissections  ever
made  of  the human Body,  b}'
aid  of  the  Stereoscope.

Sold  on  Easy  'I'ernis.  Send  for  descriptive
printed matter. Address

Imperial  Publishing  Co.

373  FOURTH  AVENUE
Uept.  A.  New  York,  N.  Y.


DR.  J. M. NABSTEDT

CHIROPRACTOR

DOWNTOWN  OFFICE  UPTOWN  OFFICE

2  COLUMBUS  CIRCLE  514  W.  149th  STREET

NEW  YORK  CITY


FRANK  B.  SCHANNE,  M.  P.,  M.  D.,  D.  0.

CONSULTING PHYSICIAN

New York  New  Jersey  Pennsylvania

Address  all communications  to

600 W. 116th  St., New  York, N. Y.


EUGENE  JACQUES  CZUKOR,  N.D.

CURATIVE  GYMNASTICS

New  York  Citv


Q.  H.  PATCHEN,  M.  D.,  D.  C.

CHIROPRACTIC  METHODS

13  Central  Pabk  West  New  York,  N y

N.W. Cor.  61st  Street Telephone,  9738  Colum'bvs

Hours: 10  to 12,  3  to  6,  and  by  Appointment


DR.  ST.  GEORGE  FECHTIG

New  York  City OSTEOPATH Lakewood, N J.

35-37 Madison Ave.  Fechtig Sanitarium

SUTHERLAND,  FLORIDA

St.  George  Osteopathic  Health  Resort


Chas.  C.  Froude,  B.  Sc,  D.  C,  N.  D.
John L. MacKinnon, D. C.

FROUDE  AND  MacKinnon

CHIROPRACTORS
260  Fair  Street  Kingston,  N.  Y.

(Post  Office  Bldg.)


T  K  R  E  S  A CI  >I  I  X  O C  R  I  S  C  U  O  L  O
A^'aturopath

Specialist in Magneto Therapy

All kinds of Drugless Methods

339  LEONARD  ST.  BROOKLYN,  N.  Y.


1038


G eoqnipli ical  Index


New  York


llerklmen Ballard, A. B.. 139

Main St. (D.C.)
Hillhurui Gaffe, I.yle^ Ells-
worth. 6th St. (IJ.O.)
Hornclli Dickinson, K \V., •'i

Kreason Bldff. (D.C.)
Fenner, J. 1-, 33 Federation

Bldg-., 38 Main St.. and

304 Main St. (l^C.)
Gray, Chester \V ., 3 HaKes

Ave. (D.O.) ,,,,,,
Marsh, John D. (N.D.)
Hudson: Nelson. Von O.. 422

Warren St. (D.C.)
HiintinKton: Marcus, M.. Box

87. (D.O.)
llion: Buck. R. H., 49 West

St. (D.C.)
Tonawunda: Park W. G., 8

Young St. (D.C.)

Ithaca: Bingham ^,?^A^ '^"

133 E. State St (D.O.)
Smith, Mrs. Hattie, 206 S.

Geneva St. (D.C.)
Smith, S. P., 206 S. Geneva

St. (D.C.)
Wilson. K. P., Box 123.

Jamaica: Baker Frederick

Dunton, 76 Hardenbrook

Ave. (D.O.)
Fechtiff, Louis R., 86 Har-
denbrook Ave. (D.O.)
Long-, Robert H.. 309 Shel-

ton Ave. (D.O.)
Jamestown: Bradley,  C.  E.,  32

Prospect  St. (D.C.)
Carlson, Harold. (D.C.)
Hansen, L. W. (D.O.)
.Jamison, Chas. E., Chada-

koin Bldg. (D.O.)
Jewett, Nicholas, 411 W.

3rd St. (D.C.)
McCarthy, Geo., 121 AV. 3rd

St. (D.C.)
Marshall, J. S. B., 503 W.

3rd St. (D.O.)  „ ^

McCartney, G., 121 W. 3rd

St. (N.D.)
Mensink. J. H. (D.O.)
Nichols, Rowe's Bath Par-
lors. (D.C.)
Noren. Hildur, 562 E. 2nd

St. (D.C.)  ^ ^^^ ^,,

Parker, Emerson  R., 411 \V .

3rd  St. (D.C.)  ^ ^

Pinney, L. Preston, Clifford

Bldg. (D.C.)
Thompson, L. E., 621 Pren-

dergast Ave. (D.C.)
Zeitler & Zeitler. Everett

Bldg. (D.C.)
Johnson City: Weist. R. S., 23

Lewis St. (D.C.)
Kendain: Van Duser. A. B.,

f  o E. .T. Van Duser.

KIngrston: Banker, Chas. F.,

184 Albany Ave. (D.O.)
•Banker, Minerva Kellogg,

184 Albany Ave. (D.O.)
Froude, Chas. C. 209-10

Warren Bldg. (D.C.)
Froude & MacKinnon, 260

Fair St. (D.C.)
MacKinnon. .lohn L., 260

Fail- St. (D.C.)
Stone. E. W. (D.C.)
Warren, Geo. S., 18 Pearl

St. (D.O.)
Watrous.  Alh^n  B. (D.C.)

I^ackawanna: Schodle, A. S.,

Box 22. (D.O.)
I.urehniont: Watrous, Allen B.


Iia-wrenoe. I.. I.t Hf-ndrick-
son, J. \\'., Mott  Ave. and
John St. (D.O.)
heroy: Goiton, M. H. (N.D.)
Graham, Robt. H. (D.O.)
Smith. Etta S.. 22 E. Main
St. (D.C.)
liHtle  Falls: Gates, B. A., 617
John St. (D.C.)
Hoerz. C. (D.O.)
liOi'kport: Himmel, Mis.s.
Kaiser, Charles A., F. & M.

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Kress, George P., 24 Har-
rison Ave., 204 Hodge
Bldg. (D.C.)
Kress, Mable T.. 24 Harri-
son Ave. (D.C.)
Scott, Margaret, 129 Wal-
nut St. (D.C.)
Traviss. F. \V., 140 Lock
St. (D.O.)
LonK Island City: King, Cor-
nelius  E.. 955 10th Ave.
(D.M.T.)
Pizarro, Evelio \., A'allev

Stream. (D.C.)
Grosshaviser, Frank, 308
Freeman Ave. (D.C.)
Lyons: Crofoot, Frank Adal-
bert, 77 William St.
McGraw: Kerr, Mrs. C. A.,
R. F. D. No. 1. (D.C.)
Mudge, C. L. (D.C.)
Medina:  Jackson, H. H., 206
West Ave. (N.D.)
Prior, T. W., Room  6, Cook

Blk., (D.C.)
Walker, J. Jay. (D.O.)
Merrick: Knibbs, Thos.

Middletown: Casler, Geo. L.,
15 Cortland St. (D.C.)
Dillabough, A. H., 7 Ro-
berts  St. (D.O.)
I Ferguson, Joseph, 11 Oi-
;  chard St. (D.O.)

Mineoln: Carbo. Magno
Labor. (D.O.)
;  .^loravia: Humphrev, C. S.

•  Mount Vernon: Balazs, L.,
117  S. 1st  Ave. (D.O.)
Buster, Will L., 139 Rich

Ave. (D.O.)
Gunzenhauser, Dr. Anna, 46

S. 13th  Ave. (N.D.)
Hough. Frank T., 222 S.

Fifth Ave. (N.D.)
Marcey. H. E., 4  3 N. 9th

St. (D.C.)
Scholz & Scholz. Drs.. 30
Valentine St. (D.C.)
Xewsirk: Chittenden, W. C
33 S. Main St. (D.O.)
Woods, H. P.. 22 Madison
Ave. (D.C.)
Xewark Valley: Weist, R. S.
1  -Xewburg: Johonnott, W. W.,
277 Grand St. (D.O.)
Killeen. John J.. 118 Grand

St. (D.C)
Marsden,  Roy  C,  225 3rd  St.

Tucker, E. J.. 67 Grand St.
New  Rochelle: Bensen,  Lester
R.. 81 Centre Ave. (D.O.)
Geiser,  J. Stephen. 39 North
Ave., and 87 (Center St.
Kingsbury, Frank D., 313

Hugenot St. (D.C.)
I^arsen, S., 14 Lincoln St.


New  Vork  City:  Achorn,  Clin-
ton E.,  6  E.  37th  St. (D.O.)
-Mbright. Edward, 267 W.

79th St. (D.O.)
Allcutt, E. Burton, 1 Madi-
son  Ave. (N.D.)
Allen, A.  A., 52  AV. 110th  St.

.Mien,  Clifford  H., 61 rolum-

bia  St. (D.C.)
Amarandos,  G.  N.  M.,  50() W.

171st St. (Ma.)
Amino, Prof., 733 Madison

Ave. (P.)
Anderson & Sjogren, 220 W.

114th St. (Ma.)
Andren,  Olga,  152  Columbus,

Ave. (Ma.)
Andrews, C. L., 36 E. 23rd

St.. and 147 W. 23rd St.

Anton, Mrs. M., 100  W. 67th

St. (Ma.)
Archer. Madame. 45 W.

34th St. (Ma.)
Arnold,  Alma  C, 9 W. 67th

St. (D.C.)
Astrom, Algol, 200 W. 7  2nd

St. (P.)
Auer,  Jacques.  Hotel Bilt-

more. (Ma.)
Banker. J. Bird.sall. 112 W.

72nd St. (D.O.)
Barker, Alex. E. W., 5ii

Church St. (P.C.)
Barker, Prof. Anthonv, 127

W. 42nd St. (P.)
Barrett,  Mrs.  J.. 1033 3rd

Ave. (Ma.)
Bartholomew.  W.  C, 128 W.

13th St. (D.C.)
Bartlett,  Wm.  G.  W., 110  W.

84th St. (Ma.)
Baruch, Sandor, 59 W. 105tli

St. (N.D.)
Baumann,  Attila  A.,  49 W.

38th St. (P)
Bayer,  Carl,  Harlem  Hydri-

atic Institution, 55 W.

113th  St. (N.D.)
Beal,  R.  W.,  2403  Broadway.

(F., D.O.)
Beckman.  Hjalmar, 128 East

57lh St. (Ma.)
Beeman, E. E., 500 5th Ave.

Beeman. L.

Broadway.
Beljeen. A. J.

St. (Ma.)
Benjamin, W. Bert, 21 W.

129th St. (D.C.)
Benson,  Pauli  S.,  78  W.  82nd

St. (Ma.)
Berger, Grace C, 2626

Broadway. (D.O.)  ,
Bernard, Emma, 146 W.

105th St. (D.C.)
Berst. Fred. J.. 144 E. 55th

St. (Bath)
Beruth,  Mrs.  E.,  371  E.  183rd

St. (Ma.)
Besell, L.. 1516 Washing-
ton Ave. (D.O.)
Beuchler,  J.  R.,  154  W.  121st

St. (D.C.)
Bick,  H.,  4  W.  117th  St.

Bidwell, Hudson, 2104 7th

Ave. (D.C.)
Binck, C. E. (D.O.)
Bingham. Will, 1931 B'way.

(P.)
Bissonette. Cyrene J., 700

W. 180th St. (D.O.)
Bjorkman, Maitin E., 213

5th  Ave. (Ma.)
Blair, F. W.. 1123 B'way.

(DC.)
Blanchard, J. W., 360 East

195th St. (N.D.)


Mason, 2131

502 W. 141st


New  York


(ir()(/r(ipliical  Judex


lO.'iO


Bliss, Ch. W., 42 Court St.

Blum, H. A., 32G Grand St.

(Opt.)
Bojus, G. H., 26 Vesey St.

(P.)
Bothner, Georg:e, 250 W.

42nd St. (P.)
Bovd,  Headley.  601  W.  IGStli

St. (N.D.)
Bradtmuller,  J.  W.,  60  Pros-
pect Place. (D.C.)
Braeuer, 338 K. 52nd St.

(Bath)
Brandman, R. Vj., 547 W.

142nd St. (D.C.)
Brandt, C, 350 B'way.

Brandt.  Carlos,  213  W.  123rd

St. (N.D.)
Brennan,  Jos.  P., 68 E. 93rd

St. (N.D.)
Brill, Morris M., 18 E. 41st

St. (D.O.)
Britzelle, Albert C, 215 W.

51st St. (D.C.)
Broberg,  Manfred,  45  W.

34th St. (N.D., D.C.)
Brodtkorb, Nils W., 50 East

29th St. (Ma.)
Brolene, A. C, 430 W. 34th

St. (N.D.)
Brown, Wm.  J.,  5 W. 66th

St. (P.)
Bruher, Mrs. Torsten, 121

Vermilyea  Ave. (Ma.)
Bivan & Bryan, 38 W. 32nd

St. (D.C.)
Bryan,  F.  J., 38  W. 32nd  St.

Buehler, John Benjamin,

680 St. Nicholas Ave.

Burling-,  Mrs.  H.,  177  Ea.st

75th  St. (Ma.)
Burnard, Harold W., 47 W.

34th St. (D.O.)
Burns, Guy Wendell, 49 W.

57th St. (D.O.)
Buster, Will L., 505 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Carroll, Max, 1269 Boston

Road. (D.C.)
Casper, William P., 2875

B'way. (D.C.)
Cassile, Dr. W. Roll, 1336

Bristow St. (N.D.)
Chiropractic Institute of

New  York, 33  W. 42nd  St.

Christian, Eugene, 213 W.

79th St. (D.C.)
Christopherson, Miss H.,

2728 Broadway. (Ma.)
Clark, A. B., 341 Madison

Ave. (D.O.)
Clausen, H.  Klinkwart, 2041

5th  Ave. (N.D.)
Cockrell,  Irvin,  505 5th  Ave.

Cohan, A., 320 E. 15th St.

Collard, Elois, 312 W. 58th

St. (P.)
Conrad, Ch. F., 110 W. 90th

St. (D.O., M.D.)
Cooley, Dr. Alvah R., 13 W.

31st  St. (Opt.)
Crane, Ralph  M., 18 E. 41st

St. (D.O.)
Crapo, J. Edwin, 288 \V.

92nd St. (D.C.)
Crusuis, E. L., 500 5th Ave.

Cummings, Miss A. M., 506

W. 113th St. (Ma.)
Cuiland, Miss Fannie, 130

W. 116th St. (Ma.)
Czukor, Eugene .Tacques,

100 W. 124th St. (N.D.)


Dahlstrom, Mi.ss T., 357 W.

23rd St. (Ma.)
D'Almaine, Chas., 32nd St.

and B'way. (D.C.)
Deininger, A., 39th St. and

P.roadway Bldg., 1416

Broadwav. (D.C.)
Dillabough, W. J. E., Hotel

Buckingham,  5th  Ave.  and

r)0th St. (D.O.)
Dougherty,  L.  &  C, 56  Fort

M^ashington Ave. (D.C.)
Downer, Arthur P., 515 W.

122nd St. (D.C.)
Draper, I^. I^., Aeolian Hall,

33 W. 42nd St. (D.C.)
Droll, Mrs. V., 58 W. 128th

St. (Ma.)
Dueringer, Heinrich, 47 W.

34th St., and 668 W. 28th
St.,  A.  M.  Bldg.  (D.C,  N.D.)
Duncan, Chas. H., 2612

B'way. (M.D.)
Dwyer, Wm., 99 Nassau St.

(Bath)
Dye, A. Aug., N. Y. Ameri-
can  Bldg. (D.C.)
Dyer, Nannie, 424 6th Ave.

(Ma.)
Eckstrom, Dr. E. A., Suite

32, Astor Court Bldg.

Edel,  M. J., 640  E. 220th St.

Elliott, J.  T., 209  E. 42nd

St. (P.)
Ericson, Miss M., 434 East

149th St. (Ma.)
Fallen, C, 62 W. 68th St.

Fechtig, St. George, 37

Madison  St. (D.C.)
Feffermann, T. D., 208 W.

112th St. (D.O.)
Fenail, Frank, 194 River-
side  Drive. (N.D.)
Fennel,  F.  S.,  25  W.  65th  St.

Fensterheim, 306 E. 3rd St.

(Bath)

Donald, 469 E.
18 W. 34th St.


Ferguson,
143rd St.

Ferrier, J.,

Ferwil, F.


194 Riverside

Drive. (D.O.)
Fielding, Owen. 968 Ander-
son St. (Ma.)
Fields, J., 30 W. 132nd St.

(Ma.)
Finkel, Dr. I. N., 536 145th

St. (Ch.)
Finkelstein, A., 12 Jefferson

St. (D.O.)
Finkelstein, Samuel, 207 W.

110th St. (D.C.)
Finnen. E., 45 W. 34th St.

Fischer, Dr. Geo. F., 221 E.

53rd St. (M.D.)
Fiske, Franklin, 1 W. 34th

St. (D.O.)
Fitzgerald, E. J., 211 E.

33rd St. (Ma.)
Fleck, Chas. E., 247 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Fleisher, Karl, Rooms 414-

15, 503 5th Ave. (D.C.)
Fletcher, Clarke F., 143 W.

69th St. (D.O.)
Fletcher,  Dr.  W.  H.  A.,  203

W. 52nd St. (Ch.)
Flush,  Mme.  B., 250  W.  94th

St. (Ma.)
Folmsbee, Wm., 756 Home

St. (D.O.)
Fowler, Jessie Allen, 1358

Broadway. (Ph.)
Fowler  & Wells, 27 E. 22nd

St. (Ph.)


Frank, Mme. L.. 540 W.

112th St. (Ma.)
P"'reda,  Louis,  261  Broadway.

(Ch.)
Fresca, Ettore, 137 E. 43rd

St. (N.D.)
Fues, Francois, 2314 B'way.

Furlong, Pauline, 111 5th

Ave. (P.)
Fusay, Henry M., 50 W.

82nd St. (Ma.)
Gerhard, Wm. P., 42nd

Street Bldg. (D.O.)
Gerschanek,  S., 39th St. and

Broadway Bldg. (D.C.)
Gmsburg, S., 25i w  . lllth

St. (Ma.)
Ginsburg, Samuel M., 60 W

75th St. (Ma.)
Glassen, G., 511 E. 162nd

St. (D.O.)
Gleason,  John  H., 20  E.  46th

St. (Ma.)
Gleichman,  AVm.,  1457

Broadway. (D.C.)
Goldstein, Israel A.. 1 E

117th St. (D.C.)
Green, L. A., 319 2nd Ave.

Griesen, Armin, 1362 Pros-
pect Ave. Bronx. (N.D.)
Green, Chas. S.. Vanderbilt

Ave. (D.O.)
Gieese, L. A., 319 2nd Ave.

'^^'•ossman, A., 7 E. 116th  St.

Grossman, D., 343 3rd Ave.

(Opt.)
Grossmann,  Fredk.  N.  M T

460 E. 141st St. (Ma.)' "'
Gruggel, Carl A., 54 E.  59th

St. (Ma.)
Grusemick. J. F., 79 Hamil-
ton St. (Ma.)
fJuenther, Einest, 222 W

140th St. (Ma.)
Hagerty, Mrs. M., 215 West

142nd  St. (Ma.)
Halligan, Nina Gilliar, 45

W. 34th  St. (D.C.)
Hanson. H. A., 41 Convent

Ave. (D.O.)
Harper, Claude B., Old

Colony Club, Hotel Wal-
dorf  Astoria. (P.)
Harlem Health Institution,

385 Manhattan Ave.

Harris, F., 45 W. 34th St.

Haskell, Chas. C, 407 W

117th St. (D.O.)
Hastad.  Miss  Amanda,

Aeolian Hall, 33 W. 42nd

St. (Ma.)
Hausmann. A., 241 W. 42nd

St. (Ma.)
Havard, Wm. Freeman, 110

E.  41st  St.,  (c/o  Dr.  Lust).

Hayes, W. S., 2050 Amster-
dam Ave. (D.O.)
Hazzard. Chas.. 18 "W. 34th

St. (D.O.)
Hebbem, L. H., 150 E. 27th

St. (D.O.)
Heckman, Eugene, 155 East

33rd St. (M. D.)
Hedwig, Geo., 207 W. 84th

St. (D.O.)
Heim, M. V., 962 Aldus St

Heller, A. G.. 1537  B'way  at

45th St. (Ch.)
Heller. A. S., 247 W. 145th

St. (D.O.)
Heller,  Dr.  G.  A. (Ma.)
Helmer, George J.. 187

Madison Ave. (D.O.)


1040


Geoqraphical  Index


New  York


Helmer, John N., 136 Madi-
son  Ave. (D.O.)
Herring-. Ernest M., 170 W.

73rd St. (D.O.)
Hibbe. Leopold H. R., 154

E.  49th  St. (M.D.)
Hicka.  J..  3872  3rd  Ave.

(D.C.)  I

Hilf,  Helen.  246  W.  128th  St.

(Ma.)
Hill. M. E., 634 E. 220th St.

Hinsch, Henry & Rudolph,

912 Grant Ave. (D.C.)
Hochman, A., 169 Riving-

ton  St. (Palmist)
Hoegen,  Jos.  A.,  334  Alexan-
der Ave. (N.D.)  !
Hofstetter,  Max,  175  E.  89th  '

St. (D.O.)
Hofstetter, M., 555 W.  151st

St. (N.D.)
Holdt, Edgar, Pearl River.

Hommel, John, 21 Manhat-
tan Ave. (Ma.)
Horton, H., 348 E. 9th St.

Hovey, Wm. G., 47 W. 34th

St., 810 Marbridge Bldg.

Howard, Edward W. S.,

235 W. 102nd St. (D.O.)
Hradek, Mrs.  J.  J.,  Hotel

Bon  Ray. (Ma.)
Hrobe, J., 314 E. 86th St.

Huber, Mrs. T., Cor. B'way

and  44th  St. (Ma.)
Irving, James Montgomery,

200 5th Ave. (P.C, N.D.)
Jackson, John A., 253 W.

42nd St. (D.O.)
Jacobs, Samuel, 163 Ludlow

St. (N.D.)
Jacobson,  Mrs.  John, 247  W.

123rd St. (Ma.)
Jacquemin, Theo. J.

44th St. (M.D.)
Jalos,  Anni,  535  W.  163rd  St.

(Ma.)
.Taven. B., 539 E. 78th St.

Jensen, Chas. L.,

24th St. (N.D.,
Johansson,  Elida,

84th St. (Ma.)
Johnson,  Clare, 200  W

St. (D.C.)
Johnson, C. P., 130 Wads-
worth Ave., and 220 W.

72nd St. (D.C.)
Jones, A. E., 1 W. 34th St.

(Ma.)
Joseph. Alfred, 224 W. 52nd

St. (Ch.)
Joven,  B.,  430  E.  66th  St.  !

Kaiser, Arthur J., 171 East  ,

81st St. (Ma.)  '

Karpen. Henrv. 16 W. 36th

St. (N.D.)
Kavser. F. T., 673 E. 216th

St. (N.D.)
Kellerman, Annette, 12 W.

31st  St. (Ma.)
Kellev, Miss Adah, 301 W.

55th St. (N.D.)
Kenney,  M.  F.,  1785  Amster-
dam  Ave. (Ma.)
Kern, Max, 113 E. 17th St.

King, Elizabeth, 154 East

32nd St. (Nat. Inst.)
Kinze, L., 379 E. 155th St.

Knapp. Lester I., Sherman

Square Hotel. (D.O.)
Knight.- Delia G., 234 W.

44th St. (D.O.)


85 Franklin


379 E.


141 E.


327 West
D.O.)
51  West

72nd


Knipe,  J. B.

St. (D.C.)
Kobel, Dr. Louis.

155th St. (N.D.)
Koppel,  Mile. S., 158 West

34th St. (Ma.)
Krau.s, Eugene R.. 2491

Broadway. (JJ).0.)
Kreuzer. C. 236 E. 69th St.

(Ma.)
Kunzo, Dr. Loui.s, 379 E.

155th St. (N.D.)
Kiipferschmied, 168-170 E.

81st  St. (N.D.)
Kurth, George, 225 W. 68th

St. (Ma.)
Larsen,  Pavne  P.,  37  E.  28th

St. (D.C.)
Larson,  Payne  P.,  37  E.  28th

St. (D.C.)
I>audberg, A., 85 E. 1st St.

(Bath)
Lee, 125  W.  58th  St. (N.D.)
Lee, Lyndon E., 217 W.

125th St. (D.C.)
LePompodour, F. S., 2730

Broadway. (D.O.)
Leubuscher,  A.  L., 345 West

70th St. (M.P.)
Liebgold,  Louis,  3604  B'way.

(Ma.)
Liederbach,  J.  L., 343 3rd

Ave. (Opt.)
Lind, G. M. E., Lincoln

Trust Bldg., B'way and

72nd St. (D.C.)
I^indstrom, E. C,

Waverly Place.
Lindstrom, .1. W.,

67th  St. (Ma.)
Lockwood, T. D., 51 E. 42nd

St. (D.O.)
Lohne, Miss I., 664 Lexing-
ton Ave. (Ma.)
Lope, Fredk.  A., 301  West

139th  St. (Ma.)
Long, Geo. P., 6 E

I^ong, Louis, 1044

mont Ave., and

178th St. CM.D.)
Love, Helen, 527 112th St.

Luck, Josephine A., 958 8th

Ave. (Ma.)
Ludwig,  M. W., 407 E. 82nd

St. (D.O.)
Lundberg, Anna M., 908

6th  Ave. (Ma.)
Lust, Benedict,

41st St. (N.D.,
Lust,  Louisa. 110 E

Lust,  Louis, 100  E.  105th  St.

Lynch,  Miss  B.,  1101  Lexing-
ton Ave. (Ma.)
Mabie, \V. W., 438 Central

Park W. (DO.)
Macfadden, Bernarr, Flat-
iron Bldg. (P.C.)
MacT^ennon. Margaret J.,

529 W. 111th St. (D.O.)
Mac  Levy,  352 4th  AVe. (P.)
MacNaughton, Helen, 121 E.

29th St. (N.D.)
Mahler, C. H., 200 W. 72nd

St. (D.C.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Rectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


143
(Ma.)
166 East


37th  St.


E. Tre-
1010 E.


110 East
DO.. M.D.)
41st  St.


Malmborgh, C. A., 51 Ea.st

42nd St. (D.C.)
Marko,  519  E.  78th  St. (Ma.)
Marks,  Louis  E.,  1465  B'wav.

Marshall, Albert R., 301 E.

85th St. (Ma.)
Mattern, Frank  G., 68 West

69th St. (Ma.)
Matthews, S. C, 500 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Mawson, Gertrude  B., 24 W.

59th St. (D.O.)
Mayer, Dr. Geo., 46 West

124th  St. (Bath)
McArthur, James B., 740

West  End  Ave. (D.O.)
McFadden, Geo., 51 E. 59th

St. (P.)
McKee, Jos. A. B., 740  West

End Ave. (D.O.)
Meffert, Alex., Wool  worth

Bldg. (Bath)
Megary. 200 W. 72nd St.

Melander,  Theo.  A., 17  R.

59th St. (Ma.)
Mere-ndino, Josepli, 2255

B'way. (D.O.)
Merkley, E. H., 36 W. 35th

St. (D.O.)
Merkley, Geo. H., Hotel

Martinique. (D.O.)
Meyer, A., 399 E. 155th St.

(Ma.)
Meyer, John W. H., 1947

B'way. (N.D., D.C.)
Moodich, Miss Alfhild, 1026

6th Ave. (Ma.)
Moonaw, Marv C, 172 W

79th St. (D.O.)
Morgan, N. A. G., Chautau-
qua. (D.C.)
Morgan, Wm. C, Chautau-
qua. (D.C.)
Morgenbesser, H., 931 Fox

St.  (M.D.)
Morrison, Daniel N., 120 E

34th St. (D.O.)
Morris, Phillip, 332 TS. 72nd

St. (M.A.)
Moriss,  L.  H.,  4  7  W.  34th  St.

(Ch.)
Morris, S.  V., 121  Madison

Ave. (M.D.)
Mosseur, H., 177 St. Nicho-
las Ave. (D.O.)
Myers, Ella Lake, 214 W.

92nd St. (D.O.)
Nabstedt,  J.  M.,  253  W.  58th

St.: 514 W. 149th St., and

1789  Broadway. (D.C.)
Nachbar,  M.,  431  5th  Ave.

Nelson,  Miss  Bertha,  121  Vov-

milyea Ave. (Ma.)
Nelson, Swen, 101 M'. 189th

St. (D.C.)
Neumann,  Carl,  510  W.  133rd

St. (Ma.)
Newirth, H. C, 233 B'way

New York School of Chiro-
practic, 39th St. and

Broadway Bldg., 1416

B'way.
Nicholas, Rebecca, 205 W.

85h St. (D.O.)
Nicola, Stephen, 16 Beaver

St. (N.D.)
Nielson. Julia K., 116 E.

58th St. (D.O.)
Nielsen, Julie K., 120 East

34th St. (D.C, D.O.)
Noonan,  M.  A.,  67  W.  90th

St. (D.C.)
Norton, Carlton C, 1 Madi-
son  Ave. (D.O.)
Ochs, S. C, 159 W. 45th St.


A'eii^  York


(r  ('()(/ rap  1 1  ira  I  Index


ion


L., 157 VV.


Olsen, Mrs.

St.  (Ma.)
Oman, Mrs.

St.  (Ma.)
O'Neill, Mrs. M.  E


17 E.


98  th
89th


1050
(Ma.)


Amsterdam Ave.

O'Neill, Thomas H., 507 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Oppenheimor, H. O., 255 W.

108th St. (D.C.)
I'almist, C, 84 Carmine St.


(DO.)
I'almist,

B'wray.
Palmist,


,1. H. F., 1947
S. A., Carneg-ie

Hall. (D.O.)
Panzer. Henry, 200 W. 72nd

St. (N.D.)
Papathopulos,  N.  P.,  14  East

38th St. (M.D.)
Paradis, Regina D., 201 W.

120th St. (Ma.)
Pare,  J.,  2310  Valentine  Ave.

Parker & Parker, General

Delivery. (D.C.)
Patchen, G. H.. 13 Central

Park  W.,  and  147  W. 23rd

St. (M.D., D.C.)
Pauwels, Robert, 110 W.

40th St. (D.C.)
Pavne. A.  V., 47 W. 34th

St. (M.D.)
Peng-el.  William, 168  W.

95th  St. (Ma.)
Penrose,  Josephine,  114  East

59th  St. (Ma.)
Pestauer, J. F., 47 W. 63rd

St. (D.C.)
Pfeifer, Hans, 1412  Prospect

Ave. (D.C.)
Pichel, C. L., 1547 B'way.

Pinz,  Ferdinand  A., 416  E.

77th St. (N.D.)
Platto. H. M., 60 Broadway.

Porreto, S., 1204 2nd Ave.

Porter, F.  J., 74 E. 96th St.

(Ma.)
Potter, Jane G.. "The Ne-
vada," 2025 Broadway.

Potter, La Forest, The

Nevada, 70th St. and

Broadwav. (M.D.. D.C.)
Praeg-r,  J.  B., 110  W. 90th

St. (M.D.)
Rabinovich. H., 206 Second

Ave. (N.D.)
Radlev. J. H., 113 W. 71st

St. (D.C.)
Ramirez, Jose A., 152 East

47th Sf. (N.D.)

St. (D.O., N.D.)
Randell, G. J., 215 W. 51st

St. (DC.)
Reckewell, Mrs. Marv, 200

W.  72nd  St. (Ma.)
Reichmann, H., 2011 Madi-
son  Ave. (N.D.)
Reidmueller, J., 117 E. 86th

St. (D.O.)
Reilly, Harold J., 1804

Milliner Ave. (N.D.)
Reinecke, E., 1972 7th Ave.

(Ma.)
Reudolph,  C.  A.,  3800  B'way,

(Ma.)
Resler, S. (Bath)
Riley,  Geo.  W.,  14  E.  31st  St.

Roberts, C. S. (M.D.)
Robson. Ernest W., 12 E

31st St. (D.O.)
Rodden, Jane, 246 Echo

Place. (Ma.)
Roesch, G. F., 291 B'way.


Rogers, Cecil R., 544 W.

157th St. (D.O.)
Rohrer, P., 262 W. 51st St.

Rolandow, G. W., 2291

Broadway. (P.)
Roller, B.  T., 106 \V. 72nd

St. (N.D.)
Rolley & Teriy, 140 West

42nd St. (Ma.)
Rose,  Dr.  F. C, 350  West

20th St. (N.D.)
Ross, R. S., 1 Madison Ave.

Rottenberg, S., 38 W. 119th

St. (DO.)
Sadler, Frank  S., 222  "VV.

123rd  St. (Ma.)
Sanchelli, Francesco, 200 W.

72nd St. (D.C.)
Sands, Ord Ledvard, 6 E.

37th St. (D.O.)
Saracena, M., 63 Park Row.

(Bath)
Savage, Dr. Walton L.,

Private Exercise and

Health Studio. (P.)
Schaefer,  .Joseph,  23  Barclav

St. (N.D.)
Schanne. Frank B., 204 W.

70th St. (N.D.)
Schannon, M. A., 855 East

72nd St. (N.D.)
Scharsmith, Wm., 115 E.

27th St. (D.C.)
Schermer, M., 57 Pitt St.

(Bath)
Schildkraut, H., 200 East

Broadway. (F.S.)
Schlasser, Rev. Francis, 339

W.  34th  St. (D.DJ
Schlatter, F., 339 W. 34th

St. (D.O.)
Schmidt, A. P., 1947 B'wav.

(P.)
Schmidt, A. P., 203 W. 56th

St. (D.O.)
Schnitger, Paul E., 1632 St.

Peters Ave. (D.C.)
Schu-ster, Miss E., 20 W.

65th St. (Ma.)
Schwartz, .Julius, 133 East

84th St. (P.)
Schwartz, M. D., 346 B'way.

Schwinzer, -John R., 347-55

Madison Ave. (D.C.)
Sears, Chas., 740 West End

Ave. (D.C.)
Seides, N. Mildred, 235 ^V.

75th St. (D.C.)
Sennott.  N. J., 521 W. 152nd

St. (D.C.)
Sharkey, Miss .Josephine,

Carnegie  Hall. (P.)
Sherr. Bertha, 500 5th Ave.

Shields. Susan, 124 ^V. 55th

St. (D.C.)
Shields, Susan, 1777 B'way.

(Ma.)
Shoemaker, Franklin T.,

500  W. 64th St. (D.C.)
Short, Thos. J., 25 W. 42nd

St. (D.C.)
Sjogren, Dr. Otto, 2 E. 33rd

St. (N.D.)
Smallwood, G. S., 110 W.

34th St. (D.O.)
Smith,  H.  R.,  130  E.  15th  St.

(DO.)
Smith, K. F., 134 W. 104th

St. (D.O.)
Soloter.  Miss  V.  P.,  940

Simpson  St. (Ma.)
Summer, Fred., 73 W. 128th

St. (D.O.)
Spangler, H., 638 E. 14th

St. (D.C.)


Spencer, Thomas H., 16

Central Park W. (DO.)
Spring-Rico, Theodosia M.,

46 W. 9t;th St. (D.O.)
Stahl, Frank J., 1264 Lex-
ington  Ave. (N.D., D.C.)
Starr, Geo. R., 45 W. 34th

St. (D.O.)
Stein, Aaron, 1226 Boston

Road. (D.C.)
Stein, Herbert, 140 W. 42nd

St., and 235 W. 103rd St.

Stern, H., 952 Broadway.

Stern, Harry .T., 6 Stuyve-

sant Ave. (D.C.)
Stryker, Anna K., Hotel

Endicott. (D.O.)
Swenson & Oman, 17 East

89th St. (Ma.)
Tattersdill, Jos., 61 W. 37th

St. (P.)
Teg. Wilhelm, 145 East

52nd St. (N.D., Ma.)
Thorburn, Thos. R., 801

West End Ave. (D.O.)
Thurman, Mrs. M., 203 East

61st St. (Ma.)
Titus, H. W., 58 Cooper

Square. (P.)
Terry, Bessie. (D.C.)
Tjomsaas, Karen, 2728

B'way. (Ma.)
Tolskoyan, The, 28 2nd  Ave.

Topel, Frederick, 2561

B'way. (N.D.)
Towns, Mi-. Ch. B., 293 Cen-
tral Park W. (N.D.)
Town's Sanitarium, Dr. Ch.

B., 293 Central Park W.

Traver, Ethel K., 203 "\V.

85th St. (D.O.)
Trieber, Mme., 149 W. 66th

St. (Ma.)
Tuttle,  Lamar  K., 18  E.  41st

St. (D.O.)
Tyler, Parker R., 103 Park

Ave. (P.)
Underwood, Evelyn K., 34  7

5th Ave. (D.O.)
Van  Keuren, F.  H., Room  1.

Sowona. (N.D.)
Vaughan, Walter  L., 206 ^V.

106^h St. (D.C.)
Vetter, Harry, 124 W» 90th

St. (D.C.)
Von  Boeckmann,  Paul,  110

W.  40th  St.  (P.)
Von Foregger, R. (M.D.)
Vought, Mrs.  A. B., 347 5th

Ave. (Ma.)
Walker. Cornelia A., The

Martinique. (D.O.)
Walker.  Peter  E.,  203  W.

122nd St. (D.C.)
Walsh, B. Thos., 119 East

76th St. (Ma.)
Walters. H. S.. 37 Madison

Ave. (D.O., N.D.)
"Walters, Richard J., 123 W.

33th St. (D.C.)
Walz, Marie. (N.D.)
Wanless, Richard, 347 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Warden, Eva R., 2131

B'way. (D.O.)
Wasser, D., 6 St. Marks PI.

(Bath)
Watson.  M.  D.,  Ill  W.  137th

St. (D.O.)
Watson, P. E., 24 Schwirel

Bldg. (D.C.)
Watson,  ^V.  J.,  Hotel  Wood-
ward. (D.O.)
Webb,  Albert  E.,  318  AVest

57th St. (Ma.)
Weber, A., 922  Torest Ave.


1042


Geographical  Index


New  York


Weber,  J., 110  W.  40th  St.

Weber, J. N., 1980 7th Ave.

Webster. Frederick A., 47

W. 34th  St. (D.O.)
Weidlich,  R.  C,  304  Madison

Ave. (Ma.)
Weinmann, Louis  A., 1873

Amsterdam Ave. (N.D.)
Weir, Mme. Helene, 101 W.

126th St. (Ma.)
Weisingrer, S., 178 Norfolk

St. (Bath)
Weiss, Geo., 420 E. 61st St.

(P)
Wells, G. W., 513 W. 134th

St. (D.C.)
Werner, A. H., 121 Madison

Ave. (D.O.)
Werner,  Ernest  G.,  244  East

61st St. (N.D.)
Werner, E.  H., 121  Madison

Ave. (M.D.)
West.  William,  75  Park  Ave.

Wetche, C. Frederick, 30

Church St. (D.O.)
White, Annette M., 514 W.

114th St. (D.O.)
White, Ernst C, 505 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
White, J. S., 115 Trinity  PI.

AVhitting-ton, A., 141 W.

3fith St. (D.O.)
Whitty, Michael. (M.D.)
Wiesner, S.. 72 W.  116th  St.

(Ma.)
Williams, Ch. F., 519 W.

134th St. (D.O.)
Wilkinson. J., 116 W. 94th

St. (D.O.)
Wilson,  M.,  109  W. 138th  St.

Wilson, M. S., 347 5th Ave.

(Ma.)
"Wolf-Heinemann,  Mrs.  M.,

242  W.  38th  St. (Ma.)
Wolpin,  A.  B..  28  W.  28th  St.

(Bath)
Wright,  Jane  A., Ill East

56th St. (P.)
Wunderlich. H. A. F., 550

Jackson  Ave. (N.D.)
Yorke. John F., Knicker-

br)cker Annex Bldg.

Zagoda, S., 223 2nd St.

(Bath)
Zimmer, Morris, 976 Home

St., Bronx. (D.M.T.)
Zinsser, H.. 219 W. 34th St.

Zinsser, Marg., 219 W. 34th

St. (N.D.)
IVinienrn Fallsj Ash, Geo., 214

Main St., Orpheum Bldg-.

Davis. A. H., Elderfleld &

Hartshorn Bldg. (D.O.)
Eldridg-e,  Geo.  W., 64 Gluck

Bldg. (D.C.)
Fayette, H. C, 975 Cleve-
land  Ave. (D.O.)
Harvey, H. A. (D.O.)
Hewins, C. S., 40 Niagara

St. (D.C.)
Hodge, J. W. (N.D.)
Horner,  L.  M. (N.D.)
Larter, E. R., Silberberg

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lincoln,  Clara  B.,  132  Payne

Ave. (D.O.)
Ripple, John  W., 404  Elder-

fleld-Hartshorn Bldg., 44

Falls St. (D.C.)
Ruthenberg,  F.  W., 420  12th

St. (D.M.T.)


North Troy  J Reeve, TO. E.,

522 2nd Ave. (D.C.)
Seeley. A. J., 522 2nd Ave.

Xorwlch: Rahr, Goldie  J., 253

N. Broad St. (D.C.)
Rahr, Wm. E., 253  N. Broad

St. (D.C.)
Seaman. G. H., 236 N.

Broad St. (D.C.)
iViiniln: Mathews, S. E., 24

West  Ave. (D.C.)
Nyack:  Krouse,  H.  G. (D.C.)
OgrdensltiirK: Craig, William,

Ford St. (D.O.)
Parker, James G., 85 Ford

St. (D.C.)
Tucker. E. J., 35 Ford St.

Olean: Eldridge, W. B., 116

W. Green St. (D.C.)
Ganoung, Floyd J. (D.O.)
Hewins,  S.  P.,  228J  N.  Union

St., and 1001 W. State St.

Merrell & Merrell, 606 W.

Henley St. (D.C.)
Oneida: Miller, Fred. W.,

Madison County Trust &

Deposit Bldg. (D.O.)
Ochsner, B. O., 144 Main St.

Rhinehart, A. W., 37 North

St. (D.C.)
Oiieonta: Apthorpe, William,

198 Main St. (D.O.)
Bo.'wers, Leroy, 150 Main

St., Room 6-7. (D.C.)
Cook & Cook, 8 Grove St.


Cook, Luther, 8 Grove St.
Onondaga! Chittenden, G. L.

Ossiningi Benjamin, W. B.,
137 Main  St., Barlow Blk.
Cole, Ernest L, 98- South
Highland  Ave. (N.D.)
0.sweKO!  Albi'o,  Leander  S.,
Oswego County Savings
Bank. (N.D.)
Albro, Wm. J., Savings

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Brook.s, Mrs. C. R., 26 Lake

St. (D.C.)
Brooks. L. C, 26 Lake St.

Hupp, Charles  M., 2nd  Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Hupp & Hupp, 2nd Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Mudge, C. L., 57 E. Bridge

St. (D.C.)
Wiest, Ray S.. 26 Lake St.
O.xfordi Hogan, F. E. (D.C.)

Walker,  Mrs.  M.  L. (D.C.)
Panamai Salesburv, C. C,

Box 45. (D.C.)
Peekskillt Lichter, S., 1028

Brown St. (D.O.)
Penn Yaiit Bancroft, Claude
M. (D.O.)
Hopkins, B. S. (D.O.)
Perry  J Parker, R. Emerson,

16 Cherry St. (D.C.)
Phoenixi Gordon, James A.

PIattsltur«^: Gage, H. W., 3
Couch St., and 20 Durand
St. (D.C.)
Perkins, Edw. J., (N.D.)
Port JefTersoii, li. 1.: Moiri-
son, Thos. H. (D.O.)


Port Jervlsi Hunt, Harold A.

Morgan, Arthur, 158 Pike

St. (D.C.)
PotHdam: Briggs, M. J., 25

Main St. (D.C.)
PouKhkeep.sIe: Cook, C. F.. 88

Market St. (D.O.)
Hutchins,  C.  E., 50-a  Wash-
ington  St. (D.C.)
.Tackson, Ernest C, 556

Main St. (D.C.)
Powell, Horace, R. (M.D.)
Worrall, Clementine I^., 50

College  Ave. (D.O.)
Piilnski: Mills, J. W., 25

North St. (D.C.)
Ripley: Thompson,  Geo.  W.

Ricliinond  Hill,  Jj.  I.«  Mayer,

E., 1127  Chestnut  St.

Itidj^evrood, Brooklyn: Hillig,

O., 1867 Cornelia St.

Hoclie.ster: Bachite, .Vuku.sIus.

27 Madison St. (N.D.)
Becker, Chas. F., 82 Main

St. W. (D.C.)
Berry, Clinton D., Granite

Bldg. (D.O.)
Berry, Gertrude S., Granite

Bldg. (D.O.)
Breitenstein, Rose E., 62

Rowley St. (D.O.)
Butler, Earl R., 12 Clay St.

Camp. Chas. D., Powers

Bldg. (D.O.)
Carlson,  Chas. M., 55 Morris

St. (N.D.)
Chase, John P., Wilder

Bldg. (D.O.)
Conant  &  Conant,  Cor.  State

and Church Sts., Carter

Bldg. (D.C.)
Conant, J. N., Cor. State

and Church  Sts. (D.C.)
Crane,  Allen B., 32 Manhat-
tan  St. (D.C.)
Crawford, Mrs. M. C, 24

Bowman St. (D.C.)
Curtice, Mary  B. (N.D.)
Daily, T.,illian B., Granite

Bldg. (D.O.)
Ehlert,  A. (N.D.)
Fennell. D. S., 8 Almira St.

Fritz, Ada Christine, 233

Gregory St. (D.C.)
Fritz, Matilda J., 233 Gre-
gory St. (D.C.)
Halbert. E. E., 268 Alexan-
der St. (D.C.)
Heizman, .Tohn Jacob. IMS

University Ave. (D.C.)
Helmer, Jessie Blaine, 429-

441  Granite  Bldg. (D.C.)
Keene & Keene, State St.

Keene, G. W., 62 State St.

Keene, R. C, 62 State St.

Lapp, Irene Kate, Granite

Bldg. (D.O.)
La Vine, S. H. (N.D.)
Ruggiero, F.. 632 Mei'can-

tile Bldg. (D.C.)
Leve. Allen H., 154 East

Ave. (Ph.C, D.C.)
Leve, Julius C, 154 East

Ave. (D.C.)
Lvtle, R. D., 311 Exchange

Place Bldg., 11 State St.

Mallie, Bertha  De, 159 Ber-
keley St. (D.C.)


New  York


Geographical  Index


1013


Martens, Theodoie Henry,

Cutler  Bldgr. (D.O.)
Merrell, Edith F., 52 Mary-
land St. (D.C.)
Merrell, Roy N., 52 Mary-
land St. (D.C.)
Seavy, Silas F., 159 Berke-
ley St. (D.C.)
Sebring, J. M., 623 Mercan-
tile  Bldg-. (D.C.)
Sherman & Sherman, 524

Plymouth Ave. (D.O.)
Sherman, Harriet K., 524

Plymouth Ave. (D.C.)
Sherman, Ray, 524 Ply-
mouth  Ave. (D.C.)
Shields, J. D., 432 Mercan-
tile Bldg-. (D.C.)
Shoemaker, A. C, 36 Col-

vin St. (N.D.)
Somerville,  Davena  P.,  10

Clay  St. (N.D.)
Thayer,  H.  A.,  200  Park  Ave.

Valentine, Geo. M., 32

Broadway. (Ph.C, D.C.)
Warburton, Otis C, 56

Charlotte St. (D.O.)
Warren, H. E., 1531 Lake

Ave. (D.C.)
Whitfield,  Henry  A.,  Granite

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Williams, Ralph H., Cham-
ber of  Commerce  Bldg.
Woods, Leva, 215 Alexan-
der  St. (D.O.)
East Rochester: Fritz, J. M.
A., 329 Mercantile  Bldg-.
Rome: Griffin, Fred C, 3-4
Lyric  Arcade  Bldg. (D.C.)
Miller, J. R., Lyric Arcade

Bldg. (D.O.)
Murphy, G. F., 108 N. Jay

St. (D.O.)
Murphy, S. F., 424 William
St. (D.O.)
Rushford: Rickerson, Alvah

C, Buffalo St. (D.C.)
Salamanca: Henderson, J. H.,
33 River  St. (D.O.)
Hewins, B. A., 28 River St.

Moore, R. E., 10 Maple St.

Thompson, L. E., 51 Broad
St. (D.C.)
Sanitaria Springs: Churchill,

Myron  L.  (D.C.)
Saranac  Lalte:  Abbott,  Geo.  M.

Saratoga Springs: Brown,
Alice A., Saratoga Bank
Bldg. (D.O.)
Owen, Pearl L., Saratoga

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Wright, Oline E., 1 Arcade
Schenectady: Bergstrom,  Har-
ry S.,  1101  State  St. (D.C.)
Billingham, Alice, 1103 Nott

St. (D.C.)
Phillips,  Grant  E., 607  State

St. (D.O.)
Ryan, Geo. S., 517 Libertv

Ave. (D.C.)
Stearns, M. W., 226 State

St. (D.O.)
Thompson, Emma Wing,

906  State  St. (D.O.)
Winne, Edgar J., 940 State
St. (D.C.)
Seneca  Falls: Kellogg, Frank

G.. 41 State St. (D.C.)
Sidney: Rutherford, Geo. S


126 Grace

G., 125 E.
113 Elliott


Sliver Creek: Palmer, Robert
L,  Main St. (D.O.)
Kellogg, J. W., Box 114

Monroe, Geo. T. (D.O.)
S. Fallsberg: Rath, Frederick

A. (D.C.)
Springville: Du  Clon,  C.  L.,  43
Buffalo St. (D.C.)
Prater, Lena  K. (D.O.)
Syracuse: Beall, Clara  P., 474
S. Salina St. (D.O.)
Beall, Francis J., 474 S.

Salina  St. (D.O.)
Bell, Marv, 200 McLennan

Ave. (D.C.)
Belmont, J. .J., 318 First

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Berger, E., 308 Prospect

Ave. (D.O.)
Bodot, J. N., 209 Gertrude

St. (D.C.)
Burlingham, Jas. P., Uni-
versity Blk. (D.O.)
Cady, Darwin F., Union

Bldg. (D.O.)
Farley,  fi.  M., Gurney  Bldg.

Foster, Louis,

St. (D.C.)
French, Amos

Onondaga St.
Fritsch, A. W.

Ave. (D.C.)
Hall, Mable, Turtle St.

Handv, F. W., 101 Gordon

Ave. (D.C.)
Hawlev, R. E., 215 New
, Rosenbloom Bldg. (D.C.)
Horning, Leonard J., 128

Peter St. (D.C.)
Jones, C. A., 143 Roberts

Ave. (D.C.)
Kellam, H. B., 109 North

First St. (D.C.)
Lawrence, Marie Ernestine,

512 S. Salina St. (D.O.)
McArthurs, Eckel Theatre

Bldg. (D.C.)
McArthur, H. A., 311-12

Kirk Blk. (D.C.)
Miller, Frank L., 318 Ca-

hill Bldg. (D.C.)
Mills, J. W., South AVarren

St. (D.C.)
Mills, M. L., 403-4 Dillage

Bldg. (D.C.)
Moore, Dr., Post Standard

Bldg. (D.C.)
Mulliner, R. H., 333 Rich

St. (D.C.)
O'Brien, M. A., 113-15 Seitz

Bldg. (D.C.)
Ocksan, B. O., 210 Post

Stand Bldg. (D.O.)
Pawlowski, 112 AVilbur St.

Perkins, Dr. Edward J.,

c/o  Band, 30th  Inf.,  U.S.A.

(Opt.,  N.D.)
Reagan, A. E., 118 Coolage

Ave. (D.C.)
Sauer, Benj. A., 536 Butter-
nut St. (D.C.)
Schwartz, H. C, 1228 East

Genesee  St.  (N.D.)
Scott, John W.. 110 W.

Newell St. (D.C.)
Steinburg, Paul, IMidland

Ave. (D.C.)
Sternberg. Paul, 516-17 S.

A. K.  Bldg. (D.C.)
Villeneauve, F. E., 109

Fountain St. (D.C.)
Vooheis. A.  H.,  509  Seymour

St. (D.C.)
Ticonderoga:  B  r  o  c  k  n  e  y,

James  L., 6 John St.


Tompkinnvllle: Ardouin, Er-
nest  J., 5'J Van Duzer St.
Troy: Brown, Alice A., 1704
5th Ave. (D.O.)
Frink, Elizabeth. 1704 5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Keel, Anna, 450 Fulton St.

Keel, James E., 450 Fulton

St. (B.Sc,  D.C.)
McDowell, J. H., 102 3rd

Ave. (D.O.)
Morlian, V. (N.D.)
Perry, Frances A., 101 Ful-
ton  St. (D.O.)
Reeves, E. E., 522 2nd Ave.

Seeley  &  Reeves,  522  2nd

Ave. (D.C.)
Seeley, Arlington J.. 522

2nd  Ave. (D.C.)
Simonds, W. E.. 2 Second

Ave. (Ma.)
Wilcox, C. F., 21 W. 13th

St. (D.C.)
Yerger, Chas. B.. 320 River

St. (D.C.)
Yerger, Julia N., 320 River
St. (D.C.)
Utica: Clapp. Carl D., Mayro
Bldg. (D.O.)
Geary,  Alice  L.,  191  Genesee

St. (D.C.)
Leffler, W. H., 5 West St.

Morrow, M. H., 196 Genesee

St. (D.C.)
Schwartz, R. C, 331 Gene-
see St. (D.C.)
Seaman, Geo. H., Garvey

Bldg. (D.C.)
Shyne, Francis T., 30-31

Gardner  Bldg. (D.C.)
Stone,  W.  TA"., 40  i Grand  St.
A'alley Stream, L. I.: Pizarro,

AValton: Barlow, Daisy  D., 26
Townsend St. (D.C.)
Schiessler, Fred. (D.C.)
Warsaw: Babcock, R. O.,

Buffalo St. (D.C.)
AVatertown: Cathcart, R. J.,
400 Franklin  St. (D.C.)
Mosher, Alexander H., 24

Taggert Blk. (D.C.)
Storer, Lyle M.. 117 Wash-
ington  St. (D.C.)
Thompson,  J.  W.,  Charlebois
Bldg. (D.O.)
Waverly: Burdick, Elwood
H., 319 Broad St. (D.C.)
Burdick & Burdick, 319

Broad  St. (D.C.)
Snyder. Ida F., 350 Broad
St. (D.C.)
AVelLsviiie: Buck, Wm. B., 32
E. Pearl St. (D.CD
Dawson,  Nellie,  229  W.  State

St. (D.C.)
Martin. F. C, E. Fasset St.

Swarthout, H. C, 260 ■V\'.

State St. (D.C.)
Richardson, William H., 34
St. Austin's PI. (D.O.)
AVe.st "U'infleld: Corgill, F. S.
Webster,  Minnie  B. (D.C.)
AVhite Plains: Rosch, Fannie
Messersmith, 29 Grand St.
Williamsbrldge, L. I.: Kand-
erer,  J.,  600  B'way. (Opt.)
Wolcott: Mclntyre, Adelbert.


104-1


Grogrnpliical  Index


Xnrlli  Carolina
Xorlh  Dakota


Yonkersi  Borgmann, A., 142
Waverly  St. (N.D.)

Lee.  Lyndon  E.,  112  Crescent
Place. (D.C.)

Leeds. George T.. 87 N.
B'way. (D.O.)

Nielson. Hans, .''.2 KllnUt
Ave. (D.O.)
Yorkshire  I Sampson. M. P.

Tracv, Elvire, 78 Warbur-
ton Ave. (D.O.)

West. H. C, 10 Highland
Ave. (D.O.)

AVolotira. ,Tohn E., 45 War-
burton Ave. (D.C.)


NORTH CAROIilNA

Ashevllle: Biggs. Mr. & Mrs.
A.  C,  Biggs  Sanitarium.
Meacham, W. B., Legal

Bldg. (D.O.)
Rockwell, Louis A., Legal

Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith, Elizabeth E., Ameri-
can Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Spalding, J. Lucena, Box

617. (D.O.)
Whitmore. S. L., 408 Hay-
wood St. (M.D., D.C.)
Barium Springs: Caldwell,

A. S. (D.O.)
Bluck Mountains: Devena,

Lena. (D.C.)
Burgaw: Durham, John D.

Burlington: Holt. G. Eugene.
First Nafl Bank Bldg.
Charlotte:  Arnan,  H.  Victor.
412 N. Maple St. (D.M.T.)
Heine, Frank R., Commer-
cial  Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Ray, H. F., Realty Bldg.
Douglas: Lindahl, Alfred K.

Durham: Caldwell, Dr. D. E.
Tucker, S. W. (D.O.)
Elizabeth City: Creese, L. D.,
Kramer Bldg. (D.C.)
McClenny, D. Clayton, Hin-
ton  Bldg. (D.O.)
Fargo: Nelson, N. P., 1 W.
B'way. (D.C.)
Newsalt, Mrs. G. A. (D.C.)
Fayettevllle: Carson. E. J.,

304 Hay St. (D.O.)
FInley: Farnand, C. J. (D.C.)
Goldsboro: Broadhurst, Lila
M. (D.O.)
Zealy. A. H.. Ill Chestnut
St. E. (D.O.)
Greensboro: Carlson, Carl I.,
Banner Bldg. (D.C.)
Crutchfleld. Wm. E., Mc-
Adoo Bldg. (D.O.)
Grand  Forks: Farnand,  M.  F.,

52 Security  Bldg. (D.C.)
Henderson: Prindle, Richard

H. (D.O.)
Hendersonville: Tebeau, A.
C, Hunter Bldg. (D.O.)
Wood, G. G. (D.C.)
Hickory:  Hull,  Marcus  E.


Hinston: .Vbbott, Lunsford,

212 E. Gordon  St. (D.O.)
Fitis, F., llOi  E.  Gordon  St.

Mnoolnton: Hull.  M.  E. (D.C.)
>Ionnt  Airy: Gilfflths,  Geo.  A.,

Banner Bldg. (D.O.)
Xa.shvllle: Win.stead, .Tno A.

\ew Berne: Aimstrong, Er-
nest C, Elks  Temple.

Dunn, Ernest W., Elks

Temple. (D.O.)
Pinehurst:  Dana,  AV.  Jay.

Raleigh: Glascock, Harold,

Masonic Temple. (D.O.)
Hoff, F. T., 215 Commercial

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Tucker, A. R., Citizens'

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Rooky Mount: Hornbeck, E.

G., Philips Bldg. (D.O.)
Salisbury: Greene, H. A.,

Grubb Bldg. (D.O.)
Groves, M. H., Box 482.

Holland, S. O., Wallace

Bldg. (D.C.)
Southern Pines: Bush, Ernest

W., Near  Pinehurst.  (D.O.)
Statesvllle: Adams, J. A.. 807

State St. (DC.)
Wilmington: Elliott, G. C,

401 Southern Bldg. (DC.)
Carson. Merl J., Southern

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wll.son: Basye,  A.  A. (D.O.)
Winston: Staines, P. S., 228

Main St. (D.C.)
Staines, J., & Stains, P. J.,

414 Liberty St. (D.O.)
AVinston-Salem:  Alexander,

Charles J.,  Machovia  Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Cox, Eugene L., 321-24 Gil-
mer Bldg. (D.C.)
Lawler, D. Evan, 713 North

Cherry St. (D.P.T.)


NORTH DAKOTA


Bismarck: Hoard, Evelyn E.,

119 4th St. (D.C.)
Bottineau: Farnand, M. J.

Bowbells: Christensen, C. E

Carrington: Berge,  H.  A.

Dickinson: Herbert, C. L. T.

Nadvornick, F., Box 333.

Douglas: Lindahl, Alfred K.

Fllendale: Rydell, Helma K

Erie:  Patton,  R.  Edwin.  (N.D.)
Fargo: Allen. H. W.. de  Len-

drecie Blk. (D.O.)
Basve, E. E., de Lendrecie

Bik. (D.O.)
Hanson, Sten., Pioneer Life

Bldg. (D.O.)
Nelson,  A.  P. (D.O.)


Nelson. M. P., 105 8th St.

Nelson, N. P., 1 N. B'waw

(DC.)
Newsalt, G. A., Savings

Loan Bldg. (D.O.)
FInley: Farnand, C. J. (D.C.)
Grand Forks: Bahlke &

Bahlke. (D.C.)
Bahlke, A. A., Flat No. 1,

Spriggs Bldg. (D.C.)
Bahlke, N. G., Flat No. 1,

Spriggs Bldg. (D.C.)
Farnand, M. F., 52 Security

Bldg. (D.C.)
Hodge, G. Edgar, 10 S. 3rd

St. (D.O.)
Tisdale. H., 214 Security

Blk. (D.C.)
(irafton: Kjelgaard, Gregers

B. (D.C.)

Hankinson: Lindehan, F. A.

Hot  Springs: Haas,  B.  J.,  Box

234. (D.O.)
Hugby: Frederickson, Mrs.

Petra. (N.D.)
Jamestoivn: McDonald, Drs.

Joseph &  Anne. (N.D.)
Kenmore: Prea. Dr. Frede-

ricksen. (S.T.)
Lakota: Ensch,  Leon. (D.C.)

Rafferty,  William  H.  (D.C.)
Langdon:  Wald,  A.  O.  (D.C.)
Lidgerwood: Tarr, Joseph W.


liLsbon:  Daniels,  Harry. (D.C.)
Maddock: Johnerson, Alfred

L. (D.C.)
Mandon: Henderson, A. O.,

207 1st  Ave. N. W. (D.C.)
Michigan: Parks, Mrs. P. D.

Mlnot: Perry, Minnie A.

Ross, Catherine. (D.O.)
Wood, G. G. (D.C.)
Wood, Lillian J. (D.C.)
"Sew  Rockforil:  Ensch,  I.,e(in.

Lindahl, A. K. (D.C.)
North  Valley  City:  Smith,

Chas. Oscar, 717 9th Ave.

Oakes: Solem, Harold. (N.D.)
Page: Bettner, Fred. (D.C.)
Parkston: Finch, F. F. (D.O.)
Sheyenne: Thompson, Niko-

lie. (N.D.)
Sioux Falls: Kickland, 400

Minnehoha Bldg. (D.O.)
South Fargo: Cox, C. W., 101

S.  8th  St. (N.D.)
A''alley City: Reed, Spencer

D., 318 E.  Main St. (D.C.)
Reed, D. S., Secretary

Chiropractic Board of

Examiners. (D.C.)
Skonnard, R. E.. over

American Nat'l Bank

Bldg. (D.C.)
Wahpeton: Blocher, Ira, 320

Wisconsin  Ave. (D.C.)
Willlston: David, Tanous H..

P. O. Box 708. (N.D.)
Sahr,  Louise,  2nd  Ave.  East.

Sahr,  N.  H.  C.  54  Main  St.


Ohio


Ci pographical  liidc.r


104.')


OHIO

Ailat Turners, Eugene A., ^OS

S.  Gilbert  St. (D.M.T.)
Adelphi: Bowshor, J. S.

(n.M.T.)
Akron: Bean, Clarence, 932J

Market St. (D.C.)
Bean, C. D., 216 College St.

Bebout, Esther M.. Hamil-
ton Bldg. (D.O.)
Bolger, B. A., Second Nat'l

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Bratchi, C. L., 3 I. O. O. F.

Bldg. (D.C.)
Bratchi,  Karl  S..  Main  St.

Brown, O. L., 401-4 Flat

Iron Bldg. (D.C.)
Bunting, D. Ray, 301 N.

Union St. (D.C.)
Chamberlain, Ina, 202  Smith

St. (Ch.)
Clayton, E. A., 19 W. Vais

St. (D.O.)
Conger, A.  L., Irving  Lawn,

Dogstron, J.  R., 110  Everett

Bldg. (D.C.)
Flouriet, C. E., 725 Second

Nafl Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Goldberg, Bernard M., 628

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg. (Ch.)
Grimm, Ella May, 483

Buchtel Ave. (Ch.)
Hagstrom, John R., 101

Everett Bldg. (D.C.)
Hagstrom, 'Jules  A., 101

Everett Bldg. (D.M.T.)
Hoffman,  E.  J., 539  Fairfield

Ave. (D.C.)
Hoover, Harry E., 47 South

Main St. (N.D.)
Houriet, C. Elise, Second

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Kauffman, Edna E., 311-16

Hall Block. (D.C.)
Koehl, Joseph F., P. O.

Box 18. (D.M.T.)
Kostner,  Ed., 605  Clinton

Alley. (D.M.T.)
Lanborn, R. W., 320 Hamil-
ton Bldg. (D.O.)
I.auby,  Geo.  E.,  311  Hall

Blk., Howard and Market

Sts. (N.D.)
Leas, Lucy, Hamilton Bldg.

Lorimer. Thos. S., 406 West

Exchange  St. (N.D.)
Marklin, Dr. R., 328 Walsh

Blk. (N.D., D.C.)
Mathias,  Geo.  L.,  404  Hamil-
ton  Bldg., and 27 Central

OfHce Bldg. (D.C.)
Mathias & Young, 420

Hamilton  Bldg. (D.C.)
Morten,  J.  W.,  570  Washing-
ton St. (D.M.T.)
Mumper, C. A., 501 Everett

Blk., 230 Bluff St. (D.C.)
Palmer, Mrs. Chas., 756 S.

Balsh St. (D.C.)
Ramis, Roy  E., 1177 Taylor

St. (D.M.T.)
Rauffs, Fred. F., 305 Flat-
iron Bldg. (N.D.)
Sanborn, R. W., Hamilton

Bldg. (D.O.)
Scott, I. W., 23 Crozier St.

Schupp,  Emil, 162 E. Center

St. (Hy.)
Shewalter, Dr. Chester, 328
. Walsh Block. (N.D.)
Steiner, O. R., 230 Akron

Savings  &  Loan  Co.  Bldg.


964 Main St.

,  525  Second
Bldg.  (D.O.)
1234 S. Main


and


Stillman. C. B., 381 E. Mar-
ket  St. (D.O.)
Stone, Franci.-? M. (N.D.)
Strong &- Strong, 210 Oti.s

Bldg. (D.C.)
Triplett, Iv. D.,

Vandegrift, H.

Nat'l Bank
Wau, Jas. W.,

St. (D.M.T.)
Weaver-Wingerter, Chai'-

lotte, 188 S. Union St.

Williams, V. G., 422 Nat'l

Bank. (D.O.)
Wilson,  H.  Le  Roy,  501  Fair-
field  Ave. (M.D.)
Young, H. C, 500 Flat Iron

Bldg. (D.C.)
Alliance: Anderson, Darl.

Andover. (N.D.)
Bates, G. C. (D.O.)
Bates, R. C, 401 Main St.

Braun, Alfred, 345 Seneca

St. (D.M.T.)
Egbert, Ellis, 18 Seneca St.

Ellis, Egbert, Main

Seneca Sts. (D.C.)
Flynn, J. P., 255 B. Main

St. (D.O.)
Fox, Jefferson. (M.D.)
Hampton,  H.  L.,  215  E.  Main

St. (D.C.)
Kaufman, Sylvia, 27 Arch

St. (Ma.)
Knowles,  C.  H.,  406  N.  Union

Ave. (N.D.)
Newcomer, J. ,T., 83 S. Arch

St. (D.C.)
Quinn, Bernard, 2050 Penn.

Ave. (D.C.)
Strahler, Ralph G. (Ma.)
Winegardner, J., Morgan

Plant. (N.D.)

Amelia: Bppley, Adam. (Ch.)

Andover: Anderson, D. C.
Hass, Edwin G. (D.C.)
Ward,  E. Thayer. (D.C.)

Andrew:  Mussler,  F.  C. (N.D.)

Ashland:  Chamberlain,  J.  A.

Donnel,  W.  O.,  241^  Main  St.

Faber, R. E., Cor. Church

and  Main  Sts.  (D.C.)
France,  Bert  C.  (D.C.)
France, W. N., Cor. Main

and Church Sts. (D.C.)
Flory, Chas. M., 311 Vesper

St. (Ch.)
Meier, Henry W., 7-8J

Majestic Bldg. (D.C.)
Okerman, J. W. (D.C.)
Ritter, J. M., Eastern  Ave.

(D.M.T.)
Saxby, Geo. O., 198^ Main

St. (D.C.)
Stought,  Miss  Bessie,  157  E.

4th St. (D.M.T.)
Williams, D.  A., 7-8 Nettle-
ton Blk. (D.C.)
Walotera,  J.,  Main  St. (D.C.)
Ashley: Shoemaker, Lester  E.

(D.M.T.)
Ashtabula: Adams, Margaret,

13 Bank St. (D.C.)
Bigler, Sidney A. (M.D.)
King, Wallace Edward, 225

Main St. (D.M.T.)


Meier, Henry  W. (D.C.)
O'Donnell, Wm., 241 J North

State  St. (D.M.T.)
Warner, Mrs. Marion, 32i

Vine St. (D.M.T.)
Williams, D.  A., Nettleton

Block. (D.C.)
Athens: Allen, D. Scott, N.

Court  St. (D.O.)
.\iistlnburK: Saxbv, G. O.


Aiistintown:  Schnun-enber-

ger,  L.  H. (D.C.)
Banesvllle: Fortnev, D. A.
Hall,  Elmer  L.,  248  W.  Main
St. (D.O.)
Barberton: Thoma.s, Lillian

509J N. 2nd St. (D.C.)
Bascoin: Coughlin, M. Eth-l.

Beach City: Langkanip.

(D.M.T.)
Bellaire: Malin, G. F >\1
Zweig Bldg. (D.C.)
Skeels, Russell H. (D.C.)
Belief ontaine: Burnett, Fred.

Maison, George F. (Ch.)
Belleville: Conner, Sallie M,
Chalfant Bldg. (D.O.)
Waltington, Frank. (N.D.)
Waltington, G., Inskeep
Bldg. (D.O.)
Bellevue: Davis, O. B., 114  J
E. Main St. (D.C.)
Margah,  N.  L..  214J  W.  Main

St. (N.D.)
Keallar, Miss Clara R., 313

S. West St. (D.M.T.)
Narmon,  L. (D.C.)
Berca: Guenther, Clifford E.
R.  F.  D.  No.  4,  Box  131.
(D.M.T.)

i  Blanchester: Bennett, I. O.
I  (D.C.)

I  Bowerston: Cartv, Wm. A.
(D.M.T.)

Bowlingr Green: Bittinger, J.
F., Cludister Bldg.
(D.M.T.)
Coney,  Grace  L. (D.C.)
! Davis, Clara. E. Wooster
St. (D.O.)
English, Jess S., 175 North

Main St. (D.M.T.)
Gonyer,  C.  H. (D.C.)
McKendree, M. G., 14 Reed
and Murray  Block. (N.D.)
Norris, C.  B.,  226  Main  St.

Williams, Chester  E. (M.D.)
Bremen: Coney, Grace L.

(N.D., D.C.)
Bridgreport: Skeels, Russell

H. (D.C.)
Brookville: Spitler,  H.  R.

Bryan: Cannott, Alice M.
Laverty,  E.  L. (D.O.)
Newcommer & Gerhardt.

Shaver, B.  C. (D.C.)

Bucyrus: Chapman,

130 S. Sandusky

Doron, Chester L.,

Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Lutz, S. A. (D.C.)

Butler: Neber,  C.  E. (D.O.)

Nehr,  Dr. C. E. (DC.)
Byesville: Finley,  B.  P. (D.C.)


M. W.,

St.

Second


1040


Grographical  Inde.r


Oh  if


Cndlzi Bruro. P. H. (PC.)

Stiers. Win. AV. (D.C.)

Sturs,  W.  W.,  Harris  Co.

Synn,  H.  TI. (N.D.)
Cnledoiilaj I.ine.s, .T. E., R. F.

D.  No. 2. (D.M.T.)
CumbrhlKc! Fchr, K. P., 135
N.  10th  St. (N.D.)

Felumlee.  Mrs.  C.  v.,  11/8
Gamber Ave. (D.C.)

Hoisington.  Bertha.  a3
Wheeling- Ave. (D.C.)

Long. Albert E. (M.D.)

Monce,  Earnest  E (D-C.)

Sheering, Elizabeth. (D.C.)
CannI Dover: Monce. E. A.,

State Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Cantoni Allison, G. C^ 330
Tuscarawas St. (D.C.)

Allison  &  Allison,  300  Tus-
carawas St. (D.C.)

Campbell,  R.  H.,  130  Tusca-
rawas? St. E. (N.D.)

Cathen,  .T.  D.  O.,  1332  Ox-
ford St. (D.C.)

Curtis,  U  R. (D.C.)

Dillman,  I.eo  E.,  401-2  Daily
News Bldg. (D.C.)

Engle, Isaiah F. (Mag.)

Gehman,  Mi.'ss  S.,  W.  C.  F.  U.
(D.M.T.)

Good,  Emil  .!.,  707  Patter-
son St. (D.M.T.)

Hartsough,  I^eroy,  525  S.
Clarendon Ave. (D.C.)

Hess,  C.  F.,  336  W.  Tu.scara-
was  St. (D.O.)

Hildebrand,  Harry,  206  N.
6th St. (D.C.)

Linderfer,  Mary  E.,  813  6th
St. (M.D-.)  , ^^

Livers,  Louis  R.,  813  6th  St.

McDonald,  J.  R..  225  Cleve-
land  Ave. (D.C.)

Mackin,  Mary  C,  525
Cleveland Ave. (N.D.)

Mackin,  R.,  525  Cleveland
Ave. (N.D.)

Menegoy,  John  E.,  318
Cleveland  Ave.  N.  W.,  and
622 Renkert Bldg. (D.C.)

Scott,  W.  I.,  527  Park  Ave.

Seed, Dr. Sirson T., 125
Cleveland Ave. (N.D.)

Seed,  Susan  T.,  125  Cleve-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Smith,  P.  C. (D.M.T.)

Stokey,  Laura  E.,  210  High
Ave. N. W. (D.O.)

Strock,  W.  F.,  225  Cleve-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Trott. Elze  D., 422 Green-
field Ave. (D.C.)

AValtenbaugh, Dr. C. C.

AVhittacker, Fred., 616 Mc-
Kinley Ave. (D.C.)
CardiiiKtoii: Basel er, A. W.,

R.  No.  1.  Box  116.  (D.M.T.)
Carey: Meyers, .Joseph E.

Squire, Mable. (D.C.)
Carrollton: Quinn, Bernard,

56 Public Square. (D.C.)
ChaR'rin  FalLs:  Barnard,  I^ena.
(Ch.)

Sherman. C. C. (N.D.)

Covert, Martin. (D.C.)
C'hamller.svllle:  Dutro, Roy.

(Mag.)
Chardon: Root, Frederick J.,

Park Hotel. (D.C.)
Cbatfleldi Lutz, N. A. (D.C.)


Cheslervlllei Covert, Wm. M.

Chicaso Junction: Engelhart,

Geo. (D.O.)
Schilling, C. E., 106 West

Pearl St. (D.C.)
Cliillieotlie: Dersam, Kathryn

E., Folk Bldg. (D.O.)
Doll, Mary Bates. (Ch.)
Getter, D.  W. (M.D.)
,Tohn.<?on, Russell W., 47 E.

5th St. (D.M.T.)
MacKeller, Peter. (El.)
Medley, Minnie P. (Ch.)
W'atei-.s, lOugene C., Folk

P.ldg. (D.O.)
Cinoinnnfit Abrams, Harry,

608 Andrews Bldg. (Ch.)
Arnold,  Ruth  S.,  2524  Wood-
burn Ave. (D.O.)
Armstrong, Ella S., cVo

Kinsey  &  Paris, Moiint

Auburn. (Ma.)
Augusta Sanitarium, The,

1633 Freeman Ave. (P.)
Banks,  .Tohn  .T.,  1122  West

Fourth St. (Ch.)
Baumgardner, J.  A., 2529

Gilbert Ave. (N.D.)
Betzner, Clarence W., 2627

Vine St. (P.)
Boone,  Mayme  A., 35 Emery

Arcade. (Ma.)
Boring, Mary E., 599 Rock-
dale Ave. (D.M.T.)
Both, E. R., 601-3 Traction

Bldg. (D.O.)
Buchold, Cora. (D.C.)
Buck, J.  D.,  Traction  Bldg.

Buddenberg's Hygienic In-
stitute, 2139 Clifton Ave.

Buser, F.  St. (Hy.)
Butler,  L. Pearl, 627  Barr

St. (Ch.)
Christian, Viola, 412 Green-

wald Bldg. (D.C.)
Cincinnati Sanitarium, The,

5642 Hamilton Ave. (P.)
Collier, Jennie E., 118 W.

6th  St. (Ma.)
Conner, Mary  A., Room 406,

104 W. 4th  St. (D.O.)
Cooper, Anne E., 502 Mer-
cantile Library  Bldg.

(Ch.)
Curlis, B. S., 811 Lyric

Theatre Bldg. (D.C.)
Curnoyn, L. H., 2341 Kem-

pfer Lane. (D.C.)
Davis, Belle C, Levergne

Bldg.,  4  W.  7th  St. (Ma.)
Davis,  John  M.,  504  Neave

Bldg. (Ch.)
Duckworth,  Jas.  A.,  59  Perin

Bldg. (D.C.)
Duffy, Mary  J., 13th and

Bremen Sts. (Ma.)
Edwards, Elizabeth, 601-3

Traction Bldg. (D.O.)
Eisenman, L. E., 314-16

Lyric  Theatre  Bldg.  (D.C.)
Everson, Geo. Price, P. O.

Box 822. (N.D.)


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the publisher of probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
change of  atldress in the course  \
of printing. Rectification will  i
be wade in .subsequent issues  ;


Farber, Peter, 1727 Elm St.

(D.M.T.)
Fithcroff. Wm., 902 Elm

St. (D.M.T.)
l-'os.s, Martha M., 4  217

Chamber.'? St. (D.O.)
l-^reman Electric Institute,

2nd Floor, 635 Walnut  St.

(Ma.)
I<"'rost, Henry, 1337 Central

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Grandview Sanitarium,

Glenway Ave. (P.)
Hagemann, Anna A., 50

Perlin Bldg. (D.C.)
Hagmon.  Anna,  830  Union

Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Hoskins, Geo. W., c/o Cin-
cinnati  Nat'l League

Baseball Club. (D.M.T.)
Huber, Chas. E., 1227 Main

St. (Ma.)
Huffman,  John  W.,  629  W.

9th St. (Ch.)
Johnson, Mrs. O. R., 130  W.

6th St. (D.C.)
Keeshan, Margaret  H.,  Hotel

Linton. (Ma.)
Kelly, A. N., S. W. Cor. 4th

and John Sts. (D.O.)
Kennedy, C. S., Room 1010,

414 Walnut St. (D.O.)
Kennedy, E. W., Mercantile

Library Bldg. (D.O.)
Kloman, Winona, 8-10 Mit-
chell Bldg. (N.D.)
Laird, John S., 3rd Floor, 5

Garfield PI. (Ma.)
La Mont. Lillian, 121 Shi-

linto Place. (Ma.)
Lange, A., 965 McMillan St.

Locke,  Onella,  Flat  11,  Cum-
berland Bldg. (D.O.)
Maescher, Ella, Levergne

Bldg. (Ma.)
Maescher,  Ella,  4  W.  7th

St. (Ma.)
Maurer, E., 3124 Fredonla

Ave. (Ma.)
McCormack, Hazel, 3131

Carthage Ave. (D.C.)
McDougall, Donald D.,

McKinney, Clara Degress,

Room 510, 18 E. 4th St.

Meeker,  G. D., 8-10  Mitchell

Bldg. (N.D.)
Meeker & Kloman, Rooms

8-10 Mitchell Bldg., 9 W.

4th  St. (D.C.)
Monroe, Sarah S., 725 Barr

St. (Ch.)
Moore, F. J., 1052 Wesley

Ave. (D.C.)
Moores,  Carrie  E.,  Room  301,

2453 Gilbert Ave. (D.O.)
Neal Institute Co., The, 601

Maple  Ave. (P.)
Nichols, W., Hyde Park.

(D.M.T.)
Norwood, .James  N., Ill

8th  St.  (Ch.)
O'Banion,  E.  C, Emery

Arcade. (Ch.)
O'Banion, Thomas, 43

Emery  Arcade. (Ch.)
Orlick, Anna, Flat 43, St.

I^eger Flats. (Ma.)
Phillips, Elizabeth, 1052

Mountain St. (Ch.)
Phillips, Wm. F., Bohman

and Young Sts. (D.M.T.)
Pollock, H. S., 3610 Vesta

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Polmanter, V. L., 801 Mer-
cantile Library  Bldg.,  Rm.

801, 414  Walnut  St. (D.C.)


Ohio


Geographical  Index


1047


Powell. Anna, 424 W. 8th

St. (P.)
Powers,  Wm.  S.,  3716  Drake

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Proelicher, Clara, 3556  Main

St. (D.C.)
Rabenstein, Wm.  M., 512

Race St. (Ch.)
Rice, Eula, 1723 Bremen

St. (Ch.)
Richard.son, Emma, 935

Baymiller  St. (Ch.)
Ro.ss, Chas. A., Room 506,

104 W. 4th St. (D.O.)
Roth, Mrs. Amelia E., 3932

Spring Grove Ave. (D.C.)
Schmidt, John C, 109

Shillito  Place.  (Ma.)
Schneider, Bertha  E., Room

409,  414  Walnut  St. (M.A.)
Schulz, Otto, 314-16 Lyric

Theatre Bldg-. (D.C.)
Shaller, J. M., 314 Mercan-
tile  Bldg. (D.C.)
Shepherd, L. K., Groton

Bldg. (D.O.)
Simmon,  J., 522  Hickman

Ave. (D.C.)
Snell's Private Sanitarium,

1054  Wesley  Ave. (P.)
Snell, Dr. Albert F., 16

Garfield Place. (S.T.)
Soderstom, Olga, 1012 Mc-

Millen St. (Ch.)
Srofe, Bessie M., 5 Melrose

Bldg., North East Cor.

McMillan and Melrose

Aves. (D.O.)
Swanson, John, Suite 705,

Comm'l Tribune Bldg.,

528  Walnut  St. (D.O.)
Symons, W. C, 807  Mercan-
tile Library Bldg. (D.C.)
Taylor,  Louise  W.,  635  West

6th St. (Ch.)
Thee, Wm., 3127 Gloss Ave.

Thompson, W. F., 212 E.

5th  St. (D.M.T.)
Thorman, Arthur  J. (Ch.)
Tidball. C. W., First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (DO.)
Tischler, Helen W., 435

Race St. (Ma.)
Toren, Lucy E., 6165 Rudge

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Von Walden, R., Suite 10,

First Nafl Bank Bldg.

Warner, Maude L., Flat 14,

2712 Woodburn Ave.

Washington, Alice M., 3450

Reading Road. (Ch.)
Watson, Cora A., 1130 Lo-
cust St. (M.A.)
Wernicke, Clara, Flat 54,

3418 Reading Road, Had-

don Hall. (D.O.)
AVilliams, Nellie E.. 43

Emery  Arcade. (Ch.)
Wolfram, Marion L., 8th

and Elm Sts. (D.C.)
Wolfram, William H., 20

Norfolk Bldg., 125 W. 9th

St. (D.C.)
CIrcIevlIIe: Wilderson, W. H.

Clevelandi Albu, D., 418 Cax-

ton  Bldg. (N.D.)

ton St. (D.C.)
Aldrich, Wm. H., The

Arcade. (D.O.)
Aljose, Chas., 10513 Lee

Ave. (D.C.)
Annen,  Marv  V., 1383  E

89th St. (Ma.)
Archer, Isaac E., The El-
lington. (El.)
Armstrong,  C.  D.,  4505  Clin-


Anlt, Margaret H., 942 Ea.st

130th St. (Ma.)
Backus, Wm. Vernon, 734

Euclid Ave. (D.S.T., N.D.)
Baker, Mrs. Ruth E., 3219

Cleveland Heights, and

5716 Euclid Ave. (D.C.)
Baker & Wiehn, 5716 Eu-
clid Ave. (D.C.)
Barker, Fred. M., 2830

Prospect Ave. (El.)
Beach, Nancv A., 2983

Mayfleld Road. (Ch.)
Bechtal,  F.  M.,  P.  O.  Box  12,

Sta. D. (N.D.)
Bender, M. F., 10,308 Euclid

Ave. (D.C.)
Bligh, Wm., 10,605 Superior

Ave. (N.D.)
Bliss,  Edna  M., 1536 E.  86th

St. (D.C.)
Bliss, Mrs. J., 1536 B. 86th

St. (D.C.)
Bolger, E. A., 3102 Perkins

Ave. (M.D.)
Bottinelli, Angelo, 2229

Murray Hill Road.

(D.M.T.)
Bourne, Hattie B., 3493

Stranton  Road. (D.M.)
Bracher, John, 14820 De-
troit Ave. (N.D.)
Brand, Elizabeth, 405 Hip-
podrome Bldg. (D.C.)
Brand & Brand, Drs., 405

Hippodrome Bldg. (D.C.)
Brice, Anna C, 168 Lennox

Bldg. (Ch.)
Bristol,  T.  D., 746  Euclid

Ave. (Or.S.)
Brown, John J., 5230

Superior Ave. (Ma.)
Brownell, James W., 10,217

Olivet  Ave. (D.C.)
Brustein, Max, 2410 Bast

40th St. (D.C.)
Buchanan, Porter  D., 907

Euclid Ave. (D.M.T.)
Butler,  George  F., 323

Euclid Ave. (Ma.)
Byrne,  Jos.  F.,  Osborn  Bldg.

Chalek, D., 1571 E. 18th St.

Chains,  Frank  J.,  4825 Fleet

St. (D.C.)
Chappell, Arthur W., 8504

Broadway, Cor. Harvard

Ave., 205 Reid Bldg.

Church, George W., 1380 E.

110th St. (D.C.)
Coffee, W. O., 1445 W. 84th

St. (N.D.)
Collinson, W. A., 785 E.

105th St. (D.C.)
Conrad, Anna .L, 92J Cary-

lon Road. (Ma.)
Cook,  Anna  I.,  Osborn  Bldg.

(Ch.)
Cook, Harriet L., 1364 East

81st St. (Ch.)
Cook, Herbert F., 1311 New

England Bldg. (D.C.)
Copeland, D., 10605 Euclid

Ave. (D.O.)
Coppala, Modestino, 1553

Central  Ave. (M.D.)«
Cordon, Anna J., 9337

Hough  St. (N.D.)
Cottrell, Mead K., 10308

Euclid Ave. (D.O.)
Coursume, Harry, 3228 Car-
negie  Ave. (N.D.)
Deckert,  Bert.  D., 1064  Dorr

St. (D.M.T.)
Dedinsky, Louis, 4201

Mapledale  Ave. (D.C.)
Deem, B. E., 5521 Perkins

Court. (D.C.)


De  Forest, Florence  S., 1548

B.  82nd St. (Ch.)
Dennis, Herbert C, 9710

I..aird Ave. (Sp.)
Dittrich, F. W., 3140 W.

90th St. (D.C.)
Duey, Fred. J., 6215 Hough

Ave. and Prospect St.

Earle, Robert Lee, 2283

105th St. (Ch.)
Edelberg, 10,740 Superior

Ave. (Ma.)
El  wood, K. W., 1150 Pros-
pect Ave. (D.C.)
English, Margaret L.,

Leader  News Bldg. (Ch.)
Evers, Henry, 840 E. 105th

St. (D.M.T.)
Fehr, B. P.. 5803 Superior

Ave. (D.C.)
Flower, Andrew G., 3622

Lorain Ave. (D.C.)
Fonger, Edwin S., 3831 W.

25th St. (D.C.)
Forquer, James W., Osborn

Bldg. (D.O.)
Fulton,  Hannah  R., 323

Euclid Ave. (Ch.)
Galavan, James  E., 318

Euclid Ave. (Ch.)
Gardner, Chas. A., 1597 E

93rd St. (N.D.)
Gaughan, P. W., 309-10

Clarence Bldg., 612 Euc-
lid  Ave., and 8424 Hough

Ave. (D.C.)
George, E. W.. 997 Lake

View Road. (DC.)
Gerber, Fred E., 122-24

Colonial Arcade. (D.C.)
Gerber & Gerber. 625 Co-
lumbia Bldg. (D.C.)
Giddings. Mary, New Eng-
land Bldg. (D.O.)
Giddings. Helen Marshall,

New England Bldg.

Gilard, Harry S., 1164 E

105th St. (D.C.)
Goldberg, A. M., 647 Euclid

Ave. (Ch.)
Gordon.  Dr.  W.  I. ''236 E

105th  St. (N.D.)'
Goss. Chas. A., 10513 Lee

Ave. (D.C.)
Gross,  Chas.  A.,  531  E.  114th

St. (D.M.T.)
Granus, Josephine, 6214

Superior Ave. (D.C.)
Gunsolly,  J.  A.,  2084 E. 46th

St. (Ma.)
Gurley, E. ^^^ (M.D.)
Haas, Edw. G., 5418 Lorain

Ave. (N.D.)
Hahn, C. F.. 8811 Detroit

Ave. (N.D.)
Haney, Dr. W. J., 10,600

Euclid Ave., and 1946 E.

101st St. (D.C.)
Harmolin,  Max  S., 30  Tavlor

Arcade. (Ch.)
Haseman,  Wm.  J.,  2215  East

71st  St. (N.D.)
Hass. E. G., 13425 Euclid

Ave. (N.D.)
Herman. Arthur M., Osborn

Bldg. (D.O.)
Herr. A. W.. 381 Arcade

Bldg. (DC.)
Hoeffler, John, 2017 E

104th  St..  1846  W.  25th  St

Hollister, B. C, 1536 E.

86th St. (D.C.)
Homes. J. H., 124  4 Walnut

St. (N.D.)
Hood,  Mrs.  &  Mr.  J.  S.,  10538

Helena  Ave. (D.C.)
Hood, John S., 733 E. 105th

St. (D.C.)


1048


Geoffraplucal  Index


()lii<


Hood. Lizzie M., 733 E.

105th St. (D.C.)
Hoover, F.  U., 425 Arbor

Road  N.  E. (D.M.T.)
Hvatt, Inez. 7624 Quincy

Ave. (D.C.)
Jobe, Geo. Theo., 6423

Beaver Ave. (D.M.T.)
.Tohn.<?. Oscar  W., 8009

Wade Park Ave. (D.M.T.)
.Tohnson. Clara. 1004 Ea.st

lOStlv  St. (N.D.)
.Tohn.son.  Thomas.  3320

Carneg^ie Ave. (DC.)
.Johnston. Tho.s. D.. 1004 R.

a05th St. (D.C.)
Jones, Anna  U., 6412 Bel-
vedere St. (Ma.)
Jurescin. David I., 2358 E

49th St. (D.M.T.)
Kaplin, Elwood S., 3241 \V

65th St. (D.M.T.)
Keck.  N.  B..  9110  Wade  Park

Ave. (D.C.)
Kerr. Clarence V., Lennox

Bldg. (D.O.)
Keymer, Slgrid. 3808 Clin-
ton  Ave. (Ma.)
Klotbach, Oscar. 746 Euclid

Ave. (Ch.)
Knowles, Cordelia B. (Ch.)
Knowles, Leonard. (D.C.)
Kramer, Nellie. 1240 Hall

Ave. (Ch.)
Kuhlon, Anna, 1397 (hidings

Road. (DC.)
Kuhlow, S. J.. 6115  Linwood

Ave. (DC.)
Knnkle. R. H.. 2041 E. 90th

St. (D.C.)
Tjarkins. Jame.s "\V., 1440 E.

81st St. (D.C.)
r.,aug-hren, Harold J., 2212

E. 79th St. (D.C.)
Lehrensedel, E., 37th St.

and Woodland Ave.

Lenz. Maria, 3808 Prospect

Ave. (Ma.)
Lewis, Cora  M., 7909 Euclid

Ave. (DC.)
Lund. Bob. 6006 Linwood

Ave. (DC.)
MacDonald, Harriet. 3335

Carnegrie St. (Ma.)
Mapes, N. .T.,

Ave. (DC.)
Maxwell, Chas.

9th St. (Ma.)
Maxwell. E. C. 6802 Carne-
gie Ave. (D.O.)
McAlindon, .Tames, 2456

Superior  Ave. N.  W.

(D.M.T.)
McCrea. Clifford T.,

Euclid Point Bldg-.,

Euclid Ave. (D.C.)
McKenna. Maurice, 1888 W.

48th St. (D.M.T.)
McKidden, Blanche E., 4740

Tvorain Ave. (D.C.)
Mellor, Joseph, 2305 E. o7th

St. (D.M.T.)
Mense.s, A. B., 1304 E. 91st

St. (D.C.)
Menoug'h & Menouph, 6300

Euclid Ave. (D.C.)
Mihah, Jno., 3184 W. 44th

St. (D.C.)
Miller. Agnes M., 785 E.

105th St. (D.C.)
Miller, A. L., New England

Bldg. (DO.)
Miller, C. A., 10,111 North

Blvd. (D.M.T.)
Miles. T. M., 2507 Archwood

Ave. (N.D.)
Monok, O. L.. 3711 W. 42nd

St. (D.M.T.)
Monroe, Daisy M., 10507

Superior  Ave. (D.C.)


318 Euclid
W., 1712 B


203
1272


Monroe.  E.  C,  8113  Melrose
Ave. (D.C.)

Morris,  Margaret,  10406
Euclid Ave. (D.C.)

Nash,  Ruby  D.,  3059  Euclid
Ave. (Ch.)

Niles,  T.  M.,  2507  Archwood
Ave. (N.D.)

Novy, A. T., 201 Pennsyl-
vania  Square  Bldg. (N.D.)

Nuennich, Frank, 1(),355
Western Ave. (D.M.T.)

Nunvar.  A.  G.,  363  Old
Arcade. (D.C.)

Olson,  A.  H.,  Suite  10-11
Liberty  Bldg..  10323
Superior Ave. (D.C.)

Parker,  Ira  L.,  10502  St.
Clair Ave. N. E. (D.O.)

Peterson.  R.  H..  10526  Su-
perior Ave. (D.C.)

Phelps.  A.  B.,  1952  E.  97th
St. (D.M.T.)

Pitts,  Mrs.  O.  H.,  7505  Mel-
rose Ave. (D.M.T.)

Prentice,  H.  H.,  8311  Euclid
Ave. (D.C.)

Raine.  L.  M.,  2248  W.  95th
St. (D.C.)

Raine,  W.  H.,  6509  Detroit
Ave. (D.C.)

Ranken,  Elis,  Colonial
Arcade. (Ma.)

Ranken,  Inez,  1428  E.  80th
St. (Ma.)

Ressler,  J.  M..  10729  Good-
ing  Ave. (N.D.)

Rickmers, N. W., 9602
Parnelia  Ave.  (D.M.)

Ringle,  Ralph,  2055  Cornell
Place. (Ch.)

Root,  Frederick,  Rose  Bldg.

Roscoe,  Percy  E.,  New  Eng-
land Bldg. (D.O.)

Rudy,  Albert  L.,  5708  Long-
fellow Ave. (D.D.T.)

Rutenbeck, 422 Garfield
Bldg. (D.M.T.)

Scheibuer, C. 1462 West
3rd St. (D.M.T.)

Schnacke,  Albert  J.,  3106  W.
25th St. (D.C.)

Schupp, Emma. (Ma.)

Seeley,  Jeanette.  1117  E.
89th St. (D.M.T.)

Shaw,  Allen  B..  10605  Euc-
lid  Ave. (DC.)

Sheridan,  Margaret,  Rose
Bldg. (D.O.)

Sherman.  C.  C,  612  Euclid
Ave. (N.D.)

Singleton,  R.  H.,  The  Ar-
cade. (D.O.)

Slaughter, Laura, 1018
Greenlawn Ave. (N.D.)

Smakal,  Mrs.  Mary,  3250  E.
49th St. (N.D.)

Smith.  Chas.  J..  1227

Snow,  Raymond  C,  10316
Ostend Ave. (D.C.)

Stahl, J.  C, 10,827 Olivet
Ave. (D.M.T.)

Standish.  Lulu,  2103  36th  St.  |
(Ma.)

Stopk,  Lena,  1874  E.  86th  St.

Svetcoff,  Geo.,  327  E.  6oth
St.  N.  E. (D.M.T.)

Swingle, M. P., 1770  Del-
mont Ave. (N.D.)

Tayler,  Chas.  E.,  2801
Garden  Ave.  S.  W.
(D.M.T.)

Thellman, J. D., 6402
Franklin Ave. (N.D.)

Thompson, Geo.  W., 22
Savoy  Bldg. (D.C.)


Thompson. Rudolph, 2205

Central Ave. (D.M.T.)
Titus, Margaret S., 3279 W.

98th St. (Ma.)
Turner. Geo. H., 734 Euclid

Ave. (Ch.)
X'argo, Joseph, 726 Illumi-
nation Bldg. (M.D.)
Von Imhoff,  Martha, 1812

Euclid Ave. (Ch.)
Walker, G. ^V., 737 Pros-
pect Ave. (D.C.)
Walker, R. H., 1928 Oregon

Ave. (D.C.)
Walsh. Paul W., 1343 105th

St. (Hy.)
Wamsley, M. F., 900 Pios-

pect St. (D.M.T.)
Ward, E. Thayer, 406-11

Erie Bldg., Prosppct and

E. 9th Sts. (N.D.)
Washington, John, 6221

Quincy Ave. (Ch.)
Webster. F.  D., 5817  (V-ntral

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Welsh, P. W., 7909 Euclid

Ave. (F.)
Welsh, P.  W., 7909 Euclid

Ave., Cor. 79th St. (Hv.)
Wiehn. Theresa. 5716 Euc-
lid Ave. (D.C.)
Williams. R. R., 7605 Supe-
rior Ave. (D.C.)
(ioverdale: Pitcher, Alonzo.

Clyilo:  Crosby,  M.  Ella. (D.C.)
Columbiana: Zugir, C. C.

(D.M.T.)
Columbii.s: Albright, E. li.,

1291 S. Pearl St. (D.M.T.)
Amsbaugh, Alfred S., 1464

E. Rich St. (D.C.)
Ball. J. F., 20 E. Broad St.

(Ch.)
Barcus. Emma M., 903 Oak

St. (Ch.)
Beaver, Edith B., 297

Champion Ave. (Ch.)
Biebl, Andrew J., 821 East

Main St. (D.M.T.)
Burlingame, Chas. Ij., 112

E. Broad St. (Ma.)
Bush, J. W., 233 Columbus

Savings  &  Trust  Co.  Bldg.

Calvert, E. H., Harrison

Bldg. (D.O.)
Campbell, Winifred P.. 918

N.  High St. (D.C.)
Clark.  C.  E.,  315  W.  8th  Ave.

Coffland. Florence, 1432

Franklin Ave. (D.O.)
Conklin, Arthur P., 582 N.

High St. (D.C.)
Crabbe, Edna  A., 2553

Glenmore Ave. (Ma.)
Craig, Stephen A., 1105

Fair Ave. (N.D.)
Cummins, Mrs. .L E., 1058

Neil Ave. (DC.)
Daumler, Miss  Mame, 519 S.

4th St. (D.C.)
Davis.  Grace  H.,  33  W.  State

St. (Ch.)
Delaplane, Dorothy, 371 E.

Long St. (Ch.)
Dickinson, C. B., Chamber

of  Commerce  Bldg. (D.C.)
Dver, Mary Maitland, 16 S.

■3rd St. (D.O.)
Ford, Eva M., 712 E. Dong

St. (Ch.)
Ford. Huscher C, 44 East

Broad  St. (Ch.)
Ford, W. W., 7312 Colonial

Savings  &  Trust  Co.  Bldg.

George, Mrs. Marion. (D.C.)
Ginn, Dora, 328J S.  High

St. (Ma.)


Ohio


Grogvaphical  Index


1049


Hall. S. A. Harrison Bldg.

Hiss. John M.. Harrison

Bldg. (DO.)
Hulett, M. F.. 8 10. Broad

St. (D.O.)
Hunter, J. .\.. T. Wesley

Blk. (D.C.)
Hutchinson. A. W., 21 S.

High St., Harrison Bldg.

Kahler.  Chas.  E.,  998  Frank-
lin  Ave. (M.D.)
Kelso. James, 246 "W. State

St. (D.C.)
I^eist,  Jos.  D.,  56  Richard

St. (D.C.)
Lippert, Henry, 371 Stod-
dard  Ave. (D.C.)
Long,  I.  W.,  101  N.  High  St.

Love, E. Blanche, 218

Detroit Ave. (Ch.)
Martin, F. D.. 305 Bronson

Bldg. (D.C.)
Mathews, Joseph M., 319

Lexington Ave. (D.M.T.)
Mayer, A. R., 202 E. Beck

St. (D.O.)
Metcalf, J. O., 306 Schultz

Bldg. (D.C.)
Nash, Mrs. I. L., Hayden

Clinton Bldg. (D.C.)
Nelson,  Melissa  J., 318 East

State  St. (Ma.)
Noel,  Edward  John,  418  E.

Long St. (D.M.T.)
Pohl, Irwin H. (M.D.)
Roll, A. C, 99 E. Tompkins

St. (D.O.)
Rinderknecht, George H.,

1522 Franklin Ave. (Hv.)
Russell, E. J., 214 E. State

St. (N.D.)
Russell,  W. E., 214 E. State

St. (D.C.)
Sager, E. T., W. Gay St.

Santurello, Peter, 84 N.

High St. (Ch.)
Sarver, Pearl M., 100 Huff-
man Ave. (D.C.)
Schaffer, A., 203 S. 5th St.

Scott, J. H. B., New First

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Scott, Katherine McLeod,

New First Nat'l Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Shafer, August, 63 East

Town St. (D.C.)
Simpson, Florence K., 379

Forest  Ave. (Ch.)
Smith,  W.  M.,  628  E.  Long

St. (D.M.T.)
Smithson,  Miss  M.  B.,  940

Highland St. (D.M.T.)
Spatz, Chas., 162  N.  High

St. (Ch.)
Stoddard, Bertha, Neil Ave.

Stover,  O.  O.,  Harrison  Bldg.

Strickler,  D.  T., 112 East

Broad  St. (N.D.)
Trego, John \V. (D.C.)
Tripp, N.  v., 150 E.  Broad

St. (N.D.)
Walton, Dollie, 697 North

High St. (Ch.)
Watkins, Hattie C, 1264

Grant  Ave. (Ch.)
"Whiteis, U. E., 112 E.

Broad St. (D.C.)
Whiteis.  g.  E.,  150  B.  Broad

St. (N.D.)
Wilcox,  Mart  M.,  293  West

7th  St. (Ch.)
Wolfram, W. H., University

Hospital. (N.D.)


Connenut: Barsky, Nathaniel.

211 Main St. (D.M.T.)
Bli.ss, Mrs. J. E., 3581

Harbor St. (D.C.)
Campbell, R. H. (D.C.)
Cody, J.  Alfred, 600  Wood-
land  Ave. (D.M.T.)
Foster, Miss Nora  D., R. F.

D.  No. 4,  Box  10. (D.M.T.)
Haller,  J.  J.,  596  Mill  St.

(D.M.T.)
Hollister, Bertrand C, 358

Harbor St. (D.C.)
Orcutt,  J.  M.,  159  Hiler  St.

(D.M.T.)
Patterson, Wright L., 374

Buffalo St. (Ma.)
Reynolds, H. D., Shaff-

master Bldg. (D.C.)
Thayer, E.  B., 435 Buffalo

St. (N.D.)
Visser, P.  J. (D.C.)
Cortland: Paugharn, E. C, R.

F. D. No. 1. (D.M.T.)
Coshoctont Chadwick, Flet-
cher,  501  N. 9th  St. (D.C.)
Geese, C. S., 553J Main St.

Goodheart,  M.  H., 221  N. 6th

St. (D.C.)
Liggens, Malinda  F., Locust

St. (Ma.)
Lynch,  R.  E.,  628  Walnut

St. (D.C.)
Westfall, DeWitt C, Munn

Bldg. (D.O.)
Crcstlinet  Pocock,  Eva  N.

Tullie,  A. M., 714 E.  Main

St. (D.M.T.)
Crooksville:  Springer,  Alton  J.

Cuniminsville: Mingo, Mrs.

Effle, 3741 Dirr Ave.

(D.M.T.)
Cnstar:  Johnston,  Martha.

Nesmith, Luther  M. (D.C.)
Prusendorfer, Adam J.,

(D.M.T.)
Cuyahoga  Falls: Shaw, Fred.,

218 S. Front St. (N.D.)
Shewalter, C. A., 120 North

Front St. (N.D.)
Shoemaker, W. Portage St.

Danville:  Robeson,  C.  S.,  Knox

Co. (N.D.)
Dayton:  Allen,  L.  T>.,  89  Linden

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Berger,  Arnold,  Park  St.

(Hy.)
Berger,  Lina,  Park  St. (Hy.)
Bower, C. H., 2 Lowe Bldg.

Broedling, John, Jr., 41

Jasper St.'  (D.M.T.)
Campbell,  John  J..  290-92

Arcade Bldg. (N.D.)
Caswell, H. Gladys, 611-18

Canby Bldg. (D.C.)
Cooke, Herbert T., Reibold

Bldg. (D.O.)
Coy, D. C, 37 Davis Bldg.

Dausch, Phoebe, 35 Ayers

Ave. (N.D.)
Eppley,  Clark  S., 55  Louis

Blk. (Ch.)
Forbes,  Agnes  B., 115  North

Perry  St. (Ma.)
Gebhart, Anna, 29 North

1st St. (M.D.)
Gibson. J. IL, 1911 W. 3rd

St. (N.D.,  T>.


i.e.)


Greathouse, Paul A., Cono-

ver  Bldg. (D.O.)
Hilf, S. B., 108 S. Jefferson

St. (N.D.)
Hughes, Mary, 26 College

St. (Ma.)
Jolly, F. W. (D.C.)
June, Elsie E., T. W. C. A.

(Ma.)
Karpf, Lester, 4 Fourth St.

(Ch.)
Kelly, O. G., 507 Schwind

St. (N.D.)
Kennel, F.  J.,  16  S.  Clain

St. (D.M.T.)
Kopp.  M. S., Colonial Hotel.

(D.M.T.)
McManis, J. V., Pres. Mc-

Manis  Table  Co. (D.O.)
Meyers, A. M., 1312 Wayne

Ave. (D.M.T.)
Miller, Delia L., 307 South

Perry  St. (Ch.)
Nesbit,  Edith  V. (Ch.)
Omlar,  John  T.,  721  Tray  St.

Petra, Almanda C, 53

Parnell Ave. (N.D.)
Rowe, Romie, Rubicon St.

Schtiler,  J.  J., 35  Lewis  Blk.

Schuster, John Remigins,

611 Lloyd St. (D.M.T.)
Shilt,  J.  L.,  W.  B.  Bldg.

Steenrod, Sarah H., 31

Illinois Ave. (N.D.)
Stout, Oliver G., Conover

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sullivan, Eugene, 29 W. 1st

St. (D.C.)
Winegardner, Jos., Callahan

Bank  Bldg. (D.C.)
Young, H. C, 9 W. 1st St.

Zurmuhlen, Dr.  Chas., 440

Ludlow  Arcade. (M.D.)
Defiance:  Moon, Flovd S.

Moore, F.  S., 22|  Clinton St.

Potter, G. L., 302^ Clinton

St. (D.C.)
Degrroff: Critcher, Carma,

Box 226. (D.C.)
Deshler, Alice  Berman.

Valentine, Josephine M.

(D.M.T.)

Dela-warei Bumstead, Lucius

A.,  16  E.  Winter  St. (D.O.)

Chubb, Catharine May,

People's Bldg. (D.O.)
Nichols, Paul S., People's

Bldg. (D.O.)
Skeels, R. H. (D.C.)
Delphos: Barnhart, Flora,
431J  N.  Main  St. (DC.)
Cremean, W., 234 E. 4th St.

McKenzie, Jesse, 326 South

Main St. (D.M.T.)
Neumeier,  Chas. (D.M.T.)
Wideman. Dr. O. (D.C.)
Duncan  Falls:  Dillev,  J.  C, 62

Main St. (D.M.T.)
Dyesville: Finley, E. P., 203

East Main St. (N.D.)
East Cleveland: Kingsbury.
Henrietta. (N.D.)
Smith, Theo. N., Winder-
mere  Bldg. (D.O.)
Ward, E. Thayer, 13,52  7
Euclid Ave. (D.C.)
Knst Liverpool: Baum, John
D.,  117  E.  6th  St. (D.O.)
Birbeek,  A.  F.,  Sta.  2,  North
Side. (D.C.)


1050

lllllllllllllll.


Uiiiver.sal  Xnturopntlilc  Directory  nn«l  Buyers'  Guide


PHYSICAL  TRAINING

FRANK  E.  MILLER,  formerly  on  the  staff  of  experts  at  the  Univer=
sity  of  Health  as  Director  of  Physical  Training  of  the  Battle  Creek  Sani=
tarium,  will  mail  copies  of  Health  Course  as  taught  by  the  famous  sani=
tarium  for  $1.00,  or  a  200  page  book  on  Club  Swinging,  with  50  illustra=
tions,  One,  Two,  and  Three  Club  Juggling,  $1.00.


Individual  courses  arranged  for  business  and  professional  men  to  meet
the  exact  needs  of  the  case. Write,  wire,  or  telephone  for  appointment.

FRANK  E.  MILLER

DIRECTOR  OF PHYSICAL  TRAINING AND HYGIENE

A Quarter Century Experience in Producing Results

>Ietlio«l!>i:  HyKienii', ^ledioal :ind Orthopedic Gymnastics, Manipulation, AMbration,

H jilrollierapy. Exercise

Object:  Promotion  of  Health  through  Exercise

EAST  PALESTINE,  OHIO


^iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii^


REESE  G.  WILSON

Mechano-Therapist
Graduate American College Mechano-Therapy

336 First Street, Darlington, S. C.

The  experienced  application  of  Manual  Manipulation
to Chronic Diseases  a Specialty


PROF.  V.  GREENEWALD,  M.  T.  D.

(Diplomiert)

121  W.  6th  ST.  COVINGTON,  KY.

PHYSICAL AND MENTAL

HEALTH  CULTURE

The Naturopathic Nerve Cure

Nature Herb Remedies Mechano-Therapy

No Drugs  No  Poison  No Knife


Thomas  F.  Mushynski,  N.D.,  D.C.

.Mi;mi!i;r  of  A.  N.  A.

Butler, N.  J.  Tangerine, Fla.


ALBERT  C.  PIETSCH,  D.  0.

Nature  Cure  and  Osteopathy

834 N. LAVERGNE AVENUE
CHICAGO,  ILL.


F.  A.  NEUBURGER,  D.P.,  N.D.'


Lock  Box  254


r)94  N.  Main Stheet

LOGAN, UTAH
Salt Lake City  Address: Lock  Box  276


M.  NESMITH,  Custar,  O.,  Lecturer  and  Enter-
tainer. Graduate  of  Many  Schools.  Human
Nature  Explained.  Medical  Freedom  and  other
Subjects  of Present Day Need.


FRANK E.  MILLER. D.  P.

Physiological Therapeutics
Director of Physical Training

EAST PALESTINE, OHIO


RATIONAL  FASTING  AND
REGENERATION  DIET

"The  Truth  About  Human  Nourishment
and  the  Conquerance  of  Gluttony,"  by
Prof.  A.  Ehret.  Mucusless  Diet.  The
most  advanced  of  all.  Live  without
meat,  eggs,  starch  food,  milk  and  even
without  bread,  not  only  as  a  possibility,
but  as  a  superior  living  of  enjoyment,
streng-th,  economy  and  a  higher  degree
of  health;  and  last,  but  not  least,  as  a
new  and  unknown  source  of  efficiency,
of  mental  and  physical  abilities.  50c.  in
stamps.  New  Life,  Dep't  H.  &  N.,  110  E.
41st  Street,  New  York,  N.  Y.


Ohio


(i eograph ical  Index


1051


Chadwick, Fletcher, 717

Edwards Ave. (D.C.)
Dean,  G.  D.,  5th  and  Market

Sts. (D.C.)
McAndrews,  C.  A.,  I.  O.  O.  F.

Hall. (D.C.)
Euttt Palestine t  Brower, G.  H.

Miller,  Frank  E. (P.)
White, E. C, 287 West

North Ave. (D.C.)
Entoni Kelly,  O.  S. (D.O.)
Spitler, Florence W. (N.D.)
Spitler, H. Riley, 10 Stotler

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Klglni Wilson, E. O. (D.O.)
Elyria: Arnold, Alice, 100

Grace Court. (N.D.)
Bair, L. L... 704 West Ave.

(D.O.)  .

Baird, Anna E., 320 7th St.

(Ma.)
Blanchard, .Tudson M.

Chandler, W. S., 252 2nd  St.

Clauser, Everett T., 313

Elyria Bank Bldg-. (D.C.)
Clauter,  E.  T.,  313  Elyria

Blk. (D.C.)
De  Wolf, Blanche E., 12

Endly Block. (D.C.)
Etting-er,  Cutler,  B.  Broad

St., R. F.  D.  No. 1.

(D.M.T.)
Judson,  M.  Blanchard, 534

W. Broad St. (D.M.T.)
Knapp, H. L., Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Speith. Perry A., 353 West

8th St. (D.C.)
Stevick, L. S. (Ma.)
Findlayt Bair, F. E., 224 Ash

Ave. (D.C.)


214i S.
214i S.


Main


Main
East
Clin-
S.


Bair, Roy R

St. (D.C.)
Brown, Una

St.  (D.C.)
Pinton,  Darius  S.,  353

Lincoln  St.  (D.S.T.)
Pi.ser,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  328

ton St. (D.M.T.)
Fisher, Alice E., 416i

Main St. (M.D.)
Franks, Simon Merl, North

Main St. (D.M.T.)
Harrington, E. B. (D.C.)
Harrington, Lillian R.

Harste, Wm., 127 Shenkle

Bldg. (D.M.T.)
Leland, Clinton W., 409

Center  St. (D.M.T.)
Leland, Fayette A.. 409

Center St. (D.M.T.)
Loose, E. Ellsworth, Niles

Bldg. (D.O.)
Richards, Addie. (Ma.)
Richards, Wm. H., 121J

Sandusky  St. (Ma.)
Sager, Mrs. Emma D.,

Ehring Bldg. (D.C.)
Snyder, E. C., Ewing Blk.

Westfall, Edgar H., Niles

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wurmser, H. L. (DC.)
Ziegler,  D.  E.,  528  Wyandott

St. (D.C, N.D.)
Forest:  Ewing, J. H. (D.M.T.)
Fort Recovery: Ashcroft,

Elmer, High St. (D.M.T.)
Fo.storla: Bair, Fred E.

Bair, Ora D. (D.C.)
Derr, Vera E., Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Drakes, Lloyd E. (D.C.)


W.


lOlli.son, Eugene, 150 Perry

St. (D.C.)
Margenthaler, E. (D.O.)
Phelps, L. W. (D.C.)
Frederlokto^vn: Hosack,
P'rank  E.,  Route  3.
(D.M.T.)
Freedom Station: Sheehan,

Jason P. (D.M.T.)
Fremont: Egan, F. W., Maso-
nic Bldg. (D.C.)
Luft, Christian G., 218 S.

Front  St. (D.O.)
Varsey, G. E., 612 Court
St. (D.C.)
Fre!«no: Huff,  Adam  L. (D.C.)
Gallon: Field, P. T., 115J W.
Main St. (D.C.)
Shanahan, R. E. (D.C.)
(inIIipoli.s:  Campbell,  Wini-
fred  P. (D.C.)
fialloway:  Ball, Edith  E.,  R.

D. No. 1, Box  48. (D.M.T.)
Geneva: Coursume, H., 34
Eagle  St. (D.C,  D.O.)
Mickols, J. A., Box 65.

Seltz, Anna E., 333 W. 4th
St. (D.O.)
Georsreto^vn:  Wells,  A.  B.

(D.M.T.)
Girard:  Jones, J. S., Kleine
and  High  Sts. (D.M.T.)
'  Gloucester:  Morris,  Elza,  R.  F.
D. No. 1. (D.M.T.)
Greenville: Weeks, R. E.,

Weaver Bldg. (D.C.)
GuttenluirK: Schirmer, H.  J.

Hamilton: Hasemeier, Albert
A.. 20 N. Front St. (D.O.,
Ma.)
Hurt, F. L., First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
McAvoy, Elizabeth, 426 N.

3rd  St. (D.M.T.)
Springer,  Alexander. (Mag.)
Harrisvllle: McAlester, J. C.

Hicksville: Gauld, W. C.
Tuttle, R. E. (D.O.)
Welty, Clara M. (D.C.)
HilLsboro:  Devitt,  Ellis, 603
West  St. (D.M.T.)
Leonard, B.  E. (N.D.)
McDonald, Elva Ethel.

McDonald, H. W. (D.C.)
Miller, Margaret. (N.D.)
Hopedale: Carson, L. R.

Hubbard: Lang, Allan. (N.D.)
Hudson  Falls:  Shoemaker,

John R. (D.M.T.)
Indian  View: Rockville  Sana-
torium, City  Office, 909-11
Union Central Bldg.  i

(P.)  I

Ironton: Klein, Geo. W., 110  j

Washington St. (D.C.)
Jefferson: Butler, Rubv.

(D.O.)  ■  ,

Loomis, Alice Rass.
(D.M.T.)
Jewell: Arps,  Henry  J.  I

(D.M.T.)

Johnstown:  Preston, F.  M., I

Park Place. (D.M.T.)  |

Kalldn:  Roheabaugh,  D.  H., ,

Box  13, (D.M.T.)  I


I  Kenia: Dougherty. M. J., 26
!  South Detroit  St. (D.C.)

'  Kent:  Daust, O.  L., R. F.  D.
I  No. 9. (D.M.T.)

I Altwater, Winfred. (D.M.T.)
Ikerman, J. W., National
Bank Annex. (D.C)
Kenton: Culbertson, Retta.
(Ch.)
I Johnson, Emmet  D., 114
!  Detroit  St. (D.C.)

I.,ehew, Emma. (Mag.)
I^ehew, George W. (Mag.)
Ohman, Henrietta C. (Ma.)
Wurth, Wm. F. (D.O.)
Lebanon: Dill, Heber M., 21

Broadway. (D.O.)
Lnkewood:  Bracker,  John,

14,820 Detroit  Ave. (N.D.)
Brooks, H. L. (D.O.)
Johnson, D. W., 14,507
Detroit Ave. (N.D.)
Tianca.ster: Baker, R. P., 215
N.  Broad St. (D.O.)
Hummel, Abraham, 406 N.

Broad St. (D.C.)
Hummel, A. F., 119 N. Co-
lumbus  St. (D.C.)
Hummel, Nellie, 119 W.

Columbus  St. (D.C.)
LaRue,  Chas.  M.,  Kirn  Bldg.

LaRue,  J.  Byron,  Kirn  Bldg.

Palmeter, Monroe, 145 1 W.

Main St. (D.M.T.)
Tovil, Francis. (D.M.T.)
Leipsic:  Bair,  F.  B. (N.D.)
Lewistown:  Forsvthe,  L.  C,

Box  62. (D.M.T.)
Lima: Albert, Phillip, 116 E.
Market St. (Ch.)
Bartlett, S. S., 233 North

Elizabeth St. (D.O.)
Black, C A., Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Deken, R. A., 120 W. Kilbv

St. (N.D.)
Fox, Mrs. E., 127 W. Circu-
lar St. (N.D.)
Hall, C. F., 6-7 Sherwood

Bldg. (D.C.)
John, Glenn V., Suite 407,
Savings Bldg. (Ph.C,
D.C.)
Mackin, Bessie G., 130 East

North  St. (El.)
Mackin, Elmer, 130 East

North St. (El.)
McConnell, F. J., 24 Metro-
politan Bldg. (D.C.)
Michelhenay, Mrs. H., Ohio

City. (N.D.)
Miller. D. S.. 210 Cincinnati

Bldg. (D.C.)
Peirce, Josephine Liffring,
New Savings Bank Bldg.
Shimer. C S.. 23 Metropoli-
tan  Bldg. (D.C.)
Snyder,  O. W., lllS  ^V.

High  St. (D.M.T.)
Wise, B. W., Holland Blk.

AVurmser, Herbert I^..
Masonic Bldg. (D.C)
Lindsey: Baker, Chas.

(D.M.T.)
Llnworth: Doughty, Frank  A.

Lodi: Hyatt, Inez. (D.C.)
Log-an:  Lahand,  Joseph.

London: Koontz, Effle. (D.O.)
Linn,  Wm. R. (D.S.T.)


1 052


Geographical  Index


Ohio


Lorain:  Bran.  C.  D.,  Bth  St.

and Broadway. (N.D.)
Brehl,  L.  J.,  1912  Broadway.

Easton. C. W., 19 I^orain

Bank Bldgr. (D.C.)
Hoiick.  Delia,  1814  Reil  Ave.

Hovel,  J.  M.,  c/o  S.  J.  Jones.

Meade, .T. C. (D.C.)
Muckley, F., 330 E. 21st  St.

Prescott, Allen Z., Majestic

Bldg:. (D.O.)
Watkin.s, J.  J., 2127 E. 30th

St. (D.M.T.)
Mneonib: Caroven.  W. D.

Nng:netic Sprines: Sager, S.

T. (N.D.)
Mnnche.ster: Anthony, A. M.

3Ian.sfleld:  Atting-er,  S.  F.,  Box

.57. (D.M.T.l
Bertrand, L. D., Bird Bldg.

Brent, J. V., 522 Park Ave

W. (D.M.T.)
Calena, Stella,  211  Baird

Bldg. (Ch.)
Hedge.s. J. S. (D.O.)
Ken-, Robert  E., 439  Main

St. (D.M.T.)
Piatt. F. W. (D.O.)
Sadler,  Miss  Harriet  Staeley,

322  W.  3rd  St. (D.M.T.)
Sites. Benj. L.. Suite 1.

Chalfern. (D.C.)
Willson. Minnie, 95 W. 3rd

St. (D.C.J
Willson. Minnie E., 138 \V.

3rd St. (D.C.)
Yarman. C. E.. Cor. Main

and 3rd Sts. (N.D.)
Yarman & Yarman, 114-15

Mohrian Bldg. (D.C.)
Marietta! Bode, H. E., 719

5th Ave. (D.C.)
Boyes. E. H., 222 Putnam

St. (D.O.)
Eichel. C. W.. St. Clare

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Hahn.  C.  F..  Box  112. (D.C.)
Houseman,  Mrs., 504  2nd  St.

Hutchinson. A. W.. 514 Bth

Ave. (D.C.)
Ross, W. S.. 312 5th St.

Wood. C. T. (D.C.)
Woods. G. W., 304 Putnam

St. (N.D.)
Marion: Blaich, Anna  Mae.

(Ma.)
Doughty, ^V. E., 113J South

Prospect St. (D.C.)
Drake. William. 209 N.

State St. (D.C.)
Dugan. R. C. 225 E. Cen-
ter St. (D.O.)
Field, D. I.. 208 W. Main

St. CD.O.)
Field, Nora. 208 W. Main

St. (D.C.)
Gerard. Frank. (D.M.T.)
.lacoby,  John,  186  Blvd.

(D.M.T.)
Jones,  Clifton  R.. Sawyer

Sanitarium. (Ma.)
Kagay. I.iorena. 404 E.

Center  St. (D.O.)
Kuhlewein,  Leonard. 116J  S.

Main  St. (Ch.)
Lett. D. W. (Ma.)
Lett, Ester. (Ma.)
Mendenhall, Louis. (Ma.)
Moore,  Mary  G. (Ma.)


Mount.  R.  C,  336  S.  Main  St.

(D.M.T.)
Neidhard, J. F., 216 S.

Main St. (D.C.)
Rayle, Minnie  D., 207J  West

Center St. (El.)
Smith. F. C, 207i W.

Center St. (DO.)
Spicer, D. F. (D.O.)
Tipton, George, 629 Cran-
ston St. (M.D.)
Ward, Olive M.. 965 Davids

St. (D.C.)
Warren, James B., William
Court. (D.C.)
Martin  Ferry:  Mackey,  John

R,.  N.  5th  St. (D.M.T.)
Marysville: Roberts. L. M.

Massillon:  Doty, Slanton  W.
Eckard, Harry L., 304 Mc-

Clymonds Bldg. (D.C.)
Hampton, H. L., First  Nat'l
Bank, Cor. Main and  Erie
Sts. (D.C.)
Kring, Oscar, 408-9 McCly-
monds Bldg. (D.C.)
Medina: Coons. W. N. (D.O.)
Damon,  G. J. (M.D.. D.C.)
Massev, W. W., 218 Hun-
tington St. (D.C.)
Metamora: Frash, Geo. F.

(M.D.. D.C.)
Mlamisburg;:  Weaver, H.

Buck, 447 Linden Ave.
Middleport: Leonard, J. O.,
Box 347. (D.M.T.)
Linville, W. B.. 121 S.

Main St. (D.O.)
Strehl, G. B. (D.C.)
Truitt,  H.  v..  Box  B.
(D.M.T.)
Middletown: Bartell. F. W.

Midland  City:  Gaskill,  A.,  R.

F.  D.  No. 1. (D.MI.T.)
MiilersburK: Bertholf. Mrs.
E. L. (N.D.)
Elder,  Mary  E. (N.D.)
Smith, Lawrence J. (M.D.)
Milton Center:  Beeman,

Alice. (D.C.)
Min^o: Stratton, C. Finley,

Box 49. (D.M.T.)
Min.ster: Reitmeier, J. H.. R.

No. 1, Box 23. (N.D.)
Montpelier:  Gordon, Leroy  M.

Box 120. (D.C.)
Mount  Gilead:  Bell,  J.  M.

(D.M.T.)
Mount  Vernon:  Darah.  Maude
Dixon, ^Valter A.. Cor. Gay

and High Sts. (D.C.)
Dixon, Walter H. (N.D.)
Fisher.  M.  K.,  9  W.  Sugar

St. (M.D.)
Robishaw.  C.  E. (Ma.)
Skeels, Russell H.. 15i W.

Hight St. (D.C.)
Stokes, Paul S. (N.D.)
Taylor. C. H.. 607 E. Front

St. (D.O.)
Welch. Chas.  E. (N.D.)
Wenger. Joseph, 19 E. Vine
St. (D.O.)
Moxahala:  Henry,  J.  D.

(D.M.T.)
Xupoleon: Gautschi, Frede-
rick. (DO.)
Sanpert, Rev. Thos. A.

(D.M.T.)
Walter,  F.  Pete. (D.M.T.)


Xaiihvillei Russell. E. .].

(D.C.)  •
Xevada: Alberts, Cora F.
Kinzly. Mabel Alberts.
Xe«-arl«: Best, Arthur E.,
Masonic Temple. (D.O.)
Corkwell, F. E.. Avalon

Bldg. (D.O.)
Creighton, B. E.. 54 Hud-
son Ave. (D.C.)
Drumm, Carl C., 18 Arcade

Evans, A. R., 160 N. 4th St.

(D.M.T.)
Kennedy, Arthur  J., 159 W.

Main  St. (Ma.)
Montgomery, James D., 159

W. Main  St. (D.M.T.)
Scott. J. W.r 69 W. Main

St. (D.C.)
Taylor, A. A., Smith Bldg.,

Hudson Ave. (D.C.)
Te Poorten, B. A., 68 E.

Main St. (D.C.)
Tiemann. Wilbur F.. Ava-
lon Bldg. (D.O.)
Ne^wcomersto^vn : Vogenitz.

Lorin. (D.M.T.)
NcTT  Concord:  Teel,  Willis.

R.  No. 4,  Box  38. (D.M.T.)
NeTT  Lexington:  "Goodin. Her-
man. (D.M.T.)
Ne^v Philadelphia: Deardon,
Alfred, 335 E. Hight St.
Frederick, R. W., Westcott

Bldg. (D.C.)
Giffey, R. E., 228 W. High

St. (D.C.)
Levine,  Frank  C. (Ma.)
Van  der  Putten, J.  H.
(Mag.)
Neiv Washin^oni Rhoad. Ira

D. (D.M.T.)
Nilest Doty, C. F., 228 North
Main St. (D.M.T.)
Garstich, Jos., 22 Maple

Ave. (D.C.)
Holzbach.  J.  H. (D.M.T.)
Nair, H. E.. Jr.. R. No. 1.

Box  69. (N.D.)
Wilson. T. H. (D.O.)
North Baltimore: Hughes,
John  W. (D.S.T.)
Wichner, Clara, R. F. D.
No. 1. (D.M.T.)
IVorth  Bend:  Kelly, -V.  N.

Xorwalk: Schillig. Jos., Case
Blk. (D.C.)
Walling, Bessie B.. 21

Whittlesey Ave. (D.O.)
Wildman.  F.  E.,  325  E.  Main
St. (D.M.T.)
Norwood: Glaescher. Alma,
2058 Elm St. (D.C.)
Overend, G. A., 2058 Elm
Ave. (D.O.)
Oberlin: Chamberlin, I. I., 21
W. College St. (D.C.)
Schillig. Joe, 25J N. Main
St. (DC.)
Ohio  City:  McElhiney,  Anna.

(D.S.T.)
Old  AVa.shIngton:  Geese,  C.  S.

Oxford: Brooks, H., 90, The
Painesvillet  G  r  1  s  w  o  1  d,

Katherine, 213 State St.


Stuart, H. C
Thayer. E.

State St.


. (D.C.)
Ward, 213


W.


Ohio


Geographical  Index


1053


PauIdiiiK: Warner, Harold M.

I'aynei Diliworth, C. C, P.  O.  1
Box 672. (D.M.T.)  !

Pemberville: Rutlidge, C.

PetersburKi Gwin, H. M.

Pioneeri Gay, Howard M.

(D.M.T.)
Plqiiii: Gravett, H. H., Orr-
Fle.sh Bldg. (D.O.)
Hoskin.s, .T. E., Orr-Flesh

Bldg^. (D.O.)
.Tansheski, C. A., 124 North

Wayne St. (D.C.)
.Janshe.ski. S. R., 124 North

Wayne St. (D.O.)
Pettiford.  O.  B. (Ch.)
Stahr, D. M., Orr-Flesh

BIdg-. (D.O.)
Vog-t,  Joseph  A., 1021 A.sh
St. (Ch.)
Port Clintons Semon, Ray-
mond R., Hitchcock Bldg.
Port JeflFersoni Ogdem, H. F.

Portsmouth:  Parks, P. D.,
205 Masonic Temple.
Parks, B. F., 20-21 Turkey

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Prentice, H. H., 201
Knickerbocker Bldg.
Prospect: Bensly, Evold.

Ravennn: Ingram, Silas.
Knowles, C. H., Riddle Blk.

McWay, Sarah A. (N.D.)
Richniondale: Games, Moses,
R.  F.  D. No. 1, Box  44.
(D.M.T.)
Rootstown: Palmer, M., R.

D. 17 (D.O.)
Rutland:  Powers,  Alexander

A. (D.M.T.)
Salem:  Dunn,  Geo.  W., 264
McKinley Ave. (D.C.)
Hartsough, Leroy, R. F. D.

No.  1. (D.C.)
Kesselmier, C. F. (D.C.)
Maguire, A. P. (D.C.)
Maguire, E. J., 354 Lincoln

Ave. (D.C.)
Sigler, W. D., 8 Lincoln

Ave. (D.O.)
Stone, Hugh F., Box 25.
(D.M.T.)
Sanbury:  Julian,  J. (D.M.T.)
Sandusky: Carvin, J. E. & S.
P., 144 Washington St.
Dann, H. J., Bliss Bldg.

Freeman, M. E., 403  Market

St. (Ch.)
Garvin, J. E., 161 Columbus

Ave. (D.C.)
Garvin, Sophia P., 914

Washington St. (D.C.)
Hermann, J. E., 743 Cen-
tral Ave. (D.C.)
Keenan, Wm., 208 West

Market St. (D.C.)
Lemon, Euphemia. (Ch.)
Murchison,  H.  L.,  210  Market

St. (D.C.)
Reiley, F. H.. 724 Market

St. (D.C.)
Ward, Chas. W., 1031
Osborn  St. (D.M.T.)


Mitchell St.
E., Mitchell


Seipio Siding: William.s, Mrs.

Cora  Belle. (D.M.T.)
<«el>rlne:  Campbell, R. H.

Shelby: Ingrbristen, H., 97
E. Main St. (D.C.)

hpham, Lawrence W., West
Main St. (D.C.)
Shepard: Run  ion, Wm. P.

Sidney: Champney, F. J.

Sayers, W. R., 132 Frank-
lin Ave. (D.C.)

Wilson, Margaret E., Old-
ham Bldg. (D.O.)
Smithfield: Bell, C. E., Gene-
ral Delivery. (D.C.)
Spencerville: Briggs, H. Ij.

SpriiiKtield: Bryan, A. K.,
Mitchell St. (D.O.)

Biyan, W. R.

Cole, Arthur
Bldg. (D.O.)

Dawson, E. E., 1398
Pythian Ave. (M.D.)

Eynon, John, Market
Square. (D.C.)

Foster, F. A., Masonic
House. (D.C.)

Francis, G. R., 18 New
Zimmerman Bldg. (D.C.)

Goul,  J.  M.,  273  Clifton  St.
(D.M.T.)

Ihrig, J. M., 140 W. Jeffer-
son St. (N.D.)

Patterson, S. R. (D.C.)

Randolph, J>. R., General
Delivery. (D.C.)

Rathburn, B. P., 30 New
Zimmerman Bldg. (D.C.)

Rathburn & Rathburn, 30-
32 Zimmerman Bldg.

Reibold, Henry. (D.O.)

Sackett, E. W., Bushnell
Bldg. (D.O.)

Schubert, G. W., 30 Zim-
merman Bldg. (D.C.)

Schubert, S. H., 30 Zim-
merman Bldg. (D.O.)

Steward, C. E.,  Gatwald
Bldg. (D.C, N.D.)

Strand, Paul, 501-2 Dollar
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

Wiganiood, R.  V.,  King
Bldg. (D.S.T.)

Winn,  R.  J. (Ch.)
St.  Marys: Grills,  L.  M., First
Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

McConnell, F. J. (D.C.)

Browning, Olive
167, Kite Bldg.


St.


Paris:

M., Box

Steubenville: Allender, J. E.,

306 Nat'l Exchange Bank

Bldg. (D.M.T.)
Bumpus, J. F., 406 Market

St. (D.O.)
Copeland, E. N., 530 Law-
son Ave. (D.O.)
Eynon, John, 308 Market

Square. (D.C.)
Field,  Violet  L.,  208  Nat'l

Exchange Bank Bldg.

(D.M.T.)
Rafston. Cora E., 922

Sherman Ave. (D.C.)
Strutliers: Johnson, A. S.

Johnson, Melissa. (D.C.)
Pilstroni, David, 124 Bridge

St. (D.C.)
Sugrar Grovei Hummel, A. F.


Tarlton: Roberts, Mary K.

TIflIn: Currence, B. C, 50 E.
Perry St. (D.O.)

Holme.s,  O.  W.,  272  Circular
St. (D.M.T.)

Lutz.  N.  A.,  P.  S.  C.  14
Gross Blk. (D.C.)

Neis,  Walter,  77  Circular
St. (D.C.)

Shafer,  Orland,  60J  Monroe
St. (D.M.T.)

Stauffer,  C.  E.,  Sneath
Bldg.,  Washington  and
Perry Sts. (D.O.)

Straub,  Maurice,  113  Mod-
son St. (D.C.)

Taylor,  C.  B..  119J  Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)

Taylor, Nellie, 119J Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Tippecanoe:  Galbraitii, I.,afay-
ette. (D.M.T.)

Sherwin. Rev. B. A.
(D.M.T.)
Toledo: Augier, F. L., 710
Tecumseh  St. (D.M.T.)

Ballert,  A.  E.,  Ohio  Bldg.

Bayless,  B.  M..  832  Oak-
wood Ave. (D.C.)

Belyea,  James  A.,  Box  316.
(D.M.T.)

Bittinger,  Jos.  E.,  123  13th
St. (M.D.)

Brill, Belva, Spitzer  Bldg.
(Ch.)

Brinkerhoff.  V.  W.,  Ohio
Bldg. (D.O.)

Conger, Carl  H., Nasby
Bldg. (D.C.)

Coughlin,  M.  E.,  508-9  Spit-
zer Bldg. (D.C.)

Crippen, Perry. (D.C.)

Crippen. Rosa L. (D.C.)

Curtis,  Edward  J.,  736  Palm-
wood St. (M.D.)

Dimick,  Frank  C,  732  Ohio
Bldg. (D.M.T.)

Dishong, Mvrtle D., 342
Huron St. (D.M.T.)

Egan.  H.  M.,  308  Nasbv
Bldg. (D.C.)

Egan,  Thos.  W.,  330  Nasby
Bldg. (D.C.)

Farr,  A.  E.,  836  Wood-
land Ave. (D.C.)

Farr,  A.  W..  852  Oakwood
Ave. (D.C.)

Ford, Miss Alberta. 328
Jarvis St. (D.M.T.)

Gonger,  C.  H..  222-24  Nasbv
Bldg. (D.C.)

Gurden,  Burton  A.,  1211
Adam St. (D.C.)

Harris, Fred.. 1520 Wash-
ington St. (Ma.)

Hascall,  H.  F.,  461  Spitzer
Bldg. (D.C.)

Haskins, Mr. M. E., 43
Schundt Bldg. (D.M.T.)

Haywood,  Alford  P.,  515
Utah St. (D.C.)

Heyer,  Ferdinand  C,  Ohio
Bldg. (D.O.)

Hoard.  Agnes  H.,  1932  Ash-
land Ave. (Ch.)

Hunt,  A.,  922  Palmwood
Ave. (D.O.)

Jansheski, S. R., 829-30
Ohio Bldg. (D.C.)

.Tarchow, Charles A. (D.C.)

Jones, A. E.. 2319 Monroe
St. (D.M.T.)

Judy.  Wilson,  505  Main  St
(D.M.T.)

Kane.  John  E.,  Ohio  Bldg.

Krantz, Henry J.. 305
Spitzer  Bldg.  (D.C.)


1054


Geo(/r(i pineal  Index


Ohio


Lecklider, Clyde, 2029 Ver-
mont  Ave. (D.M.T.)

Lichtenwagner, J. A., 2307
Elm St. (Ch.)

Liffring, L. A., Second Nat'l
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

I.ongr. Frank W., Nicholas
Bldg. (D.O.)

Martin, J., 1963  Erie  St.
(D.M.T.)

Martin. \Vm. J., St. Claire
D.  R.,  515 B'way.


Bldg.
McLain,

Method,


849-50 Ohio


D.. 1234 E. Nor-
wood St. (N.D.)
Mevers,  ^Vm.  F.,  725  New

York St. (D.C.)
Millers, J. A., Cor. Summit

and Cherry Sts. (D.M.T.)
Muhme, Gu.stav A., 415

Summit St. (Ch.)
Nash, A'^ictoria A., Spitzer

Bldg. (D.O.)
Neafie, 1301 Fernwood Ave.

(D.M.T.)
Neis, Walter, 710 Nat'l

Union Bldg. (D.C.)
O'Neil, O. M., 849-.'")0 Oliio

Bldg. (D.C.)
O'Neil, Helen,

Bldg-. (D.C.)
O'Neil & O'Neil, 847-50

Ohio Bldg. (D.C.)
Pheils, Ervin H., Second

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Pool, Arnold  A., 433  West

Central  Ave. (D.M.T.)
Reese, D. H., The Nicholas

Reese.  W. E.,  The  Nicholas.

Richards, M.

Monroe St.
Ringesein,  H

St. (M.D.)
Rogers, Bertha C, Nichols

Bldg. (D.C.)
Rogers, J. B., 342 Nichols

Bldg. (D.C.)
Riitschow, Henry A

Booth  St. (N.D.)
Schultz, A. C, 425 Pres-

cott St. (D.O.)
Shreeve, Gertrude M., Ohio

Bldg. (Ch.)
Shultz,  A.  C.  A., 425 Pres-

cott St. (M.D.)
Sones, Mrs. J. C, 46 B'way.

Sorenson, I^ouis C, Second

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Squiers, Mabel A., 2119

Ashland Ave. (D.C.)
The Toledo Sanitarium,

2102 Cherry St. (D.O.)
Utter, Gertrude, 215 Spitzer

Bldg. (Ch.)
Weber. Arthur B., 806 Bel-
mont  Ave. (D.M.T.)
AVidell, Wm. F., Madison

Ave. (Ma.)
Wilson,  John  H.,  Ohio  Bldg.

Worrell, Minnie  10., 332

Superior St. (Ch.)
Torontot Putt, 1.. P. S., Putt

Bldg. (D.O.)
Putt, Lewis  O. (D.C.)
Trimbles Hoskins, .T. I)., Box

24. (D.C.)
Trotwoodi Bixler, \V. Irving.

Troyj  Bait,  H.  Ben,  215  Ea.st
Main St. (N.D.)
Bolt, Ben.  H. (D.C.)


F., 3242


W.,  5  Superior


829


Hawkins,


Rufus Von.


Caldwell, Clara A., 404 W.

Main St. (D.O.)
Ruby,  Eugene  Edwin,

Masonic Temple Bldg.
Upper  Sniidiisky:
Jos.  G. (Ch.)
.Shcppai  <1, R. A.
Urbnntii Gunten,
Wagner, Edward  V. (Ch.)
Wagner, Sallie. (Ch.)
Urichsvlllet Johnson & John-
son, 118  N.  Main  St. (D.C.)
Johnson, Floyd J., 118 N.

Main St. (D.C.)
Johnson, Franklin S., 118
N.  Main  St. (D.C.)
Utica: I^eyland, Henry.

(D.M.T.)
Van Wertj Finkhousen, F.
W., S. Washington St.
Front, Wm. B. (D.M.T.)
Grothaus, Edmund, 140 E.

Main St. (D.O.)
Ulan, Wm. W., 214 Taylor
St. (D.C.)
Vermilion: Leidheiser, Mrs. J.

W. (N.D.)
Vincents  Hendershot,  C.  D.,

Box 39. (D.M.T.)
Wnd.swortlii Kauffman, R. S.,

R.  F.  D.  No.  1. (D.M.T.)
Wansons Yoder, S. B. (D.O.)
\%''apakoneta: Lear, Fred. W.,
121 Augleize St. (D.M.T.)
Warrens Carlson, H. E., 9i
Park Ave. (D.C.)
Dow,  W.  J. (N.D.)
Gray, Geo. W., 216 E.
Franklin St. (N.D., D.C.)
Ikerman, J. W., 431 East

Market St. (D.C.)
Mills, Carroll J., Second

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Oswald, J. H,, 302 East

Market St. (D.O.)
Reid, J. F., Trumbull Blk.

Sesley, J. E., 103i N. Elm

St. (D.C.)
Upham,  L.  M.,  Stone  Blk.

Wasfiin^tons Stewart, Chas.

E. (D.M.T.)
\Va.sliin|3;ton Court Hou.se s

Emmonds & Emmonds.

Emmons, George C. (D.C.)
Rankin, Florence. (D.O.)
\Vellingtons Phillips, Miss

Ida. (D.C.)
Bucey, Howard  L., 319 10th

St. (D.C.)
Wellston:  WHse, F. P., R. F.

D. No. 2. (D.M.T.)
West Mansfleld: MoiTett,

Everett  D.,  R.  F.  D.  No.  4.

(D.M.T.)
West Unity: Sliaffer, Joshua

B. (D.M.T.)
Willierforoe: Talbert, Horace,

Box  31. (D.M.T.)
Willougliby: Knieling, I.,.

Wilming;tons Williams, A. J.,

Citizens' Bank Bldg.


116  Calvin
H., 804 Bry-


WooHters  Crandell, Ger-

trude S., Bealle Ave.

Hahn, C. T. (D.C.)

Kerr, J. A., Wayne Bldg.

Yanders, H. H., Nolle Bldg.
Xenias Dougherty, Martha
J., No. 2 Kingsbury  Bldg.

Ewin,  C.  H.,  32  W.  Market
St. (D.M.T.)

Heilman,  Fred.,  2  Kings-
bury Bldg. (D.C.)

Hollapeten,  Mrs.  Leila,  115
N. Detroit Ave. (D.C.)

Whittington, Julia E.
(D.S.T.)

Zell, Emma, 513 S. De-
troit St. (D.O.)
Vellow Sprinffss Hugiies,

Sarah E. (D.S.T.)
Youngstowns  Aldren, John A.,
804 Bryson St. (Ma.)

Anderson,  C.  J.,  27  Fall.s
Ave. (M.D.)

Burton, Wm. P., 13 W.
Federal St. (Ch.)

Carford,  C.  H.,
St. (D.M.T.)

Carlson, Chas.
son  St. (D.)

Dazey,  Chas.  A.,  1005
Market  St. (D.)

Dikerman,  K.  M.,  Hippo-
drome Arcade. (Ch.)

Dobey,  C.  A.,  1005  Market
St. (D.C.)

Ericson, John  A. (D.)

Fassett & Fassett, Drs.

Gray,  Geo.  W.,  92J  Market
St.,  and  463  S.  Forest
Ave. (D.C.)

Henry,  James  T.,  27  Todd
Lane. (D.C.)

Ipcer,  Aaron,  1348  Millicent
Ave. (N.D.)

Johnson, Jessie B., Dollar
Savings Bank.  Bldg.

Johnson,  Maria  S.,  11  East
Woodland Ave. (D.C.)

Jones,  J.  A.,  821  High  St.
(D.M.T.)

Lewis,  Cora  N.,  73  East
Evergreen St. (N.D.)

Lewis,  J.  R.,  205  W.  Fede-
ral St. (D.C.)

Louis,  Joel,  307  Mahoning
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

Lund,  Richard,  804  Bryson
St. (D.)

Marstellar,  Charles  L.,  Dol-
lar Savings  Bank  Bldg.

McEwen,  D.  Clair,  307
Federal Bldg. (D.C.)

Nelsson,  Joseph,  General
Delivery. (N.D.)

Newton,  Winfeld  J.,  121
Fulton St. (D.M.T.)

Pedman,  Walter  J.,  Cor.
Market  and  Delaware
Sts. (D.M.T.)

Rebman,  F.  B.,  402  Stam-
bough Bldg. (D.C.)

Redifer,  Mrs.,  513  George
St. (D.C.)

Reilly,  M.  J.,  535  Plum  St.

Reiser,  Mrs.  Sophia,  1930
Logan Ave. (D.M.T.)

Reiter, D. H., R. F. D.

Russell,  Elma  E.,  522  Wood-
land Ave. (El.)

Sandstroni,  lOllen,  804  Bru-
son Bldg. (Ma.)


Oklahoma


Geoffraphicdl  Index


1 055


Schuster.  S..  43  N.  Phelps  St.

Seibert, ,1. H., 367 Martin

St. (D.O.)
Seibert, Mrs. J. M., 367

Martin St. (D.C.)
Smith, I^yle E., 301  West

Federal  St. (D.M.T.)
Sofranec, Jos., 113 Williams

Ave. (D.C.)
Stewart, Fannie D., 516

Hatman  St. (Ma.)
Stewart, Frank  L. (Ch.)
Stewart,  Margaret  W.,  Park

Ave. (Ch.)
Strand, Ida E., 501 Dollar

Saving's Bank Bldgr.

Strand, P. H., 501 Dollar

Saving's Bank Bldg-.

Streb, J. H., Federal Bank

Bldg. (DC.)
Tucker, E. J., 1875 Glen-
wood Ave. (D.C.)
Visser, Peter J., Hippo-
drome Arcade Bldg.

Williams,  A.  J.,  921 J  Market

St. (D.C.)
Wood, Henry Chas., 404 W.

Federal St. (Ch.)
ZanesTille: Bowers, W. L., 45

N.  4th  St.  (D.C.)
Biegler,  Alma.  (N.D.)
Biegler.  R.  S.  (N.D.)
Brennel,  L.  H.  (N.D.)
Covert,  O.  W.  (M.D.)
Durant,  Grace.  (N.D.)
Hess, Lawrence T., Masonic

Temple. (D.O.)
Marsh. C. C, 157 S. 6th St.

Presgraves, A. H., 117 Put-
nam Ave. (D.M.T.)
Thormahlen, Conrad, 420

Market St. (Ma.)*
Zeiger, Alma  M. (Mag.)
Zeiger, Robert S., 815 Main

St. (Mag.)


OKIiAHOMA

Ada: Cooper, Mrs. Minerva.

Allen  J  Toby,  W.  B. (N.D.)
Altusi Ray, Edward. (S.T.)
Alvai Frank. G. H. (D.C.)
Kepford, L. H. (D.C.)
Lait, J. B. (D.C.)
Ames: Mitchell, Pearl. (D.C.)
Wheeler, Howard M. (D.C.)
Anadarko: Keeler, Clyde M.
Melton, Mrs. Nellie. (S.T.)
Neeley, J. B. (D.C.)
Ogle, R. W. (D.C.)
Antlers: Fitzgerald, J. W.

Apache  t Foster, Mrs. Pearl.
Hughes, T. H. (D.C.)
Arapaho: Stout, Elmer S.
Stout, Stella M. (D.C.)
Ardmorei Cox, Howard, 5-6
Noble Bldg. (D.C.)
Shackleford, J. W. (D.O.)
Atoka  I Wheeler, Howard M.


Bartlectvlllet Btirns, Sarah A.
Waschke, W. E., 15-17 Bry-
ant & Klote Bldg. (DC.)
Wilson, R. C, Empire Bldg.
Illaokviellt Tlirallkill, W. \j.
Wallace, Heibert Chase, S.
W. Osteo Sanitarium.
Brnmani Wallace, Hillie.
Wallace, Wm. C. (D.O.)
Britton: Martin, Earl P.
(D.C.)  -

Sinclair, Wilhelmine.  "(D.C.)

Byron i Miller, Geo. H. (D.C.)
Capitol Hilli Lee, Curtis J.

Carnioni Salters, Bertha.

Carter! Gilbert, J. E. (S.T.)
Nixon, Mrs. Mary A. (S.T.)
Wolfe, C. C. (D.C.)
Ca.shiont Simmons, Carrie.
Simmons, N. J. (D.C.)
Wentworth, Geo. (D.C.)
Chelsea t Trasper, Minnie L.

Cherokee: Hale, Dr. Nora.
Henderson, Jennie M.

Bonnell, Dr. W. LeRoy.
Chiokasha: Bonnell, LeRoy.
Corbin, W. S., First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.
Eacheston, H. (D.C.)
Evans, G. W., First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Pape, O. N. (D.C.)
Claremore: Davis, Wm.
Swift, A. A. (D.O.)
Thurman, M. R. (S.T.)
Cleveland: Armstrong, A. T.

Coalsrate: Wheeler, Howard

M. (D.C.)
Colllnsvllle: Gowrley, Addie.
Gowrley, Jas. (D.C.)
Cushing: Cruzan, E. L.

Dewey: Burgy, Mabel Kim-
ble. (D.C.)
Cuff, Aug. S. (D.C.)
Cuff, J. R. (D.C.)
Scott, J. C. (D.C.)
Trewin, S. (D.C.)


The  publisher  of  this  Directory
will  consider  it  a  great  favor  if
the  users  will  send  in  correct
addresses  of  practitioners  wher-
ever they  find  the  wrong  ones
listed,  also  names  and  addresses
of  known  practitioners  who  are
not listed in this edition.


Dover: Sherman, Martyle L.

Orummond: .Stringer, Jno. D.
Wheeler, Howard M.
Duncan: Good, S. L. (S.T.)

Russell, Miss Lena. (S.T.)
Durant: Lessenger, W. I.
Edward.s, Phoebe. (D.C.)
F^dmond: Morris, Wilhel-

mina. (DC.)
Elk City: Elliott, G. E.
Keifer, S. O. (S.T.)
I^evi, Mrs. Gussie R. (D.C.)
Rowland, R. N. (D.C.)
Terrill. I. W. (D.C.)
Elmwood: Bailar,  Miss  Carrie
Burtling, Wm. (S.T.)
El Reno: Ewing, Ernest,
107^ E. Woodson St.
Jones, A. M. (D.C.)
Kehrer, Lillie R., 114^ E.

Russell St. (D.C.)
Terrill, I. W. (D.C.)
Enid: Boorn, F. B. (D.C.)
Cooley, G. G., 315 Clinton

Bldg. (D.C.)
Cooley & Cooley, 222-24
Chamber of Commerce
Bldg. (D.C.)
Giles, Joel P. (D.C.)
Jones,  A.  M. (M.D., D.C.)

Nay, William F., Chamber
of Commerce Bldg.
Stewart, Miss Helen. (S.T.)
Triplett, Neva T., 601 W.

Main St. (D.O.)
Turk, J. E., 1102 W. Main
St. (D.C.)
Erlck: McGowan,  J.  H. (D.C.)

Rowland, R. J. (D.C.)
Falrvlew: Dearth, C. E., Box

28. (N.D.)
Ferguson: Howard, Hosea.

Frederick: Lange, Chas. E.
Pope, Ora. (D.C.)
Ft. Gibson: Woods, A. M.

Ft. Towson: Lorant, Dr.

Gage: Coutney, Percy. (D.C.)
Garber: Hamgartner, J. C.

221  W.  Euclid  Ave. (D.C.)
Goltry:  Ayres, T.  E. (N.D.)

Long, Bertha R. (D.C.)
Gould: Hughes, T. A. (D.C.)
Guthrie: Booley, M. B. (D.C.)
Brewer, J. E. (D.C.)
Ferguson. Hugh. (D.C.)
Home, Mrs. F. S., 1314 W.

Cotteral St. (D.C.)
Hurlbert, G.  .W. (D.C)
Leeper.  O.  L., 109i  W.  Okla-
homa Ave. (D.O.)
Leutz, Mrs. Amanda. (D.C.)
McCormick, L. L. (D.C.)
Montague, H. A. (D.C.)
Patten, L. L. (S.T.)
Spear, Mrs. L. E. (D.C.)
Headrick: Flink, G. A. (D.C.)
Hennessey: Hughes, T. A.
Humphrey, S. B. (D.C.)
Henryettat Goeske,  C.  J.


105f)


Gcoqraphical  Index


Oklahoma


Hohnrt: Starkey & Staikey.

HofTmniii Ivistenfelz, Claia

M. (DC.)
Holdonvillc! Boyd, A. J.
Sturker. Howard. (D.C.)
lioniiiiv! Dobbins, Chlora.
William.s, D. A., Box 206.
Hughest Bell. J. B. (D.C.)
HuRos Reed, V. D., Veeland
Bldg-. (D.C.)
Teem, D. B. (D.C.)
Kaw City: Good, Ruth.

Kins Fischer: Eikler, Lillie.

I.ioTton: Carroll, Edyth, 20.'')
B St. (D.C.)
Cole, Dr. S. L. (S.T.)
Trosper, Minnie. (D.O.)
Turner, Burt, 405J Ave. C.

Turner, D^n, 405| Ave C.

Turner, Effle, 405| Ave. C.
IJndsey: Beatty, Mary.
Spoon, Nannie C. (D.C.)
l.ogan: Hunt, Miss  Clara.

>loAIester: Hart, Mina S.
De La Mater, F. Newton.

Hill. Lester M., 106| E.

Choctaw St. (D.C.)
Johnson. J. F., 108 E.

Choctaw St. (D.C.)
Mahaffay. Ira F., Model
Bldg. (D.O.)
Madill: .Johnson, W. l.-.
Teem, David B. (D.C.)
Marble City: Burnett, J. E.

Maysville: Jenkins, D. Janet

Metlford: Moore, A. S. (D.C.)
IVIeno: White, Blleb. (D.C.)
Miami: Blackman, A. C.

Mohan: Brooke, Dr. (Lady).

Mooreland: Hall, Royal F.

Mulhall: McNeal, Miss Ethel.

Mii.Hkoeee: Buis, Lemuel, 203
E. Okmulgee St. (S.T.)
Chappell, W. F., Surety

Bldg. (D.O.)
Daily, J. A., 301 W. Okla-
homa St. (D.C.)
Grim, Dr. Roxa, 709 S. 2nd

St. (S.T.)
McRye, Dr.  '  M., 5th and

Okmulgee Ave. (S.T.)
Montague, H. C, Phoenix

Bldg. (D.O.)
Moore, L. L., 305-6 Equity

Bldg. (D.C.)
Padgett, Jas. A. (D.C.)
Wesley, S. W., 533 Equity
Bldg. (D.C.)
Navlna: Boyd, Clara M.
Linsev, Pearl Aline. (D.C.)
Snell, Mark M. (D.C.)
Wentworth. Daisy  B. (D.C.)


818  E.
W.  9  th
F.. 522


521 W.


Wentworth. Florence B.

Wentworth. Guy De Witt.

Wentworth. Le Roy E.
Ne^vklrk: Hine, R. E. (D.C.)

Rose, Mrs. Emma. (D.C.)
Noble: Brown, B. M. (D.O.)
IVordin: Moore, A. I. (D.C.)

Rice, Earle. (D.O.)
Xorman:  Rice, E. C. (N.D.)
IVowatai Daggett, W. V.

Oklahoma City: Ake, Marion,
22 'W. 7th St. (D.C.)
Allen, Stella  E., 521 W. 9th

St. (D.C.)
Andrews, Geo., 410 W. 4th

St. (D.C.)
Archibald, Alice,

21st St. (D.C.)
Baker, N. E., 521

St. (D.C.)
Barberick, Henry
W. Chucksaw
Barnes, Katherine,

9th St. (D.C.)
Bartholomew, H. H., 301 E.

Park (D.E.)
Bayne, Daisy, 521 W. 9th

St. (D.C.)
Bays, Alb. J., Indiana  Bldg.

Boaz, E. R., 1021 N. Shartel

St. (D.C.)
Bradford. Horace.

25th St. (D.C.)
Bradford, Pearl,

Florida (D.C.)
Bridgford, A. J., 30 E. 26th

St. (D.C.)
Brown. H.. 811 N. Brauer

Brown. H. S.. 501 W. Grand

Cain, Cora H., 112 W. 4th

St. (D.C.)
Campbell, Esther, 1447 E.

8th St. (D.C.)
Carver, Willard, Majestic
Bldg.. 521 W. 9th Street.
(LL.B.. D.C.)
Carver College of Chiro-
practic. (D.C.)
Combs, J. H., 515 S. Robin-
son  St. (D.C.)
Condon, Mrs. Helen.
Cotner. James  W. S.

Majestic Bldg. (D.C.)
Cowdin. Glen I., 1416

8th St. (D.C.)
Cunningham. S. R., 425 E.

3rd St. (D.C.)
Dailey, C. E., Colcord Bldg.

Daniel. A. L.. 506-8 Securi-
ty Bldg. (D.C.)
David,  T.  Henry,  521  W.  9th

St. (D.C.)
Denins. Albert G., 521J N.
Broadway. (D.C.)
I Edwards, Mrs. E. C, 715 E.
I  8th St. (D.C.)

Englehart, Frank A.. 127J

W. Main St. (D.O.)
Galeener, Elsie B.. 320 E.

8th St. (D.C.)
Gallaher. Dr. Harry. 221 E.

8th St. (D.C.)
Gibson. Ralph. (D.C.)
Goff. Mary. 1600 N. McKin-

ley St. (D.C.)
Goff. Nancy. 1629 N. Mc-

Kinley St. (D.C)
Gorby,  W. R.. llli W.  Main
St. (D.C.)


1400 W.
3213 N.


T.. 515


W.


Gregory. A.. .".06 W. 12th  St.

Gregory, A. A.. 609 Camp-
bell Bldg. (D.C.)
Gregory, Alva K.. The Pal-
mer-Gregory School of
Chironractic. (M.D.. D.C.
Ph.C.)
Hamlin, P. F., 314 N. Lee

St. (D.C.)
Harper, C. W., (D.O.)
Hawlev. Blanche. 430 W.

9th St. (D.C.)
Hubbard. John  C, 614 Hiis-

kowitz Blvd. (D.O.)
Hurrv. E. M.. 816 W. lltli

St. (D.C.)
Hurry. Pearl L., 816 W.

11th St. (D.C.)
Ives, Viola. 912 N. B'way.

Jeffries. J. K., 17 E. 7th

St. (D.C.)
Jenkins. D.  J.. 1400 W. 25th

St. (D.C.)
Johnson, R. M.. 1447 E. 8th

St. (D.C.)
Johnson. W. H. H., 914 E.

6th St. (D.C.)
Lee, C. J.. 506 Security

Bldg. (D.C.)
Lesenger, J., 521 W. 9th St.

Long, Beulah, 529 W. 9th

St. (D.C.)
McColI, Alice M., 818 W.

21st St. (D.C.)
McColl, Archibald, 515 Ma-
jestic Bldg. (D.C.)
Mahaffay, Clara  A. (D.O.)
Marsh, Jas. D., 409 Culbert-

son Bldg. (D.C.)
Meadows, L. F., 122 E. 2nd

St. (N.D.)
Mitchell, W. A., 521 W. 9th

St. (D.C.)
Nida, Eugene R., 700 W.

9th St. (D.C.)
OfReld, J. Harry. (D.C.)
Payton, W. L., General De-
livery. (D.C.)
Pettit, Dr. G. S. (M.D.)
Phillips, Albert S. (D.C.)
Potts,  R.  A.,  14-15  W.  News-
paper Union Bldg. (D.C.)
Price. J. A., State Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Rice. Helen Elizabeth. 500

W. 12th St. (D.O.)
Riley, J. S., 117 W. Hudson

St. (D.C.)
Ross, G. D., 409 Culbertson

Bldg. (D.C.)
Ross, J. A., Colcord Bldg.

Rouse, J. M.» State Nat']

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Scott, John T., 311 Balti-
more Bldg. (D.C.)
Seifert, E. F., 437^ W. Park

St. (N.D.)
Sinclair, Wilhelmine. 805 N.

Laird St. (D.C.)
Smith, Helen, 1108 N. Lee

St. (D.C.)
Smith. Lovina, P. O. Bldg.

Smith, W. H. (D.C.)
Sloane. Mrs. M. J. E.. Capi-
tol Hill. (D.C.)
Stockton, J. W., 515 N.

Douglas St. (D.C.)
Supler. A. J., 116J W.

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Waite, D. Wendell, 1606 W.

Broadway. (D.C.)
Winegarden, David, 315 N.

Harvey St. (D.C.)
Woodbridge.  Katherine.

441 W. 12th St. (D.C.)


Oregon


Geographical  Index


1057


Okniiilgeei McPike, James
K., Stewart Bldg. (D.O.)
Markey, Mary A., Stewart
Bldg. (D.O.)
Park Hillj Cook, Mrs. (D.C.)
Pauls Valley: Bradford &
Bradford. (D.C.)
Hunt, M. H. (D.C.)
Markie, Mrs. (D.C.)
Williams, S. B. (D.O.)
Pawliuska: Andrus, Rachel
B. (D.C.)
Brig-g-s, Zona. (D.C.)
Downing-, L. S. (D.C.)
Hayner, Bertha. (D.C.)
Thurman, W. R. (S.T.)
Pawnee:  Bishop,  J.  A.,  Box  55.

Perry: Burke, T^ala. (S.T.)

Corbion, H. A. (S.T.)
Ponca City: Dinning, G. W.
Hill, B. M. (D.C.)
McMillan & McMillan, Drs.
Potcaii: Glover, J. C. (D.C.)

Warriner, C. O. (D.C.)
Prior: Murray, C. H. (S.T.)
Purcell: Child, Isa Coburn.
Foster, Dr. T. E. (D.C.)
Putnam: Merck, Mary A.

Reading:: Simmons, Carrie  M.

Salem: Kesselmire, G. F.

Salt  Fork: Dunn,  Mrs. L.

Sapulpa: Bell, R. G. (D.C.)
Berton, J. A., 110| Dewey

St. (D.C.)
Johnson, C. E. (D.C.)
Seeley: Elliott, C. H. (D.C.)
Sha^vnee: Philips, A., Room
3456, over  P. O. (N.D.)
Stucker, Howard. (D.C.)
Townsend, Kate R., 12 E.
9th St. (S.T.)
Shelby: Ingebristen, H., 97 E.

Main St. (D.C.)
Sidney: Champney, F. J.

Stigler: Warriner, Chas. O.
Warriner, Corrine. (D.C.)
Supply: Hisey, J. B. (D.C.)

Tanner, S. W. (D.C.)
Tahlecua: Thurman, W. R.

Talecjuah: Williscroft. W. H.

Tecuniseh: Hedspeth, R. I.

Thomas: Brower, Jno. (D.C.)
Tonkawa: Davis, F. C.
Fitzgerald, J. A. (D.C.)
Tulsa: Burns, Sarah A.
Francis, J. E., Bliss Bldg.

Goodman, Wm. A., 50fi-8

Robinson St. (D.C.)
"Larkins, Fred. B., R. T.

Daniels Bldg-. (D.O.)
Posegate, F. M., Nebraska

Bldg. (D.C.)
Schmidt, J. J., Turner  Bldg-.
Tattle: Bell, R. G. (D.C.)
Vinita: Williams, Orville R.

Wagoner:  . Allison, William
O. (D.C.)
Edwards, Phoebe  A. (D.C.)


Washington: I'-oster, Mrs.

Pearl. (D.C.)
Waukoniis: Miller, Jai^nes B.

Ward, HaiTJct Frederick.

Weatherford: Coulson, L. C.

Wilhurton: Records, W. P.


Woodward: Dunlap, A. T.
Thompson, I.. C. (D.C.)
W^ynne^vood: Kincaid, S.
Pool, W. O. (D.O.)


OREGON

Albany: Howells, Allan P.,
First  Savings  Bank  Bldg-.,
Howells, Mary S. (D.O.)
Lumm, A. W. (D.C.)
Lumm, Ninette (D.C.)
Arleta:  Lockwood,  R.  J.  (D.C.)
Ashland:  Bradford,  Pearl  (D.C.)
Reynolds,  W.  H.,  486  Allison

St. (D.C.)
Sawyer,  Bertha  E., Rhodes-
Fanlow  Bldg-. (D.O.)
A.storia: Kinney, J. Elg^ih
Hicks, Rhoda Celeste, 573

Commercial St. (D.O.)
Paulson, A. J., 10 Spexarth

Bldg. (D.O.)
Young,  A.  Howard,  510  Com-
mercial St. (D.O.)
Baker: Biggs, W. A. (D.C.)
Thornhill, J. B., 2410 Oak
St. (N.D.)
Baker City: Runnells, W. I.,

3145 5th St. (D.C.)
Boreing: Calder, A. B. (D.C.)

Brandon: Covell, Fred (D.C.)
Camas Valley: Becker, Mary.

Central Point: Dow, Lydia  S.,

Cowley Blk. (D.O.)
Coquillc: Hopkins, R. H.
Ingram, A. P., Baird Bldg.
Corvallis: Anderson, J. E.
Hewitt, L. E. (D.O.)
Howells, Elizabeth Lane,
Masonic Temple (D.O.)
Dallas:  Scheetz,  Earl  J. (D.C.)
Eugene: Barker, F. L,, 337 E.
13th St. (D.O.)
Holden, Peter A., 336 Wil-

liamette St. WC)
Jensen, Ella (D.C.)
Jenson, Thos. A. (D.C.)
Mauser,  J.  A. (D.O.)
Scott, O. L., 313-14 I.O.O.F.

Smith, Allie M., Cherry

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Studley,  Harvey  L..  C.  &  W.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Waller, Olive C. Cockerline
&  Wetherbee  Bldg. (D.O.)
Wilson, La Roy, 484  N. 4th
St. (D.C.)
Forest Grove: Walker, Clif-
ford E.,  Forest  Grove  Nat'l
Bank  Bldg-. (D.O.)
Free-water: Spegal, F. M.

Gladstone: Dunn. R. L. (D.C.)


Grant'.s Pass: Ingram, F. H.
Nice, H.  Warren (D.O.)
Greshani: Freese, Benj. J.

Halsey: Boyd, Lincoln, Box
173 (D.C.)
Boyd,  Lydia,  Box  173 (D.C.)
ilillsboro: Lloyd, Clarence R.
fD.C.)
Hibel, H.  E. (D.C.)
Smith. Elmer H., Hillsboro
Nat'l Bank  Bldg". (D.O.)
Hood  River:  lOaton,  A.  C,  1017
Hall  St. (N.D.)
Hoei-lein, H. K. (N.D.)
May,  P. H., Heilbrehner
Bldg-. (D.C.)
Klamath  Falls:  Fulton  &  Ful-
ton (D.C.)
La Grande: Allen, E. W., 209
Fir  St. (N.D.)
Dailand, S. T., Box 638

Myers & Kelly, Foley Blk.
Lebanon: Sears, Charles A.

Ilarshfield:  Leslie,  George  W.

McMinnville: Hoffman, Hazel
P. (D.C.)
Hoffman,  Wm.  C. (D.C.)
Simonson, Mary Dorothea

Stewart,  J. H. (D.C.)
Wilkens, J. H. (D.O.)
Young, D.  D. (D.O.)
>Iedford: Carlo w, Eva Mains,
Garnet-Corey  Bldg-. (D.O.)
Carlow, Frank G., Garner-
Corey  Bldg. (D.O.)
Hedges,  A.  R. (D.O.)
How-ard,  W.  W.,  Garnet-Co-
rey Bldg. (D.O.)
Rauek, E. H. (D.C.)
Spang-,  B.  W., 1028  Edwards

St. (D.C.)
Wilson, F. H., Edwards
Bldg. (D.O.)
>Iilton: Spegal, F. M., Bridley

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Xewberg:  Mallory,  W.E.(D.O.)
North Bend: Clark, Bird C.

North Powder: Lowman,  A. S.

Ontario: Seats,  Harriet (D.O.)
Oregon  City: Anderson,  G.  F.,
412 Main St. (D.C.)
Hoeye, George. (D.C.)
Latourette, Ruth, Masonic
Bldg. (D.O.)
Pendleton: Cole, O. O. (DC,)

Holsington, G. S. (D.O.)
Portland:  Achworth,  C. (D.O.)
Akin, Mabel, Corbett Bldg.

Akin. Otis F., Corbett  Bldg.

Bacon, Mabel S., 1713 Van

Houton St. (D.C.)
Baker,  Lillian,  Corbett  Bldg.

Baker, R. N. (N.D.)
Barret, H. Lester, Morgan

Bldg. (D.O.)
Bashor.  H.  A.,  Vincent  Blk.,

Bertschinger. A.. 340-43

Pittock Elk. (N.D.)
Bloxham, Harry P., 1050

Hawthorne Ave. (D.O.)
Bowers, H. D., 110 E. 71st

St. N. (D.O.)
Brazeau. Franklyn R..  600-6
Dekum Bldg. (D.C.)


1058


Geoqraphical  Index


Pennsylvania


,  Broadway
E.  Arkeny
O.  Box  984.


Breitling-, Geo. S., Royal

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Brenkman. N. H., 1593 E.

Stark (D.O.)
BripTPTS, A.  N., Cth  and  Mor-
rison  Sts. (D.C.)
Brown,  Henry  O.,  Sweatland

Bldg. (D.C.)
Brown, H.  O.. 215 Columbia

Bldg. (D.C.)
Browne, Dr. D. T., 317

Abington Bldg. (D.C.)
Collins,  Henry, 316  Alisky

Bldg. (D.P.T.)
Bearing,  Cordelia  M.,  County

Court  House (D.C.)
De Keves. A. P., Columbia

Bldg. (D.C.)
Denon,  L.  G..  30th  &  David-
son Sts. (D.C.)
Douglas, A. S., 338 Union

Ave. N. (D.C.)
Dunn,  J.  D..  106  W.  Park  St.

Farrior, Je.ssie B., Selling

Bldg. (D.O.)
Fear, Lois Mabel, Pittock

Blk. (D.O.)
Flack, Wm. O.

Bldg. (D.O.)
Fox, J. R., 700

Fulton,  N.  .T..  P.

(D.O., N.D.)
Gates, Gertrude Lord, Cor-

bett  Bldg. (D.O.)
Giles,  Mary  E.,  Morgan  Bldg.

Goode, John A., 7520 54th

St. (D.C.)
Graf, John F., 1039 E. 19th

St. N. (N.D.)
Gregory, MacGregor (D.C.)
Greiner,  Matilde  M.,  415  Mill

St. (D.C.)
Grover, Samuel F.. 310-17

Alisky Bldg.. (N.D.)
Grover,  S.  F.,  152  E.  33rd  St.

Havnie,  Nellie (D.C.)
Holder.  Jos.,  699  Everett  St.

Holmes, E. C, Buchanan

Bldg. (N.D.)
Horstman, H. V., Palace

Hotel (D.C.)
Howland.  Luther  H..  Selling

Bldg. (D.O.)
Ingham. Dr. E. H.. 1181

Harold Ave. (N.D.)
Ingram.  F.  H.,  Bank  of  Shell-
wood (D.C.)
Jones". C. M., 355 E. 8th St.

Jurva, O., 178 E. 60th St.

(D.O., N.D.)
Keller, Wm. G.. 508 Taylor

St. (D.O.)
Kinz, Geo. J., 409 Halsey

Bldg. (D.C.)
Lacv, Hammett N., Morgan

Bldg. (D.O.)
Lavalle, J. E., 207 Aliskey

Bldg. (N.D.)
Lav.nllov. J. K., 495 Bucha-
nan Bldg. (D.C.)
Lavallev, Thos. P., 403-1

Buchman Bldg. (D.C.)
Lehman, F. O., 317 Abing-
ton Bldg. (D.C.)
Lent, Geo. P., 417 Corbett

Bldg. (D.C.)
Leonard,  Hubert  F.,  Morgan

Bldg. (D.O.)
I.,eweaux, Virginia  V., Mor-
gan Bldg. (D.O.)
Lovranich, John, Stevens

Bldg. (Ma.)


MacMickle, Virgil, 808 De-

kun Bldg. (D.O., N.D.)
Mallory, W. E., 312-17

Swetland Bldg. (El.)
McMahon,  M. H.,  286 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Meader, Chas. R., 926 Glad-
stone Ave. (D.C.)
Meleen,  N.  F.,  135 12th  St.

Moore, F. E., Selling Bldg.

Moore,  H.  C.  P.,  Selling  Bldg.

Muff  ley, W. P. (D.C.)
Myers, Katherine Stott,

Journal Bldg. (D.O.)
Neill, C. O., Imperial Hotel.

Neleen, N. J., 135 12th St.

Nelson, N.  F.,  135 12th St.

Northrup, Robt. B., Morgan

Bldg. (D.O.)
Nordin, J. P. A., 375 Taylor

St. (D.O.)
Oberg, Carl, 517 Dekun

Bldg. (D.C.)
Oberg, Miss I., 49 Delmond

St. (D.C.)
Pacific Chiropractic  College.

Parker, E. Tracy, Corbett

Bldg. (D.O.)
Pengra, C. A., Selling Bldg.
• (D.O.)
Phillips, R. A., 504 Ore-

gonian Bldg. (D.O.)
Pondroy, Maurice M. (D.C.)
Powell, Anna, 409 Common-
wealth Bldg. (D.C.)
Powell,  W. O.,  409  Common-
wealth Bldg. (D.C.)
Pruden, W. F., 5033 71st

St.  S.  E. (M.D.)
Renter, Kathryn, Selling

Bldg. (D.O.)
Riceland, F. J. (D.C.)
Saconith, J., Stevens Bldg.

Scheets, Orville O., 66 6th

St. (D.C.)
Schildgen, Hugo, P. O. Box

916. (D.C.)
Shepherd, B. P., Morgan

Bldg. (D.O.)
Slater, Walter E., 1162i

Union St. (D.C.)
Spang,  Burnard  B., 29th  and

Belmont Sts. (D.C.)
Stone, Hari-y. (D.C.)
Stvles, John H., Jr., Pittock

Blk. (D.O.)
Sueall, E. P., 1042 E. 15th

St. (D.O.)
Taber, Mrs. John W.. 305|

Jeffer.son St. (D.C.)
Taber & Taber, Drs., 305 1

Jefferson St. (D.C.)
Teckner, I.  L., 202  Columbia

Bldg. (D.C.)
Tibbs, Maxey R. (D.C.)
Vehr, A. Spencer, 312 Roth-
schild Bldg. (N.D.)
Virgil, Dr. (N.D.)
Walker. Eva Snider, 124 E.

24th St. N. (D.O.)
Wntters, Ravmond E., 321

E. 8th St. N. (D.C, D.O.)
Wehoffer, Augusta V., 1169

Davison St. (D.C.)
Wilcoxon,  G.  D.,  375  Multno-
mah St. (N.D.)
AVilson, L. R. (N.D.)
Priiioe I{iii>ort: Eckerman,

Geo. (D.C.)
Rickcreall: Holmes, M. A.


Sidney
Perkins


Itcseberry: A.sliton, Major,

Cass St. (D.C.)
Ko.seltur;;: De Lapp,

L.. Perkins  Bldg.
Snell, Daniel E.,

Bldg. (D.O.)

Salem: Bancroft,  A.  M. (D.O.)

Brewster, A., Suite 428,

Hubbard Bldg. (D.O.)
Brewster, F. O., Hubbard

Bldg, (D.O.)
Brown, Daniel T., 10 Brey-

man Bldg. (D.C.)
Fulton <Sr Fulton. 108 S.

Church St. (D.C.)
Mercer, Wm. L. (D.O.)
Schoettle, M. Teresa, 678 N.

Cottage St. (D.O.)
Scott, O. L., 406 U. S. Nafl

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Stone, Harry  L.,  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg. (D.C.)
Walton, R. W.. U. S. Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
White, Bert H., 355 N.

Capitol St. (D.O.)
Seaside: Hodges,  Lena  R.


Sellwooil: Stone, H. S., 16331

E. 13th St. (D.C.)
Silvei-ton: Finseth, Anna M.


Slayton: Eaton,  A.  C. (D.C.)
Springfield: Kester, Eugene.

St. Jolin.s: Brown. H. O., 415
Kellogg St. (D.C.)
Ingram, A. P., 615 Evenhoe
The Dalles: Allen, Carol  vn.
First Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Bazeau. Frank. (D.C.)
Case,  W.  E.,  Box  133. (D.C.)
Corbin,  M.  E.,  Columbia  Hos-
pital  (D.O.)
Ingram, A. P., 401-2 First

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
McNicol, A.  M. (D.O.)
Scheltz, Earl J. (D.C.)
Tigard: Lewis, P. E. (N.D.)
Union: Woodell, J. E. (D.C.)
Vale; Sears,  Pauline. (D.O.)
Willamette: Sizer, F. R., 241f

Oak St. (N.D.)
AVoodhurn: Arjiistrong, F. H.,
Lock Box 55. (D.C.)


PENNSYLVANIA

Alleghany: May, A., General
Delivery. (D.O.)

Allentown: Allen, Wm. H., 42

S. 7th St. (DO.)
Clymer, R. S. (D.O.)
Gilbert. H. Armitt B., 28 S.

7th St. (D.O.)
Ivvne, Sandford T. (D.O.)
Scott, Wilson, 714 Walnut

St. (D.C.)
Weiss, E. A., 822 Hamilton

St. (D.O.)
Altoona:  Cassel,  G.,  80  Charles

St. (N.D.)
Davenport, Harry  Lewis,

1117 13th Ave. (D.O.)
De  Wolfe, Blanche. (D.C.)
Hurley, Helen, 1504 13th

Ave. (D.C.)


Pennsylvania


Geographical  Index


1059


Kantner, H. B. (D.O.)
Stratton, W. D.,.  221 5th St.

Yeater. I. F., 1213 8th Ave.
AmbridKc: Bonhart, Ij.
Leonhardt, Herman C, 509
Merchant St. (D.C.)
Antrnm: Qiiin.s, J. C. (D.O.)
Avaloii: Dunbar, R. J., 620

California Ave. (D.O.)
Beaver: Schiniink, P. B.,

Snitg-er Bldg-. (D.O.)
Beaver Falls: Irvine, S. W.,
903 8th Ave. (D.O.)
Mar.sh, E. I.. 1813 7th St.

Reynolds, H. D. (D.C.)
Starcke. N. R. (D.O.)
Bellefonte: Thornley, Harry

Earle. (D.O.)
Belleviie: Strain, Philip S. J.,

5fiO Forest Ave. (D.C.)
Berwick: Klinctot, H. L. &

D. B. (D.O.)
Bethlehem:  .Tones,  Etha

Marion, Bethlehem Trust
Bldg-. (D.O.)
Blossburg!  Vasselin,  W.  J.

Brailfloek: Boyd, Agnes.
Hoe, Edmond E., 719 Brad-
dock Ave. (D.C.)
Schmidt, A. S. (N.D.)
Zenk, Otto John. (D.C.)
Bradford: Hewins. C. S., 57
Congress St. (D.C.)
Husk, Noves Gaylord, 28

Main St. (D.O.)
King, J. W. (M.D.)
Lurrel, M. L., Hopley Bldg.

Salisbury, C. C, 52 Main

St. (D.C.)
Titus, M. ^^'., 7 Washing-
ton St. (D.O.)
Vernon, Alonzo W., 8 Tib-
bits Ave. (D.O.)
"Woodward, E. G.. 7 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Brookville: Coryell, Roland
S., Nat'l Bank of Broom-
ville Bldg. (D.O.)
Shannon, Eleanor, 391 W.
Main St. (D.C.)
BroTvnsville:  Rosenthal,  Room

3, Snowdon Bldg. (N.D.)
Bryii Mawr: Muttart, Chas.

J. (DO.)
Butler: Buzzard, J. D., 132 E.
Kittening St. (D.C.)
Foster, Julia  E., Stein  Bldg.

Harding & Sunstad, Guar-
anty Safe Deposit and
Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Jauss, Geo. (D.C.)
Morrow, Clara E., Main St.,
Cor. E. Diamond St.
Scott, J. C, 123 Cunning-
ham St. (D.C.)
Stehle,  C.  H.,  123  S.  Main  St.
(Ph.C, D.C.)
Catiton: Stem, Harold L.,

Lewis Bldg-. (D.O.)
Carbondale: Jennings, J. H.
Johler, C. N., Anthracite

Bldg. (D.C.)
Perkins. "W. J., Lincoln
Ave. (D.O.)
Carli.sle: Burkenholder, H. 1j.
(D.M.T.)


Krohn, G. W., 209 North
Hanover St. (D.O.)
Charlevol.v: Garbisch, Erwin,
433  McKeane  Ave.,  Green-
burg Bldg. (D.C.)
Wright, Clarence C, 514
Fallowfield Ave. (D.O.)
Cheltenham: Tracey, C. H.

Che.ster Co.: Farkasch,
Meyer, Fred. G., 619 Eg-

mont St. (D.C.)
Mack,  Raesley  S.,  114  Broad
St. (D.O.)
Clarion: Barlett, Clarence E.
Galbraith,  J.  C. (D.C.)
Clearfield: Bovard, C. C,
Market St. (D.C.)
Trenton, Mae S. (D.C.)
Conder.sport: Marsh, E. I.,

405 N. Main St. (D.C.)  !

Connellville: Carson, R. L.,
801 W. Main St. (D.C.)
Scantling, T. A. (D.O.)
Corry; McKelrey, Andrew S.,
2 Park Place, and 29 W.
Smith St. (D.C.)
Mensink, .L H., 8 S. Center

St. (D.C.)
Treichler, C. I.,andis, Horn
Bldg. (D.O.)
Danville: Lamon, Chas. P.,

200 Mill St. (D.C.)
Darlington: Wilson, Reese G.

Delaware Co.: McEwin,  Mar-
garet, Linwood Station.
Dela^vare Water Gap: Baer,

Fred J. (D.O.)
Dermont,  Pittsburgh:  Kiss-
ling, H. J., 2723 Ocean
Ave. (N.D.)
Doylestown; Hayman, Geo.
T., 148 E. State St. (D.0-)
Dubois: Berth, A. (D.O.)

Clifford, James Ray, 42 N.

Brady St. (D.O.)
Flick, Elizabeth. 204 Scrlb-

ner St. (D.C.)
Sinstadt & Smelser, 47 E.

Long- St. (D.C.)
Spencer,  F. M., 116  W.  Long-

Ave. (D.C.)
Vail, R. O., 204 Scribner St.
Duquesne: Johnson, J. T., 51

N. 1st St. (D.C.)
Easton: Beam, Wilson, 60 N.
3rd  St. (D.O.)
Danks, Edward G., 204

Northampton St. (DO.)
Jones, J. P., 19 W. 3rd St.
East Stroud-sburs:  Baer,

Fred J., 214 "Washington
St. (D.O.)
EU-tvood City: Baker, Emma
Baker, Georgiana A. (D.C.)
Bradley, Oscar Evans.
Erie: Avery, Frank E., 816
Myrtle St. (D.O.)
Earhart, Emogene M., 702

Peach St. (D.O.)
Folts & Folts, 2639 Peach

St. (D.C.)
Hoban. Harry. (D.C.)
Hubley, E. B., 921 Com-
merce Arcade Bldg.
Marshall, Eliz. J. B., 326

W. 8th St. (D.O.)
Mays, W. F.. 301 Commerce

Bldg. (D.C.)
Parker & Parker, 2002
Pe^ich  St. (D.C.)


Patton, R. Edwin, 131 West

18th St. (N.D.)
Robinson, .John Weller, 147

W. nth St. (D.O.)
Root, Frank E., 143 W.'  9th

St. (D.O.)
Scheid, Dr.  H.  .T., 421  Sassa-
fras  St. (D.C.)
Shaver, B. C, 421 Sasafras

St. (DC.)
Sweet, B. W., 136 W. 10th

St. (D.O.)
Warner, M., 326 W. 8th St.

Warner, N. S., 807 Chestnut

St. (DC.)
Etters: Nicholas, M. (D.O.)
Fair Haven: Larkins, James

W. (D.C.)
Winter, U'm. J. (D.C.)
Ford City: Hellam, Lydia.

Franklin: Harding, Vera,

1112 Liberty St. (D.C.)
Hoefner, J. Henry, 1330

Liberty St. (D.O.)
Shannon, Eleanor, 23 11th

St. (D.C.)
Turner, Grover  G. (D.C.)
Freeport: Richter, Benj. R.

Germanto^vn: Tanner, O. .J.,

5910  Wayne  Ave. (D.C.)
Marshall, Agnes, 36 E.

Clapier St. (D.C.)
Roberts, W. L., 150 AV.

Chelton Ave. (D.O.)
Gold: Howe,  L.  E. (D.C.)

Greensburpr: Honev. E. B.,

Cape Flats. (D.C.)
Rohacek. Wm. 208 N. Main

St. (D.O.)
Greenville: Canon, Fred. A.,

13 W.  Main St. (D.C.)
Hans, F. S. (D.C.)
McCormick. J. P., 94 Clin-
ton St. (D.O.)
Grove City: Bashline, Orrin

O..  Broad  St. (D.O.)
Board, Cecil, 419 E. Main

St. (D.O.)
Roseman, Walter F., 1331

Broad  St. (D.O.)
Slough, H. S. (D.C.)
Smith. C. W., 126 N. Broad

St. (D.O.)
Hallstead: Day, Beatrice.

Harrison, Mrs. E. E. (D.C.)
Hanover: Miller, Ira L., 36

Balto St. (D.C.)
Harrisburg: Baugher, I.,. Guy

229 N. 2nd St. (D.O.)
Deeter,  Ruth  A.,  132  Walnut

St. (D.O.)
Gunsaul, Irmine Z., 120

Market  St. (D.O.)
Hall. Harrv L. (D.C.)
Heisler. M. L.. 405 S. 13th

St. (D.C.)
Herrington. J. L., 1200 N.

3rd St. (D.O.)
Hoffman, Harrv C, 1403 N.

2nd St. (D.M.T.)
Kann, Frank B., 315 N.

2nd St. (D.O.)
Pease, W. W., 30 N. 2nd St.

Vastine, Harrv M., 109

Locust  St. (D.O.)
Hadley: McGranahan, J. C.

Hazleton: Miller, Gerald O.,

211-12 Markel Bank Bldg.

Shaw,  S.  A. (D.O.)
Homestead; Horner, J. C.


lOGO


Grogrdpliical  Index


Pennsylvania


HoImeMltur);: Tanner, O. J.,
8234 Frankford Ave.
Kinley, C. H., 541 Ammoii

St. (D.C.)
Law.son, H. L. (D.C.)
Munhall. Geo. M., 225 E.

15th Ave. (D.C.)
Shepard, F. M., 113 E. 8tli

Ave. (DO.)
Quig-ley. W. J., 305 E. Stli
Ave. (D.O.)
Ilone.sdnle: Cole, Percy L.

Honesidc: Hig'g'inbotham,
Carrie M.. 1205 East St.
HiintinKton: Richards. Chas.

I... 310 Penn St. (DC.)
Indinnn: Brilhart, W. W., Jr.
Shopard. W. P.. 652 Phila-
delphia St. (D.C.)
Jnincsto-wn, Mcroer Co.:

Hans. F. S. (D.C.)
John.stown: Black, Chas. L.,
Lincoln Bldg-. (D.O.)
Carter, E. M., 302 Lincoln

Bldff. (D.C.)
Hirschfeld, S., 72 Fairfield.^

Ave. (Opt.)
Montg-omery, AV. C, 204

Morrison St. (D.C.)
Murphy, Mrs. Mae. (D.C.)
Rebor, Chas. H., 411 Main

St. (D.C.)
Simon. N. C, 647 Franklin

Ave. (D.C.)
Strayer, H. R., 226 Strayer
St. (DC.)
Kennerdell:  Shannon,  Eleanor,

(DC.)
KinK.slon: Horner, ,T. C, 327

Wyoming- Ave. (D.C.)
Kittnnning: Davis, Samuel,
421 Reynolds Ave. (D.C.)
Lawson & Lawson, 210 S.

Jefferson  St. (D.C.)
McGreger, Fred. (D.O.)
Tupper, G. W. (D.C.)
Kantztown: Stein, H. T.

Ijambert.sville: Lambert, P. P.

Lnncn.ster: Becker, Rav D.,
21C E.  King-  St. (D.C.)
Grant, Wm. (D^C.)
Jones, E. Clair, 20 E

Orange St. (D.O.)
Kepperling, I. L., 662 Co-
lumbia Ave. (D.O.)
Miit.schler, O. C, 31 W.

Orange  St. (D.O.)
Purnell, Emma, Woolworth

Bldg-. fD.O.)
Sherwood, AVarren A., 142

N. Duke St. (D.O.)
Spencer, B. M., Fehl Bldg.
Ijan.sdovrne: Dickinson, Leo-
pold. (D.O.)
Lntrobe: Bertson, C. S., 1115
Legonier St. (D.C.)
Oglesby, H. L.. First Nafl
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Liebnnon: Brunner,  M.  M'., 121
S. 9th St. (D.O.)
McGuire, ^V. W., 914 Cum-
berland St. (D.C.)
Maguire,  W.  W., 208  N.  10th
St. (D.C.)
I.ie-»viston : Cole, Omer C,
I.,ewiston Trust Co. Bldg.
TJnooln.sville: Farmer, F. B.

Lincsvillo: Collins, A. B.

Lock  Ilnven: Stevenson,  .T.  P.,
205 W. Church St. (D.O.)


Itlnlioney  City:  Gable,  .John  A..

Renig Bldg. (D.C.)
l^Innlln: Ottofy, Louis. (M.D.""
DInrioiiville: Johnston, P. S

j  (D.C.)

McDonnld: Beyers, W. N.

McKecsport; Butler, AVm, H..
Ruben  Bldg.,  5th  Ave.  and
Walnut St. (D.C.)
Keitzer, W. E. (D.C.)
Jamborsky,  J.  J., 406  Centei-

St. (D.O.)
Schmidt & Butler, 213-14
Reuben  Bldg-. (D.C.)
Mendville: Barnett, E. M., 11
Park Ave. (D.C.)
Hackett. H. A., Trust Bldg.

Hackett & Hackett, Cra-wr-
ford Co. Trust Bldg.
Salisbury, Eva T. (D.C.)
Sash, Elizabeth, Masonic

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Vogan, Alberta L., 220
Chestnut St. (D.C.)
Meyersdale: Byrd, R. L., 23^
Main St. (D.C.)
Thomson. Annie, 309 North
St. (DC.)
IWitohell: Solbergr, A. (D.C.)
Itlonon^aheln: Grodecour, E.

A. (D.O.)
Monroe: Smith, R. O. (D.C.)
Montrose:  Van  de  Sand,  W.  B

(DO.)
Mt. Morris: Miller, P. H.

Mt.  Pleasant: Sutton,  W. R.

Munhall: Gustavson,  J.  F.,  711

13th Ave. (D.C.)
Nantieoke: Dalv, M. F., 6 E

Church St. (N.D.)
New Bethlehem: Bebout, E

R. (D.C.)
Nov Castle: Armstrong, ,1
D., 600-601 Greer Bid?
Armstrong, Sarah, N. Mill

St. (D.C.)
Armstrong & Armstrong
600-601 Greer Bldg.
Davies, Wm. M., 1508 S

Jefferson St. (D.O.)
Kirkham, Chas. L., K. L. 6<

M. Bldg. (D.O.)
Scott. D. E., Bleakley Blk

Thompson, Theo.  G.,  Mer-
cantile  Bldg, (D.O.)
Thorne, F. H., 325 Mercan-
tile  Bldg. (D.M.)
New Franklin: Dothage, E

A. (D.C.)
New Kensinffton; Duff, J. L..
Ridge Ave. (D.O.)
Hutchinson, L. L., 3rd Ave

Kinniburg, W. B., 742 5th

Ave. (D.C.)
Kinnenbprg & Kinnenberg,
Drs., 825 4th Ave. (D.C.)
New  Philadelnhia:  Towner, A.

H. (D.M.T.)
Norristown: Kirkbride, Har-
ry  C, 814 DeKalb St.
Mevers. Fred., 725 Swedes

St. (D.C.)
Swanson & Swanson, 710
George St. (D.C.)
Northeast: Bashaw, J. P., 34

E. Main St. (D.O.)
Oil  City; Downs,  Henrv  A.,  18
State St. (D.O.)


W., Lay

L.. 431-32
509 Inner


Easton, Mclroy

Blk. (D/O.)
Kritch, Bessie

Chamber Bldg-.
Richards. C. B.,

St. (D.C.)
Tornof, B., 16 S. Seneca  St.

Olyphant: Webb, W. P., 131

Locka Ave. (D.C.)
Parkers Landing:;: Hachinson,

T. S. (D.O.)
Herche, Jeanette B. (D.O.)
Philadelphia: Adams, Mc-

Greg-or, 1701 Chestnut St.

(DO.)
Apple, C. E.. Otis Bldg.,

16th and Sansom Sts.  ■•

(M.D., D.C.)
Bailey, De Forrest C, 739

N. 40th St. (D.O.)
Bailey, John H., Empire

Bldg. (D.O.)
Bailey,  Raymond  W.,

Franklin Bank Bldg.

Balbirnie, C. D. B., 4308

Walnut St. (D.O.)
Banker, Gene C, 526 W.

Hoetter St. (D.O.)
Barber, Chas. W., Flanders

Bldg. (D.O.)
Barrett. Onle A., 1423 Lo-
cust St. (D.O.)
Bartlett, Leonard

N. Felton St. (D.O.)
Bashline. O. O., 5040 Locust

St. (D.O.)
Belle, Josephine, 31 S. 40th

St. (D.C.)
Benion. Martha Vernon.

Flanders Bldg. (D.O.)
Bentley, Lillian L., 152?

Chestnut St. (D.O.)

2125 N.


P., 1542


Denckla
Fland-


1112


326


7127


Bobb, Henrv H.,
18th St. (N.D.)

Brav. Edwin W.,
Bldg. (D.O.)

Brearley, Peter H.,
ers  Bldg. (D.O.)

Brown, Sam'l Agnew,
Chestnut  St. (D.O.)

Bruckner. Carl D., Fland-
ers Bldg. (D.O.)

Bulster. H. G., 1112 Chest-
nut  St. (D.O.)

Burke,  Raymond  J.,  Weight-
man Bldg. (D.O.)

Cacsile, R., 139 N. 16th St.

Campbell,  A.  D.,  1524  Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)

Cardamone, Philip J.
E. Price St. (D.O.)

Carmichael, F. H.,
Germantown Ave.
D.C.)

Carothers, ,1. C., 1447 N.
Redfleld Ave. (D.O.)

Cassel, M. E.. 1530 Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)

Chevney,  A. M., R. E.  Trust
Bldg. (D.O.)

Clark, James H.,
13th St. (D.C.)

Cohalan. .John A..
Girard Bldg. (D.O.)

Cole. Julia  Mowerv, 2602 N.
12th St. (D.O.)

Collins. Alice L., 10 S. 18th
St. (D.O.)

Collins, Emma Hazel,
42nd St. (D.O.)

Conger, W. Milliard,
Witherspoon Blvd.

Cox, Robt. C 1524
nut St. (D.O.)

Creatore, Tominaso,
51st St. (DO.)

Crimmine, Th., 1602
mer  St. (D.O.)


327 W.

Stephen


424  S.


Chest-


762 S.
Sum-


Pennsylvania


Geogr(ij)hi('oI  Index


1061


Cullen, Coo. S., 421 Walnut

St. (D.C.)
Curran, Cecilia O., Kmpire

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Dana, Win. Jay, 1318

Spruce St. (D.C.)
]>avis, J. MoiTison, Hale

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Deeter,  J.  N., 315  N.  35th  St.

Dfutscher. J. L., 4  30 Heed

Bldg-. (F.S.)
Dietz, H. H.. 1725 W. Mor-
ris St. (D.O.)
Disney, J. Lambert, 1149

N. 63rd St. (S.T.)
Disney, P. V., 1149 N. (53rd

St. (D.O.)
Doughty, John, 22 S. 52nd

St. (D.C.)
Drew, Edward G., 1228 W.
. Lehiarh Ave. (D.O.)
Drew, Ira W., Land Title

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Dufur, J. Ivan, Penn Bldg-.

Dunning-ham, Margaret B.,

Real Kstate Bldg. (D.O.)
Dunningham, R. H., Real

Estate Bldg. (D.O.)
Dunningham, Wesley P.,

Stephen Oii-ard Bldg.

(DO.)
Dunningston, Earl V., Ste-
phen Girard Bldg. (D.O.)
Durkee, H. V., 4001 Parish

St. (D.O.)
Dye.  W.  AValter,  5243  Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)
Eddy, G. R., 1022 Spruce

St. (D.C.)
Eldon, Jas. B., 1741 N. 13th

St. (D.O.)
Eldridge, Roy Kerr, 5858

Spruce St. (D.O.)
Ellis,  Thomas  W., 5236  Vine

St. (D.O.)
Parrand, F. C, 11 S. 52nd

St. (D.O.)
Fenimore, B. B., 50th and

Market  St.s. (M  D..  D.C.)
Finch, J. F., 6213 Vine St.

Fineman, Harry, 1338 N.

Franklin St. (INI.D., D.C.)
Fischer,  John  A.,  Otis  Bldg.,

Ifith and Sansom Sts.

(M.D., D.C.)
Flack,  Arthur  M., 3414 Bar-
ing  St. (D.O.)
Fleming-, Evalena S. C,

"Weightman Bldg. (D.O.)
Flint, Effle A., 1636 N. 15th

St. (D.O.)
Flint. Ralph W., 1636 N.

15th St. (D.O.)
Foehl, Dr. P. E.. 5405 Bal-
timore Ave. (N.D.)
French, Leslie H., 315 N.

35th St. (N.D.)
Fritsche, Edward H., 1832

W. Girard Ave. (DO.)
Fritz, W. ^Vallace. 1600

Summer St. (M.D.)
Furey, Blanche Costello.

Real E.=itate Trust Bldg-.

Cleveland Ave. (D.O.)
Furey, Wm. .Tos., Real

Estate Trust Bldg-. (D.O.)
Gabriel, Emma, 1713 Mt.

Vernon St. (D.O.)
Galbreath, "Wm. Otis. Land

Title Bldg. (DO.)
Galbreath, J. "Willis, Penn-
sylvania Bldg. (D.O.)
Graves, Armstrong "W.,

Park and Allegheny Ave-
nues. (D.O.)
Gercke, Geo. A., 7101 Tulip

St. (D.O.)


Gloflhill, W.  J., 1530 N. 13th

St. (N.D.)
Graves, Geo. B., Hutchinson

and Lehigh Aves. (D.O.)
Grimes, Idella A., Franklin

Bank Bldg. (DO.)
Groves, Dr. Sarah E., 1112

Spruce St. (D.O.)
Gruber, Chas. J., Widener

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hales, G. N., 124 S. 11th St.

Harley, Aldine Hotel.

Harris, H., 1602 Summer

St. (D.O.)
Hart, I. Sylvester, 1540 N.

15th St. (D.O.)
Haskins,  Coverly  E. C, 2033

Sansom St. (D.O.)
Hawes,  "Wm.  F.,  Real  Estate

Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Hayman, Geo. T., Real

Estate Trust Bldg-. (D.O.)
Heintze, A. C, 1318 Spruce

St. (D.O.)
Henry, Mary Elizabeth.

1654 N. 12th St. (D.O.)
Henzel, Franklin M., 3149

N. 15th St. (N.D.)
Herwig, A., 1713 Mt. Ver-
non St. (D.O.)
Hess, Elmer C, 1118 W.

Lehigh Ave. (D.O.)
Hildebrand, A., 1112 Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)
Hildebrand, Dr. Julia I.,

1112  Chestnut  St. (N.D.)
Hill, Wm. E., 2121 Master

St. (D.O.)
Hoffman, Herbert, 1118

Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Hoopes, Chas. L., 1524

Chestnut  St. (D.O.)
Irvin, "Wm. M., Penna  Bldg.

Jackson, Mary K., 1533

Diamond St. (D.O.)
Jackson, Thos. M., 1553

Diamond St. (D.O.)
Jahn, Dr. Francis M., 1631

Chestnut St. (N.D.)
Jones, J. "Walter, 1411 Wal-
nut St. (D.O.)
Johnson. C. E., 3534 N.

11th St. (D.C.)
Johnson, Burdsall F., 1016

Lehigh  Ave. (D.O.)
Johnson, David W., 3241 N.

15th St. (D.C.)
Johnston, L. B., 628 N. 52nd

St. (D.O.)
Justice, C. T., 4037 Og-den

St. (D.O.)
Keene, AV. B.. 1530 Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)
Keller,  G.  T. (D.C.)
Keller, Harry  T.. 5320 Wal-
ton  Ave. (D.C.)
Kelly, Lawrence J., Penna

Bldg. (D.O.)
Kenderline, Clarence, Bor-

not Bldg. (D.O.)
Kilgus, Ella  D., 45  De  Long

Bldg. (N.D.)
Kilgus.  AVm.  M.,  45  De  Long

Bldg-. (N.D.)
Kirk. G. AV. (M.D.)
Kirk. J. "\V. (Ma.)
Kistler, A. J., 919 N. Broat

St (M.D., D.C.)
Kraiker, Frederick Wm.,

1201 W. Alleg-hanv Ave.

Kiinze, Dr. Erwin, 205  7

Ridg-e Ave. (D.O.)
Lake, J.. 1600 Summer St.

I^eonard. Ellsworth Harrv.

The Flanders. (D.O.)


/jeonard, H. Alfred, Frank-
lin  Bank P.ldg-. (D.O.)
Levegood, Robert R., 133 N.

52nd St. (D.O.)
Looker, William, 1243  »  N.

60th St. rD.C.)
Luntz, H., 253 S. 13th St.

Lyoett, Townsend, 2414

Pine St. fD.C.)
Lvnch, L. M., 710 Liberty

Bldg., N. E. Cor. Broad

and Chestnut St.s. (D.C.)
Marchand, A. W., 934

Spruce St. (D.O.)
Marchand,  A.  W.,  N.  E.  Cor.

Broad and Chestnut Sts.

Markle. T. K., 1022 Spruce

St. (D.C.)
Marriner, L. C, Denckla

Bldg. (D.O.)
Masterson, "V\'m. P., Wide-
ner Bldg-. (D.O.)
Mav, Sarah A., Flanders

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Maver, Ernest J., 1131

Rockland St. (D.C.)
Mayer, .John P., Broad and

Cavuga Sts. (M.D., D.C.)
MacDonald, J., 154 Arch St.

MacEwen, Margaret, 410 S.

9th St. (D.O.)
McCurdy, Chas. W., 1411

Walnut St. (D.O.)
Mclver, J. M., 1112 Chest-
nut  St. (D.O.)
McNelis, Anthony J., R. E.

Trust Bldg-. (D.O.)
Medlar, Agnes S., 1112-14

Chestnut  St. (D.O.)
Moat, V^'m. Steele, 3332 N.

17th  St. (D.O., M.D.,  N.D.)
Moore, Frank R., Real

Estate Trust Bldg.

Moore, Geo. Washington,

Real Estate Trust Bldg.

Morris, Paschall, Flanders

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Muttart, Charles J., Wide-
ner Bldg-. (D.O.)
Nicholl, Thos. H., Franklin

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Nicholl,  "Wm.  S.,  Real  Estate

Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Noelingr, G. D.. 1113 Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)
Noeling, Katherine L., 1107

Chestnut St. (D.O.)
O'Brien. Francis R., Flan-
ders Bldgr. (D.O.)
O'Neil. W. H.. 210 Parkway

Bldg-. (N.D.)
Osteopatliic Institute,

AVeightman Bldg-. (D.O.)
Padberg, Blanche 'M., 4205

Sansom St. (D.O.)
Pennock. Brown  D. S.,  Land

Title Bldg. (D.O.)
Penrose. .Tanet N., "VV'eight-

man Bldg. (D.O.)
Perkins. H. J., 8 S. 52nd

St. (D.O.)
Petterv. AVilliam E., 1536

Diamond St. (D.O.)
Pierce. J. E., 1030 "«*olf St.

Porter, F . 4308 Chestnut

St. (D.O.)
Pvne. S. H., 25 S. 16th St.

Raiilenbush. .1. S., 3633 N.

15th St. (D.O.)
Read. Miles S., "V\''eig-htman

Bldg-. (D.O.)


1062


Geographical  Index


Pennsylvania


Readiiif?, I^. W., 15th and
Pine Sts. (M.D., D.C.)

Reeves, M. Duncan. (N.D.)

Rehfeld, J., 1817 N. 79th  St.  j
(N.D.)  I

Reinfiardt. Matilda V., 1524  I
Cliestnut St. (D.C.)  '

Roberts. W. L., 1.50 W.
Chelton Ave. (D.O.)

Roehl, P. E., 5405 Balti-
more Ave. (D.O.)

Romigr, Kathryn A., Com-
monwealth  Elder. (D.O.)

Rosenblatt, A., 2618 Germin
St. (D.O.)

Ross, Simon  -P., Land Title
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Rupp, Sarah W., Common-
wealth Dldg-. (D.O.)

Salas,  Albert  M..  1112  Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)

Saxer, C. R., 51st and Wal-
nut Sts. (D.O.)

Schumacher, Erwin I^.,
5155 Haverford Ave.

Scott, Jane, Franklin Bank
Bldgr. (D.O.)

Seibert, Klizabeth Grimes,
802 N. 41st St. (D.O.)

Seibert, J. A., 2000 Green
St. (D.O.)

Sexton. Wm. H., Real
Estate Trust Bldg".  (D.O.)

Shaeffer, Laura, 1926 Chest-
nut St. (D.O.)

Shenton, A. W., 734 Real
Estate  Trust Bldg-. (DC.)

Shenton, Lillian P., 15th
and  Poplar  Sts. (D.O.)

Shute, Furman R., 1516 Mt.
Vernon St. (M.D., D.C.)

Sickels, Norman I., 5118
Chester St. (D.O.)

Simcox, Lawrence, 103 W.
Walnut Lane. (M.D.,
D.C.)

Simmons, C. W., 1628 N.
18th St. (M.D., D.C.)

Slaugh, Harry J., 922 W.
I>ehig-h Ave. (D.O.)

Slifer, C. Franklin, 5613
Germantown Ave. (D.C.)

Sloug-h, .John S., 531 E.
Alleghenv  Ave. <T).0  )

Smith, C. R., 1433 Spruce
St. (M.D., D.C.)

Smith, F. W., 1433
St. (M.D., D.C.)

Snape & Snape, 939
St. (D.C.)

Snyder, J. C.
Bldg. (D.O.)

Snyder, O. J.,


Spruce

Spruce

Pennsylvania

Wither.spoon

280  6 Gerard


Bldg. (D.O.)
Somers, G. B.

Ave. (D.O.)
Stamp, Flovd, Aldine Hotel.

Stearne, .Tohn .!., 3124 N.

15th St. (D.O.)
Stetson, A. G. C, 1825

Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Stoeckel, Florence P., 5332

Wayne St. (D.O.)
Stolp, W. L., 2039 Diamond

St. (D.O.)
Storey, Roboit .T., 1118 N.

40th St. (D.O.)
Stuart,  Charles,  4602

Frankford Ave. (D.C.)
Switzer, R. H., 5229 Spruce

St. (D.O.)
Tanner, O .T., 5910 W'avne
.  Ave. (D.C.)
Thomas, Paul Revere, Real

Estate Trust Bldg. (D.O.)
Tinges, Geo. H., Stephen

Girard Bldg. (D.O.)
Tracy, Emily F., 2124 Arch

St. (D.O.)


Turkington, J. C, 2841 N.

9th  St. (D.O.)
Tui-ner, Nettie C, I^and

Title Bldg. (D.O.)
Turner, Tiiomas E., I^and

Title Bldg. (D.O.)
Van Ronk, Chas. J., 640 E.

Chelton Ave. (D.O.)
AVallace, John W., 1703 N.

17th St. (D.O.)
Walters, Geo. W., 4214

Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Walton, Alfred, 512

Flanders Bldg. (M.D.D.C.)
Warren, S. F., 1112-14

Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Watkins, Lewis, 835 S.

Alden St. (D.O.)
Weaver, H. S., 1433 Spruce

St. (M.D., D.C.)
Weissberg,  E.  B.,  515  Spruce

St. (D.O.)
Welch, O. F., 724 N. 20th

St. (D.O.)
Whallev, Irving, I.,and Title

Bldg. (D.O.)
Widman,  William,  432  Wood

St. (D.C.)
Wiemann, Elizabeth, 516

Weightman Bldg. (D.C.)
Wildsmith, Thos. E., Park-
way Blvd. (D.O.)
Williams, L., Flanders

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wolsriffer, J., 139 N. 16th

St. (D.O.)
Wood, cniarlotte G., 10 S.

18th St. (D.O.)
Wood, J. R., 45 Johnson St.

Wroy, M. E., 2000 Spring

Garden St. (D.O.)
Wylie,  John  M., 5252  Spi'uce

St. (D.O.)
Zindel, Prank E., 2019 N.

21st St. (D.O.)
PitcJiirn: Collins, C. I., 481

3rd St. (D.O.)
Scott, .John S., 453 3rd St.

Pitt.sl>ur«;li: Adair, Rosella

E. (D.C.)
Ahlstrom, Gosta M. J., 408

Penn. Ave. (M.A.)
Atkinson, A. J., Pittsburgh

Life Bldg-. (El.)
Aunks,  Mrs. S. F., 1519  Fal-

lowfield St. (D.C.)
Baldwin, Helen M.. Liberty

National Bank Bldg.

Barth, Joseph F., 318 5th

Ave. (D.C.)
Barth. Victor, 318 5th Ave.

(N.D., D.O.)
Bartiam & Doutt, Westing-
house Bldg. (D.C.)
Battle Creek Methods, Kee-

nan Bldg. (Ma.)
Beale, Edwin F., 5127 Cen-
ter St. (D.O.)
Benecke, W. F., 400 Brad-
dock Ave. (N.D.)
Bessis, Peter N., 1001 Kee-

nan Bldg-. (Ma.)
Betts, F. L., German Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Billhimer, .1., State St.,

Carnegie. (N.D.)
Black, Fred H., 327 Strat-
ford Ave. (D.C.)
Blakeley, Chas. M., 801

Schmidt Bldg. (El.)
Boyd, Agnes E., 133 Lari-
mer  Ave. (D.C.)
Brown, H. M., 7827 Susque-

hana  St. (D.O.)
Brown,  John  R.,  404  Lyceum

Bldg. (El.)
Brown, C. Osborne, 916
Federal St. (D.C.)


Bucey, Howard L., 5642
Rippey St. (D.C.)

Buddenberg, H. H., 6th and
Penna Ave. (D.C.)

Buddenbei-g System, .lack-
son Bldg. (D.C.)

Butler, W. H., 701 Hazel
St. (D.C.)

Buzzard, J. D., 407 E. Ohio
St. (D.C.)

Callen, M. J., 6200 Pennsyl-
vania  Ave. (N.D.)

Campbell, W. J., 7132 Ben-
nett  St. (D.C.)

Catalano, Antonio. (N.D.)

Chartier, T., 1207 Monterey
St. (N.S.)

Cleeland, F.  W.,  513  Lyceum
Bldg. (D.O.)

Clinton. Mary W., Keenan
Bldg-. (D.O.)

Colerman, B. A., 20 Linden
Ave. (D.C.)

Collins, Clyde I., 484 3rd
St. (D.C.)

Compton, Emma M., Pitts-
burgh Life Bldg. (D.O.)

Compton, Mary, Pittsburgh
Life Bldg. (D.O.)

Cox, David J., 408 Charles
St. (D.C.)

Cox, Robert O., 213 Summit
Ave. (D.C.)

Craven, Jane Wells, Arrott
Bldg. (D.C.)

Crawford, Geo. S., 411
Ringgold St. (D.C.)

Crlss,  J. D., 626  Warringtoa
St. (D.C.)

Cruikshank, Omar T., 8148
Jenkins Arcade. (El.)

Dam, Myrtle M., 5461  Hill
Crest  Ave. (Ma.)

Dietz, W. S., 94 S. 18th St.

Donahue, J.  J.,  1306  Federal
Bldg. (D.C.)

Dorrance, Harold J., First
Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Dottiel, Augusta W., 4601
Forbes St. (D.C.)

Douttiel, G. W., Forbes  and
Craig Sts. (D.C.)

Doutt, E. S., 516 Federal
St. (D.O.)

Downey, Andrew I., 206 S.
St.  Clair  St.  E.  E. (D.C.)

Durham, A. D., First Nat'l
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Edwards, John, 1109 Sher-
man Ave. (D.C.)

Evans, Mrs. Nora J., 7107
Idlewild St. (D.C.)

Evans, Dr. W. Samuel, 211
Wallace Bldg. (N.D.)

Fennel], Eliz. E., 15 Mont-
gomery  Ave. (D.C.)

Festa, F. P., 1510 Werster
Ave. (N.D.)

Fillinger, C. A., 630 Wood-
ward Ave. (D.C.)

Fisher, H. Wallace, 512 5tli
Ave. (D.C.)

Fitz, Chas. B., 839 Freeland
St. (D.C.)

Flanigan, G. L., 524 Penna.
Ave. (El.)

Franke, Marie L., 2nd Nat'l
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

Freeborn, Thos. J., 405
May Bldg. (D.C.)

Galbraith, A., 130 S. Fair-
mount Ave. (D.C.)

Garman, George C, 307
Rodgers Ave. (D.C.)

Goehring, Frank L., Nixon
Bldg. (D.O.)

Goehring, Harry M.,
Diamond Bank Bldg-.


Pennsylvania


Gcocirn pineal  Index


10  (i3


Gonckcr, John F., 5308  Ger-
trude St. (D.C.)
Gottshall, Mollie E., 403-4

Schmidt Blvd. (N.D.)
Grau, Mrs. Nellie F.. 133

Sycamore St. (D.C.)
Green, C. D.. May Bldg-.

Gregory. A.. 309 Antlei

Hotel. (D.O.)
Grubb, Win. \j., Pittsburg

Life Bldg-. (D.O.)
Gutzman, F. A., May Bldg.

Han.sen, Edward N., Arrott

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hazel. Albert  E.. 403 Second

Nafl Bank Bldg. (El.)
Hickman. Warren E., 130

S. Fairmount Ave. (D.C.)
Hildreth. C. Green. 1528i

Rockland  Ave. (D.C.)
Hildreth. C. G., 405 Magee

Bldg. (D.O.)
Hilgartner. L. E., Prospecl

St. (D.C.)
Hoehn. Mr.s. Emma, 720 E.

Diamond St. (Ma.)
Hornberg, Carl H.. 408

Penna  Ave. (Ma.)
Horner, J. C, 5155 Penna

Ave. (D.C.)
Houston, Edwin A., 1520

Federal St. (D.C.)
Hovey, E. B.. 409 4th Ave

Hunter, Wm. W., 418 High-
land  Bldg. (D.O.)
Inks. F. M., 53 Hawthorne

Ave. (D.C.)
Jones. B.. 3928 5th Ave.

Jones. John, 3928 5th Ave.

Josephson, Morris, 3220

Dawson  St. (D.C.)
Kaiser, Edward C, 573

Panke Ave. (El.)
Kassmie, Remecke Inst.,

Home Trust Bldg., 6th

Ave. and Wood St.
Kassmir, M. Z., 969 Liberty

Ave. (D.C.)
Kearns, Leo M.. 609-11

Wabash Bldg. (D.C.)
Kennedy. E. A.. 808-9 E.,

End Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Kew, Arthur, First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Kilton, A. A., Empire Bldg.

Klein. S. J.. 48 S. 33rd St.

Krewson. A. P... 406 Home

Trust Bldg. (D.C.)
Lamb, Joseph J., 1252

Franklin St. (N.D.)
Lloyd, J. M. (D.C.)
Loban, J. M., 532 Lincoln

Ave. (D.C.)
Loban, J. M., 130 S.  Fair-
mount Ave. (N.D.)
Lueke. A. W., 333 Darsie

St. (N.D.)
Mang. Chas. J., First Nafl

Bank Bldg. (M.D.)
l\tangold, Walter, 2120

Sarah Sts. (D.C.)
Marshall, Tom, Alpine and

Iowa St.s. (D.C.)
Martin, John M., 949

Middleton St. (D.C.)
McCaslin, Annie. 204 N.

Negley Ave. (D.O.)
McClain. Warren, 740 Will

St. (N.D.)
McCloskev, Lomery, 301

Schmidt Bldg. (D.C.)
McDowell, L., 210 Wash-
ington Trust Bldg., 927

5th Ave. (D.O.)


McGarvey, E. S., 5626

Philips St. (D.C.)
McKinley, D. H., 1619  Green

St. (D.C.)
McRoberts, Sarah Ellen.

130 N. Negley Ave. (D.O.)
Mellotts Mechanical, 6 W.

North Ave. (Ma.)
Mercer, Alice, 513 Sandusky

St. (D.C.)
Merriman, George, 713

Armandale Ave. (D.C.)
Messer, A. L., At. Associa-
tion. (D.C.)
Messnei-, John G., First

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Meyer, E. T., 715 Home-
ward Ave. (D.O.)
Michael, A.. 701 Schmidt

Bldg. (D.O.)
Morgan, Sarah A., 220

Taylor St. (D.C.)
Neagley, Asia L., 16 Fargo

St. (N.D.)
Neagley.  Jas.  K.,  615  Sickles

Ave. (M.D.)
Olson, Herman,  501  Diamond

Bank Bldg. (Ma.)
Peck, Vernon W., First

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Peffer, Geo. M., 140 Bertha

St. (D.C.)
Peffer, J. M., 140 Berha St.

(DC.)
Peterson, Alma, 326 S.

Highland Ave. (Ma.)
Pittsburgh College of Chi-
ropractic, 320 Pittsburgh

Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Quigley, W. J., Pittsburgh

Life Bldg. (D.C.)
Reinecke,  H.  J.,  339  5th

Ave. (D.O.)
Rice.  Ray  L.,  917  Gerritt  St.

Richards, C. H., 222 3rd SI

(DC.)
Rickin, Harry C, 1466 Kel-

tin Ave. (D.C.)
Ritz, Edward P. (D.C.)
Rosensteel, E. S., 3014

Wadlow St. (N.D.)
Rossner, M. J., 969 Libertv

Ave. (D.C.)
Scheck.  Wm.  J., S16 Federal

St. (El.)
Schenk, John C. 513 San-
dusky  St. (D.C.)
Schmeichel. J. M., 1129 N.

Lang Ave. (D.O.)
Schmidt. Walter W., 19

Roland Ave. (D.C.)
Schrankel, N.  P.. 5008 Sher-
man Ave. (D.C.)
Sebolt.'  Elline  M. E., Beaver

St. (D.C.)
Seltzer. Harry, 100 S. 18th

St. (N.D.)
Seltzer. W. J., 1818 Sarah

St. (D.O.)
Sheppard. Geo. E.. 606

Southern Ave. (D.C.)
Sheppard, Harry H. F., 211

McKinley Ave. (D.C.)
Simmons. F. H., 914 High-
land  Ave. (D.C.)
Simpson, C. E., 722 South

Ave. (D.C.)
Spill, Walter E., 2509

Perrysville  Ave. (ID.O.)
Strain, Philip S. J., 560

Forest Ave. (D.C.)
Swenson. Gustave. 322 La-

marida St., AVest Liberty.

Tolputt. Anna T., 516

Federal St. (D.C.)
Tvlkowski. N., 502 Seckles

St. (DO.)


Van Doren, Mae Hawk, 700

W. North Ave. (D.O.)
Victor Bro.s., Oliver Bldg.

(Ma.)
We.stlund, Carl E., 5146

Libert.v Ave. (Ma.)
Wheler, A. S.. 14 Mifflin

Ave.. Edgewood  Park.

Whiteley, Wm. H., 127

Sycamore St. (D.O.)
Widman, Wm., 432 Wood

St. (D.O.)
Wilcox, I..eon A., Keenan

Bldg. (D.C.)
Wilcox, ^V. J., Keenan

Bldg. (D.C.)
Williams, Mary A., 1115

Chartiers Ave. (D.O.)
^Vinter, W. J., Rahm Ave.

Zuck. Janet E., 512 2nd St.

Pitt.sville: Griffiths. E. E., W.

Walnut  St. (N.D.)
Plymouth: Garrison, Eleanor.

229 E. Main St. (N.D.)
I'ottstown : Smith, M. O.

Pott.svilIe: Lidy, Henry I., 22

S.  Cf^-'tv,.  St. (D  O.)
Scott, Wilson, 6 N. Center

St. (D.C.)
Punx.suta-»Tny: Wehrle, R. M.

Reading: Bruce, Miller A.,

Mount Penn. (D.O.)
Dusher, I. A. (DO.)
Howland, Helen N.. 510

Penn St. (D.C.)
Hurley. John L., 103 S. 5th

St. (D.C.)
Kepperling,  Ira  L..  445  Milt-
more  St. (N.D.)
Maxwell. Herman L., 136

N. 5th  St. (D.O.)
McCaslin, J. A., 311 Center

St. (D.O.)
Nagel, Ph., Box 605. (D.O.)
Vastine,  Herbert,  523

Franklin St. (D.O.)
Ridley Park;  Hemenway,

Gertrude F. (D.C.)
Brown, Samuel Agnes.

Roclse.stcr: Armstrong, J.

Telford, 4-5 Wilson Bldg.

Olson. Hendrick, 314 W.

Park St. (D.O.)
Ru.sliville: Boyd & Boyd.

Sagrer.sto^vii : Bovd. C. A.. Ill

Church St. (D.C.)
Seavy, S. F. (D.C.)
Salem: Brown, Daniel T.* 10

Breyman Bldg. (D.C.)
Scott, O. L., 406-8 Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Stone, Harry  L.,  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg. (D.C.)
Savre: Mandeville, J. E.,

Lockhart  Bldg. (D.O.)
Nichols, Mrs. R. A;, 6-8

Wheelock Bldg. (D.C.)
Scranton: Benedict. May A.,

2513 N. Main Ave. (D.O.)
Boyd & Hall, (D.C.)
Bunnell, ^V. O., 116 Adams

Ave. (D.O.)
Downing.  John  T..  Board of

Trade Bldg. (D.O.)
Evans, Margaret, 623 Madi-
son  Ave. (D.O.)
Harvey, K. G., 816 Mul-

berrv St. (D.O.)


1064


Geographical  Index


Rhode  Island


Johler, L. G., 148 Adams

Ave. (D.C.)
Johler, li. a.. Bliss Davis

Elder. (D.C.)

Kirkpatrick, S. I^.. 308

Washing-ton Ave. (D.C.)
I.indsey. E. L., 603 Madison

Ave. (D.O.)
Nicholis, Charles H., 134

Wyoming- Ave. (D.O.)
Nichols, Mabel, Farr Bldg.

Sewickley: Bateson, J. C.

Dinsmore, Laura B. 214

Centennial Ave. (D.O.)
Graham, Caroline E., 437J

Beavor SI. (D.C.)
Shantokiii: Williams, Edwin

D.. 201 E. Sunbury St.

Sharon: Baird,  R.  W.,  12  Vine

St. (D.C.)
Bining-er & Lininger,

Myer's Block. (D.C.)
Doyd & Bloyd, 332-^ State

St. (D.C.)
Marcy, Nettie L., 105  i W.

State St. (D.C.)
Sowers, Homer E., Hamory

Bldg. (D.O.)
ShnriKsville: Minneck, J. Earl

Sliippin;;: Port: Marvin, W.

H. (D.C.)
Slayton: Eaton, A. C. (D.C.)

State College: Thornley,

Harry Earle. (D.O.)
St. Johns: Brown, H. O., 415
Kellogg St. (D.C.)
Ingram, A. P., 615 Evenhoe
St. (D.C.)
Stroudsburg;: Baer, Fred J.

Sunbury: Bloom, Essie U.,
Fisher, W. W. (D.O.)
Huston, Grace, First Nat'l

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Miller,  John  W.,  226  Market
Square. (D.O.)
Swi.ssvale: McClurg, Dr.


Tarentuni:


Titii.sville:


Kline, L. C.


Adair,


Rosella,
26 N. Monroe St. (D.C.)

Griffiths.  Earle  A.,  310-11
Commercial  Bank  Bldg.

Richards.  C.  B.,  77  W.  Cen-
tral Ave. (D.C.)

Smith,  Annie,  71  Superior
(St. (D.C.)

Snyder, Cecil Paul, 64 N.
Washington St. (D.O.)
Tousrh Ttonainon; Farkasch,  J.

Towandii: Pruyne, A. I.,., 120
Main St. (D.C.)

Tunkhannock: Lewis, Samuel
M.,  c/o  Hotel  Graham.
Union City: Oneland, Sarah
C, Rockwell Bldg. (D.O.)
Carson, R. L. (D.C.)
Marsh, Roy W., First Nafl

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Person,  G.  H., 32  W.  Church
St. (D.C.)
Vanrtergrift: Harding, A. C,
189 Washington  Ave., and
118 Sherman Ave. (D.C.)


Warren: Allen. T. B. (N.D.)
Bairstow,  W. R., W'arren

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Galbraith, Jane, 327 Penna

Ave. (D.C.)
Galbraith,  Sarah.  327

Penna Ave. (D.C.)
Hoagland. Mrs. Geo., 13

Dartmouth St. (D.C.)
King, Floyd E., Knapp

Bldg. (D.C.)
Parker, Dr., Market St.

Richards & Richards, 9

Franklin St. (D.C.)
Washington! Garbisch, Er-

win H., 410 Brown Bldg.

Olds,  E.  O.,  120  W.  Chestnut

St. (Ne.)
Garbisch, Henry C, 410

Brown Bldg. (D.C.)

Watsonto-wn: Sperbick, H. C.

AV'siyne.sburg: Bebout, E. R.,
People's Bank Bldg.
Brown, Robert. 124 N.

Potomac Ave. (D.C.)
Call, R. (D.O.)
Hoover, H. R., 25 N. Poto-
mac St. (D.C.)
Orrison.  Lowell  A.,  421  Mor-
ris St. (D.O.)
Wellsboro: Lyon, Louis A.,
37 Pearl St. (D.O.)
Rowley, P. S. (D.C.)
^Vest  Chester: Cramer, Oliver
H., 13 S. Church St.
West  Springfield: Cook, Chas.
D. (D.C.)

"Weysser: Howe, Mabel J.

■Wilkes Barre: Cherry, John

G., 168 N. Main St. (D.C.)
Davies, Catherine E., 15 S.

Franklin St. (D.O.)
Evans, Jno., 49 S. Main St.

Hook, ^'irgil A., Second

Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
MacCollum,  Edna  M.,

Miner's Bank Bldg.

Nelden & Nelden, 61 North

Washington  St. (D.C.)
Ogden. C. R., 221 S. Main

St. (D.C.)
Rosengrant,  Ella  M.,

People's Bank Bldg.

Selick, John J., 36 W.

Market St. (D.C.)
Sperling, F.  J.  E. (M.D.)

491 S.  Main St.


Wolotira, J.


Belknap. H.
St. (D.C.)


1330


Wilkinsburg:

813 Wood
Downey, Andrew F.,

Wood St. (D.C.)
Eggars, Harriet & Marie,

1155 South  Ave. (D.C.)
Fairlie. J. H.. 512 Todd St.

Gump. C. R., 1116 South

Ave. (D.C.)
Marshall. Thos.. 432 Re-
becca St. (D.C.)
Scott. J. S., 621 South Ave.

Simpson. C. E.. 722 South

Ave. (DO.)
Sweeney. Mrs.  S. S., 718

Ross Ave. (N.D.)


Williams, Clara H., 822

Wood St. (D.O.)
Willinnisporti Crammer,

Catherine E., 130 W.

Southern Ave. (D.C.)
Hughes, Alice, 325 Center

St. (D.O.)
Maxwell, Bertha  M., 234 W.

4th St. (D.O.)
Melaik, Mrs. N., 306 W. 3rd

St. (D.C.)
Pierce, Geo. A., 22i W. 3rd

St. (D.C.)
Reilly, A. J. (D.O.)
Wood, Fred J., 26 W. 3rd

St. (D.O.)
W^oodburn: Armstrong, F.  H.,

Look Box  55. (D.C.)
\V'ynesbur«:: Bebout, E.  R.,

People's Bank Bldg.

WyoMiing: De  Witt, Emma

Good, 277 Monument  Ave.

York: Cormeny, Howard J.,

50  K.  Market  St. (D.O.)
Davis, Samuel. (D.C.)
Downing, Edwin M., Rupp

Bldg. (D.O.)
Emerson, D. A., 316 S.

George St. (D.C.)
Loucks, W. E., 37 W.

Market St. (D.O.)


RHOllE ISLAND

Contredale: Memmert, A.,
.Smith and Church Sts.
Newport: Farnimi, Edward

C, 13 Bull St. (D.O.)
Pa-wtucket: Olson, B. H.,
Gately Bldg. (D.C.)

Wetinore, Francis W., Oak
Hall Bldg. (D.O.)
Providence: Allen, Geo. B.,
Caesar Misch Bldg.  (D.C.)

Brown,  Niles,  671  Broad  St.

Carry,  D.  C,  421  Butler  Ex-
change. (D.O.)

Chesebrough,  Edna,  171
Westminster St. (D.O.)

Clement,  Henry  W.,  43
Blackstone Blvd. (D.O.)

Dodge,  Chandler  F.,  53  Bar-
kis Ave. (D.O.)

Flanagan,  Chas.  D.,  146
Westminster St. (D.O.)

Gants,  S.  L.,  721  Broad  St.

Howland,  C.  A.  W..  290
Westminster St. (D.O.)

Hutchins,  Harry  Melville,
95 Vinton St. (D.O.)

Kellogg,  Reid,  139  Matthew-
son St. (D.O.)

Morgan,  Lallah,  290  West-
minster St. (D.O.)

Natal,  R.,  138  Atwell  Ave.

Nelson,  P.,  R.  4,  Esten  St.

Ordway,  Kesley  Sanborn,  57
Eddy St. (D.C.)

Mays,  Jessie  C.,  36  Lillian
Ave. (D.C.)

Pintler.  L.  E.,  Rooms  45-46
Conrad  Bldg.,  385  West-
minster St. (Ph.C,  D.C.)

Shepard,  William  Burt,  146
Westminster St. (D.O.)

Sivenv,  J.  F.,  402  Westmin-
ster St. (D.C.)


South  Carolina
Tennessee


Geographical  Index


106.')


Siveny, Frank. 402 West-
minster  St. (D.C.)

Slack, Annie Roberts, 146
Westniin.stcr St. (D.O.)
Strater, Kdward J., 268
Westminster St. (D.O.)

Sweet, Ralph  A., 146 West-
minster St. (D.O.)

A\'an, Clarence  H., 184  Elm-
wood  Ave. (D.O.)

Wrig-ht, Lydia H., Jackson
nidgr. (D.O.)
AVnrren: Church, Gordon W.

R. (D.C.)
AVatcU Hill: Hamilton, Ben.,

Box 123. (D.O.)
AToonsooket: Beaulieu, J. A.,
Room 34-35 Commercial
Bids-. (N.D., D.O.)


SOUTH CAROLIIVA

Aiider.son: Carter, Lillian L.,

Bleckley Bldg. (D.O.)
Charleston: Hardison, Francis

Fairfax B., 298 King- St.

Kennedy, Ralph V., 222

King-  St. (D.O.)
Columbia: Bauer,  Geo. A.,

707-8  Union  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg-. (D.C.)
Graing-er, Laura L., Union

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Hoselton, Nancy A., 1711

Gervais St. (D.O.)
Lucas, T. C, 1206 Main St.

Sims.  Mary  Lyles, 1711  Ger-
vais St. (D.O.)
narlin^ton: Wilson, Reese  G.,

336 1st St. (M.T., D.O.,

N.D.)
Gaflfncy: Hickson, F. C.

Greensville: Scott, W. E.,

^Vallace Bldg. (D.O.)
Greenwood: Barnes, Joanna

M,, Grier  Park Bldg.

Rock Hill: Moore, Sara A.,

People's Nat'l Bank  Bldg.

Spartanburg: Hale, Walter

Keith, 115 W. Main St.

Snmter: Peery, Mary  W.


SOUTH DAKOTA

Aberdeen: Bauman, C. (N.D.)
Bauman, Geo. (D.C.)
Bunker, Blanche C, Van

Slyke Bldg. (D.O.)
Calta, Geo. W. (D.C.)
Peltus & Bender, 106-7
Ferguson, Ray B., Citizens'
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Alpena: Gray. Mrs. Sarah S..

Box  56. (S.T.)
Athol: Devine &  Devine.

Belle  Fourche: Peck,  M. C.

Beresford: Abild, Isabel.
Deane, John W. (D.O.)
Brookings: Forsee, Edward
W. (DO.)


Jack.son, J. R. (D.O.)
Rensvokl, G. A. (D.C.)
Canton: Eneboc, Lena. (D.O.)
Smith, H. N. (D.C.)
Ward, H. C. (D.C.)
Cascade Springs: Tillatson,

Glad  vs. (D.C.)
Chancellor: Fey, L. M. (D.C.)
Deadwood: Fairweather, W.
E. (D.C.)
Mostad, Rachel E., 3 Shine
St. (D.C.)
Dallas: Hill, Carl. (D.C.)

Cork, Floyd. (D.C.)
Flandrean: Piatt, John W.

Freeman:  Engbrecht,  J.  J.

Groton; Burt,  Thomas  G.
Rifenbark, Lloyd I. (D.O.)
Savercool, Genevieve. (D.C.)
Harding: Owen. F. L. (DC.)

Owen, Josephine. (D.C.)
Hermosa: Koopman, Frank.

Highland:  Dougherty, J.,

Lyman County. (D.C.)
Hot Springs: Haas, Bernard,
Box 24. (D.C.)
McRoberts, W. J. (M.D.)
Scharnhorst, M. H., P. O.

Box 234. (D.C.)
Williams, S.  B. (D.C.)
Humboldt: Putzke, Dr. Hele-
na  E., R. No. 2, Box 1.
Huron; Anni.'^,  .T.  Bruce.
(D.C)
Betts, Steele  C. (D.O.)
Class, F. L. (M.D.)
Hinklev, Frank. (D.C.)
Mahaffy, J. H., 926 3rd St.
Iroquois: Anderson, W. L.

Kidder: McWilliams, R. M.

Kimball: Johnston, Emilie.

Lake Preston: Bates, Estelle
P.. Over  First  Nat'l  Bank.
Minty, H. W. (D.C.)
Lead: Hamilton. D. E., 101 S.

Mill  St. (D.C.)
Lemmon:  Garey,  C.  M. (D.C.)
licnnox: Anderson, E. L.

Madison: Sheldon, Bert L.

Marion: Gloeckler, A. C.

Menno: Gloeckler, A. G.

Milbank:  Pay,  J.  V/. (N.D.)
Miller: Sheldon,  \V.  W. (D.C.)
Mineral Park Springs: Duck,

M. E. (D.C.)
Mitchell: Irish, Daisy B.
Shank,  Edith  M.,  Crow  Bldg.

Solberg, A. (D.C.)
Mobridge: Houstman, J. M.

Parker: Dalton, D. R. (D.C.)
Park.ston: Finch, F.  E. (D.C.)
Paxton: Cork, L. B. (D.C.)
Peever: Bassett, Lina. (D.C.)
Pierre: Farr, Mary Noyes,
Wynoka  Place. (D.O.)
Henion,  J.  H.,  Karcher  Bldg.

Sanfoid, C. F., Hyde Blk.


Issen-


Fred.


J. P..


Plate: Hill, Carl. (D.C.)
Rapid City: Covert, Clare S.,

819 Main St. (D.C.)
Redfleld: Devine & Devine.

Redfleld:  Ellyson,  S.  M.,
bush Block. (D.C.)
Ostness,  Geo.  M. (I.)
Salem: Linenberger,

Semmon: Curtis, L. R.
Sioux Falls: Eneboe,
Van Eps Blk. (D.O.)
Erickson. O. fD.C.)
Fjerestad,  J. fN.D.)
Glasgow, A. M., Minnehaha

Bldg. (D.O.)
Heath, Minnie C, Eoyce-

Greeley Bldg. (D.O.)
Kirkland,  J.  E. (D.M.T.)
Larkins, J. W. (N.D.)
Sorensen, M. C. (M.D.)
Strom, Rebecca  C. (D.O.)
Sis.selton:  Hay,  Ruth  N. (N.D.)
Springfield: Dougherty, J. F.

Summit: Fierstead,  J. F.

Tyndall: Dallman, Wm. R.

Volga: Langum,  Henry. (D.C.)
\Vagner: Browning, E. A.,

Box 114. (D.C.)
Wall: Dietze,  Gustave  R.

"W^anbay: Dowd, E. L. (D.C.)
Watertown: Schoolcraft, C.
E. (D.O.)
Smith, Chas. C, 306-7

Granite Blk. (D.C.)
Terry, Lottie S. (D.C.)
Web.«iter: Dowd, Roy L.,
First Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.
"West Point: Metcalfe, Dr.

A. (S.T.)
"Winner: Dougherty, John.
Leonard &  Leonard. (D.C.)
Woonsocket; Davis, Dr.
Feige, E. W. (D.C.)
Mellbye, N. (D.C.)
Taylor, M. E. (D.O.)
Yankton; Brownell, Mr.<;.
E. (D.C, N.D.)
Brownell, N. L. (D.C.)


F.


M.


TEXXESSEE

Bristol: Dykes, A. L., 20 4th

St. (D.O.)

Snapp.  J.  W.,  Mahoney  Bldg.

(DO.)

Chattanooga: Barnes, Lora

K., Loveman Bldg. (D.O.)

Hudson, Harvev R., 815

James Bldg. (D.C.)
King, Mary L. (M.D.)
Yowell,  Elizabeth  J.,  Hamil-
ton Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.
Yowell, Otto Y., Hamilton
Nat'l Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Columbia; Bralev, S. (D.O.)

O'Bryan. M. E. (D.O.)
Covington; Price, Vivian H.,

Walker Bldg. (D.O.t
Decherd: Brittaln. Ethel.

East Chattanooga:  King.
Mary L., New Field
Laboratory. (M.D.)


1066


Geographical  Index


Texas


Fsiyettcville: Mason, Geo.

Gravsvilie: Dait, O. L. (DC.)
Harrinmn: Bartholomew, H.

11. (N.D.)  ^ ^

Horn Sin-iiigs: Horn,  J. A.

Jackson:' Dyer. Bettie Ross,
Cor. Church and Laray-
etUj Sts. (D.O.)
Mayo, Kathleen. (D.O.)
Skidniore, Walter J., 117 h..
Lafayette St. (D.O.)
Johnson City: Dykes, L. M.,
21G Main St. (D.O.)
Swan, William E., Kmg
Bldg. (D.O.)
Knoxville: Bartholomew, H.
H., 1106  N. 3rd  Ave.

Edwards, E. V. (D.C.)
Gooch.  Geo.  J.,  Althea  Bldg.

(D.O.)  _ . „,,„

Link, W. F., Empire Bldg.

(D.O.)  „ ,

Miller Lee  R.,  Holston  Bank

Bldg. (D.O.) ^ ^ ^
Richard.son. Ernest  E.,  Arn-

stein Bldg. (D.C.)
Titsworth, R. F., 400 W.

Cumberland St. (D.O.)
Lebanon: Whiteside, Sunora

L., 2.55  University  Ave.

Memphis': Baker, C. L.. 1772
Peabody Ave. (D.O.)

Bohannon, Eunice  B., Good-
win Institute. (D.O.)

Cupp. H. C. Bank of Com-
merce Bldg. (D.O.)

Harrison, John H., Gooa-
w^vn Institute. (D.O.)

Hartzell. H. C. (DC.)

Meade, Alba, Exchange
Bldg-. (D.O.)  ^ , 1

Norman, P. K.. Gentiai
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Phillebaum, Elmer,
Box  318. (D.C.)

Viehe, H., Randolph
Mineral Park SprinRs:
M. E. (D.C.) , ,,
Morristown : Twitchell^

C, Tavlor Bldg. (D.O.)
Mt. Pleasant: Petty. AV. E.

(DO.)  , . T> iTr

Murfreesboro: Balmat, IJ. W.

Brevard, May, 422 Burton
Ave. (D.O.)  ^  ^

Henderson: M. W. CDX).)
Nashville: Boulware, F. A.,
180  8th  Ave. (D.O.)

Collier. Erie .1., Stahlman
Bldg. (D.O.)

Duffleld, Bessie A., Hitch-
cock Bldg. (D.O.)

Health League. (D.O.)

Rav, Edwin C
Bldg. (D.O.)

Shackleford, J.
Bldg. (D.O.)

Williams. Miles
cock Bldg. (D.O.)

Wood, Wm. P.. 625

man Bldg. (D.C.)

Paris: T.,awrence, W . I.

Pulaski: Murray. (D.O.)

Shelhy^'ille: Dakin, Russell
S., Depot  St. (D.O.)

Sprin^fiebl: Butts,  W. E.

Tennessee City: Tubercular
Sanitarium. (D.O.)

Trenton: Park,  R.  L-.  (P  0;>  „

Tullahoma: Boyd, Richard H.

Tergins Chandler, W. (D.O.)


Lock
Bldg.
Duck,
Ionia


Stahlman
R.,  Jackon
W.,  Hitch-
Stahl-


TK-VA.S

Vbllene: Battendorf, M. N.,

259i Chestnut St. (D.C.)
Vlpine: Yates, James. (D.O.)
Vlvin:  Koch,  Otto  W. (D.C.)
.Vlvord: Bett.s,  W. P. (S.T.)
Vmarillo: Fritz. A. E. (D.C.)
Pennock,  Lewis  N. (D.O)
Strawn,  A. K.,  1604 Jackson
St. (D.C.)
AiLstin: Bathrick. Rose, 110
W. 0th St. (D.O.)
Home. Tracey P... Tiittle-

field Bldg. (D.O.)
Kinney. C. D. (D.C.)
Xiemann.  J., 1902  Nedres  St.
Bay City: Livengood, B. L.


Beaumont

Weiss


Walkti.

Ervay
Walker.

Ervay
Denison:

Securi


.\niia L.. 1109 S.
St. (D.C.)
Wm. E.. 1109 S.
St. (D.C.)
Heni-v. John
ty Bldg. (D.O.)


L.,

S.,


w


Davis. D.
Bldg. (D.O.)
Goble &  Goble. (N.D.)
Goble, Mae  D., 438-39 Weiss

Bldg. (D.C.)
Goble.  Ross  G.,  438-39  Weiss
Bldg. (D.C.)
Bee^ille; Compton, Catherine.

Belton: Ehler, Prof. J. C.

Ulooniing Grove: Kelsey, C.

C. (D.O.)
Bonham: Pruett. J. E. (D.C.)
Bonita: Rein,  Dr. E. G. (S.T.)
Braily: Hampshire,  Dr.  D.

Brownwooil: Farris, Robert  L.
Gainer, E. B. (S.T.)
CnbUvell: Moore, R. A. (S.T.)
Carlisle: Burkholder, H.  L.

(D.M.T.)
Cass: Eaves, J. E. (S.T.)
Claurte: Teem, David  B.  (D.C.)
Cleburne: Durston, C. J.
Fleming. Nellie R. (D.C.)
Ray, A. D. (D.O.)  1

Coleman: Thomas, C. A.

Comanelie: I^ewis, Dr. .T. H.

Comfort: Stahlsehmidt, Oskar.

(N.D.)  j

Corpus  Christi: Davis, W. E.,  i
719 Water St. (D.O.)
Earlv, W. J., 1005 Mosquito  1

St. (D.O.)
Teer, Dr. "Wm. (S.T.)
Corsieaua: Bobbitt, S. M.
' Sanner. Eugene E.. 114 AV.
5th Ave. (D.O.)
Crosbyton: Council, M. T.

(DC.)  . ^ ^^

Cuero: Brandenstem, E. von.

Dallas: Billings, The, 506
Linz Bldg. (D.O.)
Billings. Mrs. Annie  W., 510
1  Linz Bldg. (D.C.)

i Billings, C. W., 510 Linz
I  Bldg. (D.C.)

I Davis. W. "W., 5606 Worth
I  St. (D.C.)

Guggenheim, Victor. (N.D.)
Harris, D. S., Wilson Bldg.

Hinton,  M.  M.,  Box  62. (S.T.)
Holloway, James L., Wil-
■ son  Bldg. (D.O.)
Kinnev, C. D.. 506-9 Linz

Bldg. (D.C.)
Looper,  Mrs. Viola. (D.C.)
Scothorn. Samuel L., Wil-  !
son Bldg. (D.O.)  1

Tarr, Alfred J., Wilson
Bldg. (D.O.)  I


, 305 Wheat


E.


Denton: Crawford. John

Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
i>evine:  Trotter,  Frank. (D.C.)
Eliza:  Hill, R. (S.T.)

Hyde, I..eslie, 814 Mesa  Ave.
Kl Paso: Bowlby, Lewis M.,
Mills Bldg.  .  (D.O.)
Morgan, J. E., 914 E. Bel-

knapp St. (D.C.)
Pearce,  Jirah J.,  Mills  Bldg.

Satterlee, Nettie E., Mills

Bldg. (D.O.)
Wichman, H. T., 503 S.
Florence St. (D.C.)
Ennis: Lowry, Belle P., 401

W. Knox St. (D.O.)
Fort Worth; Bates, L. V.,

403-4 Wheat Bldg. (D.C.)
Chappie, Dr. A. J., 602

Hempell St. (S.T.)
Hager, Wm. (S.T.)
Hargett, Mrs. E. E., 305

Wheat Bldg.
Hargett, H. G.
I  Bldg. (D.C.)

( Phillips, Lloyd A., 914
'  Belknapp St. (D.C.)

Mvrich. Dr. J. F. (S.T.)
I  National Bank. (N.D.)

' Rav,  T.  L.,  Nafl  Bank  Bldg.
i  (D.O.)

Russell,  Maud  G.,  Burk  Bur-
nett  Bldg. (D.O.)
Triplett, A. T., 502 AVestern
Triplett & Monk. 301 Strip-
ling Bldg. (D.O.)
Vandergriff,  J.  R.,  218  Texas
St. Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Gsiine.sville: Bryan,  A.  L.

Galveston:  Brugger,  F.  A.,
918 Ave  K. (D.M.T.)
Eisiminger,  J.  W., 1907  Ave.

I. (D.O.)
Houghton, Elizabeth, 2820i

P  St. (D.C.)
Larkins. Earl B. (D.O.)
Lewis, W.  A. (S.T.)
Markwell, J. A., 1924 Ave.

M. (D.C.)
Markwell. J. A.. 605-6
-American Nat'I Ins. Bldg.
Markwell, M. M., 605-6
American Nat'I Ins. Bldg.
Nickerson, H. R. (D.C.)
Greenville; Clark, John F.

HaniUey: Skeen,

thew. (S.T.)
Harold: Pyle, R. M. (S.T.)
Houston: Bailey, Marvin E3.,
Kress Bldg. (D.O.)
Baister, F. A. (S.T.)
Barston, Mrs. E. A., 1117

Tvler  St. (S.T.)
Blanchard,  J.,  1713  McKinny
Ave. (D.O.)
I Bruce, Will H.,
I  (D.O.)

Col  son, C. E.,

Bldg. (D.C.)
Koch, Otto W.,

Ave. (D.C.)
Lusk, Charles

Bldg. (D.O.)
Malone, Axton

Bldg. (D.O.)

MarkAvell, .T. A.,

Apts. (D.C.)


Mrs. Mat-


Binz

Bldg.

602

Foster

90^

Rusk

M.,

Kress

J.,

Carter

., Stenberg

Utah


Geogrnphical  Index


10(57


505


Smith, Mrs. W. A.,
Walker Ave. (D.C.)
Wilcox. C. W.. 117 Travis
St. (D.C.)
H*n4lo: McLeese, John M.

Jack.sltoro: Peters, Wm. Ti-
mothy. (S.T.)
Jacksonville: Chessler, J. t..

Kress: Myers, Geo. (D.C.)
IjB Grange: Albrecht, C. W.
Loehr,  H.  C. (S.T.)
Lake View: Thomas, Jennie.

Lianipasiis: Williams. D. C.

Laredo: Kenney,  Chas.  F., 707
Convent Ave. (D.O.)
Thaison. Adellina. 1820 W.
Houston St. (D.O.)
Lavernia:  Loftin,  C.  W. (D.C.
Lissie: McNeer, Valentine.

Lockhart: Hardy, A. C.

Lockney: Burlson, J. D.
(DC.)
Dagley, J. B. (D.C.)
Hughes,  J.  H. (D.C.)
Hughes.  T.  H. (S.T.)
Vanderg-riff,  J. R. (D.C.)
Van Schoonhoven, C. L.
Marlin: Smith. Salter S., 300
Coleman St. (D.O.)
Von Prillwitz, Otto. (N.D.)
Webb, Mary  L., c/o  Torbett
Sanatorium. (D.O.)
Memphis: Neill.  J.  E. (S.T.)
Mineral Wells: Dodd, Miss
Lorain, Box 125. (S.T.)
Norwood, Robert  R. (D.O.)
Singleton. Robt. O. (D.O.)
Lindley. R. H. (M.D  )
Newbury: Davis, J. J. (b.  1  ■>
iVordheini: Moser, Fritz.

Oranse:  Dupre,  Louis,  Box

111. (N.D.)
Osborne: Chilcott, Dr. (S.T.)
Palestine: Spiegle, Andrew

A., 290 Oak St. (D.O.)
Paris:  Pruett, (D.C.)
Pecos: Brown,  Blanche. (D.C.)
Pioneer: Kitchens, 'W. P.

Plainview: Billings, C. W.
Struve, F. W. (S.T.)
Port  Arthur: Cobb, G. A., 5.39

Proctor St. (D.O.)
Raymondville: Dodd, F. T.

Rockport: Arnedt, A. F.
(DO.)
Frask, Box 297. (D.O.)
Rockwell: Holiday, W. C.
Malisky, W. C. (D.C.)
Rogers: Kellogg,  S. (S.T.)
San Anselo: Douglas. Mr. &
Mrs. J. E. (S.T.)
Germany, Prof. W. J. C

Holiman, W. O., 235 Pican

St. (D.C.)
Lettrell, A. R., 304 Conroy
Bldg. (D.C.)
San  Antonio:  Boone.  C.  O.,  c/o
Chiropractic College.
Bueren. Dr. A.. 309 State
Nafl Bank Bldg. (D.C.)


Canfil,  A.  W.,  c/o  Chiroprac-
tic College. (D.C.)
The Chiropractic College.

Cleveland, C. L., 736 S.  Ala-
mo  St. (D.C.)
Cohn, Richard. (S.T.)
Cunningham, J. R., Moore

Bldg. (D.O.)
Cuirv, L. L., 310 Swearin-
gen-McGraw Bldg. (D.C.)
Dunn. A. H., Hicks Bldg.

Hayes, F. S. (D.O.)
Eckenroth, Henry, 526

River Ave. (D.C.)
Gurden, B. F., 408  E.  Travis

St. (D.C.)
Hassell. Nellie, 305 Ave. D.

Hawley,  A. S.,  c/o  Chiro-
practic  College. (M.D.)
Haves, F. S. (D.O.)
Herrington, L. H., 736 S.

Alamo St. (D.C.)
Herrington, Mrs. M. M. E.,

736 S. Alamo St. (D.C.)
Lamprecht. K.. c/o Chiro-
practic College. (N.D.)
Marlow, R. S., 504 Rager

St. (D.C.)
Marlow,  R.  S.,  504  Eager  St.

Myers, J. W., 1811 Main

Ave. (D.C.)
Peck, Mary E., Hicks Bldg.

Peck, Paul M., Hicks Bldg.

Piper, Frederick A., 108

Soledad St. (D.O.)
Pue, John T., Hicks Bldg.

Stone, Ida C, Conroy Bldg.

Stone, J. N., 315 Central

Office Bldg. (D.C, D.O.)
Strum, Charlotte, Moore

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sucholtz, R. E.. 522 Ave C.

Triece, J. H.. c/o Chiro-
practic College. (M.D.)
Seymour: Joiner, Mrs. Una

Sherman: Cap.shaw.  E. P., 528
S.  Elm  St. (D.C.)
Capshap. (D.C.)
Littrell,  A. R. (M.D.)
Loving, F. A.. Commercial

Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Loving, Wm. B., Murphv

Bldg. (D.O.)
Spates. Aughey Virginia,
216 S. "Walnut St. (DO.)
Star: Brookings, J. E. (M.D.)
Temple: Mason, Hubert B.,
City  Nat'l  Bank Bldg.
Texarknnn: Mathis, R. E.
335-6  Bank  Bldg. (D.C.)
Mitchell. Jennie, 823 State

St. (D.O.)
Mitchell. R. M.. Texarkana
Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Thorndale; Laffere, Geo. C.

R.  No. 4,  Box  56. (S.T.)
Tyler: Bois, Louis F., 204?,

N. Bway. (D.C.)
UvaWe: Robinson, J. T.

Waco: Clough,  O.  I.,..  New  Ex-
change  Bldg. (M.D., D.C.)
Gayle. B.  L., 515  N. 12th  St.

Gildersleeve, Ellen .T., Ami-
cable Bldg. (D.O.)


Lemly, Chas. C, 522 Peer-

le.ss Bldg. (D.C.)
Sinclair, Julia Sarratt,
Provident Bldg. (D.O.)
Waxahaehic: Hampton, Wm.,

208 S. iOlm St. (D.C.)
Weatherrorcl: Coulter, Robert
P. (D.O.)

Wichita  Falls:  Black,'  F. A.,
702i Indiana  St. (D.C.)

McDermott, Mary V., 1312
Lamar St. (D.C.)

Schaiff, A. O.,  Kemp &  Kell
Bldg. (D.O.)

Whitewritfht: Davis, A. H.

V'oakum: Alkire, Margaret
M., 103 Cemetery St.


UTAH

Bountiful: Faux,  Thos.,  Box

111. (N.D.)
BriKham City: Hansen, M. G.

Cor.  Fir.st  and  Main  Sts.


Kphraim: Pyott, Fjank F

(Ph.C, D.C.)
Galveston: Markwell, J \

1924 Ave. M. (D.O.)
Lewiston: Wheeler, Milo A
i  (D.C.)

L<og-an: Chadwick, G. L.
Aiimo  Bldg. (D.C.)
Neuburger, F. A. (S.T  )
j Secrest, Wm. B. (N  D  )
j Zombro, J. B., ArimoBldg
'  (D.C.)  '=

>Ionroe: Belitz, A. (DC  )
-Mount Pleasant: Johnson,
Ben R., Box  203. (D.C  )
Olsen, Melvin C, P. O Box
No. 203. (D.C.)
O^den: Cullinan, 2370 Wash-
ington  Ave. (D.C.)
Fi-eenor, F. J., Col. Hudson

Bldg. (D.C.)
Guy. Ralph I., Box ."3

Johnson. Clarence B.. 41
Col. Hudson Bldg. (Ph  C
D.C.)
McKell, Ira J., 412-14 Col

Hudson Bldg. (D.C.)
Schultz. R. J., 361 Hudson
Bldg. (D.C.)
Park  City:  Anderson  &  Ander-
son. (D.C.)
i'rovo: Boyer, D. D. (DO)
Raito. 92 N. 4th St. W.

Sandgren. G. E., 241 N 1st
St. (D.O.)

Richfield: Gledhill, F. R.

Salt Lake City: Airev. Grace

Stratton. Scott  Bldg.

Bailey, F. T.. 178 B St.

Belitz. Alf., 161  4th  Ave.

Boyers, D. D., 313 Sharon

Bldg. (D.C.)
Brown. A. A., 657 S. State

St. (D.C.)
Buswell. A. M. (D.O.)
Cecil. N. M.. Glen  Dale.

Cecil  &  Cecil,  Drs..  Box  1091.

Cottam.  N.  L..  150  S.  Temple

St. (D.C.)


1068


Cottam,  Mr.  &  Mrs.  N'. (D.C.)

H. (M.D.)
Erickson, K. P., 234 Consti-
tution Bldg-. (D.O.)
Ewing, A. H., 215 Scott

Bldg. (D.C.)
Farnswoith, L.. i^-, Auer-

bach Bldg-. (D.C.)
Gamble, Oustavus A., Mc-

Intyre  Bldg. (D.O.)
Gamble, Mary E., Temple-
ton Bldg. (D.O.)
Haven,  C.  H.. 609  S.  11th  St.

Kerr, Frank Austm, Mc-

Intyre Blk. (D.O.)
Koer J.  W., 429  N. 6th and

West  Sts. (D.C, Ph.C.)
Walther &  Walther, 235 S.

Main St. (D.C.)
•Spaiiisli I<'ork: Leoning &

Meld  rum, c/0 Arnold

Hotel. (D.C.)
MfShane,  Dora  C, 8 W. 2nd

St. (D.C.)
Neuburgex-, F. A., Box 2*6.

Phillips, Harry, Atlas Bldg.

Vincent, A. L., Felt Bldg.

Walther, A. E., 235 S. Mam

St., Suite 303. (D.C.)
Walther, Lillian C. (D.C.)
Walther & Walther, 235 S.

Main St. (D.C.)


VERMONT

Barre: Gage, Geo. B., 305 N.
Main St. (D.C.)
Gage, T. Mae, 305 N. Main

St. (D.C.)
Maitin, L,. D.,  Miles  Granite
Bldg. (D.O.)
Bellow Falls: Brooks, Calvin

AV., 12 Green St. (D.C.)
Brattleboro: Wheeler, C. G.,

32 N. Main St. (D.O.)
Burlington: Cota, Rose, 10
Clark St. (D.O.)
Kaatz, F. C, Suite 7, Y. M.

C. A. (D.C.)
Loudon, Guy E., 199 S.

Union  St. (D.O.)
Loudon, Harry M., 153 S.
Union St. (D.O.)
Cambridge: Carter, Dr. Fred.

H. (M.D.)
Montpelier: Brock, W. W.,

134 State  St. (D.O.)
Rutland: Gage, Winfred B.,
325 Gryphon Bldg. (D.C.)
Sherburne, H. K., Meade
Bldg. (D.O.)
St. Albans: Bimis, Frank E.,
169  N. Main St. (D.C.)
Esmond, H. B. (D.O.)
Stevenson, H. A., 36 King-
man St. (D.O.)
St. Johnsbiiry:  Carleton,

Fanny T., 24 Summer St.


VIRGINIA

Abington: Stringer, G. L.
Stringer, John. (D.C.)
Stringer, Mary S. (D.C.)
AUeKhany Station: Ginn, L.

O. (D.C.)
Bristol: Echols, McRae R.,
New  Dominion  Nat'I  Bank
Bldg. (D.O.)


(icogrdphical  Index


llundloke: Valk, E. Gordon.

<'liarlo(tc.svillo: Via.,  Hugh D.,

50:i \V. Main St. (D.O.)
Clifton Forge: Bowles, L. J.

Sonder, Albert. (D.C.)
Danville: Cartel-. Cha.s.

cade Bldg. (D.O.)
E^a.st Fall Chiiroh: Ryer,

Scott. (D.C.)

McNavi, R. T.


Ar-
H.


Read, Miles S.

Stringer, Mary


Mari


Bui


Fniiioria:

Franklin:

Green Cove;

S. (D.C.)
Hardy: Walk  up,

Ilarri.sburg: Kline,  Emmer  H.,

IS Graham St. (S.T.)
Harrisonbiirpr: Bell,  Annie  W.,
Fir.st Nat'I Bank Bldg.
Hot Spring.s: Willard, Alice
N..  The  Homestead. (D.O.)
f,ynolil>iirB;: Cieasv, Ij. D.,
SOU Tierce St. (D.C.)
Dresser. B. A., 519 Church

St. (D.C.)
Garrett, Carlos K., 811

Church St. (D.O.)
Shumate, Chas. R., Medical
Bldg. (D.O.)
Meyers Cave: Yoder, F. S.

Newport Ne-*v.s; Rath. Frede-
rick A., 506 Silsbv Bldg.
Knowles,  Jerome,  3006  West
Ave. (D.O.)
Norfolk: Bachman, J. W.,
Dickson Bldg. (D.O.)
Bright, S. H., Royster  Bldg.

Bybee, Mrs. Burt, 440 Fair-
fax Ave. (D.C.)
Cummings, Dr. W. F., 719

Washington  Ave. (N.D.)
McCoy, L. C, Paul Gale

Greenwood Bldg. (D.O.)
Norfolk Hydro. Sanitarium,
719 Washington Ave.
•  Richardson,  Martyn  L.,  Paul
Gale Greenwood Bldg.
Petersburg: Bell, Haney H.,
Mechanics Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith, Minetree A., 109 W.
Tabb St. (D.O.)
Portsmouth: Summer, Frank
H. (D.C.)
Summer, Louis. (D.C.)
Pounding Mill: Bowen, Mar-
garet E. (D.O.)
Princess Anne: Holloway,
Lucy Prindle, R. F. D. 1.
Rielimond: Bo-wen,  Wm.  D., 1
W. Grace St. (D.O.)
Bybee & Bybee, Commer-
cial Bldg. (D.C.)
Calisch, Harry F., Chamber
of  Commerce  Bldg. (D.O.)
Fout, George E., Chamber
of  Commerce  Bldg. (D.O.)
Rudd, C. H., 114 N. 5th St.

Shackleford,  E.  H.,  Chamber
of  Commerce  Bldg. (D.O.)
Shaw, J. B., 200 Franklin

St. (D.C.)
Shaw, J. A., 610 Chamber
of Commerce Bldg. (D.C,
N.D.)
Roanoke: Creasy, .Tames G.,
McBain Bldg. (D.C.)
Creasy, J. C, 303 Jefferson
St. (D.C)


Vermont
Washington


Ferguson, M.  B., 110 Jeffer-
son St., Rooms 10-12.

Hurt, F. L., 1304 Stuart
Ave. (D.C.)

Quick, Walter J. (D.C.)

Semones, Harry, MacBain
Bldg. (D.O.)

Timley, N. M. (D.O.)

Wolfe, Meek J., MacBain
Bldg. (D.O.)

Whitmore,  O.  M.,  MacBain
Bldg.  (D.O.)
Staunton:  Becker,  Herbert
S..  Witz  Bldg.  (M.D.,  D.O.)
Virginia  Beaeh:  Beckler,  Jen-
nie K.,  16  N.  Market  St.

Pratt,  A. L.,  Rest  Home.
AVaynesboro: Elv, A. R.

Ely, Blondine W. (D.C.)


iVASHINGTON

Aberdeen: .Johnson, Frank,
808  Summit  St. (N.D.)

Oviatt &  Oviatt,  Masonic
Bldg. (D.C.)

Oviatt, Claude L., Masonic
Temple Bldg. (D.C.)

Oviatt, Henrietta H., Ma-
sonic Temple Bldg. (D.C.)

Smith,  Caryll  T., Finch
Bldg. (D.O.)

Bellinghani: Du Praw, Frank
L., 9-10 Clover Blk.
Munn, Allen. (D.O.)
Woodward, L. A., 305 Sun-
set  Bldg. (D.C.)
Bremerton: Murphy, J. W.

Camas:  Kinz,  Geo.  J. (D.C.)
Centralia: Burdette, Gabriel
F., 401  W.  Main  St. (D.O.)
Clarkston: Baker, F. (D.O.)

Marsh, U. G. (D.O.)
Colfax: Abegglen, C E., Lip-
pitt Bldg. (D.O.)
Bryson, Ida B. Kartowitz.
Colville: Johnson, P. H.

Davenport: Teter, Fred B.

Dayton: Jolley,  Frank  W.

E}llen.sburgi King,  Otto.  (D.O.)
Sargent, P. W., 803 N.

Water  St. (D.C.)
Walker, L. H., Olympia
Blk. (D.O.)
Everett: Lewis,  Lee  A.,  Colbv
Bldg. (D.C.)
Pugh, J. M.,  American  Nat'I
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Pour Lakes: Moore, F. F.

Frondale: Webster, Morton

E. (S.T.)
Garlield: Coon, A. S. (D.O.)

Coon, Mary E. (D.O.)
Kent: Johnson, Jackson.

Mt. Vernon: Hojm, John,

Union Blk. (D.C)
Howley, Edward, Union

Bldg. (D.O.)

North Yakima: Ho  wick, A.
B. (D.O.)
Kromo, Dr. (D.C)


West  Virginia


Geographical  Index


1069


Zedeker, J. F., 211 K. Ya-
kima Ave. (D.O.)
Oakesdale: Hartsock, W. H.

OkanoK»n: Grant, Leanora.

(D.O.)  *

Olympia: Collins, H., 411

Jefferson St. (D.C.)
Reisenwebcr. F. VV., 213 E.

15th St. (N.D.)
Ponteroy: Thompson, Alme-

dia E. (D.O.)
Prosser: Ponting, Chas. H.

Pullman: Archer, Ellsworth

A., First Nat'l Bank

Bldg-. (D.O.)
Holt, Luther W., Russell

Bldg. (D.O.)
Puyallup: Freeman, W. L.,

Citizens' State Bldg-.
Montgomery, D. H., No. 3

Postoflflce Bldg. (M.D.,

D.C.)
Ritzville: Allen, L. G. (D.C.)
Rosalia: Widmann,  Elizabeth,

Box 71. (D.C.)
Seattle: Armstrong,  I.  M., 165

Lynn St. (D.C.)
Ayer, 217  Pike  St. (D.O.)
Barrett,  Geo.  A., 816  B.  45th

St. (D.O.)
Beck, May. (D.C.)
Bonham, Clyde Lawrence,

University State Bank

Bldg. (D.O.)
Campbell &  Campbell, 402-5

Pantages Bldg. (D.C.)
Crofton, Henrietta, I^eary

Bldg. (D.O.)
Culberton, E. P. (D.C.)
Cunningham, Arthur Bost-

wick, Leary Bldg. (D.O.)
Evans, Nellie M., American

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Peeltan,  N.  J.,  114  17th  Ave.

Feidler, F. J., People's

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Ford, A. B., Hoge  Bldg.

Ford,  Roberta  Wimer,  Hoge

Bldg. (D.O.)
Ford,  Walter  J., Hoge  Bldg.

Fulton, N. J., 114 17th Ave.

N. (N.D.)
Gray, J. E., 712-13 Ameri-
can Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Harrison, K.  N.,  Amon  Apt.,

Suite 101, 901 6th Ave.

Hart, Lawrence M., 3502

Fremont Ave. (D.O.)
Hayes, Lutie Kreigh, Nor-
thern Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Morse, Park A., Joshua

Green Bldg. (D.O.)
New, Dr. Jno. F. (S.T.)
Noethen, A. J., 327 Arcade

Bldg. (D.O.)
Ohnstead, W. E., 1318 5th

Ave. (D.C.)
Potter, Minnie F., Pioneer

Bldg. (D.O.)
Roane, Jas., 4025 Arcade

Bldg. (D.C.)
Rudolph, P., 1613 Westlake

Blvd. and 5th  Ave. (N.D.)
Rule, Lewis E., 3039 Ar-
cade Bldg. (D.C.)
Sanford & Sanford, 3031

Arcade Bldg. (D.O.)
Sanford, H. S., 3031 Arcade

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sandford, Harry L. (D.C.)
Slaughter, James T., Leary

Bldg. (D.O.)


Smith, W. R., c/o Rudolph,

406 lOpler Blk. (D.O.)
Snyder, Claude H., Leary

Bldg. (D.O.)
Sorenson, John, 313 Eitel

Bldg. (D.C.)
Speckert, A. J., 309 Burke

Blk., Cor. 2nd Ave. (S.T.)
Starbuck, S. H. (M.D.)
Stoll, Wm. E., Arcade An-
nex. (D.C.)
St. Ongey, D. J. (D.C.)
Strand, Chas. E., 1014J Pine

St. (D.C.)
Tracey, La Monte PI., Pon-
tages Bldg. (D.O.)
Tracy, Paul Urban, 493

Epler  Bldg. (N.D.)
Tracy,  c/o  Rudolph,  1619  W.

Lake Blvd. (D.O.)
Turner, Annie S., 305 Belle-

vue St. N. (D.O.)
Waldo, Wm. E., Northern

Bank & Trust Bldg.
Watson, Oren T.. Northern

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Weaver, Ida .lane M.,

People's Bank Bldg.

Wilkes, Grace  Stott E., Box

304. (D.O.)
Young, M. S., 4155 Arcade

Bldg. (D.O.)

Sedro-Woolley: Dunham, E.
R., 819 Ferry  St. (D.C.)
King,  Bernice, 116  Cedar  St.
!  (D.C.)

King, R. E., 116 Cedar St.

.Snohomish: Swift, Irvin H.,
Often Bldg. (D.O.)

Spokane: Benefiel, Carrie A.,
Old Nat'l Bank Bldg.
! Brazeau,  M.  E., 368  9th  Ave.

Burgand Sanitarium, Gra-
nite Blk. (D.O.)

Burt,  C.  S.,  712  Hutton  Bldg.

Campbell, Chas. W., 308 S.
Grant St. (D.O.)

Carrill, O. G., 530 Burkeye
Ave. (N.D.)

Caster, H. E., Old Nat'l
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Erickson, John, 1603 Clark
Ave. (D.C.)

Garrigues, Louis L., Old
Nat'l Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Greenside, W. B., 314 In-
diana  Ave. (D.C.)

Grover, Sam. (D.C.)

Grover, Wm. (D.C.)

Guthridge, Walter B.,
Kuhne  Bldg. (D.O.)

Hampton, Geo. B., 711 Hut-
ton  Bldg. (D.O.)

Harrington, S. A., 178i S.
Howard St. (D.C.)

Hodgson, J. E., Old Nat'l
Bank Bldg. (D.O.)

Holcom, Harlow, 3213 0th
St. (D.C.)

Holmes, Frank, Eagle Blk.

Lamb,  C.  R. (D.C.)

Lajoie, W. L., 9-10 Ziegler
Blk. (D.C.)

Ija Jore & Johnson, 418-21
Mohawk  Bldg. (D.C.)

Binder, Chas. O. (M.D.)

Lydon, J. E., 310 Audito-
rium Bldg. (D.O.)

Miedeking, Frederick AV.,
726 Peyton Bldg. (D.C.)

Moore, Fred. F., Suite 110.
Fernwell Bldg. (D.C.)


F., 413-14
1508 Main

Old Nat'l


W.


1213


Morris, T. C, Fernwell

Bldg. (D.O.)
Newbrough, H.

Rookery Bldg.
Olson, Hoi-niari,

Ave. (D.C.)
Perrett, Mary E

Bank Bldg. (D.O.)
Reier, Martin A., 1823

Dean St. (D.C.)
Starbuck, S. H. (M.D.)
Stiiipe, Clarence H.,

Indian Ave. (N.D.)
Thayer, Odessa H., 307

Fernwell Bldg. (D.C.)
Sulton: Misgrove, T. W.

SunnyKide: Balb, F. L. (D.O.)
Tacomn: Baldy, James B.,

Fidelity Bldg. (D.O.)
Brown, Mary, 3004 S. 12th

St. (D.C.)
Nevius, Zeula Alice. (D.O.)
Smith, Geo. R., 711 Nat'l

Realty Bldg. (D.C.)
Southworth, F. W., 723

Fidelity Bldg. (D.O.)
Thomas, Walton T., Fideli-
ty  Bldg. (D.O.)
Whitlock, S. E., 930 Pacific
!  Ave. (D.O.)

1  Tekoa: Abegglen, "Walter E.
I  (D.O.)

V^anoouver; Arnold, W. H.,
U.  S.  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)
Rice, J. E. (D.O.)
Waitsbiirs-s McConnell,  W. F.,
First Nat'l Bank Bldg.
Walla  AValla: Coon, Franklin
J., Baker  Boyer  Bldg.
Heath, J. E., Baker Blk.

Mayo. Clarence R., Drum-
heller Bldg. (D.O.)
Smith,  Geo.  W.  B. (D.C.)
Thompson, H. B. (D.O.)
Trestler, E. B., 7-8 Javcox

Bldg. (D..)
Tuiner, Melvin, 427 E.

Cherry St. (D.C.)
Waffle. W. Clyde, 309 Den-
ny Bldg. (D.C.)
Wenatchee; Morse. Herbert

F., Central Bldg. (D.O.)
White Salmon: Garnett, Ad-
die L. (D.O.)


WEST VIRGIXIA

Augusta:  Beery,  J.  K. (N.D.)
Bluefield: Tedford.  A.  C,  Kel-
ley & Meyer Bldg. (D.O.)
Charleston: Ure, Wm. R., 910
Quarrier St. (D.O.)
Smith, A. M. (D.O.)
Clarksburg: Hall, Belle Jano,
c/o Farmers  Bank. (D.C.)
Hall, B. J., Gore Bldg.

Heck,  J.  Yander,  4th  St.

Joslin, J. H., 8161 Quarrier

St. (D.C.)
Morris, G. E., 239 3rd St.

Renshaw. Delia, 218 S.
Chestnut St. (D.O.)
Elizabeth: Morris, Harvey.


1070


Geographical  Index


Wisconsin


Klkins: Mouse.  A.  B. (D.C.)
Wilnioth, Clark L. (D.C.)
Fairmont: Richardson, E. K.

Fairinount:  Post,  H.  S. (M.D.)
Ruley, Caleb J., 320 Monroe

St. (D.C.)
Test, H. S. (M.D.)
filjidy: .Tohnston, P. S., Box

38. (D.C.)
Hnrri.sonville: Curry, H. B.
Hill, H. R. (D.C.)
IIiintinKton: .Tones, E. L., 520
8tli St. (D.C.)
Kinniburg & Kinniburg',

1903 3rd Ave. (D.C.)
Montpromery, Herman.

Robinett, .John H.. First
Nafl Bank Bldg-. (D.O.)
lietnrt: Rickard, C. M. (D.C.)
IWartiii.Nburg: ^Vhitacre, H. S.

Win  Creek: Kimmell, Andrew

F., Conrad  St. (D.C.)
Minffo: Brady, T. N. (D.C.)
Morgantown; Austin, I. M.
Chaplin, W. T. (D.C.)
Miller, Joseph Donley, 87
Beechuist Ave. (D.O.)


E.
W.,


E. (N.D.)
163  Clay  St.

Skeels, Russel


Purinton

Ziefel,  J.


Mound-svillc:

S. (D.C.)
Parker.sburg: Boyes, M. A.,
1003 Market St. (D.O.)

Campbell. Chas. D. (D.C.)

Currv, M. E., 603J Market
St. (D.C.)

.Johnson, Cecil F., 6-7 Che-
valier Bldg-. (D.C.)
rhillippi: Daugherty, Isiah &
C. H. (D.C.)

Dougherty. D. L. (D.C.)
I>iillnian: Cox, .T. A. (D.C.)
Raveiiswood: Jewell, Geo. W.

SIstersvllle: Hill, Homer.

Wheeling: Ball, Wm. A., 319
German Bank Bldg.

Doneghy, A. I.. 1323 Chap-
line St. (D.O.)

Herbert, J., 11.5 Zone Ave.

Sheerie,  E. (D.C.)

Skeels. R. H., 521-22 Ger-
man  Bank Bldg. (D.C.)

Sullivan, Clara
Eoff St. (D.O.)

Sullivan, Tom V..
St. (D.O.)

Svvearingen, Pearl
man  Bank Bldg


E.


1142


1142 Eoff


(iOl Ger-


WISCONSIN

Amery: Stoppe, Hanne M.

AntiKo: Baldwin,  Fred. (D.C.)
Burdin, P. A. (D.C.)
Case,  Geo., 421 Elm St.

Hodak, Jos. (D.C.)
Jansen. Albert. (D.C.)
Dudwig, Miss Mary. (D.C.)
Nicholson,  Miss  J. D. (D.C.)
Schoeppe, Paul Van de, 52"

Madison St. (D.C.)
Sims, R. S., 133 Weed St.


166.
Brown


3431 E.


Toskey, C. M. (D.C.)
Trent. A. R. (D.C.)
Appleton: Culbertson, Eliza-
beth M.,  Post  Bldg. (D.O.)
Holzer, J. D., 821 College

Ave. (D.C.)
Johnson, Heniv T., 623

Appleton  St. (D.O.)
Josephs, M. D., 1020 Atlan-
tic St. (D.C.)
Larsen, Robt., 327 Colleg-e

Ave. (D.C.)
O'Brien, Henry P. (D.C.)
Arcadia; Berg^e, Emil D.
Sauor, Albert, Box 322.
.\rKjle: Graham,  Jno.  D.,  Box

93. (D.C.) ■
Ashland: Bailey, J. R., Ma-
sonic Temple. (D.O.)
T.arsen, Carl A. (D.C.)
Barahoo:  Getchall, Chas.

Ellsworth, Reinking
Bldg. (D.O.)
I..auffenberger, Edyth.

Zwicker. P. J. (D.C.)
Rsirron: Fitzstead. T. E.

Beaver Dam: Burke, M. E.,
liniveisitv Place. (D.C.)
Smith, J. J., 113 Washing-
ton  St. (D.C.)
Tavlor, Chas. E., Hawley

Blk. (D.O.)
Ulrich &  Ulrich, 160 Wash-
ington St. (D.C.)
Beloit: Buffalow. O. T,, Gre-
gory  Blk. (D.O.)
Corenz, W. C, Box
Pape, Francis P.,

Block. (D.C.)
Richardson, R. H.,

Grand Ave. (D.C.)
Rull, Morris, 433 Goodwin

Block. (D.C.)
Young, John R., Goodwin
Bldg. (D.O.)
Berlin: Breithaupt & Breit-
haupt. (D.C.)
Breithaupt, A. \V., 311

Huron St. (D.C.)
Hart, Mrs. Emma. (D.C.)
Settle, Wm. A. (D.O.)
Birnain^vood: French, S. C.
Mueller, Carl W., Box 65.
Black River Falls: Boats-
wan, P. (D.C.)
Brodhead: Olesen, K. P.

BurlinK-ton:  DeWitt.  F.  E.,
505 Chestnut  St. (D.C.)
Hickox, Oliver. CD.C.)
Smith, Miss N., 305 N. 5th
St. (D.C.)
Chippewa Falls: Butler, A.
Ross, Cor. Bridge and
Grand Aves. (D.C.)
Chamberlain, Daida. (D.C.)
Chamberlain, Sadie. (D.C.)
Chamberlain, Sylvan. (D.C.)
Clinton: Canary,  Dr. Ella.

Cochrane: Becker, Geo.

(DC.)
Columbus: Proctor, Clara M.,

Prairie St. (D.C.)

Cuba: Pipperda, Benj. (D.C.)

Delevan: Conn, Albert C,

239 Walworth  Ave. (D.C.)

Gerdos, Mrs. H. C, 67

Walworth Ave. (D.C.)
Petty. Ernest D. (D.C.)
nod>!:eville: Jo.slin, O. W.


De Pere: Hillman, W. O.

Kau  Claire: Fraker,  Franklin,

Galvin Bldg. (D.O.)
Keck, E. W.. Suite 2, Gas

Bldg. (S?T.)
Leech, C. William, 305| S.

Barstow St. (D.C.)
Murphy,  E.  C,  Ingram  Bldg-.

Van Bushkirk, Viola, 12J S.

Barstow  St. (D.C.)
Williams, T. E., 113| Grand

Ave. (M.D., D.C.)
EdjJTerton: Dennis, R. E.,

West Fulton  St. (D.C.)
Fvansville: Armstrong,  G.  H.,

Over Pioneer  Drug Store.

Cockrell, Chas.  C, Economy

Bldg. (D.O.)
Devine, A. G. (D.C.)
Fond Du Ijac: Berglin. G. A.

M., 103 N. Main St. (D.C.)
Breitzman. Edward J.. 69

Macy St. (D.O.)
Case, Geo. H., 13 E Street.

Clark, Fred N., Collins

Bldg. (D.C.)
Gebhardt. Arthur. (D.C.)
Geisse, Chas. E., 19 Sheboy-
gan  St. (D.O.)
Knowles, Leonard, 92 S.

Main St. (D.C.)
Wright. F. A., 94 S. Main

St. (D.O.)
Fort Atkinson: Burnham.

Lillian,  315  Maple  St.

HolT, H. T., 228 S. Main St.

(DC.)
Franksville: Mortonson, ,T. C.

Galesville:  Pease,  Carrie  B.

Grand Itapids: Goodrich, 30O

Grand Ave. (D.O.)
Hoff, F. T., Daly Block.

Green Bay:  Puddicombe.

Raymond, 508 Mirabeau

Bldg. (D.C.)
Schaus. Geo. E., 1132 Wal-
nut St. (D.C.)
Scovell. Leon J.. 223 Cherry

St. (D.C.)
Ter-p, .Jesse A., 407 Mina-

han Bldg. (D.C.)
Hartford: Yohann, Wm.

Honey  Oeek: McGuire, H.


Horicon: Breithaupt, J. R.

Hortonville: Carroll, L. A.

Hudson: Svenson, Albert E.,

327 Locust St. (D.C.)
Janesville: Damrow, E. H.,
405 Jackman Block.
Dake,  ^V.  A., 321  Hayes  Blk.

Tnley, Jos. (D.C.)
Jemis, J. B. (D.O.)
Miller, F. ^W., 109 South

Academy St. (D.C.)
Sage, Norman L., Hayes

Blk. (D.O.)
Schwegler. Emil J. (D.O.)
Jeffer.son: Bradford & Brad-
ford. (D.C.)
Brewer, J. C. (D.O.)
Kenosha: Astburg, Chas. J.,
25 Meyers  Blk. (D.C.)


Wisconsin


Geographical  Index


1071


Jones,  Leroy,  538  Syrnonds
St. (D.C.)

Klema,  J.  W.,  20  Iserman
Bldg. (D.C.)

Larsen,  Robt.,  219  Main  St.

Mclntyre,  Geo.  M.,  Gros-
venor Bldg-. (D.O.)

O.'stberg-,  Chas.  J.,  310  Pub-
lic Service Bldg. (D.C.)

Volg-man,  F.  C,  214  Wis-
consin St. (D.C.)

Welfraum, O. L., 305 Main
St. (D.C.)
Ke'«vance: Besserdich, K. J.,
Enterprise Bldg. (D.C.)

Naidl. A. R., Box 308.
La  Cro.sse;  Colman,  W.  H.,
1319 State St. (N.D.,
D.C.)

Hartwell,  Messrs.  Fred  H.
&  Thomas,  National  At-
torneys, Universal  Chiro-
practic Association  and
American  Naturopathic
Association,  Lincoln  Blk.
(N.D., D.C.)

Jacobv,  Earl  W.,  407  Mc-
Millan Bldg-. (D.C.)

Jacobv.  Mary  W.,  118  N.
5th St. (D.C.)

Jorris,  A.  U.,  McMillan
Bldg. (D.O.)

Klawitter,  Wm.,  402  S.  7th
St. (D.O.)

Klawitter,  Wm.,  821  S.  5th
St. (D.O., N.D.)

Kiutzer,  Oscar  J.,  614  S.
4th St. (D.C.)

Kunert, W. Frank. (D.C.)

Kurche,  A.  G.,  1714  Berlin
St. (D.C.)

Riese,  Jos., 402 S.  7th  St.

Robb, Geo. F., 506 Main

Roesti,  Mrs.  O.  G.,  c/
C. A. (Ma.)

Scover,  A.  G..
(D.C*

Serv


Carberry, Hugh, 504 Park

St. (N.D.)
Culmyer, J. Chester. (D.O.)
Glasgow,  J.  Rupert,  Wood
Block. (D.C.)
Maribel: .ledlicka, A. J.

Marinette: Bell, H. R. (D.O.)
Blake, Edw. U (D.C.)
La Crosse, Albert J., 2004

Ella Court. (D.C.)
Naidl, A. R. (D.C.)
Sommers, May B., 1372

Merryman St. (D.C.)
Sommers, Sylvester, 1372
Merryman St. (D.C.)
Markesan: Brewer, Joe E.
Ludtke, C. W. (D.C.)
Mar.shfield: liUndy, Frederick

G., Koenig Blk. (D.C.)
Mayville: Drury, W. H.,

Bridge St. (D.C.)
Menonionie:" Cross, W. H.
Cross &  Cross, Madison

Bldg. (D.C.)
Kvle, Chas. T., Arcade
Bldg. (D.O.)
Merrill: Bode, Herbert E.,
P. O. Box 102. (D.C.)
Schmid, F. R., 814 1st St.
3Ierritt: Sauer, Albert F.

Meteor: Brickmeyer, O

Milton Junction: ''^
C. H., 1093 26t
McAdams, Fred*^
Milwaukee:
D., "'■
Ari'


I'ortej-,  Edgar,  418  11th
Ave. (D.C.)

Reese,  Mr.s.  Adolph,  71
Chambers St. (DC)

Reese,  A.  C, 1325 Green-
bay Ave. (D.C.)

Ring,  J.  G., 1012 22nd  St

Roberts, A. C, Box 654.

Robert.s,  H.,  Box 654. (N  1^  i

Scharnhorst,  L.  C  l-'t'h
and State  St.s. (D.C.)

Schuster,  John  K.,  Ste-
phenson Bldg. (DO)

Smith,  J.  J.,  809 3rd  St.

Still, Mabel J., Matthews

Bldg. (D.O.)
Teu^eberg,  1.  J., 198 27th  St.

Wasico, G. G. (D.C.)
Williamfs, O. W., Majestic
Bldg. (D.O.)
Monroe:  Abell,  W.  T..  Cardinal

Buehler, Emma  M -^

Box 70. (D  ^  ^
Crosby  &-  -"

St (-^

Po


1072


Geographical  Index


Wyoming


Salak, George, 1550 Holmes

Ave. (N.D.)
Spencer, Piatt Rogers, 437

Main St. (D.O.)
Visholm, Thos. N., 1100

State  St. (N.D.)

"Williams,  I^ouis,  1523  Center

St. (N.D.)

Reeclslmrjjrt Haukedal, Edgai-

O., 130  Myrtle  Ave. (D.C.)

Rhiiiolandcr: Nelson, W. H.

Rice liakej Finseth, Kmma
M. (D.C.)
Fitzslad, T. E. (D.C.)
Mag-ner, Ada. (D.C.)
Magner. W. O. (D.C.)
Polland, Louis A., R. R.

No. 1. (D.C.)
Williams, L,. V., Daniel
Blk. (D.C.)
Richland Center: Saxe, Ar-
thur. (D.C.)
Ripon: Fewell, K. B., 844
"^vatson St. (D.C.)

'^alls: Baker, Emma

-  -^. (D.C.)

■^ ~ -B^im  St.


Tigertoii: Nedden, Albert.

Timothy: Ortmeier, Henry.

Tomah: Taylor, E. J., Box

312. (D.C.)
Two Rivers: Denlinger,'  Mrs.
J. H., 1317 16th St. (D.C.)
Denlinger & Denlinger,

1317 16th St. (D.C.)
Hildebrant, Guy. (D.C.)
Viroqua:  Cronk, Otis E.
Mead, Clyde D. (D.O.)
"Wnilard, AV. L. (D.C.)
Waterloo: Hiebel, Benj. B.

AVatertown:  Faust, Mrs.

Clara A., 305 N. 5th St.
Kielblock, Helen. (D.C.)
Ottow, Albert.  .(D.C.)
Smith, Mrs. N., 305 N. 5th

St. (D.C.)
Smith, J. J., 701 5th St.
AVaukeslia; Brockway, Ar-
thur W., Frame Bldg.
Fulrath, Wesley, Farmer's
State Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
rSchneider, L. (D.O.)
--nith, J. W. (D.C.)

'ca: Edelbach, Mrs.
>. 119 Jefferson St.

-ger,  L.  E.,  P.  O.
. (D.C.)

' .T. (D.C.)

■'ll Jefferson


- St.


Whitewater: Bligh, T. R.
Higgins, Shelley E. (D.O.)
Parish, Chester W., Com-
mercial Bank Bldg.


WYOMING

Casper:  Dean,  Dr.  T.  A. (M.D.)

Hahn, Dr. H. (D.C.)
Cheyenne: Ekdall, A. B., Key
City Hotel. (D.C.)
Douglas, F. H., 1820 Max-
well  St. (N.D.)
Douglas. F. S., 600 E. 16th

St. (D.C.)
Ekdall, A.  B. (D.C.)
Furry, Frank T., Theater

Bldg. (D.O., M.D.)
Furry, L. (M.D.)
Quinn, W. A. (D.C.)
Doiij!rla.s: Miller, Claudia A.

Evanston: Johanson, Petrus

E.. Box 457. (D.O.)
Fort HIcKenzie: Lehman, H.

S. (N.D.)
Great  FaJl.s: Byron, Jaines  B.

Green River: Davis, Ed. B.

Lander: Hahn, Edna E.,

General Delivery. (D.C.)
Laramie: Horton. H. H., 21S
Ave. (D.C.)
Quinn, W. W.


Grand
Lookout:


Sheridan: Barnes, W. O.
Beckwith, Ann. (D.O.)
Holbrook, B. F. (N.D.)
Holbrook. F., 319 E. Works
St. (D.C.)

•'um, Henry, Box 53.
^.)

^. J. (N.D.)
*-f S., Fort Mc-


H..


Canada


(ieo(/rapIi ical  Index


CANADA


1(17.^


Alberta: Boumann, Geo.

Alexandria, Out.: Charlebois,
Elmer J., Box 148. (D.C.)
Arnstein, Ont.: Sommacal, J.

F. (D.C.)
Ayr,  Ont.: Anderson, J. M.

Bnron.s, Alb.: Hansen, H. E.

Itarrie: Horn, Geo. F. (D.C.)
Belleville: Kimmel, J. P.,

2.31-a Front St. (D.O.)
'Benfsous^, Sask.: Bell, John

P. (D.M.T.)
Berlin, Ont.: Fraser, Lillian
M.. 96 King- St., Weber
Blk. (D.C.)
Heist,  Edg-ar  D.,  61  King-  St.

W. (D.O.)
Heist, Mary  Le-wis, fil King-
St. \V. (D.O.)
Bradford. Ont.: Cotton, W.
F. (D.C.)
Harrington, Ellen E.. 202

Wellington St. (D.C.)
Harrison, David A., 202

Wellington St. (D.C.)
Miles, Ella E., 125 Alfred

St. (D.C.)
Stephens,  Francis,  293

Park Ave. (D.C.)
Swift, Ellen G., 292 Park

Ave. (D.C.)
Wallace, T. (D.C.)
Warrack, Alexander, 146

Pearl St. (D.C.)
Warrack, Arthur D., 146

Pearl St. (D.C.)
Warrack, IViargaret, 14!i
Pearl St. (D.C.)
Brandon, Manitoba: McCuidy,
Chas. W., 838 Rosser
Ave. (D.O.)
Mintey, Herbert, 231 11th
St. (D.C.)
Brantford, Ont.: Cooper, W.
H., 17 Sarah St. (D.C.)
Ir-win, Christine, 46 Nelson

St. (D.O.)
Ogg, Robt. M., Canadian
Bank of Commerce Bldg.
Sander, C. H., Temple
Bldg. (D.O.)
■^^redenbury, i^taKk. : Miller,
Geo. H. (D.C.)

Mle:  Gearhard,  L.  L.


I., Brock


•vis, T. E.,
Bldg.


Ghostley, Ray))ioiul C, Mc

Leod Bldg. (D.O.)

Harris, John F., 322 Fegler

Block. (D.C.)

Farran Point, Ont.: Sheets,

Anna Dillabough. (D.O.)

FersH.son, Ont.: Graham,

Chas. E. (D.C.)
Fore.st, Ont.: Lowrie, A.

Fronde, Ssa.sk.: Coleman, An-
drew. (D.C.)
Gauld, Quebec: McLean, A.

E. (D.C.)
Gault,  Ont.:  Heist,  Leonore  M.,
Barret & Martin Blk.
Mudge, Chas. R., Box 262.

Parker, F. W.. 225 N.

Walter St. (D.C.)
Ray, M. G., 225 N. ^Vater
St. (D.C.)
Oeorgetown, Ont.: Nielsen,

A. M. (D.C.)
Godericit, Ont.: Heilemann,

Geo.  J.,  North  St. (D.O.)
Grant Vsilley, Ont.: Garvin,

Jas.  E.,  Box  135. (D.C.)
Guelph, Ont. Goodfellow, J.
O., 20 Park Ave. (D.C.)
McAllister, Joan C, Tele-
phone Bldg. (D.O.)
Sherifts, Mary, 10 Suffolk

St. W. (D.O.)
Wilson, Hedder G. S., 55
Cork St. (D.O.)
Haileybury, Ont.: Hilliard,

Wm. P., Main  St. (D.O.)

Halifax, X. S.: Cooper, R. G.

C, 26 N. Bland St. (N.D.)

Hamilton: Bale, E. W., 8

Victoria Ave. S. (D.C.)

Beck, Duvalo, 471J E. King-

St. (D.C.)
Biekle, Isabella, 270 King-

St. (D.C.)
Canadian Colleg-e of Chiro-
practic. (D.C.)
Fleak, Gertrude, 62 Oxford

St. (D.C.)
Fleak, Hazel C, 62 Oxford

St. (D.C.)
Henderson, John A., 312

York St. (D.C.)
Lewis, Edith J., Clyde Blk.

Lewis, W. O., 172 E. Main

St. (D.O.)
Naish, Wm., 146 Katherine

St. (D.C.)
Price,  "W.  L.,  291  Main  St.  W.

Roske.  S.  H.,  805  King  St.  E.

Sinden, H. E., Bank of
Hamilton Chambers.
O.)

-. Roy. (D.C.)

■♦.: Dixon, Edith.

'"'^rnell, M.


Swart, Geo.


31  Em-
477  Col-.


321


F.  D. (D.C.)
Campbell, ChaSi

Detwiler,


Ki<clioner, Ont.

D. (M.D.)
lietlibrldftc. Alb.: Baumann,

Geo., Box 62. (D.C.)
Undsay,  Ont.:  Davis,  J P

(D.C)
Ia.stowel, Ont.: Parker, Robt.

F. (D.O.)
liOndon, Ont.: Barklie, R. C.
Cor. Maple and Talbot
Sts. (D.C.)
Chiverton, N. L.,
press St. (D.C.)
Detwilei-, E. S.,

borne St. (D.O.)
Graham, Alfred G.
Graham, Charles D. (D.CJ.)
Harkins, Marie H., St.

George Apts. (D.O.)
Jones, Mary  J. (D.C.)
Kilbourne,  Clara,

Queens Ave. (D.C.)
Parsen, Dr., 426 King- St.

Van  Kolken.
Manton, Alb.;
W. (D.C.)
Medicine Hat, Alb.
Sara B. (D.O.)
Hughes, H. A., 12 Imperial
Bank Bldg. (D.C.)
Melford, Sa.«k.: Harrison, ^V

•L (D.C.)
Midland. Ont.: SiTiith, Donald.
Smith, T. C. (D.C.)
Moncton, Ne^v  Brun.s^vick:
Ogle, John M., Empire
Blk., Main St. (D.O.)
Montreal, Quebec: Hollidav,
Phillip, 122 Stanlev St. "
McPherson, Geo. "W 414

Mackay St. (D.O.)
Perry, Florence Jarman,
851 W. Dorchester St.

Moo.se 3s\\\, Sask.: Bergin,
Fay, Hugrhes Bldg:. (D.O.)
Critchton, Francis. (D.C.)
Cudmore, E. E.. 1134 4th

Ave. N. W. (D.C.)
Sheardown, Inez A., 14
Lang-don Crescent. (D.C.)
Van  Kolkeen. F.  D. (D.C.)
Mt. Fore.st. Ont.: Peterson, E.

A. (D.O.)
IVanacino, B. C: Martindalp,
Thos. W., Box 867. (D.C.)
IVanton, Alb.: Campbell, Cha.=;.

W. (D.C.)
Niajrara Falls, Ont.s Cohen,
D., 1 Ferry Road. (DC.)
Crysler, Harriet, 351 River

Road. (D.O.)
Fuller. Victor. 39J Queen

St. (D.C.)
Gladman, David V., 62

Queen St. (D.O.)
Gladman. .7. M. (D.O.)
Marsh. .Jennie, 32 Erie Ave
(DC.)

Xorth Mara: MacDonald, M

D. (D.C.)
Olds,  Alb.: Daniel, O. L.

^er, Ont.: Davis, Russell.

-io: Chambers, J. M..
ial Bank. (D.C.)
". Praetor, 316
wick Ave. (DO.)
• Russell, Davis.


1074


Geographical  Index


Canada


O.shawn,  Ont.i  Bishop, Clifford

J..  555  Somerset  St. (D.O.)

Boath, Edw., 382 Frank St.

(D.O.)  i

Fewell, A. B. (D.C.)
Frank, Mrs. M., 775 S.

Somerset St. (D.C.)
Hardie, Jessie B., 224 I>,au-

rier Ave. AV. (D.O.)
Langlois, F. L., 256 Rideau

St. (D.C.)
Loughlin. J. P. (D.C.)
Pettypiece, M. H., 123

Nepean St. (D.O.)
Porter, W.  Wilson,  Box  240.

Soules, Adelaide E. (D.C.)
Soules, J. S. (D.C.)
Owen Sound, Ont.: Kidd, H.
B., 893 3rd  Ave. E. (D.C.)
Wilcox, W. H., 1255 6th
Ave. (D.C.)
Pembroke: Howard, M. J.,

Fraser Blk. (D.O.)

PeterborouKh, Ont.: Walms-

ley,  Asa  Gordon, Sun  lAfo

Bldg. (D.O.)

Port Arthur, Ont.: Jardine, C.

De. 99 N. Court  St. (D.O.)

Prince Albert, Sa.sk.: Cornell,

Murray. (D.C.)
Quebec City, Que.: Holliday,
Colin, 40 St. Anne St.
Regina, Sa.sk.: Blakesley, E.
A., Box 673. (D.C.)
Blackvvell, George A., 8
Black Bldg. (D.C.)
Rocanville, Sask.: Minty,

Herbert. (D.C.)
Sacatoon, Sask.i Myers, O. P.

Sarina, Ont.: Moon, C. E.,
Front St. (D.C.)
Schwab, L. W., Merrison

Blk. (D.C.)
Anderson, T. V., 167 Front
St. (D.O.)
Sanit Ste. Marie, Ont.: Brun-
dag-e, I.sa L. (D.C.)
Davis, J. P. (D.C.)
Dubois, Elizabeth B. (D.C.)
Evoy, J. W. (D.C.)
Guyon, Alice H. (D.C.)
Henderson, E. A. (D.C.)
Olivant, Margaret. (D.C.)
Perrier, Mary A. (D.C.)
Sharp, .1. B., Duffln St.

Sharp, Sarah Jane. (D.C.)
Wilcox, Margery. (D.C.)
Wilcox, W. H. (D.C.
Sidney, Man.: McBlrea, F. B.

Somerset: Frank, M. (D.O.)
Sonris, Man.: Burthwick, L.

M. (D.C.)
South Hamilton: Bale, E. W.,

8 Victoria Ave. (D.C)
Southampton. Ont.: McNabb,

Adeline M. (D.O.)
St. John, N. B.: Spangler, H.

L.,  145  Germain  St. (D.O
St. Katherlne, Ont.: F'  '
Victor, 204 St. Pau"
Hart, H. S., 2 Ray
St. lieatherines, O
Eva T. (D.C
Dixon, Edi*'


St. Thomas, Ont.: Gray, E. J.,

55  7 Talbott St. (D.O.)
Steelton, Ont.: West, Archi-
bald. (D.C.)
Sterling. Alb.: Johnson, P. H.

Stratford, Ont.: Gossman, "W.
A.. 1G7 Downie St. (D.O.)

Mfnill,  Chas.  R.,  46  Albert
St. (D.O.)

Wright, Sadie, 2 Beacon
Bldg. (D.C.)
Toronto.  Ont.:  Amsden,  Ethel-
wolfe C, 2 Bloor  St.

Armstrong, Mrs. Georgia.

Bach,  James  S.,  Temple
Bldg. (D.O.)

Baird,  G.  R.,  420  College
Ave. (D.C.)

Bessey,  Mable  M.,  108
Beatrice Ave. (D.C.)

Blain,  H.,  Cor.  Front  and
Scott Sts. (D.C.)

Clemmer,  Dr.,  15  Howland
Ave. (D.C.)

Doxsee,  Geo.  N.,  403  Ryree
Bldg. (D.C.)

Durnan,  W.  L.,  2  Bloor  St.
E. (D.O.)

Elliott,  G.  G.,  1685  Dundas
St. W. (DO.)

Galbraith,  D.,  623  Bathhurst
St. (D.C.)

Henderson,  J.  A.,  312  York
St. (D.O.)

Henderson,  Robt.  B.,  Do-
minion  Bank  Bldg. (D.O.)

Hillery,  Grace  M.,  570
Spadina Ave. (D.O.)

Horning,  J.  E.,  80  W.  Bloor
St. (D.O.)

Howard,  M.  E.,  137  Spring-
hurst Ave. (D.C.)

Howe,  R.  J.,  35  Victor  Ave.

Hoxey,  M.  A.,  533  Bloor  St.

Hoxey  &  Garland,  Drs.,  240
Brunswick Ave. (D.C.)

Jaquith,  H.  C,  Confedera-
tion Life Bldg. (D.O.)

Kerr,  Janet  M.,  24  La  Plaza
St.,  Cor.  Charles  and
Jarvis Sts. (D.O.)

Lindon,  H.  L.,  556  Dover
Court Road. (D.C.)

McKay,  Chas.  P.,  509  Mark-
ham St. (D.C.)

McLaren,  Dr.,  907  Bath-
hurst  St. (D.C.)

McLean,  Adele,  328  Palmer-
ston Blvd. (D.C.)

McLean,  D'Arcy  B.,  328
Palmerston Blvd. (D.C.)

Millard,  F.  P.,  12  E.  Rich-
mond  St. (D.O.)

North,  Dr.,  619  Spadina
Ave. (D.C.)

Nothnagel,  J.,  2  Blo<^-
Suite 64. (D.C  "

Ord, Garnet I
St. (D.C*

Pigott "


Smith, Dr. Jas., 134 Dupont

St. (D.C.)
Smith, Nesbit, 750 Lan.q-

downe Ave. (DC.)
Wheeler, R. A. (D.C.)
Williamson,  Mary  I.,  3  Colo-

lonial Apts., 534 Palmer-
ston Blvd. (D.C.)
Vancouver, B. C: Atkinson.

John T., Dominion Trust

Bldg. (D.O.)
Bell,  W. J., 792 15th St.

Carl.son, Susan, 307 Lee

Bldg. (D.C.)
Chatwin. H. W., 709 Duns-

nniir St. (D.C.)
Cleland, C. T., 1014 Nelson

St. (D.C.)
Evans, George, 309 Blower

Blk. (D.C.)
Irwin, R. J., 15 Northern

Crown Block. (D.C.)
McCombie, Thos., 1734 4th

Ave. (D.O.)
Myers, Lewis A., Birks

Bldg. (D.O.)
Prowze, E. W., 426 Duncan

Bldg. (D.C.)
Shaw,  Ernest, 307  Lee  Bldg.

Welland. Out.: Garland, Dr.

M. B. (D.C.)
West  Hamilton: Price,  A.,  291

Main  St. (D.C.)
AVeybiarn, Sask.: Raffenberg,

Mina G., 10 New Moffet

Blk. (D.O.)
Tliompson & Thompson.

Windsor, Ont.: Eakins, F. A.,

Old Curry  Bldg. (D.C.)
Savage, W. S., 102 Coyean

St. (D.C.)
Winsham, Out.: Fox, J. A.

Winnipeji, Man.: Axtell, S.
;  W., St. Regis Hotel.

!  (D.C.)

i Beath, T., Victoria Hospi-
tal. (D.C.)
Bricker, Edwin Gowdy,

Sterling Bank Bldg.

Burthwick, I. M., 2 Steele

Blk. (D.C.)
Cornelius, Chas., 485 Sher-

brook St. (D.O.)
Cornelius, Mary B

Sherbrook St. (^
Deeks, Harley

Blk. (D.O.^
De Matto.'^

kirk /
Duffv


Universal Naturoputhio  Directory niitl Itiiycrx' <;iii(le


1075


THERE  IS
A  CAUSE


Are  you  run  down?

Tired out?

Nerves  unsteady?

Do  3^ou  feel  shaky  all  over?

Are  you  weak?

Do  you  lack  ambition  and  energy?

Do  you  have  that  "all  gone"  feeling
when  you  get  up  in  the  morning?

Do  you  get  up  depressed,  low-spir-
ited, out  of  sorts?

Do  you  get  exhausted  and  "played
out"  after  very  little  effort?

Are  you  troubled  with  headache,
neuralgia,  pains  in  the  joints  and
nuiscles?

Do  you  have  dyspepsia,  heartburn,
belching,  gas  in  the  bowels,  sour
stomach?

Do  you  suffer  from  Rheumatism,
Catarrh,  Kidnej'^  trouble.  Bilious
attacks?

Are  you  subject  to  colds?

Have  you  lost  hope  of  regaining
3'^our  old  time  strength  and  health?

Do  you  know  that  all  these  ills
come  from  one  CAUSE?

Do  you  know  that  the  only  way  to
permanently  rid  yourself  of  these
troubles  is  to  eliminate  the  cause?

Don't  take  medicine.  Medicines  and
drugs  suppress  symptoms,  give
relief,  effect  temporarj^  "cures,"
but  cannot  remove  the  cause  of
the  complaint.

Give  Nature  a  chance,  assist  her  in
the  right  way,  and  Nature  will
surely  cure  you.

Your  case  is  no  worse — cannot  be
worse — than  hundreds  of  others
that  have  come  to  us  and  regained
Health  and  Strength  by  our  Nat-
ural Treatment  witliout  Drugs  or
Medicines.  Do  vou  wish  to  know
THE  CAUSE  of  your  trouble  and
how  to  eliminate  it?

Write  today  to

YUNGBORN HEALTH  RESORT

BUTLER,  N.  J. AND TANGERINE,  FLA.


BRITISH  SOCIETY  OF  NATUROPATHS

Section of tlie

Universal  Naturopathic  Alliance

Will  all  Kiiglisli  rea<lers  who  arc  interested  in
the  formation  of  above,  please  communicate  with
the officially appointed English representative :

J.  ALLEN  PATTREIOUEX,  N.  D.

Therapeutic Institute

King's Road, Sedgley Park,
Manchester, England


Conditions of Membership, etc.
application


obtained on


Mr.  Pattrtiouex  is  also  representative  in  Oreat
Britain,  for  the  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory,
and  other  books,  etc.,  issued  by  the  American
Xaturopathic  Association,  and  from  whom  parti-
culars of same may be obtained.


A.  E.  P.  SUMMERBELL


O. S., p. N.,  C. H.  D.


Osteopath.  Somapath,
pathist.  Naturopath,
and  Health  Director.
Instructor  of  Massage
therapy  at  the  Nation
Chiropractic,  Chicago,
her  of  the  Staflf  at
Macfadden  Health
Chicago, 111., U. S. A


Physculto-
Chiropractor
Formerly
and  Hydro-
al  School  of
and  a  mem-
the  Bernarr
a  t  o  r  i  u  m.


210 Falcon Street  North  Sidney

New South Wales, Australia
Phone, North  Sydney 1436


Director of CLINICA HOMEOPATICA
SAN MIGUEL No. 130-B, HABANA (CUBA)

Telephone A-4312  Cable A.ldress:


"Tr


MAHADEV  B.  KANTHARIAKER,  N.  D.

Director of
"Nav-Jivan" (New Life) Sanitarium

LAL GATE. AMEDABAD, INDIA


DR. CLIFFORD B. SEVERN

Drusiess  Institute
Suite 90-92 4tli Floor, SaekeVs Bldg.
Joubert Street, Johannesburg

xVlI  Drug-less  methods  employed  along:
.scientific  lines.  Specialties,  Female  and
c  h  1  1  d  weaknesses,  Veg-etarianism,
1' ruitarianism,  Macfadden  Methods.  \t
Muizenburg  and  Cape  Town,  Cape
(  olony, from December to Febrtiarv


THERAPEUTIC  INSTITUTE

18  King's  Road,  Sedgley  Park,  Manchester, England

"Dowsing"  Radiant  Heat  and  Light  Treatment.
Hydropathy,  Medical  Electricity,  Massage,  "Initis"
Massage,  Curative  Movements,  Physical  Exercises,
Osteopathy,  advice  on  "Food  Reform"  Dietetics,  Idio-
Kromopathy.  Open  to  the  general  public.  Write  for
tariff.

Proprietor, J. ALLEN PATTREIOUEX, N.D.


107fi


Geographical  Index


Cuba
Australia


CUBA


Havana:  Aladro,  Alfonso  .T.,
Neptuno 57. (N.D.)

Antiga,  Juan,  San  Miguel
130 B. (M.D.)

Lopez,  Aquiline,  Neptuno  57.


>IanaonK, ,S. <'.;

lioven, C. Lj.


^'onschoon-


PORTO  RICO


I'aliii nty: I>ust, Benedict.
(N.J).. M.D.)
Lust, Leo. (N.D.)
Tornan, John. (N.D.)
Santa  Fe  I.sle:  Ortell, Rev.
C. R. (D.C.)


Honolulu, Hawaiian Terr.:

Barnes,  Samuel  Denham,
280 Beretania St. (D.O.)

Mighton,  F.  C,  204-5
Boston Bldg-. (D.C.)

Weirick,  W.  C,  424  Bere-
tania St. (D.C.)


San Juan, I'orto Rico: Haley,
Stanley M., 16 Cruz St.


SOUTH AMERICA


Bucno.s Ayres, Argentine Re-
public, S. A.: Lloyd, James
Waddell, 605 Avenido de
Mayo. (D.O.)


Nye, Carlos, 1157 Avenido
de Mayo. (D.O.)
Vlajestic, Venezuela: Cordi-
nal. J. A. (D.O.)


Trinidad, British West  Indies:

Parker, Theophilus T., 53
Frederick St. (D.O.)
Valparaiso, Chile: Binkley,
W.  E.,  Casilla  88. (P.)


FOREIGN  COUNTRIES


Cairo, Kgypt: Morrow, M. H.

Cape  Town,  S.  Africa:  Savage

A. (D.O.)
Johannesburg, S. Africa:

Van Diggelen, Tromp, 21

Chudleig-h Bldg. (D.O.)


AFRICA


Severn,  Clifford  B.,  Naturo-
pathic Institute,  90-92
Sacke's  Bldg.,  Jonbert  St.


ASIA


Mamunta, Sierra Leone, West

Africa: Myers,  E.  W. (D.O.)

Smart, F. W., 20 Bradhurst

St. (D.O.)

Pretoria,  Transvaal,  S.  Africa:

^Venniger, J. H., P. O. Box

917. (N.D.)


Aniedabad, Lai Gate, India:

Kanthariaker,  Mahadev  B.,
"Nav-Jivan"  (New  Life)
Sanitarium. (N.D.)

Ballapur,  Ballia:  Dharam  Na-
rain  Srivastwa,  M.N.-P.T.
(Master  of  New  Physical
Therapeutics)

Behar,  Unao:  Sheo  Raj  Bali
Singh,  M.N.-N.T.,  Rag-
hunath Khera.

Benares; Chabby Nath Pan-
dey, M.N.-B.T. (Master of
Neo-Bio Therapeutics)
Kali Prasad, D.N.-B.T., Au-

sanganj.
Kavi  Bhushan  Ram  Kishore
Bhattacharya, D.N.-B.T.
(Ayurviganacharya Ka-
vira), Dasasumedh Road.

Bombay, India: Madon Natu-
ropathic Center, "Health
Home," 297 Hornby Road,
Fort.
Stenger,  J.  G.,  Box  30. (G.
P.O.)

Calcutta,  Ind.:  Bose,  B.  K.


Chapra:  Bindeshwari  Parshad,

M.N.-P.T.
Ghazipur: Hari Kishore Cha-

turvedi,  D.N.-B.T.
Gulgalha, IJnao: Shahzade
Singh Chandel, M.N.-P.T.
Inderab, Central  India:
Wagle, B. V. (D.O.)
Laliput, Jhansi: Md. Azimud-

din, M.N.-P.T.
Madras:  Mahabar  Singh,  M.N.-
P.T.
Ram Nath Singh, M.N.-P.T.
Shyam Kishore, M.N.-P.T.
Blundel Parshad, M.N.-P.T.
Ramasami,  K.T.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,
105  Armenian Street; Ed-
itor of "Self Culture",
published at Kizhanattan,
Tinnevelly District, South
India. President of The
Indian  Academy  of
Science, Madras.
Pebbles, J. M., M.A., M.B.,
Ph.D., Vice-President of
I. A. S., Madras, and of
Los Angeles, Cal.


Severn,  J.  M.,  F.B.,  P.S.,  As-
sociate Editor,  S.  C.  Jour-
nal.

Manilla, P. I.: Ottofy, Dr.
Louis. (M.D.)
The Self Culture Health
Club, 319 Echague. (D.O.)

Patiala, IVorth India: Taylor,
John  C,  R.  P.  Mission.

Pekins,  China:  Dieterich.  P.
H.,  Union  Medical  College
Hospital. (M.D.)

Santa  Cruz,  India:  Madon,  B.
P. (N.D., D.O., D.C, M.D.)

Sehunra,  Basti:  Vishwa  Nath
Prashad  Missar,  M.N.-
P.T.

Suva,  Fiji  Islands:  Davies,
M. D. (D.O.)

Tientsin,  China:  Barker,  E.  F.,
Yang Pei University.

Tokyo,  Japan:  Read,  Rachel,
23 Reinanzaka St. (D.O.)


AUSTRALIA


Adelaide,  S.  Au.stralia:  Nikola,
H.  Clark,  7  Mission  Bldg.,
Franklin St. (N.D., D.O.)

Melbourne,  Victoria:  Culley,
Edgar  W.,  450  Collins  St.


Harris, Neville E., 450 Col-
lins St. (D.O.)
Stenger,  J.  G.,  Box  30,  G.P.O.
IVew Zealand: Veich, R. H.,

Christ Church. (D.O.)
IVorth Sidney, IVevv South


Wales: Summerbell, A. B.

P., 210 Falcon St. (N.D.,

O. S., Ph.C, N.D.)
Sidney: Beinnie,  A. (D.O.)
(iueensland: Clark, James,

Brisbane. (D.O.)


I'.iiTope


Gpoqraphical  Index


1077


EUROPE


GERMANY

Bjulen-Bailen, tierinaiiy:

Binswang-or, Dr., I.ichtf-n-
thal Naturheilanstalt,
"hoiiisenhohe." (N.D.)
Berlin: Moellering-, 25(; Kur-

fiiistendanim. (D.O.)

Dresden: Moellering-, Bertha

AV., Miinchnerstrasse No.  8


MIchelbnch, Station Gagge-

nau,  Baden, Germany: Dust,

Johann II. (N.D.)
Lust, Benedikt. (N.D., M.D.)
Munehen: Hibbard, Max Jo-
seph  Strasse. (D.O.)
Woerishofen, Bavaria,

Germany: Baumg-arten, Al-
fred. (N.D., M.D.)
Reily, Prior Rev. (Succes-
f^ov  to  Father  Kneipp).


GREAT BRITAIN

Birkdale,  Soutliport:  Stevens,
Arthur  D..  Aughton  Road.
(D.O., D.C.)

Birmingham:  Pheils,  Elmer
T.,  Athenaeum  Chambers,
71 Temple Row. (D.O.)

Hampshire:  Nature  Resort,
Broadland. (D.O.)

Hastings:  Riposo  Health
Home  &  County  Club,  St.
Helen's Park. (D.O.)

Lancashire:  Duckworth,  Wm.

Liverpool:  Barker,  Abbie  Hol-
land, 34  Rodney  St. (D.O.)


Barker, Edward H., 34
Rodney St. (D.O.)
liOndon: Arnott,  Neil, 3 Buck-
ingham Gate. (D.O.)

Bell, Robert. (M.D.)

Browne,  Grantham  F.,  97
Mortimer  St.,  Regent  St.
W. (D.O.)

Cawston,  Margaret  I.,  3
Albemarle  St.,  Piccadilly
W. (D.O.)

Collins,  Jean  Hough,  69
Piccadilly W. (D.O.)

Cooper,  Wm.,  7  Harley  St.
Cavendish Square. (D.O.)

Foote,  Harvey  R.,  Hare-
wood  House,  Hanover
Square. (D.O.)

Horn,  F.  J.,  1  Hay  Hill,-
Berkeley Square. (D.O.)

Hough,  Clara  E.,  69  Picca-
dilly W. (D.O.)

Littlejohn,  Martin  J.,  69
Piccadilly W. (D.O.)

The  Super  Man,  64  Hay-
market. (D.O.)

Watson,  Georgiana  G.,  2
Harewood  Place,  Hanover
Square. (D.O.)

West,  Ralph  L.,  17  W.  Hert-
ford St. (D.O.)
Manchester: Ashton, Howard
F., 49 Deansgate. (D.O.)

Barker,  Abbie  Holland,  20
St. Ann's Square. (D.O.)

Barker,  Ed.  H.,  20  St.  Ann's
Square. (D.O.)

Pattreiouex,  J.  Allen,  18
King's  Road,  Sedgley
Park. (N.D., D.O.)

Ritchie, Aymer M., 13 St.
Ann St. (D.O.)
Nelson: Loader, A. J., Her-
balist,  Market Hall.
New  Castle  On  Tyne:  Bounan,
T. W., 31 Bayswater Rd.


(DC.)

Pearson,

Sea View


North ShieldM: Pearson, Chas.

S., Sea View House, 3

Tyne Terrace.
Northumberland:

Chas. Smith,

House. (D.C.)
Southport: Eteson, Arthur

D., 49 Aughton Road,

Berkdale. (D.C.)
Lean, Dora Sutcliffe, 120

Lord St. (D.O.)
Tynemouth: Pearson, P., 47

Pexey Park. (D.C.)
Belfast, Ireland: Dunham,

Jay, Shaftsbury Square.

Cardiff, Wales: Young, Wal-
lace E., 47 Richmond

Road. (D.O.)
Dundee, Scotland: Wood,

Elsie  H. Boath. St. Paul's

Manse, Laurel Blk.

E<Iinl>urgh, Scotland: Hudson,

Franklin, 12 Lansdowne

Crescent. (D.O.)
Glasgo^v: Hall, Marion K.,

249 W. George St. (D.O.)
Hamilton, Beatrice, 249 W.

George St. (D.O.)
Pratt, Frank P., 255 Bath

St. (D.O.)
Streeter, Wilfrid A., 255

Bath St. (D.O.)
Hamilton, Bermuda: Black,

Campbell, 26 Front St.

Coons, Jessie M., Magnolia

Hall. (D.O.)


SWEDEN

Stockholm,  Sweden:  Sieburg.
Chas.  G.  E.,  Kaptensgatan
13. (D.O.)


Park Scene in \)v. lUneiiict Lust's Health Resort at  Butler, X. T.


1078


Geoqraphical  Index


ENGLAND,  IRELAND  AND  SCOTLAND

Special  List  compiled  by  J.  Allen Pattreiouex, N. D., Manchester, England

LIST  of  Nature  Cure  Institutions  and  Sanitaria;  Firms  dealing  in  Natural  Remedies
and appliances; Food Reform Guest  Houses;  Food  Reform  Stores,  Manufacturers,
etc.;  Societies  and  Centres;  Naturopaths'  Training  Institutions,  Teachers  and  Practi-
tioners;  Physical  Culture  Experts; Massage  Training  Establishments; List  of  Masseurs
and Masseuses; Medical Herbalists; Publishers  of  Nature Cure Books;  New  Thought,
Health  and  Vegetarian  Periodicals  in  the  British  Isles.


Nature Cure Institutes,
Sanitaria,  etc.

Edinburgh — Edinburg-h School
of Natural Therapeutics,
James C. Thomson, Prop.

Orchard Leii^h, Che.siiam —

Chiltern Hills Nature Cure
Resort.

Peebles, Scotland — Peebles
Hydropathic.

London, AV. — Plombifere's
Treatment, Miss F. Bur-
bridge,  42  Manchester  St.

London, W. — Alexandra 'The-
rapeutic Institute,  Baker  St.

London,  W. — The  Dowsing
Medical and Therapeutic
Institution, 39-40 York
Place  and  Baker  St.

Kensin;;ton, London — Boyd,
Heniy George, 5 Cheniston
Gardens.

London,  AV. — Mrs.  H.  Mary
Crocker, Radiant Heat and
I_,ight. 18  Sackville  St.

London,  AV. C. — Miss Ellen
Moore, Radiant Heat and
I^ight, 19  Gi-cen  St.  and  Lei-
cester Square.

London,  AA'. — Greville Hot  Air
Bath Establishment, 37
Upper  Berkeley  St.

Bath — Hot Mineral Springs,
Radiant  Heat and  Light.

Bradford — Centre Baths,
Radiant  Heat and  Light.

Cheltenham — Montpelier
Baths,  Radiant  Heat  and
Light.

licaniinfirton — Royal Pump
Rooms and Baths, Radiant
Heat and Light.

Klandrindod AVells — Pump
House Hotel, Radiant Heat
and  Light.

Strathpeflfer — The Spa, Radi-
ant Heat and Light.

Torquay — Corporation Baths,
Radiant Heat  and Light.

Woodhall  Spa — Victoria  Spa
Baths,  Radiant  Heat  and
Light.


Firms nealinK in IVsitural
Remedies and Appliances

I.iondon, AV. C. — Medical Sup-
ply  Association, Electro-
Medical, etc., 167-85 Gray's
Inn Road.

London,  AV. — Schall  &  Schall.
Electro-Medical,  etc.,  71-75
New Cavendish St.

]>ondon,  E.  C. — Thompson,  T.
E.  &  Co.,  Electro-Medical,
etc., 121-23 Roseberry Ave.

Glasgow — Anderson  &  Bucha-
nan, Electro-Medical,  etc.,
54 Renfleld St.

Manchester — General  Electric
Co., Victoria  Bridge.


Manchester — James  AVoolIey
Sons & Co., Ltd., Victoria
Bridge.

London, E. C. — Health Supply
Stores, 23 Ludgate Hill.

London, E. C. — Modern Medi-
cine Co., Ivory Lane.


Food Reform, Guest Houses,
j  etc.

j  Bournemouth — Mrs. Hume,

i LoughtonhurSt,  West  Cliff
I Gardens.

,  Bri$;hton — Mrs. Kilbey, No. 6
Waterloo Place.
Bromley, Kent — Lady Marga-
ret Fruitarian Hospital.
Lady Margaret Nursing
i  Home.

I  Cotswold Hills — Hillside,
i Pitchcombe, near  Strand.
j  Dartmouth — Mrs. Barnett,
j Penlee. Stoke Fleming.
Colwyn Bay — Mrs. Butters,
Thornton House, Mostyn
Road.
Eastbourne — Kures Boarding
Establishment,  Jevington
Gardens.
Ediuburs^h — 12  East Clare-

mont St.
Felixsto-*ve — Gibson's  Hygie-
nic  Private Hotel.
Ilfracombe — Mrs. James Allen
(widow of James Allen,
New Thought writer),
Bryngolen.
Ilkley — Ward's Boarding

House.
London — "Fabian," 59 Ash-
bourne  Ave., Soldier's
Green.
"Erewhon," 48 Temple

Gardens, Soldier's Green.
Bayswater  Hotel  for  women
workers on Food Reform
Lines.
Misses  Kern,  199  Albany  St.,
Regents Park, N. W.
Letcli-»Torth — Misses Pratt,
"Roscarrock," 121 Wil-
bury  Road.
The  Guest  House,  Mrs.
Wells.
Llandudno — Eastington
House, Mrs. E. Davis,
Chapel St.
Old Colwyn — Miss Chadwick,

"Carlton,"  Cadwyn Road.
Rhoson Lea.  Colwyn Bay —
Mrs. H. Thomas. "The
Towers," Whitehall Road.
Torquay — L. Powell, "Sharon"

House, Chelston.
AVeston-super-BIare — The
Raystons, Walliscote Road.


Food Reform Stores, Manu-
facturers,  etc.

London Nut Food Co., 465
Baltersea Park Road,
London,  S.  W.


Marmite Food Extract Co.,
(Substitute for Beef Tea),
59 Eastcheap,  London, E.  C.

The Natural Food Co., Ltd.,
210 Cambridge Road,
London,  E.  C.

The Wallace P. R. Foods  Co.,
I^td., 4 Tottenham Lane,
Hornsey, London, N.

The  Simple  Life  Food  Co..
Ltd.,  (Unflred  Foods),  53
Aldergate  St.,  London,  E.  C.

Bernarr  Macfadden,  General
Buildings,  Aldwych,  London,
W.  C.

The  Sanum  Institute,  Ltd.,  5^
Edgmore Road, London, W.

Popular  Health  Food  Co.,  17
"The  Parade,  Soldier's  Green,.
London, N. W.

Mapleton's  Nut  Food  Co.,  Ltd.,.
Garston, Liverpool.

The  Manhu  Food  Co.,  Ltd.,
Liverpool.

Health Food Stores, J.
Hitchen, 212 Eskrick St.,
Halliwell, Bolton.

Sefton Park'  Health Food
Stores, 491 Smithdown
Road, Liverpool.

Southend-on-Sea. Health
Food Stores, E. P. Fitz-
patrick, 278 London Road,
Westcliff on Sea.

Pitman Health Food Co., 143
Aston  Brook  St.,  Birming-
ham.

International  Health  Food
Association,  Stanborough
Park,  Watford,  near  Bir-
mingham.


Psychotherapeutic
Societies, Centres, etc.

The Psvcho-Therapeutic So-
ciety, Ltd., 26 Red  Lion
Square, London, W. C.

Headquarters of Life Order,
86 Ladbroke Road, London,
W.

The  Higher  Thought  Centre
and International New
Thought Alliance. 39 Mad--
dox St., Regent St.,
London, W. I.

New Thought Centre, 40

Courtfleld Gardens, London,
S. W.

W.  S.  Hendry  (Healing
Centre),  245  Vauxhill
Bridge Road, London,  S.  W.

The "Aquarian" Bureau, Sec-
tion 1, "Wm. F. E. Smith,
38-a  Treboria  Road.  Earls
Court,  London,  S.  W.  5.

New  Thought Centre, Miss E.
G. Owen, 3 George St. and
Hanover  Square,  London,
W. I.

New Thought Centre, Miss
Martin, 87-89 Edmund  St..
Birmingham.


England.  Iiflfuid
and  Scotland


Geographical  Index


1079


New Thoiig-ht Scliool and
Healing- Centre, 19 Brazen-
nose St., Manchester.

•"New Ways in Medicine"
Cioiip,  Order of tlie Star in
the East, Mr. H. Haillie-
W'eaver, 19 Tavistock Sq.,
London,  W.  C. 1.


Naturopntliic Teaclier.s and

Praetitioncr.s, Training In.sti-

tiition.s, etc.

Tlie Incorporated Society of
Trained Masseuses (Exami-
nations  only). 157 Great
Portland St., London, W.

The Institute of Massage
and Remedial Gymnastics
(Examinations only), 71
King- St., Manchester.

London  School  of  Massage,
211  Great  Portland  St.  W.

National  Hospital,  Queen
Square, London, W. C.

Queen Alexandra House,
Gymnasium, Kensington
Gore, S. W.

Swedish  Institute,  106  Crowell
Road, London, S. W.

Swedish College of Remedial
Gymnastics, 30 Cavendish
Square, London, W.

School of Massage, 12 Buck-
ingham St., Strand, W. C.

School  of  Massage and Swed-
ish  Remedial Exercises,
Miss Field, 12 Buckingham
St.,  Strand,  London,  W. C.

Central  School  of  Swedish
Medical Gymnastics, 194
Marylebone Road, London,
W.

Swedish Clinique and School
of Massage and Exercises,
16  York  Place  and  Baker
St., London, W.

Chelsea  School  of  Physical
Training,  Manresa  Road,
London, S. W.

School  of  Massage,  75  The
Mount,  York.

School  of  Massage,  45  Newhall
St., Birmingham.

School of  Massage, 78 Hus-
kisson St., Liverpool.

School of Massage, 32 Mont-
pelier Road, Brighton,
Sussex.

Liverpool Physical Training
College, Bedford St., Liver-
pool.

Southport School of Massage,
125 Eastbourne Road,
Birkdale.

School of  Massage, 17 Lime
Grove, Manchester.

School of Massage, 12 Hume
St., Dublin, Ireland.

School of Massage, 20 Dublin
St., Edinburgh, Scotland.

Miss  Brunker, 27 Canfield
Gardens, South Hempstead,
London.

Miss Carpenter Haig, 14
Chenics  St. Chambers,
London, "W. C.

Mrs. Cuddiford, 29 Wands-
worth Bridge Road,
London,  S.  W.

Miss Grafton, 55 Albany St.,
Regents Park, London,
N. W.

Miss  E.  A.  Manley,  84  Park


.^letlioal .>l4-ii \vlii> ur<- in

Favor  of  'I'lic  Nature  Cure

.^lethoil

l>r.  Robert  Bell, 15 Half  Moon
St., Mayfair, l.,ondon, W.

Dr.  Dudley  D'Auvergne
Wright, Bentinck Mansions,
Bentinck  St.,  I>ondon,  W.


I'liy.sioal Culture Kxperts

T. W. Standwell, 66 Park

Road, Merton, London,

S. W.
Eustace Miles, 40-42 Chandos

St., London,  W.  C.
.Sandow's School of Physical

Culture, London.
Thomas  Inch, 74  Clarendon

Road,  Putney,  London,  S.  W.
Health & Vim Association of

Hanover, 19-21 Ludgate

Hill,  London,  E.  C.
Fred French, 41 Arcade,

Nottingham.
Anstey Physical,  Training

College (Ladies only),

Erdington, Warwickshire,
F. Walton, 4 Ivy  Terrace,

Eastbourne,
ilernarr Macfadden, General

Buildings,  Aldwych,  London,

W.  C. 2.
Prof.  Prowse, 31 North  End

Chambers,  Croyden,  near

London.
Mrs. K. A. Taylor, 2 The

Mall, Baling,  London,  W.
Miss Robinson, 17 Priory

Mansions, Drayton Gardens,

London,  S. W.
Miss Spelman Stanger,

Trevena, Sunray  Avenue,

Denmark  Hill,  London.  S.  E.
Miss M. Bradshaw, 1 Guild-
ford Road,  Tunbridge  Wells.
Miss  Margaret Clements, 9

Foxcombe Road, Bath.
Miss B. M. Foster,.  131 Sand-
gate Road, Folkestone.
Mrs. Helen Grove, 14 The

Tything, Worcester.
Mrs.  St.  Vincent  Harwood,  102

Nicolas Road, Charlton-

cum-Hardy,  near  Man-
chester,
rjiss Sanforth Jeffries, 8

Grove Road, Blackbay Hill,

Redland, Bristol.
Miss  Newton. 7  Lower  Brook

St., Ipswich.
Miss Parson, 40 Southbourne

Grove, Bourneniouth.
Miss  L. N. Smith. Monkton

Court, Heriford.
Miss  E.  M.  Watts, 8  Eldon

Terrace, Woodhouse Lane,

Leeds.
Miss  D.  ^Vest.  92  Gough  Road,
Edghaston, Birmingham.


All  the  above  also  train
nupils  for  the  Incorporated
Society  of  Trained  Masseuses
Examination.


The  IN'ational  A.s.sooiaf ion  of
Trained  Mas.seuses  and  Ula.s-
seur.s,  Ltd.  (Grant's  Certifi-
cates and  Trains),  15  Picca-
dilly,  Manchester.

Mr. O. Fox and_  Mrs. M. Fox,

1  Thorncliffe  Grove,  C.  on  M.

Manchester,
^"he  Leeds  Training  College  of

Massage, 28 Portland

Crescent,  Leeds.


Uadiant  Heat  and  lAf^ht —  The

Dow.sing Radiant Heat Co.,
Ltd., 40 Vork Place  and
Bakf-r  .St., London, W.
.\aturopath> — The  Oldham
Hydr<j and Electro-Th(;ra-
peutic Establi.shment,
Regent  St., Mumps,  Oldham.
IleriiaiiNm — -The National As-
sociation of Medical Her-
balists of Great Britain,
Ltd.,  Hon.  Secretarv,  Chas.
Burden, 16  Bridge  St.,
Woi'cester. (Exam. only).
W.  Lingaid,  Pellon  Lane,
Halifax. (Coaches pupils
for  above. )
Chroniotherapy  —  Therapeutic
Institute, Kings Road,
Sedgley Park, Manchester.
Cliiropathy — Incorporated So-
ciety of Chiropodists, 1
Silver St.. Bloomsbury,
London, ^V.  C.


lAst of >Ia.s.seur.s and
>Iasseuses.

Belfast

Bishop,  Mrs.  Helen (Swedish),

225 Belmont Road.
Bond,  Miss, 11  Wellington

Place.
Brown.  E.  &  G.,  167  University

Road.
Hggers,  Hans (Swedish). 40

University  Road.
Moore,  Miss  F., 62 Great

Victoria St.
Munster, John R. (London

Certificate), Longhview

House,  Holywood.
Seymour,  Mrs., 105  Great

Victoria  St.
Witherow, Cunningham, 95

Great Victoria St.


Birmingham

Adams,  Miss  Ethel.  Gitsayne,
Southam Road, Hall Green.

Claudine,  Madai-ne  M..  Arcade
Chambers,  Corporation  St.

Dahlia,  Madame,  67  Hagley
Road.

Dakin, Mrs. Marion, 138-139
Steelhouse Lane.

Denman,  Mrs. Hilda, 56
Bishopsgate St.

Evans,  Mrs.  M.  A.,  1  Newhall
St.

Greenberg,  Miss  C,  76  Corn-
wall  St.

.Tenkvn-Brown,  'Mrs. T. A.,
45 Newhall St., (also Elec-
tro Radiant Heat and
Vapor Baths).

Lonie,  Miss  Priscilla,  (Facial),
24  Hamstead  Road,  Hands-
worth.

Pomeroy,  Mrs.,  Ltd.,  75  Nevr
Street.

Priestley, Mrs. Thomas,
Queen's College, Paradise
St.

Thomas. Miss  Revina, 218
Birchfield Road, Birchfield.

Walton.  Miss  Irene,  45  Ne-w-
hall  St.

Warburton,  Miss  B.,  33  Paign-
ton  Road.

William.s,  Miss  S.,  183  Broad
St.

Cardiff  (various)

^ynn  School  of  Physical  Cul-
ture, 6-7  St.  John's  Square.
Lane, Croydon, London, W.


1080


Geographical  Index


England,  Ireland
and  Scotland


Houg-hton. R., Electro-Hydro-
pathic, Edwards Terrace.

Montg-omery & Teague (Con-
sulting^ Herbalists), 42
Albany  Road.

Trimmell, Wm. (Medical
Botanist),  144  Richmond
Road.


Dublin

Despard,  Mi.ss  L.,  I^incoln
Chambers,  Lincoln  Place.
(Author  of  "Textbook  of
Massage":  "Handbook  of
Massag-e  for  Beg-inners.")

Keating,  William,  25  Lower
Mount  St.

Lindsburg, K. (Swedish
Medical Gymnastics), 23
Mespil Road.


Edinburgh

Absolon, Miss, 17  Ainslie
Place.

Boyd,  Wm.  Irvine  (Swedish).
9  Gillespie  Crescent.

Burnett,  Mrs.,  26  Spring-valley
Terrace.

Burb, Mrs., 18 Viewforth.

Dahlandcr,  Ake  E.,  10  Queens-
ferry St.

Carphin, Miss  S. A., 24
Northumberland St.

Christie,  Miss  C,  24  Shand-
wick  Place.

Dudgeon, Misses, 151 Brunts
field  Place.

Ericson,  Dick,  9  Alva  St.

Fletcher, Miss  D. B., 22
Mardaie Crescent.

Flodin, Ernst. M. G., 2
Palmerston Place.

Goold,  Miss,  35  Spottiswoode
St.

Henderson, Alex (also

Swedish Medical Gymnas-
tics), 15  Comely  Bank  Grove.

Hodgson, John W., 13 Hope
St., Leith W^alk.

Hogg,  Marg-aret  I...,  fi6  Falcon
Ave.  (also  Swedish  Medical
Gymnastics).

Hume, Frances,  25 Stafford
St.

Jensen, Engel, 2  London St.

Johnson,  John  M.,  15  London
St.

Johnston, Mrs., 68 North-
umberland St.

Kennedy,  Agnes  M., 22  Hill-
side  St.

I^auder, Miss, 142 Bi-untsfleld
Place.

Lorraine,  Miss, 18-a  Minto St

Macpherson, Nurse Rollo, 1
Admiral Terrace.

M'Graw, D. Sutherland, 11
Comely  Bank Road.

M'Kenzie,  John,  34  Cambridge
Ave.

Marston, Miss  Louisa, 127
Bruntsfleld Place.

Paynn,  Miss  Hilda, 22  New-
battle Terrace.

Peddie, Mrs., 17 Torphichen
St.

Pentland,  Miss  M.,  The  Cot-
tag-c, I.,averock Bank Road.

Spence, Wm., 7 Thirlstane
Road.

Watson,  Miss Alice (bv ap-
pointment  to the Royal In-
firmary),  5 Archibald Place.

White, Mrs., 18 Bruntsfield
Gardens.

White, Miss, 18  Bruntsfield
Gardens.


Young,  J. K., 50  Palmerston

Place.
Young-, Miss  J., 124 Laurlston

Place.


Glasffotv

Ambrose, R., 208 Paisley

Road.
Bale, Mrs. Henry (Ladies

only), 24 Newton St.,

Charing Cross.
Barnet, Mary  J., 10 Kerr  St.,

Pollokshiclds.
Boyd, Mrs., 2 Carlton Court,

off Bridge St.
College of Physical Training

and Medical Gymnastics, 15

Wilson St., Hillhead.
Ellis,  George  A. (Vibratory

and Electrical Massage,

Electrical Treatment, High

Frequency,  etc.),  187  Pitt

St.
Falconer, Annie W., 10 Ibrox

Terrace. Ibrox.
Gemmell, E.  J.  M., 2  Campbell

Drive, Queen's Park.
Gillespie. Bessie, 24 Gibson

St.. Hillhead.
Gregson,  J.  S.,  396  Sanchiehall

St.
Gripenwaldt, The  Hon Raoul

(also Swedish Gymnastics),

16 West  Cumberland St.
Huggins  &  Co.  (also  Vibratory

Massa.ge,  Electric  Sun  Baths

and Electrical Treatment),

68 Willington Arcade.
Kennedy, E. J., 19 Dundas

St.,  City.
King, Charles fP. S. Sc.

I^ondon), 21 Newton Place.
Leask, .lean (Ladies only), 4

Newton  St.
Lindebxirg, Victor (also

Swedish Gymnastics), 13

Elmbank St.
Macdonald,  J.  D., Jr., 15

Regent- Crescent.
McPherson, Archibald (also

Medical Herbalist), 12

Gari-isch Drive.
Nil.'!.«on, E. (G. D. from

TTniversity of  Lund,

Sweden), also  Mechano-

Therapy, 183 West  Regent

St.
Pinkerton, Bessie, 264 Max-
well Road.
Rea,  Mrs.  Greenbank  Place,

Old Cathcart.
Ross,  Mary, 151 West  Princes

St.
Schillberg, Torsten, 276 Bath

St. (Also Swedish Gymnas-
tic).
Scientific Treatments, Ltd., 22

India St., Charing Cross.
Steward,  James  C,  434

Victoria  Road.
Watson, Miss A. M., 14

Belmont  Gardens.


Ijiverpool

Archer, Thomas F., 97-a Vic-
toria Road, New Brighton,
Bii-kenhead.

Arnstein, Miss L., 23 Neville
Road, Waterloo.

Blomley, Mrs. A., 6 Upton
Road, Claughton, Birken-
head.

Brown. Andrew, 6 Hillcroft
Road, Seacombe.

Brown, Miss  M., 75 Balliot
Road,  Bootle.

Browne, Mrs. M., 83-a Bold
St., W.


Bull, Mrs. A., 88 Banks Road,

West  Kirbv.
Earle, Mrs. M., 71-a Bold St.,

W.
Elli.s, Miss  E., 30 Huskisson

St., S.
Emmett, Mrs. E., 16 Cardigan

Road, New Brighton,

Birkenhead.
Farrell,  ^Vm.  J., (also  Medical

Electrician), 182 Upper

Parliament St., S.
Firth,  Mrs. E., 10 Bridson St.,

S.
Golje,  Mrs. S., (Swedish  Exer-
cises and  Massage,  S.  D.

Stockholm), 127 Upper

Parliament St.
Golje, Sigurd, 2 Exchange

St., W.
Hall, Bruce, 7 Lyra  Road,

Waterloo.
Holland, Miss Rose, Blacklow

Cottage, Blacklow Brow,

Huyton.
Hunter,  Miss  A.,  27  Verulam

St., E.
Leslie. Miss  Marie, 31

Catherine St., S.
Lever,  Miss  F., 16  Jermyn  St ,

S.
Lillie,  Miss  E., 24 Shrewsbury

Road, Axton,  Birkenhead.
Lord, Charles, (Swedish), 86
McAllister,  Geo., Massage and

Electric Baths, 14 Lorne

Road, Axton, Birkenhead.
Mellander,  H.  G.,  and  Brogren,

N., 43 Castle  St., ^V.
Mills, Miss M., 3 Montpelier

Terrace, LTpper Parliament

St. S
Padley.  Arthur,  31  Scholar

St.,  E.
Papamosco, Miss A., 78 Hus-
kisson  St.. S.
Plutat, S. (Swedish Gymna.s-

tics and Massage), 4 Dale

St., and 41 Hamilton St.,

Birkenhead.
Prenton Road East, Higher

Tranmere, Birkenhead.
Roughley. Mrs. A.. ^4 Mersey

View, Blundell Sands.
Smart,  Miss  A.  J.,  23  Chestnut

Grove,  Higher  Tranniere,

Biikenhead.
Smith. Miss E.. (L. S. M.), 22

Ovolo  Road,  Old  Swan.
Wright, Miss F., 40  South

Road,  Waterloo.
Wynne, Val., 2 Egerton St.,

New  Brighton,  Birkenhead.

London

Biscoe,  Francis  Benj., 28  York
Place, Portman Squ., W.

Bizzanelli, C. David, 26 Lud-
gate Hill, E. C.

Boyd, Henry George, 5
Cheni.ston Gardens, Ken-
sington, W. (Also  Medical
Electric Light and Heat
Baths, High Frequency.)

Bryce-White, Miss Priscilla,
76  Fortress  Road,  N. W.

Campbell,  Miss  Theresa, 124
Great Portland St., W.

Clements, Miss Eileen and
Mathieu, Madame Marie, 56
Maddox St., W.

Cockren, Archibald, 146 Great
Portland St., W.

Collier, Madame Gertrude. 2
Park Mansions Arcade,
Knightsbridge, S. W.

Collier, Miss Kathleen, 415
Oxford St., W.

Cuckston, Mrs. Laura, 41
Compton  Road,  N.


F.ngland,  Ireland
<ind  Scotland


Geographical  Index


1081


Davis, James Paynter, 17

Hamilton  Gardens,  N.  W.
I  lencon, Richard John, 60

Blenheim Crescent, W.
Derbyshire, Miss E. Ann, 87

George  St.,  Portman  Square,

W.
Dodd, Wm. John. 195 Suther-
land  Ave., W.
Enimellne,  Madame  Blanche,

82 Reg-ent St., W.
Evans, Wyndham, 5 South-
wold Mansions, Wedley

Road, F.lffin Ave., W.
Proberg-,  Gustav  J.. Alexandra

Studio, Alfred Place,

Brompton, S. W.
Georg-e, Max, 6 Tjombard St.,

E. C.
Grahame, Miss Clare, 132

Great  Portland  St.,  W.
Hains, Miss E. May, 18 King

St.,  Portman  Square,  W.
Hale, Mrs. Creighton (Author

of  "The  Art  of  Massage), 73

Great Portland St., W.
Halle. Madame Adela, 30

Davis St., W.
Hodson, Miss Hester, 19

Baker St., W.
Johnson,  Miss  J.,  S  Hanover

St., W.
Joulain, Madame  Rosa, 5

Blenheim  St.,  New  Bond  St.,

W.
Krose, Baldwin, 24 South

Molton St.. W.
Leo, Miss Alice, 91-a

Mortimer St., W.
Lorimer, Miss G., 80 George

St.,  Portman  Square,  W.
McCulloch, Mrs. Marion, 140

Brompton Road, S. W.
Macnab, Miss  Pilne, 140

Brompton  Road,  S. W.
Maxim, Madame Sylvia, 14

Grafton St., New Bond St.,

W.
Moore,  Miss  Maud,  4  King  St.,

and 11 York St., St. James,

S.  W.
Mosey, Hessay, 7 Pond  St.,

Hempstead, N. W.
Parmenter, Harry, 8 Titch-

borne  St.,  Edgmore  Road,

"VV. (late instructor, Nat'l

Hospital).
Pateman, Sydney, 135

Alexandra  Road,  N. W.
Pavitt, Ernest  Lloyd, 31  West

End  Lane, N. "W^.
Perott,  Mrs. E. B., 10  Bell

Yard,  Temple  Bar,  W.  C.
Poulter. Thomas, 47 Hamilton

Gardens, St. John's  Wood,

N. W.
Rogers, Miss Irene, 65-66

Cihancery  Lane, W.  C
Ross, Madame I^., 147 Oxford

St., W.
Schopper,  .Tohann, 25 Fern-
head Road. AV.
Scott,  Mrs.  Emma, 110  Strand,

W. C.
Soltan, Harry B., 2 Harewood

Place, AV.
South, Miss Beryl, 152 Great

Portland  St., W.
Stacey, Robt., 5 Thayer St.,

W.
Street, P. Reginald. 38

Victoria St., S. W.
Surzur, Madm. Marianne, 38-

39 Piccadilly. W.
Swahv,  Miss  H.  Marv,  65

Conduit St., AV.
Taylor, Miss Sqrah, 22

Kempsford Gardens, S. W.
Terry, Miss B. K., 41 George

St.,  Portman  Square,  W.


Tvson. Miss Elsie, 9 South

Molton St., W.
V^ango, John J., 56 Talbot

Road, W.
Wall, W. Thomas, 62 Albany

St., N. AV.
Whitecross, Miss Amy, 26

Sackville  St.,  W.
Wiseman, Mrs. Mary. 1 York

St., St. James, S.  W.


Manchester

Allison, J.. Matlock  House,
Hyde Road.

Brown, G. Morrison, 60 King
St.. City.

Christiansen, Miss Tj.,
(Swedish), 13 Knoll St.,
Higher  Broughton.

Clayton,  Therese,  King  St.
Buildings. Ridgefleld.

Duffern,  Albert  B.,  67  Higher
Ardwick.

Duffern,  Thomas  G.,  20  Bruns-
wick St.,  Charlton-on-Med-
lock.

George. J. Henry. 744 Rock-
dale Road.

Gray,  Wm.  B., 30-31  Barton
Arcade, City.

Hartley,  Miss  E.,  463  Chester
Road,  Old  Trafford.

Hibbs,  Mrs.  Jessie. 45 Fitz-
warren  St., Seadley.

Howsom,  Miss  L.,  26  King  St.,
City.

Hunt, Miss M. R., 186

Plymouth Grove. Charlton
on Medlock.

Huxley,  Mrs.  M.,  36  Stockport
Road.

Jenkins,  Mrs.  J.,  12  Burlington
Road.

Laughton,  Montague,  108
Wilmslow  Road,  Rush-
holme.

Machin,  Mrs. E., 188 L^pper
Brook St., Charlton on
Medlock.

Manchester  College of  Mas-
sage.  Swedish Remedial
Exercises and Electricity.
Principal. Mrs. French. 15
Piccadilly.

Maynard.  Mrs.  C.  B.  &  L.  N.,
32 King St.. City.

Mitchell,  Miss  M..  21  Queen's
Road. West Didsbury.

Morton, Thomas. Electro-
Biologist, 112 Victoria
Buildings,  Victoria  Street.

Pattreiouex, .T. Allen, N. D.,
(also Medical Electricity,
Radiant Heat and I^ight,
Hydropathy,  Physculto-
pathy and Osteopathy),
Therapeutic Institute.
King's Road, Sedgley Park.

Scambler. Mrs.  M. J.. 15

Clarence Road, Withington.

Tavlor.  Harrv. 14  Cooke  St.,
Old Trafford.

Taylor,  Miss  M.  A.,  11  Lady-
barn Lane, Fallowfield.

Tompkins, Messrs. B.  &  R.,
(Also Radiant  Heat  and
Light.  Static  Electricity),  62
Nelson St., Charlton on
Medlock.

Walker. Miss W., 373-a
Oxford Road, Charlton on
Medlock.

Ward, Miss E., 48 Lower
Ormond St., Charlton on
Medlock.

Wood,  Miss  J.,  10  Plymouth
Grove,  Charlton  on  Medlock.


>Ie«lical Hcrl>uIi.<4tH

Botanic "School of Health,"

11 Scarisbrick St., South-
port.
Burchell, .7., 05 Garlington

Road, Bradford, Yorkshire.
Green, W., 329 High Holborn,

and 616 Bank Chambers,

London, W. C.
"Herbelix," 41  Margaret  St.,

London, W. I.
Homer,  John  H.,  16  Benzen-

nose St., Manchester.
Montgomery and Teague, 42

Albany Road.
Potter and Clarke, 60-64

Artillery Lane, London

(Supplies only.)
Trimmell,  Wm., 144  Richmond

Road.
Webb, W. H., 41 East  Bank

St., Southport.


Xew  Thought,  Health and

Vegetarian Perioilicals.

Magazines

"The Rally," Id Monthly, 40
Courtfleld  Gardens, Ken-
sington,  London, S. W.

"The  New  Thought  &  Psychic
Review,"  4d  Quarterly,  L.  N.
Fowler  &  Co.,  7  Imperial
Arcade, London, E. C.

"The Sufi," 6d Quarterly
(Organ of Sufi-ism), The
Sufi Publishing Society, 99
New  Bond  St.,  London,  W.

"Food" 2d "Weeklv. 154 Fleet
St., London. E. C.

"Vegetarian Messenger"

(Organ  of  the  parent  Vege-
tarian Society).  Id  Monthly,
25  7 Dennsgate, Manchester.

"The Vegetarian" (Organ of
the Vegetarian Federal
Union), Id Monthly. 34
Memorial Hall, Farrington
St., London, E. C.

"Herald of the Golden Age"
(Official Journal of the
Order  of  the  Golden  Age;
largely  Fruitarian), 3d
Quarterly, 153-55 Brompton
Road, London, S. "W.

"The Herald of Health"
(Official Organ of the
Wallace  System  of  Diet.
Abstention  from  yeast-
raised foods and mineral
salts principally.) Monthly.
Herald of Health office,
11  Southampton  Row,
London,  W.  C.

"The  Herb Doctor" (Organ  of
Medical  Herbalism),  Id
Monthly. W. H. Webb,
Southport.

"Good Health," Id  Monthly,
Stanborough  Park,  AVatford.
Herts.

"Health and Vim." 2d

Monthly, Health Promotion.
Ltd.. 19-23 Ludgate Hill,
London, E. C.

"Health Life," 3d Monthly,
C. W. Daniel, Ltd., 3 Tudor
St., London, E. C. 4.

"Physical Culture," 2d

Monthly, Bernarr  Macfad-
den  Publishing  Co.,  Ald-
wych, London, W. C. 2.

"Woman's Be-auty and
Health," 2d Monthly.
Bernarr  Macfadden  Publish-
ing Co..  Aldwych,  London.
W.  C. 2.


10812


(ieo(ir(iphic(d  Index


l-'iKiliiiiil .  IvcUinii
(111(1  ScDtldiid


Publishers of IleiiUli Ilttoks,
Nature  Cure AVorks,  o<o.

"Health and A'im" Book

Depot, 19-21 I.udgate Hill,

London,  E.  O.
Henry Camp & Co., 10-12 Ivy

Lane, Paternoster Row,

Ivondon, K.  C.
Wm. Rider & Sons, Ltd., 8-11

Paternoster  Row,  London,

E.  C.
L.  N.  Fowler  &  Co.,  7  Imperial

Arcade, I^iidg-ate Circus,

London. R. C.


C.  W.  Daniel,  Ltd.,  3  Amen

Corner,  I.iondon,  10.  C.
Scientific  I're.s.s,  Ltd.  (Massag'c,

etc.),  2S-29  Southampton  St.,

Strand, T.,ondon.
Balliere, Tindall & Cox, 8

Henrietta  St.,  Covent

Garden, London.
Healthy Life Book Shop, 41

Margaret  St.,  Oxford  Circus,

London, W.
Sanitary Publi.shing- Co., Tjtd..

8 Bream'.s Building's, Chan-

ccry  L;m<\.  London,  10.  C.


G.  Bell  &  Son.s, Ltd., Portugal
St., W.  C. 2.

Bernarr  Macf addon  Publisliing
Co., Ceneral Buildings,
Aldwych.  London,  W.  C.  2.

Good Health .Supplies, Caler-
ham, Surrey.

The  Vegetarian  Society,  257
Dennsgate,  Manchester.

W.  H.  Webb,  Southport
(Herbalism).

Potter & Clarke, f,0-r.4 Artil-
lery  Lane, I>ondon, E.
( ITnbali.sm).


^eetbeseCine^


The  road  to  Health  is  just  as  straight,  just
as  simple — and  just  as  narrow.  There's
only  one  road.  It's  called  "Ueliirn  to  Na-
ture." There  are  a  lot  of  by-paths,  such
as  Dietetics,  Water  Cure,  Physical  Cultuic,
Heligion,  Mental  Healing.  Perhaps  you'ie
still  in  the  woods.  I  was  for  a  while.  Now
I've  reached  the  goal  of  Perfect  Health.  I
can  look  back  and  see  where  I  lost  the  road
— and  found  it  again.  I  can't  help  wanting
you to come too.

Indeed  the  whole  system  of  Naturopathy
is  designed  to  help  you  get  your  bearings —
as  1  got  mine.  Then  proceed  triumphantly
to  the  topmost  pinnacle  of  the  success  you
were  born to  achieve.

Ten  cents  brings  you  enough  literature  to
get  a  glimpse  of  the  road  "Return  to  Na-
ture." It's  a  beautiful  prospect — all  the
wealth  of  the  world  before  you.  Won't  you
send  uo\\  ?  Because  every  minute  you're
groping,  you  but  wander  further  from  the
road.

liesides  you're  losing  a  lot  of  enjoyment.
I'or  Naturopathy  includes  foods  more  de-
licious— baths  more  refreshing — thoughts
moie  inspiring — hopes  more  satisfying —
than  you  ever  imagined  could  lead  to  Health.
So — Send  Now.

BENEDICT LUST, N. D.
Recreation  Home  and  Nature-Cure  In-
stitute  and Naturopathic College
BUTLER, N.  J.


Efficiency in Drugless Healing

By EDWARD EARLE PURINTON

A  new  book,  just  off  the  press,  by  EDWARD
EARLE  PURINTON.  Mr.  PURINTON  is  known
among  Drugless  Physicians  as  an  exponent  of  their
cause  who  is  fearless  in  his  criticisms.  He  has  the
happy  faculty  of  finding  the  weak  spots  in  the  armor.
He  shows  the  profession  the  exact  position  it  occu-
pies, points  out  the  faults  of  the  individual  practi;
tioner,  but,  unlike  the  ordinary  critic,  HE  GIVES
THE  REMEDY.  Mr.  Purinton  in  this  book  opens
the  way  to  success.  You  may  not  agree  with  all  he
says,  but,  after  reading  and  digesting  his  book,  you
will  have  to  acknowledge  that  he  has  made  you  think
— and  no  greater  thing  can  be  said  of  any  man.  He
will  not  only  make  you  think,  but  compel  you  to  act.
We  consider  this  book  the  greatest  help  to  the  es-
tablishment and  maintenance  of  a  successful  practice.

Price, postpaid, $1.50; cloth, $2.00.

Nature  Cure  Publishine  Co.,  110  E.  4lBt  St.,  New  York.


HEALTH INFORMATION DEPARTMENT

VVe  are  prepared  to  give  our  readers  upon
request  any  desired  information  regarding  pres-
ervation of  health  and  beauty.  Naturopathy,
sanitariums,  health  resorts,  literary  works,  veg-
etarianism, physicians,  masseurs,  masseuses,
nurses,  societies,  etc.,  as  well  as  every  other
topic  connected  with  Naturopathy.  Upon  re-
ceipt of  twenty-five  cents  in  postage  stamps,  to
cover  running  expenses,  postage,  etc.,  the  in-
formation will  be  given  by  return  mail.  Na-
turopathic advice  for  home  treatment  regard-
ing cures  of  maladies  will  be  rendered  upon
receipt  of  $1  in  stamps  or  money  order.

NATUROPATHIC  EXCHANGE
YUNQBORN,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


11


=11


Get  the  new  book


«^,w UNFIRED
RAW FOOD

FOOD


THE  TRUE

NATURAL

DIET


B.  LUST,  N.D.
BUTLER.  N.J,


by  Drews,  and  learn  how
to  pi-epare  complete
meals,  including  soup
and  bread,  entirely  with-
out cooking.  Contains
recipes  for  wonderful  va-
riety of  pleasing,  nourish-
ing and  siu'culent  foods.
8ti(>  recipes  for  drinks,
soups,  salads,  brawn-
foods,  cakes,  pies  and
confections,  all  prepared
without  the  use  of  fire
from  natui'al  foods.
Contains  also  useful  ta-
bles of  food  values  and  a
valuable  and  learned
treatise  on  TROPHO-
THERAPY  (Natural  Food
Cure),  showing  just  what
foods  to  use  for  the  pre-
vention and  cure  of  va-
I'ious  <liscases.
Just  the  hook  you  haiie
been  looking  for  if  i/ou
are  interested  in  the  Haw
rood  Diet.

BY  MAIL,  $3.20


S


Chiroprarlors


Profcssioudl  /{('f/islcr


1083


GENERAL  DIRECTORY

OF

DRUGLESS  PHYSICIANS

ARRANGED

ACCORDING  TO  PROFESSIONS

THE  pages  of  history  are  covered  with  records  of  man's  efforts  to  combat
disease. Method after  method, system  upon  system  has  been  devised  to
meet  the  demands  of  its  age. Some have fallen by the v^^ayside, while
others,  possessing  more  merit,  have  been  handed  down  from  generation  to  gen-
eration. In recent years, mechanical  systems  of  treatment  have  been  devel-
oped to  a  high  degree  of  perfection.

Today,  with  the  revival  of  all  the  older  methods  of  natural  healing  and  the
development  of  many  new  ones,  a  great  number  of  distinctive  professions  has
been  created.

In  the  lists  following,  all  the  drugless  physicians  have  been  classified,  and,
accordingly,  placed  under  the  headings  of  their  respective  systems  of  practice.


CHIROPRACTORS

Aaders, H. J., Moody Blk.,

Long- Beach, Cal.
Abbott, Geo. B., 712 Union

Oil Bldg-., Los Ang-eles, Cal.
Abbott, Guy, Williamston,

Mich.
Abbott, Leo, Williamston,

Mich.
Abdill, J. D., 7092 S. Chicag-o

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Abell, W. T., Cardinal Block,

W.  S.  W. Square,  Monroe,

Wis.
Abernathy, Geo. H., 411-a

Hancock St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Abrams, Harry, fiOS Andrews

Bldg., Cincinnati, O. (D.C.)
Adair, Rosella, 2G N. Monroe

St., Titusville, Pa.
Adam, I. M., 313 Church St.,

San Francisco, Cal.
Adams, C, 33 Louis Block,

Dayton, O.
Adams, ('has. E., 220 S.

State St., Chicago, 111.
Adams, C. T., Room 4, Foley

Hotel,  Great Falls. Mont.
Adams, Dora E., 348 Frank-
lin  St., Bloomfield, N. J.
Adams,  E.  P., 15  Williams  St.,

Hammond, Ind.
Adams, Flora M., Galliton,
■ Mo.
-Vdams, P^lorence, Cherokee,

Kans.
Adams, J. A., 807 State St.,

Statesville,  N. C.
Adams, Mrs., 1348 Madison

St., Denver, Colo.
Adams, Margaret, 13 Bank

St., Ashtabula, O.
Adams, Margaret C, Sterling,

Mich.
Adams, R. M., Davenport, la.
Adams, W. I., McKees Rocks,

Pa.
Adlon, L. K., 404 E. 5th St.,

Des Moines, la.
Adlon, L. K., c/o Abbott

Hospital, Oskaloosa, la.


Aerni,  Clara  R.,  Telegram
Bldg., Columbus, Nebr.

Ake,  Marion,  22  W.  7th  St.,
Oklahoma City, Okla.

Albert  &  Albert,  426  S.  Sth
St., Terre Haute, Ind.

Albert  &  Albert,  11.5  Towle
Ave., Mishawaka, Ind.

Alberts, Cora F., Nevada, O.

Alberts.  Mabelle  V.,  1104  N.
Harrison St., Davenport, la.

Albertson,  B.  E.,  Room  20,
Polk  Co.  State  Bank  Bldg.,
Crookston, Minn.

Albertson,  B.  E.,  Santa  Bar-
bara, Cal.

Albright, A. T.,  .Jackson,  Minn.

Albright,  A.  T.,  110  S.  4th  St.,
Lyons, la.

Albertson, B. C, 217 San
; Marcos Bldg., Santa Bar-
bara, Cal.

Alcott, E. D., Plainfleld, N.  J.

Aldoretta,  Henry  W.,  82  Mon-
roe  St., Hoboken, N. J.

Alexson,  A.  W.,  Granite  Falls,
Minn.

Allcutt,  E.  Burton,  Truell
Court,  Plainfleld,  N.  J.,  and
1  Madison  Ave.,  New  York,
N. Y.

Allen  &  Allen,  Boone  Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Boone, la.

Allen & Allen, Mesa, Ariz.

Allen,  M.  Alice,  366  E.  47th
St., Chicago, 111.

Allen,  A.  L.,  205  Summit  Ave.,
Hoboken,  N.  J.

Allen, B. J.,  McPherson, Kans.

Allen, Edgar, Lowell, Mich.

Allen, Marie Elise, 3511 30th
St. N. W., Washington,
D. C.

Allen,  Mrs.  E.  E.,  1017  S.  36th
St., Omaha, Neb.

Allen, Edna  M., Lowell, Mich.

Allen,  Francis  W.,  3G7  10th
Ave., Paterson, N. J.

Allen,  Geo.  B.,  Caesar  Misch
Bldg., Providence, R. I.

Allen, L. G., Ritzville, \Vash.


Allen,  L.  P.,  312  Security
Bldg., Dubuque, la.

Allen, I^. P., Independence, la.

Allen,  S.,  244  N.  Athenia  St.,
Wichita, Kans.

Allen,  S.  E.,  Jr.,  282  Lawrence
St., Paterson, N.  J.

Allison  &  Allison,  300  Tusca-
rawas St., Canton, O.

Allison,  Ethel  P.,  Pratt,  Kans.

Allison,  G.  C,  330  Tuscarawas
St., Canton, O.

Allison,  Miss  M.  Lila,  1328  N.
I>a Salle St., Chicago. 111.

Altenbern,  A.  W.,  711  Locust
St.. Galesburg, 111.

Anient,  Lena  D.,  Ypsilanti,
Mich.

Amerige,  Dr.  C.  W.,  212  Hun-
tington Ave., Boston, Mass.

Amos,  Jno.  H.,  Boonville,  Ark.

Amsbaugh.  A.  S.,  1202-4  S.
Main St., Goshen, Ind.

Amspoker,  S.  D..  Cutler  Bldg..
New Haven, Conn.

Amspoker,  S.  D.,  5  Grand
Opera  House,  Michigan
City, Ind.

Anderburg,  L.  N..  1302  11th
St.,  Modesto,  Cal.

Anderson  &  Anderson,  Olivia,
Minn.

Anderson  &  Anderson, Park
City, Utah.

Andeison  &  Anderson,  Ster-
ling, Kans.

Anderson, A., Trinidad, Colo.

Anderson.  C.  A.,  P.  O.  Box
261, Mt. Vernon, la.

Anderson,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  721
Penn Ave., Des Moines, la.

Anderson,  Carl  A.,  1619  High
St., Des Moines. la.

Anderson,  Clara  H.,  Stanton,
la.

Anderson,  Clara  H.,  Gothen-
burg,  Nebr.

Anderson, Darl. Andover, O.

Anderson,  E.,  Box  623,  Canby,
Minn.

Anderson, E. L., Lennox,
S. Dakota.


1084


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Andprson, K. ^\., i^ux 113,

3rd St., Tracy, Minn.
Anderson, O. F., 412  Main St..

Oregon City, Ore.
Ander.<?on, J. M., Ayr,  Ontario,

Canada.
Anderson, J. W., AVheaton,

Minn.
Anderson, Susie M., Prescott,

la.

Mrs. W. E., 619
Ave., Trinidad,


AV. U, Bridge-


Anderson,

Arizona

Colo.
Anderson,

water, la.
Anderson, W. L., Iroquois,

S.  D.
Andres. Geo., 410 W. 4th St.,

Oklalioma City, Okla.
Andrews,  C.  L., 36  E. 23rd  St.,

New  York, N. Y.
Andrews, D. C, Mobile, Ala.
Andrews, Emma. 712 Locust

St.. Pasadena, Cal.
Andrews, H. L., 701 Atlanta

Trust Co.. Atlanta Ga.
Andrus, C. L.. 4 Madison

St., Cortland. N. Y.
Andrus.  C.  T...  147  W. 23rd  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Andrus,  Rachel  B.,  Pawhuska,

Okla.
Andruss, Flora, 136 4th Ave.,

St. Petersburg-, Fla.
Anger, Arthur, 42 Manhattan

Bldg., Fergus Falls, Minn.
Ankers, F. L., 2019 S. Grand

Ave.. Los Angeles, Cal.
Anlepp,  N.  C.  c/o  W.  J.  Lamp

Brewing Co., St. Louis, Mo.
Anne, Magdalene, 3415 N.

Tripp Ave., Chicago, 111.
Annis. J. Bruce, I. O. O. F.

Bldg., Huron, S. Dakota.
Anstrom. B. R., Ceoswell,

Mich.
Anthony, G. M., Manchester,

O.
Anthony, Gertrude M., Boone

Nafl Bank Bldg., Boone,

la.
Antwerp.  Elizabeth,  St.  John's

Bldg., Rocky Ford, Colo.
Antwerp,  H.  S.  van,  St.  John's

Bldg., Rocky Ford, Colo.
Apple, Dr. C. E., Otis Bldg.,

IGth and San.som Sts.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Applegate, C. F., 9 E. State

St.. Trenton, N. J.
Aptekman, H., 673 Jefferson

St., Gary, Ind.
Arbuthnot, R. Elsie, 334 N.

Maryland Ave., Glendale,

Cal
Archiisald, Alice, 818 E. 21st

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Ardouin, Ernest J., 59 Van

Duzer St., Tompkinsville,

N. Y.
Arisman, G. W., 401 Mathews

Bldg., Milwaukee,  Wis.
Armond,  R.  E.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Armstrong, Cleveland, Okla.
Armstrong  &  Armstrong, 600-

601 Greer  Bldg.,  New  Castle,

Pa.
Armstrong. F. H., Lock Box

55. Woodburn, Ore.
Armstrong, Dr.  G.  A., and

Bullock. R. N., 6 Lafayette

St., Albany, N. Y.
Armstrong", G. H., Over Pio-
neer Drug Store, Evans-

ville.  Wis.
Armstrong, Mrs. Georgia,

Toronto, Ont., Canada.


Armstrong. I. M.. 165 Lynn

St.. Seattle. Wash.
Armstrong. J. D., 600-1 Greer

Bldg.. New Castle. Pa.
Armstrong, J. D., N. Mill St.,

New Castle, Pa.
Armstrong, J. T., Davenport,

la.
Arm.'^trong, .T. Telford. 4-5

Wilson Bldg., Brighton

Ave.. Rochester. Pa.
Armstrong, Sarah,  N.  Mill St..

New Castle, Pa.
Arnott, Ella A., Manchester,

Mich.
Arnold,  Alma  C,  9  W.  67th  St..

New York, N. Y.
Arnold, Alma C 2025 B'way,

New  York.  N. Y.
Arnold, D. J., Eldora, la.
Artelt, Fred., 240 S. Grand

Ave., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Asay, Lillian, 117 N. 27th St.,

Camden, N. .1.
Asay, R. S., 117 N. 27th St.,

Camden. N. J.
Ash  &  Ash,  Monroe  and  Divi-
sion Sts., Grand Rapids,

Mich.
Ash,  C.  E.,  476  Glenwood  Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Ash. Geo.. 214 Main St., Or-

pheum Bldg., New York,

N. Y.
Ash, Wayne E., 118  Fulton

St.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
Ashford, J. A., 1674 Gratiot

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Ashley, E. M., Mendota, 111.
Ashmore, Margaret, Clinton,

la.
Ashton,  Major,  Cass  St.,  Rose-
berry, Ore.
Ashworth. S. L., 560 Frater-

riity Bldg., Lincoln, Nebr.
Ashworth, Sylvia, 401 S. 14th

St., Lincoln, Nebr.
Askenberg, Mrs. G., 189 Main

Ave., Passaic, N. J.
Askew, Horace, 251 Wash-
ington St., Greencastle,

Ind.
Asplin,  A. M., Hastings,  Minn.
Atherton,  Bessie,  510-11

Wheelock Bldg., Peoria, 111.
Atherton, Carrie, Twin Falls,

Idaho.
Atherton. Frederic, 101 Tre-

mont St., Boston, Mass.
Atherton, W. R., Twin Falls,

Idaho.
Atkins,  J.  D.,  Exchange  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Atkinson, Dr., 2393 Mission

St.. San Francisco, Cal.
Atkinson, Orrin, Hutchinson.

Kans.
Auberry, Emma,  Broken  Bow,

Nebr.
Auberry, Emma, Weeping

Water, Nebr.


Practitioners  are  requested  to  in-
form the  publisher  of  probable
discrepancies  found  herein,  or  of
chanqc  of  address  in  the  course
of  printing.  Hectification  will
be made in subsequent issues


Aufderheide, W^m., 806J I St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
August. Dr. H. W., 86 Hutton

St., Jersey City, N. J.
Aulepp, W. C, c/o W. J.

Lamp Brewing Co., St.

Louis, Mo.
Ausbrooks, W. P., 1, 2 & 7

Lewin  Bldg.,  Live  Oak. Fla.
Austin, J. W., Porter Bldg..

San .lose, Cal.
Axtell,  S.  W.,  St.  Regis  Hotel,

Winnipeg, Man., Canada.
Aye. Anna H., Box 554, Loup

City, Nebr.
Ayres, S. H., Curryville, Mo.
Ayres, S. H.. 233 Blondeau

St.. Keokuk. la.
Babb. H. J.. 2125 N. 18th St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Babcook, R. O.. Buffalo St..

Warsaw, N. Y.
Babcock, W. P., Longmont,

Colo.
Bachman, Dr. M. E., 411

Hippes Bldg., Des Moines.

la.
Bachman, O. K., Genoa. Nebr.
Bachman, O. K., Plattsmouth,

Nebr.
Backer,  V.  L.,  410  S.  6th  St.,

Springfield, 111.
Bacon, Jeanette, Phoenix,

Ariz.
Badders, J. O., 236 S. Ashland

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Bahlke, A. A., Flat No. 1,

Spriggs  Bldg.,  Grand  Forks,

N. Dakota.
Bahlke & Bahlke, Grand

Forks, N. D.
Bahlke, N. G., Flat No. 1,

Spriggs  Bldg.,  Grand  Forks,

N. Dakota.
Bahringer,  S.  E.,  Sherrard,  111.
Bailey, Edw. P., c/o Bimini

Baths, IjOS Angeles. Cal.
Bailey. F. T., 178 B St., Salt

Lake Citv. Utah.
Bailiff. J. O., 4803 Madison

St., Chicago. 111.
Bailor,  Blanche,  Geneva,  Nebr.
Bair, Fred. E., Fostoria, O.
Bair, P. E.. 224 Ash Ave..

Findlay. O.
Bair, Roy R., 214  J S. Main

St.. Findlay, O.
Baird. G. R., 421 College St..

Toronto, Ont., Canada.
Baird, R. W., 12 Vine St..

Sharon. Pa.
Baker, Emma, Ellwood City,

Pa.
Baker. E. H., 29 E. Madison

St., Chicago, 111.
Baker.  Geo.  W.,  101 S.  Frank-
lin St., Greenville, Mich.
Baker,  Georgiana, River

Falls, Wis.
Baker, Georgiana, Elwood

City, Pa.
Baker, John W.. 282 Leroy

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Baker. N. E., 832 Ohio St.,

Wichita. Kans.
Baker & Wiehn. 5716 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland. O.
Baker, Mrs. Ruth E., 321?

Hvde Park, Cleveland

Heights, O.
Baker & Baker, Carrollton,

Greene Co., 111.
Baldwin, F. Guy, Main and

Chopin Sts., Canandaigua,

N. Y.
Baldwin, Fred., Antigo, Wis.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1085


Baldwin, J. R.. Butler, Pa.
Bale, E. "W., 8 Victoria Ave.,

South  Hamilton,  Ont.,  Can.
Ball, Wm. A., 319 German

Bank Bldg-., Wheeling-, W.

Virginia.
Ball,  Walter  T.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Ballard, A. E., 139 Main St.,

Herkimer, N. Y.
Ballman, Meta, Davenport,  la.
Balmer, Fred. B., 7853 Car-
penter  St., Chicago, 111.
Balow, A. H., 412i Pine St..

Michigan City, Ind.
Balser & Balser, 15 S. Euclid

Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
Balzer & Balzer, 467 N. Fair

Oak Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
Bandurant, L. G., Vandalia,

Mo.
Banks, McLeod M., 114 North

Nebraska  St.,  Marion,  Ind.
Banta,  S.  S.,  Winchester,  Ind.
Banzhof, W. C, 1554 Haddow

Ave., Caniden, N. J.
Barber, Andrew, Lansing,

Mich.
Barber, B., Wolseley, Sask.,

Barber, Ed., 201 Park Bldg..

Detroit, Mich.
Barber, Morton, Carthage,

Ind.
Barbera, Anthony, 120 8th

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Barberick, Henry F., 522 W.

Chickasaw Ave., Oklahoma

City, Okla.
Barbier,  E.  A.,  201  Park  Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich.
Barco, Viola, 15 Owens Bldg..

Independence, Mo.
Bark, B. A., 344 E. llfith St..

Chicago, 111.
Barkalow, Bertrand S., Bo^

519, Canisteo,  N. J.
Barker,  B. F.,  Henderson, Ky.
Barklie,  R.  C,  Cor.  Maple  and

Talbot  Sts., London,  Canada
Barlow, Daisy D., 26 Town-
send St., Walton, N. Y.
Barlow, Geo. Grant, Neenah,

Wis.
Barnes, A. B., Byron, Mich.
Barnes, C.  A.,  Galesburg  Nat''

Bank Bldg., Galesburg, 111
Barnes, F. F., Couer d'Alene,

Idaho.
Barnes, Henrv M., 520 Court

St.,  Sault  Ste.  Marie.  Mich.
Barnett, E. M., 11 Park  Ave..

Meadville, Pa.
Barnett, J. A., Oskaloosa, la.
Barnett, J. W., American

Mechanics Bldg., Trenton,

N. J.
Barnhart, Dr., Salvin Bldg.,

e/o  Dr. Campbell,  Pasadena,

Cal
Barnhart, Flora, 431| North

Main St.. Delphos, O.
Barnhart.  Flora.  78  Davenport

St.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Barrett. Michael, .187 Plain-
field Ave., Grand Rapids.

Mich.
Bartel, Fred W., 1412 North

Ave., Milwaukee. Wis.
Bartell,  P.  W.,  Middletown, O.
Barth, Jos., 318 5th Ave.,

Pittsburg. Pa.
Barthol,  Ernest,  Stamford  anr"

S. Norwalk Sts., Stamforcl.
Conn.
Bartholomew, 6221 S. Hal-

sted  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Bartholomew, P.  H., 708 Day-
ton Ave., Wichita, Kans.


Baitholomew,  If.  H.,  301  E.
Park  Ave.,  Oklahoma  City,
Okla.

Bartholomew,  W.  C,  128  W.
12th St., New York, N. Y.

Baitlett,  Clarence  E.,  Clarion,
Pa.

Bartram  &  Doutt,  Westing-
house  Bldg.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.

Bartsch,  Walter  F.,  Water-
town,  Minn.

Bash,  Nolin  A.,  201-2  Mc-
Cormick  Bldg.,  Bowling
Green, Ky.

Bassett,  Lina,  Peever,  South
Dakota.

Bateman  &  Bateman,  I.  O.  O.
F. Bldg., Guttenberg, la.

Bateman, C. E., Elkport, la.

Bateman,  Joseph  S.,  Hazleton,
Pa.

Bates,  Albert,  Montevideo,
Minn.

Bates,  Estelle  P.,  Over  Nafl
Bank,  Lake  Preston,  South
Dakota.

Bates, Sarah, Modesto, Cal.

Bates,  Z.  C,  Grand  Rapids,
Mich.

Battendorf,  M.  N.,  259|  Chest-
nut  St., Abilene, Tex.

Battendorf,  Mrs.  N.  H.,  259;/
Chestnut St., Abilene, Tex.

Bauer, C. W., Lexington, Kv.

Bauer,  G.  A.,  Rooms  335-7,
McClelland  Bldg.,  Lexing-
ton, Ky.

Bauer, Geo.  A., 707-8 Union
Nat'L.  Bank  Bldg., Columbia,
S.  C.

Baumann,  Geo.,  323  Citizens'
Bank  Bldg.,  Aberdeen,  S.
Dakota.

Baumann, Geo., P. O. Box 62,
Lethbridge, Alb., Canada.
J. A.


Baumgardner,

City, Nebr.
Baumgardner,

Mich.
Baumgardner,

Gilbert Ave
Baumgart, C.

St., Milton


J. A.


Nebraska
Manistee,


Jos. A., 2529
Cincinnati, O.
H., 1093 26th
Junction, Wis.
Baumgart,  C.  H.,  1093  26th  St.

Milwaukee, Wis.
Baumler, Charles, 15 E. 15th

St., Paterson,  N. J.
Baxter, A. F., Cheney, Kans.
Bayless, B. M., 832 Oakwood

Ave., Toledo, O.
Bayne. Daisy, Harper. Kans
Baynes, William B., 1515
Madison Ave., Covington,

Ky.

Bays, Alb. J., Indiana Bldg.,
Oklahoma City, Okla.

Bazeau, Frank, The Dells,
Ore.

Beaman, K. AV., 1437 "W. 35th
Place, Los Angeles. Cal.

Bean,  Albert  C,  Le  Claire, la.

Bean, C. D., 216 College St.,
Akron. O.

Bean, Clarence. 9321  Market
St.,  Akron,  O.

Bean. Merwin S., Marquette,
Mich.

Beath, T., Victoria Hospital,
Winnipeg, Man.. Canada.

Beatty, Blanche E., 875 Colo-
nial Road, Elizabeth, N. J.

Beatty,  Mary  E.,  Luray,  Kans.

Beatty, Mary, Lindsey, Okla.

Beaulieu, J. A., 34 Commer-
cial Bldg., AVoonsocket,
R. I.


Beauv<-rd, A. A., 2  7 1' Si. N.

W., Washington, D. C.
Beaver,  Mrs.  E.,  Anamosa,  la.
Beaver, Mrs. E., 1220 Main

St., Davenport, la.
Beaver, W. O., 409 Mas.sachu-

setts Ave., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Bebout, E. R., New Bethle-
hem, Pa.
Bebout, E. R., People's Bank

Bldg., Waynesburg, Pa.
Becherke, F. H., 506 N. Main

St., Fremont, Nebr.
Beck, Claude G., 205-7 Nafl

Safety  Vault  Bldg.,  Denver,

Colo.
Beck, Duvalo, 4711 E. King

St., Hamilton, Ont., Canada.
Beck, E. P., 1622 N. Califor-
nia Ave., Chicago, 111.
Beck, I. E.,  Fortville, Ind.
Beck, May, Perry, la.
Beck, May, Seattle, Wash.
Beck, May, 404 S. Van Buren

St., Auburn, Ind.
Beck, M. Anna, 110 Home

Ave., Oak Park, Chicago,

111.
Becker. Chas. F., 82 Main St.

W., Rochester, N. Y.
Becker, Geo., Cochrane, Wis.
Becker,  Gustave, 5  N.  LaSalle

St., Chicago, 111.
Becker, Jackson H., 29 Pine

Grove Ave., Summit, N. .1.
Becker, Juilius, 88 N. Bonnie

Brae Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
Becker, Ray D., 216 E. King

St., Lancaster, Pa.
Becker, Ray  D., Oakland, Md.
Becker, Mrs. V. L., 412 6th

St., Springfield, 111.
Becket, Julius, 88 N. Bonnie

St., Pasadena Cal.
Becklar. B. J., 153 Madison

St., Chicago, 111.
Beecher, W. H. W., 1548 3rd

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Beek, Mrs. M. H., 404 Van

Buren St., Auburn, Ind.
Beeman, Alice, Milton Cen-
ter, O.
Beers, C. S., 73 Spring St.,

New Haven, Conn.
Begell, S. E., 771 Main St.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Beggs, Jas. H., 102  6 "W. 36th

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Beigh, T. R., 920  Slater  Bldg..

Worcester, Mass.
Beld, A. J., 1518 Roosevelt

Ave., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Beldon, C. B., 1232 Main St..

Racine, Wis.
Belinske, Adolph, 920 "VVash-

ington St.. Manitowoc, "V^'^is.
Belitz, A., Monroe, Utah.
Belknap, H. L., 813 Wood St.,

AVilkinsburg. Pa.
Bell, Albert, Woodward

Bldg., Washington, D. C.
Bell, C. E., Warsaw, 111.
Bell, C. E., General Delivery,

Smithfield, O.
Bell,  Custer,  Smithfield,  O.
Bell, Ella R.. 1415 O'Farrell

St., San Francisco, Cal.
Bell, Mrs. Jane M., 1308 W.

3rd St., "U^aterloo. la.
Bell, INIarie, 200 McLennan

Ave.. Svracuse. N. Y.
Bell, R. G., Sapulpa. Okla.
Bell, Tom, Smith Blk., Hart-
ford City, Ind.
Bell, W. J., 792 15th St..
Vancouver, B. C, Canada.


1086


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Belle, Josephine. 31 S. 40th  t
St., Philadelphia, Pa.  J

Bellingham, T. W., Bang-or,

Mich.
Belmont,  .T. .T., 318  First  Nafl
Bank  Bldgr., Syracuse, N. Y.
Belt. W. E., Dodge Center,  |
Minn.  I

Belton,  Clarence  C,  484  Broad

St.,  Newark, N. .T.
Belton. Clarence. Peapack,

N.  .1.
Bemis, Frank E.. St. Albans,

Vt.
Bencke.  Harry  C.  1334  Throop

St., Chicag-o, 111.  j

Bender, M. F., 10,308 Euclid  j

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Benham, L. O., Odd Fellows
Bldg:., 36 N. Main St.,  |
Waterbury. Conn.  j

Benjamin, W. B., 137 Main
St., Barlow Blk., Ossining-,
X. Y.
Benjamin, W. Bert, 21 W.  :

129th  St.. New York, N.Y.
Bennett, I. O., Blanchester, O.
Bensly, Evold, Prospect, O.
Benson, O. S., Memphis, Mo.
Benson, Richard C, Room
.')04. Colt Bldg-., Pater.son,
N.  J.
Benson, "\Vm. S., 76 16th  Ave.,

Newark, N. j.
Bentley, Wm. A., 3493 Eagle

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Berg, E. C, Winona, Minn.
Berg, W. G., 654 Temple
Court, Minneapolis, Minn.
P.erge, Emil C, Arcadia', Wis.
Berge. H. A., Carrington,

N. Dakota.
Bergen, J. A., 1708 Warren

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Bergen,  Jacob  A.,  704  South
Central  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Bergener,  Orza,  Decatur,  Ind.
Berger,  P.  O.,  Waukegan,  111.
Bergstrom,  Harry  S.,  1101
State  St.,  Schenectady,  N.  Y.
Bernard, Emma, 146 W. 105th

St.. New York, N. Y.
Bernhart, Flora, Bedford,

Mich.
Berrang. H. P.. 700 E St.
S.  E.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Berscheid, F. C. 8  Illinois  St.,
Chicago Heights, Chicago,
111.
Berti,  W.  J.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Berton, J.  A., llOi Dewey  St.,

Sapulpa, Okla.
Bertrand, L. D., 12 Blumerich
Ave., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Bertrand, L. D., Bird Bldg.,

Mansfield. O.
Bertson, C. S.. 1115 Legonier

St., I>atrobe, I'a.
Bessei-dich, K. J., Enterprise

Bldg., Kewanee, Wis.
Bessey, Mable M., 108 Beat-
rice  St., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Best, R.  C, Ingersoll, Ont.,

Can.
Bethge. H. E., c/o Tremont

Hotel,  Indianapolis,  Ind.
Bettner,  Fred.,  Page,  N.  D.
Betts. Edna, Security Bldg.,

Miami, Fla.
Betts,  F.  L., 203  German  Nafl
Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Beuchler, J. R., 154 W. 121st

St., New York, N. Y.
Beuchler, J. R., 1132 13th St.
N. W., Washington, D. C.


Bever, \V'. O., 400 Mas.sachu-

setts Ave., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Bezler, Guy, Steedman, Mo.
Bezler, Guy, Wymore, Nebr.
Bibler, .John J., 906 State

I..ife Bldg., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Bibler, Mabel Foster, 906

State lAfe Bldg., Indiana-
polis. Ind.
Bickelhaupt, G. E., Freeport,

111.
Bickle, Isabella, 270 King St..

Hamilton, Ont., Canada.
Bickmeyer, O. F., Meteor,

Wis.
Bickmeyer, O. P., Colorado

Springs, Colo.
Biddison, T., 1016 2nd St.,

Perry, la.
Bidwell, Hudson, 2194 7th

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Biehl, J. R., 294 Medbury

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Bigelow, Frances, Elkhart,

Ind.
Bigelow.  Mary  F..  401  N.  Main

St., Elkhart, Ind.
Biggs, W.  A., Baker. Ore.
Bilby, Ray, Skidmore, Mo.
Billet, Mary I., 477 Main St.,

Orange, N. J.
Billingham & Billingham, 20

Creighton Bldg., Omaha,

Nebr.
Billingham, Alice, 1103 Nott

St.,  Schenectady,  N.  Y.
Billingham, Samuel, 20..

Creighton Bldg., Omaha,

Nebr.
Billings, Mrs. Annie W., 510

Linz Bldg., Dallas, Tex.
Billings,  C.  W.,  303  Linz  Bldg.,

Dallas, Tex.
Billings, C. W., 510 Linz

Bldg., Dallas, Tex.
Billings, C. W., Plainview,

Tex.
Bimis, Frank E., 169 North

Main St., St. Albans, Vt.
Binck. C. E., 130 E. Pearl St.,

Burlington, N. J.
Bingesser, C, c/o Sanitarium,

Waconda Springs, Kans.
Bings, Miss  J. O., Baker  City,

Ore.
Binn,  H.  G.,  St.  Charles,  Minn.
Birbeek, A. F., Sta. 2, North

Side, Liverpool, O.
Bird, C. J., 306 W. 12th St.,

Anderson, Ind.
Bird, J. F., 181 Summer Ave.,

Newark, N. ,1.
Birdi, F. C, c/o Sahler Insti-
tute, Kingston,  N. Y.
Birdsall & Birdsall, Creston,

la.
Bishop, Edward, 34 Wash-
ington Ave., Endicott. N.  Y.
Bishop,  .7.  A.,  Box  55,  Pawnee,

Okla.
Bishop, .R. B., 509 Splittog

Ave., Kansas City, Kans.
Bishop,  S.  B., 2101  Capitol

St. W., Jackson,  Miss.
Bjorneby, A. G., 426 Main St.,

Peoria, 111.
Black A. B., 309^ Broadway,

Paducah, Ky.
Black, Byron L., Macon, Mo.
Black, Clarence H., Warrens-
burg, Mo.
Black, F. A., 702^ Indiana
Ave., Wichita  Falls, Tex.
Black, Fred. H.. 327 Strat-
ford Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.


Black,  John  J., 41  N. 18th St.,

Newark, N. J.
Black, L. M., Clinton, Mo.
Blackman,  A.  C,  Miami,  Okla.
Blackman, E. A., Valley Co.,

301 4th Ave. S., Glasgow,
Mont.
Blackmer, L. E., 260 Wash-
ington St., Binghamton,

N. Y.
Blackmer, Mildred W., 260

Washington St., Bingham-
ton, N. Y.
Blackmore, Walter W.,

R. 2, Grover Hill. O.
Blackwell. George  A., 8  Black

Bldg., Regina, Sask., Can.
Blain, H., Cor. Front and

Scott Sts., Toronto, Ont.,

Canada.
Blair, Francis W., 191 Main

St., Hackensack, N. J.
Blair, F. W., 1123 Broadway,

New  York. N. Y.
Blair, Jerusha A., Kingston,

Ont.,  Can.
Blair, Jno., 31 Eppritt St.,

East Orange, N. J.
Blair,  L.  L.,  Findlay,  O.
Blake, Edw. L., Marinette,

Wis.
Blake,  W.  O., 202 E.  Main  St.,

Ottumwa, la.
Blakeley, C. M., 339 5th Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Blakesley, E. A., Box 673,

Regina, Sask., Can.
Blanchard, E. R., General

Delivery, Mountain View',

Cal
Blanchard, J. H.. 1955 Web-
ster St., Oakland, Cal.
Blanchat  &  Blanchat,  Con-
cordia,  Kans.
Blanchat, Aug., Medicine

Lodge, Kans.
Blanchat, August., Moun-
tain Home, Ark.
Blean,  Albert  C,  Le  Claire,  la.
Blean, C. A., 210 Main Street,

Streator, 111.
Blean, R. B.,  Mystic,  la.
Blechschmidt, J. R., 920

Savoye  St., North  Bergen,

N. J.
Blechschmidt, John R., and

Rohr, Peter, 504 Clinton

Ave., West Hoboken, N. J.
Blechschmidt, Richard, 920

Savoye St.,  North  Bergen,

N. J.
Bligh, T. R., 521 Fullerton

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Bligh, T. R., 920 Slater  Bldg.,

Rochester, Mass.
Bligh, T. R., Whitewater,

Wis.
Bliss, Edna  M.,  1536 E.  86th

St., Cleveland, O.
Bliss, Mrs. Edna M., Daven-
port, la.
Bliss, Mrs. J., 1536 E. 86th

St.. Cleveland, O.
Bliss, Luther S., 1339 E. 47th

St., Chicago, 111.
Blocher, Ira, 320 Wisconsin

Ave., Wahpeton, N. D.
Blodgood, Delia, Colorado

Springs, Colo.
Bloom, I., New Hebron, Miss.
Blount, John S., Lexington,

Ky.
Bloyd, Clarence, Hillsboro,

Ore.
Blumcr. Louis, 97 Ann Street,

Hartford, Conn.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


108:


Boatswan, P., Black River

Falls. Wis.
Boaz, E. R., 1021 N. Rhartel

St.. Oklahoma City. Okla.
Bobo. R., 236 20th Ave., Min-
neapolis, Minn.
Bock, Helen, 501-2 Northwest

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Bode, Herbert  E.,  P. O.  Box

102, Merrill, Wi.s.
Bode, H. E., 719 5th Ave.,

Marietta, O.
Bodot, J.  N., 209  Gertrude  St.,

Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Bodot, J.  N., 209 Gertrude  St.,

Syracuse, N. Y.
Boehm, F., 317 Lexington

Ave., Elkhart, Ind.
Boerger, F. H., 211G Harris

Ave.. St. Louis, Mo.
Boettcher, Herman, 1138

N. Leavitt St., Chicag-o, 111.
Bohnhoff, Bertha, 852 Bel-
mont Ave., Chicago, 111.
Bohrer, Lona, North Loup,

Nebr. '
Bois,  Louis  F., 204 J N.  B'way,

Tyler,  Tex.
Bolhiuse, Jacob, Jackson,

Mich.
Bolhiuse, Jno. A., 130 S. Main

St., Elkhart, Ind.
Bolhiuse. Leonard B., 501-2

Dean Bldg-., South Bend,

Ind.
Bolhiuse, L. B., Elkhart

Water  Co..  Bldg-.,

Elkhart, Ind.
Bolling-er, G. "W., R. No. 6,

Box 13, Battle Creek, Mich.
Bol.se, J. A., 43 N. Main St.,

Sheridan,  Wyoming-.
Bolt.  Ben  H.,  Troy.  O.
Bolte. Bertha. 328 Summit

Ave., W. Hoboken, N.  J.
Boltinghouse, Mrs. Chas..

Lenox, la.
Bolton, Mrs. Nettie P.. 157

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass.
Bolzer, Guy H.. Iron River.

Mich.
Bon, Lucy E.. 108 Park Ave.,

Charlevoix, Mich.
Bond, G. E., Guthrie Center,

la.
Bond, Glenn E., Guthrie

Bond,  Robt.  'w.,"P.  O.  Box  243,

Winfield, la.
Bond, Robert W., Wolcott,

Ind.
Boner, A. C, 629 1st Street.

La  Salle,  111.
Boner, A. C, Kankakee, 111.
Boner, T. J., Box 581, Cro-wn

Point, Ind.
Bonner, E. J., Morrison  Bldg.,

Jacksonville, 111.
Bonsman, M. E., Dayton, Ind.

Bonton,  L.  C,  1188  Main  St.,
Newfleld  Bldg.,  Bridgeport,
Conn.

Bonton.  Louis  C,  339  Atlan-
tic St., Stamford, Conn.

Booher, S. D., Nevada, la.

Boone,  C.  O.,  c/o  The  Chiro-
practic College, San Anto-
nio, Tex.

Booner, Jas., Marilton, Ark.

Boorn,  Ed-ward  J..  306  Stras-
burger  Bldg., Parsons, Kan.

Booth: Ethel. Nobleville. Ind.

Booth, W. F., Sacramento,
Cal.


Boothe, W. C, Noblesville,

Ind.
Borgett, Geo. V., Melrose,

Minn.
Borgman, August, 76 Ham-
burg Ave.,  Paterson,  N. J.
Bosenier. CVias.. 1319  N. Ham-
lin  Ave., Chicago, 111.
Bosley, C. W., Monticello. la.
Bosley, M. E., Guthrie, Okla.
Boughton & Boughton, 533

O'Neill Bldg., Binghamton,

N. Y.
Boughton, B. J., 507 Press

Bldg., Binghamton, N. Y.
Bourgerjon, Leon, 1847 West

Pico St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Bovard, C. C, Market St.,

Clearfield, Pa.
Bovee, Mabel, Craig, Nebr.
Bo-wer, C. H., 2 Lo-we Bldg.,

Dayton, O.
Bo-wers & Feightner, Hun-
tington,  Ind.
Bo-wers, Leroy, 150 Main St.,

Room  6-7,  Oneonta,  N.  Y.
Bowers, W.  'L., 45 N. 4th St..

Zanesville, O.
Bowles, L. Jean,  tlllifton

Forge, Va.
Bowman, John, Madison, Wis.
Bowman, Lucy, Daud Bldg..

Ft. Dodge. la.
Bowman. Lucy, Winfield, Ta.
Bowman,  R.  F.,  Packwood,  la.
Bowman,  T.  W., 31  Bayswater

Road, New-Castle-on-Tyne,

England.
Boyce,  L.  M.,  Box  134,  Menton,

Ind.
Boyd & Hall, Scranton, Pa.
Boyd, Agnes. 200 Glencalder

St.. Pittsburgh. Pa.
Boyd, Agnes E., 133 Larimer

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Boyd,  A.  J..  Navina.  Okla.
Boyd,  A.  J.,  Holdenville,  Okla.
Boyd, C. A., Saegerstown, Pa.
Boyd. C. A.. 407 Wyoming

Ave.. Scranton, Pa.
Boyd. Clara  M.. Navina. Okla.
Boyd,  Frank  L.,  Robinson,  111.
Boyd. Lincoln. Box 173. Hal-

sey. Ore.
Boyers. D. D.. 313 Sharon

Bldg., Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Bracher, John & Katherine.

14,820 Detroit Ave.. Cleve-
land, O.
Brackett, Marie L., Augusta.

Mont.
Bradenburg. A. L., 810 Perry

St.. Davenport, la.
Bradford & Bradford, Paul's

Valley, Okla.

Bradford & Bradford, Jeffer-
son,  "Wis.
Bradford, Edgar G., 73 6th

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Bradford, Horace, 1400 W.

25th St., Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Bradford, Pearl, 3213 North

Florida Ave., Oklahoma

City, Okla.
Bradley, C. E., 32 Prospect

St., Jamestown, N. Y.
Bradley, Geo. A., 995 Market

St.. San  Francisco, Cal.
Bradley, Geo. A., 614 Haws

Bldg.. San Francisco. Cal.
Brady,  T.  N.,  Mingo,  "W.  Va.
Brainard.  Anna,  St.  Pavl,  Ark.


Brand  &  Brand,  Drs.,  405
Hippodrome  Bldg.,  Cleve-
land,  O.

Brand,  Elizabeth,  405  Hippo-
drome Bldg., Cleveland, O.

Brandenberg,  A.  L.,  Daven-
port, la.

Brandenberg,  A.  L.,  Room  2.
Mercantile Bldg., Los An-

Brandenberg,  H.  C,  28  El-
wood Place, Newark, N. J.

Brandenburger,  O.  C,  207
Calumet  St.,  East  Chicago,
111.

Brandle,  G.  E.,  1761  Wash-
ington St.,  Chicago,  111.

Brandman,  R.  E.,  547  West
142nd St., New York, N. Y.

Brandt.  Wm.  F.,  463  Dodge
St., Buffalo,  N.  Y.

Brandtmuller,  60  Prospect
Place. New York, N. Y.

Brasington,  J.  D.,  228  Eagle
Rock  Ave.,  Los  Angeles.
Cal.

Bratchi,  Carl  L.,  Odd  Fellows
Bldg., Akron, O.

Bratchi, Karl S., Main St.,
Akron,  O.

Bratchi,  O.  L.,  I.  O.  O.  F.
Bldg., Akron, O.

Braiin.  Max  Gerard,  28  Mon-
mouth  St.,  Ne-^vark,  N. .T.

Bray, Jewett  P., Box 305,
Waycross, Ga.

Brazeau, Franklyn R., 600-6
Dekum Bldg., Portland,
Ore.

Brazeau,  M.  E.,  368  9th  Ave..
Spokane, Wash.

Breaker,  John,  14,820  Detroit
Ave., Cleveland, O.

Bredford.  Wm..  Herman  Blk.,
Oshkosh, %Vis.

Breenahan,  M.,  463  Congress
St., Detroit, Mich.

Breggle, Mrs. A. C, Los An-

£"€■163 C3.1.

Brehl, L. J., 1912 Broadway.

Lorain, O.
Brehmer, Louis F., c/o P. S.

C, Davenport, la.
Breiber, IMartin. 1711 Mar-

.shall Field Bldg., Chicago,

111.
Breitenbucher, Anton E., 1911

Main St., Jacksonville, Fla.
Breithaupt  &  Breithaupt,

Berlin,  "^Vis.
Breithaupt. A. "^V.. 311 Huron

St., Berlin. Wis.
Breithaupt, J. R., Horicon,

Wis.
Breitling, Geo. S., Royal

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Brennan. J P.. 68 K 93rd

St.. New York,  N. Y.
Bresnahen, M., 637 Congress

St.. Detroit. Mich.
Bretow,  Wm.  C.  M..  621  Bush-
wick Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Brevel, Mrs. M. J., 403 Ham-
burger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Brewer, Joe E., Markesan,

"Wis.
Brewer, J. E., Guthrie, Okla.
Brickmeyer, O. F., Colorado

Springs, Colo.
Bridgeford. A. J.. 30 E. 26th

St.. Oklahoma City, Okla.
Bridges, Edmund M.. 129

Lisbon St.. Osgood Blk..

Lewiston. Me.
Briggs. A. N.. 6th and Moi-

rison Sts.. Marquaun Bldg..

Portland. Ore.


1088


Geographical  Index


Chiropractors


Briggs, H. L., Spencerville, O.
Biiggs,  M. J.,  175  Washingrton

St., Binghaniton, N. Y.
Briggs, M. J., 25 Main Street,

Potsdam, N. Y.
Bright, Corrine E., Detroit,

Mich.
Brink, Blanche, 207 Ocean

Front, Ocean Park, Cal.
Brink & Butler, 511 N. Main

St., Santa  Anna, Cal.
Brinson,  M.  N..  21t)-17  Georgia

Life Bldg., Macon, Ga.
Brinson, M. M., 1224 S. Court

St., Montgomery, Ala.
Britzelle, Albert C, 116 St.

Marks Place, Brooklyn, or

215 ^V. 51st St., New York,

N. Y.
Broberg, Manfred, 45 W. 34th

St., Ne%v York, N. Y.
Brocher, John, 14,820 Detroit

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Brocher, Katherine, 14,820

Detroit Ave., Cleveland, O.
Brocker, Ellen E., Moreland,

Kans.
Brockney, James L., 6 John

St., Ticonderoga, N. Y.
Bromert, Jos. F., Caroll, la.
Brooke, S. N., Waukon, la.
Brooker, Ellen E., 841 N.

Topeka Ave., Wichita, Kan.
Brooks, Calvin W., 12 Green

St., Bellow Falls, Vt.
Brooks, Mrs. C. R., 26 Lake

St., Oswego, N. Y.
Brooks, E., Burr Oaks, Kans
Brooks, Elizabeth, 757 East

Adams St., Phoenix, Ariz.
Brooks, Ethel, 118 Washing-
ton St., Newark, N. J.
Brooks, Maud A., 16 Gould

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Brosenne, Dora, The Toronto,

Washington, D. C.
Bross, Henry, 645 Lion St.,

San Francisco, Cal.
Browell, Hattie M., 1.308 W.

3rd St., Waterloo, la.
Brower,  G. H.,  East  Palestine,

O.
Brower, Jno., Thomas, Okla.
Browman,  T.  W.,  New  Castle-

on-Tyne, England.
Brown,  A.  A., 657 S.  State  St.,

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Brown, Allen M., 315 Colum-
bia Trust Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Brown, A. S., 405 N. 31st St.,

Billings, Mont.
Brown, Blanche, Pecos, Tex.
Brown, C.  E.,  Gowfie,  la.
Brown, C. O., 916 Federal

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Brown, Daniel T., 10 Beyman

Bldg., Salem, Ore.
Brown, G. P., 128 Brookline

St., Boston, Mass.
Brown, H., 811 N. Brauer

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Brown, H. B., 1518 Ripley  St.,

Davenport, la.
Brown, Henry C, 517 Sucat-

tan Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Brown,  H.  I.,  Scott's  Bluff,

Nebr.
Brown & Hanlin, 4-5 Wilson

Bldg., Aurora, Mo.
Brown, H. M., 504 Brushton

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Brown, H. S., 506 W. Grand

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Brown, I.  W.  B.,  Denver,  Colo.


Brown,  Jno.  A.,  Lyceum  Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Brown, L. A., Sidney, Nebr.
Brown,  L.  G.,  Currayville,  Mo.
Brown,  L.  G.,  131i  N.  0th  Ave.,

Quincy, 111.
Brown,  Mary, 3004  S. 12th  St.,

Tacoma, Wash.
Brown, M. P., 828 Brady St.,

Davenport, la.
Brown,  O.  H., 415  Kellogg  St.,

St. Johns, Ore.
Brown, O. L., 401 Flatiron

Bldg., Akron, O.
Brown, Robert, 124 N. Poto-
mac St., Waynesboro, Pa.
Brown, Robert B., Fulton,

Brown,  Sam'l  A.,  135  S.  Ar-
kansas Ave.,  Atlantic  City,
N. J.

Brown,  S.  H.,  501  W.  Grand
A.ve., Oklahoma City, Okla.

Brown,  Una,  214|  S.  Main  St.,
Findlay, O.

Brown,  Virginia  E.,  Fulton,
Ky.

Browne,  Cornelia  J.,  57  Har-
rison St.,  E.  Orange,  N.  J.

Browne, D. T., 317 Abington
Bldg.,  Portland,  Ore.

Brownell, James  W., 10,217
Olivet St., Cleveland, O.

Brownell,  Mrs.  M.  E.,  Yank-
ton, S. Dakota.

Brownell, N. L., Yankton,
S. Dakota.

Brownell, O. D., Warsaw,
Ind.

Browning, E. A.', Box 114,
Wagner, S. Dakota.

Browning,  Olive  M.,  Box  167,
Kite Bldg., St. Paris, O.

Brovles,  Sam'l,  13  Forester
Bldg., Ft. Collins, Colo.

Bruce, P. H., Cadiz, O.

Bruch,  Clara.  Carroll,  la.

Bruett, H., Pasadena, Cal.

Brugh, H. A., N. Warren, Pa.

Bruin,  Mrs.  L.  B.,  Westland
Ave., Boston, Mass.

Brundage,  Isa  L.,  Sault  Ste.
Marie, Canada.

Bruner,  Agnes,  3655  Adir  St.,
Los Angeles, Cal.

Bruner,  H.  L.,  214  E.  11th  St.,
Coffeyville. Kans.

Brustein,  Max,  2410  E.  40th
St., Cleveland, O.

Brutus,  Chas.  J.,  105  S.  State
St., Champaign, 111.

Bruyne. Dr., 561 19th  Ave.,
Oakland, Cal.

Brvan  &  Bryan,  38  W.  32nd
St., New York, N. Y.

Bryan,  Chas.  A.,  Coffeyville,
Kans.

Bivan,  D.,  485  Broad  Street,
Mt. Holley, N. J.

Bryan,  F.  J.,  38  W.  32nd  St.,
New York, N. Y.

Bryan,  H.  A.,  116  Diggen  Blk.,
Kendallville,  Ind.

Bryan,  Harrison  A.,  913  Le-
nawee St., Lansing, Mich.

Bryant,  Delia,  403  Hambur-
ger Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.

Bryant, Delia D., 514 South
Figueroa  St.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.

Bryant,  R.  A.,  The  Burlington
Apts., Washington, D. C.

Bryant,  W.  H.,  236  24th  St.,
Detroit, Mich.

Brvce, H. P., Hot Springs,
Ark.


Bryner, Agnes, 3665 Adir St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Bucey, Howard L., 5642 Rip-

pey St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bucey, Howard L., 319 10th

St., Wellsville, O.
Buchanan,  O.  H., 387  Prospect

Ave., Perth Amboy, N. J.
Buchegger, Edward, 13-a

Mechanic St., Attelboro,

Mass.
Buck,  G.  E.,  Iowa  City,  la.
Buck,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  49  West  St.,

Ilion, N. Y.
Buck, II. J., 125 N. Jefferson

St., Peoria, 111.
Buck, Wm.  B., 32 E.  Pearl  St.

Wellsville. N. Y.
Buddenberg, H. H., 6th and

Pennsylvania Aves.,

Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Buehler, Emma  M., R. 7, Box

70, Monroe, Wis.
Buell, Mrs. M. J., 403 Ham-
burger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Bueren,  Dr.  A.,  309  State  Nat'l

Bank Bldg., San Antonio,

Tex.
Buettner, Jas. A., 65 Clinton

Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Buffham, A. T., Kalamazoo,

Mich.
Bugbee, Julia  A., 164 Remsen

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Bull, Frank, 3644 W. Polk

St., Chicago, 111.
Bull, Martha A., 617 B'way,

Fidelity Bldg., Hannibal,

Mo.
Bull, Wm. D., 617 Broadway,

Fidelity Bldg., Hannibal,

Mo.
Bull,  W.  D.,  Vandalia,  Mo.
Bullis, B. S., 732 34th Street,

Oakland, Cal.
Bullis, E. S., 812 Green Ave.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Bullis, Sarah, 732 34th  Street,

Oakland, Cal.
Bunde, Wm. G., 236 Endicott

Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.
Bundy, Jos., 1715 California

St., Denver, Colo.
Bunker, M. N., Savannah,

Mo.
Bunkers, H., 2002 25th Ave.,

Oakland, Cal.
Bunker,  M. N.,  Colby,  Kans.
Bunn, Bessie, Bertrand, Nebr.
Bunn, C. R., 611 Mack Bldg.,

Denver, Colo.
Bunn & Bunn, 611-15 Mack

Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Bunn, H. G., St. Charles,

Minn.
Bunting, D. Ray, 301 North

Union  St.,  Akron,  O.
Burch  &  Burch,  Tarkio,  Mo.
Burch, G. H., 684 Boulevard,

Bavonne, N. J.
Burch,  Harley  R., Tarkio,  Mo.
Burch, Orin, 21 S. Pickney

St., Madison, Wis.
Burchill,  J. E., Coulter  Block,

Aurora, 111.
Burdette,  O.,  418  G  St.,  Wash-
ington,  D. C.
Burdick, Elwood H., 319

Broad St., Waverly, N. T.
Burdick & Burdick, 319

Broad  St.,  Waverly,  N.  Y.
Burdin,  F.  A.,  Antigo,  Wis.
Buren & Buren, Drs., Oxford,

Nebr.
Burford,  D.  E.,  Ava,  Mo.
Burg, J. Karl, Augusta,

W. Va.


Chiropractors


Professional  liegister


1089


Burge,  J.  P.,  Crown  Point,  Ind.
Burgener, Orza L., 610 Elm

St., Decatur, Ind.
Burgy,  Mable  Kimple,  Dewey,

Okla.
Burhorn, Frank F., 414-18

Rose  Bldg-.,  Omaha, Nebr.
Burich, S. J., Davenport, la.
Burke, Agnes E., 5 Oxford

Terrace, Boston, Mass.
Burke, E. W., 59 i N. B'way,

Peru, Ind.
Burke, Hilma, Brooklyn, la.
Burke. M. E., University PL,

Beaver Dam, Wis.
Burke,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  59i  B'way,

Peru, Ind.
Burkhardt,  F.  G., Idaho  Falls,

Idaho.
Burlson, J. D., Lockney, Tex.
Burnell, F. M., 301 1 W. 4th

St., Waterloo, la.
Burnett, J. A., Marble City,

Okla.
Burnham, Lillian, Ft. Atkin-
son, Wis.
Burns, Sarah A., Tulsa, Okla.
Burns, Sarah A., Bartlesville,

Okla.
Burns & Burns, 926 Main St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Burns & Burns, 320 ".i Brady

St., Davenport, la.
Burrell, Emily, 729 Mayberry

St., Detroit, Mich.
Burt, C. G., 3-4 Brand Hotel

Bldg.,  Boise, Idalio.
Burt, L. D., 4813 2nd Street,

Hazelwood, Pa.
Burthwick,  I.  M.,  2  Steel  Blk.,

Winnipeg, Manitoba, Can.
Burthwick, L. M., Souris,

Man., Canada.
Burton, A. E., Westfalia,

Kans.
Burton, Sarah  A., 9th St.,

Eugene,  Ore.
Burtrum,  Crabill  M.,  1404  L  St.

N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Busby &  Busby, Jefferson, la.
Bush, J. W., 233 Columbus

Savings and Trust Co.

Columbus, O.
Bust, Laura C, 542 Steiner

St., San Francisco, Cal.
Butcher,  Frances, 81  E.  Madi-
son St.,  Chicago,  111.
Butler, A. Ross, Cor. Bridge

and Grand Aves., Chippewa

Falls, Wis.
Butler. Edward, General De-
livery,  San  Mateo, Cal.
Butler. F. E., Los  Gatos. Cal.
Butler, W. H., 701 Hazel St..

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Butler, Wm. H., Ruben Bldg.,

5th  Ave. and Walnut  St..

McKeesport, Pa.
Butler,  W. P.,  Keokuk. la.
Butson.  J.  D..  Locknev.  Tex.
Butt, John H., Main Street.

Sleepy Eye, Minn.
Butt, Mrs. Pauline, Main St.,

Sleepy Eye, Minn.
Button, D. D., 365 Hunt St.,

Detroit, Mich.
Buzzard. J. D.. 407 E. Ohio

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bybee & Bybee. Drs., 440

Fairfax Ave., Norfolk, Va.
Bybee & Bybee, Commercial

Bldg., Richmond, Va.
Byrd. R. L.. 233 Main Street.

Meyersdale. Pa.
Byron,  James  B.,  Great  Falls,

Wis.
Cadwallader, Jesse A., Lans-
ing,  la.
Cahail  &  Cahail,  Exeter,  Nebr.


Cahill.  C.  A., Friend,  Nebr.
Cain, Cora  H.,  112 W. 4th  St.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Calder,  A. B., Boreing, Ore.
Caldwell, Fannie, Dougherty

Bldg.. Santa Rosa, Cal.
Gale,  Chas.  A., 931 S.  Hill  St.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Cale.  Charles  A..  1012 \V.  Pico

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Cale, Ernest  I.. 340 North 1st

St. Petersburgh. Fla.
Cale,  Mrs.  Linnie  A.,  931  South

Hill  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Calhoun. Daisy D., Welling-
ton, Kans.
Callahan, B. O., 511i Lincoln

Ave., York, Nebr.
Callis, G. T., Russelville,  Ark.
Callis, G. T., 1214 E. 40th St.,

Kansas  City,  Mo.
Calloway, Dr., Independence,

Ore.
Calta, Geo. W., Aberdeen,

S. Dakota.
Calvert, Cora, Stockton, Cal.
Calvert, E. J., Stockton, Cal.
Calvin, Emma, Douglas, Ariz.
Calwell,  Henry  E.,  4200  Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Calwell, Wm. A., 4200 Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Camp, M. v., 186 Seneca St.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Camp,  R.  E.,  Red  Cloud,  Nebr.
Camp,  R.  E.,  Burlington,  Colo.
Campbell  &  Campbell, 402-5

Pantages Bldg., Seattle,

Wash.
Campbell, Agnes, Lakeport,

Cal.
Campbell, C. A., Room 5,

112 7th St., Terre Haute,

Ind.
Campbell, Chas., Geneseo, 111.
t^^ampbell, Chas. D., Parkers-
burg,  W.  Va.
Campbell, C. G., 44 Somerset

Apts., Indianapolis, Ind.
Campbell, C. L. R., 86 State

St.,  Hackensack,  N. J.
Campbell, C. P., 2316 Warren

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Campbell, C. T., 1634 Rock

Island St., Davenport, la.
Campbell, Chas. W., Manton.

Alb., Canada.
Campbell, D. L., Lakeport,

Cal.
(^ampbell. Esther, 1447 E. 8th

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Campbell, F.. 2025 4th Ave S.

Minneapolis, Minn.
Campbell, Frank, 432 South

Syracuse  St..  Wichita,  Kans.
Campbell. F. R., 1015 W. 11th

St., Waterloo, la.
Campbell, John D., 290 Lud-
low  St., Arcade, Dayton, O.
•  'ampbell, J. L., 6th and

Perry Sts., Davenport, la.
Campbell,  J.  L., 200  W.  Madi-
son  St., Franklin, Ind.
Campbell, J. R., Box 2,

Norfolk, Nebr.
Campbell, Mrs. Mary W.. 310

Barnes  Ave.,  M^ichita,  Kans.
Campbell, P. D., 1121 Kears-

ley St.. Flint, Mich.
Campbell,  R. H.,  Conneaut,  O.
Campbell, R. H., Sebering, O.
Campbell.  R.  M.,  O'Neill.  Nebr.
Campbell, R. M., Norfolk,

Nebr.
Campbell, R. N., Cozad, Nebr.
Campbell, V.  A., 403 Ham-
burger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.


Campbell,  V.  A.,  1101  Marsh-
Strong  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.

Campbell,  Werner  A.,  1101
Marsh-Strong  Bldg.,  Los
Angeles, Cal.

Campbell,  Wm..  34  Arnott  St.,
Detroit, Mich.

Campbell,  W.  J.,  7132  Bennett
St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

Campbell,  Winifred  P.,  918  N.
High St., Columbus, O.

Campbell,  Winifred  P.,  Gali-
polis, O.

Campton,  Wm.  B.,  615  Cor-
dova  St., Los Angeles, Cal.

Canary, Dr. Ella, Clinton.
Wis.

Canfil,  A.  W.,  c/o  The  Chiro-
practic College,  San  Anto-
nio, Tex.

Cannard,  Wm.  M.,  1279  Belle-
vue  Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.

Canon,  Fred.  A.,  13  W.  Main
St., Greenville, Pa.

Canondell,  Cor.  6th  and  Elm
Sts.,  Valley  Junction, la.

^anvall, Alice N., Bryan, O.

Oapshaw,  E.  F.,  528  S.  Elm
St., Sherman, Tex.

Capshaw, E. F., 219 Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Colorado
Springs, Colo.

Card,  Elizabeth,  310  Hunting-
ton Ave., Boston, Mass.

harder, Bert E., 206-7 Bank-
ers' Trust Bldg., Little
Rock, Ark.

Carder,  Chas.  L.,  1008  !Mo-
rengo Ave., Pasadena, Cal.

Cardwell,  W.  A.,  Plant  City,
Fla.

Carey,  Frank  L.,  10  W.  8th
St., Anderson, Ind.

Carey,  H.  F.,  Ill  E.  Wash-
ington  St., Alexandria, Ind.

Carey, Miss S. I., Majestic,
Colo.

Carlin.  F.  W.,  307-8  Commerce
Bldg.,  Pittsburgh,  Kans.

Carlson, A. N., McKinnie
Bldg., Moline, 111.

Carlson,  Carl  I.,  Banner  Bldg.,
Greensboro, N. C.

Carlson, Chas. J., 75 Pratt
St., Hartford, Conn.

Carlson.  Charles  J..  55  Central
St..  and  23  Foster  St.,  South
Manchester, Conn.

Carlson,  Harold,  Jamestown,
N. Y.

Carlson.  H.  E.,  9 J  Park  Ave.,
Warren. O.

Carlson,  John  C.  East  Jordan,
Mich.

t'arlson,  John  G.,  Plentywood.
Mont.

Carlson.  Susan.  307  Lee  Bldg.,
Vancouver, B. C. Canada.

Carman,  Elizabeth  F.,  Cor.
3rd  and  Hill  Sts.,  Gallup,
New Mexico.

Carman.  Harriett.  529  Patton
St., Los  Angeles, Cal.

Carmichael,  F.  H.,  7127  Ger-
mantown  Ave.,  Philadel-
phia, Pa.

Carmoney,  F.  D.,  307  Johnson
Blk., Muncie, Ind.

Carmoney,  F.  D.,  2524  Jeffer-
son Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.

Carpenter,  Julia  B.,  Old
Bridge. N. J.

Carpenter,  L.  N.,  23  Continen-
tal Bldg.,  Omaha. Nebr.

Carpenter,  W.  A..  10  Boudinot
St., Newark, N. J.

Carr,  Edson.  4200  Grand
Blvd.. Chicago. 111.


lonn


Professional  Rec/istcr


Chiropractors


C-arreiro. Ernest, 67 West-
land  Ave., Boston, Mass.
Carrell, R. L., Monte Vista.

Colo.
Carrick, A. AV., 502 Millner

St.. Ottvimwa, la.
Carroll. Edyth, 205 B St.,

La^vton, Okla.
Carroll, .T. C, 1904 Chicago

Ave., Minneapoli-s, Minn.
Carroll, L. A., Hortonville,

Wis.
Carroll, Max, 1269 Boston

Road,  New York,  N. Y.
Carroll, R. L., Monte Vista,

Colo.
Carrollton, E. D., Encanto,

Cal.
Carson, Jj.  R.,  Hopedale, O.
Carson, R. L., Uniontown, Pa.
Carson, R. T... 801 W. Main

St., Connollville, Pa.
Carter, A. D., 2104 E. Michi-

g-an Ave., Indianapolis, Ind.
Carter, Anna W., 6131 Wood-
lawn Ave., Chicago, 111.
Carter,  D. W., Solomon,  Kan.s.
Carter, E. M.. 302 Lincoln

Bldg-., Johnstown, Pa.
Carter, .Tanet F., Ellis, Kans.
Carter, Vivian D., Holdridge,

Nebr.
Carter,  Vivian D., Kearney,

Nebr.
Carter's Sanatorium, 313 W.

Ash St., Salina, Kans.
Cartwright, F. A., 857 Fort

W, Detroit, Mich.
Carver, Fred.,  Vera Cruz, Mo.
Carver, Fred. J., Thornberg,

la.
Carver, Ralph H., Thornberg,

la.
Carver, Willard, Majestic

Bldg., Oklahoma  City, Okla.
Carvin,  J.  E.  &  S.  P.,  144

Washington St., Sandusky,

O.
Cary, D. C, Holbrook Bldg.,

Brockton, Mass.
Cary, David C, 310 Carr

Bldg., Springfield, Mass.
Cary, Frank L., Freeport, 111.
Cary,  Frank  I.., 16  W. 8th  St.,

Anderson, Ind.
Case,  Geo., 421 Elm  Street,

Antigo, Wis.
Case, J. E., 917 E. 62nd St.,

Chicago, 111.
Case. W. E., Box 133, The

Dallas, Ore.
Casey,  H.  M.,  Auburn,  N.  Y.
Casey, .1., Hotel Tooney,

Denver, Colo.
Cash, Marguerite, Edgewater,

Colo,
easier, Geo. L., 15 Cortland

St., Middletown, N. Y. .
Caspary. F., 1403 Santee St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Casper, William F., 2875

B'wav,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Cass, F. W., 517 3rd Avenue,

Clinton, la.
Cass, M. Hazel and R. B.,

Box 234, Bainbridge, N.  Y.
Cass, Mr. & Mrs. Ralph, 278

E. Main St., Waterbury,

Conn.
Cass  &  Cass,  505  N.  Wolfe  St.,

Baltimore, Md.
Cassady, Mamie E., 430 Clay

St., Thomasville, Ga.
Casselman, K. F.. 2039 Ogden

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Casselman,  E.  F..  1711  Monroe

St., Sta. D, Chicago, 111.
Caster, L. B., Liberty, Nebr.
Castor, Shirley, Burlington.

Colo.
Caswell, Gladys, 611 Canby
Bldg., Dayton, O.


Caswell,  G.  I.,  37  Davies  Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Cate. E., Box 231, Imlay,

Mich.
Cate, Philip, Grand Valley

Bank  Bldg.,  Grand  .Junction,

Colo.
Cathcart, R. J., 400 Franklin

St., Watertown, N. Y.
Cathen, J. D. O., 1332 Oxford

St.. Canton, O.
Caulk, Mrs. M. B., Eagle,

Colo.
Cavens, H. S., Coffeyville,

Kans.
Cecil, D. L., P. O. Box 406,

McCarty Bldg., 9th and

Idaho Sts., Boise, Idaho.
Cecil & Cecil. Drs., Box 1091,

Salt Lake City, Utah.
Chadwick, C. L., Arimo  Bldg.,

Logan, Utah.
Chadwick, Fletcher, 501 N.

9th  St.,  Coshocton,  O.
Chadwick, Fletcher, 717 Ed-
wards  Ave., E. Liverpool,

O.
Chadwick, G. L., Logan,

Utah.
Chains, Frank J., 4825 Fleet

St., Cleveland, O.
Chamberlain, Daida, Chip-
pewa  Falls, Wis.
Chamberlain, E. H., 635 W.

15th St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Chamberlain, G. L., 612 Elm

St., Atlantic, la.
Chamberlain, I. I., Oberlin, O.
Chamberlain, Sadie, Chippewa

Falls, Wis.
Chamberlain, Sylvan, North

Liberty, la.
Chamberlin, G. L., Carthage,

Mo.
Chamberlin, I. I.. Burlington,

la.
Chamberlin, I. I., 21 W. Col-
lege St., Oberlin, O.
Chamberlin, J. A., Ashland,

O.
Chambers, J. M., Rydal  Bank,

Ontario, Canada.
Chambers, T. H., Georgiana,

Fla.
Chan, G. S., 913 South B'way,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Chandlee, Wm. B., 11-13

Gross IJldg., Eureka,  Cal.
Chandler. A. B., 33 Gross

Bldg., Eureka, Cal.
Chandler, Cliff, Jasonville,

Ind.
Chandler,  L.  B.,  206-7  Masonic

Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Chandler, W. S., 252 2nd St.,

Elyria, O.
Chaplin, W. T., Morgantown,

W. Va.
Chapman, M. W., 130 S. San-
dusky St., Bucyrus, O.
Chapman, N. A., Austin,

Minn.
Chapman,  W.  A.,  Davenport,

la.
Chapman, W. A., 315 N. Main

St., Austin, Minn.
Chappell, Arthur W.. 8.^)04

Broadway, Cor. Harvard

Ave., Cleveland  Ave., Cleve-
land,  O.
Charleville, Jos., 401 Ham-
burger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Charlevois, Elmer J., Box

148, Alexandria, Ont., Can.
i  Chatterton. W. A., 1712 Las

Lumas  St..  Pa.«^adena.  Cal.
1  Chatwin, H. W., 709 Duns-

muir St., Vancouver, B. C,

Canada.
Cherry, J. C, 168  N. Main St..

Wilkes Barre, Pa.


Chessler, J. B., Jacksonville,

Tex.
Childs,  Isa  Coburn,  2305  Park

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Child. Isa Coburn, Purcell,

Okla.
Child, Mrs. J. M., Carthage,

Me.
Chilson, Maud I., Uplands,

Cal.
Chism, C. M., Argonia, Kans.
Chittenden, G. L., Onondaga,

N.  Y.
Chiverton, N. L., 31 Empress

St.,  London,  Ont.,  Canada.
Choplin. W. T., 110 Martin

St., Morgantown, W. Va.
Chretien, John I., W. 4th St.,

near  Main  St.,  Spencer,  la.
Christe, Dr. M. J., 135 Noble

St., Brooklvn, N. Y.
Christie, M. J., 135 Noble St.,

Greenpoint,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Christensen, C. E., Bowbells,

N Dakota
Christian, A. T., 608 Stewart

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Christian, Eugene, 213 W.

79th St., New York, N. Y.
Christian, Viola, Room 412.

7  W.  6th  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Chrzan, John, 2926 Wisner

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Church, George  W., 1380 East

110th  St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Church, Gordon W. B.,

Warren, R. I.
Churchhill, Geo. S., Nicollet

House, Minneapolis, Minn.
Cinader, I. L., 508 Miss. Ave.,

Davenport, la.
Cinader,  J.  S.,  Wilson,  Kans.
Clanter, E. T., 313 Elyria

Block, Elyria, O.
Clark,  A. C,  Byron,  Mich.
Clark, Casey, 3738 Calumet

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Clark, C. E., 30 E. Broad St.,

Chamber of Commerce,

Columbus, O.
Clark,  C. E., 315 W. 8th  Ave.,

Columbus, O.
Clark. Everett E., Forsvth

Bldg., Atlanta, Ga.
Clark, Fred M., Collins Blk.,

Fond  du  Lac,  Wis.
Clark,  G.  E.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Clark, H. A., Clarinda, la.
Clark, I. H., 231 Potomac

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Clark, J. H., 2478 S. 13th St.,

Philadelphia,  Pa.
Clark,  Mabel,  522  W.  13th

St.. Columbus, Neb.
Clark,  Mrs.  Mary, 1432 Date

St.,  San  Diego,  Cal.
Clark, O. G., 522 W. 13th St.,

Columbus, Neb.
Clark, O. N., I^awrence, Kans.
Clark. O. N., 2417 Forrest

Ave.,  Kansas  City,  Mis.soiiri.
Clark,  P.  R.,  Marysville,  Kans.
Clark, Dr. R. T., Jackson,

Miss.
Clark, Theo., 2504 Harrison

St., Kansas City, Mo.
Clark,  T.  N.,  502  Davidson

Bldg.,  Sioux  City.  la.
Clarke, C. L., 1468 Kenwood

Ave., Camden, N. ,T.
Clark,  W.  F.,  326  Indiana  Ave.

Washington, D. C.
Classon, Carl A., Hotel Wat-
son, Los Angeles, Cal.
Clauter, B. T., 313 Elyria

Block, Elyria, O.
Clayson.  Ralph  L.,  1569

Hertel  Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1001


Clayson, Ralph L., Carlton

Court, Buffalo, N. Y.
Clavton,  Mrs.  K.  A.,  818  Brady

St., Davenport, Iowa
Clayton, Mrs. E. E.. 200 Star

Courier Bldg., Kewanee,

111.
Cleeland, F. W.. I>yceum

Bldg-., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Cleflsch, L. M., Guttenberg,

la.
Cleland, C. T., Spurgeon

Bldg., Santa Ana, Cal.
Clement, Alice, 275 Warren

St.. Roxbury, Mass.
Clemmens, Jennie  M., Beards-
town, 111.
Clemmer, Dr., 15 Rowland

Ave.,  Toronto,  Can.
Cleveland,  C.  F.,  1014  Nelson

St.,  Vancouver,  B.  C,  Can.
Cleveland,  C.  L., 736  S.  Alamo

St.,  San  Antonio, Tex.
Cleveland,  AV.  E.,  187  N.  Pearl

St.,  Buffalo, N. Y.
Clifton, A. J., Ogallala, Neb.
Clifton,  Robt.  N.,  807  State  St.,

Camden,  N.  J.
Close, Patrick H., Sun Bldg.,

tfackson,  Mich.
Clover,  J. C,  West  Blooton,

Ala.
Coates, Ernest  J., 75 Sixth

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Cobb,  Abner  J.,  1548  California

St.,  Suite 2,  Denver, Colo.
Cobert,  Martin,  Chagrin  Falls.

O.
Cochran,  A.  D.,  Clinton,  la.
Cochran,  A.  D.,  Morrison,  111.
Cochran, Harry, 625 S. Glen

St.,  Wichita,  Kans.
Cochrane, Albert B., 39 S.

State St., Chicago, 111.
Coffin, J. N., Mulvane, Kans.
Cohan, A., 320 E. 15th St.,

New  York,  N. Y.
Cohen, D., 1 Ferry Rd.,

Niagara Falls, Can.
Colder, A. B., Boreing, Ore.
Cole, Grace T., 1301 W. 25th

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Cole, John A., 1247 1st Ave.,

Oakland, Cal.
Cole, Jno. A.. 429 Tenth St.,

Oakland, Cal.
Cole,  O.  O., Pendleton,  Ore.
Coleman, Andrew, Fronde,

Sask., Can,
Coleman,  B.  A.,  20  Linden  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Coleman, E. H., 4345 Agnes

Ave.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Coleman, Willard H., 1319

State  St.,  La  Crosse,  Wis.
Coleman,  William  H.,  1546  W.

7th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Colgan,  C.  E.,  5  Theatre  Bldg.,

Fairmount, Ind.
Colgan, E. C, Arcadia, Ind.
Collins, Charles O., 16 Gould

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Collins. Clyde I., 484 3rd St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Collins,  Clyde  I.,  400  Center

Ave.,  Pitcairn,  Pa.
Collins,  Edward  W.,  122  Rose-

ville  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Collins, F. W., 16 Gould  Ave.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Collins, Ethel Nora, 16 Gould

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Collins, H., 411 Jefferson St.,

Olympia, Wash.
Collins, Mrs. Hattie M., 552

Columbus  Ave.,  Boston.

Collins, Orville, Box 45,
Gardner, Mont.


Colllnson, W.  A., 785 E. 10.'".

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Colson, C. E., 602 Foster

Bldg.,  Houston,  Tex.
Colson,  Clarence,  Reno,  Nev.
Comb.s,  J. H., 515 S. Robinson

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Compopiano,  Anthony, 90

Center St., Orange, N. J.
Compton, C. F., 509 S. Olive

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Compton, Claude O., 407

Greenleaf Ave., Whittier,

Cal.
Compton, Jas. P., 509 S.

Olive St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Compton, William B., 615

Cordova  St., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Conable, Mrs. A. C, Axtell,

Kans.
Conable,  W.  J.,  Axtell,  Kans.
Conant & Conant, Cor. State

and  Church  Sts.,  Carter

Bldg. Rochester,  N. Y.
Conant, J. N., Cor. State &

Church  Sts.,  Rochester.  N.  Y.
Condon, Mrs. Helen, Okla-
homa  City, Okla.
Conellv, Mrs. G. W., Box 124

Redfleld,  la.
Coney, Grace L., Bowling

Green,  O.
Confrey, Hubert, 1700 W.

Jackson Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
Conger, Carl H., Nasby  Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
Conklin, Arthur P., 582 N.

High  St.,  Columbus,  O.
Conn.  Albert  C.  239  Walworth

Ave., Delevan,  Wis.
Connelly, G. W., Humboldt,

Nebr.
Connelly,  Mrs.  G.  W.,  Box  124,

Redfleld,  la.
Conover,  B.  H.,  509  Honore

St., Chicago, 111.
Conover, E. H., 886 S. Wash-
ington St.,  Denver,  Col.
Conover.  Fred  E.,  420  12th  St.,

AVest  New  York,  N.  J.
Conrad, Anna J., 92 J Carylon

Road, Cleveland, O.
Conrad,  Hal.  Corning,  la.
Conrad, Mary,  Arkansas City,

Kans.
Cook,  Alexandria  N.,  651  State

St.,  Bridgeport,  Conn.
Cook  &  Cook, 8  Grove  St.,

Oneonta,  N.  Y.
Cook, Chas. D., West Spring-


field, Pa
Cook, Mrs. D

Okla.
Cook, H. E


C, Park Hill,


De  Soto, Mo.
Cook,  Hazel,  259  Lincoln  Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Cook. Herbert F., 1311 New

England  Bldg.,  Cleveland,  O.
Cook, Luther, 8 Grove St.,

Oneonta, N. Y.
Cook,  Phillip  H..  Canby,  Minn.
Cooley & Cooley, 222-24

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg.,  Enid,  Okla.
Cooley, Alvah R., 13 W. 31st

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Cooley, Ed. L., 301-2 Belding

Bldg., Stockton, Cal.
Cooley, Edward, 81-83 San

Joaquin  Bldg.,  Stockton.  Cal.
Cooley, Mrs. Gertrude M.,

301-2 Belding Bldg., Stock--

ton, Cal.
Cooney,  Grace  L.,  Brenian,  O.
Cooper,  C.  R.,  Suite  5,  109-11  S.

Superior  Ave.,  Albion,  Mich.
Cooper, K. L., 417 N. McLean

St., Lincoln, 111.


Cooper,  Mrs.  Minerva,  Ada. -

Okla.
Cooper, Olive  M., Hamilton.

Mont.
Cooper, W. H., 17 Sai;ih St.,

Brantford,  Can.
Copeland &  Copeland,  Galve.'-,-

ton,  Ind.
Copeland &  Copeland, GDI

State Life Bldg., Indiana-
polis, Ind.
Coplan, A. G., IIC Laflin St..

Chicago,  111.
Corbett, r. T>.. 435 Collins St.,

St. Paul,  Minn.
Corbin. Grace E., 1503 School

St.,  Des  Moines,  la.
Corbin, Grace E., 520 Clapp

Bldg., Des Moines, la.
Corbo,  Alfonso,  74  Jackson

St.,  Orange,  N.  J.
Corenz,  W.  C,  Box  166,  Beloit.

Wis.
Corgell,  F.  S.,  West  Wlnsfield,

N.  Y.
Cork. L. B., Paxton, So.

Dakota.
Cornell, F. W. 22 3rd S. E.,

Dauphin,  Man.,  Can.
Cornell, Murray, Prince

Albert, Sask., Can.
Cornell, M. E., Humboldt,

^3.sk CfLn
Co'rnett, Mrs. Stella, 528 Gil-
bert Ave., Terre Haute.

Ind.
Cornwall, Charles Addison,

423 S. Spring St.. Los

Angeles, Cal.
Corrick, A. "W., 907 N. Jeffer-
son St., Ottumwa, la.
Corvin, Geo. D., Chateau,

Mont.
Corwin,  G.  P..  2665  Sulphur

Ave.. Los Angeles. Cal.
Cory,  E.  Ray, 407  N.  Main  St.,

Austin, Minn.
Coss,  L.  E.,  Willmer,  Minn.
Cottam.  N. L., 150 South

Temple St., Salt I>ake City,

Utah.
Cottam,  Mr. & Mrs. X.. Salt

Lake City. Utah.
Cotton, W. F., Bradford,

Ont., Can.
Coughlin, M. E., 508-9 Spitzer

Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Coughlin, M. Ethel, Bascom,

O.
Coulson, L. F., W^eatherford,

Okla.
Coultrup. Alfred J.. 214 E.

Pikes Peak Ave., Oolor.ido

Springs, Colo.
Council,  M.  T.,  Crosbyton,  Tex.
Coursume, Mr. and Mrs. H..

34 Eagle St., Geneva, O.
Coutney, Percy, Gage. Okla.
Covell,  Fred,  Brandon.  Oregon.
Covert,  Clare  S., 819  Main  St..

Rapid City, So. Dakota.
Covert,  Martin.  Chagrin  Falls,

O.
Cowdin, Glen I.. 1416 W. 8th

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Cox,  David  J., 408  Charles  St..

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Cox, Eugene  L., 231-34  Gilmer

Bldg., Winston-Salem, N. C.
Cox, Henry  G., 411 W. Water

St., Blmira, N. Y.
Cox,  Howard, 5-6  Noble  Bldg..

Ardmore, Okla.
Cox, Eugene L., 321-4 Gilmer

Bldg., Winston-Salem, N. C
Cox, J. A., Pullman, W. Va.
Cox, Robert  O., 213 Summit

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.


1092


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Cox  &  Cox.  525  W.  Church  St.,

Elmlra, N. Y.
Coy,  D.  C,  37  Davis  Bldg  .  Day-
ton. O.
Cozatt,  J. B.,  D. C,
Jacksonville, Fla.
Crabill.  M.  B.,  1404  L  St.  N.  W.,

Washington,  D.  C.
Crabtree, H. C, 1523 O St..

Lincoln, Neb.
Craig-,  Mrs.  Edith,  Farmland, j

Ind.
Craig-,  H.  T.,  20  E.  Jackson !

Blvd.. Chicago,  111.
Craig, Strod  H., Fai'mland,

Ind.
Crammer,  Catherine  E.,  130  W.
Southern  Ave.,  Williamsport,
Pa
Crandall.  H. P., 917  College {

Ave., Racine, Wis.
Crane,  Allen  B., 32  Manhattan

St.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.  1

Crane, P. L., 2316/i S. Union  I

Ave.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Crapo, J. Edwin, 288 W. 92nd  ;

St., New York, N. Y.
Craven, J. H., Davenport, la.
Craven, Jane Wells, Arnott

BIdg.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Crawford,  A.  D.,  1458  Penn  St..

Denver, Colo.
Crawford,  B.,  303  Bergenline

Ave.,  Union Hill,  N. J.
Crawford, C. B., Shenandoah,

la.
Crawford. C. H., 2100 Warren

Ave., Chicago,  111.
Crawford,  Geo.  S.,  411  Ringford

Ave.. McKeesport. Pa.
Crawford,  Mrs. M. C, 24

Bowman  St.,  Rochester.  N.  Y.
Crawford. Walter  H., 819

Beacon  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Cray,  Mary  H.,  28  W.  Utica

St.. Buffalo, N. Y.
Creasy.  J.  C, 303  Jefferson

St.,  Roanoke,  Va.
Creasy. L. D.. 806 Pierce St..

Lynchburg.  Va.
Creasy, James G., McBain

Bldg.,  Roanoke,  Va.
Creese, L D.. Kramer Bldg.

Elizabeth City. N. C.
Creighton.  B. E.. 54  Hudson

Ave.,  Newark.  O.
Creighton, Frank. 114-15 The

Johnson. Muncie. Ind.
Cremean.  W.,  234  E.  Fourth

St.. Delphos, O.
Cremins. E. F.. 5 Wadsworth

St.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Crichton. Francis. Moose

Jaw. Ont., Can.
Crisler, Charles E.,

Klssimmee, Fla.
Cr'^jler  &  Crisler,  Bushnell,

Fla.
Crisler, Mrs. Mary,

Kissimmee, Fla.
Criss,  J.  D.,  226  Warrington

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Crissman,  A.  E.,  Colonial
Theatre Bldg., Hagerstown,
Md.
Crissman,  John.  T>aner.  Colo.
Crist,  General  G.,  406  I.  W.
Hellman  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.
Cristian,  Viola.  412  Greenwood

Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Critcherm,  Carma,  Box  226,  Do

Graff, O.
Crichton.  Francis,  Moose  Jaw,

Ont., Can.
Criteser,  W. T.. 744 Cleveland

St., Woodland,  Cal.
Critcher, Carma, Box 226.
Desrraff. O.


Cronk,  Bertha  Harmon.
Andover, Allegany Co.,
N. Y.
Cronk. Otis K  . care P. S. C,

Davenport. la.
Crosbey,  J.  C  .  Box  243.

Loveland, Colo.
Crosby, E. M., Worthington,

Minn.
Crosby, Arthur J., Adams,

N. Y.
Crosby, M. Ella, Clyde, O.
Crosby, W. H., .Tonesboro, 111.
Crosby  &  Crosby.  143  Wood

St., Monroe, Wis.
Cross & Cross, Madsen Bldg.,

Menomonie. Wis.
Cross, Mrs. Chas., Standish,

Mich.
Cross,  W.  H.,  Menominee,  Wis.
Crossby, W., 4200 Grand

Blvd.. Chicago. 111.
Crossley, May, Oswego. Kans.
Crouse. Minnie R.. 1031 E.
Colfax St., Denver, Colo.
Crouse,  Minnie  R., Brady

Island,  Neb.
Crow,  Clyde  M., Suite 112,
Oak  Hall Bldg., Duluth,
Minn.
Crow, Margaret, Suite 112,
Oak Hall Bldg., Duluth,
Minn.
Crowell, Edgar C. 309-10

Snyder Bldg., Elmira, N. Y.
Crowell,  Gladys  L.,  Van  Court
j Inn., Roselle, N. J.
i  Crowley,  W.  H.,  141-2  Forsyth
Bldg.,  Fresno,  Cal.
Crowley, W. W., 141-2

Forsyth Bldg., Fresno, Cal.
Crumpacker, E. K., c/o

Standard School of Chiro-
practic and  Naturopathy,
Davenport, la.
Crusins,  E.  L.,  500  Fifth  Ave.,

New  York. N. Y.
Cruzan, E. L., Cu.shing, Okla.
Cudmore, E. E., 1134 Fourth
Ave. N. W'., Moose Jaw,
Sask..  Can.
Cuff,  Amy  S.,  Dewey,  Okla.
Culberton, E. F., Seattle.

"Wash.
Cullems.  Geo.. 421  Walnut  St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Cullinan. G. A., 2370 Wa.sh-
ington Ave., Ogden, Utah.
Cullough, Wm.. G.. Broad St.

Bank  Bldg.,  Trenton,  N.  J.
Culver, Celie, 1415 E. Colfax

Ave., Denver, Colo.
Cummings,  H.  D.,  Maceo,  Ky.
Cummings,  S.  H..  373  Ocean

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Cummins,  J.  E.,  120  N.  10th  St.,

Cedar  Rapids, la.
Cunningham,  C.  G.,  West

Bldg., Jacksonville, Fla.
Cunningham. Ella, 727 Indian
Pythian Bldg., Indianapolis,
Ind.
Cunningham, Mrs. E. F.,

Crawfordsville, Ind.
Cunningham, G. H., 810
Liberty  Bldg.,  Waterbury,
Conn.
Cunningham, R. D.. Summer,

111.
Cunningham.  S.  R..  425  E. 3rd

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Curliss,  E.  S., 811  Lyric  Thea-
tre Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Curnoym. L. H., 2341 Kemfer

Lane,  Cincinnati,  O.
Curran,  Harriet  E.,  4532

Clifton  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Currey, ^Vni. W., 467 Warren
Ave., Detioit, Mich.


Currier,  Sophie, Ashland,

Kans.
Currier,  W.  H., 307-309  Huron

Ave., Port  Huron, Mich.
Curry,  H.  B.,  Harrisville,  W.

Va.
Curry, L. L., 310 Swearinger-
McGraw  Bldg.,  San  Antonio,
Tex.
Curry. M. E.. 603 '/^ Market
St., Parkersburg, W. Va.
Curtis & Curtis, 240 S. Court

St., Sullivan, Ind.
Curtis  &  Curtis,  828  Brady

St., Davenport, la.
Curtis,  Mrs.  A.  F.,  Nottingham

Hotel, Boston, Mass.
Curtis,  L.  R.,  Canton,  O.
Curtis, Viola F., West  Union,

la.
Curtis. L. K., Semmon, S.

Dak.
Cutburg.  F.  R..  2348  Telegraph

Ave.. Oakland. Cal.
Cuthbertson,  Nina,  Sterling,

Kans.
Daerden. Alfred, New Phila-
delphia,  O.
Daggett.  W.  v.,  Nowata.  Okla.
Dagley,  J.  B.,  Lockney,  Tex.
Dahmrow, E. H., 418 N. Bluff

St., Janesville, Wis.
Daily,  J.  A.,  10  N.  Webb  St.,

Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Dake, W. A., 321 Hayes Blk.,

Janesville,  Wis.
Dale,  W.  J.,  6236  Lexington

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Dale, Walter J., 6236 Univer-
sity  Ave., Chicago. 111.
Dallman, Wm. R.. Tyndall, S.

Dak.
D'Almaine, C. Helen, 510

Firemen's Insurance Bldg.,
Newark,  N.  J.
D'Almaine. Chas., 32nd St. &
Broadway, New Strand,
New  York,  N.  Y.
D'Almaine, Mrs. Cornelia, 510
Fireman's Bldg., Newark,
N. J.
Dalmer  &  Dalmer,  Box  19,

Creston,  la.
Dalton,  D. R.,  Parker,  S.  Dak.
Dalton, Leo. R., Washington,

la.
Dalzell,  Jos.  G.,  Grundy  Center,

la.
Damon, W. H., 1029 W. 22nd

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Damrow, E. H.. 405 Jackman

Bldg., Janesville, Wis.
Dana,  Jay  W.,  308  Flanders
Bldg.,  15th  &  Walnut  Sts.,
Philadelphia. Pa.
Dana, L. A.. 506 Grossman

Bldg.,  Lynn.  Mass.
Danforth, Willard  J., 268

Jersey St.. Buffalo, N. Y.
Daniel, A. L., 506-8 Security
Bldg., Oklahoma  City, Okla.
Daniel,  Bert  Monroe, 39  South

State St., Chicago, 111.
Daniels, Elve V., Moscow,

Idaho.
Daniels, Harry, Lisbon, N.D.
Daniels, Harry,  Stromberg,

Neb.
Daniels, J. O., 528 Minnesota

Ave., Kansas  City, Kans.
Daniels, Melville, Sheldon

Ave., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Dannel, B. M,. 39 S. State  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Dannenberg,  A.,  1st  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., Bemidji, Minn.
Darah,  Maude,  Mount  Vernon,

O.
Darland,  Q. T., La  Grande
Nat'l  Bank  Bldg..  La  Grande
Ore.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1093


Darling:  &  Darling,  536  S.

Emporia  Ave.,  Wichita,
Kans.
Darling-, Frank S., 738 K. of

P. Bldg-., Indianapolis, Ind.
Darnell, J. J., D. C, 420 10th

St., Denver, Colo.
Darnell, Laura B., 1315

Broadway, Denver, Colo.
Darrah,  L. C,  737  S. Harri.gon

Ave., Pocatello, Idaho.
Darrah, Lindell C, 339 N.

Main St., Pocatello, Idaho.
Dart,  O.  L.,  Gray.'^ville,  Tenn.
Dash, Clemens R., 109 Park

Ave., Dunkirk, N. Y.
Daughertv, 1. and C. H.,

Phillippi, W. Va.
Dau&herty, J. "W., 301i North

Federal Ave., Mason City,

la.
Daugherty, Martha  J.,

Liansing-,  Mich.
Daugherty, Martha, Xenia, O.
Daumler, Miss Mame, 519 S.

4th St., Columbus, O.
Dausch, Phoebe, 231 N. Main

St.,  Dayton,  O.
Davenport, R. E., 504  New

York Ave., Whiting, Ind.
David, T. Henry, Pittsburgh,

Kans.
Davidson,  A.  &  A.  H.,  Lamont,

la.
Davidson, C. R., Rimel Bldg.,

Portland, Ind.
Davidson, M. E., Brockton,

Mass.
Davidson, Rebecca  R., 887

Greene  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Davidson, Wm., 246 Virginia

Ave., Jersey  City, N. J.
Davies,  F.  T.,  319  Besse  Bldg.,

Springfield, Mass.
Davies,  Samuel,  St.  Louis,  Mo
Davis, A. P., 154 W. 23rd St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Davis, E., 120 S. Grand Ave.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Davis,  E.  C, 315  E.  7th  St.,

Los  Angeles.  Cal.
Davis,  E. T., 319  Besse  Bldg.,

Springfield, Mass.
Davis, Frank  L., 242-44 K. of

P. Bldg., Des  Moines,  la.
Davis,  J.  B.,  25  New  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Davis, Jas. B., Lafayette

Ave., Chatham, N. J.
Davis, Jas. E., 766 Poplar  St.,

Macon, Ga.
Davis, J. E., 106 E. 1st Ave.,

Oskaloosa, la.
Davis,  J.  E.,  Oskaloosa,  la.
Davis, John Henry, 34 Euclid

Ave., Ludlow, Ky.
Davis, J. P., Lindsay, Ont.,

Canada.
Davis,  O.  B.,  114i^  E.  Main  St.,

Bellevue, O.
Davis, Russell, Orilla, Ont.,

Can.
Davis,  Samuel,  421  Reynolds

Ave., Kittanning, Pa.
Davis, Samuel, Altoona Trust

Bldg.,  Altoona,  Pa.
Davis, Samuel. York, Pa.
Davis,  T.  A.,  Dayton  Beach,

Fla.
Davis. T. E., 202 I. O. O. F.

Bldg., Calgary, Alb., Can.
Davis.  Thos. R.. 242-244 K. of

P.  Bldg.,  Des  Moines,  la.
Davis, Dr., Woonsocket, S.

Dakota.
Davis,  W.  W.,  5606  Worth  St.,

Dallas,  Tex.
Davis, W. W., 2609 Hickory

St., Dallas, Tex.
Davis, W. W., Hedrlck, la.


Dawson, Frances, 1007 Pierce

St., Omaha, Neb.
Dawson, Nellie, 229 W. Statc-

St., Wellsville. N. Y.
Day,  Beatrice,  Hallstead,  Pa.
Dean,  Clay  L.,  Moultrie,  Ga.
Dean, Clay L., 615 Grand

Bldg., Atlanta, Ga.
Dean, G. D., 5th & Market

Sts., East Liverpool, O.
Dean, James R., Box 35,

Winter Haven, Fla.
Dean, Walter K., 808-10

Farley Bldg., Birmingham,

Ala.
Dean &  Whitmore,  Drs.,

Asheville,  N.  C.
Dean,  W.  K.,  Birmingham,

Ala.
Dean,  W.  K.,  Berrien  Springs,

Mich.
Dearden,  Alfred, 335  E.  Hight

St.,  New  Philadelphia,  O.
Dearden,  Jno., 318  S. Saginaw

St., Flint, Mich.
Dearden, John, Battle Creek,

Mich.
Dearden, John, 407-8 F. P.

Smith  Bldg.,  Flint,  Mich.
De  Armond,  R.  E.,  230  S.  Soto

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Dearth,  C. E.,  Box 28,

Fairview, Okla.
De Baun,  Harry  C, 134

"Washington  St., Paterson,

N. J.
De  Baun,  Harry  C, 141  Myer

St.,  Hackensack,  N. J.
De  Carlo,  P.  R.,  797  Cass  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
De  Carno.  Edw.,  Davenport,  la
Decker, R. D., 639 W. 18th

St., Chicago, 111.
Dedinsky, Louis, 4201 Maple-
dale Ave., Cleveland, O.
Dedrick, S. C, Nat'l Bank

Bldg., Ronneby,  Minn.
Deeks, J. H., 529 California

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Deem, E. E., 5521 Perkins

Court. Cleveland. O.
Deem, E. E., 1945 E. 69th

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Deerin, Mr. & Mrs.. 964

Broad St., Newark, N. J.
Deininger,  Anton, 1416 B'wav.

N. E. Corner 39th St., New

York, N. Y.
Deininger,  Mrs. Elvira  A.,

1416 B'way, N. E. Corner

39th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
De  Jonge,  Jno.  J.,  Zeland.

Mich.
De Keyser. Amanda P.,

Columbia Bldg., Portland,

Ore.

Dekker. B. M., 456 W. Jeffer-
son St., Los Angeles, Cal.

Delk. J.  W.. 514  Brady  St.,
Davenport, la.

De  Long,  L.  H.,  152  S.  Burdick
St., Kalamazoo, Mich.

De Long, L. H., Vicksburg.
Mich.

De Lytle, Roy, 16 State St..
Rochester, N. Y.

De  Marsa, Clarence, 4th  &

Center Sts.. Taft. Cal.
De Mallie, Bertha, 159

Berkeley St., Rochester,

N. Y.
De Mattos. F. S.. 367 Selkirk

Ave., M'innipeg, Man.. Can.
Deming, L. B., 1130 Main St.,

Dubuque, la.
Demmenwald, G. A., 4823 W

Congress St., Chicago, 111.
Demmitt, S. T., Hutchin.«on,

Kans.


De  Motte,  A.  G.,  2720 N.

Richmond St., Chicago, 111.
Deneen, Mary, Larchwood,

la.
Denins,  Albert  G., 521;^ X.

Broadway, Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Denis, Geo., Erskine, Minn.
Denison E., Reuben. Dillon

Bldg., Hartford, Conn.
Denison, Harold B., Orpheum

Theatre Bldg., Michigan

City, Ind.
Denlinger & Denlinger, 1317

16th St., Two Rivers, Wis.
Denlinger, Dr. J. H.,

Davenport,  la.
Denlinger, J. H., 109 S.

Riverside Drive, Elkhart,

Ind.
Dennett, Dr. Herbert E., 151

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass.
Dennis, Harry, 9 Odd Fellows

Bldg., Greensburg, Ind.
Dennis, R. E., West Fulton

St., Edgerton, Wis.
Denny, L. E., 3446 D St., San

Diego,  Cal.
Denny, L. L., 908 Broadway

Central Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Denon,  L.  G.,  30th  &  Division

Sts.,  Portland,  Ore.
Denton, H. A., 517 N. Santa

Fe Ave., Pueblo, Colo.
Denton, W. N., Loveland,

Colo.
Depew, D. M., Prole, la.
Dermitt,  S. W., 318 Woods

Bldg., Evansville, Ind.
Derner, Rudolph A., Battle

Creek, Mich.
Deshler, Alice Beeman,

Degroff, O.
Devena, Lena, Black

Mountains, N. C.
Devine & Devine, Redfield,

S. Dak.
Devine  &  Devine,  Athol, S.

Dak.
Devine, A. G., Oregon, Wis.
Devine,  A.  G., 843  Wellington

AvCs, Chicago, 111.
Devine, A. G., Evansville,

Wis.
Devinny, George M., 200

Lark St., Albany, N. Y.
Devinny. Minnie S., 200 Lark

St., Albany, N. Y.
Devore,  Burmise  E.,  202  West

Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
De  Vries, Emma, Farragut

Apts., Washington, D.  C.)
De Witt. C. W., 183 Nelson

Ave., St. Paul, Minn.
De  Witt,  F. E., 505  Chestnut

St., Burlington, Wis.
De Witt, J. O., Port Huron,

Mich.
De Wolfe, Blanche, Altoona,

Pa.
De Wolfe. Blanche E., 12

Endly  Block, Elyria, O.
De  Young, Dr. S. J„ St.

Charles. 111.
Dick, E. F., 1710 Highland

Blvd., Milwaukee. Wis.
Dick. P. F., 2710 Highland

Blvd.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Dickenscher, 3700 Fifth Ave.,

Washington,  D. C.
Dickhut,  C.  W.,  Bellevue,  la.
Dickie,  W.  A.,  Purcell,  Mo.
Dickinson, C. B., 338

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg., Columbus, O.
Dickinson, E. W., 5 Kreason

Bldg., Hornell, N. Y.
Dickson,  N. E.. 338 Security

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Dieckmann. J. E.. 1705-a

Union  Ave.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.


1094


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Diego, Vincent  A., San Diego,

Cal. (D.C.)
Dlerks  &  Dierks,  Wnhoo,  Neb.
Dieiks. Geo. W., Wahoo, Neb.
Dietz. A., 1428 Vllet  St.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Dietz,  Lewi.s  H., Pliysician.s'

Bldg-., Oakland, Cal.
Dietz. W. S., 94 S. 18th St.,

Pittsburg-h, Pa.
Dietze, Gustave R., Wall, S.

Dak.
Dilling-ham, R.  C,  I^ansing-,

Mich.
Dillman, Leo E., 401-2 Daily

News  Bldg-.,  Canton,  O.
Dillon, George, North Seattle,

Neb.
Dillon, John F.. 279 Berkeley

Ave., Bloomfield, N. J.
Dippo, Anna  E., 933  S.  Adams

St.,  Marion,  Ind.
Dirkes, C. M., 110 N. Ashland

Ave., Chicago. 111.
Dittman.  Wm.  C,  962  Buffin

St., Milwaukee  Wis.
Ditto,  Eva,  135  Ninth  St.

Denver, Colo.
Ditto, Eva  L.,  Glasgow,  Mont.
Ditto, J. F.,  Breen Block,

Great  Falls,  Mont.
Ditto,  Wm.  E.,  14  Breen  Block,

Great Falls, Mont.
Ditto,  Wm.  L.,  Glasgow,  Mont.
Ditto, Wm. L., Brady Island,

Neb.
Dittrich, John J.. 60 Hudson

Place, Weehawken, N. J.
Dittrick, F. W., 3140 W. 90th

St., Cleveland. O.
Dixon, Edith, St. Catherines,

Ont., Can.
Dixon,  Edith,  Hanover,  Ont.

Can.
Dixon, G. B., 510 Grand Ave.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Dixon, L. M., Wabasha, Minn.
Dixon, Reba L., Rockville,

Ind.
Dixon,  Walter  A., cor.  Gay  &

Hight  St.s.,  Mount  A'ernon,  O.
Dizmond,  Wm..  550  W.  Matilda

St.,  Huntington,  Ind.
Doblins, Chlora, Rogers, Ark.
Dodd, F.  T., Raymondville,

Tex.
Dodd, J. E., 36 Kearney St.,

Newark, N. J.
Doerr, Jno. P., 411-13 Kirby

Bldg.,  Saginaw,  Mich.
Dogstron, J. R., 110 Everett

Bldg.,  Akron,  O.
Dollinger, G. W.. 245 Grove

St.,  Battle  Creek. Mich.
Dolson. Robt  . 113 Biddel St.

N.,  Wyandotte.  Mich.
Donahue.  J.  J.,  1306  Federal

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Donnell, W. O. 241',^ Main

St.,  Ashtabula,  O.
Donnelly, John, 1625 W.

Adams St., Chicafiro, 111.
Donnelly,  Rose,  Durant,  la.
Donnelly, Sarah, 155 William

St., Newark, N. J.
Donohoo, Glenn, Peabody,

Kans.
Donovan, Donald, 917 Van
Nuys Bldg., Los  Angeles,
Cal.
Donton, H. A., 517  N.

Santa  Fe  Ave.,  Pueblo,  Colo.
Dorosh, P. J., 533 Security

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Dorsey, Anna  B., 150 W. 33rd

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Dorvan, D., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Dothage,  E.  A.,  283  S.  William

St.,  Moberly,  Mo.
Dothage,  E.  A.,  Now  Franklin,

Pa.


Dotliagc. E. A., 3:i^Jl^, Thonia.s

Ave., Shenandoah, la.
Dottiel,  Augusta, W.,  4601

Forbes St., Pitt.sburgh, Pa.
Dougherty, D. L., Philllppl,

W.  Va.
Dougherty,  J.,  Lyman  County,

Highland, S. Dak.
Dougherty, J. F., Springfield,

S. Dak.
Dougherty, .1. W., 303 '/4 N.

Main  St.,  Mason  City,  la.
Dougherty,  John,  Winner,  S.

Dak.
Dougherty, L. & C...  56 Fort

Wa.thington Ave., New

York.  N.  y.
Dougherty, M. .1., 26 South

Detroit St., Xenia, O.
Doughty, Frank  A.,  Linworth,

O.
Doughty, Jno., 23 S. 52nd St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Doughty,  W.  E.,  S.  Prospect

St..  Marion,  O.
Douglas,  A.  S.,  338  Union  Ave.

S.,  Portland,  Ore.
Douglass, F. S., 600 E. 16th

St., Cheyenne, Wyo.
Douglas,  Iv.,  1317  Prairie  Ave.,

St. Louis, Mo.
Doutt, Edwin S., 516 Federal

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Douttiel, A. W., Forbes  &

Craig  Sts..  Pitt.sbuieh. Pa.
Dove, Geo. S., 3767 W. 14th

St.,  Oakland,  Cal.
Dovey.  C. A., 100.5 Market  St.,

Youngstown, O.
Dow,  Emma  L.,  87  Huntington

Ave., Boston, Mass.
Dowd,  E.  L.,  Wanbay,  S.  Dak.
Dowd, Ella  M., Sebeka, Minn.
Dowd, Roy  L., First Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Webster, S. D.
Dowman,  Juanita,  503-5  Union

Bldg., Anderson, Ind.
Downer, Arthur  P., 515 W.

122nd  St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.
Downer, S. W., Mt. Pleasant,

Mich.
Downey,  Andrew  I., 206 St.

Clair St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Downing,  J.  R.,  Box  15,

Ellisville, Miss.
Downing,  L.  S.,  Pawhuska,

Okla.
Downing,  R.  B.,  1549  Ogden

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Downing.  R.  B..  122 '^2  N.  W^ebb

St.,  Webb  City,  Mo.
Downs  &  Downs,  Babcock

Bldg., Billings. Mont.
Downs, Albert Victor,

Glendale, Cal.
Downs, 1.1. Irene, Midland

City, 111.
Downs, Lewis Francis,

Yellowstone Co., Billings,

Mont.
Doxsee, Geo. N., 403 Rysee
Bldg., Toronto, Ont.. Ctu.
Draer, L.  L., Aeolian Hall, 33

W. 42nd St., New York,

N.  Y.
Drain, James R., Scott City,

Kans.
Drake, E. V., 187 N. Pearl

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Drake, J. A., Cawker City,

Kans.
Drake,  .T. A.,  Abilene,  Kan.s.
Drake,  O.  M.,  Exline,  la.
Drake, William, 209 N. State

St., Marlon, O.
Drapier, D. E. Los Taft, 707

High St., Des Moines, la.
Draser, Andrew, 233 West

Jefferson St., Lob Angeles,

Cal.
Dresiier, A. S., 1341 Walnut
St., Boulder. Colo.


Dresser,  B.  A., 1904  W. Van

Buren St., Chicago, 111.
Dresser,  B.  A.,  519  Church  St.,

Lynchburg, Va.
Dresser, B. J., 407 Humboldt

St.,  Union  Hill,  N.  J.
Dresser, C. W., Caldwell,

Idaho.
Dresser, V. A., 601 Church

St., Lynchburg, "\'a.
Drews, George J., 1910 N.

Harding Ave., Chicago, 111.
Driskell, Geo. W., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Drobny, T., 235 S.  Michigan.

St., South Bend, Ind.
Drumm, Carl C, 18 Arcade,

Newark, O.
Drummet, Sybil J., 99 E.

Main St., Somerville, N. J.
Drummett, Mrs. G. N., 215 N.

24th St., Lincoln, Neb.
Drummit,  S.  J.,  Fremont,  Neb.
Drury, W. H., Bridge St.,

Mayville, Wis.
Dryden,  AV. X.,  Oskaloosa,  la.
Duboys, Elizabeth B., Sault

Ste.  Marie, Can.
Duck, M. E., Stone  Mountain,

Ga.
Duck, M. E., Mineral Park

Springs, Tenn.
Duckwell, E. D., Bunker

Hill, Ind.
Duckworth, Jas. A., 59 Perin

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Duckworth,  Jos.  A.,  830  Union

Trust Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Du  Clon, C. L.. 43  Buffalo  St.,

Springville, N. Y.
Dudley, Issbel H 1503 2ntli

St., JDes  Moines, la.
Dudley^ O. Philip, 1503 20th

St., Des Moines, la.
Dudney,  Manuel, Jacksonville,

111.
Duelos, Wm., 97 Ann St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Dueringer,  Heinrich,  47  W.

34th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Duey, Fred  J., 6215 Hough

Ave.,  Cleveland. O.
Duey,  W.  P., 624  N.  Electric

Ave.,  Alhambra,  Cal.
Duff, H.  J.,  1428  W.

Washington Blvd., Chicago,

111.
Duffin, Mrs. Nellie, 15 W. 3rd

St., Monmouth, 111.
Duffleld,  W. A., 2 Steel  Block,

Winnipeg,  Man.,  Can.
Dugger  &  Dugger,  621  Walnut

St., Springfield, 111.
Dukes & Dukes. 204 First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Corning,

N. Y.
Dukes & Dukes, Hart, Mich.
Dukes,  Lloyd  E.,  Fastoria,  O.
Dulla, B., 3529 Harper  St., St.

Louis, Mo.
Duncan, A. N., 205 E. Ontario

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Dunder,  Ruth  E.,  Wauneta,

Neb.
Dunham.  E. R., 819 Ferry  St.,

Sedro-Woolley,  Wash.
Dunham,  George  P.,  151  Hunt-
ington Ave., Boston, Mass.
Dunlap, A. T., Woodward,

Okla.
Dunlap, H. E., Garden  City,

Kans.
Dunlap, J.  A.,  Garden  City,

Kans.
Dunmore,  Dr.  W. K.,  Sterling,

111.
Dunn, Frank, Luddington,

Mich.
Dunn, Geo. W., 1003 Gaby

Ave.,  East  St.  Louis,  111.
Dunn, Geo. W., 264 McKinley

Ave., Salem,  O,


V.hiropvaclom


Profes.siondl  Hegister


1095


Dunn,  Geo.  W., 313 Woolner

Bldg-., Peoria, 111.
Dunn. J. D., 106 W. Park St.,

Portland,  Ore.
Dunn, Raymond,  Greenwood,

Ark.
Dunn,  R.  L.,  Gladstone,  Ore.
Durbin.  B.  K.,  201'/. W.  Center

St.,  Warsaw,  Ind.
Du I'raw, Frank D., !t-10

Clover  Block,  Belling-ham,

Wash.
Duiston,  C.  J.,  Mapleton, la.
Dur.ston, C. J., Cleburne, Tex.
Dutcher, E. M., 96 Chenango

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Du Valle, Beatrice, 601 State

Life Bldg-., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Dux. H., 112 E. 41st St., New-
York, N. Y.
Dwelle, Ida, 2244 Gaylord St.,

Denver, Colo.
Dye, A.  Aug., N. Y. American

Bldg-., New York, N. Y.
Dye,  Chas.  T.,  104  S.  Michigan

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Dye, Julia H., 710 Park Ave.,

Weehawken, N. J.
Eacheston, H., Chickasha,

Okla.
Eagle,  R.  O.,  52  Genessee  St.,

Saginaw,  Mich.
Eakins,  F.  A.,  Old  Curry

Bldg., Windsor, Ont., Can.
Eames, M. J., 4759 Broadway,

Chicago,  111.
Earl,  J.  C,  201  Pantages

Theatre,  I>os  Angeles,  Cal.
Earl,  J.  Cornelius,  Pasadena,

Cal.
Easto'n,  C.  W.,  19  Lorain  Bank

Bldg., Lorain, O.
Easton, May Blanche. 436 W.

30th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Eastwood,  H.  W.,  State  &

Hohman Sts., Hammond,

Ind.
Eaton, A. C, Stayton, Ore.
Eaton,  Chas.  R., 3850

Telegraph Ave., Oakland,

Cal.
Eaton, Chas. R., 4824

Telegraph  Ave.,  Oakland,

Cal.
Eaton, C. W., Lorain Blk.,

Lorain, O.
Eberhardt, G. A., 28  40 S. 41st

St., Chicago, 111.
Eberhardt, Wm.  C,  1664

Wisconsin St., Racine, Wis.
Eberhart, Emma M., Newton,

Kans.
Eble, H. A.. 738 Broad St.,

Newark, N. J.
Eckard, Harry L.. 304 Mc-

Clymonds Bldg., MassiTIon,

O.
Eckenroth,  Henry,  526  River

Ave., Tex.
Bckerman. Geo., Prince

Rupert. Ore.
Eckles, J. E., Glendale. Cal.
Ecklund,  A.,  Chailevoix,  Mich.
Eddy, C. E., 188 Water St.,

Santa  Cruz, Cal.
Eddy, Chas. E.. 137-8

Edgerley Bldg., Fresno,

Cal
Eddy,' G. R., 1022 Spruce St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Edelbach, Mrs. Rosa, 119

Jefferson St., "Waupaca,

Wis.
Edmund & Edmiind, Ames,

la,
Edmundson, F. P., Box 271,

Kiowa, Kans.
Edsall, E.. 454 Central Ave.,

Jersey  City, N. J.
Edward, L. R., 410 Bumiller

Bldg., IjOs Angele.t. Cal.


Edwards,  J.  C, Suite  445,

Haye.t Bldg., Bralnerd,

Minn.
Edwards, L. W., 2238

Farnum  St.,  Omaha,  Neb.
Edwards, Dr. Arthur, 1141

Lake St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Edwards, Dr., <•  <> Chicago

Dental Parlor, Peoria, 111.
Edwards, Mrs. E. C, 715 E.

8th St., Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Edwards, E. V., Knoxville,

Tenn.
Edwards, Frank, Wagoner,

Okla.
Edwards, H. A., La Fayette,

Ind.
Edwards, H. W., 1237 Linden

Ave., Long Beach, Cal.
Edwards, John, 1109 Sherman

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Edwards, Jos. M., Climax

Springs, Mo.
Edwards, L. W., 244 Farnam

St.,  Omaha,  Neb.
Edwards, Phoebe A..

Wagoner. Okla
Efford, William M., 11215

Longwood Drive, M. Pk.,

Chicago, 111.
Egan,  F. W.,  Masonic  Bldg.,

Tremont,  O.
Egan,  H.  M., 308 Nasby  Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
Egan, Junia, Liberty, Ind.
Egan, Joseph M., 52 Front

St., Munroe, Mich.
Egan, K. F. 310-12 Prudden

Bldg., Lansing, Mich.
Egan, T. "W., 112J Front St.,

Tremont, O.
Egan,  Thos.  W., 330  Nasby

Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Egan, Thos. W., Fremont, O.
Egbert, Ellis, Main & Seneca

Sts.,  Alliance,  O.
Eggers, Carl, Hainmond, La.
Eglinton, Laura B., 100 N. C.

St.,  Arkansas  City, Kans.
Eichel, C. W., St. Clare  Bldg.,

Marietta. O.
Eikler, Lillie. 221 W. Euclid

Ave., King Fisher, Okla.
Eilersflcken, F. B. C, Panaca,

Nev.
Eisenbacher, Paul, West

Brooklyn. 111.
Eisenbacher,  Paul,  Wesley,  la.
Eisenman, L. E., 314 Lyric

Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Eitman & Kirkpatrick,

Lancaster, Cal.
Ekdall,  A.  B.,  Key  City  Hotel,

Cheyenne, Wyo.
Eldridge, Geo. W.. 64"':. Gluck

Bldg., Niagara Ffi'ls, N. Y.
Eldridge, W. B., 29 N. Colony

St., Meriden, Conn.
Eldridge W. B., 212 S. Union

St., Clean, N. Y.
Eldridge, "SV. B., 365 Whelley

Ave., New Haven, Conn.
Elgarten, M., 362 Kearny St.,

San Francisco, Cal.
Elkins,  Harry  D., 305-7

Johnson Bldg., Muncie. Ind.
Elliot, Frank W., 828 Brady

St., Davenport, la.
Elliot,  G.  E.,  Elk  City,  Okla.
Elliott, C. H., Leedy, Okla.
Elliott, F.  W., 800-34 Brady

St.,  Davenport,  la.
Elliott, G. C, 401 Southern

Bldg., Wilmington, N. C.
Ellis, Egbert, Main & Seneca

Sts., Alliance, O.
Ellis, H. B., 11 S. Warren

St., Trenton. N. J.
Ellis,  Howard  G.,  6240  Cottage

Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.


Ellis, Leo L., 137 Joralemon

St.,  Brooklyn, N.  Y.
Ellis,  S.  E.,  Moorhead,  Minn.
Ellison,  Eugene,  150  Perry  St.,

Fostoria. O.
Ellison, Eugene E., Main St.,

Fostoria, O.
Ellwood,  Mary  A.,  346  W.  47th

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
EUyson,  S.  M.,  Vinton,  la.
Ellyson, S. M., Issenbuth

Block, Redfield, S.  D.
Elright, J. E., 216 Hogan St.,

Jacksonville, Fla.
Elsman, E., R. F. D. No. 1,

Elvin,  Mo.
Elsman, E.  H., Spencer,  la.
Elwood, Mary  A., 346  W. 47th

Place, Los Angeles, Cal.
Elwood, E. W., 1150 Prospect

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Elwood,  Mary  A., 346  W. 47th

Place, Los Angeles, Cal.
FAy, A. R., Waynesboro, A^a.
Ely,  A. R.,  308  Safety  Bldg.,

Rock Island, 111.
Ely, Blondine W., Waynes-
boro, Va.
Embree, J. S., Fremont, Neb.
Emerson, D. A., 316 George

St., York, Pa.
Emery, Mrs. Flora,

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass.
Emmonds  &  Emmonds,

Washington  Court  House,

O.
Emmons, E. J., Westville,

Okla.
Emmons,  George  C,  Washing-
ton City  Heights,  O.
Emmons, G. Clyde, Burr  Oak,

Mich.
Emmons,  G.  E.,  Washington

Court House, O.
Enestvedt, Sophia, 2337

Milwaukee Ave., Chicago,

111.
Enestvedt, John, 2337

Milwaukee  Ave.,  Chicago,

111.
England,  Archibald,  108  S.  7th

St.,  Terre  Haute.  Ind.
England, Archie, Salida, Colo.

Engle, Edward, 403 Ham-

berger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Engle, Isaiah T., Canton,  O.
Englehart, George, Chicago,

O.
Englert, A. M., 71 Broad St.,

Red Bank, N. J.
English,  Leonard  H., Wood-
ward  Bldg., Washington,

D.  C.
English, T.  H., 11  Perry  St.,

Woodstock, Can.
Engstrom, Beda E., Saint

Joseph, Mich.
Ensch, Leon, Lakota, N. Dak.
Ensch, Leon, New Rockford,

N. D.
Ensign,  Mrs.  A.  G.,  Hawarden,

la.
Eperly, Pearl, Montrose,

Colo.
Erickson, Emma, 316 1  "W'. 2nd

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Erickson, O., Sioux Falls, S.

Dak.
Erickson.  O.  J.,  201  Smitt  Blk.,

Sioux  Falls,  S.  Dak.
Erickson, P. E., 234

Constitution Bldg., Salt

Lake City, L'tah.
Erwin. R. J., Northern  Crown

Bank Bldg., Vancouver, B.

C, Can.
Erz, A. A., 1774 Sutter  St.,

San Francisco, Cal.
Escher, Emma S., Victor, la.


1096


Professional  Register


CUiropraclovs


Esslinger, E. E., Mason City,

la.
Estes, J. C, 2016 E. 15th St.,

Oakland. Cal.
Eteson,  Arthur  T>.,  49  Aughton

Rd., Berkdale, Southport,

Eng-.
Eubert,  Fred. 1221  Broadway,

Denver,  Colo.
Evans, 333 S. Dearborn St.,

Chicagro,  111.
Evans, D. L,., Adair, la.
Evans,  Jno., 49 S. Main St.,

Wilkes  Barre,  Pa.
Evans, Marshall, Hackett,

Ark.
Evans, Marshall O., Midland,

Ark.
Evans, Mrs. Nora J., 7107

Idlewild St., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Evans, Oscar, Midland, Ark.
Evans,  William,  280  Smith  St.,

Winnipeg,  Manitoba.  Can.
Evans, W. S.. 211 Wallace

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Evans & Evans, 227 Howard

St., Union City, Ind.
Evoy, Jobling, Asselin Block,

Calumet,  Mich.
Evoy, J. N., Sault  Ste. Marie,

Can.
Ewald, Emilie, 2300 Prairie

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Ewing,  A. H.,  205 Scott  Bldg.,

Salt Lake City, Utah.
Ewing,  A. W.,  Latrobe, Pa.
Eynon, John, Market Square,

Steubenville, O.
Faber, E. R., Cor. Main &

Church Sts., Ashland, O.
Fairley, J. M., Arrott Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fairlie. J. H., 512 Todd St.,

Wilkinsburg, Pa.
Fairweather, W. E.,

Deadwood, S. Dak.
Fallon, M. M., 1614 La Salle

Ave., Chicago. 111.
Fallott. J. F., Barnes  Bldg.,

Suite 309, Wichita, Kans.
Fanchett, Dr., Angola, Ind.
Fargo, F. H., Racine. Wis.
Farmer, E. C, Lansing,

Mich.
Farnand, C. J., Finley, N. D.
Farnand, M. F., 52 Security

Bldg., Grand Forks. N. D.
Farnand, M. J., Bottineau, N.

Dak.
Farnsworth, John, 637

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Farnsworth,  L. E.,  Auerbach

Bldg.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Farr, A. E., 852 Oakwood

Ave., Toledo, O.
Farrar,  Walter  E.,  Valparaiso,

Ind.
Farrington, J. L., 320 Marion

Blk., Marion, Ind.
Fash, G. F., Metamora, O.
Fassett  &  Fassett,  Youngs-
town, O.
Faust, Mrs. B. Challis, 130 S.

15th  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Faust, Clara A., 305 N.

5th  St., Watertown, Wis.
Favvcett, Nora, 310 W. 65th

St.. Chicago. 111.
Feardon, T. J., 4 E. North

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fearon, E. T., 421 7th Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fechtig, St. George, 37

Madison  St.,  New  York,  N.Y.
Fegley,  Geo.  W.,  Carroll,  la.
Fehl, Carrie, 145 South St.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Fehr, E. P., 5803 Superior

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Fehr, E. P., Cambridge, O.


Feige, E. W., Woonsocket,

S. Dak.
Fellow, Blanche, 702 Conover

Bldg., Dayton, O.
Fellow, L. N., 702 Conover

Bldg., Dayton, O.
Fellroth, Basil, Los Angele.s,

Cal.
Felper,  J. N., 833 S. State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Felt, A. F.. 1801 Jackson

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Feltus & Bender, 106-7

McDiarmed State Bldg..

Aberdeen, S. D.
Felumlee, Mrs. C. V., 1128

Gamber Ave., Cambridge,

O.
Felzer,  David,  926 S.

Marshfield Ave., Chicago,

111.
Femulle, C. N., 1128 Corner

Ave., Cambridge, O.
Fenimore, Dr. B. B., 50th &

Market Sis., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Fennel,  F.  S.,  25  W.  65th  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Fennell. Elizabeth E., 15

Montgomery Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fenner, J. L., 33 Federation

Bldg., Hornell, N. Y.
Fenner,  J.  L., 304  Main  St.,

Hornell, N. Y.
Fenter,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., Springfield.  Mo.
Fenter & Fenter. Landers

Theatre  Bldg.,  Springfield,

Mo.
Fenton, Eva J., St.

Catherines,  Ont.,  Can.
Fenton,  Laura  E.,  Washington,

la.
Ferguson,  E.  W..  115  York  St.,

New  Haven,  Conn.
Ferguson, Hugh, Guthrie,

Okla.
Ferguson,  M.  B.,  110  Jefferson

St., Rooms 10-12, Roanoke,

Va.
Ferguson,  S. K.,  Moville,  la.
Ferguson, Wm. F., Sivan St.,

Washington,  D.  C.
Ferrand. C. L., Creston, la.
Fessel,  Dr.  E.,  Manning, Fla.
Fessel. Mrs. Phena, Wild

Horse,  Colo.
Fessel, Phena C, Manning,

la.
Fete, Luther B., 1407 Allison

St., Washington, D. C.
Fett.  A.  F.. 1801  Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Fetterman, A. L., Central

Citv, Nebr.
Fetters. M. B., Rooms 3-4,

Hesler Bldg., Veedersburg,

Ind.
Fewell, A. B., 504 Watson

St., Ripon, Wis.
Fewell, A. B., Ottawa, Can.
Fewell, K. B. 844  Watson St.,

Ripon, Wis.
Fey, L. M. Weldon Springs,

Mo.
Fey,  L.  M.  Chancellor,  S.,  Dak.
Field,  A.  E. 532  Altman  Bldg.,

Kansas City, Mo.
Field, D. J., 208 W. Main St.,

Marion, Ohio.
Field, Nora, 208 W. Main St.,

Marion, Ohio.
Field,  P.  T., 115i  W.  Main  St.,

Gallon,  Ohio.
Fierstead, J. F., Summit, S.

Dak.  ■
Fiest, W. L. Hartley, la.
Fillinger, C. A., 630 Wood-
ward Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.


Finch, F. E., Parkston,

S. Dak.
Finch J. T. 122— 4th Ave.,

Urban Bldg., 506 Republic

Bldg.,  Louisville,  Ky.
Fineman, Dr. Harry, 1338 N.

Franklin St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Fink, G. A., Headrick. Okla.
Finkelstein, A. A. 97  Ann St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Finkelstein,  Sam'l, 207  W. 110

St., New York, N. Y.
Finkhousen, F. W., S. Wash-
ington  St., Van Wert, O.
Finkhousen, W. F., 22j/i

Monroe  St.,  Decatur,  Ind.
Finley,  E.  P.,  Byesville,  O.
Finley, J. E., 2510 Lisbon

Ave., Milwaukee, Wis.
Finn, L. E., Saint Joseph,

Mich.
Finn, Louis E., 30i S. 7th

St.,  Terre  Haute,  Ind.
Finnen, E., 45 W. 34th St.,

New  York, N. Y.
Finseth, Anna M., Kenyon,

Minn.
Finseth, Anna M., Silverton,

Ore.
Firth, John  W., Realty Bldg.,

Cadillac, Mich.
Firth, J. N., 828 Brady St.,

Davenport, la.
Fischer, Clara E., Vinton, la.
Fischer,  H.  M.,  Vinton,  la.
Fischer, John A., Otis Bldg..

16th  and  Sansom  Sts.,  I'hila-

delphia. Pa.
Fish, Ella  S., Garner, la.
Fisher, D., State Savings

Bank Bldg., Butte, Mont.
Fisher, H. Wallace, 512 5th

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fisher, J. Clyde, Vicksburg,

Mich.
Fisher,  Joseph,  Davenport,  la.
Fisher, Myrtle N., Vicksburg,

Mich.
Fisher, Ray  L., 306 Ferry  St..

Hartford, Conn.
Fitch, R. L., 4940 W. Kinzle

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Fite, M. S., 405J Main St.,

Lewiston, Idaho.
Fitz, Chas. B., 839 Freeland

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fitzgerald, Bess, Greenwood,

Ark.
Fitzgerald, F. W., Bowling

Green, Mo.
Fitzgerald, Frank W., Casey,

la.
Fitzgerald,  Jno.,  Hackett,  Ark.
Fitzgerald, J. A., Tonkawa,

Okla.
Fitzgerald, J. W., Antlers,

Okla.
Fitzsimmons, W. Warren,

Grand Rapids, Mich.
Fitzstad, T. E., Route 2,

Barron, Wis.
Fitzstad, T. E., Rice Lake,

Wis.
Fjerestad, J., Sisselton, S. D.
Flagel, L. H., Osterdock,

Iowa.
Flagel, L. H., 913 N. Eighth

St., Sheybogan, Wis.
Flaherty, W.  T., 305-6 Howe's

Blk., Clinton, la.
Flaherty, Wm. J., 253 Odgen

St., Jersey  City, N. J.
Flanagan, Francis N., Prud-

den Bldg., Lansing, Mich.
Flanigan, G. L., 524 Penna

Ave.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Flawith, F., 223 W. 2nd St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Flaws,  Robert,  448  Ridge  Way,

Los Angeles, Cal.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1097


Fleak,  Gertrude,  62  Oxford  St.,

Hamilton, Ont., Can.
Flegel, L. H., 913 N. 8th St.,

Sheboygan,  Wis.
Fleisher, Karl, Rooms 414-15

503 Fifth Ave., New York,

N. Y.
Fleming-, Irving, Knill Blk.,

Port Huron, Mich.
Fleming. J. H.. 1603 Marshall

St., Davenport, la.
Fleming, S. D., Knill Blk.,

Port Huron, Mich.
Fleming, Nellie R., Cleburne,

Fletcher, Mrs. Alex., R.  F.  D.

No. 2, Orange, Cal.
Fletcher, W. H., Ijnionville,

Mo.
Flick, Elizabeth, 204 Scribner

St.,  Du  Bois,  Pa.
Flick, Jas. R., 724 Hamilton

St.,  Allentown, Pa.
Flick,  James  R.,  46  Washing-
ton Ave., Collingwood, N. J.
Flink, G. A., Headrick, Okla.
Flower, Andrew G., 3622

Lorain  Ave.,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Flower, A. H., 101 St.,

Botolph St., Boston, Mass.
Flower, M. E., 501 Farmers

Trust  Bldg.,  South  Bend,  Ind.
Fluegel, A. B., Charles City,

la.
Foley, Horace P., 519 W. 4th

St., Davenport, la.
Foley, Wm. R., 272 Main St.,

New Britain, Conn.
Foltry,  Mrs.  C,  3349  Tejon  St.,

Denver, Col.
Folts  &  Folts, 2639 Peach  St.,

Erie,  Penn.
Fonger, Edwin S., 3831 W.

25th St., Cleveland, O.
Fonts,  L. H., 733;4 Garrison

Ave., Ft. Smith, Ark.
Foord,  E.  J.,  327  E.  Spruce  St.,

Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.
Foote, Arthur M., 509 Brad-
bury Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Force, Wilbur, Jackson,  Mich.
Ford. W. W.. 7312 Colonial

Savings & Trust Co.,

Columbus, O.
Forrester,  J.  I.,  Holtville,  Cal.
Fortier, J. B., Davenport, la.
Fortin, Edwin C, Cresco, la.
Fossler, W. C, Sterling, 111.
Foster  & Foster, St. Clair,

Minn.
Foster, C. E., 337 St., James

Bldg., Jacksonville. Fla.
Foster, Chas. L., Patterson

Bldg., Flint, Mich.
Foster, F. A., Masonic  House,

Springfield, Ohio.
Foster,  Frank  A.,  Box  706, St.

Augustine, Fla.
Foster,  Louis, 126  Grace  St.,

Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Foster,  B.  W.,  201  S.  Main  St.,

Carrollton, Mo.
Foster,  H.  J.,  Hastings,  Neb.
Foster, Mrs. Pearl, Washing-
ton, Okla.
Foster,  Mrs. R.  A.  Mollie, Los

Angeles, Cal.
Foster  & Kellogg, Hastings,

Neb.
Fowle, J. J., Ionia, Mich.
Fowler,  Miss  F.  I., 1226  D  St.,

N. E., Washington, D. C.
Fowley, W. R., 272 Main St.,

New Britain, Conn.
Fox  & Fox, 414 Dryden

Bldg., Flint, Mich.
Fox, J. A., Wingham, Ont.

Can.
Fox,  Warren  F.,  786  Sunset

Ave,.  Pasadena,  Cal.


Foy & Foy, 716 Kansas  Ave.,

Topeka,  Kans.
Foy, A. C, 716 Kansas Ave.,

Topeka, Kans.
Foy,  Anna  M., Pres.  Kan.sas

State Board of Chiropractic

Examiners, DenLson, Kans.
Foy, Harry  L., 674-6 Hellman

Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Foy, Raymond C, 217 San

Marcos Bldg., Santa Bar-
bara,  Cal.
Fradsham, F. B.. 220 S. State

St., Chicago, 111.
Fradsham,  W.  F.  B., 22-0 S.

State  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Fradsham, W. F. A., 718 W.

63rd St., Chicago, 111.
France, W. N., Cor. Church &

Main Sts., Ashland, O
Francis,  G. R., 10221  Prospect

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Francis, G. R., 18 New Zim-
merman Bldg., Springfield,

Ohio.
Francis,  Thomas,  94  E.  Wash-
ington St., South Norwalk,

Conn.
Frank, G. H., Alva, Okla.
Frank,  G. H.,  San  Jose, Cal.
Frank, L. Wilson, 423

Exchange Bldg., Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Frank,  Mrs.  M.,  975  S.  Somer-
set St.,  Ottawa,  Ont.,  Can.
Frank,  Sada,  Russell,  Kans.
Frank,  Sade  H.,  Utica,  Kans.
Franke, Marie L., Second

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa.
Frankowsky,  Erich.  3550  W.

Monroe  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Frantz, Glen F., North Side

Square, Noblesville, Ind.
Eraser, Lillian, Glick Bldg.,

Berlin, Ont., Canada.
Eraser, Lillian M., 96 King

St., Weber Block, Berlin,

Ont,  Can.
Eraser, W. P., 24 Alex Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Fravek, Mildred, Kingsley,

Kans.
Frazer,  F.  C,  117  Division  St..

Elkhart. Ind.
Frazier, E.  L.,  Brookfleld,  Mo.
Fredericks, Egbert, 63 East

8th St., Holland, Mich.
Frederick, R. W., Westcott

Bldg., New Philadelphia,

Ohio,
i  Freding, Jones, 801 6th St..
i Greeley, Colo.
!  Fredling & Fredling, 901 6th
I St.,  Greeley,  Colo.

Freeborn, Thos. J., 527
I Jarvella  St.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Freeborn, Thos. J., 405 May

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Freel, J. E., 748 S. 15th St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
I  Freel, Jas. S. F., Littleton
! Ave.,  Newark, N.  J.

Freenor, F. J.. Col. Hudson
' Bldg., Ogden, Utah.
Freese,  Benj.  J.,  Gresham,  Ore.
Freese,  Benj.  J., 627J  Lind  St.,

Quincy, 111.
French, J. A., 1127 W. 18th

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
French, S. C, Birnamwood,

Wis.
French, W. G., 1610 Mailers

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
Frey, B. C, Decatur, Ind.
Frey,  Hugh,  Linesville,  Pa.
Friedlein, N. F., Dubuque, la.
Friezen, I. H., Henderson,

Neb.
Frisby,  Earl  E.,  Butler,  Ind.
Fritsch,  A.  W..  13  Elliott  Ave.,

Syracuse,  N.  Y.


Fritz, Ada  Christine, 233

Gregory  St.,  Roche.ster,  N.  Y.
Fritz,  A.  E.,  315  Del  Norte  St..

Colorado Springs, Colo.
Fritz, Matilda  J., 233 Gregory

St..  Rochester.  N. Y.
Fritz,  W.  Wallace,  1600

Summer St.. Philadelphia,

Pa.
Fritz & Fritz. 208 Masonic

Temple, Denver, Colo.
Froude, Chas. C, 209-12

Warren Bldg., 260 Fair  St.,

Kingston, N. Y.
Frutiger, Ernest, Ottawa, 111.
Frutiger, E.  C,  Carrell,  la.
Frutiger, E. C, Greenfield,

Iowa.
Frutiger, G., Boone, la.
Frutiger, Godfrey, Carroll,  la.
Fry,  B.  C, Huntington,  Ind.
Fuchs, L.. Box 185. Butler.
I N.  J.

Fugate.  E.  P..  Argos.  Ind.
1  Fuller. Leroy E.. 523 Meridan
i Life  Bldg.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.
j  Fuller, Victor, 39i Queen St.,

Niagara  Falls,  Can.
Fuller, Victor, 204 St. Paul
I St.,  St.  Catherine,  Ont.
I  Fuller & Zandeen, Plainview,
! Neb.

I  Fullmer,  Jacob,  3511  S. Grand
; Ave.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
i  Fulton & Edwards, 10 New

Sharp Bldg., Lafayette, Ind.
Fulton & Fulton, Klamath

Falls, Ore.
Fulton  &  Fulton,  108  S.  Church

St., Salem, Ore.
Fulton, Margaret E., Denair,

Cal.
Fulton, Robt., Saint Joseph,

Mich.
Fulton, W. F., Denair, Cal.
Fulrath, Wesley, Farmers'

State  Bank  Bldg.,  Waukesha.

Wis.
Funk, H. F., 1138 E. 63rd St.,

Chicago,  111.
Funk. Otto. Shelbvville. Ky.
Furguson.  E.  W..  115  York  St..

New Haven, Conn.
Furst, O. J., 1335 W. 37th

Place,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Gaard, C. B., Fort Dodge,

Iowa.
Gaard, Chris., Estherville, la.
Gabbert,  Harry. New London.

la.
Gabler,  J.  F..  234  S.  Boulevard,

Oak Park, 111.
Gabriel,  J.  M.,  718  Kansas  Ave.,

Topeka,  Kans.
Gadbors, L. F., 422 E. 40th

St., Chicago, 111.
Gage,  Geo. B. 305 North  Main

St.,  Barre,  Vt.
Gage, H. W., 3 Couch St..

Plattsburg, N. Y.
Gage,  T.  Mae, 305  North  Main

St.,  Barre,  Vt.
Gage, \Y. A., 49 -A Dover St..

Albany, N. Y.
Gage,  Winfred  B..  325  Gryphon

Bldg.,  Rutland,  Vt.
Galatian, H. B., 4151 Grand

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Galbraith & Galbraith, 623

Bathhurst  St., Toronto,  Ont.
Galbraith. A., 130 S. Fair-
mount  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Galbraith,  J.  C,  Clarion,  Pa.
Galbraith, "W. J., Orillia, Ont.
Gale, Minnie, 2715 Stevens

Ave., Minneapolis, Minn.
Galeener, Elsie B., 320 E. 8th

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Gales.  A.  A.,  Sauk  Center,

Minn.


1U98


Professional  liegistrr


C.hiiopruclors


Gallaher. Ernest. Charles-
town,  Ark.
Gallaher, Dr. Harry, 221 E.

8th St., Oklahoma  City,

Okla.
Gallaher, Harry, Greenwood,

Ark.
Gallaher.  Harry,  2401  Scott  St..

Little  Rock,  Ark.
Gallaher  &  Long-,  401-2  Frisco

Bldg-.,  Joplin,  Mo.
Gallamore,  J.  T.,  508 Main  St..

Fremont, Neb.
Galop. .John, Searles Bldff.,

Monmouth. 111.
Gamble & Gamble, Gandy,

Neb.
Gamble. Harley E,, Daven-
port,  la.
Garbisch.  Erwin  H.,  410  Brown

Bldg-.,  Washington,  Pa.
Garcia, Alberto E., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Garey,  C.  M.,  Lemmon,  S.  D.
Garland. Dr. M. B., Welland,

Ont.. Can.
Garman.  Delbert.  1111  Luding-

ton St.. Escanaba, Mich.
Garman. George C., 307

Rodgers Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Garrnan, J. W.. Muskegon,

Mich.
Garner, Mrs. R. J., 504 Snell

Bldg-., Ft. Dodge. la.
Garren,  Earl  G.,  220  So.  Green

St., Crawfordsville,  Ind.
Garren, W., 220 S. Green St.,

Crawfordsville,  Ind.
Garrihart. Edward R.. 2333

Milwaukee Ave., Chicago,

111.
Garsage,  H. P.. 1100  Kansas

Ave., Topeka, Kans.
Garstick, Jos., 22 Maple Ave.,

Niles. Ohio.
Garstick, Jos., Cor. Main and

Mill Sts.. Niles, O.
Gartner,  J.  C,  Moffat,  Colo.
Garvin, Jas. E.. Box 135,

Grand Valley, Ont. Can.
Garvin.  James  E.,  703  Osborne

St., 161 Columbus Ave.,

Sandusky, O.
Garvin, Sophia  P., 914 Wash-
ington St., Sandusky, O.
Garwin, Dr., Paradise Valley

Sanatorium, National City,

Cal.
Gass,'  C. A., 10513 Lee Ave.,

Cleveland,  Ohio.
Gates, B. A., 617 John St.,

Little Falls, N. Y.
Gates, E. H., 222 Percy St.,

Flushing,  L.  I.
Gates, J. Menzo, 702 Cornice

St., Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.
Gates, Leslie, General Deli-
very, Gary, Ind.
Gates, Mabel, Saginaw, Mich.
Gates,  Marie  L.,  222  Percy  St.,

Flushing, L. I., N. Y.
Gates, Roy T., Ayrshire, la.
Gaughan, P. W., 309-10

Clarence Bldg., 61 Euclid

Ave.,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Gaughan, P. W., 8424 Hough

Ave. Cleveland, Ohio.
Gauld,  W.  C,  Hicksville,  Ohio.
Gaumer, H. W., Blackfoot,

Idaho.
Gaunt, P. D., Kansas City,

Kans.
Gaunt, P.  T., Kechi,  Kans.
Gaylord, Bertha J., 61 Park

Boulevard,  Detroit, Mich.
Gaylord,  Bertha  J.,  132  Church

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Gaylord, C. M., Montpeller,

Idaho.
Gearhard, L. L., Brock.sville,
Ont., Can.


Gearhardt, L. L., 54 Ketchum

Place.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Qcarhart,  L.  L..  52  W.  Chippe-
wa  Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Gebhardt. Arthur, Fond  du

Lac, Wis. (D.C.)
Gebhardt, Arthur, 221 Laflin

St., Chicago, 111.
Gebler,  J.  T..  234  S.  Boulevard.

Oak Park, 111.
Geddis, L.,  Valentine,  Neb.
Gedge, Edna, 2714 Normandie

Ave.,  I.1OS  Angeles,  Cal.
Geese, L. C. 553^ Main St.,

Coshocton, Ohio.
Gehrs, John G. O., 221

Angelique St., Weehawken,

N. J.
Geiser, Stephen J., 39 North

Ave., New Rochelle, N. Y.
George,  E.  W.,  997  Lake  View

Road,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
George, Mrs. Marion,

Columbus. Ohio.
Gerber  &  Gerber,  625  Columbia

Bldg.,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
Gerber, Fred E., 122-124

Colonial Arcade, Cleveland,

Ohio.
German. Geo. C, 146 fith St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Germane,  C.  D.,  Moscow,

Idaho.
Germann, Frank A., 612

Syms  St.,  W.  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Gernhardt, 726 East Adams

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Gerrie, W. M., 222 Boston

Bldg-., Pasadena, Cal.
Gesner, C. E., 103 Atwater

Terrace, Springfield, Mass.
Gibson,  J.  H.,  1114  W. 3rd  St.,

Dayton, O.
Gibson, Frank E., 927 I St.

N. W., "Washington, D. C.
Gibson,  Mrs.  Marg-aret,  Linds-

barg-, Kans.
Gibson, W. A., New Haven,

Conn.
Gibson, W. D., 938 Chapel

St., New Britain, Conn.
Giffey, Otto E., Owosso,

Mich.
Giffey, R. E., 228 W. Hight

St., New Philadelphia, O.
Gilard, Harry S., 1164 East

105th St., Cleveland, Ohio.
Gilbert, Clvde C, 78 Rich

Bldg., Caldwell, Idaho.
Gilbert. Spencer, 1631 Brush

St., Detroit, Mich.
Giles, J., 330 Madison Ave.,

Covington, Ky.
Giles, Joel T., Enid, Okla.
Gilkerson, J. E., 403.

Hamberger Bldg-., Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Gilkerson, J. K., 1101 Marsh-
Strong Bldg-., I.,os Angeles,

Cal
Gilkey. Mrs. L., 122'/. S.

Market St., Wichita,

Kans.
Gill, Mrs. C, Lohrville, la.
Gill, Helen, Farmers' Loan &

Trust Bldg-., Tipton, Ind.
Gillam, Jim, Russelville,

Ark.
Gilleri Wm. E., Perry, la.
Gillespie, Geo. D., 601

Elkan-Gunst Bldg-., San

Francisco, Cal.
Gilliam, J. P., Hartford,

Ark.
5illiar, Joseph, 190 Sherman

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Gillln, J. J., 53 S. 3rd St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Glllingham, W. P., 11th St. &
Central Ave., Los Ang-eles,
Cal.


Gllmore,  G.  H.,  Red  Wing,

Minn.
Gllmour, Harry C, 163

Dearborn St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Ginn, L. O., Alleghany

Station, Va.
Girling-, Minnie, Great Bend,

Kans.
Gil-ling, M., 201 S. Main St.,

Wichita, Kans.
Giroux,  E.  G.,  28  W.  Utica  St.,

Buffalo,  N.  Y.
CJiroux, Elizabeth J., Marsh

Bldg-., Pontiac, Mich.
Giss, A. J., 208 Lowrv  Annex,

St. Paul, Minn.
Gitzen, G. R., 1198 Gratiot

\ve.. Detroit, Mich.
Glaescher,  Alma,  2058  Elm  St.,

Norwood. Ohio.
Glans, G. D., 522 Germania

Bldg-., Milwaukee, Wis.
Glasgow, J. Rupert, Wood

Block, Manitowoc, Wis.
Glassgow, J. R., Manitowac,

Wis.
Ileichman, "Wm., 1457

Broadway, New York, N.  Y.
Glidden, Duvelle. 1550 Third

St., San Diego, Cal.
Glider, W.  H., Onawa, Fla.
Gloeckler, A. C.,  Marion, S.

Dak.
Glover,  J.  C,  Poteau,  Okla.
Glover, J. C, West Blockton,

Ala.
Glover, N. C, Wardman

Courts  West,  "Washington,

D.  C.
Glover, Wm., 304 North Ave.

A,  Canton,  111.
Glurley, J. T., Parag-ould,

Ark.
Gnothus, Herman A., 200

Mohawk St., Chicago, 111.
Goble, Mae D., 438-39 Weiss

Bldg., Beaumont, Tex.
Goble, Ross G., 438-39 Weiss

Bldg., Beaumont, Tex.
'oddis, Louie, Valentine,  Neb.
Godfrey, A. S., 105 N. State

St., Belvidere, 111.
Goelz, W. C, Box 1046.

Pensacola, Fla.
Goettler, 464 N. Pair Oaks

Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
Goff, Mary, 1600 N. McKinley

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Gogel, W.. 7 N. Main St.,

Marshalltown, la.
Goin, Frank, 4447-a

Nebraska Ave., St. I.,ouis,

Mo.
Golding-, .Tas., 5604  S.

Boulevard, Chicago, Til.
Goldstein,  Israel  A.,  1  E.  117th

St., New York, N. Y.
Goleaner,  Elsie  B., 500  "W.

9th St., Okla. City, Okla.
Gonver,  C.  H.,  Bowling  Green,

Ohio.
Gonyer, C. H., 222-24 Nasby

Bldg., Toledo, Ohio.
Gonz, Michael, 36 Mygott St..

Binghamton, N. Y.
Good, J. F., Conway Spring."?,

Kans.

ood. Ruth, Kaw City. Okla.
"Joode, George W.. 687

Bovlston St., Boston, Mass.
loodfellow, J. C, 20 Park

Ave., Guelph, Ont., Canada.
Goodheart, Geo. J., 35 Harper

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Goodheart, Geo. J., 209

Medbury Ave., Detroit,

Mich.
Goodheart, M. H., 221 N. 6th

St., Coshocton, Ohio.
Goodman, M. H., 5451 S.

Ashland  Ave., Chicago,  111.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1099


Goodman, Wm. A., 506-8

Robinson St., Tulsa, Okla.
Goodsell. F., 110 N Oth St.

Michigan City. Ind.
Goodsell. F.  L., 027  Senbnin

Ave.,  Grand  Rapid.s.  Mich.
Goodwin, Dana, Menlo, la.
Goodwin,  J.  L., Fullei-ton,  t  ul.
Goiby, W. R.. lll'/4 W. Main

St., Oklahoma City, Okla
Gordes, H. C. 67 Walwoitli

Ave., Delavan, Wis.
Gordon, James A., Davenport,

la.  ^,  .

Gordon. .lames A., Phoenix.

N Y.
Gordon. Joseph. Rockford.

Go-rdon,  Leroy  M., Box  120,

Montpelier, O. ,,  , „ ,
Gordon, Leroy M., 514 Brady

St.,  Davenport.  la.
Gore, M. E., 600 Main St., E.

Orange, N. J.
Gorham,  Marie,  Moscow,

Idaho.  ^^ ^ ...

Gosnell, Frank I., Ft. Smith,

Ark
Goss,  Chas.  A.,  10513  Lee  Ave.,

Cleveland, Ohio.
Goucher, John F., 5308

Gertrude St.. Pittsburgh,

Pa
Gould, Floyd C, 2 Hancock

St., Bing-hamton, N. Y.
Gould.  W.  C,  Hicksville.  Ohio.
Gourly, J. I., Paragould,

Ark.  ^ ,,. ...

Gowrley, Jas., Collinsville,

Okla.  ,„^^

Grack, Miss W.. 124  ^

Hustings St., Chicago, 111.
Gradwell, Chas. G.. 715

Walnut St.. Elmira, N. \.
Graham, Alfred D., London.

Ont. Canada.
Graham, Artie May, 242

PoY^ell St., San Francisco.

Cal.
Graham, Caroline E., 437/2

Beaver  St., Sewickley,  Pa.
Graham, Chas. E.. Ferguson,

Graham, Herbert C, Santa

Monica, Cal.
Graham,  H.  C,  2146  Duane  St.,

Los Angeles. Cal.
Graham, Jno. D., Box 9  3,

Argyle, \Vis.
Graham,  J. F.,  Marion, Ind.
Grambow,  Emil, 37  Lent  Ave.,

Hempstead, L. I.
Gran, Mrs. Nellie F., 133

Syracuse St., Pittsburgh.

Pa
Grank, Otis E., Viroque,

Wis.
Grannis, Josephine, 6214

Superior Ave., Cleveland,

Ohio.
Grant, Roswell D., 207 Mt.

Prospect Ave., Newark,

N. J.
Grant, Wm., Lancaster, Pa.
Grant, W. ^V., 536 Boston

Block, Minneapolis, Minn.
Grapek, Chas., 3211 W.

Madison St., Chicago, 111.
Gray,  Clyde,  1520  S.  Wash  St.,

Pocatello, Idaho.
Gray, Emma J., 802 S.

Painter Ave., Whittier, Cal.
Gray, Geo. W., 463 S. Forest

Ave., Youngstown. O.
Gray, Geo. W. 92y; Market

St.,  Youngstown,  Ohio.
Gray, Geo. W., 216 E.

Franklin St. Warren. Ohio.
Gray,  H.  Mary,  28  W.  Utica

St.. Buffalo. N. Y.
Gray, J. E., 712-13 American

Bank Bldg., Seattle, Wash.


Gray, Mary H., 735 Prospect

Ave., Buffalo. N. Y.
Gray, Mary H., 409 Porter

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Gray, Maud, 11 St. Euclid.

Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
Green &  Green, Stafford,

Kans.
Green, Chas., Tecumseh. Neb.
Green, C. D.. May Bldg..

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Green, Chas. W., Stafford,

Kans.
Green, J. M., 712 Jefferson

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Greena, C. D., 1st Nat'l Bank

Bldg., I.iOng Beach, Cal.
Greene, Curtis W., Suite 5.

Preston Bldg., Grinnell, la.
Greener,  Ivan,  Benton  County,

Ronneby, Minn.
Greenlee, W. D., 23.=^ E. 5th

St., Long Beach, Cal.
Greenside, W. B., 314

Indiana  Ave., Spokane,

Wash.
Grefe.  H.  F.,  1249  S.  Brook  St.,

Louisville, Ky.
Gregg,  W. B., Onoway. Mich.
Greggs, Phillip, Sullivan, 111.
Gregory. A., 506 W. 12th St..

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Gregory, A. A.. 609 Campbell

Bldg.,  Okla.  City,  Okla.
Gregory, Alva E., Dean, The

Palmer-Gregory College of

Chiropractic, Oklahoma

City, Okla.
Gregory, David N., 92

Colorado Ave.,'  Bridgeport,

Conn.
Gregory, W. E., 113 Poplar

St.. Marianna, Ark.
Gregory,  W.  E.,  716  Louisiana

St., Little  Rock,  Ark.
Greiner,  Mathilda  M., 415 Mill

St., Portland, Ore.
Greiner, M. M.. 6th and Van

Buren Sts., Gary, Ind.
Greiner,  M.  M.,  775'/^ Williams

Ave., Portland, Ore.
Greschik, Ernest, 507

Hackensack Plank Road.

West Hoboken, N. J.
Greth, August M. D.. 876 S.

Hill St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Griffin, E. B., Hastings, Neb.
Griffin,  Fred  C. 3  and  4  Lyric

Arcade  Bldg., Rome,  N.  Y.
Griffith. E. A.. 82 E. ^Valnut

St.. Titusville. Pa.
Griffith, F. R., San Diego,

Cal
Griffiths, Earle A., 310-11

Commercial Bank Bldg.,

Titusville, Penn.
Griggs.  W.  S.,  Sac  City,  la.
Grills, L. M.. 1st Nat'l Bank

Bldg., St. Marys, O.
Grills, M. S., New Castle,

Ind.
Grimm, Lydia B., 87 Seymour

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Grist. N. M.. 508 Kansas Ave.,

Topeka.  Kans.
Griswold,  Mrs.  Hattie.  613  2nd

St., Clinton, la.
Griswold,  Katherine.  213  State

St., Painesville, Ohio.
Gross. Cora B., 133

Peterborough St., Boston.

Mass.
Gross, Henry, 315 W. Pico

St., Los  Angeles. Cal.
Gross, James  H., 95 Columbia

Ave..  North  Bergen.  X. J.
Grosshauser, Frank. 308

Freeman Ave.. Long Island

City,  N.  Y.


Grossman, Dr., 1014 S. Grand

Ave., Loo Angeles, Cal.
Grothus, H. A., Ft. Madison,

la.
Grothus, Herman A., 2000

Mohawk St., Chicago, 111.
Grout, Ida L., 412 Exchange

Bldg., Los  Angel fs, Cal.
Grove, E. H., 141 Carr St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Grove. J. O., Ft. Wayne, Ind.
Grovem, E. H.. 144 Carr St..

Los Angeles. Cal.
Grover, S. L.. 201 Pacific

Bldg.. Oakland, Cal.
Grover, Sidney L.. 628

Burlington  St.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Grover,  Wm., Spokane, Wash.
Groves,  M. H., Box  482, Salis-
bury,  N. C.
Groves, Sarah Ethel, 111

Spruce  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Groves, Sidney L., 628

Burlington  St.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Gruene, Francis, 614 W.

Franklin St., Baltimore,

Md.
Guengerich, G. J., Kalona. la.
Guengerich, S. D., Wellman.

la.
Guentherman, W. C, 1312

Leonard  St.,  Davenport,  la.
Guines.s, Rachel M., 506 Hal-

sey  St.,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.
Gump,  C. K., 1116 South  Ave.,

Wilkinsburg. Pa.
Gunn, C,  Mattawan,  Mich.
Gunn, Glen, 109 S. Burdick

St., Kalamazoo, Mich.
Gurce, J. W., 639 Chamber of

Commerce Bldg., Los

Gurden,  Burton  A.,  1211  Adam

St., Toledo. O.
Gurden, B. F.. 408 E. Travis

St., San Antonio, Tex.
Gustafson.  Clarence  A.,  419  AV.

State St., Rockford. 111.
Gustafson, E. M.. The Cubei  -

land, Thomas Circle, Wash-
ington, D.  C.
Gustafson, G., 3007 S. Tripp

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Gustafson, J. F., 711 13th

Ave., Munhall, Pa.
Gustafson, W. A., Joliet, 111.
Guthrie, Mrs. L. S., Ames. la.
Gutzman, F. A., May Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Guy, Ed., Magazine. Ark.
Guy, Ralph, Pocatello, Idaho.
Guy, Ralph L., Box 53,

Ogden. Utah.
Guyer, R. A., Los Angeles,

Cal
Guymer. G. A.. 1256 10th St..

San Diego, Cal.
Guyon. Alice H.. Sault Ste.

Marie, Can.
Guyselman, Chas. M., 409 N.

Superior  St.,  Albion.  Mich.
Gwin.  H.  M..  Suite  202  Bennett

Bldg.,  Colorado  Springs,  Col.
Gwin,  H.  M.,  Petersburg.  O.
Gwin,  V.  R.,  Brownsville,  Mo.
Haas, Bernard, Box 24, Hot

Springs,  S.  Dak.
Habenicht, H. W.. Parkers-
burg, la.
Hackett. Mrs. H. A., Trust

Bldg.,  Meadville, Pa.
Hackett  & Hackett. Crawford

Co. Trust Bldg., Meadville,

Penn.
Hacknev,  J.  E..  R.  R.  7,  Box

250, Fresno. Cal.
Haddow & Haddow, Elm St..

River  Falls, Wis.


1100


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Haddow. Jno. R., Elm St.,

River Falls, Wis.
Haehlen, C. G.. 6401 National

Ave., West  Allis, Wis.
Hagelg-ans, Walter C,

Merchantville, N. J.
Hapemann. Anna  A., 59 Perin

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Hagemann. Anna, 800 Union

Trust Bldg-., Cincinnati. O.
Hagrenbook, Gertrude L., 2323

Nebraska  St., Parsons, Kan.
Hager, L. E., Noblesville,

Ind.
Hagerty, V. C, 519 Medical

Block, Minneapolis, Minn.
Hagmon, Anna, 830 Union

Trust Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Hagstrom, John R., 101

Everett  Bldg.,  Akron,  O.
Hahn, C. F., Box 112,

Marietta, O.
Hahn,  C.  T.,  Wooster,  Ohio.
Hahn, Edna E., General

Delivery, Lander, Wyo.
Hahn, Fred M., San Diego,

Cal.
Hahn, H., Casper, Wyoming.
Haight, T. G , Ottumwa, la.
Haight, Thos. G., 315

Blondeau St., Keokuk, la.
Halbert, E. E., 268 Alexander

St., Rochester, N. Y.
Hale, Nora, Cherokee, Okla.
Hales, C. W., 715 Eldridge

Ave., CoUingswood, N. J.
Halin, Max, 1513 Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Hall & Hall, Dodge City,

Kans.
Hall  &  Hall,  Scott  City,  Kans.
Hall,  Augustus,  228  N.  Lee  St.,

Fitzgerald, Ga.
Hall, Bell Jane,  George  Bldg.,

Clarksburg, W. Va.
Hall. C. F., 6-7 Sherwood

Bldg., Lima, Ohio.
Hall, C. L.,  Dodge  City,  Kans.
Hall, Edna C, Dodge City,

Kans.
Hall,  E.  C,  Garden  City,  Kans.
Hall,  Frank  A..  Suite  2,  174  W.

Market St., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Hall,  Glenn,  Winterset,  la.
Hall, Harry, Forsyth Bldg.,

Atlanta, Ga.
Hall, H. G., Winterset, la.
Hall, Harry L., 1116 N. 3rd

St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Hall,  J.  A.,  Eldora,  la.
Hall, L. B., Scott City, Kans.
Hall, Mabel, Tuttle St.,

Syracuse,  N. Y.
Hall. Millie, Sac City, la.
Haller.  J.  H.,  Palisades, Col.
Hallett, H. De  Vean, Madison

Bldg., Montclair, N. J.
Halligan, Nina Gilliar, 45 W.

34th St., New York, N. Y.
Halliker, G. A., Big Rapids,

Mich.
Hallock, Wm. J., 160 Summit

Ave., Jersey  City, N. J.
Halstead, W. B., Quick

Theatre  Bldg..  Fulton,  N. Y.
Halvorsen,  H.  J.,  4641  Eauston

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Hamann, A. W.. 11322 S.

Michigan Ave., Chicago. 111.
Hamann, August W.. 8928
Commercial Ave., Chicago,
111.
Hamby, Wm. H., 132 W. 48th

St., Los Angeles. Cal.
Hameltas, Huber W.. 543
Pacific Ave., Long Beach,
Cal.
Hamilton & Hamilton, 237

Magnolia  Ave.,  Long  Beach,

Cal.


Hamilton, D. E., 101 S. Mill

St.. Lead, S. Dak.
Hamilton, Dwight E., 44

High  St.,  New  Haven.  Conn.
Hamilton, J. L. B., 120 N.

Flower St., Los Angeles,

Cal
Hamilton.  R.  J..  1118  Main  St.,  I

Great Bend, Kans.
Hamilton, R. J., 1416 Kansas

Ave.,  Great  Bend,  Kans.
Hamilton, R. J., c/o

Progressive Chiropractic

College. Ft. Smith, Ark.
Hamlin, P. F.. 314 N. Lee St.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Hammett,  Elma  M.,  Maryville,

Kans.
Hammon, A. L., 151 E.

Bethune  Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Hammond, E. W., 100

Charlotte Ave., Detroit,

Mich.
Hammond, Ralph L., 2

Wilsey Square, Osmun

Bldg.,  Ridgewood,  N.  J.
Hammond, R. W., Broadway

Central Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Hampton, Annie P.. Detroit,

Mich.
.Hampton, David, 24 Masonic

Bldg. Pueblo. Col.
Hampton. Elsie R., 1821

Walnut St., Boulder, Col.
Hampton, H. L.. 1st Nat'l

Bank,  Cor.  Main  &  Erie  Sts.,

Massillon, O.
Hampton, N. C. & Geo. B.,

Hutton Bldg., Spokane,

Wash.
Hampton,  Wm.,  208  S.  Elm  St.,

Waxahachie, Tex.
Hampton,  Wm.  H..  24  Masonic

Bldg., Pueblo, Colo.
Hancock, J. L., Gothenberg,

Neb.
Handy, F. W., 101 Gordon

Ave., Syracuse, N. Y.
Haney, Edward, 848 Barry

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Hanev,  W.  J.. 1946 East

101st St., Cleveland. O.
Hankedal,  Edgar  O.,  130

Mvrtle St., Reedsburg, Wis.
Hanker. Ida M.. 1269 Marion

St.. Denver, Colo.
Hanks. John Harvey. 1914

California St.. Omaha. Neb.
Hanley, P. K., 6600  Lafayette

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Hanlin,  F.  P.,  Liberal,  Kans.
Hanlin. P. F.. Talmadge. Neb.
Hanlon,  W.  F.  O..  6904  Holmes

Ave.. Los Angeles. Cal.
Hann.  Geo.  W..  512  Newton

St..  Goodland.  Ind.
Hanna,  Mrs.  J.  E.,  Arkansas

City, Kans.
Hanna, H. O., Oakland, Cal.
I  Hannah, Albert, Burnsville,

Ark.
Hannon, Frank  S., 205

%Vashington St., Owosso,

Mich.
Hans, F. S., Jamestown,

Mercer  Co.,  Pa.
Hans, F. S., Greenville, Pa.
Hansen,  H.  E.,  2120  Cleveland
I Ave., Chicago, 111.
j  Hansen, H. E., Barons, Alta.,

Can.
Hansen, M. G., Cor. 1st and

Main  Sts.,  Brigham City,

Utah.
Hanson, Miss B. N., Walter

Reed Hospital, Washington,

D.  C.
Hanson.  Frank  O..  246  "\V.

Utica  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Hanson & Hanson, 516 S.

Topeka  Ave.,  Wichita,  Kans.


Hanson & Hanson, 567

Elmwood  Ave.,  Buffalo,

N. Y.
Hardie. G. W., 120i Second

St.,  Owensboro,  Ky.
Harding, A. C, 189 Washing-
ton Ave., Vandergrift, Pa.
Harding  &  Sunstad,  Guaranty

Safe Deposit  &  Trust  Bldg.,

Butler, Pa.
Harding, Vera, Butler, Pa.
Hardman, R. D., Tama, la.
Hardy, Marie, Amherst, N. H.
Hargett,  Mrs.  E.  E.,  305  Wheat

Bldg,, Fort  Worth,  Tex.
Hargett, H. G., 305 Wheat

Bldg.,'  Fort  Worth, Tex.
Hargrave, C. B., R. F. D. No.

40, Dale, Ind.
Harkness,  Thos.,  8  Park  St.,

Cortland, N. Y.
Harley. G. E.. 158 Cambridge

St.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Harley,  Mr.  &  Mrs. Wm.,  1228

Carpenter  St., Brunswick,

Ga.
Harley &  Harley, 1228

Carpenter St., Brunswick,

Ga.
Harlow, A., R. F. D. No. 1,

Box 80B. Redlands. Cal.
Harmer,  AValter. 1108  Aetha

St., Burlington, la.
Harmon, C. M., 19 Burt  St.,

Auburn,  N.  Y.
Harmon  &  Harmon,  93

Genesee  St.,  Auburn,  N.  Y.
Harries,  S.  Oswald,  446  E.  40th

St.. Chicago. 111.
Harris & Harris, Swartz

Creek, Mich.
Harris, O.  O., 299 Richmond

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Harriman. E. J.. 197i

Canfield  Ave., Detroit,

Mich.
Harriman, Mrs. Lucy  C, 10

Dana  St., Suite 1, Bost«n,

Mass.
Harrington, E. B., Findlay,  O.
Harrington, S. A., Davenport,

la.
Harris, Elijah G., 1656 Park

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Harris,  John F., 322 Figler

Blk., Edmonton, Alta., Can.
Harrison, David  A.. 202

^Vellington  St.,  Bradford,

Can.
Harrison,  Mrs. E. E.,

Halsted, Pa.
Harrison, Ellen E., 202

Wellington St., Bradford,

Ont.,  Can.
Harrison, J. C, 16 Central

Ave.,  New^ark,  N.  J.
:rarrison,  W.  J.,  Melford,  Sask.,

Can.
Hart, Anna, 402 Washington

St., Greensburg, Ind.
Hart, Mrs. Emma, Berlin,

Wis.
Hart,  Flora,  420  N.  High  St.,

Marshall. Mich.
Hart, H. E., Ferguson Bldg.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Hart, H. S., 2 Raymond St.,

St.  Catherines.  Ont.. Can.
Hart, Mina S., McAlester,

Okla.
Hart,  Sidney,  Hartford,  Ark.

Forest  Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Hartman, R. A., Woodward
and Forest Aves., Detroit,
Mich.
Hartsock,  W.  E..  Oaksdale,

Wash.
Hartsock,  W.  T.,  Maries,

Idaho.
Hartsough, Leroy, 525

Clarendon  Ave.,  Canton,  O.


CJiiropracton


Professional  licgister


1101


Hartsough,  Leroy.  R.  F.  D.  No.

1,  Salem,  O.  „„^

Hartwell, D. E. W., 284

Sculnor St., Grand Rapids,
Mich.
Hartzell,  H. C Memphi.s.

Tenn.
Harvey  &  Harvey,  Superior.

Neb.
Harvey  &  Harvey,  I^e  Mar.s,

la.
Harvey  &  Harvey. 2104  21st

St., Falls  City, Neb.
Harvey,  Earl  A.,  Hebron,  Neb.
Harvev, P. P., Gandy, Nobr.
Harvey,  Fred,  Gandy,  Neb.
Harvey, Fred., Wakeeny,

Kans.
Harvey,  H.  E.,  Le  Mars,  la.
Harvey, Mrs. Henry M.,

Superior, Neb.
Harvey, H. M., Superior, Neb.
Harvey, Herbert, Coughenour

Blk., Payette, Idaho.
Harvey,  Lloyd  C,  Maple  Ridg-e,

Mich.  „,j

Harvey,  Sylvester,  P.  O.  Bldgr.,

McKees Rocks, Pa.
Harwood, H. H., Seiser Bldg.,

Chillicothe,  Mo.
Hascall, H. P., 4t;i Spitzer

Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Haskins, J. D., Box 24,

Trimble,  O.
Haslein, Wm., Big Rapids,

Mich.
Haslem, Wm. H., 212

Mercantile  Blk.,  Aurora,  111.
Hass,  Edwin  G.,  Andover,  O.
Hasselquist, 32 W.

Washington  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Hathaway, Chas. E.,  Grand

Ledge,  Mich.
Hatton,  Elizabeth, 3207

Michigan  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Haupt,  Grace,  Barker,  N.  Y.
Haven, C. H., 609 S. 11th St.,

Salt  Lake City, Utah.
Haven,  C.  Margaret, 1141

Broadway, Rochester, Minn.
Haven  &  Haven,  Box  116,

Phoenix, Ariz.
Haverin,  A.  A.  &  C.  P.,  28

Lincoln Ave., Newark, N.  J.
Haverland  &  Haverland,  Twin

Falls,  Idaho.
Hawkins, D. B., Belmond, la.
Hawley, Blanche, 430 W. 9th

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Hawley,  R.  E.,  215  New

Rosenbloom  Bldg.,  Syracuse,

N. Y.
Hay,  Ruth  N.,  Sisseton,  S.  Dak.
Hay, Ruth N., Humboldt, la.
Hayden  &  Hayden,  Cedar

Rapids, la.
Hayek, P. J., 324 E. 12th St.,

Oakland,  Cal.
Hayek & Hayek, 1028 Mari-
posa Ave..  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Hayek, R. T., 1028 Mariposa

Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
Hayes, Bertha, 1008  W. 8th

St., Wilmington, Del.
Hayes,  James  P.,  404

Hamburger  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Hayes,  P.  G.,  Sage-Allen  Bldg.,

Hartford, Conn.
Hayes, P. G., Hartford, Conn.
Hayes, P. G., Bristol Savings

Bank  Bldg.,  Bristol,  Conn.
Hayner, Bertha, Pawhuska,

Okla.
Haynes,  F.  O.,  30  Fourth  Ave.,

Hutchinson, Kans.
Haynes,  Orville,  Sterling,

Kans.
Haynes, T.  C, Denison, Kans.
Haynie, Nellie, Portland,

Ore.


Hays,  J. E.,  403  Hamburger

Bldg., Los  Angele.s, Cal.
Hays,  L.  C,  Bee  Bldg.,  Omaha,

Neb.
Haywood,  Alford  P., r>ir>  Utah

St.,  Toledo,  O.
Hazel, A. E., Liberty & 9th

Sts., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hazel, L H., 234 N. Soto St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Heag, G. W., Berkshire Co.

Savings Bank Bldg., Pitts-

fleld, Mass.
Healey, .Joseph, 213 Howard

St., Detroit, Mich.
Healy,  J. J., 201 AV. Main St.,

Belding, Mich.
Healey, S., Hamburg, la.
Heard,  W.  J., 109 Maple  Ave.,

Oak  Park,  Chicago,  111.
Heath,  Helen,  Marcus,  la.
Heath, Jas. A., Millica, Minn.
Heath, W. L., 828 Brady St.,

Davenport,  la.
Heath,  W.  L.,  Orlando,  Fla.
Hedspeth,  R. I.,  Tecumseh,

Okla.
Heft, C. G., 337 Main St.,

Racine, Wis.
Heftner, Elizabeth, 1448 E.

66th Place, Chicago, 111.
Hegadorn, C. S., 320 Summit

Ave., W. Hoboken, N. J.
Hegna, Hans A., Hoffman,

Minn.
Heintze,  Arthur,  1318  Spruce

St., Philadelphia, Penn.
Heintze,  A.  C,  721  Federal  St.,

Camden,  N.  J.
Heintze,  C. A., 5 Goff  Bldg.,

23  Broadway,  Camden,  N.  J.
Heinze,  E.,  408  N.  Cicero  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Heisler,  C.  P.,  Ridgewood,  N.  J.
Heisler,  M.  L., 405 S. 13th  St.,

Harrisburg, Pa.
Heiss,  John  E., 2117

Washington Blvd., Chicago,

111.
Heitz,  J.  J.,  2030  Lincoln  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Heizman, John Jacob, 348

University Ave., Rochester,

N. Y.
1  Helfrich & Helfrich, 1915 N.
I 9th  St.,  Terre  Haute, Ind.
I  Helfrich, E. V., 1915 N. 9th

St.,  Terre  Haute,  Ind.
Helfrich, R. E., Tempe, Ariz.
Helgan,  Clara  A.,  93  State  St.,

Hammond, Ind.
Helgan, G. D., Suite 4, O. K.

Bldg., 636 Hohman Street,
1 Hammond,  Ind.
Helgan, Geo. D., Ruthven, la.
Hellam,  Lydia,  Morrisville,  Mo.
Hellam,  Lydia, Columbus

Junction, la.
;  Hellam, Lydia. Ford City,

Pa
Hellan,  Lydia,  125  McKlau  St.,

Kittanning, Pa.
Helmer,  Jessie  Blaine, 429-441

Granite Bldg., Rochester,

N. Y.
Helpian, A.,  Newton, Kans.
Hemenway, Gertrude F.,

Ridley Park, Pa.
Hemming,  Earl  J.,  Kearney,

Neb.
Hemminghausen. 88 Dearborn

St., Chicago, 111.
Henderson, A. O., 207 First

Ave. N. W., Mandan, N. D.
Henderson, Dr. A. O., Chiro-
practic Board  of  Examiners,

Mandan,  N.  D.
Henderson,  E. A.,  Sault  Ste.

Marie,  Can.
Henderson, Gustave, Schadt
Block, Fergus Falls, Minn.


Henderson,  J.  A.,  321  York  St..

Hamilton,  Ont., Can.
Henderson, Jennie M.,

Cherokee, Okla.
Henderson, J. W.. 141 Eaton

St., Buffalo,  N. Y.
Hendrickson, M. L., Newark.

N.  J.
Hendrix,  C. E.,  Jefferson  City,

Mo.
Henion, J. H., Karcher Bldg.,

Pierre, S. Dak.
Henkel,  Herbert  M.,  Box  302,

Kenyon, Minn.
Henning, E. J., 2208 F. Ave.,

Kearney,  Neb.
Henruem,  G.  N.,  Chanute,

Kans.
Henry, A., 317 Fulton St.,

Peoria, 111.
Henry, Chas., 16 Carver St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Henry, F. H., Diagonal, la.
Henry, F. M., Blairstown, la.
Hentges, Herman H., 321i
S. Ohio St., Sedalia, Mo.
Hepner,  J.  Q.,  Covina,  Cal.
Herbert, C. C, 1334 O St.,

Lincoln,  Neb.
Hermann, J. E., 743 Central

Ave.,  Sandusky,  O.
Hermeling, W. H.  A., 4456
Margaretta Ave., St. Louis,
Mo.  •

Herr, A. W., Cleveland, O.
Herrigel, Ruthelm, 60

Somerset  St., Garfield, N. J.
Herrington,  L.  H.,  108  Dakota

St., San Antonio, Tex.
Herrington,  L.  H.,  736  S.  Alamo

St., San Antonio, Tex.
Herrington,  Mrs.  M.  M. E.,
736  S.  Alamo  St.,  San
Antonio,  Tex.
Herrington, S. A., Plummer,

Idaho.
Herrington, S. A., 178J

Howard  St.,  Spokane,  Wash.
Herron,  H.  J., 322  S. Main  St.,

Albia,  la.
Hert,  Miss  Anna,  402

Washington  St.,  Greensburg,
Ind.
Hess, A. Norina, 708 N. 2nd

St., Phoenix, Ariz.
Hess, E. A., 2101 W. Adams

St., Chicago, 111.
Hess, Harriet  L.,  Phoenix,

Ariz.
Hess,  Norina  A., 403
Hamberger  Bldg., Los
Angeles, Cal.
Hewin, S. P., 1001  W. State

St., Oleon, N. Y.
Hewins,  B.  A.,  28  River  St.,

Salamanca,  N. Y.
Hewins, B. A., 1001 W. State

St.,  Clean,  N. Y.
Hewins, C. S., 40 Niagara  St.,

Niagara  Palls,  N. Y.
Hewins,  C.  S.,  57  Congress  St.,

Bradford, Pa.
Hewins, S. P., 228J N.

Union  St.,  Clean,  N.  Y.
Hewins, S. P., Davenport, la.
Hewitt  &  Hewitt,  White

Cloud, Mich.
Heydt, Henry W., 60 Hudson

Place, AVeehawken, N. J.
Heyler, Chas. A., 67 Lincoln

St., Jersey City, N. J.
Heyne. H. P., 3rd Ave.,

Rankin, Pa.
Hibel, H. E.,  Hillsboro,  Ore.
Hickman, Warren E., 130 S.
Fairmount St., Pittsburgh.
Pa.
Hickox, Oliver. Burlington,

AVis.
Hicks, J.. 3872 Third Ave.,
New York, N. Y.


1102


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Hiebel, Benj. B., Waterloo,

Wis
Hicseiick.  J.  H.. 293  Main  St.,

Biddcfoid,  Me.
Hig-adorn, Dr., 320 Summit

Ave., W. Hobokcn, N. J.
High, Jas. R., 2740 W. 32nd

Ave., Denver, Colo.
Hildebrand,  Harry. 206  N. 6th

St., Canton, O.
Hildebrand, H. C. 136 Fourth

St.. S. W., Canton, O.
Hildebrant, Guy, Two Rivers,

Hildreth, C. Green 15281

Rockland Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa
Hildreth.  G.  G..  347  Fifth  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hill B M.,  Ponca  City,  Okla.
Hill!  Carl.  Platte, S.  Dak.
Hill.  Call.  Dallas,  S.  Dak.
Hill.  C.  E.,  16  N.  Main  St.,

Hutchinson, Kans.
Hill,  Carrie,  701  High  St.,

New^ark.  N.  J.
Hill, Herbert, 16 Gould Ave.,

New^ark,  N.  J.
Hill,  Herbert  H.,  1113

Washington  St., Hoboken,

N. J.  _  >.

Hill, John West, Davenport,

Hill, J. -J-, Bishop, Cal.

Hill. John West, 2032 Cleve-
land Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

Hill,  Lester  M., 402  Donaghey
Bldg., Little Rock, Ark.

Hill,  Lester  M.,  106-112  B.
Choctaw  St..  McAlester,
Okla.

Hillard.  Margaret  C.,  211  20th
St.. West New York. N. J.

Hilliker, Geo., Tecumseh,
Mich.  ^„  ,^^

Hillman,  Gustav.  Illmo.  Mo.

Hills,  J.  D.,  213  14th  St.,  Cairo,

Hilsing,  E.  A.,  106  N.  Ashland

Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
Hilton, D. A., Box 103,

Hutchinson, Kans.
Hilton, D. A., Box 103, Mena,

Ark.  „ .. _,

Hilton, D. A.. 240 Scott St..

Little Rock, Ark.
Hilton,  John  F.,  21  E.  20th  St..

Paterson. N. J.  , ,t t^

Himmel,  Miss.  Lockport.  N.  Y.
Hinkle,  C.  R.,  Sigourney.  la.
Hinkle. J. D., 4104

Independence Ave.. Kansas

City,  Mo.
Hinklev. A. B., Delphi, Ind.
Hinkley, A. Burton. San Joa-
quin Valley. Selma, Cal.
Hinkley.  A.  B.,  Nappanee,  Ind.
Hinkley, Frank,  Huron,  South

Dakota.
Hinman, Chas., Glenwood

Springs.  Colo.
Hinnah,  Louise  C,

Marthasville,  Mo. ^ , ^ „,„
Hinsch,  Henry  &  Rudolph,  912

Grant  Ave.,  Bronx,  N.  Y.
Hinzey. A. A., Council Bluffs.

Kans.  „ , r,i.

Hippie, J. E., 500 Broad St.,

Newark,  N.  J.  , ^^

Hippie,  S.  A.,  199  Broad  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Hippie,  S.  N., 591  Warren  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.  _,  ,

Hi.sev. J. B.. Supply. Okla.
Hively,  J.  L.. 39  S.  State  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Hively.  J.  S..  156  Wabash  Ave.,

Chicago.  111. ^,  ^^ , _, ,
Hixon,  Ina  F.,  505  Union  Bldg.,

Anderson, Ind.


Hoag,  W. G., Arlington, la.
Hoag,  W.  G.,  Savings  Bank

Bldg., Pittsfleld, Ma.ss.
Hoagland,  Mrs.  Geo.,  13

Dartmouth St., Warren,

Hoard,' Evelyn  E., 119 Fourth

St.. Bismarck, N. Dak.
Hoare, W. J., Broadway

Central Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal
Hoban. Harrie, Erie, Pa.
Hobbs, R. S.. 333 S. Dearborn

St., Chicago.  111.
Hoboi.  W.  A..  838  N.  Rockwell

St.. Chicago, 111.
Hodak,  Jos.,  Antigo,  Wis.
Hodges, L. P., The Northum-
berland Apts., Washington,

D.  C.
Hodgeson,  E.  R., 382  Boylston

St., Boston. Mass.
Hodgkins, A.  A., 1440 R St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Hodgkins, Mrs. June, 1440 R

St.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Hodgson.  E.  R.,  R.  F.  D.  No.  1,

Hutchinson, Kans.
Hoe, A. E.. 110 Pattison St.,

Rankin,  Pa.
Hoe,  Edmund  E.,  719  Braddock

Ave.,  Braddock,  Penn.
Hoeffer, A. F. H., 3131 E.

Washington St., Los Ange-
les Cal
Hoeffer,  P.  T.,  1908  S.  Main  St.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Hoeffler,  J., 2017 E. 104th  St.,

Cleveland, O.
Hoeffler, John, 1846 W. 25th

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Hoellig,  Anna,  1564  E.  51st  St.,

Los Angelos, Cal.
Hoeye,  George,  Oregon  City,

Ore.
Hofeditz,  H.  W.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal
Hofeditz, H. W., Visalia, Cal.
Hofeditz, Miss  Mabel. 503

Main St., Visalia, Cal.
Hofeditz & Hofeditz, Visalia,

Cal.
Hofer,  A.  L.,  Quintard,  Colo.
Hofer,  A.  L.,  Clayton,  N.  Mex.
Hoff, F. F.,  Daily Blk., Grand

Rapids,  Wis.
HofC,  F.  T.,  228  S.  Main  St.,  Ft.

Atkinson.  Wis.
Hoffman, Axel P., McKinn-

ville. Ore.
Hoffman.  E.  J.. 539  Fairfield

Ave..  Akron.  O.
Hoffman, Esther, 2717 Lake

St., Ocean Park. Cal.
Hoffman, Esther E., 403

Hamburger  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Hoffman, R. E., 1718 E. 55th

St., Chicago, 111.
Hoffman, Stanley  A.,  2425

Milwaukee  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Hoffman, Wm. A.. 723 3rd  St.,

Milwaukee,  Wis.
Hoffman. Wm. C, McMinn-

ville, Ore.
Hoford,  Leonard,  Beaverton,

Ore.
Hofstadt, J. P., 64 E. Van

Buren  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Hogan, F. E., Oxford,

Chenango  Co.,  N.  Y.
Hogeboom, S. B., 1309 North

Charles St., Bnltimore, Md.
Hogman, Anna. 830  Union

Trust  Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Hogstrom, J. R.. 101 Everett

Bldg.,  Akron,  O.
I  Hoisington, Bertha, 713
\ Wheeling Ave., Cambridge,

! o.

I  Hoiin.  Jno..  Union  Blk.,  Mt.
Vernon,  Wash.


Holaday, E. R., 1739 Fifth

Ave., Oakland, Cal.
Holbrook, F., 319 E. Works

St.,  Sheridan,  Wyo.
Holbrook,  Grace  C,  501  Beacon

St., Boston, Mass.
Holcom, Harlow, 3213 6th St.,

Spokane,  Wasli.
Holden,  B.  F.,  Cliarles  City,  la.
Holden,  Peter  A.,  Eugene,  Ore.
Holiman, W. O., 1015  Masonic

Temple, Chicago, 111.
Holiman, W. O., 205 State
Mercantile  Bldg.,  Ft.  Collin.s,
Colo.
Holiman,  W.  O.,  235  Pecan  St..

San  Angelo,  Tex.
Holland,  Mrs.  E.  M.,  1313
Massachusetts Ave., Wash-
ington,  D.  C.
Holland.  Wm.  H.. 1313  Massa-
chusetts Ave.. Washington,

D.  C.
Hollapeten, Mrs. Leila, 115 N.

Detroit  Ave., Xenia, O.
Holliday,  C.  Thomas,  Broken

Bow, Neb.
Hollister, B. C, Conneaut, O.
Hollister, B. C, 1536 E. 86th

St., Cleveland, O.
Hollister, C. L., 358 Harbor

St., Conneaut. O.
Hollister. H. R.,  Avoca, la.
Hollister, J. R.. Pawnee, Neb.
Hollock,  H., 160 Summit  Ave..

Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Holm,  P.  O.,  Bee  Hive  Bldg.,

Butte.  Mont.
Holmes, H. R., 27 E. Monroe

St., Chicago, 111.
Holmes,  M.  A.,  Rickneall.  Ore.
Holmstrom,  C, 213 First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg., I.,ong  Beach,

Cal.
Holtan,.  A. O., 606 Hamilton

St.,  Stoughton,  Wis.
Holzer,  J.  L.,  Appleton,  Wis.
Hones,  Louise  A., 301  Hulet

Bldg., Minneapolis, Minn.
Hood,  Edwin  S.,  167  Marianna

St., East Lynn, Mass.
Hood, Mr. & Mrs. J. S..
10538  Helena  Ave..  Cleveland,

O.
Hoopes,  H.  C,  Fairfield,  la.
Hoopwood,  I.  S.,  Norton.  Kans.
Hoover.  G.  L..  119  Hills  St..

Fair Oaks. Pa.
Hoover,  H.  R.,  259  N.  Potomac

St., Waynesboro, Pa.
Hopkins, W. R., Gold Block,

Helena,  Mont.
Hopkins, Wm. R., Franklin,

Neb.
Hoppes,  Harriet  Chandler, 401

W. Briggs St., Fairfield, la.
Hora, Frank, 3739 Lowell

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Horandt, C. 120 Jasper St.,

Paterson, N. J.
Hord,  John  S.,  733  E.  105th  St.,
I Cleveland, O.
Hormell,  S.  L.,  817  S.  Olive  St..

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
!  Horn & Horn, Guthrie, Okla.
Horn,  George  F.,  Barrie,  Ont.
Horn,  M.  J., 295 Plymouth

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Horn, P. B., 1415 Colfax Ave..

Denver, Colo.
Home,  Mrs.  F.  S..  1314  W.
i Cotteral  St.,  Guthrie,  Okla.
Home,  Nellie,  1415  E.  Colfax

Ave.,  Denver,  Colo.
Horner, J. C, Homestead,

Pa.
Horner, J. C, 5155 Pennsyl-
vania Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
I  Horning, Leonard J., 128

Peter  St.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Horsington. B., 713 Wheeling

Ave.,  Cambridge, O.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1103


Horstman, H. C, 213 Pacific

Bldg.,  San Francisco,  Cal.
Hoi'stman,  H. C. 405 Whitney

Bldg-.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Horstman,  H.  C,  Palace  Hotel,

Portland, Ore.
Horton,  H.  H.,  218  Grand  Ave.,

Laramie,  Wyo.
Horton, J. C, 208-9 Black

Bldf;-., Los Ang-eles, Cal.
Hoskin.s, 1441 Jackson Blvd.,

Chicago, 111.
Hougliton, .Tas. M., Jr., 986

Summit Ave., Jersey City,

N. J.
Hotelling-, A.  L., Rock  Valley,

la.
Houck. Delia. 1814 Reil Ave.,

Lorain,  O.
Houghton, Elizabeth, 2820 Pi

St., Galveston, Tex.
House, Ethel, Coral, Mich.
Hou-stman,  J.  M., Mobridge,  S.

Dak.
Houston, Edwin A., 1520

Federal St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Houston, B. A., 2344

Perrysville  Ave.,  Pittsbuigh,

Pa.
Hoverin.  C. E.,  867  S.  19th  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Hovey,  E.  B.,  409  Fourth  Ave.,

Greensburg, Pa.
Hovey, E. B., Cape Flats,

Greensburg, Pa.
Hovey, W. G., 47 W. 34th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Howard,  A.  F.,  Owosso,  Mich.
Howard,  A.  M.,  Genesse,

Idaho.
Howard,  Ella  C, 341 Pacific

Ave.,  Long  Beach, Cal.
Howard, E. S., The Farragut,

Washington, D. C.
Howard,  J.  F.  Alan, 333 South

Dearborn St., Chicago, 111.
Howard,  Kathryn  C,  503

Spruce  St., Sault  Ste.  Marie,

Mich.
Howard,  L.  M.,  503  Ashmon  St.,

Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.
Howard,  L.  R.,  Clymer,  N.  Y.
Howard,  Lina  R.,  c/o  Graham

Nursery Co., Mechanicsville,

la.
Howard,  M.  E.,  137  Springhurst

Ave., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Howard,  R. E.,  Mt.  Clemens,

Mich.
Howe, A. J., Victor Ave.,

Toronto, Ont., Can.
Howe, Bert. F., 522 Main St.,

Joplin,  Mo.
Howe, Gracia W., Allison,

Colo.
Howe, L. E., Gold, Pa.
Howe, Mabel J., Ulysses,

Penn.
Howe, R. J., Toronto. Ont.,

Can.
Howell, C. C, 302 E. 22nd St.,

Denver, Colo.
Howell,  O.  W.,  50606  Michigan

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Howenstine, Frank F., 310

Mason Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Howerton, T. J., 2812 Connec-
ticut  Ave. N. 'W., Washing-
ton,  D.  C.
Howland, Helen N., 510

Pennsylvania St. Reading,

Pa.
Hoxey. M. A., 215 Wallace

Blvd., Ypsilanti. Mich.
Hoxey  & Garland, 240 Bruns-
wick Ave.,  Toronto,  Ont.,

Can.
Hoxsey, M. A., Suite 4,

Alfred  Blk.,  Winnipeg,  Man.,

Can.


Hoy, Harry, Belle Plain*,

la.
Hoy,  Harry,  Luverne,  Minn.
Hoy,  H. A.,  Wlnterset,  la.
Hoy, Jas., 224 E. 6th St.,

Long Beach, Cal.
Hoygard,  T.  G.,  215 7th  St.,

Rockford, 111.
j  Hoym, J. C. S., Delphos,
[ Kans.
I  Hubbard, J. C, Greenwood,

Ark.
Hubbard, J. C, 614
I Herskowitz  Blvd.,  Oklahoma

City, Okla.
Hubbard, J. C, 1223 W. 27th

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Hubbard. John C, 1400 W.

25th St., Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Hubbard, John C, 26th and

Wyandotte Sts., Kansas

City, Mo.
Huber, Bertha, Dillon, Mont.
Hubley, B. B., 921 Commerce

Arcade Bldg., Erie, Pa.
Hubner, Harry, 5195 Hudson

Blvd.,  West  New  York,  N.  J.
Hubner,  Dr.  Louis,  130  Fourth

St., Town  of  Union, N. J.
Huboi,  ^Vm., 838  ^V. Rockwell

St., Chicago, 111.
Huboi, W. A., 967 St. Johns

Ave., Highland Park, 111.
Hubor, W. A., 3940 Southport

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Huckeby,  Miss  Ora, Readville,

Mo.
Hudson,  Harvey  R.,  815  James

Bldg., Chattanooga, Tenn.
Hudson,  Stephen  W.,  c/o  S.  M.

Long  Valentine  Stage,  Grass

Range,  Mont.
Huey, C. P., 230 Fifth Ave.,

Clinton, la.
Huev, C. P., 207 Weston

Bldg., Clinton, la.
Huff,  Adam  L., Fresno, O.
Huffer, L. R., W^estport, Ind.
Huffer, Mrs. Leila, Brazil

Hotel,  Brazil,  Ind.
Huffman, J. E., Box 622,

Orange, Cal.
Huffner, Susan E., 335 W.

Ferry  St..  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Hughes, H. A., 12 Imperial

Bank Bldg., Medicine Hat,

Alberta, Can.
Hughes, J. H., Lockney. Tex.
Hughes, T. A., Hennessey,

Okla.
Hughes, T. H., 809 Third St.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Hughes,  T.  H.,  Apache,  Okla.
Hughs, Rav AV^ Rochester,

Mich.
Hull, Marcus E., Hickory,

N. C.
Hull, M. E., Lincolnton. N. C.
Hultine, L. C, Essex, xa.
Humfeld,  Julius  S..  233'^^  Main

St.,  Boonville,  Mo.
Humfeld, Wm. C, Box 353,

Washington,  Mo.
Hummel, Abraham, 406 North

Broad St., Lancaster, O.
Hummel, A. F., Lancaster, O.
Hummel, A. F., Sugar Grove,

O.
Hummel.  Nellie, 119  W.

Columbus St., Lancaster,

O.
Humphrey, G. B., Earlham,

la.
Humphrey, G. C, Moravia,

N. T.
Humphrey, S. B.. 321 Union

St., Emporia, Kans.
Hunfleld,  Julius  S.,  240  S.  Main

St., St. Charles, Mo.
Hunsaker, E. D., 7032 N.

Clark St., Chicago. 111.


Hunt, U. I-'., liunlinKburd,
[ Ind.

I  Hunt Harold  A., Port  Jervis,
N. Y.
Hunt, M. H., Pauls  Valley
Okla.
,  Hunt, K. c., Denver, Colo.
I  Hunter, J. A., 5 Wesley Blk
Columbus,  O.
Hunter, L. S., Springfield, Mo
i  Hunter, Wm. H., 418-419

Highland Bldg., I'ittsburgh,

Huntley, W. S., What Cheer

la.
Hupp & Hupp, Second Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Oswego, N. Y
Hurd,  A.  M.,  Cato, N. Y.
Hurlbut,  G.  W.,  Guthrie,  Okla
'  Hurley,  Helen,  1504  13th  Ave

Altoona,  Pa.

^o^'®^'^/"°- L- 1217  S.  Broad

St., Philadelphia, Pa
Kurley, John L.. 103 S. Fifth

St. Reading, Pa.
Hurry, E. M., 816 W. 11th  St

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Hurt, F. L., First Nafl Bank

Bldg., Hamilton, O.
iusted,  J.  W.,  56  ^Va.rren  Ave..

Detroit,  Mich.
Husted, J. W.. 57-58 Univer-
sity Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
-Ousted & Husted, 519 E.

Warren  St., Detroit, Mich.
Hutchins, C. E., 50-a

Washington St.,

Poughkeepsie, N. Y.
Hutchinson, A. W., 514 Fifth

Ave., Marietta, O.
i  Hutchison,  C.  E.,  Pomona,  Cal.
i  Hutts, C. A., 530 S. Emporia
: Ave., Wichita, Kans.
I  Huxall,  H. P.,  Owensville,  Mo.
Hyatt, A. M., 2800 Q St.,

Lincoln,  Neb.
Hyatt, Inez, Lodi, O.
Hyatt,  Inez,  7624  Quincy  Ave.

S. E., Cleveland, O.
Hyatt, Jerome, Smlth-

McKenny Bldg., Shelbvville,

Ky.
Hyatt,  Rexburg,  Idaho.
Hyatt, Roy N., 309

Washington St., Shelbyville.

Ky.
Hynes, J. F., 2203 Madison

St., Chicago, 111.
Hynes, W. J., Lacon, 111.
Hynes,  W.  J., Pontiac,  111.
Hyre, S., St. Cloud, Fla.
Ihle, Ben. Paris, Ark.
Ihne, R. E., Newkirk, Okla.
Ihne, R. E., 1032 W. 14th St.,

Davenport, la.
Ihne, Walter  W., Room 8,

Interstate  Bldg., Cedar

Rapids, la.
Ihne,  W.  W..  546  Garfield  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Ikerman, J. W., Nat'l Bank

Annex,  Kent,  O.
Ikerman,  J.  W.,  431  E.  Market

St., AVarren, O.
Iliff,  Lena, 1715 25th  Ave.,

Gulfport, Miss.
Iliff, Lena, Biloxi Health

Resort, Biloxi. Miss.
Imlay,  J.  N.,  413 6th  St..

Springfield, 111.
Imlay, J. N., Janesvill.^, Wis.
Ingalls & Ingalls. 28 Miller

St., Cortland, N. Y.
Ingalls & Ingalls. 301-4

AVysor Bldg., Muncie. Ind.
Ingalls,  Mrs. H.  B.,  21  Clinton

St.. Cortland, N. Y.
Ingalls, Julia N., 22

Washington St., Cortland,

N. Y.
Ingalls,  Murray  E.,  301  Wysor

Bldg.. Muncie, Ind.


1104


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Ing-alls & Ingalls, 21 Clinton

St., Cortland. N. Y.
Ingersoll, F. E., Box 28:;,

Howell,  Mich.
Ingram,  A. P..  Baird Bldg..

Coquille, Ore.
Ingram, A. P.. 401-402 First

Natl Bank Bldg., The

Dalles, Ore.
Ingram,  A.  P.,  615  Ivanho<-  St.,

St. Johns, Ore.
Ingram, F. H., Grant's Pas.s,

Ore.
Ingram, Silas, 9 Riddle Blk.,

Ravenna,  O.
Ingrebitsen, H., Kimball Blk..

Cedar Rapids, la.
Inks, F. M., 53 Hawthorne

Ave., Pittsburgh, Penn.
Irish. A. M., 859 Crane Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Irish, Daisy B., Mitchell, S.

Dak.
Irving, Bryne, Hamilton,

Mont.
Irving, Josephine, 74

Boylston St.. Boston, Mass.
Irving. Josephine, 1569

Beacon  St.,  Brookline, Mas.-^.
Irwin, R. J.. 15 Northern

Crown Bank, Vancouver.

B. C, Canada.
Isch,  Geo.  A.,  Washburn,  111.
Iversen, Fred. "SV., Ridgeland,

Miss., and Chicago, 111.
Ives. Viola, 912 N. Broadway,

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Jackman, J. M., Plymouth,

Ind.
Jackman, L. M., Eau Claire.

Mich.
Jackman, L. M., .SI 6 N.

Michigan  St.,  Plymouth,  Ind.
Jackman, Mable, 5242

Michigan Ave., Chicago. 111.
Jackson, B. L., 60 Mountain

St., Eureka Springs, Ark.
Jackson. C. V.,  La  Porte, Ind.
Jackson, Ernest C, 556 Main

St.,  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.
Jackson, Ernest, Clinton

Corners, N. Y.
Jackson, Fred, Box 173,

Stromburg, Neb.
Jackson,  Mrs. Lillie.

Dunnville, Ont., Can.
Jackson, Richard H., 5211

Knox St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Jacobowitz, Henry, West

18th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Jacobs, C. ^V., Gravette. Ark.
Jacobs, Frederick V., 195

Virginia Ave., Jersey City,

N. J.
Jacobs,  Julian  M.,  195  Virginia

Ave.,  Jersey  City.  N.  J.
Jacobs. W. A., 1544 Larraber

St., Chicago, 111.
Jacobson,  Max,  447  E.  44th  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Jacobv,  Earl  W.,  407  McMillan

Bldg.,  La  Crosse,  Wis.
Jacoby,  Earl  W..  922  Reihl  St.,

Waterloo, la.
Jacques, Mrs. Allie M., 800 S.

Seventh St., Terre  Haute,

Ind.
Jaeger,  Mr. &  Mrs.  Gustav,  17
S. Seventh St., Columbia,

Mo.
Jaeger, Gustav, 602 Payton
St., and 223 S. William St.,
Moberly, Mo.
James. Juliet E.. Mankato.

Minn.
James,  J.  H.. Anderson,  Ind.
James,  J.  W.,  Whiting,  Ind.
Jaros,  John, 3002 S. Central

Park  Ave.,  Chicago.  111.
Jaster,  E.  J.,  Arcade,  N.  Y.


Jauss, Geo., Butler, Pa.
Jaynes,  Tony,  116  S.  Logan  St..

Denver,  Colo.
Jeffrey, Joseph, Butte Ave.,

Alliance, Nebr.
Jeffries, Anne L., 938

Henderson Ave., Decatur,

111.
Jeffries, J. K., 17 E. Seventh

St., Oklahoma City. Okla.
Jelley. Geo. A., 632 Wabash

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Jemsen. Ella. Eugene, Ore.
Jenkins. D. J.. 1400 W. 25th

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
.lenkins.  D.  Janet,  112  W.  12th

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
.lenkins.  D.  Janet.  Maysville.

Okla.
.lenkins. Jessie C. ^^'ashing-

ton. D. C.
Jenkins.  W.  C,  Sterling,  Mich.
Jenk.s. Chas., Box 1094,

Pittsfleld, Mass.
Jennings, J. H., Carbondale,

Pa.
Jennings, J. H., 441 Kirby

Bldg., Saginaw, Mich.
.Jennings, Sarah V., 1061

Flower St., I.,os Angeles,

Cal.
Jennings, Theo. T., 76

Monmouth  St.,  Newark,  N.  J
Jensen, Effie K., New T.,isbon.

AVis.
Jensen, F. G., New Lisbon,

Wis.
Jensen, W. M., Whitehall,

Mich.
Jenson, Thos. A., Eugene,

Ore.
Jentsrh &  Woodruff,  Drs.,  c/(

The Newport Sanitarium,

Estero, Fla.
Jepson,  Lelia,  Grand  Rapid.s,

Mich.
Jergens, C. M., Little Falls.

Minn.
Jergens,  G. M.,  Security  Bldg..

Little Falls, Minn.
Jerry, Edmund W.. E. Main-
Hunt Ave., Hamburg, N. Y.
Jewell, M. B., 613 Tacoma

Bldg., Chicago. 111.
Tewett.  Nicholas,  411  W.  Third

St., .Jamestown, N. Y.
Jobe, W. H.. 401-3 Century

Blk., Des Moines, la.
Jobes & Jobes, 68 Green St..

Fredonia, N. Y.
Jobling, R., Asselin Blk., 6tli

St.,  Calumet,  Mich.
Johler,  C.  N.,  Anthracite  Bldg..

Carbondale, Penn.
Johler, L. G., Bliss Davis

Bldg., Scranton, Penn.
Johler.  L.  G.. 148  Adams  St.,

Scranton. Pa.
John, Glenn V., Suite 407,

Savings Bldg.. Lima, O.
.John. .1. R.. 1514 Linden Ave..

Baltimore,  Md.
John. Jones. 3928 Fifth Ave..

Pittsburgh. Penn.
Johnerson,  Alfred  L.,  Maddock,

N. Dak.
.Johns. A. L.. Ft. Wayne. Ind
Johns. M. E., Lansing Place.

Upper  Montclair, N. .T.
Johnson & Johnson, 118  N.

Main St.. Urichsville, O.
Johnson, A. H., Myers Blk.,

Buffalo, Minn.
.Johnson, A. J.. Gooding,

Idaho.
.Johnson.  A.  O..  Warren,  Ind.
Johnson, .V. R.. Edgar, Nebr.
Johnson,  A. S., Struthers,  O.
Johnson, Ben R.,  Box  203,  Mt

Pleasant, Utah.
.Johnson. Clarence B., 412

Hudson Bldg., Ogden, Utah.


Johnson, C. E., Sapulpa, Okla.
Johnson, C. E., 3534 N. 11th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Johnson, Cecil F., 6-7

Chevalier Bldg.,

Parkcrsburg, W. \'a.
Johnson, Cecil F., General

Delivery,  Parkersburg,  W.

Va.
Johnson,  Clare  P.,  200  W.  72nd

St., New-  York, N. Y.
Johnson.  C.  P.,  130  Wadsworth

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Johnson, David W., 3241 N.

15th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Johnson, David W., 2335

Nicholas  St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Johnson, Emmet D., 114

Detroit St., Kenton, O.
Johnson,  E.  E.,  409J^ Main  St.,

Vincennes,  Ind.
Johnson, E. L.. 511 Meridian

Life  Bldg.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.
Johnson,  E.  L.,  2116  E.  Fourth

St., Maiion, Ind.
.Johnson, Edith,  Masonic

Temple,  Cedar  Rapids,  la.
Johnson,  Mrs.  E.  M.,  Bertrand,

Neb.
Johnson,  Francis  D., 711

Hancock Ave.. Holdredge.

Neb.
Johnson, Francis D., Cokato,

Minn.
Johnson, Franklin S., 118 N.

Main  St.,  Urichsville,  O.
Johnson, G., 210 Market St.,

Paterson, N. .1.
Johnson, Geo.  L., St.  James,

Minn,
.lohnson. H. A., Gunn Blk.,

Breckenridge,  Minn.
Johnson,  Jackson,  Kent,  Wash.
Johnson,  J.  F..  108  E.  Choctaw

St.,  McAlester,  Okla.
.Johnson, J. Ford, Siloam

Springs, Ark.
Johnson.  J. T., 51  N. First  St.,

Duquesne, Pa.
Johnson, J. T., 385 W. Main

St., Battle Creek, Mich.
Johnson,  Lulu,  1729  W.  AValnut

St.,  Chicago, 111.
Johnson, Melissa, Struthers.

O.
Johnson.  O.  A.,  Warren,  Ind.
Johnson, Mrs. O. R., 130 V

Sixth St., Cincinnati, O.
.Johnson. P. H., Morrison, 111.
John.son,  P.  H.,  Colville,  Wash.
Johnson,  P.  W.,  118  E.  Ave.  A.,

Hutchinson. Kans.
Johnson. P. W., 418 N. Main

St., Hutchinson, Kans.
Johnson,  R.  M.,  218  Culbertson

Bldg., Oklahoma  City, Okla.
Johnson,  R.  M.,  1447  E.  Eighth

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Johnson. Sam., Hawarden, la.
Johnson, T. A., Box 156.

Gooding. Idaho.
Johnson, T. B., What Cheer,

la.
Johnson, Thos. D., 202

Republic Bldg., Cleveland,

O.
Johnson, W. A.. 413 22nd St.,

Birmingham, Ala.
Johnson, W. H. H., 914 E.

Sixth St., Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Johnson, W. L., Box 322,

Portales,  N.  Mex.
Johnston.  D.  E..  Kenton,  O.
1  Johnston. E. J.. 349 Walnut

St..  Trenton, N.  J.
Johnston, Ei-~-Me, Kimball, S.
1 Dak.

1  Johnston, J. Ford, 2401 Scott
' St., Little  Rock. Ark.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1105


Johnston,  P.  S.,  Marionville,

Pa.
Johnston,  P.  S.,  Box  38.  Glady,

W.  Va.
Johnston, P. W., Hoke FAdg.,

Hutchinson Kans.
Johnston, Thos. D., 1004 E.

105th  St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Johnston,  Ula, 401  Scott  St.,

Little  Rock,  Ark.
Jolitz,  Miss  Marion,  1015  F  St.,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Jolley,  Frank  W.,  Dayton,

Wash.
Jolley, John F., Los Ang-eles.

Cal
Joltz.' Mrs. C, 3349 Sejon St.,

Denver, Colo.
.Tones,  A.  M.,  El  Reno,  Okla.
Jones, Dr., Bloomfleld, Neb.
Jones,  Caroline,  1512  W.

Madison  St., Chicago, 111.
Jones,  C.  A.,  143  Roberts  Ave.,

Syracuse,  N. Y.
Jones, C. M., Albuquerque, N,

Mex.
Jones,  C.  M.,  436  Ochsner  Bldg.,

Sacramento,  Cal.
Jones.  C.  M.,  355  B.  Eighth  St.,

Portland,  Ore.
Jones, E. D., 201 N. Tremont

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Jones, E. E., 835 Delevina  St.,

Santa Barbara, Cal.
Jones, E. L., 520 Eighth St.,

Huntington, W. Va.
Jones,  E.  R.,  Eldora,  la.
Jones,  F.  A.,  401-3  Bunn  Bldg.,

Waycross,  Ga.
Jones, Freding, 801 Sixth St.,

Greeley,  Colo.
Jones, G. M., Wayland, la.
Jones,  J. Hamilton, 17th  &

Lincoln  Sts.,  Denver,  Colo.
Jones, J, N., 1629 Maine St.,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Jones,  J. N.,  Visalia,  Cal.
Jones,  J. P., 49 S.  Lincoln  St.,

Denver,  Colo.
Jones,  J.  T.,  Mystic,  la.
Jones, Louis, Hulet Blk.,

Minneapolis,  Minn.
Jones, L. M., 625 Home St.

Hammond,  Ind.
Jones,  M.  A.,  617  Merchant  St..

Emporia,  Kans.
Jones, Mary J., London, Ont.,

Can.
Jones,  O.  B.,  Hamilton,  Mont.
Jones,  Roy,  Warren,  111.
Jones,  S.  W.,  London,  Ont.,

Can.
Jones, W. Stanley, 1320 L St

N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.
Jordan,  George,  Long  Beach,

Cal.
Jordan,  J.  B.,  Stockton

Springs,  Me.
Jorgensen, P. M., Burwell,

Neb.
Josephs, M. L., 1020 Atlantic

St.,  Appleton,  W^is.
Josephson, Morris, 3220

Dawson St., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Joslin, J. H., 816i Larrier St.,

Charleston,  W.  Va.
Joslin,  J.  H..  119  State  St.,
Juchoff,  Edwin  T., 464  E.  41st

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Judd, Artilla,  Waterloo,  la.
Judd, Mrs. J. L, 224 '4 W.

Fourth  St.,  Waterloo,  la.
Judd,  Lorenzo,  San  Ysirdo,  San

Diego, Cal.
Judlander  &  Judlander, 707  B.

Locust  St.,  Des  Moines,  la.
Julander,  S.  E.,  310  Gord  Blk..

Des Moines, la.
Justice, Dorothy, 3901

Montrose Ave., Chicago, 111.
Kaatz, F.  C,  Suite  7, Y.  M. C.

A., Burlington, Vt.


Kaltwasser, H., 908 Willow

Ave.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Kambish & Kambish, Racine,

Wis.
Kappleman,  H. A., Lexington,

Mo.
Kappleman,  H.  A.,  New  Haven,

Mo.
Kasper,  Alfred  C,  58.^  11th  St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Kassmir, M. Z., 969 Liberty

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Kates, Mrs.  G. W., 600 Penn-
sylvania Ave., Washington,

D. C.
Kaufman,  Alice,  2126  High  St.,

Denver,  Colo.
Kauffman, Edna E., 311-16

Hall Blk., Akron, O.
Kaulbach, Viola C, Mendota,

111.
Kay, Mrs. Edwina, Buena

Park Cal
Keane,'  W. E., 179 Franklin

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Kearns, Leo, 509-11 Wabash

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Kearns, Leo, Smithfield St.,

Pittsbuigh, Pa.
Kearns,  L. M., 347  Fifth  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Keat, M. C, Baton, Ind.
Keck, N. B., 9110 Wade Park

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Keedsen, J. M., Alpena, Mich.
Keel & Keel, 452 Fulton St.,

Troy, N. Y.
Keel, Anna, 450 Fulton St.,

Troy,  N. Y.
Keel, James B., 450 Fulton

St., Troy, N. Y.
Keeler, Clyde M., Anadarko,

Okla.
Keenan,  Wm., 724  Market  St.,

Sandusky,  O.
Keene, G. W., 62 State St.,

Rochester, N. Y.
Keene, J. R., 620 State St.,
i Alma, Mich,
i  Keene, R. C, 62 State St.,

Rochester,  N. Y.
Keene, R. C, 612 Meisel Blk.,

Port Huron, Mich.
Kehrer, Lillie R., 114'/> E.

Russell St., El Reno, Okla.
Keifer, Frank, 912 W. Third

St., Davenport, la.
Keifer, Jas. D., 1043 W. 31st

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Keitzer,  W.  E.,  McKeesport,

Pa.
Kellam, 1409 North First St.,

Syracusfe, N. Y.
Kellar, John A., 38 Courtland

St., Bridgeport, Conn.
Keller, David  J., 632 14th St.,

Denver,  Colo.
Keller, G. T., Philadelphia,

Pa
Keller, H. F., 5320 Walton

Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Keller, Jno. A., 1115 Main  St.,

Bridgeport, Conn.
Keller, Mrs. J. H., 169 State
, St., Hammond, Ind.
Keller, L. A., 246 Plummer

Ave., Hammond, Ind.
Kelley,  John  A.,  1115  Main  St.,

Bridgeport, Conn,
i  Kelley, J. D., 882 14th Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Kelley, Miss M., Coleman,

Mich.
Kelley, Roger P.,  Albert  Lea,
I "Minn.
!  Kellogg.  Frank  G.,  39-41  State

St., Seneca  Falls, N. T.
Kellogg, H. W., Hastings,

Neb.
I  Kellogg,  Henry  "W..  Clay  Ave.,

Harvard, Neb.
Kellogg, O. J., Chriiftian Blk.,

Wabash, Ind.


Kellogg, O. J., c/o L.  Taylor,

R. F. D. No. 1, Grand

Rapids, Mich.
Kelly, J. D., 11  Madison  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Kelly, J. D., 79 Lincoln Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Kelly, Miss M., Coleman,

Mich.
Kelly, Roger 1'., Albert Lea,

Minn.
Kelly,  Samuel  W.,  Saint  Elmo,

111.
Kelso, James, 246 W. State

St., Columbus, O.
Kenagy, Paul J.. Bern, Kans.
Kennan, J. S., 1033 Washing-
ton St., Hoboken, N. J.
Kennard, Mrs. A. W., 312-13

Courier Bldg., Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Kennard, Wm., 312-13 Currier

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Kennard & Kennard, 312-13

Currier Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Kennard & Kennard, Peoria,

111.
Kennedy, Chas., Davenport,

la.
Kennedy, E. A., 808-9 B. End

Trust  Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Kent, Elmer F., 255 Coleman

St., Bridgeport, Conn.
Kent, J. A., 177 N. State St.,

Chicago, 111.
Kent, M. C, Baton, Ind.
Kepford, L. H., Alva, Okla.
Kepner, B. F., Genoa, 111.
Kerr,  Mrs. C.  A., R. F.  D. No.

1, McGraw, N. Y.
Kerr, C. B., 114^ Dubuque

St., Iowa  City, la.
Kerr, J. R., Woodbine, la.
Kesselmire, G. F., Salem, O.
Kessler, Karl, c/o  Mc  Donald

Sanitarium, Central Valley,

N. Y.
Keuck,  Martin,  201  N.  Hill  St.,

South Bend, Ind.
Kickland, J. E., Jasper, Minn.
Kidd, H. B., 893 Third Ave.

E., Owen Sound, Ont,, Can.
Kidder, Albert A., 1111 S.

Olive St.. Los Angeles, Cal.
Kiefer, Frank, 913 W. Third

St.,  Davenport,  la.
Kiefferle, Rose, 221 ^V. 12th

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Kielblock, Helen, "Watertown,

Wis.
Kightlinger, Craig  M., 9

Wayne  Ave.,  B.  Orange,  N.  J.
Kilbourne, Clara, 321 Queens

Ave.,  London, Ont.,  Can.
Killeen, John J., 118 Grand

St.,  Newburgh,  N.  Y.
Killigan, Mrs. F., Falls City,

Neb.
Kilton,  A.  A., Empire  Bldg.,

Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Kimmell,  Andrew F., Conrad

St.,  Mill  Creek,  W.  Va.
King,  Bernice,  116  Cedar  St..

Snohomish,  Wash.
King, Bernice, Petaluma,

Cal.
King, Floyd B., Knapp Bldg.,

^Varren, Pa.
King, Dr. F. L., Des Moines,

la.
King,  Gertrude,  Roseland,  La.
King,  Ida  M.,  Medical  Museum,

Washington,  D.  C.
King, R. E., 116  Cedar  St..

Snohomish,  Wash.
King,  Mrs.  S.  L.,  722  Third  St..

Muscatine,  la.
King,  William  G.,  239 J<  Second

St.,  Jersey  City.  N.  J.
Kingsbury. Frank D., Huge-
not  St.,  New  Rochelle.  N.  Y.


HOG


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Kingsbury, M. O., Audubon,

la.
Kingsland,  Jennie  B.. 82

Beverlv  St..  Newark.  N.  J.
Klnlev,  C.  H.,  Homestead,  Pa.
Kinloy, C. R., .''>41 Amnion St..

Homestead, Pa.
Kinnenberg- & Kinnenberg,

Drs., 825 P^ourth Ave.,

New  Kcn-sington,  Pa.
Kinniburs & Kinniburgr. 1903

Third Ave., Huntington, W.

Va.
Kinney,  C.  D.,  Austin,  Tex.
Kinney, C. D., 500-9 I.inz

Bldg-.,  Dallas,  Tex.
Kinney, M. M., CloQuet, Minn.
Kinz,  Geo.  J.,  Camas,  Wash.
Kinz. Geo., 409 Halsey Bldg..

Portland, Ore.
Kinzlv,  Mabel  Alberts,  Nevada,

O.
Kiplingrer, C. K. Ashburn,

Ga.
Kiplinser. Lawyers Bldg.,

Miami,  Fla.
Kirknatrick, J. F.., 202 Ward

BUlg-.,  Battle  Creek.  Mich.
Kirkpatrick, Minnie A., 13321

I5road St., Newcastle, Ind.
Kirkpatrick.  S.  I..,  308

Washing-ton Ave., Scranton,

Pa.
Kish.  F.  G.,  301  Chopin  St.,

South Bend, Ind.
Kistler, A. .T., 919 N. Broad

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Kitchen, Georgiana, 201

Pavonia  Ave.,  .Jersey  City,

N.  J.
Kielgaard,  Gregers  B.,

Grafton,  N.  Dak.
Kleczynski, A., 413 Canfleld

Ave.,  Detroit, Mich.
Kleczynski. l.'^GO Michigan

Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Klein, Geo.  W., 110

Washington St., Ironton, O.
Klein.  .T.  S., 48 33rd  St.,

Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Klema,  John  W.,  Room  20,

Tserman Bldg., Kenosha,

Wis.
Kliman, Winona, Mitchell

Bldg.. Cincinnati. O.
Klimeck. A. J., 1313 Tower

Ave., Superior, Wis.
Klockle, Mrs. Sophie, 702

Bittner  St., St. Douis,  Mo.
Kloman. Winona. 10 Mitchell

Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Klove, F. M., 1204 15th St.,

Rock T.sland, 111.
Klove,  Fremont,  309  Da

Favette  St.,  Waterloo,  Ta.
KUinder,  Paul  E., 186fi

I.,ibertv  St..  Davenport,  la.
Knauel & Knauel, 1618 State

St.,  East  St.  T>ouis.  111.
Knauer,  F.  F.,  I.,ynn,  Ind.
Kneck, G. W., South  Bend,

Ind.
Kneck, Martin, South Bend,

Ind.
Kneibess, B. J., Sturgia,  Mich.
Knibbs,  Thos.,  Merrick,  T>.  I.
Knieling, L., Willoughby, O.
Kniermann,  D.,  R. F.  D.  No. 3,

Indianola. Neb.
Knigh,  G.  S.,  3003  E.  Grand

Blvd.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Knoll, A. F., 1921 Bridge

Ave., Davenport, la.
Knoll, A. v.. Room 1 & 2,

Backman Bldg., First St. &

Third  A\e.,  Cedar  Rapids,  la.
Ivnoll, A.  v..  729  College  Ave.,

Davenport, Ta.


Knopp, Louis, 3329 First St.,

Minneapolis,  Minn.
Knopp, L., Eldorado Springs,

Mo.
Knott, J. C, 8 Cooley Blk..

Hartford  C\iy,  Ind.
Knowles,  C.  H.,  4  00  N. Union

Ave.,  Alliance,  O.
Knowles.  J.  H..  305  St.  Cloud

Bldg., New Castle, Pa.
Knowles. Leonaid, 92 S. Main

St., Fond du Lac, Wis.
Knowles, Leonard, Cleveland,

O.
Knowlton,  Harold  C,  19  Home

St.. Worcester. Mass.
Knox, James Edwin,

Harpersville, Broome Co.,

N.  Y.
Knutsen, Christina, Callender,

la.
Koch. E. F., 3005 Delmar

Blvd., St. Louis. Mo.
Koch,  Otto  W.,  903  Rusk  Ave.,

Hou.=:ton,  Tex.
Koch,  Otto  W., Alvin, Tex.
Koepf, Geo., Park Falls,

Wis.
Koer, J.  W., 429  N. 6th  and

Utah  Sts., Salt  Lake  City,

Utah.
Koffel,  Alfred, 151  Main  St.,

West  Bend,  Wis.
Koffel, Roy, 108-12 Stettiner

Bldg., Logansport, Ind.
Kohlbusch,  E.  W.,  3605  Delmai-

Blvd.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Konkler, W. H., Duluth,

Minn.
Kont,  S.  A.,  Karcher  Bldg.,

Kalispell,  Mont.
Koopman, P.  B.,  6432  N.

Hermitage  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Koose, Miss Edna, Grand

Mound,  la.
Kovner, Robert L., St. Elmo.

111.
Kozincki. L. C, 8800 Houston

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Krantz,  C.  J.,  203  Superior  St.,

Mason  City,  la.
Krantz, Henry, 305 Stilzer

Bldg,. Toledo,  O.
Krantz, Wm. J., 306;./. Fourth

St., Logansport, Ind.
Krause, Edith, 31st & S Sts.,

Lincoln, Neb.
Krause,  H.  A.,  811  S.

Marshfield  Ave., Chicago,

111.
Kreder.  Miss  E.  S.,  1911  West-
minster  St., Washington,

D. C.
Kreolic, Benj., 11th St. and

Broadway. Gary,  Ind.
Kreson, A. R., 400 Home

Trust Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Kress  &  Kress, 204 Hodge

Bldg., Lockport, N. T.
Kress,  George  P., 24  Harrison

Ave., Loekpoi't,  N.  Y.
Kress, Mabel T., 24 Harrison

Ave., Lockport, N. Y.
Kretzer, Reginald L., 207

Claremont  Ave.,  Jersey  City,

N. J.
Krewson, A.  L,  German  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Krill,  John  F.,  Bllicott  Square,

Buffalo. N. Y.
Kring. 0.scar, 408-9

McClymonds Building,

Massillon, O.
Kritch, Bessie L, 431-32

Chamber  Bldg.,  Oil  City,

Pa.
Kritzer,  J.,  1310  Consumers

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.


Krohn,  A.  H.,  1002  Michigan

Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Kromo, Dr., North Yakima,

Wash.
Krouse,  H. G.,  Nyack,  N.  Y.
Krudop, D. T., 218 Wright

&  Collender  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles, Cal.
Kiuse,  Edith  L., 428 N. 31st

St., Lincoln, Neb.
Krutzcr,  Oscar  J.,  014  S.

Fourth St., La  Crosse, Wis.
Kucera,  V.  F.,  Sidney,  Neb.
Kuehne, C.  F.,  Eagle  Grove,

la.
Kueliner, Frank O., 49

Delevan  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  .1.
Kuester, F. L., 3514 Morgan

St., St. Louis, Mo.
Kuhler, S.  J., 6115  Linwood

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Kuhlman,  E., 121  N.  Sixth  St.,

Teri-e  Haute, Ind.
Kulilow,  Anna, 1397  Gidings

Rd., Cleveland,  O.
Kuhlow, E. J., 1397 Gidings

Rd.,  Cleveland,  O.
Kuhr,  H.  C, 2  Dolan  Bldg.,

Howard,  Neb.
Kuna,  A., 31  Lincoln  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Kunkle,  R.  H.,  2041  E.  90th  St.,

Cleveland, O.
Kurche,  A.  G.,  1714  Berlin St  ,

La Crosse, Wis.
Kurtz, F. A., Cambridge, 111.
Kurz,, Robert F.. 36 High St.,

New Haven, Conn.
Kuschel, Otto  F., 1306 W. 92d

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
La  Berge,  G.  H.,  610  Stewart

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
La  Crosse,  Albert  J.,  2004  Ella

Court, Marinette, Wis.
Ladd,  C.  F.,  Marshalltown,  la.
Ladd, Mrs. Louisa, 1105

Georgia St., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Ladman,  Geo., Portland,  Mo.
Ladwick, Miss Mary, Antigo,

Wis.
Laffer, Henry. 350-7 Wells

Bldg., Quincy, 111.
Lafgron, A. J., Richvale, Cal.
La  Grange,  Alden,  Paris,  111.
Laist, Otto, 402 Haight St..

San Francisco, Cat.
Lajoie, W. L., 9-10 Ziegler

Bldg., Spokane, Wash.
La Jore & Jolmson, 418-21

Mohawk Bldg., Spokane,

Wash.
Lak,  Ray,  1201  N.  La  Salle  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Lake,  C.  A.,  1128  Bedford  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
l,ake, F. W., 950 AV. 27th St.,

Camden.  N.  J.
Fjake, Joshua. La, Grande

Apts., Atlantic City. N. J.
La  Londe, J. W.. Belleview.

Mich.
I^amb, Charles, Davenport, la.
Lamb,  C.  R.,  Spokane,  Wash.
Lambeau, V. E. .!., People's

Bank Bldg., Bloomington,

111.
Lambert. E. K., 1638 Mesa

Ave.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Lambert,  Geo.  P.,

Flemingsburg,  Ky.
Lambert,  P.  P.,  Lambertsville,

Pa.
Lamon, Chas. P., 290 Mill St.,

Danville,  Pa.
Lamt,  Chas.,  5237  Martin  Blk.,

Spokane, "Wash.
Lanby,  Geo.  E.. 313  Hall  Blk.,

Akron,  O.
Land,  J.  P.,  Chapman.  Neb.


('.Iiiropraclors


Professional  Register


1107


Landan,  Mrs., 611  S. Pearl  St.,  j

Denver, Colo.  1

Landgraff,  E.  J.,  213-15  Moran  ]

Corbett Bldg-., Decatur, 111.
I^ane. Elmer H., Plainfield,

Wis.
Lane.  S.  C,  Woodlandville,  Mo.
I^ang-, J., 80 Sauer  St.,

Paterson,  N.  J.
I^ang, Jacob, 45 Ward St., I

Paterson,  N.  J.  j

Lang-  & Thornell, S. Leebrick

St., Burling-ton, la.  I

I.,ang:an,  P.  M., 454  Fairmount

Ave.,  Oakland,  Cal.
Lang-dale, H. R., McPherson,  I

Kans.  '

Lang-dale, H. R., Pittsburgh,

Kans.  [

Lang-e, Dr. Chas. E.. 208

Masonic  Temple, Denver,

Colo.
Lange, Chas. E., Frederick,

Okla.
Lang-e,  Lydia  E.,  925

Danielson  St.,  North  Berg-en,

N.  J.  :

Langehag-en & Lang-ehagen,
Drs., 830 Le Claire  St.,
Davenport,  la.  I

Lang-enhag-en, W. W., Greene,  ;
la.  !

Langhren, Harold J., 337-39
Quimby  Bldg-.,  Cleveland,  O.
Lang-hren, Harold J., 2212 E.

79th St., Cleveland, O.
Lang-ley, Jos., 232 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Langlois,  F.  L.,  256  Ridean  St.,

Ottawa,  Ont.,  Can.
Langum, Henry, 43 N. Main  i

St., Sheridan. Wyo.
Lang-um, Henry, Volg-a, S.

Dak.
Lang-um, Henry, Story City.

la.
Langworthy, Mitchell, 834

First  St.,  Cedar  Rapids,  la.
Lang-v/orthy,  Dr.  S.  M.,  834
First  Ave.  E.,  Cedar  Rapids,
la.
Lansing-,  H.  L.,  80-82  N.  Pearl

St.,  Albany,  N.  T.
Lapin,  H.  J.,  206  E.  54th  St.,

Chicag-o, 111.
Lapin,  Wm.  J.,  Wausau,  Wis.
La  Plant, G.  L., 327  Main St.,
Suite  30.  Spear  Bldg-.,
Spring-field,  Mass.
Larsen.  Carl  A.,  414  Front  St.,

W.,  Ashland,  Wis.
Larsen. L. A.. 200 E. Walnut

St..  Denison.  la.
Larsen, Payne P., 37 E. 28th

St.,  New  York  N.  Y.
Larsen, Robert, Neenah, Wis.
Larsen,  Robert,  219  Main  St.,

Kenosha.  Wis.
Larsen, Robt., 827  CoUeg-e

Ave.,  Appleton,  Wis.
Larson,  A.  C,  127  W.  Bush  St.,

Caro,  Mich.
Larson,  A.  J.,  166  W.  Western

Ave.,  Muskegron,  Mich.
Larson.  Albin  J..  P.  O.  Bldg-..

Luding-ton,  Mich.
Larson, E. T., 2349 Gilpin St.,

Denver, Colo.
Larson,  G.  M.,  1930  Bissell  St.,

Chicag-o,  111.
Larson,  J.  W.,  2535  N.

California  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Larson. L. A., Denison, la.
Larson, Minnie,  Gilbert,  Mich.
I-,arson, Nelle, 308-9

Metropolitan Bldg., Sioux
City.  la.
Larson, Payne P., 37 E. 28th
St., New York. N. Y.


Latham, P. J., North Platte,

Neb.
Laub,  J. B.,  Chapman,  Neb.
Lauderwasser, H., 251

I^ittleton  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Lauffenberg-er, Edyth,

Baraboo, Wis.
LaufCenbcrg-er, Edyth, 2120

Cleveland  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Laundenschloger, G., 2254 N.

Clark  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Lauser,  Frank,  Columbus  City,

la.
Lauser, F., Osceola, la.
Lauser,  Frank,  Columbus  City,

la.
Lauser, Mrs. Minnie, Aurora,

Neb.
Lausler, F., O.sceola, la.
Lauterwasser, Charles, 252

Littleton  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Lauterwasser, G. Wm., 144

Ridgewood  Ave., Newark, I

N.  J.  '

Lavalley, J. E., 495 Buchanan

Building, Portland, Ore.
Lavalley, Thos. P., 403-4

Bushman Bldg., Portland,

Ore.
Lawrence, Joseph C, 1 Baird

Bldg., Omaha, Neb.
Lawrie, A., Forest, Ont.
Lawson, Herbert B., Celeron,  !

N.  Y.  '

Lawson,  H.  L.,  Homestea,d,  Pa.

Lawson  &  Lawson,  210  S.

Jefferson St., Kittanning,

Pa.
Lawton,  Dr.,  c/o  S.  R.

Jansheski, Cor. Congress &

Washington Sts., Ypsilanti,

Mich.
Layman & Layman, Room 8.

over  P.  O..  Tulsa.  Okla.
Leach. Clarence W.. 52

Raynard  St..  Denver,  Colo.
Leary,  Mathilda  V..  74  Eaton

Place.  East  Orange,  N.  J.
Leasure,  George,  127  S.  Main

St.,  Wichita,  Kans.
Leasure,  Laura  B.,  Milton,  Ky.
Leclair,  Harry, 314  Howe

Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Leclair,  Harry,  430  S.

Broadway, Los Angeles,

Cal.
LeCoultre, Emil, 1402 I St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Ledell, J. A.. Litchfield. Minn.
Ledsworth, D. T.. 417 W. 5th

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Lee  C.  H., Peru, 111.
Lee, C. J., 506 Security  Bldg.,

Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Lee. Curtis J., Capitol Hill,

Okla.
Lee. G. T., 625 N. Second St..

Arkansas City, Kans.
r.,ee, Lvndon E.. 112 Crescent

Place, New York, N. Y.
Lee,  Ruland  W„  95  Halsey  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Leech,  C.  "William, 305  ^^ S.

Barstow  St.,  Eau  Claire,  Wis.
Le  Freeman,  Ada  May,  702  So.

Spring  St.,  Los  Angeles.  Cal.
Lehman, F. O., 317 Abington

Bldg., Portland. Ore.
Lehmann.  Herman. 1874 Avon

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Lehman,  H.  S.,  Fort  McKinzie,

Sheridan, W^yo.
Leiber, Agnes,  Lafayette,  Ind.

Leist,-  Jos. D., 56 Richard St.,

Columbus, O.
Leistenfeltz,  Clara,  605  5-2  Main

St.,  Elkhart,  Ind.
Leisure, Clara B., c/o Mrs.

John  Porter,  Montezuma,  la.


Loland,  A.  L.,  Malta,  .Mont.
Leland,  A.  L.,  Arnold,  .Xeb.
Lemly, Cha.s. E., 522 Peerless

Bldg., Waco, Tex.
Lemon,  A.  B.,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,

Mich.
Lenser,  W.  M.,  Aurora,  Neb.'
Lent,  Geo.  P., 417  Corbett

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Lentz, Amanda E., 701 N.
Bioad  St.,  Guthrie,  Okla.
Lenz.  L.,  Hawkeye,  la.
Leonard  &  Leonard,  Milton,  la.
Leonard & Leonard, Merna,

Neb.
Leonard, F. F., Golchester,

111.
Leonard,  W.  C,  611  Carondelet

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Leonhardt,  Herman  C,  509
Merchant  St.,  Ambridge,
Penn.
Leonnig  & Meldrum, c/o

Arnold  Hotel,  Spanish  Fork,
Utah.
Leopold, Wm.  C, 1351 3rd  St.,
Milwaukee, Wis.
Davenport.  la.
Le  Plant,  G.  L.,  1216  Perry  St.,
Lessenger,  M.  L.,  2950  W.
10th St., Oklahoma City,
Okla.
Letson,  Samuel  B.,  248  S.  Olive

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Letson, Samuel  B., El  Centro,

Cal.
Lettrell,  A.  R.,  304-8  Conroy

Bldg.,  San  Antonio,  Tex.
Leutholz.  C.  H..  Mancelona,

Mich.
Leutz, Mrs. Amanda, Guthrie,

Okla.
Leve.  Allen  H..  154  East  Ave..

Rochester.  N.  Y.
Leve.  Julius  C,  154  East  A-v-e.,

Rochester,  N.  Y.
Levi,  Mrs.  Gussie  R.,  Elk  City.

Okla.
Lewis,  A. D., Wayne,  Neb.
!  Lewis, Burt, 1303 S. Meridian
St.,  Anderson.  Ind.
Lewis,  C.  A.,  Avoca,  la.
;  Lewis,  C. A., Glenwood. la.

Lewis. Cora  M., 7909  Euclid
I Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
!  Lewis, F. S., 642 12th St.,
I Oakland, Cal.
!  Lewis. G. H., Cameron Mills,
N. Y.
Lewis. H., Kalona, la.
Lewis, J. R.. 205 W. Federal

St..  Youngstown.  O.
Lewis,  Mrs.  H.  H..  Pana,

Christian  Co., 111.
Lewis. J. R., 307-8 Mahoning
Bank Bldg..  Youngstown,  O.
Lewis.  Lee  A..  Colby  Bldg.,

Everett,  "Wash.
Lewis,  L.  G.,  Bainbridge,  N.  Y.
Lewis,  L.  G.,  Xat'l  Bank  Bldg.,

Galesburg. 111.
Lewis,  L.  Velda,  Downs,  Kans.
Lewis, Samuel  M.,  Care  Hotel
Graham, Tunkhannock,
Pa.
Lewis,  S.  "W.,  Tunkhannock,

Pa.
Lichty. Elsa. Pacific Bldg..

San Francisco. Cal.
Liddle, Robt. L., 403 Husted

Bldg.. Kansas City. Kans.
Lieber. Agnes V., 10-13 New
Ensing  Bldg., La Fayette,
Ind.
Liechty, Leonia, 24 Center

St.. Clifton,  N.  J.
Liess,  John,  528  Garfield  Ave.,

Chicago,  111.
Liestenfeltz. Chas. L.,
Elkhart. Ind.


1108


Professioiuil  Register


Chiropractors


Liestenfeltz,  Chas.  L..  Bunker

Hill. Ind.  ^^^,^

Liestenfeltz. Clara, 605/;

Main St., Elkhart, Ind.
Li&hthall,  Henry  D.,  112  N.

Bth  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Liken, F. J.. Clarinda, la.
Lillibridge, R. A.. 771 Main

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Lillie. Arthur, 11-13  >'.

Lawndale  Ave.,  Chicago 111.
Limpus.  Edward  F.,  9-10  I.  O.

O. F. Bldg., Mt. Vernon.

Lind. A. E.. G03 Overland

Bldg-., Boise, Idaho.
Lind, A.  E., Overland  Bldg.,

Boise,  Idaho.
Lind, G.  M. E., Lincoln Trust

Bldg., B'way at  72nd  St.,

New York, N.  Y.
Lindahl,  A. K..  New  Rockford,

N. Dak.  ^

Lindahl. Alfred K., Dougla.s,

N. Dak.  ^. ,

Lindberg, David, Richvale,

Cal
Lindehan. F. A., Hankinson.

N. Dak.
Lindell, C. Darrah. 3339 N.

Main St., Pocatello, Idaho
Lindholm,  Wm.,  66  Maplewood

Ave., Bridgeport, Conn.
Linden,  H.  L.,  556  Dover  Court

Rd.. Toronto, Can.
Lindroth, C 1240 California

St., San  Francisco,  Cal.
Lindsay, Dr. F. P. W., Cedar

Rapids,  la.
Linebarger, C. A., Council

Bluffs. la.
Linenberger, Fred, Salem, S.

Dak.
Lingo, Mrs. L. B., The Wool-
worth, 10th  St.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.
Liniker, Chas. W., 2123

Telegraph Ave., Oakland,

Cal.
Lininger & Lininger, Drs.,

Myers  Blk.,  Sharon,  Pa.
Lininger,  W.  J.,  409^2 N.  Main

St.,  Maryville,  Mo.
Linsey,  Pearl  Aline,  Navina,

Okla.
Lippert, Henry, 371 Stoddard

Ave.,  Columbus,  O.
I.,iTinhart, W. F., Great Bend,

Kans.
IJttle, F. J., Standish, Mich.
Little, J. A., 19 Boardman

Ave.,  Battle  Creek,  Mich.
Little,  W.  D.,  Kiowa,  Kan.'!.
Littlefield. Chas. W.. 244

Woodward Ave., Detroit.

Mich.
Littrell,  A.  R., 304  Conroy

Bldg.,  San  Antonio,  Tex.
Livesey,  Henry P.,  5»i  .John.son

Ave., Kearny, N. J.
Lloyd,  W.  S.,  Sharon,  Pa.
Lloyd & Lloyd, 3325^ State

St., Sharon, Pa.
Loban,  Elsie,  Elmhurst, Cal.
Loban, Jay M., Davenport,

la.
Loban,  J.  M.. 1509 13th  St.,  N.

W..  Washington,  D.  C.
Lobdell, Harriet W., Great

Bend, Kans.
Lobdell, W. Harriett. 303 W.

Fifth St., Chico, Cal.
Lobdell, Harriet  W., 785

Academy  St.,  Chico,  Cal.
Lockbridge,  C.  D.,  Mishawaka,

Ind.
Lockhart, E. L., Lake St.,

Petoskey, Mich.


Lockhart, Ellis L., 433i N.

Grand  Ave.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Fvockwood, R. .T., Arleta, Ore.
Lockwood, R. J., Medford,

Ore.
Loehr, Cha.s. .1., 470 Clinton

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Lofgren,  A.  J., Richvale,

Cal.
Lofland, W. F., 1514  Linden

Ave.,  Baltimore,  Md.
Lofquest.  H.  A., White  Blk.,

Grand Rapid.s, Mich,
r^ogan. D. R., Cul de Sao,

Idaho.
Logan,  Hugh  B.,  504

Commercial St., Atchison,

Kans.
Logan, R. S., Cul  de Sac,

Idaho.
Logic,  Geo., 9181 Monroe

Ave.,  South  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Lonek, Mrs. Sarah, Arkansas

City,  Kans.
Loner, Frank E., 20 E. Jack-
son Blvd.,  Chicago.  111.
Long, Bertha  R..  Gould,  Okla.
Long, Buelah, 401-2 Frisco

Bldg., Joplin, Mo.
Long, Beulah, 529 W. Ninth

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Long,  I.  W.,  5  Wesley  Blk..

Columbus, O.
Long, John D., 126 Penn

Blk., Butte,  Mont.
Long,  M.  C,  Mechanicsville,

la.
Long, M. C, Blanchard, la.
Long, S., Alexandria, La.
Long,  Sol.  L.,  927  Easton  St.,

Alton, 111.
Looker. William, 1243  N. 60th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Loranger,  B.  G.,  302  Hodges

Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Lorant,  Dr.,  Ft.  Towson,  Okla.
Lorentzen,  O.  E.  C,  Eveleth,

Minn.
Lorman, L. L., 316 Pearl St.,

Buffalo,  N. Y.
Lostetter, C. F., 715 Madison

St.,  Covington,  Ky.
Loucks, W. A. Ebert. 37 W.

Market St., York, Pa.
Loughlin, J. P., Ottawa, Ont.

Can.
Louis, Joel, 307  Mahoning

Bank  Bldg.,  Youngstown,  O.
Lovalley, J. E., 207 Aliskey

Bldg.,  Portland.  Ore.
Love,  Helen, 522  W.  112th  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Love,  W.  P.,  Charlotte,  N.  J.
Loveless, Flora, Emporia,

Kans.
Lovell,  Judson  T.,  Pacific  Ave.,

Long Beach, Cal.
Lovitt, J. F., Utica, Kans.
Lovitt,  Jas. M.,  Larned, Kans.
Lowe, Frances  C, 1 Baker

Ave.,  Dover,  N. J.
Lowe, Louis F., 1542

Glendale  Ave.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Lowe,  Mrs.  L.  J.,  Des  Moines,

la.
Lowman,  A.  S.,  Nortli  Powder,

Ore.
Lowrie, A., Forest, Ont.,

Can.
Lowry, Dorothy B., Ann

Arbor, Mich.
Loyd,  Fox  E.,  Athens,  Mich.
Lubbert,  E.,  327-329

Commonwealth Bldg.,

Denver,  Colo.
Lubbert,  Dr. F., 1221

Broadway,  Denver,  Colo.


]  Luce,  J.  W., 406 Shops  Bldg..

8th & Walnut Sti.., Des

Moines,  la.
Luce,  J.  W.,  Indianola,  la.
Ludtke,  C. W.,  Markeson,

Wis.
Luepke, G. F. G., 401 Bergen

St., Newark, N. J.
Luhring, Rollo  A., Edwards

Apts., Orange, Cal.
Lumm,  A.  W..  753/2  S.  Hill  St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Lund,  Bob,  6006  Linwood  Ave.,

Cleveland.  O.
Lund,  Henry  P.,  393  Park

Ave.,  Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.
Lund. Paul S., 190 Grant St.,

Perth Amboy,  N.  J.
Ijundy, Frederick G., Koenig

Blk., Marshfield, Wis.
Lungmus, B., 1740 W. Adams

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Lunn, A. W.,  753 /^ S. Hill  St.,

Los  Angeles.  Cal.
Lunperich,  H.  E.,  414  Jefferson

St., Joliet, 111.
Luntz, Dr. Harry, 647

Willoughby Ave., 37  Vernon

Ave., Biooklyn. N. Y.
Lust,  Benedict,  110  E.  41st  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Lust, Benedict, Tangerine,

Fla.
Lust, Benedict, Butler, N. J.
Lusted, C. B., 502 Second

Ave.  E.,  Olwein,  la.
i  Lutes, Mrs. A. L., Davenport,
I la.
Lutes, O. R., Madison, Ind.
Lutz, C. L.,  Wichita,  Kans.
Lutz, N. A.,  P. S.  C„  14  Gross

Blk., Tiffin,  O.
I.utz,  N. A., Chatfield, O.
Lutz,  S.  A..  Bucyrus,  O.
[..yall, Ida  A., Masonic  Blk.,

Alpena,  Mich.
Lycett, Tovvnsend, 2414 Pine

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Lynch,  Chas.  F., 1839  N.

Marshfield  Ave.,  Chicago,

Ill-
Lynch,  Edward,  Temple  Court

Bldg.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Lynch,  Jno.  J.,  113  Clinton

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Lvnch, L. M., 710 Liberty

Bldg., N. E. Cor. Broad &

Cliestnut Sts., Philadelphia,

Pa
Lynch. R. E., 628 Walnut St..

Nichols Bldg., Coshocton, O.
fjynn,  Harrison  H.,  Liggett

Bldg., .^.33 Main St., Buffalo,

N.  Y.
Lyon & Lyon, Glenwood, la.
Lyon,  Blanche,  Coral,  Mich.
Lyon, Chas. A., Huston Blk.,

Tawas  City,  Mich.
Lyon. Chas. H., 206 Kirby

Blk., Saginaw,  Mich.
Lyon,  E.  R.,  Ida  Grove,  la.
Lyon,  Ernest  R.,  2961  Farnam

St., Omaha,  Neb.
Lyon,  H.  L.,  Glenwood,  la.
Lvon,  Sam  O.,  Odebolt,  la.
Lyons, S. O., 15J Main St.,

Hutchinson,  Kans.
Lvtle,  Alfred,  404-6  Dillon

Bldg.. Hartford, Conn.
Lytle,  R. D., 311 Exchange

Place  Bldg.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.
MacBride,  Mildred  E., 37  S.

10th St., Newark, N. J.
MacDonald, D. M., Box 906.

Collingwood, Ont.
MacDonald,  M. D., North

Mara,  Can.


Chiropraclors


Professional  Register


1109


Mace,  Mina  B..  919  E.  55th

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Macfarland, M., 211 Meyers

Arcade,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Mackln, Mary, 525 North

Cleveland Ave., Canton, O.
Mackin  &  Mackin,  525 N.

Cleveland  Ave.,  Canton,  O.
MacKinnon, John L., Warren

Bldg., King.ston, N. Y.
Macklin, Mary  C, Cleveland

Ave., Canton, O.
Macomber, F. J., 2.30 W. 11th

St., Anderson, Ind.
Maconkey,  Jepson,  1539  Adams

St.,  Chicago,  111.
MacQuarrie, Mrs. Laura  N.,

55  Nelson  Place,  Newark,

N. J.
Mader, 1602 20th St., Rock

Island,  111.
Madison,  Rodney, Exchange

Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Madlin,  M.  G.,  644  Pine  Ave.,

Long  Beach,  Cal.
Magner  &  Magner,  280 Forest

Ave.,  Oshkosh,  Wis.
Maguire,  A.  P.,  Salem,  O.
Maguire, W. W., 208 N. 10th

St.,  Lebanon,  Pa.
Mahan,  Helen,  1329  Waverly

St., Kansas  City,  Kans.
Mahler,  C.  H.,  200  W.  72nd  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Mahoney, S. P., Gennessee,

Kans.
Maisel. Fred. H., 122 W. 5th

Ave., Gary, Ind.
Maisel, Marie E.. 122 W. 5th

Ave., Gary, Ind.
Malcolm, Z. E., 1127 14th St.,

Bluffton, Ind.
Malin. G. F.. 211 Zeveig

Bldg.,  Bellaire,  O.
Malin,  James  P., 1122 W. 17th

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Malin,  Mrs.  Jennie,  San  Diego,

Cal.
Maliskey,  W. C,  RKJckwall,

Tex.
Maliskey,  Mrs. W. C, St.

Joseph, Mich.
Maliskey,  Mrs.  W.  C, Owosso,

Mich.
Malmborgh, C. A., 51 E. 42nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Maloney,  Chas.  H.,  Long  Beach,

Cal.
Maloney, H. C, 227-8 First

Nat'l  Bank,  Long  Beach,  Cal.
Manchee,  Helen,  6351  Ingleside

Ave.,  Chicago,  HI.
Mandt, Amy, 4054 Syndicate

Bldg.,  or  105  W.  Mullan  Ave.,

Waterloo,  la.
Mangold,  Walter,  2120  Sarah

St.,  Pittsburgh, Pa.
Manley,  Cora  O.,  The  Imperial,

Washington,  D.  C.
Mann, Peter, 348 Franklin St.

Bloomfield,  N. J.
Manning, Carrie E., 718 Main

St.,  Osago, la.
Mannix, Prof. Joe, 2242

Washington Blvd., Chicago,

111.
Manrican, O. B., 1421 Adams

St.,  Chicago, 111.
Mansen,  J.,  4450  N.  Campbell

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Manster,  Audrey  S.,  125

Shippen  St..  Weehawken

Hgts.,  N.  J.
Mantes, Louise  A., Lurline

Baths,  San  Francisco,  Cal
Mapes, N. J., 318 Euclid

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Mapes,  N.  J.,  8801  Walker

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O


Marcey,  H.  E.,  43  N.  9th  St.,

Mt.  Vernon,  N.  Y.
Marchand,  A.  W., Franklin

Bank  Bldg.,  Philadelphia,

Pa.
Marchand, Chas. E., 56 W.

Hanover St., or 145 Perry

St.,  Trenton,  N.  J.
Margoli,  L.  Narmon,  Bellevue,

O.
Marion,  Jennie  M.,

Kalamazoo,  Mich.
Markel, T. K., 1332 Broad St.,

New  Castle,  Ind.
Markel,  T.  K.,  1022  Spruce  St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Markel,  T. K.,  Albion,  Mich.
Marklin, Dr. R., 328 Walsh

Blk.,  Akron,  O.
Marks, Louis E., 1465 B'way.

New  York, N.  Y.
Markwell,  J.  A.,  New  Orleans,

La.
Markwell, J. A., Sternberg,

Apts.,  Houston,  Tex.
Markwell, J. A., 605-6 Am.

Nat'l Ins. Bldg., Galveston,

Tex
Markwell,  J.  A.,  1924  Ave  M,

Galveston,  Tex.
Markwell,  J.  A.,  404 Sixth  St.,

Alexandria,  La.
Markwell,  M.  M.,  605-6  Am.

Natl. Ins. Bldg., Galveston,

Tex.
Markwell,  P.  W.,  Blackfoot,

Idaho.
Markwell,  P.  W.,  Leesville,  la.
Marler,  C.  E.,  11154  N.

Washington St.,

Crawfordsville,  Ind.
Marlow,  R.  S.,  504  Eager  St.,

San  Antonio,  Tex.
Marriott,  H.  H.,  Burlington,

Kans.
Marrow,  Mrs.  Alberta,

Arkansas  City,  Kans.
Marsh,  C.  C,  General  Delivery,

Zanesville, O.
Marsh. E. I., 405 N. Main St.,

Condersport,  Pa.
Marsh,  Jennie, 32  Erie  Ave.,

Niagara Falls, Can.
Marshall, Agnes J., 36 E.

Clapier  St.,  Germantown,  Pa.
Marshall,  Lillard  T.,  406-7

McEldowney  Blk.,

Winchester,  Ky.
Marshall,  Mary,  Madera,  Cal.
Marshall.  Tom,  Alpine  &  Iowa

Sts., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Marshall, Thos., 432 Rebecca

St.,  Wilkinsburg,  Pa.
Marsen, Fred  H., 94 Main St.,

Everett,  Mass.
Marsland, Katherine, 721

Fourth Ave., Paterson,

N.  J.
Marshland,  K.,  13  Clark  St.,

Paterson,  N.  J.
Marshton,  A. E., Sac  City, la.
Marston, A. E., Henry, 111.
Marston,  A.  E.,  Logan,  la.
Martin,  Chas.,  Britton,  Okla.
Martin, Blanche W.. 4026

Dalton  Ave.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Martin. E. Blanche, 4026

Dalton  Ave.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Martin, Miss E. L., Emmons,

Minn.
Martin, Earl P., Britton,

Okla.
Martin, F. C, E. Fasset St.,

Wellsville, N. T.
Martin, Isaac, Richmond. Ind.


Martin, Frank, Richmond,

Md.
Martin, F. D., 305 Bronson

Bldg., Columbus,  O.
Martin, H. E., Pine  Bluff,

Ark,
Martin,  Wm.  J.,  St.  Clair  Bldg.,

Toledo,  O.
Martindale, T. W.. Box 867,

Nanaimo.  B.  C.
Martner, E. A., Minneapolis,

Minn.
Marvin, D. C, Over Jennings

&  Ramsdells,  Albion,  Mich.
Marvin, Jennie M., 813 Davis

St.,  Kalamazoo,  Mich.
Marvin, Roy G., Kalamazoo,

Mich.
Marvin,  W.  H.,  Shipping  Port,

Pa.
Marx,  Zero,  Chicago,  111.
Mason,  Etta,  Minising,  Mich.
Mason,  Geo.  E.,  302  N.  27th  St.,

Lincoln, Neb.
Mason,  G.  E..  Filley,  Neb.
Massanger,  Lilla  M.,  Simms,

Mont.
Massey,  W.  W.,  218  Huntington

St..  Medina,  O.
Mather,  A. R., 1115 W. 54th

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Mather,  A.  R.,  lOGl  W.  54th  St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Mathews, E.  G., Waterloo, la.
Mathews,  S. E.,  24  West  Ave.,

Nunda,  N.  Y.
Mathias. G. L.. 404 Hamilton

Bldg.,  Akron,  O.
Mathias & Young, 420

Hamilton  Bldg.,  Akron,  O.
Mathies,  Henry  F.,  491

Palisade Ave., West

Hoboken,  N.  J.
Mathiesen, Chas. O., Denver.

Colo.
Mathis, Bertha, Sterling, 111,
Mathis,  Dr. J.  A.,  Sterling,  111.
Mathis,  J.  A.,  Rock  Island,  111.
Mathis, R. E., Texarkana,

Ark.
Matson,  Hulda  M., Pentwater,

Mich.
Matthews, Sarah, Pocahontas,

la.

Matthias. Geo. L., 1010

Rhodes  Ave.,  Akron,  O.
Mattwig,  Jno.,  2316  E.

Washington  St.,

Indianapolis.  Ind.
Maulbetsch, George \Y., 74

S.  Ninth  St.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Maxon, C.  H., 880  Tonawanda

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Maxon. C. H., 1294 Jefferson

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Maxwell,  Leo,  Box  33,  Candon.

N. Y.
May, Gladys E., 2050 Roberts

Ave.,  Hollywood,  Cal.
Mayer,  Ernest  J.,  1131

Rockland  St.,  Philadelphia.

Pa.
Mayer, J. H., Chateau, Mont.
Mayer,  Dr.  John  P.,  Broad  and

Cayuga  Sts., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Mayer-Oakes, F. T., 151 Hun-
tington  Ave., Boston, Mass.
Maynard,  H.  M.,  San

Bernardo,  Cal.

Mays,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Canisteo,

N.  Y.
Mays.  Jessie  C,  36  Lillian  Ave.

Providence, R. I.,
Mays. ^V. F., 301 Commerce

Bldg., Erie, Pa.
1  McAdams,  Fred  J.,  Milton

Junction, Wis.


1110


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


McAdams.  C.  R.,  Lake  City,
McAlester. J. C. Harrlsville.

Mc Andrews. C. A.. I. O. O. F.

Hall.  East  Liverpool,  O.
McAnnich,  C.  G..  Newton,  la.
McAnnic.h,  C.  S.,  Newton,  la.
McAnnich.  J.  K.,  Newton,  la.
McArthurs. Eckel Theatre

Bldg-.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.
McArthur.  H.  A., 311-12  Knka

Blk..  Syracuse,  N.  Y.
McBride, Bessie, Marion,

Kans.  , .r^  1 *

McBride & McBride, Drs., 1st

Nafl Bank Bldg-.. Fairbury,

Neb.  „_

McBurney, M. R.. 918^,^

Broadway Central Bldg.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
McCall.  A.  C,  818  W. 21st  St.,

Oklahoma  City.  Okla.
McCall. J. P., 2211 West 4th

St., Davenport, la.
McCall,  J. P.. Mystic, la.
McCannon, M. H.. Over Post

Office, Chariton,  la.
McCarl, John A., 314 Pacific

Bldg-., Oakland. Cal.
McCarl,  J.  F.,  De  Witt,  la.
McCarthy,  Geo., 121  West  3rd

St.. Jamestown, N. Y.
McCarthy, W. H., Oskaloosa,

la
McCartney. Geo. T., 121  West

Third St., Jamestown,  N. Y.
McCarty & McCarty,

Springfield, Mo.
McCaskey, Laura, Falls City.

Neb.
McCaskey,  Laura.  115

Saratoga  St.. Excelsior

Springs,  Mo.
McCaskv, Laura, Mound City,

Mo.
McCasland, H. E.,  Box  387,

Fosston,  Minn.
McClain, Grace, 5204

Broadway,  Chicago,  111.
McClatchie,  Miss  A., 3119

Colfax Ave. S., Minneapolis,

Minn.
McClelland,  Paterson,  N.  J.
McCloskey, I. R., 705 Schmidt

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
McClurg, Dr., Swissvale, Pa.
McCobb, Elsie  M., 622 First

St., Loveland, Colo.
McCobb,  Elsie  M.,  418-19  Idaho

Bldg., Boise City, Idaho.
McColl, A.  C, [LL.B.j,

Majestic Bldg., Oklahoma.

City, Okla.
McConnell.  F.  J.,  24

Metropolitan Bldg., Lima,

O.
McConnell,  F.  J.,  St.  Marys,  O.
McCormack, B. E., 1178

Seneca St., Buffalo, N. Y.
McCormack, Hazel, 3131

Carthage  Ave.,  Cincinnati,

O.
McCormick,  Mrs.  Chas.,  Aledo,

111.
McCormick,  Chas.,  Nashua,  la.

McCormick.  E.  E.,  11G8  Seneca

St.,  Buffalo.  N.  Y.
McCormick.  John,  905

Steinway Hall Bldg.,

Chicago, 111.
McCormick, John T.,

Waukegan,  111.
McCormick,  L.  L.,  Guthrie,

Okla.
McCracken, Rev. A., Webster

City.  la.


McCrea.  C.  T..  1272  Euclid

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
McCrea. Clifford T.. 203

Euclid Point Bldg..

Cleveland.  O.
McCready, B. T., 215

Masonic  Temple,  Cedar

Rapids,  Ta.
McCubrey, E.  E., Kalispell,

Mont.
McDale, G., University Place,

I..incoln, Neb.
McDaniel. Ida. 851 Sunset

Blvd., Los Angeles, Cal.
McDermott. Mary V.. 1312

Lamar St.. Wichita Falls,

Tex.
McDonald, New Brunswick,

N. J.
McDonald, C. J., 12 Allen St.,

Buffalo,  N.  Y.
McDonald,  D..  York.  Neb.
McDonald. Elva Ethel.

Hillsboro,  O.
McDonald.  Ethel,  108  Hamilton

St.. Bound  Brook,  N. J.
McDonald, H. W.. 336 George

St.,  New  Brunswick.  N.  J.
McDonald.  H.  W.,  Hillsboro,

Ohio.
McDonald,  Drs.  Joseph  and

Anne, Jamestown,  N. D.
McDonald,  J.  R..  225  Cleveland

Ave.,  Canton,  O.
McDougall, Gertrude,

Fairbury. 111.
McDowell.  Lonsin,  Washington

Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
McDuffle,  J. G.. Matoon, 111.
McElrea, F. B., Sidney, Man.,

Can.
McElroy,  Cecil, P.  O.  Box  136,

Chicago,  111.
McElvany, Wm. F., 702

Warrington St., Allentown,

Pa.
McEwen,  D.  Clair,  603  Conover

Bldg., Dayton, O.
McEwin, Margaret, Linwood

Station, Delaware Co.,

Pa.
McFarlan,  Geo.  D.,  276  Carroll

St., Paterson, N. J.
McFetridge. E. L., Howard &

Barber  Bldg.,  Derby,  Conn.
McFetridge, M. J., Derby,

Conn.
McGarvev, E. S., 406 Trust

Bldg.. Pittsburgh. Pa.
McGinnis, James F.,

Maquoketa,  la.
McGinnis, J. F., Rockwell

City,  la.
McGowan, Mrs. J. A., Toledo,

O.
McGranahan, J. C, Hadley,

Pa.
McGrath.  Jos.  D., Kendalville,

Ind.
McGreggor, Gregory, 1355 S.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal.
McGuire, Ada, 132 S. Main

St., Butler, Pa.
McGuire,  Chas.  A.,  306  Marion

Blk., Marion, Ind.
VIcGuire, Cynthia, Sheron,

Kans.
McGuire, Harriet J., 507

Mathews  Bldg.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
McGuire,  W.  W.,  914

Cumberland St., Lebanon,

Pa.
Mclntire, Chas., Ypsilanti,

Mich.


Mclntire, Jessie, Ypsilanti,

Mich.
Mclntire, Lucile, Maple St.,

Marion,  Ind.
Mclntyre, Adelbert, Wolcott,

N.  Y.
Mclntyre, Mrs. Ella. 182

Exchange St., Freeport, 111.
Mclntyre, John, State St.,

Chicago,  111.
Mclntyre, Orrin R., 110

Poultney St., Geneva, N. Y.
McKay, Archibald, Shawano.

Wis.
McKay, Chas., 509 Markhaiu

St., Toronto,  Ont., Can.
McKeever,  O.  G., 406  Glass

Blk.,  Marion,  Ind.
McKell, Ira J., 412-13-14 Col.

Hudson Bldg., Ogden,

Utah.
McKellin,  Wm.,  403  Colt  Bldg.,

Paterson,  N.  J.
McKelvey, Andrew, 29 W.

Fourth  St.,  or  2  Park  Place,

Corry,  Pa.
McKelvey,  Mary  E.,  Villisca,

la.
McKenzie, Collen R., 451

Bowen  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
McKeon. Ada  H., Riverside,

Cal.
McKeon,  Ada  H.,  Woodland,

Cal.
McKidden,  Blanche E., 4740

Lorain  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
McKilligan,  Birdie,  Falls  City,

Neb.
McKindley. D. H., 1619 Green

St.,  Plulada,  Pa.
McKnight, H. F.,  Walled

Ijake,  Mich.
McLachlan, Ben N., 330

Norwood Ave., Grand

Rapids,  Mich.
McLaren, Dr., 907 Bathurst

St., Toronto, Ont., Can.
McLaughlin, Jennie L., 186

Pine  St..  Detroit.  Mich.
McLean. Darcy, 328

Palmerston Blvd., Toronto,

Ont., Can.
McLean, A. B., Gould,

Quebec,  Can.
McLean, W. R., 808 Madison

St.,  La  Porte,  Ind.
McLean,  W.  K.,  717"^  Franklin

St.,  Michigan  City,  Ind.
McLeese, John  M., Hondo,

Tex.
McLennon, M. L.,, Palestine,

111.
McMahan,  M.  H.,  595  Fourth

St.,  Portland,  Ore.
McMahon, M. H., 286

Washington  St., Portland,

Ore.
McManus, F.  E., 1829  Niagara

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
McMillan,  A.  F.,  143  East  San

Fernando  St.,  San  Jose, Cal.
McMillan, Frank, Arkansas

City.  Kans.
McMillan  &  McMillan,  Drs.,

Ponca  City,  Okla.
McMullan, Edith H.. 58 W.

Bayard St., Denver, Colo.
McNabb, C. M., St. Joe, Ark.
McNair, 525 Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago,  111.
McNamara, R. E., Baldwin,

Cal.
McNe'al, Miss Ethel, Mulhall,

Okla.
McNeille,  Horace  S..  27  W.  43d

St.,  Bayonne,  N.  J.


I'ltiropriivlon


Professional  Register


1111


McNitt, Leslie, 121 E. Main

St., Benton Harbor, Mich.
McNitt, William S.,

Watervliet,  Mich.
McNurlen,  William,  718  W.  63d

St.,  Chicago.  111.
McQulre,  H., Honey  Creek,

Wis.
McShane. Dora L., 8 W.

Second St., Salt  Lake  City,

Utah.
McSloy, H. M., Humboldt,

Sa-sk., Can.
McVicar, Elizabeth, Evanston,

m.

McWilliam.s, R. M., Prince-
town,  Mo.
McWilliams, R. M., Kidder. S.

Dak.
McWilliams,  R.  M.,  Rook

Rapids,  la.
Meadows,  L.  F.,  122  E.  Second

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Mechling-, Bessie, 417 S.

Michigan St., South Bend.

Ind.
Medcalf,  D.  W^, 431  Second

St.,  Henderson,  Ky.
Medder, Chas. B., 926

Gladstone  Ave.,  Portland,

Ore.
Medes, E. Harold, 1.5

Rickard St.,  Cortland, N.  Y.
Medlin.  M.  G.,  411  Opera  Blk.,

Long  Beach,  Cal.
Meeker. G. D., 10 Mitchell

Bldg..  Cincinnati,  O.
Meeker,  G.  D.,  Room  8,  9  West

Fourth  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Meeker, Glenn, Laurel, Mont.
Meeker,  G.  W.,  Thermopolis,

Wyo.
Meeker,  Mrs.  G.  W.,

Thermopolis,  Wyo.
Meeker & Kloman, Rooms 8

9, 10, Mitchell Bldg., 9 W.

Fourth  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Megathlin,  Violet  M.,  133

Peterborough St.. Boston,

JlTq  go

Meier,  'h. W.. 13 Bank Bldg..

or  7  Majestic  Bldg.,

Ashtabula, O.
Meier, H. W., 8>< Majestic

Bldg.,  Ashtabula, O.
Meinhardi, Ed.. New Smyrna,

Fla.
Meinhardi, E. J., Whitehall,

Mich.
Meissner, Cha.s. L., 81 Arch

Ave., Ridgewood, N. J.
Melaik,  Mrs.  N.,  306 W. Third

St., Williamsport, Pa.
Melley,  C.  J.,  116  W.  Chestnut

St.. Chicago, HI.
Mellbye. N., Woonsocket,

S.  D.
Melson,  L. C, 198 Delaware

Ave.,  Buffalo, N. Y.
Menegay, J. E., Greensburg,

Kans.
Menegay,  John  E., 318

Cleveland  Ave., N. W.,

Canton,  O.
Menegry,  J.  E.,  622  Kenkert

Bldg.,  Canton,  O.
Menges.  A.  B..  1304  E.  91st  St.,

Cleveland,  O.
Menough & Menough, 6300

Euclid  Ave., Cleveland, O.
Menough  &  Menough,  521  Main

St.,  Peoria,  111.
Mensink,  J.  H.,  8  S.  Center  St.,

Corry, Pa.
Mensink. Mrs. N., Corry Pa
Menz. Edward A., 87 Corbet

St., Dorchester, Mass
Mercer,  Alice,  513 Sanduskv

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.


Meredity,  Harry  J.,  Cripple

Creek,  Colo.
Merendino, Joseph, 2255

Broadway,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Merrell  &  Merrell, eOC,  W.
Henley  St.,  Clean.  N.  Y.
Merrill,  Edith  F.,  52  Maryland

St., Rochester,  N. Y.
Merrill, Roy N., 52 Maryland

St.,  Roche.ster,  N.  Y.
Merrill, John H., Yale. Mich.
Merrill, Ray  C, 504 Baxter

Bldg., Portland, Me.
Merrill,  R.  C,  562  Congress  St.,

Bldg.,  Portland,  Me.
Merrill,  R.  C,  1555  N.  La  Salle

St., Chicago, 111,
Merrill,  Ray  C,  366  Atlantic

St., Stamford, Conn.
Merrill  &  Merrill,  52  Maryland

St.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.
Merriman,  Geo.  S.,  Lacock  St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Merriman.  George, 713

Armandale  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,
Pa.
Merryman, H. L., 1524 8th
t Ave.,  Greeley,  Colo.
'  Merryman, Harry  L., 627
i Osage  Ave.,  Chariton,  la.
Mervy, L. A., 675 11th St..
Oakland, Cal.
}  Messenger. M. Lila, Simm.s,
I Mont.

1  Messmer, J. G., Key.stone  Bk.
Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Metcalf,  J.  O.,  306  Shultz  Bldg.,

Columbus, O.
Metzger, F.  B.. Topeka.  Kans.
I  Metzger, Dr., Goshen, Ind.
j  Meyer & Meyer, 1330 E.
j Market  St.,  Huntington,  Ind.
'  Meyer, Geo. "W., 7 Courtland
i Blk., Kokomo, Ind.
i  Meyer.  G.  W.,  113S  W.
1 Mulberry St., Kokomo, Ind.
!  Meyer. Mrs. J. E., Urbana,
! Ind.

j  Meyer, J. E. 412 N. Jefferson
i St. Huntington, Ind.
i  Meyer, James E., 38 W.

Market  St.,  Huntington.  Ind.
Meyer,  J.  H.,  Chateau,  Mont.
Meyer,  J.  P.,  412  Jefferson  St.,

Huntington, Ind.
Meyer, Ree W., Redondo

Beach,  Cal.
Meyer, S. P., 116 S. Sixth St.,

Terre  Haute,  Ind.
Meyer,  S.  P., 153  Pipestone
St.,  Benton  Harbor.  Mich.
Meyer,  S.  P.,  202-4  Arcade
Bldg., 116 S. 6th St.. Terre
Haute, Ind.
Meyer, Wm., 2517 Cortland

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Meyer,  Wm., 1456 Ridgley  St.,

North  Bergen,  N.  .1.
Meyers, Fred, 725 Swedes St.,

Morristown, Pa.
Meyers, J. A., Clarion. la.
•  Meyers,  Mrs.  J.  E.,  Urban.  Ind.
Meyers. Joseph E., Carey. O.
Meyers,  O. D.,  Majestic  Hotel,
Pueblo,  Colo.
;  Meyers.  Stephen  P.. 306  X. 6th
St.,  Terre  Haute.  Ind.
Meyers, Wm. F., 725 New

York  St.,  Toledo,  O.
Michael, A. M., 701 Schmidt

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Michigan  College  of

Chiropractic,  108  Jefferson
Ave.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
Middleditch, Emma  D., 1245
O'Farrell  St.,  San  Francisco,
Cal.
Miedeking, Frederick W., 726
Pevton Bldg., Spokane,
' Wash.


-Mighton, F. C. 204-5 Boston

i;idg., Honolulu, Hawaii.
Mlhah.  Jno., 3184 W. 44th St.,

Cleveland,  O.
Miler, T. M., 2507 Ashwood

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Miles,  Ella  E.,  125  Alfred  St.,

Bradford,  Ont.,  Can.
Miles, Robt. W., 5300 W. 41st

Ave., Denver, Colo.
Miles, Stanley, Ironwood,

Mich.
Miles,  T. M.,  2507  Archwood

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Miline. Mae. 1228 Colorado

Ave...  Colorado  Springs.  Colo.
Miller, Agnes  M., 785 E. 105th

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Miller, C. A., Harlan, la.
Miller, C. W., Miners' Bank

Bldg., Joplin, Mo.
Miller, Claudia A., Douglas,

Wyo.
Miller,  D.  S.,  210  Cincinnati

Bldg.,  Lima,  O.
Miller, Earl A., I^udington,

Mich.
Miller, E. E., 1321 Edgeware

Place,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Miller, E. W.,  Auburn, Ind.
Miller, Frank, 218 E.

Mountain  Ave.,  Ft.  Collins,

Colo.
Miller, Frank  L., 318 Cahill

Bldg.. Syracuse, N. Y.
Miller,  F.  L.,  R.  F.  D.  No.  3.

Cortland, N. Y.
Miller, Frank  W., 409-10

Jackson Bldg., Janesville,

Wis.
Miller, Frank  W., 218 E.

Mountain  Ave.,  Ft.  Collins,

Colo.
Miller, ¥. W., 109  S.  Academy

St.,  Janesville,  Wis.
Miller,  Geo.  H.,  Byron,  Okla.
Miller,  Geo.  H.,  1219  Perry  St.,

Davenport,  la.
Miller,  Geo.  H.,  Bradenburg,

Sask.,  Can.
Miller, Gerald O., 211-12

Markel Bank Bldg.,

Hazleton, Pa.
Miller, H. L., New Farmers'

Bank  Bldg.,  Monticello,  Ind.
Miller, H. L., 15 Hobart  Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Miller, H. W., 1630^ Second

Ave., Rock Island, 111.
Miller, H. W., B. & A. Bldg.,

Missoula,  Mont.
Miller, Mrs. Iowa, Fairfield,

la.
Miller,  Ira  L.,  36  Baltimore

St.,  Hanover,  Pa.
Miller,  I. S., 1639 W. 18th  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Miller, Jas. A., 134 State St.

W.. Marshall, Mich.
Miller, James B., Waukomis,

Okla.
.Miller.  J.  P..  North  Piatt,  Neb.
Miller, L. H., Danbury, Conn.
Miller, L. Janie, 6026

Washington Ave., Chicago,

111.
Miller,  L.,  1155  De  Frees  St.,

IjOS  Angeles,  Cal.
Miller, Nellie, 615 N.

Alexandria Ave., Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Miller, O. S.. 8109  Garische

Blvd..  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Miller,  R.  C.  Aurora.  Neb.
Miller, W. A., Newton, Kans.
Miller,  W. D.,  Charles  City,  la.


1112


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Miller, Wm. E.. Perry, la.
Miller, Mrs. W. R., Fairfield,

la.
Millhizer, Robt., Hannibal,

Mo.
Millman,  H.  I.,  1113  Brady  St..

Davenport,  la.
Mills,  Ella  E.,  125  Alfred  St.,

Bradford,  Ont., Can.
Mills,  Ernest  R,  G07  E.  47th

St.,  Chicago.  111.
Mills,  J.  W.,  South  Warren  St..

Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Mills,  J.  W.,  25  North  St.,

Pulaski, N. Y.
Mills, M. L.., 403-4 Dillage

Bldg-., Syracuse, N. Y.
Miltenbcrper, R., Terminal

Bldg., Hoboken, N. J.
Minar,  E.  S.,  Wheatland,  la.
Mintey. Herbert, Brandon.

Man., Can.
Minthorne, Richard, 49

Delevan  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Minty. Herbert. Rocanville,

Minty.  'h. W., Lake Preston,

S.  Dak.
Miranda,  Louis  R., Box  747,

San Juan, Porto Rico.
Mitchel, Dr., 300 Columbia

Bldg-.,  Duluth,  Minn.
Mitchell. Andrew, care The

Kallam Bldg., Tama, la.
Mitchell, Mrs. A. J.,

Hutchinson, Kans.
Mitchell, Cliarles  G.. Los

Angeles. Cal.
Mitchell, C c/o Adam Bros.

Printing  Co..  Topeka.  Kans.
Mitchell, E. G.. 815 Topeka

Ave., Wichita, Kans.
Mitchell,  Harry  L., 71  Orange

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Mitchell, K. E., Hotel

Belvidere, 158 Glyarm St.,

Denver,  Colo.
Mitchell,  Pearl,  Ames,  Okla.
Mitts. J. W.. 3542 Pierce

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Mizo, G.  W.,  325 14th  St.,

Oakland, Cal.
Moates, Charles H., 250 So.

Second St., Oakland, Cal.
Mock, Raymond D.,

Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Mockridge, Dr., 415 Central

Ave., East Orange, N. J.
Mockridge,  L.  V.,  2860  E.  14th

St,  Oakland,  Cal.
Mockridge,  Leslie  V., 326^ E.

Sixth St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Mohney, S. P.,  Carlisle,  Ky.
Mohr, J. M., 229 Walnut St.,

Jeffersonville,  Ind.
Moline, Emile, 633 S. Hill St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Monce,  E.  A., Canal  Dover, O.
Monce,  Earnest  B.,  Cam-
bridge,  O.
Monck, Mrs. Anna  M.,

Hamburger  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles, Cal.
Monk,  Helen  Louise, 125  E.

Girard  St.,  Englewood,  Colo.
Monks, Harry, P. O. Bldg.,

Shelbyville,  Ind.
Monks, \V.  H., 8-9-10  Miller

Law  Bldg.,  Rushville,  Ind.
Monroe, Daisy  M.. 10507

Superior Ave., Cleveland,

Ohio.
Monroe, E. C, 8113 Melrose

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Montague, H. A., Guthrie.

Okla.
Montan  &  Montan,  Bartow,

Fla.


Montgomery, D. H., 3 Post

Office Bldg., Puyallup.

Wash.
Montgomery. Herman,

Huntington,  W. Va.
Montgomery, W. C, 204

Morrison  St.,  Johnstown,

Pa.
Moohr, Clara  M., 423 Byrne

Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Moon,  C. E.,  Chelsea,  Mich.
Moon,  C.  E.,  Front  St.,  Sarina,

Ont.,  Can.
Moon, E. C, Port Huron,

Mich.
Moon, R. F., Emmet, Idaho.
Moon, Floyd  S.,  Defiance, O.
Moore & Dunlap, 110^ E. 6th

St., Bloomington, Ind.
Moore, Dr., Post-Standard

Bldg.,  Syracuse, N. Y.
Moore, Mrs.  A.  A., 107  Horton

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Moore,  A.,  6  Wellington  St.,

Worcester. Mass.
Moore.  A.  I.,  Nordin,  Okla.
Moore,  A.  I.,  Medford, Okla.
Moore,  A. J., 339 Main St.,

Worcester,  Mass.
Moore,  Claribel, 2802 Western

Ave.,  Mattoon,  111.
Moore,  Etna, 110  E. Sixth  St.,

Bloomington, Ind.
M6ore, Etna, Des Moines, la.
Moore, F. F., Four Lakes,

Wash.
Moore, Fred. F., Suite 410,

Fernwell  Bldg., Spokane,

Wash.
Moore, F. J., 1052 Wesley

Ave.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Moore, F. J., Arlington, la.
Moore, F. S., 22^4 Clinton St.,

Defiance,  O.
Moore. H. B.,  821 18th  Ave.,

San Diego, Cal.
Moore, Miss Jessie B., 101

Edgehill Road.  East  Milton,

Mass.
Moore, L. L., 305-6 Equity

Bldg., Muskogee. Okla.
Moore,  Newton,  Hershey  Ave.,

Muscatine,  la.
Moore, R. E., 10 Maple St.,

Salamanca,  N.  Y.
Moore,  R. E., 624  Washington

Ave., West Haven, Conn.
Moore, R. E.. Miami, Fla.
Moore  &  Moore,  Drs.,  Lincoln,

Neb.
Moos, Oscar, 1566 Franklin

Ave,, San Diego, Cal.
Morehead, H. I., Kensington,

Kans.
Morelli,  Louis,  Richmond,

Cal.
Morgan, Arthur, 158 Pike  St.,

Port  jervis,  N.  Y.
Morgan,  Frank,  Morgan,  Minn.
Morgan,  J.  E.,  914  E.  Belknapp

St., El Paso, Tex.
Morgan, McLain. Jefferson,

la.
Morgan, McLain, Sedgwick,

Colo.
Morgan, Sarah A., 220 Taylor

St.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Morgan,  Sarah, 19 Park  Way,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Morgan,  Sylvia,  Adel,  la.
Morgan, Wm. C, Chautau-
qua, N. Y.
Morhaus, F. C, Marthasville,

Mo.
Morkert,  M.  D.,  Peru,  Ind.
Morkert,  M.  D.,  Rossville,  Ind.
Morkert, M. D.,  Over

Thrasher's  Store,  Frankfort,

Ind.


Morkert, Owen, 230 Cason &

Neal  Bldg.,  Lebanon.  Ind.
Morral.  J.  B.,  Thomas  Blk.,

Leavenworth,  Kans.
Morrein. Gerard M.. 299

Snelling  Ave.. St.  Paul,

Minn.
Morrell,  S.  Phillip,  Chicago,

III.
Morris,  D.  D.,  Ozark,  111.

Morris, D. D., Coral Springs,

111.
Morris,  Dennis  D.,  Metropolis,

111.
Morris,  F.  L.,  Gunning,  Colo.
Morris,  Margaret,  10406  Euclid

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Morris, Thos., La Crosse,

Wis.
Morris  &  Hartwell,  La  Crosse,

Wis.
Morrison,  Fred  R.,  17  N.  State

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Morrison,  Kate,  Sterling,  111.
Morrison, L. A., Box 405,

Nappanee.  Ind.
Morrison. Wm. I., 17 N. State

St.. Chicago, 111.
Morrison,  W.  L.,  Aurora,  111.
Morrow,  A.  W.,  Kewanee,  111.
Morrow, Elberta,  Arkansas

City,  Kans.
Morrow,  Mabel,  545  W.  Church

St., Elmira, N. Y.
Morrow,  M. H., 196 Gennessee

St.,  Utica,  N.  Y.
Morse,  Ida  B.,  Denver,  Colo.
Mortensen, J. C, Frankville,

Wis.
Morton, E. A., 126 E. Sixth

St.,  Davenport,  la.
Morton, Sadie F., 8-9

Interstate Bldg., Cedar

Rapids, la.
Mosely, Madeline, Clay City,

111.
Moshei", Alex H., 24 Teggert

Blk.,  Watertown,  N.  Y.
Moss, A. E., Kimball, Neb.
Mostad, Rachel E., 3 Shine

St.,  Deadwood,  S.  D.
Mothersill, W. D., 127

Francisco St., Chicago, 111.
Motsch, Rud. J., 632 W. 14th

St., or  1021 Locust  St..

Davenport,  la.
Moul. Flora  L.. 4026  Dalton

Ave..  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Mouse,  A.  B..  Elkins,  W.  Va.
Mowat,  Kenneth  G.,  17  Cleve-
land Place,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Moyers,  C.  E.,  Davenport,  la.
Moyers, C. E., 26 Bogg St.,

Detroit, Mich.
Moyers, G. L., 178 Colburn

Place,  Detroit,  Mich.
Moyers,  G.  L.,  3827  14th  St..  N.

W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Mudge, Chas. K., Box 262.

Gault,  Ont.,  Can.
Mudge, C. L., McGraw, N. Y.
Mudge, C. L., 12 Otter  Creek

Place, Cortland, N. Y.
Mudge, C. L.. 57 B. Bridge

St.. Oswego, N. Y.
Mudge, O. A., Broadway,

Council  Bluffs,  la.
Mudgem, O. A., Broadway,

Council Bluffs, la.
Mueller, Carl W., Box 65.

Birnamwood,  Wis.
Mueller,  E.  A..  591  Warren  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Mueller. Jennie, St. Johns,

Kans.
Mull, Margaret, 2748 Hayden

Ave.,  Chicago, 111.
Mullen, Mrs. Wm., Lenox, la.


Chiropruclom


Professional  Reyisler


1113


Muller, Raymond.  424 Sansom

Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Mulliner, 11. 11.. 333 Rich St.,

Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Mumper, C.  A., 501  Everett

Bldg., Akron. O.
Mundell, Oliver, Clayton, N.

Mex.  '

Munhall, Geo. M., 225 E. 15th  {

St.,  Homestead,  Pa.
Munley,  Michael  L.,  i

Carbondale, Pa.
Munro.  H., 2  Steele  Blk.,  j

Winnipeg-. Man.. Can.  i

Munro, R. P., Encanto. Cal.
Murchison, H. L., 210 Feick

Market  St., Sandusky, O.
Murdock, Herman, Marshall,

Mo.
Murphy,  Charles,  918  Paterson

Ave., North  Bergen, N. J.
Murphy,  Mrs.  Mae,  Johnstown,

Penn.
Murray, Frederick, 826 Hen-
nepin Ave., Minneapolis,
Minn.
Mutchmoore,  J.  T.  O.,  642  12th

St.,  Oakland,  Cal.
Myers & Kelly, Foley Blk.,

La  Grande,  Ore.
Myers,  Donald,  526  E.  Douglas

Ave.,  Wichita,  Kans.
Myers,  E.  P.,  Davenport,  la.
Myers,  F.  G.,  Chester,  Pa.
Myers,  G. L.. 3827 14th  St.,

Washington,  D.  C.
Myers,  J. W., 1811  Main  Ave.,

San  Antonio,  Tex.
Myers,  O.  P., Sacatoon,  Sask.,

Can.
Myers, W. F., 725 New York

Ave., Toledo, O.
Myers,  Paul  J.,  K.  of  P.  Bldg.,

Crawfordsville, Ind.
Mytroszesky, Joseph. 52 16th

Ave.. Newark, N. J.
Nabstedt,  J.  M.,  253  W. 58th
St.; 514 W. 149th St.. and
1789 Broadway, New York,
N.  Y.
Nader, Miss Edith, 1602 20th
St.,  and  1920  20th  Ave.,
Rock  Island,  111.
Naidl, A. R., Marinette, Wis.
Naish.  Wm.,  146  Katherine  St.,

Hamilton. Ont., Can.
Napper &  Howard, 333 S.

Dearborn St., Chicago. 111.
Narmon,  L.,  Margoh, Bellevue,

O.
Nash,  L.  A.,  Carthage,  N.  Y.
Natal, R., 138 Atwell Ave.,

Providence,  R. I.
Nathan, Albert, Victoria

Apts., Washington, D. C.
Nathis,  J.  A.,  Rock  Island.  111.
Nation, John D. S., Anaheim,

Cal.
Neal,'  J. W., 674 Hellman
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Neale, J. W., 601 West Sixth

St., Topeka, Kans.
Neale, J. W.. 674-76 I. W.
Hellman  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.
NebeU John, 116  Laflin St.,

Chicago,  111.
Nedden,  Albert,  Tigerton,  Wis.
Neeley, J. B., Anadarko,

Okla.
Newsalt, Geo. A., Savings &

Loan  Bldg.,  Fargo,  N.  Dak.
Neff, 333 Dearborn St.,

Chicago, 111.
Nehr, Dr. C. E., Butler, O.
Neidhard, J. F., 216 S. Main

St.,  Marion,  O.
Neill, A. H.. 818 W. 55th St.,
Chicago,  111.


Neilsen & Neilsen, Drs.,  1

Washington  Bldg.,  Madison,
Wis.
Neilsen  &  Neilson,  11  Mohawk

Place, Amsterdam, N. Y.
.N'eilson, Albert, Georgetown,

Ont., Can.
N'eilson, A. J., Beatrice, Neb.
Neis, Walter, 77 Circular  St.,

Tiffin,  O.  I

Neis, Walter, care Dr. F. R.
Preston. 132 Blackwell St.,
Dover, N. J.
Neis, Walter A., 710 Nat'l

Union Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Nelden  &  Nelden,  61  N.  Wash-
ington St., Wilkes-Barre,
Pa.
Nelson, A. E., 1167  Montello

St.,  Campelle,  Mass.
Nelson, C. A., Clara  City,

Minn.
Nelson,  C.  E.,  Centerville,  la.
Nelson,  C.  E.,  Lenox,  la.
Nelson,  David,  103  W.  Center
St.,  New  Manchester,  Conn.
Nelson,  Ella,  San  Diego,  Cal.
Nelson, Geo., Independence,

la.
Nelson  &  Frank,  West  Liberty,

la.
Nelson,  N.  P.,  1  N.  Broadway,

Fargo,  N.  D.
Nelson, P., 281 Withersfleld

Ave., Hartford, Conn.
Nelson,  Swen,  101  W.  189th  St.,

New  York,  N. Y.
Nelson,  Von  O.,  Hudson,  -N.  Y.
Nelsen, W. H., Rhinelander,

Wis.
Nesbit, E.  W., Santee, Cal.
Nesbit.  Luther  M.,  Custar,  O.
Nesbit, Smith, 750  Lansdowne

Ave., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Neth,  Gustave  A., 1012  W.
Berendo St.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.
Netsgle,  Chas.,  care  I.  O.  O.  F.

Bldg, Goshen, Ind
Meuman,  Al.,  Room  3,  827  16th

St., Denver, Colo.
Neve, F. F., Box 58,  Merva,

Neb.
Neve, Flora, Benkelman,  Neb.
Neve,  Flora  K.,  Kingston,  Ont.,

Can.
.Veville,  Mary,  4662  Broadway,

Chicago, 111.
New, Ruth E., 348 Franklin

St., Bloomfleld. N. J.
Newbrough,  H.  F., 413-14
Rookery Bldg.. Spokane,
Wash.
Newcomer, J. E.. 44 Sperling

Bldg., Elgin, 111.
Newcomer,  J.  J.,  83  South

Arch  St.,  Alliance,  O.
Newcommer  & Gerhardt,

Bryan, O.
Newitt  &  Newitt,  White  Cloud,

Mich.
Newsalt,  Geo.  A.,  Fargo,  N.

Dak.
Newton,  E.  D.  B.,  421  Cajon  St.,

Redlands,  Cal.
Newton, J. H., 4200 Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Nichelson, N. H.. 1444

Washington Blvd., Chicago,
111.
Nichols,  Rowe's  Bath  Parlors,

Jamestown,  N.  Y.
Nichols &  Nichols, Drs., 6-8
Wheelock  Bldg.,  Sayre,
Pa.
Nichols, Mabel, Farr Bldg.,

Scranton,  Pa.
Nichol.<5,  Arthur  N.,  Polo.  111.


Nichols,  F.  S.,  3-4  Spies  Bldg.,

Menominee,  Mich.
NichoLson, C. G., Wilsonville,

Neb.
Nichol.son, F. H., Abilene,

Kan.s.
NichoLson, H. H., Lincoln,

Neb.
Nicholson, Hattie  H.,

Wilsonville, Neb.
Nicholson,  Miss  J. D., Antigo,

Wis.
Nicholson, J. L., Lebanon,

Neb.
Nickerson, H. R., Galveston,

Tex.
Nicola,  Mrs.  Bertha,

Sigourney,  la.
Nida, Eugene R., 700 W. 9th

St.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Nielson  &  Nielson,  11  Mohawk

Place, Amsterdam, N. Y.
Nielson  &  Nielson,  245-47
Washington Ave., Madison,
Wis.
Nielson, Andrew, Beatrice,

Neb.
Nielsen, A. M.,  Georgetown,

Ont.,  Can.
Nielsen, Julia K., 120 E. 34th

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Nielson, P. A., Box  630, Clear

Lake, la.
Nieman, Louis, 2412 Ames

Ave., Omaha, Neb.
Nierman,  Mary, Polk, Neb.
Niermann, L, 1023 West St.,

Grinnell, la.
Nisbett, Smith, 750

Lansdowne St., Toronto,
Ont.,  Can.
Nix, P. M., 2128 N. Keystone

Ave.,  Chicago.  111.
Nixon, H. E., 133 Mt. Vernon

St.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
Noeling, Geo. D., 1107

Che.<=tnut St., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Nooding & Gibson, Drs.,

Malley Bldg., New Haven,
Conn.
Noonan,  M.  A., 67  W. 90th  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Nops, W. J., Kentland, Ind.
Nord, Ragna, 1138 N. Leavitt

St..  Chicago.  111.
Nordell. Clarence  A., Cor. 6th
and Elm Sts., Valley Junc-
tion, la.
Nordlie, J. J.. 2552

Wrightwood Ave., Chicago,
111.
Noren, Hildur, 562 E. Second

St., Jamestown. N. Y.
Norman,  Dr.,  Paris,  Ark.
Norman,  Arthur,  Cor.  N.
Lawndale & Hirsh St.,
Chicago,  111.
Norman, Frank,  Orient,  la.
Norris, C. E., Bowling  Green,

O.
Norman,  F.  J.,  Lenox,  la.
Norman, F. J., P. O. Box 136,

Centerville,  la.
Norman, Geo. E., 122 Monroe

St., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Norris,  D.  L.,  Lock  Box  305,

Coon  Rapids,  la.
North,  E.  M.  7901  13th  St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
North, Dr., 619 Spadina Ave.,

Toronto, Ont., Can.
Northnagel,  J., 2 Bloor  St. E.,
Suite  64,  Toronto,  Ont.,  Can.
Norton. Horace, 1225 L St.
N. W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Nothnagel,  J.. 941  E.  14th St.,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


1114


Professional  Register


C.hiropruclorA


Novey, Anna, E. 5,ith St. &

Euclid  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Novy, A. I..  Penn. S(iiiare

Bldg-.,  Cleveland,  O.
Xoyer, S. A., Atlantic. la.
jVover, Kanmol, Atlantic, la.
Xoyes.  H.  W.,  416  Crown  St.,

New  Haven,  Conn.
Xuckols, Ja.s. H., Box 05,

Greenfield, O.
Nuest,  Mary,  Sterling-,  Kan.s.
Nunvar,  A.  G.,  363  Old  Arcade,

Cleveland, O.
Nyfeler, Edwin,  Berne, Ind.
Nvman,  Adolph, 41.5  Ninth

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Oakes,  Geo.  C,  257  H  St.,

San  Bernardino,  Cal.
Oakley, Nelson  C, San Diego,

Cal.
Oberg-,  Miss  I., 49 Delmond

St., Portland,  Ore.
O'Brien, C. L., 6611 E. 4th St.,

Sedalia, Mo.
O'Brien,  Henry  P.,  Appleton,

Wis.
O'Brien, M. A., 113-15 Seitz

Bldg-., Syracuse, N. Y.
Ochs, Louis, Merrimac St.,

Adams Bldg-., Haverhill,

O'Dell, Essie A., 14 Main St..

Batavia, N. Y.
Odle,  I.  C,  Johnson  City,  111.
Offleld, J. Harry, Oklahoma

City, Okla.
Ogden, C. R., 13 Academy St.,

221  S.  Main  St.,  Wilkes

Barre, Pa.
Ogden, H. F., Port Jefferson,

O.
Og-den, Harold W., 233 N.

32nd St.,  Camden,  N.  J.
Og-den, Vara A., 240 Prospect

St., East Orange, N. J.
Ogee, R. W., Anadarko, Okla.
Ogg-, Robert  M.,  Canadian

Bank of Commerce Bldg-.,

Brantford, Ont., Can.
O'Hanlon, N. P., 6904 Holmes

Ave.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Ohnemuller, Catherine C, 204

N. Everg-reen  St., Los

Angeles, Cal.
O'Keefe,  M.  L.,  1  Franklin

Ave.,  Morristown,  N.  J.
Okerman,  J.  W.,  Ashtabula,  O.
Oldenburg, Hugo, 1427

People's  Gas  Bldg.,  Chicago,

111.
Olds,  M.  T., 1009J  W. 11th  St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Olison, K. P., Brodhead, Wis.
Olivant, Margaret, Sault Ste.

Marie,  Can.
Oliver,  I.  M.,  The  Toronto

Apts., Washington, D.  C.
Olmstead, W. E., 1318 Ffth

Ave.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Olsen,  B.  H.,  Francis  Bldg.,

Brookfield, Mo.
Olsen, Geo., I^ake View,

Palmer, Nebr.
Olsen,  Melvin  C,  P.  O.  Box  No.

203,  Mt.  Plea.sant,  Utah.
Olson,  A. H., Suite 10-11,

Liberty Bldg., Cleveland, O.
Olson, B. H., 401 S. Monroe

St., Francis Bldg.,

Brookfield, Mo.
Olson, G. W., First State

Bank, St. Paul, Minn.
Olson, Herman, 1508 Main j

Ave, Spokane, Wash.  [

Olson, J. B., 1401 Williamson

St., Madison, Wis.
Olson, Mrs. Minnie, 1106

Seventh St., Sioux City, la.  '
Olson, M. O., 1256 Haight St.,

San Francisco Cal.


Olson, Peter, 945 W. 7th St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
O'Neal, G. M., 849-50 Ohio

Bldg., Toledo,  O.
f)'Niell,  G. W., 849  Ohio  Bldg,

Toledo,  O.
O'Neal, Helen, 849-50 Ohio

Bldg., Toledo, O.
Opland, 228 S. Wood St.,

Chicago, 111.
Oppenheimer, H.  H., 108  Villa

Ave., Buffalo,  N. Y.
Oppenheimer,  H.  O.,  255  W.

108th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Opshal  &  Opshal,  Decorah,  la.
Opshal, Helen B., 403

Jefferson St., Decorah, la.
O'Quinn, C. A., Alton, Fla.
O'Quinn, C. A., Perry, Fla.
Ord,  Garnet  L.,  210  Bloor  St.,

E., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Ordway, K. S., 273 Pearl St.,

Providence, R. I.
Ordwav, Kesley Sanborn, 57

Eddy St., Providence, R. I.
Ormand, Wm. E., 52 Formalt

St., Atlanta, Ga.
Ormsbee, C. 13., Moneta, Cal.
Ortell, Rev. C. R., Santa Fe

Isle,  Depends,  N.  I.,  Cuba.
Osborn,  R.  E.,  P.  O.  Box  192,

Bicknell. Ind.
Oschner, B. O., 144 Main St.,

Oneida,  N.  Y.
Osgood,  Helen  J.,  1325  E.

Colfax  Ave.,  Denver,  Colo.
Oshinske, Jno., 2735 N.

Central  Park  Ave.,  Chicago,

111."
Ostberg, Chas. J., 310 Public

Service Bldg., Kenosha,

Wis.
Ostberg, Chas. J., 1007 Bel-
mont Ave., Chicago, 111.
Ostroot, A. E., 1002 Third

Ave., Kalispell, Mont.
Oswalt, John, 302 E.

Market  St.,  Warren,  O.
Ottaway, Geo., 6 W. Adams

St., Detroit, Mich.
Otto, G. H., Winnipeg, Man.,

Can.
Otto,  G.  M., 6-7  Livingston

Bldg., Wass:an, Wis.
Otto, Geo. M., 528-30

Brady  St., Davenport, la.
Overend,  Geneve  A.,  2058  Elm

Ave., Norwood, O.
Overholzer, D. J., Covina,

Cal.
Oviatt & Oviatt, Masonic

Bldg., Aberdeen, Wash.
Oviatt, Henrietta, Masonic

Temple Bldg., Aberdeen,

Wash.
Owen, Ed., Coffeyville, Kans.
Owen, F.  L.,  Harding,  S. Dak.
Owens, T. J., 828  Brady  St.,

Davenport, la.
Oyer,  St.  Elmo,  230  Laurel  St.,

Buffalo. N. Y.
Oyle, E. J., Kimball, Neb.
Oyler,  Thos.  C,  Marceline,  Mo.
Pachett,  E.  E.,  2900  Carman

St., Camden. N. J.
I'aczkowski, Thaddeus,  194

Bi-oad St., Bloomfleld, N. J.
Padley, Mrs. E., 1113 N.

Dearborn St.,  Chicago,  111.
Page,  Mrs.  W.  B.,  Goshen,  Ind.
Painter, Carrie, 2359 N.

California  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Painter & Painter, 2359  N.

California  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Painter,  S.  W.,  1038  Acoma

Ave., Denver, Colo.
Painter,  Mr. & Mrs. S. W.,

Chicago, 111.
Paintoi-. S.  W.,  Bettendorf,  la.


Painter,  W.  J., 517  Medical

Block, Minneapolis, Minn.
Palotay,  J.  A.,  743  W.  Seventh

St., IjOS Angeles, Cal.
Palmer, B. J., 828 Brady St.,

Davenport, la.
Palmer, Mrs. B. J., 828  Brady

St.,  Davenport, la.
Palmer,  Mrs.  Charles, 756 S.

Balsh  St., Akron, O.
Panwels, Robert, 110 W. 40th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Parchen, G. H., Anita, la.
Parchen, G. H., Stuart, la.
Parchen, H. C,  Guttenberg,

la.
Park, W.  G., No. 8  Young  St.,

Tonawanda, N. Y.
Parker & Parker, General

Delivery, Geneva, N. Y.
Parker, Dr., Market  St.,

Warren, Pa.
Parker, Alice J., 3 Fargo

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Parker, C. R., 508 S.

Ashland Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Parker,  Emerson  R.,  411  W.

Third St.,  Jamestown,  N. Y.
Parker, F. AV., 225 N. Water

St., Gault, Ont., Can.
Parker,  James  G..  85  Ford  St.,

Ogdensburg, N. Y.
Parker, F. S., Hartley, la.
Parker, M. U., 508 S.  Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Parker, Olive B.. 12

Bellingham St., Everett,

Mass.
Parker, R., 508 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Parker, R. Emerson, 16

Cherry St., Perry, N. Y.
Parker, R. E., The De Orsay,

411 W. Third St.,

Jamestowh, N. Y.
Parker, Wm. H., 12

Bellingham  St.,  Everett,

Mass.
Parks & Parks, Tecumseh,

Neb.
I'arks, B. F., 20-21 Turkey

Bldg., Portsinouth, O.
Parks, Geo. P., 1127 14th St.,

Bedford, Ind.
Parks, L. R., Red Cloud,

Neb.
Parks,  L. R., 31 McAllister

Bldg.,  Grand  Island,  Neb.
Parks, Mrs. P. D., Michigan,

N. D.
Parks, P. D., Room 2, Imley

Blk.,  205  Masonic  Temple,

Portsmouth, O.
Parson,  Dr.,  426  King  St.,

London, Ont., Can.
Parsons,  Clarence  E.,  Alworth

Bldg., Duluth, Minn.
Parsons, F. W., Gallupville,

N.  Y.
Parsons, Geo. W., 2037 Park

Road, Washington, D. C.
Parsons, Mae C, Alworth

Bldg.,  Duluth,  Minn.
Parsons, The, Alworth Bldg.,

Duluth, Minn.
Parsons & Parsons, 808

Alworth Bldg., Duluth,

Minn.
Partridge, C. E.,  Los  Animos,

Colo.
Patchen, G. H., 147 W. 23rd

St., New York, N. Y.
Patten, R. E., 131 W. 18th

St.., Erie, Penn.
Patterson, M. B., Ft. Wayne,

Ind.
Patterson, S. R., Springfield,

O.
Patterson, W. S., 306 Good

Blk.,  Des  Moines,  la.


Chiroprailor.i


Professional  Register


Patton.  Flora  M.,  418-19  Idaho

Bldg-., Boise City. Idaho.
Paulson, A. J., 10 Spexarth

Bldg., Astoria, Ore.
Paulssem,  W.  O.  F.,  Box  184,

Manhattan, Kan.s.
Pauwels, Robt., 110 W. 40th

St., New York, N. Y.
Payne, Allen IC. 309 W. 7th

St., Flint, Mich.
Pavne & Payne. 101 Pope

Blk., Pueblo, Colo.
Pavne,  A.  V..  Marbridge  Bldg.,

B'way  and 34th St., New

York, N. Y.
Pavne,  F.  C, Sturgeon  Bay,

Wis.  ■  . ^ ,

Pavne & Payne, Craig, Colo.
Payne, M. U., Craig, Colo,,
Paynter,  John  E., 3309  Troost

Ave., Kansas City,  Mo.
Pavton, W. L., General

Delivery, Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Pearing,  W. C,  5011

Hollywood Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Pearce,  N. F.,  Benton  Harbor,

Mich.
Pearson,  B.  H.,  Craftonville,

Cal.
Pearson, Chas. Smith, Sea

View House,

Northumberland, Eng.
Pearson,  Chas. S., Sea  View

House, 3 Tyne Terrace,

North Shields, Eng.
Pearson, R.. 47 Pexey Park,

Tynemoiith, Eng.
Pease, Carrie B., Galesville,

Wis.
Pease,  W.  W.,  30  North  2nd

St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Peck,  Marie  C,  Belle  Fourche,

S.  Dak.
Peebles, Roy A., 419 Weldon

St., Latrobe, Penn.
Peffer,  Geo.  M.,  140  Bertha

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Pefley,  J.  "W., Perry,  la.
Peil, Charles  G., 1305 Linden

Ave.,  Baltimore,  Md.
Peirce, Clarence  M.,

Cambridge City, Ind.
Pelaskin,  J.  B.,  1710  Winwood

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Pennington, H. A., 1379 W.

Randolph Bt., Chicago,,

111.
Pennington, J. L., 712 Marin

Ave., Canon  City, Colo.
Pennington, J. L., 1505 O St.,

Lincoln,  Neb.
Pennington, J. L., Republican

City,  Neb.
Penrose, T. J., Whittier. Cal.
Peppercorn, Mrs.  Norma,

Spearville, Kans.
Perkins,  J.  W.,  Belleflower,

Mo.
Perrier,  Mary  A.,  Sault  Ste.

Marie,  Can.
Perry, C. \V.. 219 Water St.,

Augusta, Me.
Perry,  Grace I., Plainview,

Minn.
Perry, Maude, Humboldt,

la.
Perry, Minnie A., Minot, N.

Dak.
Perry,  M.  A., Pine  City,  Minn.
Perry, W. A., 7117 San

Fernando  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles, Cal.
Person, G. H., 32 W. Church

St.,  Uniontown,  Pa.
Peschkar. Joseph, 331 Main

St., Union Hill, N. J.


Pestaner, J. P., 174 W. 97th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Petch,  A.  J.,  Winfleld,  Kans.
Peters, A. G., Kingston. Ont.,

Can.  ,„

Poter.s. F. E., 147 S. Santa  Fe

St.,  Sallna,  Kans.
Peters, Henry, G17 Mack

Bldg.,  Denver, Colo.
Peters, Richard, 61st &

University Place, Chicago,

Peterson, 5913 S. Halsted St.,

Chicago, 111.
Peterson, C. A., 6321 St.

Lawrence Ave., Chicago,

111'  „

Peterson, F. A., Mt. Forest,

Ont., Can.
Peterson,  H.  L.,  1801  Lawrence

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Peter.son, H. S., 6131 S.
Maplewood Ave., Chicago,
111.
Peterson.  M. B., 1103  S.  Boots

St., Marion, Ind.
Petersen, P. D., Spring Val-
ley,  Minn.
Peterson,  R.  H.,  10526

Superior  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Peterson.  R.  H.,  7600  Hough

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Pettit, C. B., Lyons, Kans.
Petrisch, W. J., 1928 Brady

St., Davenport. la.
Petritsch,  J. F., Thomas
I Bigelow Bldg., Reno, Nev.
j  Better, A. J., Brack Shops,
I Los Angeles, Cal.
]  Pettit,  A.  J.,  Winfield,  Kans.
Pettv, B. I., 208 Clauss  Bldg.,

Ottoway, 111.
Petty, Ernest L., Delevan,

Wis.
Petzold, M., 1562 Milwaukee

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Pfarrius, Wm. H., 1110

Hudson  St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Pfeifer, Charles,  56 Fabyan

Place, Newark, N J.
Pfeifer, Hans, 1412 Prospect

Ave., Bronx,  N. Y.
Pfeiffer,  G.,  7  Tobyon  Place,

Newark,  N. J.
Phebus, W. A., Seymour, la.
Phelps, Adaline, Hannah
Blk., La Fayette, Ind.
Phelps,  L.  W.,  Fostoria,  O.
Phelps, L. W., Taylor Blk.,

Elwood,  Ind.
Philbrick, H. L., Hill's Bldg.,

Hartford, Conn.
Philbrick, H. L., 967 Elm St.,

Manchester, N. H.
Philbrook, N. W., 327 Cores
i Realty Bldg., Los Angeles.

Cal.
!  Phillebaum, Elmer, Lock Box
j 318,  Memphis,  Tenn.
I  Phillion. Thos. E., 2602

Harrison  St..  Davenport,  la.
Phillips  &  Phillips, Drs.,

Cutcheon, Mich.
Phillips, C. G., Siloam

Springs,  Ark.
Phillips, Mrs. E., 163
Independence Ave.,
Quincy, Mass.
,  Phillips, E. Helen, 485 Porter
1 Ave..  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

Phillips, E. J.. 961 Great
j River  Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
I  Phillips, Helen E., 107

Mariner  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Phillips,  Ida  B.  H.,  Butts
Bldg., AVichita, Kans.
Phillips. Llovd A., 914 E.
Belknap  St.,  Fort  Worth,
Tex.


Phillips, Ida, Wellington, O.
Philllp.s, U. M., 216-19  _ ^

Strickland Bldg., Valdosta,

Ga.
Phillip.s. O. L., Ill W.

Waterman St., Wichita,

Kans.
Phillips, W. M., 225 Diet

Bldg.,  DeLand, Fla.
Pichel, L. C, 1547 Broadway,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Pickard, C. E., 3 Post Office

Bldg., Canon City, Colo.
Pickard & Pickard, 3 Post

Office Bldg., Caflon City,

Colo.
Pickard & Pickard, Drs., 3

Post Office Bldg., Cafion

City,  Colo.
Pielemeir,  E. F., 518  Main  St.,

Vincennes,  Ind.
Pierce,  Mrs.,  University  Pk.,

Denver, Colo.
Pierce,  C.  M.,  Cambridge  City,

Ind.
Pierce, W. R., Springport,

Mich.
Pierce, Clarence M.,

Cambridge City, Ind.
Pierce, Geo. A., 117 Vine St.,

22^  W.  3rd  St.,  Williamsport,

Pa.
Pierce, G. Chester, 1615 E.

33rd St., Indianapolis, Ind.
Pierce. Geo. O.,  196  Oak  St..

Binghamton,  N.  Y.
Pierce, J Elwoud, 1030 Wolf

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Pierce, Willard, Milford, Del.
Pierson, F. R., 1231 Stevens

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Pietsch,  Albert,  905  Monticello

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Pillion,  Thos.  E.,  2602

Harrison  St.,  Davenport,  la.
PiLstrom, David, 124 Bridge

St.,  Struthers,  O.
Pilstrom, David, South Side

Bank Bldg., Struthers. O.
Pine, Frank  A., Post  Falls,

Idaho.
Pinkham, C. B., Sacramento,

Cal.
Pinney, L. Preston, Clifford

Bldg., Jamestown. X. Y.
Pintler, L. E., Rooms 45 &
46, Conrad Bldg., 385

Westminster  St.,
Providence,  R.  I.
Piper,  F. J.,  Box 39, Summer,

111.
Pipperda, Benj., Cuba, Wis.
Pitts,  L.  M..  47  W.  Alexandria

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Pizarro,  Eveilio  V.,  Valley

Stream.  Long  Island.  N.  Y.
Place  &  Place,  Madison,  Wis.
Place, J. R., 308 State St.,

Madison, Wis.
Plambeck, L., 2004 14th St.,

Moline, 111.
Plank. Howard T.. 1812

Heyworth Bldg., Chicago,

Planter, Mrs. L. M., Ogallala,

Neb.
Platner, L. M., 6-7

Wanamaker Bldg., Billings,

Mont.
Platner, L. M., Joliet, Mont.
Piatt, H. F., Belding, Mich.
Piatt, John  W., Flandrean, S.

Dak.
Platto, H. M., 60 Broadway,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Plumb,  Gerald  S.,  Kalamazoo,

Mich.
Plummer, G. A., 107

Cameron Ave., Detroit,

Mich.


1116


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Poage,  Eva,  Texola,  Okla.
Pobanz, Arthur G.,

Cambridge, 111.
Foe, F.  E.,  322-23 La Plante

Blk., Vincennes, Ind.
Poeet, Bernice C, 310 E.
Concord St., Vinton, la.
Pogue,  Garrett  C, 116  Dudley
107  N. 7th  St.,  Camden,  N.  J.
Pohs, Harry L,., 315 Decatur

St.,  Brooklyn, N.  Y.
Polmanteer, L. E.,
Watervliet, Mich.
Polmanteer, V. L., 801 Merc.

Lib. Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Pong-er, Edw., 132 Coles St.,

Jersey City, N. J.
Pontius, Arthur  R., Harbor

Spring's,  Mich.
Pontone, Henry, 281 Grove

St.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Poole, Lanche  M., New Paris,

Ind.
Poole, T. L., 536 Maybury

Grand, Detroit, Mich.
Pope, Hiram F., 107 Meigs

Bldg., Bridgeport, Conn.
Pope, Ora, Frederick, Okla.
Pope, O. N., Chickasha, Okla.
Poret, E., Hessmer, La.
Porter, Edgar, 418 11th Ave.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Porter,  E.  J.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Porter, Geo. E., 137-8

Edgerly Bldg., Fresno, Cal.
Porter, Geo. E., Alemeda,

Cal.
Porter, Mrs. R. G., Petoskey,

Mich.
Porter,  Rev.  T.  M.,
Wentworth & 24th Sts.,
Chicago, 111.
Porter,  W. WMlson, Box  240,

Oshawa, Ont.,  Can.
Porter & Porter, Drs.,

Petoskey, Mich.
Posson, F. W., 19 Elm St.,

Glens Falls, N. Y.
Posson,  G.  W.,  Glens  Falls,

N. Y.
Posegate, F. M., Nebraska

Bldg., Tulsa, Okla.
Post, Alfred  H., 307 City

Trust Bldg., Paterson, N. J.
Potter,  G.  L.,  302J  Clinton  St.,

Defiance, O.
Potter, Jane G, The Nevada,
2025 Broadway, New York,
N.  Y.
Potter, La  Forest, The

Nevada,  70th  St.  and  B'way,
New  York,  N.  Y.
Potter, Mrs. L. F., 69th St.
& Broadway, The Nevada,
New  York,  N.  Y.
Potts, R. A., 14-15 Western
Newspaper Union Bldg.,
Oklahoma City, Okla.
Powell, F. D., First Nafl

Bank Bldg., Corning, N. Y.
Powell.  W.  O., 109  Common-
wealth  Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Powers, J. D., 1021 Olive St.,

Long Beach, Cal.
Powley,  v.  E.,  Clarion,  la.
Prechtel, Fred. H., Lederer-

Hene Bldg., Elwood, Ind.
Preddicombe, Raymond, 508
Monahan Bldg., Green Bay,
Wis.
Prentice, H. H.. 8311 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Prentice, H. H., 201 Knicker-
bocker! Bldg., Portsmouth,
O.
Preston,  F.  E.,  Salina,  Kans.
Preston, Frances R., 132

Blackwell St., Dover, N. J.
Pretzel,  Bertha,  Opera  House,
Michigan City, Ind.


Price, A., 291 Main St., West

Hamilton, Can.
Price,  Mrs.  B.  M.,  820  Ohio  St..

St. Paul, Minn.
Price, W.  L., 291 Main  St. W.,

Hamilton,  Ont.,  Can.
Priester, Laura. 5804 Holly-
wood Blvd.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Pringle, R. J., lAirline Baths,

San Francisco. Cal.
Prior, T. W., Room 6, Cook

Blk., Medina, N. Y.
Proctor, Clara  M., Prairie St.,

Columbus. Wis.
Proelicher, Clara. 3556 Main

St., Evanston, Cincinnati, O.
Provost, A. B., 45 Pearl  St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.
Prowse, E. W., Suite 426-27.

Duncan Bldg., Vancouver,

British Columbia, Can.
Prowze, E. W., 426 Duncan

Bldg., Vancouver, British

Columbia, Can.
Pruett, J. E., Bonham, Tex.
Pruett,  Paris,  Tex.
Pruett Bros., 46 Masonic

Bldg., Pueblo, Colo.
Pruett Bros., 525 E. 18th St..

Denver, Colo.
Pruyne, A. L., 420 Main St.,

Towanda, Pa.
Puddicomb. Robt. A., 500

Main St., Burlington, la.
Puddicombe, R., 410 E.

Lafayette  St.,  Tampa,  Fla.
Pue, John T., Hicks Bldg.,

San  Antonio,  Tex.
Pugh, J. Thurman, 4716

Melrose Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Pumphrey, W. A., Adair

Bldg., Portland, Ind.
Punk, H. F., 6351 Ellis Ave.,

Chicago,  111.
Puott, F. F., Ephriam, Utah.
Putnam, Ernest, Wllliamston.

Mich.
Putt, Lewis O., Toronto, O.
Pyott, Frank F., Ephriam,

Utah.
Pyatzki, Earnest, Horton,

Kans.
Pyle, Dr. Henry  G., 537  E.

Ocean Ave., Long Beach,

Cal.

Quick,  Mrs.  M.,  711  Summit!
Ave., Clinton,  la.

Quick, Walter J., Roanoke,
Va.

Quigley,  J.  E.,  826  10th  Ave.,
Munhall,  Pa.

Quigley,  W.  J.,  305  E.  8th  St.,
Homestead, Pa.

Quigley,  W.  J..  501  Pitts-
burgh Life  Bldg.,  Home-
stead,  Pa.

Quinn, Bernard, 2050 Penn.
Ave., Alliance, O.

Quinn, W. A., Cheyenne,
Wyoming.

Quinn, W. W., Lookout,
Wyoming.

Qvittrud, E. F., Crookston,
Minn.

Racster,  Rose  L.,  410  Joy  St.,
Red Oak, la.

Racster, W. T., Red Oak, la.

Radcliffe,  Clayton  L.,  Sydney.
Nebr.

Rademacher,  Caroline,  373
Woodlawn  Ave.,  Buffalo,
N. Y.

Radice,  Samuel  S.,  45  Elm-
wood  Ave.,  Buffalo,  N. Y.

Radley,  J.  H.,  113  W.  71st  St.,
New York, N. Y.


Rafferty, William H., Lakota.

N. Dakota,
Ralir,  W.  E.,'  253  N.  Broad  St.,

Norwich, N. Y.
Raidt, Edw. P., 1764 Viola

Davenport, la.
Raine.  L.  M.,  2248  W.  95th  St.,

Cleveland, O.
Raine, Lula  M., Merritt  Bldg.,

Jackson, Mich.
Raine, W. H., 6702 Detroit

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Raine,  Wm. H.  O.,  Merritt

Bldg., Jackson, Mich.
Rainey, Howard E., Owosso,

Mich.
Rairden, N. B., 4618 Figueroa

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Ralff, H., 554 S. Figueroa  St.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Ralff, Harry, 209 Merchants
Trust Bldg., Los Angeles,
Cal.
Ralph, Gerber, Wallace,

Idaho.
Ralston, Cora, 922 Sherman

Ave., Steubenville, O.
Ramsey, H., 301 Evanston

Bldg., Minneapolis, Minn.
Ramsey, Hazel, 228 S. Court

St., Sullivan, Ind.
Ranck, E. H., Newberg, Ore.
Randall, Edward B., 776 Tre-

mont St., Boston, Mass.
Randall & Bradford, Stock-
port, la.
Randell, G. J., 215 W. 51st

St., New  York, N. Y.
Randolph, Harriett, Los

Angeles, Cal.
Randolph, J. R., General

Delivery, Springfield, O.
Ranney,  A.  W.,  9  Sylvan  Ave.,

New Haven, Conn.
Raske,  S.  H., 805 King  St. E.,

Hamilton, Ont., Can.
Rasmussen, Mrs. Meda,

Garrett,  Ind.
Rassmer, Murkee, J., 969

Liberty Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Raster,  W.  T.,  Red  Oak,  la.
Rath, Frederick A., South

Fallsburg, N. Y.
Rath. Frederick  A., 506  Silsby

Bldg.,  Newport  News,  Va.
Rathburn & Rathburn, 30-32

Zimmerman Bldg., Spring-
field, O.
Rathburn, B.  P.,  30  New  Zim-
merman Bldg., Springfield,

O.
Ratledge, T. F., 403 Ham-

berger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Ratledge, Tullian F., 217 St.

Marcus Bldg., Santa

Barbara, Cal.
Raulfs, Fred. F., 305-7 Flat

Iron Bldg., Akron, O.
Ray, Chas. P., Monroe, Wis.
Ray, C. R., Stockton, 111.
Ray, L. William, New Grand

Central  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Ray, M. G., 225 N. Water St.,

Gault,  Ont,  Can.
Raymond, A. C, 1408 Ply-
mouth Ave., Minneapolis,

Minn.
Reading,  L.  W.,  15th  and  Pine

Sts., Philadelphia, Pa.
Reading, R. W., 711 Ocean

Front, Ocean Park, Cal.
Reagan, A. E., 118 Coolage

Ave., Syracuse, N. Y.
Rearden, Anna, Locust Ave.,

Long Beach, Cal.


Chiropractors


Professional  Register


1117


Reber, Chas. G., 411 Main St.,

Johnstown, Pa.
Redcliff, Clayton I^., Sidney,

Nebr.
Redfield, Sallie, Edwards,

Miss.
Redifer,  Clara  M.,  Youngs-
town, O.
Redman, Fred., Young-stown,

O.
Reebman, Fred. B., 402 Stam-

bough Bldg., Youngstown,

O.
Reed, D. S., Secretary Chiro-
practic Board  of  Examiners,

Valley  City,  N.  D.
Reed, O. R., 204 Passaic  Ave.,

Hackensack,  N. J.
Reed, Robert P., 1034 Broad-
way,  Denver, Colo.
Reed,  Spencer  D., 318  E.  Main

St., Valley  City, N. Dakota.
Reed,  V. D.,  Veeland Bldg.,

Hugo, Okla.
Reed, W.  D., Boonville,  Ark.
Reehl, W., 828 Broad St..

Newark^  N. J.
Reese, A. C, 1325 Greenbay

Ave., Milwaukee, Wis.
Reese, Mrs. Adolph, 71

Chambers St., Milwaukee,

"Wis.
Reese, Julia, 217 N. 12th St.,

Saint Joseph, Mo.
Reese, Julia D., 1029 Omaha

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Omaha,

Nebr.
Reese,  Julia  D.,  Woodbine.  la.
Reesmith,  L.  M.,  Custar,  O.
Reeve, E. E., 522 2nd Ave.,

North Troy,  N. Y.
Reickers, Dorothea S., 117

Ridge St., Crown Point,

Ind.
Reid, R., Grand Haven, Mich.
Reid, Mrs. Vita M., 524 Con-
solidated Realty Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Reier,  Martin  A.,  1823  W.

Dean Ave., Spokane, Wash.
Reiley, F. H., 924 Market St.,

Sandusky,  O.
Reiley, P. S., Bailey, Mich.
Reim, Clara, 7 Sharp Bldg.,

Lafayette, Ind.
Reimer, J. A., 423 W. 7th St.,

Davenport,  la.
Rein, Clara, 613 Ferry St.,

Lafayette, Ind.
Reiner, Nettie A., 617 Trap-

hagen St., West Hoboken,

N.  J.
Reinhardt, Matilda V., 1524

Chestnut St., Philadelphia.

Pa.
Reinhart, C. R., 418 Jeffer-
son Bldg., South Bend, Ind.
Reinschreiber, Emma. 1517 S.

Spaulding Ave., Chicago,

111.
Reisdorf.  J.  H.,  315  Broadway.

Market Bldg., Detroit,

Mich.
Reisdorf.  J.  H..  211  Woodward

Ave.. Detroit, Mich.
Reiter, D. H., R. F. D.,

Youngstown, O.
Remsburg. G. W.. Lamont,

la.
Rencher,  G.  J.,  68  Greene  Ave.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Renfrew, D. Rhodes, 1404

Tremont St., Denver, Colo.
Reno,  Inez  F.,  Dolores,  Colo.
Reno, Inez,  Woodbine, la.
Reno,  O.  E.,  Guide  Rock,

Nebr.
Reno, O. E., Superior, Nebr.


Renshaw, 855-a Myrtle St..

Oakland.  Cal.
Rensley, Harry, 2150 Clfve-

land Ave., Chicago, 111.
Rensvold, G. A., Brookings,

S. Dakota.
Reoofleld, Sallie, Edward.s,

Miss.
Ressler, J. M., 10729 Gording

Ave.. Cleveland. O.
Rest, Haven, 2941 Broadway,

Chicago, 111.
Re.storff,  C.  145  W.  Center  St.,

Paxton,  111.
Rexford.  S.  E.,  1028  Bloomfleld

St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Reynard, Dr., 1314 Telegraph

Ave., Oakland, Cal.
Reynolds, Arlene B., 30-31

Jefferson Bldg.. St. Augus-
tine, Fla.
Reynolds, C. E., New Sharon,

la.
Reynolds,  H.  D.,  Beaver  Falls,

Pa.
Reynolds, H. D., 116 Schoff-

moster Bldg., Conneaut. O.
Reynolds, R. H., Wheatridge.

Colo.
Reynolds, Miss  Ida, Sun

Prairie. Wis.
Reynolds. R. H., San

Bernardino Cal.
Revnolds. W. H., 486 Allison

St.,  Ashland,  Ore.
Rhinehart, A. W., 37 North

St..  Oneida, N. Y.
Rhodes,  B. H.,  Sterling,  Kans.
Rhoads, H. B., Main St.,

Mantua,  N. J.
Rhodes,  B.  H.,  West  Palm

Rhodes,' F. A., 308 Northland

Ave.,  Buffalo, N.  Y.
Rice, C. M., 506 Tussing

Bldg.,  Lansing,  Mich.
Rice, Daniel A., 527 Lake

Ave., Storm Lake, la.
Rice, Mary J., 304 S. Market

St., Wichita, Kans.
Rice, Roy L., 917 Gerritt St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Rice, Steve A., 811 W. Pico

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Rice, Steve A., 326J E. 35th

St., Los Angeles. Cal.
Rice, Wm. C, 1951 Irving

Park Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Rice, Wm. C, 3959 Lincoln

Ave., Chicago. 111.
Rich, James H.. 830 Market

St., San Francisco, Cal.
Richards, Chas., Valparaiso,

Ind.
Richards. C. B.. 77 W. Cen-
tral  Ave., Titusville, Pa.
Richards, C. B., 509 Inner  St.,

Oil City, Pa.
Richards, C. H., 222 3rd St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Richards & Richards. 9

Franklin St.. Warren. Pa.
Richards. Winifred. Davison.

Mich.
Richardson, A. P., I.,a Salle,

111.
Richardson, A. W., Opera

House, Los  Angeles, Cal.
Richardson,  A. W., 511 Wash-
ington Bldg., Los Angeles.

Cal.
Richardson, A. W., 1143 S.

Olive St.. Los Angeles. Cal.
Richardson. C. E., 269 S. 8th

St., Newark, N. J.
Richardson, C. E., 854 S.

Orange Ave., Newark, N.  J.


Richardson, Ernest E., Arn-
stein Bldg., Knoxville,
Tenn.

Richardson, G. A., 152 Vir-
ginia Ave., Jersey City,
N. J.

Richardson, Mrs. Mae, 1565G
W. 45th St., Los Angeles.
Cal.

Richardson, R. H., 343i E.
Grand Ave., Beloit, Wis.

Richardson, T. B., 214 N.
Lawrence St., Wichita,
Kans.

Richie, Chas. A., 210

Equitable Bldg., Wilming-
ton,  Del.

Richey, S. H., Kokomo, Ind.

Richman, R. A., Brooklyn, la.

Richmond,  I.  M.,  92  Broadway,
Detroit, Mich.

Richmond,  J.  M.,  92  Broadway,
Room 208, Detroit, Mich.

Richter, Benj. R., Freeport,
Pa.

Richter,  Clarence,  Holyrood,
Kans.

Richter,  T. F., 37  12th  St..
Minneapolis, Minn.

Richton. Francis. Moose Jaw,
Sask Can

Rickard,  C.  M.,  Letart,  W.  Va.

Riechers. Dorothea. Crown
Point, Ind.

Riekerson, Alvah C, Buffalo
St., Rushford, N. Y.

Rieckie,  Harry  C,  1466  Kelton
Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.

Riedl, Wenzl, 2179 Telegraph
Ave., Oakland, Cal.

Rightman, Nachman, 270
Rochester Ave., Brooklyn,
N. Y.

Rightman,  N., 1505  Lincoln
Place. Brooklyn, N. Y.

Riley, Geo. P., 212 Main St.,
Dansvllle. N. Y.

Riley. Joe  Shelby, 151  Hun-
tington Ave., Boston, Mass.

Riley, J. S. 117 W. Hudson
St., Oklahoma City, Okla.

Riley,  J.  Shelby,  1116 F  St.
N. ^V., Washington, D.C.

Riley,  Laura  B., 151  Hunting-
ton  Ave.. Boston. Mass.

Riley, Lora B., Washington,
D. C.

Rinehart, M. V.. 1524 Chest-
nut St., Philadelphia,  Pa.

Ring. J. G., 1012 22nd St.,
Milwaukee, Wis.

Ripple, John W., 404 Elder-
field-Hartshorn Bldg., 44
Falls  St., Niagara Falls,
N. Y.

Risch, Gertrude. Oelwein, la.

Ritchie. Charles A., Wilming-
ton, Del.

Ritchie, J. .L, 1344 Oak St.,
Los Angeles, Cal.

Ritter, H. C. 516-a Clay St.,
Saint  Charles, Mo.

Rittmeyer, F. W., 1137  Wash-
ington St., Hoboken, N. J.

Roach, Jeanette, 45 Hague
Ave., Detroit, Mich.

Roane,  Jas.,  4025  Arcade  Bldg..
Seattle,  Wash.

Roaster. W. T.. 206 4th St.,
Red  Oak, la.

Robb, Geo. F.. 506 Main St.,
La  Crosse,  Wis.

Robb. W.  J.,  Denison,  Kans.

Robbins, E. Marie, Santa
Barbara Cal

Robbins.  E.  U., 1140  S.  Grand
Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.


1118


Professional  Register


Chiropractors


Robbins, E. U., 1407 Elvardo

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Robbins, W. J., 341 W.
Portage St., Sault Ste.
Marie, Mich.
Roberts, Helen D., Kent,

Conn.
Robertson, H. L., Box 26,

Haverlock, Ncbr.
Robertson, H. L., 120  E. Main

St., Marshalltown, la.
Robertson. R. W., Masonic

Bldg., Hutchinson, Kans.
Robeson, C. S., Danville, O.
Robeson, H. A., Sac City, la.
Robinson. Earl A., Arkansas

City, Kans.
Robinson, C. S., Danville, O.
Robinson, Earl A., Arkansas

City, Kans.
Robinson,  George,  219

Merchants' Trust  Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Robinson, Geo., 342 S. Hill

Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
Robinson, Geo. H., North

Branch, Mich.
Robinson, H. E., 1909* Main

St., Pratt. Kans.
Robinson, Mathew  H., 11 Mil-
ford Ave., Newark, N. J.
Robinson. Thos. F., 53 Lex-
ington Ave., Passaic, N. J.
Robinson, T.  J. T., 1987

Ravina  Ave.,  Flint,  Mo.
Robinson, \Vm., BroQkville,

Ind.
Robson, Edward, 4200 Grand

Blvd., Chicago. 111.
Roche. Hazel, 438 State St.,

Trenton, N. J.
Rodibaugh, Loretta, Cuba,

N. Y.
Rogers, A. G., Cooke Blk.,

Oshkosh. Wis.
Rodgers, E. R., fil5 Elm St.,

Saint Joseph, Mich.
Roe, Dr. W. H., 9 Jefferson

Ave., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Roesner. W. H., Johnston

City, 111.
Rogrers. Bertha  C, Nicholas

Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Rogers,  C.  E.,  Callaway,  Nebr.
Rogers, E. E. O., 61.5 Elm  St.,

Saint .Joseph. Mich.
Rogers. J. C, 452 Nicholas

Bldg., Toledo, O.
Rogers, L.. Lowell, Mich.
Rodger.s, Ray W., 618 Wash-
ington St., Chillicothe, Mo.
Rofer  &  Rofer,  403-5  Citizens'

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Evansville,

Ind.
Rogers, M.S., 259  Forest  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Rohlflng, Charles. 4049 St.

I..ouis  Ave.. St.  Louis.  Mo.
Rohrbeck. Gustav, 619 John

St., M^est Hoboken, N. J.
Rohr, Goldle J., 253 N. Broad

St., Norwich, N. Y.
Rohr, Peter J., 504 Clinton

Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Rohr, Wm. E., 253 N. Broad

St., Norwich, N. Y.
Rollins. Walter H.. 176

Springfield St.. Boston,

JMTq  go

Rooman, D.  G.,  c/o  Y.  M.  C.  A.,

Chicago, 111.
Root, Frederick, Rose Bldg.,

Cleveland, O.
Root, Frederick J.. Park

Hotel. Chardon, O.
Rorabacher, J. C, 108 Park

Ave., Charlevoix, Mich.
Rorabacher,  J.  G.,  2241  Larra-

bel  St.,  Chicago,  111.


Rose, A. F., 1968 Milwaukee
I Ave., Chicago, 111.
Rose, Mrs. Emma, Newklrk,

Okla.
Rose, Robert, 24 Jefferson

St., Paterson, N. J.
Rosendohl, C,  3801  Alta  Vista

Terrace, Chicago, 111.
Rosicky, William, Missouri

Valley, la.
Rosieky, Wm., Davenport, la.
Roske, S. H., 805 King  St. E.,

Hamilton. Ont., Can.
Ross, Mr. & Mrs. Herbert, 82

Roseville Ave., Newark,

N. J.
Ross, Mary  Antoinette, 805 S.

Grand Ave., or  1019 Temple

St., I^os Angeles, Cal.
Ross, M. C, 227 W. Jefferson

St., Fort Wayne. Ind.
Roth. Anna, Stuttgart, Ark
Roth, Amelia, 3932 Spring

Grove Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Roth,  R.  W.,  Main  and  Market

Sts., Columbia City. Ind.
Rothrock. Mary B., 426 N.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Roth.' Wm. J., 3151 Main St.,

Cedar Falls, la.
Rothfuss,  E.  Lloyd,  835  Wood-
ward  Bldg., Washington,

D.  C.
Rowe.  Romie,  Rubicon  St.,

Dayton,  O.
Rowland, Edward J.

1 Branford Place. Newark,

N. J.
Rowland, R. N., Elk City,

Okla.
Rowley, A. H., Idaho Bldg.,

Boise Citv, Idaho.
Rowley, Orlando W., 407-8

Snyder  Bldg.,  Elmira,  N.  Y.
Rowley,  P.  S.,  Wellsboro,  Pa.
Rowley,  P.  S.,  Auburn,  N.  Y.
Rowley & Rowley, Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Anthony,  Kans.
Rowley  &  Rowleys, Sulphur

Springs, Ark.
Rowley. W. Orlando, 402

Snvder  Bldg.,  Elmira,  N.  Y.
Rubens, H. M., 372 Amhurst

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Rudy, .1. A., Owosso, Mich.
Rudesill,  Clark  O.. 524  S.

Main  St.,  Charlotte.  Mich.
Rudledge, T. F., 403 Ham-

berger Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Ruehlman, W. F., 207-8

Meyers Arcade, Minne-
apolis, Minn.
Rule, Lewis E., 3039 Arcade

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Ruley, Caleb. .L, 320 Monroe

St.. Fairmont, W. Va.
Ruley, C. J., Creston, la.  i

Runge, Harry L., 208 Hun-
tington Ave., Boston, Mass.
Runk, Mrs. Ellen B., 2938 A

St., San  Diego,  Cal.
Runnells  &  Runnells. 1002 9th

Ave., Greeley, Colo.
Runnells, W. I., Valley Ave.,

Baker, Ore.
Runsy, O. V.. 71 S. Saginaw

St., Pontiac, Mich.  i

Rush,  G.  C,  713  H  St.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.
Rushbrook. Dr.. 61 Lakeview

Ave., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Russell.  Dr.  Flora.  548  Massa-
chusetts Ave..  Boston,  Mass.
Russell,  E.  J.,  214  E.  State  St.,  '

Columbus, O.
Russell, E. J., Nashville, O.


Russell, H. E., Kalamazoo,

Mich.
Russell, Margaret, 78 West

Milton Ave., Rahway, N. J.
Russell, W. E., 214 E. State

St., Columbus, O.
Ruth,  D.  O.,  410  W.  Bridge  St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.
Ruth, M. Eliz., 159 Orange

Ave., Irvington, N. J.
Ruth,  Wm.  H.,  Jr.,  159  Orange

Ave., Irvington,  N. J.
Rutherford. G. S., Box 495.

Bainbridge, N. Y.
Rutherford, G. S., Sidney,

N. Y.
Ruthledge, C. C, Pemberville.

O.
Rutkowski, J. M., 2571 Maine

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Ryan.  Geo. S.,  517  Liberty  St..

Schenectady, N. Y.
Ryan, John P., 9128 Com-
mercial Ave.,  South  Chicago.

111.
Ryer, H. Scott. East Fall.s

Church,  Va.
Saak,  H. A., Marthasville,  Mo.
Sank,  H.  E..  304-a  S.  Main  St..

De Sota. Mo.
Sackett. Edith F.. 185 Main

St.. Orange. N. J.
Sage.  J.  B.,  5227  W.  Adams  St..

Chicago. 111..
Sager,  Mrs.  Emma.  Findlay,  O.
Saile.  Joseph  C,  182  Broad  St.,

Bloomfleld, N. J.
Sailor, M. H., 202| Iowa  Ave.,

Washington, la.
Salesbury, C. C, Box 45,

Panama,  N. Y.
Salisbury. C. C, 52 Main St..

Bradford, Pa.
Salisbury, E. S., Underwood

Blk., Adrian, Mich.
Salisbury, Eva T., Meadville,

Pa.
Salle, Chas. E., 117 St.

Botolph  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Salters,  Bertha,  Carmon,  Okla.
Sampson,  M.  P.,  Yorkshire,

N. Y.
Samse.  Mrs.  I>.  P..  7250  Lafay-
ette  Ave., Chicago, 111.
Samuelson, Henry D., 2328

Coblentz St., Chicago, 111.
Sanchelli, Francesco, 200 W.

72nd  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Sanders & Sanders. 613 Syca-
more St.. Terre Haute. Ind.
Sanders. Katherine. 1011 N.

4th St.. Terre Haute, Ind.
Sanders.  Wm.,  Box  433,  Apple-
ton, Minn.
Sanders, W. H., 825 S. 6th  St.,

Atchison, Kans.
Sanderus,  H. J., 2230 Fillmore

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Sandford. W. R.. 16 Dudley

Ave., Ocean Park, Cal.
Sandgreen. Geo. E., 441 N.

1st  St.,  Provo  City,  Utah.
Sandles, Isadore, 222 Hewes

St., Brooklyn. N. Y.
Sanford & Sanford. 3031

Arcade Bldg., Seattle,

Wash.
Sanford. Dr. E. P., South

Saginaw, Mich.
Sanford,  Mrs.  Faune,  1447  S.

Union  Ave.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Sanford, Harry L., 3026-27

Arcade  Bldg.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Sanford, J. W, Sanford

Studio. North Adams, Mass.
Sangrenn.  Geo.  Ed.. 441  N. 1st

St. E., Provo City, Utah.


Chiropruclors


Profcssioiuil  Reqisler


119


Saminons,  V.  J.,  Ca.shion.  Okla.
Saperstein,  Morris,  325  Frank-
lin St.,  Union  Hill.  N.  J.
Sarg-ent. Andrew, St. Charles

Court, Hopkinsville, Ky.
Sarg-ent, E. M., Idaho Falls,

Idaho.
Sarsent, Fred. W.,  Red  Wing,

Minn.
Sarsent, F. W., 80:i N. VVatei-

St., Ellensburg-, Wash.
Sarg-ent,  W.  L.,  3349  30th  Ave.,

South  Minneapolis, Minn.
Sartor, M. H., 202i E. Iowa

St., Washing-ton, la.
Sarver,  Pearl  M.,  100  Huffman

Ave., Columbu.s, O.
Saswell. Gladv.s. 222 W. Main

St., Greenfield, Ind.
Sattlemeyer, Mrs. Harriet,
416 Good Blk., Des Moines,
la.
Sauer,  Albert, 6  Living-ston

Bldg-., Wausaw, Wis.
Sauer, Albert. Box 322,

Arcadia, Wis.
Sauer, A. G., Over Sub. Bldg-.,

Arcadia,  Wis.
Sauer, Benj. A., 536 Butlernut

St., Syracuse, N. Y.
Saunders,  Miss  Cora  E.,  618
Greshain Place, Washing-
ton, D.  C.
Sautzki, Wm., Putnam, Conn.
Savage. W. S.. 102 Coyean St.,

Windsor, Ont., Can.
Savercool, Genevieve. Groton,

S.  D.
Sa-wtell & Sa-wtell, Pocatello,

Idaho.
Sawtell. Reat D., 120* E.

Park, Anaconda, Mont.
Sawyer,  Geo. H.,  Jr., 5  Wilson

St., Irvington, N. J.
Sawyer, T. J., 3314 Washing-
ton St., Wilmington, Dela.
Saxby, Geo. O., 198| Main St.,

Ashtabula, O.
Saxby,  G.  O.,  Austinburg, O.
Saxe, Arthur, Richland

Center, Wis.
Saxe  &  Saxe,  5148  Page  Blvd.,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Saxe, Arthur, Princeton, Ind.
Saxe,  Mary, 218 E. Broadway,

Princeton, Ind.
Saxi-nan, R. B., 833 Sheriday

Road, Chicago, 111.
Saxton, Ella I., Ledge Fai-m,

Basom,  N.  T.
Saxton. Ella  I., Hilldale
Ranch, Grand Island.
Colusha County, Cal.
Sayer. W. R.. 132 Fianklin

Ave., Sidney, O.
Scallon, J. W., 57 E. Jacl^son

Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
Scarborough, J. L., Lakeland,

Florida.
Scarborough & Scarborough,

Lakeland, Fla.
Schaffer, A., 203 S. 5th St..

Columbus. O.
Schaffer, B. B., Auburn, Nebr.
Schalow.  L.  C. 151  W.  8th  St.,

Auburn, Ind.
Schanne,  F.  B..  44  Bleeker  St.,

Newark, N. J.
Scharf, E. E.. 1004 Dakin St.,

Chicago,  111.
Scharnhorst, L. C. 184 13th

St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Scharnhorst. M. H.. P. O. Box
234.  Hot  Springs,  S.  Dakota.
Scharnhorst,  M. H.. 1005 Hen-

nipin Ave.. Dixon. Ind.
Scharnhorst, Martin, Dixon,
111.


Scharnhorst, Martin H., 122

W. 3rd St., Muscatine, la.
Scharsmith. Wm., 115 E. 27th

St,, New York, N. Y.
Schaumburg. H. E., 28 13th

Ave.,  Newark,  N. J.
Schaus, Geo. E., 1132 AValnut

St.. Green Bay, Wis.
Scheetz, Earl J., Dallas, Ore.
Scheetz, Orville  O.. 66 6th St.,

Portland,  Ore.
Scheid, Henry Edw., 9 Virgi-
nia  Ave., .Jersey City, N. J.
Scheid, H. I^., 421 Sassafras

St., Erie, Pa.
Scheifler. Chas. A., 4 Hum-
boldt St., Newark, N. .7.
Schellenbarger, .T. A., 306 E.

State  St.. Rockford.  111.
Schenk,  .John  C,  513  Sandusky

St., Pittsburgh, Pa,
Schenk. J. H., Cor, 4th and

2nd Aves,, Cedar Rapids,

la.
Scheuder. T. H,, 4401 Prairie

Ave,, Chicago, 111.
Schied, Henry E., 9 Virginia

Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N, J.
Schied. "V^^alter J,. 58 High

St„ Belleville, N. J,
Schiefler, Chas. A., 357 Main

St., Orange, N. .T.
Schildgen, Hugo, P. O.  Box

916, Portland, Ore.
Schillig. C. E.. Suite 3,

Masonic Temple, Chicago

Junction,  111.
Schillig. Joe, 25* N. Main St.,

Oberlin, O.
Schillig,  G.  J., 101  E.  Main  St.,

Norwalk. 111.
Schilling, C. E.. 106 W. Pearl

St.. Chicago Junction, O.
Schilling. G. J., Ca.'^e Block,

Norwalk,  O.
Schilling, Joe, Oberlin. O.
Schirmer. J. F., 107 Capitol

Ave., Atlanta, Ga.
Schlasser, Ella, 1613 Pearl

St., Denver, Colo.
Schleicher, Eugene, 52 Par-
sons Blk., Burlington, la,
Schleusner, Richard R., 76

Hamburg  St.,  Paterson,  N.  J.
Schmeding, A., Mount Olive,

111.
Schmid, F. R., 814 l.st St.,

Merrill, Wis.
Schmid,  Walter  W.. 19 Roland

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Schmidt, F. R.,  Lancaster,

Wis.
Schnacke, Albert J., 3106 W.

25th St.. Cleveland, O
Schnltger. Paul E., 1632 St.

Peters Ave., New Yoi-k,

N. Y.
Schnurrenberger. I>. H.,

Austintown, O.
Schoeberl, J. M., Adrian.

Minn.  .

Schoenthaler, Wm. F.. 144 S.

West St., Geneva, N. Y.
Schoers,  J.  G., 14  8  Market St.,

Paterson, N. J.
Schoffer, A., 203 S. 5th St.,

Columbus. O.
Schofleld, Cassie Ij.. Allison,

Colo.
Schofleld.  W. J., 199 Hodge

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Scholl, Walter H., Linton,

Ind.
Scholz & Scholz, Drs., 30

Valentine St., ^It. Vernon,
N. Y.


Scholz, H. B., 3312 Madi.son

St..  Chicago,  111.
Schoolcraft. F. E., North

Manchester,  Ind.
Schoonover, Anna


Exira,


A.. Exira, la.
West Point,


la.
Schoonover,
Schorder, J.

Nebr.
Schrankle, M. P., 5008 Penn

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Schreuder, T. H., Chicago, 111.
I  Schriek, W. J., 516 Federal

St., Pitt.sburgh, Pa.
Schrlmer, J. F., 107 Capitol

Ave., Atlanta, Ga.
Schroeder, Enude, 2843 North

Clark  St.,  Chicago,  111,
Schroth, R, G., 546 Garfield

Ave,, Chicago, 111,
Schryer, W, A,, 531 Lincoln

Ave,, Detroit, Mich,
Schubert. G. H,. 30 Zimmer-
man Bldg,, Springfield, O,
Schubert,  G,  H„  505-6  Masonic

Temple, Jacksonville, Fla.
Schubert, Dr., Townly Bldg..

Miami, Fla.
Schueler. J. J., 35 Lewis  Blk..

Dayton, O.
Schueler, F. D., 344 Walnut

St., Ijawrenceburg, Tnri,
Schuessler,  Mrs. Conrad.  Iowa

City, la,
Schuetz, Carl, 744 W, 4th St„

Los  Angeles, Cal,
Schultz, C. A,, 1317 S, Grand

Ave,, Los  Angeles, Cal,
Schultz, Emil, Palisade Park,

N, J.
Schultz, F. A., Elkader, la.
Schultz,  H., 2318 Cortland St..

Chicago, 111.
Schultz, Otto, Jr., 810 Perry

St., Davenport, la,
Schulz, Otto, 314-16 Lyric

Theatre Bldg,, Cincinnati,

O.
Schultz,  Otto, 48  Central  Ave.,

Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Schulz, Otto, The Norfolk

Bldg.. Cincinnati, O.
Schultz, R. J.. 361 Hudson

Bldg., Ogden, Utah.
Schwab, A. O., 27 E. Maumee

St., Adrian, Mich.
Schwab, F. J., 352 Harrison

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Schwab, L. W., Merrison Blk..

Sarina, Can.
Schwab, O. A., Adrian. Mich.
Schwartz, Chas., 35 S. Dear-
born  St.,  Chicago. 111.
Schwartz, Chas., 182 Ex-
change St., Monmouth, III.
Schwartz, Lava Hot Springs.

Idaho,
Schwaitz, M. D.. 346 B'wav,

New York, N. Y.
Schwartz, R. C. 331 Genesee

St..  Utica.  N.  Y.
Schwenker, L. H., 4307 Man-
chester Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Sch-ivietert, A. W., Box 412,

Marshalltown, la.
Scofield, Cassie L., Allison,

Colo.
Sconnard, R. E,, over Ameri-
can National  Bank  Bldg..

Valley  City.  N.  D,
Scott. A, B.. 224 "W, 18th St„

Eric Pa
Scott,  'C. W„ 324 E, 15th St..

Davenport. la.
Scott. Dr. D. C. Bleaklev

Bldg..  New  Castle.  Pa.
Scott,  Edith,  1216  E.  Grand

Ave,, Des Moines, la.


1120


Pntfes.siuiial  Hcjjislcr


Chiropractors


Scott,  H.  H.,  Esthervillo,  la.
Scott,  H.  H..  Spencer.  la.
Scott,  H.  P.,  Clinton,  Ind.
Scott, H. S., Marquette Hotel.

Hartford, Mich.
Scott, J. C, Dewey, Okla.
Scott,  J. E.,  128  N.  1st  St.,

Arkansas, Kans.
Scott, J. E., Newton, Kans.
Scott, J. H.. Merchantsville,

N. J.
Scott, J. S., Schults Bldg-.,

Butler, Pa.
Scott. J. S.. 021 South Ave.,

Wilkin.sburg-, Pa.
Scott, John T., Baltimore

Bldg.. Oklahoma  City, Okla.
Scott,  J.  v.. 69 W.  Main St.,

Scott,  John  W.,  110  W.  Newell

St.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Scott, Lewis, 1216 K. Grand

Ave., Des Moines, la.
Scott, Margaret, 129 Walnut

St., Lockport. N. Y.
Scott, O. L., 406 U. S. Nafl

Bank Bldg., Salem, Ore.
Scott,  O.  L., 313-14 I. O.  O.  F.,

Eugene. Ore.
Scott,  Wilson. 714  Walnut  St.,

Allentown, Pa.
Scott, Wilson, 6  N. Center  St.,

Pottsville, Pa.
Scott, W. I., 527 Park Ave..

Canton, O.

Scott,  W. I., 22  B. Crosier  St.,

Akron,  O.
Scovell, L. J., 223 Cherry St.,

Green Bay, Wis.
Scover. A. G., 148 S. 6th St.,

La Crosse, Wis.
Scoville, D.  W., Humboldt, la.
Scoville, Lizzie. Rockford,

Mich.

Scubbird. Mary, 607 Mack

Bldg.,.  Denver. Colo.
Seaborn, R. A., 336 Baynes

St., Buffalo. N. Y.
Seaman,  Dimon  R.,  8  Park  St.,

Cortland, N. Y.
Seaman, Geo. H., Garvey

Bldg., Utica. N. Y.
Sears, Chas., 740 West End

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Sears, Daniel. Mayo, Fla.
Searson, W. C, Ashland, Ky.
Seavy, Silas F.. 159 Berkeley

St.. Rochester. N. Y.
Sebolt, Elline M. E., Beaver

St.. Pittsburgh, Pa.
Seckler, C. A.. Manson, Ta.
See, Jno. D., Logan, Ta.
Seed, Susan T., 125 Cleveland

Ave., Canton, O.
Seeley, Arlington J., .')22 2nd

Ave., North Trov, N. Y.
Seeley & Reeves, 522 2nd

Ave., Troy, N. Y.
Seeley, Wm. A., Vinton, la.
Seeley,  Wm.  A.,  Perry,  la.
Seelman, Cornelius M., Conk-

lin, Mich.
Seflck, Jno. J., 76 Public

Square, Wilkes  Barre. Pa.
Segur, F. B., 712 Postal Tel.

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Seibert,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  367  Martin

St., Youngstown, O.
Seides,  N.  M., 235 W. 75th  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Seigrist,  C. C,  Downes,  Kans.
Selclk, John  J.. 36 W. Market

St.,  Wilkes  Barre,  Pa.
Sellen, George, York, Pa.


Sellen,  Geo.  V., 165 Evergreen

Ave., Woodbury, N. J.
.Sellenbutlcr, W. A.. Cliamois,

Mo.
Sellers. G. W., 1626 Pearl  St.,

.Toplin. Mo.
Sells. W. E.. 3919 Nevil St.,

Oakland, Cal.
Seltzer.  H. W., 1723  Sarah St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Sennott. N. J., 521 W. 152nd

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Sesley,  J. E., 103J N. Elm  St.,

Warren. O.
Seubold,  F.  H.,  17  N.  State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Seubold, F. H., 526 Brady St.,

Davenport, la.
Shadduck,  Ralph.  3841  Cottage

Grove Ave., Chicago, Til.
.Shafer, August, 63 E. Town

St., Columbus, O.
Shafferman, N. W., 719 11th

St. N. W., Washington,

D. C.
Shaller.  J.  M.,  1011  E.  17th  St.,

Denver, Colo.
Shaller, J. M., 616 Common-
wealth  Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Shaller, J. M., 314 Mercantile

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Shanahan, H. A.. Shanahan

Court, Grand Rapids, Mich.
Shanahan, R. E., Galion, O.
.Shannon,  Eleanor,  Kannerdell,

Pa.
Shannon, Eleanor, 23 11th

St.. Fianklin, Pa.
•Jhannon, Eleanor, 391 W.

Main  St.,  Brookville,  Pa.
Sharp, Mrs. Ida, 1125 W. 10th

St., Denver, Colo.
Sharp, J. B., Sault  Ste. Marie,

Canada.
Sharp, J. L.. Davenport, la.
Sharp, Omer L., 2001 W. 1st

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Sharp, Sarah Jane, Sault Ste.

Marie, Can.
.Shauers,  C.  L.,  Cambridge,

Nebr.
Shauers, Julius A., 2238

Farnum St., Omaha, Nebr.
Shaver,  B.  C,  Bryan,  O.
Shaver,  B.  C,  Charlotte,  Mich.
.Shaw, Allen B., 10605 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Shaw, E., 250 22nd Ave. E.,

Vancouver, British Colum-
bia.  Can.
Shaw, Ernest, 307 Lee Bldg.,

Vancouver, British Colum-
bia, Can.
Shaw, Herbert, Box  G..

Hurley, N. M.
Shaw, John, Eureka. Cal.
Shaw,  Jno.,  81-83  San  Joaquin

Bldg.. Stockton, Cal.
Shaw, John, Eureka, Cal.
Shaw, J. B., 200 Franklin St.,

Richmond, Va.
Shaw,'  J. G., Murray & Jone.s

Bldg., Modesto, Cal.
Shaw, J. G., 510 Chamber of

Commerce, Richmond, Va.
Shaw, L. L., 941 Vermont

Ave., Lawrence, Kans.
Shaw, O. L., 1443 W. 5th St.,

Muncie,  Ind.
Shaw, Robert V., 15 Morton

Place, Jersey  City, N. J.
Shea,  Gertrude,  V. R.. 286

Lafayette Ave., Hawthorne,

N. J.
Sheardown, Inez  A., 14 Lang-
don Crescent, Moose Jaw,

Sask., Can.


Sheedy, Mrs. M. L., 2445 N.

Halsted St.. Chicago, 111.
Sheehan, Dr. Edw. P., Marsh-
field  Center,  Mass.
Sheeler, Rex L., 512 3rd St.,

Wausau, Wis.
Sheering, Elizabeth, Cam-
bridge,  O.
Sheerie, E.,  Wheeling, W. Va.
Sheffler, Iv. A., 7 E. Jackson

St.,  Sullivan.  Ind.
Shegetero, Morikuba, 326

Skiles Bldg., Minneapolis,

Minn.
Shehy,  Josephine  M.,  Monte-
video,  Minn.
Sheldon, Bert L., Madison,

S. Dakota.
Sheldon. Rex B., South

Branch, Mich.
Sheldon, W. W.. Miller,

S. Dakota.
Shellenbarger,  J. A.. 306 E.

State St., Rockford, 111.
Sheltenback, T. E., 139 York

Ave.,  Paterson,  N.  J.
Shenton, A. W., 15th and

Poplar  Sts.,  Philadelphia,

Pa.
Shenton, A. W., 734 Real

Estate Trust Bldg., Phila-
delphia, Pa.
■Shepard  &  Shepard,  6200  Penn.

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Shepard, F. M., 113 E. 8th

Ave., Homestead, Pa.
Shepard, Geo., 627 Penn. St.,

Denver, Colo.
Shepard, Geo., Goshen, Ind.
shepard, W. P.. 652 Philadel-
phia St., Indiana, Pa.
Sheppard, Geo. E., 606

Southern Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Sheppard, Geo. T., 1003

Galveston Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Sheppard, Harry  H. F., 211

McKinley Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Sherden, Dr., Cairo, 111.
.Sherdown, Inez A., Moose

Jaw, Ont., Can.
Sherman, F. J., 886 Trumbull

Ave., Detroit,  Mich.
Sherman, Harriet K., 524

Plymouth Ave., Rochester,

N.  Y.
Sherman, Martyle L., Dover,

Okla.
Sherman. Ray, 524 Plvmouth

Ave., Rochester, N. Y.
Sherwood, Austin J., 22 3rd

Ave. S. E., Dauphin, Man-
chester, Can.
Shields, J. D.. 5405 Calumet

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Shields, Susan. 124 W. 55th

St., New York, N. Y.
Shields, Susan, 1777 B'wav,

New  York,  N.  Y.
^hiflet,  R.  J.,  Watervliet,  Mich.
Shimer,  C.  S., 35 Harper

Blk., Lima,  O.
Shine, Chas. E., 203 Ruff

Bldg., Hammond, Ind.
Shines, Chas., 5307 N. Clark

St., Chicago, 111.
Shipman, R. L., 734 Terri-
torial Ave., Benton Harbor,

Mich.
Shipp, J. D., Box 338, Yazoo

City,  Miss.
Shoemaker, Alma C, 22 Vick

Park  Blvd.,  Rochester.  N.  Y.
Shoemaker, C. E., 36 Colvin

St., Rochester, N. Y.


Cliiroprailors


Professional  /icgislrr


1121


Shoemaker, Franklin T.. 500

W.  64th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Shoemaker, Mrs. L. J., Dela-
ware County, Lansdowne,

Pa.
Shope, R. F., Clarion, la.
Short,  Thos.  J., 25 W. 42ncl

St., New York, N. Y.
Short,  Thos.  .T.,  8.51  Manhattan

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Shumate,  Mary  Ij.,  Holdredge,

Nebr.
Shumate, Mary L., Sebring:,

Fla.
Shupert, J. C, 201-4 Sawyers

Bldg.,  Miami,  Fla.
Shupert, J. C, Gary, Ind.
Shute, Furman R., 1516 Mt.

Vernon St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Shyne, Francis T., 30-31

Gardner Bldg-., Utica, N. Y.
Sible, Pearl, 212 W. 2nd St.,

Davenport, la.
Sibring, J. M., 623 Mercantile

Bldg-.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.
Sickert, Claribel, Blackfoot.

Idaho.
Sickles, E. H., 22 Chapman

St., Orang-e, N. J.
Sidwa, S., 7 Stagers St.,

Nutlfey,  N.  J.
Siegrist, O. E., Portis, Kans.
Sieley,  A. J., 522 Second  Ave.,

Troy, N. Y.
Siemer, L. F., 309 E. 47th St.,

Chicago, 111.
Siever, J. L., N. Main Street,

Mt. Pleasant, la.
Sifton, Nate, Over Thrasher's

Store, Frankfort, Ind.
Sigrist,  Cavolish, 7029  Soutli

Michigan Ave., Chicago,

111.
Sikora, F. M., 300 River St.,

Hoboken,  N.  J.
Simcox, Lawrence, 103 W.

Walnut Lane, Philadelphia,

Pa
Simrner,  L.  F., 309  E. 47th  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Simmons, Carrie M., Reading,

Okla.
Simmons, Carrie M., Cashion,

Okla.
Simmons, C. W., 1628 N. 18th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Simmons, F. H., 914 Highland

Road,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Simmons,  N.  J.,  Cashion,  Okla.
Simmons, W. P., 817 Haddon

Ave., Collingwood, N. J.
Simon, E. A., Hastings, Mich.
Simon,  H.  S.,  308-10  Green

Bldg., Johnstown, Pa.
Simon, Leo H., 524 Consoli-
dated Realty Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Simon, N. G., 647 Franklin

St., Johnston, Pa.
Simon, Sylvester, 60 B'way,

New York, N. Y.
Simpson, C. E., 722 South

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Simpson, C. E., 487 Ella St.,

Wilkin«burg, Pa.
Simpson,  E.  C,  Fayette,  Mo.
Simpson, Florence K., 379

Forest  Ave., Columbus, O.
Simpson, Maida, Muscatine,

la.
Simpson, Martha B., 148

Maple Ave., Montclair, N.  J.
Simpson, Raymond C, 115

Kentucky Ave., Washing-
ton, D. C.
Simpson, Rosalie, 1116 F St.

N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.


Simpson, Rosalie M., Wash-
ington  School of  Chiroprac-
tic, Boston, Mass.
Simpson, S.  G., 408  McGee  St.,

Winnipeg, Can.
Sims,  R.  S.,  Weyauwega,  Wis.
Sims, R. S., Ladysmith,  Wis.
Sims, R. S., 133 Weed Street,

Antigo,  Wis.
Sims, W. B., Grangeville,

Idaho.
Sinclair, Neil, Elk's Bldg.,

Santa Rosa, Cal.
Sinclair, Sarag C, 807 H St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Sinclair, Wilhelmine, 805 N.

Laird St., Oklahoma City,

Okla.
Sinclair, Wilhelmine, Britton,

Okla.
Singer,  O.  U.,  234  Park  Ave.,

Plainfield, N. J.
Singletardy, Dora, 1506 16th

St., Denver, Colo.
Sinmer, Louis, Portsmouth,

Ya..
Sipes,  R.  A.,  528  Wall  St.,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Sipple, J., 354 Lansing Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Sisley, Jennie E., 107 N. Elm

St., Warren, O.
Sisson, Guy, Gainsville, N. Y.
Sisson, J. H., Louisiana, Mo.
Sites, Benj. L., Suite 1, Chal-

fern  Bldg.,  Mansfield,  O.
Siveny,  Frank  Caesar  Miels

Bldg., Providence, R. I.
Siveny, Frank, 402 West-
minster  St., Providence,

R. L
Siveny, J. F.,

St.,  London,
Siver,  Maude,
Skeels, Russel

port, O.
Skeels, R. H., 521-22 German

Bank, Wheeling, W. Va.
Skeels, Russell H., 15J W.

Hight  St.,  Mount  Vernon,  O.
Skeels,  Russell  S.,  Moundsville.

W. Va.
Skeels, R.  H.,  Delaware, O.
Skidmore, May, 235 S. Poplar

St., Wichita, Kans.
Skidmore, W. J., Skidmore,

Mo.
Skinner,  Mrs.  B.  F.,  Peoria,

111.
Skinner  &  Skinner, 37  Market

St., Amsterdam, N. Y.
Slack,  Annette M., 1.^)15 Madi-
son  St., Denver, Colo.
Slack, Annette M., 1310 Wel-

ton St., Denver,  Colo.
Slack, Nettie, Mont Clair.

Colo.
Slater, Thos. C, 704  N. St..

Logansport, Ind.
Slater, Thos. C, 502^ B'way.

Logansport, Ind.
Slater, W. E., 410 Church St.,

Portland,  Ore.
Slater, Walter  E., 1162i Union

Ave., Portland, Ore.
Slawatycki, L. J., 986 Fill-
more Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Slawson, E. B., University

Place, Lincoln, Nebr.
Slayton,  Carlton,  La  Porte,

Ind.
Slayton, S.  M., La  Porte,  Ind.
Slider  &  Slider, lola, Kans.
Slife,  C.  A.,  Hawarden,  la.
Slifer, Chas. F., 6th and

Rockland Sts., Philadelphia.

Pa.
Slifer, C. Franklin, 5613

Germantown Ave.. Philadel-
phia,  Pa.


62 Washington
Conn.

Garfield, Nebr.
H., Bridge-


Sloane, Mrs. M. J. E., Capitol

Hill, Oklahoma City, Okla.
Slolan, Celia, 1658 Front St.,

San Diego, Cal.
Slottlemeyer, Mrs. Harriet,

566  W. 7th St., Des  Moines,

la.
Slough, H. S.,  Grove City, Pa.
Slykf, Clifford van, 1108 Re-
public  Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Small, Sherman M., Wapello,

la.
Smallfield, Aug. C, Arkansas

City, Kans.
Smaltz, Mr.s. Alice, 247  Wash-
ington St., Traverse City,

Mich.
Smart, D. M., 4200 Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Smellie, A. B., Box 85.

Eureka, 111.
Smellie, A. V., 615 "The

Grand," Atlanta, Ga.
Smiley, M. S., c/o Sherman

Annex, La  Junta, Colo.
Smiley, Mary S., 1415-16

Y.  W.  C.  A. Bldg., Riverside,

Cal.
Smith  &  Smith,  222  W.  Wayne

St., South Bend, Ind.
Smith & Smith, Guaranty

Bldg., Mishawka, Ind.
Smith & Smith, 206 S. Seneca

St., Ithaca, N. Y.
Smith & Smith, Indianola, la.
Smith, Dr., Cedar Rapids, la.
Smith, Alexander, 1851 West

Adams  St., Chicago,  111.
Smith, Annie, 71 Superior  St.,

Titusville, Pa.
Smith, A. F., 4124 Vincennes

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Smith, A. W., 554 Elmont

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Smith, B. K., 6th and Locust

Sts.,  Des  Moines,  la.
Smith, Mrs. Bush K., 933

16th St., Des Moines, la.
Smith, Chas. C, 306-7  Granite

Block, Watertown, S. Dak.
Smith, C. E.. 3124 Logan

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Smith,  Clarence  L.,  Elsart,

Ind.
Smith, C. R., 1433 Spruce St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Smith, C. R., Washington,

D.  C.
Smith, Donald, Midland, Ont..

Can.
Smith,  E.  A.,  54  Hendrie  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Smith, Earl B., No. 4, First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Colorado

Springs, Colo.
Smith, Etta, 819 Potomac

Ave.,  c/o  Mrs.  E.  F.  Buckley,

Buffalo. N. Y.
Smith, Etta  S.,  22  E.  Main  St.,

Le Roy. N. Y.
Smith, Mrs. E. N., Washing-
ton, D.  C.
Smith, Mrs. Frances B., 1537

Wright St., Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Smith. Frank C. 122 Bigelow

St..  Newark.  N.  J.
Smith, Fred., Onowa, la.
Smith, F. W., 1433 Spruce  St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Smith, F. W., 205i E. 2nd  St.,

Muscatine, la.
Smith, Geo., Seymour, Mo.
Smith. G. H., 206 N. Sterling

St.. Streator, 111.
Smith, G. H., 408 E. Main St.,

Streator, 111.
Smith,  Geo.  L.,  Streator,  111.


1122


Professional  Register


Cliiropractors


Smith, Geo. R., 711 Nafl

Realty Bldg-., Tacoma,

Wash.
Smith, Geo. W. B., AValla

Walla. Wash.
Smith, G. \V., Guthrie, la.
Smith, Helen. 1108 N. I.ee St..

Oklahoma City.  Okla.
Smith, H. J., 2418 N. Spauld-

in«-  St., Chioas-o. 111.
Smith. H. ,T., Indianola. la.
Smith, H. N., Canton, S. Dak.
Smith, Hiram, Snowlake,

Arizona.
Smith. Dr. Jas.. 134 Dupont

St., Toronto. Ont., Can.
Smith, .T. H., Garfield, Nebr.
Smith, ,T. H.. 208 W. (ith St.,

Grand Island,  Nebr.
Smith, J. J., 809 3rd St., Mil-
waukee.  M'is.
Smith, J. .T., 113 Washington

St.. Beaver  Dam, Wis.
Smith. J. W., Slater, Mo.
Smith,  J.  W.. Waukesha. Wis.
Smith. Laura M., Princeton,

111.
Smith,  Lillian  A.,  1426 Kellam

St., Los Ang-eles, Cal.
Smith, Lovina. P. O. Bldg.,

Oklahoma City, Okla.
Smith, I.,loyd F., Minneapolis,

Kans.
Smith,  Lloyd,  Cheiokee, la.
Smith, M. L., 4014 Washing-
ton Blvd., Chicag-o, 111.
Smith, M.  L., 112 4th Avenue.

St. Cloud, Minn.
Smith. L. D., 2 Dolan Bldg.,

Grand Island, Nebr.
Smith, Dr.  Milton  I^.  & Dr.

Myrtle  L.,  220  S.  State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Smith, Milton L., Suite 69,

39 W.  .Adams St., Chicago,

111.
Smith, Mrs. Minnie D., 1439

R St. N. W., Washington,

D.  C.
Smith,  Miss  N., 305 N. 5th St.,

Burlington, Wis.
Smith. Miss  N.. 305  N. 5th  St.,

Watertown, Wis.
Smith, Nelson, &02 Spreckles

Bldg., San Diego, Cal.
Smith, b. G., Chicago, 111.
Smith, Ruby, Anderson, Ind.
Smith, R. F., Standard School

of  Chiropractic  and  Naturo-
pathy, Davenport,  la.
Smith, Richard J., 295

Plymouth Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y.
Smith, R. O., Monroe, Wis.
Smith, R. O., 3416 4th St.,

Des Moines, la.
Smith,  S.  P.,  206  S.  Geneva  St.,

Ithaca, N. Y.
Smith, S. W., 205i E. 2nd St.,

Muscatine, Ifi.
Smith, T. C, Midland, Ont., ,

Can.  I

Smith, T. C, Collingwood,

Ont.,  Can.
Smith, Violet, 1024 Oakdale

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Smith, Virgil B.. Tampa, Fla.
Smith, W. D., 117 East Lin-
coln Way, Mishawaka, Ind.
Smith, Wm. E., 544 Elmwood

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Smith,  Mrs.  W.  A.,  805  Walker

Ave., Houston, Tex.
Smith, W. Dean, Bartlett

Bldg., .Topi in. Mo.
Smith, W. F., 702 Genessee

Ave., Saginaw, Mich.
Smith. W. F., 117 Franklin

St., Saginaw, Mich.


Snape & Snape, 1509 13th St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Suavely, C. M., I'lbana, Til.
Snell. Mark M., Navina, Okla.
Snodgrass, V. L., 401 North

T'enn.  A\o.,  Independence,

Kans.
Snow, M. J., 4637 N. Robev

St., Chicago, HI.
Snow, Raymond C. 10,316

Ostend Ave., or 10,308

Euclid  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Snyder, E. C, 301 Ewing

Bldg., Findlay, O.
Snyder, Harry, Commercial

Ave. and 92nd St., Chicago,

111.
Snyder, Ida  F., 323 Broad St.,

Waverly, N. Y.
Sofranec, .Tos., 113 Williams

Ave.,  Youngstown,  O.
Soger, Emma D., Ewing Blk.,

Findlav, O.
Solberg, A., Mitchell, S. Dak.
Sollars, G. W., 1501 Joplin

St., Joplin, Mo.
Somers,  Edith, 123 E.  Boulder

St., Colorado Springs, Colo.
Someis, Edith E., Reinbeck,

la.
Somers,  Sylvester,  1372  Merry-
man St., Marinette, Wis.
Somers & Somers, 123 E.

Boulder St., Colorado

Spiings, Colo.
Somers, S. B., Fraer, la.
Sommacal, J. F., Arnstein.

Ont., Can.
Sommers, Eliz. Preiss, 310 W.

Doty St., Madison, Wis.

R. F. D. No. 4, Box 21-a,

Madison, Wis.
Sones,  Mrs.  J. C, Toledo,  O.
Sones, J. C, Julietta, Idaho.
Sones, J. C, Stayton, Ore.
Sones, J.  C,  1602 Saginaw  St.,

Flint, Mich.
Sones, J. C, 111 2nd St.,

Moscow, Idaho.
Sones, J. C, 46 Broadway,

Toledo, O.
Sorenson, Jno., 313 Eltel

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Sorg,  Mrs.  Marie, Durango,

Colo.
Souchek, Wm., 146 S. Ave 18,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Souder, Albert, Clifton Forge,

Va.
Soiile,  E.  C,  Powlerville,  Mich.
Soules,  .1. S.,  Oshawa, Ont.,

Can.
Souter, J. W., Grinnell, la.
Southerland,  C.  B.,  I.,one  Tree,

la.
Spang, Bernard B., 29th and

Belmont  Sts., Portland,  Ore.
Spang, B. W., 1st and Ed-
wards Sts., Newburg, Colo.
Spangler, H., 638 E. 14th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Spath, Alfred, 118 W. Wash-
ington  St., Bloomington, 111.
Spear, Mrs. L. E., Guthrie,

Okla.
Spearing, Herman A., 1072

W. Ashley St., Jacksonville,

Fla.
Spegal, F. M., Bridley Bldg.,

Milton. Ore.
Speicher. W. N., 1343 Wright

St.. Los Angeles, Cal.
Speith, Perry A., 353 W. 8th

St., Elyria, O.
Spencer, F. M., 116 W. Long

Ave., Dubois, Pa.
Sperbeck,  H.  C,  R.  F.  D.  No.  3,

Summerville, N. .1.
Sperbeck, H. C, Sunbury,

Pa.


Spill, W. E., Perrysville  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Spitler,  Harry R.,  Union Cftv,

Ind.
Spitler, H. R., Brookville, O.
Spitler,  Harry  R.,  Spitler

Sanitarium, Crab Oichard.

Ky.
Spitler, H. Riley, 10 Stotler

Bldg., Eaton, O.
Spoon, Nannie, Luray, Kans.
Springer, Alton J., Crooks-

ville, O.
Springer,  A.  L.,  Crooksville,  O.
Springer, G. L., 152 North

Marengo Ave., Pasadena,

Cal.
Sproviero, Patrick, 268-70 At-
lantic St., Stamford, Conn.
Spryszynski,  S.  M.,  222  Stanis-
laus St.,  Buffalo,  N. V.
Squiers, Mabel A., 2119

Ashland Ave., Toledo, O.
Squire, Mable, Cary, O.
Stacy, J. W., The Chateau,

Springfield, Mass.
Staehler, F. C, 154 Kingsland

Ave., Corona, I^ong Island,

; N.  Y.

Stahl, Frank J., 1264 Lexing-
ton Ave., New  York,  N. Y.
Stahl,  G. W.. 102 Main Street,

Council Bluffs, la.
Staines, P. S., West Point,

Miss.
Staines, Robt. W.. Aberdeen,

Miss.
Staman, Mrs. B. A., Delmar,

la.
Stanley, A. E., Exchange

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Stanley, Alta, Melchor, la.
Starbeck, C. E., 607 Grove-
land Paik, Chicago, 111.
Starkey, T. S., Holland Bldg.,

Hobart, Okla.
I  Stark, Gertrude, 406 Ever-
green  Ave., Bi'ooklyn, N. V.
Starks, Frances,  Mullett

Lake, Mich.
State, J. B., 629 Central Ave.,

Faribault, Minn.
States & States, Blair, Nebr.
State,  J. B.,  Wells,  Minn.
Stauffer. C. E., 651 Washing-
' ton St., Tiffin,  O.
;  Stayton,  Carlton, La  Porte,

Ind.
!  St.  Clair  &  Helfrich,  216-18  F.

P. Fay Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
St. Clair,  Harry, 1012  W. Pico

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
St. Clair, Harry, 218 Fay

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Stebbins. T. J., Waco St.,

Wichita, Kans.
Stebbins,  J.  I^dw.,  Agra,  Kans.
Steel-Brooke, Louise H., Box

263,  Sheridan,  Wis.
Steele, James, 403-6 Metcalfe

Bldg., Auburn, N. Y.
Stehle, C. H., 123 S. Main St.,

Butler, Pa.
Stein, Aaron, 1226 Boston

Road,  New York, N. Y.
Stein, Herbert. 235 W. 103rd

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Stein. Herbert. 140 W. 42nd

St., New York, N. Y.
Stein, R. I., 831 Monroe Ave...

Scranton, Pa.
Steinburg, Paul, Midland

Ave., Syracuse, N. Y.
Steiner, O. R., 230 Akron

Savings  and  T^oan  Co.  Bldg.,

Akron, O.


Chiropractors


Professional  liegistrr


1123


Stephenson, I^eah M., 102.') E.

Jefferson Ave., Detroit,

Mich.
Stephens,  Francis,  293  Park

Ave.,  Bradford,  Ont.,  Can.
Stern, H., Davenport, la.
Stern, Harry, 9.52 B'way,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Stern, Harry, 6 Stuyvp.sant

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Sternberg-, Paul, .^Ifi-IT S. A.

K.  Bldg:.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Sterner,  M. G., 281  Nafl Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Stertzbach, C. S., Box 83,

Mechanicsville, la.
Steurk, A. K., Y. M. C. A.

Block,  53  Court St..  Auburn,

Me.
Stevens, Arthur D., Aughton

Road, Birkdale, Southport,

Eng-land.
Stevens, B. E., 304 W. Han-
cock  Ave., Detroit,  Mich.
Stevens, B. E., 50 Volpey

Bldg-., Detroit, Mich.
Stevens,  Bertram  E.,  Trangott

Schmidt Bldg., 213 Wood-

■ward Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Stevens, E. S., 19(54 N. Bron-

son St., Hollywood, Cal.
Stevenson, Eliz. M., 31 Bay-
view Ave., Jersey City,

N. J.
Stevenson, G., 1715 California

St., Denver, Colo.
Stevens, S., 5th St., Middle-
town, Ind.
Steward,  C.  E.,  Gotwald  Bldg.,

Springfield, O.
Stewart, Chas., 4602 Frank-
ford Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Stewart, Frank, 206 Clair

Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Stewart, Frank P., 206 Clare-

mont  Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Stewart, J. H., McKinnville,

Ore.
Stewart, John R., Solomon,

Kans.
Stewart, Robt., 6553 Langley

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Stewart,  W.  S.,  Stevens  Point,

Wis.
Stickles, Albeit, Sangas, Cal.
Stiers,  Wm. W., Cadiz, O.
Stiles, W. E., 1440 Broadway,

Oakland, Cal.
Stockfleld,  I.  H.  A.,  Fremont,

Nebr.
Stockton, Dr., Green-wood,

Ark.
Stockton, Minnie B., Sabula,

la.
Stockton, J. W., 515 N.

Douglas  St.,  Oklahoma  City,

Okla.
Stockton, "W. I., New Albanv.

Ind.
Stockwell, Chas. H., 103

Temple Blk., Los Ang-eles,

Cal.
Stoddard, Bertha, Neil Ave..

Columbus, O.
Stoddard, Geo.  J.,  307  Howard

St., Detroit, Mich.
Stoever, Harry, 5426 Walnut

St., Philadelphia. Pa.
St. Ongey, D. J., Seattle,

Wash.
Stoll, Wm. E., Arcade Annex,

Seattle, Wash.
Stone,  C.  M.,  Reinbeck,  la.
Stone,  C.  M.,  General  Delivery,

Marion, la.
Stone, C. M., 146 N. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Stone, E. W., 280 Rietimond

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.


Stone, Francis M., Akron, O.
Stone, Harry S., Nat'l Bank

Bldg., Salem, Ore.
Stone,  H.  S.,  1633J E. 13th  St.,

Sellwood, Ore.
Stone, Dr. J. M., Central

Office Bldg-., San Antonio,

Tex.
Stone, .T. M., Box 935,

Phoenix, Ariz.
Stone, Jno. N., 68 Hudson St.,

Hoboken, N. J.
Stone, J.  N.,  Central Offlce

Bldg.. San Antonio. Tox.
Stone, Leslie R.. 121.'. Rliodo

Island  Ave.  N.  W..  \\'a.shing-

ton, D.  C.
St. Onge, D. J., 707-;t Eiler

Music Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
St. Onge,  Rufus  H., 826  Deary

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Stoppe,  Hanne  M., Amery,

Wis.
Stoppe, H. M.  & W., St. Paul,

Minn.
Stoppe, W. W., 301 Dowry  .

Annex, St.  Paul.  Minn.
Storer,  Dyle  M., 117  AVashing-

ton St., Watertown. N. Y.
Story,  Thos.  H.,  1503 Reid St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Stout, Elmer S., Arapaho,

Okla.
Stout, Stella  M., 408 Kennedy

Bldg-., Ft. Smith, Ark.
Stout,  Lora  K.,  Yore  Building-,

Benton Harbor, Mich.
Stowe, H. E., 243 Lake St.,

Elmira, N. Y.
Stowe, H. F., 243 Lake St.,

Elmira, N. Y.
Strahl,  G.  B.,  Middleton,  O.
Strain,  Philip  S.  J.,  560  Forest

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Strain,  Philip  S.  J..  560  Forest

Ave., Bellevue, Pa.
Strand, Chas. E., 1014^ Pine

St., Seattle, AVash.
Strand, Glen, 252 Meniman

Blk.. Council Bluffs, la.
Strand, Glen S... 350 Temple

St., Minneapolis, Minn.
Strand, J., 447 Arcade Bldg.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Strand, Jos. H., Ayrshire, la.
Sti-and.  Joe.  Thief  River  Falls,

Minn.
Strand, O. F., 2445 Lyndale

Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Strand, Paul, 501-2 Dollar

Bank Bldg., Springfield, O.
Straub. Maurice. 113 Madison

St., Tiffin, O.
Strausbaugh. N. W., 720 15th

St. S. E., Washington, D. C.
Strawn, A. E., 1604 Jackson

St., Amarillo,  Tex.
Strayer,  H.  R.,  226  Strayer  St.,

Johnstown, Pa.
Stravei', W. A., Berkeley

Hotel, Long Beach, Cal.
Strayer, Wm.. Nampa, Idaho.
Streb,  J.  H.,  Federal  Bank

Bldg., Youngstown, O.
Strehl, G, B., Middletown, O.
Strehl,, J. B., Petoskey, Mich.
Stretch, Edw. K., 617 Trap-

hagen St., West Hoboken,

N. J.
Stringer, Grover L., Abing-
don, Va.
String-er, Jno. D., Drummond,

Okla.
Stringer, Mary S., Green

Cove,  Va.
Stringer, Mary S., Abingdon,

Va.
Strobel, F. A., P. O. Box 414,

Thomasville,  Ga.


Strobel,  Richard, 3702  Hudson

Blvd., Jersey  City, N. J.
Strobel, Albin, 520 Paterson

Plank  Road, Jersey  City,

N. J.  •

Strock, W. F., 225 Cleveland

Ave., or 306 Portland Ave.,^

Canton, O.
Strond, Ida E., 501 Dollar

Bank  Bldg-.,  Youngstown,  O.
Strond. P.  H.. 5ril Dollnr

Bank Bldg., Youngstown,  O.
Strong & Strong, 210 Otis

Bldg., Akron, O.
Strouse, Ethel, Kalamazoo,

Mich.
Strouse, E. J., 607  Hanselman

Bldg., Kalamazoo, Mich.
Struck, Joseph F., 2312 Iowa

St., Chicago, 111.
Stuart, Charles, 4602 Frank-
ford Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Stucker, Howard, Shawnee,

Okla.
Stucker, Howard, Holdenville,

Okla.
Sucholtz, R. E., 522 Ave C,

San Antonio. Tex.
Sucholtz, R. E., San Antonio,

Tex.
Sullivan,  Eugene,  29  W.  1st  St.

Davton, O.
Sullivan, F. P.,  Naugatuck,

Conn.
Sullivan, P. F., 49 Water St.,

Terrington, Conn.
Sullivan,  R. K., Wausau,  AVis.
Sullivan,  Rebecca  E.,  20  Kear-
ney Ave., Jersey City, N. .1.
Sullivan, Mary J., 570 Pacific

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Sullivan, Sylvin, Brady, Nebr.
Summer, Frank H., Poits-

mouth, Va.
Summerville, A. AV., Benton

Harbor, Mich.
Summons,  Carrie  M., Reeding,

Okla.
Sunstead. O. H., Guaranty

Bldg., Butler, Pa.
Supler, A. J., 1161 AA^ Grand

Ave., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Sutherland.  Jno.  AA\,  3857  18th

St., San Francisco, Cal.
Sutherland, AA". H.. 3363 Sha-w

St., Charlotte, Mich.
Sutton, N. M., Concordia,

Kans.
Sutton, W. R., Minden. Nebr.
Sutton, AV. R., Mt. Pleasant,

Tenn.
Svenson,  Albert  E.,  327  Locust

St., Hudson, AA^is.
Swaltz, Alice, Traverse City,

Mich.
Swain, Alfred  L., 77  AA'ee-

quahie Ave.. New^ark, N. J.
Swan, S. Howard, Rea Block,

Corvdon, la.
Swan.  AA'ni.  A..  Central  Bldg..

Kansas City, Mo.
Swann, Ella, Traverse City,

Mich.
Swanson & Swanson, Drs.,

710 George St., Norristown,

Pa.
Swanson,  Ralph.  Creston,  la.
Swanson.  AV.  L..  Caradine

Bldg., Monroe, AA'is.
Swanson,  R.  A.,  156  N.  Cherry

St.. Galesburg, 111.
Swarthout,  H.  C,  260  AA".  State

St., AA'ellsville. N. T.
Swartout, H. C, Canisteo,

N. Y.
Swearingen, Pearl, 14 Canopy

Bldg., Muncie, Ind.
Swearing-en, Pearl, 601 Ger-
man Bank Bld&., Wheeling..

AV.  A'a.


1124


Professional  Rcffistcr


Cliirnpraclors


Sweet. F. T., 30-31 Lyman
Blk., Muskegon, Mich.

Sweet,  Ralph  C,  214  W.  Main
St., Battle Creek, Mich.

Swem, D. D'., 607 Webster
Bldg., Chicag-o. 111.

§wem,  Guy,  401  J.  M.  S.  Bldg.,
South  Bend,  Ind.

Swenson,  Gustaf,  322  Lilly
Ave., West Liberty, Pitts-
burgh,  Pa.

Swift, Ellen  G., 292 Park
Ave., Bradford, Ont., Can.

Swift, E. H., Milan, Mo.

Symons,  W.  V.,  807  Mercan-
tile Library  Bldg.,  Cincin-
nati, O.

Taber  &  Taber, Drs., 305 J
Jefferson St., Portland, Ore.

Tait, Beulah Long, Joplin,
Mo.

Tangeman,  Harvey  W.,  Box
60, Iowa Falls, la.

Tanner,  O.  J..  8234  Frankford
Ave., Holmesburg, Pa.

Tanner, O. J., 5910 Wayne
Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.

Tanner, S. W., Supply, Okla.

Tappan, Harry G., 26

Osbourne St., Bloomfleld,
N. J.

Tarbell,  H.  E.,  1515  W.  Monroe
St., Chicago, 111.

Tarr, Delford, Cropsey, Ind.

Tate, Philip, 210-11 Grand
Valley Bank Bldg., Grand
Junction, Colo.

Taylor, Andrew, San Fran-
CISCO CelI

Taylor,'  A.  A.,  Smith  Building,
Hudson Ave., Newark, O.

Taylor,  C.  B.,  H9|  Washing-
ton  St., Tiffin, O.

Taylor, Ella J., Box 253,
Sanger, Cal.

Taylor,  E.  J.,  Box  312,  Tomah.
Wis.

Taylor, Harry, Nevinville, la.

Taylor,  Nellie,  119|  Washing-
ton  St., Tiffin, O.

Taylor  &  Taylor,  IWh  South
Washington Ave., Tiffin, O.

Teckner,  I.  L.,  202  Columbia
Bldg., Portland, Ore.

Teem, D. B., Hugo, Okla.

Teem, David B., Clande, Tex.

Teetern, D. W., Forney,
Idaho.

Telford,  S.  P.,  729J  2nd  St.,  Ft.
Madison, la.

Teigan,  Edward,  4344  North
Winchester  Ave.,  Chicago,
111.

Telgen, Edward, Antelope,
Mont.

Tennies,  Helen  Bettie,  Sparta,
Wis.

Tennsley,  L.,  2016  Valley  St.,
Omaha,  Nebr.

Te  Poorten,  B.  A.,  68  E.  Main
St., Newark, O.

Terp,  J.  A.,  221  N.  Washing-
ton St.,  Green  Bay,  Wis.

Terp,  Jesse  A.,  407  Minahan
Bldg.,  Green  Bay,  Wis.

Terry,  Bessie,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Terry,  Frederick  C  35  Sfher-
merhorn  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Terrill, I. W., Elk City, Okla.

Terry, .1. Y., Nampa, Idaho.

Terry,  J.  Y.,  829  Jackson  St.,
Oakland, Cal.

Terry,  Lottie  S.,  Watertown,
S. Dakota.

Terry,  Lottie  S.,  805  N.  Court
St., Rockford, 111.

Teuteberg,  I.  J.,  198  27th  St.,
Milwaukee,  Wis.

Thayer,  Odessa  H.,  307  Fein-
wall  Bldg.,  Spokane,  Wash.


Thaxton, E. E., Raton, N. M.
Thedger, F. M.,  No. 7 Wesley

Blk., Adrian, Mich.
Thee, Wm., 3127  Gloss  Ave.,

Cincinnati, O.
Theurer, .!., Breckenridge,

Minn.
Thiessen & Thiessen, Drs.,

Carroll, la.
Thiessen, Mrs. R. J., Carroll.

la.
Thissen, R. .!., Eagle  Grove,

la.
Thomas, A. L., 4424 Indiana

Ave., Chicago. 111.
Thomas,  Alice  R., 2299 Seneca

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Thomas, Archie C, 2299

Seneca  St., Buffalo,  N. Y.
Thomas, Arthur, Turnbull.

Pla.
Thomas, Arthur W., 1440

Glenarm Place, Denver,

Colo.
Thomas, C. A., Coleman, Tex.
Thomas, C. A.,  L. K. Box 624,

Knightstown, Ind.
Thomas, F. A., 1308 Glenarm

Place, Denver, Colo.
Thomas, Francis, Clear Lake,

la.
Thomas,  Flora  V.,  704  Walnut

St., Terre Haute, Ind.
Thomas, James  A., 301 Vene-
tian Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Thomas, Lillian, 509J N. 2nd

St.,  Barberton,  O.
Thomas, M., 704 Walnut St.,

Terre Haute, Ind.
Thomas,  M. & F. V., 201-2

Odd Fellows  Bldg.,  Terre

Haute, Ind.
Thomas, Robert M., 3-4

Winklespeck Bldg., Brazil,

Ind.
Thomas, W. Arthur, 14

Glenarm PI., Denver, Colo.
Thomas, W. J., 405 Crescent

Ave., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Thompson & Thompson, Drs.,

Covina, Cal.
Thompson & Thompson, Drs.,

Downey, Cal.
Thompson & Thompson, Drs.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Thompson  &  Thompson,  Wey-

burn, Sask.,  Can.
Thompson, A. M., Anaheim,

Cal.
Thompson, Daisy, Elvira

Bldg., Columbia,  Mo.
Thompson, Etta L., 11,086

2nd  St.,  Chicago, 111.
Thompson,  Geo.  W.,  Ripley,

N. Y.
Thompson, L., Woodward,

Okla.
Thompson, L. C, Protection,

Kans.
Thompson,  L.  E.,  621  Prender-

grast  Ave.,  .Tame.stown.  N.  Y.
Thompson, L. E., 51 Broad

St., Salamanca, N. Y.
Thompson,  M. M., 8-9 Kokomo

Trust Co., New Building,

Kokomo,  Ind.
Thompson, O. A., Covina, Cal.
Thompson,  O. A., Arkansas

City, Kans.
Thompson, O. A., 311 Bitting

Bldg., Wichita, Kans.
Thompson, S. T., 851 E. 40th

St., Chicago, 111.
Thompson, T. F., Merchants'

Bank Bldg., Jefferson City,

Mo.
Thompson, T. J., 503 Hill

Ave., Elgin, 111.
Thompson, T. F., Elvira

Bldg., Columbia, Mo.


Thompson, W. A., 3-4 Wilson

Blk., Marion,  Ind.
Thompson, W. A., 406 Marion

Blk., Marion, Ind.
Thompson, Wm. H., 813 x'2th

St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Thompson, Wm. P., Fairmont

Hotel, San Francisco, Cal.
Thomsen, Dr., 4th Floor

Evanston Bldg"., Minne-
apolis, Minn.
Thomson,  Fulton,  Kv.
Thomson, T. E., Elvira Bldg.,

Columbia, Mo.
Thoreson, Anna O., Philips

Art Bldg., Red Wing, Minn.
Thoreson, John, Box 5,

Glenwood, Minn.
Thoreson, Helena, Lake  Mills,

la.
Thoreson, Frank M., 25 E.

Grand  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Thoreson  &  Thoreson,  Box  463,

Lake  Mills,  la.
Thorn, Henry, Room 201,

1012 Baltimore Ave.,

Kansas  City, Mo.
Thorn, Howard, 1012 Balti-
more  Ave., Kansas City,

Mo.
Thornble, T. C, Lynch, Nebr.
Thornbley & Thornbley,

Rainge Bldg., Omaha, Nebr.
Thornley, J., Bank of San

Jose Bldg., San Jose, Cal.
Thornton,  Fred.  W.,  18  Teresa

Place,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Thorp, Hugh, 211 Seymour

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Thrailkill, W. L., Blackwell,

Okla.
Thub, Edwin, 2120 North

Clark  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Tibeaes, Florence, Sterling,

Kans.
Tierman, Albert S., 322  Mason

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Tillatson, Gladys, Cascade

Springs, S. Dakota.
Timbers,  R.  S.,  Henry,  Nebr.
Timm, Richard, Hindsdale,

Mont.
Timmons, Ernest, Village,

Ark.
Timpe, Dr. F. R., Box 165,

Maquoketa, la.
Tinsdale, H., 214 Security

Blk., Grand Forks, N. Dak.
Tinsley, C. R.. 221 Pacific

Ave.,  Long  Beach,  Cal.
Tinsley,  C. R.,  Indio,  Cal.
Tinsley, Minnie L., Indio, Cal.
Tinsley,  Minnie  L., 221  Pacific

Ave., Long Beach, Cal.
Tippett, Henry W., 1004 East

Capitol St., Washington,

D.  C.
Tittatson, Gladys, Cascade

Springs, S. D.
Titterington,  Frank  L.,  620  W.

3rd St., Davenport, la.
Titterington, T. W., Marion,

Ind.
Titus, Mary W., 7 Washing-
ton St., Bradford, Pa.
Tjernagel, G. A., Story City,

la.
Tobey, H.  C, 800-34 Brady

St., Davenport, la.
Tobin,  J.,  4876  Armitage  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Todd,  G.  F.,  11  Keene  Bldg-.,

9  E.  Utica  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Todd, G. F., Swartz  Creek,

Mich.
Tolputt,  Anna  T.,  516  Federal

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Tomlinson, G. R., 4025 Sheri-
dan Road,  Chicago,  111.


Chiropraclors


Profess / o nal  li cf/is trr


1125


Toms, Francis E., 122 W. 3rd

St., Muscatine, la.
Toms, Francis, 122  W.  3rd  St.,

Muscatine, la.
Torrence,  G. W., 23 W.  Mont-

g'omery  Ave, Pittsburgrh,

Pa
Toskey, C. M., 239 1st St.,

Hinsdale, Til.
Toskey,  C.  M.,  4548  Lake  Park

Ave., Chicagro, 111.
Toskev, C. M., 1204 E. 47th

St., Chicago, 111.
Toskey,  C.  M., Antig-o,  Wis.
Toskey,  Chester  M.,  1204  E.

47th  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Toskey,  C.  M., 3166  Lincoln

Ave., Chicag-o, 111.
Toskey, Paul J.. West Salem,

111.
Tonn, W. T., Sioux Center,

la.
Tovey, Miss Verona, 635 S.

Flower  St.,  "Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Tracy & Tracy, Trenton, Mo.
Tracey,  C.  H.,  Cheltenham,  Pa.
Tracy, D. S., Trenton Trust

Bldg., Trenton, Mo.
Tracy, Mrs. J. L., Trenton

Trust  Bldg.,  Trenton,  Mo.
Tradsham, F. B.. 718 W. 63rd

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Traimis, K. G., 3301 S. Hal-
stead St., Chicago, 111.
Tramm, Geo. A., Hall and

Lewis  Block,  Meridan,  Conn.
Treat, A. R., Antigo, Wis.
Trego, John W., Columbus, O.
Trenary, J. M.. Arvada, Colo.
Trenary, J. M., 1757 Welton

St., Denver, Colo.
Trenary,  J.  M., 110  McLeon

Bldg., Kewanee, 111.
Trenary, M., Arvada, Colo.
Treseder, F. W., 4533 Wilton

Place, Los Angeles, Cal.
Trestler, E. B., 7-8 Javcox

Bldg., Walla  Walla, Wash.
Tretheway, Florence V., 2819

Broad St. N., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Trewin, S., Dewey, Okla.
Tritt,  H.  P.,  Pasadena,  Cal.
Troester, Otto, Hampton,

Nebr.
Trosper, Minnie L., Chelsea,

Okla.
Trott, Elze D., 422 Greenfield

Ave., Canton, O.
Trotter,  Eldon  A.,  Mt.  Ayr,  la.
Trotter, Frank, Devine, Tex.
Trouten,  M.  G.,.  404  Pittsburgh

Savings Bank Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa.
Trouten, Dr. Mae G., 1307 E.

33rd St., Kansas City, Mo.
Trouton, Mae G., Clearfield,

Pa.
Truitt, A. Harold, Lancaster,

Wis.
Truitt, W. T., 896 Summit

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Truxell  & Truxell, Suite 4,

Union Blk., Thief River

Falls, Minn.
Tuccio, Cajetan, 111 Hudson

St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Tucker & Tucker, 906 22nd

Ave., San Diego, Cal.
Tucker, E. J., 1875 Glenwood

Ave., Youngstown, O.
Tucker,  E.  J.,  80  Grand  St.,

New^burgh, N. Y.
Tucker,  E.  J.,  35  Ford  St.,

Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.
Tucker, W. R.. 906 22nd St..

San Diego, Cal.
Tupper,  G.  AV.,  Kittanning,  Pa.


Turk,  J.  E., 1102  W. Main St.,

Enid,  Okla.
Turner, Dan, 405J Ave C,

Lawton, Okla.
Turner, Effle, Lawton. f)kia.
Turner, Everett .!., Eldorado

Springs,  Mo.
Turner, M. F., 110 W. Cherry

St., Walla  Walla,  Wash.
Turner, F. H., 597 S.  lona  St.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.
Turner, Grover G., Franklin,

Pa.
Turner,  H. F.,  Murray, la.
Turner,  H.  F.,  Hillinger  &

Larimer Blk., Chariton, la.
Turner, Jane, 1416 16th St.,

Denver, Colo.
Turner,  Melvin, 427 E. Cherrv

St.,  Walla  Walla,  Wash.
Tyree, Julia A., Mulvane,

Kans.
Uez,  Gustave,  596  Clinton  Ave..

West  Hoboken, N. J.
Ulam,  W.  W.,  Van  Wert.  O.
Ulrich & Ulrich, 160 Wash-
ington St.,  Beaver  Dam,

Wis.
Llnderlander, J.  L., 3315 S.

Oakley  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Unzen, Henry, Minnesota,

Minn.
Upham, Lawrence W., W.

Main  St.,  Shelby,  O.
[Jrschel, Geo. C, 2421 Pierson

Ave., Indianapolis, Ind.
Vaden, W. F., 202 W. 5th St.,

Hutchinson, Kans.
Vahle, Wm. G., Coffeyville,

Kans.
Vail, R.  O.,  204  W. Scribner

St.,  Dubois, Pa.
Valentine, Geo. M., 32 B'way,

Rochester, N. Y.
Valentine, G. M., 1430 Linden

Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Van  Antwerp  &  Van  Antwerp,

Drs., St. Johns Bldg., Cor.

S. Main and Mapel Sts.,

Rocky Ford, Colo.
Van Bushkirk, Viola. 12  J S.

Barstow St., Eau Claire,

Wis.
Van Corst, Bertha, 46 E.

Montcalm St., Detroit,

Mich.
Van  den  Berg, 1303 N  St.,

Washington,  D.  C.
Vander  Heck,  J., 4th Street,

Clarksburg.  W.  "\'a.
Vandergriff, J. R., Locknev,

Tex.
Vandergriff. J. R., 218 Texas

State  Bank  Bldg.,  Ft.  Worth,

Tex.
Vandergriff,  J. R.,  Delters,

Ark.
Vandervoort, John H., 825 E.

Duval St., Jacksonville. Fla.
Van  Duser,  A.  B.,  c/o  E. J.

Van Duser, Kendiaia, N. Y.
Van  De  Schoeppe  and  \'an  De

Schoeppe.  527  Edeson  St.,

Antigo, Wis.
Vandeventer, Lew, Loveland,

Colo.
Vandoern, H.. 565 Madison

Ave.,  Elizabeth.  N. J.
Van Gelder, J. B.. Inglewood.

Cal.
Van  Hise.  Ralph.  857  North

Sacramento Blvd., Chicago,

111.
Van  Horn,  Mrs.  M.  P.,  Coal

City, Ind.
Van  Houten,  John  R.,  156

Virginia Ave., Jersey City,

N. J.
Van Kolken, F. D., Moose

Jaw, Ont.. Can.


Van Schoonhoven, O. L.,

I<ockney,  Tex.
.'an  Schuonhover,  Manacas,

S. C, Cuba.
V^an Tilburg & Van Tilburgr,

427-28 Occidental Bldg.,

Indianapolis, Ind.
V^arney, Edgar D., 46W)

Boardwalk, Wildwood. .V. J.
V^arsey,  Geo.  E.,  612  Court  St.,

Fremont, O.
V'arsey. G. E., 12 Cherry St.,

Grand Rapid.s, Mich.
Varsey, Geo. W.. 612 Court

St., Fremont, O.
Vasselin, W. J., Blossburg,

Pa.
/atteredt,  J.  A.,  Vandal ia.  Mo.
Vaughan, Walter  L., 206 "U'.

106th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Vavruska.  Wm., 904  E.  Water

St., Austin, Minn.
V^avruska, Wm.. 227 E. 3rd

St., Winona, Minn.
VsLWter, W. H., 421 Main St.,

West  Side,  Lafayette,  Ind.
Redder, H. F., 828 Brady St.,

Davenport.  Ia.
Verden,  C. W., 422  First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg., Long  Beach,

Cal.
Vermilion, J. B., 6th  and C

Sts.,  San  Diego, Cal.
Verner, Robinson, 425 12th

St., West New York, N. J.
Vest, L. L., 1513 Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Vethersole, A., 164 Palisade

Ave., Garfield, N. J.
Vetter,  Harry,  124  W.  90th  St.,

New  York.  N.  Y.
Vetter, L. J.. 321 S. Ciceio

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Veyet.  Leo.  J..  Sault  Ste.

Marie, Mich.

Via,  Hugh  S.,  503  W.  Main  St.,

Charlottsville.  Va.
Vickstrom, Alfred. 26th and

Princeton Sts., Chicago, 111.
Victor, Carl, 6017  Penna  Ave.,

Pittsburgh. Pa.
Victory, Andrew. 498 Broad

St., Elizabeth, N. J.
Viersen,  P.  A.. 607  "W^ebster

Bldg., Chicago. 111.
Villeneauve. F. E., 109 Foun-
tain  St.. Syracuse, N. Y.
Vincent,  .lennie  C,  Argonia.

Kans.
Violette. Mrs. S. N., Hotel

Oxford. Boston, Mass.
Visser, P. J., Conneaut. O.
Visser, Peter J.. Hippodrome

Arcade Bldg.. Youngs-
town. O.
Viz,  Hugh  D.. 503  W.  Main

St., Charlotteville,  Va.
Vliet, Chester  B., 47  W. State

St., Trenton. N. J.
Vogel, Walter. N. 3rd Street,

Marshalltown. Ia.
Vogel,  "W.  B..  Reinbeck,  la.
Vogel, Wm. J.. 203 Fisher

Bldg.. Waterloo. Ia.
Vogt,  H.  C. 49 Ocean  Place,

Long Beach. Cal.
Vogt, H. C. Aurora, Nebr.
Vogt, H. C. 8-9 Lahr Bldg-.,

St. Cloud, Minn.
Vogt. J. AV. J.. David City,

Nebr.
Volchman,  C,  40  Zobruhis

St., Jersey Citv. X. J.
Void, O. A., 8 N. State St.,

Chicago, 111.
Volen, G. A., 1556 3rd Street,

San Diego, Cal.


112C


Professional  licgistcr


Chiropraclor.t


Volg-man, Frank. 1542 West

Adams St., Chicagro, 111.
VolR-man, F. C, 214 Wiscon-
sin St., Kenosha. Wis.
Voltaire. Jos.. 1139 N. State

St.. Chicag-o, 111.
Volz, C. C. 1417 Iowa Street,

Davenport, la.
Volz, Joseph A., fil Madison

St., New Britain, Conn.
Von Dresky, Davenno t. la.
Voorheis, A. H., 509 Seymour

St., Syracuse, N. Y.
Vose,  F.  G.,  Machias.  Me.
Vreeland, W. H.. 211 I.ovvry

Annex. St. Paul, Minn.
Waelti, Christ. 528 Garfield

Ave.,  ChicaK-o, IM.
Wadsvvorth, L. V.. Abilene,

Kans.
Waffle, W. Clyde, 809 Denny

Bldg-.,  Walla  Walla,  Wash.
Wagner,  A.  A.,  A'ineland,  N.  J.
Wagner, Amelia, Crescent

City. Fla.
Wagner, Anna, 510-11 Meisel

Bldg., Port Huion, Mich.
Wagner, A. R., Tampa, Fla.
W^agner,  A. R.,  433  Broadway,

Camden,  N.  J.
Wagner, E. R., 2029 Farnum

St.,  Davenport,  ]m.
Wagner, Henry, 57 W. Dela-
ware  Ave., Chicago, 111.
Wagner, Lucetta, 249 Kings-
land  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N. Y.
Wahl, Adolph F., 942 Savoye

St.,  North  Bergen,  N.  J.
Wahlenmaier  & Wahlenmaier,

Phoenix, Ariz.
Wait, S. D., Alva, la.
Wait, S. D.,  Albia, la.
Waite, Wendell D., HiO'i W.

Broadway,  Oklahoma  City,

Okla.
Waite, E. R.. 2901 "Washing-
Waite,  S; D.,  Eldon,  la.

ton Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Waite,  Wendell  D., Marseilles,

111.
Walberg, Geneva O., Eagle

Rock and Oak Grove Ave.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Walburn, F. S., 210 W. Jeffer-
son St.,  Ft.  Wavn<-.  Tnd.
Walker, Anna I.., 1109 South

Ervay St., Dalla.s, Tex.
Walker, E. K., 413 Lilley

Bldg., Waterbury, Conn.
Walker, Elizabeth S.. 236 W.

23rd  St.,  Los  Angeles.  Cal.
Walker.  L.  E.  Fairbury,  111.
Walker, G. W., 737 Prospect

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Walker, G. W., 1033 Packard

St., Ann Harbor, Mich.
Walker, Mrs. M. L., Oxford.

N. Y.
Walker,  Peter  E.,  203 West

122nd St.. New Yoik, N. Y.
Walker, Peter  B., 309 S. Ash-
land  Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Walker, R., Athens, Mich.
Walker, R. H., 1928 Oregon

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Walker, Wm. E., 1109 South

Ervay St., Dallas. Tex.
Walker, W. W., 1222 O St.,

I^incoln, Nebr.
Walker, W. W., Commercial

Bldg.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Walkley, R. H.. Bank Bldg.,

Athens, Mich.
Wallace & \Vallace, 71 Grove

St., Freeport, 111.
Wallace, G. G., Box 31, Ord-

way, Colo.
Wallace,  Hilie,  Braman,  Okla.
Wallace, J. C. Wa.shington,

la.


Wallace, Sarah A., 71 Giove

St., Freeport, Ind.
Wallace,  T. F.,  Bradford,  Ont.,

Can.
Walotera, J.. Main St..

Ashtabula. O.
Walsh.  A. F., 1813  Warren St.,

University Place, Nebr..
Walsh, James. Ludescm Bldg..

Lexington. Mo.
Walsh. J. M., Beaver City.

Nebr.
Walsh, Jno.. Alleghan>- Co.,

Munhall,  Pa.
Walters, Floyd, North Man-
chester. Ind.
Walters. Richard  J.,  123  W.

33rd St., New York, N. Y.
Walther & Walther, 235 S.

Main St., Salt Lake City,

Utah.
Walther & Walther, 639 S.

Grand Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Walther, A. E., Lamar, Colo.
Walther, A. '  E., 235 S. Main

St., Suite 303, Salt Lake

City, Utah.
Walther, Ijillian,  Lamar, Colo.
Walton, Alfred, 512 Flanders

Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Walton, Jas., I^afayette, Ind.
Wamsley, D. D., Box 594,

Idaho Falls, Idaho.
Wanderson, Ernest, Tracy,

Minn.
Waner,  Anna,  Clinton,  Mich.
Ward,  C.  E.,  Hartford,  Conn.
Ward. B. Thayer, 13,527

Euclid Ave., East Cleve-
land,  O.
Ward. H. C, Canton,

S. Dakota.
Ward, H. G.. 37 Marshall St.,

Muskegon, Mich.
Ward,  John  E., San  Francisco,

Cal.
Ward, James H., 309 Colum-
bia Trust Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Ward, M. H., 509 Central

Bank Bldg., Oakland, Cal.
Ward, Thayer E., 213 North

State St., Painesville, O.
Warder,  Madison, R. F. D.

No. 9, Ottumwa, la.
Waring, G. P.. Box 251,

Alhambra, Cal.
Warmuth, H. M., Stanwood,

la.
Warmuth, M., Tinton, la.
Warner, Harold M., Paulding,

O.
Warner, M.. 326 W. 8th St.,

Erie, Pa.
Warner.  M.  L., 807  Chestnut

St., Erie, Pa.
Warrack,  Alexander,  146  Pearl

St.. Bradford, Ont., Can.
Warrack, Margaret E., 146

Pearl St., Bradford, Ont.,

Can.
Warrell, Benj., Excelsior

Springs, Mo.
Warren & Warren, Casnovia,

Mich.
Warren, H. E., 1531 Lake

Ave., Rochester, N. Y.
Warren, .lames B., Williams

Court, Marion, O.
Warriner, Chas. O., Stigler,

Okla.
Warriner, Corinne, Stigler,

Okla.
Warriner, Owen C, Green-
wood, Ark.
Warriner, O. C, Mansfield,

Ark.
Warringer, Corinne, Poteau,

Okla.


Warrington, W. F., 203 Yar-

nell  Theatre  Bldg.,  Wabash,

Ind.
Warthington, B. W., 216 W.

Park St., Anaconda, Mont.
Warwick, W. J., Alden, Minn.
Waschka, F.. 707 Washing-
ton St., Marion,  Ind.
Waschke. W.  E., 15-17  Bryant

and Klote Bldg., Bartles-

ville. Okla.
Wasico,  G.  G.,  Milwaukee.

Wis.
Water.s, O., 603 First Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Long Beach,

Cal.
Waters, Lillian E. F., 8909

Lowe Ave., Chicago, 111.
Watkins, John. 208 Myrtle

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Watkins,  Mark. 225 Jewett

Ave., Jersey City, N. .1.
Watkins, Pauline, 208 Myrtle

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Watrous,  Allen  B.,  Larchmont,

N.  Y.
Watson & Watson, Paola,

Kans.
Watson, P. E.. 24 Schnirel

Bldg., Geneva, N. Y.
Watson. Paul B.. 34 Bureil

Bldg., Portland, Ind.
Watson, T. Oren, Gardena,

Cal.
Watters, Floyd F., Mill St.,

North Manchester, Ind.
Watters. Isabella. 577 Warren

St., Newark, N. J.
Watters, Raymond E., 321 E.

8th  St.,  Portland, Ore.
Watts, J.  M., Sonnie Bldg.,

Boise, Idaho.
Waugh, R. H., 81 Forest  Ave.

W, Detroit, Mich.
Waugh, R. H.,  50  Lothrop

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Weaver, E. B., 311 W. Ferry

St., The Victoria Theatre

Bldg., or 1028 Elmwood

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
Weaver, H. S., 1433 Spruce

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Weaver. J. Ray, 519-20 Occi-
dental Bldg., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Webb, Edith M., 6846 Sunset

Blvd., Hollywood, Cal.
Webb, Jessie, Coffeyville,

Kans.
Webb, Victorine W., Greene,

N. Y.
Webb,  W.  S.,  Hope,  Ark.
Webb,  William  S.,  210  Masonic

Temple, Little Rock, Ark.
Webb, W. P.. 131 Locka  Ave..

Olyphant. Pa.
Weber,  J.,  110  W.  40th  St..

New York. N. Y.
Webber. J. H., 832 W. 18th

St., I^os Angeles, Cal.
Webber, J. H., 407 Columbia

Trust Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Webber. M. A., 1915 E. 10th

St., Kansas City, Kans.
Weber, Emil, 255 Waverly

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Weber, Helen, 1021 Spring-
field Ave., IrvinKtf)n, N. J.
Weber, J. N.. 1980 7th Ave..

New York, N. Y.
Webley, F. D., Box 398, Santa

Rosa, Cal.
Webster, Minnie B., West

Windfield, N. Y.
Webster, Mrs.  M. E., 320 N.

Division St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Weed, Trach E., Ledbetter

Bldg., Michigan City, Ind.
Weeks, G. S., Leon, la.


C.hir()i>r(i<'l<in


Proff.ssiondl  Hrgislcr


1127


Weeks. Dan S., 778 Congress

St., Portland, Me.
Week.s, R. K., Lansing-, Mich.
Weheffer, Aiigu.sta V.. 1169

Davison St., Portland, Ore.
Weidenhoeft, A. A., Kalona,

la.
Woigort, M. C "Waterloo, la.
Weiman, Elizabeth, 1524

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Weimar, T.,ouls Charles, 516

Bergen Ave., Jersey City,

N. J.
Weinberg, I. H., 1333 North

La Salle St., Chicago, 111.
"Weirick, W. C, 424 Beretania

St., Honolulu, Hawaii.
Weirshausen, Geo. C, 23 Polk

St., Guttenberg, N. J.
Weiser, A. W., 158 North

Hanover St., Pottstow^n, Pa.
Weiss, Hilda H.. 941 E. 14th

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Weiss, Oscar E., 813 N. La

Salle St., Chicago, 111.
Weist, R. S., Newark Valley,

N. Y.
Weist, R. S., 28 Lake Street,

Oswego, N. Y.
Welander, Bessie C, 907

School St., Chicago, 111.
Welch, J. S., Liberal, Kans.
Welch, W. C, 407 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
AVells & Wells. 10 Chase

Blk.. Kalamazoo. Mich.
Welfraum. O. L., 305 Main

St., Kenosha, Wis.
Wells, Chas. H., 1619 Wash-
ington St.. Denver, Colo.
Wells, G. W., 513 W. 134th

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Wells. Minnie E., 1619 Wash-
ington St.. Denver, Colo.
Welty. Clara  M.,  Hicksville,

O.
Wendi, Reidl, 2179 Telegraph

St.. Oakland. Cal.
Wentworth, Daisy  B., Novina,

Okla.
Wentworth, Geo., Cashion,

Okla.
Wentworth, Geo., Arkansas

City, Kans.
Wentworth, Guy De Witt,

Navina, Okla.
Wentworth. Dr. Paul J..

1509-11 E. Superior Street,

Duluth, Minn.
Wenzel, Alfred, 417 Palisade

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Wenzl, Reidl, 2327 Telegraph

Ave., Oakland. Cal.
Werbes, Henry  C, R. No. 4,

Buffalo,  Minn.
Wesley, S. W., 533 Equity

Bldg., Muskogee, Okla.
West, Archibald, Steelton,

Ont., Can.
West, Geo., Brainard, Minn.
TVest, G. B., Hartwick. la.
West, Harry H., 524 Cons.

Realty Bldg-., Los Angeles,

Cal.
West-Hill,  John,  Box  409,  R.

F. D. No. 14, Los  Angeles,

Cal.
West, W. R., Opera House

Blk., Danbury, Conn.
Wetherbe, E. T., 107 Meigs

Bldg-., Bridgeport, Conn.
Wetterstrand. 1436 Tremont

Place. Denver, Colo.
Weyland, Chas. E., 338 Cum-
berland St., Lebanon, Pa.


Wheatcroft, Dr., Smith

Center, Kans.
Wheeler & Wheeler, Twin

FalLs, Idaho.
Wheeler,  Mrs.  A.,  Cincinnatus,

N. Y.
Wheeler

Utah.
Wheeler


Milo A., T.,ewiston,


Miss Alma, 1 Rose-

ville Ave., Newark, N. J.
Wheeler, Alma, Cortland,

N.  Y.
Wheeler, Arlie, Eddyville, la.
Wheeler, Mrs. D. R.. 813 12th

St. N. W., Washington.

D. C.
Wheeler. Elyin, 600 Grand

Opera  House  Bldg.,  Atlanta,

Ga.
Wheeler, Etta M., 448 Wash-
ington St., Denver, Colo.
Wheeler, Fannie, Twin Falls,

Idaho.
Wheeler,  Fred.  H.,  Twin  Falls.

Idaho.
Wheeler, H. A., Eddyville,

Nebr.
Wheeler, Howard M., Anes,

Okla.
Wheeler, Howard M., Atoka,

Okla.
Wheeler, Howard M., Drum-

mond,  Okla.
Wheeler, R. A., 109 Ramsford

Road,  Toronto,  Ont..  Oan.
Whelan, R. L., Belle Plaine,

la.
Whipple,  M.  T.,  6432  Kenwood

Ave., Chicago, 111.
White,  Edwin  C,  287  W.  North

Ave., East Palestine. O.
White. Elleb., Meno. Okla.
White,  I.  O.,  Sioux  City,  la.
White, Ivan O., Hartwick, la.
White, Pearl E., Sioux City,

la.
White, "W. F., P. O. Box 294,

Shelton, Conn.
White, Wm. Al., Brighton, la.
Whiteis, U. E., 112 E. Broad

St., Columbus, O.
Whitenberg-,  Mrs. C, Geneseo,

111.
Whitenberg:, C. E., Knoxville,

la.
Whitestine. O. G.. 230 Wash-
ington St.. Huntington, Ind.
Whitleigh, Geo. A., 156 N. 5th

St.,  Newark,  N. J.
Whittenberg,  O.  W..  Detroit,

Mich.
Whitman, John E., Mt. Holly,

Nebr.
Whitman, 'SVinfleld S., 932

New  York  Ave.,  Washing-ton,

D.  C.
Whitmore, J. L., Grand Opera

House Bldg., Atlanta, Ga.
Whitney, A. A., 932 Georgia

St., Los Angeles. Cal.
Whitney,  A. E., 218  Union

Bldg., Anderson, Ind.
Whittacker, Fred.. 616 Mc-

Kinley Ave., Canton, O.
Whittenberg, C. C, Knox-
ville,  la.
Wiberg-, Miss A. S.. Denver

Sta.. R. No. 2, Box 16,

Denver, Colo.
Wicena,  A.  W.,  2635  S. Homan

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Wichman, H. T., 503 S.

Florence St., El Paso. Tex.
Wicks,  C.  H.,  1709  Grand  Ave.,

Davenport, la.
Wideman, D. O.. Delphos. O.


Widman, William. 432 Wood

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Widman, Wm., 432 Wood St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Widmann. Elizabeth, Box 76

or 71, Rosalia, Wa.sh.
Wiedenhoeft, August A.,

Kalona, la.
Wieder,  Nanna  G.,  2142  Cleve-
land Ave., Chicago, 111.
Wieder, Nanna G., 546 Gar-
field Ave., Chicago, 111.
Wieg-and, Wm., 3129 B'way,

Chicago, 111.
Wiegert, H. C, Waterloo, la.
Wieker, L. I.. 982 Woodward

Ave., Detroit. Mich.
Wieman, Elizabeth. 516

Weightman Bldg-., Philadel-
phia, Pa.
Wiesjahn, W.  H., Schrage

Bldg., Whitting, Ind.
Wiest, Ray S., 26 Lake St.,

Owego,  N.  Y.
Wight. Alice M., 1460 Pearl

St., Denver, Colo.
Wlkander, G. W., 58 Madison

Ave., Detroit. Mich.
Wilber, G. H., 403 N. Main

St., Sheridan,  Wyo.
Wilberg, Miss A., S. Denver
St., R. No. 2, Denver, Colo.
Wilbur, G. H., 7-11 Opera

House Blk., Ansonia, Conn.
Wilcox, C. F., 21 13th Street,

Troy, N. Y.
Wilcox, C. W., 1117 Travis
; St., Houston, Tex.
;  Wilcox, Dayse T., Box 629,

Colfax, la.
Wilcox, Marg-ery, Sault Ste.

Marie, Can.
Wilcox, Mrs. T. Dayse, Box

204, Colfax. la.
Wilcox, O. W., 404 Commer-
cial  Bank  Bldg., Houston,
Tex.
Wilcox, Sam A., Theeman

Bldg-., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Wildermuth, H. E., Benning-
ton, Mich.
Wilcox, "^V. H., Sault Ste.

Marie, Can.
Wilcox, ^V. H., 1255 6th Ave.,
Owen Sound, Ont., Can. -
Wilcox. W. J., Keenan Bldg-.,

Pittsburg. Pa.
Wilcoxen,  G.  C,  35  S. 11th St.,

Richmond, Ind.
Wilkening, Mrs. G., 1262

Leland Ave., Chicago. 111.
Wilkerson. Mrs. M. L.,

Woodlawn, Cal.
Willard,  Ch. E., 306 2nd  St.
S. E., \\''ashington, D. C.
Willard, W. L., A'iroque. "SVis.
Williams, A. J.. 921  i Market

St.. Youngstown, O.
Williams. C. A.. 282i 4th St.,

San Pedro, Cal.
Williams, C.  B., San Diego,

Cal.
Williams, D. A., 7-8 Nettleton

Blk., Ashtabula, O.
Williams, Calvert B., 19
Trescony St., Santa  Cruz,
Cal.
Williams,  D. A.. Nettleton

Block,  Ashtabula,  O.
Williams, Mrs. E. M.,

Arkansas  City, Kans.
Williams. F. A., 205  i Public

Square. Clinton, III.
Williams. F. A., 213 Moran-
Corbett Bldg., Decatur, 111.
Williams, Miss Harriet. 18
Huntington Ave., Boston,
Mass.


1128


Professional  Register


Chirnpractors


Williams. I. A., 101 Court St.,

Hot Springs, Ark.
Williams, Stanley S., 2603

National Ave., San Diego,

Cal.
Williams, Kate  G., 57 East

Jackson Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Williams, I>. V., Rice Lake,

Wis.
Williams, I.oella, Rice Lake,

Wis.
Williams. Orville R., A'inta,

Okla.
Williams, Robt. K.. 10.3-9

Edgcrly Blk., Fresno, Cal.
Williams, R. R., 7605 Superior

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Williams, S. B., Hot Springs,

S. Dakota.
Williams, Thomas H., 329J
Washington  St.,  Columbus,
Tnd.
Williams, T. E., Union

Savings Bank, Eau Claire,

Wis.
Williams, T. H.. 10th and

Washington Sts., Columbus,

Ind.
Williams, Mrs. V. O., Rens-
selaer,  Ind.
Williamson. A. M., 400-416

Farley Bldg., Birmingham,

Ala.
Williamson, Mary I., Colonial

Bldg., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Willis, G. F., 616 Chamber of

Commerce. Pasadena, Cal.
^Villis, Mrs. Idabelle, Missouri

Valley, la.
Willis, James S., 48 Laws St.,

Kingston, Jamaica.
Willson, Mrs. J. A., Crawford

Co., Epsyville, Pa.
Willson, Minnie E., 138 W.

3rd St., Mansfield, O.
Wilman, J. E., Mount Holly.

N. J.
Wilmoth, Clark L., Elkins,

W.  Va.
Wilson, Chas.. 1402 E. 111th

St., Evansville, Ind.
Wilson, Chas., Broken Bow,

Nebr.
Wilson, Estella H.. 1458

Court Place, Denver, Colo.
Wilson, Everett, Brooklyn,

la.
Wilson, E. C, Brooklyn, la.
Wilson, Frank Lamb, Ex-
change Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Wilson, George, Black Bldg.,

Los Angeles. Cal.
Wilson,  J.  E., 68 9th  St.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.
Wilson. I. G., 206 N. Main St.,

Wichita, Kans.
Wilson, L. H., Box 204,

Dunlap, 111.
Wilson, La  Roy, 484 N. 4th

St., Eugene, Ore.
Wilson. Minnie E.. 138 W. 3rd

St., Mansfield, O.
Wilson, O. K., Washington,

la.
Wilson, O. K., 331 N. Main

St., Chariton, la.
Wilson,  R.  C, P^mpire  Bldg.,

Bartlesville, Okla.
Wilson,  Dr.  T.  B.,  Rocky  Ford,

Colo.
Wilson, W. B., 1441 Monroe

St., Chicago, 111.
Winckler. Oscar, 817 W. 9th

St., Davenport, la.
Winckler, Oscar H., 502

Trelawney Bldg., Portland,

Me.


Wingate,  D. M., 702-3 Real

Estate Bldg., Washington,

D. C.
Winegardner, Jos., Callahan

Bank Bldg., Dayton, O.
Winkelmann, L., 248 Cam-
bridge Ave., Jersey City,

N. J.
Winne, Edgar  J., 940 State

St., Sciieneotadv, N. Y.
Winslow, Fred. E., 5 Clinton

Ave., Newark, N. J.
W'instead, .Inc. A., Nashville,

N. C.
Winters, E. E., Chambers St.,

Galesburg, 111.
Winters,, P. B,, 242 Cason-

Neal Bldg., Lebanon, Ind.
Winter, W. J., Rahm Ave.,

IMttsburgh, I'a.
Winter, Wm. J., Fair Haven,

Pa.
Wire, A.  V., Cherokee, la.
Wire,  A.  v., 5503  E. Washing-
ton St., Indianapolis, Ind.
Wire, Percy J., 13 Clinton St.,

Morristown, N. J.
Wire <Sr Wire, Rochester, Ind.
Wise, Frederick H., 505-7

Masonic Bldg., Auburn,

N. Y.
Wise, Z. W., Holand Block,

Lima, O.
Wishart, James, 828 Brady

St., Davenport, la.
Wishart, Jessie L., 1403 4th

Ave., Bay City, Mich.
Witman,  John  E., 43  Main  St.,

Mount Holly, N. J.
Witman, J. E., Box 613,

Mt. Holly, N. J.
Witman, Wm. N., 671 Broad

St., Suite 414-15, Newark,

N. J.
Woerkam, A. Van, 734 W.

Fulton St., Grand Rapids,

Mich.
Wold,  A.  O.,  Langdon,  N. Dak.
Wolf, Dr. Frederic, 1222

Organ Ave., Fort Wayne,

Ind.
Wolfe, C. C, Carter, Okla.
Wolfe, W. J.. 322 S. Bunker

Hill Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
Wolff, C. T., 414 119th St.,

^V'hiting, Ind.
Wolff, C. T., 754 Claude St.,

Hammond, Ind.
Wolff, Mai'y J., East Aurora,

N. Y.
Wolff, M. v., 135 Park Place,

East  Aurora,  N.  Y.
Wolfram, Marion L., 8th and

Elm St.s.. Cincinnati, O.
Wolfrom, William H., 20

Norfolk Bldg., Cincinnati,

O.
Wolotiia. J.. 49.\ S. Main St.,

Wilkesbarre, Pa.
Wolotira, John E., 45 War-
burton Ave., Yonkers, N. Y.
Womeldurf, H. B., Bay City,

Mich.
Wondracek,  Wm.  J.,  4403  Arce

Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Wood, A. W., Ozark, Ark.
Wood, B. J., Room 205 Crow-
ley Bldg., Lewiston, Mont.
Wood, D. B., Wagon Mound,

New Mexico.
Wood, D. E., 39 W. Adams

St., Chicago, 111.
Wood,  D.  J.,  c/o  The  Hoffman,

Lewistown,  Mont.
Wood,  Eldred  Dow.  6-a

Dexter Bldg., Chicago, 111.
^Vood,  Geo. F., Penconning,

Mich.


Wood, Goo. G., Penconning,

Mich.
Wood, G. G., Minot, N. Dak.
Wood,  Geo. T., 501  Adams  St.,

Bay City, Mich.
Wood,  G.  T.,  Marietta,  O.
Wood, Harold T., Vinton, la.
Woods, H. B., Pulver Bank,

Newark, N. Y.
Wood,  J.  M., New  Sharon, la.
Wood, Lillian J., Minot,

N Dakota
Wood, Louis  M., 218 S. Bridge

St., Belding, Mich.
Wood,  Mary  L.,  Belding,  Mich.
Wood, Tracy E., Ledbetter

Bldg., Michigan City, Ind.
Wood, Wm. P., 625 Stahlman

Bldg., Nashville, Tenn.
Woodard, L. A., 305 Sunset
Bldg., Bellingham, Wash.
Woodbridge, Katherine, 1302
N. Broadway, Oklahoma
City, Okla.
Woodbridge, Katherine, 441
W. 12th St., Oklahoma
City, Okla.
Woodell, J. E., Union, Ore.
Woodford, N. C, 436 Com-
monwealth Ave., Detroit,
Mich.
Woodford, Willard C, 436
Commonwealth Ave.,
Detroit, Mich.
Woodham, M. Saxe, Media-

polis, la.
Woodhard, E. G., 7 Washing-
ton St., Bradford, Pa.
Wooding & Gibson, Booth

Bldg., New Britain, Conn.
Wooding, Ralph A., Kensing-
ton, Conn.
Wooding, Ralph A., New

Britain, Conn.
Woodley, Roy, Hamilton,

Ont., Can.
Woodman, M. Saxe, Media-

polis,  la.
Woodruff  &  Jentsch,  c/o  New-
port Sanitarium, Lee Co.,
Estero, Fla.
Woods, A. M., Ft. Gibson,

Okla.
Woods, H. B., 22 Madison

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Woodward,  E.  G., 7  Washings-
ton St., Bradford, Pa.
Woody, Worth W., 505^
Commercial St., Atchinson,
Kans.
Woolger,  W.  C, 1233  Michi-
gan Ave., Buffalo,  N. Y.
Worley,  W.,  814  Wabash  Ave.,

Terre  Haute,  Ind.
Worrell,  Benj.  W.  J.,  Exelsior

Springs, Mo.
Worrell, F. C, 541 Consoli-
dated Realty Bldg., Los
Angeles, Cal.
Worthington, Henry, 287

Main  St.,  Norwich,  Conn.
Woulfe, M. J., 322 S. Bunker
Hill  Ave., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Woulfe,  Martin  J.,  San  Diego,

Cal.
Wren, Wm. E., 308 Washing-
ton  Ave., Scranton, Pa.
Wright, Eugenia M., 30 Am-
herst St., Detroit, Mich.
Wright, Sadie, 2 Beacon

Bldg., Stratford, Ont., Can.
Wright, Frank  J.,  907-10  Law

Bldg.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.
Wright,  H.  L.,  Ackley.  la.
Wright, Oline E., 1 Arcade,

Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.
Wright, Wm.  H.,  Summer,  III.
Wundrack,  H.  J.,  Odd  Fellows'
Bldg., Waterbury, Conn.


Chiropractors
Christian  Scientists


Professional  liegislrr


1120


Wundrack, J. VV., Odd Fel-
lows' Bldg-., Waterbury,

Conn.
Wundrack, W. J., 26 E. Main

St., Hartford, Conn.
Wurmser, H. L,., 309 Ma.sonic

Bld&., Lima, O.
Wyatt,  S.  C,  Buhl,  Idaho.
Wygal, Walter D., 63 S.

Main St., Demarest  Bldg".,-

Gloversville, N. Y.
Wynhoff,  Bernardus,  445

Eastern  Ave.,  Grand  Rapids,

Mich.
Yarman,  C. E., Cor. Main and

3i-d  Sts.,  Mansfield,  O.
Yarman & Yarman, 114-15

Mohican  Bldg^.,  Mansfield,  O.
Yates, ^Vilbur  S., 701 East

31st St., I^os Angeles, Cal.
Yerg-er  &  Yereger,  320  River

St.. Troy, N. Y.
Yerkes, C. C. 1598  Gratiot

Ave.,  Detroit.  Mich.
Yocum,  I.  W., 3102  University

Ave.,  Des  Moines,  la.
Yoder, F. S., Meyers Cane,

Va.
Yoder, Lissa  A.,  Newton,

Kans.
Yoder, Mary, Stuttgart, Ark.
Yoder,  S.  B.,  Waseau,  O.
Yoham, W. M., Hartford,

Wis.
York,  Geo.  V.,  Miami,  Fla.
Yorke, John  F., Knicker-
bocker Annex  Bldg.,  New

York, N. Y.
Yost,  C.  M.,  Pittsburg-h,  Kans.
Young, Fred. V., Chatham,

N. J.
Young,  Harry, 17  S. 5th  Ave.,

La  Grange,  111.
Young,  H.  C,  Flatiron

Bldg., Akron, O.
Young, H. C, General De-
livery,  Dayton, O.
Young, Luna  Kerr, 11-15

Keller  Bldg.,  Columbus,  Ind.
Young, Simeon, Grant Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Zachary,  B.  .7.,  Stanberry,  Mo.
Zachary, B.  J.,  Wichita  Falls,

Kans.
Zandeeni, Helma, Plainview,

Nebr.
Zander, Stanley Clarence, 822

Valley Road, Montclair,

N. J.
Zebelle, Reuben R., Saint

Joseph, Mich.
Zechman,  J.  E., 327  Good

Block,  Des  Moines,  la.
Zechman,  J.  Haas, 327  Good

Block,  Des  Moines,  lo.
Zeckman,  J.  C,  Kansas  City,

Mo.
Zeitlei'  & Zeitler, Everett

Bldg.,  Jamestown,  N.  Y.
Zeller,  Helen,  FuUerton,  Nebr.
Zenk,  Otto  Jno.,  Braddock,  Pa.
Zettle,  H.  A..  204  Scheffman

Bldg.,  St. Paul, Minn.
Ziefel,  J.  W.,  163  Clay  St.,

Morgantown,  W.  Va.
Ziegler, D. E., 528 Wyandotte

St., Findlay, O.
Ziffel, I., Windham House,

Corner  Main & Church St.,

Willimantic, Conn.
Zilligen.  A., 1103  W. Roscoe

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Zimmerman,  Dr.,  New  London,

Conn.
Zimmerman,  Emma,  533  S.

Flower  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Zimmermann, J. O., The

Wadsworth, Suite 33,

Portland, Me.


Zinkan,  M.  A., 3505  Indiana

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Zombro. .1. B., Arimo Bldg.,

Logan, Utah.
Zinkon, R. B., Ord, Nebr.
Zuck, Janet E., 512 2nd St.,

Pittsbuierh, Pa.
Zuehlke,  Harry  F.,  Oconto,

Wis.
Zweneman,  Geo.,  601  Poronia

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Zwicker,  Edw.,  Sherrard,  111.
Zwicker, F. J.,  Baraboo,  Wis.


CHIROPRACTORS
Canada

Axford, Amelia J., 473

Dufferin  Ave., London, Ont.,

Can.
Baird,  Geo. R., 921 College

St., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Bell, W. J., 792 15th Avenue,

East  Vancouver,  British

Columbia, Can.
Bowman,  T. W., 31 Bays-
water  Road,  New  Castle on

Tyne, England.
Chiverton, M. L., 31 Empress

Ave., London, Ont., Can.
Davis,  J.  F.,  Lindsay,  Ont.,

Can.
Duval, Ernest  R., 471| E.

King St., Hamilton, Ont.,

Can.
Finley, Vyla  M., Box 807,

Barrie, Ont. Can.
Fox, J. A., Wingham, Ont.,

Can.
Eraser, Lillian, Glick Blk.,

Berlin, Ont., Can.
Frith, G.  H.,  Grand  Turk,

Turk Island. British West

Indies.
Fuller, Victor, 39J Queen St.,

Niagara, Can.
Gailbraith, Sarah & Jane,

80 Nattawasaga, Ont., Can.
Galbiaith, D., 623 Bathhurst

St., Toronto Falls, Ont.,

Can.
Galbraith, W. J., 411 Somer-
set St., Ottawa,  Ont.,  Can.
Hafner,  W.  H.,  Los  Indios,

Isle  of  Pines, Cuba.
Harrington, F. C, Orillia,

Ont., Can.
Harrison, W. J., Melfort,

Sask., Can.
Hess, Carrie M., 195 Colborne

St.,  Brantford,  Ont.,  Can.
Hodgson,  AV.W.,  c/o  Alemana,

Blueflelds, Nicaragua.
Howard, M. E., Box 464,

Orangeville. Ont.. Can.
Howe,  R.  J.,  35  Victor  Avenue,

Toronto, Ont., Can.
Hughson,  Jean  M.,  Orono,

Ont., Can.
Jackson, Mrs. Lily, Selkirk,

Ont., Can.
.Johnston, Hugh, Port Bur-
well,  Ont., Can.
Kilbourne, A. B., 17 Picton

St., London, Ont., Can.
Kilbourne, Clara, 321 Queens

Ave., London, Ont., Can.
L'Ami, C. J., 401 Connaught

Blk., Saskatoon, Sask.,

Can.
Linde,  H. F., P. O. Box 44,

Wadena, Sask., Can.
Lindsay, J. H., Pedro  Miguel,

Canal Zone.
Mclntyre, H. M., 32 Ontario

St.,  Brantford,  Ont.,  Can.
Meadows, E. C,  Melfort,

Sask., Can.


Meyers, O. P., 155 2nd Ave.,

South Saskatoon, Sask.,

Can.
Misbett, Smith, 750 Lans-

downe Ave., Toronto, Ont.,

Can.
Munro, H. J., 2 Steele  Blk.,

Winnipeg, Can.
Oertel,  C.  R.,  Santa  Fe,  Isle  de

Pinos, Cuba.
Ord, Garnet L., Orangeville,

Ont., Can.
Patterson,  T.  E.,  471i King

St., East Hamilton, Ont.,

Can.
Pearson,  Chas.  Smith, North

Shields, Northumberland,

England.
Pearson, R., 47 Percy Park,

Tynemouth, England.
Porter, W. Wilson, Box 240,

Oshawa, Ont., Can.
Rodman, Isaac, Port Berry,

Ont., Can.
Smelser, Nellie, Selkirk,

Ont., Can.
Smith,  Donald, Midland,  Ont..

Can.
Smith, T. C, Coi-nwall, Ont.,

Can.
Spencer, Ellz. A., Rutland
I Apts., 264 Lisgar St.,
I Ottawa,  Ont.,  Can.
i  Stover, Calvin  J., Santa Fe,

Isle of  Pines,  West  Indies.
Tanner, J. H., 3 Reeve St.,

Woodstock, Can.
Wall, C. C, 35 Bay  St., South

Hamilton,  Ont.,  Can.
Williamson, M. I., 3 Colonial

Apts., 534 Palmerston

Blvd., Toronto, Ont., Can.


CHRISTIAN SCIENTISTS

Armstrong,  "\V.  E.,  The  Mar-
keen. Buffalo, N. Y.
Bassett,  Mrs.  Mattie  C,  405

Delaware Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y.
Beck,  Miss  A.  L.,  93  Amity  St.,

Flushing,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Blanchard, Mrs. L. D., 133

Lexington Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y.
Butler, Miss M. E., 93 Amity

St., Flushing, Brooklyn,

N.  Y.
Carr, Mrs. Antoinette "W.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Carter, Isabel! e D.. 44 Court

St.,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.
Cooper. Geo. W.. 183 Rich-
mond St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Crosier, Winfield C, 44 Court

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Du Bois, L. J., 44 Court St..

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Fanshawe, Mrs. Mary, 903

Sterling Place, Brooklvn,

N.  Y.
Farwell, Mr.s. Little A.. 335

Landon  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Goldman, Miss Anna, 25

Cooper St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Goodwin, Roy, Electric Bldg.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Hegeman,  Mrs.  A.  O.. 1130

Ocean Ave., Brooklvn, N. Y.
Hodgson. Geo. L., 542 Bird

Ave., Iroquois Bldg.,

Buffalo, X. Y.
Hodgson, Mrs. Myra W.,

Iroquois Bldg., Buffalo,

N.  Y.
Holcombe. Chas. D., 1268

Pacific St.. Brooklyn, X. Y.


1130


Professioiuil  Register


Dicliciuns
.\iusseiirs


Kline,  Hany  B.,  r,33  Brecken-
ridsre  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  \ .

Lewis,  John  W.,  225  Allen  St..
Buffalo, N. Y. ,,^ . .

Moderwell, Robt., 516 Ash-
land  St., Buffalo, N.  Y.

Nenno,  Mrs.  Carrie,  49  Wood-
lawn  Ave., Buffalo, N."!.

Phelps,  Mrs.  W.  J..  103  Ander-
son Place, Buffalo, N. Y.

Ramsey, Mrs. Margaret P.,
1347 Pacific St., Brooklyn,
N Y

Read,  "chas.  G.,  153  Riverside
Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.

Schiffer,  Mrs.  M.,  88  Ibis  St.,
Brooklyn, N. Y.

Second Church Scientist, 971
Jefferson  Ave.,  Buffalo,
N.  Y.

Sellew,  Mrs.  F.  L.,  392  La^y-
ette  Ave., Brooklyn,  N.  Y

Starr, Miss Bertha E., 1835
Dime Bank Bldg., Detroit,
Mich.  ,,_ ,„.

Tanner,  Mrs.  Mary  W., 12fi
Bedford  Ave..  Buffalo,  N \ .

Walker,  J.  W..  309  15th  St.,
Buffalo, N. y.

Welch, Mrs. Mary E., 138
Mariner  St..  Buffalo,  N.  Y

Welstead.  Mrs.  Alice  W.,  2116
Dime  Bank  Bldg-.,  Detroit,
Mich.  „„,,., xr.

Will  Mrs.  I.illie  C,  274  North
St.',  Buffalo,  N.  Y.

Will Wm. E.. 274  North  St.,
Buffalo, N. Y.  „„„ „ .

Williamson,  Eli  S.,  293  Hoyt
St Brooklyn, N. "i .

Winn,  Charles  V.,  2032  Dime
Bank Bldg-., Detroit. Mich.

Wood,  Je.ssie, 44 Court St.,
Brooklyn,  N. Y.


DIETICIANS

Beal,  Rov  Wilson.  2403  Broad-
way, New  York,  NY.

Christian. Eugene, 213 West
79th St., New York, N. Y.

Drews, Geo. J., 1910 Harding
Ave., Chicago, IH- „„ .^ ^

Schildkraut, H., 200 Bast
Broadway, New York, N.  Y.

Welsh,  P.  W.,  7909  Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, O.


DRUGIiESS DOCTORS

Carlson, Chas.  H., 804 Bryson
St., Youngstown, O.

Dazey. Chas. A., 1005 Market
St.,"  Youngstown, O.

Delk, 1j. p., c/o Standard
School of Chiropractic and
Naturopathy, Davenport,
la.

Drake,  Edward  V.,  44  N.  Pearl
St.,  Buffalo.  N.  Y.

Ericson,  John  A.,  Youngs-
town, O.  „

Froude, Chas. C, Y. M. C. A.
Bldg., Kingston, N. Y.

Fryette, H. H., 27 E. Monroe
St., Chicago, 111.

Johnson, Maria S., 11 E.
Woodland Ave., Youngs-
town, O.

Lund, Richard, 804 Bryson
St., Youngstown. O.

Lust, Benedict. 110 E. 41st
St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Paul, W. O. Henry, 126-30 E.
Jackson  St., Mankato.  Minn.

Pestaner, Joaquin F.. 174 W.
97th  St..  New  York.  N.  Y.


EKKCTKO-THKH.VIMS'rS

Atkinson, A. J., Pittsburgh

Life Bldg.. Pittsburgh, Pa.
Barker, Fred. M., 2830 Pros-
pect Ave., Cleveland, O.
Blakelev, Chas. M., 801

Schmidt Bldg., Pittsburgh,

r-a.
Brown, John R., 404 Lyceum

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Cruik.shank, Omar  T., 8148

Jenkins  Arcade,  Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Flanigan, G. L., 524  Penn.

Ave., Pittsburgh. Pa.
Hazel. A. E.. Second Nat'l

Bank Bldg.. Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hazel, Albert E., 403 Second

Nafl Bank Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Kaiser, Edward C, 573  Panke

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
MacKeller, Peter, Chillicothe,

O.
Mackin, Bessie G.. 130 East

North St., Lima, O.
Mackin, Elmer, 130 E. North

St.,  Lima, O.
Mallorv, W. E.. 312-17 Swet-

land Bldg.. Portland, Ore.
Matijaca, Anthony, 413 Cass

St., Joliet, 111.
Rayle, Minnie D., 207| West

Center St., Marion, O.
Richard, S. J. de Niord. 262

Summer St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Russell, Elma E., 522 Wood-  '

land Ave., Youngstown. O.
Scheck, Wm. J.. 516 Federal  I

St.. Pittsburgh, Pa.

HOMEOPATH

Gore, Dr. M. E., 600 Main St.,
East Orange, N. J.

HYDROPATHS

Berger, Arnold, Park St.,
Dayton,  O.

Berger, Lina, Park St., Day-
ton, O.

Buser, F. St., Cincinnati, O.

Cummings, .Tas., 676 Fulton
St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Knope, J., Pourmont Hotel,
Miami, Fla.

Rinderkneclit.  George  H.. 1522
Franklin Ave., Columbus,
O.

Schupp, Emil, 162 E. Center
St., Akron, O.

Sullivan, Broad St., Newark,
N.  J.

Walsh, Paul W.. 1343 105th
St., Cleveland, O.

Welsh, P.  W., 7909 Euclid
Ave.  Cor.  79th  St.,  Cleve-
land. O.

j  IRIDOLOGIST

Gadson, Thomas H., 403 Min-
! ing E.xchange Bldg.,
i Denver, Colo.
!  Lahn, Henry, (M.  D.),  1386  W.
Randolph St., Chicago, 111.
I  Larson,  J.  E.,  Rockford  Health
Home,  Rockford,  III.
Ostness, Geo. M., Redfleld,
S.  D.

MAGNETOPATHS

Dutro, Roy, Chandlersville, O.

Gregg, Dr. J. A., Rock Falls,
111.
I  Lehew, Emma, Kenton, O.
I  Lehew,  George  W.,  Kenton,
I O.


Springer, Ale.xander, Hamil-
ton, O.

Van  der  Putten,  J.  H.,  New
Philadelphia, O.

Zeiger, Alma M., 815 Main
St.,  Zanesville.  O.

Zeiger, Robert S., 815 Main
St., Zanesville, O.


MASSEURS

Aberly & Waters, Misses, 220

S.  State  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Able, Nellie, 160 N. 5th Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Abramson, Charlotte. 120 S.

State St., Chicago. 111.
Ahlgren, Mathilde, 4009

Sheridan Road, Chicago,

111.
Ahlstrom, Gosta M. J., 408

Penn. Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Aldren, John A., 804 Bryson

St., Youngstown, O.
Amarandos, G. N., 500 West

171st St., New York. N. Y.
Anderson  &  Sjogren, 220  W.

114th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Anderson, Carl F., 726 West

Marquette St., Chicago, 111.
Anderson, Johanna A., 4554

Cottage  Grove  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Anderson, Miss T., 3850

Indiana  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Andren,  Olga, 152 Columbus

Ave., New  York, N.  Y.
Anton, Mrs. M., 100 W. 67th

St., New York, N. Y.
Aicher, Madame, 45 W. 34th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Bagley,  Miss  I.  E.,  Kenois

Bldg., Washington, D. C.  "
Baird,  Anna  E.. 730 7th  St..

Elyria. O.
Baker,  F.,  20  S.  State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Barrett,  Mrs.  J..  1033  3rd  Ave..

New  York.  N.  Y.
Bartlett.  Wm.  O.  W.,  110  West

84th St., New York, N. Y.
Bauman, C. A.. 1667 Main St.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Becker, Gottfried, 64J Flat-
bush  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Beckman,  Hjalmar,  128  East

57th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Beljean,  A.  J.,  502  W.  141st

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Benson, Pauli S., 78 W. 82nd

St., New York, N. Y.
Bergen, M.  V.. 523 Greene

Ave.,  Brooklyn, N. Y.
Beruth, Mrs. E., 371 E. 183id

St., New York, N. Y.
Bessis. P. N.. 428 Oakland

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bessis, Peter  N., 1001 Keenan

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bieri, R., 601 Spring  St.. West

Hoboken, N. J.
Bird,  Miss  Josephine, 617

Bloomfleld Ave., Montclair,

N. J.
Bjorkman, Martin E., 213 5th

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Blaich, Anna Mae, Marion, O.
Boiseau, Miss Ida F., 223 2nd

St. S. E., Washington, D. C.
Boone, Mayme A., 35 Emery

Arcade. Cincinnati. O.
Boyesen. Mrs. Kathinka, 3206

W.  North Ave., Chicago, 111.
Brady,  Lillian, 4303 Cottage

Grove  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Bricker, Miss Sara  L., Kenois

Bldg., Washington, D.  C.
Brodtkorb, Nils W., 50 E.

29th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


Ma.sxenr.'


ProfcssioiKil  /U'gi.slcr


1131


Brown, John J., 5280 Superior

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Bruhn, Mrs. Tor.sten, 121

Vermilyea Ave., New ^'(>^l<,

N. Y.
Burgesen,  Klin  F.,  T>  South

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Burling. Mrs. H., 177 lOa.st

75th St., New York, N. Y.
Burlingame, Chas. I^., 112 K.

Broad  St.,  Columbus,  ().
Butler, George F., 323 Kuclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Cain, Miss  Katie, 71f> 7th St.

N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Carlson, Beata M., 3502 Lex-
ington Ave.. Chicago, 111.
Carlson,  Miss  Ida,  1105  E.  fiSrd

St., Chicago, 111.
Carlstrom, Chas.  O., 108 N.

State St., Chicago, 111.
Carmen, Sallie B., The Port-

ner, Washington, D. C.
Christopherson, Miss H., 2728

Broadway, New York, N. Y.
Clausen, H. Klinkwart, 2041

5th  Ave., New  York, N.  Y.
Cleveland,  W.  E.  M.,  187  North

Pearl  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Cohan, Mrs. Mae, Kenois

Bldg.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Collier, Jennie E., 118 W. fith

St., Cincinnati, O.
Crabbe, Edna A., 2553 Glen-
more Ave., Columbus, O.
Cummings,  Miss  A.  M.,  506  W.

43rd St., New York, N. Y.
Curland, Miss Fannie, 130 W.

116th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Czukor, Eugene Jacques, 25

W. 125th St., New York,

N.  Y.
Dahlberg, August, 1910 E.

73rd  St.,  Chicago, 111.
Dahlstrom, Miss T., 357 West

23rd St., New York, N. Y.
Dam, Myrtle M., 5461 Hill

Crest Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Davis, Belle C, Levergne

Bldg., 4 W. 7th St., Cincin-
nati, O.
Dorann,  M., 136  B'way,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Droll,  Mrs.  V.,  58  W.  128th  St.,

New  York,  N. Y.
Duffy, Mary  J., 13th and

Bremen Sts., Cincinnati, O.
Dyer,  Nannie, 424 6th  Ave.,

New York, N. Y.
Earle, Edna, 1520 S.  Michigan

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Ebeling,  Mrs. F., 67 Sutton

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Edelberg, 10,740 Superior

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Elizabeth, Madam, 1329

Hancock St., Brooklyn,

N. T.
Ellis,  Edward  N., 114  V  St.

N. E., Washington, D. C.
Elsasser, Mrs. M., 5003 7th

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Engelbretson, Mrs. Agnes,

6423  S.  May  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Ericson,  Miss  M., 434 E. 149th

St., New  York, N.  Y.
Fatoff, M. S., c/o Borden Co.,

114 Park PI., New York,

N. Y.
Fielding, Owen, 968 Anderson

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Fields, J., 30 W. 132nd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Fitzgerald, B. J., 211 E. 33rd

St., New York, N. Y.
Flush, Mme. B., 250 M'. 94th

St., New York, N. Y.
Forbes,  Agnes  B.,  115  N.  Perrv

St.,  Dayton,  O.
Foster,  North, 30 N. Michigan

Ave., Chicago, 111.


Fourshe, May, 3913 Cottage

Grove Ave., Chicago, 111.
Frank, Mme.  I.., 540 W. 112th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Fusav, Henrv M., 50 W. 82nd

St., New  York, N. Y.
Gehl, A. F., 1550 Claybuin

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Ginn, Dora, 328i S. High St.,

Columbus, O.
Ginsberg, S., 251 W. 111th

St., New York, N. Y.
Ginsburg, Samuel M., 60 W.

75th St., New York, N. Y.
Gleason, John H., 20 E. 46th

St., New  York. N. Y.
Gottschalk,  L.  R., 12  Kingston

Ave., Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Graham, Mrs. E., 180 Frank-
lin  St., Buffalo. N. Y.
Grossmann, Frederick N.. 460

E.  141st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Gruggel, Carl A., 54 E. 59th

St., New York. N. Y.
Grusemick, J. F., 79 Hamil-
ton Place, New York, N. Y.
Guenther, Ernest, 222 W.

140th  St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.
Gunsollv,  J.  A., 2084 E. 46th

St., Cleveland, O.
Gustafson, Marie, 14 W.

Washington Blvd., Chicago.

111.
Hagerty, Mrs. M., 215 W.

142nd St., New York, N. Y.
Hag.strom, Jules A., 109

Dodge  Ave.,  Akron, O.
Hahn, Claus, 8814  Wade

Park Ave., Cleveland. O.
Hansen, Carl  T., 108  North

State St., Chicago, 111.
Hansen, Geo., 2329 84th St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Harkow, Madame  G. E., 475

Monroe St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Harris, Fred., 1520 Washing-
ton  St.,  Toledo,  O.
Hasemeier, Albert A., Hamil-
ton,  O.
Hastad, Miss  Amanda,

Aeolian Hall, 33 W. 42nd

St., New  York, N. Y.
Haupt,  W.  H.,  607  O  St.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.
Hausmann, A., 241 W. 42nd

St., New York, N. Y.
Haussler, Joseph H., 332 14th

St.  N.  E.,  Washington, D.  C.
Heden, Gustav, 1224 Pacific

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Helf, Helen, 246 W. 128th St.,

New  York, N. Y.
Heller, Dr. G. A., 1537 B'way,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Hendrickson, Jesse W., Law-
rence, L.  I.,  N.  Y.
Hochu, Mrs. Emma, 720 East

Diamond  St.,  Pittsburgh.  Pa.
Hodge,  Mrs. M.  J., 122 East

Capitol St., Washington,

D.  C.
Holden, Marion G., 267 Park

Place, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Hornberg, Carl H., 408 Penn.

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hounnel, John, 21 Manhattan

Ave.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Hradek, Mrs. J. J., Hotel

Bon Ray, New York, N. Y.
Huber, Chas. E., 1227 Main

St., Cincinnati, O.
Huber, Mrs. T., B'way and

44th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Hultgren, Albert, 5059 N.

Clark St., Chicago, 111.
Hughes, Mary, 26 College St.,

Dayton, O.
Hulander, Hy. N., 127 Halsey

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Hurlburt, E.  F., 467 Fargo

Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.


Hyde,  Mr.s,  C.  E.,  58  E. 18th

St., Chicago, 111.
Ina, Madame, 1440 R St.

N.  W.,  Wa.shington, D.  C.
.Jacobson,  Mrs.  John,-  247  We.st

123rd St., New York, N. Y
.lalas, Onni. 535 W.' 163rd St.,

Now York, N. Y.
Jeffries, Miss M. C, 1752 17th

St.  N.  W., Washington,  D.  C.
Johansen, Miss A., 7902 13th

Ave., Brooklyn,  N. Y.
.Johanssfjn,  Mis.  Geo.  W 51  W

84th St., New Ycjrk. N. Y.
Johnson, Mrs.  Anna  B., 1614

15th  St. N. W.,  Washington,

D.  C.

Johnson, Mrs. Lydia, 1138

Connecticut Ave. N. W.,

Washington,  D.  C.
Jones, A. E., 1 W. 34th  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Jones, Anna U., 6412

Belvedere Ave., Cleveland,

Jones,  Clifton  R.,  Sawyer

Sanitarium, Marion, O.
June, Elsie  E.,  Y. W.  C.  A.,

Dayton, O.
Kaiser, Arthur J., 1137 3rd

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Kaisei', A. Jacob, 171 E. 81st

St., New York, N. Y.
Kaufman, Sylvia, 27 Arch St.,

Alliance,  O.
Kaulbach,  Mrs.  Viola  C,  221

E.  Erie St., Chicago, 111.
Kaynor, Madam. 1420 E. 55th

St., Chicago, 111.
Keeshan, Margaiet H., Hotel

Linton, Cincinnati, O.
Kelley, Mrs.  Annie M., 1161

6th St. N. E., Washington,

D.  C.
Kelly, E.  R., 47  E. 3rd  St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Kennedy.  Arthur  J.,  159  W.

Main  St.,  Newark,  O.
Kenney, M. F., 1785 Amster-
dam  Ave., New York, N. Y.
Keymer, Sigrid, 3808 Clinton

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Kjellberg, Dr., 624 S. Michi-
gan Ave., Chicago, 111.
Kjellberg,  Mrs.  T.  Folke,  10  E.

Huron St., Chicago, 111.
Koppel, Mile. S.. 158 W. 34th

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Kouth, Miss T., 3912 Cottage

Grove Ave.. Chicago, 111.
Kreuzer,  C.  236  E.  69th  St..

New  York, N.  Y.
Kurth, George, 225 W. 68th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Laird, John S., 3rd Floor, 5

Garfield PI., Cincinnati, O.
La Mont, Lillian, 121 Shilinto

Place, Cincinnati, O.
Larrowe, Miss, 87 W. Huron

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Lautenschlaeger, George,

2254  N.  Clark  St.,  Chicago,

111.
Leckert,  Theo.  A.,  1210  Florida

Ave. N.  E.,  Washington,

D.  C.
Lenz, Marie, 3808 Prospect

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Lett,  D.  W.,  Marion,  O.
Lett, Esther, Marion, O.
Levine, Frank C, New Phila-
delphia,  O.
Liebgold, Louis, 3604 B'wav,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Liggens, Malinda F., Locust

St., Coshocton, O.
Lilly, Mme., 875 Flatbush

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Lindberg, Folke, 167 W.

Washington Blvd., Chicago,

111.


1131


Professional  Iir(/istrr


Masseurs


Lindgren,  E.,  1757  K  St.  X.  W  .,

Washington.  D. C.
Lindsav, Caroline  Z., 78 St.

Marks  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Lindstrom. K.  C,  143 Waverly

Place, New  York,  N.  Y.
I.indstrom,  Jos.  W.,  166  K.

67th  St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.
Lohne, Miss T., 664 Lexington

Ave.,  New York,  N. Y.
Long,  Ruth. 421  S. Wabash

Ave.. Chicago, 111.
Lope, Fredk.  A., 301 W. 139th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Lovranich, John, Stevens

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Luck, Josephine A., 9.58 8th

\ve.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Lundberg, Anna  M., 908 6th

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Lundgren, Gurli, 5 S. ^^  aba.sh

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Lutz,  Phil.  J.,  808  Mason  Bldg..

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Lynch, Miss B., UOo Lexing-
ton Ave.,  New  1  ork,  N.  ^  •
Lynch, Miss Bridget, 1101

Lexington Ave., New lork,

N.  Y.
MacDonald, Harriet, 333o

Carnegie  St.,  Cleveland  O.
MacGregor,  J.  B.,  5  S.  ^^  abash

\ve., Chicago, 111.  , ^,^

Macher,  M. B..  204  E.  3.5th  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Madelung, Miss  Hilma, 220

Wisconsin Ave., Chicago,

Maescher, Ella, 4 W. 7th St..

Cincinnati, O.
Malmquist, Miss Hilda, 10 E.

Delaware  Place,  Chicago,

Markel, Prof. M., 39 West

Adams St., Chicago, 111.
Marko, 519 E.  78th  St.,  New

York, N. Y.  „, ^

Marshal. Albert R., 301 E.

85th  St.,  New  York,  Ts-}-
Marshall, Mrs. M. E., 1432?.

Q St. N. W., Washington,

D. C.
Mattern, Frank G., 68 W.

69th  St.,  New  York,  N. i.
Maurer, E., 3124 Fredonia

Ave., Cincinnati, O-
Maxwell, Chas. W.. 1712 East

9th St., Cleveland, O.
McDonell, 100 W. 139th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Mellotts Mechanical, 6 W.

North  Ave..  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Mendenhall.  Louis,  Marion,  O.
Meyer,  R., 399 E.  155th  St.,

New York. N. Y
Millard, H. B., 488 Nostrand

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Misunan, Frank, 825 Milton

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Montgomery, James D., 159

W. Main St., Newark, O.
Moodich, Miss Alfhild, 1026

6th  Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Moore,  Miss  D.,  127  E.  26th

St., Chicago, 111.
Moore, Mary G., Marion, O.
Morris, Philip, 332 E. 72nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Nelson, Miss Bertha, 121

Vermilyea Ave., New York,

N.  Y.
Nelson, Melissa  J., 318 East

State  St., Columbus. O.
Neumann, Carl, 510 W. 133rd

St., New York, N.  Y.
Ohman, Henrietta C, Kenton,

O.
Oldenbarg.  Hugh  Ad.. 122  S.

Michigan  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Olsen,  Mrs.  L.. 157  W. 98th

St., New York, N. Y.


Olson, Herman, 501 JJiamond

Bank Bldg., I'ittsburgh, Pa.
Oman,  Mr.s. E., 17 E. 89th  St.,

New York, N. Y.
O'Neill. Mrs. M. E., 1050

Amsterdam  Ave.,  New  York,

N. Y.
Orlik, Anna, Flat 43, St.

Leger Flats, Cincinnati, O.
Palmborg, Mrs.  Augusta, 1840

Wells St., Chicago, III.
Paradis, Regina D., 201 West

120th  St..  New  York,  N.  Y.
Parish,  J.  D..  140 N.  State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Patterson, Wright L., 374

Buffalo St.. Conneaut, O.
Peel, Peter  J., 20 W. .Tackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Pengel, William, 168 West

95th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Penrose, Josephine, 114 East

59th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Peterson, Alma, 326 S. High-
land Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Porter,  F.  J., 74 E. 96th  St.,
Province, Mme. B. P., 1416 S

St., N. W., Washington,

D.  C.
Radke, Frank, 2932 Indiana

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Ranken, Ellis, Colonial

Arcade. Cleveland, O.
Ranken,  Inez,  1428  E.  80th  St.,

Cleveland, O.
Rascher, Miss J.. 2119 N St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Rawlins, Wm. E., 46 Irving

Place, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Reckewell, Mrs. Mary, 200  W.

72nd  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Reinecke, E., 1972 7th Ave.,

New York, N.  Y.
Reudolph, C. A., 3800 B'wav.

New York, N. Y.
Richards, Addie, Findlav, O.
Richards, Wm. H., 121J AVest

Sandusky St., Findlay, O.
Robinson, Mme. D. V.  J., 1906

6th St.. "SVashington, D. C.
Robishaw, C. E., Mount

Vernon,  O.
Rolden. Jane, 246 Echo Place.

New  York,  N.  Y.
Rolley & Terry, 140 W. 42nd

St.. New York, N. Y.
Rose, Harris, 3515 Indiana

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Ross, Mrs. Bertha, 3030

Vernon Ave., Chicago, 111.
Rutzel,  A.  J.,  Cedarhurst,  L.  I.

N.  Y.
Sadler.  Frank  S.,  222  W.  123rd

St., New York. N. Y.
Sanders, L. J., 13 Sycamore

Ave., Washington, D.  C.
Sandstrom, Ellen. 804 Bruson

Bldg., Youngstown. O.
Schmidt, John C, 109 Shillito

Place, Cincinnati, O.
Schneider, Bertha E., Room

409, 414 Walnut St.,

Cincinnati, O.
Schroder, Knute  A., 2843 N.

Clark St., Chicago, 111.
Schupp, Emma, Cleveland, O.
Schuster, Miss E., 20 E. 65th

St., New York, N. Y.
Sheakford.  Mrs.  E., 347 45th

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Simonds, W. E., 2 Second St:,

Troy, N. Y.
Smith, Mrs. A. E. B., 1216 T

St. N. W., Washington,

D.  C.
Soloter, Miss  V. P., 940 Simp-
son St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Sonntag,  Miss  Clara,  1109  14th

St. N. W.. AVashington,

D.  C.


Standish, Lulu, 2103 Sfith St.,

Cleveland, O.
Stange,  J.  H.,  7  W.  Madison

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Stewart, Fannie D., 516 Hat-
man St., Youngstown, O.
Storseth, Marie. 4653 Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Stevick, L. S., Elvria, O.
Storseth, MoUie, 357 W. 63rd

St., Chicago, 111.
Strahler. Ralph G., Alliance,

O.
Swenson, Miss A. G.. Royden

Apt. House, Washington,

D.  C.
Swenson  &  Oman,  17  E.  89th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Thompson, Mrs. E. D., 952 R

St. N. W., Washington,

D.  C.
Thompson, Mrs. M. Florence,

24 Huntington Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Thormahlen, Conrad, 420

Market St., Zanesville, O.
Thurman,  Mrs.  M., 203 E. 61st

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Tischler, Helen W., 435 Race

St., Cincinnati. O.
Titus, Margaret S., 3279 West

98th St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Tjomsaas, Karan, 2728

B'way, New York, N. Y.
Tonkin, John, 2121 15th St.

N. W.,  Washington, D. C.
Trieber, Mme., 149 W. 66th

St.,  New  York. N.  Y.
Venn, Miss Louev, 1748 M St.

N.  W.
Vernon, Prof, and Mrs. A. A.,

10 Barlow Place, Buffalo,

N. Y.
Victor Bros., Oliver Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Voiight,  Mrs. A.  B., 347  5th

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Walsh, Thos. A., 119 E. 76th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Watson, Cora A., 1130 Locust

St., Cincinnati, O.
Webb, Albert  E., 318 W. 57th

St., New York, N. Y.
Weidlich, R. C. 304 Madison

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Weir,  Mme.  Helen  Barkell,  101

W. 126th  St..  New  York.

N. Y.
Westlund, Carl E., 5146

Liberty Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Wistman,  Miss  .Vnna  M., 108

N. State  St., Chicago, 111.
Wistman. Carl, 108 N. State

St., Chicago, 111.
Wickstrom, Edla M.. 4318

Cottage Grove Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Widen,  Wm. F.,  Madison  Ave..

Toledo, O.
Wiesner,  S..  72  W^  116th  St..

New  York,  N.  Y.
Williams.  Gerald  R.. 144  Mon-
roe  St., Brooklyn. N. Y.
Williams, Lloyd, 510 Fianklin

St., Buffalo,  N. Y.
Wilmot,  John  A.,  1230  East

63rd  St., Chicago,  111.
AVilson, M. S., 347 5th Ave.,

New York, N. Y.
Wolf-Heinemann.  Mrs.  M.. 242

W. 38th St., New York,

N. Y.
Young. .Tas., 1224 Pacific St..

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Zapel, Otto, Jr., W. 12th St.

and  S. 56th  Ave., Chicago,

111.
Zenkel,  Wm.  M.,  14  W.  Wash-
ington Blvd., Chicago, 111.


Mcclioiio-'J'Iicni/>ixl.i


Professional  Register


113.3


MECHANO-THEKAl'lSTS

Ahnert, Chas.. Peru, Ind.
Albright, K. 1... 1291 S. Pearl

St.,  Columbus,  O.
Allen, L. L.. «!' T.inden Ave.,

Dayton, O.
Allender, .1. E., 306 Nafl Ex-
change Bank Bldg., Steu-

benville, O.
Altwater, Winfrcd, Kent.  O.
Amberger,  Miss, 123fi 11th St.,

Washington, D.  C.
Anders, Aug., 313 S. Pine St..

Newton, Kans.
Anderson, C. J.. 27 Falls

Ave., Youngstown, O.
Arps, Henry J., R. No. 1.

.Jewell,  O.  , r.. ^

Asheroft, Elmer. High Street,

Fort  Recovery,  O.
Attinger,  S.  F., Box  57,  Mans-
field. O.
Augier. F.  I^., 710  Tecumseh

St.,  Toledo,  O.
Aurelius,  J.,  Fremont,  Kans.
Ayer,  Ed  .1.,  R.  F.  D. No.  1,

Box 39. Abbyville, Kans.
Bailev, T. C,  Gridley,  Kans.
Baily, .1. F..  Boshau,  O.
Baker,  Chas.,  I^indsey,  O.
Ball, Edith E., R. D. No. 1,

Box 48,  Galloway,  O.
Ball Wm. F., Wamego, Kans.
Barsky,  Nathaniel, 211  Main

St., Conneaut, O.
Baseler, A. W., R. No. 1, Box

116, Cardington, O.
Bassett, Dr. Norman H., 214

E.  Broad  St., Salem,  N.  J.
Bateman, l.oui.'^e, 1414 W St.

N. W., Washington,  D.  C.
Bell,  J.  M., Mount  Gilead,  O.
Bell,  John,  838  Altgeld  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Belyea, James A., Box dib,

Toledo, O.  .,., T^ T^

Bezingue, Arthur, R. F. D.

No. 8, Pittsburgh, Kans.
Biebl, Andrew J., 821 E.  Main

St., Columbus, O.
Bigler, Sidney A., Ashtabula,

Bi?tinger,  Jos.  E.,  123  13th  St.,

Toledo,  O.
Bittinger,  J.  F.,  Cludister

Bldg.,  Bowling  Green,  O.
Blanchard, Judson M., Elyria,

Blankenbecker, Grace, R. R-
No. 9, Box 49, Ottawa,
Kans.

Bolger, E. A., 3102 Perkins
Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.

Boring, Mary E., 599 Rock-
dale Ave., Cincinnati, O.

Bottinelli, Angelo, 2229 Mur-
ray  Hill Road, Cleveland,

Bourne, Hattie E., 3493

Stranton  Road,  Cleveland,  O.
Bowsher, J. S., Adelphi, O.
Braun, Alfred, 345 Seneca  St.,

Alliance, O.
Brent,  J.  V.,  522  Park  Ave.  A\ .,

Mansfield, O.
Broedling,  John,  Jr.,  41  Jasper

St., Dayton, O.
Brugger, F. A., 918 Ave. K,

Galveston,  Tex.
Brugger, S.  A., 119  New  St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Brunner, J. T., Woodward

Bldg., Washington, D. C.
Bryant, F. H.,  Court  House,

Cottonwood Falls, Kans.
Buchanan, Porter D., 907

Euclid  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Burkenholder, H. E., Carlisle,

Pa.


Burlage, Thos. T., R. F. D.

No. 1, Esbon, Kans.
Bushaw, A.  Wm., 130  Main

St., Bangoi', Me.
Carford, C.  H., 116 Calvin St..

Youngstown, O.
Carty, Wm.  A., Bowerston, ().
Clayton, Cora E., 1712 l.st

Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Cody,  J. Alfred, 600 Woodland

Ave., Conneaut, O.
Colehan, J. J., P. O. Box 414,

Centralia, Pa.
Coppala,  Modestino, 1353

Central  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Council, Dr., Wibeaux, Mont.
Covert, O. W., Zanesville, O.
Covert, Wm. M., Chesterville,

O.
Crane, F. L., 725 W. 23rd St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Cummings, Dr. W. F., 719

Washington Ave., Norfolk,

Va.
Curtis, Edward J.. 736 Palm-
wood St., Toledo, O.
Curtis, Henry  S., L. Box  5,

Dunlap, Kans.
Daniels,  James  O., 710  Minne-
sota Ave., Kansas City,

Kans.
Daust,  O.  E.. R. F. D.  No. 9,

Kent, O.
Davey,  C. A., 1005  Market  St  .

Youngstown, O.
Davies, Wm. M., 325 Mercan-
tile Bldg., New Castle, Pa.
Dawson, E. E., 1398 Pythion

Ave., Springfield, O.
Day,  J.  Warren, 80  Granite

St., Portland, Me.
Decker, Bert  D., 1064 Dorr

St., Cleveland, O.
Denis, T. B. W., 325 South

Lawrence Ave., Wichita,

Kans.
Devitt, Elli.s, 603 West St.,

Hillsboro, O.
Diliworth, C.  C, P. O.  Box

672, Payne, O.
Dilley, J.  C, 62  Main  St.,

Duncan Falls, O.
Dimick, Frank C, 732 Ohio

Bldg., Toledo, O.
Dishong,  Myrtle  D.,  342  Huron

St.,  Toledo,  O.
Doty,  C. F., 228  N. Main  St.,

Niles, O.
Doty, Slanton W., Massillon,

I O-

Ducamp,  D.  R.,  813  12th  St.
I N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
j  Edwards, Dr. Ai-thur, San
! B'lancisco, Cal.
i  English, Jess  S., 175 North

Main  St.. Bowling  Green,  O.
Ettinger, Cutler, E.  Broad  St.,

R.  F. D.  No.  1,  Elyria,  O.
Evans, A. R., 160 N. 4th St.,

Newark,  O.
Evans, T., 1347  L  St.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.
Evers, Henry, 840 E. 105th

St., Cleveland, O.
Ewin, C. H., 32 W. Market

St.,  Xenia,  O.
Ewing, J.  H., Forest,  O.
Farber, Peter, 1727 Elm St.,

Cincinnati, O
Fehr, Edwin P., 5200 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Field, Violet L., 208 Nafl

Exchange Bank Bldg.,

Steubenville,  O.
Finney, Mrs. Mary, Russell,

Kans.
Fisher,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  328  Clinton

St., Findlay. O.
Fisher, Alice E., 416i South

Main St., Findlay, O.


Fisher,  M. K.,  9 W.  Sugar  St.,

Mount Vernon, O.
Fithcroff. Wm., 902 Elm St.,

Cincinnati, O.
Ford,  Miss  Alberta,  328  Jarvis

St., Toledo, O.
Forsythe, L.  C, Box 62,

Lewistown,  O.
Foster,  Miss  Nora  D.,  R.  F.  D.

No. 4, Box 10, Conneaut, O.
Fox, Jefferson, Alliance, O.

Paole,  Kans.
Frank.s, Simon Merl, North

Main  St.,  Findlav,  O.
Frey, W. H., R. .5", Box 8,
Front, Wm. B., Van Wert, O.
Frost, Henry, 1337 Central

Ave., Cincinnati,  O.
Fuller, O. K., 4126 S. Halsted

St.. Chicago, 111.
Fuseh, W. H. A., 1630 E. 3rd

St., Topeka, Kan.s.
Gackenbach, F. A., 125 South

Main St., Wichita, Kans.
Galbraith, Lafayette, Tippe-
canoe,  O.
Gardner, Chas. A., 1597 East

93rd St., Cleveland, O.
Games,  Moses,  R.  F.  D No 1

Box  44,  Richmondale O.
Gaskill, A., R. F. D.  No. 1

Midland  City,  O.
Gay,  Howard  M.,  Pioneer,  O.
Gebhart, Anna, 29 N. 1st St

Dayton,  O.  '

Gehman,  Miss  S.,  W.  C T U

Canton, O.  ■ • .,

Gerard, Frank, Marion,  O.
Getter, D. W., Chillicothe, O
Good, Emil J., 707 Patterson

St..  Canton,  O.
Goodin, Herman, New Lex-
ington, O.
Goss, Chas.  A., 531 E. 114th

St., Cleveland, O.
Goul,  J.  M., 273 Clifton St..

Springfield, O.
Gray,  Frank, 1509 Glenn  Ave

Kansas City, Kans.
Guenther, Clifford E. R F

D. No. 4,  Box 131,  Berca, O
Hagewanig, H. B., Henington,

Kans.
Hagstrom, J.  A., 101  Everett

Bldg., Akron, O.
Hagstrom,  Richard,  101

Everett Bldg., Akron, O.
Haines, Florence Brick

Ocean City, N. J.
Hall, R. G., Box 378, Marys-

ville, Kans.
Haller,  J.  J.,  596  Mill  St.,

Conneaut, O.
Harste, Wm., 127 Shankle

St., Findlav, O.
Haskins. Mrs. M. E., 43

Schundt Bldg., Toledo, O
Haughey,  Avilla,  Route  6,

Wichita, Kans.
Hawley, S. L., Cedar, Kans.
Hayes, M. D., 719 Cottonwood

St., Independence, Kans.
Heckman,  Eugene,  155  E.  33id

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Hendershot, C. D., Box 39.

Vincent, O.
Henry, J. D., Moxahala, O.
Hill, Mrs. L. E., 901 N. Main

St., McPherson, Kans.
Hoffman, Harrv C, 1406 N

2nd St.. Harrisburg, Pa
Hogewonig. Neal Cornelius,

Horton, Kans.
Holaday, E. R., 1739 5th

Ave., Oakland, Cal.
Holmes. O. W., 272 Circular

St., Tiffin. O.
Holzbach, J. H., Niles, O.
Hoover,  F.  U..  425  Arbor

Road N. E., Cleveland, O.


1134


Professional  Rrgistcr


Mcrlidno-Tlicrapisls


Hoskins.  Geo.  W  c /o  Cincin-
nati National  League  Base-
ball  Club, Cincinnati. O.

Hosack, Frank 10.. Ron  to 3.
Frpdoiicktown, O.

Houston.  R.  A..  1520  Federal
St.. Pittsburgh, Ta.

Hubbell.  1).  A..  Ill  N'-  lafk.son
St., I.onia, Mich.

Huxman. H. W.. Box 2!t.
Utica,  Kans.

.Tatoby. .John. 186 Blvd.,
Marion. O.  ^, .

Jeffries, Wm. H.. Chetope,

.Tc^e,"Geo.  Theo.,  fi423  Beaver  I
St Cleveland, O.  „  ,,, ,

Johns,  Oscar  W.,  8009  Wade  .
Park Ave.  N.  B., Cleveland.

Johnson.  Russell  W.,  47  E.  5th  !

St., Chillicothe.  O.  ,

Jonek, A. E., 2319 Monroe St..  i

Toledo, O.  I

Jones, J. A.. 821 High  St.,

Youngstown, q.  T-iio-h

Jones, J. S.. Kleine and High

Sts., Girard, O.  rod W

Judson, M. Blanchard 534 W.

Broad St., Elyria, O.
Judv,  Wilson,  505  Main  St.,

Toledo, O.
Julian,  J..  Sanbury.  O.
Juresoin. David I., 2358 East

49th  St., Cleveland O.
Kahler, Chas. E.. 998 Frank-
lin Ave.,  Columbus,  O.
Kaiser Frank,  Pillegar,  Minn ,
Kaplin Blwood S.. 3241 West

65th St., Cleveland, O  ,

Kauffman, R. S., R. l  • ^■

No.  1. Wadsworth,  O.
Keallar,  Miss  Clara  R. 31.5 b-

West  St.. Bellevue, O.
Kenagy. Paul J., Bern, Kans.
Kennel. F. J., 16 S. Clain St.,

Ke^'r^r  Roben E., 439 Main

St., iMansfield, O.
King, Cornelius E. 955 lOUi

Ave..  Long  Island  City N Y.
King,  Wallace  Edward,  2^5

Main  St..  Ashtabula,  O.
Kintner, P., Star Route 1,

Box 29, Kinsley, Kans.
Kirkland,  J.  E.,  Sioux  Fall.s,

K?eh?,'  Joseph  F..  P.  O.  Box

18.  Akron,  O.  . , „ t^,

Kopp, M. S.. Colonial  Hotel,

Davton. O.  „,. ^

Kostner, Ed., 605 Clinton

Alley, Akron, O.
Lahand, Joseph, Logan. O.
Laird,  John  S..  5  Garfield

Place,  Cincinnati, O.
Lane, Mrs. Mae, Comosdin,

Kans.  ^ .

Langkamp.  Walter, Beach

City O.
Lavsa,' O. H., Box 30.

Ulster  Park,  N.  Y.
Lear, Fred. W., 121 Auglaize

St.,  Wapakoneta, O.
Leatherman, J.  J.,  Mounridge,

Kans.
Lecklider, Clyde, 2029 Ver-
mont Ave.,  Toledo, O.
Lee, Luther, 605 7th St., East

Hutchinson, Kans.
Lehr, Edwin P., Room 216,

The Euclid, Cleveland, O.
Leland.  Clinton  W.,  409

Center  St.,  Findlay,  O.
Leland, Fayette A., 409

Center St., Findlay, O.
Leonard,  J. O., Box 347,

Middleport, O.
Leyland, Henry, Utica, O.


813 6th


F. D. No.
371 Stod-


Linderfer, Mary

St., Canton. O,

Lines, J. E.. R.

Caledonia, O.
Linpert. Henry.

dart Ave., Columbus, O.
Long. .Vlbert E., (^inibridge,

O.
r>ong, Louis, 1044 E. Tremont

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Loomis, Alice Rass, Jefferson,

O.
Mackey,  John R., North 5th

St.. Martins Ferry, O.
Mang. Chas. J.. Fir.st Nafl
Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh,
Pa.
Manii, Mrs. E. E., Box 386,

Liberal, Kans.
Martin,  J.,  1963  Erie  St..

Toledo, O.
Mathews, Joseph M., 319
Lexington Ave.. Columbus,
O.
Maver, Emil, 1127 Chestnut
St., Richmond Hill, L. I.,
N. Y.
MacKay.  Thos.  J..  826  York

St., Camden, N. J.
McAlindon, James, 2456

Superior  Ave. N.  W.,  Cleve-
land, O.
McAvov, Elizabeth, 426 North

3rd St., Hamilton,  O.
McDougal, Donald D., 121
Shillite Place,, Cincinnati,
O.
Mclver, J. M., Box 191, Weir,

Kans.
McKenna, Maurice, 1888 W.

48th St., Cleveland, O.
McKenzie, Jesse, 326 South

Main St., Delphos. O.
McLeod. W. A., 606 Joliet
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Joliet.
111.
McMillen, A. R.. Riverdale.

Md.
Mellor, Joseph, 2305 E. 57th

St., Cleveland, O.
Meyers,  A.  M., 1312  Wayne

Ave., Dayton, O.
Miller, C. A.. 10,111 North

Blvd., Cleveland, O.
Miller, L. B., 10th and N Sts.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Miller. M.. 866 Duluth Ave.,

St. Paul, Minn.
Millers,  J.  A.,  Cor.  Summit  and

Cherry Sts., Toledo, O.
Mills, Roy. 303 N. Osage St.,

Girard. Kans.
Mingo,  Mrs. Effie, 3741 Dirr

Ave..  Cumminsville.  O.
Mitchell, Eugene, 815 N.
Topeka Ave., Wichita,
Kans.
Moffett. Everett D., R. F. D.

No. 4. West Mansfield, O.
Monck, O. L., 3711 W. 42nd

St., Cleveland, O.
Montgomery. J. D., 159 Main

St.. Newark. O.
Morris, Elza, R. F.

Gloucester, O.
Morten, J. W., 570
ton St., Akron, O.
Mount, R. C, 336 S. Main St.,

Marion.  O.
Murphy, E.  J., Young  Bldg.,

Ellwood City, Pa.
Neafie. Elon, 13(11 Fernwood

Ave., Toledo, O.
Neagley, Jas. K., 615 Sickles

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Nelson, Mrs. H., Lindsborg,

Kans.
Neumeier, Chas., Delphos, O.
Newton, Winfeld J., 121
Fulton St., Youngstown, O.


D. No. 1.
Washing-


Nichols, W., Hyde Park. Cin-
cinnati, O.
Noel, Edward John. 418 East

Long St., Columbus, O.
Nuennich. Frank, 10,355

Western Ave.. Cleveland, o.
Nussbaum, J. L.. Box 52,

Concordia. Kans.
Nutter, .T. O., Morrowville,

Kans.
O'Donnell,  Wm..  241h  Main  St.,

Ashtabula, O.
Omlar, John T.. 721 Tray St..

Dayton, O.
Orcutt, J. M., 159 Hiler St..

Conneaut, O.
Owen, Geo., 18J S. National

Ave., Fort  Scott, Kans.
Paclillo, Antonio, 381 E. Main

St.,  Bridgeport,  Conn.
Palmeter, Monroe, 145J West

Main  St., Lancaster, O.
Partridge,  G.  M.,  928  I  St.  N.

W., Washington,  D.  C.
Paugharn, E. C, R. F. D.

No. 1, Cortland, O.
Pebler, C. P., R. F. D. No. 4,

Oberlin, Kans.
Pedman. Walter J., Cor.
Market and Delaware
Sts., Youngstown. O.
Phelps. A. B., 1952 E. 97th

St., Cleveland, O.
Phillips,  Wm.  F.,  Bohman  and
Young Sts., Cincinnati, O.
Pitts, Mrs. O. H., 7505 Mel-
rose Ave., Cleveland, O.
Pocock, Eva E., Crestline, O.
Pohl, Irwin H., Columbus, O.
Pollock, H. S., 3610 A'esta

Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Pool, Arnold  A., 433 West
Central  Ave.,  Toledo, O.
Powers, Alexander A., Rut-
land,  O.
Powers, W. S., 3716 Drake

Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Presgraves, A. H., 117 Put-
nam Ave., Zanesville, O.
Preston,  F.  M.,  Park  Place,

Johnstown, O.
Prusendorfer, Adam ,T.,

Custar O.
Ramis,  Roy  E.,  1177  Taylor

St.. Akron,  O.
Randolph, Mrs. Jessie K.,
R. F. D. No. 2, Nashville,
Kans.
Reibold, Henry. Springfield,

O.
Reiley, M. J., 535 Plum St.,

Youngstown, O.
Reiser, Mrs. Sophia, 1930
Logan Ave., Youngstown,
O. .
Reynolds,  Geo.  H.,  R.  R.  No.  1.

Hazelton, Kans.
Rhoad, Ira D., New Wash-
ington,  O.
Rickmers,  N. \V., 9602
Parnelia  Ave., Cleveland,
O.
Riggle,  A.  G., 921  F  St.  N.  W.,

Washington, D. C.
Ringesein, H. W., 5 Superior

St., Toledo, O.
Ritter, J. M., Eastern Avenue,

Ashland, O.
Roheabaugh, D. H., Box 13,

Kalida, O.
Rose, C. F., Junction City,

Kans.
Rudy,  Albert  L., 5708 Long-
fellow Ave., Cleveland, O.
Rutenbeck, Carl W., 422 Gar-
field Bldg., Cleveland, O.
Ruthenberg, F.  W., 420 12th

St.,  Niagara  Falls,  N. Y.
Sadler, Miss Harriet Staeley,
322  W. 3rd  St.,  Mansfield,
O.


Medical  Doctors
(DrugU'ss)


Professional  Heyister


1135


Sanpert, Rev. Th<js. A.,

Napoleon,  O.
Scheibuer, C, 1462 W. 3rd St.,

Cleveland, O.
Schleifer, Mrs. E. M., 933

Rhode Island St., Lawrence,

Kans.
Schultz, Arthur C. A., 42H

Prescott St., Toledo, O.
Schuster, .John Reniigius, Gil

Cloyd St., Dayton, O.
Seeley, Jeanette, HIT Kast

89th St., Cleveland, ().
Shafer, Orland, (!0i Monroe

St., Tiffin, O.
Shaffer,  Jo.shiia  B.,  West

Unity, O.
Sheehan, .Jason P.. Freedom

Station, O.
Sherwin, Rev. B. A., Tippe-
canoe  City, O.
Shoemaker, John R., Hudson

Falls,  O.
Shoemaker, Lester E., Ashley,

O.
Shultz, A. C. A., 425 Prescott

St.,  Toledo, O.
Sieker, A. J. C, Strong- City,

Kans.
Silverson, Paul, 321 C St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Skinner,  M.  G.,  Alabama  Apts.,

Washington. D. C.
Skinner, P. D., 508 Spring  St.,

Coffeyville, Kans.
Smith, Chas.  J., 1227 Superior

Ave. N. E., Cleveland, O.
Smith, Lawrrence J., Millers-
burg, O.
Smith,  Lyle  E.,  301  W.  Federal

St., Youngstown, O.
Smith, P.  C, Canton, O.
Smith,  W.  M.,  628  E.  Long  St.,

Columbus, O.
Smithson,  Miss  M.  B., 940

Highland St., Columbus, O.
Snediker, R. T., 415 Everett

Ave., Kansas City, Kans.
Snyder, O. W., 1118 W. High

St.,  Lima,  O.
Stadius, Otto, 785 7th St., St.

Paul, Minn.
Stahl, J. C, 10,827 Olivet

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Stewart, Chas. E., Washing-
ton, O.
Stock, Lena, 1874 E. 86th St.,

Cleveland, O.
Stone, Hugh F., Box 25,

Salem. O.
Stone,  J.  N.,  315  Central  Office

Bldg., San Antonio^ Tex.
Stone,  L.  R.,  1215  Rhode

Island Ave., Washington,

D.  C.
Stought,  Miss  Bessie,  157  East

4th  St.,  Ashland,  O.
Stover, Orlando O., Harrison

Bldg., Columbus, O.
Stratton, C. Finley, Box 49,

Mingo,  O.
Svetcoff, Geo., 327 E. 66th St.

N. E., Cleveland,  O.
Swart, Geo. D., Kitchener,

Ont., Can.
Swartz, Mrs. E. B., White

City, Kans.
Swartz, R. E., White City,

Kans.
Talbert,  Horace,  Box  31.

Wilberforce, O.
Taylor, Chas. E., 2801 Garden

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Teel, Willis, R. No. 4, Box 38,

New  Concord,  O.
Thompson,  Rudolph,  2205  Cen-
tral Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Thompson, W. F., 212 E. 5th

St., Cincinnati, O.
Thorne, F. H., 325 Mercantile

Bldg-., New Castle, Pa.


Thoinell,  A.  M., 60  Parsons

Block, Burlington, Ta.
Tipton, George, 629 Cranston

St. (or  Creston  Ave.)

Marion, O.
Toren,  Lucy  E.,  6165  Rudge

Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Tovil, Francis, Lancaster, O.
Towner, A. H., Box 223, New

I'hiladelphia, Pa.
Tiuitt, H. v.. Box B., Middle-

poit, O.
Tullie, A.  M.. 714 E. Main St.,

Crestline, O.
Turners, Eugene, 608 South

Gilbert St., Ada, O.
Vahle. Wm.  J., 806 Spruce  St.,

Coffeyville, Kans.
Valentine, Josephine M., De

Graff, O.
Vargo, Joseph, 726 Illumina-
tion Bldg., Cleveland, O.
\'ogenitz, Lorin, Newcomers-
town, O.
Walter, F. Pete, Napoleon, O.
Wamsley, M. F., 900 Prospect

St., Cleveland, O.
Waid, Chas. W., 1031 Osborne

St.. Sandusky. O.
Warner, Mrs. Marion, 32^

Vine  St.,  Ashtabula, O.
Watkins, J. J., 2127 East

30th St., Lorain, O.
Wau, Jas. ^V., 1234  S.  Main

St., Akron, O.
Weber, Aithur  B., 806 Bel-
mont Ave., Toledo, O.
Webster. F. D., 5817 Central

Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Wells, A. B., Georgetown, O.
Wendee, Wm., Long- Beach,

Cal.
Wichner, Clara, R. F. D. No.

1,  North Baltimore,  O.
Wiebe, J. J., Box 121, Lehigh,

Kans.
Wildman. F. E., 325 E. Main

St., Norwalk, O.
Williams, Chester  E.,  Bowling

Green,  O.
Williams,  Mrs.  Cora  Belle,

Seipio Siding. O.
Wilson, H. Le Roy, 501 Fair-
field Ave., Akion, O.
Wise. F.  P., R. F.  D. No. 2,

M'ellston, O.
Woodside, R. H., Council

Grove, Kans.
Yearout, Vilas J., Box 10,

Dunlap, Kans.
Zugir,  C.  C,  Columbiana,  O.


medicaIj doctors

(Using Drugle.s.s 3Iethoils)

Abbott, Dr. Geo. M., Saranac
Lake, N. Y.

Antiea. Dr. Juan, Havana,
Cuba.

Antisdale, A. S., Chicago, 111.

Baldwin,  Dr.  Z.  L.,  Kalamazoo,
Mich.

Bateson, J.  C,  Scranton,  Pa. '

Becker,  Herbert  S.,  Staunton,
Va.

Bell, Robert,  London,  England

Benadom,  "\V.  A.,  c/o  Standard
School  of  Chiropractic  and
Naturopathy, Davenport, la.

Berry,  Benj.  F.,  c/o  The  Welt-
mer  Institute  of  Suggestive
Therapy, Nevada, Mo.

Bick,  H.,  4  \V.  117th  St.,  New
York,  N.  Y.

Bigsby, Dr. F. L., Head-
quarters of  A.  S.  O.,  Kirks-  ;
ville. Mo.  I

Billman, J. M., Sullivan, Ind.  i

Bishop,  R.  B.,  Kansas  City,
Mo.


P.onnelI, W. Lr- Roy,
Chickasha. Okla.

Bradford, Geo. H., New
London,  Conn.

Biady,  E.  F., St.  Louis,  Mo.

Brooking.s, J. iC, Lone Star,
Tex.

Browder, J. M., o/o The
Standard School of  Chiro-
practic and Naturopathy,
Davenport, la.

Brune, John H., 2545 Mont-
rose Ave., Chicagro, III.

Buswell, Arthur T., 566

Massachusett.s Ave., Boston,
Mass.

Buswell,  Dr.  Arthur, 268  W'est
Newton St., Boston, Mas.s

Butterman, W. F., 3341 Os-
good  St., Chicago. 111.

Caldwell, D. E., Durham
N. C.  '

Carrington, J.  s., Thoma.s,
N.  M.

Carter,  Fred.  H.,  Cambridge,

Vermont.
Church, Jas. L., 4847 North

Albany Ave., Chicag-o, III.
Class, F.  L., Huron, S.  D
Clinch, J. H. M., Danville,

Collins, A. B., Line.sville, Pa.
Connell,  Mary  C. 4634  Vin-

cennes Ave., Chicago, 111
Conrad,  C.  F., 110  W.  90th  St

New York, N. Y
Currier, D. M., Newport

N.  H.
Davidson, B. E., Kansas City

Mo.
Davis, Edw. G., 4601

Evanston  Ave., Chicag-o,

Dean, Dr.  T. A., Casper, Wyo.
Dejk L. P., c/o Standard

School of Chiropractic and

Naturopathy,  Davenport,  la
De  Og-ney,  O.  A.,  Milford,  Neb
Donner,  John  A.,  498  High  St.

Holyoke, Mass.
Dugdale.  G.  W.,  Boston,  Mass.
Dumbauld, B. A., Webb Citv

Mo.
Duncan. Chas. H., New York

N. Y.

Dunham, Geo. P., 151 Hunt-
ington Ave., Boston, Mass

Dunn, AV. A.. 2519 AVe.st
Broadway. Louisville, Ky

Duvall, O. N., Baltimore, Md.

Dyment, Phillip, Savannah,
Ga.

Eales, Irving James, Chicago,

Eberhardt. Noble M., 25 E.

Washington  St.,  Chicag-o,

111.
Eide,  A.  T.,  4017  Milwaukee

Ave., Chicago. 111.
Elliott, J. A., 32 N. State St.,

Chicago, 111.
Enos, J. W., Jeserville, 111.
Erling, Arnold E., Milwaukee,

Wis.
Farr,  B.  H.,  New  Smyrna,  Fla.
Fischer, Geo. F., 221 E. 53rd

St., New York,  N. Y.
Flower, A. H.. Boston, Mass.
Forstot, Samuel, 57  LTnion  St.,

Montclair, N. J.
Fritz, W. Wallace. 1600 Sum-
mer  St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Furry, L., Cheyenne, AVvo.
Gibbs,  John  P., 2750  Fulierton

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Gore,  M.  E.,  600  Main  St.,  East

Orange,  N.  J.
Griffing-, C. M.. 3964 Drexel

Blvd., Chicag-o, 111.


1136


Professional  Register


Menial  Scientists
Xaprapaths


Victor, Dallas,

Des Moines, Ta.
,  Cleveland, O.
V. H., Hot Springs,

Cal.


Grig-sby, Edw. S.. Tonapah,
Nevada.

Grist,  N.  M..  607  Kansas  Ave..
Topeka,  Kans.

Guggrenheim,  M.,  208  Palisade
Ave.,  West  Hoboken,  N.  J.

Gug-genheim,  Max,  Hoboken,
N.  J.

Guggenheim,
Tex.

Guild, \V. A.,

Gurley,  E.  W

Hallman
Ark.

Hamilton,  D.  D.,  Howard

Harris, Mae S., St. I.,ouis,  Mo.

Hawley,  A.  S.,  c/o  The  Chiro-
practic College,  San  Anto-
nio, Tex.

Heath,  L.  F.,  Georgetown,  Ky.

Held, Wm.,  Chicago, 111.

Hibbe,  Leopold  H.  R.,  154  E.
49th St., New York, N. Y.

Hinckley. Don H., 3904 Cot-
tage Grove  Ave., Chicago,
111.

Hodges,  V.  C.  Kansas  City,
Mo.

Horn,  A.  T..  3044  Wentworth
Ave.. Chicago. 111.

Hubbell, Eugene, St. Paul.
Minn.

Hunt, John H., Glendivc,
Mont.

Hunter,  Geo.  S.,  Hotel  Flor-
ence, Ogden  and  Adams  Sts..
Chicago, 111.

Jacquemin, Theodore J., 411
Franklin St., Union Hill,
N.  J.

Jacquemin, Theo.  J., 141 E.
44th St.. New  York, N. Y.

.Jensen, P. S.. Champaign, 111.

Johnson,  A.  J.,  Muskogee,  Fla.

Johnston, N. La Doit,
Chicago, 111.

.Tones, E. A.  D.,  Taft, Cal.

Jones, Eli  G., Buffalo, N.  Y.

Jones,  Margaret  M.,  Chicago,
111.

.Tones,  Oscar.  Indianapoli.s,
Ind.

Joslin, O. W., Dodgeville,
Wis.

Kennedy,  T.  W^., Sullivan,  Ind.

Kester, Eugene, Springfield.
Ore.

Kilborn, .1.  M., Sioux  City, la.

King, J. W., Bradford, Pa.

King. Mary  L.,  New Field
Laboratory, East Chatta-
nooga, Tenn.

Kirk, J. W.. Philadelphia. Pa.

Kirsch, F. W., St. Louis, Mo.

I>offler, Chas., St. Paul, Minn.

Leary, W. J., 11 Maple St.,
Chicago, 111.

Linder, Chas. O., Spokane,
Wash.

Lindley.  R.  H.,  Mineral  Wells,
Tex.

Littrell, A. R., Sherman, Tex.

Loizeaux, C. L., Dubuque, la.

Lopez, Francis, Bowling
Green, Fla.

Luepke,  J. F.  G.,  Welga.  111.

Luncan,  Chas.  H..  New  York,
N. Y.

Luttemberger.  J.  C.  M., 404
Tacoma Bldg.. Chicago, 111.

McCormick,  Chas.,  McCormick
Medical  College,  2100  Prai-
rie Ave..  Chicago,  111.

McRoberts, W. J., Hot
Springs, S. D.

Meyer,  Julia  A.,  S.'jS  Hamilton
Ave., St. Louis, Mo.


Michauer, H., Wichita, Kans.
Miller, B.  Curtis, 710 Bond

Bldg.. Washington, D. C.
Moat, W. S., 3332 N. 17th St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Moffat, Edgar  V., Orange,

N.  J.
Mols,  F.  P., 469  Best  St..

Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Morgenbesser,  H., 931 Fox

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Morris, S.  V., 121 Madison

Ave.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Muehlenbein, M. L.. 218 East

55th Place, Chicago, 111.
Muir,  Miss  A.  S.,  4200  S.  Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Miinch, G. A., 1806 Franklin

St., Tampa, Fla.
Osborne, R.  Randall,  Shannon,

111.
Ottofy, Louis, Manilla,

Philippine Islands.
Ozias, Chas. A., Kansas City,

Mo.
Parker,  Jos.  W.,  Peoria,  111.
Patchen, G. H., 13 Central

Park  West.  New  York,  N.  Y.
Payne, A. V., 47 W. 34th St.,

New  York.  N.  Y.
Perdue, E. M., Kansas City,

Kans.
Peterson, M. B., 3203 West

Harrison St., Chicago, 111.
Pettit,  G.  S.,  Oklahoma  City,

Okla.
Pfau,  F., 120  Palisade  Ave.,

West Hoboken, N.  J.
Plank, T.  Howard, Chicago,

111.
Porter, Charles  Sanford,  Long

Beach. Cal.
Powell, Horace R., Pough-

keepsie. N. Y.
Praegr,  J.  B., 110  W. 90th St.,

New York. N. Y.
Price. J. Russel, Chicago. 111.
Pruden, W. F., 5033 71st St..

Portland, Ore. (Chronic

Cases).
Purser,  John L., New  Orleans,

La.
Pusheck, C, 220  W. Ontario

St., Chicago, 111.
Pyle.  Henry  G., 332 N. Jeffer-  |

son St., Peoria, 111.
Raymond, Bertha C, 2630 E.

74th  St., Chicago,  111.
Replogle, P. S., Champaign,

111.
Rice, Alice H., Las Vegas,

N. M.
Roberts, C. S., New York,

N. Y.
Robinson, B. N., Prairie Du

Chien,  Wis.
Roemer, .T. F., Waukegan. Til.
Rogers, L. D., Chicago, 111.
Schuge, W. C, Chicago. 111.
Seton. Julia. St.  Louis, Mo.
Siegei, George H., Wichita,

Kans.
Silverman, Charles, Savan-
nah,  Ga.
Skippen, Alfred, Sweet,  Idaho.
Smith, M. O., Pottstown, Pa.
Sorensen, M. C, Sioux Falls,

S.  D.
Sperling, F. J. E., Wilkes

Barre, Pa.
Starbuck,  S.  H.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Tomlin,  R.  T., 45  Main  Ave.,

Ocean Grove, N. J.
Triece, J. H., c/o The Chiro-
practic College, San

Antonio, Tex.
Tilchler, A. S., San Francisco,

Cal.


Tuttle, Louis N., Holland,

Mich.
Unger, J. W., West Point,

Miss.
Valk, E. Gordon, Bundick,

Va.
Van  de  Sand,  G.  F., 120  S.

Honore St., Chicago, 111.
^'ereen,  Franklin,  Fort  Meade.

Fla.
Von Foregger, R., New York,

N.  Y.
Vose,  V.  G.,  Machias,  Me.
V^radenburg, H. L., York,

Nebr.
Waltenbaugh, C. C, Canton,

O.
Walton, Alfred, Philadelphia,

Pa.
Washburn, B. A., Paducah,

Ky.
Wehrle,  L.  G., 1230 E. 63rd

St., Chicago, 111.
White,  Geo.  Starr.  Los

Angeles, Cal.
Whitty, Michael,  New York,

N.  Y.
Wildman. Elias, Haddon

Heights, N. J.
Werner, E. H., 121 Madison

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Wetherell, G. M., Detroit,

Mich.
Yost,  H.  S.,  Fairmount,  W.  Va.
Zurmuhlen, Chas., 440  Ludlow

Arcade, Dayton, O.


MENTAL SCIENTISTS

Evertz,  Oscar,  N.  E.  Cor.  Ash-
land Ave.  and  Madison  St.,
Chicago, 111.

Hulick,  Miss  Harriet  C, 509
N. Newstead Ave., St.
Louis, Mo.

Miller.  John  T.,  1319  S.  Grand
Ave.. Los Angeles. Cal.


NAPRAPATHS

Cushman, Chas. R., fi N.

Michigan Ave., Chicago, III.
Goodrich,  'J.  R., 16  N.  Wabash

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Hagg, Edith M., 424-25

Holmes Bldg., Galesburg,

111.
Hanford, Ira L., c/o Chicago

College of Naprapathy,

Chicago,  111.
Heigerich, L. D., 2539 North

Kenzie St., Chicago, 111.
Hess, H. McClellan, 14 East

Jackson Blvd., Chicago, III.
Hunt, Sam'l. C, 14 East

Jackson Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Lightfoot,  Ota  P.,  c/o  Chicago

College of  Naprapathy,

Chicago, 111.
Mears, O. Benton, 6 N. Michi-
gan Ave., Chicago, 111.
Morrison, Wm., 16 N. Wabash

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Pierson, F. R., 16 N. Wabash

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Pritchett, Nettie C, 529-c

Griesheim Bldg., Blooming-
ton,  111.
Smith,  Chas.  E.,  16  N.  Wabash

Ave..  Chicago.  111.
Smith,  Oakley,  6  North

Michigan Ave., Chicago, 111.


Naturopaths


Professional  liegislcr


1137


Swartz,  Joseph  L.,  c/o

Chicago  College  of  Napia-

pathy, Chicago, 111.
Teufel, F. A., 5r)13 Drexel

Ave., Chicago, Til.
Waters, Nellie M., 108 North

State St.. Chicago, 111.
Wigelsworth, J. W., 32 North

State St., Chicago, 111.


NATUROPATHS

Abbott,  C.  A.,  Oskaloosa,  la.
Abell, A. H., 1539 W. Adams

St., Chicago,  111.
Abramson,  Elmer  C,  603  Case

St., St. Paul, Minn.
Ackley, Jos. A., 17 Erie

County  Bank  Bldg.,  Buffalo,

N. Y.
Adamop, Albert, 2057 W. Van

Buren St., Chicago, 111.
Adams, Herbert S., North

Salem, Ind.
Adams,  J.  A., P.  O.  Box  253,

Atwood, 111.
Adams,  L.  M.,  c/o  Bullis  Sani-
tarium, 32nd St., Oakland,

Cal.
Aguilera, Raphael  D., 261

33rd  St.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Alberts,  Cora  F.,  Nevada,  O.
Albro, Leander S., Oswego

Co. Savings Bank, Oswego,

N.  Y.
Albu,  D., 418  Caxton  Bldg.,

Cleveland,  O.
Albrecht, F. C, 1531 Congress

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Alders, Eliot, 310 Kingsley

Drive, Bakersfield, Cal.
Allen, E. W., 209 Fir St., La

Grande, Ore.
Allen,  F.  W., 367  10th  Ave.,

Paterson, N. J.
Allen, James, 4200 S. Grand

Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Allen,  T. B.,  Warren,  Pa.
Allen, Thos. J., Eureka

Springs, Ark.
Allison, G. C, 330 E. Tusca-
rawas  St., Canton, O.
Alpert,  A., 391 Clinton  Ave.,

Newark, N.  J.
Amen, Chas. F., 302 13th St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Ammermann-Hill,  Margaret,

101 States  Ave., Atlantic

City,  N.  J.
Anderson, Carl J., 27 Fields

Ave., Youngstown,  O.
Anderson,  C.  W.,  Balfour,

N. Dakota.
Anderson,  Dar,  Alliance,  O.
Anderson, Lewis H., 1336

Morse Ave., Chicago, 111.
Andover, Alliance, O.
Arffmann, E.  Von, 633 W.

Delaware Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y.
Arguelles,  Dr.  M.  G.,  1406  10th

Ave., Ybor  City, Tampa,

Fla.
Argust, T. A., c/o Lurlin

Baths, Brush and Larkin

Sts., Sap Francisco, Cal.
Arnold,  Alice, 100  Grace

Court, Elyria, O.
Artelt, Fred, 535 Security

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Ash, C. C, 767 Humboldt

Parkway, Buffalo,  N. Y.
Atherton, N. W., 421 S. Ash-
land Ave., Chicago, 111.
Austin, J. N., 19 Porter  Bldg.,
Autschbach, Carl, 333 S.

Dearborn St., Chicago, 111.
Ayrea, T. E.,  Goltry, Okla.

San Jose, Cal.


Bachite, Augustus  C, 27

Madison St., Rochester,

N. Y.
Bailey,  Albert  N.,  1116  Santons

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Bair, F. E., Leipsic, O.
Baker, Ruth E., 3219 Cleve-
land Heights, Cleveland, O.
Baker,  R.  N.,  Portland,  Ore.
Bait, H. Ben, 215 E. Main St.,

Troy, O.
Barber,  G.  A.,  207  S.  California

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Barth, Victor, 318 5th Ave..

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bartlet,  Maude  E.. 3709

Colorado Ave., Chicago,

111.
Baruch. Sandor, 59 W. lO.'^th

St.. New  York, N. Y.
Bates, John E., Geneseo, 111.
Bates,  R.  C, 401  Main  St.,

Alliance, O.
Baudendistal. C,  729 Polk  St.,

West  New  York,  N.  J.
Bauman,  C,  Aberdeen, S. D.
Baumgardner,  J. A., 3529

Gilbert Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Bauregard, Miss Lillian, 57

Worchester Ave., Pasadena,

Cal.
Bautsch, Rudolph, 4045 North

Calumet Ave., Chicago, 111.
Bayer,  Carl,  Harlem  Hydriatic

Institute, 55 W. 113th St.,

New  York, N. Y.
Bean, C. D., 216 College St.,

Akron, O.
Bean, C. D., 5th St. and

Broadway, Lorain, O.
Bean, Chas. R., Grinnell, la.
Bean, J. P.. 816 Turk St.,

San  Francisco.  Cal.
Beaulin, J.  A.,  Room 34-35,

Commercial Bldg., Woon-

socket,  R. I.
Bechtol, F. M., P. O. Box 12,

Station  D,  Cleveland,  O.
Becker. Jackson H., 29 Pine

Grove  Ave.,  Summit,  N.  J.
Becker, Jennie, 215 E.

Hickory  St.,  Arcadia,  Fla.
Becker, Mary, Camas Valley.

Ore.
Becker,  R.  C, 106  E.  Dote  St.,

Riverside,  Cal.
Beckman, Jerome W., Ferdi-
nand, Ind.
Beebe. M. K., 1116 15th Ave..

Minneapolis, Minn.
Beery. J. K..  Augusta, W.  Va.
Behncke,  F.  H.,  525  S.  Ashland

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Bell,  J.  B.,  1527  W.  Augustana

St., Chicago, 111.
Bell, J. H., 1452 W. Chicago..

Ave., Chicago. 111.
Bender, W. F., 10,308 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Benecke, W. F., 400 Braddock

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bennett,  C.  M.,  1339  Washing-
ton St., Springfield, 111.
Bennett, O. I., Blanchester,

O.
Benson, F. L., 346 N. Main

St., Springfield, Mass.
Berg, George, c/o Chase

House, Chicago, 111.
Berger. C. G., 1421 W. Adams

St., Chicago, 111.
Berger, Edward, 16 Bunn St.,

Amsterdam. N. Y.
Bergines. Herman. 84 Capitol

Ave., Hartford, Conn.
Berggren. Tell, 624 Glorietta

Blvd.. Coronado. Cal.
Berhalter, A. K.. 1423 Clark

St., Chicago, 111.


Bertholf,  Mrs. E.  L.,

Millersburg,  O.
Bertschinger, A., 340-43 Pit-

tock  Block,  Portland,  Ore.
Beverly, Dr. D., Lily Dale,

N. Y.
Biel,  127  N.  Genesee  St.,  Wau-

kegan. 111.
Bielskis,  J.  J.,  Hartford,  Conn.
Bigelow, F. F., Moore, Mont.
Biergs.  Mr.  &  Mrs.  A.  C,

Biggs' Sanitarium, Ashe-

ville. N. C.
Billhimer. J.. State St., Pitts-
burgh, Pa.
Bingesser, Anna. Waconda,

Kans.
Binte & Binte, 606 Mathews

Bldg.. Milwaukee, Wis.
Bird, C. L., 2583 Cherry St.,

Toledo. O.
Bird.  L.  L.,  Plant  City,  Fla.
Birdi, F. C, 1319 S. Grand

Blvd., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Black, John J.. 41 N. 18th St..

Ea.st Orange. X. .1.
Blackler, Ronald C, Y.M.C.A.,

Springfield, Mo.
Blade, V., 1233 W. Adams St.,

Chicago,  111.
Blair,  C.  B.,  Casey.  111.
Blanchard,  J.  W., 360  E. 195th

St., New York. N.  Y.
Blechschmidt. Richard, Natu-
ropathic Sanitarium, 920

Savoye St., North Bergen,

N.  J.
Bligh,  Wm.,  10,605  Superior

Ave., Cleveland. O.
Bliss, Edna M., 1536 E. 86th
Bligh,  Wm.,  Cleveland,  O.
Blochwitz, Max T., Teaneck,

N.  J.
Boatsman, P., Black River

Falls, Wis.
Bobb, Henrv  H., 2125 N. 18th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Bock,  Frederick,  Diemer

Bldg.,  East  Aurora,  N. Y.
Bode, H. E.. 719 5th St.,

Marietta, O.
Boese,  J.  A., 43 N.  Main St..

Sheridan, Wyo.
Boettcher,  H.  N..  1138  N.

Leavitt St. Chicago. 111.
Bogenrief, R. E., Northwood,

la.
Bolt,  Ben.  H.,  Troy,  O.
Bonner, Edgar J., Morrison

Bldg., Jacksonville, 111.
Bordeau. M. E., 805 Monroe

St.. Valparaiso, Ind.
Borgmann, A.. 142 Waverly

St., Yonkers. N. Y.
Boston, Geo. B.. Branchville,

N.  J.
Bowen.  T.  H..  Bridgeton,  N.  J.
Bovd, Headley, 601 ^V. 168th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Bracher. John, 14,820 Detroit

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Bracher. Katherine, 14.820

Detroit Ave., Cleveland, O.
Bracker, John, 14,820 Detroit

Ave.. Lakewood,  O.
Bradford. Edgar G.. 73 Sixth

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Bradley. O. M.. Danville, 111.
Bradley. Geo. A.. 508 Hewes

Bldg..  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Brand, Elizabeth. 405 Hippo-
drome Bldg., Cleveland, O.
Brand, Frederick. C, 3156

Pine  Grove  Ave., Chicago,

111.
Brand, Lucille S., 7465 Vine

St.,  Chicago. 111.
Branden, Mrs. Julia R., 590

California St., San Fran-
cisco, Cal.


1138


Professional  Hcf/istcr


SdliirDpullts


Brandman, R. lO., 311  Termin-
al Bldg-., Hoboken, N. J.

Bratchi. C. I... I.  O.  O.  F.
Temple, Akron, O.

Brandt, Carlos. 213 W. 123rd
St.. New York, N. Y.

Brennan, Jos. P., f.8 E. 93rd
St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Bretow-Munch, Wm. C, 621
Bushwick Ave., Brooklyn,

N- Y.  „ ^

Brig-grs. H. L., Spencerville, O.

Broberp, Manfred, 45 W. 34th

St , New York, N. Y., and

2000 Central Ave., Madison,

N.  .1.

Brolene,  A.  C, 430  W. 34th

St  , New York. N. Y.
Brook, Harry K., Chamber of
Commerce Bldg-., Los
Angeles, Cal.
Brower,  G.  H.,  East  Palestine,

O.
Brown, B. M., 352 W. 63rd

St., Chicag-o, 111.
Brown, Geo. B., 424 Iowa

Bldg., Sioux  City,  la.
Brown, H. A., 885 Flatbush

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Brown,  H. I^., 1347  Adams

St., Chicago, 111.
Brown, O. L., 401 Flatiron

Bldg., Akron, O.
Brown. Samuel A., Ridley
Park, Df'laware Co., Pa.
Brown. Una, 214^ S. Main St.,

Findlay, O.
Brownell, May E., Yankton,

S D.
Browning, O. M., St. Paris, O.
Bruen, L. Blanchard, 1402 F
St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Bryan, A., 242 E. Fair St.,

Atlanta,  Ga.
Bucaletti, Louis. 1002 Blue
Island Ave., Chicago, 111.
Buck, J. D.. Traction Bldg.,

Cincinnati, O.
Budde, Mrs. M., Box 183,

Great Falls, Mont.
Buddenberg, H. C, 2139

Clifton Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Bueren, Dr. A., 309 State
Nat'l Bank Bldg., San
Antonio,  Tex.
Buettner, Jos. A., 65 Clinton

Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Buis,  C.  L.,  Sullivan,  Ind.
Buis,  C.  O..  Fairfield,  111.
Bullis, B. S., 732 34th Street,

Oakland,  Cal.
Bundy, Ira  M., Y. M. C. A.,

Duluth, Minn.
Burford, D. E., Colchester,

111.
Burgess, R. C, 1103 Southern

Boulevard, Oak  Park,  111.
Burnes,  A.  &  W.,  926  Main  St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Burnett, S. M., 1030 Park

Place, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Burnslde, Miss Minnette,
c/o Lurlin Baths, Brush
and Larkin Sts., San
Francisco, Cal.
Burt, C. G., Hotel Brand,

Boise, Idaho.
Burwig, Wm., 870 Humboldt

Parkwav, Buffalo. N. Y.
Bush, J. W., 233 Columbus
Savings and Trust Bldg.,
Columbus, O.
Bushaw, A. Wm., 130 Main

St., Bangor, Me.
Buswell, 85 Park Ave.,

Winthrop Highlands, Mass.
Butler, Earl R., 12 Clay St.,

Rochester, N. Y.
Butler. Gunning, Santa Ana,
Cal.


Butler,  W.  B.,  4328  Lake  Park

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Callen, M. J., 5101 Butler St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Calwell, H. E., 436 K. 42nd

Place, Chicago, 111.
Calwell, "W. A., 424 Bowven

Ave.. Chicago, 111.
Campbell. C. P., 2136 Warren

Ave.. Chicago, 111.
Campbell, J. D., Box No. 346,

Biloxi, Miss.
Campbell, John J., 290-92

Arcade Bldg., Dayton, O.
Campbell, R. H., 130 •

Tuscarawas St. E., Canton,
O.
Campbell, R. H., Sebring, O.
Cannard, Mrs. E., Whittier,

Cal.
Capek, Norbert F., 169 Mil-
ford Ave., Newark, N. J.
Carberry, Hugh, 504 Park  St.,

Manitowoc, Wis.
Carlson, Chas. M., 55 Morris

St., Rochester, N. Y.
Carlson, John  G., Plentywood,

Mont.
Carmen, Elizabeth F., Cor.
3rd  and  Hill  Sts., E.  Galley,
N. Mex.
Carpenter,  W.  A.,  189 Summer

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Carque, Otto, 1605 Magnolia

Ave., 1..0S Angeles, Cal.
Carroll, Grace M., 9154 Com-
mercial Ave., South
Chicago, HI.
Carroll, Grove, McKeesport,

N.  J.
Cassel, G. 80 Charles St.,

Altoona, Pa.
Catalano, Antonio, Pitts-
burgh,  Pa.
Chadwick, F., 500 N. 9th St.,

Coshocton, O.
Chamberlain, I. I., 21  West

College St., Oberlln, O.
Chamberlain, J. A., Ashland,

O.
Chandlee, Allen B., Eureka,
I Cal

i  Chandlee, W. S., 252 2nd St.,
Elyria, O.
Chapman, Leo.. 630 Wood-
land Park, Chicago, 111.
Chapman, W. M., 1308

Sandusky St., Bucyrus, O.
Chartier, T., 1207 Monterey

St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Child, B. W., 1705 Cedar St.,

Alhambra, Cal.
Christian, F. A., 406 S. 7th

St., St. Louis, Mo.
Churan, Frank O.. 5853

Thomas St., Chicago. 111.
Civlin, Marcus B., 3841 Cot-
tage Grove  Ave.,  Chicago,
111.
Clauser, E. T., 313 Elyria

Blk., Elyria, O.
Clausen.  J. A.,  Walnut,  111.
Coffee,  W.  O., 1445  W. 84th

St.,  Cleveland, O.
Coffev, N. B.,  Box 111,  LeRoy,

111.
Cole,  Ernest  I.,  98  S.  Highland

Ave., Ossining, N. Y.
Cole,  Ernest  I.,  340  Fair  St.  N.,

St. Petersbuig, Fla.
Cole, Mrs. Grace P., 1301 W.
25th St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Coleman, E. B., 432 W. Madi-
son  St., South  Bend, Ind.
Collier, E. & L., West Bldg.,

Decatur, 111.
Collins, F. W., 122 Roseville

Ave., Newark, N. J.
Collins, H. v.. 4008 Grand
Boulevard, Chicago, 111.


Colman, W. H., 1319 State  St.,

La  Crosse, Wis.
Combs, F. R.. 88 W. Main St.,

New  Britain, Conn.
Coney, Grace L., Bremen, O.
Conklin. A. P., 582 N. High

St., Columbus, O.
•Conover,  Fred.  E.,  420  12th  St.,

West  New York,  N. J.
Contreras,  Ralph, 4060  Oaken-

wald  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Conwell, W. P., 806 7th St.,

St. Louis, Mo.
Cook, A. C, Georgetown, Ky.
Cook. Geo., 806 N. 7th St..

Buffalo, N. Y.
Cool, E. C, 1510  Millard Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Coolev, Edward, San Joaquin

Bldg., Stockton, Cal.
Cooper, R. G. C, 26 N. Bland

St.,  Halifax,  N.  S.
Coplon,  A.  C,  2240  W.  Division

St., Chicag.o, 111.
Cordon, Anna J., 9387 Hough

St., Cleveland.  O.
Cornwall, C. A., 19-20 Nampa

Bldg., Nampa, Idaho.
Coughlin, M. E., 508-9 Spitzer

Bldg., Toledo, O.
Counter,  A.  E., 4923  Pensacola

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Courgume, H., 34 Eagle St.,

Geneva, O.
Coursume, Harry, 3228 Car-
negie Ave., Cleveland, O.
Covert, Martin, Chagrin

Falls, O.
Cowman, John J., 6902 St.
Lawrence Ave., Chicago,
111.
Cox,  C. W., 101  S. 8th  St.,

South Fargo, N. D.
Coy, D. C, 37 Davis Bldg.,

Dayton, O.
Craig, Stephen A., 1105 Fair

Ave., Columbus, O.
Crane, H. J., Richter Hotel,

La Porte. Ind.
Crank, L. Mae, Stapleton

Bldg., Billings, Mont.
Creighton, B. E., 54 Hudson

Ave., Newark, O.
Criscuolo, Teresa Cimino,
339 Leonard St., Brooklyn,
N.  Y.
Critcher, Carma, Box 226,

Degroff, O.
Crosby,  C.  A.,  15  33  W.  Jackson

Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Crosby, W. H.. Jonesboro, 111.
Cummins, J. E., 120 N. 10th

St. E., Cedar Rapids, la.
Cummings, J. E., Davenpoit,

la.
Cummings, Dr. W. F., 719
Washington Ave., Norfolk,
Va.
Curliss, E. S., 510 Vine  St.,

Cincinnati, O.
Curtice, Mary B., Rochester,

N.  Y.
Cutler, Alfred, 304 N. 5th St.,

Harrison,  N. ,T.
Cutty, Thos., 1200 Poplar
Grove Blvd., Baltimore.
Md.
Daly,  M.  F..  6  E.  Chui'ch  St.,

Nanticoke, Pa.
Daly, W.  C, 22 N. Second St.,

Vincennes. Ind.
Daniels, Mrs. B., 5129 Engle-

side Ave., Chicago, 111.
Daughenbaugh,  S.  Earl,  Anita,

la.
Daughenbaugh, F. A..

Massena, la.
Daugherty, M. J., Xenia. O.
Dausch,  Phoeba, 35 Ayers
Ave.. Dayton. O.


\(ilt\r()])(ilhs


Profcssiondl  Register


1130


David,  T.  H., Scobey,  Mont.
David, Tanous H.. V. (). Box

708,  Williston,  N. D.
Davidson, James, 4200 S.

Grand  Blvd.,  ChU:-A^o,  111.
Dawes, Richard, Racino. V\'is.
Dav,  M.  A., 2224  Sedg-wick

St., Chicago, Til.
Decker,  Mrs. R.,  Whitti<M'.  Cal.
De  Bella, Joseph. 41(14 Dicxel

Bids.. Chicago, 111.
De  Cilia,  A.. 73 I. yon  St.,  New

Haven,  Conn.
Deardon, Alfred, .33.5 R. High

St., New Philadelphia, O.
Deckmann,  W., Plymouth and

Penn. Ave. N., Minneapolis,

Minn.
Dee, K.  M., Bozeman, Mont.
Deeter, J. N., 31.5 N. 3.5th St.,

Philadelphia. T'a.
Deken, R. A., 120 W. Kibby

St., Lima, O.
Denning, L. B., 1130 Main St.,

Dubuque,  la.
Deschauer, Thos., 718 W. 63rd

St., Chicago, 111.
Deshler, Alice B., Degroff, O.
Deutscher, J. L., 430 Heed

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
De Witt, Orla, 202 S. Lincoln

St., Chicago, 111.
De Wolfe, Blanche, 2 Endley

Blk., Elyria, O.
Dickinson, C.  B., 338 Chamber

of Commerce Bldg.,

Columbus,  O.
Dirkes, Clement M., 156 S.

Vermilion St., Danville, 111.
Dittrick, F. W., 3140 W. 90th

St., Cleveland, O.
Dixon, W. A., Cor. Gay and

High St., Mt. Vernon, O.
Dixon, Walter H., Mount

Vernon,  O.
Dodge, A., Ill Grand St.,

W^aterbury, Conn.
Domingo, M., 154 Martin St.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Doughty, F. A., Linworth, O.
Doughty, W. W., 131 South

Prospect St., Marion, O.
Douglas, F. H., 1820 Maxwell

St.,  Cheyenne, Wyo.
Douglas, Wm. A., l..amberton,

Minn.
Dow,  W.  J.,  "Warren,  O.
Downs, \j. Irene, Midland

City, 111.
Drews, Geo. J., 1910  N.  Hard-
ing Ave., Chicago, HI.
Duckworth, J. A., 830 Union

Trust Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Duclos, William, 1027 State

St., Bridgeport, Conn.
Dudney, H. W., 1729 W.

Walnut  St.,  Chicago,  III.
Duey, F. J., 6215 Hough Ave.,

Cleveland, O.
Dumore, W. K., Sterling, 111.
Dunham,  M.  M.,  Norwich,  Conn.
DuPIessis, J. T., 525 S. Ash-
land St.,  Chicago, 111.
Dupr6,  Louis,  Box  111,

Orange, Tex.
Dux, H., Swan & Cantee Sts.,

Jacksonville, Fla.
Easton, C. W., Lorain, O.
Ebell. Anna, 1541 W. Adams

St., Chicago, 111.
Echard, Harry, 304 McCIy-

monds Bldg., Massillon, O.
Edel, R. E., Boston, Mass.
Edmondson,  Mrs. Ethel, Hotel

Adair, Ellis St., San

Francisco, Cal.
Edmundson, J., 1818 Wash-
ington  Blvd., Chicago, 111.


I  Edwardes, Arthur W., 1147
I Lake St., San Francisco,
1 Cal.
Edward.s, L. S., 420 Main St.,

Hartfoid, Conn.
Edwards, N. 10., Box 102,

Sanford, Cal.
Edwin, E. S., 1432 W. .Jackson

St., Chicago, Til.
Egan,  H.  M., 328  Nasby Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
lOgan, T. W., 1121 Front St.,

Fremont, ().
Egbert, Ellis, Main and

Seneca  Sts.,  Alliance,  O.
Ehlert,  A.,  Rochestei',  N.  V.
Ehret, A., 413 S. Raymond

Ave., Alhambra, Cal.
Eilerficken, J. B. C, Panaca,

Nev.
Eklund,  Alice  C,  Lyon and
Healy Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Eklund, Alice, 4726 Drake

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Elbl, Harold A., Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Elder, Mary E., Millersburg,

O.
Elgarten,  M., 2313  Alameda

Ave., Alameda, Cal.
Ellis, Howard I., 452 Bowen

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Ellison, E., 150 Perry St.,

Fostoria, O.
Elssesser, Mr. A., 431 Elliott

Square, Buffalo, N. T.
Emmons, G.  C, Washington

Court House, O.
Engbrecht, J. J., Freeman,

S.  D.
Espinga, 1124 Ave  J, Flat-
bush, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Esplin, D., 4200 Grand Blvd.,

Chicago, 111.
Everson,  Geo.  Price,  P.  O.  Box

822, Cincinnati, O.
Eynn, John, Market Square,

Steubenville, O.
Faber,  R.  E., Cor.  Church and

Main Sts., Ashland, O.
Face, Mrs. Margaret E.,

506-7 Citizens' Savings

Bank Bldg., Pasadena, Cal.
Farkasch,  J.,  Tough  Renamon,

Pa
Farnsworth, John C, 1372 S.

Flower St., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Farr,' A.  E.,  852  Oakwood  Ave  ,

Toledo, O.
Faux, Thos., Box 111,

Bountiful,  Utah.
Fehr, E. P., 135 N. 10th St.,

Cambridge, O.
Fehumlee, C. V., 1128 Gamber

Ave., Cambridge, O.
Field, D. J., 208 W. Mam St.,

Marion, O.
Fellrath, Basil, North Shore

Health Resort, 1634 North

La Salle St., Lincoln Park

Sta.,  Chicago,  111.
Fenail, Frank, 194 Riverside

Drive, New York, N. Y.
Ferguson, Julius A., New

River, Fla.
Ferri, Dr. Nicandro A., The

Ferri  Sanitarium, 152 North

Ashland Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Ferri, N. A., Wheaton, 111.
Festa, F. P., 1510 "Webster

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Field, P. F., Galion, O.
Finkelstein, Dr. A. A., 97  Ann

St.,  Hartford,  Con.
Finley, E. P.. 203 E. Main

St., Dyesville, O.
Fish, H. J., 882 Fulton St.,

San Francisco, Cal.


FischfT, Frank T_,., 94 Ridge-
wood  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Fitch, Ross L., 4940 Kinzie

St.. Chicago,  III.
Flamholtz, Isaac M., .500

Riimlller Bldg., I>os

Angeles, Cal.
Flanigan, A. L., 128 17th

Ave., Paterson, N. J.
Flannigen, Hazel. Mendota,

Til.
Flower, A. G., 3622 Lorain

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Fordyce, H. A., Washington,

D. C.
Fox, Louis, 343 Leroy Ave..

Buffalo,  N.  Y.
France,  W.  N.,  Ashland,  O.
Frank, Henry J., 256 Dix

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Frantz,  Lillian,  Box 18.5,

Butler, N. J.
Frederick, R. W., Westcott

Blk., New Philadelphia, O.
Frederickson, Mrs. Petra,

Rugby,  N.  D.
Freese, Benj. J., 4913 North

Robey St., Chicago, 111.
French, Leslie H., 315 North

35th  St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Fresca, Ettore, 137 East 43rd

St., New  York, N. Y.
Fress, J. W., 47  McGraw

Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Friebel, Anna, San Antonio,

Fla.

Fritzen, Mrs. Minnie, Pine

City, Minn.
Froude,  Chas. C. 260  Fair  St.,

Kingston, N. Y.
Frumoff, L., 901 North

Western Ave., Chicago, 111.
Fues, Francois, 2314 B'wav

New York, N. Y.
Fues, Francois,  Morris  Plains

N. J.
Full, Leo,  Mendota,  111.
Fulton, N. J., P. O. Box 984,

Portland, Ore.
Fulton,  N.  J.,  114  17th  Ave.  N.,

Seattle, Wash.
Fusch,  Augusta  L.,  1630  E.  3rd

St., Topeka, Kans.
Gabriel, Dr. Emma. 1112

Chestnut St.. Philadelphia,

Pa.
Gadbois, Peon  T., 90 Diamond

Lake  San.,  Area,  111.
Galatian, H. B., 3700 Chicago

Ave., Chicago,  111.
Gallup, Dr. Chas. T., Mon-
mouth, 111.
Garcia.  Alhi-rt  E.,  Tecato,  San

Diego, Cal.
Gardner, J. A.. 965 Jackson

St., Oakland, Cal.
Garlock. 424 Bowen Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Garrett,  S. J  . 210 N. Ann St.,

Chicago, 111.
Garrison,  Eleanor, 229  E.

Main St.. Plymouth, Pa.
Garstick, Joe, Main and Mill

Sts., Niles, O.
Garvin, S.  E., 733  Osborne  St.,

Sandusky, O.
Garvin.  :Mrs.  S.  P.. 1114 ^"'a.^h-

ington  St., Sandusky,  O.

Gaugham, P. W., 8424 Hough

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Gearhart, W. H., Spreckles

Theatre  Bldg., San Diego,

Cal.
Geese, C. S., 553J Main St.,

Coshocton, O.
Gehrig,  F.  W.,  3519 Harper

St., Oakland, Cal.
Gerlach,  A.  J.,  Los  Gatos,  Cal.


1140


Professional  Register


Xaliiropalbs


Geig-er, J. J., 549 Canada St.,

St. Paul, Minn.
Geiser, J. Stephen, 39 North
Ave., New Rochelle, N. Y.
Georgrer, F. A. M., Cor. 14th
and I St. N. W., Washing-
ton, D.  C.
Gerber, F. E., 601 Columbia

Elder., Cleveland, O.
Gernhardt, Edward R., 2333
Milwaukee Ave., Logan
Squaie,  Chicago,  111.
Gerrle, Wm. Alfred, 210-11
Boston Bldg., Pasadena,
Cal.
Gibson,  J.  H.,  1911  W. 3rd St..

Dayton, O.
Giesen, Armin, ISHU Piospect

Ave., Bronx,  N. Y.
Gillespie, Geo. D., 335 Stock-
ton  St., San Francisco, Cal.
Glassburn,  H.  D.,  Macedonia,

la.
Glatfelter, Mrs. C. W., River-
side, 111.
Gledhill,  W.  J., 1530  N. 13th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Glendinning, H., East

Chicago, Ind.
Gloden, J.  N., Hubbard, la.
Goble  &  Goble,  Beaumont,

Tex.
Goldman, A., 1146 Washburn

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Goldstein, Isaac, 4001 Granil

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Gonyei-, C. H.. 222 Nasby

Bldg., Toledo, O.
Goodrich,  J. F., 16  N.  Waba.sh

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Goodheart, M. H., 221 N. 6th

St., Coshocton, O.
Gordon, W. F., 2236 E. lOStli

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Gore, Dr. M. B., 600  Main St.,

East Orange, N. J.
Gorson,  M.  H.,  Leroy,  N.  Y.
Goss, C. A., 10,513 Lee Ave..

Cleveland, O.
Gottshall. Mollie E., 403-404
Schmidt Blvd., Pittsburgh,
Pa.
Gould, W. C, Hicksville, O.
Graf,  John  F.,  1039 E. 19th

St.  N., Portland,  Ore.
Grambow, Dr. Emil, 37 Lent
Ave., Hempstead,  L.  I.,  N.  Y.
Gramm, Enrique, Paraquay,

South  America.
Gray, Geo. W., 921^ Market

St., Youngstown, O.
Gray,  G. W., 216 Franklin  St.,

Warren,  O.
Green, L.  A., 319 2nd Ave.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Greenewald. V., 31 S. 6th St..

Covington, Ky.
Greenleaf, \V. D., Colesville,

Sussex  County,  N.  J.
Gregory,  W. E., 716 Louisiana

St.,  Little  Rock,  Ark.
Gressman, H., 22 S. Kentucky

Ave., Atlantic City, N. J.
Griffiths, E. E., W. Walnut

St., Pittsville, Pa.
Griggs,  Dr.  W.  E.  Henry
Beagle Theatre Bldg.,
Fond du Lac, Wis.
Grills, L. M., St. Marys, O.
Grise,  H.  M., 1432 W. Jackson

St.. Chicago, 111.
Griswold,  K.  M.. State  St.,

Painesville, O.
Gross, H., 1257 S. Hoover St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Grossman, A., Rivercrest
Manor, Haddam, Conn.


Grossman, A., 7 E. 116th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Grover, Samuel F., 310-17

Alisky  Bldg-.. Portland, Ore.
Guyer. R. A., 809 Exchange

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Owinn, H. M., Petersburg, ().
Haag, Paul, 1296 Myrtle Ave,

Biooklyn, N. Y.
Haas, E. G., 13,425 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Haas, Edw. G., 5418 Lorain

Ave., Cleveland, O,
Haas, Gustave W., 407 Pacific

Elect. Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Hackett.  J.  N., Ceris. N. Y.
Hahn, C. P., Wooster, O.
Hahn, C. F.. 8811 Detroit

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Hallbeck, T. E., West Salem,

111.
Halstead, Cora F., Marion,

N.  Y.
Hampton, H. L., 215 E. Main

St., Alliance, O.
Hanavan, L. C, 6122 Ingle-
side  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Hansen,  Allen,  Idaho  Falls,

Idaho.
Hanssler,  E.  H.,  332  N.  Jeffer-
son  Ave., Peoria, 111.
Hardin, Ferguson A., 1204

Marsh-Strong Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Harper, C, 2151 N. Clark St.,

Chicago, 111.
Harrington, Shelby A., 4322

Vernon Ave., Chicago, 111.

Harris, Eula L.j Lavyrence-

burg,  Ky.
Harris, F., 45 W. 34th St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Harris, Henry, Jersey City,

N. J.

Harris,  H.  E., 1515  W.  Monroe

St., Chicago, 111.
Harris, Sarah N., 846 E. 47th

St., Chicago, 111.
Harris, W. A.. Ill S. Curtis

St., Alhambra, Cal.
Hartsough, Leroy, 525 S.

Claredon Ave., Canton, O.
Harvey, H. W., 4452 Sheridan

Road,  Chicago,  111.
Haseman,  Wm.  J.,  2215  E.  71st

St., Cleveland, O.
Haskins,  J. D., Trimble,  O.
Hatsfield, Mrs., c/o Powell

Sanitarium, West 3rd St.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Haussler, Emil H., 322 North

Jefferson Ave., Peoria, 111.
Havard, Wm. Freeman, 525 S.

Ashland Blvd., Chicago, III.,

and 110 E. 41st St., New

York, N. Y.
Haverin, C. F., 28 Lincoln St.,

Newark, N.  J.
Haveron, R. H.,  Passaic, N. J.
Hawey,  Mrs.  H.,  1452  Sheridan

Road,  Chicago,  111.
Hayes, Wm., 138 Leonard St.,

Jersey City, N. J.
Hayes, Wm., 276 Mapel St.,

Secaucus, N. J.
Haywood, A. P., 515 Utah St.,

Toledo,  O.
Heck,  J. Austin, 1907 S.

Clinton  Ave., Trenton, N. J.
Hecker, G. E., Box 15, Con-

nersville, Ind.
Heckman, D. J., Heckman

Sanitarium,  Ottumwa, la.
Hedges,  A.  R.,  Medford,  Ore.
Heigerick, L. D., 2539 North

Kedzie Block, Chicago, 111.
Heinze, E. P., Austin. 111.


Heinstein.  Mrs.  A. L., 270
Bowdoin St., Dorchester,

Heisser, J. H., 3012 Humboldt
Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Heldt, Edgar, Pearl River,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Holm,  Ora R.,  Cedar  Falls,  la.
Helmuth, Wm., 3251 N. Troy

St., Chicago, 111.
Hemes, Leon, 1244 Walnut

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Henzel, Franklin M., 3149 N.

15th St.. Philadelphia, Pa.
Herbing. Paul C. 1042 Argylo

St.. Chicago, 111.
Herkt,  V.  B., 1055 Colorado

St., Chicago. III.
Hess, W. G., 3115 S. Main St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Heuer,  F.,  1292  Park  Place,

Brooklvn,  N.  Y.
Heufel, Geo., 1907 S. Clinton

Ave., Trenton, N. .1.
Heyler, Charles  A., 67 Lincoln

St., Jersey City, N. J.
Higbe, D. N., 15 N.  Lincoln

St., Chicago,  111.
Hilf,  S. B., 108  S. Jefferson
i St.,  Dayton, O.
i  Hillig, O., 1867 Cornelia  Ave.,
I Ridgewood, Brooklyn, N. Y.
;  Hirsh, Arthur S. W., 137
j Summit Ave., West
Hoboken,  N.  J.
Hobstadt, M. F., 633 Morris

Ave., Topeka, Kans.
Hodge, J. W„ Niagara Falls,

N. Y.
Hoeffler, J., 2071 W. 104th

St., Cleveland, O.
Hoegen, Alexander, 334

Alexander Ave., New York,
N. Y.
Hoerlein,  H.  K.,  Hood  River,

Ore.
Hoff, Fred. H., 2036 St. Paul

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Hoffman. E. S., 401 State St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Hoffman, W. A., 1230 Wright

St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Hofstetter, M., 555 W. 151st

St., New York, N. Y.
Hogan, W., 4200 Grand Blvd.,

Chicago, 111.
Hogue,  W.  A.,  1435  W.  Adams

St.,  Chicago, 111.
Hohne, G. W., 670 State  St.,

Biidgeport, Conn.
Holdt, Edgar, Pearl River,

New York,  N. Y.
Holmes, E. C, Buchanan

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Hoisington, Bertha, 713

Wheeling Ave., Cambridge,
O.
Holbrook, Dr.  B. F., Sheridan,

Wyom.
Hollister, B. C, 1536 E. 86th

St., Cleveland, O.
Hood,  John  S.,  733  E. 105th

St., Cleveland, O.
Hood, Lizzie M., 733 E. 105th

St., Cleveland, O.
Hoover, H. E., 47 S. Main St.,

Akron, O.
Hopkins, R. H., Coquille, Ore.
Hormell, Mrs. Sophie Lee,
1912 S. Grand Ave., Los
Angeles, Cal.
Horner, L. M., Niagara Falls,

N. Y.
Hough, Frank S., 222 S. 5th

Ave., Mt. Vernon, N. Y.
Houtenbrink, Anthony, 407
S. Ashland Blvd., Chicago,
111.
Howard, J. F., 333 S. Dear-
born St.,  Chicago,  111.


i\nliiro/><ilIis


Professional  Register


1141


Howell,  J. Sullivan,  230  South

State St., Chicag-o, 111.
Hubner, Harry, 5197 Hudson

Blvd., North  Berp:en,  N.  .T.
Hubner, Loui.se, 140 4th St.,

Union Hill, N. J.
Hummel, A. F., 119 N. Colo-
nial Ave., Lancaster, O.
Hummel, Nellie, 119 North

Columbus St., l.,ancaster, O.
Hutchinson, A. W., .''lU 5111

St., Marietta,  O.
Ihrig-, .T. M., 140 W. .Teffeison

St., Spring-fleld, O.
Ikerman,  .T.  W.,  431  E.  Market

St., Warren, O.
Ing-ham, Dr. E. H., 1181

Harold Ave., Portland, Ore.
Tng-ram, Silas, 9 Riddle Block,

Ravenna, O.
Inman, I. T., Millg'rave, Ind.
Ipcer, Aaron, 1348 Millicent

St., Youngstown, O.
Irving', Montgomery, 5th Ave.

Bldg.,  200  Fifth  Ave.,  New

York, N. Y.
Israel, Benj., Holly, Col.
Iweison, Frederick W., 1553

W. Madison St., Chicago,

111.
Iyer, D. Visweswara, 26

College Hotel, Mysore,

S. India.
Jackson, H. H., 206 West

Ave., Medina, N. Y.
Jacobs, Samuel, 29 Halsey

St.. Newark, N. J.
Jacobs,  Samuel,  163  Ludlow

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Jaloraara, A. V. S.. 85 Main

St.,  Mattewan,  N.  J.
.Tames, F. L., 407 Lincoln

Bldg., Champaign, 111.
Jansheski,  C.  A.,  124  N.  Wayne

St., Piqua, O.
Jasper, Lena, Edgewater

Beach Hotel, Chicago, 111.
.Jefferson, Alpha A., Lincoln.

Cal.
Jennings, Theodore T., 295

Springfield  Ave., Newark,

N. J.
Jensen, Chas. L., 327 W. 24th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Johnson, A. S., Struthers, O.
Johnson, Clara, 1004 E. 105th

St., Cleveland, O.
Johnson,  D. W., 14,507  Detroit

Ave., Lakewood,  O.
Johnson, F. J., Urichville, O.
Johnson, Frank, 808 Summit

St., Aberdeenj Wash.
Johnson,  Homer  L.,  Oskaloosa.

la.
.Johnson,  Melissa,  Struthers,

O.
Johnson, P. E., 121 North

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Johnson, T. D., 1004 E. 105th

St.. Cleveland, O.
Johnston, Martha, Custar, O.
Jolley, John F., 3733 Occiden-
tal Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
Jones, B., 3928 5th  Ave.,

Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Jones, D., 524 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Jones, Eli  C, 879 W. Ferrv

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Joven,  B.,  430  E.  65th  St.,

New York. N. Y.
Julien, E. A., Turlock, Cal.
Jurva. O. O., 178 E. 60th St  .

Portland. Ore.
Kahn, H. I., Box 25, Libertv

N. J.
Kaltwasser,  H.,  908  Willow

Ave.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.
Kane,  M., 17 S. Fifth  Ave.,

LaGrange, 111.


Kankler, Wm. H., 504

Columbia Bldg., Duluth,

Minn.
Karpen, Henry, 16 W. 36th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Kav, Edith, 7530 Sangamon

St., Chicago, 111.
Kayser, F. T., 673 E. 216th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Keck, Mrs. M. B., 9110 Wade

Park Ave., Cleveland, O.
Keenan, Wm., 724 Market St.,

Sandusky, O.
Keep, F. A.,  1045 Lincoln St.,

Denver, Col.
Keene  & Keene. State  St.,
' Rochestei', N. Y.
I  Kelly,  Miss  Adah.  301  W. 55th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Kelly, A. N., North Bend, O.
Kelly, O. G., 507 Schwind

Bldg., Dayton, O.
Kelso, James, 246 W. State

St., Columbus, O.
Kennard,  Alta  M., Whittier,
1 Cal.

j  Kepperling, Ira L., 445 Milt-
more St., Reading, Pa.
'  Kesselmire, C. F., Salem, O.
I  Kidder, Edward E., Harmony.

Minn.
Kilberg, N., 525 S. Ashland

Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
Killeen, J. Francis, 2161

Sutter St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Kinder, M., 69 Central Ave.,

Ridgefleld  Park, N. J.
King, Edward C, Coffeyvillf.

Kans.
King, Fred., 4200 Grand Ave..

Chicago, 111.
Kingsbury, Henrietta, East

Cleveland, O.
Kirkpatrick, J. R., 221 Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Kissling, H. J., 2723 Ocean

Ave., Dermont, Pittsburgh.

Pa
Klawitter,  Wm., 821 S. 5th

St., La  Crosse, Wis.
Kleber, Ernest  A., Kleber

Sanitarium, Alpena, Mich.
Kloman, Winona, 8-10

Mitchell Bldg.,

Cincinnati,  O.
Klopferstein, W. H., Detroit.

Mich.
Klug, Rudolph  J., 323  Mon-
mouth St., Gloucester City.

N. J.
Knopf, Oscar, 236 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Knowles,  C. H., Riddle  Blk.,

Ravenna,  O.
Koran, Miss Eleanor, 327 W.

Arch St., Nevada, Mo.
Korte, H. G., 5479 Dorchester

Ave., Chicago, 111. .
Krantz,  H.  J.,  305-7  Spitzer

Blk., Toledo, O.
Kratz, J. C. 1415 Monroe St..

Chicago,  111.
Kremer, Herman, 63 25th St.,

Elmhurst,  L.  I.,  N.  Y.
Krueger,  W.  F. H., 139  Irving

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Kruger, Katherine, 608 South

Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

III.
Kuhlow, Anna, 1397 Giddings

Road, Cleveland, O.
Kuhlow, E. J., 1397 Giddings

Road,  Cleveland,  O.
Kunert,  W. Frank,  La  Crosse,

Wis.
Kunkle, R. H., 2041 E. 90th

St., Cleveland, O.
Kupferschmid,  G., 168-70 East

81st St., New York. N. Y.


Kvitrud, Henry, Opera
Block, Rooms 7-8,
Crookston, Minn.

LaCour, Carl, Dixon, 111.

I..a Freniere, Arthur K.,

18  Hazel  St., Hartford,  Conn.

Lamb, Joseph J., 1252 Frank-
lin St., Pittsburgh, Pa.

Lamprecht,  K.,  c/o  The  Chiro-
practic College, San
Antonio,  Tex.

Lance, P. C, 1531 W. Adam.s
St., Chicago, 111.

Lane, Henry, 1386 W. Ran-
dolph St., Chicago, 111.

Lang, Allan, Hubbard, O.

Lankford,  M.  C,  1531  Congress
St., Chicago, 111.

Lansen, G. C. W., 23 Polk St.,
Guttenberg,  N.  J.

Lantatt, James E., 13 Eugene
Place, Silver  Lake, N. J.

Larkins, J. W., Sioux Falls,
S. D.

Larson,  Jennie  W.,  2535  North
California Ave., Chicago,
111.

Lauby, Geo.  E., 311  Hall Blk.,
Howard  and  Market  Sts.,
Akron,  O.

Lauffenberger, Edyth  A., 2919
North  Clark  St.,  Chicago,
111.

Lauterwasser, Chas., 252

Littleton Ave., Newark,

N. J.
La  Vine,  S.  H.,  Rochester,

N. Y.
Lawler, Dr. D. Evan, 2726 S.

10th  St.,  Omaha,  Nebr.
Leavitt, Sheldon, 4665 I^ke

Park Ave., Chicago, 111.
Leahy, Francis J., St. Joseph

Sanitarium, Mount Clemens,

Mich.
Lee, 125 W. 58th St., New

York, N. Y.
Leidheiser, Mrs. J. W.,

Vermilionj^ O.
Lembke, Herbert, 4200 South

Grand  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Leonard, E. E., Hillsboro, O.
Leonard, H. N., 1347 West

Adams St., Chicago, 111.
Le Pompadour, 27 Cune  St.,

St. Augustine, Fla.
Leshy, Francis J., St. Joseph

Sanitarium, Mount  Clemens,

Mich.
Leubke. Ottillie, 6733  Stony

Island Ave., Chicago, 111.
Levanzin,  A.,  265  22nd  St.,  San

Diego, Cal.
Levers, M. E., Woolner Bldg.,

Peoria, 111.
Lewis, Cora  M., 7909 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland. O.
Lewis,  Cora  N.,  73  East  Ever-
green St., Youngstown, O.
Lewis,  Joe  R.,  307-8  Mahoning

Bldg., Youngstown, O.

Lewis, Lucile, 119 St. Botolph

St., Boston. Mass.
Lewis,  P.  E.,  Tigard,  Ore.
Lewis.  Velda, Downs, Kans.
Licata, Francis, Middlesex

Hospital,  East  Cambridge,

Mass.
Licata, Francis, 119 Guernsev

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Liden, E. J., 608 South Ash-
land Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Liebau, John, 64 East Van

Buren  St., Chicago, 111.
Lillibridge, Ray A., 771 Main

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Limperick. 414 Jefferson St.,

Joliet, 111.


1142


Professional  Regislcr


S'dliiropalhx


Lindholm,  Wm..  06  Maplewood

Ave., Bridg-cport, Conn.
Lindlahr. H., 525 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicag-o, 111.
I.islev, J. E., 153i N. Elm St.,

Warren, O.
Livers, I.oui.s S., 813 6th St..

Canton, O.
r.ivcsey, Henry P., 138 Kear-

nev  Ave.,  Arlington,  N.  J.
Loban,  J.  M.,  130  S.  Fairniount

St., Pittsburg-h, Pa.
Boney, A. M., 821 W. L. Hol-

lingswood Bldg-., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Boney, Mrs. Carrie, 821 W. I...

Angeles, Cal.
Bong, I. W., 5 Wesley Block,

Columbus, O.
Boranger, .). E., 506 Hodge.s

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Borimer,  Thos.  S., 406  W.

Exchange St., Akron, O.
Lovell, Judson C, First Nat  1

Bank  Bldg.,  Bong  Beach,

Cal
I>ueke, A. W., 333 Darsie St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Buepke, J., Welga, 111.
lAmt, R. W., 6006 Binwood

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Bust,  Benedict,  110  B.  41st  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Bust,  Benedict, Butler,  N. J.
Bust, Benedict, Tangerine,

Fla.
Bust, Bouisa, Butler, N. J.
Bust, Bouis. 100 E. 105th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Butz, N. A., Bucyrus, O.
Bvnd, W.  Bruce, 514  Ridge

"Arcade. Kansas City, Mo.
Bytle, Alfred J., 904  Main St.,

Hartford, Conn.
MacCarthy, E. N., 100  N.

Hamlin Ave., Chicago. 111.
MacCarthy, E. V., 216 S.

Baflin St., Chicago, 111.
MacCarthy, P. N., 100 Hamlin

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Macfadden. Bernarr, Flatiron

Bldg., New  York,  N.  Y.
MacFadden,  Charles,  Suite  5-6,

Temple Bldg., Bad Axe,

Mich.
Mackin, Mary C, 525 Cleve-
land Ave., Canton, O.
Mackin, R., 525 Cleveland

Ave., Canton, O.
MacMickle, Portland, Ore.
MacNaughton, Helen, 121

E.  29th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Madison, Rodney, 311-13

Grant Bldg., Bos Angeles,

Cal.
Maguire, E. J., Salem, O.
Malcolm, Harry, 931 11th St.

N.  E.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Malin, G. F., 211 Zweig  Bldg.,

Bellaire, O.
Mansfeldt, Mrs. O. C, 1654

Farwell Ave., Chicago, 111.
Mapes, N. J., 318 Euclid  Ave.,

Cleveland, O.
Marble, E. I.,., 746 Independ-
ence Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Margah, N. B., 214| W. Main

St., Bellevue, O.
Marklin, Rudolph. 1528 Este.s

Ave., Chicago, III.
Marsh,  .John  D.,  Hornell,  N.  Y.
Marshall, R. H., 844 Home

Ave.,  Oak  Park,  Chicago,

111.
Marsland, Mme. F., 79 S. 7th

St., Newark,  N. .1.
Mar  si  in, R., 328 WaLsh

Block, Akron, O.
Martin, J. P., 1761 Sedgwick

St.. Chicago, 111.


Marx,  Ellen,  Bafayette,  Ba.
Massev,  Wm.,  218  N.  Hunting-
ton St.,  Medina,  O.
Mather.  A. R., 1115  W. 54th

St.. Bos Angeles, Cal.
Mathews, Texarkana, Ark.
Mathias, G. B„ Cen. Office

Bldg., Akron, O.
Matijaca, Anthony, 413 Cass

St.,  Joliet,  Til.
Maussert, O., 1854 Fillmore

St., San Francisco,  Cal.
Maver, E., 1127 Chestnut St.,

Richmond  Hil*!,  B.  I..  N.  Y.
McAndrew. C. A., W. 6th St.,

East T.,iverpool, O.
McBurney, M. R, 918 Broad-
way Central Bldg., Bos

Angeles, Cal.
McCartney, Geo., 121 W. 3rd

St.,  Jamestown,  N.  Y.
McClain, Warren. 740 Will

St., Mount Wa.shington,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
McCormack, A., 4210 Wilcox

St., Chicago, 111.
McCroskv, .John A., 4200 S.

Grand Blvd., Chicago, 111.
McCoy, Frank, 309-19 Citi-
zens' Nat'l Bank Bldg., Bos

Angeles, Cal.
McCrea,  C.  T., 1272  Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
McDonald, E.  E.. Hillsboro,  O.
McDonald. H. W., .Jr., Hills-
boro,  O.
McDonald, .1. R., 225 Cleve-
land Ave., Canton, O.
McDonald, S. E., Bushnell, 111.
McGilwey, Mrs. Ella M., 3

Temple Court, Bos Angeles,

Cal.
Mclntyre, Ella, 825 North

Dearborn St., Chicago, 111.
McKee, Mary, 99 Broad St.,

Newark, N. .J.
McKendree, M. G., 14 Reed &

Murray Block, Bowling

Green, O.
McBain, D. R., 515 Broadway,

Toledo, O.
McBouth.  C.  Bouis, 5328 South

Park Ave.. Chicago, 111.
McMeekin, Hazel, 2935 Prairie

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
McNamara,  R.  E.,  307  Majestic

Bldg., Quincy, 111.
McNeer, Valentine, Bissie,

Tex.
McWay, Sarah A., Ravenna,

O.
Medard,  J. F., 216  S.  Main St.,

Marion, O.
Meeker, G. D., 8-10 Mitchell

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Meier,  H.  W.,  Main  St.,  Ashta-
bula, O.
Meier, I^ouise C, Nashua, la.
Meleen, N. F., 135 12th St.,

Portland,  Ore.
Menges, A. B.. 1304 E. 91st

St., Cleveland, O.
Messinger, J. A., 212 East

AdaiTi St., Phoenix, Ariz.
Metcalf, .1. O., 306 Schultz

Bldg., Columbus, O.
Method,  J.  D.,  1234  E.  Norwood

St., Toledo, O.
Metskas, M., 6258 Archer

Ave., Argo, 111.
Mever, Carolina, Box 185,

Butler, N. .J.
Meyer, John W. H., 1947

B'way, New York, N. Y.
Michelhenay, Mrs. H., Ohio

City, Bima, O.
Milan, Thos., Ba Salle, 111.
Mildenberger, Chas., Terminal

Bldg., 68 Hudson St.,

Hoboken, N. ,J.


Miles, T. M.,  2507  Archwood

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Miligan, A. Bee, Mulberry,

Ind.
Miller, Agnes, 785 E. 105th

St., Cleveland, O.
Miller. Bessie  R., Fairview,

Ba.
i  Miller, D. S., 210 Cincinnati

Bldg.,  Bima,  O.
Miller. F. B.,  Battle  Creek,

Mich.
Miller,  B.  S.,  421  S.  Ashland

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Miller, Margaret, Hillsboro,

O.
Mills, C. E., 1432 Jackson

Blvd., Chicago. 111.
Mitchell,  H. L., 71 Orange

St..  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Moates,  Chas.  H., 250  S.  Second

St., Oakland. Cal.
Mols, J. P., 469 Rest St.,

Buffalo,  N. Y.
Monahan,  E.  P.,  843  Judson

Ave., Evanston, 111.
Monce, E. A., St. Bank Bldg.,

Canal Dover, O.
Monroe, Daisy, 10,507

Superior  Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.
Monroe, E. C, 10,507 Superior

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Mooney, Frank W., 1516 East

64th  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Morgan, J. D., 37 Steele St.,

Eureka  Springs,  Ark.
Morlian,  V..  Troy,  N.  Y.
Morrison, S. B., 1402 F St.,

Wa-shington, D. C.
Morales, Miguel, 911 Security

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Moseley,  F. H.,  Walnut  St.,

Rockport, 111.
Moser, C. H., 1337 W. Adams

St., Chicago, 111.
Moser, Fritz, Nordheim, Tex.
Moss, Flora, 1130 N. Walnut

St., Danville, 111.
Moss, J. J., Winnifleld, Ba.
Muckley, F., 330  E. 21st  St.,

Borain, O.
Muller, John, 64 W. Oak St..

Chicago. 111.
Mumper,  C.  A.,  Everett  Block,

Akron, O.
Munro. W. D., 1044 Chapel

St., New Haven, Conn.
Muschynski, Thomas F.,

c/o "Yungborn," Butler,

N.  J.
Mussler. H. J., Andrew, O.
Myers,  W.  P.,  725  N.  York

Ave., Toledo, O.
Nachbar, M., 431 5th Ave.,

New York,  N.  Y.
Naimann. H. A., 1531 West

Congress St., Chicago, 111.
Nair,  H.  E.,  No.  1,  Box

69, Niles,  O.
Neagley.  Asia  B., 16 Fargo

St., Pittsburgh. Pa.
Neary,  J. F.,  487  Kosciosko

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Neenan, R. J., 6th St. and

Broadway, Bos Angeles,

Cal
Neis,  "W. A.. 710 National

Union Bldg., Toledo, O.
Neldon, Frank  P., Noblesvillc,

Ind.
Nellis, Chas. M.. 275 W. Main

St., Meriden, Conn.
Nelson, Axel S., 1813 North

2nd  St.,  Omaha,  Nebr.
Nelson, .Joseph, General Del.,

Youngstown. O.
Nelson, Clara K., 4200 S.

Grand Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Nelson, M. P., 405 8th St.,

Fargo, N. D.


Naturopaths


Professional  li<'(fisler


1143


Nelson, N. F.. 135 12th SI.,

Portland, Ore.
Nelson,  P., 610 S. 12tli St.,

Biirlington, la.
Neovius,  Geo. F., 30 N. Michi-

g-an Ave., Chicago, 111.
Nesmith,  M.  L...  Custar, O.
Neuwirth,  J.,  329  Center  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Newcomer, J. J., 83(; S. Arch

St., Alliance, O.
Newton, J. H.. Toulon, 111.
Neumann,  A.  .1., 303 Stone

Ave.,  Brooklyn.  N. Y.
Nicca, Margaret, 1532 West

Adams St., Chicago, 111.
Nick, P.. P. O. Box 1743, Los

Ang'eles, Cal.
Nickols, J.  A., R.  No. G5,

Greenfield, O.
Nicola, Stephen, 16 Beaver

St., New York, N. Y.
Niles,  T.  M..  2507  Archwood

St.,  Cleveland, O.
Nora, D. E., 361 E. 30th St..

Chicago,  111.
Norg-, A. T., E. 55th St. and
Euclid Ave., Cleveland, O.
Norri.s, C. E., 226 Main St.,

Bowling- Green, O.
Novy,  A.  T.,  201  Penn.  Square,

Bldg-., Cleveland, O.
Nunvar, A. G., 363 Arcade,

Cleveland, O.
Oakley, Nelson C, San  Dieg-o,

Cal.
Ochsner, B. O., 144 Main St.,

Oneida, N. Y.
Oehlecker, Anna, Mt. Dora,

Fla.
Oehlecker, Louis N. R., Mt.

Dora, Fla.
Oellecker, Louis M., Highland
Sanitarium, Mount Dora,
Fla.
Ogden,  H.  T., Port  Jefferson,  O.
Olds,  E.  O.,  120  W.  Chestnut

St., "Washington, Pa.
O'Neil.  G.  M.,  849-50  Ohio

Bldg., Toledo, O.
O'Neil, Helen S., 849-50 Ohio

Bldg., Toledo, O.
O'Neil, W. H., 210 Parkway

Bldg., Philadelphia. Pa.
Opland, Martha B., 1117 Mar-
shall  Ave., Mattoon, 111.
Opland, Nelson H., 1117 Mar-
shall  Ave., Mattoon, 111.
Orloff, Alexia S., 4520 Abbot
Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Ortmeyer,  A. H., 115 Edgar

St., Evansville, Tnd.
Osborn, H. M., 1432 .Tackson

St., Chicago,  111.
Oswalt, John, 302 E. Market

St., Warren, O.
Palotay, Julius A., 220
Wright and Call. Bldg.,
Los Angeles, Cal.
Palotay, J. A., 421 Broadway
Central Bldg., Los Angeles,
Cal.
Papathopulos, N. P., 14 East
38th St., New York, N. Y.
Par6, J., 2310 Valentine Ave.,

New York, N. Y.
Parks, Mrs. P. D., Turley

Blk., Portsmouth, O.
Patter.son, S. R., Springfield,

O.
Patton,  R.  Edwin,  131  W.  18th

St., Erie,  Pa.
Pay, J.  W.,  Milbank. S. D.
Perkins, Dr. Edward J., c/o
Band, 30th Inf., U.  S.  A.,
Syracuse, N. Y.
Perkins, Edw. J., Plattsburg,
N.  Y. (In  National Service.)
Payne, Dr., 47 W. 34th St.,
New  York,  N. Y.


Pery, Mrs. Nellie F., Los An-

Petcr.son, A. M., Central

Hospital, Jack.sonville, 111.
Peterson, R. H., 7600 Hough

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Petra, Almanda  C, 53 Parnell

Ave.,  Dayton,  O.
Petzold, M.. 3007 South Tripp

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Pfeifer. T., 332 S. 16th St.,

Newark, N. .1.
Philbreck, N. W.. 326 Con-
solidated Realty Bldg.,
Los Angeles, Cal.
Philips, A., Room 3456, over

P. O., Chawnee, Okla.
Phillips, Frisco Bldg., Joplin,

N. J.
Picon,  J.  A., 312  Columbia
Trust Bldg., Los Angeles,
Cal.
Pierce,  J.  Elwood,  1030  Wolf

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Pilstrom,"  David, Struthers, O.
Pinz, Ferdinand A., 416 E.
77th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
PitcKer, Alonzo, Cloversville,

O.
Plotnekoff, Even E., 362

Kearney  St., San Francisco,
Cal
Pochet, Virginia C, 346 Gar-
i field  Ave., Chicago, 111.
Pollard,  C.  E., 1515  Monroe

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Pollock, W. D., 154 27th St.,

San Francisco, Cal.
Polmanteer,  V.  L.,  301  Mercan-
tile Library Bldg.,
Cincinnati, O.
1  Poore, H. R., 361 North

Galena St., Freeport, 111.
i  Pope, H. F., 107 Meigs Bldg.,
Bridgeport, Conn.
Porter,  Geo.  E.,  127  Edgerly

Bldg.,  Fresno,  Cal.
Powell,  L.  M.,  Groton,  Mass.
Powers & Delaney, 1968i E.

1st  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Pratt. A. A., Box 907,

Binghamton,  N.  Y.
Pratt,  Miss  A.  L., Rest  Home,

Virginia  Beach, Va.
Prentice, H. H., 8311 Euclid
Ave., Room 201, Cleveland,
O.
Prillwitz, Otto von, Marlin,

Tex.
Prvke.  A. Edw., West Side
Y. M. C. A., Chicago, 111.
Puderbach, 998 Putnam Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Purinton, E. E., Morgantown,

W. Va.
Rabinovich, H., 1326 S.
Lawndale Ave., Chicago,
111.
Race, H. L., 258 Hancock St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Raine, L. M., 2248 W. 95th

St., Cleveland, O.
Raine, "W. H., 6509 Detroit

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Rairden, N. B., 4618 S.

Figuerea St., Los Angeles,
Cal.
Ralston, Cora  E., 327  N. 4th

St., Steubenville, O.
Ramus, Hattie E., Post

Office  Blk., Canon City, Col.
Ramsdall, Gladys, 4124 Vin-

cennes Ave., Chicago, 111.
Rathbun,  B. P.,  Springfield, O.
Rauffs, Fred P., 305 Flatiron

Bldg., Akron, O.
Rawson, Guy Allison, 1549
Echo Park ^Vve., Los
Angeles, Cal.


Rebman, F. B., Youngstown,

O.
Reece,  Wm.  R.,  Huntington

Park, Cal.
Rees, John T., 464 E. Colo-
rado  St., Pasadena, Cal.
Rehfeld,  J.,  1817  N. 19th  St..

Philadelphia, Pa.
Reichmann, H., 2011 Madison

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Reichtei-, Crown Point, Ind.
Reid,  A.  J.,  7001  N.  Paulina  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Reid, W. A., Pres't, Standard

School of Chiropractic and

Natuiopathy, Davenport. la.
Reif, Theodore, 901 Stratford

Road, Los  Angeles, Cal.
Reinhold, A. M., 700 Laguna

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Reisenweber, F.  W., 213 E.

15th St.,  Olympia, Wash.
Reitmeier,  J.  H.,  R.  No.  1,  Box

23, Minster, O.
Rene,  Jessie  A., 4200  S.  Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Ressler, J. M., 10,729 Gooding

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Reynolds, H. D., 116 Schoff-

master Blk., Conneant, O.
Rice,  E.  C,  Norman,  Okla.
Rice, Oscar, 2118 "VV. North

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Richards, M. F., 3242 Monroe

St., Toledo, O.
Richards, Ralph A., Lock

Box 137, Neponset, 111.
Richardson, E. E., 620 Mack

Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Richardson, Geo. Art., 511

Washington Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Richardson, Mrs. Osa B., 1731

S. Vermont Ave., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Riese, Jos., 402 S. 7th St., La

Crosse, Wis.
Riley,  J.  Shelby, 1116  F  St.

N. W., Washington, D. C.
Ritchie, Jas. J., 1344 Oak St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Rittmeyer, 1127 Washington

St., Hoboken, N. J.
Robbins, E. W.. 1321 S..  Union

Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
Roberts, A. C, Milwaukee,

^vis.

Roberts,  H.,  Box  654,  Milwau-
kee,  Wis.
:  Robeson.  C.  S.,  Knox  Co.,

Danville, O.
\  Roeber, Ernst, 1560 Mvrtle
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Roessell,  Paul  E.,  408  12th  St.,
Miami, Fla.
,  Rogers,  L.  D.. 546 Surf  St.,
I Chicago, 111.
I  Rogers,  J. E., 452 Nicholas
] Bldg., Toledo, O.
Roksowsky, Alex.. 2571 Main

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Roller,  B.  T., 166  W. 72nd St.,

New York, N. Y.
Root, F. J., Park Hotel,

Chardon, O.
Rose, F. C,  350  W.  20th  St..

New York, N. Y.
Rosensteel, E. S.. 3014

Wadlow  St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Rosenthal,  H.  H.,  Room  3,
Snowdon Bldg., Browns-
ville,  Pa.
Roth,  C.  L.,  Chenos,  111.
Rounds,  Earl, 4200  S.  Grand
, Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
Rubin, H., 1689 Pitkin  Ave..

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Runbluni. E., 558 Mercer St.,
Jersey  City, N. J,


1144


Professional  Register


Naturopaths


Runion, Win. P.. Shepard, O.
Rupe, Miss I.,ouise V., 20

Franklin St.,  San Francisco,

Cal.
Russel,  E.  J., 214 E. State  St.,

Columbus, O.
Russel. W. E., 214 E. State

St., Columbus, O.
Rutlidge, C. Pemberville, O.
Rutschow, Henry  A., 829

Booth  St.,  Toledo,  O.
Sa&er,  E.  T.,  Magnetic

Springs, O.
Sahr, Louise. 2 Ave. East,

Wiliston. N. D.
Sahr, N. H.  C, .'54 Main St..

Wiliston, N. D.
Salak, George, 1550 Holmes

Ave.,  Racine,  Wis.
Sampson, Roy, Petersburg,

111.
Sampson, S., 850 E. 47th St.,

Chicago, 111.
Sands,  C.  M.,  1497  W.  Fort  St..

Detroit, Mich.
Sargent,  J.  W.,  424  Bowen

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Sawyer,  Geo.  H., 5 Wilson St.,

Irvington,  N.  J.
Saxby, G. O., 198J Main St.,

Ashtabula, O.
Bayers,  W. R., Sidney,  O.
Schade,  W.  J.,  Lancaster,  Wis.
Schaefer, Joseph, 23 Barclay

St., New York, N.  Y.
Schaffer, A., 203 S. 5th St.,

Columbus, O.
Schannon, M. A., 855 E. 72nd

St., New York, N. Y.
Scher, Bertha, 665 5th Ave.,

New York, N. Y.
Schieltenbach, Theo. E., 139

York  Ave.,  Paterson,  N.  .T.
Schillig, G. J., Case Blk.,

Norwalk, O.
Schillig, Joe. Oberlin, O.
Schilling, C. E., 106 W. Pearl

St., Chicago Junction, O.
Schirmer,  H.  J.,  Guttenberg,  O.
Schmeickel, J. M., 1129 North

Lang St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Schmidt, A. S., Braddock, Pa.
Schneider, John D., 1592 Clay

St., Dubuque, la.
Schoeller, Julius, c/o Lafay-
ette Hotel,  Albany,  N. Y.
Schorr,  H., 1401 E.  Murdock

Ave., Wichita, Kans.
Schrier,  L.,  92  Lexington  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Schueller,  J.  J., 33  Louis  Blk.,

Dayton, O.
Schuster, S., 43 N. Phelps St.,

Youngstown, O.
Schwartz, H. C, 1228 East

Genesee  St., Syracuse, N. Y.
Scobie, Miss E., 3850 Indiana

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Scott, I. W., 23 Crozier St.,

Akron, O.
Scott, John S., 453 3rd St.,

Pitcairn, Pa.
Sebring, 6th Floor, Mercan-
tile Bldg., Rochester,  N.  Y.
Secrest,  Wm.  B.,  Logan,  Utah.
Seed,  Dr.  Sirson  T.,  125  Cleve-
land Ave., Canton, O.
Seed, Susan T., 125 S. Cleve-
land Ave., Canton. O.
Seifert,  E.  F.,  437J  W.  Park

St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Seltzer,  Harry,  100  S.  18th  St.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Service, Emma R., 609 Ex-
change Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Shande,  L.  W.,  Box  124.

Keytesville, Mo.
Shaw, Fred.. 218  S. Front  St.,

Cuyahoga  Falls,  O.


Shaw, John Allen, 610
Chamber of Commerce
Bldg., Richmond, Va.

Shaw, Robt. J., 15 Morton
Place,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.

Sherman,  C.  C,  612  Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, O.

Sherman,  C.  C, Chagrin  Falls,
O.

Shewalter, Dr. Chester, 328
Walsh Block, Akron, O.

Shewalter,  C. A., 120  N. Front
St., Cuyahoga Falls, O.

Shields, Susan, 1777 Broad-
way, New York, N. Y.

Shoemaker, W., Portage St.,
Cuyahoga  Falls,  O.

Shreve,  Ralph  W.,  525 S. Ash-
land  Blvd., Chicago, 111.

Simon,  J.  P.,  La  Grange, 111.

Singer,  O.  U.,  234  Park  Ave.,
Plainview, N. .1.

Sizer, F. R., Willamette, Ore.

Sjogren,  Otto,  2  E.  33rd  St.,
New York, N. Y.

Skeels, R. H., 15J W. High
St.,  Mt.  Vernon,  O.

Slaughter, Laura, 1018 Green-
lawn Ave., Cleveland, O.

Smakal,  Mrs. Mary, 3250 East
49th  St., Cleveland, O.

Smedley, E.  D.,  Camden,  N.  J.

Smith, C. C, Watertown,
Conn.

Smith, Chas.  Oscar, 717 9th
Ave., North Valley City,
N.  D.

Smith, Chas. E., 1708 Warren
Ave., Chicago, 111.

Smith, F. B., 1024 Main St.,
Bridgeport, Conn.

Smith, Frank C, 122 Bigelow
St., Newark, N. J.

Smith, F. D.. Chicago, 111.

Smith,  Geo.  E., 30  Huntington
Ave., Boston, Mass.

Smith, V. White, 1024 Oak-
dale.  Ave., Chicago, 111.

Smith, Walter R., 20 David-
son  Bldg., Sioux City, la.

Snyder, Dan, Kendallville,
Ind.

Snyder, E. C, 301 Ewing
Bldg., Findlay, O.

Snyder, Harvey H., 1553 W.
Madison  St., Chicago, 111.

Soeros, Sigurd S., 4200 South
Grand Blvd., Chicago, 111.

Solem, Harold, Oakes, N. D.

Somerville, Davena P., 10
Clay  St.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.

Sonderegger, Miss Hilda, 812
Hlghpoint Ave., West
Hoboken, N. J.

Sonntag, Alfred G., Palmer,
Kans.

Spangler, Alie W., 525 South
Ashland Blvd., Chicago, 111.

Spangler, H., 117 Avon Ave.,
Newark, N. J.

Spones, J. C, 46 Broadway,
Toledo, O.

Springer,  A.  J.,  Crooksvillc,  O.

Squiers, Mabel, 2119 Ashland
Ave., Toledo, O.

Staads,  Dr.  S.,  Sioux  City,  la.

Staden, Caroline, 937 Bush-
wick Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Staden,  Ludwig,  937  Bush-
wick Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Staebler, F. C, 154 Kingsland
Ave., Corona, L. I., N. Y.

Stahl, Frank J.. 1264 Lexing-
ton Ave., New York, N. Y.

Stahlschmidt, Oskar, Comfort,
Tex.

Standish,  Margaret  A.,  Long
Island, Ala.

Stangen,  Dr.  Ernest,  657  Clas-
sen  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.


Stanley, Carrie E., 151 Pleas-
ant St., Wlnchendon, Mass.
Stark, Gertrude, 406 Ever-
green  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Steenrod,  Sarah H., 31  Illinois

Ave., Dayton, O.
Stein jann's  Baths, 571  Sumner

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Stein janii, Wni., 57 i Sumner

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Stevens,  L. R., 11 Thomas  St..

Newai'k, N. J.
Stickle, Mary, 79 Halsey St.,

Newark, N. .1.
Stiener. O. R.. 230 Akron

Savings and Loan Bldg.,

Akron,  O.
Stiers, W. M., Cadiz, O.
Stippich,  "VVm.  H., 222  E.  Main

St., Meriden, Conn.
Stock. C. E., 1563 Fair  Mount

Way, Los Angeles, Cal.
Stock, W. F., 225 Cleveland

Ave., Canton, O.
Stokes, Paul S., Mount

Vernon,  O.
Stone, Anna I-., 4045 Calumet

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Storm,  H..  Fairview,  N.  J.
Strand,  Ida  E.,  501  Dollar

Bank  Bldg.,  Youngstown,  O.
Strand, P. H., 501 Dollar

Bank  Bldg.,  Youngstown,  O.
Strayer, W. A., 329i 12th St.,

Miami, Fla.
Streb. J. H.. E. Federal St.,

Youngstown, O.
Strehl, G. B., Middleton, O.
Stretch,  Edward  K.,  617  Trap-

hagen St.,  West  Hoboken,

N.  J.
Strickert. Geo. T., 228-a

Palmetto St., Brooklyn,

N.  Y.
Strickler, D. T., 112 E. Broad
I St., Columbus,  O.
'  Strobel, Richard, 3702  Hud.'son
' Blvd., Jersey  City,  N.  J.
;  Strueh, Carl, 32 N. State St.,
1 Chicago, 111.

Strueh, C, McHenry, 111.
i  Stuart, Fannie.  4200 S. Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Strupe, Clarence H., 1213
I Indian Ave., Spokane,
I Wash.

Stupnicki, M., 3109 S. Morgan
I St., Chicago, 111.
I  Sturges,  A.  B.,  113  S.  Main  St.,
1 Wallingford, Conn.
Sturla, Louis, 1342 W. Con-
gress St., Chicago, 111.
Sturs, W. W., Harris Co.,

Cadiz, O.
!  Summers, Lome A., 5411
I Ellis Ave., Chicago, 111.
Sutorius, L., 1129 Addison St.,

Chicago,  111.
Swenson, J. E., 4124 Vincen-

nes Ave., Chicago, 111.
Swingle, M. P., 1770 Demont

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Symons,  W. C,  505  Mercantile

Library Bldg., Cincinnati,

O.
Synn, H. H., Summit Bldg.,

Cadiz,  O.
System, Marinello, 723 11th

St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Taylor, C. B., 1191 S. Wash-
Washington  St.,  Tiffin,  O.
Tavlor, Nellie, 119J S. Wash-
ington St., Tiffin, O.
Teal,  J.  T.,  Chicago,  111.
Teed, E., 2236 Estes  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Teg,  Wilhelm,  145 E. B2nd  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Teufel, F. A., 5513 Drexel

Blvd., Chicago, 111.


Sdlnropdlh.'!


Profe.ssioiuil  Krc/i.slrr


1145


Thayer.  E.  B.,  435  Buffalo  St.,
Conneaut. O.

Thellman, J. D., 6402 Frank-
lin Ave.,  Cleveland,  O.

'Pliirion, Ren6 V.. 126 Bidwell

Parkway. Buffalo.  N.  Y.
Thomas. Julia  A., 223 3rd .St.,
Terre Haute. Ind.

Thompson. Nickolie.
Cheyenne.  N.  Dakota.

Thompson. O. A.. Wichita,

Kans.
Thorman, Dr. J. C, 136 W.
127th St.. New York, N. Y.

Thornhill. J.  B., 2410 Oak St..
Baker,  Ore.

Thul, Ferdipand, New Sholem
Bldg-., Baris. 111.

Throop. Herbert G., 1212 S.
Grand Ave., Los Angeles,
Cal.

Thuna,  M.  B., 433 Sutter  Ave.,
Brooklyn. N. Y.

Thurman, W. R., Tahlecuah,
Okla.

Tichler, Frank, Edgewater
Beach Hotel. Chicago, 111.

Tilden,  J.  H.,  3209  W.  Fair-
view Place, Denver, Colo.

Toby,  W.  B..  Allen.  Okla.

Topel, Frederick. 2561 Broad-
way, New York, N. Y.

Towns, M.  Ch. B., 293  Central
Park W., New York, N. Y.

Townsend,  I.  R.,  20  Glenada
Place,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Tracy, Paul Urban, 493 Epler
Bldg., Seattle, Wash.

Trainer. M. L., Suite 412.
Lincoln  Bldg.. 14 W. Wa.sh-
ington  St.,  Chicago.  111.

Trash, Larkin C, 609 East
Jefferson St., Kokomo, Ind.

Trenkle, K. May. 965 New
York  Ave..  Flatbush,  Brook-
lyn,  N. Y.

Tripp,  N.  v., 150  B.  Broad  St.,
Columbus.  O.

Triplett. A. T., 502 Western
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Fort
Worth. Tex.

Triplett. L. D.. 964 Main St.,
Akron,  O.

Troseh,  N. A.. 3977  Vernon
Ave.. Chicago. 111.

Tucker, E. J., 1875 Glenwood
Ave., Youngstown, O.

Tucker, Mrs. Nora Mae, 906
22nd St., San  Diego. Cal.

Tucker. Wm. R.. 908 22nd
St.. San Diego. Cal.

Tunisgn. E. Howard, 99

Doscher  St.,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.

Tweedie. Dick. 4008 Grand
Blvd.. Chicago, 111.

Tyerne. L. H., 1003-4 Stein-
way Hall Bldg., 64 E. Van
Buren St.. Chicago, 111.

Tyler, Byron, 616 Wyandotte
St., Kansas City, Mo.

Uez,  Gustav,  596  Clinton  Ave.,
West  Hoboken,  N. J.

Ufer. Wm., 3858 Division St..
Chicago, 111.

Ulam, W. W.,  Van  Wert, O.

Ulmer,  Herbert, 525  South
Ashland Blvd., Chicago, 111.

Unterlander, J.  L., 325 Ash-
land Ave., Chicago, III.

Upham.  L.  M.,  Stone  Block,
Warren, O.

Van Keuren, F.  H., R. No. 1,
Sowona.  New  York.  N.  Y.

Van  Middlesworth,  J.  S.. 425
Morris  Ave..  Elizabeth,  N.  J.

Van Skidwell, May, Jackson,
Miss.

Vasey, G. E.. 612 Court St.,
Fieemont, O.


Veatch. Paul J., 413 Carteret
St., Camden, N. J.

Vehr,  A. Spencer, 312  Roth-
schild Bldg., Portland, Ore.

Verhoff,  Edward  A.,  512  Wal-
nut St.,  Des  Moines,  la.

Vernon,  J.  B..  909  Cabin  Blk..
Rocky Ford. Colo.

Vernon. J. W.. Fowler, Kans.

Vesey,  L.  S..  135  5th  St.,  Eliza-
beth,  N. J.

Vileta,  Chas.  A.,  4235  W.  21.st
St.. Chicago. 111.

Villari,  N..  368  Central  Ave.,
Jersey City, N. J.

Virgil, Portland, Ore.

Virmedge,  C.  A..  2050  Moni-oe
St.. Chicago, 111.

Visholm,  Thos.  N.,  1100  State
St.,  Racine.  Wis.

Visser.  P.  J.,  Conneaut,  O.

Volz,  Jos.  A.,  61  Madison  St..
New  Britain,  Conn.

Von De Schoeppe, Paul. Nel-
son  Block, West Duluth,
Minn.

Von  Gomez,  H.,  Jacksonville,
Fla.

Von Miller, Miss Lee, 414
Jefferson  St., Muncie,  Ind.

Voss.  Carl,  3977  Vernon  Ave.,
Chicago, 111.

Wagoner,  Geo.  F..  Creston.  la.

Walker.  A.  E.,  3401  W.  Mon-
roe St.,  Chicago, 111.

Walker, Edith D., Jefferson
City, Mo.

Walker, E. K., 413 Liley
Bldg., Waterbury, Conn.

Walker, Emily M., 133 S.
Broad St.. Trenton. N. J.

Walker, Peter E., 309 S.

Ashland Blvd., Chicago, 111.

Wallschlager,  F.  A.,  56  W.
Parade Ave.. Buffalo, N. Y.

Walters, H.  S., 37 Madison
Ave., New York, N. Y.

Waltington,  Frank,  Belleville,
O.

Walz,  Marie,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Walz,  Marie  A.,  427  S.  Ash-
land Blvd.. Chicago, 111.

Ward, E. T., 13,527'  Euclid
Ave., Cleveland, O.

Ward,  E.  Thayer.  406-11  Erie
Bldg.,  Prospect  and  E.  9th
Sts.,  Cleveland,  O.

Ward, Robert Merritt, c/o
Elks  Club. Oakland. Cal.

Watson.  S.  J..  515  Polk  Bldg..
5th  St.,  Des  Moines,  la.

Weiershausen,  Geo.,  23  Polk
St., Guttenberg, N. J.

Weimar, Estero, Fla.

Weinman, John, San
Bernardino, Cal.

Weinmann, Louis A., 1873
Amsterdam  Ave.,  New  York,
N.  Y.

Welch,  Chas.  E..  Mount
Vernon. O.

Wendel,  Rev.  Dr.  H.  R.,  Tren-
ton, N.  J.

Werles, Henry  C., Parkers
Prairie, Minn.

Werner,  Ernest  George,  149
E. 85th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Werner,  Ernst  G.,  244  E.  61st
St.,  New York. N. Y.

West,  John,  3rd  and  Hill  Sts.,
Los  Angeles, Cal.

Westland.  O.  W..  506  Colum-
bia  Bldg., Duluth. Minn.

Wetherbe, E. T., 107 Meigs
Bldg., Bridgeport, Conn.

Wetherell. C. B., Jackson-
vile, Fla.

Wey,  Dr.  Julia  May  Courtnev,
1633 Court Place, Denver,
Colo.


Wheler.  A.  S., 14 Mifflin  Ave.,

Pittsburgh, I'a.
White.  Dr.  Chas.  I.,  427  Main

St.. Riverside, Cal.
White, E. C, 287 W. North

Ave., East Palestine, O.
Whiteis, C. E., 150 E. Broad

St., Columbus,  O.
Whittingston,  141 W.  36th  St..

New York, N. Y.
Wiedenhoft,  A.  A.,  Kalona,  la.
Wigelworth. J. W., 32 North

State St., Chicago, 111.
Wilcoxon. G. D., 375 Multno-
mah  St., Portland. Ore.
Wilhaber.  Prof..  4521  Law-
rence Ave.. Chicago. 111.
Wilkey.  S.  C.  Bountiful,  Utah.
Williams. Dr.. Hot Springs.

Ark.
Wiliams, Archie, Sandwich,

111.
William.s, C. B., San Diego,

Cal.
Wiliams. Louis, 1523 Center

St., Racine, Wis.
Williams, M. G., 3977 Vernon

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Williams, R. R., 7605

Superior Ave.. Cleveland,

O.
Willis, J. Grant, Manhattan,

Kans.
Wilson,  K.  P..  Box  123,  Ithaca,

N. Y.
Wilson, L. R., Portland, Ore.
Wilson, Minnie, 138 W. 3rd

St.,  Mansfield,  O.
Wilson. Mrs. M. F.. Sheridan,

Wyom.
Wilson, Reese G., 336 1st St.,

Darlington, S. C.
Winegardner, J., Morgan

Plant, Alliance,  O.
Winkelman,  R.  A., 2703  Hoag-

land  Ave., Fort  Wayne,

Ind.
Wise, Z. W., Holland Blk..

Lima, O.
Witman, Wm. U., 102 Halsey

St.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Wolff, Marv J., East Aurora.

N. Y.
Wolfram, Marion L., 125 W.

9th  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Wolfram.  ^Vm.  H.. 125 W. 9th

St.. Cincinnati. O.
Wolfram, W. H.. University

Hospital. Columbus, O.
Wolotera, J., Main St.,

Ashtabula, O.
Wood, Frank  M.. 209 S. State

St., Chicago. 111.
Wooding & Gibson, Drs.,

Chamber of Commerce

Bldg., New  Haven, Conn.
Woods. G. \V., 304 Putnam

St., Marietta, O.
Wooster, R. L.. 525 S. Ash-
land Blvd.. Chicago, 111.
Wurmser. H. L., 309 Masonic

Blk., Lima, O.
Wyly, T. E., 421 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago. 111.
Yates, L. C, 421 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Yoder,  S.  B.,  Wauseon,  O.
Young, A. Lewis. Box 44,

Egg Harbor City, N. J.
Young. H. C. 308 2nd Nafl

Bldg.. Akron. O.
Young, Jacob P., Huntington,

Ind.
Zander, Wm., Fort Meade,

Fla.
Zarman. C. E., Cor.  Main and

3rd Sts.. Mansfield, O.
Zeman, Otto, 3002 S. Central

Park Ave., Chicago, 111.
Zettel, Herbert A.. Schiffman

Bldg., St.  Paul,  Minn.


114fi


frofcssioiuil  Hrf/i.sirr


Xeuropaths
Optometrists


Zieglcr, D.  E., 528 AVyandotte

St.. Findlay, O.
Zinsser, H., 219 W. 34th St.,

New York,  N.  Y.
Zinsser,  Margraret,  219  W.  34th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Zugrler, D. E., 528 Wyandotte

St., Findlay, O.


CONSULTING PHYSICIANS
Naturopaths

Brooks, Harry Ellington, N. D..

Cliamber of Commerce BIdg..

Los Angeles. Cal.
Biggs,  A. C,  N. D.,  Asheville,

N. C.
Collins, F. W.. D. C. N. D., 122

Roseville  Ave.. Newark, N.  J.
Deininger,  Anton, N. D., D. C,

D. O., 400 16th St., West New

York, N. T.
Haas, Gustav  W., N. D., 407

Tacific Electric Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Havard,  \Vm. P.,  N.  D.,  525  Soutli

Asliland Blvd., Chicago, 111.,

and 110 E. 41st St., New York,

N. Y.
Irving, Montgomery, N. D.,

M. D., 200 Fifth  Ave., New

York, N. Y.
Lahn, Henry, M. D.. N. D., 1385

W. Randolph St., Chicago, 111.
Lindlahr, Henry, M. D., N. D.,

525 S. Ashland Blvd., Chicago,

III.
Lust, Benedict, M. D., N. D.,

D. O., Butler, N. J., Tangerine,

Fla., and 110 E. 41st St.,

New York, N. Y.
Riese, Joseph, N. D., 402 S. 7th

St., La Crosse, Wis.
Schultz, Carl, N. D., 1319 South

Grand Ave., Los Angeles, Cal.
Strueh, Carl,  N. D., M. D., 32 N.

State St., Chicago, 111.


IVEUROPATHS

Adam.s, Dr. McGregor, 1701-3

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Allcutt, Dr. E. Burton, Truell

Court, Plainfleld, N. J.
Ames, Dr. Charles P., 302

13th St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Applegate,  Dr.  George  P.,  9  E.

State St., Trenton, N. J.
Bieg-ler, Alma, Zanesville, O.
Bieg-ler, R. S., Zanesville, O.
Brennel, L. H., Zanesville, O.
Bulster, Dr. Herman G., 1112

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Cass'ile, Dr. W. Roll. 1336

Bristow  St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.
Chew, Dr. Thomas S.,

Pleasantville, N. .1.
Cheyney, Dr. Anna M., Real

Estate Trust Bldg., Phila-
delphia, Pa.
Collins, Dr. F. W., 122 Rose-
ville Ave., Newark, N. J.
Dietz, Dr. Herbert H., 1725

W. Norris St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Disney, Dr. J. Lambert, 1149

N. 63rd St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Disney, Dr. Pearl V., 1149 N.

63rd St.. Philadelphia. Pa.
Durant, Grace, Zanesville, O.
Eckstrom, Dr. E. A., Suite

32, Astor Court Bldg., New

York, N. Y.


Ely, Dr. Alfred Wm., 1002

Atlantic Ave., Atlantic

City. N. J.
Evans. Dr. W. Samuel, 211

Wallace Bldg., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Ferguson. Dr. Donald. 469 E.

143rd St., New York, N. Y.
Ferrier, Dr. James, Suite 32,

Astor Court Bldg., New

York,  N.  Y.
Fochl, Dr. P. E., 5405 Balti-
more Ave., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Fox,'  Mrs. E., 127 West Cir-
cular St., Lima,  O.
Fritz, Dr. W. Wallace, 1600

Summit St., Philadelphia,

Pa
Gabriel, Dr. Emma, 1713 Mt.

Vernon St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Groves, Dr. Sarah E., 1113

Spruce St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Gunzenhauser, Dr. Anna, 46

S. 13th Ave., Mt. Vernon,

N. Y.
Hales, Dr. George W., 124 S.

11th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Havard, Dr. Wm. Freeman,

525 S. Ashland Blvd.,

Chicago, 111.
Henninges, Wm. H.. 167 W.

71st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Herwig, Dr. Aline, 1713 Mt.

Vernon St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Hildebrand, Dr. Julia I., 1112

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Hodes,  Dr.  Robert, 214  E. 41st

St., Chicago, 111.
Jackson, Dr. Thomas  M., 1533

Diamond St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Jahn, Dr. Francis M., 1631

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Johnston, Dr. Leonard B., 628

N. 52nd  St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Justice, Dr. Crawford  T., 4037

Ogden St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Kilgus,  Dr.  Ella  D., 45  De

Long  Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Kilgus, Wm. M., 45 De  Long

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Kobel,  Dr.  Louis, 379 E. 155th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Kunze, Dr. Einma, 2057  Ridge

Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Kunze, Dr. Louis, 379 E.

155th St., New York. N. Y.
Moat,  Dr.  W.  S., 3332  N.  17th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Olds, E. O., 120 W. Chestnut

St..  Washington,  Pa.
Pruchnow, Fred., 167 W. 71st

St., New York, N. Y.
Spitler, Florence  W., Eaton,

O.
Spitler,  H.  Riley, Eaton,  O.


OPTOMETRISTS

Atzutt, Edw., 182 Cornelia
St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Babenzien, M. F., 2301 Myrtle
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Balizer. I., 483 Knickerbocker
Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Barker, Albert S., 23 Flat-
bush Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Barnes, H., 729 Manhattan
Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Barnes, H. J., 403 Bridge St.,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


Blee, W. B., 12454 Fulton St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Blum, H. A., 326  Grand  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Brooke, B. H., 277 B'way,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Brooke. L. 868 Flatbush  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Buenau, Peter J., 71 Central

Ave.. Albany, N. Y.
Coates, Fredk.  G. W ..  21  Bond

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Dailey, C. J., 94 N. Pearl St.,

Albany, N. Y.
De  Wolf.  Wm.,  502  Masonic

Temple, Chicago, 111.
DisQue, Andrew  A-, 2706

Folsom  St.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Drakeford, Jas. H.. 809 Ocean

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Duesterwald, Frank W., 1575

E.  12th  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Egleston,  J.  L.,  Wadena,  Minn.
Elmer, Frank A., 55 S. Pearl

St., Albany, N. Y.
Eskin, S. B., 275 Kingston

Ave., Brooklyn. N. Y.
Failing.  Nelson, 514  Fulton

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Failing, W. R., 2709 Jamaica

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Forgrave, L. R., Logan Bldg.,

St. Joseph, Mo.
Fulkerson, Perry, 840 N. 25th

St., St. Joseph, Mo.
Garttnkel, M. S., 1159 East

Parkway, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Gillis,  N.,  920  Bedford  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Greaves, G. H., 1107 Bedford

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Grossman,  D., 343  3rd  Ave.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Harsen,  M.,  768  Flatbush  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Harris, M. H., 1007 B'way,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Hemminger, H. J., 25 Jerome

Ave., Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Hirschfeld-, S., 72 Fairfields

Ave., Johnstown, Pa.
Hitz, Wm., 162 Bergenline

Ave., LTnion Hill, N. J.
Hoffman, E. S., 33 W. Adams

St., Jacksonville, Fla.
Hurwitz,  S., 830  Broadwav,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Martin, A., Inc., 56 Flatbush

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Jacknowitz, C, 407 Bergen-
line Ave.,  Union  Hill. N.  J.
Joseph, Joseph J., 3033 West

23rd St., Coney Island,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Kanderer, J., 600 B'way,

Williamsbridge.  L.  I.,  N.  Y.
Kennedy, Wm. F. X., 19

Central  Ave.,  Albany,  N.  Y.
Kenney, W. L., Commercial

Bldg., St. Joseph. Mo,
Kieferle, J. A., 212 Granger

Block,  San  Diego,  Cal.
Kieferle, W. F., 706 Edmond

St., St. Joseph, Mo.
Kies, Henry J., 1112 De Kalb

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Kimball. W. F., 706 Edmond

St., St. Joseph, Mo.
Kleiner. J. C, 319 Hamburg

Ave.. Brooklyn, N. Y.
Kost, August, 423 Union St.,

Union Hill, N. J.
Kurtis, Isaac M.. 1028 B'way,

Brooklyn. N. Y.
Laub, S., 400 Van Brunt St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Leonard, P. I., 710i Felix St.,

St.  Joseph.  Mo.
Lesnick. Wm., 5108 5th Ave.,

Biooklyn, N. Y.


Oriflcial  Siirqeons
Osteopaths


Profess ional  Rpqis tcr


1147


Levy,  A.  M.,  124  Graham  Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
r>evy, .T., 1882 Fulton St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Liederbach,  J.  T..,  343  3rd  Ave.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Lyman, N., Ballinger Bldg-.,

St. Joseph, Mo.
Marchant, F. B., 23 Flatbu.sh

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Martin, Stuart T., .'')6 Flat-
bu.sh  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Martinelli, Arnold, 213 Sum-
mit Ave.,  West  Hoboken,
N.  J.
McBurnie,  Thos., 1215  Bedford

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Metzner, F., 142 Woodbine

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Minton, W. H., King- Hill

Bldg-.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Nirreng-arten, A. S., 1869

Himrod St., Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Noll, John, 231 Steuben St.,

Albany, N. Y.
Parker, Gordon L., 63 Wash-
ington  Blvd., Detroit,
Mich.
Pitts, Barton, Eighth and

Francis  Sts., St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Pohs, Jacob, 315 Decatur

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Proud, W. C, Tottle-Lemon

Bank Bldg-., St.  Joseph, Mo.
Redelsheimer, Max, 80 Wash-
ington Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Renaud, E. C, 803^ Francis i
St., St. Joseph, Mo.  !

Richard. Lawrence E., 59
Fort W, Detroit, Mich.
Rochat, Louis  A., 158 Newark

Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Simmons, L., 642 Sutter Ave.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Smith,  Ben.  V., 50 N.  Pearl

St., Albany, N. Y.
Solot, M., 1784 Pitkin  Ave.,

Brooklyn. N. Y.
Steinberg, S. E., 1201 B'wav,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Standart, N. K., Washington

Arcade, Detroit. Mich.
Syrcher,  Ernest  V., 5 West

Genesee  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Taylor, J. E., 256-58  Main St.,  .

Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Thomson, D. B., 204 Scherer

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Titus, Fred. E., 113 Flatbush

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Van Vliet Optical Co., 242

Griswold St., Detroit, Mich.  |
Wertenberger, W. W., Corby-

F  Bldg.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.  j

West, L. J., 410 Masonic

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Whitsell, John C, Commer-
cial Bldg.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Wolverine Optical Co., 701-9
Stevens  Bldg., Detroit,
Mich.
Woodruff, J. K., 1212 Fulton

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Woodworth, W. R., 120 South

8th St.. St. Joseph, Mo.
Wright, Kay  &  Co., 207-11
Woodward  Ave.,  Detroit,
Mich.


Dawson,  B.  E.,  101  E.  30th  St.,

Kansas City, Mo.
Greedy, Frank A., 625 Com-
monwealth Bldg., Denver,

Colo.
Grimmer, A. H., 3842 Grand

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Harris, Elijah G., 1553 West

Madison St.,  Chicago, 111.
Herkimer, G. R., Dowagiac,

Mich.
Kilborne, J. M., Magoun Blk.,

Cor. 4th and Douglas Sts.,

Sioux City, la.
Kinnett, W. E., 401-2  Masonic

Temple Bldg., Peoria, 111.
Koch, Margaret, 819 Masonic

Temple', Minneapolis, Minn.
Lathrop,  Guy  F.,  621-23

Stevens Bldg., Detroit,

Mich.
Mitchell, Joseph R., 4654 N.

Racine Ave., Chicago, 111.
Mitchener, H., 301 Schweiter

Bldg., Wichita, Kans.
Parker  &  Parker, 519  North

Monroe St., Peoria, 111.
Pratt, E.  H., Suite 1708, 25

E. Washington  St., Chicago,

111.
Roemer,  J. F., 122 N. Genesee

St., Waukegan, 111.
Sayre, C. Edward, 29 East

Madison St., Chicago, 111.


ORIFICIAL SURGEONS

Bristol, T.  D., 746 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Brown,  James  B., 14th  and

Champa Sts., Denver, Colo.
Corbin, S. W., Linruln Bldg.,

St. Joseph, Mo.


j  OSTEOPATHS

Aaronson, Philip V., Rowell

Bldg.,  Fresno,  Cal.
Abbott, Hester L., Union Oil

Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Abbott, Lunsford, 212 East

Gordon  St.,  Klnston,  N. C.
Abegglen,  C.  E.,  Lippitt  Bldg.,

Colfax,  Wash.
Abegglen, Walter E., Tekoa.

Wash.
Abell, W. P., Princeton, Ind.
Abild, Isabel, Beresford, S. D.
Achorn, Ada A., 687 Boylston

St., Boston, Mass.
Achorn, Clinton E., 6 E. 37th

St.,  New York, N. Y.
Achorn,  Kendall  L,,  687  Boyls-
ton  St., Boston, Mass.
Ackley, Chauncey  W., 431 S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Acornley,  Albert  H.,  818  Penn-
sylvania  St., Reading, Pa.
Adams,  Bert  Lee,  Newman,  111.
Adams, Celia P., 1318 Beacon

St., Brookline, Mass.
Adams, J. Lester, Auditorium

Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Adams, William J., Ventura,

Cal.
Adelbert, F. X., Kalispell,

Mont.
Agee, Pearl M., Clinton Bldg.,

Independence, Mo.
Agnew, E. I., Brophy Bldg.,

Douglas, Ariz.
Ahlquist, O. P., 604 Congress

St., Portland, Me.
Airey, Grace Stratton, Scott

Bldg., Salt  Lake City,  Utah.
Akin, Mabel, Corbett Bldg.,

Portland, Ore.
Akin, Otis F., Corbett Bldg.,

Portland,  Ore.
Albertson,  W.  H.,  Hirsh  Bldg.,

Austin, Minn.
Albright, Chester W., 220 S.

State St., Chicago, 111.
Albright,  Edward,  267  W. 79th
St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


[  Albright, William H., .Jasper
Blk., Edmonton, Alberta.
Aldrich, William H., 449 The

Arcade, Cleveland, O.
Alexander, Charles  J., Macho-
vla Bank Bldg., Winston-
Salem, N. C.
Alexander, Geo. A., Glenwood,

Minn.
Alkire, Margaret M., 201 W.
Missouri St., El Paso, Tex.
Allabach, Frieda F., 62 Hoyt

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Allabach. L. B., 570 Prospect

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Allabach, L. D., 62 Hoyt St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Allabach, I.,ouise B., 02 Hoyt

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Allen, Alice M. C, 6253 Dor-
chester  Ave., Chicago, 111.
Allen, Arthur E., Andrus
Bldg. Minneapolis, Minn.
Allen,  Carolyn,  First  Nat'l  Bk.

Bldg., The  Dalles, Ore.
Allen, Chas. W., 1104 E. 47th

St., Chicago, 111.
Allen,  Harry  W.,  De  Lendrecie

Blk., Fargo, N. D.
Allen, Horace P., 15 Bicknell

St., Dorchester, Mass.
Allen,  L.  W.,  Davenport  Bldg.,

Greenfield, Mass.
Allen,  Margaret  H.,  64  Seventh

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Allen, Nellie A., Chico, Cal.
Allen,  W.  Burr,  Goddard  Bldg.,

Chicago, 111.
Allen, William H., 42 South
Seventh St., Allentown, Pa.
Alspach, Mary E., The  Mills

Bldg., Topeka, Kans.
Amos, Virginia, Lancaster
i Hotel, Georgetown, Ky.
Amsden, C. Ethelwolfe, 2

Bloor St. E., Toronto, Ont.

Andersen, Mary E., W. O. 'W.

I Bldg., Omaha, Neb.

I  Anderson, Carrie Parenteau,

! Goddard Bldg., Chicago, 111.

Anderson, J. Henry, 605 Main

St.,  Middletown,  Conn.
Anderson,  T.  V., 167  Front  St.,

Sarnia,  Ont.
Anderson,  Victoria,  Pittsburgh

Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.
Andrews. Mabel E.. Security
Savs. Bank  Bldg.,  Perry,  la.
Andrews, Stacy M., Aetna
State Bank  Bldg.,  Oelwein,
la.
Andrus, W. H. 904 Main St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Antes, F. L., 617-18 Farwell

Bldg.. Detroit, Mich.
Antes,  F.  L.,  Broadway  Market

Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Aplin,  Anna  K.,  Stevens  Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich.
Appleby, Anna, Jex Bldg.,

Marion. Kans.
Apthorpe, William, 198 Main

St., Oneonta, N. Y.
Arand, Charles A., Sault Ste.

Marie, Mich.
Archer, Ellsworth  A., 1st  Nat.

Bk. Bldg., Pullman, Wash.
Archer, Wm. Reed. 140 South

13th St., Lincoln, Neb.
Armond, Richard H., Ford
Bldg., Great Falls, Mont.
Armor, Gladdis, 502 Constitu-
tion St., Emporia, Kan.
Armstrong, Janet M., Box 15,

Cobourg, Ont.
Armstrong, R. M., Chronicle

Bldg.,  Augusta,  Ga.
Arnold,  G.  E.  Postoffice  Bldg.,
Albion, Mich.


1148


Professional  Ref/islcr


Osteopaths


Arnold, Ruth S., 2524 Wood-
burn  Ave., Cincinnati, (1.

Arnold, W. H., Wall Bldg.,
Vancouver, AVash.

Arnott, Neil, 33a  Saville Row
West, London, England.

Arthur, James B. McKee, 305  I
W. 97th St., New Vork.
N. Y.

A.<5hcroft,  Robert  G..  136  Well-
ington  St., Kingston, Ont.

Ashmore, Edythe, Kirksville,
Mo.

Atkins, W. A., Ohio Bldg.,
Clinton,  Til.

Atkinson. John T., Dominion
Trust  Bldg., Vancouver,

Attv. Norman B., Court Sq.
Theatre Bldg., Springfield,  .
Mass.  i

Atzen, C. B., Omaha Nat'l |

Bank  Bldg.,  Omaha,  Neb.
Aupperle, G. A., Sutherland,

Iowa.
Austin, Isabel E., Sefton Blk.,

San Diego, Cal.
Austin, I. M., Morgantown,

W. Va.
Axtell,  Eudora,  Berkeley  Nat  1

Bank  Bldg.,  Berkeley,  Cal.
Aydelotte, W. F., Charleston,  I

Mo.
Avery, Frank E., Masonic

Temple,  Erie,  Pa.
Avery, Herbert, Thomson

Bldg., Oakland, Cal.
Ayres, Elizabeth, 74 Central

Ave., Hackensack, N. .T.
Bach,  James  S., Temple  Bldg.,

Toronto,  Ont.
Bachman,  M.  E.,  Hippee  Bldg.,

Des  Moines,  Iowa.
Backus,  Loretta,  Stockton,  111.
Baer,  Fred  J..  214  Washington
St.,  E.  Stroudsburg,  Strouds-
burg and Delaware Water
Gap,  Pa.
Bagley, Edwin P., Marsh-
Strong Bldg., Los Angeles,
Cal.
Baglev, Dr. Louise M., 411 S.
Franklin St., Kirksville,
N. D.
Bagley, R. A., Law Bldg.,

Suffolk,  Va.
Bailev, De Forrest C, 739 N.
40th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Bailey,  Homer  Edward,  Frisco

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Bailev, J. F., Amicable Bldg.,

Waco,  Tex.
Bailey,  John  H.,  Empire  Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Bailey,  J. R.,  Masonic  Temple,

Ashland, Wise.
Bailey,  Raymond  W.,  Franklin
Bk. Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Bailey, Walter Edward,

Macon, Mo.
Baird,  John  W.,  Battle  Creek,

Mich.
Baird, Minerva, 105 Sayre St.,

Montgomery, Ala.
Baird,  Nora  B.  Pherigo,  Weis-
singer-Gaulbert Building.,
Louisville, Ky.
Bairstow,  W.  R.,  Warren  Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Warren, Pa.
Baker, Adam, B. & I. Bldg..

Dubuque, la.
Baker, Frederick Dunton, 76
Hardenbrook  Ave.,  Jamaica,
N. Y.
Baker, H. N., Cameron, Mo.
Baker, J. E.. Citizens' Natl

Bank  Bldg., Brazil, Ind.
Baker,  Lillian.  Corbett Bldg..
Portland, Ore.


Baker,  R.  P.,  215  North  Broad

St.,  Lancaster,  O.
Balbirnle, C. D. B., Flanders

Bldg.,  Philadelphia, Pa.
Balbirnie, C. D. B., 4308
Walnut St., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Baldwin, Helen M., Liberty
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Pitts-
burgh. Pa.
Baldy, James B., Fidelity

Bldg., Tacoma, ■V\''ash.
Bales, Grace M., P. O. Bldg.,

Hanford,  Cal.
Balfe, Anna B., Mason Bldg.,

I^os Angeles, Cal.
Balfe,  Elinor  M.,  Mason  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Balfe,  Sarah  Louise,  Ellsworth

Hotel, Denver, Colo.
Balfe,  Susan,  Mason  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles, Cal.
Ballert, A. B.,  Jr., Ohio Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
Bancroft, Claude M., Finley
Blk.,  Canandaigua  and  Penn
Yan,  N.  Y.
Bandel,  C.  F.,  Hancock  St.  and
Nostrand  Ave., Brooklyn,
N.  Y.
Banker, Charles F., 184
Albany Ave., Kingston.
N. Y.
Banker, Gene C, 526 W.
Hortter St., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Banker. J. Birdsall, 112 West

72nd St., New York, N. Y.
Banker, Louise Ayres, 112 W.

72nd St., New York, N. Y.
Banker, Minerva  Kellogg,  184
Albany Ave., Kingston,
N. Y.
Banning,  J.  W., 65  Halsey  St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Banning,  John  W.,  37  Madison
Ave., New York, N. Y., and
516 Nostrand Ave., Brook-
lyn,  N. Y.
Barbee, Lottie Catron, 31

Maple  St.,  Springfield,  Mass.
Barber, Chas. W., Flander.s

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Barber, Chas. W., 2217 South
Broad St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Barber, Isabel Olive, First
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Allegan,
Mich.
Barger,  Eva  L., 84 Park  Ave.,

Rutherford, N. J.
Barger,  Maude  F.,  Succasunna,

N. J.
Barker, Abbie Holland, 34
Rodnev St., Liverpool, and
20  St.  Ann's  Sq.,  Manchester,
England.
Barker, Carolyn, First Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Ft. Dodge,
Iowa.
Barker, Edward H., 34 Rod-
ney St., Liverpool, and 20
St. Ann's Sq., Manchester,
England.
Barker, Francis M., Wellman,

Iowa.
Barker,  Jas.  Wm.,  Eureka,  111.
Barker, Jesse S., La Harpe,

111.
Barker, O. O., Middleswoitli,

111.
Barmby, Martha, Alta Vista
i Bldg., Berkeley, Cal.
Barnes, F. E., Mitchell Blk.,

Charleston, 111.
Barnes, Joanna, Grier Park

Bldg., Greenwood, S. C.
Barnes, Lora K., Lovt-man
Bldg., Chattanooga. Tenn.


Barnes, Samuel Denham, 280
Beretawa St., Honolulu, T.
H.
Barnes, W. O., Sheridan,

Wyo.
Barnett, John Ambrose, Citi-
zens' Trust Co., Boonville,
Mo.
Barrett,  Geo.  A.,  816  East  45th

St.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Barrett, Onie A., 1423 Locust

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Barrows,  Florence  Judd,  King-
man, Kans.
Barry, Joanna, 242 Bryant

St., Buffalo, N. Y.
Barss, Emilv Malcomson, 211

N. 2nd  St.,  Corvallis,  Ore.
Bartholomew.  E.  J.,  39  S.  State

St.. Chicago,  111.
Bartlett, L. P., 1524 Chestnut

St..  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Bartlett, Leonard P., 1542 N.

Felton St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Barto, Ida E. 565 Main St.,

East  Orange, N. .1.
Bartosh,  William,  1421  E.  49th

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Bashaw,  J.  P.,  North  East,  I'a.,

and 213 Olive St., W. Palm

Beach,  Fla.
Bashline, Orrin O., Broad St.,

Grove  City,  Pa.
Bashline, O.O., 5040 Locust

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Bass, Elizabeth C, Central

Savs.  Bk.  Bldg.,  Denver.  Col.
Bass,  John  T.,  Central  Savings

Bank  Bldg.,  r>enver.  Col.
Basye,  A.  A., Wilson.  N. C.
Basye. E. E., 1016 Joseph St.,

New Orleans, La.
Bates,  Frank  A.,  Geneva,  Neb.
Bates,  Lenora  K.,  Box  102,  Los

Angeles, Cal.
Bathrick, Rose, 110 W. Ninth

St.,  Austin,  Tex.
Baudel, C.  F., 148 Hancock

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Baugher. L. Guy, 229 North

Second St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Baughman, J. H., 512 Central

Ave., Connersville, Tnd.
Baughman, J. S., 523 Division

St.,  Burlington,  Iowa.
Baum, John D., 117 E. Sixth

St.,  East  Uverpool,  O.
Baumgras, George O., Central

Nat'l Bk. Bldg., St. Peters-
burg, Fla.
Bay, Daisy E. Washburn,

Spitzer Bldg., Toledo, O.
Bavmiller, Minnie M., 104 N.

Washington St., Abingdon,

111.
Beale, Edna F., 5127 Center

Ave..  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Beall, Clara P., 474 South

Salina  St.,  Syracuse.  N. Y.
Beall, Francis J., 474 South

Salina  St.,  Syracuse,  N. Y.
Beam,  Wilson, 60  North  Third

St., Easton, Pa.
Bean, Arthur S., 34 Jefferson

Ave., Brooklyn, N. T.
Bean, E. H., Hayden Clinton

Bank  Bldg.,  Columbus,  O.
Bean,  Willard  C, 1095  Market

St., San Francisco, Cal.
Beard, Martha D., Cherokee

Bldg., Hopkinsville, Ky.
Bears0, Ada M., Livingston

Road.  Bar  Harbor,  Me.
Beaulieu,  J.  A.,  34  Commercial

Bldg., Woonsocket, R. I.
Beaven, E. H.. Granby Blk.,

Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Beaven, L. M., Lebanon, Ind,


Oxlenpalhs


Profcssioiuil  H('(jisler


1149


Bebout, Esther M., Hamilton

Bldg.,  Akron,  O.
Beck, Leonora, 718 Roscoe

St., Chicag-o, 111.
Becker, Arthur D., l*reston,

Minn.
Becker, B. H. Tatum, Payne

Bldg-.,  Roanoke,  Va.
Becker, Catherine G., Kast

Division St., Faribault,

Minn.

Ethel \u., Pre.ston,


Becker,
Minn.

Beckett,
Kans.

Beckham


O. F., Hiawatha,


James ,T., Chemical
Bldg'., St. Louis, Mo.

Beckler, Herbert S., Witz
Bldg., Staunton,  Va.

Beckler, Jennie K., 10 North
Market  St.,  Staunton,  Va.

Beckwith, Ann, Sheridan,
Wyo.

Beckwith,  Annette  H.,  Box
334, Roswell,  New  Mexico.

Beckwith,  Hermon  E.,  Fergu-
son  Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.

Bedell, Minnie Miller, Glas-
gow, Mo.

Bedwell.  W.  H..  Nat'l  Citizens'
Bank  Bldg., Mankato,  Minn.

Beeman,  E.  E.,  500  Fifth  Ave.,
New York, N. Y.

Beeman,  L.  Mason,  2131  Broad-
way, New York,  N. Y.

Beeman, Roy Herbert, 462
Jersey  Ave., Jersey  City, N.
J.

Beets,  Merrltt  J.,  21i  N.  Wash-
ington Ave., Wellington,
Kans.

Beets,  Rutherford  H.,  Beth-
any, Mo.

Beets, William E., Logan
Bldg,. St. Joseph, Mo.

Bell,  Adaline,  44  Pike  St.,
Cynthiana, Ky.

Bell, D., Plattesville, Wise.

Bell,  De  Lano  H.,  83  King  St.,
Chatham, Ont.

Bell,  Haney  H.,  Mechanics
Bldg., Petersburg,  Va.

Bell,  John  A.,  Hannibal  Trust
Co.  Bldg.,  Hannibal,  Mo.

Bell,  H. R.,  Marinette,  ^Vis.

Bell,  Leslie  Harmon,  Ames,  la.

Bell, L. J., Solomon Bldg.,
Helena, Ark.

Bell,  R.  W.,  219  W.  Myrtle  St.,
Independence, Kans.

Bemls,  J.  B.,  N.  Y.  Life  Bldg.,
St. Paul, Minn.

Benedict,  A.  May,  2513  N.  Main
Ave.,  Scranton,  Pa.

Benedict,  Loren  DeWitt,  Morse
Babcock Bldg., Ionia, Mich.

Beneflel,  Carrie  A.,  Old  Nat'l
Bank  Bldg.,  Spokane,  Wash.

Benion, Martha Vernon,
Flanders Bldg., Philadel-
phia,  Pa.

Bennett,  Carrie  A.,  Temple
Court  Bldg.,  Denver,  Colo.

Bennett,  Charles  A.,  Valpey
Bldg., Detroit, Mich.

Bennett,  E.  D.,  Husted  Bldg.,
Kansas City, Kans.

Bennett,  T.  L.,  IIOJ  Broad  St.,
Selma,  Ala.

Benning,  Lillie  M.,  2901  16th
St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.

Bensen,  L.  R.,  81  Centre  Ave.,
New Rochelle,  N. Y.

Benson,  ^V.  R.,  610  Fourth
Ave.,  Longmont,  Colo.

Bentley,  Lillian  L.,  1533  Chest-
nut St.,  Philadelphia. Pa.

Bereman,  J.  Worling,  Wulfe-
kuhler  Bldg.,  Leavenworth,
Kans.


Berger, Grace C, 2626 Broad-
way, New  York,  N.  Y.
Bergln, Fay, Hughes Bldg.,

Moose .Taw, Sask  , Can.
Bergin, P. J., 512 Woodland
Ave., Kansas City, Mo.

Bergland, V. A. 1721J Second

Ave.,  Rock  Island, 111.
Bernard, Curtis, McGrory
Bldg., Norwich, Conn.

Bernard, H. E., Fine Arts
Bldg.,  -Detroit, Mich.

Berrow, A. W., 610 Central
Ave.,  Hot  Springs,  Ark.

Berry,  A.  E.,  506  Florida  Ave.,
Tampa, Fla.

Berry, Clinton D., Granite
Bldg., Rochester, N. Y.

Berry, Gertrude S., Granite
Bldg., Rochester, N. Y.

Beslin, F. P., 203 S. Arch St.,
Aberdeen,  S.  D.

Best, Arthur E., Masonic
Temple, Newark, O.

Betzner, Hugh L. M., Green-
castle,  Ind.

Betts, C. Steele, Huron, S. D.

Blby, James B., 53451 Ballard
Ave., Seattle, Wash.

Biddle, J. Russell, Roberts-
dale, Ala.

Bienemann, Joseph C, 535
Fourth  St.,  La  Salle,  111.

Bierbower, Alice, 114 N. Ash-
land Ave.,  La  Giange,  111.

Binck, C.  E., 130 E. Pearl St.,
Burlington,  N.  J.

Binck, C. B., 26 Scott St.,
Riverside, N. J.

Bingham, Lewis J., 133 East
State St., Ithaca, N. Y.

Birlew, Dorothy S., 810 East

Bischoff,  Fred.,  Goddard  Bldg.,
Chicago,  111.

Bishop,  J.  Clifford,  555  Somer-
set St.,  Ottawa,  Ont.

Bissonette, Corene J., 700 W.
180th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.

Bissonette, Irene, 1169 Main
St., Buffalo, N. Y.

Black, C. A.,  Masonic Temple,
Lima, O.

Black,  Campbell, 26 Front  St.,
Hamilton,  Bermuda.

Black, Charles L., Lincoln
Bldg., .Johnstown, Pa.

Black, Emma, Box 125,
Oregon, Mo.

Blackford, Chauncey D., Fay
Blk.,  Bay  City,  Mich.

Blackman. Charles J., Bluff-
ton, Ind.

Blackman,  W.  Wilbur,  Robert-
son Sanitarium,  Atlanta,  Ga.

Blair,  J.  S.,  Ward  Bldg.,  Battle
Creek, Mich.

Blair, Raymond S., Parkers-
burg, la.

Blakeman,  L.  J., 64 E.  Van
Buren St., Chicago, 111.

Blanchard, Chas. A., Frater-
nity Bldg.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Bland, Myrtabell, 231 East
Colorado St., Pasadena, Cal.

Bliss, Asa Potter, Grosse
Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.

Bliss, Charles W., 32 Fort
Place,  New  Brighton,  N.  Y.

Bliss, C. W., 44 Court St.,
Brooklyn, N. Y.

Bliss, Pearl A., Grosse Bldg.,
Los Angeles, Cal.

Blocker, Boiling L., Hamilton
Bk. Bldg., Chattanooga,
Tenn.

Bloom, Essie U., 1114 Market
St., Sunbury, Pa.

Bloxham, Harry P., 319 East
37th  St.,  Portland,  Ore.


Boath, Elsie H. Wood, St.

Paul's  Manse, Laurel Bank,

Dundee, Scotland.
Boaz, H. C, 224 Elm St.,

Henderson, Ky.
Boggess, Emma Bronk, 1664

Larkin St., San Francisco.

Cal.
Bohannon,  Eunice  B.,  Goodwyn

Butte, Mont.
Bohnsack, Anita B., 113 N.

Frederick St., Cape Gir-
ardeau,  Mo.
Bolam, Julia S., Owsley Blk.,

St., East  Boston. Mass.
Bolan, Harry  R., 36 Princeton

Inst.,  Memphis,  Tenn.
Bolan,  Lincoln R., 34 Bow St.,

Somerville,  Mass.
Bolles, Jenette Hubbard. 1459

Ogden St., Denver, Colo.
Bond, Ernest C, Wells Bldg.,

Milwaukee, Wise.
Bone. John F.. Rathburn.

Bldg., Pontiac, 111.
Booth, E. R., Traction Bldg.,

Cincinnati,  O.
Bordsen, Theo. L., Alcatraz

Bldg., South Berkeley, Cal.
Borough, S., North Man-
chester, Ind.
Borton, Samuel, Golden. 111.
Borup, Georgia W., Pittsburg

Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.
Both, E. R., 601-3 Traction

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Boucher, Arthur J., 36 W.

Newton  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Boulware, F. A., 1685 Calla-
way  St., Memphis, Tenn.
Bouner,  Dr.  E.  J.,  Champaign,

111.
Bowen,  Margaret  E.,  Pounding

Mill, Va.
Bowen, William D., 1 West

Grace  St., Richmond,  Va.
Bower, J. H., N. T. Armijo

Bldg.,  Albuquerque,  N.  M.
Bower, Mary, Hazel House,

Pawnee,  Neb.
Bower, R. A., Collins Blk.,

Eureka,  Kans.
Bowers. Homer  D., Gaston,

Ore.
Bowers. Henry M., Masonic

Temple,  Las  Cruces,  N.  M.
Bowersox, U. S. G., Kistler

Bldg., Longmont, Colo.
Bowlby, Doris,  Mills  Bldg.. El

Paso,  Texas.
Bowling, R. \Y., 618 Fremont

Ave., So. Pasadena, Cal.
Bowling, Willett  Lee, Kendall

Bldg., Pasadena, Cal.
Boyd, Richard H., Tullahoma.

Tenn.
Bover,  D.  D.,  Provo,  Utah.
Boyer, G. R., Jefferson Bldg..

Peoria, 111.
Boyes, E. H., 222 Putnam St.,

Marietta,  O.
Boyes,  M. A., 1003  Market  St..

Parkersburg, W^. Va.
Boyles. J. A., Fidelity Bldg.,

Baltimore, Md.
Bradbury, Chas. C, 117 "W.

Monroe  St.,  Phoenix,  Ariz.
Bradley, M. H., 133 Mentor

Ave.,  Painesville,  O.
B'radley, Oscar Evans, Ell-
wood City, Pa.
Brake, Isabella, Equitable

Bldg., Melbourne, Australia.
Brann, Edward C, 4095 Com-
mercial  St., Oswego, Kans.
Branner, Louise Mae, 39 S.

State  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Bray, Edwin  W.. Denckla
Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.


1150


ProfessioiKil  licgislci-


Osteopaths


13rearley, Peter H., Franklin

Bank Bldg-., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Breckeniidg-e,  Karl,  105  Centre

St.. Bath, Me.
Breed.  Arthur  M.,  12(;  Pine  St.,

Corning, N. Y.
Breedlove, Dan H., ^'aldosta,

Ga.
Breitenstein,  Rose  E.,  62  Row-
ley St., Rochester,  N. Y.
Breitzman,  Edward  J.,  69  Macy

St.,  Fond  du I^ac, \\'is.
Brenz, Louis  Edward, Summit

& 5th  Aves.,  Arkansas  City,

Kans.
Bretow-Miinch Wm. C, Lake

Hopatcong-, N. J., and 621

Bushwick Ave., Brooklyn,

N. Y.
Brevard, May, 422 Burton St.,

Murfreesboro, Tenn.
Brewer, J. C, Jefferson. Wis.
Brewster,  George  A.,  24  Laurel

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Brigham, W. Curtis, Ferguson

Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Bright, S. H., Royster Bldg.,

Norfolk, Va.
Brill,  Morris  M.,  18  E.  41st  St.,

New Yoik. N. Y.
Brinkerhoff,  V.  W.,  Ohio  Bldg.,

Toledo,  O.
Britt, Florence Schaepe,

Higginsville, Mo.
Brittain, Ethel, St. James

Bldg., Jacksonville. Fla.
Broadhurst. Lila M., Golds-

boro,  N.  C.
Brock, W. W., 134 State St.,

Montpelier,  Vt.
Brockway, Arthur W., Frame

Bldg., Waukesha, Wis.
Brodbeck, Oliver, Elyria Blk.,

Elyria, O.
Broderick, Katherine  A., 59 S.

Main St., Torrington, Conn.
Brokaw, Maud, Stevens Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich.
Brown,  Albert  F.,  169 1  Dundas

St., London, Ont.
Brown, Alice A., 1704 Fifth

Ave., Troy, and Citizens"

Bank  Bldg.,  Saratoga

Springs, N. Y.
Brown,  Dale,  359  Boylston  St.,

Boston, Mass.
Brown, Edith M., White Blk.,

Charleston, 111.
Brown, Ernest H., Hooper,

Neb.
Brown. Josiah, H., 4908 N.

Mervine St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Brown, Marcus B., E. & W.

Clothing Bldg., Sioux City,

Iowa.
Brown. Niles, 671 Broad St.,

Providence,  R.  I.
Brown, Sam'l Agnevv, 1112

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Brown,  Sarah  Snavely,  945  W.

7th  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Brown, William Clare, 182

Main St., Waterville, Me.
Browne, E. M., Tiiole Bldg.,

Galesburg, 111.
Browne, F. Grantham, 97

Mortimei- St., Regent St.,

London, W., England.
Browning. M. B., Broadway

Market  Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Browning, Dr. Martin P., 019

Farwell Bldg., Detroit,

Mich.
Bruce, A. Miller, Colonial

Trust  Bldg.,  Reading,  Pa.
Bruce, Lewis,  Lindsay,  Cal.


Bruce, Will H., Bing J31dg..

Houston, Texas.
Bruckner, Carl D., 1731 Arch

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Bruner,  M.  T., Aurora.  111.
Bruninghaus, Chas. W. A. B.,

1 Chatham St., Worcester,

Brunner,  M. W..  121 S. Ninth

St.,  Lebanon,  Pa.
Bryan, A. L., Gainesville,

Texas.
Bryan.  Charles  T., 421  E. 17th

St., Santa  Ana, Cal.
Bryant,  M^ard  C,  Masonic  Blk.,

Greenfield, Mass.
Bryson, Ida B. Kartowitz,

Colfax, Wash.
Buchholz, Charles, Merced,

Cal.
Buckmaster, R. M., Whidden

Bldg., Arcadia, Fla.
Buckmaster, R. P., 132 S.

Orange  Ave.,  Orlando,  Fla.
Buckner, Alice L., Fullerton,

Neb.
Buddecke, Bertha A., Third
Nat'l  Bank Bldg.,  St. Louis,

Mo.
Buehler, John Benjamin, 381

Fifth  Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Bueler,  C.  Merwin,  Tucumcari,

N. M.
Buffalow,  O.  T.,  Gregory  Bldg.,

Beloit, Wis. '
Bullard, John R., 28 E. Main

St., Marshalltown, la.
Bullas, Grace, Biloxi, Miss.
Bullock, B. A., 211 Steven.s

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Bumpus, Glyde W., Empire

Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Bumpus,  J.  F.,  406  Market  St.,

Steubenville, O.
Bumstead, Lucius A., 16 E.

Winter  St.,  Delaware,  O.
Bunker,  Blanche  C,  Van  Slyke

Bldg.,  Aberdeen,  S.  D.
Bunting, H. S., 9 S. Clinton

St., Chicago, 111.
Burd, Walter C, Security

Savings Bank I31dg., Cedar

Rapids,  la.
Burdette, Gabriel F., 401 W.

Main  St.,  Centralia,  Wash.
Burdick, Ralph H., Tonapah,

Nev.
Burke, Isaac, 133 Geary St.,

San  Francisco, Cal.
Burke. Raymond J., 1407 S.

Broad  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Burke, Wilfrid I., Sun Bldg.,

Lowell, Mass.
Burlingham, James P.,

University  Blk.,  Syracuse,

N. Y.
Burnard, Harold W., 47 W.

34th St., New York, N. Y.,

and 158 Seventh St., Elm-
hurst, L. I., N. Y.
Burnard, W. L., York, Neb.
Burner, Ethel Louise, Unity

Bldg.,  Bloomington,  111.
Burnett, Fred  G., Ph.  B., Ins-
keep  Bldg.,  Bellefontaine,  O.
Burnett, John Clawson, 1007

Broad St., Newark, N. J.
Burns, Guy Wendall, 49 W.

57th  St.,  New  Yoik,  N.  Y.
Burns, Louisa, 122 S. Ashland

Blvd.,  Chicago, 111.
Burrus,  Madison  Cooper,  New

Franklin, Mo.
Burt, James E., 251 W. 81st

St., New York, N, Y.
Burt,  Tlionias  G.,  Groton,  S.  D.
Burton, Benj. O., Harlan, la.


Burton, Charlotte M., 218 W.

Olive  St.,  Ft.  Collins,  Colo.
Burton, George F., Frost

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Bush, C. M., 902 Main St..

Hartford,  Conn.
Bush, Earl A.. 902 Main St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Bush, Ei-ne.st W., Southei'n

Pines, N. C,  and Bethlehem,

N. H.
Bush,  Evelyn  R.,  836  S.  Fourth

Ave.,  I.,ouisville,  Ky.
Bush, Ida  Ellis, 317 Laura  St.,

Jacksonville, Fla.
Bush,  Lucius  M., 15 Exchange

Place,  Jersey  Citv,  N. ,T.
Bushart, E. E.,  Sullivan, 111.
Buster Will L., 21 Park Ave.,

Mt.  Vernon,  N.  Y.
Butcher, Frances, 81 E.

Madison  St., Chicago, 111.
Butcher, Frances M., 126 N.

Elmwood Ave., Oak Park,

111.
Butcher, O. L., 657 Mt.

Prospect Ave., Newark,

N. J.
Butler, Ruby, Jefferson, O.
Byars, W. R., U. S. Grant

Bldg., San  Diego,  Cal.
Byrkit, Anna W., Summit

Road, Wellesley. Mass.
Byrkit, Francis K., Pierce

Bldg., Copley Square,

Boston, Mass.
Bvrne, Joseph F., Osborn

Bldg.,  Cleveland,  O.
Cadwell, E. William, Acme

Bldg., Canon City, Colo.
Cady,  Darwin  F.,  Union  Bldg.,

Syracuse,  N.  Y.
Cady, James D., 30 Court St.,

Cortland, N.  Y.
Cain, Philip R., 609a Broad-
way, Hannibal, Mo.
Caine,  Allen  B.,  Iroquois  Bldg.,

Marion,  Ind.
Caldwell. Clara A., 404 W.

Main St., Troy,  O.
Caldwell, Delia B., Flynn

Bldg., Des  Moines,  la.
Calhoun, J. C, Garrett Bldg.,

Jackson, Minn.
Calisch, H. F., Chamber of

Commerce Bldg., Richmond,

Va.
Callahan, J.  L., J.  M. S.  Bldg.,

South Bend, Ind.
Callahan, Kate T., J. M. S.

Bldg.,  South  Bend,  Ind.
Calvert, A. K. S., Ponca City,

Okla.
Calvert,  E.  H.,  Harrison  Bldg.,

Columbus,  O.
Cameron, Edward M., Rich-
mond, Mo.
Camp, Charles D., Powers

Bldg., Rochester, N. Y.
Camp, Henry Clay, Chamber

of  Commerce  Bldg.,  St.  Paul,

Minn.
Campbell,  A.  D.,  1524  Chestnut

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Campbell, Charles A., Broad-
way, Earned, Kans.
Campbell, Ida S., Manwaring

Bldg., New  London, Conn.
Canfield, Carl B., Collbran,

Colo.
Cannon, M. E., Leitchfleld,

Ky.
Cannon, P. J., Farmington,

Mo.
Cantrell, S. E. Carrothers,

Cleveland,  Ga.
Card,  F.  C,  629  Third  St.,  Fort

Madison,  la.
Cardamone,  Philip  J.,  326  E.

Price  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.


Oslt'/iptiUis


Professional  firffisirr


1151


Carleton, Fanny T., 24 Sum-
mer St.,  St.  John.sbury,  Vt.
Carleton, Marparet B., Post-
office  Blk., Tveene, N. H.
Cailisif, Hardy Wm., 242

Summor  St.,  Pator.son,  N.  J.
Cai'low, Eva Mains, Ph. B.,

Garnot-Corey l>ldg-., Med-

ford,  Ore.
Callow, Frank c;., Gainet-

Corey Bldg-., Medford, Ore.
Carney, Edward V,., IJ So.

Main  St.,  Fort  Scott,  Kans.
Carothers, J. C, 1447 N. Red-
field St., Philadelphia, Pa."
Carpenter, Ethel Cook, 666

Woodward Ave.,.  Detroit,

Mich.
Carpenter,  Fannie  E.,  Ooddard

Bids'., Chicag'o,  111.
Carpenter,  George  H.,  Goddard

Bids..  Chicag-o, 111.
Carpenter,  Mark  C,  666  Wood-
ward Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Carr,  S. V., Eudora, Kans.
Carrico, Clarence  J., Gorelock

Bldg-.,  Webster  Groves,  Mo.
Carson, Henry, Ridgrefield,

Conn.
Carson, Merl J., Southern

Bldg-., Wilmington, N. C.
Carter, Bertha E., 729 Boyls-

ton  St., Boston, Mass.
Carter, Charles, Arcade Bldg..

Danville,  Va.
Carter,  Elmer  W.,  82  Main  St.,

Haverhill, Mass.
Carter, Mrs. George. 41 ^V

Capitol  Ave.,  Springfield,  HI.
Carter. H. V., 32fi N. Chailes

St.,  Baltimore,  Md.
Carter, Lillian E., Bleckley

Bldg.. Anderson, S. C.
Carter, W^alter C, 413 E.

Capitol  Ave.,  Springfield,  111.
Caruthers, Iva M., 1436 W.

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Carver, Harriet T., Sixth and

Garden  Sts.,  Columbia,  Tenn.
Carver,  J.  A.,  Childress,  Texas.
Cary, Una W., Hagelstein

Bldg., Sacramento, Cal.
Caryl, Ella Mansfield, .^21 S.

Olive  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Casey, E. M., Security  Mutual

Bldg., Binghaniton, N. Y.
Cassell. M. E. l.'iSO Chestnut

St., Philadelphia, Pa., and

140 E. Main St., Moores-

town, N.  J.
Caster, H. E., Old Nat'l Bank

Bldg.,  Spokane. Wash.
Catlow, Jessie L., 623 Story

St.,  Boone,  la.
Catron, Howard B., Payette,

Idaho.
Cave, Edith Stobo, 151 Sand-
wich St., Plymouth, and 30

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass.
Cave, Francis A., Huntington

Ave., Boston, Mass., and

Crowell Bldg., Hyannis,

Mass.
Cawston, Margaret I., Los

Angeles, Stapley Road, St.

Albans, England.
Chaffee, Alice B., Hollings-

worth Bldg.. Los Angeles.

Cal.
Chalfant, Vera. Plaza Apart-
ments, iMvincie, Ind.
Chambers, Etta O., 115 West

Second St., Geneseo, 111.
Champlin, Chas. A., 118 West

Avenue  B,  Hope,  Ark.
Champlin, Etta  E. 404 S. Elm

St., Hope, Ark.
Chandler, Alfred J., Box 473,

Salisburv, N. C.


Chandler.  Chas.  H.,  McCorriiick

Bldg.,  Cherryvale,  Kan.s.
Channell,  Leo  R.,  Wulfekiihler

Bank Bldg., Leavenworth,

Kans.
Chapman, Ada Hinckley,

Holmes Bldg., Galesbui-g,

111.
Chapman, .1. A., Kendallville,

Tnd.
Chappell, E. E., Clear Lake,

Ta.
Chappell, George G., Sidney,

la.
Chappell, Nannie J., Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg., St. Louis,

Mo.
Chappell,  W. F. Surety  Bldg.,

Muskogee,  Okla.
Chappell, Walter G., Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg., St. Louis,

Mo.
Charles, Elmer,  Pontiac,  Mich.
Chase, John P., Wilder Bldg.,

Rochester, N. Y.
Chase, Julia Jane, 42 Middle

St.,  Portsmouth,  N.  H.
Cheney, Henry S., Marsh

Strong  Bldg.,  I^os  Angeles,

Cal.
Cherrill, Katharine, Carthage,

111.
Chesebrough,  Edna,  171  West-

niin.ster  St  .  PiuiV'  . . i.

Childress, T. E., Bieri Bldg.,

Osage Cit", >-'p-
Childs, Bessie Calvert, Gold-
smith'  Bldg., Milwaukee,

Wis.
Childs, William S., Roach

Bldg., Salina, Kans.
Chiles,  Harry  L,.,  466  Main  St.,

Orange,  N.  J.
Chittenden, Albert E., 41.5

Court St., Auburn, Me.
Chittenden, W. C, 33 South

Main St., Newark, N. J.
Chrestensen, C. J., Y.  M. C. A.

Bldg., Keokuk, la.
Christensen, E. W., Long

Beach Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Long Beach, Cal.
Christiansen, C. P., Main St.,

Humboldt, la.
Chubb, Catherine May, 280 N.

Liberty  St., Delaware, O.
Church, John M., Lewiston,

Idaho.


W., Harlowton,

Mayro Bldg.,


I  Church,
1 Mont.
i  Clapp, Carl D.
Utica, N. Y.
Clark,  A. B., 37 IMadison Ave.,
New^ York, and Einniet
I Place,  Garden  City,  L.  I.
I  Clark,  Anna  Stow,  Auditorium

Blk.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
I  Clark, Charles E., Claremont,
I Cal
Clark,  Clyde  A.,  18  Asylum  St.,

Hartford, Conn.
Clark, I). L., Empire Bldg..
I Denver, Colo.
Clark, E. Heath, 359 Boylston

St., Boston, Mass.
Clark, E. H., 27 E.  Monroe
St.. Chicago, 111.
!  Clark, Edward Kennedy,
Washington. Mo.
Clark, Frank C, Auditorium
Bldg'., Los Angeles, Cal.
I  Clark,  Homer  M.,  El  Paso, 111.
I  Clark, John F., Greenville,
Texas.
Clark, M. E., Board of Trade

Bldg., Indianapolis, Ind.
Clark, Reuben T., New Mill-
saps Bldg., Jackson, Miss.
Clark, Sophia Hemstreet,
1 Libertv, l\Io.


I'laike, fOmily M., Miles Cit.v,

Mont.
Clarke, George Burt V.,

Univer.sity Bldg., Detroit,

Mich.
Clarke,  Olive, 805  W. Pico  St.,

liOS Angeles, Cal.
Clarke, Robt., 1104 10. 47th

St.. Chicago, 111.
Classen, Carrie C, First Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Ann Arbor,

Mich.
Classen, AN'illiani G., Hebron,

Neb.
Claussen,  B.  C,  Indianola,  la.
Claussen,  Pauline  M.,  Indianola

Banking Co. Bldg., In-
dianola, la.
Cleary, C. Stuart. 431 South

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Clement, Henry  W., 43  Black-
stone Blvd., Providence,

R. I.
Clements, Gertrude M.,

Welder  Bldg.,  Victoria,  Tex.
Cleveland, Edward W.,

Security Mutual Bldg.,

Binghamton.  N. Y.
Cleveland, Mabel Lewis, Iowa

City, la.
Clifford, James Ray, 42 N.

Brady  St.,  Du  Bois,  Pa.
Cline, C. O. Dighton Bldg..

Monticello,  111.
Clinton, Marv W., Keenan

Bldg., Pittsburg  • I'f-
Close, Effle A., Telephone

Bldg.,  Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.
Clouse,  D.  H.,  120  W.  Pine  St..

Lodi, Cal.
Clover, Thomas  H., Thompson

Bldg., Winfield, Kans.
Cluett, F. G., Security Bldg..

Sioux  Citv,  la.
Cluff,  Arthur  C,  Liggett  Bldg.,

Detroit, ]Mich.
Cobb, G. A., 539 Proctor St..

Port Arthur, Texas.
Cobb,  H.  M,,  Hugo,  Colo.
Cobb,  James  E., Spitzer'Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
Cobb,  Marie  Magill.  100 S  West

Lake  Ave.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Cobble, William Houston,

Fremont  Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,

Fremont, Neb.
Coburn, D. Wendell, 100 High

St.,  Newburyport,  Mass.
Cochrane,  Philip  S., 155  Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Cockrell, Charles C,

McClymonds Bldg.,

Massillon, O.
Cockrell, Irvin, 1 M'est 34th

St., and 2310 Andrews  Ave.,

Bronx. New York, N. Y.
Cockrell, Martliena, Dover,

Del.
Coffee, Eugene M., Collings-

wood,  N. J.
Coffer, G. T., 2540 Boulevard,

Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Coffer, Juliette Burns, Black

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Coffey,  Eva  Kate,  551  S.  Grand

Ave.,  Los  Angeles, Cal.
Coffland, Florence, 1432

Franklin  Ave.,  Columbus,  O.
Coffman, J. Marvin, 324 St.

Ann St., Owensboro, Ky.
Cohalen. John A., 1524 Chest-
nut St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Cohalan. John A., St. Girard

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Cohalan, John A., 2430 Poplar

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Coke, Richard H., 411 ^V.

Chestnut St., T.onisville. Kv.
Colborn, R. M., 810 Broad St.,

Newark, N. J.


1152


Professional  Re(/lster


Os  leu  paths


Colby, Irving', Marsh Bldg.,

New London, Conn.
Coldwells, Joseph A., Homer

Laughlin  Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Cole, Arthur  E., 227J N. Main

St., Urbana, O.
Cole, B. L., A'ivier Bldg-.,

Brownsville, Texas.
Cole, Earl  A., 163 S. Main St.,

Bowling  Green,  O.
Cole, J. B., Haden Bldg.,

Columbia,  Mo.
Cole, Julia  Mowerv, 2fi02 N.

12th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Cole, Merton K., 38 Pearl St„

Framingham,  Mass.
Cole, Omer C, Lewistown

Trust  Co.  Bldg.,  Lewistown,

Pa.
Collar, Emily, Hotel Oxford,

San Francisco, Cal.
Collier. Carrie B., 1610 Main

St.,  Clarinda,  la.
Collier, E. M., Spitzer Bldg.,

Toledo,  O.
Collier, Hix F., 133 W. Main

St.,  Waterbury,  Conn.
Collier, J. Erie, Stahlman

Bldg., Nashville, Tenn.
Collins, Alice L., 10 S. 18th

St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Collins, Emma Hazel, 424 S.

42nd  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Collins, H. L., 122 S. Ashland

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Collins,  Jean  Hough,  69  Picca-
dilly W., London, England.
Collins, Louisa  J.,  Geneva, 111.
Collins,  Paul  R.,  Brophy  Bldg.,

Douglas,  Ariz.
Collyer,  Frank  A.,  Pope  Bldg.,

Louisville, Ky.
Coltrane,  Ella  D.,  Union  Nat'l
Bank Bldg., ivianhattan,
Kans.
Commerford. Mary Elizabeth,

Carleton Bldg., St. Louis,

Mo.
Comjfton, Catherine, Beeville,

Texas.
Compton, Emma M., Pitts-
burgh Life Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa.
Compton, Mary, Pittsburgh

Life Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Comstock, Edgar S., Goddard

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
Conant, B. Rees, 1039 Massa-
chusetts Ave., Cambridge,

T^Q  gg

Conard', S. E., 1573 Charleston

Ave., Mattoon, 111.
Conger, Mrs. A. I>., Irving

Lawn,  Akron,  O.
Conger,  W.  Millwood,  Wither-

spoon Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Conklin, Hiram Lewis, 29

Grove Terrace, Passaic,

N.  J.
Conklin,  Hugh  W.,  Ward  Blk.,

Battle Creek, Mich.
Conley, George J., Shukert

Bldg.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Conner, D. L.. Na  ■ > IJank of

Arizona Bldg., Phoenix,

Ariz.
Conner, H. L. Ontral Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Conner,  Mary  A.,  Neave  Bldg.,

Cincinnati,  O.
Conner, Roswell F., Audit-
orium Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
Conner, R. F. & Mary H., 431

S.  Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago 111.
Conner, R. W., Hennen  Bldg.,

New  Orleans,  La.
Conner, Sallie M., Chalfant

Blk.,  Bellefontaine,  O.


Conner, W.  ,1.,  Commerce

Bldg.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Conner, William E., 35 Audi-
torium Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Conner, Wm. E., 431 S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Conrad, Charles F., 120

Palisade Ave., West Hobo-
ken,  N.  J.
Cook. C. F., 88 Market St.,

Poughkeepsie,  N. Y.
Cook, Geo. T., 32 Glenwood

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Cooke,  Herbert  T.,  Clayton,  O.
Coon. Bert D., 625 Main St.,

South  Bend,  Ind.
Coon, .1. Franklin, Baker,

Boyer Bldg.. Walla Walla,

Wash.
Coonfleld. George W., Dodge

City,  Kans.
Coons, .lessie M., Magnolia

Hall.  Hamilton,  Bermuda.
Coons. W. N., Medina,  O.
Cooper, Emma S., Waldheim

Bldg.. Kansas  City, Mo.
Cooper, R. M., Garden City,

Kans.
Cooper, Helen Victoria, 133

Geary St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Cooper, Sarshal De Pew, 133

Geary St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Cooper,  Wm.,  97  Mortimer  St.,

Regent St., London. W..

England.
Coplantz, Russ, Register

Bldg., Portage. Wis.
Copper, Lydia N., Cor. Lake

and Center Sts., Warsaw,

Ind.
CoppernoU, Orieannie, Rumer

Blk., Alliance, Neb.
Corbin, W. S., Citizens' Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Chickasha,  Okla.
Corkil. Lena C, 2112 First

Ave.,  Kearney,  Neb.
Corkwell, F. E., 96^ W. Main

St.,  Newark,  O.
Cormeny, Howard J., 50 E.

Market  St.,  York,  Pa.
Cornelius. Charles, 485 Sher-

brooke  St..  Winnipeg,  Man.
Cornelius, M. B., 485 Sher-

brooke  St.,  Winnipeg,  Man.
Cornell, Leon L., Falls City,

Neb.
Cornett, Jessie Willard, 3331

E.  13th  Ave.,  Denver,  Col.
Coryell, Roland S., National

Bank  of  Brookville  Bldg.,

Brookville,  Pa.
Cosner, E. H., Reibold Bldg.,

Dayton.  O.
Cota. Rose. 10 Clark St.,

Burlington.  Vt.
Cottrell,  Mead  K.,  10308  Euclid

Ave.. Cleveland. O.
Coulter, Robert P., Weather-
ford.  Texas.
Cour. Andrew A.. 7043 North

Clark St., Chicago, 111.
Courts. Lillian Josephine,

Pontiac,  Mich.
Covell, Martha A., Lindley

Blk., Minneapolis, Minn.
Covey, Florence A., The

Somerset,  Portland,  Me.
Cox,  Martha  S.,  910  W.  Seventh

St., Joplin, Mo.
Cox, Robert Cornelius, 1524

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.,  and  118  S.  Virginia  Ave.,

Atlantic  City,  N.  J.
Cox, W. T., 113 Main St.,

Biddeford, Me.
Crafft, Maria C, Deer Lodge,

Mont.


Craig, A. S., 3030 Tracy Ave.,

Kansas  City,  Mo.
Craig, Irvin F.. Pittsburgh

Bldg..  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Craig, William, Ford St.,

Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.
Craigie, Margaret Anne,

Harris, Mo.
Crain,  Coral, 68  N.  Marengo

Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
Crain, C. J., Box 5, Union

City, Ind.
Crain, Festal, 68 N. Marengo

Ave.,  Pasadena,  Cal.
Cramb,  L.  K.,  Masonic  Temple,

North Yakima, Wash.
Cramb,  Lulu  Lynde, Fairbury,

Neb.
Cramer, Mytle A., Brower

Bldg.,  Bakersfield,  Cal.
Cramer,  Oliver  H., 13 S.

Church  St.,  West  Chester,

Pa.
Crampton, Charles C, 217

Court  St..  Kankakee.  111.
Ci'andell, S. Gertrude, Poca-
hontas, Iowa.
Crane, Jessie M., 117 Fourth

St., Norfolk, Neb.
Crane,  Ralph  M.,  18  E.  41st  St.,

New  York,  N.  T.
Craven.  Jane  Wells,  Arrott

Bldg., Pittsburgh. Pa.
Craven. Merritt B.. 605 Davis

St., Evanston, 111.
Crawford, H. T., 673 Boylston

St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Crawford,  John  S.,  Denton  Co.

N^t'l Bank Bldg., Denton,

Crawford,  Nell  C,  22  Hancock

St., Lexington.  Mass.
Crawford, S. Virginia, 10

Library  Place,  Danbiuy,

Conn.
Crawford,  W.  A.,  928  Main  St.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Crawford, W. F., 1322

McAllister St., San

Francisco, Cal.
Creatore, Tommaso, 762 S.

51st St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Creatore, Tommaso, Widener

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Crehore, Mary Alice, 4237

Olive St., St.  Louis, Mo.
Crenshaw,  J.  H.,  5882  Clemens

Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Creswell, Lena, American

Nat'l Bank Bldg., San

Diego, Cal.
Crocker, D. C, Stahl  Bldg.,

Central  ia.  Wash.
Crofoot,  Frank  A.,  77  Williams

St..  Lyons,  N.  Y.
Crofton, Henrietta, Leary

Bldg.. Seattle, Wash.
Crosswell, Mary Sybel, M. D..

Farmington, Me.
Crow, E. C, Second and

Franklin  Sts.,  Elkhart,  Ind.
Crow, Louise P., 5311 Monte

Vista St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Crowe, I. B., 2032 Cleveland

Ave.. Chicago. 111.
Croxton, Charles H., 1813 N.

Charles  St.,  Baltimore,  Md.
Crutchfleld, William E.,

McAdoo  Bldg.,  Greensboro.

N. C.
Cruzan, Albert. 1046 Vermont

St..  Lawrence,  Kans.
Crysler, Harriet, 351 River

Rd.,  Niagara Falls, Ont.
Culbertson, Eliza M.. Post

Bldg.,  Appleton,  Wis.
Cullev,  Albert  B.,  Central  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Cullev. Edgar W., 450 Collins

St., Melbourne. Australia.


Osleopollis


Profe,s,sioii(il  Hrrfi.stci'


1153


Culmyer, J. Chpster, Manito-
woc,  Wis.
Cummlngs,  I-.,  Ankansas  Nat'l

Bk.  Bldg-.,  Hot  Spring-s,  Ark.
Cumming-.s, W. S., t; Clifton

Ave.,  I^akewood,  N.  J.
Cunningham,  Artliur  B.,  Leary

Bldg'.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Cunning-ham,  Cha.'^. .T.,  Villa

Grove,  111.
Cunnlng:ham,  F.  Lewis,  Audit-
orium  Bldg., Lo.s  Ang-eles,

Cal.
Cunning-ham,  .T.  D.,  Living.ston

Bldg-., Blooniington,  TU.
Cunningham, J. R., Moore

Bldg-.,  San  Antonio,  Texa."?.
Cunningham, R. E.. Himmel-

berg-er-Harrison  Bldg:.,  Cape

Girardeau,  Mo.
Cupp,  H.  C,  Bank  of  Commerce

Bldg:., Memphis,  Tenn.
Curran, Cecelia G., Empire

Bldg-.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Currence, B. C, 50 E. Perry

St.,  Tiffin.  O.
Curry,  Arthur  B., 3207 Lex-
ington Ave.,  Chicag-o, 111.
Curtin, Katherine E., Empire

Bldg-., Denver, Colo.
Curtis, Frederick G., Pace

Bldg.,  Mount  Vernon,  111.
Curtis, Jay L., Fergu.s Falls,

Minn.
Cushman, Chas. E., Audito-
rium Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Cutler, L. Lynn, Berlin Savs.

Bank  Bldg.,  Berlin,  N.  H.
Daily,  Lillian  B.,  Granite  Bldg.,

Rochester, N. Y.
Dakin, Russell S., Depot St.,

Shelbyville,  Tenn.
Dalln,  C.  C,  Shenandoah,  la.
Dalton,  Leone,  Racine,  Wis.
Dana, Frances, 81 E.  Madison

St., Chicago,  111.
Daniel,  O.  L.,  Brooks,  Alberta.
Daniels, Henry, Times Bldg.,

Brockton, Mass.
Daniels, Lester R., Forum

Bldg.,  Sacramento,  Cal.
Daniels,  R. R.,  Majestic  Bldg.,

Denver, Colo.
Danks,  Edward  G., 204  North-
ampton St.,  Easton,  Pa.
Dann, H. J., Bliss Bldg.,

Sandusky,  O.
Dashiell. Eleanor R., Murray

Hill, Annapolis,  Md.
Daugherty, A. E., People's  *

Bank Bldg., Bloomington,

111.
Davenport, Bert  M., Sabetha,

Kans.
Davenport, Harry  Lewis, 1117

13th  Ave.,  Altoona,  Pa.
Davey.  Flora  M.. 37.5  E. Grant

St.,  Minnea,polis,  Minn.
Davidson, H. .!., 127 Garfield

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Davidson,  Sara  A.,  58  Metcalfe

St., Montreal, Quebec.
Davies, Catherine E., 15 S.

Franklin St., Wilkes-Barre,

Pa.
Davis, A. F. V., Kelso, Wash.
Davis, A. H., Elderfleld &

Hartshorn Bldg., Niagara

Falls,  N.  Y.
Davis,  C.  H.,  39  S.  State  St..

Chicago, 111.
Davis, Chas. H., 3405 Monroe

St., Chicago, 111.
Davis, Clara, E. Wooster St.,

Bowling  Green,  O.
Davis, D. W., Weiss Bldg.,

Beaumont,  Texas.
Davis,  F.  C,  Tonkawa,  Okla.
Davis, Henry M., Skiles Blk.,

Minneapolis,  Minn.


Davis  J.,  Morrison,  Hale

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Davis,  Jas.  W.,  Wayland  Bldg.,

Girard, ICan.s.
Davis, Paul R., St. .Tame.s

Bldg., .lacksonville, Fla.
Davis, Perry E., Globe Bldg.,

Pittsburg,  Kans.
Davis, Sai-ah M., Putnam

House,  Palatka,  Fla.
Davis, Thomas L., M. D.,

Chronicle  Bldg.,  Augusta,

Ga.
Davis, W. E.. 242 West Court

St., Pari.s,  111.
Davis, W. L., Funke Bldg.,

Lincoln,  Neb.
Dawes, Willard C, 237 W.

Main  St.,  Bozeman,  Mont.
Dawson, H. M., New Castle,

Ind.
Dawson,  John  Alex,  97  Mount-
fort St., Boston. Mass., and

Dreka  Bldg.,  DeLand,  Fla.
Dav,  E. F.,  Mavfleld, Ky.
Day, J. O., Starks Bldg.,

Louisville,  Ky.
Day,  Lawrence  E..  359  Lincoln

Ave.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Day, Mary Warren, New

Baxter  Bldg.,  Portland,  Me.
Dayton, Frank E., 3259 W.

Madison St.. Chicago, 111.,

and Grand Hotel. Mackinac

Island, Mich. (Summer

season.)
Dean, H. S., First Nat'l Bank

Bldg.,  Durango,  Colo.
Deane,  Alice  M., 876 Second

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Deane, John W., Beresford,

S. D.
Deason, J. Ph. G., Goddard

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
Deason, Laura J.. 122 S. Ash-
land Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Decker,  Jas.  S.,  301  W.  4th  St.,

Earned,  Kans.
Decks, J. Harley, Somerset

Blk., Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Deeming. W. J., Brookfield.

Mo.
Deeter, Ruth A., 132 Walnut

St., Harrisburg, Pa.
De France, Josephine, Com-
mercial Bldg..  St.  Louis,  Mo.
De Groot, Fred B., Rock

Lsland, 111.
De  Jardine,  C,  99  N.  Couit  St.,

Port  Arthur,  Ontario.
De Lapp, Sidney L., Perkins

Bldg., Roseburg,  Ore.
De Lendrecie, Helen, 697 S.

Kingsley  Drive,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Belong, Laura, 96 Engle St.,

Englewood, X.  .1.
Deming, I^ee C, Box 154,

Anaheim,  Cal.
Dennette, F. A.. 138 Hunting-
ton Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Deputy, Anna W., 1251 Main

St., Riverside, Cal.
Deputy,  H.  E.,  1251  Main  St.,

Riverside,  Cal.
Derek, J. E., Bass Blk., Fort

Wayne,  Ind.
Derr, Vera E., Masonic Blk.,

Fostoria,  O.
Dersam, Kathryn E., Folk

Bldg., Chillicothe,  O.
De Sart, Roy F., Commercial

Blk., Mason City. la.
Deshazer, J. Dalton, Xeave

Bldg.. Cincinnati, O.
De Tienne, Harry G., Central

Blk.,  Pueblo,  Colo.
De Tienne, J. A., 1198 Pacific

Street, Brooklyn,  N. Y.


Detwiller, E. S., 477 Colborn«»

St., London, Ontario.
Detwiler, Sara B., Medicine

Hat,  Alberta.
De Veny, Catharine, 304 S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago, ill.
Dewey,  Arthur  E.,  Utica  Bldg.,

Des  Moines,  la.
Dewey, Nina Mason, Utica

Bldg., Des  Moines, la.
DeWitt, Emma Good, 277

Monument  Ave.,  Wj'oming.

Pa,
De Wolfe, Winnifred. Fine

Arts  Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Dickey,  Ottis  I^., Fri.sco Bldg.,

Joplin,  Mo.
Dickey, Wm. F., 1237 S. Hope

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Dickson, J. Homer, Harrison

Blk., Canon City, Colo.
Dieckmann, Louisa. 415 Ver-
mont St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Diehl, J. M., Hulett Bldg.,

Elmira,  N.  Y.
Dietz, Phineas, 500 Broad St.,

Newark,  N.  J.,
Dileos,  M..  472  Fulton  St..

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Dill. Emma B.. Mason Bldg..

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Dill, Heber M., 21 Broadway,

Lebanon,  O.
Dillabough, A. H., 7 Roberts

St.,  Middleton,  N. Y.
Dillabough,  "VV.  J.  E.,  8  W.

Halkin  St.,  Belgrave  Square

S.  W.,  London,  England.
Dilley, A.  E., 4208 S. Vermont

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Dillon, Dot, 216 E. State St.,

Centerville, la.
Dinning, G. W., Ponca  City,

Okla.
Dinsmoor, Laura B.. 214

Centennial Ave., Sewickley,

Pa.
Doane, Adele, 1720^ Main St.,

Parsons,  Kans.
Dobson,  W.  D.,  Century  Bldg.,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Dodge, Ella Taylor, 5701

Blackstone,  Ave.,  Chicago,

111.
Dodge,  F.  Chandler,  53  Parkis

Ave., Providence, R. I.
Dodson, Charles Augustus,

State Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Little Rock, Ark.
Dodson, J. T., Kirksville, Mo.
Doe, Albin H., 523 Main St.,

Racine. Wis.
Deeming, Dr. C. O.. Sterling.

111.
Dole, Almeda  Goodspeed, New

Bank  Bldg.,  Winnetka,  111.
Dole, Emily C, Alta Vista

Apartments.  Berkeley,  Cal.
Donahue,  J.  E.,  Berkeley  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Bergeley.  Cal.
Doneghy, A. I., 1323 Chapline

St.,  ^Vheeling,  W.  Va.
Donnelly, Emma B., 54 S.

El  Molino  Ave.,  Pasadena,

Cal.
Dooli'ttle,  Harriet  M.,  535  N.

Main St., Pomona, Cal.
Doron,  Charles  B.,  Pearl  Bldg.,

Bangor,  Me.
Dorrance, Harold J., First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Pitts-
burgh, Pa.
Douglass,  Harry  E.,  568  Light-
house Ave.,  Pacific  Grove,

Cal.
Dove, C. E., Dion Blk.,

Glendlve, Mont.
Dover, Mary  A., 46 Oak St.,

Lowell, Mass.


1154


Professioiuil  Rcgislcr


Osteopaths


Dow, Lydia  S., Cowley Blk.,

Central Point, Ore.
Dow, McMorrif, 'Marshall,

Cowley Blk., Central Point,

Ore.
Dowler, A. S., Panora, la.
Dowlin, Mae 1... 40 E. Colo-
rado  St., Pasadena, Cal.
Downey,  K.  C,  Chanute,  Kans.
Downing-, Edwin M., Rupp

Bldg,, York, Pa.
Downing-, J. T.,  Board of

Trade Bldg., Scranton, Pa.
Downs,  Henry  A.,  18  State  St.,

Oil  City,  Pa.
Dozier,  J.  K.,  51  Howe  St.,

New Haven. Conn.
Dozier, W. R., Grand Opera

Bldg-., Atlanta, Ga.
Drake,  James  T.,  Metcalf

Bldg., Auburn, N. Y.
Draper, C. L., 535 Majestic

Bldg.j Denver, Colo.
Draper,  L. L., 33  W. 42nd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Drennan, Dr. Anna M., 899

Woodward Ave., Detroit,

Mich.
Dressel, Walter S., Kergher

Bldg-., Carrollton, 111.
Dresser, Walter P., Temple

Auditorium, Los Ang-eles,

Cal
Drew', Edward G., 1228 W.

Lehigh Ave., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Drew, Ira W., Land Title

Bldg-., Philadelphia, Pa.
Drinkall, Earl J., 11,331

Michig-an Ave., Chicago,

111.
Drinkall, Earl J., 1421 Morse

Ave., Rogers Park St.,

Chicago,  111.
Du  Bois,  R.  Omer,  Auburn,

Wash.
DufReld, Bessie A., Hitchcock

Bldg., Nashville, Tenn.
Dufur, .1. Ivan, Penna. Bldg.,

Philadelphia, and 318 Mid-
land  Ave., St. Davids, Pa.
Dug-an, R. C, 225 E. Center

St., Marion, O.
Duglay,  H.  A.,  Ross  Blk.,

Barrie, Ont., Can.
Dulatush, Frank A., COT

Traction Bldg-., Cincinnati,

O.
Dunbar,  R.  J.,  1939 Perryville

Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Dunham, Jay, 7 Shaftsbury

Square, Belfast, Ireland.
Dunmore, Dr. W. K., Sterling,

111.
Dunn, Ernest W., Elks

Temple,  New  Berne, N. C.
Dunn, Roy O., Creighton,

Nebr.
Dunnington, Earl V., Stephen

Girard Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Dunning-ton, Margaret B.,

Real  Estate  Bldg-.,  Philadel-
phia,  Pa.
Dunnington, R. H.; Real

Estate Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Dunnington, Wesley P.,

Stephen Girard Bldg-.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Dunsmoor, H. V., 176 Hun-
tington  Ave., Boston, Mass.
Dunsmore, Luella, Watson-
town, Pa.
Durham, A. D.. Arrott  Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Durham, Jno. D., Burg-aw,

N. C.
Durkee,  H.  V.,  4001  Parish

St., Philadelphia, Pa.


Durnan,  W.  L., 2  Bloor  St. E..

Toronto, Ont., Can.
Durrett, Carrie P., Opera

House  Bldg.,  Pueblo,  Colo.
Dye, W. Walter, 734 Morgan

Ave., Palmyra, N. J., and

5243 Chestnut St., Philadel-
phia,  Pa.
l>yer,  Bettie  Ross,  Cor.  Church

and  Lafayette  Sts.,  Jackson,

Tenn.
Dyer,  Mary  Maitland,  16  S.  3rd

St., Columbus, O.
Dykes, A. L., 20 4th St..

Bristol, Tenn., Va.
Dykes,  L.  M., 216J  Main St.,

Johnson City, Tenn.
Dymond, E. C, 1422 Locust

St., Des  Moines, la.
Dysart,  R.  S.,  Equitable  Bldg.,

Des Moines, la.
Eagan, J. H., 81 Madison St.,

Chicago, 111.
Eales,  I.  J.,  Ohmes  &  Jung

Bldg., Belleville, 111.
Earhart, Emogene  M., 702

Peach St., Erie. Pa.
Easton, Melroy W., Lay Blk.,

Oil  City,  Pa.
Eaton. Mary Walker, 1801 K

St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Echols,  R.  M..  Interstate  Bldg.,

Bristol, Tenn.
Eckert, Feme, 540 Grand St.,

Monroe, La.
Eckert, W. H., Century  Bldg.,

St. Louis, Mo.
Ecklev, William  H.,  American

Nat'l Bank Bldg., St. Paul,

Minn.
Eddy, John Theodore, 14 The

Crescent, Montclair, N. J.
Eddy,  Walter, 43 West  St. N.,

Orilla, Ont., Can.
Bdmiston, S. Cameron, Wash-
ington Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Edwards, Alfred, Century

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Miss.
Edwards, Elizabeth, Traction

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Edwards, F.  O., First  Nafl

Bank Bldg., San Jose, Cal.
Edwards, James, Century

Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Edwards, Wm. B., 7th  and

Washington Sts., Concordia,
i Kans.

'  Efford, Wm. W., 11215 Long-
' wood  Drive,  Chicago,  111.
Eiler,  Isabel  G., 5  S.  Centre

St., Cumberland,  Md.
Eimert, Frederick J., Miles

Bldg., Miles  City, Mont.
Elder, Alva R., 401 E. Main

St., Visalia, Cal.
Eldon,  Jas.  B.,  1741  N.  13th  St..

Philadelphia, Pa.
Eldridge, Roy Kerr,  Land

Title Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Eldridge, Roy Kerr, 3858

Spruce  St.. Philadelphia, Pa.
Elfrink, Blanche Mayes, 27 E.

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Elfrink, Walter K., 27 Eiast

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Elliott, David H., Spreckels

Bldg., San Diego, Cal.
Elliott,  G. G., 1865  Dundas  St.

W., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Elliott, J. W., Cordele, Ga.
Elliott, Walter B., Davis Ex-
change Bank  Bldg.,  Albany,

Ga.
Ellis, E. Adelyn, 561 Central

Ave., St. Petersburg, Fla.
Ellis, Irene Harwood, 112

Lancaster Terrace, Brook-
line, Mass.


Ellis, S. A., 687 Boylston St..

Boston, Mass.
Ellis, Thomas W., 5236 Vine

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Elmore, Nannie, Roth Blk.,

Raton, N. M.
Elton, E. J., Matthews Bldg.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Emerson, Sarah  O., The

Beacon,  Manchester,  N.  H.
Emory, Mary, 53 Adams St.,

"\\Mnter Hill Sta., Boston,

Mass.
Emery, R. D., Auditorium

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Emery, Willard D., Kennard

Bldg.,  Manchester,  N.  H.
Emley,  T.  J.,  Sidney,  O.
Eneboe, .7.  P.,  Van  Eps  Block,

Sioux Falls, S. D.
Eneboe, Lena, Canton, S. D.
Engeldrum, H. C, 39 S. State

St., Chicago, 111.
Englehart, Frank A., 127J W.

Main  St.,  Oklahoma  City,

Okla.
Englehart, Wm. F., Central

Nat'l Bank Bldg., St. Louis,

Mo.
English, Leonard H., Wood-
ward  Bldg., Washington,

D. C.
English, Merton A., Colorado

Bldg., Washington, D. C.
English, Ross, 508 Summer-
field Ave., Asbury Park,

N.J.
Ennis,  Emery,  Ferguson

Bldg., Springfield, 111.
Ericson, Erica, 183 Hunting-
ton  Ave., Boston, Mass.
Eroh,  Calvin, 606  Swede  St.,

Norrlstown,  Pa.
Ervin, Charles  H., Grant

Bldg., I.1OS Angeles, Cal.
Esser, Albert, 6050  Woodlawn

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Estes, Geo. R.,  Alexandria,

Minn.
Estey,  Guy  W., York  Apts.,

Sherbrooke, Quebec, Can.
Eustace, H. E., Beloit, Kans.
Evans,  A.  L., 212i  12th St.,

Miami, Fla.
Evans, A., New Tatum Bldg.,

Miami, Fla.
Evans, Cecelia Hackney, 409

Breard  St.,  Monroe,  La.-
Evans, David Lee, Adair, la.
Evans, G. W., Shukert Bldg.,

Kansas City, Miss.
Evans, Jennie L., 212i 12th

St.,  Miami,  Fla.
Evans,  John  G.,  308 J  S.  B'way,

Rochester, Minn.
Evans, Margaret, 623 Madi-
son Ave., Scranton, Pa.
Evans, Nellie M., Northern

Bank and Trust Bldg.,

Seattle,  Wash.
Everitt, E.  C,  State  Bank

Bldg., Little Rock, Ark.
Ewing,  Ernest,  107J  B.  Wood-
son St., El Reno, Okla.
Ewing, Mary Matthew.s,

Morgan Blk., Clinton, Ind.
Faddis, Council E., 602 E.

Main St., Alhambra, Cal.
Fagan,  C.  L.,  P.  E.  N.  Bldg.,

Stuttgart, Ark.
Fager, Emma C, Havana, 111.
Fahrney, M. Sangree, 172

Capitol  Ave.,  Atlanta,  Ga.
Falk, Mary, 117  Congress St.,

Rumford Falls, Me.
Falkner, J., Texarkana, Ark.
Farber, Charles V., 903 14th

St., Detroit, Mich.
Paris, L. E., Central Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


1155


Farley, R. M., Gurney Bldg-.,

Syracuse,  N. Y.
Parmer, Frank C, 14 W.
Washing-ton St., Chicago.
111.
Farmer,  G.  C, 424  S.  B'way,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Farnham. D. C, Elkan-Gunst

Bldgr., San Francisco, Cal.
Farnham, Ja.s. McKay, St.

Cloud, Minn.
Farnham,  Margaret  H.,  Elkan-
Gunst Bldg., San Francisco,
Cal.
Farnum, C. Edward, 13 Bull

St., Newport, R. I.
Farr,  Mary  Noyes,  Wynoka

Place, Pierre, S. D.
Farrand, F. C, 11 S. 52nd  St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Farren, Mrs. M. E., 715 W.
Pierce St., Kirksville, Mo.
Farrior,  Jessie  B.,  Selling

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Farris, Robert L... Brown-
wood, Tex.
Farris, 'W. Buford,  Merchants'
Nafl Bank Bldg., Fort
Smith, Ark.
Farthing, Ollie C, A. B.,

Rosenbaum Bldg., Meridian,
Miss.
Faulk,  Minnie  I..  Masonic

Temple, Crowley, La.
Favell, Ernest J., Board of

Trade Bldg., Superior, Wis.
Fay,  Leon  E., 6  Union  Ave.,

Framingham, Mass.
Fear, Lois Mabel, Pittock

Blk., Portland, Ore.
Fechtig, F. R., 86 Harden-

brook  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Fechtig,  Louis  R., 37  Madison

Ave., New  York, N. Y.
Fechtig, St. George, 37 Madi-
son  Ave., New York, N. Y.,
and  Forest  Ave.  and  6th  St.,
Lakewood,  N.  J.
Feldler, F. J., People's Bank

Bldg.. Seattle, Wash.
Fellow.s.  HpIoti  H.,  ''^'^O  Frank-
lin St., Detroit, Mich.
Fennessy,  Wm.  C,  53  Wenham

St., Jamaica  Plains, Mass.

Ferguson, E. Bertella, 2503

Channing Way, Berkeley,

Cal.

Ferguson, Ethel S. P., Paw

Paw, 111.
Ferguson,  Joseph, 15 Crescent

Place, Middletown, N. Y.
Ferguson, R. B., 1210 Court

St., Le Mars, la.
Fernald, Edw. L.. 3527 West

Madison St., Chicago, 111.
Ferrand, R. L., 142 Forest

Ave.,  Pacific  Grove,  Cal.
Ferry,  Nellie,  Nevada,  Mo.
Fessenden,  Ernest  A.,  35  Avon

St., Wakefield, Mass.
Fessenden. Wendell W., 244
Cabot St., Beverly, Mass.
Fike, Emily M., Utica Bldg.,

Des  Moines,  la.
Finch, J. F., 6213 Vine St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Fingerle, Chas., First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Covina,  Cal.
Fink, Chas.  A., 39 S. State

St., Chicago. 111.
Finley,  Chas.  D.,  610  Chestnut

St.,  Atlantic,  la.
FInneran,  Margaret  T., 359

Boylston  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Finnertv,  Frnncis  R  ,  40

Park  St.,  Montolalr,  N.  J.
Firth,  A. P., 28  Clinton St.,
Newark,  N.  J.


Fischer, Nellie M., 239 Wau-

watosa  Ave., Wauwatosa,

Wis.
Fisher.  Albert,  Sr.,  6340

Stewart  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Fisher. Bruce E., Ida  Grove,

la.
Fisher, Charles S., Majestic

Bldg.. Milwaukee. Wis.
Fiske,  Franklin, 1  W. 34th  St.

and 445 Riverside Drive,

New  York, N. Y.
Fitch &  Grunewald, 5  N.

Wabash Ave., Chicago. 111.
Fitch. Milton B.. 4725 Lincoln

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Fitch, Stewart J., Kesner

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Fltts, F., Canady  Bldg.,

Kinston, N. C.
Fitzwater, William D., 178

Prospect Park W., Brook-
lyn,  N. Y.
j  Flack,  Arthur  M., 3414  Baring
i St., Philadelphia, Pa.
;  Flack, William O., Broadway
I Bldg., Portland, Ore.
I  Flanagan,  Chas.  D.,  146  West-
minster St., Providence,

R.  I.
Flansburgh. R. D., The

Richardson, Leominster,

Fleck,  'C. E., 247 5th Ave.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Fleming, Evalena, S. C, 1200

Spruce  St., Philadelphia,  Pa.
Fleming, Evallne S. E., 535

Hansberry  St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Fleming, Evaline S. E., 1524

Chesxnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Fleming, F. B., Keller Bldg.,

Montrose, Colo.
Fletcher, Clarke F., 143 W.

69th  St.,  New York, N. Y.
Fletcher,  Mary  M., Central

Exchange Bldg., Worcester,

IMfLSS

Flint, Effle  A., 1636 N. 15th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Flint, George  ,C., Huntington

Chambers, Boston, Mass.
Flint, Ralph "W^, 1636 N. 15th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Flory,  William O.,  Medical

Blk., Minneapolis, Minn.
Floyd, Ambrose B., Ellicott

Square, Buffalo, N. Y.
Flynn, J. P., 255 E. Main St.,

Alliance, O.
Fogarty. Julia A., 312 E. 5th

St.,  Michigan  City,  and  First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Laporte,

Ind.
Fogarty,  J. P., 312  E. 5th  St.,

Michigan City, and First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Laporte,

Ind.
Fogg, Clinton O.. Forest Ave.

and  6th  St.,  Lakewood,  N.  J.
Foote, Harvey R., 71 Har-

court St., Dublin, Ireland.

and  Harewood  House,  Han-
over Square, London "W..

England.
Forbes,  H.  W., 318 Clay  St.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Ford, A. B., Hoge Bldg.,

Seattle, Wash.
Ford, Charles  F.,  Whittell

Bldg., San Francisco, Cal.
Ford,  Roberta  Wimer,  Hoge

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Ford, Walter  J., Hoge Bldg..

Seattle, Wash.
Forquer, James W., Osborn

Bldg., Cleveland, O.


Forrister,  Ray  M.,  935  Military

St., Port  Huron, Mich.
?orsee, Edward W., Brook-
ings.  S. D.
?oss, Martha M., 4217

Chambers  St., Cincinnati,  O.
Tossler, Wellington  C,  New
Lawrence Bldg.. Sterling.
111.
iToster. Fannie,  B.,  61  Orlando

St., Springfield. Mass.
Foster, George Edward,
Mason Block, Bellingham,
Wash.
[■^j.stf-r,  J.  C, Stein  Bldg.,
Butler,  Pa.
.Foster,  Julia  E., Stein  Bldg.,
Butler, Pa.
Foster, May, Littlefield Bldg.,

Austin, Tex.
Fout, Geo. E., Chamber of
Commerce Bldg., Richmond,
Va.
B'outy, Henry M., M. S.;

Mountain Grove, Mo.
Fowler,  Rebecca,  \\'arren.  Ark.
Fraizer,  Hugh  M.,  Union  Bank

Bldg.,  Oakland, Cal.
Fraizer, Miller, U. S. Savings

Bank  Bldg., Oakland, Cal.
Fraker, Franklin, Odd Fel-
lows Bldg., Montevideo,
Minn.
Frame,  Ira  Spencer,  1035  E.

Colorado St., Pasadena, Cal.
Francis, J. E., Bliss Bldg.,

Tulsa, Okla.
Fraser,  Agnes, 5  Albion  St.,

Lawrence, Ma.'^';
Frazer, Charles  F.,  Granger

Bldg.,  San  Diego,  Cal.
Freman, A. E., The  Marl-
borough, Greeley, Colo.
Freeman,  E.  A.,  Osgood  Bldg.,

Lewiston,  Me.
Freeman, Howard M., B'way
Market  Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
French, Amos G., 125 E.
Onondaga St., Syracuse,
N. Y.
Frey, Julia V., 1645 E. 16th

Ave., Denver, Colo.
Friend, J. H., Grinnell, la.
Friend,  Lillian,  Wray,  Colo.
Frink,  Adelaide  W.,  7  Mitchell

Place. Ea.«t Oranee, X. J.
Frink,  Elizabeth, 1704 5th

Ave.,  Troy,  N.  Y.
Fritsche, Edward H., 1832 W.
Girard Ave., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Frogge, George B., City  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Paducah,  Ky.
Frost, E. M., 435 Maxwell

Ave.,  Boulder,  Colo.
Frost, H.  P., 920 Slater  Bldg.,

Worcester, Mass.
Fryette,  H.  H.,  Goddard  Bldg..

Chicago, 111.
Fryette,  Harrison  H., 27  E.
Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Frvette, :Myrtle "W.. Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Fryette, S. J., Washington

Bldg.,  Madison,  Wis.
Fulford, Harlie J., Box 9,

Chelsea, Mich.
Fulham. C. V.. Meifeld Bldg.,

Frankfort, Ind.
Furev, Blanche Costello, Real
Estate Trust Bldg., Phila-
delphia,  Pa.
Furey, Chas. A., Jr., 2501 S.
Cleveland Ave., Philadel-
phia, Pa.
Furey, Chas. A., Jr., Real
Estate Trust Bldg.. Phila-
delphia, Pa.


llod


Professional  Register


OsU'o/juths


Furey, Wm., Real Estate
Trust Bldff., Philadelphia.
Pa.

Purey, Wm. J., 1240 S.

Broad St., Philadelphia. Pa.
Furnmn, Mattie. Atlanta. Mo.
Furnish,  W.  M.,  Tipton,  la.
Furry, Frank I., Theatre

Bldg'., Cheyenne, Wvo.
Gable, Clyde A., 4545 B'wav,

Chicagro,  111.
Gable, Gustavus A.. Mclntyre

Bldgr.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Gable, Fonda M., 322 E. 51st

St., Chicago, 111.
Gable, Roy  J., 322 E. 51st  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Gaddis,  Cyrus  J.,  First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg..  Oakland,  Cal.
Gage, Fred W., Goddard

Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.
Gage, Lyle Ellsworth, Camp-
bell Bldg.,  Suffern,  N.  Y.
Gage,  Ora  L.,  Oshkosh,  Wis.
Gair,  E.  Florence,  120  New

York Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Galbreath.  Albert  Louis,  Oak-
land,  111.
Galbreath, Conrad V., 5 N.

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Galbreath, J. Willis, Penna.

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Galbreath,  William  Otis, Land

Title  Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Gallagher,  Dollie  Hunt,  The

Vendome  Hotel,  Chicago,  111.
Gallivan,  Kathryn  L.,  Ivesdale,

111.
Galsgie, EdwaTd C, Shepard

Sanitorium, Sierra Madre,

Cal.
Gamble, Hariy  W., Missouri

Valley, la.
Gamble, Mary E., Templeton

Bldg., Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Ganoung, Floyd J., Olean,

N.  Y.
Gants, S. L., 721 Broad St..

Providence,  R.  I.
Gardiner,  Warren L., Corning,

la.
Gardner,  William, 207  E.

Harrison St., Kirksville,

Mo.
Garlinghouse, A. J., 134J S.

Main St., Charlotte, Mich.
Garnett, Addie L., White

Salmon, Wash.
Garrett,  Carlos  K.,  811  Church

St., Lynchburg, Va.
Garrett, J. C, Ypsilanti Sav-
ings Bank Bldg., Ypsilanti,

Mich.
Garrett, M. E.. Valpev Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich.
Garrigues, Louis L., Old Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Spokane,  Wash.
Gartrell, Seymour C, Ackley,

la.
Gass,  L.  D.,  Ferguson  Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Gass,  P.  Y.,  Beatrice.  Nebr.
Gates,  Bertha  M.,  316  Main

St.,  Ames,  la.
Gates,  Gertrude  Lord,  Corbett

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Gates,  Mary  A.,  Box  18R,  Leon,

la.
Gates, O. B., Crapo Blk.. Bav

City, Mich.
Gautschi, Frederick,

Napoleon,  O.
Gay,  Virginia  C,  167  State  St.,

Augusta, Me.
Qayle, B. L., 515 N. 12th St.,

Waco, Tex.
Gaylord, Ethel Gertrude, 6704

Dunham Ave.,  Cleveland, O.
Gaylord, .1. S., Barnwell, Ala.


Gebhardt, Mary  O., Hulet

Block, Minneapolis, Minn.
Geddes,  Paul  W.,  Hutchinson

Bldg., Shreveport, La.
Gerardy, H. H., Wilson Bldg.,

Dallas, Tex.
Gercke, George A., 7101 Tulip

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Gerdine,  L.  Von  H.,  Kirksville,

Mo.
Gerrish, Clara Thomas, Audi-
torium Bldg., Minneapoli.«,

Minn.
Getchell. Chas. ElKsworth,

Rainking Bldg., Baraboo,

Wis.
Geyer,  Elizabeth  .7.,  Hawks-

Gortner Bldg., Goshen, Ind.
Ghostley, Raymond C, 473

8th  St., Edmonton, Alberta,

Can.
Gibbons, J. E., Concordia,

Kans.
Gibson,  Carl  C, 201 We.st

Missouri  St.,  El  Pa.'so.  Tex.
Gibson,  H.  R.,  Clovis,  N.  M.
Gibson,  P.  W.,  Fuller  Bldg.,

Winfleld, Kans.
Giddings, Helen Marshall,

New England Bldg., Cleve-
land,  O.
Giddings,  Mary, New  England

Bldg. Cleveland, O.
Gidley, J. B., F. P. Smith

Bldg., Flint, Mich.
Gies, F. A., 592 Church St.,

Toronto.  Ont.,  Can.
Gilbert.  J.  T.,  City  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., Paducah, Ky.
Gilchrist,  Elizabeth  L..  337

Lincoln Ave. Detroit, Mich.
Gildersleeve, J. Ellen,  •Ami-
cable Bldg.. Waco, Tex.
Giles, Mary E., Morgan Bldg.,

Portland,  Ore.
Gillespie, Harriet M., 133

Geary St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Gilliam, William B., Lewis-
burg, Ky.
Gilmore,  S.  J., Ridgewav,

Mo.
Gilmour, Ella R.. Securitv

Bldg., Sioux  City, la.
Ginsburg, Joel. 193 Columbia

Road, Dorchester, Mass.
Gladman, David V., 62 Queen

St. Niagara Falls. Ont.,

Can.
Gladman,  .1.  M.,  Niagara  Falls,

Ont., Can.
Glasgow, A. M., Minnehaha

Bldg.,  Sioux Falls,  S.  D.
Glasgow. Joseph C, Reedlev.

Cal.
Glassco, Daisy B., Maxim

Bldg..  New  Castle,  Tnd.
Glasscock,  Harold.  Masonic

Temple,  Raleigh,  N.  C.
Gleason, Alson H., 765 Main

St.,  Worcester, Mass.
Glenn, J. O., Santa Monica

Blvd.,  Santa  Monica,  Cal.
Glezen, R. A., Kalamazoo

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Kala-
mazoo, Mich.
Glover, J. David, American

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  San  Diego,

Cal.
Gluff. Arthur  G., 505 Liggett

Bldg., Detroit,  Mich.
Gobel. Bertha  A.. 3646-a

Arsenal St.. St. Louis, Mo.
Godfrey, Frances  M., Newman

Bldg., Holton. Kans.
Godfrey,  Nancy  J., Holton,

Kans.
Goehring, Frank  L..  Nixon

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.


Goehring, HariT  M., Diamond

Bank Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Qoerger,  F.  A.  M.,  14th  and

I Sts. N. W., Washington,

D.  C.
Goetz, Herman F., Centurv

Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Golden, Marv E., Citizens'

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Des

Moines, la.
Gooch, Geo. J., Althea Bldg.,

Knoxville, Tenn.
Gooch, Lucy Owen, Rupert,

Idaho.
Good, E., Manning Bldg.,

Plainfleld, and Madison

Bldg., Perth  Amboy,  N. J.
Goode, Geo. W., 687 Boylston

St., Boston. Mass.
Goodfellow, M^. X., Ferguson

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Goodlove, Paul C, Broadway

Central  Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Goodpasture, C. O., Colorado

Bldg., Washington, D. C.
Goodpasture, Walter C, Hurt

Bldg., Atlanta, Ga.
Goodrich. L. J.. Aiken Blk.,

Santa Barbara, Cal.
Goodwin,  M.  Maude,  Hotel

Westminster, Boston, Mass.
Gordon,  L.  E.,  1029  W.  17th

St., Des Moines, la.
Gordon, W. C, Newton,  la.
Gosden, Fannie, Farley, la.
Gotham, Thomas Barry,

Elsintire. Cal.
Gotsch, Otto H., Stoesser

Bldg., Watsonville, Cal.
Gould, Grace, Dreka  Bldg.,

De Land, Fla., and Hard-
wick, Vermont.
Gour, Andrew A., M. G., 39 S.

State  St., Chicago, 111.
Gove,  John  McClure,  7  S.  State

St., Concord,  N.  H.
Graham, Frank F..  Choate

Bldg., Winona, Minn.
Graham, F. W., 2171 Liberty

St., Morris, 111.
Graham, George  G., 309 N.

10th St., Centreville, la.
Graham, Geo. W., Masonic

Temple, Marshalltown,  la.
Graham, Robert H., Bntavia

and Leroy, N. Y.
Grainger, I^aura I..., Union

Bank Bldg.. Columbia. S. C.
Cranberry, D. W., 408 Main

St., Orange, N. J.
Graves, Geo. B., Hutchinson

and Lehigh Sts., Philadel-
phia, Pa.
Graves, Murray, Symes Bldg.,

Denver, Colo.
Graves, Millie Estelle, Bank

Bldg., La Grange, 111.
Graves, W. Armstrong, Park

and  .\llegheny  Aves.,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.
Graves, William, 207J E.

High  St.,  Jefferson  Citv.  Mo.
Gravett, H. H., Orr-Flesh

Bldg., Piqua, O.
Gravett,  W. A.,  Conover  Bldg.,

Dayton, O.
Gray, Clvde, Horton, Kans.
Gray,  C.  W.,  3  Hakes  Ave.,

Hornell, N. Y.
Gray, E. J.. 557 Talbot  St.,

St. Thomas, Ont., Can.
Greathouse, Paul A., Conover

Bldg., Dayton, O.
Green, Charles S., Vanderbllt

Avenue Bldg., New York,

N. T.
Green,  Loren,  Sac  City,  la.
Greene, Frank J., Snyder

Bldg., Elmira, N. Y.


Osteopaths


Professional  lieyisler


\\:>i


Greene.  G. C. 201 1st  St..

Jackson, Mich.
Greene, H. A., Grubb Bldg.,

Salisbury, N.  C.
Greenlee,  Anson  C.  Conneaut,

O.
Greenwell, Geo. Hunter, 121

Soquel Ave., Santa Cruz,

Cal.
Greenwood. Edna M.. 213

Huntington Ave., Boston,

Mass.
Giiffln, Caroline T.. Hartford

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Hartford.

Conn.
Griffln, Dr. Chester,  Tussing

BIk.. I^ansing-, Mich.
Griffln, Louise. Sage- Allen

Bldg., Hartford, Conn.
Giifflth, Hurwood W., 223 N.

Leroux St.. Flagstaff, Ariz.
Griggs,  Henry  R.,  Harper.

Kans.
Grimes, Idella A., Franklin

Bank Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Griggs, Lizzie O., 143 S.

Harvey  Ave., Oak Park, 111.
Grimsley,  F.  N.,  Powers  Bldg.,

Decatur, 111.
Gripe, Otto H., Grand Opera

House  Bldg.,  Atlanta,  Ga.
Groenewoud, J. C, Powers

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Groenwoud, Jennie K., 1339

E. 47th St., Chicago, 111.
Groenewoud,  John  C.  37  South

Wabash  Ave..  Chicago,  111.
Gross,  Albertina  M., Woodruff

Bldg., Joliet, 111.
Grothaus, Edmund, 140 E.

Main St., Van Wert, O.
Grow, Will W., Logan Bldg..

St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Grubb,  William  L.,  Pittsburgh

Life  Bldg.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Gruber, Chas. J., Jr., Widener

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Grunewald, Marie  B., 5 North

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Gulmyer, J. Chester, Teitgen

Blk., Manitowoc, Wis.
Gunsaul. Irmie  Z., ]?0  Market

St., Harrisburg. Pa.
Guthridge,  Walter;  B. Di  M.

Di, Kuhn Bfk., Spokane,

Wash.
Haight,  E.  A.,  228.^^  Woodward

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Haight, J. Franc, 2123 Pasa-
dena Ave., Los Angeles,

Cal.
Haight, L. Ludlow, Wright &

Callender Bldg., Los

Angeles, and 5605 Holly-
wood Blvd., Hollywood.

Cal.
Haigi's, Edward  S.. Box 121,

Rochester, N. H.
Haile, Florence R., 604 W.

125th St., New York, N. Y.
Hain, Grace Estella, 2251

Telegraph  Ave., Berkeley,

Cal.
Hain. H. S., 206 Ohio St.,

Sedalia, Mo.
Haines. Cyrus A., Forum

Bldg., Sacramento, Cal.
Haines. F. M., 100 First St.,

W.  Hutchinson,  Kansas
Hale, Frank  V.,  301J  Main  St.,

W.,  Hudson  Mich.
Hale,  Mary  E.,  Merced,  Cal.
Hale, Walter Keith, 115| W.

Main St., Spartanburg.

S.  C.
Haley,  Stanley  M.,  16  Cruz  St.,

San  Juan,  Porto  Rico.
Hall,  A.  L., Prairie City, Ta.


Hall, Elmer L., 237 E. Main

St., Barnesvllle, O.
Hall, Marion K., 249 W.

George St., Glasgow, Scot-
land.
Hall. Mida M., lir>i E. Chap-
man Ave.,  Orange.  Cal.
Hall, S. A.. Harrison Bldg..

Columbus. O.
Hall. William Campbell.

Fletcher  Savings  and  Trust

Co. Bldg., Indianapolis, Ind
1  Hall, W.  W., Ravenna, O.
I  Halvorsen, H. John, 1018  .

Wilson Ave.. Chicago, 111.
Halvorsen, Helena S., Medical

Blk.,  Minneapolis, Minn.
Hamilton, Amanda N.. 222

Coronado  St.,  Greeley,  Colo.
Hamilton, Beatrice, 249 W.

George St., Glasgow, Scot-
land.
Hamilton, Carlysle W., Frank

Bldg.,  Lake  Charles,  La.
Hamilton.  F.  W.,  107i  N.  Cross

St., Robinson. 111.
Hamilton. Martha A.. Minden,

Neb.
Hamilton.  R.  A.,  Whitehall,

Illinois.
Hamilton, R.  Emmet,  A. S.  O.,

Kirksville,  Mo.
Hamilton, Susan Harris,

Mountain  King,  Cal.
Hammon, I. F., 27 E. Monroe

St., Chicago, 111.
Hancock, Ivy E., Cor. Myrtle

& Penn Sts., Independence,

Kansas.
Handy,  George  H.,  Mode  Bldg.,

Boise,  Idaho.
Hansen,  Edward N.,  Arrott

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hanson. Chas. P., Griesheim

Bldg.,  Bloomington,  111.
Hanson, Sten, Pioneer Life

Bldg., Fargo,  N. D.
Hard,  Mary  E., Stevens  Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich.
Hardie, David H.. Main St.,

Galena.  111.
Hardie. Jessie B., 224 Laurier

Ave.  West,  Ottawa.  Ont.
Hardin.  Mary  C,  ^Valsh  Bldg.,

McCook.  Neb.
Hardin. M. C, Grand Opera

House,  Atlanta,  Ga.
Harding,  E.  F.,  Bethany.  Mo.
Hardison. Francis B. Fairfax,

298 King S., Charleston,

S C.
Hardy,  A.  C,  Lockhart,  Texas.
Hardy,  J.  H.,  La  Plata,  Mo.
Hardy,  Linda,  Hiawatha,  Kans.
Hart, I. Sylvester. 1540 N.

15th St.. Philadelphia, Pa.
Harker, Wade C, 838 Rosser

Ave., Brandon, Manitoba.
Harkins.  Marie  H., St. George

Apts., London,  Ontario.
Harlan, Frederick J., Flint  P.

Smith Bldg., Flint. Mich.
Harlan. William  F., Arbuckle,

Cal.
Harris, D. S.. Wilson Bldg..

Dallas.  Texas.
Harri.s. Edwin L., 606 Church

St.,  Marietta,  Ga.
I^arris.  Ella  E.,  M.  D..  1339  AV.

Adams  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Harris.  Francis  AV.,  1007  Grant

St.,  Carthage, Mo.
Harris, Locius A., Conrad

Blk.,  Kalispell,  Mont.
Harris,  M.  B.,  Amarillo.  Texas.
Harris,  "W.  E.. 1010  Mas.sachu-

setts  Ave.,  Cambridge.  Mass.
Harrison, John H., Goodwyn

Inst.,  Memphi.';.  Tenn.


Harrison. Kathryn M.. 901

6th  Ave.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Harrison,  L.  C,  Carlson  Bldg.,

Wlllmar,  Minn.
Harrison, Margaret Hawk,

3301 S. W. 9th St., Des

Moine.s, la.
Hart, Aubrey Warren, 64

Huntington  Ave.,  Boston,

Mass.
Hart, Edward B., The

Richelieu. Brooklyn, N. Y.
Hart, Edw. B., 385 Clinton

Ave., Brooklyn. N. Y.
Hart, Lawrence M., 3502 Fre-
mont Ave..  Seattle,  Wa.sh.
Hart,  Mae,  V.  D.,  140  State  St.,

Albany,  N.  Y.
Harvey, Eleanor Stuart,

Stfvens  Bldg.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Harvey,  K.  G.,  816  Mulbern.'

St., Scranton,  Pa.
Harvey, Leslie V.. 9th &

Euclid  Ave.s., Upland, Cal.
Harwood, Mary E., Hotel

Kupper,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Haskins, Y.. C, Coverly, 2033

Sansom  St.,  Philadelphia.  Pa.
Haslop. Edmund Brooke,

Morgan  Bldg.,  Portland.  Ore.
Hassell.  Nellie.  305  Ave.  D,  San

Antonio,  Texas.
Hastings,  Fred  E.,  Pratt,  Kans.
Hastings,  Howard  E.,  Devenish

Apts., Calgary, Alberta.
Haswell.  George  A., 10 Chest-
nut  St., Springfield, Mass.
Hatch, Charles G.. 236 Bruce

St..  Lawrence,  Mass.
Hatfield.  W.  M.,  P.  O.  Box  387,

Moscow.  Idaho.
Hathorn. Mary Maxwell,

Columbia, Miss.
Hatten, J. O.. 616 N. Taylor

Ave.,  St.  Louis.  Mo.
Hawes, Leon B.. Lenawee Co.

Bank Bldg., Adrian,  Mich.
Hawes, Norman C, Main St..

Gouverneur.  N. Y.
Hawes, William F.. Mint

Arcade  Bldg..  Philadelphia.

Pa.
Hawk,  Mervine  E.,  Trust  Bldg..

Augusta,  Me.
Hawkes,  Charles  L..  Todd  Blk..

Great  Falls.  Mont.
Hawkins,  Charles  R..  Barnard,

Kans.
Hawkins, E. W., Gladstone

Bldg., Red Wing, Minn.
Hawkins. Laura I., The

Farragut,  "Washington.  D.  C.
Hawkinson. J.  AV.. Arcade

Bldg.,  lAiverne,  Minn.
Hawley,  John  AA'inthrop.

Amosheag  Bank  Bldg..  Man-
chester, N.  H.
Hayden, Bruce L., Merrill

Bldg., Saginaw. Mich.
Hayes, AA'. S.. 2050 Amster-
dam  Ave.. New  York, N. Y.
Hayman.  Geo.  T.,  148  E.  State

St., Doylestown, Pa.
Hay  ward. Ralph AA^., Babcock

Theatre Bldg.. Billings,

Mont.
Hazard. Chas. C. 224 N. Fay-
ette  St., AA^ashington, C. H.,

Ohio.
Hazard, Chas.. 18 AVest 34th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Head, Ralph D.. Agricultural

Bank  Bldg.,  Pittsfield,  Mass.
Healev, Robert D., P. O. Box

637.  Petaluma,  Cal.
Healv. Estelle D.. Braymer,

Mo.
Heard,  Mary  A., 250 Warren

St.,  Roxbury,  Mass.


1158


Professional  Register


Osteopaths


Hearst, Ethel L., 136 South

Santa  Fe  St.,  Salina,  Kans.
Heath.  J.  E.,  Baker  Blk.,  Walla

Walla,  Wash.
Heath, Minnie C, Boyce-

Greeley  Bldg-.,  Sioux  Falls,

S. D.
Heatwole,  Webster  S.,  Masonic

Temple,  Salisbury,  Md.
Hebb, Flora E., 645 E St.,

San Bernardino, Cal.
Hedffpath, T. H., Logran

Bldg-., St. Joseph, Mo.
Heg-g-en, Anfln S., Madison,

Wis.
Heilbron,  Louisa,  Union  Bldg-.,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Heilemann, J. Georg-e,

Goderich, Ontario.
Hedg-peth,  Chas.  E.,  Sayre,

Okla.
Heine, Frank R., Charlotte,

N. C.
Heist, Albert D., Geneva,

N. Y.
Heist, A. M., 40  Ellen  St., E.,

Berlin, Ontario.
Heist, Edgar  D., 39 King St.,

West, Berlin, Ontario.
Heist,  Lenora  M.,  Union  Bank

Chambers, Gait, Ontario.
Heist, Mary  Lewis, 39 King-

St.  West,  Berlin,  Ontario.
Held,  Lillie  M.,  Le  Mars,  la.
Helmer, Geo. J. 187 Madison

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Helmer,  John  N.,  136  Madison

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Hemphill, Etha  B., Visalia,

Cal.
Henderson, Jos. W., M. D.,

First National Bank Bldg-.,

Berkeley, Cal.
Henderson,  J.  H.,  33  River  St.,

Salamanca, N. Y.
Henderson, Lucy V., Strong-
hurst, 111.
Henderson, M. W., Murfrees-

boro,  Tenn.
Henderson, Robert B.,

Dominion Bank Bldg-.,

Toronto,  Ont.
Hendrick, C, 935 Boardwalk,

Atlantic Citv, N. J.
Henke, Clara E., State Bank

Bldg-., Little Rock, Ark.
Henke, Crescense, 163 So.

Orange Ave., South Oiang-e,

Henney, Mae  Murray, 110 So

Portland  Ave.,  Brooklvn,  N  Y
Henry,  Aurelia  S.,  201  Sanford

Ave.,  Flushing-,  L.  I.
Henry,  Jno.  L.,  Security  Bldg.,

Denison, Texas.
Henry, Dr.  Percy  R., 476 Clin-
ton Ave., Brooklvn. N Y
Hensley, Alfred S.,"  Peoples

Bank  Bldg-., Perry,  Mo.
Herbert, Lulu J., Kress  Bldg.,

Trenton, Mo.
Herbst,  Edw.  G.,  378  Elmwood

Ave., Buffalo,  N. Y.
Herche, Jeanette B., Parker's

Landing-, Pa.
Herman, Arthur  M., Osborn

Bldg-.-,  Cleveland,  O.
Herman, John C, 20 Valucia

Ave., Daytona, Fla.
Herrick, W. Edwin, Watseka,

Herring-, Ernest M., 170 W
73rd St., New York, N. Y.,
and 510 Sixth Ave., Asbury
Park,  N.  J.

Herring,  Geo. D., 159  Crescent
Ave., Plainfleld, N. J

Herring-ton, Ellen, 1174 S
Dubuque St., Iowa City, la.


Herroder & Bennett, 212

Stevens Bldg-., Detroit,

Mich.
Herroder,  T.  L.,  Stevens  Bldg.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Herrold,  S. Alletta,  I.  O. O. F.

Bldg., Shelbyville. O.
Hess,  C.  F.,  336  W.  Tuscarawas

St., Canton,  O.
Hess, Elmer C, 1118 W.

Lehigh St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Hess, Lawrence T., Masonic

Temple,  Zanesville,  O.
Hewitt, Albert Murrav, 6058

Hollywood Blvd., Holly-
wood,  Los  Angeles, Cal.
Hewitt, L. E.,  Tillamook, Ore.
Heyer, Ferdinand C, Ohio

Bldg., Toledo,  O.
Hiatt, R.  C, Payetto,  Triaho.
Hibbard, Caroline S., Max

Joseph Str., 2-III Munchen,

Germany.
Hibbets, U. M., 721 Broad St.,

Grinnell, la.
Hickman, W. H., Pasquith

Bldg.,  Mexico,  Mo.
Hicks, Annie  L., 743 Congress

St.,  Portland,  Me.
Hicks. Betsy B., Ward Bldg.,

Battle Creek, Mich.
Hicks,  Ella  Y., 226  Sutton  St.,

Maysville,  Ky.
Hicks, Frederick Thomas, 513

S. Sixth St., Kirksville, Mo.
Hicks, Rhoda Celeste, 573

Commercial St., Astoria,

Ore.
Hickson,  F.  C,  Gaffney,  S.  C.
Higginbotham,  M.  W.,  Benton-

ville, Ark.
Higgins, Shelley E., White-
water,  Wis.
Higinbotham, Carrie M., 1205

East  St., Honesdale, Pa.
Higinbotham, C. J., 313

Hickory  St.,  Streator,  111.
Higinbotham, Lillian G., 307

W. 6th Ave., Pine Bluff,

Ark
Hilborn, G. V., 10 Suffolk St.,

W., Guelph, Ont.
Hildreth,  A.  G.,  Macon,  Mo.
Hildreth, C. G., 405 Magee

Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hill, Ammerman M., 101

States  Ave., Atlantic  City,

N. J.
Hill, Margaret Ammerman,

101 States Ave., Atlantic

City, N. J.
Hill,  Nellie  Scott, Champaign,

111.
Hill, Wm.  E., 2121 Master  St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Hill,  W. F., 39 S. State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Hill, W. F., Hart, Mich.
Hills,  Chas.  Whitman,  Masonic

Temple,  Dover,  N.  H.
Hlllabrant, Cora L., 652 Park

Place, Elmira,  N. Y.
Hillery,  Grace  H.,  Ph.  B.,  A.  B.,

570 Spadina Ave., Toronto,

Ont., Canada.
Hilliard, Wm. F., Main St.,

Haileybury, Ont.

Hillman, H.  V., 1716 44th s't.,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

Hilton, Bertha, 46 W. First
Ave., Denver, Colo.

Hind.s, Harriet E., 3881 E.
Colorado St., Pasadena, Cal.

Hinman, R. F., 3807 W. Har-
rison  St., Chicago, 111.

Hiss,  John  M..  Harrison  Bldg.,
Columbus,  O,


Hitchcock,  A. W., 814 Florida

St.,  Vallejo,  Cal.
Hitchcock, C. C, Parsons

Bldg., Vinton, la.
Hoagland, Lydia  Ellen, Clare-

mont,  Cal.
Hoagland, N. J., Hord Blk..

Central  City. Neb.
Hoard, Mary  A.,  Cherokee,  la.
Hobson, Ancil B., Stevens

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Hodge,  G.  Edgar,  10  So.  Third

St., Grand Forks, N. D.
Hodge-s,  Lena  R.,  Seaside,  Ore.
Hodges. P. L.. 1504 H St. N.

W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Hodgson, J. E., Old National

Bank  Bldg..  Snokane.  Wa.'^h.
Hoecker,  Mary,  Stanberry,  Mo.
Hoefner, J. Henry, 1330

Liberty  St., Franklin, Pa.
Hoefner, Victor C. 215

Madison  St.,  Waukegan,  111.
Hoffman, Herbert, 1118

Chestnut St., Philadelphia.

Pa.
Hofsess, Mary M., Benton

City,  Mo.
Hoggin.s, Josenhine  H.,  IT.

American Bldg., Frankfort,

Ky.
Hoisington, G. S., Pendleton,

Ore.
Holcomb. Anna L., 108 North

State  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Holcomb, Dayton B., Stewart

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Holcomb, Maude Brown,

Carter Bldg., Jackson,

Mich.
Hollands, Augustus, 122 S.

Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Holliday, Colin, 122 Stanley

St., Montreal, Quebec.
Holliday Phillip, 122 Stanley

St., Montreal, Quebec.
Hollis, Arthur S., Farwell

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Hollister, M. Cebelia, 1250

Pacific  St.,  Brooklyn,  N. Y.
Hollowav,  ,Tas.  L.,  Wilson

Bldg., Dallas,  Tex.
Holloway, Lucy Prindle, 258

Mistletoe St., Petersburg,

Va.
Holme,  E.  D.,  Ballinger  Bldg.,

St. Joseph,  Mo.
Holmes, Frank, Eagle Block,

Spokane, Wash.
Holme.s, H. R., 27 E. Monroe

St., Chicago,  111.
Holmes, Kathryn S., Shukert

Bldg., Kansas City, Mo.
Holmes,  Lydia  H.,  Pekin,  111.
Holmes, Walter N., Slavin

Bldg., Pasadena, Cal.
Holt, G. Eugene. First Nafl

Bank Bldg., Burlington,

N. C.
Holt, W. Luther, Pullman,

Wash.
Hook, Albert E., Brummer

Blk.,  Cherokee,  la.
Hook, .1. Henry, Palisades,

Colo.
Hook, Virgil A.. Second Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Wilkes-Barre,

Pa.
Hoopes, Chas. L., 1524 Chest-
nut  St., Philadelphia, Pa.,

and  Haddonfleld,  N.  J.
Hopkins, Ralph  W., 139  Broad

St.,  Claremont,  N.  H.
Horn, P. J., 1 Havy  Hill,

Bei-keley Sq. W., London,

England.
Horn, Mary B., 64 Main St.,

Haverhill, Mass,


Osteopaths


l*r()fes,si()ii(il  Register


1159


Hoi  no. Tracoy B, I-itllef  ield

Bldg-., Austin, Texas.
Horning,  J.  E.,  80  Bloor  St.  W..

Toronto,  Ontario.  Can.
Horton, Waldo, 500 Boylston

St., Boston, Mass.
Hoskins, .1. 10., Oir- Flesh

Bldg-.,  Piqua,  O.
Houck, Howard M., 1016

Eutaw  St., Baltimore,  Md.
Hough, Clara E., 3 Florence
Terrace,  Ealing,  London  W.,
England.
Houriet, Catherine Elsie,
Second  Nat'l  Bank Bldg.,
Akron, O.
Houseman,  Mrs. B., 304  2nd

St., Marietta,  O.
Houseman, Evan G., B. B.

Bldg., Nampa, Idaho.
Howard, Chas. G., 36 Walnut

St.,  Canton,  111.
Howard, Edward W. S., 235
W. 102nd St., New York,
N. Y.
Howard,  John  J.,  229  Berkeley

St., Boston, Mass.
Howd,  Albert  O.,  Augusta,  111.
Howard, M. J., O'Kelly Blk.,

Pembroke, Ont.
Howard, W. W., Garnett-

Corey  Bldg.,  Medford,  Ore.
Howe, Deloran Doane,

Guymon, Okla.
Howell, J. Corwin, Orlando,

Fla.
Howell, Mollie, lllj S. Wash-
ington St.,  Wellington,  Kan.
Howells, Allan P., First

Savings  Bank  Bldg.,  Albany,
Ore.
Howells,  Anna  Gerow, 445  Mt.
Prospect Ave., Newark,
N. J.
Howells, Clifford, 445 Mt.
Prospect Ave., Newark,
N. J.
Howells, Elizabeth Lane,
Masonic Temple, Corvalli.=i,
Ore.
Howerton, Mattie Coleman,

Hurdland,  Mo.
Howerton, Thomas J., South-
ern Bldg., Washington,
D. C.
Howes,  L.  A.,  Ord,  Nebr.
Howes, Luther Alan,
Minneapolis, Kans.
Howick,  A.  B.,  North  Yakima,

Wash.
Howland,  C.  A.  W., 290  West-
minster St.,  Providence.  R.  I.
Howland, Luther H., Selling

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Howley, Edward. Union Blk.,

Mt. Vernon, Wash.
Howze, Eva B., 2312 Bull St.,

Savannah, Ga.
Hoyt, Payson W., Hoopeston,

Illinois.
Hubbell, Preston R., 1664
Woodward Ave., Detroit,
Mich.
Hudson, Franklin, 12 Lans-
downe Crescent, Edinburgh,
Scotland.
Hughes, Alice, 325 Center  St.,

Williamsport, Pa.
Hughes, Arthur L., Trust

Bldg., Bloomfield, N. J.
Hulett,  Charles  E.,  725  Kansas

Ave., Topeka, Kans.
Hulett,  C.  M.  T.,  200  S.  Hamlin

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Hulett, M. F., 8 E. Broad St.,

Columbus,  O.
Hulett, M. lone, Alamogordo,

N. M.
Hull, Ella, Coleman, Mich.


I  Hull,  Wm.  Philo, 5i  S.  Jeffer-
j son St., lola, Kans.

Humiston, Sarah G., lOSi E.
I Fourth St., .Santa Ana, Cal.
Humman, Emma, 27 E.

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Hummon, Irvin F., 3402
Maple  Ave.,  Berwyn,  111.
Humphries, Ernest R. A. B.,
293 Maple Ave., Holyoke,
Mass.
Hunt, Albert T., McCugue

Bldg., Omaha, Neb.
Hunt, David  J.,  Ionia,  Mich.
Hunt, John O., Grant Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Hunter, Stanley M., Mason

Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Hunter, V. D., Citizens' Bank

Bldg., Sikeston, Mo.
Hunting, Albert, 367 E. 60th

St., Chicago,  111.
Huntington, G. L., Citizens'
Savings Bank Bldg.,
Pasadena, Cal.
Hurd, M. C, Citizens' Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Houghton,
Mich.
Hurd. Nettie M., Goddard

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Hurd, Orville R.. 512 S.

Mathews Ave., Urbana, 111.
Hurst,  Anna  Holme,  Ballinger

Blk.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Hu.sk,  Noves  Gavlord,  28  Main

St.,  Bradford,  Pa.
Huston, Grace, First  National

Bank Bldg., Sunbury, Pa.
Hutchins, Harry Melville, 95
Vinton  St.,  Providence,  R.  I.
Hutchinson, Chas. B.,
Providence Bldg., Duluth,
Minn.
Hyatt, Frank E., Joliet Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Joliet, 111.
Hyatt, J. E., 1161 Vine St.,

Macon,  Mo.
Hybart, Nora Chapman, Pur-
due Hill,  Ala.
Hyde, Leslye, 814 Mesa  Ave.,

El Paso, Texas.
Ice, R. D., 802 Sixth St.,

Moundsville, W. Va.
Ilgenfritz, M. E., Britt, la.
Illing, Fanny Blackford, 242
Gladstone Ave,, Toronto,
Ont., Canada.
Illsley, W. W., Hermiston,

Ore.
Ingalls, C. B., Griggsville, 111.  !
Ingersoll, Frank B., 441
Guarantee  Trust  Bldg.,
Atlantic  City, N. J.
Ingraham, Elizabeth M., 41
Saragossa  St.,  St.  Augustine,
Fla.
Inwood, Garfield, B. A., 27 E.  |

Monroe  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Irani, Ardeshir Beheran,
Colorado Bldg., Washing-
ton,  D. C.  j
Ireland, Harry M., 1163 27th  j

St., Des Moines, la.
Irwin,  Christine,  46  Nelson  St.,

Brantford, Ont.
Irwin, Wm. M.. Penna Bldg,,  '.

Philadelphia, Pa.
Ivie, Wm. Horace, First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg., Berkeley,  Cal.
Jackson, J. R., Brookings,

S.  D.
Jackson, Mary K.. 1533

Diamond St., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Jackson, Nelson, 1741 Wash-
ington Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Jackson,  R.  L.,  Eureka
Springs, Ark.


Jacob.s, Wellington, Box 665,

Berlin, Ont.
James,  Anna  L.,  Higgins  Blk.,

Missoula,  Mont.
James, F. K., 4463 Woodlawn

Ave., Chicago, 111.
James, I. L., Holland Bldg.,

Springfield, Mo.
James, L. Olive, 4463 Wood-
lawn Ave., Chicago, Til.
Jamison, Charles  E.,

Chadakoin Bldg., James-
town, N.  Y.
Jaquith, H. C, Confederation

Life Bldg., Toronto, Ont.
Jeffery, James C, Morrison

Bldg., Shelbyville, Ind.
Jelks, Albert A., Georgia  Life

Bldg., Macon,  rja.
Jenks, Clarissa Tuft.s, 3020
Macomb St., Cleveland
Park, Washington, D. C.
.Tennings, C. H.. Wonderly

Bldg.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
Jennings, Louise F., 1081 N.

Locust St., Centralifi, 111.
Jepson,  Beebe  Ruth, 301
Woodward Ave., Detroit,
Mich.
Jenson, James, 220 S. State

St., Chicago, 111.
Jewell, C. O., Ryland Bldg.,

San  Jose,  Cal.
Jewett,  Josephine  A.,  Acheson

Bldg., Berkeley, Cal.
Johanson, Petrus  E., Box 457,

Evanston, Wyo.
Johnnott, W. W., 227 Grand

St., Newburgh, N. Y.
Johnson, Burdsall F., 1016
Lehigh Ave., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Johnson, Carl J., Equitable

Bldg.,  Louisville,  Ky.
Johnson, C. H., Schuyler,  Neb.
Johnson. Frank R., 1555 W.
j Madison St., Chicago, 111.
Johnson, Henry T., New

Wolter  Bldg.,  Appleton,  Wis.
Johnson, H. C, Wells Bldg.,

Quincy, 111.
Johnson, J. R., 247 Seventh

Ave., Clinton, la.
Johnson, J. Stanley, First
Nat'l Bank Bldg., Hagers-
town, Md.
Johnson, Jessie B., Dollar
Savings Bank Bldg.,
Youngstown, O.
Johnson, John K., Jefferson,

Iowa.
Johnson. Julia  A., 506  Monroe

Ave., Asburv  Park, N. J.
Johnson, N. A., 33 W. Main
St., Fredonia, and Masonic
Temple, Dunkirk, N. Y.
Johnson, Oscar E., Box 102,

Princeton, ]Mo.
Johnston,  W. H..  Shoaff  Bldg.,

Fort Wayne. Ind.
Johnstone, Emma C, 206 E.

Broadway, Denison, la.
Jones, Burton J., 20 E. Front

St.,  Monroe,  Mich.
Jones, E. Clair, 20 E. Orange

St.,  Lancaster, Pa.
Jones, Etha  Marion, 44 E.

Broad St., Bethlehem, Pa.
Jones, F. C, M. D., Black

Bldg., Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Jones, Francis, 517 Oriental

Ave., Atlantic  City,  N. J.
Jones, Frank F., 354 Second

St., Macon, Ga.
Jones, George, Over German

Nat'l Bank, Hastings, Neb.
Jones, J. W., Ill N. Charles
St.. Baltimore, Md.


IIGO


Professioiuil  Rpf/islpr


Osleopntltf,


Jones,  J.  Walter,  1411  Walnut

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
.Tones,  Laila,  517  Oriental

Ave., Atlantic City, K. J.
.Tones, I..aiiren, r>avtona

Beach, Fla.
Jones,  lionise  M.,  737  Congrress

St., Portland,  Me.
Jone.s. Ralph M., Mack Bldg.,

Denver, Colo.
Jones. Sarah E., 71 Seven-
teenth Ave., Paterson, N. J.
.fone.s. T. D., Merniod &

Jaccard  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Jones, T. T., Whitman Elder.,

Wayne,  Neb.
Jones, William Henry, 200

Main  St.,  Marlboro,  Mass.
Jones, W. Stanley, 1329 L  St.

N. W..  Washing-ton, D.  C.
Jorris. A. U., McMillan Bldg-.,

La  Crosse, ^\■is.
Jorris, F. B., Lindley Blk.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Jorstad, Ezra O., Blue Earth,

Minn.
Joyner, Annie I^., Brown

Bldg., Greenville, N. C.
Jinige, A. H., Schofield Bldg.,

Cleveland, O.
Kagay, Lorena, 401 E. Center

St., Marion, O.
Ivaiser,  A.  A., 729  Troost  Ave.,

Kansas  City, Mo.
Kaiser, Chas. A., F. & M.

Bank  Bldg., l^ockport, N. Y.
Kaiser, Irving Richard, V. M.

C. A., Pensacola, Fla.
TCalb, Charles E., Ferguson

Bldg.,  Springfield,  111.
Kamp,  P.  R.,  121  E.  Water  St.,

Lock Haven, Pa.
Kampf, E. J., Traders Bank

Bldg-., Lexington, Mo.
Kani, P. F., Boston Store

I^ldg.. Omaha, Neb.
Ivann, Frank B., 315 Noith

Second St., Harrisburg, Pa»
Keefer, Fred E., Garbot-

Donovan Bldg-., Fitzgerald,

Ga.
Keeler, Mary N., Loveland,

Colo.
Keene, W. B.. 1530 Chestnut

St.. Philadelphia, Pa.
Keethler,  A.  M.,  Memphi.s,  Mo.
Keller,  Wm.  G.,  508  Tavlor  St.,

Portland, Ore.
Ivellet, M. Maude, 145 Hamp-
shire  St., Auburn,  Me.
Kelley, Elizabeth Flint, 35

Huntingrton Ave., Boston,

Mass.
Kellogg, Reid, 139  Mathewson

St., Providence, R. I.
Kellogg.  S.  M.,  207  S.  Main  St.,

Rocky Ti'ord, Colo.
TCellogg, W. E., Sterling,

Colo.
TCelly, Lawrence .T., Ponna

Bldg-., Philadelphia, Pa.
Kelsey,  C.  C,  Blooming  Grove,

Texas.
Kelso, Sophronia B., Shukert

Bldg., Kansas City, Mo.
Kendall, J. Prudence, Pi-esque

Isle,  Me.
Kendall, Marion E.. Agr.

Bank  Bldg.,  Pittsfield,  Mass.
Ivenderdine, Clarence, Boinot

Bldg.. I'hiladelphia, Pa.
Tvennedy, C. S., Mercantile

Library  Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Kennedy, E. W., Mercantile

Library  Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Kennedy.  Ralph  V.,  222  King

St., Charleston, S. C.
Kennedy,  Seth  Y.,  54  First  St.,

Gloversville, N. Y.


Kenney,  Chas  F.,  707  Convent

Ave., Laredo, Tex.
Kenney, Dwight J., Andrus

Bldg., Minneapolis, Minn.
Kenney, Edwin T., 1553 West

Madison St., Chicago, 111.
Kerr, C. \'., Lennox Bldg.,

Cleveland, O.
Kerr. F. Austin, Mclntvre

Bldg., Salt Lake  City,  Utah.
Kerr, George Asbury, Benton,

111.
Kerr, Janet M., 24 La Plaza,

Cor.  Charles  and  .Tarvis  Sts.,

Toronto,  Ont.
Kerr, J. A., AVayne Blk.,

Wooster, O.
Kerrigan, L. M., Citizens'

Bank P;idg., Tampa, Fla.
Ketcham, Anna  Marie, 180G H

St. N. W., Washington,

D. C.
Kettler,  Carl, 1710  H  St.  N.

W.,  W^ashington,  D.  C.
Kew,  Arthur,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., IMttsburgh, Pa.
Keyes,  Leslie  S..  Andrus  Bldg.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Keyes,  W.  J.,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., Portsmouth, O.
Kidder, Edith Florence, 42

High St., Belfast, Me.
Kilgore, J. M., 105 Sixth St.,

York, Neb.
Kilts, Wm. H., Warren and

Woodward Aves., Detroit,

Mich.
Kilts, William H., 16 S.

Gratiot St., Mt. Clemens,

Mich.
Kilvary, R. D., 6359 Kenwood

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Kimbley, Howard G., City of

Paris Bldg-., San Francisco,

Cal.
Kimmel. J. P., 28 Victoria

Ave., Belleville, Ont.
Kincaid, Abigail E., Citizens'

Nat'l Bank Bldg-., Newport,

N.  H.
Kincaid, Julia Nay, Forrest

Goodwin Blk., Skowhegan,

Me.
King.  A.  B., Third  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg.,  St.  I^ouis,  Mo.
King-, Edward Douglass,

Woodward Bldg-., Detroit,

Mich.
King-, Helen, 516  Harvard St.,

Brookline,  Mass.
King-, Lillian B., 110 N. Los

Robles Ave., Pasadena, Cal.
King. T. M., Woodruff Bldg.,

Springfield, Mo.
Kingsbury, Charles W., Idaho

Bldg., Boise, Idaho.
Kingsbury, L. C, 904 Main

St., Hartford, Conn.
Kingsbury, Walter S., Idaho

Bldg., Boise,  Idaho.
Kinney, Blanche E., Salida,

Colo.
Kinney, J. E., Astoria, Ore.
Kinney, Kenneth F., 101 Fox

St., Lapeer, Mich.
Kinney, I^ecta Fay, 39 S.

State St., Chicago, 111.
Kinney, Lecta Fay, 434 S.

Leavitt  St.,  Chicago, Til.
Kinsinger, J. B., 228 W. Fifth

St., Rushville, Ind.
Kinsman, Ada R., 182 Upland

Road, Cambridge, Mass.
Kirk, Morris G., 210J N.

Williams  St.,  Moberly,  Mo.
Kirkbride, Harry C, 541

Swede  St.,  Norristown,  Pa.
Kirkham,  Charles  L.,  K.,  I...  &

M.  Bldg.,  New  Castle,  Pa.


Kirkham,  C.  L.,  New  Castle,

Pa.
Kirkpatrick, Aloha  M., 319 N.

Charles  St.. Baltimore, Md.
Kirkpatrick. George D., The

Farragut,  Washington,  D.  C.
Kissinger,  L.  A.,  Beloit,  Kans.
ICitchell, Arthur Ward, 72

Elizabeth Ave., Newark.

N. J.
Kitson, Matie R.,  Osage, la.
Kjernei-, Samuel H., Wald-

heim Bldg., Kansas Citv,

Mo.
Klein, Clifford S., 2403 Fill-
more St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Kleist, Anna K., P. O. Box

317, Richland Center, Mich.
Kline, D. M., Malvern, la.
Kline, L.  C, Tarentum,  Pa.
Klippelt, J. R., 96?, W. Main

St., Newaik,  O.
Klugherz, W. L., 16 Bank St.,

Batavia, N. Y.
Klumph, C. C, 27 N. Monroe

St., Chicago, 111.
Knapp.  H.  L.,  Masonic  Temple

Elyria, O.
Knapp, Lester I., Sherman

Square Hotel, New York,

N. Y.
Knauss, S. M., 37 Monticello

Ave., Jersey City, N. J.
Knight, Delia  G., 233 W. 83rd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Knight, J.. Foote Bldg.,

McKinney, Texas.
Knowles, Jerome, 3006 West

Ave.,  Newport  News,  A"a.
Knowlton, C. P., Waterloo.

Wis.
Knox, J. F., Bellingham Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Bellingham,

Wash.
Koons, Wm. M., Broadwav &

Walnut St., Herrington,

Kans.
Koontz, Effle,  London. O.
Kottler, A. P., 81 E. Madison

St.,  Chicago,  and  New  Bank

Bldg., Winnetka, 111.
Kraiker, Frederick Wm., 1201

W. Allegheny Ave., Phila-
delphia, Pa.
Krauss, E. R., Edgemere,

L.  I.,  N. Y.  •

Kraus,  Eugene  R  ,  2491  Broad-
way, New Yoik, N. Y.
Kretschmai-, Howard. Powers

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Krill, John F., 337 Broad St.,

Waverly, N. Y.
Kritzer, Oscar J.. 606 Main

St., Davenport, la.
Krohn,  G. W., 209  N.  Hanover

St., Carlisle, Pa.
Kugel, Arthur C. L., 491

Delaware Ave., Buffalo,

N.  Y.
Kuppe, Dr. Lena D., 2800

Logan Blvd., Chicago, III.
Kurth, Walter,  Somerset  Blk.,

Winnipeg, Manitoba, Can.
Kurtz, David P., Guarantee

Title & Trust Bldg., Johns-
town, Pa.
Kyle,  Charles  T.,  Arcade  Bldg..

Menomonie, Wis.
Lacy, Hammett N., Morgaii

Bldg.. Portland, Ore.
Laird,  A. D., 2513 Farnam St.,

Omaha, Neb.
Laird, Jennie Smith, B. S.,

2513 Farnam St., Omaha,

Neb.
I^ake,  F.  Bourne,  178  Hunting-
ton Ave., Boston, and

Harbor View Inn. East

<';ioucester,  Mass.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


llGl


Lampton, Wilson E., Farmers

Bank  Bld&.. Butler. Mont.
Landes, Agrnes, 713 Grace  St.,

Chicag-o, 111.
T.andes, Samuel R., 147 Mon-
roe St.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich,
l-andis, H. I.., Ourti.s ]?lk.,

Elkhart,  Ind.
I^ane, Arthur Miner, 420

Boylston St.. Boston,  Mas.s.
Lane, Charles Allen, Albany,

Mo.
r.angley,  Mabel  A.,  483  Beacon

St.. Boston, Mass.
I.a Plount, O. W.,  Albert  Lea,

Minn.
liRpp, Irene Kate, Granite

Bldg-., Rochester, N. Y.
Larimore, Corinne E.. First

Nat'l Bank Bldg-., Lincoln,

Neb.
Larimore, L. S., State Bank

Bldg-., Caldwell, Kans.
Larkins, Earl E., Galveston,

Texas.
Larkins,  Fred  B.,  R.  T.  Daniels

Bldg-., Tulsa, Okla.
Lairabee,  T.  15., Webster  City,

Iowa.
Larsh, M. M.. Shukert Bldg-.,

Kansas  City,  Mo.
Larson,  C.  L.,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., Virginia, Minn.
Larter, E. R., Silberberg-

Bldg.,  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y.
La Rue, Charles M., B. S..

Kirn  Bldg.,  Lancaster,  O
La Rue, J. Byron, 1503

Frederica St., Owensboro,

Ky.
Laslett, M'. r>., 40 Hastings

St., West Roxbury, Mass.,

and  673  Boylston  St.,  Boston,

Mass.
Laughlin, E. H.,  Kirksville,

Mo.
Laughlin, George M., Kirks-
ville,  Mo.
Laughlin, Hariy T., Great

Falls, Mont.
Laughlin, W. R., Fay Bldg.,

Los  Angeles, Cal.
Lauver, Lillian B., Palace

Bldg.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
I.,awrence,  J.  L.,  133  Geary  St.,

San Francisco, Cal.
La-wrence, M. Ernestine, 513

So. Salina St., Syracuse,

N.  Y.
Layne, A. C, 223 W. College

St.,  Grlffln,  Ga.
Leader, Genevra E., 606

Kansas  Ave.,  Topeka, Kans.
Leard, A. W., Nicodemus

Bldg-., Spencer, la.  ■"
Learner,  Grace  C,  111  Bidwell

Parkway.  Buffalo,  N. Y.
Learner, Harry W.. Ill Bid-
well  Parkway,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Leas, Lucy, Hamilton Bldg.,

Akron, O.
Leatherwood, E. A., Eureka,

Cal.
I..ee, Minnie R., Power Bldg-.,

Helena, Mont.
Lee, Vernon R., Owl Drug

Bldg., San  Diego, Cal.
Leeds,  George  T.,  87  N.  Broad-
way, Yonkers,  N.  Y.
Lefflngwell.  Mrs.  A.  M. E., 514

Walnut  St.,  Muscatine,  la.
Leffler, Wm. H., 5 West St.,

Utica, N. Y.
Leigh, Emma  Hoye, 142 W.

18th St., University Place,

Neb.

Mo.
Leinbacli, Hanna, Reserve

Bank Bldg.. Kansas City,


Leinbach, Sara  J.,  3336  Wood-
land Ave.,  Kansa.s  City,  Mo.
Le  Kites, Rue, The Beacon

Apts., Washington, D. C.
Leonard, Ellsworth Harry,

The Flanders, Philadelphia,

Pa.
Leonard, H. Alfred, Fianklin

Bank Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Leonard, Hubert F., Morgan

Bldg-., Portland, Ore.
Leonard,  S.  L.,  Redwood  Falls,

Minn.
Leopold, Minnie S. Dickinson,

I^ansdowne,  Pa.
Leslie, George W., Marshfleld,

Ore.
Leslie, J. G., Portage La

Prairie, Manitoba, Canada.
Levegood, Robert R., 133 N.

52nd St., Philadelphia. Pa.
Leweaux, Virginia V.,

Corvallis,  Ore.
Lewis, Agnes, Farmers State

Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Cloud,  Minn.
Lewis, Edith J., Clyde Blk.,

Hamilton, Ont.
Lewis,  Emma  A.,  205  N.  Cedar

St., Owatonna, Minn.
Lewis, J. L., Bank Bldg.,

Colorado Springs, Colo.
Lewis,  Muriel  E.,  26  Broad  St..

Lynn,  Mass.
Lewis,  W.  O., 172  E. Main  St.,

Hamilton, Ont.
Lewy, Morri.s, 19 AV. 31.st St.,

Bayonne, N. J.
Lichter, S., 1028 Brown St.,

Peekskill,  N. Y.
Lidy, I. Henry, 22 S. Centre

St., Pottsville, Pa.
Liffring, Edward A., Second

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Liffring, L. A., Second Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Light, Nellie, Odesso, Mo.
Ligon. Ellen B., Inge Bldg.,

Mobile, Ala.
Linander, Alvilde E., 55 State

St., Chicago,  111.
Lincoln, Clara B., 132 Pavne

Ave.,  N.  Tonawanda,  N.  Y.
Lincoln, Fred C, Ellicott

Square, Buff  alio. N.  Y.
Lindsey, E. L., 603 Madison

Ave., Scranton, Pa.
Linebarger, H. A., Chrisman,

Illinois.
Linekar, Charles W., 2129

Telegraph Ave., Oakland,

Cal.
Linhart, C. C, Woods Bldg.,

Evansville, Ind.
Link, E. C, 87 Broad St.,

Stamford, Conn.
Link, W. F., Empire Bldg.,

Knoxville, Tenn.
Linnell, J. A., 37 S. Wabash

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Linville,  W.  B.,  407  S.  Main  St.,

Middletown, O.
Lippincott, Lydia E., 243 W.

Main  St.,  Moorestown,  N.  J.
Littell, U. G., M. H. Spurgeon

Bldg., Santa Ana, Cal.
Little, Clara Ulmer, The

Imperial,  Washington, D. C.
Littlejohn  &  Short, 159 N.

State  St., Chicago, 111.
Littlejohn, David, Battlement

Bldg.,  Benton  Harbor,  Mich.
Littlejohn, Edith  W., 64 E.

Van Buren St., Chicago,  111.
Littlejohn,  J.  B.,  401  Steinway

Hall, Chicago, 111.
Littlejohn, J. Martin, 69

Piccadill>", I>ondon W.,

England.


Livengood, B. L., Bay City,

Texas.
Livingston, Ina Patterson,

Ridge Bldg., Kansas City,

Mo.
Livingston,  L.  R.,  Ridge  Bldg.,

Kansas  City,  Mo.
Lloyd,  James  W., 605  Avenido

de Mayo, Buenos Ayres,

Argentine  Republic,  S.  A.
Locke, Oiella, Cumberland

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Lockwood, Jane E., South

Dennis. Mass.
Lockwood, T. D., 51 10. 4  2nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Loeffler,  Katherine  A.,  Lindlcy

Blk., Minneapolis,  Minn.
Logan, Charles L., 57 E.

Jackson Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Logue, J. Stanislaus,  New

York Ave. and Boardwalk,

Atlantic  City,  N.  J.
Logue, James, 4 McCrorey

Apts., Atlantic City, N. J.
Loma,.s,  Kathryn  M.,  1405  Hin-

man  Ave.,  Evanston,  III.
Long. Frank M'., Ohio Bldg.,

Toledo,  O.
Long, George Percy, 226 12th

St., Miami, Fla.
Long, L. v., Detroit, Minn.
Long, Robert H., 309 Shelton

Ave., Jamaica, N. Y.
Longpre, E. L., 194 Court St.,

Kankakee, 111.
Loose, B. Ellsworth, Xiles

Bldg.,  Findlay,  O.
Loper,  Mathilda  E.,  Third  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Lorbeers, Thomas  Lord, Free-
man Bldg., Riverside, Cal.
Lord, Mary Warren, 40 State

St., Troy, N. Y.
Lorenz, Charles E.,  Masonic

Temple, Columbus, Ga.
Loring, Margaret, Neustadt

Bldg., I>a  Salle,  III.
Loudon, Guy E., 199 S. Union

St.,  Burlington,  Vt.
Loudon, Harry M., 153 S.

Union St., Burlington, Vt.
Love, Nellie Long, Danville,

Cal.

Love,  S.  R.,  8  Pine  St.,  DeLand,

Fla.
Loving, A. S., Brown Bldg.,

Rockford, 111.
Loving, William B., Murphy

Bldg.,  Sherman,  Texas.
Lowe, James L., Woolf Bros.

Bldg., Kansas  City, Mo.
Lown, Anna B., Bradford

Court, Newton Center, and

359 Boylston St., Boston,

Mass.
Lowry,  Belle P., 401  W. Knox

St.,  Ennis,  Texas.
Lucas, F. N., Junkin Blk.,

Fairfield, la.

Lucas,  John  H.,  Goddard  Bldg.,

Chicago,  111.
Lucas, T. C, 1206J Main St.,

Columbia,  S. C.
Ludden, Raymond, 144 S.

Brand Blvd.. Glendale, Cal.
Luedicke,  F.  A., Empire  Bldg.,

Denver, Colo.
Luft, Christian G., 218 S.

Front  St.,  Fremont,  O.
Lundquist,  Nellie  O.,  Fairfield,

Iowa.
Lusk, Charles M.. Jr., Kress

Bldg., Houston, Texas.
Lust,  Benedict,  110  E.  41st  St

New York, N. Y.
Lust,  Benedict,  Butler,  N.  J.


1162


Professioiuil  Register


Osteopath.i


Lust, Louisa, Butler, N. J.
Lutz, Adda M., 929 N. Broad

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Lycan,  Jessie  V.,  Hilo,  Hawaii.
Lvchcnheini, Moni.s, Mentor

Bldg-., Chicago, 111.
Lyda, E. R., Story Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Lyke,  Chas.  H.,  700  Broadway,

Camden,  N.  J.
Lvnian, Elva James, 213 N.

Hamilton St., Madison, Wis.
Lynch, Alice E.. St. James

Bldg.,  Jacksonville, Fla.
Lynch, Delia Adeline, AVood-

men  of  World  Bldg.,  Omaha,

Neb.
I..yne, Sandford T.. AHentown.

Pa.
Lyon, Louis A., 37 Pearl St.,

Wellsboro,  Pa.
Lyons, Clara Rauch, 1824

Columbia Road, Washmg-

ton,  D.  C.
McAllister, Byron P., 225 N.

Block  St., Fayetteville, Ark.
McAllister,  Joan  C,  485  Water-
loo Ave., Guelph, Ont.
McAlpln, D. E., Boone, la.
MecBeath, Thomas L., 35

Limerock  St., Rockland,  Me.
McCabe, John A., Thief River

Falls,  Minn.
McCall, F. H., Penn Ave. and

Boardwalk, Atlantic City,

N. J.
McCall, T. Simpson, The

Spurling, Elgin, 111.
McCartney,  L.  H.,  Hoxie,  Kans.
McCaslin,  Annie,  204  N.  Negley

Ave., Pittsbunrh, l^a.
McCaslin,  J.  A.,  311  Center  St.,

Ridgway,  Pa.
McCaughan,  Russell  C,  210  N.

Market St., Kokomo, Ind.
McCauley. Andrew, Petersen

Bldg.,  Fairmont,  Minn.
McClanahan, J. L., Paola,

Kans.
McClaran, A. W., 28 Main St.,

Bradford,  Pa.
McCleery, Ben H., Mankato,

Minn.
McClenny, D. Clayton, Hinton

Bldg., Elizabeth City, N. C.
McClimans, W. A., 39 S. State

St., Chicago, 111.
McCole, George M., Conrad

Blk.,  Great Falls, Mont.
McConnell, Carl P., 14 W.

Washington  St.,  Chicago,  111.
McConnell, W. F., First Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Waitsburg,

Wash.
McConnell & Farmer, 14 W.

Washington Blvd., Chicago,

111.
McCorkle, Zuie A., 4951 Ken-
more  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
McCormack, J. J., 629 N.

Eighth St., Sheboygan, Wi.s.
McCormick, Jean Francois,

Farmington,  la.
Mccormick. J. Porter, 94

Clinton  St.,  Greenville,  Pa.
McCowan, Don C, Burr Oak

and Western Aves., Blue

I.sland, and 39 S. State St.,

Chicago,  111.
McCoy, L. r.. P.-iiil Gale-
Greenwood Bldg., Norfolk,

Virginia.
McCracken. Earl. Commercial

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Shreve-

port.  La.
McCurdy.  Charles  W.,  Tlerney

Bldg.,  Weston,  W.  Va.


McCurdy, Chas. W., 1411
Walnut St., Philadelphia,
Pa.

McCuskey,  Charlotte,  619  First

.'Vve.,  Council  Bluffs, la.
McDanlel,  A.  C,  Union  Savings

Bank Bldg., Oakland, Cal.
McDougall,  J.  R.,  27  E.  Monroe

St.. Chicago,  111.
McDowell,  J.  H.,  102  Third  St.,

Troy,  N.  Y.
McDowell, J. O., Odd Fellows

Blk., Brunswick, Me.
McDowell. M.. Scott Bldg.,

Salt Lake City,  Utah.
McFadden, .T. Clinton, Sunset

Bldg., Bellingham, Wash.
McFarland, Arthur H., Cole-
man Bldg., Deer Lodge,

Mont.
McGarock, R. E., Wiechmann

Bldg., Saginaw, Mich.
McGinni.'!, J. C, Mercantile

Bank Bldg., Aurora, 111.
McGavock, Anne H., 894

Woodward Ave., Detroit,

Mich.
McGuire.  Frank  J.,  26  Favette

St., Binghamton, N. Y.
Mclntyre, G. M., Grosvenor

Bldg., Kenosha, Wis.
McKinney, Clara DeGress,

Fourth Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Cincinnati,  O.
McKinney,  Lula  Ireland,  Rock

Port, Mo.
McKnight, Isadora, 305 North

Walnut St., Creston, la.
McLaughlin, Elizabeth A.,

Mason Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
McT>aughlin, E. T.,  I. O. O. F.

Bldg.,  Knoxville,  la.
Mcl^aughlin, S. C, 3 Harvard

St.,  Newtonville,  Mass.
McMahon, B. S., The Burling-
ton,  Washington, D. C.
McMains, Grace Ramsay,

Union Trust Bldg., Balti-
more,  Md.
McMains, Harrison, Fidelity

Bldg.,  Baltimore,  Md.
McMains, Henry A., Union

Trust Bldg., Baltimore, Md.
McMasters, Lester A., Homer,

Illinois.
McMillen, J. W., Stockton,

Kans.
McMullen, Walter M., 229 E.

Commonwealth St., Fuller-
ton, Cal.
McNabb, Adeline M., South-
ampton, Ont.
McNary,  J.  F.,  Matthews  Bldg..

Milwaukee, Wis.
McNary, Wm. D., M. D.,

Matthews  Bldg.,  Milwaukee,

Wis.
McNeil,  Jean  M., 805  Colorado

Ave., La  Junta, Colo.
McNeils, Anthonv J., Real

Estate Trust Bldg., Phila-
delphia,  Pa.
McNicol, A. M., Dallas, Ore.
McNlcoll,  D.  Ella,  Coulter  Blk.,

Frankfort, Ind.
McPherson, George W., 414

Mackay St., Montreal,

Quebec.
McPike, James K., Steward

Bldg., Okmulgee, Okla.
McQuary,  Harvey  L.,  Main  St.,

Dayton, Wash.
McRoberts, Sarah  '  Ellen, 130

N. Negley Ave., Pittsburgh,

Pa.
McSherry,  Thomas,  Broadway,

Long  Branch,  N. .T.


McWilliama,.  Alex  F.,  Hunting-
ton Chambers,  Boston,  Mass.

McWilliams, Royal A., Manu-
facturers' Bank  Bldg.,
Lewiston, Me.

MacCardle, N. B., 633 Strat-
ford Place,  Chicago.  111.

MacCarthy, Daniel, 132 North
Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.

MacCarthy, M., 216 South
Laflln St., Chicago, 111.

MacCollum,  Edna  M.,  15  S.
Franklin St., Wllkes-Barre.
Pa.

MacCracken,  F. E., Box 5,
Beatrice, Ncbr.

MacDonald,  John  A., 160  New-
berry St., P.oston. ;\^ns.s.

MacEwen, Margaret, 410 S.
9th St., Philadelphia. Pa.

MacFadden, Charles, Klllam,
Alberta,  Can.

MacGregor, G. W., Audito-
rium Bldg.,  Chicago,  HI.

MacGregor, George W., 431 S.
Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.

MacGregor, P. J., O. T. & B
Bldg.,  Olney,  O.

MacGregor,  W. C, 27  E.
Monroe St., Chicago, 111.

MacGregor & MacLean, 431
S. Wabash Ave., Chicago,

Macauley, Daniel B., 27 East

Monroe  St.,  Chicago, 111.
Mack, Henry A., fio^ E. I2th

St., Des  Moines, la.
Mack, Raesley S.. 114 Broad

St., Chester, Pa.
Mack, Warren B., 180 Lewis

St., Lynn, Mass.
MacKinnon, Barbara, Marsh-
Strong Bldg., Los Angeles,

Cal.
i  MacKinnon, C. E., St. James
i Bldg., Jacksonville, Fla.
MacLennon, Margaret J 5''0

W. 111th St., New York,

N. Y.
Maddox,;  H. H., 1705 B'wav,

Mattoon, 111.
Maddux,  Walter  S..  Central

Blk., Pueblo, Colo.
Mader, Geo.. 9807 Ave L,

Chicago, 111.
MaGee, F. E., O'Nell Bldg.,

Webb (^itv. Mo.
Mager, Edwin J., 28 B'wav,

Taunton,  Mass.
Magers, J. A., Moravia, la.
Magill, Edgar G  , Woolner

Bldg., Peoria, 111.
Magner, Ellen, 1030 Nicollet

Avenue,  •  Minneapolis, Minn
Mahaffay, Charles W., Pitts-
burgh Bldg., Helena, Mont.
Mahaffay, Clara  A., Oklahoma

City.  Okla.
Mahaffay,  Ira  F.,  Model  Bldg

McAlester, Okla.
Mahaffy, J. H., 926 3rd St  ,

Huron, S. D.
Malcolm, Robert C  , The

Savoy,  Washington,  D.  C.
;  Mali, Harry E., 64 E. Van
! Buren St., Chicago, 111.
Malone, J. Axton, Carter

Bldg., Houston, Tex.
Malone. Lillian, Mills Bldg.,

Topeka, Kans.
Maltby, Harrison W., 26 S

Wood St., Chicago, 111.
Manatt,  E. S.,  Hampton,  la.
Manchester, F. P., 653  Ave.  C,

Bayonne, N.  J.
Mandeville, J. F,., Lockhart

Bldg., Sayre, Pa.
Manning, Elizabeth May, 712

S.  5th  St.,  I.ieavenworth,

Kans.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


1163


Mantle,  Pauline  R.,  Pierik

Bldg-.. Sprinefleld, 111.
Manuel, K.  Janic, Masonic

Temple,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Marcv, Nellie !>., Hainory

Bldg-.,  Sharon,  Pa.
Marcv, Nettie  L., 105  4 West

State  St.,  Sharon,  Pa.
Marriner, L. C, Denckia

Bldg-., Philadelphia, Pa.
Marsh,  Roy  W., First  Nafl

Bank  Bldg-.,  Uniontown,  Pa.
Marsh,  U.  G.,  Clarkson,  Wash.
Marshall, Elizabeth J. B., 326

W. 8th St., Erie, Pa.
Marshall, J. S. B., .^03 W. 3rd

St., Jamestown, N. T.
Marshall, L. C, T-^ivingston,

Mont.
Marshall, Wade H., Masonic

Temple, Trinidad, Colo.
Martin, Charles C, Dawson

Springs, Ky.
Marstellar, Chas. L., Dollar

Savings Bank Bldg..

Youngstown,  O.
Martens, Theodore Henry,

Cutler Bldg-., Rochester,

N. Y.
Martin, Claude W., Commerce

Bldg-., Kansas City, Mo.
Martin, Ethel J., Rhodes-

Fanlow  Bldg-.,  Ashland,  Ore.
Martin, Elmer, Powers Bldg.,

Decatur, 111.
Martin, F. H., Powers Bldg.,

Helena, Mont.
Martin, Frederick  H., 481 N.

Park Ave., Pomona, Cal.
Martin,  Georg-e  W., 104  N.

Stone  Ave.,  Tucson,  Ariz.
•  Martin, H. B., 77 Whitestone

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
'Martin, Harry  B., 287 E. 18th

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Martin,  J.  S.,  City  Bank  Bldg.,

Xenia, O.
Martin, L. D..  Miles  Granite

Bldg., Barre, \t.
Marvine,  I.  W.,  Ballinger

Bldg-., St. Joseph, Mo.
Marx, Cora  Weed, Essex

Bldg-., Newark, N. J.
Masterson, Wm. P., Widener

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Mason, Hubert B., City Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Temple, Tex.
Mason, J. Louise, 183 Hunt-
ington Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason, L. B., Sherlock Bldg.,

Lethbridge, Alberta, Can.
Mather, E., 228 Gratiot Ave.,

Mount Clemens, Mich.
Matson, Jesse E., Plymouth

Bldg., Minneapolis. Minn.
Mathews, Ellen, 200 N. Los

Angeles  St.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Matthews, S.  C, 500 5th Ave.,

New  York. N. Y.
Matthews, S. C, 1816

Albemarle Road, Brooklyn,

N. T.
Mattison, N. D., 33 W. 42nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Mavity, Bertram J  , 130 N.

Cedar St., Nevada, Mo.
Mawson, Gertrude B., 4 De

Forest  Ave.,  Summit,  N.  J.
Maxey, C.  N.,  Watts  Bldg.,

San Diego, Cal.
Maxfield, J. Harris, 4 Myrtle

Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Maxwell, B. C 2157 E. 46th

St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Maxwell, Bertha  M., 234  W.

4th St., Wllliamsport, Pa.
Maxwell, Mrs. E. M., Scott

Bldg., Paris, Tex.


Maxwell, E. O., Amosheag

Bank Bldg., Manchester,

N. H.
Maxwell,  G. Edward, 27 E.

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Maxwell, Herman  L., 130 N.

5th St., Reading, Pa.
Maxwell, Milton L., Scott

Bldg., Paris, Tex.
May,  Sarah  A.,  M.  D.,  Flanders

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Mayers,  Rebecca  P>.,  Valpey

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Mayes, M. T., 289 State St.,

Springfield, Mass.
Mayhugh, Clyde W., 300 N.

4th St., Atchison, Kans.
Mayo, Kathleen, Kirksville,

Mo.
Mayo, R. Clarence, Drum-
heller  Bldg., Walla Walla,

Wash.
Mayronne, Delphine, 1539

Jackson Ave., New Orleans,

La.
Meacham, W. B., Legal Bldg.,

Asheville, N. C.
Mead, Clyde  D.,  Viroqua,  Wis.
Meade, Alba, Exchange Bldg.,

Memphis, Tenn.
Medaris, C. E., Masonic

Temple, Rockford, 111.
Medlar, S. Agnes, 1112 Chest-
nut St.,  Philadelphia, Pa.
Mekemson, Elvina, Biggsville,

111.
Meleski, Mary M., 604 Lion

St., Dunkirk, N. Y.
Memmert, A., Smith and

Church Sts., Centredale,

R. I.
Mercer,  William  L., Salem,

Ore.
Meredith, Oritz R., Depart-
ment Store  Blk.,  Nampa,

Idaho.
Merkley,  E.  H.,  36  W.  35th  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Merkley, G. H., Hotel Mar-
tinique, B'way and 32nd

St., New York, N. Y.
Merkley, Geo.  H., 273 Sanford

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Merkley, W. A., 487  Clinton

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Merrill,  Cliarles  R.,  Woodstock,

Ont.
Merrill, Edward Strong-,

Ferguson Bldg., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Merritt,  J.  P.,  Tekamah,

Nebr.
Messick, Chas. W., 1030 East

47th  St..  Chicago,  111.
Messick, Orville W., 954 East

43rd St., Chicago, 111.
Messick, Margaret  E., 1030 E.

47th  St.,  Chicagjo,  111.
Meyer, F. J., St. Louis  Co.

Bank  Bldg., Cloyton,  Mo.
Meyer, Richard L., 1297

Market St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Meystrick, J., 204 2nd Ave.,

Astoria,  L.  I.,  N.  Y.
Mickle,  George  E.,  Metz  Bldg.,

Grand Rapids, Mich.
Middleton, Delia, James Blk.,

Eagle  Grove,  la.
Mildenberger,  C,  62  Woodbine

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Mildenberger, Charles, 70

Hudson St., Terminal Bldg.,

Hoboken,  N.  J.
Millard, F. P., 12 Richmond

St. E., Toronto, Ont., Can.
Millay,  E.  O.,  The  Maples,

Romeo, Mich.
Millay,  E. O., 1664  Woodward

Ave., Detroit, Mich.


Miller,  A L.,  New  England

Bldg., Cleveland, O.
Miller, Clara  Macfarlane, 5931

Avenal Ave., Oakland, Cal.
Miller, Chester L., New

Gensland  Bldg., Elmhur.st,

111.
Miller,  Chester  L., 27  E.

Monroe  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Miller,  D.  F.,  Baylor,  Mont.
Miller, Frank, .''.20 VV. Front

St., Plainfield,  N.  J.
Miller, Fred W., Madison Co.

Trust  and  Deposit  Bldg.,

Oneida,  N. Y.
Miller, Grace E., Jeffords-

Smoyer Bldg-., Clearwater

Fla.
Miller, Harry  I., Union Utili-
ties Bldg.,  Morgantown,

W.  Va.
Miller, Harry  T., Hanlon

Bldg., Canton, 111.
Miller, John W., 226 Market

Square, Sunbury, Pa.
Miller, Joseph Donley, 87

Beechurst Ave., Morgan -

town, W.  Va.
Miller, J. R., Lvric Arcade

Bldg., Rome. N. Y.
Miller, Kate R., Meisel Bldg.,

Port Huron, Mich.
Miller, Linnie B., The Atlan-
tic Apts., Washington,

D.  C.
Miller, Orion S., Frisco  Bldg.,

St. Louis, Mo.
Miller, P. H.,  Mt. Morris,  Pa.
Miller, R. Lee, Holston Bank

Bldg., Knoxville, Tenn.
Miller, Samuel  B.,  Granby

Blk.,  Cedar  Raoid.s,  la.
Mills,  Anna  M.,  Star  Store

Bldg., Tuscola, 111.
Mills, David A., Tower Blk.,

Holland, Mich.
Mills, Maud  S., Robertsdale,

Ala.
Mills, W.  S.. First  Nafl Bank

Bldg., Ann  Arbor, Mich.
Miner,  E. Frank,  4  W.  Newell

Ave., Rutherford, N. J.
Minnis,  J. C.  214  Terre  Haute

Trust  Bldg.,  Terre  Haute,

Ind.
Mitchell, Chas. R., Blount

Bldg., Pensacola, Fla.
Mitchell, C. T., Hitchcock,

Bldg., Nashville, Tenn.
Mitchell,  Jennie. 823  State  St.,

Texarkana,  Tex.
Mitchell, R. M., Texarkana

Nafl Bank Bldg., Tex-
arkana, Te.x.
Mitchell,  Warren  R.. 738

Broad St., Newark, N. J.
Mitterling, Edward S.,

Webster Citv, la.
Mode, Emily  R., Hall Blk..

Harvard, 111.
Moellering, Bertha W., 256

Kurfiirstendamm, Berlin,

Germany.
Moellering, Herman H., 256

Kurfiirstendamm, Berlin,

Germany.
Moershell, R., Marengo, la.
Moffatt, Chas. M., 618 Sheri-
dan Ave.. Shenandoah. la.
Moffatt,  Lillian  May,  Provi-
dence  Bldg., Duluth, Minn.
Moffett, George, Hanover, 111.
Mogaard,  John,  2820  W.  North

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Molyneux. Albert J., 2844

Blvd., Jersey City Heights,

N.  J.
Molyneux. Cora Belle, 2844

Blvd., Jersey City Heights,

N.  J.


1164


Professional  HegisLev


Osleopalhs


Monks,  James  C, 112  Atlantic

St.. Bridgeton, N.  J.
Monroe, Georg-e T., Silver

Springs,  N.  Y.
Montague, H. C I'hoonix

Bldg., Muskogee, Okla.
Montague, William C,

American Trust Bldg.,

Evansville, Ind.
Moomaw, Mary C, 172 W.

79th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Moore, Antoinette, People's

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Belleville,

Kans.
Moore, Audrey C, 1121 Devi-

sadero St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Moore, Coyt. Raymond Bldg.,

Baton Rouge,  La.
Moore, D. V., Iowa Falls, Ta.
Moore, Ernest A., People's

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Belle-
ville,  Kans.
Moore, Ernest Melvin, Box

311, Shelbina, Mo.
Moore,  F.  E., Selling  Bldg.,

Portland, Ore.
Moore,  Frank  R., Real  Estate

Trust Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Moore, George E., Equitable

Bldg., Des Moines, la.
Moore,  George  W., 34  Dela-
ware St., Woodbury, N. J.,

and  R. E. Trust Bldg,,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Moore,  Hezzie  Carter  Purdom,

Selling  Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Moore, J. L., Madison-Thoits

Bldg., Palo Alto, Cal.
Moore, Myrtle  J., Crete, Nebr.
Moore, Riley  D., Wardman

Courts West, Washington,

D.  C.

Moore,  Sara  A.,  1711  Gervais

St., Columbia, S. C.
Moore, Thomas R., Euclid

Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Moore, W. P., Lamar, Mo.
Moores,  Carrie  E.,  2453  Gilbert

Ave., Cincinnati, O.
Moreland, Cassie C, Bacon

Blk., Oakland, Cal.
Morgan, Lallah, 290 West-
minster  St., Providence,

R. I.
Moriarty, J. J., Maloney

Bldg., Ottawa, 111.
Morrell,  Ada  E., 125 Dover

St., Lowell, Mass.
Morris, Chester  H., 37 S.

Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Morris, Fred W., 316 B'way,

Paterson, and Ridgewood

Trust Bldg., Ridgewood,

N. J.
Morris,  John  B.,  37 S.  AVabash

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Morris, Paschall, Flanders

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Morris, T. C, Fernwell Bldg.,

Spokane, Wash.
Morrison, Daniel N., 120 E.

34th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Morrison, James G., Terre

Haute Trust Bldg., Terre

Haute, Ind.
Morrison, John F., Col. Hud-
son  Bldg., Ogden, Utah.
Morrison, Martha A., 1315 B.

13th  Ave.,  Denver,  Colo.
Morrison, Myrtle Pleasant,

525 Commercial St.,

Emporia, Kans.
Morrison, Thomas  H., Port

Jefferson,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.
Morrow, A. D., West  Liberty,

la.
Morrow,  Carroll  B.,  Main,  Cor.

E.  Diamond St., Butler, Pa.


Morrow, Clara E., Main, Cor.

E.  Diamond  St.,  Butler,  Pa.
Morse, Herbert F., Harlin

Bldg., Wonatchec, Wash.
Morse, Park  A., Joshua  Green

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
.Moseley, J. R., St. Augustine,

Fla.
Mosher, Alfred, South Ride

Square, Macomb, 111.
Moss,  Joseph  M.,  Ashland,

Nebr.
Most, Louis H., Monaghan

Bldg.,  Coeur  d'Alene,  Idaho
Mulford, G. S., 295 Atlantic

St.,  Stamford,  Conn.
Mullenbrook,  J.  L.,  St.  Maries,

Idaho.
Mulrony, W. J., 341 2nd St.,

Yuma, Ariz.
Muncie, Curtis Hamilton,

Macon St., Cor. Marcy  Ave.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y
Mundie, Carrie  M.,  Cor.

Illinois Ave. and Jefferson

St., Mendota, 111,
Munger,  William  R.,  Carlsbad,

N.  M.
Munn, Allen, Bellingham,

AYash.
Munroe. Milbourne, 21.5 ]Main

St., East  Orange, N.  J.
Muntz, Glenn F., Huntington

Chambers, Boston, Mass.
Murphy,  Annie R.,  39 S.  State

St., Chicago, 111.
Murphy, E. C, Ingram Bldg.,

Eau  Claire, Wis.
Murphy, G. Glenn, Somerset

Blk.,  Winnipeg,  Manitoba.
Murray,  J.  H., 110  S. Portland

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Murphy,  J.  L.,  220  S.  State

St., Chicago, 111.
Murphy,  J.  W.,  Bremerton,

Wash.
Murray, John H., 212 E.

Hanover  St.,  Trenton,  N.  J.
Murray,  W.  F.,  Sandwich,  111.
Mutschler,  O.  C,  31  W.  Orange

St., Lancaster, Pa.
Muttart.  C.  J.,  Flanders  Bldg.,

Philadelphia, and Bryn

Mawr, Pa.
Myers, Ella  Lake, 214 W.

92nd  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Myers, E. W.,  Mamunta,

Sierra  Leone,  West  Africa.
Myers, Katherine Stott,

Journal Bldg., Portland,

Ore.
Myers, Lewis A., Dirks Bldg.,

Vancouver, B. C, Can.
Myers,  Ollie  H.  P.,  114  W.  2nd

St., Ottumwa, la.
Myles, Anna Crawford, Munn

and Central Aves., East

Orange, N. J.
Nash, Victoria, Spitzer Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
Nay, William F., Chamber of

Commerce Bldg., Enid,

Okla.
Neame, Josephine E., l.'il.'i

Boardwalk, Atlantic City,

N.  J.
Nelson, Frank C, 491 Pleas-
ant St.,  Maiden,  Mass.
Nelson, Harriet A., Essex

Blk., Minneapolis,  Minn.
Nelson, Mrs. Laura S., 1733

N. Western Ave., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Nelson,  Lura  Bingham, 424

S.  B'way,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Nelson, Loretta B., Conrad

Blk., Great Falls, Mont.
Ness, W.  F., 241 W. Utica

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.


Netty,  J.  W., 3040  W.  North

Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Nevius, Zeula A., 670J Ohio

St., Terre Haute, Ind.
Newhall, Wm. B., Y. M. C. A.

Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Nicholas, Rebecca,  *05  W.

S.'ith St.. New York, N. V
Nicholl, Tho.s. H.. Franklin

Bank Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Nicholl, Wm. S., Real Estate

Trust, Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Nicholls, Charles H., 134

Wyoming Ave.. Scranton,

Pa.
Nichols, Adrian D., Frisco

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Nichols, Paul  S.,  23^ North

Sandusky St., Delaware, O
Nichols,  Robt.  H.,  15  Beacon

St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Niehaus, Anna M., Trov, Mo
Nichols, W. L., Brown 'Bldg

Exeter, Cal.
Nicholson, F. M., 122 S. Ash-
land  Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Nielsen, Julie K., 1109 Park

St., Peekskill, N. Y.
Niemann, J., 1902 Nedres St

Austin, Tex.
Nikolas, Kathryn, Bee Bldg

Omaha, Nebr.
Nims,  Herbert  J.,  Ryland  Blk.,

San  Jose,  Cal.
Niswander, John  M.,  Danville

Ind.
•Noble,  Arza  J., 961 4th St.,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Noble, Nelson G., Dalziel

Bldg., Cal.
Noel'ng, Geo. D., 1107 Chest-
nut  St., PhiladelDhia, Pa. ■
Noeling, Katherine L., 1107

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Noland, Lou T., Baker Blk

Springfield, Mo.
Noordhoff,  L.  H.,  187  Main  St  ,

Oshkosh, Wis.
Norman, P. K., Central Bank

Bldg., Memphis, Tenn.
Norris, H. D., Marion, 111.
Norris, Kate Louise, 703

Greene  Ave.,  Brooklvn,  N  Y
Northern, Robert J., First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Hagers-

town,  Md.
Noithrup, Robert B., Morgan

Bldg., Portland,  Ore.
Norton,  Carlton  C, 1  Madison

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Norwood, Robert R., Mineral

Wells, Tex.
Notestine, Flora A., Macon,

Mo.
Novinger, W. J.. Cor.

Academy and Montgomerv

Sts.. Trenton, N. J
Nowlin, J. A., Osteopathy

Bldg.. Farmer City, 111.
Noyes,  Mary  E.,  Maloney

Bldg.,  Ottawa,  111.
Nuckles, George  T., Marshall,

Mo.
Nye, Carlos. 751 Pasaje Cul-

len, Plaza  Lopez, Rosario,

Argentine  Republic,  South

America.
Oakes,  John  H.,  32  N.  State

St.,  Chicago,  111.
O'Brien, Francis R.. Flandors

Bldg.. Philadelphia, Pa.
O'Bryan, M. B., Columbia,

Tenn.
O'Connor,  Jessie,  4836

Winthrop  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
O'Neill,  T.  H.. 419  Central

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


1165


Oelrich,  Edw.,  Ellicott  Square.

Buffalo.  N. Y.
Ogle, John M., 699 Main St.,

Moncton,  N.  B.
Oglesby,  H.  L.. First  Nat'l

Bank  BIdg.,  Latrobe,  Pa.
Oium,  F.  N.,  Bent  Blk.,

Oshkosh,  Wis.
Oldham, Jas. E., 705 S. Clay

St.,  Hopkinsville, Ky.
Oldham, J. S., 38 Pike St..

Cynthiana,  Ky.
Oldham.  W. H.,  E.  Main  St..

Elkton, Ky.
Olds, E. M., Caswell Blk.,

Milwaukee,  Wis.
Oliphant,  Lorna  Alice,

Virginia, 111.
Oliphant, Pearl, Santa Cruz,

Cal.
Oliver. Clifford C. Medical

Blk.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Oliver, Mada, Yates Center,

Kans.
Oliver, W. Rollins, 522

Locust  St.,  Johnstown,  Pa.
Olmstead,  Harry  J.,  Colonial

Bldg-.,  Boston.  Mass.  _.,^^
Olmstead,  S.  Louisa,  220  Fifth

Ave., Clinton, la.
Olney, Belle H., Ennis Bldg.,

Ottumwa,  la.
Olson,  Hendrik,  Brighton  Ave.,

Rochester.  Pa.  ^  ,  „  ^n
Olson,  J.  Edgar,  Bushnell,  111.
O'Neill,  Addison,  9  North

Beach  St.,  Daytona.  Fla.
O'Neill, Thomas H., 507 5th

Ave..  New  York.  N.  Y.
Omeland, Sarah C, Rockwell

Bldg.,  Union  City,  Fa.
Opdycke, Florence M., 16i

State St., Augusta, Me.
Orr,  Arlowyne,  Missouri  Trust

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Orrison, Lovell A.. 421 b.

Morris  St.,  Waynesboro,  Pa.
Osborn, Harry C, 926 N.

Charles  St.,  Baltimore.  Md.
Osgood, Lizzie E., 150 North

St..  Pittsfleld,  Mass.
Ovens.  Albert  N.,  Pierik  Bldg.,

Springfield, 111.
Overfelt,  L.  B.,  Boulder.  Colo.
Overstreet. C. M., Hastings.

Mich.  ^  , ^,,

Overton. J. A.. Tuscola, 111.
Owen. Hearl L., 33 Franklin

St.,  Saratoga  Springs.  N.  Y.
Pace.  Carl  H.,  St.  Johns,  Ariz.
Padberg, Blanche M., 4205

Sanson!  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Page, G. Ralph, 147 Hancock

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Paine,  Caroline  L.,  Orange,

Cal.  ^_„,

Paine. Josephine H., 4731

Lake  Park  Ave.,  Chicago,

111-  .,, ^r

Painter,  E.  M.,  UnionviUe,  Mo.
Palm,  Dr.,  Thermopplis,

Wyo.
Palmer,  Chas. R., Chamber  of

Commerce, Pasadena, Cal.
Palmer,  Edward  B.,  Hagelstein

Bldg., Sacramento, Cal.
Palmer, Robert  I.,  Main  St.,

Silver  Creek,  N.  Y.
Panars,  F.  G.,  902  Gratiot

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Panars, Frederick G., 992

Gratiot  Ave.  and  Mack  Ave.,

Detroit,  Mich.
Parcels, M.  L.,  Katz  Blk., San

Bernardino, Cal.
Parenteau, Carrie  P., 27  East

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Parfltt,  John William,

Pembroke  Bldg.,  Manchester,

N.  H.


Parish,  Chester  W.,

Commercial  Bank  Bldg.,

Whitewater, Wis.
Park,  Robert  J.,  Midland  Ave.,

Midland,  Ont.,  Can.
Park,  R.  L.,  Trenton,  Tenn.
Parker,  E.  Tracy,  Corbett

Bldg., Portland, Ore.
Parker, F.  A., Ill  West Park

Ave.,  Champaign, 111.
I^arker, F.  D.,  New  York  Life

Bldg.,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
I'arker, George W., D. D. S..

Cor.  Main  St.  and  Broadway.

Madisonvillc,  Ky.
I'arker, John Watts. New

Ridge Bldg., Kansas City,

Mo.
Parker, J.  Page,  Bradentown,

Fla.
Parker,  Thomas  Theophilus,  36

Edward  St.,  Port-of-Spain,

Trinidad,  B.  W.  I.
Parker, Nellie Lowe Haynes,

516  Main  St.,  Mt.  Carmel,  ill.
Parker, Robt. Faulkner,

Listowel, Ont., Can.
Parks,  Fannie  Springmire,  303

Jefferson St., Winterset, la.
Parks,  Kent  A.,  Lebanon,  Mo.
Parlin, Ralph  B., 124  Mill St..

New  Bedford,  and  151  Circuit

Ave.,  Oak  Bluffs,  Mass.
Parmelee, Cora G., Pagosa

Springs,  Colo.
Parsons, C. L., Roswell, New

Mexico.
Paterson,  C.  Vernon,  Traders

Bank  Bldg.,  Toronto,  Ont.,

Can.
Patterson,  Arthur,  923

Jefferson  St.,  Wilmington,

Del.
Patterson, E. W., B. S.,

Courier-Journal  Offlce  Bldg..

Louisville, Ky.
I'atton,  Arthur  W.,  Nixon  Blk.,

Raymond,  Wash.
Paul,  Arthur  H.,  Court

Exchange  Bldg.,  Bridgeport,

Conn.
Paul.  J.  W.,  Eureka  Springs,

Ark.
Paul,  Theodore,  Tarkio,  Mo.
Paul, W. E., Mound City, Mo.
Paull,  G.  G.,  Granger  Bldg.,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Pauls,  Peter  D.,  Mountain

Lake, Minn.
Pauly,  G.  W.,  DeGraff  Bldg.,

Colorado  Springs,  Colo.
Pauly,  Walter  Frank,  Myres

Bldg.,  Kahoka,  Mo.
Payne,  Geo.  H.,  First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Columbus,  Mont.
Pearce, Jira  J., Mills Bldg.,

El  Paso,  Tex.
Pease, H. L., Bradley Bldg.,

Putnam,  Conn.
Pecinovsky, Albert E.,

Valley  Falls,  Kans.
Peck,  Eber  K.  I.,  Empire  Bldg.,

Niagara  Falls,  Ont.,  Can.
Peck, John  F., Cobb  Bldg.,

Kankakee,  111.
Peck, Martin W., 36 Cherry

St., Lynn,  Mass.
Peck, Mary E., Hicks Bldg..

San  Antonio,  Tex.
Peck, Paul M., Hicks Bldg.,

San  Antonio,  Tex.
Peck, Vernon W., First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Peebles,  R.  B.,  Kalamazoo  Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Kalamazoo,  i

Mich.  '

Peery,  Mary  W.,  Sumter,  S.  C.  !
Peet,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Monticello,  la.  !
Peet,  T.  J.,  Monticello,  la.  ^
Peirce, Chas.  E.,  Elkan-Gunst

Bldg.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.


Peirce, Josephine Llffring,

New  Savings  Bldg.,  Lima,  O.
Pellette,  Eugene  F.,  Post

Office Bide-., Liberal, Kans.
Pemberton, S. D., 1187 Dean

St.,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.
Pengra.  C. A., Selling  Bldg.,

Portland, Ore.
Penland,  Hugh  E., Berkeley

Nat'l Bank  Bldg., Berkeley,

Pennock, Daisy, Amarillo,

Tex.
Pennock, D. S. Brown, Land

Title Bldg., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Pennock, D. S. B., 1030 W

Alleghany Ave., Philadel-
phia, Pa.
Pennock, Lewis N., Amarillo.

Tex.
Pennock, P. H., Plattsburg,

Mo.
Penrose,  J. T., 216  North

Bright Ave., Whittier, Cal.
Perkins,  Helen  F., 1830

Columbia Rd., Washington,

D. C.
I'erkins, W. J., Lincoln Ave.,

Carbondale,  Pa.
Perrett,  Mary  E.,  Old  Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Spokane,

Wash.
Perrin, Geo. W., Empire

Bldg., Denver, Colo.
Perry, David C, Chula  Vista,

Cal.
Perry, Florence Jarman, 851

Dorchester  St.,  W.  Montreal,

Quebec,  Can.
Perry, Frances  A., 558 3rd

Ave.,  North  Troy,  N.  Y.
Perry,  Gale  C,  967  Elm  St.,

Manchester, N. H.
Peters,  Chas.  F.,  2167  Bedford

Ave.,  Brooklyn, N.  Y.
Petersen.  F.  J.,  Rumer  Blk..

Alliance.  Nebr.
Peterson,  Byron  S.,  Brandeis

Bldg., Omaha, Neb.
Peterson, A. W., Hawarden.

la.
Peterson, Chas. J. R.. Elkan-
Gunst  Bldg..  San  Francisco,

Cal.
Petei-son, Herbert  S., 1613 W.

1st St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Petery,  Wm.  E.,  1536  Diamond

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Petree,  Martha,  Agricultural

Bank  Bldg., Parjs, Kv.
Pettyplece, M. H., 123 Nepean

St., Ottowa, Ont., Can.
Pheils, Elmer T., Athenaeum

Chambers, 71 Temple Row,

Birmingham,  Eng.
Pheils, Ervin  H.,  Second  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Toledo,  O.
Phelan, Jennie E., Cherokee.

la.
Phelps, Fannie J., First Nat'l

Bank  Bldg., Escondido, Cal.
Phelps, Grace T., 635 W. 4th

St..  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Phelps,  John  W.,  Candler

Annex, Atlanta,  Ga.
Phelps, T. G., North

Washington St., Chillicothe.

Mo.
Phillippe,  H. T., 418 Main St.,

Vincennes, Ind.
Phillips,  Grant  E.,  619  State

St.. Schenectady, and  Blood

Bldg., Amsterdam, N. Y.
Phillips, Harry, Atlas Bide",

Salt Lake  City, Utah.
Phillips,  J.  Marshall,  De  Soto

Mo.
Phillips,  Keene  B.,  Hanselman

Bldg., Kalamazoo, Mich.


UfiC)


Pi'ufessiunal  Regis ter


Osleopalhx


Pickens, Evelyn, 2464 Diana

St.. Chicago, 111.
Pickler, E. C, 17 S. 6th  St.,

Minneapolis,  Minn.
Pierce Flovd,  German  Nat  1

Bank  Bld>.,  Hastings,  Nebr.
Pierce,  Nellie  M., Sefton  Blk.,

San  Diego,  Cal.
Piercy, Geo. F., Superior,

Nebr.  „„,  ..

Pietsch, Albert  C S?A  N.

Lavergne Ave., Chicago,  111.
Pigott, Adalyn  K., College  St.

Branch  Dominion  Bank

Bldg.,  Toronto,  Ont.,  Can.
Pike, Arthur  E., 249 Pine St..

Dong  Beach,  Cal.
Piper, Frederick A., Gibbs

Bldg., San Antonio, Tex.
Pippenger,  Cora, 603 Third

Ave., S., Glasgow, Mont.
Pitts, Eugene, Eddy Bldg..

Bloomington,  111.
Pixlov, Anna  D., Eckenrode

Bldg., Olney, 111.
Plant, Ernest  A.,  La  Jolla

Beach,  San  Diego,  Cal.
Piatt, Frances, Kalamazoo

Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Kalamazoo, Mich.
Piatt,  Reginald,  Barnesville,

Minn.  , ,  .,,,

Pleak, J. J.. Hillsboro 111.
Plummer, E. D., Alberta  Blk.,

Calerary, Alberta.  , .

Plummer,  F.  Myrell,  462  Main

St.,  Orange,  N.  J. ^ „ ,,
Pocock,  Hubert  John,  G.  P.  H-

Bldg.,  Toronto,  Ont.,  Can.
Pollev, A. A., Long Beach

Bank  Bldg.,  Long  Beach,

Policy,  Mabel  A.,  Long  Beach

Bank  Bldg.,  Long  Beach,

Cal
Pollock, Anna, 2006 Columbia

Rd., Washington, D. C.
Pollock.  C.  S.,  Still-Hildreth

Sanitarium,  Macon,  Mo.
Pollok.  Lissa  M.,  Merrill  Blk..

Muskegon.  Mich.
Pouting, Chas. H., Pasco,

Wash.  „

Pool,  W.  O.,  102  E.

Washington St., Fairfield,

Po^<fl'e,  I.  Chester,  204  High  St.,
Fall  River,  Mass. -  .

Pooler, Cyrus  P.. Cor.  Blair
and Broadway, Chapman,

Posey, T. W., Bowling Green,

TCv.'  ^.

Potter. Minnie F.. Pioneer

Bldg.. Seattle. Wash.
Poulter. Estelle  E.. South

Church St., McKinney,

Powel'l, Ernest S.. New York

Life  Bldg.,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Powell.  Geo.  Byer,  Union

Bldg..  Anderson Ind
Practorlus. Conrad, 926 17th

St. N. W., Washington.

D  '  C
Prater.'  Lenna  K., Springville.

N T
Pratt. Edwin J., Goddard

Bldg..  Chicago.  111.
Pratt. Edwin .T., 27 East

Monroe St., Chicago. 111.
Pratt, Frank  P., 255 Bath  St.,

Glasgow, Scotland.
Prescott,  Allen  Z.,  Majestic

Bldg.,  Loraine,  O.
Preston. Walter A.. 221 b.

Pacific  Blvd., (Huntington

Park), Los Angeles. Cal.
Price Emma  Hook, First  ana

Walnut  Sts..  Hutchinson,

Kans.


Price, Houston A., 228 Winn

St.,  Alexandria,  La.
Price.  J. A..  State  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg., Oklahoma  City. Okla.
Price, Kenneth V., Orange

Ave.,  Monrovia,  Cal.
Price, R. L., Merchants Bank

Bldg.,  Jackson,  Miss.
Price,  Vivian  H.,  Walker  Bldg.,

Covington, Tenn.
Prindle, Richard H.,

Henderson,  N.  C.
Printy, Sylvia. Avery  Bank

Bldg.,  Fort  Collins,  Colo.
Proctor, Arthur  C, Ashton

Blk.,  Rockford.  111.
Proctor.  Burton  H.,  15  Beacon

St.,  Boston.  Mass.
Proctor. Clark M.. M. D., 316

Main  St..  Ames,  la.
Proctor, C. W., Ellicott

Square. Buffalo.  N. Y.
Proctor,  Ernest  Richard,  27  E.

Monroe  St., Chicago,  111.
Proctor, Florence B., 6543

Ingleside Ave., Chicago, 111.
Proctor, Glenn J., 27 E.

Monroe  St.,  Chicago.  111.
Propst.  Zeri  Z.,  Nevada.  la.
Prudden.  M.  A.,  Emerine  Blk.,

Fostoria,  O.
Pugh. J. M.. Am. Nat'l Bank

Bldg., Everett, Wash.
Pugh,  Sarah  Frances,  Forsythe

Bldg.,  Fresno,  Cal.
Purdom,  Mrs. T. E.,  Westover

Bldg.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Purdom. Zudie  P..  Westover

Bldg..  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Purdy,  Frank  Leroy.  A.  M.,  M.

D..  9  Hakes  Ave.,  Hornell,

N.  Y.
Purdy,  Victor  W.,  459  Main  St.,

Stevens Point. Wis.
Purnell.  Emma,  Woolworth

Bldg..  Ijancaster.  Pa.
Quelle. R. J., Burlington. la.
Quick. Roy T.. Onawa.  la.
Quinn. Ella  X.. Jefferson

Theatre  Bldg.,  St.  Augustine,

Fla.
Quisenbury,  Mary,  Lyons,

Kans.
Rader,  Geo. B.. 14  W. 2nd  St.,

Seymour. Ind.
Ragland. Hugh S., San

Fernando, Cal.
Ramsey,  C.  J.,  Ritzville,  Wash.
Rand,  Carrie  Ellsworth, 146

Massachusetts  Ave.,  Boston,

Mass.
Rankin,  Florence,  Washington

Court House. O.
Ransden. Goodwin, Cor. Main

and  Broad  Sts..  Bridgewater,

Mass.
Rasmussen,  C,  Techout  Bldg.,

Des  Moines,  la.
Rau, Marie  Kettner, 178

Alexander St.. Rochester,

N. Y.
Rav, A. D., Cleburne, Tex.
Ray, Allen L.. 3021 North

Spaulding Ave., Chicago,

111.
Ray, Charles Dennis, First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., LeMars,

la.
Ray.  H.  F.,  Realty  Bldg.,

Charlotte,  N.  C.
Ray,  Mary  L.,  146  E. 2nd

Ave.,  Roselle,  N.  J.
Ray. T. L., Ft. Worth Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Ft.  Worth.  Tex.
Raynor, Eugene  E.. Dwight

Bldg.,  Jackson,  Mich.
Read, Miles  S., Sr., 1524

Chestnut St., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Read, Rachel. 23 Reinanzaka

St.,  Tokyo,  Japan.


Record, Blanche B., Farmers

&  Merchants  State  Bank

Bldg..  Washington,  la.
Rector,  Alburn  Parks,  6161

Broadway. Chicago, 111.
Rector. Charles  A., Odd

Fellows  Bldg., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Rector, Emma. E.  Main St.,

Benton Harbor, Mich.
Redfield, G. C, Rapid City,

S. Dak.
Reeks, Lloyd D., Bradbury

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Reese, D. H., The  Nicholas,

Toledo, O.
Reese, W. E., The  Nicholas,

Toledo,  O.
Reibold, Henry, Springfield,

O.
Rehfeld,  Hugo  A.,  Martin

County Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Fairmont, Minn.
Reid, Charles C, Majestic

Bldg.. Denver, Colo.
Reid. Geo. W., Slater Bldg.,

Worcester. Mass.
Reid. J. F., Trumbull Blk.,

Warren, O.
Reid. Marietta  Putnam, 114

Newtonville  Ave.,  Newton,

Reid, T. C. Demopolis. Ala.
Reid,  W.  A.,  c/o  Standard

School of Chiropractic and

Naturopathy, Davenport, la.
Reinecke, H. J.. 339 5th Ave.,

Pittsburgh. Pa.
Renshaw, Delia. 218 S.

Chestnut  St.,  Clarksburg.  W.

Va.
Rerucha, Victor  V., McCague

Bldg..  Omaha.  Nebr.
Reuter. Kathryn. Selling

Bldg..  Portland.  Ore.
Reynolds. Uel, 9 W. Union

Ave..  Bound  Brook,  N.  J.
Rezner,  Lurena,  Lahann  Bldg.,

Monmouth, 111.
Reznikov, Anna, Sullivan St..

Miami.  Ariz.
Rhoads,  C.  J.,  212  Washington

Ave., Union City, Tenn.
Rice,  Bert  H.,  Vinton,  la.
Rice. Helen  Elizabeth. 730  W.

22nd St., Oklahoma  City,

Okla.
Richards. Chas. L., 310 Penn

St., Huntington. Pa.
Richards. Clara S.. Masonic

Temple. Denver,  Colo.
Richards, Neta, 223 W. 1st

St.,  Bloomsburg,  Pa.
Richards, S. D., Nat'l Bank

BIdsr., Savannah, Ga.
Richardson, H.. 217 12th St..

Miami, Fla.
Richardson, Horace  J.. 824 N.

Tejon  St., Colorado  Springs,

Colo.
Richardson, H. S., 302 N.

Euclid  Ave.,  Ontario,  Cal.
Richardson, Ira F., 6th and

Park  Sts.,  Fremont,  Neb.
Richardson, Julia Elnora,

Auditorium Bldg.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Richardson.  Martyn  L..  Paul

Gale-Greenwood Bldg.,

Norfolk,  Va.
Riches, C. W., 2832 2nd Ave.

S.. Minneapolis,  Minn.
Richmond. Ralph P.. 95 Sip

Ave.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.
Rider,  Clarence  L., Stevens

Bldg.,  Detroit.  Mich.
Ridgway. Kathryn B..

Securities  Bldg..  Des  Moines,

Ta.
Riedmueller. J., 117 E. 86th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


11 07


Rieger, Daisy Deane,

Stapleton Blk., Billings,

Mont.
Rifenbark, R. D., Ortonvillo,

Minn.
Riley,  Benj.  F.,  1150  Chapel

St.,  New  Haven,  Conn.
Riley,  Mrs.  Chloe  C,  14  E.  31st

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Riley,  Geo. W., 14 E. 31st

St., New York, N. Y.
Rilev, H.  Li., Boulder,  Colo.
Riley, J. S., 151 Huntington

Ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
Riley,  Nannie  B.,  West  Bldg.,

Rome, Ga.
Ring,  Merritt  M.,  Ferguson

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Ringler,  Sanford,  Neville  Blk.,

Omalia, Nebr.
Rittmeyer, F.  W., 1137  Wash-
ington St.,  Hoboken,  N. J.
Roark,  H.  Alton,  787  Main  St.,

Waltham, Mass.
Roben,  M.  G.,  Nafl  Shoe  &

Leather Bank Bldg.,

Auburn,  Me.
Roberts, D. W.,  A. B., Hippee

Bldg., Des  Moines,  la.
Roberts,  Frederick  S.,  Lyric

Theatre  Bldg., King  City,

Mo.
Roberts,  Kathryn,  Bedford,  la.
Roberts,  W.  L.,  150  W.  Chelton

Ave.,  Germantown,  Pa.
Robertson,  L.  D., 10|  N.

Chestnut St., Seymour, Ind.
Robertson, O. C, 225 Allen

St.,  Owensboro,  Ky.
Robeson, David Loran,

Commerce Bldg., Kansas

Citv,  Mo.
Robinett,  John  H., First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Huntington,  W.

Va.
Robinson, Charles E., First

Nat'l Bank Bldg., Oakland,

Cal.
Robinson, J. W., 147 W. 11th

.St., Erie, Pa.
Robinson,  Lloyd  A., Fort

Pierce, Fla.
Robinson, Mina  Abbott,

Wright & Callender Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Robison, Alice A., 42

Dartmouth St., Springfield,

Mass.
Robson,  Ernest  W.,  12  B.  31st

St., New York, N. Y.
Robuck,  S.  v.,  Goddard  Bldg.,

Chicago, III.
Rockwell, D. B., Ferguson

Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Rockwell,  Loula  A.,  Legal

Bldg., Asheville,  N. C.
Roddy, Robert, Cor. Tremont

and 2nd Sts., Kewanee, 111.
Rodman, Warren  A.,

Washington  St.,  Wellesley

Hills, Mass.
Rogers,  Alfred  W., 1091

Boylston  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Rogers,  Cecil  R.,  544  \V.  157th

St. and 47  W. 34th  St..  New

York, N. Y.
Rogers, Effle  L.,  1091

Boylston St.. Boston, Mass.
Rogers,  E.  D.,  23  E.  North  St.,

New  Castle. Pa.
Rogers, Ida M., Mound City,

Mo.
Rogers, Vim. Leonard, 14 De

Hart  St.,  Morristown,  N.  J.
Rohacek,  William,  208  N.  Main

St.,  Greensburg, Pa.
Rolf, Harry G., McPherson,

Kans.
Romig,  Kathryn  A.,  Common-
wealth  Trust  Bldg..

Philadelphia, Pa.


Root,  Claude  B., Greenville,

Mich.
Root, Frank E., 222 W. 8tli

St..  Erie,  Pa.
Root,  J.  A.,  2124  Sassafras  St.,

Erie,  Pa.
Roper,  Dora  C.  L.,  R.  F.  D.  No.

1,  Box  188.  Oakland, Cal.
Rosch,  Fannie  Messersmith,  2!

Grand St., White Plains,

N. Y.
Roscoe, Percy E., New

England Bldg., Cleveland,

O.
Rose,  Chas.  A.,  Canton,  111.
Roseborough, A. L.. 209 3r<l

St.,  Anaconda,  Mont.
Rosebrook, Sophronia  T., Th(

Somerset, Portland, Me.
Rosenblatt, A., 2618 Germin

Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Ro.'is, Annie McRobie, Loring

Bldg., Riverside, Cal.
Rosengrant, Ella M., People'.^

Bank Bldg., Wilkes-Barre.

Pa.
Ross,  C.  A..  Neave  Bldg.,

Cincinnati.  O.
Ross. Catherine, Minot, N.

Dak.
Ross, J. A., State Nat'l Bank

Bldg., Oklahoma  City, Okla
Ross,  Simon  P., Land  Title

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Rossman, Walter F., 133 1

Broad  St., Grove  City,  Pa.
Rothfuss,  Carl  W., 71  Webb

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Rouse,  J.  M.,  State  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg.,  Oklahoma  City,  Okla.
Rowe, Eva Frances. 109 1 S.

Olive  St.,  West  Palm  Beach,

Fla.
Rowe,  Willard  S.,  109i  S.  Olive

St., West Palm Beach, Fla.
Rowse, Amy J. C, City Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Long  Beach,

Cal
Ruddy.  T.  J.,  321  S.  Hill  St.,

Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Rule, J. C, Alliance Bldg.,

Stockton, Cal.
Rundall,  Napoleon  B.,

Schluckebier-Gwinn  Bldg.,

Petaluma, Cal.
Rupert,  Ina  Fuller,  Kuhn

Bldg.,  Spokane,  Wash.
Rupp, Sarah W., Common-
wealth Bldg., Philadelphia.

Pa.
Rusk, Florence T.. Grand

Island, Nebr.
Russell,  Hugh  L.,  780  Elmwood

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Russell, Lucille S. Brand.

7465  Vine  St..  Chicago.  111.
Russell, Maud G., First Naf]

Bank Bldg., Ft. Worth,

Tex.
Russell,  Sarah  E.,  780

Elmwood Ave., Buffalo,

N. Y.
Ryan.  Thomas  J.,  416  E.  State

St., Trenton, N. J.
Rydell, Helma K., Ellendale,

N.  Dak.
Rydell,  John  S., 1700  3rd  Ave.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Ryel, Jennie Alice, 263

Terrace Ave., Hasbrouck

Heights,  N.  J.
Sackett. E. W., Bushnell

Bldg., Springfield, O.
Sage,  Norman  L.,  M. D.,

Lougheed Bldg., Calgary,

Alberta.
Salas, Albert M., 1112 Chest-
nut St.,  Philadelphia.  Pa.
Samuels,  Hugh  R.,  207  College

St., Toronto, Ont., Can.


Sanborn, Genoa A., 145

Hampshire St., Auburn, Me.
Sanborn, R. W., Hamilton

Bldg.,  Akron.  O.
Sands,  Ord  Ledyard, 6  E. 37th

St.,  New  York,  K.  Y.
Sandu.s,  Esther  E.,  M.  D.,  1638

Farragut  Ave., Chicago, 111.
Sanford, C. F., Hyde Blk.,

Pierre, S. Dak.
Sanford,  Vernon  T.,  Cheney,

Kans.
Sanner, Eugene E., 114J W

5th  Ave., Corsicanna, Tex.
Sartwell, J. Oliver, 221 Essex

St., Salem, Mass.
Sash. Elizabeth, Flood Bldg

Meadville, Pa.
Sash, Ida M.. Salisbury-Earl

Bldg., Idaho Falls, Idaho.
Sasvil,  E.  M.,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg.,  Montgomery,  Ala.
Satterlee, Nettie E., Mills

Bldg.,  El  Paso,  Tex.
Sauder, C. H., Temple Bldg.,

Brantford, Ont., Can.
Saunders, Rena Packer, Oak

Park, 111.
Savage, James  A., Barnard

Bldg., Wallace, Idaho.
Sawtelle, Claude D., Jackson

Blk.,  Miles City, Mont.
Sawyer, Bertha E., Rhodes-

Fanlow Bldg., Ashland,

Ore.
Sawyer, Charlotte Page,

Augusta  Trust  Blk.,

Augusta,  Me.
Sawyer,  H.  W.,  Main  Ave., N.,

Twin Palls, Idaho.
Saxer, C. R., 51st  and  Walnut

Sts., Philadelphia, Pa.
Say,  W.  F.,  1041  Genesee  Ave.,

Buffalo, N. Y.
Scaife, Martha  E., Franklin

Bldg., Springfield, 111.
Scallan, Agnes Waltrude,

Cable  Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Scamman, Earl, 100 Boylston

St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Schaeffer, Laura, 1926 Chest-
nut St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Shanne, Frank  B., 204 West

70th  St.,  New  York,  X.  Y.
Schaub, Minnie, Central Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Schenck,  Aletta, 74  N.

Arlington Ave.,  East

Orange, N. J.
Schenkelberger, P. C, 22  E.

Washington  St.,  Chicago,  ill.
Scher, Bertha, Hotel Palm

Beach,  Palm  Beach,  Fla.
Schilling, Frederic, Traders'

Bank Bldg., Toronto, Ont.,

Can.
Schmid,  Edward  L.,  E.  Patrick

St., Frederick, Md.
Schmidt, J. J., Turner Bldg.,

Tulsa,  Okla.
Schmitt, Frederick  L., 5733 S.

Boulevard, Chicago, 111.
Schmunk,  P.  B.,  Snitger  Bldg.,

Beaver,  Pa.
Schoettle, M. Teresa, 678  N.

Cottage St., Salem, Ore.
Schofield, Jennie M., 199

Hodge  Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Schofield, T. M., 210 Illinois

Ave., Mendota, 111.
Schoolcraft,  C.  E.,  Watertown,

S.  Dak.
Schoonmaker,  Amy  B.,

Warden  Bldg.,  Macon,  Mo.
Shornick, Harry L., Union

Blk., Prescott, Ariz.
Schramm, Margaret E.,

Consumers  Bldg.,  Chicago,

111.
Schrock, Joseph B., Scott's

Bluff, Nebr.


1168


Professional  Register


Osteopaths


Schumacher,  Erwin L., 5155
Haverford Ave., Philadel-
phia, Pa.
Schuster,  John  K.,  Stephenson

Bldg:.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.
Schwarzel, Frederick M., 431
S.  Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.
Schwegler, Emil  J.,  Shukert

Bldg-., Kansas  City,  Mo.
Schwentker,  Julius  Oswald,  N.
T. Armijo Bldg-., Albuquer-
que, N.  M.
Schwieger, James Scott, Sun

Bldg., Jackson, Mich.
Scobee,  Jeptha  D., Proctor

Bldg.,  Monroe  City,  Mo.
Scothorn,  Samuel  L.,  Wilson

Bldg..  Dallas,  Tex.
Scott,  George  D.,  71  Waller  St.,

San  Francisco,  Cal.
Scott,  H.  A.,  Frazier  Bldg.,

Aurora, 111.
Scott, Jane, Franklin  Bank

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Scott,  J.  H.  B.,  New  First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg., Columbus, O.
Scott, Katherine Mc L., New
First  Nat'l  Bank,  Columbus,
O.
Scott, Leila Gordon,

Petersburg, 111.
Scott, Leo  D., Salem  Bank  of
Commerce  Bldg.,  Salem,  Ore.
Scott, W. E., Wallace Bldg.,

Greenville, S. C.
Seaman,  Kent  L.,  Shoaff  Bldg.,

Fort  Wayne,  Ind.
Seaman, W. J., Vinson
Thompson Bldg.,
Huntington,  W.  Va.
Sears,  Harriet,  Ontario,  Ore.
Sears,  Pauline,  Vale,  Ore.
Seay,  T.  G.,  Burch  Bldg.,

Dublin,  Ga.
Seelye, E. A., Prudden Bldg.,  |

Lansing,  Mich.
Seibert,  Elizabeth  Grimes,  802  i

N.  41st  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Seitz,  Anna  E.,  333  W.  4th  St.,

Greenville, O.
Sellards  &  Sellards, 24  Peter-

boro St., Detroit, Mich.
Sellards.  Dorothy  D.,  24

Peterboro  St.,  Detroit,  Mich.
Sellards, Dr. T.  M., 24 Peter-
boro  St., Detroit, Mich.
Sellars, A. H., Citizens' Bank

Bldg., Pine  Bluff,  Ark.
Sellars, D. Frances, Berkeley
Nat'l  Bank  Bldg., Berkeley,
Cal.
Sellars,  P., Pine  Bluff, Ark.
Semon,  Raymond  R.,  Hitch-
cock Bldg.,  Port  Clinton,  O.
Semones,  Harry,  McBain  Bldg.,

Roanoke,  Va.
Semple,  Sydney  G.,  207  Elm  St.,

Westfleld,  N. J.
Semple,  William,  Eastern

Trust  Bldg.,  Bangor,  Me.
Settle,  Wm.  A.,  Berlin,  Wis.
Severy,  Chas.  L.,  Stevens  Bldg.,

Detroit, Mich.
Sexton, Wm. H., R. E. Trust

Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Seymour,  Arthur  T.,  Elks

Bldg., Stockton, Cal.
Shackleford, E. H., Chamber
of  Commerce  Bldg.,
Richmond,  Va.
Shackleford,  J.  R.,  Jackson

Bldg., Nashville,  Tenn.
Shackleford, J. W., Ardmore,

Okla.
Shafer,  Clem  LeRoy,  Holtes

Blk.,  Helena, Mont.
Shambaugh,  D.  Allen,  Coleburn

Bldg.,  Norwalk,  Conn.
Sharon,  Thos.  Lewis,  126  Main
St., Davenport, la.


Sharp, Fred J., Fournet  Blk.,

Crookston,  Minn.
Sharpe,  Elizabeth,  State  Bank

Bldg.,  Little  Rock,  Ark.
Shaw, A. B., 337i South Hill

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Shaw, Enos L., Old Court

House  Bldg.,  Vinita,  Okla.

Shaw, Minnie Avis, Walther

Wvmore Bldg., Jefferson

City,  Mo.

Shedd,  Lela  White,  Salida,  Cal.

Sheehan, Helen G., 687

Boylston  St..  Boston,  Mass.
Sheehan, Thos.  J.  G., 372
Ellicott  Square, Buffalo,
N.  Y.
Sheets,  Anna  Dillabough,

Farran Point, Ont., Can.
Sheldon, T.  W., 323 Geary  St.,

San  Francisco,  Cal.
Shellenberger,  N.  W., 229  N.
Genesee  St.,  Waukegan,  111.
Shenefelt, Ralph  B.,  Royal
Bank  Bldg.,  St.  Thomas,  Ont.,
Can.
Shenton, Lillian P., 15th and
Poplar Sts., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Shepard,  William  Burt,  146
Westminster  St.,  Providence,
R.  I.
Shepherd,  B.  P.,  Morgan  Bldg.,

Portland,  Ore.
Shepherd,  L.  K.,  Groton  Bldg.,

Cincinnati, O.
Shepherd,  R. S.,  Eitel  Bldg.,

Seattle, Wash.
Sheppard, R. A., Upper

Sandusky, O.
Sherburne, F.  W., 382

Commonwealth  Ave.,  Boston,
Mass.
Sherburne,  H.  K.,  Mead  Bldg.,

Rutland,  Vt.
Sheridan,  A.  Maude,  406  E.

Ave.,  Holdredge,  Nebr.
Sheridan,  Margaret,  Rose

Bldg.,  Cleveland,  O.
Sheriffs,  Mary,  10  Suffolk  St.,

W.  Guelph,  Ont.,  Can.
Sherwood,  A.  L., 205  N.  C. St.,

Madera, Cal.
Sherwood, Warren A., 142
North Duke St., Lancaster,
Pa.
Shibley,  Alice Patterson, 1869
Wyoming  Ave.,  Washington,
D.  C.
Shilling,  Grace  W.,  Storey
Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Shipman, Wesley C, 9

Thomas  St.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Shoemaker, Paul A., Porter
Blk.,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
Shorey, J. L., 129 E. Ridge

St., Marquette, Mich.
Short,  G. W., 3110  Logan

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Short,  G.  W..  159  N.  State  St.,

Chicago, 111.
Shove, Florence I., Mentor

Bldg..  Chicago,  111.
Shrum,  Mark,  262  Washington

St., Lynn, Mass.
Shugrue, Laura  F., 1801
Calvert  St., Washington,
D.  C.
Shugrue, Laura Fenwick,
Beacon Apts., Washington.
D.  C.
Shultz,  R.  W.,  Garner.  la.
Shuman,  Louise  D.,  Colorado

Bldg., Washington, D. C.
Shumate, Chas. R., Medical

Bldg., Lynchburg, Va.
Shupert, M. Elizabeth, 314 N.

Church St., Rockford, 111.
Sickles,  Norman, 1411  Walnut
St., Philadelphia, Pa.


Sickles, Norman I., 5118

Chester  St., Philadelphia,  Pa.
Sleburg,  C.  Q.  E.,  Box  182,

Stockliulm, Sweden.
Siegert, Anna Mae, Bond

Bldg., Mt. Vernon, 111.
Siehl, Walter H., 414 Coppin

Bldg., Cincinnati, O.
Sigler. Chas. M., 130 W. State
St., Trenton, and 42 Mercer
St., Princeton, N. J.
Sigler, W. D., 8 Lincoln Ave.,

Salem,  O.
Siler, O. A., Warren Nat'l
Bank Bldg., Warren, Pa.
Simmons. Margie  D., 647 E.
26th St.. Paterson, N. J.
Simons, James C, 381 1st St.,

Manistee, Mich.
Simonson, Mary Dorothea,

McMinnville, Ore.
Simpson, Robt. H.,
Independence,  la.
Simpson, Willie Perry, 212

Alabama Ave., Ruston, La.
Sims,  Mary  Lyle, 1711  Gervals

St., Columbia, S. C.
Sinclair, Arthur  D., 290
Danforth  Ave.,  Toronto,
Ont., Can.
Sinclair,  Julia  Sarratt,

Provident  Bldg.,  Waco,  Tex.
Sinden,  Harry  E.,  Bank  of  H.
Chambers,  Hamilton,  Ont.,
Can.
Singleton, R. H., The  Arcade,

Cleveland, O.
Singleton,  Robt.  O.,  Mineral

Wells,  Tex.
Sisson, Ada B., Santa Rosa,
Bank Bldg., Santa Rosa,
Cal.
Sisson,  Effle,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg.,  Oakland, Cal.
Sisson,  Ernest,  First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Oakland, Cal.
Skidmore,  J.  Walter,  117i  E.
Lafayette  St.,  Jackson,
Tenn.
Slack,  Annie  R.. 146

Westminster  St.,  Providence,
R.  I.
Slaght,  Nellie,  409  1st  Ave.  E.,

Newton,  la.
Slaker,  Helen  M., 347  Penn-
sylvania Ave.,  Aurora,  111.
Slater, Anna, 39 S. State St.,

Chicago, 111.
Slater, Walter  D., Forum
Bldg.,  Sacramento,  Cal.
Slater,  Wm.  P.,  39  S.  State  St.,

Chicago,  111.
Slaugh,  J.  Harry,  922 W.
Lehigh  Ave.,  Philadelphia,
Pa.
Slaughter.  Hattie  Garrod,

Leary Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Slaughter,  James  T.,  Leary

Bldg., Seattle,  Wash.
Slaughter,  Kate  C,  133  Geary

St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Slaughter, M. S., P. O. Bldg.,

Webb City, Mo.
Slavin, J. L., 214  N. 4th  St.,

Danville,  Ky.
Slough, John S., 531 E. AUe-
ghanv  Ave.,  Philadelphia,
Pa.
Small,  Mary  A.,  Garrison  Hall,

Garrison  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Smallwood,  G. S., 815  Lincoln
Place, Brooklyn, N. Y.
I  Smallwood, George S.. 110 W.
I 34th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Smiley,  Wm.  M., 136

Washington  Ave.,  Albany,
N.  Y.
Smith,  Alexander  H.,  16
Hartwell  St.,  Fitchburg,
Mass.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


1169


Smith,  Allie  M.,  Cherry  Bldg-.,

Eugene,  Ore.
Smith A. Mlnetree, 109 W.

Tabb  St.,  Petersburg-,  Va.
Smith, Arthur N., West

Webster,  N. Y.
Smith, A. M., Charlestown,

W.  Va.
Smith, Caryll T., Finch Bldg.,

Aberdeen, Wash.
Smith,  Chas.  S.,  Post  Bldg-.,

Battle  Creek,  Mich.
Smith, E. Claude, Mills Bldg.,

Topeka,  Kans.
Smith,  E.  Gertrude,  1438

Lafayette  St.,  Alameda,  Cal.
Smith, Elizabeth E.,  Newport,

Tenn.
Smith, Elmer H., Hillsboro

Nat'l Bank  Bldg.,  Hillsboro,

Ore.
Smith, E. Randolph, River

Falls,  Wis.
Smith, F. C, 207?= W. Center

St., Marion, O.
Smith, F.  J., 447 W. 62nd St.,

Chicago,  111.
Smith, F. P., 473 Washington

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Smith, Frank H., Kokomo,

Ind.
Smith, Frank  P., Caldwell

Commercial Bank Bldg.,

Caldwell, Idaho.
Smith,  Furman  J.,  447  N.  62nd

St.,  Chicago,  111.
Smith, Geo. E., Huntington

Chambers, Boston, Mass.
Smith, Geo. M., 50 S. Gratiot

St.,  Mt.  Clemens,  Mich.
Smith, Georgiana B., 420 S.

Grand Ave., Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Smith,  Grace  Leone,  27  E.

Monroe St., Chicago, 111.
Smith,  G. P.,  Humboldt, Tenn.
.Smith,  Helena  Ferris,  50  Park

St., Montclair, N. J.
Smith,  H.  R.,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg.,  Long  Beach, Cal.
Smith, Jennie E., 604 4th St.,

San  Bernardino,  Cal.
Smith,  J.  G.,  Blair,  Nebr.
Smith,  J.  Louise,  Masonic

Temple, Missoula, Mont.
Smith,  J.  M.,  Carrollton,  Mo.
Smith, Joseph  M., Security

Mutual Life Bldg., Lincoln,

Nebr.
Smith,  J.  Ralph.  661  Second

Ave. E., Owen Sound, Ont.,

Can.
Smith,  Karl  K.,  West  Mason

Bldg., Fort  Dodge,  la.
Smith, Leslie T>., 1060 Wilson

Ave., Chicago, 111.
Smith,  Mary  Jodie, 1050

Roland St., Memphis, Tenn.
Smith,  Orren  E.,  Traction

Terminal Bldg.,

Indianapolis, Ind.
Smith,,  Ralph Kendrick, 19

Arlington  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Thad.  T., 1742  Grand

River  Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Smith,  Van  B., Oliver  Theater

Bldg.,  Lincoln,  Neb.
Smith,  Walter  S.,  300  Coleman

St.,  Marlin,  Tex.
Smith, "SV. Arthur, 313

Huntington Ave., Boston,

and  Gloucester,  Mass.
Smith,  Wilbur  L..  1527  I  St.

N.  W.,  ^Vashington, D.  C.
Smith,  Wilbur  L., 816 15th  St.

N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Snare,  J. P.,  Hurd  &  Husband

Bldg., Modesto, Cal.
Snavely,  J.  W.,  204  E.  Main  St.,

Ottumwa,  la.


Snedeker,  O.  O.,  92  Broadway,

Detroit,  Mich.
Snell,  Daniel  E.,  Perkins  Bldg.,

Roseburg,  Ore.
Sniff,  Dana  G.,  Hammond
.  Bldg., Moose Jaw, Sask.,

Can.
Snow,  G.  H.,  Hanselman  Bldg  .

Kalamazoo, Mich.
Snowden, Cora, 323  Geary  St.,

San  Francisco,  Cal.
Snyder,  E.  J.,  Box  577,  Fulton,

111.
Snyder,  Cecil  Paul,  64  N.

Washington St., Titusville,

Pa.
Snyder,  Claude  H.,  I^eary

Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Snyder, J. C, Pennsylvania

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Snyder,  O.  .1.,  Witherspoon

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Sommer,  Charles,  Dyersburg,

Tenn.
Sorensen, Louis C, Second

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Toledo,  O
Sowers, Hoiner E., Hamory

Bldg., Sharon, Pa.
Spangler,  H.  L.,  157  Germain

St.,  St.  John,  N.  B.
Spates, Aughey Virginia, 216

S.  Walnut  St.,  Sherman,  Tex.
Spates,  Edwin  M.,  M.  D.,  Black

Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Spaunhurst,  J.  F.,  State  Life

Bldg., Indianapolis, Ind.
Spence,  Hugh  Davis,  Rosenour

Bldg., Frederick, Md.
Spence,  Thomas  H.,  16  Centra'

Park  W.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Spencer, B. M.. Fehl  Bldg.,

Lancaster, Pa.
Spencer,  Chas.  H., 318  Clay

St., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Spencer, Elizabeth  A., 133

Geary  St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Spencer, Jennie  C,

Hollingsworth  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Spencer,  Piatt  Rogers,  437

Main  St.,  Racine,  Wis.
Sperling, D. W., Chadron,

Nebr.
Sperry,  Myra  Ellen,  21  "W.

Victoria  St.,  Santa  Barbara,

Cal.
Spicer,  D.  F.,  Marion,  O.
Spiegle,  Andrew  A.,  290  Oak

St., Palestine, Tex.
Spies,  L.  Elizabeth.  1123  Troost

Ave., Kansas  Citv, Mo.
Spill,  Walter  B.,  2509

Perrysville  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,

Pa.
Spitler,  J.  F.,  Chronicle  Bldg.,

Augusta,  Ga.
Spohr,  C.  B.,  White  Sulphur

Springs,  Mont.
Spring-Rice, Theodosia M., 46

W.  96th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Springer,  Victor  L.,  Valparaiso,

Ind.
Squire, Roger N., 904 Main

St., Hartford. Conn.
Srofe,  Bessie  M.,  5  Melrose

Bldg., N. E. Cor. McMillan

and Melrose Aves., Cincin-
nati,  O.
Staff,  L.  E.,  El  Paso,  111.
Stahr, D.  M., Orr  Flesh  Bldg.,

Piqua,  O.
Stamps, Sarah R., Madison

Ave., Memphis, Tenn.
Stanford,  Elizabeth.  453  W.

63rd  St.,  Chicago.  111.
Stark, Gertrude, 406 Ever-
green Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y,,

and 124 Poplar St., Jersey

City  Heights, N. J.


^tark,  R.  A.,  Coutler  Bell  Blk.,

Hamilton,  Mont.
Jtarkwather,  Louise  A.,

Brighton Apartments,

Washington, D. C.
starkweather,  R.  L.,  Jeffer.son

Bldg., Goshen, Ind.
'tarr, George R., 45 AV. 34th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
•tarr, J. F., 71 Bloomfleld

Ave., Passaic,  X.  ,1.
State, Walter W., 584 Dela-
ware Ave.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Stauffer, Grace H., 281

Wohlers  Ave.. Buffalo, N. Y.
Stearne,  John  J., 3124  N. 15th

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Stearns, C. H., 1504 H St., N.

W.,  Washington,  D.  C.
Stearns, Maus W., 226 State

St., Schenectady, N. Y.
Steele,  Frederick  A.,  Jr.,  107

Summit  Ave., Summit, N. J.
Steele,  W.  W.,  560  Delaware

Ave.,  Buffalo,  N. Y.
Steffen, Edward E., B. Sc,

Dole  Bldg.,  Beatrice,  Nebr.
>telle,  Truman  Y.,  Safety

Bldg., Rock  Island, 111.
Stem, Harold L.,  Lewis Bldg.,

Canton, Pa.
Stephens,  Genoa  D.,  Centurv

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stephenson, C. I., 509 Main

St., Alamosa, Colo.
Stephenson, Jennie, Garden

City Bank Bldg,, San Jose,

Cal.
Stephenson,  Troy  C, 523  Main

St.,  Cedar  Falls,  la.
Stern,  G.  M.,  409  Lowry  Annex,

St.  Paul,  Minn.
5tern, Rose  T.,  Gibbs  Bldg.,

San  Antonio,  Tex.
Stetson,  A. G. C, 1825 Chest-
nut St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Stetzer, Emma M., 233

Langside St., Winnipeg,

Man., Can.
Stevens, C. Allen, 1361 Park

St., Alameda, Cal.
Stevens, Delia Kevil, Fulton,

Ky.
Stevens, C. B., 16 Hague St.,

Detroit, Mich.
Stevens,  Dr.  C. Burton, 617-18

New  Farwell  Bldg., Detroit,

Mich.
Stevens, Dorothy  J.,

Auditorium Bldg.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Stevens, Olinda K., 387 S.

Park  Ave., Pomona, Cal.
Stevenson, H.  A., 36 Kingman

St., St. Albans, Vt.
Stevenson, J. F., 205 W.

Church  St.,  Lock  Haven.

Pa.
Stewart, C. E., 64  Illinois St.,

Chicago  Heights,  and  15,426

Turlington  Ave.,  Harvev.

111.
Stewart,  Dr,  Carrie  B. Taylor,

421 Stevens Bldg., Detroit,

Mich.
Stewart, Frances G..

Exchange  Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.

Coeur d'Alene, Idaho.
Stewart, Frank J., M. D 8

North  State  St..  Chicago,  111.
Stewart, Fred W., 78 N.

Saginaw St., Pontiac, Mich.
Stewart,  H.  D.,  Claridon  Bank

Bldg., Fairburv. 111.
Stewart,  H.  D.,  Lloyd  District

Nat'l  Bank  Bldg.,  Washing-
ton, D.  C.
Stewart,  J.  Alvin,  524  14th  St

Denver,  Colo.
Stewart,  Lida  K.,  Carlisle,  Tnd.


1170


Professional  Register


Osteopaths


Stewart. Lloyd, 27 E. Monroe

St.. rhicaero. 111.
Stewart. Myra Cain, District
Nafl Bank  Bldg..  Wash-
ington,  D. C.
Stewart, W. W., Stevens

Bldf?., Detroit,  Mich.
Stiles, J. A., Cottinpham
Bldpr.,  Morganfleld,  Ky.
Still, Hon. Andrew  T., Kirks-

ville.  Mo.
Still. Benj. F., 428  N.  Broad

St.,  Elizabeth,  N. J.
Still, O. E.. Kirksville,  Mo.
Still,  Ella  D.,  Kirksville,  Mo.
Still Geo. A.. Kirksville. Mo.
Still,  HarrvM., Kirksville,  Mo.
Still,  Mabel J.,  Matthews
Bldg-.,  Milwaukee, Wis.
Still, S. S., Kirksville, Mo.
Stingle, Nettie Haight, Mason

Bldg-.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Stockwell,  Ida  B..  Mason  Bldg.,

Los  Angele-s,  Cal.
Stoddard. Kate, Richards

Bldg.,  Lincoln,  Nebr.
Stoeckel. Florence P., 5332
Wayne Ave., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Stoel,  Harry  M.,  Torrey  Bldg.,

Duluth, Minn.
Stoike, E. J.,  Auditorium

Bldg., Austin,  Minn.
Stokey, Laura E., 403 W.

Tuse  St.,  Canton,  O.  i

Stoltenberg, Anna  L.,

Brunswick, Mo.
Stone,  J.  C,  Tipton,  Ind.
Stone,  J.  N.,  315  Central  Office

Bldg.,  San  Antonio,  Tex.
Stoner, A. B., Chandler

Court,  Mesa,  Ariz.
Storer, Elbert, Gravity, Iowa.
Storey,  Robert  J.,  1118  N.  40th
St., Philadelphia, Pa., and
Hotel  Villa  Nova,  Atlantic
City,  N.  J.
Stout,  Oliver  G.,  Conover

Bldg., Dayton, O.
Stover, O. O., Harrison Bldg.,

Columbus,  O.
Stover,  S.  H.,  Northfield,  Minn.
Stow, Ella  K., 906 W. 2nd  St.,

Glendale, Cal.
Stow, John B., 78 N. 11th St.,

Newark,  N.  J.
Strater, J. Edward, 268

Westminster  St.,  Providence,

R.  I.  ,

Streeter, Wilfrid  A., 255 Bath

St.,  Glasgow,  Scotland.
Streight, Nettie B., 105 W.
Mechanic St.. Wapakoneta,
O.
Strickland,  Mrs.  O.  M.,  702

Main  St.,  Joplin,  Mo.
Strom,  C.  Rebecca,  Sioux

Falls,  S.  D.  ,,. ^

Strong,  Bessie  E.,  Ionia,  Mich.
Strong, L.  V., 25 7th  Ave.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Strong, Leonard  V., 25 7th

Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Strong, Mary Beatrice, Ionia,

Mich.
Strother, .T. O., First  Nat  1

Bank  Bldg., Winfleld, Kans.
Struble, Carl K., First  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Hastings,  Nebr.
Strum,  Charlotte,  Moore  Bldg.,

San Antonio, Tex.
Stryker,  Anna  K.,  Hotel

Endicott,  Columbus  Ave.  and
81st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Stryker, Wm. R., Lewiston,
Mont.  „ ,  ,.

Stuart,  Mary  V.,  1728  Franklin

St.,  Oakland,  Cal.
Studley, Harvey  L.,  C. &  W.
Bldg.,  Eugene,  Ore.


Stuver, Willis N., State Bank

Bldg., Marceline, Mo.
Sullivan, Clara E., 1142 Eoff

St.. Whooling, W'. Va.
Sullivan,  H.  B., 87  Valpey

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Sullivan,  J.  H.,  Goddard  Bldg.,

Chicago,  111.
Sullivan.  M.  J.. 564  Pacific  St.,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Sullivan, Richard, New
Bodinson Bldg., Kearney,
Nebr.
Sullivan. Tom  V., 1142 Eoff

St., Wheeling, ^V.  Va.
Sutcliffe,  Dora.  120  Lord  St..

Southport,  England.
Sutherland, Wm. G., Box 345,

Mankato, Minn.
Swan,  William  E..  King  Bldg.,

Johnson  City,  Tenn.
Swanson,  John,  M.  D.,  528

Walnut St., Cincinnati, O.
Sutton.  Emilie  Victoria,  1350
Sutter  St.,  San  Francisco,
Cal.
Swartz,  Joseph, 650  Minnesota

Ave., Kansas City, Kans.
Swartz, Laura  E., Carbondale,

111.
Swartz,  W.  C,  Odd  Fellows

Bldg..  Danville,  111.
Sweet,  B.  V.,  Rockland,  Me.
Sweet,  B.  W.,  136 W.  10th  St..

Erie, Pa.
Sweet,  H.  D.,  Glens  Falls
Insurance  Bldg.,  Glens  Falls,
N.  Y.
Sweet,  Ralph  A.,  146

Westminster  St.,  Providence,
R.  I.
Swift,  A.  A.,  Claremore,  Okla.
Swift,  Floyd  Jay,  Bank  of
Commerce  Bldg.,  High  Point,
N.  C.
Swift, Irvin H., Otten Blk.,

Snohomish, Wash.
Switzer,  C.  R.,  Rood  Bldg.,
■' Evanston,  111.
Switzer, R. H., 5229 Spruce

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Swope,  Chester  D.,  The
1 Farragut,  Washington,  D.  C.
1  Symonds, Wesley E., 227i N.
Washington Ave., Lansing,
Mich.
Tallant, Kathryn G., 359
Boylston  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
iTalmadge,  Kathryn,  Stonelelgh
I Court,  Washington,  D.  C.
I  Tanna,  Rose,  Omaha  Bank
I Bldg.,  Omaha,  Neb.
(Taplin,  George  C,  581  Boylston
' St..  Boston.  Mass.
Tarr,  Alfred  J.,  Wilson  Bldg.,

Dallas Tex.
'  Tarr, Joseph W., Lidgerwood,

N.  D.
JTasker,  Anna  E.,  2010  Lemoyne

St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
!  Tasker.  Cora  N..  Auditorium
I Bldg., Los  Angeles, Cal.
Tasker.  Dain  L.,  Auditorium
1 Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Tate.  Edwin  W.,  Kinney  Bldg.,

Newark, N. J.
Taylor, Arthur, Torinus Blk.,

Stillwater, Minn.
Taylor,  Chas.  E.,  Hawley  Blk.,

Beaver  Dam,  Wis.
Taylor,  Fred,  Lewiston,  Mont.
1  Taylor, Fred Chas., Empire
I State  Bldg.,  Spokane, Wash.
;  Taylor,  John  C,  R.  P.  Mission,
I Patalia,  North  India.
■Taylor, Leona, 2447  N.  McCall
I Ave.,  Selma,  Cal.
Taylor, Lily F., Northfield,
Minn.


Taylor, M. E., Woonsocket,

S. D.
Taylor,  Pruella,  10  Troy  Rd.,

Schenectady,  N.  Y.
Taylor,  S.  L..  A.  M.,  M.  D..  541

43rd St., Des  Moines, la.
Taylor,  S  P..  Norfolk  Ave.,

Norfolk, Neb.
Taylor,  Warren.  Hopkins  Blk.,

Santa  Barbara,  Cal.
Teall,  Chas.  C,  Fulton,  N.  Y.
Tebbetts,  George  \V.,  382  S.
Highland  Ave.,  Pittsburgh,
Pa.
Tedf'ord,  A.  C.  Kelley  &  Moyer

Bldg..  Bluefleld.  W.  Va.
Tedrick. C. A., Greensburg,

Kans.
Teeter.  Fred  B.,  Davenport,

Wash.
Temple.  Stephen.  Mills  Bldg.,

Topeka, Kans.
Templeton,  W. F.,  Bramble

Blk..  Havre.  Mont.
Thawely.  Edgar  Q..  Woolner

Bldg..  Peoria,  111.
Thayer, H.  A., 200 Park Ave..

Rochester,  N. Y.
Thiele,  F.  G.,  Holme.s  Bldg.,

Galesburg, 111.
Thomas, Paul Revere, Real
Estate Trust Bldg.,
Philadelphia, Pa.
Thomas, R. M., 726 S. Judson

St.,  Ft.  Scott,  Kans.
Thomas,  Walton  T., Fidelity

Bldg.,  Tacoma,  Wash.
Thomasson,  Wm.  S.,  Rose
Dispensary  Bldg.,  Terre
Haute,  Ind.
Thompson, Almedia E.,

Pomeroy,  Wash.
Thompson. Clyde L., Citizens'

Bank  Bldg..  Alameda.  Cal.
Thompson. C. E., Utica  Bldg.,

Des  Moines,  la.
Thompson,  D.  Orval,  Sycamore,

111.
Thompson,  Elizabeth  M.,  211  E.

4th  St.,  Ottumwa,  la.
Thompson,  Emma  Wing,  906

State  St.,  Schenectady,  N.  Y.
Thompson, Garrett E.,

Elmwood. 111.
Thompson, H. B., Walla

Walla,  Wash.
Thompson, J. W., Charlebois

Bldg.,  Watertown,  N.  Y.
Thompson, Lillian, Salem, 111.
Thompson, Margaret S., 68
Ransom St., Grand Rapids,
Mich.
Thompson, Nora Lee, P. O.

Blk., Littleton, N. H.
Thompson, Theo. G., Mercan-
tile Bldg.,  New  Castle,  Pa.
Thompson, W. H., 946 Main

St.,  Riverside,  Cal.
Thompson, Wm. L., 44 S.
Main  St.,  Oakfleld.  Wis.
Thorburn, Thos. R.. 34

Jefferson  Ave..  Brooklyn, N.Y.
Thore.  Christopher  D.,  100

Boylston St., Boston, Mass.
Thornbury,  H.  A.,  Sanford

Bldg., Bridgeport, Conn.
Thornley, Harry Earle, State

College.  Bellefontaine,  Pa.
Thornton,  F.  R.,  South  Range,

Wis.
Thorsen.  Marie,  Wright  &
Callender  Bldg.,  Los
Angeles,  Cal.
Thurman, E. L., 285 Jackson

St.,  Americus, Ga.
Thurman, Stella C, 285
Jackson  St.,  Americus,  Ga.
r  Thwaites, Carrie F.,

Consolidated  Realty  Bldg.,
Los  Angeles,  Cal.


Osteopaths


Professional  Register


1171


Tice.  Elbert  A.,  Shukert  Bldg-.,

Kansas City, Mo.
Tleke, E.  M., 414  Washington

Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Tillyer,  Belle, Bozeman,  Mont.
Tindall,  Amos  Willard,

Masonic  Temple,  Hartford

•City,  Ind.
Tinges,  Geo.  H.,  1524  Chestnut

St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Tisdale, R. F., 3329 Grove St.,

Oakland,  Cal.
Titsworth,  R.  F.,  400  W.

Cumberland St., Knoxville,

Tenn.
Titus, Frank  C,  219  N.  Weber

St., Colorado Springs, Colo.
Townsend, Geo. A., Chico  Hot

Springs Hotel, Emigrant,

Mont.
Todd,  Elizabeth  H.,  819

Kansas  Ave.,  Topeka,  Kans.
Towner,  Daniel  D.,  16  E.  Main

St.,  Port  Jervis,  N.  Y.
Townsend,  Gertrude,  884  Mass.

Ave., Cambridge,  Mass.
Trabue,  J.  A.,  Syndicate

Bldg.,  Pittsburgh,  Kans.
Tracy,  Elvire,  78  Warburton

Ave.,  Yonkers,  N.  Y.
Tracy, Emilv F., 2124 Arch

St.,  Philadelphia, Pa.
Tracy,  H.  L,a  Monte, Northern

Bank  Bldg., Seattle, Wash.
Trask,  Dr. H.  D., 603 Scherer

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Traughber, Wm. F.,

Hollingsworth  Bldg.,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.
Traver,  Ethel  K., 203  W. 85th

St., New  York, N. Y.
Treat, Clara  Leila, 637 S.

Evergreen Ave., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Treble,  John  M.,  Greig  Blk.,

Corning, and 10 E. William

St., Bath, N. Y.
Treichler,  C.  Landis,  Horn

Bldg., Corry, Pa.
Treshman, Frederic W., 301

Lafayette  Ave.,  Brooklyn,

N.  Y.
Trevitt,  Cora  W.,  Monroe,  Wis.
Trevitt, Edith, Commercial &

Savings  Bank  Bldg.,  Monroe,

Wis.
Trigg,  Oliver  S., Broken  Bow,

Nebr.
Trimble, Guy C, Montezuma,

la.
Trimble,  H.  H.,  Hotel  Norman

Annex, Moultrie, Ga.
Triplett, L. B., 10 Chestnut

St., Springfield, Mass.
Triplett, Neva  T., 219 W.

Broadway,  Enid,  Okla.
Trowbridge, L. R., Dixon, III.
True,  W.  F.,  841  Ave.  C,

Bayonne,  and  26  Church  St.,

Montclair, N. J.
Trueblood,  John  O.,  Wilhelm

Bldg., Traverse City, Mich.
Tucker,  A.  R.,  Masonic  Temple,

Raleigh,  N. C.
Tucker,  Ernest  E.,  344  W.  85th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Tucker,  S.  W.,  Durham,  N.  C.
Tull, Geo., Greenfield, Ind.
Tunnell,  H. E.,  Clyde,  Kans.
Tupper, Maud, Hitchcock

Bldg., Nashville, Tenn.
Turfler,  P.  A.,  Rensselaer,  Ind.
Turkington, Jos. C, 2841 N.

9th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Turley,  H.  I.,  302  W.  Momoe

St., Mexico, Mo.
Turnbull,  J.  M.,  Glenwood,  la.
Turner,  Annie  S.,  305  Bellevue

St.  N.,  Seattle,  Wash.


Turner,  Arthur  R.,  424  Central

Ave., St. Petersburg, Fla.
Turner, F. Muir, Nat'l Bank

Bldg.,  Savannah,  Ga.
Turner,  L.  C,  673  Boylston  St.,

Boston, Mass.
Turner, Nettie C, Land Title

Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Turner,  Thomas  E.,  Land  Title

Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Turney,  Dayton, Mason Bldg.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Tuttle,  A.  Marsh, 1410 Hope

St., South  Pasadena, Cal.
Tuttle,  Arthur  H.,  1124  Central

Ave.,  Wilmette, 111.
Tuttle,  John  C,  Lillis  Bldg.,

Kansas  City, Mo.
Tuttle, Lamar K., 18 E. 41st

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Tuttle,  R.  E.,  Hicksville,  O.
Tuttle,  Mayme  K.,  743

Congress  St.,  Portland,  Me.
Twadell,  A.  B.,  15J  W.  Madison

St.,  lola,  Kans.
Twitchell, Ionia  C, Taylor

Bldg., Morristown, Tenn.
Udall, Pearl, St. Johns, Ariz.
Ulmer,  Ida,  Valdosta,  Ga.
Underwood, Evelyn K., 347

5th  Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Underwood, Horton  Fay, 44

Court  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Underwood,  J.  A.,  Realty  Bldg.,

Elmira,  N.  Y.
Underwood, Ralph E., 1 Main

St.,  New  Milford,  Conn.
Upton, Charles A., New York

Life  Bldg.,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Urban,  H.  L.,  West  Water  St.,

Decorah,  la.
Ure,  Wm.  R.,  910  Quarrier  St.,

Charleston,  W.  Va.
Usher,  Jennie  M., 71  Haight

St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Ussing,  Agnes,  Cranford  Trust

Bldg., Cranford, N. J.
Utley, Ralph E., 820 S. Blvd.,

Oak  Park,  111.
Vallier,  A.  E.,  Columbus,  Nebr.
Van Arsdale, Chas. O., 27 E.

Monroe  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Vance, A. T., 162 S. Classell

St.,  Orange,  Cal.
Vance. E. O., Fayette Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Lexington,  Ky.
Vance,  J.  A., 4064  Latona

Ave.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Vanderburgh,  Rose  B.,  Blkan-

Gunst  Bldg.,  San Francisco,

Cal.
Vanderburgh, W. W., Elkan-

Gunst  Bldg., San Francisco,

Cal.
Van  de  Sand,  W.  B.,  Montrose,

Pa.
Van Deusen, Harriet L.,

Sanford  Bldg.,  Bridgeport,

Conn.
Van  Doren,  Mae  Hawk,  700  W.

North Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Van  Horne,  Helen,  14  W.

Washington  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Vann,  Grace  C,  119  S. 5th  St.,

Kirksville, Mo.
Van  Osdol,  Oscar,  Junction

City,  Kans.
Van  Patten,  E.  M., 1st  Nat'l

Bank  Bldg.,  Ft.  Dodge,  la.
Van  Ronk, Chas. J., 640 E.

Chelton Ave., Philadelphia,

Pa.
Van  Velzer, Kathryn, 1

Washington St., Hinsdale,

111.
Van  Vleck,  A.  E.,  Paw  Paw,

Mich.
Van Winkle, Arthur  J.,

Philllpsburg,  Kans.


i  Vastine,  Harry  M.,  109  Locust

St.,  Harrisburg,  Pa.
Vastine,  Herbert,  523  Franklin

St., Reading, Pa.
Vaughan, Frank M., 359

Boylston  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Veazie,  Ella  B.,  Commerce

Bldg.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Ventress,  K.  C.,  Monmouth,  111.
Vernon,  Alonzo  W., 8  Tlbbitts

Ave., Bradford,  Pa.
Viehe, H., Randolph Bldg.,

Memphis,  Tenn.
j  Vincent,  A.  L.,  Mclntyre  Bldg..
I Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
■  Volkmann, T. J. O., 5608

Monte  Vista  St.,  Los  Angeles.

Cal.
Vredenburgh,  N. E., Forsythe,

Mont.
Vorhees,  J.  Martin,  M. D., 114

Allegan St., W. Lansing.

Mich.
Vreeland, John A.,

Agricultural Bank Bldg.,

Pittsfleld, and Great

Barrington, Mass.
Vye,  Amy  J., c/o  Mansion

House,  South  Poland,  Me.
Vyverberg, Kryn T., Taylor

Bldg., Lafayette, Ind.
Wade, G. M., Andruss Bldg.,

Minneapolis, Minn.
Wadsworth, James S., 776

Congress St., Portland, Me
Wagoner, Elizabeth E.,

Cherry Flats, Jacksonville,

Wakefield, Wm. H., Union

Savings Bank Bldg.,

Oakland, Cal.
i  Wakeham,  Jessie  A.,  Dearborn

Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Wakeham, Jessie  A., 46 West

Division  St.,  Chicago,  111.
Waldo, Wm. E., Northern

Bank  &  Trust  Bldg.,  Seattle.

Wash.
Walker, Clifford E., Forest

Grove Nat'l Bank Bldg.,

Forest  Grove, Ore.
Walker, Cornelia  A., Hotel

Martinique,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Walker, Daisy E., Mercantile

Bldg., Quincv, 111.
Walker,  Frank  P.,  Ballinger

Bldg., St. Joseph, Mo.
Walker, J. Jay, Medina, N. Y
Walker, Joseph Nelson, 102

S. Marshall St., Burlington,

la.
Walker,  L.  H.,  Olympia  Bldg.,

Ellensburg, Wash.
Walker, L. Willard, 24 Stone

Rd., Belmont, Mass.
Walker, Mary W, 288 Union

St., New Bedford, Mass.
Walker,  O.  M., 92  W.

Blackwell  St.,  Dover,  N.  J.
Walker, Robert I., 288 Union

St., New Bedford, Mass.
Walkup, Mary  B., 105

Campbell  Ave.,  Roanoke,  Va.
Wall,  Clarence  H.,  184  Elwood

Ave., Providence, R. I.
Wallace, Iva Still, Rowell

Bldg., Fresno, Cal.
Wallace, John W., 1703 N.

17th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Wallace, M. R., 1401 1st Ave.,

Oakland, Cal.
Wallace,  Paul  B.,  Tomah,  Wis.
Wallace, Ralph C,  Benedict

Blk.,  Brockport,  N. Y.
Wallace, Wilford Hall, 37 W.

Elm St., Brockton and 48

Centre  St.,  Nantucket,  Mass.
Wallace, Zilla  M., McPherson,

Kans.
Waller, Granville B., 411 W.

Chestnut  St.,  Louisville,  Ky.


1172


Professional  Register


Osleopatlis


AValler.  Olive  C,  Cockerline  &
Wetherbee  Bldgr.,  Eugene,
Ore.
Wallin, A. Carolina, Sussex,

N.  J.
Walling-, Bessie B., 21

Whittlesey Ave., Norwalk,
O.
Walmsley, Asa  Gordon, Bank
of Commerce Bldg.,
Peterborough, Ont., Can.
Walmsley, R., Thatcher I'.lk.,

Pueblo, Colo.
Walsworth, Chester B.,
I>ankei'.shim  Bldg-.,  Los
Ang'eles, Cal.
Walters, Mary, 1211 Mora
Villa  Ave.,  Santa  Barbara,
Cal.
Walton,  R.  W.,  U.  S.  Nat'l
Bank Bldpr., Salem, Ore.
Wanless, Richard, 347 Fifth

Ave., New  York,  N.  Y.
Warburton, Otis C, 56
Charlotte St., Rochester,
N. Y.
Ward, Daniel C, 31.50 Log-an

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Ward, Maud Elizabeth,

Steamboat  Springs, Colo.
Warden,  Eva  R., 2131

Broadway, New York,  N. Y.
Warden, Sarah C, 510 2nd

Ave.,  Asburv Park, N. J.
Warden,  Alice  J.,  Slater  Bldg.,

Worcester, Mass.
Warner,  Clara  Lathrope,  910
W'ashington St., Vancouver,
Wash.
Warner,  G.  F.,  6565  Yale  Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
Warner, Maude L., 2712

Woodburn Ave., Cincinnati,
O.
Warner,  S.  E.,  Board  of  Trade

Bldg-., Indianapolis, Ind.
Warns, Howard O., 720 E.

North Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Warren, E. D., Savonbuig,

Kans.
W'arren, Geo. S., 18 Pearl St.,

Kingston,  N.  Y.
Warren, S. F., 1112 Chestnut

St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Washburn,  A.  S.,  14  W.  Wash-
ington Blvd.,  Chicago,  111.
Waters, A. R., 4th and

Broadway, Chico, Cal.
Waters, Clara Sherwood, 2223
18th  St.  N.  W.,  Washington,
D.  C.
Waters, Eugene C, Foulk

Blk.,  Chillicothe,  O.
Waters, I>ulu I., Fontanet
Court, Washington, D. C.
Watkins,  Edwin  Phillips,
Union  Bldg.,  San  Diego,
Cal.
Watkins,  Homer  Earle, 43 W.
Western  Ave.,  Muskegon,
Mich.
Watkins, Lewi.s, 149 N. 52nd

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Watson,  Carl  L., KiO

Huntington Ave., Boston,
Mass.
Watson,  Georgiana,  2
Harewood  PI.,  Hanover
Square, W., London, Eng.
Watson, Ruth, First Nafl

Bank.  Bldg-., Virginia, Minn.
Watson, S. Gertrude, 53

Central St., Lowell, Mass.
Watson, T. J., Hotel

Woodward,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Weaver, Anna A., Trinity

Court,  Boston,  Mass.
Weaver,  Calvin  R.,  Decatur,

Ind.
Weaver-Wlngerter, Charlotte,
186  S.  Union  St.,  Akron,  O.


Weaver,  Ida  M.  Jayne,  People's

Bank  Bldg.,  Seattle,  Wash.
Weaver, Julia  Blanche, 454 S.
Fig-ueroa  St.,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.
Webb. H. D., 408 Main St.,

Orang-e,  N.  J.
Webb. Mary  L., Care  of
Torbett Sanitarium, Marlin,
Tex.
Weber, Aucher C, Tarbox

Bldg., Freeport, 111.
Weber,  Caroline  L.,  Century

Bldg.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Webster,  Frederick  A.,  47  34th

St.,  New  York  N.  Y.
Webster, Geo. V., Strickland

Bldg.,  Carthage,  N.  Y.
Weddell,  Wm. R.,  Sedro

Wooley,  Wash.
NVeed,  Loring,  Carter  Block,

Andovei-,  Mass.
W'eed,  O.  G.,  Corby  Forsee

Bldg.,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
\Veegar, Percy L., 1721 Main

St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Weeks, C. H., Jupiter, Fla.
Weeks, Roland F., Parrott &

Smith Bldg., Owatonna,

Minn.
^Veir, T. P., Winterset, la.
Welssberg, E. B., 515 Spruce

St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Weitzel, Walter J., 374 Main

St.,  Springfield,  Mass.
Welch, O. F., 724 N. 20th St.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Welch, R. R., 207  S.  Randolph

St., Macomb, 111.
Wells, B. F., 2636 E. 75th St.,

Chicago, 111.
Wells, Emma  R.,  City  Bank

Bldg.,  Wheeling,  W.  Va.
XVells, Geo. A., Tippett Bldg.,

Greenville, Tex.
AVells, Hugh E., Grenola,

Kans.
Wendell, Canada, Woolner

Bldg., Peoria,  111.
W'endelstadt, Edward F. M

624  W. 4th  St.,  Los  Angeles,

Cal.
Wendorff, Herman A., 122 S.

Ashland Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Wenger, H. U., 804  Court  St.,

Fulton, Mo.
Wenger, Joseph, 19 E.  Vine

St.,  Mt.  Vernon,  O.
Wentworth, Lillian P., The

Thorbus Apartments, San

Diego,  Cal.
Were, Arthur E., 60 S. Swan

St., Albany, N. Y.
AV^erkheiser, Amos E., Ryland

Bldg., San Jose, Cal.
Wernicke, Clara, Haddon

Hall, Cincinnati, O.
West, H.  C, 10  Highland

Ave.,  Yonkers,  N. Y.
West, Ralph L., 47 Hertford

St.,  London  W.,  England.
West, William, 75 Park Ave

New  York,  N.  Y.
Westendorf, Katharine,

Kittredge Bldg., Denver,

Colo.
W'estfan, De Witt  C,  Munn

Bldg., Coshocton, O.
VV^estfall, E. H.,  Niles  Bldg.,

Findlay, O.
Wetcho,  C.  Fredrik,  30  Church

St., New York, N. Y.
Wotmore, Fi-ancis W., Oak

Hall, Pawtucket, R. I.
Whalley, Irving, Land Title

Bldg., Philadelphia, Pa.
Whallon, Grace, State Bank

Bldg., Little Rock, Ark.
Wheeler,  C.  G.,  32  N.  Main  St.,
Brattleboro,  Vt.


Wheeler, G. A., 416

Marlborough St., Boston,
Mass.
Wheeler, G. D., 101 W.

Emerson St., Melrose, Mass.
Wheeler, Glenn B., Huston
Bldg., Ludington, Mich.
Wheeler, Sarah E., Lakeland,

Fla.
Whibley, G. Morrison, 700

Congress St., Portland, Me.
\Vhisler,  C.  A.,  Denton,  Md.
Whitacre, H. S., Martinsburg,

W.  A'a.
W^hitaker, L. R., 687

Boylston  St.,  Boston,  and  43
Church St., Winchester,
Mass.
Whitcomb, C. H., 392 Clinton

Ave., Brooklyn,  N. Y.
Whitcomb,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  392
Clinton  Ave., Brooklyn,
N.  Y.
White, Annette M., 514 W.

114th St., New York, N. Y.
White, Ernest C, 505 5th

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
White, Frank J., Marshall

Bldg., Redondo Beach, Cal.
White,  J.  L.,  Bank  of  Toronto
Bldg., St. Catherine, Ont.,
Can.
White, J. S., Chamber of
Commerce Bldg., Pasadena
Cal.
White, M., Patterson Bldg.,

Mobile, Ala.
W^hite, Mary N., 473

Washington  Ave., Brooklyn,
N.  Y.
White,  Nellie  Connor,  431  S.

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
AVhithead, Harriet  A.,

Wausau,  Wis.
AVhitesell, N.  Jean, 319 Union

Ave., Elizabeth, N. J.
AVhiteside,  Sunora  L.,  255
University  Ave., Lebanon,
Tenn.
Whitfield,  Henry  A.,  Granite

Bldg.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.
AVhiting,  Anna  E.,  Auditorium

Bldg.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
WHiiting, Lillian M., South

Pasadena, Cal.
Whitmore,  J.  P.,  Savings  Bank

Bldg., Marquette, Mich.
Whitmore, O. M., Still-
Hildreth  Sanitarium,  Macon,
Mo.
^Vhitney,  C.  L., 714  Edgeware

Rd., Los Angeles, Cal.
Whitney, Isabella T., Upper

Montclair, N. J.
Whittemore, A. C, 427 Main

St., East  Aurora,  N. Y.
Whittemore, F. G., Hamburg,

N.  Y.
Wiggins,  W.  Harold,  Boonton,

N.  J.
Wilcox, Frank F., 108
Crescent  Ave., Plainfleld,
N.  J.
Wilderson, W. H., Circleville,

O.
Wildsmith, Thos. E., Park-
way Bldg.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Wiles,  A.  M.,  Jerseyville,  111.
Wiley, Andrew S., Brisbane

Bldg.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.
Wilke, Geo. C, 146 S.
College Ave., Ft. Collins,
Colo.
Wilkens,  J.  H.,  McMinnvllle,

Ore.
Wilkes,  Grace  E. Stott,  Box

304,  Seattle,  Wash.
Willard, Alice N., Paul Gale-
Greenwood  Bldg.,  Norfolk,
Va.


I'hrenologisls
Physical  CuKurisIs


Professional  Register


1173


Willard.  Asa,  First  Nat'l  Bank

Bldg.,  Missoula,  Mont.
Willard, Earle S., Stock

Exchange  Bldg-.,

Philadelphia,  Pa.
Willcox,  Sylvester  \V.,  Bacon

Blk.,  Oakland,  Cal.
Willett, Nora  E.,  Mercantile

Blk.,  Aurora,  111.
VV^illiams,  A.  J.,  Citizens'  Bank

Bldg-., Wilmington, O.
Williams, C. Arthur, 41 W.

Chicago  St.,  Coldwater,

Mich.
Williams,  C.  Ernest,  Patterson

Blk.,  Flint,  Mich.
Williams, Clara  H., 822 Wood

St.,  Wilkinsburg-,  Pa.
Williams,  Ethyl  M.,  319  N.

Broadway,  Hasting-s,  Mich.
Williams, Eyan, 1024 4th St.,

Santa.  Monica,  Cal.
Williams, E. D., 201 E.

Sunbury St., Shamokin, Pa.
Williams, Kate, State Life

Bldg-,. Indianapolis, Ind.
Williams  Kate  G., 57 B.

Jackson  Blyd.,  Chicago,  111.
Williams, L,., Flanders Bldg.,

Philadelphia, Pa.
Williams, Mary A., 1115

Chartiers  Aye.,  Pittsburgh,

Pa,.
Williams, Maude G., 78 Main

St., Northampton, Mass.
Williams,  O.  W.,  M.  &  M.  Bank

Bldg., Milwaukee, Wis.
Williams, Ralph H., Chamber

of Commerce Bldg.,

Rochester, N. Y.
Williams,  Robert  H.,  New

Ridge  Bldg., Kansas  City,

Mo.
^Villiams,  S.  B.,  Salisbury,  Mo.
Williams, Spencer T., Trinity

Court  Chambers, Boston,

Mass.
Williams,  W.  Miles,  Hitchcock

Bldg.,  Nashyille,  Tenn.
Williamson, J. A., Parsons,

Kans.
Williainson,  J.  G.,  Higginsville,

Mo.
Wilson,  Claude, Post  Office

Bldg.,  Central  City,  Ky.
Wilson,  Emily  G..  229  Berkeley

St., Boston, Mass.
Wilson,  F. H.,  Edwards  Bldg.,

Newberg, Ore.
Wilson, Grace D., Grand

Valley  Bank Bldg., Grand

Junction, "Colo.
Wilson,  G.  S.  Hodder, 55  Cork

St.,  Guelph,  Ont.,  Can.
Wilson, Margaret  E., 209 S.

West  Ave., Sidney, O.
Wilson, Wm. C, 216 N. Main

St., St. Charles, and

Wentzville,  Mo.
Winbigler, C. F., The Cairo,

Washington,  D.  C.
Winchester,  Augusta  S., 229

Berkeley St., Boston, Mass.
^^'lngfield, Portia J.,

Hutchinson,  Minn.
Winner, Charles F., 739

Boylston St., Boston, Mass.
Winslow, E. S., Waterville,

Me.
Wise,  Hugh  Thomas,  Main  St.,

Rockford.  111.
Withers,  Avis  Martin,

Umatilla, Fla.«
Wolcott,  E.  J.,  Oregon,  111.
Wolf. G. B., Ottawa, Kans.
Wolf, Roy  M.,  Big  Timber,

Mont.
Wolf,  Truman.  Carthage,  Mo.
Wolfe,  J. Meek, Watt  &  Clay

Bldg.,  Roanoke,  Va.


Wolfert, William Jule.s, Red

Bank,  N.  J.
Wood,  Charlotte  G.,  10  S.  18th

St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Wood, Elizabeth, 527

Commercial St., Atchison,

Kans.
Wood, Emma Greene, 31

Ridgewood Rd., Maplewood,

N. J.
Wood,  F.  P.,  Century  Bldg.,

St.  Louis, Mo.
Wood, Geo. H., 808 St. Johns

Place, Brooklyn, N. Y.
Wood, J. Fred, 26 W. 3rd St.,

Williamsport,  Pa.
Wood, R. B., Fulton, Mo.
Wood, Thos. C, 238 S. Wood

St., Chicago,  111.
Woodall, Percy H., 1st Nat'l

Bank Bldg., Birmingham,

Ala.
Woodard, B. A., 200 N. Main

St., Galena, 111.
Woodhull, Frederick W., 101

S. 5th St., Alhambra, Cal.
Woodruff, Chas. Homei-,

Richmond, Cal.
Woods, Leva, 215 Alexander

St., Rochester, N. Y.
Work, L. Cooke, 85 Hicks

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Worrall, Clementine L., 56

College Ave., Poughkeepsie,

N. Y.
Wright, Anna A., Theatre

Bldg.,  San  Jose,  Cal.
Wright, Clarence C, 514

Fallowfield Ave., Charleroi,

Pa
Wright,  E.  R.,  413  S.  State  St.,

Belvidere, 111.
Wright, F. A., 94 S. Main St.,

Fond  du  Lac,  Wis.
Wright, George, Fay Blk.,

Bay City, Mich.
Wright, H. F., Herald Bldg.,

El Paso, Tex.
Wright, Herbert E., 226

Clifton St., Maiden, Mass.
Wright,  Ida  M.,  M.  D.,  Century

Bldg., Evanston, 111.
Wright, J. Merrill, 2610

Hartzel St., Evanston, 111.
Wright, Lydia H., Jackson

Bldg.,  Providence,  R.  I.
Wright, Peter J., 1144 River

St., Hyde  Park, Mass.
Wright, Ruth M., Ellis Bldg..

Charles City, la.
Wright, S. Ellis, Iroquois

Bldg., Marion, Ind.
Wurth,  "^Vm. F.,  Kenton,  O.
Wyatt, Benj. F., Box 58,

Kirksville, Mo.
Wyckoff, A. B., Alton, 111.
Wyckoff, Louis E., Story

isidg., Los Angeles, Cal.
Wyland, Samuel I., Santa

Rosa, Cal.
Wvlie, John M., 5252 Spruce

St., Philadelphia. Pa.
Yanders, H. H., Nolle Bldg.,

Wooster, O.
Yeater, I. F., 1213 8th Ave.,

Altoona, Pa.
Yerg.  Lindley  H.,  1  Bacon  St.,

Glens  Falls,  N.  Y.
York, Effle E., Elkan-Gunst

Bldg., San Francisco, and

705 Cowper St., Palo Alto,

Cal.
Young, A. Howard, 510

Commercial  St.,  Astoria,

Ore.
Young, Alfred AVheelock,

Goddard Bldg., Chicago,

111.
Young, C. W., Pittsburgh

Bldg., St. Paul, Minn.


Voung.  David  D.,  McMinnville,

Ore.
Young, ♦'Jertrude Carrothers,

Macfailane Bldg.,

Cumbf'iiand, Md.
\'oung, .lames Tilton,

Fremont, Nebr.
\'oung, John R., Goodwin

Bldg., Beloit, Wis.
Young, T. C, 321 S. Hill St.,

Los Angeles, Cal.
Voung, Wallace  E., 47

Richmond Rd., Cardiff,

Wales.
Youngquist, Ida W., 42 Audi-
torium Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Yowell,  Elizabeth  J.,  Hamilton

Nat'l Bank  Bldg.,

Chattanooga, Tenn.
Yowell, Otto Y., Hamilton

Nafl Bank Bldg..

Cliattanooga.  Tenn.
Yung,  Philip H.,  Macfarlane

Bldg., Cumberland, Md.
Zaph,  S.  D.,  4305  Grand  Blvd.,

Chicago,  111.
Zaphyriades,  S.  D.,  Jackson

Blvd., Chicago, 111.
Zealey, A. H., Ill Chestnut

St., E. Goldsboro, N. C.
Zechman,  J.  E.,  Fleming  Bldg.,

Des Moines, la.
Zeigler, Inez  L., 431 South

Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111.
Zindel, Frank  E., 2019 N. 21st

St.,  Philadelphia, Pa.
Zwicker, J. A., 79 Freeman

St., Wollaston, Mass.


PHRENOLOGISTS

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen,  1358
Broadway,  New  York,  N.  Y

Fowler  &  Wells, 27 E. 22nd
St.,  New  York, N. Y.


PHYSICAL, CULTURISTS

Anino, Prof., 733 Madison

Ave.,  New  York.  N.  Y.
Astrom, Algot, 200 W. 72nd

St.. New  York. N. Y.
Attila  &  Baumann,  49  W.  38th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Barker,  Alex.  E.  W.,  50

Church  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Barker,  Prof.  Anthony,  127  W.

42nd  St..  New  York,  N. Y.
Betzner, Clarence W., 2627

Vine St., Cincinnati, O.
Bingham, Will. 1931 B'way,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Bojus. G.  H., 26 Vesey St..

New York, N. Y.
Bothner, George, 250 W. 42nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Bowman, Gilbert, 1224

Century Bldg., Chicago, 111.
Brown,  Wm.  J.,  5  W. 66th  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Callan, M. J., 6200 Pennsyl-
vania  Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Cashin, Joseph P., 2138 64th

St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Collard, Elois, 312 W. r)8th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Cooper, Jack, Athletic School,

52  Vanderbilt  Ave.,  New

York,  N.  Y.
Drews, Geo. J.. 1910 Harding

Ave., Chicago, 111.


1174


Professional  Register


Physio-Therapists
Suggestive-Therapisls


Eldridge, Fred., 63 Main St..

Brockton,  Mass. ^ ^  ^^
Elliot,  J.  T.,  209  E.  42nd  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Furlong, Pauline, 111 5th

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Harper,  Claude  B.,  Old  Colony

Club, Hotel Waldorf

Astoria,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Institute of Physical Perfec-
tion, New York, N. Y.
Irving, Montgomery, Institute

of Physical Education,  ^UU

5th  Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Kellerman, Annette, 12 \\ .

31st  St.,  New  York,  N Y
Knipe, J. B., 85 Franklin St..

New  York, N. Y.
Macfadden, Bernarr, Flatiron

Bldg.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Mac  Levy,  352  Fourth  Ave.,

New York, N. Y.
McFadden,  Geo.,  51  E.  59th  St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Melander,  Theo.  A.,  17  E.  59th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Panzer, Henry, 200 W 72nd

St., New  York,  N. Y.
Powell, Anna, 424 W  . »tn

St., Cincinnati, O.
ReHly,  H.  J.,  1804  Mulllner

Ave.,  Bronx,  N.  Y.
Rolandow,  G. W.,  2291  B'way,

New  York,  N.  Y. „ „, .^
Ruggiero, F. D., 632-34 Mer-
cantile  Bldg., Rochester,

NY.  •

Savage,  Walton  L.,  Private

Exercise and Health

Studio, 56 W. 45th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Schildkraut, H., 200 East

B'way.  New  York,  N.  Y.
Schmidt.  A.  P..  1947  B'way,

New York, N. Y.
Schwartz, Julius. 133 E. 84th

St..  New  York,  N.  Y.
Sharkey. Miss Josephine.

Carnegie  Hall.  New  York.

N.  T.
Simon, Sylvester, 60 B'way,

New York, N. Y.
Strongfort, Lionel, 274 Park

Bldg., Newark, N. J.
Tattersdill, Jos., 61 W. 37th

Bt.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Titus. H. W., 58 Cooper Sq..

New  York,  N.  Y.
Tyler.  Parker  R.,  103  Park

Ave.. New York. N. Y.
Von  Boeckmann.  Paul,  110  W.

40th  St..  New  York.  N.  Y.
Weiss,  Geo., 420 E. 61st  St..

New  York,  N.  Y.
Wright. Jane A., Ill E. 56th

St.,  New  York.  N.  Y.


PHYSIO-THERAPISTS

Collins,  Henry.  316  Alisky
Bldg.. Portland.  Ore.

Cummins.  Ruby  S.,  Alison
Hotel,  First  Ave.  and  4th
St.,  Cedar  Rapids,  la.

Hill, E. E.,'6645 S. Marshfleld
Ave.,  Chicago,  111.

Horn, F. B., 221 South Ash-
land  Blvd., Chicago, 111.

Lawler, D. Evan, 713 North
Cherry St., Winston-Salem,
N. C.

Sumers,  Louis  A.,  Chicago,
111.

Teeves,  Wm.,  3975  Vernon
Ave., Chicago,  111.


SPIRITUAL AND DIVINE
HEALERS

Gowen,  Julia  1630  Main  St.,

Denver, Colo.
Myers, J.  F., Sioux  City, la.
Winbigler,  C.  F.,  1104  W.  35th

St., Los  Angeles,  Cal.


SPONDYLOTHERAPIST

Dennis,  Herbert  C,  9719  Laird
Ave., Cleveland,  O.


SUGGESTIVE THERAPISTS

Abbott.  Dr.  G.  C, Exeter, Mo.
Adair, S. P., Tipton, Mo.
Airs, W.  A., Newport. Tex.
Albrecht, C. W.. La  Grange,

Tex.
Alderson, J. J., Lackesburg,

Ark.
Algood. Dr., Lucas, Kans.
Allen,  Prof.  J.  H.,  Luyston,

Mo.
Backus, Wm. Vernon, 734

Euclid Ave., Cleveland, O.
Bailar,  Miss  Carrie,  Elmwood,

Okla.
Baister, F. A., Houston, Tex.
Baker, C. W., Hanford, Cal.
Barston, Mrs. E. A., 1117

Tyler St., Houston, Tex.
Bateman, Dr. Geo., Coffey-

ville, Kans.
Bennett, Dr. B. G., Madison-

ville, Ky.
Betts, W. P., Alvord, Tex.
Bingaman,  Mrs. H. C,  516 5th

St., Hastings. Nebr.
Black. Ellen, Adrian, Mo.
Bobbitt,  S.  M.,  Corsicana,  Tex.
Boone. Oliver C, Portales,

N. M.
Boone, S. L., Clovis, N. Mex.
Bovard, Jeffrey W., Burr

Oak, Kans.
Bowman, Ada M., Garnet,

Kans.
Bradburn, Miss Grace, Grand

Island, Nebr.
Brewington, O. M.. 127 S.

Main St.. Wichita. Kans.
Brigham, Frederick A.,

Drawer  G., Topeka, Kans.
Brooks, M. N., Hume, Mo.
Brown,  L. C, Ft. Scott,  Kans.
Browning,  H.  C.  Casville,

Ark.
Browning, Wm. N.. 402-a E.

High St.. Jefferson City,

Mo.
Buis.  Lemuel,  203  E.  Okmulgee

St.. Muskogee. Okla.
Bunting. E. T., 3011 Vincent

Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Burfleld, M. A., Bentonville,

Ark
Burge',  Mrs. J. E.. 116 S. 29th

St..  Lincoln,  Nebr.
Burke, Lula, Perry, Okla.
Burmeister, Louis, Macks-

ville, Kans.
Burtling, Wm., Elmwood,

Okla.
Buskirk.  Mrs.  S.  E.,  1820  Penn

St., Kansas  City.  Mo.
Carlson. C. E.. North Platte,

Nebr.
Carpentor, J. H., Baldwin,

Kans.
Carter.  J.  G.. Texarkana.  Ark.


;  Carter,  W.  A..  701  Houser

Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Case, John Morton, 330 Ord

St., Kansas City, Mo.
Chapman, Geo. W., Primghar,

la.
Chappie, Dr. A. J., 602

Hempell  St., Ft. Worth,

Tex.
Chilcott, Dr., Osborne, Tex.
Chorne, Prof. C. A., Fayette-

ville. Ark.
Cleveland, M. H., Cedar

Rapids, Nebr.
Cochran, Maude. Central

City. Nebr.
Cohn, Richard, San Antonio,

Tex.
Cole,  L.  L.,  Lawton,  Okla.
Cole,  Dr. S. L., Lawton, Okla.
Conners, Mrs. Emma C,

Lexington, Nebr.
Conrad, Mrs. E. M.. 2630

Capitol Ave., Omaha. Nebr.
Cooke. Mrs. E. D.. Smith

Center, Kans.
Coone, M. E., c/o The Welt-

mer  Institute of  Suggestive

Therapy, Nevada. Mo.
Corbion. H. A.. Perry. Okla.
Corp, Mrs. H. A., 22 West

Broadway, Hutchinson,

Kans.
Cotner, Dr. J. W., Lebanon,

Kans.
Coulson,  L.  T.,  Weatherford,

Okla.
Covington, R. L., Clinton,

Mo.
Cowgill, Jessie T., 116 S.

2nd St., Lincoln, Nebr.
Crabtree, H. C, 1523 O St.,

Lincoln, Nebr.
Crone,  J.  O.,  c/o  The  Weltmer

Institute  of  Suggestive

Therapy, Nevada, Mo.
Crosby, Gordon Keith, San

Diego, Cal.
Davis,  A.  H.,  Whitewright.

Tex.
Davis. J. J., Newbury, Tex.
Davis. Wm., Broken Bow,

Nebr.
Davis, Wm., Claremore, Okla.
De La Mater. F. Newton,

McAllister. Okla.
Dermott, Miss M., 3211

Chestnut St., Kansas City,

Mo.
Dewey, Mrs. Sylvia, Orando,

Montana,
Dexter, Mrs. Ellen, Burr

Oak, Kans.
Disney,  J.  Lambert, 1149  N.

63rd St., Philadelphia. Pa.
Dodd, Miss Lorain, Box 125,

Mineralwells, Tex.
Done, Dr., Lucas, Kans.
Douglas, Mr. & Mrs. J. E.,

San Angelo, Tex.
Downing, W. J., Hiawatha,

Kans.
Drake, Mrs. W. L.. Warrens-
burg, Mo.
Dresher, Albert C, Box 262

W.  Kiawa  Ave..  Ft.  Morgan,

Colo.
Droage, Mrs. Lena, Flat

River, Mo.
Dunn, Mrs. L.. Salt Fork,

Okla.
Eanes, J. E., Casse, Tex.
Kdgar,  T.  H,,  Sabetha,  Kans.
Ehler,  Prof.  J.  C,  Belton,  Tex.
English, C. Forrest, Speed,

Mo.
Fairbanks, A. E., Ratan,

New Mexico.
Felsner, Gus, Little Rock,

Ark.


Suggestive  Therapists


Professional  Register


1175


Finton, Darius S., 353 E.

Lincoln St.. Findlay, O.
Fisher, Dr., c/o Fisher

Sanitarium, Denver, Colo.
Fisher,  Capt.  Noah,  Ft.  Smith,

Ark.
Ford, Helene C, Thayer,

Nebr.
Fox, Addle L.., Goodland,

Kans.
Freeman,  A.  M.,  Macks  Creek,

Mo.
Gabbert, A. J., Paris, Mo.
Garner, E. B., Brownwood,

Tex.
Germany, Prof. W. J. C, San

Angelo, Tex.
Gilbert, J. E., Carter, Okla.
Goin, Frank, 636 Wayne

Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Good, S. L., Duncan, Okla.
Gray, Mrs. Sarah S., Box 56,

Alpena, S. D.
Greves, Mrs. Amanda L.,

Dixon, Nebr.
Grim,  Dr. Roxa, 709  S. 2nd

St., Muskogee, Okla.
Hadley, John  W.,  Aurora,

Mo.
Hag-er, Wm., Ft. Worth, Tex.
Hale, Mrs. Geo. W.,

Woodston,  Kans.
Hall, Royal F., Mooreland,

Okla.
Hamg-artner, J. C, Garber,

Okla.
Hamilton, A. T., Willow

Spring-s, Mo.
Hampshire, Dr. D., Brady,

Tex.
Harimen,  John A., 322 Spring-

St.,  Los  Ang-eles,  Cal.
Harper, Mrs. F. M., 512

Broadway, Little Rock,

Ark.
Harper,  R.  T.,  Rexford,  Kans.
Harwell, "W. A., R. No. 1,

Mena, Ark.
Heim, Fred.. 1905 Lanie St.,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Hill, J. C, Rockland, Me.
Hjll, R., Eliga, Tex.
Hinton, M. M., Box 62,

Dallas Tex.
Hoaglan'd, Nettie E., 3465

Larimore Ave., Omaha,

Nebr.
Hopper, Mary Shafter, Troy,

Kans.
Howard, Hosea, Ferguson,

Mo.
Hughes, John W., North Bal-
timore, O.
Hughes, Sarah E., Yellow

Springs, O.
Hughes, T. H., Lockney, Tex.
Huginin, Mary, Boyero, Colo.
Hunt, Miss Clara, Logan,

Okla.
Jackson, Foster, Broken

Bow, Nebr.
Jameson, H., Sedan, Kans.
Johnson, Mrs. Mamie R.,

General Delivery, Kansas

City, Mo.
Johnson,  Mrs.  Wm. H.,  R.  No.

3, Springfield, Mo.
Johnson, Mrs. W. V., Wood

Lake, Nebr.
Joiner, Mrs. Una, Seymour,

Tex.
Jones,  Jas.  K.,  Sunshine,  Colo.
Jungerman, Emma, Waverly,

Mo.
Kea, John We.=iley, 201 Olive

St., Monroe, La.
Keck, E. W., Suite 2. Gas

Bldg., Eau Claire, Wis.
Kelfer.  Dr.  F.  O.,  Elk  Oitv,

Okla.


Kelfer, S. O.. Elk City, Okla.
Kellogg,  S.,  Rogers,  Tex.
Kemmelhor, Mrs., 742 N. Bell

Ave.,  Hastings,  Nebr.
Kinkaid, IJ. L., lOOtJ Belle-

fontaine  St., Indianapolis,

Ind.
Kirby, Geo. W., Bogard, Mo.
Kitchens,  W.  P., Pioneer,  Tex.
Kline, Emmor H., 18 Graham

St., Harrisburg,  Va.
Koehler, Mrs. E., 1320 L. S.

St., Little Rock, Ark.
Laffere, Geo. C, R. No. 4,

Box 56, Thorndale, Tex.
Laney, A. T., Clinton, Mo.
Lee, Mary Cornelia, Manhat-
tan, Kans.
Leonard, L. W., Excelsior

Springs,  Mo.
Lewis, Dr. J. H., Comanche,

Tex.
Lewis, W. A.,  Galveston, Tex.
Linn,  Wm.  R.,  Logan,  O.
Linton, Minnie, Kingdom

Springs, Ark.
List, Adolph, Cape  Girardeau,

Mo.
Loehr,  Mrs.  A.  R.,  Wellington,

Kans.
Loehr, H.  C,  La  Grange. Tex.
Loveless, Mrs. Flora, 831

Cott  St.,  Emporia,  Kans.
Loy, Geo., 1006 Woodland

Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
Lydon, Dr. Edward J., 310

Auditorium, Spokane,

Wash.
Maloney, Mrs. C. E., Omaha,

Nebr.
Margarrell, Dr. T. Z., 2726 S.

10th St., Omaha, Nebr.
Marston, Dr. A. E., Welling-
ton,  Kans.
Marston School of Metaphy-
sics, Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Marquand, Henry, Chamois,

Mo.
Mathews,  R.  W.,  464  Bowen

Ave., Chicago, 111.
McCarthy, J. P., Grangeville,

Cal.
McDermott, Miss, 3211 Chest-
nut  Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
McElhiney,  Anna,  Ohio  City,

O.
McGowan, Fred. H., Safford,

Ariz.
McPhail, D., Fayetteville,

Mo.
McRye,  Dr. M., 5th  and

Okmulgee Aves., Muskogee,

Okla.
Melton, Mrs. Nellie, Ana-

darko, Okla.
Metcalfe, Dr. F. A., West

Point, S. D.
Miller, Rev. Eva Kinney,

Peoria, 111.
Miller, J. W., Bellaire, Kans.
Miller,  O. A., Ionia, Kans.
Mitchel, Dr. John, Whieten,

Mo.
Mitchell, Minnie B., Park

City, Mont.
Montoya, Dr. Jose, Wichita,

Kans.
Moore, R. A., Caldwell, Tex.
Morar, Chas. J., 701 Houser

Bldg., St. Louis, Mo.
Mosier,  Mrs.  B.  R.,  Kinsley,

Kans.
Mun,  M.  L., 521 S.  Market  St.,

Wichita, Kans.
Muns, Mrs. Jennie C,

St. John, Kans.
Munsell, Mrs. Clara S.,

Cameron, Mo.
Murphy, Chas. S., R. No. 947,

Worcestei', iTass.


Murray, C. H., Prior, Okla.
Myers, Jno. B., 108 Vine St.,

St. Louis, Mo.
Myrlch, Dr. J. F.. Ft. Worth,

Tex.
Neff,  Mrs.  J. L.,  2202 Sherman

Ave.,  Omaha,  Nebr.
Nelll, J. E., Memphis, Tex.
Nelson, W. H., Smith Center,

Kans.
Neuberger, F. A., Logan,

Utah.
New, Dr. Jno. F., Seattle,

Wash.
Nichols, Joe H., 4138 N.

Newstead Ave., St. Loui.s,

Mo.
Nicholson, J. R., Beaver City

Nebr.
Nixon, Mrs. Mary A., Carter.

Okla.
North, Mrs. Alice, Mt. Zion

Mo.
Nye, Dr., Osborne, Kans.
Otterman, J. H., Manette, Mo.
Owen, Dr. Geo., Ft. Scott,

Kans.
Pageler,  Dr.  J.  H.,  2514  Grant

St., Omaha,  Nebr.
Park,  Chas.  C,  816  N.  Walnut

St., lola, Kans.
Parker, H. R.. Mt. Carmel,

Parker, Julius  H., Salina,

Kans.
Patten, L. L., Guthrie, Okla.
Patterson, C. F., Mexico City,

Mex.
Payne,  L.  P.,  Cooter.  Mo.
Perry, Jennie, Mt. Vernon

Mo.
Peters, J. M., Lebanon, Kans.
Peters, Wm. Timothy,

Jacksboro, Tex.
Peterson, Albin, Sedan, Kans.
Pickens, H.  M., Berwvn, Nebr
Pierce, Chas., Louisiana, Mo.
Pole,  S. J., Galena, Kans.
Pontius, E: F., Harrison,

Nebr.
Powell, N.  W.,  Warsau,  Ind.
Powers, Mrs. M. A. E., 1702

Park Ave., Shereveport, La
Prather, Mrs. Mattie, Little

Rock, Ark.
Prea, Dr. Fredericksen,

Kenmore, N. D.
Prosser, W. C, General

Delivery, Wichita, Kans.
Pugh, Mrs. Maggie, Soldier,

Kans.
Putzke, Dr. Helena  E., R.  No.

2, Box 1, Humboldt, S. D
Pyle,  R.  M.,  Harold,  Tex.
Rathburn, Mrs. M. E., Lucas,

Kans.
Raviden, Nelson Blackburn

4618 S.  "Figueroa St., Los

Angeles, Cal.
Ray, Rd., Altus. Okla.
Ray, Jno. A., Lewiston, HI.
Records, W. P., Wilburton,

Okla.
Rein, Dr. E. G., Bonita, Tex.
Robinson, J. T., Uvalde, Tex.
Rodes, T. T., Paris, Mo.
Rosher, D. K.. "^Vichita, Kans.
Rowell, Mrs. Flora, 2810 4th

Ave.. Kearney, Nebr.
Russell, Miss Lena, Duncan.

Okla.
Sallee,  J.  H.,  Lincoln,  Ark.
Sampson, Mrs. Annie K.,

St. Genevieve, Mo.
Sawrey, L. S., Fayetteville.

Ark.
Schmoll, S., 2615 Potomac  St,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Schnase, Mrs., Curtis, Nebr.


1176


Professional  Register


Aslroscopists


Schrader, Mis. B. V., Moscow

Mills. Mo.
Schultz, Dr. C, C43 lOtli St.,

Rock Island, 111.
Scott, Miss Addle, 1200 S.

Ewing St., St. Louis. Mo.
Scott, Mrs. N. E., Nickerson,

Kans.
Scott,  Wm.  O.,  Great  Falls,

Mont.
Self  ridge, Mrs. Ellz., Newton,

Kans.
Selin, Oscar, Enterprise,

Kans.
Shlef,  Henry,  Maple  Hill,

Kans.
Skaw, Miss  Olina, Hornick.Ia.
Skeen, Mrs. Matt.. Handley,

Tex.
Slahaugh, I. C, Arlington.

Nebr.
Smith, Dr., Lucas, Kans.
Smith, Elmer, Rosendale, Mo.
Smith, L. R., Cassville, Mo.
Smith, Miss R. E., 405 6th

St. S., St. Petersburg, Fla.
Smith, W. H., Agua Calients,

Ariz.
Snell, Dr. Albert F., 16 Gar-
field Place, Cincinnati, O.
Spears, Mrs. Jas. D., Suite 8,

1822 Chicago  St., Omaha,

Nebr.
Speckert, A. J., 309 Burke

Blk., Cor. 2nd Ave., Seattle,

Wash.
Standlferd.  R.,  Reading,

Kans.
Stewart, Miss Helen, Enid,

Okla.
Stieber, Franz, Perryville,

Mo.
Stockton, Mrs. W. C, 217 E.

10th St.. Little Rock, Ark.
Strand & Strand, Boonville.

Mo.
Struve,  F.  W.,  Plainview,  Tex.
Surles, J. H., Putnam, Tex.
Swisher, Mrs. A., Nickerson,

Kans.
Taylor, Mrs. MoUie, Alamosa,

Colo.
Teer, Dr. Wm. Corpus

Christi, Tex.
Tenney,  C.  F.,  Bement,  111.
Thomas, Jennie, Lake View,

Tex.
Thomuse, Mrs. Sophie,

Genevieve,  Mo.
Thurman, M. R., Claremore,

Okla.
Thurman, W. R., Pahuska,

Okla.
Thurston. J. M., Lincoln,

Nebr.
Tibbitts, R. M., 17 N. Valley

Sts.,  Kansas  City,  Kans.
Tobin,  Geo. F., C40 N. Topeka

St., Wichita, Kans.
Tomson, Alfred, Lyric

Theatre, Omaha, Nebr.
Townsend, Kate  R., 12  E.  9th

St., Shawnee, Okla.
Trimmer, Juna M., Paradise,

Kans.
Tully,  F.  E.,  Cedar  Rapids,

Nebr.
Tupper, Annie Laurie, Holly

Springs,  Miss.
Twombley,  T.  C,  Lynch.  Nebr.
Tyson,  Jas.  W., Ideal, Colo.
Utt, Dr. Viola, 618 S. Hope

St., Los Angeles, Cal.
Van Velsor, Mrs. M. C, 643,';

Jackson Ave., Chicago, 111.
Vogel, Miss Mary, Argenta,

Ark.
Wahlenmaler, Geo., Arkansas

City, Kans.


Waits, John F.. Elkins. Ark.

Wanamaker, Mrs. J. H.,
Smith Center, Kans.

Webster, Morton E., Fron-
dale, Wash.

Welsh,  Hugh  S..  Datto,  Ark.

Weltmer, Ernest, c/o  The
Weltmer Institute of Sug-
gestive Therapy, Nevada,
Mo.

Weltmer, Sidney A., c/o The
Weltmer Institute of Sug-
gestive Therapy, Nevada,
Mo.

Weltmer,  J.  E.,  c/o  The  Welt-
mer Institute  of  Suggestive
Therapy, Nevada, Mo.

Weltmer,  T.  C,  o/o  The  Welt-
mer Institute  of  Suggestive
Therapy, Nevada, Mo.

West, Mrs. D. G., 340 Qua-
chita Ave., Hot Springs,
Ark.

Wetherby, M., Box 123,
Oshkosh, Nebr.

Whitaker, R. T., Joplin, Mo.

White, T. Harrison, 1114

Kansas  Ave., Topeka, Kans.

Whittington,  Julia  E.,  Xenia,
O.


Whitnell. II. AV., Cape

Girardeau, Mo.
Wigamood,  R.  V.,  King

Bldg., Springfield, O.
Wilhelm, A. C, Exeter,  Mo.
William.s, D. A., Homing,

Okla.
Williams, D. C, Lampasas,

Tex.
William.s, H. R. H., Grand

Island, Nebr.
Williscroft, W. H., Talequali,

Okla.
Willistaedt, L., Jr., 406 W.

18th St.. Kansas City, Mo.
Wilson, Mrs., Sheridan, Wvo.
Witty, C. E,, A'inconne.s. Tnd.
Wright, Dr. J. F., Monticello,

Ark.
Vuerzinger, Henry, 405

Temple Court, Minneapolis,

Minn.
Yarbrough, Rev. Geo., Reeds,

Mo.
Yeamans,  E. B., 717  Elmon

St., St. Joseph, Mo.
Yoho,  J. W., 1504  W. 11th  St.,

Coffeyville, Kans.
Young, Mrs. L. P., Holden,

Mo.


DRUGLESS  ADJUNCTS


ASTROSCOPISTS

Bradford, Edgar G., 73 Sixth
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Lundy. Prof., Bergen Point,
Bayonne, N. J.

Meyer,  Gustave, 1125  Wash-
ington St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.


BATHS AXD SWIMMING

Berst, Fred. J.,'  144 E. 5th

St.,  New  Yoik,  N.  Y.
Braeuer, 9., 338 E. 52nd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Bryant Bath Co., Inc., 4  7 W.

42nd  St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Clason Point Batli, Clason

Point, N. Y.
Dalton Swimming School, 308

310 W. 59th St.. and 19-25

W.  44th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Dwyer, Wm., 99 Nassau St.,

New  York, N. Y.
Bverard's Baths, 28 W. 28th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Fensterheim, 306 E. 3rd St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Fifth Street Baths, 624 East

5th St.,  New York, N.  Y.
Fleischman  Baths, 47  W.  42nd

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Forsyth  Baths,  79  Forsyth  St.,

New  York, N. Y.
Gordon  Baths.  Inc., 24 1st

Ave.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Hollender's  Baths, 160 W.

126th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Johansson, Elida, 51 W. 84  th

St.,  New York, N. Y.
Lafayette Baths and Hotel,

405  Lafayette  St.,  New  York,

N.  Y.
Landberg, A., 85 E. 1st St.,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Lenox  Baths,  137  W.  115th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


Mayer, Dr. Geo., 46 W. 124th
St., New York, N. Y.

Meffert, Alex., Woolworth
Bldg., New York, N. Y.

Millbank Memorial Baths,
325 E. 38th St., New York.

Miller Baths, Hi E. 29th St.

New  York. N. Y.
Montana Baths. 46 W. 124th

St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Mount  Morris  Baths,  1944

Madison Ave., New York'

N.  Y.
Murray  Hill  Baths, 113  W.

42nd  St.,  New  York,  N,  Y
Norfolk Baths, 178 Norfolk

St., New  York, N. Y.
Produce Exchange Bath-s 6

B'way,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Radio  Fango  Co.,  215  Manhat-
tan Ave., New York, N. Y.
Resler,  S., 141 Suffolk  St.,

New  York, N. Y.
St.  Marks Baths, 6 St. Marks

Place, New York, N. Y.
St. Nicholas Baths, 4 St.

Nicholas Ave., New York.

N.  Y.
St. Nicholas Baths, 27 Lenox

Ave., New York, N. Y.
Saracena, M., 63 Park Row,

New  York, N. Y.
Schumer,  M., 51  Pitt  St.,

New  York. N. Y.
Tenth Street Baths, Inc.. 268

E.  10th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Topel Swimming School and

Gymnasium, 96th St. and

Broadway, New York,  N. Y.
Wasser.  D.,  6  St.  Marks  Place,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Weisinger,  S., 178  Norfolk  St.,

New York, N. Y.
Wolpin, A. B., 28 W. 28th  St.,

New York. N. Y.
Woolworth Bldg. Baths, 233

B'way, New York, N. Y.
Yagoda.  S.,  223  2nd  St.,  New

York,  N. Y.


Chiropodisl.s


Professional  Register


1177


CHIROPODISTS

Albert, Phillip, 116 E.  Market

St., Lima,  O.
Ball,  J.  F.,  20  E.  Broad  St.,

Columbii.s, O.
Banks, John J., 1122 W. 4th

St., Cincinnati, O.
Barcu.s,  Emma  M., 903  Oak

St.,  Columbus,  O.
Barnard, Lena, Chagrin F'alls,

O.
Beach, Nancey A., 2983 May-

fleld  Road, Cleveland, O.
Beaver, Edith B., 297 Cham-
pion Ave., Columbus, O.
Benedict,  G.  A.,  244  Woodward

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Bledsoe, Mme., 240 Adams

Ave. E., Detroit, Mich.
Brewer, The Chiropodist, 3rd

Floor,  92  Broadway,  Detroit,

Mich.
Brice,  Anna  C, 168  Lennox

Bldg-., Cleveland, O.
Brill, Belva, Spitzer Bldg.,

Toledo, O.
Brown, James, Room 712,

Westbank  Bldg.,  830  Market

St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Buhl,  P.  A., 419 Fulton  St.,

Brooklyn, N. Y.
Burton,  Wm.  P., 13  W.  Fed-
eral  St., Youngstown, O.
Butler, L. Pearl, 627 Barr  St.,

Cincinnati, O.
Chamberlain, Ina, 202 Smith

St., Akron, O.
Cook, Anna I., Orborn Bids'.,

Cleveland,  O.
Cook,  Harriet  L., 1364  E. 81st

St.,  Cleveland, O.
Cooper, Anne E., 502 Mercan-
tile Library Bldg., Cincin-
nati, O.
Culbertson, Retta, Kenton, O.
Davis, Grace H., 33 W. State

St., Columbus, O.
Davis,  John  M.,  504  Neave

Bldg.,  Cincinnati,  O.
DeForest,  Florence  S.,  1548  E.
• 82nd  St.,  Cleveland,  O.
Delaphane, Dorothy, 371 East

Long  St.,  Columbus, O.
Dikerman,  K.  M.,  Hippodrome

Arcade, Youngstown, O.
Doll, Mary Bates, Chillicothe,

O.
Douglas  Roscoe  S., 501

Catherine  St..  Detroit, Mich.
Earle,  Robert  Lee, 2283  105th

St., Cleveland, O.
English, Margaret L., Leader

News  Bldg.,  Cleveland,  O.
Eppley, Adam, Amelia, O.
Eppley,  Clark  S.,  55 Louis

Block,  Dayton,  O.
Finkel,  Dr.  I.  N.,  536  W.  145th

St., New  York, N. Y.
Fletcher,  Dr.  W.  H.  A.,  203  W.

52nd St., New York, N. Y.
Flory, Chas. M., 311 Vesper

St., Ashland, O.
Ford,  Eva  M.,  712  E.  Dong  St.,

Columbus,  O.
Ford,  Huscher,  44  E.  Broad

St.,  Columbus,  O.
Freda, Louis, 261 Broadway,

New  York,  N.  Y.
Freman, M. E., 403 Market

St.,  Sandusky,  O.
Fuller,  Karl E., 813 Peter

Smith Bldg., Detroit, Midi.
Fulton,  Hannah  R.,  323  Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Galavan,  James  B.,  318  Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Galena, Stella, 211 Baird

Bldg., Mansfield, O.
Gaylord,  Bertha  J.,  61  Park

Blvd., Detroit, Mich.


George,  Mrs.  Helen, 1126  C  of

C. Detroit, Mich.
Girkes, Dr.  Louis, 2073 66th

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Goldberg,  A.  M.,  647  Euclid

Ave., Cleveland,  O.
Goldberg, Bernard M., 628

Nafl Bank  Bldg., Akron, O.
Gottlieb,  Dr.  N.  A.,  367  Fulton

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Grimm,  Ella  May, 483  Buchtel

Ave., Akron, O.
Harmolin, Max S., 30 Taylor

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Hawkins, Jos. G., Upper

Sandu.sky, O.
Heller, A. G., 1537 B'way, at

45th  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Hoard,  Agnes  A.,  1932  Ashland

Ave., Toledo, O.
Hollister, B. C., Conneaut, O.
Huffman, John W., 629 West

9th  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Johnson, Edward, 22  Varet

St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Joseph, Alfred, 224 W. 52nd

St.,  New  York, N. Y.
Karpf, Lester, 4 Fourth St.,

Dayton, O.
Kasik, W. J., 301 Woodward

Bldg., Detroit, Mich.
Kettenring, W. F., Idaho

Falls, Idaho.
Klotbach, Oscar, 746 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Knowles, Cordelia B., Cleve-
land, O.
Kramer,  Nellie,  1240  Hall

Ave., Cleveland,  O.
Krogall, Anna J., 11-77

Elizabeth St. W., Detroit,

Mich.
Kuhlewein, Leonard, 116i S.

Main St.,  Marion,  O.
Lemon, Euphemia, Sandusky,

O.
Lichtenwagner, J. A., 2307

Elm St., Toledo, O.
Love, Blanche E., 218 Detroit

Ave., Columbus, O.
Maison, George F., Bellefon-

taine,  O.
Mattler,  A. E., 240  Woodward

Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Medley, Minnie  P., Chilli-
cothe, O.
Miller, Delia L., 307 S. Perry

St.,  Dayton,  O.
Monroe,  Sarah  S.,  725  Barr

St., Cincinnati, O.
Moore, Edw. L., 220 Wood-
ward Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Moriss, L. H., 47 W. 34th St.,

New York, N. Y.
Muhme, Gustav A., 415 Sum-
mit St.,  Toledo,  O.
Nash, Ruby D., 3059 Euclid

Ave., Cleveland, O.
Nesbit, Edith  V.,  Dayton,  O.
Norwood, James N., Ill 8th

St., Cincinnati, O.
O'Banion,  E.  C, 43 Emery

Arcade, Cincinnati, O.


O'Banion, Thomas, 43 Emery

Arcade, Cincinnati, O.
Pettiford,  O. B., Piqua, O.
Phillips, Elizabeth, 1052

Mountain St., Cincinnati, O.
Rabenstein, Wm.  M., 512

Race St., Cincinnati, O.
Rice, Eula, 1723 Dreman St.,

Cincinnati, O.
Richardson, Emma, 935 Bay-
miller  St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Riddell,  Rosh,  29  Monroe  Ave.,

Detroit, Mich.
Ringle,  Ralph. 2055  Cornell

Place.  Cleveland,  O.
Santurello, Peter, 84 N. High

St., Columbu.g,  O.
Schwarz, R. B., 93 Highland

Ave., jersey City, N. J.
Shreeve, Gertrude M., Ohio

Bldg.,  Toledo.  O.
Simpson, Florence  K., 379

Forest  Ave., Columbus,  O.
Soderstom, Olga, 1012 McMil-
lan St.,  Cincinnati,  O.
Spatz, Chas., 162 N. High St.,

Columbus, O.
Stewart, Frank  L., Youngs-
town, O.
Stewart,  Margaret  W.,  Park

Ave., Youngstown, O.
Taylor,  Louise  W., 635  W. 6th

St., Cincinnati, O.
Thorman, Arthur J., Cincin-
nati, O.
Titus, Margaret  S., 3279 West

98th St., Cleveland, O.
Turner, Geo. H., 734 Euclid

Ave.,  Cleveland, O.
Utter,  Gertrude, 215 Spitzer

Bldg., Toledo, O.
Vogt, Joseph  A., 1021  Ash  St.,

Piqua, O.
Von Imhoff, Martha, 1812

Euclid Ave., Cleveland,  O.
Wagner, Edward V., Urbana,

O.
Wagner, Sallie, Urbana, O.
W^alton, Dollie, 697  N. High

St., Columbus, O.
Washington, Alice M., 3450

Reading  Road,  Cincinnati,

O.
Washington, John, 6221

Quincy Ave., Cleveland, O.
Watkins, Hattie C, 1264

Grant  Ave.,  Columbus,  O.
Wiesner,  B.  J.,  2116  Russell

Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Wilcox. Mart M., 293 W. 7th

St., Columbus, O.
Williams,  Nellie  E., 43 Emery

Arcade, Cincinnati, O.
Williams, R. B., 2215 Cleve-
land Ave.,  New  Orleans, La.
Winn, R. J.,  Springfield,  O.
Wood, Henry Chas.. 404 We.st

Federal  St.,  Youngstown,

O.
Worrell,  Minnie  E., 332

Superior  St.,  Toledo,  O.


YUNGBORX


FIRST
NATURE

CURE  RESORT  IN  FLORIDA.  Tangerine,  Oranye  County.
Station  on  Seaboard  Air  Line  R.  R.,  ZELLWOOD,  Station
on  Atlantic  Coast  Line  R.  R..  MOUNT  DORA.  Located  In
the  highlands  of  Florida,  this  beautiful  resort  offers  the  best
opportunitj-  for  those  seeking  health,  rest  and  recreation
Healthful  climate;  pure  air;  free  from  fogs  and  dampness.
Outdoor  sports;  sHlmmlng,  boating  and  bathing.  Ever>-  ad-
vantage for  carrying  out  the  true  Natural  Life  and  Natural
Healing  Sfethods.  Management  the  same  as  at  the  famous
Yungborn  at  Butler,  New  Jersey.  .Sun,  Light  and  Air  baths-
lothanin  baths,  clay  packs,  all  branches  of  Hydro-therapy.
Massage,  Swedish  Movements,  Mechano-therapy,  Clilropractlc
etc.  Vegetarian  and  fruitarian  diet.  Special  facilities  for
fasting.  For  further  information,  address,  B.  LUST,  N.  D..
Nature Cure Resort, BUTLER, N. J.


1178


tTnlveritul  Naturopathic  Directory and Buyerit*  Guide


BE  A  BENEFACTOR

Start  a  Health  Library

Circulate  It  Among  Your  Friends

WE WILL HELP YOU

These  books  constitute  the  best  Home  Course  in  Naturopathy
$55.40  in  Health  Books for  $25.00

From  time  to  time  we  will  make  other  liberal  offers  to  those  who  start  circulating
libraries. No  better  way  to  spread the message of Natural Healing.


PURINTON, E. E Proclamation of Naturopathy $0.10

BILZ,  F. E.— The  Natural  Method  of  HeaUng— 2  Vols...  10. 00

KUHNE, Louis— The New Science of Healing 3.00

KUHNE, Louis— Facial Expression, cloth 5.00

ANDERSON, L. H.— Natural Healing 25

Occult Forces 35

BAUHGARTEN, Dr. Alfred— Insomnia IS

COLLINS,  Dr.  F.  W.— Infantile  Paraljsls— Its  Cause,
Prevention and Cure 25

ERZ,  A.  A.,  N.  D.— What  Medicine  Knows  and  Does
Not  Know  about Rheumatism 75

MAYER, Dr. Emil— No More Syphilis 20

THOMAS,  J.  8.,  M.  D.— Mal-Assimilatlon  and  Its
Complications, paper 1 .  00

SHAD  EL,  A.  F.— "Confessions"  of  a  Victim  of  the
Great  White  Plague,  or  a  Guide  to  the  "Fountain  of
Eternal Youth" 50

ERZ,  A.  A.,  N.  D.— The  Medical  Question,  The  Truth
about  Official  Medicine  and  Why  We  Must  Have
Medical Freedom 4.00

A Message to all Drugless Healing Systems and

a Keminder 15

FERRIER,  James,  M.  D.— A  Scientific  Basis  for  a  Just
Law 20

GOODFELLOW,  Dr.  A.  A.,  and  ZURMUHLEN,  Dr.
Charles — Medical Monopoly and Immoral Traftlcs 15

EH  RET,  Arnold— Rational  Fasting  for  Sick  People  and
Regeneration Diet 50

PURINTON, E. E.— The Philosopliy of Fasting 1.00

LERNANTO,  Dr.  E.  L.— Re-dlscoTery  of  the  Lost  Foun-
tain of  Health  and  Happiness;  for  Nervous  and  Sexual
Diseases 1 .  00

ROSCH,  Dr.  E. — The  Abuse  of  the  Marriage  Relation,
explaining  the  origin  of  most  chronic  diseases,  espe-
cially  the diseases of Man and Woman SO

GRAY, Helen Sayr— In  Justice  to  Thomas and Tabby.. .10

HODGE,  Dr.  J.  W.— The  Use  of  Tobacco,  a  Physical
Mental and Social EvU 20

The Pestilential Tobacco Habit 20

The  Tobacco  Skunk  and  His  Depredations 20

RUEGG. John  J.— Boll  Weevil (The  Law  of  Nature  and

Mankind) 1 .  00

The  Secret  of  Health and  Disease 50

RILEY, Dr. J. S.— Rectal Dilation 10

JUST, Adolph— The New Paradise of Health 25

Return to  Nature, paper  cover. 2.00

GARQUE, 0., and CAMPBELL, D.— Diet in Relation

to Health and Efficiency. Building Brain by Diet.. .25

LUST, Mrs. Louisa — Naturopathic Cook Book 75

One  Back  Volume  of  the  Herald  of  Health  and  Na-
turopath from  the  year  1900  to  the  current  year,
of our choice 2.80


PURINTON, E. E.— Lords of Ourselves (1.60

Efficiency in Drugless Healing 1.60

The Corset In Court 15

Try the Laugh Cure 15

Woman's Work 25

The Fine Art of Giving 20

The  Future Life 20

Play 20

Genius and Eugenics 25

Fatherhood — The New Profession 25

Ask the Druggist 10

BRADSHAW. Wm. R.— Future Medicine 20

ENGELHARDT, August— A Carefree  Future 1.00

ERZ, A. A.. N. D.— True Science and  Art  of  HeaUng .60

GRAY, John A.— Schroth Cure 10

HARA, 0. Hashnu— Fruit and Nut  Diet 15

KARELL, Dr.— The Milk Cure 50

KNEIPP, Father Sebastian— Kneipp Cure (My Water

Cure) 1.00

WILMANS, Helen— The Conquest of Poverty 1.00

• Freedom,  a  journal  of  Mental  Science. 5  Numbers  1.00

POST, C. C— Men and Gods 1.00

BUNKER, W. N., D.  C— Your  Memory— Its  Functions,

Exercise and Training 50  •

RILEY, Dr.  J. S.— Zone-Therapy SimpUfled 1.00

STIERLE,  Ferd.— Back  to  Nature  and  to  Nature's  God.. .15
THOMAS,  J. R.. M. D.— The  Advantages  of  Baw  Food.

cloth 1.50

TYLER, Byron — Nature's Triumph over Disease, Raw

Food Book and Health Guide 15


EFFICIENCY  SERIES

PURINTON, E. E.— How to Succeed 25

Daily Guide to Efficiency 25

Unused Powers 25

The  Triumph of the Man Who Acts 25

Freedom the Goal of Life 25


VITALISM SERIES

LUST, Benedict- The Limits of Fatigue as a Strict
Law of Life 25

Becoming Numb — The True Cause of Cancer 25

Winds and Gases 25

The Baw Food Table 25

The Helper in Distress 25

Everything  Attainable  Through  Training  of  Thought .25

A Conscious Diet as a Foundation for Powerful

Health 25

Man, Learn to Think 25

Awaken to Complete Consciousness 25

The Overcoming of the Financial Malady called

Poverty 26


Over  $55  worth  of  Health  and  Efficiency  Books;  our  price,  $25

NOTE — No nubstltation of books* from our  other  ll.sta  can  be  made  on  this  offer.
Add  one  dollar  to  the  above  price  If  you  vrish  these  books  sent  prepaid.


DR.  BENEDICT  LUST


Butler,  N.  J.


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog  1179


CATALOG

OF  BOOKS  ON  NATUROPATHY


MEDICAL  SCIENCE  is  undergoing  a  great  evolutionary  process  at  present. It
is  a  movement  away  from  the  misrepresentations,  contradictions,  hoodwink-
ings,  superstitions,  charlatanry  and  quackery  that  characterize  official  or
drug  therapy,  and  towards  the  ministrations  of  drugless  therapy  that  employs  the
forces  of  Nature  as  the  only  legitimate  agents  in  preventing  and  curing  human
ailments.

Official  medicine  has  for  ages  battened  on  superstition,  simply  because  the
unthinking  masses  of  mankind  are  ruled  with  greater  ease,  and  will  part  with  their
money  with  greater  freedom  through  faith  in  fraud  than  for  truth  proclaimed  by
professional  reason.

Strange  that  mankind  should  wish  to  be  enslaved  by  its  own  folly,  but  such  is
the  fact,  and  the  folly  of  the  multitude  is  the  rich  soil  on  which  official  and  effete
medicine  has  waxed  fat  for  ages.

But  a  light  is  now  breaking  upon  the  world  since  mankind  has  begun  to  think
for  itself.  It  now  perceives  for  the  first  time  that  official  medicine  has  been  alone
interested  in  suppressing  symptoms  of  disease,  and  has  wholly  ignored  the  causes
thereof.  It  has  discovered  that  drugs  cannot  cure  disease,  for  even  if  a  given  drug
can  wholly  suppress  the  symptoms  of  an  ailment,  the  cause  being  left  untouched,
like  a  root  of  a  plant  that  is  not  wholly  extirpated,  it  will  create  new  symptoms
that  will  require  new  remedies  to  suppress  them.

Man  is  not  to  be  physically  regenerated  by  being  inoculated  with  the  fashion-
able dopes  of  the  hour,  the  poisonous  serums,  inoculations  and  vaccines.  Produced
for  the  most  part  from  the  agony  of  the  torture  trough,  they  are  branded  with
infamy,  and  are  a  recrudescence  of  the  Black  Magic  of  the  Middle  Ages  from
which  it  was  thought  humanity  had  finally  evolved.

Millions  of  people  have  within  the  present  generation  completely  lost  faith  in
the  allopaths  and  their  poisonous  nostrums,  and  have  had  recourse  to  those  who
employ  natural  methods  of  healing,  the  Naturopaths,  and  have  been  healed  of  their
physical  infirmities.

Naturopathy  is  a  distinct  school  of  healing,  employing  the  beneficent  agency
of  Nature's  forces,  of  water,  air,  sunlight,  earthpower,  electricity,  magnetism,
exercise,  rest,  proper  diet,  various  kinds  of  mechanical  treatment,  such  as  mas-
sage, osteopathy,  and  chiropractic,  mental  and  moral  science.  As  none  of  these
agents  of  rejuvenation  can  cure  every  disease,  the  Naturopath  rightly  employs
the  combination  that  is  best  adapted  to  each  individual  case.  The  result  of  such
ministrations  is  wholly  beneficent.  The  prophylactic  power  of  nature's  vibratory
forces,  mechanical  and  occult,  removes  foreign  or  poisonous  matter  from  the
system,  restores  nerve  and  blood  vitality,  invigorates  organs  and  tissues,  and  re-
generates the  entire  organism.

So  large  a  number  of  people  have  deserted  the  allopathic  school  of  medicine  in
favor  of  natural  therapeutics,  that  some  thirty  thousand  practitioners  are  de-
voted to  this  new  cult  of  healing,  and  a  large  library  of  books  has  come  into
existence  that  cover  every  branch  of  the  Nature  Cure. IVe  cannot  possibly  com-


1180


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


pile  a  complete  bibliography  of  Natural  Healing,  so  vast  is  the  output,  but  have
prepared  a  catalogue  of  the  best  books  on  the  various  subjects  connected  there-
with, which  we  take  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  our
readers.  If  these  books  are  diligently  studied  and  their  recommendations  prac-
ticed, life  will  be  more  happy,  more  noble,  more  gracious  and  more  long  lived,  and
mankind  lifted  to  a  higher  plane  of  civilization.

In  ordering  books,  give  names  of  those  desired,  and  quote  price  as  stated.  All
prices  quoted  include  postage.  Remittances  should  be  made  by  Post  Office  or
Express  Company  Money  Order  on  Butler,  N.  J.,  or  New  York  Draft,  and  ad-
dressed to  Universal  Naturopathic  Service,  Butler,  N.  J.,  U.  S.  A.


Part 1 — BREATHING AND
VOICE  CULTURE

Behnke,  Mrs.  Emil.— THE  SPEAK-
ING VOICE $0.85

Browne,  Dr.  L.— SCIENCE  AND
SINGING $0.50

Ciccolina,  Sophia  M.  A. — DEEP
BREATHING,  or  LUNG  GYM-
NASTICS  $0.70

Dunn,  S.  —  SOLO  SINGERS'
VADE MECUM $1.10

Elsberg,  L.— THE  THROAT  AND
ITS  FUNCTIONS $0.35

Guttman,  P.— GYMNASTICS  OF
THE VOICE $1.50

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  —  DEEP
BREATHING $2.20

Kepler,  J.  —  THE  ART  OF
BREATHING $2.23

Kepler,  J.— THE  LAW  OF  THE
VOICE $0.35

Kitchen,  J.  M.  —  THE  DIA-
PHRAGM AND  ITS  FUNC-
TIONS. A  timely  treatise  on
the  most  important  and  least
understood  muscle  of  the  body.
The  position,  strength,  and  use
of  the  diaphragm  more  or  less
determines  digestion,  respiration,
evacuation,  and  other  vital  body
processes $1.10

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.— WEAK  LUNGS
AND  HOW  TO  MAKE  THEM
STRONG.  Illustrated.  Corrects
prevalent  misconceptions  of  lung
diseases,  and  gives  explicit  di-
rections for  their  complete  eradi-
cation  $1.70

Mackenzie,  Sir  Morrell— HYGIENE
OF  THE  VOCAL  ORGANS.
Vital  suggestions  for  speakers,
singers,  and  all  who  want  strong,
resonant,  vocal  organs,  immune
from  disease $1.25

Medine,  F.  R.— WHAT  AND  HOW
OF  VOCAL  CULTURE.  ..$1.40

Prasad,  Rama— NATURE'S  FINER
FORCES.  THE  SCIENCE  OF
BREATHING.  An  occult  inter-
pretation of  a  function  commonly
considered  as  purely  physical.  The
spirit  of  Oriental  philosophy,
gradually  passing  westward,  has
many  beautiful  and  helpful  truths
to  inspire  the  American  worrier.
Psychic  Breathing  is  one  of  them
— it  means  poise, reserve,  power,

peace $1.70

Stebbins, Genevieve.  —  DYNAMIC

BREATHING $1.70

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  HUMAN
VOICE:  Its  Anatomy,  Physi-
ology, Pathology,  Therapeutics,
and Training $1.00


Von Boeckman, P. — CARE AND
DEVELOPMENT OF THE

LUNGS.  A  54-page  book,  con-
taining valuable  information  in
regard  to  Muscle  Building,  Chest
Expansion,  Proper  Breathing,
etc.  Special  chapter  for  women.
Illustrated  by  cuts  and  diagrams.
Author  has  largest  and  most  pow-
erful lungs  in  the  world — 11%
inches  expansion,  410  cubic-inch
lung  capacity.  Book  accepted  by
National  Medical  Library,  Wash-
ington, D. C $1.00

Wagner.— HABITUAL MOUTH
BREATHING $0.35


Part 2 — CHARTS AND
MANIKINS

Abrams,  Dr.  Albert.— SPONDYLO-
THERAPY:  A  Synoptic  Illus-
trated Chart $5.00

American  College  of  Mechano-Ther-
apy.  —  EIGHT  CHARTS  OF
ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLO-
GY. Each,  $5.00.  Whole  set,
$.30.00

Du  Plessis,  Dr.  Jean. — CON-
CUSSION IN  SPINAL  THE-
RAPEUTICS $1.00

Du  Plessis,  Dr.  Jean— IRIDIAG-
NOSIS.  The  only  complete
wall  chart  on  the  subject  of  diag-
nosis from  the  eye.  It  embraces
all  the  points  brought  out  by  the
various authors $1.50

Eale  and  Taber.  —  ANATOMICAL
AND  PHYSICAL  ENCYCLO-
PEDIC CHART.  (Osteopathic)
Answers  5,000  Questions.  Most
complete  and  exhaustive  chart  of
the  human  body  ever  published.
For  express  use  of  physicians  of
all  schools,  dentists,  eye,  ear  and
nerve  specialists,  and  medical  stu-
dents. An  encyclopedia  of  anat-
omy and  physiology ;  a  digest  of
symptoms  and  diagnosis;  a  key
to  osteopathy,  and  all  manipula-
tory treatments;  a  complete  die-
tary. 19  comprehensive  tables
compiled  by  the  most  eminent
authorities  in  every  line. .  .  .$5.00

THE  DISSECTED  PHRENO-
LOGICAL CHART $0.85

FOWLER'S  NEW  PHRENOLOG-
ICAL BUST.  With  upwards  of
100  divisons  in  china.  Newly-
discovered  organs  added,  and  old
ones  subdivided  to  indicate  va-
rious phases  of  action.  Most
complete  bust  ever  published.
.$5..50

Magnus,  Dr.  Hugo.  —  MANIKIN
OF  THE  HUMAN  SYSTEM.
16  inches  high,  in  5  divisions.
$2.60


THE  "MAN  WONDERFUL-
MANIKIN. WITH MANUAL.

(Erect,  1/3  life-size,  50  views.)
$4.00

THE  NEW  MODEL  ANATOMI-
CAL  MANIKIN,  WITH  MAN-
UAL. A  combination  of  charts
of  portions  of  the  human  body,
hinged  so  as  to  overlap  and  to  be
dissected  in  its  entirety.  Figure
1,  half  life-size,  contains  more
than  100  views,  and  has  many
parts  greatly  magnified.  Chromo-
lithographed  on  cloth-lined  ma-
terial and  in  realistic  colors.
Open,  3  feet  high;  closed,  about
18  inches.  Comprehensive  man-
ual included $10.00

Meyer,  Dr.  G.  — THE  FEMALE
FIGURE (complete) $1.50

Muller,  J.  P. —  CHART  ILLUS-
TRATING "MY  SYSTEM"  OF
BODILY  EXERCISES. ..$0.50

Palotay,  Dr.  Julius  A.— PALO-
TAY'S  CHEMISTRY  CHART.
$3.00

Panzer,  Dr.  G.  —  CHART  OF
THE  FEMALE  FIGURE.  .$1.00

SPECIAL  OFFER.— One  Com-
plete Chart  on  Adjustment,  Con-
cussion, and Pressure $1.00

One  set  cures  for  old  Chronic
Cases  of  Rheumatism,  Piles,
Paralysis,  Eczema,  Goitre,  and
the  Drink  and  Morphine  Habits.

$1.00

Printed Booklet on the Science

of Spinal Concussion $0.25

Printed  Booklet  on  Where  to
Adjust and Concuss for all

Diseases $0.25

Printed  Booklet  on  the  Cause
and  Cure  of  Tuberculosis..  $0.25
Printed  Booklet  on  the  History
of Medicine $0.25

Total Value $3.00

25% Discount 75

Net Price $2.25

Some  of  the  diseases  for  which
concussion  is  specially  indicated
are  Goitre,  Heart  Disease,  Pro-
static Enlargement,  Uterine  He-
morrhage, Stomach  Disorders,
Locomotor  Ataxia,  Incontinence
of  Urine,  Paralysis,  and  a  long
list  of  chronic  and  acute  maladies
so  hard  to  reach  with  anything
else.

We  have  seen  case  after  case
of  Goitre  disappear  through
Spinal  Concussion,  Enlarged
Prostrate  reduced  in  a  few  days,
and  the  very  worst  forms  of
Heart  Disease  and  Aortic  Aneu-
rism disappear so rapidly that


Unlvcrftnl NnliiroimtliU' l)Ire«'(»r.v  iiiiil Iliijer.s'  niiiilr  1181

The  Philosophy  of  Fasting  |

A  MESSAGE  TO  SUFFERERS  AND  SINNERS
By  EDWARD  EARLE  PURINTON


^
i


^^


HIS  work  is  the  product  of  an  enthusiast  along  the  Hnes  of
being.  He  is  an  explorer  afloat  on  the  ocean  of  existence,
with  a  ready  pen  to  record  what  he  sees,  what  he  feels,  what
he  desires,  what  he  hopes  for.  His  mystic  sympathies  give
birth  to  an  iridescent  philosophy  that  is  ballasted  by  a  sincere
effort  to  shed  from  his  soul-binding  flesh  its  pains  and  im-
purities, that  he  may  the  more  readily  mount  the  eternal
palace  stairs  of  health  and  truth  and  beauty.  He  has  discovered  a  Fountain
of  Youth  where  the  ailing  body  may  wash  away  its  pains,  troubles,  weakness,
blindness  and  rise  like  a  god  refreshed  and  ablaze  with  joy  and  ambition.  He

"Fasting,  rightlv  conducted  and  completed,  is  nearest  a  panacea  for  all
mortal  ills  of  any  drugless  remedy  I  know,  whether  physiological,  metaphysical,
or  inspirational.  Fasting,  resting,  airing,  bathing,  breathing,  exercising  and
hoping — these  seven  simple  measures,  if  sanely  proportioned  and  administered,
will  cure  any  case  of  acute  disease. And  almost  any  case  of  chronic.

Mr.  Purinton  ought  to  know  what  he  is  talking  about  for  he  has  actually
experienced  a  fast  of  thirty  days  duration,  and  his  book  is  a  log-book  as  it
were  of  his  sensations.  He  says  he  "found  God  through  this  fast."  His  object
was  not  merely  to  eliminate  poisons  from  his  body  through  fasting  but  to  fast
for  health,  enjoyment,  freedom,  power,  beauty,  faith,  courage,  poise,  virtue,
spirituality,  instinct,  inspiration,  and  love.

through  fasting,  and  in  order  that  the  reader  may  enjoy  the  same  results,  he  gives
twenty  rules  to  guide  the  faster  who  undertakes  the  Conquest  Fast,  that  is  to
say  a  fast  of  thirty  days  to  endow  mind,  body  and  soul  with  the  already-men-
tioned transcendent  qualities.

We  think  every  sick  man  or  woman  should  read  this  book  and  take  Mr.
Purinton's  experiences  to  heart.  It  costs  nothing  but  a  stern  resolution  to  put
in  practice  the  fast  so  strongly  recommended  as  a  cure  of  almost  every  physical
ailment.  It  will  be  admitted  that  a  man  who  has  arrived  at  adult  age  without
having  missed  a  meal  whether  his  digestive  apparatus  wanted  a  holiday  or  not,
must  be  laden  to  the  gunwales  with  all  the  poisons  of  un-eliminated  food  pro-
ducts, whose  fermentation  is  giving  him  untold  misery.

For  heaven's  sake  give  your  overworked  organs  a  rest !  Try  the  fasting  cure
and  know  a  happiness  that  cannot  otherwise  be  experienced  this  side  of  the
Elysian  Fields.  And  no  better  monitor,  no  better  guide  for  such  an  experiment
can  be  had  than  the  book  under  consideration.  Buy  this  book,  read  it,  act
upon  its  advice  and  thank  both  author  and  publishers  for  your  happiness.  Booklet
descriptive  of  Purinton's  Works  on  Philosophy,  Mental  Science,  Efficiency,
Health,  Soul  Life,  etc.,  will  be  mailed  for  5  cents  in  stamps.


Price  in  paper,  postpaid,  $1.10;  cloth,  $1.60.

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1182


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


we could hardly believe our  own
eyes.

Spinal  Concussion  must  be
considered  by  every  drugless
healer  who  wants  the  best  to  be
had in his profession.

Riley.  Dr.  J.  S.— CHART  OF  AD-
JUSTMENT, CONCUSSION
AND PRESSURE $1.00

Riley. Dr. J. S. — CHART OF
NERVE DISTRIBUTION.
$1.00

Riley,  Dr.  J.  S.  —  CHART  OF
ZONE THERAPY $1.00

Schmidt.  Dr.  —  ANATOMICAL
CHART  OF  THE  MALE
HEAD $1.00

STEREOSCOPIC  DISSECTIONS
OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY.  Price
on request.


Part 3 — DIAGNOSIS AND
DEIjINEATION

Burgess,  Dr.  W.  H.— CHRONIC
DISEASE.  The  Natural  Method
of  Diagnosis  and  Successful
Treatment $1.60

Burgess,  Dr.  W.  H.— THE  NEW
FIELD.  Part  I.  Natural  Diag-
nosis. Part  II.  Congenial  Medi-
cation and  Therapeutics.  Part  III.
Diseases  of  Women  and  Chil-
dren  $1.10

Button,  Dr.  C.  A.— RUDIMENTS
OF  REFRACTION  (Optometry)


Cheiro.— GUIDE  TO  THE  HAND.

$0.70

Doolittle.  J.  S.— MAN  AN  OPEN
BOOK. CRANIOGNOMY. The

imminent  truths  of  Phrenology,
Temperament,  Vocation,  Devel-
opment, and  the  comprehensive
study  of  the  individual.  Keen
analysis,  deft  handling,  apt  il-
lustration, attractive  style,  and,
back  of  all,  versatile  intellection
and  humanity-loving  spirit,  dis-
tinctly differentiate  this  book
from like publications $1.10

Fowler,  P.  S.,  and  L.  N.— NEW
ILLUSTRATED  SELF -IN-
STRUCTOR IN  PHRENOLO-
GY. The  pioneers  in  phrenology
progress  have  here  crystalized  a
lifetime's  experience  the  world
over.  A  beginner  cannot  find
a  better  guide — the  way-marks
are unmistakable $1.10

Heron-Allen.  Edward.  —  A  MAN-
UAL OF  CHEIROSOPHY
(Cheirognomy  and  Cheiromancy)
$2.20

Heron-Allen,  Edward.  —  THE
SCIENCE  OF  THE  HAND.  Il-
lustrated. Not  the  farce-fallacies
of  gypsy  palmistry,  but  the  eter-
nal facts  of  scientific  cheirology.
If  you  have  been  judging  digi-
tal diagnosis  by  meaningless  lines
some  one  has  traced  for  you,  there
is  a  revelation  in  store.  Every
physical  fact  is  simply  a  mental
expression,  and  a  knowledge  of
the  relationship  enables  any  man
to  become  clairvoyant  and  a
"psychic." .$2.85

Jacques,  Dr.  D.— THE  TEMPERA-
MENTS. The  standard  work  on
the  topic.  356  pp.,  150  illustra-
tions  $1.60

Kuhne.  Louie.— AM  I  WELL  OR
SICK,? $0.50


Kuhne.  Louis.  —  FACIAL  DIAG-
NOSIS. Illustrated.  No  ther-
mometer, no  pulse,  no  percussion,
no  speculum,  none  of  the  com-
mon playthings  of  the  orthodox
diagnostician.  Instead,  a  single
element — knowledge.  The  result,
not  an  axiomatic  announcement
of  unexplained  disease,  but  a
foretelling  of  it,  and  a  forbid-
ding, and  withal  a  clarifying  of
the  whole  matter.  A  book  es-
pecially for  fleshy  people  and  for
the anaemic $1.60


Louis Kuhne, Author

turopathy. The New

Healing ; and Facial


of  Neo-Na-
Science  of
Expression


Kuhne,  Louis.  —  THE  SCIENCE
OF  FACIAL  EXPRESSION.
$5.00

(Foreign  language  editions,  same
price.)

Lahn,  Dr.  E.  H.— IRIDOLOGY—
DIAGNOSIS  FROM  THE  EYE
(Also  in  German)  $2.20;  with
key $2.70

Riddle, M.  N.,  and  Frances,  Louise
E.— HUMAN NATURE EX-
PLAINED. 400  pp.,  illustrated.
....' $1.70

Sizer,  Nelson.— CATECHISM  OF
PHRENOLOGY .$0.70

Sizer.  Nelson.— CHOICE  OF  PUR-
SUITS; OR,  WHAT  TO  DO,
AND WHY. Describing 75

trades  and  professions,  and  the
temperaments  and  talents  required
for  each.  Also,  how  to  educate
on  phrenological  principles,  each
man  for  his  proper  work.  To-
gether with  portraits  and  biog-
raphies of  more  than  one  hun-
dred successful  thinkers  and
workers.  A  work  primarily  for
young  people  bound  successward.
680 pp $2.20

Schofield,  Dr.  Alfred  T.— NERVES
IN  DISORDER $1.60

Schofield,  Dr.  Alfred  T.— NERVES
IN ORDER $1.60

Thomson,  James  C. — AN  INTRO-
DUCTION TO  NATURE
CURE.  Chiefly  devoted  to  Os-
teopathy, Curative,  Dietetics  and
Iridology $2.50

Wells,  S.  R.— NEW  PHYSIOG-
NOMY. 768  pp.,  1,055  illus-
trations. Signs  of  character  as
manifested  through  temperament
and  external  forms,  and  especial-
ly in  "human  face  divine."  An
entrancing  study  of  a  scientific
system.  Physiology,  Phrenology,
Ethnology,  and  other  branches
are  shown  to  support  this  phase
of  character  study,  and  the  whole
matter  is  presented  so  fascinat-
ingly as  to  win,  first,  readers,
then  converts,  then  enthusiasts,
then_  apostles.  The  criterion  of
physiognomy  publications. .$.'{.20


Part -J — DIETETICS AND
COOKERY

Alsaker,  Dr.  R.  L.  —  HEALTH
AND  EFFICIENCY $2.00

Anderson,  E.  F.  —  HEALTH
FOODS  AND  HOW  TO  PRE-
PARE THEM $1.20

Anderson,  L.  H.— NATURAL  WAY
IN  DIET;  OR,  PROPER  FOOD
FOR  MAN.  A  typical  repre-
sentative of  the  modern  move-
ment tovvard  perfect  nutrition.
Mal-assimilation  is  assumed  now
as  the  basis  of  all  disease,  and
the  first  therapeutic  measure  is
the  regulating  of  the  dietary.  This
book  will  prove  a  valuable  ad-
junct toward this  end $1.35

Andrews,  Alfred.— WHAT  SHALL
WE  EAT? $1.10

Bailey,  Dr.  E.  H.  S.— SOURCE,
CHEMISTRY  AND  USE  OF
FOOD PRODUCTS $1.75

Beard,  Sidney  H.— A  COMPRE-
HENSIVE GUIDE-BOOK  TO
NATURAL  HYGIENIC,  HU-
MANE DIET.  Is  even  more
man  tlie  name  implies.  Con-
tains essays  on  Hygienic  Living,
Moderation,  Woman's  Mission,
Traveling  Hints,  Substitutes  for
Animal  Foods,  Health  Recipes,
and  other  vital  topics.  The  author
is  a  leading  exponent  of  the
golden-age  tenets ;  that  alone  is
ample  assurance  of  the  book's
merits. 50c.; cloth, $1.10

Bowditch,  Mrs.— NEW  VEGETA-
RIAN DISHES $0.60

Browne,  PhyUis.  —  A  YEAR'S
COOKERY $0.60

Browne,  Phyllis.  —  DAINTY
BREAKFASTS $0.60

Butterman,  Dr.  W.  F.  —  THE
CAUSE  OF  MOST  OF  OUR
AILMENTS $1.10

Carqu6,  Otto.— THE  FOLLY  OF
MEAT EATING $0.10

Carque  Otto.  —  FOUNDATION
OF  ALL  REFORM .$0.50

Carrington,  Hereward. — THE
NATURAL  FOOD  OF  MAN.
$2.55

Cassell's  COOKERY  FOR  COM-
MON  AILMENTS $0.60

Cassell's  DICTIONARY  OF
COOKERY.  The  most  complete
compilation  ever  published.  9,000
recipes,  1178  pp.  $2.50

Cassell's  POPULAR  COOKERY.
$0.85

Cassell's  SHILLING  COOKERY.
$0.45

Cassell's  VEGETARIAN  COOK-
ERY  $0.60

Crichton-Browne,  Sir  James.  —
DELUSIONS  IN  DIET,  OR
PARSIMONY  IN  NUTRI-
TION. Cloth, 118 pp., $0.85

Christian,  Eugene.— HOW  TO
LIVE  ONE  HUNDRED
YEARS $1.10

Christian,  Eugene.— CYCLOPE-
DIA OF  DIETETICS.  Five
volumes $10.00

Christian,  Eugene. —  250  MEAT-
LESS MENUS  AND  RE-
CIPES  $1.00

Christian,  Eugene.— EAT  AND
BE WELL $1.00

Christian,  Eugene.  —  LITTLE
LESSONS  IN  SCIENTIFIC
EATING SJ^S-OO


Vnlversal XnturonntliU- l)irec<ory  nml lliiyers'  Oiitde  1ISJJ


NATURE  CURE  SERIES


4h


BY  HENRY  LINDLAHR.  M.  D..  N.  D.  5

<r' President,  Lindlahr  College  of  Nature  Cure;  Founder  and  President  Lindlahr  Health V^
4h  Home,  Chicago,  and  Lindlahr  Health  Resort,  Klmhurst,  111.  ^


<^-


*'-


A  B  C  of  Natural  Dietetics  and  Nature  Cure  CooK  BooK

By  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Henry  Lindlahr

*  Are  your  ideas  on  the  subject  of  dietetics  clear? If  not

$ Free  Yourself  from  Mental  Confusion

*  by  purchasing  this  book.  •

^ hor  the  past  year,  food  has  occupied  the  center  of  the  stage  in  health  circles. Numer-
al ous  dieticians  and  food  scientists,  with  books,  pamphlets,  newspaper  and  magazine

*  articles,  have  thrown  the  field  into  a  greater  state  of  confusion  than  ever.

Dr,  Lindlahr* s  Book  Clears  the  Atmosphere

Every  dietetic  fad  is  exposed  and  every  true  principle  explained  from  a  scientific
standpoint.  It  is  a  clear  presentation  of  a  truly  simple  subject.  The  principles  of
food  chemistry  and  natural  dietetics  are  reduced  to  an  exact  science.

To  This  Scientific  Treatise  on  Food  Values,  Mrs.  Lindlahr  Has
Added

over  950  choice  recipes  which  make  a  vegetarian  diet  the  most  palatable,  as  well  as
the  most  curative  and  nourishing. Each  recipe  is  marked  in  accordance  with  its  value
$ and  the  character  of  food  elements  which  it  contains. These  recipes  are  the  result
of  extended  experiment  and  have  all  been  tested  for  their  curative  and  nourishing
qualities  in  actual  practice.

Either  hooli  sent  prepaid  on  receipt  of  Ttvo  Dollars  and  Fifteen  Cents.

NATURE CURE PUBLISHING COMPANY

S 525 SOUTH ASHLAND BOULEVARD,  CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS


^


I  Nature  Cure  Philosophy  and  Practice

i  A  SOLUTION  TO  LIFE'S  GREATEST  PROBLEM  ^

*  A  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISE  ON  HEALTH,  DISEASE  AND  CURE  J

^  Health  follows  observance  of  Nature's  Laws. Disease  is  the  result  of  disobedience  ^

<^  of  these  same  laws. Cure  is  the  process  of  retracing  and  follows  the  observance  of  *

3j  definite  laws. In  this  greatest  of  all  books  on  this  subject.  Dr.  Lindlahr  fully  explains  *

£  The  Laws  of  Cure  and  the  Laws  of  Crises  I

^  No  more  comprehensible  book  has  ever  been  written  on  disease  and  its  cure. Every  ^

*i  question  is  fully  answered. Every  argument  that  could  possibly  be  advanced  by  the  ^

*  most  exacting  critic  has  been  anticipated  and  met.  There  is  nothing  hidden;  every-  ^
^  thing  is  revealed,  and  in  Dr.  Lindlahr's  inimitable  style,  is  made  as  plain  as  day.  ^
<^  There  is  no  excuse  for  the  individual  who  fails  to  understand  Nature's  processes  #
«,  after  studying  this  book.  <*
§  "IT  SHOULD  BE  ADOPTED  BY  THE  DRUQLESS  PROFESSION  AS  THE
4  PREMIER  AUTHORITY,"  says  a  welUknown  teacher  and  practitioner.  "IT
?  IS  THE  BASIS  OF  ALL  DRUGLESS  TREATMENT."


1184


Xaluroixitliic  Book  Catalog


Davis— DIETOTHERAPY:  FOOD
IN  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.
$2.20

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  W.— HEALTH
IN  THE  HOUSEHOLD;  OR,
HYGIENIC  COOKERY.  The
standard  work  on  health  foods,
their  selection  and  preparation.
Vanity,  palatability  and  the  other
factors, usually forgotten  _ by

•  dietists,  are  made  the  foci  of
interest ;  and  the  gourmet,  as
well  as  the  health-seeker  will  revel
in these  recipes. 608  pp... $2.20

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  W.  —  THE
DIET  QUESTION.  100  pp.
(from above) $0.25

Drews,  George  J.— UNFIRED
FOOD  AND  TROPHO- THE-
RAPY (FOOD  CURE).  A  com-
plete exposition  of  the  use  of
imfired  food  for  the  prevention
and cure of  disease $3.20

Dwight,  Henrietta  L.  —  THE
GOLDEN  AGE  COOK  BOOK.
$1.20

Ehret,  Arnold.  —  RATIONAL
FASTING  FOR  SICK  PEOPLE.
$0.50

Einhorn,  Max.— LECTURES  ON
DIETETICS. Cloth $1.50

Fawcett,  William.— THE  BANA-
NA; CULTIVATION  AND
COMMERCIAL USES.  ..  .$3.50

Fisk.  Dr.  Eugene  L.— ALCOHOL:
ITS  RELATION  TO  HUMAN
EFFICIENCY  AND  LONGEV-
ITY  $1.00

Fletcher,  Horace.— THE  A.  B.  C.
OF  OUR  OWN  NUTRITION.
426 pp .$2.60

Fletcher,  Horace.  —  FLETCHER-
ISM  :  WHAT  IT  IS $1.00

Forward,  C.  W.  —  PRACTICAL
VEGETARIAN  RECIPES
(London) $0.60

Galsgie,  Dr.  Edward  C— DIET
FOR  HEALTH $1.00'

Gibbon,  Stanley.  —  UNFIRED
FOOD  IN  PRACTICE.  ....$0.35

Haig.— DIET AND FOOD. Third

edition. (See  Just  and Kintzing.)

$1.00

Haig.  —  EVERYJ5AY  DISHES
AND  EVERYDAY  WORK..$0.85

Harland,  Marion.— EVERY  WO-
MAN  HER  OWN  COOK.  $2.00

Harland,  Marion.  —  EVERY  WO-
MAN  HER  OWN  COOK.  $0.50

Harris, Frances Barber. —
FORIDA SALADS.  Ponce

de  Leon,  seeking  for  a  mythical
Fountain  of  Youth  in  the  sands
of  Florida,  did  not  know  that
all  aroun<i  him  a  true  fountain
of  youth  existed  in  the  succu-
lent and  liealth  restoring  juices
of  tropical  food  plants  that  grow
in  that  sun-kissed  clime.  The
author,  who  resides  in  Jackson-
ville, Fla.,  has  in  this  dainty
book  given  a  collection  of  epi-
curean, wholesome  salad  recipes
that  will  appeal  to  the  most
fastidious  of  gourmets.  What
can  be  done  in  the  way  of  card
party  salads,  dinner  salads,  lun-
cheon salads,  salad  dressings
and  salad  sandwiches  made  with
the  oranges,  bananas,  mangoes,
pineapples,  tomatoes,  kumquats,
loquats,  palmettoes,  grape  fruit,
tangerines,  and  mammee-sapota,
of  Florida,  not  to  mention  straw-
berries, lettuce,  spinach,  apples,
peanuts,  walnuts,  pecans  and  al-
monds, _  frozen  in  lemon  and
tomato  jelly, all of  which  gusta-


tory and  healthful  foods  can  be
partaken  of  at  the  well-known
Health  Resort  of  Yunghorn,
Tangerine,  Fla.,  and  which  form
one  of  its  potent  attractions.
$1.10

Heard,  Dr.  Mary  A.— THE  HY-
GEIA  COOK  BOOK:  COOK-
ING FOR  HEALTH $0.50

Hindhede,  Dr.  M.  —  WHAT  TO
EAT  AND  WHY.  A  Healthy,
Simi)le  and  Cheap  Mode  of  Liv-
ing  $1.00

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— EATING
FOR  STRENGTH.  For  the  in-
valid, the  student,  the  athlete.
Shows  the  exact  eflfect  of  various
foods  and  drinks,  the  relation  of
eating  to  health  and  disease,  and
makes  explicit  and  emphatic  men-
tion of  important  points  omitted
in  similar  works.  Distinctly  mod-
ern and  American,  and  one  of  the
few  really  popular  books  on  the
food question $1.10

Howard,  Dr.  Heaton  C.  —  THE
THERAPEUTIC  VALUE  OF
THE POTATO $0.55

Just,  Adolf. —  THE  YUNGBORN
DIETARY (Vegetarian)... $1.10

Kellogg,  Mrs.  E.  E.— SCIENCE
IN  THE  KITCHEN.  The  em-
bodiment of  ten  years'  experi-
ment and  experience  in  the  Lab-
oratory Kitchen  connected  with
the  Battle  Creek  Sanitarium.  A
complete  culinary  manual,  treat-
ing of  the  Pocketbook,  the  Mar-
ket, the  Kitchen,  the  Dining-
Room,  the  Pantry,  and  the  other
departments  of  model  housewifery.
Over  800  carefully  tested  recipes
of  dishes  used  at  the  greatest
Sanitarium in America. .  .  .$2.10

Keswick,  J.  B.— HEALTH  PRO-
MOTING FOOD  AND  HOW
TO COOK  IT $1.10


Kimmel.  Viola  M.— RIGHT  EAT-
ING A  SCIENCE  AND  A  FINE
ART $0.50

Kintzing,  Dr.  Pearce.  —  LONG
LIFE  AND  HOW  TO  ATTAIN
IT $1.10

Kuepper,  L.  —  QUISISANA  HY-
GIENIC COOK  BOOK.  Basis  of
cookery  at  the  Quisisana  Sanita-
rium (Naturopathic).  Adapted
menus  for  the  different  seasons
of  the  year,  and  300  hygienic
recipes $1.00

Lady,  A.— VEGETARIAN  COOK-
ERY  $1.60

Latson,  Dr.  W.  R.  C— THE  FOOD
VALUE  OF  MEAT $0.35

Lahn,  Dr.  Henry  E. — TRUE
FOOD ECONOMY $0.20

Leppel.  Sophie.  —  SUITABLE
FOOD  AND  PHYSICAL  IM-
MORTALITY  $0.,10

Leppel,  Sophie.  —  DIET  VS.
DRUGS $0.35

Lewis,  Dr.  Die.  —  OUR  DIGES-
TION; OR,  MY  JOLLY
FRIEND'S  SECRET.  A  Physi-
cian's acumen,  Dietist's  knowl-
edge, and  a  Reformer's  spirit  are
blended  in  most  happy  propor-
tions. The  thought  is  somewhat
out  of  the  regular  line,  as  the
title  indicates,  and  the  dyspeptic
will  find  a  revelation  in  the  read-
ing. 400  pp $1.60

Lindlahr,  Anna.— THE  NATURE
CURE  COOK  BOOK  AND
A.  B.  C.  OF  NATURAL
DIETETICS $2.20

Lorand,  Dr.  Arnold.  —  HEALTH
AND  LONGEVITY  THROUGH
RATIONAL  DIET $2.60

Lust,  Mrs.  Louisa. — NATURO-
PATHIC VEGETARIAN
COOK  BOOK.  $0.75;  cloth,
$1.00

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  STRENGTH
FROM  EATING $1.50


Louisa  Lust, N. D.,  Author  of  the  Xatnropathic  Vegetarian  Cook  Book


NaturopaUiic  Book  Catalog


1185


May,  Mrs.  E.  —  COMPREHEN-
SIVE VEGETARIAN  COOK-
ERY. 1,000  Tested  Recipes. $0.50

Metchnikoff,  Prof.  Elie.  —  THE
PROLONGATION  OF  LIFE.
Optimistic Studies $1!.20

Moore,— WHY  I  AM  A  VEGETA-
RIAN. Ilygicnically,  athletically,
aesthetically,  etiiically,  this  plea
for  satisfying  food  is  without  a
peer  in  all  vegetarian  literature.
The  facts  arc  unanswerable  argu-
ments, the  thought  is  chaste  and
expressive,  but,  more  than  all,  the
manifest  motif  is  a  love  for  all
animal  creation .$0.35

Nichols,  Dr.  T.  L.— BEST  SIX-
PENNY COOKERY $0.25

Nichols,  Dr.  T.  L. — THE  DIET
CURE $0.70

Nichols.  Dr.  T.  L.  —  HOW  TO
COOK $0.60

Payne,  A.  G.— CHOICE  DISHES
AT  SMALL  COST $0.00

Penira,  Dr.  J.— FOOD  AND  DIET.
$2.10

Poole,  Mrs.  Hester  M. — FRUITS
AND  HOW  TO  USE  THEM.
Superlatively  the  best  discussion
of  the  perfect  food.  Fruits  have
a  wider  sphere  of  usefulness  than
any  other  single  nutritive  ele-
ment. Antiseptic,  laxative,  de-
purative,  soothing,  sustaining,
they  are  being  made  a  daily  de-
ligjit,  by  people  who  think.  The
book  is  the  best  guide  to  their
"se $1.00

Purinton,  E.  E. — THE  PHILOSO-
PHY OF  FASTING.  $1.00;
cloth .$1.50

Schlickeysen,  G.  —  FRUIT  AND
BREAD:  A  Natural  and  Scientific
Diet $1.10

Shaw,  J.  Austin. — THE  BEST
THING  IN  THE  WORLD:
GOOD  HEALTH,  AND  HOW
TO  KEEP  IT  FOR  A  HUN-
DRED YEARS.  Record  of  a
45-day fast $1.50

Smith,  Ellen  G.— FAT  OF  THE
LAND  AND  HOW  TO  LIVE
ON  IT.  The  title  of  the  closing
chapter,  "In  a  Nutshell,"  is  an
epitome  of  the  chapters  preced-
ing. The  prose  of  everyday  eat-
ing is  transformed  into  the  poetry
of  ideal  nutrition.  Every  cognate
question  is  measured  by  the  main
point,  and  such  seemingly  foreign
topics  as  Cooking  Utensils,  Social
Requirements,  Bakeries,  Alcohol-
ics in  Food,  and  Farm-Yard
Slaughter,  each  yield  their  quota
of  truth.  The  chapters  on  Veg-
etable Oils,  Fruits,  and  Nuts  are
especially  apt $1.60

Smith,  J.  —  Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.  —
FRUITS  AND  FARINACEA;
THE  PROPER  FOOD  FOR
MAN.  Illustrated.  Lessened  ex-
pense, increased  vitality,  prolong-
ed longevity,  and  intensified  en-
joyment are  inevitable  results  at-
tending the  adoption  of  this  sys-
tem  $1.70

Swain,  Dr.  Rachel.  —  COOKING
FOR  HEALTH $1.10

Swain.  Dr.  Rachel. — PRACTICAL
HEALTH  HINTS $1,10

Towne,  Mrs.  Elizabeth.  —  JUST
HOW  TO  COOK  MEALS
WITHOUT  MEAT.  The  author's
experiences  in  the  author's  own
style.  A  biography,  a  letter,  a
chat,  a  cook-book,  and  a  ser-
mon— all  in  one $0.25

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— HYDROPATHIC
COOK  BOOK.  226  pp.,  98  illus-
trations  $0.70

TraU,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  HYGIENIC
COOK  BOOK. No  yeast,  acids.


grease,  condiments.  Every  recipe
a  bit  of  personal  satisfaction.
.$0.25

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— SCIENTIFIC
BASIS  OF  VEGETARIANISM.

Tyler,  Byron.  —  RAW  FOOD
BOOK  AND  HEALTH  GUIDE.
$0.10

Wallace,  Mrs.  C.  L.  H.  —  :5«6
MENUS.  (No  fish,  llesh,  fowl,
intoxicants.) $1.10

Weaver,  Louise  B.  and  Helen  C.
Lecron.— A  THOUSAND  WAYS
TO  PLEASE  A  HUSBAND.
(Bettina's Recipes) .$2.00

Wells,  R.  B.  D.  --  THE  BEST
FOOD,  AND  HOW  TO  COOK
IT $0.60


Part 5 — HELPS FOR
MOTHERS

Bolton,  Frances  S.— BABY..  .$0.60

Chavasse,  Pye  Henry. — ADVICE
TO A  WIFE $1.00

Chavasse,  Pye  Henry. — ADVICE
TO A MOTHER $1.00

Combe,  Dr.  Andrew. — MANAGE-
MENT OF  INFANCY.  307  pp.
$1.10

Fischer,  Dr.  Louis.  —  THE
HEALTH-CARE  OF  THE
BABY .$0.85

Oilman,  Charlotte  P.— CONCERN-
ING CHILDREN.  298  pp.  $1.35

Gordon,  Dr.  H.  Lainge.  —  THE
MODERN  MOTHER $2.00

Henry,  Mrs.  S.  M.  J.— STUDIES
IN  HOME  AND  CHILD  LIFE.
256 pp $1.00

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— PARTURI-
TION WITHOUT  PAIN,  A
natural  and  rational  regime  of
preparation,  by  which  the  pangs
of  child-birth  may  be  reduced
to  a  minimum.  To  the  common
mind.  Motherhood  means  long-
continued  and  oft-repeated  pe-
riods of  vicarious  suffering,  simply
because  the  common  mind  is  un-
educated and  unthinking.  This
book  lifts  the  veil  of  prurient
mysticism,  and  shows  how  simply,
easily  and  beautifully  Nature
means  her  daughters  to  fulfill  their
mission $1.10

Kube,  Minna.— FEWER  PEOPLE
BUT  HAPPIER.  The  artificial
restriction  of  child-bearing  among
poor,  sick  and  weakened  women.
$1.00

Lindley,  E.  Marguerite. — HEALTH
IN THE HOUSE $1.60

McPherson.  Mrs.  H.  R.— BABY
RECORD $0.50

Page,  Dr.  C.  E.  —  H  O  W  TO
TREAT  THE  BABY,  An  in-
valuable aid  for  prospective  pa-
rents. Child-crises  are  fatal  he-
cause  unforeseen,  and  not  until
forethought  and  foreknowledge
have  met  all  possible  emergen-
cies, is  a  mother  prepared  to  rear
a  child.  The  succinct  attractive-
ness of  the  author's  style  puts
the  whole  matter  into  vivid  re-
lief, and  has  won  the  appreciation
of  many  mothers $0.50

Rosch,  Dr.-  E.— THE  ABUSE  OF
THE  MARRIAGE  RELA-
TION. The  Origin  of  Most
Chronic Diseases $0.50

Shrew,  Dr. — Drayton,  Dr.  H.  L. —
PREGNANCY  AND  CHILD-
BIRTH  .$0..'J5

Stacpoole,  Florence. — ADVICE  TO
WOMEN.  Before,  During,  and
After  Confinement $0.85

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B. — TOKOL-
OGY, Illustrated. English or


German.  The  standard  work  on
motherhood.  2,700  copies  sold
in  a  single  month.  Translated
into  Russian  at  request  of  Count
Tolstoy.  Hundreds  of  "Tokology
Babies,"  whose  photographs  the
author  cherishes,  bear  livmg  wit-
ness to  the  living  truths  enun-
ciated in  "Tokology."  No  ade-
quate description  can  be  attempt-
ed here. Circulars  sent. .  .$2.S5

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B.  and  Kel-
logg, Dr.  J.  H.  — MOTHER'S
PORTFOLIO $1..35

Studley,  Dr.  Mary  J.— WHAT
OUR  GIRLS  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  MOTHER'S
HYGIENIC  HAND-BOOK.  186
pp $1.10

Waisbroker,  Mrs.  —  PERFECT
MOTHERHOOD $1.10

Winters,  Dr.  J.  E.— THE  FEED-
ING OF  INFANTS $0.60

Wood-Allen,  Dr,  Mary.— BABY'S
FIRSTS,  First  Bath,  First  Tooth,
and  other  epoch-markers  in  the
child-cycle $0.45

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.  —  BABY
RECORD $0.60


Part 6 — HINTS FOR NURSES

Hampton,  Isabel  A.— NURSING:
Its  Principles  and  Practice.  512
pp.,  illustrated.  One  of  the  few
masterly  works  on  the  profession,
second  only  to  that  of  the  physi-
cian in  importance  and  recom-
pense. Not  alone  for  nurses,  but
for  those  ever  called  upon  to  care
for  the  sick  and  for  those  in-
clining toward  therapy  in  some
form,  but  uncertain  which  to
choose $2.20

Robb,  Isabel  H.  —  NURSING
ETHICS.  For  Hospital  and  Pri-
vate I'se $1-10

Wood.  Catherine  J.  —  A  HAND-
BOOK OF  NURSING  FOR
THE  HOME  AND  HOSPITAL.
$0.85

Wood.  Catherine  J.— HANDBOOK
FOR  THE  NURSING  OF  SICK
CHILDREN.  A  blow  directed
at  the  appalling  mortality  among
children.  To  be  used  in  place
of  the  old-time  medicine  chest,
information  having  superseded  in-
jection. 300  pp $1,10


Part 7 — HYDROPATHY

Balbemie.  Dr.  J.— PHILOSOPHY
OF  WATER  CURE.  One  of  the
best  theoretical  expositions  pub-
lished  $0.25

Gully.  Dr.  J.  M.— WATER-CURE
IN  CHRONIC  DISEASES,  .\n
exposition  of  the  causes,  progress
and  termination  of  various  chronic
diseases  of  the  Digestive  Organs,
Lungs,  Nerves,  Limbs,  and  Skin,
and  of  their  treatment  by  water
and  other  hygienic  means.  405
pp $1.35

Jamison,  Dr.  Alcinous  B. — INTES-
TINAL IRRIGATION. ...$3.00

Johnson,  Dr.  Edward. — THE  DO-
MESTIC PRACTICE  OF  HY-
DROPATHY. 467  pp S1.35

Just,  Adolf.  —  RETURN  TO  NA-
TURE, (Largely  devoted  to  Hy-
dropathv.) In cloth $3.20

Kekswick,  J.  B.  —  BATHS.  OR.
THE  WATER  CURE  MADE
EASY. Illustrated $0.60


1186


Xitlurupatliic  Book  (Udoloii


Adolph Just, Hydropathist, Author of "Return to Nature"


Kellogg, Dr. J. H.— RATIONAL

HYDROTHERAPY ip::.50

Kneipp, Father. —  MY WATER

CURE. In cloth $1.60

In paper $1.00

(See heading "The Kneipp
System.")
Kuhne, Louis.  —  FACIAL DIAG-
NOSIS  (Adjunct  to  New  Science

of Healing) $1.60

Kuhne,  Louis.— NEO-NATURO-
PATHY,  THE NEW  SCIENCE

OF HEALING $;5.00

Kuhne,  Louis.  —  SCIENCE  OF
FACIAL  EXPRESSION  (Ad-
junct to  New  Science  of  Heal-
ing) $.5.00

Metcalfe,  Richard.  —  HYDROPA-
THY IN  THE  TREATMENT
OF  INFLUENZA  AND  FEVER

CASES $0.50

Metcalfe,  Richard.  —  LIFE  OF
VINCENT  PRIESSNITZ.  Illus-
trated. The  tribute  of  a  great
English  Hydropathist  to  the
the  early  methods  in  detail,  con-
trasts them  with  the  modern,  pre-
sents numerous  illustrative  cases,
emphasizes  the  cardinal  principles
of  the  Water-Cure,  and  closes
with a comprehensive chapter of

Bibliography $1.75

Miller, Dr. L. P.  —  HOW TO

BATHE $0.40

Nichols,  Mrs.  M.  S.  Y.— WOMAN'S
WORK IN WATER-CURE.

$0.60

Pope, Curran. — PRACTICAL

HYDROTHERAPY $5.00

RICHARD  METCALFE,  HY-
DROPATHIST; THE  MAN
AND  HIS  WORK.— "An  Old
Patient."  This  book  treats  of
the  life  work  of  England's  most
eminent  hydropathist,  enumer-
ates and  illustrates  diseases  suc-
cessfully treated  by  him,  includes
treatises  on  Hydrophobia  and  its
cure,  and  concludes  with  a  most
explicit  Hydropathic  Ma-
teria Medica.  A  valuable  Eng-
liih  interpretation  of  the  Water-
Cure $0.76


Trail, Dr. R.  T.— THE  BATH.  35

illustrations $0.35

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  HYDRO-
PATHIC ENCYCLOPEDIA.
Designed  as  a  guide  book  to
families  and  students,  and  a  text-
book for  physicians.  Eight  dis-
tinct heads:  Outlines  of  Anat-
omy, Physiology  of  the  Human
Body,  Hygienic  Agencies,  Pre-
servation of  Health,  Dietetics
and  Hydropathic  Cookery,
Theory  and  Practice  of  Water-
Treatment,  Special  Pathology,  in-
cluding Nature,  Causes,  Symp-
toms, and  Treatment  of  all  known
Diseases,  Applications  of  Hydro-
pathy to  Midwifery  and  the  Nurs-
ery ;  contains  also  Glossary,  Table
of  (Contents,  etc.  The  work  is  rni-
nutely  comprehensive,  but  its
chief  merit  is  the  practical  util-
ization of  the  manifold  systems
in  a  common-sense  way.  Two
volumes  in  one.  966  pp.,  4G1
illustrations $5.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— WATER-CURE
FOR  THE  MILLIONS.  The
best  brief  introduction  to  Hydro-
therapy  $0.25

Tyrrell,  Dr.  C.  A.  —  ROYAL
ROAD  TO  HEALTH.  Cascade
Treatment $1.50

Tyrrell,  Dr.  Chas.  A.  —  THE
ROYAL  ROAD  TO  HEALTH.
Advocates  the  Internal  Bath.
J.  B.  L.  Cascade  Treatment. $1.00

Wells,  R.  B.  D.— WATER,  AND
HOW  TO  APPLY  IT  IN
HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.$0.60

Wilson,  Dr.  J.  W.— Gully.  Dr.  J.
M.— THE  PRACTICE  OF  WA-
TER-CURE  $0.35

Winternitz.— HYDROPATHY.  Il-
lustrated $2.50

Wright,  Dr.  Laura  M.— THE  NEW
INTERNAL  BATH.  A  strong
and  practical  presentation  of  a
matter  commonly  misunderstood,
misconsidered,  and  misapplied.
Especially  helpful  to  the  man
whose  fetish  is  a  cathartic  or
liver pills .$0.25


Part S — IIJEAli LIVING

Aldrich,  Auretta  R.— LIFE  AND
HOW  TO LIVE  IT $1.10

Anderson.  Prof.  L.  H.— HOW  TO
WIN.  OR  SURE  SECRETS  OF
SUCCESS $2.20

Boehme,  Kate  A.  —  SEVEN  ES-
SAYS ON  THE  ATTAINMENT
OF  HAPPINESS $1.10

Buchanan.  Uriel. — ART  OF  AT-
TAINMENT  $0.35

Buchanan.  Uriel.  —  IDEALS  AND
CONDUCT $0.60

Buchanan,  Uriel.  —  SPIRITUAL
LIFE $0.75

Buchanan.  Uriel.  —  TRUTH  AND
DESTINY $0.25

Cady,  H.  E.  — ONENESS  WITH
GOD .$0..3(>

Cassell's  HEALTH  FOR  THE
YOUNG $0.60

Cassell's  HEALTH  AND  RIGHT
BREATHING $0.60

Cassell's  HEALTH  CULTURE
FOR BUSY MEN $0.60

Cassell's  HEALTH  HABITS  AND
HOW  TO  TRAIN  THEM. $0.60

Cassell's  HEALTHY  BRAIN  AND

HEALTHY BODY $0.60

Christian,  Eugene.  —  HOW  TO
LIVE 100 YEARS $1.00

Del  Mar,  Eugene.  —  SPIRITUAL
AND  MATERIAL  ATTRAC-
TION  $1.00

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.  —  THE  NO -
BREAKFAST  PLAN  AND  THE
FASTING  CURE.  These  two
books,  with  others  by  the  same
author,  are  the  most  unique,  radi-
cal, convincing  and  inspiring  con-
tributions to  the  modern  studv  of
modern  life.  Many  of  the  theo-
ries are  boldly  defiant  of  the
opinion  and  usages  of  the  ages,
all  are  directly  antagonistic  to
the  tenets  of  the  ancient  school
that  fathered  the  author  himself.
That  the  brain  is  not  fed  by  food,
that  seeming  starvation  is  the
quickest  and  safest  flesh-producer,
that  weakness  and  emaciation  are
commonly  the  results  of  over-
feeding rather  than  the  opposite
— such  propositions  need  proving.
The  professor  proves  them  abun-
dantly and  incontrovertibly  —  to
the  reason.  And  that  the  senses
are  satisfied  and  gratified  by  the
daily  embodying  of  the  strange
beliefs,  the  compilers  of  the  cata-
log are  glad  to  bear  witness.  In-
dividuals and  families  all  over  the
country  are  delighted  converts  to
the  new  creed — one  that  clears
the  body  of  the  invalid,  clarifies
the  brain  of  the  business  man,
illumines  the  visions  of  the  think-
er, lightens  the  burden  of  the
housewife,  lessens  the  daily  ex-
pense account,  and  prolongs  a  life
whose  present  pleasures  are  in-
tensified by  natural  means.  You
may  not  coincide  unreservedly,
but  you  will  agree  in  the  main,
if  you  have  enough  independence
and  perseverance  and  purpose for

a fair trial $1.10

Dewey, Dr. E. H.— THE TRUE
SCIENCE  OF  LIVING. ..$2.35
Douglass, R. C. — SPIRITUAL
EVOLUTION,  OR.  REGENER-
ATION  $1.45

Gaze,  Harry. —  HOW  TO  LIVE
FOREVER.  Death  is  a  composite
of  Food  and  Fear;  the  one  pet-
rifies, the  other  paralyzes.  If
man  knew  how  to  exclude  from
his  dietary  all  mineral,  inorganic,
and unassimilated elements, and


ITnlverwnl IVaturopathIc  Directory  and  BiiyerH'  <;uide


118T


iiiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiii nil inn ni iiininiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiuininnini|


RETURN  TO  NATURR

By ADOLF JUST

Translated  b^  BENEDICT  LUST.  N.  D.,  M.  D.,

Founder  of  the  American  "Yungborn,"  Butler,  X.  J.

The  True,  Natural  Method  of  Healing  and  Living,  Through
Physical,  Mental  and  Spiritual  Means

The  Restoration  to  Health  by  the  Use  of  WATER,  LIGHT,  AIR,  EARTH
(clay),  and  the  Proper  Kind  of  Food.  The  Book  of  Books  for  the  Drugless
Doctor  and  the  Intelligent  Seeker  for  the  Very Best  in  Natural Healing


PARTIAL  LIST  OF  CONTENTS


The Old anil the New Natural

Method of Healing
The  Nature  Bath  of  Man : Its  De-
scription
The Origin of Acute and Chronic

Diseases
The Explanation of the Curative
Eflfects'  of Rubbing and Stroking
The Mistakes and Omissions of
the Past with regard to Treat-
ment of  disease  with  light  and  air
Light and Air Baths, with details
The  Sun Bath and Its  Therapeutic

Use
What  Ought  We  to  Drink?
Health Clothing and How It Should

Made and Why-
Earth (clay) Power, and How to Utilize It

in the Natural Treatment of Disease
The Great Significance of Going Barefooted
Air Baths as a Preventative against Colds
Earth (clay) Bandages  and Compresses: their

uses and mode of application
Nutrition According  to Nature
Fruit : Man's Natural Food and Why
The Fruit Diet
Nuts  as  Food


Be


The Use of  Alcohol Due to Meat

Eating
Raw  or  Cooked  Food :  which  is  best
Milk  as  a Food for Children
Fruit as  a Food for Children
The Prevention of Great Dangers

due to Vaccination
Serum and Diphtheria
Inflammatory Rheumatism
Pneumonia

Disturbance  of  the Digestive Func-
tion
Tuberculosis of the Spinal Cord
Typhoid Fever
Convulsions

When Should a Person Take the Nature
Cure?

Diabetes

Chronic. Headaches

Influenza (grip)

The  Fear  of  Infectious  Diseases

Sea and Mineral Baths

Fruit Culture a Substitute for  Agriculture

Rest  and Work

Love and Conjugal Happiness the Result of
a Natural Life

Natural Living Edifies the Soul, etc., etc.


Price,  English,  German  or  Italian  edition,  $3.20  postpaid. Special  paper
cover  edition  in  English  only,  $2.00. Abridged  edition  in  French  only,  $1.00

Mailed  on  receipt  of  Postal  Money  Order  issued  to

DR.  BENEDICT  LUST,  BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY,  U.S.A.


ill


y


^


ftv


f


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii

liiiniiiiiuininniiiiniiiiiiniiiiiiiuniuiiiii?


1188


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


to  incarnate  in  his  life  a  whole-
some theology,  he  could  annihi-
late forever  the  last  enemy  that
shall  be  conquered."  That  is
precisely  what  the  enthroning  of
the  mental  wilj  mean,  ultimately
the  dawn  of  immortality.  The
author  radiates  this  belief,  and
the  monthly  foregleams  of  his
paper  are  focalized  in  the  burn-
ing rays  of  his  book $1.10

Grammer,  G.  W.  — LIVING  IN
THE BODY FOREVER. $1.00

Grant.  Herbert  A.  —  HEALTH
AND  BREATH  CULTURE.
$0.50

Haskell,  C.  C.  —  PERFECT
HEALTH.  By  One  Who  Has  It.
This  is  a  book  that  both
animates  and  actuates.  Families
who  have  incorporated  its  teach-
ings maintain  that  not  simply
colds,  and  season  diseases,  and
sporadic  indispositions  are  for-
gotten, but  that  worry,  and  fret,
and  the  signs  of  mental  ill-ad-
justment are  resolved  and  dis-
solved, by  this  renovating  sys-
tem. The  publishers  will  be  glad
to  refunil  purchase-price  if  a
month's  fair  trial  fails  to  con-
vince  $1.10

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— SUNBEAMS
OF  HEALTH  AND  TEMPER-
ANCE. 200  pp $1.85

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  PERPETUAL
YOUTH .$1.70

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  PREVENTION
AND  CURE  OF  OLD  AGE.
.$0.60

Lockwood,  G.  H.  —  HOW  TO
LIVE 100 YEARS .$1.10

MacDonald,  George. — HELP  FOR
WEARY  SOULS.  Selections.
.$0.60

MacLelland,  Bruce. — THE  LAW
OF SUCCESS $1.10

Mead.  Mary  R.  —  IDEALS  FOR
INVALIDS $0.35

Mead.  Mary  R.  —  SOUL-HELP
FOR INVALIDS $0.25

Octogenarian. — HOW  TO  PRO-
MOTE HEALTH  FROM
YOUTH TO OLD AGE. $0.25

Peebles,  Dr.  J.  M.— DEATH  DE-
FEATED; OR.  THE  PSYCHIC
SECRET  OF  HOW  TO  KEEP
YOUNG.  The  testimony  of  an
old  man  with  a  youthful  heart.
The  great  men  of  the  world  have
known  this  secret — Verdi,  I-iszt,
Tolstoy,  Bryant,  Bismarck,  Glad-
stone, Pope  Leo  XIII..  and
countless  others,  whose  best  work
was  done  after  middle  life.  But
they  neither  analyzed  nor  ex-
plained it.  The  simple  reading
of  the  book  will  quicken  your
heart-beat  with  a  child's  delight
in  a  new  discovery,  and  the  re-
alizing of  it  will  approximate,  for
you, the  truth  of  the title.  .$1.10

Pennington,  James  J.  —  DON'T
WORRY NUGGETS $0.55

Quigley,  Dorothy.— THE  WAY  TO
KEEP  YOUNG .$0.85

Richardson.  —  LONG  LIFE  AND
HOW  TO  REACH  IT. ....$0..50

Robinson,  Solon— HOW  TO  LIVE.
Saving  and  Wasting $1.10

Savage,  Rev.  Minot  J.  —  HELPS
FOR  DAILY  LIVING.  A  crys-
tallizing of  the  hazy  heaven  from
the  clouds  of  creed  into  daily
blessing- showers — present,  practi-
cal,  perpetual $1.10

Seward.  T.  F.— DON'T  WORRY.
Scientific  Law  of  Happiness.
(Leatherette) $0.45

Spencer.  A.  —  HOW  TO  LIVE
ONE  HUNDRED  YEARS..$0.25


Teats, Mrs. Mary  E.— THE  WAY
OF  GOD  IN  MARRIAGE.$1.35


Mrs. Mary E. Teats, Author of
"The Way of God in Marriage"


Trine,  R.  W.— IN  TUNE  WITH
THE  INFINITE.  Restfulness,
content,  peace,  is  the  brooding,
loving  spirit  that  breathes  from
every  page.  The  New  Thought,
the  New  Therapeutics,  the  New
Theology,  are  all  here,  but  not  in
the  restless  staccato  tones  that
rasp  the  nerves  of  the  average
lethargic individual.  Melody,

rhythm,  a  soothing  cadence,  are
the  measures  set  to  thoughts  that
vibrate  with  sentiment,  life  and
realness  and  power.  There  is  no
tension,  no  strain,  no  conscious
climbing  to  dizzy  heights.  But,
little  by  little,  as  you  reach  the
full  meaning  of  the  oratorio,  you
emerge  from  a  narrow  earthly
horizon,  to  the  vision  of  the
worlds  and  the  vista  of  eternity.
Until  many  readings  make  Trine's
books  a  part  of  your  being,  you
will  not  be  satisfied,  unless  they
are  a part of  your  library. $1..35

Trine,  R.  W.— WHAT  ALL  THE
WORLD'S A'SEEKING...$1.35

White,  Mrs.  E.  G.— HEALTHFUL
LIVING $0.60

Wood.  Henry.— GOD'S  IMAGE  IN
MAN.  The  old  theology  made
a  worm  of  the  dust,  crawling  in
abject  nothingness  before  a  far-
away Being  of  divine  attributes,
half-human  form,  and  intermittent
diabolic  tendencies.  The  new,
calls  men  germ-gods  that  need
only  imfolding.  And  with  the
coming  of  the  new  conception
and  the  living-out  of  the  new
belief,  the  old  torturing  gnomes
of  Superstition,  Ignorance,  Bigo-
try, Fear,  Disease,  Death,  vanish
forever $1.10


Part  0 — KNEIPP  SYSTEM

Geromiller,  L.  —  HYDROPATHIC
TREATMENT  OF  FATHER
KNEIPP. 26 illustrations. $0.60

Kneipp,  Father.- CARE  OF  CHIL-
DREN. This  is  an  excellent
translation  of  Father  Kneipp's
book  in  German,  with  sarne  title.
In  this  work  Father  Kneipp  sets
forth  the  happiness,  responsibili-
ties and  duties  of  motherhood —
and  he  also  instructs  mothers  how
to  order  their  lives,  and  how  to
bring  up  their  children  correctly
and  righteously.  This  book  gives
simple  but  very  effective  direc-
tions how  to  prevent  and  cure
all  the  usual  diseases  of  children.
Any  mother  who  loves  her  baby
should  not  fail  to  order  this  book
— as  by  following  the  advice  con-
tained  therein — instead of  always


calling  in  the  Doctor,  and  drug-
ging the  helpless  little  one — she
will  be  enabled  to  nip  every  dis-
ease in  the  bud,  and  to  combat
svtccessfully  any  illness  arising,
without asking advice of anyone

else. Paper $0.60

Boards $0.85

Elegant $1.65

Kneipp,  Father.  —  MY  WATER
CURE.  A  translation  from
I'ather  Kneipp's  famous,  world-
renowned  German  book,  "My
Water  Cure."  Father  Kneipp's
Water  Cure  has  been  tested  for
more  than  fifty  years,  and  is  at
present  known  and  adopted  in
every  country  of  the  world.  The
book  called  "My  Water  Cure, "has
been  translated  into  a  great  many
foreign  languages,  and  is  a  com-
plete guide  to  regain  one's  health
— without  the  use  of  any  drugs  or
rnedicines.  Its  200  illustrations
aid  materially  the  applications  of
the  various  bandages,  packages,
compresses  and  other  healing
components  included  in  Hydro-
pathy. A  great  variety  of  dis-
eases are  gone  through  alpha-
betically,— their  cause  and  devel-
and  then  the  mode  of  application
of  the  Water-Cure  treatment  is
detailed  very  minutely  in  each
particular  case.

Part  II.  is  the  "Apotheca"  in
his  herbal  remedies,  for  he  also
advocates  in  many  uistances  the
additional  use  of  various  herbs  in
form  of  teas.  All  these  herbs  are
each  description  is  appended  the
exact  benefits  to  be  derived  from
their  use.  A  part  of  the  book  is
devoted  to  the  description  of  sev-
eral kinds  of  strengthening  foods,
as  Whole-Wheat  Bread,  Strength-
Giving Soup and Honey-Wine.

Part  III.  of  the  book  contains  a
large  number  of  reported  cures —
all  alphabetically  arranged — with
the  exact  mode  of  application  in
each  instance  ;  giving  full  particu-
lars of  the  progress  of  each  mal-
ady, manner  of  treatment  and  du-
ration of  cure.  This  part  will
prove  of  the  very  greatest  interest
to  invalids  and  sufferers  from  all
those  diseases  enumerated  and  de-
sion, all  the  various  Kneipp-
Gushes, or  douches, are depicted


Very Reverend Monsignor
Sebastian  Kneipp


with  exact  directions  how  to  ap-
ply each  one.  Especial  stress  is
laid  upon  the  fact  that  this  book
covers  everything  pertaining  to  a
Home-treatment. Any one pos-


Univercial  Naturopiitliie  Directory  and Uuyertt'  Guide


1189


The  Kneipp  Cure

A  LITERAL  TRANSLATION  OF  "MEINE  WASSERKUR," •
BY VERY REV. MSQR. SEBASTIAN KNEIPP, PARISH
PRIEST OF WOERISHOFEN, BAVARIA. WITH 200
ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  A  PORTRAIT  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

THIS is a complete de- y<*^^*^^^^  ^ Co-operative with his hy-
sc'ription of  the  world-  /o/if^  ^^%>  dropathic ministrations. Father
famed Kneipp Water  fif/'' - \N  Kneipp  advocates  the  use  of  a
and Herb Cure by  ff,  '\  / |/4  dry, simple, nourishing house-
that celebrated  apostle  M'W ^^M  ^^^!5  ^o\6.  fare,  not  spoiled  by  art  or
of  hydropathy,  Sebastian  t^''' T^''  condiments, and for drink,
Kneipp. Father  %j' /'>^S^J  water only. He
Kneipp,  one  of  the ,-;'J^i-. ^ ^S^'^^B  r^-~--,  ''Iso gives minute


health through his  ^  -  '  -■'' numerous  cuts,
ministrations,  urged  him  to  write  a  book  on  ^ The  second  part  is  given  over  to  a  con-
his  method  of  healing, to  the  end  that the  sideration of the medicinal plants used by
world  at  large  might  learn  of  a  panacea  for  Father Kneipp in his treatment of his pa-
its troubles. His system of cure  was too  tients,  also  illustrated.

precious  to  die  with  its  originator,  and  this  ^ The  third  part  of  the  book  is  composed

consideration prevailed upon the mind of  of  an  account  of  the  many  diseases  afflicting

the  simple,  generous  healer,  and  the  oresent  humanity, particularly those  that  are amen-

book  (which  has  passed  through  one  hundred  able  to  the  water  treatment.  Many  wonderful

and  fifty-five  editions) is  the  result.  cures  are  reported,  all  of  which  are  absolutely

^, Father Kneipp's theory regarding the  vouched  for  by  the  relator,

water  cure  is  that  water  of  different  tempera-  q ft  seems  extraordinary  that  diseases  can

tures. variously applied to the system, will  be  cured  by  the  simple  means  employed  by

dissolve morbid matter in the  Father  Kneipp,  which  have  baffled  the  most

blood. It will evacuate what is  learned  physicians, but  the  testimony  is  un-

thus  dissolved. It  will  cause  the impeachable.

cleansed  blood  to  circulate  freely ^ ^^^^  ^°°^  ^^^  ^^"""^  '^^  ^'^y  through

again. It  will  harden  the  feeble '^'-  u^°''  ^f'^t^  ''''''^^  ""1  ']'  ^'^'.^^  ''^'
.....  .  ,, . ...  weight  m  gold. iNo  one  who  believes  in  na-

constitution,  strengthening  it  for tural methods of cure can do without it.

new  activity.  Translated  into  48  languages  and  dialects.

Price,  in  paper  cover,  postpaid,  $1.10;  cloth,  $1.60.

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1190


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


sessing  this  book  will  be  enabled,
without  the  aid  of  anybody  else's
help  to  treat  himself,  his  wife  or
children  at  home,  without  having
need  of  recourse  to  any  other
remedies  except  those  Natural
ones  indicated  in  this  valuable
volume.  The  low  price  is  an-
other strong  point  in  its  favor,
and  we  cannot  overemphasize  the
advisability  of  sending  for  this
book — even  before  it  is  actually
needed.  One  million  copies  have
been  sold  abroad.  100  illustra-
tions, 389  pp.  Elegant  Edition,
$2.25;  cloth.  .$l.eO;  paper  cover,
$1.10. Special  American  Edition,

cloth, $1.60; paper $1.00

Kneipp, Father. — MY WATER

CURE. Paper $0.60

Boards $0.85

Elegant $2.25

Kneipp,  Father.— MY  WILL.  A
Legacy  to  the  Healthy  and  the
Sick.  This  book  explains  best
the  Kneipp  Water-Cure  System
in  all  its  branches.  29  photo-
graphs from life. 388 pp.

Paper $0.60

Boards $0.85

Elegant $2.25

Kneipp,  Father.  —  CODICIL  TO
MY  WILL.  The  last  of  Father
Kneipp's  renowned  works,  giving
lessons  on  diet  and  cooking,  on
the  human  body,  on  practical
home  gymnastics,  on  various  dis-
eases and  accidents,  with  the
treatment therefor.  408 pp.

Paper $0.60

Boards $0.85

Elegant $2.25

Kneipp, Father.— THUS SHALT

THOU LIVE $2.20

KNEIPP'S  PLANT  ATLAS.— Illu-
strates the  curative  herbs  recom-
mended by  Rev.  Msgr.  Sebastian
Kneipp  in  his  works.  Published
in  English,  French,  German,  Bo-
hemian, Polish,  Spanish,  Hunga-
rian, and Dutch. Edition I.

(Albertype printing) $2.00

Edition  II.  (natural  colors)  $3.85
Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— APOTHEKA.
This  list  of  Father  Kneipp's  Cur-
ative Herbs  will  prove  of  mani-
fold usefulness  in  every  house-
hold  $0.50

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— THE  KNEIPP
WATER  CURE  MONTHLY.
Vol.  I  (1900)  and  Vol.  II  (1910)

per volume, cloth .$2.00

PRACTICAL  GUIDE  TO
KNEIPP'S  METHOD  OF
CURE. Published in English,

French  and German $0.25

NCDTE — Kneipp  books  are  pub-
lished also  in  French,  German,
Italian,  Spanish,  Polish,  Bohem-
ian, Portuguese,  Hungarian,
Dutch,  etc.  Price  of  any  single
book,  cloth,  $1.60.
Roug6,  Father.— NEW  ORLEANS
WATER  CURE $1.10


Part 10 — MANHOOD

Conrad, Dr. E. F.— COITION.

This  pamphlet  in  English  or
German,  is  a  scientific  mono-
graph on  the  great  importance
of  the  sexual  act  as  the  very  first
step  in  human  development.  The
author  shows  the  evil  of  self-
pollution  in  early  life  as  respon-
sible for  sexual  debility  in  after-
life. He  enunciates  a  theory
that  any  woman  Can  prevent
conception,  no  matter  how
ardently embraced by the male.


but  offers  no  proof  of  this  re-
sult in  all  cases.  He  expatiates
on  the  sexual  rights  of  both
sexes,  and  seems  to  justify  an
amorous  woman  in  leaving  a
sexually  cold  luisband  to  enjoy
the  embraces  of  an  ardent  lover.
The  writer  seeks  to  place  on  the
plane  of  physiological  science
the  sexual  activities  of  hu-
manity  $1.00

Davis, Dr. Frank P.— IMPOTEN-
CY. STERILITY AND ARTI-
FICIAL IMPREGNATION.
$2.50

Dawson,  George  E.— THE  RIGHT
OF  THE  CHILD  TO  BE
WELL BORN. Cloth $0.75

Fowler,  O.  S.  — SCIENCE  OF
LIFE;  OR,  CREATIVE  AND
SEXUAL SCIENCE $3.20

3raham,  J.  S.— CHASTITY.  .$0.60

Solbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— CHASTITY  :
Its  Physical,  Intellectual,  Moral
Advantages.  Eight  chapters :
What  is  Chastity?  Does  Chastity
Injure  Health?  Advantages  of
Chastity;  The  Great  Advantages
of  Chastity ;  Chastity  and  Chil-
dren;  Chastity  and  Virility;  What
the  Sexual  Instinct  Has  Done
for  the  World;  The  Cure;  Ap-
pendix. Not  an  awful  array  of
symptoms  or  a  theological  plea
for  asceticism,  but  a  plain,  pure,
strong,  tender  appeal  to  the  young
men  of  America $1.10

Hunter,  Rev.  W.  J.— MANHOOD
WRECKED  AND  RESCUED.
How  strength  and  vigor  is  lost,
and  how  manhood  may  be  re-
stored by  self-treatment.  In  eight
chapters  :  The  Wreck  ;  An  Ancient


Wreck  I  A  Modem  Wreck;  A
Youthful  Wreck;  A  Wreck  Es-
caped ;  The  Rescue  Begun ;  The
Rescue  Continued ;  The  Rescue
Completed.  A  single  book  that
obviates  the  humiliation  of  con-
fession, the  cost  of  consultation,
the  danger  of  medical  treatment,
the  deadliness  of  neglect,  and,
beyond  all,  the  fear  of  helpless
ignorance $1.10

Keith,  Dr.  Melville  C.  —  SEVEN
STUDIES  FOR  YOUNG  MEN
ON  CURE  OF  MIND  AND
BODY $3.50

Kellogg,  Dr.  G.  H.— MAN  THE
MASTERPIECE.  (40.000  copies
sold.) .$3.00

Lernanto,  Dr.  E.  L.— RE-DISCOV-
ERY OF  THE  LOST  FOUN-
TAIN OF  HEALTH  AND  HAP-
PINESS FOR  NERVOUS  AND
SEXUAL  DISEASES.  ...$1.00
Cloth $1.50

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.— CHASTITY ;  OR
OUR  SECRET  SINS.  This  was
the  author's  favorite  book.  In
it  he  thought  he  reached  the
highest  altitudes  of  his  life.  The
salient  point  in  connection  with
the  work  is  this:  that  the  hearti-
est commendation  and  support
has  come  from  the  Presidents  of
Colleges  and  Female  Seminaries,
where  such  questions  are  most
relentlessly  tabooed.  Every  deli-
cate phase  of  the  sex-life  is  dis-
cussed, unreservedly  and  exhaus-
tively. And  women  as  well  as
nien  who  are  striving  for  purity
and  perfection  cannot  afford  to
be  without  such  a  guide.  320  pp.
$2.10


Bernarr Macfadden, Physical Culture  Celebrity


UnlverMiil Nntiiropadilr Directory  nnd UiiyerH*  <;iil<l«'


Ilf)l


El


@


A  CAREFREE  FUTURE

THE  GOSPEL  OF  NEW  LIFE,  PHYSICAL  IMMORTALITY,  SUN,
TROPICS,  LIFE  RENEWING  DIET,  ETC.  A  GLIMPSE  INTO  THE
DEPTH AND DISTANCE FOR THE SELECTION OF MANKIND— FOR

THE  REFLECTION  OF  ALL— FOR  CONSIDERATION  AND  STIMULATION

By  August  Engelhardt


IB


EI


In  der  Sonne
isl  das  Leben  ge-
rvonnen.  In  the
sun  is  life  won.
This  is  the  motto
of  the  author  of
this  work  which
preaches  heHo-
therapy  in  its  in-
tensest  form.
Two  young  and
enthusiastic  Ger-
mans resolved 'to
flee  the  so-called
civilized  life  of
beer,  pork,  tobac-
co and  bread  to
live  naturally  on
tropic  fruits  on
the  island  of  Ka-
bakon,  in  the
Bismark  Archipelago,  in  the  romantic
South  Sea,  and  this  work  is  the  fruit  of
their  meditations  and  the  storehouse  of
their  recommendations.  They  unequivo-
cally declare  that  to  live  naturally  on  liv-
ing fruits,  means  to  accumulate  life,
strength  and  beauty.  To  do  this  in  a
land  in  the  tropics  where  the  sun-rays  are
vertical,  means  receiving  the  greatest
amount  of  energy  from  the  sun.

Besides  the  abundance  of
fruits,  the  warmth  of  the  tropics
precludes  to  a  very  great  extent,
the  need  for  clothing,  so  that  by
living  in  a  more  or  less  nude
state  the  body  is  continually
bathed  in  air  and  light  and  like
a  vegetable, reaches  its  greatest


mM^


stature  and  finest
development  in
the  lands  of  the
sun.  The  vigor
and  beauty  of  the
native  races  in  the
tropics  prove  this.
The  area  of  their
bodies  exposed  to
the  sunlight  is  the
measure  of  their
physical  vigor.

The  writer  re-
gards the  cocoa-
nut  tree  as  the
tree  of  life  and
identifies  it  with
that  tree  of  life
that  grows  in  the
paradise  of  God.
Tropical  life  is  a
combination  of  sunlight,  nudity  and  co-
coanuts,  and  they  contrast  this  with  the
life  of  fur  coats,  frost  and  roast  meat  of
the  temperate  regions.  Man  was  gen-
erated in  the  tropics.  He  feasts  on
flesh  and  fat  in  polar  regions,  on
grains  and  vegetables  in  the  temperate
regions  and  on  fruits  exclusively  in  the
tropics,  therefore  he  is  distinctly  a
frugivorous animal.

The  book  is  further  an  appeal
to  all  fruit  eaters  and  friends  of
the  natural  way  of  living  to
establish  the  fruit-eating  king-
dom of  the  world,  first  in  the
islands  of  the  South  Sea  and
Cuba,  and  from  thence  through-
out the  tropical  world.


Price,  in  cloth,  postpaid,  $1.50;  paper  cover,  $1.10

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


m


^s


1192


.WUiiropulliic  Book  Catalog


Lewis.  Dr.  Dio.  —  IN  A  NUT-
SHELL: Suggestions  to  Ameri-
can College  Students.  Health
hints  where  most  needed.  Ll(|ual-
ly  apt  for  the  youth  who  burns
the  midnight  oil  and  the  uiie  who
battles  with  the  midnight
"spread." $1.10

Lowry  and  Lambert.— HIMSELF.
$1.10

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.— TRUTHS  (for
the boy) $0.55

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.— TEACHING
SEX HYGIENE $0.55

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  MANHOOD
AND  MARRIAGE .$:{.00

Macfadden.  B.  A.— VIRILE  POW-
ERS OF  SUPERB  MANHOOD.
.$1.50

Marden,  Dr.  Orison  Swett. — THE
CRIME  OF  SILENCE.  ...$::.60

Morris,  Dr.  Sir  Malcolm. — THE
NATION'S  HEALTH:  THE
STAMPING  OUT  OF  VENE-
REAL DISEASES $1.:{5

Murray.  Dr.  Chas.  H.— KNOWL-
EDGE A  YOUNG  MAN
SHOULD HAVE $1.00

Shepherd,  E.  R.  —  TRUE  MAN-
HOOD  $1.35

Sperry,  Dr.  L.  B.  —  CONFIDEN-
TIAL TALKS  WITH  YOUNG
MEN $1.10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.  —  WHAT  A
YOUNG  BOY  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.  —  WHAT  A
YOUNG  MAN  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1-10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.  —  WHAT  A
YOUNG  HUSBAND  OUGHT
TO  KNOW $1.10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.  —  WHAT  A
MAN  OF  FORTY  -  FIVE
OUGHT  TO  KNOW.  The
peerless  "Self-and-Sex  Series."
One  of  the  conspicuously  hope-
ful signs  of  the  new  century
is  the  interest  that  teachers,
preachers,  and  parents  are  tak-
ing in  the  key  question  of  life.
Shunned  and  despised,  and  abused
through  the  centuries,  the  deific
part  of  man  has  been  made  the
diabolic.  Only  the  few  towering
figures  in  history  have  understood
procreation  of  body.  mind,  spirit.
The  situation  is  changing.  Evo-
lution and  revolution  have  agen-
cies at  work — pre-natal  and  post-
natal culture,  child-study,  practi-
cal paidology,  self  -  development
courses,  and,  in  the  front  rank,
such  books  as  the  "Self-and-Sex
Series."  Delicate,  pure,  reverent,
but  strong,  bold,  virile,  they  touch
and  mould  the  life  at  the  focal
points .Sl.lC

Trail, Dr.  R.  T.— HOME  TREAT-
MENT FOR  SEXUAL  ABUSES
$1.0(1

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.— ALMOST
A  MAN $0.S5


Part 11  I

MECHAIVOTHERAPY  I

CHIItOPRACTIC, MASSAGE  |

AND OSTEOPATHY  j

Carver. Dr. Willard.— APPLIED  i
PSYCHOLOGY .$2.00

Carver, Dr. Willard.— "AT THE  '
BAR." $0.45

Carver,  Dr.  Willard.— CARVER'S
CHIROPRACTIC ANALYSIS.

Carver.' '  Dr.'  'wiUar'd.— TH'e  '  RED
BOOK $0.50

Carver,  Dr.  Willard.  —  ROUGH
NUGGETS $2.26


Douse,  Dr.  T.  S.— THE  TREAT-
MENT OF  DISEASE  BY
PHYSICAL  METHODS.  424
pp.,  80  illustrations.  Electro-
Physics,  Electro  •  Therapeutics,
etc.,  but  Massage  principally,  and
its  practical  application  to  spe-
cific cases,  parts,  and  diseases.
Massage  is  strictly  naturopathic;
and  when  a  famous  physician  de-
votes a  whole  volume  to  it,  less-
er practitioners  can  afford  to
countenance,  consider,  and  rec-
ommend it $2.75

Firth,  Prof.  James  N.  —  CHIRO-
PRACTIC SYMPTOMATOLO-
GY  $5.00

Forest,  Dr.  W.  E.— MASSOTHE-
RAPY;  OR,  USE  OF  MAS-
SAGE ROLLERS $0.25

Forest,  Dr.  W.  E.— THE  NURSE'S
GUIDE  TO  MASSAGE.  Illus-
trated  $1.50

Goetz,  E.  W.— A  MANUAL  OF
OSTEOPATHY $2.00

Gregory,  Alva  A.— DISEASE  AND
RATIONAL THERAPY. $5.00

Gregory, Alva A.  —  SPINAL

AND RATIONAL THERAPY.

$5.00

Gregory,  Alva  A.— SPONDYLO-
THERAPY SIMPLIFIED.  .$.•5.00

Hale,  A.  Creighton.  —  THE  ART
OF MASSAGE $1.50

Hartelius,  Dr.  T.  J. —  MANUAL
OF  SWEDISH  MOVEMENTS.
95  illustrations.  The  clearest  ex-
position of  a  complex  subject.
$1.50

Hazzard,  Chas.— A  NEW  PRAC-
TICE OF  OSTEOPATHY.  Part
I.  Osteopathic  Technique,  Ex-
amination, Treatment.  Part  II.
Diseases.  Designed  as  a  com-
plete text-book  of  practice  for
students  and  practitioners.  400
PP $.3.00

INVISIBLE  GOVERNMENT;
OR,  TYRANNY  OF  THERA-
PEUTICAL TRANSGRES-
SIONS  .$1.00

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— THE  ART  OF
MASSAGE.  The  standard  work
on  the  subject.  Resume  of  twenty
years'  experience  at  the  greatest
health  establishment  in  America,
and  among  the  most  expert  mas-
seurs  on the Continent. ...$2.25

Kleer.- HAND  -  BOOK  OF  MAS-
SAGE. Special  Photographs  for
American edition $2.25

Lawrence,  H.  N.  —  MEDICAL
ELECTRICITY  AND  MAS-
SAGE  $0.50

LECTURES,  delivered  to  Third
Annual  Convention  of  the  Ohio
Chiropractic Ass'n $1.00

Loban,  Joy  M.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.  —
TECHNIC  AND  PRACTICE
OF CHIROPRACTIC. ...$4..'>0

McConnell,  Carl  P.— CLINICAL
OSTEOPATHY .$4.00

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— OSTEO-
PATHIC GYNECOLOGY.  $.'J.O0

Murray, Dr. Chas. H. — PRAC-
TICE OF OSTEOPATHY.
$3.00

Ostrom.  — MASSAGE  AND  THE
ORIGINAL  SWEDISH  MOVE-
MENTS. 4th  edition,  105  illus-
trations. One  of  the  few  final
authorities.  A  work  purely  scien-
tific and  practical,  and  unadul-
terated by  modern  mercenarism.
$1.00

Palmer, B. J.-  HEMORRHAGES.
$0.25

Palmer,  B.  J.  —  INFANTILE
PARALYSIS $0.50

Palmer,  B.  J.— KIDNEY  DIS-
EASE  $0.25


Palmer, B. J. — REMEDIES
WORSE THAN DISEASE.
$0.25

Palmer, B. J.  —  RHEUMATISM.
$0.25

Palmer, B.  J.— STONES. ...$0.25

Palmer,  B.  J.— TUBERCULO-
SIS  $0.25

Palmer, B.  J.— TUMORS. ..$0.50

Riley,  Dr.  J.  S.— SCIENCE  AND
PRACTICE  OF  CHIROPRAC-
TIC  $2.20

Ross,  N.  C— E  S  S  A  Y  S  ON
HEALTH,  VIA  CHIROPRAC-
TIC  $1.00

Ryley, Dr. J. B. — ELECTRO-
MAGNETISM  AND  MASSAGE.
$1.50

Still,  A.  T.— PHILOSOPHY  OF
OSTEOPATHY,  The  conception
of  the  "Founder  of  Osteopathy"
and  President  Kirkville's  school.
$2.50

Swietochowski,  Dr.  G.  de.  —  ME-
CHANO-THERAPEUTICS  IN
GENERAL PRACTICE. Cloth,

Taylor','  'g.'  'h.— MASSAG'e.'  '  I'rin-
ciple  and  Remedial  Treatment  by
Imparted Motion $1.00

Ward.— NOTES  ON  MASSAGE.
Interleaved $1.00

Wede,  Dr.  Anders.— HANDBOOK
OF  MEDICAL  AND  ORTHO-
PEDIC GYMNASTICS.  382
pp. — half-tone, illustrated. $3.00


Part  12 — THE  MEDICAL.

QUESTION

Legislation, Medical Freedom

and Jurisprudence

Bevan,  Dr.  John  A.— THE  TRUTH
ABOUT  THE  MEDICAL
PRpFESSION.  The  result  of
clinical  and  pathological  re-
searches at  Guy's  Hospital,
London,  and  the  Bellevue  Hos-
pital, New  York.  Keen,  caustic,
sarcastic  and  fearless  is  this  ex-
pose of  the  fakes  and  hood-
winkings  of  the  medical  profes-
sion. Popular edition $1.00

Erz,  A.  A.,  N.D.  — A  MESSAGE
TO  ALL  DRUGLESS  HEAL-
ERS  $0.15

Erz,  A.  A..  N.D.— THE  MEDICAL
QUESTION. $4.00. Cloth..$5.00

Ferrier.  Dr.  James.— A  SCIENTI-
FIC BASIS  FOR  A  JUST
LAW $0.20

Goodfellow,  Dr.  A.  A.,  and  Zur-
muhlen.  Dr.  Charles — MEDICAL
MONOPOLY  AND  IMMORAL
TRAFFIC $0.15

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.  —  MEDICAL
TYRANNY  IN  NEW  YORK
CITY $0.10


Part IX
MEDICAIi TRE  VTISES

B6champ,  Prof.  Antoine.  —  THE
BLOOD  AND  ITS  THIRD  AN-
ATOMICAL ELEMENT. .$3.00

Brubaker,  Dr.  Albert  P.  —  QUIZ-
COMPEND  OF  HUMAN  PHY-
SIOLOGY  $1.25

Burgess,  Dr.  Wm.  H.— CHRONIC
DISEASE $1.60

Burgess,  Dr.  Wm.  H.— NATURAL
DIAGNOSIS  AND  CONGENI-
AL TREATMENT $1.10

Cassell.— FAMILY  DOCTOR.$3.50

Cassell.  —  LADIES'  PHYSICIAN.
$1.85

Cutter,  J.  G.  —  A  DICTIONARY
OF  TERMS  USED  IN  MEDI-
CINE  $3.00


Unlverctnl Nnturonatlilc Directory  iiiiil Uiijctk'  Gulilc


1193


NATUROPATHY


THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY
::  HEALTH  RESTORATIVE  ::


NATUROPATHY— THE MEDICINE OF
THE  FUTURE. By  William  R.  Bradshaw.

The  author  shows  the  hostility  of  the  medical
trust  to  the  professors  of  natural  medicine  as  a
modern  example  of  the  undying  barbarity  of
license  and  monopoly  to  all  those  who  would
criticize  its  methods,  or  in  any  way  seek  to  en-
lighten the  world  as  to  the  fraud  and  misrepre-
sentation that  characterizes  official  medical
authority.  He  exposes  the  mendacious  state-
ments of  the  medical  official  hierarchy  that  are
calculated  to  maintain  the  reputation  of  the
serum-therapists,  the  manufacturers  of  serums,
inoculations  and  vaccines,  those  poisonous  con-
coctions that  both  directly  and  indirectly  are
agents  of  extermination  of  the  human  species.  He
shows  the  utter  uselessness  of  tlie  Flexner  serum
for  the  cure  of  epidemic  meningitis  as  an  example
of  medical  misrepresentation  and  inefficiency.
Price,  20  cents.


MEDICAL  TYRANNY  IN  NEW  YORK
CITY. By  Benedict  Lust,  N.  D.,  M.  D.

This  is  an  account  of  the  persecution  system-
atically carried  on  by  the  Medical  Trust  against
naturopaths  doing  business  in  New  York  City
arrest  for  upholding  Nature  Cure,  at  the  instiga-
tion of  a  mal-odorous  female  sleuth,  a  Mrs.  Ben-
cecry,  wdio  in  disguise  as  a  patient  came  to  his
establishment  and  secured  treatment  in  the  form
of  baths  and  massage,  for  the  sole  purpose  of
testifying  against  him.  He  was  arrested  and
fined  for  trying  to  save  life  rather  than  trying  to
destroy  it.  This  one  attack  with  lawyer's  fees
cost  him  over  $700,  while  former  persecutions  at
the  instigation  of  the  same  Medical  Trust  cost
him  $3,000  expenses.  This  vvdgar  persecution,
instead  of  making  Dr.  Lust  relinquish  his  pro-
fession, only  increased  his  determination  to  stand
by  his  guns  and  foster  rational  progressive  medi-
cine by  founding  with  the  assistance  of  the
rnembers  of  the  American  Naturopathic  Associa-
tion a  College  in  New  York  for  drugless  methods,
for  the  Nature  Cure,  whose  establishment  is  now
within  practical  realization.  This  is  a  most  in-
spiring pamphlet  for  the  Naturopath.  Prices,
10  cents, 10  copies  SO  cents, 50  copies  $1.50.

DIET  IN  RELATION  TO  BRAIN,  HEALTH
AND  EFFICIENCY.  By  Otto  Carque  and
Dortch  Campbell.

This  booklet  is  a  brief  for  vegetarianism  as  a
superior  diet  to  animal  food.  The  authors  plead
for  the  advantages  of  a  vegetarian  and  fruitarian
diet  for  man.  A  judicious  combination  of  plant
foods  supply  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  main-
tenance of  perfect  mental  and  physical  health.
Excessive  cooking  of  foods  reduces  most  of  the
mineral  contents,  the  iron,  calcium,  magnesium,
phosphorus,  etc.,  that  are  absolutely  necessary
for  the  proper  physiological  functioning  of  our
system,  which  are  found  in  their  most  assimil-
able forms in vegetables, nuts and fruits.

Mr.  Campbell  has  a  word  to  say  about  build-
ing brain  by  diet,  as  he  is  an  investigator  of  the
subject  of  brain  nourishment.  He  holds  that  the
lack  of  mind  endurance,  or  power  to  work  with
the  brain,  is  due  to  tlie  absence  of  the  soluble
phosphates  that  nourish  the  gray  matter  both
of  brain  and  spine.  Foods  tliat  build  the  brain
are  lean  meats,  fish,  milk,  eggs,  cheese,  beans,
peas,  lentils,  nuts,  and  certain  kinds  of  fruits.
Nuts  are  the  best  of  all,  pecans,  filberts,  alnunids.
walnuts and pinenuts. Price, 20 cents.


MEDICAL  MONOPOLY,  by  Dr.  A.  b.
Good  fellow,  F.  R.  P.  M.,  and  THE  IM  =
MORAL  TRAFFICS,  by  Charles  Zurmuh^^
len,  M.  D.

The  author  argues,  in  Medical  Monopoly,  that
the  war  of  the  orthodox  me<lical  school  on  the
drugless  healers  is  a  confession  that  the  medi-
cine men  wish  to  prevent  treatment  of  the  sick
by  any  other  means  than  by  drugs.  This  con-
spiracy to  drug  mankind,  whether  the  drugs  are
beneficial,  or  malign,  is  rightfully  regarded  as
the  sordid  gratification  of  a  jealous  medical
society's  wrath  at  seeing  their  patients  deserting
them  and  going  to  the .  unpretending  naturo-
paths whose  ministrations  cure,  where  the  drug-
vendors failed utterly.

The  Immoral  Traffics  referred  to  by  Dr.  Zur-
muhlen,  that  are  undermining  the  health  of  the
American  people,  are  the  liquor  traffic,  the  white
slave  traffic,  and  the  serum-drug  traffic.  He
shows  that  a  compulsory  vaccination  campaign
in  Dayton,  Ohio,  was  followed  by  an  epi<lemic
of  measles  followed  by  an  epidemic  of  scarlet
fever,  followed  by  an  epidemic  of  diphtheria.  He
holds  that  the  time  has  come  when  progressive,
intelligent  people  should  unite  in  a  protective
league  to  defend  the  people  against  the  ravages
of  the  regular  doctors. Price, IS cents.


A  PLEA  FOR  PHYSICAL  THERAPY,  OR
MEDICINE  WITHOUT  MEDICINE.  By
Otto  Juettner,  M.  D.,  Ph.  D.

The  author  of  this  pamphlet  has  no  faith  in
the  curative  effects  of  drugs  taken  internally.  He
states  that  individually  doctors  disparage  drug
treatment.  He  says  that  the  healing  power  of
nature  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  rational
therapy.  Heilkrafte  nicht  Heilsafte  is  his  motto.
The  physiotherapeutist  is  the  physician  of  to-day
and  to-morrow.  This  argument  is  very  useful  in
leading  up  to  svich  standard  works  on  the  same
subject,  such  as  the  "Return  to  Nature."  by  A.
Just,  and  "The  Natural  Method  of  Healing."  by
F. E. Bilz. which are complete guides to health.

This  booklet  exposes  the  superstition  that
drugs  taken  internally  can  cure  mankind
of  its  ills.  The  very  antagonism  of  the  vari-
ous schools  of  medicine,  the  pestilent  vagaries,
like  the  Witches  Broth  of  the  Dark  Ages,  are
proofs  of  this.  The  Dark  Ages  in  the  medical
world  are  still  with  us,  for  every  physician  a<l-
mits.  without  hesitation,  that  drug-medication  is
imcertain  and  disappointing.  "No  intelligent
physician  nowadays."  Says  Prof.  Ernest  Schwe-
ninger of  the  University  of  Berlin,  "believes  in
the  absurdities  of  drug  medication."  In  physio-
therapeutics alone,  that  is  to  say.  in  Natural
Healing,  can  a  sick  man  stay  his  march  to  the
grave. Price, 15  cents.


THE SCHROTH CURE.
Gray.


By John A. R.


This  is  a  description  of  the  world's  cheapest
cure.  Having  cured  his  injured  knee  by  the
application  of  cloths  steeped  in  cold  water,  he
applied  this  remedy  to  all  bodily  complaints  with
great  success.  He  added  to  this  procedure  the
practice  of  eating  dry  food  as  a  form  of  diet,  the
idea  for  which  he  obtained  from  watcb.ing  animal?
feed,  and  the  application  of  these  two  principles
of  cure  added  to  fasting,  constitute  with  many
modifications,  a  regenerative  process  of  eliminat-
ing poisonous  matters  from  the  system  and  re-
storing  it to health. Price, 10 cents.


Address all orders to


THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1194


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


Foote,  Dr.  E.  B.— HOME  CYCLO-
PEDIA OF  POPULAR  MEDI-
CAL. SOCIAL,  AND  SEXUAL
SCIENCE.  Tlie  inost  popular
work  of  the  kind  in  the  English
language.  Nearly  a  million  copies
sold.  Part  I :  Disease,  Causes,
Prevention,  Cure.  Part  II:
Chronic  Diseases,  Causes,  Suc-
cessful Treatment.  Part  III:  Sex,
Civilization,  Marriage.  Part  IV:
Restricted  Marriage  and  Improved
Parentage.  250  Recipes,  Antidotes,
Emergency  Help,  etc.  Over  1,200
pp $-.50

Foote,  Dr.  E.  B.— PLAIN  HOME
TALK $11.00

Gould,  Dr.  G.  M.— GOULD'S  CY-
CLOPEDIA OF  PRACTICAL
MEDICINE  AND  SURGERY.
Illustrated $10.00

Gould,  Dr.  G.  M.— GOULD'S  IL-
LUSTRATED DICTIONARY
OF  MEDICINE,  BIOLOGY
AND  ALLIED  SCIENCES.  One
of  the  standard  series  on  the  sub-
jects specified.  Specimen  pages
and  full  information  sent  on  re-
quest  $10.00

Gould,  Dr.  G.  M.— GOULD'S  STU-
DENT'S MEDICAL  DICTION-
ARY.  Illustrated $::.00

Hillier.— TUBERCULOSIS. .$1.25

Hollen,  Dr.  Henry  Bronson.— THE
TAINT  (Venereal  Disease)  $1.00

Jullien,  Dr.  Louis.  —  LIBERTIN-
ISM AND  MARRIAGE.  ..$1.00

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— FIRST  BOOK
IN  PHYSIOLOGY  AND  HY-
GIENE. 174 pp $0.50

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— HOME  HAND-
BOOK OF  DOMESTIC  HY-
GIENE AND  RATIONAL  MED-
ICINE. Condensed  Table  of  Con-
tents: Anatomy,  Physiology,  and
Hygiene;  Food  and  Diet;  Water,
its  Uses  and  Dangers  from  Con-
tamination ;  the  Dangers  in  Milk  ;
Stimulants  and  Narcotics;  Hy-
giene of  the  Air ;  Rational  Reme-
dies for  Disease;  Diseases  and
Their  Treatment;  Feeding  and
Care  of  Infants;  Diseases  of
Children ;  Accidents  and  Emer-
gencies ;  Surgery ;  Index  of  Symp-
toms. Last  feature  unique  and
original,  enabling  any  sufferer  to
diagnose  disease  readily  and  accu-
rately. Appendix  includes:
Healthy  Homes;  Poisons  and
Antidotes;  Popular  Nostrums  and
Patent  Medicines;  New  Remedies;
Exercise  for  Invalids,  etc.  Over
3,000  subjects,  29  colored  plates,
.5  chromo-lithographs,  paper  mani-
kin.  1,742  pp $4.50

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.  —  SECOND
BOOK  IN  PHYSIOLOGY  AND
HYGIENE.  201  pp $0.80

Kimmel,  Viola  M.— THE  DOUBLE
STANDARD  OF  CONDUCT
FOR  MEN  AND  WOMEN.$0..')0

Landis,  Dr.  Henry  G.— QUIZ-COM-
PEND  OF  OBSTETRICS  .$1.:;5

Longley.— POCKET  PRONOUNC-
ING MEDICAL  LEXICON
(Phonetic) $0.7.^^

Manson,  Dr.  Patrick.— TROPICAL
DISEASES $3..50

Meyers,  Dr.  Milton  K.— LANG'S
GERMAN  ENGLISH  MEDI-
CAL DICTIONARY $5.00

Potter,  Dr.  S.  O.  L.— QUIZ-COM-
PEND  OF  HUMAN  ANATO-
MY  $1.10

Sturgis,  Dr.  F.  R.— THE  STU-
DENT'S MANUAL  OF  VENE-
REAL DISEASES.  7th  Edi-
tion  $1.25

Talcott, Dr. S. H. — MENTAL


DISEASES  AND  THEIR  MOD-
ERN TREATMENT.  375  pp.
.$2.50

Taber,  Clarence  W.  —  TABER'S
FAMILY  MEDICAL  CYCLO-
PEDIA  $1.00

Treves.  —  GERMAN  -  ENGLISH
MEDICAL  DICTIONARY  (half
calf) $."5.25


Part 14 — MEIWORY AND
niIND

Austin,  B.  F.  —  RATIONAL
MEMORY  TRAINING. ..$1.00

Bunker.  Dr.  W.  N.— YOUR  MEM-
ORY, ITS  FUNCTIONS,  EX-
ERCISE AND  TRAINING..$0.50

Cheetham,  A.  —  MEMORY  AND
ITS CULTIVATION $0.25

Flower,  Sydney.  —  CLAIRVOY-
ANCE  $1.00

Fowler,  O.  S.— MEMORY  AND
INTELLECTUAL  IMPROVE-
MENT. Applied  to  self-instruc-
tion and  juvenile  improvement.
No  recent  work  equals  this  in
direct  arrival  at  the  root  of  the
matter $1.00

Flower,  Sydney. —  MIND  READ-
ING  .$a.00

Gates. —  THE  ART  OF  MIND-
BUILDING $0.25

Haddock,  Rev.  F.  C. — POWER  OF
WILL.  (King  on  His  Throne.)
For  students,  teachers,  profession-
al workers,  and  all  who  desire
self-culture  and  the  mastery  of
life.  In  five  parts:  Theory  and
Life,  Physical  Regime,  Mental  Re-
gime, Destruction  of  Habit,  Con-
tact With  Other  People.  One  of
the  few  books  that  both  instruct
and  inspire — deeply  meta-physi-
cal,  broadly  practical,  intensely
vital $2.50

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L. — HOW  TO
STRENGTHEN  THE  MEMO-
RY  $1.00

Mac Donald, Dr. Robert. — MIND,
RELIGION AND HEALTH.
$1.40

Maclaren,  T.  —  SYSTEMATIC
MEMORY $0.50

Moore,  G.  B.— MOORE'S  MAR-
VELOUS MEMORY  METH-
ODS. The  means  suggested  in
this  book  for  improving  the  mem-
ory are  excellent .$1.10

Mueller,  F.  Max.  —  THREE  IN-
TRODUCTORY LECTURES
ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF
THOUGHT .$0..'?5

Thompson,  John. — HOW  TO  RE-
MEMBER; OR,  THE  ART  OF
NEVER  FORGETTING... $0.50


Fiirt  15 — MENTAL  THERA-
PEUTICS,  PHRENOIjOGY,
VOCATIONAL DELINEATION

(!i) Cliri.stian Science

Atkinson,  William  W.— HOW  TO
READ  HUMAN  NATURE:
ITS  INNER  STATES  AND
OUTER FORMS $1.20

Atkinson,  William  W.  —  THE
MASTERY OF BEING. $1.20

Atkinson,  William  W.— MEMORY:
HOW  TO  DEVELOP  AND
TRAIN $1.20

Atkinson,  William  W.  —  MIND
AND  BODY,  MENTAL
STATES  AND  PHYSICAL
CONDITIONS $1.20

Atkinson,  William  W.  —  NEW
THOUGHT;  ITS  HISTORY
AND PRINCIPLES $0.30


Atkinson,  William  W.  —  THE
PSYCHOLOGY  OF  SALES-
MANSHIP  $1.20

Atkinson,  William  W.  —  YOUR
MIND  AND  HOW  TO  USE
IT $1.20

Baldwin,  Eleanor.  —  MONEY
TALKS. In lour  parts. ...$0..*J0

Boehme,  Kate  A.  —  REALIZA-
TION  MADE EASY $1.30

Ellsworth,  Paul.  —  DIRECT
HEALING $l..30

Ellsworth,  Paul.— HEALTH  AND
POWER  THROUGH  CREA-
TION  $i..-JO

Ellsworth,  Paul. — THE  GIST  OF
NEW THOUGHT $0..10

Eddy,  Mrs. —  SCIENCE  AND
HEALTH.  The  doctrines  of  the
Founder  of  Christian  Science.
.$5.00

Fosbroke,  G.  E.  —  CHARACTER
READING  THROUGH
ANALYSIS  OF  THE  FEA-
TURES.  Cloth $1.60

Forty-nine  Writers.  —  FIFTY-
THREE  EXPERIENCES  IN
NEW  THOUGHT $1.50

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.  —  CHART
OF  BRAIN  CENTERS.  4  pages,
OVa  x  11  inches;  .$0.10  each;
per dozen $0.85

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen. — A  MANUAL
OF  MENTAL  SCIENCE;  OR,
CHILDHOOD,  ITS  CHARAC-
TER AND  CULTURE. ...$1.20

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.  —  BRAIN-
ROOFS  AND  ITS  PORTI-
COES. A  Psychological  Study
of Character $1.10

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen. — LIFE  OF
DR.  FRANCOIS  JOSEPH
GALL $0.50

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.  —  PHRE-
NOLOGY IN  BUSINESS
LIFE $0.15

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.  —  PHRE-
NOLOGY IN THE SCHOOL.

„ •• $0.15

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen. — CHARAC-
TER-ANALYSIS, as  seen  in  the
Features  of  the  Face.  11  pamph-
lets,  over  200 illustrations.  $1.10

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen. — CHARAC-
TER READING  FROM
PHOTOGRAPHS $0.15

Fowler,  L.  N.  —  MENTAL
SCIENCE  EXPLAINED  BY
PHRENOLOGY $0.40

Fowler,  L.  N.— PHRENOLOGI-
CAL CHINA  BUST.  A  Model
Head,  giving  location  and  divi-
sion of  Phrenological  Organs.
Shipped parcel post, cloth, .$6.50

Fowler,  O.  S.  —  H  U  M  A  N
SCIENCE,  OR,  PHRENOL-
OGY  $3.50

Fowler.  O.  S.  and  L.  N. — HERE-
DITARY DESCENT.  Its  Laws
and  Facts  applied  to  Human
Improvement $1.20

Fowler,  O.  S.  and  L.  N.— PHRE-
NOLOGY PROVED  AND
APPLIED $1.60

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L. — HYGIENE
OF  THE  BRAIN,  AND  THE
CURE  OF  NERVOUSNESS.
$1.20

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L. — HYGIENIC
TREATMENT  FOR  CON-
SUMPTION  $1.20

Holcombe,  Dr.  Wm.  H.  —  CON-
DENSED THOUGHT  ABOUT
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. .$0.25

Larson,  James  H.  and  Mrs.  Livings-
ton.—THE  MOTHER  AS  A
WORLD POWER $0.30

Latson,  W.  R.— SECRETS  OF
MENTAL SUPREMACY. $1.60


Unlverttnl  Nuturopalbic  l>Irectory  and  Buyers'  Giildo


lies


T


HIS  standard  work  is  an  encyclopedia  of  the  natural  system  of  healing,  regarded
as  a  special  sdiool  of  medicine,  no  matter  by  whom  practiced,  and  contains  not
only  a  description  of  the  methods  employed  by  the  author  at  his  famous  Bilz
Sanatorium  at  Radebcul,  Dresden,  (iermany,  but  also  the  methods  employed  by
all  other  pioneers  of  Naturopathy,  so  as  to  present  a  complete  survey  of  natural
healing  science.

Rational  therapy  is  a  modem  revolt from the  allopathic  methods of treating  disease
l)y use  of internal  medicine, which,  whether  homeopathic,  or  allopathic, only interfere

\vith the action of  the
vital force, and are


THE  NATURAL  METHOD  OF  HEALING

A New and Complete Guide to Health


provocative of a sec-
ondary illness, manu-
factured with the idea
of supplanting the or-
iginal one, and at the
same  time  merely  plac-
ate symptoms, and do
not  attack  the  cause  of
the  disease.
People  have  a wholesome horror  of  being  poisoned by  pills
and  potions,  serums,  vaccines  and  inoculations,  of  whose  prop-
erties  they  know nothing, but fear the worst. Common sense
and the  havoc wrought by the superstitions of  allopathy have
introduced a new era of healing, and the professors of the
natural method of healing are multiplying by the thousands,
until, as Professor Bilz says, people  are giving  themselves up,
hand  and foot,  to  the  blandishments of some quack or  swind-
ler who  is  flaunting  in  their  faces  the  enticing  flag  of  the  "Na-
tural  Method of Healing." As all reality casts its shadow, so
also  the  natural  method  of  cure  will  have  its  mountebanks,  like
every other  institution  on  earth.

Professor  Bilz  goes  deeply  into  the  philosophy  of  his  sub-
ject, and  shows  how  that  crops  without  the  natural  forces
of  sun,  air,  rain,  mineral  food  and  tillage  would  perish,  so
also,  if  a  patient  is  denied  the  natural  means  of  healing,  such  as  proper  food,
air,  light,  water,  changes  of  temperature,  so  essential  to  his  well-being,  and  is  being
constantly  supplied  with  poisonous  medicines,  the  process  of  cure  initiated  by  the
vital  force,  which  is  called  upon  to  turn  the  morbid  matter  out  of  the  body,  will  be
paralyzed,  and  the  patient  will  sooner  or  later  suffer,  at  least,  most  seriously,  if  not  to
the  extent  of  losing  his  life.

Professor  Bilz  places  the  lack  of  proper  food  at  the  head  of  all  degenerative  agents,
for  he  considers  that  diseases  are  nothing  else  than  irregularities  produced  during  the
process  of  food  assimilation  in  the  digestive  organs,  both  by  the  degenerative  influences
ot  wrong  foods,  alcohol,  tea,  coffee,  spices,  gormandizing,  "lack  of  exercise,  the  wrong
application  of  otherwise  healthful  agents,  all  constituting  a  formidable  list  of  ex-
ternal depressive  influences,  that  primarily  cause  a  disturbance  of  food-assimilation,
which  leads  to  the  most  varied  forms  of  disease.

In  the  two  volumes  that  constitute  the  Bilz  encyclopedia  of  healing,  the  subject
matter  is  divided  into  two  sections,  viz.,  a  consideration  of  the  various  diseases  to
Which  Humanity  is  subjected,  with  a  description  of  their  treatment,  entitled  "The
i*  y,""^'  '^'^^y^?.?  °f  Healing  and  Its  Merits,"  the  second  section  treating  more  exclusively
of  Modes  of  Ireatment  in  the  Natural  Method  of  Healing,  both  sections  being  arranged
alphabetically.  As  may  be  expected,  the  beneficent  uses  of  nutrition,  diet,  water  used
externally  and  internally,  air,  warmth,  light,  dwellings,  exercise,  rest,  massage,  sand
baths,  mud  baths,  electropathic  treatment,  packs  and  compresses,  etc.,  are  dilated  upon,
the  whole  furnishing  a  most  valuable  puide  for  the  practical  naturopath.  The  Reports
of  Cures  show  a  list  of  over  tliree  hundred  different  ailments  that  vield  readily  to  the
natural  system  of  healing.  To  the  Kneipp  Water  Cure  is  accorded  ll.")  pages  of  descrip-
tive matter,  ranging  from  the  cure  of  cancerous  ulcers  to  common  colds.

The  Schroth  Cure,  known  also  as  Regenerative  Treatment,  or  Drv  Diet  Cure,  which
consists  of  a  partial  withdrawal  of  food  and  drink,  whereby  the  mucous  deposits  in  the
body,  and  various  humors,  become  loose,  and  are  easily  expelled,  which  results  in  the
production  of  fresh  blood  and  vigorous  humors  in  the  body.

Kuhnc's  Cure,  so  called  from  its  discoverer,  Louis  Kuhne  of  Leipzig,  is  also  fully
in  many  forms,  and  caused  by  the  accumulation  of  foreign  substances,  or  morbid
matter  in  the  body.  (See  a  full  account  of  the  Kuhne  Cure  in  the  Universal  Naturopathic
Encyclopedia,  Directory,  Drugless  Year  Book  and  Buyers'  Guide,  vol.  1,  1918.  Published
by  Dr.  B.  Lust,  Butler,  N.  J. 1,000  pages. .$10.00  postpaid.)

The  treatments  given  at  the  Bilz  Sanatorium  make  use  of  everv  method  of  cure  that
is  recommended  by  experience.  For  example,  the  various  Swedish  systems  of  Cur-
ative Gymnastics  are  largely  employed  with  immense  benefit  to  its  patients.  All  these
woman given, also colored charts in folding sections of the eye, ear, nose, head and

brain,  mouth  and  throat.' lungs  and  heart.  There
are  also  many  full-page  colored  lithographs,
showing  vapor  or  steam  baths,  packs  and  wraps,
curative  gymnastic  exercises,  illustrations  of
the  mouth  and  teeth.  colored  illustrations
of  the  stomach  in  health  and  disease,  col-
ored illustrations  of  the  art
of  swimming,  a  lithograph  of
all  the  various  races  of  man-
kind, pictures  of  the  Kneipp
Cure,  and  a  page  of  gen-
eral exercises.  There  are  over
7  2  0  illustrations  scattered
throughout  the  text,  showing  every  possible  phase  of  natural  heal-
ing, including  a  portrait  of  the  author.  There  is  a  general  index  of
63  pages,  also  indices  of  reports  of  cures,  and  of  illustrations.  We
recommend  this  standard  work  in  every  particular  as  a  necessity  to
every  Naturopath.  Two  volumes,  bound  in  embossed  cloth,  and
stamped  in  gold.  Over  three  million  copies  have  alreadv  been  sold.
Published  in  English,  French,  Spanish,  Italian.  German.  R'ussian,  Por-
tuguese,  Polish,  Hungarian, Bohemian, Swedish, Danish,  and Dutch.


Price,  postpaid,  $8.50  without  human
figure charts. With charts, $10.50.

Foreign  edilions,  two  volumes,  $10.50  postpaid

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.

BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


1196


Naturopathic  Booh-  Catalog


MacLelland, Bruce— PROSPERI-
TY THROUGH THOUGHT

FORCE $1.30

Militz, Annie R.— THE RENEW-

AL  OF  THE BODY $1.30

Newton. R. H.— CHRISTIAN

SCIENCE $0.35

Olin, Chas. H.— PHRENOLOGY.

Board Covers $0.60

Purinton. W. A.— CHRISTIAN

SCIENCE.  An  Exposition.  $1.10

Rion, Roxana.  —  THE BEAUTY

BOOK $1.30

Sheldon,  Theodore.— VIM  CUL-
TURE  $0.30

Towne.  Elizabeth.  —  CONSTITU-
TION OF MAN $0..50

Towne.  Elizabeth.  —  EXPERI-
ENCE IN  SELF-HEALING.

$0.50

Towne.  Elizabeth.  —  HAPPINESS

AND MARRIAGE $0.50

Towne, Elizabeth.  —  HOW TO

GROW SUCCESS .$0.55

Towne, Elizabeth.  —  HOW TO

READ  CHARACTER.  ....$0.50

Towne, Elizabeth.  —  HOW TO

TRAIN CHILDREN AND

PARENTS $0.^:5

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  HOW  TO
USE NEW THOUGHT IN

HOME LIFE $1.30

Towne,  Elizabeth.— JOY  PHILO-
SOPHY. Cloth $1.30

Towne, Elizabeth.— JUST HOW

TO CONCENTRATE. ...$0.25

Towne, Elizabeth.— JUST HOW

TO COOK  MEALS  WITHOUT

MEAT $0.35

Towne,  Elizabeth.— JUST  HOW
TO WAKE THE SOLAR

PLEXUS .$0.:{5

Towne, Elizabeth.— LESSONS IN

LIVING. Cloth $1.30

Towne,  Elizabeth. — PRACTICAL
METHODS  FOR  SELF-DE-
VELOPMENT; SPIRITUAL,
MENTAL  AND  PHYSICAL.

$1.30

Towne,  Elizabeth.— THE  LIFE
POWER,  AND HOW  TO USE

IT $1.30

Towne, Elizabeth.  —  YOU AND

YOUR FORCES $0.55

Towne,  William  E.— HEALTH
AND  WEALTH  FROM  WITH-

IN $1.30

Towne, William E. — HURRY,

WORRY, CURED .$0.25

Towne,  William  E.— THE  WAY
TO PERFECT HEALING.

$0.55

WaUace,  Rhodes  H.  —  PSY-
CHOMA,  OR  SOUL  SLEEP.
$1.30

Waliac'e,  Rhodes  H.— RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION  FOR  NEW
THOUGHT CHILDREN. .$0.30

Warman, B.— PSYCHIC  SCIENCE
MADE PLAIN. Cloth ...$1.50

Wattles,  Wallace  D.  —  FINAN-
CIAL SUCCESS  THROUGH
CREATIVE  THOUGHT;  OR,
SCIENCE  OF  GETTING  RICH
.$1..30

Wattles,  Wallace  D.— HEALTH
THROUGH  NEW  THOUGHT
AND FASTING $0.55

Wattles,  Wallace  D.— HOW  TO
PROMOTE YOURSELF. $0.30

Wattles,  Wallace  D.  —  THE
SCIENCE  OF  BEING  WELL.
$1.30

Welis,  S.  R.— HOW  TO  READ
CHARACTER. Cloth $1,45

WeUs,  S.  R.— NEW  PHYSIOG-
NOMY. Cloth »3.36


Winbigler,  Dr.  C.  F. -CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE  AND  KINDRED
SUPERSTITIONS.  A  power-
ful statement  of  the  facts  and  a
summing  up  of  the  arguments
against Christian Science. $1.10

Wilson,  Floyd  B. — THROUGH
SILENCE  TO  REALIZATION.
$1.30

(•>) i>la;;:neti»iin, Mcsniprlsin,
Hypnotism, SiiKfCCstlon

Advance  Thought  Publishing  Co. —
PRIVATE  LESSONS  IN  THE
CULTIVATION  OF  SEX
FORCE $1.50

Allen,  James— AS  A  MAN  THINK-
ETH $0.50;  cloth,  $1.00

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H. — ANCIENT
MAGIC.  MAGNETISM  AND
PSYCHIC  FORCES $2.00

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H. — HOW  TO
WIN:  OR,  SURE  SECRETS  OP
SUCCESS  $2.00

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H. — SUGGES-
TION, THE  SECRET  OF  SUC-
CESS $2.00

Atkinson,  WiUiam  Walker. — SUG-
GESTION AND  AUTO-SUG-
GESTION  $1.00

Bernheim.  — SUGGESTIVE  THE-
RAPEUTICS  $3.50

Dowhng,  Dr.  Leigh.  —  ABSENT
TREATMENT $2.00

Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh. — AUTO-SUG-
GESTION  $1.10

Dowhng,  Dr.  Leigh.  —  HYPNO-
TISM  $5.00

Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh.— PERSONAL
MAGNETISM. HOW  TO  SUC-

^CEED .$2.00

Drexel,  Dr.  D.  D.— HYPNOTISM
MADE EASY $o.lo

Durville,  H.— PRACTICE  OF  HU-
MAN MAGNETISM $l.i((

Hara,  O.  Hashnu. — CONCENTRA-
TION AND  THE  ACQUIRE-
MENT OF  PERSONAL  MAG
NETISM $1.00

Hooker,  Dr.  J.  Stenson.— A  NEW
SUGGESTIVE  TREATMENT
(Without Hypnotism.) ....$0.:JE

Jewett,  H.  M.,  and  Jewett,  Dr.
Milo  A.  —  SLEEP  AND
DREAMS,  also  THE  ANALO-
GY OF  INSANITY  TO
SLEEP AND DREAMS. $0.85

Neal,  S.  O.,  and  Clark,  C.  T.—
HYPNOTISM  AND  HYPNOT-
IC SUGGESTION $3.00

Pitzer,  Dr.  G.  C— SUGGESTIONS
IN  THE  CURE  OF  DISEASES
AND  THE  CORRECTION  OF
VICES.  A  physician's  recogni
tion  and  use  of  the  incalculabh
po.wer  of  thought  to  produce,  and
to eradicate, morbid body states

$1  Q^'

Randall,  F.  H.— YOUR  MESMER-
IC FORCES,  AND  HOW  TO
DEVELOP  THEM $i,0(;

Raphael. —  PRIVATE  INSTRUC-
TION IN  ANIMAL  MAGNET-
ISM  $2.5((

Schlathoelter,  Rev.  L.  —  HYPNO-
TISM EXPLAINED .$0.6<i

Schofield,  Dr.  Alfred  T.— THE
FORCE  OF  MIND.  OR,  THE
MEDICAL  FACTOR  IN  MEDI-

^  CINE ,2.10

Sextus, Carl.— HYPNOTISM.$1.50

Shaftesbury,  Edwin.— PERSONAL
MAGNETISM $4.00

Strasser,  J.  H.  and  Emily.— THE
KEY TO MAGNETIC HEAL-

1,,^^?'  Vr- *5.00

Wood,  Henry. — IDEAL  SUGGES-
TION THROUGH  MENTAL
PHOTOGRAPHY $l.2K


(c) Mental Science and New
Thought

Allen,  Abel  Leighton. — THE  MES-
SAGE OF NEW THOUGHT.

$1.25

Atkinson,  William  Walker. -^THE
MYSTERY  OF  BEING..  .$1.25
Backus,  William  Vernon. — TALO-
SOPHY,  OR.  THE  ART  OF
MAKING  HAPPINESS  EPI-
DEMIC .$1.10

Bradbury,  Harriet  B. — THE  NEW
PHILOSOPHY  OF  HEALTH.
— Contents:  Introductory,  The
Recuperative  Force,  The  Healing
of  Disease,  Mental  Causation,
Prayer,  Psychic  Powers,  A  Uni-
versal Land,  The  Duty  of  the
Church,  Occult  Phenomena,  Prac-
tical Suggestions  for  Self- Help,
Intuitive  and  Inspirational,  yet
clear and concise enough for a

textbook $0.75

Cavaness,  J.  M.  —  RHYTHMIC
STUDIES OF THE WORD.

2 vols., each $1.25

Churchill, Lydia.  —  THE MAGIC

SEVEN $1.00

Colville, W. J. —  HISTORY OF

THEOSOPHY $1.00

Colville,  W.  J.  —  SPIRITUAL
SCIENCE  OF  HEALTH  AND
HEALING.  No  particular  creed,
or  'ology,  or  'ism.  Just  truths,
and  glints,  and  foregleams  to
light one from the abyss of

physical misery $1.25

Colville,  W.  J.— WORLD'S  FAIR
TEXT BOOK OF MENTAL

THERAPEUTICS $0..50

Crane, Aaron Martin. — RIGHT
AND WRONG THINKING
AND  THEIR  RESULTS.  $1.60
"D. C. K."  — THE NEW PSY-
CHOLOGY: OR,  THE  SECRET

OF  SUCCESS $2.00

"D.  C.  K."— THOUGHT  POWER:
WHAT  IT  IS  AND  WHAT IT

DOES $0.25

Deroum,  Dr.  Francis  X. — REST,
SUGGESTION  AND  OTHER
THERAPEUTIC  MEASURES
IN NERVOUS  AND MENTAL

TROUBLES $2.50

Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh.— PERSONAL
MAGNETISM:  HOW  TO  SUC-
CEED. The  Christopathian  in-
terpretation .$2.00

Dresser,  H.  W. — THE  SPIRIT
OF  THE NEW  THOUGHT.

$1,25

Dresser.  H.  W.  —  THE  POWER
OF  SILENCE.  Solitude  and  Si-
lence are  the  great  ante-chambers
of  destiny.  Great  thoughts,  great
plans,  great  purposes,  are  not
brought  forth  amid  the  multi-
tude. They  are  sired  by  selfhood
and  borne  by  meditation.  The
common  man  cannot  bear  to
think.  That  constitutes  medio-
crity. »  The  reader's  appraise-
ment of  such  a  book  is  simply
the  declaration  of  his  own  devel-
opment  $1.25

Fletcher,  Horace.  —  MENTICUL-
TURE: OR.  THE  A. B.  C.  OF

TRUE  LIVING $1.00

Fletcher,  Horace.  —  HAPPINESS  :
THROUGH  FORE-THOUGHT
MINUS  FEAR-THOUGHT.  The
people  in  the  world  who  are
really  happy  will  feel  a  thrill  of
sympathetic  understanding  on
reading  these  thoughts — the  book
is  simply  a  syllabus  of  their
own  experience.  And  the  millions
that  are  wretched  will  get
glimpses of radiating power


|Tnlvor.s:il N:hiir<>|>:<' lii<- l)ii-o«'(or>- :iiiil Hiiyors* fiiiiilo


1107


&


B


THE  MEDICAL  QUESTION

The  Truth  About  Official  Medicine  and
Why  We  Must  Have  Medical  Freedom

Medical Laws  vs.  Human Rights  and  Constitution. The  Great  Need
of  the  Hour. What  Constitutes  the  True  Science  and  Art  of  Healing

By  A.  A.  ERZ,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

HERE is  a  book that cheers  one like  a  draught  of  ozone  after  having  breathed the
mephitic vapors of  the  philosophy  of official  medicine, that exploits  the immorality
of  vivisection, and swears  by the unscientific and useless products of the torture
trough.
It  consists  of  600  pages,  written  by  the  trenchant  pen  of  one  who  is  master  of
his  subject. It  embodies  the  revolt  of  the  latest  and  most  efficient  school  of  medical
healing  against  the  tyranny  and  ignorance  of  the  drug  doctors,  who,  while  attacking
symptoms, fail  to  understand  the  need of  the  higher  practice  of  treating  the  causes
of  disease  instead. The  charlatanry  and  inefficiency  of  official  medicine  has  reason  to  be  envious
of  the  successes  of  the  natural  school  whose  philosophic  practices  are  here  fully  manifested.
Dr. Erz makes very clear his  He  is  the sworn enemy of  the


position  in  the  art  of  healing.  He
is  an  enthusiastic  Naturopath.  He
believes  that  when  a  man  becomes
ill,  he  should  employ  the  natural
forces  of  hydropathy,  diet,  exer-
cise, sunshine,  electricity,  me-
chand-therapy,  massage,  and  all
the  healing  agencies  that  have
proven  their  worth  as  prophylac-
tics, and  their  ability  to  arouse
the  inherent  restorative  power  for
health  that  resides  in  every  or-
ganism. His  information  is  il-
luminating in the highest degree.


"scientific  medicine"  of  the  allo-
paths, that  consists  of  poisonous
drugs  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
equally  poisonous  and  wholly  dan-
gerous serums,  inoculations  and
vaccines  on  the  other,  that  form  a
body  of  medical  superstition  that
is  propagating  disease  rather  than
curing  it.  He  discusses,  one  by
one,  the  most  loudly-praised  pro-
ducts of  medical  research,  and
proves  them  either  to  be  utterly
useless,  or  of  deadly  danger  to
the  duped  and  unsuspecting  patient.


In  support  of  his  statements,  he  quotes  the  opinions  of  the  greatest  exponents  of  official
medicine  who  confess  that  allopathic  medicine  has  produced  more  misery  and  premature  death
than  famine,  pestilence  and  war  combined.  As  Billroth  says,  "Our  progress  is  over  mountains
of corpses."

He  proves  that  the  American  Medical  Association,  and  the  various  State  and  County  Asso-
ciations affiliated  therewith,  form  one  vast  engine  of  oppression,  armed  with  legal  power  to
harass,  crush,  and  if  possible  destroy,  the  true  saviors  of  mankind,  the  exponents  of  natural
healing,  whose  activities  naturally  discredit  official  medicine.  By  legally  securing  a  monopoly
of  practising  medicine,  THEY  ARE  ABLE  TO  MAKE  IT  MORE  OF  A  CRIME  TO  CURE
A PERSON  THAN  TO  KILL  HTM.

He  shows  how  easy  it  is  to  understand  why  the  unthinking  legislator  favors  official  medi-
cine to  the  exclusion  of  the  natural  school  of  therapy.  The  psychological  pressure  of  an  in-
stitution, no  matter  how  despotic  its  use  of  power  may  be,  or  how  false  and  deadly  its  products
are,  that  has  its  roots  deeply  rooted  in  history,  is  vastly  greater  on  the  unenlightened  mind,
than  a  true  and  noble  institution  that  was  born  but  yesterday — where  man  does  not  know
conservatism rules.

Dr.  Erz  fully  proves  that  the  so-called  remedies  of  medical  research  are  violations  of  every
law  of  nature,  of  health,  of  life,  and  a  disregard  of  every  principle  of  physiology,  biology  and
therapeutics.

The  people  were  never  consulted  about  these  laws,  and  never  asked  for  them

They  are  the  product  of  medical  feudalism,  which  means  intolerance,  injustice  and  brutality,
instead  of  charity,  justice  and  dignity.  The  people  should  rise  in  their  might  and  stay  the
infamous activities of these medical malefactors.

It  is  a  startling  indictment  of  humanity  that  its  saviors  are  never  recognized  until  the
advance  guard,  and  many  of  the  main  army,  are  killed,  or  trodden  underfoot,  and  official
medicine  in  America,  the  glorious  Land  of  Freedom,  is  busy  at  this  moment,  as  it  has  been
for  many  years  past,  in  hunting  down  the  drugless'  practitioner,  whose  only  fault  is  the  fact
that  he  cures  patients  by  natural  methods,  where  the  vendors  of  rotten  pus  have  signally  failed.
He  is  arrested,  and  heavily  fined,  or  thrown  into  jail  for  the  offense  of  practising  medicine
without  a  pus-vendor's  license.

Dr.  Erz  rightly  advocates  the  urgent  need  of  a  great  Academy  of  Natural  Healing  to  con-
vince the  thinking  masses  of  the  superiority  of  the  Natural  Healing  System,  and  to  protect  it
against  all  misrepresentations  and  abuses,  and  assure  its  efficiency  and  permanent  success.
Medical  Freedom  is  the  great  need  of  the  hour  to  prove  that  Nature's  constructive  laws  over-
shadow all  ignorance,  superstition  and  ambition.  As  the  e.xponent  of  a  standard  of  drugless
healing,  and  as  a  monitor,  mentor,  and  defence  of  humanity  from  rapacity  and  superstition,
such  an  institution  would  be  of  enormous  value  to  mankind.

Dr.  Erz's  work  is  a  standard  contribution  to  the  great  propaganda  of  Drugless  Therapy
that  is  sweejjing  over  the  land.  No  drugless  practitioner  can  afford  to  be  without  its  inspiring
companionship.  It  marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  grand  science  and  ai^  of  Natural
Healing.

Price,  in  cloth,  postpaid,  $5.00;  paper  cover,  $4.00.

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


D:


@


1198


Xaturopathic  Book  Catalog


through a life of conscious con-
trol  »i-oo

Flower,  Sydney.  —  CONCENTRA-
TION «<■"•»

Geiser. John O.— EVOLUTION
PROVING IMMORTALITY.
$1.50

Hamilton, Dr. Edward John. —
THE MORAL LAW, OR,
THEORY AND PRACTICE
OF DUTY $1.70

Hamilton, Dr. Edward John. —
THE MODALIST, OR, THE
LAWS OF RATIONAL CON-
VICTION  $1-35

Hamilton, Dr. Edward John. —

THE  PERCEPTIONALIST,

OR.  MENTAL  SCIENCE.  $-M0

Hara.  O  Hashnu.— MENTAL  AL-
CHEMY  $6-50

Harte,  Kichara.  —  t^KACTICAL
PSYCHOLOGY:  OR.  HOW  TO
BE  HAPPY *«>--5

Holphide.  Dr.  -  MIND  AND
BODY  $'•'•'•

Jacoby,  Dr."  George  W.— CHILD
TRAINING  AS  AN  EXACT
SCIENCE.  Cloth,  l.">  full  pages;
illustrated *l-60

Johnson,  Dr.  Franklin.  —  THh.
NEW PSYCHIC STUDIES.

$0.85

Kir'kV  'EleanoV.  —  IHE  tiO  l  lOM
PLANK  OF  MENTAL  HEAL-
ING  $0.:J5

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  LIBRA,  OR,
WHAT  THE  STARS  TOLD
ELIZABETH -U-^O

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  PERPETUAL
YOUTH $1.10

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  WHERE  YOU
j^p£  $0.:!5

Kleiser.' '  Grenvilie.  —  HOW TO
BUILD MENTAL POWER.
$3.10

Leavitt'  '  Dr.  Franklin. — MENTAL
AND  PHYSICAL  EASE  AND
SUPREMACY $1-50

Loomis,  Ernest.—  CONCENXKA-
TION. Methods  and  Helps.^l.US

Loomis,  Ernest.  — METHODS  OF
SELF-HELP.  One  of  a  series
of  pivotal  essays  in  the  length-
ening line  of  New  Thought  pub-
lications  •  •?  ."tliP

Loomis,  Ernest.  — YOUR  PRAC-
TICAL FORCES $l--5

Mitchell,  Dr.  John  K  —  SELF
HELP  FOR  NERVOUS
WOMEN $1.10

Munro,  Dr.  Henry  S.— SUGGES-
TIVE THERAPEUTICS,  AP-
PLIED HYPNOTISM,  PSY-
CHIC SCIENCE 1,  i^-^e

Newcomb,  Katherine  H. — STEPS*
ALONG THE PATH. ...$1.60

Newkirk, Newton ("Newt"). —
BACK  TO NATURE. 00 draw-
ings  $0.85

Patterson,  Charles  Brodie.  —  THE
LIBRARY  OF  HEALTH.  Per-
haps the  most  popular  exposition
of  New  Thought  psychology.$iJ.ii5

Patterson.  Charles  Brodie. — THE
WILL  TO  BE  WELL. ...$1.30

Pitzer  Dr.  G.  C— SUGGESTIONS
IN  THE  CURE  OF  DISEASE
AND  THE  CORRECTION  OF
VICES.  A  physician's  recognition
and  use  of  the  incalculable  power
of  thought  to  produce  and  to
eradicate  body states •*/:"*?

Post C. C. — CONGRESSMAN

swANSON ••v;;*^;?!?

Post.  C.  C— DRIVEN  FROM  SEA

TO SEA. A story of political

brigandage in the United States.

$0.50

Post,"c.  C.  — MEN  AND  GODS.
A bold affirmation of the new


thought  idea  that  man  is  also  a
god.  Man  should  be  a  follower
of  himself  and  not  a  follower  of
Christ,  or  Brahma,  who  are  re-
garded as  human  gods.  The  au-
thor is  a  strong  believer  in  the
efficacy  of  mental  therapeutics.
$1.00

Potter,  Dr.  L.  T.— PSYCHICAL
DEVELOPMENT  AND  THE
PHILOSOPHY  OF  NEW
THOUGHT $::.."50

Potter.  Dr.  L.  T.  —  THE  PSY-
CHOLOGY OF  HEALTH  AND
HAPPINESS $1.00

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  ASK  THE
DRUGGIST $0.10

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE $1.10

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  THE  CORSET
IN COURT $0.15

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  EFFICIENCY
IN  DRUGLESS  HEALING.
$1.50; cloth, .$2.00

Purinton,  E.  E.— FATHERHOOD  :
THE  NEW  PROFESSION..$0.::5

Purinton,  E.  E.— THE  FINE  ART
OF  GIVING $0.20

Purinton, E. E.— THE FUTURE

LIFE $o.::o

Purinton,  E.  E.— GENIUS  AND
EUGENICS $0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— HORIZONINGS.
$0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— LORDS  OF  OUR-
SELVES. ...$1.50; cloth, $2.00

Purinton, E.  E. — PLAY $0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  PROCLAMA-
TION OF  NATUROPATHY.
$0.10

Purinton,  E.  E.— SINS  OF  SEX.
.$0.35

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  TRY  THE
LAUGH  CURE $0.15

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  WOMAN'S
WORK .$0.25

Ribot.  Th.— THE  DISEASE  OF
PERSONALITY .$0.25

Ribot,  Th.— THE  DISEASE  OF
THE  WILL $0.25

Rivers,  Manuel.  —  HEAL  THY-
SELF  .$0.35

Schellhous,  Dr.  E.  J.— THE  ELE-
MENTS OF  ETHICS .$0.50

Shaftesbury,  Edwin. — PERSONAL
MAGNETISM:  HOW  TO  SUC-
CEED. Acknowledged  to  be  pre-
eminently the  authoritative  treat-
ise on  the  subject $4.00

Spinney, William Anthony. —

HEALTH THROUGH SELF-
CONTROL $1.35

Spinney,  William  Anthony. — SUG-
GESTIVE NEW  THOUGHT.
$0.15

Spurzheim.  Ur.  J.  C — i^riKiiNOL-
OGY,  OR,  THE  DOCTRINE
DOCTRINE  OF  MENTAL
PHENOMENA.  The  standard
,$3.00

Towne,  EHzabeth.  —  CONSTITU-
TION  OF  MAN .$0..50

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  JUST  HOW
TO  MAKE  THE  SOLAR
PLEXUS.  A  practical  adaptation
of  Heliocentric  philosophy.  How
to  control  emotions,  banish  fear,
develope  self,  breathe  for  health,
and  attain  complete  unfoldment.
$0.35

Walton,  Dr.  George  L. — THOSE
NERVES $1.10

Walton,  Dr.  George  L.— WHY
WORRY? $1.10

Whipple,  L.  E.— THE  PHILOSO-
PHY OF  MENTAL  HEAL-
ING  .$2.00

Wilmans,  Helen.— BLOSSOM  OF
THE CENTURY $1.00

Wilmans,  Helen.— CONQUEST  OF
DEATH. Sensitized visionaries


have  at  rare  intervals  hinted  tim
idly  at  physical  immortality.  But
the  material  side  had  atrophied,
and  evanescence  was  the  out-
come of  the  hypothesis.  This
dogma  destroyer  has  already
translated  most  of  her  theories
into  cold  cash  and  redundant
health.  There  are  idioms  in  the
translation,  but  the  spirit  and
possibility  is  just  as  valent  for
every  other  human  being.  If
you  want  to  pierce,  in  a  measure,
the  penetralia  of  existence,  get
this  book — and  go  alone  to  read
it. 400 pp., 36 half-tones. .  .$3.00

Wilmans,  Helen. — CONQUEST  OF
POVERTY.  Not  how  to  do  it-
how  it  was  done.  The  record  of
a  vision,  a  revelation,  a  trans-
formation, as  wonderful  as  the
awakening  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.
From  the  possession  of  a  frail
body,  a  life  half  gone,  and  twenty-
five  cents,  to  the  ecstacies  of
superb  health,  the  dictatorship  of
an  entire  town,  the  apostleship
of  a  world-wide  belief,  and  the
reception  of  tens  of  thousands
every  year — that  is  the  history  of
half  a  decade.  The  author  was
the  leader  insofar  as  they
acknowledge  any,  of  the  Mental
Science  advocates  of  America.
$1.00; cloth, fl.50

Wilmans,  Helen. — EUGENE  DEL-
MAR $1.00

Wilmans,  Helen. — FREEDOM.  A
journal  of  Mental  Science.  Three
copies,  50  cents.  Six  copies,
$1.00

Wilmans,  Helen— HOME  COURSE
IN  MENTAL  SCIENCE.  20
I^cssons $20.00

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  MENTAL
SCIENCE  AND  CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE $0.25

Wilmans,  Helen,  and  Powers,  Ada
Wilmans.  —  OH,  WORLD!
SUCH  AS  I  HAVE,  GIVE  I
UNTO  THEE.  A  volume  of
essays  in  support  of  the  doc-
trine  that Mental Science is the

bread  of  life. Vol. I $1.00

Vol. II $1.00

Wilmans,  Helen. — RELATION  OF
THE  IDEAL  TO  THE  AF-
FAIRS OF LIFE $0.25

Wilmans,  Helen. — SEARCH  FOR
FREEDOM.  An  autobiography
of Mrs. Wilmans $1.50

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  SPIRITUAL-
ISM FROM  THE  STAND-
POINT OF  MENTAL  SCI-
ENCE  $0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  THE  LAST
ENEMY  TO  BE  OVERCOME
IS  DEATH .$0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  OUR  PAST—
OUR FUTURE .$0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  THOUGHT
TRANSFERENCE  AND  MEN-
TAL HEALING $0.25

Winbigler,  Dr.  Chas.  F.— HAND-
BOOK OF  INSTRUCTIONS
FOR  HEALING  AND  HELP-
ING OTHERS $1.10

Winbigler,  Dr.  Chas.  F.— SUG-
GESTION; ITS  LAW  AND
APPLICATION $1.60

Wood,  Henry.— IDEAL  SUuGtS-
TION  THROUGH  MENTAL
PHOTOGRAPHY.  The  imagi-
nation, decried  and  scorned  and
throttled  through  ages  of  mate-
rialism, is  now  enshrined  by  the
thinker  as  the  real  man.  The
mental  picture  of  health,  beauty,
opulence,  power,  if  kept  undim-
med  in thought, will  slowly  tak«


UnlTersal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  BayerH'  Guide


1199


The  Finer  Elements  of  Life


FATHERHOOD, THE NEW PRO=.
FESSION. By  Edward  E.  Puriaton.

Mr.  Purinton  regards  Fatherhood  as  the
New  Profession.  It  involves  three  epochs.
The  first  e.xtends  from  marriage  to  concep-
tion, the  second  from  conception  to  birth  and
the  third  from  birth  to  maturity.  The  duty
of  the  father  during  these  three  stages  of
paternity,  the  attraction  of  the  right  kind  of
baby  soul:  his  behavior  during  gestation  of
the  child,  and  the  physical,  mental  and  moral
training  to  be  given  the  child  after  birth,  are
outlined  in  this  most  valuable  pamphlet.
Price, 25 cents.


PROCLAMATION OF NATURO=
PATHY. By  Edward  E.  Purinton.

Naturopathy.  as  apprehended  by  the
author,  is  defined  at  length  in  this  booklat.
He  states  that  Naturopathy  is  the  perfected
science  of  Human  Wholeness,  and  that  it  in-
cludes all  agencies,  methods,  systems,  re-
gimes, practices,  and  ideals  of  natural  origin
and  divine  sanction,  whereby  human  health
may  be  restored,  enhanced,  maintained.  Mr.
Purinton  is  a  born  transcendentalist,  and
many  of  his  definitions  of  Naturopathy  are
to  be  read  in  this  light. Price, 10 cents.


THE  FUTURE  LIFE. By  Edward  E.
Purinton.

"What  and  where  is  Heaven?"  asks  the
author.  No  one  knows  but  every  one  thinks
he  knows.  Being  spiritual  children,  we  must
be  content  with  theological  picture  books  or
metaphysical  picture  blocks.  But  it  is  by
these  that  we  can  learn  God's  languages,  and
prepare  to  enjoy  God's  home.  One  man's
idea  may  contradict  another's  at  every  point,
but  as  each  man's  hope  equally  inspires  him
and  leads  him  Godwards,  all  this  imaginary
charting  of  the  skies  but  serves  as  a  means  to
that  end.  In  heaven,  human  distinctions
vanish.  There  is  no  sense  of  time.  Mar-
riages are  soul-unions  without  sex  con-
sciousness. Those  only  who  have  reached  the
heights  of  self-surrender  on  earth  are  re-
warded with  promotion  to  the  highest  planes
of  being. Price, 20 cents.


THE FINE ART OF GIVING. By
Edward  E.  Purinton.

The  man  is  most  divine  who  feels  impelled
to  share  with  his  loved  ones,  or  the  world,  all
that  he  has,  or  is,  or  hopes  to  be.  Any  form
of  giving  becomes  a  fine  art  when  liberality
and  discretion,  loyalty  and  justice,  affection
and  aloofness  are  equally  blended.  It  is  not
the  size  of  the  gift  but  its  appropriateness,
that  determines  the  value.  Consideration  is
given  to  giving  money,  time,  sympathy,  oppor-
tunity, service,  truth  and  love  as  a  fine  art  in
highly  stimulating  paragraphs. Price,  20  cents.


PLAY. By  Edward  E.  Purinton.

A  philosophical  disquisition  on  the  psycho-
logy of  Play.  "Life  at  best"  says  the  author,
"is  nothing  more  than  a  child's  pretty  play."
We  must  play  the  game  squarely.  A  man  has
no  right  to  labor  unless  he  enjoys  it.  The
game  of  games  is  the  game  of  life  when  you
know  you  can  win.  The  man  who  has  found
his  work  and  is  doing  it  to  the  full  never  asks
for  leisure  to  recuperate.  Play  in  work,  that
is,  find  the  pleasure  in  and  of  congenial  work
and  make  labor  one  great  game.  Ideally,  it  is
as  foolish  for  a  man  to  take  a  vacation,  as
for  a  star,  a  flower,  a  brook,  a  breeze,  or  a
bird,  but  the  creatures  are  often  a  rose  want-
ing to  sing,  a  robin  wishing  the  talent  of
fragrance,  hence,  the  need  of  recreation  to  put
us back into ourselves. Price, 25 cents.


GENIUS AND EUGENICS. By  Ed=
ward  E.  Purinton.

This  is  a  brief  devoted  to  advocating  that
eugenics,  or  the  breeding  of  perfect  human
beings,  should  be  elevated  to  the  precision
and  authority  of  a  science.  The  author  de-
plores the  fact  that  while  abnormal  and  sub-
normal children  are  treated  by  special
methods  and  special  teachers,  the  supernormal
child,  the  flower  and  hope  of  the  race,  is  left
alone,  forgotten  and  frequently  abused,  and
always  misunderstood,  although  most  worthy
of  sympathy,  care  and  training.  He  regards
exceptional  children  as  the  greatest  and  best
resources  of  a  nation,  and  suggests  that  we
should  conserve  and  develop  such  resources.
Price, 25 cents.


WOMAN'S WORK. By Edward E.
Purinton.

The  author's  creed  regarding  the  sexes  is
that  man  possesses  the  mental  qualities  while
woman  has  a  prerogative  of  the  soul  qualities
of  the  race.  Theology  is  masculine  and  usurps
the  place  of  religion  which  is  feminine.  The
ministry  of  healing,  comforting,  serving,  and
sharing  is  feminine,  hence,  we  need  woman
pastors.  So  also  the  author  argues  we  need
women  scientists,  poets,  and  apostles  of
tenderness,  purity,  kindness  and  temperance
in  all  the  affairs  of  life.  This  booklet  is  very
stimulating to thought. Price, 20 cents.


THE  LAUGH  CURE. By  Edward  E.
Purinton.

"Long  faces  make  broad  graveyards"  is  the
motto  of  this  booklet.  The  author  explains
at  length  just  what  a  hearty  laugh  does,  and
on  his  way  to  do  so  says  that  it  is  the  univer-
sal solvent  of  human  woes.  There  is  no  little
wisdom  in  most  of  his  statements,  and  no
doubt  corrective  cachinnation  is  a  recipe  that
will  drive  away  many  a  fit  of  the  blues.  Price,
IS cents.


The  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1200


Xdluropatinc  Bouk  Culalug


tangible form ami express itself
in visible entities.  A simple

reading is altogetlu-r inadequate
for a full grasping of what the

book stands for $1.25

Wood.  Henry.— THE  NEW  OLD
HEALING $1.45

(«l) Spirit IIoaiiiiK

Brown.  Barnetta.  —  SUNSHINE
BOOKS.  Set  of  six .$1.50

Colville.  W.  J.  —  LIFE  AND
POWER  FROM  WITHIN.$I.O<>

Colville,  W.  J. —  MENTAL  THE-
RAPEUTICS  !«o.r»o

Colville.  W.  J.  — OUR  PLACES
IN  THE  UNIVERSAL  ZO-
DIAC  !S»-'»<»

Colville,  W.  J.  —  SPIRITUAL
SCIENCE  OF  HEALTH  AND
HEALING !t«l.-.'>

Colville.  W.  J.  —  SPIRITUAL
THERAPEUTICS $1.00

Dresser,  H.  W.— METHODS  AND
PROBLEMS  OF  SPIRITUAL
HEALING iSl-00

Dresser.  H.  W.  —  THE  POWER
OF SILENCE $1.-5

Eleve.  —  SPIRITUAL LAW IN

THE NATURAL WORLD.

$1.00

Filimore.'  Charles.— THE  SCIENCE
OF  BEING  AND  CHRISTIAN
HEALING *1.50

Hudson.  T.  J.  — A  SCIENTIFIC
DEMONSTRATION  OF  A
FUTURE  LIFE $1.50

Tames.  Fannie  B.  —  THE  BIBLE;
TEACHING  ABOUT  HEAL-  '
ING SHO.l'O

James. Fannie B.— STUDIES IN
THE SCIENCE OF DIVINE  ;
HEALING $1.00  I

James. Fannie B.— TRUTH AND
PROBLEMS OF SPIRITUAL  ;
HEALTH $l..'iO  j

Kingsford.  Dr.  Anna.— SPIRITU-  I
AL  THERAPEUTICS. ...$1.10  I

(e) Variou.s Phases of  Mental
Therapeutics

Buchanan,  Dr.  J.  R.  —  THERA-
PEUTIC SARCOGNOMY.  .$5.00

Close.  Dr.  C.  W.— PHRENOPA-
THY;  OR,  RATIONAL  MIND
CURE $1.00

Doud,  Dr.  F.  N.— EVOLUTION
OF THE INDIVIDUAL  .$1.00

Dubois,  Dr.  Paul.— THE  EDUCA-
TION  OF SELF. Cloth, $1.60

Dubois.  Dr.  Paul.  —  THE  IN-
FLUENCE OF  THE  MIND
ON THE BODY $0.60

Dubois.  Dr.  Paul.  —  NERVOUS
STATES.  THEIR  NATURE
AND CAUSES $0.85

Dubois.  Dr.  Paul.  —  THE  PSY-
CHIC TREATMENT  OF  NER-
VOUS DISORDERS $:M0

Dubois.  Dr.  Paul.— THE  PSY-
CHOLOGICAL ORIGIN  OF
MENTAL DISORDERS. $0.60

Flower,  Sydney.  —  PSYCHOME-
TRY $1.00

Hartman,  Franz.  —  OCCULT  SCI-
ENCE IN  MEDICINE.  ....$2.00

Holcombe.  Dr.  William.— THE  IN-
FLUENCE OF  FEAR  IN  DIS-
EASE  $0.15

Hollander, Dr. Bernard. — THE

FIRST SIGNS OF INSANITY.

$3.35

Hucicel.  Rev.  Oliver.  —  MENTAL
HEALING $1.00

Johnson,  S.  E.  —  THE  TEMPER
CURE $O..-0

Musgrove, Dr. Charles D. — NER-
VOUS BREAKDOWNS AND
HOW  TO AVOID THEM.
$1.10


Patterson,  C.  B.— THE  LIBRARY
OF  HEALTH  (paper,  7.';c).$2.25

Patterson,  C.  B.— THE  WILL  TO
BE  WELL  (Xew  Thought). $1.00

Schellhous,  Dr.  E.  J.— THE  ELE-
MENTS OF  ETHICS $0..'>0

Turner,  Albert.— LONGEVITY  AS
AFFECTED  BY  MENTAL
CONDITIONS.  Illustrated.  $0.35

Whipple, Leander Edmund. —

MENTAL HEALING. ...$2.00

Williams.  W.  H.  —  VII3RATION
THE LAW OF LIFE. .  .  .%\  •ir-,

Young,  Dr.  Meredith.  —  THE
MENTALLY  DEFECTIVE
CHILD $1.75

(f) Efficiency Series

Purinton,  E.  E.— DAILY  GUIDE
TO  EFFICIENCY $0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— FREEDOM  THE
GOAL OF LIFE $0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— HOW  TO  SUC-
CEED  $0.25

Purinton.  E.  E.— THE  TRIUMPH
OF  THE  MAN  WHO  ACTS.
$0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— UNUSED  POW-
ERS  .$0.25

The  five  Efficiency  Booklets  in
combination $1.00


Part 16 — MISCELLANEOUS

Alcott.  Dr.  W.  Q..  and  Sizer.  N. —
TEA  AND  COFFEE;  THEIR
PHYSICAL,.  INTELLECTUAL
AND  MORAL  EFFECTS.  Il-
lustrated  $0.25

Am  Rhyn,  Dr.  Otto  Henne. — MYS-
TERIA.  History  of  the  Secret
Doctrines  and  Mystic  Rites  of
.\ncient Religions iSt.SO

Bevan.  Dr.  J.  A.— THE  TRUTH
ABOUT  THE  MEDICAL
PROFESSION $1.00

Bryce,  Dr.  Alexander.  —  THE
LAWS  OF  LIFE  AND
HEALTH $1,10

Burrell,  Joseph  Dunn. — CHRIS-
TIAN SCIENCE.  A  New  Ap-
praisal  $0.60

Campbell.  —  ETIQUETTE  OF
GOOD SOCIETY $0..50

Carey.  Dr.  G.  W.  —  THE  BIO-
CHEMIC  SYSTEM  OF  HEAL-
ING  $2.50

Carlson. Antony Julius.  —  THE
CONTROL OF HUNGER IN
HEALTH AND DISEASE.
.$2.00

Conrad.  Dr.  C.  F.  —  A  SOCIAL
DANGER $0.75

Conrad.  Dr.  C.  F.  —  M  U  T  E
ISLAND $1.00

Conrad,  Dr.  C.  F.  —  TWELVE
TOED  BABY  MYSTERY.  .$0.50

Densmore,  Dr.  Emmett.  —  SEX
EQUALITY. 390 pp $1.60

Devoe,  Walter.  —  THE  DOORS
OF  LIFE,  OR,  LITTLE
STUDIES  IN  SELF-HEAL-
ING  $1.10

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.  —  RADICAL
CURE  OF  CHRONIC  ALCO-
HOLISM. The  taste  for  liquor  is
not  a  matter  oL  heredity,  or  en-
vironment, or  sociability.  It  is
simply  the  cvilmination  of  indul-
gencies  in  perverted  appetites — a
sequence  and  a  consequence  of
something  like  this:  white  flour,
lard,  glucose,  pastries,  iced  drinks,
condiments,  spices,  sauces,  stimu-
lants, spirits.  If  clogging  food
had  never  been  taken,  stimulating
elements  would  never  have  been
needed,  or  relished.  And  the  re-
storing  of a normal hunger pre


eludes  the  continuance  of  vitiated
taste.  The  author  has  proved  his
theory  in  manifold  cases,  and  the
serious  consideration  of  any  one
mterested  in  Temperance  Reform
will  be  amply  rewarded  in  this
little  brochure ,$0.50

^^)^^  Wilmer  A.— A  TEXTBOOK
OF PHYSICS ss.ss

Fisk  Dr.  Eugene  Lyman.— ALCO-
HOL; ITS  RELATION  TO
HUMAN  EFFICIENCY  AND
LONGEVITY.  Cloth  ....$lio
Tm^ P-S.— INTEMPERANCE

^.AND TIGHT LACING. ..$0.25

^'S"""^;  °''-  T.  v..  and  Ross:  Dr.
Q;  M.-WHAT  IS  VACCINA-
TION? $0  •""

Gray,  Helen  Sayr.— IN  lUSTTrp
TO THOMAS AND tAbby


Hodge, Dr. J. W.— TOBACCO A

I  loc?Af4vTT^^^°^^  °nS
6UCIAL EVIL ...  SO  lO

•^^HfpI°q ?v;;SPICES,  ■  SEEDS,

I of3^^' r,^^-- T^^'-- Botanical

Urign,  Chemical  Composition
, and Commercial Use.  <Ri  Kn

I  Keith,  Dr,  Melville  C.  —  '  THF
1  K.^OYAL  ROAD  TO  HELL.$1  50

H  O^T- n'-  ^.V^-T^HE  HOUSE-

gE°AtT°H."fo?pV^°%o°-?

"o^K'kuVEs^r^"^'^'--ti

,  CONDUCT  FOR  MEN  ANn
! WOMEN  TODAY,  #050

^T/^'^y- Florence Morse.—

MEDITATIONS FOR LIP1?

AND POWER. .  .  _  ."^ V^^^

H*!.";,  ^"- Henry E.— CAPITAL

ISM AND CURATIVE art;

Larson,  Christian"  D."— In'  '  t'hp
LIGHT  OF  THE  SPIRIT.

Larson.  Christian  D. — NOTHTMn
SUCCEEDS LIKE SUc2is£

Lewis  Dr.  DiV.— PROHVElinKifN
A  FAILURE.  The  True  Soh.
tion. ZUi, pp «1  rtn

CULTukF^-A  V^?^  ■  "AIR
l-ULTURE.  Apphcation  of  Physi-
cal culture  and  Naturopathy  to
the  scalp  and  hair.  A  welcome
and  gratifying  message  from  the
renige  of  hair  -  restorers  over-
whelming the  public. .  .  .S!(  50

Magnus,  Dr.  Hugo. — SUPER«?TT
TION IN MEDICINE $1  10

Major,  Clare  Tree.— HOW  TO
J|j\E^LOP YOUR PF!ksON-

'^^^i^d'o  I^""-  Morton.  —  PROb"
LEMS IN GENERAL PHY-

M^r • ■■; $1.00

McCjowan,  Anna.  —  WRINKLF-S-
THEIR CAUSE AND CURE.

,  Metcalfe, Richard, —  FUNCTIONS

1 OF  THE  SKIN $0 '-O

i  ^"aI^/,;  I^''-  J-  —  THE  THEORY
AND  PRACTICE  OF  HY-
GIENE,. 1.38  illustrations,  15
lithographs.  A  noteworthy  and
compendious  contribution  to  nat-
uropathy  by a physician $7.00

Novus  Homo, — YE  THOROUGH-
BRED JEQ  5Q

Oswald,  Dr.  Felix,  -1  VACCINA-
TION A  CRIME. The  cow-pox

curse and how it kills. Facts


Universal Nnliiropiitlilc  Dlreclory  suid Iliiyers' Oiilfle  1201


PURINTON'S  BOOKS  ON  EFFICIENCY


UNUSED  POWERS. By  Edward  E.  Purinlon—lM,\  H  ,'>».

brilliant  essays  that  aio  elation  calls  to  tho  efflcient  life.  The  titles  of  the  other
('our  are  How  to  Succeed,  Freedom  the  Goal  of  Life,  JJaily  Guide  to  Efflcienoy,
and  The  Triumph  of  the  Man  Who  Acts.  In  the  present  pamphlet,  the  author
seeks  to  stir  the  unused  powers  of  the  easy  going  individual  into  action.  His
creed  is  that  we  are  crippled  by  unused  muscles,  lungs,  instincts,  emotions,  per-
ception, faculties  and  ideals.  That  men  are  great  as  they  force  themselves  to  usf
themselves.  That  everybody  is  a  potential  giant,  but  is  an  actual  dwarf.  The
ideas  enunciated  are  lying  around  us  at  all  times,  but  it  is  to  the  author's  credit
that  he  perceived  them  and  has  put  them  into  a  terse  form  so  as  to  jolt  the
r<"ader  into  making  a  move  to  redeem  himself  from  his  enslaved  existence. —
I'rioe,  -5  oeiits.


THE  TRIUMPH  OF  THE  MAN  WHO  ACTS. By  Ed-

liiftrtl  F Pwirinfnn O"^"' author has an enthusiastic regard for the man

M/ufu  X-.  I  utiitiuii  ^yY^Q  acts.  This  pamphlet  is  the  friend  of  the  man
with  a  huge  will  and  a  holy  zeal.  It  is  the  epistle  of  the  man  who  desires  to
mass  his  forces  on  a  set  point,  at  a  set  time,  for  a  set  purpose.  It  explains  how
health  attends  the  man  who  acts,  how  wisdom  guides  him,  how  hope  frees  him,
how  power  moves  him,  how  progress  marks  him,  how  fame  follows  him,  how
wealth  rewards  him,  how  love  chooses  him,  how  fate  obeys  him,  how  God  blesses
him,  how immortality  crowns  liim.

Modern  days  have  placed  the  past  with  its  uncertainties,  in  almost  every  line
of  endeavor.  Yet,  it  is  imperative  that  we  use  our  God-given  powers  to  promote
our  aspirations,  for  without  action,  it  is  impossible  to  achieve  recognition. —
I'rioe,  25  oent.s.


HOW  TO  SUCCEED. By  Edward  E.  Purinfon— Slm"e"isthat

success  is  the  power  of  using  one's  self  as  Nature  intended.  The  rewards  of
money,  friendship  or  fame,  are  purely  incidental.  The  measure  of  success  is  the
expansion  of  individuality.  There  is  a  list  of  unhealthy  ideas  that  make  for
failure,  and  for  the  cuie  of  failure  he  gives  the  reader  ten  invigorating  thoughts.
.\11  are  excellent.  The  principal  cause  of  failure  in  life  is  mental  blindness.
This  is  duly  emphasized  and  these  booklets  are  simply  eyes  to  enable  the  reader
to  see  himself  blazing  with  success  and  fame. — Price,  25  cents.


DAILY  GUIDE  TO  EFFICIENCY. By  Edward  E.  Pur-

irttnn This  is  a  compendium  of  the  principles  of  efficiency,  a  boiling  down  of

cricdf  such  advice  as  Mr.  Emerson  gives  on  a  larger  platform.  There  are
twelve  principles  of  efficiency  given  with  a  full  explanation  for  the  raLson  d'etre
of  each.  The  first  is  that  all  tnen  are  made  big  or  little  by  their  motive.  When
a  man  allows  himself  to  be  blown  about  by  every  accident  of  fortune,  he  re-
sembles a  toy  locomotive  being  pulled  along  by  a  string.  Such  men  are  inef-
ficient, because  somebody  else  does  the  pulling.  But  when  a  man  starts  to
generate  his  own  energy — look  out,  an  express  train  is  coming.  Besides  these
principles  of  efflciency,  there  are  ten  physical  operations  recommended  that
will  generate  a  day  of  power.  These  refer  to  breathing,  exercise,  diet,  bathing,
etc.,  oiling  the  machinery  for  the  better  utilizing  the  principles  of  efflciencv  first
mentioned in  the  booklet, — Price,  25  cents.


FREEDOM  THE  GOAL  OF  LIFE. By  Edward  E.  Pur-

in f fin "Freedom,"  says  Mr.  Purinton,  "is  the  conscious  power  to  express  any,

iiiiuii  all.  or  none  of  yourself,  when  you  will,  as  you  will,  because  you  will.
Freedom  costs  more  than  any  other  boon  of  life,  its  price  is  infinite  patience."
This  is  true,  for  tiie  ability  of  a  musical  genius  to  give  free  expression  of  himself
through  his  art  depends  upon  terrific  work.  There  is  a  very  fine  definition  of
Freedom  given  in  this  booklet  which  is  well  worth  the  price  of  all  five  publica-
tions v.-hich  every  one  that  would  be  really  free  should  possess.  Don't  fail  to
note  tliis. —  Price, 25  cent.s.


TIio >vhole  .set of  lii  e elticiency  booklets iiostpaid, cost §1.00

Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1202


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


and  figures  and  proofs,  many  of
them  sensational,  some  almost  re-
volting, are  adduced  in  profusion
and  to  tlie  point.  The  anti-vac-
cination movement  is  spreading
incredibly,  and  up-to-date  knowl-
edge, to  say  nothing  of  personal
welfare,  demands  the  including  of
the  vaccination  rationale,  its  his-
tory and results S1.00

PATTERSON'S  AMERICAN

EDUCATIONAL  DIRECTO-
RY $5.00

Peebles,  "  Dr.'  j.'  m!  —  VACCINA-
TION A  CRIME  AND  A  MEN-
ACE TO  PERSONAL  LIBER-
TY  $l.i:5

Post,  C.  C.  —  CONGRESSMAN
SWANSON $1.01)

Post,  C.  C— DRIVEN  FROM  SEA
TO  SEA $1.50

Post,  C.  C.  —  MEN  AND  GODS.
$1.00

Rhodes-Wallace,  Helen.  —  RELI-
GIOUS EDUCATION  FOR
NEW  THOUGHT  CHILDREN.
.$0.50

Rice.  Ervin  A.— WHY  ARE  WE
HERE? An  Answer $1.25

Rilev.  Dr.  T.  Shelby.  —  RECTAL
DILATION $0.10

Riley, Dr. J. Shelby. — TWEN-  .
TIETH CENTURY ZEPHYRS,
OR, REMINISCENCES OF
CHIROPRACTICS $1.00

Robinson, D. H., Ph. D. — THE
LATIN  GRAMMAR  OF  PHAR-  \
MACY  AND  MEDICINE.  $1.75  |

Robinson,  Dr.  W.  J.  —  NEVER
TOLD  TALES.  Medical  Stories
from  real  life  relating  the  misery,
the  tragedy,  the  wasted  lives,  the
premature  graves,  the  suicides
caused by sexual ignorance  $2.25

Rogers,  Dr.  L.  D.— AUTO-HEM-
IC THERAPY $2.00

Rose,  Dr.  Achilles.— CARBONIC
ACID  IN  MEDICINE. ...$1.10

Rose,  Dr.  Achilles.  —  ATONIA
GASTRICA.  Abdominal  Strap-
ping against  Abdominal  Relaxa-
tion  $1.10

Ruegg,  John  J.  W.— BOLL  WEE-
VIL (The  Law  of  Nature  and
Mankind) $1.00

Ruegg,  John  J.  W.— THE  SECRET
OF  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.

Schmitt,  Dr.  Gustav. — A  BRIEF
OF  HOROSCOPY  AND  ITS
MEDICO-LEGAL  RELATION.
$1.10

Schroeder,  Theodore.  —  FREE
PRESS  ANTHOLOGY.  A  de-
defense  of  freedom  of  speech.
.$2.00

Scott,  John  Milton.  —  THE  SOUL
OF  SOCIALISM $0.20

Seymour,  Harriet  Ayer. — HOW  TO
THINK MUSIC $1.00

Shepherd,  Mrs.  E.  R.  —  FOR
GIRLS,  A  SPECIAL  PHYSI-
OLOGY  $1.00

Smee,  A.— Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— AC-
CIDENTS AND  EMERGEN-
CIES. ?,2 ilhistrations $0.3S

Smith,  Oakley.— NAPRAPATHIC
CHARTOLOGY $.1.00

Tapp.  Sidney  C— WHY  JESUS
WAS  A  MAN  AND.  NOT  A
WOMAN .$2.00

THE  STANDARD  FAMILY
PHYSICIAN.  500  illustrations;
24  color  plates;  2  vols.,  buck-
ram ;  $15.00  per  set.  Three-
quarter Morocco $20.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.  —  THE  ALCO-
HOLIC CONTROVERSY.$0..50

Trail.  Dr.  R.  T.  —  THE  TEM-
PERANCE PLATFORM. $0.60  ,


Waugh.  Frank  A.— THE  LAND-
SCAPE BEAUTIFUL. ...SI. .-JO

Wilcox.  Earley  Vernon. — TROPI-
CAL AGRICULTURE. ...$2.50

Wilder.- PERILS  OF  PREMA-
TURE BURIAL $o.:jo

Willoughby.  — NOTES  AND  IL-
LUSTRATIONS OF  THE  ES-
SENTIALS OF  HOME  SANI-
TATION  $0.25


Part 17 — NATUROPATHY
Xat'ure  Cure,  Drusle.ss  Healing
Hydropathy,  Hellopathy,
Electropathy,  Neuro-
pathy, etc.

Anderson,  John  K.  —  HOW  TO
HEAL  BY  NATURE'S  PO-
TENT METHODS.  In  full
leather, $10.00; cloth .>R.5.00

Bach,  Dr.  Hugo.  —  ULTRA
VIOLET  LIGHT  BY  MEANS
OF  THE  ALPINE  SUN
LAMP $1.20

Baumgarten,  Dr.  A. — INSOMNIA
(Sleeplessness) $0.15

Beard,  S.  H.— GUIDE  BOOK  TO
NATURE,  HYGIENE  AND
DIET $1.10

Biddle,  L.  M.— THE  NEW  DOC-
TOR, OR.  HEALTH  AND  HAP-
PINESS. Therapeutic  truths  in
every-day  garb  ;  Nature  teachings
in  story-form.  Attractive,  con-
vincing, inspiring,  this  book  is
essentially  a  help  in  the  home,
where  the  tyro,  whether  child  or
adult,  needs  a  bit  of  sweet  per-
suasion, along  with  solid  instruc-
tion  $1.50

Bilz,  Dr.  F.  E.  —  NATURAL
METHOD  OF  HEALING.  The
Compendium, par excellence, of


Dr. F. E. Bilz


the  Naturopathic  School.  Every
rational  measure,  from  Massage
to  Magnetism,  is  discussed  in  de-
tail, both  theoretically  and  prac-
tically. The  Kneipp  Cure,  Nurs-
ing, Dietetics,  Curative  Gymnas-
tics, Medicinal  Herbs,  Hydro-
pathy, Heliotherapy,  Hygeiothe-
rapy^every  conceivable  phase  of
the  Natural  Regime  ;  Disease,  par-
ticularly chronic,  sexual,  and
youthful,  with  their  symptoms,
origin,  purpose,  and  specific  treat-
ment ;  Anatomy,  as  pictured  in  9
adjustable  colored  models ;  Hy-
giene and  the  Art  of  Keeping
VVell.  These  are  a  few  of  the
themes  developed.  A  Cyclopedia
for  reference,  a  Text-book  for
study,  a  Manual  for  daily  use.
Over  two  million  copies  sold
abroad.  2,000  pp.  of  text,  700
illustrations.  2  Volumes,  attrac-
tively  bound $10..'>0

Bilz.  Dr.  F.  E.— FOREIGN  LAN-
GUAGE EDITIONS $10.00

Bradford,  Edgar  G.— BASIC  LAW
OF CURE $0.10


Bradshaw, Wm. R. — FUTURE

MEDICINE $0.20

Campbell, Dortch. — BUILDING

BRAIN BY DIET $0.20

Carque,  Otto.— DIET  IN  RELA-
TION TO  HEALTH  AND  EF-
FICIENCY  $0.20

Cohn,  Dr.  Toby.  —  ELECTRO
DIAGNOSIS  AND  ELECTRO-
THERAPEUTICS. —  Translated
from  the  second  German  edition,
edited  by  Francis  A.  Scratchley ;
cloth $2.10

Conger,  Dr.  M.  E.  and  Rosamond
C— THE  EDUCATOR:  CAUSE
AND  CURE  OF  ALL  DIS-
EASE  .$3.00

Conger,  Dr.  M.  E.  and  Rosamond
C  — NATURAL  CURE:  BY
PHYSICAL  AND  MENTAL
METHODS.  Twenty-four  chap-
ters of  terse  facts  and  telling
statements.  A  bold  assertion  of
the  bolder  beliefs,  backed  by  the
proofs  of  half  a  life-time  in  the
healing  vocation.  Wholly  an-
tagonistic to  Drugs,  Druggists,
and  Druggers.  Includes  studies
of  organs,  systems,  diseases,  gen-
eral and  special,  causes  and  rem-
edies, baths,  gymnastics,  dress,
recipes,  tobacco  and  alcohol,  preg-
nancy, child-birth  and  child-cul-
ture. Testimony of 100 eminent

physicians, etc .$1.50

Elegant $2.00

Davis.— NEUROPATHY. . .  .$5.00

Densmore,  Dr.  Emmet. —  HOW  NA-
TURE CURES.  HYGIENE
AND NATURAL FOOD, %•i.•^(\

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna. — THE  DIET
QUESTION $0.35

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna.  —  DRUG-
LESS  MEDICINE  (Hygeiothe-
rapy) $10.00

Engelhardt,  August.  —  A  CARE-
FREE FUTURE.  $1.00,  Cloth,
$1..50

Erz,  A.  A.,  N.  D.— TRUE  SCI-
ENCE AND  ART  OF  HEAL-
ING  $0.50

Failla, Janeway and Barringer. —
RADIUM THERAPY IN
CANCER AT THE MEMO-
RIAL HOSPITAL $1.50

Fisk,  Dr.  Eugene  L.,  and  Fisher,
Irving.— HOW  TO LIVE.  $1.00

Fitzgerald  &  Bowers.  —  ZONE-
THERAPY $1.50

Forest,  Dr.  W.  E.— THE  NEW
METHOD  IN  HEALTH  AND
DISEASE.  Naturopathy  from  a
physician's  viewpoint.  But  par-
ticularly Hygeiopathy,  for  the  in-
dividual and  the  family.  The  de-
mand for  twelve  editions  is  suffi-
cient comment  on  the  merits  of
the  work $1.00

Geromiller,  L.  —  FATHER
KNEIPP'S  HYDROPATHIC
TREATMENT .$0.60

Gray,  John  A.— SCHROTH  CURE
$0.10

Hara,  O.  Hashnu.  —  FRUIT  AND
NUT  DIET S0.15

Harris,  Dr.  J.  D.— LECTURES
ON  MEDICAL  ELECTRICITY
TO NURSES. Cloth $1.20

Henzel,  Dr.  Franklin  M. — ESSEN-
TIALS OF  DRUGLESS
TREATMENT $1.00

Hunter,  Dr.  Archibald.— HYGIEN-
IC TREATMENT.  NO  MORE
DRUGS $0-20

INVISIBLE  GOVERNMENT,
OR,  TYRANNY  OF  THERA-
PEUTICAL  TRANSGRES-
SIONS  *i-oo

Juettner,  Dr.  Otto.— A  PLEA  FOR
PHYSICAL THERAPY... $0.15


Nulnropalhic  Book  Catalog


1203


Just.  Adolf.  —  RETURN  TO  NA-
TURE. Beauty,  simplicity,  di-
rectness, power,  a  book  not
written,  but  evolved,  not  a  treat-
ise, but  a  life-experience.  Years
of  the  severest  bodily  ills,  utter
failures  on  the  part  of  all  the
Schools  of  Therapeutics,  despair
that  instinctively  turned  to  Na-
ture herself,  the  dawning  of  the
Truth,  the  realizing  of  its  power,
and  the  telling  of  it  out  of  a  full
heart— such  is  the  story  of  this
plea  for  self-hood.  Vou  are  not
ready  to  read  until  you  have
studied  the  portrait  of  the  man:
most  Nature  Curists  are  material-
ists, but  you  feel,  intuitively,  that
this  man  is  an  idealist,  and  that
the  mental  motive  is  back  of  the
purely  physical  means.  The  open-
ing pages  soother  rather  than
startle,  breathing  a  peace  and  a
conscious  poise  that  are  very  es-
sential before  the  radical  truths
that  follow.  Then  with  kaleido-
scopic swiftness  the  thought  be-
comes revolutionary,  iconoclastic-
sensational  the  ultra-purist  would
call  it.  For  the  sex  organs  are
mentioned  as  plainly  and  as  rev-
erently as  the  lover  tells  of  the
lips  of  his  betrothed.  The  Just
Bath  is  perhaps  the  distinguish-
ing feature  of  the  different  physi-
cal measures.  Based  on  a  per-
sonal study  of  animals  in  their
native  habit,  it  is  absolutely
without  analogue  in  all  the  previ-
ous range  of  Hydropathy.  Un-
like any  other  single  water-appli-
cation, it  has  a  direct  effect  on
Digestion,  Sex,  Circulation,  Secre-
tion, Exertion,  and  Nerve  Power
— the  elements  most  needing  vivi-
fying. In  the  opinion  of  the  pub-
Hshers  "Return  to  Nature"  is  the
simplest  and  the  strongest  work
ever  brought  out  in  any  lan-
guage. Not  so  much  the  actual
facts  and  treatments  and  proofs,
though  they  are  unique  and  in-
valuable, but  the  insight  into  the
New  Century  thought  is  what
makes  the  book  indispensable  to
the  thinker.  If  you  possess,  m
every  particular,  pulsating,  ener-
gizing, empowering  Health,  you
might  not  be  interested  —  for
yourself,  and  at  the  present.  But
not  one  man  in  ten  thousand
does.  At  whatever  stage  you
may  be,  simply  locate  yourself
in  the  pages  of  a  life-history  like
your  own,  and  follow  the  book
to  the  close.  If  you  once  get  in
touch  with  this  man  who  has  suf-
fered, his  vision  will  clarify  yours,
his  heart-beats  will  quicken  your
own,  and  you  will  have  the  spirit
of  Mental  Healing  with  the  meas-
ures of  the  Physical,  which  is
the ideal. Paper, $2.00; cloth

$3.00

(German and Italian editions
same price.)

Just,  Adolf.— THE  NEW  PARA-
DISE OF  HEALTH $0.25

Just.  Adolf.— "REVIENS  A  LA
NATURE."  Abridged  French
Edition $1.00

Just,  Adolf. —  THE  YUNGBORN
DIETARY.  A  New  Vegetarian
Cook  Book.  Choice  Composi-
tions. Preparation  and  Storing
of  Food  for  the  Natural  Cure  and
Natural  Mode  of  Living.  $1.10
(German, same  price.)

Kabish,  Dr.  —  NATUROPATHY
BRIEFLY EXPLAINED.  $0.20

Karell.  Dr.- THE  MILK  CURE.
$0.50


Kneipp  System.  —  PRACTICAL
GUIDE  TO $0.2.'5

Kneipp  System  (see  separate  head-
ing).

Kuhne,  Louis.  —  FACIAL  DIAG-
NOSIS  $i.eo

Kuhne,  Louis. —  NEW  SCIENCE
OF  HEALING.  A  convincingly
concrete  exposition  of  the  one-
ness of  all  Disease,  and  the  con-
sequent basal  uniformity  of  treat-
ment traces  ailments  from  the
embryo  to  the  corpse,  and  shows
just  how  impure  blood  retains  its
deadly  character  through  infinite
multiplicities  of  external  form.
The  work  is  a  detailed  account
of  Pathological  Genealogy,  set
forth  in  colloquial  phraseology,
and  appealing  to  the  reason  of
layman  and  physician.  The  au-
thor is  an  acknowledged  pioneer
in  the  field  of  German  investiga-
tion, his  methods  have  been  imi-
tated by  innumerable  plagiarist
Hydropathists,  and  "The  New
Science  of  Healing"  is  his  most
representative  book.  Translated
into 26 languages. 420 pp. (3d

edition.) $3.00

Foreign  language  editions,  same
price.

Kuhne,  Louis.  —  SCIENCE  OF
FACIAL  EXPRESSION..  .$5  00

Leppel,  Sophie. —  A  BRAINY
DIET  FOR  THE  HEALTHY.
$0.60

The Brainy  Diet Series:

Leppel,  Sophie.— THE  CRUX  OF
FOOD REFORM $0.20

Leppel,  Sophie.— THE  DIETETIC
WAY  TO  HEALTH  AND
BEAUTY $0.20

Leppel,  Sophie.— FAMOUS  DOC-
TORS ON  DIET  IN  MEDI-
CAL TREATMENT $0.20

Leppel,  Sophie.  —  HINTS  FOR
SELF-DIAGNOSIS $0.35

Leppel,  Sophie.— A  NUT  AND
FRUIT  DIET  FOR  HEALTHY
BRAIN-WORKERS $0.20

Leppel,  Sophie.  —  SEXUALITY
AND VITALITY $0.40

Leppel,  Sophie.  —  SUITABLE
FOOD,  OR,  THE  SCIENCE
OF LONG LIFE $0.25

Leppel,  Sophie.  —  VITAL  AND
NON-VITAL FOODS. ...$0.45

Leppel,  Sophie.— WHAT  SHALL
WE DRINK? $0.20

Lindlahr,  Anm.—  itisi.  imATURE
CURE  COOK  BOOK  AND  A.
B.  C.  OF  NATURAL  DIETET-
ICS  $2.20

Lindlahr,  Dr.  H.— NATURE  CURE,
Vol.  I.  Philosophy  and  Practice.
Based  on  the  Unity  of  Disease
and Cure $2.20

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor — DER
HAUSDOKTOR.  A  German
Magazine  of  Rational  Healing
and  Natural  Living  for  the  Fam-
ily. Subscription $1.00

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor. — Back
Volumes  of  DER  HAUSDOK-
TER  from  the  year  1889  to  the
current  year,  per  volume,  $2.00
Cloth bound volumes $3.50

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor. — HER-
ALD OF  HEALTH  AND  NAT-
UROPATH. Devoted  to  a  dis-
cussion of  Naturopathy  in  all  its
branches  :  hydropathy,  heliopathy.
electropathy,  neuropathy,  mecha-
no-therapy,  curative  gymnastics,
dietetics,  massage,  osteopathy,
chiropractic,  mental  science,  the-
rapeutic suggestion,  breathing,
sleep,  dietetics,  fasting,  diagnosis,
and all phases of ideal living.


Single  copies $0.20

Yearly subscription $2.00

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor. — Back
Volumes  of  THE  HERALD  OF
HEALTH  AND  NATURO-
PATH from  the  year  1900  to  the
current year, per volume, $2.50

("loth  bound volumes, $3.50

Lust, Dr. Benedict.— APOTHEKA.

$0.50

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.  —  KNEIPP
WATER  CURE  MONTHLY.
Vol. I. (1900) and Vol. II

(1901) $1.00. Bound $1.50

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor.  —
TWELVE  PICTORIAL  VIEWS
OF  "YUNGBORN"  Rational
Living  and  Nature  Cure  Resort,
Butler, N.  J.  and  Tangerine, Fla.

.$0..50

Lust, Dr.  Benedict.— TEN  VITAL-
ISM BOOKLETS:—
AWAKEN TO COMPLETE
CONSCIOUSNESS. ....'i;o.25
BECOMING NUMR — THE
TRUE  CAUSE  OF  CANCER.

.$0.25

CONSCIOUS DIET, A. ...$0.25

EVERYTHING ATTAINABLE

THROUGH TRAINING OF

THOUGHT $0.25

HELPER IN DISTRESS,  THE.

$0.23

LIMITS  OK  FAlIGUE  AS  A
STRICT LAW OF LIFE,

THE $0.25

MAN, LEARN TO THINK.

$0.25

OVERCOMING  THE  FINAN-
CIAL MALADY CALLED

POVERTY $0.25

THE  RAW  FOOD  TABLE.
§0  05

WINDS  AND  GASES.'!; '.$0.25
The  above  ten  booklets  in
combination $2.00

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict. — THE  UNI-
VERSAL NATUROPATHIC
ENCYCLOPEDIA,  DRUGLESS
YEAR-BOOK,  BUYERS'
GUIDE.  Containing  a  complete
Translation  of  Louis  Kuhne's
works.  "The  New  Science  of
Healing."  "Facial  Expression,"
and  "Facial  Diagnosis,"  Dr.  Ma-
tijaca's  "Modern  Electro-thera-
peutics." E.  E.  Purinton's  "Effi-
ciency in  Drugless  Healing,"  and
a  full  register  of  all  Drugless
Practitioners,  Colleges.  Schools
and  Institutions,  etc.  Vol.  I.  vear
1918-19,  cloth,  $10.00;  Vol.'  II.
1920-21 $10.00

Lust.  Mrs.  Louisa.  —  NATURO-
PATHIC-VEGETARIAN  COOK
BOOK $0.75;  cloth,  $1.00

Mann,  R.  O.— HERE'S  HEALTH
FOR YOU $0.25

Matijaca, Dr. A. — M  O  D  E  R  N
ELECTRO-THERAPEUTICS.
$2.00 ; c'oth. i^.TOO

Matijaca,  Dr.  A. — ELECTRO-
THERAPY IN  THE  AB-
STRACT, FOR  BUSY  PRAC-
TITIONERS  $1.50

May,  E.  and  B.— MAYS  PRACTI-
CAL METHODS.  WITHOUT
DRUGS.  MINERALS,  OR  DOC-
TOR'S FEES $0.20

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— DRUG-
LESS TREATMENT  FOR
PARTIAL DEAFNESS. $10.00

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— SUCCESS-
FUL PROMOTION  OF
DRUGLESS PRACTICE. $2.00

Oswald,  Dr.  Felix.  —  NATURE'S
HOUSEHOLD  REMEDIES.  A
manual  and  a  plea.  Disease  is
Fear,  Fear  is  Ignorance.  The
appropriating  of  the  thoughts  in
this  book will banish Ignorance,


l'iii\  ors.-il \  nliiroitiiHiM- l)lrc«'<oi-y iiiiil niiyors' (iiiiih


THE


Natural  Method  of  Healing


By  F.  E.  BILZ,


Originator  and Founder of the
\yorld  Fanuiiis  llilz  S((n(ilorinni


A Complete, Concise and Comprehensive System of Healing by

Natural  Methods — An  Encyclopedia  on  the  Drugless

Treatment of Disease


Every  Naturopathic  Stu=  ?

dent, Drugless Practi='  ?

tioner  and  Every  House=  •

hold  needs  a  set  of  these  ?

books. Over three mil=  |

lion sets already sold.  ?


?  Printed  in  two  Volumes,

I  bound  in  Green  Buckram,

f  Lettered in gold, and

I  profusely illustrated in

i  black .and white, and

f  with  lithographed  plates


A Ready Reference in any Emergency — Both Prophylactic and

Remedial — Has  to  be  seen  to  be  appreciated — 2000

pages,  700  Diagrarns,  and  21  Colored  Plates.

Complete  Male  and  Female  Manikins,  with  accompanying  Anatomical

Explanatory  Charts.

Published  in  English,  German,  French,  Spanish,  Russian,  Italian,  Bohem=
ian,  Hungarian,  Polish,  Swedish,  Dutch,  Danish,  Portuguese,  etc.

PRICE: $10.50,  postpaid. Set  of  two  volumes,  any  language.


PARTIAL LIST OF CONTENTS— Volume I


Valuable  Advice on first  aid to  the  injured in

accidents, drowning, suffocation, poisoning.

lightning, sunstroke and fractures
Diseases of the blood and metabolism
How to rear liealthy children
Twenty-six important rules to bear in mind

with regard to the application of natural

methods of healing
The brain and its diseases
Bread considered physiologically
How to  breathe correctly
Breathing exercises and how to take them

(illustrated)
Cerebrospinal meningitis and its treatment
Cholera : Symptoms, development by stages

and treatment
Colds: Their  cause,  prevention  and  treatment


The complexion and how to beautify it

Constipation  :  Its  causes  and  cure  by  natural
methods

Complete  removal  of  corns  by  a  simple  and
natural method

Croup  : Its  causes  and  cure  by  natural  method

Reports  of  some  remarkable  cures  through
natural methods

Delirium  Tremens:  Its  symptoms  and  treat-
ment

Diet for the healthy

Diet for  the sick and convalescing

Dietetic Cooking for invalids

Tables  of  food  analyses  with their  percentages

Healing properties of fruit

Curative gymnastics (illustrated)


ITiiiversiil IViidiropiHIii)- l>ii-<-f(or\ jiiid ltii.t<T.s' (rliiiilr


12rt.">


PARTIAL LIST OF CONTENTS— Volume I (concluded)


Headaches: Various types, their cause and

natural remedy-
Medicinal herbs and their therapeutic uses
The  influence  of  the  mind  in  the  treatment  of

disease
Suggestive therapeutics and their application
The Kneipp (or Water) Cure for various

diseases, and its method of application in

specific cases
How to prolong life
Heliotherapy
Rheumatism:  Its various forms, their

causes and cure


Magnetic  treatment  and modes  of  application

Fevers:  Their  cause  and  cure  by  natural
methods

Mental diseases

Diseases of children

l^iseases  of the  skin

Diseases of women

Diseases of the lungs and respiratory tract

Diseases of the blood and circulatory tract

Diseases of the digestive tract

Anatomical  charts  (lithographed  in  natural
colors)  of  the  heart,  the  lungs  and  the
head, with accompanying explanatory keys


Describing  How
to  Treat  Disease
and  According
to  What  Method

Clinical  Reports
of  Cases  with
method  of  treats
ment  and  results


A  full  descrip-
tion of  nearly
three  thousand
different  diseases

Written  in  sim=
pie  language,  and
well  illustrated:
very  clear  to  all


PARTIAL  LIST  OF  CONTENTS— Volume  II


Row.  and  according  to  what  method,  should
we treat and try to cure disease

What Man should eat and drink

Evils  of  the use  of  medicine

Various  kinds  of  baths  and  their  method  of
administration,  including  the  application  of
water in specific cases

.Vervous affections — their cause and cure

Obesity

Emaciation

Orthopedics; treating mechanical deformities

Peritonitis

Phrenology

Poisoning ; Blood Poisoning

X-rays: Their uses and application

How to nvirse the sick

Care of the teeth

Vegetarianism, and what it means

Natural methods of childbirth

Modes of healing by Natural Methods


Important  observations  on  the  use  of  packs,
bandages,  compresses,  ablutions,  affusions,
etc.,  together  with  their  modes  of  applica-
tion under various conditions

Enemas :  Kinds,  uses  and  method  of  ad-
ministration

Massage :  Different  kinds  and  how  to  give
them  with  and  without  apparatus.  (Pro-
fusely illustrated.)

Constitutional regenerative treatment

Steam,  vapor,  sun,  light  and  air  baths ;  how
and when to  give them

Venereal diseases ; syphilis

Diseases of the rectum

Diseases  of  the spine

Diseases of the stomach and intestinal tract

Diseases of the kidneys

Diseases of the heart

Index

Male and female manikins (lithographed)


DR. BENEDICT  LUST,  Butler,  New  Jersey, U.  S.  A.

Enclosed please find P. O. Money Order for $10.50, for which send me, charges prepaid,
iiilz's two volume set of  books on The Natural Method of Healing.


.\amc Street

City State

Write name and address plainly to avoid miscarriage and delay in delivery.


120f)


Nutiiropatliic  Booh'  Catalog


rout  Fear,  and  eradicate  Disease,
and  a  conscious  applying  of  right
conditions,  vvitli  a  restful  waiting
on  the  workings  of  Nature,  will
take  the  place  of  those  wrong
habits  and  that  feverisli  impa-
tience  $1.00

Oswald,  Dr.  Felix.  —  PHYSICAL
EDUCATION;  OR,  THE
HEALTH  LAWS  OF  NATURE.
$1.00

Page,  Dr.  C.  E.— THE  NATURE
CURE.  The  gist  of  the  whole
matter  presented  in  concise,  force-
ful, tactful  style,  "by  a  promi-
nent member  of  the  medical  fra-
ternity— the  house  divided  against
itself."  An  embodiment  of  the
newest  researches  in  the  New
Therapeutics $1.00

PLANT ATLAS. K.lition I. $2.00

PLANT  ATLAS.  Edition  II.  Col-
ored ]>lates $3.85

Platen,  M.  —  THd  NfivV  CURA-
TIVE TREATMENT  OF  DIS-
EASE. The  therapeutic  thought
of  the  scientific  world  translated
into  the  American  vernacular.  The
book  is  written  by  a  German,
but  it  breathes  American  spirit ;
the  "atmosphere,"  to  borrow  an
artist's  term,  is  pellucid,  you
don't  have  to  grope  through
mazes  of  archaic  circumlocution
and  technical  terminology  to
reach  the  point.  To  begin  with,
Anatomy  is  not  presented  in  the
diffusely  didactic  orthodox  style,
that  instructs  a  trifle,  bewilders
much,  interests  not  at  all.  It  is
crystallized  into  eight  anatomical
plates,  separable  and  dissectible,
picturing  the  organs  and  systems
of  the  human  body  in  their  en-
tirety^ With  this  as  a  basis,  the
author  goes  straight  into  the  vital
problems  of  everyday  life  —  Eat-
ing and  Drinking,  and  the  other
unrealized  potencies  that  twenti-
eth century  thought  is  investigat-
ing. In  a  word.  Prophylaxis  is
the  key — not  the  dreading  of  the
beneficent  germ  -  scavenger,  but
the  forbidding  and  the  clearing
of  the  corruption-mass  that  feeds
him.  Diseases,  particularly  those
incident  to  children  and  to  wo-
manhood, are  treated  in  detail  and
by  various  methods  of  Nature
Cure.  Given  the  knowledge  this
book  imparts  and  the  spirit  that
radiates  from  it,  and  one  should
never  know  what  it  means  to  be
weary,  or  weak,  or  diseased.
About  2,000  pp.,  many  illustra-
tions, 17  colored  plates,  8  ana-
tomical models.  Two  Volumes,  [
handsomely  bound.  Full  descrip-
tive matter  mailed  on  application.

$10.50

German  edition  3  vols.,  $15.00
4 Tols $20.00

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  PROCLAMA-
TION OF  NATUROPATHY.
$0.25

Rausse,  J.  H.  —  HEALTH  AND
THE  VARIOUS  METHODS  OF
CURE $0.40

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.  —  CON-  ,
SUMPTION CURABLE... $0.25  I

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.  —  HARM
FROM  OVEREATING.  ...$0.30  i

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.— KIDNEY
TROUBLES,  EPILEPSY,  ETC.
$0.50

Reinhold, Dr. Aug. F. — MEAT

DIET INJURIOUS TO MAN.

$0.50

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.— POSITIVE
PREVENTION  AND  CURE  OF
TUBERCULOSIS  BY  THE  NA-
TURE CURE  PROCESS  (Resto-


ration of Health by Natural

Methods  Series) $1.00

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.  —  PRINCI-
PLES OF  CURE. Theoretically.

Dr.  ReinhoM's  Booklets  are  the
classic  Urug-Dcuiuicuiliun  ot  mod-
ern times.  Revolution,  Renova-
tion, Reconstruction  are  the  clar-
ion calls  from  every  page.  Not
treatises  for  the  tradition-blinded,
mealy-mouthed,  convention-bound
hibernator  in  antiquity.  Not  cold-
type  dissertations,  but  live,  throb-
bing, thrilling  appeals  for  knowl-
edge and  freedom  and  health  and
nature.  The  author  eats  microbes,
sleeps  head  down,  courts  "catch-
ing cold,"  and  makes  habits  of
other  fatal  feats.  Moreover  he
tells  you  exactly  why,  and  how  it
is  that  unthinking,  p-irverse  modes
of  life  trisect  a  man's  earthly
span.  As  an  animal,  man  should
live  to  125  ;  he  dies  at  35.  The
why  and  the  how  not  are  most
ably  discussed.  The  books  go
to  the  extreme  of  radicalism,  but
that  they  reach  the  depths  of
realism  is  attested  by  many  state-
ments from  the  very  physicians
they so scathingly arraign. $0.25

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F. — PULMON-
ARY CONSUMPTION  EASILY
CURED  BY  THE  NATURE
CURE $0.25

Rodermund,  Dr.  M.  J.— MURDER-
OUS FADS  IN  THE  PRAC-
TICE OF  MEDICINE.  Written
by  the  man  who  dabbled  in  the
most  virulent  virus  and  then  shook
hands  with  family  and  friends,  to
the  consternation  of  press  and
public.  Vaccination  is  termed  the
"Prince  of  Frauds,"  and  $1,000  is
offered  to  the  first  man  who  can
demonstrate  its  accord  with  Na-
ture and  its  beneficence  in  a  single
case._  Expensive  laboratories,  a
life-time  of  research,  and  unwav-
ering convictions  are  the  back-
ground for  this  bold  defiance  of
professional  ostracism.  Other  fads,
fancies  and  foibles  commonly  ac-
cepted without  question  are  strip-
ped of  their  antediluvian  foggery,
their  mystic  chicanery,  their  au-
thoritative setting,  and  the  scanty
remnants  of  truth  are  a  pitiful
witness  to  the  world's  perversions.
654  pp $3.50

Rosch,  Dr.  E.— ABUSE  OF  THE
MARRIAGE  RELATION— THE
ORIGIN  OF  MOST  CHRONIC
DISEASES S0.50

Rosenbach. Prof. O.  —  PHYSI-
CIAN vs. BACTERIOLOGIST.
Translated from the German.
$1.60

■Jothschild,  S.  Marcus. — HOW  TO
PROLONG  LIFE.  One  Hun-
dred  Years  on Earth $1..50

Solis-Cohen,  Dr.  Solomon,  Editor —
SYSTEM  OF  PHYSIOLOGIC
THERAPEUTICS.  By  American,
English,  French,  and  German  au-
thors. Edited  by  Solomon  Solis-
Cohen,  A.M.,  M.D.,  A  practical
exposition  of  the  methods,  other
than  drug-giving,  useful  in  the
treatment  of  the  sick.  The  first
great  Naturopathic  Symposium  of
the  variant  schools  of  practice.
Eleven  compact  octavo  volumes,
exhaustive  of  the  following  sub-
jects: Electrotherapy  (2  vols.),  by
Geo.  W.  Jacoby,  M.D.,  New
York,  and  Edward  Jackson.  A.M.,
M.D.,  Denver.  —  By  William
Scheppegrell,  M.D.,  New  Orleans.
— By  J.  Chalmers  Da  Costa,  M.D.,
Philadelphia.  —  By  Franklin  H.
Martin, M.D., Chicago. — By A.


H.  Ohmann-Dumesnil,  M.D.,  St.
Louis.  Climatology  and  Health
Resorts,  Includmg  Mineral
Springs.  (2  vols.,  with  maps.)  By
F.  Parker  Weber,  A.M.,  M.D.,  F.
R.  C.  P.,  London ;  and  Guy  Hins-
dale, A.M.,  M.D.,  Philadelphia.
Prophylaxis — Personal  Hygiene —
Nursing  and  care  of  the  Sick.  By
Harold  C.  Ernst,  M.D.,  Boston;
and  Albert  Abrams,  M.D.  (Uni-
versity of  Heidelberg),  San  Fran-
cisco, Dieto-therapy.  By  Nathan
S.  Davis,  Jr.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  Chi-
cago. Mechanotherapy.  By  John
Kearsley  Mitchell,  M.D.,  Philadel-
phia; and  Luther  Gulick,  M.  D.,
Springfield,  Mass.  Rest — Mental
Therapeutics  —  Suggestion.  By
Francis  X.  Dercum,  M.D.,  Phila-
delphia. Hydrotherapy — 'Thermo-
therapy — Phototherapy — Balneolo-
gy. By  Dr.  Wilhelm  Winternitz,
Vienna;  and  Dr.  E.  Heinrich
Kisch,  Prague.  Pneumatotherapy
and  Inhalation  Methods.  By  Dr.
P.  Tessier,  Paris.  Serotherapy —
Organotherapy  —  Blood-Letting,
etc. — Principles  of  Therapeutics —
Indexes  and  Digest.  By  Joseph
Macfarland,  M.D.,  Philadelphia. —
O.  T.  Osborne,  M.D.,  New  Ha-
ven, Conn. — Frederick  A.  Pack-
ard, M.D.,  Philadelphia.— The  Ed-
itor, and  Augustus  A.  Eshner,
M.D.,  Philadelphia.  $4.00  per
volume.  Whole  set  of  eleven
volumes $40.00

Stierle,  Ferd.  —  BACK  TO  NA-
TURE AND  TO  NATURE'S
GOD. ; $0.15

Taylor,  Dr.  G.  H.— HEALTH  BY
EXERCISE $1.75

Taylor, Dr. G. H.— MASSAGE.
$1.20

Taylor,  Dr.  G.  H.— PARALYSIS
AND  OTHER  AFFECTIONS
OF THE NERVES $1.20

Thomson,  James  C— AN  INTRO-
DUCTION TO  NATURE
CURE  (Iridology,  Osteopathy
and Curative Dietetics). ..$2.50

Trail,  Dr.  I.  R.— THE  HYGIENIC
HANDBOOK.  Mention  of  the
author's  name  is  ample  certificate
for  the  character  of  the  work.
Discriminating  knowledge,  a  hu-
manitarian spirit,  common-sense
handling  with  a  technical  touch,
comprehensiveness,  and  minute-
ness, such  factors  make  the  man-
ual foremost  in  practical  utility.
$1.25

Winb'igier,  Dr! '  "c.  'f!-^h6w  TO
HELP  AND  HEAL  ONE'S
SELF $1.10


Part IS — OCCULTISM

Alvidas  et  al.  —  SCIENCE  AND
KEY  OF  LIFE.  Planetary  In-
fluences  $2.50

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— OCCULT
FORCES.  Personal  Magnetism.
$0.35

Blavatsky,  Madame  H.  P.  —  KEY
TO  THEOSOPHY $1.50

Blavatsky,  Madame  H.  P.— VOICE
OF  THE  SILENCE $0.75

Butler,  H.  E.— SOLAR  BIOLO-
GY. The  accepted  authority  on
astrology.  Treats  fully  of  zodiac,
signs,  seasons,  etc.,  and  includes
instruction  for  casting  personal
horoscope,  with  advice  in  con-
formity thereto S5.00

Chambers,  Rev.  Arthur.— OUR-
SELF AFTER DEATH. $1.10

Colville,  W.  J.— A  HISTORY  OF
THEOSOPHY $1.00


Universal IValuropathlc Dlri-otorj antl IJnyers' <;iil«l«'


r-^-


THE  SECRET  IS  OUT


A  Treat  for  the  Epicure


LOUISA LUST, N. D.


A  Triumph  of  Culinary  Art

The  Naturopathic  Resort  "Yung-
born"  at  Butler,  New  Jersey,  and
the  Florida  Yungborn  "Quisisana"
at  Tangerine  have  long  been  fa-
mous for  the  originality  and  ex-
cellence of  their  vegetarian  diet.
as  "masterpieces  of  the  culinary
art,"  and  many  have  sought  to
discover  the  secret  of  the  succu-
lent and  delicious  viands  which
grace  our  table.  All  the  vegetables,
fruits  and  nuts  of  a  bounteous
Nature  seem  to  have  combined  at
the  touch  of  a  magician's  wand
into  a  profuse  variety  of  new  and
savory  dishes  which  tickle  the
palate  and  bring  the  smile  of  in-
ward contentment  to  those  assem-
bled round  the  festive  board.
Selfishness  has  no  place  in  Natu-
ropathic ideals.  Being  willing,
therefore,  that  our  friends  should
have  the  secret  of  this  daintv  and
nutritious  cooking,  Mrs.  Lust  has
decided  to  place  before  the  pub-
lic the  result  of  her  labor  and
study  of  years  in  this  particular
branch,  in  the  form  of  a  complete
Naturopathic  -  Vegetarian  cook
book,  aptly  entitled  the


GOOD  DINNER  COOK  BOOK

Vegetarian  cooking  takes  on  a  new  meaning  after  you  have  tried  some  of
the  recipes  in  this  book  and  the  gastronomic  horizon  of  the  vegetarian  is
broadened  by  new  and  unthought-of  combinations,  even  the  reading  of
which  makes  your  mouth  water  with  joyful  anticipation.  You  are  real  mean
to  yourself  if  you  don't  get  this  book.  Send  for  it  to-day  and  give  your
friends  a  treat.


PARTIAL  CONTENTS

Section  1 — Cooked  and  Uncooked  Foods.  Section  2 — Substitutes  for  Animal  Foods.
Section  3 — Egg  Plants,  Potato  Croquettes,  etc.  Section  4 — Rice  or  Farina  Fritters,  Rice  with
Tomatoes,  etc.  Section  5 — Mushroom  Pie,  Cabbage  Pie,  Spinach  and  Eggs,  Stuffed  Peppers,
etc.  Section  6 — Soups  and  Gruels.  Section  7 — Vegetables  and  what  may  be  done  with  them.
Section  8 — -Sauces  and  their  importance  to  a  good  dinner,  etc.,  etc.  Sixteen  Sections  with
table of Food  Values from reliable authorities.


Price,  75  cents; Cloth,  i?1.00. Postpaid  with  a  year's  subscription  to The
Naturopath  $2.25. Send  all  orders  to

NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  COMPANY,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1208


Sahu'opathic  Book  Catalog


ColviUe.  W.  J.— OUR  PLACES  IN
THE  UNIVERSAL  ZODIAC.
$0.50

Curtiss,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  F.  Homer. —
REALMS  OF  THE  LIVING
DEAD S1.35

Joirc.  Dr.  Paul.  —  PSYCHIC
PHENOMENA. Cloth ...$2.20

JudKe.  William  Q.  —  ECHOES
FROM  THE  ORIENT. ...!S(»..50

Kates,  George  W.— THE  PHILO-
SOPHY OF  SPIRITUALISM.
$1.10

Kirk.  Eleanor.— INFLUENCE  OF
THE  ZODIAC  ON  HUMAN
LIFE.  By  an  author  who  af-
firms both  planetary  inlUience  and
human  power,  and  who  advocates
their  harmonious  workings.  .$1.00

Leo.  Allen.  —  PRACTICAL  AS-
TROLOGY  Si-oo

Post,  Helen  Wilmans.— SPIRITU-
ALISM FROM  THE  STAND-
POINT  OF  MENTAL
SCIENCE SO^IO

Proctor,  Henry.  —  EVOLUTION
AND REGENERATION. $1.10

Stevens,  Leon  H.  —  LETTERS
FROM  ROY,  OR,  THE
SPIRIT VOICE $1.10

Sullivan,  B.— ASTROLOGY.. $0.25


Part  19 — P  AUEXTHOOn

AMATIVENESS.  MATRIMONY.
Each iSO-15

Ballantyne,  J.  W.— EXPECTANT
MOTHERHOOD. Cloth, $1.50

Bunker,  M.  N.  —  PHYSICAL
TRAINING FOR BOYS. $1.10

Cowan,  Dr.  John.— SCIENCE  OF
A  NEW  LIFE.  A  complete  mar-
riage guide.  It  treats  of  genera-
tion and  regeneration  of  the  hu-
man race,  and  has  won  commen-
dation irom  the  leading  meiiical,
educational,  and  religious  critics.
A  few  topics:  Marriage  and  its
Advantages;  Age  at  Which  to
Marry;  Law  of  Choice;  Qualities
Man  and  Woman  .Should  Avoid
in  Choosing.  Anatomy  and  Physi-
ology of  Generation,  Children —
Their  Desirability;  Pregnancy —
its  Signs  and  Duration ;  Diseases
of  Men;  Diseases  of  Women;
Sterility  and  Impotence;  A
Happy  Married  Life — How  Se-
cured,  402 pp.,  illustrated. $2.50

Elliott.  —  EDEOLOGY:  PLAIN
TRUTHS  FOR  ALL $1.50

Fischer,  Dr.  Louis.  —  THE
HEALTH-CARE  OF  THE
GROWING CHILD $1.25

Fowler,  P.  S.— CREATIVE  AND
SEXUAL  SCIENCE.  A  com-
pendium of  facts  and  feelings,
from  the  first  meeting  of  the
man  and  the  maid,  to  the  mar-
riage of  their  children.  Psycho-
logical and  temperamental  con-
siderations are  put  first,  as  they
should  be  always,  and  commonly
are  not.  The  impalpable  reali-
ties of  mind  and  motive  are  anal-
yzed with  a  keenness  that  char-
acterizes this  author's  work ;  the
physical  and  physiological  aspects
are  illumined  fearlessly  and  fully,
and  every  question  of  the  un-
knowing, uncertain  Sll-advised
youth  is  more  than  met.  1,0.50
pp., illustrated .$.'{.00

Gestefeld.  Ursula  N.— THE  WO-
MAN WHO  DARES.  A  vivid
picture  of  the  real  new  woman ;
the  one  who  dares  defy  custom,
tradition,  and  the  demands  of  a
sensual  husband,  and  who  keeps
inviolate  the  sanctuary  q  fa  wife's
body. Legalized prostitution is


the  habit  of  husbands  and  the
woe  of  wives.  It  is  the  begin-
ning of  most  marriages,  and  the
motive  for  many.  It  ages  man-
hood, blights  womaniiood,  curses
childhood,  and  destroys  the  home.
"The  Woman  Who  Dares"  is  the
first  to  voice  what  millions  of
her  agonizing  sisters  have  hoped
and  prayed  for,  since  time  began.
The  book  is  not  a  favorite  at
female  seminaries.  But  it  marks
an epoch in the development of

womankind $1.0.')

Henry,  Mrs.  S.  M.  I.— STUDIES
IN  HOME  AND  CHILD  LIFE.


Holbrook, Dr. M. L. — HOME

CULTURE $o.,50

Jackson.  F.  C. — HINTS  ON  THE
REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS.

.$0.25

Keith,  Dr.  Melville  C— THE  MAR-
RIAGE BED .$2.50

Miller, G. N.— THE STRIKE OF

A  SEX. — The  theories  of  personal

liberty, on which the foregoing

work is based. Woman's claim

that Love and Nature, not lust

[ and  perversion,  should  dictate  the

I marriage  pledge. Edeologists  and

Advanced Thought advocates are

j the chief sympathizers with the

;  ,  protest $0.25

i  Miller, G. N. — ZUGASSENT'S

DISCOVERY $0.25

Newton, A. E. — PRE-NATAL
CULTURE. A  plea  for  prepared
parenthood,  a  just  birthright,  and
a controlling recognition of
thought-force. Partial synopsis:
Law of Embryonic Moulding;
I Chance vs. Intelligent Purpose;
I Antecedent Preparations; Re-
I generation Should Precede Gen-
eration; Is it Practicable? Right
j Living;  Aspiration,  Hope  for  All ;
! The Divine Overshadowing;
i Methods of Embryo Culture;
i Specific Suggestions; The Fa-
ther's Share  in  the  Work;  Special
Tendencies; Genius; Times and

Seasons $0.50

Pennock,  Anna  M. — THE  BETTER

! WAY .$0.25

i  Phidon, Dr. W. P. — CREATIVE

, FORCES IN VEGETABLE.

ANIMAL  AND HUMAN

WORLD $1.00

Smart, Dr. Isabelle Thompson. —
THE MYSTERIES OF LIFE.
4 little books, cloth, each .$0.8."
Stockham, Dr. Alice B. — CREA-
TIVE LIFE .$0.25

Stockham,  Dr.  AHce  B.— KAREZ-
ZA:  ETHICS  OF  MARRIAGE.
The  author  of  "Tokology"  needs
no  introduction.  The  startling
theory  put  forth  in  "Karezza"
1  may  or  may  not  coincide  with
your  convictions.  But  the  subtle
t  analysis,  the  attractive  portrayals,
I  the  chaste  thought,  the  lofty
I  ideals  will  make  you  hunger  for
I  other  spirit-food  like  this.  $1.00
I  Stockham, Dr. Alice B. — KORA-

! DINE  LETTERS $2.00

Stockham, Dr. Alice B. — LOVE'S

! COMING  OF  AGE .$1.25

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B.— PARENT-
HOOD  .$0.25

Taber, Wilbur.  —  SUGGESTION  ;

THE SECRET OF SEX. $1.00

Terry, S. H.  —  CONTROLLING

SEX  IN  GENERATION. .$1.25

Terry. S. H.— SECRET OF SEX.

$1.00

Tilden,  Dr.  J.  H.— CURSED  BE-
FORE  BIRTH $0.50

Trail,  Dr  R.  T.— SEXUAL  PHY-
SIOLOGY AND  HYGIENE.
314 pp., Ill engravings. .  .$2.00


Weltmer.  —  REGENERATION:
OR.  THE  QUESTION  OF  SEX.
$1.00

Wilcox,  D.  F.— ETHICAL  MAR-
RIAGE. An  idyll  of  the  love-life.
Lived  out  by  an  actual  husband
— not  idealized  by  an  onlooker.
A  most  helpful  book  for  all  who
desire the complete life $1.25

"Questions on Se.v"  Serlen

Chesser,  Dr.  Elizabeth  Sloan. —
FROM  GIRLHOOD  TO
WOMANHOOD $i.io

Clouston,  Dr.  Th.  —  BEFORE
I  WED;  OR,  YOUNG  MEN
AND MARRIAGE $1.10

Heap,  Dr.  Walter.  —  PREPARA-
TION  FOR MARRIAGE.  .$1.10

Scharlich,  Dr.  Mary. — WHAT  IT
MEANS TO MARRY. ...$1.10

Schofield,  Dr.  A.  T.,  and  Jackson,
Dr.  Percy  Vaughan.— WHAT  A
BOY SHOULD KNOW. $1.10

Webb,  Dr.  Helen.— LIFE  AND
ITS BEGINNINGS $1.10


Part  20
PHYSICAL  CULTURE

Anderson,  H.  T.  —  ARTISTIC
WORK. Apparatus, Drills and

.  Music $0.75

Anderson,  W.  G.— LIGHT  GYM-
NASTICS  $1.60

Andrews,  Harry— MASSAGE  AND
TRAINING $0.50

Bennett,  Sanford. — OLD  AGE  ITS
CAUSE  AND  PREVENTION.
$2.00

Bishop,  E.  M.— AMERICAN  DEL-
SARTE  CULTURE.  A  true  in-
terpretation by  a  true  disciple.
$1.00

Brubaker, Dr.  Albert  P.— HUMAN
PHYSIOLOGY AND PHY-
SIOLOGIC APPARATUS.
$3.25

Bolton,  Florence.  —  EXERCISES
FOR  WOMEN.  Illust.;  100
cuts .$1.10

Burns,  Tommy.  —  SCIENTIFIC
BOXING  AND  SELF  DE-
FENSE  $0.50

Burrows, Tom. — THE TEXT-
BOOK OF  CLUB SWINGING.
$0.50

Checkley,  Edwin.  —  A  NATURAL
METHOD  OF  PHYSICAL
TRAINING.  No  Dieting  or
Apparatus $1.00

Dowd,  D.  L.— PHYSICAL  CULT-
URE FOR  HOME  AND
SCHOOL S0.70

Duval,  Prof.  M.  —  ARTISTIC
ANATOMY. Cloth $1.60

Hebert,  Georges.  —  GUIDE.
PRATIQUE  D'EDUCATION
PHYSIQUE $5.00

Hebert,  Georges.— L'EDUCATION
PHYSIQUE $4.00

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  —  MUSCLE
BEATING $0.30

Jones,  A.  K.— CLASSIFIED  GYM-
NASIUM EXERCISE.  Roberts
System.  The  standard  text  of  the
Y.  M.  C.  A.  and  other  gymnasia.
$1.00

Klaus,  Frank.— THE  ART  OF  IN-
FIGHTING.  Illustrated. ..$0.50

Latson,  Dr.  W.  R.  C.  —  EXER-
CISE FOR HEALTH. ...$0.20

LeFavre,  Carrica,  —  PHYSICAL
CULTURE.  Delsarte $0.75

Lowell.  M.  —  HARMONIC  GYM-
NASTICS  $2.00

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  CONSTIPA-
TION, ITS  CAUSE  AND
CURE $0.60


TriilvorNiil ]Va<ui-<>|t:i(lil<- Dlri'ctory  and DiiyerN'  <iuldo


lti<m


PHYSICAL  CULTURE

A  Magazine  with  a  Soul


The  most  personally  helpful,
most  alive  and  most  mentally
stimulating  magazine  published.

PHYSICAL  CULTURE  tcaolies  the  weak
how  to  he  strons;  the  Nick  how  to  he  well;
the  well  and  strong  how  to  he  more  vital
anil vigorous.

DRUQLESS  PRACTITIONERS

Should Head PHYSICAL CULTURK for
Xc-w  Ideas on Natural  Treatment.

If  you  have  never  read  PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE you  can  scarcely  understand  what
a  live  magazine  is  like.  It  covers  the
needs  of  every  member  of  the  family.
Each  number  is  packed  full  of  personal,
helpful  information  on  building  energy,
stamina  and  rod-blooded  health.  The  Ques-
tion Department  alone  is  worth  many
times  the  price.  Read  this  magazine.  A
single  copy  will  convince  you  of  its  value.

PHYSICAL  CULTURE  on  your  office
table  will  help  to  establish  your  standing.

Advertise  in  PHYSICAL  CULTURE  to  in-
crease your practice. Rates on request.

Sub.seription,  $2.00  Per  Year.


BERNARB  MACFADDEN

Founder of the Plusical Culture Magazine, America's most

forceful advocate  of  drugless  ti^atment.

20  Cents  Per  Copy.


Macfadden's  Books  on  Health, Strength  and Natural Cure

MACFADDEN'S ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHYSICAL CULTURE

A  Complete  Library  on  Physical  Culture  and  on  Health,  Strength  and  Beautv  Building.
Five  Handsome  Volumes,  profusely  illustrated.  With  these  books  in  your  "office,  you
can  be  assured  of  not  only  thorough  knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physiology,  but  you
will  also  possess  a  reference  work  upon  which  you  may  absolutely  depend  for  plain  in-
structions for  relief  and  cure  in  event  of  injury  or  attack  by  any  form  of  illness.  Every
drugless  practitioner  should  have  this  set  of  books  on  his  shelves.  Send  for  colored
circular, and prices and terms, today.

VITALITY  SUPREME — By  Bernnrr Macfadden

For  men  and  women.  Bernair  Macfadden's  latest  book  on  the  attainment  of  the  high-
est bodily  vitality  and  physical  efficiency.  Special  methods  for  the  development  of

Bonnd in Cloth, po.stpaid. $t.OO

MANHOOD AND MARRIAGE — By  Bernarr  Macfadden

This  work  is  devoted  to  tlie  personal  sex  and  marriage  problem.  It  discusses  frankly
yet  delicately  sexual  Questions  on  a  correct  understanding  of  which  is  dependent  happi-
ness in  marriage.  Presents  description  of  the  nature,  causes,  symptoms,  and  instructions
for  treatment  of  sexual  weaknesses  and  diseases of  men. 3fi4 pages.

Bound in Cloth, postpaid, $2.00

HOW  TO  DEVELOP  MUSCULAR  POWER  AND  BEAUTY — By  Bernarr  Macfadden

103  full-page  illustrations,  actual  photographs  of  the  author.  Shows  how  all  parts  of
the  body  can  be  developed  and  strengthened.  Bound  in  Cloth,  po.stpaid,  $1.00

OLD AGE;  ITS CAUSE AND PREVENTION — By  Sanford Bennett

This  book  is  the  author's  story  of  how  he  regained  his  youth  at  past  seventy,  and  tells
of  the  system  which  accomplished  his  rejuvenation.  A  book  for  young  and  old,  men
and  women.  Over  400  pages.  Boimd  in  vellum  de  luxe  cloth  witli  numerous  photo-
graphs  and colored portraits.  Price,  postpaid.  $1.50

FATHER, MOTHER AND BABE — By Anna Jenness-Miller

A  book  for  the  expectant  motlier.  Tells  how  to  insure  the  health  of  the  prospective
mother,  the  mother  and  the  child.  Detailed  information  on  preparation  for  mother-
ho_od  and  care  and  hygiene  of  the  child.  Price, postpaid. $1.0O

NEW  HAIR  CULTURE — By  Bernarr Macfadden

Tells  how  to  care  for  the  hair,  and  how  to  remedy  all  complaints  that  affect  the  hair.
140  pages,  14  full-page  illustrations.  Bound in Cloth,  postpaid,  $1.00

STRONG EYES — By Bernarr Macfadden and  Mm.  Bates,  M.  D.

A  new  course  of  eye  training  without  glasses,  drugs,  medicines  or  operations.  How
spectacles  may  be  discarded,  the  eyes  made  strong  and  beautiful,  squint  corrected,  and
other  abnormalities  and  defects  overcome  by  educational  eye  exercises  and  other  purely
natural methods. Revolutionarv truth upon this subiect. Pictures by the score.

Price,  $3.00
FLATIRON  BLDG..
NEW YORK CITY


PHYSICAL  CULTURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,


Key 3000


1210


Xdturopatliic  Book  Catalog


Macfadden,  B.  A. —  ENCYCLO-
PEDIA OF  PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE  !!S:;2.50

The same on lasv iiaviiient
plan $:i5.00

Macfadden.  B.  A.,  and  Dr.  Felix
Oswald.— FASTING.  HYDRO-
PATHY, EXERCISE.  Every-
day knowledge,  forgotten  facts,
strange  theories  and  fervid  ap-
peals, unite  to  form  a  most  in-
teresting and  instructive  book.
Compiled  by  the  foremost  apostle
of  Physical  Culture  in  America.
$1.50

Macfadden, B. A., and Dr. Felix
Oswald.  — PHYSICAL CUL-
TURE. Volumes I— IV. Each,
$0.50

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  FASTING
FOR  THE  CURE  OF  DIS-
EASE. $1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  FASTING,
HYDROPATHY  AND  EXER-
CISE  $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— F  A  T  H  E  R,
MOTHER  AND BABE. ..$1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  GAINING
WEIGHT $0.eO

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  HOW  TO
DEVELOP  MUSCULAR
POWER AND BEAUTY. $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— MANHOOD
AND MARRIAGE $:2.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  MY  LADY
BEAUTIFUL $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— NEW  HAIR
CULTURE $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  OLD  AGE;
ITS  CAUSE  AND  PREVEN-
TION  $1.60

Macfadden. B. A.  —  PHYSICAL
CULTURE COOK BOOK.
$1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  PHYSICAL
CULTURE FOR BABY. $1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  PHYSICAL
PERFECTION $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— SCIENCE  OF
MUSCULAR  DEVELOPMENT.
$1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  STRENGTH
FROM EATING $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  STRONG
EYES $1.10

Macfadden. B. A.— THE BUILD-
ING  OF VITAL POWER.
$1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— THE  CRIME
OF SILENCE $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— THE  MILK
DIET .$0.60

Macfadden,  B.  A.— THE  TRAIN-
ER  AND ANATOMY. ...$1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  VITALITY
SUPREME $1.10

McGovern,  Terry,  and  others.  —
HOW  TO  BOX,  BREATHE,
WALK  OR  RUN $1.00

Melio.  G.  L.  —  MANUAL  OF
SWEDISH  DRILL $1.00

Mullet,  J.  B.  —  FRESH  AIR
BOOK $1.50

Muller,  J.  B.— MILITARY  EX-
ERCISES  $1.50

Muller.  J.  B.— MY  SYSTEM  FOR
CHILDREN $1.50

Muller.  J.  B.— MY  SYSTEM  FOR
MEN $1.50

Muller,  J.  B.— MY  SYSTEM  FOR
WOMEN $1..50

NATURAL  HEALTH  EXER-
CISES. 2.3  Photographs  by
Sarony.  Movements,  without  ap-
paratus, for  all  parts  of  the  body.
Exercises  illustrated,  labeled,  and
explained.  The  most  satisfactory
dispensing manual published.

Newcomb,  L.  — MUSCULAR  EX-
ERCISES  $0.75


Nissen,  H.  —  A  B  C  OF  THE
SWEDISH  SYSTEM  OF  EDU-
CATIONAL GYMNASTICS.
$1.00

Rohde  &  Haskins.  —  NEW
SCHOOL  OF  PHYSICAL
CULTURE.  How  to  Box  to  Win,
by  Terry  McGovern  ;  How  to
Build  Muscle,  by  James  J.  Cor-
bett;  How  to  Breathe,  Stand,
Walk,  or  Run,  by  J.  Gardner
Smith.  M.D.  ;  How  to  Punch  the
Bag.  by  Gus  E.  and  Arthur  R.
Keeley.  Every  author  is  at  the
pinnacle  of  his  profession,  and
the  work  may  be  taken  as  an
ultimatum.  The  best  book  writ-
ten for  energizing  the  over-stu-
dious  lad $1.00

Saxon,  Arthur.  —  THE  TEXT-
BOOK OF  WEIGHT  LIFT-
ING  $0.50

Schmidt.  A.  P.— ILLUSTRATED
HINTS  FOR  HEALTH  AND
STRENGTH.  Purposely  for  busy
people.  Not  a  calisthenic  drill,
or  an  athlete's  vade  mecum,  but
a  very  few  vitalizing  movements,
with  no  appliances  hut  a  brain
and  a  bit  of  muscle.  The  illus-
trations are  particularly  happy,
and  they  illustrate,  moreover.
This  book  is  a  radical  departure
from  the  ordinary  commonplace
chaos  sent  out  by  physical  cul-
turists $1..'>0

Scott,  Dr.  Thomas  B.  —  THE
ROAD  TO  A  HEALTHY  OLD
AGE. Cloth $1.20

Shaw,  J.  Austin.  —  THE  BEST
THING  IN  THE  WORLD:
GOOD  HEALTH.  How  to  keep
it  for  a  hundred  years.  A  record
of  the  most  wonderful  fast  in
history $1.50

Stebbins,  Genevieve. — DELSARTE
SYSTEM  OF  EXPRESSION.
A  text-book  and  self-instructor  in
aesthetic  physical  training.  Six-
teen charts,  nineteen  sets  of  gym-
nastics, etc., etc $2.00

Stebbins,  Genevieve.  —  DRILLS.
$0.30

Stebbins.  Genevieve. — SYSTEM  OF
PHYSICAL TRAINING.  $1.00

Taylor.  G.  H.— HEALTH  BY  EX-
ERCISE. Without  Apparatus.
$1.00

Trail.  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  FAMILY
GYMNASIUM.  The  parlor  of  a
home  is  usually  planned  first,  the
kitchen  last,  the  gymnasium
never.  The  reverse  is  the  hy-
gienic sequence ;  and  "The  Fami-
ly Gymnasium"  is  a  good  model
for  the  building  of  a  healthy
household $1.50


Part  21
PnOGRESS PERIODICALS

ADVANCED THOUGHT.

M.$1.10

ALETHEIAN MAGAZINE.

M.$1.50

AMERICAN KITCHEN MAGA-
ZINE. Household M.$1.00

AMERICAN MOTHER. House-
hold and Family M.$1.00

AMERICAN PHYSICAL EDU-
CATIONAL REVIEW. Q  $1.50

ANNALS OF HYGIENE. Hy-
giene  M.$2.00

AZOTH. Psychic Research, The-
osophv.  Occultism $3.00

BABYHOOD. Hygiene  of  Infants.
M..$2.00  I

BOSTON COOKING SCHOOL
MAGAZINE. Household.  .$1.00

BRAIN AND BRAWN. M.  $1.50  I


BRANN'S  ICONOCLAST.  Free
Thouglit M.$1.00

DR.  BURKE'S HEALTH  MAGA-
ZINE, "Health Culture."
M.$1.50

FRED  BURRY'S  JOURNAL,
New Thought M.$1.00

CHARACTER BUILDER.

M.$1.00

CHIROPRACTIC  BULLETIN.
M.  $0.50

CHIROPRACTOR M.  $1.00

CHRISTIAN.  Christian  Science.
.\1  .$1.00

CLINICAL  JOURNAL.  Palmer's
School of Chiropractic. M.  $3.O0

COSMOPOLITAN  OSTEOPATH.
Osteopathy M.$1.00

ESOTERIC.  Free  Thought.
M.$1.50

FOOD. Vegetarian M.$0.50

FOUNTAIN HEAD NEWS.
(Chiropractic) M.  $2.00

FREEDOM.  Mental  Science.
W.$1.00

GOOD HEALTH.  Hygiene.
M.$2.50

GOOD  HEALTH  CLINIC.  Hy-
giene  M.$1.00

GOOD  HOUSEKEEPING.  House-
hold  M.$2.00

HAUSDOKTOR,  DER  Naturo-
pathic. (German) M.  $1.00

HEALTH.  Hygiene  and  Osteo-
pathy  M .  $1.00

HEALTH. Hygiene M.  $1.00

HEALTH-CULTURE.  Hygiene
M..$2.00

HEALTH  MAGAZINE.  Hygiene.
M. $1.00

HEALTH  VIM M.$0.75

HEALTHY  HOME.  Hygiene.

HEALTHY LIFE M.  $1.25

HERALD  OF  THE  GOLDEN
AGE. Fruitarian Q.  $2.00

HERALD  OF  HEALTH.  Wallace
Diet M.$1..50

HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND
NATUROPATH M.$2.00

HERB  DOCTOR.  Medical  Herb-
alism  M.$1.50

HIGHER  LAW.  New  Metaphys-
ics  M.$2.00

HOME  AND  HEALTH.  House-
hold  and Hygiene M.1.50

HOME  AND  HEALTH  HELPER.
Hrgiene M.$1.50

HOME  COMFORT.  Hygiene.
M  .  $0.50

HOUSEHOLD.  Household.
M.$1.00

HOUSEWIFE.  Household.
M.$1.00

HUMAN  FACULTY.  Phrenology.
M.$1.00

HUMAN  NATURE.  Phrenology
and TTvE'iene M.S1.50

ILLINOIS  HEALTH  NEWS.
M. Free

INTERNATIONAL  BRIEF  (Ec-
lectic)  M. Free

INDEPENDENT  THINKER.
Free Thought M  .  $2.00

JOURNAL  OF  ELECTRO-THE-
RAPEUTICS. Electro-Therapy.
M.$3.00

JOURNAL  OF  HYGEIO-THE-
RAPY. Hygiene M.$2.00

JOURNAL  OF  MAGNETISM.
Physical Culture M  .  $2.00

JOURNAL OF OSTEOPATHY.

Osteopathy M.  $2.00

JOURNAL  OF  THE  AMERI-
CAN  ASSOCIATION  OF  ORI-
FICIAL SURGEONS. M.$2.00

KNEIPP WATER CURE.

M. $2.00

MASTEROPATHIC IDEAL.
M. $0.80


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  ami  Buyers'  Goide  1211


Edited by lJ^\i#^|^  ^x  >J^\  ^  wK  ^''■^^'  ^^^  ^^P^

Benedict Lust, A  Ujl  CllU  01  llLt?CU|ll  Subscription,

N.D.,  D.O.,  M.D. and  $2.00 a year

Naturopath


Cms  magazine,  which  is  the  professional  organ  of  the  American Naturopathic  Association, first
appeared in 1896  as  The Kneipp  Water  Cure  Monthly; then  in 1902  it  became  known as  The
Naturopath and Herald of Health; and linally, m January, 1916, it became The Herald of
Health and Naturopath. As the name indicates, this publication is the exponent ot every
phase of drugless healing. It is many years older than the Naturopathic Society, the name by
which the  American Naturopathic  Association was  first known, and  which was founded December
2nd, 1902,  in the  city  of  New York.

The  Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath  is  the  only  journal  published  in  the  United  States  that
espouses  the  healing  of  disease  by  the  simple  and  natural  methods,  as  opposed  to  the  vile-  nos-
trums and  superstitions  of  Allopathy,  otherwise  known  as  official  medicine.

The  Natural  System  of  Healing  alone  has  the  courage  to  assert  that  Nature  cures,  that  the
only  healing  force  is  the  vis  naturae  medicatrix,  and  not  the  potions,  pills  and  powders  of  the  em-
pirics. It  had  its  inception  in  Germany.  Priessnitz  of  Grafenberg,  Kuhne  of  Leipzig,  Schroth  ot
Lindewiese,  Bilz  of  Dresden,  and  Kneipp  of  Woerishofen,  established  sanatoria,  and  proved  to  a
world  sick  unto  death  with  swallowing  paralyzing  palliatives,  of  annihilating  fermenting  substances
with  chemicals,  of  suppressing  fevers  with  poison,  of  relieving  constipation  with  purgatives,  caus-
ing the  muscular  system  of  the  intestines  to  lose  tone  and  elasticity,  all  practices  antagonizing
nature  in  her  benign  efforts  to  get  rid  of  the  offending  materies  morbi  that  is  the  cause  of  the
specific  disease,  that  the  benign  forces  of  sunshine,  air,  light,  exercise,  simple  foods,  earth  cure,
water  cure,  mental  science,  etc.,  are  a  thousand  times  more  curative  of  the  ills  of  mankind  than
the  poisons  of  the  allopaths.

the  pages  of  our  magazine.  The  twentieth  century  will  be  known  as  the  Century  of  Naturopathy.
The  long  slavery  of  mankind  to  the  bag  of  bones  and  feathers  of  the  primitive  medicine  man,  the
Witches  Brodth  of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  vacuous  "megrims"  and  "vapors"  of  le  docteur  a  la  mode,
the  bleeding  craze  of  our  immediate  forefathers,  the  drugging  craze,  and  the  present  craze  for
serums,  inoculations,  and  vaccines,  has  been  broken  at  last,  and  many  allopaths  are  now  turning
naturopaths, thus fleeing from the wrath to come.

The  specialties  in  Natural  Healing,  no  matter  by  whom  introduced,  receive  most  elaborate
exposition.  These  include  the  German  Water  Cure;  the  Nature  Cure  or  Naturopathy,  which
includes  Diet,  Hydrotherapy,  Thermotherapy,  Phototherapy,  Heliotherapy,  Chromotherapy,  Elec-
trotherapy, Psychotherapy  or  Mental  Healing,  including  suggestive  therapeutics.  Mechanotherapy,
or Massage, and Physical Culture, Osteopathy, Ophthalmology, Chiropractic and Spondylotherapy.

All  these  various  drugless  methods,  and  others  not  specifically  mentioned,  are  parts  of  an  im-
mense whole  that  forms  a  body  of  medical  principles  and  practice  that  are  the  very  antithesis  of
allopathic  medicine,  which  is  but  a  system  of  ignoring  the  cause  of  disease,  thus  leaving  it  intact
to  break  forth  again.  The  system  is  an  attempt  to  enable  man  to  violate  the  laws  of  nature,  and
yet  secure  immunity  from  punishment  for  so  doing  by  the  vicarious  virtues  of  drugs,  serums  and
vaccines.  This  false  system  of  finding  "cures"  for  disease,  by  treating  the  effect,  even  if  suc-
cessful, would  only  result  in  our  seeing  a  new  series  of  ailments  springing  from  the  unextirpated
roots  thereof,  each  requiring  a  new  artificial  "remedy,"  produced  in  most  cases  with  the  infinite
suffering  of  animals  in  the  shambles  of  the medical  laboratory.

The  Natural  Method  of  Healing,  on  the  contrary,  seeks  to  change  the  very  habits  of  the  indi-
vidual by  urging  a  return  to  nature  in  eating,  drinking,  breathing,  bathing,  working,  resting,  dress-
ing,  thinking,  by  making  use  of  elementary  remedies  of  nature,  by correct  physiological  principles.

THE  HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND  NATUROPATH  contains  biographical  sketches  of  all  the
prominent  pioneers  of  Naturopathy,  not  only  those  of  foreign  countries,  but  also  those  of  the
I'nited  States.  Biographies  of  Dr.  Trail,  Graham,  Jackson,  Kellogg,  Walters,  Page,  Still,  the
originator  of  Osteopathy,  Weltmer,  who  enlarged  suggestive  therapeutics.  Palmer,  originator  of
Chiropractic.  B.  Lust  of  New  York  and  Butler,  N.  J.,  the  Naturopath,  Drs.  Lahn,  Strueh,  Lind-
lahr,  Carl  Schultz,  Collins,  Deininger,  Davis,  Havard,  professors  of  Neuropathy,  Dr.  McCormick,
the  Ophthalmologist,  etc.,  etc.

These  apostles  of  Natural  Healing  and  their  disciples  are  doing  a  wonderful  work  in  the  pre-
vention and  cure  of  disease,  having  reduced  the  death  rate  of  over  fifty  per  cent,  under  the  old
and  false  dreg  treatment  to  less  than  five  per  cent, by  the  drugless  method.

THE  HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND  NATUROPATH  is  a  magazine  for  the  people  at  large,  as
well  as  for  the  Drugless  profession.  Each  issue  is  full  of  ideas  that  will  emancipate  the  reader
from  the  tyranny  of  the  drug  superstition.  It  is  the  most  desirable  factor  in  the  regeneration
of  the  race.

Back  volumes  from  the  year  1900  on  up  to  now,  each  volume,  $2.00,  postpaid.  Single  back
numbers, except current year, cannot  be supplied.

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.

a  ft]


1212


Xalurupalliic  Book  Catalog


MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES,


MAHATMA. Occultism. M.$2.00

MENTAL ADVOCATE. Mental

Healing M.$2.00

MIND M.$::.oo

MIND AND BODY M..K2.00

MOTHERHOOD. Maternity.
M.iPlJ.OO

MOTHERS'  JOURNAL.  Mother-
hood  .M  .$::.oo

NATUROPATH  AND  HERALD
OF HEALTH. (Spanish.)  i?3.00

NAUTILUS. Xew Thought.
M.SI..V)

NORTH  AMERICAN  JOURNAL
OF HOMEOPATHY. M.  ."SS.OO

NORTHERN  OSTEOPATH.  Os
teopathy M  .$1.00

NUEVA CIENCIA,  LA.

(Spanish.)  Vegetarian  and  Hy-
dropathic Review,  Havana,  Cuba.
$1.50

NURSERY.  Household  and  Hy-
giene  M.$1.00

OCCULT  REVIEW.  Occultism.
M.$1.00

OPEN DOOR. Anti-Vivisection
M.«1.00

OPTOMETRY M.  $2.00

OUR  DUMB  ANIMALS. M.  $1.00

OSTEOPATH. Osteopathy.

M.$0.50

OSTEOPATHIC  SUCCESS.  Os-
teopathy  M .  $1.00

OUR HOME RIGHTS $1.00

PACIFIC  HEALTH  JOURNAL.
Hygiene M  .$0.50

"PATHFINDER."  New  Theolo-
gy  M.$1.00

PHILOSOPHY  OF  HEALTH.
M. $1.25

PHRENOLOGICAL  JOURNAL
AND  SCIENCE  OF  HEALTH.
Hygiene M  .  $2.00

PHYSICAL CULTURE.M..$2.00

PITTSBURGH  COLLEGE  BUL-
LETIN.  M.  Free

POCKET  BOOK  —  SOCIAL
PHILOSOPHY $1.00

PRO-VIDA. (Spanish). ..M.  $0.50

PSYCHIC  DIGEST  AND  OC-
CULT REVIEW M.$1.00

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  RE-
VIEW. Occultism M  .$2.00

RADIANT CENTRE. Xew
Thought M  .  $1.00

REASON. New  Thought. M.  $1.00

REVEALER. New Thought.

M_ $2.00

SCHOOL physiology'  JOUR-
NAL. Physical Education
M $1.60

SCIENTIFIC  HEAD  NEWS.  Irr:
Free

SECULAR THOUGHT. W..$2.00

SOUTHERN  JOURNAL  OF  OS-
TEOPATHY. Osteopathy.  $1.00

STUFFED  CLUB.  Anti-Faddist
Therapeutics M  .  $1.50

SUGGESTION. Telepathy.

M.$2.00

TEMPLE  OF  HEALTH  AND
PSYCHIC REVIEW...  M.  $1.00

THOUGHT.  Advanced  Thought.
M..$1.50

TRAINED MOTHERHOOD.
Motherhood M  ..$1.00

TRAINED NURSE. Nursing.
M.ii!2.00

TROPIC MAGAZINE. ..M.  $1.00

TRUTH  TELLER.  Semimonthly.
$0.50

TWENTIETH  CENTURY  MAG-
AZINE. Household. M.$0..')0

U.  C.  A.  JOURNAL.  (Chiroprac-
tic)  M. Free

VACCINATION.  Anti-Vaccina-
tion  M..$0.25

VEGETARIAN M .  $1..%0


VEGETARIAN MAGAZINE.

Household and Pure Food.

M.$1.00

VEGETARIAN MAGAZINE.

Vegetarianism M.$1.00

VEGETARIAN MESSENGER.

M.$1.50

VOLKSRATH.  Health  Weekly  (in

German) $2.00

WHAT TO EAT M.$1.00

WOMAN'S BEAUTY AND

HEALTH M.$1.75

WOMAN'S PHYSICAL DEVEL-
OPMENT. Physical Culture.

M.$1.50

YOUR HEALTH. Naturopathic.

M. $1.50


Part 22 — SPECIAL, AND OR-
GANIC DISEASES

Allinson.  Dr.  T.  R.— RHEUMA-
TISM: ITS  CAUSE  AND
CURE $0.25

Baumgarten,  Dr.  Alfred.— INSOM-
NIA  $0.15

Beard,  G.  M.  — SEXUAL  NEU-
RASTHENIA (Nervous  Ex-
haustion) $2.75

Bunker,  W.  N.,  D.  C— TRAIN-
ING OF  MEMORY .$0.50

Burgess,  Dr.  W.  H.  —  CHRONIC
DISEASE.  The  Natural  Method
of  Diagnosis  and  Treatment  $1.50

Collins.  Dr.  F.  W.— INFANTILE
PARALYSIS $0.25

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  W.  —  THE
LIVER  AND  KIDNEYS.  With
a Chapter  on Malaria $0.25

Drayton,  Dr.  H.  S.— NERVOUS-
NESS. Illustrated $0.25

Erz,  Dr.  A.  A.— WHAT  MEDI-
CINE KNOWS  AND  DOES
NOT  KNOW  ABOUT  RHEU-
MATISM  $0.75

Forest,  Dr.  W.  E.— NEW  TREAT-
MENT  OF FEVER iRO.25

Forster.— S  PINAL  ADJUST-
MENT  $6.50

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— HYGIENE
OF  THE  BRAIN  AND  THE
CURE  OF  NERVOUSNESS.
$1.10

Hirschfeld,  Dr.  I.  H.  —  THE
HEART  AND  BLOOD  VES-
SELS; THEIR  CARE  AND
CURE,  AND  THE  GENERAL
MANAGEMENT  OF  THE
BODY. Cloth $1.35

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— HYGIENIC
TREATMENT  OF  CONSUMP-
TION. Part  I.  Nature  and  Cause
of  Disease.  Part  II.  Prevention
and  Treatment  in  Earlier  Stages.
Part  III.  Treatment  in  More  Ad-
vanced Cases.  Not  consuinptives
alone,  but  any  one  having  nar-
row chest,  weak  linigs,  tendency
to  colds,  catarrh,  sore  throat,  etc.,
will  find  in  the  field  covered  pure
nuggets of  inspiration $2.10

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  —  LIVER
COMPLAINT,  MENTAL  DYS-
PEPSIA, AND  HEADACHE:
Their  Cure  by  Home  Treatment.
View,  Functions,  Derangements
of  Liver,  Effects,  Relations,
Causes  and  Cure ;  the  Bile,  Uric
Acid,  the  Nerves,  the  Heart,  and
other  allied  subjects  explained  in
detail.  Miscellaneous  questions
answered.  Practical  notes  con-
cerning headaches.  Essentially
an  American  work  for  American
diseases .$1.10

Hollopeter,  Dr.  WiUiam  C— HAY
FEVER-  ITS  PREVENTION
AND TREATMENT $1.35

Jackson,  J.  H.— CONSTIPATION  :
Causes and Treatment. ...$0.25

Jamison,  Dr.  A.  B. — INTESTINAL


ILLS.  A  Book  designed  for  phy-
sicians, medical  students,  and  non-
professional readers  interested  in
the  causes  of  disease.  Proctitus
(chronic  inflammation  of  anus
and  rectum)  is  posited  as  the
cause  of  costiveness,  diarrhea,
auto-intoxication,  uric  acid,  anse-
inia,  and  the  huge  host  of  ills
incident  to  fsecal  poisoning,  and
usually  misunderstood  and  mis-
treated. A  unique  work,  packed
with  thoughts  and  thought  in-
centives  .$3.00

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— THE  STOM-
ACH: Its  Disorders  and  How  to
Cure  Them.  Theories  not  specu-
lative, but  materialized  and
proved  at  the  institution  best
equipped  in  America  for  study-
ing the  stomach $2.50

Lamb,  Joseph  J. —  ASSISTING
NATURE  AND  THE  LIBER-
ATOR  $0.10

Lovett,  Dr.  Robert  W.  —  THE
TREATMENT  OF  INFAN-
TILE PARALYSIS $1.85

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  CURE  FOR
RUPTURE $1.50

Macdougal, King D. — THE

BATTLE  WITH  TUBERCU-
LOSIS AND  HOW  TO  WIN
IT .$1.60

Mayer,  Dr.  Emil.  —  NO  MORE
SYPHILLIS $0.20

Miller,  Dr.  E.  P.— DYSPEPSIA:
Causes,  Symptoms,  and  Hyeeio-
pathic Cure $0.50

Page,  Dr.  C.  E.— PNEUMONIA
AND  TYPHOID  FEVER.  $0.25

Preston, Dr. Miller E. — FRAC-
TURES  AND DISLOCATIONS
.$5.00

Rabagliati,  Dr.  A.,  M.  A.— INITIS,
Congestion  of  the  connective
tissues.  Frequently-found  symp-
toms in  the  coverings  of  muscles,
nerves  and  bones,  and  the  liga-
ments of  joints,  which  originate
in  malnutrition,  and  their  treat-
ment by  diet,  massage  and  self-
movements  of  the  affected  parts
under  pressure.  (47  photographs.)
$3.00

Reinhold,  Dr.  A.  F.— CONSUMP-
TION  CURABLE $0.25

Reinhold,  Dr.  A.  F.  —  NATURE
VERSUS DRUGS $0.50

Reinhold,  Dr.  A.  F.— POSITIVE
PREVENTION  AND  CURE  OF
TUBERCULOSIS.  Replete  with
startling  facts  and  pointed  advice.
A  companion  book  to  "Nature  vs.
Drugs,"  though  less  of  a  philip-
pic,  and more of  a manual. $1.00

Reinhold.  Dr.  A.  F.— PULMON-
ARY CONSUMPTION  EASILY
CURED  BY  THE  NATURE
CURE $0.25

Shadel,  A.  F.  —  CONFESSIONS
OF  A  VICTIM  OF  THE
GREAT  WHITE  PLAGUE.
$0.50

Thomas,  Dr.  J.  B.— MAL-ASSIMI-
LATION  AND  ITS  COMPLI-
CATIONS  $1.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.  —  DIGESTION
AND  DYSPEPSIA.  50  illustra-
tions  $0.50

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— DISEASES  OF
THE  THROAT  AND  LUNGS.
$0.25

Wasser.— DEFECTIVE  SPEECH
AND DEAFNESS $1.00


Part 23 — TEXTS  FOR
TEACHERS

DRUGGISTS'  HANDBOOK  OF
MEDICAL  ROOTS,  BARKS,
HERBS, FLOWERS, Etc.$0.75


ITiiivcrxal Naluropnthl*' Dircrlory  ami IIiijoim' (iiildc


1213


Health
Culture


Monthly
Magazine


Health  Culture  ex-
poses the  inconsist-
encies and  arrogant
humbug  of  much  that
is  called  medical  sci-
ence, but  which  in
reality  is  not  science
at  all,  but  based  on
experiments  made  up-
on the  public  and  by
torturing  dumb  ani-
mals. Nature  neveiT
intended  this,  but  ex-
pects everyone  to
keep  to  her  laws.


ELMER  LEE,
Editor


M.O.


HAROLD  WELLS  TURNER
Publisher


Unite  With  Us  for  Health


One  result  of  hyper-
civilization  is  that  it
is  damning  humanity
by  successfully  blind-
folding the  public  so
as  to  make  her  con-
tribute to  the  up-keep
of  a  profession  that
lives  on  her  suffering.
Eighteen  million  drug-
less  advocates  have
refused  to  become
slaves  to  that  system.
Step  up,  join  hands
and  unite  with  us  for
Health.

STATISTICS  prove  that,  in  the  United  States,  the  average  person  is  ill  18  days  per  annum.  That
means  a  person  living  to  the  age  of  65  is  sick  1,380  days  or  over  3J^  years  during  his  life.  Assuming
the  person  to  be  earning  the  modest  salary  of  $25.00  per  week,  this  means  a  loss  to  him  of  $4,550,  which
is  quite  a  sum,  but  you  have  still  to  add  to  this  the  doctors'  bills  and  you  know  what  they  mean,  do
you  not?

WHY  is  there  so  much  sickness?  Why  should  a  person  waste  S].^  years  or  more  in  bed  losing  money
at  this  rate  and  why  so  few  doctors  who  are  sick?  These  are  questions  one  naturally  asks.  We
can  answer  them  for  you  and  tell  what  the  cause  REALLY  IS.  IGNORANCE,  that's  the  answer,  that
is  at  the  root  of  it.  YOlJ  are  kept  in  ignorance  while  the  doctor  knows  and  so  he  takes  none  of  his
medicine,  but  gives  it  to  YOL^  He  keeps  well  and  you  become  ILL.  You  are  taught  little  about  your
body  and  still  less  about  the  cause  of  disease,  consequently  when  you  have  a  pain  or  ache,  you  run  to
the  doctor.  HEALTH  CULTURE  teaches  you  all  about  the  body,  disease,  treatments,  cures,' as  well  as
the  evils  of  drugs.  It  also  tells  you  how  to  treat  yourself  successfully  without  using  dangerous  poisons
and  with  a  saving  of  $4,550.

HEALTH  CL'LTL'RE  will  give  you  thought  control,  and  teach  you  how  to  become  strong,  virile,
magnetic  and  attractive.  Teaches  the  underlying  laws  of  eugenics  and  sexology.  Will  teach  you
to  live  the  Happy  Life  and  how  you  may  escape  from  "bondage  and  sickness  no  matter  how  you
have  trifled  with  your  health  or  what  your  environment  is,  or  what  your  parents  may  have  died  of^  or
what  your  occupation.  HEALTH  CULTURE  will  teach  you  to  climb  to  the  Iiealthy  life  and  so  become
strong  and  successful.

HEALTH  CULTl^RE  is  the  most  progressive  health  organ  in  the  world  and  teaches  the  most  up-to-
date  medical  science  based  on  Natural  Methods,  Common  Sense  Psychology  and  Diet.  What  an
important  part  the  food  we  eat  plays  in  health  and  how  little  people  understand  it.  Babies  get  thin
and  rickety  when  improperly  fed.  Children  fall  into  decline  through  lack  of  nutrition.  Nervous  and
liighly  strung  people  require  those  elements  tliat  create  nerve  power.  A  correctly  balanced  diet  supplies
the  proper  amount  of  fats,  etc.,  and  is  absolutely  necessary  for  health.  Unless  you  maintain  a  good,
all  "round  diet  you  will  sooner  or  later  suffer  for  it.  HEALTH  CULTURE  contains  numerous  articles
devoted  to  diet,  giving  valuable  information  on the  subject.

WE  are  interested  in  you  and  if  ynu  are  in  diflflcuUie';  about  anythint;  connected  witli  your  health.  remeifil>er  we  arc  at
your  service, so  write  to us fvill\ Our  Question and Aii'swer Departnient olfer^ to every  reader  a  privilepe  that few
other periodicals do. HEALTH CI'LTT'RE finhts drups. qn.Telcery ser\inis. stimulants, useless operations, medical
humbug,  vivisection,  vaccmatiou,  and  everything  likely  to  injure  the  health  of  the  nation.

THERE  is  no  reason  under  the  sun  why  you  should  grow
old  and  wrinkled  as  the  years  roll  on.  It  is  up  to  you
to  keep  youns  and  well.  Men  and  women  may  he  old  and
worn  out  at  30.  if  they  have  not  followed  the  rit-ht  course
of  liviiiR.  We  have  thousands  of  followers  of  7n  years  who
are  yoiithful  and  vigorous,  haviuR  learned  the  true  way  of
health.  It  is  not  a  question  of  ace.  I'ut  your  condition  of
Iioalth.  We  are  sincere  when  we  say  that  as  you  grow  older
and  leara  more,  you  should  grow  healthier  and  more  youth-
ful appe.iring.  The  Natural  Methods  ARE  the  Iiest.  No
right-thinking  person  can  have  the  slightest  doubt  about  that
anil  nEAI,TH  CII.Tl'RE  is  Just  brim  full  of  live  wire
infurmatiun  that  tells  you  explicitly  what  to  do  to  keep  well
and  young.


Health  Culture,  $1.50  per  year, 15c  a  copy.
HEALTH CULTURE, 1133 Broadway, New York


Cut  this  out;  it  entitles  you  to  4  months'
.subscription  to  Health  Culture  for  25  cents
(stamps or coin).

Name

Address

HEALTH  CULTURE,  1133  Broadway,  New  York


1214


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


Edwards,  Dr.  J.  F.— HYGIENE
WITH  ANATOMY  AND  PHY-
SIOLOGY.  435 pp $:i.«o

Gould,  Dr.  G.  M.— POCKET  PRO-
NOUNCING MEDICAL  LEXI-
CON. Not  at  all  Natxiropathic,
in  that  it  contains  thousands  of
terms  Latinistic,  and  mystic,  ar-
chaic and  polysyllabic,  and  per-
taining to  the  drug  system  only.
But  the  best  and  most  popular
Lexicon  for  every  student  of  the-
rapeutics. 30.000  words.  4th
Edition, Thumb Index. .  .  .$1.55

Gray.— ANATOMY.  Fully  illus-
trated. The  standard  for  scho-
lastic  and personal use. ...$7.«0

Manning.— PHYSIOLOGY.. 9'2.-M

PORTFOLIO  OF  LIFE.  (Cut,
Manikin) $fi.5<>

Potter,  Dr.  S.  O.  L.— ANATOMY.

Wood-Alien,'  Dr.'  'Mary.  —  THE
MARVELS  OF  OUR  BODILY
DWELLINGS.  Dainty  word-pic-
tures of  prosaic  facts.  Not  the
regulation  catalogue  of  endless
figures  and  dismal  functions,  but
a  series  of  graceful  silhouettes
from  the  knowing  of  a  physician,
the  feeling  of  a  poet,  and  the
portraying of an artist. ...$1.10


Part 2-1 — WOMANHOOn

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.  —  NA-
TURE'S SECRETS  FOR  WO-
MEN  $0.75

Angel,  Dr.  Emma  F.— WHAT  A
YOUNG  WIFE  OUGHT  TO
KNOW.  Experienced  physicians
and  wives,  when  it  is  too  late,
are  the  only  ones  who  realize
the  meaning  of  the  fateful  first
year.  It  is  simply  a  question
of  a  little  knowledge  before,  or  a
great  sorrow  after.  This  book
is  recent,  but  a  few  months  have
pronounced  it  the  best  published.
$1.00

Chesser, Elizabeth Sloan. —

WOMAN. MARRIAGE AND
MOTHERHOOD. Cloth, $1.50

Davis, Dr. Frank P. — IMPOTEN-
CY, STERILITY AND ARTI-
FICIAL IMPREGNATION.
$2.50

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.— NEW  ERA
FOR  WOMEN $1.25

Ecob,  Helen  G.  —  THE  WELL-
DRESSED  WOMAN.  Illustra-
ted  SlOO

Femald,  Dr.  James  C. — TRUE
MOTHERHOOD.  Leatherette.
$0.70

Fowler,  O.  S.  —  SCIENCE  OF
LIFE;  OR.  CREATIVE  AND
SEXUAL SCIENCE $3.20

Galbraith,  Dr.  Anna  M.  —  HY-
GIENE AND  PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE FOR  WOMEN.  .300  pp.,
77  illustrations.  A  modern  treat-
ment of  modern  themes.  Old
facts  in  new  thought.  The  physi-
cal and  mental  awakening  of  wo-
man has  put  her  sphere  and  mis-
sion in  a  new  liglit  The  facts
need  illumining — the  thought  in
this  work  does  it .$1.00

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.  —  LADIES'
GUIDE  IN  HEALTH  AND
DISEASE.  Seven  parts:  Anat-
omy and  Physiology  of  Repro-
duction ;  The  Little  Girl ;  The
Young  Lady ;  The  Wife ;  The
Mother;  From  Puberty  to  Wife-
hood; Marriage;  Motherhood;
Disease  and  Home  Treatment  are
a  few  leading  topics.  An  appen-
dix treats  of  Children's  Diseases.
FTydropathy,  Swedish  Movements,


Posture  Treatment,  Electricity,
Massage,  Diet,  Recipes,  etc.  The
most  comprehensive  guide  pub-
lished. (i00,000  copies  sold.  f;72
pp., 35 lithographs $;$.00

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.— FIVE-MINUTE
CHATS  WITH  YOUNG  WO-
MEN. 426 pp $1..'>0

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.  —  OUR  GIRLS.
202 pp., illustrated $1.10

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.— CONFIDAN-
CES $0.55

Lowry, Dr. E. B. — FALSE

MODESTY $0.55

Lowry, Dr. E. B. — HERSELF.
$1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— POWER  AND
BEAUTY  OF  SUPERB  WO-
MANHOOD  $1..^

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— KNOWL-
EDGE A  YOUNG  WIFE
SHOULD HAVE $2.00

Rosch,  Dr.  E.— THE  ABUSE  OF
THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION.

Salmon,  Arthur  L.  —  THE  MAN
AND  THE  WOMAN $0.75

Sessions,  Mrs.  E.  L.— PHYSICAL
CULTURE  FOR  WOMEN. $0.U5

Shepherd,  Mr.  E.  R.— SPECIAL
PHYSIOLOGY  FOR  GIRLS.
$1.10

Sperry,  Dr.  S.  B.— CONFIDEN-
TIAL TALKS  WITH  YOUNG
WOMEN.  A  man's  standpoint  is
usually  the  one  thing  lacking  in
a  woman's  view  of  woman-hood.
There  is  an  ex-parti  judgment,
an  unbiased  opinion,  an  all-round
treatment,  that  the  realm  of  auto-
biography fails  to  include.  This
particular  example  possesses  a
poignancy,  a  breadth,  a  depth,
that makes it very helpful.

Stacpoole,  Florence,  and  Anderson,
Lydia  E.  —  ADVICE  TO
WOMEN  ON  THE  CARE  OF
THEIR HEALTH. Cloth, $1.35

Taylor.  G.  H,— HEALTH  FOR
WOMEN $1.60

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— HOME  TREAT-
MENT FOR  SEXUAL  ABU-
SES  $1.00

Turner,  Albert.  —  WOMANLY
BEAUTY  OF  FORM  AND
FEATURE.  F;ourteen  chapters:
Beauty  Definitions  and  Ideals;
E.xcuses  and  Hindrances;  Plain
Words  to  Plain  Women ;  True
Standard  of  Beauty;  Fair  En-
dowments; Physical  Phases;  Im-
mediate Helps  ;  Grace  of  Design  ;
Art  Principles  Applied  to  Cos-
tume; Beauty  of  Material;
Beauty  of  Color;  Accessories;
From  Youth  to  Age ;  Models.
A  symposium  by  twenty  authori-
ties, compiled  by  the  Editor  of
"Health  Culture."  A  few  women
are  pretty,  all  may  be  beautiful.
The  distinction  is  nicely  drawn,
and  the  way  plainly  pointed  out.
A  book  every  woman  needs.  $1.10

Wood-Allen.  Dr.  Mary.— ALMOST
A WOMAN $0.35

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.— WHAT  A
YOUNG  GIRL  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.— WHAT  A
YOUNG  WOMAN  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10


Advice,  ivhen  helpful,  should  be
cheerfully  acknowledged  and  ap-
plied. The  most  advisable  re-
commendation we  can  furnish  is
the  addition  of  these  books — a
veritable  treasure  for  Naturo-
paths and  seekers  of  health.  Dr.
Benedict  Lust.  110  E.  ilst  St.,
Xew  York,  N.  Y-


Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.— WHAT  A
WOMAN  OF  FORTY-FIVE
OUGHT  TO  KNOW.  Compan-
ion books  to  tliose  of  like  title
mentioned  under  "Manhood."
Pure,  purposeful,  successful,
happy  womanhood,  free  from
pain,  and  weakness,  and  sadness
— this  is  the  reward  of  Nature
for  living  in  conformity  with  her
laws.  Most  women  violate  in-
stinct, ignorantly,  thoughtlessly,
habitually ;  and  the  woe  that  fol-
lows is  attributed  to  every  cause
l)Ut  the  right  one.  For  clearing
cobwebs  and  loosing  shackles,  the
"Ought  to  Know"  potencies  are
supreme $1.10


THE VITALISM SERIES

III which the Leppel Dietary

System  i.s  Expounded

DIETETIC  WAY  OF  HEALTH
AND BEAUTY. THE. Deals

with  such  popular  fallacies  on
dietetic  habits  as  "One  man's
meat  is  another  man's  poison,"
"It  is  a  virtue  to  live  on  cheap
foods,"  etc.  Different  dietetic
systems are also  discussed.  $0.25

HINTS  FOR  SELF-DIAGNOSIS.
— In  "Hints"  interesting  infor-
mation is  given  respecting  the
cause  of  the  unsightly  appear-
ance of  most  men  and  women,
and  the  methods  are  indicated
by  which  diseased  and  ugly  per-
sons can  be  made  healthy  and
good-looking $0.45

MISSING  LINK  IN  DIETETICS,
THE.  Discusses  the  importance
of  taking  rightly  combined  and
proportioned  foods.  Attention  is
also  called  to  the  unhealthy  ap-
pearance of  many  vegetarian  lead-
ers on  the  altar  of  their  an'mal
cause thereof  is  given $0.25

NUT  AND  FRUIT  DIETARY,  A,
The  properties  of  fruits  and  nuts
in  common  use  are  given,  with
recipes and general rules. $0.25

SEXUALITY  AND  VITALITY.
Affirms  that  the  average  man  and
woman  sacrifice  their  vital  pow-
ers on  the  altar  of  their  animal
passions.  Cause  and  cure  given.
$0.40

SUITABLE  FOOD  AND  PHYSI-
CAL IMMORTALITY.  The
author  explains  in  this  pamphlet
how  she  can,  by  taking  specified
combinations  of  foods,  make  her-
self either  prematurely  old  or
youthful  looking.  The  vegetarian
dietary  is  given  which  makes  her
yellow,  irritable,  and  nervotis.
Eczema,  boils,  a  blotchy  skin,
etc.,  can  be  as  easily  produced  by
her  as  these  disfigurements  can
be cured $0.35

THE  TEA  QUESTION.  De-
tea-drinking $0.25

VITAL  AND  NON- VITAL
FOODS.  Twenty  Lists  of  Clas-
sified Foods.  Brief  but  to  the
point.  Lists  of  food  are  given
for  the  aspiring,  who  wish  to  feel
more  "fit,"  of  to  do  their  work
more  efficiently,  also  lists  of  food
wliidi  induce  or  increase  certain
complaints $0.45

WHAT  IS  THE  DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN  THE  DENSMORE
AND  LEPPEL  DIETARY  SYS-
TEMS? Interesting Letters and

Testimonials $0.25

The  above  9  pamphlets  for  $1.50


tTnlversal  Naturopatlilo  Directory  and  Buyern'  Guide


121!


VITALISM  BOOKLETS

By  BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  M.  D.

Founder of ihe American "Yungborn" and Natural Life Colony, Editor Herald of Health and
Naturopath, Pres.  American Naturopathic  Association, Dean  American College  of Naturopathy, etc.

Ten  Pamphlets  or  Manuals  used  in  the  studies  of  the  training  of
thought,  the  art  of  breathing  and  the  art  of  nourishment,  in  Dr.  Ben-
edict Lust's  School  of  Diet,  American  School  of  Naturopathy,  Yung-
born  Health  Resort,  Butler,  N,  J.,  "Quisisana"  Nature  Cure,  Tan-
gerine, Fla.,  Natural  Life  Colony,  Palm  City,  near  Nuevitas,  Cuba,


Awaken  to  Com=
ptete  Conscious^'
ness.

Most  people  are  un-
consciously asleep  even
when  awake.  They  are
swayed  by  countless  in-
clinations and  propensi-
ties to  satisfy  which  they
incontinently  yield  their
will.  They  are  slaves  of
appetite.  Only  he  is  free
who  can  do  everything,
but  also  can  refrain  from
everything.  He  only  is
master  of  his  fate.  But
to  achieve  mastery,  such
a  man  must  cultivate  his
imperfectly  developed

brain  centers,  doing
everything  in  full  con-
sciousness, with  great
concentration.  Such  is
the  lesson  of  this  valu-
able booklet. Price,  25c.


Everything  is  At=
tainable  through
Training  of

Thought.

The  burden  of  this
booklet  is  that  thought
is  a  power,  that  every-
thing is  attainable
through  the  training  of
thought.  It  essays  an
answer  to  the  question —
What  is  thought?  Like
electricity,  it  is  a  vibra-
tion. The  vibration  of  a
thought  along  a  nerve
contracts  a  muscle  that
lifts  100  pounds.  Yet
the  thought  was  itself
imponderable.  Wonderful,
mysterious  force !  That
which  weighs  nothing
can  lift  millions  of  tons
of  matter.  Read  this  book-
let to  learn  of  this  daily
miracle  of  life.  Price,  25c.


Man,  Learn  to  Thinks

Advocates  the  regeneration  of  weakened,
depressed  conditions  in  men  and  women  by
the  power  of  energizing  thought  and  correct
breathing.  The  ladder  of  the  higher  life  has
for  its  steps  thought,  idea,  wish,  will,  deed,
repetition,  habit.  Thought  originates  the
idea  which  in  turn  develops  desire,  and  desire
in  time  incites  the  will  to  action  which,  when
engaged,  becomes  materialized  in  deed.  The
repetition  of  deed  becomes  habit,  and  many
habits  become character. Price, postpaid 25c.


The Overcoming of the Financial
Malady  called  Poverty.

Who  would  not  be  wealthy  if  he  had  the
chance  of  being  so?  Wealth  is  no  disgrace,
unless  the  money  has  been  stolen.  Men  risk
their  lives,  their  happiness  and  that  of  their
family  to  get  rich.  This  booklet  shows  that
thinking  procures  everything.  We  live  in  a
world  of  immeasurable  wealth.  It  is  bodily
bloodlessness  that  comes  from  poor  food,
wrong  food,  flat  breathing,  lack  of  exercise,
poisonous  matter  lodged  in  the  system  owing
to  inability  of  the  organs  to  eliminate  same.
The  booklet  shows  the  close  connection  be-
tween alimentary  and  financial  dietetics.
Study  and  act  upon  its  teaching.  Price,  25
cents.


The Limits of  Fatigue as a Strict
Law  of  Life.

This  booklet  is  a  fair  warning  that  you  are
using  up  your  store  of  energy  faster  than  it
can  be  replenished.  You  are  writing,  reading,
speaking,  eating,  drinking,  speculating,  attend-
ing clubs,  shows,  dinners,  concerts,  doing
everything  to  exhaust  your  reserve  of  vitality.
You  are  afflicted  with  irritability,  are  too
easily  offended  at  others,  and  suffer  from
sexual  exhaustion.  You  have  tried  every  kind
of  cure  without  relief.  Really  all  you  need  is
rest,  THAT  KIND  OF  A  REST  PRE-
this pamphlet and get well. Price, 25 cents.


Becoming  Numb: The True  Cause
of  Cancer.

When  a  man  is  compelled  to  do  without
the  foods  he  most  needs,  and  is  filled  with
matter  he  does  not  require,  illness  and  de-
generation will  result.  Thus,  the  individual
cell  is  compelled  DAILY  to  take  up  stuff  for
which  it  has  but  little  or  no  use  at  all.  It
becomes  constipated  with  poison  subject  to
decomposition,  thus  the  body  begins  to  rot
in  the  body.  A  consciously  restrained  amount
of  appropriate  food  which  the  body  can  easily
dispose  of,  is  the  object  of  cure.  It  is  ex-
plained fully  in  this  booklet. Price,  25  cents.


1210


UiiUerniil N]itiirn|t:illiic l)lriM-(ory :iiid Buyers' iJiildo


The  Helper  in  Distress.

This  booklet  is  really  a  guide,  pliilosopher
and  friend  in  all  that  relates  to  healthful,  ap-
petizing diet  as  the  foundation  of  health.  It
advocates  beginning  the  breakfast  with
breathing  exercise,  and  then  for  breakfast,  by
way  of  doing  without  a  breakfast  which  the
author  most  earnestly  recommends.  He  allows
only  an  appetite  teaser  of  Kneipp  oat
crackers  with  honey.  This  is  reinforced  with
a  little  nut-prana,  an  easily  digestible  nut
preparation,  with  a  following  of  figs,  dates
and  bananas.  Grape  juice  is  allowed  at  this
meal.  As  to  the  delightful  lunch  and  supper
we  must  refer  the  reader  to the  booklet itself.

Having  created  an  appetite  for  upbuilding
foods,  the  author  has  a  word  to  say  about  the
excretion  of  waste  products  by  means  of  a
local  steam  bath;  a  true  "helper  in  distress."
Price, 25 cents.


Winds and Gases, Conditions of
Wealiness.

This  valuable  booklet  is  devoted  to  a  con-
sideration of  one  of  those  poisonous  and
paralyzing  agents  that  tend  to  destroy  one's
energy  and  effectiveness  in  life,  viz.,  flatu-
lence, or  gas,  evolved  from  the  decomposition
of  food  in  the  intestinal  tract.  Most  people
eat  too  much,  regardless  of  the  fact  that
every  bit  of  food  too  much  will  create  putri-
factive  gases  whose  pressure  and  movements
will  cause  swellings,  will  crowd  organs  from
their  normal  position,  will  stagnate  the  blood,
interfere  with  the  activity  of  the  brain,
weaken  the  will,  and  change  the  entire
character.  Meals,  or  foods  that  produce  these
noxious  gases,  should  be  eliminated  from  one's
dietary  and  it  is  the  mission  of  this  booklet
to  tell  what  foods  should  be  eaten  and  what
foods  should  be  let  alone,  to  avoid  the  dis-
asters that  come  from  the  evolution  of  foul
gases  within  the  body.  The  mere  catalogue
of  these  serious  troubles,  which  is  given  in
the  booklet,  is  a  tremendous  argument  in  favor
of  a non-flatulent diet. Price, 25 cents.


The  Conscious  Diet  as  a  Foundation
for Health.

The  object  of  this  booklet  is  to  prove  that
diet  is  for  man  what  soil  is  for  the  plant.  The
reason  why  men  do  not  develop  all  of  the
wonderful  talents  that  lie  dormant  within
them  is  because  the  body  is  too  much  con-
taminated with  auto-intoxication,  with  the
self-poisons  that  have  taken  possession  of  the
organism..  Food,  it  is  shov/n,  is  not  merely  a
a.uestion  of  what  kind  should  be  eaten,  but
is  a  study  of  what  kind  of  a  stomach  it  is  go-
ing into.  In  early  ages,  men  fought  and
exercised  themselves  so  much  that  rank  foods
and  strong  digestion  were  necessary  to  keep
the  muscles  in  condition.  Nowadays  the
brain  workers,  so  numerous,  require  finely-
selected,  finely  mattered  foods  such  as  fruits,
nuts  and  tender  salads,  owing  to  the  lesser
vigor  of  their  digestion.  The  booklet  gives
the  rationale  of  this  difi'erence  of  menu  and
shows  how  through  diet,  breathing  and  train-
ing of  thought  towards  health  and  wealth,
happiness will result. Price, 25 cents.


The  Raw  Food  Table.

"Eat  cold  and  you  grow  old,  eat  raw  and
you  grow  bold."  Raw  food  has  this  superior
merit  that  it  contains  both  vitamines  or  elec-
tric energy,  and  the  natural  salts  that  supply
necessary  mineral  elements  and  preserve  the
alkalinity  of  the  blood.  Raw  food  invigorates
the  blood-stream,  and  thus  rejuvenates  both
body  and  mind.  The  nutriment  is  better  than
meat,  eggs  or  milk  fare,  all  of  which  overload
the  enervated  man  with  decomposing  poisons.
The  booklet  gives  a  list  of  the  most  palatable
raw  foods,  such  as  unfired  bread,  cauliflower,
kohlrabi,  early  peas,  cucumbers,  radishes,
turnips,  lettuce,  etc.,  and  commends  specific
dishes  carefully  assembled,  and  fairly  revels
in  fruits,  oranges,  bananas,  apples,  raisins;
pine-apples,  melons,  pears,  figs,  strawberries,
etc.,  and  in  nuts,  almonds,  walnuts,  pine-nuts,
hazelnuts,  Brazil  nuts,  peanuts,  etc.  Price,
25 cents.


Dr.  B.  Lust,  the  author  of  these  pamphlets,  takes  occasion  in  this  last  of
the  series,  to  make  mention  of  some  specific  combinations  of  natural  foods  that
are  used  in  his  Natural  Food  Emporium,  New  York  City,  and  Butler,  N.  J.,
such  as  oat  biscuits  and  apple  sauce,  rice  boiled  with  apples,  apple  sauce  and
raisins  mixed  with  ground  almonds,  or  peanuts,  oat  biscuits  and  honey,  green
rye  flakes,  mixed  with  ground  peanuts,  raw  cauliflowers  and  green  peas,  little
red  turnips,  tomatoes,  radishes  and  parsley,  with  cream,  marmalade  jam,  or
curdled  milk.

Taken  all  together  these  valuable  booklets  are  a  means  of  developing  indi-
viduality, strength  of  character,  will  power,  and  abundant  health.  They  are
powerful  incentives  to  self-consciousness  and  self-healing  in  accordance  -with
the  laws  of  hygiene  and  the  science  of  mind.  They  show  why,  even  in  spite  of
healthful  treatments  and  remedies,  people  remain  ill,  and  become  no  nearer  be-
ing lords  of  themselves,  by  refusing  to  think  optimistic  thoughts.  Their  dom-
inant message  is  the  invincibility  of  correct  thinking,  joined  hand  in  hand  with
correct  bodily  treatment,  for  the abolition  of  all  mortal  ills.


Price,  in  paper,  25  cents  each;  the  whole  combination  set  of  10  for  $2.00,  postpaid


THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


Naturopathic  Book  (Catalog


1217


NATURAL  HEALING  AND  NATURAL  LIFE
::  BOOKS  AND  PERIODICALS  ::


THE  ATTENTION  OF  THE  READER  is  specially  directed  to  this  carefully
selected  List  of  Naturopathic  Literature.  These  books  are  of  the  most
transcendant  importance  to  the  human  race.  They  deal,  one  and  all,  with
varying  aspects  of  the  most  vital  subject  on  earth,  viz.,  Life  itself.  Some  of  the
books  have  had  millions  of  copies  sold,  and  it  is  quite  within  the  truth  to  say  that
on  an  average  every  book  here  listed  is  intrinsically  worth  a  hundred  dollars,
although  the  price  ranges  from  a  few  cents  to  ten  dollars.  What  is  more  valuable
to  a  man  than  health?  And  the  health  that  is  sought  for  is  obtained  by  the  most
congenial  means — not  by  drugs  that  only  stifle  symptoms,  but  by  means  of  the
forces  of  Nature  that  seek  out  and  remove  the  cause  of  disease.  The  Natural  School
of  Medicine  is  making  immense  strides,  and  over  35,000,000  people  in  the  United
States,  with  30,000  practitioners,  are  devoted  to  the  cause.  The  Drugging  Prac-
titioners would  fain  try  to  suppress  this  young  giant  of  Naturopathy  that  is
destroying  their  prestige  and  throwing  allopathy  on  the  scrap  heap,  but  of  no  avail.
The  people  must  and  will  have  health,  and,  finding  they  cannot  receive  it  at  the
hands  of  the  allopaths,  turn  gladly  to  the  Naturopaths  who  alone  possess  the
Fountain  of  Youth.  To  read  and  ponder  over  this  whole  list  of  books  devoted  to
Natural  Healing  is  the  duty  of  every  Naturopath,  and  every  lover  of  life.  They
comprise  the  true  philosophy  of  health. This  knowledge  is  health,  wealth  and  power.

BENEDICT  LUST,  N.D.,  D.O.,  D.C.,  M.D.


A

Abrams,  Dr.  Albert.  —  SPONDY-
LOTHERAPY:  A  Synoptic  Illus-
trated Chart !«5.<K)

Abrams,  Dr.  Albert.— DIAGNOS-
TIC  THERAPEUTICS. ..$5.00

ADVANCE  THOUGHT.  Private
Lessons  in  Cultivating  Sex  Force.
$1.50

Alcott,  Dr.  W.  Q.  and  Sizer,  N. —
TEA  AND COFFEE .$0.25

Aldrich.  Auretta  R.— LIFE  AND
HOW  TO LIVE  IT $1.10

Allen,  Abel  Leighton.— THE  MES-
SAGE OF  NEW  THOUGHT.
$1.25

Allen.  James.  —  AS  A  MAN
THINKETH $0..'>0

Allinson,  Dr.  T.  R.  —  RHEUMA-
TISM :  ITS  CAUSE  AND
CURE .$0.25

Alsaker,  Dr.  R.  L.  —  HEALTH
AND  EFFICIENCY .$2.00

Alvidas  et  al.  —  SCIENCE  AND
KEY  OF  LIFE $':..50

AMERICAN  COLLEGE  OF  ME-
CHANO  -  THERAPY.  Eight
Charts  of  Anatomy  and  Physi-
ology. Each $5.00

Whole Set .$:{0.0<»

AMERICAN  KITCHEN  MAGA-
ZINE. Household. fM)...$1.00

AMERICAN  MOTHER.  House-
hold and  Family  Magazine.  (M)
$1.00

AMERICAN  PHYSICAL  EDU-
CATION  REVIEW. (0)..$1.50

Am  Rhyn,  Dr.  Otto  Henne.  —
MYSTERIA $1.50

Anderson.  E.  F.  —  HEALTH
FOODS  AND  HOW  TO  PRE-
PARE THEM $1.25

Anderson,  H.  T.  —  ARTISTIC
WORK.  Apparatus,  Drills  and
Music $0.75

Anderson,  John  K.  —  HOW  TO
HEAL  BY  NATURE'S  PO-
TENT  METHODS SIO.OO

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— ANCIENT
MAGIC,  Etc $2.00


Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— HOW  TO
WIN,  OR,  SURE  SECRETS
OF  SUCCESS $2.20

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— NATURAL
WAY IN DIET $l..'i5

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— NATURE'S
SECRETS  FOR  WOMEN.  $0.75

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— SUGGES-
TION THE  SECRET  OF  SUC-
CESS  $2.00

Anderson,  Prof.  L.  H.— OCCULT
FORCES $0..'J5

Anderson,  W.  G.— LIGHT  GYM-
NASTICS  $1.60

Andrews,  Alfred.— WHAT  SHALL
WE EAT? $1.10

Andrews,  Henry — MASSAGE  AND
TRAINING $0.50

Angel.  Dr.  Emma  F— WHAT  A
YOUNG  WIFE  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

ANNALS  OF  HYGIENE.  Hy
Pfiene Magazine (M) $2.00

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.— HOW  TO
READ  HUMAN  NATURE:
ITS  INNER  STATES  AND
OUTER FORMS $1.20

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.  —  MEMORY:
HOW  TO  DEVELOP  AND
TRAIN $1.20

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.— MIND  AND
BODY,  MENTAL  STATES
AND  PHYSICAL  CONDI-
TIONS  $1.20

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.  —  NEW
THOUGHT;  ITS  HISTORY
AND PRINCIPLES $0.30

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.  —  SUGGES-
TION AND  AUTO-SUGGES-
TION  $1.10

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.— THE  MAS-
TERY OF BEING $1.25

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.— THE  PSY-
CHOLOGY OF  SALESMAN-
SHIP  S1.20

Atkinson,  Wm.  W.— YOUR  MIND
AND HOW  TO USE IT.  $1.20

Austin.  B.  F— RATIONAL  MEM-
ORY  TRAINING SI  10

Azoth.  —  Psychic  Research  and
Occult  Magazine. (M) ....$:{.00


B

BABYHOOD.  Hygiene  of  Infants
Magazine. (M) .$2.00

Bach,  Dr.  Hugo.  —  ULTRA
VIOLET  LIGHT  BY  MEANS
OF  THE  ALPINE  SUN
LAMP $1.20

Backus,  William  Vernon. — TALO-
SOPHY,  OR,  THE  ART  OF
MAKING  HAPPINESS  EPI-
DEMIC  $1.10

Bailey,  Dr.  E.  H.  S.— SOURCE.
CHEMISTRY  AND  USE  OF
FOOD PRODUCTS $1.75

Balbernie,  Dr.  J —PHILOSOPHY
OF  WATER  CURE $0  .•?•)

Baldwin,  Eleanor.  —  MONEY
TALKS. In tour parts. $0.3©

Ballantyne,  Dr.  J.  W.  —  EXPEC-
TANT MOTHERHOOD. $1.60

Baumgarten,  Dr.  A. — INSOMNIA.
(Sleeplessness) $0.15

Beard,  G.  M.  —  SEXUAL  NEU-
RASTHENIA. (Nervous  Exhaus-
tion) $2.75

Beard,  S.  H.— GUIDE  BOOK  TO
NATURE,  HYGIENE  AND
DIET $1,20

Bechamp. Prof. Antoine. — THE
BLOOD AND ITS THIRD
ANATOMICAL ELEMENT.
$3.00

Behnke.  Mrs.  Emil.— THE  SPEAK-
ING  VOICE $0.S5

Bennett,  Sanford.  —  OLD  AGE;
ITS  CAUSE  AND  PREVEN-
TION  $2.00

Bernheim. —  SUGGESTIVE  THE-
RAPEUTICS  $1.50

Bevan,  Dr.  J.  A.— THE  TRUTH
ABOUT  THE  MEDICAL  PRO-
FESSION  $1.00

Biddle.  L.  M.— THE  NEW  DOC-
TOR; OR,  HEALTH  AND
HAPPINESS $1.50

Bilz.  Dr.  F.  E.— NATURAL  ME-
THOD OF  HEALING.  Two
Volumes $10.00


1218


ydtiirojxitluc  Hook  (Aitaloq


Bilz,  Dr.  F.  E.— FOREIGN  LAN-
GUAGE EDITIONS. .  .  .$I0.0(»

Bishop.  E.  M.— AMERICAN  DEL-
SARTE  CULTURE $1.0<»

Blavatsky.  Madame  H.  P.— KEY
TO THEOSOPHY $1.50

Blavatsky.  Madame  H.  P.— VOICE
OF  THE  SILENCE $0.75

Boehme.  Kate  A.  —  REALIZA-
TION MADE EASY $1.30

Boehme.  Kate  A.  —  SEVEN  ES-
SAYS ON  HAPPINESS... $1.10

Bolton, Frances  S.— BABY..  .$0.60

Bolton.  Florence.  —  EXERCISES
FOR WOMEN $1.10

BOSTON  COOKING  SCHOOL
MAGAZINE.  (Household)  (M)
$1.00

Bowditch.  Mrs.— NEW  VEGETA-
RIAN DISHES $0.B0

Bradbury,  Harriet  B.— THE  NEW
PHILOSOPHY  OF  HEALTH.
$0.75

Bradford.  Edgar  G.— BASIC  LAW
OF CURE $0.10

Bradshaw,  Wm.  R.  —  FUTURE
MEDICINE $0.20

Brann's ICONOCLAST.  Free

Thought  Magazine. (  M  ) .  .  .$t.00

Brown.  Barnetta.  —  SUNSHINE
BOOKS (Set  of  Six) $1.50

Browne.  Dr.  L.— SCIENCE  AND
SINGING $0.50

Browne.  Phyllis.  —  A  YEAR'S
COOKERY .$0.60

Browne,  Phyllis.  —  DAINTY
BREAKFASTS S0.60

Brubaker.  Dr.  Albert  P.— HUMAN
PHYSIOLOGY  AND  PHYSIO-
LOGIC APPARATUS. ....$3.25

Brubaker,  Dr.  Albert  P.  —  QUIZ-
COMPEND  OF  HUMAN  PHY-
SIOLOGY $1.^5

Bryce,  Dr.  Alexander.  —  THE
LAWS  OF  LIFE  AND
HEALTH $1.10

Buchanan.  Dr.  J.  R.  —  THERA-
PEUTIC SARC0GNOMY.$.>.«)0

Buchanan,  Uriel.— ART  OF  AT-
TAINMENT  $0.35

Buchanan.  Uriel.— IDEALS  AND
CONDUCT $0.60

Buchanan,  Uriel.  —  SPIRITUAL
LIFE $0.75

Buchanan,  Uriel.— TRUTH  AND
DESTINY .$0.2.5

Bunker,  Dr.  M.  N.  —  PHYSICAL
TRAINING FOR BOYS. $1.10

Bunker,  Dr.  M.  N.— TRAINING
OF  MEMORY.  (Vol.  191.5.  Nat-
uropath ) $2.00

Bunker.  Dr.  M.  N.— YOUR  MEM-
ORY : ITS FUNCTIONS.  $0..->0

Burgess.  Dr.  W.  H.— CHRONIC
DISEASE.  Tlie  Natural  Method
of  Diagnosis  and  Treatment. .$1  60

Burgess.  Dr.  W.  H  — THE  NEW
FIELD.  Part  I.  Natural  Diagno-
sis. Part  II.  Congenial  Medica-
tion and  Therapeutics.  Part  III.
Diseases  of  Women  and  Children.
SI. 10

Dr.  Burke's  HEALTH  MAGA-
ZINE. Hygiene. (M) $1.50


Burns.  Tommy.  —  SCIENTIFIC
BOXING  AND  SELF-DE-
FENSE  $0..'iO

Burrell,  Joseph  Dunn. — CHRIS-
TIAN SCIENCE,  A  NEW  AP-
PRAISAL  $1.60

Burrows.  Tom.  —  THE  TEXT-
BOOK OF  CLUB  SWINGING
O.-'iO

FRED  BURRY'S  JOURNAL
New  Thought. (M) $I.OO

Butler.  H.  E.— SOLAR  BIOLO-
GY  $.5.00

Butterman,  Dr.  W.  F.  —  THE
CAUSE  OF  MOST  OF  OUR
AILMENTS $l.l(t

Button.  Dr.  C.  A.— RUDIMENTS
OF  REFRACTION  (Optonie
try) $1.20


Cady.  H.  E.— ONENESS  WITH
GOD $0.30

Campbell.  Dortch.  —  BUILDING
BRAIN BY DIET $0.20

Campbell,  Dortch.  —  ETIQUETTE
OF GOOD SOCIETY. ...$0..50

Carey.  Dr.  G.  W.— THE  BIO-
CHEMIC  SYSTEM  OF  HEAL-
ING  $2.50

Carlson, Anton Julius. — THE
CONTROL OF HUNGER IN
HEALTH AND DISEASE.
$2.00

Carque.  Otto.— DIET  IN  RELA-
TION TO  HEALTH  AND
EFFICIENCY $0.20

Carque,  Otto.  —  FOUNDATION
OF ALL REFORM $0.50

Carque.  Otto.— DIET  IN  RELA-
TION TO  HEALTH  AND  EF-
FICIENCY  $0.20

Carque.  Otto.— THE  FOLLY  OF
MEAT EATING .$0.1<»

Carque, Otto.  —  THE FOUNDA-
TION OF ALL REFORM.
$0.50

Carrington,  Hereward.  —  THE
NATURAL  FOOD  OF  MAN.
.$2.55

Carver.  Dr.  Willard.— APPLIED
PSYCHOLOGY $1.60

Carver,  Dr.  Willard.— AT  THE
BAR $0.25

Carver,  Dr.  Willard.— CARVER'S
CHIROPRACTIC  ANALYSIS.
$6.50

Carver,  Dr.  Willard.— R  O  U  G  H
NUGGETS $2.25

Carver.  Dr.  Willard.— THE  RED
BOOK $0.10

Cassell's  COOKERY  FOR  COM-
MON AILMENTS $0.60

Cassell's  DICTIONARY  OF
COOKERY $2.50

Cassell's FAMILY DOCTOR.
$3.r;o

Cassell's  HEALTH  AND  RIGHT
BREATHING .$0  60

Cassell's  HEALTH  CULTURE
FOR BUSY MEN $0  60

Cassell's  HEALTH  FOR  THE
YOUNG $0.60

Cassell's  HEALTH HABITS  AND
HOW TO TRAIN THEM.
$0.60

Cassell's  HEALTHY  BRAIN
AND HEALTHY BODY. $0.60

Cassell's  LADIES'  PHYSICIAN.
SI. 2.5

Cassell's  POPULAR  COOKERY.
-^O  .S5

Cassell's  SHILLING  COOKERY.
S0.45

Cassell's  VEGETARIAN  COOK-
ERY  $0.60


Cavaness,  J.  M.  —  RHYTHMIC
STUDIES  OF  THE  WORD.  2
vols, eacli $1.25

Chambers,  Rev.  Arthur. — OUR-
SELF  AFTER DEATH. .  .$1.10

Chavasse.  Pye  Henry. — ADVICE
TO A WIFE $1.10

Chavasse,  Pye  Henry.— ADVICE
TO A MOTHER $1.10

Checkley.  Edwin.— A  NATURAL
METHOD  OF  PHYSICAL
TRAINING $1.00

Cheetham,  A.  —  MEMORY  AND
ITS CULTIVATION $0.25

Cheiro.— GUIDE  TO  THE  HAND.
.$0.70

Chesser, Elizabeth Sloan. —

WOMAN. MARRIAGE AND
MOTHERHOOD $1.60

Chesser,  Elizabeth  Sloan. — FROM
GIRLHOOD  TO  WOMAN-
HOOD  $1.10

Christian.  —  CHRISTIAN  SCI-
ENCE. .Magazine (M  1 ...$1.««»

Christian,  Eugene.  —  HOW  TO
LIVE 100 YEARS $1.0O

Christian.  Eugene.  —  CYCLOPE-
DIA OF DIETETICS. 5 vols.

$io.oo

Christian.  Eugene.  —  250  MEAT-
LESS MENUS  AND  RECIPES.
$i.oo

Christian,  Eugene. — EAT  AND  BE
WELL $1.00

Christian,  Eugene.— LITTLE  LES-
SONS IN  SCIENTIFIC  EAT-
ING  $3.00

Churchill,  Lydia.  —  THE  MAGIC
SEVEN $1.00

Ciccolina,  Sophia,  M.A.  —  DEEP
BREATHING .$0.70

Clauston,  Dr.  T.  —  BEFORE  I
WED;  OR,  YOUNG  MEN
AND MARRIAGE $1.0O

Close.  Dr.  G.  W.— PHRENOPA-
THY:  OR,  RATIONAL  MIND
CURE $1.10

Cohn.  Dr.  Toby.  —  ELECTRO-
DIAGNOSIS  AND  ELECTRO-
THERAPEUTICS  $2.10

Collins,  Dr.  F.  W.— INFANTILE
PARALYSIS:  CAUSE  AND
CURE $0.25

Colville.  W.  J.  —  HISTORY  OF
THEOSOPHY $1.00

Colville.  W.  T  — LIFE  AND  POW-
ER  FROM V'ITHT^' $1.O0

Colville.  W.  J.  —  LIGHT  AND
COLOR $1.0O

Colville.  W.  J.— MENTAL  THE-
RAPEUTICS  $0.50

Colville.  W.  J.— OUR  PLACE  IN
THE  UNIVERSAL  ZODIAC.
$0.50

Colville.  W.  J.— SPIRITUAL  SCI-
ENCE OF HEALING. ...$1.25

Colville,  W.  J.— SPIRITUAL  SCI-
ENCE OF  HEALTH  AND
HEALING $1.25

Colville,  W.  J.  —  SPIRITUAL
THERAPEUTirs $1  «»0

Colville. W. J.— TEXTROOK OF
MENTAL THERAPEUTICS.
$0.5O

Combe,  Dr.  Andrew.  —  MANAGE-
MENT OF  INFANCY. .  . $1.10

Conger.  Dr.  M.  E.  and  Rosamond
C  — THE  EDUCATOR.  The
Cause  and  Cvire  of  all  Diseases.
$3.0O

Conger,  Dr.  M.  E.  and  Rosamond
C— NATURAL  CURE:  By  Phy-
sical  and Mental Methods. $1..50

Conrad,  Dr.  C.  F.— COITION.  (Tn
English or German) S1.00

Conrad.  Dr.  C.  F.  —  M  U  T  E
ISLAND S1.00

Conrad.  Dr.  C.  F.— A  SOCIAL
DANGER $0.75

Conrad,  Dr.  C.  F.— TWELVE
TOED BABY MYSTERY.  $0.50


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


1219


The  Rediscovery  of  the  Lost  Fountain


of  Health  and  Happiness


FOR


Nervous  Afflictions  and  Nerve-Exhaustion
Including  Mental  Ills  and  Sexual  Diseases

BY  DR.  EL  LERNANTO,  ESTERNO,  FLORIDA
PRICE,  $1.00  CLOTH,  $1.50


The  world  is  overrun  with  medical  books
already  printed,  with  new  and  varied  writ-
ings on  the  cause  and  cure  of  disease  and
the  preservation  of  health,  daily  being
added  thereto.  The  extent  and  number  of
these  books  would  almost  lead  us  to  con-
clude that  the  reservoir  of  human  thought
on  this  subject  was  well  nigh  exhausted.
But  still  they  come.  Great  hospitals,  col-
leges, and  medical  and  surgical  institutes
are  constantly  being  established  for  study
and  research,  for  clinical  practice  and  ob-
servation, and  also  for  cruel  vivisection  and
experimentation  upon  animals,  to  discover
if  possible  the  secret  cause  of  disease  and
senile  decay,  together  with  their  preven-
tion and  cure.

Then  we  have  school  after  school  of  all
kinds  of  practitioners  and  fads  of  healing,
vieing  and  fighting  with  each  other  for
first  place  in  public  favor,  followed  by  thou-
sands of  patent  medicines, — cure-alls  for
whatsoever  ails  you.  And  still  the  human
family  continues  to  be  sick,  to  suffer  and
die  with  little,  if  any,  abatement  other  than
temporary  relief  or  amelioration  of  pain.
With  all  the  supposed  superior  enlighten-
ment of  this  age,  and  the  fact  that  the
gospel  (as  promised)  is  being  preached  to
all  nations,  there  is  so  far  no  substantial
realization  of  that  promise  in  Mark  xvi  :  18.
"They  shall  take  up  serpents;  and  if  they
drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not  hurt
them;  they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick  and
thev  shall  recover."

In  view  of  this  failure  to  realize  these
blessed  conditions,  how  shall  we  conclude
otherwise  than  that  the  true  gospel  is  not
being  preached,  nor  the  true  method  of
cure  and  prevention  of  disease  being  prac-
ticed or  taught?  As  we  observe  the
daily  increase  of  the  lame,  the  halt,  and
the  blind,  with  innumerable  sick,  and  the
carting  away  of  the  untimely  dead,  it  is
enough  to  turn  the  heart  to  despair,  did
we  not  know  that  all  of  this  tumult  of
doctrine  and  doctors'  prescriptions  is  but
the  void  and  chaotic  condition  presaging
the  making  of  all  things  new;  that  is,  the
establishing  of  true  life  and  doctrine,  in-
volving the  true  method  of  healing  and
preventing  of  diseases,  the  abiding  of  faith
in the coming of which is now being re-


warded in  the  presentation  to  the  public
of  a  treatise  by  Dr.  El  Lernanto  (Dr.  J.
Augustus  Weimar),  entitled  "Rediscovery
of  the  Lost  Fountain  of  Health  and  Happi-
ness," published  by  Benedict  Lust,  Butler,
New  Jersey.

The  scientific  principles  of  overcoming
disease  and  of  finally  attaining  to  the  in-
corruptibe  flesh,  have  long  been  taught  in
the  Guiding  Star  publications,  as  a  distinct
and  universal  science;  but  this  is  the  first
practical  attempt  to  collate  the  curative
phases  into  succint  form,  specially  applic-
able to  combatting  affliction.  This  re-
duces them  to  a  system  of  mental  thera-
peutics, which  cuts  at  once  the  Gordian
knot  of  all  the  intricacies  that  have  so
long  puzzled  medical  scientists,  going
straight  to  the  crux, — the  direct  and  in-
direct cause  of  all  the  ailments  the  human
flesh  is  heir  to.

This  book  shows  that  of  which  the  race
is  substantially  ignorant;  i.  e.,  that  the
propagative  sperm  and  germ  of  the  male
and  female  are  the  vital  essences  of  life,
and  that  upon  the  conservation  of  waste
of  this  energy  depends  the  health  or  ill
health  of  the  vidual  or  of  the  race.  Also
that  this  potency  has  a  twofold  use;  first,
in  the  propagation  and  multiplication  of
the  species;  and  second,  that  the  husband-
ing of  it  to  the  extent  of  purifying  the
thought  and  desire  from  sensual  indul-
gence, provides  food  and  stimulus  to  men-
tal as  well  as  physical  effort  and  capacity.
It  strengthens  the  man  or  woman  to  re-
sist and  overcome  temptations,  and  moral
and  physical  weakness  and  ailments  as
well.  And  it  also  enables  one,  through
added  mental  potency,  to  assit  others  in
doing  likewise.

Over  and  beyond  all  this,  we  are  shown
that  it  is  only  by  the  absolute  conservation
of  sex  energy,  and  the  consequent  purifica-
tion of  sex  desire,  that  we  may  become  the
children  of  the  resurrection,  who  neither
marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage,  but  are
as  the  angels  in  heaven.  (See  Luke  xx  :
35,  86.)

This  most  admirable  treatise  does  not
cease,  as  do  most  treatises  upon  this  sub-
ject, by  admonishing  us  as  to  what  we
should  do;  but  recognizing  that  sex  desire


1220


Universal  IVatiiropatliic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


is  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  human  pas-
sions, and  that  direct  resistance  is  useless
and  destructive,  we  arc  instructed  to  com-
bat it  by  substituting  higher  and  more
elevating  thoughts;  by  aspirations  for
better  and  nobler  thoughts;  by  the  itera-
tion and  reiteration  of  ennobling  and  puri-
fying sentiments,  to  he  end  that  evil
thought  and  desire  will  find  no  room  nor
congenial  abiding  place  in  our  mental
household.

In  reality,  we  arc  thoroughly  admon-
ished and  inspired  to  continually  dwell  in
the  upper  apartments  of  our  mental  habi-
tation, avoiding  all  mental  excursions  into
the  basement,  which  is  sure  to  be  overrun
and  polluted  with  vermin  and  the  noxious
contagion  of  mortal  life.  Or,  if  need  be
to  flee  to  the  house  top  of  intellectual  and
moral  aspirations,  for  the  time  is  at  hand
to  heed  the  Biblical  admonition  to  "Let
him  which  is  on  the  house  top  not  come
down  to  take  anything  out  of  the  house;"
for  the  very  good  reason,  we  doubt  not,
that  the  things  of  the  usually  inhabited  re-
gion of  the  mind  have,  by  long  association,
become  so  contaminated  with  evil  and
worldly  thought  and  desire  in  the  memory,
that  they  cannot  be  other  than  auto-sug-
gestive, and  dangerously  seductive  to  him
who  would  save  his  soul  alive.


Sick  or  well,  old  or  young,  you  need  this
book.  No  other  writing  will  lead  you  so
truly  to  the  scientific  cause  and  cure  of  dis-
ease, and  so  insure  to  you  a  joyous  life
and  happy  old  age.  Especially  will  it
benefit  the  youth  just  forming  the  habits
of  life,  pointing  out  to  them  the  danger
of  idle  and  unrestrained  indulgence  in
licentious  thought,  together  with  the  most
effective  means  of  guarding  against  and
overcoming,  and  placing  before  them  in  a
clear  and  convincing  manner,  the  rewards
of  health,  happiness,  and  great  mental
powers  to  be  gained  by  careful  restraint.
Not  a  merely  superficial  and  outward  re-
straint, but  a  restraint  that  goes  to  the
root  of  the  evil  in  the  thought  and  th(
affections.

It  teaches  that  thought  and  desire  are
substance,  and  that  every  pulsation  of  the
intellect  is  building  character  for  you, —
mentally,  morally,  and  physically,  in  direct
accord  with  the  nature  of  the  thought
coined  therein.

Read  it;  heed  it,  and  it  will  become  to
you  a  source  of  strength,  welling  up  into
a  joyous  spirit  of  mental  and  physical
elasticity,  a  constant  blessing  to  yourself
and  to  all  with  whom  you  are  in  associa-
tion. Paper  cover,  $1;  cloth,  $150,  post-
paid.


Address  All  Orders  to

BENEDICT  LUST,  N,  D.,  "YUNGBORN,"  BUTLER,  N.  J.


*  AMERICAN  SCHOOL  I


OF


NATUROPATHY


Qualifies  you  as  Doctor  in  all  branches
of  drugless  healing.  Hydropathy,  Osteo-
pathy, Chiropractic,  Neuropathy,  Diet,
Mental  Science,  etc.  Established  1896
by  Dr.  B.  Lust.  Foremost  Institution
of  Liberal,  Rational  and  Natural  Heal-
ing in  the  U.  S.  Send  25  cents  for
Prospectus and Inquiry Blank. Address,

DR.  BENEDICT  LUST,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


A Wall

PHART IRIDIAGNOSIS

V^in/AIVl DIAGNO.SIS FROM THE EYE

A  ready  reference  Chart,  condensing  the  whole
subject  of  Iridiagnosis  into  the  most  convenient
form.  Complete  drawings  and  text.  Printed  on
durable paper with metal binding. Introductory

Price $1.50

Separate Keys to Iridiagnosis 25

NATUROPATHIC CENTER

no  E.  41st  St., New  York, N. Y.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  POVERTY

By Helen Wilmans
The most popular book in the range of Mental
Science literature. It brings freedom to the mini!,
and through the  mind to  the  body.

This  book  is  in  its  seventieth  edition.  The  de-
mand has  been  so  great  that  now  we  have  issued  a
cheap  edition  that  we  sell  at  $1.00  a  copy  for  a
short time only.

Address  orders  to  :

WILMANS BOOK HOUSE

Box 74, Tangerine, Fla.


Herald^Health

A  monthly  magazine  devoted  to  Rational
Living  and  Natural  Healing.  It  stands
for  clean  living,  common  sense  in  diet,  and
the  proper  application  of  all  modern
systems  of  health  building  to  the  exclusion
of  dangerous  Drugs  and  Non-Accidental
Surgery.  Has  been  fighting  for  medical
freedom  since  the  day  of  its  first  issue,
over twenty-five years ago.

Subscriptions  to  all  parts  of  the  world
$2.00  per  year,  single  copies  20  cents  each.
Back  volumes,  from  1900  up  to  now,  per
volume, $2.00 postpaid.


BENEDICT  LUST


BUTLER,  N.  J.


Vnlvernal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyern'  Guide  •  1221


THE  REDISCOVERY  OF  THE  LOST  FOUNTAIN
OF  HEALTH  AND  HAPPINESS

FOR  NERVOUS  AFFLICTIONS  AND  NERVE  EXHAUSTION,

INCLUDING  MENTAL  ILLS  AND  SEXUAL  DISEASES

by  DR.  EL  LERNANTO,  esterno,  Florida


OUR  PREMISE:


As  every  organ  and  function  of  the  brain  {the  organ  of  the  mind,  or  intellect  and  will)
has  its  corresponding  organ  and  function  in  the  body;  consequently,  the  influence  of
a  physician's  mind,  as  well  as  that  of  the  patient's,  zvill  act  as  a  curative  factor  in  men-
tal {nervous)  and  sexual  diseases;  specifically,  if  the  ABC  method,  as  herein  outlined

Even  in  physical  diseases,  the  same  influence,  in  conjunction  with  the  material  means,
will  hasten  the  process  of  healing,  and  will  establish  a  state  of  health  and  happiness,
never before experienced.


CONTENTS

PAGES

Introductory Chapter

What  We  Saw,  Heard  and  Experienced , . . . 5-10

Chapter  A

The  Real  Source  of  Normal  Physiological  Health

Ignorance  of  This  Source,  Prudery  and  Secrecy  of  the  Subject,  the  Veritable
Hades  and  Gehenna  of  Mortal  Humanity — The  Bane  of  the  Twentieth  Century
and  Despair  of  the  Doctors — Medical  and  Drugless  Schools — Necessity  of  Dif-
ferentiating between  Physical  and  Mental  Diseases — A  List  of  Abnormal  Mental
Outgrowths — Root  and  Cause  of  Disease — Neurasthenia  and  Its  Symptoms  De-
in  Females — Strictly  Male  Neurasthenia — Alterable  Neurasthenia  According  to
Constitution — Dr.  English's  Opinion  Concerning  "Spinal  Irritation,"  or  Spinal
Cord  Affliction — Inseparable  Associated  Neurasthenia — Baneful  as  This  List  of
Neurasthenic  Symptoms  Is,  Yet  Do  Not  Despair — Man's  Guiding  Star  (Poem) . 11-16

Chapter  B

How  Life  and  Health  Are  Generated

Equilibrium  of  Mind  and  Body  the  Greatest  Factor  of  Life  and  Consequent  En-
joyment of  Health — -A  Comparison — Materialism,  Spiritualism  or  Mentalism —
The  Process  of  Mastication — The  Process  of  Digestion  (Churning  and  Dissolv-
ing)— The  Process  of  Assimilation  (Conveying  and  Absorbing) — The  Juice-Sub-
stance of  Food — The  Alchemical  Laboratory  and  Conservatorj%  \\'here  the  Real
Source  of  Mirthful  Health  and  Joyful  Life  Is  Generated — The  Glandula  Vitae  or
Gland  of  Life,  the  Real  Source  of  Pure  Blood  IMaking — -The  Conarium  or  Pineal
Gland,  the  Seat  of  Sensual  Determination — Change  of  the  Arterial  and  Venus  Cir-
culation— The  Office  of  the  Heart,  Lungs  and  Capillaries — Mental  Equilibrium
the  Greatest  Factor  for  Good  Blood-Making,  and  Consequent  Enjoj'^ment  of  Health
— The  Office  of  the  Myriads  of  Brain-Cells — The  United  Process  of  Conarium
and  Brain-Cells,  and  Origin  of  Humo-Vito-Electro-Magnetism — Ignorance  Con-
cerning the  Secret  Origin  and  Reservoir  of  Sperm  and  Germ — How  the  Brain  Is
Set  in  Motion  at  Birth— The  Supply  of  Light  (Pneuma  or  Electricity)  and  Heat
(Psyche  or  Magnetism)  to  the  Body  and  Brain — The  Process  of  Alchemical  Com-
bustion Is  the  Law  of  Reciprocal  Action  and  Relation  of  the  Inner  and  Outer  Man
— How  Mental  Healing  Is  Made  Possible,  and  an  Absolute  Fact — How  Life  Is
Generated — How  Uplifting  and  Beautiful  Is  Truth! — The  Importance  of  Masti-
cating Food  Thoroughly,  and  the  Equal  Importance  of  Being  Moderate  in  Eating
and Drinking — Acute Dyspepsia or Indigestion — Chronic Dyspepsia — "What


1222  Universal  Naturopnthic Directorr and Buyers' Guide


i)hall  We  Eat  and  Drink?"  of  Less  Importance,  and  Why — Mental  Equilibrium
More  Imperative  Than  the  Kind  of  Food — The  Intellect  Should  Be  First  and
Last  the  Director,  Guide  and  Protector  of  the  Body — The  Seed,  the  Final  Strength
of  Man,  Animal  and  Vegetable — -The  Ultimate  Potential  Energy  of  Man's  Being
Is  the  Seed  of  Man — The  Strongest  and  Deepest  Passion  in  Man— Reading  the
Thoughts  of  Men— The  Sperm  of  Male  and  Germ  of  Female  the  Veritable  Essence
of  Mirthful  Health  and  Joyful  Mortal  Life — One  of  the  Most  Weighty  Matters
of  the  Law  of  Life — The  Sex-Essence  the  Greatest  Power  for  Good  or  Evil  in
the  Universe— "The  Redemption  of  Our  Body" — Droll,  Ludicrous  and  Ridicu-
lous!— Desire  for  Lower  or  Higher  Life,  Which? — "The  Hidden  Manna" — The
Looms  of  God  and  the  Mystic  Web  (Poem) 17-33

Chapter  C

The  Law  of  Substitution,  Aspiration  and  Reiteration — The  Only  Law  by
Which  Life- Wasting  Acts  and  Sensual  Haunting  Thoughts  Can  Be  Conquered
A  Ray  of  Light,  a  Fountain  of  Life  and  a  Gold  Mine  of  Joy — Fourteen  All-Im-
portant Suggestions — Derivation  and  Definition  of  the  Term  Substitution,  Aspi-
ration and  Reiteration — Their  Depth  of  Meaning — Eighteen  Indispensable  Points
of  How  to  Apply  to  Oneself  the  Law  of  Substitution — A  Testimony — The  Science
of  Memorizing — Prominent  and  Deficient  Faculties  of  the  Brain — A  Colossal  Mis-
take of  the  School  System — Cramming  and  Its  Bad  Effects — The  Importance  of
Physiolog}',  Phrenology,  Chirognomy  or  Chirosophy,  Biology  and  Astrology —
Cramming,  a  Method  of  the  Middle  Ages — What  the  Science  of  Memorizing  Is,
and  What  It  Is  Not — Master  and  Mistress  of  the  Microcosm — Intellect,  Will  and
Education — The  Blessing  of  Forgctfulness — Thirty  Examples  of  Substitution,
Aspiration  and  Reiteration,  with  Important  Comments — The  Triumphant  Song  of
Moses  and  the  Children  of  Israel — Be  Vigilant ;  Substitute  Good  for  Evil ;  Repeat
It  O'er  and O'er (Poem)  39-60

Addendum I

Dr.  Eliot's  Prediction  of  a  New  Religion,  and  the  "Strike"  of  Archbishop  Ryan
at  the  "New  Religion,"  with  Comments  Preceding  Both  Clippings — -The  Etymo-
logical Significance  of  the  Word  "Religion,"  and  What  It  ImpHes 60-62

Addendum II

Rev.  Dr.  Goodson  Declares  "Religion  a  Failure" — Why  We  Differ  With  Him —
What  the  Term  "Religion"  Implies — Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Church  in  Every  Age  of
the  World's  History  \n  Correspondence  with  the  Rise  and  Fall  of  Nations  and
Viduals . . . ' 63-64

Addendum III

Rev.  Dr.  Stanley  Declares  Christianity  Unfit  for  the  Far  East — Missionaries  Ad-
vance Agents  of  .Armies 64-65

Addendum  IV  and  V

Prof.  Larkin  Finds  Religion  Threadbare  and  Suggests  to  "Throw  Religion  Out  of

the  Churches" 65-66

Addendum VI

Dr. Bushnell Announces, "Pauperism and Crime Annually Cost Six Millions"

in  America 66-67

Addendum  VII  and  VIII

Dr.  T.  H.  Kellogg  Says,  "We  Will  All  Be  Crazy  By  and  By,"  Unless  Mode  of
Living  Changes 67-72


PRICE  OF  THIS BOOK, ELEGANTLY  BOUND  IN  CLOTH,  $1.50;
—  PAPER  COVER,  $1 POSTPAID.

Address  All  Orders  to

BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  "YUNGBORN,"  BUTLER,  N.  J.


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


1223


COSMOPOLITAN  OSTEOPATH.
Osteopathic Magazine. (M)  $I.OO

Cowan,  Dr.  John.— SCIENCE  OF
A NEW LIFE $•-:.. ">»»

Crane,  Aaron  Martin.  —  RIGHT
AND  WRONG  THINKING,
AND THEIR RESULTS. $l.«0

Crichton-Browne,  Dr.  Sir  James. —
DELUSIONS  IN  DIET;  OR,
PARSIMONY  IN  NUTRI-
TION  $0.85

Curtiss,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Homer. —
REALMS  OF  THE  LIVING
DEAD $l..*5r)

Cutter,  Q.  G.— A  DICTIONARY
OF  TERMS  USED  IN  MEDI-
CINE  $3.00


D


Davis, Dr. Frank P.— IM POTEN-
CY, STERILITY AND ARTI-
FICIAL  IMPREGNATION.
$a.50

Davis. — FOOD IN HEALTH

AND  DISEASE $i:.::o

Davis.— NEUROPATHY. ...$5.00

Dawson,  Dr.  George.  —  THE
RIGHT  OF  THE  CHILD  TO
BE WELL BORN $0.85

"D.  C.  K."— THOUGHT  POWER:
WHAT IS IT? $0.:J5

"D.  C.  K."— THE  SECRET  OF
SUCCESS $:j.<»o

Del  Mar,  Eugene.  —  SPIRITUAL
AND  MATERIAL  ATTRAC-
TION  $1.00

Densmore,  Dr.  Emmet.  —  HOW
NATURE  CURES:  Hygienic
and Natural Food $-.50

Densmore,  Dr.  Emmet.  —  SEX
EQUALITY $1.60

Deroum,  Dr.  Fr.  X.— THERAPEU-
TIC REST  AND  SUGGESTION.
$2.50

Devoe,  Walter.  —  THE  DOORS
OF  LIFE,  OR,  LITTLE
STUDIES  IN  SELF-HEAL-
ING  $1.10

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.  —  THE  NO-
BREAKFAST PLAN $1.10

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.  —  NEW  ERA
FOR  WOMEN $1.1'5

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.  —  RADICAL
CURE  OF  CHRONIC  ALCO-
HOLISM  $0.50

Dewey,  Dr.  E.  H.— THE  TRUE
SCIENCE  OF  LIVING. $i:..*55

THE  DISSECTED  PHRENO-
LOGICAL CHART $0.S5

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  Way. — DRUG-
LESS  MEDICINE  (Hygieothe-
rapy) $10.00

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  W. — HEALTH
IN THE HOUSEHOLD. $2.:iO

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  W.  —  THE
DIET QUESTION $0.25

Dodds,  Dr.  Susanna  W.  —  THE
LIVER  AND  KIDNEYS.  With
a  Chapter  on Malaria $0.25

Doolittle.  J.  S.— MAN  AN  OPEN
BOOK.  CRAINOGNOMY.  $1.10

Doud,  Dr.  F.  N.— EVOLUTION
OF THE INDIVIDUAL -^l-OO

Douglass, R. C— SPIRITUAL
EVOLUTION, OR, REGENER-  !
ATION $1.45!

Douse,  Dr.  T.  S.— THE  TREAT-
MENT OF  DISEASE  BY
PHYSICAL METHODS. $2.75

Dowd,  D.  L.— PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE FOR  HOME  AND
SCHOOL .$(».70

Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh.  —  AUTO-
SUGGESTION  $1.10

Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh.  —  ABSENT
TREATMENT $2.00

Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh.  —  HYPNO-
TISM  .$.5.00


Dowling,  Dr.  Leigh.— PERSONAL
MAGNETISM .$2.<K(

Drayton,  Dr.  H.  S.— NERVOUS-
NESS. Illustrated $1.10

Dresser,  H.  W.— METHODS  AND
PROBLEMS  OF  SPIRITUAL
HEALING $1.00

Dresser.  H.  W.— THE  POWER
OF SILENCE SI. 2.'.

Dresser,  H.  W.— THE  SPIRIT  OF
THE NEW THOUGHT. $1.25

Drews,  George  J.  —  UNFIRED
FOOD  AND  TROPHO-THER-
APY .$.'{.20

Drexel,  Dr.  D.  D.— HYPNOTISM
MADE EASY $0.10

DRUGGIST'S  HANDBOOK  OF
MEDICAL  ROOTS.  BARKS
HERBS FLOWERS, Ftr «0  7.%

Dubois,  Dr.  Paul.  —  NERVOUS
STATES:  THEIR  NATURE
AND CAUSES .$0.85

Dubois,  Dr.  Paul— THE  EDUCA-
TION OF SELF $1.60

Dubois,  Dr.  Paul.— THE  INFLU-
ENCE OF  THE  MIND  ON
THE BODY $0.60

Dubois,  Dr.  Paul.— THE  PSY-
CHOLOGICAL ORIGIN  OF
MENTAL DISORDERS. .$0.60

Dubois,  Dr.  Paul. — THE  PSY-
CHIC TREATMENT  OF  NER-
VOUS DISORDERS $.3.10

Duff,  Wilmer  A.— A  TEXTBOOK
OF PHYSICS $2.85

Dunn.  S.  —  SOLO  SINGER'S
VADE MECUM $1.10

Durville,  H.  —  PRACTICE  OF
HUMAN MAGNETISM SI. 10

Duval,  Prof.  M. — A  R  T  I  S  T  I  C
ANATOMY. Cloth $1.60

Dwight, Henrietta L. — THE

GOLDEN AGE COOK BOOK.

$1.20


E


Eale  and  Taber.— ANATOMICAL
AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  EN-
CYCLOPEDIC CHART. iS.TOO

Eddy,  Mrs.  —  SCIENCE  AND
HEALTH S.5.00

Ecob,  Helen  G.  —  THE  WELL-
DRESSED WOMAN $1.00

Edwards,  Dr.  J.  F.  —  HYGIENE
WITH  ANATOMY  AND  PHY-
SIOLOGY  $2.00

Ehret,  Arnold.  —  RATIONAL
FASTING  FOR  SICK  PEO-
PLE  .$0.%O

Einhorn.  Max. — LECTURES  ON
DIETETICS. Cloth $1.50

Eleve.  — SPIRITUAL  LAW  IN
THE  NATURAL  WORLD..««1.00

Elliott.— EDEOLOGY:  PLAIN
TRUTHS FOR ALL 9i\  ~n

Ellsworth.  Paul.  —  DIRECT
HEALING SL.-jo

Ellsworth,  Paul.— HEALTH  AND
POWER  THROUGH  CREA-
TION  S1..-.0

Ellsworth,  Paul. — THE  GIST  OF
NEW THOUGHT .<i;o.:jO

Engelhardt,  August.  —  A  CARE
FREE  FUTURE.  .$1.00;  cloth.
$1.50


Elsberg,  L.— THE  THROAT  AND
ITS FUNCTIONS $0.35

Erz,  A.  A.,  N.D.— THE  MEDI-
CAL QUESTION.  Sl.OO;  cloth,
$5.00

Erz,  A.  A.,  N.D.— A  MESSAGE
TO  ALL  DRUGLESS  HEAL-
ERS  .$0.15

Erz,  A.  A.,  N.D.  —  TRUE  SCI-
ENCE AND  ART  OF  HEAL-
ING $0..%0

Erz,  A.  A.,  N.  D.— WHAT  MEDI-
CINE KNOWS  AND  DOES
NOT  KNOW  ABOUT  RHEU-
MATISM  $0.75

ESOTERIC.  Free  Thought  Mag-
azine. (M) $1..W


F


Failla, Janeway and Barringer. —
RADIUM THERAPY AT THE
MEMORIAL HOSPITAL.
$1.50

Fawcett,  WilUam.— THE  BANA-
NA, ITS  CULTIVATION  AND
COMMERCIAL USES. .  .$3..'>0

Fernald,  Dr.  James.  —  TRUE
MOTHERHOOD $0,70

Ferrier,  Dr.  James. — A  SCIENTI-
FIC BASIS  FOR  A  JUST  LAW.
S0.20

Firth,  Prof.  James  N.— CHIRO-
PRACTIC SYMPTOMATOLO-
GY  $5.00

Fillmore, Charles.  —  CHRISTIAN

HEALING IN 12 LESSONS.

$1.50

Fischer,  Dr.  Louis.  —  THE
HEALTH  -  CARE  OF  THE
GROWING CHILD $1.25

Fischer,  Dr.  Louis.  —  THE
HEALTH-CARE  OF  THE
BABY $0.85

Fisk,  Dr.  E.  Lyman.- ALCOHOL  :
ITS  RELATION  TO  EFFI-
CIENCY AND  LONGEVITY.
$1.10

Fisk,  Dr.  E.  Lyman,  and  Fisher,
Irving.— HOW  TO LIVE. Sl.OO

Fitzgerald  and  Bowers.  —  ZONE-
THERAPY $l.i>0

Fletcher,  Horace— THE  A.  B.  Z.
OF  OUR  NUTRITION. ..$2.60

Fletcher,  Horace.  —  FLETCHER-
ISM  : What It  Is $1.00

Fletcher,  Horace.  —  HAPPINESS
THROUGH  FORETHOUGHT
MINUS  FEAR  THOUGHT.
$1.00

Flower,  Sydney.  —  CLAIRVOY-
ANCE  .Sl.OO

Flower.  Sydney.  —  CONCENTRA-
TION  Sl.OO

Flower,  Sydney.  —  MIND  READ-
ING  $2.00

Flower,  Sydney.  —  PSYCHOME-
TRY ^ $1.00

FOOD.  Vegetarian  Magazine.
(M) $0.50

Foote,  Dr.  E.  B.— HOME  CY-
CLOPEDIA OF  POPULAR
MEDICINE S2.,50

Foote.  Dr.  E.  B.— PLAIN  HOME
TALK S2.00

Forest.  Dr.  W.  E.— MASSOTHE-
RAPY .S0.25

Forest.  Dr.  W.  E.  —  THE  NEW
METHOD  IN  HEALTH  AND
DISEASE Sl.OO

Forest.  Dr.  W.  E.— NEW  TREAT-
MENT  OF FEVER S0.25

Forest,  Dr.  W.  E— THE  NURSE'S
GUIDE  TO  MASSAGE SI  .no
Forster.  —  SPINAL ADJUST-
MENT  $6.50

Forward.  C.  W.  —  PRACTICAL
VEGETARIAN RECIPES.$0.3n


1224


Xatiiropatliic  Book  (latalog


Forty-nine  Writers.  —  FIFTY-
THREE  EXPERIENCES  IN
NEW THOUGHT $1.5(1

Fosbroke.  G.  E.— CHARACTER
READING  THROUGH  ANA-
LYSIS OF  THE  FEATURES.
$1.00

Fowler, Jessie Allen. — A MANU-
AL OF MENTAL SCIENCE.
$1.1:0

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.— B  RAIN
ROOFS  AND  PORTICOES

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.— CHARAC-
TER-ANALYSIS  $1.10

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen. CHARAC-
TER READING  FROM  PHO-
TOGRAPHS  $o.i.->

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.— CHART  OF
BRAIN  CENTERS.  Each  $0.1.5
Per  do?en $0.85

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.— LIFE  OF
DR.  FRANCOIS  JOSEPH
GALL .$0.50

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.  —  PHRE-
NOLOGY IN  BUSINESS-
LIFE .$0.15

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen.  —  PHRE-
NOLOGY IN  THE  SCHOOL.
$0.15

Fowler,  L.  N.  —  MENTAL
SCIENCE  EXPLAINED  BY
PHRENOLOGY .$0.40

Fowler.  O.  S.-  CREATIVE  AND
SEXUAL SCIENCE .$3.:J0

Fowler,  O.  S.  —  HUMAN  SCI-
ENCE; OR,  PHRENOLOGY.
$3.50

Fowler,  O.  S.— INTEMPERANCE
AND  TIGHT  LACING. ..$(K::5

Fowler,  O.  S.  — MEMORY  AND
INTELLECTUAL  IMPROVE-
MENT  $1.00

Fowler,  O.  S.  and  L.  N.— HERE-
DITARY DESCENT;  ITS
LAWS AND FACTS $l.::o

Fowler,  O.  S.  and  L.  N.— NEW
SELF  -  INSTRUCTOR  I N
PHRENOLOGY $1.10

Fowler,  O.  S.,  and  L.  N.— PHRE-
NOLOGY PROVED  AND
APPLIED $1.60

Fowler's  NEW  PHRENOLOGI-
CAL BUST $6.50

Fowler's  NEW  PHRENOLOGI-
CAL CHART $5.80

FREEDOM.  Mental  Science.  (W)
Copy, 25c. 4 copies $1.00


Galbraith.  Dr.  Anna  M.  —  HY-
GIENE AND  PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE  FOR  WOMEN. ...$1.00

Galsgie,  Dr.  Edward  C.  —  DIET
FOR HEALTH $1.00

Gates.  —  THE  ART  OF  MIND
BUILDING $0.::5

Gaze,  Harry. -HOVn^  TO  LIVE
FOREVER $1.10

Geiser, John O.— EVOLUTION

PROVING IMMORTALITY.

$1.50

Geromiller,  L.  —  FATHKR
KNEIPPS  HYDROPATHIC
TREATMENT $0.60

Gestefeld,  Ursula  N.— THE  WO-
MAN WHO DARES $1.05

Gibbon,  Stanley.  —  UNFIRED
FOOD IN PRACTICE. .  ..$0..-{5

GitTord,  Dr.  T.  V.,  and  Ross,  Dr.
Q.  M.— WHAT  IS  VACCI-
NATION? $0.25

Oilman,  Charlotte  P.— CONCERN-
ING CHILDREN .SL.-iS

Goetz.  E.  W.— A  MANUAL  OF
OSTEOPATHY .$;:.00


Goodfellow,  Dr.  A.  A.,  and  Zur-
muhlen.  Dr.  Chas. — MEDICAL
MONOPOLY  AND  IMMORAL
TRAFFIC $0.15

GOOD  HEALTH.  Hygiene  Mag
azine (M) Copy, 25c. ...$2.50

GOOD  HEALTH  CLINIC.  Hy
giene  Magazine  (M)  Copy,  10c
$1.00

GOOD  HOUSEKEEPING.  House
hold Magazine. (M) $1.00

Gordon,  Dr.  H.  Lang.  —  THE
MODERN MOTHER. ...$2.00

Gould,  Dr.  G.  M.  —  GOULD'S
CYCLOPEDIA  OF  PRACTI-
CAL  MEDICINE $10.00

Gould.  Dr.  G.  M.— GOULD'S  DIC-
TIONARY OF  MEDICINE
$10.00

Gould,  Dr.  G.  M.  —  GOULD'S
STUDENT'S  MEDICAL  DIC-
TIONARY  $2.00

Graham,  J. S.— CHASTITY.  $0.6(»

Grammer,  G.  W.  —  LIVING  IN
THE BODY FOREVER. $1.00

Grant,  Herbert  A.  —  HEALTH
AND  BREATH  CULTURE.
$0.50

Gray.— ANATOMY.  Fullv  Uhis
trated $7.00

Gray.  Helen  Sayr.— IN  JUSTICE
TO  THOMAS  AND  TABBY
$0.10

Gray,  John  A.— SCHROTH  CURE
$0.10

Gregory,  Alva  A. — D  I  S  E  A  S  E
AND  RATIONAL  THERAPY.
$5.00

Gregory,  Alva  A.  —  SPINAL
TRE  ATM  ENT $5.00

Gregory, Alva A. — SPONDYLO-
THERAPY SIMPLIFIED.
$3.00

Gully,  Dr.  J.  M.— WATER  CURE
IN  CHRONIC  DISEASES.$1.35

Guttman,  P.  —  GYMNASTICS  OF
THE VOICE $1.50


H


Haddock,  Rev.  F.  C— POWER  OF
WILL $2..'>0

Haig,  Dr.— DIET  AND  FOOD.
$1.00

Haig,  Dr.— EVERYDAY  DISHES
AND  EVERYDAY  WORK.$0.85

Harland,  Marion.  —  EVERY  WO-
MAN  HER  OWN  COOK.  $2.00

Hale.  A.  Creighton.— THE  ART
OF MASSAGE $1..50

Hamilton, Dr. Edward John. —
THE M  O  R  A,L LAW; OR
THEORY AND PRACTICE
OF DUTY $1.70

Ham.ilton, Dr. Edward John. —
THE MODALIST; OR, LAWS
OF RATIONAL CONVIC
TION $1.35

Hamilton, Dr. Edward John. —
THE  PERCEPTIONALIST;

OR, MENTAL SCIENCE.  .$2.10

Hampton,  Isabel  A.— NURSING:
ITS  PRINCIPLES  AND  PRAC-
TICE  $2.20

Hara,  O.  Hashnu.— CONCENTRA-
TION AND  THE  ACQUIRE-
MENT OF  PERSONAL  MAG-
NETISM  $1.00

Hara,  O.  Hashnu.— FRUIT  AND
NUT DIET $0.15

Hara.  O.  Hashnu.— MENTAL  AL-
CHEMY  SO.1.%

Harris,  Francis  Barber.  —  FLO-
RIDA SALADS $1.10

Harris,  Dr.  J.  D.— LECTURES
ON  MEDICAL  ELECTRICITY
TO NURSES. Cloth $1.20

Harte.  Richard  —  PRACTICAI
PSYCHOLOGY:  HOV>:  TO  BE
HAPPY $0.25


Hartelius, Dr. T. J.— MANUAL

OF SWEDISH MOVEMENTS.

$1.50

Hartman,  Franz. — OCCULT  SCI-
ENCE  IN MEDICINE. ..$2.00

Haskell,  C.  C.  —  PERFECT
HEALTH.  By  One  Who  Has
It $1.10

HAUSDOKTOR,  DER  —  Naturo-
pathic  Magazine (German) $1.00

Hazzard,  Chas.— A  NEW  PRAC-
TICE OF  osteopathy.$:j.oo

HEALTH.  Hygiene  and  Osteo-
pathy Magazine (M) $2.UO

HEALTH  CULTURE.  Hygiene
Magazine (M) Copy, 20c. $2.00

HEALTH. Hygiene .$2.00

HEALTH  LIFE.  Health  Promo-
tion  $1.00

HEALTH  AND  VIM.  liealtli
Promotion $0.75

HEALTHY  HOME.  Hygiene
Magazine (M) $i.50

Heard,  Dr.  Mary  A.— THE  HY-
GEIA COOK BOOK $0..->0

Hebert,  Georges.— GUIDE  PRAC-
TIQUE  D'EDUCATION  PHY-
SIQUE  $5.00

Hebert,  Georges.— L'EDUCATION
PHYSIQUE !M.0O

Henry,  Mrs.  S.  M.  I.— STUDIES
IN  HOME  AND  CHILD  LIFE.

Henzel,  Dr.  Franklin  M.— ESSEN-
TIALS OF  DRUGLESS
TREATMENT $1.«0

HERALD  OF  THE  GOLDEN
AGE. P"ruitarian  Magazine. $2.00

HERALD  OF  HEALTH.  Wallace
Diet Magazine. (M) $1.50

HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND
NATUROPATH.  Magazine.  20c
a  copy.  Yearly  subscription,  or
Back Volumes $2.0O

HERB  DOCTOR.  Magazine  of
Medical Herbalism $0.5O

Heron-Allen,  Edward.  —  A  MAN-
UAL OF CHEIROSOPHY.

Heron-AlieA,'  '  Edward.'— TH E  "  SCI-
ENCE OF THE HAND. $1.10

HIGHER  LAW.  New  Metaphys-
ical  Magazine (M) $1.25

Hillier.— TUBERCULOSIS. $1.25

Hindehede,  Dr.  M.  —  WHAT  TO
EAT AND WHY $1.00

Hirschfeld,  Dr.  I.  H.  —  THE
HEART  AND  BLOOD  VES-
SELS; THEIR  CARE  AND
CURE $1.35

Hodge,  Dr.  J.  W.— THE  EVIL
OF TOBACCO $0.10

Hodge.  Dr.  J.  W.— THE  PESTI-
LENTIAL TOBACCO  HABIT.
.$i».20

Hodge,  Dr.  J.  W.  —  THE  TO-
BACCO SKUNK $0.20

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— CHASTITY;
ITS  PHYSICAL,  INTELLEC-
TUAL AND  MORAL  ADVAN-
TAGES  $1.10

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  — EATING
FOR  STRENGTH $l.lO

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  —  DEEP
BREATHING $0.70

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  —  HOME
CULTURE .$0.50

Holbrook, Dr. M. L.— HYGIENE

OF THE BRAIN. AND THE

CURE OF NERVOUSNESS.

$1.10

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— HYGIENIC
TREATMENTS  OF  CON-
SUMPTION  $2.10

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.  —  LIVER
COMPLAINT.  MENTAL  DYS-
PEPSIA. AND  HEADACHE:
THEIR  CURE  BY  HOME
TREATMENT $2.10


i


CniverNiil IVntiirnitnthio nirot-tory  iiiitl Biiyerw'  Oiifdf


1225


A ]\/lrit*^1 r^l^l" ^*  ^^^  foundation  to  perpetual


health,  morality  and  all  reform


"Trophotherapeutics" is the art of curing  diseases  with  natural
specific  food."  (in  Nature's  own  way)  without  the  use  of  dangerous  drugs.

Unfired  Food  andTropho-Therapy

—  BY  DREWS  —

A Text  Book  For  Nurses,  Physicians,  Students  and  Mot/iers

It  is  a  book  embracing  five  volumes  in  one. It  contains  325  pages,  bound  in  black  cloth
and  stamped  in  white  foil. It  is  illustrated  with  30  halftones  and  some  etchings. Price  $2.00.


PART  INTRODUCTORY

The  matter  under  this  head  points  out  the
snares  and  delusions  in  the  present,  disease
breeding,  system  of  diet  and  introduces  a  nat-
ural disease-preventing  and  disease-curing  diet.

PART  I.

UNFIRED  FOOD  contains  360  recipes  for
preparing  and  combining  health  perpetuating
food  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  most  pal-
atable, delicious,  satiating  and  artistically
painty.  It  covers  drinks,  soups,  salads,  brawn-
foods,  cakes,  pies  and  confections.  This  is  the
first  book  giving  recipes  for  uncooked  soups,
flower  salads  and  unfired  pies  and  wedding
cake.

PART  11.

MATERIA  ALIMENTARIA  treats  on  the
healing  properties  and  medicinal  value  of
wholesome  specific  foods.  It  contains  all  the
American  food  analyses  and  European  organic
salt  analyses  published  to  date.  The  many
simplified  tables  which  classify  food  into
specific  remedies  are  most  valuable  and  the
first  of  their  kind.

PART  III.

TROPHOTHERAPY  (Natural  Food  Cure)
and  Prophylactic  (preventive)'  Feeding,
treats  on  the  cause,  cure  and  prevention  of  all
common  diseases.  It  tells  how  to  remove  the
cause  of  disease,  how  to  help  Nature  to  re-
establish health  and  how  to  perpetuate  health
by  feeding  on  Nature's  Panacean  Foods.  It
also  contains  a  diagram  for  diagnosing  diseases
'tv/m  the  iris  of  the  eye.

PART  IV.

PROMISCUOUS  SUBJECTS  treats  on  hy-
gienics, the  value  of  sunshine,  fresh  air,  breath-
ing exercise,  felicity  and  serenity  of  mind,
fasting,  social  dinners,  effects  of  food  on  mor-
ality, refinements  and  beauty,  commercial
foods,  dairy  products,  infant  feeding  and
drugs — drugs  the  cause  of  chronic  diseases.


PART  V.

ALIMENTARY  BOTANY.  Under  this
reference  to  source,  value,  wholesomeness,
flavor,  use  and  preparation.  This  covers
fruits,  esculent  flowers,  herbs,  roots,  nuts,p
cereals,  and  legumes.  This  department  ends
with  Cottage  Garden  Culture  and  a  diagram
with  directions  for  an  economical  arrange-
ment of  a  city  garden.


This  book  is  absolutely  original  in  the  style
of  its  recipes.  The  ingredients  of  each  recipe
are  arranged  in  a  left  marginal,  bold  faced
column.  A  glance  at  this  column  tells  you
what  you  want  and  saves  you  the  time  of
re-reading,  underscoring  and  memorizing.
Each  recipe  is  provided  with  a  column  of
weights  to  insure  perfect  results  and  save
waste  of  material.  This  feature  will  be  ap-
preciated most  by  schools  of  Domestic  Econo-
my. You  would  be  surprised  if  I  told  you
how  few  utensils  are  required  for  the  prepa-
tion  of  Natural  food.

If  you  are  interested  in  "Return  to  Nature"
you  cannot  do  without  this  book.  It  teaches
the  only  moral  diet  known  to  science  and  is
the  most  complete  Nature  Cure  food  book  in
print.  There  is  no  disease  for  those  who  feed
on  unfired  food  and  the  sick  will  get  well  by
it.  Unfired  food  is  the  foundation  to  all  re-
form. If  you  will  try  it  honestly  for  six
months  you  will  eat  no  more  cooked  food.


This  is  the  first  Food  Book  which  treats
on  Trophotherapeutics  (curative  feeding).


Price,  $3.00


By  Mail,  $3.20


BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  "Yungbom  Health  Home,"  Butler.  N.  J.


1226


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


Holbrook.  Dr.  M.  L.— MUSCLE
BEATING ^M.Mi

Holbrook.  Dr.  M.  L.— HOW  TO
STKENGl'HEN  THE  MEM-
ORY  •'SI.OO

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.— PARTURI-
TION WITHOUT PAIN.  i)!l.lO

Holcombe.  Dr.  Wm.  —  THE  IN-
FLUENCE OF  FEAR  IN  DIS-
EASE  -HO-IS

Holcombe,  Dr.  Wm.  H.  —  CON-
DENSED THOUGHTS  ABOUT
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. !|«(>.i:.'>

Hollander, Dr. Bernard.  —  THE

FIRST SIGNS OF INSANITY

$3.35

Hollen,  Dr.  H.  B.— THE  TAINT
(Venereal Disease) $I.O«

Hollopeter,  Dr.  William  C. —  HAY
FEVER;  ITS  PREVENTION
AND TREATMENT .$l.3.'>

Holphide,  Dr.  —  MIND  AND
BODY «!•<«»

HOME  COMFORT.  Hygitiu
Magazine (M) $0.50

HOME AND HEALTH. House

hold and Hygiene Magazine (M)

.$1.."50

HOME  AND  HEALTH  HELP-
ER.  Hygiene  Magazine (M).$1.50

Hooker,  Dr.  J.  S.— A  NEW  SUG-
GESTIVE TREATMENT.  $0.35

HOUSEHOLD.  Household  Mag-
azine (M) $1.00

HOUSEWIFE.  Household  Mag-
azine (M) $l-00

Howard,  Dr.  Heaton  C— THE
THERAPEUTIC  VALUE  OF
THE  POTATO .$0.55

Huckel,  Rev.  Oliver.  —  MENTAL
HEALING $1-00

Hudson,  T.  J.  —  SCIENTIFIC
DEMONSTRATION  OF  A  FU-
TURE  LIFE .$1.50

HUMAN  FACULTY.  Phrenologi-
cal Magazine. (M) $1.00

HUMAN NATURE. Phrenology

and Hygiene Magazine (M)

$1.50

Hunter,  Dr.  Archibald.  —  HYGI-
ENIC TREATMENT.  NO
MORE DRUGS .$0..->0

Hunter, Rev. W. J.— MANHOOD

WRECKED AND RESCUED.

$1.10


INDEPENDENT  THINKER.

Free Thought Magazine. (M)

$*2.00

INVISIBLE  GOVERNMENT;
OR.  TYRANNY  OF  THERA-
PEUTICAL TRANSGRES-
SIONS  $1.00


Jackson, F. C— HINTS ON THE

REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS.

$o  :{5

Jackson,  j.  H.— CONSTIPATION  ;
CAUSES  AND  TREATMENT.
$0.25

Jacoby,  Dr.  George  W.— CHILD
TRAINING  AS  AN  EXACT
SCIENCE .$1.«0

Jacques.  Dr.  D.— THE  TEMPER-
AMENTS  $1.60

James,  Fannie  B.  —  BIBLE
TEACHING  ABOUT  HEAL-
ING  $0.20

James,  Fannie  B.— THE  SCIENCE
OF DIVINE HEALING. $1.00

James,  Fannie  B.— TRUTH  AND
HEALTH $1.-^0


Jamison.  Dr.  A.  B.  —  INTESTI-
NAL ILLS $;;.o«

Jamison,  Dr.  A.  B.  —  INTESTI-
NAL  IRRIGATION .$.-{.00

Jank,  Jos.  K.— SPICES.  SEEDS,
HERBS,  ETC.  Tlieir  Butaiiicril
Origin.  Clieniical  Composition
and Commercial I'se $1..'jO

Jevv^ett,  H.  M.  and  Jewett,  Dr.  Milo
A.— SLEEP  AND  DREAMS;
ALSO  THE  ANALOGY  OF  IN-
SANITY TO  SLEEP  AND
DREAMS .1!0.,S3

Johnson,  Dr.  Edward. — THE  DO-
MESTIC PRACTICE  OF  HY-
DROPATHY  $1.35

Johnson,  S.  E.  —  THE  TEMPER
CURE $1.10

Johnson. Dr. Franklin. — THE
NEW PSYCHIC  STUDIES.
$0..S5

Joire.  Dr.  Paul.— P  S  Y  C  H  I  C
PHENOMENA. Cloth. ...$2.20

Jones. A. K. — CLASSIFIED
GYMNASIUM EXERCISE.
(Roberts System) $1.00

JOURNAL  OF  ELECTRO-THE-
RAPEUTICS. KlectroTheraiiv.
( .\1) $3.00

JOURNAL  OF  MAGNETISM.
I'livsical Culture. (M) .$2.00

JOURNAL  OF  HYGEIO-THER-
APY.  (M) $2.<M>

JOURNAL  OF  OSTEOPATHY.
Osteopathy. (BiM) $2.00

Judge.  William  Q.  —  ECHOES
FROM  THE  ORIENT. .  .  ..$0.,">0

Juettner.  Dr.  Otto. — A  PLEA  FOR
PHYSICAL THERAPY. .$0.15

Julien,  Dr.  Louis.  —  LIBERTIN-
ISM AND  MARRIAGE. $1.00

Just.  Adolf.— RETURN  TO  NA-
TURE. (Also  German  and  Ital-
ian.) $.'5.20


Just.  Adolf. —  THE  NEW  PARA-
DISE OF HEALTH .$0.25

Just.  Adolf.  —  REVIENS  A  LA
NATURE.  (Abridged  French  edi-
tion) $1.00

Just.  Adolf. —  THE  YUNGBORN
DIETARY $1.10


Kabish.  Dr.  —  NATUROPATHY
BRIEFLY EXPLAINED.  $0.10

Karell,  Dr.- THE  MILK  CURE.
$0.50

Kates.  George  W.— THE  PHILO-
SOPHY OF  SPIRITUALISM.
$1.10

Keith.  Dr.  MellviUe  C.  —  THE
MARRIAGE  BED $2..->0

Keith.  Dr.  Mellville  C.  —  THE
ROYAL  ROAD  TO  HELL.$I..50

Keith,  Dr.  Melville  C.  —  SEVEN
STUDIES  OF  MIND  AND
MATTER $3..'>0

Kellogg.  Mrs.  E.  E.— SCIENCE
IN THE KITCHEN .$2.10

Kellogs.  Dr.  J.  H.— THE  ART  OF
MASSAGE $2.25

Kellogg.  Dr.  J.  H.— FIRST  BOOK
IN HYGIENE .$0..->0


Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.  —  HOME
HANDBOOK  OF  MEDICINE.
$1.50

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— HOUSEHOLD
MONITOR  OF  HEALTH.  .$0.75

Kellogg.  Dr.  J.  H.  —  LADIES'
GUIDE  IN  HEALTH  AND
DISEASE $3.00

Kellogg.  Dr.  J.  H.— MAN,  THE
MASTERPIECE .$.3.00

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— RATIONAL
HYDRO-THERAPY $2.50

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.  —  SECOND
BOOK IN HYGIENE. ...$0.80

Kellogg,  Dr.  J.  H.— THE  STOM-
ACH: ITS  DISORDERS  AND
HOW TO CURE  THEM.  $2.50

Kellogg.  Dr.  J.  H.— SUNBEAMS
OF HEALTH $1.S5

Kendall.  Dr.  B.  J.  —  THE  SE-
CRETS OF SUCCESS. ..$1.W)

Kepler.  J.  —  THE  ART  OF
BREATHING $1.10

Kepler,  J.— THE  LAW  OF  THE
VOICE .$0.35

Keswick,  J.  B.— BATHS-  OR,  THE
WATER CURE MADE EASY.

$o.«o

Keswick,  J.  B.— HEALTH-PRO-
MOTING FOOD  AND  HOW
TO COOK IT $1.10

Kimmel,  Viola  M.  —  THE
DOUBLE  STANDARD  FOR
MEN  AND  WOMEN $0.50

Kimmel,  Viola  M.— RIGHT  EAT-
ING A  SCIENCE  AND  A
FINE ART .$0.50

Kingsford,  Dr.  Anna. — SPIRITU-
AL THERAPEUTICS... $1.10

Kingsley,  Florence  Morse. — MEDI-
TATIONS FOR  LIFE  AND
POWER $0.50

Kintzing,  Dr.  Peaice.  —  LONG
LIFE  AND  HOW  TO  AT-
TAIN IT $1.10

Kirk,  Eleanor. —  THE  BOTTOM
PLANK  OF  MENTAL  HEAL-
ING  $0.25

Kirk,  Eleanor.— INFLUENCE  OF
THE  ZODIAC  ON  HUMAN
LIFE $1.10

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  PERPETUAL
YOUTH $1.10

Kirk, Eleanor. — PREVENTION

AND CURE OF OLD AGE.

$0.60

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  WHAT  THE
STARS TOLD ELIZABETH.

$i.oo

Kirk,  Eleanor.  —  WHERE  YOU
ARE .$0.25

Kitchen,  J.  M.  — -  THE  DIA-
PHRAGM AND  ITS  FUNC-
TIONS  $1.10

Klaus,  Frank.— THE  ART  OF  IN-
FIGHTING. Illustrated. $0.50

Kleer.— HAND-BOOK  OF  MAS-
SAGE  $2. -in

Kleiser, Grenville.  — HOW TO
BUILD  MENTAL POWER.
$3.10

Kneipp,  Father.  —  CARE  OF
CHILDREN $1.65

Kneipp,  Father.  —  MY  WATER
CURE .$2.25

Kneipp, Father.— MY WILL..$2.25

Kneipp.  Father.  —  CODICIL  TO
MY WILL $2.25

Kneipp.  Father.  —  KNEIPP'S
PLANT ATLAS $3.00

Kneipp,  Father. —  THUS  SHALT
THOU LIVE $2.20

KNEIPP  SYSTEM.  PRACTICAL
GUIDE TO $0.25

KNEIPP  SYSTEM.  (See  sepa-
rate heading.  )

KNEIPP  BOOKS.  FOREIGN
EDITIONS. Per copy.  .  .$1.60

Kube.  Minna.— FEWER  PEOPLE
BUT  HAPPIER.  (Birth  Re-
striction.) $1.00


1JnIver.sal Nntiiropatiiic  Dlrootory  and  Iliiyprs'  Ciifdc


i IF  YOU
I  APPRECIATE

f  The  Value  of  a  Simple,  Effi-
f  cient  Method  of  Diagnosing
t  and  Determining  Character,
f Acquired  or  Inherited,


by  Henry  E.  Lahn,  M. D.

IS  INDISPENSABLE
TO  YOU

IRIDOLOGY  is  not  a  work  on
optics,  but  a  practical  way  of  di-
agnosing for  healing,  furnishing
an  infallible  starting  point  of  pro-
cedure of  any  method  of  treatment.

156  Pages,  70  Illustrations,
Cloth,  Prepaid,  $2.10

Das  Buch  ist  auch  in  Deutsch  er-
schienen  unter  dem  Titel :  "Der
Krankheitsbefund  aus  dem  Auge."

PERIODICITY
The  Law  of  all  Life,

by  Joseph  Rhodes  Buchanan,  M. D.

Outlines  the  Laws  of  Rhythmic
Recurrence  in  the  Phenomena  of
the  Universe  and  of  Life  and
Health.  With  some  Reference  to
Planetary  Influence  and  each  In-
dividual's Favorable  Days  and
Months  and  Years.  Fourth  edition,
140  pages,  prepaid  $L10

For  Sale  by

KOSMOS  SANITARIUM
SCHOOL  of  DIAGNOSING

HEIVRY E. I.AHIV, M.  D., Prop.

1386  W.  Randolph  Street
Chicago,  III.,  U.  S.  A.


WHAT EVERY MAN AND WOMAN
SHOULD  KNOW  ABOUT  THE  BIBLE

"It  should  be  translated  into  every  language
and  dialect,  and  placed  in  every  home  in  the
world." — Benedict  Lust,  M.  D.  "It  will  cover
a  greater  held,  reach  more  people  and  teach
more  wholesome  truths  than  all  the  clergy  of
the  Christian  world."  I'sychical  Research  Re-
view.— Tliis  book  shows  that  disease,  insanity
and  crime  can  he  traced  directly  or  indirectly
to  lust,  and  proves  it  from  the  sex  of  the  Bible
and  the  sex  of  nature.  It  should  be  read  by
every  thinking  man  and  woman  in  the  world.
Sold only  to adults. Price,  $2.00.

Address the Author,

SIDNEY C. TAPP, Ph. B., Kansas City, Mo.


Rdtlonai  Fasting


<2> //.


Regeneration  Diet  and  Natural
!| Cure  for  all  Diseases %

%  By  ARNOLD  EHRET  %

Synopsis  of  contents:  |!

The  common  fundamental  cause  ^
of  diseases.  Ity

Remedies  for  the  removal  of  the  4
^  common fundamental cause of  X

t%  disease and the prevention of  ^

^  their  reoccurrence.  %*

^  III. The  fundamental  cause  of  grow^  *i*
^  ing  old  and  ugly,  of  the  falling I>

'f  out  and  getting  gray  of  the  hair. €*

Z  IV.  Death.  a


*


THIS is a severely scientific treatise on the
rationale of fasting. The argument goes
directly to the point and shows how the
chronic stuffing of the body mucus-generating
foods is the prime cause of disease, premature
old  age,  and  death.

Our  author  declares  that  disease  is  nothing
else  but  a  clogging-up  of  the  smaller  blood
vessels,  the  arterioles  and  capillaries  by  mucus,
by  effete  food-products.  This  clogging  up
leads  to  decomposition,  to  fermentation  of  the
dead  matter,  that  is  nature's  effort  to  rid  the
system  of  wholly  offensive  and  boiled-dead
food  products.  These  decay  partially  in  the
living  body,  causing  abscesses,  cancer,  tubercu-
losis, syphilis,  lupus,  etc.  Th;  decomposed
material  gives  birth  to  microbes  that  are  not
the  cause  but  the  product  of  decomposition.
They  are  only  discernable  in  an  advanced  stage
of  the  disease,  and  by  their  excretions,  called
toxins,  they  also  poison  surrounding  tissues.
is  to  fast  entirely  from  food,  for  a  long  or  short
period, according to the vitality of the faster.

The  energy  of  the  system  when  not  engaged
in  digesting  food  attacks  the  decomposing
mucus,  slime,  or  paste,  that  over-indulgence  in
food  stores  up  in  the'  system,  and  cleanses  the
body from the offensive material.

Mr.  Ehret  declares  war  not  merely  on  meat
and  alcohol,  but  on  cereal  and  white  flour  pro-
ducts, being  a  fruitarian.  Walnuts,  figs,  dates,
oranges,  bananas,  do  not  generate  in  the  system
floral  and  faunal  fermentive  slimes  and  pastes
that  so  readily  decompose  and  produce  death
dealing  diseases.  Nobody  who  values  health
can  afford  to  overlook  this  splendid  pamphlet
that  discloses  the  natural  cure  for  all  diseases.
Price,  postpaid.  50  cents.

The Nature Cure Publishing Co.
Butler, N.  J.


<2}i*H|jfjH|H^»^Hjj(tHfV:J>^J^J>^jK;^H3Ht>t|>^£3H^^


1228


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


Kuhne.  Louis.— AM  I  WELL  OR
SICK? iSO-S"

Kuhne.  Louis. —  NEW  SCIENCE
OF HEALING *:{.00


NEONATUROPATHY


The  new  science  of  HEALING


Kuhne. Louis.— FOREIGN LAN-  !

GUAGE  EDITIONS,  same  price.  ,
Kuhne. Louis. — SCIENCE OF  |

FACIAL EXPRESSION. .$5.00  :


THE

SCIENCE  OF  FACIAL
EXPRESSION


Kuhne  Louis.— FACIAL  DIAG-
NOSIS  .$1.60

Kupper.  L— QUISISANA  HYGI-
ENIC COOK BOOK $1.00


I.


Lady,  A.  —  VEGETARIAN
COOKERY S0.60

Lahn.  Dr.  H.  R.— CAPITALISM
AND CURATIVE ART. $0.30

Lahn,  Dr.  H.  R.— IRIDOLOGY ;
DIAGNOSIS  FROM  THE
EYE $2.UO

Lahn.  Dr.  H.  R.— TRUE  FOOD
ECONOMY $0.20

Landis. Dr. Henty G. — QUIZ-

COMPEND OF OBSTETRICS.


Larson, Christian D.  —  IN THE
LIGHT OF THE SPIRIT.
$1.10

Larson, Christian D.— NOTHING
SUCCEEDS LIKE SUCCESS.
$0.55

Larson,  James  H.— THE  MOTHER
AS A WORLD POWER. .$0.30

Latson.  Dr.  W.  R.  C.  —  EXER-
CISE FOR HEATTH .  .S0.20

Latson,  W.  R.  C— SECRETS  OF
MENTAL SUPREMACY.  $1.60


Latson,  Dr.  W.  R.  C.  —  THE  1
FOOD VALUE OF MEAT.  I

$0.35  i

Lawrence,  H.  N.  —  MEDICAL
ELECTRICITY  AND  MAS-
SAGE  $0..''.0  i

Leavitt,  Dr.  C.  Franklin. — MEN-
TAL AND PHYSICAL EASE

AND SUPREMACY $1.50

Leban.  Jay  M.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.  —
TECHNIC  OF  CHIROPRAC-
TIC  $4..'>0

LECTURES  DELIVERED  TO
THIRD  ANNUAL  CONVEN-
TION OF  OHIO  CHIRO-
PRACTIC ASSOCIATION.  ,

$1.00

Le Favre, Carrica.  —  PHYSICAL
CULTURE. DELSARTE.$0.75
Leo, Allen. — PRACTICAL AS-
TROLOGY  $1.00

Leppel. Sophie. — DIET VS.

DRUGS $0.:J3

Leppel,  Sophie.  —  SUITABLE
FOOD  AND  PHYSICAL  IM-
MORTALITY  $0.;50

Leppel,  Sophie.  — A  BRAINY
DIET FOR THE HEALTHY.

$0.60

Leppel, Sophie.— H  I  N  T  S FOR

SELF DIAGNOSIS .$0.35

Leppel, Sophie.— V  I  T  A  L AND

NON-VITAL FOODS. ...$0.35

Leppel, Sophie.— THE DIETETIC

WAY TO HEALTH AND

BEAUTY $0.10

Leppel, Sophie.— WHAT SHALL

WE DRINK? $0.10

Leppel, Sophie.— THE CRUX OF

FOOD REFORM .$0.10

Leppel,  SopTiie.— A  NUT  AND
FRUIT  DIET  FOR HEALTHY

BRAIN WORKERS .$0.10

Leppel,  Sophie.— FAMOUS  DOC-
TORS ON DIET  IN  MEDICAL

TREATMENT $0.10

Leppel. Sophie. — SEXUALITY

AND VITALITY .$0.10

Lernanto,  Dr.  E.  L.  — RE-DIS-
COVERY OF  THE  LOST
FOUNTAIN OF HEALTH.

SL.'iO

Lewis, Dr. Dio. — CHASTITY:
OR, OUR  SECRET  SINS.$2.10
Lewis, Dr. Dio.— FIVE MINUTE
CHATS WITH YOUNG WO-
MEN  $1.50

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.  —  IN  A  NUT-
SHELL  $1.10

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.  —  OUR  DIGES-
TION  $1.60

Lewis, Dr. Dio.  —  OUR GIRLS.

$1.10

Lewis, Dr. Dio.— PROHIBITION

A FAILURE $1.00

Lewis,  Dr.  Dio.— WEAK  LUNGS
AND HOW TO MAKE  THEM

STRONG $l.70

Lindlahr, Anna.— THE NATURE
CURE COOK BOOK. ..$2.20
Lindlahr, Dr. H.— HOW I BE-
CAME ACQUAINTED WITH

NATURE CURE $0.30

Lindlahr,  Dr.  H.  —  NATURE
CURE PHILOSOPHY AND

PRACTICE, Vol. T $2.20

Lindlahr,  Dr.  H.— WHO  MAKES
THE VICTIMS OF THE

BLACK STORK? $0.30

Lindley, E. Marguerite — HEALTH

IN  THE  HOME $1.60

Loban.— TECHNIC  AND  PRAC-
TICE  OF CHIROPRACTIC.

$4.00

Lockwood. G. H.  —  HOW TO

LIVE  100  YEARS $1.10

Longley.  —  PRONOUNCING
MEDICAL DICTIONARY.

$0.75

Loomis,  Ernest.— YOUR  PRAC-
TICAL FORCES $1.25


Loomis,  Ernest. — METHODS  OF
SELF-HELP $1.25

Loomis,  Ernest. —  CONCENTRA-
TION: METHODS  AND'
HELPS $1.25

Lorand,  Dr.  Arnold.  —  HEALTH
AND  LONGEVITY  THROUGH
RATIONAL DIET $2.«0

Lovett,  Dr.  Robert  W. — TREAT-
MENT OF  INFANTILE
PARALYSIS $1.85

Lowell,  M.  — HARMONIC  GYM-
NASTICS  S2.00

Lowry, Dr. E. B.— HERSELF.
$1.10

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.— CONFIDAN-
CES- $0.55

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.  —  FALSE
MODESTY $0.55

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.— TEACHING
SEX HYGIENE $0.55

Lowry,  Dr.  E.  B.— TRUTHS  (for
the boy) $0.55

Lowry  and  Lambert. — HIMSELF.
$1.10

Lust,  Mrs.  Louise. —  NATURO-
PATHIC VEGETARIAN  COOK
BOOK $1.00

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— APOTHEKA
( Kneipp Herbs) $0.50

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor. — DER
HAUSDOKTOR.  A  monthly
German  Magazine  of  Rational
Healing $1.00

Lust.  Dr.  Benedict.— BACK  VOL-
UMES OF  DER  HAUSDOK-
TOR FROM  YEAR  188}>  TO
CURRENT  YEAR.  In  Cloth.

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor. — HER-
ALD OF  HEALTH  AND  NAT-
UROPATH $2.0O

Lust.  Dr.  Benedict,  Editor. — BACK
VOLUMES  OF  THE  HERALD
OF  HEALTH  AND  NATURO-
PATH FROM  THE  YEAR  1000
TO  CURRENT  YEAR.  ..$2.56
Cloth $3.50

Lust, Dr. Benedict. Editor. —
KNEIPP WATER CURE
MONTHLY (Vol. I. (1000)  and
Vol. II (1901) ,$1.50; cloth.
$2.50

Lust, Dr. Benedict, Editor. —
TWELVE  PICTORIAL  VIEWS
OFYOUNGBORN (Nature
Cure Resort), Butler, N. J., and
Tangerine. Fla $0..'»0

Lust.  Dr.  Benedict.  —  AWAKEN
TO  COMPLETE  CONSCIOUS-
NESS $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— BECOMING
NUMB  — THE  TRUE  CAUSE
OF CANCER $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— CONSCIOUS
DIET $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.  —  EVERY-
THING ATTAINABLE
THROUGH  TRAINING  OF
THOUGHT $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— HELPER  IN
DISTRESS, THE $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— LIMITS  OF
FATIGUE $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.  —  ..MAN,
LEARN TO THINK! ...$0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— OVERCOM-
ING THE  FINANCIAL  MAL-
ADY CALLED  POVERTY.
$0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.— RAW  FOOD
TABLE $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict— WINDS  AND
GASES $0.25

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict.  —  MEDICAL
TYRANNY  IN  NEW  YORK
CITY $0.10

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict. —  THE  UNI-
VERSAL NATUROPATHIC
ENCYCLOPEDIA.  DIREC-
TORY, YEAR BOOK AND


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide  122©


©f  ©Mir;


If  EDWARD  EAELE  PURHNTOM


Price,  cloth,  postpaid.
$2.10; paper. $/.50.


THE  author  calls  this  book  "A  chart  of  life  on  earth  for  souls
that  dare."  It  is  a  compendium  of  naturopathic  philosophy
spiced  with  curious,  quaint  and  even  contradictory  views  of  life.
His  style  is  a  compound  of  Whitman's  elemental  looseness,  Oscar
Wilde's  biting  sarcasm  and  sex-searching  aphorisms,  with  a  voca-
bulary that  gets  intoxicated  with  its  own  verbosity.  He  conducts  a
dissertation  on  thirteen  different  topics,  to  wit:  Naturism,  Hurnan-
ism.  Sleep,  Travel,  Play,  Study,  Stoicism,  Romanticism,  Prayer,  Ser-
vice, Music,  Silence.  These  are  the  qualities  necessary  for  those  who
dare  be  themselves  and  are  commented  upon  by  one  that  has  a  true
wanderlust  for  exploring  the  abnormal,  the  poetic,  the  irrational,  the
musical,  the  morbid,  the  primitive,  the  occult,  the  beloved  and  the
damned.  Those  who  are  Lords  of  themselves  must  possess  a  cosmic
consciousness  and  are  thrilled  by  a  Bowery  audience,  rapturous  har-
mony, or  transportation  to  a  distant  star.  Nothing  is  too  bizarre,
too  far-fetched,  or  too  unconventional  for  our  author's  philosophy.
He  is  always  looking  for  an  opportunity  to  give  conventionality  a
black  eye.  Boiled  down  to  a  phrase,  his  theme  is  Love  and  Life  and
his  dissertations  thereon  are  Purintonesque  to  the  highest  degree.
Beyond  this,  nothing  more  can  be  said.  Here  and  there,  scattered
through  his  pages  are  very  rational  views  on  health,  food,  sleep,
baths,  etc.,  proving  our  author  is  strongly  in  favor  of  a  "Return  to
Nature" for  physically  and mentally  distressed humanity.


THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


What Medicine Knows and Does  Not
Know About Rheumatism

Its  true  Nature,  Cause  and  Cure.  A  Comparative  Study  of  the  Essential  Doc=
trines  and  Practices  of  the  Various  Modern  Schools  and  Modern  Methods
of Healing. For the Promotion of Medical Freedom and Public Health.

By  A.  A.  Erz,  Physiatric  Practitioner

THE  author  states  that  rheumatism  is  due  to  some  imperfection  in  the  supply  of  the  nutritive
elements  required  in  assimilation  and  elimination  by  the  system,  which  produces  a  condition
of  malnutrition  and  consequent  retention  of  certain  waste  products  amounting  to  auto-intoxica-
tion, or  self-poisoning  in  some  degree.  He  is  assured  that  in  these  days  of  modern  ways  of  living,
life  has  become  a  complexity,  and  simple  natural  living  is  a  lost  art.  So  diet  indiscretion  and
perverted  habits  of  living,  thinking,  eating,  breathing,  exercising,  drugging  are  responsible  for
rheumatism  in  common  with  many  other  disorders,  and  all  contrary  medical  theorizing  is  non-
sense, and  a  waste  of  time  and effort.

The  medical  doctrinaires  assert  that  "The  infective  agent  upon  which  rheumatisrn  is  dependent,
is  unknown,"  that,  "The  bacteriology  of  the  disease  is  still  under  discussion,"  and  in  spite  of  this
confessed  ignorance  of  the  disease,  pretend  to  deal  therewith  as  though  every  fact  connected
therewith  was established beyond a doubt.

Professor  Erz  gives  a  rational  analysis  of  this  ailment  and  shows  that  uric  acid  alone  is  not
its  cause.  He  points  out  that  there  are  also  abnormal  accumulations  of  other  poisonous  acids
found  in  the  system  during  the  disease.  The  fact  that  the  saliva,  perspiration  and  urine  are  highly
acid  indicates  a  state  of  general  acidity  of  the  serous  secretions  and  the  excretions  which  is
evidently  due  to  the  lack  of  sodium,  iron,  lime  and  magnesium.  There  is  also  a  lack  of  oxygen
supply  through  faulty  breathing,  and  a  lack  of  constructive  and  eliminative  minerals  in  the  diet.
These  facts  account  for  the  general  state  of  abnormal  acidity  of  the  system  as  a  consequence  of  the
retention  of  waste matter.

The  author's  analysis  of  rheumatism  is  given  in  extreme  detail,  and  his  remedy  therefor  is  a
splendid  panacea,  and  is  strictly  in  accord  with  the  philosophy  of  drugless  healing.  Of  course  our
readers  cannot  expect  us  to  do  our  author  the  injustice  of  describing  same,  but  the  small  price  of
the  pamphlet  will  deter  nobody  from  learning  all  about  this  most  rational  cure.  The  author  gives
an  explanation  of  the  science  and  art  of  rational  healing  in  the  same  pamphlet.

Price,  in  strong  paper  cover,  postpaid,  85  cents

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1230


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


BUYER  S' GUIDE. This

volume  contains  a  complete  trans-
lation of  Louis  Kuhnc's  works.
"The  New  Science  of  Healing."
"Facial  Expression."  and  "Facial
Diagnosis";  Dr.  Matijaca's  "Mod-
ern Electro-Therapeutics"  ;  E.  E
Purinton's  "Efficiency  in  Drugless
Healing" ;  a  full  register  of  all
drugless  practitioners.  Colleges.
Schools.  Societies  and  Institu-
tions. Vol.  I.  year  1918-19,  post-
paid, cloth, $10.00


M


Macdonald,  George.— HELP  FOR
WEARY SOULS $1.50

Macdonald,  Dr.  Robert. — MIND.
RELIGION  AND HEALTH.

.<f;i.40

Macdougal.  King  D.  —  THE
BATTLE  WITH  TUBERCU-
LOSIS AND  HOW  TO  WIN
IT $1.60

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  CONSTIPA-
TION ;  ITS  CAUSE  AND
CURE $0.60

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  CURE  FOR
RUPTURE $1.50

Macfadden,  B.  A.— ENCYCLO-
PEDIA OF  PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE  $22.50

Easy  payment  plan $25.00

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  FASTING
FOR  THE  CURE  OF  DIS-
EASE  $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A. —  FASTING,
HYDROPATHY  AND  EXER-
CISE  .$1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  FATHER,
MOTHER AND BABE. $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  GAINING
WEIGHT $0.60

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  HOW  TO
DEVELOP  MUSCULAR
POWER AND BEAUTY. $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  MANHOOD
AND MARRIAGE $2.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— MY  LADY
BEAUTIFUL $1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.— NEW  HAIR
CULTURE $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  OLD  AGE
AND  ITS  PREVENTION.  $1.00

Macfadden, B. A.  —  PHYSICAL
CULTURE COOK BOOK.
$l.lo

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  PHYSICAL
CULTURE FOR BABY. $1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.  —  PHYSICAL
PERFECTION $1.10


Macfadden,  B.  A.— POWER  AND
BEAUTY  OF  SUPERB  WO-
MANHOOD  $i..')0

Macfadden,  B.  A.— SCIENCE  OF
MUSCULAR  DEVELOP-
MENT  $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A. —  STRENGTH
FROM EATING $l..">0

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  STRONG
EYES $1.10

Macfadden.  B.  A.— THE  BUILD-
ING OF  VITAL  POWER.  $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— THE  CRIME
OF SILENCE $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— THE  MILK
DIET $0.6(»

Macfadden,  B.  A.— THE  TRAIN-
ER'S ANATOMY $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.— VIRILE  POW-
ERS OF  SUPERB  MANHOOD.
$1.50

Macfadden,  B.  A.  —  VITALITY
SUPREME $1.10

Macfadden,  B.  A.,  and  Dr.  Felix
Oswald. —  FASTING,  HYDRO-
PATHY, EXERCISE. ...$1.50

Macfadden,  B.  A.,  and  Dr.  Felix
Oswald.  —  PHYSICAL  CUL-
TURE, Vols. I— IV. Each.  .$0..50

Mackensie,  Sir  Morell.— HYGIENE
OF  THE  VOCAL  ORGANS.
$1.25

Maclaren,  T.  —  SYSTEMATIC
MEMORY $0..50

MacLelland,  Bruce.- PROSPERI-
TY THROUGH  THOUGHT
FORCE. Cloth $1.:}0

MacLelland.  Bruce.  —  THE  LAW
OF SUCCESS $1.10

MAGAZINE  OF  MYSTERIES.
(  M  ) $'i.00

Magnus,  Dr.  Hugo.— SUPERSTI-
TION  IN MEDICINE. ..$1.10

Mahatma.— OCCULT  MAGAZINE.
(M) .$2.00

Major,  Clare  Tree.— HOW  TO
DEVELOP  YOUR  PERSON-
ALITY  $1.10

MANIKIN  CHART  OF  THE
HUMAN SYSTEM $2.60

Mann.  R.  O.— HERE'S  HEALTH
FOR YOU $0.2.->

Manning.  —  PHYSIOLOGY.  .$2.20

Manson.  Dr.  Patrick.— TROPICAL
DISEASES $3.50

"MAN  WONDERFUL."  Manikin,
with  Manual,  one-tliird  life-size.
$4.00

MAN  WONDERFUL.  Manikin
with  Manual.  Erect  half  life-
size, 100 views $10.00

Marchant,  Rev.  James,  F.  R.  S.
C— AIDS TO PURITY. $1.00

Marden.  Dr.  Orison  Swett. — THE
CRIME OF SILENCE. ...$2.60

Matijaca,  Dr.  —  MODERN  ELEC-
TRO-THERAPEUTICS. .$2.00

Cloth $;5.oo


ELECTRO-MEDICINE
ELECTRO-SURGERY


RADIOLOGY


Matijaca,  Dr.  A.  —  ELECTRO-
THERAPY IN  THE  AB-
STRACT, FOR  BUSY  PRAC-
TITIONERS  $1..5«

Masius,  Dr.  Morton.  —  PROB-
LEMS IN  GENERAL  PHY-
SICS  $i.oo

May.  Mrs.  E.  —  COMPREHEN-
SIVE VEGETARIAN  COOK-
ERY  .$0..50

May,  E.  and  B.— MAY'S  PRACTI-
CAL METHODS,  WITHOUT
DRUGS.  MINERALS.  OR  DOC-
TOR'S FEES $0.3O

Mayer.  Dr.  Emil.  —  NO  MORE
SYPHILIS $0.20

McConnell,  Carl  P.— CLINICAL
OSTEOPATHY .$4.0O

McGovern,  Terry,  and  O.hers. —
HOW  TO  BOX,  BREATHE,
WALK OR RUN $1.00

McGowan,  Anna.  —WRINKLES;
THEIR  CAUSE  AND  CURE.
$0.5O

McPherson,  Mrs.  H.  R.  —  BABY
RECORD .$0.6O

Mead,  Mary  R.  —  IDEALS  FOR
INVALIDS $0.:J5

Mead,  Mary  R.  —  SOUL  -  HELP
FOR  INVALIDS $0.25

Medine, F. R. — WHAT AND

HOW OF VOCAL CULTURE.

$1.40

Melio,  G.  L.  —  MANUAL  OF
SWEDISH  DRILL.  Natural
Health  Exercises .$0.25

MENTAL  ADVOCATE.  Mental
Healing Magazine CM) ..$2.00

Metcalfe,  Richard.  —  FUNCTION
OF  THE SKIN $0.2O

Metcalfe,  Richard.  —  HYDRO-
PATHY IN  THE  TREAT-
MENT OF  INFLUENZA  AND
FEVER $0.!>O

Metcalfe,  Richard.  —  LIFE  OF
VINCENT  PRIESSNITZ.  $2.00

METCALFE,  RICHARD,  THE
MAN  AND  HIS  WORK.— By
"An Old Patient" $0.S5

Metchnikoff, Prof. Elie. — THE

PROLONGATION OF LIFE.

$2.20

Meyer.'  Dr.  C.'  —  THE  FEMALE
FIGURE (Complete) $1.50

Meyers,  Dr.  Milton  K.— LANG'S
GERMAN  -  ENGLISH  MEDI-
CAL DICTIONARY $.5.00

Militz.  Annie  R.— THE  RENEW-
AL  OF THE BODY $1.30

Miller,  Dr.  E.  P.— DYSPEPSIA ;
CAUSES,  SYMPTOMS  AND
HYGEIOPATHIC  CURE.  $0.50'

Miller.  Dr.  L.  P.  —  HOW  TO
BATHE $0.40

Miller,  G.  N.— THE  STRIKE  OF
A  SEX $0.25

Miller,  G.  N.  —  ZUGASSENT'S
DISCOVERY $0.25

MIND. Magazine. (M) $2.0O

MIND  AND  BODY.  Magazine.
(M) .$2.O0

Mitchell,  Dr.  John  K.  —  SELF
HELP  FOR  NERVOUS
WOMEN $i.ia

Moore,  G.  B.— MOORE'S  MAR-
VELOUS MEMORY  METH-
ODS  $1.10

Moore.— WHY  I  AM  A  VEGE-
TARIAN  $0..*?5

Morris,  Dr.  Sir  Malcolm. — THE
STAMPING  OUT  OF  VENE-
REAL DISEASES $1.25

MOTHERHOOD.  Maternity  Mag-
azine. (M) $2.00

MOTHER'S  JOURNAL.  Mother-
hood.  (M) $2.00

Mueller, F. Max. — LECTURES

ON SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.

$0.35

Muller,  J.  B.— FRESH  AIR  EX-
ERCISES  $1.50.


Universal  IVaturopatlilc Direotory  and Buyers'  (iuiile


1231


Boll  Weevil,  or  The  Laws
Governing  Nature and  Mankind


The  Foundation  of  Rational,  Cultural  Life.  A  New  Doctrine  of  Life  and
Healing  for  the  thorough,  basic  and  permanent  cure  of  Plants,  Animals,
and  Men,  which  have  their  origin  in  the  degeneration  of  the  blood  and
of the Humors. The new Agriculture and new Natural Horticulture


By  Prof,  Alexander  Riggs


S  the  orthodox  boll  weevil  is  the  parasitic  enemy  of  the
cotton  plant,  so  also  the  medical  treatment  of  all  human
maladies  is  the  destructive  agent  of  physical  and  mental
health.  This  is  the  thesis  of  the  present  work.  The  author
regards  the  doctrine  of  medicine  as  a  doctrine  of  delusion,
and  that  it  is  a  fundamental  cause  of  human  distress.  He
also  regards  the  widespread  use  of  devitalized  foods,  of
foodstuffs  deliberately  defrauded  of  their  mineral  constitu-
ents, of  their  precious  vitamines,  as  a  prime  cause  of  dis-
tress and  disease.

^  As  the  cotton  plant,  when  grown  on  soil  devoid  of  the  proper  fertilizing
conditions,  becomes  a  choice  victim  of  the  boll-weevil,  so  also  the  human
organism  deprived  of  its  energy  and  vitality  by  means  of  impoverished  food-
stuffs, and  illusive,  mendacious  serums,  vaccines  and  inoculations  concocted  by
savage  cruelty  to  animal  life,  in  mysterious  secrecy,  has  its  own  form  of  boll
weevil  that  must  be  destroyed  by  a  strenuous  campaign  for  proper  food  and
the  strangling  of  the  octopus  of  official  medicine.

f  Our  author  points  out  the  serious  scarcity  of  low-priced,  wholesome  foods
that  will  supply  the  organism  with  the  most  valuable  nutritive  salts,  or  blood
builders.  He  shows  that  the  lack  of  such  salts  causes  a  thickening  of  the  blood
that  shows  itself  in  ulcers,  and  many  other  ailments,  besides  a  lack  of  energy
and  will  power,  and  a  predisposition  to  the  attacks  of  microbes  of  all  kinds.

f  The  work  is  a  book  of  150  pages  in  which  the  author  dilates  on  1:"he  para-
sitic evils  that  prey  on  plants,  animals,  and  men  and  is  largely  illustrated  with
pictures  of  boll  weevils  and  insects  that  are  mistaken  for  such  parasites.

11  Our  author  fears  for  the  downfall  of  American  industrial  and  commercial
life  in  the  near  future  as  a  result  of  the  increasing  impoverishment  of  farm
products  not  supplied  with  proper  natural  fertilizers.  The  boll  weevils  of  the
cotton  belt  are  the  prophets  of  our  degeneracy.  In  a  patriotic  attempt  to
stem  such  a  disaster  the  author  has  prepared  a  medicament  called  Hygeia  or
Lava  Tea,  which  contains  all  the  nutritive  salts  that  are  lacking,  or  have  been
extracted  from  natural  foodstuffs  properly  charged  with  such  salts.

^  The  moral  of  the  book  is  to  live  the  natural  life,  eat  only  such  vegetable
foods  as  have  not  been  boll  weevilized  by  lack  of  their  vital  mineral  qualities,
whether  by  unscientific  culture,  or  denaturing  processes  of  manufacture.  Visit
natural  cure  resorts  where  drugless  physicians  make  it  their  business  to  supply
their  patients  with  food  and  treatment  carefully  and  skilfully  co-ordinated  to
the  needs  of  the  individual.

Price  in  paper  cover,  postpaid,  $1.10.


The  Secret  of  Health  and  Disease. The  Greatest  Discovery  of  the  Age. A

Cure  for  all  "Incurable"  Diseases — by  the  same  author,  28  cents,  postpaid.

The  two  books  together,  postpaid,  $1.30.

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1232


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


MuUer,  J.  B.— CHART  ILLUS-
TRATING "MY  SYSTEM"  OF
BODILY  EXERCISES.  For
Men and Women $0.5«>

Miiller.  J.  B.  —  "MY  SYSTEM"
FOR  MEN $1.50

Muller,  J.  B.  —  "MY  SYSTEM"
FOR WOMEN .tiL.^O

MUller.  J.  B.  —  "MY  SYSTEM"
FOR CHILDREN $1.50

MUller.  J.  B.  — MILITARY  EX-
ERCISES  $1.50

Munro,  Dr.  Henry  S.— SUGGES-
TIVE THERAPEUTICS. $^.."50

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.  —  DRUG-
LESS  TREATMENT  FOR
PARTIAL DEAFNESS. $10.00

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— KNOWL-
EDGE A  YOUNG  MAN
SHOULD HAVE $1.00

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— KNOWL-
EDGE A  YOUNG  WIFE
SHOULD HAVE $1.00

Murray, Dr. Chas. H. — OSTEO-
PATHIC GYNECOLOGY.
$3.00

Murray, Dr. Chas. H.  —  PRAC-
TICE OF OSTEOPATHY.
$3.00

Murray,  Dr.  Chas.  H.— SOMA-
PATHY .$:i.50

Murray.  Dr.  Chas.  H.— SUCCESS-
FUL PROMOTION  OF
DRUGLESS PRACTICE. $2.00

Musgrove, Dr. Charles D. — NER-
VOUS BREAKDOWNS AND
HOW TO AVOID THEM.
$1.10


N


NAPRAPATHIC  CHART  BOOK
FOR  DIAGNOSIS  AND
TREATMENT $1.00

NAUTILUS.  New  Thought  Mag-
azine. (M) $1.50

Neal, S. O., and Clark, C. T. —

HYPNOTIC SUGGESTION.

$3-00

NewcombV  L."— 'mUSCIJLAR  EX-
ERCISES  $0.75

Newcomb,  Katharine  H. — STEPS
ALONG THE PATH. ...$1.60

NEW  MODEL  ANATOMICAL
MANIKIN  WITH  MANUAL.
Half life-size, 100 views.  .$10.00

Newkirk, Newton ("Newt"). —
BACK  TO NATURE. 60  draw
ings $0.85

NEW  THOUGHT.  New  Thought
Magazine. (M) $1.50

Newton,  A.  E.  —  PRE  -  NATAL
CULTURE $0.50

Newton,  R.  H.  —  CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE $0.25

Nichols,  Dr.  T.  L.  —  BEST  SIX-
PENNY COOKERY $0.25

Nichols,  Dr.  T.  L.  —  HOW  TO
COOK $0.60

Nichols,  Dr.  T.  L.— THE  DIET
CURE .$0.70

Nichols,  Mrs.  M.  S.  Y.  —  WO-
MAN'S WORK  IN  WATER
CURE $0.60

Nissen, H. — A. B. C. OF THE
SWEDISH  SYSTEM OF EDU-
CATIONAL GYMNASTICS.
$1.00

NORTHERN  OSTEOPATH.  Qs
teopathic  Magazine. (M) ..$1.00

Notter,  Dr.  J.  —  THE  THEORY
AND  PRACTICE  OF  HY-
GIENE  $7.(M)

NOVUS  HOMO.  YE  THOR-
OUGHBRED  .$0.50

NURSERY.  Household  and  Hy-
giene Magazine. (M) $1.00


<»


OCCULT  REVIEW.  Occultism
$1.0<t

Octogenarian.  —  HOW  TO  PRO-
MOTE HEALTH  FROM
YOUTH TO OLD AGE. .1!0.2.-.

Olin,  Chas.  H.— PHRENOLOGY,
Board Covers .$0.60

OPEN  DOOR.  Anti-Viviscctioi]
Magazine. (M ) $I.OO

OSTEOPATH.  Ostcopatliic  .Mag
azinc. (M) $0.50

OSTEOPATHIC  SUCCESS.  Mag
azine. (M) .$1.00

Ostrom.  —  MASSAGE  AND  THE
ORIGINAL  SWEDISH  MOVE-
MENTS  $1.00

Oswald. Dr. Felix.  — NATURE'S
HOUSEHOLD REMEDIES.
$  1 .00

Oswald,  Dr.  Felix.  —  PHYSICAL
EDUCATION;  OR,  THE
HEALTH  LAWS  OF  NATURE
$1.00

Oswald,  Dr.  Felix.  —  VACCINA-
TION  A  CRIME $1.25

OUR  HOME  RIGHTS.  Maga
zine. (M; $1.00


PACIFIC  HEALTH  JOURNAL.
Hygiene. (M) $0..50

Packard,  Dr.  Fred.  A.,  and
others.  —  PRINCIPLES  OF
THERAPEUTICS.  INDICES
AND DIGEST.

Page,  Dr.  C.  E.— HOW  TO  TREAT
THE  BABY $0.60

Page,  Dr.  C.  E.— THE  NATURE
CURE $1.00

Page,  Dr.  C.  E.  —  PNEUMONIA
AND  TYPHOID  FEVER.  $0.25

Paletay, Dr. Julius A. — PALE-

TAY'S CHEMISTRY CHART.

.$3.00

Palmer,  B.  J.  —  PALMER
PAMPHLETS, $0.10 to $0.50

Panzer,  Dr.  G.— CHART  OF  THE
FEMALE  FIGURE $1.00

PATHFINDER.  New  Theology
Magazine. (M) $1.00

Patterson.  C.  B.— THE  LIBRARY
OF HEALTH $2.2.5

Patterson,  C.  B.— THE  WILL  TO
BE  WELL $2.2.";

PATTERSON'S  AMERICAN
EDUCATIONAL  DIREC-
TORY. ....*: $5.00

Payne,  A.  G.— CHOICE  DISHES
AT  SMALL COST $0.90

Peebles,  Dr.  J.  M.  —  VACCINA-
TION A  CRIME $1.25

Peebles,  Dr.  J.  M.— DEATH  DE-
FEATED  $1.10

Penira,  Dr.  J. — FOOD  AND  DIET.

„  •••. $2.10

Pennington,  Jeams  J.  —  DON'T
WORRY  NUGGETS .$0.55

Pennock,  Anna  M. — THE  BETTER
WAY $0.25

Phidon,  Dr.  W.  P.  —  CREATIVE
FORCES  IN  VEGETABLES
ANIMAL,  AND  HUMAN
WORLD $1.00

PHILISTINE.  Literature  and
Iconoclasm

PHRENOLOGICAL  JOURNAL
AND  SCIENCE  OF  HEALTH.
(M) )R2.00

PHYSICAL  CULTURE.  Maga
zme. (M) $2.00

Pitzer,  Dr.  G.  C— SUGGESTIONS
IN  THE  CURE  OF  DISEASE.
«  j  fio

PLANT  ATLAS. Edition  I.  "$2.'o0

PLANT  ATLAS.  Edition  XL  $3.85


Platen,  M.  —  THE  NEW  CURA-
TIVE TREATMENT  OF  DIS-
EASE. (2 Vols.) $10..'>O

Poole,  Mrs.  Hester  M.— FRUITS,
AND  HOW  TO  USE  THEM.
$1.00

Pope,  Curran.— PRACTICAL  HY-
DRO-THERAPY  $5.00

PORTFOLIO  OF  LIFE.  (Cut  of
Manikin) $6.50

Post,  Helen  Wilmans.  —  SPIRIT-
UALISM FROM  THE  STAND.
POINT  OF  MENTAL  SCI-
ENCE  .$0.5O

Post,  C.  C.  —  CONGRESSMAN
SWANSON $1.00

Post,  C.  C— DRIVEN  FROM  SEA
TO SEA $0.50

Post,  C.  C— MEN  AND  GODS.
$I.O0

Potter,  Dr.  S.  O.  L.— QUIZ-COM-
PEND  OF  HUMAN  ANATO-
MY  $1.10

Potter,  Dr.  L.  T.  —  THE  PSY-
CHOLOGY OF  HEALTH  AND
HAPPINESS $1.00

Potter,  Dr.  L.  T.— THE  PHILOS-
OPHY OF  NEW  THOUGHT.

Prasad,  Ram— THE  SCIENCE  OF
BREATHING $1.70

Preston,  Dr.  Miller  E.  —  FRAC-
TURES AND  DISLOCA-
TIONS  .$5.00

Proctor,  Henry.  —  EVOLUTION
AND REGENERATION. $1.10

PSYCHIC  DIGEST  AND  OC-
CULT REVIEW $1.00

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  RE-
VIEW. Occultism .$2.0O

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  ASK  THE
DRUGGIST $0.1O

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  THE  CORSET
IN COURT $0.15

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  EFFICIENCY
IN  DRUGLESS  HEALING.
Paper,  $1.50; Cloth,  $2.0O


Purinton,  E.  E.  —  THE  EFFI-
CIENT LIFE $1.60

Purinton,  E.  E.— FATHERHOOD
—THE  NEW  PROFESSION.
$0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— THE  FINE  ART
OF GIVING $0.2O

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  THE  FUTURE
LIFE $0.2O

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  GENIUS  AND
EUGENICS $0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— HORIZONINGS.
$0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  LORDS  OF
OURSELVES $2.0O

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  PROCLAMA-
TION OF  NATUROPATHY.
$0.25

Purinton,  E.  E.— SINS  OF  SEX.
$1.6»


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  fiuide


1233^


FIVE  GREAT  CHARTS

Most Useful and Most Ex-
tensively Used Charts
Ever Printed.

1.  Nerve  Distribution,  representing  the
distribution  of  nerves  truly  and  graph-
icily,  with  marginal  review  of  spinal
therapy. 23x40 inches.

2.  Adjustment,  Concussion,  Pressure.
Practical,  Accurate,  and  Exhaustive.
19x24  inches.

3.  The  Sympathetic  Nervous  System,
The  Cranial  Nerves  and  Spondylo-Etio-
logy. 22x34 inches.

4.  Osteolo^ry.  Normal  and  Abnormal
Spines,  nd  consequent  health  and  dis-
ease. 22x36 inches.

5.  Zone  Therapy,  the  new  and  helpful
science to all others. 22x36 inches.

In  class  by  themselves.  Sold  under
guarantee.

Accompanied  by  three  useful  booklets
Spinal  Concussion,  Chronic  Cures,  and
Where to  Adjust, Concuss, etc.

Price  of  either  chart  prepaid $1.00

Two  of  above  charts,  prepaid 1.50

Three of  above charts, prepaid.... 2.00

Four  of  above  charts,  prepaid 2.50

Set  of  five  charts  above,  prepaid.  . 3.00

Address

J.  S.  RILEY
1116  F  St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.


WHEAT-NUTS

A  NATIONAL  FOOD

Will make you healthy by keeping the
bowels  right.

Wheat-Nuts  Food  is  composed  of  wheat,
nuts,  and  raisins  in  proper  proportions  to
make  a  palatable  nutritious  food,

SEND  FOR  CIRCULAR  AND  PRICES
Manufactured  and  sold  by

WARREN WEEKS
P.  O.  Box  137 Wilkes-Barre,  Pa.
Also  for  sale  at

DR.  B.  LUST'S  Health  Food  Store
no  East  41st  St.,  New  York  City


THIRTY-THREE YEARS' EXPERIENCE


MILK  DIET


As a Remedy for Chronic Disease

Sixth  Edition,  286  pages

By CHARLES SANFORD PORTER, M, D.

Long  Beach,  Cal.

$2.00, POSTPAID

One  of  the  most  valuable  books  that  a
Drugless  Practitioner  can  have  in  treating
Anemia,  Constipation,  High  and  Low  Blood
Pressure,  Dropsy,  Kidney  Disease,  Gallstones,
and  Ulceration  of  Stomach  and Intestines.

Letters  of  advice,  in  difficult  cases,  $1.00.
Write  for  diagnosis  blank.


MALT- COFFEE

Finest  quality  Montana  barley,  selected  with
great  care  and  malted  <hirir»g  eight  days  in
our  sanitary  factory.  The  beverage  prepared
from  our  malt  is  a  pure,  unadulterated  malt
extract  of  the  highest  nutritive  value  and
contains  about  70  per  cent,  malt  extract.
Shipped  in  strong,  airtight  packages  (10,  25,
50  and  100  lbs.)  at  8c  per  lb.,  f.  o.  b.  Mil-
waukee. The  freight  for  100  lbs.  is  the  same
as  for  25  lbs.  Persons  suffering  from  nervous-
ness, stomach  or  liver  complaint  should  drink
our  malt,  which  is  highly  recommended  by
leading  physicians.  It  is  not  the  same  as
roasted  barley  or  roasted  malt.  Roasted  bar-
ley contains  no  malt  extract.  SAMPLE  and
CIRCULARS FREE.

MILWAUKEE  IMPORTING  CO,

H. P. Kinneke, Pres.,

502 37th Street, Milwaukee, Wis.

When  writing,  please  mention  Directory


^


==^


LOOK  PLEASANT,  PLEASE


Wipe  that  frown  ofT  your  face.  Laugh.  A
sour  stomach  and  a  sou'-  face  always  go  to-
gether. Don't  get  in  the  Down  and  Out
Club.  Cut  Mr.  Gloomy  Gus  off  your  list  of
acquaintances.  He  isn't  a  fit  associate  for
you. This  is  the  message  in


THE

LAUGH  CURE


by  E.  E.  Purinton.  This  little  pamphlet  is
written  in  this  popular  author's  happiest
vein.  Like  all  Mr.  Purinton's  writings,  it
contains  also  a  lot  of  sound  practical  ad-
vice. If  you  feel  "blue"  or  disposed  to  look
at  the  world  through  dark  spectacles,  get
this  pamphlet  and  laugh  your  troubles  away.
Price  15  cents.


Published  by
BENEDICT  LUST,  X.  D.
BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


^


=^


ZONE THERAPY

Systematic  Book  Simpllfyingr  the  Sub-
ject, and  making-  it  of  use  to  every  one.
The  latest  therapeutic  agency.  Goes
hand  in  hand  with  every  other  drug-
less  method.

Illustrated chart  22x36  In. ...$1.00

Illustrated book, complete 1.00

Both chart and book 1.50

J.  S.  RILEY,  11 16  F  St.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.


1234


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


Purinton.  E.  E.— THE  TRIUMPH
OF THE MAN WHO ACTS.


Purinton,  K.  K.  —  TKY  THE
LAUGH  CURE iS<».15

Purinton,  E.  E.— THE  PHILOSO-
PHY  OF FASTING

Purinton, E.  E.— PLAY !)!O.Ur>

Purinton,  E.  E.  —  WOMAN'S
WORK *0.-^5

Purinton, W. A. — CHRISTIAN

SCIENCE $1.10

EFFICIEXCV SERIKS

Purinton,  E.  E.— DAILY  GUIDE
TO  EFFICIENCY *0.::5

Purinton,  E.  E.— FREEDOM  THE
GOAL  OF  LIFE SO.liS

Purinton,  E.  E.— HOW  TO  SUC-
CEED  *o.:;5

Purinton.  E.  E.— THE  TRIUMPH
OF  THE  MAN  WHO  ACTS.

Purinton.  E.  E.— UNUSED  POW-
ERS  $0.23


Quigley,  Dorothy.— THE  WAY  TO
KEEP  YOUNG *0.83

R

RADIANT CENTRE.  New

Thought Magazine. (M) ..$1.00

Randall,  F.  H.  —  YOUR  MES-
MERIC FORCES $1.00

Raphael.  —  PRIVATE  INSTRUC-
TIONS IN  ANIMAL  MAGNET-
ISM

Rausse,  J.  H.  —  HEALTH  AND
THE  VARIOUS  METHODS  OF
CURE $0.40

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.  —  CON-
SUMPTION CURABLE..  .$0.25

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.  —  HARM
FROM OVEREATING. ..$0.30

Reinhold.  Dr.  Aug.  F.— KIDNEY
TROUBLES,  EPILEPSY,  Etc.
$0.50

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.  —  MEAT
DIET  INJURIOUS  TO  MAN.
.$0.50

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.— POSITIVE
PREVENTION  AND  CURE  OF
TUBERCULOSIS  BY  NATU-
RAL METHODS $1.00

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.— PRINCI-
PLES OF  CURE .$0.25

Reinhold,  Dr.  Aug.  F.— PULMON-
ARY CONSUMPTION  EASILY
CURED  BY  THE  NATURE
CURE .$0.25

Rhodes  -  Wallace.  Helen.  —  RELI-
GIOUS EDUCATION. ...$0..'>0

Ribot.  Th.— THE  DISEASE  OF
PERSONALITY $0.25

Ribot.  Th.— THE  DISEASE  OF
THE  WILL $0.25

Rice,  Ervin  A.— WHY  ARE  WE
HERE? $1.25

Richardson.— LONG  LIFE  AND
HOW  TO REACH  IT $0..'-.0

RICHARD  METCALFE,  HY-
DROPATHIST.  THE  MAN
AND  HIS  WORK.— By  an  Old
Patient ..$0.S5

Riddle,  M.  N..  and  Frances.  Louise
E.  —  HUMAN  NATURE  EX-
PLAINED  SI. 70

Riley,  Dr.  J.  S.— CHART  OF  AD-
JUSTMENT. CONCUSSION
AND PRESSURE $I.OO

Riley,  Dr.  J.  S.— CHART  OF
NERVE DISTRIBUTION.

$i.oo

Riley. Dr. J. S.  —  CHART OF

ZONE THERAPY $1.00

Riley.  Dr.  J.  S.— RECTAL  DILA-
TION  .$0.10

Riley,  Dr.  T.  S— SCIFNCE  AND
PRACTICE  OF  CHIROPRAC-
TIC  .$2.20


Riley.  Dr.  J.  S.— TWENTIETH
CENTURY ZEPHYRS. $1.00

Rion,  Roxana.— THE  BEAUTY
BOOK $1.30

Rivers,  Manual.  —  HKAL  THY-
SELF  !|;o.35

Robb.  Isabel  H.  —  NURSING
ETHICS:  FOR HOSPITAL

AND PRIVATE USE. ...$1.10

Robinson,  Dr.  W.  J.  —  NEVER
TOLD TALES $2.25

Robinson,  D.  H.,  Ph.D.  —  THE
LATIN  GRAMMAR  OF  PHAR-
MACY AND MEDICINE.$1.75

Robinson,  Solon.  —  HOW  TO
LIVE $1.10

Rodermund,  Dr.  M.  J.— MURDER-
OUS FADS OF MEDICINE.

<;54  pp $:{..'>o

Rogers,  Dr.  L.  D.  —  AUTO-HE-
MIC THERAPY .$2.00

Rohde  and  Haskins.  —  NhC./
SCHOOL  OF  PHYSICAL
CULTURE $1.00

Rosch,  Dr.  E.— THE  ABUSE  OF
THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION.
The  Origin  of  Most  Chronic  Dis-
eases  .$0.50

Rose,  Dr.  Achilles.  —  ATONIA
GASTRICA.  Abdominal  Strap-
ping against  Abdominal  Relaxa-
tion  $1.10

Rose,  Dr.  Achilles.— CARBONIC
ACID IN MEDICINE. . $1.10

Rosenbach,  Prof.  O.  —  PHYSI-
CIAN vs.  BACTERIOLOGIST.
$1.60

Ross,  N.  C  — ESSAYS  ON
HEALTH,  VIA  CHIROPRAC-
TIC  $1.01>

Rothschild.  S.  Marcus.— HOW  TO
PROLONG LIFE $1..'>0

Rouge,  Father.— NEW  ORLEANS
WATER CURE $1.10

Ruegg,  John  J.— BOLL  WEEVIL.
(The  Law  of  Nature  and  Man-
kind.) $1.00

Ruegg,  John  J. —  THE  SECRET
OF  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.
$0.50

Ryley,  Dr.  J.  B.  —  ELECTRO-
MAGNETISM  AND  MASSAGE.
$1.50


Saleeby,  C.  W.,  and  others. — THE
PROBLEM  OF  MOTHER-
HOOD  $0.85

Salmon,  Arthur  L.  —  THE  MAN
AND THE WOMAN. ...$0.75

Savage,  Rev.  Minot  J.  —  HELPS
FOR DAILY LIVING. ..$1.10

Saxon,  Arthur.  —  THE  TEXT-
BOOK OF  WEIGHT  LIFT-
ING  .'<;o5'(

Scharlich,  Dr.  Mary.— WHAT  IT
MEANS TO MARRY. ...$1.10

Schellhous.  Dr.  E.  J.— THE  ELE-
MENTS OF  ETHICS .$0.50

Schlathhoelter,  Rev.  L.— HYPNO-
TISM EXPLAINED $0.eO

Schlickeysen,  G.  —  FRUIT  AND
BREAD:  A  NATURAL  AND
SCIENTIFIC DIET $1.10

Schmidt,  A.  P.— ILLUSTRATED
HINTS  FOR  HEALTH  AND
STRENGTH $1..50

Schmidt,  Dr.  —  ANATOMICAL
CHART  OF  THE  MALE
HEAD Sl.OO

Schmitt, Dr. Gustav. — A BRIEF

OF HOROSCOPY AND ITS

MEDICO-LEGAL RELATION.

$1.10

SCHOOL  PHYSIOLOGY  JOUR-
NAL. Physical  Education.  (M)
$1.60


Schofield, Dr. Alfred T.—
NERVES IN DISORDER.
$1.60

Schofield, Dr. Alfred T.—

NERVES IN ORDER. $1.60

Schofield,  Dr.  Alfred  T.  —  THE
FORCE  OF  MIND;  OR,  THE
MENTAL  FACTOR  OF
MEDICINE .$2.10

Schofield,  Dr.  Alfred  T.,  and
Jackson,  Dr.  Percy  Vaughan. —
WHAT  A  BOY  SHOULD
KNOW $1.10

Schroeder,  Theodore.  —  FREE
PRESS ANTHOLOGY. ..$2.00

Scott,  John  Milton. — THE  SOUL
OF  SOCIALISM .$0.20

Scott,  Dr.  Thomas  B.  —  THE
ROAD  TO  A  HEALTHY  OLD
AGE. Cloth $1.20

SECULAR  THOUGHT.  Magazine.
(VV) .$2.0<»

Sessions,  Mrs.  E.  L. — PHYSICAL
CULTURE  FOR  WOMEN.$0.25

Seward,  T.  F.— DON'T  WORRY.
$0.45

Sextus, Carl.— HYPN0TISM.$I.50

Seymour,  Harriet  Ayer.  —  HOW
TO  THINK  MUSIC $1.00

Shadel,  A.  F.  —  CONFESSIONS
OF  A  VICTIM  OF  THE
GREAT  WHITE  PLAGUE.
$0.50

Shaftesbury,  Edwin. — PERSONAL
MAGNETISM $4.00

Shaw,  J.  Austin.  —  GOOD
HEALTH,  AND  HOW  TO
KEEP  IT  FOR  A  HUNDRED
YEARS $1.50

Sheldon,  Theodore.— VIM  CUL-
TURE  $0.30

Shepherd,  E.  R.  —  SPECIAL
PHYSIOLOGY  FOR  GIRLS.
$1.10

Shepherd,  E.  R.  —  TRUE  MAN-
HOOD  $1.35

Shrew,  Dr. — Drayton,  Dr.  H.  L. —
PREGNANCY  AND  CHILD-
BIRTH  $0.35

Sizer,  Nelson.— CATECHISM  OF
PHRENOLOGY .$0.70

Sizer,  Nelson.  —  CHOICE  OF
•PURSUITS $2.20

Smart,  Dr.  Isabelle  Thompson. —
THE  MYSTERIES  OF  LIFE.
4  small  booklets,  each  .$0.85;
the set .$3.10

Smee,  A. — Trail,  Dr.  R.  T. — AC-
CIDENTS AND  EMERGEN-
CIES  $0.35

Smith.  Ellen  G.— FAT  OF  THE
LAND  AND  HOW  TO  LIVE
ON IT $1.60

Smith, J.— Trail, Dr. R. T. —

FRUITS AND FARINACEA.

S1.70

Smith,  Oakley.— NAPRAPATHIC
CHARTOLOGY $5.00

Solis-Cohen,  Dr.  Salomon,  Editor.
—SYSTEM  OF  PHYSIOLOG-
IC THERAPEUTICS. 11 Vols.

$40.00

Da  Costa, Dr.  J.  C. — and  others.

—ELECTROTHERAPY.
Davis. Dr. Nathan  S.,  Jr.— DIE-

TOLOGY.
Dercum, Dr. Francis X.— REST
— MENTAL THERAPEU-
TICS.
Ernst,  Dr.  Harold  C,  and  others.
—NURSING  AND CARE  OF
THE  SICK.
Gulick, Dr. Luther, and others.

—MECHANOTHERAPY.
Hinsdale, Dr. Guy, and others.
—CLIMATOLOGY  AND

HEALTH RESORTS.
Kisch, Dr. E. Heinrich,- and
others.  —  HYDROTHERAPY.
BALNEOLOGY.


IJniverMnI  Nnturopnthie  Olreotory  iiikI IliiyerM'  Guide


1235.


ZONE  THERAPY


The  Unique  Drugless  Science  That
Helps  All  Others.  Makes  every  Phy-
sician stronger  in  his  own  line.  Gives
wonderful  aid  in  many  of  the  hard  old
cases  of  Lumbago,  Heart  Trouble,  Deaf-
ness, Asthma,  Sleeplessness,  Goitre,
Colds,  Lagrrippe,  all  Female  Troubles,
Sciatica,  etc.

The  Simplicity  of  Innumerable  Com-
binations. The  Power  of  Forces  Within
and  Without.

Should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Phy-
sician, Father,  Mother,  or  Private  Indi-
vidual.

Dr.  Riley,  the  Author,  has  tested  every-
thing- in  the  book,  and  sells  under  a
guarantee.

Price  of  book,  prepaid $1.00

Price of  cliart, prepaid 1.00

Both book and chart, ordered

at one time, prepaid 1.50

Address:
J.  S.  Riley,  1116  F  St.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.


THE  MILK  CURE

By  Philip  Karell,  M.  D.

~^J  MID  tlie  allurements  of  a  thousand  reme-
^pl  dies  (so-called)  for  disease,  tlie  milic
cure  takes  high  rank  as  a  source  of  nu-
trition where  the  system  refuses  to  assimilate
any  other  form  of  diet.  Dr.  Karell  in  tliis
pamphlet  assures  us  that  by  means  of  an  exclvi-
sive  milk  regimen,  he  has  had  the  most  gratify-
treatment in many well-defined diseases.

He  analyses  milk,  showing  its  composition  of
water,  fat,  albumen,  sugar  and  mineral  salts,
making  it  a  perfect  food.  By  reason  of  the
fact  tliat  digested  milk  leaves  little  residue,  and
contains  little  fat,  it  produces  constipation  in
many  people,  which  is  corrected  by  swallowing
a  few  tablespoonfuls  of  bran  saturated  in  milk
per  day  and  eating  boiled  prunes  and  apples,
with, or without, the assistance of an enema.

Dr.  Karell  has  studied  the  milk  cure  from
the  standpoint  of  scientific  feeding  and  tells
us  that  milk  is  both  diuretic  and  sudorific  and
therefore  hastens  to  remove  the  fluids  of  the
body,  since  poisons  are  secreted  by  the  virine
and  in  perspiration  this  effect  is  anti-poisonous.
These  poisons  are  mostly  acids  and  the  great
efficacy  of  milk  in  general,  results  from  its  be-
ing an  alkaline  fluid  of  strong  anti-acid  power.
Another  fact  is  that  milk  renders  the  blood
more  alkaline,  and  the  more  free  from  acid  the
blood  becomes,  the  more  the  body  becomes
resistant to the inroads of disease.

He  points  out  that  great  care  must  be  exer-
cised to  obtain  milk  from  cows  living  in  the
open  and  not  in  stables,  so  that  their  milk  will
not  sour  readily.  Good  milk  is  neutral  and
does  not  react  to  testing,  that  is,  it  will  neither
redden  blue  litmus  paper,  nor  make  the  red
one  blue.  If  milk  reddens  blue  litmus  paper  it
reacts  sour,  and  therefore  cannot  be  anti-acid,
diuretic and sudorific, and anti-poisonous.

This  is  a  most  important  analysis  of  the
milk cure.


Price  in  paper,  prepaid.  50  cents.


The Nature Cure Publishing Co.
Butler, N. J.


T  .  ^

j.  THE LATEST BOOK  ON  I

I  P  H  Y  S  I  C  A  L  I
f  THERAPEUTICS  t

(h "A Treatise on Medical Practice"  ^

X  Bv Otto  Juettiicr. M.  D.  i

» .  T

<..>  This  new  work  is  based  on the Principles  and  ^

♦  Therapeutic applications  of  the Physical Modes  I

<j>  and Methods of Treatment. (Non-Medicinal  '-|»

I  Therapy). With  explanatory  notes  concerning  I

'.>  the nature and technic of the different phy-  ■€»•

I  sical agents and methods employed. '  I

(|j The author's previous books were popular.  <?,

i ran through several editions and are out of  |

4> print. This very comprehensive work em-  <,2j

I bodies  the  results  of  a  life's  study  and  research,  i

<*> It is practical, up-to-date, and a positive ad-  4»-

i dition to the  armamentaria of  the progressive  f

*  practitioner. All  physical  methods  of  treatment.  ^»

Y  Hydro -therapy,  Electro -therapy,  Ra-  't'
<%  diology,  Thermo -therapy,  Vibration,  4
X  Mechano- therapy.  Light,  Suggestion,  X
X Dietetics,  Zone-therapy,  etc.,  etc. I


Cloth, 520 pages.


Price, delivered, $5.00 ^


I  I.  W.  LONG  t

t 101  N.  HIGH  ST.,  COLUMBUS,  OHIO |

FOWLER  &  WELLS'

Phrenological, Physiognomical and Health publica-
tions. Vocational advice given from
10  A.  M.  to  4  P.  M.


M.  H.  PIERCY


27 East 22nd St.
New York City


Telephone  :
Gramercy  3099


THE IVATIOIVAL, INSTITUTE

OF SCIENCE, N  D, 116

1336  Morse  Avenue ti Chicago,  111.

Books  and  correspondence  courses  of  Lessons
on  Health,  Se.xology,  Chiropractic  and  Modern-
ized Natural  Healing,  also  Health  and  Toilet
Specialties.  '  Retail  and  Wholesale.  Circulars
and  catalogs  sent  free.  Also  owners  of  the
"Nature-Cure"  Sanitorium,  Blue  Creek  Springs,
Benton Harbor. Michigan.


"HEALTH"  0%


MAGAZINE
EFFICIENCY

"Fascinatingly interesting." — Dr. L. W. Ray.

"The  professional  man's  guiding  post  to  success  "
—Dr. F. C. Brand.

Xo  one,^  and  especially  no  doctor,  can  aflford  to  be
without  Vol.  5,  No.  3,  containing  "How  to  Com-
bine Foods,"  by  Dr.  Thomas  J.  Allen ;  Vol.  6.  Xo.
1,  "Monodiet,"  by  Dr.  R.  M.  Tohnson ;  "A  Doc-
tor's  Diet,"  by Dr. R. X. Carriker, Vol. 6, No. 3.

Either  of  these  special  numbers.  25  cents,  three,
50 cents; any 12 numbers, one  dollar.

HEALTH PUB. CO.. EUREKA SPRINGS, ARK.


1236


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


SOUTHERN  JOURNAL  OF  OS-
TEOPATHY. (\V) $1.00

Spencer,  A.  —  HOW  TO  LIVE
ONE  HUNDRED YEARS..1?0.25

Sperry,  Dr.  S.  B.— CONFIDEN-
TIAL TALKS  WITH  YOUNG
MEN $1.10

Sperry,  Dr.  S.  B.— CONFIDEN-
TIAL TALKS  WITH  YOUNG
WOMEN $1.10

Spinney, William Anthony. —

HEALTH THROUGH SELF-
CONTROL $1.35

Spurzheim,  Dr.  J.  G.— PHRENOL-
OGY. (Standard Work.) .!)!:{.00

Stacpoole,  Florence.— ADVICE  TO
WOMEN IN CONFINEMENT.

Stacpoole,  Florence.  —  ADVICE
TO  WOMEN  ON  THE  CARE
OF THEIR HEALTH. ..$1.35

a^o.ss

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.  —  WHAT  A
YOUNG  BOY  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.— WHAT  A
YOUNG  MAN  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.— WHAT  A
YOUNG  HUSBAND  OUGHT
TO KNOW $1.10

Stall,  Rev.  Sylvanus.  —  WHAT  A
MAN  OF  FORTY  -  FIVE
OUGHT  TO KNOW $1.10

STANDARD  FAMILY  PHYSI-
CIAN. 500  illustrations.  24  color
plates.  Buckram,  $15.00.  Three-
quarters Morocco $20.00

Stebbins,  Genevieve. — DELSARTE
SYSTEM  OF  EXPRESSION.
.$2.00

Stebbins,  Genevieve.  —  DRILLS.
$0.30

Stebbins,  Genevieve.  —  DYNAMIC
BREATHING $1.70

Stebbins,  Genevieve. — SYSTEM  OF
PHYSICAL TRAINING. $1.00

Steffcns,  Rev.  C.  W.— BETWEEN
OURSELVES $1.00

Stevens,  Leon  H.  —  LETTERS
FROM  ROY;  OR,  THE
SPIRIT VOICE $1.00

STEREOSCOPIC  DISSECTIONS
OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY.
Price on application.

Stierle, Ferd. — BACK TO NA-
TURE AND TO NATURE'S  i
GOD .$0.15  ■

Still,  A.  T.— PHILOSOPHY  OF
OSTEOPATHY $2..';0

Stockham,  Dr.  AHce  B.  —  CREA-
TIVE LIFE $0.25

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B. — LOVE'S  '
COMING  OF  AGE $1.25

Stockham.  Dr.  Alice  B. — KAREZ-
ZA:  ETHICS  OF  MARRIAGE.
$1 .00

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B. — KORA-
DINE  LETTERS $2.00

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B.— PARENT-
HOOD  $0.25

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B. — TOKOL-
OGY  (Science  of  Birth). ..$2.35

Stockham,  Dr.  Alice  B.,  and  Kel-
logg, Dr.  J.  H.  —  MOTHER'S
PORTFOLIO $1.35

Strasser,  J.  H.  and  Emily. — THE
KEY  TO  MAGNETIC  HEAL-
ING  S">.00

Studley,  Dr.  Mary  J.  —  WHAT
OUR  GIRLS  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

STUFFED  CLUB.  Antilad  list
Therapeutic  Magazine (M) ipl.-'JO  I

SUGGESTION.  Tidepnthic  Mapa-  '
zino. (M) SRI.OO

SUGGESTIVE  NEW  THOUGHT.
$0.15

Sturgis,  Dr.  F.  R. — STUDENT'S  I
MANUAL OF VENEREAL

. DISEASES $1.25  I


Sullivan,  B.— ASTROLOGY.  $0.25
Swain, Dr. Rachel. — COOKING

FOR  HEALTH $1.10

Swain, Dr. Rachel.— PRACTICAL

HEALTH HINTS $1.00

Swietochowsky, Dr. G. de. —

MECHANO-THERAPEUTICS

IN GENERAL PRACTICE.

Cloth $1.75


Taber,  Clarence  W.  —  TABER'S
FAMILY  MEDICAL  CYCLO-
PEDIA  $1.00

,  Taber, Wilbur.  —  SUGGESTION:

! THE  SECRET  OF  SEX.  .  .$1.00

Talcott, Dr. S. H. — MENTAL

DISEASES  AND  TREATMENT.


Tapp,  Sidney  C— WHY  JESUS
WAS A MAN AND NOT A

WOMAN $2.00

Taylor,  Dr.  G.  H.— HEALTH  BY
EXERCISE.  WITHOUT  AP-
PARATUS  $1.75

THE  "MAN  WONDERFUL"
MANIKIN  WITH  MANUAL.
Erect half life-size. 100 views.

$1  o.oo

THE  NEW  MODEL  ANATOMI-
CAL MANIKIN,  WITH  MAN-
UAL  $10.00

Taylor.  G.  H.— MASSAGE:  PRIN-
CIPLE OF  IMPARTED  MO-
TION  $1.20

Taylor, G. H.  — HEALTH FOR

WOMEN $1.10

Taylor,  Dr.  G.  H.— PARALYSIS
AND  OTHER  AFFECTIONS
OF THE NERVES $1.20

Teats,  Mrs.  Mary  E.— THE  WAY
OF  GOD  IN  MARRIAGE.  .$1.35

TEMPLE  OF  HEALTH  AND
PSYCHIC  REVIEW.  (M)  $1.00

Terry,  S.  H.— SECRET  OF  SEX.
CONTROLLING  SEX  IN
GENERATION $1.25

Tessier,  Dr.  P.— PNEUMO-THER-
APY  AND  INHALATION
METHODS.

Thompson,  John.— HOW  TO  RE-
MEMBER  $0.50

Thomson,  James  C. — AN  INTRO-
DUCTION TO  NATURE
CURE. (Iriology) $2.50

THOUGHT.  .\dvance<I  Thought
Magazine. (M) $1..'>0

Tilden,  Dr.  J.  H.— CURSED  BE-
FORE BIRTH $0..'>0

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  CONSTITU-
TION OF  MAN $0..'>0

Towne, Elizabeth. — EXPERI-
ENCE IN SELF-HEALING. I
$0..')0  '

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  HAPPINESS
AND MARRIAGE $0..'>0

Towne.  Elizabeth.  —  HEALTH  j
AND  WEALTH  FROM  |
WITHIN $1..30

Towne.  Elizabeth.  —  HOW  TO
GROW SUCCESS $0.."55

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  HOW  TO
READ CHA-RACTER. ...$0.50

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  HOW  TO
TRAIN  CHILDREN  AND
PARENTS $0.25

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  HOW  TO
USE  NEW  THOUGHT  IN
HOME LIFE. Cloth $1..'{0

Towne.  Elizabeth.  —  HOW  TO
WAKE  THE  SOLAR  PLEXUS.
$0.50

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  HURRY,  |
WORRY, CURED $0.25

Towne,  Elizabeth.— JOY  PHILO-
SOPHY. Cloth $1,30  1


Towne, Elizabeth.— JUST HOW

TO  CONCENTRATE.  ...$0.25

Towne, Elizabeth.— JUST HOW

TO COOK  MEALS WITHOUT

MEAT $0.35

Towne, Elizabeth.— LESSONS IN

LIVING. Cloth $1.30

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  THE  LIFE
POWER, AND HOW TO USE

IT $1.30

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  PRACTICAL
METHODS  FOR  SELF-DE-
VELOPMENT; SPIRITUAL,
MENTAL, PHYSICAL. Cloth.

.$1.30

Towne,  Elizabeth.  —  THE  WAY
TO PERFECT HEALING.

$0.55

Towne, Elizabeth. — YOU AND

YOUR FORCES $0.55

Towne,  William  E.  —  HEALTH
AND  WEALTH  FROM  WITH-
IN. Cloth $1.30

Towne, William E. — HURRY,

WORRY, CURED $0.25

Towne,  William  E.  —  THE  WAY
TO PERFECT HEALING.

$0.55

TRAINED MOTHERHOOD.

Motherhood  Magazine.  (M)  $1.00
TRAINED  NURSE. Nursing  Mag-
azine.  (M) .$2.00

Trail, Dr. R. T. — THE ALCO-
HOLIC CONTROVERSY.  $0.50
Trail, Dr. R. T.— THE BATH.

$0.35

Trail. Dr. R. T. — DIGESTION

AND DYSPEPSIA $0.50

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— DISEASES  OF
THE THROAT AND LUNGS.

.$0.26

Trail, Dr. R. T.— THE FAMILY

GYMNASIUM $1.50

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— HOME  TREAT-
MENT FOR SEXUAL

ABUSES $1.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  HUMAN
VOICE:  ITS ANATOMY,

PHYSIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY

AND TRAINING $1.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— HYDROPATH-
IC COOK BOOK $0.70

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  HYDRO-
PATHIC ENCYCLOPEDIA.

$5.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  HYGIEN-
IC  COOK BOOK .$0..35

Trail.  Dr.  R.  T.— THE HYGIENIC

HANDBOOK $1.25

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  MOTHER'S

HYGIENIC  HANDBOOK.$1.10

Trail. Dr. R. T.— SCIENTIFIC

BASIS OF  VEGETARIANISM,

$0.75

Trail.  Dr.  R.  T.— SEXUAL  PHY-
SIOLOGY AND HYGIENE.

$2.00

Trail,  Dr.  R.  T.— THE  TEMPER-
ANCE PLATFORM $0.G0

Trail, Dr. R. T.— WATER-CURE
FOR  THE  MILLION. ...$0..35
Treves. — GERMAN-ENGLISH
MEDICAL DICTIONARY.

$3.25

Trine,'  R.' A.— WHAT '  ALL THE

WORLD'S A'SEEKING. $1.35

Trine, R. W.— IN TUNE WITH

THE INFINITE $1.35

Turner.  Albert.— LONGEVITY  AS
AFFECTED BY MENTAL

CONDITIONS $0.35

Turner,  Albert.  —  WOMANLY
BEAUTY OF FORM AND

FEATURE $1.10

TWENTIETH CENTURY MAG-
AZINE. Household fM~l.$0..'>0
Tyler, Byron. — RAW FOOD
BOOK  AND HEALTH  GUIDE.

.$0.10

Tyrrell.  Dr.  C.  A.— ROYAL  ROAD
TO  HEALTH.  Cascade  Treat-
ment  $1.50


Universal  Naturopathic  IJirectory  and  Buyers'  Guide


1237


PROF. V. GREENEWALD, M. T. D.

Graduated
121 W. 6th Street, Covington, Ky.

Nature  Nervine.  The  best  for  Nervousness,
Nervous  I^ebiHty,  Sleeplessness  and  Neurastheny.
Compound  Nervine.  Most  reliable  for  Epilepsy,
St.  Vitus  Dance  and  Pollutions.  Full  list  of  the
best  Nature  Herb  Remedies  for  all  the  different
diseases.  Herb  book  and  Price  List  will  be
sent on application.


Three  Great  Charts

The  most  useful  and  most  extensively
used  charts  ever  printed.

1.  Chart  on  Nerve  Distribution,  repre-
senting- the  distribution  of  nerves  truly
and  graphically,  with  marginal  review^
of  the  subject  and  spinal  therapy.  23  x
40  in.

2.  Chart  on  Adjustment,  Concussion,
and  Pressure.  Practical,  accurate,  and
exhaustive. 19  x  24 in.

3.  Chart  on  Zone  Therapy,  the  new-
helpful  science  to  all  other  methods.  A
chart  you  will  appreciate  with  the  others.

Price  of  citlter  chart,  postpaid $1.00
Price of two of these charts,

postpaid 1.50

Price  of  ail  three  charts,  post-
paid 2.00

Charts  are  accompanied  by  the  three
popular  booklets  on  Spinal  Concussion,
Chronic  Cures,  and  Where  to  Adjust,
Concuss,  etc.

Address :
J.  S.  Riley,  1116  F  St.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.


WE  GUARANTEE
RESULTS

Why  be  rrfiserable  when  you  can  be  happy?
Why  be  a  miserable  nobody  when  health  is
easily  within  your  reach?  Scores  of  happy,
healthy  people  living  in  nearly  every  state  of
the  Union  owe  their  present  good  health  to  a
stay  at  our  Health  Home.  Many  of  them  were
seriously  ill,  a  great  many  were  skeptical  as
to  Results — but  in  a  short  time  they  were  con-
vinced that  they  were  at  last  on  the  road  to
health.  If  you  are  acutely  or  chronically  ill,  we
can  Cure  You.  By  our  Drugless  Methods,
Biliousness,  Constipation,  Catarrh,  Nervous-
ness, Indigestion,  Obesity,  Emaciation,  Head-
ache, Insomnia,  Kidney,  Liver,  Stomach  and
Sexual  Diseases,  Rheumatism,  General  Weak-
ness, are  substituted  by  perfect  health,  in-
creased vitality  and  the  knowledge  of  how  to
retain  what  you  have  regained.  We  use  only
genuine  Physical  Culture  Methods  as  Hydro-
therapy, Curative  Gymnastics,  Massage,  Steam
Baths,  Fasting,  Milk  Diet,  Vegetarian  and  Spe-
cial Diets,  Outdoor  Cures,  Sun  Baths,  etc.
Write  for  free  booklet  today.  Address,  Schwei-
Kert  Sanitarium,  Inc.,  Box  41,  Spotswood,
N.  J., Dept. D.

Q

SCHWEI-KERT  SANITARIUM

INCORPORATED

SPOTSWOOD,  N.  J.


E^


El


111


SCIENTIFIC
PARENTHOOD

THE  PERFECT  CHILD

A COMPLETE COURSE IN EUGENICS
By William Walker Atkinson

The  result  of  the  investigatioxi  of
world's  greatest  scientists.  This  course
contains  the  very  essence  of  what  science
teaches  on  the  various  subjects  as  well  as
the  practical  results  secured  by  countless
fathers  and  mothers.  Nothing  given  is
vague or impractical.

It  acquaints  you  with  the  scientific
principles  of  the  Anatomy  and  Physiology
of  Se.x;  Mating  and  Marrying;  Marital
Relations;  Preparation  for  Parenthood;
Pre-Natal  Culture;  Gestation;  Care  of
Mother  and  Babe;  the  Weil-Born  Child;
the  Culture  of  the  Child;  the  Physiology
of  the  Child;  Mind  and  Character  Build-
ing of  the  Child;  What  Children  Should
Know  and  How  to  Teach  Them;  the
Problems  of  Babyhood,  Childhood,  Youth
and  Adolescence  and  Row  to  Meet
Them;  What  the  Young  Man  or  Woman
Contemplating  Marriage  Should  Know;
and every allied subject.

Plain,  practical,  sensible  information
regarding  the  sexual  physiological  or-
ganism and  its  functions,  its  laws,  its  uses.
8  Complete  Lessons  3Sc.  each,  or  $1.75
postpaid; with year's subscription to

Naturopath $2.75

NATURE CURE PUBLISHING CO.

Butler, New Tersfy


@


BANISH
CARE


Would  you  like  to  know  how?  Oh,  no,
it  isn't  impossible  at  all.  Quite  feasible
on  the  contrary.  A  sane  and  practical
method  is  clearly  explained  in  a  most
entertaining  manner  in

A CAREFREE FUTURE

by  August  Engelhardt.  If  you  are  in-
terested in  the  Natural  Life  and  Nat-
ural Diet  and  would  like  to  become  a
party  to  a  practical  plan  to  adopt  this
manner  of  living  at  very  little  expense
to  yourself,  read  this  book.  It  virill  be
a  surprise  to  you  and  an  inspiration
as  well.  Price,  stiff  paper  cover,  $1.00.
Cloth,  $1.50.


BENEDICT  LUST
Butler,  New  Jersey


1238


Naturopathic  Book  Catalog


VACCINATION.  Ami  Vaccina-
tion Magazine. (M) $0.50

VEGETARIAN MAGAZINE.
Houscliolil and I'lirc Food Mag-
azine. (M) .$1.00

VEGETARIAN MAGAZINE.
Vegetarianism. (  M  ) :51.00

VEGETARIAN MESSENGER.
Magazine (M) $1.50

VITALISM SERIES OF PUBLI-
CATIONS:
Dietetic Way of Health and

Beauty $0.35

Hints  for  Self-Diagnosis.  $0.45
Missing  Link  in  Dietetics.  $0.25
Nut  and  Fruit  Dietary.  ...$0.25
Sexuality  and  Vitality.  ...$0.40
Suitable  Food  and  Physical  Im-
mortality  $0.35

Vital  and Non-Vital Foods.  .$0.45
What is the Difference Between
the  Densmore  and  Leppel  Diet-
ary Systems? .$0.2.5

Von  Boeckmann.  P.— CARE  AND
DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE
LUNGS $1.00


W


Wagner.  —  HABITUAL  MOUTH
BREATHING $1.00

Waisbroker,  Mrs.  —  PERFECT
MOTHERHOOD $1.10

Walker,  J.  W.,  and  Thompson  M.
B.  —  ESTIMATION  OF  THE
RENAL  FUNCTION  IN  URI-
NARY SURGERY $.3.10

Wallace,  Rhodes  H.— PSYCHOMA
OR SOUL SLEEP. Cloth $1..30

Wallace,  Rhodes  H.— RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION  FOR  NEW
THOUGHT CHILDREN. $0.30

Wallace.  Mrs.  C.  L.  H.  —  .365
MENUS (Vegetarian) $1.10

Walton,  Dr.  George  L.— THOSE
NERVES $1.10

Walton,  Dr.  George  L.  —  WHY
WORRY? $1.10

Ward.— NOTES  ON  MASSAGE.
Interleaved $1.00

Warman, B.— PHYSIC SCIENCE  !
MADE PLAIN. Cloth .  .  .$1.50  j

Wasser.  —  DEFECTIVE  SPEECH  I
AND DEAFNESS $1.00

Wattles.  Wallace  D.— FINANCIAL
SUCCESS THROUGH CREA- |
TIVE THOUGHT; OR. SCI- i
ENCE OF GETTING RICH.  |
Cloth $1..30

Wattles. Wallace D. — HEALTH  ;
THROUGH NEW THOUGHT
AND FASTING $0..55

Wattles,  Wallace  D.  —  HOW  TO
PROMOTE YOURSELF. .$0..30

Wattles, Wallace D. — THE

SCIENCE OF BEING WELL.

$1.30

Weaver,  Louise  B.,  and  Helen  C.
LeCron.  —  A  THOUSAND
WAYS  TO  PLEASE  A  HUS-
BAND  $2.00

Waugh,  Frank  A.— THE  LAND-
SCAPE  BEAUTIFUL. .  .  .$1..50

Webb,  Dr.  Helen.— LIFE  AND
ITS BEGINNING $1.10

Wells,  R.  B.  D.  —  THE  BEST
FOOD  AND  HOW  TO  COOK
IT $0.60

Wells.  R.  B.  D.— WATER,  AND
HOW  TO  APPLY  IT  IN
HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.$0.60

Wells.  S.  R.— HOW  TO  READ
CHARACTER $1.45

Wells.  S.  R.  —  NEW  PHYSIOG-
NOMY. Cloth $.3.35

Weltmer.  —  REGENERATION:
OR,  THE  QUESTION  OF  SEX.
$1.00


WHAT  TO  EAT.  Magazine.  (M)
$1.00

Whipple,  L.  E.— THE  PHILOSO-
PHY OF  MENTAL  HEALING.
$2.00

White,  Mrs.  E.  G.— HEALTHFUL
LIVING $0.60

Wide,  Dr.  Anders.  —  HAND-
BOOK OF  MEDICAL  AND
ORTHOPEDIC  GYMNAS-

TICS  S*5  **t)

Wilcox,'  D.'f!  '—'  ETHIC AL  MAR-
RIAGE  $1.25

Wilcox,  Earley  Vernon.  —  TROP-
ICAL AGRICULTURE. $2.50

Wilder.  —  PERIL  OF  PREMA-
TURE BURIAL .$0.30

Williams,  W.  H.  — VIBRATION
THE LAW OF LIFE. ...$1.25

Willoughby.  —  NOTES  AND  IL-
LUSTRATIONS OF  THE  ES-
SENTIALS OF  HOME  SANI-
TATION  $0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.— BLOSSOM  OF
THE CENTURY $1.00

Wilmans,  Helen.— CONQUEST  OF
DEATH $3.00

Wilmans,  Helen.— CONQUEST  OF
POVERTY $1.50

Wilmans,  Helen,  and  Powers,  Ada
Wilmans.  —ESSAYS  IN  MEN-
TAL SCIENCE $1..50

Wilmans,  Helen.— EUGENE  DEL-
MAR $1.00

Wilmans,  Helen.— FREEDOM :  A
JOURNAL  OF  MENTAL  SCI-
ENCE. 3 copies $0.50

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  HOME
COURSE  IN  MENTAL
SCIENCE. 20 Lesons. $20.00

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  THE  LAST
ENEMY  TO  BE  OVERCOME
IS  DEATH .$0.25

Wilmans.  Helen.— MENTAL  SCI-
ENCE AND  CHRISTIAN  SCI-
ENCE  $0.25

Wilmans.  Helen.  —  OH,  WORLD,
SUCH  AS  I  HAVE,  I  GIVE
UNTO  THEE.  Vol.  I.  ...$1.00
Vol. II $1.00

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  OUR  PAST —
OUR FUTURE $0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.  —  SPIRITUAL-
ISM FROM  THE  STAND-
POINT OF  MENTAL  SCI-
ENCE  .$0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.— RELATION  OF
THE  IDEAL  TO  THE  AF-
FAIRS OF LIFE .$0.25

Wilmans,  Helen.— SEARCH  FOR
FREEDOM $1.50

Wilmans.  Helen.  —  THOUGHT
TRANSFERENCE  AND  MEN-
TAL HEALING $0.25

Wilson,  Floyd  B.  —  THROUGH
SILENCE  TO  REALIZATION.
$1.30


Wilson,  Dr.  J.  W. — Gully,  Dr.  J.
M.— THE  PRACTICE  OF  THE
WATER CURE ,$0.35

Wingibler,  Dr.  C.  F.— CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE  AND  KINDRED
SUPERSTITIONS $1.10

Winbigler,  Dr.  C.  F.  —  HAND-
BOOK OF  INSTRUCTIONS
FOR  HEALING  AND  HELP-
ING OTHERS $1.10

Winbigler,  Dr.  C.  F. — HOW  TO
HELP  AND  HEAL  ONE'S
SELF $l.lo

Winbigler,  Dr.  C.  F. — SUGGES-
TION; ITS  LAW  AND  AP-
PLICATION  $1.6«

Winternitz.- HYDROPATHY.  Il-
lustrated  S2.50

Winters,  Dr.  J.  E.— THE  FEED-
ING  OF INFANTS $0.60

WOMAN'S  BEAUTY  AND
HEALTH.  Physical  Culture
Magazine. (M ) .$0.T5

WOMAN'S  PHYSICAL  DEVEL-
OPMENT. Physical  Culture
Magazine. (M  ) $1.50

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary. — ALMOST
A  MAN $0..35

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.  —  AL-
MOST A  WOMAN $0.35

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.  —  BABY
RECORD .$0.6O

Wood-Allen.  Dr.  Mary.— BABY'S
FIRSTS  (First  Bath.  First  Tooth,
Etc.) $0.45

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.  —  THE
MARVELS  OF  OUR  BODILY
DWELLINGS $1.10

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.  —  WHAT
A  YOUNG  GIRL  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $l.lo

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary.— WHAT  A
YOUNG  WOMAN  OUGHT  TO
KNOW $1.10

Wood-Allen,  Dr.  Mary. — WHAT  A
WOMAN  OF  FORTY  -  FIVE
OUGHT  TO KNOW $1.10

Wood,  Catherine  J.  —  A  HAND-
BOOK OF  NURSING  FOR
THE  HOME  AND  HOSPITAL.
.$0.S5

Wood,  Catherine  J.— HANDBOOK
FOR  THE  NURSING  OF  SICK
CHILDREN $1.10

Wood,  Henry.  —  GOD'S  IMAGE
IN MAN $1.10

Wood,  Henry.— IDEAL  SUGGES-
TION THROUGH  MENTAL
PHOTOGRAPHY $1.25

Wood,  Henry.— THE  NEW  OLD
HEALING $1.45

Wright,  Dr.  Laura  M. — THE  NEW
INTERNAL  BATH .$0.25

Young,  Dr.  Meredith.  —  THE
MENTALLY  DEFECTIVE
CHILD $1.75


'RE-DISCOVERY  OF THE
LOST  FOUNTAIN  OF
HEALTH  AND  HAPPINESS


BY DR. EL LERNANTO


Sick  or  well,  old  or  young,  you  need
this  book.  No  other  writing  will  lead
you  so  truly  to  the  cause  and  scientific
cure  of  disease,  and  so  insure  to  you  a
joyous  life  and  happy  old  age.

Price,  $1 ;  cloth,  $1.50
B.  LUST,  YUNGBORN,  Butler,  N.  J.


(ieneral  List  of  Medical  WorLs


1239


CLASSIFIED  LIST  OF  GENERAL  MEDICAL  WORKS

WE  publish  the  following  carefully-prepared  list  of  general  medical  works,
which,  while  containing  many  standard  books  on  such  sciences  as  anatomy,
physiology,  chemistry,  histology,  physics,  psychology,  etc.,  also  contains  a
presentation  of  the  entire  medical  procedures  of  allopathy  and  homeopathy  and
much  that  is  essentially  naturopathy.  The  facts  therein  contained  are  all  that  is
at  present  known  of  medical  science,  and  constitute  the  larger  part  of  a  medical
education.

No  medical  practitioner,  whatever  school  he  may  belong  to,  can  achieve  pro-
fessional success  without  a  living  knowledge  of  the  contents  of  this  library  of
medical  lore.  No  real  progress  can  be  made  by  the  physician  without  having  one
foot  firmly  planted  on  this  wealth  of  medical  philosophy,  from  which  point  of
vantage  another  stride  can  be  made  into  the  unknown.

The  raison  d'etre  of  naturopathy  is  to  supplement  this  rich  expression  of
medical  fact  and  theory  with  its  more  advanced  ideas  as  to  the  treatment  of  dis-
ease, and  this  fact  makes  this  Directory  as  a  whole  a  perfect  exponent  of  the  great
art  of  healing.  We  give  elsewhere  a  full  list  of  medical  works  of  a  specifically
naturopathic  character,  both  lists  forming  a  complete  library  of  healing,  such  as  is
not  to  be  found  in  any  other  published  index  of  medical  writings.

Every  public  library,  and,  for  that  matter,  every  private  library,  should  possess
all  of  the  works  herein  tabulated,  if  one  can  afford  to  purchase  them.  All,  or  any
of  these  valuable  books  can  be  purchased,  postpaid,  at  the  prices  given.

Address: The  Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co.,  110  East  41st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


ANAT03IY, BIOIiOGY,
HEREDITV, ZOOLOGY

Abbott. Biology $1.60

Amer. Red Cross Charts (5)  2.50
.''imer. Med. Ass'n Anatomic

Charts 25

Anatomy Outlines SO

BaiUieres. Female Body...  1.60
Bardeleben. Atlas  Anatomy.  8.00
Barker. Anat. Terminology  1.00
Human Anatomy (Man-
ual) 5.00

Barnes. Anatomy, Hygiene,

Embalming 1 .  00

Bastian. Origin Life 1.50

Bateson. Genetics (Prob-
lems  of) 4.00

Bean. Anat. Philippine Is-
landers 2.00

Bechold. Colloids 1.50

Beesley and Johnston. Sur-
gical Anatomy 4.00

P.elousow. Nerves 8. 00

Bensley.  Anat. of Rabbit...  2.00

Berry. Atlas Anatomy....  12.00

Blakiston's  Manikins 1.50

Boenning. Anatomy 1 .50

Borradaile. Zoology 3.75

Box and Eccles. Clinical

Applied  Anatomy 4.00

Boyer. Lab. Biology 90

Buchanan. Anatomy. 2 vol-
umes; each 2.75

Bundy. Anatomy  and Phys.  1.75

Burkholder. Anat. of Brain  2.00
Burns and Colenso. Living

Anatomy 2.50

Campbell. Surgical  Anatomy  5.00
Castle. Genetics  and  Eugen-

_, ics 2.00

Cheatle. Surgical Anat. of

Temporal Bone 2.00

Childe. Individuality in Or-
ganisms 1 .25

Clevenger. Evolution  in  Maii  5.00

Comstock. Study  of  Insects  3.75

C^ooke. Aphorisms 1.25

Cooke. Tablets of Anat.

Part I 2.50

Parts II and III; each  3.50


Crary. Zoology 1.25

Cryce. Int. Anatomy of

Face 4.50

Cryer. Internal Face 4.50

Cunningham. Anatomy ....  7.50
Cunningham and Watersou.

Anatomy of Body 70.00

1 Head and Neck 40.00

1  Daugherty. Zoology.

Part I 1.25

Part II 2.00

Davenport. Biologic Varia-
tion 1.50

j Heredity and Eugenics...  2.50
[Davis. Applied Anatomy...  7.00
;  Davison. Mammalian Anat.  1.50
Dawson. Causation  of  Sex..  3.00
Predetermination of Sex..  .50
Deaver. Surgical Anatomy  30.00
De Barry. Comp. Anatomy  11.00
Delamere and Leaf. Anat-
omy of  Lymphatics ...  3.50
DeVries. Intracellular Pan-
genesis 1.50

Mutation Theory 4.00

Species and Varieties 2.50

Dixon. Osteology 3.00

Doncaster. Determ. of  Sex.  2.25

Drew. Invertebrate Zoology  1.25

Drinkwater. Mendelism ...  1.00
Duff and Ewell. Physical

Measurements 1.75

Dunlop. Anat. Diagrams...  2. 00
Dwight. Thoughts  of  Catho-
lic Anatomist 1.00

Fames. Eugenics 0.75

Eckley. Nomenclature ....  0.75

Eisendrath. Clinical Anat..  5.00

Ellis. Demonstrations 3.50

Race Re-generation 50

Eycleshymer. Names 4.50

Cross-section Anatomy ..  20.00

Fagge. Aids  to  Anatom'y...  1.25

Folsom. Entomology 2.50

Ford. Cranial  Nerves'  Chart  .25

Muscles of Human Body  .50

Regional Anatomy 1.50

Frazer. Anat. of Skeleton..  6.50

Frederick.  Anatomic  Methods  .50

Galloway. Biology  of  Sex..  .75

Zoology 2.00


Gaskell. Vertebrates 6.00

Geddes  and Thomson. Evo-
lution of Sex 1.50

Gerrish. Anatomy 6.50

Giles. Anat. and Phys. of

Female  Genitalia 1 .50

Gordinier.  Anatomy of

Nervous System 6.00

Gray. Anatomy 6. SO.

Haddon. Study of Man....  2.00
Haldane. Organism and

Environment 1.25

Hamaker. Biology 1.25

Hardy. Fly 1.00

Hart. Evolution  and Hered-
ity 2.50

Hartog. Life  and Reproduc-
tion 2.50

Hegner. College Zoology..  2.60
Introduction  to  Zoology ..  1.90
Heinemann. Lab. Embryol-
ogy of  Chick  and  Pig...  1.50

Heisler. Anatomy 5.00

Herbert. Heredity 2.00

Herms. Med. Entomology..  4.00

Herter. Biologic Aspects...  1.50

Hoeve. Anat.  Head  and  Neck  3.50

Holden. Anatomy (2 Vols.)  3.00

Human Osteology 5. 25

Landmarks 75

Holmes. Animal Behavior..  2.50

Biology of Frog 1.60

Hopf. Human  Species 3.00

Huntingdon. Abdom. Anat..  10.00
Hu.xley. Anatomy of Verte-

brated Animals 2.50

Imperial. Anatomy  of Head

and  Neck. 4  Parts 10.00

International Synoptical in-
dex 3.50

Jamieson. Companion to

Anatomy 2 .  00

Johnston. Medical Anatomy  2.50

Kellogg. Anatomy Charts..  S.OO

Animals and Man 1.25

Kellogg and Doane. Eco-
nomic Zoology 1.50

Kingsley. Comparative Ver-
tebrate Anat 2.25

Levis and Price. Questions

on Anatomy 1 .  00


1240


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Leonard. I'ockct Anatomist  1.00

Linville and Kelly. Zoology  1.50

Little. Anatomy 1 .  00

Locke. Variation, Heredity

and I'-volution 2.50

Locy. Biology 3.00

Loel). Artificial  Parthenogen-
esis 2.50

Organism  as  a  Whole 2.50

Macewen. Surg. Anat 3.50

Macfie. Heredity, Evolution,

Vitalism 2.50

Marshall  and  Hurst. Zoology  3.50

Martin. Human Body 2.50

McCurdy.  Anatomy and

Dissector 1.00

McFarland. Biology 1.75

McKim. Heredity and Pro-
gress 1 .50

McLachlan. Anatomy 4.00

Meigs. Blood Vessels 5.00

Metheny. Dissection Meth-
ods.
Michel. Arterial, Venous,
Nervous,  Osteology,

Heart,  Intra-Uterine,

Life, Muscular System,
Spine  and Spinal Nerves

Charts. Each 2.25 @  3.00

Minder. Manikin 2.50

Minot. Biology 1.25

Morgan. Devel. of Frog's

Egg 1.75

E.xperimental  Zoology ....  2.75

Morris. Anatomy 9.00

Morton. Abdomen Proper..  6.00

Nancrede. Anatomy 1.25'

Napheys. Trans, of Life...  2.00^

Needham. Biology 2.00  i

Needham  and  Lloyd. Life  of  j

Inland  Waters 3.00  |

Newman.  Biology  of  Twins.  1.25
Onodi.  Accessory  Sinuses..  7.00
Anatomy  of  Nasal  Cavity..  2.40
Osborn.  Economic  Zoology.  2.00
Parker.  Wormian  Bones...  .75
Parker  and  Haswell.  Zoology  9.00
Paterson.  Anatomist's  Note-
book 2.00

Patten. Evolution 4.50  1

Piersol. Anatomic  Charts.  .  .  150.00

Anatomy 10.00  |

Pilz. Manikins 3.00'

Potter. Compend of  Anat..  1.25

Pratt. Invertebrate  Zoology.  1.25  ;

Vertebrate Zoology 1.50  !

Quain. Anatomy. Vol.  I ..  3.00

Rawling. Landmarks 2.00

Redi. Generation of Insects  2.00
Reed. Sex : Origin and De-
termination 3.00  1

Reed and Guthe. Physical

Measurements 1 .  60

Raid. Heredity 3.50  i

Reynolds. Vertebrate Skele.  4.75  |

Richards. Euthenics 1.00

Riley  and  Johannsen. Medi-  ;

cal Entomology 2.20

Robinson. Eugenics, Mar-
riage and  Birth  Control.  1.00
Uterio-ovarian Artery ...  1.00
Rockwell. Dissecting  Manual  2.00
Rolleston and Jackson.

Forms of Animal Life....  9.00

Rotzel. Man I.OO

Saleeby. Parenthood 2.75

Sanderson  and  Jackson. En-
tomology 2.00

Santee. Anatomy of Brain

and Spinal Cord 4.50

Schenck. Determ. of  Sex...  1.50

Slnite. Organic Evolution..  1.25

Small  wood. Biology 2.75

Smith. Anatomy,  Physiology,

and Hygiene

Streeter. Laboratory  Anat.  .  .30

Sutton  and Drinker. Osteol-  !

ogy  and  Syndesmology.  .  1.50  i


Sutton. Evolution  and  Dis.  .  1.50
Swanberg. Intervertebral

Foramen 2.00

Intervertebral Foramina in

Man 1.75

Swedenborg. Animal King-
dom, Anatomically ....  3.00
Taber. Anatomy  and Physi-
ology Chart 5.00

Taylor. Annlied Anatomy..  10.00

Thesing. Biology 3.75

Thomson. Heredity 3.5U

Human Anatomy for ,  Art

Students 5.25

Todd. Anatomy of Gastro-
intestinal Tract 1 .75

Treves. Applied Anatomy..  2.50
Turner. Accessory Sinuses

of  Nose 5,00

Osteology 1.25

Walker. Hereditary Char-
acter 2.40

Walter. Genetics  1.50

Weissman. Heredity 3.30

Whipple and Ward. Fresh

Water Biology 1.50

Whitaker. Anatomy  of  Brain

and  Cord 2.00

Whitehead. Anat. of  Brain.  1.00

Whittaker. Surgical Anat..  2.40

Wilder. History  of  Body.  .  .  3.25

Lab. Mammalian Anat. ..  1.25
Witkowski. Atlases.

Human  Body 2.00

Bones  of  Foot 3.00

Bones  of  Hand 2.00

Brain 2.00

Female  Reprod. Organs...  3.00

Male Reprod. Organs .^.on

Mechanism of Hearing...  2.00

Mechanism  of  Vision 2.00

Mechanism of Voice,

Speech  and  Taste 2.00

Skeleton 3.00

Woodruff.  Expansion of

Races 4.00

Woolsey. Surgical Anatomy  4.50

Young. Anatomy 2.00

Yutzy. Dissections

BACTERIOLOGY, IMMUNITY

.\bbott. Bacteriology $2.75

Abel. Lab. Bacter 1.50

Ball._ Bacteriology 1.25

.\rchinard. Bacteriology ...  1.00

Besson. Bacteriology 12.00

Bolduan and Dieudonne.
Bolduan. Immune Sera....  1.50
Bacterial Food Poison. ...  1 .00
Bolduan and Ehrlich. Im-
munity 5.00

Bordet-Gay. Immunity ....  5.00
Bosanquet. Spirochaetes.  . . .  2.50
Braun. Animal Parasites
Braun and Luhe. Parasitol-
ogy 3.50

Buchanan. Household Bac-
teriology 2.25

Buller. Fungi 4.00

Burnet. Microbes 2.00

Calkins. Protozoology 3.25

Campbell. Parasitology ....  1.00

Chester. Determinative Bac.  2.60
Clarke. Protozoa. 4 Vols. ;

each 2.50

Conn. Agricultural Bacter..  2.00

Craig. Parasitic Amebae ...  2.50

Curtis. Bacteriology 3.00

De Barry. Bacteria 1.50

Morphology  and  Biology  of
Fungi, Mycetozoa, and

Bacteria 7.75

Dhingra. Bacteriology 1.12

Rhrlich-Bolduan. Immunity.  5.00

Eisenberg. Bact. Diagnosis  1.50

Ellis. Bacteriology 2.50


Emery. Bacteriology and

Hematology 2.75

Evans. Year-book of Bac.  1.25
Eyre. Bacteriologic Tech-

nic 3.0O

Fantham. Parasites 12.00

Fischer.  Structure and

Functions in Bacteria..  2.50
Fox. Bacteriology  and  Proto-
zoology 1.75

Frankland.  Bacteria  in Daily

Life 1.75

Eraser. Immunity 1.7S

Fred. Soil Bacteriology....  1.25
Frost. Lab. Guide in Bac-
teriology 1 .60

Frost  and  McCampbell. Bac-
teriology 1 .  60

Giltner. Lab. Microbiology  2.50

Gradle. Bacteria l.DO

Guyer. Animal Micrology.  .  2.0O

Herms. Lab. Parasitology.  .  .80

Hewlett. Bacteriology ....  4.50-

Hiss  and Zinsser. Bacteriol.  3.75
Hoag and Kahn. Histology

and Bacteriology I.OO

Hueppe. Bacteriology ....  1.75

Jordan. Bacteriology 3.25

Kendall. Bacteriology ....  4.50
Klopstock and Kowarsky.

Chem., Microscopy, Bac.  3.50

Lafar. Technical Mycology  11.50
Lehmann, Neumann and
Weaver. Bacteriology.

2 Parts;  each 2.50

MacFarland. Pathogenic Bac-
teria 4.0O

MacNeal. Micro-organisms.  2.50

Marshall. Microbiology  ....  3.00
Mast. Light and Behavior

of Organisms 2.50

MetschnikofT. Immunity ..  5.25

Millard. Vaccination 2.40

Minett. Diagnosis of Bac-
teria 1.00

Mitchell. Mosquito Life....  2.00

Moor  and Hewlett. Bact. ..  4.50

Moore. Laboratory Direc. .  .  .  1.00

Microbiology 4.00

Moore and Partridge. Bac-
teriology 1.25

Morrey. Bacteriology ....

Muir. Immunity 3.00

Muir  and  Ritchie. Bacteriol.  3.25

Newman. Bacteriology ....  2.00
Nuttall. Bacteriology of

Diphtheria 5.25

Immunity and Blood Re-
lationship 4.75

Park and Williams. Patho-
genic Micro-organisms..  4.00
'  Parsons  annd  Wright. Anat-
omy. 2 Vols 4.80

'  Pfingst and Cashin. Bacter.  1.25

j  Pittfield. Bacteriology 1.25

[  Pozzi, Cohn. Escat. Toxins,

Poisons. Antibodies ....  1.00
:  Prescott  and  Winslow.  Water

I Bacteriology 1.75

Prudden. Story of Bacteria  I.OO

Reid. Bacteriology 1.2S

Richet. Anaphylaxis 1.40

Ricketts. Infection, Immun-
ity, Serum  Therapy 2.00

Russell  and  Hastings. Dairy

Bacteriology 1 .00

Savage. Bac. of Food and

Water 2.50

Schenk. Bacteriology 3.00

Schneider. Bac. for Food

and  Drug  Laboratories..  2.50

Pharm. Bac 2.00

.Schottelius. Bacteria 3.50

.Shattock. Bacteria Patho-
genic in  Man 1.00

Simon. Infection and Im-
munity 3.25

Smith. Bacteriology 1.50

Sternberg. Bacteriology ...  5.00

Infection  and  Immunity.  .  .  1.75

Symes. Bacteriology 1.00


Universal  Niituroiiathic Dirootory  iiiitl ItiijerN'  (iuide


1241


(T


=^


THE  ADVANTAGES  OF  RAW  FOOD

By  JULIAN  P.  THOMAS,  M.  D.

Tmo  hook  is  a  reproduction  of  an  address  delivered  Ijefore  the  Physical  Culture
Association  of  America  hy  Dr.  Thomas,  its  President.  Many  questions  were  asked
the  lecturer  hy  the  audience  on  all  phases  of  physiology  and  nutrition,  and  the
lecturer's replies were apt and very illuminating.

The  point  made  hy  Dr.  Thomas  is  that  fiic  changes  food  from  a  living  to  a  dead
thing,  and  that  the  dead  material  entering  the  circulation  settles  in  the  joints,  tissues
and  nerves,  contracting  and  hardening  them.  This  process  continues  until  the  walls
of  the  arteries  and  veins  are  so  hardened  that  the  hlood  cells  cannot  get  through  them
to  nourish  the  ultimate  parts  of  the  hody;  therefore,  chronic  starvation  occurs  in  every
tissue  of  the  body.  Hesides,  the  secretions  retained  hy  the  inability  of  the  unfed  organs
to  eliminate  them  gradually  poison  the  entire  organism.

The  proof  of  the  pudding  is  in  the  eating.  Dr.  Tliomas  proved  by  the  statements  of
many  of  his  patients  who  were  present,  that  his  raw  food  diet  had  worked  wonders
with  them.  One  man  stated  that  he  had  gained  thirty  pounds  in  a  shoi't  time  by  living
on  raw  food,  and  had  immensely  improved  his  vital  force.  Another  confessed  that  he
had  gained  sixty  pounds,  and  liis  employer  increased  his  salary  according  to  his  weight.

Dr.  Thomas  lias  made  out  an  unanswerable  argument  in  favor  of  living  on  natural,
uncooked  food.  All  who  wish  to  get  rid  of  dead  organic  matter  that  has  been  accumu-
lated in  their  systems,  of  mucus,  uric  acid,  germs,  bile,  accumulated  fat,  chalky  de-
posits, fermenting  acids  and  gases,  should  read  this  book,  so  as  to  adopt  a  method  of
increasing  his  vital  forces,  as  the  only  method  of  getting  freedom  from  disease.

"The  Advantages of  Raw Food"  is  certainly  a  valualile  book.

Price,  in  cloth,  postpaid,  $1.50

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


^


Dr.  Thomas  (trgiies  that  an-
imals which  subsist  on  raw
food  live  from  five  to  seven
times  as  long  as  they  require
to  develop,  while  man,  liv-
ing on  cooked  food,  scarcely
lives  more  than  three  times
his  period  of  development.


e


Of  course,  these  rules  are
varied  to  suit  each  individual
case,  as  dictated  hy  a  wide
experience  with  siich  treat-
ments, but  the  result  invar-
iably transforms  a  weak,  un-
fed creature  to  a  man  or  wo-
man full  of  spirit  and  energy.


Dr.  Thomas'  theory  is  that
cooking  destroys  vital  cells
intended  to  replace  the  cells
that  wear  out  in  ministering
to  the  activities  of  the  body:
they  fill  the  consumer  with
vitality,  and  the  system  with
disease  and  later  cause  death.


^


He  first  cleans  out  their
systems,  and  then  adminis-
ters a  bountiful  supply  of
raw  food,  sufficient  rest,  ex-
ercise and  fresh  air.  Com-
bined, they  effect  a  natural
source  of  cure,  producing,
as a result, health.


^


V^


MAL-ASSIMILATION  AND  ITS  COMPLICATIONS

By  JULIAN  P.  THOMAS,  M.  D.

THIS  book  is  a  record  of  discussions  at  six  clinics,  held  at  Dr.  Thomas'  Institute,
to  discuss  the  best  method  of  keeping  the  body  in  good  health.  The  personnel
ot  the  clinic  included  Dr.  Thomas,  the  celebrated  raw  food  expert;  Dr.  Jackson,
a  mental  scientist;  Dr.  Smith,  a  family  physician;  Dr.  Gilbert,  a  surgeon;  and  Dr.
Jones,  an  osteopath,  all  of  whom  express  their  ideas  freely  regarding  the  arguments
advanced.

various  points  of  view,  especially  if  mal-assimilation  and  lack  of  appetite  be  his  trou-
ble. Various  patients  appear  before  the  clinic  suffering  from  neurasthenia,  constipa-
tion, heart  tiouble,  insomnia,  who  are  tired,  despondent,  anaemic,  and  thoroughlv  dis-
gusted with  life.

They  have  tried  all  kinds  of  drugs,  have  traveled  and  visited  various  mineral  springs,
have  been  adherents  of  Christian  Science,  Mental  Science,  and  other  forms  of  Faith
Thomas  conducts  his  method  of  cure  on  several  of  the  patients  right  before  their eyes.

His  rules  of  health  are  thus  summarized:  1.  Fast,  and  eat  nothing  until  vour'dc-
sire  for  food  returns.  2.  Drink  plenty  of  water,  quarts  of  it.  If  possible,  at  a  sitting.
3.  Take  a  daily  bath,  either  a  shower  or  a  sitz  bath,  every  morning.  t.  Take  deep
breathing  exercises.  5.  Take  light  exercise  for  an  hour,  or  walk  five  miles  a  dav.  Eat
several  cakes  of  unflred  food  at  each  meal.  C.  Drink  two  or  more  quarts  of  milk
per day.

This  is  the  object  of  the  book,  which  is  full  of  vital  information  regarding  the  wav
to secure  abounding  health.

Price,  in  paper,  postpaid,  $1.00

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


J


1242


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Swithinbank ami Xcwman.

Bacteriology of Milk 8.00

Thomas  and Ivy. Immunol-
ogy 4. 50

Vaughan. Infection  ami Im-

mtinity 1 .00

Protein Products and Im-
munity 3.00

Von Ruch. Immunization

Against  Tuberculosis ...  4.00

West. Laboratory Notes...  1.50

Williams  and  Williams. Lab-
oratory Technic 2.50

WolfF-Eisner. Immunity  and

Serodiagnosis 2.50

Woodruff. Medical Ethnol-
ogy 3.50

Wright. Immunization ....  5.00

Zinsser. Infection and Re-
sistance 3.50

BOTANY

Arber. Herbals $3.25

Bastin. College  Botany 2.50

Bergen and Caldwell. Bot-
any 1.30

Chamberlain. Plant Histol-
ogy 2.2.''

Chandler. Plant Study 1.5(

Clute. Lab. Botany /.'

Coulter. Sex in Plants....  1.0(.
Coulter and Chamberlain.

Gymnosperms 5  .  00

Curtis. General Botany....  3.00

De Vries. Plant-Breeding..  1.50

Duggar. Fungous Diseases.  2.00

Gager. Fundamentals 1.50

Laboratory Guide 90

Goebel. Organography of
Plants.

Part 1 3.25

Part II 6.75

Green. Vegetable Pliys.  .  .  .  3.00
Kraemer. Applied and Eco-
nomic  Botanv 6.00

Outline Course 50

MacDougall. Plant Physiol.  3.00
Mansfield. Histology  of  Me-
dicinal Plants 3.00

Meier. Herbarium.

Plant Study 60

Newell. Botany 1.20

Oliver. Makers British Bot-
any 3.25

Pepoon, Mitchell and Max-
well. Plant Life 50

Pepoon.  Re|)resentative

Plants .60

PfefTer. Physiology  of  Plant  6.75

Rusby. Botany 2.50

Solerder.  Dicotyledonous

Orders. 2 Vols 16.50

Solms-Laubach. Fossil Bot.  5.00

Sorauer. Phys. of Plants..  3.00

Spalding. Introduction SO

Stevens. Introduction 1.2.S

Plant Anatomy 2.50

Tavera. Medical plants of

Philippines 2.00

Vinal. Botany 60

Youngken. Pharm. Botany  1.00


BRAIN. XERVOUS AND
MENTAL. INSANITY. PSY-
CHOTHERAPY, ETC.

Achorn. Disorders of Men-
tal Origin $0.25

Adler. Neurotic Constitu-
tion 3.00

A. M. A. Narcotic  Addiction  .10

Ash. Mind  and Health 1.25

Bailey. Dis.  of  Nervous  Sys-
tem from Accident 5.  SO

Ball. Syphilis of Nervous

System 4.00

Ballance. Decompression ..  1.00

Ballet. Neurasthenia 3.00


Barker. Nervous  System....  4.50
Barnes. Arterial and Nerv-
ous Systems. .'\tlas ...  20. OC

Barnett. Delinquents 1.25

Barr. Mental Defectives.... 4.00
Beard and Rockwell. Nerv-
ous Exhaustion 2.00

Benson. Nervous  System.  .  .  .60

Bcrnheim. Suggestion Ther.  3.50

Bianchi. Psychiatry 6.00

Hickmore. Industries for

Feebleminded 80

Bing. Nervous Diseases....  5.00
Regional Diag. in Brain

and Cord Diseases 3.00

Bjerre. Psychoanalysis ....  3.00

Bolton. The Brain 5.00

Boyd. PZmanuel  Movement..  1.00
Bramwell. Hypnotism ....  2.00
Braun and Friesner. Cere-
bellar Abscess 2.50

Bridger. Minds in Distress  1.25

Brill. Psychoanalysis 3.25

Burr. Psychology  and Men-
tal  Diseases 1 .  50

Cabot. Psychotherapy 25

Campbell. Focal Symptoms

in General Paralysis....  1.25

Chaddock. Psychiatry ....  1.50

Chase. Mental  Medicine....  2.00

Paresis 1.75

Church. Nervous  Diseases..  6.50
Church  and Peterson. Nerv-
ous and  Mental 5  .00

Clark. Epilepsy 75

Clarke. Building  of  a  Brain.  1.25

Hysteria 1.75

Cleaves. Autobiography of

Neurasthene 1.50

Clevenger. Medical Juris-
prudence of Insanity. 2

Vols 12.00

Clouston. Unsoundness of

Mind 2.50

Cole. Mental Diseases ....  3.00
Collins. Letters  to Neurolo-
gist 1.00

Way  with  Nerves 1.51

Cooper. Path. Inebriety....  1.50
Coriat. Abnormal Psychol-
ogy 2.50

Corning. Headache 1 .00

Courtney. Nerves 1 .25

Craig. Psychologic  Medicine  6.00

Crothers. The Drug Habit.  1.00
Curschmann. Nervous Dis.

2 Vols 12.00

Cuthhertson. Nervous Dis.  .  .25
Cutten, Psychology of Al-
coholism 1 .  50

Dana. Nen^ous and Mental.
Neuro.  Case  Record ;  per

100 5.00

De Courmelles. Hynnotism.  1.25
De Fursac and Rosanofif.

Psychiatry 2 .  50

Dejerine  and  Gauckler. Psy-

choneuroses 4.00

Denslow. Surg.  Treat. Loco-
motor Ataxia 1 .25

Dercum. Mental Diseases..  3.00

Rest  and Suegestion 3.50

Diefendorf. Clin. Psychiatry  3.75

Doll. Feeblemindedness  ...  2.50

Donaldson. Growth  of  Brain  1.50

Draper. Poliomyelitis 1.75

Dubois. Mind on Body 50

Nervous States 75

Psychic  Treatment 3.00

Psychologic  Origin  of  Men-
tal Disorders 50

Eder. War Shock  and Psy-

choneuroses 1 .  75

Elli.s. World of Dreams ..  2.00

Ferenczi. Psychoanalysis ...  3.00

Ferrier. Tabes Dorsalis.  .  .  .  1.50

Fiske. Brain 1.25

Forel. Hypnotism 3.50

Fox. Psychopathology of

Hysteria 2.00


Frenkel. Tabetic Ataxia...  3.00

Freud. Dreams 1.25

Psychopathology  of Every-
day Life 3.50

■  Wit  and  the  I'nconscious.  .  2.50
Friesner and Braun. Cere-
bellar Abscess 2.50

Gaskell. Nervous System..  1.80

Goddard. Criminal Imbecile  1.60

Feeble  Mindedness 4.50

Kallikak Family 1.60

Gordon. Nervous  Diseases..  4.00

Gowers. Epilepsy, etc 1.25

I^ectures 2 .  00

Nervous System 4.00

Grasset. Diagnosis of Dis-
eases of the Cord 65

Semi-insane 2.50

Halphide. Mind  and Body..  1.25

Psychic and Psychicism.  .  .  1.00
Handbook for  Attendants  on

Insane 1 .25

Hardesty. Neurologic Tech-
nic 1.75

Hare. Alcoholism 2.0O

Harris. Injuries  of  Nerves.  .  1.25

Hartenberg. Neurasthenia  ..  2.00

Hering. Memory 75

Herrick. Neurology 1.75

Herter. Diagnosis of Or-
ganic Nervous  Dis 3.00

Hilgcr. Hypnosis 3.00

Hitschman. Freud's Theory  2.00
Hollander. First  Signs  of  In-
sanity 3.25

Mental Symptoms 2.50

Nervous  Disorders  of  Men.  1.25
Nervous Disorders of

Women 1.25

Horder. Cerebrospinal  Fever  1.25

Howard. Sex Worship....  1.50

The Perverts 1.50

Hudson.  Psyciiic  Phenomena  1.50
Law  of  Mental  Medicine..  1.50
Hughes.  Neurologic  Med...  3.00
Hunt.  Diagnostic  Symptoms  2.00
Hutchinson.  Surgical  Treat-
ment of  Facial  Neuralgia  2.50
Jakob and Fisher. Atlas of

Nervous System 3.50

Janet. Symptoms of Hys-
teria 1.75

Jastrow. Fact and Fable in

Psychology 2  .  00

The .Subconscious 2.50

Jellifife. Psychoneuroses and

Psychotherapy 4.50

Jellifife and White. Nervous

and  Mental 6 .  00

Jennings. Morphia Habit...  2.00
Johnston. Nervous  System  of

Vertebrates 3 .  00

Jung. Analytic Psychology.  3.50
Psychology of Uncon-
scious 4.00

Kaplan. Serology of Nerv-
ous and Mental 3.50

Kellogg. Neurasthenia ....  2.00
Kent  and  RosanofT, Associa-
tion in Insanity 75

Kraepelin. Clinical Psychia-
try 3  .  50

Kraft-Ebing. Insanity 4.00

Psychopathia Sexualis ..  3.50
Krause. Surgery of Brain.
Surgery of Brain and

Cord 20.00

Lapponi.  Hypn.  and  Spirit  1.50
Lawrence.  Primitive  Psycho-
therapy and  Quackery..  2.00
Leavitt.  Psycho-therapeutics  2.00
Lewis.  Mental  Diseases....  7.00
Lickley.  Nervous  System..  1.80
Lombroso.  Men  of  Genius..  1.50
Lorand.  Building  Intelli-
gence 3 .00

Lugaro. Psychiatry 2.50

layman. Insomnia 1 .00

Macnamara. Instinct and

Intelligence 2.00

Mann. Psychologic  Medicine  3.00


I


Universal  Naturopathic l)ir«M>tory  and Buyers'  (iiiide  11:43


BOOKS  ON  NATURE  CURE


RETURN  TO  NATURE. By  Adolf  Just—  ,)f"  ;,Lfu, o'pa'^!!?  '.if

erature  issued  of  late  years  from  the  press,  this  work  stands  out  conspicuously
as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude  in  the  naturopathic  heavens.  The  author  is  known
throughout  the  whole  world  as  a  pioneer  of  the  simple  life,  a  great-hearted
humanitarian,  at  whose  celebrated  institution  of  Yungborn,  in  the  Hartz  Moun-
tains in  Germany,  thousands  of  ailing  mankind  have  been  regenerated  physically
and  morally  by  reason  of  living  in  intimate  communion  with  Nature.  This  work
is  a  modern  amplification  of  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  who  after  leaving
a  happy  home,  spent  health  and  fortune  in  indulging  in  an  artificial  life  amid
the  abodes  of  sin  until,  when  despairing  of  life  itself,  he  rose  in  a  frenzy  of  pain
and  remorse  and  resolved  to  return  to  father  Nature,  whom  he  had  scorned  for
many  years.  Our  author  recounts  in  simple  language  how  man  may  return  to
health  and  vigor  after  having  deviated  from  a  natural  life  by  false  modes  of  life,
false  foods,  false  stimulants,  and  the  cares  and  worries  of  life,  by  employing
natural  methods  of  healing,  eschewing  all  drugs  and  many  disastrous  sophistica-
tions of  civilized  life.  Not  only  does  he  employ  the  physical  forces  of  nature  in  his
ministrations  to  sick  humanity,  but  Herr  Just,  with  a  just  appreciation  of  man's
most  vital  needs,  claims  that  the  true  nature-cure  system,  penetrates  with  its
healing  powei-  the  innermost  recesses  of  body,  mind  and  soul.  Recognizing  the
value  of  man  being  released  from  vice  and  crime,  hatred  and  envy  and  charged
with  the  marvelous  healing  effects  of  pea,ce,  joy  and  brotherly  love,  the  author
has  interwoven  with  his  philosophy  of  natural  healing  copious  dissertations  on
the  moral  and  spiiitual  philosophy  of  the  Bible,  the  whole  forming  a  unique
volume  of  300  pages,  pregnant  with healing  truths.

There  is  a  supplement  describing  the  American  Yungborn,  founded  by  Dr.  Ben-
edict Lust  at  Butler,  N.  J.,  in  the  midst  of  the  Ramapo  Hills,  some  38  miles  from
New  York.  Here,  after  its  prototype  in  the  Hartz  Mountains  of  Germany,  is
located  a  center  of  healing  power  where  Nature  heals  the  sick  and  the  semi-
invalid  with  her  refreshing  and  strengthening  influences. — Price,  in  ctotli,  post-
paid, $:i.20;  paper  cover,  $2.00.


A  MESSAGE  TO  ALL  DRUGLESS  HEALING  SYSTEMS
AND  A  REMINDER. By  A,  A,  Erz,  D.  C— ^h'^differfnt  ZT-

tems  of  drugless  healing  the  importance  of  uniting  all  organizations  of  such
practitioners  into  one  central  federation  in  order  to  obtain  just  laws,  giving  all
approved  methods  of  healing  equal  rights,  with  special  privileges  to  none.
He  warns  against  making  any  compact  with  official  medicine  on  the  part  of
naturopaths,  citing  the  case  of  a  recent  "backyard"  compromise  recently  made
with  a  few  drugless  practitioners  who  surrendered  the  right  to  welcome  any
new  schools  of  drugless  healing,  and  even  agreed  to  join  the  allopaths  in  hunting
down  the  adherents  of  such  schools,  in  return  for  allopathic  recognition.  As  a
result  the  doctor's  trust  has  now  forced  the  drugless  practitioners,  who  are  in
alliance  therewith,  to  fight  a  bill  of  the  independent  practitioners  which  aims
to  provide  two  distinct  boards  of  examiners,  one  for  the  drug  doctors  and  one
for  the  drugless  doctors.  What  a  dishonorable  position  to  occupy  in  which  the
physiotherapeutists  are  compelled  to  fight  their  own  school  of  healing! — Price
15  cents.


BACK  TO  NATURE  AND  TO  NATURE'S  GOD. By

D^^, V^^JZ^^^J Qs.1^.^1^ The author of this naturopathic tract is en-

t\eV, rerainana Jtierie amoured of just's book "Return of Nature."

and  is  a  fervent  apostle  of  the  natural  life  and  natural  methods  of  healing.
The  return  to  Nature  presupposes  a  departure  from  Nature,  and  our  author  very
clearly  shows  that  men  who  in  the  beginning  subsisted  on  ripe  fruits  and  nuts
and  lived  a  natural  life  in  company  with  light,  warmth  of  the  sun,  air.  rain,
and  streams,  in  a  more  or  less  nude  state,  soon  sought  out  methods  of  gratifying
desires,  and  indulged  in  an  artificial  mode  of  life,  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit  of
animal  flesh,  drinking  intoxicating  liquors,  living  according  to  their  own  desires
and  inclinations,  so  that  instead  of  getting  health,  joy,  peace  and  happiness,  they
only  got  sickness,  discontent,  sin,  misery,  yea  a  hell  on  earth.  Mr.  Stierle  ad-
vocates the  natural  bath,  that  is  to  say.  a  bath  of  the  pelvic  region  only,  the
rain  bath  and  even  the  snow  bath.  He  defines  the  proper  application  of  light
and  air,  wet  earth  and  earth  baths,  and  proper  food  and  clothing,  if  the  sick
would be cured and disease prevented. Price, postpaid, 20 cents.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J


1244


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Marrs. Confessions  ol  a  Neu-

rastliciiic 1.00

Mason. Hypnotism 1.50

Telcjiathy 1.50

Matlier. Anat. and Pliys...  1.50
Maudsley. Responsibility in

Mental Diseases 1.50

McBride. Alcoiiolism and

Narcotism 2.50

McComI). Self-Suggestion  .  .  .  .50

Mclntyre. Neurology 1.25

Meige and l'"ein(lel. Tics...  3.00
Mendel and Krauss. Psychi-
atry 2.00

Mercier. Conduct 3.00

Sanity  ami Insanity 1.50

Text-book of Insanity....  2.25

Mettler. Nervons  System...  5.00

Meyer. Dementia I'raecox.  1.00

Unman Behavior 2.00

Miller. Hypnotism and Dis-
ease 1 .50

Mitchell.  Self-Helps for

Nervons 1.00

Moll. Hypnotism 1.50

Moses. Psychology  and  Neu-
rology of Fear 1 .00

Mott.  Mental  Development  1.50
Muin-o.  Suggestive  Therap.  5.00
Munsterberg.  Psychotherapy  2.25
Nag«l.  Mental  and  Nervous  1.00
Neumann.  Cerebellar  Ab-
scesses 1 .  60

Ochorowicz. Mental  Sugges-
tion 2.50

Oppenheim. Nervous Dis.  . 15.00

Psychotherapeutic 35

Ormerod. Nervous Diseases  .50

Page. t:are of Insane 1.25

Patrick  and  Pollock. Nervous

and Mental 1.35

Payot. Education of Will..  1.50

Pearce. Nervous System...  3.00

Pegler. Fifth  Nerve 8.00

Pershing. Diagnosis  of  Men-
tal  and Nervous Dis....  1.25
Pettey. Narcotic Drug Dis.  4.00
Pfister. Psychoanalytic

Method 4.00

Phelps. Injuries of Brain..  5.00
Piersol-Villiger. Brain and

Cord 4.00

Posey and Spiller. Eye and

Nervous System 7.00

Potts. Nervons and Mental  2.75
Powell. Surgical Aspects of

Traumatic Insanity 60

Price anti Eag'eton. Charts

of Nervo-Vascular Sys.  .50
Prince. Dissociation of Per-
sonality 2.80

Psychotherapeutics 1.00

Subconscious  Phenomena  ..  1.00
Ribot. I'sychology of Emo-
tions 1.50

Riley. Headaches 1 .25

Robinson. Abdominal and

Pelvic Brain 3.50

Sabin. Atlas  of  the Medulla

and Midbrain 1.7S

Sainsbury. Drugs and Drug

Habits 2.50

Savage. Alcoholism 1.50

Savage ami Goodall. Insan-
ity 1.50

Savin. Hysteria 2.50

Sawyer. Insomnia 1 .  00

Schofield. Functional Nerve

Diseases 2.50

Management of Nervous

Patient 1.75

Nerves in Disorder 1 .  50

Nerves in Order 1.50

Nervousness .50

Shaw. Nervous Diseases...  1.25

Golden  Rules  of  Psychiatry  .50

Sherren. Injuries of Nerves  2.00
Sidis. I'"oundations of Psy-
chology.

Hypnoidal Psychotherapy.  2.00

Psychology  of  Suggestion.  .  1.75


Sidis.  Psychopathic  Diseases  2.00
Psychopathologic  Research  3.00
Sherrington.  Integralion  Ac-
tion of  Nervous  System.  3.50
Solis.  Diagnosis  of  Cord...  .65
Sophian. Epidemic Cerebro-

meningitis 3.00

Spear. Nervous Diseases...  2.75

Spitzka. Insanity 2.00

Starr. Nervous  Diseases....  6.00

Stearns. Insanity 1.50

Stewart. Diag. in Nervous

Dis 6.00

Nerve Injuries 3 .  00

Stiles. Nervous  System 1.50

Stoddart. Mind Disorders..  4.50

Psychiatry 1.25

Talbot. Degeneracy 1.50

Tanzi. Mental Diseases....  7.50

Taylor. Case Histories....  5.00
Thomson. Cerebrospinal

Fluid  from  Nose 1.50

Thomson. Nervous  Diseases  2.75

Tredgold. Mental  Deficiency  4.25
Tubby and Jones. Surgery

of Paralysis 3 .  50

Tuckey. Psychotherapeutics  3.50
Turner and Stewart. Nerv-
ous Diseases 6.00

Verworn. Irritability 3.50

Vincent. Hypnotism 2.00

Vittoz. Neurasthenia 1 .  20

Walsh. Psychotherapy ....  6.50

Wells. Psychology  in  Med..  1.50
White and Jellifife. Nervous

and  Mental.  2  Vols...  12.00
Williamson.  Spinal  Cord..  5.50
Wilson.  Nervous  System...  1.25
Wingfield.  Hypnotism  ....  2.00
Winslow.  Forty  Years  Ex-
perience as Expert 3.50

Insanity of Passion and

Crime 3 .50

Wiskwar. Dreams 6.50

Wundt. Physiologic  Psychol-
ogy 3.00

Psychology 2.25

Wylie. Meningitis 2.60

Younger. Insanity 1 .25

Zenner. Mind Cure 1.25


CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS

Abderhalden  and  Hall. Phys.

Chem $5.00

Abegg  and  Von  Ende. Elec-
trolytic Dissociation....  1.25
Ahrens, Hartley and Burns.

Physics 1.25

Alexander and Zsigmondy.

Colloids 3.00

Alexeyeff and Matthews.

Organic Syntheses 3.00

Allen. Commercial Organic

Analysis. 9 Vols 40.00

Quantitative Analysis ....  1.00

Allyn. Chemistry 60

Armstrong.  Carbohydrates

and Glucosides 1 .  50

Arnold-Mandcl. Chemistry.  .  3.00

Arrhenius. Immunochemistry  1.60

Theories of Solutions 2.25

Arup. Industrial Organic

Analysis 2.25

Aungst. Technical  Anal....  1.00
Austen. Notes for Chemical

Students 1.50

Austin. Clinical Chemistry.  1.75
Autenrieth. Detection of

Poisons 2.25

Bailey  and  Cady. Analysis..  1.50
Barger. Simpler Natural

Bases 1.80

Barker. Chemistry 1.75

P.arnett. Organic  Compounds  2.75

Bartley. Medical Chemistry  3.00
Baskerville. Inorganic

Chemistry 1 .  SO

Baskerville  and Curtis. I.ab.

Manual  Chemistry 40


Baskerville and Estabrooke.

Chemic Problems 90

Bayley.  Pocketbook ' for

Chemists 2.00

Bayliss.  Enzyme  Action....  1.50
Beal.  Chemical  and  Phar-
maceutical Arithmetic  ..  l.OO
Beatty.  Enzyme  Action....  1.75
Benedict.  Organic  Analysis  1.00
Benton.  Lab.  Chemistry...  .40
Bernstein.  Carbon  Dioxid..  1.50
Bernthsen. Organic Chem..  2.50

Bigelow. General Chem 50

Riltz. Molecular Weights...  2.00
Biltz, Hall and Blanchard.

Inorganic Chemistry 2.50

Bingham and White. Inor-
ganic  Chemistry 1.00

Blanchard. Synthetic Inor-
ganic  Chemistry l.OO

Bloxam. Chemistry 6.0O

Blucher. Industrial Chem..  7.50

Bockman. Celluloid 2.50

Boltger. Qualitative Analy-
sis 2 .  GO

Bolton  and Revis. Exam,  of

Fatty Foods 3. SO

Boltwood  and Van Deveuter.

Physical Chemistry 1.50

Boynton, Morse and Wat-  ,

son. Lab. Chemistry  ..  .50
Browning  and Gooch. Qual.

Chemical Analysis ....  1.25

Bunge. Organic Chemistry.  2.00
Phvsiologic and Pathologic

Chemistry 3  .  00

Burton. Colloidal  Solution..  1.80
Caven and Lander. Inor-
ganic Chemistry 2.00

Chaffee. Lab. Physics 1.30

Cheever. Inorganic Quanti-
tative Analysis 2.00

Cheston,  Gibson  and  Timmer-

man. Physics 1.2S

Chittenden. Physio. Chem.  4.00

Chute. Lab. Physics 90

Practical Physics 1.25

Clarke. Organic  Analysis...  1.40
Classen-Hall. Chemical  Anal-
ysis by Electrolysis.  ..  .  2.50
Classen-Harriman. Quantita-
tive  Analysis 4.00

Claude. Liquid Air, Oxy-
gen, Nitrogen !.  S  .  SO

Clowes  and Coleman. Quan-
titative Analysis 3  .  SO

Coblentz  and  Vorisek. Volu-
metric Analysis 2.0O

Cohen. Organic Chemistry.  1 .  10
Physical  Chemistry  for  Bio-
logists 1 .75

Theoretical Organic  Chem.  2.00
Cohn. Indicators and Test

Papers 2.0O

Tests_  and  Reagents 3.00

Cohnheim. Enzymes l.SO

Cole. Physiologic Chem..  2. SO

Coleman. Physics 1 .25

Congdon.  Laboratory  In-
structions in  Chemistry..  l.OO
Cook.  Lab.  Organic  Chem.  .35
Cramer.  Chemical  Physiology  l.OO
Crookes.  Chemical  Analysis  8.00
Crovyther.  Molecular  Physics  l.SO
Dakin.  Oxidations  and  Re-
ductions 1 .  40

Danneel  and Merriam. Elec-
trochemistry 1 .25

Dennis and Whittelsey.

Qualitative Analysis 1 .25

Douglas. Chemistry  and  Tox.  .50

Dreaper. Chemical Research  1.25
Chemistry  and  Physics  and

Dyeing 3.50

Duff. Physics 3.00

Duhem-Burgess. Thermody-
namics and  Chemistry...  4.00
Effront and Prescott. En-
zymes 2.75

Elbs. Electrolytic Prepara-
tions 1 .  60


UnlTersal  Naturopathic  Directory  niul lliiyerN'  Guide  1245


DEFYING DISEASE AND POVERTY


THE  CARE  OF  CHILDREN  IN  SICKNESS  AND  IN
HEALTH. By  Sebastian  Kneipp. — ger^of '"disease  Ld  death^to

which  innocent  children  are  subject,  who  inherit  pain  and  misery  by  simply
being  born  into  a  world  so  beautiful,  but  that  conceals  so  much  sorrow,  a  book
like  this,  by  that  great  apostle  of  hydropathy.  Father  Kneipp,  that  tells  how
children  should  be  fed  and  cared  for  so  as  to  reduce  their  liability  to  disease  to
a  minimum,  and  then  when  they  are  actually  sick,  how  his  nature-cures  come
to  the  relief  of  the  little  sufferers  without  the  use  of  poisonous  drugs,  is  simply
invaluable.  In  this  book,  parents  are  advised  how  to  take  care  of  themselves  so
as  to  produce  eugenic  babies.  Advice  is  given  for  the  care  of  children  from  birth
to  teething,  from  teething  to  school  days,  and  for  children  during  the  school  age.
Every  possible  disease  peculiar  to  childhood  has  its  appropriate  natural  remedy
indispensable  guide  for  the  proper  conduct  of  children,  and  is  therefore  recom-
mended as  a  household  necessity. — Price,  postpaid,  bound  in  stiff  paper  covers,
55  cents;  in  clotli,  $1.00.


THE  NEW  PARADISE  OF  HEALTH:  THE  ONLY  TRUE
NATURAL METHOD OF HEALING AND LIVING.

D-. Aflrtif tttvi This is  a  dissertation of  how man  may be energized and

"J'  /*uC»t#  «/U5{  healed  of  his  many  infirmities  by  a  return  to  nature  in
the  form  of  baths,  by  reveling  in  air  and  light,  by  employing  applications  of
earth  to  the  body,  by  eating  unfired  foods;  in  a  word,  sick  humanity  must  return
to  the  woods  and  live  again  as  Adam  did  in  the  long  ago,  and,  under  the  green
canopy  of  leaves,  or  out  in  the  sunshine,  frequent  the  flowery  meads  and  flashing
streams.  The  Yungborn  is  no  infirmary,  hospital  or  medical  sanitarium,  in  the
ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  but  is  a  kind  of  recreation  home  with  an  opportunity
for  a  true  natural  method  of  living  and  winning  health  and  vigor,  and  where
the  preservation  of  health  is  taught.  The  pamphlet  is  a  condensation  of  Herr
Just's  larger  work  noticed  elsewhere  and  insists  on  the  necessity  of  obeying  the
laws  of  nature.  The  methods  of  doing  so,  when  fully  employed,  result  in  elimi-
nating the  poisons  from  food  products,  and  the  debris  of  worn-out  tissues  that
the  organs  of  the  body  are  too  weak  to  do,  under  artificial  and  false  methods
of  life,  hence  the  abundant  joy  of  life,  the  elasticity,  the  elan  of  youth,  the
Just,  or  Doctor  Lust,  either  at  the  Yungborn  of  Germany,  or  the  Yungborn  of
Butler, New Jersey.- — Price,  postpaid,  tio  cents.


THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE
AND  MENTAL  SCIENCE. By  Helen Wilmans  Post—

This  pamphlet  is  a  polemic  for  Mental  Science  as  opposed  to  Christian  Science.
It  is  a  report  of  a  lecture  delivered  before  the  International  Scientific  Association
by  Helen  Wilmans  Post,  at  Seabreeze,  Fla.,  in  1902,  in  which  she  hits  the  new
creed  many  hard  blows.  She  shows  that  it  refuses  the  idea  of  personal  God  and
substitutes  therefor  universal  principle  of  life  and  intelligence,  yet  at  the  same
time  attributes  the  masculine  sex  to  this  principle.  Jesus,  therefore,  cannot  be
the  son  of  such  an  intangible  entity,  and  is  only  a  inan,  "a  wayshower"  for  hum-
anity, as  proclaimed  by  the  late  Mrs.  Eddy.  She  attacks  the  absurd  doctrine  that
matter  is  non-existent,  and  shows  that  Christian  Science  cures  disease,  whether
there  is  any  disease  or  not;  it  heals  bodies  even  if  bodies  have  no  existence.  It  is
not  a  science,  for  it  shuts  off  the  power  of  thought  and  denies  the  use  of  the
reasoning  faculties,  the  use  of  which  science imperiously  demands.

Mental  Science,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  science  of  mental  unfoldinent  of  intel-
lectual growth.  It  bases  its  hope  of  man's  ultimate  and  perfect  redemption
from  all  the  ills  of  life,  including  disease,  old  age,  poverty  and  death,  upon  man's
ability  to  acquire  knowledge  through  the  deductions  of  his  reasoning  powers,
acting  on  his  experiences.  Man's  brain  is  the  instrumentality  by  which  he  effects
his  salvation,  which  refers  to  being  saved  from  the  ills  of  the  body,  and  not  from
the  wrath  to  come,  which,  according  to  Mental  Science,  has  no  existence.

This  new  philosophy  is  not  a  religion,  but  a  subjecting  of  everything  to  the
control and judgment of reason. All religions are thus accepted or discarded.

Mental  Science  is  one  with  Christian  Science  so  far  as  it  regards  God  as  a  mere
principle;  it  is  one  with  theosophy  when  that  cult  says  man  is  a  god;  it  is  one
with spiritualism  when that  cult  says  man is  his  own redeemer.

This  painphlet  will  be  found  very  stimulating  to  philosophic  thought. — Price,
prepaid,  -3  cents.


Send  all  Orders  to:


I THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.

!


1246


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Ekeley. Lab. Manual 1 .  UO

Eliot  and  Storer.  Qualita-
tive Analysis 1.25

Emery. Elcm. Chem 1.50

Englehardt. Electrolysis of

Water 1.25

Evans. Chemical Analysis..  .50

Ewell. Physical Chemistry.  2.25
Farrington  and  W'oll. Kxam.

of Milk 1.25

Fay. Coal Tar Dyes 4.00

Fenton. I'hysical Chemistry  .90

Findlay. Physical Chem....  1.20

Fisher. Chemistry 1.10

Fisher  and Patterson. I'hys.  .75

Fock. Chem.  Crystallography  1.40

Folin. Biologic Chemistry..  1.50

Fournier. Chemistry 1.25

Fowler. Bacteriologic and

Enzyme Chemistry ....  2.10

Sewage Analysis 2.00

Fraps. Agricultural  Chem...  4.50
Fresenius-Cohn. Quantitative

Analysis. 2 Vols 12.50]

Fresenius-Wells. Qualitative  1

Analysis 4.50  !

•Gage. Elements of Physics  1.12'

Physical Experiments 35

Physical Science 1 .00

Principles  of  Physics 1.50

Ganot. Physics 5 .  00

Garrett  and  Harden.  Or-
ganic  Chemistry 90

Garvin. Qualitative  Analysis  1.20
Gatterman. Organic  Chem... 1.75

Gerber. Analysis  of  Milk...  1.25

Getman. Physical Chemistry  2.00

Physical Science 1.50

Theoretic  Chemistry 3  .  50  i

Gilman. Quan. Analysis 90  I

Given. Sugar Analysis 2.00

Gooch. Chem. Analysis....  4.00
Gooch  and  Browning. Quali- '

tative Analysis 1.25  i

Gradwohl-Blaivas. Blood  and

Urine  Chemistry 2.50

Groves  and  Thorpe.  Chem-
ical Technology.  4

Vols 3.50 @  5.00

Hale. Calculations 1.00

Synthetic Use of Metals

in Organic Chem l.SO

Hall. Phvsics 1.25

Hammerstein-Mandel.  Physi-
ological  Chemistry 4.00

Hantzoch. Stereochemistry.  1.50
Harcourt  and  Madan. Chem.  2.60
Harden. Alcoholic Fermen-
tation 1.25

Hart. Chemistry. 2 Vols..  1.50

Second Year Chemistry...  1.25

Haskins. Orcanic  Chemistry  2.00

Hastings  and  Beach. Physics  2.75

Hatschek. Colloids 1 .25

Hawk. Physiologic Chem..  3.00

Henry. Aids  to  Chemistry..  1.25

Hering. Physics 1.75

Heusler. The  Terpenes ....  4.00

Higgins. Lessons  in Physics  .90

Hill. Chemistry 3.25

Lab.  Qual. Anal 1.00

Hilton.  Mathematical  Crys-
tallography 4.75

Hinds. Inorganic Chemistry  3.00

Lab.  Manual 1 .  00

Qualitative  .Analysis 2.00

Hinrichs. Atomic Weights.  2.50

General Chemistry 4.00

Holland. Chemistry 3.00

Holleman-Cooper. Inorganic

Chemistry 2.25

Holleman- Walker. Laboratory

Organic  Chemistry 1  .00

Holleman-Walker-Mott.  Or-
ganic Chemistry 2.25

Howe. Inorganic  Chem 3.00

Tnglis. Chemistry 1.00

.Tackson. Physiologic Chem.  1.25

.Tobling. Catalysis 1.00

Jones.  Freezing  Point.  Boil-
ing Point,  and  Conduc-
tivity Methods 1.00


Johnson. .\nalyst's  Compan-
ion 2.00

Jones. Medical Chemistry..  2.50

Nucleic Acids 1  .  10

Kahlenberg. Outlines of

Chemistry 2.60

Kellas. Inorganic Chem....  1.50

Introduction to Chemistry  1.35

Introd. to Organic Chem.  1.35

Kelvin. Molecular  Tactics  of

a  Crystal 1.15

Kimball. Physics 2.75

Klocker. Fermentations ...  4.20

Klopstock and Kowarsky.
Chem. Microscopy and

Bacteriology 3.50

Kraus. Crystallography ...  1.60

Landauer-Tingle. Spectrum

Analysis 3  .  00

Landolt. Optical Activity..  7.50

Lassar-Cohn. Chemistry in

Daily  Life 1.75

Scientific  Chemistry 2.00

Lassar-Cohn-Tingle. Reac-
tions 1 .00

Leavenworth. Qual.  Analysis  1.50

Lee. Experimental  Chemis.  .  1.50

Leffman. Analysis  of  Milk..  1.25

Chemistry 1.25

Examination  of  Water 1.25

LefTman and La Wall. Or-
ganic Chemistry 1 .  00

Lehfeldt. Electro-chemistry.  1.50

Physical Chemistry 2.50

Lenhartz-Brooks. Clinical  Mi-
croscopy and Chemistry.  3.00

Lewis. Physical  Chemistry.  .  2.50

Linebarger. Lab. Physics...  .80

Text- Book  of  Physics 1.25

Lob-Lorenz. Electro-chem.  .  3.00

Long. Analytical Chemistry  1.25

General Chemistry 1.50

Physiologic Chemistry ..  2.50

Luff and Candy. Chemistry  1.75

Lunge. Chemical Analysis,

15.00 @  18.00

Chemists' Handbook 3.50

Lunge and Cohn. Techno-

chemical Analysis 1.00

MacMunn. Spectrum  Analy-
sis 1.75

Madan. Tables of Qualita-
tive  Analysis 1.10

Marshall. Explosives. 2

Vols 16.00

Induction Coils 50

Medical Qualitative  Analy-
sis 2.00

Martin. Chemistry 2.00

Martin and  Rockwell.

Chemistry  and Physics....  1.50

Martindale. Digitalis  Assay.  1.00

Organic Anal. Charts....  1.50

Mason. Exam, of Water...  1.25

Qualitative .\nalysis 80

Mathewson. First Principles

of Chem. Theory 1 .00

Matthews. Alcoholic Fer-
mentation 2.60

Physiologic Chem 4.50

May.  Chem. Synthetic

Drugs 2.25

McCollum. Organic Chem-
istry 2.25

McGlannan. Inorganic  Chem-
istry and Physics 1.00

McGregory. Qualitative ."Xn-

alysis 1 .00

Mcjunkin. Hosp.  Lab.  Meth-
ods 1.25

McKail.  Public Health

Chem 2.50

McPherson and Henderson.

Chemistry 2.25

Meade. Pocket Manual....  3.00

Medicus. Qualitative Analy.  2.00

Meldola. Vital Product 6.00

Memminger. Qualitative  An-
alysis, Brief .  ."" 1.00

Mendelefl. Chemistry. 2

Vols 10.00

Merck. Chemical Reagents.  1.50


Meyer. Theoretical Chem...  2.50

Miller. Inorganic Chemistry  1.25

Laboratory I'hysics 2.00

Progressive  Physics 64

Millikan. Mechanics, Mole-
cular Physics  and  Heat.  .  1.50
Millikan and Gale. First

Course in Physics 1.25

Millikan and Mills. Elec,

Sound  and  Light 2.00

Mixter. Elementary Chem.  l.SO
Molinari. Industrial Chem.  6.50
Montgomery  and  Smith. Ele-
mentary Chemistry ....  1.25
Moody. Quantitative Analy-
sis 1.25

Moore. Experiments in Or-
ganic Chemistry 50

Meteorology 3  .  00

Organic Chemistry 1.50

Morgan. Physical  Chemistry  3.00

Morse. Quantitative Chem.  2.00
Muir. chem. Theories and

Laws 4.00

Principles  of Chemistry...  4.25
Muir  and  Carnegie. Practical

Chemistry 1.00

Mulliken. Dyestuffs 5.00

Identification of Organic

Compounds 5  .  00

Muter. Analytical  Chemistry  2.00

Naquet. Legal Chemistry.  .  2.00

Neave. Organic Compounds  1.25
Nelson. Anal, of  Drugs  and

Medicine 3  .  00

Newell. Chemistries 1.25

Newth. Chemical Analysis.  1.75

Inorganic Chemistry 2.00

Lecture Experiments ....  2.00

Notes  on  Chemistry 1.50

Nichols. Lab. Household

Chem 60

Norrie. Induction Coils....  1.00

Noyes. Chemistry 2.50

Organic Chemistry for La-
boratory 2.00

Qualitative Analysis 1.50

Noyes and Mulliken. Lab.
Experiments on Class

Reactions .50

O'Brine. Chemical Analysis  2.00

Odling. Practical Chemistry  2.00

Oettel. Electro-chemistry...  .75
Oldberg. Pharmaceutic  and

Chemical Problems ....  3.00
Olsen. Quantitative Chem-
ical Analysis 3.50

OrndorfT.  Lab. Organic

Chem 40

Osborne.  Vegetable  Proteins  1.20
Ostwald.  Colloid  Chemistry.  3.00
Ostwald  and  Morse.  Chem.  1.00
Ostwald  and  Ramsey.  Con-
versations on  Chemistry  l.SO
Ostwald  and  Turnbull.  Con-
versations on  Chemistry  2.00
Ostwald, Hall and Williams.

Chemistry 1.50

Page. Elements of Physics.  1.50
Physics for Med. Students  1.25
Palmer. Questions  and  Prob-
lems .25

Textbook of  Chem 1.00

Parry. Chemistry of Essen-
tial Oils 5.00

Pauli and Fischer. Physical

Chemistry  in Medicine..  1.25

Peckman. Chemistry 70

Peet. Lab. Chemistry 60

Perkin. Electro-chemistry..  1.60

Inorganic Chemistry 1.15

Qualitative Chem. Analy..  1.50
Perkin  and  Kipping. Organic

Chemistry 2 .  25

Pictet-Biddle. Vegetable Al-
kaloids 4.50

Pitcher and Troy. Labora-
tory Physics 2.00

Piatt and Pearson. Medical

Chemistry 2.50

Plimmer. Fermentations ..  1.80

Organic and Biochemistry  3.60


Universal  IVaturopntliu-  l)ire<'torj'  niul  BuyerH'  Oiii<le


HEALTH  and  the  BODILY  FUNCTIONS


WHAT  CONSTITUTES  THE  TRUE  SCIENCE  AND
ART  OF  HEALING? By  A.  A,  Erz,  D,  C— /;;;;  ^t^^^

ciple  enunciated  by  Hippocrates  that  "Nature  is  the  Healer,"  is  the  theme  of  this
brochure.  Dr.  Erz  traces  the  I'ise  of  the  natural  healing'  system  in  Germany,
giving  credit  to  Priessnitz,  Schroth,  Kuhne,  Kncipp,  Bilz,  etc.,  to  Ling  of  Sweden,
and  to  Doctors  Trail,  Graham,  Kellogg,  Page,  Lust,  Palmer,  Still,  McFadden,
McCormick,  I.,ahn,  Davis,  Lindlahr  and  others  in  the  United  States.  In  various
ways  they  avail  themselves  of  the  curative  energy  of  the  Sun,  Air,  Light,  Water,
Massage,  Earth  Cure,  Curative  gymnastics.  Electricity,  Diet,  Exercise,  etc.  As  an
outline  of  the  philosophy  of  natural  healing;  as  an  explanation  of  the  elementary
remedial  forces  of  nature;  as  a  mentor  foi'  the  proper  study  and  practice  of  natu-
ral healing;  as  a  seal  on  practices  that  have  stood  the  test  of  time  and  have
received  the  approbation  of  science;  as  a  plea  for  the  urgent  need  of  a  great
Academy  of  Natural  Healing;  as  the  most  desirable  factor  in  the  regeneration
of  the  race,  and  as  polemic  for  medical  freedom,  this  essay  should  be  in  the
hands  of  all  Health  and  Truth  Seekers,  and  every  practitioner  of  Naturopathy.
Priee,  50  cents.


YOUR  MEMORY— ITS  FUNCTIONS,  EXERCISE  AND
TRAINING. By  M.  N.  Bunker,  D.  C.  —J^^  ^r.";  ^l^^lZ;-

declares  that  attention  is  the  one  thing  that  makes  the  mental  picture,  or  record,
complete.  The  degree  of  concentration  of  attention  on  a  given  subject  denotes
the  ease,  or  difficulty,  with  which  any  record  may  be  later  recalled,  or  recollected.
Attention  is  either  voluntary  or  involuntary.  Voluntary  attention  is  produced
by  the  exercise  of  the  will  power.  Involuntary  attention  necessitates  no  exer-
cise of  the  will  power,  but  depends  entirely  on  curiosity  or  interest.  The  author
also  shows  the  vital  need  of  association,  either  of  similarity,  or  dissimilarity,
in  memorizing  facts  of  any  kind.  He  defines  a  process  of  training  the  memory
and  shows  how  necessary  it  is  for  the  eye  to  see  and  ear  to  hear,  so  that  when
one  has  seen  a  picture,  or  hear'd  a  story  he  can  reproduce  the  impressions  in  all
their  freshness.  The  author  shows  that  the  condition  of  the  body  has  much  to
do  with  the  workings  of  the  mind  and  that  a  worn  out  body,  physically,  reacts
to  the  detriment  of  the  mind,  while  a  prime  physical  condition  renders  the  mind
much more effective. — Price,  50  eent.s.


THE  SECRET  OF  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE;  THE
GREATEST  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  AGE.  By  John  J.
Ruegg,  Counselor  of  Health,  Food  Specialist  and  Polar-

inathi^t This  pamphlet  is  devoted  to  a  consideration of  a  new science of

(|yucffcac  healing  which  the  author  explains  is  an  application  of the  cura-

tive forces  of  nature  in  accordance  with  "the  polaric,  or  unifying  curative  sys-
tem." The  curative  forces  of  nature  are  those  already  well-known  to  our
readers,  but  our  author  states  that  inasmuch  as  the  nutrition  of  men,  animals,
and  plants  is  only  perfect  when  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  polaric  circula-
tion, hence  he  calls  his  new  and  improved  system  of  healing  for  both  bodv  and
mind,  the  polaric  system  of  healing,  or  Polaripathy.  Polaripathy  is  a  method
of  curing  disease  according  to  the  laws  of  magnetic  attraction  "and  repulsion,
secured  by  altering  the  acidity,  or  alkalinity  of  the  blood  by  medicated  hydro-
pathic applications  and  baths  of  various  kinds,  of  which  many  illustrations  are
given.  The  blood  is  fluid  life  and  as  such  it  is  the  sustaining'substratum  of  all
the polaric reciprocal processes on which our  life is built up. — Price.  30 cents.


NO  MORE  SYPHILIS. By  Dr.  Emil  Mayer— P/as'tl  the  oui

method  of  treating  syphilis,  which  relies  on  drug  poisoning  and  undermines  the
health  of  the  individual,  with  his  own  discovery  which  completely  cures  the  ail-
ment by  natural  means  in  the  primary  stage,  thus  saving  the  patient  the  second
and  tertiary  stages,  that  are  created  by  medical  criminology  and  quackery,  and
result  in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  deaths  yearly.  Here  is  a  pamphlet  that  every
sxifferer  froin  syphilis  should  be  in  possession  of.  He  will  learn  not  only  how
deadly  the  disease  is  for  himself  but  how  it  is  transmitted  to  posterity,  how
murderous  it  is  to  his  own  offspring. — Price,  20  cents.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1248


(iencral  List  of  Medical  Works


Planck, llcat Radiation....  J.J5
Prescott. Organic  Analysis.  .  5.00
Prescott  anil  Johnson. Quali-
tative Chemical Analy.  .  3.50
Prescott  antl  Sullivan. Quali-
tative Chemistry 1 .50

Proctor. Chemistry 1 .75

Physiologic  Chemistry ....  1.75

Reed. College I'hysics 1.50

Kenisen. College  Chemistry.  i.50

Introduction to Chemistry  1.30

Organic Chemistry 1.40

Jtichter  and  Smith. Inorganic

Chemistry 1.75

Richter and Spielman. Or-
ganic Chemistry.  2

Vols 3.00  @  5.00

Riggs. Manual  for  Chemical

Laboratory 1.25

Roberts. Stereochemistry ..  1.00
Robertson. Agricultural

Chem 2.00

Rockwood. Analysis 1.50

Jioe. Practical Chetnistry.  .  1.00

Rogers. Industrial Chetn.  .  1.50

Jtudorf. Chemical  Analysis.  .  1.00

Sadtler. Chem. K.xperiments  1  .  60

Industrial  Organic  Chem..  5.00
Sadtler  and Coblentz. Phar-
maceutic and Medical

Chemistry 4 .  00

Salkowski-Orndorf. Physio-
logic and Pathologic

Chemistrj- 2.50

Schimpf. Qual. Chem.  Anal.  1.25

Volumetric  Analysis 4.50

Schoch. Special Chemistrv.  .50

Seidell. Solubilities '.  .  3.00

Sellers. Qualitative  Analysis  1.00

Shepherd. Elements  of  Chem.  .80

Inorganic  Chemistry 1  .20

Lab. Chemistry 35

Sherman. Chetn. of Food

and  Nutrition 1 .  50

Organic Analysis 2.40

Simon. Manual of Chem...  3.50

Smith. Electro .Analysis....  2.50
Smith and Keller. Experi-
ments  in Chemistry (Short

Course) 75

Smith. Tower and Turton.

Exper. Physics 80

Snow. Light  and Heat 2.50

Soddy. C'hem. Radio-Ele-
ments 1 .  75

Somerfield. Kxam. of Milk  1.25

Speyers. Physical Chemistry  2.25

Spiegel. Chem. Constitution  1.25
Stanislaus and Kimberly.

Pharmaceutic Chemistry...  2.50

Steel. Lab. Organic 1.25

Stewart. Chemistry 2.50

Stoddard. Organic Chem...  1.50
Stone. Experimental  Physics  1.00
Story- Maskelyne. Crystallog-
raphy .  .' 3.25

Sutton. Volumetric .\nalysis  5.50

Talbot. Quant.  Analysis....  1.50

Tashiro. Chemical Life 1 .25

Thornton  and Pearson. Vol-
umetric Analysis 75

Thorpe. History Chem. 2

Vols 1.50

Inorganic Chemical Prep-
arations 1  .  50

Quantitative Analysis ....  1.50
Thorpe and .Muir. Qualita-
tive  Analysis 125

Three  Hundred  Questions  and

Answers on Chem 1.25

Tibbies. Theory  of  Ions....  1.00

Tillman. Chemistry 3 .00

Titherlcv.  Lab. Organic

Chemistry 2.00

Tory-Pitcher. Lab. Physics.  2.00
Tower. Conductivity of

Liquids 1  .50

Qualitative  Analysis 1 .00

Tower,  Smith.  Turton. Phys-
ics 1.25

Traube. Physico-chemical

Methods 1  .50


Tread  well- Hall. Anal.  Chem.

2  \'ols 3.00 @  3.50

Ulzer and Frankel. Cliem-

ico-technical Analysis ..  1.25
Van Deventer-Boltwood.

Physical Chemistry 1 .50

Van't HoflF. Chemistry in

Space 1.10

Venable. The  Atom 2.00

Von der Goltz. Bio-chem-
istry 1.25

Von Furth. Chemistry of

Metabolism 6.50

Vorisek. Qual. Analysis ...  2.25

Vosmaer. Ozone 2 .  50

Waddell. Quan. Analysis ..  1.25

Walker. Organic Chemistry  2.50

Wanklyn. Exam, of Milk  1.00

Water Analysis 2.00

Watson. Physics 3.50

Watts. Spectrum Analysis..  3.20

Wells. Chemical Pathology  3.25  |

Qualitative Analysis 1.50  |

Wentworth  and  Hill. Physics  1.15  i

Laboratory Physics 25}

Weston. Dissection of Car-
bon Compounds 1 .  10  '

Weyl. Coal-tar Colors ....  1.25
Whelpley. Chemical Notes..  1.00
Whetham. Physical Science  2.00
White and Bingham. Inor-
ganic Chemistry 1.00

Wiechman. Chemistry 1.00

Wiley. Agricultural Chem.

Analysis,  2  vols. 4.00 @  4.50

Williams. Chemistry 1.25

Chemical Science 80

Cvanogen Compounds ....  3.75

Williamson. Chemistry ....  2.10
Wilson and Hedlej-. Ele-
mentary Chemistry. 2

vols $0.75 @  1.25

Witthaus. Chemistry 4.00

Woody. Chemistry  and  Urin-
alysis 1 .  50

Wright. Teat and Capillary

Tube 4.50


CHEST, HEART, I^UNGS,
ETC.

Adam. Asthma $1.50

Adler. Growths, Lungs,  and

Bronchi 2.00

Allbutt. Arteries and An-
gina. 2 vols 9.00

Allen. Bacterial Dis. of Res-
piration and Vaccines 3.00
Babcock. Heart and Arterial

System and Lungs 6  50

Barcroft. Respiratory Func-
tion of Blood 6.00

Barnes. Arterial and Ner-
vous Systems. Atlas.... 20.00
Beck. Surgical  Dis.  of  Chest 5.00
Berkart. Bronchial Asthma 2.00
Bernheim. Blood Transfu-
sion, Hemorrhage and

Anemias 4.00

Surgery of Vascular Sys-
tem 4.00

Bishop. Arteriosclerosis ... 3.50
Hcnrt Disease, Blood
Pressure and Nauheim

Treatment 3.00

Broadbent.  Heart  Disease  4.00
Pruning.  Bronchoscopy  ...  5.00
Brunton. Therapeutics of

Circulation 2.50

Bryant. Diseases of Breast 2.00
Burwinkel. Heart Disease .25
Carter. Respiratory Pas-
sages 1  .00

Caton.  Valvular  Disease...  1.75
Clapp. Auscultation and

Percussion 1.50

Colbeck. Heart 2.50

Cowan. Heart 4.00


Ehrlich  and  Lazarus.  Anemia  4.00
Garre  and  Quincke. Surgery

of Lungs 4.00

Gatchell. Lungs 2.00

Gee.  Auscultation  and  Per-
cussion 1.50

Goulston. Cane Sugar and

Heart Disease 2.00

Guthrie.  Bloodvessel  Surg-
ery 4.00

Hare. Mediastinal Disease  2.00

Hart. Myocardial Functions  4.50
Haward. Phlebitis and

Thrombosis 1 .  50

Hay. Heart Disease 3.00

Hill. Caisson Sickness 3.00

Hirschfeld. Heart and Blood

Vessels 1.25

Hirschfelder. Heart and

Aorta 7.00

Hofman-Garson. Gymnastics

for Heart Affections...  2.00
Jackson. Tracheobroncho-
scopy 4.00

James. Pleurisy 2. 25

Joal-Wolfenden. Respiration

in Singing 2.00

Krogh.  Respiratory Ex-

change of Animals and

Man 1 .  80

Lewis. Electrocardiography.

of the Heart 2.00

Disorders of Heartbeats  2.00

Mechanism of Heartbeats  7.00

Lindsay. Lungs 4.00

Lockwood. Cancer of Breast  3.00
Lord. Bronchi, Lungs,

Pleura 5.00

Mackensie. Heart Affections  2.50

Heart Disease 5.50

Mann. Tracheobronchoscopy  7.50
Mays. Consumption, Pneu-
monia 3.00

Moon. Diseases of Heart..  1.2S

Morrison. Heart Disorders  2.50

Murphy. Wounds  of Thorax  1.00

Morris. Cardiac Pathology..  5.00
Nothangel's Practice.

Bronchi, Pleura, Inflam-
mations  of Lungs 5.00

Heart 5. GO

Influenza, Dengue S.OO

Osborne. Heart Disturbance  .75

Paget. Surgery of Chest...  2.7S
Powell and Hartley. Lungs

and Pleurae 6 .  50

Poynton. Heart Disease and

Aneurism L50

Preble. Pneumonia 1-00

Ricketts. Surgery of Heart  5.00

Ritchie. Auricular Flutter..  3.50
Robinson. Arteries of Gas-

tro-intestinal Tract 1.50

Sawyer. Heart 1.00

Schmori.  Pathologic  Anat-
omy  of Heart _.  .  5.00

Schott.  Balneo-Gymnastics

Treatment for Heart

Disease 2.50

Stitt. P.lood Work 2.00

Sutherland. Heart in Early

Life 2.00

Thome. Nauheim Treatment  1.40

Schott Method 2 .  00

Trotter.  Embolism  and
Thrombosis  of  Mesen-
teric Vessels 2.50

Villiger. Brain and Cord...  4.00
Von Neusser and Macfar-

lane. Angina Pectoris..  1.00
Bradycardia and Tachy-
cardia 1.25

Dyspnea  and  Cyanosis  ....  1 .  50

Waliion. Rhythmotherapy.  .  1.50
West. Respiratory Organs

and Lungs. 2 vols 10.00

VViggers. Circulation 1.75

Wilson. Heart Failure 4.50


I iii\  ei'siil \:il  iii'0|>:M  hie l)iri'<-(<M'> :iii<l ltli.t<-i's' (^iiiilc  1^4f>

NATURE  CURE j


REINHOLD'S


BOOKLETS


•

The  late  Dr.  A.  F.  Reinhoid,  who  conducted  a  Naturopathic  Sanitarium in  ♦

New York City  some  years  ago, was not only a highly successful drugless  J

practitioner, but was the author of 37 different books and booklets on  i

disease  as  conquered  by  the  Nature  Cure,  all  stating  in  the  clearest  terms  the  j

rationale  of  how  to cure  the various  diseases referred to. As  a whole,  the  J

various  manuals  regard  disease,  no  matter  how  different  its  manifestations,  •

as primarily  a single ailment, consisting  of abnormal material fermenting  f

in  the  organism,  which  it  ought  to  be  the  prime  purpose  of  the  physician  to  J

eradicate.  •

Dr. Reinhoid made a  deep study of his subject  and was an enthusiastic  |

disciple  of  Priessnitz, Kuhne  and Kneipp, who worked wonders in Natural  J

Healing,  particularly  in  hydrotherapy,  and  has  gone  his  teachers  one  better  •

by  improvements  on  their  methods.  |

The  very  core  of  his  philosophy  is  that  all  disease  is  caused  by  a  fermen=  j

tation  of  said  poisonous  matter  in  the  blood  and  tissues,  and  he  devoted  all  •

his  energies  to  removing  such  matter  from  the  system. The  efficacy  of  his  j
work,  applied  with  skill  and  experience,  fully  justified  his  great  reputation
as  a  physician,  and  led  to  such  a  demand  for  his  writings,  that  at  his  demise,
only  a  few  hundred copies  of  but seven of his pamphlets remained to his
estate,  a  description  of  which  we  give  as  follows:


POSITIVE  PREVENTION  AND  CURE  OF  TUBER-
CULOSIS, OR  THE  RESTORATION  OF  HEALTH  BY

NTAXITRAI MFXHOn^ Thi.s is the  most important pamphlet of the

i^'^^  *  vl\..^\l-i  li i. til  I  llKJUiJ  series  and  is  an  exposition  of  the  natural
system  of  curing-  disease,  as  opposed  to  the  drugging  system.  The  Natural
School  seeks  to  remove  the  causes  of  disease,  whereas  the  drugging  and  inocu-
lating school  only  seeks  to  suppress  symptoms,  and  is  careless  of  causes.  Thi.-?
latter  school  does  not  seem  to  understand  that  by  suppressing  symptoms  only,
the  causes  of  disease  are  more  firmly  rooted  in  the  system,  to  reappear  in  fresh
manifestations.

Dr.  Reinhoid  extols  the  virtues  of  hydropathy,  the  benefits  of  massage,  and
the  vitality-raising  powers  of  sunlight,  sleep,  baths  and  a  rational,  vegetarian
diet.  The  pamphlet  particularizes  those  agents  that  rouse  the  lungs,  skin,
kidneys  and  bowels  to  increased  activity.  With  the  organs  of  depuration  fully
at  work,  a  pei-son  cannot  take  a  contagious  disease,  for  disease  only  develops
in  a  system  already  charged  with  poisonous  products.  Thi.s  new  philo.sophy  is
the  theme  of  tliis  booklet,  a  principle  tiiat  i.s  shakin;;  the  drii^f^ini;  school  of
cure  to its foiindation.s.

The  author  points  out  that  not  only  are  those  natural  forces  which  were  em-
ployed by  him  in  the  cure  of  disease,  of  supreme  importance  in  themselves,  but
their  application  is  very  enjoyable,  being  in  harmony  with  the  feelings  of  the
patient.  As  a  handy  manual  of  Naturopathy,  clear  and  carefully  written,  it  is
a  most  valuable  publication. Price,  $1.00.


NATURE  vs.  DRUGS. MEAT  DIET  INJURIOUS  TO

11*  AM Dr. Reinhoid ai'gues in this pamphlet that, from the physiological

■^"■'^•'^  structure  of  the  human  body,  man  was  intended to  be  a  frugivorous

animal,  if  not  wholly  a  vegetarian.  He  does  not  specifically  condemn  the  use  of
eggs,  milk  and  cheese,  but  we  imagine  that,  he  prefers  that  these  animal  pro-
ducts should  not  be  indulged  in.  He  contends  that  if  once  a  civilized  nation
adopts  vegetarian  practices,  the  alcohol  and  beer  shops  \vould,  like  those  of
the  tobacconist,  butcher,  poulterer,  fishmonger  and  chemist, have  to  be  shut  up.

He  considers  the  Jews,  who  had  grown  brutal  and  degraded,  and  had  lost  all
higher  moral  and  patriotic  aspirations  through  indulging  their  appetites  in  the
flesh  pots  of  Egypt,  became  physically  and  intellectually  superior  to  their
former  selves  by  reason  of  having  had  to  wander  forty  years  eating  manna  in
the  desert.

He  quotes  a  great  many  testimonies  of  historians,  scholars,  travelers  and
others  regarding  the  vegetable  diet.  He  proves  that  vegetarians,  or  meat
abjurors  should  live  in  a  healthful  manner.  He  taboos  white  bread,  sugar  and
fats,  as  well  as  alcoholics,  tea  and  coffee,  and  refers  to  the  testimonials  of  phy-
sicians in  all  ages  regarding  the  longevity  and  physical  vigor  of  those  tribes  of
men  who  subsist  on a  vegetable diet. Price.  25c.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1250


(lencval  Li.sl  of  Medical  Works


CHILDREN AND INFANT
FEEDING

Abt and Ridlon. Pediatrics

and Orthopedic Surgery  $1.35
Adamson. Skin Affections in

Childhood 1.50

Alexander. Diseases of Ear

in Children 7.00

Ashby. Infant Mortality ..  3.25
Ashby  and Wright. Diseases

of Children S.SO

Barrett.  Management of

Children 2.00

Binet  and  Simon.  Measur-
ing Intelligence 1.00

Mentally Defective Chil-
dren 1.00

Birk. Diseases of Infancy  3.50

Brockbank. Children 1.50

Brown. Sprue 2.50

Cameron. Diet and Disease

in Infancy 2.50

Campbell  and  Kerr.  Sur-
gical Diseases  of  Chil-
dren 6.50

Candler. Children .  1 .  00

Carpenter.  Diseases  of  Chil-
dren SO

Carr. Pediatrics 5.00

Cautley. Children 8.00

l-'hapiu and Pisek. Children  3.50

Clock. Our Baby 1.30

Coit. Care and Feeding....  1.25

CooHdge. Home Care 1.00

Cornell.  Health  and  Medical
Examination of School

Children 3.00

Cunningham. Nursery  Notes  1.25

Dennett. Healthy Baby 1.25

Infant Feeding 3.50

Drummond. Child 1 .00

Duns. Care of Children 1.00

Everbasch. Diseases of Eye

in Children 7.00

Filatov and Earle. Children  7.00
Fischer. Diseases of Chil-
dren 6.50

Health and Care of Baby  .75

Infant Feeding 2.00

Care of Growing Child...  1.25
Fitz. Problems  of  Babyhood  1.25
Fordyce. Diseases of Chil-
dren 4.25

Forsyth.  Child  in  Health  and

Disease 3 .  00

Fowler. Infant Feeding....  1.50
Fraser. Tuberculosis of

Bones and Joints 4.50

Frauenthal and Manning.

Infantile Paralysis 1.00

Freyberger.  Pocket  Formu-
lary 2.00

Garrod, Batten, and Thurs-

field. Children 8.50

Ghou.  Tuberculosis  in  Chil-
dren 3.75

Gorst. Children of Nation..  2.50

Gould. Feeding Babies 1.50

Graetzer. Pediatrics 3.00

Graham.  Diseases  of ,  Chil-
dren 6.00

Griffith. Care of the Baby  1.50

Clinical Chart 50

Gruerberg. 'N'our  Child 1.25

Grulee. Infant Feeding....  3.00
Guthrie. Nervous Disorders

in Childhood 3.00

Hatfield.  Diseases  of  Chil-
dren 1 .25

Hecker, Trumpp, and Abt.

Atlas  of  Children 5.00

Hill. Management  of  Babies  .75

Hirshberg. Your Baby 1.00

Hoag. Health Index 80

Health Grading 12.00

Hogan.  How  to  Feed  Chil-
dren 1.00


Hollander. Abnormal Chil-
dren 1.25

Holmes. Conservation of

Child 1.25

Holt. Care and Feeding...  .85
Diseases of Infancy and

Childhood 6.50

Hutchinson. Child's Day .  .  .40

Diseases of Children 3.00

Illoway. Summer Diarrhea  1.00

Jacobi. Child Training....  1.50

Children 6.50

Kelley. Surgical Diseases of

Children 5.00

Kellogg. Hygiene  of  Infancy  1.25

How to Save Baby 75

Kelynack. Defective Chil-
dren 3.00

Kerley. Pediatrics 6.00

What Mother Should

Know 35

Kerr. Care and Training 75

Diagnostics of Children ..  5.00

Kilmer. Care of the Baby  .75
Physical Examination of
Infants  and Young  Chil-

drerf 75

Kirmisson  and  Murphy. Sur-
gery of  Children 7.00

Koplik. Care  of  Infants  and

Children 50

Diseases of Children 5.00

Lamb. What Baby Needs  1.00

Love. Deaf  Child ..  1.50

Lovett.  Infantile  Paralysis..  1.75
Lowenburg.  Infant  Feeding  3.50
MacMillan.  Infant  Health  .75
Mateer.  Child  Behavior  ...  2.00
McCaw.  Diseases  of  Chil-
dren 1.25

McKee  and  Wells. Pediatrics

Miller. Children 4 .  00

Moll. Sexual Life of Chil-
dren 1.75

Morse. Care and Feeding...  .50

Case Histories 5 .  50

Morse and Talbot. Diseases
of Nutrition and Infant

Feeding 3 .  00

Newman. Infant Mortality  2.50
Owen. Surgical Diseases of

Children 4.00

Pfaundler and Schlossmann.
Diseases of Children.

i 7 vols.  _ 35.00

Powell. Diseases of Chil-

I dren 1 .25

I  Pritchard. The Infant 1.00

Infant Feeding 1.50

;  Rachford. Children 6.50

Neurotic Disorders of

Childhood 2.75

Radue. Diseases  of  Children  1.25

Ramsey. Care and Feeding  2.00

Infancy and Childhood...  1.25
Romer. Epidemic Cerebro-

' spinal Paralysis 2.75

Rotch. X-rays in Pediatrics  7.00

!  Royster. Infant Feeding...  1.25

.  Ruhrah. Diseases  of  Children  2.75
Sachs. Nervous Diseases of

: Children 4.00

[Sadler. Infant Feeding 1.25

Sheffield. Backward Baby..  1.50

; Children's  Diseases 4.00

Shuttleworth and Potts.
Mentally Deficient Chil-
dren 2.50

Sill. The Child 1 .  20

Smith and Greene. Baby's

First Two Years 75

■  Spach. Infant Dietetics ...  .50

'  Stark. Baby 50

Digestive  Organs  in Child-
hood 3 .  00

Weight Charts 05

Still. Common Diseases of

Childhood 5.50


Starr. Adolescent Period...  1.00
Sutlierland. Treatment of

Children 3.75

Taylor. Examination and

Training 1 .00

Study of Child 1.25

Terman. Hygiene of Child  2.00

Thomson. Children 3.75

Tucker. Care of Babies 40

Nervous Children 1 .25

Tuley. Pediatrics 1.00

Tuttle and Thurford. Dis-
eases of Children  " 3.50

Vincent. Intestinal Toxemia  1.50

Nutrition of Infant 3.50

Vulpins. Infantile Paralysis  4.00
Wachenheim. Climate Treat-
ment of Children 1.50


DIAGNOSIS

Abrams.  Diagnostic  Thera-
peutics $6.00

Anders. Physical Diagnosis  3.50
Anders and Boston. Medi-
cal Diagnosis 6.00

Atkinson.  Functional  Diag-
nosis 1 .  50

Bartlett. Diagnosis 7 .  00

Barton.  Vital  Function  Test-
ing 1.50

Bass  and Johns. Laboratory

Diagnosis 6.50

Behan. Pain 6.50

Beifeld. Basis of Symptoms  5.00

Brewer. Surgical Diagnosis  1.00

Brockbank. Heart Sounds  1.50

Brooks. Diagnostic Methods  1.00

Brown. Medical Diagnosis  2.00
Brown  and Ritchie. Medical

Diagnosis 3.00

Butler.  Diagnostics  of  In-
ternal Medicine 6.50

Cables. Golden Rules .  2.25

Cabot. Differential Diagnosis  6.00

Physical Diagnosis 3.50

Caille.  Differential  Diagno-
sis and Treatment 6.50

Carman  and  Miller.  Roent-
gen Diagnosis 6.00

Carson. Surgical Diagnosis.  1.25
Citron.  Immunodiagnosis  and

Therapy 3.50

Clark.  Gynecological  Diagno-
sis 6.00

Clark  and  Diefendorf.  Neu-
rologic and  Mental  Di-
agnosis 1 .  25

Cohen and Esher. Diagnosis  1.25
Da  Costa. Physical Diagnosis  3.50
De Querain. Surgical Diag-
nosis 7.00

Emerson.  Clinical  Diagnosis  6.00
Faught.  Blood  Pressure  ...  3.25
Laboratory  Diagnosis  ....  3.00
Flint.  Physical  Diagnosis  2.50
Foster.  Diagnosis  from  Oc-
ular  Symptoms 6.00

French. Laboratory Methods  1.50

Index of Diagnosis 10.00

Goodman. Blood Pressure  1.50

Gould. Surgical Diagnosis..  2.50

Gruner. Puncture Fluids...  2.00

Hare. Diagnosis 4.00

narrower.  Laboratory  Diag-
nosis 1 .00

Hill. Manual of Diagnostic

Methods 1.50

Pain 1 .  50

Hilton. Rest and Pain 2.50

Hollis. Diagnosis 1.00

Hutchinson  and  Rainy.  Clin-
ical Methods 3.00

Jaksch. Clinical Diagnosis..  7.50
Johnson. Surgical Diagnosis.

• 3 vols. Each 6.50

Kiliani. Surgical Diagnosis  2.50


Univeriiiil IVii(iiro|tiitliii- Oircc-(or.v inul Uii.>fr.s' Gui<i«  1251


NATURE  vs.  DRUGS. HARM  FROM  OVEREATING—

The  author  starts  this  pamphlet  by  reciting-  an  unpopular,  but  vital  truth,  that
more  people  die  of  surfeiting-  than  of  starving.  To  llil  our  intestines  with  ri'.-h
and  artificially  concentrated  viands,  leads  to  innumerable  ailments.  In  the  first
place,  the  body  receives  inore  material  than  it  requires  and  the  surplus  exists
only  to  be  removed  by  a  gieat  expenditu'e  of  vital  enei-gy  on  the  part  of  the
excretive  oi'gans,,  or  if  these  organs  be  too  weak  fiom  overwoi-k,  the  material
remains  in  the  body  to  poison  every  function  thereof.  That  this  is  the  case  in  a
vast  majority  of instances  in  civilized life, is  stating  a well-kno\\n fact.

The  author  traces  the  degenei-ation  of  the  system  through  all  the  steps  that
receive  their  initiative  in  overeating.  Not  only  does  the  richness  and  quantity
of  the  food  prove  agents  of  disease,  but  when  the  food  itself  lias  been  de-
natured of  its  most  vital  constituents  of  lime,  nitrogen  and  many  organic  salts,
absolutely  necessary  to  sustain  a  vigoi-ous  health,  by  the  pi-ocess  of  milling  and
cooking,  it  will  be  seen  how  innutritions  it  becomes.  The  bran,  or  external
husk  of  wheat,  rice,  corn,  rye,  etc.,  that  contains  those  vital  constituents  is
wholly  removed,  to  tickle  the  organs  of  taste  with  the  flour-  that  contains  only
the  starch  of  the  grain.  Besides  this,  the  banishment  of  bran  from  the  dietary
causes  destruction  of  the  teeth  and  bones  as  well  as  a  degeneration  of  the  tis-
sues. These  defects  chiefly  subject  us  to  contagion  and  fevers  and  the  tissue.'?
being  underfed,  tear  easily,  giving  rise  to  hernia,  falling  of  the  womb,  floating
kidneys,  apoplexy,  etc.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  explanations  that
inankind  is  unconsciously  engaged  in  overeating  in  quantity  an«l  undereatin;;  in
<iuality  of  his  food,  and  the  consequence  is  a  low  state  of  vitality  everywhere,
and  a  greatly  diminishing  size  of  the  human  figure.

The  moral  of  the  author's  indictment  of  our  present  habit  of  overeating  is  that
■we  should  eat  all  of  our  food  in  its  natural  condition,  and  such  food  would  keep
money  in  our  pockets  and  the  drug  administering  doctor  from our  doors.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  question  of  food  and  how  it  should  be  partaken  of,
is  only  in  its  infancy.  Vegetarianism  is  no  longer  a  fad,  but  is  now  being  re-
garded as  the  only  possible  escape  for  mankind  from  the  thousand  alimentary
evils  that  now  curse  him  wherever  he  goes.

The  strongest  races  of  mankind  are  those  which  live  upon  the  most  simple
substances.  The  ancient  Romans  conquered  the  -^vorld  on  a  diet  of  raw  wheat
and  water.  If  people  were  only  brave  enough  to  sacrifice  their  appetites  fc>r
the  undeniably  delightful  flavors  of  cooked  food,  and  revert  to  the  spartan
simplicity  of  our  ancestors  as  regards  diet,  we  should  be  infinitely  healthier
and  happier.

Dr.  Reinhold  quotes  the  case  of  a  man  living  well  upon  less  than  half  a
dollar  a  week.  This  man's  diet  consisted  in  the  main  of  grains,  fruits  and  nuts.
He  also  ate  a  few  vegetables,  such  as  potatoes,  beets,  cabbages,  turnips  and
parsnips,  but  found  that  the  cost  of  the  veg:etables  was  three  times  as  much  as
the  grains.  He  preferred  the  grains  and  he  indulged  in  fruit  also.  "With  a  coffee
grinder  he  was  able  to  reduce  wheat,  corn  and  rye  to  palatable  and  digestible
conditions.  He  found  that  a  meal  of  corn  flavored  with  apples  prepared  in
different  ways, cost  him only  one  cent.

This  goes  to  show  that  one  can  live  on  a  high  class  of  nutritious  diet  at  the
most  minimum  cost,  and  be  richer,  healthier,  and  happier,  for  the  experience.
Trioe,  U5c.


NATURE  vs.  DRUGS. KIDNEY  TROUBLES— TeVfs  ^hap'le;

22  of  a  larger  work  entitled  Nature  vs.  Drugs  and  lefers  in  particular  to  kidney
troubles, epilepsy,  paralysis  and  contagion.

The  pamphlet  is  an  indictment  of  the  drug  practitioners  who  rarely  or  never
think  of  the  causes  of  disease,  but  who  concentrate  their  efforts  on  suppressing
the  seci-etion  of  corrupt  matter  by  the  system,  while  the  sooner  the  body  is
freed  from these encumbrances, the body assumes its natural form.

The  plain  diet  and  siinple  water  applications  so  freely  recoi-nmended  in  this
and  other  pamphlets,  are  sure  to  be  of  the  highest  value  in  the  cure  of  dropsy,
epilepsy,  and  many  contagious  diseases.

Kuhne's  Facial  Diagnosis,  which  was  translated  by  Dr.  Reinhold,  indicates
not  only  the  cause  of  the  specific  ailment  under  consideration,  but  which  also
unerringly  indicates  the  cause  of  future  diseases,  is  referred  to  as  a  guide  in
attacking  disease in general, years in advance.

Here  is  the  pathological  situation  as  outlined  in  these  pamphlets.  The  drug
doctors  di-ive  back  into  the  system  the  disease  from  which  the  patient  suffers.
by  attacking  the  syinptoms  thereof,  hence  we  can  well  believe  the  saying  of
Billroth  that  "the  progress  of  medical  science  is  over  mountains  of  corpses."

The  Naturopath,  wMthout  the  use  of  drugs,  greatly  assists  nature  in  eliminat-
ing the  poisonous  effete  matter  which  gives  rise  to  a  specific  ailment.

It  is  a  simple  fact  that  when  some  part  of  the  bodily  function  is  affected,  it
must  be  eured,  and  an  attempt  to  cure  by  unnatural  elements  generally  causes  a
condition  so  puzzling,  that  it  is  even  beyond  natural  cure — and  when  nature,
with  its  abundance  of  restorative  powers,  cannot  cure,  there  is  practically
nothiuK-  that  can. An  ailment  must  be  eliminated,  not  encouraged.

Which  system  of  treatment  most  energetically  appeals  to  the  reason  of  the
reader — the  exhilarating  process  of  Nature,  or  the  experimental  tactics  of
surgery, with its  drugs, operations, and consequent fatalities? Price. 25o.


<


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1252


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Kintzing. Signs of Internal

Disease _.  3.50

Knox. Microscopic  Diagnosis  1.25

Kohberger. Diagnosis 1.00

Kuhne. Facial Diagnosis...  2.50
Latham and Torrens. Med-
ical Diagnosis S.OO

Leftwich. Index of Symp.  4.00

Tabular Diagnosis 2. 10

Lippincott's Blood Pressure

and Clinical Charts ...  .50

Martin. Surgical Diagnosis  5.50
Maury. Surgical Differential

Diagnosis 2 .  50

McKisack. Medical Diagno-
sis 4.25

McNeil. Clinical and Lab-
oratory Technic 1 .00

Morris. Laboratory Methods  3.00
Morrow. Diagnosis and

Therapeutical Technic.  5.50

Mosher. Electro-diagnosis..  1.00

Muller. Serodiagnosis 1.50

Musser. Medical Diagnosis  5.00
Nicholson. Blood Pressure  1.50
Norris. Blood Pressure....  3.00
O'Reilly. Physical Diagno-
sis 2.00

Ponfick. Medico-surgical Di-
agnosis. Atlas 25.00

Reinhold. Facial Diagnosis  1.50

Sahli. Diagnostic Methods  6.50

Saundby. Urgent Symptoms  2.10
Sawyer. Physical Signs of
Disease of Thorax and

Abdomen 2 .  00

Schmidt. Pain 1.50

Simon. Clinical Diagnosis  5.00
Slade. Physical Examination

and Diagnostic  Anatomy  1.25
Tappeiner. Chemic Method

of Diagnosis 1.10

Todd. Clinical Diagnosis...  2.50
Von Jaksch. Clinical Diag-
nosis  • .  7.50

Wainwright. Urinary Diag-
nosis 1 .00

Wanklyn. Diagnosis of

Smallpox 1.50

Webster. Diagnostic Meth-
ods 5.00

Whiting. Medical Diagnosis.  1.25

Wilson. Medical Diagnosis  7.00
Wolfif-Eisner. Immunity and

Serodiagnosis 2.50

Wood. Chemic and Micro-
scopic Diagnosis 5.50

Wood,  Famuliner  and  Vogel.

Laboratorv Tectiiiic 75

Woolley. Clinical History  1.00


DICTIONARIES

American  Illustrated  Medi-
cal Dictionary $5.00

American Pocket Medical

Dictionary 1.50

Appleton's Dictionary 3.50

Cattell. Lippincott Medical

Dictionary S .  00

Cleaveland. Medical Lexicon .75

De Meric. French-English

Medical Dictionary ... 2.00

Dorland.  American  Illus-
trated Medical  Diction-
ary 5.00

American Pocket Medical

Dictionary 1.50

Duane.  Dictionary  of  Medi-
cine ■.••.••• 3  •  00

Dunglison.  Medical  Diction-
ary 8 .  00

Gould. Dictionary of New

Terms 5.00

Illustrated Dictionary of

Medicine 14.00

Practitioner's Dictionary 2.75


Student's Medical Diction-  |

ary 2.50

Pocket  Medical  Lexicon  1.25
Harris.  Dental  Dictionary  5.00
La Motte. Tuberculosis

Nurse 1.50

Lang  and  Meyers.  German-
English  Medical  Diction-
ary 5.00

Lehfeldt.  Medical  Dictionary  2.00
Lewis.  Optical  Dictionary  1.50
Meyer. Pocket Dictionary

in Eight Languages.... S.OO
Patterson. German-English

for Chemists 2.00

Pope.  Medical  Dictionary  1.00
Roosa. Vest-pocket Medical

Lexicon 75

Stedman. Medical Dictionary 4.50
Taber. Pocket Dictionary 1.50
Thorpe. Dictionary of Ap-
plied Chemistry 15.00

Waller. German-English

Medical Dictionary ... 2.00
Watts. Dictionary of Chem-
istry. 4 vols 50.00


DIET  AND FOOD

Anderson. Food and Cook-
ery $ .35

Andrews. What Shall We

Eat? 75

Apsley. Cookery 1 .40

Arnold. Diet Charts. Each  .05

Bailey. Food Products ....  1.60
Bardswell and Chapman.

Diets in Tuberculosis..  2.50
Bayliss. Food and Diet ...  .65
Bellows. Philosophy  of Eat-
ing 2.00

Benedict. Diet 1.50

Golden Rules of Dietetics  3.00

Black. Eating to Live 1.50

Blyth. Analysis of Food...  7.50

Boland. Invalid Cooking...  2.00
Brewster. Nutrition of

Household 1.00

Bryce. Diet 2.10

Carlson. Control of Hunger  2.00
Carpenter. Foods and Uses  .60
Carrington. Vitality, Fast-
ing and Nutrition 5.00

Carter. Diet Li«ts 1.00

Cassell. Cookery 1.00

Clayton. Food Microscopy  4.00
Crichton-Browne. Delusions

in Diet 75

Cutter. Foods 1.75

Davis. Food 3.50

Disque and Holliday. Diet  .25  j
Drinkwater. Food  in Health

and Disease 45  [

Einhorn. Dietetics 1.25  |

Folin. Preservatives 50  i

French. Food for Sick 1.00  i

Friedenwald and Ruhrah.

Diet in Health and Dis-  j

ease 4.00  ,

Gautier. Diet  and Dietetics.  4.00

Gephart and Lusk. Ready-  j

to-Serve Foods SO

Gillmore. Meatless Cookery  2.00  1

Goklsbury.  Register  of  Foods  1.00  |

Gouley. Dining 2.50

Gourand. What  Shall  I  Eat?  2.00

Greenish. Food and Drugs  3.50

Haig. Diet and Food 1.00

; Health Through Diet 1.25

Hall. Nutrition and Diet  2.25

Hare. Food in Disease 10.00

Hill. Cook-book for Nurses  .75
Hindhede. What  to  Eat  and

Why 1.00

Holland. Diet for Sick ...  .40

Hutchison. Food and Diet  4.00

James, Diabetic Cookery .  .  3.0C


Knowlton. Diabetic Cook

Book 50

Leach.  Analysis  of  Food...  .50
Leflfman. Food Analysis.... 2.50

Lewis. Diet for Sick 1.00

Locke. Food Values 1.35

Lorand. Diet 3.00

Lusk. Nutrition 50

Marshall. Diets 50

Mendel. Food Supply 50

Miles. Good Digestion 75

Mitchell. Fat and Blood... 2.00

Flesh Foods 3.00

Nichols.  Diet  in  Typhoid...  1.00
Parry. Foods and Drugs... 10.50

Pattee. Dietetics 1.75

Poole.  Cooking  for  Diabetics  1.00
Po]je and Carpenter. Diet.. 1.25

Porter. Milk Diet 2.00

Read.  Fads  and  Feeding...  1.00
Richards. First Lessons in

Food and Diet 30

Richards and Woodman.

Air, Food, and Water 2.00

Rose. Dietetics 1.10

Rosenau.  Milk  Question...  2.25
Sachse. How to Cook for

Sick 1.50

Schmidt and Aaron. Test

Diet  in Intestine Disease 1.50

Schreiner. Diet Lists 1.00

Sherer. Casein 3.00

Sherman. Food Products.. 2.40

Simplex Diet- Lists 1.50

Smith. What to Eat and

Why 2.75

Smyth.  Construction of

Dietaries 50

Stern and Spitz. Food for

the Worker 1.00

Stiles. Nutritional Physics 1.25

Adequate Diet 50

Sutherland. Dietetics 6.00

Swain. Cooking for Health 2.00

Thompson. Dietetics 5.50

Eat and grow Thin 1.00

Tibbies. Dietetics 4.00

Diet in Dyspepsia 1.00

Foods 5.00

Von Noorden. Fattening

Cures 1.50

Watson.  Food  and  Feeding  5.00
Weldon.  No  Animal  Food  1.00
Wiley.  Foods  and  Adultera-
tion 4.00

Winthrop.  Diet  in  Illness..  1.50
Winton.  Vegetable  Foods..  6.50
Worsnop. Cookery 75


DOMESTIC MEDICINE

Aikens.  Home Nurse's

Handbook $1.50

Bandler. Expectant Mother  1.25

Barnesby. Mother and Child  1.25

Barrett. Family Doctor 1.25

Bright. Family Practice...  3.00
Bridgers. Man  and His  Mal-
adies 2.00

Brown. The Baby 1.00

Scientific Living 1 .00

Buchanan. Household Bac.  2.25

Cabot. Layman's Medicine  2.00
Chance. Self-training for

Mothers 1-25

Cohen. Blue Book for Girl,

Wife, Mother 75

Woman 2.00

Conn. Bacteria, Yeasts and

Molds  in  the  Home 1.00

Coolidge. Sick Children 1.00

Custer. Sick Room 50

Dessar. Catarrhs and Colds  1.00

Dodds. Drugless Medicine  6.00

Fish. Home Dietetics 75

French. Home  Care  of  Con-
sumptives 1 .  00


Universal  Naiuropnthic  Directory  and  Itiiyors*  i^iiide


PULMONARY  CONSUMPTION-


In  this  pamphlet,  the  author
"discusses  health  and  disease  in
one  of  the  cleansing  processes  selected  by  Nature  to  purify  the  system.  The
cough  proves  the  presence  of  abnormal  inaterial  which  the  system  tries  to  dis-
lodge by  the  explosive  efforts  of  the  lungs  to  exhale.  Loss  of  appetite  is
another  measure  of  Nature  to  get  rid  of  impurities  by  cutting  off  the  supply  of
fuel  on  which  the  microbes  feed.  Night  sweats  are  another  element  of  elimina-
tion, to  prematurely  suppress  which  will  endanger  the  life  of  the  patient.  Fever
is  a  cleansing  process  as  it  burns  out  the  excess  of  bad  food,  and  thereby  de-
prives the  bacilli  of  their  means  of  existence.  But  the  fever  must  be  kept
within  limits  to  avoid  fatal results.

Lack  of  appetite  and  fever  cause  a  loss  of  weight,  but  a  point  made  by  the
author,  and  one  that  must  be  carefully  noted  by  the  reader,  is  that  the  amount
of  tissues  to  be  formed  when  appetite  returns,  depends  solely  on  the  quantity
of  air  inhaled. Hence breathe  deeply  always. Price,  25c.


CONSUMPTION  CURABLE-


"culosi.s  can  be  positively  prevented
and  cured  by  methods  of  Natural  Healing.  The  author  takes  the  medical  pro-
fession to  task  for  its  false  doctrine  that  consumption  is  incurable.  Nearly
everybody  has  had  tuberculosis  at  one  time  or  another,  a  fact  that  is  con-
tinually revealed  by  post-mortem  examinations,  which  disclose  the  healed
scars  of  former  lesion.s,  where  Nature  in  a  battle  with  the  disease  came  out  the
victor.  When  one  considers  the  harmful,  unnatural  and  futile  methods  of  treat-
ment of  the  drugging  school,  there  is  justification  for  its  pessimistic  doctrines.
The  writer  advocates,  in  conjunction  with  this  specific  form  of  treatment,  a
purely  vegetable  form  of  diet,  consisting  of  grain,  nuts,  fruits  and  vegetables.
It  is  a  satisfactory  condition  of  nature's  treatment  that  it  demands  nothing
which  even  tha  poorest  cannot  provide,  and  when  you  compare  the  complex
system  of  official  medicine  with  the  simple  curative  methods  of  the  Naturopath,
we  are  justified  in  saying  that  none  of  our  readers  can  go  astray  by  securing
the information  so  freely  discussed  in  these  valuable  pamphlets. Price,  25c.


PRIMr^IPI FQOP/^ITRP' This pamphlet refers to the principles of

1  rV.IilV.^lr  I^EjO  \jr  K^KJI\.MLi  cure  regarding  disease  in  general  rather
than  any  disease  in  particular.  It  shows  how  the  pain-liillers,  that  is  the  drug
merchants  in  the  medical  profession,  are  not  pnin  curers,  as  the  re-currence  of
the  same  pain  after  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  killed  by  the  drugs  is  sufficient

The  natural  methods  of  cure  are  exalted  by  the  author  and  rightly  so,  for  his
argument  is  that  food,  aii  and  environment,  should  be  of  the  propel  quality  and
quantity  to  reenforce  particular  treatments  for  the  rejection  of  effete  matter
from  the  diseased  organism.  Is  it  not  ridiculous  beyond  conception  to  suppose
that  an  allopathic  physician  by  means  of  a  few  drugs  can  cure  a  disease  that  is
brought  about,  is  propagated,  and  will  continue  to  be  propagated,  by  a
starvation  diet  in  a  congested  tenement  where  the  sleeping  rooms  never  see
the  light  of  dav!  It  is  futile  to  attempt  to  treat  diseases  while  such  conditions
remain  to  neutralize  curative  efforts.  It  is  only  the  Naturopath  that  points  out
this  tremendous  necessity  in  the  cure  of  disease,  that  the  environment,  as  well
Nature's  efforts  to  produce  sound bodies. Price,  25c.


KT/^'TC" Consequent to the death of Dr. Reinhold, his widow took up her

l^v-^**-«  residence  in  California,  and  shipped  thither  all  the  remaining
stock  of  her  husband's  book.'!.  The  particular  car  on  which  the  books  were
sent  got  mixed  up  in  a  railroad  wreck,  and  it  was  eight  months  before  she
could  recover  the  books  which  were  finally  delivered  to  her.  In  the  meantime
she  was  obliged  to  refuse  orders  for  over  300  copies  of  these  books,  so  great  was
the  demand  for  them,  in  some  cases  five  dollars  being  offered  for  a  publication
that  sold  for  only  half  the  price.  Mrs.  Reinhold  has  received  hundreds  of
letters  praising  the  books.  Dr.  A.  M.  Morrison,  a  Nature  Cure  practitioner  of
Los  Angeles,  at  recent  graduation  exercises  in  his  school,  said  that  "Dr.  Rein-
hold was  one  of  the  bravest  and  most  intellectual  souls  he  had  ever  met,  and  he
prized  his  books next  to the  Bible — without  exception."

■^Ve  take  pleasure  in  announcing  that  we  have  purchased  all  of  the  stock  of
Dr.  Reinhold's  works  that  has  remained  in  his  widow's  hands  amounting  to
about  300  copies.  There  are  now  no  other  copies  of  these  books  to  be  ob-
tained anywhere  save  from  ourselves,  and  this  element  of  rarity  enhances  their
value.  No  damage  has  occurred  to  the  contents  of  any  pamphlet,  but  a  certain
antique  sentiment  attaches  thereto  by  reason  of  the  fact  that,  as  these  pamph-
lets will  never  be  republished  and  have  undergone  great  danger  of  destruction,
they  will  be  prized  as  Souvenirs  of  a  great  Naturopath,  worthy  of  a  shrine  in
the  library  of  every  drugless  physician.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1254


GniPval  List  of  Medical  Works


Forest. New Method 1 .  00

Griffith. Care of the Baby  l.SO
Grimshaw. Medical Guide  3.00
Guernsey. Homeopathic Do-
mestic Practice 2.50

Gunn. Family Physician...  6.50
Hanchett. Domestic Medi-
cine 1 .75

llartshorne. Household Phy-
sician 2.50

Hcring. Homeopathic Do-
mestic Physician 2.50

Hope. Till Doctor Comes  1.00
Howe. Care of Expectant

Mother SO

Hutt. Teacher Notes 36

Keating-. Maternity 1 .25

Kellogg. Home Handbook  7.50

Ladies' Guide 3 .  00

Kerley. Short Talks with

Young Mothers 1.00

Latson. Common Disorders  1.00
Laurie and McClatchey
Homeo|)atliic Domestic

Medicine 5.00

Lindley. Health in Home..  1.25
Lippert and Holmes. When

to Send for Doctor 1.50

Moberly. Sick Nursing 50

Morgan. Domestic Practice  .50

Pulten. Domestic Physician  3.00

Rossiter. Guide to Health  3.00
Strouse and Perry's Manual

for  Doctor  and  Patient  3.00
Taylor.  Family  Register...  5.00
Twedell.  Mother's  Guide...  1.00
Verdi.  Home  Treatment  ..  3.50
Warner.  Woman's  Hand-
book 2.00

Wheeler. Hints for Mothers  .35
White. Food Values in

Household Measures .  .  .25

Wilson. Modern Physician  2.50
Woodward. Constitutional

Therapeutics ;..  3.50


EC1.ECTIO PRACTICE

Cooper.  Preventive  Medi-
cine $1.00

Dodge. Social Purity 50

FUingwood.  American  Mate-
ria Medica  and  Thera-
peutics 5.00

Practice of Medicine ....  6.00
Pregnancy and Labor....  1.50
Felter-Lloyd. American Dis-
pensatory 9.00

Foltz.  Diseases  of  Eye,
Nose, Throat, and Ear.

2 vols $2.50 @  3.50

Fyfes. Materia Medica...  2.00
Specific Diagnosis and

Medicine 5 .  00

Howe. Gynecology 4.00

Hubbard. Surgery 6.00

King. Chronic Diseases....  8.50

Eclectic Obstetrics 5.50

Woman 1.50

Locke. Materia Medica 2.00

Mundy. Eclectic Practice in

Diseases of Children...  3.00
Niederkorn. Specific Medi-
cation 1 .00

Palmer. Digestive Organs  3.00
Peterson. Materia Medica
and Clinical Therapeu-
tics 2.00

Scudder.  Diseases  of

Women 2.75

Materia Medica 4.00

Specific Diagnosis l.SO

Specific Medication 2.00

Stephens. Medical  Gynecology  3.00
Thomas. Eclectic Medicine  6.00
Watkins. Practice of Medi-
cine 2.50


Webster. Eclectic Practice 6.50
Wintermute. Obstetrics ... 5.50


El-KCTniCITY, RADIUS,
X-RAYS

Abbott. Electricity $1.25

Adam. Electricity 4.50

Addyman. X-Ray Work...  4.00
Allen, Radiotherapy, etc. ..  4.50
Arthur and Muir. X-Ray..  2.50
Raines and Rowman. Elec-
tropathology and Thera-
peutics 2.00

Beck. Atlas Radiography..  8.00
Bigelow. Medical Electricity  1.00
Bigelow and Massey. Elec-
tro-therapeutics 6.00

Blondlot. "N" Rays 1.20

Bruce. Radiography 6.00

Burdick. X-Ray, etc 1.50

Bythel  and Barclay. X-Rays  5.50

Christie. X-ray Technic 2.00

Cleaves. Light Energy....  5.00
Clewell. Direct and Alter-
nating Currents 1.00

Colin. Electro-diagnosis and

Electro-therapeutics ...  2.00
Colwell and Russ. Radium,

X-ray and Living Cell  4.00

Cooper. X-Rays 1.00

Cunningham.  Electron

Theory 1.10

Davidson. Localization by

X-ray 3.00

Dominici.  Radium  in  Mal-
ignant Disease I.UO

Dugan. Electro-therapy ...  2.00

Eberhardt. High Frequency  2.50

X-Rays 1.50

Elliott. Electro-Therapeutics

and X-Rays 2.50

Finsen-Sequeria.  Photothe-
rapy 1.75

Finzi. Radium Therapy....  2.00
Freund. Radiotherapy ...  3.00
Gottschalk. Electro-thera-
peutics 3 .  50

Granger. Radiographic Atlas  6.00
Guilleminot. Electricity in

Medicine 2.00

Haller and Cunningham.

Tesla Coil 1.25

Harris. Electric Treatment  1.00
Herdman and Nagler. Elec-
trotherapeutics 1.50

Hood. Electrotherapeutics  2.00
Huniphris. Electrotherapeu-
tics 2.40

International System of

Electro-therapeutics ...  6.00

Jones. Medical Electricity  4.00

Judd. X-Ray 2.00

King.  Static  High  Fre-
quency and  Radio-
therapy 2.50

Knox. Radio-therapy 8.00

Leduc. Electric Tons 1.00

Magill. Galvanism l.SO

Martin. Electro-therapeutics

and X-Ray 4.00

Measurement of Shocks..  1.25
Matijaca. Electro-Medicine

and Electro-Surgery ...  3  .  00
McClung. Conduction of
Electricity and Radio-
activity 1 .  50

McCoy.  Dental  Radiogra-
phy 2.00

Monell. Electricity 3 .00

High Frequency 4.00

Rudiments of Medical

Electricity 1.00

Treatment  of  Electric  Cur-
rents 6.00

X-Ray in Medicine 15.00

Morton. Cataphoresis and

Radiotherapy 4.00


Morton. Essentials of Med-
ical Electricity 2.50

Medical Electricity 1.75

Radiology 3.00

Mowat. X-Rays 3.00

Neiswanger. Electro-thera-
peutic Practice 2.50

Newcomet. Radium 2.25

Nipher.  Electricity and

Mogre 1.25

Potamian and Walsh. Elec-
tricity 2.00

Potts. P'lectricity 4.75

Prince. Roentgen Technic  2.00

Rankine. Radio-localization  .50

Rockwell. Electricity ?.(ln

Savidge. Radio-activity ....  1.50
.Sayer. Medical Electricity

and Light Treatment...  1.40
Schultz. X-Ray in Derma-
tology 4.00

.Snow. Currents of High

Potential 3.00

Electricity and X-Rays  3.00
Vibration and its Thera-
py 3.(111

Soddy. Radium 2.00

Strong. Electro-therapeutics  1.50

High Frequency Currents  4.00

Strutt. Becquerel Rays....  2.40
Tousey. Medical Electricity,

X-Rays and Radium...  7.50

Turner. Medical Electricity  4.00

Radium 1 .  75

Walmsley. Photo-Microgra-
phy 1.25

Walsh. X-Ray in Medicine  4.00

Walter. X-Rays 1 .  00

Wickham and Degrais. Ra-
dium in Cancer 6.00

Radium Therapy 1.25


EiVIBRYOLOGY

Baily and Miller. Embry-
ology .'. $4.75

Chamberlain. The Child 1.50

Harman. Embryology 50

Jenkinson.  Experimental

Embryology 4.15

Keibel and Mall. Em-
bryology. 2 vols 20.00

Keith. Human Embryology 4.20
Kellicott. Cordate Develop-
ment 2.75

Embryology 2.50

Leopold and Vogt. Yoimg

Ovum in Situ 3.50

Mall and Kcihel. Embry-
ology 20.00

Manton. Embryology 1.25

McMurrich. Development of

Human Body 2.50

Minot. Laboratory Embry-
ology 3 .  50

Prentiss. Embryology 3.75

Reese. Vertebrate Embry-
ology 1.75

Satterlee. Embryology .... 1.25
Witkowski. Gestation .... 3.00


EYE, EAR. NOSE, AlVD
THROAT

Adair-Dighton.  Nasopharynx  $3.50
Adam.  Ophthal.  Diagnosis  7.00
Adam.  Ophthal.  Therapy  ..  3.00
Adams.  Pathology  of  Eye..  l.SO
Alger.  Refraction  and  Mo-
tility 1.75

Alt. Ophthalmology 2.00

American Encyclopedia of
Ophthalmology. 12 vols.

Each 8.00

Ash. Stammering 1 .00

.\tkinson. Refraction 1.25


TTiilvorsiil Nnlliropiidiic Directory siiul ItiiyerK' Ciililc  1255

I  f

Books  On  Mental  Science  I

We have been fortunate in securing  a consignment of rare books on  ?

metaphysical subjects by the late Mrs. Helen Wilmans, her late husband  I

C.  C. Post,  and W.  J.  Colville,  the Astrologer,  that  were published by the  j

International  Scientific  Association  of  Sea  Breeze,  Fla.,  the  home  of  Mrs.  Wil=  •

mans Post since she came into fame as a writer and lecturer on Mental  |

Science. We  give  a review  of  the  individual  books  herewith.  i


THE  CONQUEST  OF  POVERTY. By  Mrs.  Helen  Wil-

mnn^ Tliis bt)ok is an aiitobiograpliical account of how the author rosf?

IHUI19  from  abject  poverty  to  wealth  by  Mental  Science.  Discovering-  that
thoug-ht  when  positive,  is  all  compelling:;  but  when  negative,  it  has  no  power,
she  applied  this  knowledge  in  dealing-  with  others  and  was  successful.  She  came
to  know  that  the  thing  one  believes  he  can  do,  he  can  do.  This  produced  an
opulent  frame  of  mind  that  favoi-ably  impressed  every  one  with  w-hom  the
author  came  in  contact.  She  proved  that  she  was  as  she  believed.  By  degrees
she  came  to  know  that  besides  being-  an  economic  force,  thoug-ht  is  also  a  healing
force.

Thought  is  the  world  builder — it  builds  health  as  well  as  wealth.  Her
husband  took  sick  with  consumption.  Christian  Science  was  invoked,  but  its
negations  could  do  nothing-,  and  she  resolved  by  the  power  of  positive  thought
.«he  would  not  let  hiin  die.  In  that  resolution,  the  movement  known  throughout
the  world  as  Mental  Science  was  born.  Her  husband  recovered,  and  she  began
to  write  a  series  of  lessons  on  Mental  Science  and  began  to  grow  rich  on  the
fees  demanded  for  such  lessons.  From  Chicago,  the  author  and  her  husband
finally  located  themselves  at  Sea  Breeze,  Fla.,  where  they  built  a  home  on  the
ocean  front  under  stately  palms  and,  later,  the  Colonnades  Hotel.  The  tide  of
wealth  began  to  roll  into  their  lives,  its  source  being  simply  an  overmastering
desire  for  money  to  banish  the  fear  of  poverty.  The  author  studied  the  law  of
accumulation  that  governs  wealth.  The  law  is  to  seek  steadfastly  the  kingdom
of  heaven  within  us  and  not  primarily  wealth,  which  is  simply  one  of  its  ex-
ternals, and  as  such  only  dead  matter.  The  weakest  man  has  within  him  the
powers  of  a  g-od  if  he  only  will  develop  them.  Man's  innate  mental  opulence
draws  to  it  material  opulence,  but  seek  first  the  righteousness  of  mental  opul-
ence and  all  other  kinds  of  opulence  will  be  added  thereto.

Life  carries  with  it  problems  without  number.  One  great  problem,  poverty,
cannot  be  adequately  solved  if  the  victim  feels  consti-ained  to  be  pes-
simistic, for  without  optimism,  how  can  we  even  hope  to  gain  the  better  side  of
life  with  its  munificence! — Price,  postpaid,  in  clotli.  SI. 10;  paper  cover,  7Ti  cent.s;
special cheap paper, 55 «'ents.


THE  LAST  ENEMY  TO  BE  OVERCOME  IS  DEATH.

R-v f-l*>1d>n Vi/ilmnnc ^^e burden of this pamphlet is a startling pro-

**j<  jjctefl  rr  lirnund  phecy  that  death,  physical  death,  is  to  be  van-
quished. The  words  of  Paul,  referring  to  the  spiritual  death,  are  taken  literally.
Vital  power  is  accumulating  on  the  planet:  every  year  adds  to  the  aggregate
length  of  human  life.  In  each  generation  death  retreats  a  little  farther  back:
in  each  generation  it  is  hated  and  dreaded  more  and  more.  Vitality  is  the  enem>'
of  death.  A'itality  overcomes  disease.  Vitality  is  life.  The  author  was  born
with  more  life  than  usual.  Mental  Science  is  itself  a  token  of  the  constantly
increasing  vitality  now  sweeping-  through  all  the  avenues  of  existence,  of  the
personal  ability  to  overcome  every  form  of  disease,  and  even  of  old  age  and  death.
The  professors  in  the  laboratories  will  not  find  an  elixir  of  life;  the  vital  power
is  expressed  in  thought.  This  is  the  faith  of  the  author  that  the  more  intelligent
in  the  scale  of  being  a  man  is,  the  more  deatliless  he  is.  It  is  in  the  generation
of  New  Thought  that  the  coming  vitality  expresses  itself.  The  generation  of
new  thought  is  the  generation  of  new  vitality.  Medically  speaking,  the  ne>v
thouiflit  i.s  challeiiK'in;:;:  the  old  beliefs  in  the  power  of  disease,  old  ajre  and  death.
And  these  old  belief.s  are  answerins'-not  liy  argument,  not  -with  reason,  but  -with
blows,  the  weapons  of  ignorance.  This  method  of  answering  is  fatal  to  them-
selves: it  is  exposing  their  weakness  more  and  more,  and  is  gradually  dissipat-
ing- the  power  heretofore  accoided  them  in  human  belief.  Their  doom  is  certain.
The  newer  thought  of  Naturopathy,  the  belief  in  the  po-^ver  of  Nature's  forces,
the  forces  of  hydropathy,  heliopathy.  electropathy,  mechanopathy,  air,  diet,  exer-
cise, massage,  fasting  and  sleep,  as  opposed  to  the  poisonous  thoughts  of  pills
and  potions,  of  serums,  inoculations  and  vaccines,  poisons  deliberately  injected
into  the  living  tissues,  is  a  mighty  truth  for  the  hope  of  the  efficacy  of  these
forces,  and  a  sure  prophecy  of  their  fulfilment. — Price,  prepaid,  25  cents.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1 25r)


(icncnil  List  of  Mediral  Works


Ayies. Oculist and Index

Reruni, each 40

Bacon. Ear 2.25

Baker. Thick Lens Optics  1.50

Ball. Nose and Pharynx...  2. 75

Ophthalmology 6.00

Ballanger. Ear, Nose, and

Throat 3.50

Ballenger and Wippern. Dis-
eases of Eye, Ear, Nose,

and Throat 3.50

Barnes. Tonsils 3 .  00

Barnhill and Wales. Otol.  5.50

Barr. Ear 5.00

Barwell. Larynx 1.50

Begg. Sprue 2 .  00

Behnke. Stammering and

Lisping 50

Bezold-Siebenmann. Otology  3.50
Biggs. Eye, Ear, Nose and

Throat 3.25

Bishop. Ear 3.00

Nose, Throat, Ear 4.00

Blair. Surgery of Mouth

and Jaws 5.50

Blake and Reik. Operative

Otology 4.00

Bluemel. Stammering, etc.  5.00

Boldt. Trachoma 3.00

Boyle. Therapeutics of Eye  3.50
Braun and Friesner. Laby-
rinth 4.50

Brophy. Oral Surgery ....  10.00

Brown. Asthma 4.00

Optician's Manual. 2 vols.

Each 2.50

Optometry 2.50

Oral Surgery 6.00

State Boards 1.50

Brown  and  Stevenson.

Squint in Children 1.00

Bruck. Nose and Throat...  5.00
Bucholz. Principles of Otol-
ogy 1  .00

Burch. Physiol. Optics. ...  1.35

Burnett. Hearing 1.00

Refraction 1.00

Button. Refraction 1  .00

Campbell. Refraction 1.75

Carter and Frost. Ophthal-
mic Surgery 2.25

Coakley. Nose  and  Throat .  2.75

Colburn. Eye 3.50

Coleman. Electricity in Eye,

Ear, Nose, Throat 5 .  00

Collins and Maynu. Patho-
logy and Bacteriology

of Eye 4.00

Coolidge. Nose and Throat  1.50

Adenoids and Tonsils 50

Darier. Ophthalmic Thera-
peutics 4.00

Davis. Accessory Sinuses  3.50

Dench. Ear 5.50

De Santi. Rules of Aural

and Nasal Surgery ....  .50

De Schweinitz. Eye 6.00

Donders. Refraction 1.25

Duane. Motor  Anomalies of

Eye 1.25

Edridge-Green. Color- Vision  1.50

Elliot. Glaucoma 1.50

Sclerocorneal Trephining  3.00

Elschnig. Pathology of Eye  15.00

Fein. Rhino, and Laryngo.  1.50

Ferguson. Nose and Throat  l.flO

Fisher. Ophthalmic  Anatomy  3.00
Forrest. Eye, Ear, Nose,

Throat 4.00

Fox. Ophthalmology 6.50

Fuchs. Ophthalmology ....  7.00

Gage. Optic Projection ....  3.00

Gile. Ear. Nose. Throat...  2.75
Gleason. Essentials of  Nose,

Throat 1.25

Manual Nose, Throat, Ear  2.75

Goadby. Mycology  of  Mouth  3.00
Gould and Pyle. Diseases

of Eye 1.25


Gowers. Ophthalmoscopy.  .  4.00

Gray. Ear 4.25

Grayson. Nose, Throat, Ear  4.00

Greeflf. External  Eye  Diseases  7.00
Microscopic Examination

of Eye 2.00

Green. Color Vision and

Color Blindness 1.50

Grimsdale and Brewerton.

Oijlithalmic Operations  2.50
Grunwald and Grayson. At-
las of Larynx 2.50

Haab and de Schweinitz.

Atlas of External Eye  3.00
Atlas of Operative Oph-
thalmology 3.50

Atlas of Ophthalmoscopy  3.00

Hanke. Eye 1.50

Hansell and Reber. Muscu-
lar  Anomalies of Eye...  2.50
Hansell and Sweet. Eye...  4.00
Harman. Conjunctiva in

Health and Disease....  2.50

Ophthalmology 1.25

Preventable Blindness ...  1.25
Hartridge. Golden Rules of

Ophthalmic Practice .  .  .40

Ophthalmoscope 1 .  50

Refraction of Eye 1.50

Heine. Operations of Ear..  3.00

Henderson. Eye 1 .50

Glaucoma 3 .  00

Herbert. Cataract  Extraction  3.75
Hirschberg. Shortsight ...  1.50
Holinger-Bezold. Otology  3.50
Holmes. Orbit and Acces-
sory Cavities 3.00

Howe. Muscles of Eye.

2 vols. Each 4.25

Hubball. Ophthalmology in

America 1.00

Ivins. Nose and Throat ...  4.00

Jackson. Essentials of Eye  1.25

Manual of Eye •.  .  .  2.00

Ophthalmic Year-book. 12

vols. $2.00, $5.00 and  10.00
Peroral Endoscopy and

Laryngeal Surgery ....  5.00

Skiascopy 1 .  00

Jennings. Color-vision and

Color-blindness 1  .00

Ophthalmology 1.50

Jones. Aural Surgery ....  1.00

Eye in Medicine 1.50

Kelson. Eyes, Ears, Nose

and Throat 3.00

Kerison. Ear 5.50

Knight and Bryant. Nose,

Throat, Ear 4.50

Kopetsky. Surgery of Ear  4.00

Krieg. Atlas of  Nose  Disease  12.00

Kyle. Nose and Throat ....  4.50

Ear, Nose, Throat 4.50

Lack. Nose and Sinuses...  8.50

Lahn. Iridology 2 .  00

Lake. Diseases of Ear 3.00

Laryngeal Phthisis 2.00

Lamb. Throat, Nose, Ear  2.75
Landolt. Defective Ocular

Movements 2 .  00

Lane. Cleft Palate and

Adenoids 4 .  00

Latson. Catarrh 60

Lewis. Optical Dictionary  1.50
Llewellyn. Miner's Nystog-

mies 2.40

Lloyd. Hay Fever 1 .00

Lockard. Tuberculosis of

Nose and Throat 5.00

Loeb. Oper.  Surg.  Ear,  Nose,

Throat. 2  vols. Set 13.00

Lohman. Disturbances of

Vision 4.00

Loring. Ophthalmoscopy...  10.00

Love. Deaf  Child I  ..SO

Diseases of Ear 10.00

MacCallan. Trachoma in

Egypt 2.75

Macnab. Ulcer of Cornea  2.00


Maddox. Ocular Muscles  2.00

Refraction 50

Marshall. Eye 3.00

Face, Mouth, Jaws 5.50

ALiy. Diseases of Eye 2.00

Mayou, Diseases of Eye...  1.50

McBride. Throat, Nose, Ear  7.00

McCormick. Optical Truths  3.00

McCurdy. Oral Surgery ..  3.00
McKenzie. Nose, Throat,

Kar 2.()U

Meller. Ophthalmic Surgery  3.50

Moure. Pharynx and Larynx  3.00
Murray. Minor Ophthalmic

and Aural Technic ...  3.00

Nance and Peck. Glaucoma  1.50

Neustaetter. Skiascopy ...  10.00
Norris  and  Oliver. The  Eye.

4 vols. Each 5.00

Nutting. Optics 2.00

Oculists' Index Rerum 3.00

Ohlemann. Ocular Thera-
peutics 1  .  75

Onodi. Lachrymal Organs

and Accessory Sinuses  4.25

Optic Nerve 3.50

Oppenheimer. Surgery of

Middle Ear and Mastoid  6.00

Packard. Nose, Throat, Ear  4.00

Parker. Diseases of Eye....  1.50

Parsons. Color Vision 3.75

Eye 4.00

Neurology of Vision 1.00

Percival. Geometric Optics  1.50

Manual of Optics 3.00

Prescribing Spectacles ..  2.00

Perkins. Otology 3 .  00

Peter. Perimetry 2.50

Philip. Golden Rule for

Aural and Nasal Prac.  .50

Phillips. Ear, Nose, Throat  6.00

Eyeglasses 1 .  00

Pickerill. Stomatology ....  5.50

Politzer. Otology 8.00

Porter. Throat, '  Nose, Ear  2.75

Posey. Eye 4 .  00

Hygiene of Eye 4.00

Posey and Spiller. Eye and

Nervous System 7 .  00

Prendeville.  No.se and

Throat 1.40

Prentice. Ophthalmic Lenses  1.50
Ramsay. Diathesis and Oc-
ular 2.00

Injuries of Eyes, Throat,

Nose and Ears 6.00

Reik, Ear, Nose. Throat...  3.50

Safeguarding Senses 75

Reik and Blake. Operative

Otology 4.00

Richards. Nose and Throat  2.00
Richardson. Thyroid and

Parathyroid 3.00

Roberts. Deformities  of Face  3.00

Roemer. Ot>lithalmology ...  6.00
Roosa and Davis. Anatomy
and Diseases of Eye

and Ear 1.00

Ruttin. The Labyrinth 2.50

Salzmann. Anatomy and

Histology  of  the Kvehall.  5.00

Savage. Ophthalmic  Myology  4.00
Ophthalmic Neuro-Myol-

ogy 2.50

Routine in Eye Work....  1.00
Schoenman. Atlas Auditory

Apparatus 10.00

Scott. Refraction 2.00

Scripture. Stuttering, Lisp-
ing 1 . 60

Shield. Nasal Obstructions  1.25
Shoemaker. Retinitis Pig-
mentosa 2 .  00

.Simpson. Adenoid  Growth  of

Nasopharynx 1.00

SkiUcrn. Catarrh, etc 5.50

Smith. Cataract 3.00

Souter. Refractive and Mote

Mechanism 2.50


Universal IVatiiropiitliic l»ire«'tory iintl llu>«'r.<s' (•iildc


1257


EXPOSITIONS  of  the  IDEAL  and  REAL


RELATION  OF  THE  IDEAL  TO  THE  AFFAIRS  OF

acterized  by  tlie  same  bold  tliinking  and  clearness  of  expression  tliat  prevails  in
all  of  the  writings  of  the  lecturer.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Mrs.  Wilmans  has  the
mind  of  a  man  in  the  body  of  a  woman.

Here  she  dilates  on  the  divine  mystery  of  the  ideal.  She  shows  that  "the  poet
is  worshipped  because  he  represents  uss  in  our  higher  aspirations.  The  poet  and
artist  have  always  been  the  great  educators  of  men,  it  is  they  that  have  put  the
highest  and  most  complete  polish  upon  human  character.  They  disclose  your
genius  by showing  you their  own."

As  delineated  by  the  story  of  "The  Arabian  Nights,"  the  getting  of  wealth  and
the  love  of  power  aie  ideas  on  a  far  higher  plane  than  nieie  vulgar  di.splay  of
riches.  The  desire  is  one  of  the  finest  manifestations  of  man's  superb  idealitj-.
The  method  of  accumulation  may  be  sordid,  but  the  desire  is  not.  Wealth  rightly
used  gives  freedom.  Freedom  to  express  one's  ideality.  Freedom  to  express  the
sublime,  the  beautiful,  the  painful  if  need  be,  and  the  humorous  in  life.  Like  the
giant  escaping  from  the  bottle  of  the  Egyptian  on  the  sea  shore  whose  form
filled  the  heavens,  is  the  beginning  of  the  development  of  Man's  mighty  Ego,  and
now  for  the  fir.-;!  time  in  history  the  human  brain  begins  to  keep  step  with  the
infinite  march  of  eternity.  The  unfoldment  of  the  possibilities  of  the  human  soul
has  just  begun.  The  desire  for  wealth  is  perfectly  legitimate.  Wealth  means
the  difference  between  slavery  and  freedom.  It  means  the  development  of  the
poet  and  artist,  the  prophet  and  philosopher;  it  means  culture,  refinement,  per-
sonal grace  and  beauty. — Price,  postpaid,  25  cents.


THOUGHT  TRANSFERENCE  AND  MENTAL HEAL-

flVT|^  !>-, t/_|^_ l/l/«/»Mr»Mo The author claims that thought is an

tX'NVl. Dy  neien VV  UmanS actual  substance,  generated  by  the  brain.

The  relation  between  the  brain  and  the  outside  world  is  caused  by  the  operation
of  self-generated  thovight,  and  the  brain  gets  any kind of  response it  asks  for.

The  author  has  very  positive  opinions  about  thought-transference,  which  has
been  in  operation  for  ages,  long  before  Marconi  made  a  public  application  by  his
wonderful Invention of wireless telegraphy.

The  wonder  of  thought  transmission  is  just  beginning  to  make  itself  really
felt.  Mrs.  H.  Wilmans,  in  the  present  pamphlet,  is  very  earnest  about  promul-
gating this  truth.  She  states  that  from  our  first  imperfect  knowledge  of  thought
transmission  came  all  the  apparent  wonder-working  of  hj'pnotism,  magic,  spirit-
ism, and  character  reading.

Disease  is  not  an  entity;  it  is  only  a  morbid  condition.  It  is  like  darkness;  let
the  light  in  on  daikness  and  it  disappears.  Let  the  light  of  an  intelligent  under-
standing of  truth  in  on  a  disease  and  it,  too,  will  disappear.

The  author  believes  that  there  is  no  limit  to  the  powers  of  mind.  She  believes
that  the  power  of  thought  transference  is  going  to  enable  us  to  coirespond  with
surrounding  planets. — Price,  postpaid,  25  cents.


A  fa.-^cinat-
i  1 1  u  s  -


DRIVEN  FROM  SEA  TO  SEA. By  C.  C.  Post-

trated  story,  that  has  already  reached  its  fifty-fifth  edition,  and  is  a  record  of
real  life  representing  the  encroachments  of  corporate  rapacity,  backed  by  con-
gressional legislation,  on  the  homes  and  industry  of  frontiersmen,  who  with  in-
credible toil  had  established  themselves  on  the  viigin  lands  of  the  great  "West,
where  they  had  hoped  to  live  comfortable  and  independent  lives  as  freemen,  and
gradually  acquire  the  amenities  and  refinements  of  civilization.  The  actual  facts
and  conditions  are  those  that  existed  between  1875  and  1SS5  dui'ing  the  transcon-
tinental railroad  building  era,  and  portray  corporate  robbery,  chicanery,  legisla-
tive bribery,  eviction  and  murder,  on  the  part  of  the  railroad  promoters.  The
principal  scenes  are  laid  in  the  hydraulic  mining  region  of  California.  Col.  Post
has  taken  great  pains  to  establish  his  facts  from  newspaper  reports,  public  ex-
pressions of  noted  men  on  corporate  aggression,  legislative  and  judicial  corrup-
tion, and  reproduces  facsimiles  of  railroad  passes  to  legislators  for  services
lendered.

Part  II  of  the  book  is  replete  with  important  data  useful  to  historians,  writers,
orators,  and  public  men  geneially  who  are  interested  in  the  history  of  the  period
to  which  the  storj'  refers.  There  is  also  a  reproduction  of  the  celebrated  "Hunt-
ingdon Letters"  which  came  to  light  in  the  trial  of  the  late  Collis  P.  Huntingdon,
railway  president  and  multi-millionaire,  at  Santa  Rosa.  California,  which  at  the
time  created  a  tremendous  sensation  because  of  the  disclosures  of  the  method.-;
by  which  the  immense  railroad  lands  were  granted. — Price,  in  paper  covers,  post-
paid, 75  cents.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO,,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1258


Gi'iu'val  List  of  Medical  Works


Spencer. ICxamination of

Ear 100

Stephenson. Contagious  Oph-
thalmia 100

Eye Strain 1.50

Ophthalmia Neonatorum  5.00
Stevens. Motor Apparatus

of Eye 4.50

Swanzy. Disease of Eye...  4.00

Sweet and Hansell. Eye 4.0U

Sym. Eye 2.50

Theobald. Prevalent Eye

Diseases 4.50

Thomson. Anatomy of Eye  12.75

Graves' Disease 1 .  50

Nose and Throat 7.50

Submucous Excision of

Septum 50

Thorington. Estimating Re-
fraction 2.50

Ophthalmoscope 2.50

Prisms 2.00

Retinoscope 1 .  00

Tod. Ear 1.50

Torok and (".rout. Ophthal-
mic Surgery 4.50

Tscherning. Physiol. Optics.  3.00
Turner and Porter. Acces-
sory Sinuses 5.00

Veasey. Diseases of P2ye.  .  .  2.00

Waggett. Nose and Throat  1.50

Weeks. Eye 6.00

West and Scott. Aural Sur-
gery 2.00

Whiting. Mastoid^  Operation  6.00

Wingfrave. Adenoids 1 .00

Wood. Ophthalmic  Operation  15.00

Ophthalmic Therapeutics  7.00
Wood,  Andrews, Shambaugh.

Eye, -Ear, Nose, Throat  1.50

Worth. Squint 2.50

Wright  and Smith. Nose  and

Throat 5.00

Wurdemann. Eye 7.00

Yearsley. Diseases of Ear  4.00


FEVERS, INFECTIOUS
DISEASES


Augustin.  Yellow  Fever.  .
Barnes. Contagious  Diseases

Boyce. Yellow Fever

Coleman. Yellow Fever  and

Dengue

Corlett. Exanthemata

Craig. Malarial Fevers.  .  .  .

Deaderick. Malaria

Fanning. Hay Fever

Foster. Cerebrospinal Fever

Fox. Smallpox

Gresswell. Scarlatina

Hanna. Smallpox

Hare. Typhoid Fever

Hatfield. Contagious  Diseases

Heiman  and  Feldstein. Men-

ingococcos  Meningitis .  .

Hcnson. Malaria

Herms. Malaria

Hollopeter. Hay Fever.  .  .  .

Hopkirk. Influenza

Ker. Fevers ._

Infectious Diseases

Langrfield. Infectious and

Parasitic Diseases

McClure. Fevers

McCurry. Malaria

Meara. Treatment of In  fee.

Milne. Scarlet Fever

Moore.  Typhoid  Fever.  .  .  .
Nothnagel's  Practice

Typhoid, Typhus Fevers.

Influenza.  Dengue  and  Ma-
larial Diseases

Diphtheria, Scarlet Fever,

Rotheln

Nutlall. Hygienic Measures

and Infections

Osborne. Infections

Ott. Fever


$6.00
3.00
3.50

1.00
4.00
4.50
4.50
.75
3.75
4.00
2.60
3.00
3.25
1.00

3.00
2.50
1 .  50  I
1.25  i
1.25  !
2.50
7.00

1.25
3.50
1.50
4.00
1.00
1.00
5.00


5.00

5.00

.75

.75

1.50


I'arsons. Isolation  Hospitals  4.00
Ricketts and Byles. Small-
pox 6.00

Rogers. Fevers  in  Tropics..  7.50

Ross. Malarial Fever 75

Prevention of Malaria....  5.00

Ruge. Malarial Diseases...  2.75

Stevens. Smallpox 85

Welch  and  Schamberg. Con-
tagious Diseases 5.00

Whipple. Typhoid Fever...  3.00

Wilson, Infectious Diseases  6.50

Zuill. Typhoid Fever 25

OYNECOI^OGY

Aarons. Aids  to Gynecology  $1.25

Golden Rules 50

Gynecologic  Threapeutics.  .  2.00
Abel. Gynecologic Pathol-
ogy 2.  SO

Ashton. Gynecology 6.50

Bainbridge  and  Meeker. Op-
erative Gynecology ....  1.00
Bandler. Medical Gynecol-
ogy 5.00

Vaginal Celiotomy 5.00

Barbour  and  Watson. Gyne-
cologic  Diagnosis 3.00

Bell. Gynecology 6.50

Berkely and Bonney. Gyne-
cologic Surgery 6.00

Gynecology 6.50

Bland-Sutton. Fibroid of

Uterus 1.80

Hysterectomy 1 .  00

Pelvic  and  Abdominal Sur.  2.50
Bland-Sutton  and  Giles. Dis-
eases of  Women 4.00

Bovee. Gynecolog}' 5.00

Burrage. Gynecologic Diag-
nosis 6.50

Bushong. Gynecology 2.00

Byford. Gynecology 3.00

Cameron. Gynecology 5.00

Child. Gynecology 1.00

Cowen. Electricity  in Gyne-
cology 1.50

Cragin. Ess. of Gynecology  1.25

Crockett. Diseases  of  Women  1.50
Crossen. Medical  Diseases  of

Women 6.50

Operative Gynecology ....  7.50
Cullen. Adenomyoma of

Uterus 5.00

Cancer  of  lUerus 7.50

Gushing. Eeucorrhea 1.00

Dudley. Genecology 5.00

Dudley-Schochet. Year-book

of Gynecology 1 .35

Eden. Gynecology 8.00

Eden  and  I-ockver. Gynecol-
ogy. 3 Vols 36.00

Fggert. ITterine  and  Vaginal

Discharges 3.50

Findley. Gynecologic Diag.  4.75

Gynecology 6.00

Fothergill.  Diseases of

Women 3.00

Galabin. Diseases  of  Women  2.00

Gardner. Gynecology 3.00

Gilliam. Gynecology 5.00

Graves. Gynecology 7.00

Green. Case  Histories 4.00

Hale. Diseases of Women  2.50
Hart  and Barbour. Gynecol-
ogy 5.00

Hartman. Gynecologic  Opera-
tions 7.00

Henrv. Pratical  Gynecologies  2.00

Herman. Diseases  of  Women  7.50

Gynecology 2.50

Hirst. Diseases  of  Women..  5.00

Tellett. Gvnecology 6.00

Jolly. Microscopic Diagno-
sis 6.00

Kelly. Medical Gynecology

2  Vols 6.50

Operative  Gynecology  ....  16.00
Kelly and Cullen. Mvomata

of  Uterus ." 7.50


Kelly  and  Noble. Gynecology

and  Abdominal  Surgery..  8.00

King. Diseases  of  Women..  1.50

Kisch. Sexual Life 6.00

Lewers. Diseases  of Women  4.00
Lewis  de  Ronet. Gynecology  4.00
Macnaughton-Jones. Gyne-
cology 1 .  SO

Martin.  IClectricity  in  Dis-
eases of Women 2.00

Martin and Jung. Diseases

of Women 5  .  00

Massey.  Conservative  Gyne-
cology and  Electro-
therapy 4 .  00

McCann. Cancer of Womb  7.00
McDonald. Gvnecology and

Obstetrics' 1.00

McKay. Ancient  Gynecology  3.00

Operation  on  Uterus 6.00

Montgomery. Gynecology..  6.00

Norberg. Gynecology 2.25

Norris. Gonorrhea in Wo-
men 6. 50

Norstrom.  Diseases  of  Women  2.50
Parsons. Prolapse  and  Retro-
version 1.45

Penrose. Diseases  of  Women  3. 75

Polak. Gynecology 3.00

Reed. Diseases  of  Women..  6.50
Rice. Electricity in Gyne-
cology 1.50

Robinson. Landmarks in

Gynecology 2.50

Utero-ovarian  Artery 1 .00

SchaeflFer and Norris. Atlas

of  Gynecology 3.50

SchaeflFer  and  Webster. Atlas

Operative  Gynecology ..  3.00

-Schmitz. Diseases  of  Women  2.00

Skeel. Gynecology 3.00

Stevens. Diseases  of  Women  4.00
Stewart and Young. Gvne-
cology ' . . .  2.00

Sutton and Giles. Diseases

of Women 4.00

Webster. Diseases  of  Women  7.00

Wells. Gynecology 1.2S

Williams. Uterine  Tumors..  3.00
Winter and Ruge. Gyneco-
logic  Diagnosis 6  .  00

Wood. Clinical Gynecology.  2.00
Woodward. Intra-Uterine

Medication 2.50

HISTOLOGY

Bailey. Histology $3.75

Bohm. DavidoflF and Huber.

Histologv ; _.  .  3.50

Campbell. Histologic  Studies

on Cerebral Functions  _.  5. 75
Dahlgren and Kepner. Ani-
mal  Histologv 3.75

De Witt. Lab. Histology..  2.00
Dunham. Normal Histology  2.75
Ferguson and Jordan. His-
tologv 3 .75

Foote. Histologv 3.75

Goodall. Histology 1  .  25

Gottheil. General Histology  1.00
Hardestv. Laboratory His.  1.50
Hill. Histology and Organ-
ography 2.25

Huber. Directions for His-

tolofric Laboratory  _•■■•  1-25
Huber. Bohm and Davidoff.

Human  Histoloey 3.50

Kingsbury. Hist. Technic.  .  .90

I>aboratorv Histology ....  1.25

Krausc. ' Histology 6.25

Lerov. Histology 1  .25

Lewis  and Stohr. Histology  3.50
Low-Stuart. Mucous Mem-
branes 1  .  00

MacEwen. Growth of Bone  3.50
Mann. Phvsiologic  Histology  5.00
McKay. Treatment of Sec-
tion Cases 5.00

Piersol. Normal Histology  3.50


UnlversJil ]V:Uiii-o|k;inii4' Dirocf oi-y ami Itiiyors* C^iiiilf^  1250


RESUMES  OF  IMPORTANT  SUBJECTS


A SEARCH FOR FREEDOM. By  Helen  Wilmans—

Tlii.s  i.s  an  autobiog-rapliical  account  of  a  woman  who  .s'-aicht-s  fm  I'licfioni  ficjiii
conventionality,  from  iclig-iou.s  supt'r.stition.s,  fium  marriage-,  from  the-  grinding
druclgcry  of  farm  life  as  known  sixty  years  ago,  from  every  thing:  that  would
limit  or  suppress  the  independence  of  the  1,  that  is  to  say the  K>to  most  concerned.

The  author  gives  a  long  account  of  her  life  as  a  child,  of  liow  .^he  was  the
nuise  of  the  family,  of  her  experiences  at  a  religious  school  where  she  beat  one
offers  of  marriage  which  she  declined  before  marrying  a  doctor  who  afterwards
became  a  farmer  in  California,  and  of  the  drudgery  of  cooking  for  24  hired  men,
in addition to other distressing duties.

"Marriage,"  she  says,  "is  slavery  to  both  husband  and  wife  all  the  world  over.
It  is  only  a  stepping-stone  to  the  real,  the  true,  the  divine  marriage.  In  this
higher  marriage  the  sex  intei'change  will  continue,  but  under  the  control  of  the
intellect."  Hei-  statement  is  criptic.  She  gives  further  light  on  the  subject  as
follows:  "The  sex  relation  is  even  now  in  process  of  evolving  to  a  higher  use
than  the  mere  begetting  of  children — namely — the  quickening  into  active  life  of
a  world  of  vital  intelligence,  so  high,  and  fine  and  potent,  that  we  may  not  now
even  guess its  power."

This is Malthusianism with a  vengeance.

She  deplores  "ordinary  animal  marriage."  Her  husband  \vas  a  failure  as  a
farmer.  She  tried  to  find  comfort  in  religion  but  got  into  a  discussion  with
some  preachers  who  frequented  her  hous'e,  who  could  not  assure  her  that  her
babies  and  other  peoples'  babies  would  be  saved  should  they  die  before  being
able  to  exercise  faith  in  salvation,  and  so  be  lost  everlastingly  in  the  tortures
of  an  Orthodox  hell.  She  called  them  cold-blooded  sneaks,  satisfied  to  eat,  sleep
and  wear  fine  clothes,  when  nine-tenths  of  the  people  are  on  the  down  grade,
sliding  into  hell.  She  told  them  to  get  out  of  the  house,  and  threw  their  um-
brellas, hats  and  canes  out  of  the  door,  in  advance  of  their  going.  It  was  at  this
moment  that  she  "got  I'id  of  lier  leligion."

We  are  not  endorsing  Mrs.  Wilmans'  emancipation,  but  simply  outlining  the
story  of  her  life.  Her  husband,  wliile  not  at  all  religious,  gave  her  no  sympathy.
He  simply  piled  more  work  upon  her.  He  has  discovered  a  vein  of  quicksilver
and  she  had  now  to  cook  for  a  gang  of  miners  as  well  as  for  the  farm  hands.
He  regarded  her  as  a  machine  to  run  day  and  night.

She  determined  to  leave  the  farm  at  once.  One  of  her  two  children  was  dead
and  the  other  away  at  school.  She  borrowed  ten  dollars  from  a  friend  and  the
next  day  after  breakfast  she  slipped  away  on  the  stage  for  San  Francisco,  and
when  there,  began  the  life  of  a  literary  free  lance,  her  adventures  from  this  point
onwards  being  recorded  in  her  book  entitled  "The  Conquest  of  Poverty,"  the
sequel to the present  work.

The  book  must  be  read  to  be  appreciated.  It  traces  the  growth  of  a  soul  that
has  come  to  realize,  rightly  or  wrongly,  that  man  can  work  out  his  own  salvation
and  that  Mental  Science  is  the  most  potent  truth  we  have.  Like  the  theosophists
she  proclaims  that  each  human  bodv  is  the  temple  of  a  god  within. — Price,  pre-
paid, in olotli,  $1.00.


HORIZONINGS. By  Edward  E.  Purinton—titl?nalf  7^\T.

are  devoted  to  lyric  songs  in  the  style  of  Heine,  and  philosophic  musings,  respect-
ively. As  to  the  philosophic  musings,  they  are  tliose  of  a  mystic  who  now  and
then  comes  down  from  the  clouds  and  touches  the  firm  earth  His  affirmations
are,  to  use  his  own  language,  "mere  psychological  pills."  The  soul  correctives.
.Some  of  the  sayings  are  cryptic- — we  wonder  if  he  knows  himself  what  he  has
.said.  Others  contain  a  deeper  meaning  than  the  author  intended.  And  so  it
goes.  The  poems  are  love  lyrics-  if  anything,  and  are  selections  from  a  volume
of  77  poems,  entitled  "The  Soul  in  Silhouette,"  by  Mr.  Purinton.  They  are
characterized  by  great  simplicity  of  thought,  and  a  tender  grace,  and  resemble
flowers  that  decorate  the  parched  highways  of  life.  The  titles  are  characteristic
of  the  poems.  "A  Magic  Secret,  Di'eam  of  Vision,  The  Divine  Feminine,  The  Kiss,
and  How  the  Dimple  Grew,"  will  show  how  the  author's  time  is  spent  in  the
Tiiystic  world  where  he  dwells.  This  age,  which  is  so  materialistic,  needs  ideal
food  for  its  sustenance.  The  food  acts  as  fuel  for  thought,  for  realization,  for
ifcognition. We cultivate our ideals in accordance with the mind's eye.

The  soul  needs  an  occasional  dash  of  sunshine,  just  like  a  flo\ver  needs  the
rain.  I^ife  is  as  changeable  as  the  weather.  There  is  a  contributory  cause  for
the  variations  in  life,  and  we  go  about  in  accordance  to  those  changes.  The  soul
is  happy  when  the  stomach  is  fed,  when  the  heart  is  strong,  and  the  head  erect.
Otherwise,  there  is  discord,  for  which  there  is  a  cure,  and  the  steps  to  this  cure
can be  found in Mr. Purinton's resume of essentials  for the springtime of  life.

The  author  should  be  encouraged  to  write  many  more  such  books.  We  need
many  an  excui'sion  into  the  ideal  land,  to  enjoy  the  rippling  laughtei-  of  those
bloomy  shores.  —  Price,  .10  cents.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1260


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Prudden. Histology 1-25

Radasch. Histology 1 .25

Reed and Noyes. Histology  1.00

Schafer. Histology 3.50

Practical Histology 2.25

Sobotta and Huber. Atlas

of Human Histology..  4.50

Stirling. Histology 2.00

HISTORY OF MEDICINE,
BIOGRAPHIES, ETC.

Adams. Genuine Work of

Hippocrates $5.00

Life of  Agnew 1-50

Baas. History of Medicine  6.00

P>all. Vesalius 5.00

Beaumont. Life  and Letters  4.00

Bernays. Biography 2.00

Bolton. His.  of  Thermo.  ..  .  1.00
Bradford and Roth. His. of

Medicine 1-00

Brown. His. of Chemistry.  4.00
Bucholz. Growth of Medi-
cine 5.00

Budge. Syrian Anatomy,
Pathology, Therapy. 2

Vols 16.80

Camac. Epoch-Making  Con-
tributions 4.00

Cholmelay. John of Gad-

desden ?9

Clarke. Donders LOO

Crawford. Last Days of

Charles  II ;  •  1-75

Plague and Pestilence in

Literature  and  Art 4.15

Danforth. Life  of  Davis 2.00

Davies. Doctors of Old

School 2.50

Davis. History  of  Med 2.00

Elliott. Greek and Roman

Med 2.50

Evans. Med.  Science  of  To-
day ;•••■  1-50

Firebaugh. First Expedition

to South Africa 2.50

Garrison. His. of Medicine  6.00

Gillespie. His. of Digestion  1.50

Gorton. His. of Medicine.  6.00

Gould. Biographic Clinics..  6.00

Guerni. His. of Dentistry..  6.00

Hilditch. His. of Chemistry  1.23
Hoerule. Med. of Ancient

India 2.60

Holmes. Medical Assays...  1.50

Honan. Med. Europe 1.50

Jacobi. Collectanea. 8 Vols.  15.00

Juettner. Life  of  Drake 5.00

Keen. Addresses 3.75

Kelly. Cyclopedia of Amer.

Med.  Biography. 2  Vols  10.00
Kemper. World's Anato-
mists 25

Kurella. Caesare Lombroso  1.50

Lister. Collected Writings.  7.50
Macmichael. Gold-Headed

Cane -.  •  3.00

Magnus.  Superstition in

Med 1-00

Moon. Med.  and  Philosophy  1.50

Moore. Med. in Britain....  3.40
Moulton. Cyclo. of Med.

His 2.50

Myer. Life  of  Beaumont...  4.00
Neuburger  and  Playfair. His.

of Medicine 9.00

Osier. Aequanimitas 2.25

Alabama  Student 2.00

Packard. His. of Medicine

in United States 4.00

Paget. Confessio Medici...  1.25

Memoirs and Letters 2.50

Pasteur and After 1.50

Park. His. of Medicine....  2.00
Payne. English Med. in

Anglo-Saxon Times....  2.90

Pepper. Biography 4.00

Richards. Reminiscences ..  1.00

Richardson. Disciples °f  ,  ..

Aesculapius 12.00


Robinson. Pathfinders in

Medicine 2.50

Sach. History  of  Botany...  3.25
Sothene. Shrine of Aescu-
lapius 2.50

Spalding. Life 3.50

Thorpe. Dr. Wm. Pepper..  4.00

Tyson. Addresses 1 .75

Venable. Hist,  of  Chemistry  1.12
Walsh. Catholic  Cliurchmeii

in Science 1.00

Century of Columbus 3.50

Makers of Modern Medi-
cine 2.00

Old-Time  Makers  of Med-
icine 2.00

Pope and Sciences 2.00

Walsh  and  Ptamian. Makers

of Electricity 2.00

Wilder. His. of Med 2.75

Wright. His.  of  Laryngology

and Rhinology 4.00


HOMEOPATHY

.\dams. Homeo. Treatment  $2.00

Allen. Keynotes 2 .  00

Materia Medica 12.00

Nosodes 4.00

Therapeutics of Fevers...  4.00

Therapeutics  of  Skin 2.00

American  Homeopathic  Phar-
macopeia 2.50

Anshutz. Elements Homeo  1.00
New, Old, and Forgotten

Remedies 2.00

Therapeutic By-ways ....  1.00
Twelve  Tissue  Remedies... .75

Sexual Ills 1.00

.Vrndt. Practice  of  Medicine  3.00

Symptomatology 1.25

System of Medicine 22.50

•Vurand. Botanical Materia

Medica  2.50

Baehr. Therapeutics 9.00

Baker. Diagnosis .25

Bakody. Scientific  Med.  and

Homeo 50

Bartlett. Treatment 8.00

Baruch. Antitoxin : Its Re-
lation to Homeopathy.  .  .25

Bechamp. The Blood 1.50

Bell. Diarrhea 1.50

Benson. Nursery Manual..  1.00
Bernstein. Dermatology ...  3.00
Bidwell. How  to  Use  Reper-
tory 1.00

Bigler. Physiology 1.25

Blackwood. Contagious  Dis.  1.75

Food Tract 1.75

Heart 2.00

Kidneys and Nervous Sys-
tem 1.50

Liver, Pancreas,  Spleen...  1.25

Lungs 2.00

Materia Medica, Thera-
peutics and Pharmacy..  2.75
Boeninghausen. Alphabetic

Repertory 3 .  00

Characteristics and Reper-
tory 6.50

Lesser  Writings 1.50

Therapeutic Pocket-book..  3.25

Boericke. Children 1.00

Homeopathy l.SO

Materia Medica 3.50

Boericke-Anshutz. Homeo..  1.00
Boericke-Dewey. Twelve  Tis-
sue Remedies 2.50

Boger. Antipsoric,  Antisyphi-
litic and Antisycotic

Remedies 3 .  00

Characteristics and Reper-
tory 6.50

Diphtheria 65

Synoptic  Key  to  Mat.  Med.  3.50

Boyle. Ear 1.00

Bradford. Bibliography ...  1.00
His. of Hahnemann Col-
lege 3.50


Index  to  Provings 2.00

Life of Hahnemann 2.50

Logic in Figures 1.25

Pioneers 3.00

Bray. Materia Medica 3.00

Breyfogle. Homeopathic

Med 1.25

Brigham. Catarrhal Diseases  1.00

Phthisis Pulmonalis 2.00

Bryant. Homeo. Medicine..  1.50

BufTum. Eye  and  Ear 1.50

Burnett. Change of Life...  1.00

Consumption 1 .00

Curability of Tumors 1.25

Delicate Children, etc 1.00

Enlarged Tonsil 60

Gout  and Its Cure 90

Liver 1.00

Organic  Dis.  of  Women...  1.00

Ringworm 50

Skin 1. 00

Burt. Clinical Companion..  1.50

Butler. Electricity in Surg.  .50

Electro-therapeutics 3.00

Mental Diseases 3.50

Carleton.  Genito-urinary

Dis 3.00

Homeo.  in  Med.  and  Surg.  2.00
Repertory for Urogenital

Diseases 1.50

Sexual  Organs  of  Men....  2.50

Urologic  and Venereal....  5.00

Uropoietic Diseases 3.50

Clarke. A. B. C. of Mat.

Med 1.25

Catarrh, Colds, Grippe ..  .75

Dictionary of Medicine..  1.25

Indigestion 75


Cleveland. Materia Medica

and  Therapeutics 1.00

Conant. Obstetrics Mentor.  1.50

Copeland. Rrefraction ....  1.00
Cowperthv/aite. Materia

Medica 5.00

Crandall. Disease 1.00

Custis. Practice  of  Medicine  2.00

Dake. Asiatic Cholera.....  .50

Dearborn. Diseases of Skin  5.00
Dewey. Homeopathic Ma-
teria Medica  and Phar.  .  1.75
Homeopathic Therapeutics  2.50

Dickie. Hay Fever 1.00

Dienst. Head 1.00

Dispensatory, Standard

United States 9.50

Doughty.  Genito  -  urinary

System and Syphilis....  2.50
Douglass. Homeo. Mat.

Med 5.00

Pearls of Homeopathy...  1.25

Skin Diseases 3.50

Tongue  Symptoms 1.00

Duncan. Acid and Alkaline

Children 75

Diseases of Heart 1.00

How to Be Plump 25

Dunham. Homeopathy 3.00

Materia Medica 5.00

Edmonds. Children 2.50

Elliott. Nervous  and  Mental  5.00
Ellis. Avoidable Causes of

Diseases 1.50

Farrington. Materia Medica  6.00

Faulkfter. Pocket  Repertory.  .50

Visiting List 1.50

Fernie. Herbal Simples....  2.50

Fisher. Children 5 .  00

Homeopathic Surgery ....  7.00

Franklin. Art of Surgery..  15.00

Venereal Diseases 1.00

Gallavardin. Alcoholism ...  .50
Gentry. Homeopathic Ma-
teria Medica 2.00

Gregg. Consumption 1.25

Griffith. Nursing 1.50

Gross. Comparative  Materia

Medica 6.00

Guernsey. Obstetrics 8.00

Hagen. Clinical  Examination

and Diagnosis 1.25


tTnlver»nt  Naturopathic  Directory  uiui  IliiyerN'  Guide


1261


THE LANE TO  REAL  PROGRESS


ASK THE DRUGGIST. By Edward E. Purinton—

Tliis  is  an  arraignment  of  Natuiist  and  JJiugKi'^l.  as  illu.sti  tiled  by  the  following
nionolugue —

"Why  do  drugs  fail  to  cure?"

Don't  ask  the  druggist^he  doesn't  know. A.sk  the  IVnturlst.

"Why  does  Naturism  fail  to  convert?"  '

Don't  ask the  Naturist — he  can't imagine. A.sk  the  DriiKgii^t.

This  reminds  us  of  Gracian's  saying  that  "One  lialf  of  the  world  laughs  at  the
other  and  fools  are  they  all."  The  author  delights  in  complementary  phrases,
placing  druggist  and  naturist  as  the  positive  and  negative  poles  of  healing
truth.  He  says:  "the  druggist  has  the  wisdom  of  civilization,  the  naturist  the
wisdom  of  savagery,  neither  the  wisdom  of  symmetry."  Having  got  his  subject
on  the  run,  as  it  were,  he  follows  it  up  relentlessly.  He  defends  the  druggist
with  a  series  of  enconiums  that  betray  a  suspicion  of  insinceiity,  and  per  contra
abuses  the  naturist  with  a  suspicion  of  being  heartily  in  sympathy  with  his
gaucheries.  After  complimenting  the  druggist  for  coaxing  nobody,  for  guaran-
teeing a  cure,  for  wearing  an  air  of  mystery,  for  working  in  a  line  with  a
patient's  faith,  for  prohibiting  little  or  nothing,  for  preserving  an  esprit  de  corps,
he  caps  the  climax  by  exhibiting  the  hostility  of  all  naturists  to  one  another."
The  follower  of  Just  calls  the  Kneippist  an  old  fogy,  crude,  materialistic  and
superstitious.  The  Kneipp  adherent  retorts  that  the  Justian  is  lazy,  irrational
and  impractical.  Osteopaths  and  Divine  Healers  are  at  sword  points;  masseur's
and  athletes  scorn  each  other;  vegetarians  and  mental  scientists  hurl  anathemas
at  each  other.  The  doctors,  smiling  and  unmolested,  rifle  the  pockets  of  the
dead. — Price,  15  cent.s.


OUR  PLACES  IN  THE  UNIVERSAL  ZODIAC. By  W.

J /^f^jfjiljgt The  study  of  Astrology  Is  one  of  hoary  antiquity. We read  of

•'•  ^OlVllie  the  magicians  and  astrologers  at  the  court  of  the  gr-eat  Assy-
rian potentate  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  of  the  star-gazing  proclivities  of  the  Chal-
deans. The  three  wise  men  of  the  East,  the  three  kings  from  Persia  or  Meso-
potamia, who  were  led  a  long  journey  to  Bethlehem  to  worship  Christ,  by  His
star  that  guided  them  safely  to  the  manger  where  He  lay,  testify  to  a  living
interest  in  the  ancient  world  in  Astrology,  the  forerunner  of  our  modern  science
of  Astronomy.

Astronomy  is  a  study  of  the  mathematical  and  mechanical  as  well  as  the  chemi-
cal and  physiological  aspects  of  the  starry  universe,  while  Astrology  is  a  stud\'
of  the  psychological  aspects  of  the  same  worrder  world.

The  centre  of  gravity  of  each  of  the  suns,  stars,  planets  and  satellites,  as  it
moves  away  from  or  nearer  to,  or  among,  besides,  or  around  other  heavenly
bodies,  alone  inter-ests  the  astronomer,  but  the  astrologic  psychic  center  of  each
individual,  that  is  to  say,  his  position  in  time  and  space  on  the  earth  at  the
moment  of  birth,  belongs  to  astrology  which  determines  the  mutual  aspects  of
the  sun  and  planets  of  the  solar  system  at  the  time  of  birth  and  their  influences,
near  or  remote,  hostile  or  friendly  to  the  individual,  in  whichever  of  the  twelve
houses,  or  constellations,  he  belongs  to.

These  houses  or  constellations  have,  from  time  immemorial,  been  known  by  the
names  of  animals  or  man  according  as  the  var-iorrs  groups  of  stars  are  fancifully
supposed  to  resemble.  There  ar^  twelve  constellations  forming  a  great  circle  of
the  heavens  and  analogous  to  the  twelve  months  of  the  year,  and  known  as  the
twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac.

The  astrologic  month  begins  on  the  20th  day  of  the  month  and  ends  on  the
20th  day  of  the  following  month.  Thus  Aries,  the  ram,  begins  on  March  20  and
ends  April  20.  The  other  constellations  are  known  as  Taurus,  the  bull,  Gemini,
the  twins.  Cancer,  the  crab,  Leo,  the  lion,  A'rrgo,  the  virgin,  Libra,  the  balance,
Scorpio,  the  scorpion,  Saggittarius,  the  archer,  Capricorn,  the  goat,  Aquarius,
the  water-bearer,  and  Pisces,  the  fishes.

Mr.  Colville  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the  characteristics  of  individuals  born
under  the  constellation  that  rules  the  time  of  their  birth  nrodified  by  the  position
of  the  planets.  It  is  really  wonderful  how  well  a  man's  characteristics  and
chances  of  success  or  failure  in  life  can  be  determined  by  "the  house"  he  belongs
to.  That  the  stars  do  influence  human  destiny  has  been  the  belief  of  man  in  all
ages.  There  must  be  something  more  than  fancy  in  a  philosophy  that  has
endured  from  the  very  earliest  ages  until  now.  We  see  in  the  word  lunacy  an
indication  of  the  moon's  influence  on  the  mentality  of  people  of  weak  intellect,
luna  being  the  Latin  name  of  the  moon.

Anyone  desiring  to  know  himself,  to  discover  in  what  direction  his  qualities
of  body,  mind  and  soul  prevail,  should  consult  this  valuable  book.  To  know  in
what  one  is  apt  to  excel,  and  to  apply  one's  energies  in  the  direction  of  developing
such  faculties  is  most  valuable  knowledge.  The  correspondance  of  man  with
the  heavens  is  a  proof  of  the  essential  unity  of  all  creation  and  this  point  is
elaborately  manifested  by  Mr.  Colville. — Price,  postpaid,  $1.00.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1262


(rencral  List  of  Medical  Works


Hahnemann. Chronic Dis-
eases 10.00

Defense of Organon 1.00

Materia Medica Pura 10.00

Organon of Mealing 45

llahncmann-Dudgeon. Or-
ganon of  Medicine l.SO

Hale. Diseases ot Heart...  3.00

New Remedies 5.00

I'ractice 6 .  00

Saw Palmetto 50

Hallet and Vehslage. Uis.

of Nose, Throat, Kar.  .  .  3.00

Hamlin. Practical  01)stetrics  2.50

Hanchett. Sexual Health..  .50

Hart. Intracranial Diseases  2.00

Nervous  Diseases 3  .  00

Respiratory Passages ....  4.00

Therap. of Nervous Sys..  2.00
Helmuth. Suprapubic Litli-

otomy 1 .50

Surgery 9.00

Hemple. Homeopathy ....  1.40

Hensel. Macrobiotic 1 .50

Hering. Guiding Symptoms  50.00

Materia Medica 5.00

Repertory to Guiding

Symp 10.00

Heysinger. Basis  of  Med...  .50
Holcombe. Truth About

Homeopathy 25

Homeopathic Pharmacopeia.  2.50

Homeopathic Surgery 7.00

Hoyne. Venereal L'rinary

Dis 35

Hull's Jahr Symptomatology  4.80

Jahr. Diseases  of  Females..  2.00

Forty Years' Practice....  3.00

Therapeutic Guide 3.00

Johnson's Therapeutic Key.  1.50

Guide  to  Practice 2.00

Jones. Grounds of Homeo.

Faith 30

Bee-line  Therapia .*.  .  2.00

Medical  Genius 2.00

Mnemonic Similiad 1 .00

Jousset. Pathogenic Mi-
crobes 1 .00

Practice of Medicine 3.UU

Kent. Materia Medica ....  7.00

Repertory 16.50

King. Chemistry of Food..  1.00

Medical  Union  No.  6 50

Laidlow. Clinical  Guide....  1.50

Lawrence. Practice 3.00

Leavitt. Obstetrics 5.00

Lee and Clark. Cougli and

Expectoration 4.00

I^ilienthal.  Therapeutics  ...  6.00
l>innell.  Lye  in  Diagnosis..  1.00
Lippe.  Homeo.  Mat.  Med..  1.00
Lippincott.  Hay  Fever....  1.00
Ludlam.  Diseases  of  Women  5 '.00
Lutze.  Therapeutics  of  Fa-
cial and  Sciatic  Neural-
gia 1.25

MacBride. Eye 3.00

.Vlack. Principles  of Homeo  1.00

Majumdar. Cholera SO

Malcolm  and  Moss. Materia

-Medica  6.00

Markham.  Message  of  Health  .75

Marsdcn. Midwifery 2.35

McMichel. Materia Medica

and Therapeutics 6.00

Mills. Practice 5 .  00

Millspaugh. American Me-
dicinal Plants 10.00

Minton. Uterine Therapeu.  5.00

Mitchell. Modern  Urinology  3.00

Urinary Organs 4.00

Mofifat.  Therapeutics in

Ophthalmology 1 .  25

Morgan. LIrinary Organs..  3.00

Morton. Refraction of Eye  1.00

Nash. Homeopathic  Thcra.  .  2.50

How  to  Take  Case 50

Regional Leaders 1.50

Respiratory Leaders 1 .  50

Testimony of Clinic 1.50

Typhoid Fever 75


Use of Sulphur 1.00

Ncidhard. Head  Symptoms.  1.50

Norton. Eye 1.75

Ophthalmic  Diseases 3.00

Ostrom. Breast 2 .  00

Epithelioma of Mouth....  1.10

Leucorrhea  1 .  00

LTterine Cervix 2.50

Paige. Lungs, Bronchi and

Pleura 1.00

Pathogenic Materia Medica.  2.00

Perkins. Rheumatism 1.50

Pierce. Plain Talks on

M. M 5.00

Quay. Nose  and  Throat 1.25

Rademacher. Organ Reme-
dies 1.00

Rankin. External Therap..  .^.50

Diseases of Chest 2.50

Raue. Children 5.00

Pathology 7.00

Ray. Cholera 1 .  00

Ribot. Diseases of Person-
ality 1.00

Ruddock. Stepping  Stones.  .  1.00

Schuessler. Abridged Ther.  1.00

Sharp. Homeopathy 75

Shedd. Clinic  Repertory ...  .  1.50

Shuldham. Health  of  Skin.  .  .50

Sore Throat 25

Small. Homeo. Practice...  2.50
Smith. Before and After

Operations 1.25

Sterling. Diseases of Ear..  1.25

Talcott. Mental Diseases...  2.50

Teste. Children 1.20

Tooker. Children 5.00

Underwood. Childhood ....  2.00

Underwood. Materia  Med..  2.00

Headache 1.25

Vandenburg. Therap. of

Resp. System 5.00

Verdi. Maternity 2 .  00

Mothers  and  Daughters...  1.50

Progressive Medicine ....  2.00
Von  Boenninghauser. Reme-
dies 3.00

Von Tagan. Biliary Calculi  1.25
Wells. Intermittent Fever.  1.00
Wilcox. Surgery of Child-
hood 3.50

Wilsey. Repertory of Back  1.00

Winslow. Ear 4.50

Winterburn. Repertory ....  1.00

Value of Vaccination ...  .75

Wood. Gynecology 3.00

Worcester. Insanity 3.50

Repertory to Modalities..  1.25
^■ingIing. Accoucheur's  Em-
ergency  Manual 1.25

Suggestions  to  Patients ...  .50


HYGIENE, PROPHYLAXIS,
SEX PROBLEIU

Adams. Health Master....  $1.40
Allen. Civics  and  Health...  1.25
Andrews. Adolescent  Educa-
tion 1.50

Armstrong. Infections in.

Schools 1.20

.Ashburn. Military Hygiene.  1.50
Bailey. Light  on  Dark  Sub-
jects 1.00

Bandler. Expectant  Mothers  1.25
Barnes. Anatomy, Hygiene.

Embalming 1 .  00

Bashore. Overcrowding  ....  1.00

Sanitation 1.25

Bell. Sex Complex 4 .  00

Bergey. Hygiene 3 .  00

Berggren. Curative Gym...  1.00
Berkeley. Lab. Work with

Mosquitos 1  .  00

Bibb and Hartman. Health  .40

Human Body 70

Blackman. Tropical  Hygiene  1.25

Blaikie. How  to  Get  Strong  1.00

Blair. Public Hygiene 10.00

Blaisdell. Life  and Health.  .  .90


Bloch. Sexual Life 5.00

Bowen. Physical  Training..  1.00
Bowers. Bathing  for Health  1.00
Boyce. Health in West In-
dies 3.50

Mosquito  or  Man 3.50

Brackett. Care  of  Teeth 50

Brady. Personal Health....  1.50
Brewer. Personal Hygiene

in Tropics 1.00

Rural Hygiene 1.25

Bryce. Life and Health...  2.00
Bulstrode. Prevention of

Disease 7.50

Burrage  and Bailey. School

Sanitation 1.50

Butler. Every Boy's Book  1.00

Every  Girl's Book 1 .00

Cavanagh. Care  of  Body.  ..  .  2.50

Capp. The Daughter 1.00

Chapin. Municipal Sanita-
tion  in United States...  5.00
How to Avoid Infection..  .50

Sources  of Infection 3.00

Childe. Control of Scourge.  2.50
Clarke. Sex  in Education..  1.25
Cleveland and Ogden. Sew-
age  Disposal 1.50

Clouston. Hygiene  of  Mind.  2.50
Corfield. Hygiene  and I^ws

of Health 50

Cornaro. How  to  Live Long  1.00
Cowell. Pure Air, Ozone

and Water 2.00

Cromie. Keeping Physically

Fit 1.00

Croy. 1000  Things  a  Mother

Should Know 1 .  50

Cunning and Campbell.

Healthy Girl 1.75

Curtis. Nature  and  Health..  .35
Daniels  and  Wilkinson. Trop-
ical Medical and Hy-
giene. 3 Vols.; each...  3.00

DeBruin. Birthrate 3.50

Doane. Insects  and Disease  1.75
Dock. Hygiene  and  Morality  1.25
Doty. Prevention of Infec-
tious  Diseases 2.75

Eales. Healthology 1.50

Egbert. Hyg.  and  Sanitation  2.50
Ellis. Analysis of Sexual

Impulse 2.50

Erotic  Symbolism 2.50

Man  and  Woman 1.50

Sexual  Inversion 2.50

Sexual Periodicity and

Autoerotism 2.50

Sex  and Society 3.50

Sexual  Selection 2.50

Task of  Social Hygiene...  2.50

Emerson. Personal  Health..  .75

Public Health 50

Fitz. Physiology and Hy-
giene 1.15

Folwell. Sewerage Systems.  3.00

Water-supply Engineering  3.50

Fones. Mouth  Hygiene 5.00

Fordyce. Hyg.  ot  Infancy..  2.50
Forel. Nervous and Mental

Hygiene 2 .  00

Sex  Question 5.00

Galbraith. Four Epochs of

Woman's  Life 1-50

Personal Hygiene and
physical Training for

Women 2.25

Galton.  Construction of

Health Dwellings 2.75

Ciardner.  Sanitation for

Health  Officers 4.00

Gatewood. Naval  Hygiene.  .  6.00

Gerrish. Sex Hygiene 60

Gilbert. True  and  False  Sex

Alarms  1  --S

Giles. Climate  and  Health..  3.00

Godfrey. Health  of  City 1.25

Graham-Smith. Flies and

Disease ^  ■ ""

Guernsey. Plain Talks on

Avoided Subjects 50


Univer«al  Naturopathic  Directory  iinti  Bu.ver.s'  Guide


1263


TOPICS  OF  INDISPENSABLE  IMPORTANCE


A  HISTORY  OF  THEOSQPHY. By  IV.  J.  ColvilU—

Considerable  confusion  exists  in  the  average  mind  of  those  who  have  given  an>
thought  to  rheosophy  as  to  what  it  is  really  all  about,  because  of  the  varying
opinions  held  by  the  devotees  of  the  cult,  but  in  the  present  work  by  Mr.  Colville,
in  addition  to  tracing  the  history  of  the  philosophy  from  ancient  times  to  the
present,  he  has  made  a  successful  attempt  to  correlate  the  varying  dogmas  into
one  coherent  expression  of  theosophic  truth.  The  word  theo.sophia  means  Divine
Wisdom,  and,  says  the  author,  "to.  the  Theosophist,  God  is  the  inm<^st  life  of  man."
He  further  quotes  Prof.  Ditson,  who  says,  "We  shall  enter  no  Supreme  Presence
greater 'than  man."  The  conclusion  we  arrive  at  is  that  man  is  deity,  and  that
theosophy  is  a  woi-ship  of  this  deity.  Theosophy  is  one  with  Mental  Science
when  it  asserts  that  "the  individual  human  soul  contains  within  itself  the  latent
ability  to  build  and  govern  planets,  but  this  concealed  energy  is  only  rendered
available  in  the  field  of  use  through  a  long  process  of  evolutionary  development."

This  then  is  the  secret  of  theosophy;  it  is  a  bold  assertion  that  man  is  a  god.
As  a  philosophy  we  are  told  that  it  is  a  modern  incarnation  of  ancient  Buddhistic
teaching  of  which  the  Mahatmas  and  adepts  are  apostles  and  holds  the  same
doctrines  of  Karma  and  Reincarnation.  But  Mr.  Colville  traces  theosophy  to
still  more  archaic  sources,  to  the  ancient  Egyptians  and  to  far  earlier  races  of
mankind,  to  races  of  commanding  mentality  that  antedated  prehistoric  man,  to
fabulous  eras  when  the  gods  were  god-like  men  of  superior  achievements  even
to  the  Egyptians.  The  stupendous  magical  achievements  attained  by  highly-
developed  individuals  in  Hindoostan,  Ceylon  and  Thibet  lend  color  to  this  claim
that  man  is  a  veritable  deity.

Speaking  in  the  language  of  our  author,  theosophy  is  not  the  private  property
of  any  religion,  or  cult,  but  is  the  soul  of  all  systems  of  religion,  the  outer  tenets
of  which  are  scarcely  more  than  veils  thrown  over  the  interior  meaning.

Theosophy  may  be  regarded  as  Buddhistic  New  Thought,  as  the  renaissance  of
the  old  idea  that  man  is  a  spark  of  universal  existence,  now  fully  equipped  with
the  modern  conception  of  Democracy  that  the  All-Highest  is  I,  Myself.

This  certainly  is  Mental  Science  In  excel.si.s.  The  ultimate  conclusion  of  this
philosophy  is  that  not  merely  a  few  of  us,  but  all  of  us,  possess  the  Divine  right
to  be  gods,  or  at  least  imperial  dignity.

This  is  a  long  step  from  the  idea  that  "no  one  oversteps  the  narrow  limits  of
humanity,"  or  that,  "we  are  all  miserable  worms  of  the  dirt."  Somewhere  be-
tween these  two  extremes  of  opinion  the  truth  lies  hidden.

Just  how  far  the  reader  will  coincide  with  the  transcendental  speculations  of
the  author  will  depend  entirely  on  the  quality  of  his  mind  and  his  own  moral
and  religious  experiences.  Theosophy  is  certainly  a  very  tolerant  philosophy.
"Let  us  not,"  says  the  author,  "call  each  other  idolators  heathen,  pagans,  sinners,
outcasts,  or  apply  any  opprobious  epithet  to  any.  Let  us  make  the  Golden  Rule
our  guide  of  practice."

This  compendium  of  theosophy  both  as  a  history  and  as  an  exposition  of  its
cardinal  principles,  is  one  of  those  books  every  educated  man  should  have  in  his
library,  whether  he  believes  in  the  teachings  of  the  cult  or  not.  While  it  is
claimed  that  "theosophy  knows  absolutely  nothing  of  slavish  dependence  upon
an  outside  deity,  who  desires  glory  from  men  and  threatens  with  everlasting
misery  all  who  abstain  from  offering  incense  at  the  shrine  of  this  majestic  po-
tentate," yet  there  is  a  vast  fund  of  religious  truth  contained  in  the  volume,  and
many  most  recondite  and  marvelous  speculations  regarding  the  miracle  of  man
and  his  destiny,  such  as  might  be  expected  from  an  assiduous  worker  in  the  great
quarries  of  transcendental  philosophy  that  are  our  inheritance  from  the  wise
men  of  a  far-off  time,  the  products  of  the  terrifying  Oriental  imagination  strug-
gling with  the  vast  problems  of  *Life  and  Death. — Price,  pcstpaid,  $1.60.


CONGRESSMAN  SWANSON.


By  C,  C.  Post— 7''  '■''''  ""-


'thor was for

thirty  years  an  active  participant  in  the  reform  movement  of  the  United  States
as  writer,  journalist,  orator,  and  organizer  on  great  public  questions,  and  had
rare  opportunities  for  familiarizing  himself  with  the  facts,  conditions  and  per-
sons depicted  in  his  great  story  of  Congressman  Swanson.  The  book  is  a  true
mirror  of  the  times  in  which  the  story  is  placed.  The  principal  character  is
typical  of  the  aspirant  for  congressional  honors,  who  starts  out  to  represent  the
laboring  classes  and  ends  by  adopting  the  methods  of  the  aspiring  politician.
The  professional  agitator  and  labor  reformer  come  in  for  their  share  of  exposure.
In  the  recurring  panics  in  the  commercial  world,  with  their  financial  and  indus-
trial collapses,  the  honest  persevering  mechanic  rises  to  affluence  and  honor  and
the  wealthy  manufacturer  becomes  a  tramp  by  the  wayside.  The  story  is  a  tale
of  love  that  lightens  the  background  of  economic  ideas  that  were  discussed  in
the  Farmer's  Alliance,  Labor  and  Greenback  movements  of  the  period.  As  a
picture  of  a  great  formative  period  in  American  history  and  as  a  story  that  is
both  interesting  and  instructive,  this  book  is  favorablyrecommended  to  readers
appreciative of  good  literature. — Price,  in  clotli,  po.stpaid,  $1.10.


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1264


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Greene. Healthy Exercise.. 1.00
Gulick. Body and Its De-
fences 65

Body  at  Work 50

Control  of  Body  and  Mind .50

Good  Health 40

Health  and  Safety 40

Med. Inspection Schools.. 1.40

Next  Generation 75

Physical Education  by  Ex-
ercise 75

Physiology, Hygiene and

Sanitation 65

Town and City 50

Hall. Psychology of Ado-
lescence 7.50

Sexual  Hygiene 1 .  00

Sexual Knowledge 1 .00

Youth to Manhood 50

Harrington. Hygiene 5.00

Hartman-Bibb. Health 40

Human  Body  and Its  Ene-
mies 70

Havard. Military  Hygiene.. 5.00

Hazen. Water  Supplies 3.00

Hewitt. House-fly 4.75

Hill.  New  Public  Health...  1.25
Hindle.  Flies  and  Disease..  4.00
Hoag and Terman. Health

Work in Schools 1.60

Hough and Sedgwick. Hy-
giene and Sanitation.... 1.25

Howard. Breathe Well 1 .00

Chats  with  Boys 1.00

Chats  with  Girls 1.00

Facts for Married 1.00

How to Ivive Long 1.00

How  to  Rest 1.00

Sex Hygiene 1.00

Sex  Problems 1 .00

Hutchinson. Civilization  and

Health 1.50

Community Hygiene 65

Health  Handbook 1.35

Preventable Diseases .... 1 .50

Jamieson. Care  of  Skin 1.00

Kauflmann.  Care  of  Teeth..  .60
Keefer. Military Hygiene

and Sanitation 1.50

Kellogg. Colon  Hygiene 2.00

Plain Facts for Both

Sexes 3.00

Plain Facts for Old and

Young 6 .  00

Kelynack. Med. Exam, of

Schools 4.20

Kenwood. Public Health

Laboratory Work .... 4 .  GO
Kershaw. Sewage Purifica-
tion and  Disposal 3.75

Kinnicutt,  Winslow  and  Pratt.

Sewage  Disposal 3.00

Kintzing. Long  Life. 1.00

Knox.  Military  Hygiene....  2.00
Latimer.  Girl  and  Woman..  1.75
Ledingnam and Arkwright

Cancer  Problem 3.50

Lelean. Sanitation in War. 2.00
Lilienthal. School and In-
dustrial Hygiene 40

Lowry. Confidences 50

False  Modesty 50

Herself 1.00

Himself 1.00

Truths 50

Macfie.  Air  and  Health  ..  2.50
Macdonald. Mind, Religion,

Health 1.30

Mackintosh. Hosp.  Construe-  I

tion 6.00  i

Maclennen.  Phys.  Education  2.60
Malchow.  Sexual  Life....  3.00
March.  Towards Racial

Health 1.25

Marshall.  Mouth  Hygiene..  2.00
Mason. The Sanitary

Troops 4.00

Water Supply 4.00

McKenzie. Exertise  in  Edu-
cation  and Medicine.... 4.00
Meisel-Hess. Sexual Crisis 3.00


I  Melville. Military Hygiene  3.50

Metchnikoff. New Hygiene  1.00

Prolongation of Life 1.75

Michels. Sexual Ethics....  1.50
Middleweek. Medical Gym-
nastics 75

Miles. Prevention and Cure  1.50

Monin. Hyg. of»Beauty.  .  .  1.00

Moore. Health  Age 1.40

More. Uncontrolled Breed-
ing vs. Civilization 1.00

Muirhead. Tropical Sanita-
tion 3.50

Muller. Hygiene  of  Face...  1.50

My  Breathing System....  1.00

My  System 1.00

My  System for Children..  1.00

My  System for Ladies....  1.00

Munson. Military Hygiene  8.00

Nabarro. Laws  of  Health..  .50

Napheys. Physical Life of

Women 2.00

Newmaycr. School Inspec-
tion 2.50

Northcote. Christianity and

Sex Problems 3.00

Notter. Hygiene 7 .  00

Notter and Firth. Hygiene  1.50
Nystrom. Natural Laws of

Sexual Life 2.00

Ochsner. Exercise of In-
valids 1.00

Ochsner and Strum. Hos-
pitals 8.00

Ogden and Cleveland. Sew-
age  Disposal 1.50

Pakes and Nankivell. Hy-
giene 1.75

Parker. Biology and Social

Problems 1.10

Parkes and Kenwood. Hy-
giene and Public Health  4.00
Poore. Colonial and Camp

Sanitation 90

Earth in Relation to Con-
tagion 1.75

Rural Hygiene 2 .  00

Price. Hygiene 1 .  00

Prudden. Drinking Water..  1.00
Dust and Its Dangers....  1.00
Purcell. Tropic Hygiene ...  .90
Primer of Tropic Sanita-
tion 50

Rafter and Baker. Sewage

Disposal 6 .  00

Rapeer. School Health 2.25

Rebman and Seiler. Human

Frame 35

Reed. Marriage and Genet-
ics 1.00

Richards. Hygiene  for  Girls  .70

Sanitation in Daily Life..  .60
Richards  and  Talcot. House

Sanitation 80

Ritchie. Sanitation 1.20

Ritchie and Caldwell. Hy-
giene 70

Ritchie and Purcell. Sanita-
tion  for Tropics 50

Robie. Sex Ethics 3.50

Robinson. Limitation  of  Off-
spring 1 .00

Never Told Tales 1.00

Sex Knowledge for Girls

and Women 1.00

Sex Knowledge for Men..  2.00

Sex Morality 1.00

Sexual  Problems  of  To-day  2.00

Woman 3.00

Robinson and Drysdale.

Small  vs.  Large  Families  1.00
Robinson  and  Paul.  Popula-
tion and  Birth  Control..  3.00
Rogers.  Life  and  Health..  1.00
Robe  and  Robin.  Hygiene..  3.00
Rosenau.  Preventive  Medi-
cine and Hygiene 6.50

Ross. Reduction  of Mosciui-

tos 1.75

Mosquito Brigades 90

Russell. Preventable  Cancer  1.50


Rowlands.  Hygiene for

Teachers 1 .  00

Russell  and  Turneaure. Pub-
lic Water Supplies 5.00

Saleeby. Health, Strength,

Happiness 1.75

Woman and Womanhood.  2.50

Sanger. Prostitution 2.50

Schofield. Health  for  YOung

and Old 1.50

Home Life  in Order 1.50

How to Keep Fit 75

Schreber. Medical Indoor

Gymnastics 1.00

Scott. Old Age 1.00

Sexual Instinct 2.00

Sedgwick. Sanitary Science  3.00

Seligman. Social Evil 1.75

Senator and Kaminer. Mar-
riage and Disease 6.00

Shoemaker.  Health and

Beauty 1.50

Simpson. Health  in  Tropics.

Tropical Hygiene 1.25

Smith. Practical Hygiene..  2.00
Sommerville. Sanitary Sci-
ence 3.50

.Stacpoole. Women's Health  1.00

Starr. Hygiene of Nursery  1.00
Steinhardt. Sex Talks to

Boys 1.00

Sex Talks to Girls 1.00

Stevens. Med. Supervision

of Schools 2.00

Stevenson  and  Murphy. Hy-
giene. 3 Vols. $5.00 @  6.00
Sturm  and Ochsner. Hospi-
tals 8.00

Sykes. Public Health 1.50

Talbot. House Sanitation..  .80

Taylor. Health for Women  1.25

Thompson. Woman 1.25

Turneaure-Russell.  Public

Water Supplies 5.00

T'uttle. Public Health 50

Venable. Bacterial Treat-
ment  of Sewage 3.00

Waldo. Hygiene 50

Walters. Health Control...  1.50
Physiology and Hygiene..  1.20
Wanhill  and  Beveridge. San-
itary Officer's  Hygiene..  1.40
Warren. Woman's Hand-
hook 2.00

Wanng. Sanitary  Drainage.  2.00
Watson. Rural  Sanitation  in

Tropics 4.25

Weaver. Mind  and  Health..  2.00
Weininger. Sex and Char-
acter 3.00

Whipple. Mass. Sanitation  2.50

White. Care  of  Skin 50

Whiting. Public  Sanitation.  .  3.00
Whittelegge. Hygiene and

Public Health 3.00

Wide. Curative Gymnastics  3.00
Willson. American Boy and

Social Evil 1 .  00

Wilson. Hygiene 3.00

Nobility of  Boyhood 50

Winslow. Prevention  of  Dis.  1.75

Wood. Sanitation 3.00

Woodhull. Military  Hygiene  1.50

Personal  Hygiene 1.00

Woodworth. Care  of  Body.  .  1.50

Wooton. Toilet Medicine..  1.00

Wrench. Healthy Marriage  1.50
Zenner. Sexual Phys. and

Hygiene 1.00


LIVER, PANCREAS, STOM-
ACH, INTESTINES,  ETC.

Aaron. Digestive Organs..  $6.00

Abrams. Auto-intoxication .  1.50

Adams. Digestive System..  2.00

Alderson. Indigestion 50

Austin. Digestive  Tract....  5.50
Bassler. Stomach and Ali-
mentary Tract 6.00*


Univprsnl ]Va(iirop<i(lii<- Directory sinti Buyers'  Cluidc  126S


NICOTINE,  THE  INVISIBLE  ECLIPSE  OF  HEALTH


THE  TOBACCO-SKUNK  AND  HIS  DEPREDATIONS.

!?■»» / IV f-trtr1eyd» M Fi  King  .Tamos'  "Countorbla.st  against  Tobacco"

*^y  •'•  yy »  nOagSf  Iwl*  U*  ha.s  a  mod(-rn  endor.sement  of  Iho  mo.st
.strenuou.s  character  in  thi.s  pamphlet  by  Dr.  Hodge,  our  modern  knight  errant
who  fights  to  the  death  against  drug  therapy,  serum-therapy,  the  drug  habit,
and  every  vicious  and  poisonous  practice  that  is  enslaving  and  cursing  mankind.
The  present  philippic  is  directed  against  all  tobacco  fiends,  whether  smoker,
chewer,  or  snuffer  of  the  stink-weed.  He  denounces  the  use  of  tobacco  as  utterly
obnoxious,  detestable  and  loathsome,  not  only  on  the  part  of  the  tobacco  fiends
in  general,  but  also  denounces  the  healing  profession,  and  those  reverend  "stink-
pots" who  also  use  tobacco,  as  men  belonging  to  professions  that  aim  to  uplift
and  redeem  humanity  from  its  vices.  There  are  consumed  in  the  United  States
every  year,  seven  billions  of  cigars,  ten  billions  of  cigarette."?,  and  three  hundred
million  pounds  of  manufactured  tobacco,  costing  seven  hundred  and  fifty  millions
of  dollars. What  an  enormous  waste of  finances  for  a  deadly  drug! — Price,  20c.


THE  USE  OF  TOBACCO  A  PHYSICAL,  MENTAL,
MORAL  AND  SOCIAL  EVIL. By  J.  W.  Hodge,  M.  D,

This  pamphlet  is  a  scientific  exposition  of  the  effects  of  tobacco  on  the  human
system.  The  author  proves  that  nicotine,  the  deadly  principle  of  tobacco,  is  a
poison  of  such  extreme  violence,  that  a  minute  quantity  placed  upon  the  tongue
of  an  adult  animal  will  cause  death  in  two  minutes.  The  deleterious  effects  of
tobacco  on  the  digestive  organs,  blood,  heart,  brain  and  nervous  system,  optic
also  expatiated  upon,  proving  tobacco  indulgence  to  be  a  physical,  mental,
moral  and  social  evil.  Dr.  Hodge  does  not  believe  that  the  tobacco-fiend  can  be
reformed;  he  is  too  deeply  wedded  to  his  curse.  His  case  is  hopeless.  The  object
is  to  warn  the  youths  of  the  country  who  have  not  acquired  the  pernicious
tobacco  habit,  against  the  vicious  example  set  before  them  by  their  tobacco-using
doctors,  elders,  teachers,  and  spiritual  advisers,  those  reverend  "stink-pots"  who
by  means  of  their  "holy  smoke"  are  blazing  a  way  for  their  Sunday  School
scholars  to  insanity  and  death. — Price,  20  cents.


THE PESTILENTIAL TOBACCO HABIT. By  J, W.

Hnrftr^ M D  ^^'- Hc'^^S'e is really  doing  the  present  generation  a  great,

'*VUgKf  in,  U%  service  in  so  fiercely  condemning  the  filthy  and  disgusting'
tobacco  habit,  so  offensive  to  one's  friends  and  so  pernicious  to  one's  self.  His
denunciation  of  our  tobacco-debauched  civilization  is  outspoken  in  the  extreme,
and  is  not  at  all  too  severe,  when  one  considers  the  fearful  grip  that  cigars,
cheroots,  stogies  and  mal-odorous  old  pipes  have  vipon  the  devotees  of  My  Lady
Nicotine.  He  believes  that  every  citizen  of  the  United  States  possesses  an
inalienable  right  to  enjoy  fresh  air,  uncontaminated  by  poisonous,  unhealthful
and  offensive  odors,  and  that  the  tobacco  plague  should  be  suppressed  by  force.
Of  course  the  tobacco  fiends  resent  interference  with  their  vile  habits,  "as  will
also  those  "holy  preachers"  and  "divines"  who  have  blessed  the  fumes  of  tobacco
as  they  ascend  from  their  consecrated  pipes  and  cigars,  their  vicious  example
being  largely  instrumental  in  leading  young  boys  into  a  degrading  practice
which  Is  the  stepping  stone  to  alcoholic  intemperance.  These  three  pamphlets
are  wholesome  advisors,  and  the  reader  will  gain  greatly  by  procuring  the  set
for  perusal. — Price,  20  cents.


FREEDOM:  A  JOURNAL  OF  REALISTIC  IDEALISM.
By  Mrs.  Helen  Wilmans  Post—r^ir^-'J^^s'%ri  po^iir^^f.i'^.'JS

(if  Mental  Science,  being  edited  by  that  gifted  apostle  of  mental  freedom,  Mrs.
Helen  Wilmans  Post,  of  Seabreeze,  Fla.  The  articles  are  of  perennial  importance,
because  the  philosophy  they  preach  is  as  fresh  today  as  when  published  fifteen
years  ago.  Those  who  desire  to  be  the  architects  of  their  own  destiny  are  re-
commended to  secuie  as  many  copies  of  Freedom  as  remain  on  our  hands.  They
may  sa^'e  you  from  the  disasters  of  fool's  luck,  that  makes  a  sport  of  the  man
that  does  not  command  his  own  destiny.  If  fate  or  luck  makes  a  man,  then
adverse  fame  or  luck  can  unmake  him,  hence  so  many  failures  in  life.  Get  en-
thused with  the  suggestions  of  success  and  fortune  that  characterize  this  unique
publication. — Price  for  one  copy,  25  cents;  5  numbers,  each  different,  SI. 00.  10
copies  mixed,  $2.00,  postpaid.


•  Send  all  Orders  to:  i

I THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J. |

•  •


1266


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Barclay. Alimentary Tract  4.00
Bid  well. Intestinal Surgery  2.25
Bigg. Indigestion, Constipa-
tion, Liver 1.50

Billings. Digestive Tract..  6.50

Blake. Intestinal Catarrh..  2.00
Bland-Sutton. Gall-stones

and Bile  Ducts 2.00

Bolton. Ulcer  of  Stomach ..  4.70

Bouchard. Auto-intoxication  2.00
Brinkerhoff. Rectum and

Intestines 4.00

Brown. Amccbic Dysentery  3.00
Cannon. Mechanical Factors

of  Digestion 3.00

Cantlie. Stomach, Intestines

and  Pancreas 4.00

Clarke. Surg, of Kidneys..  4.00
Cohnheim. Digestive  Canal .  .  4.00
Combe. Intestinal Auto-in-
toxication 4 .  00

Cushing. Pituitary  Body.  ..  .  4.00

Dienst. Stomach 1.00

Douglass. Dis. of Abdomen  6.00

Einhorn. Intestines 3.00

Stomach 4.00

Fothergill. Indigestion and

Billiousness 1.50

Gant. Constipation 6.00

Diarrhea 6.00

Glazier. Trichinae 25

Goodbody and Harley. Gas-
tric Diseases 2.40

Habersohn. Stomach 2.50

Handley. Ileus Duplex ...  1.00

Hemraeter.  Intestines.  2  Vols.  10.00

Diseases  of  Stomach 6.00

Ilerschell. Doudenal Ulcer  .40

Indigestion 1.50

Ilerschell and Abrahams.

Colitis 2.00

Hertz. Constipation 4.00

Sensibility of Alimentary

Canal 1.50

Hill. Gastroscopy 1.25

Keay. Medical  Treatment  of

Gall-stones 1 .25

Kemp. Stomach, Intestines

and  Pancreas  7.00

Lane. Intestinal Stasis ...  4.00

Kinks of Ilium 60

Langenhagen.  Mucomem-

branous Entercolitis ...  1.00

Latson. Appendicitis 50

Lockwood. Stomach 5.50

MacMilan. Constipation ....  2.00

Morrison.  Abdominal Injuries  1.00

Moynihan. Gall-stones 5.00

Xothnagel's Practice.

Intestines and Peritoneum  5.00
Kidney, Spleen and Hem-
orrhagic Diseases S .  00

Pancreas,  Liver,  etc 5.00

Stomach  5.00

Opie. Pancreas  3.50

Oppenheimer. Ferments  and

their Actions 2.50

Osier and McCrae. Cancer

of  Stomach 2.00

Partsch. Ills of Indigestion  2.00
Paterson. Gastric Surgery..  2.00
Peters. Epidemic  Diarrhea..  2.50
Reed. Stomach and Intes-
tines 5.00

Robson. Cancer of Stomach  1.75

Rogers. Dysenteries 3 .75

Roleston. Liver, GaU-blad-

der,  Bile-ducts 7.00

Rose and Kemp. .\tonia

Gastrica 1.00

Rutherford. Ileo-Cecal  Valve  2.25
Salisbury. Alimentation and

Disease 5.00

Saundby. Digestive System  2.00

Sawyer. Coprostasis 1 .00

Smithies  and Ochsner. Can-
cer of  Stomach 5.75

Stockton. Diseases  of  Stom-
ach 6.50

Sutton. Gallstones 2.00


Thomson. Paralytic .\fTec-

tions  of  the  Stomach 40

Von Noorden. Acid-Intoxi-
cation 50

Colitis 50

Metabolism  and  Nutrition.  . 3.75

Wegele. Therapeutics 3.50

White. Liver 2.00


MASSAGE

Abbott. Hy<lrotherapy and

Massage $0.30

Beevor. Movements 1 .50

Bennett. Massage in Frac-
tures 1  .  75

Bohm  and  Painter. Massage.  1.75
Bucholz. Therapeutic Exer-
cise 3.25

Despard. Massage 5.50

Massage  for Beginners ...  2.00
Dowse. Primer of Massage.  .75
Eberhardt. Vibratory Tech-
nique 1 .00

Ellison. Massage 2.00

Graham. Massage 5.00

I  Hale. Art  of  Massage 2.00

Kellgren's Manual of Treat-

[ ment 4.00

!  Kellogg. Art of Massage..  2.50

[ Vibrotherapy 50

I  Lewis. Medical Exercises..  .75

I  Luke. Massage 1.00

:  Nissen. Practical Massage..  1.50
I  Norstrom. Chronic Head-

I ache and Massage 1 .00

Ostrom. Massage 1 .00

!  Palmer. Massage 2.50

Pilgrim. Vibratory Stimula-
tion 1.50

Swietochowski.  Mechano-

Therapeutics 1.50

Ziegenspeck. Massage in

Diseases  of Women ....  1  .  50

MATERIA MEDICA,
PHARMACY, ETC.

Abbott. Federal Narcotic

Record Book $0.25

Abbott and Waugh. Ameri-
can Alkalometrv.  4

vols. ; each 1 .  00

American Medical Associa-
tion  Handbook of Drugs  .50
Epitome of Pharmacopeia

and  Formulary 50

ISIedical Laws 30

New and Non-official

Remedies 1 .  00

Amy. Pharmacy 5.50

Baruch. Hydrotherapy ....  4.00

Beal. Drugs 1.50

Galenical Pharmacy 1.50

Pharmaceutical Chemicals.  2.00

Pharm. Lab. Practice....  1.00

Pharmaceutical Technic ..  1.25

Pharmacy in Abstract....  1.00
Beasley. Druggists' Receipt

Book 2.50

Bethea. Mat.  Med. and Pre-
scription Writing 4.50

Blair. Botanic Drugs 2.00

Bosanquet. Serums, \'ac-

cines and Toxins 2.75

British Pharmaceutic Co-
dex 5.00

Pharmacopeia 4.20

Bruce. Materia Medica and

Therapeutics 2.00

Rurgess. Epsom Salts 1.00

Butler.  Materia Medica,

Therapeutics  and Phar.  .  4.00

Cables. Golden Rules 2.25

Caspari. Pharmacy 4.75

Coleman. Materia Medica..  1.00
Crossley-Holland. Pharmacy

Handbook 2.00

Culbreth. Materia Medica

and Pharmacy 5,25


t'ummings.  Formulary  ....  3.00
Cushny. Pharmacology and

Therapeutics 3. 75

Daggett. Phar. Chemistry.. 2.75

DeLorme. Pharmacy 1.25

Di.xon. Pharmacology 4.?0

Edmunds and Cushny. Ex-
perimental Pharmacology 1.50
Fantus. Prescription  Writing

and Pharmacy 3.00

Fantus and Evans. Year-

Book 1..S0

Fenner. Formulary 10.00

Fitch.  Pocket  Formulary..  2.00
Fortescue-Brickdale. Newer

Remedies 2.00

Francis  and  Fortesque-Brick-
dale. Chemical Basis  of

Pharmacology 4.00

Gerrish. Prescription-writing .50
Gray. Pharmaceutic Com-
pendium 1.50

Prescriptions 1.50

Greene.  Experimental  Phar-
macology 1 .  00

Pharmacology 3.50

Halberg  and  Salisbury.  Phy-
sicians'  Manual to Phar.

and Formulary 50

Halsey.  Pharmacology  ....  6. .00
Hampshire.  Volumetric  Anal.  1.25
Hatcher  and  Wilbert. Pharm. 1.50

Heebner. Pharmacy 2.00

B.  P. Preparations 2.00

Pharmaceutical Chemistry. 2.00

Henry. Plant Alkaloids 5.50

Hopkins. Formulas 5.00

Howe  and  Beard. Latin.... 1.00

Hynes. Pharmacy Laws 75

Jackson. Experimental Phar. 4.00
Kauflfman, Beal and Koch.
Laboratory in Applied

Pharmacy 1 .00

Kemp. Pharmacopeia for

India 2.50

Kiepe. Materia Medica and

Therapeutics 1.00

Kraerner.  Scientific  and  Ap-
plied  Pharmacognosy ... 5.00

Liquor Register 1.00

Lucas  and  Stevens.  Pharma-
copeias 3.00

Ludy. Pharm. State Board 1.50


Maitland.  Prescription  Writ-
ing and Reading 50

Maltbie. Pharmacy 3.00

Mann.  Prescriptive-writing 1.00

Mathews. Pharmacology  and

Therapeutics 1 .  00

May and Mason. Index of

Materia  Medica 1 .  00

Meyer  and  Gottlieb.  Phar-
macology 6.00

Morris. Materia  Medica  and

Therapeutics 1 .25

National Formulary 2.50

National  Standard  Dispensa-
tory 9.50

Netter. Ancient Pharmacy

and  Medicine  1.50

O'Connor.  Commercial  Phar-
macy 3 .  00

Oldberg. Pharmacy 3 .  00

Pharmaceutic and Chemi-
cal Problems 3.00

Oldberg and Miner. Lab.

Manual Pharm. Prep... 1.50
Orr. Materia Medica and

Therapeutics 1 .00

Osborne.  Materia  Medica,
Pharmacology  and  Pre-
scription-writing 1.00

Parry. Foods  and  Drue;s.  .  .  . 10.50
Patton. Materia Medica.... 1.00
Pembrey and Phillips. Phy-
siologic Action  of  Drugs. 1.50
Pictet  and  Biddle. Vegetable

Alkaloids 4.50

Potter. Therap., Materia

Medica, Pharm 6.00


UniverMiil  Nuluropiitlilc  Directory  niid  Buyers'  Guide


1207


OOKS  ON  NATURAL  LIF
AND  RATIONAL  CURE


E


Constituting  the  Home  Course  for  Naturo-
pathic Practitioners  and  the  General  Public

THE  TRUE  ART  and  SCIENCE  of  NATUROPATHY

BooliM  published and  sold  by

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.

NEW  YORK  CITY  DR.  BENEDICT  LUST  tangerine,  fla.


DIAGNOSIS


FASTING


KUHNE,  L.oui!« — Facial  Expression,  cloth  $5.00

Foreig-n language editions,

san^e pi'ice.
— Facial Diagnosis. An abridged

edition of Facial Expression 1.60
LAHBf,  Dr.  H.  E. — Iridology — Diagnosis

from the eye, $:!.:!0; with key 2.50

(In German, same price.)


DISEASES

IIVSOMXIA, TUBERCULOSIS, INFANTILE
PARALYSIS, RHEUMATISM, ETC.

BAUMGARTEN, Dr. Alfred — Insomnia  .$  .15
COLLINS,  Dr.  F.  W. — Infantile Paraly-
si.s — Its Cause, Prevention and

Cure 25

ERZ,  A.  A.,  N.  D. — What  Medicine
Knows and Does Not Know

about Rheumatism 75

MAYER,  Dr.  Emil — No  More  Syphilis  .20
REINHOLD,  Aug.  F.,  M.  D. — Po.sitive
Prevention  and  Cure  of  Tuber-
culosis (Part  VI — Restoration
of  Health  by  Natural
Methods) 1.00

—  Consumption Curable 2.'>

—  Pulmonary Consumption is

Easily Cured by the Nature
Cure 25

—  Nature vs. Drugs (K  i  d  n  e  y

Troubles, etc.) 50

THOMAS.  J.  B.,  M.  D. — Mal-Assimila-
tion and its Complications,

paper 1.00

SHADEL,  A.  P. — "Confessions"  of  a
Victim  of  the  Great  White
Plague,  or  a  Guide  to  the
"Fountain of Eternal Youth" .50


THE  MEDICAL  QUESTION

LEGISLATION, MEDICAL FREEDOM AND
JURISPRUDENCE

ERZ,  A  A.,  N.  D. — The  Medical  Question,
The  Truth  about  Official  Medi-
cine and  Why  "We  must  have
Medical  Freedom,  $4.00;  cloth  $5.00
— •  A  Message  to  all  Drugless  Heal-
ing Systeins and a Reminder .I.'

PERRIER, James, M. D. — A Scientific

Basis  for  a  Just  Law 20

GOODPELLOW. Dr. A. A. and ZUR-
MUHIiEN, Dr. Cliarles — M  e  d  i  c  a  1

Monopoly  and  Immoral  Traffics .15

LUST, Benedict. N. D., M, D. — Medical

Tyranny in New York City .10


EHRET,  Arnold — Rational  Fasting  for
Sick  People  and  Regeneration
Diet $  .50

PURINTON, E. E. — The Philosophy of

Fasting,  $1.00;  cloth 1.50


MENTAL  THERAPEUTICS

NEW THOUGHT, PSYCHOTHERAPY, MEN-
TAL SCIENCE, MEMORY TRAIMNfi, SUG-
GESTIVE THERAPEUTICS, HYPNOTISM
AND SPIRITUAL HEALING,
EFFICIENCY,  ETC.

BOYD, Asa, Prof. — How to Acquire a

Good Memory $2.10

BUNKER,  W.  N.,  D.  C. — Your  Memory
— Its  Functions,  Exercise  and
Training 50

COLA'ILLE,  AV.  J. — History  of  Theoso-

phy, cloth 50

—  Our Places in the Universal

Zodiac, cloth I.OO

POST, C. C. — Congressman Swanson,

$0.50; cloth 1.00

—  Driven from Sea to Sea 30

—  Men and Gods l.«M)

POST, Helen AVilmans — Spiritualism

from the Standpoint of Mental
Science 50

—  Mental Science and Christian

Science 25

—  Relation of the Ideal to the

Affairs of Life 25

—  The  Last  Enemy  to  be  Overcome

is Death .>»

—  Our Past, Our Future 25

—  Thought Transference and

Mental Healing 25

PURINTON,  E.  E. — Lords  of  Ourselve.s,

$1.50; cloth 2.00

—  Efficiency in Diugless Healing,

$1.50; cloth 2.00

—  The  Corset  in  Court 15

PURINTON,  E.  E. — Try  the  Laugh  Cure .15

—  Horizonings 23

—  Sins  of  Sex 35

—  Woman's Work 25

—  The Fine Art of  Giving 20

—  The Future Life 20

—  Play 25

—  Genius and Eugenics 2"

—  Fatherhood — The  New  Profession .25

—  Ask the Druggist lo

Efficiency  Series

—  How to Succeed 25

—  Daily Guide to Efficiency 25

—  Unused Powers 25

—  The Triumph of the Man Who

Acts 25

—  Freedom the  Goal of  Life 25

Five  Efficiency  Booklets  in  combination.  $1.00


1268


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Poison Register 1 .00

Powell. Formulary 1.75

Prichard. Prescribing 2.00

Remington. Pharmacy 6.00

Robinson. Hashish ........  .50

Ruddiman. Incompatibilities

in  Prescriptions 2.00

Materia Medica 2.25

Whys  in  Pliarmacy 1 .00

Riuiolphy.  Pharmaceutic  Di-
rectory 2.50

Saint  Clair. Med. Latin 1.25

Saunders' Pocket Medical

Formulary 1.75

Sayre. Materia Medica and

Pharmacognosy 4.50

Schleif.  Materia  Medica,
Therapeutics  and  Pre-
scription-writing 2.50

Schneider. Pharm. Bac 2.50

Vegetable  Pharfnacographv.  1.25

Scoville. Compounding ....  3.00
Shoemaker. Materia Medica

and Therapeutics 5.00

Smith. Common Remedies..  1.25
Sollmann. Lab. Pharmacol-
ogy 2. 50

Pharmacology 4.50

Squire.  Companion  to  Brit-
ish Pharmacopeia 6.00

Pharmacopeia of London

Hospitals 2. SO

Standard  Formulary 5.00

Stanislaus and Kimberly.

Pharmaceutic Chemistry.  2.50

Stark. Aids  to  Pharmacy ..  1.25

St. Clair. Medical  Latin 1.25

Stevens. Modern Materia

Medica  and  Therap 3.50

Pharmacy and Dispensing.  2.50

Stewart. Pharmacy 1.25

Sturmer. Pharm. Arithmetic  1.35

Pharm. Latin .•  :  •  •  ^-^^

Swan. Prescription Writing

and Formulary 1 .25

Thornton. Formulary 1.50

Materia  Medica 3.50

Tyrode. Pharmacology 1.50

U.  S.  Dispensatory 10.00

U. S.  Pharmacopeia 3.00

Wall. Pharmacognosy 5.00

Whelpley. Therapeu.  Terms.  1.00
White and Wilcox. Materia

Medica  and  Ther 3.00

Wilcox. Materia  Medica  and

Therap 3.50

Wilson.  Medical  Pocket  For-
mulary 2.50

Wood. Pharmacology and

Therapeutics 4.50

Wood. Tablet Manufacture.  2.00
Wootton. Chronicles of

Pharm. 2 Vols 6.50

Youngken. Pharm. Botany  1.00


MEDICAL. JURISPRUDENCE,
TOXICOLOGY

Amer.  Med.  Asso. Case  Law

on Practice $6.00

Atkinson. Golden Rules 50

Law in Practice 3.00

Bayly. Medicolegal Status

of Physician 1.00

Blackmer. Jurisprudence of

Sexuality 1.50

Medical Jurisprudence ...  1.50

Blyth. Poisons 7.50

Bolduan and Dieudonne.

Bacterial Food Poisoning  1.00
Brothers. Medical Juris....  3.00
Brundage. Toxicology ....  2.00
Buchanan. Forensic Medi-
cine 3 .25

Collie. Malingering 4.50

Culbertson. Med. Men and

Law 3.00

Dercum. Hysteria 2.00

Dwight. Medical Jurispru-
dence 1 .00


Douglas. Chemistry  and  Tox.  .50
Emerson. Legal Medicine

and  Toxicology 5.50

Glaister and Logan. Indus-
trial (Jas Poisoning 3.50

Med. Juris, and Toxi....  5.00
Golcbiew.ski and Bailey. At-
las Accident Diseases...  4.00
Hamilton. Medical Juris. .  .  2.00

Railway Accidents 3.50

Hamilton and Godkin. Legal

Medicine. 2 Vols. .  .  ._.  10.00
Hawthorne. Forensic Medi-
cine  and To.xicology ...  1.70
Herold. Legal Medicine....  4.00

Knocker. Accidents 8.50

Kobert. Toxicology 2.50

Legge. Lead Poisoning....  3.50
McKendrick. Malingering..  .60
Mercier. Criminal Responsi-
bility 3.75

Mitchell. Doctor in Court..  1.50

Hospitals and Law 1.75

Naqjiet. Legal Chemistry...  2.00

Piatt. Poisons 25

Poison Register 1 .00

Purrington. Legal Decisions  .50
Rambousek. Industrial Pois-
oning 3 .50

Reese.  Medical Jurisprvi-

dence and Toxicology..  3.00

Riley. Toxicology 1.50

Robertson.  Jurisprudence

and Toxicology 4.25

Schmitt. Necroscopy 1 .00

Tanner. Poisons 75

Taylor. Medical Jurisp 4.50

The Law  and Physicians.  .  2.00
Thoinot  and Weysse. Moral

Offences 3.50

Thompson. Occupational  Dis-
eases 6.50

LTniversal Poison Register...  1.00
Von Hofmann and Peterson.

Atlas  of  Legal  Med 3.50

Wharton and Stile. Medical

Jurisprudence. 3 Vols..  22.50

Witthaus. Toxicology 7.00

Urinalysis and Toxicology  1.00
Witthaus  and Becker. Medi-
cal Jurisprudence and
Toxicology. 4 Vols.;

each 6.00


MICROSCOPE, MICROSCOPY

Archinards. Microscopy and

Bacteriology $1.00

Baker. Spectroscope 1.75

Barnard. Photomicrography  4.20

Carpenter. Microscope 9.00

Clark. Microscopy 1 .60

Clayton. Food Microscopy..  4.00

Cross  and  Cole. Microscopy.  2.00

Gage. Microscope 3.00

Ilanausek  and  Winton.  Mi-
croscopy of Technical

Products 5.00

Heath. Microscope 50

Hogg. Microscope 3.50

Klopstock  and  Kowarsky.
Chemistry, Microscopy

and Bacteriology 3.50

Lee. Microtomists' Vade

Mecum 4.50

Lenharts-Brooks.  Clinical
Microscopy  and  Chemis-
try 3.00

Oertel. Medical Microscopy  2.00

Schneider. Microscopy ....  l.SO

Spitta. Microscopy 4.00

Whipple.  Microscopy of

Drinking Water 4.00

Winslow. Microscopy 1.50


MISCELLANEOUS


Abrams.
Adams.


The Blues $1.50

American Fraud.. .50


.Mbright. Business Methods

of Specialist 1.25

General Practitioner as

Specialist 3 .  00

.\llbutt.  Education with

Reference to Medicine..  .75

.■\mer. Med. Assn. Directory  10.00

Commemoration Volume...  2.50

Nostrums and Quackery..  1.00

Propaganda for Reform..  l.UO

.\ndrews. Age, Sex, and

Frequency of Disease...  4.20

.\uerbach. Headache 1.50

Baldwin. Individual  and So-
ciety I  .50

Barlow.  Doctor's  Day

Dreams 1.25

Barnes. Embalming 5.00

Barnesby. Medical Chaos

and Crime 2.00

Bilz. Natural Method of

Healing. 2  vols 10.00

Black. Forty Years in Med-
ical Profession 3.00

Blakiston's Visiting Lists,

2.50 @  1.00

Brockbank. Life Insurance  2.50

Butler. Physician Detective  1.00
Cabot. Social Service and

Healing 1.10

What Men Live By 1.50

Cammidge. Feces 5.00

Catechism Series 30

Cathell. Physician Himself.  2.50

Charaka Club 3.50

Clevenger. Fun in a Doc-
tor's Life 1 .00

Coleman. Case Records....  5.00

Confessio Medici 1.25

Covey. Profitable  Office  Spe-
cialties 3.50

Secrets of Specialties 3.00

Crile. Kinetic Drive 2.00

Man,  an  Adaptive  Mechan-
ism .  . .  ; 2.75

Mechanistic View  of Peace

and War 1.20

Crook. Mineral Waters 3.50

Crothers  and Bice. Elements

of Latin 1 .25

Davies. Doctor's Leisure

Hour 2.50

Davis. To Collect Bill 1.00

De Manaceine. Sleep ....  1.50

Denison. Climate  of  U. S. .  .  1.00

Deutsch. Medical German..  1.75

Doty. The Mosquito 85

Downer. Death Highway...  1.50
Drews. Unfired  Food  for  the
Cure and Prevention of

Disease 3.15

Ehret. Rational Fasting ...  .50

Ellis. War Time 1.50

Engelhardt. A Carefree Fu-
ture l.SO

Firebaugh. Physician's Wife  1.25
Fisher and Fisk. How to

Live 1  .00

Galton. Healthy Hospital...  2.75

Gardner. Tconograms 15.00

Gilford. Postnatal Growth..  6.00
Goldmark. Fatigue  and EflS-

ciency 2.00

Gould. Right and Lefthand-

edness 1.25

Gouley, Moral Philosophy of

Medicine 1 .  SO

Greene. Life  Insurance ....  4.00

Hall, Handicrafts l.SO

Harbaugh. Industrial Claim

Adjuster 1.00

Harston. Europeans  in  Trop-
ics 3.00

Held. Crime  and  Disease ..  1.50
Hinshaw. Doctor's Confes-
sion 75

Hornsby  and Schmidt. Mod-
ern Hospitals 7.00

Hurd. Hospital Visitors ...  1.00

International Clinics 2.00


iJniver.snl  Nadiropiitliic  Directory  jiimI lliiycrx'  (jiiiidc


1260


BOOKS  ON  NATURAL  LIFE  AND  RATIONAL  CURE


WIIiMANS, Melon — The Conquest of
Poverty, .$1.00; cloth

—  The  Conquest of  Death

—  Search foi- Freedom

—  Blossom of the Century

—  Oh World, Such as I Have,

Give I (Parts 1 and II)

—  Freedom, a journal of Mental

Science. Single copy, liSc;
5 numbers, $1.00; 10 numbers

—  Home Course in Mental

Science — 20 lessons


$1.50
1.50
1.00

1.00


:!.oo

20.00


NATUROPATHY

NATURE  CURE,  DRUGI^ESS  SYSTEMS,
HYDROPATHY,  HELIOPATHY,  ELECTRO-
PATHY, l>IETETICS,  NATURAL,  LIFE,  ETC.

1III,Z,  F.  E. — The  Natural  Method  of
Healing— 2  Vols.,  $10.00;  For-
eign Language editions $10.00

BRADSHAAV,  AVm.  R. — Future  Medi-
cine 20

CARUUE.  O.,  and  CAMPBELL,  D. —
Diet  in  Relation  to  Health  and
Efficiency,  Building  Brain  by
Diet 25

DODDS,  S.  W.,  M.  D. — Drugless  Medi-
cine, Hygliotherapy 10.00

DREWS,  J.  G.,  N.  D. — Unfired  Food  and
Tropho-Therapy  (Food  Cure)
For  Mothers,  Students  and
Doctors.  A  complete  Treatise
on  the  use  of  Unfired  Food  for
the  cure  and  prevention  of
disease 3.15

ENGELHARDT, August — A Carefree

Future. $1.00; cloth 1.50

ERZ, A. A., N. D. — True Science and

Art of Healing 50

GRAY,  John  A. — Schroth  Cure 10

HARA,  O.  Hashnu — Fruit  and  Nut  Diet .15

JUETTNER. Otto, M. D. — A Plea for

Physical Therapy 15

.JUST, Adolpli — The New Paradise of

Health 25

—  Return to  Nature.  $2.00;  cloth... 3.00

(German and Italian editions,
same  price)

—  Abridged French Edition

"Reviens  a  la  Nature" 1.00

■ —  The  Yungborn  Dietary.  A  New
Vegetarian  Cook  Book,  Choice
compositions.  Preparation  and
Storing  of  Food  for  the  Na-
tural Cure and Natural Mode

of Living 1.00

(German,  same  price.)

KARELL,  Dr. — The  Milk  Cure 50

KNEIPP.  Father  Seba.stian — Kneipp
Cure  (My  Water  Cure),  $1.00;
cloth 1.65

—  Abridged French Edition "Guide

Practique  de  la  Cure  Kneipp".. .25

—  Baby's Kneipp Cure, $0.75; cloth 1.00

—  Water Cure Monthly, Vols. 1900,

1901, each  $2.00; cloth, each... 3.00
KUHNE, Louis — The New Science of

Healing 3.00

(Foreign I^anguage edition.?,
same  price)
LINDLAHR. H., M. D. — Nature Cure,
Vol. 1. Pliilosophy and Prac-
tice. Based on the Unity of

Disease and Cure 2.-0

LINDLAHR,  Anna — The  Nature  Cure
Cook  Book  and  ABC  of
Natural Dietetics 2.20


LUST,  Uenedlct,  N.  D.,  M.  D. — Herald
of Health and Naturopath,

yearly  subscription,  $2.00;
foreign,  $2.50.  Single  copie.s,
$0.20; foreign $  .25

—  Back Volumes of the Herald of

Health  and  Naturopath  from
the  year  1900  to  the  current
year,  per  volume,  $2.50;  cloth
bound volumes 3.50

—  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory,

Drugless  Year  Book,  Buyers'
Guide  and  lOncyclopedia, vol. 1,

year 1918, cloth 10.00

This  volume  contains  a  full
register  of  all  drugless  practi-
tioners, schools,  societies,  in-
stitutions, etc.  L.  Kuhne's
writings,  "The  New  Science
of  Healing,"  "Facial  Expres-
sion," E.  E.  Purinton's
"Efficiency  in  Drugless  Heal-
ing," "Modern  Electrothera-
peutics,"  etc.

—  Der Hausdoktor, a monthly

German  magazine  for  the
family,  for  rational  healing
and  natural  living.  Yearly
subscription,  $1.00;  foreign
$1.50.  Single  copies,  $0.20;
foreign 25

—  Back volumes of Der Hausdok-

tor from  the  year  1889  to  the
curi-ent  year,  per  volume,
.$2.00; cloth bound volumes.... 3.50

—  12 Pictorial Views of Yung-

born — Rational  Living  and
Nature  Cure  Resort,  Butler,
N.  J.,  and  Tangerine,  Fla 50

Vitalism  Series

— • The Limits of Fatigue, as a

Strict Law of Life 25

—  Becoming Numb — The True

Cause of Cancer 25

—  Winds and Gases 25

—  The Raw Food Table 25

—  The  Helper in Distress 25

—  Everything Attainable Through

Training of Thought 25

—  A Conscious Diet as a Founda-

tion for  Powerful  Health 25

—  Man, Learn to Think 25

—  Awaken to Complete Conscious-

ness 25

— ■ The  Overcoming  of  the  Financial

Malady called Poverty 25

The above 10 Vitalism booklets

in combination 2.00

LUST,  Mrs.  Louisa — Naturopathic Cook

Book, .$0.75; cloth 1.00

MATIJACA,  Dr.  A. — Principles  of
Electro-Medicine.  El  ectro- Sur-
ge rv  and  Radiology,  $2.00;
cloth 3.00

PURINTON, E. E. — Proclamation of

Naturopathv 10

REINHOLD,  Aus-  F.,  M.  D. — Nature  vs.
Drugs  (Meat  Diet  Injurious
to Man) 25

—  Nature vs. Drugs (Harm from

Overeating) 25

—  Principles  of  Cure 25

RILEY.  Dr.  .1.  S. — Zone-Therapy  Simpli-
fied 1.00

STIERLE, Ferd. — Back to Nature

and to Nature's God 15

THOMAS.  J.  B.,  M.  D.— The  Advantages

of Raw Food, cloth 1.50

TYLER,  Byron — Nature's  Triumph  over
Disease.  Raw  Food  Book  and
Health Guide 15


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.,  U.  S.  A.


1270


General  List  uf  Medical  Works


The Re-

the lost

Health ;


International  Medical  Annual

James. Death

Just. Return  to  Nature ....

Keen. Animal Experimenta-
tion

Kellogg. Life

Man, tlie Masterpiece ....

Kelyiiack. Drink Prnbltni..

Kenncily's  Oucstioii  Manual .

Kilner. Human  Atmosphere.

Kimball. Soldier Doctor of
Our .Army

King. Country Doctor ....
Doctor's  Domicile

Kneipp. The Kneipp Cure.
(My Water Cure) ....

Kuhne. Neo-Naturopathy,  the
New Science of Healing
Science of Facial Expres-
sion

Lahn. Iridology

Lamson. My Birth

I.educ. Mechanism  of  Life.

Leonard. Handy  Ledger .  .  .

Office Day-Book

Pocket Day-book

Lernanto, Dr. El.,
discovery of
Fountain of
■Nervous Afflictions,
Mental Ills and Sexual
Diseases

Lindlahr, Anna. The  Nature
Cure Cook-Book

Lindlahr. Nature Cure ....

I.oeb. Mechanistic ConcciJ-
tion of  Life

Lombroso. Criminal Man .  .

Lorand. Old Age.

Lust, Mrs. Louisa. Naturo-
pathic  Cook Book

Matijaca. Principles  of Elec-
tro-Medicine

McComb. Religion  and  Medi-
cine

McDowell. How to Suc-
ceed

McKisack. Case Taking. .  .

McNaughton-Jones. Ambi-
dexterity

McOscar. All-round Special-
ist

Medical  Record  Visiting  List.

Meigs. Origin of Disease.  .

Metchnikoff. Nature  of  Man.

Minot. Age, Growth, Death.

Mitchell. Doctor  and  Patient

Morris. London  Hosp

Morse. Emergencies

Moulton. Doctor  in Art....
Doctor  Who's  Who

Mumford. Doctor's Table.  .

Murray. Law  of  Hospitals.  .

Nash. Evolution and Dis-
ease

Oliver. Occupations

Osier. Man's  Redemption of

Man

Way of Life

Pliilips and Pembrey. Legal

Security  Acct. Book

Liquor Problem

Register of Births and

Deaths

Physicians' Visiting List
$1.00 @

Practitioner's  Case Book . .

Prince. Christian Science...

Purinton.  Efficiency in

Drugless Healing

Philosophy of Fasting .  . .

Ramsey. Life  Insurance....

Richeberg. Eat, Drink, Live
Long

Rosenbach. Physician vs.
Bacteriologist

Saundby. Med.  Ethics

Old Age

Saunder.s Hand Atlases.  .
2.50 @


4.00

.50

3.00

1.75
1.50
3.00

2.50
1.00
5.00

l..=i0
1.00

Z.iO

1.65

3.00

5.00
2.50
1.25
2.50
2.50
2.00
1.00


1.50

2.20
2.20

1.50
2.00
3.00

1,00

3.00  I


2.00
1.50  j

1  .no

3.50  '
1.25  I
5.00  1
1.50  i
2.00  :
2.00
1.75
4.00  I
6.00  I
2.50  !
1.25
4.00

1.40  '

\.m

.50
.50

5.00
4.50

.75

2.00
2.00
1.00

2.00
1.50

2.00

.50

1.50
3.00
.2.10

5.00


Question Compends 1 .25

Schofield. Force of Mind..  J. 00

Unconscious  Mind 2.00

Unconscious  Therapeutics..  1.75
Scripture. Thinking,  Feeling,

Doing 1.75

Shastid. Malpractice 1.50

Stanton. Face and Form

Reading 6.00

Slarkey. Glands of Life ..  2.00
.State i'>oard Examinations ..  2.40
Taylor. Character Develop-
ment 1  .00

Pocket .\ccount Book ....  1. 00

Pocket  Case Record 1.00

Treves. Other Side of the

Lantern 5.00

Tale  of  Field Hospital 1.00

Universal Liquor Register ..  1.00

Vaughan. Medical Research  5.00

Visiting  List, Practitioners' .  1.25

Walsh. Ledger 3.50

Walton. Calm  Your.self 50

Peg  Along 1.25

' Those  Nerves 1 .  25

Why  Worry  ? 1.25

Warbasse. Medical  Sociology  2.25
Ward. Climate  and  Man ...  2.00
Warren. Passages  from  Phy-
sicians' Diary 2.50

Weir. Religion  and  Lust ...  1.50

Whitby. Makers of Man ..  3.50

White. Character  Formation.  1.75
Wilmans. Conquest of

Poverty 1.50

Conquest of Death 3.00

Home Course in Mental

Science. 20 Lessons .  .  20.00
Worcester  and Atkinson.

Small Hospitals 1.25

NURSING AND FIRST  AID

Abbott. Hydrotherapy 4.00

Aikens. Clinical Studies ...  2.00

Ethics 1.75

Home  Nurse's  Handbook  ..  1.50

Hospital  Housekeeping  ...  .  1.25

Hospital Management ....  3.00

Primary  .Studies 1.75

Training  School  Methods  ..  1.50
•Ambulance Work and Nurs-
ing l.SO

Amer. National Red Cross

Charts 2.50

.Amos. Chemistry  for  Nurses  1.50

Andrews. Midwifery 1 .25

.'\sh. Nursing  Nervous Pati-
ents 1.00

.'Vsher. Chem.  and  Toxicol ..  1.25

Bacon. Obstetric  Nursing ..  2.00

Baily. Nursing  Insane 1  .00

Barnett.  .Accidental  Injuries.  3.00
Barrus.  Nursing  Insane  ....  2.00
Beatson.  Woimd  Treatment.  .80
Beck.  Reference  Handbook  .  1.25
Berkley.  Handbook  for  Mid-
wives  1.25

Berry. Orthopedics 1 .00

Bishop. Surgical .Nursing ..  1.00
Bliss  and  Olive. Pliysics  and

Chemistry 1 .  75

Blumgarten. Materia  Med..  .  2.50
Bolduan  and  Grund. Bacter-
iology 1.50

Boyd. State Registration ..  1.25

Bridge. Hospital Nursing ..  1.00

Brown. First  Aid 25

Junior  Nurse 1 .50

Bruce. Tuberculosis  for  Nur-
ses 1.00

Bryan. Medical  Dictionary .  .75

Budin. The  Nursling 6.00

Burra. Tuberculosis  for  Nur-
ses 80

Burrows.  Abdom.  Surgery  for

Nurses 1  .00

Butler. Emergency  Notes ..  .50


Campbell. Home  Nursing ..  1.25

Carey. Bacteriology 1 .00

Carlson.  Obstetric  Quiz 1 .75

Carrel and Dumas. Infected

Wounds 1.00

Childe. Surgical Nursing .  .  2.00

Clarke. Clinical  Notes 50

Nurses  F.n(iuire  Within  ...  .80
Cook.  Inrlex  of  Nursing  ....  1  .00
Cooke.  Nurses'  Obstetrics  ..  2.25
Cuff.  Medicine  for  Nurses  .  .  1.25
Curran.  .Sickness  and  Acci-
dents 1 .00

Darr. First  .Aid 25

Davis.  Obstetric  and  Gyne-
cologic Nursing 2.00

Davis  and  Douglas.  Eye,
Ear,  Nose,  Throat  Nurs-
ing 1.50

Daw.  Care  of  Consumptives.  .50
Dawson.  Anat.  and  Phys.  ..  1.75
Delano  and  Mclsaac.  Hy-
giene and  Home  Care  ..  1.00
DeLee.  Obstet.  for  Nurses..  2.50
DeWitt. Private Nursing..  1.75

Dock. Materia  Medica 1.5u

Dock and Nutting. History

of  Nursing. 4  vols 10.00

Domville. Manual  for  Nurses  .75

Donahue. Nursing 2.25

Doty. Aid  to  Injured 1.75

Driiikwater. First Aid 45

Sick Nursing 45

Drummond. Golden Rules

Physiology SO

Dulles. Accidents 1 .  00

Dunton, Occupation  Therapy  .50

Dupuy. Stretcher- Bearer ...  1.00
Eccles. Anatomy and Sin-

gery  for Nurses 1.00

Eghian. Mother's  Nursing  .  .  1.00

Emergencies  in  Abstract ....  1 .00
Fairbairn. Text-book for..

Midwives 4  .  50

Farr. Med.  for  Nurses 2.00

Fen  wick. Chest Disease 2.00

Finnemore. Pharni.  and  Mai.

„.  ,  Med •. 1.00

t iske. The  Body 1 . 25

Fitzwilliams. Manual for..

Orderlies 2.00

Foote. Materia Medica ....  L50

State Boards 2.50

Forsyth. Medical Diseases

for Nurses 1 .  40

Fowler. Operating  Room  and

Patient 3 .  50

Fox.  _ Duties Before (Jpera-

tions 50

Friedenwald and Ruhrah.

Dietetics  for  Nurses  ....  4.00

Fullerton. Obstetric  Nursing  1.00

.Surgical Nursing I.UO

Galabin. Midwifery 6.00

Gardner.  Public  Health  Nurs-
ing 1.75

Gibson. Laboratory  Technic.  1.25
Giles. Gynecologic Nursing.  1.50
Goodnow. First-Year Nurs-
ing 1 .50

History  of Nursing 2.00

War Nursing 3.00

Gray-Cooke. Obstetrics ....  2.25

Griffith. Helps  in  Nursing .  .  l.SO

Groff. Materia  Medica 1.25

Groves  and  Brickdale.  Text-
book for  Nurses 4.50

Gulick. Emergencies -tO

Hadley. Nursing 1-40

Handbook  of  Nursing 1.25

Harding. Mental  Nursing ..  .50
Nursing Fevers and Infec-
tions ^^

Harris. Elec. for Nurses ..  1.00

Harrison. Home  Nursing ..  1.00

Hassard. Practical  Nursing  .  1.50
Hawkins-Ambler. Gynecologic

Nursing 50


Universal IVtitiiro|>iilliM' Dlrcotor.v iiimI llujor.s' Guide


1:J71


BOOKS  ON  NATURAL  LIFE  AND  RATIONAL  CURE


MISCELLANEOUS

GRAY, Helen Snyr — In Justice lo

Thomas and Tabby $  .10

HODGE, l)r. J. VV. — The Use of

Tobacco, a Physical, Mental

and Social Evil -0

—  The Pestilential Tobacco Habit .20

—  The Tobacco Skunk and His

Depredations -0

nUEGG, John J. — Boll Weevil (The

Law of Nature and Mankind) 1.00

—  The Secret of Health and

Disease 50

RlLiEY, Dr. J. S. — Rectal Dilation 10


SEXOLOGY


LBRNANTO,  Dr.  E.  L,. — Re-discovery
of  the  Lost  Fountain  of
Health  and  Happiness,  for
Nervous  and  Sexual  Diseases,
$1.00; cloth .. $1.50

ROSCH,  Dr.  E. — The  Abuse  of  the
Marriage  Relation,  explaining-
the  orig-in  of  chronic  Diseases,
especially of Men and Women .50


GERMAN  PUBLICATIONS
Deutsche  Biicher

AlVLICKER, F. — Der Lehm als Natur-

heilmittel $  .50

BILZ — Das  neue  Naturheilveifahren.
Volksausgabe.  Reich  illustriert.
Mit  zerlegbaren  M  o  d  e  1  1  e  n.
Elegant gebunden 6.00

—  Grosse Familien- und Natur-

arzte-Ausgabe, in 4 Banden... 14.50

—  In Englisch, Pranzosisch, Spa-

nisch,  Bohmisch,  Polnisch,
Russisch,  Danisch,  Schwedish,
Italienisch,  Ungarisch,  Hollan-
disch,  Portugiesisch,  in  2  Ban-
den 10.50

—  ..Grosser Hausschatz und Biblio-

thek  der  Bildung  und  des  Wis-
sens".  Komplett  in  5  Banden.
Umfasst  alle  Gebiete  menschli-
chen  Wissens -0.00

BUNGE von G. — Tabaksvergiftung 15

EHRET, A. — Kranke Menschen 50

— ■  Allgemeiner  Lehrbrief  fiir  Faster
und  Gesundesser  mit  Anwei-
sungen iiber Schleimlose Diat 2.00

ERZ,  A. — Personliche Freiheit, Kurier-

freiheit 15

HEIXINGER,  .1.,  D.  D..  Ph.  D. — Philo-
sophie  der  Mentalen  Poten-
tialitat in Menschen 25


HUBBARD, Elbert— Erfolg dei- O-steo-

patliy $  .10

KABISCH, Dr. K.— Naturheilkunde lo

JUST, A. — Das Neue Paradies der Ge-

sundheit 25

—  Die naturgemasse Heilweise.  . .  . I.OO

—  Kehrt  zur  Natur  zurtick 3.20

—  Der Jungborn-Tisch 1.10

KOEHLER, E. — Die Anwendungsfor-

men des Naturheilverfahrens 2.50

KNEIPP,  Seh.,  Pfarrer— Die  Kneipp-
kur,  Praktischer  Wegweiser
zu Kneipps Heilmethode 20

—  Das Grosse Kneippbuch 5.50

—  Meine Wasserkur. Pracht-Aus-

gabe 2.25

—  Mein Testament 2.25

LAHN,  Dr.  H.  E. — Die  Naturheil-
kunde  bei Tierkrankheiten 25

—  Der Krankheitsbefund aus dpm

Auge 2.20

LUST, Dr.  B. — Auffrischung  des  Blutes

durch Pflanzensafte .50

—  Der Naturopath und Gesund-

heitsratgeber,  1902 — 1914,  pro
Jahrgang  $2.00;  gebunden  $3.00
Einzelnummern 25

—  Amerikanische  Kneippblatter.

1896 — 1901,  pro  Jahrgang  $2.00;
gebunden $3.00; Einzelnummern .25

—  Der Hausdoktor, Zeitschrift flir

verniinftige  Lebens-  und  Heil-
weise. Abonnement per Jahr

$1.00; Einzelnummern 25

Friihere  Jahrgange  von  1889
bis  jetzt,  $2.00  per  Jahrgang.
portofrei.

—  Gesundheitskalender  fiir  Freunde

der  Kneippkur  und  Anhanger
der  Naturheilmethode,  Jahr-
gange 1899.  1900  und  1901.  50
Cents  per  Jahigang.  postfrei,
alle  3  Jahrgange  zusammen
$1.10,  postfrei;  gebunden  $1.00
per  Jahrgang  oder  alle  3  Jahr-
gange gebunden  in  1  Band.... 2.50

RICJHTER,  R. — Der  Neue  Obstbau.  Ein-
faches,  naturgemasses  Verfah-
ren 1.10

SHOENEBERGER, Dr. P. und AV.

SIEGER  T — Lebenskunst  —
Heilkunst.  Aerztlicher  Rat-
geber  fiir  Gesunde  und  Kranke.
2  Bande  mit  Beilage  von  13
farbigen  Tafeln  und  zerleg-
barem  Modell  des  menschlichen
Korpers.  Bestes  Lehr-  Fami-
lien- und  Nachschlagewerk  des
gesamten  Naturheilverfahrens,
einschliesslich der Kneippkur  10.00

SIEGERT, W^ — Gesundheitspflege und

Naturheilkunde 25

SPOHR,  D. — Die  Pocken 15

UHIilG, A. — Zweck und Wesen der

Naturheilkunde 05


Any  book,  article,  or  information  on  Natural  Healingr  and  kindred  Subjects  supplied.
Catalogue  free. Agents  ^vanted  everyTrhere


Send  all  Orders  to:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J., U.S.  A.

BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  M. D., Proprietor


1272


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Hawes. First-year  Nurses .  .
Hawkins-Dempster. Lectures

for  Nurses

Henry. Medicine  for  Nurses
Hodson. How to Become a

Trained  Nurse

Howard. Surgical  Nursing .
Hoxie  and  I.aptad. Medicine

for  Nurses

Hughes. District  Nursing .  .

Humphrey. Nursing

Jacques. District  Nursing .  .

Jardine. Midwifery

Jenkins. Nurses'  Record .  .  .
Jewett. Childbed  Nursing .  .
Kimber. Anatomy  and  Phys-
iology for  Nurses

Kirkpatrick. Ethics

Lauffer. Resuscitation

Lewis. Anatomy and Physi-
ology

Little. Anatomy and Physiol-
ogy

Lounsbury. Making  Good. .  .

Lynch. First  Aid

Lynch  and  Shields.  Red  Cross

Aids'

MacDonald.  Flome  Nursing
Macfarlane.  Gynecology  .  .  .
Macleod.  Hygiene  for  Nurses
Maitland.  Fever  Nursing...
Manhattan  Hospital  Eye,  Ear,
Nose,  Throat  Nursing .  .

^^ann. Invalid Recipes

Marquardt. Urinalysis for

.  Nurses

Marshall. Physiology

Maxwell and Pope. Nursing
McCombs. Dis. of Children

for  Nurses

McCurdy. Emergencies ....
Mclsaac. Bacteriology for

Nurses '

Hygiene  for  Nurses

Nursing  Technic

McMurty.  Nursing  in  Pel-
vic Surgery

Meachen. Nursing of Skin

Diseases

Mills. Nervous and Insane
Moberly. Nursing  at  Home .
Montgomery. Care of Surg-
ical Patients .  .  .  .-

Morrow. Immediate  Care  of

Injured

Moi  timer. Home Nursing

of Sick Children

Morton.  Midwife's  Pocket-
book

.Murrell. Poisoning

Nightingale. Nursing

Nunn.  Nurses'  Daily  Re-
ports

Orme. Hospital and Private

Nursing

Ottenberg. Chemistry

Owen. Treat,  of  Emergencies

Page. Care  of  Insane

Parker. .Mat. Med

Parker  and  Breckenridge.
Gyne.  and  Surg.  Nurs-
ing

Parsons.  Problems  and  Ob-
ligations

Paul.  Materia  Medica

Nursing  in  Acute  Fevers .  .

Pilcher. First Aid

Pope.  Anatomy  and  Physiol-
ogy

Dictionary for  Nurses ....
Physics  and Chemistry .  .  .

Practical Nursing

Pope and Pope. Nursing .  .
Price. Hygiene and Sanita-
tion

Nurses  and Nursing

Richards  (Linda).  Reminis-
cences


1.25

1.40
2.00

2.25
1.70

.1.50
.50
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.00


2.50
.50
.50


1.75
1.25
1.00

.30
1.10
1.25
1.50

.50

1.50
25

.60

75

2.00

2.00
1.00

1.25
1.25
1.25

.50

1.00
1.50

.50


2.00

.50

.50

1.00

.75

.10

.50
1.00
2.00
1.25
1.75

2.50

1.00
1.50
1.00
2.00

2.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
2.00

1.50
1.25

1.00


, Red Cross Charts 2 .  50

j  Robb. Educational  Standards. 1.25

I Nursing 1.75

I Nursing  Ethics 1 .  SO

Roberts. Bacteriology and

Pathology for Nurses ..  1.50

!  Sanders. Practical  Nursing .  2.50

Schroeder. Materia  Medica  .  1.25
j  Schwartz and Blumgarten.

Diseases of Children .  .  2.50

Scott. Materia  Medica 1.00

1  Senn. Nurse's Guide for

Operating  Room 1 .75

Smith. Operating  Room  ....  1.50
Stephenson.  Ophthalmic  Nurs-
ing 1.50

Stewart. Gyne.  Nursing  ....  1.00
Stimson. Drugs and Solu-
tions 1 .00

Stoddart. Mental  Nursing  .  .  1.00
Stoney. Bacteriology and..

Surgical Technique ....  1.75

Materia  Medica 1.50

Nursing 1.75

Tracy. Invalid  Occupations.  ...  1 .  50

Tuley. Obstetric Nursing ..  1.50
Wainwright. Poisoning and

First  Aid 75

Walsh. Skin Diseases 2!  50

Warnshuis. Surgical Nurs-  \

„, in?,----, 2.50

Warwick  and  Tunstall. First

„, ^'"^ ••■ 1.00  ;

Watson. Nursing 2.00

Weeks  and  Shaw. Nursing..  2!oO  I

Wilcox. Fever  Nursing ....  1.00

Wilson. Fever  Nursing ....  1.50  !

Obstetric  Nursing 1 .25  '

Wise. Text-book  for  Trained

Nurses. 2 vols 2.50

Woodwark. Medical Nurs-
ing 1  25

Woolacott. Nursing in In-  ' ,

fections 1 .00

Worchester. Nurses  for  Our  '  '

Neighbors 1 25

Wrench. Midwifery 2 00  I

Yearsley. Nursing  in  Dis.  of

Throat, Nose, Ear .  .  1 00

Young. First Aid to Sick..  l'.25


ou


1.00
00


Herman. Ditficult Labor ..  2.50

Inglis. Obstetrics 1 .00

Jardine. Delayed Labor ...  3^00

Obstetrics 6.50

Jewett. Obstetrics 5'ou

Johnstone. Midwifery 3.25

Kerr. Operative Midwifery.  6.50

King. Manual  of  Obstetrics.  2.75

Landis. Obstetrics 1.25

Lea. Puerperal Infection ..  6.00

Lewis. Obstetric Clinic ....  3.00

Longndge. Puerperium ....  1.50

Manton. Obstetrics 1  .do

McDonald. (Jynecology and

Obstetrics 1  .  00

McKerron. Pregnancy aiid

Labor  with  '1  umor 2  00

Modeland. Mother  and  Child  1

Nail. Aids to Obstetrics 1

Paddock. Maternitas 1

Partridge. Obstetric Re-
membrancer

Peterson. Obstetrics .  .'.  .

Polak. Obstetrics j'qo

Rion. Painless Childbirth.  .  !  '  SU
bchaeffer and Edgar. Atlas
of Obstetric Diagnosis

and Treatment 3 00

Shears. Obstetrics 5"  00

Slemmons. Prospective  Moth-
er J 75

Stacpoole and -Anderson.

Confinement 1 25

Sylvan. Painless Childbirth'  '75

I  aussig. Abortion 2  00

Thomas. Abortion '  I'oo

Tweedy. Obstetrics.... ''  5 '50

\  ogt. Golden Rules ''25

Warren. Obstetrics '  s' qq

Webster. Obstetrics 5  'oo

Placentation 3'  75

Williams. Obstetrics .  .' .' '  / oo

Surgical  and  Obs.  Open "  2 50

Wright. Obstetrics s 00


OSTEOPATHY


OBSTETRICS

.Ashton. Essentials of Ob-

stetrics $1.25

Ayres. Physical Diagnosis

m  Obstetrics 2  00

Bacon. Obstetrics 2  00

Barbour. Maternity  Primer '.  ".75
Berkley and Bonney. ( )b-

stetric  Emergencies 8 50

Bourne. Midwifery 1.75

Cadwallader. Obstetrics .  .'.  2^00

Calder. Midwifery 2.00

Cheadle. Mother 'and Child.  2.00

Cragin. Obstetrics 6.00

Davis. Manual Obstetrics...  2!25

Operative Obstetrics 5  50

Davis. Mother and Child..  2.00

DeT.ee. Obstetrics 8.00

Year-book of Obstetrics.  .  1.35
DeNormandie. Case Histo-
ries 4.00

Eden. Midwifery 3.50

Obstetrics 5  .  00

Edgar. Obstetrics 6.00

Engelman. Ancient Labor..  8.00

Evans. Obstetrics 2.25

Flint. Stereoscopic Obstetri-
cal Gynecology 12.50

Fothergill. Obstetric Prac-
tice 40

Garrigues. Obstetrics 5.00

Grandin. Jarmin  and  Marx.

Practical Obstetrics ....  4.50
Hadden. Gynecology of Ob-
stetrics 3.50

Hart. Midwifery 6.00

Hellman. Twilight Sleep...  l.SO


1.50

2.00

3.00
3.00
1.


Barber. Osteopathy ....  $3  00

Burns. Blood 4_'oo

Consciousness 4*  00

Lumbar  Lesions 2  00

Nerve  Centres 4*00

Principles of Osteopathy  4*00

Vertebral  Lesion 2  00

C'ark- Diseases of Women  5^00

2000  Questions 2  00

Craven. Physical Diagnosis  ^25
Ueason. Physiology  Research  4.00
h.ilison. Jurisprudence .  .  60
Fredler. Household Osteo-
pathy

Goetz. Osteopathy .  .  .  ,  .
Hazzard. Practice of Osteo-
pathy

Principles of Osteopathy !
Hoffman. Pathology

Hulett. Osteopathy ... '  3 '50

Kent. State  Boards  ... '  ' S5

Klein. Pathology [  5^

Laughlin. Anatomy eiso

Murray. Gynecology 3.  so

Practice of  Osteopathy ...  3.50

Riggs. Osteopathy ....'.....  1.00

Still. Autobiography 3.00

Research  and  Practice 6.00

Tasker. Osteopathy 5.00


PATHOL.OGY, HEMATOLOGY

Abel. Gynecologic Pathology  $2.50
Adami. Inflammation (Pa-
thology) 2.00

Pathology 6.00

.\dami-McCrae. Pathology ..  5.00

Adami-Nicolls. Pathology ..  6.00

Beattie. Postmortem  Methods  S.OO


tTnlverM:il Nadiropatliie Diioctorj and IJiijer.s'  Guide  1273

Bflcbcriibernaturbeilkuiulc  I


DIE  AUFFRISCHUNG  DES  BLUTES  DURCH  PFLAN-
ZENSAFTE. Von  Benedict  Lust,  N.  D,,  M,  D.— b'iV^unichen

Prakliker  cUr  Naturheiltncthode,  sowolil  wie  fur  den  Hausg-ebrauch  g-leich  wich-
tiges  und  nicht  zu  entbehrendes  Werkchen,  in  welchem  die  den  Pflanzen  inne-
■wohnenden  Ileilkrafte  in  gedrangter  Form  zusamniengestellt  sind.  Dieses  BiJch-
lein  ist  ein  in  des  Wortes  volLster  Bedeutung'  getieuei'  Ekhard  fiir  jedermann  in
seinen  tausend  Leiden  des  Alltags,  ein  freundlicher  und  hilfreicher  Berater  in  al-
ien jenen  Fallen,  in  denen  mangelnde  Zufuhr  von  Nahisalzen  das  Blut  des
menschlichen  Korpers  schwach  und  widerstandslos  werden  lasst;  statt  eines  na-
turlichen  Bekampfers  der  sich  im  Korper  aufspeichernden  schlechten  Safte  und
Gifte,  wird  das  Blut  kraftlos  und  somit  zum  Bundesgenossen  der  sich  im  Org-anis-
nius  niehi'enden  zerstorenden  Elemente.  Einen  unschatzbaren  Vorteil  g'ewinnt  das
Buchlein  dadurch,  dass  es  von  den  verschiedenen  Krautern  aehr  exakte  Abbildun-
g'en  bring't,  denen  kurze  botanische  Bemerkung'en  beig'eg'eben  sind.  Die  Oe-
brauchsanweisung'en  der  einzelnen  Krauter  in  den  in  Betracht  kommenden  Fal-
len, zeichnen  sich  einer  wohltuenden  Klarheit  aus.  Preis  50  Cents;  portofrei  52
Cents.


ERFOLG  DER  OSTEOPATHIE. Von  Elbert  Hubbard  —

In  der  Geschichte  der  Naturheilkunde  hat  in  neuerer  Zeit  die  Osteopathic  zwei-
fellos  eine  bedeutsame  Stellung-  sich  erobert,  besonders  in  den  Vereinig-ten  Staa-
ten,  wo  sie  heute  uber  eine  bemerkenswei'te  Anzahl  von  Anhang'ern  und  Prakti-
kern  verfug't.  Geschichtlich  ist  sie  freilich  leicht  auf  die  in  Deutschland  be-
kannte  wissenschaftliche  Massag'e  und  Mechano-Therapie,  Ordopathie  zuriick-
zufiihren,  deren  spezifischen  Charakteristika  der  Osteopathia  eigen  ist.  In  ihrer
modernen  Ausiibung'  ist  die  Osteopathic  vielfach  ausg'ebaut  und  hat  zum  Begrtin-
der,  Andrew  Taylor  Still,  urspriing-lich  ein  Landarzt,  der  im  Mittelwesten  durch
manuelle  Behandlung:en  bei  vielen  Kranken  und  Kriippeln  Heilerfolg'e  erzielte,
und  einen  bedeutenden  Namen  erlangt  hat.  Ohne  Zweifel  verdient  die  Osteo-
pathic Anerkennung'  als  HilfsvN^issenschaft  der  Naturopathie,  die  ja  auch  Hydro-
pathie  und  schleimlose  Diat  als  Hilfsmittel  zur  Erreichung'  von  Heilerfolg'en  be-
dient.  Die  vorliegende  Schrift  g'ibt  einen  Riickblick  iiber  die  Entstehung  der
Osteopathie und  diirfte  viele  Intei'essenten  finden. Preis  '25  Cents.


DIE KNEIPPKUR. Von Pfarrer  Sebastian Kneipp —

Als  unbedeutender  und  unscheinbarer  Weberg'ehilfe,  den  Armut  stets  zu  Geld-
erwerb  zwang-,  zur  baren  Eebenerhaltung',  strebte  der  nachmalig'e  Pralat  Sebastian
Kneipp  unablassig'  danach,  in  den  Priesterstand  zu  treten.  Ein  g'liicklicher  Zufall
wollte,  dass  der  jiinge  Sebastian  auf  seinei'  Wanderschaft  einem  Manne  begegnete,
der  ihm  Gelegenheit  gab,  seinem  innigsten  Ziele  einen  Schritt  naher  zu  komnien,
indem  er  nun  in  die  Schule  gehen  konnte.  Mit  einem  wahren  Heisshunger
stiirzte  sich  der  kiinftige  Pfarrer  auf  das  Stadium,  sodass  er  nach  dem  Absolu-
toriuin  des  Gymnasiums  zu  Dillingen  (Bayern)  sich  selbst  kaum  mehr  er-
kannte:  aus  dem  einstigen  frischen,  robusten  Webergesellen  ward  er  ein  sie-
cher,  kranker  Mann.  Die  Aerzte  konnten  ihm  nicht  helfen  und  das  Ziel  schon
in  Reichweite,  sah  er  seine  Zukunft  schwinden.  In  diesem  Stadium  fiel  ihm
Hahn's  Buch  iiber  die  "VVasserheilkunde  in  die  Hande,  nach  welchem  er  sich
einer  "Wasserkur  anvertraute  und  das  mit  dem  besten  Erfolge.  Dieser  Wasser-
behandlung  blieb  er  von  nun  ab  zeitlebens  treu;  diese  half  ihm  iiber  die  nach-
sten  Jahre  emsigen  Studiums  in  Miinchen  und  Dillingen.  In  \Voerishofen  liess
er  sich  schliesslich  als  Pfarrer  nieder,  wo  er  die  Wasserheilkunde  ausbaute  und
kraftige  Propaganda  fiir  eine  natiirliche  Lebensweise  machte.  In  Woerishofen
auch  hinterliess  er  sein  schonstes  Monument,  eine  Kuranstalt  nach  ihm  be-
nannt,  die  jahrlich  tausenden  und  abertausneden  Linderung  bringt.  Pfarrer
Kneipp  starb  am  17.  Juni  1897  in  einem  Alter  von  77  Jahren.

In  dem  vorliegenden  Biichlein  sind  fiir  alle  Krankheitsfalle  rasch  ■«'irkende
Hilfsmittel  angegeben,  die  besonders  fiir  den  Hausgebrauch  berechnet  sind.
Dieser  Ratgeber  sollte  in  jedem  Familienheime  anzutreffen  sein.  Ein  Ergan-
zungsbiichlein  stellt  das  Heftchen  „Kneipp's  Thee"  dar,  das  in  kurzer,  jedoch
klarer  \Veise  die  Ziibereitung  der  verschiedenen  Krautertees  anweist  und  von
hervorragenden  bildlichen  Darstellungen  der  einzelnen  Krauter  begleitet  ist.
Diese  beiden  Biichlein  sind  die  gedrangte  Form  der  Lebensarbeit  Pfarrer  Kneipps,
und  zum  Preise  von  je  25  Cents  portofrei  erhaltlich.  Beide  zusammen  fiir
40  Cents  portofrei.


Zu  beziehen  durch:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1274


(General  List  of  Medical  Works


Beattie and Dickson. Pa-
thology 5.00

Beck. Surgical Pathologry ..  1.00

Bernstein.  Applied  Pathology  3. 25

Uowlby. Surgical Pathology  3.50

Box. Postmortem  Manual ..  2.00

Brooks. Pathology 6 .  00

Brouardel. Death and Sud-
den Death .1 .  50

Buchanan. Blood and Dis.  4.50
Buckmaster. Morphology of

Blood 3.00

Burnett. Pathology of  Blood  1.50

Cabot. Blood 6.50

Campbell. Pathology 1.25

Cannon. Bodily Changes in
Pain, Hunger, Fever,

Rage 2.50

Cattell. Postmortem Path...  4.00

Coplin. Pathology 4.50

Councilman. Pathology ....  4.50
Da  Costa. Clinical Hema-
tology 5.00  i

Daniels. Laboratory Studies

in  Tropical  Medicine ...  4.50
Delafield and Prudden.

Pathology 6.00

Durck and  Hektoen. Atlas

of  Path.  Histology 5.00

Earl. Laboratory Work ...  1.40
Emery. Bacteriology and

Hematology 2.75

Ewing. Pathology of Blood  3.50
Fothergill. Blood Exam, in

Tropical Diseases 1.00

French. Laboratory  Methods  1.50
Gibson. Postmortem Hand-
book 1.50

Gilchrist. Surgical  Patholog^y  2.50
Green. Pathology and Mor-
bid Histology 4.50

Gruner. Biology  of  Blood ..  6.00

Gulland and Goodall. Blood  5.00  !
Hall and Herxheimer. Mor-  \

bid Histolog^y and Clini-  i

■ cal Pathology 3.00

Hektoen. Post-mortems ....  1.00  i

Horder. Clinical  Pathology.  .  3.00

Hunter. Hematology 2.25

Kettle. Tumors 3.00

Krehl. Clinical  Pathology ..  5.00

Lazarus- Barlow. Pathology .  6.50

MacCallun. Pathology 7.50

Mallory. Pathologic Histol-
ogy 5.50

Mallory and Wright. Patho-
logic Technique 3.25

McConnell. Pathology 2.75

McFarland. Pathology 5.00

Miller. Pathology 2.50  1

Xewth and Owen. Post-
mortems 75

Nichols. Laboratory  Methods  2.50
Oliver. Atheroma and Ar-
teriosclerosis SO

Blood and Blood Pressure  3.00

Owens. Post-mortems 75

Panton. Clinical Patholofv.  4.00
Pappenheim. Clinical Exam.

of  Blood 1.25

Pembrey and Ritchie. Path.  5.00
Pottenger. Musclespasm and

Degeneration 2.00

Rolleston  and  Kanthack. Mor-
bid Anatomy 1.75

Schleip. Hematologic  Atlas .  6.00

Shennan. Post-mortems 5.50

Stengel  and  Fox. Pathology.  6.00

Stenhouse. Pathology 1.00

Sutherland. Blood-stains ...  2.75

Talbot. Pathology 6.00

Thayer. Special  Pathology  ..  1.25

Wadsworth. Postmortems ..  6.00

Wallgren. Pathology 1.00

Ward. Bedside  Hematology  .  3.50
Warthin. Blank Book for

Autopsies 75

Wells. Chemical  Pathology .  3.25
Whitacre. Laboratory  Pathol-
ogy 1 .50


U'oodhcail. Pathology 8.00

Zcit. Autopsy  Protocols 75

Ziegler. Gen.  Pathology .... 6.00
Special  Pathologic  Anatomy 4.00


PHYSIOLOGY, METABO-
LISM, NUTRITION

.\bderhalden. Defensive  Fer-
ments $2.75

.\lcock and Ellison. Experi-
mental Physiology 1 .50

Appleton's  Monographic

Medicine; 6 vols 39.50

.-\shby. Notes  on  Physiology  1.50

Assheton. Growth in Length  ,75
.\ulde. Chem. Problem in

Nutrition 3.00

Bainbridge and Mengies.

Physiology 3.75

Bayliss. General  Physiology  . .65

Beddard  and  Others. Phys. .  4.U0
Biedl. Internal Secretory

Organs 6.00

Blaisdel. Physiology 1.10

Bliss  and  Olive. Physics  and

Chemistry 1 .  75

Brooks. Physiology 60

Brown. Physiologic Princi-
ples 2.25

Physiology for Lab 75

Brubaker. Physiology 1.25

Budgett. Physiology 1 .25

Bundy. Anatomy  and  Physi-
ology 1.75

Burdon-Sanderson. Physiol-
ogy of Nerve, Muscle,

and  Electrical  Organ ...  5.25
Busch. Laboratory  Physiology.  .1.50

Byrne. Semicircular  Canals  .  3.00

Cannon. Lab. Physiology ..  2.50

Carrington. Death 3.00

Cathcart. Protein Metabo-
lism 1.25

Childe. Senescence and Re-
juvenescence 4.00

Cobb. Internal  Secretions ..  2.00

Collins  and  Rockwell. Phys.  1.50

Colton. Physiologies.  $0.60  @  1.40

Craner. Chemical  Physiology  1.00
Dana. Comparative Physiol-

^ ogy 25

Dhingra. Uricacidemia ....  1.00
Fischer. Fats  and  Fatty  De-
generation 2 .  00

Physiology  of  Alimentation  2.00

Fish. Physiology 1.50

Fishberg. Internal Secre-
tions 2.00

Fisk. Alcohol 75

Fitz. Physiology  and  Hygiene  1.12

Furneaux. Elementary  Phys.  .80
Garrod. Inborn Errors of

Metabolism 1.35

Giles. Anat. and Phys. of

Female Genitalia 1.50

Gley. Internal Secretions ..  2.00
Gotch. Two Oxford  Physiol-
ogists 35

Greenwood. Physiology of

Special Senses 2.40

Guenther. Physiology 1.00

Hall. Experiments 2.75

Golden  Rules 40

Haliburton. Chemical Phys.  1.75

Physiology 3.50

Hartman. Laboratory Phys.  .60

Hemmeter. Physiology ....  2.50

Hill. Body at Work 4.50

Human  Physiology 2.00

Hindhede. Protein and Nu-
trition 3.00

Hough and Sed^ick. Hu-
man  Mechanism 2.00

Physiology 1.25

Howell. Labratory  Physiology  .65

Howell. Physiology 4.00

Hutchinson. Physiology  ....  2.00

Jones  &  Bunce. Physiology..  1.50


.lorflan. Nutrition 1.7S

Kirkes. Physiology 3.00

Kirkes  and  Greene. Physiol-
ogy 3.75

Landois. Physiology 7.00

Loeb. Physiology  of  Brain..  1.75

Lombard. Lab. Phys 1.50

Luciani. Physiology. 5 vols.  5.25

r,usk. Nutrition 4.50

Lusk. Basis of Nutrition ..  .50

Lyle. Physiology 4.00

.MacLeod-Pearce.  Human

Physiology 2.25

Marshall. Phys.  of  Reproduc-
tion 6.00

Martin. Human Body ....  2.50

Matthews. Phys.  Chemistry  .  4.50

McCay. Protein Element ..  3.00

Moore. Physiology 80

Morat. Physiology of Ner-
vous System 5.00

Mosso and Drummond. Fa-
tigue 1.50

Ott.  Internal  Secretion  ....  l.OU
Paton.  Human  Physiology  ..  2.75
Nervous  and  Chem.  Regu-
lators of  Metabolism  ....  2.00
Pavlov.  Digestive  Glands  ..  3.50
Pembrey and Philips. Phys.

Action  of  Drugs .  1.50

Porter. Physiology 4.00

Rhodes. Physiology 1 .00

Ritchie. Physiology 80

Rivers. Alcohol and Fatigue  1.70
Sailer. Nutrition and Meta-
bolism 2.50

Schafer. Endocrine  Organs  .  3.50

P'xperimental Phys 1.35

Practical  Physiology 1 .00

Schenck and Gurber. Phys.  1.75
Sherman. Chem. of Nutri-
tion 1.50

Short. Physiology 2.25

Smith. Metabolism 6.50

Obesity 1.40

Sohn. Nutrition 1.75

Starling. Fluids  of  Body ..  2.00

Physiology 5 .  00

Physiology of Digestion ..  2.00

Steele. Hygienic  Physiology.  1.00

Stewart. Physiology ".  .  4.25

Stiles. Human  Physiology ..  1.50

Nutritional  Physiology  ....  1 .25

Stirling. Physiology 2.00

Taber. Antomy and Physi-
ology  Chart 5.00

Tait  and  Krause. Physiology  1.25
Taylor. Digestion  and  Meta-
bolism 3.75

Thompson. Growth  and  Form  6!  50

Thornton. Physiology 1.50

Tigerstedt. Physiology 4.50

Underbill. Amino-Acids 1.35

Vaughan. Poisonous  Proteins  1.00
Von Noorden. Drink Re-
striction 75

Von Noorden. Metabolism

and  Med. 3  vols 3.75

Waller. Physiology  4 .  00

Walters. Phys.  and  Hygiene  1.20
Willows and Hatchek. Sur-
face Tension and En-
ergy 1.25

Wundt. Physiologic Psy-
chology 3 .  00

Zoethout. Physiology 2.00


PRACTICE.  THERAPEU-
TICS, SERl^M.  VACCINE
AND HYDROTHERAPY

Abbott. Hydrotherapy $0.30

Abbott  and  Waugh. Practice

of Medicine 3.00

Abrams. Diagnostic  Therapy.  6.00

Spondylotherapy 5.00

Allbutt. Medical  and  Surgical  1.00
Allbutt and Rolleston. Sys-
tem  of Medicine 6.00


Vnlvernal  NiUuropatbic  IJlrcvtory  and  Diiycrn'  C.ulile  1276

Durcb  Fasten  und  Diat  zur  Gesutidbeit


f


KRANKE  MENSCHEN. Von  Arnold  Ehret  —  ''  fen^a^urP/

der  hochsten  und  letzten  Dinge  iiber  dcs  Menschcn  irdischon  Dasein  in  physi-
schf'i-  N'oUkoninu'nhiit,  in  Kottllcher  Karmonie  mit  d<-n  N'aturge.setztfin,  unnah-
bar  und  trotzend  alien  Anfoindungen  alltjiglicher  Krankheiten  und  Leiden,  wirkt
die  Lekture  dieses  griindlegenden  Werkchens,  das,  auf  dem  Pfade  des  Altmei-
fiters  der  Natur-  und  Fastenheilkunde,  Louis  Kuhne  in  seiner  "JJie  neue  Heil-
wissenschaft"  wandelnd,  in  seinem  Author  und  dessen  Erfahrungsschule  und
Lebenspraxis  die  schlagendste  Illustration  findet.  Noch  als  Zeichenlehrer  an
der  Oberrealschule  zu  Freibui-g  in  Baden,  litt  Ehret  an  einem  chronischen  Nieren-
leiden,  veibunden  mit  hochsr-adig'ei-  Nervenschwache  vind  Hei-zaffektion,  gegen
welche  die  medizinische  Wissenschaft  nichts  auszurichten  vermochte  und  unter  de-
ren  Pf ilfsversuchen  der  Ki-anke  keine  Fortschritte  machte,  vielmehr  seinem  Knde
entgregen  zu  gehen  drohte.  Der  Lebensfunke  in  ihm  gliihte  indes  noch  stark  ge-
iiug-,  um  einen  Heilvei-such  auf  eigene  Faust  durch  eine  Fastenkur  zu  unterneh-
men,  die  ihin  schliesslich  in  der  Tat  wiedergesunden  liess.  Damit  war  in  ihm
der  Grund  zu  weiteren  Forschungren  auf  diesem  Gebiete  gelegt.  Mit  einer  her-
vorragenden  Intuition  und  Deduktionsbegabung  ausgestattet,  spiirte  er  den  Ge-
heimnissen  der  Zellenmaschine  des  mensclilichen  Korpers  nach,  und  gelangte
solcherart  zur  Kenntnis  der  den  Gang  dei'selben  storenden  Elemente.  Die
Schleimbildung  und  der  Schleimgehalt  iin  menschlichen  Korper  durch  missver-
standene  und  irrtiimliche,  durch  Tradition  festgewurzelte  Ernahrungsweise,  ist
nach  Ehret  das  Alpha  und  Omega  der  hundert  und  tausend  taglichen  Krank-
heiten, die  die  Menschheit  foltern  und  martei-n,  die  aber  durch  eine  intelligente
Ernahrungsweise  ganz  von  selbst  ausscheiden  wiirden.  Seine  Theorie  geht
dahin,  dass  gekochte  Kost  unserem  Korper  keine  zellbildende,  blutstarkende
Elemente  zufiihrt,  vielmehr  als  zelltote  Nahrung  in  unserem  Korper,  vornehm-
lich  schleimerzeugend  wirkt.  Auf  dieser  Grundlage  tritt  der  Verfasser  fiir  den
Genuss  von  Obst  und  Pflanzen  aus  der  ,,Sonnenkuche"  ein.  Hand  in  Hand  da-
mit empfiehlt  er  regelmassiges  Fasten,  das  den  Korper  von  alien  Saften  und
Schleimhaufungen  befreit.  Diesen  Erkenntnissen  folgend  und  sie  in  die  Tat
umsetzend,  demonstiieite  Ehiet  durch  ein  49  Tage  wahrendes  Fasten,  mit  nur
zehn  darin  enthaltenen  Dursttagen,  dass  rationelles  Fasten  duichaus  keinen
Krafteverfall  herbeifuhrt,  noch  das  Korpergewicht  dadurch  permanente  Ein-
busse erleidet.

Von  dem  Standpunkte  ausgehend,  dass  Krankheit  nichts  anderes  ist  als  ein
chemischer  Zerfall,  eine  Zersetzung  der  Eiweisszellen,  gibt  Ehret  folgende
exakte  Definition:  ,, Krankheit  ist  ein  Gahrungs-  und  Faulnissprozess  von  Kor-
persubstanz,  oder  von  iiberschiissigem  Nahrungsmaterial,  das  sich  iin  Laufe  der
Zeit,  namentlich  in  den  Verdauungsorganen  angesammelt  hat,  und  als  Schleim-
ausscheidung  in  die  Erscheinung  tritt".  Es  liegt  auf  der  Hand,  dass  dieser  Vor-
.  gang  von  negativen  Diiften  begleitet  ist,  wahrend  die  Natur  dem  Leben  und  der
Entstehung  neuen  Lebens  Wohlgeriiche,  also  positive  Diifte  verleiht,  wie  zum
Beispiel in  diesem  Sinne  die  BUitezeit  der  Pflanzen zu erwahnen ware.

In  dem  Schlusskapitel  beschaftigt  sich  das  Werk  mit  dem  Tod,  gegeniiber
vvelchem  der  Author  als  Ursache  die  Maxiine  aufstellt,  dass  derselbe  eine  Krisis
darstelle,  in  welcher  der  Korper  noch  eine  letzte  Anstrengung  mache,  Schleim
auszustossen,  ein  letzter  Kampf  der  lebendigen,  lebenserhaltenden  Zellen  gegen
die  erstorbenen  und  totenden  Leichengifte;  der  Sieg  der  letzteren  bewirkt  natur-
gemass  eine  Verstopfung  und  Lahmung  der  Zirkulationskanale  des  Blutes,  und
somit  auch  des  Herzens.  Die  Publikation  in  ihrer  Gesammtheit  ist  ein  monu-
mentales  Werk,  dem  die  fliissige,  leichte  und  doch  schonheitstrunkene  Sprache,
eine  Starke  Ueberzeugungskraft,  einen  besonderen  Adel  verleiht.  Der  urspriing-
liche  Beruf,  dem  der  Author  angehorte,  biirgt  fiir  den  asthetischen  AVert  des
Buches.  Eine  hochst  enipfehlenswerte  Lekture,  nicht  nur,  wie  der  Titel  vielleicht
besagen  konnte,  fiir  kranke  Menschen,  sondern  auch.  und  das  besonders,  fiir  die
Gesunden,  die  daraus  viele  T..ehren  fiir  die  Erhaltung  ihrer  Gesundheit  Ziehen
werden. Preis  in  En^lisch  oder  Deutsch  50  Cents;  portofrei  52  Cents.

Ein  weiteres  Buch  von  Arnold  Ehret,  ,,Gesunde  Menschen",  als  Geg"enstiick
zu  ,, Kranke  Menschen"  ist  schon geschrieben und  erscheint  in  Kurze.


GESUNDHEITSPFLEGE UND NATURHEILKUNDE.

V/»fi IV ^f/»<T*>r/  ^^^'" Verfasser bezeichnet die Schrift selbst als ein

r  Uti rr  .  •Jce^crc  Mahnwort, das besonders an die Mutter gerichtet ist

und  gibt  ihnen  darin  Anregungen,  wie  sie  am  Besten  alle  Krankheitskeime  von
ihrem  Heime  fernhalten  konnen,  oder  in  Krankheitsfallen  auf  Grund  der  Natur-
heilkunde  schnelle  und  nachhaltige  Heilung  zu  erzielen  vermogen,  ohne  die
kranken  Organe  erst  durch  Medizine  zu  beschweren  und  deren  Zustand  dadurch
zu  verschlimmern.  Kurz  gesagt  ist  diese  Publikation  eine  Einfiihrung  in  die
Begriffswelt  der  Naturheilkunde,  die  fortschreitend  neue  Anhanger  gewinnt  und
als  die  Aerztin  der  klinftigen  Menschheit  berufen  ist,  wenn  erst  einmal  die
Schaden  der  medizinischen  Behandlung  weitesten  Kreisen  bekannt  und  von  die-
sen erkannt  werden. Prel.s  25  Cents.


Zu  beziehen  durch:


\ THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J


i . \


1276


General  List  of  Medical  Works


2.00
5.50
1.50
.40
1.00

6.00

3.00
.50

1.75

3.00
1 .  00
4.00
2.00

.50
6.00
1.50
5.00
5.50
1.25

8.00


Allen. Vaccine  Therapy .... 3.00
Glycosuria  and  Diabetes .. 9.00
Allsop. Hydropathic Estab-
lishments

Anders. Practice

Armstrong. "I  K"  Therapy  .

Ayers. Clinical  Charts

Bach. Ultra-Violet  Light .  .  .
Ballantyne. Encyclopedia.
IS vols.; 4 ready; each
Barton. Therapeutic Index
and  Perscription-writing  .
Bashore. Clinical  Chart  ....
Batty and Shaw. Organo-
therapy

Beard. Enzyme Treat. Can-
cer

Sea-sickness

Bier. Hyperemia

Billings. Focal Infections.  .
Year  book  of  General  Med-
icine

Bovaird. Internal  Medicine. .

Bracken. Infection

Braddon. Beri-beri

Broadbent. Writings

Brooke. Tropical Medicine
Brown and Murphy. Ency-
clopedia

Bruce. Materia Medica and

Therapy Treatment 2 .  00

Burdick. The  Remedy 1.00

Burnet  and  Austen. Medical

Treatment 1.50

Burnett. Treatment 1.25

Bury. Clinical Medicine ... 6.50
Butler. Materia Medica,

Therany  and  Pharmacy . 4.00

Byrne. Sea-sickness 1 .25

Cabot. Case  Histories 3.00

Constitutional and Blood

Diseases 6.50

Prescriptions 50

Caille.  Differential  Diagno-
sis and  Treatment 6.50

Calmette.  Venoms 5.00

Calwell. Treatment 4.50

Campbell. Treatment 2.50

Carter.  Elements  of  Medicine 3.00
Castellan! and Chalmers.  .

Tropical  Medicine 9.00

Cochrane  and  Sprawson. Use

of Tuberculin 2.25

Corner.  Operations  of  Prac-
tice 5.50

Corey. Vaccination 3.25

Crispin. Diseases  in  Tropics. .50

Croftan. Therapeutics 5.00

Daniels  and  Wilkinson...
Tropical  Medicine  and
Hygiene.  Parts  I,  II,  III,

each 3.00

Dayton. Practice  of  Medicine 1.00
Deaderick and Thompson.

Diseases of South .... S.OO
Delafield. Practice of Medi-
cine 9.00

Dieffenbach. Hydrotherapy . 3.00
Dieulafoy. Practice  of  Medi-
cine 13.00

Dieudonne  and  Bolduan. Bac-
teria  Foot Poisoning ... 1.00
Dixey. Epidemic Influenza 1.90

Dock. Case  Taking 25

Dock and Bass. Hookworm

Disease  2.50

Dyer. Art  of  Medicine .... 1.00
Edwards. Practice of Medi-
cine 6.00

Eggleston. Prescription .  .

Writing 1.00

Ehrlich. Specific  Therapy .. 1.00

Emerson. Medicine 2.50

Emery.  Immunity  and  Spe-
cific Therapy 3.50

Falta. Ductless Glandular

Diseases 7.00

Fantus. Candy Medication . 1.00
Fantua and Evans. Year-

Book 1.50


Fischer. Oedema and Ne-
phritis

Forchheimer. Internal Dis-
ease Therapeutics.  5  vols.

and Index

Prophylaxis  and  Treatment
Foster. Diabetes  Mellitus .  .

Fox. Hydrology

Frazier-Peake. Spleen and

Anemia

French.  Active-principle

Therapeutics

French  and  Williamson. Prac-
tice of Medicine

Frothergills. Therapeutics .  .
Gee. Medical Lectures and

Clinical Aphorisms

Gibbon. Medical  Benefit  ....
Giovanni. Commentaries  ....
Goepp. State Board Ques-
tions and  Answers

Gordon. Climatology

Gould and Pyle. Cyclopedia
of  Medicine  and  Surgery

2  vols 12.00 @

Pocket  Cyclopedia

Gray.  Positive  Medication  .  .
Gregory. Rational  Therapy. .

Giiffith. Clinical  Charts

Haig. Causation of Disease

by  Uric  Acid

Epitome  of  Uric  Acid ....
Hall. Borderline Distribu-
tion.  2  vols

Hall  and  Buck.  Work  Cure  .
Hall-Edwards. Carbon Di-

oxid Snow

Hare. Modern  Treatment. 2

vols

Practice  of  Medicine

Therapeutics

Harvey. Lecture Series.

Each,

Hawes. Observation  of  Symp-
toms

Hewlett. Serum  and  Vaccine

Therapy

Hill and Eckman. Allen

Treatment  of  Diabetes  .  .

Hinsdale. Hydrotherapy .  .  .

Horwitz. Dis.  of  Foot

Howard. Therapeutic Value

of  Potato

Hoxie. Symptomatic and

Regional  Therap

Hoyt. Therapeutics

Hudson.  Aids  to  Medicine  .
Hughes.  Practice  of  Medicine
Hurry.  Vicious  Circles  ....
Hurst.  Diseases  of  War  ....
Hutchinson.  Common  Dis.  .  .
Hutchinson and Sherren

Treatment

Jackson. Tropical  Medicine  .

Tames. Rheumatism

Jefferys  and  Maxwell. Disease

of  China

Jenkins. Clinical  Record .  .  .

Jennings. Plague

Johnson. Muskets  and  Med-
icine

Jones. Arthritis  Deformans  .

Ionic  Medication

Jores. Commoner  Diseases  .  .
Joslin. Treatment of Dia-
betes

Jowett.  Blood-serum  Therap.
Juettner. Physical  Therap.  .  .

Keen. Clinical  Charts

Kellogg. Diabetes

Hydrotherapy

Light  Therap

Sinusoidal Current

Kelly. Practice

Kiepe. Materia Medica and

Therapeutics

Kober and Hansen. Voca-
tional  Therapy

Koch. Cholera

Kohkerger. Medicine


5.00  I


33.50

5.50

3.00
2.00

5.00

.50

5.50
.50

2.00
2.00
4.50

4.25
1.50


14.00

1.50

1.00

5.50

.50

4.00
1.00

13.00
1.50

1.40

12.00
6.00
4.75

2.50

1.00

3.00

1.25
3.50
2.50

.50

4.50
5.00
1.25
3.00
3.00
1.75
1.50

7.00

4.00

.50

3.00
1.75
2.00  j

1.50
4.00  I
1.50
4.50

4.50
1.75
5.00

.25
2.50
6.00
2.00

.7S
4.75

1.00

8.00
1.50

1.00


.50
.70


Krause,  Heyman,  and  Ehren-
fried.  Surgical  Opera-
tions 7.00

Kuepper. Natural  Cure .... 2.00
Krumbhaar-Peake.  Spleen

and Anemia S.OO

Latham.  Dictionary  of  Treat-
ment 2.00

Laumonier. New  Treatment. 2.50
Laveran  and  Mesnil. Trypan-
osomiasis 7 .

I.eftwich. Treatment 1

Lengmann. Emergencies in

Practice 6.00

Leonard. Dose Book 75

Prescriptions 1 .  00

Lewis. Medical  Vade  Mecum 5.00

Lindsay. Gout 1.50

Lippincott. Diabetic  Chart  .. .50
Llewellyn-Jones. Fibrosites  . 7.50
Loomis  and Thompson. Sys-
tem of  Practice.  4  vols. . 5.00

Lucas. Prescriptions 3.75

Ludy.  Answers  to  Ques-
tions of  State  Boards .. 4.00

Luff. Gout 2.50

MacKenzie. Symptoms 3.00

MacLeod. Diabetes 3.00

Madden. Bilharziosis 1 .  75

Manquat. Therapeutics .... 3.00
Manson. Tropical  Diseases . 5.00

Marie. Pellagra 2 .  SO

Marsden.  Commoner  Infec-
tions 1.00

Mathews. Pharmacology  and

Therapeutics 1.00

McCurry. Practical  Points.  . 1.00
McKenzie. Exercise in  Edu-
'  cation  and  Medicine .... 4.00

i  McLaughlin. Abridgement  of

Medicine 2.00

Medical Clinics of North
J  America. Six  numbers  .  .

Miles.  Prevention  and  Cure.
Mitchell,  Mechano-therapy  .  .  .
Moon. Medicine  and  Philoso-

,, phy -.

Morris.  Clinical  Tempera-
ture Charts

Morris. Materia  Medica  and

Therapeutics 1 25

Morrow. Diag. and Therap.

Technic 5.50

Murphy. Practitioner's Cy-

clopedia  7.00

Musser and Kelly. Treat-

^ ment 6.00 @ 7.00

Nascher. Geriatrics 5.00

Naylor. Common Ailments .75

Niles. Pellagra 3.00

Nothnagel's  Practice  (each).  .' s!oO
Oliver. Disease  of  Occupation 3.50

Lead  Poisoning 2  00

O'Malley  and  Walsh.  Pastoral

Medicine 2.50

Oppenheimer.  Opsonic  Tem-
perature Chart SO

Ortner. Internal  Diseases ... 6.00
Orr. Materia Medica and

Therapeutics 1 .  00

Osborne,  Fishbein  and  Sal-
isbury. Therapy 1.50

Osier. Medicine 6.00

Treatment of Disease 40

Osier  and  McCrae. Medicine.

2  Vols. Each

Overall.  Evolutionary  Prac-
tice

I'eake.  Spleen  and  Anemia  .
Pick and Hecht. Clinical

Symptomatologry 6.50

Pope. Hydrotherapy 6.00

Potter. Therapeutics,  Materia

Medica, Pharmacy 6.00

Poyntou  and  Paine.  Rheu-
matism 5.00

Practical Medicine Series.

10 vols 10.00

Price. Philosophy  of  Therap. 1.00


14.00
1.50
3.00

1.50

.50


5.50


3.00
5.00


ITnlvcrsal  Nnturopntliio Directory  ami  Iliiyors'  Ciiiide


1277


Beste  Biid)er  tiber  llaturbeilkunde  und  naturleben


ALI.ISOIV, Dr. T. R. — Die I.un-

S'onschwindsueht $  .:J0

BARNBECK.  A. — Kochbiich.  275
vegetarisclie  Koch  -,

Brat- und Backrezepto.  . ,60

BAUERNFEIND,  E.  II. — Korner-
Ernahrung'.  Die  fleisch-,
eier-,  kase-  und  milch-
freie Ernahrung' 45

—  Nahrmittel-Tabellen. hlv-

nahrung'sarten  des  Men-
schen  und  Charakterbil-
dung- 80

—  Die polare Verteilung der

Asche  und  Minei-alstoff-
Ernahrung  der  Pflan-
zen,  Tiere  und  Men-
schen 50

—  Wirkung des Garung-sg-if-

tes  Oder  Alkohol  auf  den
menschlichen K8rper .  .  . .35

BII.Z, P. E. — Wie schafft man

bessere Zeiten? 25

fJILBERT,  Dr.  W.  H. — Trauben-
saft  bei  Neurosen  und
als Diat und Heilmittel .10

tiERLING,  R. — Wen  darf  ich  hei-

raten? 30

—  Sofortig-e Schmerzstillung

durch Handg-riffe 50

GRIEBEL,  Carl — Herzkrankheit  .50
GRIENFELD, Dr. — Der prak-

tische Krauterarzt 1.50

JUNGK,  W. — Der  Weg  zum  haus-

lichen Wohlstand 75

JUST, A. — Kehrt zur Natur zu-

ruck. 2ter  Band 1.00

—  Das  neue Paradies der  Ge-

sundheit 25

—  Kleidung- und Betten 35

JUETEIVBOCK, Dr. W. — Die

Zahnkrankheit 80

KISTENMACHER, H. — Die

Zuckerkrankheit 70

KNEIPP, Seb., Pfarrer — Oeffent-

liche Vortrage, 4 Bande,

per Band 1.10

KUBE, Mina — ,,Gesund" zu wer-

den und zu bleiben 1.00

—  Das nervose Jahrhundert .80

—  Rheumatismus, Gicht, In-

fluenza und  Erkaltungs-
krankheiten 50

—  Die Kunst einen gesunden

Mann  zu  bekonimen.
Hochstwichtig^es Buch .  . 1.00


KUBE, MIna — \V  e  n  i  g  e  r Men-

Kilien abei- glUcklichore  $  .80

MEYER,  E.  L.  M.  (Schweixer-
Moyer) — -V'om  Ma,dchen
zui- Fiau 1.25

PACZKOWSKI,  Dr.  med. — „Darm-
schwacine  und  Stuhlver-
stopfung-" 3(»

P  R  A  G  E  R, Dr. — MannersUnden

und Frauenleiden 40

PREISSLER,  A. —  Einfachstes
Koch-,  Brat-  und  Roh-
kostbiichlein 40

RECLAM,  Dr.  C. — Gesundheits-
schliissel  fur  H  a  u  s,
Schule  und  Arbeit 75

TRALL,, R. T.— Kehl- und Lun-

genleiden 40

SCHOENEIVBERGER,  Dr.  P. —
Was  j  u  n  g-  e  Eheleute
wissen miissten 1,25

—  Was unsere Tochter wis-

sen sollten 75

—  Aerztliche Winke fur

junge Eheleute 30

—  Kleidung-, Schonheit, Ge-

sundheit eo

—  Gesundheitliches  Schuhwerk .30
SCHI.ATHOEL,TER, L,. P. Rev.—

Hypnotismus erklart .  .  . .60
SELLIN, P. — M  e  n  s  0  h, Weltan-
schauung-, Kultur 60

—  Die g-etrocknete oder

Dauer-Banana 25

SPOHR, Dr. R. — Rheumatismus

und Gicht 30

ULSA>IER, J. A. — Hausapotheke.

Heilkrauter 75

VOGEL,, Dr. J. — Korpulenz. Ur-

sachen und Heilung- 60

\VAL,SER, Dr. — Die Blinddarm-

entziindung- 40

WINSCH,  Dr.  W. — Ueber  Warme-

kultur CO

— ■ Krankenheilung- ohne Arz-

nei  und  ohne  Operation  .50
ZSCHOMMLER, G. 31. — Die Kin-

dererziehung- im Hause .40

—  Gesundheitspflegrejdes  Kin-

des wahrend der Schul-

zeit 50

ZIEGELROTH, Dr. — Heilung der

Gesichlechtskrankheiten  . 1.00

—  Ursachen und Behandlung-

der Malaria 50

—  Das Luft- und Sonnenbad .50


DIE  TABAKVERGIFTUNG. Von  Dr.  med,  et  phil.  G.  von

fiiinat> ^" diesem Werkchen zeichnet sich der Author durch reiches Er-

MJUngc  fahrungsmaterial,  das  hier  skizzenweise  niedergelegt  ist,  aus. Die

Frage  der  Nikotinvergiftung,  deren  Folgen,  die  sichtlichen,  sowohl  wie  die  hau-
fig  erst  in  der  nachsten  Generation  hervortretenden,  sind  vom  arztlichen,  mora-
lischen  und  asthetischen  Gesichtspunkt  behandelt.  Preis  15  Cts.;  portofrei  18  Cts.


EINE  FRAGE  PERSONLICHER  FREIHEIT,  Kurierfrei-

hctif \/r\n A A FfT  Unerschiitterlich, von heiliger  Ueberzeugungs-

ffccc. V  Uil  ^\. /^,  Z-iTi  treue geleitet, bricht der bekannte naturo-

pathische  Schriftsteller  eine  Lanze  fiir  die  Kurierfreiheit  und  geisselnd  -w'eist  er
auf  die  Misstande  hin,  die  in  einem  freien  Amerika  es  der  iTiedizinischen  Klasse
gestattet,  dem  freien  Burger  vorzuschreiben,  wie  und  von  wem  er  sich  in  Krank-
heitsf alien  behandeln zu  lassen  hat. Preis 15  Cents;  portofrei  IS  Cents.


Zu  beziehen  durch:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1278


(ieiienil  List  of  Medical  Works


Progressive  Medicine 6.00

Reilly. Building Practice ..  3.00
Ricketts. Infection Immun-
ity, and  Serum  Therapy.  2.00

Roberts. Pellagra 2 .  SO

Rogers. Cholera 4.00

Rose. Carbonic Acid in

Medicine 1 .00

Sainsbury. Therapeutics ....  2.50
Sajous. Analytic Cyclopedia  S6 . 00
Principles of Medicine ... 12.00
Sargent and Russell. Kmer-

fencies  in  Practice 5.50
ge. Unclassified Dis-
eases 1 .  50

Schleif.  Materia  Mcdica,
Therapeutics,  Prescrip-
tion writing 2.50

Schorer. \"accine  and  Scrum

Therapy  3.00

Schorder.  Insurance  Medi-
cine 2.00

Scott. Modern  Medicine ...  1.50

Secor. Hydrotherapy 1.50

Seufert and Stuart. Vade

Mecum  of  Treatment  ...  2.50
.'^hattuck. Medical Treat-.  .

ment !  .  50

Shoemaker. Materia Medica

and Therapeutics 1 .75

Short. Inde.x  of  Prognosis..  7.00

Sims. Chronic  Diseases ....  3.50
Skinner. Therapy of Hot

Air 2. SO

Smith. Practice 1.25

Squire. Medicine Hints ....  1.00
Stedman. Reference Hand-
book of  Medical  Science.

8  vols 56.00

Stephenson.  Hormone  Ther-
apy 1.00

Stern. Antitoxin Cases ....  1.00

Fasting  in  Diabetes 2.00

Stevens. Materia  Medica  and

Therapeutics 3  .  So

Practice of Medicine ....  3.50
Stewart. Pocket  Therapeutics

and Dose-book 1. 00

Stewart. Practice  of  Medicine  2.00

Stitt. Tropical Diseases ...  2.00

Straub. Symptom  Register .  .50

Strauss. Gout 1 .  00

Strumpell.  Practice  of  Medi-
cine. 2  vols 13.00

Sutton. Tumors 5.00

Symes. Rheumatic  Diseases  .  1.75

Taylor. Cancer 2.50

Clinical History Blanks ..  1.00
Thompson. Occupational  Dis-
eases 6.50

Practical Medicine 5.00

Thompson.  Clinical  Medi-
cine 5.00

Thornton. Dose-book 2.00

Tracy. Rake  Knitting 25

Tyson and Fussell. Practice

of  Medicine 5.50

A'edder. Reriberi 4.00

Vincent.  Visiting  List,  Medi-
cine  Record 1.25

Von Noordeni. Diabetes ....  1.50

New  Aspects  of  Diabetes  .  .  1.50

Obesity SO

Reduction  Cures  and  Gout  .  1.50

Saline Therapy 75

Waller. Thyroid Therapv ..  2.00
WaUh. Physician's 'Call

Book 1.50

Walsh and O'Malley. ,Pa.s-

toral Medicine 2.50

Waugh. Treatment  by  Active

Principles 3 .  00

Waugh and Abbot. Positive

Therapeutics 3.00

Wheeler  and  Jack. Medicine  2.75
White and Wilcox. Materia

Medica  and  Therapeutics 3.00
Whitla. Dictionary of Treat-
ment 5.00

Wilcox. Treatment 6.00


Williams. Minor  Maladies  ..  2.50

Wilson. Clinical  Charts 50

Clinical  Diagrams SO

Wood. Pellagra 4.50

Pharmacy  and  Therapeutics  4.50
Woodruff. Effects  of  Tropical

Light 3.50

Woodwark. Medicine 3.75

Wright. Drugs  and  X'acciiies  2.00

Wynter. Minor Medicine .  .  2.00

Yeo. Treatment 6.00

Mineral .Springs and Cli-
mate 3 .  50

Zinsser. Laboratory  Guide  in

•Serum  Therapy 1 .25


RECTUM AND ANUS

Albright. Rectal Diseases,

Ambulant Treatment .  .  $4.00
.\ndrews. Rectal and Anal

Surgery 1 .50

Ball. Rectum 5.00

Bodkin. Rectum  and  Colon.  3.50
Brinkerhoff. Rectum  and  In-
testines 4.00

Cooke. Rectum  and  Anus.  ..  5.50

Cripps. Cancer  of Rectum..  2.00

Rectum and Anus 3.25

Earle.  Anus,  Rectum

Sigmoid 5.50

Gant.  Rectum  and  Anus ....  6.00
Goodsall and Miles. Rectum

2  vols 2.00  @  2.50

Hirschman. Rectal Diseases  4.00

Lynch.  Rectum 5 .  00

Mason.  Office  Treatment  ....  2.50

Mummery. Rectum  and  -Anus  3.00

Wallis. Surgery  of  Rectum.  .  2.00


SKIN AND ITS APPEN-
DAGES

Belot. Kadiotlierapy  for  Skin  $2.00

Brown. Eczema 1 .00

Bulkley. Diet  and  Hygiene .  2.00

Eczema 1.25

Local  Treatment 1 .50

Menstruation  and  Skin ...  1.50

Skin  and  Internal  Diseases  l.SO

Skin Diseases 1.25

Cornet. Scrofulosis 5.00

Crawford. King's  Evil 2.90

Crocker. Diseases  of  Skin ..  5.00

Davis. Skin 3.75

Dearborn. Skin  Diseases  ...  6.00

Evans. Skin 3.00

Freeland. Corns  and  Bunions  .75
Gardner-Zinsser. Applied

Dermochromes 21  .  00

Gaucher. Skin 5 .  SO

Gottheil. Illustrated Skin

Disease 17.00

Skin  Cancers 1.00

Stereoscopic Studies of

Skin Diseases 35.00

Grindon. Skin 2.00

Hardway  and  Grindon.  Cuta-
neous Therapeutics  2.75

Hartzell. Diseases  of Skin..  7.00

Hazen. Skin 4.00

Skin  Cancer 4.00

Hughes. Chiropody SO-

Jackson. .Skin Direqse'; ....  3.00
Jackson and McMurtry.

Hair 3.75

Joseph. Cosmetics 1 .  00

Joseph  and  Vanderventer. At-
las Cutaneous Morbid

Histology 5.00

Kingsbury. Dermochromes.

3 vols 27.00

Kippax. Skin  Diseases 1 .  75

Knowles. Skin 4.00

Lloyd. Skin 2.00

Low. Carbonic  Acid  Snow..  1.50
MacLeod. Pathology of

Skin 6.00


Morris. Ringworm 2.00

Morris  and  Dore. Light  and

X-Ray  Treatment l.SO

Mracek  and  Stelwagon,  Atlas

of Skin Diseases 4.00

Muller. Baldness 1.50

Hair  1.50

Neisser and Jacobi. Tkono-
graphia Dermatologica.

7 parts; each 3.00

Ohmann-Dumesnil. Skin  Dis-
ease 4.00

Ormsby. Skin 6.00

Yearbook of Skin and \'c-

nereal Diseases 1.35

Pringle.  Atlas  of  Skin  Disease  S.OO

Pusey. Dermatology 7.00

Skin  and  Hair 1.00

Rainforth. Stereosopic .Skin

Clinic 24.00

Robinson. Baldness  and  Gray-

ness 1 .00

Dermatology 1 .00

Saalfeld. Cosmetic Treat-
ment 1 .75

Sabourand. Regional  Derma-
tology 3.50

Schalek. Skin  Diseases ....  1.00
Schamberg. Skin and Erup-
tive Fevers  3 .  25

Skin  Diseases 1 .  25

Schultze. X-Rays 4.00

Sequeira. Skin Diseases ....  9.00

Shoemaker. Diseases  of  Skin  6.00

Sibley. Skin 1.40

Stelwagon. Diseases  of Skin  1.25

Sutton. Diseases  of  Skin ...  6.50

Van  Harlingen.  Skin  Diseases  3.00

Wagner. Chiropody 2.00

Walker. Dermatology 4.50

Walsh. Excretory Irritation  .75

Golden  Rules 50

Hair and Diseases 1.00

Skin Diseases 2.50

White. Occupational Affec-
tions 2.00

Winterburn. Purpura 1.50

Wolff. Dermatology 2.50

SURGERY AND ANESTHE-
SIA

Abrams. Transactions  of  .An-
tiseptic Club $1.00

Adams and Cassidy. Acute

Abdominal Diseases ....  4.50
Albee. Bone-graft  Surgery..  6.50
Allbutt. Surgical and Medi-
cal 1.00

Allen. Local  Anesthesia ...  6.00
American Practice of Surg-
ery 56.00

Ashhurst Surgery 6.00

Bainbridge.  Cancer 5.00

Barber.  Nitrous  Oxide S.OO

Barnard. Abdominal Surgery  4.20
Barton. Administration of

Ethyl-chlorid 75

Battle. Acute Abdomen ....  1.50
Battle and Cornex. .\|)pen-

dicitis 3.00

Beck. Bismuth  Paste  in Sup-
puration 2.50

Surgical  Pathology 1.00

Bell.  Cancer  2.00

Bennett. Abdominal Ih-rnia  2.50

Fractures  of  the  Limbs ...  .80

Knee  Joint 2.00

Bennie. Hip Diseases 2.00

Bernays  and  Coughlin.  Golden

Rules 2.25

Berry. Hare  Lip 4.00

Bidwell. Minor  Surgery  ....  3.00
Bier  Hyperemia. (See  under

Meyer  and  Schmieden.) .  4.00
Binnie. Operative  Surgery  ..  7.50
Bland-Sutton. Pelvic  and  Ab-
dominal Surgery 2.50

Bimbaum. Malformations . . S.OO

Tumors 6.00


irniverNiil XiitnroitiiUiic Dirot-tory hikI Iliiy4'i-.s* (■iii<lo  1270


I  Systetnatiscbe  Krankbeftsbebandlund


DIE NATURHEILKUNDE BEI TIERKRANKHEITEN.

1/a** a/ F t  j^Urt M n I" Erweiterung- der Sclirift ,,Maul- unci

Y  on  n,  ML.  l^ann,  lfl»  U,  Klauenseuche unci die Naturheilkunde".

schuf  Lalin  das  neue  BUchlein  ,, Naturheilkunde  bei  Tierkrankheiton",  das  sioh
an  die  Landwiite  wendet  mit  Fingrerzeigren,  wie  sie  den  von  ihnen  gepflegten
Tieren  das  Hochstmass  von  Wohlsein  ang-edeihen  lassen  konnen.  Und  in  der
Tat  ftillt  diese  Schrift  ang-esichts  der  vielerorts  als  unfehlbar  angenommenen
Behandlung-sweise  der  Zunftmedizin  eine  recht  fuhlbar  gewordene  Llicke  aus.
Dieses  BUchlein  beweisst,  wie  nahe  das  Tier  der  Natur  steht  und  wie  in  Krank-
heitsfallen  dem  Tiere  nur  durch  natUrliche  Hilfsmittel  in  kurzer  Zeit  voile  Ge-
sundheit  wiedergegeben  werden  kann.  Kein  Landwirt  sollte  dieses  BUchlein
missen. Prels  25  Cents;  portofrei  28  Cents.


DIE  POCKEN. Von  Oherst  a.  D.  Spohr  —  i^l^?jfn"in?iu^  ilc"h

auf  Untersuchungen  der  Pockengeschichte  bis  ins  17.  Jahrhundert  stUtzt,  bringt
der  Author  gegen  das  noch  heute  geUbte  Impfsystem  ein  erdrUckendes  Beweis-
material,  das  in  seiner  luckenlosen  Geschlossenheit  nicht  mehr  und  nicht  weni-
ger  als  ein  Todesurteil  dieses  nur  Unheil  stiftenden  Aberglaubens  darstellt,  dem
die  Mediziner  in  unverstandlicher  Weise  noch  huldigen.  Auf  Grund  zahlreicher
Erfahrungen,  die  Spohr  wahrend  des  Krieges  1870 — 71  an  seinen  eigenen,  an  der
Front  stehenden  Leuten  gemacht,  tritt  er  den  Beweis  an,  dass  die  gegen  Pocken
gebrauchte,  kunstlich  hergestellte  Lymphe  alles  andere,  denn  ein  hinlangliches
Schutzmittel  ist,  vielmehr  den  Grund  zu  einer  Reihe  anderer  Krankheiten  wie
Skrophulose,  Tuberkulose,  etc.,  legt.  Die  fUr  die  verschiedenen  Pockenfalle  und
deren  Begleiterschelnungen  gegebenen  Verhaltungsmassregeln  werden  von  jedem
Pockenkranken  mit  Erfolg  angewendet  werden,  und  ohne  Zuflucht  zu  dem  den
Organismus  im  ubrigen  noch  mehr  gefahrdenden  Impfen  zu  nehmen,  Heilung'  fin-
den. Preis  15  Cents;  portofrei  18  Cents.


DER  LEHM  ALS  HEILMITTEL. Von  Fritz  Anliker  —

Der  Erde  Energien  und  Krafteausstrahlungen  sind  in  der  intensivsten  Form  im
Lehm  konzentrieit,  ein  Faktum,  das  der  Menschheit  schon  lange  bekannt  und
de.ssen  sie  sich  bei  Krankheiten  der  Tiere  schon  seit  langem  bedient.  Der
Schluss,  dass  die  Eigenschaften  des  Lehms  auch  gegen  menschliche  Krankhei-
ten von  heilbringender  \\'irkung  sein  mUsste,  liegt  deshalb  nahe,  und  doch  ist
seine  Anwendung  in  diesem  speziellen  Sinne  verhaltnismassig  neueren  Datums.
In  dem  vorliegenden  BUchlein  hat  Fritz  Anliker  die  Applikation  von  Lehmum-
schlagen  auf  Grund  seiner  reichen  Erfahrungen  fur  die  verschiedensten  Krank-
heitsfalle,  systematisch  ausgearbeitet.  In  alien  seinen  Vorschriften  legt  der
Author absolute Prinzipientreue und bedingungslose Gefolgschaft der Natur-

heilmethode  an  den  Tag,  indem  er  an  einer  Stelle  sagt:  Mit  dem  I^ehm  mus-

sen  aber  auch  die  anderen  natUrlichen  Hellfaktoren,  wie  Wasser,  I.,uft,  Sonnen-
und  Dampfbader,  Massage,  Pflanzen-  und  Fruchtkost  und  Enthaltsamkeit  des
Alkohols  mitwirken.  .  .  ."  Die  zitierten,  zahlreichen  Behandlungsfalle  illustrie-
ren  die  Wirkung  der  Lehmanwendung  auf  das  Eindringlichste.  Preis  50  Cents;
portofrei  52  Cent.s.


PHILOSOPHIE  DER  MENTALEN  POTENTIALITAT
IM  MENSCHEN.  Von  Johannes  Heininger,  D.  D.,  Ph.  D.  —

In  diesem  BUchlein '  spUrt  der  Verfasser  den  geheim.sten  Seeleniegungen  nach,
deren  Entstehen  und  Wirkungen  der  gottlichen  Macht  im  Menschen  zuschrei-
bend.  Fi'oinme  Denkungsweise  gepart  mit  scharfer  Logik  geleiten  Dr.  Heininger
hinab  in  die  tiefsten  Tiefen  des  mysteriosen  menschlichen  Herzens,  alles  Kan-
tige  und  Eckige  darin  glattend  Oder  aufdeckend.  Nach  einer  gesonderten  Defi-
nition der  Begriffe,  Subjektivitat  und  Objektivitat  des  ..Minds"  (oder  Lebens-
und  Seelengeistes),  gelangt  der  Verfasser  zur  Deduktion  des  AVillens,  der  auch
den  Gedanken  kontrolliert  mit  all  seinen  magnetischen  und  elektrischen  (Vibra-
tion, Radiation  und  Stromeentwickelung)  Eigenschaften,  die  Gedanken  in  sechs
Klassen  einteilt  iind  deren  Vollkommenheit.  schliesslich  das  Heiz  oder  die
Schatzkammer  der  Gedanken  darstellt,  Eine  Seelenstarkung  fUr  jeden  Leser  ist
die  Ueberleitung  des  Begriffes  von  I^eid  und  Schmerz,  in  den  Begriff  der  gottli-
chen Harmonie,  die  dem  Kranken  das  Leiden  ei'leichtert,  den  Sterbenden  mit  den
Worten  ,,Soli  Deo  Gloria"  Abschied  nehmen  lasst. Preis  25  Cts.;  portofrei  28  Cts.


\  Zu  beziehen  durch:  •

I THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J. \

•  •


1280


General  List  of  Medical  Works


.75
.25
.50


.40


Rlumfielci. Anesthetics 1.40

Bockenheimer and Frohse.

Typical Operations .... 16.00

Bolton. Notes  on  Surgery ..  2.00

Bowlby. Surgery  Pathology  .  3.50

Boyle. -Anesthetics 1 .  50

Bradford  and  Lovett. Ortho-
pedic Surgery 3

Braun.  Local  Anesthesia ....  4

Brewer. Surgery 5

Brickner. Surgical Assistant  2.00

Thousand Suggestions ....  1.00
Bristow. Joint and Muscle

Injuries 2.00

Broca. Amputations 3.00

Bryan. Surgery 4 .  00

Bryant. Operative  Surgery . 11.00

Bukley. Cancer 3 .  00

Burghard. Operative  Surgery  30.00

Buxton. Anesthetics 3.50

Caird and Cathcart. Surgi-
cal  Manual 3.00

Calot.  Orthopedics 5 .  00

Cantile. Anesthetics 3  .  00

Carrel  and  Dehelly. Infected

Wounds 2.50

Carson.  Asepsis 50

Cathcart. Tumors 4.00

Choyce  and  Beattie. Surgery  21.00
Clarke. Congenital Disloca-
tion of  Hip-joint 1 .  50

Compton. Surgery 1.00

Cotton. Dislocations 6.00

Cowling. Aphorisms in Frac-
tures

Crandon.  Surgical  After-treat-
ment 6.00

Crile. Hemorrhage and...

Transfusion 5.50

Surgical  Anemia 5.50

Crile and Lower Anoci-. .

Association 3 .  00

Crookshank. Flatulence and

Shock 1.00

Crutcher. Appendicitis 1.50

Cullen. Diseases  of  Umbilicus  7.50

Cunning. Aids  to  Surgery  .  .  1.25

Da  Costa. Surgery 6.00

Dannreuther. Minor and

Emergency Surgery ....  1.25

Davis. Bandaging 1 .  00

Davison and Smith. Auto-
plastic Bone Surgery

Dawbarn. Cancer

Deaver. Appendicitis 4.00

Deaver and Ashhurst. Sur-

_, gery 10.00

Deaver  and McFarland. Sur-
gery of  Breast 9.00

DeGarmo. Abdominal  Hernia  5.00

DeLorme. War Surgery ...  1.50

Dulles. Accidents 1 .  00

Button. Venesection 2.00

Dwight. Atlas of Variations
of Bones of Hands and

^ Feet 4.00

fcccles. Hernia 2.50

Edmunds. Glandular  Enlarge-
ments 2.00

Elder. Ship  Surgeon's  Hand-

„,. book 2.00

Eliason. Bandaging,  etc 1.50

First  Aid 1.50

Elsberg. Surgery of Spinal

Cord  5.00

Elsmile. Coxa Vera .'60

Ely. Bones  and Joints ....  2!oO
Esmarch  and Kowalzig. Sur-
gical Technique 3 .  SO

Fenger. Memorial Volumes  15.00
Fenwick. Surgical  Practice.  .  .40
Ferguson. Modern Opera-
tions for  Hernia 4.00

Fitzwilliams. Operative Sur-
gery 3.75

Flagg. Anesthesia 4.00

Fluhrer. Broken  Limbs ....  3.00

Foote. Minor  Surgery 5.50

Fowler. Appendicitis 3.00


3.50
.00


Fowler. Operating  Room  and

Patient

Freeman. Skin Grafting .  .  .

Gardner. Anesthesia

Gessner.  Operative  Sur-
gery

Gilchrist. Surgical  Pathology

(iiles. After Results

fiokltluvaite.  Painter,  anfi  Os-
good. Bones  and  Joints.  .
Goodwin.  Field  Service  .  .  .
Green.  Cancer  Problem  ...
Gregory. Spinal  Adjustment.

Groves. Fractures

Surgery

Grovis. Gunshot Injuries .  .

Gwathmey. Anesthesia

Ilarbaugh.  Adjuster's  Man-
ual for  Accident  Insur-
ance

Causes  of  Disability

Haubold. Preparation and

After  treatment

Ileineck. Anesthesia

Helferich and Bloodgood.

Atlas of Fractures ....

Herschell. Intragastic Tech-

nic

Hertzler. Operations with

Local  Anesthesia

Tumors

Hewitt. Anesthetics

Hirschel. Local  Anesthesia .

Hopkins. Fractures

The Roller Bandage

Horsley.  Bloodvessel  Sur-
gery

Horwitz. Surgery

Hosking. Bandaging

Surgical Dressings

Howard. House Surgeon's

Vade  Mecum

Practice of Surgery

Hubbard.  Practical  Surgery
Hull. Surgery in War ....

Jacobson. Operations

Johnson.  Operative  Therapeu-

sis. 5  vols

Jones.  Military  Orthopedics.
Kahler.  Surgical  Chiropody.
Kanaval. Infection of  Hand

Keen. Surgery

Kellogg. Cancer

Kelly. Appendicitis

Kelly  and  Hurdon.  Vermi-
form Appendix

Kelly  and  Noble.  Gynecology
and Abdominal Surgery.

2 vols. ; each

Kocher. Operative Surgery.
Kolle. Hydrocarbon. Pro-
theses

Plastic and Cosmetic Sur-
gery

I  r,agarde.  Gunshot  Injuries .  .

i  Lane. Fractures

I  Lawrence. Accidents

Leaf. Cancer  of  Breast ....

f-eonard. Bandaging

Levings. Everyday  Surgery  .

Tumors

Lexer  and  Bevan.  Surgery  .
Lockwood. Aseptic  Surgery.

Clinical Surgery

Lorenz and .Soxl. Orthope-
dics  in Medical Practice
Lovett. Lateral  Curvature  of

Spine

Lucas-Championniere.  Anti-
septic  Surgery

Luke. Guide  to  Anesthetics.
Mackenzie. Surgical Dress-
ings

Magee  and  .Johnson. Siirgerv
Makins. Surgical Experi-
ences  in South Africa .

Manley. Hernia

Marsh and Watson. Joints

and Spine

Massey. Ionic Surgery .  . .


3.50
1.50
2.25

3.00
2.50
5.00

6.00
1.25
2.00
6.00
2.75
3.25
1.25
6.25


2.50
6.00

6.50
1.00

3.00

2.00

3.00
7.00
5.00
2.75
4.00
1.50

4.00

1.25

.50

.50

2.10
6.00
6.00
4.00
13.00

37.50

1.50
2.00
4.00
7.00
1.00
7.00

10.00


8.00

8.00

2.50

5.50
4.00
4.00
.50
4.20
1.50
5.00
5.00
6.50
1.00
1.50

3.00

1.75

2.00
2'.  00

.50
1.00

3.75
2.00

3.00
3.00


3

25

10

00

4

20

1

00

4

00

6

00

Maylard. Abdominal Sur-
gery

Mayo.  Collected  I'apers  .  .  .
McCarrison.  Endemic  Goiter
.McCurdy. Arthrosteopedic.

Surgery

McDill. Surgery  of the Far

East

McGrath. Ojeration Surgery
McKendrick. Back Injuries 1.25
McMechan. Year Book of

Anethesia, etc 4.00

.Mennel. Fractures 4.00

-Meyer  and  Schmieden. Bier's

Hyperemic  Treatment .. 3.00
Milne. Instruments (Greek

and Roman) 4.75

Montgomery. Cure of Sur-
gical Patients 1.25

Moorhead. Traumatic Sur-
gery 6.50

Morison. Surgery 2 .  50

Morris. Dawn t'ourth Era

in Surgery 1 .  25

-Morse. Post  Operative  Treat-
ment 4 .  00

-Mortimer. Anesthesia and..

•Analgesia 2 .  00

-Moullin. Biology of Tumors .80
-Moynihan. -Abdominal Oper-
ations 11.00

Duodenal Ulcer S.OO

Retro-peritoneal  Hernia  ..  2.25
Muller.  Spinal  Curvature  .  1.00
-Mumford. End Results ... .25

Surgical Memoirs 2.50

Surgical Problems 3.00

-Mumford- Practice of Sur-
gery 7.00

Mummery. After-treatment . 1.75
Murphy. Practitioner's Cy-
clopedia 7 .  00

Murray. Hernia 1^75

Mynter. Surgical Treatment

of  Appendicitis 2.00

Neef. Surgical Practice ... 1.50

-Voble. Minor Surgery 2.50

-Vutt. Diseases of Foot ... 2.75

Ochsner. Appendicitis 1.50

Year-Book  of  General  Sur-
gery

Ochsner  &  Percy. Surgery..
Ochsner and Thompson.
Thyroids and Parathy-
roids 5 .

Owen. Appendicitis 1,

Palmer. Surgical  Asepsis .  . 1 ,

Park. Evil Eye 1 .

Modern Surgery 7.

Parkes. Abdominal and

Clinical Surgery 2.00

Paterson. Surgery of Stom-
ach 4.00

Patton. Anesthetics 2.50

Pearson. Surgical  Technic . 4.00
Pels-Leusden. Operations... 5.00
Penhallow. Military Sur-
gery 5.00

Pick. Surgery 6 .  00

Power. Intussusception 50

Wounds  in  War 1 .  00

Prendeville. Ethyl Chlorid. .40

Preston. Fractures 6.50

Pringle. Fractures 5.50

Prohyn-Williams. Anesthetics 1.60
Pye. Surgical Handicraft .. 4.50

Rankin. Bandaging 1.50

Rawling. Surgery  of  Head . 1.25

Surgery  of  Skull  and  Brain 6.00

Remondino. Circumcision .. 1.2S

Robb.  •  Aseptic  Technic 2.50

Roberts  and  Kelly. Fractures 7.00

Robinson. Peritoneum 4.00

Robson  and  Cammidge. Gall-
stones 1 .50

Rodman. Diseases  of  Breast

Especially  Cancer 4.00

Romer. Bonesetting 1.75


2.00

8.00


.00
.50
.25
.50
.00


TTiitvcrsiil  NnUiroi)!!!!!!*- Directory  iiiid  Iliiyors*  <>iii«io  lliSI


BesU  naturopatbiscbe  Zeitscbriften


DER NATUROPATH, Jahrgdnge 1902—1914 (ein-

I  |« t' h \ UnttM-  diesem  zusammenfassonden  Namen  gelang-te in  die-

SCn.ll6SSltCn.J sen Biinden cine nncrschopfliche Menge des Wissenswoi-

tcn  iind  dos  ITncntbehrlichen  zur  Veioffentlichung-.  AUes,  was  mit  der  Natuiheil-
ni.lhode  in  Bezit'hung-  stohl,  gelang-t  hier  zu  VVorte  und  gibt  diesen  Banden  sol-
cliiiait  di'n  Oharakter  eines  iiinfassenden  und  gediegencn  Lelirbuches,  desscn
keiner,  der  in  diesei-  Wissenscliaft  tiel'er  zu  forachen  bestrebt  ist,  entbehren
kann.  Theorie  und  Praxis  sind  darin  in  haimonischer  Weise  gepaart  und  eroff-
nen  besonders  dcm  Lei-nenden  grosse  Perspektiven.  Diese  Biicher  kcinnen  gar-
nicht  g-enug-  empfohlen  werden.  Broscliilrt  per  JalirKati}?  12  Nummern  $::.00;
Kehundoii  $3.00  portofrei.  Eiiizelheft  25  Cents;  3  Hefte  ziisanimeii  50  Cents;  10
Hefte  ziisainmen semiseht,  je«le Nnmnier versehiedcn, $1.25  portolrei.


AMERIKANISCHE  KNEIPPBLATTER,  Jahrgdnge  1896

lam /'^'».«^l.l<A<.ol<^A ^ Diese Biicher stellen ein geradezu voll-

——lifUI {  einSCniieSSllCn.J  liommenes Kompendium der speziellen

Kneippsachen  dar,  die  in  zahlreichen  Abhandlungen  von  den  verschiedensten
Standpunkten  aus  beleuchtet  sind.  Eine  Unsumme  von  Forsehungen  und  prak-
tisclien  Erfahrungen  auf  diesem  Gebiete  sind  darin  niedergelegt,  denen  der  Ver-
lauf  der  Jahre  seit  ihrer  ersten  Veroffentlichung  nichts  an  Frische  nehmen
konnte-  deren  Lekture  vielmehr  in  uns  das  JGefiihl  erwecken,  als  waren  diese
Aufsatze  erst  gestern  in  Druck  gegangen.  Broschllrt  kostet  jeder  Jahrgang
von  12  Heften  $2.00;  ^el>unde«i  $.3.00.  Probeheft  25  Cents.  10  Hefte  alle  ver-
sohieden,  iinserer  eisenen  Auswahl  $1.00 portofrei


r^CD U  A I  TQr^OVXOR Wenn die Naturheilmethode in den Ver-

LfiltSx n/VUOL'VylV  1  WIx  einigten Staaten zu einem Ansehen gelang,

so  ist  das  in  erster  Linie  ein  Verdionst  des  ..Hausdoktors".  Unablassig,  mit
zilhem  Eifer,  geboren  aus  der  Methode  innewohnenden  Ueberzeugungskraft,
focht  und  kampfte  er  seit  dem  Jahre  1889  und  noch  heute  steht  er  als  riesiger
Knappe  in  glanzender  Rijstung  auf  dem  Schlachtfelde,  das  er  nach  so  manch
hartem  Strauss  gegen  Intrigue  und  offene  boswillige  Anfeindungen  siegreich
behauptet.  , „  ,  .  ...,,.,,,

Die  im  Laufe  der  Jahre  im  „Hausdoktor  erschienenen  Artikel  smd  durch-
wegs  von  einem  bleibenden  Wert  und  der  Verlag  hat  deshalb  die  Einrichtung  ge-
troffen,  jeden  Jahrgang  zusammengeheftet  Interessenten  zu  liefern.  Es  bilden
dieselben  eine  Fundgrube  von  Ratschltigen  und  Anregungen  f ur  den  Laien,  sowohl
wie  fiir  den  Studierenden  und  ausiibenden  Heilpraktilver.  Die  Hefte  dlirften  in
keiner  Hausbibliothek  fehlen.  Preis  per  Jnlir};an»;,  12  Hefte,  brosohflirt  $1.00;
portofrei  $1.25. Laufendes  Abonnement  .$1.00. Probenuninier  25  Cents.


GESUNDHEITSKALENDER  fiir  Freunde  der  Kneipp-Kur
und  Anhdnger  der  Naturheilmethode. Von  Dr,  B.  Lust  —

Von  diesem  praktischen  Ratgeber  sind  nur  die  Jahrgange  1899,  1900  und  1901
erhaltlich,  die  keiner,  der  mit  der  Naturheilkunde  in  irgendwelcher  ^Veise  in  Be-
ziehung  steht,  sicli  entgehen  lassen  sollte.  Das  Lektiirenmaterial  in  diesen
Banden  ist  von  auserlesener  Gediegenheit  und  von  eminent  praktischem  Werte.
Preis  per  .TahrsaniK,  broschilrt  50  Cents  portofrei;  die  3  Jalirsanse  znsammen
$1.10  portofrei;  sebnnden,  per  Jahrgang  $1.00;  die  3  JahrsanRe  zusammen,  gre-
bunden, $2.75 portofrei.


UBER ZWECK UND WESEN DER NATURHEIL-

t^I  TMT^ir \/^»^ A ITUli^  Eine im aufklarenden Sinne herausgege-

iVUl^L'J-i. von  /±. L/nilg  bene  AVerbeschrift, die  sich  an  das  grosse

Publikum  v/endet.  Bescheiden  und  anspruchslos  fiir  sich  selbst,  versucht  diese
Schrift,  den  Leser  in  das  AVesen  der  Naturheilkunde  einzufiihren  und  bringt  zu
diesem  Zwecke  eine  gedrangte  geschichtliche  Uebersicht  dieser  heute  zu  einer
maclitigen  Organisation  geieiften  Bewegung,  die  viele  Hunderttausende  von  Men-
schen  zu  einer  Gemeinde  zusanwiengefiigt  hat  und  wachsend stets  neue  Anhan-


ger  findet. Preis  5  Cents.


Zu  beziehen  durch:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1282


General  List  of  Medical  \Vorks


Rose and Carless. Surgery  6.50

Ross. Cancer 2.00

Induced  Cells  and  Cancer.  4.. SO
Roth. Lateral Curvature ...  3.50
Rovsing.  Abdominal  Surgery.  5.50
Rumpet. Cystoscopy in Sur-
gery 6.00

Russell. Causation of  Cancer  1.25
Saleeby. Surgery and So-
ciety 2.50

Sargent. Surgical Emer-
gencies 1 .50

.Saviuge. Cancer 1.50

Schlesinger. Indications for

Operations 3  .  00

Local  Anesthesia 1.50

Schmidt. Diagnosis of Ab-
dominal  Tumors 4  .  00

Schmieden. Operative Sur-
gery 4.00

Scudder. Kractures 6.00

Tumors  of  Jaws 6.50

Senn. Experimental Surgery  2.50

Intestinal  Surgery 1.25

Medico-surgical Aspects of

Spanish-American War..  1.50

Principles  of Surgery ....  2.50

Sexton. Chiropody SO

Sheldon. Indications for

Operative Treatment ..  4.00

Shenton. Disease  in  Bone  ..  1.50

Silk. Anesthetics 1 .00

Sluss. Emergency Surgery.  4.00

Smith. Suture  of  Arteries .  .  .90

Speed. Fractures 6.00

Spencer. Gunshot Wounds.  1.50

Spencer  and  Cask. Surgery.  5.50

Stern. Bloodletting 3.50

Stevenson. Wounds in War  4.50

Stewart. Surgery 4.00

Visceral Surgery 1 .  00

Stimson. Fractures  and  Dis-
locations 6 .  00

Straub.  Med.  Service  in  War  1.50
Sultan and Coley. Atlas of

Abdominal Hernias ....  3.00

Surgical  Clinics  of  Chicago..  14.00

Taylor. Orthopedic Surgery  5.00

Thomson  and  Miles. Surgery  10.00
Thorndike. Orthopedic Sur-

lilmanns. Surgery 5.00

Todd. Surgical  Treatment  .  .  1.25

Treves. Operative Surgery.  13.00

Surgical Operations 2.50

Tubby. Appendicitis 1.00

Deformities 13.00

Turnbull. Anesthesia .....'  2.50
Turner and Carling. Treat-
ment after  Operation ...  3.25
Van Hoosen. Scopolamin-

Morphin  Anesthesia ....  1.50
Van  Schaick. Regional  Minor

Surgery i.so

V'on Esmarch and Kowalzig

Surgical Technique ....  2.50
Wacherhagen. After-treat-
ment of  Operations  ....  1 00
Walker. Renal Function in

Urinary Surgery 3.00

Waring. Surgery 3.75

Warren. Surgery 7.  so

Watson. Wounds so

Wharton. Minor  and 0))era-

tive Surgery 3.00

Wharton and Curtis. Sur-
gery 6.50

White. Tumors 3.50

Whitelocke. Sprains 3.00

Whiting. Bandaging 1.25

Whitman. Orthopedic Sur-
gery 5.50

Wiles. Treat, after Opera-
tions 50

Williams. Anesthesia SO

Natural Historv of Cancer  S.OO

Wright. Wound Infections  1.00

Wyeth. Surgery 6.00

Young. Atlas of Orthopedic

Surgery 10.00


Zuckerkandl  and  DaCosta
Atlas  of  Operative  Sur-
gery


3.50


TUBEUCULOSIS

Bandelicr and l\iie|ikc. Tu-
berculosis $6.00

Bandelicr, Rocpke, and Mur-

land. Tubeiculiii 4.50

Bardswell. Advice to Con-
sumptives 75

Exjiectation  of Life 1.50

Treatment with Tuberculin  2.40
Bardswell and Chapman.

Diets in Tuberculosis ....  2.50

Bennett. Tuberculin 1 .00

Blake. Tuberculosis 1.50

Bonney.  Pulmonary Tubercu-
losis 7.00

Brown. Tuberculosis 1.25

Burton and Fanning. Con-
sumption 1 .50

Cheyne. Tuberculosis  Joints  S.SO
Clark. Dispensary Tubercu-
losis '. 6.00

Cobbett. Causes 6.50

,  Cooke. X-rays in Tubercu-

I losis 1 .50

,  Cornet. Miliary Tuberculo-
sis 1.50

1  Crofton. Pul.  Tuberculosis.  .  1.50

I  Davis. Consumption 1.00

Daw. Care of Consump.

i  fives 50

I  Ely. Joint  Tuberculosis ....  2.50

Fanning. Open-air  Treat. ..  l.SO
\  Fearis. Tuberculosis and L

' K.  Therapy 2.40

;  Fishberg. Pul. Tuberculosis.  5.00

,  Flick. Consumption 1 .00

j  Eraser. Tuber, of Bones in

Children 4.50

Ghon.  Tuberculosis  in

Children 3.75

Gordon. Winds  and Phthisis  3.00
Hamman and Wolman.

Tuberculin 3.50

[Harris. Pul. Phthisis 1.00

Hawes. Early  Pul.  Tuber. ..  l.SO
I  Hillier. Prevention of Con-
sumption 1.50

Hort. Immunization  in  Treat-

.,r ,  '"e"' 1.50

Iluber. Consumption 3.00

Hutchinson. Con<iuest of

Consumption 1 .  00

Klebs. Tuberculosis 6.50

,  Knopf. Tuberculosis 2.25

j  Koch. Tuberculosis 1 .00

Laird. Tuberculosis 1.00

Lee. Pulmonary  Tuber 2!  00

Lockard.  Tuberculosis of

Nose  and  Throat 5 00

Maylard. Abdominal Tuber.  4.00
Mays. Consumption, Pneu-
monia 3 QO

Minchin. Treat.  Tuberculosis  2^00

Moore. Bovine Tuberculosis  2.00

Mortfimer. Consumption ..  1.00
Newsholme. Cause and Pre-

vention of  Tuberculosis..  3  00

Nothnagel. Tuberculosis .  .  S 00

Otis. Pul. Tuberculosis 175

Paterson. Autoinoculation.  .  8.00

lotlenger. Clinical Tuber..  12.00

Tuberculin 2 SO

Riviere. Early Diagnosis !  !  2 00
Riviere and Morland. Tu-
berculin Treatment ....  2.00

Robin. Treatment 5.25

Sahli. Tuberculin Treat. ..  3^00

Southerland. Tuberculosis .  6.00

Sprawson. Tuberculin 2.25

Sylvan. Consumption 1 .  25

Thomson. Consumption ....  4.50

Pulmonary Phthisis 2.00

Von Behring and Bolduan.

Suppression  of  Tuber. ..  1.00


Walsham.  Channels  of  In-
fection  in  Tuberculosis..  3.00

Walters. Open-air Treat 2.25

Wolf-Eisner. Diagnosis ....  2.75

URINE, KinXEY, OENITO-

IRIXARY, VEXEREAI.,  ETC.

American  Medical  Associa-
tion. Boys' Venereal

Peril $0.05

.•\iucill. Clinical Diagnosis

and Urinalysis 1.00

Asch. Gonorrhea 1.50

liallenger. Genito-urinary ..  5.00

Bayly. Path, of  Syphilis ...  2.25

Beddoes. Syphilis 2.00

Berjeau. .Syphilis 1.50

Blodgett. Urinary Diseases.  1.00

Blum. Renal  Diagnosis ....  2.00

Brasch. Pyelography 5.00

Bulkley. Syphilis  .  .' 1 .  00

Cabot.  Disorders  of  Bladder  2.00
Cammidge.  Glyco.suria  ....  4.50
Carpenter.  Syphilis  of  Child  1.2S
Casper.  Genito-urinary  Dis.  5.00
Casper  and  Richter.  Func-
tional Diagnosis 1 .  SO

Chetwood. Urology 5.50

Ciechanowski.  Prostate  Hy-
pertrophy 2 .  00

Clark. Genito-urinary 1 .25

Clarke. Urine Analysis ...  1.00
Cooper. Sexual Disability

in Man 2.25

Corbet-Smith. Problem of

Nations 1 .00

Cordiero. Gonorrhea .: 25

Corner. Male Dis. in tjen-

eral Practice 6 .  00

Male Genitalia 1.50

Croftan. Clinical LTrinoIogy.  -'.SO
Dalton. Venereal  and  General  1.75
Davis. Impotency, Sterility,
and Artificial Impregna-
tion 1  .00

IJ)eaver. Enlargment of

Prostate 7.00

Disque  and Holliday. Gen-
ito-urinary and Venereal  1.00
Elirlich and McDonagh.

"606." 3.00

Ehrlich-Hata. Experimental

Chemotherapy 4.00

Fenwick. Resecting Bladder

Walls 1.40

Findley.  (Jonorrhea  in  Wo-
men 2 .  00

Fischer.  Oedema  ami  Ne-
phritis S.OO

Flint. Urine Sil

Fournier. Syphilis 4.00

Fracostor. Syphilis 2.0(i

Garceau.  Renal,  Ureteral,
Perineal,  .'Xdrenal  Tu-
mors 5.50

Gilbert. Uric Acid 3.00

Gottheil. Syphilis 1.00

Gouley.  .Surgery  of  Genito-
urinary  Organs 2.00

Greene and Brooks. Genito-
urinary and  Kidney  ....  5.50
Guiteras. Urology. 2  vols.  .  13.00

Flaig. Uric  Acid 1.50

Hayden. Venereal Diseases.  2.50
Hayes. Treat. Syphilis and

Locomotor .Ataxia 1.40

Heitzmann. Urinary Analysis

and Diagnosis 3  .  00

Hensel, Weil and Jelift'e.

Urine  and  Feces 2.75

Herringham and Williamson.

Kidney  Diseases 4.00

Hewatt. Urine 1.00

Hirsch. Genito-urinary ....  1 .25

Holland. Urine,  etc 1.00

Howe. Excessive Venery ..  2.00
Huhner. Dis. of Sexual

Function 3.00

Treatment  of  Steriliiv 2.50


ITiilvcrsnl !Vn<iiro|»nthlo I>lr»»o<or.v  iiiid Buycru'  CJiilcIc


Neue gute Biicher iiber Korper- und Geistespflege,
Naturheilkunde, Schwimm- und Turnkunst, Athletik etc.


Amberg.  Unsere  Volks-  und  Hausmittel  (Sym-
pathische  Kuren)  und  deren  richtige  An-
wendung  bei Krankheitsfiillen -— -  $0.45

Ammon.  Die  ersten  Mutterpflichten  und  die
erste  Kinderpflege.  Belehrungsbuch  fur
junge  Mutter. El.  Ganzlbd 1.40

Anders. Die Flechten und ahnliche Hautaus-

schldge ^^

Ausfeld. Wie  schaffen  und  erhalten  wir  uns  ge-

sunde Zdhnef Br -- -- 45

—  Baer. Die  Hygiene  der  Syphilis. Behandlung

etc. Br 80

Barth. Leberkranke -■ VV""VV

Baumgiirtner. Blinddarm-Entzundung. Mit 34

Abbildungen -•• ;v'-r";

Baur. Gesundheitspflege fiir  s Hans M.it 64

feinen Farbdrucktafeln, 180 Abbildungen

und iiber 500 Seiten Text mit ca. 400

Abbildungen. Geb .^. •--" °-]^

Baumgarten. Dr. Insomnia, Cause and Lure  .. .is
Berger. Die Bedeutung von Krankhetten /Mr

die  Ehe ■ •-• --■ •'*°

Kur fiir Magere nach didtetischen Grund-

sdtzen •.•■ - '^X

—  Die  Nervenschwdche (Neurasthenie) oo

Die Hygiene vor den Flitterwochen 80

Ischias. Das  Hiiftweh. Wese...  Behandlung

und Heilung 55

Blutarme  jO

Nervenkranke -—  - •''"

Bit:. Das  neue  Naturheilverjahren. Volks-Aus-

gabe. Reich  illustr. Mit  zerlegbaren Mo-

dellen Eleg. geb. $5.00. Supplement.

Eleg.  geb -- '-'S

—  Grosse  Familien-  und  Naturdrzte-Ausgabe. 3

Bande,  $10.00;  in  4  Banden 13.50

—  The Natural Method of Healing. Mit 700

Illustr.,  vielen  kol.  Tafeln  und  9  zerlegba-
ren  Modellen. Elegant  gebunden 8.00

—  In Franzosisch,  Spanisch,  Bohmisch,  Polnisch,

Russisch,  Danisch,  Schwedisch,  Italienisch,
UncarLsu-..,  lljllandisch, Portugiesisch 8.50

—  L^ttmn— !■ ^m^. 1.00

dtndcr. D'li CTygiene des  geschlechtlichen he-

bens. Br 80

Deutsch-Englisch, Englisch-Deutsch. Pro

Bd.  geb 1.50

Blaschke. Medizinische Konversationsbiicher:
Deutsch, Franz, und Englisch in einem
Alphabete. Geb 3.25

Bock.  Das  Buck  vom  gesunden  und  kranken
Menschen.  Siebzehnte  vollstandig  umge-
arbeitete  und  vermehrte  Aufl.  Mit  145
Textabbild.  u.  6  Tafeln. In  Hlbfz.  el.  geb. 2.80

—  Bau,  Leben  und  Pflege  des  menschlichen  Kor-

pers  in  Wort  und  Bild. Kart SO

Bohme. Was  muss  man  von  den  Heilpflanzen

wissenT Br 45

Bohne.  Der  Hausarzt.  Ein  allgemein  verstand-
licher  Ratgeber  in  gesunden  und  Kranken
Tagen. Illust. Br 80

Borchardt. Der  Schreibkrampf  und  die  ihm  ver-

uandten  Bewegungsstorungen. Br 80

Braun. Wie  schiitze  ich  mich  vor  syphilitischer

Ansteckungf Br 80

Breits.  100  Ratschldge  fiir  Nervenkranke  mit
besonderer  Beriicksichtigung  der  Neu-
rasthenie, Hypochondrie una Hysteric 45

eleven. Die Haarkur. Br 80

Collins.  Die  schmerzlose  Entbindung.  Verhal-
tungs-Massregeln  zur  Vermeidung  der
Schmerzen  und  Gefahren  der  Nieder-
kunft. Geb 70

Deutsch. D  ie Ursachen und  Heilung  der  Epi-

lepsie. Br 90

—  Die  Neurasthenie  beim  Manne. Br 45

Elster.  Die  Unterleibsbriiche  und  ihre  Behand-
lung. Br 60

Esmarch. Erste  Hiilfe  bei  Ungliicksfdllen.  Cart. .80
Faber. Hygiene  der  Schwangerschaft. Br 80

—  Wie sollen wir baden  f Zuverlassige Rat-

schlage. Br 60

Falkenstein. Die Zahne. Ihre Hygiene und

Pflege. Br 40

Fechner. Die  habituelle  Stuhlverstopfunp. Br 60

Dr.  Anna  Fischer-Diickelmann.  Die  Prau  als
Hausdrztin.  Ein  arztliches  Nachschlage-
buch  der  Gesundheitspflege  und  Heil-
kunde  in  der  Familie.  Reich  illustr.  Eleg.
geb 5.75

—  Englische  Ausgabe  5.75

NATUROPATHIC  CENTRE,  110  E.  4 1  St  ST.,


Foote.  Offene  Volkssprache  iiber  das  Menschen-
system;  die  Gewohnheiten  der  Manner
und  Frauen,  Ursachen  und  Verhiitung
der  Krankheiten,  und  Gesunder  Men-
schenverstand. Geb. $1.65. Englisch 2.25

Friese. Haut und Haare. Br 60

—  Die Riickenmarks-Krankheiten und  ihre Be-

handlung 65

Fruit and Nut Diet — .15

Gaebeler. Was muss man vom Heil-Magnetis-

mus wissenf Br 45

Coerges.  Das  Kind  im  ersten  Lebensjahre.  Geb.  .40
Graf. Wegweiser fiir Hdmorrhoidal-Leidende.

Geb ■ ;- ."5

—  Wegweiser fur Rheumatismus und Gichtlei-

dende. Geb 75

—  Wie  soil der Herzkranke  leben f Br 45

—  Wie  uierden  Bleichsiichtige  und  Blutarme  ge-

sundf 40

—  Wie  soil  der  Zuckerkranke  lebenf Br „ 40

—  Die Hustenkrankheiten. Br 55

GUnther. Fussleiden und  Fusspflege. Br 55

Haller. Was  muss  man von Hypnotismus  und

Suggestion wissenf Br 75

Hartmann. Wie erlange ich Energie und

SchaffenskraftT Br 45

Hausse. Wie erkennt man Krankheiten? Mit

16  Abb. Geb 45

Hellwig. Unterleibsbriiche  und  die  Bruchbdnder .80

Hochstetter. Grosses illustriertes Krduterbuch.

Mit iiber 100 Abbildungen. Geb 2.25

Hockendorf. Die nervosen Magenerkrankun-

gen 80

Just.  Kehrt  zur  Natur  zuriick.  Die  Korper-
pflege,  Wasser,  Licht,  Luft,  Erde,  Nah-
rung,  Obstbau  etc.  Geb.  $3.00.  Englisch
geb.  $2.00;  broschiirt  $1.50;  Italienisch
$3.00; Franzosisch im Auszug 1.00

Just. Jungborn. Dietary. Cloth  1.00

Just. Return to Nature. Vol. I,  $1.50; cloth,

$2.00; Vol. II,  cloth  3.00

Katz.  Der  Augen  Pflege  in  Haus  und  Fa-
milie. Br 1.45

Klencke.  Das  Weib  als  Gattin.  Lehrbuch  fiir
die  physischen,  seelischen  und  sittlichen
Pflichten  etc. Eleg.  geb 2.15

—  Das Weib als  Jungfrau. Eine Korper- und

Seelen-Diatetik zur Selbsterziehung und  .

Selbstpflege. Eleg.  geb 1.70

Kneipp. Meine Wasserkur. Geb 1.10

—  The  Kneipp  Cure. Paper,  $0.85;  cloth 1.10

—  Baby Cure, $0.50; cloth  1.10

—  Kneipp-Apotheke „ 10

—  So  sollt  Ihr  leben. Geb 1.00

—  Thus thou shalt live. Cloth, $2.20; stiff

cover 85

—  Mein Testament fiir Gesunde und Kranke.

Geb 1.10

—  My Will. Cloth, $2.20; stiflF  cover 85

—  The Care of Children in Sickness and in

Health. Cloth, $1.80; stiff cover 85

—  Kinderpflege in gesunden und kranken Ta-

gen. Geb 65

—  Codicil to My Will. Cloth, $2.20; stiff

cover 85

—  Water-Cure  Monthly,  2  vols., 1900  and 1901.

Per volume $1.00; cloth 1.50

—  Kodizill  zu ,,Mein Testament." Geb 1.10

—  Allerhand  Niitzliches  fiir Wasserkur  und  Le-

bensweise. Geb 1.25

—  Das Grosse Kneippbuch. Bearb. von Prior

Reile. Geb 4.50

Kneipp-Bldtter, Jahrgange 1899, 1900, 1901, in

Heften, per  Jahrg. $1.00; elegant  geb 1.50

Kneipp Gesundheits-Kalcnder. Tahrgange 1899,

1900,  1901 @  25  Cts. Die  drei  Jahrgange

elegant gebunden 1.00

Koch. Wie  hiiten  ivir  Auge  und  OhrT  Brosch.  .45

—  Wie  schiitsen  ivir  uns  vor  Erkrankungen  der

Atmungs-OrganeT Brosch 45

Kornig. Die Hygiene der Keuschheit 80

—  Wer darf heiratenf Gemeim:erstdndlich be-

antwortet 35

Kriiche. Hdmorrhoiden. Br 80

Kuhne,  L.  Die  neue  H eihvissenschaft .  oder  die
Lehre  von  der  Einheit  der  Krankheiten
und  deren  darauf  begriindete  arzneilose
und operali'jnslose Heilung. Geb 1.75

—  The  New  Science  of  Healing. Cloth 2.75

—  Gesichtsausdruckskunde. $4.00. Englisch.... S  00

—  Bin  ich  gcsund  oder  krankf 50  Cts. Fnel.  <5

NEW  YORK  CITY  and  BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


1284


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Hutchinson. Syphilis 4.00

Jones. Goiiorrlieal Arthritis 1.00
Keyes. Dis.  of  Male  Urethra.

Urology 6.50

Kidd. Urinary  Surgery .... 2.60
Kellv.  Kidney, Ureter,

Bladder. 2  vols 13.00

Keogh,  Melville,  Leishmann,
and Pollock. Venereal

Disease 1 .  .^0

Kreissl.  Uro-genital  Thera-
peutics 5 .  00

Lambkin. Syphilis 2.25

Lassar-Cohn-Lorenz. Praxis

of  Urinary  Analysis  ....  1.00
Lewis  and  Mark. Cystoscopy

and Urethroscopy 4.50

Little. Nephritis 1.23

Longyear. Nephrocoloptosis 3.00
Lydston. Stricture  of  Urethra 1.50

Varicocele 1.00

MacGowan. Prostate 2.50

Maisonneuve.  Prophylaxis

of Syphilis 1.50

Malsbary. Diag. Syph 5.00

Mann.  Physiology  and  Path-
ology  of Urine 4.00

Marchildon.  Wassermann

Test 1.50

^Marshall.  Syphilis  and  Ve-
nereal 3.50

Martin.  Surgery,  Bandag-
ing and  Venereal  Dis-
eases 1.25

Martindale and Westcott.

Salvarsan 1 .  50

McCrudden. Uric Acid ... 2.00

McDonagh. Salvarsan 3.00

Mcintosh  and Fildes. Syph-"

ilis 3.00

Memminger. Diagnosis by  i

Urine 1.00  '

Mitchell. Kidneys 1 .  50  |

Renal Therapeutics 2.00

Morton.  Genito-urinary  Dis-
eases and Syphilis 5.00

Morris. Nation's Health .. 1.25
Surgery of Kidnevs and  '

.  Ureter. 2 vols 12.00

Moullin. Enlargement of

Prostate 1.75  i

Mulzer. Syphilis 1.50

Newman. Movable  Kidney . 1.75
Surgical Diseases of Kid-

^^ ney 3.00

Noguchi. Serum Diag. of

Syphilis 3.00

Nonne and Ball. Syphilis.. 4.00
Nothangel. Kidneys, Spleen,

Hemorrhagic  Diseases  ..  5.00
Oertel.  Bright's  Disease  ..  5.00
Ogden. Clinical  Examination

of Urine 3.00

Oppenheimer. Gonorrhea in

Male 1.25

Ormsby  and  Mitchell.  Year-
book of  Skin  and  Vene-
real 1.35

Philips. Genito-urinary Sur-
gery and Venereal .... 2.00
Prostate Hypertrophy .... 1.00

Pilcher. Cystoscopy 6.00

Pollock  and  Harrison.  Gon-
ococcal Infection 1.50

Venereal  Diseases 3.75

Pontoppiden. Venereal 75

Portner  and  Lewis.  Genito-
urinary 2.50

Power  and  Murphy. Syphilis

5 vols 18.00

Pringle. Atlas of Skin and

Syphilis S.OO

Purdy. LTrinaly.sis 3.00

Pusey. Syphilis 50

Ravogli. Syphilis 5 .  00

Robinson. Gonorrhea 3.00

Sexual Impotence 3.00

Shaw-McKenzie. Maternal.

Syphilis 2.00


Rumpel. Cystoscopy 6.00

Squier and Bugbee. Cys-
toscopy 3 .00

Sturgis. Sexual Debility .. 3.00

Taylor. Salvarsan 2.00

Thompson. Syphilis 4.25

Tyson. Bright's Disease ... 4.00
Ultzman. Neviroses of the

Genito-urinary System . 1.00
Valentine. Irrigation Treat-
ment  of Gonorrhea .... 2.00
\'ecki. .Sexual Diseases .... 1.50

Sexual  Im])otence 2.25

Von Noorden. Nephritis .. 1.00
Walker Genito-urinary Sur-
gery 7.00

Wallace. Enlargement of

Prostate 4.50

Ware. Plaster  of  Paris 1 .  00

Watson. Gonorrhea 3.75

Watson and Cunningham.
Genito-urinary  Surgery.  2

vols 12.00

Weiss. Urethritis 2.75

White and Martin. Genito-
urinary Surgery 7.00

Wilcox. Genito-urinary ami

Venereal 1.25

Williams  and  Williams. Ur-

analyses 1.00

Wilson and Howell. Mova-
ble Kidney 1.25

Woody. Chemistry  and  Urin-
alysis l.SO

Zinsser. Syphilis, etc 10.00


VETERIIVARY, FOOD  IN-
SPECTION

.^Ibrechtsen-Wehrbein. Ster-
ility of Cows $1.50

Ansluitz. Dogs 75

Bach. Judging a Horse ...  1.00

Baker. Veterinary Practice.  3.50
Ballou. Veterinary Anatomy

and Physiology 1.25

Banham. Posology  and  Ther-
apeutics 1 .00

Barton. Cats 1.00

Diseases of Dog 1.50

Horse 2.50

Non-Sporting Dogs 1.75

Sporting  Dogs 2.50

Toy Dogs 1.00

Battershall. Food .Adultera-
tion 3.50

Belcher. Clean Milk 1.00

Bell. Call-book 1.25

Bradley. Veterinary An-
atomy 3.25

Brown. Farrier 3 .  00

Bruce. Pure Food Tests ..  1.25
Buchanan  and  Murray. Vet-
erinary Bacteriology ..  3.50
Cadiot. Equine Surgery ...  2.50
Medicine and Surgery ...  5.25

Roaring .  .  . ' 75

Cadiot-.Mmy. Surgical Ther-
apeutics of Domestic

Animals 4. 50

Campbell. Springtime Sur-
gery 1  .00

Chapman. Lameness 2.00

Chauveau. Anatomy of Do-
mesticated Animals ....  7.00

Clarke. Fossil Horse 25

Horses' Teeth 2.50

Clement. \'eterinary Post-
mortem Examinations ..  .75
Conn. Bacteria, Yeasts, and

Molds in the Home ...  1.00

Courtenay. Medicine 2.75

Cox. Horses 1.30

Craig. Diseases  of  Farm  Ani-
mals 1.50

Judging Livestock 1.50

Dalrvmple. Obstetrics 2.50

Dalziel. Dogs 50

Hordes 50


Dance. Veterinary Tablet .  .75

Davenport. Breedine 2.50

De  Bruin. Bovine Obstetrics  3. SO
Dollar. Diseases of Cattle,

Sheep, Goats  and Swine  8.75

Horse-shoeing 4.75

Operative Technic 3.75

Regional Surgery 6.25

Veterinary Surgery 8.25

Dun. N'eterinary .Medicine .  3.75

Kccles. Food Preservations.  1.00

Ecker's Anatomy of Frog..  5.25
Edelmann, Mohler, Eichhorn

Meat Inspection 4.50

Fish.  Doses  and  Prescrip-
tions 1  .50

Urine  in  Horse  and  Man..  1.50
Fleming. Contagious  Disease  .25
Fleming. Operative Sur-
gery. 2  vols 6  .  00

Practical Horse Keeper ..  .75

Roaring  in  Horses 1.50

French. Surgery of Dog ..  3.00
Frick. Antiseptic Treatment

of Wounds 1  .  SO

Friedberger and Frohner.
Veterinary Pathology
and  Therapeutics.  2  vols.  8.00
Frotmer-Udall. Surgery ...  3.00
Glass. Diseases  of Dog ....  6.00
Godbille-Liantard. Lymphat-
ic Glands 2.00


Diseases of Horse 65

Equine Medicine 2.75

Veterinary Pharmacopeia.  3.50

Hadley. Horse 1.50

Halligan. Stock Feeds and

Feeding 2.50

Hammerton.  Veterinary  Doc-
tor 3.00

Hassloch. Materia Medica

and Therapeutics 1.30

Heatley.  Stock Owner's

Guide 1 .25

Ilerzog.  Veterinary  Micro-
organisms 475

Hill. Cat 1125

Moare. Veterinary Medicine

2 vols 15.00

Veterinary Therapeutics.

and Pharmacology ....  5.50
Hobday. Anesthesia of Ani-
mals 1.25

Surgical Diseases of Dog

and Cat 3.25

Castration and Ovariotomy  1.75
Homeopathic  Veterinary  Prac-

„ .  tice ■ S.OO

Huidekoper. Age  of  Animals  1.00

Hunting. Glanders 4.00

Horseshoeing 1 .  00

Hurndall. \'eterinary  Homeo-

^^ Pathy 2.00

Hutyra  and  Marek.  Special
Pathology  and  Thera-
peutics. 2  vols 16.00

Jenkins.  Models  of  Cow,
Horse, Dog, Pig, Sheep

each •. 2.00

Half  Life-Size of Cow ...  10.00

Jenson. Milk Hygiene ....  2.50
Jones. Surgical Anatomy of

Hor.se 20.00

Parasitic Diseases 2.25

Poultry Culture 2.00

Poultry Diseases 1.50

Kinsley.  Veterinarv  Pathology  4.50
Kitt. Veterinary  Pathology.  .  4.00
Lander. X'eterinary Toxicol-
ogy 2.50

Law. Farmer's  Adviser ....  3.00
Leeney. Animal Doctor ...  3.00
Leisering, Ellenberger, and
Baum. Anatomy of
Horse  and  Domestic  Ani-
mals.  2  vols 10.00

Liautard. Animal Castration  2.00

Horse's Foot 2.00


Universal Nsituropatliio  l>lrcotorj aiul  BiiyorN'  Guide


1285


—  Kindererzienu)ig. 30 Cts. Cholera, Ilrc<.ii-

durchfall etc

Kiihner. Gesundhtitspflege und naturgemiisse

Lebensweise. Geb

Lan., Dr. Die Augendiagnose mil Schliissel.

$1.25 ; geb

—  The  Diagnosis  of  the  Eye,  with  Key. $1.25.

Cloth

Lahmann.  Die  didtetische  Blutentmischung  als
Grundursache  der Krankheiten. Geb

—  "Hygiene.'' His whole theories translated

into English

Lang. Hygiene fiir Lungenleidende {Brnst-

kranke) Br _

Lenz. Die Hygiene nach den Flitterwochen.

Br

Letzel. Die  Harnbeschtverden. Br

Lewinski. Wie soil der Magenkranke leben?

Br

Liebmann. Stottern, Stammeln, Lispeln, Nd-

seln

Lust, Louisia. Naturopathic-Vegctarian Cook

Book.  The  table  of  the  "Jungborn"  Sani-
tarium and Recreation Home, Butler,

N.  J. 75  Cents;  cloth

Lust's Health Almanac (Gesundheitskalender)

1899, 1900 und 1901, each vol. 25 cents

The 3 volumes bound in cloth in one

volume

Lutze. Lehrbuch  der  Homoopathie. Geb

Maas. Fettsucht. Br

Mertens. Die Krankheiten des Halses %ind

Kehlkopfes

Meyer. Hygiene  der  kinderlosen  Ehe. Br

Michaclis. Pflanzenheilkunde. Pflanzen und

Krauter  als  Volksheilmittel. Brosch

Modelle,  Zerlegbare,  des  Menschlichen  Korpers:

Dr.  Ebenhoech. Der  Mensch. Mit  Text.

Cart

Ergo. Der Kopf des Menschen. Mit Text.

Geb

Esta. Der Mensch. Mit Text. Folioformat.

Cart

Meyer. Der weibliche Korper in ungefahr %

Lebensgrosse. Cart

Panzer.  Der  weibliche  Korper.  Mit
Text. Cart

Securio,  Das  Auge  des  Menschen.  Eleg.
geb

Werner. Das  Ohr  des  Menschen. Eleg.

geb

Moller. Das  Schrothsche Heilverfahren. 75

Cts. ;  Englisch

Miick's  Praktische Taschenbiicher:

Bd.  20.  Anatomie  des  menschlichen  Kor-
bers

Ba. 24. Sonnen-  und  Luftbdder

Mailer,  F. Das  grqsse  illusttierte  Krduterbuch.

Ausfiihrliche Beschreibung  aller Pflanzen

hinsichtlich  ihres  Gebrauchs,  Nutzen,  ihrer

Anwendung und Wirkung der Arznei-

kunde.  Mit  320  Abbildungen.  Eleg.  geb.
Mailer,  J.  P.  Hygienische  Winke.  Hlustr.  Geb.
Nagel. Kopfschmerzen  und  Migrdne. Br

—  IVie  werde  ich  meine  Nervositdt  losf Br

Naturopath,  Der. Jahrgange  1901—1908,  in  Hef-

ten  per  Jahrgang  $1.00;  elegant  geb.  per
Jahrg

Naturopath.  English  Edition.  1901-1912,  per
vol.  $1.50;  cloth

Neumann.  Die  Krankheiten  der  Nieren  und  der
Blase

Pingler.  Die  Syphilis.  Ihr  Wesen  und  grund-
Hche Heilung

Pinner.  Die  Krebskrankheit.  Ursachen,  Wachs-
tum  etc

Platen.  Die  neue  Heilmethode.  Neue  Ausgabe,
vollig  umgestaltet  und  neu  bearbeitet  un-
ter  Mitwirkung  von  35  prakt.  Aerzten,
Hygienikern  und  Padagogcn.  Mit  iiber
3000  Seiten  Text,  660  Textabbildungen,
62 Tafeln, und 10 zerlegbaren farbigen

Modellen. In 4 Bande elegant geb

Englische  Ausgabe

Plea  for  Physical Therapy

Pohl.  Das  Haar.  Die  Haarkrankheiten  etc.
Brosch

Prager.  Wie  das  Wasser  heilt!  Ratgeber  zur
Anwendung  aller  Wasserkuren  in  gesun-
den  und  kranken  Tagen. Geb

Purinton,  E.  E.  Lords  of  Ourselves.  $1.00;
Cloth

—  The  Philosophy  of  Fasting. $1.10. Cloth

—  Sins  of  Sex

—  Proclamation  of  Naturopathy

—  Happiness

—  Try  the  Laugh  Cure

—  The  Corset  in  Court


Horizoni)


.30

.45

2.00

2.00

1.00

2.75

.80

.70
.55

.35

.35

1.00


1.00

2.35

.45

.50
.70

1.00


.55

.85

1.20

1.20

.65

.70

.70

1.00


.35
35


2.50

1.50

.50

.35


1.50
2.00

.35
1.00

.35


10.00

10.00

.10

.85


1.00

2.00
1.50
.30
.10
.60
.10
.15
.20


—  canijfials in Naturopath from 1901 to the

Present Day. Per Vol

Puritas-Biblivlhek. 5 Bande, eleg. geb. @

Was  ein  Knube  uisseii  muss.

Was  ein  junger  Mann  wtssen  tnuss. Von

S. Stall.

Was ein junges Mddchen wissen muss.
Von Mary Wood-Allen.

Was ein junger Ehemann wissen muss.
Von S. Stall.

Was eine  Junge Ehefrau wissen muss.
Von E. Drake.
Querner. Anleitung zur Pflege und Heilung

der Kranken

Reiss. Die Nase. Ihre Krankheiten und Be-

handlung

—  Die Natur-Heilmethode. Geschichte, Bedeu-

tung, Technik, Anwendung, Heilwirkung

etc. Band  1 :  Diatetische  Behandlung

Band  2:  Nerven-  und  Riickenmark-
Krankheiten.  3:  Magen-  und  Darmlei-
den.  —  4:  Astlima  und  Herzleiden.  —
5:  Frauen-Krankheiten.  —  6:  Rheumatis-
nius  und  Gicht.  —  7:  Lungen-  und  Hals-
krankheiten.  —  8:  Zuckerkrankheit.  —  9:
Hamorrhoidalleiden.  —  10:  Fettleibigkeit.
—  11:  Blutarmut,  Magerkeit  etc.  —  12:
Nieren-  und  Blasenleiden.  —  13:  Hiift-
weh,  Gesichts-  und  Kopfschmerzen,  Ma-
genkrampf.  —  14:  Erkaltungskrankhei-
ten.  —  15:  Leber-  und  Gallenleiden.  —  16:
Hautleiden.  —  17:  Krampfe  und  Krampf-
krankheiten,  Schreibkrampf,  Veitstanz
etc.  —  18:  Sexuelle  Neurasthenia.  —  IV:
Gallen-,  Niesen-,  Blasen-,  und  Steinlei-
den.  —  20:  Geschlechtskrankheiten.  Pro
Band brosch

Rose.  Was  muss  man  vom  menschlichen  Kor-
per  {Anatomic) wissen?  Hlustr.  Br

Rosch,  Dr.  Abuse  of  the  Marriage  Relation,
Cause  of  Most  Chronic  Diseases,  Especial-
ly of  the  Female  Sex

Schlesingcr.  Wie  erndhren  wir  die  Sduglinge
am  best  en  mit  der  Flaschef Br

Schroth  Cure

Schroder.  Der  Frauenarzt.  Darstellung  der
Frauenkrankheiten,  ihre  Ursachen,  Ver-
hiitung  und Behandlung. Br

—  Geschlechtskranke

—  Zuckerkranke

Schultze. Lehrbuch  der  Hebammenkunst. Eleg.

geb

Schwabe.  Wie  soil  der  Ruckenmarks-Kranke
leben  f

Schwarzbart.  Hypnose  und  Suggestion  in  der
Hcilkunde

Steinmann. Die  Influenza  (Grippe)

Stekel.  Wie  beuge  ich  einer  Blinddarmentzund-
ung vor?

Stockl.  IVie  pflegst  und  erziehst  du  dein  Kind?
Ratschlage  einer  Mutter  fiir  junge  Mutter.
Geb

Sttirjn.  Die  natiirliche  Heilweise.  Ratgeber  fur
gesunde  und  kranke  Menschen.  Mit  268
Abbildungen  im  Text,  30  farbigen  Tafeln
und 2 zerlegbaren Modellen. Geb

Theodor.  Praktische  Winke  zur  Ern'dhrung  und
Pflege  der  Kinder  in  gesunden  und  kran-
ken Tagen. Br

Wagner.  Der  Wasserarzt  fiir  Hans  und  Familie.
Geb

Walter. Ohrenkrankheiten  und  Ohrenpflege

Weber.  Das  Weib  als  Gattin  und  Mutter.
Illust. Geb

Weill.  Gesetze  und  Mysterien  der  Liebe.
Brosch

Weissbrodt. Die eheliche  Pflicht. Geb

Werner.  Die  Massage.  Mit  Holzschnitten.
Brosch

—  Schlaflosigkeit  und  Schlafmittel. Br

—  Vertrauliche Ratschlage fur junge Manner.

Brosch

—  Ratschlage  fiir  junge  Madchen. Br

—  Lungenkranke ~


1.50
l.OO


1.00
.50

.75


.40
.60

.30

.35
.10

.35
.85
.50

2.75

.35

.40
.35

.35
.85

6.00

.70

1.25
.50

1.50

.70
1.35

.85
.55

.70
.70
.70


Angerstein  und  Eckler.  Hausgymnastik  fiir  Ge-
sunde und  Kranke.  Mit  zahlreichen
Holzschnitten. Geb 1.00

Bauk)iecht.  Korperkultur.  Uebungen  eines  63-
jahrigen  Turners  (taglich  15  bis  30  Mi-
nuten  morgens  vor  und  nach  dem  Auf-
stehen). Mit 71 .Abbildungen 85

Cherpillod.  Handbuch  des  DschiuDschitsu.  Die
gebrauchlichsten  Kunstgriffe.  Bearb.  fiir
die  Turnvereine  und  fiir  weitere  Kreise.
Mit 90 Tllustrationen. Geb 70

Fay.  Hantcl-System.  Neues  deutsches  System
der  Zimmergymnastik  und  Korperpflrge.
Illustriert 2$


NATUROPATHIC  CENTRE,  1 10  E.  41st  ST.,  NEW  YORK  CITY  and  BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


1286


General  List  of  Medical  Works


Liautartl.  Lameness  in  Horses  2.50

Lymphatic  Glands 2.00

Median Neurotomy 1 .00

Operative Surgery 5.00

Telling  Age of Animals ..  .50

Vade  Mecum  of  -Anat. ...  2.00

Long. Book of Pig 4.00

Lowe. Breeding Racehorses  7.50

Ludlow. Stable SO

Lupton. Horse 1.25

I-vnch. Diseases of Swine

(Hog  Cholera) 5.00

Macewen. Food  Inspection..  2.50

Malkmus. Diagnostics 3.00

Mayall. Cows, Cow-liouses,

and  Milk  1.00

Pigs, Sties,  and Pork 1.25

Mayhew. Horse  Management  2.50

Mavo. Diseases of Animals  1.75

McClure. Stable Guide 1.00

McFaydean. Anat. of Horse  5.50

Comparative  Anatomy ....  2.75
Melick. Dairy Laboratory

Guide 1.25

Merillat. Animal Dentistry.  3.00

Surgical Operations 5.50

Merrilat,  I,e  Blanc,  Cadeac,
and  Corougeau.  Veteri-
nary Surgery 3.50

Mills. Keeping Dog in City  .25

Moore. Bovine Tuberculosis  2.00

Health  Herd  Book 3.75

Pathology of Infectious

Diseases 4 .  00

Moore and Fitch. Bacter-
iology and Diagnosis ..  1.00
Mosselman-Lineaux. V^eter-

inary  Microbiology 2.00

Neel. Cats 50

Neuman.  Parasites  and  Par-
asitic Diseases 6.75

Nocard. Tuberculosis 1.00

Nunn. Toxicology 1.75

Olsen. Pure Foods 80

Ostertag. Meat  Inspection  ..  7.50


Paget. Experiments  on  Ani-
mals 2.00

Pallin. Epizootic Lymphan-
gitis 1  .25

Paton. Veterinary Physician  3.00

Pellerin. Median  Neurotomy  1.00

Peters. Tuberculosis Herd  .25

Poultry Doctor 50

Pursell. Poultry Sense 75

Quitman. Materia Medica .  .S.OO
Reeks. Colics  of Horse ...  2.25
Diseases of Horse's Foot.  4.00
Reighord  and  Jennings. An-
atomy of  Cat 4.00

Richards. Food Materials

and Adulteration 1.00

Rideal. Disinfection  and  Food

Preservation 4.00

Roberge. Foot of Horse ..  3.00

Roberts. The Horse 1.35

Robertson  and  Herzog. Meat

and  Food  Inspection  ...  3.50
Rogers.  Veterinary  Hand-
book and  Visiting  List.  .  1  50
Rosenau.  Milk  Question  ..  2.25
Rush.  Veterinary  Homes..  .50
Rushworth. Sheep  and  Their

Diseases 1 .  50

Scales. Microscopy 150

Schaeffer. Veterinary Medi-

^ ?ine 2.00

Sessions. Cattle  Tuberculosis  1.00
Sewell. Examination of

Horses 1 .  50

Sharp. Ophthamology 2^00

Sisson. Anatomy Domestic

Animals 7.50

Smith. Veterinary Hygiene.  4.75
Smythe. Veterinary  Parisitol-

ogy 1.50

Spargo. Milk Question ....  1.50

Steel. Diseases  of  Ox 6.00

Strangeway. Anatomy ....  3.00
Sussdorf. Colored  Wall Dia-
grams;  each 1.75


Thompson.  Veterinary  Lec-
tures 3.50

Thresh. Examination of

Water 5.00

Thresh and Porter. Food

Preservation 4 .  50

Toenjes.  Animal  Understand-
ing 60

Tuson. Pharmacopeia 2.50

Udall-Frohner.  Materia  Med-
ica and  Therapeutic  Sur-
gery 3.00

Van Mater. Opthalmology .  2.00

Veterinary Counter Practice.  2.00

Diagrams;  5  charts 4.75

Veterinary Manual 5.00

Von Rosenberg. Veterinary

Practice '.  .  "5

Walker. Food Inspection ..  3.00

Walley. Meat  Inspection ..  3.00

White. Castration 4.00

Veterinary Medicine 3.25

Whipple. Pure  Water 1.00

White  and  Fischer.  Internal
Diseases  of  Domestic  Ani-
mals 3.00

Wiley.  Foods  and  Adultera-
tion 4.00

Williams. Medicine 7.50

Obstetrics 8.00

Veterinary Surgery 7.50

Winslow. Clean Milk 3.25

Diseases of Domestic Ani-
mals 3.50

Materia Medica Thera-
peutics 6.00

Woodruff. Feeding Horses  1.2S

Wyman. Lameness  of  Horse  2.50
Principles of Veterinary

Surgery 3.50

Tibio-Peroneal Neurectomy  .50

Veterinary Surgery 3.50

Youatt. Dog 2.00

Horse 2.25

Zundel. Horse's Foot 2.00


Franken. Wie  erlangt  und  wie  erhalt  man  sich

tin gutes Gedachtnis? Br 85

Gebhardt.  Die  Pflege  der  personlichen  Erschei-
nung.  Eine  rationelle  Korperkultur  zur
Erlangung  und  Erhaltung  von  Schonheit,
Kraft,  Gesundheit. Br 1.85

Hancock.  Dschiu-Dscliitsu.  Methodische  Kor-
perstahlung  und  athletische  Kunstgriffe
der Japaner. Illustr. Br. 70

'-{artelius.  Lehrbuch  der  schwedischen  Heilgym-
tiastik.  (Deutsche  Ausgabe.)  Mit  97  Text-
abbildungen. Leinenbd 1.70

Kloss. Hantel-Biichlein  fiir  Zimmerturner. II-

lustriert. Geb 40

Koch. Lehrbuch  des  Ringkampfes. Mit  64  Ab-

bildungen. Br 35

kinduer.  Thure  Brandt'sche  Massage  und  Gym-
nastik,  sowie  IVasserbehandlung  und
Pflege  bet  weiblichen  Unterleibscustdn-
den. Illustr. Geb 2.00

Marcuse.  Korperpflege  durch  Wasser,  Luft  und
Sport.  Eine  Anleitung  zur  Lebenskunst.
Mit 121 Abbild. Geb 2.00

Meiringer.  Hochste  Muskelkraft,  durch  12  Han-
teliibungen.  Anleitung  zur  systematischen
Kraftentwicklun^  des  ganzen  Korpers  auf
Grund  neuer  Pnnzipien  des  Kraftturnens.
Erlautert  durch 30  Abbildungen  35


Moeller.  Der  Vorturncr.  Hilfsbuch  fiir  deut-
sches  Geratturnen  in  Vereinen,  Schulen
etc. Mit 140 Abbildungen. Kart 70

M tiller,  J.  P.  Mein  System.  15  Minuten  tag-
licher  Arbeit  fiir  die  Gesundheit.  Mit  41
Illustrationen nach der Natur. Geb 1.00

Mailer. Katechismus der Schwimmkunst. II-

lustriert. Geb 60

Puritz. Handbiichtein turnerischer Ordnungs-,  ,

Freihantel- und Stabiibungen. Mit 283
Illustrationen. Geb 1.00

—  Merkbiichlein  fiir  Vorturner  in  Lehranstalten

utid  Turnvereinen. Mit  284  Illustr. Geb. .35

Sarto.  Schonheitspflege.  Eine  Darstellung  der
Pflege  und  Forderung  menschlicher
Schonheit  auf  naturgemasse,  kiinstliche  u.
asthetische Art. Mit Abbildungen. Geb. .35

Scherbcl.  Moderne  Schonheitspflege  und  Kos-
metik.  Haut-,  Gesichts-,  Haar-,  Zahn-
pflege,  Gesichtsmassage  etc. Br 70

Schrcber. Aerstliche Zimmergymnastik. V. A.

Br 35

Vogi.  Korperkultur  —  aber  wie  —  und  warumf
Ein  Ratgeber  fiir  jedermann.  Reich  il-
lustriert. Brosch 40

IVinkemann.  Atmen  —  aber  wie  —  und  warum?
Ein  Weckruf  zur  Lungengymnastik  fur  je-
dermann. Brosch 40


Obige BUcher  sind portoSrei zu den angefuhrten Preisen zu beziehen von
B.  LUST,  NEW  YORK  CITY  oder  "JUNQBORN"  VERSANDHAUS,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


Kein  Umtausch  gestattet


^


Book  lieuiew


1287


BOOK REVIEW


APYRTROPHY DEFINED AND ITS
AXIOMS

APYRTROPHY  is  the  science  that
teaches  the  gospel  of  physical  righteousness
through  intestinal  cleanliness  for  perfect
health,  inclusive  morality  and  happiness  by
means  of  feeding  on  natural  unfircd  food,
for  which  Dr.  Drews  gives  the  following
axiomatic  reasons,  i.  e.:


Dr. George J. Drews

That  all  natural  unfired  food  can  be  so
daintily  prepared,  so  scientifically  com-
bined and  elegantly  served,  that  it  appeals
favorably  to  the  palate  and  aesthetic  na-
ture of  cultured  man  without  reducing  its
wholesomeness;

— that  primitive  man  thrived  and  devel-
oped in  the  absence  of  the  culinary  artifice
which  degenerates  miscultured  man;

—that  a  little  knowledge  of  inorganic
chemistry  applied  to  organic  chemistry  is  a
dangerous  thing;

— that  organic  chemistry  is  perfect,  and
that  only  misinformed  man  tries  to  im-
prove on  it  to  his  detriment  and  sorrow;

— that  God  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  co-
operates with  God  in  the  animal  kingdom
for  mutual  benefits;

— that  all  unfired  esculent  green  leaves
and  roots  can  never  produce  auto-intoxica-
tion and  its  sequent  diseases,  because  they
do  not  ferment  in  the  alimentary  canal;

— that  unfired  nuts  and  cereals  do  not
ferment  when  not  combined  with  liquids
other  than  saliva;

— that  unfired  fruits  may  ferment  in  the
alimentary  canal,  but  without  producing
any  sequential  diseases  outside  of  the  tem-
porary distress;

— that  the  product  of  the  yeast  germ  and
other  bacteria  is  almost  harmless,  when
produced  from  unfired  food,  than  the
paralyzing  toxins  produced  from  fired  food;

— that  unfired-fooders  need  not  fear
germs  and  bacteria; because  to  them  thej'-


are  a  part  of  Nature's  beneficent  plan,  for
germs  only  become  a  source  of  danger
when  their  nutrition  is  derived  from  fired
food;

—that  the  yeasts  and  disease  bacteria
are  all  scavengers  and  thrive  only  on  wastes
and  fired  foods;

— that  cooking  prepares  all  food  for  the
invasion  of  yeast  germs  and  other  poison-
producing  bacteria,  and  that  the  surplus  of
digested  and  absorbed  fired  food  becomes
the  soil  for  all  disease  bacteria;

— that  fired  food  can  not  be  made  normal
by  digestio'n.  for  it  retains  its  abnormal
character  similar  to  waste  in  the  blood
stream  and  tissues,  and  this  then  becomes
the  food  for  the  bacteria  of  diseases;

— that  the  high  temperature  which  the
fired  food  has  been  subjected  to,  has  so
changed  the  relation  of  many  organic,  basic
and  acid  elements,  that  they  have  become
inorganic  and  useless  to  the  normal  func-
tions of  the  tissues,  which  then  become  en-
gorged with  wastes,  and  starve  for  want
of  proper  elements;

— that,  as  the  fired  food  ferments  and  de-
cays in  the  alimentary  canal,  it  produces
toxins  which  not  only  paralyze  the  nerves
of  peristalsis,  but  also  the  functional  nerves
of  all  the  glands  within  reach,  and  when
these  toxins  reach  the  nerves  of  the  heart,
instant death is  the result;

— that  the  toxin  of  fermentation  so  irri-
tates the  nerves  of  procreation,  that  it  un-
balances, even  perverts,  the  sense  of  pro-
creation, and  in  the  female  this  irritation
finally  results  in  the  total  paralysis  of  the
procreative  function  known  as  menolipsis
and  menopause.  It  is  estimated  that  on  an
unfired  diet,  which  does  not  produce  toxins,
that  the  average  normal  women  should  re-
tain their  menses  till  they  are  at  least  sixt}-
years  of  age.  There  are  women  on  record
who  have  retained  their  menses  up  to  sev-
enty. The  author  personally  knows  a  wo-
man who,  after  a  careful  selection  of  her
diet,  regained  her  menses  at  sixty;

— that  the  troph  who  prepares  unfired
food  for  the  table  does  not  need  to  worry
about  cooking  or  baking,  nor  suffer  from
the  heat  or  smoke  involved;  nor  is  the
house-fly  attracted  by  the  odor  of  fresh
fruits,  roots  or  nuts,  and  even  honey  does
not  attract  the  fly  unless  it  is  diluted  and
allowed  to  sour;

— that  in  the  northern  winter  the  win-
dows of  the  apyrtropher  do  not  freeze  up
with  ice;

— that  the  unfired  diet  saves  the  fuel  ex-
pense  for  cooking  and  baking;


1288


J)()()L-  JU'incin


— that  a  sumptuous  unlirod  fare  may  cost
as  much  as  the  most  costly  vulgar  fare;  but
a  simple,  wholesome,  unfired  fare,  need  not
cost  half  as  much  as  the  cheapest  fired
fare;

— that  the  unlired  food  does  not  cause
the  body  to  have  an  offensive  odor,  nor  are
the  feces  and  flatus  offensive.

ApjTtrophy  is  also  the  basis  of  tropho-
therapy — the  science  that  teaches  how
wholesome,  unfired  food  can  be  used  spe-
cifically as  a  means  to  cure  diseases;  and
further,

— that  unripe  fruits  only  irritate  (in  a
curative  attempt),  intestinal  surfaces  that
are  inflamed  from  the  use  of  flesli  and  salt;

— that  distress  experienced  after  eating  a
new  (generally  wholesome)  unfired  food,
indicates  its  eliminating  properties,  and  that
it  is  acting  on  some  taint  of  disease;

— that  every  new,  wholesome,  unfired
food  in  its  season  may  manifest  curative
activities  if  a  taint  of  disease,  upon  which
it  can  act,  is  present,  before  the  system
uses  it  as  nutrition;

— that  all  unfired  esculent  leaves  and
roots  have  curative  properties  and  also  tone
the  blood  with  alkaline  elements,  and  that
fruits  and  nuts  balance  the  alkalinity  pro-
duced.

Apyrtrophism  is  the  doctrine  and  prac-
tice of  living  on  unfired  food  for  gaining  and
maintaining  perfect  health,  keener  joy  of
living,  clearer  mind,  prolonged  youthful-
ness  and  less  drudgery  for  the  troph  who
prepares  the  wholesome  fare,  as  set  forth  by
Dr.  Drews  in  the  year  1909,  in  his  treatise
on "Unfired Food and Trophotherapy."


UNFIRED FOOD AND TROPHO-
THERAPY

By  George  J.  Drews,  Al.  D.,  D.  C,  N.  D.

Those  who  eat  to  live  will  be  gratified  to
know  that  a  new  work  has  been  published,
devoted  to  extolling  the  virtues  of  unfired
food,  which  combines  a  minimum  of
trouble  in  preparation,  with  a  maximum  of
benign,  alimentary  content.  The  author  is
an  enthusiastic  devotee  of  latter-day
manna  as  it  comes  from  the  hand  of  nature,
which  he  strongly  recommends  not  only  to
the  healthy,  but  to  those  suffering  from
physical  ailments,  as  an  effective  method
of  restoring  youthful  vitality,  strength,
endurance,  courage,  will-power  and  resist-
ance.

He  regards  disease  as  caused  by  the
fermenting  of  cooked  food  in  the  digestive
tract  and  this  fermentation  paralyses  the
nerves  that  control  the  peristaltic  contrac-
tions of  the  intestines,  thus  causing  consti-
pation and  its  attendant  ills.  This  poison
also  penetrates  to  the  nerves  of  the  heart,
lungs,  liver,  pancreas  and  kidneys,  and
especially  to  the  organs  of  pro-creation,
limiting,  or  suspending,  their  functions,
and  being,  in  fact,  the  source  of  all  disease.


This  argument  is  built  up  with  great
force,  and  man's  natural  foods  are  shown
to  be  the  fruits,  succulent  herbs  and  roots,
nuts  and  cereals,  which  in  their  natural
(unfired)  form  appeal  to  the  unperverted
sense  of  alimentation.

There  is  a  comparison  between  the  food
values  of  unfired  and  fired  food  products
to  the  disadvantage  of  cooked  foods.
Original  recipes  are  given  for  apyrtrophic
drinks,  soups,  salads,  cakes  and  breads,
sauces,  desserts  and  dressings.  The  "re-
turn to  nature"  is  absolute  both  as  regards
everyday  alimentation,  and  the  quality  of
natural  foods  as  a  remedy  for  disease.  The
work  is  a  complete  exposition  of  Tropho-
therapy. Price,  in  cloth  $3.15,  postpaid.
The  Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co.,  Butler,
New  Jersey.


A  THOUSAND WAYS TO PLEASE  A

HUSBAND, WITH BETTINA'S

BEST  RECIPES

By  Louise  Bennet  Weaver  and  Helen
Cowles  LeCron.  Britton  Publishing
Co.,  354  4th  Avenue,  New  York.

A  thousand  books  have  been  written  on
the  art  of  cooking,  ranging  from  the  pre-
tentious preparation  of  royal  banquets  to
the  democratic  makeshifts  of  a  chafing
dish.  These  contain  very  formal,  cut-and-
dried  instructions,  conventional  to  the  last
degree,  but  it  has  remained  for  the  authors
of  this  book  to  approach  the  subject  of
cooking  from  the  human  standpoint,  and
let  us  see  and  feel  the  romance  that  is  hid-
den in  the  subject.

When  we  consider  that  cooking  and
humanity  are  inseparable  companions,  we
wonder  why  the  human  standpoint  has  not
hitherto  been  exploited.  There  is  no  func-
tion in  life  that  involves  sociality  to  such  a
degree  as  people  taking  dinner  together,
and  the  joys  of  eating  dainty  viands  can
be  extended  to  the  art  of  preparing  the
menu,  as  any  enthusiastic  young  bride  will
readily  admit.

We  are  introduced  by  the  authors  to  two
dear  friends  of  theirs,  Bob  and  Bettina,
who  are  just  married,  and  who  are  healthy
enough,  young  enough,  and  hungry  enough
to  enjoy  the  gustatory  delights  that  Bet-
tina's  fair  fingers  create.  This  attractive
young  couple  occupy  a  nice  house  and  are
in  fairly  good  circumstances,  and  the  story
of  Bettina's  dietetic  triumphs  for  a  whole
year  make  the  reader's  motith  water  to
taste  her  dainty  handiwork.  We  would
give  a  good  deal  to  be  a  guest  at  some  of
Bettina's  luncheons,  teas,  porch  parties,  or
motor  picnics,  not  to  speak  of  her  Fourth
of  July,  Thanksgiving  and  Christmas  Day
dinners.

The  rose-colored  lights  of  romance  m
the  story  conceal  a  serious  purpose,  that  is,
to  give  instructions  how  a  thousand  dainty,


Book  Review


1280


practical  menus  can  be  realized,  with  sucli
ability  as  any  enthusiastic  bride,  with  just
a  touch  of  the  artist  about  her,  can  easil}-
prepare  for  the  delight  of  her  Bob  and
their  mutual  friends.

The  book  is  handsomely  bound  and
decorated  with  numerous  illustrations
showing  Bettina  engaged  in  cooking  or
admiring  her  pies  and  preserves,  with  Bob
as  a  delighted  onlooker.  Price,  cloth.  $2.00.
For  sale  by  The  Nature  Cure  Publishing
Co.,  Butler, N.  J.

* * *

ZONE  THERAPY  SIMPLIFIED
By  Dr.  J.  S.  Riley

Zone  Therapy  is  a  new  and  unique  method
of  treating  the  ordinary  ailments  of
humanity  by  means  of  pressures  and  mani-
pulations of  the  fingers  and  tongue,  and
percussion  on  the  spinal  column,  according
to  the  relation  of  the  fingers  to  certain
zones  of  the  body  where  the  offending
organs  of  the  body  are  located.  Zone-
therapy  is  not  mechano-therapy,  nor  in
part  chiropractic,  nor  yet  a  system  of
counter  irritants,  but  is  an  absolutely  new
departure  in  therapeutics!  The  booklet
that  explains  the  rationale  of  this  unique
process  of  cure  is  accompanied  by  a  chart
showing  the  subdivision  of  the  human
figure into some ten longitudinal sections.

These  zones  were  suggested  by  the  five
fingers  on  each  hand.  Lines  are  drawn
along  the  centre  of  each  finger,  from  the
tips  thereof  to  the  shoulders,  where  such
lines  meet,  and  merge  into  similar  lines
drawn  from  head  to  foot,  so  that  each  half
of  the  figure  is  divided  into  five  zones,  each
indicated  by  the  line  being  drawn  along  the
center  thereof.

Both  halves  of  the  figure  are  similarly
mapped  out,  so  that  the  whole  ten  fingers
of  botli  hands  dominate  the  entire  ten
zones  of  the  whole  figure.

It  may  appear  that  so  arbitrary  a  division
of  the  body  could  have  only  an  imaginar)'
relation  to  the  fingers  of  the  hand,  but  we
must  remember  that  the  body  as  a  whole
is  a  single  organism,  whose  every  organ  is
interdependent  with  the  others  and  what
will  invigorate,  or  devitalize  one,  will
similarly  affect  all.  The  plexus  of  the
nervous  system  telegraphs  vibrations,  irri-
tations, and  manipulations,  from  one  part
of  the  body  to  any  other  part,  and  sug-
gestions of  this  kind  are  invariablj^  obeyed
within  the  limits  of  the  reactive  powers  of
the  system.

The  author  of  this  system  of  cure
process  of  treatment.  In  the  case  of  colds,
or  la  grippe,  he  points  out  that  the  nasal
passages  affected  are  mostly  in  the  first,  or
second  zones,  tliat  is.  the  zones  nearest  the
central  line,  and  this  means  that  the  two
inside  fingers,  the  thumb  and  forefinger  of
each  hand,  are  the  ones  to  be  manipulated.


The  thumb  and  index  finger  of  each
hand  are  placed  together,  and  are  alter-
nately firmly  pressed  around  the  ends  and
joints  and  nails  by  the  other  hand.  The
middle  finger  of  each  hand  may  also  be
included  in  the  treatment.  When  you  have
squeezed  the  three  fingers  of  the  right
hand  for  two  or  three  minutes,  change  to
the  other  hand,  and  in  like  manner,  squeeze
and  manipulate  the  same  fingers  of  the
left  hand.  Continue  this  alternate  maneu-
vering for  ten  minutes  at  a  time.  Repeat
the  process  three  or  four  times  a  day.  This
method  of  treatment,  the  author  states,
works  like  a  charm.

A  variation  of  making  the  pressure  on
the  fingers  of  one  hand  by  the  other  with  a
tight  grip,  and  hold  on  for  about  a  minute,
then  change  back  to  the  first  method.  Re-
peat this  process  with  either  hand  clasped
by  the  other,  and  so  repeat  the  process
back  and  forth  for  eight  minutes.  Repeat
both  methods  several  times  a  day.  It  will
have  a  marvelous  effect  in  curing  the  cold.

In  like  manner,  varying  treatments  are
constipation,  epilepsy,  eye  troubles,  goitre,
heart  troubles,  piles,  parah'sis  of  all  kinds,
neurasthenia,  neuritis,  insomnia,  tubercu-
losis, whooping  cough,  and  many  other
ailments. Price  of  book,  $1.00.

Dr.  Riley  has  also  prepared  a  Chart  on
Zone  Therapy,  for  affixing  to  the  wall,
which  shows  at  a  glance  the  various  zones
of  the  body,  with  a  description  of  the
methods  to  be  adopted  in  treating  the,
different  ailments.  Price  of  chart,  prepaid,
$1.00.  The  Nature  Cure  Publishing  Co..
Butler,  N.  J.,  and  Naturopathic  Publishing
Co.,  110  East  41st  Street,  New  York.


"ZONE  THERAPY,  OR,  RELIEVING
PAIN  AT  HOME,"  by  Wm.  H.  Fitz-
gerald, M.  D.  and  Edwin  F.  Bowers,
M.  D.,  (published  by  I.  W.  Long,  Co-
lumbus, Ohio.)

This  is  a  new  addition  to  drugless
therapj',  and  treats  of  such  subjects  as:  Re-
lieving pain  by  pressure,  Headaches,  Cur-
ing Goitre  with  a  probe.  Finger  squeezing
for  eye  troubles.  Making  the  deaf  hear,
Painless  Child  Birth,  Zone  Therapy  for
women.  Relaxing  Nervous  tension.  Curing
Lumbago  with  a  Comb,  Scratching  the  Head
for  sick  stomach;  Haj-  fever,  asthma  and
tonsilitis;  Curing  a  sick  voice;  A  specific
for  \\'^hooping  and  other  coughs,  How  a
phantom  tumor  was  dissipated.  Dr.  White's
Experience,  Zone  Therapy — for  Dentists
only;  Zone  Therapy — for  Doctors  onlj-;
Food  for  thought.  These  are  all  physiolo-
gical methods  of  diagnosis  and  treatment
that  are  new.  The  book  can  be  ordered  for
$1.60  post-paid  from  the  Nature  Cure
Centre,  Butler,  N.  J.


1200  UiiivorMiil Xatiiropathic l>iroo<ory and Buyers' Guide


Herafdof  Health


and

NaturoiKitli


MAGAZINE  FOR  NATURAL  LIFE,  RATIONAL  CURE,  PHYSICAL,  MENTAL,
AND  SPIRITUAL  REGENERATION

DR.  BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  M,  D.,  Editor  and  Publisher


I/— I  I— \|HIS  well-known  organ  of  Naturopathy  is  now  in  its  twenty-second  year  of

publication,  and  more  than  ever  does  it  appeal  to  Vegetarians, Physical

Culturists,  Students,  Business  men,  and  all  who  believe  in  the  doctrines  of

<-—>' Naturopathy as taught therein, which include Bilz Cure, Just Cure,

Kneipp Cure, Kuhne Cure, Curative Gymnastics, Dietetics, Exercise,

Electropathy,  Heliopathy,  Hydropathy,  Massage,  Mental  Science  and  Therapeutic

Suggestions.

^  This  magazine  is  a  storehouse  of  the  latest  and  best  ideas,  telling  how  to  obtain
health,  beauty,  power,  success.  In  a  word,  it  is  the  acme  of  Naturopathic  knowl-
edge regarding  the  science  and  practice  of  Nature's  greatest  healing  forces.
^  Medical  Science,  the  world  over,  now  recognizes  the  fact  that  drugs  and  serums,
as  agents  of  health,  have  lost  their  hold  on  the  confidence  of  mankind  through  their
sheer  impotency  to  cure  disease,  and  that  a  return  to  nature,  as  advocated  in
the  Herald  of  Health,  is  the  only  means  of  obtaining  and  preserving  that
buoyant  health  which  makes  for  physical,  mental  and  spiritual  vitality  and  happiness.

Yearly  subscription,  $2.00; foreign $2.50

Single  copies,  20c.; foreign 25

Back  volumes  of  the  Herald  of  Health  and
Naturopath  from  the  year  1900  to  the  current
year,  per  volume,  $2.50;  cloth  bound  volumes 3.50

DER  HAUSDOKTOR,  Zeitschrift  fur  vernunftige  Lebens-
und  Heilweise,  Dr.  Benedict  Lust,  Editor  and  Publisher
A  German  Magazine  for  the  family,  for
rational  healing  and  natural  living.  This
magazine  discusses  the  same  subjects  and
advocates  the  same  progressive  principles  as
the  Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath;  only
in  German.

Yearly  subscription,  $1.00; foreign $1.50

Single  copies,  20c.; foreign 25

Back  volumes  of  Der  Hausdoktor  from  the
year  1889  to  the  current  year,  per  volume,
$2.00;  cloth  bound  volumes 3.50

Descriptive  Catalogue  of  Naturopathic  Books  for  3c.  in  stamps. Address:

THE  NATURE  CURE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  /iin/ers'  Guide  1291


BUYERS'  GUIDE

OF

NATUROPATHIC  SUPPLIES

FOR  SALE  BY  THE

UNIVERSAL NATUROPATHIC EXCHANGE
110  EAST  FORTY-FIRST  STREET,  NEW  YORK  CITY


THE  HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND  NATUROPATH  is  a  monthly  magazine
devoted  to  a  popularizing  of  the  great  curative  forces  of  Nature,  by which
alone  are  the  causes  of  disease  removed  and  not  merely  temporary  symptoms
abated. The  insurance  of  health  is  the  particular  aim  of  this  publication,  which  is
is  enforcing  its  doctrine  with  all  the  vigor  worthy  of  such  a  humanitarian  enterprise.

It  tells  how  a  sick  man  may  get  well  by  a  scientific  application  of  hydro-
pathy, photopathy  (sun  and  electric  light  baths),  electropathy,  osteopathy,  chiro-
practic, mechanopathy,  massage,  air  and  earth  baths,  neuropathy,  curative  gym-
nastics, breathing  exercises,  Kneipp  Cure,  Ehret  Cure,  Kuhne  Cure,  Bilz  Cure,
dietetics  (including  fasting),  mental  science,  suggestion,  psychopathy  and  every
other  natural  agent  for  lifting  man  to  a  higher  and  happier  plane  of  physical,
mental  and  moral  existence.

Apart  from  specific,  acute  and  chronic  ailments,  there  are  millions  of  people
seemingly  well,  but  who  in  reality  are  made  supremely  miserable  by  the  basic  fact
of  all  disease,  the  retention  of  waste  matters  and  the  decomposition  that  arises
therefrom,  ovdng  to  the  fact  that  the  organs  of  elimination,  the  intestines,  liver,
kidneys,  skin,  and  lungs  are  unable  for  lack  of  vitality  to  remove  such  poisons  from
the  body. Retention  causes  enervation,  and  enervation  in  turn  increases  retention.

The  physical  symptoms  of  retention,  coupled  with  enervation,  are  acute  sensi-
tiveness to  cold,  catarrh,  an  excited  pulse,  laboring  as  if  obstructed,  as  it  really  is.
There  is  a  coated  tongue,  a  perverted  taste,  a  loss  of  smell,  constipation,  headache,
rheumatism,  apathy,  loss  of  appetite,  loss  of  weight,  and  general  toxemia.  Changes
caused  by  chemical  decomposition  and  recomposition  in  the  blood  and  tissues  re-
sult in  compounds  known  as  glucosides,  enzymes,  ptomaines,  and  leucomaines,  many
of  which  are  powerful  poisons.  The  lowered  vitality,  the  impairment  of  vital  func-
tions show  that  the  central  nerve  power  is  taxed  to  the  utmost,  and  the  heart,  em-
barrassed by  the  coagulated  and  decomposing  elements  of  congestion,  threatens
sudden  collapse.

In  the  mental  region,  the  patient,  especially  if  a  woman,  becomes  hysterical,  and
is  troubled  wdth  irritating  sensibility,  bad  temper,  impatience,  unsteadiness,  ranging
from  pietism  to  idiocy,  insomnia  at  night  and  sleepiness  by  day,  fault  finding,  cramps,
nightmares,  exaggerated  tenderness  and  fits  bordering  on  madness.  The  patient
may,  and  often  is,  naturally  good-natured,  but  in  these  abnormalities  of  conduct
it  is  the  enzymes,  ptomaines  and  leucomaines  that  are  getting  in  their  devilish  work.

The  allopathic  physician,  true  to  his  traditional  training,  will  attack  such  symp-
toms with  his  pills  and  potions,  with  serums,  vaccines,  inoculations  and  drugs  that


1292  Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


are  chiefly  poisons,  and  will  succeed  in  many  cases  in  temporarily  stifling  or  sup-
pressing the  symptoms,  but  the  causes  being  untouched,  these  only  break  out  again
with  a  renewed  energy  in  mockery  of  the  useless  medication  of  the  dilettente  docteur
a  la  mode.

civilization,  is  the  immediate  and  forceful  scientific  application  of  Naturopathy,  of
sun  and  air  and  exercise,  of  baths  and  massage  and  dieting,  and  electric  treatment,
of  radiant  light  and  heat,  mental  poise,  with  or  without  the  use  internally  of  herbal
remedies.

This  is  the  principal  theme  of  THE  HERALD  OF  HEALTH  AND  NATURO-
PATH, which  is  published  monthly  at  20  cents  a  copy  and  two  dollars  per  year.  Its
advocacy  of  the  prevention  and  cure  of  all  disease  is  worth  a  hundred  dollars  per
annum  to  its  readers.

DER  HAUSDOKTOR  is  the  German  edition  of  the  HERALD  OF  HEALTH,
the  price  of  which  is  fifteen  cents  a  copy  and  one  dollar  a  year.

We  have  elsewhere  published  a  list  of  Naturopathic  Books  published  by  Dr.
Benedict  Lust,  and  a  still  larger  list  of  similar  works  by  other  publishers,  the  whole
forming  a  CHOICE  LIBRARY  OF  NATURAL  HEALING  of  the  highest  possible
value  to  mankind.

In  this  great  science  and  art  of  Psycho-Physical  regeneration,  the  following  list
of  Foods,  Clothing  and  Appliances  are  the  weapons  by  which  the  Naturopath  com-
bats disease.  We  have  explored  the  entire  field  of  natural  and  manufactured  health
food  products  and  have,  with  infinite  trouble,  selected  the  very  best  foodstuffs  and
beverages  from  the  standpoint  of  possessing  all  the  natural  mineral  salts  and  other
qualities,  which  a  sophisticated  taste  on  the  part  of  the  public  caused  the  manu-
facturers and  exploiters  to  remove  from  modern  foodstuffs.  Subsisting  for  years  on
such  denatured  foods,  people  have  become  enervated  with  the  results  already  de-
that  he  can  acquire  the  vigor  and  hardihood  of  bygone  generations  devoted  to  the
outdoor  life.

These  books,  foods,  clothing,  articles  de  luxe  and  appliances  are  recommended
and  used  by  leading  Physicians,  Teachers,  Healers,  Nurses,  Physical  Guitarists,
Vegetarians  and  New  Thought  people  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere.  Our
market  for  both  buying  and  selling  is  the  entire  world.

We  are  prepared  to  do  business  on  the  following  terms:

First: We  require  the  payment  in  advance  for  all  kinds  of  goods.

Second:  In  cases  where  we  cannot  send  goods  exactly  as  ordered,  by  reason
of  being  temporarily  out  of  stock  of  same,  we  will  substitute  a  similar  book,  or
foodstuff,  or  appliance,  for  the  article  ordered,  subject  to  its  approval  by  the  buyer.

Third:  Stamps  are  accepted  in  payment  for  orders  under  one  dollar.  For  sums
exceeding  that.  Money  Orders  or  Draft  on  New  York,  drawn  to  B.  Lust,  Butler,
N.  J.,  must  be  the  medium.  All  out-of-town  checks  must  include  ten  cents  extra
to  meet  exchange  rate.

Fourth:  Full  name  and  address  of  purchaser  should  be  given  with  name  of
Express  Company,  if  the  goods  are  not  to  be  sent  by  Parcel  Post.


lliiivor.s.'il \]i4iir4»|>:i(liif Diroolory iiiul Iliiyors' fjliiidc


11!»3


in - -
open  air
Living.
The  only
Successful
fresh  air
abode  for  -
any  and  all
Purposes. -


Heliobode.

- Ideal for

Invalids  or

the Lover

-  of  Out-Doors.


Mail  a  Dime  and
KNOW A  GOOD  THING

Whether you contemplate building a Helio-
bode, a  Sanitarium  or  a  Natural  Life  Colony,

Consult a Specialist.

As a Graduate Naturopath of 11 Years

Standing,  I  know  Your  Needs.

H.  A.  F.  WUNDERLICH

Architect
NATUROPATHIC  SPECIALIST

550 Jackson Ave., New York City

Member  of  A.  N.  A.


Appliances  for  all

ABDOMINAL  TROUBLES


TRUSSES

SUPPORTS

BANDAGES


Hernia
Gastroptosis
Pendulous Abdomen
Weak Abdominal Wall


THE  BUNKER  is  the  only  Truss  built  on  a
curative  principle.  It  assists  Nature  to  effect  a
Cure.  Drugless  Wiysicians  should  investigate  these
Appliances.

Literature sent on request.

J.  W.  BUNKER,  INC.

no  W. 34th  St.,  New  York, N. Y.


Are  you  seeking  an  exceptional  opportunity?
WE  WANT  AGENT.S  in  every  city,  town
and  village  in  the  United  States  to  represent
THE  NATUROPATH  MAGAZINE.  This  is
the  original  Nature  Cure  Magazine  and
Guide  to  the  Natural  Mode  of  Life.  In-
valuable to  those  seeking  Information  or
instruction  regarding  the  Natural  Life  and
Drugless  Healing.  Contains  articles  by  the
leading  writers  on  the  Kneipp  Water  Cure,
Hydro-therapy,  Light,  Air,  Earth  and  Diet
Cures,  Massage  and  kindred  subjects.  De-
voted to  the  interests  of  Drugless  Practi-
tioners and  the  spreading  of  the  gospel  of
Natural  Living.  We  have  a  splendid  propo-
sition to  offer  bright,  hustling,  energetic
agents  who  are  willing  to  undertake  and
push  the  representation  of  The  Naturopath
Magazine  and  our  various  other  publica-
tions. W'ill  be  glad  to  submit  same  to  you
on  application.  Write  to-day,  enclosing
stamped  and addressed  envelope.


NATUROPATH  MAGAZINE
Box  185,  Butler,  N.  J.


No  More  Syphilis

Thi.s  terrible  di.sease  has  been  fully  con-
quered by  Natural  treatment.  Far  better
than  noxious  and  poisonous  drugs,  ab-
solutely harmless.  Diet,  Hydropathy,
Lig-ht  and  Air  treatment,  right  Mentality
and  my  wonderful  discovery  are  the  best
for  specific  treatment  of  all  Sexual  dis-
eases. Simple,  effective,  easy  to  apply  in
your  own  home.  Does  all  that  is  claimed
for  Salvarsan,  but  safely  and  surely.
Complete  Instruction  with  outfit  cost
$3.25,  postpaid.  Dr.  E.  Mayer,  1127  Chest-
nut St., Richmond Hill, L. I., N. Y.

For Sale  also  at  Naturopathic  Centre,
110 E. 41st St., New York,  N. Y.


The  Kneipp  Naturopathic  Supply  Store


Carries  a  large  assortment  of  Health  Foods — domestic  and  imported.  The  best  that  can  be
obtained.  Only  such  foods  as  can  be  safely  used  by  adherents  to  the  Natural  Method  of  Living
are  kept  in  stock.  Complete  descriptive  Catalog  of  all  Foods  and  Beverages  will  be  mailed  on
receipt  of  4  cents  in  stamps.

We  carry  the  best  selection  of  Naturopathic  Underwear:  Kneipp' s  Linen  Mesh;  Kneipp' s
Tricot  Linen;  Dr.  Walser's  Ramie  Rippenkrepp,  Air-Cell  and  Net  Garments;  Light  and  Air
Undcrtvear ;  Shirts,  Air  Robes.  Porous  Outer  Clothing,  Linen  and  Cotton  I'entilation  Socks  and
Stockings ;  Linens  and  Yunghorn  Cloth  by  the  yard;  Linen  and  Raiu  Silk  Packs  and  Bandages,
Air  Shoes.  Sandals,  Sprays,  Brushes,  Exercisers,  Cabinets,  Sponges,  Thermometers,  Kneipp's
Herbs, Teas, Pozvders, Oils, Clay, Literature, etc.,  etc.

This  is  the  only  place  in  America  where  you  can  find  these  up-to-date  Health  Goods.  Prices
reasonable. Descriptive catalog and samples of porous cloth on receipt of 5 cents in stamps.


BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  M.  D. :: BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


I


VMi


l?nivor.Hiil Niituropatliie l)ire«-<ory niiil Riiyrrs' Ciiiilc


DUPELL INTERNAL BATH


THE NEAVEST AND MOST IMPROVED DEVICE FOR INTERlVAli BATHING, THE
ELIMIIVATIOX OF INTESTINAL. TOXINS AND BACTERIAL POISONS GENERALIiY


A  Positive  Necessity  in  Every  Household  in  Which
Good  Health  Is  a  AVatchword

MORE  and  more  people  are  daily  realizing  the  wonderful value  of  internal bathing.
It  is  a  positive  safeguard  in  many  vvays. As a remedial agent in constipation,
chronic or occasional, and in auto-intoxication,  the  internal  bath  is  an  appliance
of  utmost  value. This  is  particularly  true  of  the Dupell Internal Bath because of its
scientific  improvements.

The  DUPELL,  INTERNAL  BATH  is  made  of  the  fine.st  para  rubber,  sufficiently  rein-
forced to  bear  the  weight  of  a  man  weighing  300  pounds.  It  can  be  operated  by  sitting
on it  or  by  gravity.

Every  member  of  the  family  can  use  the  DUPEI.1L  ^vithoiit  any  suggestion  of  nncleanll-
ness  by  having  his  or  her  individual  rectal  cone. Ttvo  cones  are  'with  each  outfit.

The  DUPELL  is  also  used  for  vaginal  douching. An extended  cone, which is  part
of  the  outfit,  is  used. The  DUPEIjI.,  can  also  be  used  as  a  hot  water  bottle.

One of the very important  features of  the DUPELL is its
convenience in"  the sick room for giving enema to bed-
ridden patients. For  this  purpose  alone  it  is  worth  many
times  the  price  asked.

AVOID OR SEEK TO LESSEN THE PERILS OF
BACTERIAL. POISONING

Bear in mind that putrefactive  bacteria  are ev-
erywhere present. In warm weather they at-
tack meat  and  vegetables  and  other  substances,
and  cause putrefactive fermentation. Putre-
factive bacteria, in  the  air  everywhere,  find
their  way  into  the  intestines,  on  the  food
eaten. The intestines, constantly main-
tained at  body  heat,  serve  as  a  most  ef-
fective culture  tube. Keep  a  DUPELL
INTERNAL  BATH  in  your  bathroom,
and  regard  It  as  a  vital  necessity..
Not  until  you  have  studied  your-
self, used  a  DUPELL  INTERNAL
BATH, and experienced the
wonderful health-restoring, invigorating effects, can you fully appreciate the great value
of  this  simple  apparatus. It  saves  doctors'  bills, prevents  loss  of  time  from  business, and
avoids the necessity of taking nauseating  cathartics. Safe,  simple  and  easy  to  use.

Thousands  of  Men,  Women  and  Children
would be freer  from ills, would be happier,  Its need is vividly emphasized these days

take  keener  interest in  life, if  the  DUPELL when one hears and reads so much about
INTERNAL  BATH  were in every household. the ravages  of  germ diseases.


Constipation  is  one  of  the  curses  of  every
generation.  It  causes  endless  miseries.  Its
causative  effects  are  far-reaching — some-
times resulting  in  death.

A  well-informed  writer  says:  "People  little
realize  how  much  one's  happiness  or  unhap-
piness  depends  on  the  proper  action  of  the
organs  within  the  abdominal  cavity."

The  DUPELL  INTERNAL  BATH  has  all
the  best  points  of  other  internal  baths,  none
of  their  faults,  and  exclusive  features  of  its
own.


Strengthen  and  Invigorate  Yourself

Cleanse  the  colon,  the  receptacle  endowed
with  absorbent  glands  that  take  up  and  car-
ry to  the  blood  the  foods  of  poison  it  con-
tains. To  the  skin,  the  kidneys,  the  liver
and  the  brain  are  carried  endless  tiny
streams  of  poisonous  matter — destructive
bacteria.

Unless  checked,  innumerable  ills  arise  and"
often lead to grave consequences. Absorp-
tion from the colon leads to many things.
Appendicitis  is  frequently  due  to  poison  gen-
erated in  the  colon.


Headaches
Intestinal Gases
Depression
Kidney  Ailments
Disturbed Heart Action


lia Grippe
Dyspepsia
Mental  Lethargy
Various Fevers
Bad  Breath


Boll.s, Pimples,
Irritability
Nervousness
General  Lassitude


Flatulence

Impoverished Blood

Catarrh

Bad Complexion


Are  a  few  of  the  ailments  and  conditions  that ari.se from a colon loaded with waste and
poisonous  matter.

Bear  in  Mind  That  You  Don't  Have  to  Be  Sick to  Need  a  Dupell  Internal  Bath

The  DUPELL  is  as  necessary  in  the  bathroom  as  your  tooth  brush  or  your  hair  brush.
When  you  stop,  think  and  understand  your  Internal  self,  you  will  realize  the  Importance
and  truth  of  this.  There  isn't  a  doctor  alive  who  won't  tell  you  that  the  occasional  cleans-
ing of  the  colon  is  highly  beneficial.

The  regular  price  Is  $10,  but  to  Introduce  the  DUPELL  INTERNAL  BATH  more  quickly,
we  have  made  the  price  $7.50  (express  prepaid)  for  a  limited  time.

By  purchasing  a  DUPELL  INTERNAL  BATH  now  you  not  only  save  $2.50,  but  you  get
the  newest  and  most  improved  Internal  Bath — an  apparatus  worth,  in  result,  its  weight  In
gold. Send  P.  O.  or  express  money  order  to


DR.  CHARLES  COMPANY


748  Fulton  Street


Sole  Agents


Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


Universal  Xuluroijalliic  Directory  und  Bayers (iuidr


1295


BUYERS'  GUIDE

THE  material,  foods,  clothing  and  therapeutic  appliances  listed  below  have
received  the  endorsement  of  the  American  Naturopathic  Association. The
firms mentioned are reliable  and  most  highly  recommended. The  prices
given,  however,  are  merely  nominal  and  subject  to  market  fluctuations  owing
to  the  present  unsettled  business  conditions.


BUILDING MATERIALS

"Anti-Hydro," HarJen's Concrete

Asbestos Stone Flooring

Building Material

Bungalow — North Carolina Pine

Closets, Lockers — Steel

Concrete Block Machines


HOUSE SUPPLIES AND
ACCESSORIES

Adjustable Chair $40.00

Alabastine for  walls

Awnings, Blinds

Barometers

Bath Room Fixtures, "Omaha"


Fircless Cooker (For Home,

Motoring or Traveling)
Food Choppers  and Grinding  Mills
Gas Mixer

Gasoline Storage Plants
Heating, Laborless
Heater — Electric, Water
Lighting Systems for Homes and

Country Estates
Luncheon Case (For Motoring)
Marvelite, Luminous  Compound,

Painty  etc.
Mattresses — Ostermoor. Ostermoor

& Co., 114 Elizabeth St.,

New York, N. Y.
Mills — Grain and Nut Grinding


Concrete Houses
Flooring — Asbestos, Stone
Flooring — Composition
Flooring — Patent
Furnaces, Ranges. Boilers
Garages— Ambler Asbestos
Heating System — Rector
Hinges, Springs, Butts
Limestone — Indiana
Locks — "Burglarproof"
Locks — Secret
Lockers, Closets — Steel
Lumber

Moulded Concrete Houses
North Carolina Bungalow
Ornamental Iron and Bronze
Ornamental Metal Fixtures
Plans  for  House-Boiilders
Roof — Tile, Lastbestos
Roofing — Slate

Roofing to_ Shingles — Vulcanite
Slate — Inlaid
Steel Products
Stonecrete — Cast Stone

CLOTHING

See  Special List Page.

GREENHOUSES, NURSERIES,
SEEDS AND PLANTS

Dandelion Killer, "Ideal"
Fertilizer, "Ideal"
Fertilizer, "Life Rock"
Fertilizer, "Humus"
Fertilizer, "Lava"
Fertilizer, "Universal"
Frames — Hot  Bed
Fruit  Plants
Grape Vines
Greenhouses — Hot Bed, Sash,

Garden Frames
Trees, Plants, Shrubs
Seeds

HOUSES

Open Air Houses, Heliobode.

H. A. F. Wunderlich, Arch.,
SSO Jackson Ave., New York,

N. Y.


Beds, Table, "Ta-Bed"

Cabinet — Folding Turkish

Carpets

Combination Window Screen

Comfy Holders

Cooking Utensils — Aluminum

Closet — Indoor Comfort

Curtain Fixtures

Dish Washer

Dish Washing Machines

Drain Pans

Electric Lighting Plants for

Homes, Institutions, etc.

Western Utilities Electric Co.

Milwaukee, Wis.
Fruit and Vegetable Evaporators
Fruit Evaporators, "\J.  S."


Natural  Wrong

Skeleton — Naluro-Toilets (low-
down).
Paints and Enamels
Paper Towels

Parer, Sheer  and Corer (Apple)
Pillows — Sleepwell Wonder
Power — Plants, Home


the: heliobode

AS  BUILT  AT  THE  AMERICAN YUNGBORN

Bellevue,  Butler,  N.  J.


H. A. F. WUNDERLICH,  NATUROPATHIC ARCHITECT


Kindly  mention Directory when  ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any  article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealer's  name  obtainable  from  yafnropathic Center, 110  East  Mst  St., Xew York


1296


rnipcrsal  Xdliirojxdhic  Dircvtonj  (uul  liiiijcrs'  (iiiidc


I'limii ('losL-t

Relri^i  '  atois

Roach an  1 Insect Powder

Rugs

Screens — Brass,  Copper  and Bronze

Sewage Disposal Plants for Homes

Shears and Snips

Shower Baths

Soap (Liquid) and Fixtures

Stills — Water

\'acuuin Cleaning Systems for

Homes
X'acuum Sweepers
Water Heater — IClectric. attaches

to Faucet and Electric Light

Socket
Water  Supply  System  for Homes
Wafer System, Pnevimatic
Weilaphone — Helping hearing over

Phone
Window Box — For refrigerating

Foods
Window  Ventilator — "U  Need Me"

MACHINERY AND TOOLS

Evaporators — Kiln Purnaces
Fruit Evaporating Machinery
Motors and Generators
Trucks

JEWELRY
Emblems, Pins, Medals

OFFICE FURNITURE AND
SUPPLIES

Addressing Machine
American Paper Goods
Boxes — Mailing
Cards and Cases
Coin Wrappers
Filing Desks
Envelopes
Gummed Products
Indicators — Ideal Ofifice
Labels — Gummed
Linograph Machine
Lithograph Products
Loose Leaf Books
Mailing Service

Office Supplies  [

Rubber Stamps

Scales — "Parcel Post Zone"  1

OILS AND GREASES  '

The Reliance Oil and Grease Co.,

Cleveland, O.

REAL ESTATE
Bungalow Sites
Colonies — Natural Life
Farm Lands
Fruit Lands

SANITARY GOODS
Blue Cross Innershield Napkins.

Sanitary Manufacturing Co.,

851 Marquette Bldg., Chicago,

111.
Shirts

Toilet Paper
l^nderwear. N-»turopathic Center,

Butler. N. T.


CLOTHING


Porous Cloth for Underwear and
Shirts, bleached or unbleached.


NATUROPATHIC CLOTHING,

APPLIANCES  AND

SUPPLIES

IT  is  not  the  kind  of  clothing  that
keeps  the  body  warm,  but  of
greater  consequence  is  the  man-
ner in  which  it  is  woven.  A  heavy,
closely  woven  fabric  protects  the
body  from  cold  less  than  a  loosely
woven  fabric,  for  it  is  the  air  that
lies  between  and  in  the  meshes  of
the  clothing  and  the  body,  forming
a  garment  of  air,  that  really  keeps
us  warm.  In  very  warm  weather,
fabrics  with  an  open  weave  permit
this  air  to  be  constantly  changed,
making  the  air  next  the  skin  of  the
same  temperature  as  the  air  without
us. Besides,  it  permits  evaporation


gins  to  feel  warm  and  comfortable,
while  the  pain  consequent  to  his  ail-
ment leaves  him.

In  cases  where  active  manipula-
tion is  needed,  the  compress  is  fre-
quently dipped  in  cold  water  as  it
feels  warm,  or  it  is  kept  cool  and
moist  without  being  removed  from
the  body,  by  being  sprinkled  with
water  squeezed  from  a  sponge.

The  Spanish  Mantle  is  a  kind  of
long  flowing  shirt  or  wrap,  which,
when  wet,  covers  the  entire  body
and  is  a  powerful  means  of  drawing
poisonous matter from the corpus.


Porous Linen, per yard $1.00 Yungborn Drawers

of  moisture,  which  is  a  very  cooling
operation,  for  whatever  suppresses
the  evaporation  of  perspiration  is
extremely  inimical  to  health,  as  the
Black  Hole  in  Calcutta  testified.

Porous,  China-grass,  Ramie,  linen
mesh  and  "Yungborn"  garments  re-
ferred to  in  the  following  list  testify
to  the  fact  that  the  skin  breathes,
and  if  suffocated  by  non-porous
attire, suffers from asphyxiation.

In  winter,  the  least  possible  amount
of heavy clothing should be worn,
so  that  the  skin  should  be  hardened  i  Yungborn
to the changes of temperature.

In  the  prevention  and  cure  of
disease,  a  variety  of  flannel  and  line
cloths,  known  as  packs,  compresses,
and  mantles,  are  used  for  hydro-
pathic treatments  that  alleviate  pain,
soothe  local  inflammation,  and  elim-


$2.50


N'ungborn Outing Shirt $3.50


Yungborn Cloth,  per  yard  ....  $1.00

itiate  poisons.  The  procedure  con-
sists in  applying  the  cloths,  first
dipped  in  water  of  the  right  tem-
perature, for  the  treatment  of  the
case  in  hand,  and  folding  them  in
four  or  eight  ply,  to  the  seat  of
pain  or  inflammation.  Such  a  com-
press is  kept  on  the  body  for  a
period  of  from  half  an  hour  to  re-
taining it  all  night  if  the  patient
finds  it  agreeable  to  do  so.  If  the
water  is  cold,  it  gives  a  slight  initial
shock,  but  when  the  patient  is
closely  wrapped up  in  dry  blankets


per yard $1.00  i  over  the  wet  compress,  he  soon  be


Yungborn Dress Shirt $4.00


Kindly mention Directoru when ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
mnnufitrturer's  or  dealers  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  !i1st  St., New York


Universal Xj«<  iiroiiaflilr l)ir«'«'<«>r.v :iii<i IIii.xts' «;iii«le


ll'OT


Oudianteedllectric  light  Plants
foi  Iloine&  Hotels.  Institutions


You  can  have  your  home,  hotel  or  institution
lighted  with  electricity,  no  matter  how  far  you
may  be  from  city  lighting  service.  Utility  low-
voltage  plants  are  safely  usable  anywhere.  The
cost  is  extremely  reasonable  to  begin  with,  and
the  work  and  expense  of  operating  is  inconsiderable.
Electric  lights  are  not  only  more  convenient  and
economical  than  any  other,  but  they  are  absolutely
the  safest.

Don't  imagine  that  you  can't  afford  electric  lights,  or  that  you  need  to
understand  all  about  electricity  in  order  to  run  a  Utility  plant.  We  send  you
complete instructions  for installation  and operation.


I^IGHTING  PUAMTjS


are  backed by the  strong^est Guarantee ever  given ^vith any  Lighting  Plant

A  Utility  Plant  will  prove  a  big-paying  investment  for  the  hotel  or  in-
stitution owner,  because  it  will  be  a  great  magnet  to  draw  trade.  No  traveler
will  think  of  stopping  at  the  hotel  lighted  with  oil  lamps  or  a  dangerous  gaso-
line or  acetylene  system  when  there  is  an  electric  lighted  hostelry  in  the
locality.

12  to  200  Light  Plants  for  Home  and  Hotel  Lighting,  $130  and  up.
250  to  500  Light  Plants  for  Big  Institutions,  $750  and  up.

The  plant  shown  below  is  one  of  our  Junior  Plants — battery,  switchboard
and  generator,  all  mounted  on  one  base.  This  is  the  ideal  type  of  plant  for
small  homes.  Requires  small  space — is  easy  to  install  and  operate,  and  de-
mands but  the  minimum  of  attention.  Even  a  ten-year  old  child  could  run
this  plant.

We  ca,n  furnish  the  right  type  of  plant  to  meet  your  needs — and  we  can
save  you  money. Write:

WESTERN  UTILITIES  CO.,  Dept.  00,  MILWAUKEE,  WIS.


"1


/Rear  mounted  field  regulator  for  reg-
y\ulating  dynamo.

Dynamo  and  engine  starting  switch.

rContactor  which  automatically  opens
.■(and closes  connections  between  bat-
[tery,  dynamo  and  line.


Write  Today
for  Catalog

showing all
sizes  and  types
of  Utility
Guaranteed
Electric  Light-
ing  Plants for
homes, hotels,
institutions,
schools,
churches,
creameries,  etc.

Thousands  in
use  —  everyone
giving  satis-
faction and
saving money
for  its  owner.


1298  Universal  yatiiropat/iic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


YUNGBORN POROUS UNDER-
WEAR AND GARMENTS

(For  Men  and  Women)

Undershirts,  Quality  11,  I  la.
and  III $2.25

Drawers,  Quality  II,  I  la,  and
III 2.50

Shirts,  plain,  without  Collar,
Quality  II.  ITa.  and  III.
natural  color,  $3.00;  bleach-
ed 3.25

Shirts, with in.set Bosom.

Quality  Illa  and Ila 3.75


Yungborn Dress Shirt $3.75

Night Shirts, II and Ila 3.25

Tourist  Shirts,  II  and  Ila...  3.50
Socks, Natural Gray, pure

Mako  or  linen 1.00

Socks, Diamond Black 1.25

Stockings,  Diamond  Black...  1.50
Light-Air-Bathing Robes a la

Just 3.75


:i:i;:-!::;i:i:::f^ai;:;i:;:;;:ii!iiiiiil


Yungborn Sport Shirt $3.50

Corsets  (Health  Waists),
without Bones. All sizes.. 3.25

Colored  Cloth  for  Garments,
37^-inch  widths,  la,  all-
wool,  per  yard, $3.00. Ila,

all-cotton, 1.60

The  cloth  is  to  be  taken
double.  la  outside,  Ila  in-
side, as  the  latter  serves  at
the  same  time  as  lining.  The
colors  arc  non-poisonous  and
wash-proof.


Grecian Bust Girdle. "Corset
Rest." $1.25  and $1.75

Venus  Physical  Culture  Waist,
with  attachments.  $1.75  to.  . 3.25

Dr. Med. Walser's Chinagrass —
For Women and Men.
China-Grass  Air-Cell  Under-
shirts (2 threads) $2.75

China-Grass Air-Ceil Shirts,
with  or  without Collar .... 3.75
China-CJrass Air-Ceil Cloth,
24 in. wide, per yd 1.00


Metz  Net  and  Air  Cell  • —  For
Women and Men.

Shirts,  silk $3.25

Shirts, cotton.  ..  .$1.25 and 1.50

Drawers,  silk 3.50

Drawers, cotton  ..  $1.50 and 1.75

Dr.  Med.  Walser's  Rippenkrepp
(Double  Layer) — For  W^omen
and Men.

Undershirts, unbleached, with

China-Grass ribs $3.25

Undershirts, bleached, with

China-Grass  ribs 3.50

Drawers, unbleached, with

China-Grass  ribs 3.50

Drawers,  bleached,  with  China-
Grass  ribs 3.75

Shirts,  with  or  without  Collar
(can  be  worn  without  un-
derwear) 3.75

Sporting and Night Shirts... 4.00


Yungborn Health Belt $3.00


Shirts,  with  a  stifl  linen
bosom  (renders  underwear
superfluous  for  the  summer) 4.00

Rippenkrepp- texture,  unbleach-
ed or  bleached,  with  China-
Grass  ribs,  width  22  inches,
per yard 1.25

LINEN MESH

Men's Garments are made heavy

weight or medium weight. We

recommend heavy weight for

winter  wear  and  medium  all  year

around. We have in stock  three

sleeve lengflis: Long (23 inches

from  shoulder)  ; Short (21  inches

from shoulder)  ; ]/, (10 inches

from shoulder). Drawers have

four  lengths of  inseani, viz.: 27,

29, 31  and 33 inches;  also  knee

length for  golf  and bicycle wear.

Shirts,  sizes  34  to  48,  price.. $3. 25

Drawers,  sizes  30  to  48,  price  3.25

Union  Suits,  all  sizes  (made  to

order only) fi. 50

Night  Shirts,  all  sizes,  price.. 5.50
fabric especially adapted to the
Night Shirts  are made  of  a
light  fabric  especially  adapt-
ed to the purpose.
Pajamas, all sizes, per suit.  . 7.50
Men's Mosquito Linen-Mesh
Undershirts, a boon in sul-
i try weather, all sizes. Price 2.75


Ladies'  (iarmenti)  are  made  of
medium  weight,  unless  ordered
otherwise.

Vests,  sizes  30  to  4U,  high  or
low  neck,  long,  '/^,  J4,  or  no

sleeves. Price $3.25

Drawers, sizes 22 to ,38,
knee or  ankle length. Price 3.25

Garments  to  order,  excepting
combination suits, $1.00 extra.

l^nion  Suits,  all  sizes,  knee  or
ankle  length  (made  to  order
only). Price . 6.00

Night  Gowns,  all  sizes. Price  5.50
Night  Gowns  are  made  of  a
light  fabric  especially  adapt-
ed to the purpose.
Hosiery

Ladies'  Hosiery,  linen  foot,
black  cotton  top.  All  sizes,
per  pair $1.25  and  1.50

Gents' Half Hose. All  sizes,

per  pair 1.00

Piece  Goods

Heavy,  30  inches  wide.  I'cr
yard $1.50

Medium,  30  inches  wide.  Per
yard 1.25

No.  100,  light,  30  inches  wide.

Per yard 1.15

Bath Towels

Linen  -  Mesh  Friction  -  Bath
Towels, each $1.25

Linen-Mesh  Face  Towels,  each  0.75

The Naturopathic Kneipp

Linen-Tricot

Prices  for  Men's  and  Women's

Underwear

(Following prices are for sizes 32
to 52.)

Undershirts, natural gray.

Quality  50  and  60 $3.25

Undershirts,  bleached.  Quality
30  and  40 3.50

Drawer.^,  natural  gray.  Quality
50  and 60 3.50

Drawers,  bleached,  Quality  30
and  40 3.75

Filet  Undershirts  (neat,  extra
light  and  porous  for  hot
weather) 2.75

Extra heavy knitted for ex-
tremely cold  climates —

Undershirts 4.00

Drawers 4.25

Shirts,  with  or  without  collar. 5.00

Kneipp's Linen  -  tricot Socks,
natural  gray —

Nos. 7  to  12 1.00

Nos. Ili4_  to 12y2 1.15

Kneipp's Linen-tricot Socks,
black — •

Nos. 7 to 11 1.25

Nos.  11 J4  to  12J4 1.40

Linen  Socks,  light  and  extra
fine 1.00

Linen  Stockings  for  Ladies,
Wheelmen,  Sports,  etc. —
Gray,  Nos.  fi  to  0,  80c;  9-4
to  121/i,  $1.25.  Black,
Nos.  fi  to  8,  90c;  S'A  to
12'/2 1.50

Piece  Goods,  Quality  50  and
60,  natural  gray,  26  inches
wide. Per yard 1.25

Piece  Goods.  Quality  30  and
40,  bleached,  30  inches  wide.
Per  yard 1-50

^'arn,  Thread,  for  Mending
Stockings  and  Underwear.
Per skein, black or gray... 0.35

Measure  for  Undervests  and
Shirts —
1.  Total  length.  2.  Circumfer-
ence of  breast  (full  measure).
3.  Length  of  sleeve  from  middle
of  back  to  wri.st  (bend  arm  when
taking  measure).  For  shirts,  add
width of neck wanted.


Kindly mention Directory when ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealers name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, HO  East  filst  St., New York


iriilvors:il IVa^iiropiilliic l)ii-<><-<or.v .-iiiil Itiiycrs' <<iil<lo


THE  KNEIPP  NATUROPATHIC  SUPPLY  STORE


Carries  a  large  assortment  of  Health  Foods — domestic  and  imported.  The
best  that  can  be  obtained.  Only  such  food  as  can  be  safely  used-  by  adherents
to  the  Natural  Method  of  Living  are  kept  in  stock.  Complete  descriptive
Catalog  of  all  Foods  and  Beverages  will  be  mailed  on  receipt  of  four  cents
in  stamps.

We  carry  the  best  selection  of  Naturopathic  Underwear:  Kneipp's  Linen
Mesh;  Kneipp's  Tricot  Linen;  Dr.  Walser's  Ramie  Rippenlfrepp,  Air-Cell  and
Net  Garments;  Light  and  Air  Underrvear;  Shirts,  Air  Robes,  Porchis  Outer
Clothing,  Linen  and  Cotton  Ventilation  Soclfs  and  Stockings;  Linens  and  Yung-
horn  Cloth  bv  the  yard;  Linen  and  Raw  Silk  Packs  and  Bandages,  Air  Shoes,
Sandals,  Sprays,  Brushes,  Exercisers,  Cabmets,  Sponges,  Thermometers,
Kneipp's  flerbs.  Teas,  Powders,  Oils,  Clay,  Literature,  etc.,  etc.

This  is  the  only  place  in  America  w^here  you  can  find  these  up-to-date  Health
Goods.  Prices  are  reasonable.  Descriptive  catalog  and  samples  of  porous
cloth  sent  on  receipt  of  five  cents  in  stamps.


BENEDICT  LUST,  N.  D.,  M.  D. : : BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


All  the  Accessories  for  ''Return  to  Nature"

may  be  had  from  Naturopathic  Supply  Company.

Mr.  Lust  puts  special  emphasis  on  the  Nut-Fruit  Dietary,  Natural  Bath,
Compresses  and  Clay  Bandages,  Porous  Clothing,  and  Air  Sandals.

We  supply  Hand  and  Family  Mills  for  grinding  Nuts,  Grains,  Cereal  Coffee,
etc.,  besides  lieeping  in  stock  the  nuts  and  fruits  themselves,  both  natural  and
prepared.

We  furnish  Bath-tubs,  Sprays,  Hose,  and  various  appliances  for  giving  all
kinds  of  Hydropathic  treatment.

We  import  linen  and  raw  silk  for  bandages  and  compresses  clay  for  poul-
tices, and  herbs  for  embrocations  and  infusions. We  procure  direct  from  Ger-
many the  very  Porous  Underwear  recommended  by  Mr.  Lust  for  its  hygienic,
durahle  and  economic  qualities.

We  carry  a  full  line  of  shirts — for  inner,  outer,  night  and  dress  wear.
Air-robes,  Linen  in  piece  for  made-to-measure  trade,  etc.,  and  we  offer  the  only
line  of  Air  Sandals,  Health  Hosiery  and  Naturopathic  Footwear  available  in
America.

Books,  Exercisers,  Foods  for  Children  and  Invalids,  and  other  Naturopathic
remedies  included  in  this  store.


Complete  Illustrated  Catalogue  for  i  Cents  Postage.
Naturopathic  Supply  Company,  Butler,  N.  J.,  U.  S.  A.


1300


Iniuersal  XaliiiojuiUiif  Dbeclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


Measure  for  Drawers —

1. Circumference of body. 2.
LeiiRth  of  k-g  from  step  to  ankle.
3. Total length of drawers.
Kneipp  Normal  Linen  —  For  Men

and Women.
Undershirts, natural gray....  $2. 25

Undershirts, bleached 2.50

Drawers, natural gray 2.50

Drawers, bleached 2.75

Shirts,  with or  without Collar

and Hosom 3.50

Tourist  Shirts  (Outing  Shirts) 3.75
Linen Cloth  for  Shirts  and  Under-
wear
Normal Linen A, gray, not

bleached, 33 inches wide.. $1.00
Normal Linen B, bleached,

for  Shirts,  33  inches  wide.. 1.10
Normal Linen C, colored
stripes,  for  Shirts  or  Outing
Shirts, 33 inches wide.... 1.1(1
Normal Linen, extra porous,

bleached. 33 inches wide.. 1.50
Linen Cloth, Extra Heavy — For
Bathing Purposes, Bed-Cloth-
ing,  etc.
Quality D,  32 inches  wide.. 1.10
Quality D, 58 inches wide. 1.50
Quality D, (i4 inches wide. 1.75
Pediforme Shoes, constructed
on scientific and truly sen-
sible principles, should be
worn by every member of
the family, including the
baby. Pediforme Shoe Co
36 W. 36th St., New
York, N. V.


Eden Light and Air Shoe.

Pair $5.00

Openwork Low Shoes, Black,

Brown,  Cream,  $4.50  and  5.00
Sanitary  Curled Hair  Insoles,

per  pair 40

Sanitary  Curled Hair  Insoles,

heavy 60


"Rippenkrepp"  Underwear  —  With
Chinagrass  ribs ;  best  for  Fall,
Winter,  and  Spring  use.  Under-
shirts, $3.25;  bleached,  $3.50.
Drawers, $3.  50  ;  bleached,  $3  .  75.


Record  Light  and  Air  Sandal,  best
of  all. Price $4.00

.Sandals, Leather, with strai)s

only,  $3.75 to $5.00

Common  Sense  Naturopathic  Air
Shoe. — A  real  boon  and  a  bless-
ing to  all  those  suffering  from  hot
and  sweaty  feet.  May  be  had  in
Gray,  Brown  or  Black,  made  of
strong,  knitted  linen,  have  the
best  leather  soles — and  let  the  feet
exhale  freely,  allowing  the  air
free access to the pores. They


are  a  great  comfort  to  any  one,
especially  in  hot  weather,  and
keep  the  feet  warm  in  cold  and
cool weather. Look neat and

stylish. Ladies* sizes $4.00

Gentlemen's,  $4.50.  To  take
measure,  put  your  foot  firmly  on
a  sheet  of  paper  (with  the  stock-
ings on)  and  mark  outlines  with
a  pencil ;  then  with  a  tape  meas-
ure around  the  foot  where  it  is
broadest,  right  behind  the  toes,
and  send  these  measurements
with your order.


FOODS  AND  FOOD  APPLIANCES


NATURAL VERSUS UNNATU-
RAL FOOD  PRODUCTS

WHEREVER  man  lives  on  the
simple,  natural  products  of
the  vegetable  world,  he  lives
a  healthy,  happy  life,  but  when  he
becomes  carnivorous,  and  gorges
himself  with  flesh,  meat,  and  wine,
tickling  his  palate  with  an  over-sup-
ply of  spices,  highly  fermentiiig  nu-
trition, he  becomes  the  victim  of
obesity,  cancer,  apoplexy,  nervous
troubles,  auto  -  intoxication,  prema-
ture old  age,  and  early  death.  Man
has  fallen  from  his  high  estate  as
an  eater  of  fruits  and  nuts,  and
like  the  hog,  devours  everything  that
comes  his  way,  fish,  flesh  or  fowl,
even  enjoying  decomposing  game  to
please  an  artificially  perverted  taste.

Man  has  indeed  eaten  of  the  for-
bidden fruit  of  life,  and  is  a  brother
to  the  beasts  of  prey  and  is  filled
with  misery  and  disease  in  conse-
quence. The  stimulating  meat  diet,
cooked  so  as  to  develop  its  most
pungent  flavors,  tempts  the  con-
sumer to  eat  too  much  and  so  be-
come stupid,  languid,  fat  and  full  of
poisons,  due  to  the  fermentation  and
decomposition  of  food  products  that
the  overworked  depurative  organs
are  unable  to  remove.

Thus  it  is  that  a  man  who  would
not  risk  a  dollar  in  a  gambling
transaction,  gambles  with  his  life  to
please  his  artificial  taste.  The  rude
health  and  gigantic  strength  that
belong  to  the  simple  life  are  un-
known to  him.  Eating  of  the  wrong
kinds  of  food  and  eating  more  than
he  can  properly  digest,  without  tak-
ing adequate  exercise,  and  possibly
sleeping  for  an  hour  after  the  mid-  ,
day  meal,  he  is  marked  for  early
death.  His  only  salvation  is  to  stop  I
eating  all  kinds  of  stimulating  food,  ;
and  adopt  a  menu  of  simple,  natural
foods,  and  the  more  nearly  they  are
consumed  as  Nature  has  ripened
them  in  the  fires  of  the  sun,  the
better for the individual.

Civilized  man  is  degenerating.
Look  at  the  under-sized  men  and
women  one  meets  every  day  in  the


crowded  streets  of  our  cities.  The
animals  that  most  nearly  resemble
man,  the  most  highly  developed
apes,  live  on  a  strictly  vegetable
diet.  If  compelled  to  subsist  wholly
on  animal  food,  they  would  degen-
erate like  mankind  and  soon  perish.
We  cannot  imagine  the  powerful
apes  possessing  their  health  and  vi-
tality if  compelled  to  eat  meat,  to
drink  alcohol,  coffee,  tea,  cocoa,
and  to  smoke  innumerable  cigars  a
day.  Nor  would  they  be  so  happy
if  they  indulged  in  cocaine,  mor-
phine, heroin,  coca  cola,  opium,  ar-
senic and  other  poisons.

It  must  be  remembered  that  while
the  organs  of  the  body  in  youth
can  throw  off  the  poisons  generated
by  over-feeding,  or  by  eating  wrong
combinations  of  food,  there  will
come  a  time  in  the  life  of  every  in-
dividual when  the  excretory  energy
of  the  body  fails  in  part,  as  the  be-
ginning of  inevitably  increasing  fail-
ure, to  eliminate  such  poisonous
products,  thus  laying  the  founda-
tion of  the  particular  disease,  or
diseases,  that  will  end  life.  This
state  of  things  calls  for  the  use  of
a  non-stimulating  diet  at  the  earli-
est moment,  to  counteract  the  re-
sults of  the  former  erroneous  die-
tary, and  as  part  of  the  stern  meas-
ures to  be  employed  to  restore  the
poisoned  organism  to  health.

The  following  list  of  beneficial
pure  food  supplies  includes  all
the  necessary  materials  of  a  vege-
tarian, or  natural  life  diet,  so  help-
ful to  dyspeptics  and  convales-
cents. Meats,  tea,  coffee,  spices,  al-
coholic drinks  and  drugs  of  all  kinds
are  excluded,  and  in  their  place  are
offered  gluten  and  whole  wheat  pro-
ducts, cereal  coffees,  cocoas  and
teas,  nuts  of  many  kinds,  nut  but-
ters and  vegetable  oils,  non-alcoholic
drinks,  health  foods  and  special
preparations  of  foodstuffs  to  take
the  place  of  meat  dishes.

Our  mission  is  to  guide  man  back
to  the  use  of  the  simplest  and
purest  foods:  to  an  all-nutritious,
un-stimulating  regimen  devoid  of
poison,  and  calculated  to  enrich  the
system  with  supreme  vitality.


Kindly mention Direcloru when ordcrinq merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealer's  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  ilst  St.,  New York


IJiilverKiiI IVnliiropaf liic l)lre«-<ory  :iii<l Itiijers' (<iiiclo


Dr.  BENEDICT  LUST

BUTLER,  N.J.  AND  TANGERINE,  FLA.,  U.S.A.

International Establishment for the Science of Healing
without  Drugs  and  without  Operations


Established September 15th, 1896, Enlarged, 1904, 1908 and 1912.
Consultation  Hours: 10  to  12  a.  m. Sundays,  10  to  12  a.  m.,  3  to  6  p.  m.


Special  Advice  and  Information  in  All  Cases  of  Sickness,
including  by  Letter

Great  success  without drugs and without operations; also in cases of

internal  malignant  growths,  tumors and ulcers,  external

gangrenous inflammation, etc.

A  new  and  reliable  method  of  diagnosis,  both  for  actual  disease  and  for
predisposition  to  disease,  tlirough  the  Science  of  Facial  Expression,  with-
out local examination, particularly in female and abdominal diseases.

Patients  from  all  parts  of  the  world. Prospectus  Free.


The  folloiviiij?  -^vorks  on  the  Kuhne  System  have  also  been  published  by  Dr.
B.  I>ust,  Butler,  N^.  J.,  an«l  >vill  be  for^vardert,  on  receipt  of  the  publisher's  price,
postpaid  to  any  part  of  the  -world.

I.OIIS  KUHIVE,  <'THE  SCIEIVCE  OF  FACIAL  EXPRESSION."  A  handbook  of
a  new  system  of  examination  to  find  tlie  state  of  the  disease,  based  upon  original
researches  and  discoveries.  Fully  illustrated.  Has  appeared  in  German,  English,
Spanish,  Danish  and  Telugu.  Price  of  the  English  or  German  edition,  elegantly
bound,  $5.00,  or  £1.

LOUIS  KUHNE,  "A>I  I  WELL  OR  SICKf"  A  vade-mecum  and  adviser  for
everyone.  Has  appeared  in  German,  English,  French,  Spanish,  Portviguese,  Dutch,
Italian,  Swedish,  Danish,  Hungarian,  Telugu  and  Urdu.  Price  of  the  English  or
German  edition  75c,  or  3s.

LOUIS  KUHXE.  "THE  REARING  OF  CHILDREN."  A  word  of  warning  and
advice  to  all  parents  and  teachers.  Has  appeared  in  German,  English,  Portuguese,
Dutch,  Danish  and  Hungaiian. 50c,  or  2s.

LOUIS  KUHNE,  "CHOLERA,  DIARRHEA,  AND -SIMILAR  ILLNESSES:  Their
Cure and Their Treatment ^vithout Medicines." Has appeared in German and

Portuguese. Price  of  the  German  edition,  50c.

DR.  B.  LUST,  REPORTS  OF  CURES  by  means  of  the  New  Science  of  Healing
without  Drugs  and  without  Operations,  together  with  a  Prospectus.  38th  edition.
Has  appeared  in  German.  English,  French,  Spanish,  Portuguese,  Dutch,  Italian,
Russian,  Swedish,  Danish,  Greek,  Roumanian,  Polish,  Bohemian  and  Hungarian.
Gratis.


MRS. B. LUST'S
•Vunsborn"  Dietary.


NATUROPATHIC-VEGETARIAN COOKERY BOOK. The

Only in  the  English  language. Cloth, $1; paper  cover, 75c.


Address  all  orders,  with  Postal  Money  Order,  to

DR.  BENEDICT  LUST,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


1302


Universal  Xdluropalhic  Dircclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


Austin, Nichols & Co., New York

OLIVE OIL IN TINS
Spanish

Sunbeam Brand
Pat. Nozzle

per  gal.

1 gal., 10  in Case $  3.25

1 gal., 3  in  Case 3.30

'A  gal.,  20  in Case 3.35

yi gal., 6  in Case 3.40

J4 gal.,  40  in Case 3.45

Screw Top

14 gal., 12 in Case 3. 55

'A  gal.,  80  in  Case 3.75

•A  gal., 24  in Case 3.80

Screw Cap

1/16  gal.,  96  in  Case 4.1S

3  gal. assorted 11.50

Carmelo Brand
Screw  Cap

per  gal.

5  gal., 1 in Case $2.85

1  gal., 6  in  Case 3.00

'A gal., 12  in  Case 3.10

54 gal.,  24  in Case 3.20

'A  gal.,  48  in Case 3.40

1/16  gal.,  96  in  Case 3. 75

Rodier  Brands, Plain  Tins
Brass label

per  gal.

1 gal., cs. 6 tins —

Vi gal., cs. 12 tins $4.00

'A gal., cs. 24  tins —

The  above  are  round  tins  with  neck
spouts.

Barton & Guestier, Decorated  Tins
Pat. Nozzle

per  gal.

1 gal., cs. 6  tins $5.00

Vz gal.,  cs. 12 tins 5.25

14 gal.,  cs. 24  tins 5.50

Vs gal., cs. 25 tins 5.90

2/16  gal.,  cs. 48  tins 6.55

1/32 gal., cs. 48  tins 7.25


PEANUT OIL

Delft's Brand, Decorated

per  gal.

2 S-gal. tins  to  case $1.80

10 1-gal. tins  to  case 1.95

20 ^-gal. tins  to  case 2.00

40 j4-gal. tins  to  case 2.25


DOMESTIC SALAD OIL
Cottonseed — In glass

Republic

per  C

Fifths, 24  fluid Oz 1 dz. $5.50

Large 1  dz. 3.75

Medium 2  dz. 3.00

Small 2  dz. 2.00

Salad Oil — In tin
Diamond  M

per  gal.

5-gal. tins. 2  in  case $1.70

S-gal.  tins. 1 in  case 1.75

1-gal.  tins. 10  in  case 1.85

Providence  Salad  Oil — In  glass
Union

per  C

Large 1 dz.  $4.25

Medium 2  dz. 4.55

Small 2  dz. 2.70

Kindly mention Directory when
manufacturer's  or  dealer  x  name


Austin, Nichols & Co., New York  '  Austin, Nichols & Co., New York


SAWTAY
Made from cocoanut oil

per  tin

20- lb tins $  4.70

40- lb tins 9.20

65-ttj tins 14.80

In  cases  per  cs.

48 No. 10  tins  $6.00

24  No. 25 tins  7.75

12 No. 50  tins  7.75

6 No. 100  tins  7.7S

COTTOLENE

All prices are per case

Less  j

No.  tin than  5  case

per  cs. 5  cases  lots i

Medium 15 12.50  12.40

Small 30 12.50  12.40

Large 6 12.50  12.40

Small A  boxes 6.35  6.30

Freight paid on 2 case lots and
upward.

CRISCO

In  Cases  per  cs.

24 IH-lb tins  $7.75

12 3- lb tins  7.75

6 6- It) tins  7.75

RICE  FLOUR

per  lb
A. N. & Co's. Bags of  230

lbs $0.10

Sunbeam. Cont. 24  No. 1 . . . .9J4

POPPING  CORN

Sunbeam. Case of 20 l-tb
packages —

GLUTEN  FLOUR
Sunbeam

per  bag

5-tb Cotton Bags $1.25

10-tb Cotton Bags 2.50

25-tb Cotton Bags 6.25


GRAHAM FLOUR
In Bulk

Nervine. Entire Wheat $16.50

Franklin Mills. Entire  Wheat 18.00

Franklin Mills. A bbl 10.00

Carr's Graham 11.50

Sunbeam Hygienic. Superior

to all 11.50

Standard Niagara 11.00

Rye. Craham or Meal. New 1.00

In  Paper  Bags

per  cs.
Franklin Mills. Entire Wheat
10 5-tbs $4.75

In Muslin Bags
Sunbeam

Each
Hygienic. 3- lb bags.  24  in  jute

bapr $0.30

Hygienic.  5-tb bags. 12  in  jute

bag SO

Hygienic.  7-tb  bags. 10  in  jute

bag 69

Entire  Wheat.  3- lb  bags.  24  in

jute bag 33

Entire  Wheat.  7- lb  bags. 10  in
jute bag 72


Bulk.


RICE
Bags of 100 lbs.


Domestic Fancy Head ....$0.10

Domestic Choice 09J4

Broken 06J/i

Japan Style 0814

Cartons, Uncoated

per  lb
rancy Head, Sunbeam. Is.

Cases 100 Is $0.11J4

Cotton Bags, Uncoated
Sunbeam

per  lb
Fancy Head. Bags 100 Is.  $0.11
Fancy  Head. Bags 22 3s. .10J4
Fancy  Head. Bags 20 5s. AOA

Cotton Bags, Japan Style
Sunbeam

per  tb
Fancy Head. Bags 100 Is. $0.1054
Fancy Head. Bags 33 3s. .10
Fancy Head. Bags 20 Ss. .09^

RYE FLOUR
In Bulk

per  bbl.
A. N. &  Co.,  York  State ...$12.50

In Muslin Bags, Sunbeam

Each
3-tb bags. 24  in  Jute  Bag.  .$0.20
7-tb  bags. 10  in  Jute  Bag.. .63^^

MACARONI
Angelus

per  box

Mezzani. Net  22 tbs $3.00

Spaghetti. Net  22 lbs 3.00

Carmelo — Domestic

per  tb
Mezzani. Boxes. 25 12-oz.

Cont $0.12

Spaghetti. Boxes. 25 12-oz.

Cont 12

Vermicelli. Boxes. 25 12-oz.

Cont 12

ABC  Paste. Boxes. 25 12-oz.

Cont 12

Domestic

Sunbeam

per  tb

Mezzani. 25/ls  short $0.15

Spaghetti. 25/ls  short 15

Vermicelli. 2S/1 short 15

Elbows. 25/1 short 15

Alphabets. 2S/1 short 15

Le Moyne

per  tb

Mezzani. 25/1 short $0.16

Spaghetti. 25/1 Open Pipe 16

Spaghetti. 25/1 Solid Pipe 16

EGG NOODLES

Sunbeam

per  cs.
Broad, Med. or Fine. \2'A

ctns $1.40

Broad, Med. or Fine. 24}4

ctns 1.45

per  tb
Broad, Med. or Fine. 13-tb
bulk $0.18

Republic — Assorted

per  tt>

12 1-tb ctns $0.19

per  cs.

24 10c. ctns $2.45

48 Sc. ctns 2.50


ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
obtainable  from  Nalnropalhic Center, 110  East  hist  St., New York


Universal Naturopathic Directory  and Iliijcrw' Guide


EVERY PROGRESSIVE, UP-TO-DATE PRACTITIONER

Whether Naturopathic, 0»teopathic, Chiropractic or Medical .should u»c and recommend

"SUNBEAM"  PURE  FOOD  PRODUCTS

"THE WORLD'S BEST"

ALL practitioners recognize  what an essential factor food is in maintaining health and in
curing disease. That improper or non-nutritious food can nullify the most scientific
practice. Therefore,  since  the  BEST  QUALITY food  contains  the MOST  NUTRIMENT,
"Sunbeam"  being  THE  WORLD'S  BEST  QUALITY,  is  the  food  that  you  should  always
use  and recommend to INSURE the best results. We cater  to Naturopathic Institutes, Health
Resorts,  etc. It  will  pay  you  to  call  and  see  us.  or  write for  information and prices on  foods  to
meet  your  particular  requirements.

AUSTIN,  NICHOLS  &  COMPANY,  Inc.,  NEW  YORK  CITY


THE  LARGEST  IMPORTING,  MANUFACTURING  WHOLESALE  GROCERY  CONCERN  IN  THE  WORLD


Life-Rock  Improves  All  Crops

A  pulverized,  volcanic  magma,  Life-Rock  contains  the  ten  (10)  tissue-
building  mineral  salts,  viz. — sulphur,  phosphorus,  potash,  sodium,  mag-
nesium, calcium,  manganese,  aluminum,  iron  and  silica.  It  is  something  like
Phonolite  (German  "Stonemeal"),  but  much  better  in  several  ingredients.
Has  aseptic,  neutralizing  function  for  infected  soils,  as  well  as  invigorative
and  restorative  powers.

Life-Bock  is  a  remarkable  plant-food,  enhancing  the  size,  color,  flavor,
and  keeping-qualities  of  all  crops.  Eliminates  cutworms  and  red  spiders;
arrests  blights,  rots  and  fungi  diseases.  Recommended  for  all  uses,  from
house  plants  to  all  kinds  of  fruits,  vegetables  and  cereals.  Adapted  for  soils
in  all  climates.  Improves  germination  of  seed.  Highly  indorsed  by  growers
under  glass,  and  by  intensive  farmers  for  soil  invigoration  and  crop  im-
provement.

Reliable  agents  wanted  in  all  communities  to  take  orders  and  explain
the  wonderful  powers  of  Life-Rock,  as  proven  by  many  authoritative  testi-
monials.

Life-Rock  is  put  up  in  various  sizes,  from  100  lb.  bags  down  to  22  oz.
cans,  and  prices  are  comparatively  low.  A  trial  package,  enough  to  be  used
Oil  window  plants,  etc.,  will  be  sent  postpaid  upon  receipt  of  25  cents.

Correspondence  solicited. ^Yrite  at  once  for  particulars.


LIFE-ROCK COMPANY


44  BROMFIELD  STREET


BOSTON,  MASS.


1304


I'tiiuersal  XcUurupathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Austin, Nichols & Co., New York

Mueller's

per  contr.
Flag  Brand.  24  10c.  sizes.  ...$2.40
Flag  Brand.  48  5c.  sizes.  .  .  .  2.50
Trisom Brand. 12-lb bulk. ... 1.60

SMALL PEARL  TAPIOCA

Substituting German Sago

Cartons

per  ctn.
Sunbeam. Cont'r. 24 No. 1

ctns $0.15J4

BEANS

Domestic

Tare  pt-r  100  lbs.

Vi Lima. Cal $15.50

J4 Marrow. Imp 14.00

^ Medium. N. V 18.00

J4 Pea. X. V 15.50

J4 Red  Kidney. N. 'i' 16.00

54 White Kidney. Tap 13.50

H Vellow-Eyed. Jap 15.50

a  Turtle Soup. Jap 13.50

PEAS

Bulk

Tare  pfi"  100  lbs.

J4 Green. Scotch $13.00

H  Split, Yellow 13.00

H  Split, Green. Bags 17.00

'/i Black Eye. 2 bus 1.00

LENTILS
000000  Crop 1913. Bags $0.15

CORN  MEAL
In Muslin Bags

Each
Yellow. Gran. 3- ft bags. 24

in jute bag $0.22

Yellow. Gran. 7tb bags. 10

in jute bag SOJ^

White. Gran. 3tt) bags. 24

in jute bag 22

White. Gran. 7- lb bags. 10

in jute bag 505^

Dixie. White. 3-ltj bags. 24
in  jute bag 22

RYE  MEAL
In Muslin Bags

Each
Sunbeam. Best. 3- lb bags.

24  in  jute bag $0.26^

FARINA
Bulk
A. N. & Go's. B. Bags, 98

lbs $  8.50

A. N. & Go's. B. Bbls., 196

lbs 10.50

Packages

per  ctn.
Sunbeam. Cases. 24 No. 1

ctns $0.10^

Cream. 18  pkgs.  per  case .... 3.70

HOMINY
In  Bulk

Nichols' Pearl. Bbls $11.00

Nichols' Pearl. lOO-lb Sacks 5.50

In Packages

per  pkg.
Sunbeam. Cont'r. 12 No. 2

ctns $0.15

Indiana  Mills.  Cases. 8  No.  5
ctns 36


Austin, Nichols & Co., New York Austin, Nichols & Co., New York


Nichols,
lbs. .


ROLLED OATS
In  Bulk

Crushed. Sacks, 90


.$6.00


In Packages

per  cont.
Sunbeam. Cont'rs. 18 ctns.
24-oz —


OATMEAL
In  Bulk

Fine Gr'd. Aberdeen. Bbls.,

200 lbs $14.00

Fine Gr'd. Highlander. Bbls.


DATES
Fard

19  lbs., Small  boxes, 1 lb each.
Bulk of 7 lbs.

per  lb
tHif. Kx., Fancy, Cs., 9-12

lib Boxes $0.17

tH+ Fancy,  60  lbs —

Circle  W., Ex. Ch.,  9-12  1-tb

Boxes 165^^

FIGS

California

per  lb
Calimyrna, 2^ in. Layers.
Boxes of 10 lbs $0.16


200 lbs.' 14.00 Sultan, 2^< in. Layers


Pinhead  Sham.  B  or  C. Bbls.


Boxes of 10 lbs.


200 lbs. 14.00  ,  Natural, Fancy. Boxes of


Pinhead  Sham.  B  or  C.  Bags

100 lbs 7.00

Pinhead  Ohio.  B  or  C.  Bbls.
200 lbs 14.00

Pinhead Ohio. B  or  C. Bags,

100 lbs 7.00

In Packages

McCann's
Irish Imp. Cases. 12 5-lb

tins $  9.80

Irish Imp. Cases. 24 2-tb

tins 8.75

Robinson's
Scotch  Imp. Cases. 20 5-lb

tins 12.50

Scotch  Imp. Cases.  24/2s ... —

POTATO  FLOUR

per  lb

Bulk.  220  Bags $0.14

Sunbeam. Cont. 24  No. 1-tb

ctns 12J4

Sunbeam Cont. 48 No. 1-tb

ctns 12;t4

APPLES

Ring Cut

per  lb
Anco, Fancy, Cs., 36 1-tb

ctns _ $0.17

Hudson, Choice, Cs., 48

16-oz. ctns 16

Fancy, Boxes  of  SO lbs 14^'2

Whole, Choice, Boxes of

25 lbs 1414

APRICOTS

per  ctn.
Anco,  Fancy,  Cs.  36  1-tb  ctns.


50 lbs.


M'/j


PEACHES
Peeled

per  ctn.
Anco, Fancy Muirs, Cs., 36

No. 16  ctns $0.18

per  lb
Blue Ribbon. Boxes of 25

lbs $0.15  ;-4


Unpeeled

Anco, Fancy, Cs., 36 No
16 ctns


per  ctn.


0.14!.4
per  lb
Ex. Fancy Muirs, Cs., 25

lbs $0.13}^

Fancy Muirs. No. 25 ctns. .13
Standard. Boxes, 25 lbs. .. .11

PEARS
Halves

per  ctn.
Sunbeam, Fancy, Cs., 36

No. 16  ctns $0.16

per  tb
Boxes  of  25  lbs $0.14J.<

PRUNES

California

Sunbeam — In  No. 16  Ctns.

per  ctn.
Ex. Fancv. 30/40 Cs. 36

ctns $0.1SJ4

Ex. Fancy. 40/50 Cs. 36

ctns 1554


Various — Choice


25  I  Imperial  Prunes. 20/30  Bxs


per  tb


per  lb
Republic, Fancy, Blenheim.
Boxes of 25  lbs $0.23


CHERRIES— Pitted
Fancy, Imported,  Sour

Stmbeam, Cs., 36 No. 16 ctns —
Sunbeam,  Boxes  of  25  lbs. ... —

California
Pansy, Royal Anne, Boxes of
25 lbs —

CURRANTS
Washed  and  Cleaned

per  ctn.
Sunbeam, Fancy, 36 1-tb

ctns $0.32

Republic, Choice, 36 1-tb

ctns 26  ''^


25 Ifis $0.16

Santa Clara. 30/40 Bxs. 25
lbs 14


California, French Style

Sunbeam. 30/40 Cs. 1 doz.


2-tb Jars


.$7.00


Oregon


Fancv.  20/30  Bxs.  25  lbs.
Fancy.  30/40  Bxs.  25  lbs.
Fancy.  40/50  Bxs.  25  lbs.


per  tb
$0.14
.13
A2y,


RAISINS

California Loose Muscatels

per  tb
Choice. 3  cr.  Boxes.  SO  lbs.  $0.09
Seedless. 1 cr. Box. 50
lbs 10J4


Kindlu mention Directory when
ma  nil  fact  II  re  r's  or  dealer  s  name


ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  ilst  St.,  New York


Viiivcrsal  Naliuopatliic  Directory  and  Bnijers (iuidr


1305


Austin, Nichols & Co., New York Austin, Nichols & Co., New York


Malaga Loose Muscatels

per  box
Casado. 6 or. Grade Boxes.

22 lbs $3.25

Casado. S cr. Grade Boxes.
22 lbs 3.09


California Clusters and Layers

per  box
Crown London Layers. Bxs.

20 lbs $2.10

Crown London Layers. 14

Box. 10 lbs 1.25

Crown London Layers. J4

Box. S lbs 70


Malaga Clusters
Sections (Clusters) Sunbeam Anco
per  box
No. 1 Boxes,  sections. .  .  .

No. 2 Boxes,  sections. . . .

No. 4 Boxes, 20  sections. ...$4.25
No. 5 Boxes, 20 sections. .  . . 3.75

Casado
7 cr. Nonpareil Bxs. Syi lbs. $1.60
6  cr. Nonpareil Bxs. Syi lbs. 1.40

RASPBERRIES
Fancy Black

per  ctn.
Sunbeam.  Cs.,  36  No.  16  ctns.  —
Bulk. Boxes  of  25  lbs —


PROPRIETARY  PREPARATIONS


BERHALTER HEALTH FOOD
COMPANY


CARQUfiS DRIED FRUITS


Chicago, 111. Bakery,
Parkway, near Lincoln Avenue,
Store, 1428 N. Clark St.; Restau-
rant and  Store, 19  E.  Van  Buren  St.

List  of  Berhalter  Health Foods

Whole Wheat Meal Bread

Fine Ground Whole Wheat Bread

Whole Wheat Bran Bread

Whole Wheat Fruit Bread

Whole Rye Bread

Whole Wheat Pies

Bran Fruit Laxative

Whole Wheat Fruit and Nut Rolls

Whole Wheat Pecan Cake

Whole Wheat Cookies

Honey Oat Cookies

Honey Wheat Cookies

Whole Wheat Cinnamon Roll

Four Grain Combination Cookies

Laxative  Bran  Wafers

Bran Cookies

Whole Wheat Cup Cakes

Bran Muffins

Whole Wheat Buns

Whole Wheat Doughnuts

Honey-Maple Peanut Candy

Unfired Health Bread

Pure Grape Juice

Pure Honey

Natural Peanut Butter

Berhalter Wheat Breakfast Food

Berhalter Laxative Breakfast Food

Coarse Whole Wheat Bread Flour

Fine Ground Whole Wheat Bread

Flour
Fine Ground Rice Flour
Fine  Ground  Whole  Rye  Flour
Fine  Ground Barley  Flour, (Coarse

Ground)
Fine Ground  41% Gluten Flour for

Diabetes  «

Fine Ground Rolled Whole Wheat
Fine Ground Rolled Whole Oats
Unground, Cleaned Hard Wheat

for Bread
LTnground, Soft Cleaned Cooking

Wheat
Unground, Cleaned Rye
Hulled XTnground Oats
Hulless Barley, LInground
Buckwheat Grits
Clean, Fresh Wheat Bran
Berhalter's Whole Rice
Barley Grits

Chas  S.  Cash — Honey,  Figs,  Dates,
Pnmes,  Raisins,  Peanut  Butter.
225  Fulton  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.


Garque's  Like-fresh Prunes... .30
Diversey Carque's Like-fresh Pears 30


('arquc's Fruit Laxative 10

Carque's Fruit Bars 05

Carque's Stuffed Dates 25

Carque's  Olives . .20

Carf|ue's Swedish Black Mis-
sion Figs 25

JULIUS HENSEL MEDICAL
AND DIETARY PREPARA-
TIONS

The Hillside Health Food Co.,
Sioux City, Iowa

Hensel Tonic

12 oz $1.00

1 qut 2.50

1 gal 8.00

Sal-Bion
% lb $1.00

yi  lb 1.75

1 lb 3.00

Makro-Bion

.Same prices  as Sal-Bion.

Ner-Bion

Same  prices  as  Sal-Bion.


Carque's  Like-Fresh  Peaches.
Carque's  Like-fresh  Apricots.
Carque's Sultana Raisins

(Seedless) 20

Carque's Cluster Raisins 20


Yoghurt

2  oz $1.00

% lb 2.00

^ lb 3.50

1 lb 6.00


Hensel's Foods have the New Life-Giving Nutritive Salts


Kindly mention Direclori) when ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealer^s  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center. 110  East  ilst  St..  New York


1306


rninrrsal  Xdluropdl/iic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Er-Bion

14 lb $1.00

'A lb 1.75

I lb .3.60


KNEIPP HEALTH FOODS


1  oz.

2  oz.
4 oz.

14 lb.
1 lb.


"Schokomaya'


.$0.50
.  1.00
.  2.00
.  3.50
. 6.00


Nutro Cocoa Compound

•A lb $0.50

1 lb 1.00


Oat  and Cocoa Compound

'A lb $0.50

1 lb 1.00

Banana and Cocoa Compound

A lb $0.50

1 lb 1.00

Acorn and Cocoa Compound

A lb $0.50

1 lb 1.00

Ready Cocoa Compound

A lb $0.50

1 lb 1.00

Coffee Substitute

1  package $0.35

3  packages 1.00

Nutr-Ad

2  oz $0.50

4  oz 1.00


EDUCATOR  CRACKERS

No. 1  Cracker,  small  tin,  .'iOc;

smallest tin $0.20

Xo. 1 Wafer, small tin, 50c;

smallest  tin 20

No.  2  Cracker,  small  tin,  50c;

smallest  tin 20

No.  3  Cracker,  small  tin,  40c;

smallest tin 20

-N'o. 3 Wafer, small tin, 50c;

smallest tin 20

No. 4 Biscuit, small tin, 50c;

smallest tin 20

No.  5 Biscuit, small  tin,  40c;

smallest tin 20

Fruited Educator, small tin,

50c; smallest tin 30

Oatmeal Biscuits, small tin,

50c; smallest tin 30

Barley Biscuits, small tin

50c  ; smallest tin 30

Golden Maize Biscuits, small

tin, 50c; smallest tin 25

Almonettes. .Small tin. tiOc;

smallest tin 35

Baby Educator, small tin,

45c  ;  smallest  tin 30

Rye Biscuits, small tin, 50c;

smallest tin 30

Rye Slips, small tin, 4.'ic;

smallest tin 20

Health Cookies 35


Father  Kneipp  supplemented  his
hydropathic  ablutions  for  the  cure
of  disease  with  a  simple  vegetarian
regimen,  prescribing  only  such
cereals  and  garden  produce  as  had
not  been  robbed  of  their  mineral
constituents,  so  necessary  to  the
health  and  vigor  of  humanity.  There
is  nothing  in  the  Kneipp  list  of
foodstuffs,  even  where  cooked  foods
are  offered,  that  will  disturb  th«
digestion,  but  on  the  contrary  they
will  impart  the  greatest  strength
and  activity  to  the  body.  It  is
well  in  this  artificial,  pretentious
and  expensive  age  to  have  one  sane,
clear  voice  calling  man  to  a  repast
so  simple  as  that  recommended  by
Father Kneipp.

KNEIPP  PREPARATIONS

Coffee-Malt,  Genuine  Kneipp. — Per-
haps the  most  popular  of  all  the
Kneipp  foods.  Pure  malted  bar-
ley, flavored  with  caffeone,  roasted
by  a  specially  patented  process,
and  sealed  in  one-pound  sacks.
Any  chemist  will  tell  you  that
caffeone,  the  dainty,  volatile  aro-
ma, is  very  different  from  caffeine,
the  deadly  poison ;  any  dietist
will  tell  you  that  both  malt  and
barley  are  invaluable,  the  dias-
tase of  the  one  facilitating  the  as-
similation of  the  other;  and  any
rationalist  will  maintain,  given  a
thoroiigh  trial,  the  inherent  su-
periority of  the  malt-coffee  over
the  pseudo-hygienic  drinks  foisted
as  coffee-substitutes.  One  pound,
20c;  2  lbs.,  38c ;  4  '
lbs.,  $1.50;  2S-lb.
50-lb.  case,  $8.75;
$17.50.

Egg-Noodles. — Father  Kneipp's  fa-
vorite dish.  Unadulterated  ;  made
from  best  whole-wheat  flour  and
fresh-laid  eggs.  I'sed  extensively
in  sanitariums,  but  just  as  whole-
some, palatable  and  satisfying  for
family  and  individual  use.  A  de-
licious substitute  for  macaroni,
spaghetti  and  like  products  of
dirt  and  white  flour.  Pound  box,
35c; A lb., 25c; three kinds.

I'-lderberry  Wine.  —  Recommended
originally  by  Father  Kneipp,  and
latterly  by  many  eminent  physi-
cians, sets  the  stomach  a-hunger-
ing,  the  liver  a-functioning.  Has
valuable  sudorific  properties.  To
be  used  as  a  beverage,  tonic,
food.  Quart  bottle,  $1.00;  pint,
60c.

Honey-Wine(Mead).  Father  Kneipp.
The  nectar  of  flowers  distilled  for
the  nourishment  of  man.  A  direct
bequest  from  the  early  Germans,
and  a  famous  factor  in  their
sturdy  strength  and  proverbial
longevity. Tones the stomach.


lbs.,  7Sc;  8
case,  $4.50
100-lb case,


promotes  digestion,  enhances  ap-
petite. Has  a  most  salutary  ef-
fect on  blood,  kidneys,  and  blad-
der. Honey  is  one  of  the  few
foods  whose  assimilation  begins
directly  on  entering  the  mouth.
Noticeable  heat  and  energy  are
its  immediate  effects,  and  in  cases
of  intestinal  or  bilary  difficulty,
it  is  an  adequate  substitute  for
starches  and  fats.  Quart,  $1.00;
pint,  COc.  Pure  imported,  quart,
$1.25; pint, 60c.

Oatmeal  Biscuits. — Father  Kneipp.
— Prepared  with  oatflour  and  real
Swiss  milk-m^al.  One  pound  of
the  latter  equals  five  pounds  milk
in  nutritive  value,  and  far  sur-
passes in  digestive  properties.
Children,  convalescents,  and  dys-
peptics may  include  these  biscuits
in  their  dietary  with  entire  im-
punity, perfect  confidence,  and  the
most  gratifying  results.  25c  the
package.

Soup  Flours. — Father  Kneipp. — Not
the  scraps  and  refuse  of  other
manufactures,  seasoned  highly,
and  labeled  Frenchily,  but  the
sturdy  German  pabulum  of  purity
and  power.  VVe  can  commend
these  flours  as  incomparably  bet-
ter than  the  diluted,  adulterated,
dollar-tainted  concoctions  you  see
in  the  stores  and  the  street-cars,
and  hear  from  later  in  some  un-
explained diseases,  Griinkem
flour,  large  package,  45c;  small,
25c.  Barley,  bean,  lentil,  maize,
oat-grits,  pea,  potato,  rice,  large
package, 35c; small, 25c.

Baby  F"ood.  —  Kneipp's  imported,
can, 40c; domestic, 20c.

Malt  Coffee. — -Pure  malted  barley.
Original  packages,  1  lb.,  20c. ;
case  of  100  lbs.,  $17.00.

Domestic  Malt  Coffee.  —  Lust's.
1  lb.,  20c.

Egg  Noodles.  —  Whole  wheat  and
fresh  eggs.  Vz  lb.,  25c. ;  1-lb.  box,
3Sc.  in  three  kinds,  soup,  me-
dium, and  broad.

Elderberry  Wine. — Appetizer,  cho-
lagogue,  sudorific.  Quart  bottle,
$1.00;  pint  bottle,  60c;  dozen
quarts, $9.00.

Kneipp's  Breakfast  Tea,  40c;  large,
75c.

Kneipp's  Family  Tea,  40c;  large,
75c.

Kneipp's  Aromatic  Nourishing  Tea,
40c;  large,  75c.

A  small  trial  package  in  paper  bag
of  any  of  the  three  Kneipp  Table
Teas  for  15c.

Kneipp's  Honey  Nuts.  —  Delicious
and  strengthening,  A  lb.,  30c;
1 lb., 45c.

Kneipp's  Honey-Wine  (Mead). —
Original  German.  Quart  bottle,
$1.00;  pint  bottle,  60c;  dozen
quarts,  $9.00;*  2  dozen  pints,
$10.50.

Kneipp's  Honey  Wine  (Mead). —
Imported.  Quart,  $1.25;  pint,
_70c.

Kneipp's  Oat-Flour.  —  Best  for
growing children. 35c and 25c.

Kneipp's  Oatmeal  Bonbons.  —
Coughcure  and  confection.  Box,
25c.

Kneipp's  Oatmeal  Biscuit  (with
Swiss  milk-meal).  Package,  15c
and 25c.

Kneipp's  Roasted  Flour  Soup. —
Highly  nutritious.  2  portions,
15c; 4 portions, 20c.

Kneipp's  Whole-Wheat  Zwieback,
imported, 45c.


Kindly mention Directory when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any  article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealer  s  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  41st  St.,  New York


ITnlvcrMnl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyerw'  Guide


1307


Do  you  wish  to  regain  and

maintain  your  health?  Then

live according to Nature^s

Laws, and use HENSEUS

FOOD  ADDITIONS,


You  Do  Not  Wish  to
Swallow  Medicines

but  prefer  to  regain  and  maintain  your
health  by  observing  Nature's  Laws  as  to
proper  living,  proper  diet,  etc.  That  our
foods  are  too  poor  in  the  necessary  phy-
siological salts,  has  always  been  claimed
by  our  great  Nature  Cure  physicians  like
Bilz,  Platen,  Kneipp,  Lust  and  others.
Therefore  they  gladly  accepted  the  proven
theories  of  the  great  Julius  Hensel  and
put  them  to  work  in  their  daily  practice.
Platen,  in  his  famous  work:  "Die  Neue
Heilmethode"  supplement,  pp.  688-709
mentions  the  subject,  fully  describing  the
absolute  necessity  of  the  daily  use  of  nu-
tritive salts.  Here  are  a  few  of  his  con-
vincing arguments :  HenseVs  cardinal  prin-
ciple is this: The  more ash and earth

substance  our  blood  contains,  the  better  it

will  oppose  decomposition,  which  means
that  it  will  resist  disease  so  much  better.  If  we  increased  the  mineral  constituents  of  our  blood,
the  degeneration  of  mankind  would  be  greatly  retarded ;  diseases  due  to  decomposition  of
blood  and  lymph  would  be  gradually  diminished  and  disappear  entirely.  When  to  this
feeding  of  mineral  constituents  to  our  blood  be  added  the  external  applications  of  Nature
Cure,  diseases  would  much  quicker  and  surer  be  changed  to  cures.  Besides  ordinary
table  salt,  HenseVs  hygienic  food  addition  (called  Nutr-Ad.  in  this  country)  should  be
found  on  every  table.  It  contains  those  nutritive  substances  which  are  absolutely  necessary
to  make  normal,  healthy  blood,  and  its  constant  daily  use  will  keep  our  blood  from  dimin-
ishing in  mineral  constituents.  The  more  than  1  0  years  practical  experience  with  these  plain
earths  and  salts  as  Food  supplements  have  in  untold  desperate  diseases  not  only  proven  be-
yond a  question  the  correctness  of  these  nutrition  theories,  but  also  established  the  important
fact  that  these  preparations  used  daily  by  healthy  people  are  great  preventives  against  blood
decomposition.

We  offer  you  here  these  peculiar,  effective  and  genuine  Hensel  Food  Supplements,  rich
in  both  organic  and  inorganic  salts:

Hensel  Nutro-Cocoa,  Zf'-Ti^:  1tS

ily  and  for  the  sick.

Hensel  Oat  Cocoa,


blood


to increase the red
cells.

improve the
serum.

for general weak-
ness.


blood


Hensel  Tonic,
Hensel  Sal-Bion,  1°.
Hensel  Makro-Bion,

Hensel  Ner-Bion, for weak nerves.
Hensel  Er-BtOn, for blood impurities.

Hensel  Nutr-Ad.,  l^  J'  ""'"^  "'*'^  ^^"^

for catarrh of stomach
and intestines, and to


for diseases of
stomach and in-


Hensel  Yoghurt,

make yoghurt  milk.

Hensel  Schokomaya,

testines  when constipated.

HenseVs  Cocoas ^^anidafts  r"""' '" ^^

Upon receipt of price, we ship these preparation_

Send  for  our  free  literature.

The  Hillside  Health  Food  Co.'r


very nourishing, es-
pecially for children.

Hensel  Banana  Cocoa, vafescentsTnd

\veak  stomachs.

Hensel  Acorn  Cocoa,

diarrhoea.

Hensel  Sho-Ko-Ko,

no  boiling nor  any addition.

P f^ for each of the named preparations; 50c

r  rice and $1.00, prepaid.

Hensel  Substitute  for  Coffee,

should be used in every family. 3Sc.


great for_  those
who incline to


a very palatable
ready cocoa; needs
A full diet.


*  JV^ fCfimF g> ^  ^'cy  fine  drink,  tastes  like  coffee.


but is free from injurious caffein.
\'ery nutritious. 35c.

prepaid  to  any  part  of  the  United States  arrtt  Canada.
Discount  to  retailers.
(Sole  distributors

for Hensel
Chemical  Works)


Sioux  City,  Iowa


1308


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Father Kneipp


Lust's  Kneipp  Whole-Wheat  Bread,
10c.

Lust's  Kneipp  Whole-Wheat  Rolls,
doz., 20c.

Lust's  Kneipp  Whole-Wheat  Zwie-
back, per  package,  20c.

Lust's  Kneipp  Strength  -  Giving
Soup, "Kraftsuppe," 25c; 2-lb.

f>kge.,  4.5c;  imported,  small,  25c;
arge,  35c.
Lust's  Nut  and  Fruit  Loaf, 25c.
Kneipp's  Imported  Baby  Food,  50c.
Kneipp's  Honey  Gingerbread (Hon-

iglebkuclien), at 35c, 45c, and

55c.
Kneipp's Grain Soup, large pkge.,

35c; small pkge., 25c.
Kneipp's  Barley Flour,  large  pkge.,

35c;  small  pkge., 25c.
Kneipp's Bran Flour, large pkge.,

35c;  small  pkge.,  25c.
Kneipp's Gruenkern, large pkge.,

45c; small pkge., 30c.
Kneipp's Oat Grits, large pkge.,

35c; small pkge.. 25c.
Kneipp's Lentil Flour, large  pkge.,

35c; small  pkge., 25c.
Kneipp's Pea Flour, large pkge.,

35c; small  pkge., 25c.
Kneipp's Herb-Vinegar Essence,

bottle, $1.10.
Kneipp's Maize Flour, large pkge.,

35c;  small  pkge.,  2.5c.
Kneipp's Rice Flour, large pkge.,

35c; small pkge., 25c.
Kneipp's  Potato Flour,  large  pkge.,

35c;  small  pkge.,  25c.
Kneipp's Sweet Acorn Coffee, 1-lb.
pkges.,  45c. Seelig's,  small  pkge.,

30c.


WHOLE  WHEAT  PRODUCTS

L.  Lust.  —  Bread,  Flour,  Grain,
Nut-Fruit  Loaf,  Rolls,  Zwieback.
So  far  as  we  know,  tliese  are  the
only  entire  wheat  foods  to  be  had
in  New  York  City.  The  Zwie-
back and  the  Nut- Fruit  Loaf  are
adapted  to  out-of-town  trade,  and


the  l'"lour  may  be  sent  by  ex-
press. No  sugar  is  used  in  the
preparation  of  these  health  foods,
a  minimum  of  yeast,  no  lard,  no
white  flour,  and  no  adulterations
of  any  kind.  A  crisp  outer  crust
faciHtates  dextrinization  and  pre-
serves the  loaf  fresh  and  moist  for
an  unusual  length  of  time.
Bread,  loaf,  10c;  Flour,  5  lbs,
4Sc;  Grain,  3  lbs.,  35c;  Nut-
Fruit  Loaf.  2V2  lbs.,  25c;  Rolls,
2c  each ;  Zwieback, 1  lb.,  20c.

LUST'S  FRESH  GROUND
CEREALS
Whole  Wheat  Flour,  Graham
Flour,  Wheat  Meal,  Cracked
Wheat,  Whole  Rye  Flour,  Yel-
low Corn  Meal,  White  Corn
Meal,  Pan  Cake  Flour,  Cooking
Bran,  Whole  Wheat,  Whole  Rye,
Whole  Barley,  Whole  Lentils,
Whole Corn. In 5 lb. packages.

$0.50

LUST'S FINE NUT BUTTER

(2 kinds  and 2 sizes  of  each  kind)

No. 1, 35c and 60c per jar; $3

and  $5  per  doz.,  made  exclusively

of peanuts.  j

No. 2, 45c and 75c per jar; $4

and $7.00 per doz., made of al-  !

monds  and  pecans.
Samples sent  on receipt of  10c  for

each kind.


GUM GLUTEN FOODS


Gum Gluten,

Gum Gluten,

Gum Gluten,

Gum  Gluten,

Gum Gluten,

Gum Gluten,

Gum Gluten,

Raising —

Five-pound

Ten-pound

Twenty-five

"Gluten as  a

Diabetes,  B

eases." by


Per  Pkge.

Ground $0.25

Self-Raising 25

Breakfast Food .25

Macaroni 25

Crackers 35

Glutenettes 30

Ground or Self-


sack $1.00

sack 1.75

-pound sack . . . 6.00

Therapeutic  Agent  in
right's  and  Other  Dis-

Prof. N. C. Parhall.


NASHVILLE SANITARIUM
FOODS


Dixie Cookies

Sweet  Graham  Crackers,  per
pkg

Whole  Wheat  Wafers,  per  pkg.

Whole  Wheat  Sticks,  per  pkg.

Malted  Breakfast  Crisps  (Im-
proved Ruskola), per pkg..

Laxative  Bran  Crackers,  per
pkg

Can Nutfoda (Vegetable
Meat). 1 lb., 35c; 2  54  lbs.

Can Nutcysa (Vegetable
Cheese). 1 lb., 35c; 2J4

lbs

Sanitarium  Meal  (about  20
per cent, gluten), per  pkg.

Cereal Coffee, per pkg

Xut  Butter,  V2  lb.  25c.,  1  lb.,
35c; 8 lbs

Can Malta, 1 quart. 40c; 1


gal.


'"mi^


Can Sanitarium Beans, per

can, 20c; 24 cans

Zwieback, per  *pkg

Malted Nuts, 1 lb. fiOc; 5

lbs.  ;

Sterilized Bran, per pkg


$0.20

.15

.15
.20

.20

.30

.fiO

.CO

or,
.'20

2.00

1.25

3.25
.10


Can Soy Bean Cheese, per

can, 30c; 24 cans 5.75

Can Soy Beans, per can 30

24 cans 2.75

Olive Oil (High Quality), 1

quart 1.00

Ripe  Olives  (Small  but  Good)

per gal 1.25

Charcoal  Tablets,  30c..  large  .50
Pure  Abstract Cascara Sagra-

da Tablets, per pkg 45


2.25
.10


PITMAN'S  FOODS

Vegsal  Soups.  Varieties:  Spin-
ach, Nuts,  Asparagus,  Nuto-
Cream,  Mulligatawny,  Brown
Haricot,  Nutmarto,  Mush-
room. Sample tin, 20c;

large can $0.70

!  V^incgar Essence 1.25

Vegex  for  Soups  and

Gravies,  20c,  30c  and 1.00

Pemmican, a Prepared and

I Condensed Food, 1 lb 35

3-lb. can 1.00

Olive  Oil,  Imported,  25c,  50c

I and 1.00

I  Olive Oil, Imported, Best
Italian —

1-pt. can (iO

j 1 qt 1.00

'A  gal 1.90

1  gal 3.75

Calwa, Pure California  Unfer-
mented Wine, Red and
White-
Pint 35

Quart 70

Case  of  12 quarts 7.00

Case of 24 pints 8.00

Sparkling Calwa, pint 60

Case of 24 pints 12.00

Unfermented Portuguese
Port Wine, Red and
White-
Pint 75

Quart 1.30

Pure Hawaiian Pineapple
Juice —

^ Pint 15

'/S Pint 25

Pint 4  0

Quart 75

Case of 12 Quarts 7.50

Case of 24 Pints 8.00

RALSTON HEALTH FOODS

Breakfast Food, per  pkge.  ...  $0.25

Barley  Food,  per  pkge 25

Health  Oats,  per  pkge 25

Pancake  Flour,  per  pkge 20

Health C"hib Cocoa, '/.-lb. can .50
Health  Flour,  5-lb.  pkge 45

GENERAL LIST OF SELECT
FOODS

Nutritive  Vegetable  Extract  —
Renders  all  food  more  digest-
ible by  adding  the  parts  lost
in  its  artificial  preparation.  For
instance,  white  flour  has  lost
the  salts,  phosphates  and  gluten
that  cling  to  the  hull  through  the
milling;  potatoes  are  peeled  and
robbed  of  the  strength  ingredients
nestling  next  the  skin  ;  vege-
tables are  boiled  into  filjrous  fa-
tuities, while  the  good  goes  into
the  water  that  is  thrown  away.
In  short,  the  indispensable  ele-
ment that  people  can't  see,  they
fail  to  value  and  make  use  of.
This  extract  is  tangible  knowl-
edge. $1.00,  $2.00  and  $3.00
per  jar.


Kindly mention Directory when ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer  s  or  dealer's  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  fflst  St.,  New York


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyer*'  Guide


/  STAMINA\

^ A RAW FOOD ^
READY  TO  EAT ^


What  is  Stamina?  A  new  thought
food.  A  food  ready  to  eat.  An
absolute  Raw  Food.  It  conforms
strictly  with  the  Raw  Food  theory.
Has  not  been  subjected  to  heat  nor
the  deadening  effects  of  cooking.
A  Power  food  meal.  Can  be  used
as  a  Diet  food  exclusively.  When
going  on  a  vacation,  Hunting,
Traveling  or  Camping,  have  a
supply  of  "Stamina"  with  you  and
your  food  Problem  is  happily
solved.  Five  to  Six  ounces  furnish
abundant  food  value,  therefore
makes  living  inexpensive  and  practical.  It  consists  solely  of
crushed  grains  and  Cereals  combined  with  selected  fruits  and
rich  Nut  Meats.  Its  true  natural  food  character  tends  to  assist
the  Human  body  in  performing  its  natural  functions  and  elimi-
nates the  cause  of  many  ailments.  The  most  natural  prevention
and  cure  for  constipation.

Price  in  single  one  lb.  Packages,  35c.,  postpaid,  41c.

Three  lb.  Cans,  $1.00,  postpaid,  $1.15.
Cases of Six $1.00 Cans, $6.50, express prepaid.

Will  keep  in  any  climate  Small  Samples  15c.  postpaid


\


Put  up  exclusively  by


LOUIS  LUST'S  HEALTH  FOOD  BAKERY


S.E.  COR.  105th  street  AND  PARK  AVENUE,  NEW  YORK


1310


Universal  Naturopathic  Direclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


Campbell's  Wgetable  Soup  ■ —
Case $5.75

Campbell's  Tomato  Soup  —
Case $5.75

Vegetable  Milk  —  For  bottle-
fed  children  ami  for  all  invalids
and  dyspeptics  needing  a  food
containing  extreme  digestibility
with  high  nutrition.  1.00  per
can.

Galactenzyme  Abbott.  —  Bulgarian
Bacillus.  For  relief  of  intestinal
fermentation.  Bottle  of  100
Tablets,  75c.  Bouillon — liquid
culture — 12 vials, 75c.

Cocovena.  —  A  most  satisfactory
substitute  for  the  heavy,  rich,
expensive  cocoas  sold  on  the
strength  of  a  name.  Composed
of  the  purest  cocoa  and  the  best
oatmeal  preparation.  Attested
analysis,  specified  in  the  circu-
lars, demonstrates  the  two  promi-
nent qualities — the  nutritive  and
the  assimilative.  Prices,  tins,  25
cups,  25c;  50  cups,  50c;  100
cups, $1.00; 500  cups. $4.00.

Dyspepsia  Cakes.  —  A  new  and
valuable  food  product,  combining
nutritive  and  therapeutic  proper-
ties. Constipation,  dyspepsia,  and
general  atonicity  of  the  digestive
organs  yield  readily  to  the  con-
tinued use  of  these  tonic-cathartic
nutritives. 50c per box.

Gluten  Foods.  —  Government
analysis  proves  most  of  the  so-
called  Gluten  and  Diabetic  Foods
to  contain  more  starch  and  other
injurious  elements  than  the  aver-
age Pharisaical  manufactures  that
everybody  knows  to  be  adulterated.
This  company  has  won  official
sanction  of  its  methods  and  prod-
ucts, and  is  one  of  the  few  whose
purpose  seems  to  be  as  pure  as
their  food  is  guaranteed.  Biscuit,
Breakfast  Food,  Crackers,  Flour,
etc.

Ko-Nut.  —  The  best  frying  and
shortening  medium  made.  Pure
vegetable  fat,  untainted  by  ani-
mal or  other  alien  matter.  Never
gets  rancid,  goes  twice  as  far  as
lard,  heats  a  third  hotter,  has
absolutely  no  waste,  is  thoroughly
digestible,  and  is  of  a  dainty  nut-
like taste,  quite  different  from  the
soggy,  infested  loathsomeness  of
animal  fats.  The  highest  cookery
experts  commend  it  unqualifiedly,
and  the  humblest  housewives  use
it  regularly.  Cans,  $1.00,  $2.00,
$.3.00.

Malt  Food.  —  A  distilled  diasta-
sic  agent — pure  sugar,  pure  albu-
men, pure  peptones,  pure  phos-
phates. More  of  a  fat,  flesh  and
force-former  than  ordinary  sweets
and  fats,  and  assimilated  directly
instead  of  taxing  several  already
overburdened  organs.  A  deli-
ciously  wholesome  successor  to
syrup,  sugar,  butter,  marmalade,
and  other  common  embellish-
ments on  the  omnipresent  "staflf."
.Small  can,  35c;  large  can, 70c.

Ideal  Nut  Food.  —  Three  vari-
eties. No.  I,  peanuts  only;  No.
II,  mixed;  No.  Ill,  peanuts
omitted.  Nothing  but  nuts,  and
salt,  and  saloric — and  experience.
Better  than  butter,  more  fatten-
ing than  milk,  more  strengthen-
ing than  meat,  and  cheaper  than
any  of  them.  Glass  jars.  No.  I,
50c;  No.  II,  $1.00;  No.  Ill,
$1.50.


Dr. H. Lahmann,  the  great German Doctor who
introduced the Vegetable Nutritive Salt Theory


Oatnuts. — ^AU  the  kernel  but  the
shaggy  outer  coat.  The  an-
nouncement of  a  new  breakfast
food  nowadays  is  equivalent  to  an
open  insult — so  many  of  them
have  robbed  your  pocket  of  shek-
els, and  your  duodenum  of
strength.  Add  some  insignificant
kink  in  manufacture,  dig  out  some
euphemistic  title,  design  a  unique
cover,  fill  it  with  handiest  adul-
teration, advertise  it  as  a  health
food,  and  live  in  luxury  while
your  gullible  buyer  wrestles  with
a  rasped  stomach,  a  clogged  colon,
and  a  paralyzed  liver.  We  can
countenance  very  few  of  the  foods
so  widely  sold,  and  commend  al-
most none.  "Oatnuts"  is  a  grati-
fying exception,  attested  by  per-
sonal use.  For  large  nutrition,
slight  waste,  small  cost,  and  gen-
eral excellence,  it  is  an  admirable
success.  25c  per  box,  or  2  for
45c.

Plasmon.  —  The  only  pure,  solu-
ble, digestible  milk  proteid — -Na-
ture's nutrient.  One  teaspoonful
equivalent  to  ^ -pound  best  beef
in  actually  proven  food  value.
eminent  American,  English,  and
German  physicians  and  dietists.
The  history  of  "Plasmon"  fails  to
show  a  case  where,  if  used  right-
ly, it  does  otherwise  than  digest,
assimilate,  and  strengthen.  Price-
list,  testimonials,  record  of  cases,
and  full  description  mailed  on  re-
quest. 1-lb.,  $1.00;  y2-\h.,  tiOc;
'/i-lb., 35c; Plasmon Cocoa, J/j-


Ib.,  50c;  Plasmon  Biscuits,  tins,
30c  and  50c;  Plasmon  Chocolate,
per  tablet.  30c.


Tropon.  —  A  vegetable  albumen,
ready  for  appropriation  by  the
weakest  stomach,  and  capable  of
sustaining  life  where  similar  prep-
arations fail  of  peptonizing  or
dextrinizing.  Convincing  reports
of  clinical  cases  and  satisfying
statements  concerning  Tropon  will
suffice  imtil  you  have  made  per-
sonal trial.  Small  box,  50c;  large
box, $1.00 ; Iron Tropon. 75c.

Vegetable  Bouillon. — Legumes  are
the  vegetarian  and  valetudinarian
successors  of  meat.  The  Vege-
table Bouillon  presents  them  in
pure  essence  form,  and  free  from
the  ptomaines  that  inevitably  pre-
ponderate in  meat-stocks  and  ex-
tracts. 50c and $1.25.

Macerated  Wheat.  —  Tyler's.
A  condensed  combination  food
made  from  crushed  whole  wheat,
nuts,  fruits  and  other  corrective
foods.  A  highly  concentrated
food — very economical. Ready


Kindly  mention  Dlrectorv  when ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on anu  article  listed without
mannfnrturer's  or  dealer  s  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic  Center, 110  East  fiist  St.,  New York


ITiilvorxnl  Nntiiropalliio l)iro<-<ory  iiiul  Hiiyors'  Guide  ^^^^*

Eat  Your  Way
to  Health

Use  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  and  other
raw  foods  Uke  I  did  and  get  well.


Put  iron  in  your  blood  and  other  organic  mineral  elements  in  your  system
BO  essential  to  life  and  health.  That's  why  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  with
other  raw  foods  is  so  successful  in  relieving  constipation  and  restoring  health.

After  losing  my  health  and  trying  many  ways  to  regain  it  without
Buccess  I  finally  discovered  a  combination  of  natural  foods  which  very
quickly  started  me  on  the  road  to  health.  For  more  than  17  years  I  have
lived  on  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  and  other  raw  foods.  In  all  that  time
I  haven't  had  one  sick  day.  Not  an  ache  nor  a  pain.  No  colds.  No
headaches.  I  am  past  67  years  of  age,  but  I  feel  younger  than  I  did  25
years  ago.  I  have  more  energy  and  physical  endurance.  I  feel  good  and
strong  enough  to  see  100  years  of  age.  For  all  this  I  must  give  full  credit
to  my  raw  food  diet  the  principal  part  being  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat.
That's  why  I  say  "Eat  your  way  to  Health.  "

TYLER'S

Macerated  Wheat

Will  do  more  than  anything  else  to  build  you  up  in  health

—  make  you  strong  and  vigorous  —  give  you  real  life  and
energy — reduce  blood  pressure— lessen  hardening  of  arteries

—  make  your  weight  normal  —  make  you  feel  like  doing
things,  mental  and  physical.

A  fair  trial  of  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  will  convince  you  of  its  .j * u

great  merit. It  very  quickly  relieves  constipation  which  is  the  primary  cause  of  nearly  all  diseases. Get  nd  of  the
constipation  and  your  other  troubles  are  bound  to  improve. Make  yourself  physically  fit  and  you  will  make  good  and
be  happy— but  you  must  have  Health  and  a  Clear  Brain. You  can  have  both  by  using  "Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  and
•certain  other  raw  foods,  which  contain  the  organic  elements  necessary  to  completely  nourish  the  human  body— to  restore
health  and  keep  you  in  health— to  sustain  at  highest  efficiency  all  the  mental  and  physical  powers. All  this  requires  no
extra  expense. Usually  it  means  real  economy. You  may  not  realize  that  one  pound  of  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  has
as  much  nutritive  value,  and  gives  more  human  enercry  than  three  pounds  of  porter  house  steak  and  costs  much  less.
Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  is  composed  of  macerated  whole  wheat,  nuts,  raisins  and  other  wholesome  corrective  foods.
Prepared  in  a  perfectly  sanitary  way  and  put  up  in  just  the  right  proportions  to  make  a  most  perfect  food  for  man.
Altogether  a  very  appetizing  food. A  food  which  contains  the  mineral  elements  our  system  requires,  such  as  lime,
phosphates,  iron,  etc.,  in  their  organic  state  and  which  are  always  found  wanting  in  cooked  foods. Aids  digestion.
Gives  you  a  natural,  normal  appetite. Prolongs  life. Prevents  disease. Makes  lif«  worth  livingi Valuable  sug-
gestions given  to  prevent  colds  and  rheumatism.  ^  at.
Read  the  following  extracts  from  Letters: iRValuaWC  fOF  NorSUig  and  PTOSpCCtlVC  MOtnCrS.
They are just  a  few  of  the  many  we  are  constantly There  is  nothing  SO  good  as  Tyler's  Macerated  Wheat  together
'*"""°^YoDr  food  has  practically  eared  me  of  consti- with  a  little  fruit  and  green  stutf  for  relieving  constipation  and
pation,  and  I  can't  say  too  much  in  praise  of  it." consequent ills which nearly  every  prospective  mother ex-
"At  the  end  of  the  p'cond  week  I  could  sleep periences. Nursing  mothers  will  find  the  Macerated  Wheat  of
"^••C^n s'tip^tion'dis^ppL^r^d  'arT/trrny  great greatest  value  as  it  conUins  the  lime,  phosphate,  iron.  etc..  in
astonishment other troubles so common to their organic  state  so  necessary  to  produce  rich, nutntous
women,  have  vanished  also." _ mother's  milk— the  ideal  and  Correct  food  for  the  infant. For
cn'rfd  bv'eatinc  Ma^eratTd  Wh^af'^""*^^^^  ' your  own  and  your  child's  sake  you  cannotafford  to  do  without
Names  and  addresses  of  above  and  others,  perhaps  one Ty'er's  Macerated  Wheat. Write  for  literature  giving  valuable
or  more  in  your  vicinity,  given  on  request. information  for  mother  S  diet.

Send  $1.00  for  three-pound  can  of  food  and  Tyler's  Raw  Food  Book  and  Health
Guide; postpaid anywhere. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded

BYRON  TYLER,  99  Gibralter  BIdg.,  Kansas  Oty,  Mo.,  U.  S.  A.


Trade  Mark.


ESTABLISHED  1899.


1312


I'liiDcrsdl  Nalnropatliic  Direclonj  und  Buyers'  Guide


to  eat  3  lb.  cans.  ?1.00.  Pre-
pared liy  l?yron  Tyler,  616
Wyandotte  St.,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Cocoa,  Nutritive  (Nahrsalz).  —
Recent  experiments  in  the
U.  S.  Army  and  elsewhere
have  proved  chocolate  and  cocoa
to  be  the  quintessence  of  nutri-
ment —  so  condensed  indec<l  that
none  but  the  strongest  digestion
can  appropriate  and  the  most  ac-
tive body  assimilate.  The  ex-
cessive fat  clogs  the  liver  and
burdens  the  colon,  and  makes  an
otherwise  ideal  food  quite'  imprac-
ticable for  the  average  American.
Three  famous  German  dietists
have,  each  in  his  own  way,  ap-
prehended the  difficulty  and  large-
ly overcome  it.  The  Hensel
Cocoa  (gold  medal,  Paris.  Tou-
lon. Berlin)  contains  fruit-salts
which  facilitate  intestinal  diges-
tion and  feed  the  nerves  and
brain ;  the  Lahmann  cocoa  has
certain  vegetable  vitalizers,  and  is
perhaps of a lower valence ; the


Bilz  Swiss  oat  cocoa  includes  a  di-
gestible preparation  of  oatmeal,
wjiich  intensifies,  although  dilut-
ing, the  force-element  in  the  cocoa
proper.  Pound  tin  (100  cups),
$1.00;  '/;-lb.,  .^iOc;  ^-Ib.,  HOc.
.Same  with  oatmeal  addition,  y^-
lb.  package  4.50.  Pound  tin.  90c;
'Mb.,  4.5c;'  '4 -lb..  30c.  Plasmon
Cocoa — '/i-lb  tin, .'iOc.


BEVERAGES


NUTRITIVE BEVERAGES

(Substitutes  for  Tea,  Coffee
and  Spirits)


$0.30
.30


'A  Ltr. !4  Ltr,
Agathon, Wood-Root,

condensed $0.50

Agathon, Orange, dry,

condensed 50

Agathon, Orange,

mild, condensed fiO

Agathon, Lemon,

condensed (pure

lemon juice) 80

Golden Russet  Qt.

Cider (Sparkling)  ..  $0.40
Carbonated  Sweet

Cider (Sparkling).. .40
V^in de Pomme

(Non-Alcoholic) .  .  . .40

(By  the  dozen, 10%

discount.)

Crab-apple Cider 25

Cocoa, Bilz's Nutritive. Fruit

Salts. In  tins. 1  lb. (100

cups)

Vi lb.,  50c; 14 lb

Cocoa,  Lahmann's  Health.
Vegetable  Salts.  In  tins,  1
lb.,  $1.00;  '/ilb.,  50c;  14
lb.,  30c;  with  oatmeal  ad-
dition, yi-lh. pkge. 45

Cocovena.  Cocoa  with  Oat-
meal. In tins. 25 cups 25

50 cups, 45c; 225 cups,.. 1.50
500 cups 4.00

Coflfee, Kneipp Malt. Pure
Malted Barley. In  bags.  .  . .20
Case 3.50

Coffee,  Kneipp's  Sweet  Acorn.

Original packages 35

Coffee,  Seelig's  Acorn.  Origi-
nal package, small

Coffee,  German  Malt.  (Also  in
5  and  10-lb.  packages.) Lb. .20


35


.45
Pt.
$0.20

.20

.20


.15


1.00
.30


.35


Raspberry Vinegar 50

Raspberry  Juice.  Original  qt.
bottles,  $1.00;  16-oz.  bots
Cocoa.  Prager's  Hygienic  Re-
form. Vegetable  Salts  and
Oatmeal.  In  tins.  1  .lb...
■/, lb


45


GRISONS


White  Horse

: BRAMD


A  DEtous  Breakfast  CuF.i


surface.  The  tuber,  earth-grown
and  earth-fettered,  may  be  fit
food  for  the  earth-workers,  to
whom  muscle  dominates  mind,
whose  fore  and  top-brain  is  rudi-
mentary, and  whose  horizon  is
defined  by  the  first  hillock.  But
the  man  who  purposes,  and  hopes,
and  aspires,  who  is  attuned  to  the
music  of  the  spheres,  who  is  ma-
king his  ideal  the  real — such  a
man  finds  in  fruit  the  impalpably
electrifying  power  of  the  Light-
god,  whither  his  face  is  turned.
These  wines  are  not  glucose  and
chemical  flavoring,  but  are  the
product  of  the  genuineness  that
distinguishes  imported  prepara-
tions. Prices  on  application,  rang-
ing  from  SOc  to  $2.00  the  bottle.


UNFERMENTED WINES

'/^  Ltr. >4  Ltr.

German, white $0.50 $0.30

German, red 65  .35

Spanish. Almeria 1.00  .60

Apple Cider,

(jravensteiner 45  .25

Apple Cider,

Altenlander 45  .25

Blackberry Wine 70  .40

Cherry Wine 60  .35

Bilberry Wine 60  .35

Quart, $1.25.

Bilberry  Wine, Quart $1.25

Malthop Phosphate, Quart... .35
Physiological Tonicum, Natu-
ral Tonic Invigorant,  large

(postage 25c) 1.35

Small (postage 20c) 75

Borash,  for  Gout  and  Rheuma-
tism 1.75

V'italonga.  Good  remedy  tor
Malaria,  Fever,  and  Stom-
ach Disorders 110


NON-ALCOHOLIC WINES,

MALT-BEER, MINERAL

WATER

Calwa, Pure  California  Unfer-
mented Grape Juice, Red

and White; per  pint $0.35

Quart 70

Case of 12 qts 7.00

Case of  24 pints 8.00

Malto-Brau, per pint 25

Case  of  24  pints 3.00

Blue Castle Water, 14 pint... 15
Case of 50 5.00

Dietate Spring Water, per  pt. .15
Per  Quart.

.\qua Nova Vita, per  bottle..


FRUIT JUICES

Grape  Juice, pint, 30c; qt...$0.50

Bo.x, doz. bottles 5.00

2 doz. pints 6.00

Grape-Juice,  best  quality,  in
flasks,  qt.,  50c;  pt.  30c;  yi
pt 15


35c., 5 lbs., $4.50, 10 lbs., $9.00.

Raspberry Syrup, Imjiortcd.

Qt..  $1.00;  pt 60

Strawberry Juice 1.00

Currant  Juice 1.00


FOOD DRINKS

Caramel- Cereal- Coffee.

per  pkge $0.25

L^nfermented Grape  Juice,

Quarts 50

L^nfermented Grape  Juice,

Pints,  30c; i^-pints 20

Unfermented  Wine.  —  Sealed
Sunshine.  A  food  is  refreshing
and  vitalizing,  and  vivifying  in
proportion to  its  area  of  exposeil


.25

5.00

Case  of  10  bottles 30.00


LIQUID GRAPE FOOD

Gordo  Blanco,  white,  pints,  16

oz., 85c;  quarts, 32  oz $1.35

Cabernet, red, pints, 16 oz. .  . .85
Quarts,  32  oz 1.75

Mapleine, Flavoring Essence,
2 oz. bottle 35


LIQUID LEMON

1  oz.,  equal  to  V2  doz.  Lemons$0.20
4  oz.,  equal  to  2  doz.  Lemons  .35
10  oz.,  equal  to  5  doz.  Lemons  .60
2-J  oz,,  equal  to  12  doz.  Lemons  1.25


Kindly  mention Directory when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dcaler^s  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  Ulst  St.,  New York


I


TTiii\'orN:il \ii<iiro|»ii<liio Oirootory iin<1 ItiiyorK* C.iiliir


Established  J  908


Incorporated  1916


Anthony  A.  Berhaltik
Picsuicnt


®


K  A  I  II  IK  I  N  K f JtRHAI.T  KR

I  'ice-Prcsidevt


DIVERSEY PARKWAY
NEAR  LINCOLN  AVE.


CHICAGO. ILL.
U.  S.  A.


Originators  and  Producers  of

WholeWheatBread  ,WholeRyeBread

Bran  Breao , "Whole.  VC^heat  Fbxjit  Bread  , made  from
Select  Grains  ,Ground  in  their  ov/n  Mills; also  Cakes  ,  Pies
AND  other  Good  Things  .  All  from  the  Formulas  of  the
BERHALTERS  and  under  their  Peirsonal  Supeirvesion.


BEYOND  question  of  a  doubt,  the  Berhalters
are  the  originators  and  producers  of  the  finest
and  most  complete  hne  of  Health  Foods  in  the
world.  From  a  little  store,  opened  at  309  North
Avenue,  Chicago,  in  1908,  their  business  has  grown
to  its  present  immense  magnitude.  Their  great
factory,  located  on  Diversey  Parkway,  near  Lincoln
Avenue, Chicago, is  a  block  long, and  modem in

IKAKK  MARK  1 . 'I  f ".

every  detail  or  its  equipment.

The  cleanliness  and  care  with  which  Berhalter  Foods  are  made  would
surprise  and  delight  the  most  particular.  The  finest  of  wheat  and  other  grains
are  ground  fresh  in  their  own  mills  for  each  day's  output.

All  who  realize  that  it  means  perfect  health  to  live  in  accordance  with
natural  laws,  and  to  eat  Nature's  Foods  Scientifically  Prepared,  should
investigate  the  work  and  products  of  the  Berhalters.  Catalogue  and  full
information  will  be  mailed  FREE. Address:


BERHALTER  HEALTH  FOODS  COMPANY

DIVERSEY PARKWAY, near
LINCOLN  AVE.,  CHICAGO


1>^I^  Uniuersdl  Naturopathic  Direclonj  and  Buyers'  Guide


CEREAL  PRODUCTS


FARINACEA, BREAD AND
BREADSTUFFS

Barley Crystals, per  pkgc.  .  .  .  $0.25

Digestive Biscuits 50

Disrestive Biscuits, small box,

dSc  ; iargc box 60

Graham Flour, per ,')-lb. bag,

45c; 1011).  hag 90

Gum Gluten Bread, Loaf 15

Gum Gluten Breakfast Fooil,

pkge., 2.^>c; 5 lbs 1.00

Gum Gluten Crackers, box.. .30

Gum Gluten Crisp, Loaf 15

Gum  Gluten  Ground  and  Plain

Flour, pkge., 25c; 5-lb.

sack 1.00

Gum Gluten Macaroni, pkge. .35
Gum-Gluten Self - Raising

Flour,  pkge,  30c;  5-lb.  sack, 1.10
Health Nursery Biscuit.
Health Wafer.
Health Thin Water Wafer.
Health Cold Water Crackers.
Health Zwieback.
K.  C.  Whole-Wheat  Flour,  per

5-lb. bag, 45c; 10-lb. bag. .90

Nameless Breakfast Food 30

Nameless Breakfast Food,

35c; 2 for •.•••.•• -60

Nutritive  Almond-milk  Biscuit,

pkge 25

Oatnuts. All the berry but

the shaggy outer-coat, 2-Ib.

pkge 25

Ralston Breakfast Food, 2-lb.

pkge 25

Rose  Wheat 25

Rye  Graham  Flour,  5  lbs 45

Ry-Krisp, Swedish Health

Bread,  per  package,  1^4  lbs.  .50
Soup- Flours, etc. (See

"Kneipp Foods.")

LTncooked Bread, pkge 50

Wheatlette,  25c;  2  for 35

Whole Wheat Bread, no

sugar, minimum of yeast,

loaf 10

Whole-Wheat  Berry,  washed.

For Breakfast and for Raw

Diet, 1 lb., 10c; 5 lbs 45

Whole-Wheat Flour, 1 lb.,

10c;  5  lbs.,  45c;  10  lbs...  .90
Whole- Wheat Nut- Fruit Loaf

(Pears, Raisins, Walnuts,

etc.), 2^-lb. loaf 25

Whole- Wheat  Zwieback, pkge. .20
Zwieback, Friedrichsdorfer,

pkge 15

Zwieback, Prager, pkge 25

Zwieback,  Karlsbader,  original

pkge. (about  5  lbs.),  $1.25;

small pkge 50

Zwieback. Hamburger, long,

original pkges., 200 pieces,

$1.25  ;  round,  original  pkgs.,

200  pieces,  $1.25; loose,  per

pound 40

Ulm Mutschel Flour, large pkge.,

35c; small pkge., 2r)C.
Genuine Kgg Noodles, three  kinds,

large, medium and soup, 1 lb.,

30c; ■/, lb., 25c.

(All  above  -  mentioned  Health
Foods  arc  imported,  except  Lust's
Specialties  an<i  Egg  Noodles.)

Genuine  Kneipp  -  Kathreiner's  Malt
CofTee,  1  lb.,  25c;  2  lbs.,  45c;
25-lb.  case,  $4.00;  50-lb.  case,
$12.00;  lOOlb.  case,  $22.00.

Domestic  Malt  Coffee,  1  lb.,  20c;
5  lbs..  90c;  10  lbs.,  $1.50.
(Special  prices  on  larger  quan-
tities.)


Kneipp  Whole-Wheat  Flour,  1  lb.,
10c;  5  lbs.,  45c;  10  lbs.,  90c;
><-bbl.,  100  lbs.,  $8.00;  1  bbl.,
200  lbs.,  $19.00.

Selected  Washed  Wheat  in  Grains,
1  lb.,  10c;  5  lbs.,  45c;  10  lbs.,
itOc;  100  lbs.,  $8.00;  200  lbs.,
$17.50.  Mills  for  grinding  whole
wheat  and  making  nut  butter,
$1.50;  Quaker,  $4. .''.((;  extra
strong, $5.50.

Rye  Graham  Flour,  1  lb.,  10c;  5
lbs.,  45c;  10  lbs.,  90c;  J4  bar-
rel,  $9.00; whole  barrel, $16.00.

"I'omo"  Apple  Tea,  with  Nutrition
Salts. — Contains  a  large  amount
of  organic  iron,  and  is  one  of  the
best  blood  builders  known.  Not
stimulating,  of  pleasant  taste,  for
sick  and  convalescents,  as  well
as  for  the  healthy,  an  always  wel-
come drink  of  highest  hygienic
value.  For  families  and  children,
the  cheapest  and  most  agreeable
breakfast  and  supper  beverage.
Price  35c  per  pkge., postpaid.


BAKED  FOODS

Uncooked Fruit  Cake $0.40

Whole Wheat Fruit  Cake 40

Honey Cake, 2 for 10

Berhalter's Unfired Health

Bread (Fruit) 40

Berhalter's Unfired Health

Bread (Plain) 35

Berhalter's  Ex  Lax,  per  lb...  .25
Banana  Biscuits,  il5c; large.. .30

BREAKFAST PREPARATIONS

Toasted Wheat Flakes,

per pkge $0.25

Toasted Corn Flakes,

per  pkge 25

Granola,  per  pkge 25

Granose  Flakes,  per  pkge 25

Granose  Biscuits,  per  pkge 25

Hulled Wheat,  per  pkge 25

Wheatose, per  pkge 25

CEREALS, FLOURS, GRAINS,
RICE, BRAN, Etc.

Lust's Whole Wheat Flour,

5 lb. bag $0.45


Ballard's  Bran.  Ideal  Drugless
Laxative.  Hull-less  Barley,
Hull-less  Oats,  Muscle
Brand  Whole  Wheat  Flour.
In 10 lb. sacks 1.00

Kellogg's Bran. Carton 25


CRACKERS AND WAFERS

Graham Crackers, soft  and

sweet,  per  jikge $0.2(1

Graham  Crackers,  per  pkge... .20

Fruit Crackers,  per  jikge 25

Cream Sticks, per pkge 25.

Oatmeal wafers, per pkge... .20
Whole ■ Wheat Wafers, per

pkge 20

Whole  -  Wheat Zwieback, per

pkge 20

Graham  Wheat  Zwieback, per

pkge 20


CANNED GOODS

Baked Beans, per can $0.20

Hulless  Beans,  per  pkge 20


MISCELLANEOUS HEALTH
HOODS

Whole  Wheat  Flour,  1  lb,,
10c;  5  lbs.,  45c;  10  lbs.,
90c;  >X  bbl.,  100  lbs.  $10;
1 bbl., 200 lbs...". $18.00

Whole  Wheat  Meal,  5-lb.  car-
tons 50

Whole  Wheat  F'lour,  5-lb.  car-
tons 50

Gluten  Flour,  "Diet  Ease,"
5 lb. sack .75

Banana  Flour,  per  Ih 30


Unpolished Rice,  15c.  per  package.


Kindly  mention Direcloru when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on ariu article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealer  s  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  ilst  St., New York


Unlvernnl \iituro|Mitlil<- Dlrwtor.v and Buyers' Ouidp

=!iiiiiMtmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiuiiiiiiiiHHinii»^


i3i;


PAPER  SHELL

Cultivated  Pecans

Soft  Shell  Walnuts
Paper  Shell  Almonds

Nuts  of  every  Jdnd  are  to  be
found  here  all  new  crop  and
all  of  fine  quality.  Delicious
Home Made Peanut Butter.

SPECIAL  ATTENTION
TO VEGETARIANS

DRIED  FRUITS  in  great  va-
riety, too.  None  but  the  best
grades  handled.  Get  acquaint-
ed with  this  store— and  send
NOW  for  descriptive  price  list  to


Chas.S.  Cash  225


Nut Store
Fulton  Street
New  York  City


SPECIAL:  Our  Red  Ribbon  Brand
of  Extra  Large  Oregon  Prunes  are
the  Finest  Grown.


I  ZONE  THERAPY  |

T  ^'  •

Y  DRS. FITZGERALD and BOWERS  f

»  The  first  and  only  book  on  this  unique  T
system.  The  technic  is  fully  explained  |
and  illustrated.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  verit-  *
able  course  in  Zone  Therapy,  and  any  1
intelligent  man  or  woman  can  relieve  T
and  often  cure  many  conditions  which  |
often  call  for  the  most  skilled  specialist,  j

CONTENTS  i*

Chapter 1  : Relieving Pain by Pressure. — -2 :  <^

That  Aching Head. — 3  : Curing Goiter  with  a  |

Probe. — 4  : Finger  Squeezing  for  Eye  Troubles.  ^

5  :  Making  the  Deaf  Hear. — 6  : Painless  Child-  f

birth. — 7: Zone  Therapy  for Women. — 8: Re-  4|>

laxing  Nervous  Tension. — 9  : Curing  Lumbago  |

with a Comb. — 10 : Scratching the Hand for  <*>

Sick  Stomach. — 11: Hay  Fever  and Tonsilitis.  |

~12: Curing a Sick Voice. — 13: A Specific  <2>

for  Whooping  and other  Coughs. — 12: How  a  (

Phantom Tumor was Dissipated. — 15: Doctor  tV

White's  Experience.  — 16:  Zone  Therapy,  Main-  \

!y for Dentists. — 17: Zone Therapy for Doc-  ^>

I tors  Only. — 18: Food for  Thought.  )

I  Zone  Therapy  cannot  possibly,  under  any i

^  circumstances, injure anyone.  ^S*

i»
CLOTH,  Price,  $2.00  *

t  L  W.  LONG  f

t  101 N. High  Street,  Columbus,  Ohio. |


A  NERVE  TONIC

and  a  Deiigbtful  Addition  to  the  Toilet
BING'S  PINE  NEEDLE  BATHS

Recommended  by  the  foremost  Doctors
of  all  Schools
Ha.s  all  the  magic  curative  qualities  of
the  Pine.  Used  by  the  Public,  Drugless
Doctors  of  all  Schools,  Naturopathic
In.stitutions  and  Sanitariums.  Endorsed
and  used  by  Dr.  B.  I.ust.  3  Sizes.  No.  I:
12  Baths  $1.00;  No.  II:  Family  Package,
25  Baths,  $5.00;  No.  Ill:  Institution.  160
baths, $10.00, prepaid.

FRED K. BINQ,  Jr.

742 DICKEY BUILDING, CHICAGO, ILL.


r


IRIDIAGNOSIS I

The Science of Diagnosing
the  condition  of  the  body
from  signs  which  ap-
pear in  the  Iris.

For  the  convenience  of  students  and
practitioners,  all  the  essential  points  of
this  science,  together  with  pictures,
drawings  and  key,  have  been  compiled
from  the  various  works  on  the  subject,
and  incorporated  in  a

WALL  CHART

(34  X  222  inches')

This Chart is printed and lithographed on
heavy, durable stock, ivith metal binding

CONTENTS

1 — The relation of the Iris to the rest of the

eyeball.
2 — The structures composing the Iris as re-
vealed  by  the microscope.
3 — The surface-view of the Iris, magnified to
show the most important marks and signs.
4 — The  blood-supply  of  the  Iris.
5 — The nerve supply of Iris, indicating how it
is placed in connection with the entire  ner\--
ous  system.
6 — Color changes — from normal to abnormal. '
and the process by which the normal color
.  is  restored.

7 — Density changes — changes in the compact-
ness  of the texture of the Iris.
8 — A complete map of the Iris showing the
regions  of the Iris and the organs  or  parts
of  the  body to which each corresponds.
A condensed tabulation of the allopathic
uses of the drugs recorded in the Iris as
well as the symptoms to which each gives u
rise. This data has been gathered from ,|
the latest works of various international
authorities on allopathic therapeutics and
toxicology.
In the  text, the various marks  and signs  oc-
curring in the Iris are divided into Color
Changes and Texture Changes. The descrip-
tion and  significance  of  each  is  given  in  detail.
No progressive physician can afford to be
without  this  valuable  diagnostic  adjunct.


NATUROPATHIC CENTER
110  East  4l8t  Street,  New  York,  N.  Y,


1316


Viiivrrsal  Xutnropathir  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Taroena 50

Fancy Pearl Barley 26

Barley  Pancake Flour 25

Rolled Macaroni Wheat 25

Rolled Cream of Barley 25

Purified Pignolias 75

Specially  Prepared  Black  Wal-
nuts, per carton 60

Specially Prepared Filberts,

per carton GO

Specially Prepared Pecans,

per carton 60

Specially Prepared Combina-
tion Nuts, per  carton fiO

Fruit  Crackers,  per  carton...  .25
I.,axative  Cereal,  per  carton..  .35
Combination  Nut  Like  Flakes  .35
Protose Vegetable Meat, per

Jar 35

Flour — all  grades.  Farina,  Com
Products,  Buckwheat,  Grain  and
Products,  Pearl  Barley,  Beans,
Peas,  Lentils,  Seeds,  Rice,  Sugar
and other  staples  at  market  prices.

OTHER SPECIALTIES


Grape Nuts, per  pkge $0.25

Postum Cereal, 1 lb. pkge.,

35c: y,-lh. pkge 20

Pettijohn's Breakfast Food.. .25

Malt  Breakfast  Food 25

Malta- Vita, per pkge 25

Force, per pkge 25

Shredded Whole-Wheat Bis-
cuits, per pkge 25

Cream of Wheat, per pkge.. .25
Wesson Oil, for Sala<l 30


Wesson  Oil,  for  Cooking,  2-
Ib. can 35

Saccharine  Tablets,  100,  50c;
500 2.25

UNCOOKED  FOODS

Tyler's Pcmniicati, per can...  $1.00

Wheat Nuts,  8 lb. bag 2.00

L. Lust's Stamina 1.00

CEREAL  COFFEES.  COCOAS

AND  TEAS
Lust's Genuine Old- Fashioned

Barley Malt Coffee, per  lb. .$0.20
Lindon Cereal Coffee, 100 lb.

sack 8.00

Kneipp's Malt CofTee, 11-oz.

pkg 20

Kneipp Acorn Coffee, for

children  and  weak  Digestion .45
Hensel's Coffee Substitute... .35

Fig  Cereal Coffee 35

Banana Nutro 35

Hensel's Nutro Cocoa, '/> lb.,

50c; 1 lb 1.00

Hensel's Nutro Oat Cocoa,

Vi lb., 50c., 1 lb 1.00

Hensel's  Nutro  Banana  Cocoa,

Vi lb.. 50c: 1 !>> 1  r\r\

Malt Coffee, 10, 25, 50 and 100

lb. pkgs., 8c. per lb. Milwaukee

Imporiing Co., 506 37th St.,

Milwaukee, Wis.
Swiss-Oats Cocoa.

% lb.  boxes 25

5 lb. tins 4.50

10 lb. tins 9.00


NUTS  AND  NUT  PREPARATIONS


NEW NUT PRODUCTS

THE  most  nourishing,  the  most
digestible.  Marvelous  for  fat
and  blood  -  making,  and  for
strength-sustaining proprieties.

Nuts  furnish  an  essential  con-
stituent of  a  vegetarian  diet.  In
their  natural  state,  they  are  difficult
of  digestion,  and  cannot  be  used
by  many  persons.  We  have  discov-
ered a  method  for  rendering  nuts
easily  digestible  by  even  the  most
delicate  stomach,  in  the  prepara-
tions following.

Those  desirous  of  subsisting  on
a  nut  diet  in  winter  and  who  like
to  vary  their  diet  with  fruits,  need
not  be  reminded  that  grapes,  pears,
apples,  oranges,  bananas,  etc.,  are
always  available.  Then  there  are
the  dried  fruits  —  apples,  pears,
prunes,  dates,  figs,  apricots,  peaches,
bananas,  raisins,  currants,  etc.  To
cook  dried  fruit,  wash  it  thoroughly
in  clean  water,  then  place  it  in  a
dish  with  enough  water  to  cover
it,  and  soak  ten  or  fifteen  hours;
then,  leaving  it  in  the  water  it  has
been  soaked  in,  put  it  on  the  stove
and  let  it  simmer  gently  until
cooked.  When  nearly  done,  add
sugar  for  individual  taste.

Bromose  makes  fat  and  blood.
This  product  is  made  of  Malted
Nuts,  and  is  especially  useful  as
a  food  for  persons  who  cannot
digest  starch.  Put  up  in  tablets
about  the  size  of  caramels.  ^2-lb.
box, 4Sc: 1 lb., 85c.

Malted  Nuta  is  a  complete
food,  suited  to  all  ages,  and  pos-
sesses the  essentials  of  a  perfect
nutrient. This  pure  nut product


is  especially  desirable  as  a  bever-
age or  food  for  persons  who  de-
sire a  rapid  increase  of  fat  and
blood.  1-pt.  bottles,  $1.00;  ^-pt.,
SSc.

Meltose  is  the  latest  triumph
in  the  art  of  preparing  cereal
foods  by  natural  processes,  so  as
to  render  them  capable  of  imme-
diate assimilation.  Meltose  is
delicately  sweet  in  flavor,  and  rnay
be  eaten  as  freely  as  bread  with-
out injury.  It  should  be  substi-
tuted for  cane  sugar,  syrup,
honey,  and  all  artificially  pre-
pared sweets.  1-lb.  jar,  35c:  1-
gal. can. $1.70; '/<-gal.. $1.00.

Protose,  Vegetable  Meat,  re-
sembles meat  in  color,  taste,  and
fiber,  and  is  the  exact  nutritive
analogue  of  meat,  containing
about  25  per  cent,  more  nutri-
ment for  a  given  weight.  In  form
it  resembles  pressed  chicken.  1-lb.
can. 35c: '/,-lh.,  20c.

Nut  Butter  is  a  substitute  f9r
ordinary  butter,  presenting  fat  in
the  form  of  a  perfect  emulsion.
Combined  with  water,  it  forms  a
delicious  cream,  and  may  be  used
for  shortening  of  all  kinds.  It  is
a  pure  product  of  nuts,  and  may
be  eaten  by  those  who  cannot
use  ordinary  butter.  1-lb.,  35c;
'/-lb.. 20c.

Nuttolene,  a  rich,  delicate,  and
palatable  substitute  tor  butter,
prepared  wholly  from  nuts.  May
be  eaten  by  invalids  who  can  not
digest  nuts  in  any  other  form.
1 lb., 35c; ■:. lb.. 25c.

Sanitas  Food  Candy,  or  Health
Confection,  made  from  Malt
Honey,  besides  being  an  ad-
mirable substitute Tor sugar


candy,  and  a  predigested  food  of
exceptional  value,  is  a  peptogen ;
that  is,  it  aids  the  digestion  of
other  foods,  lib.  box,  60c;  'A-
lb., 35c.

SHELLED NUTS, NUT-BUT-
TER AND OILS

(Substitutes for Meat and Animal

Fats)
Jordan  Almonds, 12  oz.  pkge.  $0.80

Filberts, 10 oz. pkges 60

Hickory Meat, J-j lb o5

Pecan Meat, Vz lb 55

Walnut Meat, Vi lb 55

Nut-Stuffed French Prunes,

Box 55

Pecan-Stuffed Dates. Box 30

Walnut-Stuffed Dates, Box... .30
Almond-Stuffed Dates, Box.. .30
Marcipan-Stuffed Dates, Box. .30
Nut Marmalade (Fruits and
Nuts),  glass  jars,  35c; 6-lb.

pail 1.50

Ideal Nut  Food (Nut  Butter)
No. 1. (Peanuts alone),

small jar, 30c.; large GO

No. II. (Mixed) GO

No. III. (Peanuts  omitted) .60

Olive  Oil 50

Sweet Table Oil (Celery

Gloria) 40

Ko-Nut.  Vegetable  frying  and
shortening  medium,  steril-
ized, guaranteed  free  from
animal  fat,  3-lb.  can,  $1.00;
5-lb.  can,  $1.50;  10-lb.  can  2.75
Sweet Butter Vegetable Oil,

Cooking  and Table, per  can 2.50
Malt  Food. (Pure  Sugar,  Al-
bumen, Peptones  and Phos-
phates) 35

Malt Extract (pure), bottle,  1.00

Small keg 3.50

Whitcomb's Cream-o-Nuts
(Peanut Butter), J4-lb. jar,
10c; ^-Ib. jar, 20c; 1-lb.

jar, 30c: 3-lb. crocks 55

Pure Peanut Brittle, small

pkge., 5c; large  pkge 10

Peanut Wafers. chocolate

filled, pkge 10

Salted Peanuts, 1 lb., 15c; 2

lbs 25

Roasted Peanuts, 1 lb.. 15c;

2 lbs 25

Prices  of  all  other  shelled  nuts  will
be sent on application.

NUT MEATS AND SHELLED

NUTS

(In Fancy Boxes)

Pecan  Halves, ^  lb.,  45c; %■
lb $0.25

Hickory  Meat, 'A  lb.,  45c; yi
lb 25

Walnut Halves, >/ lb., 45c;
14 lb 25

Filberts,  in  20-oz. pkgs 50

Black Walnut Meat, lOoz.
pkges 40

Jordan  Almonds,  1  lb 75

Valencia  Almonds,  1  lb 55

Sicily  Almonds,  1  lb 55

Salted  Jordan  Almonds '/4  lb.,
50c.; 14-lb.,  35c; %  lb 25

Salted Pecans, Vz lb., 45c;

I li lb., 30c; li lb 25

!  Salted  Jumbo Peanuts, 'A lb.,

I 25c; '4 lb 20

Nuts,  all  kinds,  wholesale  quanti-
ties. Austin,  Nichols  &  Co.,  100
Hudson St., New Vork, N. Y.

(Above  prices  subject  to  market
fluctuations.)

Nuts— Paper shell Pecans, Al-
monds,  soft shell Walnuts, Chas.
S. Cash, Nut Store, 225 Fulton
1 St., New York, N. Y.


Kindly mention Dlrectoru when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any  article listed without
manufacturer's or  dealers name oblainahle  from Naturopathic Center. 110  hast 'list St., New York


I'niucrsdl  Xdliuojjdtliic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


1317


COMBINED NUT AND FOOD
PREPARATIONS


Stuffed Arabia Faril New
Dates, ill fancy square
lioxes, with  :

Pecans, at $0.60

Almonds, at 60

Walnuts, at 40

Crystalized Citron, at 45

Crystalize  1 Orange, at 45

Crystalized Ginger,  at 45

With  Pecans,  Almonds,  Wal-
nuts; large drums, 50c;
small drums, 30c; in 15c
packages 15

Golden  Dates,  with  Pecans,
Almonds,  Walnuts.  In  large
fancy  boxes,  40c;  in  round
boxes 25

French  Prunes,  stuffed  with
Walnuts. Fancy boxes 40

"Corona"  ladies'  ideal  food.
Fancy  box  1  lb.,  40c;  yi-
lb ■ 25

Nut  Marmalade,  1  lb.  jar,
40c; y, lb. jar 20

Nut  Butter  of  Pecans  and  Pig-
noltas,  1-lb.  jar,  60c;  ^-Ib.
jar 35

Choice  Smyrna  Figs,  2-lb.
nest, 60c; lib. nest 35

Wheat Nuts. Whole wheat,
nuts and raisins, Syi lb.
pkg., $1.25; 8 lb. pkg. .  .. 2.50
Warren Weeks, P. O. Box
137, Wilkes Barre, Pa.


NUT BUTTERS, HONEY, VEG-
ETABLE FATS, OILS, Etc.

Ko-Nut  Pure  Vegetable  Fat,
3  lbs.,  $1.00; 5  lbs $1.75

Kaola  (Cocoanut  Butter)  3  lb.
can, $1.00; 5 lb can 1.65

Lust's  Pure  Honey,  1  lb.  jar.  . .30

Spanish  Olive  Oil,  yi  gal.,
$1.90;  1  gal.,  $3.50;  qt.,
$1.00; pint 60

Myotherma  (Butter,  Food  and
Tonic combined), tin 1.00

Ripe Olives, small size, 60c;

Dried 20

.Sawtay  (very  best  veg.  but-
ter) ;  large  tins,  40c;  small
tins 20

California  White Hpney 35

California  Red Honey 35


SPECIAL PREPARATIONS

Nut Bromose, lib. box $0.75

yi-lh. box 40

Nut  and Fruit Hro'iKisi-. 1  lli.

box, 75c; J/^-lb.  box 40

Meltose  or Malt Honey, l-lli

jar, 40c; 1-gal. can, $2.00;

^-gal. can 1.00

Nut and Apricot Bromose,

1-lb.  box,  75c.;  J^-lb.  box  .40
Malted  Nuts,  pint  bottle 90

yi  pint 50

Protose,  Vegetable  Meat,  l-lh.

can, 35c; yi-]h. can 20

Protose Savory, 1-lb. can 35

yi lb 25

Nuttose, 1-lb. can 35

Vj lb 20

Nuttolene, lib. can 35

yi  lb .  .20

Nut Soup Stock lib. can.. .45

y lb 25

Nut Butter, lib. can 35

yi  lb 20

Salted Nut Butter, 1-lb. jar.. .45

yi lb 25

Nuttol, pint  bottle 50

'/,  pint 35

Nut  Meal,  pint  bottle 45

yi  pint 30

Almond  Meal,  pint  bottle 75

Almond  Nut  Butter,  1  lb.  can  .75
Antiseptic Charcoal Tablets,

large box, 60c; small 35

Sanitas  Food  Candy,  1-lb.  box .75

yi-lb. box 40


IMPORTED AND DOMESTIC
HEALTH FOODS

Nutritive  Chocolate,  with
Fruit  Extract,  Bilz. — No.
1:  1  lb.  $1.00;  yi  lb.,  50c;
'4  lb.,  ^Oc.  No.  2:  1  lb..
$1.00;  '/'  lb.,  50c;  yi  lb..  .^
Swiss  Milk  Chocolate,  Bilfiii-
ger, 1 lb., $1.00; 'A lb.,

50c; i^-lb

Honey, California, Jar

Janan Soya (Mushroom

Sauce), Lahmann. Bottle..

Nutritive Vegetable Extract,

Lahman Jar, $1.00 and....

I  Bilz Vegetable Extract, in

Powder

I  Fruitone.  Compound fruit

' laxative; in glass  jars,  50c.

I and

I  Fruit-vigor ; for stomach and
I bowels; jar, $1.00; or, 4

i jars for

j  Vegetable Milk, Lahman, Can

I  Lactated  Tissue  Food,  per  can

Nu  Nuts,  a  food  laxative, tin.

Banana Figs are Bananas

cured  and  dried  the  same  as

Figs. Sample  pkge

Banana  Marmalade  or  Cheese,

lb

Pure California Honey, lib.

jar

Grape  Jelly

Laxative  Food,  50c;  large...
Dr.  Conrad's  Health  Food.
This  is  not  a  predigested
food  that  lessens  the  work
of  the  digestive  organs,
but  their  work  is  made
easier  by  the  vegetable  fats
contained  in  the  food,  and
the combination of health-


50.20

.30

.  3  5

1.00

2.00

1.00

.75


3.50

1.00

.35

.50


.15

.35

.35

.35

1.00


ful,  wholesome  cereals  ac-
celerates and  stimulates  the
process  of  digestion.  One
of  the  constituents  of  this
health  food  is  flaxseed.  Per
package 50

Dr.  Winter's  Nutritive  Salts
for  Young  and  Old,  I.,  II.,
TIL, at ....• 1.00

Dr.  Winter's  Nutritive  Salts
for  the  Nerves,  pkge 1.25

Egg  Noodles.  Best  flour  and
strictly  fresh  eggs  used.  'A-
Ib. box, 25c; 1-lb. box 35

Fruit  Jam 35

Iltz  &  Kludt  Nutritive  Salt
Powder 1.00

Barley  Crystals,  per  pkg.,  25c;
Cresco  Gluten  Flour,  or
Cresco Gluten Grit 25

Nut  Bromose, 1-lb.  box,  60c;

Protose  Vegetable  Meat,  1-lb.
can, 35c; }^ lb .25

Selected  Washed  Wheat  in
Grains,  1  lb.,  10c;  5  lbs.,
45c; 10 lbs 85

Whole  Grain  Wheat,  cooked,
in cans 20

LTnpolished  Rice,  1  lb.,  15c;  5
lbs.,  70c;  10  lbs.,  $1.30;
25 lbs 3.00

Oatmeal Biscuits, pkge 25

Oatmeal Crackers, pkge 25

Lahman's  Nutritive  Salts  Oat-
meal Biscuits, pkge 25

Mapleine,  for  making  Maple
Syrup, bottle 35

Pease  Meal, large  tin 35

Pure  Sylmar  Olive  Oil  —

Gallon cans 3.75

Quart 1.00

Pint 60

yi pint 30


COMPOTE

Sweet-sour Plums, 2-lb. glass .85
Sweet-sour Cherries, 2-lb.

glass 85

Sweet-sour Bergamot Pears,

2-lb. glass 85

Pineapples, whole fruit, 2-lb.

can

Pineapples,  sliced,  2-lb.  can..
Pineapples,  grated,  2-lb.  can.
Pineapples, Malacca squares.

2-lb. can

Pflaumenmus (Compote) —

Sweet  and  unadulerated,  lb. .25
Sweet and unadulterated.

Original 5-lb. jars, lb.... 1.00
Mainzer Apfelkraut (Bors-

dorf  Apples,  jellied),  lb..  .35
Mainzer  Birnenkraut  (Berg-
amot Pears,  jellied),  lb...  .50
Mulson  -  Hamburg  Krons-
beeren  (Cranberries),  pre-
served in  their  own  juice.
Gallon  cans,  $3.00;  2-lb.
glass, 75c.; 1-lb. glass... .50


.35
.35
.35

.35


Kindly mention Directoru when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
nidnnfacliircr's or dealer  n name oblninabic from Xnturopathic Center. HO Fast 'ilst St., Sew Yorh


1318


L'niuersdl  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


SPECIAL FOODS FOR DYS-
PEPTICS AND CONVA-
LESCENTS

Brano's  Biscuits  for  Diabe
tics.  This  is  a  delicious
sustaining  biscuit  almost
free  from  starch.  It  is  the
only  one  of  its  kind  and  is
manufactured  by  the  Brano
Biscuit  Company,  New
York.  It  is  highly  endorsed
by  physicians  as  the  best
possible  substitute  for
bread.  Very  efficacious  in
the  treatment  of  diabetes
and constipation.

"Brano" Cookies 60

"Brano" Nuts 40

"Brano" Biscuits with

cheese 40

"Brano" Biscuits,, plain 35

"Brano" Breakfast Food... .35

Dyspepsia  Cakes,  for  Consti-
pation and  Indigestion,
small box 35

Gluten Foods, for Diabetes,
Rheumatism, etc. (See
"Farinacea.")

Lactated  Tissue  Food.  Pre-
pared  Evaporated Milk,  can .30

Maltine ;  malt,  milk,  eggs —
flavored  with  cocoa.  Food
for convalescents, 50c. and 1.00

Nut-filled  Fruits,  for  Nervous-
ness, Nervous  Dyspepsia,
Toxaemia,  and  Special
American  Ailments.  (See
"Nuts and Oils.")

Nutritive  Vegetable  Extract.  A
Food-Elixir  for  Diseases  of
Deficient  Diet  (See  "Mis-
cellanea."

Physiological  Tonicum.  A  Di-
rect Blood-maker.  (See  "Nu-
tritive Beverages.")

Plasmon  Powder,  large  pkg. .  . 1.00

Medium  package 60

Small package 3.5

Plasmon  Biscuits,  contain  30
per  cent  Plasmon.  Large
tins, 50c; small tins 30

Plasmon  Chocolate,  contains
25  per  cent  Plasmon.  Per
package 30

Plasmon Cocoa, contains 55

per  cent Plasmon. Per  tin. .50

Tropon.  Pure  Vegetable  Albu-
men. Regular size 1.00

Iron Tropon 75

Unfermented  Fruit  Juices.  For
Anaemia,  Chlorosis,  Bilious-
ness, and  all  Digestive  and
Blood  Diseases.  (See  "Nu-
tritive  Beverages.")


are  best  when  eaten  raw,  fresh  from
the  hand of Nature.

All  fruits  of  the  earth  contain
nutritive  mineral  salts,  absolutely
necessary  to  health,  and  it  is  these
salts  that  are  washed  out  of  the
vegetable  tissues  by  the  useless  and
dangerous  practice  of  cooking.


UNCOOKED FOODS

Unfired Bread $0.35

Laxative Bread 50

Unfired Fruit Wafers 25

Combination Cereal 25

Laxative Cereal Flakes 35

Combination  Cereal Meal,  25c

and 50

Protoid Nuts, 1-lb. cartons.. .75

Uncooked Wheat Bread 40

Raw Flaked Wheat 25

Muffins, 4 for 10c; Bread,

Whole Wheat, 10c. Fig

Rolls,  10c. Date-Nuts,  10c.

LTncooked  Fruit  Bread,  25c.

Nut and Oatmeal Biscuits.. .15

Macerated  Wheat 1.00

Honey  Nuts, 6-lb. sack 1.50

Digestive  Biscuits, 25c  and... .50


VALUABLE RECIPES

Slantic  Ichor,  a  purely  tem-
perance beverage,  contains  no
alcohol and is made strictly ac-


cording to  tke  laws  of  Divine
and  natural  healing.  It  is  a
drink  which  St.  Patrick  already
used  and  enabled  him  to  live
120  years.  Slantic  is  from  an
old  Celtic  word,  meaning  the  God
of  Health.  Ichor  was  the  name
of  the  brew  drunk  by  the  heathen
gods  to  preserve  life.  The  re-
cipe was  obtained  by  the  Rev.
Father  Wm.  O'Shea,  of  Kansas
City,  Mo.,  who  claims  that  it
will  keep  men  from  the  saloon
and  will  solve  the  temperance
and  prohibition  question.  Being
a  sturdy  man  of  grand  old  age.
Father  O'Shea  bears  witness  at
least  that  this  creation  has  not
been  harmful  to  him.

The  original  recipe  will  be
copied  and  forwarded  to  anyone,
on receipt of $5.00.

Recipe  for  Whole  Wheat  Bread,
price, $1.00.

Louis  Kuhne's  Whole  Wheat
Bread, price, $1.00.

Father  Kneipp's  Recipe  for  Fruit
and Nut Bread,  price,  $1.00.

A  practical  Bread  recipe.  How  to
make  Uncooked  Bread  or  natural
bread  from  cocoanuts  and  un-
cooked oats.  (Bread  for  the
tropics  and  where  cocoanuts
can be obtained.) Price, $2.00.

Dr.  Havard's  Recipe.  Constipa-
tion Food  Remedy,  cures  the
most  obstinate  cases.  Simple  and
easy to compound. Price, $1.00


FOOD  HELPS

MILLS


RAW  VEGETABLES  AND  RAW
DIET

A  list  of  uncooked  foods,  such
as  may  be  kept  in  store  for  sale,
necessarily  excludes  a  long  list  of
green  garden  products  that  may  be
eaten  fresh  from  the  earth  in
which  they  grew.  There  are  cab-
bage, cauliflower,  onions,  carrots,
beets,  cucumbers,  melons,  tomatoes,
radishes,  Brussels  sprouts,  pump-
kins, parsley,  asparagus,  leeks,  sa-
vory, lettuce, chard,  etc.

Then  there  are  the  fruits — apples,
pears,  peaches,  grapes,  cherries,
strawberries,  raspberries,  black-
berries, currants,  bananas,  pine-
apples, figs,  dates,  prunes,  apricots,
oranges and lemons, all of which The Gem


Extra  large  Mill  (heavier)  for
Nut  Butter  and  all  kinds  of
grinding $5.00


(Juaker  City  Peanut  Mill,  No.
F  4.  Capacity,  5  lbs.  Peanut
Butter  per  hour.  Used  also
for CofTce Mill. Cereals.

Spices, etc $5.50

Additional  worm  feed  and
fine  grinding  plates  for
making  nut  butters  and  fruit
and  vegetable salads 1.50


.$1.50


Kindly  mention Directory when ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any  article listed without
iitnnufacturer's or dealer  s name oblainnble  from Ntiliiropalhic Center, 110 Fast 'fist St., New Yorl;


i


Vniocrsdl  Ndlnropdl/u'c  Dirrclonj  (tnd  Bui/crs'  (im'dc


l.'^HJ


FILTERS


BERKEFELD FILTER
Large,  $10.00; Extra  large,  $25.
Kilters.  Filtered water tasteless,

odorless, colorless. From $3.00
,.  lip-
Filters. Continuous  flow, liemoves
Tyiihoid  Bacilli.  From  $10.0(1  up.


Vale Fruit I're
size


7.00; large
$10.00


HYGIENIC FILTER
Reversible and self-cleaning.
Adjustable to all size Fau-
cets  $1..S0


Still,  Sanitary.  Sterilizes  and  aerates
water. From $10.00 up.

Water  Purifiers,  stone.  Self-cleans-
ing, Germ-proof. $.o.50 up.


THERAPEUTIC  APPARATUS


ABDOMINAL SUPPORTERS

'7*5., THE NEW

ADONIS
SUSPENSORY
Worn  next  skin.
$1.7.5


The  New Adonis Suspensory,
medium  or  large, Lantz....

Abdominal  Supporters,
all  sizes,  difTerent  prices.

Suspensories,  according  to
size  and  style,  from  $1.00
to


$1.75


2  50


BATH CABINETS

Burdick Cabinet Co., Milton, Wis.

The Milton

The pearly, white enamel finish,

sanitary collarette, high efficiency

I  reflecting panels, perfect ventila-

I  tion, flush  joint  and  seam construc-

i  tion by means of electric and

I  acetylene welding, produce a cabi-

I  net  of  great  durability, beauty  and

sanitation.

The  Burdick  Ventilating  System
maintains  an  even  distribution  of
heat,  preventing  an  accumulation
of  heat  in  the  upper  portion  of  the
cabinet,  eliminates  the  impurities,
and  provides  a  method  of  absolute
control.

Dimensions:  Width  34!/2  inches;
depth  39  inches;  height  50  inches;
width  of  doors  22 Ji  inches;  ship-
ping weight  425  pounds;  con-
structed in  two  sections  for  easy
installation.


white  enamel  finish,  and  with  high
efficiency  reflecting  panels,  ad-
justable collarette,  revolving  metal
stool,  40-60-watt  carbon  lamps.  F.
O. B. Milton, Wisconsin, $225.00

60-watt  tungsten  lamps,  extra,
$7.50.


BURDICK RADIO-VITANT
APPLICATORS

Applicator  on Standard  in  Use
Can  also  be  used as Local  Baking

Cabinet.
1  Burdick  Radio-Vitant  Appli-
cator, with  double  metal  walls,
asbestos  interlining,  rubber  in-
sulated supporters,  body  finished  in
dark  green  plush  and  hard  rubber
enamels  with  nickel  trimmings;  6
120-watt  lamps  (2  extras  for  future
use) ;  1  Adjustable  Applicator
Standard ;  1  Manual  of  Instruc-
tions, "Local  Applications  Made
Practical."  Regular  Price,  $35.00.
Special  Introductory  Price,  $21.50.
With  Carrying  Case,  Mantle  and
Compress, as illustrated, $27.50.

RADIO-VITANT  APPLICATOR
TYPE  "G"

TYPE  "G,"  for  general  pro-
longed applications  of  light  and
heat  at  moderate  temperatures,  and
for  short  intensive  applications  for
derivative and sweating eflfects.

Applicator  is  operated  over  the
hospital  Cot  by  means  of  the  type
"G"  stand  or  over  a  permanent
treatment  table  by  special  spring
counter-balances.

The  stand  is  easily  movable  on
the  floor  from  bed  to  bed  and  Ap-
plicator is  raised  and  lowered  over
patient  in  bed  with  a  simple  mo-
tion of  the  hand.

A  splendid  upright  Cabinet  may
also  be  formed  by  coupling  two  of
the  type  "G"  Applicators  together
as  shown  in  center  figure  on  the
next  page.  A  special  feature  of
this  Cabinet  is  that  no  special
wiring is required.

Our  "mogul"  multiple  socket  is
recommended  for  permanent  instal-
lation. For  maximum  results,  75-
watt  nitro-tungsten  lamps  may  be
used.

Dimensions:  Length  45  inches;
width  adjustable  from  18  inches  to
3i  inches;  lamps,  12  60-watt  car-
bons, controlled  by  a  two-circuit
switch. Weight 50  pounds.

Price,  complete,  $75.00.  Type  "G"
stand,  $35.00.  Ceiling  counter-
balance, $15.00.

Two  Applicators  for  upright
cabinet,  and  including  stool,  coup-
ling sections,  double  weight  can-
vass top,  etc.,  $155.00.  "Mogul"
Multiple Socket,  $3.00.

RADIO-VITANT  APPLICATOR
TYPE  "I"
TYPE  "I,"  for  application  to
the  various  sections  of  body,  as
trunk  or  hips  and  legs,  is  of  the
same  general  construction  as  type
"G,"  only  smaller.  It  has  special
advantages  not  obtainable  in  any
other  device  for  applying  radiant
light  and  heat,  for  the  special  pur-
poses for  which  this  outfit  is  in-
tended.


Kindly mention Directory when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any  article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealer's name  obtainable  from Naturopathic Center. 110  East 'ilst  St.. \ew York


1.^20


rnii>rrs<il  Xdliiro/xilliic  Diicclorij  (Uid  Ihu/rrs'  (hiidr


Cabinet "G"
Attacliefl to Oiling


fahinet "I"
Open Position


i

1

j^^^H


' P

^1

■

Miifciii rr^.:  rii

-;-;*

Cal.inet  "G" *
Kasily Movable


Two C"ahinet Sections Com-
l)inc(l for Sitting Cabinet


Unlvermnl IV'iidiropiithlf Dlroctorj nml Bnyorw' faildp


!5>


■^


Try  This  1 0  Days  Free

HERE'S  a  chance  for  you  to  tesl  out  one  of  the  latest
and  greatest  therapeutic  developments  —  a  device
for  the  local  application  of  light,  hot  air,  and  steam  for

the  relief  of
pain,  conges-
tions, hyper-
tensions, etc. —
the  B  u  r  d  i  c  k
"Radio-Vitant"
Applicator.

Its  range  of
usefulness
makes  it  truly
the  Universal
Method.  Try  it
and  you'll  ap-
preciate its  real,
practical,  ther-
apeutic value.


The universal method  for  local  application of  heat


Send  No  Money

We  want  you  to  test  this  Applicator  your-
self. Just  ask  for  one.  Test  it.  Observe
your  results.  Keep  it  ten  days.  Then,  if
you  don't  think  it  worth  the  price — $35.00 —
send  it  back.  If  you  want  to  keep  it,  send
only  $21.50.  That's  our  special  introductory
price.  It  will  be  withdrawn  when  we  have
placed  the  limited  number  of  Applicators
set  aside  for  this  purpose.

So  don't  wait
Get  yours  now


Visit  Our  Office

If  you  are  near  enough  to
call  at  our  Chicago  Ofllce,
15  East  Washington  Street,
we  shall  be  glad  to  demon-
strate not  only  this
Applicator,  but  our  fa-
mous Light-Bath  Cabinets
as well.


Get  Our  Free  Book

Just  drop  us  a  card  and
we'll  mail  you  free  a  copy
of  our  new  "Manual  of
Physiologic  Therapeutics."
Valuable  and  interesting.
Treats  the  subject  of  Light
and  Hot  Air  Therapy  in  a
comprehensive manner.


BURDICK  CABINET  CO.


Relieving  a  case  of  yeuritis


601  MADISON  AVENUE
MILTON, WISCONSIN


a


=B


1322


rniucrsal  Saliiropallnc  Diicclonj  and  Buyers'  (iuide


1


(1)  Its  construction  is  of  twenty-
four  gauge  furniture  steel  and  con-
forms with  electrical  code  of  the
National  Board  of  Underwriters  in
every particular.

(3)  Adjustable  in  width  and
height,  adapting  it  for  treating  a
knee  joint  or  the  body  of  a  large
person.


(.')  Patent  tubular  ball-bearing
hinge for operation of side walls.

Dimensions — Length  18  inches;
width  adjustable  from  14  inches  to
26  inches;  height  adjustable  from
16  inches  to  22  inches;  lamps,  8
60-watt  carbons,  controlled  by  a
two-circuit switch. Weight 17 lbs.

Price, complete, $55.00.


BURDICK CABINET CO., Milton,  Wis.


BATH  CABINETS  (Continued)

ELECTRIC LIGHT,  STEAM, DRY HOT  AIR


King  Edward  Electric  Light
Cabinet.  36  long  tubular  lamps
and  3  4,000  C.  P.  violet  ray
arc  lamps  on  separate  switch.
Heavy  crystal  plate  mirrors.
Direct  current,  110  Volts,  $250.00
Alternating  current,  110  Volts,
$275.00.

Without violet rav arc lamps,
$192.00.

Metropolitan  Prismatic  Electric
Bath  Cabinet.  "All  Steel"  con-
struction. 42  lamps.  Can  be
folded.  Complete  with  all  at-
tachments, $2.50.00.

Special,  Heavy,  All  Steel  Cabinet.
For  steam,  vapor,  hot-air
(Turkish)  or  electric  light  baths.
For  Steam — Vapor  medicated
bath,  using  either  live  or  exhaust
steam  from  building  plant,  with
revolving stool, $106.00.

For  Hot  Air.  Fitted  with  4-
wall  pattern  radiators  to  be  con-
nected to  steam  or  hot  water
plant, $110.00.

For Electric Light, $165.00.

Carlsbad  Electric  Light  Cabinets.
The  patient  lies  on  a  car  which
can  be  rolled  into  the  cabinet  as
far  as  desirable.  Made  of  best
quarter  sawed  oak  and  steel.
Fitted  with  36  16  C.  P.  long
tubular  lamps  and  French  crystal
plate  mirrors,  $2'10.00.
With  nickel-plated  panels,  in
stead of mirrors, $190.00.

Hospital  Model.  All  steel.  Sqtiare
or  octagon  inside.  Ftillv  oqui))
ped, $42.';. 00.


Dry  Hot  Air  Cabinets.  Body
apparatus,  reclining.  Construc-
ted of  metal  throughout;  weight
500  pounds.  Complete  with
rubber  air  pillow,  2  robes,
2  turkish  blankets,  mits,  stock-
ings and  50  feet  Turkish  towel-
ing. With  gas  or  gasoline  heat-
ers, $82.50.

Apparatus  for  Local  Treatment.
For  Arms,  legs,  hips,  back,  ab-
domen, etc.  Made  for  gas,
gasoline  or  alcohol  heaters.
(State  which  kind  is  wanted)
Price, $24.00.

Smaller  Apparatus  for  Knee.
Made  for  gas.  gasoline  or  al-
cohol heater.  (State  which  kind
IS wanted). Price, $16.50.

Compresses. Absorbent mineral.


Folding  Cabinets  for  steam  or  Dry
Hot  Air,  $10.00;  $12.50;  $15.00
and $20.00.


DILATORS

Electrothermal Dilator.  Kcttal

dilation  and  heat.  Price,  com-
plete, $1.'').00.  Electrothermal
Co., Steubenville, O.

Pneumatic  Rectal  Dilator  and
Exerciser.  Gives  prostatic  mas-
sage and  tone  to  the  rectum  and
sigmoid. Price, postpaid, $2.60.

Parallel  Blade  Dilator.  Will  dilate
up  to  'i  inches.  Made  in  hard
rubber. Price, $3.00.

Douching Apparatus

(See Syringes)


The  Rather  Turkish  Bath  Ap-
paratus. A  Turkish  Bath  in
your Bed.  J 'rice, complete,

$18.00.  The RatlK-r 'l  iii-kiMi

Bath Co., Rosebank, Staten
Island, N. ^^


Leucodecent l.aniii Outfit. Price.
$75.00.

Spondylotherapy-Set. For verte-  |

bral concussions and pressure,  i  Vapor-Bath Cabinet, J.^i.-'iO, $7.00,
Price, $5.00.  I $10.50, $12.00, $15.50.


Extra  Vapor  Bath Cabinet, $50.00.

Blood  Pressure  .'Vpparatus.  All
makes  and  styles.  $15.00  to
$30.00.  Zoe Johnson Co.,

Chicago, III.


Kindly mention Dtrcctoru when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
niannforturer's  or  dealers  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  Mst  St.,  New York


i


IfiiiverMiil N:iOiro|»a(lii<- I>ir4>f(4>ry iiiiil llii}'4>r.s'  (^iihlc

Please  note  the  Important  qualities  of  the

VACUUM-NEUROPA  THIC

TREATMENT,

JUNOD'S  HAEMOSPASIA,

BIER'S  HYPEREMIA.

Tlie  following  sets  forth  in  a  concise  manner  some
of  the  rare  and  invaluable  qualities  of  the
VACUUM-NEUROPATHIC  TREATMENT,  that
are  not  possessed  by  any  other,  and  which  are  so
patent  that  their  importance  in  eliminating  diseased
conditions are readily recognized.

This  method,  in  addition  to  restoring  the  circula-
tion of  the  blood  to  the  diseased  area,  is  an  invalu-
able aid  to  our  means  of  diagnosis,  as  it  discloses,  by
the  appearance  of  the  blood  brought  to  the  surface,
the  pathological  condition  of  the  circulation'  and  the
underlying  tissues.  On  normal  structures,  the  treat-
ment brings  out  a  fine,  healthy,  florid  color;  but  on
all  morbid  parts,  the  color  is  unhealthy ;  it  may  be
highly  colored,  angry  looking  red,  denoting  inflamma-
tion; or  pallid,  dead  looking,  of  various  dark  hues.
approaching  absolute  blackness,  denoting  congestion,
stasis,  deposits  of  debris,  waste  effete,  and  worn-out
matter  of  the  tissues,  blood  and  nerve  cells,  etc.,
which  clog  the  small  blood  vessels  and  prevent  the
blood,  nutrition,  from  reaching  the  diseased  area,  all
of  which  will  be,  by  persistent,  moderate  treatment,
dissolved  and  absorbed  by  the  circulating  media,  and
through  the  organs  of  the  circulation  and  elimination,
in nature's  way, expelled from the body.

It  is  the  only  system  that  is  able  to  break  through
the  barriers  to  the  circulation,  met  with  in  acute  and
chronic  ailments,  which  is  largely  responsible  for  its
many  near  miraculous  cures  of  Pneumonia,  Loco-
motor Ataxia,  Asthma,  Neurasthenia,  Bright's  Dis-
ease, Diabetes,  Infantile  and  Adult  Paralysis,  Artefio
Sclerosis,  Vertigo,  Hardening  of  the  Spinal  Cord  and
Arteries,  Paralysis  Agitans,  and  other  serious,  chronic,
'incurable  (so-called)  ailments  of  mankind.  The
blood  does  it  all,  and  at  the  same  and  the  one  opera-
tion, supplies  arterial  blood  and  ner-vo  vital  fluids,
nutrition,  to  the  diseased  area,  the  weakened  nerves,
tendons,  tissues,  blood  and  nerve  cells,  and  absorbs
the  debris  of  worn-out  tissues,  nerve  and  blood  cells,
and,  in  Nature's  way,  eliminates  the  impurities,
which  are  the  causation,  or  result,  of  disease;  an
indispensable  corollary,  in  eliminating  disease  and
restoring  health.

No  other  system  possesses  these  necessary  and
essential  features,  the  importance  of  which  Neuro-
paths and  Pathologists  appreciate,  and  which  are
worthy  of  your  careful  consideration.

Our  instruments  are  constructed  on  correct,  sci-
entific, mechanical  lines,  based  on  a  practical  ex-
perience, in  their  use  of  50  years,  which  has  brought
them  so  near  perfection,  that  their  continual  use
under  the  most  arduous  and  practical  conditions  de-
velops no  defects.  They  are  always  ready  for  im-
mediate use  and  are  fully  guaranteed,  and  we  invite
your  careful  consideration  of  their  construction  and
therapeutical  utility.

Every  physician  should  have  our  illustrated  and
instructive  price  list,  which  contains  valuable  infor-
mation not  obtainable  elsewhere.  We  shall  be
pleased  to  mail  it  to  your  address.

Send postal for yours.


The  Physician's  Emergency
Outfit

which  win  decide  Pathology  and
Diagnosis  for  you.


Pump and Cups  of Emergency Outfit


Cups, Nested to Place  in  Bag


Club Bag, to Carry Them in


The  Emergency  Outfit,  Price,  $90

The  Emergency  Outfit,  as  shown  above,  consists
of  No.  90  Satchel  Pump  and  Cups  Nos.  3  to  11,  in-
clusive. The  Cups  will  nest  together  nicely  and,
with  the  Pump,  will  fit  in  the  16-inch  Club  Bag
shown  above.  This  makes  a  very  convenient  selec-
tion for  the  physician  to  carry  to  the  bedside  of  his
patient  and  use  in  case  of  LUMBAGO,  PNEU-
MONIA, PLEURISY,  MENINGITIS,  MASTITIS.
INCIPIENT  CANCER  OF  THE  BREAST,  CON-
GESTIONS. INFLAMMATIONS  of  the  SPINE,
etc.,  the  aching  condition  of  the  spine  met  with  in
tjrphoid  and  other  fevers.  All  acute  ailments  yield
readily  to  its  potent  influence.  BUT  BE  CAUTIOUS
not to  treat too HEROICALLY.


With  the  Emergency  Outfit  shown  above  and  Sul-
phate of  Magnesia  (Epsom  Salts),  in  one-ounce  doses,
which  should  always  be  given  to  cleanse  the  inner
man  and  whiskey  in  one  to  four  dram  doses  to  stim-
ulate the  nervous  system  as  required.  The  Physician
is  in  a  position  to  cope  successfully  with  every  case
of Pneumonia, Meningitis, Pleurisy, Lumbago, etc.


Apply  the  cups  mildly  but  thoroughly  and  persist-
ently over  and  at  the  painful  part  and  long  enough
to  relieve  pain,  and  repeat  the  application  as  often
as  the  pain  returns ;  usually  one  to  four  applications
will  suffice  to  cure — No  medicine  other  than  the  Ep-
som Salts  and  whiskey  need  be  given. — Prof.
H. N. D. Parker.


The  H.  N.  D.  Parker  Manufacturing  Co.

Maryland  Bldg.,  1410  H  St.  N.  W.  Washington,  D.  C.


132


Vuivorsdl  \(ilur<)[)(illiic  Diirclonj  und  lUii/rrs'  Guide


ELECTROTHERAPY

The  vibratory  energy  of  the  elec-
tric current,  whether  Galvanic,  Fa-
radic,  Static,  or  Sinusoidal,  is
highly  curative,  and  is  one  of  the
powerful  adjuncts  of  Naturopathy.
At  first,  electro-therapeutic  batteries
were  of  the  brutal,  violent  type.
These  were  followed  by  Galvanic
belts  that,  after  being  used  a  short
time,  developed  no  current  at  all.
Finally,  both  extremes  were  aban-
doned for  machines  of  ir.ild  currents
from  the  large  Static  machine  to  the
pocket  battery  run  by  nitrate  of
silver.

Klectropoise ,$10.(1(1

Dome klcctric Massage Bat-
tery, complete (extra Drv

Cells) r).on

Brush Electrode 1.2.''i

Medical Battery, for Home

I'se.  With instructions.

l'"lectro(les, etc. Impnncd

Red Cross Battery l.OfI

.Medical Battery, Dry Cell

20th Century Battery .5.00

Medical Battery, Double Dry

Cell Perfection Battery.... 8.00


Polysine  Generators.  Combination
machine.  Sinusoidal,  galvanic,
diagnostic;  very  powerful.  Prices,
$12.'>.00 to $17.5.00.

Sinusoidal  Apparatus.  According
to  size.  $60.00  to  $225.00.  I.  W.
Long, Columbus, O.


HYDROPATHY

r.ath Cabinets, Home, Turko-
Russian,  $12.50,  $10.00.  $7.50.

Bath  Cabinets,  $12.50,  $7.50,  $5. (Hi
and  $1.00.

Bath  Cabinets,  X'apor,  Xo.  1
(Double  Wall),  Wood,  $15.5(1;
Steel, $12.00.

Bath  Cabinets,  Vapor.  Xo.  2  (Single
Wall),  Wood,  $7.50;  Steel,  $(;.«0,
$5.0(1.

I 'lunge  Baths.  Heavy  Woo.l  Bot-
toms, Japanned,  5  ft.,  green,
«  1  n  1 1 1 1


Medical  Battery,  for  Physi-
cians. Double  Dry  Cell
Dial Battery $12.00

High  Frequency  Machines.  From
$15.00  up.  Zee  Johnson  Co.,
1553  W.  Madison  St.,  Chicago,
III.

Violetta  High  Frequency  Instru-
ment. I'ortable.  Bleadon-Dunn
Co.,  15-17  Desplains  Street,
Chicago, 111.

Combination  Electric  Outfits.

Electrical  apparatus  to  fit  every
ofifice  need.  Zoe  Johnson  Co.,
Chicago, III.

X-Ray  Apparatus.  Zoe  Johnson
Co., Chicago, 111.

Sinustat.  A  portable  machine
giving  various  sinusoidal  cur
rents.  Price,  $60.00.  For  home
use. price, $4,S.nO.  Ultima

Physical  Appliance  Co.,  136  W.
Lake St.. Chicago. III.

Electrical  Therapeutic  Apparatus.
Harris  Therapeutic  Appliance
Co.,  45  W.  34th  St.,  New  York,
N.  Y.


lorn
$10.0(..
I'lunge Baths. Heavy
Jai)aiiiied.


Wo,


Bot-

■een,

Bot-
een.


$12.50."

I'lunge  Baths,  Heavy  Wood  Bot-
tom. Japanned.  (1 ft.,  oak,  $14.50.

Portable  Shower  Baths.  Direct  Fau-
cet Connection, $2.50, $2.75,


$3.00, $3.25.
Rubbing Towels. 75c; $1.
$2.00 an''


2.50


Melcher's Shower ^■oke, $4.00 and
$5.00.


Extra Folding  Plunge Bath, $10.00 Baby Folding Bath, Price, $8.00


1

Warming Vessel $0.50

Metal, Hot Water Bed, Stomach
and  Foot  Warmer,  $4.50  &  $5.50


00


Rubber .Sponge-Baths. Fold-
ing, Self-Adjusting,  large.. $1

Rubber Sponge- Baths, Fold-
ing, Self-Adiusting (suitable
for  Sitz-Baths),  small 10.00


Shower Bath Outfit, $3.50.


Kindlii mention Divectory ivhen ordering merchanflise.  —  Information on any article listed without
nidniifactiircr's or dealer's name obtainable from Xaliirnpalliir Center. 110 East filsi St.. New York


Tlniversiil lV]iliiro|t]i(liI<- l>ir«M'<or.v :iii<l liii.tcrK* C^iiiilo


Che  Dru9le$$  Supply  fioHse

C  hir  license  is  organized  to  serve  the  interests  of  Drugless  men  and
women  everywhere.  We  deal  altogether  with  Drugless  Practitioners
We  are  the  only  supply  house  in  existence  today  handling  everything  for
the  rhysician  that  is  devoted  solely  to  serving  the  Drugless  Profession.

\\e  solicit  the  support  of  every  Drugless  Physician.  We  stand  back
of  everything  we  recommend.  VVe  can  quote  you  lowest  prices  on  all
articles.  Ask  about  our  profit-sharing  plan,  whereby  you  receive  a  dis-
count on  many  purchases.

You  can  order  from  us  with  the  assurance  that  if  the  purchased  article
is  not  in  every  way  as  represented,  it  can  be  returned  to  us  and  your
money  will  be  refunded.


GET OUR PRICES
ON  THESE  ARTICLES

Concussors

Vibrators

Manikins

Dilators

Stethoscopes
Treating  tables

Chiropractic  tables

Suit  case  tables

Traction  tables

Chiropractic  emblems

X-Ray  apparatus

High  Frequency  outfits

Percussion  apparatus
Therapeutic  lamps

Combination  electric  outfits

All  Drugless  books

Physiological  charts

Concussion  charts

Urinary  Test  outfits

Blood  pressure  apparatus


Ulcolite Therapeutic Lamp
PRICE,  $8.00

Reflector  9%  inches,  100  can-
dle power  carbon  bulb.  At-
tached to  ordinary  lamp  socket.
Weighs  but  a  few  ounces.
Penetrates  skin  2  inches  below
surface.  Get  one  on  ten  days'
trial.  We  can  furnish  red,  blue
or  amber  screens  for  $3.00  each


WRITE


FOR DESCRIPTIVE LITERATURE
OF  DRUGLESS SUPPLIES


ZOE  JOHNSON  COMPANY

Therapeutic  Supplies,  Books,  Etc.  (Everything  except  Drugs)

Wendell  Bank  Bldg.,  Cor.  Madison,  Ashland  &  Ogden  Chicago,  111.


132(i


Ininersdl  Xdluropal/iir  Dlrcclorij  and  limjcrs'  (iiiide


.^itim^mr'


PACKS AND BANDAGES


Sitr Baths, $14.00, $18.00, $20.00
and  $24.50.

Sitting-Bath  Tubs,  zinc,  anti-
rust,  small 7.50

Medium,  $10.00;  Standard,  12.00

U  Large 14.00


I  Spanisli Mantle, $4, $4.50,  $4.75
'  Rubber Hose, elastic, best

quality,  per  foot 50

Rubber Hose, hard, best

quality, per foot 50

Flesh Brushes. (See Special
Apparatus.)


Head Bandage 75

Neck Bandage 50

Dr.  Wright's  Health  Syringe,

with 2 tubes 8.00

Extra  single  tubes,  long  or
short, each 1.00


Self  -  Douchers  (Simplified
Shower-Baths),  with  5  feet
Hose 10.50

Self-Douchers, Okie, aiiti

rust, complete 25.00

Shower  Yoke,  with  Book,
complete 4.00

Shower  Yoke,  Patent  Bulb,
Single  Attachment,  com-
plete 4.25

Shower  ^'oke,  Patent  Bulb,
Double  Attachment,  com-
plete 4.25

Shower  Yoke,  Double  Bulb-
less Connection, complete. 4.25

Cascade,  with  attachment  for

Women, with $1.00 Book  1

on Health 10.00


Syringes,  Universal  and
Alpha  (Injection)  for
Adults, $2, $2.25 $2.50,

$3.00, and .' 3.50

Syringes,  Universal  and  Alpha
(Injection) for Children,

50c,  80c  and 1.00

Syringes,  I'rimo,  for  Women.  3.50
Syringes,  for  Women,  Suction

Injection 3.50

Sipho, Automatic Vaginal

Apparatus 12.50

Short  Wrapper  (short  ban-
dage) 2.50

Large  Wrapper  (lower  ban-
dage 3.50

Under and Upper Compress

(Aufschlager) 2.00

Shawls 1.25

Abdominal Bandage (Leib-

umschlag) 1.00

Other bandages made to order.
Cascade (Internal Bath),

with  $1.00  Book  on  Health  10.00

Linen  Sheet 4.00

Woolen Sheet 10.00

Raw silk sheet 6.00

Under-jacket  of  flannel 4.00

Over-jacket of linen 2.50

Short  pants of flannel 4.50

Over pants of  linen 3.00

Triangular bandage 2.00

T bandage 2.00

Four tail bandage 3.50

Short  pack 2.50

Three-quarter pack 3.50

Full pack 4.50

Porous  Bath  Sheets 3.50

(Therapeutic Apparatus continued
on page 1344.)


PHYSICAL CULTURE

Breast Developer (Suction
Principle) $5.00


Kxerciser.s,  with  Illustrated  In-
struction Book 5.00


;  Exercisers,
best Elas
Exercisers.
Short Pack Linen, $2.50;  (with

Raw  Silk $3.50 Strength


Kindly mention Directoru when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer's or  dealers name  obtainable  from Nalurnpathic Center. 110  East filst St., New York


Unlverwal Naturopathic  Directory and IlujcrM* (;uI«Ip


1327


One  Thing  Money  Cannot  Buy

By  ROY  WILSON  BEAL


SOME  folks  imagine  that  the  greatest
thing  in  the  world  is  a  fat  bank  ac-
count and  plenty  of  leisure  time  in
which  to  spend  the  money.  The  blind
man  thinks  the  greatest  thing  in  the
world  is  to  be  able  to  see.  The  cripple
thinks  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world
is  to  possess  a  body  free  from  deform-
ities, acbes  and  pains.  The  hungry  man
thinks  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world  is
to  sit  down  to  a  table  loaded  with  all
kinds  of  good  things  to  eat.  The  lover
thinks  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world  is
love.

In  fact,  everyone  thinks  the  great-
est thing  in  the  world  is  that  which  each
most  desires  and  is  least  able  to  obtain.

The  greatest  thing  in  the  world  is  not
money  or  power,  automobiles  or  man-
sions; it  is  something  money  cannot  buy.
You  may  ask,  "Is  there  anything  money
cannot  buy?"  Yes,  there  is.  The  most
important,  the  most  vital  and  the  most
necessary  thing  in  life  to  have  in  order
to  be  satisfied,  contented  and  happy  and
able  to  enjoy  life  is  to  possess  that  "one
thing  money  cannot  buy."

What  is  that  thing  which  money  can-
not buy?

It  is  HEALTH.  Precious,  vital,  price-
less health.  Necessary  alike  for  rich
and  poor.  Attainable  equally  for  young
and  old.  The  rich  cannot  be  happy
without  it;  the  poor  cannot  be  well
without  it.  You  cannot  purchase  it  in
a  drug  store,  for  it  does  not  come  put
up  in  bottles  ready  to  "take  accord-
ing to  directions."  Nor  can  you  obtain
it  from  the  grocer,  for  it  does  not  exist
either  in  bulk  or  in  packages.  Those
who  have  it  rarely  appreciate  to  its  full-
est extent  its  priceless  value.  Those
who  have  lost  it  would  give  all  they  had
in  the  world  sometimes  to  get  it  back.
A  few  are  privileged  to  enjoy  it  without
exerting  apparently  any  effort  on  their
part  to  keep  it,  but  the  majority  of  us


arc  obliged  to  work  for  it;  first  t(j  ac-
(luire  it  and  then to  keep  it.

Now  the  question  naturally  arises,  "If
/  do  not  possess  this  greatest  of  all  human
blessings,  where  and  how  can  I  get  it?"
By  simply  devoting  a  few  minutes  a  day
occasionally  indulging  in  "an  internal
bath"  administered  with  the  aid  of  a  "J.
B.  L.  Cascade."  What  is  a  "Cascade?"
It  is  an  appliance  used  for  the  admin-
istration of  an  internal  bath  and  was
invented  by  Dr.  Chas.  A.  Tyrrell,  who  not
only  saved  but  prolonged  his  own  life
more  than  fifteen  years  beyond  the  time
set  by  his  own  physicians  to  live  and  is
alive  and  hearty  today.  Internal  bath-
ing is  a  short  cut  from  illness  to  health.
There  is  nothing  laborious  or  objection-
able about  it.  It  is  a  simple,  efficacious
and  quick  method  of  ridding  the  body  of
those  poisons  which  are  known  to  multi-
ply enormously  in  the  colon  or  large  in-
testine and  directly  or  indirectly  the  un-
derlying cause  of  most  of  our  physical
and  mental  ills.

The  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands
of  testimonials  on  file  in  Dr.  Tyrrell's
office  attest  to  the  almost  miraculous  re-
sults obtained  through  the  use  of  the
"Cascade."  If  you  will  write  to  Chas.  A.
Tyrrell,  M.D.,  134  W^est  65th  Street,  New-
York  City,  mentioning  The  Universal
Naturopathic  Directory,  there  will  be
mailed  to  you  a  booklet  entitled  "The
What,  the  Why,  and  the  Way  of  Internal
appliance  and  how  it  has  benefited
thousands  suffering  from  a  variety  of
ills.

As  a  prophylactic  means  of  avoiding
serious  or  prolonged  illness  and  as  an  aid
in  assisting  Nature  to  restore  the  health
of  those  who  are  ill,  it  has  almost  no
equal  in  the  realm  of  science.  There  is
almost  no  condition  of  ill  health  that
does  not  derive  some  benefit  from  its  use.
—Adv.


Australian  Agent:  Mrs.  M.  E.Levine,  Norwich  Chambers,  56  Hunter  St.,  Sydney,  X.S.W.
(Sole  Agent,  Santa  Cruz,  India— P.  B.  MADON)


328


i'niucrsdl  Xaturupdlhic  Directory  and  Ihiyers Guide


Exercisers. — Noiseless  Striking
Bag,  including  Platform.
Bag  and  Gloves,  complete,  $20.00

Exercisers, Travelers', with

Booklet 2.00

Exercisers,  Travelers',  Ath-
lete's Tension, 5 to  60  lbs.. 2.00

Exercisers.  —  Combination
Wrist,  Racine  Steel  Springs.
No. 1, $2.00; No. 2...... 2.50

Exercisers.  —  Chest,  Racine
Steel,  No.  1 2.50

Exercisers. — Wall,  Nos.  2  and
3 4.00

Exercisers. — -No.  4,  Athlete... 4.50

Exercisers.  — •  Wood  Pulleys,
Changeable  Strength,  5  to
23  lbs 3.00

Exercisers.  —  Metal  Pulleys,
Strength,  5  to  40  lbs.,  2-yr.
guarantee 4.00

Exercisers.  — -  Screw  Pulleys,
Nickeled  ;  Strength,  5  to  4.'i
lbs.. 2-yr. guarantee 5.00

Exercisers.  —  Screw  Pulleys,
Extra  Strength,  5  to  50,  2-yr.
guarantee 6.00

Exhaler,  Wilhide's,  with  In-
struction  Book 1.00

Massage  Roller,  Combination,
with  Illustrated  Instructions. 1.25

Massage Roller 1.50

Matto  Chain (Massage) 2.50

Wrist  Bells,  Wood,  friction
polish, all colors 2.00


L'yousa iPeveloper (Massage
Treatment) 1.50


Wrist  Machine.  Wood  Handles  1.00
Wrist Machine, Rosewood or

Mahogany Handles 1.50

Wrist  Bells, Cork Handles...  2.00

Wrist  Bells, Rosewood 3.00

Yankee Health Vibrator, 24-

Ball 1.50

Yankee Health Vibrator, 36-

Ball 3.50


Price $25.00


Yankee  Health  Vibrator,  two
Elastic  Rubber  Buflfers,  24-
Ball 2.00

Yankee  Health  Vibrator,  two
Elastic  Rubber  Buffers,  30-
Ball 2.50


CONCUSSORS

Hand Concussors, $3.50.

Electric  Concussors.  Prices  ac-
cording to  size  and  make.  Zoe
Johnson  Co.,  1553  W.  Madison
St., Chicago, 111.

Hand  Concussors,  $3.50.  I.  W.
Long.  110  N.  High  St.,  Co-
himbiis, ().

Chiropractic  Tables.  All  makes.
Zoe Johnson Co., Chicago, 111.


MASSAGE ROLLERS

No.  1,  Six  Wheels,  Body  Roller,
$3.00.  The  best  size  for  use  over
the  body,  and  especially  for  in-
digestion, constipation, rheuma-


Vibrator. Price


$10.00


Kindly  mention Direclory when ordering merchandise
manufacturer's  or  dealer  s  name  obtainable


Information on any  article  listed without
from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  Mst  St.,  New York


Unlvcrsnl Nnturoiiathlc I)lr«><-<or.v and niiyers* fiiiUlo


1329


Why  Pay  $150.00  to  $200.00

for  a  traction  or  stretching  table  when
you  can  buy  The  Universal  Adjuster
and  Spinal  Relaxer  for  $5.00  and  it
will  do  the  same  work  and  do  it  better.
Why?  Because  the  patient  operates
it  himself,  and  Innate  Intelligence  will
protect  him  from  harm.
Send  for  Dr.  Olds*  booklet.  ''A  Nerv
and  Economical  Way  of  Getting
Welir

IT  IS  FREE

This  booklet  explains  the  "Why"  o£
the  UNIVERSAL  ADJUSTER  AND
SPINAL  RELAXER  and  is  specially
dedicated  to  those  suffering  witli  head-
aches, pains  in  the  back  and  shoulders,
asthma,  throat  and  bronchial  trouble,
catarrh,  colds,  goitre,  total  paralysis
and  any  and  all  troubles  of  the  head,
chest  and  upper  extremities.

It  tells  you  how  I  cured  myself,  how
others  cured  themselves,  and  how  you
can  cure  yourself,  or  use  it  to  advan-
tage on  3'our  patients.  Write  for  it  today.

DR.  E.  O.  OLDS

530  Washington  Trust  Bldg., Washington,  Pa.


>».^— iW^— ..2>— - -  -.,?>-««»— .Ji-...Ji«.<J>»'.Jt—.


Seiiii-I'Mexlii)^ Shank.s


PEDIFORME

All  The  Best  Features  Of  All The
Best  Shoes  Combined  In  One.

PEDIFORME  mean.s  foot  .shapo
— uncramped  anatomy.
Here's  a  shoe  that  has  style  and
appearance — a  decided  improvement
over  all  other  orthopedic  shoes  thus
far  produced — a  shoe  that  restores
normal  position  and  action  to  each
bone  and  muscle — that  removes  the
weight  from  the  arch  and  distributes
it  to  the  true  weight-bearing'  surface
— the  outer  side  of  the  foot.
The  Pediforme  Semi-Flexing  Shanks
adjust  themselves  to  the  high  arch —
an  exclusive  feature  not  found  in  any
other  shoe.

PEDIFORME  SHOES

Ooii.striicted on scientific and truly

.sensible principles, should be ^vorn

by every member of the family,

Inclndins  the  baby.

Send NOW for our instructive little book
"The Last Word In Footwear." It's free

Pediforme Shoe Company

36  yVest  36th  Street New  York  City


THE  RATHER -TURKISH  BATH
SPELLS  HEALTH  AND  SUCCESS

A  Turkish  Bath  in  your  bed  for  two  cents,  is
what  this  invention  means.  Set  up  or  take  down
this  apparatus  in  one  minute.  Experts  have  investi-
gated and  tried  it,  and  happily  exclaimed  that  this
IS  the  missing  link  in  the  profession.  No  practi-
tioner's equipment  is  complete  without  it.  It  beats
the  public  baths  all  to  pieces ;  is  more  sanitary,
more  agreeable  and  effective,  besides  tlie  great  econ-
omy. Here  are  a  few  patented  features:  It  is  col-
lapsible, has  rigid  circulation,  automatic  discharge
of  foul  air,  adjustable  to  local  treatments,  is  lire-
proof.  Dr.  Conrad  says :  "It  is  six  apparatus  in
one."

Guarantee  with  each  bath.  Ask  for  booklet  N.
Special  introductory  price,  complete,  $18.00  Save
money,  buy  now,  and  you  have  proven  your  own  best
friend. DO  IT  NOW.

THE RATHER-TURKISH-BATH CO.
ROSEBANK,  STATEN  ISLAND  NEW  YORK


POPP'S SWISS HERB TEA

Nature's Own Remedy for Blood and Skin

Diseases, Liver  and Kidney  troubles  and Gas

in the Stomach

Ftir Katarrh,


For  Catarrh,
Malaria,  Head-
ache. Costive-
ness.  Female
Troubles.  Dizzi-
ness, Indiges-
tion, Rheumat-
ism, Lung,  Blood
and  Skin  Dis-
eases, Liver  and
Kidney  Troubles
and  Gas  in  the  Stom-
ach. Beautifies  the  schonert
Complexion.  farbe.

DER BERUEHMTE ECHTE  SCHWEIZER
KRAUTER-THEE (POPP'S),
die beste Blutreinigungs-Medizin und Spezifikum
fiir alle Magen-, Leber- und Nierenkrankheiten,
sowie  Verstopfung.
seren Apotheken.

THE RED HAND TEA COMPANY
1233  DeKalb Avenue, Cor. Evergreen  Avenue
Brooklyn,


Trade  Mark


und


Malaria, Kopf-

schmerzen,
Schwindel, Ver-
stopfung, V  e  r-
dauungrsbe-
schwe^rden,
Rheumatismus,
Lungenbe-
schwerden,
Frauenleiden,
Hautkrank-
heitcn, Leber-
und  Nierenleiden
Blahungen. Vcr-
die Gesichts-


Preis  25  Cents. In  alien  bes-
Auch brieflich  von


N. Y.


"So More Sleep Disturbing Urinary Troubles'

Age  conquered.  Health  and  Prolongation  of  Life
by  Dr.  Mayer's  discoveries  are  established  facts,
because  all  diseases  are  cured  in  less  than  one-
third  of  the  time.  Indispensable  also  for  Doctors.
Metaphysicians  and  Mechano-Therapists  who  ^v  ish
to  perform  miraculous  cures  without  swindle
medicines.  Price,  .^1.00.  Address:  Dr.  E.  Mayer,
1127  Chestnut  Street,  Richmond  Hill, L.  I.,  X.  Y.


1330


L'niuersal  Naturopalhic  Dircrlory  and  Buyers'  Guide


tism,  etc.  Can  also  be  used  for
redaction.

No.  2,  Four  Wheels,  Body  Roller,
$2.50.  Smaller  and  lighter  than
Xo.  1,  for  small  women  it  is  the
best  in  size,  for  use  over  the
stomach  and  bowels,  the  limbs,
and for  cold feet.

No.  3,  Three  Wheels.  Scalp  Roller,
$2.50. Made  in fine  woods, and


HERBAL  AND  PHYSIOLOGICAL  REMEDIES


KNEIPP'S HERBAL
REMEDIES

:E  use  of  herbs in  connection
with the natural remedial
forces of Naturopathy may
seem  a  return  to  the  use  of  drugs,


THI
w


for use over the scalp, for the
preservation  of  the  hair. Can  be
used also over the neck to fill
it  out,  and  for  the  throat.
can  be  obtained.

No.  4,  Five-Wheel  Roller,  Bust  De-
veloper, $3.50.  The  best  de-
veloper made.  By  following  the
plain,  physiological  directions
given, most satisfactory results

No.  5,  Twelve  Wheels,  Abdominal
Roller,  $.5.00.  For  the  use  of
men  to  reduce  the  size  of  the
abdomen,  and  over  the  back.  The
handles  give  a  chance  for  a  good,
firm,  steady  pressure.

No.  6.  Three  Small  Wheels,  Mas-
sage Roller,  $3.50.  Made  in
ebony  and  ivory,  for  use  over  the
face  and  neck,  for  preventing  and
removing  wrinkles,  and  restoring
its  contour  and form.

No.  7.  Three  Wheels,  Facial  Mas-
sage Roller,  $2.50.  Like  No.  6,
made  in  white  maple.  In  other
respects  the  same.

No.  8,  Eight  Wheels,  Abdominal
Roller,  $4.50.  This  is  the  same
as  No.  5,  except  with  the  less
number  of  wheels.  Is  made  for
the  use  of  women,  for  reducing
hip and abdominal measure.

With  each  Roller  is  sent  Dr.  For-
est's Manual  of  Massotlierapy,
containing  100  pages,  giving  full
directions  for  use.  Price,  sepa-
rately, 35c.

Oval  Roller,  a  Body  Kneader,  $2.25


Armstrong's Exercise Dummies.
Price, $40.00.


IMPROVED MUSCLE
BEATERS

No. 1. I'neumatic Beater,

single  tube $2.50

Xo.  2.  Pneumatic  Beater,  three

tubes  on  one  handle 4.00

No. 3. Plain Beater, four  fin-
gers 3.00

No. 4. Plain Beater,  three  fin-
gers 2.50

No. 5. Ball Beater, one ball
on  handle. Per  pair 2.50

No. 6. Ball Beater, two  balls
on  handle. Per  pair 3.00

Home  Gymnasium.  The  Bar-
Bell  Combination.  Six  machines
in  one.  Price,  complete  with
instructions, $B.00.

Pneumauxetor.  For  lung  devel-
opment and  Breathing  gymnas-
tics. Price, $10.00.

Rectal  Exerciser  and  Vibrator.
Pneumatic.  Restores  tone  to
rectum  and  sigmoid.  Price,
postpaid, $2.60.

Stretcher  and  Exerciser.  "Dr.  J.  S.
Riley,  1116  F  St.  N.  W.,  Wash-
ington, D. C.  •

Universal  Adjustor  and  Spinal
Relaxer.  Attached  to  top  of  any
door  casing.  Price,  complete
$5.00.  Dr.  E.  O.  Olds,  120  W.
Chestnut St., Washington, Pa.


but  we  must  remind  the  reader  that
the  use  of  herbal  decoctions,  ex-
tracts, washes,  depuratives,  purga-
tives, teas,  oils  and  powders,  while
of  immense  benefit  in  disease  when
used  as  directed,  possess  no  harm-
ful results,  like  the  ordinary  drugs
of  the  apothecary.  All  vegetarian
menus  contain  foodstuffs  that  pos-
sess very  definite  medical  effects.
Indeed  it  is  the  lack  of  vegetable
products  possessing  those  mineral
salts  on  which  health  absolutely
depends,  that  is  primarily  the  cause
of  disease  in  civilized  life.  If  it  is
beneficial  to  include  in  our  dietary
whole-wheat  mea  (instead  of  flour),
spinach,  carrots,  beets,  asparagus,
lettuce,  cabbage,  celery,  onions,
etc.,  primarily  as  chemical  that  is
medicinal,  foods,  why  overlook
those  herbal  gifts  of  nature  that  are
complementary  thereto,  and  that
assist  interiorly  the  energizing  ex-
terior treatments  of Naturopathy?

As  Father  Kneipp  says  of  them,
they  have,  like  the  water  applica-
tions, a  three-fold  aim,  viz.,  to  dis-
solve morbid  matter  in  the  interior,
to  evacuate  it,  and  then  to
strengthen  the  organism.  Both  the
interior  and  exterior  cures  harmon-
ize and  work  together  with  perfect
unity.

Disease  thus  attacked  on  both
sides  by  natural  weapons,  that  leave
no  painful  after  effects,  but  which
are  wholly  beneficial,  has  no  choice
but  to  leave  the  body  it  distresses,
just  as  in  the  old  days  the  demon
of  disease  was  exorcised  from  the
body  it  tortured,  by  superhuman
nower.  The  superhuman  power  over
disease  to-day  is  tihe  thre  -  fold
agency  of  Natural  Forces,  Vegeta-
rian Diet  and  Herbal  Remedies.

KNEIPP HERBS


Water-Cure  and Naturopathy

Selected Qualities

Directions  how  to  use  herbs  in
different  ailments  are  given  in
Kneipp's  books  and  in  the  booklet,
Kneipp's  Naturopathic  Herbs  and
Their Use. Price, 50c.

If  ordered  by  mail,  add  for  pos-
tage ISc  to  the  pound  price,  and
5c  to  the  package  price.

Lb. Pkg.
-Agave, Aloe Agave

(Amerik. Aloe) $0.75 $0.,-!.S

Apricot Leaves

(Weichselblatter) .^S

Althea  (Marsh  Mallow)

(Eihischwurzel) GO .25

Angelica Root (Engel-

wurzel),  powd.,  40c.  .60  .2,[>
Alum  (Alaun) Powder.  .  .25

Anise Seed (Anis-

Samen), powd., 40c.  . .50 .25
I  Arnica Flowers (G.

Leopard's Bane),

Arnika-Bliitheri

(Wohlverleih) 60 .35

Aromatic (nourishing)
' Tea (Diatetischer

Nahr- und Kraftthee

Worishofer Krauter-

thee) large pkg 60 .35

Asarum Powder (Hasel-

wurzpulver) 70 .35

Ash Leaves (Silber-

Eschen-Blatter) 75 .25

Balm  Mint  (Melisse)  ..  .75  .35
Bark  of  Oak (Eichen-

rinde) 30


.25


Kindly  mention  Directory when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any  article listed without
mannfactiirer's  or  dealer^s  name  obtainable  from  Ncilnropalhic Center, ItO  East  'ilst  St., New York


Uutv<'r.H«l .\ii<iiro|>]i(liic l>irf<-(«>i-> iiiid IIii><tn' (^iilalc


A  New  Aid  in  the  Cure  of  Constipation

PNEUMATIC
DILATOR

A  Rectal

Exerciser

and

Prostatic

Masseur

All  parts  of
soft  rubber —
no metal.
Sent  postpaid
on  receipt  of
$3.00.


[Patent  applied  for]


A — Bulb for inflating sacula; B — Flexible rubber colon tube; C — Soft
rubber  sacule;  D — ^Valve  with  escape  vent.


Use  of  Pneumatic  Dilator

THIS  instrument  was  primarily  designed  for  giving  rectal  massage  and
toning  the  musculature  of  the  lower  colon.
Its function is  not  so  much  to dilate  the  parts, as  to  afford
them  a  certain  amount  of  exercise.

Any  physician  who  has  had  experience  in  the  treatment  of
chronic  constipation  knows  that  by  far,  the  greater  number  of  such  cases  are
due  to  atony  of  the  colon.  This  condition  is  particularly  evident  in  the  sigmoid
flexure  and  rectum.  These  structures,  due  to  loss  of  muscular  tone,  are  in-
capable of  full  contraction,  and  accumulations  of  fecal  matter  resulting  in  im-
pactions throughout  the  entire  colon  is  the  usual  occurrence.

The  effect  of  the  pneumatic  dilator  is  that  of  a  mechanical  irritant  to
stimulate  the  viscero-motor  reflexes  and  restore  tone  to  the  musculature  of  the
colon.  It  also  has  the  effect  of  massage  treatment  upon  the  mucous  membrane
and  sub-mucous  tissues  by  emptying  out  the  intercellular  infiltration,  thus  estab-
lishing better  tissue  circulation.  No  greater  amount  of  dilation  or  stretching
of  the  colon  or  sigmoid  by  the  use  of  the  dilator  is  necessary,  as  the  effect  is
produced  by  the  rythmic  action  established  through  alternate  inflations  and
deflations  of  the  sacule.

TPr^l-INIOl  IP  "^^^  Dilator  should  be  used  after  an  evacuation,  or  after
1  i:4V.>ni^AV^v^I-i.  the  rectum  has  been  cleansed  by  the  use  of  a  hot  soapy
enema.  A  super-fatted  alcohol  soap,  or  one  free  from  alkali,  is  best  for  this
purpose.  In  giving-  such  an  enema  for  the  cleansing  of  the  lower  bowel,  use  a
flexible  rubber  colon  tube,  inserting  it  about  twelve  inches.  Inject  one  quart
of  soapy  water  at  a  temperature  as  hot  as  the  hand  can  bear  it.  After  the
evacuation  which  the  enema  produces,  use  the  dilator.  To  lubricate  the  sacule
and  colon  tube  of  the  dilator,  use  soap.  Do  not  use  oil  or  vaseline,  as  It  will
rot  the  rubber.  Insert  it  about  eight  inches  into  the  rectum,  using  great  care
not  to  force  it.  When  inserted  too  suddenly,  it  is  likely  to  double  back  or  coil
up  in  the  rectum.  Hold  the  bulb  in  the  right  hand  with  the  thumb  covering  the
escape  valve.  Press  upon  the  bulb  until  the  sacule  is  inflated,  or  until  the
patient  feels  the  pressure.  Perform  this  first  inflation  gradually,  so  that  the
sacule  will  have  an  opportunity  to  conform  to  the  part.  Now  raise  the  thumb
and  allow  the  air  to  escape.  Continue  treatment  by  alternately  inflating  and
deflating  the  dilator  for  from  three  to  seven  minutes.  A  little  practice  will  enable
the  operator  to  manipulate  the  instrument  to  make  its  action  correspond  to
the  normal  vermicular  motion  of  the  intestines.  Daily  treatment  is  advisable,
xintil  normal  movements  are  established.


NATUROPATHIC  CENTRE,  BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


1332


rniuersdl  XatnropdHiic  Dircclonj  mid  linycrs'  Guide


Bark of Black Alder

Tree (Faulbaum) 75 .30

Barberries (Berberitzen-

Becren) 75 .25

Basil  (Josephs-Krautlein)  .80  .35
Bear Berry Leaves

(Barentrauben-Blatter) .50 .25
Berries of Buckthorn

(Kreuzdorn-Beeren) .  . .50 .25

Betony  (Betonie) .15

Bilberry Leaves  (Heidel-

beeren-Biatter) 75 .25

Blessed  Thistle  (Kardo-

benediktenkraut) fi5 .35

Blind (or  Dead) Nettle

Flowers  *(Taubnessel-

bliithen) 2.00 .35

Bilberries (Blueberries)

(Heidelbeeren) 75 .25

Birch Leaves (Birken-

Blatter) 75 .25

Blackthorn Blossoms

(Dornschleh Bliithen) 1.25 .25
Black Currant Leaves

(Johannisbeer-Blatter) .75 .25
Bramble (Blackberry)

(Brombeerblatter) ... .75 .25
Breakfasttea  (Fruhstuck-

tee), large pkg., 60c.  .35

Briar  Hip  (Hagebutten)  .50  .25
Briar Hip Seeds

(Hagebutten-Kerne) . .40 .20
Broomherb  (Geniste)

(Ginster) 50 .25

Bogbean  (Bitter-Kice) .  .  .JU  .25
Buckthorn Bark

(Kreuzdornrinde) .  .  . .40 .25
Buckthorn Berries

(Kreuzdorn-Beeren) . .50 .25
Burdock  Roots  (Kletten-

VVurzel) 50 .25

Burdock Wort (Klet-

tenkraut) 50 .25

Calamus (Sweet Flag)

(Kalmus-Wurzel),

powd., 35c 50 .25

Camomile  (Kamille)  ..  .80  .25
Caraway  (Kiimmel)  ...  .50  .35
Carline Thistle

(Eberwurz) i. .60 .25

Centaury (Tausend-

guldenkraut) ........ .75 .25

Chalk Powder (Kreide-

mehl) .25

Charcoal Powder

(Lindenholzkohle) .  .  .  .30

Chestnut Powder

(Kastanien-Pulver) ...  .25

Chicory (Succory)

(Wegwart) 50 .25

Chickweed (Hiihner-

darm) (Sternmiere) .  . .60 .30
Clay (Thon-Lehm)

(Polarerde) 30 .25

Colts  Foot (Huflattich).

powd.,  .35c 45 .25

Colts Foot Flower

(Huflattichbluthen) ..  .40

Commock (Hauhechel-

Wurzel) .75 .30

Common Avens

(Nelkenwurz) .35

Common  Nettle (Brenn-

Nessel) 50 .25

Common  Nettle  Roots

(Brennessel Wurzel)  . .60 .25
Cough Tea (Husten-

Thee),  large  pkg.,  60c.  .35

Cramp Tea (Krampf-

Thee) large  pkg.,  65c.  .40

Daisy (Gansebliimchen).  .  .30

Depurative Tea (Blut-

reinigungs-Thee),

large  pkg., 60c .35

Diabetic Tea (Zucker-

hamruhrtee) fiO

Diuretic Tea (Wasser-

suchts-Thee), large

pkg., 60c .35

Kindly  mention  Directoru  when
manufacturer' X or  dealer  s name


Dwarf Elder (Attich-

Wurzel),  powd.,  40c
Elder Berries

(Holiunder-Becren)  .
Elder Flowers

(Hollunder-Bliithen)
Elder Leaves

(Hollunder-Bliitter).
I  Elder  Roots

(Hollunder  Wurzel).
Elecampane

I (Alant-Wurzel)

Eucalyptus (Eukalyp-

tus), small box, 20c.
Eyebright (Augen-
! trost), powd., 40c...
Family Tea (Familien-

gesundheitstee), large

j pkge., 60c

!  Fern (Polypody)
I (Farnkraut-Wurzel)
Flaxseed (Linseed)

(Leinsamen)

Fenugreek (Foenum

Graecum) (Bocks-

hornklee)  Powder,  25c
Fennel Seed (Fenchel),

powd.,  25c

;  Gallstone Tea (Gallen-
j steintee), large pkg..

Geritian (Enzian)

Grains  of  Incense  (Harz-

korner)

Ground Ivy (Gundel-

Rebe)

Hay  Flowers  (importirte

j Heublumen)

Hearts Ease (Stiefmiit-

terchen) (Dreifaltig-

keits-Thee)

[  Heather  (Haidekraut)

(Erika)

Holy  Herb  (Herba-Santa

Heiliges Kraut)

Horehound  (Andorn)  .  .
Iceland  Moss

(Islandisches  ■  Moos)  .
Iris  (Schwert-Lilie)  .  .  .
Juniper Berries (Wach-

holder-Beeren)

Juniper  Berries  Powder
Juniper Sprigs

(Wachholder-Spitzen)
Knotgrass (Wegtritt)

(Knoterich)

Laxative  Tea  (Stuhl-

gangs-Thee)

Linden Flowers (Lime

tree) (Linden)

Liverwort

(Leberblumchen)
Lungworth (Lungen-

Kraut)

Mallow  Flowers

(Hollyoke)  (Malve)  .  .
Marigold Flowers

(Ringel-BIumen)  ....
Milkwort (Bittere

Kreuzblume)

Millet  ChaflF(Hirsespreu)
Mistletoe  (Mistel)  '.  .  .  .
Mouse  Ear  (Maus-

Oehrchen)

Mullein Flower (Woll-

Blume)

Mullein  Herb  (Wollblu-

men Kraut)

Nerve  Tea  (Nerventee) .
Oat  Straw (importirtes

Haferstroh)

Obesity  Tea  (Entfet-

tungstee)

Parsley Root

(Petersilien  Wurzel)  .
Peppermint

(PfeflFerminze)

Pimpernelle (small bur-

nett) (Bimbernelle-

Wurzel) (Gauchheil).


SO

.35

90

.25

75

.25

50

.25

75

.30

80

.35

.25

50

.25

.35

60

.25

50

.20

00

.25

30

.20

40

.60
.20

80

.35

50

.25

.35

00

.25

65

.30

.60
.30

60

.25
.30

40

.20
.25

50

.25

50

.30

.25

60

.25

80

.JO

50

.25

75

.25

00

.30

20
50

.25
.25

00

.40

75

.40

SO

.25
.60

.25

.60

.35

75

.25

75

.30

.20


.30

.25

.35
.40

.30

.20

.00
.20

.50
.30
.60

.20
.25
.25

.50
.90

or,

.20

.65


Pme Sprigs (Fichten

Sprossen)

Pine  Tannin  (Fichtenlohc

Tannin)

Prirnrose (Cowslips)

(Schliisselblume)

Primrose Roots

Pumpkin Seeds

(Kiirbiskerne)

Quassia  Wood  (Quassia)
Rheumatism Tea

(Rheumatismustee),

large pkg

Rhubarb Powder

Ribworth

(Spitzwegerich)  ....
Rosemary (Rosmarin)..

Rue (Raute)

Sage (Salbei)

Powder, 35c

Sallow  (Sahlwctderinde)
Sandalwood (Red

Saunders) (Sandel-

holz)  Powder,  35c...
Sanicle (Sanikel) (Heil-

dolde)  Powd.,  35c...
Sarsaparilla Roots

(Riedgras)

Sassafras  (Sassafras) .  .
Scurvy Grass (Spoon-
wort) (Lofifelkraut). .
Sea Onion

(Meerzwiebel)

Shave Grass (Common

Horse Tail, Pewter-
grass) (Zinnkraut)..  .
Shepherd's Purse

(Hirtentiischchen)
Silverweed (Anserine

Oder  Gansefinger-

kraut)

Soapwort  (Seifenkraut)
Sorrel  (Sauerampfer). .  .
St. John's Wort

(Johanniskraut)  ....
St.  John's  Wort  Powder
Stomach Tea (Magen-

thee),  large  pkg.,  60c.
Strawberry Leaves

(Erdbeerblatter)  ....
Thyme (Thymian)

(Quendel)

Tonic Laxative I.

(VViihlhuber  I.)

Tonic Laxative II.

(Wiihlhuber  II.)  ....
Tormentil  (Tormentille)

(Blutwurz,  Fiinffinger-

kraut)  Powder,  35c.
Valerian  Root  (Baldrian-

wurzel),  powder,  40c.
Veronica (Male Speed-
well) (Ehrenpreis) .  .
Vervain (Eisenkraut) .  .
Violet Leaves (Veil-

chen-Blatter)

Violet Root

Wallworth (Beinwell

Wallwurzel)

Walnut Leaves

(Wallnussblatter)  . . .
Watermint

(Wasserminze)

Watercress

(Brunnenkresse)  ....
White Beanpods

(Bohnenhulsen)  ....
Woodroof

(Waldmeister)

Wood Ashes (Holz-

Asche)  large  box,  50c
Wormwood  (Wermuth),

Powder, 30c

Wormseed

(Wurmsamen)

^'arrow  (Milfoil)

(Schafgarbe)

For  Postage,  add  18c  per  lb.,  or  Sc.
per  package.


75
80

.45

.25

.20

60

.20

40

.20

50

.25

50

.25
.20
.30

40

.25
.35

.35

75

.25

50

.30

.40

.40

50

.25

65

.30

70
60

or;
.25

60

.25
.40

50

.25

50

.25

50

.25

.15

80

.35

60

.25

.25

40

.20

.20

40

.25

ordering  merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  Mst  St., New York


JOSEPH  SCHAEFER

Importer  of  Articles  pertaining  to  the

"KNEIPP  CURE"

23  BARCLAY  STREET :: ::  :: NEW  YORK

Catalogues  of  Articles  recommended  by  Msgr.  Kneipp  can  be  had  in  English,

German  and  French.


ITiiivernal NiiluroiiiiUii*' Directory and Iliiyer.s* <;iil«l<-  1333

'T^HE  Koesel'sche  Buchhandlnng  in  Kcmpten,  Bavaria,  has

-■- made  arrangements  with  the  undersigned  for  llie  estab-

1  *  ^ lishmenl  of  a  general  distributing  agen-  1

ey  of  S.  Kneipp's  hydropathie  works,  j

The  immense  suecess  of  S.  Kneipp's  »

system of  hydropathic  treatment  and  ♦

tne  enormous  sale  of  his  works  through-  ♦

out  Europe  will  no  doubt  encourage  the  t

Trade  to  introduce  these  works  on  a

larger scale to the American public.  ♦

The  following  books  can  be  furnished  ♦

in  paper  cover  and  in  better  binding:  "My  Water  Cure,"  }

"Thus  Shalt  Thou  Live,"  "My  Will,"  "Codicil  to  Mv  Will,"

"The  Care  of  Children,"  "Plant  Atlas,"  etc. Most  of  these  j

standard  German  works  have  been  translated  into  English,  j

French,  Italian,  Polish,  Bohemian,  Spanish,  Portuguese,

Hungarian  and  other  languages. — More  particulars  con-  j

tained  in  Schaefer's  catalogue,  w^hich  will  be  mailed  gratis  j

on  application. This  catalogue  also  enumerates  the  rem-  j

edies  recommended  in  Msgr. Kneipp's  works,  such  as:  j

CURATIVE  HERBS,  Roots,  Berries,  Leaves,  Barks,  etc.,  ♦

put  up  hermetically  in  tin  boxes.  Powders,  Tinctures,  Oits,  j

Pills,  in  small  glass  bottles.  j

Two  Excellent  Food  Articles  for  daily  use:  MALT  COF-
FEE and  STRENGTH  GIVING  FOOD.  From  a  large  num-
ber of  letters  of  recommendation,  I  quote  the  following:

\  "Your  Malt Coffee is  an excellent  substitute  for  coflfeie  in  all  cases of

Scntarrhal  disease  of  the  bowels  and  stomach,  where  common  coffee  seldom
agrees,  viz., in cases of  \\  eak stomach and chronic diarrhoea. Further-

I  more,  it  is  recommended  for  nervous  people,  as  it  does  not  have  the  irri-

i  tating  qualities  of  ordinary  coffee;  and  besides,  it  deserves  preference  on

i  account  of  containing  real  nourishment,  whereas  common  coffee  contains

i  none. In all cases where  physicians forbid the use of ordinary coffee,

i  your  Malt  Coffee  can  be  used  instead  w  ith  great  benefit." — Dr.  Acularius.
•

♦  Boston,  Mass.,  Nov.  17,  1913.

!  "Dear Mr. Schaefer: Last simimer I was completely run down and

!  unable to do any work. At that time my attention was called to the

!  "Strength Giving Food" which Msgr. S. Kneipp so highly recommends

I  in  his  works. I at  once  ordered  a  quantity  of  it. Its  use  has  benefited

I  me  so  much  that  1  am  now able  to  perform  my  duties  and  ordinary  work

!  as Ijefore niv collapse."

I  Rev.  p.  j.  M.  Schleuter,  S.  J.,  Holy Trinity  Church.


1334


I'niucr.sdl  Saiuiopulhir  Directory  and  lUiijers Guide


KNEIPP'S  HERBAL  REMEDIES

Messrs.  Oberhauser  &  Landaucr,
of  VViirzburg,  Germany,  are  the  Sole
Manufacturers  in  the  World  of  the
Only  (ienuine  Rev.  Seb.  Kneipp's
Remedies.  Customers  are  therefore
reiiuested  to  observe  closely  that
all  such  remedies  are  done  up  in
stamped  wrappers  bearing  the  sig-
nature of  Oberhauser  &  Landauer,
Wiirzburg,  as  also  the  registered
Trademark  (the  picture  and  signa-
ture of  Rev.  Kneipp)  on  every  pack-
age. If,  therefore,  the  packages  are
marked  differently,  our  customers
are  warned  that  they  are  fraudulent
imitations.  General  Depot  for  the
United  States  of  America:  Kneipp
Health Store Company, 110 East


41st  Street,  New  York.  All  the
following  Herbal  Remedies  and  Spe-
cialties are  prepared  in  accordance
with  Rev.  Seb.  Kneipp's  own  direc-
tions, now  under  the  supervision
of  his  successors,  from  the  very
best  herbs  to  be  obtained.  Rev.
Father  Kneipp  recommended  in  con-
junction with  the  Water  Treatment
for  all  diseases  the  simultaneous
use  of  the  hereunder  mentioned
specialties :

Kneipp's  Eye-Bright  (Augcn-
trost)  has  proved  itsell  most  ben-
eficial for  diseases  and  inflamma-
tion of  the  eyes,  caused  either
by  purulent  lesions  or  by  weak-
ness. To  be  diluted  with  5  parts
of  water  and  applied  3  times  a
day  to  the  sore  eyes  with  a  clean
linen  rag  or  absorbent  cotton.
Price  50c;  postage.  7c.
Kneipp's  Arnica  Salve,  used
with  excellent  results,  in  sore-
ness of  the  skin,  eczema  and  re-
cent small  wounds.  Price,  35c;
postage,  3  c.
Kneipp's  Depurative  Tea  (Blut-
reinigungsthee)  is  the  best
depurative;  it  rids  the  blood  ot
morbid  matter  and  acts  slightly
upon  the  bowels.  For  a  radical
depuration  of  the  system  in  case
of  eruptions,  itch,  lupus  and  can-
cerous affection,  this  tea  must  be
used  for  quite  a  long  while  and
suitable  applications  of  water  be
made  at  the  same  time,  to  insure
a  radical  cure.  Each  package
contains  directions  for  use.  Price,
55c;  postage,  5c;  large,  $1.10.
Kneipp's  Cholera  Drops  (Cholera-
tropfen)  are  an  excellent  remedy
for  diarrhea  and  diarrhea  witli
vomiting,  cholorine  or  cholera.
One  tablespoonful  4  or  5  times
a  day.  Price,  $1.00;  postage,
10c.
Kneipp's  Pine  Sprig  Honey  and
Kneipp's  Fircone  Honey  (Tan-
nen-  und  Fichtennadelhonig).
Excellent  for  all  ailments  of  the
throat,  hoarseness,  coughs,  colds,


etc.,  etc.  Price,  per  bottle,  oOc;
postage, 10c.

Kneipp's  Frangula  Extract,  a  most
excellent  remedy  in  cases  where
uersons  object  to  taking  iiills,
but  where  a  regular  stool  is  de-
sirable. Children  should  take
about  '/i  a  teaspoonful,  adults
from  1  to  i:  teaspoon luls.  Price,
55c  ;  postage,  10.

Kneipp's  Gout  Embrocation

(Gicht-  und  Rheumatismus-
nuisnuttel;  is  the  uest  embroca-
tion for  gouty  and  rheumatic  pain.
Apply  3  times  a  day.  Price,
$1.00; postage, 10c.

Kneipp's  Antidiabetic  Pills  (Hei-
delbeerbliitterpillen).  Made  from
the  extract  ot  leaves  of  Bilberry.
It  is  both  an  efficient  remedy  and
easy  to  take.  L'sed  for  "Dia-
betes mellitus",  3  pills  3  times  a
day. Price, 50c ; postage, 2c.

Kneipp's  Antidiarrhea  Pills  (Hei-
delbeerfruchtpillen).  Made  from
the  fruit  of  the  Bilberry,  l'sed
in  diarrhea,  catarrh  of  the
bowels  or  of  the  stomach.  For
adults  and  children,  3  pills  3
times  a  day.  Price,  50c;  postage,
2c.

Kneipp's  Cough  Drops  (Hus-
tenbonbons).  These Cougu

Drops  are  made  from  the  ex-
tracts of  Father  Kneipp's  best
herbs,  and  prove  very  salutary
for  coughs,  hoarseness,  catarrh
of  the  throat,  etc.,  etc.  Price,
25c; postage, 3c.

Kneipp's  Cough  Tea  (Hustenthee).
This  is  an  excellent  remedy  for
all  cases  of  catarrh  of  the
respiratory  organs ;  it  cannot
be  too  highly  recommended
to  those  WHO  sutler  iroin  tin.
chest,  throat  or  lungs.  We  have
seen  the  most  obstinate  cases  of
catarrh  disappear  in  a  few  days,
especially  when  the  appropriate
applications  of  water  were  made
at  the  same  time.  Full  directions
inclosed in  each package. Price,

_55c. ; postage, 5c.; large, $1.10.

Kneipp's  Pomade  of  Marigold
(Calendulasalbe),  for  the  cure
of  sores  and  wounds  of  all
kinds.  Directions  lor  use  on  tuc
box. Price, 35c ; postage, 3c.

Kneipps  Whooping  Cough  Extract
(Keuchhustensaft).  This  excel-
lent remedy  is  prepared  from
Thyme  and  Chestnut  extract,
and  is  mixed  together  with
other cough-stUling ucrus.  li

gives  immediate  relief  and  effects
wonderful  cures  in  the  most  ob-
stinate cases.  Price,  50c;  pos-
tage, 10c.

Kneipp's  Bone  Powders.  Nourish
the  blood  and  the  bones,
strengthen  the  nerves  There  is
no  powder  used  in  any  ailment
which  is  as  easy  to  digest  as
this  one,  so  that  even  little  chil-
dren and  adults  with  the  weak-
est stomachs  can  take  it  with-
out disturbance.  From  this  prop-
erty may  be  attributed  the  mar-
velous cures  often  produced  in
anaemic  persons,  scrofulous  and
rachitic  children,  and  in  cases  of
nervousness  and  nervous  head-
ache and  vertigo.  Kneipp  has
three  kinds  of  Bone  Powder:  1.
The  White  Powder  is  the  best
remedy  for  nervousness,  nervous
headache,  anaemia  and  vertigo.
Price,  50c;  postage,  5c.  2.  The
Gray Powder  is the  best  remedy


for  lung,  kidney  and  bladder  dis-
eases. Price,  60c;  postage,  5c.
3.  The  Black  Powder  is  the  best
remedy  for  scrofulous  and  ra-
chitic children.  Price,  50c;  pos-
tage, 5c.  Children  take  a  small
pinch  of  powder,  adults  a  quar-
ter of  a  teaspoonful  3  times  a
day,  during meals.

Kneipp's  Cramp  Drops  and
Cramp  Tea  (Kramitfthec  und
Krampftropfen;.  The  best  reme-
dy for  cramps  of  all  kinds,  es-
pecially of  the  womb,  and  a  good
anti-hysteric  remedy.  Three  times
a  day  one  teaspoonful  of  the
Drops  in  a  cup  of  Cramp  Tea.
Price. 55c. each; postage, 5c.

Kneipp  s  Magentrost  (Stomach
Elixir).  This  excellent  sto-
mach elixir  is  prepared  Iru.u  n.c
choicest  and  purest  of  Kneipp's
herbs,  and  is  used  to  great  ad-
vantage in  all  stomach  disorders.
Will  effectually  cure  Dyspepsia
and  Indigestion,  Loss  of  Appe-
tite, Acidity,  Vomiting,  Diarrhea,
Spasms,  Wind,  Colic,  etc.  Sold
in  three  sizes  of  bottles.  Prices,
50c,  postage  7c;  $1.00,  postage
10c;  $2.00,  postage  25c.

Kneipp's  Nerve  Tonic  (Nerven-
trost),  for  nervousness  and
sleeplessness,  accoruiiig  lu  i-.c
scription  by  Dr.  Baumgarten,
Worishofen.  Price,  per  bottle,
$1.00;  postage,  10c.  The  cele-
brated essay  on  sleeplessness  and
nervous  affections  by  Dr.  Baum-
garten, in  English  or  German,
price,  15c.,  should  be  bought
with each order.

Kneipp's  Tincture  for  Travelers
(Reisetropfen).  Recommended

by  all  who  have  used  it.  Price.
$1.00; postage, 10c.

Kneipp's  Pectoral  Syrup  (Husten-
saft).  Made  from  the  juice
of  the  plaintain  and  extract
of  malt.  A  splendid  reme-
dy for  coughs,  sore  throat,  and
all  atTections  of  the  respiratory
organs.  Three  times  daily  a  tea-
spoonful. Price,  50c;  postage,
10c.

Kneipp's  Pocket,  Home  and
Traveling  Apotheca  (Haus-  und
Reise-Apotheken)  contains,  prac-
tically arranged  and  prettily
fitted  up  (in  the  shape  of  a
cigar  case),  8 — 16  articles,
with  exact  directions  for  using
all  of  them,  ready  and  conven-
ient for  immediate  use.  Almost
indispensable  at  home  and  abroad.
Prices.  $1.00,  $2.00,  $3.00;  pos-
tage 5c,  15c,  25c.  Larger  ones
for  home  use  in  elegant  cabinets,
from  $10  to  $25.

Kneipp's  Diuretic  Tea  (Wasser-
suchtsthee).  .\ highly pro-

nounced diuretic  liyarag^-giie.  it.-<
virtues  have  often  been  proven
in  cases  of  dropsy,  diseases  of  the
kidneys  (Bright's  Disease),  and
diseases  of  the  bladder  (stone,
gavel).  Each  package^  contains
directions  for  use.  Price,  55c. ;
postage, 5c; large, $1.10.

Kneipp's  Wormwood  Eye  Salve.
This  Honey  Salve  was  used
by  Father  Kneipp  with  the
greatest  success  in  cases  of  cata-
racts, weak  eyes,  etc.,  etc  ,  Price,
40c,  with  accurate  directions  for
use.  Glass  rod  to  apply  the
salve  with,  10c.  Price,  together,
50c;  postage,  6c.


I


Kindly  mention Directon/ when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer  .1  or  dealer's  name  ohiainable  from  Nnturnpathic Center. 110  East 'ilst  St., New York


Universal N'aturopnthio l)lrort»r.v iiikI llii.vors* Ciiidc


1335


Trade  Mark


NATURE'S

BATH  POWDER

RADIUMACTIV.  An  inexpensive  Natural  MINERAL  POWDER.
Can  be  used  in  any  HOME  BATH  TUB.  Endorsed  by  the  American  Natu-
ropathic Association,  and  individual Practitioners.

The therapeutic value of radio-aetivity  has been established.
RadiumactiV  i.s an aluminum-iron-magnesium silicate (lime, sodium, potas-
sium), possessing- decided radio-active and electro-magnetic properties, in that
it  has  the  following-  properties:

Its  radical  energy  can  be  measured  by  the  radiometer.
When  burned  in  the  flame  of  an  arc-Ught,  it  imparts  a  carmine

color,  which  is  a  distinguishing  property  of  radium.
Discharging  a  negatively  charged  electroscope.
Magnetizes  and  imparts  radio-activity  to  surrounding  objects.

THERAPEUTICAL  ACTION

An  application  of  RadiumactiV  promotes  healthy  circulation  of  the  blood  by
stimulating  molecular  activity.  It  destroys  pus  and  bacteria  and  liberates  tox-
ines,  and  by  the  specific  action  of  its  light,  heat,  electric  and  magnetic  properties,
changes  the  pathological  conditions  into  healthy  tissue.  It  revivifies  cell  pro-
toplasm and  prepares  the  way  for  the  action of  the  phagocytes.

It  lowers  blood-pressure,  increases  sexual  vitality,  has  a  solvent  action  on
gouty  deposits,  and  influences  sympathetic  nervous  affections,  such  as  neurasthe-
nia and  allied  conditions.  It  is  strictly  ethical  and  when  used  as  indicated,  it  will
bring  results.

Being  a  radiferous  substance,  RadiumactiV  is  indicated  In  all  painful  condi-
tions or  disturbed  equilibrium  of  living  tissue,  from  pus  infection  to  epithelio-
mata  and  malignant  growths.  The  magnetic  properties,  when  carried  into  the
tissues  by  the  radio-active  energy,  are  antiseptic,  cooling  and  soothing,  creat-
ing, as  it  were,  a  double  therapeutic  action  with  the  rays,  establishing  nervous
and  vascular  equilibrium  which  hastens  the  elimination  of  toxines.  It  is  indi-
cated in  acute  and  chronic  Neuritis,  Rheumatism,  Neuralgia,  Pneumonia,  Pleurisy,
Pleurodynia,  Sprains,  Deep  Seated  Abscesses  (of  septic  origin),  recent  Contusions,
open  Sores,  Burns,  Boils,  Felons,  Skin  Diseases  of  -^vhatever  nature,  Pruritis.
(itching  of  any  part).  Proctitis,  Synovitis,  Lumbagro,  Mastitis,  Hemorrhoids,  and
all Catarrhal  conditions.

Diseases  of  the  rectum  and  vagina  are  readied  by  means  of  capsules  or
has  been  used.  These  will  be  valuable  in  Arterio-sclerosis,  Rheumatism,  Bright's
Disease,  Diabetes,  Neuritis,  etc.  They  reduce  the  blood  pressure,  relax  the
arterial  walls,  stimulate  cutaneous  reflexes,  equalize  the  circulation,  and  through
the  sympathetic  nervous  system,  aid  digestion,  relieve  abdominal  stasis  and
constipation, promote  metabolism, etc.

IT  DOES  NOT  INTERFERE  WITH OTHER  TREATMENTS

Literature,  Reference,  Price  List, and  Free  Sample  for  the  Asking.

RadiumactiV,  for  Baths  in  the  Home.  Can  be  Sold  and  Directed  in  Con-
nection with  Treatments  by  Practitioners.

TERMS: Cash  with  Order,  in  every  Case

The  RadiumactiV  Company


31  SOUTH  FOURTH  STREET


COLUMBUS,  OHIO


133G


Universal  Xaliiropathic  Directonj  and  Biujers Guide


Kneipp's  Worishofen  Herb  Tea,
or  dietary,  nourishing  and
strength-giving  tea  (Woris-
hofener  Nahr-  und  Kraft-Thee).
This  very  valuable  nourishing  and
strength-giving  tea  was  used  by
Father  Kneipp  to  a  great  extent,
and  with  constant  success  (or
weak  patients,  convalescents,
anaemic  persons,  for  improving
the  appetite  and  physical  strength.
The  best  substitute  for  any  break-
fast tea. Price,  55c.;  postage,  5c.

Kneipp's  Naturopathic  Family  Tea
(Kneipp's  Faniilien-thee)  is  the
very  best  substitute  for  China  tea.
It  is  prepareil  from  the  choicest
herbs,  is  guaranteed  not  to  be
injurious  to  the  nerves  and  is
much  cheaper  than  the  other.  It
is  mixed  and  prepared  to  taste
similar  to  Chinese  tea  and  is
served  in  the  same  way.  We
cannot  recommend  it  enough  to
all  housewives  and  dyspeptics.
Trices,  sample  package,  .'jOc.  nr>s-
tage  2c.;  ^^-Ib.  package,  55c.,
postage,  5c.;  VS-lb.  package,
$1.00; postage, 10c.

Kneipp's  Liver  Regulator  No.  1
(Tonic  Laxative  I,  or  VViihlhuber
No.  1).  This  is  a  strong  purga-
tive, which  cleanses  the  stomach
and  bowels  of  all  morbid  matter.
It  must  be  rarely  used,  that  is,
only  in  cases  of  necessity.  Put
one-half  to  one  tablespoonful  in
a  cup  of  boiling  water,  let  it  draw
during  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  This
tea  is  taken  either  hot  or  cold  at
bedtime.  Price,  40c;  postage,
."ic.  Tonic  Laxative  No.  1,  made
up  in  pill form, 50c; postage 2c.

Kneipp's  Liver  Regulator  No.  2
(Tonic  Laxative  II,  or  VViihlhu-
ber No.  2).  This  tea  has  less
purgative  properties  than  No.  1,
but  acts  especially  upon  the  kid-
neys and  the  bladder.  It  is  em-
ployed with  great  success  in  the
beginning  of  dropsy  and  in  af-
fections of  the  urinary  canal,  also
in  acute  pains  of  the  bladder  and
tlie  kidneys.  It  is  prepared  and
taken  in  the  same  manner  as  No.
1.  Price,  40c;  postage,  5c.  Made
u))  in  pill  form,  50c;  postage,  2c.
Those  persons  who  cannot  take
the  Liver  Regulator  on  account
of  its  bitterness,  may  take  in-
stead :

Kneipp's  Pills.  They  are  free  from
all  injurious  aperients,  being  ex-
clusively composed  of  herbal  in-
gredients, and  are  universally  con-
sidered the  best  for  keeping  the
bowels  open  without  weakening
the  stomach.  These  same  herbal
ingredients  were  used  by  Rev.
.Seb.  Kneipp  at  Worishofen  in  his
treatments.  The  pills  may  be
taken  for  years  without  injury  to
the  system,  and  with  only  bene-
ficial results.  It  is  therefore  easily
explained  why  our  Kneipp  Pills
.are  recommended  by  celebrated
professors,  medical  men,  the  fol-
lowers of  the  Kneipp  Treatment,
and  by  the  public  at  large,  and
that  they  are  preferred  to  any
other pills or laxatives.  The

Kneipp  Pills  are  the  best  and
most  pleasant  laxative  of  the
world.  On  account  of  their  ef-
ficiency in  most  stubborn  cases  of
constipation,  indigestion,  piles,
giddiness,  and  all  complaints  of
the  _  liver.  Father  Sebastian
Kneipp  has  given  to  Oberhauser
& Landauer, of Wiirzburg, the


exclusive  right  to  denominate
same  with  his  name,  and  to  at-
tach his  picture  and  signature,
registered  as  a  trade-mark.  Price,
50c  ;.  postage,  2c.  Directions  for
Use: — 1.  To  procure  a  regular
opening  of  the  bowels,  which  is
particularly  desirable  with  women,
take  2  pills  at  bedtime  (for  the
first  time  3  or  4  pills  are  often
necessary).  2.  To  prevent  wind
and  spasms,  take  a  pill  in  the
morning.  ,'{.  To  procure  a  thor-
ough cleansing  of  the  bowels,  take
2  i)ills  at  bedtime  and  3  or  4
pills  in  the  morning.  Persons  of
very  strong  constitution  require
in  these  3  cases  one  or  two  pills
more.  The  pills  usually  act  after
12  hours,  in  some  cases  24  hours.
The  best  way  of  taking  these
pills  is  to  swallow  them  as  they
are,  or  wrapped  up  in  a  wafer
with some water.

Okie's  VVoerishofen  Gout  Cure  is
an  unfailing  safe  remedy  for  gout,
rheumatism  (joints  and  muscular
rheumatism),  sciatica  (hip  pains),
and  sick  headache.  Two  years
ago  I  made  a  trial  on  myself  and
other  patients,  and  every  time
with  the  best  results.  The  Ciout
Cure  is  based  on  Father  Kneipp's
principles,  and  is,  in  the  eyes  of
the  law,  neither  a  medicine  nor  a
secret.  It  is  used  externally.
Full  directions  with  every  bottle.
Large  bottles,  .$3.00;  small  bot-
tles, $2.00.  Can  be  sent  only  by
express.

Okie's  Woerishofen  Tormentilla
Soap. — The  finest  and  best  in  the
world.  Okie's  Tormentilla  Woer-
ishofen Soap  is  the  best  Toilet
Soap  of  the  age.  It  is  not  only
cleansing,  but  also  medicinal.  It
cures  eruption  of  all  kinds,  chap-
ped or  rough  skin,  comedones,
blackheads,  dandruff,  and  es-
pecially saltrheum  and  eczema.  A
sure  cure  for  itching  piles.  It
makes  the  skin  soft  and  tender,
and  is  also  very  economical.  To
obtain  quick  and  certain  results
in  cases  of  freckles,  saltrheum
and  all  other  skin  diseases,  let
the  lather  dry  on  afflicted  parts.
Price  35c;  postage,  4c;  five  for
$1.35  postpaid.  The  Okie's
Woerishofen  Tormentilla  Soap  is
tmadulterated  and  perfectly  neu-
tral, i.  e.,  it  is  free  from  car-
bonic acid  and  caustic  alkalies.
It  has  the  qualities  of  a  good
and  mild  toilet  soap.  Dr.  C.
Huggenberg,  Examining  Chemist
for  the  Soap  Manufacturers'
l^nion.  P.  S. — My  hand  was  very
badly  swelled,  the  result  of  a
painful  bruise.  I  saturated  a
piece  of  wet  linen  with  the  soap
and  tied  it  on  over  night.  Next
morning  the  swelling  had  all  dis-
appeared. S. M. W.

Okie's  Improved  Hair  Invigorator
(Lotion). — Okie's  Improved  Hair
Invigorator  is  a  sure  remedy  to
prevent  the  hair  falling  out;  it
produces  a  luxurious  growth  of
hair;  it  keeps  the  scalp  clean
and  healthy,  and  strengthens  and
invigorates  the  roots.  It  is  com-
pounded of  pure  vegetable  ex-
tracts, an<l  cannot  be  injurious
under  any  circumstances.  Price
per  bottle,  with  directions  for
use,  $1.00.

Okie's  Tooth  Powder  (Dentifrice).
— Okie's  Dentifrice  is  prepared  of
pure vegetable matter. It has


all  the  qualities  of  good  tooth
poNvder,  containing  nothing  in-
jurious to  the  teeth  or  gums.
Price, 45c; postage, 4c.

Okie's  Antiridine. — This  is  a  beau-
tifier  which  l)anishes  freckles,  cor-
rugations and  wrinkles,  makes  the
skin  soft  and  smooth.  Where
other  means  fail,  this  often  helps.
It  has  the  property  of  never
destroying  the  tissues  or  irri-
tating the  skin.  Only  genuine
when  the  box  bears  the  names
of  the  inventor  and  manufacturer.
Price  and  directions  for  use,  45c;
postage, 4c.

Okie's  Tormentilla  Cream.  —  Best
salve  for  all  kinds  of  wounds,
sores,  rough  skin,  friction,  etc.
Price,  50c;  postage,  5c.

Okie's  Mosqutto  Cure. — 10c,  post-
paid.

Kneipp's  Sloe  -  Blossom  Extract.
Best  remedy  for  moving  the
bowels  and  purifying  the  bloo<l
of  little  children. SOc.

Kneipp's  Bean  Pod  Extract,  for
gout  and kidney  diseases. $1.00.

Kneipp's Loam Salve, for  exanthe
ma, impetigo, serpigo, old sores,
_  etc., etc. 40c.

Kneipp's  Toothache Drops. 30c.

Kneipp's  Pitch  Plaster,  for  lung  and
chest diseases, rheumatism, gout
^  and  lumbago. 20c.

Kneipp's  Tapeworm  Remedy,  made
of  fresh  fernroot,  best  and  safest
remedy  for  adults,  $3.  ;  for  chil-
dren,  $2; cures  without  fail.

Kneipp's  Tormentil  Sugar,  for  weak
and  sick  eyes.  Unexcelled  con-
jointly with  the  water  cure  for
atrophy of  the optic nerves. SOc.

Kneipp's  Frangula  Extract,  for  all
catarrhs  of  the  respiratory  organs.
50c.

r^anolin  Cream,  for  sore  hands,  etc.
20c.

r.-umbago Plaster. ISc.

Mana-Juice  (Manasaft).  Acts  still
milder than Sloe-Blossom. SOc.

Mustard Plaster. Sc.

Suet  of  Deer,  for  sore,  foul  feet.  20c.

Worm  Chocolate  for  children. 20c.

Okie Woerishofen Gout Cure

(Kneipp Formula), $2 and 3.00

Okie  Woerishofen,  mosquito  Cure.
Each inc. 5 for  4Sc.


PLANT EXTRACTS AND
BATH ADDITIONS

Magic  Bath for  Rheumatism. Gout,
Eczema, etc. Price $1.25.
Box  of  1  Dozen,  $10.00.
Shave-grass Extract. Price 50e,

postage 10c.
Hay-flower Extract. I'rice 50c.

postage 10c.
Oats-straw Extract. Price SOc.

postage 10c
Pine-sprigs Extract. Price 75c.

postage  10c.
All  the  above  extracts  are  manu-
factured from  the  very  best  herbs
and  are  used  for  packs,  poultices,
vapor  baths,  sitzbaths.  etc.  They
are  imported  from  Germany,  as  the
plants  themselves  would  arrive  here
in  a  damaged  state  from  their  long
transport.

OILS, POWDERS AND
TINCTURES


Imported  in  tin  boxes  or  bottles,
ontaming  100  grams  each,  packed
ly  the  only  authorized  maniifactur-
rs of Kneipp Remedies, Messrs.


con

b

ers


Kindlij mention Direcloru when ordering merchandise.  — Information on anu article listed without
manufacliirvr's  or  dealer's name obtainable  from Naturopathic Center, HO East 'list St., New Yorii


I'liiiorsnl Nii(iirc>|»;itlilc Dirootory I Iliiyors' CiilHo


$^FDR  HEALTH  AND  VIGOR


En  Jocsftl  ty  fiiiivnt  Physicians


■y^^^  Watch  your  heaJtfi  improve


Pu.  ifioj;  the  Blood.
KcsLotv-s  the  Nerves


(Teach  BATH  A  DELIGHT  ^^^^^

THE MAGIC BATH  CO.  INC.  N.Y.


A  Soon  to  the  Stck,
M  Luxury  to  the  Well.


ADD  TO  THE  JOY  OF  LIVING  -  TRY  IT !

The  Magic  Bath  Preparation

Has  received  the  endorsement  of  many  eminent  physicians.  Dr.  Benedict  Lust  says,
"I  am  using  your  Magic  Bath  Preparation  with  remarkable  success  in  my  sanitariums
in  Butler,  N.  J.,  and  Tangerine,  Fla.  It  has  a  most  wonderful  effect  in  hastening  the
elimination  of  poisons  in  rheumatic  cases.  The  patients  claim  a  feeling  of  remarkable
revitalization  after  a  Magic  Bath. This  remedy  should  be  more  widely  known."

Superior  to  Turkish  and  Mineral  Baths

Dr.  B.  O.  Kinnear,  a  prominent  physician  in  one  of  the  leading  Sanitariums  in  the
United  States,  says,  in  part:  "I  consider  The  Magic  Baths  superior  to  any  of  the  well-
known  Springs  so  extensively  advertised;  also,  as  a  hygienic  measure  to  be  regularly  or  oc-
casionally employed  by  persons  in  fair  health,  I  consider  them  superior  to  Turkish,  Russian
or  Vapor  Baths;  being  able  to  enjoy  them  in  your  own  bathtub,  the  possibility  of  con-
tagion of  Tuberculosis  by  inhaling  the  breath  of  other  patients  who  may  be  afflicted  with
this  terrible  malady  is  entirely  eliminated."

The  Magic  Bath  produces  more  profuse  perspiration,  and  is  therefore  more  depurat-
ing or  cleansing  in  its  effect.  It  does  not  relax  the  system,  but  produces  a  tonic  effect
and  a  delightful  sensation  of  vigor.  It  secures  perfect  equalization  of  the  circulation,
glandular  activity  is  increased,  elasticity  and  power  given  to  the  muscles,  and  a  permanent,
stimulating  and  tonic  influence  imparted  to  the  system,  a  condition  at  once  conducive  to
the  enjoyment  and  prolongation  of  life.

DESCRIPTION:  The  Magic  Bath  is  a  Health  Bath,  prepared  from  Herbs  and  Vegetable  matter.  Re-
sults are  quick  and  permanent.  Testimonials  from  prominent  people  sent  on  request.  It  is  registered
and  protected,  put  up  in  Three  Oz.  Bottles.  Labels,  Green  and  Black;  every  bottle  is  sealed  with  a
stamped  Seal  (Red).  See  that  it  is  not  broken.  It  is  guaranteed  under  the  pure  Food  and  Drug  Law,
Serial 4858.

It  is  not  sold  to  Druggists,  but  can  be  obtained  from  the  Sole  Agent  in  your  City,  or  direct;  sent
postpaid upon  receipt of  price,  $1.00 per  bottle; 1 dozen, $10.00.

THE  MAGIC  BATH  COMPANY

500  Fifth  Avenue  New  York,  N.  Y.


P. S. A word to thr ~cisf. The Sole Agency for any City or State not taken, can he obtained on
reasonable terms, at prices that will insure a handsome profit.


1338


r III i>ei  Sill  Siiliiroixithic  Direclunj  (i/id  Ihiycrs'  (iiiidr


Oberhauser & Landauer in Wiirz-

burg, Bavaria, Germany. Price  $1.

per  bottle  or  tin. Smaller  quantities

in  tin  or  glass,  packed  in  New  York.

Powders and Tinctures, 35c. Oils,

30c. Always in stock :

Oils,  at  30c,  by  mail  3Sc,  and  SOc,
by  mail  60c. — Almond,  Anisseed,
Burdock.  Camphor,  Caraway,
Cloves,  Fennel,  Fircone,  Juniper
Berries,  Lavender,  Peppermint,
Rue,  Spikenard,  St.  John'.s  Wort,
Thyme,  Wormwood,  Salad

(Olive).

Powders,  at  35c,  by  mail  40c,  and
SOc,  by  mail  tiOc. — Agave,  Aloe,
Alum,  Angelica,  Anisst-ed,  Bone
Dust  (white,  gray  and  black),
Caraway,  Chalk  Dust,  Limetree
W^ood,  Coal  Dust,  Coltsfoot,
Dwarf  Elder  Root,  Eyebright,
Fennel,  Fenugreek  (Foenum
Graecum),  Gentian  Root,  Juniper
Berries,  Linseed,  Peppermint,
Rosemary,  Red  Saunders  (San-
dal), Rhubarb  Root,  St.  John's
Wort,  Sweet  Flag  Root  (Cala-
mus), Sage,  Sanicle,  Tormentill
Root, Valerian aii<l Wormwood

Tinctures,  at  35c,  by  mail  40c,  and
$1.00,  by  mail  $1.10.  Arnica,  An-
gelica, Bilberry,  Birch-sap,  Bog-
bean,  Bearberry,  Burnet  (Pim-
pemelle),  Beanshell,  Calamus
(Sweet  Flag),  Common  Camo-
mile, Centaury,  Eyebright,  Gen-
tian, Geniste  (Broomherb),  Hip,
Hound's  Tongue.  Juniper,  Pep-
permint, Rue,  Rosemary  (also
wine,  large  bottles  $1.25,  excel-
lent remedy  for  liver  and  kidney
diseases).  Sage,  St.  John's  Wort,
Scurvy  (5rass  (Spoon wort).  Suc-
cory, Shave  Grass,  Tormentill,
Valerian, and Wormwood.


DR. SCHOSSLER'S

BIOCHEMIC TREATMENT

OF DISEASE

The Tw^elve Tissue Remedies of

Biochemic Treatment otherwise

known as "Cell Salts."

This  new  treatment  of  disease
based  upon  Biochemistry,  is  gain-
ing rapidly  in  acceptance  by  lead-
ing physicians,  and  many  of  the  in-
telligent  public everywhere.

These  tissue  builders  are  really
cell  food — not  medicine — not  drugs
— absolutely  harmless.  They  are
absorbed  by  the  system  when
needed, and thus, effect  cures.

Dr.  Schussler  based  his  theory
upon the following considerations:

The  human  body  is  made  up  of
cells.  Various  kinds  of  cells  build
up  the  different  tissues  and  organs
of  the  body.  The  difference  in  the
cells  is  largely  determined  by  the
kind  of  inorganic  salts  which  enter
into  their  composition.  These  are
the  inorganic  constituents  of  the
body;  the  salts  of  iron,  magnesia,
lime,  etc.,  which  build  up  its  tis-
sues. Because  they  are  the  tissue
builders,  both  the  structure  and
vitality  of  the  body  depend  upon
their  proper  quantity  and  dis-
tribution in every cell.

These  Tissue  Remedies  are  in-
organic cell  salts,  prepared  by  tri-
turation, to  reduce  the  particles  to
such  a  degree  of  minuteness  that
they  may  be  absorbed  by  the  deli-
cate cells  wherever  needed.

Health is the state of the body


when  all  the  cells  are  in  a  normal
condition,  and  they  are  kept  in
this  state  when  each  of  _  them  re-
ceives the  requisite  quantity  of  the
needful salt for  its  upbuilding.

Disease  is  an  altered  state  of
the  cell,  produced  by  some  irre-
gularity in  the  supply  to  the  cells
of  one  of  the  inorganic  tissue  salts.
Imperfect  cell  action  results,  dis-
eased tissues  and  organs  follow,
and  all  the  phenomena  of  disease
are  developed.

The  cure  consists  in  restoring
the  normal  cell  growth  by  fur-
nishing a  nominal  dose  of  the  cell
salt  requisite  to  the  restoration  of
proper  molecular  motion.  To  do
this  successfully,  it  is  necessary  to
know  what  salts  are  needed  for  the
upbuilding  of  the  different  tissues
and for  their  normal action.

By  giving  a  tissue  remedy  in
such  a  dose  as  can  be  assimilated
by  the  growing  cells,  most  wonder-
ful and  speedy  restoration  to
healthy  function  is  brought  about
in every case of curable disease.

All  diseases  that  are  at  all  cura-
ble may  be  successfully  dealt  with
by  means  of  the  tissue  remedies
properly  prepared  to  the  needs  of
the  organism.

It  is  claimed  by  some  that  the
whole  success  of  Homeopathy  is
attributable  to  the  fact  that  the
remedies  used,  often  contain  some
of  these cell-salts.

The  cell  of  each  tissue  group  re-
ceive their  own  special  and  peculiar
cell  salt;  for  instance,  those  enter-
ing into  the  promotion  of  nerve
cells  are  Magnesia,  Potash,  Soda
and  Iron ;  of  bone  cells.  Lime,
Magnesia  and  Silica,  etc.,  etc.,
which  are,  as  a  rule,  extracted  by
the body from the food we take.

There  are  twelve  Tissue  Reme-
dies— the  twelve  inorganic  salts
found  in  the  ashes  of  the  body —
all  essential  to  the  proper  growth
and  development  of  every  part  of
the  body.  They  are  those  of  Lime,
Calcarea  Phosphorica ;  of  Iron,
Ferum Phosphoricum.

Phosphates  of  Potash,  Kali  Phos-
phoricum; of  Soda,  Natrum  Phos-
phoricum ;  of  Magnesia,  Magnesia
Phosphoricum.

Chlorides  of  Potash,  Kali  Muri-
aticum ;  of  Soda,  Natrum  Muriati-
cum ;  of  Lime,  Calcarea,  Sulphu-
rica.

Sulphates  of  Soda,  Natrum  Sul-
phuricum;  of  Potash,  Kali  Sulphu-
ricum.

Fluoride .  of  Lime,  Calcarea
Fluorica  and Pure  Silica, Silicea.

THE  CHIEF  USES  OF  THE
TWELVE TISSUE REMEDIES

Kali  Phosphoricum
The  great  remedy  for  all  forms  of
nervous  debility.  It  is  indicated
in  all  diseases  or  symptoms  arising
from  want  of  nerve  power,  brain
exhaustion,  neurasthenia,  sleepless-
ness, want  of  energy,  irritability
lack  of  confidence,  gloomy  fore-
bodings, morbid  fears,  hysteria,
hypochondriasis,  melancholy,  etc.
Nervousness,  Neuralgia  and  pains
generally,  especially  in  those  who
are  run  down.  Headache  in  deli-
cate and  excitable,  nervous  pa-
tients. Paralyzing  pains  in  limbs.
Also  the  remedy  for  every  offensive


discharges,  offensive  ulcers,  etc.
It  is  the  remedy  for  all  ner\'Ous
people,  curing  their  headaches,
neuralgias,  sleeplessness,  despon-
dencies and pains.

Ferrum Phosphoricum

All  ailments  arising  from  dis-
turbed circulation,  fevers,  inflam-
mations, congestions;  thus,  when-
ever heat,  pain,  redness,  throbbing,
quickened  pulse  are  present.  The
first  stage  of  all  acute  diseases,
colds,  pneumonia,  pleurisy,  bron-
chitis, croup,  diphtheria,  diarrhoea,
rheumatism, etc.

It  is  best  and  surest  remedy  for
colds  on  the  chest  in  children,
whether  simple,  catarrhal  affec-
tions or  going  on  to  pneumonia.

Nosebleed  always  calls  for  it,  or
any  hemorrhage  from  any  orifice
of  the  body.  It  is  an  excellent
remedy  for  wetting  of  the  bed  in
children.

Magnesia Phosphorica

Chief  remedy  for  nervous  com-
plaints of  a  spasmodic  nature.  All
ailments  with  intense  pains,  dart-
ing, spasmodic,  constricting.  It
is  the  great  anti-spasmodic  remedy;
hence  in  convulsions,  colic  with
flatulence,  St.  Vitus'  dance,  spas-
modic cough,  cramps,  neuralgic
palpitation,  toothache,  writers'
cramp,  etc.  Chief  remedy  for
babies'  colic.  In  sever  cases,  dis-
solve in  a  little  hot  water,  repeat-
ing the  dose  every  fifteen  minutes
until relieved.

Calcarea Phosphorica

The  great  remedy  for  the  young
and  growing.  Indispensable  dur-
ing dentition  and  puberty.  The
tonic  after  acute  diseases  and  for
constitutional  weakness,  consump-
tion, emaciation,  bone  diseases,  and
all  ailments  that  prove  obstinate.
Slowly  developing,  weak  children,
chlorosis  and  difficulty  during
menstruation,  leucorrhoea  and  pains
during  menses,  especially  in  young
girls.  The  great  remedy  for  tran-
sition periods  of  life — dentition,
puberty, old age.

Natrum  Phosphoricum
that  arise  from  an  acid  condition  of
the  system.  It  is  especially  suited
to  young  children  who  have  been
fed  with  too  much  sugar  and  suffer
from  acidity.  Dyspepsia,  acid  ris-
ings, sour  vomiting,  greenish,  sour
diarrhoea,  tongue  is  coated  with
yellow  deposit  and  thick  like  cream.
Whenever  this  condition  is  present,
no  matter  what  disease,  this
remedy  will  prove  curative.  For
worms  and  complaints  caused  by
their presence.

Calcarea Sulphurica

Acts  on  the  connective  suppura-
tions, abscesses,  mattery  discharges,
tubercular ulcers, rheumatism.

Kali  Sulphuricum
A  want  of  this  salt  causes  a  yel-
low, slimy  deposit  on  the  tongue,
slimy,  thin,  decidedly  yellow  or
greenish  discharges,  and  peeling  of
the  skin.  Useful  in  any  ailment
where  this  condition  prevails,  espe-
cially if  patient  is  worse  towards
evening,  and  in  a  heated  room.
Catarrhs from any mucous mem-


Kindly mention Directory when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any
manufacturer's or dealers name obtainable from Naturopathic Center. ItO Ea>


Information on any  article listed without
' ~  St 'list  St., New York


Unlvemal  IVatnropathie  Directory  iiiul Buyerw'  Uuide  133®


ATTENTION!


Something New Coming!

A  Combination  Instrument  of  Wide  Adaptability

Affords  Many  Forms  of  Treatment  in  ONE

SAVES  SPACE,  tfierefore  means  LOWER  OFFICE  RENT
SAVES  TIME,  tfierefore  means  MORE  EFFICIENCY

SAVES  MONEY  IN  ORIGINAL  COST

since  separate  apparatuses  for  giving  the  various  forms  of  treatment
possible  with  this  combination,  would  cost  many  times  as
much  to  purchase.

May  be  purchased  complete,  or  Attachments  may  be  added

gradually  at  your  convenience.
The  BASIS  is.  Dr.  Manfred  Broberg's

"CHIRO-TRACTION"

(Trade-Mark)

Massage.  ADJUSTMENT  TABLE  and  STRETCHER  for

Mechanical  and  Traction  by  Hand

The  various  ATTACHMENTS,  which  may  be  conveniently  pushed  aside
or  brought  into  action  as  needed,  furnish  applications  directly  in  line  with  the
newest  and  most  approved  methods  of  the  art  of  healing. The  most  important  are :

THE BACHELET CO-ACTIVE WAVE GENERATOR

sending  miriads  of  microscopically  fine  vibrations  through  tissues,  bones,
cartilages,  muscles  and  nerve-fibres,  creating  cell  activity  without  violence.

Attacfiments  for

THERMO-THERAPY

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION

for  local  or  general  application

EXERCISING DEVICES

for certain muscles.
and  a  variety  of  other  uses.

To  practice,  you  must  have  an  Adjustment  Table  of  some  k^nd.  Why  not  get
the  ONE  with  the  vj'idest  range  of  usefulness?

We  Tvant  your  name  on  our  mailing  list  and  you  ivill  find  it  to  your  interest
to  have  it  there. Send  in  your  name  and  address.

ALWAYS  AT  YOUR  SER\ICE

BACHELET  MEDICAL  APPARATUS CO., Inc.
320  Schermerhorn  Street  : :  : :  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


1340


I'liiucr.sdl  XdluroiJdiliic  Dirrctorij  and  Buyers'  Guide


brane — head,  vagina,  etc. — when
secretion  is  yellow  and  slimy.  Fre-
quently called  for  toward  the  end
of  a  cold,  when  the  discharge  is
profuse and comes up easy.

Kali  Muriaticum
All ailments characterized by
exudations, infiltrations, swellings,
during the latter stages of acute
diseases ; thus, after  or  in altema-  1
tion with Ferrum Phos. All ail-  !
ments accompanied by a white or  I
gray coating of the tongue, thick  j
white  discharge and expectorations,  |
skin diseases, dysentery, etc. An  I
excellent constitutional remedy for
old chronic ailments,  _ hereditary
complaints and dyscrasias.  '

Natrum Sulphuricum
Acts  on  the  cells  of  the  liver  and  j
kidneys and regulates the amount
of water in the tissues. Bilious-  [
ness, headache and vomiting of
bile, bitter taste, diarrhoea, gravel,  [
sandy urine, intermittent fever,
dropsy, diabetes, liver troubles,
troubles arising from living in
damp places.

Natrum Muriaticum

Is  found  in  all  the  tissues  of  the
body.  Useful  for  all  pains,  such  as
indigestion,  etc.,  when  accompanied
by  either  flow  of  salvia  or  in-
creased secretion  of  tears,  vomiting
of  water  or  clear  mucus.  Ca-
tarrhs with  frothy,  watery  mucus
or  blisters.  In  all  catarrhs  where
the  secretion  is  clear  and  trans-
parent. Headache,  costiveness,  in-
termittent fever  with  catarrh  of  the
stomach.

Calcarea  Fluorica
A  disturbance  of  the  equilibrium
of  the  molecules  of  this  salt  causes
a  dilation  and  relaxed  condition  of
elastic  fibers,  hence  useful  in  vari-
cose veins,  hemorrhoids  and  vascu-
lar tumors.  Also  in  hanl,  bony
swellings.  For  piles,  if  they  are
apt  to  bleed  ;  may  be  advantageous-
ly  alternated with Ferrum Phos.

Silicea

Is  useful  in  suppurations,  pro-
moting the  formation  of  pus,  matur-
ing abscesses,  while  Calc.  Sulph.
comes  in  later  to  heal  the  wound ;
disease  of  the  nervous  system,
paralytic  syrnptoms,  spasms,  rheu-
matic pain  in  limbs,  etc.

I'seful  also  in  Brain  Fag.  Acts
as  a  conductor  for  the  gray  matter
of the brain.

NATUROPATHIC CENTER,
110  East  41st  St.,  New  York, N.  Y.


COMBINATIONS IN
NATURES PROPORTIONS


Neurasthenia

Formula  No.  1 — Ferr.  Phos.,
Kali Phos., Mag. Phos.

This  tablet  is  indicated  in  all
nervous  affections,  neurasthenia,
nervous  prostration,  tendency  to
insanity,  mania  and  other  mental
derangements.  This  remedy  is  not
a  nerve  stimulant,  but  a  nerve  food,
which  will  gradually  build  up  the
nervous  system,  producing  perma-
nent  tone and strength.


Anemia and Chlorosis
Formula No. 2— Calc. Phos.,

Kali  Phos.,  Ferr.  Phos.
This  preparation  is  useful  in  all
cases  of  defective  development,
mental  or  physical.  It  may  be
used  at  any  age  of  life.  It  is  es-
pecially adapted  in  children's  dis-
eases, such  as  rickets,  marasmus,
early  decay  of  teeth,  etc.  Indicated
in  adults  where  there  is  a  general
wasting  of  all  the  tissues,  waxy
appearance  of  the  skin,  palpitation,
trembling  and  weakness,  anemia  ol
the  brain  from  long-continued
mental  strain.
Acidity,  Flatulence,  Indigestion
Formula No.  3 — Nat. Phos., Nat.

Suliih.,  Silicea.
This  tablet  is  indicated  in  all
gastric  disturbances,  acidity,  flatu-
lence, dyspepsia,  acid,  sour  risings,
feeling  of  weight  in  abdomen,  bili-
ous vomiting,  flatulent  colic,  head-
ache, jaundice,  and  general  de-
rangement of  the  stomach  or
bowels.

Skin and Scalp Diseases
Formula No. 4 — Kali Mur., Kali

Sulph.,  Calc.  Sulph.,  Silicea.
This  combination  is  applicable  in
all  skin  diseases,  simple  or  chronic,
such  as  pimples,  eczema,  acne,  ery-
sipelas, crusta  lactea,  lupus
growths,  ring  worm,  scurfy  erup-
tions on  head  and  face  of  child-
ren, etc.

Coughs,  Colds,  Catarrh
Formula No. 8 — Ferr. Phos.,  j
Kali Mur.. Nat. Mur.  ,

This tablet  is  useful in  all cases  \
of colds with fever or cold in the
head,  with  watery  discharge. Acute
catarrh, rattling, hollow cough,
difficult respiration, pain in chest.

Constipation
Formula No. 9 — Nat. Mur., Nat.

Sulph., Cals. Fluor.
This combination is indicated in
obstinate cases, where the bowels
are constipated without apparent
cause, liver  torpid, stools  hard and  j
black, headache, bad breath, bad  I
taste in mouth, tongue coated.

Vital Weakness

Formula No. 6 — Nat. Mur., Kali
Phos., Calc. Phos.

This tablet is indicated in all
forms of sexual weakness, and
general impairment of the sexual
system. It is especially applicable
to all suffering from exhavisting
discharges. from colds, hemor-  ;
rhages, diarrhoea and all similar  ■
drains, impotence, spermatorrhoea,  !
lassitude and general debility,
emissions followed by trembling
and weakness. This preparation  :
tones up the entire sexual system  !
and tends to restore vigor and
general health. It is not merely a
"tonic" but a "Nerve Food,"
specially prepared for the above-
named  conditions.

Rheumatism

Formula No. 7 -Ferr. Phos.,

Mag. Phos., Kali Sulph.

This remedy is valuable in all
rheumatic conditions. Pains in
limbs or arms — shooting or boring
pains, fever, swelling of parts,  ]
lumbago, sciatica, muscular rheu-  |
matism.


Tonic  (Nerve  and  Brain)

Formula  No.  5 — Calc.  Phos.,
Mag.  Phos.,  Ferr.  Phos.,  Nat.
Phos., Kali Phos.

This  preparation  is  a  general
tonic  in  chronic  wasting  diseases,
anemia  of  young,  rapid  growing
people,  in  women  weakened  by  too
frequent  child-bearing,  in  weakened
conditions  from  acute  diseases  dur-
ing convalescence,  weakness  from
overwork,  mental  strain,  brain  fag
and  nervous  prostration,  general
debility.

Biolasma

This  is  a  combination  of  the
Twelve  Tissue  Remedies  in  the
same  proportion  as  these  cell  salts
are  found  in  the  human  organism.
It  has  been  called  the  "Elixir  of
Life."

Efficacious in debilitated condi-
tions; all female weakness or irre-
gularities; also when there is a
doubt  as  to the  needful remedy.
How  to  order  the  Remedies

Do  not  fail  to  state  whether  you
desire  the  3x  (for  acute  ailments)
or  the  6x  (for  chronic  troubles).
Order  the  combinations  by  number.

Prices  for  single  Remedies
Box  of  250  tablets,  postpaid,  $0.35.
Box  of  500  tablets,  postpaid,  .60.
Box  of  1,000  tablets,  postp.,  1.00
Box  of  6,000  tablets,  postp.,  6.00.
Brown's  Wonder  Salve

For  Boils,  Bruises,  Burns,  Chaf
ing.  Chilblains,  Croup,  Deafness,
Earache,  Eczema,  Frostbites,  Itch-
ing, Inflammation  of  Lungs,  In-
juries on  all  parts  of  the  Body.
Piles,  Sores,  Sore  Throat,  Sting  of
Insects,  Sprains,  Sunburn.  It  de-
serves its  name. Postpaid, 50  cents.

Biochemistry — The new domestic

treatment by J. B. Chapman,

M.  D.  300  pages.  Postpaid,  $1.10.

The  Biochemic  System  of  Medi-
cine, by  G.  \V.  Carey,  M.  D.  450
pages. Postpaid, $2.50.

Address all orders to

NATUROPATHIC CENTER
110 E. 41st St., New York. N. Y.


MEDICINAL ROOTS, HERBS,
BARKS AND SEED

Large Box, postpaid, 50 cents
Family Size Box, postpaid, $1.10.

These prices apply to all of the
following  products:
Anise Seed
Angelica Root
Arnica Flowers
.Avensroot
Balsam

Balm  of  Giliad Buds
Balmony
Barberries
Bearberry
Benjamin Bush
Benne Leaves
Beth Root
Bitter  Root
Bitter Sweet
Blackberry  Root
Bloodroot
Blue Cohosh
Blue Flag
Blue Gentian
Blue Scull Cap
Boneset

Buckhorn Bark
Canada  Snake  Root
Caraway


Kinillii mention Directory when ordering merchandise. — Information on any article listed without
maniifacliircr's  or  dealer's  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  'list  St., New York


UnlvjTunl .\iitiiro|iu(lii«- l>iro«'t«r.v iiiul lliijorN' (iiiiiU'

'i^iiiiiiiiiiiii,


1311


This  is  an  Age  of  Hygiene  and  Sanitation

Your  help  expect,  and  your  guests  and  patrons  demand,  that
you  provide  it  for  them

Blue Cross Innershield Napkins sold through Blue Cross Vendors, provide

women  with  one  of  their  greatest  necessities in  a manner  strictly sanitary

and  free  from  embarrassment.

They arc sanitary,


Made  of  the  finest  and
softest  ahsorhent  ma-
terial, sterilized  ah-
sorhent cotton  and
high  test  impervious
fabric,  they  are  equip-
ped with  tape  and
may  be  worn  either
over  or  under  the
corset.


PRICE $12.00
GROSS


washable,  and  can  be
used  many  times  by
the  simple  insertion
of  fresh  absorbent
cotton.

Endorsed  by  physi-
cians and  nurses
eveiywhere.
Can  be  worn  with
close-fitting  gowns
without  detection.


I We  will  furnish  you  an  18-gauge  pressed  steel  vending  machine  for  your  free  |

use  for  the  sale  of  these  napkins. Ladies  toilet  and rest  rooms  everywhere  =

I  are  being  equipped  daily.  M

i  Circular  giving  full  particulars  on  request.  |

I SANITARY MANUFACTURING COMPANY  |

f  372  TRANSPORTATION  BUILDING,  CHICAGO,  ILL.  |

illllllllilllllllll|i|||lillllll!lllllllllllllllll!lllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllilllll!l!lil!y^


i
i


OSTERMOOR MATTRESSES

Built,  Not  Stuffed,  Grand  Externally,  Clean  Internally,
Wear  Eternally,  Cheap  Infernally.

X Our  book,  the  "TEST  OF  TIME,"  describing  and  illustrating  the  various  styles,  free  for  the  asking.

I  O^f^rmnnr Chlirrh Clivhinnv ^*^ '"*^* furnished over 23,000 churches

X  yj^lKTmOOT K^nurcn K^USniOnS ^^Ith Cu8hion.s. We also renovate and re-

X  cover  them  cheaper  and  quicker  than j  oil ima»;ine. Our  Book,  "CHURCH CUSHIOXS,"

M  free  for  the  asking^.

= Ostermoor  Upholstered  Spiral  Springs  ^^"^  ""  0'**«™'««'^  Mattress


»(0

i
i


outfit  Brains  and  Skill  can  produce.


on top makes best sleeping:
Catalog;  free  for  the  asking.


I  Ostermoor  Wrought  Steel  Bedsteads  7a^u\a^Zl''nVs7itX'"ro^%'Z  I

X  Asylums,  etc. Attractive.  Durable,  ('heap. Catalog  free  for  the  asking.  .  X

I  State  on  postal  which  catalog  you  want  I

c  ANOTHER FAMOUS OSTERMOOR PRODUCT WHICH SURPASSES  c

1  RUBBER  SHEETING  I

2  Ovft>rmnnr ^nnitnrv ^httofina Waterproof — Odorless  —  AVashable  —  Guar-  c
I  \j:»iermOOr Oaniiary sneezing anteed  — Free from Rubber  — single and  A

■  Double Coated — White  or Maroon. — Guaranteed not to peel or crack; is acid proof.  I

■  For  sale  at  leading-  Department  Stores, or  send here for  samples. Also SAXITARY  I
C  MATTRESS-PROTECTORS  made  of  Ostermoor  Sheeting-  to  fit  all size  Bedsteads.  c

I  OSTERMOOR  &  COMPANY  |

T  114 ELIZABETH  STREET  NEW YORK  X

I  Canadian Agency: The ParkhiU Mfg. Company. Ltd.. Montreal  I


O)"


►(O


1342


Universal  Naturopathic  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


Cascara

Catnip

Celery Seed

Centaurea

Cheese  Plant

Chiretta

Chocolate  Root

Cinnamon  Bark

Cloves

Colic  Root

Comfrey  Root

Couch  Grass

Cough  Wort

Coriander Seed

Cramp  Bark

Crimson Clover

Crow  Com

Cubeb Berries

Damiana

Dandelion Root

Dog  Grass

Dwarf  Elder  Bark

Dwarf  Elder

Elder Flowers

Eyebright

Fennel  Seed

Feverfew

Fever Twig

Fishberries

Five  Finger  Grass

Flax  Seed

Fragrant Valerian

German Chamomille

German Cheese Plant

Gentian

Golden  Seal

Goose  Grass

Grindelia Robusta

Hoarhound

Hops

Hydrangea

Insect  Aster

Indian Balsam

Indian Balm

Indian Deer Berry

Indian Elder Root

Indian Elm

Indian Ginger

Indian Hyssop

Indian  Sage

Indian Sloe

Jamaica  Ginger

Jerusalem Oak

Juniper Berries

Kidney  Root

Kidney Wort

Lady  Slipper

Lemon  Balm

Licorice  Root

Life Everlasting

I^iferoot

Lilly  Root

Lovage

Male Fern Root

Mallow

Mandrake

Marsh  Mallow

May  Apple Root

Mint  Blossoms

Mint  Grape  Bark

Mint Buffalo  Herb

Mullein Flowers

Mullein

Mustard Seed

Nerve  Root

Nettle Leaves

Oregon  Grape

Pale Cohosh

Papoose Root

Peppermint

Pig  Weed

Pink  Root

Pipsissewa

Pomegranate Bark

Poplar  Root  Bark

Prickley  Ash  Bark

Princess  Pine

Red Clover


Rhubarb
Rose  Pink
Rue

Sacred  Bark
Sage Leaves
Sandal  Wood
Sassafras Bark
Saw Palmetto Berries
Senega

Senna Leaves
Seven  Barks
Silver  Mullein
Skunk Cabbage
Snakehead
Solomon Seal
Spearmint
Spikenrad
Squaw Bush
Squaw Vine
Squaw Weed
Starwort
St. Johns  Wort
Swamp Cabbage
Swamp Hellebore
Sweet Balm
Sweet Fern
Sweet Gum Bark
Sweet Weed
Tetter  Wort
Thoroughwort
Thousand Seal
Turtle Bloom
Uva  Ursi

Virginia  Snake  Root
Water Plantain
Wild Bergamot
Wild Clover
Wild Cranberry Bark
Wild Licorice
Wild Senna
Witch Hazel Bark
White Pine
Worm  Grass  Root
Yarrow

Yellow Dock  Root
Yellow Jessamine
Young Mullein

No Order Accepted for Less than
50 cents.


SEED OF MEDICINAL HERBS

We  can  furnish  seed  of  the  fol-
lowing medicinal  plants  at  the
prices given, per packet, postpaid.

Anise $0.25

Balmony 25

Bene Leaves Plant 25

Black Haw 25

Blessed Thistle 25

Blue Gentian 25

Blue Scullcap 25

Blue Vervain 25

Boneset 25

Buffalo Herb, large pkg 75

Carduus Benedictus 25

Carraway 25

Celery 25

Centaurea 25

Chamomille 25

Chickory 25

Columbine 25

Coriander 25

Crampbark 25

Crimson Clover 25

Cummin 25

Fennel . 25

Fever Twig 25

Flax 25

Fragrant Valerian 25

Gravel Root 25

Golden Seal 1.00

Hoarhound 25

Hops 25

I  Insect Aster 25

i  Indian Sage 25


Jacobs Ladder 25

Jerusalem Oak 25

Jobs Tears 25

Juniper 25

Kidney Root 25

Lavender 25

Life Everlasting 25

Marsh Mallow 25

Master of the Woods 25

Mdy Apple 25

Mint 25

Mt. Grape Root 35

Mullein 25

Oregon Grape Root 35

Pig Weed 25

Plantain 25

Red Clover 25

Rhubarb 25

Rose Pink 25

Rosemary 25

Rue 25

Sage 25

Sassafras 25

Scullcap 75

Silver Mullein 25

Sloe 25

Snakehead 25

Squaw Weed 2.S

Stramonium .25

Sweet Balsam 25

Sweet Gum 25

Sweet Root 25

Thousand Seal 25

Turtle Bloom 25

Vandal Root 25

Viburnum Opulus 25

Water Plaintain 25

Wild Bergament 25

Wild Clover 25

Wild Cranberry 25

Wild Indian Hyssop 25

Wild Strawberry 25

Wormwood 25

Yarrow 25

Yellow Dock 25

Yuuca Root 25


MEDICINAL ROOTS AND
PLANTS

For  replanting.  Shipped  only  in
season.  All  orders  held  until
weather  conditions  are  favorable
for replanting.

Balm of Giliad $1.50

Bethroot 1.00

Bitter Sweet 1.00

Black Haw 1.00

Bloodroot 1.00

Buckthorn 1.50

Chee.se Plant 1.00

Colic Root 1.00

Columbine 1.00

Cramp Bark 1.50

Fever Few 1.00

Fever Twig 1.00

Five Finger .  Grass 1.00

Fox Glove 1.00

.Fragrant Orris Root 1.00

Golden Seal Root ; 1.50

Hop Roots 1.00

Indian Elder 1.00

Indian Sage 1.00

Juniper 1 .00

Larkspur 1 .00

Marsh Mallow 1.00

Master of the Woods 1.50

Oregon Grape Root 1.50

Pennyroyal 1.00

Pig Weed 1.00

Plantain, 1.00

Rhubarb 1.00

Rock Mountain Grape Root  1.50

Rue 1  00

Sassafras 1.50

Seven Barks 1.50


Ktndl


idlu mention Directoru when ordering merchandise.  —  Infor
nufnctiirer'x or  dealer  s nfinie ohlainahle from Nntnrnpntnic


Information on any article listed without
Center. HO  East  fil.st  St.. New York


IJiilverMiil \a<uroi»jUlii<- l)ii<-«(oi-.v iiiul llu.x-rs" <;iiJ«l<'


J:i4:J


Doctor,  are  you  Alive?

To  the  value  of  PHYSICAL  TREATMENT APPARATUS in Drugless Therapy
by  the  use of  Electricity  in the  different  modalities, such as derived from

High-Frequency  Auto-Condensation
Sinusoidal  Currents

Vibratory  Massage

Therapeutic  Lamps
Electric  Light  Baths

Electric  Light  Bakers

Obesity  Apparatus

Kirotraction  Tables,  Etc.

We  have  them  all  of  the  best.  We  have  made  them  over  twenty  years  and  know
how  to  serve  your  needs.  If  you  desire  to  improve  your  work  and  income  100%,
call  or  write  at  once  for  literature  and  catalogs.  You  are  invited  to  call  at  any
time  to  witness  the  practical  demonstration  of  modern  apparatus  in  a  fully-equipped
institute. A  free  course  of  instruction  to  our  customers.

I.  HARRIS


Suite  1002


Office  and  Demonstration: 45  West  34th  Street

Telephone,  Greeley  1160


/f


"It  is  by  far  the  most  profitable  appliance  I  have  in
my  office  equipment/*

writes  a  leading  drugless healer  in  a  large Illinois city.

Hundreds  of  drugless  healers  in  all  branches  of  the  profession  endorse  the  VIOLETTA  High-
Frequency  Instrument;  not  only  from  an  investment  standpoint,  but  also  as  to  unsurpassed
efficiency  of  operation  and  amazing  results  obtained.

No  drugless  healer  can  afford  to  be  without  it  either  as  a  money  maker  or  means  of  effecting
quick relief  from many stubborn ailments  which have resisted other methods.

High-Frequency  Generator

is  the  most  compact,  convenient  and  thoroughly
efficient  machine  of  its  kind  ever  produced.  Ex-
tremely easy  to  apply  as  entire  mechanism  is  contained
in  a  single  piece,  permitting  adjustments  to  be  made
without  leaving  patient.  Current  always  under  instant
control — may  be  regulated  while  treatment  is  being
given.  Noisy  and  nerve  jarring  spark-gap  eliminated.
Can  be  carried  to  patients'  home  or  used  by  patients
themselves.  Operates  on  alternating  or  direct  current.
Battery  outfit  supplied  where  current  is  not  available.

Guaranteed perfect in construction
and  operation

Write to-day for handsome
chart giving technique with

high-frequency current  and Book  of  interest  to  every

drugless physician.

CO.


=^


FREE.


BLEADON-DUNN

Dept. 1 D.

11-17  S.  Desplains  St.,  Chicago,  111.

New  York Representative:

THEODORE  STAVE  CO.

30 Church Street


-^


1


1344


Vniversal  WduropaUnc  Directory  (ind  Bayers Guide


Sloe 1.25

Squaw Flower 1.25

Squaw Lily 1.25

Swamp Hellebore 1.50

Sweet Flag 1.25

Sweet Gum 1.50

Sweet Weed 1.00

St. Johns Wort 1.25

Star Grass 1.00

Thousand Seal 1.25

Wild Bergamot 1.25

Wild Cranberry 1.50

Wormwood 1.00

Vucca Root 1.25

Yarrow 1.25

^'ellow Dock Root 1.00


TOILET  PREPARATIONS

Soap,  Foenum  Graecum,  for
Freckles,  Pimples  and  Skin
Impurities $0.35

Soap,  Mayflower,  for  Rheuma-
tism, Gout and Scrofula... .35

Soap,  Shavegrass,  for  severe
Skin Affections 35

Soap,  Tormentil,  for  toilet,
medicinal  and  general  pur-
poses , Sf)

Soap, Green, for I'rurigo, in

tin  boxes .^lO

Soap,  Pure  Salutary,  with  Ar-
nica  and Marigold

White Wheat Gluten Soap...

H. C. Skin Food, 50c; large. 1

Mouth  and  Tooth  Wash

Tooth  Powder,  Kneipp's

Tooth  Brushes,  25c;  good  and
durable .

Antyridine, Complexion  Beau-

tifier, box 75

Tooth Powder, Okie, box... .45

Hair  Invigorator, Okie,  box.. 1.00

Hair  Cure 1.00

Scalp Soap Against  Dandruff. .35

Hair Oil 7.5


SPECIAL APPLICATIONS

Protection Soap $0.30

Complexion Soap 30

Lanolin Cream 25

Liquid Shampoo, $1.00 and.. l.JO
Superfine  Hair  Rejuvenator.  .  . 1.00

Okie  Hair  Invigorator 1.00

Okie  .\ntiridine,  a  skin  beauti-

fier 75

Hair  Dye 5.00


KNEIPP'S CELEBRATED
TOILET  ARTICLES

For  preserving  the  Iiair  and  to
prevent  falling  out  of  the  hair  and
formation  of  dandruff,  Kneipp
recommended  the  daily  use  of  his
celebrated  Capillary  Extract  of
XettleRoot,  to  be  had  in  three
sizes:  Bottles  containing  about
4  oz.,  $1.00;  postage,  10c.  Bot-
tles containing  about  16  oz.,
$3.50;  per  P^xpress  only.  Bottles
containing  1  liter,  $7.50;  per  Ex-
press only.  In  addition  to  using
the  Extract  of  Nettle-Root,
Kneipp  recommended  the  occa-
sional use  of  either  the  Kneipp
Capillary  Oil  of  Nettle-Root,  50c.,
postage  10c,  or  Oil  of  Sweet  Al-
mond, 50c,  postage  10c,  or  Oil
of  Burdoek-Root,  50c,  postage  10c
(to  be  applied  once  or  twice  a
week  only).  Price  50c,  postage
10c.  Full  directions  arc  enclosed
in  each  package.


Kneipp's  Gargle  and  Toothwash
(Mund-  und  Zahnwasser),  made
of  shave  grass,  scurvy  grass,  pep-
permint, etc.,  etc.  Excellent  for
removing  bad  odors  from  the
mouth,  and  is  a  refreshing  and
restorative  mouth  wash  for  the
difTcrcnt  diseases  of  the  gum,  of
the  cavity  of  the  mouth  and  the
pharyngeal  cavity.  One  teaspoon-
ful  in  one  wineglassful  of  water
three  times  daily  for  gargling  and
washing.  Price,  $1.00,  postage  10c.

Kneipp's  Herb  Tooth  Powder
(Kr.iuter-Zahnpulver).  This  really
excellent  tooth  cleaner  removes
the  bad  odor  from  the  mouth,
strengthens  the  gums  and  pre-
serves the  teeth.  Price  40c  per
box,  postage  5c.  A  good  serv-
iceable tooth-brush,  25c,  postage
3c. Extra fine, 50c, postage 3c.


FOR  THE  CARE  OF  THE  SKIN

WE  RECOMMEND
KNEIPP'S  PURE  HERB  SOAPS

To  improve  the  effect  of  the  s :)ai)
one  may  use  hot  water  and  allow
the  lather  to  be  partly  absorbed  by
the  skin,  the  rest  you  wipe  off
with a towel.

Kneipp's  Foenum  Graecum  Soap. —
Used  for  all  impurities  of  the
skin,  like  exanthemata,  grubs,
pimples,  freckles,  etc.,  etc.,  Per
piece,  35c;  postage,  4c.
Kneipp's  Shavegrass  Soap  (Zinn-
krautseife).  —  Used  with  great
success  for  severe  affections  of
the  skin,  serpigo,  deep-seated
grubs,  pimples,  freckles,  liver-
spots,  etc.,  etc.  This  soap  eon-
tains  shavegrass,  pulverized  very
fine,  in  large  proportions,  and
thereby  possesses  all  qualities  of
the  same.  Price  35c,  postage,  4c.
Kneipp's  Tormentillas  Soap.  —  For
general  toilet  use.  Price  35c,
postage, 4c.


Kneipp's  Mayflower  Soap  (Heublu-
menseife). — Used  for  rneumatism,
gout  and  scrofula.  Per  piece,  35c,
_  postage, 4c.

Kneipp's  Pure  Salutary  .Soap  (Reine
Heilseife),  with  arnica  and  mari-
gold, absolutely  pure,  a  neutral
soap  answering  all  purposes.  It
does  not  prickle  but  keeps  the
skin  fresh  and  soft.  Price  3Sc,
postage  4c.  Any  three  pieces  of
above  soaps  for  60c,  postage  12c.
For  bathing  purposes,  we  can
recommend the  following:


HOMEOPATHIC AND OTHER
HOME  REMEDIES

Baunseheidt Treatment.  Ex-

anthematic.  Effective  in  remov-
ing morbid  matter  from  the
system  through  the  skin.  Resus-
citator  (needle  instrument),  one
bottle  of  oil  and  book  of  instruc-
tions. Price,  $9.50.  Oil,  per
bottle, $2.00.

Golden State Herb Tea.

Foreign and Domestic Herbs.

Eye Essence.  Dr. Hartwig's.

Terpezone.  Air purifier and

germicide.

Alpha  Remedies.  Boericke  &
Tafel,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,
Pittsburgh.  Baltimore,  Cincin-
nati,  and New York.

Bing's  Pine  Needle  Bath.  3  sizes,
$1.00,  $5.00  and  $10.00.  Glogau
&  Co.,  180  N.  Dearborn  Street,
Chicago, 111.

The  Magic  Bath  Addition.  For
Rheumatism,  Gout,  Eczema,
Nervousness, etc. Price, $1.25.

RadiumactiV  Bath  and  Electrode
Powder,  per  can,  $2.00.  The
RadiumactiV  Co.,  31  S.  4th  St..
Columbus, O.

Pusheck Home Remedies.

Bodi-Tone,  General  Tonic.  Price,
$1.10.


THERAPEUTIC  APPARATUS

Continued from  page 1326


DIAGNOSTIC APPARATUS

Magnifying  Lenses.  For  Iridiag-
nosis — with  or  without  magni-
fying mirror,  $1.00,  to  $4.00.
Aukouophone.  Huston's.  A  differ-
ential Stethoscope — with  case,
$3.50.

All makes.
Chicago, 111.
Vibroscope.


Zoe


Stethoscopes.
Johnson Co.,

Dr.  Fosgate's  Vibroscope.  Zoe
Johnson  Co.,  Chicago,  111

Cameron's  Diagnostolite  Pocket
equipment  for  cavity  examina-
tion. $6.00, $7.50, $12.00.

Thermometers,  Fever.  All  makes.
Zoe  Johnson Co.,  Chicago, III.

Thermometers,  Sell  -  Register-
ing, Clinical,  with  indestruc-
tible Index 1.75

Thermometers, Siek-Room.  .. . 1.50

Thermometers. — Fahrenheit,  in
wood  Case,  up  to  120°  F.
For  the  Bath 0.50

Thermometers.  — •  Fahrenheit
and  Reaumur,  up  to  2C0°  F.,
$2.00; up to 150° 1.75

Thermometers. — Fahrenheit  or
F.  &  R.,  up  to  260°,  $2.00;
for  Hot-Air  Baths,  up  to
360°  F 2.50


Thermometers.  —  Maxima,
Fever,  Fahrenheit.  Hani
Rubber  Case 1.00

Thermometers.  —  Maxima,
Fever,  Reaumur  or  Centi-
grade .. 1.00

Thermometers.  — ■  Maxima
Fever,  Red  Cross,  Perfec-
tion 1.50


HYPEREMIA APPARATUS

Bier's Hyperemia Apparatus. See

Vacuum Cups.
Dr. Roger  Auto-Haemie  Outfit  with

book. Price. $10.00.


LAMPS

Lamps. For local treatments.

Magic  Pain  Relieving  Lamp.
Magic  Pain  Relieving  Lamp  Co.,
544 Garfield Ave., Chicago, HI.

Sun's  Rival  Lamp.  A  power-
ful 2000  C.  P.  nitrogen  lamp.
Bracket  with  extension  for
fastening  to  wall.  Price,  com-
plete, $50.00.  I.  W.  Long,  110
N. High St., Columbus, O.


Kindl\i mention Directoru when ordering mei
ninntifnrlnrer's or  dealer  s name obtainable  f


erchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
rom  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  'tist  St., New York


I


ITll
OH

I

i
i


Ixersnl XiH  iir<»|>iillil<- l)lir><<<»ry anil Hiiyorx* (;iii<l^


The  Celebrated  Pf  arrer  Sebastian

KNEIPP PILLS

are  free  from  all  injurious  aperients,  being  exclusively  composed  of  herbal  ingredients,
and  are  universally  considered  the  best  for  keeping  the  bowels  open  without  weaken-
ing the  stomach.  These  herbs  are  used  by  Pf  arrer  Seb.  Kneipp  at  Wbrishofen  in  his
treatments.  The  pills  ma^  be  taken  for  ^ears  Tvithout  an);  injury  to  the  system  and
rvith  only  beneficial  results.


are  the  best  and  most  pleasant  laxative  of  the  world

On  account  of  their  efficiency  in  most  stubborn  cases  of  constipation,  indigestion,
piles,  giddiness  and  all  complaints  of  the  liver,  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipp  has  given  to  the
undersigned  only  the  exclusive  right  to  denominate  same  with  his  name  and  to  attach
his  picture  and  signature  to  their  labels  etc.  and  to  have  bis  picture  and  signature
registered  as  a  Trade  Mar^.

Price  50c,  —  By  Mail  52c.


DIRECTIONS  FOR  USE


To  procure  a  regular  opening  of  the
bowels  which  is  particulary  desirable
with  females  take  I — -2  pills  at  bed
time;  for  the  first  time  3  or  4  pills  are
often  necessary.


2.  To  prevent  wind  and  spasms  take  one
pill  in  the  morning.

3.  To  procure  a  thorough  cleansing  of
the  bowels  take  2  pills  at  bedtime  and
2  to  3  pills  in  the  morning.


W^^^KS^*  Persons  of  ver\j  strong  constitution  require  in  these  3  cases
^^^^r  1  or  2  pills  more.  The  pills  usually^  act  after  12  hours,  in
some  cases  after  24  hours  onl\).

The  best  ivay  of  taking  these  pills  is  to  sTvallorv  them  as  they  are  or  rvrapped  up  in
a  wafer  with  some  water.

The  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipp  Pills  and  all  other  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipp  Remedies  are
only  genuine  when  bearing  our  registered  Trade  Mark  (picture  and  signature  of
Pfarrer  Kneipp)  and  the  name  of  the  only  authorized  manufacturers


OBERHAUSSER  &  LANDAUER,  Wurzburg,  Germany


j The  Pfarrer  Sebastian  Kneipp  Pills |


Sole  Agency  for  the  United  State*

KNEIPP  AND  NATURE  CURE  CENTRE

BENEDICT  LUST,  N.D.,  M.D.

BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY

NEW  YORK  CITY  TANGERINE,  FLA. I


I


0)-<


134G


Vnivrrsitl  Xaluropdlhic  Dircclonj  mul  Buyers'  Guide


Therapeutic  Lamp.  Ulcolite.  0}4
inch  reflector.  100  C.  P.  carbon
lamp.  Attach  to  any  light  socket.
Price,  $8.00.  Screens— red,  blue
or  Amber.  Smaller  Lamp,  price,
each,  $3.00  and  $5.00.  Zoe
Johnson Co., Chicago, 111.


SYRINGES

Colon Fountains, Douches, etc.


Dupell Internal Bath. Prices,

$6.00. A. E. Dupell, 7.'".2 Fulton

St., Brooklyn, X. ^".
Vaginal and Colon Syringe.
Ideal Self Draining Douche and

Dilator. No. 1, price, $6.50;

No. 2, price, $5.00.
J. B. L. Cascade. Chas. A.

Tyrrell, 134 W. 65th St., New

York, N. Y.

Sweet's  Colon  Bath.  Sweet's  Colon
Bath  Co..  603  Harris  Trust
Bldg., Chicago, III.


TREATMENT TABLES

Chiropractic Adjusting Tables.

Osteopathic Tables.

MasSage Tables.

Adjustable  Swedish  Massage

Tables.

Eclectic Table. Suitable for
Osteopathic, Chiropractic and
Massage Treatments. Zoe John-
son  Co., Chicago,  III.

Zenith  Chiropractic  Table.  The
most  adjustable  adjusting  table
on  the  market.  All  metal  frame,
Aluminum  finish.  2.S  inches
high.  Price.  $45.00.  Zoe  John-
son Co.,  Chicago,  III.,  and
Naturopathic Center.

("iriffin  Chiropractic  Adjusting
Table.

"Chiro-Traction."  Massage,  Ad-
justment Table,  Stretcher  and
Vibrator.  Bachelet  Medical  Ap
paratus  Co.,  320  Schermerhoni
St., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Pandiculators  (Stretchers).  T.  W.
Long, Columbus, O.

Motor  Traction Tables.

Tents for  Sun and  Air Baths.


Erectruss


SUN AND AIR TENTS


Impotcncy. Price, $10.00.

Style  No.  IS— "Junior."  1/S
H.  P.  motor.  In  silk  lined  case
with  8  applicators.  Price,  $35.00.
Style  No.  \~%  H.  P.  motor.  In
silk  lined  case  with  8  applica-
tors. Price, $45.00

Style  No.  80— The  "Shelton"
Ideal  Pedestal  Machine  is  the
very  latest  vibratory  apparatus.
Price, $67.50.

Nu-System Electric.

Electric Pulser. For home  use.

Vibrato-Masseur.  A  cabinet  ma-
chine for  the  office,  built  on  a
new principle.


Portable  Sun,  Air  and  Light  Bath,
for  Lawn,  Yard  or  Roof.  Price,
$25.00; large, $45.00.


VACUUM CUPS AND PUMPS

For  Vacuum-Neuropathic

Treatment

H.  N.  D.  Parker  Manufacturing
Co.,  Bond  Bldg.,  Washington,
D.  C.


VIBRATORS, ELECTRIC

Shelton Electric Vibrators.

Style  No.  75 — "Gentry,"  oper-
ates on  any  electric  light  circuit.
1/10  H.  P.  motor.  In  silk  lined
case  with  5  applicators.  Price,
$16.50.

Style  No.  85— The  "Knicker-
bocker," operates  on  110  volt,
direct  or  alternating  circuit.  %
H.  P.  motor.  In  silk  lined  case
with 5 applicators. Price, $20.00

Style  No.  71 — "Special,"  oper-
ates on  110  volt,  direct  or  alter-
nating circuit.  1/7  H.  P.  motor.
In  silk  lined  case  with  6  ap-
plicators. Price, $25.00.

Style  No.  19 — "De  Luxe
Wayne."  Best  all  around  ma-
chine made.  1/6  H.  P.  motor.
In  silk  lined  case  with  7  appli-
cators. Price, $30.00.


TRUSSES

Trusses,  Therapeutic  Corsets,  Sus-
pensories, etc.  Bunker  Truss.  For
Hernia.  Built  on  the  Curative
Principle.  J.  W.  Bunker,  Inc.,
110  W.  34th  St.,  New  York,
N. Y.

Surgical and Maternity Corsets.


PHYSIOLOGICAL REMEDIES

Flaxolyn.  Food and Herbal

compound  for  stomach,*  liver,
kidney  and  bowel  troubles.  Dr.
H.  Luntz,  37  Vernon  Ave.,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
Kneipp  Herbs  and  Remedies.
See  complete  List  under  Kneipp
heading.

Joseph Schaefer, 23 Barclay St.,
New York. N. Y.
Mayer's Salve.  For Blood

poisoning,  syphilis  and  Gonor-
rhea. Emil  Mayer,  Richmond
Hill,  N.  Y.  Outfit  with  book,
price,  $3.00.
Popp's  Swiss  Herb  Tea.  For
Blood  and  Skin  Diseases,  Liver,
Stomach  and  Kidney  Troubles.
Price, $0,25.

Red  Hand  Tea  Co.,  1233  DeKalb
Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Animator, No. 4 5.00

Balsam Inhalent 1.00

Capsheaf Safety Pin —

No.  1,  per  doz 10

Nos.  2  and  25^,  per  doz 20

No. 3 20

Centauer  Safety Corn Knife.. .75

Corn Cure, 30c and 25

Corn Cure Plaster 25

Eye-Baths. 30c., 50c. and 1.00

Infant Rectal Syringe, SO and .75


Ktndlg mention Directoru when ordering merchandise.  —  Information on any article listed without
manufacturer's  or  dealers  name  obtainable  from  Naturopathic Center, 110  East  fitst  St., New York


I


Universal  Xnturoputhic  Dirootory  and BiiyerM' fiulde


1347


A  BOOST  FOR  YOU

Doctor  of  Drugless  Healing

Even  the  Medical  Doctors  (M.  D's.)  and  the
leading  medical  journals  of  the  world  who  a
few  years  ago  scoffed  at  the  idea  of  constipation,
auto-intoxication  and  intestinal  toxemia  being
the  cause  of  the  majority  of  the  diseases  of
mankind,  now  admit  that  90'/o  of  all  diseases
are  due  to  intestinal  trouble  and  they  are  now
recommending  and  prescribing  the  Colon  Bath
as  a  means  of  relieving  bowel  trouble.


SWEET'S  COLON  BATH  cleanses  the  Co-
lon or  large  Intestine  and  is  a  valuable  asset  to
the  Doctor  of  Drugless  Healing.  Vou  wouldn't
start  to  build  a  new  house  on  an  old  site  that
was  littered  with  debris  and  wreckage.  Would
you?  No,  you  would  first  clear  away  the  wreck-
age and  build  a  solid  foundation.  That's  what
SWEET'S  COLON  BATH  will  do  with  your
patient ;  clear  away  the  fecal  matter,  cleanse  the
colon  and  put  it  into  a  healthy  condition  and
give  you  a  foundation  to  work  on  and  a  patient
to  work  with.

The  portable  pad  made  of  hard  rubber,  sani-
tary, easily  sterilized  and  containing  a  chamber
in which  oil  can  be  used.

Now  a  good  flushing  with  warm  sterilized
water  clears  away  the  "wreckage,"  leaving  the
colon  in  a  well  lubricated  and  healthy  condition.
SWEET'S  COLON  BATH  is  only  part  of  our
health  promoter,  as  we  have  in  our  combina-
tion an  Internal  Bath,  a  perfect  hot  water
bottle,  an  excellent  doviche  bag  or  fountain
syringe.  Positively  guaranteed  for  2  years  and
with  ordinary  care  will  last  for  years  longer.

If  it  isn't  SWEET'S  COLON  BATH  it
isn't  a  complete  Internal  Bath,  because  one  of
the  first  essentials  in  an  article  of  this  nature  is
to  know  that  it  is  Sanitary  and  can  be  easily
Sterilized.  No  wood  to  warp,  no  paint  to  rub  ofT,
no  metal  to  corrode  or  rust,  no  valves  to  break
and  get  out  of  order.  Instead,  just  a  plain,
clean,  portable  hollow  hard  rubber  pad  to  con-
nect with  a  ^ood,  big,  rich  comfy  hot  water
bottle  that  will  lull  you  to  sleep  at  night  to
awaken  in  the  morning  exhilarated  and  re-
freshed, with  a  snap  and  ginger  that  spells
efficiency,  ready  to  look  every  human  being
square  in  the  eye  and  thank  the  Great  Master
of  the  Universe,  that  He  put  it  into  the  mind
of  man  to  invent  an  article  that  will  restore  to
health  that  much  abused  organ,  the  Colon,  the
cause  of  so  many  human  ills.

My  dear  Doctor — Will  you  help  to  spread  the
truth?  You  certainly  can  render  an  excellent
service  to  your  patients  with  a  great  good  will.
Order  a  sample  to-day.  Make  it  a  part  of
your  office  equipment.  SWEET'S  COLON
BATH  is  the  last  word  in  internal  bathing.  It
signifies Health, Strength and Happiness.

Write for our special terms and dis-
count to Doctors and Nurses. Order
Now. To-day. Watch for our  .

advertisements in the Herald  cO" 9-  o

of  Health.  Read  what  Dr.  ^"^  . "^ ' \e<  ''^

Lust  says  of  internal  -ft^^  ^  \-''''^^

bathing  in  the  edi-  ^^^  . »%°' s°'^Vi\^'^

torial section  -^V^vnN'' .«.  AoO"^

of  the  Di-
rectory


..c,  5v&4'


oVOc'^^''^,^cet  ^°°


(I tO  ^
. o'^-^c,.


>^\>


^">'


>*


^»^


Free!  This  Valuable  Chart

1000  Copies  of  a

Chart  of  Sinusoidalogy

will  be  distributed  free  to  advertise  the

Ultima No. 3 SINUSTAT
Spinal Therapy Simplified


With  the  sinusoidal  current  you
can  obtain  splendid  results  in  many
chronic  conditions  amenable  to  no
other  measure  such  as  in  Cardiac
Neuroses,  Diseases  of  Women,  Var-
ious Forms  of  Paralysis  (including
Anterior  Poliomyelitis).  Prostatic
Diseases. Hay  Fever, Asthma,  etc.


The  Ultima  No.  3  Sinustat

affords  slow  and  rapid  sinusoidal  cur-
rent, operates  on  A.  C.  or  D.  C.
Special  Offer  to  Drugless  Practition-
ers. Sign  and  mail  the  coupon  today
and  receive  free  chart.

Ultima  Physical  Appliance
Company

136  W.  Lake  Street Chicago,  III.

Gentlemen:

Kindly  send  me  free  cliart  and
description  and  price  of  the  No.  3
SINUSTAT.

Name

Address


1348


Cniucrsal  Xaliirupatluc  Dircclory  and  Ihii/ers'  Guide


Invincible  Heater. For  Ear-
ache, Cramps, Cold Feet,

Hot  Applications,  etc 50

Invincible Heater.  Fuel

Sticks. Per package (10) .60
Lactometers (Milk-Testers).. 1.25
l^rinometers (IVine  -  Testers),
whole  outfits.  $3.00.  $4.00, $6.00

and 10.00

Oxydonor, Victory.  — ■  Order

No. 18, uncovered Cord.. 10.00
Oxydonor, Victory.  —  Order
No. 20, covered Cord and

Case 15.00

Oxydonor, Victory (no ice).
— Order No. 28, uncov-
ered Cord 23.00

Oxydonor, Victory (no ice).
— Order No. 29, covered

Cord 25.00

Panaxora (Disease  Arrester) 2.00

Rubber Bath-Brush 1.00

Rubber Finger Cots 10

Rubber Hot-Water Bottles,
$1.00, $1.50, $2.00 and... 3.00

Rubber  Shampoo Brush 1.50

Rubber Teething Ring 20

Speculums,  large 1.25

Speculums, small 1.00

Steven I'niversal Nebulizer.. 2.50

With foot pump 5.50

Syringes, $1, $2, $3, $5, $6,

$8  and 10.00

The Ideal Leg an<I Back Seat. —
Can be attached to any chair.

$2.50; upholstered $3.00

Toothbrushes, best quality,

25c; imported 0.50  !

Vapor Counter-irritant. For

Nervousness,  Headache.  i

etc 1.50  '

Ulcer  and  Ear  Syringe, $0.40, 0.60


Life  and  Nature Cure Supply

Centre, Tangerine, Fla.
B.  Jones, 516 Federal Bldg.,

Pittsburgh, Pa.
Louis Lust's Health Food Bakery,

100  E. 105th  St.,  New  York,

N.  V.
B.  Lust,  Health  Store,  110  E.  41st

St.,  New  York,  N. Y.
Your Health Supply Co., E. D.

llunsaker, 912 Belmont Ave.,

Chicago, 111.
J. H. Heisser's Health Food

Store, 3012 Humboldt Ave. S.,

Minneapolis, Minn.

SERVICE

The  Houses  and  Service  Stations
listed  below  are  engaged  in  the
business  of  supplying  the  profession
with every requisite of  practice.


Supply Houses

American  Naturopathic  Service.
Booklets,  Circulars,  Announce-
ments, Cards :  prepared  for  the
Drugless  Physician.  We  will  pre-
pare attractive  ads.,  and  write
copy  that  will  bring  patients  to
your  office.

An extensive assortment of
Books,  Periodicals,  Health

Foods,  Health  Garments,  Ameri-
can and  Foreign  Herbs,  Thera-
peutic Apparatus.  We  sell  and
procure  anything  for  the  Dn.:g-
less Physician.

Naturopathic Center, 110 E. 41st
St., New York, N. Y.

Berhalter's Pure Food Supplies.
1423 N. Clark St., Chicago, III

Chiropractic Press, Printing and
Mailing Service. 1124 Foster
Ave., Chicago, 111.

I. W. Long. Drugless Specialties,
no N. High St., Columbus, O.

Louis  Lust — Pure Food. 100 East
105th St., New York, N. Y.
Complete supply of all products
serviceable in the practice of,
and adherence to. Naturopathy.

Nature Cure Publishing Co.

525  S.  Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago,
111.


Film Service

Dr. Thos. J. Allen. Naturopathic
Films. F^ifreka Springs, Ark,


VEGETARIAN, FRUITARIAN

AND NATUROPATHIC

RESTAURANTS. BAKERIES

AND HEALTH FOOD

COMPANIES

The Ceresea Shop, Vegetarian

Bakery and Restaurant, 1240

Fillmore St., San Francisco,

Cal.
Electric Hygienic  Bake Shop, 1411

Polk St., San Francisco, Cal.
The Healtheries Restaurant (Ber-
halter's), 17 N. Wabash Ave.,

Chicago, 111. Food Stores, 19

E. Van Buren St. and 1423 N.

Clark  St., Chicago, 111.
Macfadden Pure Food Restau-
rants, Inc., 141 Fulton St., 296

Broadway; 1162 Broadway,

New  York, N. Y.
Nicola, K. & S., Exporters and

Commission Merchants, 16

Beaver  St., New York,  N. Y.
Pro-Vida Vegetarian Restaurant,

57 Neptuno St., Havana, Cuba.
Physical Culture Restaurants, Inc.,

85 Bleecker  St.;  37  W. 17th  St.;

and  615  6th  Ave.,  New  York;  25

S. 9th St., Philadelphia, Pa.;

37 Richmond St., Toronto, Ont.,

Can., and 127 Farmer  St.,

Detroit, Mich.
Vegetarian Cafeteria, 714 Market

St., San Francisco, Cal.
Vegetarian Cafeteria, 259 S. Hill

St., Los  Angeles. Cal.
Gustav Uez, 596 Clinton Ave.,

W'est Hoboken, New  Jersey.
Winer's Health Food Store, 1176

Market St., San Francisco, Cal.
Yungborn, Pure Food Centre,

Butler,  N.  J.

Kindly mention Directory when ordering merchandise,
niainifaclnrcr's  or  dealer  s  name  obtainable  from  Nuliii


Palmer  Chiropractic  Film  Service.
Chiropractic  Advertising  Filrtig.
Davenport, la.

"The  Spine  in  Its  Relation  to  Dis-
ease.' By  Chas.  F.  Anderson,
A.  B.,  M.  I).,  former  President  of
American  Association  for  the
Study  of  Spondylotherapy.  A
Post  Graduate  Mail  (Toiirse.
Complete  in  20  lectures,  price,
$25.00.  Terms,  $5.00  cash  and
$5.00  monthly.  IHtima  Physical
Appliance  Co..  i:{6  W.  Lake  St.,
Chicago, 111.


Laboratory and Diagnostic Service

Pathological, Bacteriological,
Chemical

Naturopathic Center, 110  East  41st
St., New York, N. Y.

Wassermann  Outfits,  Culture
Media  and  Sterile  Containers  for
sending  specimens  by  mail,  sent
free by Naturopathic Center.

Lindlahr Diagnostic Service.

Complete  Examinations  made  for
Drugless  Physicians.  525  South
Ashland Blvd., Chicago, III.

George  Starr  White,  M. D.

Biodynamo-Chromatic Diagnosis.
327 S. Alvarado St., Los
Angeles. Cal.

J. W. Wigelsworth, N. D.

Biodynamo-Chromatic  Diagnosis.
32 N. State  St., Chicago, III.

Zoe  Johnson Co. "Everything for
the  Drugless  Physician." 1553
W. Madison  St., Chicago, 111.


Lecture and Lyceum Bureaus

National Naturopathic Lecture

Bureau,  110  E.  41st  Street,
New  \"ork,  N.  Y.
Supplies  Lecturers  on  Health
Topics.  Natural  Therapy,  Drug-
less Systems  of  Treatment,
Natural  Living,  Physical  Culture,
Health  Building,  Health  Main-
tenance. For  Public  Meetings,
Clubs,  Societies,  Banquets  and
other  gatherings.  For  particulars,
address:  Naturopathic  Center,
110  E.  41st  St.,  New  York,  N.  Y.
Lindlahr College Lecture Bureau,

Chicago, 111.
Palmer Lyceum and Lecture
Bureau. Palmer  School  of
Chiropractic, Davenport, la.


Psychical  Research  Review

A  new  monthly  sixty-four  page  rnagazine
with  spirit  pictures,  devoted  to  Psychical  Re-
search, Occultism,  Astrology,  Psychology,
Higher Thoughts, and Christian Science.

Prominent  writers  of  Occult  Books  will
contribute articles each month.

Published  by  the  Psychological  Publishine
and  Distributing  Corporation,  109  West  87tli
Street,  New  ^'ork  City.  C.  P.  Christensen.
Editor  and  President  of  the  Psychological
Research Society of New York, Inc.

Subscription  Rates:  In  U.  S.,  per  year
$2.00;  Six  months,  $1.00;  Single  copies,  20c.
Canada, $2.25 ; Foreign countries, $2.50.

(No Free Samples)


Information on any article listed without
ropathic Center. tlO  East 'lUt  SI.. \ew York


Universal  Nntiiropathie  Directory  nncl Biijerw'  (iuiile


1340


United  States  Physicians  Exchange

Everything  a  Physician  Wants

(Excepting  Drugs)

"SPECIALTIES OUR SPECIALTY"
Here  are  some  of  them:

Apparatus — Books — Charts — Vibrators — Sphygmomanometers — Dictionaries

Simplex  Surgeon — Thermometers — Printing — Directories — SIceletons

DeLyte Surgeons — Microscopes — Etc., Etc.

ISo  matter  what  you  want,  we  are  here  to  serve  you. Write  us  about  it.

Let's  get  acquainted.


JOIN THE U.  S.  P. E. IT SAVES YOU MONEY.
Ask  for Prospectus. — It is Free.

Printing and Engraving Department. Strictly Up-To-Date.

300 Professional Cards, $1.00, and a Card-Case Free.

Send us your printing orders

UNITED  STATES  PHYSICIANS  EXCHANGE

600  ELLICOTT  SQUARE  BUFFALO, N. Y.


INSTRUCTION


DR. A. MATIJACA

Author  of
"Principles  of  Electro-Medicine,  Electro-Surgery
and Radiology, gives a thorough instruction
in  the

PRACTICE

of
ELECTRO-MEDICINE, ELECTRO-
SURGERY and RADIOLOGY
Certificate awarded

For further particulars, address:

DR. A. MATIJACA

Electropathic Physician and Roentgenologist

413 Cass  Street  Joliet, 111.


HEALTH  AND  LONG  LIFE

Secured by the use of

A  Famous  Botanical Drug  Substitute
FLAXOLYN is a remedy for all stomach ail-
rnents, liver trouble, constipation, gall stones and
kidney  trouble.

It  is  a  food  tonic  and  tissue  builder,  not  a  patent
medicine.

Prepared of eatable herbs, roots and pulverized
fruits, scientifically compounded with flaxseed.

It builds up the system. No diet is necessary
with the  use of  FLAXOLYN.

$1.00 a Box, Prepaid
Money  refunded  if  not  satisfied  with  Flaxolyn

FLAXOLYN,  INC.

DR. H. LUNTZ
37 Vernon  Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Agents wanted on liberal commission basis


Health  i^^^
Information
Department


.


We  are  prepared  to  give  our
readers  any  desired  information
regarding  preservation  of  health
and  beauty.  Naturopath}',  sani-
tariums, health  resorts,  literary
works,  vegetarianism,  physi-
cians, masseurs,  masseuses,
nurses,  societies,  etc.,  as  well  as
every  other  topic  connected
with  Naturopathy.  Upon  re-
ceipt of  twenty-five  cents  in
postage  stamps,  to  cover  run-
ning expenses,  postage,  etc.,  the
information  will  be  given  by  re-
turn mail.  Naturopathic  advice
for  home  treatment  regarding
cures  of  maladies  will  be  ren-
dered upon  receipt  of  $2.00  in
stamps or money order.

NATUROPATHIC EXCHANGE
Vungborn  Butler,  N.  J.


1350


UniverNHl  Naturopathic Directory and Buyers' Guide


Pfamr  $eb.  Kneipp'sdie  Spezialltaten


sind  luis  den  Pflaixzenmitteln  Sr.  Ilochwiirden
des  Herrn  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipp  in  Wdrishofen
hcrgcstellt  und  wiirde  von  ihni  in  Anerkennuns
der  Echtheit  und  (iiite  den  Verfeitigern  dieser
Heilniittel,  dcr  I'irnia  ObcrhJiusscr  &  LandaiR-r
in  NViirzburg,  das  ausschliessliche  Alleinrechl  fiir
In-  und  Ausland  zu  deren  Herstellung  und  Be-
nennung  erfeilt,  so  dass  laut  Vertrag  uiit  Henn
Pfarrer  Kneip^p  niemand  ausser  tins  Ileilmiltel
und  Toiletteinittel  als  Kneippsche  bezeichnen  oder
mit  seinem  Namen  oder liild  versehen  darf. Ge-


gen Nachahnier miissen wir daher mit aller ge-
richtlichen Strenge  vorgehen  1

Man  merke :  Alle  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Heil-
niittel nehnie  man  beim  Kauf  nur  dann  an,  wenn
sie  die  Firnia :  Oberhausser  &  Landauer,  sowic
eine  der  auf  dom  Titelblatl  abgebildeten  Schutz-
warken  enlhaiten,  welche  allein  fiir  die  Giite  der
Ware,  sowie  dafiir  biirgen,  dass  man  wirklich
die  echten  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Heilmittel  er-
balt,  da  viel  Missbrauch  mit  dem  Namen  Kneipp
getrieben wird.


Vom  Kaiserl.  Deutschen  Patentamt  und  in  den  Vereinigten  Staaten
sind  uns  gesetzlich  geschUtzt:  Bilder  und  Namenszug  Kneipps  und  die
Namen:  Kneipp,  Kneipphaus,  Sebastian,  Augentrost,  Magentrost,  Gicht=
trost,  Hustentrost,  Nerventrost,  Bluttrost,  Tormentol  etc.  fiir  Heilmittel
und  Toilettemittel,  Hustenbonbons,  Fruchtsafte  und  Kraftnahrmittel  etc.,
Alkoholfreie  Weine,  Krauter-  u.  Beeren=Essige  etc.
Die  Pfarrer  Kneipp  Heilmittel  und  Toilettemittel  sind  keine  Geheimmittel,  sondern
REINE  aus den Kneipp' schen Krautern hergestellte NATURHEILMITTEL


Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Arnikasalbe  dient  als  Heil-
salbe  bei  Wundsein,  Ausscliliigen  und  fiir
Wunden.  Die  Blechschachtel  kostet  portofrei
40 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Augentrost  wird  benutzt
als  Augenwasser  bei  Aiigenleiden  und  Entziin-
dungen  der  Augen,  denen  Augenkatarrhe,
schwiiriges  NVundsein  und  Scbwiichezustande
zugrunde  liegen.  Man  wiseht  dreimal  tiiglich
die  leidenden  Augen  aus,  indeni  man  ein  lei-
nenes  sauberes  Tuch  oder  reine  Watte  mit  dem
5  fach  mit  Wasser  verdiinnten  Augentrost  be-
feuchtet !  1-laschchen  portofrei  GO  Cents.  Gros-
sere portofrei .$1.10.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Blntreinigungslee  dient  als
Blutreinigungsmittel  und  wirkt  wohltuend  auf
den  Stuhlgang.  Bei  einer  durchgreifenden
Blutreinigungskur,  die  besonders  bei  Hautaus-
schlagen,  Hautjucken,  Flechten  und  Gicht  an-
gezeigt  ist,  muss  dieser  Tee  langere  Zeit  hin-
durch  im  Vereine  mit  der  Kneippschen  Was-
seranwendung  gebraucht  werden.  Ein  Paket  mit
genauer  Gebrauchsanweisuiig,  ca.  acht  Tage
reichend,  kostet  portofrei  40  Cents.  1  Doppel-
karton  portofrei 70 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  blutbildende  Tropfen  ■ —
Bluttrost.  Diese  Tropfen  dienen  besonders
blutarnien  schwachen  Personen  und  Bekon-
valeszenten  zur  Hebung  des  Appetits  und  der
Korperkrafte.  1  Flasche  mit  Gebrauchsanwei-
sung  portofrei .$1.10.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Choleratropfen  gegen  Diarr-
hoe,  Brecbdurchfall,  Cholerine  und  Cholera.
Man  nimmt  4 — 5  mal  tagllch  1  Kaffeeloffel
voU. Das Flaschchen kostet portofrei .$1.10.

Kneipps  Entfeltungstee.  Vorziiglich  wirksam,  70
Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Familien-Gesundheitstee.
Dieser  bildet  ein  Vermachtnis  des  Herrn  Pra-
laten  Kneipp  fiir  die  Familie.  Er  enthalt  nur
deutsche  Kneipp'sche  Krauter  und  ersetzt  den
echten  chinesischen  Tee,  vor  welchem  er  den
Vorzug  hat,  dass  er  .die  Nerven  nicht  erregt
und  viel  billiger  ist.  Dureh  die  eigenartige
Preparation  und  Mischung  schmeckt  er  ganz
ahnlich  wie  chinesischer  Tee  und  wird  ebenso
wie  dieser  bereitet  und  getrunken.  Es  gibt
Probepakete  zu  10  Cents,  sowie  zu  125  g  fiir  40
Cents und 2.50 g zu 70 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Fenchelhonig.  Anwendung
und  Wii'kung  wie  die  des  Spitzwegerichsafts
mit  Malzextrakt.  Preis  der  FI.  35  Cents  und
60 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Fichtennadelhonig  dienl
gegen  lang  andauernden  Husten,  Brustkatarrh,
Influenza  etc.  Das  Flaschchen  mit  Gebrauchs-
anweisung kostet 60 Cents.


Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Frangula-E.xtrakl.  Unter
diesem  Namen  stellen  wir  cinen  Auszug  aus
der  Faulbaumrinde,  dem  Kreuzdorn  und  Rha-
barber  her,  welcher  vornehnalich  auch  solchen
Personen  dienen  soil,  welche  keine  Pillen  neh-
men  konnen  und  ein  sicher  und  mild  abftih-
rend  wirkendes  Mittel  fiir  den  regelmassigen
Sluhlgang  bediirfen.  Erwachscne  soUen  abends
vor  dem  Schlafengehen  1  bis  2  Kaffeeloffel
voll,  grossere  Kinder  yi  Kaffeeloffel  voll  neh-
mcn.  Ganz  kleinen  Kindern  gibt  man  als  Ab-
fiihrmittel  entweder  etwas  Schleebliitentee  oder
Mannasaft  oder  Rhabarbersaft  oder  Kreuzdorn-
beerensaft  bei  Bedarf  1  Kaffeeloffel  voll.  1
Flaschchen kostet 60 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Frilhstiickstee  in  Paketen
zu  15,  40  und  70  Cents,  besser  als  dieser
schmeckt  der  Familiengesundheitstee  in  Pake-
ten  zu  gleichem Preis.

Kneipp-Gallensteintee.  Bewahrtes  Mittel  bei
Gallenstein-  und  Leberleiden.  1  Paket  kostet
70 Cents.

Gehordl.  Bei  Ohrensausen,  Schwerhorigkeit  und
Ohrenkatarrh  tropft  man  taglich  zweimal  einige
Tropfen  in  das  Ohr  und  vcrschliesst  dasselbe
mit  etwas  Watte.  Bei  Ohrenkatarrh  oder  bei
Vorhandensein  von  vertrocknetem  Ohrenschmalz
lasse  man  vorher  das  Ohr  mit  lauwarniem
Wasser  dreimal  taglich  jedesnial  dreimal  nach
einander  ausspritzen.  1  Flaschchen  Gehorol
kostet 50 Cents. 1 Spritzchen dazu 40 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Gicht-  und  Rheumatismus-
mittel  dient  als  Einreibung  gegen  gichtische
und  rheumatische  Schmerzen.  1  Flasche  mit
Anweisung kostet 60 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Gicht-  und  Rheumatismus-
tee.  Dieser  antirheumatische,  antiarthritische,
blutreinigende  Tee  dient  gegen  Gicht  und  Rheu-
matismus  und  wird  gleichzeitig  mit  dem  Pfar-
rer Kneipps  Gicht-  und  Rh'eumatismus-Einrei-
bungsmittel  gebraucht.  Das  Paket  kostet  40
Cents und 70 Cents.

Kneipp-Gummi-Lakritzbonbons.  Diese  vorziig-
lich schmeckendcn  Hustenbonbons  haben  sich
vorzuglich  bewahrt  bei  Husten,  Heiserkeit  und
alien  Katarrhen  der  Atmungsorgane.  Sie  sind
zu  haben  in  Blechschachtcln  zu  25  Cents  und
Springdosen zu 40 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Heidelbeerbldtterpillen  be-
nutzt man  bei  Znckerharnrnhr  (Diabetes  melli-
tus).  Die  Schachtel  mit  Anweisung  kostet  52
Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Hustenbonbons.  Diese  aus
den  Extrakten  der  besten  Kneipp'schen  Krauter
liergestellten  Hustenbonbons  sind  vorzuglich
bewfihrt  bei  Husten,  Heiserkeit,  Rachenkatarrh
etc. Die Blechschachtel  kostet  25 Cents.


Bestellungen  sind  zu  rlchten  an:

KNEIPP-CENTRALE .-. BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


Univer$ial  Nnturopiithie  Directory  and  Buyers'  Guide


1301


Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Ildnujrrhoidal-  und  Magen-
pulver.  Dieses  Pulver  beniitzen  Personen,
welche  an  Udmorrhoiden,  Windsucht,  Gelb-
sucht,  BJahungen,  saureni  Aufstossen,  Sodbren-
nen,  Verstonfung,  schlethter  Verdautmg  und
Appetitlosigkeit  leidpn.  Kine  Schachtel  niit  Ge-
brauchsiiinvrisung kostct ()3 Ceiils.

lieste  IJuslentropfcn  ..llttstentro.st".  Wirkuiig  wie
die  des  Hustentei-s.  I'lasclien  niit  Gebrauchs-
anweisung tO und 00 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Heidelbeerfritchtpillen  die-
nen  gegen  Diavrhoen  Erwachsener  sowie  audi
von  Kindern.  Die  Schaciitel  niit  Anweisung
kostet 52-  Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Bibernelle-Bonbons.  20
Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Malzextrakt-Bonbons.  20
Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Spitzwegerich-Bonbons.
Diese  3  verschiedenen  Hustenbonbons  sind  niit
den  entspreclienden  Extrakten  kunstgerecht  her-
gestellt  und  werden  niit  grossem  Erfolg  bei
Husten,  Heiserkeit,  Brust-  und  Halsleiden,  Ka-
tarrlien  der  Atmungsorgane  etc.  angewendet.
Alle  3  Sorten  sind  in  Beuteln  zu  20  Cents  zu
haben  und  kann  daher  jedermann  durch  Pro-
bieren  diejenige  Sorte  finden,  welche  ihm  am
bestcn  zusagt.  Die  Spitzwegerich-Bonbons  sind
auch  in  Blechschachteln  zu  25  und  40  Cents
zu  haben.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Hiistentee  wird  benutzt  bei
Katarrhen  der  Atmungsorgane,  und  dient  auch
Brust-,  Hals-  und  Lungenleidenden.  Pakete  zu
40  Cents  und  70  Cents  enthalten  genaue  Ge-
brauchsanweisung.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Kalendiilasalbe  dient  als
Heilsalbe  fiir  verschiedene  Wunden.  Eine
Blechschachtel kostet 40 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Keuchhustensaft.  Dieser
aus  Thyniian  und  Kastanienextrakt  mit  noch
anderen  hustenstillenden  Krautern  hergestellte
Saft  dient  vornehmlich  Kindern  bei  dem  lasti-
gen  Keuchhusten.  Das  Flaschchen  mit  Ge-
brauchsanweisung kostet 60 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Knochenmehle.  1.  Das
weisse  Pulver  dient  nach  Kiieipp  gegen  Nervosi-
tat,  Migrane,  Kopfweh,  Bleichsucht,  Blutarmut,
Veitstanz etc. 55 Cents.

2.  Das graiie Pulver gegen Lungen-, Blasen-
und  Nierenleiden. 55 Cents.

3.  Das schwarze Pulver fiir skrofulose und
knochenschwache Kinder. 55 Cents.

Von  alien  diesen  3  Sorten  nehmen  Erwachsene
dreimal  taglich  eine  grosse,  Kinder  dreimal
taglich  eine  Messerspitze  voll,  wahrend  der
Mahlzeit  in  der  Suppe  oder  im  Wasser  etc.
Preis  per  Biichse  55  Cents,  500  Gramni  kostet
$2.00.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Krampftee  und  Krampf-
tropfen  gegen  Krampfe  des  Unterleibes,  be-
sonders  der  Frau  wahrend  des  Unwohlseins
etc.  Man  nimmt  dreimal  taglich  1  Kaffee-
loffel  voll  Krampftropfen  in  einer  Tasse  voll
Krampftee.  Tee  und  Tropfen  kosten  je  40
Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Magenpulver.  Wirkung  und
Gebrauch  wie  die  des  Magentrost.  1  Schachtel
65 Cents.

Kneipps  Magentee.  Vorziiglich  bewahrt  bei  Ma-
genbeschweiden,  schlechter  Verdauung,  Appetit-
losigkeit, Blahungen,  Magenkrampfen  etc.  Zu
haben in Paketen zu 40 und 70 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Magentrost  dient  gegen
schlechte  Verdauung,  Schwdche  des  Magens.
Appetitlosigkeit,  Uebelsein,  saures  Aufstossen,
Erbrechen,  Magenkrampfe,  Blahungen,  Leib-
weh,  Kater  etc.  Flaschen  zu  50  Cents,  $1.10,
$1.20  und  $3.00  enthalten  genaue  Gebrauchsan-
weisung.

Kneippmittel  zur  Blutstillung  ist  hergestellt  aus
Tormentillwurzel.  Man  nimmt  bei  Unterleibs-,
Hamorrhoidal-  oder  Lungenblutungen  bis  zur
Ankunft  des  .\rztes  jede  Stunde  je  einen  Kaf-
feeloffel  voll  in  etwas  Wasser,  bis  die  Blutung
nachlasst. 1 Glas kostet $1.10.

Kneipp  Xerventee.  Zur  Beruhigung  der  Nerven
bei  Nervosltat,  Schlaflosigkeit,  Herzklqpfen,
Aufgeregthelt etc. Das Paket kostet 70 Cents.


Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneijjps  (Servenberuhiger)  Seroen-
trost  gegen  Nervosltat  und  Schlaflosigkeit.
Preis  der  rlasche  mit  einer  Abhandlung  iiber
Schlaflosigkeit und Nervenleiden, $1.10.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  lieisetropfen  gegen  Magen-
stdiungen  auf  der  Rcise.  1  Flaschc  mit  Anwei-
sung kostet $1.10.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Spitzwegerichsaft  mil
Malzcxirakt  dient  als  Husten-  und  Brustsaft.
Flaschen  zu 60 Cents und $2.00.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Tannenzapfen-Honig  wird
benutzt  bei  Halsleiden,  HeiserKeit,  Husten  etc.
Man  nimmt  drei-  bis  viermal  taglich  1  Kaffee-
loffel  voll  rein  oder  in  Milch.  Die  Flasche  ko-
stet CO  Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Taschen-,  Reise-  und  Haus-
Apotheke  enthalt  in  herrlicher  Zusammenstel-
lung  und  hiibscher  Aufmachung  (Zigarrenetui-
form)  14 — 16  Artikel  mit  genauer  Gebrauchsan-
weisung  zum  bequemen,  sofortigen  Gebrauch
und  ist  fast  unentbehrlich  fiir  die  Reise  und
zu  Hause!  Hochst  passend  und  wertvoll  als
Geschenk  kostet  eine  solche  $1.00.
Grossere  Taschen-  und  Reise-.Xpotheke  mit
Wegweiser  $2.00,  $3.00  und  4.00.
Grossere  Haus-Apotheken  im  Preise  von  $10,
15,  20  und $25 in  hiibschen  Holzschranken.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Wassersuchtstee  dient  als
wassertreibendes  Mittel  bei  Wassersucht,  Nie-
ren-  und  Blasenleiden  (Stein  und  Gries).  Paket
mit  genauer  Gebrauchsanweisung  zu  40  Cents
und 70 Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Wermutaugensalbe.  Gegen
Augentriibungen  und  Augenschwache.  Das
Gliischen  mit  genauer  Gebrauchsanweisung  ko-
s^t mit GlasstJibchen  zum  Einstreichen  50  Cts.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Didtetischer  \dhr-  und
Krafttee  wurde  von  Pfarrer  Kneipp  in  ausge-
dehntem  Masse  angewendet,  so  speziell  bei  Re-
konvaleszenten,  schwachen  und  blutarmen  Per-
sonen, zur  Hebung  des  Appetits  und  der  Kor-
perkrafte.  Das  Paket  dieses  vorziiglichen  Nahr-
tees  kostet  mit  Anweisung  40  Cents.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Wiihlhuber  Nr.  I.  Dieser
Tee  wirkt  kraftig  abfiihrend  und  befreit  den
Magen  und  Darm  von  Schleim.  Er  soil  nur
selten  genommen  werden,  d.  h.  nur  wenn  es
notig  ist,  abends  vor  dem  Schlafengehen  eine
Tasse  voll,  indem  man  auf  eine  Tasse  kochen-
den  Wasser  '/< — 1  Kaffeeloffel  voH  hiervon
nimmt;  nach  ^  Stunde  langem  Stehen  seiht
man  durch  und  trinkt  diesen  Absud  kalt  oder
warm. Die Blechdose kostet 50c., Pillen 52c.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Wiihlhuber  Nr.  II  wirkt
schwacher  abfiihrend  als  Nr.  I,  jedoch  mehr  auf
die  Niere  und  Blase,  weshalb  er  speziell  bei
Anfangern  der  Wassersucht,  Beschwerden  beim
Urinieren  und  Brennen  in  Blase  und  Niere  etc.
angewendet  wird.  Er  wird  bereitet  wie  Wiihl-
huber Nr.  I.  Die  Blechdose  kostet  50  Cents.
In  Pillenform  52  Cents.  Frauen-Tee,  nicht  so
stark  wie  Wiihlhuber,  40  Cents.
NB.  Wer  Wiihlhuber  nicht  trinken  kann,  was
wegen  des  bitteren  Geschmackes  auch  nicht
leicht  ist,  wende  statt  des  Nr.  I  und  Nr.  II
stets  die

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Pillen  an;  diese  sind  leicht
und  bequem  zu  nehmen  und  wirken  wie  beide
Tees,  da  alle  Stoffe  des  Wiihlhuber  Nr.  I  und  II
mit  Rhabarber  rationell  darin  verbunden  sind.
Die  Kneipps  Pillen  wirken  sicher  bei  schlech-
tem  Stuhlgang  und  wegen  ihres  Rhabarberge-
haltes  dabei  noch  giinstig  auf  den  Magen,  so
dass  sie  sich  vornehmlich  zu  langandauerndem
Gebrauche  eignen!  Sie  sind  cin  blutreinigendes
magenstdrkendes  Abfiihrmittel;  enthalten  nur
reine  pflanzliche  Stoffe  und  werden  deshalb  be-
niitzt  bei  anhaltender  Verstopfung,  schlechter
Verdauung.  Hdmorrhoidal-Beschwerden  und
Blutanstauungen,  besonders  geeignet  fiir  Frau  en
bei  Leiden,  die  ihren  Grund  in  tragem  Stuhl-
gange  und  schlechter  Verdauung  haben.  Eine
Blechschachtel  mit  60  Stiick  und  genauer  Ge-
brauchsanweisung kostet 52 Cents.

Kneipp-Tee  gegen  Zuckerharnruhr.  Dieser  leistet
ganz  hervorragende  Dienste.  1  Paket  kostet
70 Cents.


Bestellungen  sind  zu  richten  an:

KNEIPP-CENTRALE  BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


1' iii\  tTNiil \u(ur«|>utliif Directory uud Buyer.H* Guide


€d)te  Pfarrcr  $eb.  Rn«lpp'$(bc
Beilmimi  und  toilemmimi

Die  Pfarrer  Kneipp  Heilmittel  und  Toilettemittel  sind keine Geheimmittel, sondern
REINE  aus den Kneipp' schen Krautern hergestellte NATURHEILMITTEL


Uedetabilleti,  S^ftCt  Oele

Preis in Cents, per 100 Gramm cinschliesslifli
Porto unci Verpackung.

Agava,  geschnitten  oder  pulversiert 45

Alantu'tirzel (Inula Helenium) 40

Alaun, pulverisiert, ganz rein 30

A  lexandrinatee 40

Aloe, pulverisiert oder geschnitten 40

Ampher (Runiex acet.) 40

Angelica (Engelwur/), geschnitten 40

Angelica, pulverisiert 45

Anis, in ganzen Friichten 30c'., pulverisiert..  45

Anisol, bestes 10 g  25

Anserine (Gansefingerkraut ) 30

Arnikabliiten 40c., Ainikaol 60

Attichbldtter, geschnitten ,;  30

Attichwurzel, geschnitten, echt 40

Attich, pulverisiert 45

Augentrost 30c., pulverisiert 35

Pdrentranbe. geschnitten 30

Haldrianwurzel, geschnitten 35

Haldrianwurzel, pulverisiert 45

Hanilnnmnmittel, sicher wlrk. fiir Kinder.  .$1.00
fiir Erwachsene.  ..'fl.50

Berberitzenbeeren 35

hibernellewurzel (Pimpinella) 35

liirkcnblatler (1 Pfd. 80 Cents) 30

Bitterklee. geschnitten 30

Hohnenschalenlee. 1 Pfd. $1.00 40

liorsalbe,  1 Blechbiichse  25 Cents

Brennesselbldtter. geschnitten 35

Hrennesselwnrzel. geschnitten 35

BrombeerbUitter, 1 Pfd. 80 Cents 30

Cold-Cream, 1 Blechbiichse 25 Cents

Dornschlehbliilen 35

Eberwiirzel, geschn. oder pulv 35

Ehrenpreis (Veronica) 30

Eibischwurzel, geschnitten 35

Eichenrinde, geschnitten, 1 Pfd. 45, 1 Kg.  80  30

Eisenkraut (Verbena) 30

Enzianwurzel. geschn. 30, pulv 40

EpheusafI 50,0  =  60 Cents

ErdbeerbUitter. geschnitten, Pfd. 85 Cents..  30

Faulbaumrinde,  1 Pfd. 85 Cents 35

Fenchel. 30 Cents, pulverisiert 35

Fenchelol, 20 g Fl. 25 Cents

Fichtennadelextract. Pfd. 75c., 2 Pfd. .'!;1.50..  60
Fichlenlohextract. 1 Kg.-Kanne .$1.50, 10 Kg.

(22 lbs.) *9.75 60

Fichteuloh und Lohlanninrinden. 1 Pfd. 40,

5 Pfd. .<«1.50

Foenuni graecmu (Bockshornklce) pulv. oder

geschnitten, per Pfd. 15 Cents 35

Frauentee, milder Avie Wiihlhuber 40

Gdnsebliimchentee 35

(iancliheil gcgen Verdauungsniangel 35

Gazemullbinclen, 5 ni lang, in Breitc v. 1.  6,

8 u. 10 cm zu 60c

Ginster (Genista tinctoria) 30

OrUne Seife gegen Kratze, Dose 35

(iundelrebe, Gundermann 40

llafer.itroh. geschn., 1 Pfd. 35 Cents 30

Ilaferstrohextrakt 60

Ilugebutten 30

llagebuttenkerne 30

Ilaidekraut 30

llarzkfirner (Weihrauch) 40


Ilaselunirzpulver (Asar europ.  i 40

IJaiihechelirurzel, geschnitten 35

Heidelbeeren, getrocknet 30

IJeidelbeerblatler (gegen Zuckerharnruhr)

1 Pfd. 85 Cents 30

Ileidelbeeevsaft (Sirup) CO

llerba Sanla (Heiliges Kraut  I 40

lleublumen, 1 Pfd. ,'{0 Cents, 1 Postkolli—

9'/2 Pfd. franko  od.  gegen Nachnahme  .*2.50

Hexenscliusspfla.ster. 1 St. 20 Cents

Ilirtentdschelkraiit 30

Hirsenspreu fiir Kissen, gegen Aufliegen,

1 Pfd. 35 Cents 30

Ilirschtalg  niit Salicyl, geg. wunde Schweiss-

I'iisse, 1 Stiick 25 Cents

Hohlzahn, geschnitten 30

llolliin'derbeeren 30

Holliinderbldtter. geschnitten 30

Hollunderblitten 35

Ilolundersaft,  dick 6()

HoUunderwurzel 35

Honig, gereinigt und dickfliissig, 1 Pfd 30

Hiihneraugenpflaster, 1 Couv. 10 Cents

Hiihneraugentinktnr 30

Hiihnerdarm (Stern- u. Miiusekraut) 35

Hiihnerdarmsaft (vzl. Brusts.) 60

Huflattighldller. ganz oder geschnitten ....  30

Hiiflattigbldtter. pulverisiert 35

Huflaltigbliiten 40

Johannisbeerbldtter, schwarz 30

.Johanniskraut, geschnitten 30

Johanniskraiit, pulverisiert 45

Josephskrdiitlein (Basilicum) 40

Isldndisch Moos 40

Kalnniswurzel. 35c., pulverisiert 45

Kamillenbliiten 30

Kampferol CO

Kardobenediktenkraut 35

Kastanienpuli'er (Schnupfenmittel) 20  g  25  C.

Klettenkraut oder Wurzel 35

Kohlenstaub, aus Lindenkohle 30

Kreidemehl, bestes, priizipitiert 35

Kreuzdornbeeren 30

Kiimniel, pulverisiert 35

Ktimmelol,  20 g 30 Cents 60

Kiirbiskerne 30

Lanolin-Cream gegen Wundsein u. aufgespr.

HJinde,  1 Blechbiichse  25 Cents

Lavendelblitlcn 35

Lavendelol. feinstes, 20 g 25 Cents 60

Lehm,  1  Pfd.  35  Cents 30

Lehmsalbe, 200 g 40 Cents

Leinsamenniehl, Yz Kilo  40  Cents 25

Lindenbliiten 30

Loivenzahnwurzel 35

Lungenkraut 30

Malefizol.  extrastark  .$1.05;  1  kleine  Tlasche.  .  55

malvenbliiten 35

Mandelol 60

Mausohrle "15

Melissenbldtter 40

!\linze (Pfeffer- oder Wasser-Minze) geschn.  30

pulverisiert 45

Mistel, geschnitten 35

Nelkenol.  20  g  25 Cents 60

Nelkenwurz (Geum unbanum) 40

Nussblatter (Juglnns regia) 30

Pechpflaster.  1 Stttck  20  Cents

Petersilienwurzel 40


Bestellungen  sind  zu  richten  an:


KNEIPP-CENTRALE


BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


UnlTerttal Naturopathic  Directory  anil  Bujerw*  (iuUic


13S3


Pfefferminzol,  20  g  25 Cents 60

I'feffcnninzkugclcheu 40

Quendelkraut {Seipylluni) 35

Raute :{0

liaulendl. 20 g 25 Cents 60

ningelblumen (Calendula^ 30

lilturbarberwurzel, geschn. u. pulverislert .  .  35

Rosmarin (gepulvert 10 Cents) 30

Salatdl (bestes Olivenol) 60

Salbei, 30c., pulverisierl 10

Sanikel (Heildolde) 30c.,  pulverisiert 40

Santel, pulverisiert 40

Sarsaparillwurzel, beste 50

Sassafras 30

Schafgarbenbliilen 30

Schlehensaft gcgen Husten 00

Schliisselbluinen, 50 g 45 Cents 90

Schliisselblninenivarzel 45

Senfkdrner, gelb oder schwa r/ 30

Senfpapier, 1 Blatt 5 Cents

Sennesbldtter  .  35

Spickol. 20 g 25 Cents 60

Spilzwegerich .30

Spitzivegerichsaft niit Honig 60

Spitzwegerichsaft mit Mal/extrakt 60

Stiefmiilterchentee 30

Siissholz 30

Tannenspilzen (Fichtcnreiser  i 25

Tannenzapfenol.  cchl.  20  g  25  Cents 60

Taubnesselbliilen, 50 g 60 Cents 95

Tausendguldenkraut 50

Thymian 30

Ton-Lehm. fnst. 1 Pfd. 30 Cents 25

Tormentill-Creani xu 50 u. 75 Cents

Tormentillwiirzel . 35c., pulverisiert 45

Tormentillziicker 55

Vaseline.  1 Blechbiichse  20  Cents

VeUchenblatter. geschnitten 30

Veilchenwurzel, geschnitten 45

Verbandwatte in Pak. von 25, 40, 60 und

75 Cents

Vogelknolerich, (Polyg. avic.) 35

Wachholderbeeren, 1 Pfd. 50 Cents 25

Wachholderbeeren, pulverisiert 35

Wachholderol, 20  g  25 Cents 60

Wachholderbeersaft.  bester 60

Wachholderspitzen 30

Waldmeister. geschnitten 30

Wallwurz, (Beinwell, Symphytum officinale  I  35

Wegtritt (Polyg. aviculare) 30

W egwartkraut , geschnitten 30

WegwartwurzeV, geschnitten 35

Wermut. 30c., pulverisiert 35

Wermntpillen.  100  Stiick  52  Cents

Wermutol,  20  g  25  Cents 60

Wollkraut 30

Wollkrautbliiten rWoHblume) 50

Wiihlhuberpillen.  100  St. Nr.  I  oder  II  52 C.


W'unusihokoludc. 1 Sch. 25 Cents ..■•

Zahnwehlrupfen. d. I'l. 25 Cents

JAnnkrunl. geschnitten oder gan/ 2.1

yjnnkraut.  geschn.  1 Pfd.  55  Cents .••

7Annkraut. 9'2 Pfd.=-1 Postkolli franko oder

gegen Nachnahme .?4.50

Ausser  den  hier  genannten  Krautern  habnn
wlr  noch  eine  sehr  grosse  Anzahl  anderer  in
NaturheilbUchern  genannter  Krauter,  Wurzeln
etc.,  wie  sie  im  Kneipp-Teebuchlcin  am  hnde
desselben  aufgefuhrt  sind,  in  echter  Ware  zu
ahnlichen  Preisen  (racist  35  Cents  portofren,
vorratig


CInkturen,  Gxtrakte

Preis in Cents, per 100 Gramm porlofrei
Porto und Verpucknng frei

Angelikatinktur •}'*

.\  rnikatinktiir '"'J^

Augentrosttinktur "»'

Baldriantinktur 60

Hibernelletinktur oit

liitterkleetinktur •  •.•  •  ''"

Bohnenschalenextrakt (grgc" Giclit- und Nic-

renleiden) V'

Enziantinktur j!''

Fichtennadelextrakt Jj"

Gdnsefingerkrauttinktnr «"

Ginstere.rtrakt ^"

Ilagebuttentinktur |J"

Haferstrobextrakl »"

Ileidelbeertinktur 60

Heiiblumenextrakt ""

Hiihneraugentinktur. 1 I'l. 30 Cents

Hundszungentinktur '»'

Johanniskrautiinklur »(

Kalmustinktur JJjJ

Kamillentropfen Jjjj

Kampferspiritns 60

Loffelkrautspiritus 60

Myrrhentinktur Jj6

Pfefferminzgeist, bester 60

Rautentinktnr 66

Rosmarintinktur 60

Rosmarinwein 60

Salbeitinktur 60

Tausendgnldenkrauttinktur 60

Tormentilltinktur 60

Wachholderbeertinklur 60

Wermuttinktiir 60

M'egwarttinktnr 60

Wermutwein 60

Wunderbalsam. 1 Glas 35 Cents

Zinnkraiittinktur u. -Ertrakt 60


Die  bekantitcsteti  Kneipp^nabrtnittel


PER
POST

Alkoholfreier Wein. Pint 40c Quart  80  95

Echte  Neufundldnder  Lebertran-Enmlsion
mit  knochen-  und  blutbildenden Nahr-

salzen i/t Kilo  60  70

Aechter Bienenhonig 30  40

California Black Mission Figs. ..Packet  25  35

Erbsenmehl 1 Paket  25  35

Frucht-Marmelade 25  40

Gerstenmehl 1 Paket  25  35

Glutenbrod (Kleber) per Brot  10  20

Friihstilcksnahriing, allerbesto, 25  35

Hafermehl 1 Paket  25  35

Uafergries mit Nahrsalz 1 Pfund  30  40

riafergriitze 1 Paket  25  35

Haferschrotflocken neuc

(gibt eine  vorziigliche  Suppei 1 Pfund  20  30

Pflanzenmilch (Muttermilchersatz  i 70  85

Haferndhrbiscuits 1 Paket  35  40

Kneipp-Kraftbrot per Brot  10  20

Kneipp Kraftschrotzwieback ...A Paket  15  25


Kneipp \uss- und Fruchtbrod .  .per Brot

Kleie,  beste 1 Paket

Kraftsuppenmehl 1 Pfund

Linsenmehl 1 Paket

\dhrsalz-Pflanzenpulver.  nat.  No.  I  od.  II  1.

\dhrsalz-Kakao. nat ^i Kilo

Ndhrsalz-Kakao ^-2 Kilo  1

l^'dhrsalz-Haferkakao ^i Kilo

Sdhrsalz-Haferkakao '2 Kilo

Katiirlicbe Pflanzen-\dhrsalz-Schokolade

1^4 Kilo

Olivenol Quart  1 ,

Eichelkaffee 1 Pfund

Feigenkaffee. reinster '^ Pfund

Gesundheitskaffee ( Eichelnialz-Xdhrkaf-

fee\ 1 Pfund

Kathreiners Kneipp-Malzkaffee. 1 Paket

Kornkaffee 1 Pfund

Malzkaffee, echten,  hiesigen ....1 Pfund
W'eizenmalz-Kaffee in Kornern, 1 Paket


PKR

POST

25

35

10

15

25

35

25

35

00  1.05

50

60

.00  1.10

45

50

90  1.00

50

55

00  -

.15

35

45

20

30

35

15

25

35

25

35

15

25

25

35

Bestellungen  sInd  zu  richten  an:

KNEIPP-CENTRALE .-. BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


1354


VnlverMnl ^nturopnthic- Director} uiiil UuyerK' Oulde


Pfarrer  $eb*  Kneipp'scbe  Coilettemittel


a)  Fllr  die  Haarpflege  gegen  Ausfallen  der  Haare
und  Schuppenbilduug  euipfichlt  Pfarrer  Kneipp
das

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Brennessel-Haarwasser.
Dieses  ist  wohl  das  beste  Toilettenhaarwasser
der  Gegenwart  infolge  der  wohlfuenden  \Vir-
kung  auf  die  Kopfhaut  und  die  Fordcrung  des
Haarwuchses.  Es  erhiilt  die  Haare  locker  und
geschmeidig  bei  angenehnisteni  Geruch.  Es  ist
zu  haben  in  blauen  IMaschen  zu  $1.00,  $2.00
und  ?3.00  mit  Gebrauchsanweisung.  ^uch  er-
haltlich  in  blauen  Spritzflaschen  zu  .$1.50  und
9,3.00.  Wer  ein  sehr  sprtides  Haar  hat,  ver-
lange  das  fellhaltige  Kneipp-Brennesselhaar-
wasser  in  weissen  Spritzflaschen  zu  .$1.75  und
$3.00.  Der  Liter  kostet  .$5.00  jeder  Sorte.
Bei  zu  trockenem  Haarboden  oder  zu  rauhem
Haar  beniitzt  man  dabei von  Zeit  zu Zeit

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Brennessel-Oel  oder  Pfar-
rer Seb.  Kneipps  Kletten-Oel,  welche  beide
Sorten  in  Probeflaschchen  zu  30  Cents  oder
Flaschen  zu  55  Cents  und  $1.00  zu  beziehen
sind.  Statt  diesen  kann  verwendet  werdcn
Ttrennessel-  oder  Kleltenpomade  in  Topfchen  zu
50  Cents

b)  Fiir  Miind  und  Zahnpflege  verwendet  man
Pfarrer Seb. Kneipps Miind- und Zahnwasser.

hergestellt  aus  Zinnkraut,  Loffelkraut  und
Pfefferminz,  dient  zur  Beseitigung  des  iiblen
Geruchs  und  bei  verschiedenen  Krankheiten  des
Zahnfleisches,  der  Mund-  und  Rachenhohle  als
erfrisehendes  und  belebendes  Mundwasser.
Man  nimmt  1  Kaffeeloffel  voll  auf  ein  NVein-
glas  voll  Wasser  3  mal  tiiglich  zum  Ausspiilen
und Gurgeln. 1 Glas kostet -$1.10.

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Krduter-Zahnpulver.  Die-
ses vorziigliche  Zahnreinigungsmittel  befestigt
das  Zahnfleisch,  beseitigt  den  iiblen  Geruch  aus
dem  Munde,  reinigt  die  Zahne  aufs  beste,  ohne
denselben  im  mindesten  Schaden  zu  bringen,
da  dasselbe  keine  Chemikalien  oder  Minerallen
enthalt,  sondern  nur  rein  aus  Kneipp'schen
Krautern  in  feinster  Pulverisierung  besteht.
Eine  Blechschachtel  kostet  45  Cents.  1  Zahu-
biirstchen hlerzu 30 Cents.

Oder  das  weisse  Kneipp-Zahnpulver  in  Schach-
teln  zu  45  Cents.

c)  Fiir  allgemeine  Hautpflege  beniitzt  man  eine
oder die andere der

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Reinen  Seifen.  Unter  die-
sem  Namen  bringen  wir  absolut  reine,  alien
Anspriichen  vollkommen  entsprechend  neutrale
Seifen  in  den  Handel,  welche  also  nicht  pri-
ckeln,  sondern  die  Haut  geschmeidig  erhalten.
Wir stellen folgende Sorten her:

1.  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Reine  Heilseife  ist  eine
hochvorziigliche  reine  neutrale  Kernfettseife
und  dient  als  feine  Hautwaschseife  zum  tagli-
chen Gebrauch. Das  Stiick  kostet 28 Cents.

2.  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Arnika-Seife  enthalt  den
Auszug  aus  Arnika  mit  allerbester  neutraler
Kernfettseife.  Sie  dient  als  gute  Seife  bei  den
verschiedensten  Hautunreinigkeiten.  Das  Stiick
kostet 28 Cents.

3.  Die  Pfarrer  Kneipps  Kalendulaseife  ist  eine
ganz  vorziigliche  Hautseife,  welche  bei  den  ver-
schiedensten Hautkrankheiten,  Ausschlagen.
Mitessern,  Sommersprossen,  Rissigwerden  der
Haut  etc.  angewendet  wird.  Farbe:  gelb.  28  Cts.

4.  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Foenum  graecum  Seife
gegen  Hautausschlage  und  Hautunreinigkeiten.
Das Stiick kostet 28 Cents.

5.  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Heublumen-Seife  verwen-
den  Personen  als  Badeseife,  welche  an  Rheu-
matismus,  Gicht  und  skrofulosen  Zustanden
leiden. Das Stiick kostet 28 Cents.

6.  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Zinnkraut-Seife  dient
gegen  Mitesser,  Finnen,  Sommersprossen,  Le-
berflecken etc. Das Stiick kostet  28 Cents.

7.  Die  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipps  Tormentillseife  wird
bei  den  verschiedensten  Hautunreinigkeiten  als
vorziigliche Toilettenseife benutzt. Unser Fa-


brlkal  hat  hohen  Gehalt  des  hellwirkendea
Tormentillextraktes  und  enthiilt  die  beste  Kern-
fettseife, also  nicht  Kokosseife.  Das  Stiiek  ko-
stet  28 Cents.

8.  Pfarrer  Kneipns  Brennesselseife.  Diese  Seife
ist  iiberfettet,  rtaher  sehr  zart.  Vorziiglich  gr-
eignet  zum  Waschen  der  Haare  bei  Haarausfall
und  Kopfschuppeu. Das  Stiick  kostet  28  Cents.

9.  Die  Pfarrer  Kneipps  Katnillenseife  ist  eine  sehr
weiche,  iiberfettete  Seife,  sehr  beliebt  zunj
Waschen  des  Kopfes  und  speziell  als  Kinder-
seife. Das Stiick kostet 28 Cents.

Diese  Seifen  sind  auch  einzeln  und  gemischt  in
Kartons  von  3  und  12  Sliick  zu  haben.

Tormentol  ist  das  neueste  und  beste  Mundwasser
der  Welt,  bcsser  und  sparsamer  als  alle  ande-
ren  niarktschreierisch  angebotenen  Mundwas-
ser. Dieses  Mundwasser  kann  Zahn-,  Rachen-,
Driisen-  und  Halslcidenden  zum  Ausspiilen  und
Gurgeln  der  Mundhohle  und  des  Rachens  gar
nicht  warm  genug  empfohlen  werden.  Ein
halber  Kaffeeloffel  voll  oder  00  Tropfen  in
einem  Weinglas  voll  Wasser  geniigen  zum  tag-
lichen  Gebrauch.  Die  Flasche  mit  Anweisung
$1.10.

Kneipp-Tormenlill-Cream  findet  Verwendung  als
kosmetische  Hautcream,  gegen  aufgesprungene
Haut,  Wundsein,  Wolf,  Pusschweiss,  Fuss-
brennen.  Die  Blechbiichse  oder  Tube  kostet  50
Cents.  Die  Porzellandose  75  Cents.  —  NB.  Man
achte  darauf,  dass  stets  das  Bild  Kneipps  auf
den Packungen  sich  befindet!  —


.\ls  Spezialmittel  gegen  verschiedenartige  Flech-
ten  empfehlen  wir;  i.  eine  Flechtensalbe  gegen
nasse  Flechten,  2.  eine  Flechteneinpinselung  ge-
gen Schuppenflechten  (Psoriasis),  3.  zum
gleichzeitigen  inneren  Gebrauch  bei  beiderlei
Flechtenarten  zum  Blutreinigen  ein  Flechten-
pulver. Preis jeder Packung $1.00.

Exodor-Fusschweissalbe.  Das  beste  Mittel  gegen
Fusschweiss  und  dessen  Folgen.  Vertreibt  so-
fort  auch  den  lastigen  Geruch  ohne  irgend  wel-
chen  Schaden  fiir  die  Gesundheit.  In  Porzel-
lantopfen  zu  55  Cents.

Tiroler  Kropfbalsam.  Vorziiglich  wirkend  bei
Blahhals,  Kropf  und  Driisenanschwellungen,
nicht  fettend. In  Glasern  zu  $1.10.

Gebirgs-Gesundheitstee  und  Alpenkrauterlee  in
Paketen zu 40 Cents und $1.00.

Echter  Melissen-Ralsam  (Karmeliter-Geist).  Ein
bewahrtes  Volksmittel  bei  Ohnmachten,  Vebel-
sein,  Kopfweh,  Magenschmerzen  etc.  ist  zu  ha-
ben in Flaschchen zu 55 Cents.

Herba  Santa  —  Heiliges  Kraut.  Vorziiglich  wirk-
sam  bei  den  Leiden  der  Luftwege  und  Atmungs-
organe.  Man  kocht  einen  Essloffel  voll  mit
einer  guten  Tasse  Wasser,  lasst  5  Minuten  ste-
hen,  seiht  durch,  versetzt  mit  Zucker,  Honig
oder  Malzextrakt  und  trinkt  so  dreimal  taglich
eine Tasse  voll. Das Paket kostet 40 Cents.

Asthmapulver  ,,.\tme  leicht!"  Dieses  wird  benutzt
gegen  Asthma,  Emphysem  und  Atemnot.  Ein
Kaffeeloffel  voll  von  diesem  Pulver  wird  auf
einer  Untertasse  angeziindet  und  davon  dei*
Ranch  tief  eingeatmet.

Die Blechbuchse mit Anweisung kostet $1.0.0.
Zweckmassig trinke man dabei noch Pfarrer
Kneipps  Hustentee.

Asthmatropfen  sind  tausendfach  bewahrte  Trop-
fen, von  denen  man  bei  Asthma  und  Atemnot
mit  grossem  Vorteil  nach  Bedarf  15  Tropfen
auf  Zucker  oder  in  Pfarrer  Kneipps  Hustentee
nimmt.  Das  Flaschchen  kostet  40  Cents  und
60 Cents.

Blut-  und  Bleichsuchts-Pillen  ..Wangenrot".  Un-
ter diesem  Namen  bringen  wir  mit  Zucker  iiber-
zogene  Pillen,  nach  einem  nur  in  unserem  Be-
sitz  befindlichen  alten  Rezept  hergestellt,  in
den  Handel,  welchc  gegen  Bleichsucht  und
Blutarmut  bei  Madchen  und  Frauen  benutzt
werden.  Blechschachteln  mit  200  Pillen,  fiir
iiber  1  Monat  reichend,  kosten  mit  genauer  An-
weisung $1.55.


Bestellungen  sind  zu  richtea  an:


KNEIPP-CENTRALE


BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY


UniverNul  Nuturoputklo  Directory  aiiil Buyers'  Guide


Q>^(


►<H


H)-i


H)A


H)


►(H


135S


I  Die  beriihmten  Pfarrer  Sebastian  j


KNEIPP-PILLEN

i  sind  frei  von  alien  drastischen  Abfuhrmitteln,  enthalten  nur  reine  pflanzUche  Stoffe,

2  welche  als  Schleim  abfiihrende,  windtreibende,  magensidrk<^ndc  und  den  Stuhlgang

I  befordemde Mittel im  hochsten  Ansehen stehen und durch Pfarrer Kneipp in

c  Worishofen  bei  seinen  Kuren  angewendet  wurden.

! Die  Pfarrer  Sebastian  Kneipp-Pillen

1  sind das angenehmste magenstarkende und

2  blutreinigende Abf iihrmittely welches  existiert

f  Wegen  ihrer  grossartigen  Wirkung  bei  anhaltender  (habitueller)  Verstopfung,  Ver-

I  dauungsstorungen, H dmorrhoidalbeschwerden und  Blutanstauungen gegen Kopf,

I  Brust,  Leber  und  MHz  erhielten  die  Unterzeichneten  von  Herrn  Pfarrer  Kneipp

0  das ALLEINRECHT zur Herstellur^g uT\d Benerxnung mit  seinem Narrxen.

1  Preis  SOc,  —  Per  Post  S2c.


GEBRAUCHSANWEISUNG


1 .  Zur  Herbeifuhrung  eines  einfachen,
regelmdssigen  Stuhlganges,  rvie  es
hauptsachlich  bei  Frauen  erwiinscht
ist,  nehme  man  abends  vor  dem  Schla-
fengehen  1 — 2  Pillen;  das  erste  Mai
sind  oft  3 — 4  Pillen  notig.


2.  Sollen  die  Pillen  nur  Tifindireibend  ge-
gen Blahungen  wirken,  nehme  man
morgens  nur  1  Pille.

3.  Soil  ein  reichlicher,  mehrmaliger
Stuhlgang  erfolgen,  nehme  man
abends  2  und  morgens  2 — 3  Pillen.


1^*


Nur  sehr  starke  Naturen  brauchen  in  diesen  3  Fallen  je  1 — 2
Pillen  mehr.  Die  Wirkung  triit  meistens  in  12,  manchmal  erst
in  24  Stunden  ein.


Am  leichleslen  nimmt  man  die  Pillen  in  der  Weise,  dass  man  dieselben  n>ie  sie  sind,
oder  in  etrvas  feuchte  Oblate  eingeivickelt,  mit  ein  wenig  IVasser  verschluckt.
Die  Pfarrer  Kneipp-Pillen  und  alle  anderen  Pfarrer  Kneipp  Heilmittel-Speziali-
taten  sind  nur  echt,  wenn  sie  die  Namen  der  alleinberechtigten  Fabrikanten


AUeiniges  Generaldepot  fiir  die  Vereinigten  Staaten

KNEIPP-  UND  NATURKUR-ZENTRALE

BENEDICT  LUST,  N.D.,  M.a

BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY

NEW  YORK  CITY  TANGERINE,  FLA.


I


I OBERHAUSSER  &  LANDAUER,  Wiirzburg,  Deutschland |

sow^ie  unsere  eingetragene  Schutzmarke  (Bild  und  Namenszug  Kneipp's)  enthalten. i

1


135()  L'nii)crs(tl  Salnropathic  Dircrtonj  and  Bui/t'rs'  Guide


I


Notes  and  ncninvs


1357


I  NOTES  and  REVIEWS  I


INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF

PHYSICIANS  AND  SURGEONS

Principles  of  the International  Alliance of

Physicians  and  Surgeons

Knowing'  that  the  medical  colleges  teach
only  a  pathology  of  temporary  and  super-
ficial symptoms,  infection  and  bacteriology,
— that  these  symptoms  are  grouped  to-
gether for  determining  names  of  diseases,
— and  that  the  names  are  treated  in  a
routine  manner  by  text-book  authority,  and
recognizing  the  necessity  to  regain  the  con-
fidence of  the  public,  the  members,  com-
posed of  all  Sciiools  of  Therapeutics,  be-
lieve it  their  duty  to  unite  on  a  common
platform  to  teach  an  advanced  pathology
that  more  definitely  outlines  the  true  con-
dition of  disease.  Said  teachings  are  to  con-
cur with  the  American  Association  of
Progressive  Medicine  and  are  to  determine
the  degree  of  permanent  perversions  of  the
physiological function.

It  is  further  observed  by  the  members  of
the  International  Alliance  of  Physicians
and  Surgeons  that  these  permanent  per-
versions are  due  to  foods  which  dispro-
portion the  acid  and  alkali  secretions  and
by  unconscious  irritations  produce  reflex
contractions — abnormal  reflexes,  which,
through  the  influence  of  the  great  sym-
pathetic nerve,  result  in  contractions  of
cells,  tissue  and  muscles.

These  contractions  pervert  the  physio-
logical functions  inhibiting  cell  dynamics,
obstructing  cell  osmosis,  and  inducing
periodical  and  permanent  contractions  of
the  sphincters,  they  impinge  nerves;  they
also  empty  the  capillaries,  and  induce
anemia.  These  effects  disproportion  the
acid  and  alkali  secretions,  resulting  in  the
generation  of  a  weak  electrical  energy  or
resistance,  until  local  irritation  and  inflam-
mation develop  malignant  growths, — the
factors  of  operations.

The  present  ofiicers  of  the  Alliance,  who
were  elected  at  the  last  annual  Convention
held  in  Atlantic  City,  N.  J.,  on  October  6,
7  and  8,  1916,  are:  H.  Morgenbesser,  B.  S.,
M.  D.,  President;  Joseph  Safian,  M.  D.,  1st  •
Vice-President;  H.  Bick,  M.  D.,  2nd  Vice-
President;  Edward  Carroll,  D.  C,  3rd  Vice-
President;  C.  E.  Binck,  D.  O.,  4th  Vice-
President:  J.  B.  Prager,  M.  D.,  Secretary;
and  Dr.  F.  Pfau,  Treasurer.  The  Alliance
publishes  its  own  official  organ.  The
International  Brief,  which  is  a  ver)-  able
journal.  Dr.  C.  F.  Conrad  is  the  Editor.
The  Brief  is  now  in  its  16th  year  and  is
very  healthy  indeed.

Physicians who have a diploma from a


k'gitiniate  school  or  college,  qualified  to
practice,  are  eligible  to  become  members
of  the  Alliance.  Merely  send  application
with  fee  to  The  International  Alliance  of
Physicians  and  Surgeons,  N.  Y.  Office,  110
West  90th  Street,  New  York  City.
Do  it  now.

The  Alliance  is  affiliated  with  the
National  Association  of  the  Osteo-thera-
peutic  Practitioners,  incorporated  under  the
laws  of  the  State  of  New  York  and  New
Jersey.  The  principals  of  both  Societies
are  the  same.  Dr.  B.  Lust  is  the  president
of  the  National  Association  and  Dr.  J.
Hoegen  is  the  Secretary  and  treasurer.
Both  Societies  are  prosperous.
♦  *  *
THE  BERHALTER  IDEA

It  just  didn't  happen  that  we  have  an
Anthony  A.  and  Katherine  Berhalter,  en-
dowed with  a  genius  for  making  Health
Foods.  For  just  as  surely  as  the  sunrise
and  sunset  is  brought  about  by  the
operation  of  a  fixed  and  eternal  law,
so  are  the  demands  of  humanity
governed  and  controlled  by  that  same  law.
To  meet  humanity's  needs  and  conditions
of  development,  Columbus,  Washington,
Field,  Lincoln,  Bell,  Morse,  Edison,  and
others,  have  been  regarded  as  the  "men  of
the  hour."  And  because  during  the  past
25  or  more  years  humanity  has  been  awak-
ening to  the  fact  that  the  food  they  have
been  eating  is  not  good:  awakening  to  the
fact  that  bread  made  from  white  flour  has
been  robbed,  for  commercial  reasons,  of
over  907c  of  the  qualities  that  nature  had
put  into  the  wheat  berry  for  the  complete
nourishment  of  man,  a  man  and  a  woman,
with  the  knowledge  of  how  to  prepare  nat-
ure's foods  with  scientific  skill,  were  ready
to supply this human demand.

On  October  30,  1878.  Anthony  A.  Ber-
Iialter  was  born  at  EUenburg,  Wiirttem-
berg,  Germany.  The  same  year  Kathe-
nne  Novak  (now  Mrs.  Berhalter)  was  born
m  Chicago.  When  these  two  people  first
opened  their  eyes  on  Earth's  plane,  they
were  separated  by  thousands  of  miles  and
there  was  no  indication  that  years  after
they  would  be  brought  together  as  asso-
ciates in  a  great  work  for  the  betterment
of  humanity.  But  "the  Divinity  that  shapes
our  ends,  rough  hew  them  as  we  may"  was
operating,  as  it  always  has  and  always  will
continue  to  operate.  At  the  appointed  time
these  two  people  came  together.  They
came  together  because  for  many  years  their
thoughts and purposes had been directed


1358


Xotcs  and  licviciv.^


along  parallel  lines.  Both  had  suffered
from  wrong  habit  of  eating  and  living.  Both
l>ad  determined  to  correct  this  wrong  to
their  minds  and  bodies  by  the  discovery  of
how  to  scientifically  make  and  so  use  na-
ture's foods,  as  to  build  strong  bodies  and
develop  active  and  well-balanced  minds.  In
this  they  succeeded.  Their  success  was
brought  about  through  years  of  toil  and  re-
search. Every  book  on  the  cause  and  effect
of  disease  was  purchased  and  read.  Among
the  leading  books  were  those  published  by
Dr.  Benedict  Lust,  of  New  York,  and  his
monthly  magazine  was  read  and  carefully
studied  each  month.  And  so  both  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Berhalter  worked  up  out  of  ill  health
to  perfect  health;  from  ignorance  of  the
proper  food  to  eat  and  drink  to  a  scientific
knowledge  of  the  demands  of  the  human
body;  and  they  together  worked  out  the
formulas  to  make  these  health  foods.  Their
gratitude  for  delivery  from  ill  health  found
expression  in  the  desire  to  have  others
share  their  good  fortune.  So,  in  the  year
1908,  they  opened  a  bakery  and  store  for
the  manufacture  and  sale  of  Berhalter
Health  Foods  at  309  North  Ave.,  Chicago.
People  came  slowly  at  first  to  the  little
store,  more  by  chance  than  anything  else,
for  no  advertising  was  done.  But  all  who
came  returned,  for  they  found  there  a  new
sort  of  food,  more  delicious  and  nourishing
than  any  they  had  ever  bought.  The  good
news  spread  quickly  about  the  neighbor-
hood, and  it  was  not  long  before  that  most
of  the  people  within  a  radius  of  many
blocks  thronged  to  the  Berhalters  for
their  supplies.  Then  came  growth.  People
moved  from  the  neighborhood  and  sent  in
orders  by  mail.  Visitors  who  had  tasted
Berhalter  foods  in  Chicago,  on  their  re-
turn home  sent  back  orders  from  distant
states  to  the  North  Avenue  shop  for  the
foods  whose  equals  they  could  find  nowhere
else.  East  and  West  the  business  spread
across  the  map,  until  nine  years  after  the
doors  of  the  little  store  were  opened  on
North  Avenue,  Chicago,  customers  were
being  served  in  nearly  every  State  in  the
Union.  Then  a  handsome  three-story
bakery  and  salesrooms  was  erected  at  1423
North  Clark  Street,  Chicago.  It  was  thought
this  new  building  would  take  care  of  all
demands  for  many  years  to  come,  but  in
less  than  three  years  they  were  driving
their  bakery  day  and  night  to  produce  the
foods  for  which  an  eager  and  educated
public  was  clamoring.  And  as  this  book
goes  to  press,  a  great  factory,  a  block  long,
is  being  built  on  Diversey  Parkway  and
Lincoln  Avenue,  Chicago,  which  it  is  hoped
will  meet  the  demand  at  least  for  some
time  to  come.  But  it  will  only  be  a  matter
of  time  when  Berhalter  Health  Food  Fac-
tories will  be  built  in  other  cities  through-
out the  United  States,  for  the  demand  for
the  Health  Foods  they  make  is  nation  wide.
The  old  saying  that  the  way  to  a  man's
heart is through his stomach, holds true.


and  it  is  often  the  case  that  the  stomach
is  the  quickest  avenue  of  approach  to  his
mind.

Through  their  delicious,  wholesome,
health-giving  foods,  the  Berhalters  have
brought  many  sufferers  to  an  understand-
ing of  Nature  Cure.  Every  Berhalter  store
and  restaurant  is  an  educational  center
where  the  health  seeker  may  receive  in-
formation on  Nature  Cure  and  the  natural
life.  The  Berhalters  are  doing  a  great
work.  May  the  scope  of  their  influence
continue to extend.

* « *

COLON  THERAPY
By  J.  H.  Eager,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.


Mr. J. H. Eager

Colon  Therapy  is  so  important  to  the
welfare  of  the  human  body  that  the  great
wonder  is  that  a  knowledge  of  the  anatomy
of  the  colon  is  not  made  a  pre-requisite  to
the  granting  of  a  diploma  to  all  aspiring
to  become  medical  practitioners,  and  yet,
although  of  such  paramount  importance,
only  a  very  small  number  of  students  have
had  the  physical  courage  to  examine  one,
so  repugnant  is  the  odor  which  emanates
from  that  part  of  a  dead  body.

Hence,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that
a  knowledge  of  he  existence  of  a  colon  in
the  human  body  is  known  only  to  compar-
atively few  lay,  general  readers.

Its  activity  is  so  essential  and  important
to  the  health  and  well-being  of  each  indi-
vidual of  the  human  race  that  it  should  be
made  the  subject  of  a  government  treatise,
to  be  freely  disseminated.

It  should  also  be  made  a  subject  of  first
importance  in  the  curriculum  of  all  schools
and  imiversities,  and  more  of  an  essential
requirement  for  the  benefit  of  those  as-
piring to  become  teachers.

.\r\  opportunity  is  offered  to  school  or
university  teachers  to  observe  in  a  student
tlie  deteriorating  transition  from  a  bright
and  alert  mental  state  to  a  retrograde  one,
where  he  becomes  unexpectedly  dull,  and
where  the  grasping  of  the  lessons  becomes
manifestly laborious.

Observant  teachers  are  perplexed  at  the
temporary dullness of a hitherto bright


Soti's  and  Reuiews


1359


\


scholar,  without  even  guessing  at  the  cause,
as  they  themselves  are  unacquainted  with
the  dulling  effect  of  constipation;  whereas
if  they  had  been  required  before  earning  a
diploma  to  make  a  theoretical  study  of  the
dire  effects  of  constipation  upon  the  mental
faculties,  they  would  have  been  far  more
useful instruments in the art of  teaching.

While  the  scholars  might  be  conscious
of  the  fact  that  a  great  effort  is  required
to  carry  out  their  studies,  they  might  not,
without  a  suggestion  as  to  the  probable
cause  of  their  backwardness,  know  the  im-
portance of  keeping  the  drain  pipes  of  their
body  active,  and  the  serious  consequences
to  their  health  if  they  neglect  them.

Ignorance  on  the  part  of  scholars  of  the
existence  of  the  colon,  and  the  importance
of  it,  plays  in  their  life  for  good  or  ill,  is
not  to  be  wondered  at.  in  view  of  the  wide-
spread false  modesty  among  the  female
members  of  the  community.

The  duty  of  parents  in  that  regard  is
serioush'  neglected,  but,  when  we  consider
their  own  lack  of  knowledge,  it  is  not  so
surprising  to  find  the  younger  part  of  the


The Eager Internal Bath

community  entirely  ignorant  of  the  fact
that  the  colon  is  not  only  a  very  important
organ  within  their  body,  "but  that  they  know
nothing  whatever  of  the  importance  of
keeping  it  active.

It  is  not  so  surprising  that  those  rinan-
cially  interested  in  the  business  of  dissem-
inating knowledge  relative  to  the  need  of
an  instrument  for  daily  use  by  the  average
person  for  the  purpose  of  cleaning  the
colon,  find  it  not  a  little  difficult  to  edu-
cate people  and  convince  them,  when  they
are  confronted  with  adverse  advice,  auth-
oritatively given  out  by  the  lecturers  of
the  Board  of  Health,  against  the  self-
applied  Internal  Bath.

Can  such  advisers  have  the  good  of  the
public  at  heart,  when  they  know  that  the
pernicious  habit  of  drug-taking  plays  havoc
with  the  other  organs  of  the  body,  and  that
by  belittling  the  drugless  practitioners  on
ever\-  occasion,  they  leave  the  public  with
nothing  to  depend  upon  but  the  many
chemical  compounds  for  relieving  their  ail-


ments. It  is  not  the  practice  of  the  would-
be  medical  monopolists  to  decry  these
drugs,  because  they  know  well  that  they  not
onl}-  administer  them  themselves,  but  sooner
or  later,  the  cathartic  users  will  be  send-
ing for  them  when  conditions  more  severe
than  mere  constipation  announce  them-
selves.

Like  the  narcotic  habit,  which  is  often
the  result  of  a  prescription  administered
by  a  reputable  M.  D.  under,  perhaps,  ser-
ious conditions,  without  an  accompanying
caution  against  its  repetition,  the  drug  ha-
bit takes  hold  of  the  average  person
through  a  repetition  of  the  doctor's  pre-
scription, when  a  dull,  stagnant  condition
arises  resembling  that  which  existed  when
the  doctor  recommended  the  dose,  which
previously  afforded  temporary  relief.  The
a  cathartic  known  to  the  patient,  and
which  brought  relief,  giyes  character  to
the  drug,  and  it  is  but  natural  that  when
conditions  are  seemingly  the  same,  the
same  drug,  and  thus  the  habit  is  implanted
on  the  strength  of  the  good  standing  of

If  the  American  business  man  would  take
a  lesson  from  the  higher  class  Chinaman,
who  employs  a  physician  to  keep  him  well
^prevent  sickness — the  doctor,  if  he  de-
sired to  continue  to  be  emplo}-ed.  would
teach  his  patient  the  necessity  of  keeping
the  colon  active,  the  wherefore  and  the
manner  of  doing  so.  Such  a  doctor  would
not  recommend  the  use  of  Drugs  to  ac-
complish the  desired  activity  of  the  colon,
for  the  reason  that  he  would  know  that  a
worse  condition  would  sooner  or  later  fol-
low; the  debilitating  effect  of  the  drugs
which  preyed  upon  the  other  organs,  by
draining  them  of  tJie  fluids  Nature  had  pro-
vided, for  the  proper  accomplishment  of
the important functions of  the  organs.

While  all  medical  authorities  concur  in
the  fact  that  in  the  colon  is  found  the
origin  of  the  irritation  which  causes  head-
aches, thej-  are  slow  to  educate  their  pa-
tients as  to  the  necessity  for  keeping  that
drain  pipe  of  their  body  clean  and  active;
they  know  that  the  dangerous  headache
powders  have  been  depended  upon  for  re-
lief, but  do  they  advise  against  the  use  of
such  dangerous  poisons?

The  colon  plays  such  an  important  of-
fice in  the  origin  of  disease  when  it  is
inactive,  and  such  a  beneficial  action  when
it  is  performing  its  functions  regularly,
that  the  necessity  for  cleansing  it  without
the  use  of  drugs  should  be  taught  until  the
laity  knows  of  the  all-importance  of  the
cleansing  of  that  organ  by  drugless  me-
thods, and  esoecially  when  such  diseases  as
Typhoid  or  Malarial  fevers  are  disturbing
the health of  the neighboring  families.

People  should  be  taught  that  the  worst
enemy  of  good  health  is  the  self-prescrip-
tion of cathartics, the taking of  which is


1360


Xoles  and  Heiyicws


certain  to  be  followed  by  a  reaction  in-
volving a  loss  of  vitality.

The  constant  or  daily  prodding  of  the
sluggish  colon  with  drugs  is  a  very  dan-
gerous habit,  and  the  public  ought  to  know
from  reliable  authority  that  if  this  perni-
cious practice  is  continued  for  long,  it  is
certain to  have  serious  results.

It  is  a  matter  of  record  in  the  history  of
Guy's  Hospital,  in  London,  England,  that
the  doctors  employed  therein,  following  the
teachings  of  Professor  MetclinikofY,  to  the
eflfect  that  the  elimination  of  the  colon  dur-
ing youth  was  the  only  hope  for  reducing
the  percentage  of  diseases  arising  from  an
unclean  colon,  operated  upon  a  child  there
who  was  in  the  last  stages  of  tubercular
joint  disease,  and  amputated  the  greater
part  of  the  colon,  leaving  only  about  nine
inches,  which  remaining  part  they  joined
to  the  small  intestines,  and  the  child  got
well in a few weeks.

It  goes  without  saying  tiiat  the  amputa-
tion of  the  colon  would  have  no  beneficial
eflfect  in  the  future,  unless  the  remainder
were  .kept  active;  hence,  the  most  import-
ant feature  lies  in  the  practice  of  the  indi-
vidual  keeping  it clean.

When  it  is  conceded  by  all  medical  auth-
orities that  90  per  cent,  of  all  our  ailments
arise  from  a  congested  colon,  we  must  be-
lieve that  during  the  prevalence  of  an  epi-
demic, such  as  Typhoid,  Small  Pox,
Infantile  Paralysis,  etc.,  etc.,  those  who
become  its  victims  were  certainlj^  in
the  first  place  the  victims  of  a  sluggish
colon,  and  those  living  in  the  same  envir-
onments, in  the  same  family,  owe  their
immunity  to  the  fact  that  their  colon  was
discharging  its  duty  naturally,  or  possibly
with  the  aid  of  a  cleanser  other  than  drugs.

If  ever  there  was  a  parallel  to  the  quo-
tation "Robbing  Peter  to  pay  Paul,"  it
is'  surely  found  in  "Cathartics,"  for  the
cathartics  prej'  upon  the  innocent,  inof-
fending  organs  of  the  body,  such  as  the
gall  bladder,  the  liver,  the  kidneys,  the  in-
testines, etc.,  etc.,  so  as  to  furnish  fluids
with  which  to  flood  the  sluggish  colon  and
liquify  the  contents,  so  that  they  may  be
expelled  and  the  body  relieved  of  "that  dull
feeling,"  the  sick  headache,  or  other  symp-
tom of  Constipation  that  prompted  the  tak-
ing of  the  Cathartic,  which  becomes  a  ver-
itable robber  of  the  fluids  Nature  provided
for  other  uses.

So  the  process  of  "Robbing  Peter  to  pay
Paul"  goes  merrily  on  year  after  year,  ac-
cording to  the  ratio  of  vigor  with  which
Nature  had  fortified  the  user  until  the
"Last  Straw"  is  eventuallv  reached,  when
nature calls a halt  and falls exhausted.

irritating  drugs,  if  an  educated  man,  knows
the  deteriorating  influence  upon  the  hu-
man body;  hence  he  deliberately^  attacks
the welfare  of the individual.

He  knows  the  greater  beneficial  action
of the Internal Bath Appliance, wherein


warm  water  is  substituted  for  the  "fluid"
that  his  Poison  Drugs  have  been  drawing
from  other  organs.

He  knows  that  the  water,  applied  direct-
ly at  the  seat  of  the  greatest  congestion.
can  have  no  debilitating  or  other  injurious
effect  upon  the  patient.

He  knows  that  the  action  of  the  Internal
Bath,  applied  at  the  seat  of  the  greatest
congestion,  liquifies  the  congested  material
more  effectually  than  when  fluid  is  drawn
from  the  other  organs  of  the  body,  and
cleans  the  colon  thoroughly  and  com-
pletely.

He  also  knows  that  the  drug,  by  deplet-
ing the  other  organs,  fails  to  clean  the
colon  completely,  but  that  there  remains
in  the  colon  a  dangerous  quantity  of  auto-
poisons  which  will  be  taken  into  the  cir-
culation, and  eventually  deposited  at  -  the
weakest  part  of  the  body,  there  to  start
the  inroads  of  disease  that  may  cause  a
breakdown  of  the  constitution  and  encom-
pass  the death of  the  patient.

The  cleansing  process  that  benefits  by
invigorating  the  colon  is  ignored,  because
the  M.  D.  in  charge  "Does  not  believe  in"
the  self-administered  Internal  Bath,  which
he  would  believe  in,  and  would  order  ad-
ministered, if  his  patient  were  a  hospital
case.  His  influence  is  thus  exerted  in  fa-
vor of  the  depleting  process.

I  reproduce,  below,  the  extraordinary
physical  benefits  derivable  and  actually  de-
rived (for  I  write  of  a  veritable  personal
experience),  by  Mr.  A.,  a  man  of  72  years,
who  had  used  the  Internal  Bath  twice  daily
for  at  least  one  year  previous  to  June,
1^14,  when  he  was  taken  with  pneumonia
of  the  left  lung,  due  to  unusual  exposure
to  a  cold  draught  of  air  when  sweating
profusely.

I  was  granted  the  privilege  of  quoting
his  case,  as  he  gave  it  to  me.

Very  shortly  after  the  middle  of  May,
1914,  he  contracted  pneumonia,  from  which
lie  suffered  for  a  week  or  ten  days,  when,
on  the  3rd  of  Tune,  his  stomach  rejected
food  and  his  wife,  becoming  alarmed,  sent
for an M. D.

A  careful  examination  revealed  a  temper-
ature of  104°,  respiration  .'16°,  and  discharge
of  rusty  sputum.  The  doctor  gave  orders
for  the  hiring  of  a  trained  nurse,  and  for-
bade his  patient  to  go  to  the  bath  room,
only  two  doors  away,  saying  he  would  re-
turn  in  the  afternoon.

The  patient  progressed  so  rapidly  that
just  nine  days  thereafter,  or  Tune  9th,  he
went  out  on  business  and  walked  home,
over  a half  mile.

The  doctor  discharged  himself  the  6th,
after  he  had  made  five calls.

The  patient  felt  no  ill  effects  other  than
great  weakness  for  a  few  davs;  he  con-
tinued to  gain  in  strength,  and  never  suf-
fered  from  the  attack  thereafter.

Tt  is very  questionable  if  this  patient,  at


Notes  (ind  Reviews


1361


the  age  of  72  years,  would  have  recovered
at  all,  to  say  nothing  of  the  rapidity  of  his
recovery,  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that
lie  had  used  an  Internal  Bath  Appliance
twice  each  day  for  over  a  year,  resulting
in  creating  a  pure  blood  stream,  with  an
entire  absence  of  auto-poisons.

Others  can  bring  about  just  as  healthy
resistance  power  by  the  use  twice  daily  of
the  Internal  Bath,  without  a  particle  of
danger.

The  rapid  accumulation  of  auto-poisons
in  the  neglected  colon  becomes  easy  when-
ever the  activities  of  the  colon  are  re-
tarded or neglected.


THE  DUPELL  INTERNAL  BATH

The  intestinal  tract  is  the  very  founda-
tion of  animal  life.  Without  the  stomach
and  its  digestive  appurtenances  man  could
not  exist.  When  the  digestion  and  elimina-
tion of  the  waste  products  of  food  go  on
in  a  normal  manner,  health,  vitality  and
happiness  are  the  result,  but  when  these
processes  are  interfered  with  in  any  way,
either  sickness  or  death  results.  The  most
formidable  physiological  evil  in  the  world
to-day  is  constipation,  that  is.  retention  of
waste  matter  in  the  system  beyond  its
normal  health  period,  wdiich  gives  rise  to
fermentation,  which  in  turn  provides  a
fecund  soil  for  the  growth  of  millions  of
malign,  disease-producing  microbes,  whose
poisonous  excreta,  together  with  the
poisons  chemically  elaborated  in  the  fer-
menting food  waste,  are  absorbed  into  the
blood,  a  process  known  as  auto-intoxica-
tion, which  gives  rise  to  any  number  of
the most dangerous diseases.

The  digestive  canal  is  some  twenty-five
feet  in  length  and  is  lined  up  with  a  mucous
membrane  forty-five  feet  long,  arranged  in
sacculated  folds,  and  otherwise  provided
with  millions  of  absorbents  that  absorb
and  convey  the  nutrition  contained  in  the
digested  food  to  the  blood.  The  normal
section  of  this  tube  for  purposes  of  nutri-
tion extends  twenty  three  feet  from  the
stomach  while  the  remaining  twelve  inches
above  the  vent  is  the  natural  receptacle
for  the  feces,  but,  in  constipation,  the  en-
tire large  intestine  is  clogged  up  with  the
sewage  of  the  system,  which  becomes  dry
by  the  absorption  of  the  poisonous  putre-
factive  material.

People  suffering  from  constipation  are
anemic,  sallow,  clay-colored,  or  deadly
white,  and  suffer  from  indigestion,  bilious-
ness, flatulency,  uric  acid,  gout,  rheu-
matism, piles,  fistula,  disease  of  the  kidneys
and  bladder,  and  are  also  the  victims  of
neurasthenia,  loss  of  memory  and  general
debility.

The'  doctor  when  appealed  to,  proceeds
to  relieve  the  clogging  up  of  the  system
with  a  cathartic,  mixed  with  belladonna,
or  opium,  which  latter  drugs  are  meant  to


hush  the  painful  cry  of  outraged  nature
which  the  cathartic  has  invaded.  Millions
are  now  spent  on  purgatives  that  only  at-
tack symptoms  in  such  a  manner  that
offended,  disgusted  nature,  loathing  their
presence,  ejects  them  from  the  system  by
secreting  into  the  intestines  a  large  quan-
tity of  fluid  matter,  evolved  from  the  blood
by  an  excessive  expenditure  of  nervous
force.

Common  sense  tells  us  that  this  is  an
exhaustive,  a  most  ruinous  method  of  treat-
ing constipation.  All  that  nature  requires
is  the  assistance  of  a  little  warm  water,
than  which  no  medicine  is  cheaper.  The
DUPELL  Internal  Bath  has  been  designed
to  convey  this  warm  water  to  the  place
where  it  is  most  needed  in  a  safe,  con-
venient, and  luxurious  manner.  The  appa-
ratus consists  of  a  rubber  reservoir  from
which  a  flexible  tube,  terminating  in  a
rubber  rectal  cone,  conveys  the  water  to
the  colon  when  the  receptacle  is  pressed
upon.

The  reservoir  contains  ZVi  quarts  of
water  and  the  method  of  using  it  is  as  fol-
lows: The  reservoir  is  first  pressed  softly
so  that  only  a  small  quantity  of  water  is
injected.  Giving  the  water  a  few  minutes
to  be  absorbed,  more  pressure  is  applied,
and  after  a  time  the  patient  may  sit  upon
the  reservoir  and  use  all  of  his  own  weight
to  force  the  water  into  the colon.

When  the  water  reaches  the  dried  im-
prisoned feces,  it  is  loosened  from  its  at-
tachment to  the  colon,  and  the  mass  is
moved  towards  the  exit  bj^  the  expulsive
action  of  the  bowels.  As  the  sudden  flood
of  water  is  expelled  it  carries  with  it  the
inspissated  feces,  and  the  internal  Ego
congratulates  itself  on  the  delightfullj^  re-
freshing manner  in  which  the  local  dis-
turber with  its  myriads  of  microbes  has
been dispossessed.

In  health,  tlie  internal  bath  may  be  taken
at  least  twice  a  week,  but  in  cases  of  con-
stipation it  may  be  taken  daily.  After  an
experience  of  ten  years  no  instance  has
occurred  of  any  'ill  effects  from  internal
bathing,  but  on  the  contrary  it  has  been
found  to  restore  natural  action  and  to  act
as  a  tonic  stimulus  on  the  muscles  of  the
colon.

The  Dr.  Charles  Company,  748  Fulton
Street,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  is  the  sole  agent
for  the  Dupell  Internal  Bath.  The  regular
price  is  ten  dollars,  but  to  introduce  the
bath  more  quickly  the  price  for  a  limited
period  is  seven  and  a  half  dollars.


FROUDE,  CHAS.  C,  N.  D..  D.  C,  Post
Office  Building,  260  Fair  Street,
Kingston,  N,  Y.

Dr.  Froude,  who  was  born  in  1888.  gradu-
ated at  the  Universal  Chiropractic  College
in 1914 and the American College of


1362


Notes  and  Reviews


Xaturopathy,  and  is  a  member  of  the
American  Naturopathic  Association,  Inter-
national Chiropractic  Association,  and  the
International Medical Freedom Association.


Dr. Charles C. Froude

He  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Froude  &
MacKinnon  and  is  author  of  "Simplified
and  Practical  Dietetics,"  of  which  three
editions  have  been  published.


FERRI SANITARIUM  AT  WHEATON,
ILLINOIS.

This  new  natural  healing  resort  has  been
opened  by Dr. Ferri.

Dr.  Ferri  is  the  well-known  editor  and
Italian  pioneer  in  this  country  who  pub-
lishes the  magazine  "La  Medicina
Naturale,"  and  who  is  the  author  of  the
book  "La  Cura  Naturale"  and  several  other
pamphlets.  He  is  conducting  a  very  suc-
cessful institution  for  Nature  Cure  and
Natural  Life,  principally  Hydrotherapy,
Diet,  and  manual  methods  at  152  North
Ashland  Blvd.,  Chicago  and  is  a  well
qualified  man  for  an  institution  of  this  kind
on  a  larger  scale.

The  major  practical  experience  in  his
professional  work,  Dr.  Ferri,  however,  has
acquired  as  doctor  in  his  Health  Resort  in
Chicago,  and  has  been  writing  a  number  of
treatises,  pamphlets  and  books.  In  fact,
he  was  one  of  the  strong  men  in  Chicago
in  the  Naturopathic  movement  for  the  last
ten  years.

Dr.  Ferri  is  well  known  as  a  loyal  and
active  supporter  of  rational  Naturopathic
methods,  who  uses  the  good  in  all,  and
applies  the  treatment  to  suit  the  require-
ments of  each  patient.  Fasting  and  diet  are
largely  used in his methods,  as  in all ra-


tional, highly  developed  therapeutics,  and
therefore  he  has  been  so  successful  in  the
past.  Doctor  Ferri  is  married,  and  his
wife  is  a  true  and  able  assistant  in  the
ladies'  department  and  the  household  of
the  Resort.  It  is  a  known  fact  that  a  large
institution  cannot  be  successfully  handled
by  a  Drugless  doctor  without  the  good  as-
sistance of  an  efficient  wife,  who  is  usually
half  of  the  success  of  the  institution.

We  know  Dr.  Ferri  c|uite  well,  being
familiar  with  his  individual  qualifications,
and  we  feel  that  the  enterprise  will  prove
a  great  success.

We  recommend  this  institution  to  our
readers  in  Chicago  and  vicinity,  feeling  se-
cure in  the  belief  that  visitors  are  always
welcome.

A  descriptive  circular  will  be  forwarded.
on  request.

City  office  is  at  152  North  Ashland  Blvd.,
Chicago,  111.

• * *

ERATH.  MR.  W.  F.,  Rosebank,  N.  Y.

Sufferers  from  rheumatism,  encumbrances
of  morbid  matter,  boils,  abscesses,  open
sores,  hemor-
rhoids, goitre,
and  kindred
ailments,  are
susceptible  of
being  cured
by  the  hot-air,
or  Turkish
bath.  Hither-
to the  public
Turkish  bath
was  the  only
available  place
where  hot-air
baths  could  be
obtained,  but
such  places
are  established
for  the  use  of
people  not
suffering  from
any  of  the
troubles  men-
tioned, and  be-
sides patients
would  not  care
of  themselves
to  invade  the
publicity  of
such  institu-
tions. It  fol-
lows that  such
patients  can
only  obtain
treatment  from  such  practitioners  as  pos-
sess an  apparatus  for  giving  hot-air  treat-
ments or  possess  a  hot-air  apparatus  of
their  own.  This  latter  idea  is  at  once  the
most  private,  most  convenient,  most  eco-
nomical, and  most  therapeutic,  advantages
that  will  commend  the  bath  to  everyone.


Mr.  W.  F.  Erath


1


iVo/f'6'  and  lieview.s


1363


Rather Turkish Bath

Mr.  W.  F.  Erath,  of  Rosebank,  Staten
Island,  N.  Y.,  has  been  a  long  sufferer  from
rheumatism  and  kindred  diseases,  and  has
visited  many  home  and  foreign  bathing
establishments  without  gaining  any  relief.
The  idea  of  indulging  in  Turkish  baths  at
home,  as  being  more  enjoyable,  more
wholesome  and  more  economical,  than  by
attending  public  baths,  so  possessed  him
that  he  set  about  making  a  cabinet  Turk-
ish bath  for  home  use,  and  after  years  of
experiment,  created  the  Rather  Turkish
bath,  a  marvel  of  perfection,  simplicity  and
economy.  By  means  of  this  bath  not  only
himself,  but  many  of  his  friends  have  been
made  healthy,  strong  and  happy.  The  bath,
as  will  be  seen  from  the  illustration,  is  of
strong,  commodious  and  artistic  construc-
tion, and  is  a  most  effective  agent  of  health.
To  be  able  to  take  a  Turkish  bath,  with
all  the  advantages  the  Rather  bath  affords,
is  well  worth  the  price  of  same.  By  its
use  adverse  pathological  conditions  are
abated,  and  all  debris  of  waste  matter  and
poisons  that  clog  the  arterial  capiflaries  are
removed  in  Nature's  way,  by  elimination
through  the  eliminative  organs,  and  dis-
eased conditions  are  wholly  eradicated.
The  possession  of  a  healthv  and  happy  life
by  means  of  the  Rather  Turkish  bath  is  a
consummation  devoutly  to  be  wished.


YOUR HEALTH SUPPLY COMPANY

Anyone  visiting  No.  912  Belmont  Avenue,
Chicago,  111.,  the  home  of  Your  Health
Supply  Co.,  of  which  Dr.  E.  D.  Hunsaker  is
president,  will  discover  a  prize  in  the  form
of  a  food  preparation  manufactured  by  this
concern  for  the  cure  of  that  universal  com-
plaint, constipation.  This  is  a  combination
of  California  fruits,  whole  wheat  and  bran
flour,  and  other  harmonious  laxative  vege-
tables, and  pressed  so  that  it  will  keep  for
months.  Being  a  food  and  not  a  drug,  it  can
be  eaten  at  every  meal  as  a  palatable  part  of
the  menu.  It  is  guaranteed  to  regulate  the
bowels  and  strengthen  the  intestinal mus-


cles. It  has  a  higher  nutritive  quality  than
meat.  Its  use  does  away  with  the  use  of
purgatives,  pills  and  mineral  waters,  all  of
which  give  only  temporary  relief  and  leave
the  system  in  a  worse  condition  than  before.
Dr.  Hunsaker  carries  on  an  active  mail  or-
der business  in  his  food  regulator,  and  sends
a pound package prepaid for $1.25.


THE HISTORY OF THE INTERNAL
BATH

By  Charles  A.  Tyrrell,  M.  D.

Inasmuch  as  I have the best  of  reasons
for  the  statement  that  Internal Bathing  is


Charles  A.  Tyrrell,  M. D.

at  the  present  time  being  regularly  prac-
tised by  upward  of  at  least  half  a  million
Americans,  it  may  be  of  somewhat  general
interest  to  examine  into  what  is  known  of
its  origin,  its  reason  and  the  recent  stages
by  which  it  arrived  at  its  present  popularity
and resultfulness.

Though  popularly  supposed  to  be  a  com-
paratively modern  practice,  its  usage,  in  a
crude  form,  is  traceable  many  centuries
back,  for  Pliny  in  his  Naturalis  Historia,
by  the  Ancient  Egyptian  Physicians  to
whom  its  investigation  was  suggested  by
the  health  habits  of  the  Ibis,  a  bird  of  the
Nile.

These  Egyptian  Physicians,  by  the  way,
were  the  first  medical  practitioners  known
to  history,  not  excepting  the  Chinese.


1301


Xolcs  and  Reviews


And  the  ancient  Egyptians,  measured  by
their  accomplishments,  seem  to  have  been  a
pretty  healthy,  husky  people.

Although  history  does  not  give  much
light  on  the  subject  in  more  recent  periods,
it  does  mention  a  widespread  use  of  this
treatment  throughout  Europe  in  the  early
part  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  especially
in  France.

The  recent  resuscitation  of  this  ancient
remedial  practice  dates  back  to  the  early
forties,  when  Dr.  A.  Wilford  Hall  of  New
York,  after  years  of  public  speaking  and
the  authorship  of  many  religious  and  scien-
tific works,  failed  in  health,  rapidly  declined
and  was  given  by  his  physicians  but  a  few
months  to  live.

Dr.  Hall  was  not  a  Doctor  of  Medicine,
but  of  Philosophy  and  Laws,  and  a  man  of
the  highest  knowledge  and  attendants.  I
knew  him  very  well  in  later  years  and  he
frequently  said:  "Having  had  considerable
trouble  that  way,  the  idea  came  to  me
like  an  inspiration  that  if  I  could  keep  the
colon  cleansed  of  waste  matter,  I  would
have  at  least  a  better  chance  of  recovery."
Dr.  Hall  persisted  in  this  treatment,
using  the  crude  and  laborious  method  of  a
bulb  syringe,  and  from  that  time  until  his
death  at  the  generous  age  of  eighty-two,
forty  odd  years  after  he  had  been  given  up,
did  his  utmost  to  give  the  world  the  benefit
of  his  personal  experience.

I  arrived  in  New  York  City  in  1887,  after
an  extended  trip  through  India,  China  and
Japan,  and  unwisely  invested  my  entire
capital  in  a  commercial  venture  which
failed.

More  or  less  indiiiferent  attention  to  my
physical  condition  and  the  shock  of  this  ex-
perience brought  on  a  second  stroke  of
paralysis  on  the  left  side  (the  first  having
occurred  previously  in Hong  Kong).

Being  helpless,  I  became  an  inmate  of  a
hospital  for  a  time;  was  then  refused  ad-
mission to  another  and  fortunately  knowing
of  some  of  the  results  of  Internal  Bathing
I  resorted  to  it  regularly  with  such  success
that  in  90  days  I  was  walking  about  the
city.

Impressed  by  the  fact,  however,  that  the
method  of  taking  these  baths  was  then
crude  and  imperfect,  I  decided  to  study,
practice  and  improve  on  it.  Hence,  the  in-
vention of  that  appliance  so  long  and
favorably  known  as  the  "J.  B.  L.  Cascade."
To  do  this  properly  and  legally  I  quickly
found  that  I  would  have  to  become  a
Doctor  of  Medicine.

Entering  immediately  a  medical  college,  I
took  the  four  years'  course  and  graduated
with  honors.

Not  at  all  a  bad  commentary  on  the  re-
sults of  Internal  Bathing,  considering  my
condition  the  year  before  entering.

After  graduating,  I  found  my  experience
exactly  akin  to  all  those  who  must  educate


the  public,  especially  in  a  matter  where
most  of  us  are  so  notoriously  careless —
Irregularity.

But  I  knew  from  the  exi)erience  of  myself
and  others  that  the  foundation  of  a  great
and  revolutionary,  though  perfectly  natural
remedy  was  there.

And  that  once  its  results  were  generally
known,  no  power  could  stop  its  rapid  and
universal  appreciation.

And  so  I  persevered.

From  the  smallest  of  beginnings,  I  found
that  every  J.  B.  L.  Cascade  which  1  dis-
tributed brought  me  demand  for  others —
that  once  the  proper  administering  of  the
Internal  Bath  accomplished  its  result  with
one  patient,  he  was  generously  eager  to
pass  his  experience  along.

And  so  it  grew,  and  has  grown  so
astoundingly  in  the  past  twenty. years  that  1
heartily  agree  with  physicians  generally
when  they  claim  that  "the  vast  majority  of
human  illnesses  are  directly  or  indirectly
caused by  accumulated waste  in the  colon.

That  also  is  the  direct  cause  of  our  fre-
quent loss  of  spirits  and  lack  of  confidence;
in  other  words,  our  fifty  per  cent,  of  efli-
cienc}^

You  will  never  appreciate  this  properly
except  in  the  clear,  eager,  confident  way
you  will  always  feel  the  morning  after  an
Internal  Bath.

We  all  want  to  be  well  and  efficient  and
stay  so  without  calling  upon  Drugs  to  help,
if  that  be  possible.  There  are,  as  I  have  said,
hundreds  of  thousands  who  are  already
doing  this  by  this  purely  natural  prevent-
ative, and  the  numbers  are  steadily  growing.

As  a  result  of  my  success  during  the
twenty-five  years  of  my  specializing  on  this,
Nature's  remedy,  many  imitators  of  my
appliance -and  method  have  come  and  gone.

Successful  inventions  always  have  imita-
tors (a  tribute  to  merit),  consequently  I
have  several  followers  who,  not  content
with  pirating  my  ideas,  actually  appropriate
But  there  is  only  one  tried  and  approved
method  of  taking  an  internal  bath,  for  there
is  only  one  "J.  B.  L.  Cascade."


WHAT IS AN INTERNAL BATH?

Much  has  been  said  and  volumes  have
been  written,  describing  at  length  the  many
kinds  of  baths,  civilized  man  has  indulged
in  from  time  to  time.  Every  possible  re-
source of  the  human  mind  had  been  brought
into  play  to  fashion  new  methods  of  bath-
ing, but,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  most
important  as  well  as  the  most  beneficial,  of
all  baths,  the  "Internal  Bath,"  has  been
given  little  thought.  The  reason  for  this  is
probably  due  to  the  fact  that  few  people
seem to realize the tremendous part that


Notes  and  lieoiews


1 30.'.


internal  bathing  plays  in  the  acquiring  and
maintaining  of  health.

If  you  were  to  ask  a  dozen  people  to  de-
fine an  internal  bath,  you  would  have  as
many  different  definitions,  and  the  proba-
bility is  that  not  one  of  them  would  be  cor-
rect. To  avoid  ,any  misconception  as  to
what  constitutes  an  internal  hath,  let  it  be
said  that  a  hot  water  enema  is  no  more  an
internal  bath  than  a  bill  of  fare  is  a  dinner.

If  it  were  possible  and  agreeable  to  take
the  great  mass  of  thinking  people  to  wit-
ness an  average  post  mortem,  the  sights
they  would  see  and  the  things  they  would
learn  would  prove  of  such  lasting  benefit
and  impress  them  so  profoundly  that
further  argument  in  favor  of  internal  bath-
ing would  be  unnecessary  to  convince  them.
Unfortunately,  however,  it  is  not  possible
to  do  this,  profitable  as  such  an  experience
would  doubtless  prove  to  be.  There  is,
then,  only  one  other  way  to  get  this  infor-
mation into  their  hands,  and  that  is  by  ac-
quainting them  with  such  knowledge  as
will  enable  them  to  appreciate  the  value  of
this  long-sought-for  and  health-producing
necessity.

Few  people  realize  what  a  very  little
thing  is  necessary  sometimes  to  improve
their  physical  condition.  Also,  they  have
almost  no  conception  of  how  little  careless-
ness, indifference  or  neglect  can  be  the  fun-
damental cause  of  the  most  virulent  disease.
For  instance,  that  universal  disorder  from
which  almost  all  humanity  is  suffering,
known  as  "constipation,"  "auto-intoxica-
tion," "auto-infection"  and  a  multitude  of
other  terms,  is  not  only  curable  but  pre-
ventable through  the  consistent  practice  of
internal  bathing.

How  many  people  realize  that  normal
functioning  of  the  bowels  and  a  clean  intes-
tinal tract  make  it  impossible  to  become
sick?  "Man  of  to-day  is  only  fifty  per  cent,
efficient."  Reduced  to  simple  English,  this
means  that  most  men  are  trying  to  do  a
man's  portion  of  work  on  half  a  man's
power. This  applies  equally  to  women.

That  it  is  impossible  to  continue  to  do
this  indefinitely  must  be  apparent  to  all.
Nature  never  intended  the  delicate  human
organism  to  be  operated  on  a  hundred  per
cent,  overload.  A  machine  could  not  stand
this  and  not  break  down,  and  the  body  cer-
tainly cannot  do  more  than  a  machine.
There  is  entirely  too  much  unnecessary  and
avoidable  sickness  in  the  world.

How  many  people  can  you  name,  includ-
ing yourself,  who  are  physically  vigorous,
healthy  and  strong?

It  is  not  a  complex  matter  to  keep  in
condition,  but  it  takes  a  little  time,  and  in
these  strenuous  days  people  have  time  to  do
everything  else  necessary  for  the  attain-
ment of  happiness,  but  the  most  essential
thing  of  all,  that  of  giving  their  bodies  their
proper  care.


People  don't  seem  to  realize,  strange  to
say,  how  important  it  is  to  keep  the  body
free  from  accumulated  body-waste  poisons.
Their  doing  so  would  prevent  the  absorp-
tion into  the  blood  of  the  poisonous  excre-
tions of  the  body,  and  health  would  be  the
inevitable  result.

If  you  would  keep  your  blood  pure,  your
heart  normal,  your  eyes  clear,  your  com-
plexion clean,  your  mind  keen,  your  blood
pressure  normal,  your  nerves  relaxed  and  be
able  to  enjoy  the  vigor  of  youth  in  your  de-
clining years,  practice  internal  bathing  and
begin  to-day.

Now  that  your  attention  has  been  called
to  the  importance  of  internal  bathing,  it
may  be  that  a  number  of  questions  will  sug-
gest themselves  to  your  rnind.  You  will
probably  want  to  know  WHAT  an  Internal
Bath  is,  WHY  people  should  take  them,  and
the  WAY  to  take  them.  These  and  count-
less other  questions  are  all  answered  in  a
booklet  entitled  "THE  WHAT,  THE
WHY  and  THE  WAY  OF  INTERNAL
BATHING,"  written  by  Doctor  Charles  A.
Tyrrell,  the  inventor  of  the  "J.  B.  L.  Cas-
cade," whose  lifelong  study  and  research
along  this  line  make  him  the  pre-eminent
authority  on  this  subject.

Perhaps  you  realize  now,  more  than  ever,
the  truth  of  these  statements,  and  if  the
reading  of  this  article  will  result  in  a  prop-
er appreciation  on  your  part,  of  the  value
of  internal  bathing,  it  will  have  served  its
purpose.  What  you  will  want  to  do  now  is
to  avail  yourself  of  the  opportunity  for
learning  more  about  the  subject,  and  your
calling  for  this  book  will  give  you  that  in-
formation. Do  not  put  off  doing  this,  but
get  the  book  now,  while  the  matter  is  fresh
in  your  mind.  Address:  Charles  A.  Tyrrell,
M.  D.,  134  West  65th  Street,  New  York,
N.  Y.


THE  ZOE  JOHNSON  COMPANY

The  Zoe  Johnson  Company,  Wendell
Bank  Bldg.,  Chicago,  111.,  hdndle  a  line  of
supplies  for  practitioners  of  all  drugless
methods.  About  the  only  difference  be-
tween that  company  and  the  ordinary  phy-
sicians supply  house  is  that  the  Zoe  John-
son Co.  deal  exclusively  with  Drugless  Phy-
sicians and  their  line  is  essentially  different
in  that  respect.

This  company  was  organized  over  two
years  ago  under  the  name  of  H.  D.  Ulmer  &
Co.  It  is  a  thorough  Naturopathic  organi-
zation and  specializes  in  the  sale  of  all
books  and  articles  of  interest  to  the  Pro-
fession.

It  is  the  desire  and  purpose  of  the  Zoe
Johnson  Company  to  give  the  same  service
to  the  Naturopathic  practitioners  that  the
larger  medical  supply  houses  render  to  the
medical  organization.  The  company's
policy  is  consistently  Naturopathic  and  its


1366


Sotes  and  Reviews


growth  should  be  in  proportion  to  the
growth  of  the Naturopathic  movement.

The  company  was  founded  on  the  idea
that  other  considerations  being  equal,  most
Drugless  Practitioners  would  prefer  to
patronize  a  liouse  in  sympathy  with  their
principles  in  preference  to  dealing  with  a
medical  supply  iiouse.  On  this  principle
the  Zoe  Johnson  Co.  solicits  the  trade  and
friendship  of  members  of  all  schools  of
natural  healing.  The  company  also  asserts
that  it  can  save  the  Profession  the  incon-
venience of  ordering  their  supplies  from
widely  different  sources  as  they  carry
practically  everything  that  a  Drugless  Phy-
sician has  occasion  to  use.

The  Zoe  Johnson  Company  claim  to  be
the  only  house  on  earth  dealing  exclusively
with  the  Drugless  Profession  that  carry  a
complete  line  of  supplies.  They  have  for
sale  all  the  books  dealing  with  natural
methods  of  healing,  Naturopathic,  Chiro-
practic, etc.,  also  handle  a  good  line  of
electro-therapeutical  apparatus,  treating
tables  and  other  equipment.

The  company  is  confident  that  rational
healing  methods  will  increase  greatly  with-
in the  next  few  years  and  they  believe  that
a  house  such  as  their  organization  repre-
sents should  increase  its  usefulness  in  pro-
portion to  the  advance  of  Naturopathy  if
accorded  the  support  of  the  Profession.

* * «

THE  LINDLAHR  IDEA

One  of  the  first  Nature  Cure  Institutions
to  be  established  in  this  country  was
founded  by  Dr.  Henry  Lindlahr  of  Chicago
in  the  year  1900.

This  institution  of  humble  origin  has
fought  its  way  against  terrific  opposition
to  a  position  of  prominence  in  the  field  of
therapeutics.  The  scope  of  the  work  per-
formed by  this  institution  has  undergone  a
number  of  extensions,  but  always  has  ad-
hered closely  to  the  fundamental  principles
governing  disease  and  its  cure.

The  home  institution  is  located  in  the
heart  of  Chicago,  a  few  minutes'  ride  from
the  famous  loop  district,  situated  on  a  wide
boulevard  and  surrounded  by  many  of
Chicago's  well-known  institutions  of  learn-
ing.

The  house  itself  is  a  large  and  stately
mansion,  one  of  Chicago's  historic  land-
marks, thoroughly  re-modelled  and  en-
larged to  suit  its  present  purposes.  The
first  floor  of  the  main  building  contains  the
treatment  rooms,  and  bath-rooms  equipped
with  modern  appliances  for  the  application
of  water  cure,  baths,  massage,  osteopathic,
chiropractic,  neuropathic  and  other  of  the
latest  evolved  methods  of  healing.  On  the
next  floor  are  situated  the  doctor's  offices,
pathological  laboratory,  general  offices  of
the  institution,  large  and  spacious  parlors,
and  the  main  dining  room. The  remainder


of  the  house  is  given  over  to  bed-rooms  for
the  accommodation  of  guests,  sun  parlors
and  air  baths.

A  few  years  ago  it  became  necessary  to
enlarge  tiiis  institution  for  the  purpose  of
accommodating  the  growing  number  of  ap-
plicants desirous  of  undergoing  the  Nature
Cure.  This  led  to  tlic  purchase  of  Hunting-
ton Manor  in  the  beautiful  suburb  of  Elm-
hurst,  situated 17  miles  west  of  Chicago.

The  property  comprises  about  8  acres  of
land  laid  out  in  beautiful  lawns,  flower  beds,
vegetable  gardens  and  macadam  drive-
ways. The  extensive  lawns  are  surrounded
by  woods  containing  the  finest  variety  of
trees  of  fifty  years'  growth;  stately  elm,
shade_  maple  and  spreading  oak  along  witii
fir,  pine,  spruce  and  many  other  selecte<i
trees  blending  in  artistic  combinations  and
contrasts.  The  borders  of  the  woods  are
lined  with  many  varieties  of  shrubbery
which  come  into  bloom  successively  during
the  spring  and  summer  season.

Mr.  Bryan  Lathrop,  the  former  owner
and  founder  of  Huntington  Manor  had  a
hobby  for  landscape  gardening,  and  it  was
through  his  efforts  that  Huntington  Manor
became  a  park  in  every  sense  of  the  word.

Dr.  Lindlahr  has  added  to  this,  his  knowl-
edge of  agriculture  by  treating  the  soil
with  the  positive  electro-magnetic  mineral
fertilizers  on  which  depend  the  richness  of
food  products  from  the  viewpoint  of  natural
dietetics.  The  vegetable  garden  which  he
has  established  on  the  grounds  furnishes
both  health  homes  with  the  most  luscious
fruits  and  vegetables  rich  in  mineral  salts,
and,  therefore,  of  unusual  medicinal  value.

In  1916,  it  again  became  necessary  to  en-
large the  institution  and  for  this  purpose
the  adjoining  property  to  Huntington
Manor  was  acquired,  thus  adding  12  more
acres,  and  many  buildings  to  the  original
property.

The  employees  of  the  Lindlahr  Institutes
number  one  hundred  and  twenty.

The  Medical  Staff  consists  of  Dr.  Lind-
lahr, the  chief;  Dr.  Millis,  House  Phy-
sician;  Dr. Carter,  Asst. House Physician;


Lindlahr Sanitarium, Elmhurst, 111.


Notes  and'  Reviews


1367


Dr.  du  Plessis,  and  Dr.  Ulmer,  Asst.  House
Physicians  and  Chief  Supervisors  of  the
special  manipulative  work;  Dr.  Matthiesen,
matron;  Dr.  Larson,  Chief  of  Nursing  Staflf;
Dr. Kilberg, Clinical Pathologist.

The  general  business  of  the  institution  is
managed  by  Mr.  Pilbeam.

The  other  employees  consist  of  Nurses,
operators,  household  help,  engineers,
gardeners, etc.

In  connection  with  the  institution  is  a
training  school  for  nurses  and  the  College
of  Nature  Cure.  All  of  the  nurses,  oper-
ators and  physicians  are  thereby  trained
within  the  institution.  The  plan  upon
which  the  school  was  originally  operated,
and  which  plan  is  still  in  eflfect,  is  to  offer
qualified  young  men  and  women  an  oppor-
tunity of  acquiring  an  education  in  this
work  without  cost  or  expense  to  them.
They  are  given  their  room,  board,  tuition
and  a  salarj'  in"  exchange  for  the  services
which  they  render  the  institution.

The  nurses'  training  course  is  three  years
practice  and  the  college  course  in  Nature
Cure  for  the  degree  of  doctor  is  likewise
of  three  years'  duration.  It  can  be  readily
understood  that  there  are  always  a  greater
number  of  applicants  for  places  in  the  in-
stitution than  there  are  accommodations  for
or  for  whom  there  is  a  sufficient  amount  of
work.  As  a  consequence,  it  becomes  neces-
sary to  establish  a  course  on  a  paid  tuition
basis.  The  College  is  now  offering  a  two
year  course  for  those  students  who  desire
to  earn  a  Doctor's  Degree.  There  are
likewise  many  applications  for  enrollment
by  graduates  of  other  schools  and  systems
of  therapeutics,  and  for  their  accommoda-
tions, there  have  been  established  post-
graduate courses  of  four  and  six  weeks'
duration.  In  order  to  accommodate  these
students,  it  has  been  necessary  to  acquire
three  other  houses  in  the  immediate
neighborhood.

The  work  is  growing  to  such  an  extent
that  more  space  will  have  to  be  added  in
the  very  near  future.  As  there  are  but  few
institutions in this country devoted ex-


Lindlahr Sanitarium, Chicago, 111.


clusively  to  drugless  treatment,  it  behooves
every  practitioner  of  natural  therapeutic
measures  to  acquaint  himself  with  the
Lindlahr  Idea,  as  it  is  quite  frequently  the
case  that  practitioners  find  it  necessary  to
send  patients  to  a  sanitarium,  and  they
should  be  sure  that  they  are  selecting  one
in  which  the  ideas  of  drugless  healing  are
upheld.

This  institution  is  not  subsidized,  nor  en-
dowed. It  is  not  supported  by  any  re-
ligious creed  or  sect,  nor  does  it  support
any  sect,  creed  or  cult.  It  is  an  indepen-
dent non-sectarian  organization  built  on
the  idea  of  service  to  humanity.  It  em-
ploys by  way  of  treatment  only  those  forms
and  methods  which  are  in  harmony  with
Nature's  laws.

This  then  is  the  Lindlahr  Idea, — to  teach
right  living  for  the  establishment  of  health;
to  teach  health  as  the  foundation  of  effi-
ciency; to  teach  efficiency  as  the  basis  of
true  service  to  humanity.

* * *

LOCAL APPLICATIONS MADE
PRACTICAL.

By  F.  F.  BURDICK,  Milton,  Wis.

The  evolution  of  "Local  Applications,"
from  the  days  of  "blistering,"  "cupping,"
"bleeding,"  etc.,  to  the  present  time,  makes
an  interesting  page  in  medical  history.

Every  physician — whether  specialist  or
general  practitioner — has  frequent  demand
for  the  most  effective  means  of  Local  Ap-
plications for  the  relief  of  pain,  congestion,
infections,  sprains,  dislocations,  hyperten-
sions, etc..  and  to  increase  local  nutrition
and  stimulate  reflex  functional  activity  in
sluggish  organs.

Hot  water  bottles,  electric  pads,  soap
stones,  vibrators,  high  frequency  currents,
and  radiant  light  and  heat,  have  all  been
requisitioned  to  service  in  this  important
field  of  therapeutic  ministration.

Light  possesses  many  physical  qualities
which,  when  properly  understood,  readily
give  it  first  place  among  natural  agencies
for  therapeutic  applications.  In  fact,  in
these  days  of  progress,  few  physicians  are
to  be  found,  who  have  not  experienced
some  of  the  splendid  results  of  Radiant  Light
and  Heat  for  the  special  purposes  mention-
ed above.

Light  is  a  vital  stimulant,  to  vegetable
and  animal  cells  alike.  Practically  the  same
physical  processes  are  obtained  in  both,
under  the  influence  of  Light  Rays.

We  are  all  familiar  with  the  effects  of
sunlight  upon  the  dormant  little  garden
seeds  in  spring  time,  stimulating  them  to
leaf,  flower  and  fruitage,  within  the  short
space  of  the  summer  months.  But,  we  fail
to  observe  the  marvelous  effects  of  light
upon the metabolism of our own bodies.

The  same  vital  force  that  tints  the  cheeks
of  the  ripening  fruit  in  the  orchard,  or  aids


13G8


\olcs  and  licvirws


Fig. I


i


the  growing  plant  in  the  garden  to  build
itself  from  air.  water  and  soil,  will  redden
the  blood  in  the  veins  of  the  anemic,  and
help  build  healthy  bone  and  muscle  tissue
from  good corn  and  potatoes.

In  other  words,  the  same  light  rays  that
prepare  the  solids  in  the  soil  for  plant  food
and  stimulate  the  tiny  vegetable  cells  to
growth  and  development,  transform  the
green  starch  of  the  ripening  fruit  into  grape
sugar  for  us,  and  stimulate  the  digestive
and  assimulative  functions  to  their  fullest
activity  for  norrnal  tissue  building  and
repair.

Properly  applied,  light  is  the  most  vital
stimulant  to  the  processes  of  nutrition  with-
in the  realm  of  physical forces.

Reaction  is  obtained  without  the  ex-
penditure  of  vitality.

Light,  penetrating  the  tissues,  stimulates
functional  activities  without  exhausting  ef-
fects, and  is  the  ideal  agency  for  combat-
ting the  diseases  of  childhood  and  other
conditions  associated  with  low  vitality.
Because of this, infantile paralysis, in its


early  stages,  is  being  handled  verj^  success-
fully with  proper  light  applications.

To  place  the  subject  of  Local  Applica-
tions upon  both  a  practical  and  scientific
basis,  the  writer  developed  the  Radio-
Vitant  series  of  Applicators.  They  are
constructed  upon  basic  principles  which
make  them  the  most  effective  and  universal
method  for  local  applications  known:

An  even  distribution  of  light  and  heat
over  the  entire  area  treated,  permits  of
continued  application  with  increasing  in-
tensity, thus  securing  deep,  effective  pene-
tration, without  discomfort  or  danger  to
the  patient.

Wide  range  of  control,  provides  the  most
varied  and  positive  technique,  from  a  low
graduated  heat,  when  used  as  a  "bed
warmer,"  to  the  intense  heat  of  the  baking
cabinet.

Perfect  thermal  insulation  protects  from
all  danger  of  burning  patient  or  bedding.
The  value  of  this  feature  will  be  appreci-
ated by  all  those  familiar  with  the  severe
burning  from  hot  water  bottles,  etc.,  in  the
surgical  ward.


I


Fig.  2


A


Notes  and  Rrnicins


13(i0


They  are  light  and  portable,  and  can  be

easily  carried  to  the  homes  of  the  patients,
or  to  the  hospital.

The  universal  features  provide  the  widest
possible  range  of  adaptation  to  every  pan
of  the  body  and  in  all  positions  and  modal-
ities, including:

(1)  Direct  Method.

With  the  "Applicator"  resting  upon  the
supporters,  (fig.  1)  applications  may  be
made  to  the  back,  chest,  abdomen,  etc.,
varying  the  height  of  the  Applicator  by
extension  of  the  supporters.

(2)  Indirect Method.

Operated  on  the  Radio-Vitant  Stand,  the
applicator  may  be  placed  over  any  portion
of  the  patient's  body  in  bed  (fig.  2)  or  sit-
ting (fig.  3)  with  wide  variations  of  tech-
nique.

(3)  Radio-Vitant  Foot  and  Leg  Bath
(fig.  4).


I


Fig.  3

The  Light  Rays,  dilating  the  blood  ves-
sels of  the  feet  and  legs,  divert  the  blood
from  the  head,  lungs,  stomach,  liver,  etc..
thus  quickly  relieving  congestion  in  these
organs.  A  sheet  wrapped  about  the  legs  of
the  patient,  with  feet  on  Applicators,  forms
the  retaining  walls  for  the  Leg-bath  Cabi-
net. Botton  of  feet  should  be  protected  by
asbestos  or  other  sandals.

(4)  Radio-Vitant Steam Compress.

Too  great  value  can  scarcely  be  placed
upon this  modality.

The  linen  pad  wrung  from  cold  water,  is
placed  in  the  container  with  the  air  tight
covering  (fig.  5).  It  is  then  placed  on  the
chest,  back,  knee-joint,  or  other  parts  de-
sired for  treatment,  under  Applicator.  The
temperature  of  the  compress  is  quickly
brought to the desired point where it is


Fig.  4

held  uniformly  for  an  hour  or  more  with-
out changing.

(5)  Radio-Vitant Baking Cabinet.

By  folding  a  blanket  about  the  lower
edge  of  the  Applicator  or  supported  on
the  "Stand"  and  by  using  the  three  heats
of  640  watts,  the  most  excellent  baking
cabinet  for  inflamed  joints  and  other  dis-
eased parts  is  obtained.

A  black  cotton  covering  for  exposed  areas
absorbs  light  rays  and  moisture  of  the  skin,
making  possible  high  temperatures  without
discomfort.

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  feature,
however,  about  this  new  method  of  Local
Applications  is  that  the  manufacturers  have


1370


\oles  and  Reviews


perfected  dies,  presses,  and  special  tools,
for  building  the  various  outfits  in  large
quantities  at  less  cost  than  ordinarily
charged  for  an  ordinary  lamp  in  a  Para-
bolic reflector.

It  might  be  added  that  an  interesting
brochure  has  been  written  regarding  Local
Applications  Made  Practical,  which  is  free.
Address:  F.  F.  Burdick.  Milton.  Wis.


LOUIS  LUST'S  HEALTH  BAKERY
100  E.  105th  St.,  New  York

Many  foods  which  are  daily  consumed
have  a  disastrous  effect  on  the  body.
People  wonder  whj'  their  hair  comes  out
— why  their  teeth  decay — why  they  have
bad  complexions — why  they  have  head-
aches and many more serious troubles.

These  things  do  not  accompany  health.
Everybody  recognizes  •  that  good  food,
exercise — sunshine — fresh  air  and  a  proper
mental  attitude  are  essential  to  health.
While  the  importance  of  "good  food"  is
acknowledged,  the  people  of  America  are
just  beginning  to  learn  what  good  food
really  is.  Good  food  is  good  in  every
respect.  It  looks  good,  tastes  good  and
does  good,  in  that  it  supplies  the  chemical
elements  and  other  properties  necessary  to
build  the  body.


Mr. T.oiiis Lust


Whole  wheat  bread  is  good  food.

Dr.  Harvey  Wiley  Advises  Women  to
Use  Whole  Wheat  Product  Next  to  coffee,
white  bread  is  the  Nation's  greatest  curse,
Dr.  Harvey  Wiley,  food  expert,  told  a
meeting  of  the  Women's  Section  of  the
.\avy  League,  "White  bread  is  poisonous,"
he  said.  "Whole  wheat  bread  is  the  only
kind.  If  America  had  been  nourished
properly  from  the  cradle  up,  the  majority
of  men  to-day  would  not  be  unfit  for  mili-
tary service."

Thousands  of  Physicians  and  Dentists
and  many  Sanitariums  advocate  whole
wheat  bread.  Among  many  prominent
advocates  are:  Alfred  W.  McCann — in  The
New  York  Globe;  Dr.  W.  A.  Evans— in  The
Chicago  Tribune;  Martin  Delaney — in  The
Chicago  American;  Dr.  Albert  S.  Gray — in
The  Daily  News;  Bernarr  Macfadden — in
Physical  Culture  Magazine;  Phillip  B
Hawk,  Ph.  D. — in  Ladies'  Home  Journal;
Dr.  Benedict  Lust — in  the  Herald  of  Health
and  Naturopath;  Dr.  F.  W.  Collins— in
"Mecca  News."

The  late  Rev.  Father  Sebastian  Kneipp
endorses  and  recommends  the  exclusive
use  of  pure  natural  Whole  Wheat  Bread  in
all  his  books  written  on  this  great  Natural
food  movement.

Foods  that  prevent  constipation,  foods
that  build,  foods  not  deprived  of  their
mineral  elements  nor  organic  salts.

This  Natural  Whole  Wheat  Bread  and
many  other  genuine  Whole  Wheat  Pro-
ducts, like  Whole  Wheat  Fruit  Bread,  W
W.  Muffins,  Zwieback  Crackers,  Soup  Meal,
Bran  Rolls,  Bran  Bread,  and,  also,  the
genuine  whole  wheat  flour,  are  manufac-
tured exclusively  by  Louis  Lust's  Health
Food  Bakery,  New  York,  and  distributed
daily to agencies in greater New York.

♦  * *

MacKINNON,  JOHN L.,  D.  C,  260  Fair
Street,  Kingston,  N.  Y.

Born  in  1888,  Dr.  MacKinnon  graduated
at  the  Palmer  School  of  Chiropractic  in
1916,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Universal
Chiropractic  College  and  a  partner  in  the
firm  of  Froude  &  MacKinnon.

*  * *

HISTORY OF  THE  "MECCA OF

CHIROPRACTIC" HOSPITAL AND

CLINIC OF DRUGLESS PHYSICIANS

AND BLOODLESS SURGEONS

Dr.  F.  W.  Collins,  in  1911,  in  connection
with  the  New  Jersey  College  of  Chiroprac-
tic, established  a  clinic  for  the  poor  at  1113
Washington  St.,  Hoboken,  N.  J.  The
parlor  of  his  home  was  used  for  the  school,
and  the  hospital  consisted  of  the  back
parlor  with one bed.

In  1912,  Dr.  G.  E.  Harley  became  asso-.
ciated  with  Dr.  Collins,  and  a  free  clinic
and  hospital  was  opened  in  the  Terminal
Building,  Hoboken,  with  one  adjusting
table,  and  the  following  announcement  ap-
peared  in the Hoboken papers:


^^


Notes  and  Reviews


1371


I


A  free  clinic  has  been  established  for
the  poor  who  desire  to  receive  Chiro-
practic Adjustments  in  the  new  science
of  healing  without  drugs.  Apply,
Rooms  605-607  Terminal  Buildmg,
Hoboken,  N.  J.

In  1913,  the  New  Jersey  College  of  Chiro-
practic was  moved  to  122  Roseville  Ave.,
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  incorporated  under  the
laws  of  the  State  of  New  Jersey  as  an  in-
stitution of  learning.  One  room  was  de-
voted exclusively  to  free  clinic  patients
under  the  direction  of  Dr.  J.  C.  Saile;  this
room  containing  two  tables.  This  clinic
became  so  large  that  it  was  necessary  to
send  out  the  senior  students  to  the  homes
of  patients  that  were  afflicted  and  could  not
get  out  of  the  house.


Dr. F'. W. Collins

The  method  pursued  was  this:  two  or
three  students  were  taken  to  these  cases
with  one  of  the  professors,  and  the  case
lectured  on  and  left  in  charge  of  Seniors.

In  connection  with  the  New  Jersey  Col-
lege of  Chiropractic  advertisement,  the
clinic  was  advertised  in  over  thirty  papers
published  in  the  State.

The  clinics  grew  daily,  and  in  1915  it  was
necessary  to  open  another  room,  using  one
for  women  and  crippled  girls,  the  other
for  men  and  crippled  boys,  with  nine  tables
for adjusting.


In  January,  1916,  Dr.  Saile  resigned,  and
Dr.  Matthew  Robinson  was  appointed
chief director of  clinics.

The  wonderful  success  of  Chiropractic
and  Naturopathy  in  the  curing  of  disease
has  spread  throughout  the  State,  and  it
was  decided  this  year  to  form  a  corpora-
tion, and  secure  a  site  for  a  Hospital  in
Newark, in the Roseville section.

The  charter  of  incorporation  has  been
received  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  for
the  "Mecca  of  Chiropractic"  Hospital  and
Clinic  of  Drugless  Physicians  and  Blood-
less Surgeons  of  the  State  of  New  Jersey,
at  122  Roseville  Ave.,  Newark,  N.  J. — In-
corporated Under  the  Laws  of  the  State  of
New  Jersey,  for  the  Purpose  of

Conducting  Clinics  for  the  poor;

To  establish  Hospitals  and  Ambulance
service  in  the  Counties  of  the  State  of  New
Jersey;

To  train  nurses  Chiropractically  in  the
care  of  the  sick  by  drugless  methods;

To  furnish  Hospital  and  Clinical  practice
for  graduate  doctors  and  students  to  be-
come drugless  physicians  and  bloodless
surgeons;

To  give  free  lectures  and  demonstrations
to  the  public  on  Chiropractic  and  drugless
sciences;

To  promote  harmony  and  brotherly  feel-
ing throughout  the  State  of  New  Jersey
wih  all  Chiropractors  and  drugless  practi-
tioners, the  upholding  of  professional  ethics
and  the  furthering  of  Social  Intercourse
among  its  members.

The  Board  of  Directors  and
Incorporators
Matthew  H.  Robinson,  Ph.  G.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.
John  R.  Blechschmidt,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.
M.  Elting  Gore,  M.  D.,  N.  D.,  D.  C.
Benedict  Lust,  M.  D.,  N.  D.,  D.  C.
John  F.  G.  Luepke,  M.  D.,  S.  D.
James  S.  E.  Freel,  N.  D.,  D.  C.
Peter  T.  Rohr,  N.  D..  D.  C,  Ph.  C.
Mathilda  V.  Leary,  R.  N..  N.  D..  D.  C.
Edward  W.  Collins,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.
Chas.  O.  Collins.  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Officers  and  Attending  Physicians

John  R.  Blechschmidt,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C,

President.
M.  Elting  Gore,  M.  D.,  N.  D..  D.  C,  First

Vice-President.
William Davidson, M. D.. D. O., D. C.

Second Vice-President.
Benedict  Lust. M.  D., N. D..  D.  C.  Third

Vice-President.
John F. G. Luepke, M. D.. S. D., Fourth

Vice-President.
Alfred L. Swain,  M.  T. D..  D. C. Ph.  C,

Secretary.
Helen Weber, N. D., D. C, Assistant

Secretary.
Matthew  H.  Robinson.  Ph.  G.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Treasurer.
M.  Elizabeth  Ruth,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Assistant

Treasurer.


1372


Nofrs  and  Reviews


Gladys  L.  Crowell,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Otto  Schults,  Jr.,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Margaret  May  Russell,  N. D.,  D.  C.

Francis  W.  Allen,  N.  D.,  D. C.

Swen  Nelson.  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Edward  W.  Collins,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Herbert  Oppenheimer, Ph. D., D.  C.

Toaguine  F.  Pestaner,  M.  T.  D.,  D.  C.

Joseph  Volz,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Ethel  Nora  Collins,  D.  C.

Sarah Ross, D. C.

L,  V.  Mockridge,  D.  O.,  D.  C.

Emil  Weber,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Charles  O.  Collins,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Henry  W.  August,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Theodore  T.  Jennings,  N.  D.,  M.  T.  D.,  D.  C.

Louis Hubner,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Joseph  Gilliar,  N.  D..  D.  C.

Edward Ponger,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Charles  A.  Heyler.  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Harry  C.  De  Baun,  M.  E..  D.  C.

George  Zwerneman,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Francis  W.  Blair,  Oph.  D..  D.  O.,  D.  C.

Maud  A.  Brooks,  D.  C.

Gerald  A.  Richardson,  D.  O.,  D.  C.

I.  A.  Goldstein,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Richard  Minthorne, D.  C.

John  G.  O.  Gehrs,  D.  C,  N.  D.

Lydia  E.  Lange,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

John  J.  Dittrich,  D.  C.

William  J.  Flaherty,  D. C.

F.  V.  Jacobs,  D.  C.

James  G.  M. Houghton, D.  C.

Frank  O.  Kuehner,  D.  C.

Helen  Deuell Roberts, D.  C.

Emil  Schultz,  D.  C.

Cornelia  J.  Browne,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

E. H.  Sickles,  D.  C.

H.  M.  Platto,  D.  C.

T.  F.  Robinson.  N.  D..  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

William  Ruth.  D.  C.

G.  W.  Lauterwasser,  D.  C,  N.  D.
George Maulbetsch, D.  C.
Bertha  Bolte,  D.  C.

Edward Edsall,  D. C. Ph.  C.

Joseph  A.  Buettner,  N.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Alfred  T.  Weiser,  N.  D.,  D.  C.

Robert  J.  Shaw,  D.  C.

Harrv  E.  Schaumberg,  D.  C.

Craig  M.  Kightlinger,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Lorenzo  Dodd.  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

J.  M.  Jacobs,  D.  C.

Henry  W.  Heydt,  D.  C.

Henry  P.  Livesey,  D.  C.

Michael  L.  Munley,  N.  D.,  D.  C.  IMi.  C.

Mildred MacBride, D. C.

George  .'\.  Whitleigh,  D.  C

Harry  L.  Pohs,  D.  C.

Tames Edwin Knox, D. C.

Adolph  F.  Wahl,  N.  D.,  D.  C.  Ph.  C.

Frank  Smith.  D.  C.  N.  D.

Henry  E.  Schied,  D.  C.

Joseph  Mystraszesky,  D.  C.

Carrie  Fehl,  D.  C.

A.  Campopiano,  D.  C.

L.  Winkleman,  D.  C.

Peter  J.  Rohr,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.

Nathan  Cole,  D.  C.

C.  V.  Zanders.  D.  C,  Ph.  C.


Consulting Physicians

Frederick  W.  Collins,  M.  D.,  D.  O.,  D.  C.

Ph.  C.
Benedict  Lust,  M.  D.,  N.  D.,  D.  O.,  Ph.  C
Morris  Elting  Gore,  M.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.
George E. Harlev, M. .\., D. O., D. C,

Ph.  C.
George  H.  Patchen,  M.  D.,  D.  C,  Ph.  C.
W. Wallace Fritz, M. D., N. D., D. C,

Ph. C.
Jacob  Lang,  D.  O.,  N.  D..  D.  C.  Ph.  C.
C.  Eugene  Christian.  F. S.  D..  D.  C.
John  F.  G.  Leupke,  M.  D.,  S.  D.,  D.  C.

Dr.  Collins'  book,  "Chiropractic  in  a  Nut-
shell" will  soon  go  to  press.  This  is  a
unique  work — nothing  like  it  has  ever  be-
fore been  published.

Dr.  Willard  Carver  says,  "although  I  do-
not  believe  in  all  of  Dr.  Collins'  views,  I
believe  him  to  be  sincere.

Dr.  Stretch  said  at  the  fifth  annual  ban-
quet of  the  New  Jersey  College  of  Chiro-
practic, "Dr.  Collins  is  the  greatest  drug-
less  phj'sician of  the  twentieth century."

Dr.  B.  Lust,  at  the  annual  pilgrimage  of
the  Faculty  and  Students  at  the  Yungborn,
Butler,  N.  J.,  June  1916,  said,  "We  have
had  many  pioneers  in  the  drugless  healing
art,  but  the  man  that  has  done  more  than
all  the  pioneers,  the  man  that  has  given
more  money  and  assisted  in  legislative
work  than  all  the  others  put  together  in
the  State  of  New  Jersey,  is  Dr.  F.  W.
Collins,  and  it  gives  me  unbounded  pleas-
ure to  introduce  to  you  Dr.  F.  \\'.  Collins."

Dr.  .'\.  Victory,  in  Philadelphia,  in  ad-
dressing some  students  at  the  Philadelphia
College  of  Osteopathy,  said,  "Dr.  Collins
is  an  authority  on  the  cure  of  disease,  es-
pecially Infantile  Paralysis,  and  we  take
off  our  hat  to  him."

Dr.  Wallace  Fritz,  at  the  Convention  in
Atlantic  Citj'  of  Drugless  Physicians,  said,
"It  gives  me  pleasure  to  introduce  to  you
a  man  who  knows  more  about  legislation
than  all  the  others  in  the  State."

Dr.  C.  A.  Burdette,  Psychologist,  says,
"Dr. Collins Has a Master Mind."

Dr.  C.  F.  Haverin  says,  "It  was  through
the  efforts  of  Dr.  Collins  and  his  money
and  influence  that  Osteopaths  are  recog-
nized in  New  Jersey."

Dr.  B.  J.  Palmer  said,  regarding  the  last
Chiropractic  T^ill,  that  Dr.  Collins  would
be  the  only  man  in  the  State  of  N.  J.  that
could  meet  tlie  requirements  and  pass  such
examinations  as  required  by  the  Chiro-
practic Act.

Dr.  Collins  was  selected  by  Thomas
Flemming,  the  cartoonist,  as  one  of  the
100  prominent  Newarkers.  as  Macbeth,
with  the  motto  "Throw  Physic  to  the  dogs.
I'll  have  none  of  it. I  am  a  Chiropractor."

Dr.  Wire,  an  M.  D.,  says,  "I  have  heard
doctors  lecture  in  many  Colleges,  but  there
is  only  one  real  lecturer,  and  that  is  Dr.
F. W. Collins."


Notes  and  Reviews
»


i;j-


Dr.  Paczkowski,  M.  D.,  says,  "To  think
we  have  to  go  to  a  Medical  College  for
four  years,  serve  interne  for  one  year,  pass
a  stiff  State  Board  examination,  and  then
come  to  Dr.  Collins,  a  Chiropractor,  to
learn  how to  cure disease."

Miss  Rose  E.  Tapley,  the  great  moving
picture  actress,  says,  "Dr.  Collins  js  a  wiz-
ard  at healing the sick."

Dr.  Schneider  said,  after  Dr.  Collins'  lec-
ture in  St.  Cccila  Lodge  of  Masons,  in
Newark,  "That  man  Collins  is  shaking  the
very  foundation  of  medical  theory,  don't
ever  have him lecture here again.


more  of  practical  Chiropractic  than  li.  J.
Palmer  and  all  the  rest  put  together."

Dr.  1).  Lust  says,  "Dr.  F.  W.  Collins  is  a
man  wiio  does  things.  We  live  in  the  same
community  and  I  am  glad  to  count  him  as
my  sincere friend."

Dr.  Arnold,  at  iiutler,  exclaimed  to  the
delegation  making  the  Pilgrimage  to  the
Vungborn,  "That  is  the  Collins  bunch.
They  arc  bright  and  intelligent,  1  am  glad
to  meet  them."

Prof.  Jackson,  Psychologist,  says,  "Dr.
Collins  is  a Master  in  the  healing  Art."

Prof.  Nelson  Sizer,  of  the  Wells  Phreno-


Xew .Ter.sey College and Hospital of Chiropractic, Newark, N. J.


Dr.  B.  A.  Dresser  stated  to  a  class  he  was
instructing  in  1914.  in  the  New  Jersey  Col-
lege of  Chiropractic,  that  he  was  a  gradu-
ate of  the  Universal  College  of  Chiroprac-
tic in  Davenport,  had  taken  special  work
under  Dr.  Sharpe  of  the  Davenport  College
of  Chiropractic,  had  been  in  the  Palmer
School  of  Chiropractic  and  talked  with  Dr.
Palmer  and  watched  him  at  work,  but  he
said  the  greatest  adjustor  of  all  is  your
Dean,  Dr.  F.  W.  Collins.  He  is  truly  the
King  of  Adjustors:  we  can  all  lift  our  hat
to  him.

Dr.  Eugene  Christian  says.  "As  a  lec-
turer and  instructor,  Dr.  Collins  has  no
peer."

Dr.  W^  Wallace  Fritz  says,  "Dr.  Collins
has  the  knack  to  know  how  to  control;  his
students  stick  and  obey  his  every  wish."

Dr.  Blumer  exclaimed,  "Dr.  Collins  is  a
wonder."

Dr.  .\.  E.  Gregory  says,  "Dr.  F.  W.  Col-
lins is a constructive builder. He knows


logical  Cabinet,  says.  "What  You  (Col-
lins) know  how  to  do,  few  can  pass  or  ex-
cel; you  would  make  a  great  surgeon,  lec-
turer and teacher."

Dr.  Delmar  Eugene  Croft,  Psychothera-
pist, says,  in  the  delineation  of  Dr.  Collins,
"You  will  excel  as  a  Scientist,  Surgeon.
Specialist,  Advisor,  Organizer,  Lecturer,
Public Speaker,  W'riter  and Manager.

Dr.  Paul  Von  de  Schoppe,  character  de-
lineator, says  "Dr.  Collins  will  make  his
mark  in  the  world  bj-  his  intense  feeling,
vitalit}-  and  energy.  He  has  Perception.
Occult  Insight,  Premonition,  Creative
Royaltj',  Impulse,  Tact,  Judgment,  Zeal,
Courage,  Sagacity.  Decision,  Genius.
Justice,  Endurance.  Determination  and
Force.  He  is  a  lover  of  the  beautiful,  is
gentle,  harmonious,  sympathetic,  full  of
Hope,  Faith  and  Love.  He  is  Receptive,
Spiritual,  Domestic.  Benevolent,  Willing,
and  Active — a  man  when  you  once  know
him,  is  to  love him."


1374


Notes  and  Reviews


NATIONAL  CHIROPRACTIC  LEAGUE

The  National  Chiropractic  League  was
founded  by  a  number  of  prominent  Chiro-
practors whose  fundamental  aim  was  to
bring  together  the  members  of  Chiropractic
societies;  all  the  Chiropractic  Schools  and
colleges  and  all  the  students  attending  Chi-
ropractic Schools  and  Colleges  in  the  coun-
try. Already  in  its  short  career  it  may  be
stated  to  include  200  odd  members.  Officers
elected  for  the  first  two  years  are  as  fol-
lows: A.  Deininger,  D.  C,  D.  C,  N.  D.,
President,  Dean  of  New  York  School  of
Chiropractic;  Chief  of  Staff  of  Chiropractic
Sanatarium,  Vice-Presidents:  L.  Kaim,  Ph.
G.,  D.  C,  D.  C,  representing  societies.  B.
Lust,  M.  D.,  D.  O.,  N.  D.,  exchange-vice-
president,  president  American  Naturopath
Association,  Editor  of  Herald  of  Health
and  Naturopath.  E.  A.  Deininger,  repre-
senting Sanataria.  Mrs.  B.  Sears,  repre-
senting Chiropractic  students.  Treasurer:
Frank  L.  Tucker,  D.  C.  Board  of  Governors
Dr.  A.  C.  Broline,  Dr.  H.  Mitchell,  Dr.  H.
Harris,  Dr.  J.  S.  Riley,  Pres.  Washington
School  of  Chiropractic,  Dr.  M.  Broberg,
Chief  of  Broberg  Institute.  As  Executive
Secretary  S.  Gerschanek,  A.  M.  was  elected
to  give  histime  and  labors  to  carrying  out
all  those  aims  and  purposes  for  which  the
League  was  formed.

Object  of  the  League

1.  To  advance  the  Philosophy,  Science  and
Art  of  Chiropractic  in  every  and  all  legiti-
mate ways.  2.  To  co-ordinate  and  to  syste-
matize a  uniform  plan  to  obtain  and  to
promote  favorable  legislation  in  all  the
states  of  the  Union.  3.  To  undertake  and
to  encourage  and  to  support  all  campaigns
for  legislative  recognition;  to  oppose  un-
favorable acts  throughout  the  country.
4.  To  advance  the  standards  of  education
and  to  establish  minimum  requirements  in
Chiropractic  Schools  and  Colleges.  5.  To
spread  and  disseminate  information  con-
cerning Chiropractic  and  its  principles
among  the  laity.  6.  To  advance  and  stimu-
late further  growth  of  membership  among
its  competent  members.  7.  To  formulate
and  encourage  high  ethical  standards  in  the
profession.  8.  To  promote  and  establish
additional  local  and  state  chapters  or  branch
societies  in  every  state  and  important  cities,
or  strengthen  those  already  formed  which
join  the  League.  9.  To  promote  and  to  ad-
vance professional  intimacy  and  to  ex-
change institutional  courtesy  and  ideas
among  and  between  all  recognized  Chiro-
practic Schools  and  Colleges.  10.  To  estab-
lish a  library  and  Clearing  House  of  Infor-
mation, both  for  the  Societies,  Schools,
members  and  the  laity.  11.  To  condemn  and
disbar  from  practice  those  Chiropractors
who  are  proven  dishonest  or  incapable.  12.
To  conduct  a  registration  bureau,  covering
every  section  of  the  country,  thus  aiding
the practitioners to virgin fields and to


spread  the  gospel  of  Chiropractic  into
every  city,  village  and  hamlet  of  the  coun-
try. 13.  To  provide  a  form  of  discussion,
issuing  bulletins  of  information  and  pro-
gress and  publishing  an  official  organ.  14.
To  aid  in  establishing  free  Clinics.  15.  To
enlist  the  moral  support  and  financial  aid
of  the  leading  men  and  women  in  the  com-
munity, to  spread  the  gospel  of  right  living
through  Chiropractic.  Membership  to  the
League  is  open  to  every  Chiropractor  and
to  every  man  and  woman  who  may  in  any
way  be  interested  in  Chiropractic  and  in  its
endeavors  to  spread  the  gospels  of  the
drugless  profession.  Address  the  Executive
Secretary,  39th  Street  and  Broadway,  New
York  City.


THE NATURAL LIFE COLONY AT
PALM  CITY,  CUBA

The  Natural  Life  Colony,  which  was  a
dream  for  so  many  years  and  looked  so
many  times  as  though  it  would  never  re-
alize, has  now  become  a  fact.  We  are  glad
to  announce  to  all  who  are  interested  in
this  project  that  the  Colony  Association
has  taken  up  1,500  acres  of  land  at  Palm
City,  Province  of  Camenquey,  Cuba.

After  examining  prospective  sites
throughout  the  United  States,  including  the
Pacific  Coast,  Florida,  etc.,  we  nowhere
found  exactly  the  conditions  that  we  would
like  to  have  for  a  Natural  Life  Colony.  We
had  to  consider  climate,  location,  soil,  gov'
ernment,  market,  etc.  The  northern  coast
of  Cuba  offered  us  the  best  inducement.

In  the  first  place,  on  account  of  its  ideal
climate,  which  is  good  all  year  round,
neither  excessively  hot  nor  very  cold,  ab-
solutely frostproof.  This  was  one  of  the
special  points  which  discouraged  us  in
Florida  and  California;  particularly  the
frost  that  ruins  a  man's  investment  and
labor  in  a  night.

In  the  second  place,  the  soil  is  of  the
very  best.  We  do  not  believe  in  artificial
fertilizers.  Here  in  the  rich  Cubitas  Val-
ley we  have  an  inexhaustible  soil  where
horticulture  and  agriculture  can  be  carried
on  all  the  year  round.  This  soil  will  yield
splendid  foods,  rich  in  organic  vegetable
salts.  The  Cubitas  Mountains  are  extinct
volcanoes  and  the  lava  from  the  eruptions
has  formed  the  soil.  There  is  no  better  soil
than  the  lava  soil.  There  is  not  a  better
fertilizer  than  Nature's  natural  mineral  fer-
tilizer. Fruits,  nuts,  vegetables  and  salads
raised  in  such  soil  prevent  disease,  because
bodies  raised  on  such  food  will  be  disease
resistant;  in  fact  the  Nature  Cure  movement
today  teaches  that  in  order  to  cure  and
prevent  disease  we  have  to  treat  the  soil,
putting  into  it  what  our  bodies  need  and
have  it  transformed  by  Nature  into  organic
salts  which  are  essential  for  normal  Health.
The  Colonists  we  are  looking  for  and
who  have  interested  themselves  up  to  now
are  those  who  believe  in  the  strict  natural


Notes  and  Reviews


137:


life  as  held  out  by  our  great  pioneers  and
leaders:  Engelhardt,  Ehret,  Just,  Lahmann
and  Kuhne.  Whoever  studies  the  principles
of  these  great  masters  and  leaders  in  nat-
ural life  and  Nature  Cure,  knows  what  the
Colony  stands  for.

At  Palm  City  a  man  can  have  a  strict
cocovorian  diet;  he  can  have  fruits,  nuts,
vegetables  and  salads;  or  he  can  become  a
general  vegetarian  as  legumes  are  plentiful
and  easily  raised  all  the  year  round.

The  beautiful  bays,  islands,  keys,  salt
water  and  fresh  water  and  Nature  in  its
grandeur  and  simplicity  are  open  for  every-
body.

The  section  is  so  far  only  settled  by  Am-
ericans and  Germans,  has  public  schools,
churches  and  transportation  by  water  at
present  to  the  port  of  Nuevitas  or  Caibarien.

Those  who  wish  to  live  on  the  water
front  can  do  so.  Those  who  desire  a  higher
inland  location  have  plenty  of  opportunities
to  take  up  holdings.

The  Colonists  we  desire  arc  of  two
classes:

First,  those  who  will  stay  permanently,
taking-  up  5  or  10  acre  tracts,  planting  fruits
and  nuts  for  home  consumption  and  also
the  market.  Cocoanuts,  alligator  pears,
oranges,  grape  fruit  and  other  tropical
fruits  bring  good  prices.  Also  some  in-
dustries are  contemplated  along  the  pure
food  line  so  that  the  local  products  can  be
used  by  people  in  the  North.

Second,  those  who  come  to  spend  an  ideal
and  happy  life  and  take  up  bungalows  for
homes  for  the  winter  or  the  whole  year.

The  bungalows  will  have  a  small  acreage
so  a  man  can  get  his  fruits,  vegetables  and
nuts for  himself  right from the  property.

The  Association  will  sell  uncleared,
cleared  and  planted  tracts,  also  ready  furn-
ished homes  so  that  when  the  Colonist
comes  he  finds  a  house  ready  for  occupancy.
There  will  be  water  and  electric  light  sup-
plied for  all  bungalows.  The  buildings  will  be
so  located  that  sun  and  air  baths  can  be  in-
dulged in  common  or  either  on  the  beach
or  special  reserved  parks  for  the  purpose.

We  do  not  wish  paupers  and  people  who
have  the  idea  that  somebody  else  will  furn-
ish them  an  existence  in  the  Colony.  Only
honest,  sincere  people,  with  character,  who
have  sufficient  means  to  establish  a  home
for  themselves  and  are  ready  to  work  out
their  own  salvation  are  welcome.  Appli-
cants who  can  take  up  homes  or  tracts  and
pay  for  in  full  when  taking  possession  of
land  are  only  wanted  at  present.

THE NATURAL LIFE CENTRE

BUTLER,  NEW  JERSEY.  U.  S.  A.


NEW YORK SCHOOL OF CHIRO-
PRACTIC.

The  New  York  School  of  Chiropractic  is
regarded  by  all  the  professionals  as  one  of
Art, Science and Philosophy of Chiro-


practic. It  was  founded  upon  sound  Psy-
chological principles  of  educational  laws  so
that  each  and  every  one  of  its  graduates
may  claim  to  combine  all  the  theories  and
technical  practice  of  Chiropractic  plus  broad
cultural  knowledge  of  all  those  subjects
both  directly  and  indirectly  relating  to  the
drugless  profession.  Every  graduate  is  a
thoroughly  professional  and  technical  au-
thority. The  School  requires  an  actual  at-
tendance of  eighteen  months  in  a  two  year
course.  In  its  day  department,  regular  class-
es are  held  from  9  A.  M.  to  1  P.  M.  During
these  periods  the  subjects  given  include  the
following:  Anatomy,  Physiology,  Physiolo-
gical Chemistry,  Physics,  Biology,  Diete-
tics, Symptomatology,  Bacteriology,  Histo-
logy, Urmology,  Practical  Dissection,  Mi-
croscopy, in  a  sequence  both  logical  and
natural.  In  the  afternoon  from  2  to  4  p.  m.
daily  Clinical  practice  is  given  in  our  free
Clinic  attached  to  the  School  where  innu-
merable men,  women  and  children  are
treated  daily.  During  the  senior  year  the
students  treat  patients  personally,  under
the  direct  supervision  of  the  instructors.
In  addition,  not  only  by  didactic  instruction,
but  by  actual  practical  labors  in  the  labo-
ratory, by  scientific  devices  for  proper  teach-
ing and  study  of  Biology,  Anatomy,  Osteo-
logy, Physiological  Chemistry  and  all  those
apparatus  used  by  the  Chiropractors  are
employed  and  demonstrated  in  the  actual
class  room  practice  and  clinical  labors.  In
the  evening,  the  same  thorough  attention  is
given;  hours  being  from  7  to  10.30  with
periods  devoted  to  practice  in  the  Clinic  at
the  convenience  of  the  School.  Every  in-
structor employed  in  the  School  must  be
and  is  an  experienced  teacher  of  many  years
of  practical  labors  and  in  addition  men,
who  have  had  many  years  of  actual  experi-
ence as  Chiropractors.  The  School  is  lo-
cated at  39th  Street  and  Broadway,  New
York  City;  which  is  most  centrally  situa-
ted and  most  convenient  to  the  transit
lines  both  within  the  city  and  to  the  sub-
urbs: A  catalogue  giving  full  details  will  be
sent  upon  request  to  the  Registrar;  S.  Ger-
schanek,  A.  M.  Our  faculty  is  composed  at
the  present  as  follows:  A.  Deininger,  D.  O.,
D.  C,  N.  D.,  Dean— Professor  of  the  Theo-
ry and  Practice  of  Chiropractic.  S.  Ger-
schanek,  A.  B.,  A.  M.,  D.  C. — Professor  of
Physiology,  Bacteriologv,  and  Biology.  El-
vira A.  Deininger.  D.  O..  D.  C,  N.  D.— Pro-
fessor of  Palpation.  Nerve  Tracing  and
Adjustment.  I.  Harris.  D.  C. — Instructor  of
Electro  Therapy.  Frank,  L.  Tucker,  D.  C. —
Instructor  of  Hygiene.  First  Aid.  F.  Hirsh-
land,  M.  D. — Professor  of  Practical  Dissec-
tion at  the  Women's  Hospital.  D.  Fergu-
son. D.  C. — Instructor  of  Neurology.  B.
Lust.  M.  D..  D.  O..  N.  D..  D.  C— Instructor
of  Naturopathy  and  Hvdrotherapv.  L.
Kaim.  Ph.  G..  D.  C..  D.  'C— Profes'sor  of
Chemistry  and  Toxicology.  I.  Pinz,  M.  D.
— Instructor  of  Anatomy.  E.  H.  Tunison.
N.  D.,  D.  C. — Professor  of  Dietetics.


1376


iVo/f's  and  Rrviews


A  RATIONAL  MEDICAL  SCHOOL
Vetus  Academia  (O.  P,  M.  College)

The  Vetus  Academia  (O.  P.  M.  College),
formerly  known  as  the  Old  Physio  Medical
College,  was  organized  in  1898  by  Dr.  C.  F.
Conrad,  who  later  organized  the  affiliated
institutions,  the  Eclectic  Osteopathic  In-
stitute and  the  National Eclectic  Institute.

The  \'etus  Academy  (O.  P.  M.  College),
was  incorporated  in  1914  and  is  registered
with  the  Secretary  of  State  in  Pennsylvania
and  New  Jersey.  The  Director's  private
office  is  located  at  110  West  90th  Street,
New  York  City.  For  many  years  a  New
Jersey  branch  has  been  successfully  con-
ducted at  120  Palisade  Avenue,  West  Ho-
boken.  The  system  taught  is  eclectic,
which  means  the  best  chosen  from  every
branch  of  nature-healing,  combined  with
the  teachings  of  Europe's  greatest  naturo-
paths. Instruction  in  English.  German  and
Swedish.  The  officers  of  the  College  for
1917  are  H.  Morgenbesser,  B.  S.,  M.  D.,
President;  J.  B.  Praeger,  M.  D.,  Secretary;
Dr.  F.  Pfau,  Treasurer.  Vice-Presidents
are:  J.  Safian,  M.  D.;  H.  Bick,  M.  D.;  E.
Carroll,  D.  O.;  and  C.  E.  Binck,  D.  O.
Over  a  hundred  graduates  from  the  Osteo-
pathy Department  of  this  College  have
been  licensed  to  practice  Osteopathy  in  the
States of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

A  successful  future  is  predicted  for  all
who  graduate  from  this  and  the  affiliated
institutions.

*  * *

THE  REST  HOME

Virginia  Beach,  Va.

Miss  A.  L.  Pratt,  N.  D.,  D.M.T.,  Graduate
of  Liverpool  Royal  Infirmary,  England,
1891,  Liverpool  Maternity  Hospital,  1891,
Queen  Victoria's  Institute,  London,  Eng-
land, 1901.  The  College  of  Fine  Forces,
California.  E.  D.  Babbitt  Sunlight  Healing.
A  member  of  American  Naturopathic  As-
sociation, 1916  and  student  of  Nature  cure
from  the  Lindlahr  College  of  Nature  Cure,
Chicago.  (28  years  of  Professional  ex-
perience). Born  March  18th,  1864,  England.
Miss  Pratt  and  her  assistants  employ
hydropathy,  heliotherapy,  massage,  etc.,
together  with  health  foods  with  signal
success.  The  Rest  Home  is  situated  on
the  edge  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  whose
surf  rolls  ceaselessly  on  the  beach.  Four
miles  north  by  trolley  is  Cape  Henry,  whose
hills  of  sand,  rising  sixty  feet  above  sea
level,  furnish  a  recreation  ground  many
square  miles  in  extent;  a  natural  solarium
of tremendous potency in the cure of

disease.

*  * *

DR.  SCHROTH'S  ILLINOIS  POST

GRADUATE AND TRAINING

SCHOOL  FOR  NURSES

The  Illinois  Post  Graduate  and  Training
School for Nurses was organized twelve


years  ago  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrat-"
ing  to  the  public  and  their  students  that
any  ordinary  person  can  be  taught  all
branches  of  nursing  in  two  years'  time  in-
stead of  three  which  the  hospitals  require,
and  at  the  end  of  two  years'  training  be
more  efficient  and  reliable  than  a  three
year  hospital  nurse.  This,  of  course,  is  due
to  their  special  system  of  teaching  and
the  elimination  of  the  drudgery  which  is
required of the hospital nurses.

Their  nurses  receive  a  thorough  and
complete  training,  and  are  employed  as
many  weeks  during  the  year  as  they  de-
sire, receiving  from  $25  to  $35  per  week
for  their  services.  Physicians  prefer
graduates  of  this  school  because  they  are
thorough,  reliable,  and  carry  out  orders
explicitly.  Another  reason  for  doctors
employing  nurses  from  this  school  is  that
they  do  not  want  a  graduate  from  a  three-
year  hospital  on  their  cases  who  has  been
taught  to  boost  the  hospital  and  the  head
physician  connected  therewith.  Every
doctor  wants  a  nurse  who  is  for  him  and
one  who  is  not  going  to  give  some  other
doctor  a  "lift"  at  his  expense.  This  is
another  reason  why  we  recommend  nurses
from  the  Illinois  Post  Graduate  and  Train-
ing School  for  Nurses,  for  they  are  taught
to  let  the  whole  community  know  who  the
doctor  is,  that  is  the  most  reliable  and
liberal-minded  and  most  fair  with  the  pa-
tients, so  that  the  public  may  profit  by
going  to  this liberal-minded doctor.

If  there  are  none  of  these  nurses  in  your
community  at  the  present  time,  it  would
pay  you  as  a  doctor  to  send  in  some  pros-
pective nurses  to  them,  and  when  they  re-
turn, you  will  have  some  friendly  nurses
in your  vicinity.

Think  this  over.  In  the  meantime,  when
in  need  of  a  nurse,  you  can  send  to  their
school  at  546  Garfield  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.,
either by letter, telegram, or telephone

Lincoln  2155.

* * *

DR. CARL STRUEH'S SANATARIUM

AND  HEALTH  RESORT

By  George  Osgood

Devoted  to  the  treatment
of the sick by Natural
Means, and not by drugs,
it also offers unsurpassed
advantages to convales-
cents  and those who wish
Jw  .^ to recuperate amidst the
m  ^a most healthful and pleas-
^^^i^^^^H ant rural surroundings.
^Vf <4^^H  Dr. Strueh's institution

'^*— ''=*^^*  is  located  near  McHenry,
111.,  a  picturesque  and  pros-
l)erous  little  country  town  of  some  two
thousand  inhabitants.  This  part  of  Illinois
is  known  as  the  Fox  River  Valley  and  re-
nowned for  its  pure  invigorating  air,  its
scenic  beauties,  and  its  numerous  inland
lakes,  which  add  pleasure  to  the  outdoor  life.


Notes  and  licuicius


1377


McHenry  is  only  one  hour's  ride  from
Chicago,  on  the  Chicago  and  Xorthwestern
Railway,  and  also  easily  accessible  hy
automobiles  from  all  directions.

Dr.  Strueh  founded  his  Sanatariinn  trii
years  ago,  and  it  is  astounding  to  what  pro-
portions he  develojied  his  undertaking  from
the  very  smallest  beginning.  He  received
his  medical  education  al)roa(l.  at  tlie  univer-
sities of  Goettingen,  Munich  and  Zurich,
and  in  1886  located  at  Cliicago  where  he  en-
joyed a  lucrative  practice  until  he  entered
ujjon  the  Sanatarium  work.  He  is  of  higli
standing  in  his  profession  and  a  member  of
numerous  medical  societies,  such  as  the
Chicago  Medical  Society,  the  Illinois  State


cultivate  a  health  inspiring  spirit  which  is
bound  to  greatly  increase  the  effectiveness
of  the  treatment.

The  grounds  could  not  i)e  more  beautiful,
i'^verything  is  pleasing  to  the  eye.  The
river  front,  with  its  beautiful  grove  of  oak,
elm.  hickory  and  maple  trees,  the  Hower
beds,  the  cottages  and  other  buildings,
amidst  rural  surroundings,  combine  to  make
an  attractive  and  i)eautiful  sjjot  for  the
lover of Xature.

The  Method  of  Treatment  applied  at  the
institution  starts  at  the  root  of  the  evil  and
is  meant  to  bring  about  a  comiilete  con-
stitutional reconstruction  of  the  body,  for
only  in  this manner  a  permanent  cure  can


Fox River, at Dr. Carl Strneirs Sanitariniii. McHeiirv. 111.


Medical  Society,  the  American  Medical
Association,  the  German  Medical  Society  of
Chicago,  etc.

Whoever  has  been  a  patient  at  Dr.
Strueh's  Sanatarium  has  been  impressed  l)y
the  pleasant,  home-like  atmosphere  that
prevails  at  this  institution.  And  this  means
much  to  a  person  suffering  from  disease.
We  all  know  that  the  state  of  a  patient's
mind  is  of  utmost  importance.  There  is  no
greater  obstacle  to  the  progress  of  re-
covery than  worry,  and  no  more  powerful
aid  than  a  cheerful  disposition.  It,  there-
fore, is  the  policy  at  Dr.  Strueh's  institution
to  make  the  patient's  surroundings  as
pleasant  as  possible  and,  by  eliminating
everything  that  is  suggestive  of  a  hospital.


be  effected,  not  by  drugs  and  other  arti-
ficial means.  Every  artificial  treatment  is
more  or  less  symptomatic  and  as  such  ad-
missible in  incurable  diseases  where  the
object  of  the  treatment  is  to  ease  the  pa-
tient's suffering.  and  occasionallj^  in
which  the  symptoms  require  immediate
relief.

However,  to  treat  an  established  curable
disease  mereh'  symptomaticalh',  as  a  great
many  patients  are  inclined  to  do,  is  de-
cidedly wrong.  Symptoms  are  but  the
manifestation  cff  the  disease,  not  the  disease
itself,  and  to  direct  our  efforts  towards
them,  instead  of  their  cause,  is  like  chop-
ping off  the  leaves  of  a  weed  to  kill  the
plant.


1378


Xolrs  and  Hcuicws


We  can  suppress  most  any  symptom  by
means  of  a  remedy,  we  can  produce  sleep
in  a  person  suffering  from  insomnia  by  a
dose  of  veronal,  we  can  relieve  a  headache
by  administering  aspirin,  we  can  cause  an
evacuation  of  the  bowels  in  constipation  by
a  laxative,  we  can  suppress  the  symptoms
of  rheumatism  by  administering  salicylates,
wc  can  quiet  a  neurasthenic  by  sedatives,
we  can  lessen  the  frequency  of  convulsions
in  an  epileptic  bj^  bromides.  But  we  do  not
cure  in  this  manner.

If  we  discontinue  the  treatment,  the
former  symptoms,  as  a  rule,  will  reappear,
and  if  we  continue  it,  we  may  do  the  patient
irreparable  harm.


To  act  upon  and  strengthen  this  natural
healing  power  is  the  object  of  treatment
which  is  employed  at  Dr.  Strueh's  institu-
tion. And  the  means  by  which  this  is
brought  about  are  Motlicr  Nature's  unfail-
ing remedies,  consisting  of  proper  feeding,
out-door  life,  an  abundant  supply  of
oxygen  for  the  blood  cells,  sun  and  air
l)aths,  water  treatments,  systematic  exer-
cise, or,  in  other  cases,  rest, massage,  etc.

These  are  apparently  simple  means,  and
yet  how  powerful,  if  scientifically  applied,
i.  e.,  in  conformity  with  the  requirements
of  each individual  case.

At  Dr.  Strueh's  Sanatarium  the  patients
are  in  the  condition  to  live  the  out-door  life


Dr. Carl Strueh's Open Air  Gymnasium, McHenry, Til.


Tn  order  to  cure  a  disease,  it  must  be  our
object  to  abstain  from  symptomatic  treat-
ment as  much  as  possible  and  engage  the
entire  cell  action  in  the  repair  work  which
has  to  be  done,  instead  of  burdening  it
with  additional  work  which  is  incurred  in
the  process  of  eliminating  the  drug.

The  power  that  cures  a  disease  lies  in  the
patient  himself.  It  is  called  the  Vis  Medi-
catrix  Naturae,  i.  e.,  the  inborn  natural  heal-
ing power  which  exists  in  every  living
body.  It  is  the  dominant  force  which  in
sickness  as  well  as  in  health  moves  and
regulates  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the
action  of  the  lungs,  the  processes  of  diges-
tion and  assimilation,  the  function  of  the
kidneys, muscles, nerves and so forth.


in  the  most  ideal  way.  The  sleeping  cot-
tages provide  the  most  perfect  ventilation
and  thus  enable  the  patient  to  breathe  pure
air.  during  every  minute  of  his  stay  at  the
institution,  day  and  night.

The  sun  l>aths  at  Dr.  Strueh's  Sanatarium
are  given  in  the  open  and  form  one  of  the
main  features  of  the  method  of  treatment.
Two  secluded  enclosures,  one  for  women
and  one  for  men,  provide  absolute  privacy
and  the  patient  is  at  liberty  to  enjoy  the
full benefit of an ideal sun and air  bath.

The  Diet  as  applied  at  Dr.  Strueh's  itisti-
tution  is  varied,  according  to  the  peculiari-
ties of  each  individual  case.  In  obstinate
cases  the  dietetic  treatment,  as  a  rule,  is
commenced with a short fast whereupon


Notes  and  Reviews


1379


the  patient  is  put  on  a  milk  diet  or  some
other  special  diet,  and  gradually  returns  to
a  general  vegetarian  or  mixed  diet.  Everj'-
thing  depends  upon  the  individual  case.

The  Water  Cure  applied  at  the  Sana-
larium  reminds  ono  very  much  of  Woeris-
hofen,  where  Father  Kneipp  achieved  such
wonderful  success  with  his  Cure  which
since  then  is  knowii  as  the  Kneipp-Cure  all
over  the  world.  The  large  meadow  at  Dr.
Strueh's  Sanatarium  in  the  early  morning
is  crowded  with  patients  who  are  taking
tlieir  barefoot  walk  in  the  dew  -  covered
grass.

The  physical  exercises  at  the  institution
are  given  in  the  Air-Bath  where  the  pa-
tients ar^  not  hampered  by  uncomfortable
clothing,  and  are  graduated  according  to
the  character  and  stage  of  the  disease  and
the  physical  strength  of  the  patient.  Apart
of  these  exercises  there  are  ample  oppor-
tunities for  all  kinds  of  out-door  games  and
sports,  boating,  swimming  and  cross
country  walks.  The  patients  also  have  an
opportunity  to  assist  in  gardening  and
farming,  if  they  so  desire.

During  the  summer  the  institution  is  also
extensively  patronized  by  people  who  come
here  to  spend  a  few  weeks  or  months  vaca-
tion under  the  most  favorable  and  pleasant
conditions,  so  entirely  different  from  the
ways  at  the  ordinary  summer  hotel.

The  writer  will  never  forget  the  three
months  spent  at  Dr.  Strueh's  institution,
and  the  thorough  way  in  which  he  was
cured  from  an  affliction  that  had  kept  liini
;in  invalid  for  more  than  ten  years.
* * *

TYLER'S  RAW  FOODS

Every  drugless  doctor,  dietician,  or  ad-
vertiser who  meets  patients  or  writes  let-
ters to  sick  people  is  always  faced  with
the  question,  what  shall  we  eat;  what  diet
foods  are  indicated  in  my  case?  From  the
naturopathic  standpoint  there  is  only  one
answer:  and  that  is,  elementary,  natural
food.  Here  we  are  at  once  puzzled:  what
is  elementary  and  natural  food?  Are  the
foods  which  I  eat  good  foods,  such  as  meat,
eggs,  well  cooked,  prepared  restaurant  or
hotel  foods,  or  not?  Natural  food  is  un-
adulterated, plain,  simple  products,  which
are  eaten  in  Nature's  state  without  anj^
addition,  without  baking  in  any  way  or
cooking.  The  more  foods  are  cooked,  the
more  vital  elements  are  destroyed,  the
more  they  cause  complication  and  dishar-
mony in  the  digestive  apparatus.

Professor  Byron  Tyler,  of  Kansas  City,
Mo.,  has  solved  this  question.  Since  1899
he  has  been  helping  thousands  of  people,
not  only  throughout  the  United  States,  but
also  in  foreign  countries,  with  his  natural
foods.  Being  an  invalid  and  sufferer  him-
self,  he madf experiments and deductions


on  himself.  His  instinct  finally  brought
him  down  to  the  question  that  the  food
question  is  the  first  one  to  be  considered
if  one  wants  to  have  health  and  strength.
So  he  started  to  live  on  macerated  wheat,
fruits,  nuts  and  vegetables.  Today  he  is
70  years  old,  and  his  health,  strength  and
vigor  are  those  of  a  youth.  His  normal
ration,  as  incorporated  in  his  macerated
wheat,  also  sometimes  called  pcmican,  is
without  a  peer  in  this  country.  Conse-
quently Professor  Tyler  is  a  leader  and  an
authority  on  the  food  question.  He  has
been  endorsed  as  such  by  the  Editor  of
the  Herald  of  Health  and  Naturopath,  by
the  Committee  on  the  diet  question  of  the
American  Naturopathic  Association,  by
authors  and  writers  along  dietetic  lines  in
this  country  and  abroad.  He  stands  also
as  a  leader  and  an  authority  who  can  be
trusted  and  relied  upon.  The  writer  of
this  notice  personally  knows  many  people
who  have  been  cured  and  many  institutions
where  his  foods  are  used  with  great  suc-
cess. The  American  Yungborn  at  Butler.
N.  J.,  the  Southern  Yungborn  Quisisana,
Tangerine,  Fla.,  both  use  these  foods  ex-
tensively and  they  are  always  included  in
the  regeneration  diet  menu.  In  the  Pure
Food  Store,  in  New  York  City,  110  East
41st  Street,  these  foods  have  been  sold
over  the  counter  for  the  last  10  years,  and
satisfied  customers  have  always  come  back
and  asked  for  them  and  recommended  them
to  their  friends.  Universal  satisfaction  with
these  natural  foods  has  given  to  them  the
best  advertisement.  Many  a  drugless  doc-
tor is  puzzled  and  quite  at  a  loss  to  get
around  the  diet  question.  I  would  make  the
following  suggestion  to  each  one:  write  to
Professor  Byron  Tyler,  818  Wyandotte
Street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  enclosing  10c  for
a  copy  of  "Nature's  Triumph  over  Disease."
The  9th  edition  of  this  booklet  is  just  out,
and  Professor  Tyler  will  mail  it  to_  you,
and  it  will  give  you  instruction  and  infor-
mation on  the  diet  question,  which  will
enable  you  to  instruct  your  patients  and
be  of  great  service  to  them  so  far  as  the
diet  question  is  concerned.
* * *

THE "VIOLETTA" VIOLET-RAY
APPARATUS

We  can  now  present  for  the  first  time  a
piece  of  apparatus  which  has  been  wanted
by  physicians,  as  well  as  laymen,  for  years,
and  is  invaluable  in  every  home.  It  is  a
portable  High-Frequency  outfit  with  allthe
therapeutic  value  of  the  large  machines
used  in  phvsicians  offices.

The  Vio'letta  Violet-Ray  outfit  delivers
the  true  High-Frequency  current  that  is  of
so  much  value.  It  is  almost  noiseless  in
operation  and  absolutely  safe,  as  it  causes
no  muscular  contraction  or  unpleasant  sen-
sation of  any  sort.  The  weight  being  only
Wi lbs.  makes  it  ideal  for  portability. In


13«()


Xoles  and  Reviews


use  the  apparatus  consumes  less  then  %  of
the  current  consumed  by  a  16  c.  p.  lamp.
The  instrument  will  operate  on  both  A.  C".
or  D.  C.  without  special  adjustment.  Special
batter}'  outfit  where  no  current  is  a\ail-
able.

Tlie  wonderful  curative  i)roperties  of  the
\'iolet-Ray  is  in  the  fact  that  it  generates
approximately  75,000  volts  at  5tX).60O  oscil-
lations. This  enormous  cpiantity  of  elec-
tricity passing  through  the  body  during  a
Violetta  treatment  has  a  very  sedative
action  on  the  body,  aiding  elimination,  di-
gestion, sleep,  etc.  The  stimulation  which
results  when  the  treatment  is  given  througli
the  clothing  causes  a  healthy  flow  of  l)lood
to  the  part  wdiere  local  treatment  is  being
given.  And  lastly,  the  Ozone  wliich  is
generated  is  the  greatest  germicidal  and  dis-
infectant known.  You  have  probably  ex-
perienced the  refreshing  action  of  Ozone
after  a  thunderstorm.  All  these  beneficial
effects  are  accomplished  without  the  least
unpleasant  sensation  on  the  part  of  the  pa-
tient.

The  \  iolet-Ray  has  been  most  successful
in  the  following  cases:  Scalp  Diseases
(Dandruff,  Alopecia)  Skin  Diseases  (Pimp-
les, Acne,  Eczema),  Rheumatism,  Neuritis,
Neuralgia. Lumbago, Goitre, and Catarrh.


A  chart  and  l)ooklet  giving  details  of  treat-
ment is  furnished  with  each  instrument.
nieadon-Dunn  Company,  Manufacturers  of
iClectro-Medical  Ap])aratus,  208  N.  Fifth
.Avenue. Chicago. 111.


SOMETHING NEW

on a subject that is not understood by many
eople. This  is  the  question of  the relationship
" " "'  CN-


and MI-:i


H


between SKX and the PHYSICAI
TAL HEALTH

"The  Abuse  of  the  Marriage  Relations

written  by  an  experienced  physician,  who  has
investigated  this  subject  and  has  found  it  to  be
the  origin  of  the  most  chronic  disease.  This
is  also  the  cause  of  so  many  unhappy  marriages.
This  is  a  very  valuable  book  for  those  who  are
married  or  intend  to  get  married;  it  will  avoid
considerable  unhappiness  and  heartaches.  This
book  will  be  sent  you  prepaid  upon  receipt  of
23  cents  in  stamps  or  coin.  For  10  cents  addi-
tional a  sample  caapy  of  a  unique  magazine,
"Naturopath."  prospectus  of  the  famous
"^'uNCBORN"  Health  Home  in  Butler.  N.  T.,
American  School  of  Naturopathy  and  Hospital,
.Advice  by  Mail,  Kneipp  Pure  Food  Store,
Books,  etc.

B.  LUST,  N.  D.
YUNGBORN,  BUTLER,  N.  J.


IF  YOU  DOUBT  THE


MERrrS  OF  NATUROPATHY

it  is  because  you  have  not  begun  riglit.  It  is  both  unsatisfactory  and  unsafe  to
experiment  in  any  line  of  Naturopathic  treatment.  This  is  peculiarly  true  of
Physical  Culture,  Water-Cure,  Dietetics  and  Fast-Cure.

We  have  established  a  Bureau  of  Advice  through  which  beginners,  learners
and  all  hesitant  folk  may  know  before  they  act.  To  be  most  beneficial,  any
healing  force  must  be  applied  so  as  to  delight  the  patient — not  dismay  him.
And  our  first  object  is  to  make  the  change  from  your  old  artificial  existence  to
your  new  natural  life  so  gradual,  gentle  and  pleasurable  as  to  win  your  volition
Natureward  as  well  as  your  vitality.

Exact  prescription  in  the  use  of  air,  sun,  water,  vapor  and  similar  Baths,
Vegetarian,  Fruitarian  and  Lahmannian  Diet,  Herbal  applications  and  all  meas-
ures of  Natural  Healing  and  Living.  Fee  $1  single  letter  with  (k-lailcd  pre-
scription, $5  monthly  treatment.

All  otIuMs  must  enclose  $1  with  symptomatic  letter.  State  nature  of  your  dis-
ease, duration  and  kinds  of  medication  employed.


GIoss((ri/


1381


GLOSSARY

AND

DICTIONARY  OF  NATUROPATHIC  TERMS

WHILE  it  has  always  been  the  endeavor  of  Naturopathy  to  expound  its  teach-
ings in simple language using terms comprehensible to the laymen and
avoiding  all  such  which  need  special  explanation,  a  number  of  terms  adopted
from foreign languages have crept in and still other ordinary words have come
to  be  used  in  more  or  less  of  a  specific  sense.

The following glossary  will explain the more common words and  terms.


Adjustment — The  object  of  Chiropractic
treatment.  A  thrust  on  a  subluxated
vertebrae  for  the  purpose  of  restoring
it  to  its  normal  position.  To  adjust —
to  correct  a  malposition  of  a  vertebrae.

Apyrtrophy — Unfired  food.  The  arts  of
preparing  unfired  food.  The  doctrine
of unfired food.

Astroscopy — The  study  of  stars  in  their  re-
lation to  and  influence  upon  human
activities.

Astro-Medical  Diagnosis — Diagnosis  of  di.s-
ease conditions by Astroscopy.

Biochemistry — Life  chemistry;  the  chem-
istry of  living  things.  .\  systein  of
treatment  by  the  employment  of  so-
called "cell salts." See Cell Salts.

Cell  Salts — Twelve  salts  or  tissue  remedies
used  in  the  treatment  of  disease  in  the
system  of  Biochemistry,  the  theory
being  that  diflferent  disease  manifesta-
tions occur  as  the  result  of  the  ab-
sence of  one  or  more  of  the  twelve
cell salts.

Chiropractic — Literally,  'done  by  the  hand.'
A  system  of  spinal  adjustment.  Treat-
ment applied  to  the  spinal  column  or
special  vertebrae  thereof  for  the  pur-
pose of  restoring  normal  position  to
malimposed  vertebrae,  the  theory  of
such  practice  being  that  subluxations
or  malpositions  of  vertebrae  cause  dis-
ease manifestations  through  pressure
on the  spinal  nerves.

Crisis — L'sed  in  .\ature  Cure  to  signify  a
critical  period,  a  culmination.  Disease
crisis — the  culmination  of  a  disease  pro-
cess resulting  in  death.  Healing  crisis
— in  medical  language  an  acute  disease;
in  Nature  Cure,  the  pinnacle  of  effort
reached  in  nature's  healing  process  re-
sulting, nnder  proper  handling,  in  the
expulsion  of  disease  causes,  the  elim-
ination of  morbid  matter  and  the  re-
storation of licalth.


Directo — A  naprapathic  term.  .\  specific
thrust  to  a  vertebrae  the  direction  in
which  the  thrust  is  applied  being  the
important  factor  in  establishing  its  ef-
fect.

Encumbrance — A  term  applied  specificallj'
mulation of  morbid  matter  or  foreign
substance  in  the  body  which  is  inter-
fering  with normal activity.

Gush — A  term  used  in  Kneipp  \\'ater  Cure.
.\  specific  application  of  water  by
pouring.  Gushes  are  named  from  the
part  of  the  body  to  which  they  are  ap-
plied, as  back  gush,  upper  gush,  etc.

Healing — A  process  of  nature  in  which  the
body  reacts  to  disease  producing  ele-
ments. The  restoration  of  normal  func-
tion. The  restoration  of  health.

Healing  Crisis — See Crisis.

Heliotherapy — The  use  of  light,  particular-
h'  sun-light,  in  the  treatment  of  dis-
ease.

herbs  or  botanical  remedies  for  the
cure  of  disease.

Iridiagnosis — See  Iridology.

Iridology — The  science  of  the  Iris  of  the
e3'e.  .\  S3'Stem  of  diagnosing  disease
conditions  by  changes  and  signs  which
occur  in  the  Iris.  Sometimes  called
Diagnosis from the Eye.

Lesion — A  term  used  specifically  in  Osteo-
pathy to  signify  any  abnormalitj-  of
tissue  or  formation  causing  pressure  on
nerves and vessels. See Osteopathy.

Ligatite — .\  term  used  in  Naprapathy  to
indicate  a  shrunken  or  tense  ligament,
or  shrunken  connective  tissue.  See
Naprapathy.

Morbid  Matter — Used  specifically  in  Nat-
ure Cure  to  indicate  disease  breeding
material,  largely  autotoxins,  which  ac-
cumulates in  the  body  due  to  unnatural
living.


M«L'


(il()ss<n!/


Naprapathy — Literally  meaning,  to  fix  dis-
ease. A  system  of  mechanical  treat-
ment directed  to  the  spinal  vertebrae
for  the  pnrpose  of  stretching  tensed
spinous  ligaments  and  shrunken  con-
nective tissue,  the  theory  being  that
disease  manifestations  are  caused  bj-
abnormal  pressure  on  nerves  exerted
by shrunken connective tissue.

Naturarzt — From  the  German,  meaning
Nature Physician.

Naturopathy — A  misnomer,  literally  mean-
ing nature  disease,  but  accepted  to
mean  cure  of  disease  through  natural
methods.  It  recognizes  as  the  cause
of  disease  interference  with  natural
law  and  natural  operation  and  as  the
cure  the  removal  of  obstruction  and
the  elimination  of  the  cause  by  natural
healing  reactions.  In  the  process  of
cure,  it  makes  use  of  all  systems  and
methods  that  are  in  agreement  with
natural  law  and  physiological  opera-
tions. Its  system  of  hygiene  and  pro-
phylaxis is  based  on  natural  living  and
clean,  wholesome  hal)its  of  body  and
mind.

Neuropathy — A  misnomer,  literally  mean-
ing "nerve  disease,"  ])ut  accepted  to
mean  the  cure  of  disease  through  res-
toration of  normal  nerve  action.  A
system  of  manual  and  thermal  treat-
ment for  the  purpose  of  correcting  dis-
ease manifestations  through  restoring
normal  activity  to  the  nerves  control-
ling  the circulation. See page 702.

Ophthalmology — The  treatment  of  eye  dis-
eases and their systemic results.

Optometry — The  drugless  system  of  cor-
recting abnormalities of vision.

Orificial  Surgery — A  system  of  surgical
treatment  of  the  openings  of  the  body
and  sphincter  muscles  for  the  purpose
of  releasing  impinged  nerves  and  for
the  relief  of  disorders  occurring  as  a
result  of  irritation  from  such  impinge-
ment.

Osteopathy — A  misnomer,  literally  mean-
ing "bone  disease,"  but  accepted  to  im-
ply a  system  of  mechanical  treatment
designed  to  release  bony  impingement
of  nerves  and  vessels,  the  theory  being
that disease manifestations  are caused


by bony pressure obstructing normal
nerve  activity  and normal  blood flow.

Pack — A  covering  used  in  hydrotherapy,
in  which  to  wrap  the  body  or  part
thereof.  Packs  are  of  various  kinds, —
Wet,  Dry,  Hot  and  Cold.  The  band-
age usually  consists  of  linen  and  tht'
outer covering of wool.

Phrenology — The  science  of  I)rain  func-
tions. A  system  of  analyzing  from  the
contour  of  the  head,  the  mental,  physi-
cal and  emotional  characteristics  latent
and  potent  in  the  individual.  A  system
of  character  analysis  and  a  foundation
for vocational training.

Physiologic  (or  Physiological)  Therapeu-
tics— The  use  of  therapeutic  agents
which  are  in  agreement  with  the
physiological operation of the  body.

Physio-Therapy — The  therapeutic  use  of
physical  agents,  such  as  mechanical
and  manual,  thermal  and  electrical
measures.

Phytotherapy — The  therapeutic  use  of
hcr])s and botanical remedies.

Somopathy — Treatment  of  physical  ail-
ments. Largely  the  use  of  heat,  cold
and  mechanotherapy  specifically  ap-
plied.

Spanish  Mantel — A  linen  cloak  or  complete
liody  covering  used  in  giving  a  wet
pack in hydrotherapy.

Spondylotherapy — A  medical  term  for  spi-
nal treatment.  A  specific,  symptom-
atic, meclianical  treatment  for  the  pur-
pose of  increasing  or  inhibiting  nerve
reflexes.  An  endeavor  to  accomplish
b)'  spinal  concussion  and  mechanical
pressure  the  effects  produced  by  cer-
tain  drugs.

Subluxation — Used  in  chiropractic  to  signi-
fy a  displaced  vertebrae.  A  vertebrae
out of alignment.

Talosophy — The science  of  happiness.

Thrust — .\  chiropractic  term  signifying  the
action in  the  treatment.

Trophotherapy- — Treatment  of  disease  by
the  use  of  appropriate  foods.  The  ap-
plication of  apyrtrophj'  to  the  cure  of
ailments.


A  PARTING  WORD

vie

rlllS  DUiEC/rOHY  has  been  compiled  with  considerable,  labor  and
sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  Editor  and  his  assistants,  as  well  as  on
the  part  of  the  printers  thereof,  and  is  the  successfnl  result  of  a
cherished  desire  on  the  part  of  the  publisher  to  contribute  to  the  fullest
extent  to  the  prestige  and  popularity  of  a  method  of  healing  the  ills  of
humanity  for  which,  from  the  earliest  years,  he  has  entertained  an  im-
movable  loyalty,  and  has  made  a  business  of  practicing  what  he  has
preached,  in  face  of  tremendous  odds  and  setbacks.

He  thanks  all  who  have  supported  him  with  their  patronage:  the
doctors  of  drugless  healing  and  those  schools  and  institutions  who
patronized  him  with  their  advertisements.  Those  who  have  hesitated
to  patronize  this  venture  in  its  inception,  will,  we  think,  support  future
editions,  when  they  come  to  realize  the  great  benefit  such  a  Directory
contributes  to  the  Naturopathic  profession  id  large,  for  in  this  case  the
benefit  to  the  many  is  the  benefd  to  the  individual.

This  volume  of  the  Directory,  the  fwst,  may  be  regarded  as  the
foundation  on  which  a  superstructure  of  other  volumes  will  be  reared.
The  Editor's  idea  is  to  publish  a  new  edition  every  two  years,  but  he
hopes  and  believes  that  the  loyalty  and  co-operation  of  his  confreres
null  permit  him  to  publish  the  Directory  annually.

Further,  the  Editor  desires  to  say  that,  owing  to  the  great  expense
and  immense  labor  involved  in  preparing  this  work,  and  the  lack  of
adequate  ])ublishing  machinery  for  compiling  the  same,  it  is  possible
that  mistakes  null  have  been  made  in  the  lists  of  Practitioners  presented,
and  in  view  of  this,  he  begs  every  reader  of  the  book  who  discovers
such  errors  to  so  advise  him,  to  the  end  that  absolute  dependence  can  be
placed  on  the  publication  as  a  work  of  reference.

The  Encyclopedia  feature  is  intended  to  be  a  permanent  feature  of
the  work,  and  is  susceptible  of  endless  development.  Just  how  varied
the  development  will  be,  will  depend  entirely  on  the  circulation  of  the
book  and  the  further  co-operation  that  is  necessary  to  make  it  a  com-
plete success.  A  hundred  subjects  might  be  discussed  to  show  how  the
employment  of  Nidure's  forces  can  encompass  the  prevention  and  cure
of  disease.  Valuable  above  everything  else  in  life  are  the  themes  that
may  be  exploited  in  our  pages.  Give  us  an  opportunity  of  serving  you
by  buying  the  Directory  yourself  ami  seeing  that  your  brother  prac-
Htioner  obtains  a  copy.  Have  your  professional  card  appear  in  our
advertising  columns,  and  talk  of  the  Directory  continually  to  both
friend  and  foe.

April,  1918.  ' Benedict  Lust,  \.  /)..  V.  /).


rHlS,  then,  completes  Volume  I  of
the  Naturopathic  Directorij,  Drug-
less  Year  Book  and  Buijers  Guide
for  the  years  1918  and  1919.
Into  it,  has  been  placed  the  conscien-
tious tabor  of  many  willing  hearts,  hands
and  njinds.  It  is  their  contribution  to  the
noble  cause  of  natural  healing.  It  will
stand  as  a  monument  to  their  endeavors,
as  well  as  a  memorial  to  the  great  souls,
the  fathers  of  natural  healing,  who  have
passed  on.

Let  this,  then,  heridd  a  new  era — the
era  wherein  man  shall  recognize  the
omniscience  of  Nature,  and  shall  profit
through  conforming  to  her  laws.


(reneral  Index  to  Contents


.'185


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  CONTENTS


Abbreviations. Key to 813.  973

Abdomen, abnormal, large 442

Abdominal  diseases. .  .338,  468,  46').  491

Abdomen. Steam l)aths for 228

.\bdominal tumors 234. 291.  381

Abortion 428.  430

Absent  healers »•  ■  •  •  -1-5

Abscess, a curative crisis 537

Acids. Character of 587

.\cid producers — protein, fats ant!

starches 45

Acute  diseases.  Malignancy  of 563

.\cute  disease.  Treatment  of 41

Ad writing, Experiences in 113

"Ads," Comic and tragic 151

.Adventures. Literary 82

.\dvertise. What to 150

Advertisements,  Misleading 152

.\dvertising.  Appeal  in 72

Advertising. Experiences in 82

Advertising, Models  of 151

.\dvice to advice  givers 1 10

Affliction, benefits of 219

.\frica, Physicians in 1076

After-birth, Adhesion of.. 433. 444,  446

Agitation, Nervous 420

Agoraphobia 366

Ague 386

Ailments overcome 81

Alabama, Physicians in 974

.Alcoholism, Chronic 400

.Alcoholism, Disastrous effects of.

during  coition 563

Allopathic  System. Emits  of 20

.\llopathj\  and  the Xew  Science  of

Healing r  .  228

.Allopathy, Criticism of 214

-Alternating currents. Cycles of .  .  603

.Mternating  currents  explained ....  603

.\lternating  currents. Frequency  of  603

.Alternating  currents.  Periods  of...  ()03
-American Diagnostic Institute.

Need  of 211

-American  Medical  .Association — The

Foe  of  Naturopathy 104

-American .Naturopathic  Association  798

-Amourosis 371

-Amperage  or  Current Strengtli ....  577

Amperage-output  of  battery 582

Amputation 407.  414.  421

Anaemia 296,  366,  369,  443,  459

-Anaesthesia,  Local  and  general,  by

electricitv S7?


.Analyses, Chemical 303

-Anaphoresis 587

-Anatomy,  Books  on 1239

-Anatomy, Pathological 776

-Anesthesia, Books  on 1278

-Anger,  Arthur,  D.  C,  Biography  of  833

.Vnger,  a  cause  of  fermentation . .  .  238-

-Animals, domestic. Overfeeding  of  297

-Anions 586

Ankle, W  eak 413

.Antifel)riii 2ol. 387.  417

-Antiga. Dr. luan. Biograi)hv of..  833

Antipyrin ..." 26'l. 386.  .387

.Antiseptic  treatment 406,  413

-Antiseptics, anaestlietics, anal-
gesics, contra  ionic medication..  587

.Anus, Medical books on 1278

-Anxiety, -Attacks of 352,  451

-Apparatus, Diagnostic 1344

-Apparatus, Therapeutic catalog of  1319

-Appendicitis. Surgerj' in 197

-Apples  and  green  beans 316

-Apples  and red  cabbage M6

-Apnles  and  rice 316

-Apolicators.  electric  light.  List  of..  1319

-Apyrtrophy. .Axioms of 1287

-Apyrtrophy, Definition of 1287

-Apyrtroph}' and trophotherapy .  .  .  .  743
-Apyrtrophy. or science of unfired

foods 743

-Arizona,  Piiysicians  in 975

Arkansas,  Physicians  in 974

-Arm, Broken 415

-Arm. Paralyzed 468

-\.rnold,  -Alma  C,  Biography  of....  833
-Articular  rlieumatism  .  .267.  434.  463.

468.  487

-Asia, Physicians  in 1076

-Associations, Chiropractic 798

-Associations.  Drugless 798

.Asthma ^3().  450

-Astroscopists 1176

-Astroscopy.  Schools  of 797

Atropine.  Treatment  with 371,  373

Aural  diseases 370.  449.  478.  481

.Auscultation 325

-Australia. Physicians in 1076

-Author's  reply  to  Dr.  Lust's  letter..  195
.Vuto-condensation. .Administration

of 611.  612

.Auto-condensation and auto-con-
duction, contraindications 611

Auto-condensation and auto-con-
duction, nature  and  indication  .  .  .  610
Auto-condensation,  Experiment  with  (>12


138G


(it'iierdl  Index  lo  (^.oiilcnls


B


Baby, Treatment of 45U,  460

Bacilli, a product of fermentation

239,  241,  331

Back  encumbrance 488, 489,  520

Back  encumbered  mentally  inferior  524
Back encumbrance and sexual in-
stinct 522

lUick encumbrance, a notaljle case  531

Back, Humped 276,  277

Back, Pains  in... 444,  447.  461,  464,  479

Bacteria 260

Bacteria, Effort of  ligbt on 649

Bacteriology, Medical books on..  1240

Bakeries, Health, List of 1348

Baldness 336

Bandages, Earth 295.410.  434

Bandages. Material for 1326

Bandages, Plaster 474

Barks,  remedial.  List  of 1340

Barn Doctor. The 129

Barrenness 425

Bases and metals, electro-positive

elements 587

Bath, Additions for 1336

Bath,  colon,  Apparatus  for 1346

Bath,  electric  light  cabinet, List  of

1319  to  1322

Bath Institutions 1176

Bath, Steam, Appliances for 1322

Bath, Turkish,  Appliances for ....  1322

Baths,  dry  hot  air.  Appliances  for..  1322

Baths, Friction hip 291

Baths, Friction sitz 291

Baths, Hvdro-electric 624

Baths.  Steam 286.

Baths,  Sun 289

Baths, see  also Hydrotherapy ....

Battery ' . 581

Beans and  ai^pies. (ireen 316

Bed-wetting 347

Bee-sting 419.  420

Beer, Injurious nature of 297

Beer, non-alcoholic. List of 1312

Beetroot salad 317

Belais, Diana. Biography of 835

Berggren,  Tell,  N.  D.,  M. D.,  Bio-
graphy of 841

Berhalter, Dr. Anthony A., Dr.

Katherine, Biographies  of 837

Berhalter  Idea,  The 1357

Beverages difficult of digestion...  299

Beverages, f^ist  of 1312

Bieri. R., N. D.. Biography of....  843

Biggs.  Dr.  .A.  C,  Biography  of....  845

F.ilious fever 386

Binck,  Dr.  C. I-:.,  Biography  of....  845

I'iographies,  Medical,  Books  of....  1260

I'liology, Books on 1239

Birth.  'P.reecb 432

P)irth,  ("onduct  after 437

Births,  Easy.  .430,  444,  448,  472,  482,  483

Births,  Premature 432,  434

Biscuits,  Educator  list  of 1306

Bites  of  snakes  and  mad  dogs ....  419

Bladder. Catarrh of 349

Bladder.  Diseases 346.  454,  464,  480


l^>ladder, Spasms  of

iiladder. Stone  in 347.  456,

Bloating. Cure of

P>lood. .Accumulation of

Blood, discharged with urine ....

Blood, Loss of 281.

Blood  poisoning

]51ood.  Poverty  of. 363,  444,  45''.  4()2.

151ood  pressure.  Abnormal

Blood  pressure,  hypotensinn  and  il-^
causes

Blood  pressure,  normal,  diastolic,  or
minimal  nressure

P)lood  pressure.  Plow to  determine

IMood  pressure,  normal  pulse  pres-
sure

Blood,  Stagnation  of 352,  353.

P)lood  pressure,  systolic  or  maxima!
pressure

Blood,  Tumors  and  cysts

lilood  vessels.  Tying  of

Blum.  H^iry  A.,  Opt..  Biography  of

Bodily  form. Changes in.. 230.  233.

234.

Bod3^  Healthy 2.30,

Body. Normal 273.

Boiled  milk

Boils 289,  329,

Bone,  Splintered

Bone.  Tuberculosis  of . . 335,  443.

Bony tumor

Books  and  Periodicals.  Publisher's
alphabetical  list  of

P>ooks,  Medical,  classified  list  of...

Books,  Miscellaneous

Books,  Naturopathic

Books.  Reviews  of

Books,  Scientific,  Classified  list  of..

Bordier  tints

Botany. Books  on

Bottles  of  fermenting  fluid.  Ex-
amples of 239,  245,  251,  266.

Bowels. Chronic  inflammation  of..

Bowels, Inflammation of.. 442,  446.

Bradshaw. ^^^ll. R.. Biography of

Brain. Affection of

Brain. .Atrophy of

Brain. Congestion of

Brain.  Consumj^jtion  of 380.

lirain  faculties  needed  by  physicians

Brain,  "Inflammation  of  the ...,380.

P.rain.  Medical  books  on

Brain. Softening of

Brain.  Water  on

Bread baking. Recipes of

P>rcad. Directions for  baking

Bread.  Wholemeal

Bread. Wholemeal,  coarse

Breakfast,  natural  diet  recii)es

Pireast, Cancer nf 400,

Breasts, Sore «

Breath,  Importance  of

I'reatliing, Books  on

Breathing,  Difficulty  in.... 325.  336.

342.

Breech  births

Bretow.  Dr.  Wm.  M..  Biography  of

British Isles,  Physicians  in


349
476
526
411
446
446
419
531
698

699

697
697

697
451

697
411
409

847

231
275
314
3.30
482
482
4.59

1217
1239
120(1
1180
1287
1239
651
1242

269
442
455
847
428
324
453
382
129
382

1242
458
371
315
315
315
.300
315
402
425
787

1180


462

432  l|

847  I

1077  I

1


(iciicrdl  Index  lo  (U)iilenls


i:i«7


British  Isles,  Sanitaria  in 1078

Bromide of potassium 363

Bromine  416

Bronchial  catarrli .  .325,  442,  449,  458,  464

Bronchocele 378

Bruises  411

Bubo 339

I'ullets, Extraction  of 413

Bureaus,  Lecture  and  Lyceum 1348

ISurns 413,  481

Business cards criticized 182

Business  men  made  by  their  dreams  70
Butler, Raj'mond E., X. D., l')io-

graphy  of 84''

fiutterflv.  Instance  of 258


Cabbage,  red,  and  apples 315

Cabbage,  white,  and  tomatoes 315

Cabbages  and  groats 316

Cabinets, Bath 1319,1322

Calculi, Biliary..  .349,  442.  454,  472.  47(j

Calculous disease 349

California,  Physicians  in 975

Canada,  Chiropractors  in 1129

Canada, Physicians in 1073

Cancer 342

Cancer  of  the  breast 400,  402,  444

Cancer  of the  lip 451

Cancer  of  the noae 400,  444

Cancer  of  the  stomacli 3W,  480

Cancer of the tongue 400

Cancer of the uterus 400,  460

Cancerous  nodules  and  tumors. 329,  332

Carbolic acid 329

Carbuncles 289,  457

Cardiac  artery,  Protrusion  of 450

Cardiac  diseases.  .235,  342,  3S2.  450.

4(j4.  487

Caries  335.  443,  482

Carnivora 243

Carrots and Potatoes 316

Carver,  Willard,  D.  C,  Biography  of  849

Cases,  Reports  of 780

Cat. Instance of a -107

Cataphoresis, Indications of 589

Cataphorcsis, Litroduction  of  cath-

ious 587

Cataphoresis,  Metallic,  and  its  oper-
ation 588,  589

Cataract,  Black 371

Cataract, green v  1

Cataract, Crey 371

Catarrh,  a result of  morbid matter  537

Catarrh.  Pdadder 349,  464

Catarrh, Broncliial .  .  .  .  ,325,  442,  449,  458

Catarrh, Gastric 446.  466. 480.  487

Catarrh.  Intestinal 466

Catarrh, Xasal ^25

Catarrh, Pharyngeal .  .325.  442,  449,

455,  464,  480

Catarrh,  Pulmonary 442,  481,  486

Cathions,  or  positively  charged  ele-
ments 586

C'autery-work 582

Cells connected in parallel 582


Cells  connected  in  series 582

Cells,  dry,  difference  from  wet....  582

Cell-salts, List  of 1338

Cereals, List  of 1314

Cereals,  Lust's,  List  of 1308

Chaff  in  horse  food,  Importance  of  300

Chancre 338,  339

t^haracter.  Analysis  of 785

Charts,  Anatomical,  etc 1180

Chemical  analyses 303

Chemistry,  Books  on 1244

Cherry  tree.  Instance  of 290

Chest,  Development  of 789

Chest,  Medical  books  on  1248

Chest,  Pain  in  the 464,  481

Chicken-pox 252

Child,  Accumulation  of  foreign  mat-
ter in 561

Child, Encumbrance in 560

Children,  Bringing  up  of 439,  441

Children,  Diseases  of.. 254,  259,  448,

451,  465, 479,  483

Children, Treatment of 439,  441

Chilliness 241.  246

Chiropodists,  List  of 1177

Chiropractic  and  evolution 730

Chiropractic,  Books  on 1192

Chiropractic,  dislocations 718

Chiropractic, functional elements..  722
Chiropractic,  "guy  ropes"  of  uterus  717
Chiropractic, Nerve impulses ac-
cording to 722

Chiropractic,  Opposition  encounter-
ed by 712

Chiropractic, Osteopath's opinions

of  119

Chiropractic  schools  and  colleges..  797

Chiropractic,  Tables  used  in 1346

Chiropractic, Three crucial ques-
tions in 714

Chiropractic; what  it  is 731

Chiropractic,  withdrawal  of  inerva-

tion  produces  disease? 721

Chiropractors  in  Canada,  List  of..  1129

Chiropractors  in  U.  S.,  List  of  ....  1083
Chlorine  (Sodium  Chloride)  and  its

indication 588

Chlorosis.. 283, 291, 302, 363. 369,

449,  450

Chlorotic  color  of  the  skin 302

Cholera 383,  385

Choppers, vegetable 1318

Chorea 35'^^>.  452

Crisis. The law of 9^ 40

Christian  Science  and Nature  Cure  4*^
i"hristian  Science.  Success  and  fail-
ure of  221

Christian Scientists 140.1129

Chronic  diseases.  Development  of..  237

Chronic  diseases.  Treatment  of....  45
Church, a friend of the Medical

Trust 105

Cigars 303

Circuits, internal and external....  581

Citizen, Rights of 28

(  limatic  fever 388,  457,  478

Closet  paper 231,  302

Clothing,  Naturopathic  catalog  of..  1296


138.S


(icucrdl  Imlc.v  lo  C.onlcnls


PAGE

Cocaine 408

Cocaine  anaesthesia 587

Cocaine, Hydrochloricte.  and  its  in-
dication 588

Cocoa. Injurious nature of 297

Coffee, Injurious nature of 297

Cold  hands  and feet.. 279,  280.  356,  444

Cold  in  the  head 263.  i77

Cold perspiration 356

Cold  water  compress 409,  413

Colds 238, 262, 27'), 368. 376.  459

Colds  a  cause  of  firnientation  .  .238.  241

Colic.  Hepatic 47')

Colic. Nephritic 347

Colleges.  Classified  list  of 797

Colleges.  General  list  of 807

Collins.  Dr. F.  \V..  Biography  of..  851

Colon, Inflammation of 446

Colon  Therapy.  l)y  j.  H.  i'.ager  ....  1358

Color in health 500

Colorado. Physicians in 982

Colored  screens.  Nature  of  ()51

Combined galvanic and sinusoidal

current,  Nature  of  605

Combined galvanic and undulatory

galvanic  current 605

Compresses 40^^^.  413

Conception 432

Concussors 1328

Confinement.  .430.  444.  448.  472.  482.  486

Confinement,  Treatment  after  ..437,  438

Congestion  of  the  brain.  .  .  .279.  280.  453

Connecticut,  f'hysicians  in 984

Constipation, Cause of 527

Constipation.  Chronic .  .302,  369,  381.

385.  453.  467,  477

Constipation, Infantile 447.  450

Constipation.. 284,  302,  380,  447,  450.

453.  455.  477.  47').  484

Consumption. Galloping 325,  328

Consumption of  the  brain ?61.  380

Consumption of the lungs..  325.

328, 335. 342. 416. 446, 455, 480,  465
Consumption of the spinal cord

359,  446,  453

Consumption, Origin of il7

Contagion, Danger of 259

Contusions 411,  457

Contractility of muscles, in dead  641
Contractility of muscles, in new-
born 641

Contraction, Nature of 639

Convalescents 260

Convulsion!^.  ....363, 452, 459. 470,  479

Cooked food difficult of digestion  555

Cooking recipes 316,  317

Cooking, Suggestions in 313,  315

Coolidge X-Ray,  Tube  of 668

Cooling the bod}- after a steam-
bath 287

Coombs, Dr. Franklin R., Bio-
graphy of 853

Copper Sulphate  and  its indication  587

Corpulence 230, 442,  457

Corrosive sublimate 356

Costiveness — See Constipation

Coughs 461,  485

Crackers, Educator, List of 1306


Crackers, List of 1314

Crippling Zhl ,  265.  278,  443

C  riscuolo, Teresa C, N. D., Bio-
graphy of 853

Crisis,  The  law  of.  by  Dr. H.  Lind-

lahr 40

Crooked l)ack 276.  278

Crying, hysterical ' 479

Crystals, green 651

Crystals, yellow 651

Cuba, Physicians in 107o

Cummins,  Dr.  josepli I'.dward. lUo-

graphy of 853

Curative  agents. My 286,  295

Curative  crises 240,  255,  2%.  452

Curative efforts of nature 255

Cure,  Fundamental  law  of 40

Cure of disease 225,  232

Cures, Psychology in 201, 202,  203

Cures of paralysis 573

(  ures of rlieumatisni. neuralgic
l^ains. livpochondria.  .  .  .467. 468.

472. 475.  487
Cures of spasmodic and nervous

affections hi?)

Cures. Reports of 442,  488

Currents, Ap])lication of. galvanic.

faradic, sinusoidal 625

Current, diathermic 646

Current, to  condense 039

Current. Duration of 588

Curvature of  the spine ....  276,  17'f>.  470

Cyanosis 450

Cysts.  Blood 411

Czukor,  Dr.  Eugene  j..  Biography  of  855


D


D'Arsonval  current. Direct  applica-
tion of 612

D'Arsonval  current. Nature of....  606

David.  Dr.  T.  H..  Biography  of .  .  . .  855

Dead  languages  satirized 87

Deafmutes 453

Deafness 574.  449.  453,  457

Debility. General ....  413, 443, 462,  463

Debility,  Mental 318,  324,  471

De  Cilia, Dr. A.. Biography  of....  857
Decomposition, Process  of, in pul-
monary disease  i27

Deformity,  Cause  of 773

Deformity.  Preventive  treatment  of  772

Deformities 272,  278

Deininger.  Dr.  Anton,  Biography  of  857

Deininger.  Dr.  Elvira.  Biography  of  857

Delaware, Phj'sicians  in ')85

Depolarizers. Manganese dioxide

(MO2) 581

Derbyshire-neck 370

Despondency 356,  474

Diabetes  348.  488

Diagnoses,  Percentage  of  correct..  132

Diagnosis, Allopathic, unreliable..  492

Diagnosis. Apparatus for 1344

Diagnosis,  Astro-medical 782

Diagnosis, Books  on 1 182

Diagnosis.  Different  theories  of....  122


(rciicrdl  Index  lo  (lonlenls


1  :w.)


niaf,''nosis, Clairvoyance, psyclio-

metry and hypnotism, factors in  209

Diagnosis, Clinic for 122

Diagnosis,  Electricity  in 375

Diaj^nosis. Five consecntive stages

of 211

Diagnosis from the eye 48

Diagnosis in practice 5.S9

Diagnosis  of  disease from external

appearance 491

Diagnosis,  Medical  hooks  on 12,i()

Diagnosis of the Xew Science of

Healing US.  IM

Diagnostic Service l.>48

Diarrhea 299,  348.  383,  385.  445

Diarriiea. Medical cure of. causes

constii)ation 506

Diathermic current, cooking a po-
tato in the middle 615

Diathermic  currents.  Generation  of  613
Diathermic  current.  Localization  of  614
Diathermy.  Contra-indications  of..  ()17
Diathermy,  duration  of  application  (>18
Diathermy  electrodes,  how  applied  617
Diathermy,  general  remarks  on  ef-
fects .  .' 618

Diatherni}'.  its  future 612

Diathermy, method of application  617
Diathermy. Nature of. and indica-
tions .'. 614.  016

Diathermy,  strength  of  current ....  Ol7
Diathermy,  surgical,  or  electro-coa-
gulation 614

Diathermy, toleration of current..  Ol8
Diatiiermv. vacuum tube ap]>lica-

tion ..'. 618.  620

Dictionaries. Medical 1252

Diet. Correct 305.  306.  313.  317

Diet  for  invalids 314.  315

Diet.  Liudlahr  on 46

Diet, Medical hooks on 1252

Diet,  Natural 315.  317

Dietetics. Books on 1 182

Dietetics. Schools of 797

Dieticians 1130

Dietology. T'rofessor of 708

Digestii)ility of fluids 299

Digestibility of foods 299.  304

Digestion. Fermentive (process of

239.  300

Digestive canal lOo

Digestive function more important

than diet 531

Digestive  organs. Healthy 558

Digestive  power  weaker  in  the  eve-
ning 562

Digestive  process. 296,  298,  313.  317.  554
Digestive troubles ..  ,302. 365. .?80.

383.  447.  449.  454.  477.  484

Digitalis 416

Dilators 1322

Di-magnetic  substances,  repelled  by

magnets 590

Dinner, natural diet 315

Diphtheria.. 250. 448. 452, 465. 479.  482

Diplomas, Professional value of...  135

Dipsomania 400

Directory. Purpose of 9


Discoveries. .\ general resume of

225, m
Disease,  how  it  arises.  .235.  244,  245, 246

Disease,  Nature  of 490

Disease of the internal organs....  529

Disease.  Origin  of 529

Disease.  Prevention  of 241

Disease. I'redisposition to 263

Disease,  Primary  cause  of 42

Disease,  The signs  t>l 121

Disease.  Transmission of 259

Disease, Unity of 245

Disease, \'arious forms of 244

Diseases, .\cute 241

Diseases. Books on 1212

Diseases,  Genito-L  rinary.  Books  on  1282
Diseases,  infectious. Medical  books

on 1258

Diseases  of  digestive  tract.  Medical

works on 12o4

Diseases caused by side encum-

l)rance  516

Diseases of children 501

Diseases, venereal. Books on 1282

Diseases  of  women 243.  422,  429

Disinfectants 263.  264,  416

Disney.  Dr.  J.  Lambert.  Biography  of  857

District  of  Columbia. Phvsicians  in  985

Distortions '..2:^7, 272.  443

Divine Healers 1 174

Dizziness 290. :mk^.  365

Doctor  and  Patient.  Relatioushi])  of  160

Doctor, Efificient 142

Doctor.  Right  to  choose 106

Doctor. What  it  means  to  l)e  a....  132

Doctors, Anta,gonism towards 192

Doctors  as  advertisers 149

Dr. Carl Strueh's Sanitarium and

Health Resort. Notes on 1376

Dr. Schnee bath, or  four  cell bath  b23
Dr.  Schroth's  111.  Post  Graduate  and
Training  School  for  Nurses.  Notes

on 1376

Doctor's  degree  and  license.  Quali-
fications for 97

Doctor's wealth proportional to

ignorance  of  patient 213

Dog.  Instance  of  wounded 408

Dogs, Bites  of  mad 419

Dosage,  Regulation  of  598

Dorsal  encumbrance.  Delineation  of  542

Double vision ^72

Doulitful Cure,  A 546

Douche, Ap])aratus  for 1346

Douches 226.  229

Dressing. Plaster 474.  483

Drinks. List of 1312

Dropsv.. 235.  342.  352.  390.  445.  456.

484.  485.  487

Droi)sy  of  the  heart 487

Drug doctor and witch doctor....  213

Druggism  a  dead  tree 146

Drugs.  Poisonous  319

Drugless  doctors.  List  of 1 130

Drugless  healers.  Methods  of.  crude.

ineffective,  unwise 157

Drugless  healers.  Therapeutic  black-

sniiths  200


1390


(icncral  Iinlc.v  to  ('ontcnls


Drugless  Healing  systems,  Origina-
tors of 16,  20

Drugless  Profession,  Advice  to....  791

Drugless  ranks,  Chaos  in  Kl.i

Drugless  union lUl

Drugless  union, Duties  of 102

Duniliness 453

Dumplings.  Potato 317

Dupell  Internal  Uath,  Notes  on....  1361

Dux, Dr. lienrv, I'.iographv  of....  859

Dysentery ' 300,  301,  383.  385

Dyspepsia,  Acute,  caused  by  mental

fright 211

Dyspepsia,  Cure  of 532


E


Ear,  Discharge  from.. 370,  374,  478,  481

Ear,  Diseases  of 374,  447,  478,  481

Ear, Medical books on 1254

Ear,  Polypus  of 481

Ear, Ringing  in 574.  447

Earth  bandages 295,  410,  434

Eating, Aloderation in 313,  314

Eclecticism  778

Eczema 351

Education,  Aim  of  86

Edward Earle Purinton's letter to

Dr. Benedict Lust 195

Edwards,  Dr.  L.  S.,  and  Dr.  Lillian

Edwards, Biographies  of 859

Effects of electrical currents and

modalities 575

Effects of raw food and Kuhne

treatment _.  551

Effeminating the body 325,  326

Effete  matter,  Dangerous  transfer-
ence  of 505

Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing  de-
fined 83

Efficiency  in  Drugless  Healing,  the

result  of  fifteen  years'  study....  o7

Efficiency,  the  only  test  for  medicos  97

Eggs, Injurious nature of 297,  303

Egyptian  eye  disease.  .371,  450,  464,  484
Electric  arc  light.  Composition  and

effect  of 659

Electric  arc light therapy o59

Electric  charges.  Means  of  produc-
tion ^ 594

Electric  douche,  how  applied 623

Electric  light  bath 656,  658

Electric light bath. Therapeutic

apulication of 655

Electric  power.  Generation  of 313

Electrical  cures.  Consideration  of..  574

Electricity, Books on 1254

Electricity a therapeutic  agent....  573

Electricity  in  diagnosis 575

Electricity,  Flow  of 581

Electricity, Static 594

Electricity, Static or Franklinic.  . .  594

Electro-Bioscopy 641

Electro-Cautery, Nature of, and

how done 643,  644

Electro-coagulation,  indication  of..  645


Electro-coagulation,  or  surgical  dia-
thermy 614

Electro-Diagnosis (j29

Electro-Diagnosis in gynecology,

Value  of 641

Electro-Magnetism 590

Electro-Surgery 643

Electro-therapeutics,  I'rogress  of..  574

Electro-thermo therapy 626

Electrode,  connected  to  foot  or  arm

bath  588

Electrode, Size of 588

Electrodes,  active  and  indifferent..  583
Electrodes, anode  and cathode, or

positive  and  negative  poles 585

Electrodes, applied to patient in

high  tension  machines 598

Electrodes,  care  and  its  indications  583

Electrodes,  covered,  indications  for  584

Electrodes,  labile  and  stabile

Electrodes,  Size  of,  governs  direct-
ly density  of  current 584

Electrolysis, explained 586

Electrolysis, Galvanic current in...  647

Electrolysis in test for Polarity..  583

Electrolysis, Indications  of 646

Electrolysis, Polarity  in 646

Electrolysis relieves strictures....  647
Electrolysis, strong  current contra

weak 647

Electro-Therapists 1 130

Electro-therapy,  Apparatus  for  ....  1324

Electro-therapy, Schools of 797

Elimination of waste products....  575

Emaciation, Cause of 531

Embryology, Books on 1254

Emission,  Nocturnal.  .339,  359,  453,  486
Emotion, a cause of fermentation

238,  239
Encumbrance, Back and side ....  525
Encumbrance  causes  unequal  devel-
opment of  brain 567

Encumbrance, front. Chronic dis-
eases resulting  from 511

Encumbrance,  General 525

Encumbrance inherited 25'-K  260

Encumbrance in the head 515

Encumbrance,  Left  side 518

Encumbrance,  Mixed 525

Encumbrance  of  the  back.. 272,  278,  4W

Encumbrance  of  the  front.. 272,  278,  489

Encumbrance  of  the  side.. 272.  278,  491

Encumbrance on left side 518

Encumbrance,  Recognition  of 522

Encumbrance,  Side  and  front 519

Encumbrance  the  cause  of  leprosy. .  538

Encumbrance,  \'^arieties  of ....489,  491

Encysted  tumor 447

Encumbrances,  Cure  for 511

Encumbrances  on front  and side..  519

Encumbrances, Side 517

Energies  of  body.  Latent 575

Epidemic  diseases  flourish in Win-
ter 564

Epidemics 240,  262

Epilepsy 364,  366,  416,  417,  459.  460

Erath, Mr.  W. F., Notes on 1362

Eructation 303.  346


General  Index  lo  (lonlenls


\VM


Eruption  of  the  face.. 336,  ii7 ,  458,  482
Eruption  of  the  skin.. 235,  336,  350,

351,  389,  458,  482

Erysipelas of the face 447

Erz,  Dr.  A.  A.,  Biography  of 859

Esquimos,  Low  vitality  of  555

Ethics  of  Advertising 1117

European  societies  protected  ijy  le-
gislation 109

European  war. Effects  of 106

Evening  meal 315

Evil  habits,  Elimination  of  29

Examinations,  Unreliable  allopathic  492
Examinations. Electrical, how ex-
ecuted 639

Examinations, Local 423

Excitement  a  cause  of  fermentation  240

Exercise  and  rest 756

Exercise, Breathing 788

Exercise for  development 754

Exercise  for  eliminating  disease. .  . .  754

Excrements,  Color  of 302

Excretory  organs 230,  231,  339

Existence  of  beings.  Conditions  of  290

Expediency,  Policy  of 16

Exposure,  X-Ray,  determining  dur-
ation • •  679

Extension-bed 443,  474

Extracts, Injurious  nature of.. 296,

313,  440

Extracts, Plant 1336

Eye  diseases.  .370,  445,  450,  455,  464,

484,  486,  487
Eye diseases, Egyptian.  .371, 450.

464,  484
Eye, Lancinating  pain  in  the.. 477,  478
Eye-magnet operations and diag-
nosis 647

Eye,  Medical  books  on 1254

Eyes,  Weak 476

Eyes,  black spots before 445


Face, Eruptions of... 336,  351,  458,  482

Facial details. Indications  of 540

Facial expression, Examples illus-
trative of 489,  491

Facial expression. Science of.. 257,

283.  285,  312.  326,  366,  489,  491,  496

Facial  neuralgia 449

Fasces,  Color  of 302

Faeces,  Retention  of 347

Fainting  fits 290,  363,  365,  459

Faith  cures.  Church  clinics  for....  209

Fakirs in healing  art 90

Far-sightedness 449

Faraday, induction 573

Faradic  contractility  640

Faradic current, primary and sec-
ondary 591

Faradic  current,  generation  and  nat-
ure  of .  591

Faradic current, compared with

other currents 592

Faradic  current,  its  application  and

effects  592


Faradic hyperexcitability 630

Faradic  hypoexcitability 630

Faradic, or  induction coil 591

h'aradism, effects different from

Galvanism 593

Faradism, or magnetism produced

by  the  electric  current 590

Fasting 297

Fasting  against  overeating 39

Fasting,  bad  taste  in  mouth 752

Fasting,  Bathing  during 751

Fasting,  coldness 752

Fasting,  Dizziness  during 752

Fasting,  Enema  during 751

Fasting, environment  for 751

Fasting,  exercise 751

Fasting, fresh air 75 1

Fasting,  fever 752

Fasting,  headache 752

Fasting,  How  to  break 752

Fasting,  hunger 752

Fasting, nervousness 752

Fastings,  Objects  of  750

Fasting,  pains 752

Fasting,  rapid  heart 752

Fasting,  sleep 751

Fasting,  slow heart 7S2

Fasting, symptoms of suppressed

diseases  will  recur 752

Fasting  treatment 750

Fasting,  Treatment  of  nausea 752

Fasting,  vomiting 752

Fasting,  water  drinking 751

Fasting,  When  to  break

Fasts, in Winter 564

Feeding  children  and  infants,  Books

on .'. 1250

Feeding  of  children 558

Feeding,  Wrong  297

Feet,  Cold 279,  356,  442,  444

Feet, Distortions of 257

Feet. Sweating 349.  350

Feet. Swollen 457.  473

Female diseases .422.  429

Ferguson,  Dr.  E.  \V.,  Biography  of  861

Fermentation,  Cause  of 239,  241

Fermentation of foreign matter..  501
Fermentation of morbid matter

233,  244
Fermenting matter, direction it

takes ..' ....240,  241

Fermentation in process of diges-
tion  ....299.  304

Ferri Sanitarium, Notice of 1362

Fertilizers 1295

Fever, Bilious 386,  389

Fever,  Climatic 386,  389.  457,  478

Fever. Curing of 243

Fever, Explanation of.... 233. 244.  457

Fever. Malarial 286,  389

Fevers,  Medical  books  on 1258

Fever  present  in all  disease 491

Fever, Puerperal ill,  427

Fever,  Scarlet 248.  448,  452.  482

Fever,  Tropical 386.  389,  428

Fever,  Typhoid 383.384.  475

Fever  wound _.  357

Fever, Yellow 385.  388


1392


(iciicrdl  Index  lo  ('onlriils


Fi.miri-.  clctornu-cl  l)v  I'orei.nii  niatur  542

Filters.  List  of  ....'. 1319

Filtration, how practised ()50

h'iiiancial  opportunity  in  the  Nature

Lure  field ". W

Finsen  method. Use  of 649

Finsen-Reyn  lamp,  how  made 660

hinsen  treatment,  caution  necessary  ()62
Finsen treatment, composition, ef-
forts  and indications ()()()

First Aid. Books on 1270

Fischer, Dr. F. L.. i'.iosraphy of  S()l

Fistula. Intestinal ..?49.  4S6

I'^istula.  Rectal 48()

Flatulence i03.  ,M6

Fletcher, Dr. VV. H.. liio.yraphy of  863

F'lexion of the uterus 425.  475

h'lorida, I'hysicians  in 986

Fluids, difficult to digest 2'XJ

Fluoroscope 674

Fluoroscope, I'rotectioii of i)atienl

and operator  in 674

Food, Books  on  inspection of 1284

Food  companies,  British  Isles 1078

Food  helps 1318

Food,  Insalivation  of  299,  .300

Food,  Medical  hooks  on 1252

Food, Nutritive  material in ^03.  304

Foods, Assimilation of M)\

Foods, dig-estil)ility of 29'>,  .i04

Foods,  Doctors  who  i)rescril)e 141

Foods for convalescents and dys-

peotics. List of 1318

Foods, General list of  selected....  1308
I""oods, Tulius Hensel. F^reparation

of  ..  .". 1305

Foods, List of baked 1314

I'oods. List  of  Berhalter's 1305

Foods,  List  of  breakfast 1314

Foods,  List  of  canned 1314

Foods, List of  Carque's 1305

Foods, List  of  compote 1317

Foods.  List  of  Health 1.302

Foods,  List  of  imported 1317

Foods, List  of Pitman's 1308

Foods, List  of  special 1316

Foods, List of  unfired 1318

Foods,  List  of  wholesale 1302

Foods, Nashville Sanitarium. List

of  1308

Foods, Natural  and  cooked  ....  297.  298

Foods,  Natural  versus  unnatural...  1,300
Foods, nut preparations. List of

1316,  1317

Foods, Tickling and salting 290

Foods,  Ralston Health,  List  of....  1.308

Foreign  matter.  Changes  caused  by  .507

Foreign  matter.  Upward  pressure  of  543
Form. Change of l)odilv..230, 231.

233,  234

Forms  of  disease, \  arious 243.  244

Fowler.  Jessie Allen. Bifigrajihy of  861

Fractures 415

Fresh meat. Injurious 5''7,  403

Fresh  plants,  leaves  and  fruit 555

Friction bath, in hemorrhoids....  505

Friction, Hi]) and sitz baths.. 286,  295

Friction. Theory of  light  and heat  565


Fright.  \  cause  of  lermenl^ation .  .  240
Fritz. Dr. Wallace W., F.iography

of 865

brunt encuml)rance 489. 491,  508

Front encuml)rance. Lure of 513

Frosted glass 551

Froude,  Dr.  Chas.  C,  Biography  of  867

Fronde. Dr.  Chas.  C,  Notes  on....  1361

bVugivora 307

Fruit. Unri])r 413

Fruit juices. List of 1312

I'j-uils, List  of  dried 1305

Fulguration,  Dangers  of 645

Fulguration, Nature  of 644

Fulguration, two methods 645

Full I)ath 229

Full steam baiii 286,  288

Functional perversions, central.

peripheral 705

Furniture. List  of  office 1296

Fury. I'aro.xysnis of 266. 457,  484


Gail lijadder. Disease of the.. 349.

442.  472.  479

<jal! stone 349. 442. 472,  470

(ialloi)ing  consumption 325,  328

Galvanic hyperexcitability 630

(ralvanism explained 573

Galvano-l-'aradization,  its  origin  and

application 592

Gardening,  Materials  for 1295

Gases  in  the  intestines.  Necessity  of  558

Gastric  catarrh 446,  466,  480,  487

General  debility 313,  442,  462,  463

Georgia,  Physicians  in 988

(Jerman organizations of Nature

,  Cure 107

German  sanitariums.  Experience in  35

Germany, Physicians in 1077

Gerschanek,  Dr.  Sinai,  Biography  of  867

(iiddiness 290,'  363,  366,  459

(Handular swellings and tumors

233.  234.  444,  449,  455,  481

Glaucoma S7\

Gluten food products 1308

(Goitre 378

Goitre, .\ case of 514

Gonorrhea 339, .U8.  345

Gout 270

Gout,  uiicured  riieumatism 535

(Graduates of Nature Cure schools

are 40  per cent, born physicians  125
Graduates of medical schools are

20 per cent, born physicians...  125

Grain as food '. 300.  301

(Jrain products. List of 1314

Grape iuices. List  of 1312

Green sickness.  .283, 308, .309, .566,

369.  43*'

Greenewald. Prof. \  .. liicjgraphy  of  860

Greenhouses 1295

(iressman, Dr. Herman, Biograj^hy

of 869

Groats and cabbage 316

Gruel, Directions for makinii ....  315


General  Index  to  Contents


I'MKi


Gruel, oatincal 314

Gnats, Instance of 242

Guidance, \'ocational 784

Gunpowder magazine, instances of  24b

Gunshot wounds 413.  415

Gymnastics, Schools of 797

Gynecology, Medical books on....  1258


H


Habits, Corrective 29

Hair, Loss  of 336

Half-bath 279

Hands, Cold 279, 280, 356,  444

Hands, Distortions  of 257

Hare, Instance  of 297

Haricots and tomatoes 316

Harlej', Dr. Geo.  E., Biography  of  869
Havard, Dr. \Vm. F., on Neuro-
pathy 702

Head breeze, danger from metal

hair  pins  and celluloid 600

Head breeze, positive, negative,

how  applied 600

Head,  Congestions  of  the.. 279,  280,  453

Head,  Hot ..  279

Head, its significance for  the New

Science of Healing 233

Head, pressure of morbid matter

279 280,  453

Head, Steam  bath for '....."  289

Headache.. 290, 348, 380, 382. 443,

456, 458, 461, 464, 470, 476, 481,  484

Headache, Rheumatic 472

Healing, Conflicting systems of..  120

Healing crises 46

Healing Force 29

Healing, Natural  and  divine 777

Healing,  New  System  of  549

Healing, Power  of 219

Health, Alphabet of 787

Health  Books,  Publishers  of,  British

Isles 1082

Health Culture, Schools and in-
stitutions of ■ 797

Health  instruction,  a  universal  need  215

Health  letters,  Analj'sis  of 176

Health letters. Characteristics of..  170

Health Reformer HI

Health reformer. Bankrujitcv of..  113

Health Resorts ' 797

Health Studios 797

Health study. Practical side  of....  74
Health and strength not syno-
nymous 755

Healthy figures 499

Healthy man 497

Hearing,  Difficulty  of .  .374,  449,  453,  457

Heart,  Defect  of  the 455,  463

Heart diseases .  .233, 244, 342. 352.

358.  463.  486

Heart, Dropsy of the 486

Heart, Medical books on 1248

Heart. Palpitation of  the 353,  450

Heart. Paralysis of 353

Heart trouble. Treatment in 788

Heart valves. Defects  of 353


PAOI.

Heartburn 303

Helio-therai)y 648

Hematology, I'.ooks on 1272

Hematuria 455

Hemorrhage, uterine 446,  460,  461

Hemorrhoidal affections.  .361. 380,

382. 455, 456. 467. 473. 477. 484.  487

Hepatic colic '. 479

Herbalists. P.ritish Isles 1081

Herbivora 306

Herbs, List of 1340

Herbs, Kneipj) 1330

Heredity. Medical books  on 1239

Hernia, Intestinal 398

Herpes 281.  325,  326,  348,  350,  447

High frequency currents. Applica-
tion of 609

High fret|uency currents 606

High frequency currents. Wonder-
ful properties  of 574

High shoulders 279


291

474


1363

1370
477

869

229


Hip-baths, Frictiim

Hip disease 271,  443,

Histology, Books  on 125^

History of the Internal Bath, by

Chas. A. Tyrrell, M. D.

History  of  the  Mecca  of  Chiroprac-
tic

Hoarseness 449.

Hoegen,  Dr. loseph .\..  Biographj'

of ■ .^

Homeopathy  and the New Science

of  Healing  228.

Homeopathy. Books  on 1260

Homeopathy, Not a complete sys-
tem 777

Homeopathy,  Source  of 495

Horse.  Instance  of 236

Hot  head 279. 280

House supplies. List  of 1295

Houses, Open  air 1295

"How  to  be  happy" 785

Human  tissue,  a  semi-fluid  646

Humpbacks 2?7.  281.  288, 443

Hydrocephalus 371

Hydro-Electric application, indica-
tion 623. 624

Hydro-electro  therapeutics.  (General

remarks on 624

Hj'dro-electro  therapy. .Nature  and

application of 622

Hydrogen, Importance in electro-
lysis and  ionization 586

Hydropathy,  Schools of 797

Hydropaths, List  of 1 130

Hydro-electro therapy. Apparatus

for 625

Hydrotherapy.  Apparatus  for 1324

Hydrotherapy,  Medical  books  on..  1274
Hydrotherapy. Naturopathic  books

on

Hydrotherapy, the alternate foot

bath

Hydrotherapy, the cold full bath

indications 765

Hydrotherapy,  the  cold  foot  bath..  767
Hydrotherapy,  the  cold  sitz-bath .  .  767
Hydrotherapy, the douche l^ath... 766


1185


/6/


IHlll


(iciwnil  Index  lo  ConlcnLs


Hydropathyj  general  qualification..  765

Hydrotherapy,  half-bath .....' 766

Ilydrotherapj',  the  high batli 765

Hydrotherapy,  historical  sketch....  764

Hydrotherapy, the hot  foot bath..  767

Hydrotherapy, the hot sitz-bath .  .  768

Hydrotherapy,  the  Nauheini  liath  .  ,  768

Hydrotherapy,  the  salt  rub  or  glow  767

Hydrotherapy,  the  shower  bath,,..  766

I  lydrotherapy,  the  sitz-bath 767

Hydrotherapy,  the  sponge  l)ath....  766

Hydrotherapy,  the  tepid  bath 766

Hydrotherapj', the tepid sitz-Iiath  768

Hydrotherapy,  the  warm  full-batli .  .  766

Hydrothera])y,  the  wet  sheet  pack.  .  768

Hygiene,  Medical  books  on 1262

Hyperemia, Apparatus for 1.344

HyiK-r-nutrition 279, 284,  443

Hypochondria (^Sce also Nervous

Diseases) ...318,  324

Hysteria (See also .\er\ous Dis-
eases)  M8,  324

Hj^sterical crying 479


Idaho, Phj'sicians in 989

Illinois, Physicians in 989

Illness, Moral gain from 197

Imbecility .260. 318, 416, 417,  457

Immunity, Medical  books  on 1240

Impotence 343,345,  447

Impulse,  Sexual  ..339,  343,  432,_  440,  486
Incandescent lamp, Therapeutic...  652
Incandescent lamps for static ma-
chines 596

Incandescent light treatment, indi-
cation 651

Incandescent light, Composition  of  651

Indian  corn 315

Indiana,  Physicians  in 999

Indigestion,. 301.  365.  472.  385,  447,

450,  453,  455,  466,  467,  475,  484
Induction  coil.  Primary  and  second-
ary winding  of 591

Induration of the liver 480

Induration of  the  tissues 234

I  nfant.  First  food  of  -500

Infantile constipation 447.  450

Infection,  Danger  of 241,259,  264

Infections, Medical  books  on 1258

Inflammation  of  the  l)rain  .  .361,  380,  382

I  nflammation of  the colon 446

Inflammation of the kidneys.....  456

Inflammation  of  the  larynx 277

Inflammation  of  the  lungs.. 330,  465,  485
Inflammation of the spinal cord..  480
Inflammation at the place of fric-
tion 293,  401

Influenza 262, Z77 ,  470

fnjection  of  solution  of  lead 342

Injection of zinc .342

Injections 341,  342

Injuries, Internal 411,  414

Injuries,  External,  wounds ....406,  421

Injurious  prescriptions 493

Inoculation a fatal error 507


Inoculation.. 254,  259,  Hi.  370,  4l0,

482.

Insalivation of food 299. .300,

Insanity 261,  318,  417,

Insanity,  Medical  books  on

Insects,  Stings  of 419,

Insomnia, Psychic  origin  of

Insomnia.. 318, 324,  '442, 449, 456,

470,  477.

I  nstinct, Natural 303,

Institutions,  Classified  list  of

Institutions, General list of

Insulators  or  non-conductors

Internal Bath, History of

International  Alliance  of  Physicians
and Surgeons

Interrupter of faradic coil, its use

I  ntervertebr.e  foramen.  Measures  of

Intestinal  catarrh

Intestinal  fistul.'c  and  ulcers  ...  .349,

Intestinal  hernia

Intestines,  Medical  books  on

Inunctions,  Mercurial .  .338,  341,  343,

366,

Invalid  diet

Invalids,  Needs  of

Iodide  of  potassium 341.

Iodine .,..341,  408,

Iodine  (Potassium  Iodide)  and  its
indication

Iodoform .. 341,  408,  411,

Ionic  medication,  superior  to  exter-
nal, h^'podermic administration

586,

Ionization,  see Iontophoresis

Ionization

Iontophoresis

Iowa, Physicians  in

Iridologists, List  of

Iridology,  Schools  of

Iron. Administration of 366.

Irving,  Dr,  James  Montgomery,
Biography  of

Itch 387,

Itching of the skin


492
314
457
1242
421
212

484
394
797
807
577
1363

1357
591
720
466
486
,?98

1264

416
314
216
416
416

588
464


587
586
588
586
1002
1130
798
369

869
388
219


Jaundice 349.  443

Jesus  a  scientist  more  than  a  seer..  205

Jesus's  power  to  read  men's  minds  205

Jewelry 12%

Jokes,  jigs  and  songs,  versus  health

literature 218


K


1007


Kansas, Physicians in

Kanthariaker, Dr, Mahadev B.,

Biography  of  871

Kentucky,  Physicians  in 1010

Kidney, Medical books on 1282

Kidneys  affected  by  encumbrance..  534
Kidneys,  Diseases  of  the.. 346,  387,

454,  480

Kidneys, Inflammation of 456


(icncntl  Index  lo  Conlcnls


Killis eruption 389

Klawitter,  Dr.  Win.  C,  Biography  of  873

Knee,  Tuberculosis  of  the 337,  482

Kneipp, Foods and Preparations,

List of 1300

Kneipp  System,  Books  on 1188

Knowinjr  your  job 1 10

Knowledt^e of Self 785

Kriiger,  Dr.  \\m.  F.  H.,  Biography  of  873
Kuhne  theory  of  the  cause  of  solar

light  heat S()(>

Kuhne treatment sculptures the

human figure conferring youth

and vitality 547

Kuhne's  conclusions  proved  correct

in  thousands  of  cases 568

Kurz, Dr. Roliert  F., Riograiihy  of  873


Laboratories, Diagnostic 1348

Lacerations 409,  421

Laclanche  cell  580

Lamp,  Leucodecent  outfit 1322

Lamps, Therapeutic 1344

Lancinating pain in tlie eye 477

Laryngeal  polypus  449

Larj'nx, Inflammation  of  the 378

Latson,  Dr.  W.  R.  C,  Biography  of  873

Lead  solution, Injection  of ^42

League of drugless physicians.

Need  of  116

Leaven,  Example  of  260

Lee,  Dr. Elmer,  Address  liy 913

Left-sided encumlM'ance causing

blindness 510

Left-sided encumbrances suppress

perspiration 51b

Leg, Broken 415

Leg, Sores  on 445

Leg, Stiff 443

Legs,  swollen 484

Legislators, Duty  of 26

Lemon liquid 1312

Lentils. Food value  of 317

Lentils and ))runes 317

Lepra,  bacilli 356.  358

Leprosy  356,  358,  390,  396

I-^eprosy  incuralile,  according  to  .Al-
lopaths 538

Leprosy. Bacilli  of 537

Leprosy,  the  result  of  cncunil>rance  S37

Lettuce 317

Letter  from  a Naturist  criticized..  180

Letters  of  thanks 442.  488

Leucorrhea 339, 468,  474

Leyden Tar, ajjplication of Morton

wave ." 598

T^eyden lar,  its  makeup 598

Life ..." 20

Life,  what  it  is  790

Life, Development of 242

Life. Duration of 215

Life,  Elixir  of 24

Ligatures 409.  410

Light, heat, ozone, produced elec-

tricallv 575


Lightheadedness in ozone treat-
ment 628

Lindlahr Idea, The 1366

Lindlahr, Dr. Henry 33

Linen compresses 409,  410, 413

Lip,  Cancer  of  the  451

Litmus  i)apcr  in  test  for  jjolarity..  583
Lithium  .Sulphate  and  its  indication 587

Liver  disease 349,  467,  472, 477

reiver disorders 534

reiver, Induration  of  the 480

Liver, Medical books on 1264

Living. Books on ideal 1186

Living,  Xew  principles  of 29

Loban,  Dr.  Joy  M.,  Biography  of..  873
Local api)lications marie ])ractical,

by F. F. I'.urdick.. .•••.••• 1367

Local applications of light, indica-
tions 658

Local  bath 623

Local examination 422

Long,  Dr.  L  \V.,  Biography  of  ....  875
Louis  Lust's  Health  Bakerv,  Xotes

on 1370

Louisiana. Physicians in 1011

Luepke,  Dr. John F..  Biography  of 875

Lumbago . .  ." 287, 288

Lungs, .\ffection of.. 325. 328,  342.

416,  450,  457.  463,  465,  481, 485

Lungs, Development  of 788

I-^ungs, Medical  books  on 1248

Lungs,  Inflammation  of  the  ....330,  465
Lungs  suffer  from  encumbrances..  539
Lungs, Tuberculosis of..  266. 269.

334,  342,  416.  443,  446.  455,  480.  482. 483
Luntz. Dr. Harry, Biographv of.. 877

Lupus 325.  336.  337. 485

Lupus  of  the  face 336.  458, 482

Lytle, .Mfred  Y.. Biography  of.... 877


M


Macfadden. Bernarr. Biography of  877

Machinery. List of 1296

Machines  for  producing  static  elec-
tricity 594

Machines, Friction, for static elec-
tricity 594

Machines,  influence,  for  static  elec-
tricity .W

Machines. Holtz type 595

Machines, Toepler-Holtz type 595

Machines, W'imshurst  type 5'^r

MacKinnon. Dr. John L.. Bio-
graphy of 879

McKinnon.  Dr. Tohn L..  Xotes  on  1370

Mad  dogs. Bites  of 41^

Magazines. List of Health 1210

Magnesium  Sulphate  and  its  indica-
tion 588

Magnetic field.  Strength  of 590

Magnetic force. Lines of 590

Magnetic substances 590

Magnetism, Law  of 590

Magnetism,  Therapy  of 628

Magnetopatliic  treatment 495

Magnetopatlis,  List  of 1 130


1


130(!


(icncnil  Index  /o  (Unilcnh


Magnets, Kinds  of 590

Maine, Physicians in lOll

Maize 315

Malaria 386. 389.  393

Malingering. Indication of 641

Malignant growths 399,  451

Malnutrition 299

Malpractice. Drugless mills of....  177

Malpractice 124

xManhood, Books  on 1190

Manipulation, Physical and mental  214
Manipulation, substitute for med-
ication 214

Maryland, Physicians  in 101 1

Massachusetts. I'hysicians in 1012

Massage, Books on 1192.  1266

Massage.  Rollers  for  1328

Masseurs, British Isles 1079

Masseurs, List  of 1 130

Masturbation ?43.  441.  487

Materia  alimentaria 708

Materia medica 214

Materia  medica.  Books  on 1266

Material. List of building 1295

Matijaca. Dr. Anthony, Biography

of '.  881

Matter, Existence  of 575

Meals,  Natural  diet 315,  317

Meals,  Time for 561

Measles 247.  248.  482

Measurements  in  electricity 577

Meat.  Injurious 1^)7.  302

Mecca of Chiropractic. History of  1370

Mechanical vibration. Nature of..  694
Meclianical vibrations, indications

and  contra-indications 694.  695

Mechanical vibration, \  alue  of....  694
Mechanical vibration, spinal vibra-
tion  indications 695.  696

Mechano-therapists 1133

Mechano-therapy. Books  on 1192

Mechano-therap3', Idealism in ....  736
Mechano-therapy, master mind for

suggestive theory 734

Mechano-therapy, new era of ....  736

Mechano-therapy,  qualifications for  734

Mechano-therapy, Field  of 735

Mechano-therapy. Schools  of 798

Medical  doctors. List  of 1135

Medical  doctors  of  other  times....  13

Medical freedom. Books on 1 1*^2

Medical graduates. What l)ecomes

of 131

Medical  jurisprudence. I'.ooks on..  1268

Medical Manslaughter 24

Medical prescription 212.  222

Medical  schools.  Criticism  of 131

Medicinal poisons 319

Medicine, Books  on 1 192

Medicine,  Classified  list  of  books  on  123*^)

Medicine,  Criticism  of 13

Medicine, Disgrace  of 26

Medicine,  domestic. Books  on 1252

Medicine,  Histories  of 1260

Medicine, Miscellaneous books on  1268

Medicine, Superstition  in 13

Melancholia  (See  also  Nervous  Dis-
eases) 356.  474


PAOL

Memory,  Books  on 1 194

Memory,  Weakness  of 457.  461

Men,  Sexual  diseases  of 338,  345

Menses, Suppression of the..  288.

364,  423,  429,  446,  466,  47V

Menstruation, Disturl)ances  in 423

Mental diagnosis,  catalogued ..  .206 — 211

1.  Psycho-analysis 206

2.  Phrenology 206

3.  Experimental  psychology 206

4.  .\strology .' 206

5.  Symbology 207

6.  Aura 207

7.  Psychic  research 208

8.  Occultism 208

9.  \'ocations 209

10. Emmanuelism 209

Mental  causation 1*^8

Mental  diseases 318.  326,  416,  *470

Mental  disorders.  Medical  Ijooks  on  1242

Mental healers 204

Mental  science. Incantation  in 213

Mental  science. Physical  culture  in  21*'
Mental states. Chronic ailments

caused by 318,  325

Mental  science.  Schools  of  798

Mental  scientists.  List  of 1136

Mental therapeutics. Books on....  1194

Mercurial inunctions 338, 341.

343,  36().  416

Mercury treatment liarmful 4'*4

Mercury.  Weakness  from ^i7

Meso-thorium  bromide,  in j^lace of

radium 693

Meso-thorium.  Radiations  of 693

Metabolism. Books  on 1274

Metaphysician  not  a  safe  guide ....  220

Method  of  testing 639

Method  of  testing.  C.eneral  remarks

on ' 640

Methods, Criticism  of 84

Methods  and  morals.  Analysis  of..  84

Methods,  intrinsic  or  extrinsic ....  29

Mica. Lower  voltage  of 596

Michigan. Physician in 1014

Microbes .  .  . .' 241.  259

Microscopy. J-Jooks on 1268

Micturition 346.  347

Midday meal 315

Migraine 380. .^82.  454

Milk  in  mothers.  .\l)sccnce  of 426

Milk, Boiled and unboiled U4.  439

Milk diet ..  758

Milk diet, l-'asting in connection

with  : 710

Milk  diet. C(jnstipation in 738

Milk diet for constipation 757

Milk  diet,  exclusive,  what  it  should

be 710

Milk  diet. I'^xercise  during 758

Milk  diet  for  diarrhea 757

Milk  diet. P>esh  air  during 758

Milk  diet  in  liypochlorhydria 757

Milk diet. Indications for 711

Milk diet, kind of  milk to  use....  756
Milk  diet. Lord Byron's  opinion  of  710
Milk  diet,  remedy  in  functional  dis-
ease 70')


(icnrnil  Itulc.v  lo  ('onlculs


\'Mil


Milk diet, nausea  ajiid vomiting...  758

Milk  diet, .Summary  of 758

Milk diet, temperature of milk,...  757

Milk  diet  treatment.^ 758

Milk diet,  undigested surplus 711

Milk diet, what to take with milk  757

Milk, preser\  cd 439

Milk,  Soxhlet  apparatus  for  boiling  439

Milk, Sterilized 429

Milliampere meter with a trans-
former ()79

Milliamperes 577

Milliampere  seconds,  how  calculated  f)79

Mills, Grain and nut 1318

Mind, Aberration of 470

Mind,  Books  on 1194

Mind, mental, emotional, psychic,

spiritual 200

Mind,  Training  of 785

Mineral Salts in  diet, \  alue  of....  47

Minnesota, Physicians in 1018

Miscarriages 42(). 4,>0,  432

Mississippi, Physicians in 1020

Missouri, Physicians in 1020

Mol)ility  in  health 500

Moderation  in  eating  313,  314

Montana,  Physicians  in 1023

Moon,  Relation  to  menstrual  period  423

Morbid matter, Deposit of 241

Morbid matter. Decomposition of

233,  244,  ^27
Morbid matter. Fermentation of

2.^7.  241

Morning  meal 315

Morning  sun 561

Morphia 260

Morton-wave  by  Leyden  jar 598

Morton-wave current 601

Mothers, Helps for (books) 1185

Motor  nerves  and  muscles, Testingof  639

Motor points 639

Motor-wave current, mode of ap-
plication 601

Motor  vibrators.  Types  of 6'~H

Muckley. Dr. Ferdinand A., l!io-

graphy  of 881

Mucous,  Discharge  of 485

Mumps 241

Munro.  Dr,  \V.  D.,  Biography  of..  881
Muscular  contractions  produced  by

electric current 573

Muscles.  Cold  against  warm 040

Muscular  exercise 755

Mushrooms and potatoes 317

Music  in  diagnosis  and  therapeutics  207

Myopia  371,  373.  374


N


Xagelschmidt, Dr. Franz 613

Xaprapaths 1136

Xaprapathy, Schools of 798

Xasal catarrh 325

National herb-store conspiracy re-
commended 163

Xatural dietetics 45

Xatural healing. Development of..  792


PACE

Natural  elements  a  source  of  health 560
Natural  healing,  Principles  and  me-
thods of  779

Natural healing, System of 16

Natural instinct 303,  344

Natural life colony at Palm City,

Cuba,  Notes  on 1370

Natural qualifications f)f a true

physician 128

Natural remedies and appliances,

Dealers in — liritish Isles 1078

Natural treatment of wounds and

open sores 45

Nature. Curative  efforts of 255

Nature  Cure 123

Nature Cure colleges and institu-
tions 798

Nature Cure, dei^artment store of

health 84

Nature  Cure, Examples  of 93

.Nature Cure, Lindlahr 33

Nature Cure colleges, Making  effi-
cient 133

Nature Cure institution. .Necessary

departments  in 85

Nature  Cure  institutes  and  sanitaria

in British Isles 1078

Nature  Cure  must  reach  great  mass-
es of  people 68

Nature  Cure.  .\'o  ultimate  authoritv

in '.  159

Nature  Cure  onh-  20  i)er  cent,  etifi-

cient 68

Nature  Cure.  Opportunities  in.... 89. 91
Nature Cure philosophy  and Prac-
tice 38

Nature Cure.  Qualities  found in . .  109

Nature Cure system. Earlier 226

Nature Cure system, principles,

aims  and  program  of  the 13

Nature  Cure,  things  it  must  do....  68
Nature  Cure  and  mental  and  meta-

phj'sical  healing 49

Nature  curists  who  fail for  lack  of

business  principles 71

Naturist. I'.fificiency  of 168

Naturist schools 133

Naturists. Traits lacking in 126

Naturists are in vagueness and

ignorance 161

Naturists. Methods  of.  in Germany  189
Naturists  in  the  business  of  selling

health 71

Naturopathic Colleges  and Institu-
tions 800

Naturopaths. British Isles 1079

Naturopaths, List of 1137

Naturopathy, Books  on 1179,  1202

Naturopathy,  germ  theory  criticized  55

Naturopathy. People treated by...  55

Naturopathy.  Understanding  of....  189

Naturopathy.  What  cures  in ' 55

Naturopathy in Great Britain:

Apparatus  and  appliances 61

Chiropractic 59

Christian Science 61

Chromo-therapy 58

Electro-therapeutics 58


1398


(iciu'vul  Index  lo  C.onlcnls


Herbalism 59

H3'drotherapy 57

Magnetic  healing,  iiypnotism,  sug-
gestion 60

Massage and Swedish exercises  57

New  Thought 60

Osteopatlij- 58

Practice prohibited b}- unregis-
tered persons 5o

Radiant  heat  and  liglit  treatment  58

Nausea 450

Neagley,  Dr.  Asia  L.,  Biography  of  883

Nearsightedness ^71,  373,  374

Nebraska, Physicians in 1024

Neck,  its  significance for the New

Science of Healing 233

Neck,  Steam  bath  for 289

Nephritic colic 343

Nerve action, Facts regarding....  704

Nerves,  Impingement  of  719

Nervous diseases. ..  .318, 324, 442,
453, 456, 461. 464, 467, 472, 476,

479,  480,  487

Nervous  disorders,  Medical  books  on  1242

Nervousprostration,Drugsuselessin  199

Nervous restlessness 470

Nervous  spasms 453

Nervus sympathicus 293,  359

Nesmith, Dr.  L. M.. J'.iography  of  883

-Neuralgia 449,  460,  478

Neuralgia,  Facial 460

Neurasthenia 449, 460, 461,  478

Neuropathic  treatment,  h'lYects  of..  707

Neuropaths,  List  of 1 146

Neuropathy,  Colleges  of  800

Neuropathy, Fundamental idea of  705
Neuropathy, history, principles,

physiological basis 702,  703

Neuropathy,  Three  laws  of 703

Nevada, Physicians in 1026

New Hampshire,  Physicians in....  1026

New  Jersey, Physicians in 1026

New  Mexico,  Physicians  in 1031

New Science of Healing, Cure i)y  549
New Science of Healing, Discov-
ery of 225,  237

New  Science  of  Healing  turns  mis-
ery  into joy 547

New  Thought advocates 163

New  Thought  cults  neglect  physio-
therapy, Nature Cure neglects

psychotherapy  204

New York,  .Physicians in 1031

New York School of Chiropractic,

Notes on 1 375

Nicotine  poisoning 303

Nitrous oxide. Collection of 597

Nitrous  oxide in static machines..  596

No  Nature  Cure  without  Mind  Cure  204

Nocturnal  emissions.  .338,  359,  453,  485

Nodular  deposits  lowered  vitality..  553
Nodules  and  tumors.. 233,  291,  329,

332,  347,  444,  451,  455,  485

Nodules, boils and ulcers 536


Normal form of body 272

Normal  reaction  of  a  muscle 629

Normal reaction of a nerve 6.^0


North Carolina, Pivysicians in 1044

North  Dakota, Physicians  in 1044

Nose,  Cancer  of 400,  444

Nose,  Diseases  of 289

Nose,  Medical  books  on 1254

Nose,  Steam  bath for 289

Nourishment  of  young  animals....  306

Nurseries,  Supplies  for 1295

Nursing, liooks  on 1 185

Nursing,  Medical  books  on  1270

Nursing,  Schools  of 800

Nutrition  553

Nutrition,  Books  on 1274

Nutrition, V'arious forms of... 290,  317
Nutritive material in foods..  303,

311,  317,  42(,

Nut  butters,  Louis  Lust's  List  of..  1308

Nuts, shelled, List of 1310

.\'uts,  food  preparations  of. List  of  1316


Oaten groats and cabbage ?16

Oatmeal gruel 314

Obesity 230,  442,  457

Obesity, Treatment of 790

Obsessed by the health-cult habit  69

Obstetrics, Books on 1272

Occultism, Books on 1206

Occupations  lend  clues  to  the  med-
ical  Sherlock Holmes 209

Ofifice  furniture  and  supplies,  List  of  1296

Official  medicine 16

Ohio, Physicians in 1045

Ohm's  law 578

Ohm,  or  unit  of  resistance 577

Oil of eucalyptus 627

Oil of pine needles b27

Oils,  Combination  of 627

Oils,  ozonated,  usable  for  dressing

ulcers  and  chronic  diseases 628

Oils, Remedial 1336

Ointment, mercurial .  .338, 341,  343,

366,  416

Oklahoma, Physicians  in 1055

Old  Soul  vs.  Young  Soul 129

Onanism 343,  441,  487

One  hundred  methods  of  diagnosing

the  sick 135

Omnivora '  306

Open  letter  from ]^>enedict  Lust...  194

Open sores 416

Operations 402,  403

Ophthalmic  diseases.  .370,  374,  445,

450,  455,  464, 484,  487
(Ophthalmology  and  Optometry,  al-
buminuric  neuroretinitis 7(A

Ophthalmology and Optometry,

diabetic retinitis 762

Ophthalmology and Optometry,

leucaemic retinitis 762

Ophthalmology and Optometry.

purulent retinitis 763

Ophthalmology and Optometry,

retinitis  i)roliferans 763

Ophthalmology and Optometry,

sypiiilitic retinitis 760


Gciif'i'dl  Index  to  Coidenls


1399


(Jphtlialmoscope 647

Opportunities in tlie Nature Cure  86

Optometrists 1146

Order  of  Cure;  mental  diagnosis,
physical  diagnosis,  physical  treat-
ment,  mental treatment 204

Oregon, Physicians  in 1057

Organization  for  ])rotectivc  pur-
poses lauded 101

Organization, Xecd of 103

Organize! 103

Organs of sense 306

Orthodox  medical diagnosis 122

Orthopedics,  Scope  of 770

Orthopedist, his relation to pliysi-

cian 771

Oscilloscope,  Description  of 669

Osteopaths, a close corporation..  99

Osteopaths, List  of 1147

Osteopaths and Chiropractors,

Medical  men's  opinion  of  119

Osteopathy, a distinct system of

medicine 737

Osteopathy, all outside nature a

specific for human ailments....  737

Osteopathy,  Books  on 1192

Osteopathy,  Books  on 1272

Osteopathy,  Chiropractic  and  Spon-

dylotherapy.  Union  of 779

Osteopathy.  Colleges  and  institu-
tions of 800

Osteopathy, cure implies funda-
mentally adjustive manipulation  738
Osteopathy deals in incantation..  213
Osteopathy,  how  looked  upon  imtil

recently 737

Otalgia 478

Otorrhea 370, 478,  481

Oudin current, nature of  and how

produced 609

Overfeeding 296,  306

Oxychloride.  its  germicidal  and  as-
tringent properties 589

Oxychloride, passes through cot-
ton or  chamois  leather  into  tissues  589
Ozone, Application of and indica-
tion 627

Ozone, how  produced  and purified  627


Packs, Material  for 1326

Packs,  Wet 22b,  253,  416

Pain,  Nature  of 267

Pains in the back.. 444, 447, 461,

464,  479.  487

Pains in the side 464.  487

Painted  screens  and  lamps 651

Palpitation  of  the  heart 353

Pancreas, Medical books on 1264

Paralysis 261,318,453.  455

Paralysis,  cerebral  contra  periplier-

al. How  to determine 460

Paralysis  of  the  arm 468

Paralysis  of  the  heart 353

Paralysis. Progressive 261,  318

Parasites ....': 396,  397


Parenthood,  Books  on 1208

Parker, Prof. H. X. D., Biography

of  883

Paroxysms  of  rage  457,  484

Parsons,  poets  and  pedagogues....  81

Parting  word, A 1381

Parturition, Easy 430, 436, 444.

■ 448, 452,  472, 482,  483,  486
Passive  resistance  of  narrow-mind-
ed physicians  574

Pathology, Cellular 775

Pathology, Descriptive 775

Pathology, Experimental 775

Pathology,  General 774

Pathology,  Humoral 775

i'athology,  Medical  books  on 1272

i'athology. Special 775

Patients should  ')be seriously and

extensively diagnosed 161

Pattreiouex, Dr. J. Allen, Bio-
graphy of 887

Payne, Dr. A. V.. Biography of..  887
Peas. Most digestible manner of

l)oiling 317

Penetration of rays, depends on

respective refraction 648

Pennsylvania, Physicians in 1058

People must be hypnotised by a
large institution back of Nature

Cure 159

Peppermint tea 387

Pepsin 369

Percussion 325.  328

Pericardium, Dropsj^ of the 487

Personal aciiuaintance death to a

profession 184

Perspiration. Cold ".  .  356

Perspiring  feet 425

Pessaries • 425

Pet  modes  of  treatment 135

Periodicals 1210

Periodicals. Health, British Isles..  1081

Periodicity.  The  law  of 41

Pharmacy. Books on 1266

Pharyngeal catarrli .  .325. 442. 449,

458,  464,  486

Phenacetin 261

Photo-  and  actino-therapy 648

Photo-therapy 651

Phoresis  (See  also  Iontophoresis) . .  586

Phrenologists 1 173

Phrenolog}'.  P.ooks  on 1194

Phrenology.  Modern 785

Phrenology,  Schools  of 800

Phthisis.. 325,  328.  334.  342.  416.  443.

446.  455,  480,  482.  485

Physicultopathy. what it means...  759

Physi-Culture 750

Physicians. Alphabetical directory

of  . '.  813

Physicians in the British Isles....  1079

Physicians. Classified list of 1083

Ph3'sicians. Geographical index of  973

Phj'sicians.  Naturopathic  consulting  1146
Physical condition. Determination

of 500

Physical Culture.  Apparatus  for...  1326

Physical Culture. Books on 1208


1400


General  Index  to  Contents


Phj'sical  Culture, Involved systems

of •••.•••.■  1-0

Physical  Culture.  Schools  and  Saui-

toria  of 800

Physical culturist should teach

mental science 219

Physical Culturists, i'.ritish Isles..  1079

Physical Culturists, List of.......  1173

Physical Tlierapeutics, Schools of  800

I'hysical Training, Reason for....  787

Physical weakness counterpart of

mental and moral defects 218

Physics. Hooks on 1244

Physiologic Therapeutics. Defini-
tion of 790

Physiology, Fiooks  on 1274

Physio-Therapists 1174

Phytotherapy » 740

Phytotherapy,  altruism  recommend-
ed  against money-making 739

Phytotherapy,  l>otanic  dispensatory  742

Phytotherapy, emetic treatment...  742

Phytotherapy,  errors  to  he  avoided  739
Phytotherapy,  infusion  as  means  of

enema  740

Phytotherapy,  Pacific  Ocean  health

resort . .  .' 740,  741

Phytotherapy, shrunken or con-
tracted bowels,  remedy  for 741

Phytotherapy, yerbascum leaves

and  kidney  pains 741

Pickling  foods  299

Piles 329,  355,  361,  .380-2,  484,  487

Pills 367,  369,  399

Placanta. Adhesion  of  the ....433,  444

Plan of  medical business book....  137
Planets  exert  positive influence  on

humans 207

Planets,  Movements  'of 783

Plants 1295

Plants,  List  of  remedial 1342

Plaster dressings 474,  483

Platinum  heating 582

Pleasures  of  childhood  and  troubles

of  age  210

Pleurisy 330.  332.  465.  485

Poise more than ]>ower  needed by

Americans 89

Poisoning, Blood 419

Poisonous medicines 319

Poisons.  Abstraction  of  metallic.  l)y

electricity 575

Polar effects 582

Polarity. Tests for 583

Polarization 581

Pole, negative, and its effects 583

Pole, positive, and its effects ....  583

Pollutions 339,  359,  453.  485

Polypus 449.  452,  481

Polypus, laryngeal 449

Polypus  of  the  ear 481

Polypus  of  the  throat 481

Post Graduate Colleges 800

Porto Rico, Physicians  in 1076

Potassium bromide 363

Potassium iodide 341,  416

Potatoes  and apple salad 317

Potatoes  and  carrots 316


Potato dumplings 317

Potatoes and mushrooms 317

iV)tatocs and spinacli 3l6

I'otatoes and turnijjs 316

Powders, Remedial 1336

Practice, Eclectic, Hooks on 1254

Practice. Medical books on 1274

Preachers and hustlers 81

Preaching prophyla.xis sliould be

rigorously l)arrcd l62

Predisposition  to  disease 20().  263

Pregnancy.  ..423.  424,  430,  436.  472.  482

Premature  l)irths 425,  431.  434

Presbyopia 449


Prescriptions. Mental 212

I'revention  of  disease 246

I'rillwitz,  Dr.  A.  Von, Biography  of  887
Principles and methods of the
"specialist" sliould l>e used by

Xaturists 1 04

Principles  of  .\"ew  Science  of Heal-
ing 491

Procreation best attained in the

morning  hours 5t)2

Production of sleep by electricity  595

Profession, making  it  pay 179

Professional ethics a moral grave-
yard 149.

Professor Freud's method of self-
analysis 206

Prohibition  mo\ement— against  use

of  drugs 38

Profuse  perspiration  and  cold  baths

indicated 521

Progressive paralysis 2()1.  318

Prolapse  of  the  uterus 425,  475

Proliferations 399,  451

Propagation. Capacity of 338.  345

Prophylaxis, Medical  books  on....  1262
Proportions of  a normal figure .  .  502
Proportions  of  an encumbered fig-
ure 503

Proud flesh 399,  405

Prunes  and  lentils 317

Psychiatry supersedes physical

diagnosis 206

Psychic  pull from the  sky 202.  203

Psychological  reason  for  drugs....  213
Psychological tribunal of doubters

and scoffers needed 221

Psychology. Books on 1196

Psychology, Curative 221

Psychology of Advertising 147

Psycho-physical and physico-psy-

chic  progression  in  disease 210

Psychotherai)ist is unpsychological

in  use  of  psychology 219

Psychotherapy.  Medical  books  on..  1242

l^iblishers. British  Lsles 1082

I'uerperal fever 427.  429

Pulmonary  affections  .  .325,  328,  342,

416.  442.  450.  457.  463.  484,  486

Pulmonary  catarrh  . .  .  .442,  48_1,  482,  486
Pulmonary consumption ..  325. 328.

334,  342,"  416,  443,  446,  455,  480,  483,  485
Punishment for unsuccessful doc-
tors 98


(icnci'dl  Index  to  Conb'iits


1  101


PAGE

Pure  air  raises  the  vitality  of  food  560
Purinton's  advice,  acted  upon,  will

increase income 68

I'urinton's apparent flesertion  •  of

health reform 09

I'urinton  declared  a  \isioiiary  ....  70
I'urinton gets sick of Health Cwrc'

propaganda 69

Put  brains  in  work — not  in  talk....  72


Q

Quarantine 264

Quinine 261,360,387.  410

Quinine Bisulphate and its indica-
tion 587


Rabid  dogs,  Bites  of 419

Radiant  energj'  (ether-viljrations)  .  . 648
Radiant  heat,  thermic  rays,  effects  of 649
Radiant light, luminous raj-s. Ef-
fects  of 649

Radiograph  V, Developer-solutions

for ' 680

Radiography, Developing negative 680
Radiography, duration of  exposure

of plates 070

Radiography in eye-magnet opera-
tions o47

Radiography,  fixing  bath  for  devel-
oped plates  681

Radiography, Xaturc of 674

Radiolog)-. Subdivisions of 648

Radiotherapy, after treatment .... 686
Radiotherapy, distance depending

on vacuum of tube 683

Radiotherapy, duration of treat-
ment 084

Radiotherapj', filtration of rays .  . 68o
Radiotherapy, frequency of treat-
ment 085

Radiotherapy, indications 682

Radiotherai^y, method of applica-
tion .  .  .  . ' t)%2

Radiotherapy,  Pfahler's  sole  leather

and  aluminum filter 686

Radiotherapy, qualification of X-

rays for deep penetration 090

Radiotherapy, Regulation of \olt-

age in 083

Radiotherapy: stimulation and in-
hibition 681

Radiotherapy, tubes which allow

perfect control of vacuum 683

Radium, Books on 1254

Radium-Emanation, how applied.. 693
Radium Emanation, indications... 693
Radium Emanation, mode of col-
lecting the gas 692

Radium Therapy 648. 691

Radiimi Therapy. Application of

radium 692. 693

Radium  Therapy,  dosage  in  use  of
radium 692


PAGE

Radium Therapy,  embraces  radium

— radiation and emanation 691

Radium Therapy, general qualities

of  radium  and  effects 691

Radium  Therapy,  method  of  treat-
ment " 692

Radium Theraijy, platinum tubes

al)sorl)  alpha  rays 692

Radium  Therapy,  protection  of  pa-
tient and  operator  in  use  of  rad-
ium 692

Radium  Therapy,  similarity  of  gam-
ma to X-rays 691

Rage, Paroxysms  of 457. 484

Rancor  defeats  remedial  legisla-
tion 192

Rational  diet. Hints  on  selection  of

315,  317
Rational  Medical  School,  X'otes  on  1376
Rays, actinic or chemical. Nature

and effects  of 649

Rays, always considered conjunc-
tively as  light,  heat  and  radiation 649
Rays, thermic, luminous and ac-
tinic 649

Reaction of Degeneration 629

Reader  will  be  angry  at  some  state-

■ ments 73

Reading character liy touch and

smell 209

Real  doctors descrii)ed 142

Recipe for wholemeal bread 315

Recipe for wholemeal gruel 314

Recipes, Special 1318

Rectal fistula 38o

Rectum 231. 302

Rectum. Medical l)Ooks on 1278

Redness of the skin 348

Reformers  as  fanatics 187

Reformers  need  informers  and  per-
formers 70

Reformers  babies  in  business  me-
thods 112

Refraction and  penetration 648

Refraction,  proportional  to  fre-
quency of  other  vibrations 648

Refreshing light breeze to patient

from  static  charge 599

Reilly.  Dr. Harold  J..  Biography  of 887
Relation of the Science of Facial

Expression  to  Phrenology 567

Remedial  agents.  Mv 286 — 295

Remedies. Herbal 1330

Remedies. Home 1344

Remedies. Kneipp Herbal 1334

Remedies. Phj-siologic 1346

Remedies. Tissue, Schiissler's 1338

Removal  of  encumbrance  only  ra-
tional method  of  treating  dis-
ease 547

Renal  affections ..  346.  351.  387.  454.

464.  480. 482
Rencher, Dr. Gottlieb ].. Bio-
graphy of 889

Research. Contra-distinction of. to

practice 571

Rest Home. The. Xotes on 1376

Restaurants. British Isles 1078


M02


Gcncnil  Iiidc.v  lo  Conlcnls


Restaurants, Vegetarian and Xat-

uropathic 13-18

Restless  condition 756

Restlessness,  Nervous 470

Results  of  back  encumbrance 521

Retention  of  the  f:eces  347

Retention  of  the  urine 347

Retrogression  of  fermentive  process

through fall  of  temperature ....  233
Rheostat  increases  or  decreases  re-
sistance of  current 578

Rheostat, oscillating, how made,

and  mode  of  working (j03

Rheotome,  rythmical  interrupter  of

faradic  current 592

Rheumatic  headache 472

Rheumatism.. 2o5.  278,  434.  455,  463.

467,  472,  475,  487
Rlieumatism, Articular ...  .267, 434,

4o3,  467,  468,  487

Rheumatism,  Cause  of  535

Rhode  Island,  Physicians  in 1064

Rice 315

Rice  and  apples 316

Rice  pudding 316

Rickets ?>ii.  342

Rickli, Dr.  Arnold, Biography  of..  891
Riedmiiller, Dr. Jacob, l!iograi)iiv

of  .' ; '.  889

Riese, Dr. Joseph, Hiography of..  889
Right kind of Nature Cure books

and magazines 92

Right-sided encumbrance causes

perspiration 516

Riley,  Dr.  J.  Shelby, Biography  of  891
Roentgen or X-Rays, nature and

generation 663

Roentgenology 648,  674

Roessell,  Dr.  Paul  E.,  Biography  of  893

Roots, List  of  remedial 1342

Ruegg,  Prof.  John  J.,  Biography  of  893


Salesmanship, Course in

Salicylic acid 349, 411,

Salicylic  Ionization  (Sodium  Sa-
licylate) and its indication

Salt

Sand,  Eating  of,  for  constipation  .  .

Sanitaria, Classified list of

Sanitaria, Drugless

Sanitaria,  General  list  of

Sanitarium,  drugless.  Description  of

Sanitary  goods, List  of

.Sanitarium  without  a  psychologist  a
joke

Sanitarium  patient  should  be  taught
nature,  cause  and  cure  of  his
trouble

.Satiety  of  life 319,  356,  369,

Scabies 397,

Scald  head

Scalds 411.

Scarlet  Fever 248,  448,  452,

Schaefer,  Joseph, Biography  of....


182

416

588
299
557
797
800
807
139
1296

200


217
466
398
258
481
482
895


.Schlathulter, i\e\ Coins, l^io-

graphy  of yOl

School lioard> hut beds of super-
stition 105

Schools,  Classified  list  of 797

Schools,  Consolidation  of 134

Schools,  Correspondence  797

Schools  granting  diplomas  are  un-
regulated, unrationalized 135

.Schools,  naturopathic.  General  list  of  807
Schools of drugless tiierapeutics
teach the art of healing but not

the business thereof 74

Schultz. Dr. Carl. Biography of..  901

Sciatica 271,  443,  448,  455,  474

Science  of  facial  e.xpression  con-
cerned  with the whole man 497

Science  of  facial  expression  diag-
nosed (S.  F.  E.) 490

Science  of  Facial  Expression;  the
result  of  thirty  years  of  observa-
tion 568

.Scientific method of professional

rating  needed 127

Scrofula 256, iZZ. 342,  449,  455

Secretory  organs 339

Seeds 1295

Seeds,  remedial.  List  of 1342

Seek  to  win  back  doctors  hy  reason

and  skill  193

Self-abuse 343, 345, 441,  447,  487

."-^elf-analysis,  self-criticism,  self-
reform  essential  for  success 7c)

Semen,  Nocturnal  emission  of.. 338,

359,  453.  485

Seminal fluid 326.  il7

.Serious  troubles  caused  by  spiritual

repression 213

Serum  Therapy, Medical books on  1274

Service.  Film 1348

Service,  Naturopathic  1348

Seven kinds of opportunity in the

study  of  the Nature Cure 88

Sex, Medical  books  on 1262

Sexual  diseases. .  ..2>iS,  345.  447.  454.  456
Sexual  organs. Diseases  of.  in  wo-
men 534

Sexual  excitement,  Excessive 432

Sexual impulse.. 339,  343. 344,  432,

440,  441,  486
Shewalter. Dr. Chester A., Bio-
graphy of 897

Shocks  a  cause  of  fermentation. 240.  241

Short sightedness i7\,  37?,,  374

Shot.  ICxtraction  of,  from  wounds..  413

Should  a  doctor  study  medicine?..  139

Shower baths 229

Sick-diet  314,  315

Sick  minds  must  be  cured  as  well  as

sick  bodies 121

.Sick  want recovery — not discovery  72

Sickness,  a  crime 216

Side  encumbrance 272,  278,  491

.Side  encumbrance 514

.Silence  and  mystery  should  sur-
round the  healing  art  160

Simpson,  Dr.  Rosalie  M.,  Biograiihv

of '.  907


(icncral  Index  to  ('.oiileids


\u:\


Sinusoidal currents, application of

and  indications 004

Sinusoidal currents, nature of, and

how  generated 60.^

Sinusoidal  currents,  slow  or  gal-
vanic and  rapid,  distinguished Iiy

amount  of  cycles 003

Sitz  haths 229

Sitz  hatiis, friction 286,  295

Skiagraph 674

Skin,  Activity  of  the 250

Skin, Chlorotic  color  of  the 302

Skin,  Diseases  of  the.. 283,  325,  3^7.

348, 350,  447
Skin,  Eruption  of  the.. 235,  336.  350,

389,  458,  482

Skin, Itching  of  the 418

Skin, Medical books  on 1278

Skin,  Redness  of  the 348

Skin,  Tension  of  the 240

Sleep  not  an  inactive state 755

Sleeplessness..  318, 324, 442, 449,

450,  453,  456,  470,  477,  484
Sleuth  on  medical  monopoly  advo-
cated ." 157

Small  pox 252,  258,  383

Smoking  foods 299

Smoking to1)acco 303

Snake bites 419

Snake. Instance of 297

Snake  poison  in  blood  versus  sto-
mach 506

Soaps, Kneipp's 1344

Social and financial standing for

Naturopaths in Germany 109

Social opportunit}^ in the Nature

Cure 89

Societies, British Isles 1078

Societies, Naturopathic 798

Softening  of  the brain 457

Soldiers, Instance  of 270

Solution  for  ionic  medication  is  one

or two per cent 588

Somewhere  a  system  of  cure  exists

for  you 221

Sonntag, Dr. Alfred G., Biographv

of ".  903

Sore  breasts 425,  426

Sore throat 454

Sores,  open.  Cause  of 501

Soul extends beyond the body....  207

Soups,  difficult  to  digest 296,  299

Source  of  failure  and  success  de-

South America. Physicians in ....  1076

South Carolina, Physicians in....  1065

South Dakota, Physicians in 1065

Soxhlet's  process 440

Spasms.. 258,  364,  416.  459,  460.  470,  479

Spasms  of  the  bladder 349

Specialism 321

Specialist that should have  been a

swineherd 127

Spectrum,  rays  and  colors  of,  due
to  wave  lengths  and  other  vibra-
tions 648

Spectrum  of  sun  light,  Colors  com-
posed of 648


Sphyginonianouietry, method of

auscultation 700

Sphygmomanometers, two kinds,

for auscultation and palpation..  699
!^l)]iygmomanometry, directions for

examination 699

.Siiliygmomanometry,  or  method  of

measuring blood pressure 699

Sphygmomanometrj^ method of

palpation 700

Sphygmomanometry,  pulse  pressure  701

Spices in foods 248

Spinal adjustment, or chiropractic  712
S])inal cord. Consumption of the

359,  440,  453
S])inal cord. Diseases of the.. 359,

446.  453,  480

Spinal  cord. Inflammation  of  the..  480

Spinach and potatoes 316

Spine,  Curvature  of  the 276-8,  470

Spiritual Healers. List of 1174

Spiritual  renewal  underlies  jihvsical

relief  .^ .' 222

Spleen, Enlargement  of  the 480

Splinter  in  finger.  Effect  of 230

Splintered bone 482

Spondylotherapists. List  of 1174

Spondylotiierapy, Apparatus for.

Application of 1322

"Spooks"  in  cloudland  cause  trouble  208

Spondylitis 482

Sputum  containing  blood 485

Squinting 372

Staden, Dr. Ludwig. Biography  of  905
Stagnation of the blood.. 352, .353.  450
Standard of entrance for matricu-
lants  needed 136

Standardizing  the Nature  Cure ...  116

Start  for  success,  The 96

"Starving America" 47

Static charging, positive and neg-
ative ..  ..' 599

Static electricity. Application of..  599
Static electricity, contra-indica-

tions 599

Static electricity, also frictional .  .  .  574
Static electricit}^ patients to re-
move all  metallic  bodies 599

Static induced current, indications

and  application  of 60O

Static  machine,  Difficulties  in  oper-
ating 596

Static  machine,  earthing  it  and  dan-
gers of  earthing  597

Static machine, high frequency

from 609

Static machine, insulated i-)latform

for 598

Static macliine. Location of 597

Static machine. Moisture in the

case  of  596

Static machine, operator not to

come  too  close  to  patient 600

Static machine. Polarity of, and

modes  of  testing  it 597

Static  machines.  Mixture  for 596

Static  machiius.  Reversing  polaritv

of '.  597


1404


General  Indc.v  to  (lonlenls


Static  'machines. Size of terminal

balls 601

Static Roller Massage, indication

and  application 602

Static  sparks,  direct,  too  severe,  sel-
dom employed 602

Static sparks, indnced or indirect.

Application  of 602

Static sparks, their indication, Ap-

I)lication  and cantion in 602

Static sprays, indication and aj)-

plication 602

Steam  baths 286.  288

Steam  baths, Directions for  taking?  286

Steam baths for the abdomen....  288

Steam  baths,  Apparatus  for 286

Steam  baths  for  the  head,  neck  and

nose 289

Steam  baths,  partial 289

Steam  pots,  with  alcohol  heaters  for

baths 286,  287

Sterility 425

Sterilized  milk ^ 439

Sterilizers,  List  of  1319

Stethoscope,  Use  of 700

Stiffness  of  leg 443

Stings  of  insects 419.  421

Stomach,  Afifection  of  the.. 280,  442,

446.  463,  467,  476,  481,  487

Stomach,  Cancer  of  the 399,  480

Stomach,  Catarrh  of.. 446,  466,  480,  487

Stomach, Digestive power  of  the..  303

Stomach, Dilatation  of 449

Stomach, Medical  books  on 1264

Stone.. ..347, 456,  476

Stop talking  and writing, and per-
form cures 167

Stoutness  442

Strictures 443,  488

Strueh,  Dr.  C,  I'enefits  from  Christ-
ian science 53

Strueh, Dr. C, Drugs finally lead

to  madhouses 52,  53

Strueh, Dr. C, Ignorance of cell-

chemism 53

Strueh, Dr. C, Medicine a capital

constantly  increasing 53

Strueh, Dr. C,  The  "teaspoon me-
thod" 53

Strueh, Dr. C, Treatment judged

by  results 51

Strueh, Dr. C, "\'is medicatrix

naturae" 51

Stupidity among drugless doctors  104

St. Vitus dance 359,  452,  453

Subluxations, reasons why denied  715

Subluxations,  \  ertebral  714

Substitute for surgery should be

advised 163

Suckling  of  children 425.  426

Successful treatment of swollen

tongue 493

Suffocative attacks 398,  461

Suggestion, Books  on 1196

Suggestive Therapists 1174

Suicide,  Thoughts  of.. 318.  355,  369,  466

.Snlphnric acid for static machines  596


Summerbell, Dr. A. E. P., Bio-

graphy  of 905

Sun, air and light both as factors

of  vitality 552

Sun  baths  ". 289

Sun  and  water,  joint  effect  of.. 466.  47''
Superheated  air,  indication  and  how

applied 626

Supper 315

Supplies, List of office 1296

Supplies, Where to obtain 1348

Supply Houses 1348

Supporters,  Alidominal 1319

Suppression of the menses.. 288.

364,  423,  429,  446

Suppression  of  symptoms  no  cure..  547

Surgeons, Orificial 1147

Surgery. Books on 1278

Surgeon who was a messenger of

^  God 190

Surgical  diathermy. Absolute  asep-
sis of 645

Surgical diatliermy, preferable to

cautery 645

Sweating feet 349,  350

Sweden, Physicians in 1077

Swellings 473,  480.  484.  486

Svcosis 447

Syphilis 260. 338, 345, 416.  456

Syringes 1346


Table of substances in order of

their conductivity 578

Tables, Massage 1346

Tables, Osteopathic 1346

Tables. Traction 1346

Tables, Treatment 1346

Tabes  dorsalis 359,  362,  44o,  453

Tape  worm 396,  397

Tea, Injurious nature  of 297,  303

"Teach  me  how  to  staj'  well" 217

Teachers,  Texts  for 1212

Tears 2i2

Teas,  Kneipp  1334

Teeth,  Cleaning  the 376

Teeth, Diseases of the.. 376. 379,

457,  477.  486

Teeth,  Extraction  of 386

Teeth, Hollow 376

Teeth. Loss of 230

Temperature, Regulation of 418

Temperature.  Change  of 239.  240

Ten Efficiency Principles:

1.  Don't transgress the law.... 7i

2.  Co-operate in serious cases
with  a  qualified  M. D 76

3.  Concentrate  on  one  thing  un-
til you  have  made  it  a  success 76

4.  Choose  your  helpers  who  can
work  best 77

5.  Never  cut  your  fee 78

6.  Never  send  out  your  own  bills

— emi)l()y  a  secretary 78


(icncrdl  Index  lo  (.onlriils


1  105


7.  Run  the  financial  side  of  your
work  as  a  business,  not  pliil-
anthropy 79

8.  I.ove  your  work  enough  to
leave it occasionally 7'J

9.  Never  try  to  capitalize  reform  79
10. Do not substitute cult for

character 80

Tendons,  Extension  of 462

Tennessee,  Physicians  in 1065

Tension  of  the skin 240

Tesla current. Description of, and

how  generated 606,  (>U8

Test  for  death.  Importance  of 641

Tetters 282

Texas, Physicians in 1066

"Thank  God  for  persecution" 125

Theorists,  the  curse  of  colleges  and

libraries 81

Therapeutjc application of electric

light  bath .  655

Therapeutic  Instruction,  Hoard  of..  217

Therapeutics,  Medical  l)ooks  on  .  .  .  .  1274

Therapeutics, Physiologic 787

Therapy,  lumino  and  actino 659

Thermopenetration,  leading  place  in

future 613

Thermophores,  or  electro-therm
compressors,  nature  and  how  ap-
plied 626

Thousand  ways  to  please  a  husband,

A, Review of :••,••  ^-^^

Throat, Disease of  the.... 325,  ci77,

452,  454,  457,  473,  481

Throat,  Medical  books  on 1254

Throat, Inflammation of the.. 378.

454,  473

Tlirush 258

Thunderstorms,  Instances  of 255

Tinctures, Remedial 1336

Tissues,  Induration  of 22)2

Tissite  massage  Ijj-  static  electricity  599

Tissue Remedies, Schiissler's 1338

Tobacco, Effects  of  smoking 303

Toiler  with  the  divine  gift  of  healing  127

Toilet,  .Articles  for 1344

Toilet  articles, Kneipp's 1344

Toleraace 188

Tongue, Cancer  of  tiie 400

Tools,  List  of 1296

Toothache 230,  457.  477,  486

Toxicology, Books  on 1268

Tracheotomy 451

Trachoma 371.  450,  4b4,  484

Training  and testing  a  physician..  131
Transformers, interrupterless. De-
scription  of 671

Transmission of  disease 263

Traumatic  fever 407

Treatment,  Biochemic 1338

Trophotherapy, advantages of un-

fired diet 744

Trophotherapy,  cereals,  unfired.  va-
lue of 74()

Trophotherapy,  Historical  sketch  of  747
Trophotherapy,  list  of  unfired  foods

and  their  iireiiaration 747.  749


rAi,i

Trophotherapy,  natural  and  projjhy-

lactic feeding 743

Trophotherapy,  obstaculous  notions

it meets .743.  744

Troi)hotherapy, prophylactic syn-

edes, or apyrtropher salads 746

Trophotherapy,  use  of  roots 745

Trophotherapy, value of divers

green vegetables 744.  745

Trophotherapy. value of the tree-
fruits 746

Trophotherapy. value of unripe

fruits and nuts 746

Trophotherapy, value  of  vegetable-
fruits 745

Tropical fever 386. .389.  478

Trusses _ 1346

Tuliercular consumption  .  .325, 328,
334, 342, 416. 443. 446. 455. 480,

482.  485

Tubercular nodules 329

Tul>erculin ^ii

Tuberculin, Girl  poisoned Ijy  .  .  .  .  ._.  541

Tuberculosed knee i7 ,  482

Tuberculosis  of  the  bone.. 335,  443,  482
Tuberculosis  of  the  brain.. 360.  361,

380,  ?,>i2
Tuljerculosis  of  the  lun"S..325,  334.

342, 416, 443, 446, 455, 480, 483.  485

Tul)erculosis.  Medical  books  on....  1282

Tucker,  Dr.  Frank  L.,  Biographv  of  'X)7
Tumors.  .2ii.  286.  329.  .347.  380.  444.

449.  451.  455
Tumors  and  cancers  caused  by  un-

appeased sex longings 202

Tumors, Blood 411

Tumors, Bony 45''

Tumor  caused  by  emotional  repres-
sion 201^

Tumors,  Encysted 447

Tumors, forerunners of  death ....  536

Tumors,  glandular ...  .233,  444,  449.  455

Tumor  on  a  lady's  neck  removed..  547

Tumor on the abdomen .  .232, 291,  381

Tumors  on  the  neck.. 233,  444,  449.  455

Tumors, Uterine 474

Tungsten filament, in vacuum or

nitrogen-filled globe 054

Tunison, Dr. E. Howard, Bio-
graphy of 909

Turnips and potatoes ^16

Two fundamental principles to
unite the devoters of rational

healing 100

Two-thirds of doctors should be

plumbers, butchers,  etc 125

Tying  up blood vessels 409

Tyler's Raw Foods. Notes on....  1379

Typhoid  fever 383.  385.  475


U


Uez, Dr.  Gustav.  Biography  of....  909

Ulcers 289,  330,  443,  486

Ulcers, Intestinal 349,  486

Unfired  food.  Review  of 1288

United States, Phvsicians in 974


1106


(rcjirral  Index  h>  C.ontcnls


PAGt

Unity  of  disease  246

Unity of disease and cure .34

L'nnatural foods never thoroughly

digested 501

Unripe food recomnicndi'd 535

Unripe  fruit ?15

Uraemia ^48

Urethra.  Stricture  of  the 44.?.  488

Urination .U7,  348

Urine, Blood in the 446

Urine, Books on 1282

L>ine, Retention  of  the .?47.  .>48

Utah, I'hysicians in 1067

Uterine  cancer 4(X),  4oO,  487

Uterine  hemorrhage 400,  460

Uterine  tumor 474

Uterine  flexion 425

L"terus, Prolapse of  the .... 425,  475


V

X'accination.. 233,  254.  2()0,  370,  4l0,  452

N'accination a fatal error 507

\'accine,  Medical  books  on 1274

Vacuum tube burns, and how to

avoid  them  620

\'acuum tubes, low, medium and

liigh 619

\  acuum  tubes. Sterilization  of 620

X'aluc of  tolerance 187

\  alue of the morning sun 561

\'alve tube, connected to X-ray

,  tube 669

V'aso  constrictor  nerves 705

A^egetarianism, Principles of 45

Vegetarians,  why  they  fail 46

Vermont, Physicians in 1068

Vertebra. Inflammation of a 483

Vermin, Instances  of 241,  242

Veterinarj', Books  on 1284

Vibrators 1346

"Violetta" violet rav apparatus.

Notes on 1379

\'irginia, Physicians in 1068

\'isions,  beautiful. Aids  to 81

\  ital force 38

\'ital  power 240,  294,  298

Vitalism, Books on 1214

Vitality 754

Vitality, Flood  tide of 574

Vitality, Increasing  the  ■ 553

Vitality  a basic factor in the cure

of  disease 553

Vitality transforms nodules into

ulcers h?i7

\'ivisector 16

\'ocation. Books  on 1  I'M

Vocation. Selection of 784

Vocational  opportunity  in the  Nat-
ure  Cure 88

Vulcanite  gives  higher  voltage  than

glass

Voltage  output  of  battery 582

Voltage  of  faradic current and its

regulation 592

V^oltage of a static machine, cal-
culation by length of spark....  596


PAGE

\  oltage,  or  Tension,  or  Electro-
Motive Force 577

\'oltage,  U.  S.  Standard  for  sparks
by  inch-gap 596

Vomiting 385, 450


W

VVagner, l)r, Otlo, Biography of..

Washington. Physicians in

W  aste  matter,  (.'haracteristics  of.  in
health

Water  and  sun.  Joint  efifect  of.. 466,

\\  ater, accnnnrlation of, in the
body

Water compresses 409, 410,

Water, Distilled, for solutions....

Waters,  mineral. List  of

Water  on the brain

Watt, or the unit of ele(;trical
power

\\'eak stomach caused by a weak
perverse mind

Weather,  Change  of,  a  cause  of  fer-
mentation

Weltmer,  Dr.  Sidney,  Biography  of

West Virginia, Physicians in ....

What  shall  we  eat?

Wheat, Louis Lust's, whole pro-
ducts. List of

When  shall  we  cat?

Whites,  The 338,  339,  468,

Who  should  heal?

Whole  bath, how made  up

\\  hole bath, mono-polar and bi-
polar

Wholemeal bread

Wholemeal  gruel

Whole steam  baths 286,

Whooping  cough 254,  460,  466,

Why  all druglcss methods?

Bio-chemistry and deficiency of

salts

Chiropractors and "majors" and

"minors"

Dictologists

Examination  by  osteopath

Fifty-seven varieties of drugless

healing

Xaprapath and ""tightened" liga-
ment

Neuropath's  a])nornial  vaso-motor

activit}'

.Suggestive therapeutist's power
of  mind  over  body

Wh3'  doctors  will  not  advertise....

Why  patients are few and far  be-
tween

Widespread back encumbrance is
national  de.generacv

Wilber,  Dr.  C. H., Biography  of..

Wilson.  Reese  G.,  Biography  of.  .  .  .

Wine, Injurious nature  of

Wines,  non-alcoholic.  List  of

Wines,  unfermented.  List  of

Wisconsin, Physicians in

W^isdom and work


1068

498

479

354
413

588

1312

371

578

199

240

909

1069

554

1308
561
474
124
622

623
315

315
295
475


62,

63

63

63

63

63

63
149

185

524

911

911

299

1312

1312

1070

70


Gencnil  Imlcx  lo  (lonleuls


1  !(!■


Wiser  professional  methods 156

Womanhood. Books  on 1214

Womb, Prolapse of  the 425,  475

Women. Diseases  of 243,  422,  429

Work  of  European  organizations..  198

Worms 396,  397

Wounds,  Breaking  open  of  ....416,  418
Wounds, contused, incised, lace-
rated, punctured 409,  421.

Wounds, fever accomi)anying 407

Wounds, Gunshot 413.  415

Wounds,  their  treatment  and  cure
without  drugs  and  without  oper-
ations 406,  421,  481

Wyoming,  Physicians  in 1072


X


X-Ray  burns.  Idiosyncrasy  to ....  689

X-Ray  cancer  in  patient  or  operator  687
X-Ray plates, caution in handling

them 674

X-Ray  plates.  The  most  sensitive..  674

X-Ray  tube,  .\ir-valve  regulator  for  668

X-Ray tul^e, .\nti-cathode of 664

X-Ray tube. Automatic spark or

Queen-Sayen  patent  regulator  for  668

X-Ray tube. Bi-anode of 664

X-Ray  tube,  Cathode  of 663

X-Ray  tube.  Coolidge  668

X-Ray tube, distance between tar-
get  and photographic plates .  .  .  676

X-Ray  tube.  Exciting  of 664

X-Ray tube, how made 663

X-Ray tube o]>eration, Protection

of  patient and operator 671

X-Ray  tube  operation,  use  of  vase-
line 672

X-Ray  tube.  Osmosis  regulator  for  668

X-Ray tube. Qualimeter for 666

X-Ray tube. Target of. composed

of  platinum,  iridium,  tungsten...  664

X-Rav  tubes,  Penetrametcrs  for...  667


X-Ray  tubes,  Regulation  of  vacuum  667
X-Ray tubes, equivalent spark-
lengths  of  666

X-Rays,  Books  on  1254

X-Rays, "cross-fire" method for

deep  seated  conditions  689

X-Rays,  Dangers  of 687

X-Rays, discovered 691

X-Rays,  inflammatory  effects.  Four

classes of 688

X-Rays injure nuclei of proto-
plasm cells 690

X-Rays,  penetration  of 665

X-Rays,  prevention  of  Inirns.  etc...  688

X-Rays,  soft,  medium  and  hard....  666

X-Rays,  symptoms  of  over-exposure  687
X-Rays, use of  lead lined screens,

etc 672


Veast. I{!xample of 260

Yellow fever 385,  388

Young  animals,  liow  fed 306

Young. Dr. M.  G., Biography  of..  913

"You  don't  know  your  job" 114

Your  Health  Supply  Co.,  Review  of  1363
Youth, Diseases ensuing through

errors of 306

Youth without back encumbrance

a good  prognosis 545


Zinc,  Injection  of 342

Zinc  ionization  and  its  indication..  587

Zodiac,  in  diagnosis ^ 783

Zoe  Johnson  Co..  The,  Xotes  on..  1365

Zone  Therapy. Review  of 1289

Zone  Therapy  simplified.  Review  of  1289

Zoology. l^)Ooks on 1239


1108


Lisl of  ninsbdliotis


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS


Krontispiece  -Dr.  Benedict
Lust

Vincenz I'riessnitz 14

Father Kneipp lecturing at

Woerishofeti 16

Father Kneipp and Pope

I,co XIII 18

Dr. Adolph Just 19

Or. Carl Strueh 19

Rev. Albert Stroebclc 20

American  'Vungborn,'  But-
ler, \.  J.  (bird's-eye  view)  21
Father  Kneipp  with  the
Archdukes  Francis  and
Joseph  Ferdinand  of  Aus-
tria 22

Dr.  Lust's  Naturopathic  In-
stitute, Clinic  and  Hos-
pital 2.i

Father  Kneipp  in  his  Con-
sultation  Hall 24

Prof. F. E. Bilz 26

Dr. Katz 26

Dr. H. Lahmann 27

Louis Kuhne 27

Dr. Lust in VVoerishofen .  . 28

Rev. Prior Reily 28

American  School  of  Xaturo

pathy 29

(jraduating  Class,  1902,  Am.

School of Naturopathy.  . 3(1
Charter  Members,  Am. Nat-
uropathic  Society 31

Graduating  Class,  1914,  Am.
School  of  Naturopathy... 32

Dr. Henry Lindlahr 33

Dr.  Henry  Lindlahr's  Healtli
College, front and back

view 42, 43

Calisthenics  in  Dr.  Lind-
lahr's Health Gymnasium .SO

Dr. Carl Strueh 51

Dr.  Strueh  row-boating
near  his Health Resort  at

McHenry, 111 S4

Edward Earlc Purinton... 66

Louis Kuhne 224

Patient suffering from

<lropsy (Fig. 1) 234

Patient cleared of foreign

matter (Fig. 2) 234

Bottles,  illustrating  fer-
menting matter.. 239,  245,

251, 266, 269
Form, normal, of human

figure (Fig. A) 273, 274

Form, abnormal, of human

^  figure (Fig. B) 273, 274

Form,  abnormal,  of  human
figure,  caused  by  deposi-
tion of foreign matter

(Fig. p. F. F.) 275. 276

Human figure, deformed by

foreign matter  (Fig. G)-- 277
Human figure, freed from

foreign  matter  (Fig. H).. 277
Baths, steam, home made,

(Fig. A) 287

Baths, steam, home made

(Fig. B  C) 288

Baths, sitz (Fig. D) 291

I'atient, before and after

treatment 357

Human  figure,  showing  ef-
fects of  leprosy  (Fig.  1,
2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7).. 391,  392,

393, 394, 395
Human figure, showing ap-
plication of abdominal

bandage 438

Front Encumbrance 487

Back Encumbrance 488


PAiii;

Front,  Side  and  Back  En-
cumbrance 489

Child,  inoculated  with  tu-
berculin ' 490

Normal human figure (Fig.

I) 502

Whole body encumbered

(Fig. 2) 503

Normal human figure (Fig.

3) 504

.Vormal human figure (Fig.

4) 505

Front  encumbrance  (Fig.  5)  509
Normal human form (Fig.

6) 509

Front  encumbrance  (Fig.  7)  510
Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 8) 510

Front  encumbrance  (Fig.  9)  512
Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 10) . 512

Front encumbrance (Fig.

II) 513

Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 12) 514

Front  and  side  encumbrance

^(Fig. 13) . 515

.Normal human form (Fig.

14) 515

Side  encumbrance  (Fig.  15)  517
Side  encumbrance  (Fig.  16)  517
Side  encumbrance  (Fig.  17)  518
Pronounced side and front

encumbrance (Fig. 18).. 519
Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 19) . 519

Back encumbrance (Fig.

20) . 520

Back encumbrance (Fig.

21) 521

Back  and side encumbrance

(Fig. 22) 522

Back  encumbrance  (Fig.  2i)  523
Back  encumbrance  (Fig.  24)  523
Back and side  encumbrance

(Fig.  25) 524

(ieneral  encumbrance,  chief-
ly on  left  side  (Fig.  26).  . 525
General encumbrance (Fig.

27) ,.  ..  . 526

General encumbrance (Fig.

28) 527

General encumbrance ( Fig.

29) 628

(Ieneral encumbrance (Fig.

30) 528

General encuml)rance ( I'ig.

31) 529

(ieneral encumbrance (Fig.

i2) 529

(ieneral encumbrance (Fig.

33) . 530

(ieneral encumbrance (Fig.

34) 530

Back  encumbrance  (Fig.  35)  531
Front  anil  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 36) 532

Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 37) 532

Kront  and  siile  encuml)rancc

(Fig. 38) 533

Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 39) 533

I'>ont  and  side  encumbrance

(Fig. 40) 544

Front  and  side  enciuiibrance

(Fig. 41) 545

Front  and  side  encumbrance

(Figs. 42, 43) 548

.Normal Imman figure (Fig.

44) 549


I'AC.]-

(ieneral  encumbrance  (Fig.
45) 550

(ieneral  encumbrance,  re-
moved  (Fig.  46) 551

Esquimos  from  Greenland
(Fig. 47) 556

Normal human form (Fig.

48) . 559

(ieneral encumltrance (Fig.

49) 560

(ieneral  encumbrance (Figs.

50, 51) 561

.Solar rays (Figs. 52, 53).. 566

Dr. A. Matijaca 570

Laclanche  cell (Fig. 1) 580

Cells,  connected  in  series
(Fig. 2) 581

Cells,  connected  parallel
(Fig. 3) 582

■Vlilli-Ampere-Meter (Fig.  4) 584

.Motor Cienerator (Fig. 5) 584

Galvanic  and  Faradic  bat-
teries combined (Fig. 6) 591

Currents  and  Modalities,
loco  potential (Fig. 7)... 593

.Static machines (Fig. 8)... 594

Charger  to  excite  the  Holtz
machine (Fig. 9) 595

Sinusoidal  current  apparatus
(Fig. 10) 604

.Sinusoidal  current  apparatus,
diagram of. (Fig. 11)... 605

D'Arsonval  Type,  diagram
of. (Fig. 12) 6117

Tesla  type,  diagram  of  (Fig.
13) 608

Oudin Resonator (Fig. 14) 609

H  viierstatic  Transformer
(Fig. 15) ()lii

Patient,  undergoing  auto
condensation  treatment
(I'igs. 16, 17, 18) 611

.\pplication  of  Diathermy
(Fig. 19) 614

Combination  X-Ray  Appa-
ratus  (Fig. 20) 615

Combination  X-Ray  Appa-
ratus,  rear- view (Fig. 21) 616

Surface  vacuum  electrode
(Fig.  22,  23).. 619

Insulated  prostatic  electrode
(Fig.  24) 619

Transformer  of  X-Rays
(Fig. 25) 620

Electrical  apparatus  deliver-
ing various  electrical  mo-
dalities (Fig. 26) 621

Hydro-Electro  liath  (Fig.
27) 622

Bi-Polar  batli,  diagram  of.
(Fig. 28) 624

Ozone inhalation (Fig. 29) 627
.Motor-points for electric
stimulation, diagrams
(Plates 1 to 8) 631-63.<

Cautery  electrode  handles.
(Fig. 30) 643

Cautery  generator (Fig.  31) 644

(ilass, Fulguration F.lec-

trodc (Fig. 32) 644

.Magnet, large  eye (Fig. 33) 646
Lamp, therapeutic (Figs.

34, 35, 47) 65(), 651, 658

Lamp, alpine  sun (Figs.  36,

37, 38) 652, 653

.\pplieator "Radio X'itant"

(Fig. 39) 654

.\pplication of Radio-V'itant

(Fig. 40) 654

.Vpplication  of  radiant  light
(Figs. 41, 42) 655


List  of  lUuslralions


1 109


PAC.I-:

Applications,  spinal  (Figs.
43, 44) 656

ICIectric  Light  Bath  (Figs.
45, 46) 657

Applicator,  Light  and  Heat
(Figs. 48, 49) 658, 659

Lamp,  "Kromayer"  (Figs.
SO, 51) 660-661

X-Ray  tube,  diagram  of.
(Fig. 52) 663

X-Ray  tube — high  frequency
(Fig. 53) 664

Tungsten  Target  water-
cooled  tube (Fig.  54).... 665

X-Ray  tube,  rack (Fig. 55) 666

X-Ray  tube  apparatus,
Coolidge  (Fig.  56) 667

X-Ray  tube-stand (Fig.  57) 669

Induction  coil,  X-Ray  ap-
paratus (Fig. 61) 672

Induction  coil,  X-Ray  ap-
paratus, diagram  (Fig.  62) 673

Fluoroscope (Fig. 63) 674

Fluoroscopy  of  the  shoulder
(Fig. 64) .  .  . 675

Klinoscope,  Universal  (Figs.
65,  66,  67) 676,  677,  678

Oscilloscope (Fig. 58) 670

Valve tube (Fig. 59)...... 670

Screen,  X-Ray  protective
(Fig. 60) 671

Table  and  Radioscope  (Figs.
68,  69,  70) 678,  679,  680

Switchboard-type  Inter-

rupterless machine (Fig.

71) 681

X-Ray coil, portable (Fig.

72) 682

Transformer,  Interrupterless

(Figs. 73, 74, 76, 77)

683, 684, 686, 687

Transformer,  Interrupterless,
diagram  of. (Fig. 75).... 685

Portable  X-Ray  and  electro-
therapeutical outfit (Fig.

78) 688

Dental X-Ray and High

Frequency  Generator  (Fig.

79) 689

Dental  Indicators,  Views  of

(Fig. 80) 689

Vibrator,  pedestal  type  (Fig.

81) 695

Auscultation  Method  with
the  Mercurial  Sphygmo-
manometer (Fig. 82)  ...  . 698


Auscultation .Vlelliod with
Diaphragm  S[)liygmomano-

nieter (Fig. 83).. 700

Palpation method with the
Diai)hragm  Sphygmomano-
meter (Fig. 84) ...... 701

Palpation of the Cervical

Vertebrae (Fig. 1) 713

Palpation of  the  dorsal ver-
tebrae (Fig. 2) 716

Correction of Lumbar Sub-
luxation (Fig. 3) 719

Correction of Cervical Sub-
luxation  ( Fig.  4) 721

Back with skin removed

(Fig. 1) 726

Back with fourth layer of

muscles removed (Fig.  2) 727
Aspect of Spine, Anterior

(Fig. 3) 728

Aspect of spine, lateral.

(Fig. 4) 729

Dr.  George  J.  Drews..'....  743
Dr. James Montgomery

Irving 787

Statuesque Pose 788

Dr. Lust's Health Resort
"Yungborn,"  Butler,  N.  J. 795

Florida "Yungborn" 803

Dr. Tuan  Antiga 833

Dr.  "A. C. Arnold 835

Mrs. Diana Belais 835

Anthony  A.  Berhalter,  N.  D.  839
Katherine  Berhalter,  N.  D.  839
Tell  Berggren,  N.  D.,  M.  D. 843

A. C. Biggs, N. D 845

William R. Bradshaw 847

Dr. Wm. M. Bretow 847

Willard Carver, D. C 84')

Dr. F. W. Collins 851

Franklin R. Coombs, N.  D. 853

Dr. Eugene J. Czukor 855

Dr. T. H. David 855

Dr. A. de Cilia 857

Dr.  Elvira  A.  Deininger.  .  .  . 857

Dr. Anton Deininger 857

J. Lambert  Disney,  N.  D... 857

Dr. A. A. Erz 859

Dr. L. S. Edwards 859

Dr. Lillian  Edwards 861

E.  W.  Ferguson,  D.  C.  ...  861
Miss Jessie Allen Fowler.  . 861

Dr. W. H.  A. Fletcher 865

Dr.  Wallace  W. Fritz 865

Dr.  Charles  Froude 867

Dr.  Sinai  Gerschanek 867


PAGE

Prof. V.  Grcenewald 869

Dr. Herman Gressman....  869

Dr. George E. Harley 869

Dr. Joseph Hoegen 869

Dr. James Montgomery

Irving 871

Dr. Wm. C. Klawitter 873

Dr. Wm.  F. H.  Kriiger 873

Dr.  W.  R. C. Latson 873

Dr.  John  F.  G. Luepke 875

Dr. Harry Luntz 877

Dr. Alfred Y. Lytle 877

Bernarr Macfadden 877

Dr. John L. MacKinnon..  879

Dr. Anthony Matijaca.  .  .  .  881

Dr. W. D. Munro 881

Dr. Asia L. Neagley 883

Dr. L. M. Nesmith 883

Dr. H. N. D. Parker 883

Dr. J. Allen Pattreiouex.  .  887

Dr. A. von Prillwitz 887

Dr. Harold J. Reilly 887

Dr. Gottlieb J. Rencher .  .  889

Dr. Jacob Riedmiiller 889

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Joseph  Riese  889
Dr. Riese's Naturopathic

Sanitarium 891

Dr. J. Shelby Riley 891

Dr. Arnold Rickli 893

Dr. Paul E. Roesell 893

Prof. John  J. Ruegg 895

Mr. Joseph Schaefer 897

Dr. Chester  A. Shewalter.  .  897

Rev. Louis Schlathselter.  .  901

Dr. Carl Schultz 901

Dr.  Alfred Sonntag 903

Mrs. Alfred Sonntag 903

Dr. Rosalie M. Simpson .  .  905

Dr. A. E. P. Summerbell  905

Dr. Ludwig Staden 907

Dr. Frank L. Tucker 907

Dr. E. Howard Tunison..  909

Dr. Gustav Uez 909

Dr. Otto Wagner 909

Prof. Sidney Weltmer 911

Dr. C. H. Wilber 911

Dr. Reese G. Wilson 911

Dr. M. G. Young 913

Dr. Young's Fresh Air

Bungalow 913

Dr. Elmer  Lee 915

Mr.  Harold  Wells  Turner  913
Scene in Dr. Lust's Health

Resort, Butler, N. J 1077

Graduating Class 1907 —

Vetus  Academia 1356


1410


Biographical  Index


BIOGRAPHICAL  INDEX


PAGE

Anger. Arthur, U. C. ...  833

Antiga, Dr. Juan 833

ArnoUl. Or. Alma C 833

Belais. Mrs. Diana 835

Berggren, Tell. N. I)., M.

I) 841

Berhalter, Dr. Anthony A.  837

Bcrhalter, Dr. Katherine-..  837

Bieri, R., X. D 843

Biggs, A. C. \. D 845

Binck, C. F., M. D., D.

O., X. D 845

Rkim. Henry A., Opt. .  .  847

Bradshaw,  NVilliam  Richard  847

Butler, Raymond E 849

Bretow, Dr. Wm. M 847

Carver,  Willard  F.,  D.  C.  849
Collins, F, W.. M. D., D.

C _ 851

Criscuolo, Teresa Cimino,

X.  D 853

Coombs, Franklin R., X'.

D., D. C 853

Cummins, Edward Joseph,

X. D., D. C 853

Czukor,  Dr.  Eugene  Jac-
ques 855

David,  T. H..  D.  C,  X.  D.,

M.  T 855

De  Cilia,  A.,  X. D 857

Deininger, Mrs. Elvira A..

D.  O.,  D.  C,  X.  D.  .  .  .  .  857
Deininger. Anton, D. ().,

D. C., X. D 857

Disney.  J.  Lambert.  .\'.  D.  857
Dux. Henry M., X. D..

D. O., M. D 859

Edwards,  L.  S..  X. D.,  M.

T 859

Edwards, Lillian, M. T.,

N. D 859

Erz.  A.  A.,  X.  D.,  D.  C.  .  .  859


PAGE

Ferguson,  E.  W..  D.  C.  ..  861
Fischer, F. L., D. O., D.

0 861

Fletcher, VV. H.  A., X. D.  863

Fowler.  Jessie  A.,  I'hren.  861
Fritz, Wallace W., M. D.,

D.  D.  S.,  X.  D 865

Froude, Dr. Chas. C 867

Gerschanek, Sinai, D. C.  867

Grambow, Dr. Emil 867

Greenewald; I'rof. V., M.

T 869

Gressman.  Herman,  X.  1).  869
Harley, (Jeorge E., A. M.,

M. D.,  D. 0 869

Havard,-.  J:)r. William F.  702

Hoegen,  Joseph  A.,  N.  D.  869
Irving,  Tames  Montgomery,

Ph. C 869

Kanthariaker, Mahadev B.,

X. D 871

Klawitter, William C X.

D 873

Kruger, Wm. F. H., Ph.

G.,  Ph.  D.,  X.  D.,  D.  O.  873

Kurz, Robert F., D. C. .  .  873

Latson,  Dr. W.  R. C 873

Lee. Elmer, M. D 913

Loban,  Toy  M.,  D. C,  Ph.

C 873

Long,  J.  W.,  X. D 875

I^uepke, John F. f;., M.

D., S. D 875

Luntz,  D.  O.,  X.  D.,  M.  D.  877

Lytle, Alfred V.. X. D. .  .  877

Macfadden, Bernarr, P. C.  877

MacKinnon,  John  L.,  D.  C.  879
Matijaca, Anthony. M. D..

"X. D., D. () 881

Mildenbcrger, Charles, D.

O., D. C 881

Muckley,  Ferdinand.  A. X.

V 881


PAGE

Munro,  W.  D.,  X.  D 881

X'^eagley,  Asia  L.,  X.  D...  883
Xesmith, L. M., D. C,

Ph. C, B. Sc 883

Parker, Prof. H. X. D.,

M. D., X. D 883

Pattreiouex, J. Allen, X.

D 887

Payne.  A.  V.,  D.  C,  M.  D.  887

Prillwtiz.  A.  Von,  X.  D.  .  .  887
Reilly,  Harold  John,  X.  D.,

P. C 887

Trencher, Gottlieb lulius.  .  889

Rickli,  Arnold, X. D 891

Ricdmiiller, Jacob, X. D.  889

Ricse, Josef, X. D 889

Riley, Joe Shelby, M, S..

D. O., D. C 891

Roesell, Paul E., X. 1). ..  893

Ruegg, Prof. John J 893

Schaefer. Joseph 895

Schlatholter,  Rev.  Louis..  901
Schultz, Carl, X. D., I).

O., M. D 901

Shewalter, Chester A,, X.

D 897

Simpson,  Rosalie  M., D.  C.  907

Sonntag, Alfred, N. D. .  .  903

Staden,  Ludwig,  X.  D.  .  .  905
Summerbell, A. E. P., N.

D 905

Tucker,  Frank  L.,  D.  C. .  .  907
Tunison, Emory Howard,

X. D., D. C 909

Uez.  Gustav,  N.  D 909

Wagner, Otto, X. D 909

Weltmer,  Sydney,  D.  S. T.  909

Wilber,  C. H., X. D 911

Wilson, Reese G.. M. T.,

D. C, D. 0 911

Young, M.  G.,  X.  D.. Phy-

totherapist 913


Index  to  Diseases


]  111


INDEX  TO  DISEASES


vm:k
ACUTE DISEASES. FEVERS
AND HEALING CRISES

Acute diseases 241

Acute diseases, Malig-
nancy  of 563

Acute disease, Treatment

of 41

Ague 386

Fever, Curing of 243

Fever, Explanation of

233, 244-,  457

Bilious  fever 386,  389

Boils 289,  329,  330

Bowels, Inflammation of

.442, 446,  455

Carbuncles 289,  457

Chicken pox) 252

Cholera 383,  385

Climatic fever..  386, 389,

457,  478
Diphtheria.  .250, 448, 452,

465,  479,  482

Epidemics 240,  262

Influenza 262, 377,  470

Leprosy 356, 358, 390,  396

Leprosy, Bacilli of 357

Malaria 386, 389,  393

Measles 247, 248,  482

Mumps 241

Puerperal fever 327,  427

Scarlet fever.  ...  248, 448,

452,  482

Smallpox 2^2, 258,  383

Syphilis 260, 338, 345,

416,  456

Traumatic fever 407

Tropical fever...  386, 389,  478

Typhoid fever... 383, 385,  475

Yellow fever 385,  388

Whooping cough 254,

460, 466,  475


DISEASES OF CHILDREN

Children, Diseases  of.  .254,

259, 448, 451, 465, 479. 483
Children,  Treatment  of. 439, 441


DISEASES  OF  THE  MOUTH
AND TEETH

Teeth,  Diseases  of  the.  .376.

379, 457, 477,  486

Teeth, Extraction of 386

Teeth, Hollow 376

Teeth, Loss of 230

Thrush 258

Tongue, Cancer  of  the....  400

Toothache.  .230. 457, 477.  486


DISEASES OF THE NOSE
AND THROAT

Catarrh, Nasal 325

Catarrh, Pharyngeal.  .325,

442,  449,  455,  464.  480

Cold  in  the  head 263.  377

Colds.  .238, 262, 279. 368,

376.  459
Colds,  A  cause  of  fermenta-
tion 238.  241

Hoarseness 449,  477

Inflammation of the la-
rynx 377,  378

Laryngeal polypus 449

Nasal  catarrh 325

Nose,  Cancer  of 400,  444

Nose,  Diseases  of 289


PACK

Pharyngeal catarrh.  .  .325,

442,  449,  458, 464, 486
Throat, Diseases of.. 325,

377, 452, 454. 457, 473, 481
Throat, Inflammation of

378, 454, 473
Tracheotomv 451


DISEASES OF  THE EYE

Albuminuric neuroretinitis  761

Black spots before eyes..  445

Cataract, Black 371

Cataract, Grey 371

Cataract, Green 371

Diabetic retinitis 762

Double vision 372

Egyptian eye disease.  .371,

450, 464,  ■  484
Eye diseases 370, 445,

450, 455, 464, 484, 486,  487

Far-sightedness 449

Glaucoma 371

Lancinating  pain  in  the  eye  477

Leucaemic retinitis 762

Myopia 371, 373,  374

Ophthalmic  diseases.  .  .370,

374, 445, 450, 455, 464,

484,  487

Presbyopia 449

Purulent retinitis 763

Retinitis proliferans 763

Syphilitic retinitis 760

Trachoma.  .  .371, 450. 464.  484

Weak eyes 476


DISEASES OF  THE  EAR

Aural diseases.  .  .370. 449,

478,  481

Deafness 374, 449, 453,  457

Ear, Discharge from.. 370,

374, 478,  481
Ear,  Diseases  of.. 374, 447,

478,  481

Ear, Polypus of 481

Ear, Ringing  in .... 374,  447
Hearing, Difficult of..  374,

449, 453,  457

Otalgia 478

Otorrhea 370, 478.  481


DISEASES OF DIGESTIVE
ORGANS AND LIVER

Abdomen,  Abnormally  large  442
Abdominal diseases.  .  .338,

468,  469,  491
Abdominal tumors.  ..  .234,

291.  381

Bloating, Cure of 526

Calculi, Biliary 454,  476

Catarrh, Gastric.  .446, 466.

480.  487

Catarrh, Intestinal 466

Chlorosis.  ..  .283, 291. 302,

363, 369. 449.  450

Chlorotic color  of  the skin  302

Colic hepatic 479

Colon, Inflammation of.  .  .  446

Constipation, Cause of.  .  .  .  327
Constipation, Chronic.  302,

369, 381, 385, 453, 467.  477

Constipation. Infantile. 447,  450
Constipation.  .284.  302,  380,
447, 450. 453, 455, 477.

479,  484

Diabetes 348,  488

Diarrhea.  .  .299, 348, 383.

385.  445


Digestive  troubles 302,

365, 380, 383, 447, 449,

454, 477,  484

Dysentery.  .300, 301, 383,  385

Dyspepsia, Cure of 532

Eructation 303,  346

Fistula, Intestinal.  ..  .349,  486

Fistula, Rectal 486

Flatulence 303,  346

Gall-bladder,  Disease  of  the

349, 442, 472,  479

Gall-stone..  349, 442, 472,  479
Gastric catarrh.  .446, 466,

480,  487
Green sickness.  .  .283, 308,

309,  366,  369,  439

Heartburn 303

Hemorrhoidal  affections

361, 380, 382, 455, 456,

467, 473, 477, 484,  487

Hepatic colic 479

Hernia, Intestinal 398

Indigestion  .  .301, 365, 385,
447, 450, 453, 455, 466,

467,  472,  475.  484

Induration of the liver.  .  .  480

Infantile  constipation.  .447,  450

Inflammation of the colon  446

Intestinal catarrh 466

Intestinal fistulae and ul-
cers 349,  486

Intestinal hernia 398

Liver  disease 349,  467,

472,  477

Liver  disorders 534

Liver, Induration of the.  .  480

Nausea 450

Piles.. 329, 355, 361, 380,

382,  484,  487

Rectal fistula 386

Rectum 231,  302

Retention of the faeces..  347
Stomach. Affection of. 280,
442, 446. 463, 467, 476,

481,  487
Stomach,  Cancer  of..  399,  480
Stomach, Catarrh of.  .446,

466, 480,  487

Stomach, Dilatation of...  449

Ulcers, Intestinal ....349,  486

Vomiting 385,  450

DISEASES OF RESPIRA-
TORY ORGANS

Asthma 336. 450

Breathing-, Difficulty in

325, 336, 342, 462
Bronchial Catarrh.  ..  .325,

442. 449, 458, 464

Bronchocele 378

Chest, Pain in .  .  .  .  .  .  .464, 481

Consumption, Origin of.  . 327

Coughs 461. 485

Decomposition, Process  of,

in  pulmonary  disease  .  .  327
Galloping  consumption  325,  328
Inflammation of the lungs

330, 465, 485
Phthisis (See Tuberculosis

of  the  lungs)

Pleurisy.  ..  .330, 332. 465, 485
Pulmonarv affections.  .325,
328, 342, 416. 4^2. 450,

457, 463. 484, 486
Pulmonary catarrh.  ..  .442.

481,  482, 486
Sputum  containing  blood.. 485
Tuberculosis of the lungs
266, 269, 325. 334, 342.
416, 443, 446, 455, 480,

483, 485


1412


Index  to  Diseases


PAGli

DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART,
BLOOD AND ARTERIES

Blood, Accumulation of..  411

Bloo.l, Loss of 281,  446

Blood, Poverty of.... 363,

444, 459,  462,  531
Blood pressure, Abnormal  698
Blood pressure, Hypoten-
sion and  its  causes ....  699
Blood, Stagnation of.. 352,

353,  451
Cardiac artery, Protrusion

of 450

Cardiac  diseases.  .235,  342,

352, 450, 464,  487

Cyanosis 450

Dropsy.. 235, 342,352,390,

445,  456,  484,  485,  487

I^ropsy of the heart 487

Heart, Defect of 455,  463

Heart diseases.  .233, 244,

342, 352, 358, 463,  486

Heart, Dropsy of the....  486
Heart, Palpitation of the

353,  450

Heart, Paralysis of 353

Heart trouble. Treatment

of 788

Heart valves. Defects of..  353

Palpitation of the heart.  .  353

Pericardium,  Dropsy  of  the  487

DISEASES OF THE URIN-
ARY ORGANS

Bed-wetting 347

Bladder  diseases.  .  346,  454,

464,  480

Bladder,  Stone  in  i^'J,  456,  476
Blood, discharged with

urine 446

Catarrh of bladder 349,  464

Colic, nephritic 347

Excretory  organs 230,  231,  339

Hematuria 455

Kidneys, Inflammaation of  456
Kidneys,  Diseases of.. 346,

387, 454,  480

Nephritic colic 343

Renal affections.  .346, 351,

387, 454,  464,  480,  482

Retention of  the  urine....  347

Spasms of the bladder.  .  .  349

Strictures 443,  488

Uraemia 348

Urethra. Stricture of.  .443,  488

Urine, Blood in the 446

DISEASES  OF  THE  SEXUAL
ORGANS

Chancre 338,  339

Gonorrhea 3i7, 338,  345

Impotence 343, 345,  447

Impulse, Sexual.  .339, 343,

432, 440,  486

Masturbation.  ..  .343, 441,  487
Men, Sexual diseases of

338,  345
Nocturnal emissions.  .338,

359,  453,  485

Onanism 343,  441,  487

Pollution 339, 359,  453,  485

Propagation, Capacity of

338,  345
Semen,  Nocturnal  emission

of 338,  359,  453,  485

Sexual diseases.  .338, 345,

447,  454,  456
Sexual  excitement,  Excess-
ive 432

Sterility 425

DISEASES OF WOMEN

Barrenness 425

Breasts, Cancer of 400,  402


PACK

Breasts, Sore 425

Diseases of women. Gen-
eral 422,  429

Hemorrhage, Uterine.  .446,

460,  461
Leucorrhea.  .338, 339, 468,  474
Menstruation, Disturb-
ances  in 423

Milk,  Absence  of,  in  moth-
ers 426

Miscarriages 426, 430,  432

Sexual  organs,  Diseases  of,

in women 534

Sore breasts 425,  426

Suppression  of  the menses

288, 364, 423, 429,  446

Uterine cancer.  .400, 460,  487

Uterine flexion 425

Uterine hemorrhage.  .  .400,  460

Uterine tumor 474

Womb, Prolapse of the

425,  475
Women, Diseases of.  .243,

422  429


NERVOUS DISORDERS

DISEASES OF THE BRAIN

AND  CORD

Agitation, Nervous 420

Agoraphobia 366

Amourosis 371

Anxiety, Attacks of..  352,  451

Brain, Affection of 428

Brain, Atrophy of 324

Chorea 359,  452

Congestion of the Brain

279, 280,  453
Consumption of the brain

361,  380
Consumption of the spinal

cord 359, 446,  453

Crying, Hysterical 479

Dipsomania 400

Dumbness 453

Deafmutes 453

Debility,  Mental.. 318,  324,  471

Despondency 356,  474

Emotion, a cause of fer-
mentation 238,  239

Epilepsy. 364,  366,  416,  417,

459,  460

Facial neuralgia 449

Fainting  fits. 290,  363,  365,  459

Hydrocephalus 371

Hypochondria (See also

Nervous Diseases)  .  .318,  324
Hysteria  (See  also  Nervous

Diseases) 318,  324

Imbecility.  .260, 318, 416,

417,  457
Inflammation of the  brain

361,  380,  382
Inflammation  of  the  spinal

cord 480

Insanity 261, 318, 417,  457

Insomnia,  Psychic  origin  of  202
Insomnia.  ..  .318, 324,  442,

449, 456. 470, 477,  484
Melancholia (See also

Nervous Diseases) .  .356,  474
Memory, Weakness of

457,  461
Mental diseases.  .318, 326,

416,  470

Mind, Aberration of 470

Nervous diseases.  318, 324,
442, 453, 456, 461, 464,

467, 472, 476, 479, 480,  487
Nervous  prostration,  Drugs

useless in 199

Nervous spasms 453

Nervus sympathicus.  .293,  359

Neuralgia 449, 460,  478

Neuralgia, Facial 460

Neurasthenia ...449, 460,

461,  478

Paralysis 261, 318, 453,  455


PACK

Paralysis,  cerebral  contra
peripheral.  How  to  de-
termine 640

Paralysis of the arm 468

Paralysis of the heart.  .  .  .  353

Paralysis, Progressive 261,  318
Rage, Paroxysms of.  .266,

467,  484

Restlessness,  Nervous ....  470

Restless condition 756

Sciatica 271, 443, 448,

455,  474

Sleeplessness 318, 324,

442, 449, 450, 453, 456,

470, 477,  484

Softening  of  the  brain ....  457
Spasms.. 258,  364,  416,  459,

460, 470,  479
Spinal cord, Consumption

of 359, 440,  453

Spinal cord, Diseases of

359,  446. 453,  480
Spinal cord, inflammation

of 480

St. Vitus dance.. 359, 452,  453
Suicide, Thoughts of.. 318,

355,  369,  466
Tabes dorsalis.  .  .359, 362,

446,  453
Tuberculosis of the brain

360,  361,  380,  382
Water on the brain 371

DISEASES OF THE GLAND

Bubo 339

Goitre 378

Goitre, A case of 514

Spleen, Enlargement of.  .  480

DISEASES OF THE SKIN


Eczema

Eruption of the face.  .336,

3i7,  458,

Eruption  of  the skin.  .235,

336,  350,  351,  389,  458,

Erysipelas of the face....

Herpes.. 281,  325,  326,  348,

350,

Itch 387,

Itching  of the skin

Lupus 325,  336,  337,

Scabies 397,

Scald heail

Scrofula 256, 322, 342,

449.
Skin,  Chlorotic  color  of. .
Skin,  Diseases  of  the.  .283,

325,  337,  348,  350,
Skin, Eruption of 235,

336,  350,  389,  458,

Skin, Itching  of

Skin, Redness of

Skin, Tension of

Tetters


351

482

482
447

447
388
219
485
398
258

455
302

447

482
418
348
240
282


DISEASES OF THE HAIR

Hair, Loss of 336

Sycosis 447


DISEASES AND INJURIES
OF THE BONES

Arm, Broken 415

Bone, Splintered 482

Bone,  Tuberculosis  of 335,

443,  482

Bony  tumor 459

Calculous disease 349

Caries 335,  443  482

Leg, Broken 415

Splintered bone 482

Spondylitis 482

Subluxations, Vertebral...  714
Tuberculosis of the bone

335, 443,  482


Index  to  Diseases


1413


PAGE

DISEASES OF  THE  JOINTS

Ankle, Weak 413

Articular  rheumatism.  .267,

434, 463, 468,  487
Knee, Tuberculosis of the

337,  482

Lip, Cancer  of  the 451

Rheumatism,  Articular  267,

434,  463,  467,  468,  487

Tuberculosed knee ..337,  482


CANCER, TUMORS, CYSTS
AND ULCERS

Cancer  .142

Cancer  of  the  breast.. 40U,

402,  444

Cancer of the nose... 400,  444

Cancer of the lip 4.';i

Cancer of the stomach

399,  480

Cancer  of  the  tongue 400

Cancer  of the  uterus.  .400,  460
Cancerous nodules and

tumors 329,  332

Cysts, Blood 411

Encysted tumor 447

Glandular swellings and

tumors 233,  234,  444,

449, 455,  481

Malignant growths 399,  451

Nodules and tumors.. 233,

291, 329, 332, 347, 444,

451,  455,  485
Nodular deposits, lowered

vitality 553

Polupus 449, 452,  481

Polypus, Laryngeal 449

Polypus of the ear 481

Polypus  of  the  throat 481

Tubercular nodules 329

Tumors 233, 286, 329,

347, 380, 444, 449, 451,  455

Tumors, Blood 411

Tumors, Glandular.  . .  .233,

444,  449,  455
Tumor on the abdomen

232, 291,  381
Tumors  on the neck.. 233,

444, 449,  455

Tumors, Uterine 474

Ulcers 289, 330, 443,  486


OBSTETRICS

Abortion 428, 430

After-birth, Adhesion of

433,  444, 446
Birth, Conduct after .... 437

Births, Easy 430, 444,

448, 472, 482, 483

Births, Premature 432, 434

Breech-births 432

Parturition, Easy 430,

436, 444, 448, 452, 472,

482, 483, 486
Placenta, Adhesion of the

433, 444


Pregnancy.  .423, 424, 430,

436,  472,  482

Premature  births.  .425,  431,  434

Puerperal fever 427,  429


WOUNDS AND BURNS

Bee-stings 419,  420

Bites of snakes and mad

dogs 419

Bruises 411

Bullets, Extraction of.  .  .  .  413

Burns 413,  481

Contusions 411,  457

Fever, Wound 357

Fractures 415

Gunshot wounds ....413,  415

Injuries, Internal 411,  414

Injuries,  External  (wounds)

406,  421

Insects, Stings of.  .  .  .419,  421

Lacerations 409,  421

Leg, Sores on. 445

Malingering, Indication of  641
Natural treatment of

wounds  and  open  sores.  .  45

Open  sores 416

Operations 402,  403

Proliferations 399,  451

Proud flesh 399,  405

Scalds 411,  481

Shot, Extraction of, from

wounds 413

Snake bites 419

Sores, open. Cause of.  .  .  .  501
X-Ray bums, idiosyncrasy

to 689

Wounds,  their  treatment
and  cure  without  drugs
and without operations

406, 421,  481
Wounds, Fever accom-
panying 407

Wounds,  contused,  in-
cised, lacerated,  punc-
tured 409,  421

Wounds, Breaking  open  of

416,  418

Wounds, Gunshot ....413,  415
X-Ray cancer, in patient

or operator 687

Tying up blood vessels.  .  409


DEFORMITIES

Crooked back 276,  278

Crippling 257,265,278,  443

Curvature  of  the  spine. 276,

278,  470

Deformities 272,  278

Derbyshire-neck 370

Distortions 257,  272,  443

Feet, Distortions of 257

Hands, Distortions of.  .  .  .  257

High shoulders 279

Hip disease 271, 443,  474

Humpbacks.  .257,  281,  288,  443


PAGE

PARASITIC  DISORDERS

Parasites 396, 397

Tape  worm 396, 397

Worms 396, 397


POISONING

Contagion, Danger of.... 259
Infection, Danger of.  .241,

259, 264
Inoculation.  .254, 259, 333,

370,  416,  482, 492

Nicotine poisoning 303

Poisoning, Blood 419

Poisons,  metallic.  Ab-
straction of,  by  electri-
city 575

Poisonous medicines 319

Tuberculin 333

Tuberculin, Girl poisoned

by 541

Vaccination.  .233,  254,  260,

370,  416, 452
Vaccination a fatal error 507


MISCELLANEOUS

Debility, General. 413, 443,

462,  463
Disease  of  the  internal or-
gans 527

Dizziness 290, 363,  365

Feet, Cold.. 279, 356, 442,  444

Gout 270

Gout, uncured rheumatism  535

Hands,  cold.. 279,  280,  356,  444
Head, Congestions of the

279,  280,  453

Hot  head 279,  280

Headache..  290, 348, 380,
382, 443, 456, 458, 461,

464, 470, 476, 481,  484

Headache, Rheumatic 472

Hysterical crying 479

Induration of the tissues

232,  234

Lumbago 287,  288

Migraine 380, 382,  454

Mucous, Discharge of . . . .  485

Nodules, boils and ulcers  536

Obesity 230, 442,  457

Obesity, Treatment of 790

Perspiring feet.. 349, 350,  425

Perspiration, Cold 356

Rheumatic headache ....  472

Rheumatism 265, 278,

434, 455, 463, 467, 472,

475,  487

Rheumatism, Cause  of. . . .  535
Stagnation of the blood

352,  353,  450

Stiffness of leg 443

Suffocative attacks 398,  461

Swellings.. 457, 473, 480,

484,  486
Water, Accumulation of,

in the body 354


Mil


Index  io  Atlix'rliscrs


INDEX  TO  ADVERTISERS


PAGE

American  Naturopathic  As-
sociation 972

Antiga,  Dr.  Tiian — Prof,
card 1075

Arnold, Dr. Alma C. —

Prof, card 1037

Austin,  Nichols  &  Co. —
Pure Foods 1303

Bachelet Medical Apparatus
Co., Brooklyn, N. Y... 1339

Berggren,  Dr.  Tell,  Sani-
tarium 825

Berhalter  Ilealtli  Foods
Co., Chicago, 111 1313

Biggs,  Dr.  A.  C..  Sanitarium 815

Bing, Fred. K., Fr. — Tine

Needle Bath Tonic 1315

Bleadon-Dunn  Co.  —  High
Frequency  Machines,
Chicago, III 1343

Blechschmidt, Dr. Ricli-

ard— Prof. Card 1027

Blochwitz,  Dr.  Max  T.,
Sanitarium 831

Buceletti, Dr. L., College 829

Bunker,  J.  W.,  Inc., —
Trusses 1293

Burdick  Cabinet  Co.,  Mil-
ton, Wis 1321

Brandman,  Dr.  R.  E. —
Prof. Card 1027

Cash,  Chas.  S.— Xut  Store.

New York 1315

Chicago  College  of  Napra-
pathy 825

Criscuolo,  Dr.  Teresa  C.
—Prof. Card 1037

Czukor, Dr. Eugene J. —

Prof. Card 1037

Deininger,  Dr.  Anton,
— School,  Sanitarium

810, 811

Doctor  Charles  Co., —
Duppell Internal Bath.. 1294

Fechtig, Dr. St. George —
Institutes 1037

Ferri, Dr. N.- — Sanitarium 812

Fowler,  Jessie  Allen — Vo-
cational Training 1037

Froude. Dr. Chas. C. —

Prof. Card 1037

Crambow,  Dr.  Emil — Prof.
Card ^. .  . 1033

Greenewald, Prof. V. —

Herbal Remedies 1237

Greenewald, Prof. V. —

Prof. Card 1050

Gressman,  Dr.  H. — Sani-
tarium 831

Harley,  Dr.  G.  E.— Prof.
Card 1027

Harris,  I. — Physical  Treat-
ment Apparatus,  New
York 1343

Health  Culture  Publishing
Co 1213

Health Publishing Co. .  . 1235

Hillside  Health  Food  Co.
— Hcnsel Remedies .... 1307

Illinois  Post  Graduate  and
Training  School  for
Nurses 817

Imperial  Publishing  Co.
New York 1037

Irving,  Dr.  James  Mont-
gomery— Physiologic  In-
stitute 801


Johnson,  Zoe  Co. — Drug-
less  Supplies,  Chicago,
111 1325

Kanthariaker,  Dr.  Maha-
dev B.— Prof. Card .. 1075

Kosmos Sanitarium 1227

Krueger, Dr. Wm. F. H.

—  Prof. Card 1033

Kuna,  Dr.  Andrew, — Prof.
Card 1027

Life  Rock  Company  Fer-
tilizers 1303

Lindlahr  Nature  Cure  In-
stitutes :

Sanitarium 806

College 809

Books 1183

Lindlahr Nature Cure

Series 1183

Long, I. \V.— Books 1315

Luntz, Dr. H.— Flaxolyn 1349

Lust, Dr. B 1033, 1075

Florida Yungborn.  .802, 987
Yungborn, Butler, N. J.

825, 1075
School 829

Lust,  Dr.  Benedict,  Tan-
gerine, Fla 1301

Lust,  Louis — Health  Foods,

New York 1309

MacKinnon,  Dr.  Tohn  L.
—Prof. Card .  .". 1037

Magic  Bath  Co.,  New
York 1337

Matijaca,  Dr.  A. — Electro-
therapy Instruction  .... 1349

Meyer, Dr. E. — Richmond

Hill, L. 1 1293, 1329

Mildenberger,  Dr.  Chas. —
Institute 1027

Miller, Dr. Frank E. —

Prof. Card 1050

Milwaukee Importing Co.

Malt Coffee 1233

Mushynski, Dr. Thomas

F.— Prof. Card 1050

Nabstedt, Dr. T. M.—

Prof. Card 1037

National  Institute  of
Science 1235

Naturopathic Exchange... 1349

Naturopathic Publishing

Co.— Book List 1267,

1269, 1271

Naturopathic Supply Co. 1299

Nesmith,  Dr.  L.  M. —
Prof. Card 1050

Neuburger,  Dr.  F.  A. —
Prof. Card 1050

New Jersey College of

Chiropractic 819

New  York  School  of  Chiro-
practic 810

Olds,  Dr.  E.  O.— Univer-
sal Adjuster 1 329

Ostermoor & Co., New

York — Mattresses 1341

Patchen,  Dr.  G.  H.— Prof.
Card 1037

Pattreiouex,  Dr.  T.  Allen
—Prof. Card 1075

Pediform  Shoe  Co.,  New
York 1329

Pfau,  Dr.  Frieda— Prof.
Card 1027


PAGF.

Physical  Culture  Publish-
ing  Co 1209

Piercy,  M.  H. — Phrenolo-
gical Works 1235

Pietsch,  Dr.  Albert  C. —
Prof. Card 1050

Porter,  Dr.  C.  S.— Milk
Diet, Book on 1233

Psychical  Research  Re-
view 1348

RadiumactiV  Company,
Columbus,  O.  — ■  Bath
Powder 1335

Rather Turkish Bath Co.,

New York 1329

Red  Hand  Tea  Co.,  Brook-
lyn, N. Y 1331

Rencher, Dr. Gottlieb J. —

Prof. Card 1033

Rencher,  Dr.  Rose  G. —
Prof. Card 1033

Riedmiiller,  Dr.  J. — Insti-
tute 823

Riese,  Dr.  Joseph — Sani-
tarium 831

Riley, Dr. J. S.— Charts.  . 1233

Riley, Dr. J. S.— School.. 821

Sanitary  Manufacturing
Co., Chicago, 111 1341

Schaefer,  Joseph,  New
York — Kneipp  Cure  Ar-
ticles 1333

Schanne.  Dr.  Frank  B. —
Prof. Card 1027, 1037

Schultz,  Dr.  Carl — Sani-
tarium, College  ...  .823, 829

Schwarz,  Dr.  Herman  C.
— Sanitarium 827

Schwei-Kert Sanitarium  .  . 1237

Severn,  Dr.  Clifford  B. —
Prof. Card 1075

Sonntag,  Dr.  Alfred  G. —
Sanitarium 827

Stark,  Dr.  Gertrude — Insti-
tute 1033

Strueh,  Dr.  Carl — Sanitar-
ium 825

Summerbell,  Dr.  A.  E.  P.
—Prof. Card 1075

Sweet's  Colon  Bath  Co.,
Chicago, III 1347

Topel, Prof.  —  Swimming

School 1033

Tyler,  Byron. — Macerated
Wheat 1311

Tyrrell,  Chas.  A.,  M.  D.,
J.  B.  L.  Cascade,  New
York 1327

Uez,  Dr.  Gustave — Prof.
Card 1027

Ultima  Physical  Appli-
ance Co., Chicago, 111. 1347

United States Physicians'

Exchange,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. 1349

Vaughan, Dr. Walter L. —

College :■■■■■ 829

\'etus Academia, College

829, 831

Weeks, Warren  —  Wheat

Nuts _.  .  .  . 1233

Western  I'tilities  Co. —
Lighting  Plants 1297

Wunderlich,  H.  A.  F. —
Open Air Houses 1293

Zoe Tohnson  Co.,  Chicago,

III."— Drugless Supplies. 1325


Index  (()  Advciiisciuents


1415


INDEX  TO  ADVERTISEMENTS


PAGK I

APPARATUS  i

"Chiro  -  Traction" Table,

Bachelet Medical Appa-  1

ratus Co 1339

Dupell Internal Bath..... 1294

High Frequency Machine,
Bleadon-Dunn 1343

J.  B.  L.  Cascade,  Dr.  Chas.

A. Tyrrell 1327

Physical Treatment Ap-
paratus,  S. Harris 1343

Pneumatic Dilator and

Rectal Exerciser 1331

Radio-Vitant Applicators,

Burdick Cabinet Co. .  .  . 1321

Rather-Ttirkish  Bath  Equip-
ment 1329

Sinustat,  Ultima 1347

Sweet's Colon Bath 1347

Trusses, Supports. Band-
ages— J.  W.  Bunker,  Inc. 1293

Ulcolite Therapeutic Lamp
— Zee Johnson Co 1325

Universal  Adjuster — Dr.  E.

O. Olds 1329 1


ASSOCIATIONS

American  Naturopathic  As-
sociation 972

British  Society  of  Nat-
uropaths 1075

Agents  Wanted 1293


BOOKS

A Carefree Future (Engel-

hardt) 1237

Abuse of the Marriage

Relations 1027, 1380

Advantages of Raw Food

(Thomas) 1241

Ask the Druggist (Purin-

ton) 1261

Boll  Weevil,  or.  The Laws

of Nature and Mankind

(Riggs) .  .. 1231

Book Advertisements in

German 1273 to 1286

Book List  —  Naturopathic

Publishing  Co 1267,

1269,  1271
Books  on  Nature  Cure...  1243
Carefree Future (Engel-

^  hardt) 1191

Care  of Children (Kneipp) 1245
Christian Science and

Mental Science (Post). 1245
Congressman  Swanson

(Post) 1263

Conquest  of  i'overtv (Wil-

mans) .'.  .1220, 1255

Dietetics (Lindlahr) 1183

Driven from Sea to Sea

(Post) 1257

Efficiency Books (Purin-

ton) 1201

Efficiency in Drugless

Healing (Purinton) .... 1082
Five Great Charts (Riley) 1233

Food Booklets 1216

F"reedom — A  journal  (Post) 1265
Health — A magazine .... 1235
Health books and corres-
pondence lessons 1235

Health  Culture  Magazine.. 1213

Health Library 1178

Herald of Health 1211, 1290

History  of  Theosophy  (Col-
ville) 1263


PAGE

Horizonings (Purinton)... 1259
Iridiagnosis Chart ..1220, 1315

Iridology (Lahn) 1227

Kneipp Cure, The 1189

Last Enemy to be Over-
come is Death (Wil-

mans) 1255

Laugh Cure (Purinton).. 1233
Lords of Ourselves (Pur-
inton) 1229

Macfadden's Books on

Health 1209

Mal-Assimilation and its
Complications (Thomas) 1241

Malt Coffee 1233

Medical Question (Erz).. 1197

Milk Cure (Karell) 1235

Milk Diet (Porter) 1233

Naprapathic Chartology  .  .  . 825
Natural Methods of Heal-
ing (Bilz) 1195, 1204

Nature Cure Series (Lind-
lahr) 1183

Nature vs. Drugs (Rein-
hold) 1249, 1251, 1253

Naturopathic pamphlets... 1193
New Paradise of Health

(Just) 1245

No  More  Syphilis (Mayer) 1247
Our Place in the L'niver-

sal Zodiac (Colville) .  .  . 1261
Pestilential Tobacco Habit

(Hodge) 1265

Periodicity (Buchanan)... 1227
Philosophy and Practice
of Nature Cure (Lind-
lahr 1183

Philosophy of Fasting

(Purinton) 1181

Phrenology (Fowler &

Wells) 1235

Physical Culture Magazine 1209
Physical  Therapeutics

(Juettner) 1235

Physical Training (Frank

E. Miller) 1050

Plea for Physical Ther-
apy (Juettner) 1027

Psychical Research Re-
view 1348

Purinton  books 1 199

Rational Fasting (Ehret)

1050, 1227
Rediscovery of the Lost
Fountain of Health and
Happiness (Lernanto)

1219, 1.221
Relation of the Ideal to

the  Affairs  of  Life  (Post) 1257
Return to Nature (Just)

1072, 1187
Science and Art of Heal-
ing (Erz) 1247

Scientific Parenthood (At-
kinson) 1237

Search for Freedom (Wil-

mans) 1259

Secret of Health and Dis-
ease  (Ruegg) 1247

Stereoscopic Studies of

Anatomy 1037

Thought Transference and
Mental Healing (Wil-

mans) 1257

Three Great Charts (Ri-
ley) 1237

Tobacco Skunk (Hodge) 1265
Tuberculosis, Prevention

and Cure (Reinhold).. 1249
Unfired Food (Drews)... 1082
Unfired Food  and Tropho-
Therapy (Drews) 1225


PAGE

Use  of  Tobacco,  Evils  of
(Hodge) 1265

Vegetarian  Cook  Book
(Lust) 1207

Vitalism Booklets 1.215

What  Every  Man  Should
Know  About  the  Bible
(Tapp) 1227

What  Medicine  Knows  and
Docs  Not  Know  About
Rheumatism (Erz) .... 1229

Your  Memory — Its  Func-
tions (Bunker) 1247

Zone  Therapy  (Fitz-
gerald), I.  W.  Long,
Pub 1315

Zone Therapy (Riley)

1233, 1235

COLLEGES  -^  See Educational
Institutions

DRUGLESS SUPPLIES

Drugless  Supplies  —  Zoe
Johnson Co 1325

Kneipp  Naturopathic  Sup-
ply Store 1293

Physician's  Supplies,  Drug-
less .  ; 1349

EDUCATIONAL INSTITU-
TIONS

American  School  of  Nat-
uropathv, New York

829, 1072, 1220

Chicago  College  of  Neu-
ropathy 829

Electro-Therapy  Instruc-
tion 1349

Empire  School  of  Chiro-
practic, New York.... 829

Health Information 1349

Illinois  Post  Graduate  and
Training  School  for
Nurses, Chicago, 111. .  . 817

Lindlahr  College  of  Nat-
ure Cure, Chicago, III. '809

Mecca  of  Chiropractic,
Newark, N. J 819

Naturopathic College and

Sanitarium of California S£9

New York School of

Chiropractic 810

Vetus  Academia,  New
York 829, 831

Washington  School  of
Chiropractic,  Washing-
ton, D. C 821


HEALTH RESORTS — See
Sanitariums

FOODS

Berhalter Health Foods.. 1313

Flaxolyn— Dr. H. Luntz.  . 1349

Hensel  Remedies  —  The
Hillside Pure Food Co. 1307

Macerated  Wheat,  Health
Food — Byron  Tyler .... 1311

Nuts  Specialties — Chas.  S.
Cash 1315

Stamina,  Raw  Food —
Louis  Lust's  Health  Bak-
ery 1309

Sunbeam  Pure  Food  Pro-
ducts— Austin,  Nichols
&  Co 1303

Wheat Nuts 1233


ni6


Jnde.v  to  Advertisements


PAGE

HERBS. BATH ADDITIONS
AND TOILET ARTICLES

Bing's Pine Needle Baths 1315

Herb  Remedies — Prof.  V.
Greenewald 1237

Kneipp  Cure,  Articles  for
— Joseph Schaefer 1333

Kneipp  Herbs- — -Advertise-
ments in  German.  .1352, 1353

Kneipp  Naturopathic  Sup-
ply Store 1299

Kneipp Pills 1345

Kneipp  Specialties — ^^Ad-
vertisements in German

1350, 1351

Kneipp  Toilet  Articles —
Advertisements  in  Ger-
man 1354

Magic Bath Preparation 1337

Popp's Swiss Herb Tea —

Red Hand Tea Co. ... 1329

RadiumactiV  Bath  Pow-
der 1335

Syphilis, Cure for 1293

Urinary  Trouble  Cured —
Dr. E. Mcvcr 1329


PROFESSIONAL CARDS

Antiga, Dr. Juan, Havana,

Cuba 1075

Arnold,  Dr.  Alma  C,  New

York 1037

Blechschmidt, Dr. Rich-
ard, North  Bergen,  N.  J. 1027
Brandman, Dr. R. E., Ho-
boken, i\. J. ......... 1027

Criscuolo, Teresa Cimino,

Brooklyn, N. Y 1037

Czukor, Dr. Eugene J.,

New York 1037

Fechtig, Dr. St. George,

New York 1037

Fowler, Jessie Allen, New

York 1037

Froude, Dr. Chas. C,

Kingston, N. Y 1037

Grambow,  Dr.  Emil,

Hempstead, L. 1 1033

Greenewald, Prof.  V., Cov-
ington, Ky 1050

Harley, Dr. G. E.,  Jersey

City, N. J 1027

Kanthariaker,  Dr.  Mahadev
B., Sal Gate,  Amedabad,

India 1075

Krueger,  Dr.  Wm.  F.  H.,
.Brooklyn,  N.  Y 1033


PAGE

Kuna, Dr. Andrew, New-
ark, N. J 1027

MacKinnon, Dr. John L.,
Kingston, N. Y 1037

Miller,  Dr. Frank  E.,  East
Palestine, 0 1050

Mushynski, Dr. Thomas
F., Butler, N.  J lOSO

Nabstedt, Dr. J. M., New
York 1037

Nesmith, Dr. L. M., Cus-
tar,  0 1050

Neuburgcr. Dr. F. A.,
Logan, Utah 1050

Patchen, Dr. G. H., New
York 1037

Pattreiouex, Dr. J. Allen,
Manchester, England . . 1075

Pfau, Dr. Frieda, West
Hoboken, N. J 1027

Pietsch, Dr. Albert C,
Chicago, 111 1050

Rencher, Dr. Gottlieb,
Brooklyn, N. Y 1033

Rencher, Dr. Rose G.,
Brooklyn. N. Y 1033

Schanne, Dr. Frank B.,

Newark, N. J 1027

New York 1037

Severn,  Dr.  Clifford  B.,  Jo-
hannesburg, Transvaal.. 1075
Stark, Dr.  Gertrude,

Brooklyn, N. Y 1033

Summerbell, Dr. A. E. P.,
N. Sidney, New South

Wales, Australia 1075

Uez, Dr. Gustave, West
Hoboken, N. J 1027


SANITARIUMS

Battery  Swimming  School,
New York 1033

Biggs  Sanitarium,  The,
Asheville, N. C 815

Bright  Side  Naturopathic
Epileptic  Sanitarium,
Teaneck, N. j;. 831

Chiropractic  Sanitarium  of
West New York, N. J. 811

Ferri  Sanitarium,  Wheaton,
111 812

Gressman's  Naturopathic
Recreation  Home,  At-
lantic  City, N. J 831

Hiilsohem  by  the  Sea,  Ca-
lifornia Yungborn .... 825


PAGE

Hoegen's Institute, New

York 831

Information Department,

Health 1082

James Montgomery Irving

Institute, New York 801

La  Crosse  Naturopathic
Sanitarium,  La  Crosse,
Wis 831

Lindlahr  Nature  Cure  In-
stitutes, Chicago  and
Elmhurst, 111 806

Mildenberger's Institute,

Hoboken,  N.J 1027

Naturopathic Institute and

Sanitarium of California 823

Naturopathic Consultation

Bureau 1380

Recreation  Home,  Butler,
N. J 1082

Riedmiiller Naturopathic

Institute, New York .  . 823

Schwei-Kert  Sanitarium,
Spotswood, N. J 1237

Sonntag's  Naturopathic
Hospital  and  Sanitar-
ium, Fowler, Kans 827

Strueh's  Sanitarium  and
Health  Resort,  McHcnry,
111 825

Syracuse  Naturopathic  In-
stitute and  Sanitarium,
Syracuse, N. Y 827

Therapeutic  Institute,

Manchester, England .  . 1075

Water  Cure  and  Massage
Institute,  Brooklyn,  N.
Y 1033

Yungborn, Butler, N. J... 796

Yungborn, Tangerine, Fla.

802—805,  987, 1033, 1075

SCHOOLS  — See Educational
Institutions

SOCIETIES— See Associations


MISCELLANEOUS

Blue Cross Innershicld

Napkins  1341

Heliobode, Open Air

Houses ,.  .  1293

Life Rock Fertilizer 1303

Ostermoor Mattresses.  .  .  .  1341

Pediform Shoes 1329

Utility Lighting Plants

Western Utilities  Co. ..  1297
