MARTIN LUTHER

ON THE
BONDAGE OF

THE WILL,
WRITTEN IN...

Martin Luther


m


f


M&vtin flutter


ON THE


BONDAGE OF THE WILL.


WRITTEN IN ANSWER

TO THE

DIATRIBE OF ERASMUS

ON

FREE-WILL.


FIRST PUBLISHED IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 152.1,

AND NOW TRANSLATED

BY THE REV. HENRY COLE,

OP C LAKE-HALL, CAMBRIDGE,
AND LATE LECTURER OF WOOLWICH, KENT.


It i» oot of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that thrwtth mercy .

ix. 10.


PRINTED BY T. BENSLEY.
Crane Coort, Fleet Street,

FOR W. SIMPKIN AND R. MARSHALL, STATION ERS'-H A LLC 0 L RT .
AND SOLD BY J. BEDES, NO. t, N EWGATB-STREET.

1823.


i, oxford ;


The Translator has long had it in meditation, to
present the British Church with an English version '
of a choice Selection from the Works of that great
Reformer, Martin Luther: and in November last, he
issued Proposals for such a publication. He considers
it however necessary to state, that this Treatise on the
Bondage of the Will, formed no part of his design
when those Proposals were sent forth. But receiving,
subsequendy, an application from* several Friends to
undertake the present Translation, he was induced
not only to accede to their request, but also to ac-
quiesce in the propriety of their suggestion, that this
work should precede those mentioned in the Proposals.
The unqualified encomium bestowed upon it by a
Divine so eminent as the late Reverend Augustus
Montague ToPLADV,who considered it a master-
piece of polemical composition, had justly impressed
the minds of those friends with a correct idea of the
• value of the Treatise ; and it was their earnest desire.


vi


that the plain sentiments and forcible arguments of
Luther upon the important subject which it contained,
should be presented to the Church, unembellished by
any superfluous ornament, and unaltered from the
original, except as to their appearance in an English
version. In short, they wished to see a correct and
faithful Translation of Luther on the Bondage
of the Will — without note or comment/ In this
wish, the Translator fully concurred : and having
received and accepted the application, he sat down
to the work immediately : which was, on Monday,
December 23d, 182€.

As it respects the character of the version itself—
the Translator, after much consideration of the emi-
nence of his Author as a standard authority in the
Church of God, ami the importance of deviating from
the original text in any shape whatever, at last decided
upon translating according to the following principle ;
to which, it is his design strictly to adhere in every
future translation with which he may present the pub-
lic — to deliver faithfully the mind of Luther ;
retaining literally, as much of his own wording,
phraseology, and expression, as could be ad-
mitted into the English version. — With what degree
of fidelity he has adhered to this principle in the
present work, the public are left to decide.

The addition of the following few remarks shall
suffice for prefatory observation.


Google


t


vii

1. The Work is translated from Melancthons
Edition, which he published immediately after Luther's
dealth.

2. The division-heads of the Treatise, which are
not •distinctively expressed in the original, are so ex-
pressed in the Translation, to facilitate the Reader's
view of the whole work and all its parts. The Heads
are these — Introduction, Preface, Exordium, Dis-
cussion part the First, part the Second, part the
Third, and Conclusion.

3. The subdividing Sections of the matter, which,
in the original, are distinguished by a very large capital
at the commencement, are, in the Translation, for
typographical reasons, distinguished by Sections I,
H, III, IV, &c.

4. The Quotations from the Diatribe, are; in the
Translation, preceded and followed by a 'dash and
inserted commas: but with this distinction— where
Erasmus' own words are quoted in the original, the
commas are double ; but single, where the substance of
his sentiments only is (Quoted. The reader will observe,
however, that this distinction was not adopted till
after the first three sheets were printed : which will
account for all the quotations, in those sheets, being
preceded and followed by double commas. Though it is
presumed, there will be no difficulty in discovering
which are Erasmus' own words, and wroch are his
sentiments in substance only.


mi nt rrr-rriiur v ur i^r?iLsft ptswo. Tins

t irtU* mm mr i»tskwl &

>r rtwr mwwTjd f^ifhw on the Bondage of the Win
o the P*>ittlir.. Atut he crnsta he has a iineere desire,
hat us own lahfnr may prove to be, in every
respect. * tkithrul Translation ; and that the work
be found, index the Divine blessing, to
[nvaiuanie acquisition to the Church — " a

having teeth" for the
t>anner in defence of
ihx cruch — inu a means of edification and establish-
ment co all those, who are willing to come to the
l^frc tu hate their deeds made manifest, and to be

to the oracles of God !

HENRY COLE.


Digitized by Googl<


INTRODUCTION. .4^:


I--


i * .


Martin Luther, to the venerable D. Erasmus of Rotter-
dam, wishing Grace and Peace in Christ.

That I have been so long answering your Dia-
tribe on Free-will, venerable Erasmus, has hap-
pened contrary to the expectation of all, and contrary
to my own custom also. For hitherto, I have not only
appeared to embrace willingly opportunities of this
kind for writing, but even to seek them of my own
accord. Some one may, perhaps, wonder at this new
id unusual thing, this forbearance or fear, in Luther,
who could not be roused up by so many boasting
taunts, and letters of adversaries, congratulating Eras-
mus on his victory, and singing to him the song of
Triumph — What that Maccabee, that obstinate as-
sertor, then, has at last found an Antagonist a match
for him, against whom he dares not open his
mouth !

But so far from accusing them, I myself openly
concede that to you, which I never ■ did to any one
before : — that you not only by far surpass me in the
powers of eloquence, and in genius, (which we all
concede to you as your desert, and the more so, as I
am but a barbarian and do all things barbarously,)
but that you have damped my spirit and impetus, and
rendered me languid before the battle ; and that by


8


two means. First, by art : because, that is, you con-
duct this discussion with a most specious and uniform
uiodestv ; by which you have met and prevented me
trom being incensed against you. And next, by for-
tune, or chance, or fate : because, on so great a sub-
ject, vou say nothing but what has been said before :
therefore, vou sav less about, and attribute more unto
Free-will, than the sophists have hitherto said and at-
tributed : (of which I shall speak more fully hereafter.)
So that it seems even superfluous to reply to these
your arguments, which have been indeed often re-
futed by me ; but trodden down, and trampled under
foot, by the incontrovertible Book of Philip Meianc-
ihou " Concerning Theological Questions:" a book, in
my judgment, worthy not only of being immortalized,
but of being included in the ecclesiastical canon: in
comparison of which, your Book is, in my estimation,
so mean and vile, that I greatly feel for you for having
denied your most beautiful and ingenious language with
such vile trush ; and I feel an indignation against the
matter also, that such unworthy stuff should be borne
about in ornaments of eloquence so rare; which is as if
rubbish, or dung, should be carried in vessels of gold
and silvw. And tin's you yourself seem to have felt/
who were so unwilling to undertake this work of
writing ; bemuse your conscience told you, that you
would of necessity have to try the point with all the
i eloquence; and that, after all, you would
net be able so to blind me by your colouring, but that
I should, having torn otV the deceptions of language,
i»>ver the real dregs beneath. Tor. although I am
fgfo m s l UHrn » vet, by the grace of God, I am jiot
in understanding. And, with Paul, I dare


s

arrogate to myself understanding, and with confidence
derogate it from yon; although I willingly, and de-
servedly, arrogate eloquence and genius to you, and
derogate it from myself.

Wherefore, I thought thus— If there be any who
have not drank more deeply into, and more firmly
held my doctrines, which are supported by such
weighty scriptures, than to be moved by these tight
and trivial arguments of Erasmus, though so highly
ornamented, they are not worthy of being healed by
my answer. Because, for such men, nothing could
be spoken or written of enough, even though it should
be in many thousands of volumes a thousand times
repeated : for it is as if one should plough the sea-
shore, and sow seed in the sand, or attempt to fill a
cask, full of holes, with water. For, as to those who
have drank into the teaching of the Spirit in my
books, to them, enough and an abundance has been
administered, and they at once contemn your writings.
But, as to those who read without the Spirit, it is no
wonder if they be driven to and fro, like a reed, with
every wind. To such, God would not have- said
enough, even if all his creatures should be converted
into tongues. Therefore it would, perhaps, have
been wisdom, to have left these offended at your
book, along with those who glory in you and decree
to you the triumph. 1 —

Hence, it was not from a multitude of engage-
ments, nor from the difficulty of the undertaking, nor
from the greatness of your eloquence, nor from a fear
of yourself ; but from mere hrksomeness, indignation,
and contempt, or (so to speak) from my judgment of
your Diatribe, that my impetus to answer you was

b 2


4


everv occasion slipperv and pliant of

to appear to

to

rx^rc cautious than Ulysses, you seem to be
yqot coarse between Scylla and Charybdis.
tot such a sort, what, I would ask, can be
composed, unless any one knew
to catch Proteus himself? But what I may be
to do m this matter, and what profit your art will
to you. I will, Christ co-operating with me, here-


This ray reply to you, therefore, is not
without cause. My brethren in Christ press me to
it. setting before me the expectation of all; seeing
the authority of Erasmus is not to be despised,
truth of the Christian doctrine is endangered
in the hearts of many. And indeed, I felt a persua-
sion in my own mind, that my silence would not be

ad that I was deceived by the pro-
of the flesh, and not sufficiently
mindful of my office, in which I am a debtor, both to
the wise and to the unwise ; and especially, since I
was called to it by the entreaties of so many


For although our cause is such, that it n
than the external teacher, and, besides him that
and him that watereth outwardly, has need
of the Spirit of God to give the increase, and, as a
living teacher, to teach us inwardly living things, (all
which I was led to consider ;) yet, since that Spirit is
fW* and bloweth, not where we will, but where he


5

wilkth, it was needful to observe that role of Paul,
" Be instant, in season, and out of season." For
we know not at what hour the Lord cometh. Be
it, therefore, that those who have not yet felt the
teaching of the Spirit in my writings, have been
overthrown by that Diatribe— perhaps their hour was
not yet come. • ■

And who knows but that God may even con-
descend to visit you, my friend Erasmus, by me his
poor weak vessel ; and that I may (which from my
heart I desire of the Father of mercies through Jesus
Christ our Lord) come unto you by this Book in a
happy hour, and gain over a dearest brother. For
although you think and write wrong concerning Free-
will, yet no small thanks are due unto you from me,
in that you have rendered my own. sentiments far
more strongly confirmed, from my seeing the cause
of Free-will handled by all the powers of such and so
great talents, and so far from being bettered, left
worse than it was before: which leaves an evident
proof, that Free-will is a mere lie; and that, like
the woman in the gospel, the more it is taken in
hand by physicians, the worse it is made. Therefore
the greater thanks will be rendered to you by me, if
you by me gain more information, as I have, gained
by you more confirmation. But each is die gift of
God, and not the work of our own endeavours.
Wherefore, prayer must be made unto God, that he
would open the mouth in me, and the heart in you
and in all ; that he would be the teacher in the midst
of us, who may in us speak and hear.

i But from you, my friend Erasmus, suffer me to
obtain the grant of this request ; that, as I in these


matters bear with your ignorance, so you, in return,
would bear with my want of eloquent utterance. God
giveth not all things to each ; nor can we each da all
things. Or, as Paul saith, " there are diversities of
gifts, but the same Spirit" It remains, therefore, that
these gifts render a mutual service ; that the one, with
his gift, sustain the burden and what is lacking in the
other; so shall we fulfil the law of Christ.

PREFACE.

■ ♦
* * •

Sect. I. — Fibst of all, I would just touch upon
some of the heads of your Preface; in which, yod
somewhat disparage our cause and adorn your own.
In the first place, I would notice your censuring in me,
in all your former books, an obstinacy of assertion;
and saying, in this book, — " that you are so far from
delighting in assertions, that you would rather at once
go over to the sentiments of the sceptics, if the invio-
lable authority of theiioly scriptures, and the : decrees
of the' church, would permit you: to which authorities
you willingly submit yourself in all things, whether
you follow what they prescribe, or follow it not ,, -i*
These are the principles that please you.

I consider, (as in courtesy bound,) that these
things are asserted by you from a benevolent mind,
as being a lover of peace. But if any one else had
asserted them, I should, perhaps, have attacked him
in my accustomed manner. But however, I must
not even allow you, though so very good in your
intentions, to err in this opinion. For not to delight
iri assertions, is not the character of the Christian
mind : naiy, he must delight in assertions, orte is not


7


a Christian. But, (that we may not be mistaken in
terms) by assertion, I mean a constant adhering,
affirming, confessing, defending, and invincibly per-
severing. Nor do I believe the term signifies any
thing else, either among the Latins, or as it is used by
as at this day.

And moreover, I speak concerning the asserting
of those things, which are delivered to us from above
in the holy scriptures. Were it not so, we should
want neither Erasmus nor any other instructor to
teach us, that, in things doubtful, useless, or unne-
cessary ; assertions, contentions, and strivings, would
be not only absurd, but impious : and Paul condemns
such m more places than one. Nor do you, I believe,
speak of these things, unless, as a ridiculous orator,
you wish to take up one subject, and go on with
another, as the Roman Emperor did with his Turbot ;
or, with the madness of a wicked writer, you wish to
contend, that the article concerning Free-will is
doubtful, or not necessary. i.

Be sceptics and academics far from us Chris-
tians ; but be there with us assertors twofold more
determined, than the stoics themselves. How often
does the apostle Paul require that assurance ofiaitlr;
that is, that 'most certain, and most firm assertion of
Conscience, calling it, Rom. x., confession, " With the
mouth confession is made unto salvation ?" And Christ
also sailh, " Whosoever confesseth me before men,
him Willi confess before my Father." Peter commands
us to " give a reason of the hope" that is in us. But
why should I dwell upon this; nothing is more. known
and more general among Christians than assertions.
Take away assertions, and you take away Christianity.


8


Nay, the Holy Spirit is given unto them from heaven,
that he may glorify Christ, and confess him even unto
death ; unless this be not to assert — -to die for con-
fession and assertion. In a word, the Spirit so
asserts, that he comes upon the whole world and
reproves them of sin ; thus, as it were, provoking to
battle. And Paul enjoins Timothy to reprove, and
to be instant out of season. But how ludicrous to me
would be that reprover, who should neither really
beiieve that himself, of which he reproved, nor con-
stantly assert it ! — Why I would send him to Anti-
cyra, to be cured.

But I am the greatest fool, who thus lose words
and time upon that, which is clearer than the sun.
What Christian would bear that assertions should be
contemned ? This would be at once to deny all piety
and religion together; or to assert, that religion, piety,
and every doctrine, is nothing at all. Why therefore
do you too say, that you do not delight in assertions,
and that you prefer such a mind to any otfier?

But you would have it understood that you have
said nothing here concerning confessing Christ, and
his doctrincs.-r— I receive the admonition. And, in
courtesy to you, I give up my right and custom, and
refrain from judging of your heart, reserving that for
another time, or for others. In the mean time, I
admonish you to correct your tongue, and your pen,
and to refrain henceforth from using such expressions.
For, how upright and honest soever your, heart may
be, your words, which are the index of the heart, are
not so. For, if you think the matter of Free-will is
not necessary to be known, nor at all concerned with
Christ, you speak honestly, but think wickedly : but,


9


tf yott think it is necessary, you speak wickedly, and
think righdy. And if so, then there is no room for
you to complain and exaggerate so much concerning
useless assertions and contentions : for what have they
to do with the nature of the cause?

: ' ..

\ Sect. II. — But what will you say to these your de-
clarations, when, be it remembered, they are not con-
fined to Free-will only, but apply to all doctrines in
general throughout the world— that, " if it were per-
mitted you, by the inviolable authority of the sacred
writings and decrees of the church, you would go oyer
to the sentiments Of the sceptics ?" —

What an all-changeable Proteus is there in these
expressions, " inviolable authority " and " decrees of
the church!" As though you could have so very
great a reverence for the scriptures and the church,
when at the same time you signify, that you wish you
had the liberty of being a sceptic ! What Christian
would talk in this way ? But if you say this in re-

news

is there in what you say ? Who, in such things, would
not wish for the liberty of the sceptical profession?
Nay, what Christian is there who does not actually
use this liberty freely, and condemn all those who are
drawn away with, and captivated by every opinion ?
•Unless you consider all Christians tf> be such (as the
term is generally understood) whose doctrines are use-

by assertions.: But if you speak of necessary things,
what declaration more impious can any one make,
than that be, wishes for the liberty of asserting nothing
in such matters? Whereas, the Christian will rather


10

<y tm » I 9m 90 averse to the sentiments of the
wrtito^ tftot vtotver I am not hindered by the
fctifeBfev«t £»flt<h, I will not only steadily adhere to
(^^rf wiiliagL> every where, and in ail parts of
:n*at *** *s?ert them, but I wish also to be as certain
4£ |N*hM* » things that are not necessary, and that
It «*fcp*C the scripture : for what is more miserable
sfci naumfnty?

Wly* <W1 we say to these things also, where you
gH— ^ To which authorities I submit my opinion
dl ; whether I follow what they enjoin, or

Wfcat say you, Erasmus ? Is it not enough that
w* satarit your opinion to the scriptures ? Do you
ate*** it to the decrees of the church also ? What
tin* church decree, that is not decreed in the
>c- \^rvs ' If it can, where then remains the liberty
1»4 |*>wer of judging those who make the decrees ?

Paul, 1 Cor. xiv., teaches, " Let others judge."
A* you not pleased that there should be any one to
(ho decrees of the church, which, nevertheless,
H*u! onjoins? What new kind of religion and humi-
'•tv is this, that, by our own example, you would take
twftv rrom us the power of judging the decrees of
Men, and give it unto men without judgment ? Where
iloes the scripture of God command us to do this ?

Moreover, what Christian would so commit the in-
unctions of the scripture and of the church to the winds,
—4* to say " whether I follow them, or follow them
not ?" You submit yourself, and yet care not at all
whether you follow them or not. But let that Chris-
tian be anathema, who is not certain in, and does not
fellow, that which is enjoined him. For how will he


11

believe that which he does not follow ?-^I>o you
here, then, mean to say, that following is under-
standing a thing certainly, and not doubting of it at
all in a sceptical manner? If you do, what is there
in any creature which any one can follow, if follow*
ing be understanding, and seeing and knowing per-
fectly? And if this be the case, then it is impossible
that any one should, at the same time, follow some
things, and not follow others; whereas, by following
one certain thing, God, he follows all things ; that is,
in him, whom whoso followeth not, never followeth
any part of his creature. . . i

j In a word, these declarations of yours amount to
this— that, with you, it matters not what is believedty
any one, any where, if the peace of the world be but
undisturbed ; and if every one be but allowed, when his
life, his reputation, or his interest is at stake,- ta do as
he did, who said, " If they affirm, I affirm j if they
deny, I deny:" and to look upon the Christian doc-
trines as nothing better than the opinions of philoso-
phers and men : and that it is the greatest of folly to
quarrel about, contend foT, and assert them, as nothing
can arise therefrom but contention, and the disturbance
of the public peace: " that what is ahorse us, does not
concern m." Ifcis, I say* to what ydur declarations
mount to. — Thus, to put an end to our fightings, you
come in as an intermediate peace -maker, that you may
cause each side to suspend armSj and persuade us to
cease from drawing swords about things so absurd
and useless.

• i What I should cut at here,. I believe, my friend
Erasmus, you know very well. But, as I said before*
I will not openly express myself. In the mean time,


12

I excuse your very good intention of heart ; but do
you go no further; fear the Spirit of God, who
searcheth the reins and the heart, and who is not
deceived by artfully contrived expressions. I have,
upon this occasion, expressed myself thus, that hence-
forth you may cease to accuse our cause of perti-
nacity or obstinacy. For, by so doing, you only
evince that you hug in your heart a Lucian, or some
other of the swinish tribe of the Epicureans; who,
because he does not believe there is a God himself,
secretly laughs at all those who do believe and confess
it. Allow us to be assert ors, and to study and delight
in assertions : and do you favour your sceptics and
academics until Christ shall have called you also.
The Holy Spirit is not a sceptic, nor are what he has
written on our hearts doubts or opinions, but asser-
tions more certain, and more firm, than life itself and
all human experience.

i

Sect. III. — Now I come to the next head, which
is connected with this; where you make a " distinction
between the Christian doctrines, " and pretend that
" some are necessary, and some not necessary. " You
say, that "some are abstruse, and some quite clear."
Thus ydu merely sport the sayings of others, or else
exercise yourself, as it were, in a rhetorical figure.
And you bring forward, in support of this opinion*
that passage of Paul, Rom. xi., " O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and goodness of God!"
And also that of Isaiah xl., " Who hath holpen
the Spirit of the Lord, or who hath been his coun-
sellor?" , :

You could easily say these things, seeing that,


13


you either knew not that you were writing to Luther,
but for the world at large, or did not think that you
were writing against Luther : whom, however, I hope
you allow to have some acquaintance with, and judge-
ment in, the sacred writings. But, if you do not
allow it, then, behold, I will also twist things thus.
This is the distinction which I make, that I also may
act a little the rhetorician and logician — God, and the
scripture of God, are two things ; no less so than
God, and the Creature of God. That there are in
God many hidden things which we know not, no one
doubts; as he himself saith concerning the last day:
" Of that day knoweth no man but the Father,"
Matt. xxiv. And Acts i. " It is not yours to know
the times and seasons." And again, " I know whom
I have chosen," John xiii. And Paul, " The Lord
knoweth them that are his," 2 Tim. ii. And the like.

But, that there are in the scriptures some things
abstruse, and that all things are not quite plain, is a
report spread abroad by the impious sophists; by
whose mouth you speak here, Erasmus. But they
never have produced, nor ever can produce, one
article whereby to prove this their madness. And it
is with such -scare-crows that Satan has frightened
away men from reading the sacred writings, and has
rendered the holy scripture contemptible, that he
might cause his poisons of philosophy to prevail in
the church. This indeed I confess, that there are
many places in the scriptures obscure and abstruse ;
not from the majesty of the thbgs, but from our
ignorance of certain terms and grammatical particu-
lars ; but which do not prevent a knowledge of all the
things in the scriptures. For what thing of more


14


that the seals are broken, the. stone roiled from the
door of the sepulchre, and that greatest of all/ mys-
teries brought to light, Christ made man : that God is
trinity and unity : that Christ suffered for us, and
will reign to ail eternity ? Are not these things kno#n
and proclaimed even in our streets r Take Christ out
of the scriptures, and what will you find remaining
in them? . . ' « - :

All me inttigs, mereiore, containeu in uie scrip-
tures, are made manifest, although some places; from
the words not being understood, are yet obscure. ' Bu t
to know that all things in the scriptures are set in the
clearest light, and then, because a few words are ob-
scure, to report that the things are obscure, is absurd
and impious. And, if the words are obscure in one
place, yet they are clear in another. But, however,
the same thing, which has been most openly declared
to the whole world, is both spoken of in the scriptures
in plain 'words, and' also stiff lies- hidden in obscure
words. Now, therefore, it matters not if the thing
be in the light, whether any certain representations of
it be in obscurity or not, if, in the mean while, many
other representations of the same thing be in the light.
For who would say that the public fountain is not in
the light, because those who are in some dark narrow
lane do not see it, when all those who are in the open
place can see it plainly ?


Sect I V.— W hat you adduce, therefore, about the
darkness of the Corycian cavern; amounts to nothing ;
matters are not so in the scriptures. For those things
are of the greatest majesty, and the most abstruse


m


15

mysteries, are no longer in the dark corner, but before
the very doors, nay, brought forth and manifested
openly. For Christ has opened our understanding to
understand the scriptures, Luke xsxr. And the gospel
is preached to. every creature. " Their sound is gone
out into all the earth," Psalm x. And " All things that
are written, are written for our instruction,^ Rom. xvt
And again, " All scripture is inspired from above, and
is profitable for instruction," 2 Tim. ii.

Therefore come forward, you and all the sophists
together, and produce any one mystery which is still
abstruse in the scriptures. But, if an any tilings still
remain : abstruse to many, this does not arise from
obscurity in the scriptures, but from their own blind*
ness or want of understanding, who do not go the way
to see the all-perfect clearness of the truth. As
Paul saith concerning the Jews, 2 Cor. iv. " The veil
still remains upon their heart." And again, " If our
gospel be. hid it is hid to them that are lost, whose
heart the god of this world hath blinded," 1 Cor. iv.
With the same rashness any one may cover his own
eyes,, ox go from the light into the dark and hide
himself, and then blame the dav and the sun for being
obscure. .Let, tnereiore, wretcnea men cease to im-
pute, . with blasphemous perverseness, the darkness
and . obscurity of their own heart to the all-clear
scriptures of God.

You, therefore, when yott adduce Paul, saying;
"His judgments are incomprehensible," seem to make
the pronoun his ( ejus ) refer to scripture ( scriptura)*
Whereas Paul does not say, The judgments of the
scripture are incomprehensible, but the judgments of
God. So also Isaiah xl. does not say, Who has


16


inown the cilao oj the scripture, but, who has known

-thenundaithel^rd?" Although Paul asserts that
the txmtii of the Lord is known to Christians : but it is
in those things which are freely given unto us : as he
saith also in the same place, 1 Cor. ii. You see, there-
fore, how sleepily you have looked over these places of
the scripture : and you cite them just as aptly as you
cite nearly all the passages in defence of Free-will.

In like manner, your examples which you subjoin,
not without suspicion and bitterness, are nothing at
all to the purpose. Such are those concerning the
distinction of persons : the union of the divine and
human natures : the unpardonable sin : the ambieruitv
attached to which, you say, has never been cleared
up. — If you mean the questions of sophists that
have been agitated upon those subjects, well. But
what has the all-innocent scripture done to you, that
you impute the abuse of the most wicked of men to
its purity? The scripture simply confesses the trinity
of God, the humanity of Christ, and the unpardon-
able sin. There is nothing here of obscurity or am-
biguity. But how these things are the scripture
does not say, nor is it necessary to be known^ The
sophists employ their dreams here ; attack and con-

ti^3U^H y ^iJl^l 11 \\* t>I S^^I*1 tUl*^3 • JL-i U ^ j ^^^^WJ

mean the reality of the matter, I say again, attack
not the scriptures, but the Arians, and those to whom
the gospel is hid, that, through the working of Satan,
they might not see the all-manifest testimonies con-,
cerning the trinity of the Godhead, and the hu-
manity of Christ. > .

But to be brief. The clearness of the scripture
is twofold ; even as the obscurity is twofold also.


17

The one is external, placed in the ministry of the
word ; the other internal, placed in the understand-
ing of the heart. If you speak of the internal clear-
ness, no man sees one iota in the scriptures, but he
that hath the Spirit of God. All have a darkened
heart ; so that, even if they know how to speak of,
and set forth, all things in the scripture, yet, they
cannot feel them, nor know them : nor do they believe


m


according to that of Psalm xiv., " The fool hath said in
his heart, God is nothing. " For the Spirit is required
to understand the whole of the scripture and every
part of it. If you speak of the external clearness,

or ambiguous : but
all things that are in the scriptures, are by the Word
brought forth into the clearest light, and proclaimed
to the whole world.

Sect. V.— But this is still more intolerable,— Your
enumerating this subject of Free-will among those
things that are "useless, and not necessary ;" and
drawing up for us, instead of it, a " Form" of those
things which you consider " necessary unto Christian
piety." Such a form as, certainly, any Jew, or any
Gentile utterly ignorant of Christ, might draw up.
For of Christ you make no mention in one iota. As
though you thought, that there may be Christian piety
without Christ, if God be but worshipped with all
the powers as being by nature most merciful.

What shall I say here, Erasmus? To me, you
breathe out nothing but Lucian, and draw in the
gorging surfeit of Epicurus. If you consider this
subject " not necessary" to Christians, awav, I nrav


IS


*u W i* >dti ; I have nothing to do with you.

ics .v* it be " irreligious," if it be " curious,"
^ * * ^iqwdtoous," to know, whether or not God
v*»*jw*>*ttx thing by contingency; whether our own
W *rr thing in those things which pertain unto
v %***u ^atattooo, or is only passive under the work of
. % aether or not we do, what we do of good or
o \i y ova* necessity, or rather from being passive ; .
*fc*t than* 1 ask, is religious ; what is grave ; what is
u*«?uU fc> be known? All this, Erasmus, is to no pur-
poc* whatever. And it is difficult to attribute this to
> oux i^uorance, because you are now old, have been
conversant with Christians, and have long studied the
sacred writings: therefore, you leave no room for
my excusing you, or having a good thought concern-
ing you.

And yet the Papists pardon and put up with these
enormities in you : and on this account, because you
are writing against Luther : otherwise, if Luther were
not in the case, they would tear you in pieces tooth
and nail. Plato is a friend ; Socrates is a friend ; but
Truth is to be honoured above all. For, granting
that you have but little understanding in the scriptures
and in Christian piety, surely even an enemy to
Christians ought to known what Christians con-
sider useful and necessary, and what they do not.
Whereas you, a theologian, a teacher of Christians,
and about to draw up for them a Form of Chris-
tianity, not only in your sceptical manner doubt of
what is necessary and useful to them, but go away
into the directly opposite, and, contrary to your own
principles, by an unheard of assertion, declare it to be


19

your judgment, that those things are "not -necessary :*

whereas, if they be not necessary, and certainly known,
there can remain neither God, nor Christ, nor Gos-
pel, nor Faith, nor any thing else, even of Judaism,
much less of Christianity ! In the name of the im-
mortal God, Erasmus, what an occasion, yea, what a
field do you open for acting and speaking against you !
What could you write well or correctly concerning
Free-will, who confess, by these your declarations,
so great an ignorance of the scripture and of god-
liness? But I draw in my sails : nor will I here deal
with you in my words (for that perhaps I shall do
hereafter) but in your own.


Sect VI.— Th e Form of Christianity set forth by
you, among other things, has this — " That we should
strive with all our powers, have recourse to the remedy
of repentance, and in all ways try to gain the mercy
of God; without which, neither human will, nor endea-
vour, is effectual." Also, " that no one should despair
of pardon from a God by nature most merciful." —

These statements of yours are without Christ,

without the Spirit, and more cold than ice ; so that,

the beauty of your eloquence is really deformed by

them. Perhaps a fear of the Popes and those tyrants,

extorted them from you their miserable vassal, lest

you should appear to them a perfect atheist. But

what they assert is this — That there is ability in us ;

that there is a striving with all our powers ; that there

is mercy in God ; that there are ways of gaining that

mercy ; that there is a God, by nature just, and most

merciful, &c. — But if a man does not know what

these powers are ; what they can do, or in what they

c 2


trs cu be native ; mh*L dstar eC! ci*rv . or % bit their


nr » ; wfeat om sacb an ooe do : What will


~ It i* krcfigwcs, cnrioo*, mod so pert! nous, (you say)
to wish to iaow, whether our own will does any thing
thiols which pertain unto eternal salvation,
it is wholly passive under the work of
' — But here, you say the contrary: that it is
Christian piety to " strive w ith all the powers;** and that,
" without the mercy of God the will is ineffective."

Here you plainly assert, that the will does some-
thing in those things which pertain unto eternal salva-
tion, when you speak of it as striving : and again, you
assert that it is passive, when you say, that without
the mercy of God it is ineffective. Though, at the
same time, you do not define how far that doing, and
being passive, is to be understood : thus, designedly
keeping us in ignorance how far the mercy of God
extends, and how far our own will extends ; what our
own will is to do, in that which you enjoin, and what
the mercy of God is to do. Thus, that prudence of
yours, carries you along ; by which, you are resolved
to hold with neither side, and to escape safely through
Scylla and Charybdis ; in order that, when you come
into the open sea, and find yourself overwhelmed and
confounded by the waves, you may have it in your
power, to assert all that you now deny, and deny all
that you now assert.

Sect VII. — But I will set your theology before
your eyes by a few similitudes. — What if any one, in-
tending to compose a poem, or an oration, should never
think about, nor inquire into his abilities, w hat he could


21

do, and what he could not do, nor what the subject
undertaken required; and should utterly disregard
that precept of Horace, " What the shoulders can
sustain, and what they must sink under ; " but should
precipitately dash upon the undertaking and think
thus — I must strive to get the work done ; to inquire
whether the learning I have, the eloquence I have,
the force of genius I have, be equal to it, is curious
and superfluous : — Or, if any one, desiring to have
a plentiful crop from his land, should not be so curious
as to take the superfluous care of examining the nature
of the soil, (as Virgil curiously and in vain teaches in
his Georgics,) but should rush on at once, thinking of
nothing but the work, and plough the seashore, and
cast in the seed wherever the soil was turned up,
whether sand or mud : — Or if any one, about to make
war, and desiring a glorious victory, or intending to
render any other service to the state, should not be
so curious as to deliberate upon what it was in his
power to do; whether the treasury could furnish
money, whether the soldiers were fit, whether an£
opportunity offered ; and should pay no regard what-
ever to that of the historian, " Before you act, there
must be deliberation, and when you have deliberated,
speedy execution;" but should rush forward with his
eyes blinded, and his ears stopped, only exclaiming
war ! war ! and should be determined on the under-
taking : — What, I ask you, Erasmus, would you think
of such poets, such husbandmen, such generals, and
such heads of affairs ? I will add also that of the
Gospel — If any one going to build a tower, sits not .
down first and counts the cost, whether he has enough


the distinction between our
of God, I know not God
1 x ;o v IYO t C^od, I cannot worship
Ts^-e hol *r*t aim thanks, nor serve him ; for

mach I ought to ascribe unto
God. It is


x^*«r or ^«oa and our power, the working of God
it w* would live in his fear.


ty; on which depends, and in
a* sattor. the knowledge of ourselves, and the
$Jory of God. Wherefore, friend
ca&ag the knowledge of this point ir-
\xu is not to be borne in you.
^ swo\ to xixu but we owe all to the fear of
Ns»y )kw watrself see, that all our good is to

*nd you assert that in your
sit llrtftauitY . and in asserting this, you
at the >*aie time assert also, that the
^ v^vvt akw ^ioes all tluu*s, and that our own

\ rather acted upon: and so
V\ itfhrr*ise the whole is not ascribed unto
v^jt* .Uai^wt* iawn*\iuAtei\ afterwards, you say, that
v uW> ftua^ awd to know them, is irreli-
^ d«^ttvs **d xaiav But at this rate a mind,
* tu ami unsettled and ineji-t

^k«l\v "At ihv ifeuifc^s v*l ^wikUMSScv caunot but talk.

I

V Ul Asom« p&rt of the >um of Chris-
9***^ ^ v ka*p» x wbeihet God Mwkjacrars any thing
ajt s wi'^^K> *r wtwtber w* vK> aU tha«gs from ne-


2.5

rious, and vain, as all the wicked do : the devils and the
damned also, make it detestable and execrable. And
you shew your wisdom in keeping yourself clear from
such questions, wherever you can do it But how-
ever, you are but a>'very poor rhetorician and theo-
logian, if you pretend to speak of Free-will without
these essential parts of it. I will therefore act as a
whetstone, and though no rhetorician myself, will tell
a famed rhetorician what he ought to do— If, then,
Quintihan, purposing to write on Oratory, should say,
" In my judgment, ail that superfluous nonsense
about invention, arrangement, elocution, memory,
pronunciation, need not be mentioned ; it is enough
to know, that Oratory, is the art of speaking well '* —
would you not laugh at such a writer? But you act
exactly like this: for pretending to write on Free-
will, you first throw aside, and cast away, the grand
substance and all the parts of the subject on which
yoa undertake to write. Whereas, it is impossible
that you should know what Free-will is, unless you
know what the human will does, and what God does
or foreknows.

. Do not your rhetoricians teach, that he who un-
dertakes to speak upon any subject, ought first to show,
whether the thing exist ; and then, what it is, what
its parts are, what is contrary to it, connected with it,
and like unto it, &c.? But you rob that miserable
subject in itself, Free-will, of all these things ; and
define no one question concerning it, except this first,
viz. whether it exist : and even this with such argu-
ments as we shall presently see : and so worthless a
book on Free-will I never saw, excepting the ele-
gance of the language. The sophists, in reality, at^


fit)

tfcs point better than you, though
have attempted the subject of
: for they define all the
v*^*i^v>w^^ with it : whether it exists, what it

ith reference to, &c. : although
**&ct what they attempt In this book,
; m*i push you, and the Sophists together,
«t* define to me the power of Free-will,

mm * K»f% 4 can do : and I hope I shall so push you,
v V>»«* «s to make you heartily repent that

^***^*&&hed your Diatribe. u >f


^*cc IX. — This, therefore, is also essentially ne-
w*s«y and wholesome for Christians to know : that
{u*ijbr*k*ows nothing by contingency, but that he fore-
purposes, and does all things according to his im~
rmUabky eternal, and infallible will. By this thunder-
bolt, Free-will is thrown prostrate, and utterly dashed
to pieces. Those, therefore, who would assert Free-
will, mast either deny this thunderbolt, or pretend
not to see it, or push it from them. But, however,
before I establish this point by any arguments of my
own, and by the authority of scripture, I will first
set it forth hryour words.

• Are you not then the person, friend Erasmus,
who just now asserted, that, God is by nature just,
and by nature most merciful? If this be true, does
it not follow that he is immutably just and merciful ?
That, as his nature is not changed to all eternity, so
neither his justice nor his mercy ? And what is said
concerning his justice and his mercy, must be said
tilno concerning bis knowledge, his wisdom, his good-
his will, and his other attributes. If therefore


27

these things are asserted religiously, piously, and
wholesomely concerning God, as you say yourself,
what has come to you, that, contrary to your own
self, you now assert, that it is irreligious, curious, and
vain, to say, that God foreknows of necessity? You
openly declare that the immutable will of God is to
be known, but you forbid the knowledge of his im-
mutable prescience. Do you believe that he fore-
knows against his will, or that he wills* in ignorance?
If then, he foreknows, willing, his will is eternal and
immovable, because his nature is so : and, if he
wills, foreknowing, his knowledge is eternal and im-
movable, because his nature is so.

From which it follows unalterably, that all things
which we do, although they may appear to us to be
done mutably arid contingently, and even may be
done thus contingently by us, are yet, m reality, done
necessarily and immutably, with respect to the will
of God. For the will of God' is effective and cannot
be hindered ; because the very power of God is natu-
ral to him, and his wisdom is such that he cannot be
deceived. And as his will cannot be hindered, the
work itself cannot be hindered from being done iri'the
place, at the time, in the measure, and by whom he
foresees and wills. If the will of God' were such,
that, when' the work was done, 'the work remained but
the will ceased, (as is the case with the will of men,
which, when the house is built which they wished to
build, ceases to lot//, as though it ended by death)
men, indeed* it might be said, that things are done by
contingency and mutability. But here, the case is
the contrary ; the work ceases, and the will remains.
So far is it from posfflWlity; that the doing of the


28

work or its remaining, can be said to be from con-
tingency or mutability. But, (that we may not be
deceived in terms) being done by contingency, does
not, in the Latin language, signify that the work itself
which is done is contingent, but that it is done accord-
ing to a contingent and mutable will— -such a will as
is-ftot to be found in God ! Moreover, a work can-
not be called contingent, unless it be done by us
unawares, by contingency, and, as it were, by chance;
that is, by our will or hand catching at it, as presented
by chance, we thinking nothing of it, nor willing any
thing about it before.

Sect. X.— I could wish, indeed, that we were fur-
nished with some better term for this discussion, than
thiscommonlyused term, necessity, which cannot rightly
be used, either with reference to the human will, or
the divine. It is of a signification too harsh and
ill-suited for this subject, forcing upon the mind an
idea of compulsion, and that which is altogether
contrary to will; whereas, the subject which we are
discussing, does not require such an idea : for WrH,
whether divine or human, does what it does, be it
good or evil, not by any compulsion, but by mere
willingness or desire, as it were, totally free. The
will of God, nevertheless, which rules over our mu-
table will, is immutable and infallible ; as Boetius
sings, " Immovable thyself, thou movement giv'st
to all. M And our own will, especially our corrupt
will, cannot of itself do good ; therefore, where the
term fails to express the idea required, the under-
standing of the reader must make up the deficiency,
knowing what is wished to be expressed— the immuta-


20

ble will of God, and the impotency of our depraved
will ; or, as some have expressed it, the necessity of
immutability, though neither is that sufficiently gram-
matical, or sufficiently theological.

Upon this point, the sophists have now laboured
hard for many years, and being at last conquered,
have been compelled to retreat. All things take
place from the necessity of the consequence, (say they)
but not from the necessity of the thing consequent.
What nothingness this amounts to, I will not take
the trouble to show. By the necessity of the conse-
quence, (to give a general idea of it) they mean this —
If God wills any thing, that same thing must, of
necessity, be done ; but it is not necessary that the
thing done should be necessary ; for God alone is
necessary ; all other things cannot be so, if it is God
that wills. Therefore, (say they) the action of God is
necessary, where he wills, but the act itself is not
necessary ; that is, (they mean) it has not essential
necessity. But what do they effect by this playing
upon words? Only this, that the act itself is not
necessary, that is, it has not essential necessity. This
is no more than saying, the act is not God himself.
This, nevertheless, remains certain, that if the action
of God is necessary, or if there is a necessity of the
consequence, every thing takes place of necessity,
how much soever the act be not necessary; that is,
be not God himself, or have not essential necessity.
For, if I be not made of necessity, it is of little
moment with me, whether my existence and being be
mutable or not, if, nevertheless, I, that contingent
and mutable being, who am not the necessary God,
ani made. 4 , « :


pky upon words, that
the necessity of the const-
of the thing con-
more than this — all
nace of necessity, but all the things that
not God himself. But what need
r As though there were any
the things done were God
4r possessed divine or necessary nature. This
truck therefore, stands and remains invincible
place according to the imrauta-


■1


1


Nor is there here any obscurity or
lu Isaiah he saith, " My counsel shall
» will shall be done. " And what school-
understand the meaning of these ex*
wss*ocs. - counsel,' ' " wily " shall be done," " shall


. XI. — But why should these things be abstruse
CWtsiuins, so that it should be considered irreli-


, and the very commonalty, have them in
worths in the most frequent use? How often
A** Virgil alone make mention of Fate? " All
*t»mi fixed by law immutable." Again,
- *\*«d is the day of every man." Again, " If the
fc^tas summon yon. " And again, " If thon shalt
fcmfc the binding chain of Fate." All this poet aims
* v* to ahow, that in the destruction of Troy, and in
i**ui!g th* Roman empire, Fate did more than all the
sWvotrd em>rts of men. In a word, he makes even
their immortal gods subject to Fate. To this, even


31


Jupiter and Juno must, of necessity, yield. Hence
they made the three Pare® immutable, implacable,
and irrevocable in decree.

Those men of wisdom knew that which the event
itself, with experience, proves; that no man's own
counsels ever succeeded, but that the event happened
to all contrary to what they thought Virgil's Hector
says, " Could Troy have stood by human arm, 1 it
should have stood by mine." Hence that common
saying was on every one's tongue, " God's will be
done." Again, "If God will, we will do it" Again,
44 Such was the will of God. " " Such was the will of
those above." 44 Such was your will," says Virgil.
Whence we may see, that the knowledge of predes-
tination and of the prescience of God, was nolessnleft
in the world than the notion of the divinity itself.
And those who wished to appear wise, went in their
disputations so far, that, their hearts being darkened,
they became fools, Rom. i., and denied, or pretended
not to know, those things which their poets and the
commonalty, and even their own consciences, held to
be univerealry known, most certain, and most true.

Sect. XII. — J Observe furthery not only how
true these things are (concerning which I shall speak
more at large hereafter out of the scriptures), but also
how religious, pious, and necessary it is to know them ?
for if these things be not known, there can be neither
faith, nor any worship of God : nay, not to know
them, is to be in reality ignorant of God, with which
ignorance salvation, it is well known, cannot consist
For if you doubt, or disdain to know that God fore-
knows and wills all things, not contingently, but


3*

necessarily and immutably, how can you believe con-?
fidently, trust to, and depend upon his promises?
For when he promises, it is necessary that you should
be certain that he knows, is able, and willing to per-
form what he promises; otherwise, you will neither
hold him true nor faithful; which is unbelief, the
greatest of wickedness, and a denying of the Most
High God !

And how can you be certain and secure, unless
you are persuaded that he knows and wills certainly,
infallibly, immutably, and necessarily, and will per-
form what he promises ? Nor ought we to be certain
only that God wills necessarily and immutably, and
will perform, but also to glory in the same ; as Paul,
Rom. iii., " Let God be true, but every man a liar. H
And again, " For the word of God is not without
effect. " And in another place, " The foundation of
God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth
them that are his," 2 Tim. ii. And Titus i., il Which
God, that cannot lie, promised before the world
began." And Heb. xi., " He that cometh, must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that hope in him."

If, therefore, we are taught, and if we believe,
that we ought not to know the necessary prescience
of God, and the necessity of the things that are to
take place, Christian faith is utterly destroyed, and
the promises of God and the whole Gospel entirely
fall to the ground ; for the greatest and only consola-
tion of Christians in their adversities, is the knowing
that God lies not, but does all things immutably, and
Umt his will cannot be resisted, changed, or hindered.


33


Sect XIII. — Do you now, then, only observe,
friend Erasmus, to what that most moderate, and most
peace-loving theology of yours would lead us. You call
us off, and forbid our endeavouring to know the pre-
science of God, arid the necessity that lies on men and
things, and counsel us to leave such things, and to avoid
and disregard them ; and in so doing, you at the same
time teach us your rash sentiments; that we should
seek after an ignorance of God, (which comes upon us
of its own accord, and is engendered in us), disregard
faith, leave the promises of God, arid account the
consolations of the Spirit, and the assurances of con-
science, nothing at all! Such counsel scarcely any
Epicure himself would give ! \ _

Moreover, not content with this, you call him
who should desire to know such things, irreligious, cu-
rious, and vain ; but him who should disregard them,
religious, pious, and sober. What else do these words,
imply, than that Christians are irreligious, curious,
and vain ? And that Christianity is a thing of nought,
vain, foolish, and plainly impious? Here again,
therefore, while you wish by all means to deter us
from temerity, running, as fools always do, directly
into the contrary, you teach nothing but the greatest
temerity, impiety, and perdition. Do you not see,
then, that in this part, your book is so impious, bias
phemous, and sacrilegious, that its like is not any
where to be found ?

I do not, as I have observed before, speak of your
heart; nor can I think that you are so lost, that from
your heart, you wish these things to be taught and
practised. But I would shew you what enormities
that man must be. compelled unknowingly to broach*

D


34


who undertakes to support a bad cause. And more-
over) what it is to Tun against divine things and truths,
when, in mere compliance with others and against
our own conscience, we assume a strange character
and act upon a 'strange stags* . It is neither a game
nor a jest, to undertake to teach 'the sacred truths
and godliness : for it is very easy here to meet with
that fall which James speaks of, " He that offimdeth
in one point is guilty of all." James ii. For when
we begin >to be, in the least degree, disposed to trifle,
and riot to hold the sacred truths in due reverence, we
are soon involved in impieties, and overwhelmed with
blasphemies : as it has happened to you here, Erasmus-
May the Lord pardon, and have mercy upon yon !

- That the sophists have given birth to such num-
bers, of reasoning questions upon these subjects, and
have intermingled with them many unprofitable things,
many of which you mention, I know and confess, as
well as you : and I have inveighed against them much
more than you have. But you act with imprudence
and rashness, when you liken the purity of the sacred
truths unto the profane and foolish questions of the
impious, and mingle and confound, it with them.
" They have defiled the gold with dung, and changed
the good colour," Lam. iv. (as Jeremiah saith.) But
the gold is not to be compared unto, and cast away
with the dung ; as you do it. The gold must be
wrested from them, and the pure scripture separated
from their dregs and filth; which it has ever been my
aim to do, that the divine truths may be looked upon
in one light, and the trifles of these men in another.
But it ought not to be considered of any service to us,
that nothing has been effected by these questions, but


35


their causing us to favour them less with the whote Cur-
rent of our approbation, if, nevertheless, we still desire
to be wiser than we ought. The cjuestion with us is not,
how much the sophists have effected by their reason-
ings, but how we may become good men, and Chris-
tians. Nor ought you to impute it to the Christian
doctrine that the impious' do evil. That is nothing to
the purpose: you may speak of that somewhere else,
mA.s^em^mt^pmt'hm. • *uV \'.--+. r. ( ■
. \ >r'* *)%•*: • 'u\i •» ' ? t* m invj if>

>Sect XIV." — Under your third head, you at-
tempt to make us some of those very modest and quiet
Epicureans. With a different kind of advice indeed,
but no better than that, with which the two foremen-
tioned particulars are brought forward: — "Some
lgs (you say) are of that nature,' that, although
they are true in themselves, and might be known, yet
it would not be prudent to prostitute them to the ears
of every one." — ► *
Here again, according to your custom, you mingle
d every thing, to bring the sacred ihings
to a level with the profane, without making any
distinction whatever : again falling into the contempt
of, and doing an injury to God. As I have said be-
fore, those things which are either found in the sacred
writings, or may be proved by them, Are not ' only
plain, but wholesome; and therefore may be, hay,
etighttobe, spread abroad, learnt, and known; So
that your saying, that they ought not to be prostituted
to the ears of every one, is false: if, that is, you
speak of those things which are in the scripture: but
if you speak of any other things, they are nothing
to me, and nothing to the purpose : you lose time aftrd
paper in saying any thing

d2


I


36

Moreover, you know that I agree not with the
sophists in any thing: you may therefore spare me, and
not brine me in at all as connected with their abuse
of the truth. You had, in this book of yours, to
speak against me. I know where the sophists are
wrong, nor do I want you for my instructor, and they
have been sufficiently inveighed against by me : this,
therefore, I wish to be observed once for all, when-
ever you shall bring me in with the sophists, and
disparage my side of the subject by their madness.
For you do me an injury ; and that you know very
well.

* •


. Sect XV. — No w let us see your reasons for giving
this advice — * you think, that, although it may be true,
that God, from his nature, is in a beetle's hole, or
even in a sink, (which you have too much holy reve-
rence to say yourself, and blame the sophists for
talking in such a way) no less than in heaven, yet, it
would be unreasonable to discuss such a subject be-
fore the multitude.' — »s •

First of all, let them talk thus, who can talk thus.
We do not here argue concerning what are facts in
men, but concerning justice and law: not that we
may live, but that we may live as we ought. Who
among us lives and acts rightly ? But justice and the
doctrine of law are not therefore condemned : but
rather they condemn us. You fetch from afar these ir-
relevant things, and scrape together many such from all
quarters, because you cannot get over this one point,
the prescience of God : and since you cannot overthrow
it in any way, you want, in the mean time, to tire out
the reader with a multiplicity of empty observation.

But of this, no more. Let us return to the point.


37

What then is your intention, in observing that
there are some things which ought not to he spoken
of openly ? Do you mean to enumerate the subject
of Free-will among those tilings? If you do, the
whole that I have just said concerning the necessity of
knowing what Free-will is, will turn round uponf you.
Moreover, if so, why do you not keep to your own
principles, and have nothing to do with your Diatribe ?
But, if you do welf in discussing Free-will, why
do you speak against such discussion? and if it is a
bad subject, why do you make it worse? But if you
do not enumerate it among those things, then, you
leave your subject-point ; and like an orator of words
only, talk about those irrelevant things that have no-
thing to do with the subject. |

Sect. XVI. — Nob are you right in the use of this
example; nor in condemning the discussion of this
subject before the multitude, as useless — that God is
in a beetle's hole and even in a sink ! For your
thoughts concerning God are too human. I confess,
indeed, that there are certain fantastical preachers, who,
not from any religion, or fear of God, but from a de
sire of vain-glory, or from a thirst after some novelty,
or from impatience of silence, prate and trifle in the
lightest manner. But such please neither God nor
men, although they, assert that God is in the heaven
of heavens. But when there are grave and pious
preachers, who teach/ in modest, pure, and sound
words ; they, without any danger, nay, unto much
profit, speak on such a subject before the multitude.

Is it not the duty of us all to teach, that the Son
of God was in the womb of the Virgin, and pro-


ceeded forth from her belly? And in what does the


shameless terms ? But such persons we justly con-
demn ; because, there are numberless pure words, in
which we speak of that necessary subject, even with
decency and grace. The body also of Christ himself
was human, like ours. Than which body, what is
more filthy ? But shall we, therefore, not say what
Paul saith, that God dwelt in it bodily? Col. Hi.
What is more unclean than death ? What more hor-
rible than hell ? Yet the prophet glorieth that God
was with him m death, and left him not, in hell.

The pious mind, therefore, is not shocked at
hearing that God was in death and in hell : each of
which is more horrible, and more loathsome, than
either a hole or a sink. Nay, since the scripture tes-
tifies that God is every where, and fills all things,
such a mind, not only says that he is in those places,
but will, of necessity, learn and know that he is there.
Unless we are to suppose, that if I should at any time
be taken and cast into a prison, or a sink, (which has
happened to many saints,) I could not there call upon
,God, or believe that he was present with me, until I
^ ' should come into some ornamented church. If you
\ t«ch us that we are thus to trifle concerning God,
and if you are thus offended at the places of his essen-
tial presence, by and by you will not even allow that
he dwells with us in heaven. Whereas, the heaven of
heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kingg viii. ; or, they are
notwbrthy. But, as I said before, you, according
to your custom, thus maliciously point your sting at
our cause, that you may disparage and render it hate-


39

ful, because you find it islands against you insuperable,

and invincible. , :!< + i r,« ?n . nl 1 . wv-

As to the other example, that " there are three
Gods," — I confess, if that should be taught, it wouW
be an offence : for it is not true, nor does the scripture
teach it But the sophists speak in this way, and

Itf _j» » ■ _m_ m urn, ji rl n — , n mmm I ^ — * - - - L_ ^_ X I 1— — A f ^

nave iormed a new way or reasoning— but what . 18
that to us ! ■ ' ; i Mi .-J* c«v;Li

•lit.' . ■ .,> : . r-cIt-A: ml

Sect. XVII. — In the remaining example coft-
cerning confession and satjafrfetion, it is wonderful to
observe with what dexterous prudence you proceed.
Throughout the whole, according to youjr custom, you
move along on the tiptoe of caution, lest you should
seem, neither plainly to condemn my sentiments, nor
to oppose the tyranny of the Popes: a path which
you found to be by no means safe. Therefore, throwi-
ing ptff, in this matter, both God and conscience, (for
what are these things to Erasmus? What has he to
do. with diem? What profit are they to him?) you
rush upon the external bugbear, and attack the com-
monalty. 1 t... -i , : . v r 4 .

ing of a rreeconfession arid of satisfaction, to an occasion
. of the flesh. But, nevertheless, (you say) by the neces-
sity of confessing, they are, in a measure, restrained.'—
O memorable and excellent speech 1 Is this teach-
ing theology ! To bind souls by laws, and, (as Ezekiel
saith) to hunt them to death, which are not bound by
God ! Why, by this speech you bring upon us the
universal tyranny of the laws of the Popes, as useful
and wholesome ; because, that' by them also the de-
pravity of the commonalty is restrained.


40

But l will notfnveigh against this place as it de-
serves. I will descant upon it thus briefly — A good
theologian teaches, that the commonalty are to be
restrained by the external power of the sword, where
they do evil: as Paul teaches, Rom. iii. But their
consciences are not to be fettered by false laws, that
they might be tormented with sins where God wills
there should be no sins at all. For consciences are
bound by the law of God only. So that, that inter-
mediate tyranny of Popes, which falsely terrifies and
murders the souls within, and vainly wearies the
bodies without, is to be taken entirely out of the way.
Because, although it binds to confession and other
things, outwardly, yet the mind is not, by these things
restrained, but exasperated the more into the hatred
both of God and men. And in vain does it butcher
the body by external things, making nothing but hypo-
crites. — So that tyrants, with laws of this
•nothing else but ravening wolves, robbers, and
derers of souls: And yet you, an excellent counsellor
of souls, recommend these to us again : that is, you
are an advocate for these most barbarous soul-mur-
derers, who nil the world with hypocrites, and with
such as blaspheme God and hate him in their hearts,
in order that they may restrain them a little from out-
ward sin. As though there were no other way of re-
straining, which makes no hypocrites, and is wrought
without any destroying of consciences. , •.

1**1 . ,

i Sect XVIIL— Here you produce similitudes
(in which you aim at appearing to abound, and to use
very appropriately) ; that is, — * that there are diseases,
which may be borne with less evil than they can be


41


cured : as the leprosy, &c.' You add, moreover, the
example of Paul, who makes a distinction between
those things that are lawful, and those that are not
not expedient " It is lawful (you say) to speak the
truth; but, before every one, at all times, and in
every way, it is not expedient." — . .

How copious an orator ! And yet you under-
stand nothing of what you are saying. In a word,
you treat this discussion, as though it were some
matter between you and me only, about the recovering
of some money that was at stake, or some other trivial
thing, the loss of which, as being of much less con-
sideration than the general peace of the community,
ought not so to concern any one, but that he may
yields act, and suffer upon the occasion, in any way
that may prevent the necessity of the whole world
being thrown into a tumult Wherein, you plainly
evince, that this peace and tranquillity of the flesh,
are, with you, a matter of far greater consideration
man faith, than conscience, than salvation, than the
word of God, than the glory of Christ, than God
himself! Wherefore, let me tell you this; and I
entreat you to let it sink deep into your mind— I am,
in this discussion, seeking an object solemn and es-
sential ; nay, such, and so great, that it ought to be
maintained and defended through death itself; and
that, although the whole world should not only be
thrown into tumult and set in arms thereby, but even
if it should be hurled into chaos and reduced to no-
thing. — If you cannot receive this, or if you are
not affected by it, do you mind your own business,
and allow us to receive it and to be affected by it, to
whom it is given of God.


But I v „. matt so gnt a fool

serves. I — sustain aad defend

theologiiv fortitude and so

restrni ***** obstinacy) in the face

they (I jc so much hatred, so

consci- * in the face of the

they _-i*r^~ iave not done this for

then ^ afl^e nor desire ; nor for vain -

bou _ jr* I could not obtain in a

nv me; nor for the life of

n be made sure of for an

} ^ ^ that you only have a

0 ^ 3$ these tumults? Yet, I am
v w*> I born from the Marpe-

m m xemwot be otherwise, I choose


mr1 m & toOM&ts intolerable ! May
- mf I utMe and hope, that your heart
^ k-» certainly your words imply,

tvm consider the word of God

^ * fc» awe tables. For, in your
^ tm^i mx* us, tor the sake of the
rwif ; ^4 tke peace of the c omm u ni ty,
occasion, and depart from the
(g^tUnii: whereas, if we put off that,
£ML salvation and all Christianity

fca W vifaent from this is the instruc-
^ ^> we should rather despise the

• . •


Sect XIX.—- But you say these things, because
yon either do not read or do not observe, that such is
most constantly the ease with the word of God, that
because of it, the world is thrown into tumult And
that Christ openly declares : u I came not (says he) to
send peace but a sword," Matt x. And in Luke,
" I came to send fire upon the earth," Luke xii. And
Paul, 2 Cor. vi., " In tumults, &c." And the prophet,
Psalm ii. abundantly testifies the same : declaring, that
the nations are in tumult, the people roaring, the kings
rising up, and the princes conspiring against the Lord
and against his Christ As though he had said, multi-
tude, height, wealth, power, wisdom, righteousness, and
whatever is great in the world, sets itself against the
word of God. ' ' -

Look into the Acts of the Apostles, and seewhat
happened in the world on account of the word of Paul
only (to say nothing of the other apostles): how he
alone throws both the Gentiles and Jews into commo-
tion : or, as the enemies themselves express it, " tarns
the world upside down," Acts xvii. Under Elijah,
the kingdom of Israel was thrown into commotion : as
king Ahab complains, 1 Kings xviii. What tumult
was there under the other prophets, while they are all
either killed at once or stoned to death ; while Israel
is taken captive into Assyria, and J udah also to Baby-
lon! Was all this peace? The world and its God can-
not and will not bear the word of the true God : and
the true God cannot sand will not keep silence. While,
therefore, these two gods are at war with each other,
what can there be else in the whole world, but
tumult?

Therefore, to wish to silence these tumults, is


nothing else, than to wish to hinder the word of God,
and to take it out of the way! For the word of God,
wherever it comes, comes to change and to renew the
world. And even heathen writers testify, that changes
of things cannot take place, without commotion and
tumult, nor even.without blood. It therefore belongs
to Christians, to expect and endure these things, with
a stayed mind : as Christ says, " When ye shall hear
of wars and rumours of wars, be not dismayed, for
these things must first come to pass, but the end is not
yet," Matt. xxiv. And as to myself, if I did not see
these tumults, I should say the word of God was /not
in the world. But now, when I do see them, I re-
joice from my heart, and fear them not : being surely
persuaded, that the kingdom of the Pope, with all his
followers, will fall to the ground : for it is especially
against this, that the word of God, which now runs, is
directed. .

I see indeed, my friend Erasmus, that you complain
in many books of these tumults, and of the loss of
peace and concord ; and you attempt many means
whereby to afford a remedy, and (as I am inclined to
believe) with a good intention. But this gouty foot
laughs at your doctoring hands. For here, in truth, as
you say, you sail against the tide ; nay, you put out fire
with straw. Cease from complaining, cease from doc-
toring; this tumult proceeds, and is carried on, from
above, and will not cease until it shall make all the ad-
versaries of the word as the dirt of the streets. Though
I am sorry that I find it necessary to teach you, so
great a theologian, these things, like a disciple, when
you ought to be a teacher of others.

Your excellent sentiment, then, that some diseases


t


45

may be borne whh less evil than they can be cured ap-
plies here: which sentiment you do not appositely use.
Rather call these tumults, commotions, perturbations,
seditions, discords, wars, and all other things of the
same kind with which the world is shaken and tossed to
and fro on account of the word of God, — the diseases.
These things, I say, as they are temporal, are borne
with less evil than inveterate and evil habits; by which
all souls must be destroyed if they be not changed by
the word of God: which being taken away, eternal
good, God, Christ, and the Spirit, must be taken away
with it.

But how much better is it to lose the whole world,
than to lose God the creator of the world, who can
create innumerable worlds again, and is better than in-
finite worlds? For what are temporal things when com-
pared with eternal? This leprosy of temporal things,
therefore, is rather to be borne, than that every soul
should be destroyed and eternally damned, and the
world kept in peace, and preserved from these tumults,
by their blood and perdition : whereas, one soul can-
not be redeemed with the price of the whole world !

You certainly have command of elegant and excel-
lent similitudes, and sentiments,- but, when you are
engaged in sacred discussions, you apply them child-
ishly, nay, pervertedly: for you crawl upon the
ground, and enter in thought into nothing above
what is human. . Whereas, those things which God
works, are neither puerile, civil, nor human, but di-
vine; and they exceed human capacity. Thus, you
do not see, that these tumults and divisions increase
throughout the world, according to the counsel, and
by the operation of God; and therefore, you fear lest


46


heaven should tumble about our ears. But I> by the
grace of God, see these things clearly ; because, I see
other tumults greater than these that will arise in the
age to come; in comparison of which, these appear
but as the whispering of a breath of air, or , the 1 mur-
muring of a gentle brook. ' . ■ • f

Sect XX. — But, the doctrine concerning the
liberty of confession arid Batisfaction, you either deny,
or know not that there is the word of God. — And
here arises another inquiry. But we know, and are
persuaded, that there is a word of God, in which the
Christian liberty is asserted, that we might not suffer
ourselves to be ensnared into bondage by human tra-
ditions and laws. This I have abundantly shewn
elsewhere. But if you wish to enter the lists, I am pre-
pared to discuss the point with you, and to fight it
out Though upon these subjects I have books ex-
tant not a few.

But, — " the laws of the Popes (you say,) may at
the same time be borne with and observed, in charity;
if perchance thus, eternal salvation by the word of
God, and the peace of: the world, may together
consist, without tumult. " —

I have said before, that cannot be. The prince of
this world will not allow the Pope and his high-priests,
and their laws to be observed in liberty, but his design
is, to entangle and bind consciences. This the true
God will not bear. Therefore, the word of God, and
the traditions of men, are opposed to each other with
implacable discord ; no less so, than God himself and
Satan ; who each destroy the works and overthrow the
doctrines of the other, as regal kings each destroying


47

the kingdom of the other. " He that is not with me

(saith Christ) is againt me," Luke xlv .: ... .


pravedly inclined, will abuse this liberty" —

This must be considered among those tumults, as a
part of that temporal leprosy which is to be borne, and
of that evil which is to be endured. But these are not
to be considered of so much consequence, as that, for
the sake of restraining their abuse, the word of God
should be taken out of the way. For if all cannot be
saved, yet some are saved; for whose sake the word of
God is sent ; and these, on that account; love it the
more fervently, and assent to it the more solemnly.
For, what evils did not impious men commit before,
when there was no word ? Nay, what good did they do ?
Was not the world always drowned in War, fraud,
violence, discord, and every kind of iniquity? For if
Micah (vii.) compares the best among them to a thorn
hedge, what do you suppose he would call the rest?

But now the Gospel is come, men begin to impute
unto it, that the world is evil. Whereas, the truth is,
that by the good gospel, it is more manifest how evil
it was, while, without the gospel, it did all its works in
darkness. Thus also the illiterate attributed to learn-
ing, that, by its flourishing, their ignorance becomes
known. This is the return we make for the word of
life and salvation! — And what fear must we suppose
there was among the Jews, when the gospel freed all
from the law of Moses? What occasion did not this
great liberty seem to give to evil men? But yet, the
gospel was not, on that account, taken away; but the
impious were left, and it was preached to tte! pious,


And as to


a fear, that many who are de-


43

tliat they migbt not use their liberty to an occasion of
the flesh. Gal. v.

. . .

Sect XXI. — Nor is this part of your advice, or
your remedy, to any purpose, where you say — " It is
lawful to speak the truth ; but it is not expedient, ei-
ther before every one, or at all times, or in every man-
ner." And ridiculously enough, you adduce Paul,
where he says, " All things are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient." —

But Paul does not there speak of teaching doc-
trine or the truth ; as you would confound his words,
and twist them which way you please. On the con-
trary, he will have the truth spoken every where, at aft
times, and in every manner. So that he even rejoices
that Christ is preached even through envy and strife,
PHI. i. Nay, he declares in plain words, that he re-
joices, let Christ be preached in any way.

Paul is speaking of facts, and the use of doctrine :
that is, of those, who, seeking their own, had no con-
sideration of the hurt and offence given to the weak.
Truth and doctrine, are to be preached always, openly,
and firmly, and are never to be dissembled or con-
cealed ; for there is no offence in them ; they are the
staff of uprightness. — And who gave you the power,
or committed to you the right, of confining the
Christian doctrine to persons, places, times, and
causes, when Christ wills it to be proclaimed, and
to reign freely, throughout the world? For Paul
saith, " the word of God is not bound/' but Erasmus
bounds the word. Nor did God give us the word that
it should be had with respect of places, persons, or


49

times : for Christ saith, " Go ye out into the whole
world," Matt, xxviii : he does not say, as Erasmus
does, — go to this place and not to that. Again,
" Preach the Gospel to every creature," Mark xvi. : he
does not say — preach it to some and not to others. In
a word, you enjoin, in

of God, a respect of persons, a respect of places, a
respect of customs, and a respect of times ; whereas,
the one and especial part of the glory of the word con-
sists in this, — that, as Paul saith, there is, with it, no
respect of persons; and that God is no respecter of
persons. You see therefore, again, how rashly you
run against the word of God, as though you preferred
far before it, your own counsel and cogitations.

Hence, if we should demand of you that you
would determine for us, the times in which, the per-
sons to whom, and the manner in which, the truth is
to be spoken, when would you come to an end ? The
world would sooner compute the termination of time
and its own end, than you would settle upon any one
certain rule. In the meantime, where would remain the
duty of teaching? Where that of teaching the soul ?
And how could you, who know nothing of the nature of
persons, times, and manner, determine upon any rule
at all ? And even if you should know them perfectly,
yet you could not know the hearts of men. Unless,
with you, the manner, the time, and the person be
this : — teaching the truth so, that the Pope be not in-
dignant, Caesar be not enraged, and that many be not
offended and made worse ! But what kind of counsel
this is, you have seen above. — I have thus rhetorically
figured away in these vain words, lest you should
appear to have said nothing at all.

E


How much better is it for us wretched men to
ascribe unto God, who knoweth the hearts of all

the persons to whom, and the times in which the
truth is to be spoken! For he knows what is to be
spoken to each, and when, and how it is to be spoken.
He then, determines that his Gospel which is neces-
sary unto all, should be confined to no place, no
time ; but that it should be preached unto all, at all
times and in all places. And I have already proved,
that those things which are handed down to us in the
scriptures, are such, that they are quite plain and
wholesome, and of necessity to be proclaimed abroad ;
even as you yourself determined in your Paraclesis
was right to be done ; and that, with much more wis-
dom than you advise now. But let those who would
not that souls should be redeemed, such as the Pope
and his adherents— let it be left to them to bind the
word of God, and hinder men from life and the king-
dom of heaven, that they might neither enter in them-
selves nor suffer others to enter ; — to whose fury you,
Erasmus, by this advice of yours, are perniciously
subservient

Sect. XXII. — Of the same stamp with this, is
that prudence of yours also, with which you next
give it as your advice — 6 that, if any thing were settled
upon, in the councils, that was wrong, it ought not to
be openly confessed : lest, a handle should be thereby
afforded, for contemning the authority of the fathers. < —

This, indeed, is just what the Pope wished you to
say ! And he hears it with greater pleasure than the
Gospel itself, and will be a most ungrateful wretch, if

>4


$1

he, do not honour you in return, with a cardinal's cap
together with all the revenues belonging to it. But
in the mean time, friend Erasmus, what will the souls
do that shall be bound and murdered by that iniqui-
tous statjute ? Is that nothing to you ? But however,
you ajways think, or pretend to think, that human
statutes can be observed together with the word of
God, without peril. If they could, I would at once go
over to this your sentiment.

But if you are yet in ignorance, I tell you again,
that human statutes cannot be observed together with
the word of God: because, the former bind con-
sciences, the latter looses them. They are directly
opposed to each other, as water to fire. Unless, in-
deed, they could be observed in liberty ; that is, not to
bind the conscience. But this the Pope wills not,
nor can he will it, unless he wishes his kingdom to be
destroyed and brought to an end : for that stands only
in ensnaring and binding those consciences, which the
Gospel pronounces free. The authority of the fathers,
therefore, is to be accounted nought : and those sta-
tutes which have been wrongly enacted, (as all have
been that are not according to the word of God) are to
be rent in sunder and cast away : for Christ is better
than the authority of the fathers. In a word, if it be
concerning the word of God that you think thus, you
think impiously ; if it be concerning other things, your
verbose disputing about your sentiment is nothing to
me : I am disputing concerning the word of God !

Sect. XXIII. — In the last part of your Preface,
where you deter us from this kind of doctrine, you
think your victory is almost gained.

E 2


52

" What (you say) can be more useless than that this
paradox should be proclaimed openly to the world —
that whatever is done by us, is not done by Free-will,
l*ut from mere necessity. And that of Augustine
also — that God works in us both good and evil : that
he rewards his good works in us, and punishes his evil
works in us." (You are mightily copious here in
giving, or rather, in expostulating concerning a rea-
son.) " What a flood-gate of iniquity (you say)
would these things, publicly proclaimed, open unto
men ! What bad man would amend his life ! Who
would believe that he was loved of God ! Who would
war against his flesh !"

I wonder, that in so great ^vehemency, and con-
tending zeal, you did not remember our main subject,
and say — where then would be found Free-will !

My friend, Erasmus ! here, again, I also say, if
you consider that these paradoxes are the inventions
of men, why do you contend against them ? Why
are you so enraged ? Against whom do you rail ? Is
there any man in the world, at this day, who has in-
veighed more vehemently against the doctrines of
men, than Luther! This admonition of yours, there-
fore, is nothing to me ! But if you believe that those
paradoxes are the words of God, where is your coun-
tenance, where is your shame, where is, I will not say
your modesty, but that fear of, and that reverence
which is due to the true God, when you say, that no-
thing is more useless to be proclaimed than that word
of God ! What ! shall your Creator, come to learn
of you his creature, what is useful, and what not use-
ful to be preached ? What ! did that foolish and un-
wise God, know not what is necessary to be taught,

1


until you his instructor prescribed to him the mea-
sure, according to which he should be wise, and ac-
cording to which he should command? What! did
he not know before you told him,, that that which you
infer would be the consequence of this his paradox ?
If, therefore, God willed that such things should be
spoken of and proclaimed abroad, without regarding
what would follow, — who art thou that forbiddest it ?

The apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans,
discourses on these same things, not " in a corner,"
but in public and before the whole world, and that
with a freely open mouth, nay in the harshest terms,
saying, " whom he will he hardeneth." And again,
" Grod, willing to shew forth his wrath," &c. Rom. ix.
What is more severe, that is to the flesh, than that word
of Christ : " Many are called but few chosen ?" Matt.
xxiL And again, " I know whom I have chosen?"
John xiii. According to your judgment then, all
these things are such, that nothing can be more use-
lessly spoken ; because that by these things, impious
men may fall into desperation, hatred, and blas-
phemy.

Here then, I see, yon suppose that the truth- and
the utility of the scripture are to be weighed and
judged of according to the opinion of men, nay, of
men the most impious ; so that, what pleases them or
seems bearable, should be deemed true, divine, and
wholesome ; and what has the contrary effect upon
them, should at once be deemed useless, false, and
pernicious. What else do you mean by all this, than
that the words of God should depend on, stand on r
and fall by, the will and authority of men? Whereas
the scripture, on the contrary saith, that all things


m~i "£Ll"^ "mtis^r tt?it ^ni» co need ot reverencing
rrmirs jcr^crz^e hjooen. tecanse there were no such


Ac * siac^ «s» c5. in the most religious terms,
iSr ahrxaess of the Coiycian cavern, lest we

sk aiii rsiii KT^rird with too much curiosity ; so that,
W ifer awe. vou well nigh frightened us from reading
srrircraes altogether; (to the reading of which
Orst and his apostles urge and persuade us, as well
«* «n do yourself elsewhere.) Bu| here, where we
a* come not to the doctrines of the scripture, nor to
mr Corycian cavern only, but to the very, and greatly
a> be reverenced secrets of the divine Majesty, viz.
why he works thus ? — here, as they say, you burst
open all bars and rush in ; all but, openly blasphem-
ing! What indignation against God do you not disco-
ver, because you cannot see his reason why, and his
design in this his counsel ! Why do you not here frame,
as an excuse, obscurity and ambiguity? Why do you
not restrain yourself, and deter others from prying
into these things which God wills should be hidden

WH


55

from us, and which he has not delivered to us in the
scriptures ? It is here the hand is to be laid upon
the mouth, it is here we are to reverence what lies
hidden, to adore the secret counsels of the divine Ma-
jesty, and to exclaim with Paul, " Who art thou,
O man, that contendest with God?" Rom. ix.

Sect XXIV. — " Who (you say) will endeavour
to amend his life?" — I answer, No man ! no man can !
For your self-amenders without the Spirit, God re-
gartleth not, for they are hypocrites. But the elect,
and those that fear God, will be amended by the Holy
Spirit; the rest will perish unamended. Nor does
Augustine say, that the works of none, nor that the
works of all are crowned, but the works of some.
Therefore, there will be some, who shall amend their
lives.

" Who will believe (you say) that he is loved of
God ?" — I answer, no man will believe it ! No man
can ! But the elect shall believe it ; the rest shall
perish without believing it, filled with indignation
and blaspheming, as you here describe them. There-
fore, there will be some who shall believe it.

And as to your saying that — " by these doctrines
the flood-gate of iniquity is thrown open unto men" —
be it so. They pertain to that leprosy of evil to be
borne, spoken of before. Nevertheless, by the same
doctrines, there is thrown open to the elect and to
them that fear God, a gate unto righteousness, — an
entrance into heaven — away unto God ! But if, ac-
cording to your advice, we should refrain from these
doctrines, and should hide from men this word of
Cod, so that each, deluded by a false persuasion of


56


salvation, should never learn to fear God, and should
never be humbled, in order that through this fear he
might come to grace and love; then, indeed, we should
shut up your flood-gate to purpose ! For in the room
of it, we should throw open to ourselves and to all,
wide gates, nay, yawning chasms and sweeping tides,
not only unto iniquity, but unto the depths of hell !
Thus, we should not enter into heaven ourselves, and
them that were entering in we should hinder.

— " What utility therefore (you say) is there in,
or necessity for proclaiming such things openly, when
so many evils seem likely to proceed therefrom ?" —

I answer. It were enough to say — God has
willed that they should be proclaimed openly : but the
reason of the divine Mill is not to be inquired into,
but simply to be adored, and the glory to be given
unto God : who, since he alone is just and wise, doth
evil to no one, and can* do nothing rashly or incon-
siderately, although it may appear far otherwise unto
us. With this answer those that fear God are con-
tent. But that, from the abui idance of answering
matter which I have, I may say a little more than
this, which might suffice; — there are two causes
which require such things to be preached. The first is,
the humbling of our pride, and the knowledge of the
grace of God. The second is, Christian faith itself.

First, God has promised certainly his grace to the
humbled : that is, to the self-deploring and despairing.
But a man cannot be thoroughly humbled, until he
comes to know that his salvation is utterly beyond his
own powers, Counsel, endeavours, will, and works,
and absolutely depending on the will, counsel, plea-
sure, and work of another, that is, of God only. For


57

if, a* long as be has any persuasion that he can do
even the least thing himself towards his own sal-
vation, he retain a confidence in himself, and do
not utterly despair in himself, so long he is not
humbled before God; but he proposes to himself
some place, some time, or some work, whereby he
may at length attain unto salvation. But he who
hesitates not to depend wholly upon the good-will of
God, he totally despairs in himself, chooses nothing
for himself, but waits for God to work in him ; and
such an one, is the nearest unto grace, that he might
be saved.

These things, therefore, are openly proclaimed for
the sake of the elect : that, being by these means hum-
bled and brought down to nothing, they might be
saved. The rest resist this humiliation ; nay, they
condemn the teaching of self-desperation ; they wish
to have left a little something that they may do
themselves. These secretly remain proud, and ad-
versaries to the grace of God. This, I say, is one
reason : — that those who fear God, being humbled,
might know, call upon, and receive the grace of God.

The other reason is — that faith is, in things not
seen. Therefore, that there might be room for faith,
it is necessary that all those things which are believed
should be hidden. But they are not hidden more
deeply, than under the contrary of sight, sense, and
experience. Thus, when God makes alive, he does
it by killing ; when he justifies, he does it by bringing
in guilty ; when he exalts to heaven, he does it by
bringing down to hell : as the scripture saith, " The
Jjotd killeth and maketh alive, he bringeth down to
the grave and raiseth up," 1 Sam. ii. ; concerning


x*d my
rtuj^s.— Thns be conceals his
^ 4 *<a£» kindness l»eiixDz hisetetnai
behind a


,: t , *+*t- saw so few and damns soi
mi *ho according to his own wiii,
^^^nH damnable, that he
M delight in the
^ ^ ^ v <he an object of hatred rather than
v iMtfore, I could by any means com-
^ ^mu God can be merciful and just,
^ ^ ik? appearance of so much wrath and
v «\Hi)d be no need of faith. But now,
lw comprehended, there is room for
while such things are preached and
_ *w***d: >n the same manner as, while
M*is. ^ taith of life is exercised in death. Suf-
x . *v> said thus much upon your Preface.
* ii* w*y, we shall more rightly consult for the
tho* who dispute upon these paradoxes,
^ .^voiduty! to your way : whereby, you wish to in-
impiety try silence, and a refraining fromsay-
^ ^ thityi : which is to no profit whatever. For if
<*Wvt\ or oven suppose these things to be true,
>v**t$ Uk^V iuto paradoxes of no small moment,) such
x i)v ***tM>to desire of mortals to search into secret
^yp^ *ud the more so the more we desire to keep
^ *crot, thai, by this admonition of yours, you
^Ktolutoly make them public ; for all will now
.^ifr awiro desire to know whether these paradoxes
S ^ or not : Urns they will, by your contending


.59


zeal, be so roused to inquiry, that not one of us ever
afforded such a handle for making them known, as you
yourself have done by this over-religious and zealous
admonition. You would have acted much more pru-
dently, had you said nothing at all about being cau-
tious in mentioning these paradoxes, if you wished
to see your desire accomplished. But, since you do
not directly deny that they are true, your aim is frus-
trated : they cannot be concealed : for, by their ap-
pearance of truth, they will draw all men to search
into them. Therefore, either deny that they are true
altogether, or else hold your own tongue first, if you
wish others to hold theirs.

Sect. XXV. — As to the other paradox you men-
tion, — that, 1 whatever is done by us, is not done by
Free-will, but from mere necessity* —

Let us briefly consider this, lest we should suffer any
thing most perniciously spoken* to pass by unnoticed.
Here then, I observe, that if it be proved that our
salvation is apart from our own strength and counsel,
and depends on the working of God alone, (which I
hope I shall clearly prove hereafter, in the course of this
discussion,) does it not evidently follow, that when
God is not present with us to work in us, every thing
that we do is evil, and that we of necessity do those
things which are of no avail unto salvation? For if it is
not we ourselves, but God only, that works salvation in
us, it must follow, whether or no, that we do nothing
unto salvation before the working of God in us.

But, by necessity \ I do not mean compulsion;
but (as they term it) the necessity of immutability,
not of compulsion: that is, a man void of the Spirit


60


of God, does not evil against his will as by violence,
or as if he were taken by the neck and forced to it, in
the same way as a thief or cut-throat is dragged to
punishment against his will ; but he does it sponta-
neously, and with a desirous willingness. And this
willingness and desire of doing evil he cannot, by his
own power, leave off, restrain, or change ; but it goes
on still desiring and craving. And even if he should
be compelled by force to do any thing outwardly to
the contrary, yet the craving will within remains averse
to, and rises in indignation against that which forces
or resists it But it would not rise in indignation, if
it were changed, and made willing to yield to a con-
straining power. This is what we mean by the neces-
sity of immutability : — that the will cannot change
itself, nor give itself another bent; but rather the
more it is resisted, the more it is irritated to crave ;
as is manifest from its indignation. This would not
be the case if it were free, or had a Free-wilL Ask
experience, how hardened against all persuasion they
are, whose inclinations are fixed upon any one tiling.
For if they yield at all, they yield through force, or
through something attended with greater advantage ;
they never yield willingly. And if their inclinations
be not thus fixed, they let all things pass and go on
just as they will.

But again, on the other hand, when God works
in us, the will, being changed and sweetly breathed
on by the Spirit of God, desires and acts, not from
compulsion, but responsively, from pure willingness,
inclination, and accord ; so that it cannot be turned
another way by any thing contrary, nor be compelled
or overcome even by the gates of hell ; but it still


6\


goes on to desire, crave after, and love that which is
good ; even as before, it desired, craved after, and
loved that which was evil. This, again, experience
proves. How invincible and unshaken are holy men,
when, by violence and other oppressions, they are
only compelled and irritated the more to crave after
good ! Even as fire, is rather fanned into flames
than extinguished, by the wind. So that neither is
there here any willingness, or Free-will, to turn itself
into another direction, or to desire any thing else,
while the influence of the Spirit and grace of God
remain in the man.

In a word, if we be under the god of this world,
without the operation and Spirit of God, we are led
captives by him at his will, as Paul saith, 2 Tim. ii. ;
so that, we cannot will any thing but that which he
wills. For he is that " strong man armed," who so
keepeth his palace, that those whom he holds captive
are kept in peace, that they might not cause any
motion or feeling against him ; otherwise, the king-
dom of Satan, being divided against itself, could not
stand ; whereas, Christ affirms it does stand. And
all this we do willingly and desiringly, according to
the nature of will: for if it were forced, it would be
no longer will. For compulsion is (so to speak) un-
willingness. But if the " stronger than he " come
and overcome him, and take us as his spoil, then,
through the Spirit, we are his servants and captives,
(which is the royal liberty) that we may desire and do,
willingly, what he wills.

Thus the human will is, as it were, a beast be-
tween the two. If God sit thereon, it wills and goes
where God will : as the Psalm saith, " I am become


as it were a beast before thee, and I am continually
with thee," If Satan sit thereon, it wills and goes
as Satan will. Nor is it in the power of its own will
to choose, to which rider it will run, nor which it will
seek ; but the riders themselves contend, which shall
have and hold it.


Sect. XXVI. — And now, what if I prove from
your own words, on which you assert the freedom of
the will, that there is no such thing as Free-will at
all ! What if I should make it manifest that you
unknowingly deny that, which, with so much policy,
you labour to affirm. And if I do not this, actually,
I vow that I will consider all that I advance in this
book against you, revoked ; and all that your Diatribe
advances against me, and aims at establishing, con-
firmed.

You make the power of Free-will to be — ' that


mm


>Tn>


grace of God, is utterly ineffective.' .j
Do you not acknowledge this ? — Now then, I ask
and demand of you, if the grace of God be wanting,
or, if it be taken away from that certain small degree
of power, what can it do of itself? ' It is ineffective


(you say) and can do nothing of good. ' Therefore,
it cannot do what God or his grace wills. And why ?
because we have now separated the grace of God
from it ; and what the grace of God does not, is not
good. And hence it follows, that Free-will, without
the grace of God is, absolutely, not free ; but, im-
mutably, the servant and bond-slave of evil ; because,


it cannot turn itself unto good. This being determined,
I will allow you to make the power of Free-will, not


G3

only a certain small degree of power, but to make it
evangelical if you will, or, if you can, to make it
divine: provided that, you add to it this doleful
appendage — that, without the grace of God, it is
ineffective. Because, then you will at once take
from it all power : for, what is ineffective power, but
plainly, no power at all ?

Therefore, to say, that the will is free, and that
it has indeed power, but that it is ineffective, is what
the sophists call ' a direct contrariety/ As if one
should say, Free-will is that which is not free. Or
as if one should term fire cold, and earth hot. For
if fire had the power of heat, yea of the heat of hell,
yet, if it did not burn or scorch, but were cold and
produced cold, I should not call it fire, much less
should I term it hot; unless, indeed, you were to
mean an imaginary fire, or a fire represented in a
picture. — But if we call the power of Free-will that,
by which a man is fitted to be caught by the Spirit,
or to be touched by the grace of God, as one created
unto eternal life or eternal death, may be said to be ;
this power, that is, fitness, or, (as the sophists term
it) * disposition-quality,' and ' passive aptitude,' this I
also confess. And who does not know, that this is not
in trees or beasts? For, (as they say) heaven was not
made for geese.

Therefore, it stands confirmed, even by your own
testimony, that we do all things from necessity, not
from Free-will : seeing that, the power of Free-will is
nothing, and neither does, nor can do good, without
grace. Unless you wish efficacy to bear a new signi-
fication, and to be understood as meaning perfection I
that is, that Free-will can, indeed, will and begin, but


64

perfect : which I do not believe : and upon
this I shall speak more at large hereafter.

It now then follows, that Free-will is plainly a
divine term, and can be applicable to none but the
divine Majesty only : for he alone " doth, (as the
Psalm sings) what he will in heaven and earth."
Whereas, if it be ascribed unto men, it is not more
properly ascribed, than the divinity of God himself
would be ascribed unto them : which would be the
greatest of all sacrilege. Wherefore, it becomes
theologians to refrain from the use of this term alto-
gether, whenever they wish to speak of human ability,
and to leave it to be applied to God only. And
moreover, to take this same term out of the mouths
and speech of men ; and thus to assert, as it were,
for their God, that which belongs to his own sacred
and holy name.

But if they must, whether or no, give some power
to men, let them teach, that it is to be called by some
other term than Free-will ; especially since we know
and dearly see, that the people are miserably deceived
and seduced by that term, taking and understanding
it to signify something far different from that which
theologians mean and understand by it, in their dis-
cussions. For the term, Free-will, is by far too
grand, copious, and full ; by which, the people ima-
gine is signified (as the force anjd nature of the term
requires) that power, which can freely turn itself as it
will, and such a power as is under the influence of,
and subject to no one. Whereas, if they knew that
it was quite otherwise, and that by that term scarcely
the least spark or degree of power was signified, and
that, utterly ineffective of itself, being the servant


65

and bond-slave of the devil, it would not be at all
surprising if they should stone us as mockers and
deceivers, who said one thing and meant something
quite different ; nay, who left it uncertain and Unintel-
ligible what we meant. For " he who speaks sophis-
tkalty (the wise man saith) is hated," Eccles. xxxvii.:
and especially if he does so in things pertaining to
godliness, where eternal salvation is at stake.

Since, therefore, we have lost the signincation of
so grand a term and the thing signified by it, or
rather, never had them at all, (which the Pelagians
may heartily wish had been the case, being themselves
illuded by this term,) why do we so tenaciously hold
an empty word, to the peril arid mockery of the
believing people ? There is no more wisdom in so
doing, than there is in kings and potentates retaining,
or claiming and boasting of, empty titles of kingdoms
and countries, when they are at the same time mere
beggars, and any thing but the possessors of those
kingdoms and countries. But however, this is bear-
able, since they deceive and mock no one thereby,
but only feed themselves on vanity without any
profit. But hete, is a peril of salvation, and the
most destructive mockery.

Who would not laugh at, or rather hold up to
hatred, that most untimely innovator of terms, who,
contrary to all established use, should attempt ! to
introduce such a mode of speaking, as by the term
'beggar/ to have understood, 4 wealthy;' not be-
cause such an one has any wealth himself, but because
some king may, perchance, give him his wealth?
And what if such an one should realty do this, not by
any figure of speech, as by periphrasis or irony, but

f


(ft

^ . mmtnn i: In the same way, speaking
^ ueaaV he may wish to be under-
u,i »ti Joe in ' perfect health : * giving this
jtvituae the one may give the other his
. ^ he may, by < iJliterate idiot,' mean
^ ; ' because some other may perchance

learning. Of precisely the same nature
.o. man has a Fiwe-Will: for this reason, if
-»mm <Jod should t give him his. By this abuse
. <* manner of speaking, any one may boast that
h,**** any thing : that he is the Lord of heaven and
«4U*— if perchance, God should give this unto hum.

tfu* is not the way in which theologians should
tPMal> this is the. way of stage-players and public
uformers. Our words ought, to be proper wonds,
pure and sober ; and, as Paul saith, " sound speech
chat cannot be conde«med:' \utb

But, if we do not like to leave out this term»alto-
gether, (which would be most safe, and also most
religious) we may, nevertheless* with a good con-
science teach, that it be used so for as to allow man
a Free-will, not in respect of those which are above
him, but in respect only of those things which are
below him : that is, he may be allowed to know; that
he has, as to his goods and possessions, the right of
using, acting, and omitting, according to his Freer
will ; although, at the same time, that same Free-will
v* overruled by the Free-will of God alone, just as he
pha**; but that, God-ward, or in things which per-
uui unto salvation or damnation, he has no Free-will,
bat * a captive, slave, and servant, either to the will
* ( tail or to the will of Satan.


67

Sect XXVII.— These observations have I
made upon the heads of your Prepace, which, in-
deed, themselves, may more properly be said to em-
brace the whole subject, than the following body of
the book. But however, the whole of these observa-
tions in reply, might have been summed up and
made m this one short compendious answer to you. —
Your Preface complains, either of the .words of God,
or of the words of men. If of the words of men, the
whole is written in vam; if of the words of God, the
whole is impious. Wherefore, it would have saved
much trouble, if it had been plainly mentioned, whe-
ther we were disputing concerning the words of God,
or the words of men. But this, perhaps, will be
handled in the ExoIcdium which follows, or in the
body of the discussion itself.

But the hints which ybtt have thrown together
in the conclusion of your Preface, have no weight
whatever.

— Such as, your calling my doctrines 'fables, and
useless:' and saying, 4 that Christ crucified should ra-
ther be preached, after the example of Paul : that
wisdom is to be taught among them that are perfect :
that the language of scripture is attempered to the va-
rious capacities of hearers: and your therefore think-
ing, that it should be left to the prudence and charity
of the teacher, to teach that whkh may be profitable
to his neighbour '—

All this you advance senselessly, and away from
the purpose. For neither do we teach any thing but
Christ crucified. But Christ crucified, brings all
these things along with himself, and that ' wisdom also
among them that are perfect : ' for there is no other

F 2


Co-


in plain serious meaning ? 1>
of one ' sick unto death,' In
stood as meaning, one in
as his reason, because i
health. So also he n
' most learned been
give him hih learning,
is this :— man has
perchance God shon
of the manner of
he has any thing :
earth — if perchanc
But this is not t
proceed, this is t
informers. Our
pure and sober ;
that cannot be <
But, if we d
gether, (which
religious) we i
science teach,
a Free-will, n
him, but in r«
below him : th;
he has, as to hi
using, acting,
will; although
is overruled l»
pleases: but th;
tain unto salvat
but is a captive,
of God, or to tht


69


\ < m do not, I know, quite approve
line, or, by what other term soever
ate this my mode of discussion.
• so great a number of the most
i » roved by the consent of so many
weight with you. Among whom
lie most extensively acquainted with
ings, and also some of the most holy
renowned for miracles, together with
nt theologians, and so many colleges,
lops, and popes : so that, in a word, on
the balance are (you say) learning, ge-
tde, greatness, highness, fortitude, sanctity,
id what not! — But that, on my side, are
»liff and a Laurentius Valla (although Au-
v hom you pass by, is wholly on my side),
•arison with the others, are of no weight
that Luther, therefore, stands alone, a pri-
mal, an upstart, with his followers, in whom
ither that learning nor that genius, nor mul-
r magnitude, nor sanctity, nor miracles. For
not ability enough (you say) to cure a lame
l hey make a show of scripture, indeed; con-
hich, however, they areas much in doubt as
f he other side of the question. They boast
it al>o, which however they never show
\nd many other things, which, from the
our tOBgue, you are able to enumerate in
fusion. But these things have no effect
r we say to you, as the wolf did to the
\bi( b be devoured, " You are SoumL
i " — « They say^M^>bserve,) and upon
would haves them.' 1


I confess, my friend Erasmus, that you may well
be swayed by all these. These had such weight with
me for upwards of ten years, that I think no other
mortal was ever so much under their sway. And I
myself thought it incredible that this Troy of ours,
which had for so long a time, and through so many
wars stood invincible, could ever be taken. And I
call God for a record upon my soul, that I should
have continued so, and have been under the same in-
fluence even unto this day, had not an urging con-
science and an evidence of things, forced me into a
different path. And you may easily imagine that
my heart was not of stone ; and that, if it had been
of stone, it would at least have been softened in
struggling against so many tides, and being dashed to
and fro by so many waves, when I was daring that,
which, if I accomplished, I saw that the whole autho-
rity of those whom you have just enumerated, would
be poured down upon my head like an overwhelm-
ing flood.

But this is not a time for setting forth a history
of my own life or works ; nor have I undertaken this
discussion for the purpose of commending myself, but
that I might exalt the grace of God. What I am,
and with what spirit and design I have been led to
these things, I leave to him who knows, that all this is
carrying on according to his own Free-will, not ac-
cording to mine : though even the world itself ought
to have found that out already. And certainly, by
this Exordium of yours, you throw me into a very
offensive situation, out of which, unless I speak in fa-
vour of myself, and to the disparagement of so many
fathers, I shall not easily extricate myself. But I will


71

do it in a few words. — According to your own judg-
ment of me, then, I stand apart from all such learn-
ing, talents, multitude, authority, and every thing else
of the kind.

Now, if I were to demand of you these three
things, what shewing forth the Spirit is, what miracles
are, what sanctity is, as far as I have known you from
your letters and books, you would appear so great a
novice and ignoramus, that you would not be able to
give three syllables of explanation. Or, if I should
put it to you closely, and demand of you, which one
among all those of whom you boast, you could to a
certainty bring forth, either as being or having been a
saint, or as having possessed the Spirit, or as having
wrought miracles, I apprehend you would have hot
work of it, and all in vain. You bring forth many
things that have been handed about in common use
and in public sermons ; but you do not credit, how
much of their weight and authority they lose, when
they are brought to the judgment of conscience.
There is an old proverb, " Many were accounted
saints on earth, whose souls are now in hell ! "

Sect. XXIX. — But we will grant you, if you
please, that they were all saints, that they all had the
Spirit, that they all wrought miracles (which, how-
ever, you do not require.) But tell me this — was any
one of them made a saint, did any one of them re-
ceive the Spirit or work miracles, in the name, or by
virtue of Free-will, or to confirm the doctrine of Free-
will ? Far be such a thought (you will say,) but in the
name, and by virtue of Jesus Christ, and for the con-
firmation of the doctrine of Christ, all these things


72

were done. Why then do you bring forward the
sanctity, the spirit, and the miracles of these, in con-
firmation of the doctrine of Free-will, for whkh they
M ere not wrought and given ?

Their miracles, Spirit, and sanctity, therefore, be-
long to us who preach Jesus Christ, and not the abi-
lity and works of men. And now, what wonder if
those who were thus holy, spiritual, and wonderful
for miracles, were sometimes under the influence of the
flesh, and spoke and wrought according to the flesh ;
since that happened, not once only, to the very
apostles under Christ himself. For you do not deny,
but assert, that Free-will does not belong to the Spi-
rit, or to Christ, but is human; so that, the Spirit who
is promised to glorify Christ, cannot preach Free-
will. If, therefore, the fathers have at any time
preached Free-will, they have certainly spoken from
the flesh, (seeing they were men,) not from the Spirit of
God ; much less did they work miracles for its confir-
mation. Wherefore, your allegation concerning the
sanctity, the Spirit, and the miracles of the fathers is
nothing to the purpose, because Free-will is not proved
thereby, but the doctrine of Jesus Christ against the
doctrine of Free-will.

But come, shew forth still, you that are on the
side of Free-will, and assert that a doctrine of this
kind is true, that is, that it proceeds from the Spirit of
God — shew forth still, I say, the Spirit, still work
miracles, still evidence sanctity. Certainly you who
make the assertion owe this to us, who deny these
things. The Spirit, sanctity, and miracles ought not to
be demanded of us who maintain the negative, but
from you who assert in the affirmative. The nega-


Digitized by GoogI


73

live proposes nothing, is nothing, and is bound to
prove nothing, nor ought to be proved: it is the
affirmative) that ought to be proved. You assert
the power of Free-will and the human cause : but
no miracle was ever seen or heard of, as proceeding
from God, in support of a doctrine of the human
cause, only in support of the doctrines of the divine
cause. And we are commanded to receive no doc-
trine whatever, that is not first proved by signs from
on high, Deut. xviii. Nay, the scripture calls man
" vanity," and " a lie:" which is nothing less than
saying, that all human things are vanities and lies.
Come forward then ! come forward i I say, and
prove, that your doctrine, proceeding from human
vanity and a lie, is true. Where is now your shewing
forth the Spirit ! Where is your sanctity ! Where are
your miracles ! I see your talents, your erudition, and
your authority ; but those things God has given alike
iinto all the world !

But however, we will not compel you to work
great miracles, nor " to cure a lame horse," lest you
should plead, as an excuse, the carnality of the age.
Although God is wont to confirm his doctrines by mi-
racles, without any respect to the carnality of the
age : nor is he at all moved, either by the merits or
demerits of a carnal age, but by pure mercy and
grace, and a love of souls which are to be confirmed,
by solid truth, unto their glory. But we give you the
choice of working any miracles, as small an one as
vou d lease.

But come ! I, in order to irritate your Baal into
action, insult, and challenge you to create evea one
frog, in the name, and by virtue of Free-will ; of
which, the Gentile and impious Magi in Egypt,


74


conM create many. I will not put you to the task of
creating lice; which, neither could they produce.
But I will descend a little lower yet. Take even one
flea, or louse, (for you tempt and deride our God by
your 4 curing of the lame horse/) and if, after you
have combined all the powers, and concentrated all
the efforts both of your god and your advocates,
you can, in the name and by virtue of Free-will, kill
it, you shall be victors; your cause shall be esta-
blished ; and we also will immediately come over and
adore that god of yours, that wonderful killer of the
louse. Not that I deny, that you could even re-
move mountains ; but it is one thing to say, that a
certain thing was done by Free-will, and another to
prove it

And, what I have said concerning miracles, I say
also concerning sanctity. — If you can, out of such a
series of ages, men, and all the things which you have
mentioned, shew forth one work, (if it be but the
lifting a straw from the earth,) or one word, (if it be
but the syllable my,) or one thought of Free-will, (if
it be but the faintest sigh,) by which men applied
themselves unto grace, or by which they have merited
the Spirit, or by which they have obtained pardon, or
by which they have prevailed with God even in the
smallest degree, (I say nothing about being sanctified
thereby,) again, I say, you shall be victors, and we
vanquished ; and that, as I repeat, in the name and
by virtue of Free-will.

For what things soever are wrought in men by the
power of divine creation, are supported by scripture
testimonies in abundance. And certainly, you ought
to produce the same : unless you would appear such
**tMcul°us teachers, as to spread abroad throughout

i \


75

the world, with so much arrogance and authority,
doctrines concerning that, of which you cannot pro-
duce one proof. For Buch doctrines will be called
mere dreams, which are followed by nothing : than
which, nothing can be more disgraceful to men of so
many ages, so great* so learned, so holy, and so mira-
culous ! And if this be the case, we shall rank even
the stoics before you : for although they took upon
them to describe such a wise man as they never saw,
yet they did attempt to set forth some part of the cha-
racter. out you cannot set iortn any tnmg whatever,
not even the shadow of your doctrine.

The same also I observe concerning the Spirit.
If you can produce one out of all the assertors of
Free-will, who ever had a strength of mind and affec-
tion, even in the smallest degree, so as, in the name
and by virtue of. Free-will, to be able to disregard one
farthing, or to be willing to be without one farthing,
or to bear one word or sign of injury, (I do not speak
of the stoical contempt of riches, life, and fame,)
again, ihe palm of victory shall be yours, and we, as
the vanquished, will willingly pass under the spear.
And these proofs you, who with such trumpeting
jnouths sound forth the power of Free-will, are bound
to produce before us. Or else, again, you will ap-
pear to be striving to give establishment to a nothing :
or to be acting like him, who sat to see a play in an
empty theatre.

Sect XXX.— But I will easily prove to you
the contrary of all this: — that such holy men as you
boast of, whenever they approach God, either to
pray or to do, approach him, utterly forgetful of their


crvins
at the >amc time
is the contrary. In
in the same state
of death, he said,
cecause I hare lived wrong.**
was any power spoken
apply itself onto Grace, bat that all
as bens only averse ; al-
at the time when they dis-
spoke otherwise. And
happened unto all, that when
<4te3fe5e*i in words and disputations, they are
jut another, when they come to experience
In the former, they speak differently
they telt before ; in the latter, they feel dif-
trom what they spoke before. But men. good
*k a* bad, are to be judged of, more from what
mqp tag*, than from what they say.

ttarwe will indulge you still further. We will not
r*^t*itt itiiracies, the Spirit, and sanctity. We return
t» t*K wcirtne itself. We only require this of yrai : —
vtti v«Mft would at least explain to us, what work, what
j^ht. that power of Free-will can move,
vw perKwav at carder to apply itself unto grace,
fe^c * ^uoc ea«Hf|k to say. there is ! there is ! there
* Mil fo»*r ot Free-will ! For what is more
sa*l tfca* laas ^ Nor does sweh a way of pro-
^ 44'rt^ajL ^ V£WV ami tWr awt Imaec. aad the most
fc*y %W a*vr fern ar ^ » aaawy ases, but
***i»f v<*fe** I d K Ha v a< w src» a German pro-
waifc_> W ma^aal aAat taaat is, what

^Vfcfc fe*********** ^ wittS ukes place.

f V


77

To give you an example (for I shall press you most
Jiomely) this is what is required : -J- Whether that
power must pray, or fast, or labour, or chastise the
body, or give alms ; or what other work of this kind it
must do, or attempt. For if it be a power it must do
some kind of work. But here you are more dumb
than Seriphian frogs and fishes. And how should
you give the definition, when, according to your
own testimony, you are at an uncertainty about the
power itself, at difference among each other, and in-
consistent with yourselves ? And what must become
of the definition, when the thing to be* defined hits nti
consistency in itself ? ; .. v . •..# • • i . '< ' m

But be it so, that since the time of Plato, you are
at length agreed among yourselves concerning the
power itself; and that its work may be defined to be
praying, or fasting, or something of the same kind,
which perhaps, still lies undiscovered in the ideas of
Plato. Who shall certify us that such is truth, that
it pleases God, and that we are doing right, in safety ?
Especially when you yourselves assert that there is a
human cause which has not the testimony of the
Spirit, because of its having -been handled by philo-
sophers, and having existed m the world before Christ
came, and before the Spirit was sent down from hea-
ven. It is most certain, then, that this doctrine was
not sent down from heaven with the Spirit, but sprung
from the earth long before : and therefore, there is
need of weighty testimony, whereby it may be con^-
firmed to be true and sure.

, We will grant, therefore, that we are private indi-
viduals and few, and you public characters and many ;
we ignorant, and you the most learned ; wc stupid,


78

and you the moat acute ; we creatures of yesterday,
and yo* older than Deuealion; we neve* received,
and you approved by so many 1 ages; in a word, we
sinners, carnal, and dolts, and you awe^striking to the
very devils, for you* sanctity, spirit, and miracles. —
Yet allow us the right at least of Turks and Jews, to
ask of you that reason for your doctrine, Which your
favourite Peter has commanded you to give. We ask
it tpf you in the, tmo&t imodest way : that by we do not


1


m


i


I


by miracles, (which however we could do in oar
right, ' seeing that you yourselves require that of
others): nay, we even indulge you so far, as not to
require you to produce any example of a work, a
word, or a thought, in confirmation of your doctrine;
but only to explain to us the doctrine itself, and
merely to tell us plainly; what you would have to be
understood by it,, and what the fortm of it is. If you
will not* or cannot do this, then let us at least attetrrpt
to set forth an example of it ourselves. For yon are
as bad as the Pope himself, and his Mowers, who
say, " Y«u are to do , as we say? but not to« do*
as. we do" In the same manner you say, that that
power requires a work to be done: and so^ we shall
be set on to work, while you remain at your ease. But
will you not grant us thi% that the more you are in
numbers, the longer ybUf are in- standing, the greater
you are, the farther you are on all, accounts superior
to us, the more disgraceful it is> to yon, that we, who
in every respect are as nothing in your eyes, should
desire to learn and practise your doctrine, and that
you should not be able to prove it, either by any mi-
racle, or by the killing of a louse, or by any the least


79


motion of the Spirit, or by any the least work of
sanctity, nor even to bring forth any example of it,
either in worjk or word? And further, (a thing un-
heard of Wore) that you should net be able to tell
us plainly Pf what form the doctrine is, and hqw it is
to be understood ?— O excellent teachers of Free-will !
What are you, now, but " Sound only!" Who noj#»,
Erasmus, are they who " boast of the Spirit but shew
it not, forth ? " Who " say only, and then, wish men
to believe them?" Are not your friends they, who
axe, thus^e^toll^d .(p. .fhe skies, and who can say, no-
thing, and yet, boast oft andex^ swhgre^tthin^
We entreat, therefore, you and yours, my friend
Erasmus, that you will allow us tp, stand, aloof and
tremble with fear,, alarmed at the peril of our con-
science; or, at leasts to wav$ our assenting Jo, a . doc-
trine, which, as you yourself aee, even though you
should succeed to the utmost, and aU your argurnents
should be proved and established, is nothing but an
empty term, and a soundwg c^. these syllables-^f There
m a power of Freerwilll—There is ( a powervof £mt
will i — Moreovet, it still remains an uncertainty
among your <6wn friends themselves, whether iti be, s
term even, j or. not .1 for they differ from each, other, and
are inconsistent with 'themselves-.- It is most inkiuitoua.
therefore, nay* the greateskofr miseries, that our con-
sciences, which 1 Christ redeemed by his blood,
should be tormented by the: gho»t of one term, and
that, a term which has ne> certanity in it. And yet, if
we should not suffer ourselves to, be thus tormented^ we
should be held as guilty of unheard-of pride, for dis-
regarding so many fathers of so many ages, who have
asserted Free-will. Whereas, the truth is, as yoa


80

see from what has been said, they never denned any
thing whatever concerning Free-will : but the doctrine
of Free-will is erected under the covering, and upon
the ttesis of their name : of which, nevertheless, they
can sheW no form, and for which, they can fi* no
term : and thus they delude the world with a term,
that is a lie! • ^

a.: ti ; . . ... • ■ . :? ^ 1 1 : yi

Sect. XXXI.— And here, Erasmus, I call to your
remembrance your own advice. You just now ad-
vised— 6 that questions of this kind be omitted; and
that, Christ crucified be rather taught, and those
things which suffice unto Christian piety — but this,
we are now seeking after and doing. What are we
contending for, but that the simplicity and purity of
the Christian doctrine should prevail, and that those
things should be left and disregarded, which have
been invented, and introduced with it, by men ? But
you who give this advice, do not act according to it
yourself : nay you act contrary to it : you write Dia*
tribes: you exalt the decrees of the Popes: you
honour the authority <of men : and you try all means
to draw us aside into these strange things and con-
trary to the holy scriptures : but you consider not the
things that are necessary, how that, by so doing W€
should corrupt the simplicity and sincerity of the
scriptures, and confound them with the added inven-
tions of men. From which, we plainly discover^ that
you did not give us that advice, from you heart ; and
that you write nothing seriously, but take it for
granted that you can, by the empty bulls of your
words, turn the world as you please. Whereas you
turn them no where : for you say nothing whatever


81

but mere contradictions, in all things, and every
where. So that he would be most correct, who
should call you, the very Proteus himself, or Ver-
tumnus : or should say with Christ, 1 Physician, heal
thyself."—* The teacher, whose own faults his igno-
rance prove, has need to hide his head ! — «-"

Until, therefore, you shall have proved your
affirmative, we stand fast in our negative. And in
the judgment, even of all that' company of saints of
whom you boast, or rather, of the whole world, we
dare to say, and we glory in saying, that it is our
duty not to admit that which is nothing, and which
cannot, to a certainty, be proved what it is. And
you must all be possessed of incredible presumption
or of madness, to demand that to be admitted by us,
for no other reason, than because you,, as being many,
great, and of long standing, choose; to assert that,
which you yourselves acknowledge to be nothing.
As though it were a conduct becoming Christian
teachers, to mock the miserable people, in things
pertaining to godliness, with that which is nothing,
as if it were a matter that essentially concerned their
salvation. Where is that former acumen of the
Grecian talent, which heretofore, at least covered lies
under some elegant semblage of truth — it now lies in
open and naked words ! Where is that former dex-
terously laboured Latinity — it now thus deceives,
and is deceived, by one most empty term!

But thus it happens to the senseless, or the mali*-
cious readers of books : all those things which were
the infirmities of the fathers or of the saints, they
make to be of the highest authority : the fault, there-
fore, is not in the authors, but in the readers. It is

G


82


as though one relying on the holiness and the autho*
rity of St. Peter, should contend that all that St Peter
ever said was true: and should even attempt to
persuade us that it was truth, when, Matt, xvi., from
the infirmity of the flesh, he advised Christ not to
suffer. Or that: where he commanded Christ to
depart from him out of the ship. And many
other of those things, for which he was rebuked of
Christ

Men of this sort are like unto them, who, for the
sake of ridicule, idly say, that all things that are in
the Gospel are not true. And they catch hold of that,
John viii. : where the Jews say unto Christ, " Do
we not say well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast
a devil?" Or that: « He is guilty of death." Or
that : " We found this fellow perverting our nation,
and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar." These, do
the same thing as those assertors of Free-will, but
for a different end, and not wilfully, but from blind-
ness and ignorance ; for they, so catch at that which
the fathers, falling by the infirmity of the flesh, have
said in favour of Free-will, that they even oppose it
to that which the same fathers have elsewhere, in the
power of the Spirit, said against Free-will : nay, they
so urge and force it, that the better is made to give
way to the worse. Hence it comes to pass, that they
give authority to the worse expressions, because
they fall in with their fleshly mind ; and take it from
the better, because they make against their fleshly
mind.

But why do we not rather select the better? For
there are many such in the fathers. — To produce an
example. What can be more carnally, nay, what


83

more . impiously, sacrilegiously, and blasphemously,
spoken, than that which Hieronymus is wont to say —
4 Virginity peoples heaven, and marriage, the earth.'
As though the earth, and not heaven, wias intended
for the patriarchs, the apostles, and Christian hus-
bands. Or, as though heaven was designed for gentile
vestal virgins, who are without Christ. i And yet,
these things and others of the same kind, the sophists
collect out of the fathers that they may procure
unto them authority, carrying all things more by
numbers than by judgment. As that disgusting car-
penter of Constance did, who lately made that jewel
of his, the Stable of Augeas, a present to the public,
that there might be a something to cause nausea and
vomit in the pious and the learned.


• V


Sect XXXII. — And now, while I am making
these observations, I will reply to that remark of
yours, where you say^-< that it is not to be believed,
that God would overlook an error in his church for
so many ages, and not reveal to any one of his saints
that, which we contend for as being the grand essen-
tial of the Christian doctrine '—

In the first place, we do not say that this error
was overlooked of God in his church, or in any one
of WssaiBtst For the church is ruled by the Spirit
of God, and the saints are led by the Spirit of God,
Rom. viii. And Christ is with his church even unto
the end of the world, Matt xxviii. And the church
is the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Tim. Hi. These
things, I say, we know; for the creed which we all
hold runs thus, " I believe in the holy catholic

g 2


84


church so that, it is impossible that she can €rr
even in the least article. And even if we should
grant, that some of the elect are held in error through
the whole of their life ; yet they must, of necessity,
return into the way of truth before their death ; for
Christ says, John x., " No one shall pluck them out
of my hand." But this is the labour, this the point —
whether it can be proved, to a certainty, that those,
whom you call the church, were the church ; or
rather, whether, having been in error throughout their
whole life, they were at last brought back before
death. For this will not easily be proved, if God
suffered all those most learned men whom you adduce,
to remain in error through so long a series of ages —
Therefore, God suffered his church to be in error.

But, look at the people of Israel : where, during
so many kings and so long a time, not one king is
mentioned who never was in error. And under
Elijah the prophet, all the people and every thing
that was public among them, had so gone away into
idolatry, that he thought that he himself was the
only one left : whereas, while the kings, the princes,
the prophets, and whatever could be called the people
or the church of God was going to destruction, God
was reserving to himself " seven thousand." But who
could see these or know them to be the people of
God? And who, even now, dares to deny that God,
under all these great men, (for you make mention of
none but men in some high office, or of some great
name,), was reserving to himself a church among the
commonalty, and suffering all those to perish after
the exampie of the kingdom of Israel? For it is


H3


peculiar to God, to restrain the elect of Israel, and
to slay their fat ones : but, to preserve the refuse and
remnant of Israel, Ps. ixxviii. Isaiah L . i .

What happened under Christ himself, when alL
the apostles were offended at him, when he was denied
and condemned by all the people, and there were
only a Joseph, a Nicodemus, and a thief upon the
cross preserved? Were they then said to be the
people of God? There was, indeed, a people of
God remaining, but it was not called the people of
God; and that which was so called, was not the
people of God. And who knows who are the people
of God, when throughout the whole world, from its
origin, the state of the church was always such, that
those were called the people and saints of God who
were not so ; while others among them, who were as
a refuse, and were not called the people and saints of
God, were the people and saints of God? as is
manifest in the histories of Cain and Abel, of Ishmael
and Isaac, of Esau and Jacob.

Look again at the age of the Arians, when
scarcely five catholic bishops were preserved through-
out the whole world, and they, driven from their
places, while the Arians reigned, every where bearing
the public name and office of the church. Never-
theless, under these heretics, Christ preserved his
church : but so, that it was the least thought or con-
sidered to be the church.

Again, shew me, under the kingdom of the Pope,
one bishop discharging his office. Shew me one
council in which their transactions were, concerning
the things pertaining to godliness, and not rather,
concerning gowns, dignities, revenues, and other


B6

baubles, which they could not say, without being mad,
pertained to the Spirit ! Nevertheless they are called
the church : when all, at least who live as they do,
must be reprobates and any thing but the church.
And yet, even under them Christ preserved his
church, though it was not called the church. How
many saints must you imagine those of the inquisition
have, for some ages, burnt and killed, as John Huss-
and others, in whose time, no doubt there lived many
holy men of the same spirit J

Why do you not rather wonder at this, Erasmus,
that there ever were, from the beginning of the world,
more distinguished talents, greater erudition, more ar-
dent pursuit among the world in general than among
Christians or the people of God ? As Christ himself
declares, " The children of this world are wiser than
the children, of light," Luke xvi. What Christian
can be compared (to say nothing of the Greeks) With
Cicero alone for talents, for erudition, or for indent-
tigability ? What shall we say, then, was the preven-
tive cause that no one of them was able to attain unto
grace, who certainly exerted Free-will with its utmost
powers? Who dares say, that there was no one among
them who contended for truth with all his efforts ?
And yet we must affirm that no one of them all attained
unto it. Will you here too say, it is not to be believed,
that God would utterly leave so many great men,
throughout such a series of ages, and permit them to
labour in vain? Certainly, if Free-will were any
thing, or could do any thing, it must have appeared
and wrought something in those men, at least in some
one instance. Rut it availed nothing, nay it always
wrought in the contrary direction. Hence by this


4


87

argument only, it may be sufficiently proved, that
Free-will is nothing at all, since no proof of it can be
produced even from the beginning of the world to the
end!


Sect XXXIII. — But to return — What wonder,
if God should leave all the elders of the church to go
their own ways, who thus permitted all the nations to
go their own ways, as Paul saith Acts xvii. ? — But,
my friend Erasmus, the church of God indeed,

IS NOT SO COMMON A THING AS THIS TERM, CHURCH

of God: nor are the saints of God indeed,
every where to be found like the term,
saints of God. They are pearls and pre-
cious JEWELS, WHICH THE SPIRIT DOES NOT CAST
BEFORE SWINE ; BUT WHICH, (as THE SCRIPTURE
EXPRESSES IT,) HE KEEPS HIDDEN,. THAT THE

wicked see not the GLORY of God ! Other-
wise, if they were openly known of all, how could it
come to pass that they should be thus vexed and
afflicted in the world? As Paul saith, 1 Cor. ii., " Had
they known him, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory."

I do not say these things, because I deny that
those whom you mention are the saints and church
of God; but because it cannot be proved, if any
one should deny it, that they really are saints, but
must be left quite in uncertainty ; and because, there-
fore, the position deduced from their holiness, is not
sufficiently credible for the confirmation of my doc-
trine. I call them saints, and look upon them as
such : I call them the church, and look upon them


I


88

as such — according to the law of Charity, but not
according to the law of Faith. That is, charity,
which always thinks the best of every one, and sus-
pects not, but believeth and presumes all things for
good concerning its neighbour, calls every one who
is baptized, a saint. Nor is there any peril if she err,
for charity is liable to err ; seeing that she is exposed
to all the uses and abuses of all ; an universal hand-
maid, to the good and to the evil, to the believing
and to the unbelieving, to the true and to the raise. —
But faith, calls no one a saint but him who is declared
to be so by the judgment of God, for faith is not
liable to be deceived. Therefore, although we ought
all to be looked upon as saints by each other by the
law of charity, yet no one ought to be decreed a saint
by the law of faith, so as to make it an article of
faith that such or such an one is a saint. For in this
ivay, that adversary of God, the Pope, canonized' his
minions whom he knows not to be saints, setting him-
self in the place of God.

All that I say concerning those saints of yours, or
rather, ours, is this : — that since they haye spoken dif-
ferently from each other, those should rather be se-
lected who have spoken the l>est : that is, who have
spoken in defence of grace, and against Free-will; and
those left, who, through the infirmity of the flesh,
have borne witness of the flesh rather than of the Spi-
rit And also, that those who are inconsistent wilh
themselves, should be selected and caught at, in those
parts of their writings where they speak from the Spi-
rit, and left, where they savour of the flesh. This is
what becomes a Christian reader, and a 1 clean beast
dividing the hoof and chewing the cud/ Whereas


89

now, laying aside judgment, we swallow down all
things together, or, what is worse, by a perversion of
judgment, we cast away the best and receive the
worst, out of the same authors ; and moreover, affix
to those worst parts, the title and authority of their
sanctity ; which sanctity, they obtained, not on ac-
count of Free-will or the flesh, but on account of the
best things, even of the Spirit only.

i

Sect. XXXIV.— But you say—" what therefore
shall we do ? The church is hidden, the saints are un-
known ! What, and whom shall we believe ? Or, as
you most sharply dispute, who will certify us ? How
shall we search out the Spirit ? If we look to erudi-
tion, all are rabbins ! If we look to life, all are sin-
ners ! If we look to the scripture, they each claim it
as belonging to them ! But however, our discussion is
not so much concerning the scripture (which is not it-
self sufficiently clear,) but concerning the sense of the
scripture. And though there are men of every order
at hand, yet, as neither numbers, nor erudition, nor
dignity, is of any service to the subject, much less can
paucity, ignorance, and mean rank avail any thing." —

Well then ! I suppose the matter must be left in
doubt, and the point of dispute remain before the
judge : so that, we should seem to act with policy if
we should go over to the sentiments of the sceptics.
Unless, indeed, we were to act as you wisely do, for
you pretend that you are so much in doubt, that you
professedly desire to seek and learn the truth ; while,
at the same time, you cleave to those who assert
Free-will, until the truth be made glaringly manifest.

But no ! I here in reply to you observe, that you
neither say all, nor nothing. For we shall not search


Digitized by V^OOQle


90

out the Spirit by the arguments of erudition, of life, of
talent, of multitude, of dignity, of ignorance, of inex-
perience, of paucity, or of meanness of rank. And
yet, I do not approve of those, whose whole resource
is in a boasting of the Spirit For I had the last year,
and have still, a sharp warfare with those fanatics who
subject the scriptures to the interpretation of their
own boasted spirit On the same account also, I
have hitherto determinately set myself against the
Pope, in whose kingdom, nothing is more common,
or more generally received than this saying : — ' that
the scriptures are obscure and ambiguous ; and that
the Spirit, as the interpreter, should be sought from
the apostolical see of Rome!* than which, nothing
could be said that was more destructive ; for by means
of this saying, a set of impious men have exalted
themselves above the scriptures themselves ; and, by
the same, have done whatever pleased them; till at
length, the scriptures are absolutely trodden under
foot, and we compelled to believe and teach nothing
but the dreams of men that are mad. In a word, that
saying is no human invention, but a poison poured
forth into the world by a wonderful malice of the
devil himself, the prince of all demons.

We hold the case thus : — that the spirits are to be
tried and proved by a twofold judgment The one,
internal ; by which, through the Holy Spirit, or a pe-
culiar gift of God, any one may illustrate, and to a
certainty, judge of, and determine on, the doctrines
and sentiments of all men, for himself and his own
personal salvation : concerning which it is said, 1 Cor.
ii., " The spiritual man judgeth all things, but he himself
is judged of no man." This belongs to faith, and is
necessary for every, even private, Christian. This,


91


we have above called, 1 the internal clearness of
the holy scripture.' And it was this perhaps to
which they alluded, who, in answer to you said,
that all things must be determined by the judgment
of the Spirit. But this judgment cannot profit
another, nor are we speaking of this judgment in
our present discussion; for no one, I think r doubts
its reality.

The other, then, is the external judgment ; by which,
we judge, to the greatest certainty, of the spirits and
doctrines of all men ; not for ourselves only, but for
others also, and for their salvation. This judgment is
peculiar to the public ministry of the word and the ex-
ternal office, and especially belongs to teachers and
preachers of the word. Of this we make use, when
we strengthen the weak in faith, and when we refute
adversaries. This is what we before called, ' the ex-
ternal clearness of the holy scripture." Hence we
affirm that all spirits are to be proved m the face of
the church, by the judgment of scripture. For this
might, above all things, to be received, and most
firmly settled among Christians: — that the holy scrip-
tures are a spiritual light by far more clear than the
sun itself, especially in those things which pertain

unto salvation or necessity.

— • • -

Sect. XXXV.— But, since we have been per-
suaded to the contrary of this, by that pestilent say-
ing of the sophists, 1 the scriptures are obscure and
ambiguous ; ' we are compelled, first of all, to prove
that first grand principle of ours, by which all other
things are to be proved : which, among the sophists, is
considered absurd and impossible to be done.


.OS


Deut. xvii., that, 4 if there
* mjO;:r ia*> hard in judgment, men are to go to
trt*i <hail choose for his name, and
the priests, who are to judge of it ac-
k*w of the Lord.'
snit&. ~ according to the law of the Lord " —
htn hr<* they judge thus, if the law of the Lord
tv< externally most clear, so as to satisfy them
s \Knxnuii£ it ? Otherwise, it would have been suffi-
o«rtxc k if he had said, according to their own spirit.

it is so in every government of the people, the
ctittse* of all are adjusted according to laws. But how
couki they be adjusted, if the laws were not most cer-
tain, and absolutely, very lights to the people ? But if the
laws were ambiguous and uncertain, there would not
only be no causes settled, but no certain consistency
of manners. Since, therefore, laws are enacted thai
manners may be regulated according to a certain form,
and questions in causes settled, it is necessary that
that, which is to be the rule and standard for men in
their dealings with each other, as the law is, should of
all things be the most certain and most clear. And if
that light and certainty in laws, in profane administra-
tions where temporal things only are concerned, are
necessary, and have been, by the goodness of God,
freely granted to the whole world ; how shall he not
have given to Christians, that is to his own elect, laws
and rules of much greater light and certainty, accord-
ing to which they might adjust and settle both them-
selves and all their causes ? And that more especially,
since he wills that all temporal things should, by his,
be despised. And u if God so clothe the grass of the
field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the


93


oven," how much more shall he clothe us ? — But, let
us proceed, and drown that pestilent saying of the
sophists, in scriptures.

Psalm xix. saith, " The commandment of the
Lord is clear (or pure), enlightening the eyes." And
surely, that which enlightens the eyes, cannot l)e ob-
scure or ambiguous !

Again, Psalm cxix., ""The door of thy words giveth
light ; it giveth understanding to the simple." Here,
it is ascribed unto the words of God, that they are a
door, and something open, which is quite plain to all
and enlightens even the simple. , .

Isaiah viii. sends all questions " to the law and to
the testimony ; " and threatens that if wc do not this,
the light of the east shall be denied us.

In Malachi, the second chapter commands, ' that
they should seek the law from the mouth of the
priest, as being the messenger of the Lord of hosts.'
But a most excellent messenger indeed of the Lord of
hosts he must be, who should bring forth those things,
which were both so ambiguous to himself and so ob-
scure to the people, that neither he should know*
what he himself said, nor they what they heard !

And what, throughout the Old Testament, in the
119th Psalm especially, is more frequently said in
praise of the scripture, than that, it is itself a most cer-
tain and most clear light ? For the 1 19th Psalm cele-
brates its clearness thus : " Thy word is a lamp unto
my feet and a light unto my paths." He does not say
only — thy Spirit is a lamp unto my feet; though he
ascribes unto him also his office, saying, " Thy good
Spirit shall lead me into the land of uprightness."


9$

What was the intention of Christ, John v., in teaching
the Jews to " search the scriptures" as testifying of
him ? Was it that he might render them doubtful con-
cerning faith in him? What was their intention,
Acts xvii., who having heard Paul, searched the scrip-
tures night and day, " to see if these things were so ? "
Do not all these things prove that the apostles, as well
as Christ himself, appealed to the scriptures as the
most clear testimonies of the truth of their discourses ?
With what face then do we make them ' obscure ? '

Are these words of the scripture, I pray you, ob-
scure or ambiguous—" God created the heavens and
the earth," " The Word was made flesh," and all those
other words which the whole world receives as articles
of faith ? Whence, then, did they receive them ? Was
it not from the scriptures ? And what do those who at
this day preach ? Do they not expound and declare
the scriptures ? But if the scripture which they de-
clare, be obscure, who shall certify us that their de-
claration is to be depended on ? Shall it be certified
by another new declaration ? But who shall make that
declaration ? — And so we may go on ad infinitum.

In a word, if the scripture be obscure or ambigu-
ous, what need was! there for its being sent down from
heaven? Are we not obscure and ambiguous enough
in ourselves, without an increase of it by obscurity,
ambiguity, and darkness being sent down unto us
from heaven ? And if this be the case, what will be-
come of that of the aposde, " All scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction ?" 2 Tim. v. Nay, Paul, thou
art altogether useless, and all those things which thou
ascribest unto the scripture, are to be sought for out


96


of the fathers approved by a long course of ages, and
from the Roman see ! Wherefore, thy sentiment must
be revoked, where thou writest to Titus, chap, i., 6 that
a bishop ought to be powerful in doctrine, to exhort
and to convince the gainsayers, and to stop the mouths
of vain talkers, and deceivers of minds.' For how shall
he be powerful, when thou leavest him the scriptures in
obscurity — that is, as arms of tow and feeble straws, in-
stead of a sword ? And Christ must also, of necessity,
revoke his word where he falsely promises us^ saying,
" I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your
adversaries shall not be able to resist," Luke xxi.
For how shall they not resist when we fight against
them with obscurities and uncertainties ? And why do
you also, Erasmus, prescribe to us a form of Chris-
tianity, if the scriptures be obscure to you !

But I fear I must already be burdensome, even to
the insensible, by dwelling so long and spending so
much strength upon a point so fully clear ; but it was
necessary, that that impudent and blasphemous say-
ing, ' the scriptures are obscure/ should thus be
drowned. And you, too, my friend Erasmus, know
very well what you are saying, when you deny that
the scripture is clear, for you at the same time drop
into my ear this assertion : ' it of necessity follows
therefore, that all your saints whom you adduce, are
much less clear.' And truly it would be so. For who
shall certify, us concerning their light, if you make the
scriptures obscure ? Therefore they who deny the all-
clearness and all-plainness of the scriptures, leave us
nothing else but darkness.

* Sect XXXVII.— But here perhaps, you will


97

say— ell that you have advanced is nothing to me.
I do not say that the scriptures are every where ob-
scure (for who would be so mad ?) but that they are
obscure in this, and the like parts. — I answer : I do
not advance these things against you only, but against
all who are of the same sentiments with you. More-
over, I declare against you concerning the whole of
the scripture, that I will have no one part of it called
obscure: and, to support" me, stands that which I
have brought forth out of Peter, that the word of God
is to us a " lamp shining in a dark place. " But if
any part of this lamp do not shine, it is rather a
part of the dark place than of the lamp itself. For
Christ has not so illuminated us, as to wish that any
part of his word should remain obscure, even while
he commands us to attend to it: for if it be not
shiningly plain, his commanding us to attend to it is
in vain. i , ./ " * ■* a ^

WTierefore, if the doctrine concerning Free-will be
obscure and ambiguous, it does not belong unto Chris-
tians and the scriptures, and is therefore to be left
alone entirely, and classed among those u old wives'
fables" which Paul condemns in contentious Chris-
tians. But if it do belong unto Christians and the
scriptures, it ought to be clear, open, and manifest,
and in every respect like unto all the other most evi-
dent articles of faith. For all the articles of faith
which belong unto Christians ought to be such, as may
not only be most evident to themselves, but so de-
fended by manifest and clear scriptures against the
adversaries, as to stop the mouths of them all, that
they shall not be able in any thing to gainsay. And
this Christ has promised us, saying, " I will give you

H


Digitized-by^Google


98

a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall
not be able to resist." Bnt if our mouth be weak in
this part, that the adversaries are able to resist, his
saying, that no adversary shall be able to resist our
mouth, is false. In the doctrine of Free-will, there-
fore, we shall either have no adversaries, (which will
be the case if it belong not unto us ;) or, if it belong
unto us, we shall have adversaries indeed, but such as
will not be able to resist

But concerning the inability of our adversaries to
resist, (as that particular falls in here,) I would, by die
way, observe that it is thus : — It does not mean, that
they are forced to yield with the heart, or to confess,
or be silent For who can compel men against their
will to yield, confess their error, and be silent ? ' What
(saith Augustine), is more loquacious than vanity?'
But what is meant by their mouths being stopped,
their not having a word to gainsay, and their saying
many things, and yet, in the judgment of common
sense, saying nothing, will be best illustrated by ex-
amples. —

When Christ, Matt rxii., put the sadduces to si-
lence by proving the resurrection from the dead, out
of that scripture of Moses, Exod. Hi. " 1 am the God
of Abraham, &c, God is not the God of the dead but
of the living this they were not able to resist, nor
had they a word to gainsay. But did they, therefore,
cease from their opinion ?

And how often did he, by the most evident scrip-
tures and arguments, so confute the pharisees, that the
very people saw them to be confuted openly, and they
themselves felt it. Nevertheless, they still perse-
veringly continued his adversaries.


99

Stephen, Acts vii., so spoke, that, according to the
testimony of Luke, " they could not resist the spirit
and the wisdom with which he spake." But what did
they? Did they yield? No! from their shame of
being overcome and their inability to resist, they be-
came furious, and shutting their eyes and ears they
suborned false witnesses against him.

Behold how the same apostle, standing in the
council, confutes his adversaries, while he enumerates
to that people the mercies of God unto them from
their beginning, and proves to them, that God never
commanded a temple to be built unto him : (for it was
upon that point they then held him as guilty, and that
was the subject in dispute.) At length however, he
grants, that there was a temple built under Solomon.
But then he takes up the point in this way : " but the
Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands."
And to prove this, he brings forward Isaiah the pro-
phet, lxyi., " What is the house that ye build unto
me?" And, tell me, what could they here say against
a scripture so manifest ? Yet still, not at all moved
•by it, they stood fixed in their own opinion. Where-
fore, he then launches forth on them saying, " Ye
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the Holy Ghost, &c." Acts vii; He sarth, "ye do
resist," although they were not able to resist

But let us come to our own times. John Huss
preached thus against the Pope from Matt xvi. — »
'The gates of hell shall not prevail against my church.
Is there here any obscurity or ambiguity ? But the
gates of hell do prevail against the Pope and his, for
they are notorious throughout the world for their open
impiety and iniquities. Is there any obscurity here

h 2


100

either? Ergo : the Pope and his, are not the

CHURCH CONCERNING WHICH CHRIST SPEAKS.'

What could they gainsay here ? How could they resist
the mouth that Christ had given him ? Yet, they did
resist, and persist until they had burnt him : so far
were they from yielding to him, in heart And this is
the kind of resistance to which Christ alludes when he
saith, " Your adversaries shall not be able to resist"
He says they are " adversaries;" therefore they will
resist, for otherwise, they would not remain adversa-
ries, but would become friends. And yet he says, they
" shall not be able to resist " What is this else but
saying — though they resist, they shall not be able to
resist?

If therefore, I also shall be enabled so to refute the
doctrine of Free-will, that the adversaries shall not be
able to resist, although they persist in their opinion,
and go on to resist contrary to their conscience, I shall
have,«done enough. For I know well, by experience,
how unwilling every one is to be overcome ; and, (as
Quintillian says,) ' that there is no one, who would not
rather appear to know, than to be taught.' Although,
now-a-days, all men in all places, have this pro-
verb on their tongue, but more from use, or rather
abuse, than from heart-reality — * I am willing to
learn, and I am ready to follow what is better,
when I am taught it by admonition: I am man,
and liable to err. ' Because, under this mask, this
fair semblance of humility, they can with plausible
confidence say ; ■ I am not fully satisfied of it' 4 1 do
not comprehend it' * He does violence to the scrip-
tures. 5 < He asserts so obstinately.' And they nestle
under this confidence, taking it for granted, that no


101


one wbnld ever suspect, that souls of so much humi-
lity could, ever pertinaciously resist and determinately
impugn the known truth. Hence their not yielding in
heart, is not to be imputed to their malice, but to the
obscurity and duplicity of their arguments. 1 J *

7ri the same manner did the philosophers of the
Greeks act ; who, that the one might not appear to
give up to the other, though evidently confuted, began,
as Aristotle records, to deny first principles. In the
same way we would mildly persuade ourselves and
others, that there are in the world many good men,
who would willingly embrace the truth, if there were
but one who could plainly shew which it is ; and that,
it is not to be supposed, that so many learned men, in
such a course of ages, were all in error, and did not
know that truth. — As though we knew not, that the
world is the kingdom of Satan, where, in addition to
the natural blindness that is engendered in our flesh,
and those most wicked spirits also which have domi-
nion over us, we grow hardened in that very blindness,
arid are bound in a darkness, no longer human, but

devilish: .v !

> Sect. XXXVIII.— But you ask—" if then the
scripture be quite clear, why have men of renowned
talent, through so many ages, been blind upon this
point? —

' I answer: they have been thus blind, to the praise
attd* glory of Free-will; in order that, that highly
btafeted-of * power/ 'by which a man is able to apply
himself unto those things that pertain unto eternal sal-
vation/ might be eminently displayed ; that very exalted
power, which neither sees those things which it sees,


102

nor hears those things which it hears, and much less,
understands and seeks after them. For to this power,
applies that which Christ and the evangelists so often
bring forward out of Isaiah vi., " Hearing ye shall
hear and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see
and shall not perceive." What is this else but saying,
that Free-will, or the human heart, is so bound by the
power of Satan, that, unless it be quickened up in a
wonderful way by the Spirit of God, it cannot of itself
see or hear those things which strike against the eyes
and ears so manifestly, as to be as it were palpable by
the hand ? So great is the misery and blindness of the
human race ! Thus also the evangelists themselves,
when they wondered how it could be that the Jews were
not won over by the works and words of Christ,
which were evidently incontrovertible and undeniable,
satisfied themselves from that place of the scripture,
where it is shewn, that man, left to himself, seeing
seeth not, and hearing heareth not. And what can be
more monstrous ! " The light (saith Christ) shineth in
darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not,"
John i. ! Who could believe this ? Who hath heard
the like — that the light should shine in darkness,
and yet, the darkness still remain darkness, and not be
enlightened !

Wherefore, it is no wonder in divine things, that
through so many ages, men renowned for talent re-
mained blind. It might have been a wonder in human
things, but in divine things, it would rather have
been a wonder if there had been one here and there
that did not remain blind: that they all remained ut-
terly blind alike, is no wonder at all. For what is the
whole human race together, without the Spirit, but


103

the kingdom of the devil (as I have said) and a con-
fused chaos of darkness? And therefore it is, that
Paul, Bphes. vi., calls the devils, the rulers of this
darkness. And, 1 Con ii., he saith, thai none of the
princes of this world knew the wisdom of God. What
then must he think of the rest, who asserts that the
princes of this world are the slaves of darkness ? For
by princes, he means those greatest and highest ones,
whom you call * men renowned for talent.' And why
were all the Arians blind ? Were there not among
them men renowned for talent? Why was Christ
foolishness to the nations ? Ave there not among the
nations men renowned for talent r " God (saith Paul)
knoweth the thoughts of the wise that they are vain,"
1 Cor. iii. He chose not to say " of men," as the
text to which he refers has it, but would point to the
first and greatest among men, that from them 1 we might
form a judgment of the rest— But upon these points
more at large, perhaps, hereafter.

Suffice it thus to have premised, in Exordium,
that the scriptures are most clear, and that by them,
our doctrines /can be so defended that the adversaries
cannot resist: but those doctrines that cannot be
thus defended, are nothing to us, for they belong not
unto Christians. But if there be any who do not see
this clearness, and are blind, or offend under this sun,
they, if they be wicked, manifest how great that domi-
nion and power of Satan is over the sons of men,
when they can neither hear nor comprehend the all-
cleat' words of God, but are as one cheated by a
juggler, who is made to think that the sun is a cold
cinder, or to believe that a stone is gold. But if they
fear God, they are to be numbered among those elect,


4


104

who, to a certain degree, are led into error that the
power of God may be manifest in us, without which,
we can neither see nor do any thing whatever. For
the not comprehending the words of God, does not
as you pretend, from weakness of mind ; nay,


of God, than a weakness of mind ; for it was on ac-
count of these weak ones, and to these weak ones, that
Christ came, and it is to them he sends his word. But
it is the wickedness of Satan enthroned and reigning
in our weakness, and resisting the word of God : — for
if Satan did not do this, a whole world of men might
be converted by one word of God once heard, nor
would there be need of more.

I

Sect XXXIX. — But why do I go on enlarging?
Why do I not conclude this discussion with this Exor-
dium, and give my sentence against you in your own
words, according to that saying of Christ, Matt. xnV,
M By thy words thou shalt be justified, anjj by thy words
thou shalt be condemned? " For you say that the scrip-
ture is not quite dear upon this point And then, sus-
pending all declaration of your own sentiment, you dis-
cuss each side of the subject, what may be said for, and
what against and nothing else whatever do you do,
in the wlaOe of this, hook of yours ; which, for that
very rauout you wished to call Diatribe [The
Collation] rather thau Afophasis [The Denial], or
something of that kind ; because, you wrote with a
design lo rt&vt <*# tki**** and to assert nothing.
Hut if the sariptur* he not quite dear upon this point,
why do those ol whom vou boast not only remain
blind to their side of the subject but rashly and as


105


tools, define and assert Free-will, as though proved
by a certain and all-sure testimony of scripture, — that
numberless series of the most learned men, I mean,
whom the consent of so many ages has approved;
even unto this day, and many of whom, in addition
to an admirable acquaintance with die sacred writings,
a piety of life commends ? — Some have given, by
their blood, a testimony of that doctrine of Christ;
which they had defended by scriptures. If you say
what yon say, from your heart, it is surely a settled
point with you, that Free-will has assertors, who are
endowed with a wonderful understanding in the sacred
writings, and who even gave testimony of that doc-
trine by their blood. If this be true, they certainly had
clear scripture on their side, else, where would be
their admirable understanding in the sacred writings?
Moreover, what lightness and temerity of spirit must
it be, to shed ones blood for a matter uncertain and
obscure? This is not to be the martyrs of Christ, but
the martyrs of devils ! .

Now then, do you just set the matter before you,
and weigh it in your mind, and say, to which of the
two you consider the greater credit should be given ;
to the prejudices of so many learned men, so many
orthodox divines, so many saints, so many martyrs,
so many theologians old and recent, so many col-
leges, so many councils, so many bishops and high-
priest Popes, who were of opinion that the scriptures
are quite clear, and who (according to you) confirmed
the same by their writings and by their blood ; or to
your own private judgment, who deny that the scrip-
tures are quite clear, and who, perhaps, never spent
one single tear or sigh for the doctrine of Christ, in the


106'


whole of your life ? If you believe they were right
in their opinion, why do you not follow them in it?
If you do not believe they were right, why do you
boast of them with such a trumpeting mouth, and
such a torrent of language, as though you . would
overwhelm us head and ears with a certain storm or
flood of eloquence ? Which flood, however, will the
more heavily rush back upon your own head, whilst
my Ark is borne along in safety on the top of the
waters! Moreover, you attribute to so many and
great men, the utmost folly and temerity. For when
you speak of them as being men of the greatest under-
standing in the scripture, and as having asserted it
by their pen, by their life, and by their death; and
yet at the same time contend yourself, that the same
scripture is obscure and ambiguous, this is nothing
less than making those men most ignorant in under-
standing, and most stupid in assertion. Thus I, their
poor private despiser, do not pay them such an ill
compliment, as you do, their public flatterer. . .


Sect XL. — Here, therefore, I hold you fast in a
last-pinch syllogism (as they say). For either the one or
the other of your assertions must be false. Either that,
where you say, ' those men were admirable for their
understanding in. the sacred writings, for their life,
and for their martyrdom;' or that, where you say,
that ' the scriptures are not quite clear.' But since
you are drawn more this latter way, that is, to believe
that the scriptures are not quite clear, (for this is
what you harp upon throughout the whole of your
book), it remains evident, that it was either from your
own natural inclination


107


of flattering them, but by no means from seriousness,
that yon called those men, * men of the greatest under-
standing in the scripture, and martyrs of Christ;'
merely in order that you might blind the eyes of the
inexperienced commonalty, and make work for Luther
by loading his cause with empty words, odium, and
contempt. But, however, I aver that neither of your
assertions are true, and that both are false. For,
first of all, I aver, that the scriptures are quite dear :
and next, that those men, as far as they asserted
Free-will, were most ignorant of the sacred writings;:
and moreover, that they neither asserted it by their
life, nor by their death, but by their pen only ; and
that, while their heak^as travelling another road.

Wherefore this small part of the Disputation I
conclude thus. — By the scripture, as being obscure,
nothing ever has ihjjherto, nor ever can be defined con
cexning Free-rwiii ; according to your own testimony.
Moreover, nothing has ever been manifested in, con-
firmation of Free-will, in the lives of all the men from
the beginning of the world ; as we have proved above*
To teach, then, a something which is neither de-
scribed by one word within the scriptures, nor evi-
denced by one feet without the scriptures, is that,
which does not belong to the doctrines of Christians,
but to tine very fables of Lucian. Except, however,
rthat Luciano as ho , amuse* only with ludicrous stories
from wit and policy, deceive? and injures no one.
But these friends of ours, in a matter of importance
Which iconcerns eternal salvations madly trifle to the
perdition of souls innumerable,
i, JFhus I might herei have concluded the whole of
this distuBsion, even* with the testimony of my atfver-


108


saries making for me, and against themselves. For
no proof can be more decisive, than the very con-
fession and testimony of the guilty person against
himself. But however, as Paul commands us to
stop the mouths of vain talkers, let us now enter upon
the Discussion itself, and handle the subject in the
order in which the Diatribe proceeds : that we may,
first, confute the arguments adduced in support of
Free-will : secondly, defend our arguments that
are confuted : and, lastly, contend for the Grace of
God against Free-will.

i

'♦n« : vtnn trHL v.'jii* vd u ^V>»» vMri* >*? jfiii

DISCUSSION.


FIRST PART.

Sect. XLI. — And, first of all, let us begin regu-
larly with your definition: according to which, you
define Free-will thus,

— " Moreover I consider Free-will in this light:
that it is a power in the human will, by which, a man
may apply himself to those things which lead unto
eternal salvation, or turn away from the same." —

With a great deal of policy indeed, you have here
stated a mere naked definition, without declaring any
part of it, (as all others do) ; because, perhaps, you
feared more shipwrecks than one. I therefore am
compelled to state the several parts myself. The
thing defined itself, if it be closely examined, has a
much wider extent than the definition of it : and such
a definition, the sophists would call faulty : that is,
when the definition does not fully embrace the thing
defined. For I have shown before, that Free-will


109


cannot be applied to any one but to God only. You
may* perhaps, rightly assign to man some kind of
will, but to assign unto him Free-will in divine things,
is going too far. For the term Free-will, in the
judgment of the ears of all, means, that which can,
and does do God-ward, whatever it pleases, restrain-
able by no law and no command. But you cannot
call him free, who is a servant acting under the power
of the Lord. How much less, then, can we rightly
call men or angels free, who so live under the all-
overruling command of God, (to say nothing of sin
and death,) that they cannot consist one moment by
their own power.

Here then, at the outset, the definition of the term,
and the definition of the thing termed, militate against
each other : because the term signifies one thing, and
the thing termed is, by experience, found to be an
other. It would indeed be more properly termed
Vertible-will, or Mutable-will. For in this way
Augustine, and after him the sophists, diminished the
glory and force of the term, free; adding thereby
this detriment, that they assign vertibility to Free-will.
And it becomes us thus to speak, lest, by inflated and
lofty terms of empty sound, we should deceive the
hearts of men. And, as Augustine also thinks, we
ought to speak according to a certain rule, in sober
and proper words; for in teaching, simplicity and
propriety of argumentation is required, and not high-
flown figures of rhetorical persuasion.

Sect. XLII. — But that we might not seem to
delight in a mere war of words, we cede to that abuse,
though great and dangerous, that Free-will, means Ver-


no

tible-will. We will cede also that to Erasmus, where
he makes Free-will 1 a power of the human will ; ' (as
though angels had not a Free* will too, merely because
he designed in this book to treat only on the Free-will
of men !) We make this remark, otherwise, even in
this part, the definition would be too narrow to em-
brace the thing denned.

We come then to those parts of the definition,
which are the hinge upon which the matter turns, Of
these things some are manifest enough ; the rest shun
the light, as if conscious to themselves that they, had
every thing to fear : because, nothing ought to be
expressed more clearly, and more decisively, than a
definition; for to define obscurely, is the sameithing
as defining nothing at all. , ■

The clear parts of the definition then are these : — >
' power of human will:' and 4 by which a man
can :' also, • unto eternal salvation.' But these are
Andabatse : — ' to apply:' and, ' to those thing?
which lead :' also, * to turn away/ What shall we
divine that this 4 to apply' means? And this ' to
turn away' also ? And also what these wonda mean,
4 which pertain unto eternal salvation?' Into what dark
corner have these withdrawn their meaning ? I seem
as if I were engaged in dispute with a very Scotinian,
or with Heraclitus himself, so as to be in the way of
being worn out by a twofold labour. First, that I
shall have to find out my adversary by groping and
feeling about for him in pits and darkness, (which is
an enterprize both venturous and perilous,) and if I
do not find him, to fight to no purpose with ghosts,
and beat the air in the dark. And, secondly, if I
should bring him out into the light, that then, I shall


Ml


have to fight with him upon equal ground, when I ajn
already worn out with hunting after him.

I suppose, then, what you mean by the * power
of the human will' is this : — a power, or faculty, or
disposition, or aptitude, to will or not to will, to choose
or refuse, to approve or disapprove, and what other
actions soever belong to the will. Now then, what it
is for this 'same power ' to apply itself,' or ' to turn
away/ I do not see: unless it be the very willing
or not willing, choosing or refusing, approving or
disapproving; that is, the very action itself of the
will. But may we suppose, that this power is a kind
of medium, between the will itself and the action
itself ; such as, that by which the will itself allures
forth the action itself of willing or not willing, or
by which the action itself of willing or not willing is
allured forth? Any thing else beside this, it is im-
possible for one to imagine or think of. And if I am
deceived, let the mult be my author's who has given
the definition, not mine who examine it. For it is
justly said among lawyers, * his words who speaks
obscurely, when he can speak more plainly, are to be
interpreted against himself.' And here I wish to
blow nothing of our moderns and their subtleties,
for we must come plainly to close quarters in what
we say, for the sake of understanding arid teaching.
• And as to those words, * which lead unto eternal
salvation,' I suppose by them are meant the words
and works of God, which are offered to the human
will, that it might either apply itself to them, of turn
away from them. But I caU'fcoth the law and 1 the
gospel the words of God. By the law, works are
required ; and by the gospel, faith. For there are no


112

other things which lead either unto the grace of God,
or unto eternal salvation, but the word and the work
of God : because grace or the spirit is the life itself,
to which we are led by the word and the work

of God.

i

Sect. XLIII. — But this life or salvation is an eter-
nal matter, incomprehensible to the human capacity :
as Paul shews, out of Isaiah, 1 Cor. ii., " Eye hath not
seen nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the
heart of man to conceive, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love him." For when we
speak of eternal life, we speak of that which is num-
bered among the chiefest articles of our faith. And
what Free-will avails in this article Paul testifies,
1 Cor. ii. Also : " God (saith he) hath revealed
them unto us by his Spirit." As though he had said,
the heart of no man will ever understand or think of
any of those things, unless the Spirit shall reveal
them ; so far is it from possibility, that he should ever
apply himself unto them or seek after them.

Look at experience. What have the moat ex-
alted minds among the nations thought of a future
life, and of the resurrection ? Has it not been, that
the more exalted they were in mind, the more ridicu-
lous the resurrection and eternal life have appeared
to them ? Unless you mean to say, that those philo-
sophers and Greeks at Athens, who, Acts xvil,
called Paul, as he taught these things, a " babbler"
and a " setter forth of strange gods," were not of
exalted minds. Portius Festus, Acts xxvi., calls out
that Paul is " mad," on account of his preaching
eternal life. What does Pliny bark forth, Book vii. ?


113

What does Lucian also, that mighty genius? Were
not they men wondered at? Moreover to this day
there are many, who, the more renowned they are for
talent and erudition, the more they laugh at this
article ; and that openly* considering it a mere fable.
And certainly, no man upon earth, unless imbued
with the Holy Spirit, ever secretly knows, or believes
in,' or wishes for, eternal salvation, how much soever
he may boast of it by his voice and by his pen. And
may you and I, friend Erasmus, be free from this
Boasting leaven. So rare is a believing soul in this
article ! — Have I got the sense of this definition ?

Sect. XLIV.— Upon the authority of Erasmus,
then, Free-will, is a power of the human will, which can,
of itself will and not will to embrace the word and
work of God, by which it is to be led to those things
which are beyond its capacity and comprehension.
If then, it can will and not will, it can also love and
hate. And if it can love and hate, it can, to a certain
degree, do the law and believe the Gospel. For it
is impossible, if you can will and not will, that you-
should not be able by that will to begin some kind of
work, even though, from the hindering of another,
you should not be able to perfect it. And therefore,
as among the works of God which lead to salvation,
death, the cross, and all the evils of the world are
numbered, human will can will its own death arid
perdition. Nay, it can will all things while it can
wifl the embracing of the word and work of God.
For what is there that can be any where beneath,
above, within, and without the word and work of
God, but God himself? And what is there here left


114


to grace and the Holy Spirit? This is plainly to
ascribe divinity to Free will. For to will to embrace
the law and the Gospel, not to will sin, and to will
death, belongs to the power of God alone : as Paul
testifies in more places than one.

Wherefore, no one, since the Pelagians, has written
more rightly concerning Free-will than Erasmus.
For I have said above, that Free-will is a divine term,
and signifies a divine power. But no one hitherto,
except the Pelagians, has ever assigned to it that
power. Hence;, Erasmus by far outstrips the Pela-
gians themselves : for they assign that divinity to the
whole of Free-will, but Erasmus to the half of it only.
They divide Free-will into two parts; the power of
discerning ■, and the power of choosing; assigning the
one to reason, and the other to will ; and the sophists
do the same. But Erasmus, setting aside the power
of discerning, exalts the power of choosing alone, and
thus makes a lame, half-membered Free-will, God
himself! What must we suppose then he would
have done, had he set about describing the whole of
Free-will!

But, not contented with this, he outstrips even
the philosophers. For it has never yet been settled
among them, whether or not any thing can give
motion to itself ; and upon this point, the Platonics
and Peripatetics are divided in the whole body of
philosophy. But according to Erasmus, Free-will
not only of its own power gives motion to itself, but
* applies itself' to those things which are eternal ;
that is, which are incomprehensible to itself! A new
and unheard-of definer of Free-will, truly, who leaves
the phttosophers, the Pelagians, the sophists, and


1T5

till the rest of them, far behind him I Nor is this alii
He does not even spare himself, but dissents from,
and militates against himself, more than against all
the rest together. For he had said before, that * the
human will is utterly ineffective without grace: 9
(Wil«s perhaps this was said only in joke!) but here,
where he gives a serious definition, he says,* that
■ the human will has that power by which it can
effectively apply itself to those things wtrich pertain
unto eternal salvation ; ' that isy which are incom-
parably beyond that power. So that, in this part,
Erasmus outstrips even< himself! * .

. - , . .. in-

Sect XLV.-^Do you see, friendi Erasmus, that
by this definition, you (though unwittingly I presume,)
betray yourself, and make it manifest that you either
know nothing of these things whatever, or that, with-
out any consideration, and in a mere air or contempt,
you write upon the subject, not knowing what you
say nor whereof you affirm ? And as I said before,
you say less about, and attribute more to Free-will,
than all others put together ; for you do not describe
the whole of Free-will, and yet you assign unto it all
things. The opinion of the sophists, or at least of
the father , of them, Peter Lombard, is for more
tolerable : he says, < Free-will is the faculty of dis-
cerning, and then choosing also good, if with grace,
but evil if grace be wanting.' He plainly agrees in
sentiment with Augustine, that 1 Free-will, of its own
power, cannot do any thing but fall, not avail unto
any thing but to sin.' Wherefore Augustine also,
Book ii., against Julian, calls Free-will ' under
bondage,' rather than ' free. ' — But you make the

i 2


116


power of Free-will equal in both respects : that it
can, by its own power, without grace, both apply itself
unto good, and turn itself from evil. For you do not
imagine how much you assign unto it, by this pronoun
itself, and by itself when you say * can apply itself:'
for you utterly exclude the Holy Spirit with all his
power, as a thing superfluous and unnecessary. Your
definition, therefore, is condemnable even by the so-
phists; who, were they not so blinded by hatred and
fury against me, would be enraged at your book rather
than at mine. But now, as your intent is to oppose
Luther, all that you say is holy and catholic, even
though you speak against both yourself and them, —
so great is the patience of holy men !

Not that I say this, as approving the sentiments
of the sophists concerning Free-will, but because I
consider them more tolerable, for thev approach
nearer to the truth. For though they do not say, as
I do, that Free-will is nothing at all, yet since they
say that it can of itself do nothing without grace, they
militate against Erasmus ; nay, they seem to militate
against themselves, and to be tossed to and fro in a
mere quarrel of words, being more earnest for conten-
tion than for the truth, winch is just as sophists should
be. But now, let us suppose that a sophist of no
mean rank were brought before me, with whom I
could speak upon these things apart, in familiar con-
versation, and should ask him for his liberal and
candid judgment in this way: — ' If any one should
tell you, that that was free, which of its own power
could only go one way, that is, the bad way, and
which could ga the other way indeed, that is, the right
way, but not by its own power, nay, only by the help


117

of another — could you refrain from laughing in his
face, my friend ?' — For in this way, I will make it
appear, that a stone, or a log of wood has Free-will,
because it can go upwards and downwards ; although,
by its own power, it can go only downwards, but can
go upwards only by the help of another. And, as
I said before, by meaning at the same time the
thing itself, and also something else which may be
joined with it or added to it, I will say, consistently
with the use of all words and languages— all men are
no man, and all things are nothing !

Thus, by a multiplicity of argumentation, they at
last make Free-will, free by accident; as being that,
which may at some time be set free by another. But
our point in dispute is concerning the thing itself,
concerning the reality of Free-will. If this be what is
to be solved, there now remains nothing, let them say
what they will, but the empty name of Free-will.

The sophists are deficient also in this — they as-
sign to Free-will, the power of discerning good from
evil. Moreover, they set light by regeneration, and
the renewing of the Spirit, and give that other exter-
nal aid, as it were, to Free-will : but of this here-
after. — Let this be sufficient concerning the defini-
tion. Now let us look into the arguments that are
to exalt this empty thing of a term.

Sect. XLVL— First of all, we have that of
Ecclesiasticus xv.— " God from the beginning made
man, and left him in the hand of his own counsel.
He gave him also his commandments, and his pre-
cepts : saying, If thou wilt keep my commandments,
and wilt keep continually the faith that pleaseth me,


1 JH

they 6h all preserve thee. He hath set before thee fire
and water; and upon which thou wilt, stretch forth
thine hand. Before man is life and death, good and
evil ; and whichsoever pleaseth him, shall be given
unto him. " —

Although I might justly refuse this book, yet, ne-
vertheless, I receive it ; lest I should, with loss of
time, involve myself in a dispute concerning the books
that are received into the canon of the ' Hebrews :
which canon you do not a little reproach and deride,
when you compare the proverbs of Solomon, and the
Love-song, (as, with a double-meaning sneer, you call
it,) with the two books Esdra and Judith, the History
of Susannah, of the Dragon, and the Book of Esther;
though they have this last in their canon, and accord*
ing to my judgment, it is much more worthy of being
there, than any one of those that are considered not to)
be in the canon

But I would briefly answer you here in your own
words, 4 The scripture, in this place, is obscure and
ambiguous;' therefore, it proves nothing to a cer-
tainty. But however, since I stand in the negative,
I call upon you to produce that place which declares,
in plain words, what Free-will is, and what it can do,
And this perhaps you will do by about the time of the
Greek Calends.— In order to avoid this necessity, yoo
spend many fine sayings upon nothing ; and moving
along on the tip-toe of prudence, cite numberless
opinions concerning Free-will, and make of Pelagius
almost an evangelist. Moreover, you vamp up a four-
fold grace, so as to assign a sort of faith and charity
even to the philosophers. And also that new fable* a
three-fold law ; of nature, of works, and>of raith; so


119


as to assert with all boldness, that the precepts of the
philosophers agree with the precepts of the Gospel.
Again, yoto apply that of Psalm iv., " The light of thy
countenance is settled upon us," which speaks of the
knowledge of the very countenance of the Lord, that
is, of faith, to blinded reason. All which things toge-
ther, if taken into consideration by any Christian, must
compel him to suspect, that you are mocking and derid-
ing the doctrines and religion of Christians. For to at-
tribute these things as so much ignorance to him, who
has illustrated all our doctrines with so much dili-
gence, and stored them up in memory, appears to me
very difficult indeed. But however, I will here abstain
from open exposure, contented to wait until a more
favourable opportunity shall offer itself. Although I
entreat you, friend Erasmus, not to tempt me in this
way like one of those who say — who sees us ? For it
is by no means safe in so great a matter, to be con-
tinually mocking every one with Vertumnities of words.
But to the subject

Sect. XLVIL — Out of the one opinion concern-
ing Free-will you make three. You say — * that the
first opinion, of those who deny that man can will
good without special grace, who deny that it can begin,
who deny that it can make progress, perfect, &c, seems
to you severe, though it may be very probable/
And this you prove, as leaving to man the desire and
the effort, but not leaving what is to be ascribed to his
own power. i That the second opinion of those who
contend, that Free-will avails unto nothing but to sin,
and that grace alone works good in us, &c. is more
severe still.* And 1 that the opinion of those who say


120

that Free-will is an empty term, for that God works
in us both good and evil, is most severe" And ' that, it
is against these last that you profess to write.' —

Do you know what you are saying, friend Eras-
mus ? You are here making three different opinions
as if belonging to three different sects : because you
do not know that it is the same subject handled by
us same professors of the same sect, only by diffe-
rent persons, in a different way and in other words.
But let me just put you in remembrance, and set
before you the yawning inconsiderateness, or stupidity
of your judgment

How does that definition of Free-will, let me ask
you, which you gave us above, square with this first
opinion which you confess to be, * very probable?'
For you said that 1 Free-will is a power of the human
will, by which a man can apply himself unto good ;'
whereas here, you say and approve the saying, that
! man, without grace, cannot will good ! ' The defim-
tidn, therefore, affirms what its example denies. And
hence there are found in your Free-will both a yea
and a nay : so that, in one and the same doctrine
and article, you approve and condemn us, and ap-
prove and condemn yourself. For do you think, that
to 'apply itself to those things which pertain unto
eternal salvation/ which power your definition assigns
to Free-will, is not to do good, when, if there were so
much good in Free-will, that it could apply itself unto
good, it would have no need of grace ? Therefore, the
Free-will which you define is one, and the Free-will
you defend is another. Hence then, Erasmus, out-
stripping all others, has two Free-wills ; and they,
militating against each other ! . .


121


Sect XLVIII.— But, setting aside that Free-will
which the definition defines, let us consider that which
the opinion proposes as contrary to it You grant,
that man, without special grace, cannot will good :
(for we are not now discussing what the grace of God
can do, but what man can do without grace :) you
grant, then, that Free-will cannot will good. This is
nothing else but granting that it cannot ' apply itself
to those things which pertain unto eternal salvation, '
according to the tune of your definition. Nay, you
say a little before, ' that the human will after sin, is so
depraved, that having lost its liberty, it is compelled
to serve sin, and cannot recal itself into a better state. '
And if I am not mistaken, you make the Pelagians to
be of this opinion. Now then I believe, my Proteus
has here no way of escape : he is caught and held
fast in plain words : — ' that the will, having lost its
liberty, is tied and bound a slave to sin.' O noble
Free-will ! which, having lost its liberty, is declared by
Erasmus himself, to be the slave of sin ! When
Luther asserted this, * nothing was ever heard of so
absurd; 1 'nothing was more useless, than that this
paradox should be proclaimed abroad*! " So much so,
that even a Diatribe must be written against him !

But perhaps no one will believe me, that these
things are said by Erasmus. If the Diatribe be read
in this part, it will be admired : but I do not so much
admire it. For he who does not treat this as a serious
subject, and is not interested in the cause, but is in
mind alienated from it, and grows weary of it, cold m
it, and disgustedgwith it, how shall not such an one
everywhere speak absurdities, follies, and contrarie-
ties, while, as one drunk or slumbering over the cause,


122


he belches out in the midst of his snoring, It is so ! it
is not so ! just as the different words sound against his
ears ? And therefore it is, that rhetoricians require a
feeling of the subject in the person discussing it. Much
more then does theology require such a feeling, that
it may make the person vigilant, sharp, intent, pru-
dent, and determined. ... j

If therefore Free-will without grace, when it has
lost it liberty, is compelled to serve sin and cannot
will good, I should be glad to know, what that desire
is, what that endeavour is, which that first ' probable
opinion' leaves it. It cannot be a good desire or a
good endeavour, because it cannot will good, as the
opinion affirms, and as you grant Therefore, it is an
evil desire and an evil endeavour that is left, which,
when the liberty is lost, is compelled to serve sin.-*
But above all, what, I pray, is the meaning of this
saying : ' this opinion leaves the desire and the en-
deavour, but does not leave what is to be ascribed to
its own power.' Who can possibly conceive in his
mind what this means ? If the desire and the endea-
vour be left to the power of Free-will, how are they
not ascribed to the same ? If they be not ascribed to
it, how can they be left to it ? Are then that desire
and that endeavour before grace, left to grace itself
that comes after, and not to Free-will, so as to be at
the same time left, and not left, to the same Free-will?
If these things be not paradoxes, or rather enormities,
men pray what are enormities ?


Sect. XLIX. — But perhaps the Diatribe is
dreaming this, that between these two 1 can will good '
and 1 cannot will good' there may be a medium ;


123

seeing that, to will is absolute, both in respect of good,
and evil. So that thus, by a certain logical subtlety,
we may steer clear of the rocks, and say, in the will
of man there is a certain willing, which cannot indeed
will good without grace, but which, nevertheless, being
without grace, does not immediately will nothing but
evil, but is a sort of mere abstracted willing, vertible,
upwards unto good by grace, and downwards unto
evil by sin. But then, what will become of that
which you have said, that, 4 when it has lost its liberty
it is compelled to serve sin?' What will become of
that desire and endeavour which are left ? Where will
be that power of ' applying itself to those things which
pertain unto eternal salvation?' For that power of ap*
prying itself unto salvation, cannot be a mere willing,
anless the salvation itself be said to be a nothing.
Nor, again, can that desire and endeavour be a mere
willing; for desire must strive and attempt something,
(as good perhaps,) and cannot go forth into nothing,
nor be absolutely inactive.

In a word, which way soever the Diatribe turn*
itself, it cannot keep clear of inconsistencies and
contradictory assertions ; nor avoid making that very
Free-will which it defends, as much a bond-captive as
it is a bond-captive itself. For, in attempting to li-
berate Free-will, it is so entangled, that it is bound,
together with Free-will, in bonds indissoluble. . V

Moreover, it is a mere logical figment that in man
there is a medium, a mere willing, nor can they who
assert this prove it ; it arose from an ignorance of
things and an observance of terms. As though the
thing were always in reality, as it is set forth in terms;
and there are with the sophists many such misconcep-


124

tions. Whereas the matter rather stands as Christ
saith, " He that is not with me is against me." He
does not say, He that is not with me is yet not against
me, but in the medium. For if God be in us,. Satan is
from us, and it is present with us to will nothing but
good. But if God be not in us, Satan is in us, and it
is present with us to will evil only. Neither God nor
Satan admit of a mere abstracted willing in us ; but,
as you yourself rightly said, when our liberty is lost we
are compelled to serve sin : that is, we will sin and
evil, we speak sin and evil, we do sin and evil.

Behold then ! invincible and all-powerful truth
has driven the witless Diatribe to that dilemma, and
so turned its wisdom into foolishness, that whereas, its
design was to speak against me, it is compelled to
speak for me against itself ; just in the same way as
Free-will does any thing good ; for when it attempts
so to do, the more it acts against evil the more it acts
against good. So that the Diatribe is, in saying,
exactly what Free-will is in doing. Though the whole
Diatribe itself, is nothing else but a notable effort of
Free-will, condemning by defending, and defending by
condemning : that is, being a twofold fool, while it
would appear to be wise.

This, then, is the state of the first opinion com-
pared with itself : — it denies that a man can will any
thing good; but yet that a desire remains; which de-
sire > however, is not his own!

Sect. L. — Now let us compare this opinion with
the remaining two.

The next of these, is that opinion ' more severe still/
which holds,' that Free-will avails unto nothing but to


135

sin. And this indeed is Augustine's opinion , ex-
pressed, as well in many other places, as more es-
pecially, in his book " Concerning the Spirit and
the letter/' in (if I mistake not) the fourth or fifth
chapter, where he uses those very words.

The third, is that < most severe ' opinion ; -that
Free-will is a mere empty term, and that every thing
which we do, is done from necessity under the
bondage of sin. — It is with these two that the Dia-
tribe conflicts.

I here observe, that perhaps it may be, that I am
not able to discuss this point intelligibly, from not being
sufficiently acquainted with the Latin or with the Ger-
man. But I call God to witness, that I wish nothing else
to be said or to be understood by the words of the last
two opinions than what is said in the first opinion : nor
does Augustine wish any thing else to be understood,
nor do I understand any thing else from his words,
than that which the first opinion asserts : so that, the
three opinions brought forward by the Diatribe are
with me nothing else than my one sentiment. For
when it is granted and established, that Free-wity
having once lost its liberty, is compulsively bound to
the service of sin, and cannot will any thing good ; I,
from these words, can understand nothing else than
that Free-will is a mere empty term, whose reality is
lost. And a lost liberty, according to my grammar, is n6
liberty at all. And to give the name of liberty to that
which has no liberty, is to give it an empty term. If I
am wrong here, let him set me right who can. If these
observations be obscure or ambiguous, let him who
can, illustrate and make them plain. I for my part,
cannot call that health which is lost, health ; and if I


126

were to ascribe it to one who was sick, I should think
I was giving him nothing else than an empty name.

fttt away with these enormities of words. For
who would bear such an abuse of the manner of
speaking, as that we should say a man has Free-will,
and yet at the same time assert, that when that liberty
is once lost, he is compulsively bound to the service of
gin) and cannot will any thing good ? These things are
contrary to common sense, and utterly destroy the
common manner of speaking. The Diatribe 19 rather
to be condemned, which in a drowsy way, foists forth
its own words without any regard to the words of
others. It does not, I say, consider what it is, nor
how much it is to assert, that man, when his liberty 4s
lost, is compelled to serve sin and cannot will any
thing good. For if it were at all vigilant or observant,
it would plainly see, that the sentiment contained in
the three opinions is one and the same, which it makes
to'be diverse and contrary. For if a man, when he
has lost his liberty, is compelled to serve sin, and can-
not will good, what conclusion concerning him can be
more justly drawn, than that he can do nothing but
sin, and will evil ? And such a conclusion, the sophists
themselves would draw, even by their syllogisms.
Wherefore, the Diatribe, unhappily, contends against
the last two opinions, and approves the first ; whereas,
that is precisely the same as the other two ; and thus
again, as usual, it condemns itself and approves my
sentiments, in one and the same article.

i

Sect LI. — Let us now come to that passage in
Ecclesiasticus, and also with it compare that first
1 probable opinion/ The opinion saith, ' Free-will


127

cannot will good/ The passage in Ecclesiasticus is
adduced to prove, that Free-will is something, and
can do something. Therefore, the opinion which is to
be proved by Ecclesiasticus, asserts one thing; and
Ecclesiasticus, which is adduced to prove it, asserts
another. This is just as if any one, setting about to
prove that Christ was the Messiah, should adduce a
passage which proves that Pilate was governor of
Syria, or any thing else equally discordant. It is in the
same way that Free-will is here proved. But, not to
mention my having above made it manifest, that no-
thing clear or certain can be said or proved concerning
Free-will, as to what it is, or what it can do, it is
worth while to examine the whole passage thoroughly.

First he saith, " God made man in the begin*
ning." Here he speaks of the creation of man; nor
does he say any thing, as yet, concerning either Free-
will or Uie commandments.

Then he goes on, " and left him in the hand of
his own counsel." And what is here ? Is Free-will
built upon this ? But there is not here any mention of
commandments, for the doing of which Free-will is
required ; nor do we read any thing of this kind in the
creation of man. If any thing be understood by " the
hand of his own counsel," that should rather be under-
stood which is in Gen. i. and ii. : that man was made
lord of all things that he might freely exercise dominion
over them : and as Moses saith, " Let us make man,
and let him have dominion over the fishes of the sea:"


nor can any thing else be proved from those words :
for it is in these things only that man may act of his
own will, as being subject unto him. And moreover,
he calls this man's counsel, in contradiction as it


were to the counsel of God. But after this, when he
has said, that man was made and left thus in the hand
of his own counsel — he adds,

"He added moreover his commandments and his
precepts." Unto what did he add them? Certainly
unto that counsel and will of man, and over and
above unto that constituting of his dominion over
other things. By which commandments he took from
man the dominion over one part of his creatures,
(that is, over the tree of knowledge of good and evil,)
and willed rather that jie should -nor be free. — Having
added the commandments, he then comes to the wfli
of man towards God and towards the things of God.

" If thou wilt keep the commandments they shall
preserve thee," &c. From this part, therefore, " If
thou wilt," begins the question concerning Free-will.
So that, from Ecclesiasticus we learn, that man is
constituted as divided into two kingdoms. — The one,
is that in which he is led according to his own will and
counsel, without the precepts and the commandments
of God: that is, in those things which are beneath
him. Here he has dominion and is lord, as " left in
the hand of his own counsel." Not that God so leaves
him to himself, as that he does not co-operate with
him ; but he commits unto him the free use of things
according to his own will, without prohibiting him by
any laws or injunctions. As we may say, by way of
similitude, the Gospel has left us in the hands of our
own counsel, that we may use, and have dominion
over all things as we will. But Moses and the Pope
left us not in that counsel, but restrained us by laws,
and subjected us rather to their own will. — But in the
other kingdom, he is not left in the hand of his own


Digitized by


189

counsel, but is directed and led according to the will
and counsel of God. And as, in his own kingdom, he is
led according to his own will, without the precepts of
another ; so, in the kingdom of God, he is led accord-'


[J


And this is what Ecclesiasticus means, when he says, 1
" He added moreover his commandments and his pre-
cepts : saying, If thou wilt," &c.

If, therefore, these things be satisfactorily clear, I
have made it fully evident, that this passage of Eccle-
siasticus does not make for Free-will, but directly
against it : seeing that, it subjects man to the precepts
and will of God, and lakes from him his Free-will.
But tf they be not satisfactorily clear, I have at least
made it manifest, that this passage cannot make for
Free-will; seeing that, it may be understood in a
sense different from that which they put upon it, that
is, in my sense already stated, which is not absurd, but
most holy and in harmony with the whole scripture.
Whereas, their sense militates against the whole scrip-
ture, and is fetched from thte one passage only, con-
trary to the tenor of the whole scripture. I stand
therefore secure in the good sense, the negative of
Free-will, until they shall have confirmed their strained
and forced affirmative. - .

When, therefore, Ecclesiasticus says, " If thou
wilt keep the commandments, and keep the faith that
pleaseth me, they shall preserve thee," I do not see
that Free-will can be proved from those words. For,
" if thou wilt," is a verb of the subjunctive mood,
which asserts nothing : as the logicians say, 1 a con-
ditional asserts nothing indicatively :' such as, if the
devil be God, he is deservedly worshipped : if an as**

K


130


fly, an ass has wings : so also, it there be Free-will,
grace is nothing at all. Therefore, if Ecclesiasticus
had wished to assert Free-will, he ought to have spoken
thus:— man is able to keep the commandments of
God, or, man has the power to keep the com-
mandments.

• i |

Sect. LIL— But here the Diatribe will sharply
retort — " Ecclesiasticus by saying, " if thou wilt keep,"
signifies that there is a will in man, to keep, and not to
keep : otherwise, what is the use of saying unto him
who has no will, " if thou wilt ? " Would it not be ri-
diculous if any were to say to a blind man, if thou
wilt see, thou mayest find a treasure ? Or, to a deaf
man, if thou wilt hear, I will relate to thee an excel-
lent story ? This would be to laugh at their misery"—

I answer : These are the arguments of human rea-
son, which is wont to shoot forth many such sprigs of
wisdom. Wherefore, I must dispute now, not with
Ecclesiasticus, but with human reason concerning a
conclusion ; for she, by her conclusions and syllogisms,
interprets and twists the scriptures of God just which
way she pleases. But I will enter upon this willingly,
and with confidence, knowing, that she can prate no-
thing but follies and absurdities ; and that more espe-
cially, when she attempts to make a shew of her wis-
dom in these divine matters.

First then, if I should demand of her how it can
be proved, that the freedom of the will in man is sig-
nified and inferred, wherever these expressions are
used, 1 if thou wilt,' 4 if thou shalt do,' * if thou
shalt hear ; ' she would say, because the nature of
words, and the common use of speech among men,


131

seem to require it. Therefore, she judges of divine
things and words according to the customs and things
of men ; than which, what can be more perverse ;
seeing that, the former things are heavenly, the latter
earthly. Like a fool, therefore, she exposes herself,
making it manifest that she has not a thought con-
cerning God but what is human.

But, what if I prove, that the nature of words ; and
the use of speech even among men, are not always of
that tendency, as to make a laughing stock of those to
whom it is said, < if thou wilt,' * if thou shalt do it/
1 if thou shalt hear ? ' — How often do parents thus
play with their children, when they bid them come
to them, or do this or that, for this purpose only,
that it may plainly appear to them how unable they
are to do it, and that they may call for the aid of the
parent's hand? How often does a faithful physician
bid his obstinate patient do or omit those things which
are either injurious to him or impossible, to the intent
that, he may bring him, by an experience, to the
knowledge of his disease or his weakness ? And what
is more general and common, than to use words of
insult or provocation, when we would show either
enemies or friends, what they can do and what they
cannot do?

I merely go over these tilings, to shew Reason her
own conclusions, and how absurdly she tacks them' to
the scriptures : moreover, how blind she must be not to
see, that they do not always stand good even in hu^
man words and things. But the case is, if she see it to
be done once, she rushes on headlong, taking it for
granted, that it is done generally in all the things of

k 2


ids

God and men, thus making, according to die way of
her wisdom, of a particularity an universality.

If then God, as a father, deal with us as with
sons, that he might shew us who are in ignorance our
impotency, or as a faithful physician, that he might
make our disease known unto us, or that he might in-
sult his enemies who proudly resist his counsel ; and
for this end, say to us by proposed laws (as being
those means by which he accomplishes his design the
most effectually) 1 do,' ' hear,' ' keep,' or, c if thou
wilt,' 1 if thou wilt do,' ' if thou wilt hear ; ' can this
be drawn herefrom as a just conclusion — therefore,
either we have free power to act, or God laughs at us?
Why is this not rather drawn as a conclusion — there-
* fore, God tries us, that by his law he might bring us to
a knowledge of our impotency, if we be his friends ; or,
he thereby righteously and deservedly insults and de-
rides us, if we be his proud enemies. For this, as Paul
teaches, is the intent of the divine legislation. Because
human nature is blind, so that it knows not its own
powers, or rather its own diseases. Moreover, being
proud, it self-conceitedly imagines, that it knows and
can do all things. To remedy which pride and igno-
rance, God can use no means more effectual than his
proposed law : of which we shall say more in its
place: let it suffice to have thus touched upon it
here, to refute this conclusion of carnal and absurd
wisdom s — * if thou wilt 1 — therefore thou art able to
will freely.

The Diatribe dreams, that man is whole and
sound, as, to human appearance, he is in his own
affairs; and therefore, from these words, 4 if thou


133

wilt,' < if thou wilt do,' « if thou wilt hear, 1 it pertly
argues, that man, if his will be not free, is laughed at.
Whereas, the scripture describes man as corrupt and
a captive ; and added to that, as proudly contemning
and ignorant of his corruption and captivity : and
therefore, by those words, it goads him and rouses
him up, that he might know, by a real experience,
how unable he is to do any one of those things.

Sect. LIII. — But I will attack the Diatribe itself.
If thou really think, O Madam Reason ! that these
conclusions stand good, 1 If thou wilt — therefore
thou hast a free power,' why dost thou not follow the
same thyself? For thou sayest, according to that
1 probable opinion,' that Free-will cannot will any
thing good. By what conclusion then can such a sen-
timent flow from this passage also, ' if thou wilt keep,'
when thou sayest that the conclusion flowing from
this, is, that man can will and not will freely? What!
can bitter and sweet flow from the same fountain?
Dost thou not here much more deride man thyself,
when thou sayest, that he can keep that, which he can
neither will nor choose ? Therefore, neither dost thou,
from thy hqart, believe that this is a just conclusion,
* if thou wilt — therefore thou hast a free power,' al-
though thou contendest for it with so much zeal, or, if
thou dost believe it, then thou dost not, from thy heart,
say, that that opinion is * probable,' which holds that
man cannot will good. Thus, reason is so caught in
the conclusions and words of her own wisdom, that
she knows not what she says, nor concerning what
she speaks : nay, knows nothing but that which it is
most right she should know— that Free-will is -de-


136

if that conclusion of yours be admitted, it will make
for the Pelagians against all the others ; and conse-
quently, it makes against the, Diatribe; which, in this
passage, is stabbed by its own sword !

m Sect LIV. — Bu*r, as I said at first, so I say
ftere : this passage of Ecclesiasticus is in favour of no
one of those who assert Free-will, but makes against
them all. For that conclusion is not to be admitted,
1 If thou wilt — therefore thou art able;' but those
words, and all like unto them, are to be understood
thus : — that by them man is admonished of his im-
potency; which, without such admonitions, being
proud and ignorant, he would neither know nor feel.

For he here speaks, not concerning the first man
only, but concerning any man : though it is of little
consequence whether you understand it concerning the
first man, or any others. For although the first man
was not impotent, from the assistance of grace, yet,
by this commandment, God plainly shews him how
impotent he would be without grace. For if that
man, who had the Spirit, could not by his new will,
will good newly proposed, that is, obedience, because
the Spirit did not add it unto him, what can we do
without the Spirit toward the good that is lost ! In
this man, therefore, it is shewn, by a terrible example
for the breaking down of our pride, what our Free-
will can do when it is left to itself, and not continually
moved and increased by tjie Spirit of God. He could
do nothing to increase the Spirit who had its first-
fruits, but fell from the first-fruits of the Spirit
What then can we who are fallen, do towards the
first-fruits of the Spirit which are taken away ! Espe-


i


137

cially, since Satan now reigns in us with full power,
who cast him down, not then reigning in him, but by
temptation alone! Nothing can be more forcibly *
brought against Free-will, than this passage of Eccle-
siasticus, considered together with the fall of Adam.
Bnt we have no room for these observations here,
an opportunity may perhaps offer itself elsewhere.
Meanwhile, it is sufficient to have shewn, that Eccle-
siasticus, in this place, says nothing whatever in favour
of Free-will (which nevertheless they consider as their
principal authority), and that these expressions and
the like, ' if thou wilt/ ' if thou hear/ < if thou do/
shew, not what men can do, but what they ought
to do!

Sect LV. — Another passage is adduced by our
Diatribe out of Gen. iv. : where the Lord saith unto
Cain, " Under thee shall be the desire of sin, and
thou shalt rule over it." — " Here it is shewn (saith the
Diatribe) that the motions of the mind to evil can be
overcome, and that they do not carry with them the
necessity of sinning." —

These words, 4 the motions of the mind to evil
can be overcome/ though spoken with ambiguity,
yet, from the scope of the sentiment, the consequence,
and the circumstances, must mean this : — that Free-
will, has the power of overcoming its motions to evil ;
and that, those motions do not bring upon it the
necessity of sinning. Here, again, what is there
excepted which is not ascribed unto Free-will ? What
need is there of the Spirit, what need of Christ, what
need of God, if Free-will can overcome the motions
of the mind to evil ! And where, again, is that ' pro-


138


bable opinion ' which affirms, that Free-will cannot
so much as will good ? For here, the victory over
evil is ascribed unto that, which neither wills nor
wishes for good. The inconsiderateness of our Dia-
tribe is really — too — too bad !

Take the truth of the matter in a few words. As
I have before observed, by such passages as these, it
is shewn to man what he ought to do, not what he
can do. It is said, therefore, unto Cain, that he
ought to rule over his sin, and to hold its desires in
subjection under him. But this he neither did nor
could do, because he was already pressed down under
the contrary dominion of Satan. — It is well known,
that the Hebrews frequently use the future indicative
for the imperative: as in Exod. xx., " Thou shalt
have none other gods but me," " Thou shalt not kill,"
u Thou shalt not commit adultery," and in number-
less other instances of the same kind. Otherwise, if
these sentences were taken indicatively, as they really
stand, they would be promises of God ; and as he
cannot lie, it would come to pass that no man could
sin ; and then, as commands, they would be unneces-
sary ; and if this were the case, then our interpreter
would have translated this passage more correctly
thus : — " let its desire be under thee, and rule thou
over it," Gen. iv. Even as it then ought also to be
said concerning the woman, " Be thou under thy
husband, and let him rule over thee," Gen. iii. But that
it was not spoken indicatively unto Cain is manifest
from this : — it would then have been a promise.
Whereas, it was not a promise ; because, from the
conduct of Cain, the event proved the contrary.


139

Sect. LVI. — The third passage is from Moses,
Deut. xxx. " I have set before thy face life and
death, choose what is good, &c." — " What words
(says the Diatribe) can be more plain ? It leaves to
man the liberty of choosing." —

I answer : What is more plain, than, that you
are blind ? How, I pray, does it leave the liberty of
choosing ? Is it by the expression • choose' ? — There-
fore, as Moses saith * choose,' does it immediately
come to pass that they do choose ? Then, there is no
need of the Spirit. And as you so often repeat and
inculcate the same things, I shall be justified in re-
peating the same things also. — If there be a liberty
of choosing, why has the * probable opinion ' said that
* Free-will cannot will good?' Can it choose not
willing or against its trill? But let us listen to the
similitude, —

— " It would be ridiculous to say to a man stand-
ing in a place where two ways met, Thou seest two
roads, go by which thou wilt, when one only was
open/' —

This, as I have before observed, is from the
arguments of human reason, which thinks, that a man
is mocked by a command impossible : whereas I say,
that the man, by this means, is admonished and
roused to see his own impotency. True it is, that we arc
in a place where two ways meet, and that one of them
only is open, yea rather neither of them is open. But by
the law it is shewn how impossible the one is, that is,
to good, unless God freely give his Spirit ; and how
wide and easy the other is, if God leave us to our-
selves. Therefore, it would not be said ridiculously,
but with a necessary seriousness, to the man thus


standing in a place where two ways meet, 'goby
which thou wilt,' if he, being in reality, impotent wished
to seem to himself strong, or contended that neither
way was hedged up.

Wherefore, the words of the law are spoken, not
that they might assert the power of the will, but that
they might illuminate the blindness of reason, that it
might see that its own light is nothing, and that the
power of the will is nothing. " By the law (saith
Paul) is the knowledge of sin," Rom. iiL : he does
not say — is the abolition of, Or the escape from sin.
The whole nature and design of the law is to give
knowledge only, and that of nothing else save of sin,
but not to discover or communicate any power what-
ever. For knowledge is not power, nor does it com-
municate power, but it teaches and shews how great
the impotency must there be, where there is no power.
And what else can the knowledge of sin be, but the
knowledge of our evil and infirmity ? For he does not
say — by the law comes the knowledge of strength or
of good. The whole that the law does, according to*
the testimony of Paul, is to make known sin.

And this is the place, where I take occasion to
enforce this, my general reply : — that man, by the
words of the law, is admonished and taught what he
ought to do y not what he can do : that is, that he is
brought to know his sin, but not to believe that he
has any strength in himself. Wherefore, friend Eras-
mus, as often as you throw in my teeth the words of
the law, so often I throw in yours that of Paul, " By
the law is the knowledge of sin," — not of the power of
the will. Heap together, therefore, out of the large
Concordances all the imperative words into one chaos,


141


provided that, they be not words of the promise but
of the requirement of the law only, and I will imme-
diately declare, that by them is always shewn what
men ought to do, not what they can do, or do do. And
even common grammarians and every little school-boy
in the street knows, that by verbs of the imperative
mood, nothing else is signified than that which ought
to be done, and that, what is done or can be done, is
expressed by verbs of the indicative mood.

Thus, therefore, it comes to pass, that you theolo-
gians, are so senseless and so many degrees below
«ven school-boys, that when you have caught hold of
one imperative verb you infer an indicative sense, as
though what was commanded were immediately and
even necessarily done, or possible to be done. But
how many slips are there between the cup and the lip !
So that, what you command to be done, and is there-
fore quite possible to be done, is yet never done at
all. Such a difference is there, between verbs impera-
tive and verbs indicative, even in the most common
and easy things. Whereas you, in these things which
are as far above those, as the heavens are above the
earth, so quickly make indicatives out of imperatives,
that the moment you hear the voice of him command
rag, saying, " do," " keep," " choose," you will have,
that it is immediately kept, done, chosen, or fulfilled,
or, that our powers are able so to do.

• ■

Sect. LVII. — In the fourth place, you adduce from
Deut. iii. and xxx. many passages of the same kind
which speak of choosing, of turning away from, of
keeping ; as, 1 If thou shalt keep/ * if thou shalt turn
away from,' ' if thou shalt choose.' — " All these ex-


previous ^vou say) are made use of preposterously
if there be not a Free-will in man unto good " — ■

I answer : And you, friend Diatribe, preposte-
rously enough also conclude from these expressions
the freedom of the will. You set out to prove the
endeavour and desire of Free-will only, and you have
adduced no passage which proves such an endeavour.
But now, you adduce those passages, which, if your
conclusion hold good, will ascribe all to Free-will.

Let me here then again make a distinction, be-
tween the words of the scripture adduced, and the
conclusion of the Diatribe tacked to them. The words
adduced are imperative, and they say nothing but
what ought to be done. For, Moses does not say,
1 thou hast the power and strength to choose.' The
words * choose,' ' keep,' * do/ convey the precept ' to
keep/ but they do not describe the ability of man.
But the conclusion tacked to them by that wisdom-
aping Diatribe, infers thus : — therefore, man can do
those things, otherwise the precepts are given in vain.
To whom this reply must be made : — Madam Dia-
tribe, you make a bad inference, and do not prove
your conclusion, but the conclusion and the proof
merely seem to be right to your blind and inadvertent
self. But know, that these precepts are not given
preposterously nor in vain ; but that proud and blind
man might, by them, learn the disease of his own im-
potency, if he should attempt to do what is com-
manded. And hence your similitude amounts to no-
thing where you say,

— " Otherwise it would be precisely the same, as if
any one should say to a man who was so bound that
lie could only stretch forth his left arm, — Behold !


143


thou hast on thy right hand excellent wine, thou hast
on thy left poison ; on which thou wilt stretch forth
thy hand

These your similitudes I presume are particular
favourites of yours. But you do not all the while
see^ that if the similitudes stand good, they prove
much more than you ever purposed to prove, nay,
that they prove what you deny and would have to he
disproved : — that Free-will can do all things. For
by the whole scope of your argument, forgetting what
you said, * that Free-will can do nothing without
grace/ you actually prove that Free-will can do all
things without grace. For your conclusions and simi-
litudes go to prove this : — that either Free-will can
of itself do those things which are said and com-
manded, or they are commanded in vain, ridiculously,
and preposterously. But these are nothing more than
the old songs of the Pelagians sung over again, which
even the sophists have exploded, and which you have
yourself condemned. And by all this your forgetful-
ness and disorder of memory, you do nothing but
evince how little you know of the subject, and how
little you are affected by it. And what can be worse
in a rhetorician, than to, be continually bringing for-
ward things wide of the nature of the subject, and not
only so, but to be always declaiming against his sub-
ject and against himself?

* ■ ■

* * Sect. LVIII. — Wherefore I observe, finally, the
passages of scripture adduced by you are imperative,
and neither prove any thing, nor determine any thing
concerning the ability of man, but enjoin only what
things are to be done, and what are not to be done.


144


naa* «wr refusions or appendages, and simili-
TMAas t "lupr prove any thing they prove this : — that
,v ts«— im do all things without grace. Whereas
tob^ >tni <iitti mot undertake to prove, nay, it is by you
taateu* Wherefore, these your proofs are nothing
&Ef the most direct confutations.
For, (that I may, if I can, rouse the Diatribe from
ss lethargy) suppose I argue thus — If Moses say,
• Choose the and keep the commandment,' unless man
be able to choose life and keep the commandment,
Moses gives that precept to man ridiculously. — Have
I by this argument proved my side of the subject, that
Free-will can do nothing good, and that it has no
external endeavour separate from its own power?
Nay, on the contrary, I have proved, Iry an assertion
sufficiently forcible, that either man can choose life
ami keep the commandment as it is commanded, or
Moses is a ridiculous law-giver. But who would dare
to assert that Moses was a ridiculous law-giver P It
K>Uows therefore* that man can do the things that are

Thfc is the way in which the Diatribe argues
throughout* contrary to its own purposed design;
wherein, it promised that it would not argue thus, but
would prove a certain endeavour of Free-will; of
which however, so far from proving it, it scarcely
makes mention in the whole string of its arguments;
nay, it proves the contrary rather; so that it may
itself be more properly said to affirm and argue all
things ridiculously.

And as to its making it, according to its own ad-
duced similitude, to be ridiculous, that a man ' hav-
ing his right arm bound, should be ordered to stretch


Digitized by


145

forth his right hand when he could only stretch forth his
left. — Would it, I pray, be ridiculous, if a man, having
both his arms bound, and proudly contending or igno-
rantly presuming that he could do any thing right or
left, should be commanded to stretch forth his hand
right and left, not that his captivity might be derided,
but that he might be convinced of his false presump-
tion of liberty and power, and might be brought co
know his ignorance of his captivity and misery ?

The Diatribe is perpetually setting before us such
a man, who either can do what is commanded, or at
least knows that he cannot do it. Whereas, no such
man is to be found. If there were such an one, then
indeed, either impossibilities would be ridiculously
commanded, or the Spirit of Christ would be in vain.

The scripture, however, sets forth such a man, who
is not only bound, miserable, captive, sick, and dead,
but who, by the operation of his lord Satan, tp
his other miseries, adds that of blindness : so that
he believes he is free, happy, at liberty, powerful,
whole, and alive. For Satan well knows that if men
knew their own misery he could retain no one of them
in his kingdom : because, it could not be, but that
God w ould immediately pity and succour their known
misery and calamity : seeing that, he is with so much
praise set forth, throughout the whole scripture, as
being near unto the contrite in heart, that Isaiah lxi.
testifies, that Christ was sent " to preach the Gospel
to the poor, and to heal the btoken hearted."

Wherefore, the work of t Satan is, so to hold men,
that they come not to know their misery, but that
they presume that they can do all things which are
enjoined. But the work of Moses the legislator is the


14tf


contrary, even that by the law he might discover trj
man his misery, in order that he might prepare him;
thus bruised and confounded with the knowledge of
himself, for grace, and might send him to Christ to
Ihj saved. Wherefore, the office of the law is not ridi-
culous, but above all things serious and necessary.

Those therefore who thus far understand these
things, understand clearly at the same time, that the
Diatribe, by the whole string of its arguments effects
nothing whatever ; that it collects nothing from the
scriptures but imperative passages, when it under-
stands, neither what they mean nor wherefore they
are spoken ; and that, moreover, by the appendages
of its conclusions and carnal similitudes, it mixes up
such a mighty mass of flesh, that it asserts and proves
more than it ever intended, and argues against itself.
So that there were no need to pursue particulars any
further, for the whole is solved by one solution, seeing
that the whole depends on one argument. But how-
ever, that it may be drowned in the same profusion
in which it attempted to drown me, I will proceed to
touch upon a few particulars more.

Sect. LIX.— There is that of Isaiah i., "If ye
be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the fat of the
land :" — * Where, (according to the judgment of the
Diatribe,) if there be no liberty of the will, it would
have been more consistent, had it been said, If I will;
if I will not.'

The answer to this may be plainly found in what
has been said before. Moreover, what consistency
would there then have been, had it been said, ' If I
will, ye shall eat the fat of the land ?' Does the


Diatribe from its so highly exalted wisdom imagine,
that the fat of the land can be eaten contrary to the
will of God ? Or, that it is a rare and new thing, that
we do not receive of the fat of the land but bv the
will of God?

So also, that of Isaiah xxi. " If ye will inquire,
inquire ye : return, come."—" To what purpose is
it (saith the Diatribe) to exhort those who are not
in any degree in their own power? It is just like
saying to one bound in chains, Move thyself to this
place." —

Nay, I reply, to what purpose is it to cite passages
which of themselves prove nothing, and which, by the
appendage of your conclusion, that is, by the perver-
sion of their sense, ascribe all unto Free-will, when
a certain endeavour only was to be ascribed unto it,
and to be proved ?

— " The same may be said (you observe) concerning
that of Isaiah xlv., " Assemble yourselves and come."
" Turn ye unta me and ye shall be saved." And that
also of Isaiah lii., " Awake ! awake !" " shake thy-
self from the dust," " loose the bands of thy neck."
And that of Jeremiah xv., " If thou wilt turn, then
will I turn thee ; and if thou shalt separate the pre-
cious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth." And
Zechariah more evidently still, indicates the endeavour
of Free-will and the grace that is prepared for him
who endeavours, " Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of
hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord."
Zech. i."—

Sect. LX.— In these passages, our friend Dia-
tribe makes no distinction whatever, between the voice
of the Law and the voice of the Gospel : because,

L 2


-vtsoodk it » so Dtimi and 50 ignorant, that it knows
not * hat is the Uw and what is the Gospel. For out
of all the passages from Isaiah, it produces no one w^ri
01* the law, save this, i If thou wilt all the rest is qj#-
pel, by which, as the word of offered grace, the brui«*tJ
and afflicted are called unto consolation. Whereas*,
the Diatribe makes them the words of the law. Bat,
I pray thee, tell me, what can that man do in theo-
logical matters, and the sacred writings, who has not
even gone so far as to know what is Law and what h
Gospel, or, who, if he does know, condemns the ob-
servance of the distinction between them ? >Such an
one must confound all things, heaven with hell, and life
with death ; and will never labour to know any thing
of Christ. Concerning which, I shall put my friend
Diatribe a little in remembrance, in what follows.

Look then, first, at that of Jeremiah and Zecha-
riah. " If thou wilt turn, then will I turn thee f
and, " turn ye unto me, and I will turn unto you."
Does it then follow from " turn ye" — therefore, ye
are able to turn ? Does it follow also from " Love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart" — therefore, thou
art able to love with all thine lieart ? If these argu-
ments stand good, what do they conclude, but that
Free-will needs not the grace of God, but can do all
things of its own power ? And then, how much more
right would it be that the words should be received
as they stand — * If thou shalt turn, then will I also
turn thee?' That is; — if thou shalt cease from sin-
ning, I also will cease from punishing ; and if thou
shalt be converted and live well, I also will do well
unto thee in rurniug awav thy captivity* and thy evils.
Out even in this wa\\ it does not follow, that man
can turn by his own power, nor do the words imply


149

this; but they simply say, "'If thou wilt turn;" by
which, a man is admonished of what he ought to do.
And when he has thus known and seen what he aught
to do but cannot do, he would ask how he is to do it,
were it not for that Leviathan of the Diatribe (that
is, that appendage and conclusion it has here tacked
on) which comes in and between and says, — * therefore,
if man cannot turn of his own power, " turn ye" is
spoken in vain.' But, of what nature all such conclu-
sion is, and what it amounts to, has been already fully
shewn.

It must, however, be a certain stupor or lethargy
which can hold, that the power of Free-will is con-
firmed by these words " turn ye," " if thou wilt
turn," and the like, and does not see, that for the same
reason, it must be confirmed by this scripture also,
" Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart," seeing that, the meaning of him who com-
mands and requires is the same in both instances. For
the loving of God, is not less required than our con-
version, and the keeping of all the commandments ;
because, the loving of God is our real conversion.
And yet, no one attempts to prove Free-will from
that command 1 to love,' although from those words
M if thou wilt," " if thou wilt hear," " turn ye," and
the like, all attempt to prove it If therefore from that
word, " love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," it
does not follow that Free-will is any thing or can do
any thing, it is certain that it neither follows from
these words, "if thou wilt," " if thou wilt hear," " turn
ye," and the like, which either require less, or require
with less force of importance, than these words " Love
God !." " Love the Lord ! "


150


Whatever, therefore, is said against drawing a
conclusion in support of Free-will from this word
u love God," the same must be said against drawing a
conclusion in support of Free-will from every other
word of command or requirement. For, if by the
command 1 to love,' the nature of the law onlv be
shewn, and what we ought to do, but not the power of
the will or what we can do, but rather, what we cannot
do, the same is shewn by all the other scriptures of
requirement. For it is well known, that even the
schoolmen, except the Scotinians and moderns, assert,
that man cannot love God with all his heart There-
fore, neither can he perform any one of the other pre-
cepts, for all the rest, according to the testimony of
Christ, hang on this one. Hence, by the testimony
even of the doctors of the schools, this remains as a
settled conclusion : — that the words of the law do not
prove the power of Free-will, but shew what we ought
to do, and what we cannot do

Sect LXI. — But our friend Diatribe, proceeding
to still greater lengths of inconsiderateness, not only
infers from that passage of Zechariah, " turn ye unto
me," an indicative sense, but also, goes on with zeal to
prove therefrom, the endeavour of Free-will, and the
grace prepared for the person endeavouring.

Here, at last, it makes mention of the endeavour,
and by a new kind of grammar, * to turn,' signifies,
with it, the same thing as * to endeavour:' so that
the sense is, " turn ye unto me," that is, endeavour
ye to turn ; " and I will turn unto you," that is, I
will endeavour to turn unto you : so that, at last, it
attributes an endeavour even unto God, and perhaps,


151


would have grace to be prepared for him upon his
endeavouring : for if turning signify endeavouring in
one place, why not in every place?

Again, it says, that from Jeremiah xv., " If thou
shalt separate the precious from the vile," not the en-
deavour only, but the liberty of choosing is proved ;
which, before, it declared was ' lost,' and changed
into a ' necessity of serving sin.' You see, therefore,
that in handling the scriptures, the Diatribe has a
Free-will with a witness : so that, with it, words of the
same kind are compelled to prove endeavour in one
place, and liberty in another, just as the turn suits.

But, to away with vanities, the word turn is
used in the scriptures in a twofold sense, the one legal,
the other evangelical. In the legal sense, it is the
voice of the exactor and commander, which requires,
not an endeavour, but a change in the whole life. In
this sense Jeremiah frequently uses it, saying, " Turn
ye now every one of you from his evil way:" and,
" Turn ye unto the Lord : " in which, he involves the
requirement of all the commandments ; as is sufficiently
evident. In the evangelical sense, it is the voice of the
divine consolation and promise, by which nothing is
demanded of us, but in which the grace of God is
offered unto us. Of this kind is that of Psalm cxxvi.,
4< When the Lord shall turn again the captivity of
Zion;" and that of Psalm cxvi., " Turn again into
thy rest, O my soul." Hence, Zechariah, in a very
brief compendium, has set forth the preaching both of
the law and of grace. It is the whole sum of the
law, where he saith, " Turn ye unto me ; " and it is
grace, where he saith, " I will turn unto you." Where-
fore, as much as Free-will is proved from this word,


152


" Love the Lord," or from any other word of parti-
cular law, just so much is it proved from this word of
summary law, " turn ye." It becomes a wise reader
of the scriptures, therefore, to observe what are words
of the law and what are words of grace, that he
might not be involved in confusion like the unclean
sophists, and like this sleepily-yawning Diatribe.

m

Sect. LXII. — Now observe, in what way the
Diatribe handles that single passage in Ezekiel xviii.
" As I live, saith the Lord, I desire not the death of
a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his
wickedness and live/' In the first place — " if (it says)
the expressions " shall turn away," " hath done,"
" hath committed," be so often repeated in this
chapter, where are they who deny that man can do
any thing? " —

Only remark, I pray, the excellent conclusion ! It
set out to prove the endeavour and the desire of Free
will, and now it proves the whole work, that all thini
are fulfilled by Free-will ! Where now, I pray, v
those who need grace and the Holy Spirit? For
pertly argues thus: saying, 'Ezekiel says, u If i
wicked man shall turn away, and shall do righteou
ness and judgment, he shall live." Therefore,
wicked man does that immediately and can do
Whereas Ezekiel is signifying, what ought to be do
but the Diatribe understands it as being done, l
having been done. Thus teaching us, by a new kind
grammar, that ought to be is the same a^ having 4e»
being exacted the same as being performed, and be,
required the same as being rendered.

And then, Uiut voice of the all -sweet Gospc


153

desire not the death of a sinner," &c. it perverts
thus : — " Would the righteous Lord deplore that death
of his people which he himself wrought in them ? If,
therefore, he wills not our death, it certainly is to be
kid to the charge of our own will, if we perish. For,
what can you lay to the charge of him, who can do
nothing either of good or evil ? " —

It was upon this same string thatPelagius harped
long ago, when he attributed to Free-will not a desire
nor an endeavour only, but the power of doing and
fulfilling all things. For as I have said before, these
conclusions prove that power, if they prove any thing ;
so that, they make with equal, nay with more force
against the Diatribe which denies that power of Free-
will, and which attempts to establish the endeavour
only, than they do against us who deny Free-will alto-
gether. — But, to say nothing of the ignorance of the
Diatribe, let us speak to the subject.

It is the Gospel voice, and the sweetest consola-
tion to miserable sinners, where Ezekiel saith, " I de-
sire not the death of a sinner, but rather, that he
should be converted and live," and it is in all respects
like unto that of Psalm xxx. ; " For his wrath is but
for a moment, in his willingness is life." And that of
Psalm xxxvi., " How sweet is thy loving-kindness, O
God." Also, " For I am merciful." And that of
Christ, Matt, xi., " Come unto me, all ye . that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." And
also that of Exodus xx., " I will shew mercy unto
thousands of them that love me."

And what is more than half of the holy scripture,
but mere promises of grace, by which, mercy, life,
peace, and salvation, are extended from God unto


156


desperation and impenitency, unless God soon come
in to help, and to call back, and. raise up by the word
of promise. For the concern of God in promising
grace to recal and raise up the sinner, is itself an ar-
gument sufficiently great and conclusive, that Free-will,
of itself, cannot but go on to worse, and (as the scrip-
ture saith) * fall down to hefl : ' unless, indeed, you
imagine that God is such a trifler, that he pours forth
so great an abundance of the words of promise, not
from any necessity of them unto our salvation, but
from a mere delight in loquacity ! Wherefore, you
see, that not only all the words of law stand against
Free-will, but also, that all the words of the promise
utterly confute it; that is, that the whole scripture
makes directly against it.

Hence, you see, this word, " I desire not the
death of a sinner," does nothing else but preach and
offer divine mercy to the world, which none receive
with joy and gratitude but those who are -distressed
and exercised with the fears of death, for they are they
in whom the law has now done its office, that is, in
bringing them to the knowledge of sin. But they who
have not yet experienced the office of the law, who do
not yet know their sin nor feel the fears of death,
despise the mercy promised in that word.

Sect. LXIV. — But, why it is, that some are
touched by the law and some are not touched, why
some receive the offered grace and some despise it,
that is another question which is not here treated
on by Ezekiel; because, he is speaking of the

PREACHED AND OFFERED MERCY OF GoD, not of
that SECRET AND TO BE FEARED WILL OF GoD,


Digitized by


157


who, according to his own counsel, ordains whom,
and such as, he will to be receivers and partakers of
the preached and offered mercy : which will, is not
to be curiously inquired into, but to be adored with
reverence as the most profound secret of the divine
Majesty, which he reserves unto himself and keeps
hidden from us, and that, much more religiously than
the mention of ten thousand Corycian caverns.

But since the Diatribe thus pertly argues — " Would
the righteous Lord deplore that death of his people,
which he himself works in them ? This would seem
quite absurd " —

I answer, as I said before, — we are to argue in
one way, concerning the will of God preached, re-
vealed, and offered unto us, and worshipped by us ;
and in another, concerning God himself not
preached, not revealed, not offered unto us, and wor-
shipped by us. In whatever, therefore, God hides
himself and will be unknown by us, that is nothing unto
us : and here, that sentiment stands good — ' What is
above us, does not concern us.'

And that ho one might think that this distinction
is my own, I follow Paul, who, writing to the Thessa-
lonians concerning Antichrist, saith, 2 Thess. ii., 11 that
he should exalt himself above all that is God, as
preached and worshipped : n evidently intimating,
'that any one might be exalted above God as he is
preached and worshipped, that is, above the word and
worship of God, by which he is known unto us and
has intercourse with us. But, above God not wor-
shipped and preached, that is, as he is in our own na-
ture and majesty, nothing can be exalted, but all things
are under his powerful hand.


158


God, therefore, is to be left to remain in his own
nature and majesty ; for in this respect, we have no-
thing to do with him, nor does he wish us to have, iu
this respect, any thing to do with him : but we have
to do with him as far as he is clothed in, and deli-
vered to us by, his word; for in that he presents him-
self unto us, and that is his beauty and his glory, in
which the Psalmist celebrates him as being clothed.
Wherefore, we say, that the righteous God does not
1 deplore that death of his people which he himself
works in them ; ' but he deplores that death which he
finds in his people, and which he desires to remove
from them. For God preached desires this: — that,
our sin and death being taken away, we might be
saved, " He sent his word and healed them," Psalm
cvii. But God hidden in majesty neither de-
plores, nor takes away death, but works life and death
and all things : nor has he, in this character, defined
himself in his word, but has reserved unto himself, a
free power over all things.

But the Diatribe is deceived by its own igno-
rance, in not making a distinction between God
preached and God hidden : that is, between the
word of God and God himself. God does many things
which he does not make known unto us in his word;
he also wills many things which he does not in his
word make known unto us that he wills. Thus, he
does not 4 will the death of a sinner,' that is, in his
word; but he wills it by that will inscrutable. But in
the present case, we are to consider his word only, and
to leave that will inscrutable : seeing that, it is by his
word, and not by that will inscrutable, that we are to
be guided ; for who can direct himself according to a


Digitized by


159

will inscrutable and incomprehensible ? It is enough
to know only, that there is in God a certain will in-
scrutable : but what, why, and how far that will wills*
it is not lawful to inquire, to wish to know, to be con-
cerned about, or to reach unto — it is only to be
feared and adored !

Therefore it is rightly said, ' if God does not de-
sire our death, it is to be laid to the charge of our own
will, if we perish: ' this, I say, is right, if you speak of
God preached. For he desires that all men should
be saved, seeing that, he comes unto all by the word
of salvation, and it is the fault of the will which does
not receive him : as he saith, Matt xxiii., " How
often would I have gathered thy children together,
and thou wouldest not!" But why that Majesty
does not take away or change this fault of the will in
all, seeing that, it is not in the power of man to do
it ; or why he lays that to the charge of the will, which
the man cannot avoid, it becomes us not to inquire,
and though you should inquire much, yet you will
never find out: as Paul saith, Ronuix., w Who art
thou that repliest against God I " — Suffice it to have
spoken thus upon this passage of Ezekiel. Now let us
proceed to the remaining particulars.

Sect. LXV. — The Diatribe next argues — " If
what is commanded be not in the power of every one,
all the numberless exhortations in the scriptures, and
also all the promises, threatenings, expostulations, re-
proofs, asseverations, benedictions and maledictions,
together with all the forms of precepts, must of neces-
sity stand coldly useless." —

The Diatribe is perpetually forgetting the subject


f


Digitize


d by Google


160


point, and going on with that which is contrary to its
professed design : and it does not see, that all these
things make with greater force against itself than
against us. For from all these passages, it proves the
liberty and ability to fulfil all things, as the very words
of the conclusion which it draws necessarily declare :
whereas, its design was, to prove ' that Free-will is
that, which cannot will any thing good without grace,
and is a certain endeavour that is not to be ascribed to
its own powers' But I do not see that such an en-
deavour is proved by any of these passages, but that
as I have repeatedly said already, that only is re-
quired which ought to be done : unless it be needful
to repeat it again, as often as the Diatribe harps upon
the same string, putting off its readers with a useless
profusion of words.

About the last passage which it brings forward
out of the Old Testament, is that of Deut. xxx. " This
commandment which I command thee this day, is not
above thee, neither is it far off. Neither is it in hea-
ven, that thou shtaddest say, Who of us shall ascend
up into heaven and bring it down unto us, that we
may hear it and do it. But the word is very nigh
unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou
mayest do it." The Diatribe contends—* that it is de-
clared by this passage, that what is commanded is not
only placed in us, but is down-hill work, that is, easy
to be done, or at least, not difficult. —

I thank the Diatribe for such wonderful erudi-
tion ! For if Moses so plainly declare, that there is
in us, not only an ability, but also a power to keep all
the commandments with ease, why have I been toiling
all this time ! Why did I not at once produce this


Digitized by


161

passage and assert Free-will before the whole world !
What need now of Christ! What need of the
Spirit ! We have now found a passage which stops the
mouths of all, and, which not only plainly asserts the
liberty of the will, but teaches that the observance of
all the commandments is easy ! — What need was there
for Christ to purchase for us, even with his own blood,
the Spirit, as though necessary, in order that he might
make the keeping of the commandments easy unto
us, when we were already thus qualified by nature !
Nay, here, the Diatribe itself recants its own asser-
tions, where it affirmed, that 1 Free-will cannot will
any thing good without grace,' and now affirms, that
Free-will is of such power, that it can, not only will
good, but keep the greatest, nay, all the command-
ments, with ease.

Only observe, I pray, what a mind does, where
the heart is not in the cause, and how impossible it is
that it should not expose itself ! And can there still
be any need to confute the Diatribe ? Who can more
effectually confute it, than it confutes itself! This
truly, is that beast that devours itself ! How true is the
proverb, that 1 A liar should have a good memory ! '

I have already spoken upon this passage of Deu-
teronomy, I shall now treat upon it briefly ; if indeed,
there be any need so far to set aside Paul, who,
x., so powerfully handles this passage. — You


MB


Ml


•PI!


ble to speak, either of the ease or difficulty, of the
power or impotency of Free-will or of man, either to
keep or not to keep the commandments. Except
that those, who entangle the scriptures in their own
conclusions and cogitations, make them obscure and


162

ambiguous to themselves, that they might thus make
of them what they please. But, if you cannot
turn your eyes this way, turn your ears, or feel out
what I am about to say with your hands. — Moses
saith, " it is not above thee," " neither is it far from
thee," " neither is it in heaven," " neither is it beyond
the sea." Now, what is the meaning of this, " above
thee?" What, of this "far from thee?' What, of
this « in heaven?" What, of this "beyond the sea?"
Will they then make the most commonly used term*
and even grammar so obscure unto us, that we shall
not be able to speak any thing to a certainty, merely
that they might establish their assertion, that the
scriptures are obscure ?

According to my grammar, these terms signify
neither the quality nor the quantity of human powers,
but the distance of places only. For " above thee"
does not signify a certain power of the will, but a
certain place which is above us. So also "far from
thee," " in heaven," " beyond the sea," do not signify
any thing of ability in man, but a certain place at a dis-
tance above us, or on our right hand, or on our left hand,
or behind us, or over against us. Some one may perhaps
laugh at me for disputing in so plain a way, thus set-
ting, as it were, a ready-marked-out lesson before such
great men, as though they were little boys learning their
alphabet, and I were teaching them how to put
syllables together — but what can I do, when I see
darkness to be sought for in a light so clear, and
those studiously desiring to be blind, who boastingly
enumerate before us such a series of ages, so much
talent, so many saints, so many martyrs, so many
doctors, and who with so much authority boast of


Digitized by


163

this passage, and yet will not deign to look at the
syllables, or to command their cogitations so far, as
to give the passage of which they boast one conside-
ration ? Let the Diatribe now go home and consider,
and say, how it can be, that one poor private indivi-
dual should see that, which escaped the notice of so
many public characters, and of the greatest men of so
many ages. This passage surely, even in the judg-
ment of a school-boy, proves that they must have
been blind not very unfrequently !

What therefore does Moses mean by these most
plain and clear words, but, that he has worthily per-i
formed his office as a faithful law-giver; and that
therefore, if all men have not before their eyes and
do not know all the precepts which are enjoined, the
fault does not rest with him ; that they have no place
left them for excuse, so as to say, they did not know,
or had not the precepts, or were obliged to seek them
elsewhere ; that if they do not keep them, the fault
rests not with the law, or with the law-giver, but with
themselves, seeing that the law is before them, and
the law-giver has taught them ; and that they have no
place left for excusation of ignorance, only for accu-
sation of negligence and disobedience? It is not,
saith he, necessary to fetch the laws down from hea-
ven, nor from lands lieyond the sea, nor from afar,
nor can you frame as an excuse, that you never had
them nor heard them, for you have them nigh unto
you ; they are they which God hath commanded,
which you have heard from my mouth, and which you
have had in your hearts and in your mouths continu-
ally ; you have heard them treated on by the Levites in
the midst of you, of which this my word and book

M 2


164


are witnesses ; this, therefore only remains— that you
do them. — What, I pray you, is here attributed unto
Free-will ? What is there, but the demanding that it
would do the laws which it has, and the taking away
from it the excuse of ignorance and the want of the
laws ?

These passages are the sum of what the Diatribe
brings forward out of the Old Testament in support of
Free-will, which being answered, there remains no-
thing that is not answered at the same time, whether
it have brought forward, or wished to bring forward
more ; seeing that, it could bring forward nothing but
imperative, or conditional, or optative passages, by
which is signified, not what we can do, or do do, (as I
have so often replied, to the so often repeating
Diatribe) but what we ought to do, and what is re-
quired of us, in order that we might come to th£ know-
ledge of our impotency, and that there might be
wrought in us the knowledge of our sin. Or, if they
do prove any thing, by means of the appended con-
clusions and similitudes invented by human reason,
they prove this : — that Free-will is not a certain small
degree of endeavour or desire only, but a full and free
ability and power to do all dungs, without the grace
of God, and without the Holy Spirit.

Thus, nothing less is proved by the whole sum of
that copious, and again and again reiterated and in-
culcated argumentation, than that which was aimed
at to be proved, that is, that probable opinion;
by which, Free-will is denned to be of that impotency,
\ that it cannot will any thing good without grace, but
is compelled into the service of sin ; though it has an
endeavour, which, nevertheless, is not to be ascribed to


165

its own powers.' — A monster truly! which, at the same >
time, can do nothing by its own power, and yet, has
an endeavour within its own power : and thus, stands
upon the basis of a most manifest contradiction !

Sect. LXVL— We now come to the NEW TES-
TAMENT, where again, are marshalled up in de-
fence of that miserable bondage of Free-will, an host
of imperative sentences, together with all the auxilia-
ries of carnal reason, such as, conclusions, similitudes,
&c. called in from all quarters. And if you ever saw
represented in a picture, or imagined in a dream, a
king of flies attended by his forces armed with lances
and shields of straw or hay, drawn up in battle array
against a real and complete army of veteran warriors
—it is just thus, that the human dreams of the Dia-
tribe are drawn up in battle array against the hosts of
the words of God !

First of all, marches forth in front, that of Matt,
xxiii., as it were the Achilles of these flies, " O Jeru-
salem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered
thy children together, and thou wouldest not." — 14 If
all things be done from necessity (says the Diatribe)
might not Jerusalem here have jusdy said in reply to
the Lord, Why dost thou weary thyself with useless
tears? If thou didst not will that we should kill the
prophets, why didst thou send them ? Why dost thou
lay that to our charge, which, from will in thee, was
done of necessity by us ?" — thus the Diatribe. —

I answer: Granting in the mean time that this
conclusion and proof of the Diatribe is good and true,
what, I ask, is proved thereby ? — that * probable opi-
nion/ which affirms that Free-will cannot will good ?


166


Nay, the will is proved to be free, whole, and able to
do all things which the prophets have spoken ; and
such a will the Diatribe never intended to prove. But
let the Diatribe here reply to itself. If Free-will can-
not will good, why is it laid to its charge, that it did
not hear the prophets, whom, as they taught good, it
could not hear by its own powers ? Why does Christ
in useless tears weep over those as though they could
have willed that, which he certainly knew they could
not will ? Here, I say, let the Diatribe free Christ
from the imputation of madness, according to its
' probable opinion,* and then my opinion is immedi-
ately set free from that Achilles of the flies. There-
fore, that passage of Matthew either forcibly proves
Free-will altogether, or makes with equal force against
the Diatribe itself, and strikes it prostrate with its
own weapon !

' But I here observe as I have observed before, that
we are not to dispute concerning that secret will
of the divine Majesty; and that, that human temerity,
which, with incessant perverseness, is ever leaving
those things that are necessary, and attacking and
trying this point, is to be called off and driven back,
that it employ not itself in prying into those secrets of
Majesty which it is impossible to attain unto, seeing
that, they dwell in that light which is inaccessible; as
Paul witnesseth, 1 Tim. vi. But let the man acquaint
himself with the God incarnate, or, as Paul saith,
with Jesus crucified, in whom are all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge — but hidden ! for in him, there
is an abundance botli of that which he ought to
know, and of that which he ought not to know.
' The God incarnate, then, here speaks thus—" I


Digitize


d by Google


167


would and thou wouldst not ! " lie God incar-
nate, I say, was sent for this purpose— that he might
desire, speak, do, suffer, and offer unto all, all things
that are necessary unto salvation, although he should
offend many, who, being either left or hardened by that
secret will of Majesty, should not receive him thus de-
siring, speaking, doing, and offering : as John L saith,
" The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not." And again, " He came unto
his own, and his own received him not." It belongs
also to this same God incarnate, to weep, to lament,
and to sigh over the perdition of the wicked, even
while 'that will of Majesty, from purpose, leaves and
reprobates some, that they might perish. Nor does it
become us to inquire why he does so, but to revere
that God who can do, and wills to do, such things.

Nor do I suppose that any one will cavillingly
deny, that that will which here saith, " How often
would I ! " was displayed to the Jews, even before God
became incarnate ; seeing that, they are accused of
having slain the prophets, before Christ, and having
thus resisted his will. For it is well known among
Christians, that all things were done by the prophets in
the name of Christ to come, who was promised that
he. should become incarnate: so that, whatever has
been offered unto men by the ministers of the word
from the foundation of the world, may be rightly
called, the Will of Christ

Sect. LX VII. — But here Reason, who is always
very knowing and loquacious, will say,— This is an
excellently invented scape-gap ; that, as often as we
are pressed close by the force of arguments, we might


168


ran back to that to-be-revered will of Majesty, and
thus silence the disputant as soon as he becomes trou-
blesome; just as astrologers do, who, by their in-
vented epicycles, elude all questions concerning the
motion of the whole heaven. —

j I answer : It is no invention of mine, but a com-
mand supported by the holy scriptures. Paul, Rom.
ix., speaks thus : " Why therefore doth God find
fault; for who hath resisted his will? Nay, but
O man, who art thou that contendeth with God?"
" Hath not the potter power ? " And so on. And be-
fore him, Isaiah lviil, " Yet they seek me daily, and
desire to know my ways, as a nation that did righte-
ousness : they ask of me the ordinances of justice, and
desire to approach unto God."

. From these words it is, I think, sufficiently ma-
nifest, that it is not lawful for men to search into
that will of Majesty. And this subject is of that na-
ture, that perverse men are here the most led to pry
into that to-be-revered will, and therefore, there is here
the greatest reason why they should be exhorted to
silence and reverence. In other subjects, where those
filings are handled for which we can give a
and for which we are commanded to give
do not this. And if any one still persist in searching
into the reason of that will, and do not choose to
hearken to our admonition, we let him go on, and,
like the giants, fight against God; while we look on to
see what triumph he will gain, persuaded in ourselves,
that he will do nothing, either to injure our cause or to
advance his own. For it will still remain unalterable,
that he must either prove that Free-will can do all
things, or that the scriptures which he adduces must


169


make against himself. And, which soever of the two
shall take place, he vanquished, lies prostrate, while
we as conquerors " stand upright ! "

Sect. LXVIII. — Another passage is that of
Matt. xix. ; " If thou wilt enter into life, keep the
commandments."—" With what face, (says the Dia-
tribe,) can " if thou wilt" be said to him who has not
a Free-will?"—

To which I reply: — Is, therefore, the will, ac-
cording to this word of Christ, free ? But you wish to
prove, that Free-will cannot will any thing good ; and
that, without grace, it of necessity serves sin. With
what face, then, do you now make will wholly free ?

The same reply will be made to that also—" If
thou wilt be perfect," " If any one will come after
me," " He that will save his life," " If ye love me,"
"If ye shall continue." In a word, as I said before,
(to ease the Diatribe s labour in adducing such a load
of words) let all the conditional if 8 and all the impe-
rative verbs be collected together. — " All these pre-
cepts (says the Diatribe) stand coldly useless, if no-
thing be attributed to the human will. How ill does
that conjunctive if accord with mere necessity?" —

I answer : If they stand coldly useless, it is your
fault that they stand coldly useless, who, at one time,
assert that nothing is to be attributed to Free-will,
while you make Free-will unable to will good, and
who, on the contrary, here make the same Free-will
able to will all good ; nay, you thus make them to
stand as nothing at all ; unless, with you, the same
words stand coldly useless and warmly useful at the
same time, while they at once assert all things and
deny all things.


170


I wonder how any author can delight in repeat-
ing the same things so continually, and to be as
continually forgetting his subject design : unless per-
haps, distrusting his cause, he wishes to overcome his
adversary by the bulk of his book, or to weary him
out with the tedium and toil of reading it. By what
conclusion, I ask, does it follow, that will and power
must immediately take place as often as it is said, * If
thou wilt/ ' If any one will,' ' If thou shalt ? ' Do
we not most frequently imply in such expressions im-
potency rather, and impossibility ? For instance. — If
thou wilt equal Virgil in singing, my friend Mevius,
thou must sing in another strain. — If thou wilt surpass
Cicero, friend Scotus, instead of thy subtle jargon,
* thou must have the most exalted eloquence. If thou
wilt stand in competition with David, thou must of
necessity produce psalms like his. Here are plainly
signified things impossible to our own powers, al-
though, by divine power, all these things may be done.
So it is in the scriptures, that by such expressions, it
might be shewn what we cannot do ourselves, but
what can be done in us by the power of God.

Moreover, if such expressions should be used in
those things which are utterly impossible to be done,
as being those which God would never do, then, in-
deed, they might rightly be called either coldly use-
less, or ridiculous, because they would be spoken in
vain. Whereas now, they are so used, that by them,
not only the impotency of Free-will is shewn, by
which no one of those things can be done, but it is also
signified, that a time will come when all those things
shall be done, but by a power not our own, that is,
by the divine power ; provided that, we folly admit,
that in such expressions, there is a certain significa-


171


turn of things possible and to be done : as if any one
should interpret them thus :— " If thou wilt keep the
commandments, (that is, if thou shalt at any time
have the will to keep the commandments, though
thou wilt have it, not of thyself, but of God, who
giveth it to whom he will,) they also shall preserve
thee."

But, to take a wider scope. — These expressions,
especially those- which are conditional, seem to be so
placed also, on account of the predestination of God,
and to involve that as being unknown to us. As if
they should speak thus : — " If thou desire," " If thou
wilt: " that is^ if thou be such with God, that he
shall deign to give thee this will to keep the com-
mandments, thou shalt be saved. According to which
manner of speaking, it is given us to understand both
truths. — That we can do nothing ourselves; and
that, if we do any thing, God works that in us. This
is what I would say to those, who will not be content
to have it said, that by these words our im potency
only is shewn, and who will contend, that there is also
proved a certain power and ability to do those things
which are commanded. And in this way, it will also
appear to be truth, that we are not able to do any of
the things which are commanded, and yet, that we
are able to do them all : that is, speaking of the for-
mer, with reference to our own powers, and of the
latter, with reference to the grace of God.

Sect. LXIX.— The third particular that moves
the Diatribe is this :— " How there can be (it observes)
any place for mere necessity there, where mention is
so frequently made of good works and of bad works,


173

and where there is mention made of reward, I cannot
understand: for neither nature nor necessity can
have merit."' —

Nor can I understand any thing but this : —
that that ' probable opinion/ asserts ' mere necessity '
where it affirms that Free-will cannot will any thing
good, and yet, nevertheless, here attributes to it even
4 merit.* Hence, Free-will gains ground so fast, as the
book and argumentation of the Diatribe increases,
that now, it not only has an endeavour and desire of
its own, * though not by its own powers,' nay, not
only wills good and does good, but also merits eter-
nal life according to that saying of Christ, Matt v.,
" Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your re-
ward in heaven." " Your reward," that is, the re-
ward o( Free-will. For the Diatribe so understands
this passage, that Christ and the Spirit of God are
nothing. For what need is there of them, if we
have good works and merit by Free-will ! I say these
things, that we may see, that it is no rare thing for
men of exalted- talent, to be blind in a matter which
is plainly manifest even to one of a thick and unin-
formed understanding; and that we may also see, how
weak, arguments drawn from human authority are in
divine things, where the authority of God alone
avails.

But we have here to speak upon two things. First,
upon the precepts of the New Testament And next,
upon merit. We shall touch upon each briefly, having
already spoken upon them more fully elsewhere.

The New Testament, properly, consists of pro-
mises and exhortations, even as the Old, properly,
consists of laws and threatenings. For in the New


173


Testament, the Gospel is preached ; which is nothing
else than the word, by which, are offered unto us the
Spirit, grace, and the remission of sins obtained for us
by Christ crucified ; and all entirely free, through the
mere mercy of God the Father, thus favouring us un-
worthy creatures, who deserve damnation rather than
any thing else.

And then follow exhortations, in order to animate
those who are already justified, and who have ob-
tained mercy, to be diligent in the fruits of the Spirit
and of righteousness received, to exercise themselves
in charity and good works, and to bear courageously
the cross and all the other tribulations of this world.
This is the whole sum of the New Testament. But
how little the Diatribe understands of this matter is
manifest from this: — it knows not how to make any
distinction between the Old Testament and the New,
for it can see nothing any where but precepts, by which,
men are formed to good manners only. But what the
new-birth is, the new-creature, regeneration, and the
whole work of the Spirit, of all this it sees nothing
whatever. So that, I am struck with wonder and
astonishment, that the man, who has spent so much
time and study upon these things, should know so little
about them.

This passage therefore, " Rejoice, and be exceed-
ing glad, for great is your reward in heaven," agrees as
well with Free-will as light does with darkness. For
Christ is there exhorting, not Free-will, but his apos-
tles, (who were not only raised above Free-will in
grace, and justified, but were stationed in the ministry
of the word, that is, in the highest degree of grace,) to
endure the tribulations of the world. But we are now


174


disputing about Free-will, and that particularly, as it is
without grace ; which, by laws and threats, or the Old
Testament, is instructed in the knowledge of itself only,
that it might flee to the promises presented to it in the
New Testament.

Sect LXX. — As to merit, or a proposed reward,
what is it else but a certain promise? But that promise
does not prove that we can do any thing; it proves
nothing more than this ;— if any one shall do tins
thing or that, he shall then have a reward. Whereas,
our subject inquiry is, not what reward is to be gives,
or how it is to be given, but, whether or not we can
do those things, for the doing of which the reward
is to be given. This is the point to be settled and
proved. Would not these be ridiculous conclusions ? —
The prize is set before all that run in the race : there-
fore, all can so run as to obtain. — If Caesar shall con-
quer the Turks, he shall gain the kingdom of Syria :
therefore, Caesar can conquer, and does conquer the
Turks. — If Free-will shall gain dominion over sin, it
shall be holy before the Lord : therefore Free-will is
holy before the Lord.

But away with things so stupid and openly absurd :
(except that, Free-will deserves to be proved what it
is by arguments so excellent) let us rather speak to
this point:- 4 that necessity, has neither merit nor
reward.' If we speak of the necessity of compulsion, it
is true : if we speak of the necessity of immutability, it
is false. For who would bestow a reward upon, or
ascribe merit to, an unwilling workman ? But with
respect to those who do good or evil willingly, even
though they cannot alter that necessity by their own


Digitized by


175


power, the reward or punishment follows naturally
and necessarily : as it is written " thou shalt render
unto every man according to his works." It natu-
rally follows — if thou remain under water, thou wilt
be suffocated ; if thou swim out, thou wilt be saved.

To be brief : As it respects merit or reward, you
must speak, either of the worthiness or of the conse-
quence. If you speak of the worthiness, there is no
merit, no reward. For if Free-will cannot of itself
will good, but wills good by grace alone, (for we are
speaking of Free-will apart from grace, and inquiring
into the power which properly belongs to each) who
does not see, that that good will, merit, and reward,
belong to grace alone. Here then, again, the Diatribe
dissents from itself, while it argues from merit the
freedom of the will ; and with me, against whom it
fights, it stands in the same condemnation as ever;
that is, its asserting that there is merit, reward, and li-
berty, makes the same as ever directly against itself ;
seeing that, it asserted above, that it could will no-
thing good, and undertook to prove that assertion.

If you speak of the consequence, there is nothing
either good or evil which has not its reward. And
here arises an error, that, in speaking of merits and re-
wards, we agitate opinions and questions concerning
worthiness, which has not existence, when we ought
to be disputing concerning consequences. For there
remains, as a necessary consequence, the judgment of
God and a hell for the wicked, even though they them-
selves neither conceive nor think of such a reward for
their sins, nay, they utterly detest it ; and, as Peter
saith, execrate it, 2 Pet ii.

In the same manner, there remains a kingdom for


Digitized by V^OOQle


176

the just, even though they themselves neither seek it
nor think of it ; seeing that, it was prepared for them
by their Father, not only before they themselves
existed, but before die foundation of the world. Nay,
if they should work good in order to obtain the king-
dom, they never would obtain it, but would be num-
bered rather with the wicked, who, with an evil and
mercenary eye, seek the things of self even in God.
Whereas, the sons of God, do good with a free-will,
seeking no reward, but the glory and will of God
only ; ready to do good, even if (which is impossible)
there were neither a kingdom nor a hell.

These things are, I believe, sufficiently confirmed
even from that saying of Christ only, which I have
just cited, Matt xxv., " Come, ye blessed of my
Father, receive the kingdom which was prepared for
you from the foundation of the world." — How can they
merit that, which is theirs, and prepared for them be-
fore they had existence? So that we might much
more rightly say, the kingdom of God merits us its
possessors ; and thus, place the merit where these
place the reward, and the reward where these place
the merit For the kingdom is not merited, but before
prepared: and the sons of the kingdom are before
prepared for the kingdom, but do not merit the king-
dom for themselves : that is, the kingdom merits the
sons, not the sons the kingdom. So also hell more pro-
perly merits and prepares its sons, seeing that, Christ
saith, " Depart, ye cursed, into eternal fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels."

Sect. LXXI. — But, says the Diatribe — " what
then mean all those scriptures which promise a


177

kingdom and threaten hell ? Why is the word reward
so often repeated in the scriptures ; as, " Thou hast
thy reward," " I am thy exceeding great reward?"
Again, " Who rendereth unto every man according to
his work;" and Paul, Rom. ii., "Who by patient con-
tinuance in well doing, seek for eternal life," and
many of the same kind ?"—

It is answered : By all these passages, the conse-
quence of reward is proved and nothing else, but by
no means the worthiness of merit: seeing that, those
who do good, do it not from a servile and mercenary
principle in order to obtain eternal life, but they seek
eternal life, that is, they are in that way, in which
they shall come unto and find eternal life. So that
seeking, is striving with desire, and pursuing with ar-
dent diligence, that, which always leads unto eternal
life. And the reason why it is declared in the scrip-
tures, that those things shall follow and take place
after a good or bad life, is, that men might be in-
structed, admonished, awakened, and terrified. For
as " by the law is the knowledge of sin" and an
admonition of our impotency, and as from that, it can-
not be inferred that we can do any thing ourselves ;
so, by these promises and threats, there is conveyed
an admonition, by which we are taught, what will
follow sin and that impotency made known by the
law ; but there is not, by them, any thing of worthi-
ness ascribed unto our merit.

Wherefore; as the words, of the law are for in-
struction and illumination, to teach us what we ought
to do, and also what we are not able to do; so the
words of reward, while they signify what will be here-
after, are for exhortation and threatening, by which


178


the just are animated, comforted, and raised up to go
forward, to persevere, and to conquer; that they
might not be wearied or disheartened either in doing
good or in enduring evil ; as Paul exhorts his Corin-
thians, saying, " Be ye steadfast, knowing that your
labour is not in vain in the Lord," 1 Cor. xv. So
also God supports Abraham, saying " I am thy ex-
ceeding great reward," Gen. xv. Just in the same
manner as you would console any one, by signifying
to him, that his works certainly pleased God, which
kind of consolation the scripture frequendy uses ; nor
is it a small consolation for any one to know, that he
so pleases God, that nothing but a good consequence
can follow, even though it seem to him impossible.

' Sect LXXII.— To this point pertain all those
words which are spoken concerning the hope and ex-
pcctatkm, that those things which we hope for will
certainly come to pass. For the pious do not hope
because of these words themselves, nor do they expect
such things because they hope for them. So also the
wicked by the words of threatening, and of a future
judgment, are only terrified and cast down that they
might cease and abstain from sin, and not become
proud, secure, and hardened in their sins.

But if Reason should here turn up her nose and
say — Why does God will these things to be done by
his words, when by such words nothing is effected, and
when the will can turn itself neither one way nor the
other? Why does he not do what he does without the
word, when he can do all things without the word ?
For the will is of no more power, and does no
more with the word, if the Spirit to move within be


179


wanting; no* is it of less power, nor does it do less
without the word, if the Spirit be present, seeing that,
alJ depends upon the power and operation of the
Holy Spirit.

I answer : Thus it pleaseth God — not to give the
Spirit without the word, but through the word ; that
he might have us as workers together with him, while
we sound forth in the word without, what he alone
works by the breath of his Spirit within, wheresoever
it pleaseth him ; which, nevertheless, he could do with-
out the word, but such is not bis will. And who are
we that we should inquire into the cause of the divine
wiU ? It is enough for us to knpw, that such is the
will of God ; and it becomes us, bridling the temerity
of reason, to reverence, love, and adore that will.
For Christ, Matt, xi., gives no other reason why the
Gospel is hidden from the wise, and revealed unto
babes, than this : — So it pleased the Father ! In the
same manner also, he might nourish us without bread :
and indeed he has given a power which nourishes us
without bread, as Matt. iv. saith, " Man doth not live
by bread alone, but by the word of God :" but yet, it
hath pleased him to nourish us by his Spirit within,
by means of the bread, and. instead of the bread used
without

It is certain, therefore, that merit cannot be proved
from the reward, at least out of the scriptures ; and,
that, moreover, Freerwill cannot be proved from
merit, much less such a Free-will as the Piatribe set
out to prove, that is, ' which of itself ;cannot will any
thing gpod ! ' And even if you grant merit, and add
to it, moreover, those usual similitudes and conclu-
sions of reason, such as, ' it is commanded in vain,'
' the reward is promised in vain,' 1 threatenings are

N 2


180

denounced in vain, if there be no Free-will : * all these,
I say, if they prove any thing, prove this : — that Free-
will can of itself do all things. But if it cannot of
itself do all things, then that conclusion of reason still
remains — therefore, the precepts are given in vain,
the promises are made in vain, and the threatenings
are denounced in vain.

Thus, the Diatribe is perpetually arguing against
itself, as often as it attempts to argue against me.
For God alone by his Spirit works in us both merit
and reward, but he makes known and declares each,
by his external word, to the whole world ; to the in-
tent that, his power and glory and our impotency and
vileness might be proclaimed even among the wicked,
the unbelieving, and the ignorant, although those
alone who fear God receive these things into their
heart, and keep them faithfully ; the rest despise them.

Sect. LXXIII. — It would be too tedious to re-
peat here each imperative passage which the Diatribe
enumerates out of the New Testament, always tack-
ing to them her own conclusions, and vainly arguing,
that those things which are so said are * to no pur-
pose,' are ' superfluous,' are * coldly useless,' are * ridi-
culous,' are 1 nothing at all,' if the will be not free. And
I have already repeatedly observed, even to disgust,
that nothing whatever is effected by such arguments ;
and that if any thing be proved, the whole of Free-
will is proved. And this is nothing less than over-
throwing the Diatribe altogether ; seeing that, it set
out to prove such a Free-will as cannot of itself do
good, but serves sin ; and then goes on to prove such
a Free-will as can do all things ; thus, throughout,
forgetting and not knowing itself.


Digitized by Googk


181


It is mere cavillation where it makes these re-
marks — " By their fruits, saith the Lord, ye shall
know them." He calls works fruits, and he calls
them ours, but they are not ours if all things be done
by necessity." —

I pray you, are not those things most rightly called
ours, which we did not indeed make ourselves, but
which we received from others? Why should not
those works be called ours, which God has given
unto us by his Spirit ? Shall we then not call Christ
ours, because we did not make him, but only received
him ? Again : if we made all those things which are
called ours — therefore, we made our own eyes, we
made our own hands, we made our own feet : unless
you mean to say, that our eyes, our hands, and our
feet are not called our own ! Nay, " What have we
that we did not receive," saith Paul, 1 Cor. iv. Shall
we then say, that those things are either not ours, or
else we made them ourselves ? But suppose they are
called our fruits because we made them, where then
remain grace and the Spirit? — Nor does he say, " By
their fruits, which are in a certain small part their own,
ye shall know them." This cavillation rather is ridi-
culous, superfluous, to no purpose, coldly useless, nay,
absurd and detestable, by which the holy words of
God are defiled and profaned.

In the same way also is that saying of Christ
upon the cross trifled with, " Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do." Here, where some as-
sertion might have been expected which should make
for Free-will, recourse is again had to conclusions —
" How much more rightly (says the Diatribe) would
he have excused them on this ground — because they


Digitized by V^OOQle


185


have not a Free-will, nor can they if they willed it,
do otherwise." —

No ! nor is that Free-will which 1 cannot will any
thing good/ concerning which we are disputing, proved
by this conclusion either; but that Free-will is proved
by it which can do all things; concerning which no
one disputes, to except the Pelagians.

Here, where Christ openly saith, " they know not
what they do," does he not testify that they could
not will good ? For how can you will that which you
do not know ? You certainly cannot desire that of
which you know nothing ! What more forcible can
be advanced against Free-will, than that it is such a
thing of nought, that it not only cannot will good, but
cannot even know what evil it does, and what good is?
Is there then any obscurity in this saying, " they know
not what they do ? " What is there remaining in the
scriptures which may not, upon the authority of the
Diatribe, declare for Free-will, since this word of
Christ is made to declare for it, which is so clearly
and so directly against it ? In the same easy way
any one might affirm that this word declares for Free-
Hill — " And the earth was without form and void : *
or this, " And God rested on the seventh day : " or any
word of the same kind. Then, indeed, the scriptures
would be obscure and ambiguous, nay, would be
nothing at all. But to dare to make use of the scrip-
tures in this way, argues a mind that is in a signal
manner, a contemner both of God and man, and that
deserves no forbearance whatever.

Sect. LXX I V.— Again the Diatribe receives that
word of John i. " To them gave he power to become
the sons of God," thus — " How can there be power


18:3


become the sons of God, if


given unto them, to
be no liberty in our will ?"—

This woid also, is a hammer that beats down
Free-will, as is nearly the whole of the evangehst
John, and yet, even this is brought
port of Free-will. Let us, I pray you, just too*
this word John is not speaking concerning any
work of man, either great or small, but concerning the
very renewal and transformation of the old
is a son of the devil, into the new man , whc , a .a
of God. This man is merely passive (as the term rs
used), nordoes he do any thing, but is wholly made:
and John is speaking of being made: be sartb we
are made the sons of God by a power jven unto
us from above, not by the power of Free-will inherent

in Thteas, our friend Diatribe here concludes, that
Free-will is of so much power, that it makes us the
sons of God ; if not, it is prepared to aver, that me
woTof John is ridiculous and stands coldly useless.
BuVwho ever so exalted Freewill as tc .assign -to u
the power of making us the sons of God, ' especially
such a Free-will as cannot g ^t^Tto

will it is that the Diatribe ^^upon^efto
establish ? But let this conclus.on he ^after the
rest which have been so often repeated; by which,

all, than that which the Diatribe denies—

will can do all things.

The meaning of John is this.— That by tne c g

of Christ into the world by his Gospel,
wm offered, but not works required, a fuU opportu-
was onereu, u becoming the sons of

nity was given to all men ot becoming


184


God, if they would believe. But as to this willing
and this believing oh his name, as Free-will never
knew it nor thought of it before, so much less coukf it
then do it of its own power. For how could reason
then think that faith in Jesus as the Son of God and
man was necessary, when even at this day it could
neither receive nor believe it, though the whole
creation should cry out together — there is a certain
person who is both God and man ! Nay it is rather
offended at such a saying, as Paul affirms, 1 Cor. i. :
so far is it from possibility that it should either will it,
or believe it

John, therefore, is preaching, not the power of
Free-will, but the riches of the kingdom of God of-
fered to the world by the Gospel ; and signifying at
the same time, how few there are who receive it ; that
is, from the enmity of the Free-will against it ; the
power of which is nothing else than this:— Satan
reigning over it and causing it to reject grace, and the
Spirit which fulfils the law. So excellently do its
4 endeavour' and * desire' avail unto the fulfilling of
the law.

But we shall hereafter shew more fully what a
thunderbolt this passage of John is against Free-will.
Yet I am not a little astonished that passages which
make so signally and so forcibly against Free-will are
brought forward by the Diatribe in support of Free-
will ; whose stupidity is such, that it makes no dis-
tinction whatever between the promises, and the words
of the law : for it most ridiculously sets up Free-will
by the words of the law, and far more absurdly still
confirms it by the words of the promise. But how
this absurdity is, may be immediately solved, if it be


Digitized by V^OOQle


185


but considered with what an unconcerned and con-
temptuous mind the Diatribe is here disputing : With
whom, it matters not, whether grace stand or fall, whe-
ther Free-will lie prostrate or sit in state, if it can but,
by words of vanity, serve the turn of tyrants, to the
odium of the cause !

mi Sect LXXV. — After this, it comes to Paul
also, the most determined enemy to Free-will, and
even he is dragged in to confirm Free will ; Rom. ii.
" Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
patience, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leadeth to repentance?" — " How
(says the Diatribe) can the despising of the com-
mandment be imputed where there is not a Free-will?
How can God invite to repentance, who is the author
of impenitence ? How can the damnation be just,
where the judge compels unto evil doing ?

I answer : Let the Diatribe see to these questions
itself. What are they unto us ! The Diatribe said
according to that ' probable opinion,' ' that Free-will
cannot will good, and is of necessity compelled to serve
sin.' How, therefore, can the despising of the com-
mandment be charged on the will, if it cannot will
good, and has no liberty, but is necessarily compelled
to the service of sin ? How can God invite to repen-
tance who is the authqr of the reason why it cannot
repent, while it leaves, or does not give grace to, that,
which cannot of itself will good? How can the
damnation be just, where the judge, by taking away
his aid, compels the wicked man to be left in his wick-
edness who cannot of his own power do otherwise ?
All these conclusions therefore recoil back upon


188

a detestable and useless discussion has he made of it !
So that, did not the Holy Spirit know a little some-
thing of rhetoric, there would be some danger, lest,
being broken at the outset by such an artfully managed
show of contempt, he should despair of his cause,
and openly yield to Free-will before the sound of the
trumpet for the battle. But, however, I, as a recruit
taken into the rear of those two passages, will display
the forces on our side. Although, where the state of
the battle is such, that one can put to flight ten thou-
sand, there is no need of forces. If therefore, one pas-
sage shall defeat Free-will, its numberless forces will
profit it nothing.

Sect LXXVII. — In this part of the discussion,
then, the Diatribe has found out a new way of elud-
ing the most clear passages : that is, it will have that
there is, in the most simple and clear passages, a
trope. And as, before, when speaking in defence of
Free-will, it eluded all the imperative and conditional
sentences of the law by means of conclusions tacked,
and similitudes added to them ; so now, where it de-
signs to speak against us, it twists all the words of the
divine promise and declaration just which way it
pleases, by means of a trope which it has invented ; thus,
being every where an incomprehensible Proteus ! Nay,
it demands with a haughty brow, that this permission
should be granted it, saying, that we ourselves, when
pressed closely, are accustomed to get off by means of
invented tropes : as in these instances : — " On which
thou wilt, stretch forth thine hand : " that is, grace
shall extend thine hand on which it will. " Make you
a new heart:" that is, grace shall make you a new
heart : and the like. It seems, therefore, an indignity


189


offered, that Luther should be allowed to give forth an
interpretation so forced and twisted, and that it should
not be far more allowable to follow the interpretations
of the most approved doctors.

You see then, that here, the contention is not for
the text itself, no, nor for conclusions and similitudes,
but for tropes and interpretations. When then shall
we ever have any plain and pure text, without tropes
and conclusions, either for or against Free-will ? Has
the scripture no such texts anywhere ? And shall the
cause of Free-will remain for ever in doubt, like a
reed shaken with the wind, as being that which can
be supported by no certain text, but which stands
upon conclusions and tropes only, introduced by men
mutually disagreeing with each other?

But let our sentiment rather be this : — that nei-
ther conclusion nor trope is to be admitted into the
scriptures, unless the evident state of the particulars, or
the absurdity of any particular as militating against an
article of faith, require it : but, that the simple, pure,
and natural meaning of the words is to be adhered to,
which is according to the rules of grammar, and to that
common use of speech which God has given unto men.
For if every one be allowed, according to his own lust,
to invent conclusions and tropes in the scriptures, what
will the whole scripture together be, but a reed shaken
with the wind, or a kind of Vertumnus? Then, in
truth, nothing could, to a certainty, be determined on
or proved concerning any one article of faith, which
you might not subject to cavillation by means of
some trope. But every trope ought to be avoided as
the most deadly poison, which is not absolutely re-
quired by the scripture itself.


190


See what happened to that trope-inventor, Origen,
in expounding tine scriptures. What just occasion did
he give die calumniator Porphery, to say, ' those
who favour Origen, can be no great friends to Hiero-
nymus.' What happened to the Arians by means of
that trope, according to which, they made Christ God
nominally ? What happened in our own times to those
new prophets concerning the words of Christ, "This
is my body ? " One invented a trope in the word
"this," another in the word 'tis," another in the
word " body." I have therefore observed this : — that
all heresies and errors in the scriptures, have not
arisen from the simplicity of the words, as is the ge-
neral report throughout the world, but from men not
attending to the simplicity of the words, and hatching
tropes and conclusions out of their own brain.

For example. " On which soever thou wilt,
stretch forth thine hand." I, as far as I can remen>
ber, never put upon these words so violent an inter-
pretation, as to say, ' grace shall extend thine hand
on which soever it will : ' " Make yourselves a new
heart," * that is, grace shall make you a new heart,
and the like;' although the Diatribe traduces me
thus in a public work, from being so carried away
with, and alluded by its own tropes and conclusions,
that it knows not what it says about any thing. But
I said this :— that. by the words, ' stretch forth thine
hand/ simply taken as they are, without tropes or
conclusions, nothing else is signified than what is
Kpnri of us inT etching of wW,^
what we ought to do ; according to the nature of an
imperative expression, with grammarians, and in the
common use of speech.


Digitized by


191

But the Diatribe, not attending to this simplicity
of the word, but with violence adducing conclusions
and tropes, interprets the words thus : — " Stretch
forth thine hand;" that is, thou art able by thine
own power to stretch forth thine hand. " Make you
a new heart," that is, ye are able to make a new heart.
' Believe in Christ,' that is, ye are able to believe in
Ohrist So that, with it, what is spoken imperatively,
and what is spoken indicatively, is the same thing ; or
else, it is prepared to aver, that the scripture is ridi-
culous and to no purpose. And these interpretations,
which no grammarian will bear, must not be called, in
theologians, violent or invented, but the productions of
the most approved doctors received by so many ages.

But it is easy for the Diatribe to admit and follow
tropes in this part of the discussion, seeing that, it
teres not at all whether what is said be certain or un-
certain. Nay, it aims at making all things uncertain ;
for its design is, that the doctrines concerning Free-
will should be left alone, rather than searched into.
Therefore, it is enough for it, to be enabled in any
way to avoid those passages by which it finds Wself
closely pressed.

But as for me, who ' am maintaining a serious
cause, and who am inquiring what is, to the greatest
certainty, the truth, for the establishing of consciences,
I must act very differently. For me, I say, it is not
enough that you say there may be a trope here : but
I must inquire, whether there ought to be, or can be
a trope there. For if you cannot prove that there
must, of necessity, be a trope in that passage, you
will effect nothing at all. There stands there this word
of God—" I will harden the heart of Pharaoh." K


192

you say that it can be understood or ought to be un-
derstood thus : — I will permit it to be hardened : I hear
you say, indeed, that it may be so understood. And I
hear this trope used by every one, 1 I destroyed you,
because I did not correct you immediately when you
began to do wrong.' But here, there is no place for
that interpretation. We are not here inquiring, whether
that trope be in use : we are not inquiring whether any
one can use it in that passage of Paul : but this is the
point of inquiry — whether or not it be sure and safe
to use this passage plainly as it stands, and whether
Paul would have it so used. We are not inquiring into
the use of an indifferent reader of this passage, but
into the use of the author Paul himself.

What will you do with a conscience inquiring
thus ?— Behold God, as the author, saith, 11 1 will
harden the heart of Pharaoh;" the meaning of the word
" harden " is plain and well known. But a man, who
reads this passage, tells me, that in this place, 1 to
harden/ signifies 'to give an occasion of becoming
hardened/ because, the sinner is not immediately cor-
rected. But by what authority does he this ? With
what design, by what necessity, is the natural signifi-
cation of this passage thus twisted ? And suppose the
reader and interpreter should be in error, how shall it
be proved that such a turn ought to be given to this
passage? It is dangerous, nay, impious, thus to twist
the word of God, without necessity and without au-
thority. Would you then comfort a poor soul thus
labouring, in this way? — Origen thought so and so.
Cease to search into such things, because they are
curious and superfluous. But he would answer you,
this admonition should have been given to Moses or


193

Paul l>efore they wrote, and so also to God himself,
for it is they who vex us with these curious and super-
fluous scriptures.

Sect. LX XVIII. — This miserable scape-gap of
tropes, therefore, profits the Diatribe nothing. But
this Proteus of ours must here be held fast, and com-
pelled to satisfy us fully concerning the trope in this
passage ; and that, by scriptures the most clear, or by
miracles the most evident. For as to its mere opinion,
even though supported by the laboured industry of all
ages, we give no credit to that whatever. But we urge
on and press it home, that there can be here no trope
whatever, but that the word of God is to be under-
stood according to the plain meaning of the words.
For it is not given unto us (as the Diatribe persuades
itself) to turn the words of God backwards and for-
wards according to our own lust : if that were the case,
what is there in the whole scripture, that might not
be resolved into the philosophy of Anaxagoras — ! that
any thing might be made from any thing?' And thus
I will say, "God created the heavens and the earth;"
that is, he stationed them, but did not make them out
of nothing. Or, " he created the heavens and the
earth ; " that is, the angels and the devils ; or the just
and the wicked. Who, I ask, if this were the case,
might not become a theologian at the first opening of
a book?

Let this, therefore, be a fixed and settled point :
— that since the Diatribe cannot prove, that there is a
troj>e in these our passages which it utterly destroys,
it is compelled to cede to us, tliat the words are to be
understood according to their plain meaning ; even

o


196

carrying the saints away into heaven at die day of
judgment, will not be in mercy, but in hardening ; be-
cause, by his long-suffering, he will give them an oc-
casion of abusing it. But his thrusting the wicked
down to hell, will be his mercy ; because, he punishes
the sinners. — Who, I pray you, ever heard of such
examples of the mercy and wrath of God as these?

And be it so, that good men are made better both
by the long-suffering and by the severity of God; yet,
when we are speaking of the good and the bad promis-
cuously, these tropes, by an utter perversion of the
common manner of speaking, will make, out of the
mercy of God his wrath, and his wrath out of his
mercy ; seeing that, they call it the wrath of God
when he does, good, and his mercy when he afflicts. ,

Moreover, if God be said then to harden, when
he does good and endures with long-suffering, and
then to have mercy when he afflicts and punishes, why
is he more particularly said to harden Pharaoh than
to harden the children of Israel, or than the whole
world? Did he not do good to the children of Israel ?
Does he not do good to the whole world? Does he
not bear with, the wicked ? Does he not rain upon the
evil and upon the good ? Why is he rather said to have
mercy upon the children of Israel than upon Pharaoh ?
Did he not afflict the children of Israel in Egypt,
and in the desert? — And be it so, that some abuse,
and some rightly use, the goodness and the wrath of
God ; yet, according to your definition, to harden, is
the same as, to indulge the wicked by long-suffering
and goodness ; and to have mercy, is, not to indulge,
but to visit and punish. Therefore, with reference to


197


God, he, by his continual goodness, does nothing
but harden ; and by his perpetual punishment, does
nothing but shew mercy*

Sect. LXXIX.— But this is the most excellent
statement of all — ' that God is said to harden, when he
indulges sinners by long-suffering ; but to have mercy
upon them, when he visits and afflicts, and thus, by
severity, invites to repentance.* —

What, I ask, did God leave undone in afflicting,
punishing, and calling Pharaoh to repentance ? Are
there not, in his dealings with him, ten plagues re-
corded? If, therefore, your definition stand good,
that shewing mercy, is punishing and calling the sin-
ner immediately, God certainly had mercy upon
Pharaoh ! Why then does not God say, I will have
mercy upon Pharaoh ? Whereas he saith, " I will
harden the heart of Pharaoh." For, in the very act of
having mercy upon him, that is, (as you say) afflicting
and punishing him, he saith, " I will harden" him;
that is, as you say, I will bear with him and do him
good. What can be heard of more enormous ! Where
are now your tropes? Where are your Origens?
Where are your Jeroms ? Where are all your most
approved doctors whom one poor creature, Luther,
daringly contradicts? — But at this rate the flesh
must unawares impel the man to talk, who trifles
with the words of God, and believes not their solemn
importance !

The text of Moses itself, therefore, incontro-
vertibly proves, that here, these tropes are mere in-
ventions and things of nought, and that by those
words, " I will harden the heart of Pharaoh, " some-


19S

thing else is signified far different ! ftpny and of
greater importance than, doing good, or affliction and
punishment; because, we cannot deny, mat both
were tried upon Pharaoh with the greatest care and
concern. For what wrath and punishment/ could be
more instant, than his being stricken by so many
wonders and with so many plagues, that, as 'Moses
himself testifies, the like had never been ? Nay, even
Pharaoh himself, repenting, was moved by them more
than once ; but he was not effectually moved, nor did
he persevere. And what long-suffering or goodness of
God could be greater, than his taking away the plagues
30 easily, hardening his sin so often, so often bringing
back the good, and so often taking away the evil ? Yet
neither is of any avcfilj he still' saith, u I will harden
the heart of PharabUr You see, therefore, that
even if i/wr hardening and mercy, that is, your gjosses
and tropes, be granted to the greatest extent' aft' sup-
ported by use and by example, arid as seen in the case
of Pharaoh, there is yet a "hardening that still remains ;
arid that the hardening of which Moses speaks must,
of necessity, be one, and that of which you dream,
another.

J .1. •«•' .•/ \[- t vi i' ' - * r - -V, 'F!»t ywWf

Sect. LX XX. —But since I have to fight with
fictibn^framers and "ghosts, let me turn to ghost-
raising also. Let me suppose (which is an impossibi-
lity) that the trope of which the Diatribe dreams
avails in this passage; in order that I may see,
which way the Diatribe will elude the being compelled
to' declare, that all things take place according to the
will of God alone, and from necessity in us ; and how it
will clear God from being himself the author and


m

cause of our becoming hardened. For if it be true
that God is then said to "harden" when he bears
with long-suffering,. and does not immediately punish,
these two positions still stand firm.

First, that man, nevertheless, of necessity serves
sin. For when it is granted that Free-will cannot will
any thing good, (which kind of Free-will the Diatribe
nndertook to prove) then, by the goodness of a long-
suffering God, it becomes nothing better, but of neces-
sity worse.— Wherefore, it still remains, that all that
we do, is done from necessity.

And next, that God appears to be just as cruel in
this bearing with us by his long-suffering, as he does,
by being preached, as willing to harden, by that will
inscrutable. For when he sees that Free-will cannot
will good, but becomes worse by his enduring with,
long-suffering; by this very long-suffering he ap-
pears to be most cruel, and to delight in our mise-
ries ; seeing that, he could remedy them if he willed,
and might not thus endure with long-suffering if he
willed, nay, that he could not thus endure unless he
willed; for who can compel him against his will?
That will, therefore, without which nothing is done,
being admitted, and it being admitted also, that Free-
will cannot will any thing good, all is advanced in
vain that is advanced, either in excusation of God, or
in accusation of Free-will. For the language of Free-
will is ever this :— I cannot, and God will not. What
can I do ! If he have mercy upon me by affliction, I
shall be nothing benefited, but must of necessity be-
come worse, unless he give me his Spirit. But this he
gives me not, though he might give it me if he willed.
It is certain, therefore, that he wills, not to give.


300

LXXXI. — Nor do the similitudes adduced
thing to the purpose, where it is said by the
As under the same sun, mud is hardened
ami wax melted ; as by the same shower, the culti-
Taitd earth brings forth fruit, and the uncultivated
thorns ; so, by the same long-suffering of God,
are hardened and some converted." — ; & #m>
- 1 For, we are not now dividing Free-will into two dif-
ferent natures, and making the one like mud, the other
like wax ; the one like cultivated earth, the other like
uncultivated earth ; but we are speaking concerning that
one Free-will equally impotent in all men ; which, as
it cannot will good, is nothing but mud, nothing but
uncultivated earth. Nor does Paul say that God, as
the potter, makes one vessel unto honour, and anoth
unto dishonour, out of different kinds of clay, but he
saith, " Out of the same lump," &c. Therefore, as.
mud always becomes harder, and uncultivated earth,
always becomes more thorny; even so Free-will, al-
ways becomes worse, both under the hardening sun of
long-suffering, and under the softening shower of rain.

If, therefore, Free-will be of one and the same na-
ture and impotency in all men, no reason can be given
why it should attain unto grace in one, and not in
another ; if nothing else be preached to all, but the
goodness of a long-suffering and the punishment of a
mercy-shewing God. For it is a granted position, that
Free-will in all, is alike defined to be * that which can-
not will good/ And indeed, if it were not so, God
could not elect any one, nor would there be any place
left for election; but for Free-will only, as choosing or
refusing the long-suffering and anger of God. And if
God be thus robbed of his power and wisdom to


1


901

elect, what will there be remaining but that idol For-
tune, under the name of which, all things take place
at random ! Nay, we shall at length come to this :
that men may be saved and damned without God's
knowing any thing at all about it; as not having de-
termined by certain election who should be saved and
who should be damned; but having set before all
men in general his hardening goodness and long-suf-
fering, and his mercy-shewing correction and punish-
ment, and left them to choose for themselves whe-
ther they would be saved or damned; while he, in
the mean time, should be gone, as Homer says, to an
Ethiopian feast !

It is just such a God as this that Aristotle painty
out to us ; that is, who sleeps himself, and leaves every
one to use or abuse his long-suffering and punishment
just as he will. Nor can reason, of herself, form any
other judgment than the Diatribe here does. For as
she herself snores over, and looks with contempt upon,
divine things; she thinks concerning God, that he
sleeps and snores over them too ; not exercising his
wisdom, will, and presence, in choosing, separating,
and inspiring, but leaving the troublesome and irk-
some business of accepting or refusing his long-suf-
fering and his anger, entirely to men. This is what we
come to, when we attempt, by human reason, to limit
and make excuses for God, not revering the secrets of
his majesty, but curiously prying into them — being lost
in the glory of them, instead of making one excuse
for God, we pour forth a thousand blasphemies ! And
forgetting ourselves, we prate like madmen, both
against God and against ourselves; when we are all


t


202

the while supposing, that we are, with a great! deal of
wisdom, speaking both for God and for ourselves.

Here then you see, what that trope and - gloss of
the Diatribe, will make of God. And moreover^ how*
excellently consistent the Diatribe is with itself; which
before, by its one definition, made Free-will one and
the same in all men; and now, in the course of its
argumentation, forgetting its own definition, makes
one Free-will to be cultivated and the other unculti-
vated, according to the difference of works, of man-
ners, and of men : thus making two different Free-
wills ; the one, that which cannot do good, the other,
that which can do good, and that by* its own powers
fyefore grace : whereas, its former definition declared,
that it could not, by those its own powers, will any
thing good whatever. Hence, therefore, it comes to
pass, that while we do not ascribe unto the will of
God only, the will and power of hardening, shewing
mercy, and doing all things ; we ascribe unto Free-
will itself the power of doing all things without grace ;
which, nevertheless, we declared to be unable to do>
any good wliatever without grace.

The similitudes, therefore, of the Sun and of the
shower, make nothing at all to the purpose. The
Christian would use those similitudes more rightly, if
he were to make the sun and the shower to represent
the Gospel, as Psalm xix. does, and as does also He-
brews vi. ; and were to make the cultivated earth to
represent the elect, and the uncultivated the repro-
bate ; for the former are, by the word, edified and
made better, while the latter are offended and made
worse. Or, if this distinction be not made, then, as to


&0S

Free-will itself; that, is mall men uncukivated earth
and the kingdom of Satan.

i.i • ..».-.*•» ton ,•' /' a • i

Sect. LXXXII.-^But let us now inquire into the
reason why this trope was invented in this passage. —
" It appears absurd (says the Diatribe) that God,
who is not only just but also good, should be said to
have hardened the heart of a man, in order that, by
his iniquity, he might shew forth his own power. The
same also occurred to Origen; who confesses, that the
occasion of becoming hardened was given of God, but
throws all the fault upon Pharaoh. He has, morei
over, made a remark upon that which the Lord saith,
" For this very purpose have I raised thee up." He
does not say, (he observes) For 4his very purpose have
I made thee : otherwise, Pharrfoh could not have been
wicked, if God had made hrni such an one as he was,
for God beheld all his works, and they were " very
good"— ^us the Diatribe. » •

It appears then, 'that one of the principal causes
why the words of Moses and of Paul are not received,
is their absurdity. But against what article of faith
does that absurdity militate ? Or, who is offended at
it ? It is human Reason that is offended ; who, being
blind, deaf, impious, and sacrilegious in all the words
and works of God, is, in the Case of this passage, in-
troduced as a judge of the words and works of God.
According to the same argument of absurdity, you
will deny all the articles of faith : because, it is of
all things the most absurd, and as Paul saith, foolish-
ness to the Gentiles, and a stumbling-block to the
Jews, that God should be man, the son of a virgin,
crucified, and sitting at the right hand of his Father :


204

it is, I say, absurd to believe such things. Therefore,
let us invent some tropes with the Arians, and say,
that Christ is not truly God. Let us invent some
tropes with the Manichees, and say, that he is not
truly man, but a phantom introduced by means of a
virgin ; or a reflection conveyed by. glass, which fell,
and was crucified. And in this way, we shall handle
the scriptures to excellent purpose indeed !

After all, then, the tropes amount to nothing; nor is
the absurdity avoided. For it still remains absurd, (ac-
cording to the judgment of reason,) that that God, who
is just and good, should exact of Free-will impossibili-
ties : and that, when Free-will cannot will good and
of necessity serves sin, that sin should yet be laid to its
charge: and that, moreover, when he does not give the
Spirit, he should, nevertheless, act so severely and un-
mercifully, as to harden, or permit to become hardened :
these things, Reason will still say, are not becoming
a God good and merciful. Thus, they too far exceed
her capacity ; nor can she so bring herself into sub-
jection as to believe, and judge, that the God who
does such things, is good ; but setting aside faith, she
wants to feel out, and see, and comprehend how he
can be good, and not cruel. But she will comprehend
that, when this shall be said of God : — he hardens no
one, he damns no one ; but he has mercy upon all, he
saves all ; and he has so utterly destroyed hell, that no
future punishment need be dreaded. It is thus that
Reason blusters and contends, in attempting to clear
God, and to defend him as just and good.

But faith and the Spirit judge otherwise ; who
beUeve, that God would be good , even though he
should destroy all men. And to what profit is it, to


205


weary ourselves with all these reasonings, in order that
we might throw the fault of hardening upon Free-will !
Let all the Free-will in the world, do all it can with all
ks powers, and yet, it never will give one proof, either
that it can avoid being hardened where God gives not
his Spirit, or merit mercy where it is left to its own
powers. And what does it signify whether it be har-
dened, or deserve being hardened, if the hardening be
of necessity, as long as it remains in that impotency,
in which, according to the testimony of the Diatribe,
it cannot will good ? Since, therefore, the absurdity
is not taken out of the way by these tropes ; or, if it be
taken out of the way, greater absurdities still are in-
troduced in their stead, and all things are ascribed
unto Free-will ; away with such useless and seducing
tropes, and let us cleave close to the pure and simple
word of God !

Sect. LXXXIIL— As to the other point—' that
those things which God has made, are very good :
and that God did not say, for this purpose have I
made thee, but " For this purpose have I raised
thee up" —

I observe, first of all, that this, Gen. i., concern-
ing the works of God being very good, was said be-
fore jhe fall of man. But it is recorded directly after,
in the third chapter, how man became evil, — when God
departed from him and left him to himself. And
from this one man thus corrupt, all the wicked were
born, and Pharaoh also : as Paul saith, " We were
all by nature the children of wrath even as others."
Eph. ii. Therefore God made Pharaoh wicked; that


206


isyfrom a wicked and corrupt seed;: as he saith in the
Proverbs of Sqlomon, xvi., " God hath made all things
for himself, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil V
that i« r not by creating evil in them, but by forming
them out of a corrupt seed, and ruling over mem.
This therefore is not a just conclusion— *God made
man wicked : therefore, he is not wicked. For how
can he not be wicked from a wicked seed ? As Ps. li.
saith, " Behold I was conceived in sin/' And Job. xiv.
"Who can make that dean whkh is conceived from
unclean seed ? For although God did not make sin,
yet, he ceases not to form and multiply that nature,
which, from the Spirit being withdrawn, is defiled by
sin. And as it is, when a carpenter makes statues of
corrupt wood ; so such as the nature is, such are the
men made, when God creates and forms them out of
that nature. Again : If you understand the words,
" They were very good," as referring to the works of
God after the fall, y oil will be pleased to observe, that
this was said, not with reference to us, but with refe-
rence to God. For it is not said, Man saw all the
things that God had made, and behold they were very
good. Many things seem very good unto God, and
are very good, which seem unto us very evil, and are
considered to be very evil. Thus, afflictions, evils,
errors, hell, nay* all the very best works of God, are,
in the sight of the world, very evil, and even damnable.
What is better than Christ and the Gospel ? But
what is more execrated by the world? And there-
fore, how those things are good in the sight of God,
which are evil in our sight, is known only unto God and
unto those who see with the eyes of God ; that is, who


307

have the Spirit. ■ But there is no need of argumentation

floiplose^as^^th* preceding answer is sufficient

Sect. LXXXIV.— But here, perhaps, it will be
asked, how can God be said to work evil in us, in the
same way as he is said to harden us, to give us up to
our own desires, to cause us to err, &c. ?

We ought, indeed, to becontent with the word of
God, and simply to believe what that saith; seeing
that, the works of God are utterly unspeakable. But
however, in compliance with Reason, that is, human
foolery, I will just act the fool and the stupid fellow for
once, and try, by a little babbling, if I can produce any
effect upon her. !i >

First, then, both Reason and the Diatribe grant,
that God works all in all ; and that, without him, no-
thing is either done or effective, because he is omni-
potent; and because, therefore, all things come under
his omnipotence, as Paul saith to the Ephesians.

Now then, Satan and man being fallen and left of
God, cannot will good ; that: is, those things which
please God, or which God wills ; but are ever turned
the way of their own desires, so that they cannot but
seek their own. This, therefore, their will and nature,
so turned from God, cannot be a nothing : nor are Satan
and the wicked: man a nothing : nor are the nature and
i die will which they have a nothing, although it be a
nature corrupt and averse. That remnant of nature,
"therefore, in Satan and the wicked man, of which we
speak, as being the creature and work of God, is not
less subject to the divine omnipotence and action, than
ali'the rest of the creatures and works of God.

Since, therefore, God moves and does all in all, he


Digitized I oogle


908

necessarily moves and does all in Satan and the
wicked man. But he so does all in them, as they
themselves are, and as he finds them : that is, as they
are^themselves averse and evil, being carried along by
that motion of the divine omnipotence, they cannot
but do what is averse and evil. Just as it is with
a man driving a horse lame on one foot, or lame
on two feet ; he drives him just so as the horse him-
self is ; that is, the horse moves badly. But what can
the man do ? He is driving along this kind of horse
' together with sound horses; he, indeed, goes badly,
and the rest well ; but it cannot be otherwise, unless
the horse be made sound.

Here then you see, that, when God works in, and
by, evil men, the evils themselves are inwrought, but
yet, God cannot do evil, although he thus works
the evils by evil men ; because, being good himself
he cannot do evil ; but he uses evil instruments, which
cannot escape the sway and motion of his omnipo-
tence. The fault, therefore, is in the instruments, which
God allows not to remain actionless ; seeing that, the
evils are done as God himself moves. Just in the same
manner as a carpenter would cut badly with a saw-
edged or broken-edged axe. Hence it is, that the
wicked man cannot but always err and sin ; because,
being carried along by the motion of the divine omni-
potence, he is not permitted to remain motionless, but
must will, desire, and act according to his nature.
All this is fixed certainty, if we believe that God is
omnipotent !

It is, moreover, as certain, that the wicked man is
the creature of God ; though being averse and left to
himself without the Spirit of God, he cannot will or


209

*> good. For the omnipotence of God makes it, that
the wicked man cannot evade the motion and action of
God, but, being of necessity subject to it, he yields ;
though his corruption and aversion to God, makes
him that he cannot be carried along and moved unto
good. God cannot suspend his omnipotence on ac-
count of his aversion, nor can the wicked man change
his aversion. Wherefore it is, that he must continue of
necessity to sin and err, until he be amended by the
Spirit of God. Meanwhile, in all these, Satan goes on
to reign in peace, and keeps his palace undisturbed
under this motion of the divine omnipotence.

K ■ . ...

Sect. LXXXV.— But now follows the act itself
of hardening, which is thus : — The wicked man (as we
have said) like his prince Satan, is turned totally the
way of selfishness, and his own ; he seeks not God,
nor cares for the things of God ; he seeks his own
riches, his own glory, his own doings, his own wis-
dom, his own power, and, in a word, his own king-
dom ; and wills only to enjoy them in peace. And if
any one oppose him or wish to diminish any of these
things, with the same aversion to God under which
he seeks these, with the same is he moved, enraged,
and roused to indignation against his adversary. And
he is as much unable to overcome this rage, as he is
to overcome his desire of self-seeking ; and he can no
more avoid this seeking, than he can avoid his own
existence ; and this he cannot do, as being the crea-
ture of God, though a corrupt one.

The same is that fury of the world against the
Gospel of God. For, by the Gospel, comes that.

p


810

stronger than • he," who ^overcomes the quiet pos-
sessor of the palace; and condemns those desires of
glory, of riches; of>*isdom, of self-ri^iteousness, and
of ail things in whichhen trusts. This very irritation of
the wicked, when God speaks and acts contrary to
what they willed*' is their hardening and their galling
weight. <For as they die in this state of aversion from
the very corruption of nature, so they become more
and more averse, and worse and worse, as this aversion
is opposed or turned out of its way. And thus, wheri
God threatened to take away from the wicked Pha-
raoh his power, he irritated and aggravated him, and
hardened his heart the more, the more he came to him
with his word by Moses, making known his intention
to take away his kingdom and to deliver his own
people from his power: because, he did not give him
his Spirit within, but permitted his wicked corruption,
under the dominion of Satan, to grow angry, to swell
with pride, to burn with rage, and to go on still in a
certain secure contempt.

Sect. LXXXVI. — Let no one think, therefore,
that God j where he is said to harden, or to work evil
in us (for to harden is to do evil), so does the evil as
though he created evil in us anew, in the same way as
a malignant liquor-seller, being himself bad, would
pour poison into, or mix it up in, a vessel that was
mot bad, where the vessel itself did nothing but re-
ceive, or passively accomplish the purpose t)f the ma-
lignity of the poison-mixer. For when people hear it
said by us, that God works in us both good and evil,
and that we from mere necessity passively submit to the


211

working of God, they seem to imagine, that a man who
is good, or not evil himself, is passive while God ivo? ks
evil in him : not rightly considering that God, is far
from being inactive in all his creatures^ and never
suffers, any one of them to keep holiday.

But whoever wishes to understand these things
let him think thus that God works evil in us, that
is, by us, not from the fault of God, but from the
fault of evil in us :*?-that is, as we are evil by nature,
God, who is truly good, carrying us along by his own
action, according to the nature of his omnipotence,
cannot do otherwise than do evil by as, as? instru*
meats, though he himself" he good ; though by his
wisdom, he overrules that. evil well, to his own glory
and to bur sarvatidh.

Thus God, finding the will of Satan evil, not
creating it so, but leaving it while Satan sinningly
commits 'the evil, carries it along by his working, and
moves it which way he will ; though that will ceases
not to be evil by this motion of God.

In this same way also David spoke concerning
Shimei, 3 Samuel xvi. : " Let him curse; for God
hath bidden him to curse David." How cduld God
bid to curse, an action so evil. and virulent! There
was no where an external precept to that effect;
David, therefore, looks to this: — the omnipotent
God saith and it is done : that is, he does all things by
his external word'. Wherefore, here, the divine action
and omnipotence, die good <God himself, carries
along the wiUof Shimer, already eVil together with all
his members, and before incensed against David, and,
while David is thus opportunely situated and deserv-
ing such blasphemy, commands the blasphemy, (that

p2


SI*

Here therefore, you see, H is confirmed even by
this very scripture, that Free-will can do nothing but
evil, while God, who is not deceived from ignorance
nor lies from iniquity, so surely promises the harden-
ing of Pharaoh ; because, be was certain, that an evil
will could will nothing but evil, and that, as the good
which it hated was presented to it, it could not but
wax worse and worse.


'- i • • i

Sect. LXXuXVIII — It now then remains, that
perhaps some one may ask — Why then does not God
cease from that motion of his omnipotence, by which
the will of the wicked » moved to go on in evil, and
to become worse? I answer: this is to wish that
God, for die sake of the wicked, would cease to be
God ; for this you really desire, when you desire his
power and action to cease ; that is, that he should
cease to be good, lest the wicked should become
worse.

Again, it may be asked—Why does he not then
change, in his motion, those evil wills which he moves ?
— This belongs to those secrets of Majesty, where " his
judgments are past finding out" Nor is it ours to
search into, but to adore these mysteries. If " flesh
and blood" here take offence and murmur, let it
murmur,* but it will be just where it was before, God
is not, on that account) changed ! And if numbers of
the wicked be offended and " go away," yet> the elect
shall remain ! - . • . r

The same answer will be given to those i who
ask— Why did he permit Adam to fall? And Why
did he make all of us to be infected with the same
sin, when he might have kept him, and might-have


215

created us from some other seed, or might first have
cleansed that, before he created us from it ? —

God is that being, for whose will no cause or rea-
son is to be assigned, as a rule or standard by which
it acts; seeing that, nothing is superior or equal to it,
but it is itself the rule of all things. For if it acted by
any rule or standard, or from any cause or reason, it
would be no longer the will of God. Wherefore, what
God wills, is not therefore right, because he ought or
ever was bound so to will ; but on the contrary, what
takes place is therefore right, because he so wills. A
cause and reason are assigned for the will of the crea-
ture, but not for the will of the Creator; unless you
set up, over him, another Creator.

Sect LXXXIX.— Bv these arguments, I pre-
sume, the trope-inventing Diatribe, together with its
trope, are sufficiently confuted. Let us, however, come
to the text itself, for the purpose of seeing, what
agreement there is between the text and the trope.
For it is the way with all those who elude arguments
by means of tropes, to hold the text itself in sovereign
contempt, and to aim only, at picking out a certain
term, and twisting and crucifying it upon the cross
of their own opiaion, without paying, any regard what-
ever, either to circumstance, to consequence, to pre-
cedence, or to the intention on .object of the author*
Thus the Diatribe, m this passage, utterly disregard
ing the intention of Moses and the scope of his words,
tears out of the text this term, " I will harden, " and
makes of it just what it will, according to its own
lust: not at all considering, whether that can be again
inserted so as to agree and square with the body of


216

the text. And this is the reason why the scripture w»
not sufficiently clear to those most received and most
learned men of so many ages. And no wonder, for
even the sun itself would not shine, if it should be
assailed by such arts as these.

But (to say nothing about that, which I have al-
ready proved from the scriptures, that Pharaoh cannot
rightly be said to be hardened, ' because, being borne
with by the long-suffering of God, he was not imme-
diately punished,' seeing that, he was punished by so
many plagues ;) if hardening be 1 bearing with divine
long-suffering and not immediately punishing ; ' what
need was there that God should so many times pro-
mise that he would then harden the heart of Pharaoh
when the signs should be wrought, who now, before
those signs were wrought, and before that hardening,
was such, that, being inflated with his success, prospe-
rity and wealth, and being borne with by the divine
long-suffering and not punished, inflicted so many
evils on the children of Israel? You see, therefore,
that this trope of yours makes not at all to the pur-
pose in this passage; seeing that, it applies generally
unto all, as sinning because they are borne with by
the divine long-suffering. And thus, we shall be com-
pelled to say, that all are hardened, seeing that, there
is no one who does not sin ; and that, no one sins,
but he who is borne with by the divine long-suffering.
Wherefore, this hardening of Pharaoh, is another
liardening, independent of that general hardening as
produced by the long-suffering of the divine goodness.


Sect. XC. — The more immediate ddsign of
Moses then is,- to announce, not so much the hard-


217

ening of Pharaoh, as the veracity and mercy of God ;
that is, that the children of Israel might not distrust
the promise of God, wherein he promised, that he
would deliver them. And since this was a matter of
the greatest moment, he foretels them the difficulty,
that they might not fall away from their faith; know-
ing, that all those things which were foretold must be
accomplished in the order in which, he who had made
the promise, had arranged them. As if he had said, I
will deliver you, indeed, but you will with difficulty
believe it; because, Pharaoh will so resist, and put off
the deliverance. Nevertheless, believe ye; for the
whole of his putting off shall, by my way of operation,
only be the means of my working the more and
greater miracles to your confirmation in faith, and to
the display of my power ; that henceforth, ye might
the more steadily believe me upon all other occasions.

In the same way does Christ also act, when, at
the last supper, he promises his disciples a kingdom.
He foretels them numberless difficulties, such as, his
own death and their many tribulations ; to the intent
that, when it should come to pass, they might after-
wards the more steadily believe,
r... And Moses by no means obscurely sets forth this
meaning, where he saith, " But Pharaoh shall not
send you away, that many wonders might be wrought
in Egypt" And again, " For this purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might shew in thee my power ;
that my name might be declared throughout all the
earth." Here, you see that Pharaoh was for this pur-
pose hardened, that he might resist God and put off
the redemption ; in order that, there might be an occa-
sion given for the working of signs, and for the display


218

of the power of God, that he might be declared and
believed on throughout all the earth. And what is
this but shewing, that all these things were said and
done to confirm faith, and to comfort the weak, that
they might afterwards freely believe in God as true;
faithful, powerful, and merciful ? Just as thongfr he
had spoken to them in the kindest manner, as to little
children, and had said, Be not terrified at the hard-
ness of Pharaoh, for I work that very hardness my-
self; and I, who deliver you, have it in my own banc!
I will only use it, that I may thereby work many
signs, and declare my Majesty, for the furtherance of
your faith.

And this is the reason why Moses generally
after each plague repeats, " And the heart of Pha-
raoh was hardened, so that he would not let the peo-
ple go ; as the Lord had spoken." What is the intent
of this, " as the Lord had spoken," but, that the Lord
might appear true, who had foretold that he should
be hardened ? — Now, if there had been any vertibiUty
or liberty of will in Pharaoh, which could turn either
way, God could not with such certainty have foretold
his hardening. But as he promised, who could neither
be deceived nor lie, it of certainty and of necessity
came to pass, that he was

not have taken place, had not the hardening been
totally apart from the power of man, and in the power
of God alone, in the same manner as I said
viz. from God being certain, that he should not
the general operation of his omnipotence in Pharaoh,
or on Pharaohs account; nay, that he could not
omit it.

hi Moreover, God was equally certain, that the will


319


of Pharaoh, being naturally evil and averse, could not
consent to the word and work of God, which was
contrary to it; and that, therefore, while the impetus
of willing was preserved in Pharaoh by the omnipo-
tence of God, and while the hated word and work
was continually set before his eyes without, nothing
else could take place in Pharaoh, but offence and the
hardening of his heart. For if God had then omitted
the action of his omnipotence in Pharaoh, when he set
before him the word of Moses which he hated, and the
will of Pharaoh might be supposed to have acted alone
by its own power, then, perhaps, there might have been
room for a discussion, whkh way it had power to turn.
But now, since it was led on and carried away by its
own willing, no violence was done to its will, because
it was not forced against its will, but was carried
along, by the natural operation of God, to will natu-
rally just as it was by nature, that is, evil ; and there-
fore, it could not but run against the word, and thus
become hardened. Hence we see, that this passage
makes most forcibly against Free-will ; and in this
way— God who promised could not lie, and if he
could not lie, then Pharaoh could not but be har-
dened.

t '*

Sect XCI. — But let us also look into Paul, who
takes up this passage of Moses, Rom. ix. How mi-
serably is the Diatribe tortured with that part of the
scripture ! Lest it should lose its hold of Free-will,
it puts on every shape. At one time it says, ' that
there is a necessity of the consequence, but not a ne-
cessity o£ the thing consequent.' At another, f that
there . is an ordinary will, or will of the sign, which


may be resisted ; and a will of decree, which cannot
be resisted.' At another, * that those passages ad-
duced from Paul do not contend for, do not speak
about, the salvation of man.' In one place it says
' that the prescience of God does impose necessity
in another, ' that it does not impose necessity.' Again,
in another place it asserts, * that grace prevents the will
that it might will, and then attends it as it proceeds
and brings it to a happy issue.' Here it states, ' that the
first cause does all things itself : ' and directly after-
wards, 1 that it acts by second causes, remaining itself
inactive.'

By these and the like sportings with words, it does
nothing but fill up its time, and at the same time ob-
scure the subject point from our sight, drawing us
aside to something else. So stupid and doltish does
it imagine us to be, that it thinks we feel no more
interested in the cause than it feels itself. Or, as little
children, when fearing the rod or at play, cover
their eyes with their hands, and think, that as they
see nobody themselves, nobody sees them; so the
Diatribe, not being able to endure the brightness,
nay the lightning of the most clear scriptures, pre-
tending by every kind of manoeuvre that it does not
see, (which is in truth the case) wishes to persuade us
that our eyes are also so covered that we cannot see.
But all these manoeuvres, are but evidences of a con-
victed mind rashly struggling against invincible truth.
• That figment about ' the necessity of the conse-
quence, but not the necessity of the thing consequent,*
has been before refuted. Let then the Diatribe invent
and invent again, cavil and cavil again, as much as it
will— if God foreknew that Judas would be a traitor,


Digitized by Googl<


S21

Judas became a traitor of necessity ; nor was it m
the power of Judas nor of any other creature to alter
it, or to change that will ; though he did what he did
willingly, not by compulsion ; for that willing of his
was his own work ; which God, by the motion of his
omnipotence, moved on into action, as he does every
thing else. — God does not lie, nor is he deceived.
This is a truth evident and invincible. There are no
obscure or ambiguous words here, even though all
the most learned men of all ages should be so blinded
as to think and say to the contrary. How much so-
ever, therefore, you may turn your back upon it, yet,
the convicted conscience of yourself and all men is
compelled to confess, that, if God be not de-
ceived IN THAT WHICH HE FOREKNOWS, THAT
WHICH HE FOREKNOWS MUST, OF NECESSITY, TAKE

place. If it were not so, who could believe his pro-
mises, who would fear his threatennings, if what he
promised or threatened did not of necessity take place !
Or, how could he promise or threaten, if his presci-
ence could be deceived or hindered by our mutability !
This all-clear light of certain truth manifestly stops
the mouths of all, puts an end to all questions, and
for ever settles the victory over all evasive subtleties.

. We know, indeed, that the prescience of man is
fallible. We know that an eclipse does not therefore
take place, because it is foreknown ; but, that it is
therefor* foreknown, because it is to take place. But
what have we to do with this prescience? We are dis-
puting about the prescience of God ! And if you do not
ascribe to this, the necessity of the consequent fore-
known, you take away faith and the fear of God, you

destroy the force of all the divine promises and threat-


ruling . and thus deny divinity itself. But, however,
itseit after having held out for a long
ail things, and being pressed hard br
ne rurce or truth, at last confesses my sentiment :


.— u The question concerning the will
iaa preue?timirion or God* b somewhat difficult. For
Guu viii- dkiee same thinjjs which he foreknows. And

at what Pan! subjoins, " Who
it he huve mercy on whom he
viil. m\i mnien whom be witf r For if there were a
cmiti erieet whatever he chose, and no one


vri


of God, as it is thepri
ill :nnu£s voich tatee place, seems to impose a

— Thus the Diatribe.
I thanks to God for a sound
)touribe ' W here now then is Free-
& * — out igtun this slippery eel is twisted aside in


Paul ooe> not explain this point, he only
afc> ? *w; ^ Who art thou, O man, that
ret^isfsc a^siae* God 1" —

O ooi&DHe e»a^io« ! Is this the way to handle

to make a declaration upon
out of ones own brain, with-
out a scripture, without a miracle, nay, to corrupt the
dear words of God r What! does not Paul
point? What does he then? 'He only
the dLpater/ says the Diatribe. And is not
that rebuke the most complete explanation? For
what was inquired into by that question concerning


223

the will of God? Was it not this— whether or not
it imposed a necessity on our will ? Paul, then, an-
swers that it is thus : — " He will have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.
It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God thatsheweth mercy." Moreover, not con-
tent with this explanation, he introduces those who
murmur against this explanation in their defence of
Free-will, and prate that there is no merit allowed,
that we are damned when the fault is not our own,
and the like, and stops their murmuring and indigna-
tion : saying, " Thou wilt say then, Why doth he yet
find fault? for who hath resisted his will ? "

Do you not see that this is addressed to those,
who, hearing that the will of God imposes necessity
on us, say, '* Why. doth he yet find fault ? " That is,
Why does God thus insist, thus urge, thus exact, thus
find iault ? Why does he accuse, why does he reprove,
as though we men could do what he requires if we
would ? He has no just cause for thus finding fault ;
let him rather accuse his own will ; let him find fault
with that; let him press his requirement upon that;
*5 For who hath resisted his will ?" Who can obtain
mercy if he wills not ? Who can become softened
if he wills to harden? It is not in our power to
change his will, much less to resist it, where he wills
us to be hardened ; by that will, therefore, we are
compelled to be hardened, whether we will or no.

If Paul had not explained this question, and had
not stated to a certainty, that necessity is imposed on
us by the prescience of God, what need was there for
his introducing the murmurers and complainers say-
ing, That his will cannot be resisted? For who would


286

doth he yet firid fault f for Who hath resisted his will ? tt
Where is the God by nature most mertiful ? Where
is he who " willeth not the death of a sinner?" Has
he then created us for this purpose only, that he
might delight himself in the torments of men? And
many things of the same kind, which will be howled
forth by the damned in hell to all eternity.

But however, natural Reason herself is compelled
to confess, that the living and true God must be such
an one as, by his own liberty, to impose necessity on
us. For he must be a ridiculous God, or idol rather,
who did not, to a certainty, foreknow the future, or
was liable to he deceived in events, when even the
(Gentiles ascribed to their gods ' fate inevitable/ And
he would be equally ridiculous, if he could not do and
did not all things, or if any thing could be done with-
out him. If then the prescience and omnipotence of
God be granted^ k naturally follows, as an irrefraga-
ble consequence, that we neither were made by our-
selves, nor live byjourselves, nor do any thing by our-
selves, but by his omnipotence. And since he at the
first foreknew that we should be such, and since he
fobs made «&< such, and moves and rules over us as
such, how, I arte, can it be pretended, that there is any
liberty in us to do, in any respect, otherwise than he
at first foreknew and now proceeds in action ! '

Wherefore, the prescience and omnipotence of
"God, are diametrically opposite to our Free-will. And
it must he, that either God is deceived in his pre-
science and ews in his action; (which is impossible)
i>r we act, and are acted upon, according to his pre-
science and action. — But by the omnipotence of God,
I mean, not that power by which he does not many


227

things that he could do, but that actual power by
which he powerfully works all in all, in which sense
the scripture calls him omnipotent. This omnipotence
and prescience of God, I say, utterly abolishes the
doctrine of Free-will. No pretext can here be framed
about the obscurity of the scripture, or the difficulty
of the subject-point : the words are most clear, . and
known to every school-boy ; and the point is plain
and easy and stands proved by judgment of common
sense ; so that the , series of ages, of times, or of per-
sons, either writing or teaching to the contrary, be it
as great as it may, amounts to nothing at all '«ui
■\ . . • ,r-t. v,r! . • .rJl Jj.*.iJj. .
Sect XCIV. — But it is this, that seems to give
the greatest offence to common sense or natural reason,
— -that the-Ood^ whef is set forth as being so full of
mercy and goodness, should, of his mere will, leave
men, harden them, and damn diem, as though he
delighted in the sins, and in the great and eternal tor*
ments. of the miserable. To think thus of God, seems
iniquitous,): cruel, intolerable ; and it is this that has
given offence to so many and great men of so
toaijy ages.* •> -

, ; And who would not be offended ? I myself have
been offended more than once, even unto the deepest
abyss of desperation;* nay, so far, as even to wish
that I had never been born a man; that is, before I
was brought to know how healthful that desperation
was, and how hear it was unto grace. Here it is*,' that
there has been so much toiling and labouring, to excuse
the goodness of God, and to accuse the will of m«n.
Here it is, that distinctions have been invented between
the ordinary will i of Go<i and the absolute will of God :


228

between the necessity of the consequence, and the
necessity of the thing consequent : and many other
inventions of the same kind. By which, nothing has
ever been effected but an imposition upon the un-
learned, by vanities of words, and by " oppositions of
science falsely so called." For after all, a conscious
conviction has been left deeply rooted in the heart
both of the learned and the unlearned, if ever they
have come to an experience of these things ; and a
knowledge, that our necessity, is a consequence that
must follow upon the belief of the prescience and om-
nipotence of God.

And even natural Reason herself, who is so of-
fended at this necessity, and who invents so many
contrivances to take it out of the way, is compelled
to grant it upon her own conviction from her own
judgment, even though there were no scripture at all.
For all men find these sentiments written in their
hearts, and they acknowledge and approve them
(though against their will) whenever they hear them
treated on;— First, that God is omnipotent, not only
in power but in action (as I said before) ; and that, if
it were not so, he would be a ridiculous God. — And
next, that he knows and foreknows all things, and
neither can err nor be deceived. These two points
then being granted by the hearts and minds of all, they
are »X once compelled, from an inevitable consequence,
to admit, — that we are not made from our own will,
but from necessity : and moreover, that we do not
what we will: according to the law of Free-will, but as
God foreknew and proceeds in action, according to
his infallible and immutable counsel and power.
Wherefore, it is found written alike in the hearts of all


£29

men, that there is no such thing as Free-will ; though
that writing be obscured by so many contending dispu-
tations, and by the great authority of so many men who
have, through so many ages, taught otherwise. Even
as every other law also, which, according to the testi-
mony of Paul, is written in our hearts, is then acknow-
ledged when it is rightly set forth, and then obscured,
when it is confused by wicked teachers, and drawn
aside by other opinions. ;

Sect XCV. — I now return to Paul. If he does
not, Rom. ix., explain this point, nor clearly state our
necessity from the prescience and will of God ; what
need was there for him to introduce the similitude of the
" potter," who, of the " same lump" of clay, makes " one
vessel unto honour and another unto dishonour? " What
need was there for him to observe, that the thing formed
does not say to him that formed it, " Why hast thou
made me thus ?" He is there speaking of men ; and
he compares them to clay, and God to a potter. This
similitude, therefore, stands coldly useless, nay, is in-
troduced ridiculously and in vain, if it be not his sen-
timent, that we have no liberty whatever. Nay, the
whole of the argument of Paul, wherein he defends
grace, is in vain. For the design of the whole epistle
is to. shew, that we can do nothing, even when we
seem to do well; as he in. the same epistle testifies,
where he says, that Israel which followed after righ-
teousness, did not attain unto righteousness ; but that
the Gentiles which followed not after it did attain unto
it. Concerning which I shall speak more at large
hereafter, when I produce my forces.

The fact is, the Diatribe designedly keeps back the


body of Pauls argument Bind its scope, arid Comfort-
ably satisfies itself with' pratjkig upon a few detached
arid corrupted terms. Nor does the exhortation which
Paul afterwards gives, Rom. xL, at all help the Dia-
tribet; where he sakh, " Thou standest by faith, be
not high^mdedr ajgain, " and they also, if they
^iali believe, shall be grafted in, &c. ;" for he says
nothing there about the ability of man, but brings
forth imperative and conditional expressions ; and
what effect they are intended to produce, has been
fully shewn already. Moreover, Paul, there antici-
pating the boasters of Free-will, does not say, they can
believe, but he saith, " God is able to graft them
in again." < :

on To be i brief: The Diatribe moves along with
so much hesitation, and so lingeringly, in handling
these passages of Paul, that its conscience seems to
give the lie to all that it writes. For just at the
point where it ought to have gone on to the proof, it
for the most part, stops short with a * But of this
enough;'. 4 But I shall not now proceed with this;'
' But this is not my present purpose j 1 ' But here they
should have said so and so ;' and many evasions of
the same Jkind ; and it leaves off the subject just in
the middle ; so that, you are left in uncertainty whether
it wished to be understood as speaking on Free-will,
or whether it was only evading the sense of Paul by
means of vanities of words. And all this is being just
in its character, as not having a serious thought upon
the cause in which it is engaged. But as for me I
dare not be thus cold, thus always on the tip-toe of
policy, or thus move to and fro as a reed shaken with
the wind. I must assert with certainty, with con-


$31

stancy, ahd with ardbuf ; and prove what I assert
solidly, appropriately, and fully. ,

Sect. XCVI. — And now, how excellently does
the Diatribe preserve liberty in harmony with neces-
sity, where it says — " Nor does all necessity exclude
Free-will. For instance : God the Father begets a
son, of necessity; but yet, he begets him willingly and
freely, seeing that, he is not forced." —

Am I here, I pray you, disputing about compul-
sion and force? Have I not said in all my books
again and again, that my dispute, on this subject, Is
about the necessity of immutability? I know that the
Father begets willingly, ahd that Judas willingly
betrayed Christ But I say, this willing, in the per-
son of Judas, was decreed to take place from im-
mutability and certainty, if God foreknew it. Or, if
men do not yet understand what I mean, — I make
two necessities : the one a necessity of force, in refe-
rence to the act; the other a necessity of immutability
in reference to the time. Let him, therefore, who
wishes to hear what I have to say, understand, that I
here speak of the latter, not of the former : that is, I
do not dispute whether Judas became a traitor willingly
or unwillingly, 'but whether or not, it was decreed to
come to pass, that Judas should will to betray Christ
at a certain time infallibly predetermined of God !

But only listen to what the Diatribe says upon
this point—" With reference to the immutable pre-
science of God, Judas was of necessity to become
a traitor ; nevertheless, Judas had it in his power to
change his own will."—

Dbst thou understand, friend Diatribe, what thou


252

sayeat? (To aay nothing of that which has been'
already proved, that the will cannot will any thing
but evil.) How could Judas change his own will,
if die immutable prescience of God stand granted !
Could he change the prescience of God and render it
fallible !

<; Here the Diatribe gives it up, and, leaving its
standard, and throwing down its arms, runs from its
post, and hands over the discussion to the subtleties of
the schools concerning the necessity of the consequence
and of the thing consequent : pretending — ' that it
does not wish to engage in the discussion of points
so race.'—

' A step of policy truly, friend Diatribe! — When
you have brought the subject-point into the midst of
the field, and just when the champion-disputant was
required, then you shew your back, and leave to
others the business of answering and defining. But
you should have taken this step at the first, and ab-
stained from writing altogether. < He who ne'er
proved the training-field of arms, let him ne'er in
the battle's brunt appear.' For it never was expected
of Erasmus that he should remove that difficulty which
lies in God's foreknowing all things, and our, never-
theless, doing all things by contingency : this difficulty
existed in the world long before ever the Diatribe saw
the light : but yet, it was expected that he should make
some kmd of answer, and give some kind of definition.
Whereas he, by using a rhetorical transition, drags
away us, knowing nothing of rhetoric, along with him-
self as though we were here contending for a thing
of nought, and were engaged in quibbling about in-
significant niceties; and thus, nobly betakes himself


233

out of the midst of the field, bearing the crowns both
of the scholar and the conqueror.

But not so, brother ! There is no rhetoric of suf-
ficient force to cheat an honest conscience. The voice
of conscience is proof against all powers and figures of
eloquence. I cannot here suffer a rhetorician to pass
on under the cloak of dissimulation. This is not a
time for such manoeuvring. This is that part of the
discussion, where matters come to the turning point.
Here is the hinge upon which the whole turns. Here,
therefore, Free-will must be completely vanquished,
or completely triumph. But here you, seeing your
danger, nay, the certainty of the victory over Free-
will, pretend that you see nothing but argumentative
niceties. Is this to act the part of a faithful theolo-
gian ? Can you feel a serious interest in your cause,
who thus leave your auditors in suspense, and your
arguments in a state that confuses and exasperates
them, while you, nevertheless, wish to appear to have
given honest satisfaction and open explanation ? This
craft and cunning might, perhaps, be borne with in
profane subjects, but in a theological subject, where
simple and open truth is the object required, for the
salvation of souls, it is utterly hateful and intolerable !

* • * ■

Sect. XCVII. — The sophists also felt the invin-
cible and insupportable force of this argument, and
therefore they invented the necessity of the consequence
and of the thing consequent. But to what little pur-
pose thi3 figment is, I have shewn already. For they
do not all the while observe, what they are saying,
d what conclusions they are admitting against them-
selves. For if you grant the necessity of the conse-


256

pertain to the salvation of man, (to which point 1 shall
speak hereafter), are we to suppose, then, that Paul
who adduces it, does so, for no purpose whatever?
Shall we make Paul to be ridiculous, or a vain
trifler, in a discussion so serious ?

But all this breathes nothing but Jerom, who
dares to say, in more places than one, with a super-
cilious brow and a sacrilegious mouth, 'that those
things are made to be of force in Paul, which, in
their own places, are of no force.' This is no less than
saying, that Paul, where he lays the foundation of the
Christian doctrine, does nothing but corrupt the holy
scriptures, and delude believing souls with senti-
ments hatched out of his own brain, and violently thrust
into the scriptures. — Is this honouring the Holy Spi-
rit in Paul, that sanctified and elect instrument of
God ! Thus, when Jerom ought to be read with judg-
ment, and this saying of his to be numbered among
those many things which that man impiously wrote,
(such was his yawning inconsiderateness, and his
stupidity in understanding the scriptures,) the Diatribe
drags him in without any judgment; and not thinking
it right, that his authority should be lessened by any
mitigating gloss whatever, takes him as a most certain
oracle, whereby to judge of, and attemper the scrip-
tures. And thus it is; we take the impious sayings of
men as rules and guides in the holy scripture, and
then wonder that it should become ' obscure and am-
biguous,' and that so many fathers should be blind in
it; whereas, the whole proceeds from this impious
and sacrilegious Reason.

Sect. XOIX. — Let him,, then, be anathema who


237

shall say, 4 that those things which are of no force in
their own places are made to be of force in Paul.'
This, however, is only said, it is not proved. And it
is said by those, who understand neither Paul, nor
the passages adduced by him, but are deceived by
terms; that is, by their own impious interpretations
of them. And if it be allowed that this passage,
Gen. xxv., is to be understood in a temporal sense
(which is not the true sense) yet it is rightly and ef-
fectually adduced by Paul, when he proves from it,
that it was not of the " merits " of Jacob and Esau,

* but of him that calleth," that it was said unto Re^
becca, " the elder shall serve the younger."

Paul is argumentatively considering, whether or
not they attained unto that which was said of them,
by the power or merits of Free-will ; and he proves,
that they did not ; but that Jacob attained unto that,
unto which Esau attained not, solely by the grace
" of him that calleth." And he proves that, by the
incontrovertible words of the scripture : that is, that
they were " not yet born : " and also, that they had

* done neither good nor evil." This proof contains
the weighty sum of his whole subject point: and by
the same proof, our subject point is settled also.

The Diatribe, however, having dissemblingly
passed over all these particulars, with an excellent rhe-
torical fetch, does not here argue at all upon merit,
(which, nevertheless, it undertook to do, and which
this subject point of Paul requires,) but cavils about
temporal bondage, as though that were at all to the
purpose; — but it is merely that it might not seem to be
overthrown by the all-forcible words of Paul. For
what had it, which it could yelp against Paul in sup-


238


port of Free-will*? What did Free-will do for Jacob,
or what did it do against Esau, when it was already
determined, by the prescience and predestination of
God, before either of them was born, what should be
the portion of each ; that is, that the one should serve,
and the other rule? Thus the rewards were decreed,
before the workmen wrought, or were born. It is to this
that the Diatribe ought to have answered. Paul con-
tends for this : — that neither had done either good or
evil : and yet, that by the divine sentence, the one was
decreed to be servant, the other lord. The question here^
is not, whether that servitude pertained urito salva-*
tion, but from what merit it was imposed on him who
had not deserved it. But it is wearisome to contend
with these depraved attempts to pervert and evade
the scripture. '

Sect. C. — But however, that Moses does not in-
tend their servitude only, and that Paul is perfectly
right in understanding it concerning eternal salvation,
is manifest from the text itself. And although this is
somewhat wide of our present purpose, yet I will not
suffer Paul to be contaminated with the calumnies of
the sacrilegious. The oracle in Moses is thus^-" Two
manhenof people shall be separated from thy bowels,
and the one people shall be stronger than the other
people ; and the elder shall serve the younger."
: . Here, manifestly, are two people distinctly men-
tioned. • The one, though the younger, is received
into the grace of God; to the intent that, he might
overcome the other ; riot by his own strength, indeed,
but by a favouring God : for how could tjie younger
overcome the elder unless God were with him !

i


239

Since, therefore, the younger was to be the peo-
ple of God, it is not only the external rule or servi*
tude which is there spoken of, but all that pertains to
the people of God ; that is, the blessing, the word, the
Spirit, the promise of Christ, and the everlasting king-
dom. And this the scripture more fully confirms af-
terwards, where it describes Jacob as being blessed,
and receiving the promises and the kingdom.

All this Paul briefly intimates, where he saith,
" The elder shall serve the younger : " and he sends
us to Moses, who treats upon the particulars more
folly. So that you may say, in reply to the sacrile^
gious sentiment of Jerom and the Diatribe, that these
passages which Paul adduces have more force in their
own place than they have in his epistle. Audi this is
true also, not of Paul only,.' but of all the apostles;
who adduce scriptures as testimonies and assertions
of their own sentiments. But it would be ridiculous
to adduce that as a testimony, which testifies nothing,
and does not make at all to the purpose. And even rf
there were some among the philosophers so ridiculous
as to prove that which Was unknown, by that which
was less known still, or by that which was totally irre*
levant to the subject,' with what face can we. attribute
such kind of proceeding toithe greatest champions
and authors of the Christian doctrines, especially,
since they teach those things which are the essential
articles of faith, and on which the salvation of souls
depends ? But such a face becomes those who> in the
holy scriptures, feel no serious interest whatever.


Sect CI. — And with respect to that of Malachi
which Paul annexe*, Jacob have I loved, but Esau


240


have I hated;" that, the Diatribe perverts by a three-
fold contrivance. The first is—" If (it says) you stick
to the letter, God does not love as we love, nor does
he hate any one : because, passions of this kind do
not pertain unto God." —

What do I hear ! Are we now inquiring whether
or not God loves and hates, and not rather why he
loves and hates ? Our inquiry is, from what merit it
is in us that he loves or hates. We know well enough,
that God does not love or hate as we do ; because,
we love and hate mutably, but he loves and hates
from an eternal and immutable nature ; and hence it

is, that accidents and passions do not pertain unto

» -.

I11XD.

And it is this very state of the truth, that of ne-
cessity proves Free-will to be nothing at all ; seeing
that, the love and hatred of God towards men is im-
mutable and eternal ; existing, not only before there
was. any merit or work of Free-will, but before the
worlds were made ; and that, all things take place in
us from necessity, accordingly) as he loved or loved not
from all eternity. So that, not the love of God only,
but even the manner of his love imposes on us neces-
sity. Here then it may be seen, how much its invented
ways of escape profit the Diatribe ; for the more it
attempts to get away from the truth, the more it
runs upon it; with so little success does it fight
against it !

But be it so, that your trope stands good — that
the love of God is the effect of love, and the hatred
of God the effect of hatred. Does, then, that effect
take place without, and independent of, the will of
God ? Will you here say also, that God does not will


241

as we do, and that the passion of willing doesf'ttot
pertain to him ? If then those effects take place, they
do not take place but according to the will of God.
Hence, therefore, what God wills, that he loves
and hates. Now then, tell me, for what merit did
God love Jacob or hate Esau, before they wrought,
or were born ? Wherefore it stands manifest, that
Paul most rightly adduces Malachi in support of th*
passage from Moses : that is, that God therefore
called Jacob before he was born, because he loved
him ; but that he was not first loved by Jacob, nor
moved to love him from any merit in him. So that, in
the cases of Jacob and Esau, it is shewn — what abi-
lity there is in our Free-will ! 1

Sect C II. — The second contrivance is this: — '
' that Malachi does not seem to speak of that hatred
by which we are damned to all eternity, but of tem-
poral affliction : seeing that, those are reproved who
wished to destroy Edom.' —

This, again, is advanced in contempt of Paul, as
though he had done violence to the scriptures. Thus,
we hold in no reverence whatever, the majesty of the
Holy Spirit, and only aim at establishing our own
sentiments. But let us bear with this contempt for a
moment, and see what it effects. Malachi, then,
speaks of temporal affliction. And what if he do? What
is that to your purpose ? Paul proves out of Malachi,
that that affliction was laid on Esau without any de-
sert, by the hatred of God only : and this he does,
that he might thence conclude, that there is no such
thing as Free-will. This is the point that makes
against you, and it is to this you ou#rt to have answered.

a


242

I am arguing about merit, and you are all the while
talking about reward ; and yet, you so talk about it,
as not to evade that which you wish to evade ; nay,
in your very talking about reward, you acknowledge
merit ; and yet, pretend you do not see it. Tell me,
then, what moved God to love Jacob, and to hate
Esau, even before they were born ?

But however, the assertion, that Malachi is speak-
ing of temporal affliction only, is false: nor is he
speaking of the destroying of Edom : you entirely
pervert the sense of the prophet by this contrivance.
The prophet shews what he means, in words the most
clear. — He upbraids the Israelites with ingratitude :
because, after God had loved them, they did not, in
return, either love him as their Father, or fear him as
their Lord.

That God had loved them, he proves, both by the
scriptures, and by facts : viz. in this : — that although
Jacob and Esau were brothers, as Moses records
Gen. xxv., yet he loved Jacob and chose him before
he was born, as we have heard from Paul already;
but that, he so hated Esau, that he removed away his
dwelling into the desert : that moreover, he so conti-
nued and pursued that hatred, that when he brought
back Jacob from captivity and restored him, he would
not suffer the Edomites to be restored; and that, even
if they at any time said they wished to build, he
threatened them with destruction. If this be not the
plain meaning of the prophet's text, let the whole
world prove me a liar.— Therefore the temerity of the
Edomites is not here reproved, but, as I said before,
the ingratitude of the sons of Jacob ; who do not see
what God has done, for them, and against their bre-


343

thren the Edomites ; and for no other reason, than be-
cause, he hated the one, and loved the other.

How then will your assertion stand good, that the
prophet is here speaking of temporal affliction, when
he testifies, in the plainest words, that he is speaking of
the two people as proceeding from the two patriarchs,
the one received to be a people and saved, and the
other left and at last destroyed ? To be received as a
people, and not to be received as a people, does not
pertain to temporal good and evil only, but unto all
things. For our God is not the God of temporal
things only, but of all things. Nor does God will to
be thy God so as to be worshipped with one shoulder,
<or with a lame foot, but with all thy might, and with
all thy heart, that he may be thy God as well here, as
hereafter, in all things, times, and works.

Sect CIII.— The third contrivance is— « that,
according to the trope interpretation of the passage,
God neither loves all the Gentiles, nor hates all the
Jews ; but, out of each people, some. And that, by
this use of the trope, the scripture testimony in ques-
tion, does not at all go to prove necessity, but to beat
down the arrogancy of the Jews.' — The Diatribe
having opened this way of escape, then comes to this
— 1 that God is said to hate men before they are
born, because, he foreknows that they will do that
which will merit hatred : and that thus, the hatred
and love of God do not at all militate against
Free-will.' — And at last, it draws this conclusion —
1 that the Jews were cut off from the olive tree on ac-
count of the merit of unbelief, and the Gentiles grafted
in on account of the merit of faith, according to the

r 2


QAJL

authority of Paul ; and that, a trope is held out to
those who are cut off, of being grafted in again, and a
warning given to those who are grafted in, that they
fall not off.'—

May I perish if the Diatribe itself knows what it
is talking about. But, perhaps, this is also a rhetori-
cal fetch ; which teaches you, when any danger seems
to be at hand, always to render your sense obscure,
lest you should be taken in your own words. I, for
my part, can see no place whatever in this passage
for those trope-interpretations, of which the Diatribe
dreams, but which it cannot establish by proof. There-
fore, it is no wonder that this testimony does not
make against it, in the trope-interpreted sense, be-
cause, it has no such sense.

Moreover, we are not disputing about cutting off
and grafting in, of which Paul here speaks in his ex-
hortations. I know that men are grafted in by faith,
and cut off by unbelief ; and that they are to be ex-
horted to believe that they be not cut off. But it does
not follow, nor is it proved from this, that they can
believe or fall away by the potver of Free-will, which
is now the point in question. We are not disputing
about, who are the believing and who are not ; who are
Jews and who are Gentiles ; and what is the conse-
quence of believing and falling away ; that pertains
unto exhortation. Our point in dispute is, by what
merit or work they attain unto that faith by which
they are grafted in, or unto that unbelief by which they
are cut off. This is the point that belongs to you as
the teacher of Free-will. And pray, describe to me
this merit.

Paul teaches us, that this comes to them by no


245

work of theirs, but only according to the love or the
hatred of God : and when it is come to them, he ex-
horts them to persevere, that they be not cut off.
But this exhortation does not prove what we can do>
but what we ought to db. 1 / 1

I am compelled thus to hedge in my adversary
with many words, lest he should slip away from, and
leave the subject point, and take up any thing but
that : and in fact, to hold him thus to the point, is to
vanquish him. For all that he aims at, is to slide away
from the point, withdraw himself out of sight, and take
up any thing but that, which he first laid down as his
subject design. : . mr^j s T . ,\\ :

Sect. CIV. — The next passage which the Dia-
tribe takes up is that of Isaiah xlv., " Shall the clay
say to him that fashioneth it, what makest thou?"
And that of Jeremiah xviii., " Behold as the clay is
in the potter s hand, so are ye in mine hand." Here
the Diatribe says again— "these passages are made to
have more force in Paul, than they have in the places
of the prophets from which they are taken ; because, in
the prophets they speak of temporal affliction, but Paul
uses them, with reference to eternal election and repro-
bation." — So that, here again, temerity or ignorance
in Paul, is insinuated.

But before we see how the Diatribe proves, that
neither of these passages excludes Free-will, I will
make this remark : — that Paul does not appear to
have taken this passage out of the scriptures, nor does
the Diatribe prove that he has. For Paul usually
mentions the name of his author, or declares that he
1ms taken a certain part from the scriptures ; whereas,


246

here, he does neither. It is most probable, therefore,
that Paul uses this general similitude according to his
spirit in support of his own cause, as others have used
it in support of theirs. It is in the same way that he
uses this similitude, 11 A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump : v which, 1 Cor. v., he uses to represent
corrupt morals : and applies it in another place to those
who corrupt the word of God : so Christ also speaks
of the " leaven of Herod" and " of the Pharisees."

Supposing, therefore, that the prophets use this
similitude, when speaking more particularly of temporal
punishment ; (upon which I shall not now dwell, lest I
should be too much occupied about irrelevant questions,
and kept away from the subject point,) yet Paul uses it,
in his spirit, against Free-will. And as to saying that
the liberty of the will is not destroyed by our being as
clay in the hand Of an afflicting God, I know not
what it means, nor why the Diatribe contends for
such a point : for, without doubt, afflictions come upon
us from God against our will, and impose upon us
the necessity of bearing them, whether we will or no :
nor is it in our power to avert them : though we are
exhorted to bear them with a willing mind.

Sect CV. — But it is worth while to hear the
Diatribe make out, how it is that the argument of
Paul does not exclude Free-will by that similitude :
for it brings forward two absurd objections : the one
taken from the scriptures, the other from Reason.
From the scriptures it collects this objection.

— 11 When Paul, 2 Tim. ii., had said, that in a
great house there are vessels of gold and silver, wood
and earth, some to honour and some to dishonour, he


247

immediately adds, " If a man therefore purge himself
from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, &c." —
Then the Diatribe goes on to argue thus : — " What
could be more ridiculous than for any one to say
to an earthen chamber-convenience, If thou shalt
purify thyself, thou shalt be a vessel unto honour ?

But this would be rightly said to a rational earthen
vessel, which can, when admonished, form itself ac-
cording to the will of the Lord." — By these observa-
tions it means to say, that the similitude is not in all
respects applicable, and is so mistaken, that it effects
nothing at all.

I answer : (not to cavil upon this point :) — that
Paul does not say, if any one shall purify himself from
his own filth, but " from these ;" that is, from the
vessels unto dishonour : so that the sense is, if any
one shall remain separate, and shall not mingle him-
self with wicked teachers, he shall be a vessel unto
honour. Let us grant also that this passage of Paul
makes for the Diatribe just as it wishes : that is,
that the similitude is not effective. But how will it
prove, that Paul is here speaking on the same subject
as he is in Rom. ix., which is the passage in dispute ?
Is it enough to cite a different passage without at all
regarding whether it have the same or a different ten-
dency ? There is not (as I have often shewn) a more
easy or more frequent fall in the scriptures, than the
bringing together different scripture passages as being
of the same meaning. Hence, the similitude in those
passages, of which the Diatribe boasts, makes less to
its purpose than our similitude which it would refute.

But (not to be contentious), let us grant, that each
passage of Paul is of the same tendency ; and that a


248

similitude does not always apply in all respects; (which
is without cotroversy true ; for otherwise, it would not
be a similitude, nor a translation, but the thing itself ;
according to the proverb, 1 A similitude halts, and
does not always go upon four feet yet the Diatribe
errs and transgresses in this : — neglecting the scope
of the similitude, which is to be most particularly ob-
served, it contentiously catches at certain words of it :
whereas, ' die knowledge of what is said, (as Hilary ob-
serves,) is to be gained from the scope of what is said,
not from certain detached words only.' Thus, the
efficacy of a similitude depends upon the cause of the
similitude. Why then does the Diatribe disregard
that, for the purpose of which Paul uses this simili-
tude, and catch at that, which he says is unconnected
with the purport of the similitude ? That is to say,
it is an exhortation where he saith, ( \ If a man purge
himself from these;" but a point of doctrine wheie-
he saith, " In a great house, there are vessels of gold,
&c." So that, from all the circumstances of the words
and mind of Paul, you may understand that he is
establishing the doctrine concerning the diversitY and
use of vessels. ♦ . 9

i . The sense, therefore, is this : — seeing that so many
depart from the faith, there is no comfort for us but
the being certain that " the foundation of God standeth
sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that
are his. And let every one that calleth upon the
name of the Lord depart from evil." This then is the
cause and efficacy of the similitude — that God knows
his own ! Then follows the similitude — that there are
different vessels, some to honour and some to disho-
nour. By this it is proved at once, that the vessels
V


249


do not prepare themselves, but that the
pares them. And this is what Paul means, Rom. ix. :
where he saith, " Hath not the potter power over the
clay, &c." Thus, the similitude of Paul stands
effective : and that to prove, that there is no
thing as Free-will in the sight of God.

After this, follows the exhortation : " If a
rify himself from these, &c." and for what purpose
this is, may be clearly collected from what we have
said already. It does not follow from this, that the
man can purify himself. Nay, if any thing be proved
hereby it is this:— that Free-will can purify itself
without grace. For he does not say, if grace purify
a man ; but, " if a man purify himself." But con-
cerning imperative and conditional passages, we have
said enough. Moreover, the similitude Is not set
forth in conditional, but in indicative verbs — that the
elect and the reprobate, are as vessels of honour and
of dishonour. In a word, if this fetch stand good,
the whole argument of Paul comes to nothing. For
in vain does he introduce vessels murmuring against
God as the potter, if the fault plainly appear to be
in the vessel, and not in the potter. For who would


nation !

rit i*ut jocJ.™* r Miiu 4femJ u ) j ecu* *\3
Sect. CVI. — The other absurd objection, the
Diatribe gathers from Madam Reason ; who is called,
Human Reason — that the fault is not to be laid on
the vessel, but on the potter : especially, since he is
such a potter, who creates the clay as well as at-
tempers it.—" Whereas, (says the Diatribe) here the


*-w • 9 « _ >


a '


250

vessel is cast into eternal fire, which merited nothing ;
except that it had no power of its own."—

In no one place does the Diatribe more openly
betray itself, than in this. For it is here heard to say,
in other words indeed, but in the same meaning, that
which Paul makes the impious to say, " Why doth
he yet complain? for who hath resisted his will?"
This is that which Reason cannot receive, and can-
not bear. This is that, which has offended so many
men renowned for talent, who have been received
through so many ages. Here they require, that God
should act according to human laws, and do what
seems right unto men, or cease to be God ! * His
secrets of Majesty, say they, do not better his cha-
racter in our estimation.' Let him render a reason
why he is God, or why he wills and does that, which
has no appearance of justice in it. It is as if one
should ask a cobbler or a collar-maker to take the
seat of judgment'

Thus, flesh does not think God worthy of so great
glory, that it should believe him to be just and good,
while he says and does those thing? which are above
that, which the volume of Justin and the fifth book of
Aristotle's Ethics, have defined to be justice, That
Majesty which is the creating cause of all things, must
bow to one of the dregs of his creation : and that
Corycian cavern must, vice versA, fear its spectators.
It is absurd that he should condemn him, who can-
not avoid the merit of damnation. And, on account
of this absurdity, it must be false, that God has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and hardens whom he
will. He must be brought to order. He must have


251

certain laws prescribed to him, that he damn not
any one but him, who, according to our judgment,
deserves to be damned.

And thus, an effectual answer is given to Paul
and his similitude. He must recal it, and allow it to
be utterly ineffective : and must so attemper it, that
this potter (according to the Diatribe's interpretation)
make the vessel to dishonour from merit preceding :
in the same manner in which he rejected some Jews
on account of unbelief, and received Gentiles on
account of faith. But if God work thus,' and have
respect unto merit, why do those impious ones mur-
mur and expostulate ? Why do they say, " Why
doth he find fault? for who hath resisted his will ?"
And what need was there for Paul to restrain them ?
For who wonders even, much less is indignant and
expostulates, when any one is damned who merited
damnation? Moreover where remains the power of
the potter to make what vessel he will, if, being sub-
ject to merit and laws, he is not permitted to make
what he will, but is required to make what he Ought?
The respect of merit militates against the power and
liberty of making what he will : as is proved by that
" good man of the house," who, when the workmen
murmured and expostulated concerning their right,
objected in answer, " Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with mine own?" — These are the argu-
ments, which will not permit the gloss of the Diatribe
to be of any avail.

' Sect. C VII.— But let us, I pray you, suppose that
God ought to be such an one, who should have respect
unto merit in those who are to be damned. Must we


2o2


not, in like manner, also require and grant, that he
ought to have respect unto merit in those who are to
be saved ? For if we are to follow Reason, it is equally
unjust, that the undeserving should be crowned, as
that the undeserving should be damned. We will con-
clude, therefore, that God ought to justify from merit
preceding, or we will declare him to be unjust, as being
one who delights in evil and wicked men, and who
invites and crowns their impiety by rewards. — And
then, woe unto you, sensibly miserable sinners, under
that God ! For who among you can be saved !

Behold, therefore, the iniquity of the human heart !
When God saves the undeserving without merit, nay,
justifies the impious with all their demerit, it does not
3.CCUSG him of iniquity, it does not expostulate with
him why he does it, although it is, in its own judgment,
most iniquitous ; but because it is to its own profit,
and plausible, it considers it just and good. But
when he damns the undeserving, this, because it is not
to its own profit, is iniquitous ; this is intolerable ;
here it expostulates, herd it murmurs, here it blas-
phemes I

You see, therefore, that the Diatribe, together with
its friends, do not, in this cause, judge according to
equity, but according to the feeling sense of their own
profit. For, if they regarded equity, they would ex-
postulate with God when he crowned the undeserving,
as they expostulate with him when he damns the un-
deserving. And also, they would equally praise and
proclaim God when he damns the undeserving, as
they do when he saves the undeserving ; for the iniquity
in either instance is the same, if our own opinion be
regarded : — unless they mean to say, that the iniquity


25S

is not equal, whether you laud Cain for his fratricide
and make him a king, or cast the innocent Abel into
prison and murder him !

Since, therefore, Reason praises God when he
saves the undeserving, but accuses him when he
damns the undeserving; it stands convicted of not
praising God as God, but as a certain one who serves
its own profit ; that is, it seeks, in God, itself and the
things of itself, but seeks not God and the things of
God. But if it be pleased with a God who crowns
the undeserving, it ought not to be displeased with a
God who damns the undeserving. For if he be just
,in the one instance, how shall he not be just in the
other ? seeing that, in the one instance, he pours forth
grace and mercy upon the undeserving, and in the
other, pours forth wrath and severity upon the unde-
serving ? — He is, however, in both instances, mon-
strous and iniquitous in the sight of men, yet just and
true in himself. But, how it is just, that he should
crown the undeserving, is incomprehensible now, but
we shall see when we come there, where it will be nb


longer believed, but seen in revelation face to face.
So also, how it is just, that he should damn the unde-
serving, is incomprehensible now, yet, we believe it,
until the Son of Man shall be revealed !

•»

Sect CVIII. — The Diatribe, however, being it-
self bitterly offended at this similitude of the " potter "
and the " clay," is not a little indignant, that it should
be so pestered with it. And at last it comes to this.
Having collected together different passages of scrip-
ture, some of which seem to attribute all to man, and
others all to grace, it angrily contends — ' that the


254

scriptures on both sides should be understood accord-
ing to a sound interpretation, and not received simply
as they stand : and that, otherwise, if we still so press
upon it that similitude, it is prepared to press upon
us, in retaliation, those subjunctive and conditional
passages; and especially, that of Paul, ".If a man
purify himself from these." This passage (it says)
makes Paul to contradict himself, and to attribute all
to man, unless a sound interpretation be brought in to
make it clear. And if an interpretation be admitted
here, in order to clear up the cause of grace, why
should not an interpretation be admitted in the simi-
litude of the potter also, to clear up the cause of Free-
will?'—

I answer : It matters not with me, whether you
receive the passages in a simple sense, a twofold
sense, or a hundred-fold sense. What I say is this :
that by this sound interpretation of yours, nothing
that you desire is either effected or proved. For that
which is required to be proved, according to your de-
sign, is, that Free-will cannot will good. Whereas, by
this passage, " If a man purify himself from these,"
as it is a conditional sentence, neither any thing nor
nothing is proved) for it is only an exhortation of
Paul. Or, if you add the conclusion of the Diatribe,
and say, 1 the exhortation is in vain, if a man cannot
purify himself ; ' then it proves, that Free-will can do
all things without grace. And thus the Diatribe ex-
plodes itself.

We are waiting, therefore, for some passage of the
scripture, to shew us that this interpretation is right;
we give no credit to those who hatch it out of their
own brain. For, we deny, that any passage can be


255

found which attributes all to man. We deny that Paul
contradicts himself, where he says, " If a man shall
purify himself from these." And we aver, that both
the contradiction and the interpretation which exhorts
it, are fictions ; that they are both thought of, but nei-
ther of them proved. This, indeed, we confess, that,
if we were permitted to augment the scriptures by the
conclusions and additions of the Diatribe, and to say,

• if we are not able to perform the things which are
commanded, the precepts are given in vain ;' then, in
truth, Paul would militate against himself, as would
the whole scripture also : for then, the scripture would
be different from what it was before, and would prove
that Free-will can do all things. What wonder, how-
ever, if he should then contradict himself again, where
he saitth, in another place, that " God worketh all
inall!"

But, however, the scripture in question, thus
augmented, makes not only against us, but against the
Diatribe itself, which defined Free-will to be that,

* which cannot will any thing good.' Let, therefore,
the Diatribe clear itself first, and say, how these two
assertions agree with Paul : — ' Free-will cannot will
any thing good/ and also, 4 If a man purify himself
from these : therefore, man can purify himself, or it is
said in vain/ — You see, therefore, that the Diatribe,
being entangled and overcome by that similitude of
the potter, only aims at evading it; not at all consi-
dering in the meantime, how its interpretation mili-
tates against its subject point, and how it is refuting
and laughing at itself.

Sect. CIX. — But as to myself, as I said before,


256


I never aimed at any kind of invented interpretation.
Nor did I ever speak thus : 1 Stretch forth thine hand ;
that is, grace shall stretch it forth.' All these things,
are the Diatribe's own inventions concerning me, to
the furtherance of its own cause. What I said was
this : — that there is no contradiction in the w ords of
the scripture, nor any need of an invented interpreta-
tion to clear up a difficulty. But that the assertors of
Free-will wilfully stumbled upon plain ground, and
dream of contradictions where there are none.

For example : There is no contradiction in these
scriptures, " If a man purify himself," and, " God
worketh all in all." Nor is it necessary to say, in
order to explain this difficulty, God does something
and man does something. Because, the former scrip-
ture is conditional, which neither affirms or denies any
work or power in man, but simply shews what work
or power there ought to be in man. There is nothing
figurative here ; nothing that requires an invented in-,
terpretation ; the words are plain, the sense is plain ;
that is, if you do not add conclusions and corruptions,
after the manner of the Diatribe : for then, the sense
would not be plain : not, however, by its own fault,
but by the fault of the corrupter.

But the latter scripture, " God worketh all in all,"
is an indicative passage ; declaring, that all works and
all power are of God. How then do these two pas-
sages, the one of which says nothing of the power of
man, and the other of which attributes all to God,
contradict each other, and not rather sweetly harmo-
nize. But the Diatribe is so drowned, suffocated in,
and corrupted with, that sense of the carnal interpreta-
tion, ' that impossibilities are commanded in vai^,'


257


that ithas no- power over itself; but as soon as it
hears an imperative or conditional word, it immedi-
ately tacks to it its indicative conclusions : — a certain
thing is commanded - therefore, we are able to do it,
and do do ity or the command is ridiculous.

On this side it bursts forth and boasts of its com*
plete victory : as though it held it as a settled point}
that these conclusions, as soon as hatched in thought,
were established as firmly as the divine authority.
And hence, it pronounces with all confidence, that ill
some places of the scripture aH is attributed to man :
and that, therefore, there ir a contradiction that re-
quites interpretation. But it does not see, that all this
is the figment of its own brain, no where confirmed
by one iota of scripture. And not only so, but that it
is of such a nature, that if it were admitted, it would
confhte no one more directly than itself : because, if
it proved <ariy thing, it would prove that Free-will can
dd ail things* whereas, it undertook to prove the di-
rectly contrary. • ,

0

. Sect. CX.— ^In the same way also it so continually
repeats this : — " If man do nothing there is no place for
merit, and where there is no place for merit, there can
be no place either for punishment or for reward."—

Here again, it does not see, that by these carnal
arguments, it refutes itself more directly than it refutes
us. For what do these conclusions prove, but that all
merit is in the power of Free-will ? And then, where
is any room for grace? Moreover, supposing Free-
will to merit a certain little, and grace the rest, why
does Free-will receiVejthe whole reward ? Or, shall we
suppose it to receive but a certain small portion, of re-


958

ward ? Then, if there be a place for merit, in order
that there might be a place for reward, the merit must
be as great as the reward.

But why do I thus lose both words and time upon
a thing of nought ? For, even supposing the whole
were established at which the Diatribe is aiming, and
that merit is partly the work of man, and partly the
work of God ; yet it cannot define that work itself,
what it is, of what kind it is, or how far it is to ex-
tend; therefore, its disputation is about nothing at
all. Since, therefore, it cannot prove any one thing
which it asserts, nor establish its interpretation nor
contradiction, nor bring forward a passage that attri*
butes all to man ; and since all are the phantoms of
its own cogitation, Paul's similitude of the " potter'*
and the " clay," stands unshaken and invincible — that
it is not according to our Free-will, what kind of
vessels we are made. And as to the exhortations of
Paul, " If a man purify himself from these," and the
like, they are certain models, according to which, we
ought to be formed ; but they are not proofs of our
working power, or of our desire.— Suffice it to have
spoken thus upon these points, the hardening of
Pharaoh, the case of Esau, and the similitude
of the potter.

Sect. CXI. — The Diatribe at length comes to

THE PASSAGES CITED BY LUTHER AGANIST FrEE-
WILL, WITH THE INTENT TO REFUTE THEM.

The first passage, is that of Gen. vi., " My
Spirit shall not always remain in man ; seeing
that, he is flesh." This passage it confutes variously.
First, it says, < that flesh, here, does not signify vile


£59

affection, but infirmity.' Then it augments the text of
Moses, 1 that this saying of his, refers to the men of
that age, and not to the whole race of men : as if he
had said, in these men.' And moreover, 1 that it does
not refer to all the men, even of that age ; because,
Noah was excepted.' And at last it says, ' that this
word has, in the Hebrew, another signification ; that it
signifies the mercy, and not the severity, Of God ; ac-
cording to the authority of Jerom.' By this it would,
perhaps, persuade us, that since that saying did not
apply to Noah but to the wicked, it was not the mercy,
but die severity of God that was shewn to Noah, and
the mercy, not the severity of God that was shewn to
the wicked.

But let us away with these ridiculing vanities of
the Diatribe : for there is nothing which it advances,
which does not evince, that it looks upon the scrip-
tures as mere fables. What Jerom here triflingly talks
about, is nothing at all to me ; for it is certain that he
cannot prove any thing that he says. Nor is our dis-
pute concerning the sense of Jerom, but concerning
the sense of the scripture. Let that perverter of the
scriptures attempt to make it appear, that the Spirit
of God signifies indignation. — I say, that he is defi-
cient in both parts of the necessary two-fold proof:
First, he cannot produce one passage of the scripture,
in which the Spirit of God is understood as signifying
indignation : for, on the contrary, kindness and sweet-
ness are every where ascribed to the Spirit. And
next, if he should prove that it is understood in any
place as signifying indignation, yet, he cannot easily
prove, that it follows of necessity, that it is so to be
received in this place.

s 2


So also, let kirn attempt to make it appear, that
44 flesh," is here to be understood as signifying infinnity ;
yet, he is as deficient as ever in proof. For where
Paul calls the Corinthiane " carnal," he does not
signify mfirmity, but corrupt affection; because, he
charges them with " strife and divisions ; " which is
not infirmity, or incapacity to receive " stronger "
doctrine, but malice and that " old leaven," which, he
commands them to " purge out" But let us examine
the Hebrew.

Sect CXIL — " My Spirit shall not always judge
in man; for he is flesh." These are, verbatim,, the
words of Moses : and if we would away with our own
dreams, the Words as they there stand, are, I mink,
sufficiently plain and clear. And that they are the
words of; an angry God, is fully manifest, both from
what precedes, and from what follows, together with
the effect — the flood \ The cause of their being
spoken* was, the. sons of men taking unto them wives
from the mere lust of the flesh, and then, so filling* the
earth with violence, as to cause God to hasten the
flood, and- scarcely to delay that for "an hundred
and twenty years," which, but for them, he would
never, have brought upon the earth at all. Read and
study Moses, and you will plainly see that this is his
meaning.

But it is no wonder- that the scriptures should be
obscure, or that you should be enabled to establish
from them, not only a free, but a divine will, where
you are allowed so to trifle with them, as to seek to
make out of them a Virgilian patch-work. And this is
what you call, clearing up difficulties, and putting an


261

end to all dispute by moans of au interpretation ! Btrt
it is with these trifling vanities that JeromiandGrigen
have filled the world; iandi have been the original
cause of that pestilent practice — the not attending to
the simplicity of fhe scriptures . us. j . 1

It is enough for me to prove, that in this passage,
the divine authority calls men " flesh;" and flesh,
in that sense, that die Spirit sif Godxould not conti-
nue among them, but was, oat a decreed -time, to he
taken from them. And what God meant when he de-
clared that his Spirit should not ** always judge among -
men," is explained immediately afterwards, where he
determines "an hundred and twenty years'* as the
time that , he would still continue to judge.

Here he contrasts ''spirit" with ^ flesh:" shew>
ing-, that men being flesh, receive not the Spirit : and
he, as being a Spirit, cannot approve of lesh : where-
f ore it is, that the Spirit, after " an imndred and
twenty years," is to be withdrawn. Hence you may
understand the passage of Moses thus- — My Spirit,
which is in Noah andtih the other holy men, rebukes
those impious ones; by the won! of their preaching,
and by their holy lives, (for to "judge anrtng men,"
is to act among them in the office of the word ; to re-
prove, to rebuke, to beseech tttem, opportunely and
importunely,) but in vajn: for they, being blinded
and gardened by the flesh, only become the worse 1 the
more they are judged. — And so it ever is, that where-
everthe word of God comes forth in the world, these
men become the worse, the more they hear of it. And
this is the reason why wrath is hastened, even as the
flood was hastened at that time : because, they now,
not only sin, but even despise *race : a* Christ salth,

1


1


46a

" Light is come into the world, and men hate the
light." John iii.

' Since, therefore, men, according to the testimony
of God himself, are P flesh," they can savour of nothing
but flesh ; so far is it from possibility, that Free-will
should do any thing but sin. And if, even while the
Spirit of God is among them calling and teaching,
they only become worse, what will they do when left
to themselves without the Spirit of God !

Sect CXIII.— Nob is it at all to the purpose,
your saying, — * that Moses is speaking with reference
to the men of that age' — for the same applies unto
all men ; because, all are flesh ; as Christ saith, John
iii.i " That which is born of the flesh is flesh." And
how deep a corruption that is, he himself shews in
the same chapter, where he saith, u Except a man
be born again, he cannot enter the kingdom of God."
Let, therefore, the Christian know, that Origen and
Jerom, together with all their train, perniciously err,
when they say, that "flesh" ought not, in these passages,
to be understood as meaning ' corrupt affection:'
because, that of 1 Cor. iii., " For ye are yet carnal,"
-fignhies ungodliness. For Paul means, that there are
some among them still ungodly: and moreover, that
even the saints, in as far as they savour of carnal
things, are " carnal," though justified by the Spirit.

In a word; you may take this as a general observa-
tion upon the scriptures. — Wherever mention is made
of " flesh " in contradistinction to " spirit," you may
there, by " flesh," understand every thing that is con-
trary to spirit : as in this passage, " The flesh profketh
But where it is used abstractedly, there you


. 1 «


I I II


ITU


D


i


265

may understand the corporal state and nature : as
u They twain shall be one flesh," " My flesh is meat
indeed," " The Word was made flesh." In such pas-
sages, you may make a figurative alteration in the
Hebrew, and for ' flesh,' say 1 body.' For in the He-
brew tongue, the one term " flesh" embraces in sigr
nification our two terms, ' flesh ' and 4 body.' And I
could wish that these two terms had been distinctively
used throughout the canon of the scripture. — Thus
then, I presume, my passage Gen. vi. still stands di-
rectly against Free-will : since " flesh " is proved to
be that, which Paul declares, Rom. viii., cannot be
subject to God, as we . may there see ; and since the
Diatribe itself asserts, ' that it cannot will any thing
good.' u

* •

Sect CXIV. — Another passage is that of
Gen., viii., " The thought and imagination of man's
heart, is evil from his youth." And that also Gen. vi.,
" Every imagination of man's heart is only evil conti-
nually." These passages it evades thus : — " The prone-
ness to evil which is in most men, does not, wholly,
take away the freedom of the will."— '>.; u

n* Does God, I pray you, here speak of ' most men,'
and not rather of all men, when, after the flood, as it
were repenting, he promises to those who were then
remaining, and to those who were to come, that he
would no more bring a flood upon the earth " for
man's sake : " assigning this as the reason s — because
man is prone to evil ! As though he had said, If I
should act according to the wickedness of man, I should
never cease from bringing a flood. Wherefore, hence-
forth, I will not act according to that which he de-


264


mne$i4BK You tee; therefore, that God, both before
and after the flood, declares that man is erii : «o that
what the Diatribe says about ' most men/ amounts
to nothing at aU

Moreover, a proneness or inclination to evil, ap-
pears to the Diatribe, to be -a matter of little moment ;
as though it were in our own power to keep ourselves
affright, or to restrain it* whereas-the scripture, by that
proneness, signifies the continual bent and impetus
of the will, to evil. Why does not the Diatribe here
appeal to the Hebrew? Moses says nothing there about
proneness. But, that you may have no room for cavil-
laoon, the Hebrew, diapj runs thus :— "€hol

JET 2 MAH*SC»EBOTH LLBBO RAK RA CMOL

haiom that is, u Every imagination of the thought
pf his heart is only evil all days." He does not say, that
he is intent or prone to evil ; but that, evil altogether,
and nothing bat evil, is thought or imagined by man
throughout his whole life. The nature of his evil is
described to be that, which neither does nor can do
any thing but evil, as being evil itself : for, according
to the testimony of Christ, an evil tree can bring forth
none other than evil fruit.

And as to the Diatribes pertly objecting— « Why
was time given for repentance, then, if no part of
repentance depend on Free-will, and all things be
conducted according to the law of necessity " —

I answer: Yon may make the same objection
to aH the precepts of God; and say, Why does he
command at all, if all things take place of necessity?
He commands, in order to instruct and admonish,
that mm, being humbled under the icnowledge a£
their evil, might come to grace, as I have fully shewn


365

already.— This passage, therefore, still remains invin-
cible against the freedom of the will !

Sect. CXV. — The third passage is that in Isaiah
ri., " She hath received at the Lord's hand double
for ail her sins."—" Jerom (says the Diatribe) inter-
prets this concerning the divine vengeance, not con-
cerning his grace given in return for evil deeds." —

I hear you.— Jerom «ays so : therefore, it is
true !— I am disputing about Isaiah, who here speaks
in the clearest words, and Jerom is east in my teeth ;
a man, (to say no worse df him) of neither judgment
nor application. Where *ow is that promise of ours,
by which we agreed at the outset, ' that we would go
according to the scriptures, and tiot according to the
commentaries of men ? ' The whole of this chapter of
Isaiah, aixording to the testimony of the evangelists,
where they mention it as referting to John the Baptist,
" the voice of one crying," speaks of the remission of
sins proclaimed by the Gospel. But we will allow
Jerom, after his manner, to thrust in the blindness of
the Jews for an historical sense, and his own trilling
vanities for an allegory; and, turning all grammar
upside down, we will understand this passage as
speaking of vengeance, which speaks of the remission
of Bite. — But, I pray you, what vengeance is fulfilled
in the preaching of Christ ? Let us, however, see how
the words run in the Hebrew.

" Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, (in the voca-
tive) or, my people (in the objective ) saith your God."
— -He, I presume, who commands to " comfort," is
not executing vengeance ! It then follows,

« Speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry


Digitized by Gc*Ogle~


266

unto her/—" Speak ye to the heart " is a Hebraism,
and signifies to speak good things, sweet things, and
alluring things. Thus, Shechem, Gen. xxxiv. 3, speaks
to the heart of Dinah, whom he defiled : that is, when
she was heavy-hearted, he comforted her with tender
words, as our translator has rendered it And what
those good and sweet things are, which are com-
manded to be proclaimed to their comfort, the
prophet explains directly afterwards: saying,

" That her warfare is accomplished, her iniquity is
pardoned; for she hath received of the Lord's hand,
double for all her sins." — " Her warfare," ( militia*)
which our translators have rendered " her evil," ( ma-
litia,) is considered by the Jews, those audacious gram-
marians, to signify an appointed time. For thus they
understand that passage Job vii., " Is there not an
appointed time to man upon earth ? " that is, his time
is determinately appointed. But I receive it simply,
and according to grammatical propriety, as signifying
" warfare." Wherefore, you may understand Isaiah,
as speaking with reference to the race and labour of
the people under the law, who are, as it were, fight-
ing on a platform. Hence Paul compares both the
preachers and the hearers of the word to soldiers :
as in the case of Timothy, 2 Tim. ii., whom he com-
mands to be " a good soldier," and to " fight the
good fight" And, 1 Cor. ix., he represents them as
running " in a race : " and observes also, that M no
one is crowned except he strive lawfully." He equips
the Ephesians and Thessalonians with arms, Ephes.
vi. And he glories, himself, that he had " fought the
good fight," g Tim. iv. : with many like instances m
other places. So also at 1 Samuel ii., it is in the


267

Hebww, " And the sons of Eli slept with the women
who fought (nultiantibus) at the door of the taber-
nacle of the congregation :" of whose fighting, Moses
makes mention in Exodus. And hence it is, that the
God of that people is called the " Lord of Sabaoth : "
that is, the Lord of warfare and of armies.

Isaiah, therefore, is proclaiming, that the warfare
of the people under the law, who are pressed down
under the law as a burthen intolerable, as Peter saith.
Acts xv., is to be at an end ; and that they being
freed from the law, are to be translated into the new
warfare of the Spirit. Moreover, this end of their
most hard warfare, and this translation to the new and
all-free warfare, is not given unto them on account of
their merit, seeing that, they could not endure it ; nay,
it is rather gfven unto them on account of their deme-
rit; for their warfare is ended, by their iniquities being
freely forgiven them.

The words are not * obscure or ambiguous* here.
He saith, that their warfare was ended, by their ini-
quities being forgiven them : manifestly signifying, that
the soldiers under the law, did not fulfil the law, and
could not fulfil it : and that they only carried on a war-
fare of sin, and were soldier-sinners. As though God
had said, I am compelled to forgive them their sins, if
I would have my law fulfilled by them ; nay, I must
take away my law entirely when I forgive them ; for
I see they cannot but sin, and the more so the more
they fight ; that is, the more they strive to fulfil the
law by their own powers. For in the Hebrew, " her
iniquity is pardoned" signifies, its being done in gra-
tuitous good-will. And it is thus that the iniquity is
pardoned ; without any merit, nay, under all demerit ; as


£68

is shewn in what follows, "for she hath received at
the Lord's hand doable for all her Bins."— That is, as
I said before, not only the remission of sins, but an
end of the warfare : which is nothing more or less
than this : — die law being taken out of the way, which
is " the strength of sin," and their sin being pardoned,
which is "'the sting of death," they reign in a two-
fold liberty by the victory of Jesus Christ: which is
what Isaiah means when he says, " from the hand of
the Lord:" for they do not obtain it by their own
pow r ers, or on account of their own merit, but they
receive it from the conqueror and giver, Jesus Christ

And that which is, according to the Hebrew, " in
all her sins," is, according to the Latin, "for all her
sins," or, " on account of all her sins." As in Hosea
xii., " Israel served in a wife :" that is, "for a~wife."
And so also in Psalm lix., " They lay in wait in my
soul that is, "for my soul." Isaiah therefore is here
pointing out to us those merits of ours, by which we
imagine we are to obtain the two-fold liberty ; that of
the end of the law-warfare, and that of the pardon of
sin ; making it appear to us, that they were nothing but
*ins, nay, all sins. * m+

Could I, therefore, suffer this most beautiful pas-
sage, which stands invincible against Free-will, to be
thus bedaubed with Jewish filth cast upon it by Jerom
and the Diatribe ?— God forbid ! No! My Isaiah
stands victor over Free-will ; and clearly shews, that
grace is given, not to merits or to the endeavours of
Free-will, but to sins and demerits ; and that Free-
will with all its powers, can do nothing but carry on a
warfare of sin ; so that, the very law which it imagines
to be given as a help, becomes intolerable to it, and


263

makes h the greater sinner, the longer it is under
its warfare.

Sect. CXVI. — But as to the Diatribe disputing
thus — >' Although sin abound by the law, and where sin
has abounded, grace mwch more abound ; yet, it does
not therefore follow, that man, doing by God's help
what is pleasing to him, cannot by works morally good,
prepare himself for the favour of God."—

Wonderful ! Surely the Diatribe does not speak
this out of its own head, but has taken it out of some
paper or other, sent or received from another quarter,
and inserted it in its book ! For it certainly can neither
see; nor hear the meaning of these words! If sin
abound by the law, how is it possible that a man can
prepare himself by moral works, for the favour of
God ? How can works avail any thing, when the law
avails nothing ? Or, what else is it for sin to abound
by the law, but for all the works, done according to
the law, to become sins? — But of this elsewhere. But
what does it mean when it says, that man, assisted
by the help of God, can prepare himself by moral
works? Are we here disputing concerning the divine
assistance, or concerning Free-will ? For what is not
possible through the divine assistance ? But the feet
is*, as I said before, the Diatribe cares nothing for the
cause it has taken up, and therefore it snores and
yawns forth such words as these.

But however, it adduces Cornelius the centurion,
Acts x., as an example : observing — * that his prayers
and alms pleased God before he was baptized, and
before he was inspired by the Holy Spirit. '

I have read Luke upon the Acts too, and yet I


97b


never perceived from one single syllable, that the
works of Cornelius were morally good without the
Holy Spirit, as the Diatribe dreams. But on the
contrary, I find that he was " a just man and one that
feared God : " for thus Luke calls him. But to call
a man without the Holy Spirit, " a just man and one
that feared God," is the same thing as calling Baal,
Christ !

Moreover, the whole context shews, that Corne-
lius was " clean" before God, even upon the testimony of
the vision which was sent down from heaven to Peter,
and which reproved him. Are then the righteousness
and faith of Cornelius set forth by Luke in such
words and attending circumstances, and do the Dia-
tribe and its sophists remain blind with open eyes, or
see the contrary, in a light of words and an evidence
of circumstances so clear? Such is their want of dili-
gence in reading and contemplating the scriptures :
and yet, they must brand them with the assertion that
they are * obscure and ambiguous.' But grant it, that
he was not as yet baptized, nor had as yet heard the
word concerning Christ risen from the dead : — does it
therefore follow, that he was without the Holy Spirit?
According to this, you will say that John the Baptist
and his parents, the mother of Christ, and Simeon,
were without the Holy Spirit '.—But let us take leave
of such thick darkness !


Sect. CXVII.— The fourth passage is that of
Isaiah in the same chapter. " All flesh is grass, and
all the glory of it as the flower of grass : the grass is
withered, the flower of grass is fallen : because the
Spirit of the Lord hath blown upon it."—


271


This scripture appears to my friend Diatribe, to
be treated with violence, by being dragged in as appli-
cable to the causes of grace, and Free-will. Why so, I
pray ? ' Because, (it says), Jerom understands " spirit"
to signify indignation, and " flesh" to signify the infirm
condition of man, which cannot stand against God.'
Here again the trifling vanities of Jerom are cast in
my teeth instead of Isaiah. And I find I have more
to do in fighting against that wearisomness, with
which the Diatribe with so much diligence (to use no
harsher term) wears me out, than I have in fighting
against the Diatribe itself. But I have given my
opinion upon the sentiment of Jerom already.

. Let me beg permission of the Diatribe to com-
pare this gentleman with himself. He says 1 that
" flesh," signifies the infirm condition of man ; and
u spirit," the divine indignation.'

Has then the divine indignation nothing else to
"wither" but that miserable infirm condition of man,
which it ought rather to raise up ?

This, however, is more excellent still, ? The
" flower of grass," is the glory which arises from the
prosperity of corporal things.'

The Jews gloried in their temple, their circum-
cision, and their sacrifices, and the Greeks in their
wisdom. Therefore, the " flower of grass," is the glory
of the flesh, the righteousness of works, and the wis-
dom of the world. — How then are righteousness and
wisdom called by the Diatribe, ' corporal things?'
And after all, what have these to do with Isaiah, who
interprets his own meaning in his own words, saying,
" Surely the people is grass?" He does not say;
Surely the infirm condition of man is grass, but " the
people;" and affirms it with an asseveration. And


272

what is the people? Is it the infirm condition of
man only ? But whether Jerome by ' the infirm con-
dition of man ' means the whole creation together, or
the miserable lot and state of man only, I am sure I
know not Be it, however, which it may, he cer-
tainly makes the divine indignation to gam a glorious


renown and a noble spoil,


TV


C3


mga


creation or a race of wretched men, and not rather,
from scattering the proud, pulling down the mighty
from their seat, and sending the rich empty away : as
Mary sings !

Sect CX VIII. — But let us dispatch these hob-
goblins of glosses, and take Isaiah's words as they are.
" The people (he saith) is grass." " People" does not
signify flesh merely, or the infirm condition of human
nature, but it comprehends every thing that there is in
people — the rich, the wise, the just, the saints. Unless
you mean to say, that the pharisees, the elders, the
princes, the nobles, and the rich men, were not of the
people of the Jews ! The " flower of grass" is rightly
called their glory, because it was in their kingd<
their government, and above all, in the law, in God,
in righteousness, and in wisdom, that they gloried :
as Paul shew6, Rom. ii. iii. and ix.

When, therefore, Isaiah saith, « All flesh," what
else does he mean but all " grass," or, all " people ?"
For he does not say "flesh" only, but "all flesfi."
And to " people" belong soul, body, mind, reason,
judgment, and whatever is called or found to be most
excellent in man. For when he says " all flesh is
grass," he excepts nothing but the spirit which wither-
eth it* Nor does he omit any thing when he says,
« the people is grass." Speak, therefore, of Free-will,


273

speak of any thing that can be called the highest or.
the lowest in the people,— Isaiah calls the whole
"flesh'' and grass!" Because, those three terms
" flesh," " grass," and " people," according to his in-
terpretation who is himself the writer of the book,
signify in that place, the same thing.

Moreover, you yourself affirm, that the wisdom of
the Greeks and the righteousness of the Jews which
were withered by the Gospel,* were/" grass " and " the
flower of grass." Do you then think, that die wisdom
which the Greeks had was not the most excellent?
and that the righteousness which the Jews wrought
was not the most excellent? If you do, shew us
what was more excellent With what assurance then
is it, that you, Philip-like, flout and say,

■"-i*-" If any one shall contend, that that which is
most excellent in the nature of man. is nothing else
but " flesh that is, that it is impious, I will agree
with him, when he shall have proved his assertion by
testimonies from the holy scripture?"—

You have here Isaiah, who cries with a loud voice
that the people, devoid of the Spirit of the Lord, is
" flesh;" although you will not understand him thus.
You have also your own confession, where you said,
(though unwittingly perhaps), that the wisdom of the
Greeks was " grass," or the glory of grass ; which is
the same thing as saying, it Was , " flesh. "-—'Unless
you mean to say, that the wisdom of the Greekaudid
not pertain to reason, or to the egemonicon, as you
say, that is, the principal part of man* H, therefore,
you will not deign to listen to me, listen to yourself;
where, being caught in the powerful trap of truth,
you speak the truth, "<->■■

T


n4

You have moreover the testimony of John, " That
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
bom of the Spirit is spirit." You have, I say, this
passage, which makes it evidently manifest, that what
is not born of the Spirit, is flesh : for if it be not
so, the distinction of Christ could not subsist, who
divides all men into two distinct divisions, " flesh"
and " spirit" This passage you floutingly pass by, as
if it did not give you the information you want, and
betake yourself somewhere else, as usuul ; just drop-
ping as you go along an observation, that John is
here saying, that those who believe are born of God,
and are made the sons of God, nay, that they are
gods, and new creatures. You pay no regard, there-
fore, to the conclusion that is to be drawn from this
division, but merely tell us at your ease, what persons
are on one side of the division : thus confidently rely-
ing upon your rhetorical manoeuvre, as though there
were no one likely to discover an evasion and dissimu-
lation so subtlely managed.

Sect. CXIX.— It is difficult to refrain from con-
chiding, that you are, in this passage, crafty and dou-
ble-dealing. For he who treats of the scriptures with
that prevarication and hypocrisy which you practise in
treating of them, may have face enough to pretend,
that he is not as yet fully acquainted with the scrip-
tures, and is willing to be taught ; when, at the same
time, he wills nothing less, and merely prates thus, in
order to cast a reproach upon the all-clear light of the
scriptures, and to cover with the best cloak his deter-
minate perseverance in his own opinions. Thus the
Jews, even to this day, pretend, that what Christ, the


275


apostles, and the whole church have taught, is not to
be proved by the scriptures. The papists too pretend,
that they do not yet fully understand the scriptures ;
although the very stones speak aloud the truth. But
perhaps you are waiting for a passage to be produced
from the scriptures, which shall contain these letters
and syllables, ' The principal part of man is flesh or,
* That which is most excellent in man is flesh other-
wise, you will declare yourself an invincible victor.
Just as though the Jews should require, that a por-
tion be produced from the prophets, which shall con^
sist of these letters, 1 Jesus the son of the carpenter,
who was born of the Virgin Mary in Bethlehem, is
the Messiah the Son of God ! '

Here, where you are closely put to it by a plain
sentence, you challenge us to produce letters and
syllables. In another place, where you are overcome
both by the sentence and by the letters too, you have
recourse to * tropes/ to ' difficulties,' and to * sound
interpretations.' And there is no place, in which you
do not invent something whereby to contradict the
scriptures. At one time, you fly to the interpretations
of the Fathers : at another, to absurdities of Reason :
and when neither of these will serve your turn, you
dwell on that which is irrelevant or contingent : yet
with an especial care, that you are not caught by the
passage immediately in point. But what shall I call
you ? Proteus is not half a Proteus compared with
you ! Yet after all you cannot get off. What victo-
ries did the Arians boast of, because these syllables
and letters, homousios, were not to be found in the
scriptures ? Considering it nothing to the purpose,
that the same thing could be most effectually proved
in other words. But whether or not this be a sign

t 3


276 *

of a good, (not* to day pious,) mind, and a mind
desiring to be taught, let impiety or iniquity itself be
judge. ■ •

Take your victory, then ; while we, as the van-
quished confess, that these characters and syllables,
4 That, which is most excellent in man is nothing but
flesh/ is not to be found in the scyptures. But just
behold what a victory you have gained, when we
most abundantly prove, that though it is not found in
the scriptures, that one detached portion, or 1 that which
is most excellent/ orthe ' principal part/ of man is flesh,
but that the whole of man is flesh ! And not only so,
but that the whole people is flesh ! And further still,
that the whole human race is flesh ! For Christ saith,
" That which is born of the flesh is flesh." Do you
here set about your difficulty-solving, your trope-in-
ventitig, and searching for the interpretations of the
Fathers ; or, turning quite another way, enter upon a
dissertation on the Trojan war, in order to avoid
seeing and hearing this passage now adduced.

We do not believe only, but we see and experi-
ence, that the whole human race is " born of the
flesh ;^ and therefore, we are compelled to believe
upon the wont of Christ, that which we do not see ;
th^t the whole human race "is flesh." Do we now -
then give the sophists any room to doubt and dispute,
Whether or not the principal (egernonica) part of man
be comprehended in the whole man, in the whole
people, in the whole race of men ? We know, how T
ever, that in the whole human race, both the body and
soul are comprehended, together with all their powers
and works, with all their vices and virtues, with ait
their wisdom and folly, with all their righteousness
and unrighteousness! All things are "flesh;" be-


277

cause, all things savour of the flesh, that is, of their
own; and are, as Paul saith, Rom. iii., Without the
glory of God, and the Spirit of God !


Sect. CXX. — And as to your saying — "Yet
every affection of man is not flesh. There is an affec-
tion called, soul : there is an affection called, spirit :
by which, we aspire to what is meritoriously good, as
the philosophers aspired : who taught, that we should
rather die a thousand deaths than commit one base
action, even though we were assured that men would
never know it, and that God would pardon it." —

I answer: He who believes nothing certainly,
may easily believe and say any thing. I will not ask
you, but let your friend Lucian ask you, whether you
can bring forward any one out of the whole human
race, let him be two-fold or seven-fold greater than
Socrates himself, whoever performed this of which you
speak, and which you say they taught. Why then do
you thus babble in vanities of words ? Could they
ever aspire to that which is meritoriously good, who
did not even know what good is ?

If I should ask you for some of the brightest ex-
amples of your meritorious good, you would say, per-
haps, that it was meritoriously good when men died
for their country, for their wives and children, and for
their parents ; or when they refrained from lying, or
from treachery ; or when they endured exquisite tor-
ments, as did Q. Scevola, M. Regulus, and others. But
what can you point out in all those men, but an exter-
nal shew of works For did you ever see their hearts ?
Nay, it was manifest from the very appearance of their
works, that they did all these things for their own


278


glory ; so much so, that they were not even ashamed
to confess, and to boast, that they sought their own
glory. For the Romans, according to their own testi-
monies, did whatever they did of virtue or valour, from
a thirst after glory. The same did the Greeks, the
same did the Jews, the same do all the race of men.

But though this be meritoriously good before men,
yet, before God, nothing is less meritoriously good
than all this ; nay, it is most impious, and the greatest
of sacrilege ; because, they did it not for the glory of
God, nor that they might glorify God, but with the
most impious of all robbery. For as they were rob-
bing God of his glory and taking it to themselves,
they never were farther from meritorious good, never
more base, than when they were shining in their most
exalted virtues. How could they do what they did for
the glory of God, when they neither knew God nor
his glory ? Not, however, because it did not appear,
but because the " flesh" did not permit them to see
the glory of God, from their fury and madness after
their own glory. This, therefore, is that right-ruling
■ spirit/ that 4 principal part of man, which aspires to
what is meritoriously good ' — it is a plunderer of the
divine glory, and an usurper of the divine Majesty !
and then the most so, when men are at the highest of
their meritorious good, and the most glittering in their
brightest virtues ! Deny, therefore, if you can, that
these are " flesh" and carried away by an impious
affection.

But I do not believe that the Diatribe can be so
much offended at the expression, where man is said
to be, either " flesh" or "spirit;" because a Latin
would here say, Man is either carnal or spiritual. For


279

this particularity, as well as many others, must be granted
to the Hebrew tongue, that when it says, Man is
"flesh" or "spirit," its signification is the same as
ours is, when we say, Man is carnal or spiritual. The
same signification which the Latins also convey, when
they say, * The wqlf is destructive to the folds,' 4 Mois-
ture is favourable to the young com:' or when they
say, ' This fellow is iniquity and evil itself.' So also
the holy scripture, by a force of expression, calls man
" flesh;" that is, carnality itself; because it savours
too much of, nay, of nothing but, those things which
are of the flesh : and " spirit," because he savours of,
seeks, does, and can endure, nothing but those things
which are of the spirit.

Unless, perhaps, the Diatribe should still make
this remaining query — Supposing the whole of man
to be " flesh," and that which is most excellent in
man to be called " flesh," must therefore that which
is called " flesh" be at once called ungodly? — I call
him ungodly who is without the Spirit of God. For
the scripture saith, that the Spirit was therefore given,
that he might justify the ungodly. And as Christ
makes a distinction between the spirit and the flesh,
saying, " That which is born of the flesh is flesh," and
adds, that that which is born of the flesh " cannot see


it


m


soever is flesh is ungodly, under the wrath of God,
and a stranger to the kingdom of God. And if it be
a stranger to the kingdom of God, it necessarily fol-
lows, that it is under the kingdom and spirit of Satan.
For there is no medium between the kingdom of God
and the kingdom of Satan ; they are mutually and
eternally opposed to each other.


These are the arguments that prove, that the most
exalted virtues among die nations, the highest per-
fections of the philosophers, and the greatest excel-
lencies among men, appear indeed, in the sight of
men, to be meritoriously virtuous and good, and are
so called : but that, in the sight of God, they are in
truth " flesh," and subservient to the kingdom of
Satan : that is, ungodly, sacrilegious, and, in every
respect, evil !

Sect. CXXI. — But pray let us suppose the sen-
timent of the Diatribe to stand good — * that every
affection is not " flesh; " that is, ungodly ; but is that
which is called good and sound spirit/ — Only ob-
serve what absurdity must hence follow; not only
with respect to human reason, but with respect to the
Christian religion, and the most important articles of
faith. For if that which is most excellent in man be
not ungodly, nor utterly depraved, nor damnable, but
that which is flesh only, that is the grosser and viler
affections, what sort of a Redeemer shall we make
Christ? Shall we rate the price of his blood so low
as to say, that it redeemed that part of man only
which is the most vile, and that the most excellent
part of man has power to work its own salvation, and
does not want Christ ? Henceforth then, I must preach
Christ as the Redeemer, not of the whole man, but of
his vilest part; that is, of his flesh; but that the man
himself is his own redeemer, in his better part !

Have it, therefore, which way you will. If the
better part of man be sound, it does not want Christ
as a Redeemer. And if it does not want Christ, it
triumphs in a glory above that of Christ : for it takes


281

care of the redemption of the better part itself,
whereas Christ only takes care of that of the viler
part And then, moreover, the kingdom of Satan will
come to nothing at all, for it will reign only in the
viler part of man, because the man himself will rule
over the better part.

So that, by this doctrine of yours, concerning 4 the
principal part of man,' it will come to pass, that man
will be exalted above Christ and the devil both: that
is, he will be made God of gods, and Lord of lords !
— Where is now that i probable opinion ' which as-
serted 4 that Free-will cannot will any thing good ? '
It here contends, that it is a principal part, meritori-
ously good, and sound ; and that, it does not even
want Christ, but can do more than God himself and
the devil can do, put together !

I say this, that you may again see, how eminently
perilous a matter it is to attempt sacred and divine
things, without the Spirit of God, in the temerity of
human reason. If, therefore, Christ be the Lamb of
God that taketh away the sins of the world, it follows,
that the whole world is under sin, damnation, and the
devil. Hence your distinction between the principal
parts, and the parts not principal, profits you nothing:
for the world, signifies men, savouring of nothing
but the things of the world, throughout all their

Sect. CXXII. — " If the whole man, (says the
Diatribe) even when regenerated by faith, is nothing
else but " flesh," where is the " spirit " born of the
Spirit? Where is the child of God? Where is the


new-creatui

— Thus the Diatribe

Where now ! Where now ! my very dear friend,
Diatribe ! What dream now ! You demand to be in-
formed, how the " spirit " bora of the Spirit can be
" flesh." Oh how elated, how secure of victory do
you insultingly put this question to me, as though it
were impossible for me to stand my ground here. —
All this while, you are abusing the authority of the
ancients : for they say * that there are certain seeds of
good implanted in the minds of men. But, however,
whether you use, or whether abuse, the authority of the
ancients, it is all one to me : you will see by and by
what you believe, when you believe men prating out
of their own brain, without the word of God. Though
perhaps your care about religion does not give you
much concern, as to what any one believes ; since
you so easily believe men, without at all regarding,
whether or not that which they say, be certain or un-
certain in the sight of God. And I also wish to be
informed, when I ever taught that, with which you so
freely and publicly charge me. Who would be so mad
as to say, that he who is " born of the Spirit," is
nothing but " flesh ? "

I make a manifest distinction between " flesh M
and " spirit," as things that directly militate against
each other; and I say, according to the divine ora-
cles, that the man who is not regenerated by faith
" is flesh ; " but I say, that he who is thus regene-
rated, is no longer flesh, excepting as to the remnants
of the flesh, which war against the first fruits of the
Spirit received. Nor do I suppose you wish to attempt


283

to charge mo, invidiously, with any thing wrong here ;
if you do, there is no charge that you could more ini-
quitoosly bring against me.

But you either understand nothing of my side of
the subject, or else you find yourself unequal to the
magnitude of the cause ; by which you are, perhaps,
so overwhelmed and confounded, that you do not
rightly know what you say against me, or for yourself.
For where you declare it to be your belief, upon the
authority of the ancients, * that there are certain seeds
of good implanted in the minds of men,' you must
surely quite forget yourself; because, you before as-
serted, 1 that Free-will cannot will any thing good/
And how ' cannot will any thing good/ and ' certain
seeds of good* can stand in harmony together, I
know not. Thus am I perpetually compelled to re-
mind you of the subject-design with which you set
out; from which you with perpetual forgetfulness
depart, and take up something contrary to your pro-
fessed purpose.

i *

t

Sect. C XX I II. — Another passage is that of
Jeremiah x., " I know, O Lord, that the way of man
is not in himself : it is not in man that walketh to di-
rect his steps." — This passage (says the Diatribe) ra-
ther applies " to the events of prosperity, than to the
power of Free-will." —

Here again the Diatribe, with its usual audacity,
introduces a gloss according to its own pleasure, as
though the scripture were fully under its control.
But in order to any one's considering the sense and
intent of the prophet, what need was there for the
opinion of a man of so great authority ! — Erasmus


284


says 60 1 it is enough ! it must be so ! If this liberty
of glossing as they lust, be permitted the adversaries,
what point is there which they might not carry ? Let
therefore Erasmus shew us the validity of this
gloss from the scope of the context, and we will
believe him.

I, however, will shew from the scope of the con-
text, that the prophet, when he saw that he taught
the ungodly with so much earnestness in vain, was
at once convinced, that his word could avail nothing
unless God should teach them within; and that,
therefore, it was not in man to hear the word of God,
and to will good. Seeing this judgment of God, he
was alarmed, and asks of God that he would correct
him, but with judgment, if he had need to be cor-
rected ; and that he might not be given up to his di-
vine wrath with the ungodly, whom he suffered to be
hardened and to remain in unbelief.

But let us suppose that the passage is to be un-
derstood concerning the events of adversity and pros-
perity, what will you say, if this gloss should go most
directly to overthrow Free-will ? This new evasion is
invented, indeed, that ignorant and lazy deceivers
may consider it satisfactory. The same which they
also had in view who invented that evasion, 1 the ne-
cessity of the consequence.' And so drawn away are
they by these newly-invented terms, that they do not
see that they are, by these evasions, ten-fold more
effectually entangled and caught than they would
have been without them. — As in the present instance :
if the event of these things whichare temporal, and over
which man, Gen. i., was constituted lord, be not in our
own power, how, I pray you, can that heavenly thing,


285


the grace of God, which depends on the will of God
alone, be in our own power? Can that endeavour of
Free-will attain unto eternal salvation, which is not
able to retain a farthing or a hair of the head ? When
we have no power to obtain the creature, shall it be
said that we have power to obtain the Creator? What
madness is this ! The endeavouring of man, therefore,
unto good or unto evil, when applied to events, is a
thousand-fold more enormous ; because, he is in both
much more deceived, and has much less liberty, than
he has in striving after money, or glory, or pleasure.
What an excellent evasion is this gloss, then, which
denies the liberty of man in trifling and created events,
and preaches it up in the greatest and divine events ?
This is as if one should say, Codrus is not able to pay
a groat, but he is able to pay thousands of thousands
of pounds ! I am astonished that the Diatribe, having
all along so inveighed against that tenet of Wickliffe,
* that all things take place of necessity,' should now
itself grant, that events come upon us of necessity.
I — " And even if you do (says the Diatribe) forcedly
twist this to apply to Free-will, all confess that no
one can hold on a right course of life without the
grace of God. Nevertheless, we still strive ourselves
with all our powers : for we pray daily, 1 O Lotd my
God, direct my goings in thy sight.' He, therefore*
who implores aid, does not lay aside his own en-
deavours."—

The Diatribe thinks, that it matters not what it
answers, so that it does not remain silent with nothing
to say ; and then, it would have what it does say to
appear satisfactory ; such a vain confidence has it In
its own authority. It ought here to have proved, whe^


£86

ther or not we strive by our own powers; whereas, it
proved, that he who prays attempts something. But,
I pray, is it here laughing at us, or mocking the
papists ? For he who prays, prays by the Spirit ; nay,
it is the Spirit himself that prays in us, Rom. viii.
How then is the power of Free-will proved by the
strivings of the Holy Spirit ? Are Free-will and the
Holy Spirit, with the Diatribe, one and the same
thing? Or, are we disputing now about what the
Holy Spirit can do ? The Diatribe, therefore, leaves
me L passage of Jeremiah uninjured and invinci-
ble; and only produces the gloss out of its own
brain. I also can 1 strive by my own powers : 1 and
Luther, will be compelled to believe this gloss, — if
he will!

Sect. CXXIV. — There is that passage of Prov.
xvi. also, " It is of man to prepare the heart, but of
the Lord to govern the tongue," which the Diatribe
says — 1 refers to events of things.' —

As though this the Diatribe's own saying would
satisfy us, without any farther authority. But how-
ever, it is quite sufficient, that, allowing the sense of
these passages to be concerning the events of things,
we have evidently come off victorious by the argu-
ments which we have just advanced : 1 that, if we
have no such thing as Freedom of Will in our own
things and works, much less have we any such thing
in divine things and works.

But mark the great acuteness of the Diatribe
— " How can it be of man to prepare the heart, when
Luther affirms that all things are carried on by ne-
cessity ? " —


287


I answer : If the events of things be not in our
power, as you say, how can it be in man to perform
the causing acts? The same answer which you gave
me, the same receive yourself! Nay, we are com-
manded to work the more for this very reason, be-
cause all things future are to us uncertain : as saith
Ecclesiastes, " In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening hold not thine hand : for thou knowest
not which shall prosper, either this or that," Eccles. xi.
All things future, I say, are to us uncertain in know-
ledge, but necessary in event. The necessity strikes
into us a fear of God that we presume not, or become
secure, while the uncertainty works in us a trusting,
that we sink not in despair.

Sect. CXXV. — But the Diatribe returns to
harping upon its old string — 'that in the book of
Proverbs, many things are said in confirmation of
Free-will : as this, " Commit thy works unto the
Lord." Do you hear this (says the Diatribe,) thy
works?' —

Many things in confirmation ! What because there'
are, in that book, many imperative and conditional
verbs, and pronouns of the second person ! For it is
upon these foundations that you build your proof of
the Freedom of the Will. Thus, " Commit "—there-
fore thou canst commit thy works : therefore thou
doest them. So also this passage, "I am thy God,"
you will understand thus : — that is, Thou makest me
thy God. " Thy faith hath saved thee : " do you
hear this word " thy ? " therefore, expound it thus :
Thou makest thy faith : and then you have proved
Free-will. Nor am I here merely game-making ; but


288

I am shewing the Diatribe, that there is nothing se-
rious on its side of the subject.

This passage also in the same chapter, "The
Lord hath made all things for himself ; yea, even the
wicked for the day of evil," it modifies by its own
words, and excuses God as — * having never created
a creature evil.' —

As though I had spoken concerning the creation,
and not rather concerning that continual operation of
God upon the things created; in which operation,
God acts upon the wicked; as we have before shewn
in the case of Pharaoh. But he creates the wicked,
not by creating wickedness or a wicked creature;
(which is impossible) but, from the operation of God,
a wicked man is made, or created, from a corrupt
seed ; not from the fault of the maker, but from that
of the material.

Nor does that of chapter xxi., " The heart of the
king is in the Lord's hand : he inclineth it whither-
soever he will," seem to the Diatribe to imply force*
— " He who inclines (it observes) does not immedio
ately compel''' —

As though we were speaking of compulsion, and
not rather concerning the necessity of immutability.
And that is implied in the inclining of God : which
inclining, is not so snoring and lazy a thing, as the Dia-
tribe imagines, but is that most active operation of
God, which a man cannot avoid or alter, but under
which he has, of necessity, such a will as God has
given him, and such as he carries along by his mo-
tion : as I have before shewn.

Moreover, where Solomon is speaking of " the
kings heart," the Diatribe thinks — 'that the passage


289

cannot rightly be strained to apply in a general
sense : but that the meaning is the same as that of
Job, where he says, in another place, " He maketh
the hypocrite to reign, because of the sins of the peo-
ple." At last, however, it concedes, that the king is
inclined unto evil by God : but so, that he permits
the king to be carried away by his inclination, in
order to chastise the people.' —

I answer : Whether God permit, or whether he
incline, that permitting or inclining does not take
place without the will and operation of God : be-
cause, the will of the king cannot avoid the action of
the omnipotent God : seeing that, the will of all is
carried along just as he wills and acts, whether that
will be good or evil.

And as to my having made out of the particular
will of the king, a general application ; I did it, \ pre-
sume, neither vainly nor unskilfully. For if the heart
of the king, which seems to be of all the most free,
and to rule over others, cannot will good but where
God inclines it, how much less can any other among
men will good ! And this conclusion will stand valid,
drawn, not from the will of the king only, but from
that of any other man. For if any one man, how pri-
vate soever he be, cannot will before God but where
God inclines, the same must be said of all men. Thus
in the instance of Balaam, his not being able to speak
what he wished, is an evident argument from the
scriptures, that man is not in his own power, nor a
free chooser and doer of what he does : were it not so,
no examples of it could subsist in the scriptures.

Sect. CXXVI.— The Diatribe after this, having


u


by which it proves, that " nothing" is the same as in
degree, and imperfect But perhaps, its own adverb
1 cannot,' ought also to be conveniently interpreted,
so as to signify, that evangelical fruits can be produced
without Christ in degree and imperfectly. So that we
may preach, that the ungodly who are without Christ
can, while Satan reigns in them, and wars against
Christ, produce some of the fruits of life : that is, that
the enemies of Christ may do something for the glory
of Christ — But away with these things.

Here however, I should like to be taught, how we
are to resist heretics, who, using this rule throughout
the scriptures, may contend that nothing and not are
to be understood as signifying that which is imperfect.
Thus — Without him " nothing" can be done; that is a
little. — " The fool hath said in his heart there is not a
God ; " that is, there is an imperfect God. — M He
hath made us, and not we ourselves ; " that is, we did
a little towards making ourselves. And who can num-
ber all the passages in the scripture where 4 nothing '
and * not ' are found ?

Shall we then here say that a * convenient inter-
pretation' is to be attended to ? And is this clearing
up difficulties — to open such a door of liberty to cor-
rupt minds and deceiving spirits? Such a licence of
interpretation is, I grant, convenient to you who care
nothing whatever about the certainty of the scripture;
but as for me who labour to establish consciences, this
is an inconvenience ; than which, nothing can be more
inconvenient, nothing more injurious, nothing more
pestilential. Hear me, therefore, thou great coo-
queress of the Lutheran Achilles ! Unless you shall
prove, that 4 nothing ' not only may be> but ought to


$93

be understood as signifying a ' little/ you have done
nothing by all this profusion of words or examples, but
fight against fire with dry straw. What have I to do
with your may be, which only demands of you to
prove your ought to be? And if you do not prove
that, I stand by the natural and grammatical signifi-
cation of the term, laughing both at your armies and
at your triumphs.

Where is now that 1 probable opinion ' which de-
termined, ' that Free-will can will nothing good ? ' But
perhaps, the ' convenient interpretation ' comes in
here, to say, that 1 nothing good ' signifies, something
good — a kind of grammar and logic never before
heard of ; that nothing, is the same as something :
which, with logicians, is an impossibility, because they
are contradictions. Where now then remains that ar-
ticle of our faith, that Satan is the prince of the world,
and, according to the testimonies of Christ and Paul,
rules in the wills and minds of those men who are his
captives and servants ? Shall that roaring lion, that
implacable and ever-restless enemy of the grace of
God and the salvation of man, suffer it to be, that
man, his slave and a part of his kingdom, should
attempt good by any motion in any degree, whereby
he might escape from his tyranny, and that he should
not rather spur and urge him on to will and do the
contrary to grace with all his powers? especially,
when the just, and those who are led by the Spirit of
God, and who will and do good, can hardly resist
him, so great is his rage against them?

You who make it out, that the human will is a
something placed in a free medium, and left to itself,
certainly make it out, at the .same time, that there is


Digitized by^OOgle


298


be it so, -ffaat this ridiculous example Btands good;
again, it stands in favour of me. For what i maintain
is this : that Free-will is ' nothing; that is, isuseiess of
itself (as you expound it) before God ; and it is con*
cerning its being nothing as to what it can do of itself
that we are now speaking : for as to what it essen-
tially is in itself we know, that an impious will must
be a something, and cannot be a mere nothing.


■ ■ •

Sect. CXXX. — There is also that of 1 Cor. xiii.
" If I have not charity I am nothing:" Why the
Diatribe adduces this as an example I cannot see,
unless it seeks only numbers and forces, or thinks that
we have no arms at all, by which we can effectually
wound it. For he who is without charity, is, truly and
properly, 'nothing' before God. The same also we
say of Free-will. Wherefore, this example also stands
for us against the Diatribe. Or, can it be that the
Diatribe does not yet know the argument ground
upon which I am contending ? — I am not speaking
about the essence of nature, but the essence of grace
(as they term it.) I know, that Free-will can by
nature do something ; it can eat, drink, beget, rule,
&c. Nor need the Diatribe laugh at me as having
prating frenzy enough to imply, when I press home so
closely the term ' nothing,' that Free- will cannot even
sin without Christ : whereas Luther, nevertheless says,
« that Free- will can do nothing but sin— but so it pleases
the wise Diatribe to play the fool in a matter so seri-
ous. For I say, that man without the grace of God,
remains, nevertheless, under the: general omnipotence
of an acting God, who moves and ^carries along all
things, of necessity, in the course of his infallible
motion; but that the man's being thus carried along,


is nothing ; that is, avails nothing in the sight of God,
nor is considered any thing else but sin. Thus in
grace, he that is without love, is nothing. Why then
does the Diatribe, when it confesses itself, that we are
here speaking of evangelical fruits, as that which can-
not be produced without Christ, turn aside immedi-
ately from the subject point, harp upon another string,
and cavil about nothing but natural works and human
fruits ? Except it be to evince, that he who is devoid
of the truth, is never consistent with himself.

So also that of John iii., " A man can receive
nothing except it were given him from above***

John is here speaking of man, who is now a some-
thing, and denies that this man can receive any thing;
that is, the Spiritwtth his gifts ; for it is in reference
to that he is speakmgj not in reference to nature. For
he did not want the Diatribe as an instructor to teach
' him, that man has already eyes, nose, ears, mouth,
""hands, mind, will, reason, and all things that be-
long to man. — Unless the Diatribe believes, that
the Baptist, when he made mention of man, was think-
ing of the ' chaos* of Plato, the < vacuum' of Leucip-
pus, or the ' infinity' of Aristotle, or some other no-
thing, which, by a gift from heaven, should at last be
made a something. — Is thii' producing examples out
of the scripture, thus to trifle designedly in a matter
so important !

And to what purpose is all that profusion of
words, where it teaches us, ' that fire, the escape from
evil, the endeavour after good, and other things are
from heaven,' as though there were any one who did
not know, or who denied those things ? We are now
taHring about grace, and, as the Diatribe itself said,


300


concerning Christ and evangelical fruits; whereas, it
is itself, making out its time in fabling about nature ;
thus dragging out the cause, and covering the witless
reader with a cloud. In the mean time, it does not
produce one single example as it professed to do,
wherein 1 nothing/ is to be understood as signifying
some small degree. Nay, it openly exposes itself as
neither understanding nor caring what Christ or grace
is, nor how it is, that grace is one thing and nature
another, when even the sophists of the meanest rank
know, and have continually taught this difference m
their schools, in the most common way. Nor does it
all the while see, that every one of its examples make
for me, and against itself. For the word of the Bap-
tist goes to establish this : — that man can receive
nothing unless it be given him from above ; and that,
therefore, Free-will is nothing at all.

Thus it is, then, that my Achilles is conquered —
the Diatribe puts weapons into his hand, by which it
is itself dispatched, naked and weapon-less. And
thus it is also that the scriptures, by which that obsti-
nate assertor Luther urges his cause, are, 4 by one
word, brought to nothing.'

Sect. CXXXI. — After this, it enumerates a mul-
titude of similitudes : by which, it effects nothing but
the drawing aside the witless reader to irrelevant
things, according to its custom, and at the same time
leaves the subject point entirely out of the ques-
tion. Thus, — " God indeed preserves the ship, but the
mariner conducts it into harbour : wherefore, the mari-
ner does not do nothing." — This similitude makes a dif-
ference of work : that is, it attributes that of preserving


301


to God, and that of conducting to the mariner. And
thns, if it prove any thing, it proves this : — that the
whole work of preserving is of God, and the whole
work of conducting of the mariner. And yet, it is a
beautiful and apt similude.

Thus again — " the husbandman gathers in the in-
crease, but it was God that gave it" — Here again, it
attributes different operations to God and to man :
unless it mean to make the husbandman the creator
also, who" gave the increase. But even supposing the
same works be attributed to God and to man — what
do these similitudes prove? Nothing more, than that
the creature co-operates with the operating God!
But are we now disputing about co-operation, and not
rather concerning the power and operation of Free-
will, as of itself! Whither therefore has the renowned
rhetorician betaken himself? He set out with the pro-
fessed design to dispute concerning a palm ; whereas
all hi3 discourse has been about a gourd ! * A noble
vase was designed by the potter ; why then is a pitcher
produced at last ?'

I also know very well, that Paul co-operates with
God in teaching the Corinthians, while he preaches
without, and God teaches within ; and that, where
their works are different. And that, in like manner,
he co-operates with God while he speaks by the
Spirit of God ; and that, where the work is the same.
For what I assert and contend for is this : — that God,
where he operates without the grace of his Spirit,
works all in all, even in the ungodly ; while he alone
moves, acts on, and carries along by the motion of his
omnipotence, all those things which he alone has
created, which motion those things can neither avoid


302


nor change, but of necessity follow and obey, each one
according to the measure of power given of God : — thus
all things, even the ungodly, co-operate with God ! On
the other hand, when he acts by the Spirit of his
grace on those whom he has justified, that is, in his
own kingdom, he moves and carries them along in
the same manner; and they, as they are the new
creatures, follow and co-operate with him ; or rather,
as Paul saith, are led by him.

But the present is not the place for discussing
these points. We are not now considering, what we
can do in co-operation with God, but what we can do
of ourselves : that is, whether, created as we are out
of nothing, we can do or attempt any thing of our-
selves, under the general motion of God's omnipo-
tence, whereby to prepare ourselves unto the new
creation of the Spirit.— This is the point to which the
Diatribe ought to have answered, and not to have
turned aside to a something else !

What I have to say upon this point is this : — As
man, before he is created man, does nothing and en-
deavours nothing towards his being made a creature;
and as, after he is made and created, he does nothing
and endeavours nothing towards his preservation, or
towards his continuing in his creature-existence, but
each takes place alone by the will of the omnipotent
power and goodness of God, creating us and preserv-
ing us, without ourselves ; but as God, nevertheless,
does not work in us without us, seeing we are for that
purpose created and preserved, that he might work in
us and that we might co-operate with him, whether it
be out of his kingdom under his general omnipotence,
or in his kingdom under the peculiar power of his


303


Spirit so, man, before he is regenerated into the
new creation of the kingdom of the Spirit, does no-
thing and endeavours nothing towards his new crea-
tion into that kingdom, and after he is re-created does
nothing and endeavours nothing towards his perse-
verance in that kingdom ; but the Spirit alone effects
both in us, regenerating us and preserving us when
regenerated, without ourselves ; as James saith, " Of
his own will begat he us by the word of his power,
that we should be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures,"
(where he speaks of the renewed creation :) nevertheless,
he does not work in us without us, seeing that he has for
this purpose created and preserved us, that he might
operate in us, and that we might co-operate with him :
thus, by us he preaches, shews mercy to the poor,
and comforts the afflicted. — But what is hereby attri-
buted to Free-will ? Nay, what is there left it but
nothing at all ? And in truth it is nothing at all !

Sect. CXXXIL— Read therefore the Diatribe
in this part through five or six pages, and you will
find, that by similitudes of this kind, and by some of
the most beautiful passages and parables selected from
the Gospel and from Paul, it does nothing else but
shew us, that innumerable passages (as it observes) are
to be found in the scriptures which speak of the cc~>
operation and assistance of God: from which, if I
should draw this conclusion — Man can do nothing
without the assisting grace of God : therefore, no works
of man are goodr— it would on the contrary conclude,
as it has. done by a rhetorical inversion — " Nay,
there is nothing that man cannot do by the assisting
grace of God : therefore, alt the works of man can be


eauaneer this cause of Christ ; though, by your learn-
ing, as to real effect, you can do nothing at all. And
who can always so temper his pen as never to grow
warm r For even you, who from a show of modera-
tion grow almost cold in this book of yours, not
unfrequently hurl a fiery and gall-dipped dart: so
much so, that if the reader were not very liberal and
kind, he could , not but consider you virulent But
however, this is nothing to the subject point We must
mutually pardon each other in these things ; for we
are but men, and there is nothing in us that is not
touched with human infirmity.


THIRD PART.

We are now arrived at the last part of this
discussion. Wherein I am, as I proposed, to bring
forward my forces against Free-will. But I shall not
produce them all, for who could do that within the
limits of this small book, when the whole scripture, in
every letter and iota, stands on my side ? Nor is there
any necessity for so doing; seeing that, Free-will al-
ready lies vanquished and prostrate under a two-fold
overthrow. — The one, where I have proved, that ail
those things, which it imagined made for itself, make
directly against itself. — The other, where I have made
it manifest, that those scriptures which it attempted to
refute, still remain invincible. — If, therefore, it had not
been vanquished by the former, it is enough if it be
laid prostrate by the one weapon or the other. Ami
now, what need is there mat the enemy, already dis-
patched by the one weapon or the other, should have
his dead body stabbed with a number of weapons


309

more ? In this part, therefore, I shall be as brief as
the subject will allow : and from such numerous
armies, l snail produce only tuo cnampion-generals,
with a few of their legions— Paul, and John the
Evangelist !

til 1? :ti\ t .ij'.,, iHk-T f *U<y K rh'i 'iWmI tti\i fi* m "\l • . iJOffl

>»> Sect. CXXXV.— Paul, writing to the Romans,
thus enters upon his argument, against Free-will, and
for the grace of God. " The wrath of God (saith he)
is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in un-
righteousness." —

Dost thou hear this general sentence " against
all men," — that they are all under the wrath of
God ? And what is this but declaring, that they all
merit wrath and punishment? For he assigns the
cause of the wrath against them — they do nothing
but that which merits wrath ; because they are all un-
godly and unrighteous, and hold the truth in unrigh-
teousness. Where is now the power of Free-will
which can endeavour any thing good ? Paul makes it
to merit the wrath of God, and pronounces it ungodly
and unrighteous. That, therefore, which merits wrath
and is ungodly, only endeavours and avails against
grace, not for grace.

But some one will here laugh at the yawning
mconsiderateness of Luther, for not looking fully
into the intention of Paul. Some one will say, that
Paul does not here speak of all men, nor of all their
doings ; but of those men only who are ungodly and
unrighteous, and who, as the words themselves describe
them, " hold the truth in unrighteousness; " but that,
it does not hence follow, that all men are the same.


?10

i Here I observe, that in tWs r passage of Paul, the
words " against all ungodliness* of men" are of the
same import, as if you should say,— against the ungod-
liness of all men. For Paul, in almost all these in-
stances, uses a Hebraism : so that, the sense is. 'ail
men are ungodly and unrighteous, and hold the truth

i^Wghteousness-; and therefore, all. merit wrath.
! Jier^e, in the Greek, there is no relative which mi^it
be , rendered ' of those who/ but an article, causing
the sense to run thus, " The wrath of God is revealed
_frpm heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteous-
ness of men, holding the truth in unrighteousness."
So that this may be taken as an epithet, as it were,
applicable to all men as " holding the truth in un-
righteousness [ even as it is an epithet where it is
said, " Our, Father which art in heaven:" which
might in other words be expressed thus: Our hea-
venly Father, or Our Father in heaven. For it is
so expressed to distinguish those who believe and
fear God.

i But these things might appear frivolous and vain,
did not the very train of Pauls argument require them
,to be so understood, and prove them to be true. For
he had said just before, "The Gospel is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believeth, to the
Jew first and also to the Greek." These words are
surely .neither obscure or ambiguous, "to the Jew
first and ajso to the Greek :" that is, the Gospel of
the power of God is necessary unto all men, that,
believing in it, they might be saved from the wrath of
God revea|ed. Does he not then^ I pray you, who de-
clares, that Jhe Jews who excelled in righteousness, m
the law of God, and in the power of Free-will, are,


311


without difference, destitute and in need of the power
of God by which they might be saved, and who makes
that power necessary unto them, consider that they
are all under wrath? What men then will you pre-
tend to say are not under the wrath of God, when you
are thus compelled to believe, that the most excellent
men in the world, the Jew3 and Greeks, were so ?

And further, whom among those Jews and Greeks
themselves will you except, when Paul subjects all
of them, included in the same word, without difference,
to the same sentence ? And are we to suppose that there
were no men, out of these two most exalted nations,
who * aspired to what was meritoriously good ?' Were
there none among them who thus aspired with all the
powers of their Free-will ? Yet Paul makes no dis-
tinction on this account, he includes them all under
wrath, and declares them all to be ungodly and un-
righteous. And are we not to believe that all the
other apostles, each one according to the work he had
to do, included all other nations under this wrath, in
the same way of declaration ?

-iw.«. >ti;i .or.-i r'r>'\ -i. - i j ■ • .•■n 'V'

Sect. CXXXVL— This passage of Paul, there-
fore, stands firmly and forcibly urging — that Free-will,
even in its most exalted state, in the most exalted men,
who were endowed with the law, righteousness, wis-
dom, and all the virtues, was ungodly and unrighteous,
and merited the wrath of God ; or the argument of
Paul amounts to nothing. And if it stand good, his
division leaves no medium : for he makes those who
believe the Gospel to be under the salvation, and all
the rest to be under the wrath of God : he makes the
believing to be righteous, and the unbelieving to be


314


Jews and Gentiles comprehend the principal natu
under heaven, it is hence certain, that Free-will is
nothing else than the greatest enemy to righteousness
and the salvation of man : for it is impossible, but
that there must have been some among the Jews
and Gentile Greeks who wrought and endeavoured
with all the powers of Free-will ; and yet, by all that
endeavouring, did nothing but carry on a war against
grace.

Do you therefore now come forward and say, what
Free-will can endeavour towards good, when goodness
and righteousness themselves are a " stumbling-block"
unto it, and " foolishness." Nor can you say that
this applies to, same and not to all, Paul speaks of
all without difference, where he says, " to the Jews a
stumbling-block and to the Gentiles foolishness nor
does he except any but believers. " To us, (saith he,)
who are called, and saints, it is the power of God and
wisdom of God." He does not say to some Gentiles,
to some Jews ; but plainly, to the Gentiles and to the
Jews, who are " not of us." Thus, by a manifest divi-
sion, separating the believing from the unbelieving, and
leaving no medium whatever. And we are now speak-
ing of Gentiles as working without grace : to whom
Paul saith, the righteousness of God is " foolishness,"
and they abhor it — This is that meritorious endeavour
of Free-will towards good !


Sect. CXXXVIII. — See, moreover, whether
Paul himself does not particularize the most exalted
among the Greeks, where he saith, that the wisest
among them " became vain in their imaginations, and


31-5

their foolish heart was darkened;** that " they be-
came wise in their own conceits : " that is, by then-
subtle disputations.

Does he not here, I pray you, touch that, which
, was the most exalted and most excellent in the Greeks,
when he touches their " imaginations ? " For these com-
prehend their most sublime and exalted thoughts and
opinions ; which, they considered as solid wisdom.
Bat he calls that their wisdom, as well in other places
" foolishness," as here " vain imagination;" which,
by its endeavouring, only became worse; till at last
they worshipped an, idol in their .own darkened hearts,
and proceeded to the other enormities, which he after-
wards enumerates.

If therefore, the most exalted and devoted endea-
vours and works in the most exalted of the nations be
evil and ungodly, what shall we think of the rest, who
are, as it were, the commonalty, and the vilest of the
nations ? Nor does Paul here make any difference
between those who are the most exalted, for he con-
demns all the devotedness of their wisdom, without
any respect of persons. And if he condemn their
very works and devoted endeavours, he condemns
those who exert them, even though they strive with
all the powers of Free-will. Their most exalted
endeavour, I say, is declared to be evil — how much
more then the persons themselves who exert it !

So also, just afterwards, he rejects the Jews, with-
out any difference, who are Jews " in the letter" and not
" in the spirit." " Thou (saith he) honourest God in the
letter, and in- the circumcision." Again, " He is not
a Jew which is one outwardly, but he is a Jew which
i&one inwardly."


316


What can be more manifest than the division here
made ? The Jew outwardly, is a transgressor of the
law ! And how many Jews must we suppose there
were, without the faith, who were men the most wise,
the most religious, and the most honourable, who
aspired unto righteousness and truth with all the
devotion of endeavour? Of these the apostle con-
tinually bears testimony : — that they had " a zeal of
God," that they " followed after righteousness," that
they strove day and night to attain unto salvation, that
they lived " blameless :" and yet they are transgressors
of the law, because they are not Jews " in the spirit,"
nay they determinately resist the righteousness of
faith. What conclusion then remains to be drawn,
but that, Free-will is then the worst when it is the
best; and that, the more it endeavours, the worse
it becomes, and the worse it is ! The words are
plain — the division is certain — nothing can be said
against it.

i

Sect. C XX XIX.— But let us hear Paul, who is
his own interpreter. In the third chapter, drawing
up, as it were, a conclusion, he saith, " What then ?
are we better than they ? No, in no wise ; for we
have before proved both Jews and Greeks that they
are all under sin."

Where is now Free-will! All, saith he, both
Jews and Greeks are under sin ! Are there any
1 tropes ' or ' difficulties ' here ? What would the * in-
vented interpretations' of the whole world do against
this all-clear sentence? He who says "all," excepts
none. And he who describes them all as being
" under sin," that is, the servants of sin, leaves them


317

no degree of good whatever. But where has he given
this proof that " they are all, both Jews and Gentiles,
under sin?" Nowhere, but where I have already
shewn : viz. where he saith, " The wrath of God
is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men." This he proves to them
afterwards from experience: shewing them, that
being hated of God, they were given up to so many
vices, in order that they might be convinced from the
fruits of their ungodliness, that they willed and did
nothing but evil. And then, he judges the Jews also
separately ; where he saith, that the Jew * 1 in the letter,"
is a transgressor of the law : which he proves, in like
manner, from the fruits, and from experience : saying,
" Thou who declarest that a man should not steal,
stealest thyself : thou who abhorrest idols, committest
sacrilege." Thus excepting none whatever, but those
who are Jews " in the spirit."

Sect CXL. — But let us see how Paul proves his
sentiments out of the holy scriptures : and whether
the passages which he adduces ' are made to have
more force in Paul, than they have in their own
places. 1 " As it is written, (saith he,) There is none
righteous, no not one. There is none that under-
standeth, there is none that seeketh after God. They
are all gone out of the way, they are all together
become unprofitable : there is none that doeth good,
no, not one," &c.

Here let him that can, produce his ' convenient
interpretation/ invent 1 tropes/ and pretend that the
words 1 are ambiguous and obscure ! ' Let him that
clares, defend Free-will against these damnable doc-


320

their most noble faculties, to turn unto good, but only
to turn unto evil ! What is it not to fear God, but for
men to be in all their faculties, and most of all in
their noblest faculties, contemners of all the things of
God, of his words, his works, his laws, his precepts,
and his will ! What then can reason propose, that is
right, who is thus blind and ignorant ? What can the
will choose that is good, which is thus evil and im-
potent? Nay, what can the will pursue, where the
reason can propose nothing, but the darkness of its
own blindness and ignorance ? And where the reason
is thus erroneous, and the will averse, what can the
man either do or attempt, that is good !


Sect CXLI. — But perhaps someone may here
sophistically observe — though the will be gone out of
the way, and the reason be ignorant, as to the perfec-
tion of the act, yet the will can make some attempt,
and the reason can attain to some knowledge by its
own powers ; seeing that, we can attempt many
things which we cannot perfect; and we are here
speaking, of the existence of a power, not of the per-
fection of the act.—

I answer : The words of the prophet comprehend
both the act and the pmver. For his saying, man seeks
not God, is the same as if he had said, man cannot .
seek God: which you may collect from this— If
there were a power or ability in man to will good, it
could not be, but that, as the motion of the divine
omnipotence could not suffer it to remain actionless,
or to keep holiday, (as I before observed) it must be
moved forth into act in some men, at least, in some
one man or. other, and must be made manifest so as


Digitized by


331

to afford an example. But this is not the case. For
God looks down from heaven, and does not see even
one who seeks after him, or attempts it. Wherefore
it follows, that that power is no where to be
found, which attempts, or wills to attempt, to seek
after him ; and that all men 4< are gone out of the
way."

Moreover if Paul be not understood to speak at
the same time of impotency, his disputation will
amount to nothing. For Paul's whole design is, to
make grace necessary unto all men. Whereas, if they
could make some sort of beginning themselves, grace
would not be necessary. But now, since they cannot
make that beginning, grace is necessary. Hence you
see that Free-will is by this passage utterly abolished,
and nothing meritorious or good whatever left in
man : seeing that, he is declared to be unrighteous,
ignorant of God, a contemner of God, averse to God,
and unprofitable in the sight of God. And the words
of the prophet are sufficiently forcible both in their
own place, and in Paul who adduces them.

Nor is it an inconsiderable assertion, when man
is said to be ignorant of, and to despise God : for
these are the fountain springs of all iniquities, the sink
of all sins, and the hell of all evils. What evil is there
not, where there are ignorance and contempt of God?
In a word, the whole kingdom of Satan in men, could
not be denned in fewer or more expressive words than
by saying — they are ignorant of and despise God !
For there is unbelief, there is disobedience, there is
sacrilege, there is blasphemy against God, there is
cruelty and a want of mercy towards our neighbour,
there is the love of self in aU the things of God tind

Y


man! — Here you have a description of the glory and
power of Free-will !

*,

Sect. CXLII. — Paul however proceeds, and
testifies, that he now expressly speaks with reference
to all men, and to those more especially who are the
greatest and most exalted : saying, " that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world become guilty be-
fore God : for by the works of the law shall no flesh
be justified in his sight."

How, I pray you, shall every mouth be stopped,
if there be still a power remaining by which we can
do something? For one might then say to God — That
which is here in the world is not altogether nothing.
There is that here which you cannot damn : even
that, to which you yourself gave the power of doing
something. The mouth of this at least will not be
stopped, for it cannot be obnoxious to you. — For if
there be any sound power in Free-will, and it be able
to do something, to say that the whole world is ob-
noxious to, or guilty before God, is false ; for that
power, whose mouth is not to be stopped, cannot be
an inconsiderable thing, or a something in one small
part of the world only, but a tjhing most conspicuous,
and most general' throughout the whole world. Or, if
its mouth be to be stopped, then it must be obnoxious
to, and guilty before God* together with the whole
world. But how can it rightly be called guilty, if it
be not unrighteous and ungodly; that is, meriting

punishment and vengeance ?

Let your friends, I pray you, find out, by what

' convenient interpretation ' that power of man is to

t$, cleared from this charge of guilt, by which the


323

whole world is declared guilty before God; or by
what contrivance it is to be excepted from being com-
prehended in the expression " all the world." These
words — " They are all gone out of the way, there is
none righteous, no not one," are mighty thunder-
claps and riving thunder-bolts ; they are in reality
that hammer breaking the rock in pieces mentioned
by Jeremiah ; by which, is broken in pieces every thing
that is, not in one man only, nor in some men, nor in
a part of men, but in the whole world, no one man
being excepted : so that the whole world ought, at
those words, to tremble, to fear, and to flee away.
For what words more awful or fearful could be uttered
than these— The whole world is guilty ; all the sons
of men are turned out of the way, and become un-
profitable ; .there is no one that fears God; there is
no one that is not unrighteous ; there is no one that
understandeth ; there is no one that seeketh after God !

Nevertheless, such ever has been, and still is, the
hardness and insensible obstinacy of our hearts, that
we never should of ourselves hear or feel the force of
these thunder-claps or thunder-bolts, but should, even
while they were sounding in our ears, exalt and esta-
blish Free-will with all its powers in defiance of them,
and thus in reality fulfil that of Malachi i., " They
build, but I will throw down ! "

With the same power of words also is this said—
" By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified
in his sight." — " By the deeds of the law " is a forci-
ble expression ; as is also this, " The whole world ; "
and this, " All the children of men." For it is to be
observed, that Paul abstains from the mention of
persons, and mention* i their totyp only ' that is, that

y 2


he might comprehend all persons, and whatever in
them is most excellent. Whereas, if he had said the
commonalty of the Jews, or the Pharisees, or certain
of the ungodly, are not justified, he might have seemed
to leave some excepted, who, from the power of Free-
will in them, and by a certain aid from the law, were
not altogether unprofitable. But now, when he con-
demns the works of the law themselves, and makes
them unrighteous in the sight of God, it becomes ma-
nifest, that he condemns all who were mighty in a de-
voted observance of the law and of works. And none
devotedly observed the law and works but the best
and most excellent among them, nor did they thus
observe them but with their best and most exalted
faculties ; that is, their reason and their will.

If therefore, those, who exercised themselves in the
observance of the law and of works with all the devoted
striving and endeavouring both of reason and of will,
that is, with all the power of Free-will, and who were
assisted by the law as a divine aid, and were instructed
out of it, and roused to exertion by it ; if, I say, these
are condemned of impiety because they are not justi-
fied, and are declared to be flesh in the sight of God,
what then will there be left in the whole race of man-
kind which is not flesh, and which is not ungodly?
For all are condemned alike who are of the works
of the law : and whether they exercise themselves in
the law with the utmost devotion, or moderate de-
votion, or with no devotion at all, it matters nothing.
None of them could do any thing but work the works
of the law, and the works of the law do not justify :
and if they do not justify, they prove their workmen
to be ungodly, and leave them so : and if they be


Digitized by


325

ungodly, they are guilty, and merit the wrath of God !
These things are so clear, that no one can open his
mouth against them.

Sect. CXLIII. — But many elude and evade
Paul, by saying, that he here calls the ceremonial
works, works of the law; which works, after the
death of Christ, were dead.

I answer: This is that notable error and igno-
rance of Jerom ; which, although Augustine strenu-
ously resisted it, yet, by the withdrawing of God and
the prevailing of Satan, has found its way throughout
the world, and has continued down to this day. By
means of which, it has come to pass, that it has been
impossible to understand Paul, and the knowledge of
Christ has, consequently, been obscured. Therefore,
if there had been no other error in the church, this
one might have been sufficiently pestilent and power-
ful to destroy the Gospel : for which, Jerom, if peculiar
grace did not interpose, has deserved hell rather than
heaven : so far am I from daring to canonize him,
or call him a saint ! But however, it is not truth
that Paul is here speaking of the ceremonial works
only: for if that be case, how will his argument stand
good, whereby he concludes, that all are unrighteous
and need grace? But perhaps you will say — Be it
so, that we are not justified by the ceremonial works,
yet one might be justified by the moral works of the
decalogue. By this syllogism of yours then, you have
proved, that to such, grace is not necessary. If this
be the case, how very useful must that grace be,
which delivers us from the ceremonial works only,


326

the easiest of all works, which may be extorted from
us through mere fear or self-love ! - . • »

And this, moreover, is erroneous — that ceremonial
works are dead and unlawful, since the death of Christ.
Paul never said any such thing. He says, that they
do not justify, and that they profit the man nothing
in the sight of God, so as to make him free from
unrighteousness. Holding this truth, any one may
do them, and yet do nothing that is unlawful. Thus,
to eat and to drink are works, which do not justify or
recommend us to God ; and yet, he who eats and drinks
does not, therefore, do that which is unlawful.

These men err also in this. — The ceremonial
works, were as much commanded and exacted in the
old law, and in the decalogue, as the moral works:
and therefore, the latter had neither more nor less
force than the former. For Paul is here speaking,
principally, to the Jews, as he saith Rom. i. : where-
fore, let no one doubt, that by the works of the law
here, all the works of the whole law are to be under-
stood. For if the law be abrogated and dead, they
cannot be called the works of the law ; for an abro-
gated or dead law, is no longer a law ; and that Paul
knew full well. Therefore, he does not speak of the
law abrogated, when he speaks of the works of the
law, but of the law in force and authority : otherwise,
how easy would it have been for him to say, The
law is now abrogated? And then, he would have
spoken openly and clearly.

But let us bring forward Paul himself, who is the
best interpreter of himself. He saith, Gal. iii., " As
many as are of the works of the law, are under the


Digitized by


327

curse : for it is written, Cursed is every one that con-
tinueth not in all things, which are written in the book
of the law, to do them." You see that Paul here,
where he is urging the same point as he is in his
epistle to the Romans, and in the same words,'
speaks, wherever he makes mention of the works of
the law, of all the laws that are written in the book
of the law.

t And what is still more worthy of remark, Paul
himself cites Moses, who curses those that continue
not in the law ; whereas, he himself curses those who
are of the works of the law ; thus adducing a testi- 1
mony of a different scope from that of his own senti-
ment; the former being in the negative, the latter in
the affirmative. But this he does, because the real
state of the case is such in the sight of God, that
those who are the most devoted to the works of the
law, are the farthest *from fulfilling the law, as being
without the Spirit, who only is the fulfiller of the law;
which such may attempt to fulfil by their own powers,
but they will effect nothing after all. Wherefore, both
declarations are truth— that of Moses, that they are
accursed who continue not in the works of the law;
and that of Paul, that they are accursed who are of
the works of the law. For both characters of persons
require the Spirit, without which, the works of the
law, how many and excellent soever they may be,
justify not, as Paul saith ; wherefore neither character
of persons continue in all things that are written, as
Moses saith.

Sect. CXLIV.— In a word : Paul by this divi-
sion of his, fully confirms that which I maintain. For


328

be divides law-working men into two classes, those
who work after the spirit, and those who work after
the flesh, leaving no medium whatever. He speaks
thus : " By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be jus-
tified." What is this but saying, that those whose
works, profit them not, work the works, of the law
without the Spirit, as being themselves flesh ; that is,
unrighteous and ignorant of God. So, Gal. iii., making
the same division, he saith, " received ye the Spirit
by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith r"
Again Rom. iii, " but now, the righteousness of God
is manifest without the law." And again Rom. iii,
" We conclude, therefore, that a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law."

From all which it is manifest and clear, that in
Paul, the Spirit is set in opposition to the works of the
law, as well as to all other things which are not
spiritual, including all the powers of, and every thing
pertaining to the flesh. So that, the meaning of Paul,
is evidently the same as that of Christ, John iii., that
every thing which is not of the Spirit is flesh, be it
never so specious, holy and great, nay, be they works
of the divine law the most excellent, and wrought by
all the powers imaginable ; for the Spirit of Christ is
wanting ; without which, all things are nothing short
of being damnable.

Let it then be a settled point, that Paul, by the
works of the law, means not the ceremonial works,
but the works of the whole law ; then, this will be a
settled point also, that in the works of the law, every
thing is condemned that is without the Spirit. And
without the Spirit, is that power of Free-will, (for
that is the point in dispute,) — that most exalted


3S9

faculty in man ! For, to be " of the works of the law,1
is the most exalted state in which man can be. The
apostle, therefore, does not say, who are of sins, and
of ungodliness against the law, but who are " of the
works of 'the law ; " that is, who are the best of men,
and the most devoted to the law : and who are, in ad-
dition to the power of Free-will, even assisted, that
is, instructed and roused into action, by the law
itself. - :

If therefore Free-will assisted by the law and exer-
cising all its powers in the law, profit nothing and
justify not, but be left in sin and in the flesh, what
must we suppose it able to do, when left to itself
without the law !

» By the law (sahh Paul) is the knowledge of sin."
Here he shews how much, and how far the law pro-
fits : — that Free-will is of itself so blind, that it does
not even know what is sin, but has need of the law
for its teacher. And what can that man do towards
taking away sin, who does not even know what is sin ?
All that he can do, is, to mistake that which is sin for
that which is no sin, and that which is no sin for that
which is sin. And this, experience sufficiently proves.
How does the world, by the medium of those whom
it accounts the most excellent and the most devoted
to righteousness and piety, hate and persecute the
righteousness of God preached in the Gospel, and
brand it with the name of heresy, error, and every op-
probrious appellation, while it boasts of and sets forth
its own works and devices, which are really sin and
error, as righteousness and wisdom ? By this scrip-
ture, therefore, Paul stops the mouth of Free-will
where he teaches, that by the law its sin is discovered


330


unto it, of which 8m it was before ignorant ; go leur is
he from conceding to it any power whatever to at-
tempt that which is good.

i ■■ ■ •«

Sect. CXLV.— And here is solved that question
ot tne uiatriDe so otten repeated tnrougnout its book
* — " if we can do nothing, to what purpose are so
many laws, 6o many precepts, so many threatenings,
and so many promises ?" —

Paul here gives an answer : " By the law is the
knowledge of sin." His answer is far different from
that which would enter the thoughts of man, or of
Free-will. He does not say, by the law is proved
Free-will, because it co-operates with it unto righte-
ousness. For righteousness is not by the law, but, " by
the law is the knowledge of sin :" seeing that, the
effect* the work, and the office of the law, is to be a
light to the ignorant and the blind ; such a light, as
discovers to them disease, sin, evil, death, hell, and the
wrath of God ; though it does not deliver from these,
nut shews them only. And when a man is thus
brought to a knowledge of the diboase of sin, he is
cast down, is afflicted, nay despairs : the law does not
help him, much less can he help himself. Another
light is necessary, which' might discover to him the
remedy. This is the voice of the Gospel, revealing
Christ as the Deliverer from all these evils. Neither
^Free-will nor reason can discover him. And how
should it discover him, when it is itself dark and
devoid even of the light of the law, which might dis-
cover to it its disease, which disease, in its own light
it seeth not, but believes it to be sound health.

So also in Galattans, hi., treating on the same


$31

poiai, health, " Wherefore then serveth the lair r
To which he answers, not as the Diatribe does, in a
Way that proves the existence of Free*- will, but he
saith, " it was added because of transgressions, until
the seed should come, to whom the promise was
made." He saith, " because .of .transgressions ; " not,
however, to restrain them, as Jerom dreams ; (for
Paul shews, that to take away and to restrain sins,
by the gift of righteousness, was that which was pro-
mised to the seed to come ;) but to cause transgres-
sions to abound, as he saith Rom. v., " The. daw en-
tered that sin might abound." Not thai sins were not
committed and did not abound without the Jaw, but
they were not known to be transgressions and sins of
such magnitude ; for the most and greatest of them,
were considered to be righteousnesses. And /while
sins are thus unknown, there is no place for remedy,
or for hope; because, they will not submit to the hand
of the healer, considering themselves to be whole,
and not to want a physician. Therefore, the law is
necessary, which might give the knowledge of sin ; in
order that, he who is proud and whole in his own
eyes, being humbled down into the knowledge of the
iniquity and greatness of his sin, might groan and
breath after the grace that is laid i up in Christ.

Only observe, therefore, i the simplicity of the
words—" By the law is the -knowledge of -am;" and
yet, these alone are of force sufficient to confound and
overthrow Free-will altogether. For if it be true, that
of itself, it knows not what is sin, and what is evil, as
the apostle saith here, and Rom. vii., u I should not
have known that concupiscence was sin, except the
law had said, Thou shalt not covet," how can it ever


332

know what is righteousness and good ? And if it
know not what righteousness is, how can it endea-
vour to attain unto it ? We know not the sin in which
we were born, in which we live, in which we move and
exist, and which lives, moves, and reigns in us ; how
then should we know that righteousness which is with-
out us, and which reigns in heaven ? These works
bring that miserable thing Free-will to nothing —
nothing at all !

Sect CXLVL— The state of the case, therefore,
being thus, Paul speaks openly with full confidence
and authority, saying, " But now the righteousness of
God is manifest without the law, being witnessed by
the law and the prophets ; even the righteousness of
God which is. by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and
upon all them that believe in him : (for there is no
difference, for all have sinned and are without the
glory of God :) being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus : Whom
God hath set forth to be a propitiation for sin, through
faith in his blood, &c."

Here Paul speaks forth very thunder-bolts against
Free-will. First, he saith, " The righteousness of God
without the law is manifested." Here he marks the
distinction between the righteousness of God, and the
righteousness of the law : because, the righteousness
of faith comes by grace, without the law. His saying,
" without the law, " can mean nothing else, but that
Christian righteousness exists, without the works of
the law : inasmuch as the works of the law avail no-
thing, and can do nothing, toward the attainment unto
it As he afterwards saith, " Therefore we conclude


333


that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the law." The same also he had said before, " By
the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in
nis signt.

From all which it is most clearly manifest, that
the endeavour and desire of Free-will are a nothing at
all. For if the righteousness of God exist without the
law, and without the works of the law, how shall it
not much rather exist without Free-will ! especially,
since the most devoted effort of Free-will is, to exer-
cise itself in moral righteousness, or the works of that
law, from which its blindness and impotency derive
their ■ assistance ! ' This word " without," therefore
abolishes all moral works, abolishes all moral righte-
ousness, abolishes all preparations unto grace. In a
word, scrape together every thing you can as that
which pertains to the ability of Free-will, and Paul
will still stand invincible saying, — the righteousness
of God is " without " it !

But, to grant that Free-will can, by its endea-
vour, move itself in some direction, we will say,
unto good works, or unto the righteousness of the civil
or moral law ; yet, it is not moved toward the righ-
teousness of God, nor does God in any respect allow
its devoted efforts to be worthy unto the attainment
of this righteousness : for he saith, that his righteous-
ness availeth without the works of the law. If there-
fore, it cannot move itself unto the attainment of the
righteousness of God, what will it be profited, if it
move itself by its own works and endeavours, unto the
attainment of (if it were possible) the righteousness of
angels ! Here, I presume, the words are not ' ob-
scure or ambiguous/ nor is any place left for 1 tropes'


334

of any kind Here Paul distinguishes most manfc
festly the two righteousnesses; assigning the one to
the law, the other to grace ; and declares that the
latter is given without the former, and without its
works; and that the former justifies not, nor avails
any thing, without the latter. I should like to see,
therefore, how Free-will can stand, or be defended,
against these scriptures !

Sect. CXLVIL— Another thunder-boH is this
— The apostle saith, that the righteousness of God is
manifested and avails, " unto all and upon all them that
believe" in Christ; and that, "there is no drfference."*-*-

Here again, he divides in the clearest words, the
whole race of men into two distinct divisions. To the
believing he gives the righteousness of God, but takes
it from the unbelieving. Now, no one, I suppose,
will be madman enough to doubt, whether or not the
power or endeavour of Free-will be a something that
is not faith in Christ Jesus. Paul then denies that
any thing which is act this faith, is righteous before
God. And if it be not righteous before God, it must
be sin. Fortkenris with God no medium between
righteousness and sin, which can be as it were a
neuter — neither righteousness nor sin. Otherwise the
whole argument of Paul would amount to nothing:
for it proceeds wholly upon this distinct division—
that whatever is done and carried on by men, must
be in the sight of God, either righteousness or sin:
righteousness, if done in faith ; sin, if faith be wanting.
With men, indeed, things pass thus.— All cases in
which men, m tbefr intercourse with each other, neither
owe any thing as a due> nor do any thing as a free


335

benefit,! are called medium and neuter. But here tkti
ungodly man sins against God, whether he eat, of
whether he drink, or whatever he do ; because, he
abuses the creature of God by his ungodliness and
perpetual ingratitude, and does not, at any one mo-
ment, give glory to God from his heart.

Sect. CXLVIIL— This also, is no powerless
thunder-bolt where the apostie says, "All have sinned
and are without the glory of God : for there is no
difference."

What, I pray you, could be spoken more clearly ?
Produce one of your Free-will-workmen, and say to
me — does this man sin, in this his endeavour ? If he
does not sin, why does not Paul except him? Why
does he include him also without difference ? Surely
he that saith " all," excepts no one in any place, at
any time, in any work or endeavour. If therefore you
except any man, for any kind of devoted desire or
work, you make Paul a liar; because he includes
that Free-will-workman or striver, among all the rest,
and in all that he saith concerning them ; whereas,
Paul should have had some respect for this person,
and not have numbered him among the general herd
of sinners!

There is also that part, where he saith, that they
are " without the glory of God."

You may understand " the glory of God " here
twp ways, actively and passively. For Paul writes thus
from bis frequent use of Hebraisms. « The glory of
God," understood actively, is that glory by winch God
glories in us ; understood passively, it is that glory by
which we glory in God. But it/seems to me proper,.


338

Paul here give* yo* an answer.— That there 4& no
such thing ad merit at all ; biit that all wtoo are justi-
fied are justified " freely ; " that this is ascribed to no
one but to the grace of God.— And when this righte-
ousness is given, the kingdom and life eternal tire
given with it! Where is your endeavouring now?
Where is your devoted effort? Where are you*
works ? Where are your merits of Free-will ? Where
is the profit of them all put together ? You cannot
here make, as a pretence, 1 obscurity and ambiguity : '
the facts and the works are most clear and most plain.
But be it so, that they attribute to Free-will a very
little indeed, yet they teach us that by that very little
we can attain unto righteousness and grace. Nor do
they solve that question, Why does God justify one and
leave another? in any other way, than by asserting
the freedom of the will, and saying, Because, the one
endeavours and the other does not : and God regards
the one for his endeavouring, and despises the other for
his not endeavouring; lest, if he did otherwise, he
should appear to be unjust.

And notwithstanding all their pretence, both by
their tongue and pen, that they do not profess to
attain unto grace by \ the merit of worthiness ' ( meri"
turn condignum ) nor call it the merit of worthiness,
yet they only mock us with a term, and hold fast their
tenet all the while. For what is the amount of their
pretence that they do not call it 1 the merit of worthi-
ness, ' if nevertheless they assign unto it all that be-
longs to the merit of worthiness ?— saying, that he in
the sight of God attains unto grace who endeavour*,
and he who does not endeavour, does not attain unto,
it? Is this not plainly making it to be the merit of


S39

worthiness ? it not making God« 1 a respecter of
works, of merits, and of persons, to say that one marr
is devoid of grace from his ownr fault, because he did
not endeavour after it, but that another, because her
did endeavour after it, has attained unto grace,' unto
whfch he would not have attained, if he had not en-
deavoured after it ? If this be not 1 the merit of wor*
thiness,' then I should like to be informed what it is
that is called * die merit of Worthiness.'

In this way you may play a game of mockeryr
upon all words ,- and say, it is not indeed the merit of
worthiness, but is in effect 1 the same as the * merit of
worthiness/ — The thorn is not a bad tree, but is m
effect the same as a bad tree ! — The fig is not a good*
tree, but is in effect the same as a good tree '. — The
Diatribe is not, indeed, impious, but says and does
nothing but what is impious !

Sect CXLIX.— It has happened to these as^
sertors of Free-will according to the old proverb,
1 Striving dire Scylla's rock to shun, they 'gainst Cha*-
rybdis headlong rtfo.' For devotedly striving to dissent
from Ae Pelagians, they begin to deny the « merit of
worthiness ; ' whereas, by the very way in which trjey
deny it, they establish it more firmly than ever. They
deny it by their word *ahd> pen, but establish it id
reality, and in heart-sentiment : and thus, they are
worse than the Pelagians themselves : and that, on
two accounts. First, the Pelagians plainly, candidly*
and ingenuously, assert the * merit of worthiness; '
thus calling a boat a boat, and a fig a fig; and teadH
mg what thtey really think. Whereas, our Free-will


340


friends, while they think and teach the same thing,
yet mock us with lying words and false appearances,
as though they dissented from the Pelagians ; when the
fact is quite the contrary. So that, with respect to
their hypocrisy, they seem to be the Pelagians* strongest
opposers, but with respect to the reality of the matter,
and their heart-tenet, they are twice-dipped Pela-
gians. And next, under this hypocrisy, they estimate
and purchase the grace of God at a much lower rate
than the Pelagians themselves. For these assert, that
it is not a certain little something in us by whi tchwe
attain unto grace, but whole, full, perfect, great, and
many, devoted efforts and works. Whereas, our friends
declare, that it is a certain little something, almost
a nothing, by which we deserve grace.

If therefore there must be error, they err with
more honesty and less pride, who say, that the grace
of God is purchased at a great price, and who account
it dear and precious, than those who teach, that it
may be purchased at that which is very little, and in-
considerable, and who account it cheap and contemp-
tible. But however, Paul pounds both in pieces in one
mortar, by one word, where he saith, that ail are
"justified freely;" and again that they are justified
" without the law M and " without the works of the
law." And he who asserts that the justification must
be free in all who are justified, leaves none excepted
who work, deserve, or prepare themselves ; he leaves
no work which can be called 1 merit of congruity * or
1 merit of worthiness ; ' and by the one hurling of this
thunder-bolt, he dashes in pieces both the Pelagians
with their < whole merit/ and the sophists with their


341

' very little merit/ For a free justification allows of
no workmen : because, a free gift, and a work-prepa-
ration, are manifestly in opposition to each other.

Moreover, the being justified through grace, will
not allow of respect unto the worthiness of any per-
son : as the apostle saith also afterwards, chap, xi.,
M If by grace then it is no more of works ; otherwise,
grace is no more grace." He saith the same also,
chap, iv., " Now to him that worketh, is the reward
not reckoned of grace, but of debt." Wherefore, my
Paul stands an invincible destroyer of Free-will, and
lays prostrate two armies by one word. For if we be
justified " without works," all works are condemned,
whether they be very little, or very great. He excepts
none, but thunders alike against all.

Sect. CL. — Here you may see the yawning in-
considerateness of all our friends, and what it profits a
man to rely upon the ancient fathers, who have been
approved through the series of so many ages. Were
they not also all alike blind to, nay rather, did they
not disregard, the most clear and most manifest words
of Paul ? Pray what is there that can be spoken clearly
and plainly in defence of grace, against Free-will, if
the argument of Paul be not clear and plain ? He
proceeds with a glow of argument, and exalts grace
against works ; and that, in words the most clear and
most plain; saying, that we are "justified freely,"
and that grace is no more grace, if it be sought by
works. Thus most manifestly excluding all works in
the matter of justification, to the intent that, he might
establish grace only and free justification. And yet
we, in all this light, still seek after darkness ; and


.342


when we cannot ascribe unto ourselves great things,
and all things, we endeavour to ascribe unto our-
selves a something ' in degree/ ' a very little ; ' merely
that, we might maintain our tenet, that justification
through the grace of God is not " free " and " with-
out works." — As though he who declares, that greater
things, and all things profit us nothing unto justifica-
tion, does not much more deny that things I in degree,'
and things 1 very little/ profit us nothing also: particu-
larly when he has settled the point, that we are justi-
fied by grace alone without any works whatever, and
therefore, without the law itself, in which are compre-
hended all works, great and little, works of * congruity 1
and works of ' worthiness/ * >fr

Go now then and boast of the authorities of the
ancients, and depend on what they say ; all of whom
you see, to a man, disregarded Paul, that most plain
and most clear teacher ; and, as it were, purposely
shunned this morning star, yea, this sun rather, be-
cause, being wrapped up in their own carnal reason,
they thought it absurd that no place should be left to
merit.

ifi ■•• : i r» h *r*wh 3JJBitw

Sect. CLI. — Let us now bring forward that
example of Abraham which Paul afterwards adduces.
" If (saith he) Abraham were justified by works, he
hath whereof to glory, but not before God. For what
saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it
was counted unto him for righteousness."

Mark here again, I pray you, the distinction of
Paul, where he is shewing the two-fold righteousness
of Abraham. — The one, is of works ; that is, moral
and civil ; but he denies that he was justified by this


343

before God, even though he were justified by it before
men. Moreover, by that righteousness^ " fee hath
whereof to glory" before men, but <is all theiwhile
himself without the glory of God. Nor ran any *>ne
here say, that they ase the works of the law^or of ce-
remonies, which are here condemned; seeing that,
Abraham existed so many years before the law. Paul
plainly speaks of the- works of Abraham, and these his
best works. For it would be ridiculous to dispute,
whether or not any one were justified by evil works.

If therefore, Abraham be righteous by no works
whatever, .and if both he himself and all his works be
leftnnder sin, unless he be clothed with another righ-
teousness, even with the , righteousness of faith, it is
quite manifest, that no man can do any thing by works
towards his becoming righteous : and moreover, that
no works, no devoted efforts, no endeavours of Free-
iwill, avail any thing in the sight of God, but are all
judged to be ungodly, unrighteous, and evil. For if the
man himself be not righteous, neither will his works
or endeavours be righteous : and if they be not righte-
ous, they are damnable, and merit wrath.

The other righteousness is that of faith ; which
consists, not in any works, but in the favour and im-
putation of God through grace. And mark how Paul
tdwells upon the word "imputed ; " how he urges it,
repeats it, and inculcates it — " Now (saith he) to
him that worketh, is the reward not reckoned of
grace, but of debt But to him that worketh not, but
.believeth in him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness," according to the pur-
pose of the grace of God. Then he adduces David,
saying the same thing concerning the imputation


344


through grace. " Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord will not impute sin," Sec. >t

In this chapter, he repeats the word u impute ^
above ten times. In a word, he distinctively sets
forth " him that worketh," and " him that worketh not,"
leaving no medium between them. He declares, that
righteousness is not imputed "to him thatworketh," but
asserts that righteousness is imputed "to him that
worketh not," if he believe ! Here is no way by which
Free-will, with its devoted efforts and endeavours,
can escape or get off : it must be numbered with
" him that worketh," or with " him that worketh not 7
If it be numbered with "him that worketh," you hear
that righteousness is not imputed unto it; if it be
numbered with " him that worketh not, but bcKeveth"
in God, righteousness is imputed unto it And then;
it will not be the power of Free-will, but the new
creature by faith. But if righteousness be not imputed
unto it, being " him that worketh," then, it becomes
manifest, that all its works are nothing but sins, evils,
and impieties before God.

Nor can any sophist here snarl, and say, that,
although man be evil, yet his work may not be evil.
For Paul speaks not of the man simply, but of " him
that worketh," to the very intent that, he might
declare in the plainest words, that the works and
devoted efforts themselves of man are condemned,
whatever they may be, by what name soever they may
be called, or under what form soever they may be
done. He here also speaks of good works ; because,
the points of his argument are, justification, and
merits. And when he speaks of " him that worketh,"
he speaks of all workers and of all their works;


Digitized by


but more especially of their good and meritorious
works. Otherwise, his distinction between " him that
worketh," and "him that worketh not," will amount
Urnothingj

SeettGLII.-^-I here omit to bring forward Uiose
all-powerful arguments drawn from the purpose of
grace, from the promise, from the force of the law,
from original sin, and from the election of God; of

overthrow Free-will. For if grace come by the pur-
pose of God, or by election, it comes of necessity,;
and not by any devoted effort or endeavour of our own;;
as I have already shewn. Moreover, if God promised
grace/ before the law, as Paul argues here, and in his
epistle; to the Galatians also, then it does not come by
works or by the law; otherwise, it would be no longer
a promise. And so also faith, if works were of any
avail, would come to nothing : by which, nevertheless,
Abraham was justified before the law was given.
Again, as the law is the strength of sin, and only
discovers sin, but does not take it away, it brings the
conscience in guilty before God. This is what Paul
means when he saith, " the law worketh wrath."
How then can it be possible, that righteousness should
be obtained by the law ? And if we derive no help
from the law, how can we derive any help from the
power of Free-will alone ?

Moreover, since we all lie under the same sin and
damnation of the one man Adam, how can we attempt
any thing which is not sin and damnable ? For when
he saith "all," he excepts no one ; neither the power
of Free-will, nor any workman ; whether he work or


346

work not, attempt or attempt not, he must of neces-
sity be included among the test in the *aU." Nor
should' we stn or be damned by that one sat of Adam,

if the sin were not our own: for who con id be
damned for the sin of another, especially in the sight
of Ood? Nor is the sin ours by imitation, or by
working ; for this would not be the one sin of Adam ;
because^ then, it would not be the sin which he com-
mitted, but which we committed ourselves ; — it be-
comes our sin by generation. — But of this in some
other place.— Original sin itself, therefore, will not
allow of any other power in Free-will, but that of
sinning and going on unto damnation.

These arguments, I say, I omit to bring forward,
both because they are most manifest and most for-
cible, and because I have touched upon them already.
For if I wished to produce all those parts of Paul
which overthrow Free-will, I could not do better, than
through with a continued commentary on the


whole of his epistle, as I have done on the third and
fourth chapters. On which, I have dwelt thus parti-
cularly, that I might shew all our Free-wiU friends
their yawning inconsiderateness, who so read Paul in
these all-clear parts, as to see any thing in them but
these most powerful arguments against Free-will ; and
that I might expose the folly of that confidence which
they place in the authority and writings of the ancient
teachers, and leave them to consider with what force
the remaining most clear arguments must make
against them, if they should be handled with
it.


Sect. CLIII. — As to myself, I must confess, - 1


347


am more than astonished, that, when Paul so often uses
thoseimit^ally agiptyi^g wnds f 'All," "none/: V noV»
" j»t one/! wMwut," thua^." they ajre Ail goneoiit of
the way, theue iarnone that doeth good, no not one } "
all are sinners and condemned by Aheooe ainof Adam;

justified byrftuth " wthotttr the law ;., ".with-
out" the works of theiaw ; so thai, if any one wished
to apeak otherwise so as to be more intelligible, he
could not ^peak in words more clear and more plain ;
—I am more loan astonished, I say, how it is, that
wortjfl a#d sentences, contrary and contradictory to
thes£ ; universally applying words and sentences, have
gained ,so much ground; which say* — Some are not
gone out of the way, are not unrighteous, am not evil,
are not sinners, are not condemned : there is something
in man which is good and which endeavours after good :
as though that man, whoever he be, who endeavours
after good, Were not comprehended in this one word
" all," «r " none;" or ■« not"

I could find nothing, even if I wished it, to ad-
vance against Paul, or to teply m contradiction to
him : but should be compelled to acknowledge that
the power of my Fiee-will, together with its endea-
vouf$,is comprehended in those " alls," and " nonei,"
of whom Paul here speaks ; if, that is* no new J&ind of
grammar or new manner of speech were introduced.

Moreover, if Paul had used this mode of expres-
sion .once, or in one place only, there might have been
room for imagining a trope, or for taking hold « of and
twisting some detached terms. Whereas, he uses it
perpetually both in the affirmative and in the nega-
tive : and so expresses hia sentiments by his argument
juid by his distinctive division, in every place and in


L


all parts, that not the nature of his words only and
the current of his language, but that which follows
and that which precedes, the circumstances, the scope,
and the very body of the whole disputation, all com- J
pel us to conclude, according to common sense, that
the meaning of Paul is,— that out of the faith of Christ
there is nothing but sin and damnation.

It was thus that we promised we would refute
Free-will, so that all our adversaries should not be*
able to resist : which, I presume, I have effected, even
though they shall not so far acknowledge themselves
vanquished, as to come over to my opinion, or to ;
be silent : for that is not in my power' : that is the gift
of the Spirit of God !

Sect CLIV. — But however, before we hear the*
Evangelist John, I will just add the crowning testK*
mony from Paul : and I am prepared, if this be not
sufficient, to oppose Paul to Free-will by commenting
upon him throughout; In Rom. viii., where he di-
vides the human race into two distinctive division*,'
" flesh" and 44 spirit," as Christ also does, John iiW
he speaks thus — " They that are after the fleshy do
mind the things of the flesh ; but they that are after
the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit."

That Paul here calls all carnal who are not spiri-
tual, is manifest, both from the division itself and the
opposition of spirit to flesh, and from the very words
of Paul himself, where he adds, " But ye are not in
the flesh but in the Spirit; if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ he is none of his"— What else is the
meaning of " But ye are not in the flesh, but in the


Digitized by


349

Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of Christ dwell in you,"
but, that those who have not the " Spirit," are, neces-
sarily, in the "flesh?" And if any man be not of
Christ, what else is he but of Satan ? It is manifest,
therefore, that those who are devoid of the Spirit, are
" in the flesh," and under Satan.

Now let us see what his opinion is concerning the
endeavour and the power of Free-will in the carnal,
who are in the flesh. " They cannot please God."
Again, " The carnal mind is death." Again, " The
carnal mind is enmity against God." And again, " It is
not subject to the law of God neither indeed can be."
Here let the advocate for Free-will answer me — How
can that endeavour toward good " which is death,"
which " cannot please God," which " is enmity against
God," which " is not subject to God, " and " cannot"
be subject to him ? Nor does Paul mean to say, that
the carnal mind is dead and inimical to God ; but that,
it is death itself, enmity itself, which cannot possibly
be subject to the law of God or please God ; as he
had said just before, " For what the law could not do,
in that it was weak through the flesh, God did," &c.

But I am very well acquainted with that fable of
Origen concerning the three-fold affectum ; the one of
which he calls * flesh,' the other ' soul,' and the other
1 spirit,' making the soul that medium affection, ver-
tible either way, towards the flesh or towards the spirit
But these are merely his own dreams ; he speaks them
forth only, but does not prove them. Paul here calls
every thing " flesh" that is without the " Spirit," as I
have already shewn. Therefore, those most exalted vir-
tues of the best men are in the flesh ; that is, they are
dead, and at enmity against God ; they are not sub-


350

ject to the l*w of God, nor indeed cah=te; and they
please not God. For Paul does not on!y f say that
such men art not subject, but that they cannot be
subject. So also Christ, Matt vii., sahh, " An evil
tree cannot bring forth good fruit" And again,
chap, xii., " How can ye being evil speak that which
is good." Here you see, we not only speak that which •
is evil, but cannot speak that which is good.

And though he sahh in another place, that we
who are evil know how to give good gifts unto out
children, yet he denies that we do good, even when
we give good gifts ; because those good gifts which we
give are the creatures of God ; but we ourselves not
being good, cannot give those good gifts well. For
he is speaking unto all men ; nay, even unto his own
disciples. So that these two sentiments of Paul, that
the just man liveth " by faith," and that " whatsoever
is not of faith is sin," stand confirmed : the latter
of which follows from the former. For if there be
nothing by which we are justified but faith only, it is
evident, that those who are not of faith, are not justi-
fied. And if they be not justified, they are sinners.
And if they be sinners, they are evil trees' and can do
nothing but shV and bring forth evil fruit^Wherefore,
Free-will is nothing bat the servant of sin, of death;
and of Satan, doing nothing, and being able to do or
attempt nothing, but evil !

Sect. CLV. — Add to this that example, chap, x.j
taken out of Isaiah, " I was found of them that sought
me not, I was made manifest unto them that asked
not for me." He speaks this with reference to the
Gentiles : — that it was given unto them to hear and


$51

know Christ, when before, they could not even think
of him, much less seek him, or prepare themselves for
him by the power of Free-will. From this example
it is sufficiently evident, that grace comes so free, that
no thought concerning it, or attempt or desire after it,
precedes. So also Paul — when he was Saul, what
did he do by that exalted power of Free-will? Cer-
tainly, in respect of reason, he intended that which
was best and most meritoriously good. But by what
endeavours did he come unto grace ? He did not
only not seek after it, but received it even when he
was furiously maddened against it !

On the other hand, he saith of the Jews—" The
Gentiles which followed not after righteousness have
attained unto the righteousness which is of faith. But
Israel which followed after the law of righteousness
hath not attained unto4helaw of righteousness;" What
has any advocate for Free-will to mutter against this ?
The Gentiles when filled with ungodliness and every
vice, receive righteousness freely from a mercy-shew*
ing God : while the Jews, who follow after righteous-
ness with all their devoted effort and endeavour, are
frustrated. Is this not plainly saying, that the endea-
vour of Free-will is all in vain* even when it strives
to do the best ; and 1 that Free-will, of itself, can only
fall back and grow worse and worse ?

Nor can any one say, that the Jews did not
follow after righteousness with all the power of Free-
will. For Paul himself bears this testimony of them,
chap, x., " That they had a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge." Therefore, nothing which
is attributed to Free-will was wanting to the Jews;
and yet, it attained unto nothing) nay 'unto the con-


352

trary of that after which they strove. Whereas, there
was nothing in the Gentiles which is attributed to
Free-will, and they attained unto the righteousness of
God. And what is this but a most manifest example
from each nation, and a most clear testimony of Paul,
proving, that grace is given freely to the most unde-
serving and unworthy, and is not attained unto by any
devoted efforts, endeavours, or works, either small or
great, of any men, be they die best and most merito-
rious, or even of those who have sought and followed
after righteousness with all the ardour of zeal ?


Sect. CLVI. — Now let us come to John, who
is also a most copious and powerful subverter of
Free-will.

He, at the very first outset, attributes to Free-will
such blindness, that it cannot even see the light of
the truth : so far is it from possibility, that it should
endeavour after it. He speaks thus, u The light
shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not" And direcdy afterwards, " He was in the
world, and the world knew him not ; he came unto
his own, and his own knew him not" ■ •

What do you imagine he means by "world?"
Will you attempt to separate any man from being
included in this term, but him who is born again of
the Holy Spirit? The term " world " is very particu-
larly used by this apostle ; by which he means, the
whole race of men. Whatever, therefore, he says of
the " world," is to be understood of the whole race of
men. And hence, whatever he says of the " world," is


excellent in man. According to this apostle, then, the


353


" world " does not know the light of truth ; the
u world M hates Christ and his; the " world " neither
knows nor sees the Holy Spirit ; the whole " world "
is settled in enmity ; all that is in the " world/ is
" the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life." " Love not the world." " Ye (saith
he) are not of the world." " The world cannot hate
you ; but me it hateth, because I testify of it that the
works thereof are evil."

All these and many other like passages are pro-
clamations of what Free-will is — ' the principal part '
of the world, ruling under the empire of Satan ! For
John also himself speaks of the world by antithesis ;
making the " world " to be, every thing in the world
which is not translated into the kingdom of the Spi-
rit. So also he saith to the apostles, " I have chosen
you out of the world, and ordained you," &c. If there-
fore, there were any in the world, who, by the powers
of Free-will, endeavoured so as to attain unto good,
(which would be the case if Free-will could do any
thing,) John certainly ought, in reverence for these
persons, to have softened down the term, lest, by a
word of such general application, he should involve
them in all those evils of which he condemns the
world. But as he does not this, it is evident that he
makes Free-will guilty of all that is laid to the charge
of the world : because, whatever the world does, it
does by the power of Free-will : that is, by its will and
by its reason, which are its most exalted faculties, —
He then goes on,

" But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God; even to them
that believe on his name. Which were bom, not of

2 A


354


blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God."

Having finished this distinctive division, he rejects
from the kingdom of Christ, all that is " of blood,"
"of the will of the flesh," and " of the will of man." By
"'blood,* I believe, he means the Jews ; that is, those
who wished to be the children of the kingdom, because
they were the children of Abraham and of the Fathers;
and hence, gloried in their " blood." By " the will of
the flesh," I understand the devoted efforts of the
people, which they exercised in the law and in works:
for "flesh" here signifies the carnal without the

o

Spirit, who had indeed a will, and an endeavour, but
who, because the Spirit was not in them, were carnal.
By " the will of man,'' I understand the devoted efforts
of all generally, that is, of the nations, or of any men
whatever, whether exercised in the law, or without the
law. So that the sense is — they become the sons of
God, neither by the birth of the flesh, nor by a devoted
observance of the law, nor by any devoted humun
effort whatever, but by a divine birth only.

If therefore, they be neither born of the flesh, nor
brought up by the law, nor prepared by any human
discipline, but are born again of God, it is manifest,
that Free-will here profits nothing. For I understand
" man," to signify here, according to the Hebrew
manner of speech, any man, or all mat ; even as
"■flesh," is understood to signify, by antithesis, the
people without the Spirit : and " the will of man," I
understand to signify the greatest power in men, that
is, that 4 principal part/ Free-will.

But be it so, that we do not dwell thus upon the
signification of 'the words, singly; yet, the sum and


355

eubstance of the meaning is most cleat ; — that John,
by this distinctive division, rejects every thing that is
not of divine generation ; since he says, that men are
made the sons of God none otherwise than by being
born of God; which takes place, according to his
own interpretation — by believing on his name! In
this rejection therefore, " the will of man," or Free-
will, as it is not of divine generation, nor faith, is ne-
cessarily included. But if Free-will avail any thing,
" the will of man" ought not to be rejected by John,
nor ought men to be drawn away from it, and sent to
faith and to the new bhrth only ; lest that of Isaiah
should be pronounced against him, "Wo unto you
that call good evil." Whereas now, since he rejects
alike all "blood," " the will of the flesh," and "the
will of man," it is evident, that "the will of man "avails
nothing more towards making men the sons of God,
than " blood" does, or the carnal birth. And no one
doubts whether or not the carnal birth makes men
the sons of God ; for as Paul saith, Rom. ix., " They
which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God ;" which he proves by the examples
of Ishmael and Esau. % f ,

Sect CLVII. —The same John, introduces the
Baptist speaking thus of Christ, "And of his fulness
have all we received, and grace for grace."

He says, that grace is received by us out of the
fulness of Christ— but for what merit or devoted
effort? " For grace," saith he; that is, of Christ; as
Paul also saith, Rom. v., "The grace of God, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, hath
d unto many/'^Where is now the endeavour

2 A 2


356

of Free-will by which grace is obtained ! John here
saith, that grace is not only not received for any de-
voted effort of our own, but even for the grace of
another, or the merit of another, that is " of one man
Jesus Christ." Therefore, it is either false, that we
receive our grace for the grace of another, or else it is
evident, that Free-will is nothing at all; for both
cannot consist — that the grace of God, is both so
cheap, that it may be obtained in common and every
where by the 'little endeavour' of any man; and at
the same time so dear, that it is given unto us only in
and through the grace of one man, and he so great!

And I would also, that the advocates for Free-will
be admonished in this place, that when they assert
Free-will, they are deniers of Christ. For if I obtain
grace by my own endeavours, what need have I of the
grace of Christ for the receiving of my grace ? Or,
what do I want when I have gotten the grace of
God ? For the Diatribe has said, and all the sophists
say, that we obtain grace, and are prepared for the
reception of it, by our own endeavours ; not however
according to ' worthiness/ but according to 4 con-
gruity.' This is plainly denying Christ: for whose
grace, the Baptist here testifies, that we receive grace.
For as to that fetch about 1 worthiness' and 'con-
gruity/ I have refuted that already, and proved it to
be a mere play upon empty words, while the 1 merit
of worthiness ' is really intended; and that, to a more
impious length than ever the Pelagians themselves
went, as I have already shewn. And hence, the un-
godly sophists, together with the Diatribe, have more
awfully denied the Lord Christ who bought us, than
ever the Pelagians, or any heretics have denied him.


357


So far is it from possibility, that grace should allow of
any particle or power of Free-will !

But however, that the advocates for Free-will
deny Christ, is proved, not by this scripture only, but
by their own very way of life. For by their Free-will,
they have made Christ to be unto them no longer a
sweet Mediator, but a dreaded Judge, whom they
strive to please by the intercessions of the Virgin
Mother, and of the saints; and also, by variously
invented works, by rites, ordinances, and vows ; by all
which, they aim at appeasing Christ, in order that he
might give them grace. But they do not believe, that
he intercedes before God and obtains grace for them
by his blood and grace ; as it is here said, " for grace."
And as they believe, so it is unto them ! For Christ
is in truth, an inexorable judge to them, and justly so;
for they leave him, who is a Mediator and most mer-
ciful Saviour, and account his blood and grace of less
value than the devoted efforts and endeavours of their
Free-will !

Sect. CLVIII. — Now let us hear an example of
Free-will. — Nicodemus is a man in whom there is
every thing that you can desire, which Free-will is
able to do. For what does that man omit either of
devoted effort, or endeavour? He confesses Christ
to be true, and to have come from God ; he declares
his miracles ; he comes by night to hear him, and
to converse with him. Does he not appear to have
sought after, by the power of Free-will, those things
which pertain unto piety and salvation ? But mark
what shipwreck he makes. When he hears the true
way of salvation by a new-birth to be taught by


358

Christ, does he acknowledge it; or confess that he
had ever sought after it ? Nay, he revolts from it,
and is confounded ; so much so, that he does not only
say he does not understand it, but heaves against it as
impossible — " How (says he) can these things be? "

And no wonder: for who ever heard, that man
must be born again unto salvation "of water and of
the Spirit ? " Who ever thought, that the Son of God
must be exalted, " that whosoever should believe in


him, should not perish, but have everlasting life?"
Did the greatest and most acute philosophers ever
make mention of this ? Did the princes of this world
ever possess this knowledge ? Did the Free-will of any
man ever attain unto this, by endeavours ? Does not
Paul confess it to be " wisdom hidden in a mystery,"
foretold indeed by the prophets, but revealed by the
Gospel ? So that, it was secret and hidden from the
world.

In a word : Ask experience : and the whole world,
human reason itself, and, in consequence, Free-will
itself is compelled to confess, that it never knew
Christ, nor heard of him, before the Gospel came into
the world. And if it did not know him, much less
could it seek after him, search for him, or endeavour
to come unto him. But Christ is " the way" of truth,
life, and salvation. It must confess, therefore, whether
it will or no, that, of its own powers, it neither knew
nor could seek after those things which pertain unto
the way of truth and salvation. And yet, contrary to
this our own very confession and experience, like mad-
men we dispute in empty words, that there is in us
that power remaining, which can both know and
apply itself unto those things which pertain unto sal-


359

vation ! This is nothing mole or less than saying,
that Christ the Son of God was exalted for us, when
no one could ever have known it or thought of it ; but
that, nevertheless, this very ignorance is not an igno-
rance, but a knowledge of Christ ; that is, of those
things which pertain unto salvation.

Do you not yet then see and palpably feel out,
that the assertors of Free-will are plainly mad, while
they call that knowledge, which they themselves con-
fess to be ignorance ? Is this not to " put darkness
for light? " Isaiah v. — But so it is, though God so
powerfully stop the mouth of Free-will by its own
confession and experience, yet even then, it cannot
keep silence and give God the glory.

Sect. CLIX. — And now farther, as Christ is
said to be ' i the way, the truth, and the life," and that,
by positive assertion, so that whatever is not Christ is
not the way but error, is not the truth but a lie, is
not the life but death, it of necessity follows, that
Free-will, as it is neither Christ nor in Christ, must be
bound in error, in a lie, and in death. Where now will
be found that medium and neuter-r— that the power of
Free-will, which is not in Christ, that is, in the way,
the truth, and the life, is yet not, of necessity, either
error, or a lie, or death ?

For if all things which are said concerning Christ
and grace were not said by positive assertion, that they
might be opposed to their contraries; that is, that
out of Christ there is nothing but Satan, out of grace
nothing but wrath, out of the light nothing but dark-
ness, out of the life nothing but death — what, I ask
you* would be the use of all the writings of the apostles,


360

my, of the whole scripture ? The whole would be
written in vain ; because, they would not fix the point,
that Christ is necessary (which, nevertheless, is their
especial design) and for this reason, — because a medium
would be found out, which of itself, would be neither
evil nor good, neither of Christ nor of Satan, neither
true nor false, neither alive nor dead, and perhaps,
neither any thing nor nothing; and that would be
called, 1 that which is most excellent and most ex-
alted 1 in the whole race of men !

Take it therefore which way you will. — If you
grant that the scriptures speak in positive assertion,
you can say nothing for Free-will, but that which is
contrary to Christ : that is, you will say, that error,
death, Satan, and all evils, reign in him. If you do not
grant that they speak in positive assertion, you weaken
the scriptures, make them to establish nothing, not
even to prove that Christ is necessary. And thus,
while you establish Free-will, you make Christ void,
and bring the whole scripture to destruction. And
though you may pretend, verbally, that you confess
Christ ; yet, in reality and in heart, you deny him. For
if the power of Free-will be not a thing erroneous alto-
gether, and damnable, but sees and wills those things
which are good and meritorious, and which pertain
unto salvation, it is whole, it wants not the physician
Christ, nor does Christ redeem that part of man. —
For what need is there for light and life, where there
is light and life already ?

Moreover, if that power be not redeemed, the
best part in man is not redeemed, but is of itself good
and whole. And then also, God is unjust if he damn
any man ; because, he damns that which is the most


561

excellent in man, and whole ; that is, he damns him
when innocent For there is no man who has not
Free-will. And although the evil man abuse this, yet
this power itself, (according to what you teach) is not
so destroyed, but that it can, and does endeavour to-
wards good. And if it be such, it is without doubt
good, holy, and just : wherefore, it ought not to be
damned, but to be distinctly separated from the man
who is to be damned. But this cannot be done, and
even if it could be done, man would then be with-
out Free-will, nay, he would not be man at all, he
would neither have merit nor demerit, he could nei-
ther be damned nor saved, but would be completely
a brute, and no longer immortal. It follows therefore,
that God is unjust who damns that good, just, and
holy power, which, though it be in an evil man, does
not need Christ as the evil man does.

Sect. CLX.— But let us proceed with John. " He
that beiieveth on him, (saith he) is not condemned ; but
he that beiieveth not is condemned already, because
he hath not believed on the name of the only begotten
Son of God."

Tell me ! — Is Free-will included in the number of
those that believe, or not ? If it be, then again, it has
no need of grace; because, of itself, it believes on
Christ — whom, of itself it never knew nor thought of !
If it be not, then it is judged already : and what is this
but saying, that it is damned in the sight of God? But
God damns none but the ungodly: therefore, it is
ungodly. And what godliness can that which is un-
godly endeavour after? For I do not think that the


362

power of Free-will can be excepted ; seeing that, he
speaks of the whole man as being condemned.

Moreover, unbelief is not one of the grosser af-
fections, but is that chief affection seated and ruling
on the throne of the will and reason ; just the same as
its contrary, faith. For to be unbelieving, is to deny
God, and to make him a liar ; 1 John v., " If we be-
lieve not we make God a liar." How then can that
power, which is contrary to God, and which makes
him a liar, endeavour after that which is good ? And
if that power be not unbelieving and ungodly, John
ought not to say of the whole man that he is con-
demned already, but to speak thus, — Man, according
to his * grosser affections,' is condemned already ; but
according to that which is best and * most excellent,'
he is not condemned ; because, that endeavours after
faith, or rather, is already believing.

Hence, where the scripture so often saith, " All
men are liars," we must, upon the authority of Free-
will, on the contrary say — the scripture rather, lies ;
because, man is not a liar as to his best part, that is,
his reason and will, but as to his flesh only, that is, his
blood and his grosser part : so that that whole, ac-
cording to which he is called man, that is, his reason
and his will, is sound and holy. Again, there is that
of the Baptist, " He that believeth on the Son hath
everlasting life ; he that believeth not the Son shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him." We must
understand " upon him " thus : — that is, the wrath of
God abideth upon the 1 grosser affections ' of the man:
but upon that power of Free-will, that is, upon his
will and his reason, abide grace and everlasting life.


Digitized by


363

Hence, according to this, in order that Free-will
might stand, whatever is in the scriptures said against
the ungodly, you are, by the figure synecdoche, to twist
round to apply to that brutal part of man, that the truly
rational and human part might remain safe. I have,
therefore, to render thanks to the assertors of Free-
will ; because, I may sin with all confidence ; knowing
that, my reason and will, or my Free-will, cannot be
damned, because it: cannot be destroyed by my sin-
ing, but for ever remains sound, righteous, and holy.
And thus, happy in my will and reason, I shall rejoice
that my filthy and brutal flesh is distinctly separated
from me, and damned ; so far shall I be from wishing
Christ to become its Redeemer ! — You see, here, to
what the doctrine of Free-will brings us — it denies
all things, divine and human, temporal and eternal ;
and with all these enormities, makes a laughing-stock
of itself!

Sect. CLXI. — Again, the Baptist saith, " A man
can receive nothing, except it were given him from
above."

Let not the Diatribe here produce its forces, where
it enumerates all those things which we have from
heaven. We are now disputing, not about nature, but
about grace : we are inquiring, not what we are upon
earth, but what we are in heaven before God. We
know that man was constituted lord over those things
which are beneath himself; over which, he has a
right and a Free-will, that those things might do,
and obey as he wills and thinks. But we are now
inquiring whether he has a Free-will over God,


i Digitized by Google


364


that he should do and obey in those things which
man wills : or rather, whether God has not a Free-
will over man, that he should will and do what God
wills, and should be able to do nothing but what
he wills and does. The Baptist here says, that he
11 can receive nothing, except it be given him from
above.'* — Wherefore, Free-will must be a nothing
at all !

Again, " He that is of the earth, is earthly and
speaketh of the earth, he that cometh from heaven is
above all."

Here again, he makes all those earthly, who are
not of Christ, and says that they savour and speak of
earthly things only, nor does he leave any medium cha-
racters. But surely, Free-will is not " he that cometh
from heaven." Wherefore it must of necessity, be " he
that is of the earth," and that speaks of the earth and
savours of the earth. But if there were any power in
man, which at any time, in any place, or by any work,
did not savour of the earth, the Baptist ought to have
excepted this person, and not to have said in a gene-
ral way concerning all those who are out of Christ,
that they are of the earth, and speak of the earth.

So also afterwards, chap, viii., Christ saith, " Ye
are of the world, I am not of the world. Ye are from
beneath, I am from above. "

And yet, those to whom he spoke had Free-will,
that is, reason and will ; but still he says, that they are
" of the world." But what news would he have told, if
he had merely said, that they were of the world, as to
their ' grosser affections ? 1 Did not the whole world
know this before ? Moreover, what need was there


565

for his saying that men were of the world, as to that
part in which they are brutal ? For according to that,
beasts are also of the world.

Sect. CLXII. — And now what do those words
of Christ, where he saith, " No one can come unto
me except my Father which hath sent me draw him,"
leave to Free-will ? For he says it is necessary, that
every one should hear and learn of the Father himself,
and that all must be " taught of God." Here, indeed,
he not only declares that the works and devoted efforts
of Free-will are of no avail, but that even the word
of the Gospel itself, (of which he is here speaking,) is
heard in vain, unless the Father himself speak within,
and teach and draw. " No one can," " No one can
(saith he) come : " by which, that power, whereby man
can endeavour something towards Christ, that is, to-
wards those things which pertain unto salvation, is
declared to be a nothing at all.

Nor does that at all profit Free-will, which the
Diatribe brings forward out of Augustine, by way
of casting a slur upon this all-clear and all-power-
ful scripture — 1 that God draws us, in the same way
as we draw a sheep, by holding out to it a green bough.'
By this similitude he would prove, that there is in us
a power to follow the drawing of God. But this simi-
litude avails nothing in the present passage. For God
holds out, not one of his good things only, but many,
nay, even his Son, Christ himself; and yet no man
follows him, unless the Father hold him forth other-
wise within, and draw otherwise ! — Nay, the whole
world follows the Son whom he holds forth !

But this similitude harmonises sweetly with the


JOO

experience of the godly, who are now made sheep, and
know God their shepherd. These, living in, and being
moved by, the Spirit, follow wherever God wills, and
whatever he holds out to them. But the ungodly
man comes not unto him, even when he hears the
word, unless the Father draw and teach within : which
he does by shedding abroad his Spirit. And where
that is done, there is a different kind of drawing from
that which is without : there, Christ is held forth in
the illumination of the Spirit, whereby the man is
drawn unto Christ with the sweetest of all draw-
ing : under which, he is passive while God speaks,
teaches, and draws, rather than seeks or runs of
himself.

Sect. CLXIII. — I will produce yet one more
passage from John, where, he saith, chap, xvi., " The
Spirit shall reprove the world of sin, because they be-
lieve not in me."

You here see, that it is sin, not to believe in
Christ ; And this sin is seated, not in the skin, nor in
the hairs of the head, but in the very reason and will.
Moreover, as Christ makes the whole world guilty
from this sin, and as it is known by experience that
the world is ignorant of this sin, as much so as it is
ignorant of Christ, seeing that, it must be revealed by
the reproof of the Spirit ; it is manifest, that Free-
will, together with its will and reason, is accounted
a captive of this sin, and condemned before God.

■ a

Wherefore, as long as it is ignorant of Christ and be-
lieves not in him, it can will or attempt nothing good,
but necessarily serves that sin of which it is ignorant.
In a word : Since the scripture declares Christ


367


eveiy whwe by positive assertion and by antithesis, (as
I said' before)^ in order that, it might subject every
thing that is without the Spirit of Christ, to Satan, to
ungodliness, to error, to darkness, to sin, to death,
and to the wrath of God, all the testimonies concern-
ing Christ must make directly against Free-will ; and
they are innumerable, nay, the whole of the scripture.
If therefore our subject of discussion is to be decided
by the judgment of the scripture, the victory, in every
respect, is mine ; for there is not one jot or tittle of
the scripture remaining, which does not condemn the
doctrine of Free-will altogether !

But if the great theologians and defenders of Free-
will know not, or pretend not to know, that the scrip-
ture every where declares Christ by positive assertion
and by antithesis, yet all Christians know it, and in
common confess it. They know, I say, that there are
two kingdoms in the world mutually militating against
each other. — That Satan reigns in the one, who, on that
account is by Christ called " the prince of this world,"
and by Paul " the God of this world f who, accord-
ing to the testimony of the same Paul, holds all cap-
tive according to his will, who are not rescued from
him by the Spirit of Christ: nor does he suffer any
to be rescued by any other power but that of the
Spirit of God : as Christ testifies in the parable of
" the strong man armed " keeping his palace in peace.
— In the other kingdom Christ reigns : which king-
dom, continually resists and wars against that of Satan :
into which we are translated, not by any power of
our own, but by the grace of God, whereby we are
delivered from this present evil world, and are snatched
from the power of darkness. The knowledge and con-


Digitized b^Google


368

fession of these two kingdoms, which thus ever mutu-
ally war against each other with so much power and
force, would alone be sufficient to confute the doctrine
of Free-will : seeing that, we are compelled to serve
in the kingdom of Satan, until we be liberated by a
divine power. All this, I say, is known in common
among Christians, and fully confessed in their pro-
verbs, by their prayers, by their pursuits, and by their
whole lives.

Sect CLXI V. — I omit to bring forward that
truly Achillean scripture of mine, which the Diatribe
proudly passes by untouched — I mean, that which
Paul teaches, Rom. vii. and Gal. v., that there is in
the taints, and in the godly, so powerful a warfare
between the spirit and the flesh, that they cannot do
what they would. From this warfare I argue thus : —
If the nature of man be so evil, even in those who
are bora again of the Spirit, that it does not only not
endeavour after good, but is even averse to, and mili-
tates against good, how should it endeavour after
good in those who are not bora again of the Spirit,
and who are still in the " old man," and serve under
Satan ? Nor does Paul there speak of the 1 grosser
affections' only, (by means of which, as a common
scape-gap, the Diatribe is accustomed to get out
of the way of all the scriptures,) but he enumerates
among the works of the flesh heresy, idolatry, con-
tentions, divisions, &c. ; which he describes as
reigning in those most exalted faculties ; that is, in
the reason and the will. If therefore, flesh with
these affections war against the Spirit in the saints,
much more wijl it war against God in the ungodly,


Digitized by


369


and in Free-will. Hence, Rom. viii.,* he calls it
" enmity against God." — I should like, I say, to see
this argument of mine overturned, and Free-will
defended against it.

As to myself, I openly confess, that I should not
wish Free-will to be granted me, even if it could be so,
nor any thing else to be left in my own hands, whereby
I might endeavour something towards my own salva-
tion. And that, not merely because in so many op-
posing dangers, and so many assaulting devils, I could
not stand and hold it fast, (in which state no man
could be saved, seeing that one devil is stronger than
all men f) but because, even though there were no dan-
gers, no conflicts, no devils, I should be compelled to
labour under a continual uncertainty, and to beat the
air only. Nor would my conscience, even if I should
live and work to all eternity, ever come to a settled
certainty, how much it ought to do in order to satisfy
God. For whatever work should be done, there
would still remain a scrupling, whether or not it
pleased God, or whether he required any thing more ;
as is proved in the experience of all justiciaries, and
as I myself learned to my bitter cost, through so many
years of my own experience.

But now, since God has put my salvation 6ut of
the way of my will, and has taken it under his own,
and has promised to save me, not according to my
working or manner of life, but according to his own
grace and mercy, I rest fully assured and persuaded
that he is faithful, and will not lie, and moreover great
and powerful, so that no devils, no adversities can
destroy him, or pluck me out of his hand. " No one
(saith he) shall pluck them out of my hand, because

2 B


370

my Father which gave them me is greater than tiL v
Hence it is certain, that in this way, if all are not
saved, yet some, yea many shall be saved ; whereas,
by the power of Free-will, no one whatever could be
saved, but all must perish together. And moreover,
we are certain and persuaded, that in this way, we
please God, not from the merit of our own works, but
from the favour of his mercy promised unto as ; and
that, if we work less, or work badly, he doe3 not im-
pute it unto us, but, as a father, pardons us and makes
us better. — This is the glorying which all the saints
have in their God! 1 . - 4 HI ' ^

Sect. CLXV. — And if you are concerned about
this, — that it is difficult to defend the mercy and jus-
tice of God, seeing that, he damns the undeserving,
that is, those who are for that reason ungodly, because,
being born in iniquity, they cannot by any means
prevent themselves from being ungodly, and from re-
maining so, and being damned, but are compelled from
the necessity of nature to sin and perish, as Paul sailh,
"We all were the children of wrath, even as others,"
when at the same time, they were created such by
God himself from a corrupt seed, by means of the
sin of Adam, — 1 ?■ P nr i >«*rj||f

—Here God is to be honoured and revered, as
being 1 most merciful towards those, whom he justifies
and saves under all their un worthiness : and it is to
be in no small degree ascribed unto his wisdom, that
he causes us to believe him to be just, even where he
appears to be unjust. For if his righteousness were such,
that tit Was .considered to be righteousness according
*> hunian\iudjpnent, it would be no longe* divine, nor


371

would it in any thing differ from human righteousness.
But as he is the one and true God, and moreover in-
comprehensible and inaccessible, by human reason, it
is rightj nay, it 'is necessary, that his righteousness
should be incomprehensible : even as Paul exclaims,
saying, " Oh the depth of the riches, both of the wis-
dom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his judgments,' and his ways past finding out ! " But
they would be no longer "past finding out" if we
were in all things able to see how they were righteous.
What is man, compared with God ! What can our
power do, when compared with his power ! What is
our strength, compared with his strength ! What is
our knowledge compared with his wisdom ! What is
our substance, compared with his substance! In a
word, what is all that we are, compared with all that
he is !

If then we confess, even according to the teaching
of nature, that human power, strength, wisdom, know-
ledge, substance, and all human things together, are
nothing when compared with the divine power, strength,
wisdom, knowledge, and substance, what perverseness
must it be in us to attack the righteousness and judg-
ments of God only, and to arrogate so much to our own
judgment, as to wish to comprehend, judge, and rate,
the divine judgments ! Why do we not, here in like
manner say at once— What! is our judgment nothing,
when compared with the divine judgments ! — But ask
reason herself if she is not, from conviction, compelled
to confess, that she is foolish and rash for not allowing
the judgments of God to be incomprehensible, when
she confesses that all the other divine things are in-
comprehensible ? In every thing else we concede to
God a divine majesty ; and yet, are ready to deny it

2 a 2


379

to his judgments ! Nor can we for a little while be-
lieve, that he is just, even when he promises that it
shall come to pass, that when he shall reveal his
dory, we shall all see, and palpably feel, that he
ever was, and is,-ju8t!

Sect. CLXVL— But I will produce an example
that may go to confirm this faith, and to console that
" evil eye" which suspects God of injustice. — Behold !
God so governs this corporal world in external things,
that, according to human reason and judgment, you
must be compelled to say, either that there is no God,
or that God is unjust : as a certain one saith, * I am
often tempted to think there is no God.' For see the
great prosperity of the wicked, and on the contrary the
great adversity of the good ; according to the testi-
mony of the proverbs, and of experience the parent
of all proverbs. The more abandoned men are, the
more successful ! " The tabernacles of robbers (saith
Job) prosper." And Psalm lxxiii. complains, that the
sinners of the world abound in riches. Is it not, I
pray you, in the judgment of all, most unjust, that the
evil should be prosperous, and the good afflicted?
Yet so it is in the events of the world. And here it is,
that the most exalted minds have so fallen, as to deny
that there is any God at all; and to fable, that fortune
disposes of all things at random : such were Epicurus
and Pliny. And Aristotle, in order that he might
make his 1 First-cause Being' free from every kind of
misery, is of opinion, that he thinks of nothing what-
ever but himself ; because he considers, that it must
be most irksome to him, to see so many evils and so
many injuries.

But the prophets themselves, who believed there


373


is a God, were tempted still more concerning the in-
justice of God, as Jeremiah, Job, David, Asaph, and
others. And what do you suppose Demosthenes and
Cicero thought, who, after they had done all they
could, received no other reward than a miserable
death ? And yet all this, which is so very much like
injustice in God, when set forth in those arguments
which no reason or light of nature can resist, is most
easily cleared up by the light of the Gospel, and the
knowledge of grace : by which, we are taught, that
the wicked flourish in their bodies, but lose their souls!
And the whole of this insolvable question is solved in
one word. — There is a life after this life : in which
will be punished and repaid, every thing that is not
punished and repaid here : for this life is nothing
more than an entrance on, and a beginning of, the life
which is to come !

If then even the light of the Gospel, which
stands in the word and in the faith only, is able to
effect so much as with ease to do away with, and
settle, this question which has been agitated through
so many ages and never solved ; how do you suppose
matters will appear, when the light of the word and of
faith shall cease, and the essential Truth itself shall be
revealed in the divine Majesty ? Do you not suppose
that the light of glory will then most easily solve that
question, which is now insolvable by the light of the
word and of grace, even as the light of grace now
easily solves that question, which is insolvable by the
light of nature ?

Let us therefore hold in consideration the three
lights — the light of nature, the light of grace, and the
light of glory ; which is the common, and a very good


Lay aside all respect of persons. You, I confess, are
great and adorned with many, and those the most
noble, gifts of God ; (to say nothing of the rest,) with
talent, with erudition, and with eloquence to a mira-
cle. Whereas I, have nothing and am nothing, except-
ing that, I glory in being almost a Christian !

In this, moreover, I give you great praise, and
proclaim it — you alone in pre-eminent distinction from
all others, have entered upon the thing itself ; that is,
the grand turning point of the cause; and have-not
wearied me with those irrelevant points about popery,
purgatory, indulgences, and other like baubles, rather
than causes, with which all have hitherto tried to
hunt me down, — though in vain ! You, and yon alone
saw, what was the grand hinge upon which the whole
turned, and therefore you attacked the vital part at
once ; for which, from my heart, I thank you. For in
this kind of discussion I willingly engage, as far as time
and leisure permit me. Had those who have here-
tofore attacked me done the same, and would those
still do the same, who are now boasting of new
spirits, and new revelations, we should have less sedi-
tion and sectarianism, and more peace and concord.
« — But thus has God, by the instrumentality of Satan,
avenged our ingratitude !

But however, if you cannot manage this cause
otherwise than you have managed it in this Dia-
tribe, do, I pray you, remain content with your
own proper gift. Study, adorn, and promote literature
and languages, as you have hitherto done, to great
advantage, and with much credit. In which ca-
pacity, vou have rendered me also a certain service :
so much so, that I confess myself to be much in-


Digitized by


377


debted to you: and in that character, I certainly
venerate, and honestly respect you. But as to this our
cause: — to this, God has neither willed, nor given it
you, to be equal : though I entreat you not to consi-
der this as spoken in arrogance. No ! I pray that the
Lord may, day by day, make you as much superior to
me in these matters, as you are superior to me in all
others. And it is no new thing for God to instruct a
Moses by a Jethro, or to teach a Paul by an Ananias.
And as to what you say, — " You have greatly mist the
mark after all, if you are ignorant of Christ " — You
yourself, if I mistake not, know what that is. But all
will not therefore err, bec«hise you or I may err. God
is glorified in his saints in a wonderful way ! So that,
we may consider those saints who are the farthest
from sanctity. Nor is it an unlikely thing, that you, as
being man, should not rightly understand, nor with
sufficient diligence weigh, the scriptures, or the sayings
of the Fathers : under which guides, you imagine you
cannot miss the mark. And that such is the case, is
quite manifest from this : — your saying, that you do
not assert but collect. No man would write thus, who
was fully acquainted with, and well understood, his
subject. On the contrary I, in this book of mine, have
collected nothing, but have asserted, and still do assert :
and I wish none to become judges, but all to yield
assent — And may the Lord, whose cause this is,
illuminate you, and make you a vessel to honour
and to glory. — Amen ! " ^ ' '

• ' ^' l " ; tinis. 1 ' ''■ "

• v*» t> ■ * - n - *,*

it i > f'u . f- - ~


378


MARTIN LUTHER'S JUDGMENT


I received your last letter gladly, my
excellent friend, because I believe you wish well to,
and are concerned for, the state of the Christian
cause. And I wish and pray, that the, Lord would
perfect that which he hath begun in you.
i I am grieved at hearing, that among you also
this cruel persecution is carried on against Christ
But it will come to this :-^ther. that cruel tyrant will
change his fury of his own. accord, or you will change
itifor him, and that shortly. , t v'.j i
. \ Concerning predestination, I knew long ago, that
Mosellanus agrees with Erasmus: for he is an.Eras-
mian altogether. My fixed opinion is, however, that
Erasmus knows less about predestination, (or rather
pretends to know) than even the schools of the so-
phists have known. Nor have I any need to fear a
fall, while I maintain my sentiments unchanged.
Erasmus is not to be dreaded on this point, nor in-
deed on any essential point of Christianity. Truth is


OF


A


1


TO A CERTAIN FRIEXD.^


more powerful than eloquence; the Spirit^ far above
human talent; faith is beyond all erudition; and, as
Paul eaith, " the foolishness of God is wiser than
men ! " The eloquence of Cicero, was often overthrown

Julian, was more eloquent than Augustine. In a word,
the victory is in the hands of child-speaking truth,
not in the hands of lying eloquence! — As it is written,
" Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings has thou
ordained strength, that thou mightest still the enemy
and avenger."

I will not provoke Erasmus, nor. will I even when
provoked once or twice, return the blow. And yet I
do not think he shews his wisdom, in directing the
powers of his eloquence against me. For I fear he
will not find in Luther a Faber pf Picardy, nor be
able to exult over me, as he does over him, where he
says, 1 All congratulate me upon my victory over the
Gaul.' But however, if he will enter the lists with
me, he shall find, that Christ fears neither the powers
of the air, nor the gates of hell. And I, a most w eak-
tongued babe, will meet the all-eloquent Erasmus
with confidence, caring nothing for his authority, his
name, or his reputation. 1 know well what is in the
man ; seeing that, I am well acquainted with the
thoughts of Satan ; though I expect he will daily
manifest more and more that disposition, towards me
which he fosters in his heart.

I express myself thus plainly, that you might
have no fear or concern on my account, nor be
frightened at the great and swelling words of others.
I wish you to salute Mosellanus in my name : for I
am not therefore ill-affected towards him, because he


380


leant to the side of Erasmus rather than to mine.
Nay tell him to stand by Erasmus firmly : for the
time will come, when he will think otherwise. In the
meantime, the weakness of an excellent heart is to be
borne with. And may you also prosper in the Lord.

Wirtemberg, 1523. | ,
MARTIN LUTHER TO NICOLAS ARMS DOFF,

CONCERN ING

ERASMUS OF ROTTERDAM.

. imwvjai WW

tot il ; > 'lUysd'-

Grace and peace in Christ,

I thank you, my excellent friend, that you
give me so candidly your opinion on my book. I care
not at all that the Papists are offended : I did not
write on their account, for they are not worth my
writing or speaking in consideration of them any
more. God has given them up to a reprobate mind j
so that they even fight against that, which they know
to be the truth. * fl**

My cause was heard as Augsberg, before the em-
peror Charles, and the whole world, and found to be
irreprehensible, and to contain sound doctrine. More-
over, my Confession and Apology are made public, and
set in the open light "throughout the world. By these,
I have answered an infinity of my adversaries' books,


Digitized by


381

nnfi nil the Hps of* the Pariists noof ntgg^it and tn
come '

I have confessed Christ before this wicked and
adulterous generation, and I doubt not but that he will
also confess me before his Father, and the holy angels.
My light is set on a candlestick ! — Let him that seeth
it, see it more clearly still ; let him that is blind, be
blinder still ; let him that is just, be juster still ; let
him that is filthy, be filthier still ; — their blood be upon
themselves ; — I am clean from their blood ! I have de-
clared to the unrighteous his unrighteousness, and he
will not be converted ; — let him therefore die in his
sins; — I have saved my own soul! There is no need,
therefore, that- 1 should write, or care to write on
their account, any farther.

And as to your advice, that that grammarian or
vocabularian whom you call the Erasmian plagiary
should be held in contempt, and that Erasmus him-
self should rather be answered : know, that I have
held him in sufficient contempt already : for I have
not read one page of his writings. Jonas answered
him once, although I was much against his doing k;
and advised him, according to your opinion, to hold
him in contempt For I know the man well, from his
skin to his heart, that he is not worthy of being
spoken to, or dealt with, by any good man ; such a
hypocrite is he, and so full of reprobate envy and
malevolence.

Moreover, you know my usual way of overthrow-
ing writers of this stamp — by holding them in silent
contempt For how many books of Eccius, Faber,
Emser, Cochles, and many others, who seemed to be
as mountains in labour, and about to bring forth I


384

with our doctrines, or the doctrines of Christianity ;
he knew them, but from policy would not know them.
And though he may not understand, nor indeed can
understand, those doctrines which are peculiar to our
fraternity, and which we maintain against the syna-
gogue of the Pope, yet he cannot be ignorant of those
which are held in common by us and die church
under the Pope ; because, he writes on these very
largely, or rather, laughs at them. — Such as, the
trinity of the divine Persons, the divinity and hu-
manity of Christ, sin, the redemption of the human
race, the resurrection of the dead, eternal life, and the
like: he knows, I say, that these things are taught
and believed even by many ungodly and false Chris-
tians. But the truth is, he hates all the doctrines
together. Nay, there can be no doubt in the mind of
a true believer, who has the Spirit in his nostrils, that
his mind is alienated from, and utterly hates, all religion
together ; and especially, the religion of Christ Many
proofs of this are scattered here and there. And it will
come to pass by and by, that like the mole, he will
throw up some dirt, thai will shew where and what he
is, and prove his own destruction.

He published lately, among his other works, his Ca-
techism, a production evidently of Satanic subtlety/
For, with a purpose full of craft, he designs to take chil-
dren and youths at the outset, and to infect them with' -
his poisons, that they might not afterwards be eradicated'
from them; just as he himself, in Italy and at Rome, so
sucked in his doctrines of sorcerers- and <>f devils, that
now all remedy is too late. But who would bear with
this method of bringing up children, or the weak iftr
faith, which Erasmus proposes to us ? The tender and


Digitized by


«■} Li f

unexperienced mind is to be formed at first by certain,
plain, and necessary principles, which it may firmly
believe. Because, it is necessary that every one who
would learn, should believe: for what will he ever
learn, who either doubts himself, or is taught to doubt ?

But this new chatechist of ours, aims only at
rendering his catechumens, and the doctrines of faith,
suspicious. For at the very outset, laying aside all
solid foundation, he does nothing but set before them
those heresies and offences of opinions, by which the
church has been troubled from the beginning. So
that in fact, he would make it appear, that there has
been nothing certain in the Christian religion. And if
an unexperienced mind be from the very beginning
poisoned by principles and questions of this kind, what
else can it be expected to think of or do, but, either
to withdraw itself secretly from, or, if it dare, to hold
the Christian religion in utter detestation, as a pest to
mankind?

He imagines however, all the while, that no one
will discover the craft of this design. As though we
had not in the scriptures numberless examples of
these bug-bears of the devil. It was thus the serpent
dealt with Eve. He first entangled her in doubts, and
brought her to suspect the reality of the precept of
God concerning the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, and when he had brought her to a stand-still
of doubt, overthrew and destroyed her. — Unless
Erasmus considers this to be a mere fable also!

It is with the same serpent-like attack that he
creeps upon, and deceives, simple souls; saying —
' How is it, that there, have been so many sects land

2 t


Digitized by Gdftgle **


•3o0

errors in this one true religion, (as it is believed to
be ?) How is it, that there have been so many creeds?
Why, in the Apostles 1 Creed, is the Father called
God, the Son not God, but Lord, and the Spirit
neither God nor Lord, but Holy?* And so on. — Who
I would ask troubles unexperienced souls, whom he
undertakes to instruct, with questions like these, but
the devil himself ? Who would dare to speak thus
upon a creed of faith, but the very mouth and in-
strument of the devil?— Here you have the Plot,
the Execution, and the catastrophic End, of a soul-
murdering tragedy !

But behold, I am here almost carried into a refu-
tation of his catechism; whereas, I merely intended to
Shew you, why I thought it better not to answer this
viper at all : — because, he will most effectually refute
himself in the minds of all godly and good men.

The like game also he played on the apostle Paul,
in his preface to the Romans; (to say nothing about
his paraphrases, or his mad vagaries [paraphroneses,]
to use his own term;) where he speaks of the praises
of Paul in that way, that no simple reader whatever
whq * is unacquainted with rhetoric, could be more
effectually drawn away, and beaten off, from reading
and studying Paul : so confused, intricate, self-contra-
dictory, diverse, and disgusting, does he represent
him to be: so that, the reader must of necessity
believe the epistle to be the production of some mad
man : so far is it from possibility, that he should con-
sider it to be profitable.

And among the rest of his sharp-razor cuts, he
could not receive, without venting his spleen, even


Digitized by


587

thfe's-'that Peter should call Christ Man; atfd
hiMtane of his Godhead.— A notable annotation trulyl
And most appropriately applicable to the passage !

1 And then as to his method, with all Its twfetlHgs
and windings, what it but a holding up Christ, and
every thing done by him, to derision? Who Coiilil
gather any thing from this Method but a disgtrit at*
nay a hatred of, attending to a religion so confuted
and pelleted, and perhaps after all, merely ft*
bulbus?' * , :

Who, moreover, ever spoke in so much disdain
and contempt (not to say enmity) of the apostle and
evangelist John, who, among Christians' is held 16 be 1
of the highest authority after Christ?^—* He merely
scOlds little children ; excfept it be wheti he 'consider*
a man to be a' dolt or a logger-headi' — Christiaiis
ever speak of die apostles with reverence ari'd'TeaT:
whereas, this fellow would teatfh us tb *peak of them 1
with profane pride and contempt. &nd this is the
first step towards speaking profanely of God" himself,
whose die apostles are. Nay, it is the same as saying
in contempt of the" fioly Spirit, (whose the wordS'bT
the apostlfefeare;) that he merely scolds little children^

Numberless things of this kind are to be found in
Erasmus ; or rather, this is his whole ctia^acteV'm
theology. And this many others havfe observed
before me, iand still do observe daily more and mote *
nor does he cease to go on and to publish daily his
annotations more and more grossly, for his "judg-
ment now for a long time iingereth not," antt-hfe
" damnation slumbereth not."

This is also a notable instance of the j>iety ef
.• 2 c 2


388

Erasmus ! — In his letter upon * Christian philosophy/
which is published with his New Testament, and used
in common throughout all the churches, when he had
propounded the question,—- 4 Why Christ, so great a
teacher, descended from heaven, when there are many
things taught even among the heathens which are
precisely the same, if not more perfect,' — he answers,
'Christ came (which I doubt not but he believed
most Erasmianly) from heaven, that he might exem-
plify those things more perfectly and more fuUy than
any of the saints before him ! *

Thus, this miserable renewer of all things, Christ,
(for so he reproaches the Lord of glory) has lost the
glory of a Redeemer, and becomes only one more
holy than others. — This sentiment could not be ex-
pressed in ignorance, but must have been designed
and wilful; because, even those who do not truly
helieve, know, and every where confess, that Christ
descended from heaven to redeem us men from sin
and death.

This was the sentiment that first alienated my
mind from Erasmus. From that moment, I began
to suspect him of being a plain Democritus or Epi-
curus, and a crafty derider of Christ: for he every
where intimates to his fellow Epicureans, his hatred
against Christ: though he does it in words so figu-
rative and insiduous, that he leaves himself a clue for
raging most furiously against those Christians, who,
from being offended at his suspicious and double
meaning words, will not interpret them as standing
in favour of their Christ. — As though Erasmus him-
self had an all-free prerogative throughout the world,
of speaking on divine things with obliquity and craft,


and had all men so under his thumb, that they must
interpret ail his obliquities and crafty manoeuvres, as
having an upright and honest intent !

Why does he not rather speak openly and plainly?
Why does he always deal in these crafty and ensnaring
figures of speech? So great a rhetorician and theo-
logian ought not only to know, but to act according
to, that which Fabius says, ' An ambiguous word
should be avoided as a rock.' Where it happens now
and then inadvertently, it may be pardoned: but
where it is sought for designedly and purposely, it
deserves no pardon whatever, but justly merits the
abhorrence of every one. For to what does this
hateful double-tongued way of speaking tend ? It
only furnishes an opportunity of disseminating and
fostering in safety the seeds of every heresy, under
the cover of words and letters that have a shew of
Christian faith. And thus, while religion is believed
to be taught and defended, it is, in reality, utterly
destroyed, and subverted from its foundation before
it is understood.

Wherefore, all are perfectly in the right who
interpret his suspicions and insidious words against
himself. Nor is any notice to be taken of him when
he cries out calumny ! calumny ! because his words
are not fairly and candidly interpreted. Why does
he himself ever avoid fair words, and designedly
express himself in those which are unfair? For it is
an unheard-of kind of tyranny to wish to have the
whole human race so under his thumb, that they
should be compelled to understand fairly what he
says insidiously and dangerously, and thus cede to him
the prerogative of expressing himself insidiously. No!


390


Loir him rather he reduced to order, and commanded

to bow to the whole human race; that is, by ab-
staining from that profane and double-tongued verti-
bility of speech and vain-talking, and by avoiding, as
Paul saith, " profane and vain babblings."

For this it was, that even the public laws of the
Roman empire condemned this manner of speaking,
and punished it thus. — They commanded, ' that the
words of him who should speak obscurely, when he
could speak more plainly, should be interpreted against
ihimself/ And Christ also, condemned that wicked
servant who excused himself by an evasion; and
interpreting his own words against himself, said,
•* Out of; thine own month will I judge thee, thou
wicked servant." For, if in religion, in laws, and in
all weighty matters, we should be allowed to express
ourselves ambiguously and insidiously, what could
follow but that utter confusion of Babel, where no
one could understand another! This would be, to
learn the language of eloquence, and in so doing, to
lose the language of nature !

Moreover, if this licence should prevail, I might
< conveniently' interpret all that the whole herd of
heretics ever said, nay all that the devil himself ever
did or said, or could say or do, to all eternity. Where
then would be the power of refuting the heretics and
the devil ? Where would be that wisdom of the Letd
C hrist, which all the adversaries shall not be able to
resist ? What would become of logic, the instructor
of teaching rightly? What would become of rhetoric,
the faculty of persuading r Nothing would be taught,
nothing would be learned, no persuasion could be
carried home, no consolation would be given, no fear


39 1

Would be wrought: because, nothing would be spoken
or heard that was certain. ■ t • . * '

^hen, therefore, Erasmus lightly and ridiculously
nys of John the Evangelist, 'that he merely scolds
babes/ he is to be adjudged immediately a disciple of
Epicurus or Democritus, and to be addressed thus. — r
Learn to speak of Majesty with more reverence.
Some noted jesters have, indeed, sometimes spoken
of princes thus irreverently, and fool-like, but not
always with impunity. But if any one else of a
sound mind and judgment had done the same, he
might, perhaps, have lost his head, for the crime of
insulted majesty.

Thus, when Erasmus says, * Peter addresses Christ
as Man, and says nothing of his Divinity/ r he is to be
condemned of Arianism and heresy: because, he
could have omitted this insidious observation alto-
gether, in a matter where the divine Majesty is
eminently concerned, or have spoken more reve-
rently: for the words plainly imply, that the Arians
do not like that Christ should be called God, but
consider it better that he Bhould be called man only.
And how conveniently soever they may be interpreted
in favour of the divinity of Christ ; yet, as they stand
and are read according to their plain meaning, espe-
cially since their author is suspicious, they offend
Christian minds: because, they have not one plain
meaning, and may be more easily understood to
favour the Arians, than the orthodox.

Hence Jerom, writing of the Arians of his time
who' taught in the same artful way, says, 'Their
priests say one thing, and their people understand
another.' In like manner, there was no necessity for
• ■ ■ .


39S

observing to Christians on that passage, that Peter dkl
not call Christ, God ; though in truth he 4id not omit
to call Christ, God. Nor is it enough to pretend, 4 that
he called him man only, on account of the common
multitude : ' for though he did call him Man, yet, he
did not therefore omit to call him God, except that
he did not pronounce these three letters, God: but
this Erasmus rigidly deems was necessary: by so
doing, however, he does nothing here, as well as in
every other place, but lay snares, without any cause
whatever, to entrap the inexperienced, and to render
our religion suspicious.

That Carpisian, whoever he was, justly condemns
him as a favourer of the Arians in his preface to
Hilary, where he has said, 'We dare to call the Holy
Spirit, God, which the ancients did not dare to do.'
And when, having been faithfully admonished, he
ought to have acknowledged his high-flown figures of
speech, and his Arianisms, and to have corrected
them, he not only did not do that, but even inveighed
against the admonition, as a calumny proceeding from
Satan, and laughed at the Divinity two-fold more than
ever: — such a confidence has he in his pliability of
speech, and his circumlocutive evasions. Neverthe-
less, he very seriously confesses the Trinity, and
would not by any means whatever be thought to deny
the Trinity of the God-head, but only wishes to say,
that the curiosity (which he afterwards requests will
be 'conveniently interpreted' diligence) of the moderns, .
has received and dared many things from the scrip- y
tures which the ancients dared not. — As though the ,j
Christian religion rested on the authority of men: (for
this is what he would persuade us to.) And what is this,
but considering all religion together to be a mere fable ! j

r I


393

Here, although the Carpisian be in many things
of no weight whatever, and ever an enemy to Luther,
yet Erasmus, from an unheard-of pride, thinks all
men together to be mere stocks and stones; who
neither understand any subject, nor see through the
meaning of any words. Read that observation of his,
and say, if you do not discover the incarnate devil !
This observation fixes in me a determination (let
others do as they please) not to bebeve Erasmus,
even if he should openly confess in plain words, — that
Christ is God. But I would address to him that sophis-
tical saying of Chrysippus, ' If you lie, you lie even
when you speak the truth.* For what need was there,
if he in verity believed that the Holy Spirit is God, to
say, 4 We dare to call the Holy Spirit, God, which the
ancients did not dare to do?' What need was there to
use this vertible word 'dare/ that it might apply both
to the praise and dispraise of these same moderns,
when we received this doctrine from the ancients, and
dkl not 'dare' to receive it first?

Hut however, it is a stark lie, to say, that the an-
cients did not first 'dare' to call the Holy Spirit,
( rod : — unless by ancients, according to one of his
very beautiful figures of speech, he means Democritus
and Epicurus : or unless, he means God, materially,
that is, these three letters, God ! But to what purpose
is all this hateful manoeu vering, but to make of a gnat
an elephant, as a stumbling-block to the unexperienced,
and to intimate, that the Christian religion is a nothing
at all ! and that, for no other reason, than because
these three letters, God, are not written in every
place, where he considers they ought to have been
written !


304

In the same manner hi* fathers, the Arians, made
numberless quibbles, because these letters ho mo us ios,
and I5JNASCIBIH8, were not found in the sacred
writings : considering it nothing to the purpose, that
the same thing could be solidly proved in substance.
And where the name God was written, they were
ready with their gjoss to elude the truth, by contend-
ing, that it did not mean God in reality, but God by
appellation. So that, you. can do nothing with these

or without the scriptures.

This* is the way of the malice of Satan. When he
cannot deny the fact, he turns to demanding certain
particular terms, which he himself prescribes. And thus
the devil himself may say, even to Christ— Although
thou speakest the truth, yet since thou dost not speak
it in the terms which I think requisite, thou sayest
nothing at all : and I wish the truth to be spoken in no
words whatever. — This is like Marcolfus, who wished
to be hung upon a tree chosen by himself, and yet
wished to choose no tree at all. Hut of this elsewhere,
if the Lord shall give me leisure, and length of life.
For it is my determination to leave behind me my
true and faithful testimony concerning Erasmus : and
thus, to expose Luther to be bitten and stung by
these vipers, but not to be utterly torn in pieces and
destroyed!—-

I now return to my observation upon my liberty
which I have asserted; giving it as my sentiments,
that the tyranny of Erasmus which he would exercise
by means of circumlocutive evasions, is not to be
borne, but that he is to be judged ppenly, out of his
own mouth. Where he speaks as an Arian, let him be


395

judged an Arian; where he speaks as a Lucian, let
him be .judged a, Lucian ; where he speaks as a Gen-
tile, let him be judged a Gentile ; unless he repent
and cease to defend such ways of expressing himself.

For instance. In one of his epistles on the incar-
nation of the Son of God, he uses a most abominable
term, calling it * the intercourse of God with the
Virgin ! — here he is to be judged, a horrible blasphemer
of God and the Virgin ! Nor does it make him at all
better, his afterwards expounding ' intercourse ' as
tpplying to the form of the Christian doctrine. Why
did he not speak of the form of Christian doctrine ?
For he well knew, that by this word, i intercourse,'
Christians could not but be greatly offended— and let
him be judged ungodly who would not be offended at
a term so abominably obscene, in a matter so sacred :
knowing that, an ambiguous expression of such a
nature, is always taken in its worst sense, even though
we be not ignorant, that the term may have another
meaning. If it take place from inadvertency, it may
be pardoned : if from design and wilfulness, it is to be


1 1< j i>


condemned, as I said, without mercy. For to h
doctrine of faith is arduous, and a divine work, even
when delivered in proper, evident, and certain words.
How then shall it be held, if it be delivered in ambi-
guous, doubtful, and oblique words !

St. Augustine says, « philosophers ought to speak
freely on difficult points, fearing no offence : but we
(says he) must speak according to a certain rule.'
And therefore, he blames the use of the term fortune,
or fate, both in himself and others. For even though
the person may by fortune mean the divine mind, the
agent of all things, from which nature is known to be


396

distinctly different, and thus may not think impiously,
yet, says he, ' Let him hold his sentiment, but correct
his expression.'
• Tl And even to suppose that Augustine did not say
this, and never had any certain rule according to
which he expressed himself, yet nature will tell us,
that every profession, sacred as well as profane, uses
certain terms of its own, and avoids all ambiguities.
For even common tradesmen, either reprove or con-
demn, or hold up to ridicule, the man who speaks of
his own trade in the technical terms (as they are
called) peculiar to the trade of another. With how
much greater force will this apply to things sacred,
Where certain salvation, or eternal perdition is the
consequence, and where all must be taught in certain
and proper terms ! Let us, if we must do it, trifle
with ambiguities in other things that are of no mo-
ment, as nuts, apples, pence, and other things which
are the toys of children and of fools : but in religion,
and weighty matters of state, let us shun, with all pos-
sible care, an ambiguity, as we would shun death or
the devil! I,

Our king of ambiguity, however, sits upon his
ambiguous throne in security, and destroys us stupid
Christians with a double destruction. First, it is his
will, and it is a great pleasure to him, to offend us by
his ambiguous words : and indeed he would not like it,
if we stupid blocks were not offended. And next, when
he sees that we are offended, and have run against his
insidious figures of speech, and begin to exclaim
against him, he then begins to triumph and rejoice
that the desired prey has been caught in his snares.
For now, having found an opportunity of displaying


397

his rhetoric, he rushes upon us with all his powers
and all his noise, tearing us, flogging us, crucifying us,
and sending us farther than hell itself; saying, that
we have understood his words caiumniously, viru-
lently, satanically; (using the worst terms he can find;)
whereas, he never meant them to be so understood.

In the exercise of this wonderful tyranny, (and
who would think that this Madam ambiguity could
make so much ado, or who could suppose that any
one would be so great a madman as to have so much
confidence in a vain figure of speech ?) he not only com-
pels us to put up with his all-free prerogative of using
ambiguities, but binds us down to the necessity of
keeping silence. He plainly designs all the while, and
wishes us to be offended, that he, and his herd of
Epicureans with him, may have a laugh at us as fools :
but on the other hand, he does not like to hear that
we are offended, lest it should appear that we are true
Christians. Thus must we suffer wounds without
number, and yet, not utter a groan or a sigh !

We Christians, however, who are to judge, not
meats and drinks only, but angels and the whole
workl, and who actually judge, even now, not only do
not bear with this tyranny of ambiguities, but on the
contrary, oppose to it our liberty of pronouncing a
two-fold condemnation. The first is, as I have already
observed, we condemn all die ambiguous expressions
of Erasmus, and interpret them against himself : as
Christ saith, " Out of thine own mouth will I judge
thee, thou wicked servant." Again, " By thine own
words shalt thou be condemned : for wherefore hast
thou spoken against thine own soul ? " " Thy blood
be upon thiue own head." The second condemitatiQn


398

is, we condemn and curse again and again his glosses
and 4 convenient interpretations,' by which, he not
only does not correct his ungodly expressions, but
even defends them : that is, he laughs at us twice as
much in his after interpretations, as he does in his
first expressions.

For example : He says, that by ' the intercourse
of God with the Virgin* he does not mean a common
intercourse, but another kind of marriage between God
and the Virgin, where the angel Gabriel is the bride-
groom, and the Holy Spirit performs the act of con-
summation. Only observe what this fellow, by his in-
terpretation, would have us to hear and understand
Christ to be. And he says these things, that he might
defend the filthiness and obscenity of his expression
in the face of offended Christians, and laugh at them
all the while; and thus, he forces upon us this offen-
sive term, when he knows very well, that this mystery
of the most holy incarnation, cannot be explained to
the mind of man by all the obscene and ambiguous
words of the whole world : but how it is understood
by the Epicureans, I dare not, for horror, imagine.
Why do we not call the conversation of God with
Moses and the other prophets, « intercourse ' also, and
make the angels bridegrooms, and the Holy Spirit the
consummator of the act, or make of it 1 something still
more obscene? Moreover, here is the impious idea
of sex introduced, to perfect this monstrous derision of
saying, that God had ' intercourse with the Virgin ; * — *
in order that, the whole might be made a fable, like that
wherein Mars is said to have had intercourse with
Rhea, and Jupiter with Semele; and that Christianity
might be reduced to a level with one of the fabulous


stories of old, and men represented as fools' and piti-
able madmen for believing such a story to be serious
and true, not considering what turpitudes and obsce-
nities were the objects of their faith and worship !
And therefore, Christians, that stupid set of creatures;
were to be admonished by means of figures like
these, to begin to doubt, and then, from doubting to
depart from the faith; that thus, religion might fee*
utterly destroyed before any one could be aware of it.

This is the verification of that parable, Matt. xiii.
where the enemy is represented as sowing tares in the
night, and going his way. Thus, we Christians are
sleeping in security : and even if we were not sleep-
ing, those bewitching Syrens, by their honey, of
speech, would soon lull us to sleep, and bring a
cloud of night over our eyes. In the meantime, are
sown those tares of figurative and insidious words :
and yet when Sacramentarians, Donatists, Arians,
Anabaptists, Epicureans, &c. are sprung up, we ask
—How is it that our Lord's field hath tares? They,
however, who have sown them, are gone away ; that
is, they so paint and set themselves off by their ' con-
venient interpreta1ions, , and withdraw themselves from
sight, that they seem as if they had sown nothing but
wheat. Thus the enemy slides away, and is off in
safety, and crowned with honour and applause, and
appears to be a friend, when he is in truth the greatest
of enemies. This is the way with the strange woman*
Prov. xxx., who, " when she has eaten, wipeth her
month, and saith, I have done no wickedness !"

Thus have I replied to your letter, my friend
Armsdorff, though perhaps I have l>een too long and
tedious. But I wished to shew you, why I judged it


400


test not to answer Erasmus any farther. I am more-
over abundantly engaged in teaching, confirming,
correcting, and governing my flock. And my work of
translating the Bible, alone requires the devotion of
my whole time: from which work, Satan with all his
might endeavours to withdraw me, as he has done
upon former occasions; that he might get me to leave
the best things, to follow after those which are nothing
but vain and empty vapours. For my Bondage of the
Will proves to you how difficult a task it is to cope
with that proteus Erasmus, on account of his vertibi-
lity and slipperiness of speech ; in which alone is all
his confidence. He never remains in one position,
but, with the deepest craft, evades every blow, and is
like an irritated hornet.

Whereas, miserable I, am compelled to stand my
ground in one position, and that upon unequal ground,
as " a sign to be spoken against." For whatever
Luther writes, is condemned before ten years are at an
end. Luther is the only one who writes from envy, from
pride, from bitterness, and in a word, at the instiga-
tion of Satan himself; but all who write against him,
write under the influence of the Holy Spirit !

Before my time, it required a great to-do, and an
enormous expense, to canonize a dead monk. But
now, there is no easier way for canonizing even living
Neroes and Caligulas, than the declaration of hatred
against Luther. Only let a man hate and bravely
curse Luther, and that, immediately, makes him a
saint, equal almost to our holy Lord, the servant of
the servants of God. But who could ever believe that
hatred against Luther would be attended with so
much power and advantage? It fills the coffers of


Digitized by


401


very beggars; nay, it introduces obscure moles
and bats to the favour of princes and of kings ;
it procures prebendaries and dignities; it procures
bishoprics ; it procures the reputation of wisdom and
of learning to the most consummate asses; it procures
to petty teachers of grammar, the authority of writing
books ; nay, it procures the crown of victory and of
glory, eternal in the heavens ! Nay, happy are all who
hate Luther, for they obtain, by that one vile and
easy service, those great and mighty things, which
none of the most excellent of men could ever obtain
with all their wisdom and their virtues ; no, not even
Christ himself, with all his own miracles, and the
miracles of his apostles and all his saints !

Thus are the scriptures fulfilled. — Blessed are ye
who persecute Luther, for yours is the kingdom of
heaven! Blessed are ye who curse and say all manner
of evil against Luther ; rejoice and be exceeding glad
in that day, for great is your reward in heaven ; for so
persecuted they the apostles, the holy bishops, John
Huss, and others who were before Luther! — Where-
fore, I feel more and more persuaded, that I shall act
rightly by answering Erasmus no farther : but I will
leave my testimony concerning him, even for his own
sake, that he might hereafter be unburdened from
that concern which, as he complains, is completely
death to him : viz. that he is commonly called a
Lutheran. But, as Christ liveth, they do him a great
injury who call him a Lutheran, and I will defend him
against his enemies : for I can bear a true and faithful
testimony, that he is no Lutheran, but Erasmus
himself !

And if I could have my will, Erasmus should be

2d


402

exploded from our schools altogether : for if he be
not pernicious, he is certainly useless : because he, in
truth, discusses and teaches nothing. Nor is it at ail
advisable to accustom Christian youth to the diction
of Erasmus : for they will learn to speak and think of
nothing with gravity and seriousness, but only to laugh
at all men as babblers and vain-talkers. In a word,
they will learn nothing, but to play the fool ! And
from this levity and vanity they will, by degrees,
grow tired of religion, till at last they will abhor and
profane it ! Let him be left to the Papists only, who
are worthy of such an apostle, and whose lips relish
his dainties !

May our Lord Jesus Christ, whom, according to
my faith, Peter did not omit to call God; by whose
power I know, and am persuaded, that I have often
been delivered from death, and by faith in whom I
have undertaken and hitherto accomplished all these
things which excite the wonder even of my enemies ;
may this same Jesus guard and deliver us unto the
end — for he is the Lord our God ! — To whom alone,
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory for
ever and ever ! Amen !


T. Bikilet, Printer, Crane Cowt, Ftoet-Jtocct, London


Digitized by


PROPOSALS

FOR PUBLISHING IN MONTHLY NUMBERS,

Of U. 6d. each.

A TRANSLATION

OF

A CHOICE SELECTION

FROM THE

EXPERIMENTAL WORKS

OF

jftartm Uutbtv:

WHICH WILL CONTAIN,

I.—" His Christian Liberty" — (Description of the Soul Liberty
of a Christian by Faith.)

II. — His Exposition of the Fifty-first Psalm.

III. — Selections from/ his Preface to the Epistle to the Romans,
from his Commentary on the Galatians, and the Epistles by St. Peter,
and other Works j intended to give, at one view, his Description of
the experience of a Child of God, and of Soul-justifying and delivering
Faith.

IV. — His Description of real and spiritual Prayer.

V. — His Sermons on, The Rich Man and Lazarus — The Good
Shepherd — The Power and Increase of Faith and Love, Ephes. Hi.
14-21— The Ten Lepers— The Lost Sheep— The 8ummary of the
Christian Life, 1 Tim. i. 5, 6, 7 — The Coming of Christ, and the
Signs that shall precede the Last Day (his "Word of Consolation to
the Church,") Luke xxi. 25.

VI.— His Exposition of the 17th Chapter of the Gospel by St. John.

VU.— His " Seven Burthens of the Heavy Laden, and their Seven
Consolations."

VIII.— His "Last Words of David," (Exposition of 2 Sam.xxiii. 1-7.)

IX. — His " Three Symbols, or Confessions, of the Christian Faith,"
and his " True Marks of the Church j what it is, which it is, and
where it is."

X. — His valuable Exposition of the 15 Psalm of Degrees.

XI. — Other choice Matter, that may seem adapted to the present
State and Wants of the Church, and desirable to form the completion
of the Work.

BY THE REV. HENRY COLE,

Of Clare Hall, Cambridge, and late Lecturer of Woolwich, Kent.


It is impossible for the Translator to say, precisely, to what extent
this Work must, of necessity, be carried } but he judges it will not
exceed Twenty- five Numbers.


2


If the Translator be asked the reason why he proposes to bring
forth such a Work, he has no other answer to give, than that, from
many particularly directing Circumstances, he was led to believe it
would, under the divine blessing, be useful to the Church of God in the
present day. He wishes it to bear this Title —

SELECT WORKS

or

ittarttn Uutftrr,

AN OFFERING TO

THE CHURCH OF GOD

IN

"THE LAST DAYS."

2 Tim. iii. 1.


As the Translator considers that the Work will, from its Design,
fall principally into the hands of those who arc unacquainted with the
language of the original, he does not publish the Latin Text; but those
who desire it may have the Latin, together with the Translation, if the
number of such Subscribers shall amount to 200. — TheTrice of each
Number, with the Latin, will be 3s. Sd.


The Translator may probably bring forth some of the Pieces of
Martin Luther on Popbby, when the present Work shall have been
completed, or it may be, during its Publication j and, if this offering
be blessed with a reception, and his life be spared, and time set apart
tor such a purpose, he has it in desire to publish in numbers atao,
that last, matured, and invaluable Production of Luther, his " Com-
mentary on the Book of Genesis ;" but of these Works due notice will
be giveu in some of the numbers of the Translation now proposed.

Uontion:

miNTKn for the author, by t. benslby,

Omme Cmmrl, fleet Street |

And sold by J . Eaoaa, No. 9, Newgute Street; R. Bayxes, 21, Ivy Lane f
and by W. Clarke, 96, Ermouth Street, Spa Fields.


■J


ADVERTISEMENT.


The Translator desirer. to take this opportunity of
informing those Friends who have favoured him with their
Names in support of the Publication announced in the Pho-
fosals, that he has, after much deliberation, deemed it ad-
visable to send the Work forth in Numbers of Eighteen-
pence, instead of a Shilling each. Many friends intimated to
him their thoughts, that the length of time which it must take to
bring the whole to a completion in Numbers of One Shilling
each, would be somewhat objectionable. In compliance with
their wishes, therefore, and under a conviction of the propriety
of their intimations, he has made the alteration : and by so
doing has, consequently, shortened the time one third. — Thi9
alteration, he hopes, when the important reason assigned is
considered, will not be disapproved by the Friends in general.

Those who may favour the Translator with their Names as
Subscribers, are moreover respectfully informed, that the ar-
rangements of the Publication are such, as to require each
Number to be paid for on delivery.

The advantage of this opportunity is taken also for an-
nouncing, that the First Number of the proposed Work will
appear on the Brst of April 1823.

Also that, in the same Month, will be presented to the Church,

TWO VERY REMARKABLE TRACTS

ON

POPERY,

The productions of Luther and Melancthon in conjunction.

These Tracts are of a very singular, striking, and important
nature. Each contains an extraordinary Wood-cut Figure, with
a scriptural interpretation, and an appeal and warning to all
true Christians. That by Melancthon, is a representation of the
WntoRE of Babylon : that by Luther, of Monkery.

The First Tract will appear on the 7th, the Second on the
14th, of April next.

London, Marth, 18*3.


Digitized fc^Google


• ■ u


This Day is published, by Richard Baynks, 25, Ivy-Lane,

Paternoster- Row,

THE PREACHER;

or, SKETCHES OF ORIGINAL SERMONS,

Chiefly selected from the Manuscripts of Eminent Divine*
of the Last Century, for the Use of Lay Preachers and Young
Ministers; to which are prefixed a Familiar Essay on the
Composition of a Sermon, a Letter to a young Minister on
Preaching the Gospel, &c. &c. 12mo. price 4s.

The Second Edition of Vol. I. may now be had, and Vol. II.
and III. price 4s. each.

Vol. IV. will be published early in January, 1823.

RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE ABOVE WORK.

Extracted from the Revises.

" These .Sketches embrace name of the more interesting topics which the Gospel
contains. With eery few exceptions, they bear a resemblance to those published
suuie years since by the pioua Mr. Simeon, of Cambridge; and they may be con-
sidered as helps to the arrangement and composition of Discourses designed for the
pulpit. Prefixed to the first volame, is an Essay on the Composition of a Sermon,
by the late Mr. Fuller, of Kettering, whose name is a sufficient recommendation of
whatever comes from his pen. In these skeletons or outlines of Sermons, blank
spaces are left nt the conclusion of such sentences or paragraphs as admit of and
require enlargement. In this respect, the method recommended by the late Robert
Robinson in his plan of Lectures on Nonconformity seems to be adopted or imitated ;
and that Teacher must be very deficient iudced, in taste and judgment, who cannot
take the hint, and make the necessary improvements. It wifl readily he perceived
that these sketches discover a comurrhemife mum/, and connect a vast f""d nf leading
Ideas. The authors seem to take their stand on the frontiers of their subjects, and
having taken a walk round their various circumferences, leave the reader or
pupil to explore the internal according to his own views.

" It too frequently happens, that in modern discourses, the vitiated taste of a de-
generate age is taken as a standard, to which the writers appeal, and the plain and
unvarnished truths of the Gospel are thrown in the back ground, lest they should
* shock the ears of auditors polite.' No charge of this kind can however be urged
against the writers or the compilers of the Volume before us ; they know no other
Htaudard than that which Jesus Christ and his AposUes erected, hence they censure
wiUi boldness those who want a Gospel accommodation.


" That these sketches might be rendered exceedingly serviceable to many young
Preachers, we have the fullest conviction : not to furnish them with details to be


" They appear to us to be very sound in the doctrinal sentiment which pervades
them ; by which we mean, that they are strictly Calvinistic ; not the hyper Calvinism
of Dr. Crisp, but the moderate Calvinism of President Edwards, of Owen, and
Charnook, and Booth. The Essay on the Composition of a Sermort, &©. is said to
be from the pen of Mr. Fuller, and we are greatly mistaken if many of these outlines
nre not from the same quarter. We think we can trace the great man in many of
these pages. — New Evangelical Magazine, May 1822.

" Several of the discourses which we have read are very excellent, and we have
no hesitation in pronouncing the Author of the excellent Essay on the Composition
of a Sermon, (prefixed), namely the late Rev. Andrew Fuller, to be also the author
of some of the outlines, and probably one of the divines of the last Century, men-
tioned in the title. For rectifying the judgment, and especially for Uie parpose of
helping yonng ministers, w« think them adinirablv adapted, and among the best pro-
ductions of the kind which have issued from the press." — UoMR Missionary
Magazine, February.

" Some of (hem. and especially a considerable number of those in which passages
of the Old Testament are made the subjects o practical remark and improvement,
possess more than ordinary excellence. Mont of them ate snuttd, judicious, and in-
strueiice.. To manv young preachers thev will furnish occasional hints of much value ;
and we can cordially recommend it to those who feel themselves in need of ansa,
assistance as it professes to provide."- Methodist Magazine, Oet. Itti2.


2

RECOMMENDA TI0S3 CmMtti from II* ok,, .«*.

" After thii explanation (the Editor's preface'), the essay follow*, written by the
Iter. Andrew Puller ; and a more valuable production of the kind we bare not seen.
We moat, therefore, recommend the work to the attention of young preacheis.
te whom we think it will pro re a rateable acquisition."*- Christian'* .Pocket
Magazine, and Theological Critic, for February.

" We are justified ia recommending tbeae Sketch ea, and the young Preacher may
he encouraged to arail himself of them on the ground of their being reuerallv good :
not a few are peculiarly excellent."— Evangelical Mao. for December.

PUBLISHING BY SUBSCRIPTION,

AN UNIFORM EDITION OF THE

a-

Whole Works of

JOHN OWEN, D. D.

Vice Chancellor of Oxford, and Dean of Ckriit Church,
DURING THE COMMON WEALTH.

To be Edited by Thomas Cloutt, M. A.


CONDITIONS.

1. The Work will be printed on a fine demy paper, with the
best ink, uniform with the New Editions of Taylor's, Baxter's,
and Lightfoofs Works.

2. It will be comprised, as nearly as can be calculated, in
Sixteen Volumes, Octavo; each Volume to contain, on the
average, Thirty-five sheets, or nearly Six Hundred pages,
price 12s.

3. A Volume to be published every Two Months. A Ge-
neral Index, and a List of Subscribers will be given in the last
Volume.

Printed for Richard Baynes, Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row.

•*>* The Publisher respectfully, solicits those Gentlemen who
are disposed to patron. ie the undertaking, to transmit to him
through their respective Booksellers, their Names and Address
as early as possible, which will be printed with the concluding
Volume.
