Sir Libeaus Desconus (Weston 1902)
==================================
Lybeaus Desconus in Jessie L. Weston's 1902 English prose rendering, published with Sir Cleges (London: David Nutt, 1902), complete. Scan via Internet Archive (SirClegesLibeausDesconusWeston).

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/



Arthurian
Romances
Unrepresented
in Malory's
"Morte ...



Jessie Laidlay
Weston



d by Google



36



>u1



■1300

✓■5. copy i



Itemed on Ittti&mttjj $ttearj)

fife** of
(English ^aelr^




gffovmdei* aufc maintain^



Digitized byGoOgk



ARTHURIAN ROMANCES

Unrepresented in Malory's
"Morte d'Arthur"




v

git ties**
§bir feifleae ©eeconue



Digitized byGoOgk



ARTHURIAN ROMANCES

UNREPRESENTED IN MALORY'S
"MORTE D' ARTHUR."

I. SIR GAWAIlf ANDTHB GREEN KNIGHT.
A Middle-English Romance retold in Modern
Prose, with Introduction and Notes, by
Jessie L. Weston. With Designs by M . M.
Crawford. 1898. 2s. net.

II. TRISTAN AND ISEULT.

Rendered into English from the German of
Gottfried of Strassburg by Jessie L. Weston.
With Designs by Caroline Watts. Two
▼ols. 1899. 4s. net.

III. GUINGAMOR, LANVAL, TYOLET, LB

BISCLAVERET.

Four Lays rendered into English Prose from
the French of Marie de France and others
by Jessie L. Weston. With Designs by
Caroline Watts. 1900. as. net

IV. MORIEN.

A Metrical Romance rendered into English
Prose from the Mediaeval Dutch by Jessie
L. Weston. With Designs by Caroline
Watbs. 190a. 2S. net.



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



^re, Loncion.

Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk




Published fy David HuLl, Lon^ Acre. London i901

Digitized by Google



i

3 III
.0?

(9oo

V.$jC. f



digitized by G00gk



Jnfrobucfton



Of the two romances contained in this
volume, the first — Sir Cleges — scarcely, per-
haps, deserves the name of a romance ; it
has rather the character of a lai or fabliau^
the tale being short and somewhat com-
pressed in style, and the final incident dis-
tinctly humorous in character. It exists in
a unique paper MS. of the fifteenth century,
preserved in the Advocate's Library, Edin-
burgh, from which it was printed by Weber
in the first volume of his Metrical Romances.

Though lacking in the grace and charm
of the French lais the story of Sir Cleges
is by no means wanting in interest ; the
simple faith and trust of the poverty-stricken
knight, and the miraculous succour vouch-
safed to him, contrasted with the somewhat
rough humour of the closing scene, have a
piquant and by no means unpleasing effect.
The author is unknown, but the edifying




viii



^Introduction



character of the tale might lead to the con-
jecture that it was the work of an ecclesiastic
gifted with a sense of humour. Slight as
it is, the story seemed worth preserving,
especially in a volume intended for Christmas
publication.

Our second romance, Sir Libeaus Desconus,
belongs to an entirely different category ;
it is the English representative of a small,
but highly interesting and important, group
of poems, dealing with a hero who, brought
up in poverty and obscurity, rises to fame
and honour at Arthur's Court, and eventu-
ally proves to be the son of the king's
nephew, Sir Gawain — in one variant, Sir
Gawain, instead of being the lad's father,
is that father's slayer.

The group consists of the English poem
1/ here given, the French Le Uel Inconnu^ the
German Wigalois^xA the Italian Carduino;
this last, as mentioned above, differing from
all the others in the r$le ascribed to Gawain.

Further, the continuations of the Perceval
of Chretien de Troyes contain two distinct
accounts of the begetting of Guinglain [Le
Bel Inconnu), and several references to his
early life and adventures ; while the second
part of the romance of Ipomcdon betrays, in



Digitized byGoOgk



Jnfrobucfton ix

incident and sequence, a knowledge, on the
part of the writer, of our story. There is,
I think, little doubt that the tale of this
unknown son of Sir Gawain is older and at
the same time more important for the study
of Arthurian Romance than has yet been
realised.

Hitherto the efforts of scholars have been
mainly directed towards the establishment of
the relations existing between the French
and English forms of the story. Doctor
Schofield's interesting study on the subject
(Studies on the Libeaus Desconus, Harvard
Studies, vol. iv.) have gone for to establish
the independence of the two versions, and
have certainly proved, beyond reasonable
doubt, the extensive use made by the French
writer of the Erec of Chretien de Troyes.
The most interesting part of Doctor Scho-
field's study, that in which he maintains the
original iaentity of the hero with Perceval
li Galois, has not hitherto been received
with much favour by the majority of critics ;
but I am inclined to think that a closer
examination of the tales will bring to light
other and stronger arguments, of the exist-
ence of which Doctor Schofield, at the time
he published his study, was not aware.



Digitized by



X



Jnfrobucfton



This much is quite certain : the various
versions of the Perceval Enfances, largely as
they have already engaged the attention of
scholars have not as yet been exhaustively
studied ; a close critical comparison of every
extant version is urgently necessary, both
for the purpose of arriving at a clear idea of
the earliest form of the story — which, unless
I am much mistaken, is no longer fully
represented byany — and also for establishing
the true position to be assigned to the poem
of Chretien.

In the notes attached to this volume I have
endeavoured to indicate certain points which
appear to be worthy of closer study, but so
far the ground is not ripe for the expression
of any definite views as to the real origin
and development of the tale. We must
first determine the earliest form of the
Perceval story before we shall be in a posi-
tion to formulate a definite theory of the
evolution of this kindred group.

The poem, of which a prose rendering
is here given, has been preserved in several
MSS. ; the dialect is that of southern
England — Doctor Schofield thinks, in all
probability, of Kent — and was written
about the middle of the fourteenth century.



Digitized byGoOgk



Certain correspondences of phrase and
metre have led some critics to maintain,
but on somewhat insufficient grounds, that
it is the work of Thomas of Chestre, the
author of LaunfaU It has been four times
edited — by Ritson in 1802; by Hippeau in
i860 ; by Hales and Furnivall in 1868 ;



this volume was made from Ritson's edition
some years ago, and was not originally in-
tended for this series, but through unfore-
seen circumstances I was unable either to
undertake a fresh translation or to revise
extensively the work already completed. I
can, therefore, only apologise to the reader
for any imperfection that may be found in
the text, and remind the critic that the
object of this series is to popularise the
study of Arthurian Romance by presenting
it in a form acceptable to the general
reader, not to provide scholars with a
critical text.

DULWJCH

J urn 1902




The version in



Digitized by



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



git €fe«e* 3

isteNj lordings, and ye shall
hear of the fathers that
went afore us ; hardy men
they were and valiant.
'Twas in the days of King
Uther, who was father
unto King Arthur (fair
was he to look upon) ; he
had a knight, hight Sir
C leges, one of the Round
Table; none was there
doughtier of deeds. He was a man of tall
stature, thereto full fair of feature, and
withal of great might. A more courteous
knight than he might not be found through-
out the realm, so gentle was he and free of
hand. They that had wandered in lands
wasted by war, and were fallen into poverty,
to them he gave both gold and fee; the
poor would he succour, and do wrong to
no man.

Gentle of manner was Sir Cleges, and
held open table to all who were fain to
visit him, for he had great plenty. A fair
wife had that knight, never a better was
there in life, and passing merry of counte-
nance. Dame Clarys was that lady hight ;
she was a good lady assuredly, and ever of



Digitized byGoOgk



4 &tr €fese*

joyful mood ; she gave alms right freely to
the poor, and cherished many; no man,
rich or poor, bare ill-will towards them, for
they ever did right.

Every year at Christmastide would Sir
Cleges hold a great feast and royal, even
as if he were a king, in honour of the day ;
throughout all the land was there no man,
rich or poor, who would say nay when
bidden thereto. Nor would the minstrels
be behind, for they will ever be where they
may find most mirth ! Nor when the feast
was done should they get them gone with-
out largesse great and good ; horses, robes,
rich rings, gold, silver, and many a thing
beside did they have to the amending of
their mood.

Ten years did Sir Cleges hold such feast,
to the honour of Holy Mary, that Maiden
mild, and of Him who died on the Rood,
and then did his goods begin to wax scant
by reason of his much spending, that knight
of gentle blood. Yet would not Sir Cleges
be let from holding his Christmas feast,
but set his manors in pledge (thinking well
to redeem them), and so did he feast knight
and squire full many a year for the honour
of God Almighty tul, sooth to say, it came



Digitized byGoOgk



Mit Ciegt* 5

to pass at the last that all his goods were
spent, and he had but little left. Yet though
it were his last penny would not that good
knight stint of holding feast, for that he
hoped in God ; and thus did he, right
royally, till that his manors were all gone
and but one was left to him, and that of
such little worth that he and his wife might
scarce live thereon. His men, who were
proud of mood, began to forsake him on
every side ; no man would dwell with him,
but he was left with his wife and children
twain ; then was Sir Cleges in great woe,
and bemoaned himself right bitterly.

Now it befell on Christmas Eve that the
king, who dwelt beside Kardyf, bethought
himself of the season, and ordained a great
feast for all in his hall j* but Sir Cleges (whose
manor lay hard by the borders of Kardyf)
was not bidden thereto, for 9 twas many a year
since the king had heard speech of him, and he
deemed well that he was already dead. But
that good knight, when it drew towards
noon, fell on swooning, thinking how it

* Here, and in the concluding passage, the M.S. appears
to be defective, and I have added the passages italicised, in
order to avoid adruptness aud dislocation of the narrative.
—J. L. W.



Digitized by



6 &%t turn

behoved him to make mirth, and how he
had sold and lost his manors and his fair
rents. Bitter sorrow did he make ; he
wrung his hands and wept sore for that his
pride was brought thus low.

As he walked up and down, sighing sore,
Sir Cleges heard the sound of divers min-
strelsy, trump, pipe and clarinet; harp, lute
and guitar ; cithole and psaltery ; on every
side he heard the voice of singing, of caroles
and of fair dancing ; then did Sir Cleges
wring his hands and weep, sighing right
piteously : " Lord Jesu," he quoth, " King
of Heaven, who hast made all things
of naught, I thank Thee for these Thy
good tidings; aforetime was I wont at
this time to make merry for Thy sake ;
bondman and free did I reed alike ; all that
came to me in Thy name wanted for
naught that was in my lands, rich meats
and good drinks, the best that might be,
by the Rood — never did I lend my goods
upon usury." As he thus stood and made
lament, his good wife drew nigh and clasped
him in her arms; she kissed him with
gladsome cheer. a My lord," she said,
" my true comrade, I heard your speech ;
ye see well it helpeth naught t;o make



Digitized byGoOgk



git Ctese* 7

moan, therefore I pray ye cease and put
away your sorrow, and thank God of His
love for all that He hath sent. For Christ's
sake I pray ye think no longer of the griefs
that beset ye, for honour of this day,
wherein every man should rejoice. There-
fore be no more sad, but think on what I
say. Go we to meat forthwith, and let us
be blithe and joyful as best we may ; truly
I hold this for the best, for your meat is all
ready, and I trust well to your liking."

"That will I," quoth the knight, and
turned him with her, and somewhat amended
his mood. Yet he was heavy at heart, but
she comforted him more and more to the
setting aside of his sorrow, so that he began
to wax blithe, and wiped away the tears
that ran adown his cheeks. Thus they
washed and went to meat with such victuals
as they might get, and made them merry
together.

When they had eaten, sooth to say, they
passed the day in such mirth as they might ;
they made sport with their children, and
after supper, when the night fell, they gat
them to bed.

On the morrow they betook them to
church, to do God service, as is both reason



Digitized by



8 git Ctese*

and right. Sir Cleges, he kneeled low on
his knee and prayed unto Jesu Christ for
his wife so dear. "Gracious Lord," he
said, "have mercy alike on my wife and
my children, and keep them far from strife."
The lady, too, prayed for her husband that
God should keep him from sorrow and
brine him to life everlasting. When that
the Mass was done they gat them home
again, giving thanks of good heart to God,
and put away care from their thoughts.

When Sir Cleges came again to his
place, he had abated him somewhat of his
sorrow and set it aside. Therewith he
caused his wife and his children to go
before him, and betook himself alone into
the garden, and there did he kneel down
and pray to God surely, thanking Him
from his heart for the poverty and the want
which He had sent upon him. When as
he thus kneeled low and made his prayer
beneath a cherry-tree, a bough smote him
on the head, and he arose up quickly and
knelt no longer, for even as he caught the
bough in his hand he found green leaves
thereon and berries beside. Quoth the
knight, "Dear God in Trinity, what manner
of berries may these be which grow thus



Digitized byGoOgk



git tteg'e* 9

at Christmastide ? Never before saw I tree
that bare fruit at this season." He thought
to taste the fruit and spare not, and put one
into his mouth. Lo ! the flavour was such
that never cherry that he had tasted since
that he had grown to manhood was to be
compared therewith.

Sir Cleges brake off a little bough, think-
ing to show it to his wife, and brought it
to her. " Lo ! dame, see here a marvel !
On a cherry-tree in our garden did I find
it growing. I fear me lest it be the fore-
token of harm to follow ; so it thinketh
me forsooth ! Yet, whether we have less
or more, let us thank our God therefor, for
truly so doth it seem fitting."

Then the lady spake of joyful cheer and
said, " Fill we a basket of this which God
hath now sent to us ; to-morrow, when the
day dawneth, ye shall to Kardyf, to the
king, and bear this for a present. It may
well be that ye have at his hand such a gift
that we fare the better throughout the year,
so I tell ye verily." The knight granted
her prayer. " To-morrow," he quoth, " I
will to Kardyf at your will."

On the morrow, when it was light, the
lady made ready a basket, and called unto



Digitized by



io £tt Cfegee

her her eldest son, "Take up this goodly
basket," she said, " and bear it forth lightly
with thy father." Then Sir Cleges took
unto him a staff, no horse had he, saith the
book, wherewith to ride on his way, neither
steed nor palfrey, but a staff must needs be
his hackney, as befitting a poor man.

Thus the good knight and his gentle son
went on their way to Kardyf all on this
Christmas Day ; to the castle they came in
safety, even as men made ready for meat,
and Sir Cleges verily thought to enter.
But he was poorly clad and in simple array,
and the porter spake roughly, "Churl,
withdraw thee speedily and without delay,
so do I rede thee, else, by God and Holy
Mary, I shall break thine head for thee.
Go thou, stand in the beggar's row, an
thou come further I shall give thee such a
clout as thou shalt rue well ! "

" Good sir," quoth the knight, " I prithee
let me enter, believe me without a doubt I
have brought unto the king a gift from
Him that hath made all things of naught.
Look thou here ! 99

With that the porter went unto the
basket and raised the lid and looked upon
the cherries; well he wist that he who



Digitized byGoOgk



brought such offering unto the king should
receive a goodly gift : he quoth, "By Him
who bought me thou comest not in hither,
as I be a mortal man, save that thou grant
me the third part of all that the king give
thee, be it silver or gold ! " Sir Cleges
said, " Thereto I agree," and with that the
porter bade him pass without further hind-
rance.

As he went in swiftly the usher stood at
the hall-door, with his staff raised as he
were fain to smite Sir Cleges. " Go back,
thou churl ? " quoth he, " apace, and tarry
not, else will I grant thee no grace, but
will smite thee on every limb, head and
body, if thou make more pressing ! "

" Good sir," quoth Sir Cleges, " for the
love of Him who made mankind, cease this
wrathful mood. I bring here a gift from
Him who made all of naught, and died on
the Rood ; this night did it grow in my
garden ! Behold whether I speak false or
true, they be fair and good !" With that
the usher lift up the lid and beheld the
berries, and marvelled much within him-

self -

Quoth the usher, "By sweet Saint
Mary, churl, thou goest no further (that



Digitized byGoOgk



i2 &tt Cfegec

do I tell thee of a truth), but that thou
grant me without fail the third part of
thy guerdon whenas thou comest hither
again."

Sir Cleges saw he might do no other-
wise, naught else would he have : with
heavy cheer he took his son and his basket,
and went his way into the hall. The
steward, in costly weed, walked there
among the lords, he gat him to Sir Cleges
boldly and quoth, " Who made thee so
hardy as to come into this hall? Thou
art overbold, churl ! I rede thee, get thee
hence with thine old clothes speedily."

Quoth the knight, "I bring hither a
present from our Lord, who bought us full
dear and bled upon the Rood." He proffered
the basket unto the steward, and pulled out
the pin as smartly as might be. Quoth
the steward, <c By Holy Mary, since 1 was
born saw I never the like at this season of
the year. Thou shalt come no nigher to
the king save that thou grant me mine
asking — by Him that bought me I will
have the third part of the king's guerdon,
or thou comest no further."

Then Sir Cleges bethought him, "My
share is lost 'twixt these men, and I shall



Digitized byGoOgk



gkit Cfegee 13

have naught ; an I have a meal for my
pains, 'tis all I may look for" — thus he
bethought him, sighing. Quoth the
steward, " Rascal, hast no tongue ? Speak
to me, and grant me mine asking without
longer tarrying, else with my staff I shall
wake thee, making thy ribs to quake, and
put thee out headlong." Sir Cleges saw
that there was none other remedy save that
he grant his asking, and said, sighing sore,
" Whatsoever the king's guerdon, be it less
or more, ye shall have the third part
thereof," Then soberly, and with good
intent, the knight went up to the daYs and
knelt low before the king.

Sir Cleges uncovered the basket, kneeling
low, and showed unto the king the bright
red cherries, saying : " Jesus, our Saviour,
sent thee this fruit with honour, causing it
to grow upon the ground." The king
looked upon the fresh cherries, and quoth,
" I thank Christ Jesus, of a sooth 'tis a fair
gift for a New Year." He commanded
the knight to sit down to meat, thinking
to speak with him thereafter.

Of certain of the cherries King Uther
made a present and sent it unto a gentle
lady of Cornwall, a bright and lovely lady



Digitized by



h §ktt Ctest*

she was, and withal of good repute. The
rest he bade be served throughout the hall.

Quoth the king, that royal lord, "I
counsel ye all that ye make merry, and he
that brought me this present it shall avail
him right well ; full well shall I content
him."

When all were merry and glad, spake
the king unto a squire, " Bring now hither
before me the poor man who brought the
cherries." Sir Cleges tarried not but came
anon, and fell low on his knees before the
king and his lords, saying mildly unto the
king, u Lord, what may be your will ?
I am your man freeborn." " I thank thee
heartily," said King Uther, "of the gift
and the present which thou hast now
brought ; through it hast thou honoured all
my feast, old and young, great and small,
and done me great worship. Whatsoever
thine heart desireth I will grant thee for
the asking — so may God save me ! "

Quoth the knight, " Gramercy, noble
king, this is a comforting unto me. I tell
ye, of a surety, land or folk or other riches,
that were over much for me, but sith that
I may choose myself, I prithee of thy
clemency that thou grant me twelve



Digitized byGoOgk



git Cfegee is

strokes, to deal where it liketh me best
— to pay them all with my staff to mine
adversaries here in the hall."

Then answered King Uther, " I repent
me of the grant that I made to thee.
By heaven, thou had'st better have gold or
fee, thou hast more need thereof."

Sir Cleges spake boldly, " Lord, 'tis your
own granting, and thereof am I right glad."
The king was sad at heart, but nevertheless
he granted him that which he desired.

Straightway Sir Cleges betook him to the
hall, among the great lords, and sought out
the proud steward to give him his reward,
since that he had so sorely grieved him.
He gave the steward such a stroke that he
fell as a log before them all ; after, he gave
him the other three, till he cried, " Sir, of
thy courtesie smite me no more." Out of
the hall went Sir Cleges, with intent to
pay more without let or hindrance 5 he
went swiftly to the usher, " Have here
some strokes," he said when they met, —
thereafter for many a day that usher forbade
no man entrance, so grimly did he greet him 1

Sir Cleges said "By my troth thou hast
the third part of my guerdon, even as I
promised thee."



Digitized by



16 Sit Cfesee

Then went he to the porter, and four
strokes he gave him, his full share; for
many a day that porter would forbid no
man entrance, came he ahorse or afoot.
The first stroke Sir Cleges dealt him he
brake his shoulder-bone and one arm ; the
knight quoth, "By my troth, thou hast
now the third part of my guerdon, even
the covenant that I made with thee ! "

The king was set in his parlour with
honour, mirth and solace. Sir Cleges went
thither, and as he came a minstrel sang
before the king the gest of a knight, even
of himself. The king spake to the harper,
" Where is knight Cleges ? Tell me now,
for thou hast journeyed far and wide 5 tell
me the truth, knowest thou aught of that
man ? " Quoth the harper, " Yea, I knew
him aforetime, he was a true knight, and of
comely presence ; we minstrels miss him
sorely since that he departed from this land,
he was fair of stature and free of hand."

The king said, " By my beard, I trow
Sir Cleges be dead, I loved him much ;
would God he were alive, I had liever have
him than any other five, for he was doughty
at need." Sir Cleges kneeled low before
the king, and thanked him courteously for



Digitized byGoOgk



Mit CtestB 17

that he had granted his boon. Then the
king prayed him to say wherefore he had
dealt those strokes to three of the king's
men. The knight quoth, " Since that I
might not enter till that I had granted to
each the third part of all which ye should
give me : with that I should have naught
left for myself ; wherefore I chose twelve
strokes, for verily it seemed unto me
better so ! "

Then old and young, and all who were
with the king, laughed loudly and made
much solace thereof. The king might
scarce stay his mirth, he quoth, " I vow by
Heaven this is a doughty fellow!" He
sent unto his steward. " Hast thou,"
he said, " thy reward ? Christ, 'tis a man
to praise ! "

The steward made answer grimly, " May
the devil burn him on a lowe ! " Then
quoth King Uther, " Tell me thy name,
good man, here anon." " Sir Cleges am I
night who aforetime was your own true
knight, that is my rightful name."

" Art thou Sir Cleges, who served me so
truly ? He who was so courteous and so
free of hand, and so strong in fight ? "

" Yea, my lord, that man was I, till that

B



Digitized by



&\t Cfegec



God in heaven visited me with sore
poverty,"

Anon did the king give him all that
belonged unto a knight, to enrich his
estate — the fair castle of Kardyf, with many
more gifts, that hereafter he might live
merry and joyful. The knight betook him
to Dame Clarys his wife, fairer lady was
none alive, and shewed her all that had
befallen him in the king's hall y the ill-will
of the three kings men, the guerdon that they
had won therefor y and the fair gifts with
which the king had dowered him. There-
after did Sir Cleges and his good wife live
together in joy and bliss. May Mary,
that fair Virgin, guard their souls, and the
souls of all ye who have hearkened unto




Digitized byGoOgk



fetfieaue ©eeconus



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



21



$ix fetfieaue ©eeconue

MAY our Saviour Christ, and the sweet
maid His mother, help him who shall hearken
to this tale of a knight, wise of wit, a valiant
warrior, and doughty in deed.



fill



jhe name of this knight was
Gyngalyn. Son he was
to Sir Gawain, who had
met with his mother by
a forest side, and never
have ye heard tell of a
braver knight 'mid all
those who sat with Arthur
at the Round Table.

This Gyngalyn was
fair to look upon, grace-
ful of body, and bright of face, but his
mother kept him close, for very dear he
was to her, and she feared lest ill should
befall him. And for love of his fair face
she called him Beau-fis and naught else;
and he himself was but simple, and never
thought to ask his mother what his true
name might be.

Now it chanced on a day that the boy
went forth to the woods to chase the deer,
and he found a knight lying clad in gay
armour ; slain he was, and lifeless. And



Digitized by



22 Six fetfieaue flDetconue

the boy did off the dead knight's weed,
and clad himself in that rich armour, and
went forth to Glastonbury, where King
Arthur held his Court.

Then he kneeled in the hall before all
the knights, and greeted them with honour,
and prayed King Arthur that he might
speak a word. Then said Arthur the King
without delay, "Tell me thy name, for
never since I was born have I looked on
one so fair of face." And the boy said,
" I know not my name, the more foolish
I, but while I abode at home my mother
in her game would call me Beau-fis."

Then said Arthur the King, " This is a
wondrous thing, when he who would be a
knight knows not his own name, and yet
is so fair to look upon ! Now will I give
him a name before ye all here present. By
St. James, his mother, whoever she may
be, hath never so called him ! For that
he is so fair and frank, for the love of me
ye shall all call him Libeaus Desconus. Wit
ye well that the reading of that is, The Fair
Unknown ; of a surety so shall he be called."

In the self-same day did King Arthur
make him a knight, and gave him bright
armour, and girt him with a sword of



Digitized byGoOgk



Mix fetfieaue ©eeconue 23



might, and hung round his neck a shield,
rich and gilded over, and on it was the
device of a griffin. And his father, Gawain,
(but he knew not that he was his father)
took him forth on the plain to teach him
how to handle his arms as befitting a knight.

When the lad was made a knight there
and then he prayed a boon of the King
and said, " My lord, I were right glad at
heart if I had the first fight that any man
asks of thee ! " Then said Arthur the
King, "I grant thee thine asking, whatever
the battle may be ; but methinks by
aught that I can see thou art too young to
make a good fight ! " Without more words
the knights, dukes, earls, and barons washed
themselves and sat them down to table ;
enough had they of all manner of meats as
befitted such famous knights.

Now Arthur had been seated at table
but so long as might suffice to ride a mile,
when there came a maiden Tiding, and a
dwarf beside her, all of a sweat for heat.
The maid was named Elene ; a lady mes-
senger was she, gentle, fair, and bright;
neither countess nor queen, though fair to
look upon, might be her peer.

The dwarf was clothed in silk of Ind j



Digitized by



H Hit fetfieaue ©eeconus

stout he was and pert ; among all Christian
kin his like might no man find. He wore
an open surcoat, his beard was yellow as
wax, his hair hung low to his girdle. His
shoes were all bedight with gold ; his
clothing was that of a knight who knew
not poverty. Teodelain he was called, and
his fame was known north and south. He
was skilled in music, on the cithole, the
psaltery, harp, and fiddle. He was a noble
teller of tales in the ladies* bower and a
merry man in his speech. He spoke to
that maiden and bade her tell their errand,
since it would brook no delay.

Then the maiden kneeled in the hall
before all the knights, and greeted them
with honour, and said to the King, " Evil
is the case of which I tell thee ; within
walls was never a sadder. The fair lady
of Sinadoun is held in close prison. She
prays thee to send her a knight good
and strong of heart who may win her
freedom."

Then up started that young knight and
said, u Arthur, my lord, if thou art true of
word, 'tis I shall venture this fight and
win that fair lady ! 99 And Arthur answered,
" That is sooth and certain, as I bear record.



Digitized byGoOgk



£tr fetfieaue ©eeconus 25

God grant thee grace and strength to uphold
that lady's right by stroke of sword."

Then began Elene to lament and say, /■ /
"Alas the day that I was sent hither! . L /5 ^
Little shall this word avail. Lord King, ■■fe-*'t * / f- l
now are thy fame and thy manhood dis- ^
honoured when thou sendest a child, wild
and witless, to deal mighty strokes, and
yet hast valiant knights, Lancelot, Perceval,
and Gawain, well proved in many a tourna-
ment ! "

Then Libeaus Desconus answered, " Yet
was I never afraid for wrath of man, and
somewhat have I learnt to fight with spear
and sword whereby men may be slain. I
wot, he that fleeth for fear, by road or street,
his body is forfeit. I will take the battle, and
never forsake it, as is Arthur's law."

Then said Arthur straightway, "By
Christ that bought me dearly thou gettest
none other knight. If thou thinkest him
not valiant enough, go, get thee a braver
where thou canst."

And the maiden for wrath and anger
would neither eat nor drink, but sat herself
down with the dwarf, all dismayed, till the
feast might be over.

Anon Arthur bade four of the chief



Digitized byGoOgk



26



$%x fetfieaue $)e*conu*



knights of the Round Table arm Libeaus
with the best arms that might be found,
and said, "Through the help of Christ
who was baptized in the flood, he shall
keep all he has promised, and be a good
champion to the lady of Sinadoun, and
uphold all her rights."

And the knights were fain to arm him.
The first was Sir Gawain, the second
Sir Perceval, the third Sir Ywayn, and
the fourth Sir Agravain (go the F rench^
talesaith^. And they put 'on' him a~shirt
oFsilk, fair and white, and a bright hauberk,
richly bedight, the mail of which was close
and small. Gawain, his own father, hung
about his neck the shield with the griffin
device, and Lancelot brought him a spear
that would stand him in good stead in
battle, and a sharp falchion. Sir Ywayn
brought him a steed, eager as a lion, good
at every need ; and a costly helmet, all of
steel, not of iron, did Sir Perceval set on
his head.

Then the knight sprang on his horse
and rode up to Arthur the King and said,
" My lord, give me now thy blessing, since
my will is to wend forth without more




And Arthur lifted upjiis hand



Digitized byGoOgk



jgitr fetfieaue ©eeeonue 27

and gave him his blessing as a courteous
king and true : " God grant thee grace
and speed thee well, that thou mayst bring
the lady out of bonds."

The maiden sprang on her palfrey, the
dwarf riding beside her ; and ever till the
third day did she mock and chide the young
knight, and said, "Coward and caitiff, though
thou vaunt thee of thy valour, yet now is
thy pride fallen. This pass before us doth
a knight keep whose fame is spread far and
wide. William of Salebranche is he called,
and with every man that cometh will he
fight, and none may endure his joust, so
doughty a warrior is he. All that ride
against him will he smite with his spear
through heart or through thigh." Then
said Libeaus Desconus, " Is his fighting so
fierce ? Hath he never been smitten ?
Whatsoever may betide I will ride to him
and see how he may sit his steed."

So the three rode together and came to
a Castle Adventurous, and upon the Vale
Perilous they saw the knight, clad in shining
armour. He bare a shield of green, whereon
were three golden lions, and was armed in
such fashion that he might deal stout strokes
to all who came against him. But when



Digitized by



28 g%t fetfieaue flDesconus

he had sight of them he rode straight towards
them and said, w Welcome, fair brother 5
he that rideth here, by day or night, must
needs fight with me or leave here his arms
in my keeping."

" Well," said Libeaus Desconus, " for
the love of God let us pass safely. Far
have we to ride, and far are we from our
friends, I and this maid, my companion."
And William answered, " Thou shalt not
escape me so ; ere thou goest we will fight
together, we two, a furlong here to the
west." Then said Libeaus, "Now I see
that it may not be otherwise, do thy best
in haste ; ride me a joust with thy spear
if thou be a skilful knight, for little time
have I for delaying."

No longer would they tarry, but at full
speed v each rode against the other. In that
joust Libeaus Desconus smote William of
Salebranche in the side with a sharp spear ;
and William sat so fast in the saddle that
his stirrup brake and the hinder bow of his
saddle, and he bowed him backward over his
horse's croup and fell to the ground. His
steed ran away, but William lay not long,
anon he started to his feet and said, " By
my faith, before to-day found I none so



Digitized byGoOgk



J}tr &t6e*u* ©esconu* 29

strong. Now my steed is gone, fight we
on foot, as thou art valiant knight." Then
Libeaus Desconus said, "Thereof shall I
be right joyful ! "

Then they drew forth their swords and
sprang each on the other, and fell and fast
they fought. So mighty were their strokes
that fire sprang forth from their helmets.
But William of Salebranche smote Libeaus
Desconus through his shield, so that a can-
tell thereof fell to the ground ; and Libeaus
took that sorely to heart. Then as noble
knight and valiant warrior he smote and
shore off the crest of William's helmet,
and with the point of his sword he shaved
off his beard and came nigh to cutting his
flesh. Then William smote him again so
fiercely that his sword brake in two, and
he cried aloud, " For the love of St. Mary
let me pass alive, for it were great villainy
to slay an unarmed knight."

Then said Libeaus Desconus, " Thy life
shalt thou not have, save that ere we two
part thou swearest me an oath. Kneel
down in haste, and swear on my sword
that thou wilt wend thy way to Arthur
and say, u Lord of renown, as one overcome
and a prisoner a knight hath sent me hither;



Digitized by



3° Sit &i6e*u* ©esconus

Libeaus Desconus is he called, of kith and
kin unknown." Then William fell on his
knees and sware even as the young knight
bade him.

Thus they departed from each other,
and William went on his way to Arthur's
hall. And as it chanced that self-same day
he met with three proud knights — his sister's
sons were they — and when they saw William
bleed they made great lamentation, as men
much dismayed.

And they said, " Uncle, who hath done
thee this shame and wounded thee so sorely ? "
And he answered, " By St. James, naught
is he to blame for that, he is a good and valiant
knight ; a dwarf had he for squire and a
right fair maiden with him. But one thing
grieveth me sore : he hath made me swear
upon his sword to rest neither day nor
night till I come before King Arthur ; for
I must yield me prisoner, as one overcome
by his own knight, and bear neither shield
nor spear against him. All this have I
promised."

Then said the three knights, "Of a
sooth thou shalt be well avenged. He
alone against us three will not be worth a
straw to hold the battle. Wend forth, uncle,



Digitized byGoOgk



£tr &i6eau0 ©eeconue 31

and do thine oath. By the Rood we will
assail the traitor ere he pass this forest,
though his armour be good ! "

Now leave we speaking of William, who
went on his way toward Arthur the King,
and hearken, lordings, to the fair and gallant
fighting of these three knights :

Without delaying they armed them well
in iron and steel and leapt on their steeds
and rode forth to slay that young knight.
But hereof Libeaus knewnaught, as he rode
gently on his way. He and that maiden
bright made great game and solace together.
She cried him mercy for the villainy that
she spake against him, and he forgave her
that trespass. The dwarf was their squire,
and served them far and near of all that
was needful to them.

At morning, when it was day, they went
on their journey towards Sinadoun. Then
they saw three knights in shining armour
ride out of Karlown. All armed were they
to the teeth, mounted on bay-brown steeds.
Each one had sworn his death, and cried to
him, " Thief, turn again and fight, or leave
here thy renown ! "

Then Libeaus Desconus cried, "I am
ready to ride against ye all ! " As a prince



Digitized byGoOgk



3* £tr &i6e*u* ©esconus

in pride he spurred his steed towards them ;
the eldest brother — Sir Gower was his
name — bare a spear against him, but Libeaus
smote him so fiercely that he brake his thigh,
and ever after he went lame. The knight
groaned for pain, and Libeaus smote him
down to the ground. The dwarf Teodelain
took the steed by the rein and leapt into
the saddle and rode to where that fair maid,
Elene, sat. Then the maiden laughed aloud
and said, " This young knight is in sooth a
champion for my choice ! "

Then the middle brother came riding
swiftly, upon a steed strong and eager as
a lion, thinking to fell Libeaus adown.
As one out of wit he smote the young
knight on the helmet with a sharp falchion,
and so mighty was his stroke that the sword
clave through helm and basnet till it touched
his crown.

Then was Libeaus angered when he felt
on his head the sharp edge of the steel, and
he brandished his sword as a warrior wild
and wood,* cleaving all that he might hit.
"Alas," he said, "one against two is no fair
fight ! " for both the knights now smote

♦ Wood a Mad.



Digitized byGoOgk



£tr &t6e*u* ©esconus 33

fiercely at him, and he with grim strokes
withstood them well.

Then these knights saw that they had
no might to fight against so fierce a foe,
and they yielded up their spears and shields
to Sir Libeaus and cried him mercy. And
Libeaus answered, "Nay, thou shalt not
so escape me, but thou and thy two brethren
shall here plight me your faith to wend
to King Arthur and say, 4 Lord of renown,
a knight hath hither sent us, overcome and
prisoners, to dwell in your bonds and to
yield you tower and town for ever.' And
but ye will so do, I shall slay you three ere
it be night !" Then the knights sware that
they would go to Arthur, and plighted their
troth thereto.

Thus they departed, and Sir Libeaus and
that fair maidfen rode gaily together until
the third day. And ever they rode west-
ward, through the wild forest, toward Sina-
doun ; and when night fell and they would
rest, since there was no town near at hand,
with their keen swords they made them a
bower of leaves in the green groves and
dwelt therein all night.

But the dwarf awoke oft, fearing lest a
thief should come and take their horses

c



Digitized by



34 £tr &i6eau* ©e*conu*

with guile. And he began to quake with
dread, for he saw a great fire scarce half a
mile away. " Arise, he said, "young knight,
and get thee to horse, for I doubt me there
is peril near. I hear a great noise and I
smell the smell of roasting."

Then Libeaus leapt on his charger and
took shield and spear and rode towards the
fire. And when he drew near he saw two
giants; grisly they were of countenance,
the one was red and loathly and the other
black as pitch. And the black giant held
clasped in his arm a maiden as bright as
blossom on bough. The red giant was
turning a wild boar on a spit before the
fire, which burnt brightly. The maiden
cried aloud that some man should come to
her aid, and said, " Alas, that ever I saw
this day, that I should sit with two fiends !
Now help me, Mary mild, for love of thy
dear Son, lest I be brought to shame ! "

Then said Sir Libeaus, " By St. James,
'twere a fair emprise to save this maiden
from shame ! and yet 'twere no child's play
to fight with the twain, they be both so
grim and grisly!" Then he rode at
them, spear in rest, as a skilful knight,
and smote the black giant through liver,



Digitized byGoOgk



Sit &i6e*u* ©esconus 35

lungs, and heart, that he might rise up no
more.

Then that fair maiden fled, thanking
the Queen of Heaven who had sent her
such succour. And the maid, Elene, came
with her dwarf, and with goodwill took
her by the hand and led her into the grove
to their bower of leaves ; and they prayed
Christ to help Libeaus Desconus, that he
be not overcome in the strife.

But the red giant smote at Sir Libeaus
with the boar that was on the spit as one
that is beside himself; and he set such
sore strokes upon him that the knight's
courser fell dead to the ground. B ut Libeaus
leapt swiftly out of his saddle, even as a
spark from a burning brand, and eager as
a lion he fought with his falchion to give
the giant his desert. The giant ever fought
till his spit brake in two, and he caught a
tree in his hand and tare it up to fight
against his foe, and with the end of the
tree he smote Sir Libeaus 9 shield into three
pieces. Then was Libeaus in woe ; but ere
the giant could heave the tree up again the ^
knight, with a mighty stroke, smote off his cA &
right arm. The giant fell to the ground, and
Libeaus, with no delay, smote off his head.



Digitized byGoOgk



3* Sit &i6eau0 ©eeconue

So were the two giants slain. And the
knight took the heads and gave thejn to
the maiden for whom he had fought that
fight. And the maiden was glad and blithe,
and many a time she thanked God that ever
he had been made a knight.

Then said Libeaus, "Gentle lady, tell
me thy name and where thou wert born."
And she said, "My father dwelleth near
by ; he is of great fame, an earl, an old hoar
knight who hath been a mighty man in
his day ; Sir Antore is his name. Men
call me Violette, and for me have these
giants aforetime beset our castle. Yester-
day, at eventide, I went forth on my playing,
thinking no evil, when of a sudden the giants
sprang out of a cave and brought me to this
fire. I had been lost had not God, Who
made this world, sent me succour."

Without any more talking they gat them
to horse and rode all together. And Libeaus
told the earl, Sir Antore, tidings, how in
fair fight he had slain the giants and rescued
his daughter from woe and shame. The |
two heads he sent with much joy as a present
to Arthur the King. Then nrst arose in
the Court the praise and feme of Sir Libeaus
Desconus.



Digitized byGoOgk



&ir fetfieaue ©esconu*



37



And Sir Antore was blithe, and proffered
him his daughter, that fair maiden Violette,
to wife, with fifteen castles, and all his lands
for ever after his death. Then said Libeaus
Desconus, "Nay, no wife may I take as
yet ; I must needs journey farther with
this fair maiden, therefore I bid ye farewell."
But Sir Antore for his good deeds would
give him gifts — rich garments, a shield and
shining armour, and a noble steed strong
and doughty in battle.

So they rode forth all three towards the
fair city of Kardevyle, for so was it named.
They saw in a park a stout and strong
castle, royal in fashion. Such an one had
they never seen before : 'twas built of lime
and stone with battlements all about. " Oh,"
said Libeaus, "here were a worthy prize for
a valiant knight ! "

Then that maiden laughed aloud and
said, "He who owneth that castle is the ,
best knight here about. He that will fight
with him, be it by day or by night, he



who is passing fair, he hath made it to be
cried aloud that he will give a ger-falcon,
white as a swan, to any knight who shall
bring with him a fairer lady; but if the



layeth him low.




Digitized by



Google



38 £iy feffieau* ©esconu*

maiden be not so fair, then her knight shall
fight with Giffroun, and ill shall he speed,
for his head shall be smitten off and set on
a spear-shaft that it may be seen far and
wide. Thyself canst see full well how on
tach battlement there stand one or two
heads." Then said Libeaus swiftly, "By
St. Michael, I will fight with Giffroun and
challenge the ger-falcon, and say that I
have in this town a lady as fair as his ! and
if he wills to see her, then will I show thee
to him!"

The dwarf said, "Gentle Sir Libeaus
Desconus, that were a great peril ; Sir
. Giffroun hath arts whereby to beguile the
knights who would fight with him." But
Libeaus answered, "Thereof have I no
care. I will see his face ere I pace west-
ward a mile from this city." Without more
speech they rode into the town and took
them a lodging, and lay in peace that night.

At morn Libeaus was fain to win him
renown, and he rose without delay and
armed him full surely in the self-same
armour that Sir Antore had given him.
Then he bestrode his steed, and, with the
dwarf beside him, rode towards that proud
palace.



Digitized byGoOgk



£%t fetfieaue Oesconu* 39

Sir Giffroun arose, as was his use, in the
early morning, and when he came forth
from his castle he saw Libeaus Desconus
come pricking as a prince in pride ; and
without more ado he rode towards him,
crying in a loud voice, " Comest thou for
good or for ill ? Tell me, and hide naught
from me."

Then said Libeaus, " I have great desire
to fight with thee, for thou doest maidens
a despite in saying that there be no lady
half so fair as thy mistress. I have in this
town one fairer of face when she is fitly
robed, therefore shall I bear thy ger-falcon
to Arthur the crowned king."

Then said Giffroun, "Gentle knight,
how shall we prove the which of them be
the fairer? And Libeaus answered, "In
Kardevyle city, that each man may see
them, there let them be set in the market-
place, for all, bond and free, to look upon ;
and if my lady be not fair, then will I fight
with thee for the ger-falcon." Then said
Giffroun swiftly, "All this I grant thee well.
To-day at underne-tide will I ride to the
city." And they held up their gloves as
pledges each to the other.

No longer would Sir Libeaus abide, but



Digitized by



4° §btt &i6eaus ©esconue

rode home to his lodging and bade Maid
Elene clothe herself in her fairest robes ;
" for Giffroun's lady shall to-day come to
the town, and there, in the midst of the
city, shall men look upon ye both, and if
thou be not so fair, then will I fight with
Giffroun to win the ger-falcon."

Anon Maid Elene tired herself in a robe
of samite, with white kerchiefs wrought
with gold wire. About her neck she cast
a velvet mantle, furred with gris and grey,
and on her head she set a circlet of gold,
with stones, the best in that land.

Then Sir Libeaus set the maiden on her
palfrey and the three rode forth, and all
men who saw them said, "Here cometh
a lady, gay and goodly to look upon."
Into the market midway of the city she
rode, and then she stayed her palfrey.

Then they saw Giflroun come riding
with two squires and no greater following.
He bare a shield, gules, with three owls of
silver, and the border thereof was gold ;
of no other colour were his armour and I
trappings. One squire led before him on <
a steed three shafts, good and sure ; the
other bare the white ger-falcon that was
laid to wager. After him a lady came



i

Digitized byGoOgk



JJtr &t6e*us ©esconu* 4 1

riding in her pride, all clothed in purple

pall. From far and wide the folk came

to look upon her, so graceful and slender

was she. Her mantle was furred with

ermine, rich and royal ; on her head she

ware a golden circlet wherein was many a

jewel. Her cheeks were red as the rose ;

her hair on her head shone bright as gold

wire ; her brows were even as a silken

thread ; her nose was straight, her eyes

grey as glass, her skin milk-white (so said 6 j <^m.*^l

they who saw her) ; her neck was long and

slender ; no man might tell all her beauty.

Then they set them together in the
midst of the market-place that all might
behold them. And all, young and old,
said, of a truth and without lying, no com-
parison might there be, for Giffroun's lady
was fair as the rose on the bough, and
beside her Maid Elene was but as one of
her waiting-women.

Then said Giffroun, " Sir Libeaus Des-
conus, the hawk hast thou lost." And
Libeaus answered, "Nay, such yiras never
mine use ; a joust will I ride for it, and
if thou nearest me down, then hast thou
mine head, and the falcon as aforetime ;
and if I bear thee down, then shall the



Digitized byGoOgk



42 §bxt fetfieau* Oesconug

hawk go with me, maugre thine hoar
head!"

They rode forth to the field, and a great
folk with them. With spears strong and
sharp did they smite each other on the
shield so that the shafts brake, and their
blows sounded as thunder that cometh out
of the sky ; and with drums and trumpets
and loud-voiced heralds did the people ac-
claim their strokes.

Then Sir Giffroun spoke, "Bring me
here a shaft that will not break, a shaft
with a cornall !* This young valiant
knight is as fast in his saddle as a stone
in the castle wall ; yet though he be as
mighty a warrior as Alexander or Arthur,
Lancelot or Perceval, I will make him
stoop over his horse's croup and give him
an evil fall."

The two knights rode together at full
speed, and Libeaus smote Giffroun so that
his shield fell from his grasp on to the
field. And all that saw it laughed and said,
of a truth, duke, earl, or baron, never
before had they seen the man who might
stand a Joust with Giffroun.

Sir Giffroun was mad out of wit that

* A broad steel point.



Digitized byGoOgk



§bxt &t6e*us Oesconus 43

he might no better speed. Then he rode
again, and smote Libeaus even as one
beside himself, but Libeaus sat so fast that
he smote down both Giffroun and his steed,
and Giffroun's leg brake so that all men
around heard the crack.

Then all that were there said that Giffroun
had lost the hawk, and they bare it to Sir
Libeaus, and great and small went back
with him to the city. With care and
rueful moan was Sir Giffroun borne on
his shield to his castle. The white ger-
falcon was sent by the hand of a knight
named Gludas to Arthur, the crowned
King, and with him he bare written all
the adventure how Libeaus had won the
hawk. And when Arthur had heard it
read he said to his knights, "Libeaus
warreth well : since he first began he hath
sent me the proof of four noble deeds.
Now will I send him treasure, that he may
spend as befitteth so valiant a knight.
And a hundred pounds in florins did he
send to Kardevyle. There Libeaus held
a feast forty days for lords of renown.

Then Libeaus and Elene, the maid, took
their leave of duke, earl, and baron to wend
into another country on their way to Sina-



Digitized by



44 §bit fetfieaue flDeeconue

doun. As they were riding on a hill they
heard a blowing of horns there below the
down, and the sound of a great hunt and
of many hounds running in the vale. And
the dwarf said, " Of a sooth I have known
that horn well for many a year past : 'tis
Sir Otis de Lisle bloweth it, he who whilom
served my lady while she was in fair estate,
but when she was taken by guile he fled
for the great peril westward into Wales ! 99

As they rode talking, a brachet* came
running across their way, and all said 'twas
the fairest hound they had ever beheld, for
he was of all colours, even as the flowers
that blossom between May and Midsummer.
The maiden said swiftly, "Never saw I
any jewel that pleased me better ; I would
I had him for mine own ! "

Straightway Sir Libeaus caught the brachet
and gave him to Maid Elene. And they rode
on together, speaking ever of knightly deeds
done for the sake of fair maidens.

Scarce had they ridden a mile in that
green forest when they saw a hind come
flying, followed by two greyhounds. And
Sir Libeaus and the maiden drew bridle

* A small hound, often referred to in Mediaeval Romances
as a pet of noble ladies.



Digitized byGoOgk



J£ir fetfleaue flDeeconue 45

under a linden to see the course of the
hind. Then they saw come riding a knight,
on a bay charger, clothed in silk of Inde.
He gave a blast on his bugle, that his folk
should know where he might be, and spoke
courteously : " Sir, that brachet was mine
own for seven years past ; let him go,
friends." But Libeaus answered, "That
shall never betide, for with mine own two
hands I gave him to the maiden who rideth
with me."

Then said Sir Otis de Lisle, "If thou
abide by that word, then art thou in peril."
And Libeaus answered, "Chide an thou
wilt, churl ; I care naught for thy threats."

Sir Otis de Lisle spake, "111 words be
those, Sir Knight ; churl was never my name.
An earl was my father, and my mother
Countess of Carlisle. Were I but armed
ready as thou art we would fight, here and
now ; but an thou leavest me not the
brachet, thou shalt play a wonder wild game
ere it be eventide ! "

Then said Libeaus swiftly, "Thereof
do thy best ; thy brachet shall wend with
me." Then they took their way westward
through the wild forest, even as the dwarf
guided them.



Digitized by



4 6 £ir fetfieaue flDeeconue

But the lord rode in great haste home to
his tower, and called his friends together,
and told them how one of Arthur's knights
had shamefully entreated him and taken
from him his brachet. Then they said, all
and several, "That traitor shall be taken
and never again return home, aye, even
though he were a doughtier champion than
Lancelot of the Lake." Then they did
on them their armour, with swords and
halberds, as if war should awake, and knights
and squires leapt on their chargers for their
lord's honour.

Upon a high hill they saw Sir Libeaus
riding gently, and they cried loudly upon
him, " Traitor, thou shalt die for this thy
wicked trespass." And Sir Libeaus beheld
and saw that the field was full and that there
was a great people, and he said, "Maid Elene,
I ween we are in an evil case for this our
brachet. I rede that ye withdraw your-
selves into the wood and hide your heads,
for though I should be slain, yet were I
fain to abide their onset."

Into the wood they rode, but Libeaus
abode in the open as an adventurous knight
in pride j and his foemen shot fast at him
with bows and cross-bows and made wide



Digitized byGoOgk



§bxt fetfieaue ©eeconue 47

wounds ; and Libeaus spurred his steed
towards them and bare down horse and
man, sparing none, so that the folk said,
" This is the fiend Satan, who will destroy
mankind ! " for whom Libeaus smote, after
the first stroke he slept for evermore. But
soon he was beset as in a net, and sore and
grimly wounded ; for he saw come swiftly
through the forest twelve knights in bright
armour. All day they had lain at rest, and
thought to slay Libeaus the knight. The
twelve were all armed alike and one was
Sir Otis himself; and they smote all at
once, thinking to strike Sir Libeaus down
and break his bones.

Then might men hear loud clang of arms
and the ring of sword-blades. So fiercely
did they fight that the sparks sprang from
shield and helmet. Sir Libeaus slew three
of his foes, and four durst not draw nigh
him but fled ; but the lord and his four
sons abode there to sell their lives dearly.

And the blows fell thickly, for the one
knight against the five fought as if he were
wood. The blood ran from his wounds as
water over a rock j well-nigh had they
borne him down, for his sword brake at
the hilt. Then was he mad of mood, for



Digitized by



48 JUit fetfieaue ©eeconue

the lord dealt him a stroke through helm
and basnet that the blade stood fast in his
shield, so that he fell swooning as one dead
on his saddle-bow, and his foemen thought
to pierce through his armour, mail and
hauberk. Then as he smarted sorely he
took heart once more and bethought him,
all but too late, of the axe that hung ready
at his hinder saddle-bow. And he bestirred
him as a knight, and he smote three mighty
strokes, and at each stroke he smote off the
head of a steed.

The lord saw that sight, and he turned
his horse and fled swiftly. But Libeaus
rode after him, and had slain him under a
chestnut-tree but that Sir Otis yielded to
him to be at his will, with his treasure, his
lands, and his castles. And Sir Libeaus
thereto agreed if he would ride to King
Arthur and say, " Lord of renown, I am
overcome and prisoner to thine honour."
Then Sir Otis granted him his will and
led him to his tower.

Anon fifteen knights fetched Maid Elene
to the castle, and she and the dwarf told
all the bold deeds of Sir Libeaus Desconus,
how they had befallen, and how he had
sent four such presents to King Arthur



Digitized byGoOgk



JJtt fetfieauB ©eeconue 49

that he had won praise and honour. And
the lord was glad and blithe, and would
have Sir Libeaus abide with him in all
honour till his wounds were healed.



Jow leave we Sir Otis de
Lisle and tell of other
tales, how Sir Libeaus
rode many a mile and
met with many a stern
adventure in Ireland and
in Wales.

It befell in the month
of June, when the fennel
hangeth green in many
a goodly hall, when the
summer day is long and the song of the
birds gay and the notes of the nightingale
are heard, that Sir Libeaus came riding by
a riverside and saw a great city with a
proud palace and high castles and many
a great gate. Then he asked what the
city might be, and Maid Elene answered,
" Sir, I will tell thee : men call it L'lle
d'Or. Here hath been more fighting than
elsewhere in my country, for the land is



Digitized by



s° §it fetfieaue flDeeconue

in dismay because of a noble lady, fair
as the rose on the bough. A giant named
Maugis, who hath no equal, hath beset her
about. He is black as pitch (none was ever
like him), stern and fierce in deed ; whoso
passeth the bridge must lay down his arms
and do homage to the giant."

Then said Sir Libeaus, "Maid, I shall
not wend hence for his ill strokes. If God
give me grace, ere this day end, I shall
have felled him in fight. Oft have I seen
great oaks fall before the blast while that
the small trees have stood fast. Though I
be young and light yet will I smite him."

They rode forth all three towards the
city called by men LTle d'Or. On the
bridge of wood they saw Maugis, fierce
as any wild boar. His shield and armour
were black as pitch ; thereon he bare three
devils* in shining gold. He held in his
hand shield and spear, and cried despite-
fully, " Say, thou fellow in white, who art
thou ? Turn thee home again quickly for

* The original word is Mammettes which probably =
Mahomet*. Our forefathers mistakenly believed the
Saracens to be idolaters, and credited them with worshipping
not only their great prophet Mahomet, but all the gods of
classical antiquity.



Digitized byGoOgk



JJtr fetfieau* flDeeconue 5 1

thine own profit if thou West thy renown ! "
Sir Libeaus answered, " Arthur made me
a knight, and to him I made vow that I
would never turn me back from any fight ;
therefore, thou devil in black, make thee
ready!"

With that Sir Libeaus and Maugis, on
their good steeds, rode straightway at each
other. Both lords and ladies leant forth
from the tower windows to see that goodly
fight ; and they prayed with goodwill,
both loud and low, " Help Libeaus the
knight, and grant that that vile giant who
believes in Termagaunt may die this day."

Then their blows rang as thunder, and
the shafts flew in pieces. All men wondered
that Libeaus had not been borne under
in the first shock. They drew their
swords as men that were wroth and went
each for the other. And Libeaus smote
Maugis so that his shield fell from his
hand and flew afar into the field. But
Maugis was cunning in the wiles of war,
and he smote the knight's steed so that the
brains fell out on the ground, and the steed
fell down dead. Libeaus said no word, but
started up again and took the axe that hung
at his saddle-bow, and with it he smote a



Digitized by



5* JJtt fetfieaue ©eeconue

stroke of might and clave through the neck
of Maugis' steed and smote asunder bone
and gristle so that the head fell on the
plain.

Then they began to fight afoot as mighty
men of war, and no man might fitly tell of
the blows that passed between them, for
they fought from the hour of prime till it
was already evensong. Then Sir Libeaus
thirsted sore, and he said to Maugis, u Let
me drink, and I will grant thee any such-
like boon as thou mayest ask of me ; 'twere
great shame and little profit to slay a knight
for thirst." And Maugis granted him his
will to drink his fill without hindrance or
despite ; but as Libeaus lay on the river
bank and drank through his helmet, Maugis
smote him a stroke that he fell into the
river and wetted all his armour.

Then the knight started up swiftly and
said, " By St. Michael, now am I twice as
light as I was before ! What dost thou,
foul fiend, who wast unchristened till I met
thee in fight? For this baptism shall I
right well repay thee ! "

Then they began to fight anew, and
either ran upon the other and dealt him
heavy blows. Many a gentle knight and



Digitized byGoOgk



JNtr fetfieaue fl&eeconue 53

fair lady wrung their hands for Sir Libeaus,
for Maugis carved his shield in twain. But
Libeaus ran to where on the field lay the
giant's shield that he had smitten from his
hand earlier in the fight, and caught it up
and ran again on his foe with strokes great
and grim. So they fought a bitter battle
on that river's brink till it was dim with
the dusk of evening. Then Libeaus smote
a stroke of might through hauberk, mail,
and shoulder-bone, so that Maugis' right
arm fell from him on to the field. The
giant seeing that he would be slain turned
and fled, but Libeaus followed hard after
him, and with three stern strokes he clave
his back asunder, so that he fell dead. And
the knight smote off his head, and joyful
of his victory bare it with him into the
town, and the folk all came to meet him
in fair procession.

They came to the palace, and a lady,
white as a flower, who was called La Dame
tfJmoury received Sir Libeaus well, and
thanked him that he had been her succour
against that evil giant. She led him to a
chamber, and did off* his armour, and clad
him in fair attire, and bade him be lord of
herself, her city, and her castle. And the



Digitized by



54 JJtr fetfieaue flDeeconue

knight granted her prayer, and cast his love
upon her, for she was wondrous fair. Alas
that he did so, for much loss it caused him !
Twelve months and more he abode there,
and never might he go forth to help the
lady of Sinadoun.

For this lady knew much of sorcery,
more than any other five. She made him
melody with all manner of minstrelsy that
can be thought of. When he saw her face
he thought himself in Paradise, with spells
and witchery so did she blind his eyes ; till
it fell on a day that he met Maid Elene
within that castle tower, and she spake to
him, saying, " Sir knight, tbou art false to
King Arthur. For love of a woman skilled
in sorcery thou doest thyself great dishonour !
The lady of Sinadoun lieth o'er long in prison
and great is the pity of it ! "

When Sir Libeaus heard her so speak his
heart was like to break for sorrow and
shame. By an unlatched postern he. stole
away from that fair lady, and took with
him his steed, his shield, and his goodly
armour, and so rode forth ; and the steward
— Giflet was his name— he made his squire.

They rode as swift as might be on
their journey, till on the third day they



Digitized byGoOgk



§bix fetfleaue ©eeconue 55

saw that fair city of Sinadoun with its high
castle and proud palace built in wondrous
fashion. But Libeaus Desconus wondered
him much of a custom that he saw there,
for all the filth and off-scouring of the city
that was cast outside the walls did the folk
gather together. And the knight said, " Tell
me, Maid Elene, what meaneth this ? Me-
thinks they do amiss to gather together that
which they have already cast forth ! "

Then said Maid Elene, "Sir knight, the
meaning will I tell thee. No knight findeth
lodging here save at the will of the steward,
whom men call Sir Lambard, Constable of
this castle. Ride thou to yonder gate and ask
entrance courteously, and ere he grant thy
prayer a joust will he ride with thee. If
he bear thee down then shall his trumpets
be blown, and throughout the city men
and maidens shall throw on thee the dirt
which thou seest them gather ; and then
to thy life's end wherever thou goest shalt
thou be held for a coward, and through
thy deed shall King Arthur be reft of his
honour."

Then said Sir Libeaus, "That were a
great despite for any man living. To profit
King Arthur and to aid the lady will I



Digitized by



;6 Sit fetfieaue flDeeconu*

joust with him. Sir Giflet, make thee
ready ; thither will we fare blithe and
speedily."

Then with spear-shafts five they rode
even to the castle gate and asked hostelry
for adventurous knights. And the porter
let them within swiftly and asked who
might be their lord, and they answered,
"King Arthur, who is the man most
mighty against his foes, the well of courtesy,
and flower of chivalry."

And the porter went and told his tale
thus to his lord the Constable, " Sir, there
be come two bold knights of the Round
Table, and the one is well armed in rose-
red armour, with three lions of gold."
And Lambard was fain to hear the tidings,
and sware an oath that he would joust
with him ; and he bade them make ready
to fare into the field without the castle
gate. Then the porter ran as swiftly as
greyhound after the hare and said, "Ye
adventurous knights, let nothing hinder
you, but see that your shields be strong
and your shafts stout, and ride into the
field, for my lord cometh to joust with
you." Libeaus spake boldly, "That is a
tale well pleasing to my hearing." Into



Digitized byGoOgk



JJtr fetfieaue ©eeconue 57

the field they rode and drew bridle, and
waited even as beasts brought to bay.

Then the Constable bade them bring
him his steed, his shield, and his goodly
armour. Fair was his attire ; his shield
was of fine gold ; the boar's head thereon
black as a burnt brand ; the border thereof
was ermine ; there was none so cunning of
device 'twixt Carlisle and Kent. And all
his armour and trappings were of the same
fashion, fair and well wrought. His spear
was strong withal, and the cornall broad to
deal mighty blows.

And when that gallant steward, Sir
Lambard, was armed at all points, he rode
into the field, light as a leopard. There
the knights awaited him. Sir Libeaus rode
at him with spear in rest, and either smote
the other on the shield, so that their shafts
brake and the pieces flew far afield ; and all
that beheld them said each to the other,
"The young knight is keen." Sir Lambard
was sore ashamed, for never before had it
so chanced to him, and he cried, " Bring
hither a new spear, and it shall be seen if
Arthur's knight have skill."

Then he took a spear, the cornall thereor
was sharply ground, and rode straight for



Digitized by



58 git fetfieaue flDeeconue

his foe ; and either showed himself valiant
as a lion to give the other a deadly wound.
Sir Lambard smote Libeaus so that his shield
fell from him adown to the ground ; so
fierce was the blow that his shaft brake,
and the young knight might scarce sit
upright in the saddle. And Libeaus hit
Sir Lambard on the helmet so that the
fastenings broke, and helmet, vintail, and
gorget flew afar into the field, and Lambard,
upright in his saddle, rocked even as a child
without might in the cradle. And each
man who saw it took the other by the sleeve
and laughed and clapped their hands, barons,
burghers, and knights.

Again Sir Lambard thought to ride a
joust, and another helmet was brought him
and a new spear. When they met together
each smote the other in the shield with a
grimly great stroke. Sir Lambard's shaft
brake, and Sir Libeaus sat so fast in the
saddle that the steward, Sir Lambard, fell
backward off his steed, so fiercely did they
meet.

The Constable was sore ashamed. Then
said Libeaus, "Wilt thou more?" And he
answered, " Nay ; never since I was born
did I see come hither a knight so ready



Digitized byGoOgk



git fetfieaus ©eeconu* 59

to my liking. A thought have I in my
heart. Thou art surely one of Gawain's
kin, who is so gay and gallant a knight.
If thou wilt fight for my lady, then art
thou welcome to me in all faith and love."

Then Libeaus answered swiftly, "Fight
I shall for thy lady by behest of King
Arthur, but I know not wherefore, nor
why, nor who doth villainy to her, nor
what may be her grief. A maiden, who is
her messenger, and a dwarf, brought me
here to her succour." And the Constable
said, "Well found, noble Knight of the
Round Table."

Anon Maid Elene was fetched by ten
knights before Sir Lambard, and she and
the dwarf told all the valiant deeds the
knight had done on his journey thitherward,
and how that Sir Libeaus fought with foul
monsters, and spared not for fear of death.
And Sir Lambard was glad, and gave thanks
to God and St. Edward.

Thus they sat them down to supper
with much mirth and rejoicing, and Sir
Lambard and Sir Libeaus, as comrades,
spoke together of many brave adventures.
Then said Libeaus, "Sir Constable, tell me
of a truth what is the name of the knight



Digitized by



6o



who holds in prison the lady of Sinadoun,
who is so fair and gracious a maiden ? "
"Nay/' said Sir Lambert, "knight is he
none who holds her in prison, but two
clerks are her foes. False are they in flesh
and bone who have done this deed. Men
of mastery are they, versed in all magic
spells. Mabon is the one called, and his
brother, Yrain, and we go in dread of
them both. This Mabon and Yrain have
made of our city a palace of cunning device.
There is no knight or baron, be he bold as
a lion, who durst enter therein. This have
they done by magic and fafiry j and the
lady of Sinadoun, who comes of a noble
kin, do they hold within, a prisoner. Often
do we hear her cries, but have no power to
behold hen By day and night do they



have sworn to do her to death save that
she promises to do Mabon's will and yield
to him all her rights. The lady comes of
a noble kin and is heir to this fair dukedom.
Meek she is and debonnaire y therefore we
are in despair lest evil befall her." Said
Libeaus Desconus, "By God's grace I shall
win that lady from Mabon and Yrain and
put them both to an open shame."



torment




The two



Digitized byGoOgk



J£t'r fetfieaus ©eeconu* 61

Then they took their rest in the castle
that night, and the morrow Libeaus arose,
fresh and ready to fight, and did on his
best armour. And Sir Lambard led him
forth and brought him to the palace gate,
and they found it open, but neither earl,
baron, nor knight durst bare him company
farther, but turned them home again, save
his squire, Sir Giflet, who would ride with
him. But Sir Libeaus bade him also turn
again and he sware an oath, if they would
abide him in the castle they should see him
anon. Then they rode back to the castle,
and cried on God that He would send them
glad tidings of them that had so long held
their lady captive.

Sir Libeaus, that courteous knight, rode
into the palace and alighted at the great
hall. There, before the high daYs, he saw
minstrels with trumpets and shawms. In
the midst of the hall was a great fire that
burnt brightly. He led in his steed, that
was wont to aid him in fight. Then he
began to pace through the chambers within
the palace, but of great or small he saw no
one, neither body nor face, save only min-
strels clad in silk, who made merry with
harp, fiddle, organ, cithole, and psaltery.



Digitized by



62 gxt fetfie&u* ©egconu*

So much melody was never within walls.
Before each minstrel stood a torch burning
brightly.

Ever farther he went, seeking for one
who should fight with him. He sought in
the corners and looked on the pillars that
were strange to see. Of jasper were they
and fine crystal, pillars and walls alike,
none richer had he ever seen. Of brass
were all the doors ; the windows of glass
adorned with fair imagery ; all painted was
the hall ; never had he seen its like. Then
he sat him down on the daYs, and lo ! the
music was stayed, the torches that burnt
so brightly were quenched, and all the
minstrels vanished. The doors and windows
throughout the hall rattled as at the voice
of thunder $ the daYs shook and the earth
quaked ; the stones from out the wall fell
on him as he sat, and the roof above his
head gaped wide as if it would rend
asunder.

As he sat thus dismayed he heard horses
neigh, and said to himself, well pleased,
" Yet may I hope to fight ! " He looked
forth into a field, and there he saw two
come riding, well armed with shield and
spear. All their armour and trappings



Digitized byGoOgk



$%t fetfieaue ©eeconu* 63

were of purple Inde, gay with golden gar-
lands. Then one rode into the hall and
began to call aloud, " Sir Knight Adven-
turous, proud though thou mayst be, yet
must thou needs fight with us. . Cunning
must thou be of wile if thou wouldst win
that fair lady ! "

Then said Libeaus, " With the help or
God, ready am I to fight ! " With good-
will he sprang into his saddle, lance in hand
he rode swiftly against him, for all his
desire was to fell his foe in the field. When
they met together they smote each other
doughty strokes on their shields. Mabon's
shaft flew in splinters, and he was sore
aghast and deemed himself lost. Sir Libeaus
bare him down over his horse's tail, for the
hinder bow of his saddle brake and he fell
to the ground. Well-nigh had the young
knight slain him when Yrain came riding,
with helm, hauberk, and coat of mail all*
fresh for fight, thinking by force to slay
Libeaus.

Then was Sir Libeaus 'ware of him, and
rode at him with a spear, and let his brother
lie. He smote him such a stroke that his
hauberk was all rent, and Yrain liked that
ill. Their lances brake in two, and they



Digitized by



H &xt fetfieaue ©eeconue

drew out their swords, with grim intent to
prove their might one against the other.
As they hewed at each other Mabon,
the fiercer of the two, rose up ; he saw and
knew well that Yrain smote but few strokes,
therefore he ran to aid him to slay in fight
the noble knight, Sir Libeaus. But Libeaus
fought with them both, though they were
never so wroth, and kept himself safely.

When Yrain saw Mabon he smote a
felon stroke, and struck the neck of Sir
Libeaus' steed before the saddle-bow. But
Libeaus was a skilful warrior, and he smote
off his thigh, skin, and flesh, and bone,
neither his armour nor his enchantments,
nor his spells might help him aught ; down
he fell, a sorry sight !

Libeaus lighted adown to fight on foot
with Mabon, such strokes they gave each
other that the sparks sprang out bright from
shield and helmet ; and as their swords
clashed together, Mabon smote the blade
of Sir Libeaus in twain.

Sir Libeaus was sore ashamed, and angry
at heart, for he had lost his sword, and his
steed was lamed, and he feared lest he should
lose his fame before Arthur his lord. Then
he ran to Yrain, and drew out his sword,



Digitized byGoOglC



&xt fetfieau* ©eeeonu* 6$

which was keen and sharp of edge, and ran
upon Mabon, and began to fight fiercely.
No word of love was there betwixt them,
but Mabon as a furious lion ever sought to
slay Libeaus. Then Libeaus smote down
his shield with the sword that he took from
Yrain, and hewed off his right arm with
the shield. Then spake Mabon, "Hold
thy fell strokes, Sir Knight, and I will yield
me to thy will in all truth and loyalty ; and
thou shalt have that lady whom I hold in
my power. For through the stroke of that
sword have I lost mine hand, and shall
surely die of the venom ; for of a truth I
poisoned both swords, thinking to slay
thee!"

Said Libeaus, " By my troth I will naught
of thy gifts, were I to win all this world
by it. But lay on thy strokes, for one ot
us shall surely slay the other."

Then Mabon and Sir Libeaus fell to-
gether again, and stinted their blows for
naught ; but Libeaus was the mightier of
the two, and cleft Mabon's helmet and his
head in twain.

When Mabon was thus slain he ran,
sword in hand, to where he had left Yrain,
thinking to cleave his head also. But when

B



Digitized by



66 &it fetfieaus ©eeconue

he came there his foe had been borne away,
whither he wist not ; he sought him in all
the chambers, and when he found him not
he held himself betrayed, and said in himself,
" For this shall I pay dearly, that he has
thus escaped me." On his knees fell that
gentle knight, and prayed to the Blessed
Virgin to shield him from sorcery. And
as he prayed thus in the hall the casement
of one of the windows fell open, downwards,
and a great wonder seized upon him as he
beheld, for a worm came forth from the
wall, with the face of a woman, young and
fair. Her body and wings were bright and
shining like gold, hideous was her tail, and
her paws grim and great. Libeaus began
to sweat with fear, so sorely terrified was
he that he dare not arise, not even though
the place had been afire. And ere he wist
the worm had coiled about his neck, and
kissed him on the mouth, and even as she
kissed him, behold the tail and wings fell
off from her, and the fairest woman he had
ever seen stood before him naked and
trembling !

She said, " Gentle knight, my foes hast
thou slain ; two evil clerks who would have
done me to death. East, north and south,



Digitized byGoOgk



JH? fetfieau* ©egconue 67

many a man could they harm by their
spells. A worm did they make me by their
enchantments, to dwell in woe till I had
kissed Gawain, or some other knight of his
kin. And since thou hast saved my life
fifteen castles will I give thee, and myself
to be thy wife, if it be Arthur's will."

Then Sir Libeaus was glad and blithe ;
and he leapt on his steed, and left that lady,
for ever he feared Yrain, since he was not
slain, that he would harm him by his spells.
To the castle gate he rode, and drew rein,
and told Lambard and the other knights
how it had gone with him, how Mabon
was slain and Yrain wounded ; and how
that fair lady by their enchantments had
been made into a worm j how, through the
kiss of a knight, she had been turned again
into a maiden, goodly to look upon. — " But
she stood before me naked, and said, ' Now
am I sure that we may abide in peace,
since my foemen, Mabon and Yrain, are
slain.'"

When Sir Libeaus had told the Constable
all this adventure, he bade them bring forth
a purple robe, furred with grey, cauls, and
rich kerchiefs, and sent them to his lady
without delaying. And when she was



Digitized by



68 J$tt fetfieau* ©esconu*

ready dight she rode forth, and all the
people of the city went in fair procession
to bring her into the town. And when
she was come into the city they set on her
head a crown of gold and precious stones,
and were glad and blithe, and gave thanks
to God that her woe was ended. And all
the lords did homage and fealty unto her,
as was her right ; thus Libeaus won that
fair lady out of the devil's net.

Seven nights did they sojourn with Lam-
bard in his tower, and then they went with
honour and great rejoicing to the noble
King Arthur. And Arthur and his knights
thanked God that Sir Libeaus had not been
put to shame ; and Arthur gladly gave that
fair lady to Sir Libeaus to wife.

The joy of that bridal is told in no tale
and recounted in no geste. Barons and
lords and noble ladies came to that fair hall ;
there was rich service, for great and small
alike, of all that men could desire. The
minstrels in hall and bower and the wan-
dering folk had rich gifts. Forty days they
dwelt with Arthur the King, and held
their feast, as the French tale saith, and
then Arthur with his gallant knights rode
with them to their land. For many years



Digitized byGoOgk



&t'0e<itte ©e«conu« 69

they dwelt in joy and gladness, Sir Libeaus
and that sweet lady.. May Christ our
Savtour, and the fair Maid, His Mother,
grant us a like good ending. '



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



SIR CLEGES.

1. Page 3.— Sir C leges, A knight of a similar name,
Clegis, is mentioned by Malory among the Knights of
the Round Table, Morte Arthur, Books V., c. 9, and
XIX., c. 12, but no hint of the story attaching to him is
given. One of Chretien de Troyes' earliest metrical
romances has for hero a certain Cliges, nephew to the
Emperor of Constantinople, and son of Sir Gawain's
sister. He is, also, a Knight of the Round Table, but'
the story told of him and his love for his uncle's wife,
Phenice, is apparently of Oriental origin, a variant of
the tale of Salomon and Markolf. Though by no
means an unfavourable specimen of Chretien's style, the
poem of Cliges does not appear to have won anything like
the popularity enjoyed by Erec, Yvain, or Perceval, and
references to the characters and incidents of the romance
are rare in contemporary literature. It does not seem
probable that the hero of our fabliau, who is represented
as being of full manhood in the reign of Arthur's father,
and before Arthur's birth, can be in any way connected
with the Cliges of Chretien, who, as mentioned above, is
son to Sir Gawain's sister, and considerably the junior of
the leading heroes of Arthur's Court ; but which of the
two Malory's knight represents it is not easy to say. It
is perhaps more likely that the English compiler should
have known, and referred to, the hero of our tale, than
to Chretien's knight.

2. Page 13.—^ gentle lady of Cornwall. This is, of



Digitized by



7* ®ofe*

course, Iguerne, wife, first of the Duke of Cornwall, and
secondly of King Uther, and mother of Arthur. The
Merlin gives an account of Uther's wooing of the lady
and the embarrassment caused by his costly gifts, among
which the cherries are not mentioned !

3. PAGE 14. — / prithee, grant me twelve strokes. A
similar situation to this of our tale is found in one of the
novels of Sachetti (Florence, 1724, vol. ii.). Here the hero
is a peasant, who finds a hawk belonging to the King of
France. An usher of the palace demands half the
reward, and the peasant, when given his choice of a
guerdon, prays for fifty lashes. The King demands the
reason of his choice, and on learning it, orders that the
usher shall be paid in kind, while the peasant receives
his share in golden pieces. An even closer parallel is
that afforded by the following little tale, included in
Wright's Latin Stories, No. cxxvii. *' Vir quidam ad
imperatorem Fredericum veniens cum fructibus auos
multum dilexit, ingressum habere non potuit nisi janttori
lucri promitteret medietatem. Imperator vero in fruc-
tibus illis delectatus, eum ccegit ut a liquid peteret t qui
petiit ut sibi centum ictus dan praciperet. Cujuscausam
cum imperator cognovisset, suos ictus leviter, alterius
vero graviter solvt jussit"

This tale is drawn from the collection of John of
Bromyard, an English Dominican of the fourteenth cen-
tury, and the editor remarks that it can probably be
traced through several centuries; a supposition which
the large number of parallels cited by Doctor I. Bolte, of
Berlin (to whose courtesy I owe the above Latin reference)
fully bears out.

The tale is apparently to be found in all times, and in
all lands, even so far afield as among the Berbers of
Africa. The immediate source of our Sir Cleges was not
improbably a French Lai, but whether the Latin repre-
sents the germ from which the earlier poem was ex-
panded, or whether it be but a condensed reminiscence
of that source, it is impossible to say. In any case
Sir Cleges is of undoubted interest as affording an in-
genious and graceful variant of an ancient and oft-told
tale,



Digitized byGoOgk



73



SIR LIBEAUS DESCONUS.

1. Page 21. — The name of this knight was Gyngalyn.
The name of the hero of our tale seems worthy ot more
attention than it has yet received. The French B. I. has
Guinglain, the continuations of the Perceval Guiglain,
the German Wigalois, which the author expressly tells
us is a corruption of Gwt von Galois. Professor Zimmer
is of opinion that the form given in the Perceval is the
original, and suggests an intermediate Guiganlois,
giving Wigalois. Taking into consideration the very
decided resemblance between parts of our tale and
the Perceval Enfances, is it not possible that the original
name was, as stated by the German poet, a simple name
of one syllable, which later on became amalgamated
with its qualifying appellation? In any case, the con-
nection of the term Galois with the hero is, vu the
Perceval parallels, decidedly worthy of attentive
examination. Mis-readings, and mis-copyings, are so
frequent in mediaeval MSS. that the possibility of their
occurrence can never be left out of sight in attempted
derivations. Professor Zimmer' s suggestion that the
termination ain may be due to the influence of Gauvain,
he being the hero's father, and the reference to the names
Gauvain, Agravain, and Yvain, as illustrations of such
influence, scarcely strikes me as happy. Yvain is net
Ga wain's brother, nor is he ever represented as such ; of
the four brothers of that hero, Agravain, alone, has a
kindred termination, while both in their case and in that
of Perceval and Agloval, cited by the learned Professor as
a further example, the name of the father is entirely
different ; for the suggested theory to hold good they
should correspond in some measure with the names of
their sons.

2. Page 21. — Sir Gawain, who had met his mother by a
forest-side. This is lacking in the French B.I., but
agrees closely with Gawain 's adventure with the sister of
Brandalis, related in the old English Jeste of Syr
Gawayne, and also in the continuations of the Perceval.
These latter, which distinctly identify our hero as the



Digitized by



74 m OXofe*

offspring of that liaison, give two variants of the story
in one the lady has long desired Gawain as a lover ; in
the other she yields to force against her will. The
existence of these variants shows clearly that the story of
Gawain's amours with the lady was, at the date of the
appearance of the earliest continuations of Chretien's
poem, sufficiently well known for conflicting versions of it
to be in circulation, and that in one case, if not in both,
she was recognised as the mother of an already popular
hero, Guinglain, or The Fair Unknown*

In the B.I.,on the contrary, Guinglain is the son of
Gawain and the fairy Blancemal; while the late version
of The Weddynge of Syr Gawayne makes him the
offspring of that hero's union with the bespelled Dame
RagnelL This contradiction of evidence seems to
indicate that there were two distinct accounts of
Guinglain's birth current, in one of which he was the son
of a mortal maiden, in the other of a fairy, or super-
natural being. The Wigalois seems to occupy a position
midway between these versions, the mother, herself
mortal, being sister to a magician.

Malory, in his list of knights given in the handling of
Sir Urre (Book XIX., chap, xi.) mentions three sons of
Sir Gawain— Sir Gingalin, Sir Florence, and Sir Lovel,
adding that the two latter were begotten upon Sir
Brandiles' sister, thus apparently excluding Gingalin.
The point deserves closer attention.

3. Page 21. — She called him Beawfis and naught else.
This should be compared with Parzival (Book II.
1. 1628). It is one of the points of contact with the
Perceval story ; cf. also my Legend of Sir Lancelot du
Lac, chaps, ii. and vii., for the curious correspondence
between our story and the Lancelot, This is a point
unfortunately overlooked by Doctor Schofield.

4. Page 21. — Found a knight lying dead in gay
armour. The incident of finding a dead knight, or slaying
a knight, and clothing himself in his armour, also occurs
in certain of the Perceval romances. In the Perceval
continuations, already referred to, Gawain's son, in his
first encounter, slays his adversary, and not recognising
death, which he has never seen before, takes up the slain



Digitized byGoOgk



#ofe* 75

knight in his arms and shakes him violently! thinking to
awake him. Here the simplicity, which is so marked a
trait in Perceval, appears strongly in Guinglain (cf.
Parzival, Wisse-Collm, section i78d, p. 276).

5. PAGE 23. — Ye shall call him Libeaus Desconus. In
the Perceval continuations we find two apparent allusions
to this. In Wisse-Collin (197a, p. 364) we are told that
our hero was called by the Britons Scbone Unbekannte.
Later on he reveals himself to Gawain as Uwer sUn, den
kdnig Artus nannte Der Schdne Unerkannte (Ibid,
243 b » P- 572). The general impression given by these
scattered references is that of correspondence with L.D.
rather than with B.I.

6. Page 23. — There came a maiden riding. This sum-
moning of a young knight by a maiden messenger is of
frequent occurrence in mediaeval romances ; apart from
the immediate members of our group, we may mention
the Prose Lancelot, where the parallel is sufficiently close
to have led M. Philipot to maintain the view that in the
Lancelot vit have the original of which the B.I. is a &
copy (cf. Romania, xxvi. p. 290). Also my Legend 0/ /
Sir Lancelot; and the episodic romance of the CoteMal-
taile*, now generally found incorporated in the Prose
Tristan, and included in Malory's excerpt from that
romance ; the story of Gareth, or Sir Beaumains, also
given by Malory (Book VII.), and so far found nowhere
else ; and the metrical romance of(/^gg^^ -- All.tbf^.^^
also agree in the persistent floutinj^oTthe young knight

by the lady, who is eventually convinced of his valour ;
in the last-named romance she carries her repentance so
far as to offer herself to the hero ! The correspondence
in the case of the Ipomedon is so strong that it seems
impossible to doubt that the author was familiar with
some form of our story, a fact especially interesting in
view of the comparatively early date of the I. A striking
feature of the parallels is their agreement, now with the
French, now with the English, version of the tale — a
peculiarity which appears to indicate that the particular
form drawn upon was one which, while it corresponded
exactly with neither, possessed features common to both.
I have gone more fully into this question in a study on



Digitized byGoOgk



76 Q}ofe*

The Three Days Tournament, which will appear shortly
in the Grimm Library. For the general series of adven-
tures, and the relation of one account to the other, I would
refer the reader to Doctor Schofield's Study, where the
whole subject is treated in an exhaustive manner ; here
I have endeavoured to confine my remarks to points which
appeared to me to be worthy of fuller discussion.

7. PAGE 38.— Sir Giffroun hath arts. I note this, as the
real significance of the allusion appears to have escaped
Doctor Schofield ; he simply says, "The dwarf advises
the hero to be wary, for the knight is full of guile."
The reference appears to me rather to indicate that the
original owner of the hawk was a magician, and that
the passage had been retained in the text after the real
meaning had been forgotten. As it is, the warning is
superfluous; Giffroun practises no wiles, but simply
relies on his knightly skill. But the fact that the adven-
ture, as a whole, stands in a close relation, not only to
the " Sparrowhawk," but also to the " Joie de la Court,"
adventure of Erec t where the garden is surrounded
by a magic mist, and the lord is certainly a magician,
would suggest the view that here L.D. has retained a
hint of the original form which has vanished from B. I.
It may be noted also that in the Wigalois, though the
knight is not said to be a magician, yet the horse, one
of the prizes to be competed for, is parti-coloured, white,
red, black, and yellow. These parti-coloured animals
are, as a rule, of fairy origin, and the presence of a horse
of this description lends strength to the supposition that
the adventure with which it is found connected was
originally of a fairy character. Under varying forms
the adventures here found combined are of frequent
occurrence in mediaeval romance (cf. Legend of Sir
Lancelot, App., p. 223). They probably both belonged
to the "stock-in-trade" of professional story-tellers, and
were in no sense the invention of Chretien de Troyes.

8. Page 44.-7%* fairest hound they had ever beheld.
This should be compared with the description of Petitcriu,
in the Tristan of Gottfried von Strasbourg (cf. No. II.
of this series, vol. ii. p. 90), also with the brachet pur-
sued by Schionatulander in Titurel (Parzival, Bartsch,



Digitized byGoOgk



®ofe« 77

vol. iii. p. 254); and the horse given by Guivret le
Petit to Enid, in Free. Titurel being incomplete, the
origin of the brachet is not explained, but there is no
doubt that the others are fairy animals.

9. Pages 49 and 53. — L'fled'Or— La Darned' Amour.
The retention of these names is interesting as showing
that the original source must have been French.

10. PAGE 5c. — Men and maidens shall throw on thee / y
dirt, 6v. This should be compared with Gawain's^^
experiences at the Grail Castle (Legend of Sir Lancelot,
App., p. 222).

11. Page 6a — Mabon 6* Yrain. In other versions of
the story there is but one enchanter. In the " Joie de la
Court " in Erec, already alluded to, the magician's name
is Mabonagrain. M. Gaston Paris considers that this is
the original form, and that the two enchanters, Mabon
and Yrain (or Eurain, as in B.I.), are due to a mistaken
division of the name. M. Ferd. Lot, on the contrary,
holds the two enchanters to be the more primitive form,
and would refer Mabonagrain to a fusion of the earlier
names (cf. Romania, vol. xxiv. pp. 321, 322).

12. Page 62. — He looked on the pillars— Doors and
windows rattled. Compare this with Gawain's adven-
ture in the Chateau Merveil (Parzival, Book XI. 1L 373
et seq.), also in the Grail Castle (Legend of Sir Lancelot.
App., p. 221). I have before this suggested that Gawain's
adventures may be the basis for the later presentment of
the Grail Castle, and the parallel of the dirt-throwing,
noted above, seems to make it possible that they may
also have affected our story.

13. Page 66. — A worm came forth from the wall. — For
the variants of the Fier Baiser adventure, cf Doctor
Schofield's Study. The Perceval poems do not among
their allusions include any mention of this feat, nor is
there a hint of it in the Jpomedon. I am inclined to
think that, in spite of Doctor Schofield's conclusions to
the contrary, this adventure may not have been in the
original version of the story, though it must have been
added to it at an early date. It is evident that there is
ample material for more study than has yet been devoted
to the subject.



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



Printed by
B ALL ANTYNB, HANSON 6* CO
London 6* Edinburgh



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



Digitized byGoOgk



PRINCETON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY




II



32101 013986375



Digitized by
