Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


From  the  library  of
CAPTAIN  THOMAS  J.  J.  SEE

PmtnuJ  to  Stanford  by  bis  son


PRINCIPLES   OF  GEOLOGY


VOL.  I.



r.4


PRINCIPLES   OF   GEOLOGY


VOL.  I.


The  GEOLOGICAL  EVIDENCES  of  the
ANTIQUITY  of  MAN.  With  an  Outline  of
Glacial  Fost-tertiaiy  Geology,  and  Remarks  on  the
Origin  of  Species,  with  special  reference  to  Man's
first  appearance  on  the  Earth.  By  Sir  Chablbs
Ltell.    Fourth  Edition,  with  Illustrations,  Svo.  lis.

*  A  space  of  ten  yean  haa  now  elapaed  since  the  publication  of

the  Third  Edition  of  this  work.    A  new  edition  has  long  been  called

for,  and  I  hare  therefore  carefnlly  reviaed  it  and  introdnced  snch

new  matter  as  seemed  to  me  necessary  to  bring  it  np  to  the  present

'State  of  our  knowledge.' — Author'*  Prffcyot,


The  STUDENT'S  ELEMENTS  of  GEOLOGY.

By  Sir  Chablbs  Ltbix.     With  600  Illustrations.
Post  8vo.  9*.

*  Sir  Charles  Lyell  has  here  done  for  the  geological  student  what
Sir  John  Herschel  did  for  the  student  of  astronomy  in  his  incom-
parable "  Outlines."  Young  beginners  in  natural  science  had  long
wanted  a  short  manual  of  geology  at  a  reasonable  price,  which
should  yet  contain  a  full  explanation  of  the  leading  facts  and
principles  of  the  science.    Now  they  haye  it.' — Examiner.


,    t.j.j  sre  s^^

'Aare  Islamd.  cauf.  ^  J^i"

PRINCIPLES   OF   GEOLOOT


OB  THE


MODERN  CHANGES  OF    THE  EARTH
AND  ITS  INHABITANTS


CONSIDERED   AS  ILLUSTRATIVE   OF   GEOLOGY


By  sir  CHARLES  LYELL,  Babt.  M.A.  F.R.S.


*  Vert  scire  ett  per  caoMs  idre'— Baoov

'  The  itony  rockn  are  not  primeyal,  bat  the  dangfaterB  of  Time '— LiNXiSUS,  S^st.  Nat.
ed.  5,  Stockholm,  1748,  p.  319

*  Amid  all  the  rerohitioiiB  of  the  globe  the  economy  of  Nature  has  been  nniform,  and
her  lawR  are  the  only  UiingB  that  hare  resisted  the  general  movement.  The  rirers  and
the  rocks,  the  seas  and  the  continents,  hare  been  changed  in  all  their  parts;  bat  the
laws  which  direct  those  changes,  and  the  roles  to  which  they  are  subject,  have  re-
mained inyariably  the  same '— Platvair,  lUuatrationt  o/tiu  Huttonian  Theory,  (  874


TWELFTH    EDITION


In  Two  Volumes — Vol.  I.


Rliustrated     with    J£ap3,     (Plates,     and     "Woodcuts


LONDON
JOHN    MURRAY,    ALBEMARLE    STREET

1875


Tkt  rig^  of  tranOntion  i$  rcmrtff^


LOXDOX  I    PRIKTKO    BY

•POTTiavrOODK    A5D    00.,    HBYr-ST&BKT    •QDABB

AXD    PARLIAMXirT    BTRBST


PEEFACE


TO


THE    TWELFTH    EDITION,


The  Twelfth  Edition  of  the  '  Principles  of  Geology '
was  being  prepared  for  the  press  at  the  time  of  the
Author's  death  in  the  early  part  of  this  year.

After  the  complete  recasting  which  the  work  under-
went in  preparing  the  Tenth  Edition  in  1867,  and
the  corrections  and  additions  made  in  the  suc-
ceeding Edition  which  appeared  in  1872,  my  uncle
had  found  little  to  alter.  The  corrections  were  few
and  unimportant;  most  of  them  merely  verbal.  In
all  instances  they  have  been  introduced.  With  these
few  changes  the  work  remains  the  same  as  the
Eleventh  Edition  of  1872.


LEONARD  LYELL,


Kixhordt:  October^  1876.


PEEFACE


TO


THE     ELEVENTH    EDITION.


-•0*-


Theee  has  been  an  interval  of  five  years  between  the
last  and  present  edition  of  this  first  volume  of  the
*  Principles  of  Geology.'  During  this  time  much  discussion
has  taken  place  on  important  theoretical  points  bearing
on  meteorology  and  climate,  and  much  new  information
obtained  by  deep-sea  dredging  in  regard  to  the  tempera-
ture, and  shape,  of  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  and  ite  living
inhabitants.

In  order  to  avail  myself  of  this  newly  acquired  know-
ledge, I  have  found  it  necessary  to  recast  Chapters  X.,  XI.,
XII.,  and  XIII.,  which  relate  to  the  geological  proofs  of
former  changes  of  climate,  and  the  paramount  importance
of  the  distribution  and  height  of  the  land  over  all  other
causes  in  bringing  about  past  variations  of  temperature.
At  the  same  time  I  have  endeavoured  to  render  more
intelligible  some  of  those  astronomical  changes  which
must  periodically  affect  climate,  though  probably  not  in  so
influential  a  degree  as  some  have  imagined.

In  Chapter  XX.  I  have  briefly  dwelt  upon  the  latest
known  facts  concerning  marine  currents,  especially  those
in  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and  have  considered  some
theories    of    oceanic    circulation    recently    propounded    to


viii  PREFACE  TO  THE  ELEVENTH  EDITION.

account  for  the  cold  of  the  abysses  of  the  ocean.  With
these  exceptions,  the  work  has  been  reprinted  mainly  w.
it  stood  in  1867,  with  corrections  and  additions.

The  changes  made  in  the  tenth  edition  were  so  nume-
rous and  important  that  I  have  thought  it  best  to  reprint
the  Preface  to  that  edition  in  fall,  thereby  giving  the
reader  the  opportunity  of  knowing  what  advance  has
been  made  in  the  work  since  1858,  when  the  ninth
edition  appeared.  The  pages  of  additions  and  corrections
given  in  that  Preface  correspond  so  nearly  to  those  of
the  present  volume  that  the  passages  referred  to  may  be
always  found  by  turning  a  few  pages  backwards  or  for-
wards.

CHARLES  LYELL.

73  Hablit  Stbeet:
January  15,  1872.


PREFACE


TO


THE     TENTH    EDITION.


It  is  now  thirteen  years  and  a  half  since  the  last  or  ninth
edition  of  the  *  Principles  of  Geology '  appeared ;  a  long  in-
terval in  the  history  of  the  progress  of  a  science,  in  which
so  many  able  investigators  and  thinkers,  in  every  civilised
country  of  the  world,  are  actively  engaged.  In  re-editing  the
work,  I  have  found  it  necessary  entirely  to  re-write  some
chapters  and  to  recast  others,  and  to  modify  or  omit  some
passages  given  in  former  editions.  For  the  sake  of  those
readers  who  are  already  familiar  with  the  '  Principles,'  I  sub-
join a  list  of  the  chief  additions  now  made  for  the  first  time,
pointing  out  the  pages  at  which  corresponding  matter  occurs
in  the  ninth  and  tenth  editions.

List  of  the  Principal  Additions  and  Corrections  in  the  First
Volume  of  the  Tenth  Edition  of  the  ^  Principles  of  Geology,^


Ninth
Edition


Page


130

to

163


}


Tenth
Edition.

Page

14


139


136

to

173


}


Additions  and  Corrections.


The  opinion  of  Anaximander,  *  that  fish  were  the  parents  of
mankind,'  how  far  an  anticipation  of  the  modern  doctrine
of  development.

An  ahridged  table  of  fopsiliferous  strata  in  their  order  of
superposition,  inserted  from  the '  Elements '  for  the  sake
of  reference.

The  Ninth  Chapter,  on  the  progressive  development  of  or-
ganic life,  has  been  entirely  re-written.


PHEFACE  TO  THE  TENTH  EDITION.


%


113|

l;!oJ

100 1
and}-
12<jJ


The  Tenth  Chapter  (correeponding  in  part  with  Chapter  VI.
of  the  fonuer  editioo)  hag  abo  been  cc-written.  It  tn^ata
of  the  changes  of  climate,  establishud  on  erideuce,  or^iiciic
and  inorganic,  derived  from  tie  Tertiary  and  Post-Tertiarj-
lbrmationB.

The  Eleventh  Chapter  isnew,  treating  of  the  priMifB  or  former
viciasitudcB  in  cKmnte,  derived  from  the  etud;  of  the
Secondary  and  Primary  fonalifewiia  fonnalionn.

The  Twelfth  Chapter,  on  the  geographiciU  causes  of  foTmer
changes  in  cliojate,  has  been  re-wntten.     It  ia  Illustrated


hytl
lut^e


three  new  a
Thirteenth  Chapter,  to  which  there  are  only  a


sages  corresponding  in  former  editions,  1  have  coosidered
how  far  former  vicissitudes  in  cliuiate  mav  have  been  in-
fluenced by  astronomical  changes ;  such  as  veiriali<.)iis  in
the  excentricitv  of  the  earth's  orbit,  changes  in  the  obli-
quity of  the  edjptic,  and  different  phaxes  of  the  precession
of  the  equinojea.  Mr.  CroU'a  auggestion  as  to  the  probable
effects  of  a  large  BXceDtricity  in  producing  glaciiil  epochs  is
fully  discussed,  and  the  question  is  entertitined  whether
geological  dates  may  be  obbiined,  b;  reference  to  the  com-
bined eftect  of  Hstronomieal  and  gjjoprflpliical  causes.

The  earth-pillars  or  pyramids  of  Botzen  in  the  Tyrol  nod
other  localities,  illustrated  by  a  drawing  of  Sir  J»ho
Ilerschel's,  are  here  introduced,  as  showing  the  power  of
rain  as  distinct  from  that  of  running  waler.  The  glacial
origin  of  the  foroiatian  of  which  the  pillars  are  made  is
also  pointed  out.

Notice  of  the  theory  of  regelation  of  Tyndall  and  Faraday  in
eKplanatiou  of  the  motion  of  glaciers.

The  glaciei^lake  of  the  Alps  cilled  'the  Miujelen  See,'  de-
scribed and  illustrated  by  two  diagrams,  and  its  bearing
on  the  oripin  of  the  parnlfel  roads  of  Glciirny  expl.iined.

Livp  fish  rising  in  the  Artesian  wells  of  the  Sahara.

Facts  relating  to  the  origin  of  mineral  and  thermal  waters
and  the  hot  springs  of  Bath.

Playfair  on  the  origin  of  the  lake-baan  of  Geneva.

Mr.  Homer  on  the  mode  of  computing  the  antiquity  of  the
Nile  mud:  with  the  opinions  of  Mr.  S.  Shaipe,  Sir  J.
Lubbock,  and  Mr.  Wallace  on  the  subject.

A  new  hypothesis  proposed  to  eiplain  the  ori^rin  of  the
'  mud-lumps '  of  the  mouths  of  the  Slisaiseippi,  illustrated
by  a  map  and  two  views.

The  antiquity  of  the  deltn  and  alluvial  plain  of  the  Mtssis-
sippi  discu.-sed  with  reference  to  new  facts  brought  to
light  during  the  survey  of  Meiers.  Humphreys  and  Abbot,
in  1801,  and  the  boring  of  the  Artesian  weft  at  New  Or-
leans in  18o4,  to  the  depth  of  HOO  feeL

Mr.  H.  W.  Bates  and  Professor  Agassiz  on  the  delta  of  the
Amazons.

Freahwater  depofuts  supposed  by  Agassiz  to  indicate  an
ancient  Inlcu  closed  by  a  terminal  moraine  of  a  glacier
considered.

Delta  of  the  Ganges — Mr.  Fergusson's  opinion  as  to  the


PREFACE  TO  THE  TENTH  EDITION.


Zl


Ninth
BditiQn.


Page
291

306
323
334


340


Tenth
Edition.


Page

495
514

539

563


Additions  and  Clonections.


568


616

625
633


origin  of '  the  swatch  '  and  the  mode  of  formation  of  the
elevated  banks  of  rivers.

Various  causes  of  currents  treated  of  more  fuUy  than  in  the
former  edition.

Waste  of  the  coast  of  Norfolk  illustrated  by  the  ruins  of
Ecdes  Church  as  they  appeared  in  1839  and  in  1862.  A.
drawing  by  the  Rev.  S.  W.  King  of  the  church  in  1862.

St  Michaers  Mount,  Cornwall — Three  views  of  the  Mount
— Its  identity  with  the  Ictis  of  Diodorus — Drawing  of  a
block  of  tin  dredged  up  in  Falmouth  Harbour.

Temperature  of  di^erent  divisions  or  basins  of  the  Mediter-
ranean compared  to  that  of  the  Atlantic — Saltness  of  the
Mediterranean,  and  a  diagram  illustrating  the  result  of
Captain  Spratt*s  survey.

Shoals  and  valleys  in  the  German  Ocean — The  Silver  Pits
and  Dogger  Bank — Comparison  of  the  recent  deposits  of
these  shoals  and  the  crag  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk.

Internal  talus  of  Monte  Nuov^o,  containing  fragments  of
marine  shells  and  pottery^  with  a  section  of  the  mountain.

Ropy  lava  and  origin  of  tlus  structure.

Hypothesis  of  elevation  craters  not  applicable  to  Somma  or
Vesuvius — Ravines  on  the  north  side  of  Somma,  and  the
light  which  they  throw  on  its  structure,  from  observa-
tions made  by  the  author  in  1857  and  1858 — Presence  of
land-plants  and  absence  of  contemporaneous  marine  shells
in  the  ancient  tuffs  of  Monte  Somma.


The  reader  may  also  be  interested  in  knowing  the  dates
of  the  successive  editions  of  this  treatise,  as  well  as  of  two
other  of  my  geological  works,  which  are  intimately  connected
with  it.


List  of  the  dates  of  publication  of  successive  Editions  of  the

*  Principles,^  '  Elements,^  and  the  ^  Antiquity  of  ManJ*

Principles,  vol.  i.  in  8vo.,  published  in Jan.  1830.

„  ii.     „ Jan.  1832.

„  i.   2ud  edition  in  8vo 1832.

„  ii.  2nd  edition     „ Jan.  1833.

„  iii.  1st  edition      „ May  1833.

New  edition  (called  the  ?rd)  of  the  whole  work  in

4  vols.  12mo May  1834.

4th  edition,  4  vols.  12mo. June  1835.

5th    „            tt          }t              .....  Mar.  1837.

Elements,  1st  edition  in  1  vol. July  1838.

Principles,  6th       „          3  vols.  12mo June  1840.

Elements,  2nd  edition  in  2  vols.  12mo.             ....  July  1841.


xii  PREFACE  TO  THE  TENTH  EDITION.

Principles^  7th  edition^  in  1  vol.  8vo.  publifihed  in  .        .        .    Feb.  1847.

8th  edition      „  „ May  1860.

Elements^  Srd  edition  (or  Manual  of  Elementary  Geology)  in

1  vol.  8vo Jan.  1851.

Elemental  4th  edition  (or  Manual)  in  1  vol.  8vo.      .        .        .    Jan.  1852.
Principles^  0th  edition^  published  in  1  vol.  8vo.       .        .        .    June  1853.

Elements,  5th  edition^  in  1  voL 1855.

Antiquity  of  Man,  1st,  2nd,  and  3rd  editions  .        .  Feb.  —Nov.  1863.

Elements,  6th  edition,  in  1  vol.  8vo Jan.  1865.

Principles,  10th  edition,  in  2  vols.  8vo.,  the  first  now  published.  Nov.  1866.

[*#*  ^ct.  1876. — Since  the  above  list  was  made  there  were  published —

Principles,  1 0th  edition,  2Dd  vol March  1868.

Student's  Elements  of  Geology Jan.  1871.

Principles,  11th  edition 1872.

Antiquity  of  Man,  4th  edition 1873.

Student's  Elements,  2nd  edition 1874.

L.L.]

The  '  Principles  of  Geology,'  in  the  first  five  editions,  em-
bvaced  not  only  a  view  of  the  modem  changes  of  the  earth  and
its  inhabitants,  but  also  some  account  of  those  monuments
and  analogous  changes  of  andeiit  date,  both  in  the  organic
and  inorganic  world,  which  the  geologist  is  called  upon  to
interpret.  The  subject  last  mentioned,  or  geology  proper,
constituted  originally  a  fourth  book,  now  omitted,  the  same
having  been  enlarged  into  a  separate  treatise,  first  published
in  1838,  in  one  volume  12mo.,  and  called  *The  Elements  of
Geology,'  afterwards  recast  in  two  volumes  12mo.  in  1842,
again  re-edited  under  the  title  of  ^Manual  of  Elementary
Geology,'  in  one  volume  8vo.  in  1851,  and  lastly  under  the
title  of  ^  Elements  of  Geology,'  in  one  volume  8vo.  in  1865.

The  ^Principles'  and  ^Elements,'  thus  divided,  occupy,
with  one  exception,  to  which  I  shall  presently  allude,  very
different  ground.  The  ^  Principles '  treat  of  such  portions  of
the  economy  of  existing  nature,  animate  and  inanimate,  as
are  illustrative  of  Geology,  so  as  to  comprise  an  investigation
of  the  permanent  effects  of  causes  now  in  action^  which  may
serve  as  records  to  after  ages  of  the  present  condition  of  the
globe  and  its  inhabitants.  Such  effects  are  the  enduring
monuments  of  the  ever-varying  state  of  the  physical  geo-


PREFACE  TO  THE  TENTH  EDITION.  xiii

graphy  of  fhe  globe,  the  lasting  signs  of  its  partial  destmc-
tion  and  renovation,  and  the  memorials  of  the  equally
flnctnating  condition  of  the  organic  world.  They  may  be
regarded,  in  short,  as  a  symbolical  language,  in  which  the
earth's  autobiography  is  written.

In  the  ^  Elements  of  Otology,'  on  the  other  hand,  I  have
treated  briefly  of  the  component  materials  of  the  earth's  crust,
their  arrangement  and  relative  position,  and  their  organic
contents,  which,  when  deciphered  by  aid  of  the  key  supplied
by  the  study  of  the  modem  changes  above  alluded  to,  reveal
to  us  the  annals  of  a  grand  succession  of  past  events — a  series
of  revolutions  which  the  solid  exterior  of  the  globe,  and  its
living  inhabitants,  have  experienced  in  times  almost  entirely
antecedent  to  the  advent  of  man.

In  thus  separating  the  two  works,  however,  I  have  retained
in  the  ^  Principles '  (Book  I.)  the  discussion  of  some  matters
which  might  fairly  be  regarded  as  common  to  both  treatises ;
as,  for  example,  an  historical  sketch  of  the  early  progress  of
geology,  followed  by  a  series  of  preliminary  essays  to  explain
the  facts  and  arguments  which  lead  me  to  believe  that  the
forces  now  operating  upon  and  beneath  the  earth's  surface
may  be  the  same,  both  in  kind  and  degree,  as  those  which  at
remote  epochs  have  worked  out  geological  changes.

If  I  am  asked  whether  the  '  Principles '  or  the  ^  Elements '
should  be  studied  first,  I  feel  much  the  same  difficulty  in
answering  the  question  as  if  a  student  should  enquire  whether
he  ought  to  take  up  first  a  treatise  on  Chemistry,  or  one  on
Natural  Philosophy,  subjects  sufficiently  distinct,  yet  insepa-
rably connected.  On  the  whole,  while  I  have  endeavoured  to
make  the  two  treatises,  in  their  present  form,  each  quite
independent  of  the  other,  I  would  recommend  the  reader  to
study  first  the  modern  changes  of  the  earth  and  its  inhabi-
tants as  they  are  discussed  in  the  present  volume,  proceeding
afterwards  to  the  classification  and  interpretation  of  the
monuments  of  more  remote  ages.


xiv  PREFACE  TO  THE  TENTH  EDITION.

It  will  be  seen  in  the  foregoing  list  of  the  dates  of  publi-
cation,  that  in  1863  I  brought  out  a  volume  on  ^the  Anti-
quity of  Man/  or  to  state  the  title  more  fully,  *0n  the
Geological  Evidences  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  with  Remarks
on  Theories  of  the  Origin  of  Species  by  Variation.'

The  subject-matter  of  this  work  coincided  in  part  with
that  treated  of  in  the  ^  Principles '  and  ^  Elements,'  namely,
the  fossil  remains  of  Man  and  his  works;  but  whereas
these  topics  occupy  a  few  pages  only  in  the  'Elements'
and  '  Principles,'  half  a  volume  is  devoted  to  them  in  the
Antiquity  of  Man.'  In  the  latter  treatise  also,  the  ac-
count given  of  the  Glacial  Period,  and  its  relation  to  the
earliest  signs  of  Man's  appearance  in  Europe  and  North
America,  is  much  more  expanded  than  in  the  '  Elements'  and
'  Principles,'  and  regarded  from  a  different  point  of  view.
The  manner  also  in  which  the  origin  of  species  is  handled  in
the  *  Antiquity  of  Man '  will  be  found  to  be  different  in  many
respects  from  that  in  which  I  shall  view  the  same  subject  in
the  concluding  volume  of  this  work.


CHARLES  LYELL.


73  HARI.BY  Strbht  :
November  6,  1866.


CONTENTS


OF


THE     FIEST    VOLUME.


»o»


BOOK    I.

CHAPTER  I.

INTRODUCTORY.

Geology  defined — compared  to  History — its  relation  to  other  Physical  Sciences —
not  to  be  confounded  with  Cosmogony pagr  1


CHAPTER  n.

HISTORY   OF   THE    PROGRESS    OP   GEOLOGY.

Oriental  Cosmogony — Hymns  of  the  Vedas — Institutes  of  Menu — Doctrine  of  the
successive  Destruction  and  Renovation  of  the  World — Origin  of  this  Doctrine —
Common  to  the  Egyptians — adopted  by  the  Greeks — Anaximander  on  the  Origin
of  Mankind  from  Fish — System  of  Pythagoras^-of  Aristotle — Dogmas  concern-
ing the  Extinction  and  Reproduction  of  Genera  and  Species — Strabo's  Theory  of
Elevation  by  Earthquakes — Pliny — Concluding  Remarks  on  the  Knowledge  of
the  Ancients 6


CHAPTER  m.

HISTORY  OP  THE   PROGRESS   OP  GEOLOGY — COnUnued,

Arabian  Writers  of  the  Tenth  Century — Avicenna — Omar — Cosmogony  of  the
Koran — Kazwini — Early  Italian  Writers — Leonardo  da  Vinci — Fracastoro —
Controversy  as  to  the  Real  Nature  of  Fossils — Attributed  to  the  Mosaic  Deluge
— Palissy — Steno — Scilla — Quirini — Boyle — Lister — Leibnitz — Hooke's  Theory
of  Elevation  by  Earthquakes — Of  Lost  Species  of  Animals — Ray — Physico-
Theological  Writers — Woodward's  Diluvial  Theory — Burnet — Whiston — Val-
lisneri — Lazzaro  Moro — Generelli — Buffon — His  Theory  condemned  by  the  Sor-
bonne  as  Unorthodox — His  Declaration — Targioni — Arduino — Michell — Catcott
— ^Raspe — Fnchsel — Fortis — Testa — Whitehurst — Pallas — Saussure       .        27


xvi  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  IV.

HISTOBY  OF  THB  PBOGRBSS  OF  QBOLOGY — continued

Werner's  Application  of  G^©ology  to  the  Art  of  Mining — Excursive  Character  of
his  Lectures — Enthusiasm  of  his  Pupils — His  Authority — His  Theoretical  Er-
rors— Desmarest's  Map  and  Description  of  Auvergne — Controversy  between  the
Vulcanistfl  and  Neptunists — Intemperance  of  the  Rival  Sects — Hutton's  Theory
of  the  Earth — His  Discovery  of  G-ranite  Veins — Originality  of  his  Views — Why
opposed — ^Playfair's  Illustrations — Influence  of  Voltaire's  Writings  on  Greology
— Imputations  cast  on  the  Huttonians  by  Williams,  Kirwan,  and  De  Luc —
Smith's  Map  of  England — Geological  Society  of  London — Progress  of  the
Science  in  France — Growing  Importance  of  the  Study  of  Organic  Remains.

PAGE  67

CHAPTER  V.

FBSJTTDIGES  WHICH  HAYS  BBTARDBD  THE  PBOGBESS  OF  GEOLOGY.

Prepossessions  in  regard  to  the  Duration  of  Past  Time — Prejudices  arising  from
our  peculiar  Position  as  Inhabitants  of  the  Land — Others  occasioned  by  our  not
seeing  Subterranean  Changes  now  in  progrens — All  these  Causes  combine  to
make  the  former  Course  of  Nature  appear  different  from  the  present — Objec-
tions to  the  Doctrine  that  Causes  similar  in  Kind  and  Energy  to  those  now
acting,  have  produced  the  former  Changes  of  the  Earth's  Sur&ce,  considered    88

CHAPTER  VI.

SUPPOSED  TSTSSSITZ  OF  AQUEOUS  CAUSES  AT  BEMOTE  PEBIODS.

Intensity  of  Aqueous  Causes — Slow  Accumulation  of  Strata  proved  by  Fossils —
Rate  of  Denudation  can  only  keep  pace  with  Deposition — Erratics  and  Action
of  Ice — Deluges,  and  the  Causes  to  which  they  are  referred — Supposed  Univer-
sality of  Ancient  Deposits        103

CHAPTER  VII

OF  THE  SUPPOSED  FOBMEB  INTENSITY  OF  THE  IGNEOUS  FOBCES.

Volcanic  Action  at  successive  Geological  Periods — Plutonic  Rocks  of  different
Ages — Gradual  Development  of  Subterranean  Movements — Faults — Doctrine
of  the  Sudden  Upheaval  of  Parallel  Mountain-chains — Objections  to  the  Proof
of  the  Suddenness  of  the  Upheaval,  and  the  Contemporaneousness  of  Parallel
Chains — Trains  of  Active  Volcanos  not  parallel — As  Large  Tracts  of  Land  are
rising  or  sinking  slowly,  so  Narrow  Zones  of  Land  may  be  pushed  up  gradually
to  Great  Heights— Bending  of  Strata  by  Lateral  Pressure — Adequacy  of  the
Volcanic  Power  to  effect  this  without  Paroxysmal  Convulsions       .         .         114

CHAPTER  VIII.  i

DIFFEBENCE  IN  TEXTUBE  OF  THE  OLDEB  AND  NEWEB  BOCKS.

Consolidation  of  Fossiliferous  iStrata — some  Deposits  originally  solid — Structure
termed  Transition— Slaty  Texture — Crystalline  Character  of  Plutonic  and  Meta-
morphic  Rocks — Theory  of  their  Origin — Essentially  Subterranean— No  Proofs
that  they  were  produced  more  abundantly  at  Remote  Periods       .  136


WNTENTS   OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUMa  xvii


CHAPTER  IX.

THEORY  07  THB  PBOGBESSIYE  DEVELOPKENT  OF  OZQAKIO  LIFE  AT

SUCCESSIVE  OEOLOOICAL  PERIODS.

Theoiy  of  the  Progressive  Development  of  Organic  Life — ^Evidence  in  its  Support
derired  from  Fossil  Plants — ^Fossil  Animals — ^Mollusca — Whether  they  have
adranced  in  Grade  since  the  Earliest  Rocks  were  formed — High  Antiquity  of
Cephalopoda — Slight  Indications  of  Progress  afforded  by  Fossil  Fish — Fossil
Amphibia — True  Reptiles — Transitional  Link  between  Reptiles  and  Birds —
Land  Animals  of  Remote  Periods  why  rare — Fossil  Birds — Mammalia — Stones-
field  Marsupials — Absence  qf  Cetacea  in  Secondary  Rocks — Successive  Appear-
ance of  the  great  Sub-classes  of  Mammalia  of  advancing  Grade  in  Chronological
Order — Modern  Origin  of  Man — Introduction  of  Man,  to  what  extent  a  Change
in  the  System pagk  143


CHAPTER  X.

FURTHER  CONSIDERATION  OF  THE  AGREEHENT  OF  THB  ANCIENT  AND
MODERN  CAUSES  OF  CHANGE — VICISSITUDES  IN  CLIMATE.

Arguments  derived  from  former  Differences  in  Climate — ^The  Reality  of  such
formf'r  Differences  considered — Climate  of  the  Ages  of  Bronze  and  of  Stone —
Fossil  Quadrupeds  and  Shells  of  the  Drift — Temperature  implied  by  the  Re-
mains of  the  Mammoth  and  other  Extinct  Quadrupeds — Carcasses  of  the  Ele-
phant and  Rhinoceros  preserved  in  the  Frozen  Mud  of  Siberia — Important
Bearing  of  the  Condition  of  these  Fossil  Remains  on  the  Theory  of  Climate —
Variation  in  the  Temperature  of  Post-Glacial  Times — Organic  and  Inorganic
Proofs  of  Great  Cold  in  the  Glacial  Epoch  —Inter-Glacial  Periods  of  Diirnten
and  Cromer — British  Pliocene  Strata,  showing  Transition  from  Warmer  to
Colder  Climate — The  Signs  of  Warm  Temperature  afforded  by  Italian  Pliocene
Strati — Warm  Climate  of  Central  Europe  in  Upper  Miocene  Times — Reptiles
and  Quadrumana — Fossils  of  the  SiwMik  Hills — Upper  Miocene  Strata  of  West
Indies — Warm  Climate  implied  by  Lower  Miocene  Fauna  and  Flora — Miocene
Forest  Trees  in  High  Arctic  Latitudes — High  Temperature  of  the  Eocene  Period
— Supposed  Signs  of  Ice-action  implied  by  Erratic  Blocks  of  Upper  Miocene
and  Middle  Eocene  Conglomerates 172


CHAPTER  XI.
FORMER  VICISSITUDES  IN  CLnikTS~~c<mtinued,

Warm  Climate  implied  by  the  Fossils  of  the  Chalk— Cretaceous  Reptiles — How  far
extinct  Genera  and  Orders  may  enable  us  to  infer  the  Temperature  of  Ancient
Climates — Evidence  of  Floating  Ice  in  the  Sea  of  the  White  Chalk  of  England
— Warm  Climate  of  the  Oolitic  and  Triassic  Periods — Wide  Range  of  the  same
Fauna  from  South  to  North — Abundance  and  wide  Range  of  Reptiles  implies  a
general  Absence  of  severe  Cold — The  Non-existence  of  contemporary  Mammalia
will  not  explain  the  Predominance  of  Reptiles  in  High  Latitudes — Permian
Fossils — Supposed  Signs  of  Ice-action  in  tlie  Permian  Period — Uniformity  of  the
Fossil  Flora  over  wide  Areas — Melville  Island  Coal-plants — How  far  tlie  Ab-
sence of  flowering  Plants  vitiates  our  Inferences  as  to  ancient  Climates —
Whether  the  Atmosphere  was  surcharged  with  Carbonic  Acid  in  the  Coal  Period

VOL.  I.  a


xviii  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME.

— Fossil  Shells  and  Corals  of  the  Carboniferous  Strata— Climate  implied  by  the
Beptiles  or  Amphibia  of  the  Coal — Deronian  Period,  and  supposed  Signs  of  Ice-
action  of  that  Era  considered — Climate  of  the  Silurian  Period — Concluding  Be-
marks  on  the  Climates  of  the  Tertiary,  Secondary,  and  Primary  Epochs,   paob  211


CHAPTER  Xn.

YICISSITT7DES  IN  CLIMATE  CAUSED  BT  OEOOSAPHICAL  CHANGES.

On  the  Causes  of  Vicissitudes  in  Climates — On  the  present  Difiusion  of  Heat  over
the  Globe — Moan  Annual  Isothermal  Lines — Dependence  of  the  Mean  Tempera-
ture on  the  relative  Position  of  Land  and  Sea — Climate  of  South  Georgia  and
Tierra  del  Fuego — Cold  of  the  Antarctic  Region — Open  Sea  near  the  North  Polo
— Effect  of  Currents  in  equalising  the  Temperature  of  High  and  Low  Latitudes
— The  present  Proportion  of  Polar  Land  abnormal — Succession  of  Geographical
Changes  revealed  to  us  by  Geology — Map  showing  the  Amount  of  European
Land  which  has  been  under  Water  since  the  Commencement  of  the  Eocene
Period — ^Antiquity  of  the  existing  Continents — Changes  in  Geography  which
preceded  the  Tertiary  Epoch — Map  showing  the  unequal  Distribution  of  Land
and  Water  on  the  Globe — Former  Geographical  Changes  which  may  have
caused  the  Fluctuations  in  Climate  revealed  to  us  by  Geology — Ideal  Map  with
the  Excess  of  Land  removed  from  Polar  to  Tropical  Regions — Great  Depth  of
the  Sea  as  compared  to  the  Mean  Height  of  the  Land,  and  its  Connection  with
the  Slowness  of  Climatal  Changes 233


CHAPTER  XIIL

VICISSITUDES  IN  CLIMATE  HOW  PAR  INFLUENCED  BT
ASTKONOMICAL  CHANGES.

The  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes,  and  Variations  in  the  Excentricity  of  the  Earth's
Orbit  considered  as  affecting  Climate— Sir  John  HerscheVs  Views  upon  this
Subject—  Later  Theories  as  to  the  Effect  of  Astronomical  Causes — Climates  of
the  successive  Phases  of  Precession — Predominating  Effect  of  Geographical
Causes  on  the  present  Climate  of  the  Earth — How  fkr  we  may  speculate  on  a
probable  Date  for  the  Glacial  Period — Evaporation  of  Ice  and  Snow  in  a  dry
way — Radiation  of  Heat  impeded  by  a  Covering  of  Snow — ^Absence  of  recurrent
Glacial  Periods  in  the  Earlier  Formations — Variation  in  the  Obliquity  of  the
Ecliptic — Supposed  Variations  in  the  Temperature  of  Space — Supposed  Diminu-
tion of  the  Earth's  primitive  Heat 272


CHAPTER  XIV.

UNIFOBMITT  IN  THE  SERIES  OP  PAST  CHANGES  IN  THE
ANIMATE  AND  INANIMATE  WORLD.

Supposed  alternate  Periods  of  Repose  and  Disorder — Observed  Facts  in  which
this  Doctrine  has  originated — These  may  be  explained  by  supposing  a  uniform
and  uninterrupted  Series  of  Changes — Threefold  Consideration  of  this  Subject :
First,  in  reference  to  the  Laws  which  govern  the  Formation  of  Fossiliforous
Strata,  and  the  Shifting  of  the  Areas  of  Sedimentary  Deposition ;  Secondly,  in


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUME.  xix

reference  to  the  liying  Creation,  Extinction  of  Species,  and  Origin  of  New
Animals  and  Plants ;  Thirdly,  in  reference  to  the  Changes  produced  in  the
Earth's  Crust  by  the  Continuance  of  Subterranean  Movements  in  certain  Areas,
and  their  Transference  after  long  Periods  to  New  Areas — On  the  combined
Influence  of  all  these  Modes  and  Causes  of  Change  in  producing  Breaks  and
Chasms  in  the  Chain  of  Becords — Concluding  Eemarks  on  the  Identity  of  the
Ancient  and  Present  System  of  Terrestrial  Changes         .        .        .    page  208


BOOK  11.

CHANGES  NOW    IN  PROGRESS    IN   THE    INORGANIC  WORLD.

CHAPTER  XV.

AaUEOTTS    CAUSES.

IMrision  of  the  Subject  into  Changes  of  the  Organic  and  Inorganic  World — Inor-
ganic Causes  of  Change  divided  into  Aqueous  and  Igneous — ^Aqueous  Causes
first  considered — Fall  of  Rain — Recent  Rain-prints  in  Mud — Earth-pyramids
formed  by  Rain  in  the  Tyrol  and  Swiss  Alps — Dwarfs  Tower  near  Viesch —
Destroying  and  Transporting  Power  of  Running  Water — Newly- formed  Valleys
in  Georgia— Sinuosities  of  Rivers — Two  Streams  when  united  do  not  occupy
a  Bed  of  Double  Surface — Inundations  in  Scotland — Floods  caused  by  Land-
slips in  the  White  Mountains — Bursting  of  a  Lake  in  Switzerland — Devas-
tations caused  by  the  Anio  at  Tivoli — Excavations  in  the  Lavas  of  Etna  by
Sicilian  Rivers — Gorge  of  the  Simeto — Gradual  Recession  of  the  Cataract  of
Niagara 321

CHAPTER  XVI.

TBANSPOBTATION   OP  SOLID  MATTER  BY  ICE.

Carrying  Power  of  River-Ice — Rocks  annually  conveyed  into  the  St.  Lawrence  by
its  Tributaries — Ground-Ice ;  its  Origin  and  Transporting  Power — Glaciers —
Theory  of  their  Downward  Movement — Smoothed  and  Grooved  Rocks — The
Moraine  Unstratified — Terrace  or  Beach  formed  by  a  Glacier-Lake  in  Switzer-
land— Icebergs  covered  with  Mud  and  Stones — ^Limits  of  Glaciers  and  Icebeigs
— Their  Effects  on  the  Bottom  when  they  run  aground — Packing  of  Coast-Ice
— Boulders  drifted  by  Ice  on  Coast  of  Labrador — Blocks  moved  by  Ice  in  the
Baltic 359

CHAPTER  XVII.

PHENOMENA  OF  SPRINGS.

Origin  of  Springs — Artesian  Wells — Borings  at  Paris — ^Live  Fish  rising  in  the
Artesian  Wells  in  the  Sahara — Distinct  Causes  by  which  Mineral  and  Thermal
Waters  may  be  raised  to  the  Surface — Their  Connection  with  Volcanic  Agency
— Thermal  Waters  of  Bath — Calcareous  Springs— Travertin  of  the  Elsa— Baths
of  San  Vi^one  and  of  San  Filippo,  near  Radicofani — Spheroidal  Structure  in


XX  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME.

Travertin—Lake  of  the  Solfatara,  near  Rome— Travertin  at  Cascade  of  Tivoli—
Gypseous,  Siliceous,  and  Femiginons  Springs — Brine  Springs — Carbonated
Springs — Disintegration  of  Granite  in  Auvergne — ^Petroleum  Springs— Pitch
Lake  of  Trinidad paqb  384


CHAPTER  XVin.

REPRODXJCTIVB  EFFECTS   OF  RIVERS.

Xjake  Deltas — Growth  of  the  Delta  of  the  Upper  Rhone  in  the  Lake  of  Geneva —
Playfair  on  the  Origin  of  Lake  Basins— Computation  of  the  Age  of  Deltas —
Recent  Deposits  in  Lake  Superior — Deltas  of  Inland  Seas — Course  of  the  Po —
Artificial  Embankments  of  the  Po  and  Adige — Delta  of  the  Po,  and  other  Rivers
entering  the  Adriatic — Rapid  Conversion  of  the  Gulf  into  Land — Mineral
Characters  of  the  New  Deposits — ^Marine  Delta  of  the  Rhone — ^Various  proofs
of  its  Increase — Stony  Nature  of  its  Deposits— Coast  of  Asia  Minor — Delta  of
the  Nile — Chronological  Computation  of  the  Growth  of  the  Nile  Mud  at
Memphis 412


CHAPTER  XIX.

BBPRODUOnVE  EFFECTS  OF  BITEB8^C0fl^tl6<£

Deltas  formed  under  the  Influence  of  Tides — ^Basin  and  Delta  of  the  Mississippi
— ^Alluvial  Plain — River-Banks  and  Blufifs — Curves  of  the  River — Natural  Rafts
and  Snags  —Mud-Lumps  near  the  Mouths  and  their  probable  Origin — New
Lakes,  and  Effects  of  Earthquakes — Antiquity  of  the  Delta — Section  in  Artesian
Well  at  New  Orleans— Delta  of  the  Amazons— Delta  of  the  Gtinges  and  Brah-
mapootra— Head  of  the  Delta  and  Sunderbunds — Islands  formed  and  destroyed
— Crocodiles— Amoimt  of  Floviatile  Sediment  in  the  Water — Artesian  Boring
at  Calcutta — Proofs  of  Subsidence — Age  of  the  Delta — Convergence  of  Deltas
— Origin  of  existing  Deltas  not  contemporaneous — Grouping  of  Strata  and
Stratification  in  Deltas — Conglomerates — Constant  Interchange  of  Land  and
Sea      . 436


CHAPTER  XX.
DESTROYING  AITD  TRAKSPORTINa  EFFECTS  OF  TIDES  AND  CTJRRENT8.

Differences  in  the  Rise  of  the  Tides — Causes  of  Currents — Lagullas  and  Gulf
Currents — Current  in  Lake  Erie — Surface  Current  into  the  Mediterranean  due  to
Excess  of  Evaporation —Outflow  at  great  Depths  d  ue  to  Tidal  Action — Contrast  of
Temperature  between  the  Mediterranean  and  Atlantic — Surface  Current  in  the
Black  Sea — Velocity  of  Currents — General  Oceanic  Circulation — ^Action  of  the
Sea  on  the  British  Coast — Shetland  Islands— Large  Blocks  removed — Isles
reduced  to  Clusters  of  Rocks — Orkney  Isles — ^Waste  of  East  Coast  of  Scotland
— and  East  Coast  of  England— Waste  of  the  Clifb  of  Holderness,  Norfolk,  and
Suffolk — Eccles  Church  in  1839  and  1862— Sand-Dunes  how  far  Chronometers —
Silting  up  of  Estuaries — Yarmouth  Estuary— Suffolk  Coast— Duhwich — Essex
Coast — Estuary  of  the  Thames  -  Goodwin  Siinds — Coast  of  Kent — Formation  of
the  Straits  of  Dover — South  Coast  of  England — Sussex — Hants — Dorset — Port-
land—Origin of  the  Chesil  Bank— Tor  Bay — St.  Michael's  Mount,  Cornwall —
Coast  of  Brittany 490


CONTENTS  OF  THE  TIRST  VOLUME.  xxi


CHAPTER  XXI.
AonoK  OF  TIDES  AND  CUBSXKTS — continued,

InioBds  of  the  Sea  at  the  Mouths  of  the  Rhine  in  Holland — Changes  in  the  Arms
of  the  Rhine — Proofs  of  Subsidence  of  Land — ^Estuary  of  the  3ies  Bosch,  formed
in  1421 — Zuyder  Zee,  in  the  Thirteenth  Century — Islands  destroyed — Delta  of
the  Ems  converted  into  a  Bay — Estuary  of  the  Dollart  formed — Encroachment
of  the  Sea  on  the  coast  of  Sleswick— on  the  Shores  of  North  America —Baltic
Currents— Cimbrian  Deluge — Tidal  Wave,  called  the  Bore     .        .    paob  662


CHAPTER  XXn.

BEPBODUCnVE  EFFECTS  OF  TIDES  AND  CXTBBEirTS.

Depositing  Power  of  Tidal  Currents— Silting  up  of  ^Estuaries  does  not  compen-
sate the  Loss  of  Land  on  the  Borders  of  the  Ocean — Origin  of  Shoals  and  Valleys
in  the  Bed  of  the  German  Ocean — Composition  and  Extent  of  its  Sand-banks —
Strata  deposited  by  Currents  in  the  English  Channel — At  the  Mouths  of
the  Amazons,  Orinoco,  and  Mississippi — ^Wide  Area  over  which  Strata  may  be
formed  by  this  Cause 666


CHAPTER  XXIU.

IGNEOUS  CAUSES.

Changes  of  the  Inorganic  World,  continued— Igneous  Causes— Division  of  the
Subject — Distinct  Volcanic  Regions — Region  of  the  Andes— System  of  Volcanos
extending  from  the  Aleutian  Isles  to  the  Molucca  and  Sunda  Islands — Poly-
nesian Archipelago — Volcanic  Region  extending  from  Central  Asia  to  the  Azores
— Tradition  of  Deluges  on  the  Shores  of  the  Bosphorus,  Hellespont,  and  Grecian
Isles— Periodical  Alternation  of  Earthquakes  in  Syria  and  Southern  Italy —
Western  Limits  of  the  European  Region — Earthquakes  rarer  and  moru  feeble
as  we  recede  from  the  Centres  of  Volcanic  Action — Extinct  Volcanos  not  to
be  included  in  Lines  of  Active  Vents 676


CHAPTER  XXIV.

VOLCANIC  DISTRICT  OF  NAPLES,

History  of  the  Volcanic  Eruptions  in  the  District  round  Naples — Early  Convulsions
in  the  Island  of  Ischia — Numerous  Cones  thrown  up  there — ^Lake  Avemus — The
Solfatara — Renewal  of  the  Eruption  of  Vesuvius,  a.d.  72 — Pliny's  Description
of  the  Phenomena — His  Silence  respecting  the  Destruction  of  Herculaneum  and
Pompeii — Subsequent  History  of  Vesuvius — Lava  discharged  in  Ischia  in
1802 — Pause  in  the  Eruptions  of  Vesuvius — Monte  Nuovo  thrown  up — Uni-
formity of  the  Volcanic  Operations  of  Vesuvius  and  Phlegnsan  Fields  in  Ancient
and  Modem  Times •        699


xxu  COKTENTS  OF  THE  FIEST  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  XXV.
VOLCANIC  DISTRICT  OF  JXkVJJSS— Continued,

Dimensions  and  Structiireof  the  Cone  of  VeeuTins — Fluidity  and  Motion  of  Lara —
Kopy  Scoriae — Dikes — Hypothesis  of  Elevation  Craters  not  applicable  to  Somma
and  Vesuvius — Sections  seen  in  Valleys  on  the  North  Side  of  Monte  Somma —
Alluviums  called  'Aqueous  Lavas  * — Origin  and  Composition  of  the  Matter
enveloping  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii — Condition  and  Contents  of  the  buried
Cities— Small  Number  of  Skeletons—State  of  Preservation  of  Animal  and  Vege-
table Substances — Rolls  of  Papyrus — Stabiae — Torre  del  Greco— Concluding
Remarks  on  the  Campanian  Volcanoes page  621


LIST    OF    PLATES.

Directions  to  the  Binder.

FBONTispiifiCB.    View  of  the  Temple  of  Serapis,  at  Pozzuolii  in  1836

To  face  Title-pa/jfe

Plate    I. — Map  showing  the  area  in  Europe  which  has  been  covered  by  water

since  the  beginning  of  the  Eocene  Period     .        To  face  Page    254

Platb  n. — View  of  Earth-pillars   of   Kitten,  on  the  Finsterbach,  near

Bot«en,  Tyrol To  face  Page   330

PuLTE  m. — Ideal  bird's-eye  view  of  the  course  of  the  Niagara  River  from
Lake  Erie  to  Queenstown,  showing  the  ravine  cut  by  the  river
between  Queenstown  and  the  Falls      .        .    .     To  face  Page    Zo^

Plate  IV. — Boulders  drifted  by  ice  on  shores  of  the  St  Lawrence

To' face  Page    361


PEINCIPLES


OF


GEOLOGY.


>}«Oo-


CHAPTEE  I.

OBOLOOT  DHFIXED — COMPARBD  TO  BISTORT — ITS  RBLATIOX  TO  OTHKR
PHYSICAL   SCIENCES — NOT  TO   BE  CONFOUITDED   WITH   COSMOGONY.

GEOLOGY  is  the  science  which  investigates  the  succes-
sive changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  organic  and
inorganic  kingdoms  of  nature ;  it  enquires  into  the  causes  of
these  changes,  and  the  influence  which  they  have  exerted  in
modifying  the  surface  and  external  structure  of  our  planet.

By  these  researches  into  the  state  of  the  earth  and  its  in-
habitants at  former  periods,  we  acquire  a  more  perfect  know-
ledge of  its  present  condition,  and  more  comprehensive  views
concerning  the  laws  now  governing  its  animate  and  inanimate
productions.  When  we  study  history,  we  obtain  a  more
profound  insight  into  human  nature,  by  instituting  a  compa-
rison between  the  present  and  former  states  of  society.  We
trace  the  long  series  of  events  which  have  gradually  led  to
the  actual  posture  of  affairs ;  and  by  connecting  effects  with
their  causes,  we  are  enabled  to  classify  and  retain  in  the
memory  a  multitude  of  complicated  relations — the  various
peculiarities  of  national  character — the  different  degrees  of
moral  and  intellectual  refinement,  and  numerous  other  cir-
cumstances, which,  without  historical  associations,  would  be
uninteresting  or  imperfectly  understood.    As  the  present

VOL.  I.  B


J
f


2  GEOLOGY  COMPABBD  TO  mSTORY.  [Ch.  I.

condition  of  nations  is  the  result  of  many  antecedent  changes,
some  extremely  remote,  and  others  recent,  some  gradual,
others  sudden  and  violent ;  so  the  state  of  the  natural  world
is  the  result  of  a  long  succession  of  events ;  and  if  we  would
enlarge  our  experience  of  the  present  economy  of  nature,
we  must  investigate  the  effects  of  her  operations  in  former
epochs.

We  often  discover  with  surprise,  on  looking  back  into  the
chronicles  of  nations,  how  the  fortune  of  some  battle  has  in-
fluenced the  fate  of  millions  of  our  contemporaries,  when  it
has  long  been  forgotten  by  the  mass  of  the  population.  With
this  remote  event  we  may  find  inseparably  connected  the
geographical  boundaries  of  a  great  state,  the  language  now
spoken  by  the  inhabitants,  their  peculiar  manners,  laws,  and
religious  opinions.  But  far  more  astonishing  and  unexpected
are  the  connections  brought  to  light,  when  we  carry  back  our
researches  into  the  history  of  nature.  The  form  of  a  coast,
the  configuration  of  the  interior  of  a  country,  the  existence
and  extent  of  lakes,  valleys,  and  mountains,  can  often  be
traced  to  the  former  prevalence  of  earthquakes  and  volcanoB
in  regions  which  have  long  been  undisturbed.  To  these
remote  convulsions  the  present  fertility  of  some  districts,  the
sterile  character  of  others,  the  elevation  of  land  above  the
sea,  the  climate,  and  various  peculiarities,  may  be  distinctly
referred.  On  the  other  hand,  many  distinguishing  features
of  the  surface  may  often  be  ascribed  to  the  operation,  at  a
remote  era,  of  slow  and  tranquil  causes — to  the  gradual  depo-
sition of  sediment  in  the  lake  or  in  the  ocean,  or  to  the  prolific
increase  of  testacea  and  corals.

To  select  another  example :  we  find  in  certain  localities
subterranean  deposits  of  coal,  consisting  of  vegetable  matter,
which  formerly  grew  like  peat,  in  swamps,  or  was  drifted  into
seas  and  lakes.  These  seas  and  lakes  have  since  been  fiilled
up,  the  lands  whereon  the  forests  grew  have  been  submerged
and  covered  with  new  strata,  the  rivers  and  currents  which
floated  the  vegetable  masses  can  no  longer  be  traced,  and  the
plants  belong  to  species  which  for  ages  have  passed  away
from  the  surface  of  our  planet.  Yet  the  commercial  prospe-
rity, and  numerical  strength  of  a  nation,  may  now  be  mainly


Ch.  I.]  GEOLOGY  COMPAEED  TO  HISTORY.  3

dependent  on  the  local  distribution  of  fuel  determined  by  that
ancient  state  of  things.

Geology  is  intimately  related  to  almost  all  the  physical
sciences,  a«  history  is  to  the  moral.  An  historian  should,  if
possible,  be  at  once  profoundly  acquainted  with  ethics,  poli-
tics, jurisprudence,  the  military  art,  theology;  in  a  Word,
with  all  branches  of  knowledge  by  which  any  insight  into  hu-'
man  affisurs,  or  into  the  moral  and  intellectual  nature  of  man,
can  be  obtained.  It  would  be  no  less  desirable  that  a  geolo- 1
gist  should  be  well  versed  in  chemistry,  natural  philosophy,  |
mineralogy,  zoology,  comparative  anatomy,  botany ;  in  short,  i
in  every  science  relating  to  organic  or  inorganic  nature.
With  these  accomplishments,  the  historian  and  geologist
would  rarely  fail  to  draw  correct  and  philosophical  conclu-
sions from  the  various  monuments  transmitted  to  them  of
former  occurrences.  They  would  know  to  what  combination
of  causes  analogous  effects  were  referable,  and  they  would
often  be  enabled  to  supply,  by  inference,  information  con-
cerning many  events  unrecorded  in  the  defective  archives  of
former  ages.  But  as  such  extensive  acquisitions  are  scarcely
within  the  reach  of  any  one  individual,  it  is  necessary  that  men
who  have  devoted  their  lives  to  different  departments  should
unite  their  efforts ;  and  as  the  historian  receives  assistance
from  the  antiquary,  and  from  those  who  have  cultivated  dif-
ferent branches  of  moral  and  political  science,  so  the  geolo-
gist should  avail  hunself  of  the  aid  of  many  naturalists,  and
particularly  of  those  who  have  studied  the  fossil  remains  of
lost  species  of  animals  and  plants.

The  analogy,  however,  of  the  monuments  consulted  in  geo-
logy, and  those  available  in  history,  extends  no  farther  than
to  one  class  of  historical  monuments — those  which  may  be
said  to  be  undesignedly  commemorative  of  former  events.  The
buried  coin  fixes  the  date  of  the  reign  of  some  Boman  empe-
ror: the  ancient  encampment  indicates  the  districts  once
occupied  by  invading  armies,  and  the  former  method  of  con-
structing military  defences ;  the  Egyptian  mummies  throw
light  on  the  art  of  embalming,  the  rites  of  sepulture,  or  the
average  stature  of  the  human  race  in  ancient  Egjrpt.  The
canoes  and  stone  hatchets,  called  celts,  found  in  our  peat-bogs

B  2


4  GEOLOGY  DISTINCT  FROM  COSMOGONY.  [Ch.  I.

and  estuary  deposits,  afford  an  insight  into  the  rude  arts
and  manners  of  a  prehistoric  race,  to  whom  the  use  of  metals
was  unknown,  while  flint  implements  of  a  much  ruder  type
point  to  a  still  earlier  period,  when  man  coexisted  in  Europe
with  many  quadrupeds  long  since  extinct.  This  class  of  me-
morials yields  to  no  other  in  authenticity,  but  it  constitutes  a
small  part  only  of  the  resources  on  which  the  historian  relies,
whereas  in  geology  it  forms  the  only  kind  of  evidence  which
is  at  our  command.  For  this  reason  we  must  not  expect  to
obtain  a  full  and  connective  account  of  any  series  of  events
beyond  the  reach  of  history.  But  the  testimony  of  geological
monuments,  if  frequently  imperfect,  possesses  at  least  the  ad-
vantage of  being  free  from  all  intentional  misrepresentation.
We  may  be  deceived  in  the  inferences  which  we  draw,  in  the
same  manner  as  we  ofben  mistake  the  nature  and  import  of
phenomena  observed  in  the  daily  course  of  nature ;  but  our
liability  to  err  is  confined  to  the  interpretation,  and,  if  this  be
correct,  our  information  is  certain.

It  was  long  before  the  distinct  nature  and  legitimate  ob-
jects of  geology  were  fully  recognised,  and  it  was  at  first
confounded  with  many  other  branches  of  enquiry,  just  as  the
limits  of  history,  poetry,  and  mythology  were  ill  defined  in
the  infancy  of  civilisation.  Even  in  Werner's  time,  or  at  the
close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  geology  appears  to  have  been
regarded  as  little  other  than  a  subordinate  department  of
Mineralogy;  and  Desmarest  included  it  imder  the  head
of  Physical  Geography.  But  the  most  common  and  serious
source  of  confusion  arose  from  the  notion,  that  it  was  the
business  of  geology  to  discover  the  mode  in  which  the  earth
originated,  or,  as  some  imagined,  to  study  the  effects  of  those
cosmological  causes  which  were  employed  by  the  Author  of
Nature  to  bring  this  planet  out  of  a  nascent  and  chaotic  state
into  a  more  perfect  and  habitable  condition.  Hutton  was  the
first  who  endeavoured  to  draw  a  strong  line  of  demarcation
'  between  his  favourite  science  and  cosmogony,  for  he  declared
that  geology  was  in  nowise  concerned  ^  with  questions  as  to
the  origin  of  things.'

An  attempt  will  be  made  in  the  sequel  of  this  work  to


Ch.  I.]  GEOLOGY  DISTINCT  FROM  COSMOGONY.  5

demonstrate  that  geology  differs  as  widely  from  cosmogony,  as
speculations  concerning  the  mode  of  the  first  creation  of  man
differ  from  history.  But,  before  entering  more  at  large  on
this  controverted  question,  it  will  be  desirable  to  trace  the
progress  of  opinion  on  this  topic,  from  the  earliest  ages  to
the  commencement  of  the  present  centmy.


6


CHAPTER  11.

OBIBMTAL  COSMUOOKT — HT1CN8  OF    THE    YEDAS — DrSTmTTBS  OF  VXSt — DOC-

TBIKE  OF  THE  8UCCBS9ITB  DBSTBUCTIOir  AKD  BENOTATIOIT  OF  THB  WOBLT)

OBIOnr  OF  THIS  DOCTBIMB — COUMOV  TO  THE  BOYFTLAKS — ADOPTED  BT  THB
OBEBK8 — ANAXIMANDEB  OIT  THB  OBIGIN  OF  MANKIND  FBOM  FISH — STSTBM
OF  PTTHAOOBAS — OF  ABISTOTLB — DOGMAS  CONCBBNINO  THB  EXTINCTION  AND
BBPBODUCnON  OF  OENBBA  AND  SPECIES — STBABO's  THBOBT  OF  BLBYATIOK
BY  BABTHQUAXB8 — PLINT^-CONCLUDINO  BBMABKB  ON  THB  KNOWLEDGE  OF
THE  ANCIBNTS.

I  Oriental  Cosmogony. — The  earliest  doctrines  of  the  Indian
and  Egyptian  schools  of  philosophy  agreed  in  ascribing  the
first  creation  of  the  worid  to  an  omnipotent  andjnfinite  Being.
They  concurred  also  in  representing  this  Being,  wlib  Lad
existed  from  all  eternity,  as  having  repeatedly  destroyed
and  reproduced  the  world  and  all  its  inhabitants.  In  the
sacred  volume  of  the  Hindoos,  called  the  Ordinances  of  MeniL,
comprising  the  Indian  system  of  duties  religious  and  civil,  we
find  a  preliminary  chapter  treating  of  the  Creation,  in  which
the  cosmogony  is  known  to  have  been  derived  from  earlier
writings  and  traditions  ;  and  principally  from  certain  hymns
of  high  antiquity,  called  the  Vedas.  These  hymns  were  first
put  together,  according  to  Mr.  Colebrooke,*  in  a  connected
series,  about  thirteen  centuries  before  the  Christian  era,  but
they  appear  from  internal  evidence  to  have  been  ivritten  at
various  antecedent  periods.  In  them,  as  we  learn  from  the
researches  of  Professor  Wilson,  the  eminent  Sanscrit  scholar,
two  distinct  philosophical  systems  are  discoverable.  Accord-
ing to  one  of  them,  all  things  were  originally  brought  into
existence  by  the  sole  wiU  of  a  single  First  Cause,  which
existed  from  eternity;  according  to  the  other,  there  have
always  existed  two  principles,  the  one  material,  but  without

*  Elssajs  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Hindoos.


Ch.  n.]  ORIENTAL  COSMOGONY.  7

form,  the  other  spiritual  and  capable  of  compelling  ^  inert
matter  to  develope  its  sensible  properties/  This  develop-
ment of  matter  into  *  individual  and  visible  existences  *  is
called  creation,  and  is  assigned  to  a  subordinate  agent,  or  the
creative  fiiculty  of  the  Supreme  Being  embodied  in  the  person
of  Brahma.

In  the  first  chapter  of  the  Ordinances  of  Menii  above
alluded  to,  we  meet  with  the  following  passages  relating  to
former  destructions  and  renovations  of  the  world : —

*  The  Being,  whose  powers  are  incomprehensible,  having
created  me  (Menii)  and  this  universe,  again  became  absorbed
in  the  supreme  spirit,  changing  the  time  of  energy  for  the
hour  of  repose.

*  When  that  Power  awakes,  then  has  this  world  its  full
expansion ;  but  when  he  slumbers  with  a  tranquil  spirit,  then

the  whole  system  feides  away For  while  he  reposes,  as

it  were,  embodied  spirits  endowed  with  principles  of  action
depart  from  their  several  acts,  and  the  mind  itself  becomes
inert.'

The  absorption  of  all  beings  into  the  Supreme  essence  is
then  described,  and  the  Divine  soul  itself  is  said  to  slumber
and  to  remain  for  a  time  immersed  in  *  the  first  idea,  or  in
darkness.'  After  which  the  text  thus  proceeds  (verse  fifty-
seven),  *  Thus  that  immutable  power  by  waking  and  reposing
alternately,  revivifies  and  destroys,  in  eternal  succession,  this
whole  assemblage  of  locomotive  and  immovable  creatures.'

It  is  then  declared  that  there  has  been  a  long  succession
of  manwantarcis,  or  periods,  each  of  the  duration  of  many
thousand  ages,  and —

*  There  are  creations  also,  and  destructions  of  worlds  in-
numerable :  the  Being,  supremely  exalted,  performs  all  this
with  as  much  ease  as  if  in  sport,  again  and  again,  for  the
sake  of  conferring  happiness.'*

No  part  of  the  Eastern  cosmogony,  from  which  these
extracts  are  made,  is  more  interesting  to  the  geologist  than
the  doctrine,  so  frequently  alluded  to,  of  the  reiterated  sub-
mersion of  the  land  beneath  the  waters  of  an  universal  ocean.

*  loBtitutes  of  Hindoo  Law,  or  the  Ordinances  of  Menii,  from  the  Sanscrit,
tZAOslated  by  Sir  William  Jones,  1796.


8  ORIENTAL  COSMOGONY.  [Ch.  n.

In  the  beginning  of  things,  we  are  told,  the  First  Sole
Cause  *  with  a  thought  created  the  waters,'  and  then  moved
upon  their  surface  in  the  form  of  Brahma  the  creator,  by

I  whose  agency  the  emergence  of  the  dry  land  was  effected,
and  the  peopling  of  the  earth  with  plants,  animals,  celestial

I,  creatures,  and  man.  Afterwards,  as  often  as  a  general  con-
flagration at  the  close  of  each  manwantara  had  annihilated
every  visible  and  existing  thing,  Brahma,  on  awaking  from
his  sleep,  finds  the  whole  world  a  shapeless  ocean.  Accord-
ingly, in  the  legendary  poem  called  the  Puranas,  composed
at  a  later  date  than  the  Yedas,  the  three  first  Avatars  or
descents  of  the  Deity  upon  earth  have  for  their  object  to
recover  the  land  from  the  waters.  For  this  purpose  Vishnu
is  made  successively  to  assume  the  form  of  a  fish,  a  tortoise,
and  a  boar.

Extravagant  as  may  be  some  of  the  conceits  and  fictions
which  disfigure  these  pretended  revelations,  we  can  by  no
means  look  upon  them  as  a  pure  effort  of  the  unassisted
imagination,  or  believe  them  to  have  been  composed  without
regard  to  opinions  and  theories  founded  on  the  observation
of  Nature.  In  astronomy,  for  instance,  it  is  declared  that,
at  the  North  Pole,  the  year  was  divided  into  a  long  day  and
night,  and  that  their  long  day  was  the  northern,  and  their
night  the  southern  course  of  the  sun ;  and  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  moon,  it  is  said  one  day  is  equal  in  length  to  one
month  of  mortals.*  If  such  statements  cannot  be  resolved
into  mere  conjectures,  we  have  no  right  to  refer  to  chance
alone  the  prevailing  notion  that  the  earth  and  its  in-
habitants had  formerly  undergone  a  succession  of  revolu-
tions and  aqueous  catastrophes  interrupted  by  long  intervals
of  tranquillity.

Now,  there  are  two  sources  in  which  such  a  theory  may
have  originated.  The  marks  of  former  convulsions  on  every
part  of  the  surface  of  our  planet  are  obvious  and  striking.
The  remains  of  marine  animals  imbedded  in  the  solid  strata
are  so  abundant,  that  they  may  be  expected  to  force  them-
selves on  the  attention  of  every  people  who  have  made  some
progress  in  refinement;  and  especially  where  one  class  of

*  Meni!i,  Inst.  c.  i.  66,  and  67.


Ch.  n.J  ORIENTAL  COSMOGONY.  9

men  are  expressly  set  apart  from  the  rest,  like  the  ancient  i
priesthoods  of  India  and  Egypt,  for  study  and  contemplation.
If  these  appearances  are  once  recognised,  it  seems  natural
that  the  mind  should  conclude  in  favour,  not  only  of  mighty
changes  in  past  ages,  but  of  alternate  periods  of  repose  and
disorder ; — of  repose,  when  the  animals  now  fossil  lived,  grew
and  multiplied — of  disorder,  when  the  strata  in  which  they
were  bturied  became  transferred  from  the  sea  to  the  interior
of  continents,  and  were  uplifted  so  as  to  form  part  of  high
mountain-chains.  Those  modem  writers,  who  are  disposed
to  disparage  the  former  intellectual  advancement  and  civili-
sation of  Eastern  nations,  may  concede  some  foundation  of
observed  facts  for  the  curious  theories  now  under  considera-
tion, without  indulging  in  exaggerated  opinions  of  the
progress  of  science ;  especially  as  universal  catastrophes  of
the  world,  and  exterminations  of  organic  beings,  in  the
sense  in  which  they  were  understood  by  the  Brahmins,  are
untenable  doctrines.

We  know  that  the  Egyptian  priests  were  aware,  not  only
that  the  soil  beneath  the  plains  of  the  Nile,  but  that  also
the  hills  bounding  the  great  valley,  contained  marine  shells ;
and  Herodotus  inferred  from  these  facts,  that  all  lower
Egypt,  and  even  the  high  lands  about  Memphis,  had  once
been  covered  by  the  sea.*  As  similar  fossil  remains  occur  in
all  parts  of  Asia  hitherto  explored,  far  in  the  interior  of  the
continent  as  well  as  near  the  sea,  they  could  hardly  have
escaped  detection  by  some  Eastern  sages  not  less  capable
than  the  Greek  historian  of  reasoning  philosophically  on
natural  phenomena.

We  also  know  that  the  rulers  of  Asia  were  engaged  in  very
remote  eras  in  executing  great  national  works,  such  as  tanks
and  canals  requiring  extensive  excavations.  In  the  fourteenth
century  of  our  era  (in  the  year  1360),  the  removal  of  soil
necessary  for  such  undertakings  brought  to  light  geological
fiicts,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  a  people  less  civilised
than  were  many  of  the  older  nations  of  the  East.  The  his-
torian Ferishta  relates  that  50,000  labourers  were  employed
in   cutting  through   a  mound,  so   as   to   form  a  junction

*  Herodot.  Euterpe,  12.


10  ORIENTAL  COSMOGONY.  [Ch.  H.

between  the  rivers  Selima  and  Satlej ;  and  in  this  mound
were  found  the  bones  of  elephants  and  men,  some  of  them
petrified,  and  some  of  them  resembling  bone.  The  gigantic
dimensions  attributed  to  the  himian  bones  show  them  to  haye
belonged  to  some  of  the  larger  pachydermata.*^

But  although  the  Brahmins,  like  the  priests  of  Egypt,
may  have  been  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  fossil  remains
in  the  strata,  it  is  possible  that  the  doctrine  of  successiye
destructions  and  renovations  of  the  world,  merely  received
corroboration  from  such  proofs ;  and  that  it  may  have  been
originally  handed  down,  like  the  religious  traditions  of  most
nations,  from  a  ruder  state  of  society.  The  system  may  have
had  its  source,  in  part  at  least,  in  exaggerated  accounts  of
those  dreadful  catastrophes,  which  are  occasioned  by  particular
combinations  of  natural  causes.  Floods  and  volcanic  erup-
tions, the  agency  of  water  and  fire,  are  the  chief  instruments
of  devastation  on  our  globe.  We  shall  point  out  in  the
sequel  the  extent  of  many  of  these  calamities,  recurring  at
distant  intervals  of  time,  in  the  present  course  of  nature ;
and  shall  only  observe  here,  that  they  are  so  peculiarly  cal-
culated to  inspire  a  lasting  terror,  and  are  so  offcen  fatal  in
their  consequences  to  great  multitudes  of  people,  that  it
scarcely  requires  the  passion  for  the  marvellous,  so  character-
istic of  rude  and  half-civilised  nations,  still  less  the  exuberant
imagination  of  Eastern  writers,  to  augment  them  into  general
cataclysms  and  conflagrations.

The  great  flood  of  the  Chinese,  which  their  traditions
carry  back  to  the  period  of  Yaou,  something  more  than  2,000
years  before  our  era,  has  been  identified  by  some  persona
with  the  universal  deluge  described  in  the  Old  Testament ;
but,  according  to  Mr.  Davis,  who  accompanied  two  of  our
embassies  to  China,  and  who  has  carefully  examined  their
written  accounts,  the  Chinese  cataclysm  is  therein  described
as  interrupting  the  business  of  agriculture,  rather  than  as
involving  a  general  destruction  of  the  human  race.     The

*  A  Persian  MS.  copy  of  the  historian  from  the  library  of  Tippoo  Saltan  in

Ferishta,  in  the  library  of  the  East  India  1799;  which  has  been  referred  to  at

Company,  relating  to  the  rise  and  pro-  some  length  by  Dr.  Buckland.    (Oeol.

gress  of  the   Mahomedan    empire    in  Trans.   2d  Series,  vol.  ii.  part  iii.  p.

India,  was  procured  by  Colonel  Briggs  389).


Ch.  il]  oriental  cosmogony.  Ill

great  Yn  was  celebrated  for  having  *  opened  nine  channels  to
draw  off  the  waters/  which  ^  covered  the  low  hills  and  bathed
the  foot  of  the  highest  mountains.'  Mr.  Davis  suggests  that
a  great  derangement  of  the  waters  of  the  Yellow  Biver,  one
of  the  largest  in  the  world,  might  even  now  cause  the  flood
of  Yaou  to  be  repeated,  and  lay  the  most  fertile  and  popu-
lous plains  of  China  under  water.  In  modem  times  the
bursting  of  the  banks  of  an  artificial  canal,  into  which  a
portion  of  the  Yellow  Eiver  has  been  turned,  has  repeatedly
given  rise  to  the  most  dreadful  accidents,  and  is  a  source  of
perpetual  anxiety  to  the  government.  It  is  easy,  therefore,
to  imagine  how  much  greater  may  have  been  the  inundation,
if  this  valley  was  ever  convulsed  by  a  violent  earthquake.*

Humboldt  relates  the  interesting  fact  that,  after  the
annihilation  of  a  large  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  Cumana,  by
an  earthquake  in  1766,  a  season  of  extraordinary  fertility
ensued,  in  consequence  of  the  great  rains  which  accompanied  i
the  subterranean  convulsions.  ^The  Indians,'  he  says,
*  celebrated,  after  the  ideas  of  an  antique  superstition,  by
festivals  and  dancing,  the  destruction  of  the  world  and  the
approaching  epoch  of  its  regeneration.'f

The  existence  of  such  rites  among  the  rude  nations  of
South  America  is  most  important,  as  showing  what  effects
may  be  produced  by  local  catastrophes,  recurring  at  distant
intervals  of  time,  on  the  minds  of  a  barbarous  and  unculti-
vated race.  I  shall  point  out  in  the  sequel  how  the  tradition
of  a  deluge  among  the  Araucanian  Indians  may  be  explained,
by  reference  to  great  earthquake-waves  which  have  repeatedly
rolled  over  part  of  Chili  since  the  first  recorded  fiood  of  1590.
The  legend  also  of  the  ancient  Peruvians  of  an  inimdation
many  years  before  the  reign  of  the  Incas,  in  which  only  six
persons  were  saved  on  a  float,  relates  to  a  region  which  has
more  than  once  been  overwhelmed  by  inroads  of  the  ocean
since  the  days  of  Pizarro.  I  might  refer  the  reader  to  my
account  of  the  submergence  of  a  wide  area  in  Cutch  so  lately  as
the  year  1819,  when  a  single  tower  only  of  the  fort  of  Sindree

•  Sec  Daris  on  •  The  Chinese/  pub-  f  Humboldt  et  Bonpland,  Voy.  Relat.

lished   bj  the  Soc.  for  the  Diffus.  of      Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  30.
Use.  Know.  vol.  i.  pp.  137, 147.


12  EGYPTIAN  COSMOGONY.  [Ch.  n.

appeared  above  the  waste  of  waters,  if  it  were  necessary,  to
prove  how  easily  the  catastrophes  of  modem  times  might
give  rise  to  traditionary  narratives,  among  a  rude  people,  of
floods  of  boundless  extent.  Nations  without  written  records,
and  who  are  indebted  for  all  their  knowledge  of  past  events
exclusively  to  oral  tradition,  are  in  the  habit  of  confounding
in  one  legend  a  series  of  incidents  which  have  happened  at
various  epochs ;  nor  must  we  forget  that  the  superstitions  of
a  savage  tribe  are  transmitted  through  all  the  progressive
stages  of  society,  till  they  exert  a  powerful  influence  on  the
mind  of  the  philosopher.  He  may  find,  in  the  monuments  of
former  changes  on  the  earth's  surface,  an  apparent  confirma-
tion of  tenets  handed  down  through  successive  generations,
from  the  rude  hunter,  whose  terrified  imagination  drew  a
false  picture  of  those  awful  visitations  of  floods  and  earth-
quakes, whereby  the  whole  earth  as  known  to  him  was
simultaneously  devastated.

Egyptian  Cosmogony. — Respecting  the  cosmogony  of  the
Egyptian  priests,  we  gather  much  information  from  writers  of
the  Grecian  sects,  who  borrowed  almost  all  their  tenets  from
Egypt,  and  amongst  others  that  of  the  former  successive  de-
struction and  renovation  of  the  world.*  We  learn  from  Plu-
tarch, that  this  was  the  theme  of  one  of  the  hymns  of  Orpheus,
so  celebrated  in  the  fabulous  ages  of  Greece.  It  was  brought
by  him  from  the  banks  of  the  Nile  ;  and  we  even  find  in  his
verses,  as  in  the  Indian  systems,  a  definite  period  assigned
for  the  duration  of  each  successive  world.f  The  returns
of  great  catastrophes  were  determined  by  the  period  of  the
Annus  Magnus,  or  great  year— a  cycle  composed  of  the  revo-
lutio];^s  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets,  and  terminating  when
these  return  together  to  the  same  sign  whence  they  were
supposed  at  some  remote  epoch  to  have  set  out.  The  dura-
tion of  this  great  cycle  was  variously  estimated.  According
to  Orpheus,  it  was  120,000  years;  according  to  others,
300,000 ;  and  by  Cassander  it  was  taken  to  be  360,000  years,  f

We  learn  particularly  from  the  Timseus  of  Plato,  that  the

♦  Prichard's  Egypt.  Mythol.  p.  177.        Prichard's  Egypt.  Mythol.  p.  182
t  Plut.  de  Defectu  Oracolorum,  cap.  J  Prichard's  Egypt  Mythol.  p.  182.

12.  Censorinus  de  Die  Natali.    See  also


Ch.  n.]  EGYPTIAN  COSMOGONY.  13

Egyptians  believed  the  world  to  be  subject  to  occasional
conflagrations  and  deluges,  whereby  the  gods  arrested  the
career  of  human  wickedness,  and  purified  the  earth  from  guilt.
After  each  regeneration,  mankind  were  in  a  state  of  virtue  \
and  happiness,  from  which  they  CTadually  degenerated  again
into  Tice  and  immorality.  From^s  E^tL  doctrinefthe
poets  derived  the  fable  of  the  decline  from  the  golden  to  the
iron  age.  The  sect  of  Stoics  adopted  most  fully  the  system
of  catastrophes  destined  at  certain  intervals  to  destroy  the
world.  These  they  taught  were  of  two  kinds ; — the  Cataclysm,  \
or  destruction  by  water,  which  sweeps  away  the  whole  human
race,  and  annihilates  all  the  animal  and  vegetable  productions
of  nature ;  and  the  E^pyrosis,  or  destruction  by  fire,  which
dissolves  the  globe  itself.  From  the  Egyptians  also  they
derived  the  doctrine  of  the  gradual  debasement  of  man  from
a  state  of  innocence.  Towards  the  termination  of  each  era
the  gods  could  no  longer  bear  with  the  wickedness  of  men,
and  a  shock  of  the  elements  or  a  deluge  overwhelmed  them ;
after  which  calamity,  Astrea  again  descended  on  the  earth,
to  renew  the  golden  age.*

The  connection  between  the  doctrine  of  successive  cata-
strophes and  repeated  deteriorations  in  the  moral  character  of
the  human  race  is  more  intimate  and  natural  than  might  at
first  be  imagined.  For,  in  a  rude  state  of  society,  all  great
calamities  are  regarded  by  the  people  as  judgments  of  God
on  the  wickedness  of  man.  Thus,  in  our  own  time,  the
priests  persuaded  a  large  part  of  the  population  of  Chili,  and
perhaps  believed  themselves,  that  the  fatal  earthquake  of  1822
was  a  sign  of  the  wrath  of  Heaven  for  the  great  political
revolution  just  then  consummated  in  South  America.  In
like  manner,  in  the  account  given  to  Soloi  by  the  Egyptian
priests,  of  the  submersion  of  the  island  of  Atlantis  under  the
waters  of  the  ocean,  after  repeated  shocks  of  an  earthquake,
we  find  that  the  event  happened  when  Jupiter  had  seen  the
moral  depravity  of  the  inhabitants.f  Now,  when  the  notion
had  once  gained  ground,  whether  from  causes  before  sug-
gested or  not,  that  the  earth  had  been  destroyed  by  several
general  catastrophes,  it  would  next  be  inferred  that  the

*  Prichard'B  i^t  MythoL  p.  193.  f  Plato's  Timaeus.


14  EGYPTIAN  COSMOGONY.  [Oh.  n.

human  race  had  been  as  often  destroyed  and  renovated.  And
since  every  extermination  was  assumed  to  be  penal,  it  could
only  be  reconciled  with  divine  justice,  by  the  supposition  that
man,  at  each  successive  creation,  was  regenerated  in  a  state
of  purity  and  innocence.

A  very  large  portion  of  Asia,  inhabited  by  the  earliest
nations  whose  traditions  have  come  down  to  us,  has  been
always  subject  to  tremendous  earthquakes.  Of  the  geo-
graphical boundaries  of  these,  and  their  e£Fects,  I  shall  speak
in  the  proper  place.  Egypt  has,  for  the  most  part,  been
exempt  from  this  scourge,  and  the  Egyptian  doctrine  of  great
catastrophes  was  probably  derived  in  part,  as  before  hinted,
from  early  geological  observations,  and  in  part  from  Eastern
nations.

In  the  Egyptian  and  Eastern  cosmogonies,  and  in  the
Greek  version  of  them,  no  very  definite  meaning  can,  in
general,  be  attached  to  the  term  *  destruction  of  the  world ;  *
for  sometimes  it  would  seem  almost  to  imply  the  annihilation
of  our  planetary  system,  and  at  others  a  mere  revolution  of
the  surface  of  the  earth.

One  remarkable  fiction  of  the  Egyptian  mythology  was  the
supposed  intervention  of  a  masculo-feminine  principle,  to
which  was  assigned  the  development  of  the  embryo  world
from  chaos,  somewhat  in  the  way  of  incubation.  When  the
first  chaotic  mass  had  been  produced  by  a  self-dependent  and
eternal  Being,  it  required  the  mysterious  functions  of  this
subordinate  deity  to  produce  the  mundane  egg  from  which
the  whole  organised  world  was  developed.

Aristophanes,  alluding  to  this  Egyptian  fable,  which  had
been  engrafted  by  Qrpheus  on  the  Greek  mythology,  intro-
duced the  chorus  m  his  comedy  of  *  The  Birds '  singing  in  a
solemn  hymn,  *  How  sable-plumaged  Night  conceived  in  the
boundless  bosom  of  Erebus,  and  laid  an  egg,  fr^m  which,  in
the  revolution  of  ages,  sprang  Love,  resplendent  with  golden
pinions.  Love  fecundated  the  dark-winged  chaos,  and  gave
origin  to  the  race  of  birds.'  *

It  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Hindoo  mythology  to  sup-
pose that  Pythagoras,  whose  opinions  will   presently   be

*  Aristophanes'  Birds,  p.  694.


Ch.  n.]  OPINIONS  OF  THE  GREEKS.  15

mentioned,  might  have  found  in  the  East  not  only  the  system
of  nniversal  and  violent  catastrophes  and  periods  of  repose  in
endless  succession,  but  also  that  of  periodical  revolutions,
effected  by  the  continued  agency  of  ordinary  causes.  For
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  the  first,  second,  and  third  persons
ofThe  Hindoo  triad,  severally  represented  the  Creative,  the  li
fteservmg,  and  the  Destroying  powers  of  the  Deity.  The  co-  I'
existence  of  these  three  attributes,  all  in  simultaneous  opera-
tion, might  well  accord  with  the  notion  of  perpetual  but
partial  alterations  finally  bringing  about  a  complete  change.
But  the  fiction  expressed  in  the  verses  before  quoted  from
Menii  of  eternal  vicissitudes  in  the  vigils  and  slumbers  of  -
Brahma  seems  accop\modated  to  the  system  of  great  general  \
catastrophes  followed  by  new  creations  and  periods  of  repose.
Opinions  of  the  Oreeks. — Anojximander  (610  B.C.)  In  the  8th
book  of  Plutarch's  Symposiacon  or  *  Convivial  Conversations,'
the  question  is  raised  why  the  Pythagoreans  were  averse
to  eating  fish,  and  it  is  considered  whether  the  prejudice
may  have  had  an  Egyptian,  or  a  Syrian,  or  an  ancient  Greek
source.  One  of  the  party  alludes  to  the  doctrine  of  Anaxi-
mander  that  *  Men  were  in  the  beginning  engendered  in  fish,|
and  after  they  had  been  nourished  and  had  become  able  to  shift*
for  themselves,  they  were  cast  out  and  took  to  the  land.'  A
suggestion  is  then  made  that,  as  fish  were  the  parents  of
mankind,  Anaximander  may  have  objected  to  the  use  of  them
as  food.  Such  allusions  to  an  ancient  doctrine  by  no  means
warrant  us  in  assuming  that  Anaximander  had  really  taught
that  men  should  abstain,  from  such  a  motive,  from  eating
fish,  but  they  are  curious  as  afibrding  evidence  that  the
Milesian  philosopher  really  believed  that  men  originally
sprang  from  fish.  Unfortunately  all  the  works  of  Anaxi-
mander, the  pupil  of  Thales,  are  lost.  He  was  bom  610
years  before  Christ,  and  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who
left  a  philosophical  treatise  in  writing.  It  is  only  from  a  few
brief  citations  scattered  through  the  pages  of  later  authors,  !
that  we  learn  anything  of  his  opinions.  Eusebius  quotes
from  a  lost  work  of  Plutarch  called  ^7p(afxaTels  or '  patchwork,'
the  following  words  :  *  Man,  according  to  Anaximander,  must
have  been  bom  from  animals  of  a  different  form  {i^  aXXoet&uy


16  ANAXIMANDEB.  [Ch.  IL

^(Hkov)  ;  for  whereas  other  animals  easily  get  their  food  by
themselves,  man  alone  requires  long  rearing;  and  no  one
being  such  as  he  was  originally,  could  have  been  pre-
served.'*

In  another  work  of  Plutarch  we  read  as  follows :  *  Anaxi-
mander  taught  that  the  first  animals  (t^  irpSrra  ^oni)  were
begotten  in  moisture,  and  were  covered  with  prickly  integu-
ments, but  as  they  grew  older  they  came  out  into  the  dry  land,
and  their  integuments  were  rent  asunder.'  f  Censorinus,  in
liis  work  *  De  Die  Natali,'  says  that,  according  to  Anaxi-
mander,  either  fish,  or  animals  very  like  fish,  sprang  from
heated  water  and  earth,  and  that  the  human  foetuses  grew  in
these  animals  to  a  state  of  puberty,  so  that  when  at  length
they  burst,  men  and  women  capable  of  nourishing  themselves
proceeded  from  them.  J  Full  justice  cannot,  probably,  be  done
to  the  views  of  this  ancient  author  by  reference  to  the  few
meagre  fragments  of  his  writings  which  have  alone  come
down  to  us,  but  we  trace  the  same  idea  running  through  all
of  them,  namely,  the  peculiar  helplessness  of  the  human
infant,  making  it  natural  to  suppose  that  there  must  have
been  a  connection  between  the  embryonic  condition  of  the
first  human  beings  and  some  previously  existing  animals.
Anaximander  evidently  took  for  granted  that  man  was  not
created  in  an  adult  or  fully  developed  state,  and  in  so  doing  he
made  at  least  some  slight  approach,  twenty-five  centuries
before  our  time,  to  the  modem  doctrine  of  evolution.  But
none  of  the  above  passages  warrant  the  conclusion  that  the
Greek  philosopher  had  anticipated  the  Lamarckian  theory  of
progressive  development.  Yet  H.  Eitter,  writing  in  1819,§
represents  him  as  having  taught  that  after  the  first  imperfect
and  short-lived  creatures  had  been  engendered  in  slime,  an
advance  took  place  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  grades  of
life,  until  at  length  man  was  formed ;  and  Cuvier,  usually
so  accurate,  but  who  seems  never  in  this  instance  to  have
consulted  the  original  texts,  went  a  step  beyond  Eitter,  and
said,  ^  Anaximander  pretended  that  men  had  been  first  fish,

♦  Euseb.  Ewory«^«^s  irporap.  1-8.  J  Censorinus  de  Die  Natali  IV.

t  De  PlacidiBPhilosophoniiDfbooky.  §  Ersch  and  Gnibei's  Encydopiidia,

chap.  10.  article  Jnaximander,


Ch.  n.]  PYTHAGOREAN  DOCTRINES.  17

then  reptiles,  then  mammalia,  and  lastly  what  thej  now
are/  *  A  system/  he  adds,  *  which  we  find  reproduced  in
times  very  near  to  our  own,  and  even  in  the  nineteenth
century/  *Quoi  qu'il  en  soit,  Anaximandre,  ayant  admis
Teau  comme  le  second  principe  de  la  Nature,  pr^tendait  que
les  hommes  avaient  primitivement  et^  poissons,  puis  reptiles,
puis  mammif^res  et  enfin  ce  qu'ils  sont  maintenant,  nous
retrouverons  ce  syst^me  dans  des  temps  tr^s-rapproch^s  des
n6tres  et  mSme  dans  le  dix-neuvifeme  si^cle.'*

Pythagorean  Doctrines. — Pythagoras  (580?  B.C.),  who  re-  f
sided  for  more  than  twenty  years  in  Egypt,  and,  according  to  j
Cicero,  had  visited  the  East,  and  conversed  with  the  Persian  '
philosophers,  introduced  into  his  own  country,  on  his  return,
the  doctrine   of  the  gradual  deterioration   of  the  human
race  from  an  original  state  of  virtue  and  happiness ;  but  if
we  are  to  judge  of  his  theory  concerning  the  destruction  and
renovation  of  the  earth  from  the  sketch  given  by  Ovid,  we
must  concede  it  to  have  been  far  more  philosophical  than
any  known  version  of  the  cosmogonies  of  Oriental  or  Egyp-
tian sects.

Although  Pythagoras  is  in ti  educed  by  the  poet  as  deliver-
ing his  doctrine  in  person,  some  of  the  illustrations  are
derived  from  natural  events  which  happened  after  the  death
of  the  philosopher.  But  notwithstanding  these  anachronisms,
we  may  regard  the  account  as  a  true  picture  of  the  tenets  of
the  Pythagorean  school  in  the  Augustan  age ;  and  although
perhaps  partially  modified,  it  must  have  contained  the  sub-
stance of  the  original  scheme.  Thus  considered,  it  is  ex-
tremely curious  and  instructive ;  for  we  here  find  a  compre-
hensive summary  of  almost  all  the  great  causes  of  change
now  in  activity  on  the  globe,  and  these  adduced  in  confirma-
tion of  a  principle  of  a  perpetual  and  gradual  revolution
inherent  in  the  nature  of  our  terrestrial  system.  These
doctrines,  it  is  true,  are  not  directly  applied  to  the  explanation
of  geological  phenomena ;  or,  in  other  words,  no  attempt  is
made  to  estimate  what  may  have  been  in  past  ages,  or  what

♦  Carier,   Hist,   des  Sciences   natu-  derived  their    theory    of    progressive

ittUes,  tome  i.  p.  91,  published  in  1841.  development  from  geological  data,  the

Lamarck  and  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  are  former  having  publishe^l  his   opinions

erideotly  here  alluded  to:  they  had  in  1801,  nnd  G.  St.  Hilaire  in  1828.

VOL.  I.  C


18  PYTHAGOREAN  SYSTEM.  [Ch.  II.

may  hereafter  be,  the  aggregate  amount  of  change  brought
about  by  such  never-ending  fluctuations.  Had  this  been  the
case,  we  might  have  been  called  upon  to  admire  so  extra-
ordinary an  anticipation  with  no  less  interest  than  astrono-
mers, when  they  endeavour  to  define  by  what  means  the
Samian  philosopher  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Copemican
system.

Let  us  now  examine  the  celebrated  passages  to  which  we
have  been  adverting : — •

^  Nothing  perishes  in  this  world ;  but  things  merely  vary
and  change  their  form.  To  be  born,  means  simply  that  a
thing  begins  to  be  something  different  from  what  it  was
before ;  and  dying,  is  ceasing  to  be  the  same  thing.  Yet,
although  nothing  retains  long  the  same  image,  the  sum  of
the  whole  remains  constant.'  These  general  propositions
are  then  confirmed  by  a  series  of  examples,  all  derived  from
natural  appearances,  except  the  first,  which  refers  to  the
golden  age  giving  place  to  the  age  of  iron.  The  illustrations
are  thus  consecutively  adduced.

1.  Solid  land  has  been  converted  into  sea.

2.  Sea  has  been  changed  into  land.  Marine  shells  lie  far
distfint  from  the  deep,  and  the  anchor  has  been  found  on  the
summit  of  hills.

3.  Valleys  have  been  excavated  by  running  water,  and
floods  have  washed  down  hills  into  the  sea.f

4.  Marshes  have  become  dry  ground.

6.  Dry  lands  have  been  changed  into  stagnant  pools.

6.  During  earthquakes  some  springs  have  been  closed  up,
and  new  ones  have  broken  out.  Rivers  have  deserted  their
channels,  and  have  been  re-born  elsewhere ;  as  the  Erasinus
in  Greece,  and  Mysus  in  Asia.

7.  The  waters  of  some  rivers,  formerly  sweet,  have  become
bitter  ;  as  those  of  the  Anigris  in  Greece,  &c.  J

8.  Islands  have  become  connected  with  the  main  land  by


*  Ovid's  Metamor.  lib.  16.  to  the  abrading  power  of  floods,  tor

t  Eluvie  mens  ept  dwluctus  in  sequor,  rents,  and  rivers.
V.  267.     The  meiini  ng  of  this  last  vtTse  {  The  impregnation  from  new  mineral

is  somewhat  obscure  ;  but  taken   with  springs,  caused  by  earthquakes  in  volca-

tbo  context,  may  be  supposed  to  allude  nic  countries,  is  perhaps  here  alluded  to.


Ch,  n.]


PYTHAGOREAN  SYSTEM.


19


the  growth  of  deltas  and  new  deposits ;  as  in  the  case  of
Antissa  joined  to  Lesbos,  Pharos  to  Egypt,  &c.

9.  Peninsulas  have  been  divided  from  the  main  land,  and
have  become  islands,  as  Leucadia ;  and  according  to  tradition
Sicily,  the  sea  having  carried  away  the  isthmus.

10.  Land  has  been  submerged  by  earthquakes ;  the  Grecian
cities  of  Helice  and  Buris,  for  example,  are  to  be  seen  under
the  sea,  with  their  walls  inclined.

11.  Plains  have  been  upheaved  into  hills  by  the  confined
air  seeking  vent,  as  at  Troezene  in  the  Peloponnesus.

12.  The  temperature  of  some  springs  varies  at  difierent
periods.  The  waters  of  others  are  inflammable.*  Some
streams  make  the  hair  to  resemble  amber  and  gold,  others
influence  the  mind  as  well  as  the  body,  having  some  of  them
an  exciting,  others  a  soporific  effect.

13.  There  are  streams  which  have  a  petrifying  power,  and
convert  the  substances  which  they  touch  into  marble.

14.  Extraordinary  medicinal  and  deleterious  effects  are
produced  by  water  of  different  lakes  and  springs.f

15.  Some  rocks  and  islands,  after  floating  and  having
been  subject  to  violent  movements,  have  at  length  become
stationary  and  immovable,  as  Delos,  and  the  Cyanean
Isles,  t

16.  Volcanic  vents  shift  their  position;  there  was  a  time
when  Etna  was  not  a  burning  mountain,  and  the  time  will
come  when  it  will  cease  to  burn.  Whether  it  be  that  some
caverns  become  closed  up  by  the  movements  of  the  earth,
and  others  opened,  or  whether  the  fuel  is  finally  exhausted,

The  various  causes  of  change   in   the   inanimate   world


♦  That  is  probably  an  allusion  to  tho
e«cnpe  of  inflammable  gas,  like  that  in
the  district  of  Baku.  wo6t  of  the  Cas-
pian ;  at  Pieipamala,  in  the  Tuscan
Apennines ;  and  several  otlier  places.

t  Many  of  those  described  seem
fanciful  fictions,  like  the  exaggerated
rirtues  still  attributed  to  some  mineral

I  Kaspe.  in  a  learned  and  juHcious
essay  (De  Novis  Insulis,  cap.  19),  has
made  it  appear  extremely  probable  that


all  tho  traditions  of  certain  islands  in
the  Mediterranean  having  at  some
former  time  frequently  shifted  their
positions,  and  at  length  become  stii-
tionarj',  originated  in  the  great  change
produced  in  their  form  by  enrtliquakes
and  submarine  eniptions,  of  which  there
have  been  m»Kiorn  examples  in  the  new
islands  raised  in  the  time  of  history.
When  the  series  of  convulsions  ended,
the  island  was  said  t/>  l)ecf>me  fixed.


c  2


20  ARISTOTEUAN  SYSTEM.  [Ch.  II.

having  been  thus  enumerated,  those  of  the  animate  cre9.tion
are  next  alluded  to.    The  metamorphoses  of  insects  and  frogs
are  mentioned,  and  some  popular  notions  respecting  other
changes  in  the  organic  world,  such  as  the  springing  Bp  of
the  phoenix  from  the  ashes  of  its  parent ;  but  none  of  the
facts  or  fables  have  any  geological  bearing,  unless  weconsider
the  alleged  generation  of  bees  and  wasps  from  the  putrid
carcases  of  dead  cattle  and  horses,  and  the  originating  of
snakes  from  the  marrow  of  the  human  spine  in  sepulchres,  as
implying  the  adoption  of  the  doctrine  of  equivocal  generation.
The  transmigration  of  seuls  into  the  bodies  of  animals  is
referred  to  as  having  been  taught  by  Numa  Pompilius.     But
there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  the  Greeks  or  Romans  had  any
fixed  ideas  respecting  a  general  change  of  species  having  oc-
.  curred  in  the  past  history  of  the  globe,  still  less  that  there  had
'  been  a  progressive  development  of  life  from  the  lowest  to  the
highest  grades  of  organisation.     Xenophanes,  a  Colophonian
who  lived  B.C.  535,  spoke  of  shells,  fishes,  and  seals  which  had
become  dried  in  mud,  and  were  found  inland  and  on  the
tops  of  the  highest  mountains.     Aristotle,  in  his  treatise  on
respiration,  speaks  distinctly  of  fossil  fishes ;  and  his  pupil
Theophrastus,  alluding  to  such  fishes  found  near  Heraclea,
in  Pontus,  and  in  Paphlagonia,  says,  that  they  were  either
procreated  from  fish-spawn  left  behind  in  the  earth,  or  had
gone  astray  from  rivers  or  from  the  sea,  for  the  sake  of  food,
into  cavities  in  the  earth,  where  they  had  become  petrified.
The  same  writer,  treating  of  fossil  ivory  and  bones,  sup-
posed them  to  be  produced  by  a  certain  plastic  virtue  latent
in  our  earth.

Opinions  of  Aristotle. — From  the  works  now  extant  of
Aristotle,  and  from  the  system  of  Pythagoras,  as  above  ex-
posed, we  might  certainly  infer  that  these  philosophers  con-
sidered the  agents  of  change  now  operating  in  nature,  as
capable  of  bringing  about  in  the  lapse  of  ages  a  complete
revolution ;  and  the  Stagyrite  even  considers  occasional  ca-
tastrophes, happening  at  distant  intervals  of  time,  as  part  of
the  regular  and  ordinary  course  of  nature.  The  deluge  of
Deucalion,  he  says,  affected  Greece  only,  and  principally  the
part  called  Hellas,  and  it  arose  from  great  inundations  of


Ch.  n.]  ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEM.  21

rivers  during  a  rainy  winter.  But  such  extraordinary  winters,
he  says,  though  after  a  certain  period  they  return,  do  not
always  revisit  the  same  places.*

Censorinus  quotes  it  as  Aristotle's  opinion,  that  there  were
general  inundations  of  the  globe,  and  that  they  alternated
with  conflagrations ;  and  that  the  flood  constituted  the
winter  of  the  Great  Tear,  or  astronomical  cycle,  while  the
conflagration,  or  destruction  by  fire,  is  the  summer  or  period
of  greatest  heat.t  If  this  passage,  as  Lipsius  supposes,  be
an  amplification,  by  Censorinus,  of  what  is  written,  in  *  the
Meteorics,'  it  is  a  gross  misrepresentation  of  the  doctrine  of
the  Stagyrite,  for  the  general  bearing  of  his  reasoning  in
that  treatise  tends  clearly  in  an  opposite  direction.  He  refers
to  many  examples  of  changes  now  constantly  going  on,  and
insists  emphatically  on  the  great  results  which  they  must
produce  in  the  lapse  of  ages.  He  instances  particular  cases
of  lakes  that  had  dried  up,  and  deserts  that  had  at  length
become  watered  by  rivers  and  fertilised.  He  points  to  the
growth  of  the  Nilotic  Delta  since  the  time  of  Homer,  to  the
shallowing  of  the  Palus  Mseotis  within  sixty  years  from  his
own  time ;  and  although,  in  the  same  chapter,  he  says  nothing
of  changes  in  the  relative  level  of  land  and  sea,  yet  in  other
parts  of  the  same  treatise  he  speaks  of  such  events  in  con-
nection with  earthquakes.  J  He  alludes,  for  example,  to  the
upheaving  of  one  of  the  Eolian  Islands  previous  to  a  volcanic  ,
eruption.  *  The  changes  of  the  earth,'  he  says,  *  are  so  slow  '
in  comparison  to  the  duration  of  our  lives,  that  they  are  over-
looked (XavOdvei) ;  and  the  migrations  of  people  after  great
catastrophes  and  their  removal  to  other  regions,  cause  the  ^
event  to  be  forgotten.'§

When  we  consider  the  acquaintance  displayed  by  Aristotle,
in  his  various  works,  with  the  destroying  and  renovating
powers  of  Nature,  the  introductory  and  concluding  passages
of  the  twelfth  chapter  of  his  *  Meteorics  '  are  certainly  very
remarkable.  In  the  first  sentence  he  says,  *  The  distribution
of  land  and  sea  in  particular  regions  does  not  endure
throughout  all  time,  but  it  becomes  sea  in  those  parts  where  I

♦  Meteor,  lib.  i.  cap.  12.  J  Lib.  iu  cap.  14   16,  and  16.

t  De  Die  Nat  §  Ibid.


22  AEISTOTEUAN  SYSTEM.  '  [Ch.  IL

it  was  land,  and  again  it  becomes  land  where  it  was  sea :  and
there  is  reason  for  thinking  that  these  changes  take  place
according  to  a  certain  system,  and  within  a  certain  period.'
The  concluding  observation  is  as  follows  : — *  As  time  never
fails,  and  the  universe  is  eternal,  neither  the  TsLnais,  nor  the
Nile,  can  have  flowed  for  ever.  The  places  where  they  rise
were  once  dry,  and  there  is  a  limit  to  their  operations  ;  but
there  is  none  to  time.  So  also  of  all  other  rivers;  they
spring  up,  and  they  perish;  and  the  sea  also  continually
deserts  some  lauds  and  invades  others.  The  same  tracts,
therefore,  of  the  earth  are  not,  some  always  sea,  and  others
always  continents,  but  everything  changes  in  the  course  of
time.'

It  seems,  then,  that  the  Greeks  had  not  only  derived  firom
preceding  nations,  but  had  also,  in  some  slight  degree,
deduced  from  their  own  observations,  the  theory  of  periodical
revolutions  in  the  inorganic  world:  there  is,  however,  no
ground  for  imagining  that  they  contemplated  former  changes
ill  the  races  of  animals  and  plants.  Even  the  fact  that
marine  remains  were  enclosed  in  solid  rocks,  although
observed  by  some,  and  even  made  the  groundwork  of  geo-
logical speculation,  never  stimulated  the  industry  or  guided
the  enquiries  of  naturalists.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the
theory  of  equivocal  generation  might  have  engendered  some
indifference  on  this  subject,  and  that  a  belief  in  the  sponta-
neous production  of  living  beings  from  the  earth  or  corrupt
matter,  might  have  caused  the  organic  world  to  appear  so
unstable  and  fluctuating,  that  phenomena  indicative  of
former  changes  would  not  awaken  intense  curiosity.  The
Egyptians,  it  is  true,  had  taught,  and  the  Stoics  had  repeated,
'  that  the  earth  had  once  given  birth  to  some  monstrous
'•  animals,  which  existed  no  longer ;  but  the  prevailing  opinion
seems  to  have  been,  that  after  each  great  catastrophe  the
same  species  of  animals  were  created  over  again.  This  tenet
is  implied  in  a  passage  of  Seneca,  where,  speaking  of  a
future  deluge,  he  says,  *  Every  animal  shall  be  generated
anew,  and  man  free  from  guilt  shall  be  given  to  the  earth.'*

*  *  Omne  ex  integro  animal  generabitur,  dabiturque  tenia  homo  inBciiu  8ce>
lerum/—  Qusest.  Nat.  ill.  c.  29.


Ch.  II.]


SPECULATIONS  OF  STRABO.


23


An  old  Arabian  version  of  the  doctrine  of  the  successive
revolations  of  the  globe,  translated  by  Abraham  Ecchellen-
SLS,^  seems  to  form  a  singular  exception  to  the  general  rule,
for  here  we  find  the  idea  of  different  genera  and  species
having  been  created.     The  Gerbanites,  a  sect  of  astronomers
who    flourished  some  centuries  before   the   Christian  era,
taught  as  follows: — *That  after  every  period  of  thirty-six \
thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty-five  years,  there  were  pro-(
duced  a  pair  of  every  species  of  animal,  both  male  and  female, ,
from  whom  animals  might  be  propagated  and  inhabit  this .
lower  world.     But  when  a  circulation  of  the  heavenly  orbs ,
was  completed,  which  is  finished   in  that   space  of  years,:
other  genera  and  species  of  animals  are  propagated,  as  also  of  I
plants  and  other  things,  and  the  first  order  is  destroyed,  and
so  it  goes  on  for  ever  and  ever.'  f

Theory  of  Siraho. — As  we  learn  much  of  tlie  tenets  of  the
Egyptian  and  Oriental  schools  in  the  writings  of  the  Greeks,
so,  many  speculations  of  the  early  Greek  authors  are  made
known  to  us  in  the  works  of  the  Augustan  and  later  ages.
Strabo,  in  particular,  enters  largely,  in  the  second  book  of
his  Geography,  into  the  opinions  of  Eratosthenes  and  other
Greeks  on  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  in  geology,  viz.
by  what  cause  marine  shells  came  to  be  plentifully  buried  in
the  earth  at  such  great  elevations  and  distances  from  the  sea.


♦  This  author  was  Regias  Professor
of  Sjriac  and  Arabic  at  Paris,  where,
in  1685,  he  published  a  Latin  transla-
tion of  many  Arabian  MSS.  on  different
departments  of  philosophy.  This  work
has  always  been  considered  of  high  au-
thority.

t  *Oerbanitse  docebant  singulos  tri-
ginta  sex  mille  annos  quadringentos,
Tiginti  qmnque  bina  ex  singulis  anima-
liom  spedebus  produci,  marem  scilicet
ac  feminam  ex  quibus  animalia  propa-
gantur,  huncque  inferiorem  incolunt
orbem.  AbsolntA  autem  coelestium  or-
biom  circulatione,  qua  illo  annorum
conficitur  spatio,  iterum  alia  producun-
tnr  animalium  genera  et  species,  quem-
admodum  et  plantarum  aliarumque
luum,  et  primus  destruitur  oido,  sicque


in  infinitum  producitur.* — Histor.  Orient.
Suppl.  per  Abrahamum  Ecchellensem,
Syrum  Maronitam,  cap.  7  et  8,  ad
caleem  Chronici  Orientali.  Parisiis,  e
Typ.  Regis,  1686,  fol.

I  have  given  the  punctuation  as  in  the
Paris  edition,  there  being  no  comma
after  quinque;  but,  at  the  suggestion  of
M.  de  Schlegel,  I  have  referred  the
number  twenty-five  to  the  period  of
years,  and  not  to  the  number  of  pairs
of  each  species  created  at  one  time,  as  I
had  done  in  the  first  two  editions.

Fortis  inferred  that  twenty-five  new
species  only  were  created  at  a  time ;  a
construction  which  the  passage  will  not

admit.    M^m.  sur  THist.  nat  de  Tltalie,

vol.  i.  p.  202.


24  THEORY  OF  STRABO.  [Ch.  H.

He  notices,  amongst  others,  the  explanation  of  Xanthus  the
Lydian,  who  said  that  the  seas  had  once  been  more  exten-
,  sive,  and  that  they  had  afterwards  been  partially  dried  op,  as
/  in  his  own  time  many  lakes,  rivers,  and  wells  in  Asia  had
failed  during  a  season  of  drought.     Treating  this  conjecture
with  merited  disregard,  Strabo  passes  on  to  the  hypothesis
of  Strato,  the  natural  philosopher,  who  had  observed  that
the  quantity  of  mud  brought  down  by  rivers  into  the  Enxine
was  so  great,  that  its  bed  must  be  gradually  raised,  while  the
rivers  still  continued  to  ponr  in  an  undiminished  quantity  of
water.     He  therefore  conceived  that,  originally,  when  the
Euxine  was  an  inland  sea,  its  level  had  by  this  means  become
so  much  elevated  that  it  burst  its  barrier  near  Byzantinm,
and  formed  a  communication  with  the  Propontis ;  and  this
partial  drainage,  he  supposed,  had  already  converted  the  left
side  into  marshy  ground,  and  thus,  at  last,  the  whole  would
be  choked  up  with  soil.     So,  it  was  argued,  the  Mediter-
ranean had  once  opened  a  passage  for  itself  by  the  Columns
of  flercules  into  the  Atlantic ;  and  perhaps  the  abundance
of  sea-shells  in  Africa,  nepr  the  Temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon,
might  also  be  the  deposit  of  some  former  inland  sea,  which
had  at  length  forced  a  passage  and  escaped.

But  Strabo  rejects  this  theory,  as  insufficient  to  account
for  all  the  phenomena,  and  he  proposes  one  of  his  own,  the
profoundness  of  which  modem  geologists  are  only  beginning
to  appreciate.  *  It  is  not,'  he  says,  ^  because  the  lands  co-
vered by  seas  were  originally  at  different  altitudes,  that  the
waters  have  risen,  or  subsided,  or  receded  from  some  parts
and  inundated  others.  But  the  reason  is,  that  the  same  land
is  sometimes  raised  up  and  sometimes  depressed,  and  the  sea
also  is  simultaneously  raised  and  depressed,  so  that  it  either
overflows  or  returns  into  its  own  place  again.  We  must,
therefore,  ascribe  the  cause  to  the  ground,  either  to  that
ground  which  is  under  the  sea,  or  to  that  which  becomes
flooded  by  it,  but  rather  to  that  which  lies  beneath  the  sea,
for  this  is  more  movable  and,  on  account  of  its  humidity,
can  be  altered  with  greater  celerity.*     It  is  propery^  he

*  '  Quod  enim  hoc  attollitur  ant  sub-      ab  lis  recedit,  ejus  rei  causa  non   est
sidit,  et  vel  inundat  qusedam  loca,  yel      quod  alia  aliis  sola  humiliora  pint  aut


Ch.  n.]  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.  25

observes  in  continuation,  *io  derive  our  explanations  from  things
which  are  oivious^  and  in  some  measure  of  daily  occurrence^  stich
as  delugesy  earthquaJeeSy  and  volcanic  eruptionsy^  and  sudden
swellings  of  the  land  beneath  the  sea ;  for  the  last  raise  np  the
sea  also ;  and  when  the  same  lands  subside  again,  they  occa-
sion the  sea  to  be  let  down.  And  it  is  not  merely  the  small,
but  the  large  islands  also,  and  not  merely  the  islands,  but  the
continents  which  can  be  lifted  up  together  with  the  sea;  and
both  large  and  small  tracts  may  subside,  for  habitations  and
cities,  like  Bure,  Bizona,  and  many  others,  have  been  en-
gulphed  by  earthquakes.'

In  another  place  this  learned  geographer,  in  alluding  to
the  tradition  that  Sicily  had  been  separated  by  a  convulsion
from  Italy,  remarks,  that  at  present  the  land  near  the  sea  in
those  parts  was  rarely  shaken  by  earthquakes,  since  there
were  now  open  orifices  whereby  fire  and  ignited  matters,  and
waters  escape ;  but  formerly,  when  the  volcanos  of  Etna,  the
Lipari  Islands,  Ischia,  and  others,  were  closed  up,  the  impri-
soned fire  and  wind  might  have  produced  far  more  vehement
movements.f  The  doctrine,  therefore,  that  volcanos  are
safety-valves,  and  that  the  subterranean  convulsions  arej
probably  most  violent  when  first  the  volcanic  energy  shifts]'
itself  to  a  new  quarter,  is  not  modem.

We  learn  from  a  passage  in  Strabo,t  that  it  was  a  dogma
of  the  Graulish  Druids  that  the  universe  was  immortal,  but
destined  to  survive  catastrophes  both  of  fire  and  water.  That
this  doctrine  was  communicated  to  them  from  the  East,  with
much  of  their  learning,  cannot  be  doubted.  Csesar,  it  will  be
remembered,  says  that  they  made  use  of  Greek  letters  in
arithmetical  computations.  §

Pliny,   A.D.    23.  —  This    philosopher    had  no   theoretical

altiora;   sed  quod   idem   solum   mod6  riilis    multari    possit* — Strabo,    Geog.

attollitur   mod6  deprimitur,    simulque  Edit  Almelor.  Amst.  1707t  lib.  i.

etiam  mod6  attollitur  modo  deprimitur,  *   Volcanic  enijptions^  eruptiones  fla-

mare  :  itaque  Tel  exuudat  vel  in  suum  tuum,  in  the  Latin  translations,  and  in

redit  locum/  the  original  Qreek,  &i«^tMr^/Aara,  gaseous

Posted,   p.  88.     'Restat,  ut  causam  eruptions?  or  tn/o^ioTM  of  land?    Ibid.

adieribamus  solo,  sive  quod  mari  subest  p.  93.

sire  quod  inundatur ;  potiilis  tamen  ei  i*  Strabo.  lib.  Ti.  p.  396.

quod  mari  subest.     Hoc  enim  mult^  est  \  Book  iv.

mobilios,  et  quod  ob  humiditatem  cele-  §  L.  vi.  ch.  ziii.


26  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.  [Oh.  U.

opinions  of  his  own  concerning  changes  of  the  earth's  surface;
and  in  this  department,  as  in  others,  he  restricted  himself  to
the  task  of  a  compiler,  without  reasoning  on  the  facts  stated
by  him,  or  attempting  to  digest  them  into  regular  order.  But
his  enumeration  of  the  new  islands  which  had  been  formed
in  the  Mediterranean^  and  of  other  convulsions,  shows  that
the  ancients  had  not  been  inattentive  observers  of  the  changes
which  had  taken  place  within  the  memory  of  man.

Such,  then,  appear  to  have  been  the  opinions  entertained
before  the  Christian  era,  concerning  the  past  revolutions  of
our  globe.  Although  no  particular  investigations  had  been
made  for  the  express  purpose  of  interpreting  the  monuments
of  ancient  changes,  they  were  too  obvious  to  be  entirely
disregarded  ;  and  the  observation  of  the  present  course  of
nature  presented  too  many  proofs  of  alterations  continually
in  progress  on  the  earth  to  allow  philosophers  to  believe  that
nature  was  in  a  state  of  rest,  or  that  the  surface  had  remained,
and  would  continue  to  remain,  unaltered.  But  they  had
never  compared  attentively  the  results  of  the  destroying  and
reproductive  operations  of  modem  times  with  those  of  remote
eras,  nor  had  they  ever  entertained  so  much  as  a  conjecture
concerning  the  comparative  antiquity  of  the  human  race,  or
of  living  species  of  animals  and  plants,  with  those  belonging
to  former  conditions  of  the  organic  world.  They  had  studied
the  movements  and  positions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  with
laborious  industry,  and  made  some  progress  in  investigat-
ing the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms ;  but  the
ancient  history  of  the  globe  was  to  them  a  sealed  book,  and,
although  written  in  characters  of  the  most  striking  and  im-
posing kind,  they  were  unconscious  even  of  its  existence.


27


CHAPTER  ni.

HISTOBT   OP  THE   PBOOBESS   OP   GEOLOGY — continued.

ATtABIAW  WRrniBS  OF  THB  TENTH  CBHTTTBT — AYICBlfKA — OMAR — COSHOaOXT
OF  TH«  KORAN — KAZWINI — BABLT  ITALIAK  WBITBB8 — LBOXABDO  DA  VINCI —
'  FSACASTOBO— COITTBOYEBST  A8  TO  THB  BKAL  KATUBB  OF  FOSSILS — ATTBI-
BUTXD  TO  THB  MOSAIC  DBLUOB — PALI8SY — 8TBN0 — SCILLA^^UIBINI — BOTLB
— U8TEB — I.EIB3nTS — HOOKb's  THBOBT  OF  BLBTATION  BT  BABTBQUAKBS —
OF  Lost  SPBCIES  OF  AlOMALS — BAY — PUTSICO<THBOIX>UICAL  WBTTEBS — WOOD-
WARD'S DILUYIAL        THBOBT — SUBNET — WHISTON — ^YALLISNEBI — LAZZABO

MORO GBNERKLU — BUFFON — HIS   THBOBT    CONDBMlfED    BT    THE     SOBBONNB

AS         UNORTHODOX— HIS         DECLARATION — TABOIONI — ABDUINO — MICHBLL —

CATCOTT  —  RA8PB  —  FUCH8BL  — FORTIS  —  TESTA  —  "WHITEHURST  —  PALLAS

ftAUSflURX.

Arabian  writers. — After  the  decline  of  the  Roman  empire,  ^
the  cultivation  of  physical  science  was  first  revived  with  some
success  by  the  Saracens,  aboat  the  middle  of  the  eighth  cen-
tury of  our  era.  The  works  of  the  most  eminent  classic  writers
were  purchased  at  great  expense  from  the  Christians,  and
translated  into  Arabic ;  and  Al  Mamun,  son  of  the  famous
Harun-al-Rashid,  the  contemporary  of  Charlemagne,  received
with  marks  of  distinction,  at  his  court  at  Bagdad,  astronomers
and  men  of  learning  from  diiferent  countries.  This  caliph,
and  some  of  his  successors,  encountered  much  opposition
and  jealousy  from  the  doctors  of  the  Mahometan  law,  who
wished  the  Moslems  to  confine  their  studies  to  the  Koran,
dreading  the  eftects  of  a  diffusion  of  a  taste  for  the  physical
sciences.*

Avicennu. — Almost  all  the  works  of  the  early  Arabian
writers  are  lost.  Amongst  those  of  the  tenth  century,  of  which
fragments  are  dow  extant,  is  a  short  treatise,  *'  On  the  Forma-
tion and  Classification  of  Minerals,'  by  Avicenna,  a  physician,

*  Mod.  UniT.  llist.  vol.  ii.  chap.  it.  section  iii.


28


OMAH  — THE  KORAK.


[Ch.  in.


in  whose   arrangement  there   is   considerable   merit.     The.
second  chapter,  ^  On  the  Cause  of  Mountains/  is  remarkable;
for  mountains,  he  says,  are  formed,  some  by  essential,  others
by  accidental  causes.     In  illustration  of  the  essential,   he
instances  *  a  violent  earthquake,  by  which  land  is  elevated,
and  becomes  a  mountain ; '  of  the  accidental,  the  principal,  he
says,  is  excavation  by  water,  whereby  cavities  are  produced,
and  adjoining  lands  made  to  stand  out  and  form  eminences.*
Omar — Cosmogony  of  the  Koran. — In  the  same  century  also,
Omar,  sumamed  ^  El  Aalem,'  or  *  The  Learned,'  wrote  a
work  on  *The  Ee treat  of  the  Sea.'     It   appears  that  on
comparing  the  charts  of  his  own  time  with  those  made  by
the  Indian  and  Persian  astronomers   two   thousand   years
before,  he  had  satisfied  himself  that  important  changes  had
taken  place  since  the  times  of  history  in  the  form  of  the
coasts  of  Asia,  and  that  the  extension  of  the  sea  had  been
greater  at  some  former  periods.     He  was  confirmed  in  this
opinion  by  the  numerous  salt  springs  and  marshes  in  the
interior  of  Asia, — a  phenomenon  from  which  Pallas,  in  more
recent  times,  has  drawn  the  same  inference.

Von  Hoff  has  suggested,  with  great  probability,  that  the
changes  in  the  level  of  the  Caspian  (some  of  which  there  is
reason  to  believe  have  happened  within  the  historical  era),
and  the  geological  appearances  in  that  district,  indicating
the  desertion  by  that  sea  of  its  ancient  bed,  had  probably  led
Omar  to  his  theory  of  a  general  lowering  of  the  waters.
But  whatever  may  have  been  the  proofs  relied  on,  his  system
was  declared  contradictory  to  certain  passages  in  the  Koran,
and  he  was  called  upon  publicly  to  recant  his  errors ;  to
avoid  which  persecution  he  went  into  voluntary  banishment
from  Samarkand.t


*  '  Montes  quandoque  Hunt  ex  causa
essentiali,  quandoque  ox  causa  ac-
cidental!. Ex  essentiali  causa,  ut  ex
yehemcnti  motu  teme  elevatur  terra,
et  fit  moDS.  Accidental],  &c.* — De  Oon-
gelatione  Lapidani,  ed.  Gedani,  1682.

t  Von  Hoff,  Geschichte  der  Veran-
derungen  der  Erdoberflache,  toI.  i.  p.
406,  who  cites  Delisle,  bey  Hismann,
Welt-  und  Volkergeschichte.    Alte  Ge-


schichte, 1««'  Theil,  8.  234.— The  Ara-
bian persecutions  for  heretical  dogmas
in  theology  were  often  very  sanguinary.
In  the  same  ages  wherein  learning  was
most  in  esteem,  the  Mahometans  were
divided  into  two  sects,  one  of  whom
maintained  that  the  Koran  was  increate
and  had  subsisted  in  the  yeiy  essence
of  G^  for  all  eternity ;  and  the  other,
the  Motazalites,  who,  admitting  that  the


Ck.  IIL]  ababian  weitees.— kazwini.  29

The  cosmological  opinions  expressed  in  the  Koran  are  few,
and  merely  introduced  incidentally :  so  that  it  is  not  easy  to
understand  how  they  could  have  interfered  so  seriously  with
free  discussion  on  the  former  changes  of  the  globe.  The
Prophet  declares  that  the  earth  was  created  in  two  days,
aud  the  mountains  were  then  placed  on  it ;  and  during  these,
and  two  additional  days,  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  were
formed ;  and  in  two  more  the  seven  heavens.*  There  is  no
more  detail  of  circumstances ;  and  the  deluge,  which  is  also
mentioned,  is  discussed  with  equal  brevity.  The  waters  are
represented  to  have  poured  out  of  an  oven  ;  a  strange  fable,
said  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Persian  Magi,  who  represented
them  as  issuing  from  the  oven  of  an  old  woman.f  All  men
were  drowned,  save  Noah  and  his  family ;  and  then  God  said,
*0  earth,  swallow  up  thy  waters;  and  thou,  0  heaven,  with-
hold thy  rain ; '  and  immediately  the  waters  abated.  J

We  may  suppose  Omar  to  have  represented  the  desertion
of  the  land  by  the  sea  to  have  been  gradual,  and  that  his
hypothesis  required  a  greater  lapse  of  ages  than  was  con-
sistent with  Moslem  orthodoxy ;  for  it  is  to  be  inferred  from
the  Koran,  that  man  and  his  planet  were  created  at  the
same  time ;  and  although  Mahomet  did  not  limit  expressly
the  antiquity  of  the  human  race,  yet  he  gave  an  implied
sanction  to  the  Mosaic  chronology,  by  the  veneration  ex-
pressed by  him  for  the  Hebrew  Patriarchs.  §

A  manuscript  work,  entitled  the  ^  Wonders  of  Nature,*  is
preserved  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Paris,  by  an  Arabian  writer,
Mohammed  Kazwini,  who  flourished  in  the  seventh  century
of  the  Hegira,  or  at  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century  of
our  era,  II     Besides   several   curious   remarks   on   aerolites,

Koran    was   instituted  by  God,    con-  *  Koran,  chap.  xli.

ceived  it  to  have  been  first  made  when  t  Sale's  Koran,  chap,  xi.  see  note.

revealed  to  the  Prophet  at  Mecca,  and  J  Ibid.

accused  their  opponents  of  believing  in  §  Kossa,  appointed  master  to  the  Ca-

two   eternal  beings.     The  opinions  of  liph  Al  Mam{id,  was  author  of  a  book

each  of  these  sects  were  taken  up  by  entitled  '  The  History  of  the  Patriarchs

different  caliphs  in  succession,  and  the  and  Prophets, /ro;n  the  Creation  of  the

followers  of  each  sometimes  submitted  World.* — Mod.  Univ.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  ch,

to  be  beheaded,  or  flogged  till  at  the  iv.

point  of  death,  rather   than  renounce  ||  Translated  by  MM.  Chezy  and  De

their  creed.—  Mod.  Univ.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  Sacy,  and  cited  by  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont,

ch.  iv.  Ann.  des  Sci.  nat.  1832.


30  EARLY  ITALIAN  WRTTEBS.  [Ch.  HI.

earthquakes,  and  the  successive  changes  of  position  which
the  land  and  sea  have  undergone,  we  meet  with  the  following
beautiful  passage  which  is  given  as  the  narrative  of  Kidhz,
an  allegorical  personage : — *  T  passed  one   day  by   a   very
ancient  and  wonderfully  populous  city,  and  asked  one  of  its
inhabitants  how  long  it  had  been  founded,     "  It  is  indeed
a  mighty  city,"  replied  he ;  "  we  know  not  how  long  it  has
existed,  and  our  ancestors  were  on  this  subject  as  ignorant
as  ourselves."     Five  centuries  afterwards,  as  I  passed  by  the
same  place,  I  could  not  perceive  the  slightest  vestige  of  the
city,     I  demanded  of  a  peasant,  who  was  gathering  herbs
upon  its  former  site,  how  long  it  had  been  destroyed.     "  In
sooth  a  strange  question!  "  replied  he.     "The  ground  here
has  never  been  different  from  what  you  now  behold  it." —
"  Was  there  not  of  old,"  said  I,  "  a  splendid  city  here  ?  " —
"  Never,"  answered  he, "  so  far  as  we  have  seen,  and  never  did
our  fathers  speak  to  us  of  any  such."     On  my  return  there
500  years  afterwards,  I  found  the  sea  in  the  same  placey  and
on  its  shores  were  a  party  of  fishermen,  of  whom  I  enquired
how  long  the  land  had  been  covered  by  the  waters  9     "  Is
this  a  question,"  said  they,  "for  a  man  like  you?  this  spot
has  always  been  what  it  is  now."     I  again  returned,  500
years  afterwards,  and  the  sea  had  disappeared ;  I  enquired
of  a  man  who  stood  alone  upon  the  spot,  how  long  ago  this
change  had  taken  place,  and  he  gave  me  the  same  answer
as  I  had  received   before.     Lastly,  on   coming  back   again
after  an  equal  lapse  of  time,  I  found  there   a   flourishing
city,  more  populous  and  more  rich  in  beautiful   buildings,
than  the  city  I  had  seen  the  first  time,  and  when  I  would
fain   have   informed    myself  concerning   its  origin,  the  in-
habitants answered  me,  "  Its  rise  is  lost  in  remote  antiquity  :
we  are  ignorant  how  long  it  has  existed,  and  our  fathers  were
on  this  subject  as  ignorant  as  ourselves."  '

Early  Italian  Writers. — It  was  not  till  the  earlier  part  of  the
sixteenth  century  that  geological  phenomena  began  to  attract
the  attention  of  the  Christian  nations.  At  that  period  a  very
animated  controversy  sprang  up  in  Italy,  concerning  the  true
nature  and  origin  of  marine  shells,  and  other  organised  fossils,
found  abundantly  in  the  strata  of  the  peninsula.     The  cele-


Ch.  m.]  LEONARDO  DA  VINCI.  31

brated  painter  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  who  in  his  youth  had
planned  and  executed  some  navigable  canals  in  the  north  of
Italy,  was  one  of  the  first  who  applied  sound  reasoning  to
these  subjects.  The  mud  of  rivers,  he  said,  had  covered  and
|>enetrated  into  the  interior  of  fossil  shells  at  a  time  when
these  were  still  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  near  the  coast.
*  They  tell  us  that  these  shells  were  formed  in  the  hills  by
the  influence  of  the  stars ;  but  I  ask  where  in  the  hills  are
the  stars  now  forming  shells  of  distinct  ages  and  species  ?
and  how  can  the  stars  explain  the  origin  of  gravel,  occurring
at  different  heights  and  composed  of  pebbles  rounded  as  if
by  the  motion  of  running  water ;  or  in  what  manner  can  such
a  cause  account  for  the  petrifaction  in  the  same  places  of
various  leaves,  sea- weeds,  and  marine  crabs  ?  '  *

The  excavations  made  in  1517,  for  repairing  the  city  of
Verona,  brought  to  light  a  multitude  of  curious  petrifactions,
and  furnished  matter  for  speculation  to  different  authors,
and  among  the  rest  to  FracastorOjt  who  declared  his  opinion,
that  fossil  shells  had  all  belonged  to  living  animals,  which
had  formerly  lived  and  multiplied  where  their  exuviae  are
nt)w  found.  He  exposed  the  absurdity  of  having  recourse
to  the  *  plastic  force  '  of  Theophrastus  (see  above,  p.  20)  which
had  power  to  fashion  stones  into  organic  forms ;  and  with
no  less  cogent  arguments,  demonstrated  the  futility  of
attributing  the  situation  of  the  shells  in  question  to  the
Mosaic  deluge,  a  theory  obstinately  defended  by  some.  That
inundation,  he  observed,  was  too  transient:  it  consisted
principally  of  fluviatile  waters;  and  if  it  had  transported
shells  to  great  distances,  must  have  strewed  them  over  the
surface,  not  buried  them  at  vast  depths  in  the  interior  of
mountains.  His  clear  exposition  of  the  evidence  would  have
terminated  the  discussion  for  ever,  if  the  passions  of  mankind
had  not  been  enlisted  in  the  dispute ;  and  even  though  doubts
should  for  a  time  have  remained  in  some  minds,  they  would

♦  See  Vcnturi's   extracts    from   Da  f  Museum    Calceol. — Roe    Brocchi's

Vin<»i'8  MSS.  now  in  Libnin-  of  Insti-  Diseourso  on  the  Prop^ss  of  the  Study

tut#»  of  France.     They  are  not  mentioned  of  Fossil  Conchology  in   Italy,  where

by  Bpocchi,  and  my  attention  was  first  some  of  the  following  notices  on  Italian

called  to  them  by  Mr.  Hallam.     L.  da  writers  will  be  found  more  at  large.
Vinci  died  a.d.  1519.


32  EARLY  ITALIAN  WRITERS.— FRACASTOEO.         [Ck.  HI.

speedily  have  been  removed  bj  the  fresh  information  obtained
almost  immediately  afterwards,  respecting  the  structure  of
fossil  remains,  and  of  their  living  analogues.

But  the  clear  and  philosophical  views  of  Fracastoro  were
disregarded,  and  the  talent  and  the  argumentative  powers  of
the  learned  were  doomed  for  three  centuries  to  be  wasted
in  the  discussion  of  these  two  simple  and  preliminary
questions ;  first,  whether  fossil  remains  had  ever  belonged  to
living  creatures ;  and,  secondly,  whether,  if  this  be  admit-
ted, all  the  phenomena  could  not  be  explained  by  the  deluge
of  Noah.  It  had  been  the  general  belief  of  the  Christian
world  down  to  the  period  now  under  consideration,  that  the
origin  of  this  planet  was  not  more  remote  than  a  few
thousand  years  ;  and  that  since  the  creation  the  deluge  was
the  only  great  catastrophe  by  which  considerable  change
had  been  wrought  on  the  earth's  surface.  On  the  other
hand,  tlie  opinion  was  scarcely  less  general,  that  the  final
dissolution  of  our  system  was  an  event  to  be  looked  for  at
no  distant  period.  The  era,  it  is  true,  of  the  expected  mil-
lennium had  passed  away ;  and  for  five  hundred  years  after
the  fatal  hour  when  the  annihilation  of  the  planet  had  been
looked  for,  the  monks  remained  in  undisturbed  enjoyment  of
rich  grants  of  land  bequeathed  to  them  by  pious  donors,  who,
in  the  preamble  of  deeds  beginning  '  appropinquante  mundi
terraino ' *  appropinquante  magno  judicii  die,'  left  last-
ing monuments  of  the  popular  delusion.*

But  although  in  the  sixteenth  century  it  had  become
necessary  to  interpret  certain  prophecies  respecting  the
millennium  more  liberally,  and  to  assign  a  more  distant  date
to  the  future  conflagration  of  the  world,  we  find,  in  the
speculations  of  the  early  geologists,  perpetual  allusion  to
such  an  approaching  catastrophe ;  while  in  all  that  regarded
the  antiquity  of  the  earth,  no  modification  whatever  of  the
opinions  of  the  dark  ages  had  been  effected.  Considerable
alarm  was  at  first  excited  when  the  attempt  was  made  to
invalidate,  by  physical  proofs,  an  article  of  faith  so  generally

♦  In  Sicily,  in  particular,  the  title-  about  the  period  when  the  good  King

deedts  of  numy  valuable  granta  of  land  Roger  was  expelling  the  Saracens  from

to  the  monasteries  are  headed  by  such  that  island,
preambles,  composed  by  the  testators


Cx.  m.]  tABLY  ITALIAN  WRTTEBS.  33

received;  but  there  was  sufficient  spirit  of  toleration  and
candour  amongst  the  Italian  ecclesiastics,  to  allow  the  sub-
ject to  be  canvassed  with  much  freedom.  They  even  entered
warmly  into  the  controversy  themselves,  often  favouring  dif-
ferent sides  of  the  question;  and  however  much  we  may
deplore  the  loss  of  time  and  labour  devoted  to  the  defence
of  untenable  positions,  it  must  be  conceded  that  they  dis-
played fiur  less  polemic  bitterness  than  certain  writers  who
followed  them  *  beyond  the  Alps/  two  centuries  and  a  half
later.

OONTfiOVEBSY  AS   TO  THE   REAL   NATUBE   OF   FOSSIL

OBOANIO   REMAINS.

MatHoHn-FaUoppioj  1500-1523.— The  system  of  scholastic
disputations,  encouraged  in  the  universities  of  the  middle
ages,  had  unfortunately  trained  men  to  habits  of  indefinite
argumentation ;  and  they  often  preferred  absurd  and  extrava-
gant propositions,  because  greater  skill  was  required  to
maintain  them;  the  end  and  object  of  these  intellectual
combats  being  victory,  and  not  truth.  No  theory  could  be
so  £Eir-fetehed  or  fantastical  as  not  to  attract  some  fol-
lowers, provided  it  fell  in  with  popular  notions;  and  as
cosmogonists  were  not  at  all  restricted,  in  building  their
systems,  to  the  agency  of  known  causes,  the  opponents  of
Fracastoro  met  his  arguments  by  feigning  imaginary  causes,
which  differed  from  each  other  rather  in  name  than  in  sub-
stance. Andrew  Mattioli,  for  instance,  an  eminent  botanist,
the  illustrator  of  Dioscorides,  embraced  the  notion  of  Agricola,
a  skilful  Grerman  miner,  that  a  certain  ^  materia  pinguis,'  or
*  £atty  matter,'  set  into  fermentation  by  heat,  gave  birth  to
fossil  organic  shapes.  Yet  Mattioli  had  come  to  the  conclu«
sion,  from  his  own  observations,  that  porous  bodies,  such  as
bones  and  shells,  might  be  converted  into  stone,  as  being
permeable  to  what  he  termed  the  lapidifying  juice/  In
like  manner,  Falloppio  of  Padua  conceived  that  petrified  shells
were  generated  by  fermentation  in  the  spots  where  they  are
found,  or  that  they  had  in  some  cases  acquired  their  form
fit)m>the  tumultuous  movements  of  terrestrial  exhalations.'
Although  celebrated  as  a  professor  of  anatomy,  he  taught

VOL.  L  D


34  EABLY  ITALIAN  WBITEBS.  [Gh.  HI.

that  certain  tusks  of  elephants,  dag  np  in  his  time  in  Apulia^
were  mere  earthy  concretions ;  and,  consistently  with  these
principles,  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  consider  it  probable,
that  the  vases  of  Monte  Testaceo  at  Rome  were  natural  im-
pressions stamped  in  the  soil.''^  In  the  same  spirit^  Mercati,
who  published,  in  1574,  faithful  figures  of  the  fossU  shells
preserved  by  Pope  Sixtus  V.  in  the  Museum  of  the  Vatican,
expressed  an  opinion  that  they  were  mere  stones,  which  had
assumed  their  peculiar  configuration  from  the  influence  of
the  heavenly  bodies :  and  Olivi  of  Cremona,  who  described
the  fossil  remains  of  a  rich  museum  at  Yerona,  was  satisfied
with  considering  them  as  mere  *  sports  of  nature.'

Some  of  the  fanciful  notions  of  those  times  were  deemed
less  unreasonable,  as  being  somewhat  in  harmony  with  the
Aristotelian  theory  of  spontaneous  generation,  then  taught
in  all  the  schools.f  For  men  who  had  been  taught  in  early
youth,  that  a  large  proportion  of  living  animals  and  plants
were  formed  from  the  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms,  or  had
sprung  from  the  corruption  of  organic  matter,  might  easily
persuade  themselves,  that  organic  shapes,  often  imperfectly
preserved  in  the  interior  of  solid  rocks,  owed  their  existence
to  causes  equally  obscure  and  mysterious.

Cardano,  1552. — But  there  were  not  wanting  some  who,
during  the  progress  of  this  century,  expressed  more  sound  and
sober  opinions.  The  title  of  a  work  of  Cardano's,  published  in
1552,  *  De  Subtilitate'  (corresponding  to  what  would  now  be
called  Transcendental  Philosophy),  would  lead  us  to  expect,  in
the  chapter  on  minerals,  many  far-fetched  theories  character-
istic of  that  age ;  but  when  treating  of  petrified  shells,  he
decided  that  they  clearly  indicated  the  former  sojourn  of  the
sea  upon  the  mountains.  J

Cesalphw — Majoli,  1597. — Cesalpino,  a  celebrated  botanist^
conceived  that  fossil  shells  had  been  left  on  the  land  by  the  re-
tiring sea,  and  had  concreted  into  stone  during  the  consolida-
tion of  the  soil;  §  and  in  the  following  year  (1597),  Simeone
Majoli  II  went  still  farther ;  and,   coinciding  for  the  most

*  De  Fossilib.  pp.  109  and  176.  Progreesi,  vol.  i.  p.  67.
t  Aristotlo,  On  Animals,  chapters  1  §  De  Metallicis.

aQ(l  1 5.  II  Dies  Caniculares.

I  Brocchi,  Con.  Fos.  Subap.  Disc  siii


Ch.  nLJ  PALISSy.— FABIO  COLONNA.  35

part  with  the  views  of  Cesalpino,  suggested  that  the  shells
and  submarine  matter  of  the  Veronese,  and  other  districts,
might  have  been  cast  up  upon  the  land  by  volcanic  ex-
plosions, like  those  which  gave  rise,  in  1538,  to  Monte
Nuovo,  near  Puzzuoli.  This  hint  seems  to  have  been  the  first
imperfect  attempt  to  connect  the  position  of  fossil  shells
with  the  agency  of  volcanos,  a  system  afterwards  more  fully
developed  by  Hooke,  Lazzaro  Moro,  Hutton,  and  other
writers.

Two  years  afterwards,  Imperati  advocated  the  animal
origin  of  fossil  shells,  yet  admitted  that  stones  could  vege-
tate by  force  of  *  an  internal  principle ; '  and,  as  evidence  of
this,  he  referred  to  the  teeth  of  fish  and  spines  of  echini
found  petrified.*

Palisgyy  1580.— Palissy,  a  French  writer  on  *  The  Origin  of
Springs  fix>m  Rain-water,*  and  of  other  scientific  works,  under-
took, in  1580,  to  combat  the  notions  of  many  of  his  contem-
poraries in  Italy,  that  petrified  shells  had  all  been  deposited
by  the  universal  deluge.  *  He  was  the  first,*  said  Fontenelle,
when,  in  the  French  Academy,  he  pronounced  his  eulogy,
nearly  a  century  and  a  half  later,  *  who  dared  assei't,*  in  Paris,
that  fossil  remains  of  testacea  and  fish  had  once  belonged  to
marine  animals.

Fahio  Colonnay  1592. — To  enumerate  the  multitude  of
Italian  writers,  who  advanced  various  hypotheses,  all  equally
fantastical,  in  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  would
be  unprofitably  tedious ;  but  Fabio  Colonna  deserves  to  be
distinguished ;  for,  although  he  gave  way  to  the  dogma,  that
all  fossil  remains  were  to  be  referred  to  the  deluge  of  Noah,
he  resisted  the  absurd  theory  of  Stelluti,  who  taught  that
fossil  wood  and  ammonites  were  mere  clay,  altered  into  such
forms  by  sulphureous  waters  and  subterranean  heat ;  and  he
pointed  out  the  different  states  of  shells  buried  in  the  strata,
distinguishing  between,  first,  the  mere  mould  or  impression  ;
secondly,  the  cast  or  nucleus ;  and,  thirdly,  the  remains  of
the  shell  itself.  He  had  also  the  merit  of  being  the  first  to
point  out,  that  some  of  the  fossils  had  belonged  to  marine
and  some  to  terrestrial  testacea.t

*  Storia  Naturale.  t  Osserv.  sugli  Animuli  aquat.  e  torrest.     1626.

D  2


36  THEORY  OF  STENO.  [Ch.  m.

StenOy  1669. — Bat  the  most  remarkable  work  of  tliat  period
was  published  by  Steno,  a  Dane,  once  professor  of  anatomy
at  Padna,  and  who  afterwards  resided  many  years  at  the  court
of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany.  His  treatise  bears  the  quaint
title  of  *  De  Solido  intra  Solidum  naturaliter  contento  (1669)/
by  which  the  author  intended  to  express,  *  On  Gems,  Crystals,
and  organic  Petrifactions  inclosed  within  solid  Bocks.'  This
work  attests  the  priority  of  the  Italian  school  in  geological
research;  exemplifying  at  the  same  time  the  powerful  ob-
stacles opposed,  in  that  age,  to  the  general  reception  of
enlarged  views  in  the  science.  It  was  still  a  favourite  dogma,
that  the  fossil  remains  of  shells  and  marine  creatures  were
not  of  animal  origin  ;  an  opinion  adhered  to  by  many  firom
their  extreme  reluctance  to  believe,  that  the  earth  could
have  been  inhabited  by  living  beings  before  a  great  part  of
the  existing  mountaius  were  formed.  In  reference  to  this
controversy,  Steno  had  dissected  a  shark  recently  taken  firom
the  Mediterranean,  and  had  demonstrated  that  its  teeth  and
bones  were  identical  with  many  fossils  found  in  Tuscany.
He  had  also  compared  the  shells  discovered  in  the  Italian
strata  with  living  species,  pointed  out  their  resemblance,
and  traced  the  various  gradations  from  shells  which  had
only  lost  their  animal  gluten,  to  those  petrifactions  in
which  there  was  a  perfect  substitution  of  stony  matter.  In
his  division  of  mineral  masses,  he  insisted  on  the  secondary
origin  of  those  deposits  in  which  the  spoils  of  animals  or
fragments  of  older  rocks  were  inclosed.  He  distinguished
between  marine  formations  and  those  of  a  fluviatile  character,
the  last  containing  reeds,  grasses,  or  the  trunks  and  branches
of  trees.  He  argued  in  favour  of  the  original  horizontality
of  sedimentary  deposits,  attributing  their  present  inclined
and  vertical  position  sometimes  to  the  escape  of  subterranean
vapours  heaving  the  crust  of  the  earth  from  below  upwards,
and  sometimes  to  the  falling  in  of  masses  overlying  subter-
ranean cavities.

He  declared  that  he  had  obtained  proof  that  Tuscany  must
successively  have  acquired  six  distinct  configurations,  having
been  twice  covered  by  water,  twice  laid  dry  with  a  level,


Ch.  in.]  STENO.—SCILUL— DILUVIAL  THEORY.  37

and  twice  with  an  irregular  and  uneven  surface.^  He  dis-
played great  anxiety  to  reconcile  his  new  views  with  Scrip-
tore,  for  which  purpose  he  pointed  to  certain  rocks  as
having  been  formed  before  the  existence  of  animals  and
plants :  selecting  unfortunately  as  examples  certain  forma-
tions of  limestone  and  sandstone  in  his  adopted  country,
now  known  to  contain,  though  sparingly,  the  remains  of
animals  and  plants, — strata  which  do  not  even  rank  as  the
oldest  part  of  our  secondary  series.

SciUa,  1670. — Scilla,  a  Sicilian  painter,  published,  in  1670,
a  treatise,  in  Latin,  on  the  fossils  of  Calabria,  illustrated
by  good  engravings.  This  work  proves  the  continued  ascen-
dency of  dogmas  often  refuted ;  for  we  find  the  wit  and
eloquence  of  the  author  chiefly  directed  against  the  obstinate
incredulity  of  naturalists  as  to  the  organic  nature  of  fossil
shells.  He  quotes  the  remark  of  Cicero  on  the  story  that
a  stone  in  Chios  had  been  cleft  open,  and  presented  the  head
of  Paniscus  in  relief: — ^I  believe,*  says  Cicero,  Hhat  the
figure  bore  some  resemblance  to  Paniscus,  but  not  such  that
you  would  have  deemed  it  sculptured  by  Scopas  ;  for  chance
never  perfectly  imitates  the  truth.'  Like  many  eminent
naturalists  of  his  day,  Scilla  seems  to  give  way  to  the  popular
persuasion,  that  all  fossil  shells  were  the  effects  and  proofs  of
the  Mosaic  deluge.

Diluvial  Theory. — The  theologians  who  now  entered  the
field  in  Italy,  Germany,  France,  and  England,  were  in-
numerable ;  and  henceforward,  they  who  refused  to  subscribe
to  the  position,  that  all  marine  organic  remains  were  proofs
of  the  Mosaic  deluge,  were  exposed  to  the  imputation  of
disbelieving  the  whole  of  the  sacred  writings.  Scarcely  any
step  had  been  made  in  approximating  to  sound  theories  since
the  time  of  Fracastoro,  more  than  a  hundred  years  having
been  lost,  in  writing  down  the  dogma  that  organised  fossils
were  mere  sports  of  nature.  An  additional  period  of  a  cen-
tury and  a  half  was  now  destined  to  be  consumed  in  ex-
ploding the  hypothesis,  that  organised  fossils  had  all  been
buried  in  the   solid  strata  by  Noah's  flood.     Never  did  a

*  Sex  itaque  distinctas  Etrurise  fades  agnosdmns,  dum  bis  fluida,  bis  plana,
et  sicca,  bis  aspera  futrit,'  &c.


38  DILUVIAL  THEORY.-QUIKINL  [Ch.  IIL

theoretical  fallacy,  in  any  branch  of  science,  interfere  more
seriously  with  accurate  observation  and  the  systematic  clas-
sification of  facts.  In  recent  times,  we  may  attribute  our
rapid  progress  chiefly  to  the  careful  determination  of  the  order
of  succession  in  mineral  masses,  by  means  of  their  different
organic  contents,  and  their  regular  superposition.  But  the
old  diluvialists  were  induced  by  their  system  to  confound  all
the  groups  of  strata  together,  referring  all  appearances  to
one  cause  and  to  one  brief  period,  not  to  a  variety  of  causes
acting  throughout  a  long  succession  of  epochs.  They  saw
the  phenomena  only,  as  they  desired  to  see  them,  sometimes
misrepresenting  facts,  and  at  other  times  deducing  false  con-
clusions from  correct  data.  In  short,  a  sketch  of  the  pro-
gress of  geology  from  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  to  the  end
of  the  eighteenth  century  is  the  history  of  a  constant  and
violent  struggle  of  new  opinions  against  doctrines  sanctioned
by  the  implicit  faith  of  many  generations,  and  supposed  to
rest  on  scriptural  authority.

Quiriniy  1676. — Quiidnijin  1676,*  contended,  in  opposition
to  Scilla,  that  the  diluvial  waters  could  not  have  conveyed
heavy  bodies  to  the  summit  of  mountains,  since  the  agitation
of  the  sea  never,  as  Boyle  had  demonstrated,  extended  to
great  depths ;  and  still  less  could  the  testacea,  as  some  pre-
tended, have  lived  in  these  diluvial  waters ;  for  *  the  dura-
tion of  the  flood  was  brief,  and  the  heavy  rains  must  have
destroxjed  the  saWiess  of  the  sea !  *  The  opinions  of  Boyle,
alluded  to  by  Quirini,  were  published  a  few  years  before,
in  a  short  article  entitled  ^  On  the  Bottom  of  the  Sea.'
From  observations  collected  from  the  divers  of  the  pearl
fishery,  Boyle  inferred  that,  when  the  waves  were  six  or
seven  feet  high  above  the  surface  of  the  water,  there  were
no  signs  of  agitation  at  the  depth  of  fifteen  fathoms ;  and
that  even  during  heavy  gales  of  wind,  the  motion  of  the
water  was  exceedingly  diminished  at  the  depth  of  twelve
or  fifteen  feet.  He  had  also  learnt  from  some  of  his  infor-
mants, that  there  were  currents  running  in  opposite  direc-
tions at  different  depths,  t     Quirini  was  the  first  writer  who

*  De  Tostaceis  fossilibus  Mus.  Sep-  t  Boyle's  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.    110.

taliani.  London,  1744


Ch.  in.]  PLOT.— USTER.— LEIBNITZ.  39

▼eDtured  to  mamtaJn  that  the  nniversality  of  the  Mosaic
catadysm  ought  not  to  be  insisted  upon.  As  to  the  nature
of  petrified  shells,  he  conceived  that  as  earthy  particles
united  in  the  sea  to  form  the  shells  of  moUusca,  the  same
crystallising  process  might  be  effected  on  the  land;  and
that,  in  the  latter  case,  the  germs  of  animals  might  have
been  disseminated  through  the  substance  of  the  rocks,  and
afterwards  developed  by  virtue  of  humidity.  Visionary  as
was  this  doctrine,  it  gained  many  proselytes  even  amongst
the  more  sober  reasoners  of  Italy  and  Germany;  for  it
conceded  that  the  position  of  fossil  bodies  could  not  be
accounted  for  by  the  diluvial  theory.

Plot — Lister y  1678. — In  the  meantime,  the  doctrine  that
fossil  shells  had  never  belonged  to  real  animals  maintained
its  ground  in  England,  where  the  agitation  of  the  question
began  at  a  much  later  period.  Dr.  Plot,  in  his  ^  Natural
History  of  Oxfordshire'  (1677),  attributed  to  a  Aplastic
virtue  latent  in  the  earth '  the  origin  of  fossil  shells  and
fishes  ;  and  Lister,  to  his  accurate  account  of  British  shells,
in  1678,  added  the  fossil  species  under  the  appellation  of
turbinated  and  bivalve  stones,  *  Either,'  said  he,  *  these
were  terriginous,  or,  if  otherwise,  the  animals  they  so
exactly  represent  Jiave  become  extinct.*  This  writer  appears
to  have  been  the  first  who  was  aware  of  the  continuity  over
large  districts  of  the  principal  groups  of  strata  in  the
British  series,  and  who  proposed  the  construction  of  regular
geological  maps.*

Leibnitz  J  1680. — The  great  mathematician  Leibnitz  pub-
lished his  *Protogoea'  in  1680.  He  imagined  this  planet  to
have  been  originally  a  burning  luminous  mass,  which  ever
since  its  creation  has  been  undergoing  refrigeration.  When
the  outer  crust  had  cooled  down  sufficiently  to  allow  the
vapours  to  be  condensed,  they  fell,  and  formed  a  universal
ocean,  covering  the  loftiest  mountains,  and  investing  the
whole  globe.  The  crust,  as  it  consolidated  from  a  state  of
fusion,  assumed  a  vesicular  and  cavernous  structure;  and
being  rent  in  some  places,  allowed  the  water  to  rush  into  the

*  See  Conybeare  and  Phillips,   *  Outlines  of  the  Geology  of  England  and
Wales/  p.  12.


40  HOOEE.  [Ob.  m.

sabterranean  hollows,  whereby  the  level  of  the  primeyal
ocean  was  lowered.  The  breaking  in  of  these  vast  caverns  is
supposed  to  have  given  rise  to  the  dislocated  and  deranged
position  of  the  strata  '  which  Steno  had  described/  and  the
same  disruptions  communicated  violent  movements  to  the
incumbent  waters,  whence  great  inundations  ensued.  The
waters,  after  they  had  been  thus  agitated,  deposited  their
sedimentary  matter  during  intervals  of  quiescence,  and  hence
the  various  stony  and  earthy  strata.  ^  We  may  recognise,
therefore,'  says  Leibnitz, '  a  double  origin  of  primitive  masses,
the  one  by  refirigeration  from  igneous  fusion,  the  other  by
consolidation  from  aqueous  solution.'  By  the  repetition  of
similar  causes  (the  disruption  of  the  crust  and  consequent
floods),  alternations  of  new  strata  were  produced  until  at
length  these  causes  were  reduced  to  a  condition  of  quiescent
equilibrium,  and  a  more  permanent  state  of  things  was
established.*

Hooke,  1668. — The  *  Posthumous  Works  of  Eobert  Hooke,
M.D.,'  well  known  as  a  great  mathematician  and  natural  phi-
losopher, appeared  in  1705,  containing '  A  Discourse  on  Earth-
quakes,' which  we  are  informed  by  his  editor,  was  written  in
1688,  but  revised  at  subsequent  periods.  Hooke  frequently
refers  to  the  best  Italian  and  English  authors  who  wrote
before  his  time  on  geological  subjects ;  but  there  are  no  pas-
sages in  his  works  implying  that  he  participated  in  the  en-
larged views  of  Steno  and  Lister,  or  of  his  contemporary.
Woodward,  as  to  the  geographical  extent  of  certain  groups
of  strata.  His  treatise,  however,  is  the  most  philosophical
production  of  that  age,  in  regard  to  the  causes  of  former
changes  in  the  organic  and  inorganic  kingdoms  of  nature.

*  However  trivial  a  thing,'  he  says,  *  a  rotten  shell  may
appear  to  some,  yet  these  monuments  of  nature  are  more
certain  tokens  of  antiquity  than  coins  or  medals,  since  the
best  of  those  may  be  counterfeited  or  made  by  art  and  design,
as  may  also  books,  manuscripts,  and  inscriptions,  as  all  the
learned  are  now  suf&ciently  satisfied  has  often  been  actually

*  For  an  able  analysis  of  the  views      on  the  Progress  of  Geological  Science,
of  Leibnitz,  in  his  Protogcea,  see  Mr.      1832.
Conybeare's  Beport  to  the  Brit  Assco.


Cs.  m.]  HOOEE.  41

practised,'  &c. ;  '  and  thougli  it  must  be  granted  that  it  is
very  difficult  to  read  them  (the  recoixls  of  nature)  and  to  raise
a  chronology  out  of  them,  and  to  state  the  intervals  of  the
time  wherein  such  or  such  catastrophes  and  mutations  have
happened,  yet  it  is  not  impossible.'  *

Respecting  the  extinction  of  species,  Hooke  was  aware  that
the  fossil  ammonites,  nautili,  and  many  other  shells  and  fossil
skeletons  found  in  England  were  of  diiferent  species  from  any
then  known ;  but  he  doubted  whether  the  species  had  become
extinct,  observing  that  the  knowledge  of  naturalists  of  all  the
marine  species,  especially  those  inhabiting  the  deep  sea,  was
Tery  defective.  In  some  parts  of  his  writing,  however,  he
leans  to  the  opinion  that  species  had  been  lost;  and  in
speculating  on  this  subject,  he  even  suggests  that  there  might
be  some  connection  between  the  disappearance  of  certain
kinds  of  animals  and  plants,  and  the  changes  wrought  by
earthquakes  in  former  ages.  Some  species,  he  observes,  with
great  sagacity,  are  *  peculiar  to  certain  places,  and  not  to  be
found  elsewhere.  If,  then,  such  a  place  had  been  swallowed
up,  it  is  not  improbable  but  that  those  animate  beings  may
have  been  destroyed  with  it ;  and  this  may  be  true  both  of
aerial  and  aquatic  animals :  for  those  animated  bodies,
whether  vegetables  or  animals,  which  were  naturally  nourished
or  refreshed  by  the  air,  would  be  destroyed  by  the  water,'  &c.t
Turtles,  he  adds,  and  such  large  ammonites  as  are  found  in
Portland,  seem  to  have  been  the  productions  of  hotter  countries ;
and  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  that  England  once  lay  under  the
sea  within  the  torrid  zone !  To  explain  this  and  similar  phe-
nomena, he  indulges  in  a  variety  of  speculations  concerning
changes  in  the  position  of  the  axis  of  the  earth's  rotation,  ^  a
shifting  of  the  earth's  centre  of  gravity,  analogous  to  the
revolutions  of  the  magnetic  pole,'  &c.  None  of  these  conjec-
tures, however,  are  proposed  dogmatically,  but  rather  in  the
hope  of  promoting  fi^sh  enquiries  and  experiments.

In  opposition  to  the  prejudices  of  his  age,  we  find  him
arguing  against  the  idea  that  nature  had  formed  fossil  bodies
'  for  no  other  end  than  to  play  the  mimic  in  the  mineral

*  Potth.  Works,  Lecture,  Feb.  29,  1688.  t  Postli.  Works,  p.  327.


4  2  HOOKE  ON  EXTINCT  SPECIES.  [Ce.  m.

kingdom ; ' — maintaining  that  figured  stones  were '  really  the
several  bodies  thej  represent,  or  the  mouldings  of  them
petrified/  and  ^  not  as  some  have  imagined,  **  a  lusus  natorse,"
sporting  herself  in  the  needless  formation  of  useless  beings.^
He  explained,  with  considerable  clearness,  the  different  modes
in  which  organic  substances  may  become  lapidified;  and,
among  other  illustrations,  he  mentions  some  silicified  palm-
wood  brought  from  Africa,  on  which  M.  de  la  Hire  had  read
a  memoir  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  France  (June  1692),
wherein  he  had  pointed  out,  not  only  the  tubes  running  the
length  of  the  trunk,  but  the  roots  at  one  extremity.  De  la
Hire,  says  Hooke,  also  treated  of  certain  trees  found  petrified
in  the  ^  river  that  passes  by  Bakan,  in  the  kingdom  of  Ava^
and  which  has  for  the  space  of  ten  leagues  the  virtue  of
petrifying  wood.'  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  silicified
wood  of  the  Irawadi  should  have  attracted  attention  nearly
two  hundred  years  ago.  Remarkable  discoveries  have  been
made  there  in  later  times  (1827)  of  fossil  animals  and  vege-
tables, by  Mr.  Crawfurd  and  Dr.  Wallich.f

Tt  was  objected  to  Hooke,  that  his  doctrine  of  the  extinc-
tion of  species  derogated  fix)m  the  wisdom  and  power  of  the
Omnipotent  Creator ;  but  he  answered,  that,  as  individuals
die,  there  may  be  some  termination  to  the  duration  of  a
species ;  and  his  opinions,  he  declared,  were  not  repugnant
to  Holy  Writ :  for  the  Scriptures  taught  that  our  system
was  degenerating,  and  tending  to  its  final  dissolution ;  '  and
as,  when  that  shall  happen,  all  the  species  will  be  lost,  why
not  some  at  one  time  and  some  at  another  ? '  J

But  his  principal  object  was  to  account  for  the  manner  in
which  shells  had  been  conveyed  into  the  higher  parts  of  *  the
Alps,  Apennines,  and  Pyrenean  hills,  and  the  interior  of  con-
tinents in  general.'  These  and  other  appearances,  he  said,
might  have  been  brought  about  by  earthquakes,  *  which  have
turned  plains  into  mountains,  and  mountains  into  plains,
seas  into  land,  and  land  into  seas,  made  rivers  where  there

♦  Posth.  Works,  Lecture,  Feb.   16,  '  Obserrations  made  in  the  Indies  bj

1688.  the  Jesuits.'

t  See  Geol.  Trans,  vol.  ii.  part  iii.  p.  J  Posth.  Works,  Lecture,  May  29,

377,  second  series.    De  la  Hire  cites  1689.
Father  Duchats  in  the  second  volume  of


Ch.  m.]  HOOKKS  DILUVIAL  THEORY.  43

were  none  before,  and  swallowed  up  others  that  formerly
were,  &c.  &c. ;  and  which,  since  the  creation  of  the  world,
have  wrought  many  changes  on  the  superficial  parts  of  the
earth,  and  have  been  the  instruments  of  placing  shells,  bones,
plants,  fishes,  and  the  like,  in  those  places  where,  with  much
astonishment,  we  find  them.'^  This  doctrine,  it  is  true,  had
been  laid  down  in  terms  almost  equally  explicit  by  Strabo,  to
explain  the  occurrence  of  fossil  shells  in  the  interior  of  conti-
nents, and  to  that  geograj>her,  and  other  writers  of  antiquity,
Hooke  frequently  refers ;  but  the  revival  and  development  of
the  system  was  an  important  step  in  the  progress  of  modem
science.

Hooke  enumerated  all  the  examples  known  to  him  of  sub-
terranean disturbance,  from  ^  the  sad  catastrophe  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,'  down  to  the  Chilian  earthquake  of  1646.
The  elevating  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  the  sinking  and  sub*
mersion  of  the  land,  and  most  of  the  inequalities  of  the  earth's
surface,  might,  he  said,  be  accounted  for  by  the  agency  of
these  subterngiean  causes.  He  mentions  that  the  coast  near
Naples  waa  raised  during  the  eruption  of  Monte  Nuovo ;  and
that,  in  1591,  land  rose  in  the  island  of  St.  Michael,  during
an  eruption  :  and  although  it  would  be  more  difficult,  he  says,
to  prove,  he  does  not  doubt  but  that  there  had  been  as  many
earthquakes  in  the  parts  of  the  earth  under  the  ocean,  as  in
the  parts  of  the  dry  land;  in  confirmation  of  which,  he
mentions  the  immeasurable  depth  of  the  sea  near  some
volcanos.  To  attest  the  extent  of  simultaneous  subterranean
movements,  he  refers  to  an  earthquake  in  the  West  Indies,  in
the  year  1690,  where  the  space  of  earth  raised,  or  *  struck
upwards,'  by  the  shock,  exceeded,  he  affirms,  the  length  of
the  Alps  and  Pyrenees.

Hookers  diluvial  theory. — As  Hooke  declared  the  favourite
hypothesis  of  the  day,  *  that  marine  fossil  bodies  were  to  be
referred  to  Noah's  flood,'  to  be  wholly  untenable,  he  appears
to  have  felt  himself  called  upon  to  substitute  a  diluvial  theory
of  his  own,  and  thus  he  became  involved  in  countless  diffi-
culties and  contradictions.     *  During  the  great  catastrophe,'

*  Poeth.  Works,  p.  312.


44  RAY.  [Ch.  in.

he  said, '  there  might  have  been  a  changing  of  that  part  which
was  before  dry  land  into  sea  by  sinking,  and  of  that  which
was  sea  into  dry  land  by  raising,  and  marine  bodies  might
have  been  buried  in  sediment  beneath  the  ocean,  in  the
interval  between  the  creation  and  the  deluge.'  *  Then  follows
a  disquisition  on  the  separation  of  the  land  from  the  waters,
mentioned  in  Genesis ;  during  which  operation  some  places
of  the  shell  of  the  earth  were  forced  outwards,  and  others
pressed  downwards  or  inwards,  &c.  His  diluvial  hypothesis
very  much  resembled  that  of  Steno,  and  was  entirely  op-
posed to  the  fundamental  principles  professed  by  him,  that
he  would  explain  the  former  changes  of  the  earth  in  a  more
natural  manner  than  others  had  done.  When,  in  despite  of
this  declaration,  he  required  a  former  *  crisis  of  nature,'  and
taught  that  earthquakes  had  become  debilitated,  and  that
the  Alps,  Andes,  and  other  chains,  had  been  lifted  up  in  a  few
months,  he  was  compelled  to  assume  so  rapid  a  rate  of  change,
that  his  machinery  appeared  scarcely  less  extravagant  than
that  of  his  most  fanciful  predecessors.  For  this  reason,
perhaps,  his  whole  theory  of  earthquakes  met  with  undeserved
neglect.

Rayy  1692. — One  of  his  contemporaries,  the  celebrated
naturalist,  Bay,  participated  in  the  same  desire  to  explain
geological  phenomena  by  reference  to  causes  less  hypothetical
than  those  usually  resorted  to.f  In  his  essay  on  ^  Chaos  and
Creation,'  he  proposed  a  system,  agreeing  in  its  outline,  and
in  many  of  its  details,  with  that  of  Hooke ;  but  his  knowledge
of  natural  history  enabled  him  to  elucidate  the  subject  with
various  original  observations.  Earthquakes,  he  suggested,
might  have  been  the  second  causes  employed  at  the  creation,
in  separating  the  land  from  the  waters,  and  in  gathering  the
waters  together  into  one  place.  He  mentions,  like  Hooke,  the
earthquake  of  1646,  which  had  violently  shaken  the  Andes
for  some  hundreds  of  leagues,  and  made  many  alterations
therein.     In  assigning  a  cause  for  the  general  deluge,  he

*  Posth.  Works,  p.  410.  He  speaks  of  Hooke  as  one  *  whom  for

tKaj'sPhjsico-theological Discourses  his  learning  and  deep  insight  intx>  the

-were  of    somewhat    later    date    than  mysteries  of  nature  he  desenredly  ho-

Hooke*s  great  work    on    earthquakes.  noured.' — On  the  Deluge,  chay.  ir.


Ch.  m.]  RAY.— WOODWARD.  45

preferred  a  change  in  the  earth's  centre  of  gravity  to  the
introduction  of  earthquakes.  Some  unknown  cause,  he  said,
might  have  forced  the  subterranean  waters  outwards,  as  was
perhaps  indicated  bj  'the  breaking  up  of  the  fountains  of  the
great  deep.'

Ray  was  one  of  the  first  of  our  writers  who  enlarged  upon
the  effects  of  running  water  upon  the  land,  and  of  the  en-
croachment of  the  sea  upon  the  shores.     So  important  did
he  consider  the  agency  of  these  causes,  that  he  saw  in  them
an  indication  of  the  tendency  of  our  system  to  its  final  disso-
lution ;  and  he  wondered  why  the  earth  did  not  proceed  more
rapidly  towards  a  general  submersion  beneath  the  sea,  when
so  much  matter  was  carried  down  by  rivers,  or  undermined  in
the  sea-clifis.     We  perceive  clearly  from  his  writings,  that
the  gradual  decline  of  our  system,  and  its  future  consumma-
tion by  fire,  was  held  to  be  as  necessary  an  article  of  faith  by
the  orthodox,  as  was  the  recent  origin  of  our  planet.     His
discourses,  like  those  of  Hooke,  are  highly  interesting,  as
attesting  the  familiar  association  in  the  minds  of  philosophers,
in  the  age  of  Newton,  of  questions  in  physics  and  divinity.
Ray  gave  an  unequivocal  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  his  mind,
by  sacrificing  his  preferment  in  the  Church,  rather  than  take
an  oath  against  the  Covenanters,  which  he  could  not  reconcile
with  his  conscience.     His  reputation,  moreover,  in  the  scien-
tific world  placed  him  high  above  the  temptation  of  courting
popularity,  by  pandering  to  the  physico-theological  taste  of
his  age.     It  is,  therefore,  curious  to  meet  with  so  many  cita-
tions from  the  Christian  fathers  and  prophets  in  his  essays
on  physical  science — to  find  him  in  one  page  proceeding,  by
the  strict  rules  of  induction,  to  explain  the  former  changes  of
the  globe,  and  in  the  next  gravely  entertaining  the  question,
whether  the  sun  and  stars,  and  the  whole  heavens,  shall  be
annihilated,  together  with  the  earth,  at  the  era  of  the  grand
conflagration.

fVoodwardy  1695. — Among  the  contemporaries  of  Hooke
and  Ray,  Woodward,  a  professor  of  medicine,  had  acquired
the  most  extensive  information  respecting  the  geological
structure  of  the  crust  of  the  earth.  He  had  examined  many
parts  of  the  British  strata  with  minute  attention ;  and  his


46  BURNET.  [Ch.  m.

systematic  collection  of  specimens,  bequeathed  to  the  Uni-
versity of  Cambridge,  and  still  preserved  there  as  arranged
by  him,  shows  how  far  he  had  advanced  in  ascertaining  the
order  of  superposition.  From  the  great  number  of  facts  col-
lected by  him,  we  might  have  expected  his  theoretical  views
to  be  more  sound  and  enlarged  than  those  of  his  contempo-
raries ;  but  in  his  anxiety  to  accommodate  all  observed  phe-
nomena to  the  scriptural  account  of  the  Creation  and  Deluge,
he  arrived  at  most  erroneous  results.  He  conceived  *the
whole  terrestrial  globe  to  have  been  taken  to  pieces  and  dis-
solved at  the  flood,  and  the  strata  to  have  settled  down  from
this  promiscuous  mass  as  any  earthy  sediment  from  a  fluid.*  *
In  corroboration  of  these  views  he  insisted  upon  the  fact,
that  ^marine  bodies  are  lodged  in  the  strata  according  to
the  order  of  their  gravity,  the  heavier  shells  in  stone,  the
lighter  in  chalk,  and  so  of  the  rest.'  t  Ray  immediately  ex-
posed the  unfounded  nature  of  this  assertion,  remarking  truly
that  fossil  bodies  ^  are  often  mingled,  heavy  with  light,  in  the
same  stratum ; '  and  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  say,  that
Woodward  '  must  have  invented  the  phenomena  for  the  sake
of  confirming  his  bold  and  strange  hypothesis.'  J

Burnet^  1680-1690. — At  the  same  time  Burnet  published
his  ^  Theory  of  the  Earth.'  §  The  title  is  most  characteristic
of  the  age, — *  The  Sacred  Theory  of  the  Earth ;  containing
an  Account  of  the  Original  of  the  Earth,  and  of  all  the  gene-
ral Changes  which  it  hath  already  undergone,  or  is  to
undergo,  till  the  Consummation  of  all  things.'  Even  Mil-
ton had  scarcely  ventured  in  his  poem  to  indulge  his  ima-
gination so  freely  in  painting  scenes  of  the  Creation  and
Deluge,  Paradise  and  Chaos.  He  explained  why  the  primeval
earth  enjoyed  a  perpetual  spring  before  the  flood ;  showed
how  the  crust  of  the  globe  was  fissured  by  *  the  sun's  rays,'
so  that  it  burst,  and  thus  the  diluvial  waters  were  let  loose
from  a  supposed  central  abyss.  Not  satisfied  with  these
themes,  he  derived  from  the  books  of  the  inspired  vmters,
and  even  from  heathen  authorities,  prophetic  views  of  the

*  R«i6ay  towards  a  Natural  History  of  J  Consequences  of  the  Deluge,  p.  165.

the  Earth,  1605.    Preface.  §  Firfit  published  in  Latin  between

t  Ibid.  the  years  1680  and  1690.


Ch.  IIL  BUEIJET.—WHISTON.  47

fntiiTe  reyolutions  of  the  globe,  gave  a  most  terrific  descrip-
tion of  the  general  conflagration,  and  proved  that  a  new
heaven  and  a  new  earth  will  rise  out  of  a  second  chaos — after
which  vdll  follow  the  blessed  millennium.

The  reader  should  be  informed,  that,  according  to  the  opi-
nion of  many  respectable  writers  of  that  age,  there  was  good
scriptural  ground  for  presuming  that  the  garden  bestowed
upon  our  first  parents  was  not  on  the  earth  itself,  but  above
the  clouds,  in  the  middle  region  between  our  planet  and  the
moon.  Burnet  approaches  with  becoming  gravity  the  dis-
cussion of  so  important  a  topic.  He  was  willing  to  concede
that  the  geographical  position  of  Paradise  was  not  in  Mesopo-
tamia, yet  he  maintained  that  it  was  upon  the  earth,  and  in
the  southern  hemisphere,  near  the  equinoctial  line.  Butler
selected  this  conceit  as  a  fair  mark  for  his  satire,  when,
amongst  the  numerous  accomplishments  of  Hudibras,  he

says, —

He  knew  the  seat  of  Paradise,
Could  tell  in  what  de^ee  it  lies ;
And,  as  he  was  disposed,  could  prove  it
Below  the  moon,  or  else  above  it.

Tet  the  same  monarch,  who  is  said  never  to  have  slept
without  Butler's  poem  under  his  pillow,  was  so  great  an
admirer  and  patron  of  Burnet's  book,  that  he  ordered  it  to
be  translated  from  the  Latin  into  English.  The  style  of  the
*  Sacred  Theory  '  was  eloquent,  and  the  book  displayed
powers  of  invention  of  no  ordinary  stamp.  In  was,  in  fact,  a
fine  historical  romance,  as  Buffon  afterwards  declared:  but  it
was  treated  as  a  work  of  profound  science  in  the  time  of  its
author,  and  was  panegyrised  by  Addison  in  a  Latin  ode,
while  Steele  praised  it  in  the  *  Spectator.'

Whistony  1696. — ^Another  production  of  the  same  school,
and  equally  characteiistic  of  the  time,  was  that  of  Whiston,
entitled,  *  A  New  Theory  of  the  Earth;  wherein  the  Creation
of  the  World  in  Six  Days,  the  Universal  Deluge,  and  the
General  Conflagration,  as  laid  down  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,
are  shown  to  be  perfectly  agreeable  to  Reason  and  Philo-
sophy.' He  was  at  first  a  follower  of  Burnet;  but  his  faith
in  the  infallibility  of  that  writer  was  shaken  by  the  declared


/'


48  WmSTON.— HUTCHINSON.  CCk.  m.

opinion  of  Newton,  that  there  was  every  presumption  in
aetronomy  against  any  former  change  in  tiie  inclination  of
the  earth's  axis.  This  was  a  leading  dogma  in  Burnet's
system,  though  not  original,  for  it  was  borrowed  from  an
Italian,  Alessandro  degli  Alessandri,  who  had  suggested  it
in  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  to  account  for  the
former  occupation  of  the  present  continents  by  the  sea.  La
Place  has  since  strengthened  the  arguments  of  Newton,
against  the  probability  of  any  former  revolution  of  this  kind.

The  remarkable  comet  of  1680  was  fresh  in  the  memory  of
every  one  when  Whiston  first  began  his  cosmological  studies;
and  the  principal  novelty  of  his  speculations  consisted  in  at-
tributing the  deluge  to  the  near  approach  to  the  earth  of  one
of  these  erratic  bodies,  and  the  condensation  of  the  vapour
of  its  tail  into  water.  Having  ascribed  an  increase  of  the
waters  to  this  source,  he  adopted  Woodward's  theory,  sup-
posing all  stratified  deposits  to  have  resulted  frx)m  the
*  chaotic  sediment  of  the  flood.'  Whiston  was  one  of  the
first  who  ventured  to  propose-  that  the  text  of  Genesis  should
be  interpreted  differently  from  its  ordinary  acceptation,  so
that  the  doctrine  of  the  earth  having  existed  long  previous
to  the  creation  of  man  might  be  no  longer  regarded  as  un-
orthodox. He  had  the  art  to  throw  an  air  of  plausibility
over  the  most  improbable  parts  of  his  theory,  and  seemed
to  be  proceeding  in  the  most  sober  manner,  and,  by  the  aid
of  mathematical  demonstration,  to  the  establishment  of  his
various  propositions.  Locke  pronounced  a  panegyric  on  his
theory-,  commending  him  for  having  explained  so  many
wonderful  and  before  inexplicable  things.  His  book,  as
well  as  Burnet's,  was  attacked  and  refuted  by  Keill.*

Hutchinson^  1724?. — John  Hutchinson,  who  had  been  em-
ployed by  Woodward  in  making  his  collection  of  fossils,
published  afterwards,  in  1724,  the  first  part  of  his  'Moses's
Principia,'  wherein  he  ridiculed  Woodward's  hypothesis.  He
and  his  numerous  followers  were  accustomed  to  declaim
loudly  against  human  learning;  and  they  maintained  that
the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  when  rightly  translated,  comprised  a

*  An  Examination  of  Dr.  Burnet's  Theozy,  &c.  2d  ed.  1784.


Ch.  m.]     CELSIUS.— SCHEUOHZER.—ITALIAN  GEOLOGISTS.         49

perfect  system  of  natural  philosophy,  for  which  reason  they
objected  to  the  Newtonian  theory  of  gravitation.

CeUius. — Andrea  Celsius,  the  Swedish  astronomer,  pub-
lished about  this  time  his  remarks  on  the  gradual  diminution
and  sinking  of  the  waters  in  the  Baltic,  to  which  I  shall  have
occasion  to  advert  more  particularly  in  the  sequel  (Ch.  31),

Seheuchaer^  1708. — In  Germany,  in  the  meantime,
Scheuchzer  published  his  '  Complaint  and  Vindication  of  the
Pishes'  (1708),  *Piscium  QuerelsB  et  Vindiciee,'  a  work  of
zoological  merit,  in  which  he  gave  some  good  plates  and
descriptions  of  fossil  fish.  Among  other  conclusions  he
laboured  to  prove  that  the  earth  had  been  remodelled  at  the
deluge.  Pluche,  also,  in  1732,  wrote  to  the  same  efiect;
while  Holbach,  in  1753,  after  considering  the  various  attempts
to  refer  all  the  ancient  formations  to  the  flood  of  Noah,
exposed  the  inadequacy  of  this  cause.

Italian  Oeologists — VaUisneriy  1721. — I  return  with  pleasure
to  the  geologists  of  Italy,  who  preceded,  as  has  been  already
shown,  the  naturalists  of  other  countries  in  their  investiga-
tions into  the  ancient  history  of  the  earth,  and  who  still
maintained  a  decided  pre-eminence.  They  refuted  and  ridi-
culed the  physico-theological  systems  of  Burnet,  Whiston,
and  "Woodward ;  while  Vallisneri,*  in  his  comments  on  the
Woodwardian  theory,  remarked  how  much  the  interests  of
religion,  as  well  as  those  of  sound  philosophy,  had  suffered
by  perpetually  mixing  up  the  sacred  writings  with  questions
in  physical  science.  The  works  of  this  author  were  rich  in
original  observations.  He  attempted  the  first  general  sketch
of  the  marine  deposits  of  Italy,  their  geographical  extent,  and
most  characteristic  organic  remains.  In  his  treatise  ^  On
the  Origin  of  Springs,'  he  explained  their  dependence  on
the  order,  and  often  on  the  dislocations,  of  the  strata,  and
reasoned  philosophically  against  the  opinions  of  those  who
regarded  the  disordered  state  of  the  earth's  crust  as  exhibit-
ing signs  of  the  wrath  of  God  for  the  sins  of  man.  He  found
himself  under  the  necessity  of  contending,  in  his  prelimi-
nary chapter,  against  St.  Jerome,  and  four  other  principal

*  Dei  Coorpi  Marini.    Lettere  critiche,  jcc     1721.
VOL.  I.  E


50  VALLISNERI.— LAZZARO  MORO.  [Ca.  m.

interpreters  of  Scripture,  besides  several  professors  of  divinity,
^  that  springs  did  not  flow  bj  subterranean  siphons  and  cavi-
ties from  the  sea  upwards,  losing  their  saltness  in  the  passage,'
for  this  theory  had  been  made  to  rest  on  the  infallible  testi-
mony of  Holy  Writ.

Although  reluctant  to  generalise  on  the  rich  materials
accumulated  in  his  travels,  Vallisneri  had  been  so  much
struck  with  the  remarkable  continuity  of  the  more  recent
marine  strata,  from  one  end  of  Italy  to  the  other,  that  he
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ocean  formerly  extended
over  the  whole  earth,  and  after  abiding  there  for  a  long
time,  had  gradually  subsided.  This  opinion,  however  un-
tenable, was  a  great  step  beyond  Woodward's  diluvian  hypo-
thesis, against  which  Vallisneri,  and  after  him  all  the  Tuscan
geologists,  uniformly  contended,  while  it  was  warmly  sup-
ported by  the  members  of  the  Institute  of  Bologna.*

Among  others  of  that  day,  Spada,  a  priest  of  Grezzana,  in
1737,  wrote  to  prove  that  the  petrified  marine  bodies  near
Verona  were  not  diluvian.f  Mattani  drew  a  similar  inference
from  the  shells  of  Volterra  and  other  places  :  while  Costan-
tini,  on  the  other  hand,  whose  observations  on  the  vaDey  of
the  Brenta  and  other  districts  were  not  without  value,
undertook  to  vindicate  the  truth  of  the  deluge,  as  also  to
prove  that  Italy  had  been  peopled  by  the  descendants  of

Japhet4

Moroy  174«0. — Lazzaro  Moro,  in  his  work  (published  in
1740)  '  On  the  Marine  Bodies  which  are  found  in  the  Moun-
tains,'§  attempted  to  apply  the  theory  of  earthquakes,  and
changes  of  level  in  the  earth's  crust,  as  expounded  by
Strabo,  Pliny,  and  other  ancient  authors,  with  whom  he
was  familiar,  to  the  geological  phenomena  described  by
Vallisneri.il  His  attention  was  awakened  to  the  elevating
power  of  subterranean  forces  by  a  remarkable  phenomenon

♦  Brocchi,  p.  28.  of  his  views  were  in  accordance   with

t  Ibid.  p.  33.  theirs,  he  was  probably  ignorant  of  their

I  Ibid.  writings,  for  they  had  not  been  trana-
§  Sui  Crostacei  ed  altri  Corpi  Marini  lated.    As  he  always  refers  to  the  Latin

che  si  trovano  sui  Monti.  edition  of  Burnet,  and  a  French  trans-

II  Moro  does  not  cite  the  works  of      lation  of  Woodward,  we  may  presume
Hooke  and  Kay  :  and  although  so  many      that  he  did  not  read  English.


Ch.  mj  LAZZARO  MORO.  51

which  happened  in  his  own  time,  and  which  had  also  been
noticed  by  Vallisneri  in  his  letters.     A  new  island  rose  in
1707  firom  deep  water  in  the  Gulf  of  Santorin  in  the  Medi-
terranean, daring  continued  shocks  of  an  earthquake,  and,
increasing  rapidly  in  size,  grew  in  less  than  a  month  to  be
half  a  mile   in  circumference,  and   about  twenty-five  feet
above  high-water  mark.*    It  was  soon  afterwards  covered  by
volcanic  ejections,  but,  when  first  examined,  it  was  found  to
be  a  white  rock,  bearing  on  its  surface  living  oysters  and
Crustacea.     In  order  to  ridicule  the  various  theories  then  in
vogue,  Moro  ingeniously  supposes  the  arrival  on  this  new
island  of  a  party  of  naturalists  ignorant  of  its  recent  origin.
One  immediately  points  to  the  marine  shells,  as  proofs  of
the  universal  deluge ;  another  argues  that  they  demonstrate
the  former  residence  of  the  sea  upon  the  mountains ;  a  third
dismisses  them  as  mere  sports  of  nature ;   while  a  fourth
afBrms,  that  they  were  born  and  nourished  within  the  rock
in  ancient  caverns,  into  which  salt  water  had  been  raised  in
the  shape  of  vapour  by  the  action  of  subterranean  heat.

Moro  pointed  with  great  judgment  to  the  faults  and  dis-
locations of  the  strata  described  by  Vallisneri,  in  the  Alps
and  other  chains,  in  confirmation  of  his  doctrine,  that  the
continents  had  been  heaved  up  by  subterranean  movements.
He  objected,  on  solid  grounds,  to  the  hypothesis  of  Burnet
and  of  Woodward  ;  yet  he  ventured  so  far  to  disregard  the
protest  of  Vallisneri,  as  to  undertake  the  adaptation  of  every
part  of  his  own  system  to  the  Mosaic  account  of  the
creation.  On  the  third  day,  he  said,  the  globe  was  every-
where covered  to  the  same  depth  by  fresh  water ;  and  when
it  pleased  the  Supreme  Being  that  the  dry  land  should
appear,  volcanic  explosions  broke  up  the  smooth  and
regular  surface  of  the  earth  composed  of  primary  rocks.
These  rose  in  mountain  masses  above  the  waves,  and
allowed  melted  metals  and  salts  to  ascend  through  fissures.
The  sea  gradually  acquired  its  saltness  from  volcanic  exha-
lations, and,  while  it  became  more  circumscribed  in  area,
inci*eased  in  depth.     Sand  and  ashes  ejected  by  volcanos

♦  For  an  account  ofa  similar  eruption      Principles  of  Geology,   vol.  ii.  p.  69,
in  the  Gulf  of  Santorin  in   1866,  see      10th  ed.  1868.

B  2


52  G£N£R£LLI*S  TREATISE  ON  [Cr.  HL

were  regnlarlj  disposed  along  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  and
formed  the  secondary  strata,  which  in  their  torn  were  lifted
up  by  earthquakes.  "We  need  not  follow  this  author  in
tracing  the  progress  of  the  creation  of  vegetables  and
animals  on  the  other  days  of  creation ;  but,  upon  the  whole,
it  may  be  remarked,  that  few  of  the  old  cosmological
theories  had  been  conceived  with  so  little  violation  of
known  analogies.

OenerdKs  illustrations  of  Moro,  1749. — The  style  of  Moro
was  extremely  prolix,  and,  like  Hutton,  who,  at  a  later
period,  advanced  many  of  the  same  views,  he  stood  in  need
of  an  illustrator.  The  Scotch  geologist  was  hardly  more
fortunate  in  the  advocacy  of  Playfiiir,  than  was  Moro  in
numbering  amongst  his  admirers  Cirillo  Grenerelli,  who,
nine  years  afterwards,  delivered  at  a  sitting  of  Academi-
cians at  Cremona  a  spirited  exposition  of  his  theory.  This
learned  Carmelite  friar  does  not  pretend  to  have  been  an
original  observer,  but  he  had  studied  sufficiently  to  enable
him  to  confirm  the  opinions  of  Moro  by  arguments  from
other  writers ;  and  the  selection  of  the  doctrines  then  best
established  is  so  judicious,  that  a  brief  abstract  of  them
cannot  fail  to  be  acceptable,  as  illustrating  the  state  of
geology  in  Europe,  and  in  Italy  in  particular,  before  the
middle  of  the  last  century.

The  bowels  of  the  earth,  says  he,  have  carefully  preserved
the  memorials  of  past  events,  and  this  truth  the  marine
productions  so  frequent  in  the  hills  attest.  From  the  reflec-
tions of  Lazzaro  Moro,  we  may  assure  ourselves  that  these
are  the  effects  of  earthquakes  in  past  times,  which  have
changed  vast  spaces  of  sea  into  terra  firma,  and  inhabited
lands  into  seas.  In  this  more  than  in  any  other  department
of  physics,  are  observations  and  experiments  indispensable,
and  we  must  diligently  consider  facts.  The  land  is  known,
wherever  we  make  excavations,  to  be  composed  of  different
strata  or  soils  placed  one  above  the  other,  some  of  sand,
some  of  rock,  some  of  chalk,  others  of  marl,  coal,  pumice,
gypsum,  lime,  and  the  rest.  These  ingredients  are  some-
times pure,  and  sometimes  confusedly  intermixed.  Within
are    often    imprisoned  different  marine   fishes,  like  dried


Cb.  m.]  LAZZARO  MORO'S  THEORY.  53

mummies,  and  more  frequently  shells,  cmstacea,  corals,
plants,  &c.,  not  only  in  Italy,  bnt  in  France,  Germany,
England,  Afidca,  Asia,  and  America; — sometimes  in  the
lowest,  sometimes  in  the  loftiest  beds  of  the  earth,  some
upon  the  mountains,  some  in  deep  mines,  others  near  the
sea,  and  others  hundreds  of  miles  distant  from  it.  Wood-
ward conjectured  that  these  marine  bodies  might  be  found
everywhere;  but  there  are  rocks  in  which  none  of  them
occur,  as  is  sufficiently  attested  by  Yallisneri  and  Marsilli.
The  remains  of  fossil  animals  consist  chiefly  of  their  more
solid  parts,  and  the  most  rocky  strata  must  have  been  soft
when  such  exuvise  were  enclosed  in  them.  Vegetable
productions  are  foimd  in  different  states  of  maturity,  in-
dicating that  they  were  imbedded  in  different  seasons.
Elephants,  elks,  and  other  terrestrial  quadrupeds,  have  been
found  in  England  and  elsewhere,  in  superficial  strata,  never
covered  by  the  sea.  Alternations  are  rare,  yet  not  without
example,  of  marine  strata,  with  those  which  contain  marshy
and  terrestrial  productions.  Marine  animals  are  arranged
in  the  subterraneous  beds  with  admirable  order,  in  distinct
groups,  oysters  here,  dentalia  or  corals  there,  &c.,  as  now,
according  to  Marsilli,*  on  the  shores  of  the  Adriatic.  We
must  abandon  the  doctrine,  once  so  popular,  which  denies
that  organised  fossils  were  derived  from  living  beings,  and
we  cannot  account  for  their  present  position  by  the  ancient
theory  of  Strabo,  nor  by  that  of  Leibnitz,  nor  by  the  uni-
Tersal  deluge,  as  explained  by  Woodward  and  others  :  *  nor
is  it  reasonable  to  call  the  Deity  capriciously  upon  the  stage,
and  to  make  him  work  miracles  for  the  sake  of  confirming
our  preconceived  hypothesis.' — '  I  hold  in  utter  abomina-
tion, most  learned  Academicians  !  those  systems  which  are
built  with  their  foundations  in  the  air,  and  cannot  be
propped  up  without  a  miracle ;  and  I  undertake,  with  the
assistance  of  Moro,  to  explain  to  you  how  these  marine  ani-
mals were  transported  into  the  mountains  by  natural  causes.'f
A  brief  abstract  then  follows  of  Moro's  theory,  by  which,

*  Saggio  fisico  intoroo  alia  Storia  del  in  aria ;  massime  quando  k  tale,  che  non

Mare,  part  i.  p.  24.  possa  sostenersi  senza  an  miracolo,'  &c.

t  *AbbomiDO  al  somino  qoalsivoglia  — De'  Crostacei  e  di  altre  Prod uz.  del

fitt»"F%  che  aia  di  pianta  fabbricato  Mare.  &c.    1749.


54  GZyERELIXS  TRyATTgF  oy  |^q^  jj^

days  Generelli,  we  mar  eip'Iain  all  the  phenomena^  as  YaUia-
aeri  so  ardently  desired.  ■  wichoct  Ti:»Ieiii?e.  without  fictionSi
without    hrpc'theais,   withoTit   miracles  ' — ^*  Senza    Tiolenze,
senza  finzioni,  senza  snpptisti.  senza   miracolL'     The  Car-
melite then  proceeds  to  srru^^le  against  an  obTioos  objection
to  Moro'a  svatem.  considered  as  a  method  of  explainini^  the
revolations  of  the   earth,   H'ii*iraUij,     If  earthquakes   have
been  the  agents  of  such  mighty  changes,  how  does  it  happen
that  their  effects  since  the  times  ot  history  hare  been  so
inconsiderable '?     This  same  dilhculty  had.  as  we  hare  seen,
presented  itself  to  Hooke,  half  a  century  before,  and  forced
him  to  resc»rt  to  a  former  *  crisis  of  nature : '  but  Geneielli
defended  his  position  by  showing  how  numerous  were  the
accounts  of  eruptions  and  earthquakes,  of  new  ialftfidg^  and
of  elevations  and  subsidences  of  land,  and  yet   how  much
greater  a  number  of  like  events  must  have  been  unattested
and   unrecorded   during   the   last  six  thousand  years.     He
also  appealed  to  Tallisneri  as  an  authority  to  prove  that  the
mineral  masses  containing  shells  bon?,  upon  the  whole,  but
a  small  proportion  to  those  rocks  which  were  destitute  of
organic   remains :   and  the  latter,  says  the  learned  monk,
might  have  been  created  as  they  now  exist,  in  the  beginning,
Generelli  then  describes  the  continual  waste  of  mountains
and   continents,   by  the  action  of  rivers  and  torrents,  and
concludes  with  these  eloquent  and  original  observations : —
'  Is   it   possible  that  this  waste  should  have  continued  for
six  thousand,  and  perhaps  a  greater  number  of  years,  and
that   the   mountains   should   remain  so  great,  unless  their
ruins  have  been  repaired  ?     Is  it  credible  that  the  Author
of  Nature  should  have  founded  the  world  upon  such  laws,
as  that  the  dry  land  should  for  ever  be   growing  smaller,
and  at  last  become  wholly  submerged  beneath  the  waters  9
Is  it  credible  that,  amid  so  many  created  things,  the  moun-
tains  alone   should   daily   diminish   in   number   and  bulk,
without  there  being  any  repair  of  their  losses  ?     This  would
be  contrary  to  that  order  of  Providence  which  is  seen  to
reign  in  all  other  things  in  the  universe.     Wherefore  I  deem
it  just  to  conclude,  that  the  same  cause  which,  in  the  be-
ginning of  time,  raised  mountains  from  the  abyss,  has  down


Ch.  m.]  LAZZARO  MORO'S  THEORY.  55

to  the  present  day  continued  to  produce  others,  in  order  to
restore  from  time  to  time  the  losses  of  all  such  as  sink  down
in  different  places,  or  are  rent  asunder,  or  in  other  ways
suffer  disintegration.  K  this  be  admitted,  we  can  easily
understand  why  there  should  now  be  found  upon  many
mountains  so  great  a  number  of  Crustacea  and  other  marine
animals.'

In  the  above  extract,  I  have  not  merely  enumerated  the
opinions  and  facts  which  are  confirmed  by  recent  observa-
tion, suppressing  all  that  has  since  proved  to  be  erroneous,
but  have  given  a  faithful  ^abridgment  of  the  entire  treatise,
with  the  omission  only  of  Moro*s  hypothesis,  which  Generelli
adopted,  with  all  its  faults  and  excellences.  The  reader  will
therefore  remark,  that  although  this  admirable  essay  embraces
so  large  a  portion  of  the  principal  objects  of  geological  re-
search, it  makes  no  allusion  to  the  extinction  of  certain
classes  of  animals  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  no  opinions  on  thi^
head  had,  at  that  time,  gained  a  firm  footing  in  Italy.  That
Lister  and  other  English  naturalists  should  long  before  have
declared  in  favour  of  the  loss  of  species,  while  Scilla  and  most
of  his  countrymen  hesitated,  was  perhaps  natural,  since  the
Italian  museums  were  filled  with  fodsil  shells  belonging  to
species  of  which  a  great  portion  did  actually  exist  in  the
Mediterranean ;  whereas  the  English  collectors  could  obtain
no  recent  species  from  such  of  their  own  strata  as  were  then
explored.

The  weakest  point  in  Moro's  system  consisted  in  deriving
all  the  stratified  rocks  from  volcanic  ejections ;  an  absurdity
which  his  opponents  took  care  to  expose,  especially  Vito
Amici.*  Moro  seems  to  have  been  misled  by  his  anxious
desire  to  represent  the  formation  of  secondary  rocks  as  having
occupied  an  extremely  short  period,  while  at  the  same  time
,he  wished  to  employ  known  agents  in  nature.  To  imagine
torrents,  rivers,  currents,  partial  floods,  and  all  the  operations
of  moving  water,  to  have  gone  on  exerting  an  energy  many
thousand  times  greater  than  at  present,  would  have  appeared
preposterous   and  incredible,   and  would   have  required   a

*  Sui  Tastacei  della  Sicilia.


56  MABSILLI— DONATI.— BALDASSARI.  [Ch.  HI.

hundred  violent  hypotheses;  bnt  we  are  so  anacqnainted
with  the  true  sources  of  subterranean  disturbances,  that  their
former  violence  may  in  theory  be  multiplied  indefinitely,
without  its  being  possible  to  prove  the  same  manifest  con-
tradiction or  absurdity  in  the  conjecture.  For  this  reason,
perhaps,  Moro  preferred  to  derive  the  materials  of  the  strata
from  volcanic  ejections,  rather  than  from  transportation  by
running  water.

Mardlli, — Marsilli,  whose  work  is  alluded  to  by  Generelli,
had  been  prompted  to  institute  enquiries  into  the  bed  of  the
Adriatic,  by  discovering,  in  the  territory  of  Parma,  (what
Spada  had  observed  near  Verona,  and  Schiavo  in  Sicily,)  that
fossil  shells  were  not  scattered  through  the  rocks  at  random,
but  disposed  in  regular  order,  according  to  certain  genera
and  species.

Yitaliano  Donatio  1750. — With  a  view  of  throwing  further
light  upon  these  questions,  Donati,  in  1750,  undertook  a
more  extensive  investigation  of  the  Adriatic,  and  discovered,
by  numerous  soundings,  that  deposits  of  sand,  marl,  and
tufaceous  incrustations,  most  strictly  analogous  to  those  of
the  Siibapennine  hills,  were  in  the  act  of  accumulating  there.
He  ascertained  that  there  were  no  shells  in  some  of  the  sub-
mariue  tracts,  while  in  other  places  they  lived  together  in
families,  particularly  the  genera  Area,  Pecten,  Venus,  Murex,
and  some  others.  He  also  states  that  in  divers  localities  he
found  a  mass  composed  of  corals,  shells,  and  crustaceous
bodies  of  different  species,  confusedly  blended  with  earth,
sand,  and  gi*avel.  At  the  depth  of  a  foot  or  more,  the  organic
substances  were  entirely  petrified  and  reduced  to  marble ;  at
less  than  a  foot  from  the  surface,  they  approached  nearer  to
their  natural  state ;  while  at  the  surface  they  were  alive,  or,
if  dead,  in  a  good  state  of  preservation.

Baldassari. — A  contemporary  naturalist,  Baldassari,  had
shown  that  the  organic  remains  in  the  tertiary  marls  of  the
Siennese  territory  were  grouped  in  families,  in  a  manner
precisely  similar  to  that  above  alluded  to  by  Donati.

Bufforiy  1749. — Buflfon  first  made  known  his  theoretical
views  concerning  the  former  changes  of  the  earth,  in  his
'  Natural  History,*  published  in  1749.   He  adopted  the  theory


Ch.  m.]  BUFFON.  67

of  an  original  volcanic  nucleus,  together  with  the  universal
ocean  of  Leibnitz.  By  this  aqueous  envelope  the  highest
mountains  were  once  covered.  Marine  currents  then  acted
violently,  and  formed  horizontal  strata,  by  washing  away
solid  matter  in  some  parts,  and  depositing  it  in  others ;  they
also  excavated  deep  submarine  valleys.  The  level  of  the
ocean  was  then  depressed  by  the  entrance  of  a  part  of  its
waters  into  subterranean  caverns,  and  thus  some  land  was
left  dry.  Buffon  seems  not  to  have  profited,  like  Leibnitz
and  Moro,  by  the  observations  of  Steno,  or  he  could  not
have  imagined  that  the  strata  were  generally  horizontal,  and
that  those  which  contained  organic  remains  had  never  been
disturbed  since  the  era  of  their  formation.  He  was  conscious
of  the  great  power  annually  exerted  by  rivers  and  marine
currents  in  transporting  earthy  materials  to  lower  levels,  and
he  even  contemplated  the  period  when  they  would  destroy
all  the  present  continents.  Although  in  geology  he  was
not  an  original  observer,  his  genius  enabled  him  to  render
his  hypothesis  attractive ;  and  by  the  eloquen^.e  of  his  style,
and  the  boldness  of  his  speculations,  he  awakened  curiosity,
and  provoked  a  spirit  of  enquiry  among  his  countrymen.

Soon  after  the  publication  of  his  *  Natural  History,'  in
which  was  included  his  *  Theory  of  the  Earth,*  he  received
an  official  letter  (dated  January  1751)  from  the  Sorbonne,  or
Faculty  of  Theology  in  Paris,  informing  him  that  fourteen
propositions  in  his  works  *  were  reprehensible,  and  contrary
to  the  creed  of  the  church.'  The  first  of  these  obnoxious
passages,  and  the  only  one  relating  to  geology,  was  as
follows : — *  The  waters  of  the  sea  have  produced  the  moun-
tains and  valleys  of  the  land — the  waters  of  the  heavens,
reducing  all  to  a  level,  will  at  last  deliver  the  whole  land
over  to  the  sea,  and  the  sea  successively  prevailing  over  the
land,  will  leave  dry  new  continents  like  those  which  we
inhabit.'  BufEbn  was  invited  by  the  College,  in  very  courteous
terms,  to  send  in  an  explanation,  or  rather  a  recantation  of
his  unorthodox  opinions.  To  this  he  submitted ;  and  a
general  assembly  of  the  Faculty  having  approved  of  his
*  Declaration,'  he  was  required  to  publish  it  in  his  next  work.
The  document  begins  with  these  words : — ^  I  declare  that  I


58  TARGIONI.  [Ch.  in.

had  no  intention  to  contradict  the  text  of  Scriptare ;  that  I
believe  most  firmly  all  therein  related  abont  the  creation,
both  as  to  order  of  time  and  matter  of  fact ;  I  abandon  every^
thing  in  my  book  respecting  the  formation  of  the  ea/rthy  and,
generally,  all  which  may  be  contrary  to  the  narration  of
Moses.'  *

The  grand  principle  which  Bufifon  was  called  upon  to  re-
nounce was  simply  this, — *  that  the  present  mountains  and
valleys  of  the  earth  are  due  to  secondary  causes,  and  that
the  same  causes  will  in  time  destroy  all  the  continents,
hills,  and  valleys,  and  reproduce  others  like  them.'  Now,
whatever  may  be  the  defects  of  many  of  his  views,  it  is  no
longer  controverted  that  the  present  continents  are  of
secondary  origin.  The  doctrine  is  as  firmly  established  as
the  earth's  rotation  on  its  axis ;  and  that  the  land  now
elevated  above  the  level  of  the  sea  will  not  endure  for  ever,
is  an  opinion  which  gains  ground  daily,  in  proportion  as  we
enlarge  our  experience  of  the  changes  now  in  progress.

Targioniy  1751. — Targioni,  in  his  voluminous  *  Travels  in
Tuscany,  1751  and  1754/  laboured  to  fill  up  the  sketch  of
the  geology  of  that  region  left  by  Steno  sixty  years  before.
Notwithstanding  a  want  of  arrangement  and  condensation
in  his  memoirs,  they  contained  a  rich  store  of  faithful  obser-
vations. He  has  not  indulged  in  many  general  views,  but
in  regard  to  the  origin  of  valleys,  he  was  opposed  to  the
theory  of  BufFon,  who  attributed  them  principally  to  sub-
marine currents.  The  Tuscan  naturalist  laboured  to  show
that  both  the  larger  and  smaller  valleys  of  the  Apennines
were  excavated  by  rivers  and  floods,  caused  by  the  bursting
of  the  barriers  of  lakes,  after  the  retreat  of  the  ocean.  He
also  maintained  that  the  elephants  and  other  quadrupeds,
so  frequent  in  the  lacustrine  and  alluvial  deposits  of  Italy,
had  inhabited  that  peninsula ;  and  had  not  been  transported
thither,  as  some  had  conceived,  by  Hannibal  or  the  Bomans,
nor  by  what  they  were  pleased  to  term  *  a  catastrophe  of
nature.'

Lehman^  1756. — In  the  year  1756  the  treatise  of  Lehman,

*  Hiflt.  Nat.  torn.  v.  W.  de  I'lmp.  Rojale.    Paris,  1769.


Ch.  m.]  LEHMAN.— GESNER.  59

a  German  mineralogist,  and  director  of  the  Prussian  mines,
appeared,  who  divided  mountains  into  three  classes;  the
first,  those  formed  with  the  world,  and  prior  to  the  creation
of  animals,  and  which  contained  no  fragments  of  other  rocks;
the  second  class,  those  which  resulted  from  the  partial
destruction  of  the  primary  rocks  by  a  general  revolution;
and  a  third  class,  resulting  from  local  revolutions,  and  in
part  from  the  deluge  of  Noah.

A  French  translation  of  this  work  appeared  in  1759,  in  the
preface  of  which,  the  translator  displays  very  enlightened
views  respecting  the  operations  of  earthquakes,  as  well  as  of
aqueous  causes.*

Oesner,  1758. — In  this  year  Gesner,  the  botanist  of  Zurich,
published  an  excellent  treatise  on  petrifactions,  and  the
changes  of  the  earth  which  they  testify.f  After  a  detailed
enumeration  of  the  various  classes  of  fossils  of  the  animal
and  vegetable  kingdoms,  and  remarks  on  the  different  states
in  which  they  are  found  petrified,  he  considers  the  geological
phenomena  connected  with  them ;  observing,  that  some,  like
those  of  (Eningen,  resembled  the  testacea,  fish,  and  plants
indigenous  in  the  neighbouring  region ;  X  while  some,  such
as  ammonites,  gryphites,  belemnites,  and  other  shells,  are
either  of  unknown  species,  or  found  only  in  the  Indian  or
other  distant  seas.  In  order  to  elucidate  the  structure  of
the  earth,  he  gives  sections,  from  Verenius,  Buffon,  and
others,  obtained  in  digging  wells;  distinguishes  between
horizontal  and  inclined  strata;  and,  in  speculating  on  the
causes  of  these  appearances,  mentions  Donati's  examination
of  the  bed  of  the  Adriatic ;  the  filling  up  of  lakes  and  seas
by  sediment ;  the  imbedding  of  shells,  now  in  progress  ;  and
many  known  effects  of  earthquakes,  such  as  the  sinking  down
of  districts,  or  the  heaving  up  of  the  bed  of  the  sea,  so  as  to
form  new  islands,  and  lay  dry  strata  containing  petrifactions.
The  ocean,  he  says,  deserts  its  shores  in  many  countries,  as  on
the  borders  of  the  Baltic ;  but  the  rate  of  recession  has  been
so  slow  in  the  last  2,000  years,  that  to  allow  the  Apennines,

*  Emai  d*une  Hist,  nat  des  Coaches      in  Latin,
de  la  Terre.     1750.  t  Part.  ii.  chap.  9.

t  John  Qesner  published  at  Leyden,


60  ARDUINO.—MICHELL.  [Ch.  IO.

whose  snmmits  are  filled  with  marine  shells,  to  emerge  to
their  present  height,  would  have  required  about  80,000
years, — a  lapse  of  time  ten  times  greater,  or  more,  than  the
age  of  the  universe.  We  must  therefore  refer  the  phenomenon
to  the  command  of  the  Deity,  related  by  Moses,  that  '  the
waters  should  be  gathered  together  in  one  place,  and  the
dry  land  appear.'  Gresner  adopted  the  views  of  Leibnitz,  to
account  for  the  retreat  of  the  primeval  ocean :  his  essay  dis-
plays much  erudition;  and  the  opinions  of  preceding  writers
of  Italy,  Germany,  and  England,  are  commented  upon  with
fairness  and  discrimination.

ArduinOy  1 759. — In  the  year  following,  Arduino,*  in  his
memoirs  on  the  mountains  of  Padua,  Vicenza,  and  Verona,
deduced,  from  original  observations,  the  distinction  of  rocks
into  primary,  secondary,  and  tertiary,  and  showed  that  in
those  districts  there  had  been  a  succession  of  submarine
volcanic  eruptions.

Michelly  1760.— In  the  following  year  (1760)  the  Eev.  John
Michell,  Woodwardian  Professor  of  Mineralogy  at  Cambridge,
published  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  an  Essay  on
the  Cause  and  Phenomena  of  Earthquakes.f  His  attention
had  been  drawn  to  this  subject  by  the  great  earthquake  of
Lisbon  in  1755.  He  advanced  many  original  and  philo-
sophical views  respecting  the  propagation  of  subterranean
movements,  and  the  caverns  and  fissures  wherein  steam
might  be  generated.  In  order  to  point  out  the  application
of  his  theory  to  the  structure  of  the  globe,  he  was  led  to
describe  the  arrangement  and  disturbance  of  the  strata,  their
usual  horizontality  in  low  countries,  and  their  contortions
and  fractured  state  in  the  neighbourhood  of  mountain
chains.  He  also  explained,  with  surprising  accuracy,  the
relations  of  the  central  ridges  of  older  rocks  to  the  *long
narrow  slips  of  earth,  stones,  and  minerals,'  which  are
parallel  to  these  ridges.  In  his  generalisations,  derived  in
great  part  from  his  own  observations  on  the  geological
structure  of  Yorkshire,  he  anticipated  many  of  the  views

♦  Giornale  de' Criselini.     1769  Rev.  Feb.   1818,  re-edited  Lond.  and

t  See  a  Sketch  of  the  History  of  Eng-      Edinb.  Phil.  Mag.  voL  i.  and  ii.  1832-
lish  Geology,  by  Dr.  Fitton,  in  Edinb.      33.


Ch.  m.]  CATCOTT.— FORTIS.— ODOAKDI.  61

more  folly  developed  by  later  naturalists.  Some  of  Michell's
observations  anticipate  in  so  remarkable  a  manner  the  theories
established  forty  years  afterwards,  that  his  writings  would
probably  have  formed  an  era  in  the  science,  if  his  researches
had  been  uninterrupted.  He  held,  however,  his  professor-
ship only  eight  years,  when  his  career  was  suddenly  cut  short
by  preferment  to  a  benefice.  Prom  that  time  he  appears  to
have  been  engaged  in  his  clerical  duties,  and  to  have  entirely
discontinued  his  scientific  pursuits."^

Catcott,  1761. — Michell's  papers  were  entirely  free  from  all
physico-theological  disquisitions,  but  some  of  his  contem-
poraries were  still  earnestly  engaged  in  defending  or  impugn-
ing the  Woodwardian  hypothesis.  We  find  many  of  these
writings  referred  to  by  Catcott,  a  Hutchinsonian,  who  pub-
lished a  *  Treatise  on  the  Deluge'  in  1761.  He  laboured
particularly  to  refute  an  explanation  offered  by  his  contem-
porary. Bishop  Clayton,  of  the  Mosaic  writings.  That
prelate  had  declared  that  the  deluge  ^  could  not  be  literally
true,  save  in  respect  to  that  part  where  Noah  lived  before
the  flood.'  Catcott  insisted  on  the  universality  of  the  deluge,
and  referred  to  traditions  of  inundations  mentioned  by
ancient  writers,  or  by  travellers,  in  the  East  Indies,  China,
South  America,  and  other  countries.  This  part  of  his  book
is  valuable,  although  it  is  not  easy  to  see  what  bearing  the
traditions  have,  if  admitted  to  be  authentic,  on  the  Bishop's
argument,  since  no  evidence  is  adduced  to  prove  that  the
catastrophes  were  contemporaneous  events,  while  some  of
them  are  expressly  represented  by  ancient  authors  to  have
occurred  in  succession.

Foriis — Odoardij  1761. — The  doctrines  of  Arduino,  above
adverted  to,  were  afterwards  confirmed  by  Fortis  and  Des-
marest,  in  their  travels  in  the  same  country;  and  they,  as
well  as  Baldassari,  laboured  to  complete  the  history  of  the

*  The  abrupt  BOspeDsion  of  Michell's  clerg3nnen,  the  reward  of  success  dis-

scientific  career  exemplified  the  disad-  qualified  them,  if  thej  conscientiously

Tantageous  working  of  a  system  in  full  discharged    their    new    duties,    from

force  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge  in  the  farther  advancing  the  cause  of  science,

last  century,  where  the  chairs  of  mathe-  and  that,   too,   at  the  moment  when

matics,  natural  philosophy,  chemistry,  their  labours  would  naturally  bear  the

botany,  astronomy,  geology,  mineralogy,  richest  fruits.
and  others,  being  frequently  filled  by


62  RASPE.  [CJh.  ill

Subapennine  strata.  In  the  work  of  Odoardi,*  there  was  also
a  clear  argument  in  favour  of  the  distinct  ages  of  the  older
Apennine  strata,  and  the  Subapennine  formations  of  more
recent  origin.  He  pointed  out  that  the  strata  of  these  two
groups  were  unconformdbley  and  must  have  been  the  deposits
of  different  seas  at  distant  periods  of  time.

RaspCy  1763. — A  history  of  the  new  islands  by  Easpe,  an
Hanoverian,  appeared  in  1763,  in  Latin.f  In  this  work,  all
the  authentic  accounts  of  earthquakes  which  had  produced
permanent  changes  on  the  solid  parts  of  the  earth  were
collected  together  and  examined  with  judicious  criticism.
The  best  systems  which  had  been  proposed  concemiug  the
ancient  history  of  the  globe,  both  by  ancient  and  modem
writers,  are  reviewed;  and  the  merits  and  defects  of  the
doctrines  of  Hooke,  Eay,  Moro,  Buflfon,  and  others,  fairly
estimated.  Great  admiration  is  expressed  for  the  hypothesis
of  Hooke,  and  his  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  strata  is
shown  to  have  been  more  correct  than  Moro's,  while  their
theory  of  the  effects  of  earthquakes  was  the  same.  Baspe
had  not  seen  Michell's  memoirs,  and  his  views  concerning
the  geological  structure  of  the  earth  were  perhaps  less
enlarged;  yet  he  was  able  to  add  many  additional  arguments
in  favour  of  Hooke's  theory,  and  to  render  it,  as  he  said,  a
nearer  approach  to  what  Hooke  would  have  written  had  he
lived  in  later  times.  As  to  the  periods  wherein  all  the  earth-
quakes happened,  to  which  we  owe  the  elevation  of  various
parts  of  our  continents  and  islands,  Raspe  says  he  pretends
not  to  assign  their  duration,  still  less  to  defend  Hooke's  sug-
gestion, that  the  convulsions  almost  all  took  place  during  the
deluge  of  Noah.  He  adverts  to  the  apparent  indications  of
the  former  tropical  heat  of  the  climate  of  Europe,  and
the  changes  in  the  species  of  animals  and  plants,  as  among
the  most  obscure  and  difficult  problems  in  geology.  In
regard  to  the  islands  raised  from  the  sea,  within  the  times  of
history  or  tradition,  he  declares  that  some  of  them  were

*  Sui   Corpi    Marini    del    Feltrino.  Bophical  Works  of  Leibnitz.  Amst.  et

1761.  Leipzig,  1765;'  also  author  of  *  Tassie's

t  Be  Novis  e  Mari  Natis  Insnlis.  Oems/    and     'Baron     Munchausen's

Kaspe  was  also  the  editor  of  the  '  Philo-  Travels.'


Ch.  m.]  FUCHSEL.  63

composed  of  strata  containing  organic  remains,  and  that
they  were  not,  as  Baffon  had  asserted,  made  of  mere  volcanic
matter.  His  work  conclades  with  an  eloquent  exhortation
to  naturalists  to  examine  the  isles  which  rose,  in  1707,  in  the
Grecian  Archipelago,  and,  in  1720,  in  the  Azores,  and  not
to  neglect  such  splendid  opportunities  of  studying  nature
*  in  the  act  of  parturition.'  That  Hooke's  writings  should
have  been  neglected  for  more  than  half  a  century,  was  mat-
ter of  astonishment  to  Baspe  ;  but  it  is  still  more  wonderfdl
that  his  own  luminous  exposition  of  that  theory  should,
for  more  than  another  half-century,  have  excited  so  little
interest.

Fuchsdj  1762-1773. — Puchsel,  a  German  physician,  pub-
lished,  in   1762,   a  geological   description   of  the  country
between  the  Thuringerwald  and  the  Hartz,  and  a  memoir
on  the  environs  of  Rudolstadt  ;*  and  afterwards,  in  1773,  a
theoretical  work  on  the  ancient  history  of  the  earth  and  of
man.f     He  had  evidently  advanced  considerably  beyond  his
predecessor  Lehman,  and  was   aware  of  the   distinctness,
both  as  to  position  and  fossil  contents,  of  several  groups  of
strata  of  dififerent  ages,  corresponding  to  the  secondary  for-
mations now  recognised  by  geologists  in  various  parts  of
Germany.     He  supposed  the  European  continents  to  have
remained  covered  by  the  sea  until   the   formation   of  the
marine  strata  called  in  Germany  *  muschelnalk,'  at  the  same
time  that  the  terrestrial  plants  of  many  European  deposits,
attested  the  existence  of  dry  land  which  bordered  the  ancient
sea ;  land  which,  therefore,  must  have  occupied  the  place  of
the  present  ocean.     This  pre-existing  continent  had  been
gradually  swallowed  up  by  the  sea,  different  parts  having
subsided  in  succession  into  subterranean  caverns.     All  the
sedimentary   strata  were   originally  horizontal,   and    their
present  state  of  derangement  must  be  referred  to  subsequent
oscillations  of  the  ground.

As  there  were  plants  and  animals  in  the  ancient  periods,
so  also  there  must  have  been  men,  bat  they  did  not  all

*  Acta  Academiae  Electoralis  Magun-      from  an  excellent  analysis  of  his  me-
time.  voL  ii.    Erfurt.  moirs  by  M.    Kefsrstein.    Journ.    de

t  This  account  of  Fuchsel  is  derived      G^ologie,  torn.  ii.    Oct  1830.


64  BRANDER.—SOLDANL—FORTIS.— TESTA.  [Oh.  UL

descend  from  one  pair,  but  were  created  at  varions  points  oo
the  earth's  surface ;  and  the  number  of  these  distinct  birth-
places was  as  great  as  are  the  original  languages  of  nations.

In  the  writings  of  Puchsel  we  see  a  strong  desire  mani-
fested to  explain  geological  phenomena  as  far  as  possible
by  reference  to  the  agency  of  known  causes ;  and  although
some  of  his  speculations  were  fanciful,  his  views  coincide
much  more  nearly  with  those  now  generally  adopted,  than
the  theories  afterwards  promulgated  by  Werner  and  his
followers.

Brander,  1766.— Gustavus  Brander  published,  in  1766,  his
^  Fossilia  Hantoniensia,'  containing  excellent  figures  of  fossil
shells  from  the  Eocene  marine  strata  of  Hampshire.  *  Yarious
opinions,'  he  says  in  the  preface,  *  had  been  entertained  con-
cerning the  time  when  and  how  these  bodies  became  deposited.
Some  there  are  who  conceive  that  it  might  have  been  effected
in  a  wonderful  length  of  time  by  a  gradual  changing  and
shifting  of  the  sea,'  &c.  But  the  most  common  cause  as-
signed is  that  of  *  the  deluge.'  This  conjecture,  he  says,  even
if  the  universality  of  the  flood  be  not  called  in  question,  is
purely  hypothetical.  In  his  opinion,  fossil  animals  and
testacea  were,  for  the  most  part,  of  unknown  species ;  and
of  such  as  were  known,  the  living  analogues  now  belonged  to
southern  latitudes.

Soldaniy  1780. — Soldani  applied  successfully  his  know-
ledge of  zoology  to  illustrate  the  history  of  stratified  masses.
He  explained  that  microscopic  testacea  and  zoophytes  inha-
bited the  depths  of  the  Mediterranean ;  and  that  the  fossil
species  were,  in  like  manner,  found  in  those  deposits  wherein
the  fineness  of  their  particles,  and  the  absence  of  pebbles,
implied  that  they  were  accumulated  in  a  deep  sea,  or  far
from  shore.  This  author  first  remarked  the  alternation  of
marine  and  freshwater  strata  in  the  Paris  basin.*

Fortis — Testa,  1793. — A  lively  controversy  arose  between
Fortis  and  another  Italian  naturalist.  Testa,  concerning  the
fish  of  Monte  Bolca,  in  1793.  Their  letters,!  written  with
great  spirit  and  elegance,  show  that  they  were  aware  that  a

*  Saggio  orittografico,  &c  1780,  and  t  Lett,  sui  Pesci  Fossili  di  Bdca.

other  WorkB.  Milan,  1793.


Ch.  m.]  CORTESI.— PALLAS.— SAUSSURE.  65

large  proportion  of  the  Subapennine  shells  were  identical
with  living  species,  and  some  of  them  with  species  now  living
in  the  torrid  zone.  Portis  proposed  a  somewhat  fanciful
conjecture,  that  when  the  volcanos  of  the  Vicentin  were
burning,  the  waters  of  the  Adriatic  had  a  higher  tempera-
ture ;  and  in  this  manner,  he  said,  the  shells  of  warmer
regions  may  once  have  flourished  there.  But  Testa  was
disposed  to  think  that  these  species  of  testacea  were  still
common  to  their  own  and  to  equatorial  seas :  for  many,  he
said,  once  supposed  to  be  confined  to  hotter  regions,  had
been  afterwards  discovered  in  the  Mediterranean.

Cortesi — Spallamani — Wallerivs —  Whitehursty  1 775-1 798.
— While  these  Italian  naturalists,  together  with  Cortesi  and
Spallanzani,  were  busily  engaged  in  pointing  out  the  analogy
between  the  deposits  of  modem  and  ancient  seas,  and  the
habits  and  arrangements  of  their  organic  inhabitants,  and
while  some  progress  was  making,  in  the  same  country,  in
investigating  the  ancient  and  modern  volcanic  rocks,  some  of
the  most  original  observers  among  the  English  and  German
writers,  Whitehurst*  and  Wallerius,  were  wasting  their
strength  in  contending,  according  to  the  old  Woodwardian
hypothesis,  that  all  the  strata  were  formed  by  Noah's  deluge.
Bub  Whitehurst's  description  of  the  rocks  of  Derbyshire  was
most  faithful ;  and  he  atoned  for  false  theoretical  views  by
providing  data  for  their  refutation.

Pallas— SaussurCy  1793-1799. — Towards  the  close  of  the
eighteenth  century,  the  idea  of  dividing  the  mineral  masses  on
our  globe  into  separate  groups,  and  studying  their  relations,
began  to  be  generally  diffused.  Pallas  and  Saussure  were
among  the  most  celebrated  whose  labours  contributed  to
this  end.  After  an  attentive  examination  of  the  two  great
mountain-chains  of  Siberia,  Pallas  announced  the  result,  that
the  granite  rocks  were  in  the  middle,  the  schistose  at  their
sides,  and  the  limestones  again  on  the  outside  of  these;
and  this  he  conceived  would  prove  a  general  law  in  the
formation  of  all  chains  composed  chiefly  of  primary  rocks.f

In  his  ^Travels  in  Russia,'  in  1793  and  1794,  he  made

*  Inqniiy  into  the  Original  State  and         t  Observ.  on  the  Formation  of  Moun-
F9rmatioQ  of  the  Earth.     1778.  tains.    Act.  Fetrop.  ann.  1778,  part  L

VOL.  I.  F


66  SAUSSUBB.  [Ce.  m.

many  g^logical  observations  on  the  recent  strata  near  the
Wolga  and  the  Caspian,  and  adduced  proo&  of  the  g^reater
extent  of  the  latter  sea  at  no  distant  era  in  the  earth's
history.  His  memoir  on  the  fossil  bones  of  Siberia  attracted
attention  to  some  of  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  in
geology.  He  stated  that  he  had  found  a  rhinoceros  entire  in
the  frozen  soil,  with  its  sldn  and  flesh :  an  elephant,  found
afterwards  in  a  mass  of  ice  on  the  shore  of  the  North  Sea,
removed  all  doubt  as  to  the  credibility  of  so  wonderful  a
discovery.*

The  subjects  relating  to  natural  history  which  engaged
the  attention  of  Pallas,  were  too  multifimous  to  admit  of  his
devoting  a  large  share  of  his  labours  exclusively  to  geology.
Saussure,  on  the  other  hand,  employed  the  chief  portion  of
his  time  in  studying  the  structure  of  the  Alps  and  Jura,  and
he  provided  valuable  data  for  those  who  followed  him.  He
did  not  pretend  to  deduce  any  general  system  from  his  nu-
merous observations ;  and  the  few  theoretical  opinions  which
escaped  from  him,  seem,  like  those  of  Pallas,  to  have  been
chiefly  derived  from  the  cosmological  speculations  of  preced-
ing writers.

♦  Nov.  comm.  P^tr.  XVII.    Cuyier,  ^oge  de  Pallaa.


"^


67


CHAPTER  IV.

HISTOBT  OF   THE   PEOGEESS   OP   GEOLOGY — continued.

WXBNKb's  APPIJCATIOir  OF  OBOLOOT  TO  THB  ABT  OF  ICININO  — BXCURSITR
CHARACTER  OF  HI8  LBCtURBS — ENTHUSIASM  OF  HIS  PUPILS — HIS  AUTHORITY —
HIS  THSORKnCAL  ERRORS — DBSMARBST's  MAP  AND  DESCRIPTION  OF  AUYBRQNK
—CONTROVERSY  BETWEEN  THB  VULCANISTS  AND  NBPTUNISTS — INTBMPERANCB
OP  THE  RIVAL  SECTS — HUTTON*S  THEORY  OF  THE  EARTH — HIS  DISCOTBRT
OF  GRANITB  VEINS — ORIGINALITY  OF  HIS  VIEWS — WHY  OPPOSED — PLAYFAIR's
ILLUSTRATIONS — INFLUENCE  OF  VOLTAIRE*S  WRITINGS  ON  GEOLOGY — IMPU-
TATIONS CAST  ON  THE  HUITONIANS  BY  WILLIAMS,  XIRWAN,  AND  DB  LUC —
smith's  map  of  ENGLAND — GEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF  LONDON — PROGRESS  OF
THB  BCIENCES  DC  FRANCE — GROWING  IMPORTANCE  OF  THB  STUDY  OF  OBGA-
mC  REMAINS.

Werner. — The  art  of  mining  had  long  been  taught  in
France,  Crermany,  and  Hungary,  in  scientific  institutions
established  for  that  purpose,  where  mineralogy  has  always
been  a  principal  branch  of  instruction.

Werner  was  named,  in  1775,  professor  of  that  science  in
the  *  School  of  Mines,'  at  Preyberg,  in  Saxony.  He  directed
his  attention  not  merely  to  the  composition  and  external
characters  of  minerals,  bub  also  to  what  he  termed  'geo-
gnosy,' or  the  natural  position  of  minerals  in  particular  rocks,
together  with  the  grouping  of  those  rocks,  their  geographical
distribution,  and  various  relations.  The  phenomena  ob-
served in  the  structure  of  the  globe  had  hitherto  served  for
little  else  than  to  furnish  interesting  topics  for  philosophical
discussion :  but  when  Werner  pointed  out  their  application
to  the  practical  purposes  of  mining,  they  were  instantly  re-
garded by  a  large  class  of  men  as  an  essential  part  of  their
professional  education,  and  from  that  time  the  science  was
cultivated  in  Europe  more  ardently  and  systematically.
Werner's  mind  was  at  once  imaginative  and  richly  stored
with  miscellaneous  knowledge.     He  associated  every  thing

F  2


68  WERNER.  [Ch.  IV.

with  his  favourite  science,  and  in  his  excursive  lectures  he
pointed  out  all  the  economical  uses  of  minerals,  and  their
application  te  medicine :  the  influence  of  the  mineral  com-
position of  rocks  upon  the  soil,  and  of  the  soil  upon  the
resources,  wealth,  and  civilisation  of.  man.  The  vast  sandj
plains  of  Tartary  and  Africa,  he  would  say,  retained  their
inhabitants  in  the  shape  of  wandering  shepherds;  the
granitic  mountains  and  the  low  calcareous  and  alluvial
plains  gave  rise  te  different  manners,  degrees  of  wealth,  and
intelligence.  The  history  even  of  languages,  and  the  migra-
tions of  tribes,  had  been  determined  by  the  direction  of
particular  strata.  The  qualities  of  certain  stenes  used  in
building  would  lead  him  to  descant  on  the  architecture  of
different  ages  and  nations ;  and  the  physical  geography  of  a
country  frequently  invited  him  to  treat  of  military  tactics.
The  charm  of  his  manners  and  his  eloquence  kindled  en-
thusiasm in  the  minds  of  his  pupils ;  and  many,  who  had
intended  at  first  only  to  acquire  a  slight  knowledge  of
mineralogy,  when  they  had  once  heard  him,  devoted  them-
selves to  it  as  the  business  of  their  lives.  In  a  few  years,  a
small  school  of  mines,  before  unheard  of  in  Europe,  was
raised  to  the  rank  of  a  great  university ;  and  men  already
distinguished  in  science  studied  the  German  language,  and
came  from  the  most  distant  countries  to  hear  the  great  oracle
of  geology.^

Werner  had  a  great  antipathy  to  the  mechanical  labour  of
writing,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a  valuable  treatise  on
metalliferous  veins,  he  could  never  be  persuaded  to  pen  more
than  a  few  brief  memoirs,  and  those  containing  no  develop-
ment of  his  general  views.  Although  the  natural  modesty
of  his  disposition  was  excessive,  approaching  even  to  timidity,
he  indulged  in  the  most  bold  and  sweeping  generalisations,
and  he  inspired  all  his  scholars  with  a  most  implicit  faith  in
his  doctrines.  Their  admiration  of  his  genius,  and  the  feel-
ings of  gratitude  and  friendship  which  they  all  felt  for  him,
were  not  undeserved ;  but  the  supreme  authority  usurped  by
him  over  the  opinions  of  his  contemporaries  was  eventually
prejudicial  to  the  progress  of  the  science;  so  much  so,  as

♦  Cuvier,  l^loge  de  Werner.


Ch.  IV.]  WERNER.  69

greatly  to  counterbalance  the  advantages  which  it  derived  from
his  exertions.  If  it  be  true  that  delivery  be  the  first,  second,
and  third  requisite  in  a  popular  orator,  it  is  no  less  certain,
that  to  travel  is  of  first,  second,  and  third  importance  to
those  who  desire  to  originate  just  and  comprehensive  views
concerning  the  structure  of  our  globe.  Now  Werner  had
not  travelled  to  distant  countries  ;  he  had  merely  explored  a
small  portion  of  Germany,  and  conceived  and  persuaded
others  to  believe  that  the  whole  surface  of  our  planet,  and  all
the  mountain-chains  in  the  world,  were  made  after  the  model
of  his  own  province.  It  became  a  ruling  object  of  ambition
in  the  minds  of  his  pupils  to  confirm  the  generalisations  of
their  great  master,  and  to  discover  in  the  most  distant  parts
of  the  globe  his  ^  universal  formations,'  which  he  supposed
had  been  each  in  succession  simultaneously  precipitated  over
the  whole  earth  from  a  common  menstruum,  or  ^  chaotic  fluid.'
It  now  appears  that  the  Saxon  professor  had  misinterpreted
many  of  the  most  important  appearances  even  in  the  im-
mediate neighbourhood  of  Freyberg.  Thus,  for  example,
within  a  day's  journey  of  his  school,  the  porphyry,  called  by
him  primitive,  has  been  found  not  only  to  send  forth  veins  or
dikes  through  strata  of  the  coal  formation,  but  to  overlie
them  in  mass.  The  granite  of  the  Hartz  mountains,  on  the
other  hand,  which  he  supposed  to  be  the  nucleus  of  the
chain,  is  now  well  known  to  traverse  the  other  beds,  as  near
Groslar;  and  still  nearer  Freyberg,  in  the  Erzgebirge,  the
mica  slate  does  not  mantle  round  the  granite  as  was  sup-
posed, but  abuts  abruptly  against  it.  Fragments,  also,  of
the  greywacke  slate,  containing  organic  remains,  were
found  entangled  in  the  granite  of  the  Hartz,  by  M.  de
Seckendorf.*

The  principal  merit  of  Werner's  system  of  instruction  con-
sisted in  steadily  directing  the  attention  of  his  scholars  to
the  constant  relations  of  superposition  of  certain  mineral
groups ;  but  he  had  been  anticipated,  as  has  been  shown  in
the  last  chapter,  in  the  discovery  of  this  general  law,  by

*  I  am  indebted  for  this  information  and  partly  to  Dr.  Charles  Hart  mans,
pnrtlj  to  MeMrs.  Sedgwick  and  Morchi-  the  translator  of  this  work  into  QtT'
ton,  who  have  iDvestigated  the  country,      man.


70  VULCANISTS  AND  NEPTUNISTS.  [Ch.  IV.

several  geologists  in  Italy  and  elsewhere ;  and  his  leading
divisions  of  the  secondary  strata  were  at  the  same  time,  and
independently,  made  the  basis  of  an  arrangement  of  the
British  strata  by  our  countryman,  William  Smith,  to  whose
work  I  shall  refer  in  the  sequel.

Controversy  between  the  Vulcanists  and  Neptunists.— In  re-
gard to  basalt  and  other  igneous  rocks,  Werner's  theory  was
original,  but  it  was  also  extremely  erroneous.  The  basalts
of  Saxony  and  Hesse,  to  which  his  observations  were  chiefly
confined,  consisted  of  tabular  masses  capping  the  hills,  and
not  connected  with  the  levels  of  existing  valleys,  like  many
in  Auvergne  and  the  Yivarais.  These  basalts,  and  all  other
rocks  of  the  same  family  in  other  countries,  were,  according
to  him,  chemical  precipitates  from  water.  He  denied
that  they  were  the  products  of  submarine  volcanos;  and
even  taught  that,  in  the  primeval  ages  of  the  world,  there
were  no  volcanos.  His  theory  was  opposed,  in  a  twofold
sense,  to  the  doctrine  of  the  permanent  agency  of  the  same
causes  in  nature ;  for  not  only  did  he  introduce,  without
scruple,  many  imaginary  causes  supposed  to  have  once
effected  great  revolutions  in  the  earth,  and  then  to  have
become  extinct,  but  new  ones  also  were  feigned  to  have
come  into  play  in  modern  times ;  and,  above  all,  that  most
violent  iustrument  of  change,  the  agency  of  subterranean
heat.

So  early  as  1768,  before  Werner  had  commenced  his
miueralogical  studies,  Baspe  had  truly  characterised  the
basalts  of  Hesse  as  of  igneous  origin.  Arduino,  we  have
seen,  had  pointed  out  numerous  varieties  of  trap-rock  in  the
Yicentin  as  analogous  to  volcanic  products,  and  as  distinctly
referable  to  ancient  submarine  eruptions.  Desmarest,  as
before  stated  (p.  61),  had,  in  company  with  Portis,  examined
the  Vicentin  in  1766,  and  confirmed  Arduino's  views.  In
1772,  Banks,  Solander,  and  Troil  compared  the  columnar
basalt  of  Hecla  with  that  of  the  Hebrides.  CoUini,  in  1774,
recognised  the  true  nature  of  the  igneous  rocks  on  the
Ehine,  between  Andemach  and  Bonn.  In  1775,  Guettard
visited  the  Yivarais,  and  established  the  relation  of  basaltic
currents  to  lavas.     Lastly,  in  1779,  Faujas  published  his


Ch.  IV.]  DESMABE8T.  71

description  of  the  volcanos  of  the  Vivarais  and  Velaj,  and
showed  how  the  streams  of  basalt  had  poured  out  from
craters  which  still  remain  in  a  perfect  state."^

DegmareaL — When  sound  opinions  had  thus  for  twenty
years  prevailed  in  Europe  concerning  the  true  nature  of  the
ancient  trap-rocks,  Werner  by  his  simple  dictum  caused  a
retrograde  movement,  and  not  only  overturned  the  true  theory,
but  substituted  for  it  one  of  the  most  unphilosophical  that
can  well  be  imagined.  The  continual  ascendency  of  his
dogmas  on  this  subject  was  the  more  astonishing,  because  a
variety  of  new  and  striking  facts  were  daily  accumulated  in
favour  of  the  correct  opinions  previously  entertained.  Des-
marest,  after  a  careful  examination  of  Auvergne,  pointed  out,
first,  the  most  recent  volcanos  which  had  their  craters  still
entire,  and  their  streams  of  lava  conforming  to  the  level  of
the  present  river-courses.  He  then  showed  that  there  were
others  of  an  intermediate  epoch,  whose  craters  were  nearly
effaced,  and  whose  lavas  were  less  intimately  connected  with
the  present  vaUeys;  and,  lastly,  that  there  were  volcanic
rocks,  still  more  ancient,  without  any  discernible  craters  or
scorise,  and  bearing  the  closest  analogy  to  rocks  in  other  parts
of  Europe,  the  igneous  origin  of  which  was  denied  by  the
school  of  Freyberg.f

Desmarest's  map  of  Auvergne  was  a  work  of  uncommon
merit.  He  first  made  a  trigonometrical  survey  of  the  district,
and  delineated  its  physical  geography  with  minute  accuracy
and  admirable  graphic  power.  He  contrived,  at  the  same
time,  to  express  without  the  aid  of  colours,  many  geological
details,  including  the  different  ages,  and  sometimes  even  the
structure,  of  the  volcanic  rocks,  and  distinguishing  them  from
the  fresh-water  and  the  granitic.  They  alone  who  have  care-
folly  studied  Auvergne,  and  traced  the  different  lava  streams
from  their  craters  to  their  termination, — the  various  isolated
basaltic  cappings, — the  relation  of  some  lavas  to  the  present
valleys, — the  absence  of  such  relations  in  others, — can  appre-
ciate the  extraordinary  fidelity  of  this  elaborate  work.  No
other  district  of  equal  dimensions  in  Europe  exhibits,  perhaps,

*  Carier,  &oge  de  Desmarest  and  M^m.  de  Tlnst.,  Sciences  math^mat

t  Joom.  de  Phja.  yol.  xiii.  p.  116;      et  phjs.  voL  vi.  p.  210.


72  DOLOMIEU.— MONTLOSIEB.— HUTTON.  [Ch.  IV.

HO  beautiful  and  varied  a  series  of  phenomena;  and,  fortu-
nately, Desmarest  possessed  at  once  the  mathematical  know-
ledge required  for  the  construction  of  a  map,  skill  in  miner-
ology,  and  a  power  of  original  generalisation.

Dolomieu — Montlosier^  1784-1788. — ^Dolomieu,  another  of
Werner's  contemporaries,  had  found  prismatic  basalt  among
the  ancient  lavas  of  Etna;  and,  in  1784,  had  observed  the
alternations  of  submarine  lavas  and  calcareous  strata  in  the
Val  di  Noto,  in  Sicily.*  In  1790,  also,  he  described  similar
phenomena  in  the  Vicentin  and  in  the  Tyrol.f  Montlosier
published,  in  1788,  an  essay  on  the  theoiy  of  the  volcanos  of
Auvergne,  combining  accurate  local  observations  with  com-
prehensive views.  Notwithstanding  this  mass  of  evidence,
the  scholars  of  Werner  were  prepared  to  support  his  opinions
to  their  utmost  extent ;  maintaining,  in  the  fulness  of  their
faith,  that  even  obsidian  was  an  aqueous  precipitate.  As
they  were  blinded  by  their  veneration  for  the  great  teacher,
they  were  impatient  of  opposition,  and  soon  imbibed  the
spirit  of  a  faction;  and  their  opponents,  the  Yulcanists,
were  not  long  in  becoming  contaminated  with  the  same  in-
temperate zeal.  Eidicule  and  irony  were  weapons  more
frequently  employed  than  arguments  by  the  rival  sects,  till
at  last  the  controversy  was  carried  on  with  a  degree  of
bitterness  almost  unprecedented  in  questions  of  physical
science.  Desmarest  alone,  who  had  long  before  provided
ample  materials  for  refuting  such  a  theory,  kept  aloof  from
the  strife ;  and  whenever  a  zealous  Neptunist  wished  to  draw
the  old  man  into  an  argument,  he  was  satisfied  with  replying,
*  Go  and  see.'J

Huttouy  1788. — It  would  be  contrary  to  all  analogy,  in
matters  of  graver  import,  that  a  war  should  rage  with  such
fury  on  the  Continent,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  our  island
should  not  mingle  in  the  affray.  Although  in  England  the
personal  influence  of  Werner  was  wanting  to  stimulate  men
to  the  defence  of  the  weaker  side  of  the  question,  they  con-
trived to  find  good  reason  for  espousing  the  Wemerian  errors
with  great  enthusiasm.     In  order  to  explain  the  peculiar

*  Journ.  de  Pbys.  xxy.  p.  191.  {  Cavier,  &oge  de  Desmarest.

t  Ibid*  torn,  xxxvii.  part  ii.  p.  200.


Ch.  IV.]  HUTTONIAN  THEOBY.  73

motiyes  which  led  many  to  enter,  even  with  party  feeling,
into  this  contiest,  it  will  be  necessary  to  present  the  reader
with  a  sketch  of  the  views  unfolded  by  HuttoD,  a  contem-
porary of  the  Saxon  geologist.  Hntton  had  been  educated
as  a  physician,  but  declining  the  practice  of  medicine,  he
resolved,  when  young,  to  remain  content  with  the  small
independence  inherited  from  his  father,  and  thenceforth
to  give  his  undivided  attention  to  scientific  pursuits.  He
resided  at  Edinburgh,  where  he  enjoyed  the  society  of
many  men  of  high  attainments,  who  loved  him  for  the  sim-
plicity of  his  manners  and  the  sincerity  of  his  character.
His  application  was  unwearied ;  and  he  made  frequent  tours
through  different  parts  of  England  and  Scotland,  acquiring
considerable  skill  as  a  mineralogist,  and  constantly  arriving
at  grand  and  comprehensive  views  in  geology.  He  commu-
nicated the  results  of  his  observations  unreservedly  and  with
the  fearless  spirit  of  one  who  was  conscious  that  love  of
truth  was  the  sole  stimulus  of  his  exertions.  When  at  length
he  had  matured  his  views,  he  published,  in  J  788,  his  *  Theory
of  the  Earth,'*  and  the  same,  aftwwards  more  fully  developed
in  a  separate  work,  in  1795.  This  treatise  was  the  first  in
which  geology  was  declared  to  be  in  no  way  concerned
about  *  questions  as  to  the  origin  of  things ;'  the  first  in
which  an  attempt  was  made  to  dispense  entirely  with  all
hypothetical  causes,  and  to  explain  the  former  changes  of
the  earth's  crust  by  reference  exclusively  to  natural  agents.
Hutton  laboured  to  give  fixed  principles  to  geology,  as
Newton  had  succeeded  in  doing  to  astronomy ;  but,  in  the
former  science,  too  little  progress  had  been  made  towards
famishing  the  necessary  data,  to  enable  any  philosopher,
however  great  his  genius,  to  realise  so  noble  a  project.

Huttonian  theory. — *  The  ruins  of  an  older  world,'  said
Hutton,  *  are  visible  in  the  present  structure  of  our  planet ;
and  the  strata  which  now  compose  our  continents  have  been
once  beneath  the  sea,  and  were  formed  out  of  the  waste  of
pre-existing  continents.  The  same  forces  are  stiU  destroying,
by  chemical  decomposition  or  mechanical  violence,  even  the
haidest  rocks,  and  transporting  the   materials  to  the  sea,

»  Ed.  Phil.  Trans.  1788.


74  HXITTONIAN  THEORY.  [Ch.  IT.

where  they  are  spread  out,  and  form  strata  analogous  to  those
of  more  ancient  date.  Although  loosely  deposited  along  the
bottom  of  the  ocean,  they  become  afterwards  altered  and  con-
solidated by  volcanic  heat,  and  then  heaved  up,  fractured,
and  contorted/

Although  Hutton  had  never  explored  any  region  of  active
volcanos,  he  had  convinced  himself  that  basalt  and  many
other  trap-rocks  were  of  igneous  origin,  and  that  some  of
them  had  been  injected  in  a  melted  state  through  fissures  in
the  older  strata.  The  compactness  of  these  rocks,  and  their
dififerent  aspect  from  that  of  ordinary  lava,  he  attributed  to
their  having  cooled  down  under  the  pressure  of  the  sea ;  and
in  order  to  remove  the  objections  started  against  this  theory,
his  friend.  Sir  James  Hall,  instituted  a  most  curious  and
instructive  series  of  chemical  experiments,  illustrating  the
crystalline  arrangement  and  texture  assumed  by  melted
matter  cooled  under  high  pressure.

The  absence  of  stratification  in  granite,  and  its  analogy,
in  mineral  character,  to  rocks  which  he  deemed  of  igneous
origin,  led  Hutton  to  conclude  that  granite  also  must  have
been  formed  from  matter  in  fusion ;  and  this  inference  he
felt  could  not  be  fully  confirmed,  unless  he  discovered  at
the  contact  of  granite  and  other  strata  a  repetition  of  the
phenomena  exhibited  so  constantly  by  the  trap-rocks.
Resolved  to  try  his  theory  by  this  test,  he  went  to  the
Grampians,  and  surveyed  the  line  of  junction  of  the  granite
and  superincumbent  stratified  masses,  until  he  found  in  Glen
Tilt,  in  1785,  the  most  clear  and  unequivocal  proofs  in
support  of  his  views.  Veins  of  red  granite  are  there  seen
branching  out  from  the  principal  mass,  and  traversing  the
black  micaceous  schist  and  primary  limestone.  The  inter-
sected stratified  rocks  are  so  distinct  in  colour  and  appear-
ance as  to  render  the  example  in  that  locality  most  striking,
and  the  alteration  of  the  limestone  in  contact  was  very
analogous  to  that  produced  by  trap  veins  on  calcareous
strata.  This  verification  of  his  system  filled  him  with
delight,  and  called  forth  such  marks  of  joy  and  exultation,
that  the  guides  who  accompanied  him,  says  his  biographer,

ere   convinced  that  he   must  have   discovered  a  vein  of


Ch.  IV.]  HUTTONIAN  THEORY.  75

silver  or  gold.*  He  was  aware  that  the  same  theory  would
not  explain  the  origin  of  the  primary  schists,  but  these  he
called  primary,  rejecting  the  term  primitive,  and  was  dis-
pOHed  to  consider  them  as  sedimentary  rocks  altered  by  heat,
and  that  they  originated  in  some  other  form  from  the  waste
of  previously  existing  rocks.

By  this  important  discovery  of  granite  veins,  to  which  he
had  been  led  by  fair  induction  from  an  independent  class  of
facts,  Hutton  prepared  the  way  for  the  greatest  innovation
on  the  systems  of  his  predecessors.  Yallisneri  had  pointed
out  the  general  fact  that  there  were  certain  fundamental
rocks  which  contained  no  organic  remains,  and  which  he
supposed  to  have  been  formed  before  the  creation  of  living
beings.  Moro,  Generelli,  and  other  Italian  writers,  embraced
the  same  doctrine;  and  Lehman  regarded  the  moun-
tains called  by  him  primitive,  as  parts  of  the  original
nucleus  of  the  globe.  The  same  tenet  was  an  article  of
fiuth  in  the  school  of  Freyberg :  and  if  anyone  ventured  to
doubt  the  possibility  of  our  being  enabled  to  carry  back  our
researches  to  the  creation  of  the  present  order  of  things,  the
granitic  rocks  were  triumphantly  appealed  to.  On  them
seemed  written,  in  legible  characters,  the  memorable  in-
scription—

Dinanzi  a  me  non  fur  cose  create
Se  non  eteme ;  t

and  no  small  sensation  was  excited  when  Hutton  seemed,
with  unhaUowed  hand,  desirous  to  erase  characters  already
regarded  by  many  as  sacred.  *  In  the  economy  of  the
world/  said  the  Scotch  geologist,  *  I  can  find  no  traces  of  a
beginning,  no  prospect  of  an  end  ;*  a  declaration  the  more
startling  when  coupled  with  the  doctrine,  that  all  past
changes  on  the  globe  had  been  brought  about  by  the  slow
agency  of  existing  causes.  The  imagination  was  first
fatigued  and  overpowered  by  endeavouring  to  conceive  the
immensity  of  time  required  for  the  annihilation  of  whole

*  Playfair's  Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  75.
t  '  Before  me  things  create  were  none,  save  things
Eternal.'

Dante*s  Inferno^  canto  iii.,  Gary's  Translation.


'^  HUTTOlJIAar  THEOHT.  (^Ck.  IT.

Jontinenta    by  go    insensible    a    process;    and    when    the
:houghta  had  wandered  througE  these  interminable  periods,
10  resting-place  was  assigned  in   the    remotest  distance,
rhe  oldest  rocks  were  represented   to  be  of  a   derivmtiTe
latnre,  the  last  of  an  antecedent  series,  and  that,  perhaps,
me  of  many  pre-exLiting  worlds.     Sach  views  of  the  im-
nensity  of  paat    time,  like   those   nnfolded   hj  the    New-
onian   philosophy   in  regard   to   space,   were   too   vast   to
kwaken  ideas  of  sublimity  unmixed  with  a  painful  sense  of
>nr  incapacity  to  conceive  a  plan  of  such  infinite   extent.
iVorlds  are  seen  beyond  worlds  inmieasurably  distant  from
ach  other,  and,  beyond  them  all,  innumerable  other  systems
.re  faintly  traced  on  the  confines  of  the  visible  universe.

The  characteristic  feature  of  the  Huttonian  theory  iras,
is  Ix^fore  hinted,  the  exclusion  of  all  causes  not  supposed  to
belong  to  the  present  order  of  nature.  But  Hutton  Ji^d
narle  no  step  beyond  Hooke,  lloro,  and  Baspe,  in  pointing
►ut  in  what  manner  the  laws  now  governing  subterranean
aovements  might  bring  about  geological  changes,  if  soffi-
lent  time  be  allowed.  On  the  contrary,  he  seems  to  have
alien  far  short  of  some  of  their  views,  especially  when  he
efused  to  attribute  any  part  of  the  external  configuration  of
he  earth's  crust  to  subsidence.  He  imagined  that  the  con-
inents  were  first  gradually  destroyed  by  aqueous  deorada-
ion ;  and  when  their  ruins  had  furnished  materials  for  new
:ontinents,  they  were  upheaved  by  violent  convulsions.  He
herefore  required  alternate  periods  of  general  disturbance
md  repose :  and  such  he  believed  had  been,  and  would  for
5ver  be,  the  course  of  nature.

Generelli,  in  his  exposition  of  Moro's  system,  had  made  a
ar  nearer  approximation  towards  reconciling  geological  ap-
)earances  with  the  state  of  nature  as  known  to  us ;  for  while
le  agreed  with  Hutton,  that  the  decay  and  reproduction  of
•ocks  were  always  in  progress,  proceeding  with  the  utmost
jniformity,  the  learned  Carmelite  represented  the  repairs  of
nountains  by  elevation  from  below  to  be  effected  by  an
equally  constant  and  synchronous  operation.  Neither  of
;hese  theories,  considered  singly,  satisfies  all  the  conditions

r  the  great  problem,  which  a  geologist,  who  rejects  cosmo-


Ch.  IV.]       PLAYFAIR'S  ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  HUTTON.  77

logical  causes,  is  called  upon  to  solve ;  but  they  probably
contain  together  the  germs  of  a  perfect  system.  There  can
be  no  doubt,  that  periods  of  disturbance  and  repose  have
followed  each  other  in  succession  in  every  region  of  the
globe ;  but  it  may  be  equally  true,  that  the  energy  of  the
subterranean  movements  has  been  always  uniform  as  regards
the  whole  earth.  The  force  of  earthquakes  may  for  a  cycle
of  years  have  been  invariably  confined,  as  it  is  now,  to  large
but  determinate  spaces,  and  may  then  have  gradually  shifted
its  position,  so  that  another  region,  which  had  for  ages  been
at  rest,  became  in  its  turn  the  grand  theatre  of  action.

Flayfair^s  illustrations  of  Huiton^  1797. — In  the  explana-
tion proposed  by  Hutton,  and  by  Playfair,  the  illustrator  of
his  theory,  respecting  the  origin  of  valleys,  great  stress  was
laid  on  the  action  of  the  rivers  now  flowing  in  them.  They
perhaps  ascribed  valleys  in  general  too  exclusively  to  this
one  cause.  Yet  Playfair,  in  speaking  of  the  upper  valley  of
the  Bhone  (see  chap,  xviii.),  has  shown  that  he  did  not  wholly
disregard  the  influence  of  subterranean  movements,  and  of
the  waves  of  the  sea,  during  the  original  emergence  of  the
land.

Although  Hutton 's  knowledge  of  mineralogy  and  chemistry
was  considerable,  he  possessed  but  little  information  con-
cerning organic  remains ;  they  merely  served  him,  as  they
did  Werner,  to  characterise  certain  strata,  and  to  prove
their  marine  origin.  The  theory  of  former  revolutions
in  organic  life  was  not  yet  fully  recognised;  and  without
this  class  of  proofs  in  support  of  the  antiquity  of  the  globe,
the  indefinite  periods  demanded  by  the  Huttonian  hypothe-
sis appealed  visionary  to  many ;  and  some,  who  deemed  the
doctrine  inconsistent  with  revealed  truths,  indulged  very
uncharitable  suspicions  of  the  motives  of  its  author.  They
accused  him  of  a  deliberate  design  of  reviving  the  heathen
dogma  of  an  ^  eternal  succession,'  and  of  denying  that  this
world  ever  had  a  beginning.  Playfair,  in  the  biography  of
his  friend,  has  the  following  comment  on  this  part  of  their
theory:  *In  the  planetary  motions,  where  geometry  has
carried  the  eye  so  far,  both  into  the  future  and  the  past,
we  discover    no    mark    either   of   the    commencement  or


78  VOLTAIKE.  [Ce.  IV.

termination  of  the  present  order.  It  is  unreasonable,  indeed,
to  suppose  that  such  marks  should  anywhere  exist.  The
Author  of  Nature  has  not  given  laws  to  the  universe,  which,
like  the  institutions  of  men,  carry  in  themselves  the  elements
of  their  own  destruction.  He  has  not  permitted  in  His
works  any  symptom  of  infancy  or  of  old  age,  or  any  sign  by
which  we  may  estimate  either  their  future  or  their  past
duration.  He  may  put  an  end^  as  He  no  dovht  gave  a  heginningy
to  the  present  system,  at  some  determinate  period  of  time ;
but  we  may  rest  assured  that  this  great  catastrophe  will  not
be  brought  about  by  the  laws  now  existing,  and  that  it  is
not  indicated  by  anything  which  we  perceive.'*

The  party  feeling  excited  against  the  Huttonian  doctrines,
and  the  open  disregard  of  candour  and  temper  in  the  con-
troversy, wiU  hardly  be  credited  by  the  reader,  unless  he
recalls  to  his  recollection  that  the  mind  of  the  English
public  was  at  that  time  in  a  state  of  feverish  excitement.  A
class  of  writers  in  France  had  been  labouring  industriously
for  many  years  to  diminish  the  influence  of  the  clergy,  by
sapping  the  foundations  of  the  Christian  faith;  and  their
success,  and  the  consequences  of  the  Revolution,  had  alarmed
the  most  resolute  minds,  while  the  imagination  of  the  more
timid  was  continually  haimted  by  dread  of  innovation,  as  by
the  phantom  of  some  fearful  dream.

Voltaire^  1730-1760. — ^Although  Voltaire  was  actively  en-
gaged throughout  the  greater  part  of  his  literary  career  in
a  successful  war  against  religious  intolerance,  and  in  defence
of  those  who  were  persecuted  for  opinions  to  which  they  had
been  led  by  freedom  of  enquiry,  yet  he  contemplated  with  no
friendly  feelings  the  cultivators  of  geology  in  general.  He
found  that  the  most  popular  systems  of  geology  had  been
accommodated  with  much  ingenuity  to  the  account  given  in
Genesis  of  the  creation  and  deluge,  and  he  regarded  the
science  as  one  which  had  been  successfully  enlisted  by  the
theologians  as  an  ally  in  their  cause.

When  ridiculing  the  theories  of  Burnet,  Woodward,  and
other  physico-theological  writers,  he  declared  that  they  were

♦  Playfair*8  Works,  toI.  iy.  p.  65.


Ch.  IV.]  COWPER.— WILLIAMS.  79

as  fond  of  changes  of  scene  on  the  face  of  the  globe  as  were
the  populace  at  a  play.  ^  Every  one  of  them  destroys  and
renovates  the  earth  after  his  own  fashion,  as  Descartes
framed  it :  for  philosophers  put  themselves  without  ceremony
in  the  place  of  God,  and  think  to  create  a  universe  with  a
word/*  In  his  anxiety  to  shake  the  popular  belief  in  the
universal  deluge,  he  endeavoured  to  inculcate  scepticism  as
to  the  real  nature  of  fossil  shells,  and  to  recall  from  contempt
the  exploded  dogma  of  the  sixteenth  century  that  they  were
sports  of  nature.  Yet  in  his  later  writings,  speaking  of  the
fossil  shells  of  Touraine,  he  admits  their  organic  origin,  and
in  another  of  his  works  we  find  him  implying  the  true  nature
of  the  shells  collected  in  the  Alps  and  other  places,  by
ascribing  them  to  Eastern  species  which  had  fallen  from  the
hats  of  pilgrims  coming  from  Syria.

Ckrtcper — Williamsy  1785-1789. — Some  faint  idea  may  be
formed  of  the  obloquy  to  which  geologists  exposed  them-
selves by  announcing  the  most  obvious  results  of  their  in-
vestigations, if  we  observe  the  manner  in  which  they  were
mentioned  even  by  the  amiable  poet  Cowper.  In  his  poem
of  *  The  Task '  he  says :

Some  drill  and  bore
The  solid  earth,  and  from  the  strata  there
Extract  a  register,  by  which  we  learn
That  He  who  made  it,  and  revealed  its  date
To  Moees,  was  mistaken  in  its  age.t

The  date  here  alluded  to  for  the  creation  of  this  planet,  or
rather  of  the  universe,  was  4004  years  before  the  birth  of
Christ;  a  date  which  for  more  than  eighty  years  before
Cowper  published  *The  Task'  had  been  printed  in  the
authorised  versions  of  the  Bible  in  the  margin  of  the  first
chapter  of  Genesis,  and  was  regarded  by  millions  with  the
same  reverence  as  the  text  of  the  Bible  itself.  Cowper  was
probably  as  little  aware  as  are  the  majority  of  the  present
readers  of  this  version  that  this  chronology  was  derived  from
the  speculations  of  Usher,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  and  is


*  Diatertation  enyoy^e  a  rAcad^mie      riv^b  dans  notre  Globe.
de  Boulogne,  snr  les  Changemens  ar-         t  The  Task,  book  iii.,  *  The  Garden.


80  WILLIAMS.— DE  LUC— KIRWAN.  £Ch.  IV.

nowhere  to  be  found  in   the  narrative  of  the    unknown
author  or  authors  of  the  Hebrew  cosmogony.*

To  pass  over  the  works  of  many  divines,  it  may  be  mentioned
that  among  the  foremost  ranks  of  the  intolerant  at  this
period  are  found  several  laymen  who  had  considerable
claims  to  scientific  reputation.  Among  these  appears
Williams,  a  mineral  surveyor  of  Edinburgh,  who  published
a  *  Natural  History  of  the  Minei*al  Kingdom,'  in  1789;  a
work  of  great  merit  for  that  day,  and  of  practical  utility,  as
containing  the  best  account  of  the  coal  strata.  In  his  pre-
face he  charges  Hutton  with  *  warping  everything  to  support
the  eternity  of  the  world.'t  He  descants  on  the  pernicious
influence  of  such  sceptical  notions,  as  leading  to  downright
infidelity  and  atheism,  'and  as  being  nothing  less  than
to  depose  the  Almighty  Creator  of  the  universe  from  His
oflSce.'t

De  Luc — KirwaUy  1798. — De  Luc,  in  the  preliminary  dis-
course to  his  Treatise  on  Geology§  says,  *  the  weapons  have
been  changed  by  which  revealed  religion  is  attacked ;  it  is
now  assailed  by  geology,  and  the  knowledge  of  this  science
has  become  essential  to  theologians.'  He  imputes  the  failure
of  former  geological  systems  to  their  having  been  anti-
Mosaical.  It  might  be  supposed  from  these  and  other
similar  charges  that  the  geologists  of  that  age  were  animated
by  a  polemical  and  aggressive  spirit ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
those  writers  who  were  fortunate  enough  *  to  discover  the
true  causes  of  things,*  rarely  deserved  another  part  of  the
poet's  panegyric,  ^Atque  metus  omnes  suhjedt  pedibus,*  The
caution,  and  even  timid  reserve,  of  many  eminent  authors
in  Italy  and  elsewhere  from  the  early  period  to  that  at  which
we  have  now  arrived  is  very  apparent ;  and  there  can  hardly
be  a  doubt,  that  they  subscribed  to  certain  dogmas,  and
particularly  to  the  first  diluvian  theory,  out  of  deference  to

*  The  date  of  4004  years  B.a  for  the  present  time  (1871)  in  the  large  annuil

creation    was   published  (see   Horner,  reprints  given  out  from  the  Clarendon

Presidential  Address,  Quart.  Geo.  Joum.  Press  at  Oxford.

1861,  p.  Ixix.)  in  1701  in  an  edition  of  f  P.  667.

the  Bible  now  to  be  seen  in  the  British  t  P*  69.

Museum,  and  is  continued  up  to  the  §  London,  1809.


Ch.  IV.  DE  LUC .— KIRWAN.  81

popular  prejudices,  rather  than  from  conviction.  If  they
were  guilty  of  dissimulation,  we  may  feel  regret,  but  must
not  blame  their  want  of  moral  courage,  reserving  rafcher  our
condemnation  for  the  persecuting  spirit  of  the  times,  which
forced  Galileo  to  abjure,  and  the  two  Jesuits  to  disclaim  the
theory  of  Newton.

According  to  De  Luc,  the  first  essential  distinction  to  be
made  between  the  various  phenomena  exhibited  on  the  sur-
face of  the  earth  was,  to  determine  which  were  the  results  of
causes  still  in  action,  and  which  had  been  produced  by
causes  that  had  ceased  to  act.  The  form  and  composition  of
the  mass  of  our  continents,  he  said,  and  their  existence  above
the  level  of  the  sea,  must  be  ascribed  to  causes  no  longer  in
action.  These  continents  emerged,  at  no  very  remote  period,
on  the  sudden  retreat  of  the  ocean,  the  waters  of  which  made
their  way  into  subterranean  caverns.  The  formation  of  the
rocks  which  enter  into  the  crust  of  the  earth  began  with  the
precipitation  of  granite  from  a  primordial  liquid,  after  which
other  strata  containing  the  remains  of  organised  bodies  were
deposited,  till  at  last  the  present  sea  remained  as  the  residuum
of  the  primordial  liquid,  and  no  longer  continued  to  produce
mineral  strata.*

Kirwan,  president  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Dublin,  a
chemist  and  mineralogist  of  some  merit,  but  who  possessed
much  greater  authority  in  the  scientific  world  than  he  was
entitled  by  his  talents  to  enjoy,  said,  in  the  introduction  to
his  *  Geological  Essays,  1799,*  *that  sound  geology  graduated
into  religion,  and  was  required  to  dispel  certain  systems  of
atheism  or  infidelity,  of  which  they  had  had  recent  experi-
ence.'t  He  was  an  uncompromising  defender  of  the  aqueous
theory  of  all  rocks,  and  was  scarcely  surpassed  by  Burnet
and  Whiston  in  his  desire  to  adduce  the  Mosaic  writings  in
confirmation  of  his  opinions.

Hutt«m  answered  Kirwan's  attacks  with  great  warmth,
and  with  the  indignation  justly  excited  by  unmerited  reproach.
*  He  had  always  displayed,'  says  Playfair,  *  the  utmost  dis-
position to  admire  the  beneficent  design  manifested  in  the

•  Elementary  Treatise  on  Geology.  t  Introd.  p.  2.

londoD,  1809.  TiaiiBlatedbyDe  In  Fite.

VOL.  I.  G


82  SMITH'S  MAP  OF  ENGLAND.  [Ch.  IV,

structure  of  the  world ;  and  he  contemplated  with  delight
those  parts  of  his  theory  which  made  the  greatest  additions
to  our  knowledge  of  fiual  causes.'  We  may  say  with  equal
truth,  that  in  no  scientific  works  in  our  language  can  more
eloquent  passages  be  found,  concerning  the  fitness,  harmony,
and  grandeur  of  all  parts  of  the  creation,  than  in  those  of
Playfair.  They  are  evidently  the  unaflFected  expressions  of
a  mind  which  contemplated  the  study  of  nature,  as  best
calculated  to  elevate  our  conceptions  of  the  attributes  of  the
First  Cause.  At  any  other  time  the  force  and  elegance  of
Playfair's  style  must  have  insured  popularity  to  the  Hut-
tonian  doctrines;  but  by  a  singular  coincidence,  Neptuni-
anism  and  orthodoxy  were  now  associated  in  the  same  creed ;
and  the  tide  of  prejudice  ran  so  strong,  that  the  majority
were  carried  far  away  into  the  chaotic  fluid,  and  other  cos-
mological  inventions  of  Werner.  These  fictions  the  Saxon
professor  had  borrowed  with  little  modification,  and  without
any  improvement,  from  his  predecessors.  They  had  not  the
smallest  foundation  either  in  Scripture  or  in  common  sense,
and  were  probably  approved  of  by  many  as  being  so  ideal
and  unsubstantial,  that  they  could  never  come  into  violent
collision  with  any  preconceived  opinions.

William  Smith,  1 790. — While  the  tenets  of  the  rival  schools
of  Freyberg  and  Edinburgh  were  warmly  espoused  by  devoted
partisans,  the  labours  of  an  individual,  unassisted  by  the
advantages  of  wealth  or  station  in  society,  were  almost  un-
heeded. Mr.  William  Smith,  an  English  surveyor,  published
his  *  Tabular  View  of  the  British  Strata '  in  1790,  wherein  he
proposed  a  classification  of  the  secondary  formations  in  the
West  of  England.  Although  he  had  not  communicated  vnth
Werner,  it  appeared  by  this  work  that  he  had  arrived  at  the
same  views  respecting  the  laws  of  superposition  of  stratified
rocks ;  that  he  was  aware  tliat  the  order  of  succession  of
different  groups  was  never  inverted ;  and  that  they  might  be
identified  at  very  distant  points  by  their  peculiar  organised
fossils.

From  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  the  *  Tabular  View,'  the
author  laboured  to  construct  a  geological  map  of  the  whole
of  England ;  and  with  the  greatest  disinterestedness  of  mind.


Ch.  ivj  new  school  of  geology.  83

comnmnicated  the  results  of  his  investigations  to  all  who
desired  information,  giving  such  publicity  to  his  original
views,  as  to  enable  his  contemporaries  almost  to  compete
with  bim  in  the  race.  The  execution  of  his  map  was  com-
pleted in  1815,  and  remains  a  lasting  monument  of  original
talent  and  extraordinary  perseverance ;  for  he  had  explored
the  whole  country  on  foot  without  the  guidance  of  previous
observers,  or  the  aid  of  fellow-labourers,  and  had  succeeded
in  throwing  into  natural  divisions  the  whole  complicated
series  of  British  rocks.  D'Aubuisson,  a  distinguished  pupil
of  Werner,  paid  a  just  tribute  of  praise  to  this  remarkable
performance,  observing,  that  *what  many  celebrated  mineralo-
gists had  only  accomplished  for  a  small  part  of  Germany  in
the  course  of  half  a  century,  had  been  effected  by  a  single
individual  for  the  whole  of  England.'*

Werner  invented  a  new  language  to  express  his  divisions
of  rocks,  and  some  of  his  technical  terms,  such  as  grey  wacke,
gneiss,  and  others,  passed  current  in  every  country  in  Europe.
Smith  adopted  for  the  most  part  English  provincial  terms,
often  of  barbarous  sound,  such  as  gault,  cornbrash,  clunch
clay ;  and  affixed  them  to  subdivisions  of  the  British  series.
Many  of  these  still  retain  their  place  in  our  scientific  classi-
fications and  attest  his  priority  of  arrangement.

MODERN   PROGRESS   OP   GEOLOGY.

The  contention  of  the  rival  factions  of  the  Vulcanists  and
Neptonists  had  been  carried  to  such  a  height,  that  these
names  had  become  terms  of  reproach ;  and  the  two  parties
had  been  less  occupied  in  searching  for  truth,  than  for  such
arguments  as  might  strengthen  their  own  cause  or  ser\'e  to
annoy  their  antagonists.  A  new  school  at  last  arose,  which
professed  the  strictest  neutrality,  and  the  utmost  indiiference
to  the  systems  of  Werner  and  Hutton,  and  which  resolved
diligently  to  devote  its  labours  to  observation.  The  reac-
tion, provoked  by  the  intemperance  of  the  conflicting  parties,
now  produced  a  tendency  to  extreme  caution.  Speculative
views  were  discountenanced,  and,  through  fear  of  exposing

•  See  Dr.  Fitton's  Memoir,  before  cited,  p  60.

o  2


84  GEOLOGICAL  SOdETY  OF  LONDON.  [Ch.  IV.

themselves  to  the  suspicion  of  a  bias  towards  the  dogmas  of
a  party,  some  geologists  became  anxious  to  entertain  no
opinion  whatever  on  the  causes  of  phenomena,  and  .were
inclined  to  scepticism  even  where  the  conclusions  deducible
from  observed  facts  scarcely  admitted  of  reasonable  doubt.

Geological  Society  of  London^  1807. — But  although  the
reluctance  to  theorise  was  carried  somewhat  to  excess,  no
measure  could  be  more  salutary  at  such  a  moment  than  a
suspension  of  all  attempts  to  form  what  were  termed
*  theories  of  the  earth.'  A  great  body  of  new  data  was
required;  and  the  Geological  Society  of  London,  founded  in
1807,  conduced  greatly  to  the  attainment  of  this  desirable
end.  To  multiply  and  record  observations,  and  patiently  to
await  the  result  at  some  future  period,  was  the  object  pro-
posed by  them ;  and  it  was  their  favourite  maxim  that  the
time  was  not  yet  come  for  a  general  system  of  geology,  but
that  all  must  be  content  for  many  years  to  be  exclusively
engaged  in  furnishing  materials  for  future  generalisations.
By  acting  up  to  these  principles  with  consistency,  they  in  a
few  years  disarmed  all  prejudice,  and  rescued  the  science
from  the  imputation  of  being  a  dangerous,  or  at  best  but  a
visionary  pursuit.

A  distinguished  modern  writer  has  with  truth  remarked,
that  the  advancement  of  three  of  the  main  divisions  of  geo-
logical enquiry  has,  since  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  been  promoted  successively  by  three  diflferent  na-
tions of  Europe — the  Germans,  the  English,  and  the  French.*
We  have  seen  that  the  systematic  study  of  what  may  be
called  mineralogical  geology  had  its  origin  and  chief  point
of  activity  in  Germany,  where  Werner  first  described  with
precision  the  mineral  characters  of  rocks.  The  classification
of  the  secondary  formations,  each  marked  by  their  peculiar
fossils,  belongs,  in  a  great  measure,  to  England,  where  the
labours  before  alluded  to  of  Smith,  and  those  of  the  most
active  members  of  the  Geological  Society  of  London,  were
steadily  directed  to  these  objects.  The  foundation  of  the
third  branch,  that  relating  to  the  tertiary  formations,  was

•  Whewell,  British  Critic,  No.  xvii.  p.  187.     1881.


Ch.  IV.]  STUDY  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS.  85

laid  in  Prance  bj  the  splendid  work  of  Cuvier  and  Brongniart,
published  in  1808,  *  On  the  Mineral  Geography  and  Organic
Remains  of  the  Neighbourhood  of  Paris.'

We  may  still  trace,  in  the  language  of  the  science  and  our
present  methods  of  arrangement,  the  various  countries  where
the  growth  of  these  several  departments  of  geology  was  at
different  times  promoted.  Many  names  of  simple  minerals
and  rocks  remain  to  this  day  Gorman ;  while  the  European
divisions  of  the  secondary  strata  are  in  great  part  English,
and  are,  indeed,  often  founded  too  exclusively  on  English
types.  Lastly,  the  subdivisions  first  established  in  the  Paris
basin  have  served  as  normal  groups  to  which  other  tertiary
deposits  throughout  Europe  have  been  compared,  even  in
cases  where  this  standard  was  wholly  inapplicable.

No  period  could  have  been  more  fortunate  for  the  discovery,
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  of  a  rich  store  of
well-preserved  fossils,  than  the  commencement  of  the  present
century;  for  at  no  former  era  hud  Natural  History  been
cultivated  with  such  enthusiasm  in  the  French  metropolis.
The  labours  of  Cuvier  in  comparative  osteology,  and  of  La-
marck in  recent  and  fossil  shells,  had  raised  these  departments
of  study  to  a  rank  of  which  they  had  never  previously  been
deemed  susceptible.  Their  investigations  had  eventually  a
powerful  effect  in  dispelling  the  illusion  which  had  long
prevailed  concerning  the  absence  of  analogy  between  the
ancient  and  modem  state  of  our  planet.  A  close  comparison
of  the  recent  and  fossil  species,  and  the  inferences  drawn  in
regard  to  their  habits,  accustomed  the  geologist  to  contem-
plate the  earth  as  having  been  at  successive  periods  the
dwelling-place  of  animals  and  plants  of  different  races,  some
terrestrial,  and  others  aquatic — some  fitted  to  live  in  seas,
others  in  the  waters  of  lakes  and  rivers.  By  the  consideration
of  these  topics,  the  mind  was  slowly  and  insensibly  withdrawn
from  imaginary  pictures  of  catastrophes  and  chaotic  confu-
sion, such  as  haunted  the  imagination  of  the  early  cosmogo-
nists.  Numerous  proofs  were  discovered  of  the  tranquil
deposition  of  sedimentary  matter,  and  the  slow  development
of  organic  life.  If  many  writers,  and  Cuvier  himself  in  the
number,    stiU  continued  to  maintain   that  *the  thread  of


86  MODERN  PROGRESS  OF  GEOLOGY.  [Ch.  DT.

induction  was  broken/*  yet,  in  reasoning  by  the  strict  rules  of
induction  from  recent  to  fossil  species,  they  in  a  great  measure
disclaimed  the  dogma  which  in  theory  they  professed.  The
adoption  of  the  same  generic,  and,  in  some  cases,  even  of  the
same  specific,  names  for  the  exuvise  of  fossil  animals  and  their
living  analogues,  was  an  important  step  towards  fiEkmiliarising
the  mind  with  the  idea  of  the  identity  and  unity  of  the  system
in  distant  eras.  It  was  an  acknowledgment,  as  it  were,  that
part  at  least  of  the  ancient  memorials  of  nature  were  written
in  a  living  language.  The  growing  importance,  then,  of  the
natural  history  of  organic  remains  may  be  pointed  out  as  the
characteristic  feature  of  the  progress  of  the  science  during
the  present  century.  This  branch  of  knowledge  has  already
become  an  instrument  of  great  utility  in  geological  classifi-
cation, and  is  continuing  daily  to  unfold  new  diata  for  grand
and  enlarged  views  respecting  the  former  changes  of  the
earth.

When  we  compare  the  results  of  observations  in  this
century  with  those  of  the  three  preceding  centuries,  we  can-
not but  look  forward  with  the  most  sanguine  expectations
to  the  degree  of  excellence  to  which  geology  may  be  carried,
even  by  the  labours  of  the  present  generation.  Never,  perhaps,
did  any  science,  with  the  exception  of  astronomy,  unfold,  in
an  equally  brief  period,  so  many  novel  and  unexpected  truths,
and  overturn  so  many  preconceived  opinions.  The  senses  had
for  ages  declared  the  earth  to  be  at  rest,  until  the  astronomer
taught  that  it  was  carried  through  space  with  inconceivable
rapidity.  In  like  manner  was  the  surface  of  this  planet
regarded  as  having  remained  unaltered  since  its  creation,
until  the  geologist  proved  that  it  had  been  the  theatre  of
reiterated  change,  and  was  still  the  subject  of  slow  but  never-
ending  fluctuations.  The  discovery  of  other  systems  in  the
boundless  regions  of  space  Wiis  the  triumph  of  astronomy ;  to
trace  the  same  system  through  various  transformations — to
behold  it  at  successive  eras  adorned  with  different  hills  and
valleys,  lakes  and  seas,  and  peopled  with  new  inhabitants, was
the  delightful  meed  of  geological  research.     By  the  geometer

*  Discoura  sur  les  R^rolations  de  la  Terre.


Ch.  IV.]  MODERN  PROGBESS  OF  GEOLOGY.  87

were  measured  tlie  regions  of  space,  and  the  relative  distances
of  the  heavenly  bodies ; — by  the  geologist  myriads  of  ages
were  reckoned,  not  by  arithmetical  computation,  but  by  a
train  of  physical  events — a  succession  of  phenomena  in  the
animate  and  inanimate  worlds — signs  which  convey  to  our
minds  more  definite  ideas  than  figures  can  do  of  the  immen-
sity of  time.

Whether  our  investigation  of  the  earth's  history  and
structure  will  eventually  be  productive  of  as  great  practical
benefits  to  mankind  as  a  knowledge  of  the  distant  heavens,
mast  remain  for  the  decision  of  posterity.  It  was  not  till
astronomy  had  been  enriched  by  the  observations  of  many
centuries,  and  had  made  its  way  against  popular  prejudices
to  the  establishment  of  a  sound  theory,  that  its  application
to  the  useful  arts  was  most  conspicuous.  The  cultivation  of
geology  began  at  a  later  period ;  and  in  every  step  which  it
has  hitherto  made  towards  sound  theoretical  principles,  it
has  had  to  contend  against  more  violent  prepossessions.
The  practical  advantages  already  derived  from  it  have  not
been  inconsiderable;  but  our  generalisations  are  yet  imper-
fect, and  they  who  come  after  us  may  be  expected  to  reap
the  most  valuable  fruits  of  our  labour.  Meanwhile  the  charm
of  first  discovery  is  our  own ;  and,  as  we  explore  this  mag-
nificent field  of  enquiry,  the  sentiment  of  a  great  historian
of  our  times  may  continuaUy  be  present  to  our  minds,  that
^  he  who  calls  what  has  vanished  back  again  into  being
enjoys  a  bliss  like  that  of  creating.'*

*  Niebuhr  B  Hist,  of  Rome,  toI.  i.  p.  5.    Hare  and  Thirlwall's  translation.


88


CHAPTER  V.

PREJUDICES   WHICH   HAVE   BETABD^D   THE   PBOGBESS   OF

GEOLOGY.

PREPOSSESSIOX8  IN  BBGARD  TO  THB  DUBATION  OF  PAST  TIMB — PREJUDICBflf
AUISING  FUOM  OUR  PECULIAR  POSITION  AS  INUABITAMTS  OF  THIS  LAXD^ —
OTHERS  OCCASIONED  BY  OUR  NOT  SEEING  SUBTERRANEAN  CHANGES  NOW
IN  PROGRESS — ALL  THESE  CAUSES  COMBINE  TO  MAKE  THE  FORMER  COURSE  OF
NATURE  APPEAR  DIFFERENT  FROM  THE  PRESENT — OBJHCnONS  TO  THB  IMX:-
TUINK  THAT  CAUSES  SIMILAR  IN  KIND  AND  J&24ERGT  TO  THOSE  NOW  ACTDTO,
HAVE  PRODUCED  THE  R)ttME&  CHANGES  OF  THE  EARTH'S  SUBFACB,  CON-
SIDERED.

Ip  we  reflect  on  the  historj  of  the  progress  of  geology,  as
explained  in  the  preceding  chapters,  we  perceive  that  there
have  been  great  fluctuations  of  opinion  respecting  the  nature
of  the  causes  to  which  all  former  changes  of  the  earth's
surface  are  referable.  The  first  observers  conceived  the
monuments  which  the  geologist  endeavours  to  decipher  to
relate  to  an  original  state  of  the  earth,  or  to  a  period  when
there  were  causes  in  activity,  distinct,  in  kind  and  degree,
from  those  now  constituting  the  economy  of  nature.  These
views  were  gradually  modified,  and  some  of  them  entirely
abandoned,  in  proportion  as  observations  were  multiplied,  and
the  signs  of  former  mutations  were  skilfully  interpreted.
Many  appearances,  which  had  for  a  long  time  been  regarded
as  indicating  mysterious  and  extraordinary  agency,  were
finally  recognised  as  the  necessary  result  of  the  laws  now
governing  the  material  world;  and  the  discovery  of  this
unlooked-for  conformity  has  at  length  induced  some  philo-
sophers to  infer,  that,  during  the  ages  contemplated  in
geology,  there  has  never  been  any  interruption  to  the
agency  of  the  same  uniform  laws  of  change.  The  same
assemblage  of  general  causes,  they  conceive,  may  have  been
sufficient  to  produce,  by   their  various   combinations,   the


Ch.  v.]       views  on  the  duration  of  past  time.  89

endless  diversity  of  effects,  of  which  the  shell  of  the  earth
has  preserved  the  memorials ;  and,  consistently  with  these
principles,  the  recurrence  of  analogous  changes  is  expected
by  them  in  time  to  come.

Whether  we  coincide  or  not  in  this  doctrine,  we  must
admit  that  the  gradual  progress  of  opinion  concerning  the
succession  of  phenomena  in  very  remote  eras,  resembles,  in
a  singular  manner,  that  which  has  accompanied  the  growing
intelligence  of  every  people,  in  regard  to  the  economy  of
nature  in  their  own  times.  In  an  early  state  of  advancement,
when  a  greater  number  of  natural  appearances  are  unintel-
ligible, an  eclipse,  an  earthquake,  a  flood,  or  the  approach
of  a  comet,  with  many  other  occurrences  afterwards  found
to  belong  to  the  regular  course  of  events,  are  regarded  as
prodigies.  The  same  delusion  prevails  as  to  moral  pheno-
mena, and  many  of  these  are  ascribed  to  the  intervention
of  demons,  ghosts,  witches,  and  other  immaterial  and
sapematural  agents.  By  degrees,  many  of  the  enigmas  of
the  moral  and  physical  world  are  explained,  and,  instead  of
being  due  to  extrinsic  and  irregular  causes,  they  are  found
to  depend  on  fixed  and  invariable  laws.  The  philospher  at
last  becomes  convinced  of  the  undeviating  uniformity  of
secondary  causes ;  and,  guided  by  his  faith  in  this  principle,
he  determines  the  probability  of  accounts  transmitted  to  him
of  former  occurrences,  and  often  rejects  the  fabulous  tales  of
former  times,  on  the  ground  of  their  being  irreconcilable
with  the  experience  of  more  enlightened  ages.

Prepossessions  in  regard  to  the  duration  of  past  time. — As  a
belief  in  the  want  of  conformity  in  the  causes  by  which  the
earth's  crust  has  been  modified  in  ancient  and  modem  periods
was,  for  a  long  time,  universally  prevalent,  and  that,  too,
amongst  men  who  were  convinced  that  the  order  of  nature
had  been  uniform  for  the  last  several  thousand  years,  every
circumstance  which  could  have  influenced  their  minds  and
given  an  undue  bias  to  their  opinions  deserves  particular
attention.  Now  the  reader  may  easily  satisfy  himself,  that,
however  undeviating  the  course  of  nature  may  have  been
from  the  earliest  epochs,  it  was  impossible  for  the  first  cul-
tivators of  geology  to  come  to  such  a  conclusion,  so  long


90  PREJUDICES  WHICH  RETARD  [Ch.  V.

as  they  were  under  a  delusion  as  to  the  age  of  the  world,
and  the  date  of  the  first  creation  of  animate  beings.  However
fantastical  some  theories  of  the  sixteenth  century  may  now
appear  to  us, — however  unworthy  of  men  of  great  talent  and
sound  judgment, — we  may  rest  assured  that,  if  the  same
misconception  now  prevailed  in  regard  to  the  memorials  of
human  transactions,  it  would  give  rise  to  a  similar  train  of
absurdities.  Let  us  imagine,  for  example,  that  Champollion,
and  the  French  and  Tuscan  literati  when  engaged  in  ex-
ploring the  antiquities  of  Egypt,  had  visited  that  country
with  a  firm  belief  that  the  banks  of  the  Nile  were  never
peopled  by  the  human  race  before  the  beginning  of  the  nine-
teenth century,  and  that  their  faith  in  this  dogma  was  as
difficult  to  shake  as  the  opinion  of  our  ancestors,  that  the
earth  was  never  the  abode  of  living  beings  until  the  creation
of  the  present  continents,  and  of  the  species  now  existing, —
it  is  easy  to  perceive  what  extravagant  systems  they  would
frame,  while  under  the  influence  of  this  delusion,  to  account
for  the  monuments  discovered  in  Egypt.  The  sight  of  the
pyramids,  obelisks,  colossal  statues,  and  ruined  temples,
would  fill  them  with  such  astonishment,  that  for  a  time  they
would  be  as  men  spell-bound — wholly  incapable  of  reasoning
with  sobriety.  They  might  incline  at  first  to  refer  the  con-
struction of  such  stupendous  works  to  some  superhuman
powers  of  a  primeval  world.  A  system  might  be  invented
resembling  that  so  gravely  advanced  by  Manetho,  who  relates
that  a  dynasty  of  gods  originally  ruled  in  Egypt,  of  whom
Vulcan,  the  first  monarch,  reigned  nine  thousand  years ;
after  whom  came  Hercules  and  other  demigods,  who  were
at  last  succeeded  by  human  kings.

When  some  fanciful  speculations  of  this  kind  had  amused
their  imaginations  for  a  time,  some  vast  repository  of  mum-
mies would  be  discovered,  and  would  immediately  undeceive
those  antiquaries  who  enjoyed  an  opportunity  of  personallj
examining  them ;  but  the  prejudices  of  others  at  a  distance,
who  were  not  eye-witnesses  of  the  whole  phenomena,  would
not  be  so  easily  overcome.  The  concurrent  report  of  many
travellers  would,  indeed,  render  it  necessary  for  them  to
accommodate  ancient  theories  to  some  of  the  new  facts,  and


Ch.  v.]  the  progress  of  geology.  91

much  wit  and  ingenuity  would  be  required  to  modify  and
defend  their  old  positions.  Each  new  invention  would
▼iolate  a  greater  number  of  kno^vn  analogies ;  for  if  a  theory
be  required  to  embrace  some  false  principle,  it  becomes  more
yisionary  in  proportion  as  facts  are  multiplied,  as  would  be
the  caae  if  geometers  were  now  required  to  form  an  astro-
nomical system  on  the  assumption  of  the  immobility  of  the
earth.

Amongst  other  fanciful  conjectures  concerning  the  history
of  Egypt,  we  may  suppose  some  of  the  following  to  be  started.
^  As  the  banks  of  the  Nile  have  been  so  recently  colonised
for  the  first  time,  the  curious  substances  called  mummies
could  never  in  reality  have  belonged  to  men.  They  may
have  been  generated  by  some  plastic  virtue  residing  in  the
interior  of  the  earth,  or  they  may  be  abortions  of  Nature
produced  by  her  incipient  efforts  in  the  work  of  creation.
For  if  deformed  beings  are  sometimes  born  even  now,  when
the  scheme  of  the  universe  is  fully  developed,  many  more
may  have  been  "  sent  before  their  time,  scarce  half  made  up,"
-when  the  planet  itself  was  in  the  embryo  state.  But  if  these
notions  appear  to  derogate  from  the  perfection  of  the  Divine
attributes,  and  if  these  mummies  be  in  all  their  parts  true
representations  of  the  human  form,  may  we  not  refer  them
to  the  future  rather  than  the  past  ?  May  we  not  be  looking
into  the  womb  of  Nature,  and  not  her  grave?  May  not
these  images  be  like  the  shades  of  the  unborn  in  Virgil's
Elysium — the  archetypes  of  men  not  yet  called  into  ex-
istence ? '

These  speculations,  if  advocated  by  eloquent  writers,  would
not  fail  to  attract  many  zealous  votaries,  for  they  would
relieve  men  from  the  painful  necessity  of  renouncing  precon-
ceived opinions.  Incredible  as  such  scepticism  may  appear,  it
has  been  rivalled  by  many  systems  of  the  sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth centuries,  and  among  others  by  that  of  the  learned
Falloppio,  who,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  33),  regarded  the  tusks
of  fossil  elephants  as  earthy  concretions*,  and  the  pottery  or
fragments  of  vases  in  the  Monte  Testaceo,  near  Rome,  as
works  of  nature,  and  not  of  art.  But  when  one  generation
had  passed  away,   and   another,  not  compromised  to  the


^


92  PREJUDICES  WHICH  RETARD  [Ch.  V.

support  of  antiquated  dogmas,  had  succeeded,  thej  would
review  the  evidence  afforded  by  mummies  more  impartiaUy,
and  would  no  longer  controvert  the  preUminary  question,
that  human  beings  had  lived  in  Egypt  before  the  nineteenth
century :  so  that  when  a  hundred  years  perhaps  had  been
lost,  the  industry  and  talents  of  the  philosopher  would  be
at  last  directed  to  the  elucidation  of  points  of  real  historical
importance.

But  the  above  arguments  are  aitned  against  one  only  of
many  prejudices  with  which  the  early  geologists  had  to
contend.  Even  when  they  conceded  that  the  earth  had  been
peopled  with  inanimate  beings  at  an  earlier  period  than  was
at  first  supposed,  they  had  no  conception  that  the  quantity
of  time  bore  so  great  a  proportion  to  the  historical  era  as  is
now  generally  conceded.  How  fatal  every  eiTor  as  to  the
quantity  of  time  must  prove  to  the  introduction  of  rational
views  concerning  the  state  of  things  in  former  ages,  may  be
conceived  by  supposing  the  annals  of  the  civil  and  military
transactions  of  a  great  nation  to  be  perused  under  the  im-
pression that  they  occurred  in  a  period  of  one  hundred  instead
of  two  thousand  years.  Such  a  portion  of  history  would
immediately  assume  the  air  of  a  romance ;  the  events  would
seem  devoid  of  credibility,  and  inconsistent  with  the  present
course  of  human  affairs.  A  crowd  of  incidents  would  follow
each  other  in  thick  succession.  Armies  and  fleets  would
appear  to  be  assembled  only  to  be  destroyed,  and  cities  built
merely  to  fall  in  ruins.  There  would  be  the  most  violent
transitions  from  foreign  or  intestine  war  to  periods  of  pro-
found peace,  and  the  works  effected  during  the  years  of
disorder  or  tranquillity  would  appear  alike  superhuman  in
magnitude.

He  who  should  study  the  monuments  of  the  natural  world
under  the  influence  of  a  similar  infatuation,  must  draw  a
no  less  exaggerated  picture  of  the  energy  and  violence  of
causes,  and  must  experience  the  same  insurmountable  diffi-
culty in  reconciling  the  former  and  present  state  of  nature*
If  we  could  behold  in  one  view  all  the  volcanic  cones  thrown
up  in  Iceland,  Italy,  Sicily,  and  other  parts  of  Europe,
during  the  last  five  thousand  years,  and  could  see  the  lavas


Ch,  v.]  the  progress  of  geology.  93

whicli  have  flowed  during  the  same  period;  the  dislocations,
subsidences,  and  elevations  caused  during  earthquakes ;  the
lands  added  to  various  deltas,  or  devoured  by  the  sea,  to-
gether with  the  effects  of  devastation  by  floods,  and  imagine
that  all  these  events  had  happened  in  one  year,  we  must
form  most  exalted  ideas  of  the  activity  of  the  agents,  and
the  suddenness  of  the  revolutions.  If  geologists,  therefore,
have  misinterpreted  the  signs  of  a  succession  of  events,  so  as
to  conclude  that  centuries  were  implied  where  the  characters
indicated  thousands  of  years,  and  thousands  of  years  where
the  language  of  Nature  signified  millions,  they  could  not,  if
they  reasoned  logically  from  such  false  premises,  come  to  any
other  conclusion  than  that  the  system  of  the  natural  world
had  undergone  a  complete  revolution.

We  should  be  warranted  in  ascribing  the  erection  of  the

great  pyramid  to  superhuman  power,  if  we  were  convinced

that  it  was  raised  in  one  day  ;  and  if  we  imagine,  in  the  same

manner,  a  continent  or  mountain-chain  to  have  been  ele-

Tated  during  an  equally  small  fraction  of  the  time  which

iras  really  occupied  in  upheaving  it,  we  might  then  be  justified

in  inferring,  that  the  subterranean  movements  were  once  far

more  energetic  than  in  our  own  times.     We  know  that  during

one  earthquake  the  coast  of  Chili  may  be  raised  for  a  hundred

cniles  to  the  average  height  of  about  three  feet.     A.  repetition

of  two  thousand  shocks,  of  equal  violence,  might  produce  a

^nountain-chain  one  hundred  miles  long,  and  six  thousand

:feet  high.     Now,  should  one  or  two  only  of  these  convulsions

liappen  in  a  century,  it  would  be  consistent  with  the  order

of  events  experienced  by  the  Chilians  from  the  earliest  times :

T>iit  if  the  whole  of  them  were  to  occur  in  the  next  hundred

years,  the  entire  district  must  be  depopulated,  scarcely  any

animals  or  plants  could  survive,  and  the  surface  would  be

one  confused  heap  of  ruin  and  desolation.

One  consequence  of  undervaluing  greatly  the  quantity  of
past  time,  is  the  apparent  coincidence  which  it  occasions  of
events  necessarily  disconnected,  or  which  are  so  unusual,
that  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  all  calculation  of  chances
to  suppose  them  to  happen  at  one  and  the  same  time.  When
the  unlooked-for  association  of  such  rare  phenomena  is


94  PREJUDICES  WmCH  RETARD  [Ch.V.

witnessed  in  the  present  conrse  of  nature,  it  scarcely  ever
fails  to  excite  a  suspicion  of  the  preternatural  in  those  minds
which  are  not  firmly  convinced  of  the  uniform  agency  of
secondary  causes; — as  if  the  death  of  some  individual  in
whose  fate  they  are  interested  happens  to  be  accompanied
by  the  appearance  of  a  luminous  meteor,  or  a  comet,  or  the
shock  of  an  earthquake.  It  would  be  only  necessary  to
multiply  such  coincidences  indefinitely,  and  the  mind  of
every  philosopher  would  be  disturbed.  Now  it  would  be
difficult  to  exaggerate  the  number  of  physical  events,  many
of  them  most  rare  and  unconnected  in  their  nature,  which
were  imagined  by  the  Woodwardian  hypothesis  to  have
happened  in  the  course  of  a  few  months:  and  numerous
other  examples  might  be  found  of  popular  geological  theories,
which  require  us  to  imagine  that  a  long  succession  of  events
happened  in  a  brief  and  almost  momentary  period.

Another  liability  to  error,  very  nearly  allied  to  the  former,
arises  from  the  frequent  contact  of  geological  monuments
referring  to  very  distant  periods  of  time.  We  often  behold,
at  one  glance,  the  effects  of  causes  which  have  acted  at  times
incalculably  remote,  and  yet  there  may  be  no  striking  cir-
cumstances to  mark  the  occurrence  of  a  great  chasm  in  the
chronological  series  of  Nature's  archives.  In  the  vast  interval
of  time  which  may  really  have  elapsed  between  the  results
of  operations  thus  compared,  the  physical  condition  of  the
earth  may,  by  slow  and  insensible  modifications,  have  become
entirely  altered ;  one  or  more  races  of  organic  beings  may
have  passed  away,  and  yet  have  left  behind,  in  the  particular
region  under  contemplation,  no  trace  of  their  existence.

To  a  mind  unconscious  of  these  intermediate  events,  the
passage  from  one  state  of  things  to  another  must  appear  so
violent,  that  the  idea  of  revolutions  in  the  system  inevitably
suggests  itself.  The  imagination  is  as  much  perplexed  by
the  deception,  as  it  might  be  if  two  distant  points  in  space
were  suddenly  brought  into  immediate  proximity.  Let  us
suppose,  for  a  moment,  that  a  philosopher  should  lie  down
to  sleep  in  some  arctic  wilderness,  and  then  be  transferred
by  a  power,  such  as  we  read  of  in  tales  of  enchantment,  to  a
valley  in  a  tropical  country,  where,  on  awaking,  he  might


Ch.  v.]  the  progress  of  geology.  95

find  himself  surrounded  by  birds  of  brilliant  plumage,  and
all  the  luxuriance  of  animal  and  vegetable  forms  of  which
Nature  is  so  prodigal  in  those  regions.  The  most  reasonable
supposition,  perhaps,  which  he  could  make,  if  by  the  necro-
mancer's art  he  were  placed  in  such  a  situation,  would  be,
that  he  was  dreaming ;  and  if  a  geologist  form  theories  under
a  similar  delusion,  we  cannot  expect  him  to  preserve  more
consistency  in  his  speculations  than  in  the  train  of  ideas  in
an  ordinary  dream.

It  may  afford,  perhaps,  a  more  lively  illustration  of  the
principle  here  insisted  upon,  if  I  recall  to  the  reader's  recol-
lection the  legend  of  the  Seven  Sleepers.     The  scene  of  that
popular  fable  was  placed  in  the  two  centuries  which  elapsed
between  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Decius  and  the  death  of
Theodosius  the  younger.     In  that  interval  of  time  (between
the  years  249  and  450  of  our  era)  the  union  of  the  Roman
empire  had  been  dissolved,  and  some  of  its  fairest  provinces
overrun  by  the  barbarians  of  the  north.     The  seat  of  govern-
ment had  passed  from   Rome  to  Constantinople,  and  the
throne  from  a  pagan  persecutor  to  a  succession  of  Christian
and  orthodox  princes.     The  genius  of  the  empire  had  been
humbled  in  the  dust,  and  the  altars  of  Diana  and  Hercules
were  on  the  point  of  being  transferred  to  Catholic  saints  and
martyrs.     The  legend  relates,  *  that  when  Decius  was  still
persecuting  the  Christians,  seven  noble  youths  of  Ephesus
concealed  themselves  in  a  spacious  cavern  in  the  side  of  an
adjacent  mountain,  where  they  were  doomed  to  perish  by  the
tyrant,  who  gave  orders  that  the  entrance  should  be  firmly
secured  with  a  pile  of  huge  stones.     They  immediately  fell
into   a   deep   slumber,  which  was   miraculously  prolonged,
without  injuring  the  powers  of  life,  during  a  period  of  187
years.     At  the  end  of  that  time  the  slaves  of  Adolius,  to
whom   the   inheritance   of    the    mountain   had   descended,
removed  the    stones  to  supply  materials   for   some  rustic
edifice :  the  light  of  the  sun  darted  into  the  cavern,  and  the
seven  sleepers  were  permitted  to  awake.    After  a  slumber,
as  they  thought,  of  a  few  hours,  they  were  pressed  by  the
calls  of  hunger,  and  resolved  that  Jamblichus,  one  of  their
number,  should  secretly  return  to  the  city  to  purchase  bread


96  PREJUDICES  WHICH  HAVE  EETARDED  [Ch.  V.

for  the  use  of  his  companions.  The  youth  could  no  longer
recognise  the  once  familiar  aspect  of  his  native  country,
and  his  surprise  was  increased  by  the  appearance  of  a  large
cross  triumphantly  erected  over  the  principal  gate  of
Ephesus.  His  singular  dress  and  obsolete  language  con-
founded the  baker,  to  whom  he  offered  an  ancient  medal  of
Decius  as  the  current  coin  of  the  empire ;  and  Jamblichus,
on  the  suspicion  of  a  secret  treasure,  was  dragged  before
the  judge.  Their  mutual  enquiries  produced  the  amazing
discovery,  that  two  centuries  were  almost  elapsed  since
Jamblichus  and  his  friends  had  escaped  from  the  rage  of  a
pagan  tyrant.'

This  legend  was  received  as  authentic  throughout  the
Christian  world  before  the  end  of  the  sixth  century,  and
was  afterwards  introduced  by  Mahomet  as  a  divine  revelation
into  the  Koran,  and  from  hence  was  adopted  and  adorned
by  all  the  nations  from  Bengal  to  Africa  who  professed  the
Mahometan  faith.  Some  vestiges  even  of  a  similar  tradition
have  been  discovered  in  Scandinavia.  ^  This  easy  and
universal  belief,'  observes  the  philosophical  historian  of  the
Decline  and  Fall,  *  so  expressive  of  the  sense  of  mankind,
may  be  ascribed  to  the  genuine  merit  of  the  fable  itself.  We
imperceptibly  advance  from  youth  to  age,  without  observing
the  gradual,  but  incessant,  change  of  human  affairs;  and-
even  in  our  larger  experience  of  history,  the  imagination  is
accustomed,  by  a  perpetual  series  of  causes  and  effects,  to
unite  the  most  distant  revolutions.  But  if  the  interval
between  two  memorable  eras  could  be  instantly  annihilated ;
if  it  were  possible,  after  a  momentary  slumber  of  two
hundred  years,  to  display  the  new  world  to  the  eyes  of  a
spectator  who  still  retained  a  lively  and  recent  impression  of
the  old,  his  surprise  and  his  reflections  would  fiimish  the
pleasing  subject  of  a  philosophical  romance.'*

Prejudices  arising  from  our  peculiar  position  as  inhahitants
of  the  land. — The  sources  of  prejudice  hitherto  considered
may  be  deemed  peculiar  for  the  most  part  to  the  infancy  of
the  science,  but  others  are  common  to  the  first  cultivators  of

*  Gibbon,  Dedine  and  FaU,  chap,  xxxiii.


ch.  v.]  the  progress  of  geology.  97

geology  and  to  ourselves,  and  are  all  singularly  calculated  to
produce  the  same  deception,  and  to  strengthen  our  belief
that  the  course  of  nature  in  the  earlier  ages  differed  widely
from  that  now  established.  Although  these  circumstances
cannot  be  fully  explained  without  assuming  some  things
as  proved,  which  it  has  been  my  object  elsewhere  to  demon-
strate,* it  may  be  well  to  allude  to  them  briefly  in  this  place.

The  first  and  greatest  difficulty,  then,  consists  in  an
habitual  unconsciousness  that  our  position  as  observers  is
essentially  unfavourable,  when  we  endeavour  to  estimate  the
nature  and  magnitude  of  the  changes  now  in  progress.  In
consequence  of  our  inattention  to  this  subject,  we. are  liable
to  serious  mistakes  in  contrasting  the  present  with  former
states  of  the  globe.  As  dwellers  on  the  land,  we  inhabit
about  a  fourth  part  of  the  surface;  and  that  portion  is
almost  exclusively  a  theatre  of  decay,  and  not  of  reproduc-
tion. We  know,  indeed,  that  new  deposits  are  annually
formed  in  seas  and  lakes,  and  that  every  year  some  new
igneous  rocks  are  produced  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  but
we  cannot  watch  the  progress  of  their  formation ;  and  as
they  are  only  present  to  our  minds  by  the  aid  of  reflection,
it  requires  an  effort  both  of  the  reason  and  the  imagination
to  appreciate  duly  their  importance.  It  is,  therefore,  not
surprising  that  we  estimate  very  imperfectly  the  result  of
operations  thus  unseen  by  us;  and  that,  when  analogous
results  of  former  epochs  ai'e  presented  to  our  inspection,  we
cannot  immediately  recognise  the  analogy.  He  who  has
observed  the  quarrying  of  stone  from  a  rock,  and  has  seen  it
shipped  for  some  distant  port,  and  then  endeavours  to
conceive  what  kind  of  edifice  will  be  raised  by  the  materials,
is  in  the  same  predicament  as  a  geologist,  who,  while  he  is
confined  to  the  land,  sees  the  decomposition  of  rocks,  and
the  transportation  of  matter  by  rivers  to  the  sea,  and  then
endeavours  to  picture  to  himself  the  new  strata  which
Nature  is  building  beneath  the  waters.

Prejudices  arising  from  our  not  seeing  subterranean  changes,
— Nor  is  his  position  less  unfavourable  when,  beholding  a
volcanic  eruption,  he  tries  to   conceive  what  changes  the

*  Elements  of  Geologj,  6th  edit.,  1865 ;  and  Student*8  Elements,  2nd  edit,  1874.
VOL.   I.  H


98  PREJUDICES  WmCH  HAVE  EETAEDED  [Ch.  V.

colatnn  of  lava  has  produced,  in  its  passage  upwards,  on  the
intersected  strata ;  or  what  form  the  melted  matter  may  as-
sume at  great  depths  on  cooling ;  or  what  may  be  the  extent
of  the  subterranean  rivers  and  reservoirs  of  liquid  matter  tea
beneath  the  surface.  It  should,  therefore,  be  remembered,
that  the  task  imposed  on  those  who  study  the  earth's  history
requires  no  ordinary  share  of  discretion ;  for  we  are  pre-
cluded from  collating  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  system
of  things  as  it  exists  now,  and  as  it  existed  at  former  periods.
If  we  were  inhabitants  of  another  element — if  the  great
ocean  were  our  domain,  instead  of  the  narrow  limits  of  the
land,  our  difficulties  would  be  considerably  lessened ;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  although  the
reader  may,  perhaps,  smile  at  the  bare  suggestion  of  such
an  idea,  that  an  amphibious  being,  who  should  possess  our
faculties,  would  still  more  easily  arrive  at  sound  theoretical
opinions  in  geology,  since  he  might  behold,  on  the  one  hand;
the  decomposition  of  rocks  in  the  atmosphere,  or  the  trans-
portation of  matter  by  running  water ;  and,  on  the  other,
examine  the  deposition  of  sediment  in  the  sea,  and  the
imbedding  of  animal  and  vegetable  remains  in  new  strata.
He  might  ascertain,  by  direct  observation,  the  action  of  a
mountain  torrent,  as  well  as  of  a  marine  current;  might
compare  the  products  of  volcanos  poured  out  upon  the  land
with  those  ejected  beneath  the  waters ;  and  might  mark,  on
the  one  hand,  the  growth  of  the  forest,  and,  on  the  other,
that  of  the  coral  reef.  Yet,  even  with  these  advantages,  he
would  be  liable  to  fall  into  the  greatest  errors,  when
endeavouring  to  reason  on  rocks  of  subterranean  origin.
He  would  seek  in  vain,  within  the  sphere  of  his  observation,
for  any  direct  analogy  to  the  process  of  their  formation,  and
would  therefore  be  in  danger  of  attributing  them,  wherever
they  are  upraised  to  view,  to  some  *  primeval  state  of  nature.'
But  if  we  may  be  allowed  so  far  to  indulge  the  imagina-
tion, as  to  suppose  a  being  entirely  confined  to  the  nether
world — some  '  dusky  melancholy  sprite,'  like  Umbriel,  who
could  *  flit  on  sooty  pinions  to  the  central  earth,'  but  who
was  never  permitted  to  ^  sully  the  fair  face  of  light,'  and
emerge  into  the  regions  of  water  and  of  air ;  and  if  this


Ch.  v.]  the  progress  of  geology.  99

being  should  busy  himself  in  investigating  the  structnre  of
the  globe,  he  might  frame  theories  the  exact  converse  of
those  nsnaJlj  adopted  by  human  philosophers.  He  might
infer  that  the  stratified  rocks,  containing  shells  and  other
organic  remains,  were  the  oldest  of  created  things,  belonging
to  some  original  and  nascent  state  of  the  planet.  ^  Of  these
masses,'  he  might  say,  ^  whether  they  consist  of  loose  in-
coherent sand,  soft  clay,  or  solid  stone,  none  have  been
formed  in  modem  times.  Every  year  some  of  them  are
broken  and  shattered  by  earthquakes,  or  melted  by  volcanic
fire ;  and  when  they  cool  down  slowly  from  a  state  of  fusion,
they  assume  a  new  and  more  crystalline  form,  no  longer
echibiting  that  stratified  disposition  and  those  curious
impressions  and  fantastic  markings,  by  which  they  were
previously  characterised.  This  process  cannot  have  been
carried  on  for  an  indefinite  time,  for  in  that  case  all  the
stratified  rocks  would  long  ere  this  have  been  fused
and  crystallised.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  the
whole  planet  once  consisted  of  these  mysterious  and
curiously  bedded  formations  at  a  time  when  the  volcanic
fire  had  not  yet  been  brought  into  activity.  Since  that
period  there  seems  to  have  been  a  gradual  development  of
heat;  and  this  augmentation  we  may  expect  to  continue
till  the  whole  globe  shall  be  in  a  state  of  fluidity,  or  shall
consist,  in  those  parts  which  are  not  melted,  of  volcanic  and
crystalline  rocks.'

Such  might  be  the  system  of  the  Gnome  at  the  very  time
that  the  followers  of  Leibnitz,  reasoning  on  what  they  saw
on  the  outer  surface,  might  be  teaching  the  opposite  doctrine
of  gradual  refrigeration,  and  averring  that  the  earth  had
begun  its  career  as  a  fiery  comet,  and  might  be  destined  here-
after to  become  a  frozen  mass.  The  tenets  of  the  schools  of
the  nether  and  of  the  upper  world  would  be  directly  opposed
to  each  other,  for  both  would  partake  of  the  prejudices  in-
evitably resulting  from  the  continual  contemplation  of  one
class  of  phenomena  to  the  exclusion  of  another.  Man
observes  the  annual  decomposition  of  crystalline  and  igneous
rocks,  and  may  sometimes  see  their  conversion  into  stratified
deposits;  but  he  cannot  witness  the  reconversion  of  the

H  2


100  ASSUMED  DISCORDANCE  OF  [Ch.  V.

sedimentary  into  the  crystalline  by  subterranean  heat.  He
is  in  the  habit  of  regarding  all  the  sedimentary  rocks  as  more
recent  than  the  unstratified,  for  the  same  reason  that  we  may
suppose  him  to  fall  into  the  opposite  error  if  he  saw  the
origin  of  the  igneous  class  only.

For  more   than  two   centuries  the   shelly  strata  of  the
Subapennine  hills  afforded  matter  of  speculation  to  the  early
geologists  of  Italy,  and  few  of  them  had  any  suspicion  that
similar  deposits  were  then  forming  in  the  neighbouring  sea.
Some  imagined  that  the  strata,  so  rich  in  organic  remains,
instead  of  being  due  to  secondary  agents,  had  been  so  created
in  the  beginning  of  things  by  the  fiat  of  the  Almighty.
Others,  as  we  have  seen,  ascribed  the  imbedded  fossil  bodies
to  some  plastic  power  which  resided,  in  the  earth  in  the
early  ages  of  the  world.   In  what  manner  were  these  dogmas
at  length  exploded  9     The  fossil  relics  were  carefully  com-
pared with  their  living  analogues,  and  all  doubts  as  to  their
organic  origin  were  eventually  dispelled.     So,  also,  in  regard
to  the  nature  of  the  containing  beds  of  mud,  sand,  and  lime-
stone :  those  parts  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea  were  examined
where  shells  are  now  becoming  annually  entombed  in  new
deposits.     Donati  explored   the   bed  of  the  Adriatic,  and
found  the  closest  resemblance  between  the    strata  there
forming,  and  those  which  constituted  hiUs  above  a  thousand
feet  high  in   various  parts  of  the  Italian  peninsula.     He
ascertained  by  dredging  that  living  testacea  were   fchere
grouped  together  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  were  their
fossil  analogues  in  the  inland  strata ;  and  while  some  of  the
recent  shells  of  the  Adriatic  were  becoming  incrusted  with
calcareous  rock,  he   observed  that  others  had  been  newly
buried  in  sand  and  clay,  precisely  as  fossil  shells  occur  in
the  Subapennine  hills.

In  like  manner,  the  volcanic  rocks  of  the  Vicentin  Iiad
been  studied  in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century ;  but  no
geologist  suspected,  before  the  time  of  Arduino,  that  these
were  composed  of  ancient  submarine  lavas.  During  many
years  of  controversy,  the  popular  opinion  inclined  to  a  belief
that  basalt  and  rocks  of  the  same  class  had  been  precipi-
tated from  a  chaotic  fluid,  or  an  ocean  which  rose  at  succes-


Ch.  v.]  ancient  and  modern  causes.  101

sive  periods  over  the  continents,  charged  with  the  com-
ponent elements  of  the  rocks  in  question.  Few  will  now
dispute  that  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  invent  a  theory
more  distant  from  the  truth ;  jet  we  must  cease  to  wonder
that  it  gained  so  many  proselytes,  when  we  remember  that
its  claims  to  probability  arose  partly  from  the  very  circum-
stance of  its  confirming  the  assumed  want  of  analogy  between
geological  causei^and  those  now  in  action.  By  what  train  of
inyestigations  were  geologists  induced  at  length  to  reject
these  yiews,  and  to  assent  to  the  igneous  origin  of  the  trap-
pean  formations  9  By  an  examination  of  volcanos  now  active,
and  by  comparing  their  structure  and  the  composition  of
their  lavas  with  the  ancient  trap  rocks.

The  establishment,  from  time  to  time,  of  numerous  points
of  identification,  drew  at  length  from  geologists  a  reluctant
admission,  that  there  was  more  correspondence  between  the
condition  of  the  globe  at  remote  eras  and  now,  and  more
uniformity  in  the  laws  which  have  regulated  the  changes  of
its  surface,  than  they  at  first  imagined.  If,  in  this  state  of
the  science,  they  still  despaired  of  reconciling  every  class  of
geological  phenomena  to  the  operations  of  ordinary  causes,
even  by  straining  analogy  to  the  utmost  limits  of  credibility,
we  might  have  expected,  at  least,  that  the  balance  of  proba-
bility would  now  have  been  presumed  to  incline  towards  the
close  analogy  of  the  ancient  and  modern  causes.  But,  after
repeated  experience  of  the  failure  of  attempts  to  speculate
on  geological  monuments,  as  belonging  to  a  distinct  order  of
things,  new  sects  continued  to  persevere  in  the  principles
adopted  by  their  predecessors.  They  still  began,  as  each
new  problem  presented  itself,  whether  relating  to  the  animate
or  inanimate  world,  to  assume  an  original  and  dissimilar
order  of  nature  ;  and  when  at  length  they  approximated,  or
entirely  came  round  to  an  opposite  opinion,  it  was  always
with  the  feeling,  that  they  were  conceding  what  they  had
been  justified  a  priori  in  deeming  improbable.  In  a  word,
the  same  men  who,  as  natural  philosophers,  would  have  been
most  incredulous  respecting  any  extraordinary  deviations
fi^m  the  known  course  of  nature,  if  reported  to  have  hap-
pened in  their  own,  time,  were  equally  disposed,  as  geologists.


102


UNIFOEMITy  OF  ANCIENT  CAUSES.


rCa.  V.


to  expect  the  proofs  of  such  deviations  at  every  period  of
the  past.

I  shall  proceed  in  the  following  chapters  to  ennmerate
some  of  the  principal  difficulties  still  opposed  to  the  theory
of  the  uniform  nature  and  energy  of  the  causes  which  have
worked  successive  changes  in  the  crust  of  the  earth,  and  in
the  condition  of  its  living  inhabitants.  The  discussion  of  so
important  a  question  on  the  present  occasion  may  appear
premature,  but  it  is  one  which  naturally  arises  out  of  a
review  of  the  former  history  of  the  science.  It  is,  of  course,
impossible  to  enter  into  such  speculative  topics,  without
occasionally  carrying  the  novice  beyond  his  depth,  and
appealing  to  facts  and  conclusions  with  which  he  will  be
unacquainted,  until  he  has  studied  some  elementary  work  on
geology,  but  it  may  be  useful  to  excite  his  curiosity,  and
lead  him  to  study  such  works  by  calling  his  attention  at
once  to  some  of  the  principal  points  of  controversy.*


*  In  the  earlier  editions  of  this  work,
a  fourth  book  was  added  on  Geology
Proper,  or  Systematic  Geology,  con-
taining an  account  of  the  former  changes
of  the  animate  and  inanimate  creation,
brought  to  light  by  an  examination  of
the  crust  of  the  earth.    This  I  after-


wards (in  1838)  expanded  into  a  sepa-
rate publication  called  the  EUements  or
Manual  of  Geology,  of  which  a  sizth
edition  appeared,  Jannazy  1865»  and
the  greater  part  of  which  is  embodiad
in  the  Student's  Elements,  a  second
edition  of  which  was  published  in  1874.


103


CHAPTER  VI.

SUPPOSED  INTENSITY  OP  AQUEOUS  POECES  AT  REMOTE  PERIODS.

mTEHai'l'l    OF  AQUEOUS    CAU8X8 — SLOW  ACCTMULATIOK    OF   STRATA    PBOTED
BT   FOSSILS — RATB  OF  DBKUDATION   CAN   ONLY  KEBP  PACB  WITH   DEPOSITION

BBBATICS,   AND    ACTION    OF    ICE — DBLUGBS,   AND    TUB    CAUSES    TO   WHICH

THST  ABB  BBFBRBBD — SUPPOSED   UNI?EBSALITT   OP  ANCIENT  DEPOSITS.

Intensity  of  aqueous  causes. — The  great  problem  alluded
to  at  the  close  of  the  last  chapter  maj  thus  be   stated,
whether  the  former  changes  of  the  earth  made  known  to  us
by  geology  resemble  in  kind  and  degree  those  now  in  daily
progress.     This  question  may  be  contemplated  from  several
points  of  view,  and  it  embraces  among  other  subjects   the
enquiry,  whether  there  are  any  grounds  for  the  belief  enter-
tained by  many,  that  the  intensity  both  of  aqueous  and  of
igneous  forces,  in  remote  ages,  far  exceeded  that  which  we
iritness  in  our  own  times.

First,  then,  as  to  aqueous  causes :  it  has  been  shown  iu
onr  history  of  the  science,  that  Woodward  did  not  hesitate,
ID  1695,  to  teach  that  the  entire  mass  of  fossiliferous  strata
contamed  in  the  earth's  crust  had  been  deposited  in  a  few
months;  and,  consequently,  as  their  mechanical  and  deriva-
tive origin  was   already  admitted,  the  reduction  of  rocky
inasses  into  mud,  sand,  and  pebbles,  the  transportation  of
the  same  to  a  distance,  and  their  accumulation  elsewhere  in
r^lar  strata,  were  all  assumed  to  have  taken  place  with  a
rapidity  unparalleled  in  modem  times.     This  doctrine  was
modified  by  degrees,  in  proportion  as  different  classes  of
organic  remains,  such  as  shells,  corals,  and  fossil  plants,  had
been  studied  with  attention.     Analogy  led  every  naturalist
to  assume,  that  each  full-grown  individual  of  the  animal  or
vegetable  kingdom,  had  required  a  certain  number  of  days,


104  SUPPOSED  FORMER  INTENSITY  [Ck.  VI.

months,  or  years  for  the  attainment  of  maturity,  and  the
perpetuation  of  its  species  by  generation  ;  and  thus  the  first
approach  was  made  to  the  conception  of  a  common  standard
of  time,  without  which  there  are  no  means  whatever  of
measuring  the  comparative  rate  at  which  any  succession  of
events  has  taken  place  at  two  distinct  periods.  This
standard  consisted  of  the  average  duration  of  the  lives  of
individuals  of  the  same  genera  or  families  in  the  animal  and
vegetable  kingdoms ;  and  the  multitude  of  fossils  dispersed
through  successive  strata  imj^lied  the  continuance  of  the
same  species  for  many  generations.  At  length  the  idea  that
species  themselves  had  had  a  limited  duration,  arose  out  of
the  observed  fact  that  sets  of  strata  of  different  ages  con-
tained fossils  of  distinct  species.  Finally,  the  opinion  became
general,  that  in  the  course  of  ages,  one  assemblage  of  animals
and  plants  had  disappeared  after  another  again  and  again,
and  new  tribes  had  started  into  life  to  replace  them.

Denudation. — In  addition  to  the  proofs  derived  fix)m  organic
remains,  the  forms  of  stratification  led  also,  on  a  fuller  in-
vestigation, to  the  belief  that  sedimentary  rocks  had  been
slowly  deposited  ;  but  it  was  still  supposed  that  denvdatian,
or  the  power  of  running  water,  and  the  waves  and  currents
of  the  ocean,  to  strip  off  superior  strata,  and  lay  bare  the
rocks  below,  had  formerly  operated  with  an  energy  wholly
unequalled  in  our  times.  These  opinions  were  both  illogical
and  inconsistent,  because  deposition  and  denudation  are
processes  inseparably  connected,  and  what  is  true  of  the  rate
of  one  of  them  must  be  true  of  the  rate  of  the  other  within
very  narrow  limits,  and  the  conveyance  of  solid  matter  to  a
particular  region  can  only  keep  pace  with  its  removal  from
another,  so  that  the  aggregate  of  sedimentary  strata  in  the
earth's  crust  can  never  exceed  in  volume  the  amount  of
solid  matter  which  has  been  ground  down  and  washed  away
by  rivers,  w^aves,  and  currents.  How  vast  then  must  be  the
spaces  which  this  abstraction  of  matter  has  left  vacant !  how
far  exceeding  in  dimensions  all  the  valleys,  however  nume-
rous, and  the  hollows,  however  vast,  which  we  can  prove  to
have  been  cleared  out  by  aqueous  erosion  !  The  evidence  of
the  work  of  denudation  is  defective,  because  it  is  the  tendency
of  every  destroying  cause  to  obliterate,  in  great  part,  tlie


ch.  vl]        of  aqueous  causes  controverted.  105

signs  of  its  own  agency.  The  amount  of  reproduction  in  the
form  of  sedimentary  strata  will  only  afford  a  measure  of  the
minimum  of  denudation  which  the  earth's  surface  has  under-
gone, because  the  same  materials  in  a  multitude  of  cases
haye  been  broken  up  again  and  again  and  re-stratified,  so
that  the  last  alone  of  many  forms  through  which  they  have
passed  is  now  presented  to  our  view.

Erratics  and  iee-a^ctian.— Another  phenomenon  to  which  the
advocates  of  the  excessive  power  of  running  water  in  times
past  have  appealed,  is  the  enormous  size  of  the  blocks  called
erratic,  which  lie  scattered  over  the  northern  parts  of  Europe
and  North  America.  Unquestionably  a  large  proportion  of
these  blocks  have  been  transported  far  from  their  original
position,  for  between  them  and  the  parent  rocks  we  now  find,
not  unfrequently,  deep  seas  and  valleys  intervening,  or  hills
more  than  a  thousand  feet  high.  To  explain  the  present  situa-
tion of  such  travelled  fragments,  a  deluge  of  mud  was  imagined
by  some  to  have  come  from  the  north,  bearing  along  with
it  sand,  gravel,  and  stony  fragments,  some  of  them  hundreds
of  tons  in  weight.  This  flood,  in  its  transient  passage  over
the  continents,  dispersed  the  boulders  irregularly  over  hill,
valley,  and  plain ;  or  forced  them  along  over  a  surface  of
hard  rock,  so  as  to  polish  it  and  leave  it  indented  with  paral-
lel scratches  and  grooves, — such  markings  as  are  still  visible
in  the  rocks  of  Scandinavia,  Scotland,  Canada,  and  many
other  countries.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  myriads  of  angular  and
rounded  blocks  above  alluded  to  cannot  have  been  borne
along  by  ordinary  rivers  or  marine  currents,  so  great  is  their
volume  and  weight,  and  so  clear  are  the  signs,  in  many
places,  of  time  having  been  occupied  in  their  successive
deposition ;  for  while  some  of  them  are  buried  in  mud  and
sand,  others  are  distributed  at  various  depths  through  heaps
of  regularly  stratified  sand  and  gravel.  No  waves  of  the  sea
raised  by  earthquakes,  nor  the  bursting  of  lakes  dammed  up
for  a  time  by  landslips  or  by  avalanches  of  snow,  can  account
for  the  observed  facts ;  but  I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  in
the  sequel,*  that  a  combination  of  existing  causes  may  have
conveyed  erratics  into  their  present  situations.

*  See  also  Elements  of  Geology,  ch.  11,  12,  and  Student's  Elements,  p.  143 ;  et  seq.


106  SUPPOSED  FORMER  INTENSITY  [Ch.  VI.

The  causes  which  will  be  referred  to  are,  first,  the  carrying
power  of  ice,  combined  with  that  of  running  water;  and
second,  the  upward  movement  of  the  bed  of  the  sea,  con-
verting it  gradually  into  land.  Without  entering  at  present
into  any  details  respecting  these  causes,  I  may  mention  that
the  transportation  of  blocks  by  ice  is  now  simultaneously  in
progress,  not  only  in  the  arctic  and  antarctic  regions,  but  in
a  part  of  the  temperate  latitudes  both  of  the  northern  and
southern  hemispheres,  as,  for  example,  on  the  coasts  of
Canada  and  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  also  in  Chili,  Pata-
gonia, and  the  island  of  South  Georgia.  In  those  regions
the  uneven  bed  of  the  ocean  is  becoming  strewed  over  with
ice-drifted  fragments,  which  have  either  stranded  on  shoals,  or
been  dropped  in  deep  water  by  melting  bergs.  The  entangle-
ment of  boulders  in  drift  ice  will  also  be  shown  to  occur
annually  in  North  America,  and  these  stones,  when  firmly
frozen  into  ice,  wander  year  after  year  from  Labrador  to  the
St.  Lawrence,  and  reach  points  of  the  western  hemisphere
farther  south  than  any  part  of  Great  Britain.

The  general  absence  of  erratics  in  the  warmer  parts  of  the
equatorial  regions  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  confirms
the  same  views.  As  to  the  polishing  and  grooving  of  hard
rocks,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  glaciers  give  rise  to  these
eflects  when  pushing  forward  sand,  pebbles,  and  locky  frag-
ments, and  causing  them  to  grate  along  the  bottom.  Nor
can  there  be  any  reasonable  doubt  that  icebergs,  when  they
run  aground  on  the  floor  of  the  ocean,  must  imprint  some-
what similar  marks  upon  it.

It  is  unnecessary,  therefore,  to  refer  to  deluges,  or  great
oceanic  waves,  to  explain  the  transportation  of  erratics  to
great  distances.

As  to  variations  in  the  tides  in  past  times,  they  can
never  have  been  sufficient  to  have  imparted  to  marine
currents,  or  to  the  waves  breaking  on  a  coast,  a  degree  of
force  greatly  exceeding  that  which  they  usually  exert.
When  the  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit,  of  which  more
will  be  said  in  the  thirteenth  chapter,  is  at  or  near  its  maxi-
mum, the  rise  of  the  solar  tide  will  amount  to  two-and-a-half
instead  of  two  feet ;  but  the  increased  power  thus  derived


Ch.  VI.]  OF  AQUEOUS  CAUSES  CONTROVERTED.  107

from  solar  attraction  may  be  neglected  by  a  geologist,
seeing  that  the  configunition  of  the  land  now  produces
differences  in  the  height  of  the  tides  to  the  extent  of  fifty
feet  and  upwards,  instead  of  those  few  additional  inches
gained  by  proximity  to  the  sun  in  the  case  above  proposed.
At  some  former  periods,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  the  local
development  of  ice,  sometimes  in  one  hemisphere,  sometimes
in  the  other,  was  so  great  as  to  enable  it  to  exert  a  carrying
power  far  beyond  what  it  now  exerts  in  the  same  region.
But  such  increased  ice-action,  recurring  at  distant  intervals
and  for  limited  periods,  is  by  no  means  confirmatory  of  the
theory  of  those  who  ascribe  paroxysmal  energy  to  causes
supposed  to  have  operated  in  a  nascent  state  of  the  planet.
In  regard  also  to  ice,  we  must  remember  that  its  action  on
land  is  substituted  for  that  of  running  water.  The  one
becomes  a  mighty  agent  in  transporting  huge  erratics,  and
in  scoring,  abrading,  and  polishing  rocks,  but  meanwhile
the  other  is  in  abeyance.  When,  for  example,  the  ancient
Rhone  glacier  conveyed  its  moraines  from  the  upper  to  the
lower  end  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  there  was  no  great  river  as
there  now  is,  forming  a  delta  many  miles  in  extent,  and
several  hundred  feet  in  depth,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  lake.

Deluges. — As  deluges  have  been  often  alluded  to  (page  10,
&c.),  I  shall  say  something  of  the  causes  which  may  be  sup-
posed to  give  rise  to  these  grand  movements  of  water.

Geologists  who  believe  that  mountain-chains  have  been
thrown  up  suddenly  at  many  successive  epochs,  imagine
that  the  waters  of  the  ocean  may  be  raised  by  these  con-
vulsions, and  then  break  in  terrific  waves  upon  the  land,
sweeping  over  whole  continents,  hollowing  out  valleys,  and
transporting  sand,  gravel,  and  erratics  to  great  distances.
The  sudden  rise  of  the  Alps  or  Andes,  it  is  said,  may  have
produced  a  flood  even  subsequently  to  the  time  when  the
earth  became  the  residence  of  man.  But  it  seems  strange
that  none  of  the  writers  who  have  indulged  their  imagina-
tion in  conjectures  of  this  kind  should  have  ascribed  a
deluge  to  the  sudden  conversion  of  part  of  the  iinfathomable
ocean  into  a  shoal  rather  than  to  the  rise  of  mountain-chains.
In  the  latter  case  the  mountains  themselves  could  do  no


108  PROBABLE  CAUSES  OF  FLOODS.  [Ck.  VL

more  than  displace  a  certain  quantity  of  atmospheric  air,
whereas  the  instantaneous  formation  of  the  shoal  would  dis-
place a  vast  body  of  water,  which  being  heaved  up  to  a  great
height  might  roll  over  and  submerge  a  large  portion  of  a*
continent.

If  we  restrict  ourselves  to  combinations  of  causes  at  present
known,  it  would  seem  that  the  two  principal  sources  of  extra-
ordinary inundations  are,  first  the  escape  of  the  waters  of  a
large  lake  raised  far  above  the  sea ;  and,  secondly,  the  pour-
ing down  of  a  marine  current  into  lands  depressed  below  the
mean  level  of  the  ocean.

As  an  example  of  the  first  of  these  cases,  we  may  take
Lake  Superior,  which  is  more  than  400  geographical  miles  in
length,  and  about  150  in  breadth,  having  an  average  depth  of
from  500  to  900  feet.  The  surface  of  this  vast  body  of  fresh
water  is  no  less  than  600  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ocean ;
the  lowest  part  of  the  barrier  which  separates  the  lake  on  its
south-west  side  from  those  streams  which  flow  into  the  head
waters  of  the  Mississippi  being  about  600  feet  high.  If,
therefore,  a  series  of  subsidences  should  lower  any  part  of
this  barrier,  even  a  few  yards  at  a  time,  or  if  earthquakes
should  rend  it  open,  the  breaches  thus  made  might  allow  the
sudden  escape  of  vast  floods  of  water  into  a  hydrographical
basin  of  euormous  extent.  If  the  event  happened  in  the  dry
season,  when  the  ordinary  channels  of  the  Mississippi  and
its  tributaries  are  in  a  great  degree  empty,  the  inundation
might  not  be  considerable ;  but  if  in  the  flood  season,  a
region  capable  of  supporting  a  population  of  many  millions
might  be  suddenly  submerged.  But  even  this  event  would
be  insufficient  to  cause  a  violent  rush  of  water,  and  to  pro-
duce those  eflects  usually  called  diluvial ;  for  the  difference
of  level  of  600  feet  between  Lake  Superior  and  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  when  distributed  over  a  distance  of  1,800  miles,
would  give  an  average  fall  of  only  four  inches  per  mile.

The  second  case  before  adverted  to  is  where  there  are  large
tracts  of  dry  land  beneath  the  mean  level  of  the  ocean.  It
seems,  after  much  controversy,  to  be  at  length  a  settled
point,  that  the  Caspian  is  really  83  feet  6  inches  lower  than
the  Black  Sea.    As  the  Caspian  covers  an  area  about  equal


Ch.  VI.]    SUPPOSED  UNIVERSALITY  OF  ANCIENT  DEPOSITS.     109

to  that  of  Spain,  and  as  its  shores  are  in  general  low  and  flat,
there  mnst  be  many  thousand  square  miles  of  country  less
than  83  feet  above  the  level  of  that  inland  sea,  and  conse-
quently depressed  below  the  Black  Sea  and  Mediterranean.
This  area  includes  the  site  of  the  populous  city  of  Astrakhan
and  other  towns.  Into  this  region  the  ocean  would  pour  its
waters,  if  the  land  now  intervening  between  the  Black  Sea
(or  rather  the  Sea  of  Azof)  and  the  Caspian  should  subside.
Yet,  even  if  this  event  should  occur,  it  is  most  probable  that
the  submergence  of  the  whole  region  would  not  be  accom-
plished simultaneously,  but  by  a  series  of  minor  floods,  the
Binking  of  the  barrier  being  gradual.*  The  shores  of  the
Dead  Sea  have  lately  been  ascertained  by  a  party  of  our
Royal  Engineers  to  be  about  1,800  English  feet  below  the
level  of  the  Mediterranean,  or  about  four  feet  less  than
1,300  on  an  average. t  In  this  case,  towns  built  on  hills
nearly  1,800  feet  high  might  be  submerged  by  such  a  change
of  level  in  the  barrier  as  would  open  a  commimication  be-
tween the  Mediterranean  and  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.

Supposed  universality  of  ancient  deposits. — The  next  fallacy
which  has  helped  to  perpetuate  the  doctrine  that  the  opera-
tions of  water  were  on  a  different  and  grander  scale  in
ancient  times  is  founded  on  the  indefinite  areas  over  which
homogeneous  deposits  were  supposed  to  extend.  No  modern
sedimentary  strata,  it  was  said,  equally  identical  in  mineral
character  and  fossil  contents,  can  be  traced  continuously
from  one  quarter  of  the  globe  to  another.  But  the  first
propagators  of  these  opinions  were  very  slightly  acquainted
with  the  inconstancy  in  mineral  composition  of  the  ancient

♦  It  has  been  suspected  ever  since  Journ.  Roy.  Geograph.  Soc.  vol.  viii.  p.

the  middle  of  the  last  century,  that  135.)    Sir  R.  Murchison,  however,  con-

the  Caspian  was  lower  than  the  ocean,  eludes,  in  1845,  from  the  best  Russian

it  being  known  that  in  Astrakhan  the  authorities,  that  the  depression  of  the

mercnry  in  the    barometer    generally  Caspian  is  only  83  feet  6  inches.

stands  above  thirty  inches.    In  1836,  f  Sir  Henry  James,  who  planned  this

the  Russian  government  directed  the  survey,  which  was  executed  by  Capt.

Academy  of  St.  Petersburg  to  send  an  Wilson,  RE.,  informs  me  that  on  the

expedition   to  determine   the    relative  12th  of  March,  1865,  the  difference  of

level  of  the  Caspian  and  Black  Seas  level  was  1,292  feet.     The  maximum

by  a  trigonometrical  survey.     It  was  depression  occurring  in  the  dry  season

found  that  the  Caspian  was   101  Rus-  amounts  to  1,298  feet,  the  minimum,

eian,  or  108  English,  feet  lower  than  as  ascertained  by  the  drifted  seaweed  on

the  Black  Sea.     (For  authorities,  see  the  shores,  being  only  1,289*5  feet


no  SUPPOSED  UNIVERSALITY  [Ch.  VI.

formations,  and  equally  so  of  the  wide  spaces  over  which  the
same  kind  of  sediment  is  now  actually  distributed  by  rivers
and  currents  in  the  course  of  centuries.  The  persistency  of
character  in  the  older  series  was  exaggerated,  its  extreme
variability  in  the  newer  was  assumed  without  proof.  In  the
chapter  which  treats  of  river-deltas  and  the  dispersion  of
sediment  by  currents,  and  in  the  description  of  ree&  of
coral  now  growing  over  areas  many  hundred  miles  in  length,
I  shall  have  opportunities  of  convincing  the  reader  of  the
danger  of  hasty  generalisations  on  this  head.  I  may  also
mention  in  this  place,  that  the  vast  distance  to  which  the
white  chalk  can  be  traced  east  and  west  over  Europe,  as
well  as  north  and  south,  from  Denmark  to  the  Crimea,  seemed
to  some  geologists  a  phenomenon,  to  which  the  working  of
causes  now  in  action  could  present  no  parallel.  But  the
soundings  made  in  the  Atlantic  for  the  submarine  telegraph
have  taught  us  that  white  miid,  formed  of  organic  bodies
very  similar  to  those  of  the  ancient  chalk,  is  in  progress  over
spaces  still  more  vast.*

But  in  regard  to  the  imagined  universality  of  particular
rocks  of  ancient  date,  it  was  almost  unavoidable  that  this
notion,  when  once  embraced,  should  be  perpetuated ;  for  the
same  kinds  of  rock  have  occasionally  been  reproduced  at
successive  epochs:  and  when  once  the  agreement  or  disagree-
ment in  mineral  character  alone  was  relied  on  as  the  test  of
age,  it  followed  that  similar  rocks,  if  found  even  at  the
antipodes,  were  referred  to  the  same  era,  until  the  contrary
could  be  shown.

Now  it  is  usually  impossible  to  combat  such  an  assumption
on  geological  grounds,  so  long  as  we  are  imperfectly  acquainted
with  the  order  of  superposition  and  the  organic  remains  of
these  same  formations.  Thus,  for  example,  the  red  marl  and
red  sandstone,  containing  salt  and  gypsum  (the  Triassic  gpx)up
of  the  table,  p.  135),  being  interposed  in  England  between
the  Lias  and  the  Coal,  all  other  red  marls  and  sandstones,
associated  some  of  them  with  salt,  and  others  with  gypsum,
and  occurring  not  only  in  dififerent  parts  of  Europe,  but
in  North  America,  Peru,   India,  and  salt  deserts  of  Asia,

*  Elements  of  Geol.,  6th  edit  p.  318 ;  and  Student's  Elements,  p.  261.


Ch.  VI.]  OF  ANCIENT  DEPOSITS.  Ill

those  of  Africa— in  a  word,  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe — were
referred  to  one  and  the  same  period.  The  burden  of  proof
was  not  supposed  to  rest  with  those  who  insisted  on  the
identity  in  age  of  all  these  groups — their  identity  in  mineral
composition  was  thought  sufficient.  It  was  in  vain  to  urge
as  an  objection  the  improbability  of  the  hypothesis  which
implies  that  all  the  moving  waters  on  the  globe  were  once
simultaneously  chained  with  sediment  of  a  red  colour.

But  the  rashness  of  pretending  to  identify,  in  age,  all  the
red  sandstones  and  marls  in  question,  has  at  length  been
sufficiently  exposed,  by  the  discovery  that,  even  in  Europe,
they  belong  decidedly  to  many  diflferent  epochs.  The  inves-
tigations of  De  Yemeuil  in  Spain  have  shown  that  the  red
sandstone  and  red  marl,  containing  the  rock  salt  of  Cardona
in  Catalonia,  belong  to  the  Middle  Eocene  or  Nummulitic
period.  It  is  also  known  that  certain  red  marls  and  varie-
gated sandstones  in  Auvergne  which  are  undistinguishable  in
mineral  composition  from  the  New  Eed  Sandstone  of  English
geologists,  are  nevertheless  of  the  same  older  tertiary  period :
and,  lastly,  the  gypseous  red  marl  of  Aix,  in  Provence,
formerly  supposed  to  be  a  marine  secondary  group,  is  now
acknowledged  to  be  a  tertiary  fresh-water  formation.  In
Nova  Scotia  one  great  deposit  of  red  marl,  sandstone,  and
gypsum,  precisely  resembling  in  mineral  character  the  *  New
Red'  of  England,  occurs  as  a  member  of  the  Carboniferous
group,  and  in  the  United  States  near  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  a
similar  formation  constitutes  a  subdivision  of  the  Upper
Silurian  series.**^

Nor  was  the  nomenclature  commonly  adopted  in  geology
without  its  influence  in  perpetuating  the  erroneous  doctrine
of  universal  formations.  Such  names,  for  example,  as  Chalk,
Greensand,  Oolite,  Eed  Marl,  Coal,  and  others,  were  given
to  some  of  the  principal  fossiliferous  groups  in  consequence
of  mineral  peculiarities  which  happened  to  characterise  them
in  the  countries  where  they  were  first  studied.  When  geolo-
gists had  at  length  shown,  by  means  of  fossils  and  the  order
of  superposition,  that  other  strata,  entirely  dissimilar  in
colour,  texture,  and  composition,  were  of  contemporaneous

*  See  Ljeirs  TraveU  in  N.  America,  ch.  2  and  25.


112  SUPPOSED  UNIVERSAUTY  [Ch.  VI.

date,  it  was  thought  convenient  still  to  retain  the  old  names.
That  these  were  often  inappropriate  was  admitted ;  but  the
student  was  taught  to  understand  them  in  no  other  than  a
chronological  sense ;  so  that  the  Chalk  might  be  a  grey  quartz-
ose  sandstone  devoid  of  calcareous  matter,  as  near  Dresden,
or  a  hard,  compact,  and  sometimes  flaggy  limestone,  as  in
parts  of  the  Alps,  or  a  brown  sandstone  or  green  marl,  as  in
New  Jersey,  U.S.  In  like  manner,  the  Greensand,  it  was
said,  is  often  represented  by  limestone  and  other  mineral
masses  entirely  devoid  of  green  grains.  So  the  Oolitic  tex-
ture was  declared  to  be  rather  an  exception  than  otherwise
to  the  general  rule  in  rocks  of  the  Oolitic  period,  and  to  be
found  in  strata  both  of  older  and  newer  date ;  and  it  often
became  necessary  to  affirm  that  no  particle  of  carbonaceous
matter  could  be  detected  in  districts  where  the  true  Coal
series  abounded.  In  spite  of  every  precaution,  the  habitual
use  of  this  language  could  scarcely  fail  to  instil  into  the  mind
of  the  pupil  an  idea  that  chalk,  coal,  salt,  red  marl,  and  the
Oolitic  structure  were  far  more  widely  characteristic  of  the
rocks  of  a  given  age  than  was  really  the  case.

There  is  still  another  cause  of  deception,  disposing  us  to
ascribe  a  more  limited  range  to  the  newer  sedimentary  forma-
tions as  compared  to  the  older,  namely,  the  very  general
concealment  of  the  newer  strata  beneath  the  waters  of  lakes
and  seas,  and  the  wide  exposure  above  waters  of  the  more
ancient.  The  Chalk,  for  example,  now  seen  stretching  for
thousands  of  miles  over  different  parts  of  Europe,  has  become
visible  to  us  by  the  effect,  not  of  one,  but  of  many  distinct
series  of  subterranean  movements.  Time  has  been  required,
and  a  succession  of  geological  periods,  to  raise  it  above  the
waves  in  so  many  regions ;  and  if  calcareous  rocks  of  the
middle  and  upper  tertiary  periods  have  been  formed,  as
homogeneous  in  mineral  composition  throughout  equally  ex-
tensive regions,  it  may  require  convulsions  as  numerous  as  all
those  which  have  occurred  since  the  origin  of  the  Chalk  to
bring  them  up  within  the  sphere  of  human  observation.
Hence  the  rocks  of  more  modem  periods  may  appear  partial,
as  compared  to  those  of  remoter  eras,  not  because  of  any
original  inferiority  in  their  extent,  but  because  there  has  not


Ch.  VI.]  OF  ANCIENT  DEPOSITS.  113

been  sufBcient  time  since  their  origin  for  the  development
of  a  great  series  of  elevatory  movements.

In  regard,  however,  to  one  of  the  most  important  character-
istics of  sedimentary  rocks,  their  organic  remains,  many
naturalists  of  high  authority  have  maintained  that  the  same
species  of  fossils  are  more  widely  distributed  through  forma-
tions of  high  antiquity  than  in  those  of  more,  modern  date,
and  that  distinct  zoological  and  botanical  provinces,  as  they
are  called,  which  form  so  striking  a  feature  in  the  living
creation,  were  not  established  at  remote  eras.  Thus  the  plants
of  the  Coal,  the  shells  and  trilobites  of  the  Silurian  rocks,
and  the  ammonites  of  the  Oolite,  have  been  supposed  to  have
a  wider  geographical  range  than  any  living  species  of  plants,
crastaceans,  or  mollusks.  This  opinion  seems  in  certain  cases
to  be  well  founded,  especially  in  relation  to  the  plants  of  the
Carboniferous  epoch,  owing  partly  to  greater  uniformity  of
climate,  and  partly,  as  Professor  Heer  has  suggested,  to  the
fiu5t  that  almost  all  the  plants — including  even  large  trees  —
of  that  period,  were  cryptogamous :  .so  that  their  minute
spores  might  be  carried  by  the  wind  for  indefinite  distances,
as  are  now  the  spores  of  ferns,  mosses,  and  lichens.  But  a
recent  comparison  of  the  fossils  of  North  American  rocks  with
those  of  correspondiug  ages  in  the  European  series,  has  proved
that  the  terrestrial  vegetation  of  the  Carboniferous  epoch  is
an  exception  to  the  general  rule,  and  that  the  fauna  and  flora
of  the  earth  at  successive  periods,  from  the  oldest  Silurian  to
the  newest  Tertiary,  were  as  diversified  as  now.  The  shells,
corals,  and  other  classes  of  organic  remains  demonstrate  the
fBLct  that  the  earth  might  then  have  been  divided  into  separate
zoological  provinces,  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that  observed
in  the  geographical  distribution  of  species  now  living.


TOL.   I.


114


CHAPTER  Vn.

OIH   THE   SUPPOSED   FOSMEB  INTENSITY  OF  TEE   lONEOUS

FORCES.

VOLCANIC  ACTIOX  AT  SCCCKSSIYB  OBOLOOICAL  PERIODS — ^PLUTOXIC   BOCKS  OF

DIFFEBENT  AOES — GRADUAL  DKVHLOPMBirr   OF  SUBTERBAMBAX  KOTBmUfTS

FAl'LTS — DOCTRINB  OF  THE  SXTDDBN  UFKBATAL  OF  PARALLEL  MOUlTTAIir-
CKAIN8— OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  PROOF  OF  THE  S17DDBNNBS8  OF  THE  UPKBATAI^
AND  THE  COirrBlfPORANBOrSNESS  OF  PARALLEL  CHAINS — TRAINS  OP  ACnYB
VOIXl^NOS  NOT  PARALLEL — ^AS  LARGE  TRACTS  OF  LAND  ARE  RISING  OR  BINX-
IN(}  SLOWLY,  80  NARROW  ZONES  OF  LAND  MAT  BE  PUSHED  UP  GRADUALLY
TO  GREAT  HKIGHT8— BENDING  OF  STRATA  BT  LATERAL  PRESSURE — ^ADBQUACT
OF  THE  VOLCANIC  POWER  TO  EFFECT  THIS  WITHOUT  PAROXTSMAL  COITTUZ^
SIGNS.

When  reasoning  on  the  intensity  of  volcanic  action  at  former
periods,  as  well  as  on  the  power  of  moving  water,  geologists
have  been  ever  prone  to  represent  Nature  as  having  been
prodigal  of  violence  and  parsimonious  of  time.  Now,
although  it  is  less  easy  to  determine  the  relative  ages  of  the
volcanic  than  of  the  fossiliferous  formations,  it  is  undeniable
that  igneous  rocks  have  been  produced  at  all  geological
periods,  or  as  often  as  we  find  distinct  deposits  marked  by
peculiar  animal  and  vegetable  remains.  It  can  be  shown,
for  example,  that  there  are  not  only  trappean  rocks  contem-
poraneous with  the  Falseozoic,  Mesozoic,  and  Cainozoic
periods,  and  with  each  of  the  several  groups  into  which  these
are  divisible,  but  that  volcanic  products  can  be  more  strictly
limited  and  assigned  to  minor  subdivisions,  such  as  the  Lower
and  Upper  Carboniferous  and  the  Lower  and  Upper  Eocene.
Again,  if  one  of  these  igneous  formations  is  examined  in
detail,  we  find  it  to  be  the  product  of  many  successive  ejec-
tions or  outpourings  of  volcanic  matter.*    As  we  enlai^,

*  Seo  Elements  of  Geology,  6th  ed. ;  and  Students  Elements,  1871.    Index,

•  Volcanic*


Ck.  Vn.]  SUPPOSED  FORMER  INTENSITY  OF  IGNEOUS  FORCES.  115

therefore,  our  knowledge  of  the  ancient  rocks  formed  by  sub-
terranean heat,  we  find  ourselves  compelled  to  regard  them
as  the  aggregate  e£Fects  of  innumerable  eruptions,  each  of
which  may  not  have  exceeded  in  violence  those  now  experi-
enced in  volcanic  regions.

It  may  indeed  be  said  that  we  have  as  yet  no  data  for
estimating  the  relative  volume  of  matter  simultaneously  in  a
state  of  fusion  at  two  given  periods,  such  as  enable  us  for
instance  to  compare  the  columnar  basalt  of  Staffa  and  its
environs  with  the  lava  poured  out  in  Iceland  in  1783;  and
for  this  very  reason  it  would  be  rash  and  unphilosophical  to
assume  an  excess  of  ancient  as  contrasted  with  modern  out-
pourings of  melted  matter  at  particular  periods  of  time.*  It
would  be  still  more  presumptuous  to  take  for  granted  that
the  more  deep-seated  effects  of  subterranean  heat  surpassed
at  remote  eras  the  corresponding  effects  of  internal  heat  in
our  own  times.  Certain  porphyries  and  granites,  and  all  the
rocks  commonly  called  plutonic,  are  now  generally  supposed
to  have  resulted  from  the  slow  cooling  of  materials  fused  and
solidified  under  great  pressure ;  and  we  cannot  doubt  that
beneath  existing  volcanos  there  are  large  spaces  filled  with
melted  stone,  which  must  for  centuries  remain  in  an  incan-
descent state,  and  then  cool  and  become  hard  and  crystalline.
That  lakes  of  lava  are  continuous  for  hundreds  of  miles
beneath  the  Chilian  Andes,  seems  established  by  observa-
tions made  in  the  year  1835.t

Now,  wherever  the  fluid  contents  of  such  reservoirs  are
poured  out  successively  from  craters  in  the  open  air,  or  at
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  the  matter  so  ejected  may  afTord
evidence  by  its  arrangement  of  having  originated  at  different
periods ;  but  if  the  subterranean  residue  after  the  withdrawal
of  the  heat  be  converted  into  crystalline  or  plutonic  rock,  the
entire  mass  may  seem  to  have  been  formed  at  once,  however
countless  the  ages  required  for  its  fusion  and  subsequent
refrigeration.  As  the  idea  that  all  the  granite  in  the  earth's
crust  was  produced  simultaneously,  and  in  a  primitive  state
of  the  planet,  has  now  been  universaUy  abandoned ;  so  the

*  See  below,  toI.  ii.,  Icelandic  eruptions.
I  See  below,  toI.  ii.,  Chilian  eartbquiike.

I  2


116  SUPPOSED  FORMER  INTENSITY       [Ch.  VH.

suggestion  above  adverted  to  maj  put  tis  on  our  gaard
against  too  readily  adopting  another  opinion,  namely,  that
each  large  mass  of  granite  was  generated  in  a  brief  period
of  time.  Modem  writers  of  authority  indeed  seem  more  and
more  agreed  that  in  the  case  of  granitic  rocks,  the  passage
from  a  liquid  or  pasty  to  a  solid  and  crystalline  state  must
have  been  an  extremely  gradual  process.

The  doctrine  so  much  insisted  upon  formerly,  that  crystal-
line  rocks,  such  as  granite,  gneiss,  mica-schist,  quartzite,
and  others,  were  produced  in  the  greatest  abundance  in  the
earlier  ages  of  the  planet,  and  that  their  formation  has  ceased
altogether  in  our  own  times,  will  be  controverted  in  the  next
chapter.

Gradual  development  of  evhterranean  movements, — ^The  ex-
treme violence  of  the  subterranean  forces  in  remote  ages  has
been  often  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  older  rocks  are
more  fractured  and  dislocated  than  the  newev.  But  what
other  result  could  we  have  anticipated  if  the  quantity  of
movement  had  been  always  equal  in  equal  periods  of  time?
Time  must,  in  that  case,  multiply  the  derangement  of  strata
in  the  ratio  of  their  antiquity.  Indeed  the  numerous  excep-
tions to  the  above  rule  which  we  find  in  nature,  present  at
first  sight  the  only  objection  to  the  hypothesis  of  uniformity.
For  the  more  ancient  formations  remain  in  many  places
horizontal,  while  in  others  much  newer  strata  are  curved  and
vertical.  This  apparent  anomaly,  however,  will  be  seen  in
the  next  chapter  to  depend  on  the  irregular  manner  in  which
the  volcanic  and  subterranean  agencies  affect  different  parts
of  the  earth  in  succession,  being  often  renewed  again  and
again  in  certain  areas,  while  others  remain  during  the  whole
time  at  rest.

Tliat  the  more  impressive  effects  of  subterranean  power,
such  as  the  upheaval  of  mountain-chains,  may  have  been
due  to  multiplied  convulsions  of  moderate  intensity  rather
than  to  a  few  paroxysmal  explosions,  will  appear  the  less  im-
probable when  the  gradual  and  intermittent  development  of
volcanic  eruptions  in  times  past  is  once  established,  for
geologists  no  longer  doubt  that  there  is  an  intimate  con-
nection between  the  two  classes  of  phenomena.


Ch.  vil]  of  igneous  forces.  117

Faults. — ^The  same  reasoning  is  applicable  to  great /awtt«,
or  those  striking  instances  of  the  upthrow  or  downthrow  of
large  masses  of  rock,  which  have  been  thought  by  some  to
imply  tremendous  catastrophes  wholly  foreign  to  the  ordinary
course  of  nature.  Thus  we  have  in  England  faults  in  which
the  vertical  displacement  of  the  rocks  amounts  sometimes  to
several  hundred,  and  in  other  cases  to  several  thousand  feet,
while  the  line  of  fissure  extends  horizontally  for  distances
varying  from  a  few  hundred  yards  to  thirty  miles.  Their
width  varies  from  less  than  an  inch  to  fifty  feet,  the  space
between  the  opposite  walls  being  now  filled  up  with  fragmen-
tary matter  from  the  sides,  and  various  minerals  which  have
crystallised  along  the  fissures.  But  when  we  enquire  into  the
proofs  of  the  mass  having  risen  or  fallen  suddenly  on  the
one  side  of  these  great  rents,  several  hundreds  or  thousands
of  feet  above  or  below  the  rock  with  which  it  was  once  con-
tinuous on  the  other  side,  we  find  the  evidence  defective.
There  are  grooves,  it  is  said,  and  scratches  on  the  rubbed
and  polished  walls  which  have  often  one  common  direction,
favouring  the  theory  that  the  movement  was  accomplished
by  a  single  stroke,  and  not  by  a  series  of  interrupted
movements.  But,  in  fact,  the  strise  are  not  always  parallel
in  such  cases,  but  often  irregular,  and  sometimes  the
stones  and  earth  which  are  in  the  middle  of  the  fault,  or
fissure,  have  been  polished  and  striated  by  friction  in  difier-
ent  directions,  showing  that  there  have  been  slidings  sub-
sequent to  the  first  introduction  of  the  fragmentary  matter.
Nor  should  we  forget  that  the  last  movement  must  always
tend  to  obliterate  the  signs  of  previous  trituration,  so  that
neither  its  instantaneousness  nor  the  uniformity  of  its  direc-
tion can  be  inferred  from  the  parallelism  of  the  strias  that
have  been  last  produced.

When  rocks  have  been  once  fractured,  and  freedom  of
motion  communicated  to  detached  portions  of  them,  these
will  naturally  continue  to  yield  in  the  same  direction,  if  the
process  of  upheaval  or  of  undermining  be  repeated  again  and
again.  The  incumbent  mass  will  always  give  way  along  the
lines  of  least  resistance,  and  therefore  usually  in  the  places
where  it  was  formerly  rent  asunder.     Probably  the  eflfects  of


^


118  SUPPOSED  CONTEMPORANEOUS  UPHEAVAL       [Ch.  VH.

reiterated  movement,  whether  upward  or  downward,  in  a
fault,  may  be  undistingfuishable  from  those  of  a  single  and
instantaneous  rise  or  subsidence ;  and  the  same  maj  be  said
of  the  rising  or  falling  of  continental  masses,  such  as  Swe-
den or  Greenland,  which  we  know  to  take  place  slowly
and  insensibly.

Doctriyie  of  fhe  siidden  upheaval  of  parallel  mountain-
chaijis. — The  doctrine  of  the  suddenness  of  many  former
revolutions  in  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe  has  been
thought  by  some  to  derive  additional  confirmation  from  a
theory  respecting  the  origin  of  mountain-chains,  advanced  in
1838  by  a  distinguished  geologist,  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont.
In  several  essays  on  this  subject,  the  last  published  in  1852,
he  has  attempted  to  establish  two  points ;  fii'st,  that  a  variety
of  independent  chains  of  mountains  have  been  thrown  up
suddenly  at  particular  periods ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  con-
temporaneous chains  thus  thrown  up  preserve  a  parallelism
the  one  to  the  other.

These  opinions,  and  others  by  which  they  are  accompanied,
are  so  adverse  to  the  method  of  interpreting  the  history  of
geological  changes  which  I  have  recommended  in  this  work,
that  I  am  desirous  of  explaining  the  grounds  of  my  dissent,
a  course  which  I  feel  myself  the  more  called  upon  to  adopt,
as  the  generalisations  alluded  to  have  been  very  popular,
owing  to  the  known  experience  of  the  author  as  an  observer
in  the  field,  his  profound  mathematical  acquirements,  and  his
skill  as  a  wiiter.  I  shall  begin,  therefore,  by  giving  a  brief
summar}'  of  the  principal  propositions  laid  down  in  the  works
above  referred  to.*

1st.  M.  de  Beaumont  supposes  *that  in  the  history  of  the
earth  there  have  been  long  periods  of  comparative  repose,
during  which  the  deposition  of  sedimentary  matter  has  gone
on  in  regular  continuity;  and  there  have  also  been  short
periods  of  paroxysmal  violence,  during  which  that  continuity
was  broken.

•  Ann.  des  Soi.  nat..  eeptembre,  no-  de  Beaumont's  theory  will  he  fbnnd  in
Tcmbre,  et  deccmbre  1829.  Bevno  the  12th  vol.of  theDiccionnaireiiniTer-
fran^HiFe,  No.  16.  Mnyl830.  Bulletin  Belle  d'llist.  nut.  1852,  art. 'Syst&mei
de  la  Soci(!'t6  (i6oI.  de  France,  p.  864.  de  Montagnes ;'  also  the  same  printed
May  1847.     The  latest  edition  of  M.  separately.


Ch.  Vn.]  OF  PARALLEL  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.  119

'  2dly.  At  ea<5h  of  these  periods  of  violence  or  "  revolu-
tion/' in  the  state  of  the  earth's  surface,  a  great  number  of
mountain-chains  have  been  formed  suddenly.

*8dly.  The  chaifls  thrown  up  by  a  particular  revolution
have  one  uniform  direction,  being  parallel  to  each  other
within  a  few  degfrees  of  the  compass,  even  when  situated  in
remote  regions;  whilst  the  chains  thrown  up  at  different
periods  differ,  for  the  most  part,  from  each  other  in  direction.

*4thly.  Each  "revolution,"  or  "great  convulsion,"  has
fallen  in  with  the  date  of  another  geological  phenomenon ;
namely,  "  the  passage  from  one  independent  sedimentary
formation  to  another,"  characterised  by  a  considerable  dif-
ference in  "  organic  types."

*  Sthly.  There  has  been  a  recurrence  of  these  paroxysmal
movements  from  the  remotest  geological  periods ;  and  they
may  still  be  reproduced,  and  the  repose  in  which  we  live  may
hereafter  be  broken  by  the  sudden  upthrow  of  another  system
of  parallel  chains  of  mountains.

*  6thly.  The  origin  of  these  chains  depends  not  on  partial
volcanic  action,  or  a  reiteration  of  ordinary  earthquakes,  but
on  the  secular  refrigeration  of  the  entire  planet.  For  the
whole  globe,  with  the  exception  of  a  thin  envelope,  much
thinner  in  proportion  than  the  shell  to  an  egg,  is  a  fused
mass,  kept  fluid  by  heat,  but  constantly  cooling  and  con-
tracting its  dimensions.  The  external  crust  does  not  gradu-
ally collapse  and  accommodate  itself  century  after  century  to
the  shrunken  nucleus,  subsiding  as  often  as  there  is  a  slight
failure  of  support,  but  it  is  sustained  throughout  whole
geological  periods,  so  as  to  become  partially  separated  from
the  nucleus,  until  at  last  it  gives  way  suddenly,  cracking  and
&lling  in  along  determinate  lines  of  fracture.  During  such
a  crisis  the  rocks  are  subjected  to  great  lateral  pressure,  the
unyielding  ones  are  crushed,  and  the  pliant  strata  bent,  and
are  forced  to  pack  themselves  more  closely  into  a  smaller
space,  having  no  longer  the  same  room  to  spread  themselves
out  horizontally.  At  the  same  time,  a  large  portion  of  the
mass  is  squeezed  upwards,  because  it  is  in  the  upward  direc-
tion only  that  the  excess  in  size  of  the  envelope,  as  compared
to  the   contracted  nucleus,   can  find  relief.    This   excess


120  TflEOKY  OF  SUDDEN  BISK  OF  [Ch.  VH.

produces  one  or  more  of  those  folds  or  wrinkles  in  the  earth's
crust  which  we  call  mountain-chains.

^  Lastly,  some  chains  are  comparatively  modem ;  such  as
the  Alps,  which  were  partly  upheaved  after  the  middle  ter-
tiaiy  period.  The  elevation  of  the  Andes  was  much  more
recent,  and  was  accompanied  by  the  simultaneous  outburst
for  the  first  time  of  270  of  the  principal  volcanos  now  ac-
tive.* The  agitation  of  the  waters  of  the  ocean  caused
by  this  convulsion  probably  occasioned  that  transient  and
general  deluge  which  is  noticed  in  the  traditions  of  so  many
nations.'  t

Several  of  the  topics  enumerated  in  the  above  summary.
such  as  the  cause  of  interruptions  in  the  sedimentary  series,
will  be  discussed  in  the  14th  chapter,  and  I  shall  now  confiie
myself  to  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  insufficiency  of  the
proofs  adduced  in  favour  of  the  suddenness  of  the  upthrow,
and  the  contemporaneousness  of  the  origin  of  the  paraJlel
chains  referred  to.  At  the  same  time  I  may  remark,  that
the  great  body  of  facts  collected  together  by  M.  de  Beaumont
will  always  form  a  most  valuable  addition  to  our  kiow-
ledge,  tending  as  they  do  to  confirm  the  doctrine  that
different  mountain-chains  have  been  formed  in  succession,
and,  as  Werner  first  pointed  out,  that  there  are  certain  de-
terminate lines  of  direction  or  strike  in  the  strata  of  various
countries.

The  following  may  serve  as  an  analysis  of  the  evideice  on
which  the  theory  above  stated  depends.  *  We  observe^*  says
M.  de  Beaumont,  *  when  we  attentively  examine  nearly  all
mountain-chains,  that  the  most  recent  rocks  extend  hori-
zontally up  to  the  foot  of  such  chains,  as  we  should  expect
would  be  the  case  if  they  were  deposited  in  seas  or  lakes,  of
which  these  mountains  have  partly  formed  the  shores ;  whilst
the  other  sedimentary  beds,  tilted  up,  and  more  or  less  con-
toHed,  on  the  flanks  of  the  mountains,  rise  in  certain  points
even  to  their  highest  crests.'  J  There  are,  therefore,  ui  and
adjacent  to  each  chain,  two  classes  of  sedimentary  rocks,  the
ancient  or  inclined  beds,  and  the  newer  or  horizontal.  It  is
evident  that  the  first  appearance  of  the  chain  itself  was  an

*  Systcmos  de  Montagnes,  p.  762.  X  ^^i^*  ^^^'  <^d  Annals,  No.  58.

t  Ibid.  pp.  761  and  773.  New  Series,  p.  242.


cbl  vn.]


PARALLEL  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.


121


event  *  intermediate  between  the  period  when  the  beds  now
upraised  were  deposited,  and  the  period  when  the  strata  were
produced  horizontally  at  its  feet.*

Thus  the  chain  A  assumed  its  present  position  after  the


ns.  1.


deposition  of  the  strata  b^  which  have  undergone  great  move-
ments, and  before  the  deposition  of  the  group  c,  in  which  the
strata  have  not  sufiFered  derangement.
If  we  then  discover  another  chain  B,  in  which  we  find  not


b


only  the  formation  6,  but  the  group  c  also,  disturbed  and
thrown  on  its  edges,  we  may  infer  that  the  latter  chain  is  of
subsequent  date  to  A ;  for  B  must  have  been  elevated  after
the  deposition  of  c,  and  before  that  of  the  group  d;  whereas
A  had  originated  before  the  strata  c  were  formed.

It  is  then  argued,  that  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  other
mountain-ranges  are  of  contemporaneous  date  with  A  and  B,
or  are  referable  to  distinct  periods,  we  have  only  to  enquire
whether  the  inclined  and  undisturbed  sets  of  strata  in  each
range  correspond  with  or  differ  from  those  in  the  typical
chains  A  and  B.

Now  all  this  reasoning  is  perfectly  correct  so  long  as  the
period  of  time  required  for  the  deposition  of  the  strata  b  and
c  respectively  is  not  made  identical  in  duration  with  the
period  of  time  during  which  the  animals  and  plants  found
fossil  in  b  and  c  may  have  flourished ;  for  the  duration  of
certain  groups  of  species  may  have  g^reatly  exceeded,  and
probably  did   greatly  exceed,   the  time   required  for  the


122  THEOBY  OF  SUDDEN  RISE  OF  [Cwl  VU.

accumulation  of  certain  local  deposits,  such  as  b  and  c
(figs.  1  and  2).  In  order,  moreover,  to  render  the  reason-
ing correct,  due  latitude  must  be  given  to  the  term  con-
temporaneous ;  for  this  term  must  be  understood  to  allude,
not  to  a  moment  of  time,  but  to  the  interval,  whether
brief  or  protracted,  vfhich  elapsed  between  two  events,
namely,  between  the  accumulation  of  the  inclined  and  that
of  the  horizontal  strata.

But,  unfortunately,  no  attempt  has  been  made  in  the
treatises  under  review  to  avoid  this  manifest  source  of  con-
fusion, and  hence  tbe  very  terms  of  each  proposition  are
equivocal ;  and  the  possible  length  of  some  of  the  intervals
is  so  vast,  that  to  affirm  that  all  the  chains  raised  in  such
intervals  were  contemporaneous  is  an  abuse  of  language.

In  order  to  illustrate  this  argument,  I  shall  select  the
Pyrenees  as  an  example.  Originally  M.  E.  de  Beaumont
spoke  of  this  range  of  mountains  as  having  been  uplifted
suddenly  (d  un  seul  jet)^  but  he  has  since  conceded  that  in  this
chain,  in  spite  of  the  general  unity  and  simplicity  of  its
structure,  six,  if  not  seven,  systems  of  dislocation  of  different
dates  can  be  recognised.*  In  reference,  however,  to  the
latest,  and  by  far  the  most  important  of  these  convulsions,
the  chain  is  said  to  have  attained  its  present  elevation  at  a
certain  epoch  in  the  earth's  history,  namely,  between  the
deposition  of  the  chalk,  or  rocks  of  about  that  age,  and  that
of  certain  tertiary  formations  *  as  old  as  the  plastic  clay ;  *  for
the  chalk  is  seen  in  vertical,  curved,  and  distorted  beds  on
the  flanks  of  the  chaiu,  as  the  beds  b,  fig.  1,  while  the  tertiary
formations  rest  upon  them  in  horizontal  strata  at  its  base,  as
c,  ibid.

The  proof,  then,  of  the  extreme  suddenness  of  the  convul-
sion is  supposed  to  be  the  shortness  of  the  time  which  inter-
vened between  the  formation  of  the  chalk  and  the  origin
of  certain  tertiary  strata.t  Even  if  the  interval  were  re-
ducible within  these  limits,  it  might  comprise  an  indefinite
lapse  of  time.  In  strictness  of  reasoning,  however,  the
author  cannot  exclude  the  Cretaceous  or  the  Tertiary  periods

*  Syst^mes  de  Montagues,  1852,  p.  t  Phil.  Mag.  and  AnnaU,  No.  58.

429.  New  Series,  p.  243.


Ch.  Vn.]  PARALLEL  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.  123

from  the  possible  duration  of  the  interval  during  which  the
elevation  may  have  taken  place,  for,  in  the  first  place,  it
cannot  be  assumed  that  the  movement  of  upheaval  took
place  after  the  close  of  the  Cretaceous  period ;  we  can  merely
say,  that  it  occurred  after  the  deposition  of  certain  strata  of
that  period ;  secondly,  although  it  were  true  that  the  event
happened  before  the  formation  of  all  the  tertiary  strata  now
at  the  base  of  the  Pyrenees,  it  would  by  no  means  follow  that
it  preceded  the  whole  Tertiary  epoch.

The  age  of  the  strata,  both  of  the  inclined  and  horizontal
series,  may  have  been  accurately  determined  by  M.  de  Beau-
mont, and  still  the  upheaving  of  the  Pyrenees  may  have  been
going  on  before  the  animals  of  the  Chalk  period,  such  as  are
found  fossil  in  England,  had  ceased  to  exist,  or  when  the
Maestricht  beds  were  in  progress,  or  during  the  indefinite
ages  which  may  have  elapsed  between  the  extinction  of  the
Maestricht  animals  and  the  introduction  of  the  Eocene
tribes,  or  daring  the  Eocene  epoch,  or  the  rise  may  have
been  going  on  throughout  one,  or  several,  or  all  of  these
periods.

It  would  be  a  purely  gratuitous  assumption  to  say  that
the  inclined  cretaceous  strata  (6,  fig.  1)  on  the  flanks  of  the
Pyrenees,  were  the  very  last  which  were  deposited  during
the  Cretaceous  period,  or  that  as  soon  as  they  were  upheaved
all  or  nearly  all  the  species  of  animals  and  plants  now  found
fossil  in  them  were  suddenly  exterminated ;  yet,  unless  this
can  be  affirmed,  we  cannot  say  that  the  Pyrenees  were  not
npheaved  during  the  Cretaceous  period.  Consequently,  an-
other range  of  mountains,  at  the  base  of  which  cretaceous
rocks  may  lie  in  horizontal  stratification,  may  have  been
elevated,  like  the  chain  A,  fig.  1,  during  some  part  of  the
same  great  period.

There  are  mountains  in  Sicily  two  or  three  thousand  feet
high,  the  tops  of  which  are  composed  of  limestone,  in  which
a  large  proportion  of  the  fossil  shells  agree  specifically  with
those  now  inhabiting  the  Mediterranean.  Here,  as  in  many
other  countries,  the  deposits  now  in  progress  in  the  sea
must  inclose  shells  and  other  fossils  specifically  identical  with
those  of  the  rocks   constituting  the  contiguous  land.     So


124  THEOBY  OF  SUDDEN  RISE  OF  [C«.  VIL

there  are  islands  in  the  Pacific,  where  a  mass  of  dead  coral
}ias  emerged  to  a  considerable  altitude,  while  other  portions
of  the  mass  remain  beneath  the  sea,  still  increasing  by  the
growth  of  living  zoophytes  and  shells.  The  chalk  of  the
Pyrenees,  therefore,  may  at  a  remote  period  have  been  raised
to  an  elevation  of  several  thousand  feet,  while  the  species
found  fossil  in  the  same  chalk  still  continued  to  be  repre-
sented in  the  fauna  of  the  neighbouring  ocean.  In  a  word,
we  cannot  assume  that  the  origin  of  a  new  range  of  moun-
tains caused  the  Cretaceous  period  to  cease,  and  served  as
the  prelude  to  a  new  order  of  things  in  the  animate  creation.

To  illustrate  the  grave  objections  above  advanced,  against
the  th  ory  considered  in  the  present  chapter,  let  us  suppose,
that  in  some  country  three  styles  of  architecture  had  pre-
vailed in  succession,  each  for  a  period  of  one  thousand  years;
first  the  Greek,  then  the  Soman,  and  then  the  Gothic ;  and
that  a  tremendous  earthquake  was  known  to  have  occurred
in  the  same  district  during  one  of  the  three  periods — a  con-
vulsion of  such  violence  as  to  have  levelled  to  the  ground  all
the  buildings  then  standing.  If  an  antiquary,  desirous  of
discovering  the  date  of  the  catastrophe,  should  first  arrive
at  a  city  where  several  Greek  temples  were  lying  in  ruins  and
half  engulphed  in  the  earth,  while  many  Gothic  edifices  were
standing  uninjured,  could  he  determine  on  these  data  the
era  of  the  shock  ?  Could  he  even  exclude  any  one  of  the  three
periods,  and  decide  that  it  must  have  happened  during  one
of  the  other  two  ?  Certainly  not.  He  could  merely  affirm
that  it  happened  at  some  period  after  the  introduction  of  the
Greek  style,  and  before  the  Gothic  had  fallen  into  disuse.
Should  he  pretend  to  define  the  date  of  the  convulsion  with
greater  precision,  and  decide  that  the  earthquake  must  have
occurred  after  the  Greek  and  before  the  Gothic  period,  that
is  to  say,  when  the  Boman  style  was  in  use,  the  fallacy  in
his  reasoning  would  be  too  palpable  to  escape  detection  for
a  moment.

Yet  such  is  the  nature  of  the  erroneous  induction  of  which
I  am  now  treating.  For  as,  in  the  example  above  proposed,
the  erection  of  a  particular  edifice  is  an  event  scarcely  ever
coextensive  in  time  with  the  whole  period  of  a  certain  style


Ch.  Vn.]  PARALLEL  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.  125

of  architecture  to  which  it  conformed,  so  the  deposition  of
chalk  or  any  other  set  of  strata  may  have  been  eflfected  in  a
small  part  of  that  geological  epoch  to  which  the  species  of
fossils  characterising  such  strata  may  belong.

It  is  almost  superfluous  to  enter  into  any  further  analysis
of  the  theory  of  parallelism,  because  the  whole  force  of  the
ailment  depends  on  the  accuracy  of  the  data  by  which  the
contemporaneous  or  non-contemporaneous  date  of  the  ele-
vation of  two  independent  chains  can  be  demonstrated.  In
every  case,  this  evidence,  as  stated  by  M.  de  Beaumont,  is
equivocal,  because  he  has  not  included  in  the  possible  interval
of  time  between  the  deposition  of  the  deranged  and  the
horizontal  formations,  part  of  the  periods  to  which  each  of
those  classes  of  formations  are  referable.  Even  if  all  the
geological  facts,  therefore,  adduced  by  the  author  were  true
and  unquestionable,  yet  the  conclusion  that  certain  chains
were  or  were  not  simultaneously  upraised  is  by  no  means  a
legitimate  consequence.

In  the  third  volume  of  my  first  edition  of  the  Principles,
which  appeared  in  April  1833,  I  controverted  the  views  of
M.  de  Beaumont,  then  just  published,  in  the  same  terms  as
I  have  now  restated  them.  At  that  time  I  took  for  granted
that  the  chronological  date  of  the  newest  rocks  entering  into
the  disturbed  series  of  the  Pyrenees  had  been  correctly
ascertained.  It  now  appears,  however,  that  some  of  the
most  modem  of  those  disturbed  strata  belong  to  the  num-
mnlitic  formation,  which  are  now  regarded  by  the  majority
of  geologists  as  Eocene  or  lower  tertiary.

Perhaps  a  more  striking  illustration  of  the  difficulties  we
encounter,  when  we  attempt  to  apply  the  theory  under  con-
sideration even  to  the  best  known  European  countries,  is
afforded  by  what  is  called  by  de  Beaumont  '  The  System  of
the  Longmynds.'  This  small  chain,  situated  in  Shropshire,
and  having  a  direction  of  N.  25**  E.,  is  the  third  of  the  typical
systems  to  which  other  mountain-ranges  corresponding  in
strike  and  structure  are  compared.  The  date  assigned  to  its
upheaval  is  *  after  the  unfossiliferous  grey wacke,  or  Cambrian
strata,  and  before  the  Silurian.'  But  Sir  B.  I.  Murchison
had  shown  in  1838,  in  his  ^  Silurian  System,'  and  the  British


126  THEORY  OF  SUDDEN  RISE  OF  [Ch.  VIL

Government  surveyors,  since  that  time,  in  their  sections  (about
1845),  that  the  Longmynds  and  other  chains  of  similar  com-
position in  North  Wales  were  elevated  in  posi-Silurian  times.
In  all  of  them  fossiliferous  beds  of  the  lower  Silurian  forma-
tion or  Llandeilo  flags  are  highly  inclined,  and  ofken  verticaL
When,  therefore,  so  grave  an  error  is  detected  in  reg^ard  to
the  age  of  a  typical  chain,  we  are  entitled  to  enquire  with
surprise,  by  what  means  nine  other  parallel  chains  in  France,
Germany,  and  Sweden,  assumed  to  be  ^  ante-Silurian,'  have
been  made  to  agree  precisely  in  date  of  upheaval  with  fhe
LongmyndsP  If  they  are  correctly  represented  as  older
than  the  Silurian  strata,  they  cannot  be  contemporaneous
with  the  Longmynds,  and  this  only  proves  how  little  reliance
can  be  placed  on  parallelism  as  a  test  of  simultaneousness
of  upheaval.  But  in  truth  it  is  impossible,  for  reasons
already  given,  to  demonstrate  that  each  of  those  nine  chains
coincide  in  date  with  one  another,  any  more  than  vnth  the
Longmynds.

It  will  be  seen  in  the  second  volume"^  that  various  opinions
are  entertained  as  to  the  minimum  thickness  which  may
with  probability  be  assigned  to  the  solid  crust  of  the  earth.
According  to  some  calculations  it  cannot  be  less  than  800  or
1000  miles  thick,  and  may  be  more.  Even  if  it  be  solid  to
the  depth  of  a  hundred  miles,  such  a  thickness  would  be
inconsistent  with  M.  E.  de  Beaumont's  hypothesis,  which
requires  a  shell  not  more  than  thirty  miles  thick,  or  even
less.  But  it  is  not  denied  by  those  who  insist  on  the  solidity
of  the  exterior  of  the  planet  to  a  great  depth  that,  though
solid  as  a  whole,  it  may  contain  within  it  vast  lakes  or  seas
of  lava.  If  so,  the  gradual  fusion  of  rocks,  and  the  expansive
power  of  heat  exerted  for  ages,  as  well  as  the  subsequent
contraction  of  the  same  during  slow  refrigeration,  may  have
much  to  do  with  those  movements  of  upheaval  and  subsidence
which  give  origin  to  mountain-chains.  For  these,  as
Dolomieu  has  remarked,  are  *  far  less  important,  propor-
tionally speaking,  than  the  inequalities  on  the  surface  of  an
egg-shell,  which  to  the  eye  appears  smooth.'     A  *  centripetal

*  See  Index, '  Earth,  crust  of/


Ch.  Vn.]  PARALLEL  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.  127

force'  affecting  the  whole  planet  as  it  cools,  seems  a  mightier
cause  than  is  required  to  produce  wrinkles  of  such  insignifi-
cant suse.

In  pursuing  his  investigations,  M.  E.  de  Beaumont  has  of
late  greatly  multiplied  the  number  of  successive  periods  of
instantaneous  upheaval,  admitting  at  the  same  time  that
occasionally  new  lines  of  upthrow  have  taken  the  direction  of
older  ones.'^  These  admissions  render  his  views  much  more
in  harmony  with  the  principles  advocated  in  this  work,  but
they  impair  the  practical  utility  of  parallelism,  considered  as
a  chronological  test ;  for  no  rule  is  laid  down  for  limiting
the  interval,  whether  in  time  or  space,  which  may  separate
two  parallel  lines  of  upheaval  of  different  dates.f  In  his
later  enquiries  he  has  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  the
principal  mountain-ranges,  if  prolonged,  would  intersect  each
other  at  certain  angles,  so  as  to  produce  a  regular  geometric
arrangement,  which  he  calls  a  ^  pentagonal  network.'  This
theory  has  been   ably   discussed  and   controverted  by   Mr.

Hopkins.^

Among  the  various  propositions  above  laid  down  (p.  120),
it  will  be  seen  that  the  sudden  rise  of  the  Andes  is  spoken
of  as  a  modern  event,  but  Mr.  Darwin,  in  his  Geology  of  South
Ajnerica,  has  brought  together  ample  data  in  proof  of  the
local  persistency  of  volcanic  action  throughout  a  long  suc-
cession of  geological  periods,  beginning  with  times  antecedent
to  the  deposition  of  the  oolitic  and  cretaceous  formations  of
Chili,  and  continuing  to  the  historical  epoch.  It  appears
that  some  of  the  parallel  ridges  which  compose  the  Cordil-
leras, instead  of  being  contemporaneous,  were  successively  and
slowly  upheaved  at  widely  different  epochs.  The  whole  range,
after  twice  subsiding  some  thousands  of  feet,  was  brought  up
again  by  a  slow  movement  in  mass,  during  the  era  of  the
Eocene  tertiary  formations,  after  which  the  whole  sank  down
once  more  several  hundred  feet,  to  be  again  uplifted  to  its
present  level  by  a  slow  and  often  interrupted  movement.§

*  Art.  Systemes  de  Montagnes,   p.  %  Anniversary  Address  as  President

775.  of  the  Geol.  Soc.,  Feb.  1853.

t  Comptes  Rendus,  Sept.  1850,  and  §  Darwin's  Geology  of  South  America,

Syst^met  de  Montagues.  p.  248.    London,  1846.


128  UPHEAVAL  AND  SUBSIDENCE  OF  [Ck.  Vn.

In  a  portion  of  this  latter  period  the  *  Pampeaa  mad '  was
formed,  in  which  the  Megatherium,  Mylodon,  and  other
extinct  quadrupeds  are  buried.  This  mud  contains  in  it
recent  species  of  shells,  some  of  them  proper  to  brackish
water,  and  is  believed  by  Mr.  Darwin  to  be  an  estuary  or
delta  deposit.

In  studying  many  chains  of  mountains,  we  find  that  the
strike  or  line  of  outcrop  of  continuous  sets  of  strata,  and  fhe
general  direction  of  the  chain,  may  be  &r  firom  rectilinear.
It  may  even  deviate  from  the  normal  direction  at  an  angle
of  20°  or  30%  as  is  exemplified  in  the  Alleghanies.*  In  like
manner,  trains  of  active  volcanos  and  the  zones  throughout
which  modern  earthquakes  occur  are  often  linear,  but  though
contemporaneous,  all  belonging  to  our  own  epoch,  they  are
not  by  any  means  parallel,  but  some  at  right  angles,  the  one
to  the  other.

Sl(yiv  upheaval  and  subsidence, — Recent  observations  have
disclosed  to  us  the  wonderful  fact,  that  not  only  the  west
coast  of  South  America,  but  also  other  large  areas,  some  of
them  several  thousand  miles  in  circumference,  such  as
Scandinavia,  and  certain  archipelagos  in  the  Pacific,  are
slowly  and  insensibly  rising;  while  other  regions,  such  as
Greenland,  and  parts  of  the  Pacific  and  Indian  oceans,  in
which  atolls  or  circular  coral  islands  abound,  arc  as  gradually
sinking.  That  all  the  existing  continents  and  submarine
abysses  may  have  originated  in  movements  of  this  kind,
continued  throughout  incalculable  periods  of  time,  is  un-
deniable, for  marine  remains  are  found  in  rocks  at  almost  all
elevations  above  the  sea,  and  the  denudation  which  the  dry
land  appears  to  have  suffered,  favours  the  idea  that  it  was
raised  from  the  deep  by  movements  of  the  earth's  crust,
prolonged  throughout  indefinite  periods.  Bain  and  rivers,
aided  sometimes  by  slow  and  sometimes  by  sudden  and*^
violent  movements,  have  undoubtedly  excavated  some  of  the
principal  valleys ;  but  there  are  also  wide  spaces  which  have
been  denuded  in  such  a  manner  as  can  only  be  explained  by
reference  to  the  action  of  waves  and  currents  on  land  slowly
emerging  from  the  deep.

*  See  Student's  Elements,  p.  70.


Ch.  VII.]  PARALLEL  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.  129

It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  there  is  no  analogy  between
the  slow  upheaval  of  broad  plains  or  table  lands,  and  the
manner  in  which  we  must  presume  all  mountain-chains,  with
their  inclined  strata,  to  have  originated.  It  seems,  however,
that  the  Andes  have  been  rising  century  after  century,  at  the
rate  of  several  feet,  while  the  Pampas  on  the  east  have  been
raised  only  a  few  inches  in  the  same  time.  Crossing  from
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  in  a  line  passing  through  Mendoza,
Mr.  Darwin  traversed  a  plain  800  miles  broad,  the  eastern
part  of  which  has  emerged  from  beneath  the  sea  at  a  very
modem  period.  The  slope  from  the  Atlantic  is  at  first  very
gentle,  then  greater,  until  the  traveller  finds,  on  reaching
Mendoza,  that  he  has  gained,  almost  insensibly,  a  height  of
4,000  feet.  The  mountainous  district  then  begins  suddenly,
and  its  breadth  from  Mendoza  to  the  shores  of  the  Pacific  is
120  miles,  the  average  height  of  the  principal  chain  being
firom  16,000  to  16,000  feet,  without  including  some  promi-
nent peaks  which  ascend  much  higher.  Now  all  we  require,
to  explain  the  origin  of  the  principal  inequalities  of  level
here  described,  is  to  imagine,  first  a  zone  of  more  violent
movement  to  the  west  of  Mendoza,  and,  secondly,  to  the  east
of  that  place,  an  upheaving  force,  which  died  away  gradually
as  it  approached  the  Atlantic.  In  short,  we  are  only  called
upon  to  conceive,  that  the  region  of  the  Andes  was  pushed
up  four  feet  in  the  same  period  in  which  the  Pampas  near
Mendoza  rose  one  foot,  and  the  plains  near  the  shores  of  the
Atlantic  one  inch.  In  Europe  the  land  at  the  North  Cape  is
said  to  ascend  about  five  feet  in  a  century ;  farther  to  the
south,  as  at  Gefle,  it  amounts  to  two  or  three  feet  in  the  same
period,  while  at  Stockholm  it  does  not  exceed  three  or  four
inches,  and  at  certain  points  still  farther  south  there  is  no
movement.

But  in  what  manner,  it  is  asked,  can  we  account  for  the
great  lateral  pressure  which  has  been  exerted,  not  only  in  tlie
Andes,  Alps,  and  other  chains,  but  also  on  the  strata  of  many
low  and  nearly  level  countries?  Do  not  the  folding  and
fracture  of  the  beds,  the  anticlinal  and  synclinal  ridges  and
troughs,  as  they  are  called,  and  the  vertical,  and  even  some-
times the  inverted  position  of  the  beds,  imply  an  abruptness

VOL.   I.  K


130  UPHEAVAL  AND  SUBSIDENCE  [Ch.  VIL

and  intensity  in  the  disturbing  force  wholly  different  in  land
and  energy  to  that  which  now  rends  the  rocks  during  ordi-
nary earthquakes  ?  I  shall  treat  more  fully  in  the  second
volume  of  the  probable  subterranean  sources,  whether  of
upward  or  downward  movement,  and  of  great  lateral  pressure,
but  it  may  be  well  briefly  to  state  in  this  place  that  in  our
own  times,  as,  for  example,  in  Chili,  in  1822,  the  volcanic
force  has  overcome  the  resistance,  and  permanently  uplifted  a
country  of  such  vast  extent  that  the  weight  and  volume  of
the  Andes  must  be  insigniflcant  in  comparison,  even  if  we
indulge  the  most  moderate  conjectures  as  to  the  thickness  of
the  earth's  crust  above  the  volcanic  foci.

To  assume  that  any  set  of  strata  with  which  we  are  ac-
quainted are  made  up  of  such  cohesive  and  unyielding  mate-
rials as  to  be  able  to  resist  a  power  of  such  stupendous
energy,  if  its  direction,  instead  of  being  vertical,  happened
to  be  oblique  or  horizontal,  would  be  extremely  rash.  But
if  they  could  yield  to  a  sideway  thrust,  even  in  a  slight
degree,  they  would  become  squeezed  and  folded  to  any
amount  if  subjected  for  a  sufficient  number  of  times  to  the
repeated  action  of  the  same  force.  We  can  scarcely  doubt
that  a  mass  of  rock  several  miles  thick  was  uplifted  in  Chili
ill  1822  and  1835,  and  that  a  much  greater  volume  of  solid
matter  is  upheaved  wherever  the  rise  of  land  is  very  gradual,
as  in  Scandinavia,  the  development  of  heat  being  probably,
in  that  region,  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  sur£a,ce.  K
continents,  rocked,  shaken  and  fissured,  like  the  western
region  of  South  America,  or  very  gently  elevated,  like  Norway
and  Sweden,  do  not  acquire  in  a  few  days  or  hours  an  addi-
tional height  of  several  thousand  feet,  this  can  arise  from  no
lack  of  mechanical  force  in  the  subterranean  moving  cause.
It  must  arise  simply  from  the  antagonist  forces  having  pre-
viously become  nearly  or  quite  balanced,  those  of  expansion
and  resistance  having  approached  an  equilibrium.  The  in-
cumbent crust  of  the  earth  is  never  allowed  to  attain  that
strength  and  coherence  which  would  be  necessary  in  order
to  enable  the  volcanic  force  to  accumulate  and  form  an
explosive  charge  capable  of  producing  a  g^nd  paroxysmal
eruption.   The  subterranean  power,  on  the  contrary,  displays


Ch.  Vn.]  OF  MOUNTAIN-CHAINS.  181

even  in  its  most  energetic  efforts  an  intermittent  and  miti-
gated intensity,  being  never  permitted  to  lay  a  whole  con-
tinent in  mins.  Hence  the  numerous  eruptions  of  lava  from
the  same  vent,  or  chain  of  vents,  and  the  recurrence  of
similar  earthquakes  for  thousands  of  years  aloug  certain
areas  or  zones  of  country.  Hence  the  numerous  monuments
of  the  successive  ejection  and  injection  of  melted  matter  in
ancient  geological  epochs,  and  the  fissures  formed  in  distinct
ages,  and  often  widened  and  filled  at  different  eras.

Among  the  causes  of  lateral  pressure,  the  expansion  by
heat  of  large  masses  of  solid  stone  intervening  between
others  which  have  a  different  degree  of  expansibility,  or
which  happen  not  to  have  their  temperature  raised  at  the
same  time,  may  play  an  important  part.  It  may  also  happen
that  hot  vapours  or  thermal  waters  charged  with  various
mineral  matters  in  solution,  may  permeate  rocks  and  aug-
ment their  volume,  while  giving  rise  to  new  chemical  com-
binations and  a  metamorphic  structure.  We  shall  presently
see,  when  treating  of  the  great  thickness  of  shallow-water
deposits  of  different  geological  periods,  how  repeatedly
some  areas  have  sunk  down  hundreds  or  thousands  of  feet
below  their  original  level,  and  we  can  hardly  doubt  that
much  of  the  bending  of  pliant  strata,  and  the  packing  of  the
same  into  smaller  spaces,  has  taken  place  during  such  sub-
sidence. Whether  the  failure  of  support  be  produced  by  tlie
melting  of  porous  rocks,  which,  when  fluid,  and  subjected  to
great  pressure,  may  occupy  less  room  than  before,  or  which,
by  passing  fix)m  a  pasty  to  a  crystalline  condition,  ^ay,  as
in  the  case  of  granite,  suffer  contraction,  or  whether  the
sinking  be  due  to  the  subtraction  of  lava  driven  elsewhere  to
some  volcanic  orifice,  and  there  forced  outwards,  or  whether
it  be  brought  on  by  the  shrinking  of  solid  and  stony  masses
during  refrigeration,  or  by  the  condensation  of  gases,  or  any
other  imaginable  cause,  we  have  no  reason  to  incline  to  the
idea  that  the  consequent  geological  changes  are  brought
about  so  suddenly,  as  that  large  parts  of  continents  are  swal-
lowed up  at  once  in  unfiithomable  subterranean  abysses.  If
ca\ities  be  formed,  they  will  be  enlarged  gradually,  and  as
gradually  filled.    We  read,  indeed,  accoimts  of  engulphed

K  2


182  UPHEAVAL  AND  SUBSIDENCE  [Ch.  YU.

cities  and  areas  of  limited  extent  which  have  sunk  down
many  yards  at  once;  but  we  have  as  yet  no  authentic
records  of  the  sudden  disappearance  of  mountains,  or  the
submergence  or  emergence  of  great  islands.  On  the  other
hand,  the  creeps  in  coal  mines  ^  demonstrate  that  gravitation
begins  to  act  as  soon  as  a  moderate  quantity  of  matter  is
removed  even  at  a  great  depth.  The  roof  sinks  in,  or  the
floor  of  the  mine  rises,  and  the  bent  strata  ofben  assume  as
regularly  a  curved  and  crumpled  arrangement  as  that  ob-
served on  a  grander  scale  in  mountain-chains.  The  absence,
indeed,  of  chaotic  disorder,  and  the  regularity  of  the  plica-
tions in  geological  formations  of  high  antiquity,  although
not  unfrequently  adduced  to  prove  the  unity  and  instan-
taneousness  of  the  disturbing  force,  might  with  far  gfreater
propriety  be  brought  forward  as  an  argument  in  favour  of
the  successive  application  of  some  irresistible  but  moderated
force.

In  conclusion,  I  may  observe  that  the  real  point  on  which
the  whole  controversy  turns  is  the  relative  amount  of  work
done  by  mechanical  force  in  given  quantities  of  time,  past
and  present.  Before  we  can  determine  the  relative  intensity
of  the  force  employed,  we  must  have  some  fixed  standard  by
which  to  measure  the  time  expended  in  its  development  at
two  distinct  periods.  It  is  not  the  magnitude  of  the  effects,
however  gigantic  their  proportions,  which  can  inform  us  in
the  slightest  degree  whether  the  operation  was  sudden  pr
gradual,  insensible  or  paroxysmal.  It  must  be  shown  that
a  slow  process  could  never  in  any  series  of  ages  give  rise  4o
the  same  results.

The  advocate  of  paroxysmal  energy  might  assume  an  xmi-
form  and  fixed  rate  of  variation  in  times  past  and  present
for  the  animate  world,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  dying-out  and
coming-in  of  species,  and  then  endeavour  to  prove  that  the
changes  of  the  inanimate  world  have  not  gone  on  in  a
corresponding  ratio.  But  the  adoption  of  such  a  standard  of
comparison  would  lead,  I  suspect,  to  a  theory  by  no  means
favourable  to  the  pristine  intensity  of  natural  causes.  That
the  present  state  of  the  organic  world  is  not  stationaiy,  can

*  See  Lyell's  Elements  of  Geology,  p.  50 ;  and  Student'i  Elements,  p.  66.


Ch.  Vnj  OF  MOUNTAIN-CHAINa  183

be  fairly  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  some  species  are  known
to  have  become  extinct  in  the  course  even  of  the  last  three
centuries,  and  that  the  exterminating  causes  always  in  acti-
Tity,  both  on  land  and  in  the  waters,  are  very  numerous.
But  granting  that  a  secular  variation  in  the  zoological  and
botanical  worlds  is  going  on,  and  is  by  no  means  wholly
inappreciable  to  the  naturalist,  still  it  is  certainly  far  less
manifest  than  the  revolution  always  in  progress  in  the  in-
organic world.  Indeed  the  quantity  of  sediment  annually
carried  down  by  several  of  the  most  important  rivers  from
the  land  to  the  sea,  has  already  been  so  far  measured  as  to  en-
able the  physicist  by  a  simple  arithmetical  calculation  to  show
approximately  in  how  many  years  the  minimum  of  change
brought  about  by  such  a  process  would  be  capable  of  excavat-
ing the  deepest  vaUeys,  and  altering  the  height  and  volame
of  continental  masses.  Or,  if  we  turn  to  the  igneous  forces,
we  find  that  every  year  some  volcanic  eruptions  take  place,
and  a  rude  estimate  might  be  made  of  the  number  of  cubic
feet  of  lava  and  scorise  poured  or  cast  out  of  various  craters.
The  amount  of  mud  and  sand  deposited  in  deltas,  and  the
advance  of  new  land  upon  the  sea,  or  the  annual  retreat  of
wasting  sea-cliffs,  are  changes  the  amount  of  which  might  be
roughly  estimated.  The  extent  of  land  raised  above  or  de-
pressed below  the  level  of  the  sea  might  also  be  computed,
and  the  change  arising  from  such  movements  in  a  century
might  be  conjectured.  Suppose  the  average  rise  of  the  land
in  some  parts  of  Scandinavia  to  be  as  much  as  two  and  a
h*alf  feet  in  a  hundred  years,  the  present  sea-coast  might  be
uplifted  850  feet  in  fourteen  thousand  years ;  but  we  should
have  no  reason  to  anticipate,  from  any  zoological  data
hitherto  acquired,  that  the  molluscous  fauna  of  the  northern
seas  would  in  tliat  lapse  of  years  undergo  any  sensible  amount
of  variation.  We  discover  sea-beaches  in  Norway  700  feet
high,  in  which  the  shells  are  identical  with  those  now  living,
although  their  geographical  distribution  has  somewhat
altered,  the  fossil  species  constituting  an  assemblage  which  at
present  characterises  the  sea  several  degrees  farther  north.
The  rise  of  land  in  Scandinavia,  however  insensible  to  the
inhabitants,  has  evidently  been  rapid  when  compared  to  the


134  UPHE.VVAL  AND  SUBSIDENCE  OF  MOUNTAINS.    [Ch.  VU.

rate  of  contemporaneous  change  in  tlie  testaceous  fauna  of
the  German  Ocean.  Were  we  to  wait,  therefore,  till  the
molliisca  shall  have  undergone  as  much  alteration  as  they
underwent  between  any  two  of  the  twelve  larger  groups  fix)m
the  Laurentian  to  the  Pliocene  (enumerated  in  the  table  at
the  end  of  this  chapter),  or  even  in  the  time  intervening  be-
tween the  minor  subdivisions  of  some  of  these  groups,  what
stupendous  revolutions  in  physical  geography  ought  we  not
to  expect,  and  how  many  mountain-chains  might  not  be
produced  by  the  repetition  of  shocks  of  moderate  violence,  or
by  movements  not  even  perceptible  to  man  !

If  we  turn  from  the  moUusca  to  the  vegetable  kingdom,
and  ask  the  botanist  how  many  earthquakes  and  volcanic
eruptions  might  be  expected,  and  how  much  the  relative  level
of  land  and  sea  might  be  altered,  or  how  far  the  principal
deltas  will  encroach  upon  the  ocean,  or  the  sea-cliffs  recede
from  the  present  shores,  before  the  species  of  European  forest-
trees  will  die  out,  he  would  reply  that  such  alterations  in  the
inanimate  world  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely  before  he
should  have  reason  to  anticipate,  by  reference  to  any  known
data,  that  the  existing  species  of  trees  in  our  forests  would
disappear  and  give  place  to  others.  In  a  word,  the  movement
of  the  inorganic  world  is  obvious  and  palpable,  and  might  be
likened  to  the  minute-hand  of  a  clock,  the  progress  of  which
can  be  seen  and  heard,  whereas  the  fluctuations  of  the  living
creation  are  nearly  invisible,  and  resemble  the  motion  of  the
hour-hand  of  a  timepiece.  It  is  only  by  watching  it  atten-
tively for  some  time,  and  comparing  its  relative  position  after
an  interval,  that  we  can  prove  the  reality  of  its  motion.*

*  Sec  tlic  Author  s  Anniversarj  Ad-      vol.  vi.  p.  46,  from  which  some  of  the
dress,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  1850,      above  passages  are  extracted.


Ch.  Vn.]     GENERAL  TABLE  OF  FOSSIUFEROUS  STRATA.  135


]
1
t


y&ZOCBVB.


oc


CXaTAGBOVB.


JiniA.88ZG.


•DSYONIAN.


J


[  SILUBIAN.


<      ^


2  ^
o


N


kH

•

«

<

o

p

».S

>^.

oO

C

gi

i^

/


/


o

Hi

o


a°^


(4

(1h


/


/


o

O

w


Abbidoxd  Gbkbral  Tablb  of  Fossilifeboxjs  Strata;    showing  their  chrono-

luxlical  8uccb88ion  altd  order  of  superposition.*
1.  BBCENT.

908T-TZSTZAST.

S.  F06T-FU0CENE.

t.  NXWBB  FLIOCEKE.

4.  OLDER  PLIOCBN&

5.  TJPFEB  HIOCBNE.
«.  LOWEB  lOOCENK

7.  UPPER  EOCENE.

8.  MIDDLE  EOCENE.

9.  LOWER  EOCENE.

10.  MABSTRICHT  BEDS.

11.  WHTTB  CHALK.
IS.  CHLORinO  SERIES.
IS.  GAT7LT.
14.  NEOCOIOAN.
U.  WBALDSN.
l€.  FURRECK  BEDS.

17.  PORTLAND  STONE.

18.  KTlfMERTDGE  CLAY.

19.  CORAL  RAG.

50.  OXFORD  CLAY.

51.  GREAT  or  BATH  OOLITE.
«.  INFERIOR  OOLITE.
SS.  LIAS.

Si.  UPPER  TRIAS.
SS.  MIDDLE  TRIAa
28.  LOWER  TRLAS.

57.  FERIOAN.

58.  COAL-MEASXTRES.

39.  CARBONIFEROUS
LDIESTONE.


C

S3
O

Hi


90.  UPPER
31.  MIDDLE
33.  LOWER

33.  UPPER

34.  LOWER

33.  UPPER     )

V  CAMBRIAN.
36w  LOWER    j

37.  UPPER     \

\  LAUBSNTIAN.

38.  LOWER    j

*  For  a  more  detailed  and  extended  list  see  Elements  of  Geology,  6th  edit,  p.  102 ;
and  Studtnt'f  Elements,  p.  109.


136


CHAPTER  VIII.

DIFFEBENCE  IN  TEXTURE  OF  TEE  OLDEB  AND  NEWER  ROCKS.

COK80IJDATI0N  OF  FOSSILTFEROUS  STRATA — SOME  DEPOSITS  ORIOIKALLT  SOLID
— TRANSITION  AND  SLATY  TJ£XTCHR^R¥STALLINR  CHARACTER  OF  PLUTONIC
AND  METAMORFHIC  ROC'XS — THEORY  OF  THEIR  ORIGIN — ESMOmALLT  SVB-
TKRRANKJkN — NO  PROOFS  THAT  THEY  WERE  PR0DT7CED  MORE  ABUNDANTLY  AT
KKMOTE   PERIODS.

Consolidation  of  strata. — ^Another  argument  in  favoor
of  the  dissimilarity  of  tlie  canses  operating  at  remote  and
recent  eras  has  been  derived  by  many  geologists  from  the
more  compact,  stony,  and  crystalline  texture  of  the  older  as
compared  to  the  newer  rocks.

This  subject  may  be  considered,  first,  in  reference  to  the
fossiliferous  strata;  and,  secondly,  in  reference  to  those
crystalline  and  stratified  rocks  which  contain  no  organic
remains,  such  as  gneiss  and  mica-schist.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  former  of  these  classes,  or  the  fossiliferous,
are  generally  more  compact  and  stony  in  proportion  as  they
are  more  ancient.  It  is  also  certain  that  a  great  part  of
them  were  originally  in  a  soft  and  incoherent  state,  and  that
they  have  been  since  consolidated.  Thus  we  find  occasionally
that  shingle  and  sand  have  been  agglutinated  firmly  together
by  a  ferruginous  or  siliceous  cement,  or  that  carbonate  of
lime  in  solution  has  been  introduced,  so*  as  to  bind  together
materials  previously  incoherent.  Organic  remains  have
sometimes  suffered  a  singular  transformation,  as,  for  example,
^^'liere  shells,  corals  and  wood  are  silicified,  their  calcareous
or  ligneous  matter  having  been  replaced  by  nearly  pure
silica.  The  constituents  of  some  beds  have  probably  set  and
become  hard  for  the  first  time  when  they  emerged  fix>m
beneath  the  water.


Ch.  Vra.]     TEXTUBE  OF  OLDER  AND  NEWER  ROCKS.  137

But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  observe  in  certain  formations
BOW  in  progress,  particnlarlj  in  coral  reefs,  and  in  deposits
from  the  waters  of  mineral  springs,  both  calcareous  and
siliceous,  that  the  texture  of  rocks  may  be  stony  from  the
first.  This  circumstance  may  account  for  exceptions  to  the
general  rule,  not  unfrequently  met  with,  where  solid  strata
are  superimposed  on  others  of  a  plastic  and  incoherent  nature,
as  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  where  the  tertiary  forma-
tions, consisting  often  of  compact  limestone  and  siliceous
grit,  are  more  stony  than  underlying  beds  of  the  same
series.

It  will  readily  be  understood,  that  the  various  solidifying
causes,  including  those  above  enumerated,  together  with  the
pressure  of  incumbent  rocks  and  the  influence  of  subterranean
beat,  must  all  of  them  require  time  in  order  to  exert  their
full  power.  H  in  the  course  of  ages  they  modify  the  aspect
and  internal  structure  of  stratified  deposits,  they  will  give
rise  to  a  general  distinctness  of  character  in  the  older  as
contrasted  with  the  newer  formations.

Tramition  texture. — In  the  original  classification  of  Werner,
the  highly  crystaUine  rocks,  such  as  granite  and  gneiss,
which  contain  no  organic  remains,  were  called  primary,  and
the  fossiliferous  strata  secondary,  while  to  another  class  of  an
age  intermediate  between  the  primary  and  secondary  he  gave
the  name  of  transition.  They  were  termed  transition  because
they  partook  in  some  degree  in  their  mineral  composition  of
the  nature  of  the  most  crystalline  rocks,  such  as  gneiss  and
mica-schist,  while  they  resembled  the  fossiliferous  series  in
containing  occasionally  organic  remains,  and  also  in  exhibit-
ing evident  signs  of  a  mechanical  origin.  It  was* at  first
imag^ed,  that  the  rocks  having  this  intermediate  texture
had  been  all  deposited  subsequently  to  the  series  called
primary,  and  before  all  the  more  earthy  and  fossiliferous
formations.  But  when  the  relative  position  and  organic
remains  of  these  transition  rocks  were  better  understood,  it
was  perceived  that  they  did  not  all  belong  to  one  period.
On  the  contrary,  the  same  mineral  characters  were  found  in
strata  of  very  di£ferent  ages,  and  some  formations  occurring


138  DIFFERENCE  IN  TEXTURE  OF  [Ch.  Vm.

in  the  Alps,  which  several  of  the  ablest  scholars  of  Werner
had  determined  to  be  transition,  were  ultimately  ascertained,
by  means  of  their  fossil  contents  and  position,  to  be  members
of  the  Cretaceous,  and  even  of  the  nummulitic  or  older  Ter-
tiary period.  These  strata  had,  in  fact,  acquired  the  transition
texture  from  the  influence  of  causes  which,  since  their  deposi-
tion, had  modified  their  internal  arrangement.

Texture  and  origin  of  Plutonic  and  metamorphic  rocks. —
Among  the  most  singular  of  the  changes  superinduced  on
rocks,  we  have  occasionally  to  include  the  slaty  texture,  the
divisional  planes  of  which  sometimes  intersect  the  true  places
of  stratification,  and  even  pass  directly  through  imbedded
fossils.  If,  then,  the  crystalline,  the  slaty,  and  other  modes
of  arrangement,  once  deemed  characteristic  of  certain  periodn
in  the  history  of  the  earth,  have  in  reality  been  assumed  by
fossiliferous  rocks  of  different  ages  and  at  different  times,  we
are  prepared  to  enquire  whether  the  same  may  not  be  true  of
Hie  most  highly  crystalline  state,  such  as  that  of  gneiss,  mica-
schist,  and  statuary  marble.  That  the  peculiar  character-
istics of  such  rocks  are  really  due  to  a  variety  of  modifying
causes  is  now  very  generally  admitted,  and  the  differences  of
opinion  among  geologists  which  still  prevail,  relate  chiefly  to
the  manner  in  which  the  transformation  has  been  brought
about.  According  to  the  original  Neptunian  theory,  all  the
crystalline  formations  were  precipitated  from  a  universal
menstruum  or  chaotic  fluid  antecedently  to  the  creation  of
animals  and  plants,  the  unstratified  granite  having  been  first
thrown  down  so  as  to  serve  as  a  floor  or  foimdation  on  which
gneiss  and  other  stratified  rocks  might  repose.  Afterwards,
when  the  igneous  origin  of  granite  was  no  longer  disputed,
many  conceived  that  a  thermal  ocean  enveloped  the  globe,  at
a  time  when  the  first-formed  crust  of  granite  was  cooling,
but  when  it  still  retained  much  of  its  heat.  The  hot  waters
of  this  ocean  held  in  solution  the  ingredients  of  gneiss,  mica-
schist,  hornblende-schist,  clay-slate,  and  marble,  rocks
which  were  precipitated,  one  after  the  other,  in  a  crystalline
form.  No  fossils  could  be  enclosed  in  them,  the  high  tempe-
rature of  the  fluid,  and  the  quantity  of  mineral  matter  which


Ch.  Vmj  THE  OLDER  AND  NEWER  ROCKS.  189

it  held  in  Bolution,  rendering  it  unfit  for  the  support  of
organic  beings.

It  would  h4  inconsistent  with  the  plan  of  this  work  to
enter  here  into  a  detailed  account  of  what  I  have  elsewhere
termed  the  meta/morphic  theory ;  *  but  I  may  state  that  it  is
now  demonstrable  in  some  countries  that  fossiliferous  forma-
tions, some  of  them  older  than  the  Cambrian  strata  of  our
table,  p.  185,  others  of  the  age  of  the  Silurian  strata,  as  near
Christiana  in  Norway,  others  belonging  to  the  Oolitic  period,
as  around  Carrara  in  Italy,  and  some  even  of  tertiary  date,  as
in  the  Swiss  Alps,  have  been  converted  into  gneiss,  mica-
schist,   or  statuary  marble.      The  transmutatiou  has  been
effected  by  the  influence  of  subterranean  heat  acting  under
great  pressure,  and  aided  by  thermal  water  or  steam  and
other  gases  permeating  the  porous  rocks,  and  giving  rise  to
various  chemical  decompositions  and  new  combinations,  the
whole  of  which  action  has  been  termed  '  plutonic,'  as  express-
ing in  one  word  all  the  modifying  causes  brought  into  play
at  great  depths,  and  under  conditions  never  exemplified  at
the  surfiaice.  t    To  this  Plutonic  action  the  fusion  of  granite
itself  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  the  development
of  the  metamorphic  texture  in  sedimentary  strata,  may  be
attributed  ;  and  in  accordance  with  these  views  the  age  of
each  metamorphic  formation  may  be  said  to  be  twofold,  for
we  have  first  to  consider  the  period  when  it  originated,  as  an
aqueous  deposit,  in  the  form  of  mud,  sand,  marl,  or  lime-
stone ;  secondly,  the  date  at  which  it  acquired  a  crystalline
texture.     The  same  strata,  therefore,  may,  according  to  this
view,  be  very  ancient  in  reference  to  the  time  of  their  deposi-
tion, and  comparatively  modern  in  regard  to  the  period  of
their  assuming  the  metamorphic  character.

No  proofs  that  these  crystalline  rocks  were  produced  more
abundantly  at  remote  periods, — Several  modem  writers,  with-
out denying  the  truth  of  the  Plutonic  or  metamorphic  theory,
still  contend  that  the  crystalline  and  non-fossiliferous  forma-
tions, whether  stratified  or  unstratified,  such  as  gneiss  and

*  See  Lyell^s  Elements,  ch.xxxT.;  and  t  See  Student's  Elements:  Remarks

Student*!  Elements,  p.  560.  on  hydrothermal  action,  p.  568.


140  DIFFERENCE  IN  TEXTUBE  OF  [Ch.  VIIL

granite,  are  essentially  ancient  as  a  class  of  rocks.  They
were  generated,  say  they,  most  abundantly  in  a  primeyal
state  of  the  globe,  since  which  time  the  quantity  produced
has  been  always  on  the  decrease,  until  it  became  very
inconsiderable  in  the  Oolitic  and  Cretaceous  periods,  and
quite  evanescent  before  the  commencement  of  the  tertiary
epoch.

Now  the  justness  of  these  views  depends  almost  entirely  on
the  question  whether  granite,  gneiss,  and  other  rocks  of  the
same  order  ever  originated  as  such  at  the  surface,  or  whether,
according  to  the  opinions  above  adopted,  they  are  essentially
subterranean  in  their  origin,  and  therefore  entitled  to  the
appellation  of  hypogene.  If  they  were  formed  superficially  in
their  present  state,  and  as  copiously  in  the  modem  as  in  the
more  ancient  periods,  we  ought  to  see  a  greater  abundance
of  tertiary  and  secondary  than  of  primary  granite  and  gneiss ;
but  if  we  adopt  the  theory  of  their  subterranean  origin,  their
rapid  diminution  in  volume  among  the  visible  rocks  in  the
earth's  crust  in  proportion  as  we  investigate  the  formations  of
newer  date,  is  quite  intelligible.  If  a  melted  mass  of  matter
be  now  cooling  very  slowly  at  the  depth  of  several  miles
beneath  the  crater  of  an  active  volcano,  it  must  remain  in-
visible until  great  revolutions  in  the  earth's  crust  have  been
brought  about.  So  also  if  stratified  rocks  are  now  by  hydro-
thermal  action,  or  under  the  influence  of  intensely  heated
steam  and  other  gases,  undergoing  semi-fiision  and  recon-
struction far  underground,  it  will  probably  require  the  lapse  of
many  periods  before  they  will  be  forced  up  to  the  surface  and
exposed  to  view  by  denudation,  even  at  a  single  point.  To
effect  this  purpose  there  may  be  need  of  as  great  a  develop-
ment of  subterranean  movement  as  that  which  in  the  Alps,
Andes,  and  Himalayas  has  raised  strata  containing  marine
fossil  shells  and  ammonites  to  the  height  of  8,000,  14,000,
and  16,000  feet.  By  parity  of  reasoning  we  can  hardly  expect
that  any  tertiary  rocks  of  the  hypogene  class  will  have  been
brought  within  the  reach  of  human  observation,  save  at  a  few
isolated  points,  seeing  that  the  emergence  of  such  rocks  must
always  be  so  long  posterior  to  the  date  of  their  origin ;  and.


Ch.  Vm.]  THE  OLDER  AND  NEWER  ROCKS.  141

as  extensive  denudation  must  also  combine  with  upheaval
before  they  can  be  displayed  at  the  surface  throughout  wide
areas,  formations  of  this  class  cannot  become  generally  visible
until  so  much  time  has  elapsed  as  to  confer  on  them  a  high
relative  antiquity.

All  geologists  who  reflect  on  subterranean  movements  now
going  on,  and  the  eruptions  of  active  volcanos,  are  con-
vinced that  great  changes  are  now  continually  in  progress
in  the  interior  of  the  earth's  crust  far  out  of  sight.  They
must  be  conscious,  therefore,  that  the  inaccessibility  of  the
regions  in  which  these  alterations  are  taking  place  compels
them  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  a  great  part  of  the  working
of  existing  causes,  so  that  they  can  only  form  vague  conjec-
tures in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  products  which  volcanic
heat,  aided  by  steam  and  various  gases,  may  elaborate  under
great  pressure.

When  therefore  they  find  in  mountain-chains  of  high
antiquity,  that  what  was  once  the  interior  of  the  earth's
crust  has  since  been  forced  outwards  by  mechanical  violence
or  exposed  to  view  by  denudation,  they  may  expect  to  behold
some  of  the  nether  formed  rocks  of  remote  eras,  the  modern
representatives  of  which  they  cannot  see.  They  may  be
prepared  to  find  that  these  rocks  wUl  differ  wholly  from  the
fossiliferous  strata  deposited  at  the  surface  and  from  the  lava
and  scoria)  thrown  out  by  modem  volcanos  in  the  open  air.
They  may  recognise  in  granite,  gneiss,  mica-schist,  horn-
blende schist,  and  other  crystalline  rocks,  products  of  a  nature
and  aspect  distinct  from  those  which  they  have  observed  in
process  of  formation,  and  these  they  may  therefore  be  ready
to  refer  to  the  action  of  subterranean  heat  and  gases  under
great  pressure.

The  contrast  in  the  characters,  both  positive  and  negative,
of  such  rocks  with  those  which  are  known  to  be  of  superficial
origin  is  a  reason  for  referring  them  to  operations  which
the  geologist  has  had  no  opportunities  of  observing.  The
anomalous  appearances  are  the  result,  not  of  an  order  of
things  which  has  passed  away,  but  of  a  set  of  conditions
removed  by  their  very  nature  from  the  possibility  of  being


142  TEXTURE  OF  OLDEB  AND  NEWEB  BOOKS.     [CH.VnL

observed.  Thej  are  not  the  monuments  of  the  primeval
period,  bearing  inscribed  upon  them  in  obsolete  characters
the  words  and  phrases  of  a  dead  language ;  but  they  teach
us  that  part  of  the  living  language  of  nature  which  we
cannot  learn  by  our  daily  intercourse  with  what  passes  on
the  habitable  surface.


143


CHAPTER  IX.

THEORY    OF    THE     PBOGBESSIVE     DEVELOPMENT    OF    OBGANIO
LIFE   AT   SUCCESSIVE   OEOLOOICAL   PERIODS.

THBORT  OF  THB  PROORBSSIVB  DEVKLOPMSNT  OF  ORGAKIC  LIFB — HYIDENCH  IN
ITS  SUPPORT  DKRITBD  FBOM  FOSSIL  PLAKTS — FOSSIL  AKIMALS — M0LLU8CA —
WHETHSB  THET  HATB  ADTANCEO  IN  GRADB  8INCB  THE  EARLIEST  BOCKS
WBRB  FOB]nn>— mOH  ANTIQUmr  of  CEPHALOPODA — SLIGHT  INDICATIONS  OF
PB0GRBS8  AFFORDED  BT  FOSSIL  FISH — FOSSIL  AMPHIBIA — TRUE  REPTILBS —
TRANSITIONAL  LINK  BETWEEN  REPTILES  AND  BIBDS — LAND  ANIMALS  OF
BEMOTB  PERIODS  WHT  RARE— FOSSIL  BIRDS — MAMMALIA — STONESFIELD  MAR-
EUPIAIil — AB8ENCB  OF  CETACBA  DC  SECONDARY  ROCKS— SUCCESSnTE  APPEARANCE
OF  THB  ORXAT  SUB-CLASSES  OF  MAMMALIA  OF  ADTANCINO  GRADE  IN  CHRONO-
LOGICAL ORDER — MODERN  ORIGIN  OF  MAN — INTRODUCTION  OF  MAN,  TO  WHAT
■ZTSNT  CHANGE  DC  THB  SYSTEM.

In  the  last  three  chapters  vre  considered  whether  the  doctrine
of  the  greater  intensity  of  the  aqueous  and  igneous  forces  in
remote  ages  has  any  foundation  in  fact,  and  whether  the
peculiar  crystalline  texture  of  many  of  the  older  rocks  favours
the  opinion  that  the  former  changes  in  the  earth's  crust,  of
which  geology  treats,  were  brought  about  by  other  than
ordinary  causes.  We  may  now  discuss  the  arguments
derived  from  the  organic  creation  in  support  of  the  notion
that  there  is  a  want  of  analogy  and  continuity  between  the
past  and  present  course  of  events  in  the  natural  world.  The
objections  on  this  head  were  formally  stated  in  1830,  by  the
late  Sir  Humphry  Davy.  *  It  is  impossible,'  he  affirms,  *  to
defend  the  proposition,  that  the  present  order  of  things  is
the  ancient  and  constant  order  of  nature,  only  modified  by
eldsting  laws  :  in  those  strata  which  are  deepest,  and  which
must,  consequently,  be  supposed  to  be  the  earliest  deposited,
forms  even  of  vegetable  life  are  rare ;  shells  and  vegetable
remains  are  found  in  the  next  order ;  the  bones  of  fishes  and
oviparous  reptiles  exist  in  the  following  class  ;  the  remains


144  DEVELOPMENT  OF  OEGANIC  LIFE.  [Ch.  IX.

of  birds,  with  those  of  the  same  genera  mentioned  before,  in
the  next  order ;  those  of  quadrupeds  of  extinct  species  in  a
still  more  recent  class ;  and  it  is  only  in  the  loose  and
slightly  consolidated  strata  of  gravel  and  sand,  and  which
are  usually  called  diluvial  formations,  that  the  remains  of
animals  such  as  now  people  the  globe  are  found,  with  others
belonging  to  extinct  species.  But,  in  none  of  these  forma-
tions, whether  called  secondary,  tertiary,  or  diluvial,  have
the  remains  of  man,  or  any  of  his  works,  been  discovered ;
and  whoever  dwells  upon  this  subject  must  be  convinced,
that  the  present  order  of  things,  and  the  comparatively
recent  existence  of  man  as  the  master  of  the  globe,  is  as  cer-
tain as  the  destruction  of  a  former  and  a  different  order,  and
the  extinction  of  a  number  of  living  forms  which  have  no
types  in  being.  In  the  oldest  secondary  strata  there  are  no
remains  of  such  animals  as  now  belong  to  the  surface ;  and
in  the  rocks,  which  may  be  regarded  as  more  recently
deposited,  these  remains  occur  but  rarely,  and  with  abun-
dance of  extinct  species ; — there  seems,  as  it  were,  a  gradual
approach  to  the  present  system  of  things,  and  a  succession
of  destructions  and  creations  preparatory  to  the  existence  of
man.*

In  the  above  passages  the  author  has  done  little  more  than
reiterate  the  theory  of  progression  which  Lamarck  had  pro-
posed about  thirty  years  before  in  his  Philosophy  of  Zoology.
Another  interval  of  more  than  forty  years  has  again  elapsed
since  Davy  wrote,  one  marked  by  ever-increasing  activity  in
palseontological  research,  yet  the  new  facts  brought  to  light
have  scarcely  overturned  any  of  the  leading  propositions
above  enumerated,  although  several  of  them  have  required  to
be  considerably  modified.  Fossil  remains  of  man  and  rude
works  of  art  have,  it  is  true,  been  detected  in  the  formations
termed  by  Sir  H.  Davy  diluvial,  in  which  the  bones  of  the
mammoth  and  other  extinct  quadrupeds  so  frequently  occur.
But,  although  these  discoveries  have  enabled  us  to  trace
back  the  memorials  of  our  race  one  short  step  farther  into
the  past,  tliey  have  not  shaken  our  belief  in  the  extremely
modern  date  of  the  human  era,  as  compared  to  that  of  a

*  Sir  H.  Davy,  Consolations  in  Travel :  Dialogue  IIL  '  The  Unknown.*


Ch.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  145

series  of  antecedent  epochs,  each  of  them  characterised  bj
distinct  species  of  animals  and  plants.^  The  dates  of  the
saccessive  appearance  of  certain  classes,  orders,  and  genera,
those  of  higher  organisation  always  characterising  rocks
newer  in  the  series,  have  often  been  mis-stated,t  and  the
detection  of  chronological  errors  has  engendered  doubts  as  to
the  soundness  of  the  theory  of  progression.  In  these  doubts
I  myself  indulged  freely  in  former  editions  of  this  work.
But  after  numerous  corrections  have  been  made  as  to  the
date  of  the  earliest  signs  of  life  on  the  globe,  and  the  periods
when  more  highly  organised  beings,  whether  animal  or
vegetable,  first  entered  on  the  stage,  the  original  theory  may
be  defended  in  a  form  but  slightly  modified.

Fossil  Plants. — To  speak  first  of  the  vegetable  creation —
recent  investigations  have  made  it  more  and  more  clear  that  '
the  oldest  known  fiora  was  characterised  by  a  great  predomi-
nance of  cryptogamous  plants.  In  the  Devonian  flora  of
North  America  the  lycopodiaceous  genera,  such  as  the  Lepi-
dodendra,  were  the  most  numerous,  while  the  associated
plants,  such  as  Sigillarise,  ferns,  and  Coniferse,  although  they
are  specifically  distinct,  agree  generically  with  those  of  the
carboniferous  strata  which  come  next  in  succession.  It  had
been  suggested  that  the  absence,  in  the  true  coal,  of  the
higher  grade  of  fiowering  plants,  (the  dicotyledonous  angio-
sperms  of  Brongniart,)  which  now  constitute  three-fourths  of
the  vegetation  of  the  globe,  might  be  explained  by  supposing
that  the  fossil  species  represent  those  only  which  grew  in  a
particular  class  of  stations,  such  as  low  swamps  bordering
the  sea;  and  that  more  highly  organised  genera  and  species
would  have  become  known  to  us,  had  we  been  acquainted
with  the  fiora  of  the  higher  and  mountainous  regions.  But
although  it  is  now  universally  admitted  that  the  plants  which
form  the  bulk  of  the  coal  grew  on  the  spots  where  we  now
find  that  fuel,  yet  there  are  many  vegetable  remains  in  the

*  In  my  work  on   the  Antiquity  of  and  Adolphe   Brongniart,   as    applied

Man.    1863,   I  bare  given,  p.  295,   a  both  to  the  animal  and  vegetable  worlds,

coDcise   statoment  of  the  doctrine   of  which  I  need  not  repeat  in  the  present

progreesion   as    laid   down    by  Prof.  chapter.

Sedgwick,   the  late  Hugh  Miller,  M.  t  See  my  Elements  of  Geology,  p.

Agassiz,  Prof.  Owen,  and  Profs.  Bronn  853.

VOL.   I.  L


146  DEVELOPMENT  OF  ORGANIC  LIFE  [Ck.  IX.

associated  sandstones,  which  must  have  been  drifted  firom  a
distance  or  washed  down  by  great  rivers  from  higher  groands
to  the  sea-coast.  Nor  can  we  point  to  a  marsh  in  the  delta
of  any  existing  river,  where  ferns  and  other  Cryptogams
together  with  Coniferse  flourish,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  the
more  highly  organised  plants.

Certain  fruits  and  leaves  of  the  coal-measures,  formerly
supposed  to  be  those  of  palms,  are  now  very  generally  referred
to  plants  of  less  perfect  structure,  being  variously  classed  by
botanists  as  cycads,  conifers,  or  lycopodiacesB.  There  seems
also  ground  for  suspecting,  in  accordance  with  the  suggestion
of  Dr.  Dawson,  that  the  flora  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  North
America  was  of  a  more  upland  character  than  that  of  the  coal,
and  the  mere  fact  of  our  having  traced  this  ancient  vegetation
(the  Devonian  and  Carboniferous),  consisting  of  several  hun-
dred species,  over  so  vast  an  area  in  space,  in  Europe  and
North  America,  and  through  such  a  lapse  of  ages,  makes  it
probable  that  we  have  already  obtained  a  correct  notion  of  the
leading  features  of  the  botany,  both  upland  and  lowland,  of
those  palseozoic  times.  The  almost  entire  want  in  this  fossil
flora,  the  first  which  geology  has  yet  revealed  to  us,  of  plants
of  the  most  complex  organisation  is  very  striking,  for  not  a
single  dicotyledonous  angiosperm  has  yet  been  proved  to
exist  in  any  primary  formation,  and  only  one  undoubted
monocotyledon,^  although  these  two  great  divisions  taken
together  form  four-fifths  of  our  living  vegetation.

In  regard  to  secondary  or  mesozoic  times,  all  botanists  agree
that  palms,  with  some  other  monocotyledons,  were  already  in
existence ;  but  it  seems  doubtful  whether  any  trace  of  a
dicotyledonous  augriosperm  has  yet  been  detected  in  rocks
of  the  Triassic,  Oolitic,  or  Lower  Cretaceous  (Neocomian),
periods.  Conifers,  cycads,  and  ferns  abounded,  but  the
plants  which  now  constitute  the  larger  portion  of  our  flora,
and  comprise  all  the  native  European  trees  except  those  of
the  fir  tribe,  seem  not  to  have  come  into  being,  and  must  cer-
tainly have  been  extremely  rare  before  the  Upper  Cretaceous

*  Pot  hocitf^  Grantonii.'P  Ateraon,  from  plate  3.  1844.  This  plant,  which  is
the  coal  shale  of  Granton  near  Edin-  referred  to  the  family  Aroidee,  has  the
burgh.    Edin.  Bot.  Soc.  Trans.  voL  i.      spike  well  preserred.


Ch.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  147

era.  It  is  in  Btrata  of  this  latter  age,  at  A  ix-la-Chapelle,  that
we  at  length  meet  with  an  assemblage  of  fossil  plants,  in
which  the  principal  classes  and  orders  of  the  living  vegetable
creation  are  fhlly  represented.  The  variety  and  completeness
of  the  fossil  flora  then  attained  continued  to  be  conspicuous
throughout  a  long  succession  of  tertiary  ages,  in  which  the
forms  were  perpetually  changing,  but  always  becoming
more  and  more  like,  generically  and  specifically,  to  those  now
in  being.  On  the  whole  there  appears  therefore  to  have  been
an  advance  in  the  fossil  flora  in  the  course  of  ages,  although
the  cryptogamous  plants  of  the  Primary  periods  were  some  of
them  more  perfect  or  of  a  higher  grade  than  any  of  the  same
class  now  living.  The  Gymnogens  (cycads  and  conifers)
became  more  abundant,  as  also  the  Monocotyledons  in  the
Secondary  epochs,  while  in  the  Tertiary  periods  all  the  lead-
ing forms  of  the  most  complex  dicotyledons  now  inhabiting
the  globe  appear  to  have  flourished.

Fossil  Animals. — We  may  next  turn  to  the  animal  kingdom,
and  consider  the  arguments  derived  from  fossil  vertebrata  and
invertebrata  in  favour  of  progressive  development.  When-
ever these  arguments  are  founded  on  negative  evidence,  we
cannot  be  too  cautious  in  our  reasoning,  and  we  must  always
bear  in  mind  that  it  has  been  evidently  no  part  of  the  plan  of
Nature  to  hand  down  to  us  a  complete  or  systematic  record  of
the  former  history  of  the  animate  world.  We  may  have  failed
to  discover  a  single  shell,  marine  or  fresh-water,  or  a  single
coral  or  bone  in  shale  or  sandstone,  even  in  such  a  formation  as
that  of  the  valley  of  the  Connecticut,  in  which  the  footprints
of  bipeds  and  quadrupeds  abound ;  but  such  failure  may  have
arisen,  not  because  the  population  of  the  land  or  sea  was  scanty
at  that  era,  but  because  in  general  the  preservation  of  any
relics  of  the  animals  or  plants  of  former  times  in  sedimentary
formations  is  the  exception  to  a  general  rule.  It  is  only  when
the  rocks  are  made  up  bodily  of  the  remains  of  plants  or
animals,  as  in  the  case  of  beds  of  coal,  chalk,  or  coral-limestone,
that  a  representation  of  certain  classes  of  the  animal  kingdom
can  be  looked  for  as  constituting  an  essential  part  of  the
formation.  Time  so  enormous  as  that  contemplated  by  the
geologist  may  multiply  exceptional  cases  till  they  seem  to

L  2


143  DEVEL0P3IEXT  OF  ORGAiSaC  LIFE  [Ch.  DC

constitute  the  rule,  and  so  impose  on  the  imagination  as  to
lead  us  to  infer  the  non-existence  of  creatures  of  which  no
monuments  happen  to  remain*  The  late  Edward  Forbes  re-
marked, that  few  geologists  are  aware  how  large  a  proportion
of  all  known  species  of  fossils  are  founded  on  single  specimens,
while  a  still  greater  number  are  founded  on  a  few  individuals
discovered  in  one  spot.  This  holds  true  not  onlj  in  regard  to
animals  and  plants  inhabiting  the  land,  the  lake,  and  the
river,  but  even  to  a  surprising  number  of  the  marine  moUusca,
artieulata,  and  radiata.  Our  knowledge,  therefore,  of  the
living  creation  of  any  given  period  of  the  past  may  be  said
to  depend  in  a  great  degree  on  what  we  commonly  call  chance,
and  the  casual  discovery  of  some  new  localities  rich  in  pecu-
liar fossils  may  modify,  and,  to  a  great  extent,  overthrow  all
our  previous  generalisations.

MoUusca. — Of  all  the  invertebrate  animals,  the  mollusca
are  the  most  important  in  geology,  as,  owing  to  the  durable
nature  of  their  shells,  they  have  been  more  generally  pre-
sented, in  strata  of  every  age,  than  the  memorials  of  any  other
creatures.  They  are  also  peculiarly  well  fitted  to  throw  light
on  the  controverted  question  whether  there  has  or  has  not
been  a  gradual  advance  in  the  course  of  ages,  from  the  humbler
and  more  simple  to  the  higher  and  more  complex  grades  of
structure.  By  a  higher  or  more  peifect  organisation  is  meant
one  in  which  there  are  a  greater  number  of  organs  specially
devoted  to  particular  functions.  Thus  in  the  lowest  divisions,
such  as  the  Bryozoa  and  Brachiopoda^  we  find  no  separate
organs  of  respiration,  sight,  or  locomotion ;  whereas,  in  the
lamellibrancliiate  bivalves,  although  they  are  without  heads,
we  find  a  heart,  mouth,  gills,  and  foot,  with  several  other
organs,  wanting  in  the  inferior  orders  before  alluded  to.  The
Gasteropoda,  again,  have  a  head,  mouth,  lingual  teeth,  a
special  breathing  apparatus,  and  nearly  all  of  them  organs  of
sight,  while  in  the  highest  grade,  the  Cephalopoda,  we  meet
with  so  many  instruments  appointed  to  perform  distinct
functions,  such  a  concentration  of  the  nervous  svstem  in  what
may  be  regarded  as  a  brain,  such  acuteness  of  the  senses,
especially  those  of  sight  and  touch,  with  such  powers  of  loco-
motion, that  we  cannot  refuse  to  assign  to  them  a  place  supe-


C?H.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  149

rior  to  that  of  all  the  other  mollusca,  and  even  to  some  few
species  of  the  vertebrata,  although  these  last  belong  to  a
type  which  as  a  whole  ranks  so  much  higher  in  the  scale.

We  have  now,  therefore,  to  enquire  whether  the  fossil
representatives  of  the  different  divisions  of  the  mollusca  above
enumerated,  the  Bryozoa,  Brachiopoda,  Lamellibranchiata,
Gasteropoda,  and  Cephalopoda,  made  their  appearance  in
succession  in  the  ancient  seas  in  the  same  order  of  time  as
they  would  stand  in  an  ascending  series  in  a  zoological  classi-
fication. In  our  endeavour  to  reply  to  this  question  it  will  be
well  to  exclude  from  our  survey  the  fossils  of  the  lowest  strata,
or  those  older  than  the  Lower  Silurian  (Nos.  35  and  36  of
the  Table,  p.  135),  with  which  we  are  so  imperfectly  acquainted
that  it  is  dangerous  to  derive  from  them  any  conclusions
founded  simply  on  negative  evidence.  Additions  made  from
year  to  year  may  change  the  whole  aspect  of  this  primordial
fauna  of  Barrande.  Already  indeed  the  notion  of  the  extreme
scarcity  of  organic  remains  and  their  inferiority  of  grade  has
to  some  extent  had  to  be  abandoned  by  the  detection  in  it  of
an  Orthoceras  and  of  a  rich  fauna  of  trilobites,  as  well  as
other  forms  of  life.

To  begin  then  with  the  Lower  Silurian  (No.  34  of  the  same
table),  we  find  that  it  contains  representatives  of  all  the
groups  to  which  we  have  alluded,  and  the  Cephalopoda  alone
have  already  furnished  the  conchologist  with  several  hun-
dred species  and  a  long  list  of  genera.  Many  of  these
chambered  shells,  especially  the  Orthocerata,  were  of  large
size,  and  they  may  possibly  have  swarmed  the  more  in  the
ancient  ocean  because  there  were  no  fishes  to  compete  with
them.  It  has  been  remarked  by  the  advocates  of  *  progressive
evolution,'  that  all  the  cephalopods  of  this  era  are  referable
to  the  tetrabranchiata,  or  four-gilled  form,  a  family  which  is
not  so  highly  organised  as  the  dibranchiata  (or  two-gilled),
to  which  the  belemnites,  so  abundant  in  the  Lias,  Oolite,  and
Chalk,  as  well  as  the  living  cuttlefish,  belong.  Doubtless  the
absence  of  all  genera  of  this  highest  order  from  the  Silurian,
Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  formations  may  seem  to  imply
that  the  testaceous  fauna  of  the  older  rocks  had  not  yet
obtained  so  high  a  grade  as  it  afterwards  reached.     But  the


■.:>  IiTZl-r?IZ3T     J      r^'.'.y^r  iZFi  [Cm.  IX.

■  jz.-'-    :  :■:.-  -^^•.:iir^  js  ^nitrwhiir  ^t^akmed  by  thefiict,

-: 7  "---ru  j-urr?-    :     '■Tv.p«.«*i5  :n.«ir  -xisc  in  our  seas,  which

IT'-  v:t_.-  :r  .r-r-r::.^  :'«'ii:r*.  like  Tii^a^  >'J3Cateod  by  the  Sepia«
7  -r: -rr.--  -iiril?.  i^.-  "iL-^r  •t  "iie  5j.uriius.  Sach  soft-
V  .11-'.  •.-"_.."'  ''^-  ~:iTr«*r. rv.  .-.•^lid  at-r  'y^  -expected  to  leave
?-iim.L  ~-r'ji  Li:;*  -j^nr.^  oitrnivrTaii  .■£  liieir  •^xfiscenee.  It  is
.v_--  ..-.-  ^t.?:i::ii:i:j  "i— r  "iL*-rv  Tr-rr?  ao  '«ioIi  xenezti  in  the
-)  :^i-  •.: .  '^;^.  "ilj.:  T-rr  rjjii  . -nii'ltrnrij"  ini'trr  a  ix^mparatire
.'jLZ'.-ir. . : —  :  r^.--r  :.  i"  t^ic  aioLltis-_-a  >i  rhac  earij  period.
Zr  _:.>  — ■:  ;^  r^-'iiL^rr.-L  .::  r^iWrvnoe  ro  die  testaceoas
:;.  iz:.  :  "-■--  •r-.m-.r^  -rcr-.i.ni.  "Iill:  ^iiiie  tiie  lamellibnuLchiate
31"— *""?•    ^^-       i:i::jjr.L:i'-">ri*"  rc^r    oi    iiiiuiber.   br&chioDods  of

---: .T--—    I    ■  r-u    ir^  -rJrrr-Liiii:''- xourroant.     It  cannot

:-  lr:i  -l  ■.:..:  "1:  -  ;r*  :':*:•  a  -E*  ilic-jc-  .use  ±ih«  on  this  earlier

-^ :::::   :  i'l*.:!::     i:  -::.-r--  :-:r-.      3ut  li  Tt  laj  ai^oh  stress  on

-In?  :rj'::-^  --:-.  v--  i::  1  -liiir  :r   s  s«  aie^ua:  ovonterbuiinced

't-  -'■":i1---_:.  -    I'-.ijrji:^    --    J-^    jiy;^' <;"-  'i-rr-.-rii: a*  jjid   ecuollv

it^r."-i  rr  ii  Tiir  "^  i;-  ^*'  ^^  n  irn  >r    c  liir?  nepcesentatiTcS

7    li±'-r-!iT     rL'.-rs     t    .ll^■kl^I^^:•^.     1:   T.ie    Br'.wiiiopoda  ont-

-  v:i--'--*  '-1-   L>i ^r?  -l:':  r.u:..-  .i : ;irti  -:  ^rv.-ir:?.  so*  on  the  other

•■J. '_■:.  1    -.1-   .  r .  li.L^' ["• 'U    i:-i:i.:i  :trr '-lie  •-Ta;5r<;n:> pods,  espe-

.■_j,i'.'  "1:  ■    l:.^.!:"?'    ;."•.?:•  a     c    :::.-:*c   ji;^^.  tliose   which  are

^.^•^.  i-L-  .1.  L.vl  -vi.-li  ii  :=  •-i-^^iis.  :::arlne  :iTi=TnnT^  seem

,-    ji^-r    .>-:i  i;".':r^ -1  •:   :,'  "-ir  •.rt-i'.oerj.tiu  yj.arxlas«  and

,-,..;_.      -. --zt.>.     1i  ■-  ^  -••-li*:.  'i^'ra^i  la^-ic.  cei::^  nioHusoa  of  a

•.    -:j^ -7  j7-^ ;.-.  Lii':!^  "-?:•*  f'izit:':!-.!!:?  z-.^r  rertbrai^Hi  to  a  :jreat

^l^-j_7  *  -  r  i^Tzt:^.*:*''^*  t1L:1i  i^^^  V'v^r  m  tiie  scale.     On  the

:_     -  •■ — .--  '-r-  iiLiL  iliJ.:  tlic  5::cct^i^»*  -lifTelocinent.  ia

.  -  -    ■  ir?-^  .''  Tii^'  J-^r"?.  .:  liic'-'rr  j'^ti  ziore  vromplex  struc-

^^   -i  ■—  -^r-  zitIzs  :■  z^~  l-ji-.o;?  iz.  tlu-Z  'r^ia*i  branch  of

^.  ^  '_z.*z:l1  xizj"!-—  "^li-'l-  "^  zi"  #"  '.iirvflj  rvrnrsear^fd  in  a
1  ^rr_  ^7^-...  7.1-  Tirlr"  ■  '.^rj-irs  ::'  "j"'^*  1=.  ^c  restacea  is
.^^.-^-  :^  -r  tl-iz  i.:  izT  ::rziir  r«frl'>L  cat  the  rate  of
"-^-.-•-o  •-     --iz'liaci.z  lii5  cr-rz  sl-.'w  iz-'I-feL  if  the  oal^


'N


i.'n


Ch.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  151

since  elapsed,  in  order  to  bring  about  a  gradual  evolution
from  a  brjozoon  to  an  orthoceras.

FoM8il  Fish. — The  failure  of  the  palaeontologist  to  detect  a
single  bone  of  anj  aquatic  animal  of  the  vertebrate  class  in
rocks  older  than  the  Ludlow  formation  of  Murchison,  one  of
the  uppermost  divisions  of  the  Silurian  system,  is  a  fact  of  no
small  weight  in  favour  of  progressive  development,  although
as  the  oldest  fish  (Pteraspis),  alluded  to  above,  is  by  no  means
of  the  lowest  grade,  we  may  still  expect  to  trace  back  the
memorials  of  the  great  class  of  fishes  to  strata  of  higher
antiquity.     But  when  we  consider  how  rich  a  molluscous
fauna — to  say  nothing  of  the  crustaceans,  sea-urchins,  stone-
lilies,  and  corals — has  been  met  with  in  Silurian  rocks  in
almost  all  parts  of  the  world,  it  seems  impossible  to  account
for  our  not  having  yet  found  any  accompanying  bones  of  fish,
except  by  supposing  that  they  were  not  yet  in  being,  or  that
they  only  occupied  a  limited  area.     To  verify  the  date  of  the
first  appearance  of  any  new  type  of  organisation  is  perhaps
more  than  we  can  reasonably  expect,  as  the  first  representa-
tives of  such  types  probably  originate  in  one  region  only,  from
which  they  would  spread  very  slowly  over  the  globe.

Next  to  the  Silurian  comes  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  or
Devonian  formation,  which  is  so  rich  in  fishes  that  the
number  of  British  species  alone  described  by  Agassiz,  in
1844,  amounted  to  sixty-five,  and  the  number  has  since  been
raised  to  more  than  a  hundred.  Almost  all  of  these  belonged
to  the  order  of  Ganoids,  and  some  few  only  to  that  of  the
Placoids,  of  Agassiz;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  vast
majority  of  the  fossil  fish  of  the  succeeding  formations,  from
the  Carboniferous  to  the  Oolitic,  consist  in  like  manner  of
Ganoids,  a  family  which,  though  so  rich  in  genera  in  the
olden  times,  is  of  quite  exceptional  occurrence  at  the  pre-
sent day,  being  confined  to  the  North-American  rivers,  and
those  of  Africa  north  of  the  line.  In  the  chalk,  and  still
more  in  the  tertiary  formations,  we  find  the  majority  of  the
fish  to  belong  to  a  great  variety  of  genera  of  the  class  called
TeleoBtei  because  their  skeletons  are  perfectly  ossified,  which
is  very  rarely  the  case  with  the  Ganoids  of  the  older  rocks.
The  cartilaginous,  persistent  nature  of  the  spinal  column  or


152  DEVELOPMENT  OF  0B6ANIC  LIFE  [Ck.  IX.

notochord,  which  is  not  diyided  into  separate  vertebrae,  ii
regarded  on  the  whole  as  a  mark  of  a  lower  grade,  aa  is
also  the  form  of  the  tail  called  heterocercal,  which  is  almost
universal  in  fish  older  than  the  chalk.  Nearly  all  the  living
fish  have  equilobed  tails,  and  the  heterocercal  or  ineqoilobed
form  is  looked  upon  bj  Owen  as  a  retention  of  the  embryonic
character,  or  an  instance  of  arrested  development.  But  the
affiiiitv  of  the  ancient  Placoid  and  Granoid  fishes  in  the  stmc-
tare  of  their  heart,  brain,  generative  organs,  and  many  other
characters  to  living  sharks,  as  well  as  to  the  African  Poly-
pteroas  and  the  bony  pike,  or  Lepidosteus,  of  America,  leads
the  anatomist  to  assign  to  them  by  no  means  a  low  place
in  the  piscine  class.  In  short,  a  retrospect  of  the  history
of  this  class  in  geological  time  ^imparts,'  according  to
Professor  Owen,  *  an  idea  rather  of  mutation  than  of  pro-
gression.'*

Reptiles. — No  well-authenticated  example  of  a  reptile
occurring  in  strata  so  old  as  the  Devonian  has  yet  been
established,t  and  even  in  the  succeeding  Carboniferous
formation,  it  was  not  till  the  year  1844  that  some  repi^-
sentatives  of  the  lowest  division  of  this  class,  the  amphibia,
which  are  regarded  by  some  naturalists  as  intermediate  be*
tween  reptiles  and  fish,  were  discovered  in  the  coal  of  Saar-
bruck.  In  1852  Dr.  Dawson  and  I  discovered  the  osseous
remains  of  a  reptile  in  the  Carboniferous  strata  of  Nova
Scotia,  and  in  the  same  formation  and  country  three  other
genera,  all  air-breathers,  were  found  by  Dr.  Dawson,  and
described  by  him  in  his  *  Air-breathers  of  the  CoaL'  Since
that  period  several  genera  of  the  Labyrinthodont  family,  some
containing  species  of  large  size,  have  been  found  in  the  car-
boniferous rocks  of  North  America  and  Britain.  So  late  as
1865,  four  or  five  new  genera  of  this  family  determined  by
Professor  Huxley  have  been  added  from  the  coal  of  Tipperary
in  Ireland.  Some  of  these  have  well-ossified  bony  skeletons,
although  they  belong  to  that  sub-class  which,  like  the  frogs
and  newts,  possessed  gills  at  some  period  of  their  existence,
and  were  also  marked  by  other  piscine  characters.     In  rocks

*  Owen's  Palseontologj,  2Dd  edit.  p.  t  See  Elements  of  Geologj,  6th  edi-

175.  tion,  p.  626  nots.


Ch.  ex.]        at  successive  geological  periods.  153

of  later  age,  from  the  Triassic  to  the  Cretaceous  inclusive,
there  is  an  extraordinary  profusion  of  reptile  life,  to  which  I
shall  have  occasion  to  allude  again  in  the  eleventh  chapter,
when  treating  of  changes  in  climate.  Two  orders,  the
Dinosauria  and  Compsognatha,  have  been  denominated
Omithoscelida,  because,  as  Professor  Huxley  has  especially
pointed  out,  they  supply  in  some  important  parts  of  their
structure  a  transitional  link  between  the  reptiles  and  birds,
more  especially  in  the  case  of  the  Compsognathus  longipes,  a
fossil  form  of  the  Solenhofen  slate,  a  member  of  the  Jurassic
formation.  The  hind  limbs  in  particular  of  these  Omitho-
scelida are  much  more  similar  to  those  of  birds  than  they  are
to  those  of  reptiles,  and  these  bird-reptiles,  or  reptile-birds,
were  more  or  less  completely  bipedal.*  No  form  of  reptiles
is  so  remarkable  in  the  Secondary  or  Mesozoic  formation
as  the  winged  reptiles  called  Pterodactyls,  which  sometimes
attain  a  great  size,  one  of  them  from  the  Kentish  chalk
measuring  more  than  sixteen  feet  from  tip  to  tip  of  its  out-
stretched wings,  and  another  in  strata  of  the  same  age  in
America  attaining  even  larger  dimensions.  Their  batlike
wings  were  not  composed  of  feathers,  as  in  birds,  but  appear
to  have  consisted  of  an  extended  membrane  which  was  sup-
ported, like  that  of  bats,  by  the  fourth  digit,  which  was  enor-
mously elongated.  They  resemble  birds  in  many  of  their
osteological  characters,  among  others  in  the  presence  of  air-
cavities  in  their  bones,  the  prominent  median  crest  of  the
broad  breast-bone,  and  often  in  their  horn-sheathed  beaks.
But  they  are,  says  Professor  Huxley,  rather  a  sort  of  reptilian
bat  than  links  between  reptiles  and  birds.

Scarcity  of  Air-breathers  in  Primary  rocks. — Our  informa-
tion respecting  the  fossils  of  the  oldest  rocks,  especially
those  anterior  to  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  or  Devonian  forma-

«

Hon,  is  almost  exclusively  derived  from  strata  of  marine
origin.  This  we  might  have  anticipated,  if  the  ocean  always
occupied,  as  it  does  now,  nearly  five  parts  in  seven  of  the
earth's  surface.  After  many  geographical  revolutions,  after
the  sinking  down  of  ancient  continents  and  the  upheaval  of
newer  ones,  it  is  natural  that  the  strata  of  a  very  remote  age

*  Huxley,  Pres.  Add.  Geol.  Quart.  Journ.  1870,  vol.  xxvi.


154  DEVELOPMENT  Of  OBGANIC  LIFE  [Ck.  IX.

should  coincide  generally  with  the  bed  of  the  ancient  ocean,
rather  than  with  the  space  which  was  occupied  by  land.
Well  therefore  may  we  despair  of  gaining  more  than  a  super-
ficial acquaintance  with  the  terrestrial  plants  and  air-breath-
ing animals  which  once  belonged  to  those  small  areas  which
represent  spaces  where  palseozoic  land  of  Silurian  or  Cambrian
date  may  have  happened  to  coincide  with  a  portion  of  our
present  continents  and  islands.  Even  if  they  had  never  been
submerged  from  the  earliest  period,  they  would  have  suffered
such  denudation  by  rain  and  rivers,  either  when  the  land  was
stationary,  or  when  it  was  undergoing  changes  of  level,  that
no  parts  of  the  old  surface,  or  of  its  lacustrine  and  fluviatile
deposits,  would  remain.  Our  best  chance  of  hitting  upon
the  spots  where  some  monuments  of  such  early  times  have
escaped  destruction,  would  arise  from  their  submergence  and
the  accumulation  of  marine  strata  upon  them  or  upon  the
littoral  deposits  found  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.
Even  then  we  could  only  obtain  access  to  the  buried  strata,
whether  fresh- water  or  littoral,  at  those  points  where  they
had  been  exposed  to  view  by  the  partial  waste  of  the  in-
cumbent formations.  The  general  absence  therefore  in
Cambrian,  Silurian,  and  Devonian  rocks  of  all  remains  of
land  animals  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  and  taken  alone
raises  no  very  strong  presumption  against  the  existence,  in
palaeozoic  times,  of  air-breathers  of  the  most  highly  organised
class.

Up  to  the  year  18G5  only  a  few  insects  had  been  obtained
even  from  the  Carboniferous  strata,  the  land  plants  of  which
.are  well  known  to  us,  and  none  from  the  Devonian.  From
this  last  formation  several  have  now  been  brought  to  light
in  North  America,  chiefly  of  the  order  Neuroptera,  found  by
Mr.  Hartt,  in  rocks  near  St.  John's,  New  Brunswick,  and
determined  by  Mr.  Scudder,  of  Boston,  U.S.  Why  then
should  we  despair  of  finding  in  our  future  researches  some
air-breathers  of  a  much  higher  order  than  insects^  which
may  have  peopled  the  forests  of  the  Devonian  era,  in  which
some  flowering  plants  of  the  monocotyledonous  class,  together
with  pines,  tree-ferns,  SigillarisB,  and  Lepidodendra  or  gigantic

copodiacese,  flourished.     The  first  pulmoniferous  moUusk,


Ck.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  155

A  land  shell,  called  Pupa  Vetusiaj  of  which  hundreds  of
individuals  have  now  been  detected,  was  not  discovered  in
the  coal  measured  until  the  year  1852,  in  Nova  Scotia.

Birds. — In  regard  to  birds,  they  are  usually  wanting,  for
reasons  to  be  explained  in  the  next  volume,  in  deposits  of  all
ages,  even  in  the  tertiary  periods,  where  we  know  that  birds
as  well  as  land  quadrupeds  abounded.  But  in  the  litho-
graphic stone  of  Solenhofen,  a  division  of  the  Upper  Oolite,
a  skeleton  of  a  bird  almost  entire,  and  retaining  even  some
of  its  feathers,  was  found  in  1862,  and  determined  by  Professor
Owen  to  belong  to  the  class  Aves.  It  differs  from  all  living
birds  in  the  structure  of  its  fore  limbs  and  still  more  of  its
tail,  in  which  last  there  were  no  less  than  twenty  vertebra,
each  of  them  supporting  a  pair  of  plumes.  In  the  tail  of
living  birds  the  coalescence  or  anchylosed  state  of  the  ter-
minal vertebrsB  is  a  constant  character,  the  vertebrsB  being
distinct  and  separate  only  in  the  embryo.  The  tail  of  the
Archeopteryx  therefore  exhibits,  as  Professor  Owen  has
pointed  out,  an  earlier  or  more  embryonic  type  persistent  in
the  full-grown  individual.  Although  no  skeletons  of  the
feathered  tribe  have  been  found  in  rocks  older  than  the
Oolite,  yet  the  footmarks  of  a  great  variety  of  species  of
various  sizes,  some  larger  than  an  ostrich,  others  smaller  than
the  plover,  have  been  observed  in  rocks  of  higher  antiquity
in  North  America.*  These  bipeds  have  left  the  marks  of
their  footsteps  on  strata  of  Triassic  age  in  the  valley  of
the  Connecticut,  and  they  are  useful  in  warning  us  against
speculating  on  the  relative  grade  of  ancient  and  modem
representatives  of  this  class,  seeing  that,  although  there  were
so  many  of  these  bipeds,  we  are  so  ignorant  of  their  structure.
Hitherto,  even  footprints  of  the  class  Aves  have  eluded  our
search  in  all  formations  older  than  the  Trias,  so  that  we  may
declare  at  present  that  the  first  appearance  of  fish,  reptiles,
and  birds  follows  a  chronological  order  in  accordance  with
the  position  which  the  same  classes  would  occupy  when
arranged  zoolo^cally  by  a  naturalist  in  an  ascending  series :
and  we  shall  presently  see  that  the  lowest  class  of  Mammalia

*  See  Hitchcock's  Report  on  Geol.  of  Massachussets,  and  Ljeirs  Travels  in
North  America,  chap.  12.


156


DEVELOPMENT  OF  ORGASIC  LIFE


[Cm.  IX.


have  not  yet  been  traced  back  bo  far  as  the  footprints  of  the
earliest  known  birds.

Mammalia. — So  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  present  cen-
tury it  wa£  a  generally  received  dogma  in  geologj  that  the

Fig,  3,  SatnralriM.


Thjlncoiharium  PrrroBtii  ( riUm?t«nnu).    Amphitherinm  (Omm).    Lovsr  jav,
from  the  lUte  of  Stonesfiald,  near  Oxford.*

Mammalia  had  not  been  created  before  the  Tertiary  period,
and  the  first  announcement  of  the  discoTCiy  in  the  Loirer
Oolite  of  Stonesfield,  of  the  jaw  of  a  small  marsupial,  recog-
Fig.*.


nised  ae  such  in  1818  by  Cuvier,  caused  a  sensation   almost
as  great  as  would  now  be  excited  by  our  finding  the  bones  of

of  tb«


•  This  flgiiM  {No.  3}  ia  from  adrnw-
ing  hy  ProfoBsor  C.  Prevost,  publiehed
Ann.  doB  Sci.  nnt.  ami  1823.  Tlio
liisnil  IB  n  lower  jnir,  iidhering  by  its
inuec  cido  to  the  Klub  of  oolite,  in  which
it  ia  EUtik.  Tlie  form  (if  Iho  condyle,  nr
pisWrior  proreBs  of  tho  JHW,  ia  mnvei,
n^eeing  with  the  mammiferouB  tjpe,
and  is  distinrtly  B?eD.  ao  impmBioQ  of
it  being  left  on  tlie  Btona,  although  in
thiH  tpocimun  the  bone  is  wanting.  The
anlerior  purl  of  the  jaw  has  bpen  par-
tially broken  away,  so  that  the  doable
fnn^  of  thu  molar  teeth  are  «ean  Died
in  their  aocheta,  the  form  of  the  fangs
being  tharactcriotic  of  the  mammalia.
Ten  mohrn  are  prsoerred,  and  the
place  of  on  eleventh  u  believed  to  be


appnrcDL    The  enamel  of  w
te«th  ia  well  pneerved.

t  A  coloured  figure  of  thia  email  and
elegant  quadruprd  ie  girctiin  the  Tnnl.
Zool.  3oc.  Tol.  ii.  pi.  28.  It  ia  ineect-
ivoroua,  and  whs  taken  in  a  hollow
tree,  in  a  country  abouoding  in  ftnt-
liills,  ninety  niile*  to  the  soutli-eaBt  of
the  mouth  of  Swan  Rirer  in  Aaitralia.
— It,  ia  the  firvt  living  mannj^al  sp«rie*
known  to  have  nine  molar  taeth  in  the
lower  jaw,  and  some  of  the  teeth  are
wiilely  sepsjated  from  others,  one  of
the  peculiarities  in  the  ThyUmtherinm
of  Stoneafleld,  which  at  Sr«t  induced
H.  Blainville  t«  refsi  that  creattue  to
the  ctoiB  of  KptilM.


Ch.  H.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PEEIODS.


157


Bome  quadmrnanous  animal  in  one  of  the  Secondary  rocks.
Many  naturalietB,  rather  than  allow  their  faith  in  the  theory
of  progressive  development  to  be  so  rudely  shaken,  cherished
to  the  last  a  hope  that  it  might  ultimately  turn  out  that  the
Fig  6.


ItMnnl  alt*.
PhaacolWberiDm  Bucklscdi  {Oven).    {Syn.  Didelphia  Bnckluidi,  Brod.)    Lower

jaw,  (rom  Stoneifleld.*

1  Tbs  j&wmagnifled  twice  in  length,  ZThsBecoad  molar  tooth  magnified  Biztimea.

Fig.  e.


a.  Portion  of  jnw  with  three  molnr  teeth  from  StoDesfield  oolite.  Natural  aiie.
(Ob«ii'(  Palnontologj,  p.  345.)  6,  Middle  tooth  of  the  three  contained  in  the
jaw  a.    (Oign*.  Ibid.,  p.  846.)

British  geologists  had  been  mistaken  in  their  opinion  as  to
the  age  of  the  deposit  in  which  this  precious  relic  was  en-
tombed :  while  other  eminent  anatomists,  M.  Blainville  among
the  number,  called  in  question  the  mammalian  character  of


*  Thii  figure  (No.  6)  was  taken
fnan  the  originiil,  formerly  in  Mr.
Brodeiip'e  collection,  and  now  in  the
Britith  Hmeam.  It  comista  of  tba
right  half  of  a  lower  JHir,  of  which  the
iniMT  nde  U  aeen.  The  jaw  contains
■ersD  molar  teeth,  one  canine  and  three
inaaoa  ;  but  the  end  of  the  jaw  ii
bactorod,  and   tTM««  of  the  alreolua


of  a  fourth  inciaor  are  to  be  seen.
With  this  addition,  the  number  of  t«eth
would  agree  ezactlj  with  (hose  of  a
didelpbii.  The  foasil  ie  woll  pnarrred
in  a  slab  of  oolitic  etructure  cnntnining
ahelU  of  trigonia  and  other  mnrine
remaiDB.  See  Broderip,  Zool.  Joura.
Tol.  iii.  p.  408.  Owen,  Proceedinga
Geol.  Soc.,  Norembet  183B.


158         DEVELOPMENT  OF  ORGANIC  LIFE       [Oh,  IX.

the  relic.  But  no  less  than  nine  other  specimens  of  lower
jaws  of  mammiferous  quadrupeds  have  since  been  met  with
in  the  same  slate  of  Stonesfield,  so  that,  including  the  first
found  (fig.  3,  p.  156),  there  are  now  four  distinct  species  refer-
able to  three  genera  in  this  one  member  of  the  Lower  Oolite.

After  Cuvier  had  referred  the  specimen  first  met  with  to  a
marsupial,  Professor  Owen  pointed  out  that  the  extinct  genus
to  which  it  belonged  had  considerable  affinity  to  an  Australian
mammifer,  the  Myrmecobius  of  Waterhouse,  which  has  nine
molar  teeth  in  the  lower  jaw  (see  fig.  4).

The  next  representative  of  the  same  class  found  in  the  same
slate  was  at  once  regarded  as  an  opossum,  with  which  it
agrees  nearly  in  osteological  character,  and  precisely  in  the
number  of  its  teeth  (fig.  5,  p.  157).  But  the  most  remark-
able of  all  the  mammalia  of  which  the  remains  have  been
found  at  Stonesfield,  was  that  made  known  to  the  scientific
world  in  1 854,  under  the  name  of  Stereognathus.*  The  portion
found  consisted  of  part  of  a  lower  jaw  containing  three
double-fanged  teeth,  indicating  an  animal  small  in  size,  but
larger  than  any  of  the  other  quadrupeds  as  yet  obtained  from
those  rocks  (see  fig.  6).  Although  the  teeth  differed  in
structure  from  those  of  any  recent  or  fossil  animal  yet  known,
they  are  admitted  by  anatomists  to  have  more  affinity  to  the
higher  or  placental  division  of  mammalia  than  any  of  the
species  previously  found  at  Stonesfield,  or  those  yet  procured
from  any  rocks  older  than  the  Tertiary.  It  is  conjectured
by  Professor  Owen  that  it  may  have  been  a  small,  hoofed,
herbivorous  animal,  or  at  least  a  mixed  feeder,  but  he  still
regards  this  conclusion  as  doubtful;  so  far  does  Stereo^
gnathiia  depart  from  any  known  type,  whether  living  or
extinct.

When  the  Stonesfield  oolite  had  continued  for  nearly  thirty
years  to  be  the  only  rock  which  had  in  any  part  of  the  world
afforded  an  example  of  a  fossil  mammifer  anterior  in  date
to  the  Tertiary  period,  the  tooth  of  another  small  marsupial
mammifer,  called  Microlestes,  was  discovered  in  the  Upper

*  This  generic  name  was  given  to  it      in  vhoso  posscsBion  it  had  been  ibr
in   1864,    by  Mr.   Charleeworth,  who      twenty  years  or  more,
obtained  it  from  the  Eev.  J.  P.  Dennis,


C?H.  DC.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  159

Trias  of  Stnttgardt  in  1847.*  Between  that  year  and  1863
this  rock  and  the  Upper  Trias  of  Somersetshire  have  yielded
three  species  of  the  same  genus,  and  a  stratum  probably  of
about  the  same  age  in  North  Carolina  has  supplied  us  with
three  jaws  of  a  small  insectivorous  mammal,  probably  marsu-
pial, called  by  the  late  Professor  Emmons  Dromatherium
sylvesire.  The  only  other  mammalia  as  yet  discovered  in
any  other  part  of  the  globe  in  formations  older  than  the
Eocene  are  those  of  the  uppermost  Oolite  or  Purbeck  strata
in  Dorsetshire,  where  about  twenty-five  species,  referable  to
about  eleven  genera,  have  been  met  with  between  the  years
1854  and  1871,  all  very  small,  most  of  them  decidedly  mar-
supial,  and  the  rest,  if  not  of  the  same  sub-class,  belonging
to  insectivora  of  low  grade.f

It  may,  no  doubt,  be  said  that  our  acquaintance  with  the
purely  fresh-water  strata  of  periods  older  than  the  Secondary
is  very  defective,  and  that  we  ought  therefore  to  expect  that
memorials  of  land  animals  in  marine  strata  of  Primary  or
PalflBOzoic  date  would  be  very  exceptional.  There  are  regions
at  present,  in  the  Indian  and  Pacific  Oceans,  coextensive  in
area  with  Europe  and  North  America,  where  we  might
dredge  the  bottom  and  draw  up  thousands  of  shells  and
corals,  without  obtaining  one  bone  of  a  land  quadruped.
Suppose  our  mariners  were  to  report  that,  on  sounding  in
the  Indian  Ocean  near  some  coral  reefs,  and  at  some  distance
from  the  land,  they  drew  up  on  hooks  attached  to  their  line
portions  of  an  ape,  elephant,  or  leopard,  should  we  not  be
sceptical  as  to  the  accuracy  of  their  statements  ?  and  if  we
had  no  doubt  of  their  veracity,  might  we  not  expect  them  to

*  Elements,  pp.  430-440.  referable  to  eight  or  nine  genera,  had

t  Only  tiro  species  of  Purbeck  mam-  then  been  obtained  from  a  stratum  a  few

mals  discovered  by  Mr.  Brodie  and  re-  inches  thick  of  the  Middle  Purbeck,  all

femd  by  Prof.  Owen  to  his  genus  Spala-  within  an  area  of  600  square  yards.

oathertum^  were  known  before  the  year  This  number  has  now  been  increased  to

1S56,  when  Mr.  S.  H.  Beckles  sent  me  no  less  than  twenty-five  species,  refer-

&  coUection  of  fossils,  which  I  submitted  able  to  eleven  genera,  and  the  whole  of

to  Dr.  Falconer.    From  his  interpreta-  them  admirably  described  and  figured  in

tion  of  th«»  remains,  chiefly  of  lower  a  Monograph  of  the  Palaeontographical

jaws,   I  was  enabled  to  announce  in  Society,  1871,  by  Prof.  Owen.    See  also

18>67t  in  the  supplement  to  my  Manual  Elements,  6th  ed.,  p.  379  ;  and  Student's

or  Elements  of  Geology,  that  no  less  Elements,  1871)  p.  303.
than    ficmrteeii    species  of  mammalia,


160  DEVELOPMENT  OF  ORGANIC  LIFE  [Ck.  IX.

be  unskilled  naturalists  9  or,  if  the  &uct  were  nnquestioned,
should  we  not  be  disposed  to  believe  that  some  vessel  had
been  wrecked  on  the  spot?

The  casualties  must  always  be  rare  by  which  land  quadra-
peds  are  swept  by  rivers  far  out  into  the  open  sea^  and  still
rarer  the  contingency  of  such  a  floating  body  not  being
devoured  by  sharks  or  other  predaceous  fish,  such  as  were
those  of  which  we  find  the  teeth  preserved  in  some  of  the
carboniferous  strata ;  but  if  the  carcase  should  escape,  and
should  happen  to  sink  where  sediment  was  in  the  act  of
accumulating,  and  if  the  numerous  causes  of  subsequent
disintegration  should  not  efface  all  traces  of  the  body,  in-
cluded for  countless  ages  in  solid  rock,  it  would  be  contrary
to  all  calculation  of  chances  that  we  should  hit  upon  the
exact  spot,  that  mere  point  in  the  bed  of  an  ancient  ocean,
where  the  precious  relic  was  entombed.  Can  we  expect  for
a  moment,  when  we  have  only  succeeded,  amidst  several
thousand  fragments  of  corals  and  shells,  in  finding  a  few
bones  of  aquatic  vertebrata,  that  we  should  meet  with  a
single  skeleton  of  an  inhabitant  of  the  land  9

Clarence,  in  his  dream,  saw  ^  in  the  slimy  bottom  of  the
deep,'

a  thousand  fearful  wrecks ;

A  thousand  men,  that  fishes  gnawed  upon ;
Wedges  of  gold,  great  anchors,  heaps  of  pearL

Had  he  also  beheld,  amid  ^  the  dead  bones  that  lay  scattered
by,'  the  carcases  of  lions,  deer,  and  the  other  wild  tenants
of  the  forest  and  the  plain,  the  fiction  would  have  been
deemed  unworthy  of  the  genius  of  Shakespeare.  So  daring
a  disregard  of  probability  and  violation  of  analogy  would
have  been  condemned  as  unpardonable,  even  where  the  poet
was  painting  those  incongruous  images  which  present  them«*
selves  to  a  disturbed  imagination  during  the  visions  of  the
night.

Absence  of  Cetacea  in  Secondary  rochs, — But  there  is  a  nega-
tive fact  of  great  significance  which  seems  more  than  any
other  to  render  it  highly  improbable  that  we  shall  ever  find
air-breathers  of  the  highest  class  in  any  of  the  primary  strata,
or  in  any  of  the  older  members  of  the  secondary  series*


Ch.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  161

This  fact  is  the  absence  hitherto  of  all  bones  of  cetacea
among  the  numerous  remains  of  fossil  vertebrata  entombed
in  rocks  older  than  the  Eocene.  Cetacean  bones  are  of  rare
occurrence  in  the  Lower  Tertiary  formations  of  Europe,  the
only  instance  in  Great  Britain  being  a  species  of  Monodon
from  the  London  claj,  and  the  position  even  of  this  specimen
is  somewhat  doubtful.  But  in  the  middle  Eocene  of  Americay
as  in  Greorgia  and  Alabama,  the  gigantic  Zeuglodon^  now
admitted  to  be  a  true  placental  mammal,  is  by  no  means  of
uncommon  occurrence.*  The  dimensions  of  the  cetacea  in
general  are  such  that  they  could  hardly  have  failed  to  ob-
trude themselves  on  the  notice  of  collectors  had  they  been
entombed  in  the  mud  and  sand  of  Triassic,  Liassic,  or  other
secondary  formations  where  the  skeletons  of  huge  reptiles
are  so  conspicuous.  The  ichthyosaurs  and  other  carnivorous
saurians  seem  formerly  to  have  played  the  part  now  assigned
to  the  cetacea  in  the  economy  of  nature ;  and  if  we  assume
this  to  have  been  the  case,  it  seems  probable  that  the  pla-
cental mammalia,  if  they  existed  at  all  before  the  Tertiary
period,  were  at  least  extremely  scarce.

Successive  appearance  in  chronological  order  of  the  great
sub-classes  of  mammalia  of  higher  and  higher  grade, — In  a
classification  of  mammalia,  founded  on  the  modification  of
their  cerebral  structure.  Professor  Owen  has  assigned  the
lowest  place  to  a  sub-class  called  Lyencephala,  which  com-
prises two  orders,  the  Marsupialia  and  the  Monotremata.
Li  this  last  are  included  the  Echidna  (or  duckbilled  Platypus)
of  Australia  and  the  Omithorhynchus  of  the  same  continent.
No  members  of  this  lowest  division  of  the  mammalia  have
yet  been  found  fossil,  but  we  ought  to  look  for  their  remains
in  the  Carboniferous  and  other  primary  rocks,  should  air-
breathers  higher  than  the  class  of  reptiles  ever  be  dis-
covered in  them,  assuming  that  a  thorough  knowledge  of
the  succession  in  time  of  the  fossil  vertebrata  would  bear  out
folly  the  theory  of  progressive  development  from  the  sim-
plest to  the  most  complex  types.     We  should  then  have

*  The  snpposed  cetaceans  of  the  lately  been  ascertained  by  him  to  be  of
eretaceons  rocks,  which  I  formerly  cited  Miocene  date. — Leidy,  Reptiles  of  the
on  the  anthority  of  Dr.  Leidy,  have      Chalk.

VOL.  1.  H


162  DEVELOPMENT  OF  OHOAmC  LIFE  [Ch.  IX.

monotremata  in  the  Primary,  marsupials  in  the  Secondary,
and  placentals  in  the  Tertiary  strata,  assuming  for  the
present  that  the  class  to  which  Stereognathua  belongs  is  still
undetermined.

In  the  history  of  the  Tertiary  and  Post-Tertiary  series,  it
may  be  said  that  there  is  in  the  mammalia  a  still  farther
evolution  from  the  less  to  the  more  perfect  stractores.  For
the  earliest  known  species  of  the  placental  sab-class  does  not
belong  to  the  Quadrumanous  order,  the  most  ancient  repre-
sentative of  that  sub-class  being  the  Aretocyon  prinuBvus,  a
mammal  allied  to  the  bear,  which  has  been  met  with  in
France  in  Eocene  strata  older  than  the  Plastic  clay  or
Woolwich  beds.  Of  later  date  than  this,  M.  Butimeyer  has
recognised,  in  a  member  of  the  Middle  Eocene  group  of  the
Swiss  Jura,  the  jawbone  of  a  monkey  allied  in  some  points
to  the  Mycetes  or  howling  monkey  of  America  and  in  others
to  the  Lemurs.  If  this  determination  be  confirmed  when
more  of  the  skeleton  has  been  discovered,  the  CoenapUheeug
lemuroidea  would  constitute  the  oldest  known  example  of  a
fossil  quadrumanous  animal.^  The  next  step  occurs  in  the
Upper  Miocene  or  Falunian  deposits  of  Europe,  in  which
several  examples  of  the  monkey  tribe  have  been  met  with,
and  amoDg  them  some  of  the  anthropomorphous  apes.  One
of  them,  the  Dryopithecvsy  allied  to  the  Gibbon,  discovered
in  the  South  of  France,  rivalled  man  in  stature.  If  in  the
Pliocene  strata,  which  followed  next  in  the  order  of  time,  no
quadrumana  have  been  detected,  we  may  attribute  their
absence  to  the  diminished  warmth  of  the  Pliocene  climate,
which  began  to  resemble  that  now  enjoyed  in  the  south  of
Europe,  instead  of  being,  like  that  of  the  Upper  Miocene,
sub-tropical.  For  evidence  of  the  gradual  development  of
the  monkeys,  apes,  and  orangs,  and  of  the  first  appearance
of  man,  the  progressionist  will  naturally  look  to  those
countries  which  escaped  the  rigours  of  the  Glacial  period,
whereas  our  most  careful  investigations  have  hitherto  been

*  The  fosBil  monkey  named  Macacus  nons  on  the  authority  of  Prof.  Owen,  was

EocenuB  by  Owen,  found  in  1840,  at  pronounced  by  the  same  anatomist  in

Kyeon,  near  Ipswich  in  Sufiulk,  in  a  1862  to  be  a  pachyderm,  more  ample

stratum  older  than  the  Ix)ndon  clay,  and  data  for  its  correct  determination  having

which  I  formerly  cited  as  quadruma-  been  obtained.


Ch.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  163

confined  to  the  temperate  latitudes  of  the  northern  hemi-
sphere, whether  in  the  Old  or  New  World.  However  slender
therefore  may  be  the  foundation  of  facts  on  which  such
grand  generalisations  are  built,  and  however  anxious  we  may
be  not  to  place  too  much  reliance  on  the  soundness  of  our
inferences,  we  may  yet  say  that  the  direction  in  which  the
&cts  point  are  decidedly  towards  the  theory  of  progression.
It  may  no  doubt  be  said  that  the  entire  area  from  which  the
Secondary  or  Mesozoic  species  of  mammalia,  thirty-three  in
number,  have  been  obtained  is  confined  to  a  very  limited
part  of  the  globe,  even  when  we  include  the  site  of  the
Dromatherium  of  North  Carolina,  between  three  and  four
thousand  miles  distant  from  Stuttgardt.  But  on  the  other
hand  we  must  recollect  that  the  time  throughout  which  this
fieiuna  has  been  traced  is  of  vast  duration,  extending  from
the  Ehortic  or  Upper  Triassic  beds  to  those  which  form  the
Purbeck  or  last  stage  of  the  great  Oolitic  era.  In  Australia
at  present,  out  of  more  than  two  hundred  living  species  of
mammalia  above  three-fourths  are  marsupial,  and  the  re-
maining species  are  confined  to  the  orders  of  bats  and
rodents  which  are  small  in  size  and  belong  to  the  Lissen-
cephaJa  or  lowest  sub-class  of  placental  mammalia,  when
classified  according  to  cerebral  development.  In  the  ancient
strata  of  Mesozoic  age  so  far  as  yet  known  we  also  find  a
predominance  of  undoubted  marsupials,  associated  with  some
species  which  may  perhaps  be  placental,  but  which,  if  so,
are  diminutive  in  size,  and  belonging  to  orders  of  a  low
grade  in  that  class.  During  the  long  period  throughout
which  this  mammalian  fauna  was  persistent,  there  were
abundance  of  terrestrial  and  aquatic  reptiles,  and  the  species
both  of  the  vertebrate  and  invertebrate  classes  were  frequently
changing,  so  that  the  absence  of  a  single  cetacean,  or  other
representative  of  the  Gyrencephalous  orders  can  hardly  be
regarded  as  wholly  accidental,  or  attributed  entirely  to  our
limited  acquaintance  with  the  air-breathers  of  the  period  in
question.  We  may  at  least  afBrm  that,  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  a  comparison  of  this  mammalian  fauna
with  that  of  the  Tertiary  era  which  succeeded  it  next  in

X  2


164  DEVELOPMENT  OF  OBGANIC  LIFE  [Cr.  IX.

chronological  order,  points  to  a  law  of  progressive  develop-
ment from  the  more  simple  to  the  more  complex.

We  have  then  been  fairly  led  by  palseontological  researches
to  the  conclusion  that  the  invertebrate  animals  flourished
before  the  vertebrata,  and  that  in  the  latter  class  fish,  reptiles,
birds,  and  mammalia  made  their  appearance  in  a  chronolo-
gical order  analogous  to  that  in  which  they  would  be  arranged
zoologically  according  to  an  advancing  scale  of  perfection  in
their  organisation.  In  regard  to  the  mammalia  themselves,
they  have  been  divided  by  Professor  Owen,  in  the  classifica-
tion already  alluded  to  (p.  161),  into  four  sub-classes  by
reference  to  modifications  of  their  brain.  In  the  two  lowest^
called  Lyeucephala  and  Lissencephala,  are  included  the
marsupials  and  insectivora,  and  these  have  been  met  with
fossil  in  the  secondary  rocks.  Next  above  them  in  grade  are
the  Gyrencephala,  in  which  Cetaceans,  Proboscidians,  Bnmi-
nants,  Camivora,  and  Quadrumana  are  classed,  all  of  which
ai*e  found  fossil  in  tertiary  strata.  Among  these  the  Quad-
rumana rank  highest,  and  the  Anthropomorphous  family  takes
the  lead  in  organisation  and  instinct  among  the  Quadrumana,
coming  also  last  in  the  order  of  time.  To  crown  the  whole,
the  series  ends  with  the  fourth  great  sub-class,  the  Archen-
cephala,  of  which  man  is  the  sole  representative,  and  of  which
the  fossil  remaius  have  not  yet  been  detected  in  deposits  older
than  the  post-tertiary.

Antecedently  to  investigation,  we  might  reasonably  have
anticipated  that  the  vestiges  of  man  would  have  been  traced
back  at  least  as  far  as  those  Pliocene  strata  in  which  nearly
all  the  testacea  and  a  certain  number  of  the  mammalia  are  of
existing  species,  for  of  all  the  mammalia  the  human  species
is  the  most  cosmopolite,  and  perhaps  more  capable  than  any
other  of  surviving  considerable  vicissitudes  in  climate,  and
in  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe.

No  inhabitant  of  the  land  exposes  himself  to  so  many
dangers  on  the  waters  as  man,  whether  in  a  savage  or  a
civilised  state;  and  there  is  no  animal,  therefore,  whose
skeleton  is  so  liable  to  become  imbedded  in  lacustrine  or  sab-
marine  deposits:  nor  can  it  be  said  that  his  remains  are
more  perishable  than  those  of  other  animals ;  for  in  ancient


Ch.  k.]        at  successive  geological  periods.  165

fields  of  battle,  as  Cnvier  has  observed,  the  bones  of  men
have  suffered  as  little  decomposition  as  those  of  horses  which
were  buried  in  the  same  grave.  But  even  if  the  more  solid
parts  of  our  species  had  disappeared,  the  impression  of  their
form  might  have  remained  engraven  on  the  rocks,  as  have
the  traces  of  the  tenderest  leaves  of  plants,  and  the  soft
integuments  of  many  animals.  Works  of  art,  moreover,
composed  of  the  most  indestructible  materials,  would  have
outlasted  almost  all  the  organic  contents  of  sedimentary
rocks.  Edifices,  and  even  entire  cities,  have,  within  the
times  of  history,  been  buried  under  volcanic  ejections,  sub-
merged beneath  the  sea,  or  engulphed  by  earthquakes ;  and
had  these  catastrophes  been  repeated  throughout  an  indefinite
lapse  of  ages,  the  high  antiquity  of  man  would  have  been
inscribed  in  far  more  legible  characters  on  the  framework  of
the  globe  than  are  the  forms  of  the  ancient  vegetation  which
once  covered  the  islands  of  the  northern  ocean,  or  of  those
gig^tic  reptiles  which  at  still  later  periods  peopled  the  seas
and  rivers  of  the  northern  hemisphere.

Introduction  of  Marty  to  what  extent  a  change  of  the  system,
— I  shall  defer  to  the  next  volume  the  discussion  of  a  theo-
retical question  of  surpassing  interest  with  which  the  palseon-
tologist  has  been  busily  engaged  ever  since  the  time  of
Lamarck,  namely,  whether  it  is  conceivable  that  each  fossil
fauna  and  fiora  brought  to  light  by  the  geologist  may  have
been  connected,  by  way  of  descent  or  generation,  with  that
which  immediately  preceded  it,  our  record  being  so  defective
that  nearly  all  the  intermediate  links  by  which  a  transition
was  effected  fix>m  genus  to  genus,  or  from  species  to  species,
have  in  most  cases  left  behind  them  no  vestiges  of  their
former  existence.  In  support  of  this  opinion,  it  has  been
argued  that  the  earliest  remains  of  man  imply  a  rude  state
of  the  arts  and  an  entire  ignorance  of  the  use  of  metals.  On
the  other  hand,  little  or  no  progress  has  been  made  in  dis-
covering fossil  remains  which  indicate  any  inferiority  in  the
cerebral  development  of  the  men  who  were  contemporary
with  the  mammoth,  and  were  the  fabricators  of  the  earliest
known  stone  weapons.  It  may  fairly  be  argued  that  the
superiority  of  man  depends,  not  on    those  faculties  and


J  66         DEVELOPMENT  OF  ORGANIC  LIFE       [Ch.  IX.

attributes  which  he  shares  in  common  with  the  lower  animals,
but  on  his  reason,  by  which  he  is  distinguished  from  them.
When  it  is  said  that  the  human  race  is  of  far  higher  dignitj
than  were  any  pre-existing  beings  on  the  earth,  it  is  the  in-
tellectual and  moral  attributes  of  our  race,  rather  than  the
physical,  which  are  considered ;  and  it  is  by  no  means  dear
that  the  organisation  of  man  is  such  as  would  confer  a  de-
cided pre-eminence  upon  him,  if,  in  place  of  his  reasoning
powers,  he  was  merely  provided  with  such  instincts  as  are
possessed  by  the  lower  animals.  Without  entering  at  present
into  the  discussion  of  this  and  other  cognate  questions,  we
may  endeavour  to  answer  an  objection  which  has  been  made
to  the  doctrine  of  the  past  uniformity  of  nature.

Is  not  the  interference  of  the  human  species,  it  is  asked,
such  a  deviation  from  the  antecedent  course  of  physical  events
that  the  knowledge  of  such  a  fact  tends  to  destroy  all  our
confidence  in  the  uniformity  of  the  order  of  nature,  both  in
regard  to  time  past  and  future  9  If  such  an  innovation  could
take  place  after  the  earth  had  been  exclusively  inhabited  for
thousands  of  ages  by  inferior  animals,  why  should  not  other
changes  as  extraordinary  and  unprecedented  happen  from
time  to  time  9  If  one  new  cause  was  permitted  to  supervene,
differing  in  kind  and  energy  from  any  before  in  operation,
why  may  not  others  have  come  into  action  at  different  epochs?
Or  what  security  have  we  that  they  may  not  arise  hereafter?
And  if  such  be  the  case,  how  can  the  experience  of  one  period,
even  though  we  are  acquainted  with  all  the  possible  effects
of  the  then  existing  causes,  be  a  standard  to  which  we  can
refer  all  natural  phenomena  of  other  periods  ?

Now  these  objections  would  be  unanswerable,  if  adduced
against  one  who  was  contending  for  the  absolute  uniformity
throughout  all  time  of  the  succession  of  sublunary  events — ^if,
for  example,  he  was  disposed  to  indulge  in  the  philosophical
reveries  of  some  Egyptian  and  Greek  sects,  who  represented
all  the  changes  both  of  the  moral  and  material  world  as  re-
peated at  distant  intervals,  so  as  to  follow  each  other  in  their
former  connection  of  place  and  time.  For  they  compared  the
course  of  events  on  our  globe  to  astronomical  cycles ;  and  not
only  did  they  consider  all  sublunary  affairs  to  be  under  the


CfH.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  167

influence  of  the  celestial  bodies,  but  they  taught  that  on  the
earth,  as  well  as  in  the  heavens,  the  same  identical  pheno-
mena recurred  again  and  agam  in  a  perpetual  vicissitude.
The  same  individual  men  were  doomed  to  be  re-bom,  and  to
perform  the  same  actions  as  before :  the  same  arts  were  to
be  invented,  and  the  same  cities  built  and  destroyed.  The
Argonautic  expedition  was  destined  to  sail  again  with  the
same  heroes,  and  Achilles  with  his  Myrmidons  to  renew  the
combat  before  the  walls  of  Troy.

Alter  erit  torn  Tiphys,  et  altera  quse  vehat  Argo

Dilectos  heroas ;  ertiDt  etiam  altera  bella,

Atque  iterum  ad  Trojam  magnus  mittetur  AchUles.*

The  geologist,  however,  may  condemn  these  tenets  as  ab«
surdy  without  running  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and  denying
that  the  order  of  nature  has,  from  the  earliest  periods,  been
uniform  in  the  same  sense  in  which  we  believe  it  to  be  uni-
form at  present,  and  expect  it  to  remain  so  in  future.  We
have  no  reason  to  suppose,  that  when  man  first  became  master
of  a  small  part  of  the  globe,  a  greater  change  took  place  in
its  physical  condition  than  is  now  experienced  when  districts,
never  before  inhabited,  become  successively  occupied  by  new
settlers.  When  a  powerful  European  colony  lands  on  the
shores  of  Australia,  and  introduces  at  once  those  arts  which
it  has  required  many  centuries  to  mature ;  when  it  imports
a  multitude  of  plants  and  large  animals  firom  the  opposite
extremity  of  the  earth,  and  begins  rapidly  to  extirpate  many
of  the  indigenous  species,  a  mightier  revolution  is  effected  in
a  brief  period  than  the  first  entrance  of  a  savage  horde,  or
their  continued  occupation  of  the  country  for  many  centuries,
can  possibly  be  imagined  to  have  produced.  If  there  be  no
improprieiy  in  assuming  that  the  system  is  uniform  when
disturbances  so  unprecedented  occur  in  certain  localities,  we
can  with  much  greater  confidence  apply  the  same  language
to  those  primeval  ages  when  the  aggregate  number  and  power
of  the  human  race,  or  the  rate  of  their  advancement  in
civilisation,  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  far  inferior.     In

•  Virgil,  Eclog.  It.     For  an  account      Human  Mind,  vol.  ii.  chap.  ii.  sect.  4  ;
of  the«e  doctrines,  see  Dugald  Stewart's      and  Prichard's  Egypt.  Mjthol.  p.  177-
Elemeota  of  the  Philosophy    of   the


168  DEVELOPHENT  OF  OBGANIC  LIEB  [On.  IX.

reasoning  on  the  state  of  the  globe  before  the  existence  of  man,
we  must  be  guided  by  the  same  rules  of  induction  as  when
we  speculate  on  the  state  of  America  in  the  intenral  that
elapsed  between  the  introduction  of  man  into  Asia,  the  sup-
posed cradle  of  our  race,  and  the  arrival  of  the  first  ad-
venturers on  the  shores  of  the  New  World.  In  that  interval,
we  imagine  the  state  of  things  to  have  gone  on  according  to
the  order  now  observed  in  regions  unoccupied  bj  man.  Even
now,  the  waters  of  lakes,  seas,  and  the  great  ocean,  which
teem  with  life,  may  be  said  to  have  no  immediate  relation  to
the  human  race — to  be  portions  of  the  terrestrial  system  of
which  man  has  never  taken,  nor  ever  can  take,  possession ;
so  that  the  greater  part  of  the  inhabited  surface  of  the
planet  may  still  remain  almost  as  insensible  to  our  presence
as  before  any  isle  or  continent  was  appointed  to  be  our
residence.

If  the  barren  soil  around  Sydney  had  at  once  become  fer-
tile upon  the  landing  of  our  first  settlers ;  if,  like  the  happy
isles  whereof  the  poets  have  given  us  such  glowing  descrip-
tions, those  sandy  tracts  had  begun  to  yield  spontaneously
an  annual  supply  of  grain,  we  might  then,  indeed,  have
fancied  alteratiouR  still  more  remarkable  in  the  economy  of
nature  to  have  attended  the  first  coming  of  our  species  into
the  planet.  Or  if,  when  a  volcanic  island  like  Ischia  was,  for
the  first  time,  brought  imder  cultivation  by  the  enterprise
and  industry  of  a  Greek  colony,  the  internal  fire  had  become
dormant,  and  the  earthquake  had  remitted  its  destructive
violence,  there  would  then  have  been  some  ground  for  specu-
lating on  the  debilitation  of  the  subterranean  forces,  when
the  earth  was  first  placed  ujider  the  dominion  of  man.  But
after  a  long  interval  of  rest,  the  volcano  bursts  forth  again
with  renewed  energy,  annihilates  one-half  of  the  inhabitants,
and  compels  the  remainder  to  emigrate.  The  course  of  na-
ture remains  evidently  unchanged ;  and,  in  like  manner,  we
may  suppose  the  general  condition  of  the  globe,  immediately
before  and  after  the  period  when  our  species  first  began  to
exist,  to  have  been  the  same,  with  the  exception  only  of  man's
presence.

The  modifications  in  the  system  of  which  man  is  thi


Ch.  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  169

instrament  do  not,  perhaps,  constitute  so  great  a  deviation
from  preyions  analogy  as  we  nsuallj  imagine ;  we  often,
for  example,  form  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  the  extent  of
onr  power  in  extirpating  some  of  the  inferior  animals,  and
cansing  others  to  multiply ;  a  power  which  is  circumscribed
within  certain  limits,  and  which  is  by  no  means  ex-
clusiyely  exerted  by  our  species.*  The  growth  of  human
population  cannot  take  place  without  diminishing  the  num-
bers,  or  causing  the  entire  destruction,  of  many  animals.  The
larger  beasts  of  prey  in  particular  give  way  before  us ;  but
other  quadrupeds  of  smaller  size,  and  innumerable  birds,  in-
sects, and  pluits,  which  are  inimical  to  our  interests,  increase
in  spite  of  us,  some  attacking  our  food,  others  our  raiment
and  persons,  and  others  interfering  with  our  agricultural  and
horticultural  labours.  We  behold  the  rich  harvest  which  we
have  raised  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow,  devoured  by  myriads
of  insects,  and  are  ofken  as  incapable  of  arresting  their
depredations,  as  of  staying  the  shock  of  an  earthquake,  or
the  course  of  a  stream  of  lava.

A  great  philosopher  has  observed,  that  we  can  command
Nature  only  by  obeying  her  laws ;  and  this  principle  is  true
even  in  regard  to  the  astonishing  changes  which  are  super-
induced in  the  qualities  of  certain  animals  and  plants  by
domestication  and  garden  culture.  I  shall  point  out  in  the
next  volume  that  we  can  only  effect  such  surprising  alter-
ations by  assisting  the  development  of  certain  instincts,  or
by  availing  ourselves  of  that  mysterious  law  of  their  organi-
sation,  by  which  indiyidual  peculiarities  are  transmissible
from  one  generation  to  another.f

It  is  probable,  from  these  and  many  other  considerations,
that  as  we  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the  system,  we  shall  be-
come more  and  more  convinced,  that  the  alterations  caused
by  the  interference  of  man  deviate  far  less  from  the  analogy
of  those  effected  by  other  animals  than  is  usually  supposed.^
We  are  often  misled,  when  we  institute  such  comparisons,  by
our  knowledge  of  the  wide  distinction  between  the  instincts
of  animals  and  the  reasoning  power  of  man ;  and  we  are  apt

•  See  Ch.  XLH.  J  See  Ch.  XXXVIIL.  XXXIX.,  XL.,

t  See  Ch.  XXXVL  XLII.


170         DEVELOPMENT  OF  ORGANIC  UFE       [Ch.  IX.

hastily  to  infer,  that  the  effects  of  a  rational  and  irrational
species,  considered  merely  as  physical  agents^  will  differ  almost
as  much  as  the  faculties  by  which  their  actions  are  directed.

It  is  not,  however,  meant  by  the  foi*egoing  observations
to  convey  the  idea,  that  a  real  departure  from  the  ante-
cedent course  of  physical  events  cannot  be  traced  in  the
introduction  of  man.  K  that  latitude  of  action  which  enables
the  brutes  to  accommodate  themselves  in  some  measure  to
accidental  circumstances  could  be  imagined  to  have  been  at
any  former  period  so  great  that  the  operations  of  instinct
were  as  much  diversified  as  are  those  of  human  reason,  it
might,  perhaps,  be  contended,  that  the  agency  of  man  did
not  constitute  an  essential  deviation  from  the  previously  es-
tablished order  of  things.  It  might  then  have  been  said
that  the  advent  of  man  upon  the  earth  was  an  era  in  the
moral,  not  in  the  physical  world — ^that  our  study  and  con-
templation of  the  earth,  and  the  laws  which  govern  its
animate  productions,  ought  no  more  to  be  considered  in  the
light  of  a  disturbance  or  deviation  from  the  system,  than  the
discovery  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  should  be  regarded  as
a  physical  event  affecting  those  heavenly  bodies.  Their  in-
fluence in  advancing  the  progress  of  science  among  men,  and
in  aiding  navigation  and  commerce,  was  accompanied  by  no
reciprocal  action  of  the  human  mind  upon  the  economy  of
nature  in  those  distant  planets ;  and  so  the  earth  might  be
conceived  to  have  become,  at  a  certain  period,  a  place  of
moral  discipline  and  intellectual  improvement  to  man,
without  the  slightest  derangement  of  a  previously  existing
order  of  change  in  its  animate  and  inanimate  productions.

The  distinctness,  however,  of  the  human  from  all  other
species,  considered  merely  as  an  efficient  cause  in  the  physi-
cal world,  is  real ;  for  we  stand  in  a  relation  to  contemporary
species  of  animals  and  plants  widely  different  from  that
which  irrational  animals  can  ever  be  supposed  to  have  held  to
each  other.  We  modify  their  instincts,  relative  numbers,
and  geographical  distribution,  in  a  manner  superior  in  degree,
and  in  some  respects  very  different  in  kind,  from  that  in
which  any  other  species  can  affect  the  rest.  Besides,  the
progressive  movement  of  each  successive  generation  of  men


Ch,  IX.]  AT  SUCCESSIVE  GEOLOGICAL  PERIODS.  171

caufles  the  human  species  to  differ  more  from  itself  in  power
and  intelligence  at  two  distant  periods,  than  any  one  species
of  the  higher  order  of  animals  differs  from  another.  The
establishment,  therefore,  by  geological  evidence,  of  the  inter-
vention of  such  a  peculiar  and  unprecedented  agency,  long
after  other  parts  of  the  animate  and  inanimate  world  existed,
affords  ground  for  concluding  that  the  experience  during
thousands  of  ages  of  all  the  events  which  may  happen  on
this  globe,  would  not  enable  a  philosopher  to  speculate  with
confidence  concerning  future  contingencies.  But  his  re-
liance need  not  be  shaken  in  the  unvarying  constancy  of  the
laws  of  nature,  or  in  his  power  of  reasoning  from  the  present
to  the  past  in  regard  to  the  changes  of  the  terrestrial  system,
whether  in  the  organic  or  inorganic  world,  provided  that  he
does  not  deny,  in  the  organic  world  at  least,  the  possibility  of
a  law  of  evolution  and  progress.    *


172


CHAPTEE  X,

FUBTHEB  C0N8IDEBATI0N  OF  THE  AGEEEMEKT  OF  THE  ANCIEKT
AND  MODERN  CAUSES  OF  CHANGE — VICISSITUDES  IN  OLIMATB.

ABOUlfEirrs  DEBITED  FBOM  FORMER  DIFFEBBSTCBS  IV  CLDCATI — TEM  BBAXJTT
OF  SUCH  FOBMEB  DIFFEBENCBS  CONSIDBJUD) — CLOCATB  OF  THS  AGBS  OF
BBONZE  AKD  OF  STOZnt — FOSSIL  QUADRUPEDS  AKD  SHELLS  OF  THS  DRIFT —
TEMPEBATURB  IMPL1KD  BT  THE  REMADTS  OF  THE  XAMMOTH  AlTD  OTESR
EXTINCT  QUADBUFEDS^<:ABCASE8  OF  THB  BLEFHAMT  AlTD  BHUrOCBR06  FRB-
SBBYBD  IN  THE  FBOZEN  MUD  OF  SIBBBIA— Df PORTANT  BBARINO  OF  TBM
CONDITION  OF  THESE  FOSSIL  RBXAIMS  ON  THB  THEORY  OF  CLXMATB — TABIA-
TION  IN  THB  TEMPEBATUBE  OF  FOST-OLACXAL  TTXER — OROAXIC  AMD  IKOR-
0AN1C  PROOFS  OF  GREAT  COLD  IN  THE  GLACIAL  EPOCH — INTBB-GLAGXAL
PERIODS  OF  DCRNTEN  AND  CROXBR — BRITISH  PLIOCRNB  STRATA,  SHOWINO
TBANSITION  FROM  WARMER  TO  COLDER  CLXMATB — THB  SIGNS  OF  WARM
TEMFEBATURE  AFFOBDED  BT  ITALIAN  FUOCENB  STRATA — WARM  CLXMATB  OF
CENTRAL   EUROPE  IN  UPPER    MIOCENE  TIMES — XUDPTKLBS   AND   QUADRUMAKA —

FOSSILS   OF   THE    SIWAXIK  HILLS — UPPER  MIOCENE  STRATA   OF  WEST  INDIES

WARM  CLIMATE  IMPLIED  BY  LOWEB  MIOCENE  FAUNA  AND  FLORA — MIOCBNB
FOREST  TREES  IN  HIGH  ARCTIC  LATITUDES — HIGH  TEMPERATURB  OF  THB  BOCENB
PERIOD — SUPPOSED  SIGNS  OF  ICE-ACTION  IMPLIED  BT  ERRATIC  BLOCKS  OF
UPPKR  MIOCENE  AND  MIDDLE  BOCENB  CONGLOMBRATES.

Climate  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere  formerly  different. — An-
other objection  to  the  theory  which  endeavours  to  explain
all  geological  changes  by  reference  to  causes  now  in  action
is  founded  on  the  former  prevalence  of  climates  hotter  than
those  now  experienced  in  corresponding  latitudes.  We  have
seen  (p.  41)  that  Hooke,  about  the  year  1688,  grounded  his
belief  in  the  reality  of  the  higher  temperature  of  the  waters
of  the  ancient  sea  on  the  occurrence  of  fossil  turtles  and
ammonites  in  the  Portland  oolite.  In  later  times  the  shells
and  corals  of  the  other  fossiliferous  strata,  some  older  and
some  newer  than  this  Secondary  or  Mesozoic  rock,  were  ap-
pealed to  as  confirmatory  of  the  same  conclusions,  whilst  the
botanist  referred  to  the  character  of  the  fossil  flora  of  the
ancient  carboniferous  rocks  as  favourable  to  the  same  doctrine.


CH.X.]  FORMEK  VICISSITUDES  OF  CLIMATE.  178

All  indications  of  a  liigh  temperature  recognised  in  the  older
formations  were  the  more  readily  accepted  because  they
seemed  to  lend  support  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  primeval
igneous  fusion  of  the  planet,  the  mass  of  which,  while  it
radiated  heat  into  the  surrounding  atmosphere  and  ocean,
had  gradually  cooled,  and  had  been  constantly  acquiring  a
thicker  crust.

Since  I  first  attempted,  in  the  year  1830,  to  account  for
vicissitudes  of  climate  by  reference  to  changes  in  the  physical
geography  of  the  globe,*  our  knowledge  of  the  subject  has
greatly  increased,  and  the  problem  to  be  solved  has  assumed
a  somewhat  new  aspect.  More  extended  observations  have
shown  that  in  times  past  the  climate  of  the  extra-tropical
regions  has  by  no  means  been  always  hotter  than  now,  but,
on  the  contrary,  there  has  been  at  least  one  period,  and  one
of  very  modem  date  geologically  speaking,  when  the  tempe-
rature of  those  regions  was  much  lower  tiian  at  present.  It
will  be  desirable,  therefore,  before  entering  into  a  discussion
of  the  probable  causes  of  the  changes  of  temperature  which
have  been  experienced  since  the  earliest  of  the  fossiliferous
rocks  were  formed,  to  lay  before  the  reader  a  brief  account
of  the  evidence  by  which  the  reality  of  such  changes  has  been
established.

At  first  sight  it  may  seem  to  be  the  simplest  way  of  dealing
with  this  subject  to  begin  with  a  description  of  the  proofs
deduced  from  organic  remains  of  the  state  of  things  in  very
remote  times,  and  then  to  pass  on  to  successive  variations  in
climate  manifested  by  the  fauna  and  flora  of  later  epochs.
But  such  a  method  is  impracticable,  for  not  only  are  all  the
animals  and  plants  found  fossil  in  the  oldest  rocks  specifically
distinct  from  those  now  living,  but  a  large  part  of  the  genera
and  not  a  few  of  the  orders  to  which  they  belong  have  for
ages  ceased  to  exist.  Consequently,  when  we  attempt  to
make  such  a  comparison  with  the  view  of  determining  the
difference  of  the  climates  which  prevailed  at  two  distant
periods,  we  find  it  almost  impossible  to  apply  the  rules  derived
from  the  study  of  the  present  state  of  the  animate  world  to
another  which  differed  from  it  so  widely.     The  thread  of

*  Principles  of  Geology,  Ist  edition.     1830.


174         CLIMATE  OF  AGES  OF  BRONZE  AND  OF  STONE.    [Ch.  X.

induction  seems  broken,  and  we  become  convinced  that  in
order  to  make  good  our  groimd,  and  to  reason  secnrelj  from
the  known  to  the  unknown,  we  must  first  ascertain  the
relation  which  the  present  organic  creation  bears  to  that  of
the  period  immediately  antecedent,  when  the  species  of  mol-
lusca  or  those  fossils  with  which  we  have  most  to  deal  were
nearly  all  identical,  and  then  carry  back  our  retrospect  step
by  step  to  formations  of  older  date.  In  adopting  this  course
we  have  the  advantage  of  comparing,  in  the  first  instance,  the
species  now  in  being,  of  which  the  habits  and  physiological
characters  are  known,  with  the  animal  and  vegetable  remains
entombed  in  the  Tertiary  formations,  in  which,  as  we  have
seen  in  the  last  chapter,  all  the  classes  of  animals  and  plants
are  represented  in  proportions  very  analogous  to  those  now
prevailing.  By  this  means  we  escape  the  danger  of  one
source  of  error,  namely,  that  of  ascribing  the  predominance
of  certain  genera  or  families  to  a  difference  in  climate  while
in  reality  this  predominance  may  have  depended  not  on  tem-
perature, but  on  the  absence  of  competing  tribes  of  higher
grade,  which,  according  to  the  law  of  progressive  develop-
ment, had  not  yet  made  their  appearance  on  the  earth.

Climate  of  tlie  Ages  of  Bronze  and  of  Stone. — In  pursuance,
then,  of  this  method  of  enquiry,  we  may  consider,  in  the  first
place,  the  climate  of  Europe  in  times  immediately  anterior  to
the  historical.  We  there  find  no  indications  of  any  marked
divergence  from  the  present  condition  of  things,  whether  in
the  memorials  of  the  age  of  bronze  or  in  those  of  the  Neolithic
age,*  which  preceded  it,  namely,  that  to  which  the  Danish
kitchen-middens  and  many  of  the  Swiss  lake  dwellings
belonged.

It  is  evident  that  the  plants  and  animals  which  co-existed
with  man  in  those  ages  were  identical  with  species  now  living
in  the  same  countries,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  known  to
have  been  locally  extirpated  in  historical  times.

The  next  antecedent  era  of  which  we  have  acquired  any
information  is  that  designated  by  the  late  M.  Lartet  ^  the

*  Sir  John  Lubbock,  in  his  '  Prebisto-  stone,  calling  the  older  stone  period,  that
ric  Times,'  p.  3,  has  proposed  the  term  in  which  man  was  contemporary  with
'  Neolithic '  for  this  more  modem  age  of      many  extinct  mammalia,  '  Paleolithic/


C?H.  X.]  CLIMATE  OF  AGES  OF  BRONZE  AND  OF  STONE.  175

Beindeer  period,'  when  that  northern  animal,  together  with
several  others  fitted  for  a  cold  climate,  extended  its  range  to
the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees.  The  mammoth  and  cave-lion,  quad-
rupeds more  characteristic  of  an  anterior  period,  have  been
found  sparingly  in  this  fauna,  and  another  extinct  quadruped,
the  Irish  elk  or  gigantic  deer.*^  The  weapons  then  in  use  by
man  show  a  rude  state  of  the  arts,  and  complete  ignorance  of
the  use  of  metals.  Passing  over  this  intermediate  period,
which  is  as  yet  but  vaguely  and  imperfectly  defined,  we  come
to  the  older  stone  age,  or  *  Palaeolithic  Period,'  comprising
the  ancient  river-gravels  of  Amiens  and  Abbeville  in  France,
and  of  Salisbury  and  Bedford  in  England,  and  the  superficial
deposits  of  many  other  parts  of  Europe.  Here,  for  the  first
time  in  our  retrospect,  we  encounter  the  bones  of  a  large
number  of  extinct  species  of  the  genera  elephant,  rhinoceros,
bear,  tiger,  and  hyeena,  associated  with  the  remains  of  living
animals  and  of  man.  The  human  relics  consist  almost  en-
tirely in  North- western  Europe  of  unpolished  fiint  implements
of  a  type  different  from  those  of  the  later  or  Neolithic  era,
implying  a  less  advanced  state  of  civilisation.  The  gravels
containing  such  works  of  art  and  bones  of  extinct  animals
belong  to  a  time  when  some  of  the  minor  features  of  the
physical  geography  were  diflferent  from  those  now  character-
ising the  same  part  of  Europe,  a  discordance  which  does  not
hold  true  of  the  more  modem  or  Neolithic  times.  The  valleys
of  the  more  ancient  of  the  two  periods  had  not  acquired  their
present  width,  depth,  and  outline.  The  bones  of  man  and
rude  works  of  art  occur  also  in  caves  associated  with  the
remains  of  mammalia  similar  to  those  of  the  palseolithic
gravels  above  mentioned.  The  enormous  volume  of  alluvial
matter  formed  in  the  channels  of  the  old  rivers,  the  contorted
stratification  of  some  parts  of  such  alluvium,  and  the  large  size
of  many  of  the  transported  stones  which  it  contains,  imply  a
climate  which  generated  much  snow  and  ice  in  winter,  and
a  mean  annual  temperature  lower  than  that  now  found  in
the  same  parts  of  Europe.f     The  fossil  shells  also  imbedded

*  See  Mr.  BoydDawkinsMistofmam-  t  For  contortions  of  the  drift,   see

malia  of  the  Dordogne  Cares,  Quart.      Antiquity  of  Man,  by  the  Author,  p.
Joaxn.  of  Sd.,  July  1866,  p.  343.  138.


1 76  CLIMATE  OF  THE  MAMMOTH  [On.  X.

in  the  same  deposits  are  all  of  species  now  living,  and  cha-
racteristic, with  a  few  exceptions  to  be  mentioned  in  the
sequel,  of  Central  and  Northern  Europe.  The  general  absenoe
of  the  bones  of  reptiles,  even  of  those  of  small  dimensions,  is
very  significant,  as  indicating  a  former  state  of  the  atmosphere
and  of  the  waters  uncongenial  to  that  class  of  vertebrata.

Climate  of  the  Mammoth  and  its  assoeiatea. — Gfeologists,
when  they  first  examined  the  fossils  of  the  drift,  approached
the  subject  with  the  fullest  conviction  on  their  minds  that
the  climate  of  the  globe  in  the  olden  times  was  warmer  than
it  is  now.  This  opinion  they  had  legitimately  derived  from
the  study  of  the  Tertiary  and  Secondary  rocks,  and  when
they  encountered  the  bones  of  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  hip-
popotamus, lion,  tiger,  and  hyeena  plentifully  entombed  in  the
old  river-gravels  above  mentioned,  and  in  the  contemporaneous
mud  and  breccia  of  caverns,  they  concluded,  without  hesita-
tion, that  as  all  the  genera  alluded  to  are  now  characteristic  of
warmer  latitudes,  their  presence  was  in  perfect  harmony  with
the  received  doctrine.  The  fact  that  the  numerous  land  and
fresh-water  shells  accompanying  the  same  fossils  were  almost
without  exception  identical  with  those  now  inhabiting  the
same  country,  ought  doubtless  to  have  served  as  a  warning
against  the  belief  in  a  hotter  climate ;  but  the  well-known
forms  of  many  large  and  conspicuous  mammalia  made  a
greater  impression  on  their  minds  than  the  comparatively
diminutive  moUusca,  with  which  few  were  £Eimiliar.  The  late
Dr.  Fleming,  however,  before  the  notion  had  gained  ground
that  a  glacial  epoch  had  intervened  between  tertiary  and
historical  times,  called  in  question,  in  1829,  the  opinion  that
the  bones  of  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros,  and  other  associated
pachyderms  and  beasts  of  prey,  implied  a  tropical  climate.
A  near  resemblance,  he  observed,  in  form  and  osteological
structure  is  not  always  followed  in  the  existing  mammiferous
fauna  by  a  similarity  of  geographical  distribution ;  and  we
must  therefore  be  on  our  guard  against  deciding  too  confi-
dently, from  mere  analogy  of  anatomical  structure,  respecting
the  habits  and  physiological  peculiarities  of  species  now  no
more.  *  The  zebra,'  he  remarked,  *  delights  to  roam  over  the
tropical  plains ;  while  the  horse  can  maintain  its  existence


I  I


Ch.  X.]  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATES.  177

througliont  an  Iceland  winter.  The  buffalo,  like  the  zebra,
prefers  a  high  temperature,  and  cannot  thrive  even  where  the
common  ox  prospers.  The  musk-ox,  on  the  other  hand,
though  nearly  resembling  the  buffalo,  prefers  the  stinted
herbage  of  the  arctic  regions,  and  is  able,  by  its  periodical
migrations,  to  outlive  a  northern  winter.  The  jackal  [Cams
aureus)  inhabits  Africa,  the  warmer  parts  of  Asia,  and  Greece ;
while  the  isatis,  or  arctic  fox  {Canis  lagopus)^  resides  in  the
arctic  regions.  The  African  hare  and  the  polar  hare  have
their  geographical  distribution  expressed  in  their  trivial  ^^
names ;  *  *  and  different  species  of  bears  thrive  in  tropical,
temperate,  and  arctic  latitudes.

Other  writers  soon  followed  up  the  same  line  of  argument,
and  Mr.  Hodgson,  among  others,  in  his  account  of  the  mam-
malia of  Nepal,  stated  that  the  tiger  was  sometimes  found
at  the  very  edge  of  perpetual  snow  in  the  Himalaya.t  Pen-
nant had  previously  mentioned  that  it  had  been  seen  among
the  snows  of  Mount  Ararat  in  Armenia,  and  later  authorities
have  placed  it  beyond  all  doubt  that  a  species  of  tiger  identi-
cal with  that  of  Bengal  is  common  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Lake  Aral,  near  Sussac,  in  the  forty-fifth  degree  of  North
latitude.  Humboldt  remarks,  that  the  part  of  Southern
Asia  now  inhabited  by  this  Indian  species  of  tiger  is  separated
from  the  Himalaya  by  two  great  chains  of  mountains,  each
covered  with  perpetual  snow, — the  chain  of  Kuenlun,  lat.
85**  N.,  and  that  of  Mouztagh,  lat.  42°, — so  that  it  is  im-
possible that  these  animals  should  merely  have  made  ex-
cursions from  India,  so  as  to  have  penetrated  in  summer  to
the  forty-eighth  and  fifty-third  degrees  of  North  latitude.
They  must  remain  all  the  winter  north  of  the  Mouztagh,  or
Celestial  Mountains.  The  last  tiger  killed,  in  1828,  on  the
Lena,  in  lat.  52^°,  was  in  a  climate  colder  than  that  of  St.
Petersburg  and  Stockholm.J

A  species  of  panther  [Felis  irbis)^  covered  with  long  hair,
has  been  discovered  in  Siberia,  evidently  inhabiting,  like  the

•  Fleming,   Ed.   New  Phil.  Journ.,  J  Humboldt,  Fragmens  de  G^ologie,

Ko.  xii.  p.  282,  1829.  &c.,  tome  ii.  p.  388.     Ehrenbergr,  Ann.

t  Jonm.  of  Asiat.  Sec.,  toI.  i.  p.  240.      des  Sci.  nat.,  tome  zxi.  pp.  387,  390.

VOL.  I.  N


/  f:  -^


o


178  CLIMATE  OF  THE  MAMMOTH  [Cm.  X.

tiger,  a  region  north  of  the  Celestial  Mountains,  which  are
in  lat.  42^*

In  regard  to  the  climate  of  the  living  elephant,  the  Be  v.
Eobert  Everest  observes,  that  the  greatest  elevation  at  which
it  is  found  in  a  wild  state  is  in  the  north-west  Himalaya,  at  a
place  called  Nahun,  about  4,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the
sea,  and  in  the  31st  degree  of  N.  lat.,  where  the  mean  yearly
temperature  may  be  about  64°  Fahrenheit,  and  the  difference
between  winter  and  summer  very  great,  equal  to  about  86**  F.,
the  month  of  January  averaging  45°,  and  June,  the  hottest
month,  dV  F.f

Von  Schrenck,  writing  in  1858,  announced  that  in  Amoor-
land,  part  of  North-Eastem  Asia,  then  recently  annexed  to
the  Eussian  Empire,  no  less  than  34  out  of  58  living  qnad-
rupeds  are  identical  with  European  species.  Among  those
which  are  not  European,  some  are  arctic,  others  of  tropical
forms ;  in  illustration  of  which,  he  states  that  the  Bengal
tiger,  ranging  sometimes  northwards  as  far  as  lat.  42%  sub-
sists chiefly  on  the  flesh  of  the  reindeer,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  the  small  tailless  hare  or  pika  occasionally  wanders
from  its  polar  haunts  to  parts  of  Amoorland  as  &r  south
as  48^1  In  America,  the  jaguar  has  been  seen  wandering
from  Mexico  as  far  north  as  Kentucky,  lat.  37°  N.§,  and  in
the  opposite  direction  as  far  as  42®  S.  in  South  America, — a
latitude  which  corresponds  to  that  of  the  Pyrenees  in  the
northern  hemisphere.  ||  The  range  of  the  puma  is  still  wider,
for  it  roams  from  the  equator  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,
being  often  seen  at  Port  Famine,  in  lat.  53°  38'  S.  When  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  first  colonised,  the  two-homed  Afncan
rhinoceros  was  found  in  lat.  34°  29'  S.,  accompanied  by  the
elephant,  hippopotamus,  and  hysena.  Here  the  migration  of
all  these  species  towards  the  south  was  arrested  by  the  ocean ;
but  if  the  African  continent  had  been  prolonged  still  farther,
and  the  land  had  been  of  moderate  elevation,  it  is  highly

♦  Ehrenbcrg.  Ann.  dcs  Sci.  nat.,tomo  Antiquity  of  Man,  p.  168.
xxi.  pp.  387,  800.  §  lUfineBque,  Atlantic  Joom.,  p.  18.

t  Everest  on  Climate  of  Foss.  Eleph.,  ||  Darwin's  Journal    of   Travels   in

Journ.  of  Asiat.  Soc.,  No.  25,  p.  21.  South  America,  &c,  1832  to  1836,  in

t  Nut.  Hist.  Rev.,  vol.  i.  p.  1 2,  1861.  Voyage  of  H.M.S.  Beagle,  p.  169.


Ch.  X,]  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATES.  179

probable  that  they  might  have  extended  their  range  to  a
greater  distance  from  the  tropics.

Now,  if  the  Indian  tiger  can  range  in  our  own  times  to  the
southern  borders  of  Siberia,  or  skirt  the  snows  of  the  Hima-
laya, and  if  the  puma  can  reach  the  fifty-third  degree  of
latitude  in  South  America,  we  may  easily  understand  how
large  species  of  the  same  genera  may  once  have  inhabited
Northern  Europe.  The  mammoth  {E.  primigenius)^  already
alluded  to,  as  occurring  fossil  in  England,  was  decidedly  dif-
ferent firom  the  two  living  species  of  elephants,  one  of  which
is  limited  to  Asia,  south  of  the  31"^  of  N.  lat.,  the  other  to
Africa,  where  it  extends,  as  before  stated,  as  far  south  as  the
Cape  of  Grood  Hope.  The  bones  of  the  fossil  species  are  very
widely  spread  over  Europe  and  North  America ;  but  are  no-
where in  such  profusion  as  in  Siberia,  particularly  near  the
shores  of  the  Frozen  Ocean.

But  if  we  are  thence  to  conclude  that  this  animal  pre-
ferred a  northern  climate,  it  will  naturally  be  asked.  By  what
food  was  it  sustained,  and  why  does  it  not  still  survive  near
the  Arctic  circle  ?  *  Pallas  and  other  writers  describe  the
bones  of  the  mammoth  as  occurring  in  a  very  fresh  state
throughout  all  the  Lowland  of  Siberia,  stretching  in  a  direc-
tion west  and  east,  from  the  borders  of  Europe  to  the  ex-
treme point  nearest  America,  from  south  to  north,  from  lat.
60**  and  from  the  base  of  the  mountains  of  Central  Asia  to
the  shores  of  the  Arctic  Sea.  (See  map,  fig.  7,  p.  180.)  Within
this  space,  scarcely  inferior  in  area  to  the  whole  of  Europe,
fossil  ivory  has  been  collected  almost  everywhere,  on  the
banks  of  the  Irtish,  Obi,  Yenesei,  Lena,  and  other  rivers.
The  elephantine  remains  do  not  occur  in  the  marshes,  but
where  the  banks  of  the  rivers  present  lofty  precipices  of  sand
and  clay;  from  which  circumstance  Pallas  very  justly
inferred  that,  if  sections  could  be  obtained,  similar  bones
might    be    found    in    all    the   elevated  lands   intervening

*  Tlie  speculations  which  follow,  on  companions,    MM.    de    Vemcuil    and

the  ancient  physical  geography  of  Sibe-  Eeyserling,  in  their  great  work  on  the

lia,  and  its  former  fitness  as  a  residence  Geology  of  Russia,  1845  (vol.  i.  p.  497  j,

for  the  mammoth,  were  first  given  in  have,  in  citing  this  chapter,  declared

their  present  form  in  my  4th  edition,  that  their  investigations  have  led  them

June  1S35.    Sir  R  Mnrchison  and  his  to  similar  condasions.

V  2


CLIMATE  OF  THE  MAMMOTH


between  the  great  rivers.     Strohleaberg,  indeed,  had  stated,
before  the  time  of  Pallas,  that  wherever  an;  of  the  great


rivers  overflowed  and  cut  oat  iieBh  channels  daring  floods,
more  fossil  remains  of  the  same  kind  were  iovariablj  dis-
closed.


Ch.  X.]  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATES.  181

As  to  tbe  position  of  the  bones,  Pallas  found  them  in  some
places  imbedded  together  with  marine  remains ;  in  others,
simply  with  fossil  wood,  or  lignite,  such  as,  he  says,  might
have  been  derived  fi:t)m  carbonised  peat.  On  the  banks  of
the  Yenesei,  below  the  city  of  Krasnojarsk,  in  lat,  56'',  he
observed  grinders  and  bones  of  elephants,  in  strata  of  yellow
and  red  loam,  alternating  with  coarse  sand  and  gravel,  in
which  was  also  much  petrified  wood  of  the  willow  and  other
trees.  Neither  here  nor  in  the  neighbouring  country  were
there  any  marine  shells,  but  merely  layers  of  black  coal.*
But  grinders  of  the  mammoth  were  collected  much  farther
down  the  same  river,  near  the  sea,  in  lat.  70°,  associated
with  marine  remains.f  Many  other  places  in  Siberia  are
cited  by  Pallas,  where  sea  shells  and  fishes'  teeth  accompany
the  bones  of  the  mammoth,  rhinoceros,  and  Siberian  buffalo,
or  bison  {Bos  priscus).

Carcasses  of  elephant  and  rhinoceros  preserved  in  frozen
mud. — But  it  is  not  on  the  Obi  nor  the  Yenesei,  but  on  the
Lena,  farther  to  the  east,  where  in  the  same  parallels  of
latitude,  the  cold  is  far  more  intense,  that  fossil  remains
were  first  found  in  the  most  wonderful  state  of  preservation.
In  1772,  Pallas  obtained  from  Wiljuiskoi,  in  lat.  64%  from
the  banks  of  the  Wiljui,  a  tributary  of  the  Lena,  the  carcass
of  a  rhinoceros  {R.  tichorhinus)^  taken  from  the  sand  in
which  it  must  have  remained  congealed  for  ages,  the  soil  of
that  region  being  always  frozen  to  within  a  slight  depth
of  the  surface.  This  carcass,  which  was  compared  to  a
natural  mummy,  emitted  an  odour  like  putrid  flesh,  part
of  the  skin  being  still  covered  with  short  crisp  wool  and  with
black  and  grey  hairs.  In  allusion  to  the  quantity  of  hair  on
the  foot  and  head  conveyed  to  St.  Petersburg,  Pallas  asked
whether  this  animal  might  not  have  inhabited  a  cold  region
of  Middle  Asia,  its  clothing  being  so  much  warmer  than  that
of  the  African  rhinoceros.^

Professor  Brandt,  of  St.  Petersburg,  in  a  letter  to  Baron
Alex.  Von  Humboldt,  dated  1846,  adds  the  following  parti-
culars respecting  this  wonderful  fossil  relic  : — '  I  have  been

*  Pallaa,  Keise  im  Russ.  Beiche,  pp.  t  Nov.  Com.  P^trop.,  toI.  xvii.  p.  684.

400,  410.  I  Ibid.  p.  591.


182  CLDiATE  OF  THE  MAMMOTH  [Ch.  X.

SO  fortunate  as  to  extract  from  cavities  in  the  molar  teeth  of
the  Wiljui  rhinoceros  a  small  quantity  of  its  half-chewed
food,  among  which  fragments  of  pine-leayes,  one-half  of  the
seed  of  a  polygonaceous  plant,  and  very  minute  portions  of
wood  with  porous  cells  (or  small  fragments  of  coniferous
wood),  were  still  recognisable.  It  was  also  remarkable,  on  a
close  investigation  of  the  head,  that  the  blood-vessels  disco-
vered in  the  interior  of  the  mass  appeared  filled,  even  to  the
capillary  vessels,  with  a  broivn  mass  (coagulated  blood),  which
in  many  places  still  showed  the  red  colour  of  blood.'  *

Thirty  years  after  the  discovery  of  the  rhinoceros  by
Pallas,  the  entire  carcass  of  a  mammoth  was  obtained  in
1803,  by  Mr.  Adams,  much  farther  to  the  north.  It  fell  from
a  mass  of  ice,  in  which  it  had  been  encased,  on  the  banks  of
the  Lena,  in  lat.  70"^ ;  and  so  perfectly  had  the  soft  parts  of
the  carcass  been  preserved,  that  the  flesh,  as  it  lay,  was
devoured  by  wolves  and  bears.  This  skeleton  is  still  in  the
Museum  of  St.  Petersburg,  the  head  retaining  its  integument
and  many  of  the  ligaments  entire.  The  skin  of  the  animal
was  covered,  first,  with  black  bristles,  thicker  than  horse-
hair, from  twelve  to  sixteen  inches  in  length  ;  secondly,  with
hair  of  a  reddish-brown  colour,  about  four  inches  long ;  and
thirdly,  with  wool  of  the  same  colour  as  the  hair,  about  an
inch  in  length.  Of  the  fur,  upwards  of  thirty  pounds'  weight
were  gathered  from  the  wet  sandbank.  The  individual  was
nine  feet  high  and  sixteen  feet  long,  without  reckoning  the
large  curved  tusks ;  a  size  rarely  surpassed  by  the  largest
living  male  elephants.f

It  is  evident,  then,  that  the  mammoth,  instead  of  being
naked,  like  the  living  Indian  and  African  elephants,  was
enveloped  in  a  thick  shaggy  covering  of  fur,  probably  as
impenetrable  to  rain  and  cold  as  that  of  the  musk-ox.  J  The
species  may,  as  Cuvier  observed,§  have  been  fitted  by  nature
to  withstand  the  vicissitudes  of  a  northern  climate  ;  and  it
is  certain  that,  from  the  moment  when  the  carcasses,  both  of

*  Quart.  Jonrn.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  \  Fleming,   Ed.   New  Phil.  Joiim.,

iv.  p.  10,  Memoirs.  No.  xii.  p.  285,  1829.
t  Journal  du  Nord,  St.  Petersburg,  §  Ossements  fossils,  4th  ed.,  1836.

7.


Ch.  X.]  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATES.  183

the  rhinoceros  and  elephant,  above  described,  were  buried
in  Siberia,  in  latitudes  64*^  and  70®  N.,  the  soil  must  have
remained  frozen,  and  the  atmosphere  as  cold  as  at  this  day.
The  discoveries  made  in  1843  by  Mr,  Middendorf,  a  distin-
guished Russian  naturalist,  and  which  he  communicated  to
me  in  September  1846,  aflFord  more  precise  information  as  to
the  climate  of  the  Siberian  Lowlands,  at  the  period  when  the
extinct  quadrupeds  were  entombed.  One  elephant  was  found
on  the  Tas,  between  the  Obi  and  Tenesei,  near  the  Arctic
circle,  about  lat.  66''  80'  N.,  with  some  parts  of  the  flesh  in
so  perfect  a  state  that  the  ball  of  the  eye  is  now  preserved  in
the  Museum  at  Moscow.  Another  carcass,  together  with  a
young  individual  of  the  same  species,  was  met  with  in  the
same  year,  1843,  in  lat.  75''  15'  N.,  near  the  river  Taimyr,
with  the  flesh  decayed.  It  was  imbedded  in  strata  of  clay
and  sand,  with  erratic  blocks,  at  about  fifteen  feet  above  the
level  of  the  sea.  In  the  same  deposit  Mr.  Middendorf  ob-
served the  trunk  of  a  larch- tree  {PintLS  larix)^  the  same  wood
as  that  now  carried  down  in  abundance  by  the  Taimyr  to
the  Arctic  Sea.  There  were  also  associated  marine  shells
of  living  northern  species,  and  which  are  moreover  character-
istic of  the  drift  or  glacial  deposits  of  Scotland  and  other
parts  of  Europe.  Among  these,  Nucula  pygmcea,  Tellina  caU
carea.  My  a  truncata,  and  Saxicava  rugosa  were  conspicuous.

So  fresh  is  the  ivory  throughout  Northern  Eussia,  that,
according  to  Tilesius,  thousands  of  fossil  tusks  have  been
collected  and  used  in  turning ;  yet  others  are  still  procured
and  sold  in  great  plenty.  He  declares  his  belief  that  the
bones  still  left  in  Northern  Russia  must  greatly  exceed  in
number  those  of  all  the  elephants  now  living  on  the  globe.

Remains  of  the  mammoth  have  been  collected  from  the
clifis  of  frozen  mud  and  ice  on  the  east  side  of  Behring's
Straits,  in  Eschscholtz  Bay,  in  Russian  America,  lat.  66^  N.
As  the  clifis  waste  away  by  the  thawing  of  the  ice,  tusks  and
bones  fall  out,  and  a  strong  odour  of  animal  matter  is  exhaled
from  the  mud.*

In  1866,  in  the  flat  country  near  the  mouths  of  the  Yene-
sei,  between  lat.  70®  and  75®  N.,  many  skeletons  of  mammoths

♦  See  Dp.  Backland's  description  of  these  bones,  Appen.  to  Beechy*8  Voyage.


184  CLIMATE  OF  THE  MAMMOTH  [Cs.  X.

were  found  retaining  the  skin  and  hair.  The  heads  of
most  of  them  are  said  to  have  been  turned  towards  the
south.  So  late  as  1869-709  an  exploring  expedition  was
made  by  Herr  von  Majdell,  under  the  direction  of  the
Academy  of  St.  Petersburg,  to  the  river  Indigiska,  to  ex-
amine some  remains  said  to  have  been  discovered  there.
We  learn  from  M.  Brandt  *  that  the  travellers  found  the  skin
and  hair  as  well  as  the  bones  of  the  Elephas  prinUgenitis  at
two  points  on  the  river,  about  thirty  miles  distant  from  each
other,  and  sixty-six  miles  from  the  Arctic  Sea.  In  one  of
the  localities  a  perfect  skull  also  was  dug  out.  The  preser-
vation of  these  and  other  individuals  before  mentioned  in  ice
or  frozen  mud  is  a  fact  which  has  a  most  important  bearing
on  all  speculations  concerning  the  climate  of  the  Arctic
regions,  both  at  the  time  when  these  animals  existed,  and
throughout  the  whole  period  which  has  since  elapsed.  There
may  have  been  oscillations  of  temperature,  accompanying
changes  in  the  geography  of  the  globe,  or  partly  due  to
distinct  phases  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  or  to
various  states  of  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth^s  orbit  since  the
era  in  question ;  but  one  thing  is  clear,  that  the  ice  or  con-
gealed mud  in  which  the  bodies  of  such  quadrupeds  were
enveloped  has  never  once  been  melted  since  the  day  when
they  perished,  so  as  to  allow  the  free  percolation  of  water
through  the  matrix,  for,  had  this  been  the  case,  the  soft
pai'ts  of  the  animals  could  not  have  remained  undecom-
posed.

Bome  is  the  most  southern  limit  to  which  the  fossil  bones
of  the  mammoth  have  as  yet  been  traced  in  Europe.  Some
were  detected  in  1858  in  Monte  Sacro,  in  the  environs  of
Rome,  where  they  were  recognised  by  M.  Lartet  among  the
mammalian  remains  obtained  by  Professor  Ponzi  from  the
volcanic  gravel  of  that  locality.  Other  specimens,  as  I  learn
from  M.  de  Verneuil,  have  since  been  found  in  ancient  allu-
vium on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber,  at  Ponte  Molle,  associated
with  flint  implements  of  contemporaneous  date.

We  are  not  obliged,  says  Dr.  Falconer,  to  suppose  that
this  ancient  elephant,  which  in  Europe  extended  its  range

*  Bull,  de  TAcad.  Imp.  des  Sciences  St.  Petersbarg,  vol.  zv.  p.  347.


Ch.  X.]  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATES.  185

from  the  Tiber  to  the  Lena,  and  in  North  America  from
Eschscholtz  Bay  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  was  enveloped  in
every  latitude  with  a  thick  covering  of  fur.  *  The  fine  silky
fleece  with  which  the  domestic  goat  is  clothed  on  the  plains
of  Tibet,  where  the  winter,  at  a  height  of  16,000  feet  above
the  sea,  is  most  severe,  disappears  entirely  from  the  same
animal  in  the  valley  of  Cashmere/*

Dr.  Fleming,  long  before  the  discovery  above  alluded  to
by  Brandt,  of  fossil  pine-leaves  in  the  molar  of  a  Siberian
rhinoceros,  had  hinted,  that  ^  the  kind  of  food  which  the
existing  species  of  elephant  prefers  will  not  enable  us  to
determine,  or  even  to  oflFer  a  probable  conjecture,  concerning
that  of  the  extinct  species.  No  one,'  he  said,  ^  acquainted
with  the  gramineous  character  of  the  food  of  our  fallow-deer,
stag,  or  roe,  would  have  assigned  a  lichen  to  the  reindeer.'

Travellers  mention  that,  even  now,  when  the  climate  of
Eastern  Asia  is  so  much  colder  than  the  same  parallels  of
latitude  fiarther  west,  there  are  woods  not  only  of  fir,  but  of
birch,  poplar,  and  alder,  on  the  banks  of  the  Lena,  as  far
north  as  latitude  69*"  5^t

Professor  Owen  observes,  that  the  teeth  of  the  mammoth
differ  from  those  of  the  living  elephants,  whether  Asiatic  or
African,  having  a  larger  proportion  of  dense  enamel,  which
may  have  enabled  it  to  subsist  on  the  coarser  ligneous  tissues
of  trees  and  shrubs.  In  short,  he  is  of  opinion,  that  the
stmcture  of  its  teeth,  as  well  as  the  nature  of  its  epidermis
and  coverings,  may  have  made  it  '  a  meet  companion  for  the
reindeer.'

It  has  been  suggested,  that  as,  in  our  own  times,  the
northern  animals  migrate,  so  the  Siberian  elephant  and
rhinoceros  may  have  wandered  towards  the  north  in  summer.
The  musk-oxen  annually  desert  their  winter  quarters  in  the
douth,  and  cross  the  sea  upon  the  ice,  to  graze  for  four
months,  from  May  to  September,  on  the  rich  pasturage  of
Melville  Island,  in  lat.  75^  The  mammoth  may  in  like
manner  have  made  excursions,  during  the  warmth  of  a
northern  summer,  from  the  central  or  temperate  parts  of

♦Falconer,    American    Fossil    Ele-  t  Hi  story  of  British  Fossil  Mammalia,

phADt,  Nat.  Hist.  Rev.,  vol.  iii.  1863.         1844,  p.  261  et  seq.


/


\


186  CLIMATE  OF  THE  MAMMOTH  [Ch.  X.

Asia  to  the  75th  parallel  of  latitude^  even  though  the  con-
tinuous land  may  not  have  extended  so  far.

If  such  were  the  ease,  the  preservation  of  their  bones,  or
even  occasionally  of  their  entire  carcasses,  in  ice  or  frozen
soil,  may  be  accounted  for,  without  resorting  to  speculations
concerning  sudden  revolutions  in  the  former  state  and
climate  of  the  earth's  surface.  We  seem  entitled  to  assume,
that,  in  the  time  of  the  extinct  elephant  and  rhinoceros,  the
Lowland  of  Siberia  stretched  less  far  towards  the  north  than
now ;  for  we  have  seen  (p.  181)  that  the  strata  of  this  Lowland,
in  which  the  fossil  bones  lie  buried,  were  originally  deposited
beneath  the  sea ;  and  we  know,  from  the  facts  brought  to
light  in  Wrangel's  Voyage,  in  the  years  1821,  1822,  and
1823,  that  a  slow  upheaval  of  the  land  along  the  borders
of  the  Icy  Sea  is  now  constantly  taking  place,  similar  to  that
experienced  in  part  of  Sweden.  In  the  same  manner,  then,
as  additions  have  been  made  to  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of
Bothnia,  not  only  by  the  influx  of  sediment  brought  down  by
rivers,  but  also  by  the  elevation  and  consequent  drying  up  of
the  bed  of  the  sea,  so  a  like  combination  of  causes  may,  in
modem  times,  have  been  extending  the  low  tract  of  land
where  marine  shells  of  arctic  species  now  existing  and  fossil
bones  occur  in  Siberia.  In  fact,  the  observations  of  Sir  R.
Murchison  and  other  travellers  have  shown  that  such  an  ex-
tension has  actually  taken  place.  Such  a  change  in  the
physical  geography  of  that  region,  implying  a  constant
augmentation  in  the  quantity  of  arctic  land,  would,  according
to  principles  to  be  explained  in  the  twelfth  chapter,  tend  to
increase  the  severity  of  the  winters,  and,* by  limiting  the
supply  of  food,  finally  contribute  to  the  extermination  of  the
mammoth  and  its  contemporaries.

On  referring  to  the  map  (p.  180),  the  reader  will  see  how
all  the  great  rivers  of  Siberia  flow  at  present  from  south  to
north,  from  temperate  to  arctic  regions,  and  they  are  all
liable,  like  the  Mackenzie,  in  North  America,  to  remarkable
floods,  in  consequence  of  flowing  in  this  direction.  For  they
are  filled  with  running  water  in  their  upper  or  southern
course  when  still  frozen  over  for  several  hundred  miles  near
their  mouth,  where  they  remain  blocked  up  by  ice  for  six


Ch.  x.]  and  its  associates.  187

months  in  every  year.  The  descending  waters,  therefore,
finding  no  open  channel,  rush  over  the  ice,  often  changing
their  direction,  and  sweeping  along  forests  and  prodigious
quantities  of  soil  and  gravel  mixed  with  ice.  Now  the  rivers
of  Siberia  are  among  the  largest  in  the  world,  the  Tenesei
having  a  course  of  2,600,  the  Lena  of  2,000  miles ;  so  that
we  may  easily  conceive  that  the  bodies  of  animals  which  fall
into  their  waters  may  be  transported  to  vast  distances  towards
the  Arctic  Sea,  and,  before  arriving  there,  may  be  stranded
upon  and  often  frozen  into  thick  ice.  Afterwards,  when  the
ice  breaks  up,  they  may  be  floated  still  farther  towards  the
ocean,  until  at  length  they  become  buried  in  fluviatile  and
submarine  deposits  near  the  mouths  of  rivers.

Humboldt  remarks  that  near  the  mouths  of  the  Lena  a
considerable  thickness  of  frozen  soil  may  be  found  at  all
seasons  at  the  depth  of  a  few  feet ;  so  that  if  a  carcass  be  once
imbedded  in  mud  and  ice  in  such  a  region  and  in  such  a
climate,  its  putrefaction  may  be  arrested  for  indefinite  ages.*
According  to  Professor  Von  Baer  of  St.  Pet;ersburg,  the  ground
is  now  frozen  permanently  to  the  depth  of  400  feet  at  the
town  of  Yakutzk,  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Lena,  in  lat.  62*^
N.,  600  miles  distant  from  the  Polar  Sea.  Mr.  Hedenstrom
tells  us  that,  throughout  a  wide  area  in  Siberia,  the  boundary
cliffs  of  the  lakes  and  rivers  consist  of  alternate  layers  of
earthy  materials  and  ice,  in  horizontal  stratification  ;t  and
Mr.  Middendorf  told  me  in  1846,  that,  in  his  tour  there  three
years  before,  he  had  bored  in  Siberia  to  the  depth  of  seventy
feet,  and,  after  passing  through  much  frozen  soil  mixed  with
ice,  had  come  down  upon  a  solid  mass  of  pure  transparent
ice,  the  thickness  of  which,  after  penetrating  two  or  three
yards,  they  did  not  ascertain.

The  late  Sir  John  Richardson  informed  me,  that  in  the
northern  parts  of  America,  comprising  regions  now  inhabited
by  many  herbivorous  quadrupeds,  the  drift  snow  is  often  con-
verted into  permanent  masses  of  ice.  This  snow  is  commonly
blown  over  the  edges  of  steep  cliffs,  so  as  to  form  an  inclined

*  Hamboldt,    Fragmens    asiatiques,       ternaire,  who  cites  Observ.  sur  la  Si-
tom.  ii.  p.  393.  Urie,  Bibl.  Univ.,  juillet  1832.

t  B«boiil,  G^l.  de  la  Periodo  qua-


188  CLIMATE  OF  THE  MAHHOTH  [Gh.  X.

talus  hundreds  of  feet  Hgh ;  and,  when  a  thaw  oommenoes,
torrents  rush  from  the  land,  and  throw  down  from  the  top  of
the  cliff  alluvial  soil  and  gravel.  This  new  soil  soon  becomes
covered  with  vegetation,  and  protects  the  foundation  of  show
from  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Water  occasionally  penetrates
into  the  crevices  and  pores  of  the  snow ;  but,  as  soon  as  it
freezes,  it  serves  the  more  effectively  to  consolidate  the  mass
into  compact  ice.  It  may  sometimes  happen  that  cattle
grazing  in  a  valley  at  the  base  of  such  cliffs,  on  the  borders
of  a  river,  may  be  overwhelmed  by  drift  snow  and  at  length
enclosed  in  solid  ice,  and  then  transported  towards  the  polar
regions.  Or  a  herd  of  mammoths,  returning  from  their
summer  pastures  in  the  north,  .may  have  been  suiprised,
while  crossing  a  stream,  by  the  sudden  congelation  of  the
waters.  The  missionary  Hue  relates,  in  his  Travels  in  Tibet
in  1846,  that,  after  many  of  his  party  had  been  frozen  to
death,  the  survivors  pitched  their  tents  on  the  banks  of  the
Mouroui-Ousson  (which  lower  down  becomes  the  famous
Blue  Biver),  and  saw  from  their  encampment  'some  black
shapeless  objects  ranged  in  file  across  the  stream.  As  they
advanced  nearer,  no  change  either  in  form  or  distinctness
was  apparent ;  nor  was  it  till  they  were  quite  close,  that  they
recognised  in  them  a  troop  of  the  wild  oxen,  called  Yak  by
the  Tibetans.*  There  were  more  than  fifty  of  them  en-
crusted in  the  ice.  No  doubt  they  had  tried  to  swim  across
at  the  moment  of  congelation,  and  had  been  unable  to  dis-
engage themselves.  Their  beautiful  heads,  surmounted  by
huge  horns,  were  still  above  the  surface,  but  their  bodies
were  held  fast  in  the  ice,  which  was  so  transparent  that  the
position  of  the  imprudent  beasts  was  easUy  distinguishable ;
they  looked  as  if  still  swimming,  but  the  eagles  and  ravens
had  pecked  out  their  eyes.'  t

Considering  all  the  facts  above  enumerated,  it  seems
reasonable  to  imagine  that  a  large  region  in  Central  Asia,
including,  perhaps,  the  southern  half  of  Siberia,  enjoyed,  at
no  very  remote   period   in  the  earth's   history,  a  climate

*  Conjectured  to  be  the  -wild  stock  of      Tartary,  Tibet,  and  China  (ch.  zv.  p.
Bos  grunniens.  234),  by  M.  Hue    Longman,  1852.

t  Recollections  of  a  Journey  through


Ch.  XL]  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATES.  189

sofiSciently  mild  to  afford  food  for  numerous  herds  of  ele-
phants and  rhinoceroses,  of  species  distinct  from  those  now
living.  It  has  often  been  taken  for  granted  that  herbivorous
animals,  of  large  size,  require  a  very  luxuriant  vegetation  for
their  support ;  but  this  opinion  is,  according  to  Mr.  Darwin,
completely  erroneous : — ^  It  has  been  derived,'  he  says,  ^  from
onr  acquaintance  wit&  India  and  the  Indian  islands,  where
the  mind  has  been  accustomed  to  associate  troops  of  elephants
with  noble  forests  and  impenetrable  jungles.  But  the
soathem  parts  of  Africa,  from  the  tropic  of  Capricorn  to  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  although  sterile  and  desert,  are  re-
markable for  the  number  and  great  bulk  of  their  indigenous
quadrupeds.  We  there  meet  with  an  elephant,  five  species
of  rhinoceros,  a  hippopotamus,  a  giraffe,  the  Bos  Gaffer^  the
elan,  two  zebras,  the  quagga,  two  gnus,  and  several  antelopes.
Nor  must  we  suppose  that,  while  the  species  are  numerous,
the  individuals  of  each  kind  are  few.  Dr.  Andrew  Smith
saw,  in  one  day's  march,  in  lat.  24*^  S.,  without  wandering  to
any  great  distance  on  either  side,  about  150  rhinoceroses^
with  several  herds  of  giraffes,  and  his  party  had  killed,  on  the
previous  night,  eight  hippopotamuses.  Yet  the  coxmtry
which  they  inhabited  was  thinly  covered  with  grass  and
bushes  about  four  feet  high,  and  still  more  thinly  with  mi-
mosa-trees, so  that  the  waggons  of  the  travellers  were  not
prevented  from  proceeding  in  a  nearly  direct  line.'*

In  order  to  explain  how  so  many  animals  can  find  support
in  this  region,  it  is  suggested  that  the  underwood,  of  which
their  food  chiefly  consists,  may  contain  much  nutriment  in  a
small  bulk,  and  also  that  the  vegetation  has  a  rapid  growth ;
for  no  sooner  is  a  part  consumed,  than  its  place,  says  Dr.
Smith,  is  supplied  by  a  fresh  stock.  Nevertheless,  after
making  every  allowance  for  this  successive  production  and
consumption,  it  is  clear,  from  the  facts  above  cited,  that  the
quantity  of  food  required  by  the  larger  herbivora  is  much  less
than  we  have  usually  imagined.  Mr.  Darwin  conceives  that
the  amount  of  vegetation  supported  at  any  one  time  by  Great
Britain  may  exceed,  in  a  tenfold  ratio,  the  quantity  existing

♦  Darwin,  Journal  of  Travels  in  S.      H.M.S.  Beagle,  p.  98.     2nd  ed.,  London,
America,  &c,  1832-1836,  in  YojagO  of      1845,  p.  86.


1 90  CLIMATE  OF  EUEOPEAN  DRIFT  [Ck.  X.

on  an  equal  area  in  the  interior  parts  of  Southern  Afirica.
It  is  remarked,  moreover,  in  illustration  of  the  small  con-
nection discoverable  between  abundance  of  food  and  the
magnitude  of  indigenous  mammalia,  that  while  in  the  desert
part  of  Southern  Africa  there  are  so*  many  huge  animals,
there  is  not,  in  Brazil,  where  the  splendour  and  exuberance
of  the  vegetation  are  unrivalled,  a  single  wild  quadruped  of
the  largest  size.

It  would  doubtless  be  impossible  for  herds  of  mammoths
and  rhinoceroses  to  subsist,  at  present,  throughout  the  year,
even  in  the  southern  part  of  Siberia,  covered  as  it  is  with
snow  during  winter ;  but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  a
vegetation  capable  of  nourishing  these  great  quadrupeds  to
have  once  flourished  between  the  latitudes  40**  and  65**  N.

Climate  of  European  Drift  and  Gave  Deposits. — ^We  may
now  ask,  With  what  European  deposits  does  the  frozen  mud
of  Siberia  containing  the  remains  of  the  mammoth  in  so
fresh  a  state  correspond  geologically  P  Their  superficial  dis-
tribution, and  the  species  of  mammalia,  as  well  as  the  fact
that  the  shells  which  Middendorf  and  others  observed  in
them  are  of  living  species,  seem  to  connect  them  chronologi-
cally with  that  palaeolithic  drift  in  which  flint  implements
have  been  detected  in  England,  France,  and  Italy.  The
temperature  which  prevailed  in  the  valleys  of  the  Thames,
Somme,  and  Seine  at  the  era  in  question,  was,  according  to
Mr.  Prestwich,  20*  Fahrenheit  colder  than  now,  or  such  as
would  now  belong  to  a  country  from  10®  to  15°  of  latitude
more  to  the  north.*  This  estimate  is  founded  on  a  careful
analysis  of  the  land  and  fresh-water  shells  which  accompany
the  remains  of  the  mammoth  and  its  associates  in  the
palaeolithic  alluvium.  If  we  confine  our  attention  to  those
terrestrial  shells  which  are  most  commonly  buried  in  the
same  gravel  and  sand  as  the  Elephas  primigemus  and  JBhiivO'
ceros  tichorhinus,  we  find  them  to  amount  to  no  less  than
48  species  in  the  valley  of  the  Thames  and  its  neighbourhood.
All  but  two  of  these  still  survive  in  Britain;  these  two,
Helix  incarnata  and  Helix  rud-erata,  still  inhabit  the  continent
of  Europe,  and  have  a  great  range  from  north  to  south.     The

*  Prestwich,  Phil.  Trans.,  1864,  part  2,  p.  89.


Ck.  X.]  AND  CAVE  DEPOSITS.  191

associated  fresh-water  shells,  more  than  twenty  in  number,  are
also  British  species ;  but  as  they  occur,  with  two  or  three
exceptions,  as  far  north  as  Finland,  their  presence  is  not
opposed  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  cold  climate,  especially  as  the
LimncBCB  are  capable  of  being  frozen  up,  and  then  reviving
again  when  the  river-ice  melts.     At  Fisherton,  near  Salisbury,
one  of  the  rude  flint  implements  of  the  earliest  stone  age
was  found  in  drift  containing  the  mammoth  and  Siberian
rhinoceros,  together  with  the  Greenland  lemming  and  a
SpennophiluSy  another  northern  form  of  rodent  allied  to  the
marmot,  besides  the  tiger,  hysena,  horse,  and  other  extinct  and
liying  species ;  the  whole  assemblage  being  confirmatory  of
the  opinion,  that  the  men  of  the  early  stone  period  had  often
to  contend  with  a  climate  more  severe  than  that  now  pre-
vailing in  the  same  parts  of  Europe.*    The  late   Edward
Forbes  compared  the  condition  of  Britain  and  the  neighbour-
ing parts  of  the  continent,  during  the  period  next  preceding
the  historical,  to  the  ^  barren  grounds '  of  Boreal  America,
including  the  Canadas,  Labrador,  Bupert's  Land,  and  the
countries   northwards  where  the  reindeer,  musk-ox,  wolf,
arctic  fox,  and  white  bear  now  live.f     But  we  find  in  some
parts  of  the  drift  evidence  of  a  conflicting  character,  such  as
may  suggest  the  idea  of  the  occasional  intercalation  of  more
genial  seasons  of  sufficient  duration  to  allow  of  the  migration
aod  temporary  settlement  of  species  coming  from  another  and
more  southern  province  of  mammalia,  so  that  their  remains
were  buried  in  river  gravels  at  the  same  level  as  the  bones
of  animals  and  shells  of  a  more  northern  climate.     If  we
*Uow  a  vast  lapse  of  ages  for  the  accumulation  of  the  drift,
we  may  take  for  granted  that  there  must  have  been  such
changes  in  climate,  owing  chiefly  to  geographical  conditions
to  be  explained  in  the  twelfth  chapter,  and  perhaps  sometimes
modified  by  astronomical  causes,  which  will  be  treated  of
u^  the  thirteenth  chapter.     Bones  of  the  hippopotamus,  of  a
species  closely  allied  to  that  now  inhabiting  the  Nile,  are
often  accompanied  in  the  valley  of  the  Thames  and  elsewhere

*  Ant.  of  Man,  3rd  edit.,  Appendix,       Forbes,  in  the  Memoirs  of  Geol.  Survey
p.  5.  of  Great  Brit.,  vol.  i.  p.  336.     1846.

"^  See  an    admirable    essay    by    £.


192  GLACIAL  EPOCH.  [Ch.  X.

by  a  species  of  bivalve  shell,  Cyrena  {Carbicula)  JlwninaliSf
now  living  in  the  Nile  and  ranging  through  a  great  part  of
Asia  as  far  as  Tibet,  but  quite  extinct  in  the  rivers  of  Europe-
Imbedded  in  the  same  alluvium  with  this  shell,  we  find  at
Grays  in  Essex,  Unto  littoralis^  a  mussel  no  longer  British,
but  abounding  in  France  in  rivers  more  southern  than  the
Thames.  The  Hydrobia  marginata  is  also  a  shell  Bometimes
met  with  in  the  drift,  a  species  now  inhabiting  more  southern
latitudes  in  Europe.  The  kind  of  elephant  and  rhinoceros
accompanying  the  Cyrena  at  Grays  {E.  antiqvAM  and  JS.  mega-
rhimis)  are  not  the  same  as  the  mammoth  and  rhinoceros
which  occur  with  their  flesh  in  the  ice  and  frozen  mud  of
Siberia,  or  in ,  those  assemblages  of  mammalia  which  have
an  arctic  character  in  the  drift  of  England,  France,  and
Germany.  Sonie  zoologists  conjecture  that  the  fossil  species
of  hippopotamus  was  fitted  for  a  cold  climate,  but  it  seems
more  probable  that  when  the  temperature  of  the  river-water
was  congenial  to  the  Cyrena  above  mentioned,  it  was  also
suited  to  the  hippopotamus.

Olacml  Epoch. — The  next  step  of  our  retrospect  carries  us
back  to  what  has  been  called  the  Glacial  Epoch,  which,
though  for  the  most  part  anterior  to  the  valley-drifts  and
cave  deposits  of  the  palaeolithic  age  above  mentioned,  was
still  so  closely  connected  with  that  period  that  we  cannot
easily  draw  a  line  of  demarcation  between  them.  The  disper-
sion of  large  angular  fragments  of  rock,  called  erratics,  over
the  northern  parts  of  Europe  and  North  America,  fer  from
the  nearest  parent  rocks  from  which  they  could  have  been
derived,  had  long  presented  a  difficult  enigma  to  geologists
before  it  began  to  be  suspected  that  they  might  have  been
transported  by  ice,  either  on  land  or  by  floating  bergs,  at  a
period  when  large  parts  of  the  present  continents  were  sub-
merged beneath  the  sea.

These  blocks  are  observed  to  extend  in  Europe  as  far  south
as  lat.  50°,  and  still  farther  in  America,  or  to  lat.  40°.  It  was
remarked  that  some  of  them  were  polished,  and  striated  on
one  or  more  of  their  sides  in  a  manner  strictly  analogous  to
stones  imbedded  in  the  moraines  of  existing  glaciers  in  the
Alps.    In  many  areas  covered  with  them  both  in  America


/


\


Ch.  X.]  INTER-GLACIAL  PERIODS.  1 93

and  Europe,  the  uuderlyiug  solid  rocks  were  seen  to  be
marked  by  similar  scratches  and  rectilinear  furrows,  their
direction  usually  coinciding  with  the  course  which  the  erratics
themselves  had  taken.  As  both  the  smoothing  and  striation
of  the  transported  fragments  and  the  surfaces  of  the  rocks
in  situ  were  identical  in  character  with  those  recently
produced  by  existing  glaciers,  it  was  at  length  admitted  (but
not  till  after  the  point  had  been  controverted  for  a  quarter
of  a  century,  and  in  direct  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  the
earlier  geologists)  that  the  climate  which  preceded  the  his-
torical was  not  only  colder  as  far  south  as  lat.  50''  in  Europe,
and  even  to  46**  in  the  Alps,  but  was  marked  by  an  in-
tensity of  cold  quite  unequalled  at  present  in  corresponding
latitudes,  whether  in  the  northern  or  southern  hemisphere.

Some  marine  shells  of  living  arctic  species,  and  which  no
longer  frequent  the  seas  of  temperate  latitudes,  were  found
in  the  glacial  drift  of  Scotland  and  North  America;  so
that  evidence  derived  from  the  organic  as  well  as  from  the
inorganic  world  conspired  to  establish  the  former  prevalence
of  a  climate  now  proper  to  polar  latitudes  throughout  a  great
part  of  Europe.

By  means  of  these  drifts,  and  others  containing  assem-
blages of  marine  shells  more  or  less  northern  in  character,
great  oscillations  in  the  level  of  the  land  since  the  com-
mencement of  the  Glacial  epoch  were  proved  to  have  taken
place.  The  change  of  level  in  Scotland,  as  demonstrated
by  this  kind  of  proof,  amounts  to  more  than  500  feet,  in
some  parts  of  England,  as  in  Cheshire,  to  1,300,  and  in
North  Wales  to  1,400  feet;  these  movements  having  all
occurred  in  Post-Tertiary  times,  or  within  the  period  of
the  living  testacea.  But  Professor  Ramsay  infers,  from
the  position  of  the  stratified  drifts  of  the  Glacial  period  in
North  Wales,  that  the  full  extent  of  the  vertical  move-
ment which  brought  about  first  the  submergence  and  then
the  re-emergence  of  the  land  exceeded  2,000  feet.

Inter^Gldcial  Periods, — Without  entering  in  this  place
into  the  proofs  of  two  continental  periods  in  Britain  during
the  Glacial  epoch,  separated  from  each  other  by  a  long
interval  of  submergence,  during  which  Great  Britain  and

VOL.  I.  0


194  INT^-GLACIAL  PERIODS.  [Cs.  X.

Ireland  were  in  the  state  of  an  archipelago  of  small  islands,
it  may  be  affirmed  that  the  excessive  cold  lasted  for  a  long
series  of  ages,  although  not  always  with  the  same  intensity.
As  illustrative  of  the  fact  of  the  cold  having  been  intermitted
or  sometimes  mitigated  for  a  season,  may  be  mentioned  what
the  late  Hugh  Miller  called  ^  striated  pavements.'  These
consist  of  horizontal  surfaces  of  boulder  clay,  in-  which  the
imbedded  boulders  are  seen  to  have  been  subjected  to  a  pro-
cess of  abrasion  similar  to  that  which  the  solid  rock  below
had  previously  undergone.  In  such  instances  large  stones
or  blocks  fixed  in  the  clay  have  not  only  their  original  and
independent  striee,  but  have  subsequently  suffered  a  new
striation  which  is  parallel  and  persistent  across  them  alL
These  appearances  have  been  observed  on  the  shores  of  the
rirth  of  Forth,  below  Edinburgh,  and  in  other  places,
both  on  the  east  and  west  coasts  of  Scotland,  and  On  the
shores  of  the  Solway  in  England.  Some  examples  of  this
second  striation  may  have  been  due  to  the  friction  of  ice-
bergs on  the  bed  of  the  sea  during  a  period  of  submergence ;
others  to  a  second  advance  of  land  glaciers  over  morainea  of
older  date.*

M.  Morlot  and  others  have  adduced  abundant  evidence  of
two  glacial  periods  in  the  Alps,  during  the  first  of  which
the  glaciers  attained  colossal  dimensions,  filling  the  great
valley  of  Switzerland  with  ice,  which  reached  from  the
Alps  to  the  Jura,  while  on  the  southern  side  of  the  great
chain  other  contemporaneous  glaciers  invaded  the  plains  of
the  Po,  where  they  have  left  moraines  of  truly  gigantic
dimensions.  After  these  huge  glaciers  had  retreated  for  a
time,  they  advanced  again,  and  though  not  on  so  large  a
scale,  they  still  vastly  exceeded  in  size  the  largest  Swiss
glaciers  of  our  day.  The  interval  of  milder  weather,  marked
by  the  decrease  of  snow  and  ice  in  the  Alps,  has  been  called
by  Prof.  Heer  the  Inter-Glacial  period,  which  must  have
been  of  considerable  duration,  for  it  gave  time  for  the
accumulation  of  dense  beds  of  lignite,  like  those  at  Diimten,
and  other  localities  near  Ziirich.    During  this  intercalated

*  A.  Geikie,  Phenomena  of  Glacial      Messrs.    C.  Maclaren,    Hugh    Miller,
Drift  of  Scotland,  p.   66,   who  cites      Milne-Holme,  and  Smith  of  Jordan-hilL


C«.  X.]  INTEB-GLACIAL  PERIODS.  195

series  of  warmer  seasons  the  climate  is  supposed  by  Heer  to
have  closely  resembled  that  now  experienced  in  Switzerland.
He  infers  this  from  the  fossil  flora  of  the  lignite,  especially
from  the  ocenrrence  of  cones  of  the  Scotch  and  spruce  firs,  and
the  leaves  of  the  oak  and  yew,  all  of  living  species,  as  well  as
from  the  seeds  of  certain  marsh  plants.  The  insects  also,  and
the  fresh- water  shells,  tell  the  same  tale.  Among  the  mam-
malia occurring  in  the  lignite-bearing  shales  of  Diimten  are
an  elephant  {E.  aniiquvs)y  an  extinct  species  of  bear  [Ursus
9pel€eus)y  and  a  rhinoceros  diflFerent  from  R.  tichorhinns.  That
the  formation  of  the  shale  and  lignite  containing  the
above-mentioned  remains  was  both  preceded  and  followed  by
periods  of  greater  cold  is  shown  on  the  one  hand  by  the
polished  and  striated  rock  surfaces  on  which  the  shale  and
lignite  rest,  and  on  the  other  by  the  large  size  of  the  erratic
blocks 'which  are  superimposed  upon  them.*

In  England  the  lignite,  or  Forest  Bed  as  it  is  called,  of
Cromer,  on  the  Norfolk  coast,  presents  a  singular  analogy
to  that  to  Diimten  above  described.  It  contains  in  like
manner  the  cones  of  the  spruce  and  the  Scotch  fir,  and  the
seeds  and  leaves  of  marsh  plants,  and  some  shells  and
mammalia  in  common  with  the  Swiss  deposit.  It  was  also
preceded  and  followed  by  a  period  of  greater  cold.  The
antecedence  of  a  colder  climate  is  proved  by  the  arctic  charac-
ter of  a  large  proportion  of  the  shells  of  living  species  in-
cluded in  the  marine  strata  of  Chillesford,  near  Ipswich,  in
lat.  52®  N.,  which,  according  to  the  observations  of  Messrs.
Prestwich  and  Searles  Wood,  are  more  ancient  than  the
forest  or  lignite  bed.  On  the  other  hand,  that  the  Forest  Bed
of  Cromer  was  followed  by  an  era  of  severe  cold,  is  shown  by
the  fact  that  it  underlies  the  great  mass  of  glacial  drifb,  which
is  in  part  unstratified,  and  contains  boulders  and  angular
blocks  tiunsported  from  great  distances,  and  some  of  them
exhibiting  polished  and  striated  surfafie8.t

We  are  by  no  means  suflSciently  advanced  in  our  interpre-
tation of  the  monuments  of  the  Glacial  epoch,  and  of  the
long  succession  of  events  which  mark  its  history,  to  be  able
to  affirm  that  the  inter-glacial  periods  of   Diimten   and

*  Hear,  Urwelt  der  Sehweic,  p.  532.        t  Antiquity  of  Man,  pp.  212-218.

o  2


196  INTER-GLACIAL  PERIODS.  [Ch.  X.

Cromer,  above  mentioned,  were  contemporaneons ;  but  ihey
both  of  them  alike  demonstrate  that  there  were  oscillations
of  temperature  in  the  course  of  that  long  epoch  of  cold.
There  were  also  great  changes,  as  before  stated,  in  the  form
of  the  earth's  crust,  many  movements  of  upheaval  and  subsi-
dence, and  many  conversions  of  sea  into  land,  and  land  into
sea,  during  the  Glacial  epoch.  We  are  in  danger  of  under-
rating the  quantity  of  time  during  which  the  cold  prevailed ;
because,  in  proportion  as  the  ice  increases  in  thickness,  it
cancels  all  marks  of  antecedent  glaciation.  The  grinding
action  of  the  great  ice-sheet  which  now  envelopes  Grreenland
illustrates  this  process.  Were  that  ice  to  melt,  it  would
require  as  much  skill  to  detect  the  evidence  of  the  moraines
and  erratics  of  an  older  time  as  in  the  caj^e  of  a  palimp-
sest to  recover  the  work  of  the  original  author,  which  had
been  purposely  washed  out  to  make  room  for  the  new  manu-
script.

From  the  foregoing  observations,  the  reader  will  leam
that  the  prevalence  of  a  colder  climate  at  the  close  of  the
Tertiary,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  Post-Tertiary  periods,
has  been  inferred  from  two  perfectly  independent  sources  of
evidence,  the  first  of  which  may  be  called  inorganic,  such  as
erratic  blocks,  moraines,  and  the  polishing  and  striation  of
rocks ;  and  the  second,  organic,  such  as  the  arctic  character
of  the  shells  found  in  the  drift  of  temperate  regions.  But
another  or  third  proof  was  also  pointed  out  by  the  late
Edward  Forbes,  as  derivable  from  the  present  geographical
distribution  of  animals  and  plants  in  mountainous  regions,
especially  in  high  latitudes,  in  Europe  and  North  America.
After  the  refrigeration  of  the  northern  hemisphere  had  lasted
for  thousands  of  years,  an  arctic  fauna  and  flora  must  have
inhabited  the  lower  lands  of  temperate  latitudes,  at  a  time
when  the  more  elevated  parts  of  the  same  country  were
buried  under  permanent  snow  and  ice.  On  the  return  of  a
warmer  climate,  when  the  excess  of  snow  was  gradually
reduced,  the  arctic  species  of  plants,  insects,  birds,  and
mammalia,  would  ascend  to  the  higher  parts  of  each  con-
tinent, while  the  plains  would  be  invaded  by  species  migrat-
ing from  the  south.    Hence  an  arctic  fauna  and  flora,  which


Ch.  X.]  TRANSITION  FROM  WARMER  TO  COLDER  CLIMATES.      197

once  extended  from  polar  latitudes  far  to  the  south,  ranging
continuously  over  what  are  now  the  temperate  regions  of
America,  Europe,  and  Asia,  became  restricted  to  the  sum-
mits of  the  highest  chains,  such  as  the  Alps  or  the  mountains
of  Scotland,  Scandinavia,  and  New  Hampshire  in  the  United
States.  The  identity  of  the  species  now  found  in  isolated
patches  at  or  near  the  tops  of  so  many  widely  separated
mountains  would  have  been  inexplicable,  had  not  the  geolo-
gist  discovered  that  about  the  close  of  the  Tertiary  era  there
was  a  glacial  epoch  instead  of  that  warm  temperature
formerly  assigned  to  times  preceding  the  historical.*

British  Pliocene  stratay  showing  transition  from  warmer  to
colder  climate. — When  we  pass  beyond  the  ages  when  a
colder  temperature  prevailed,  and,  receding  a  step  farther
into  the  past,  examine  the  fossils  of  the  British  Pliocene
strata,  we  find  in  the  earliest  or  lowest  members  of  them
very  interesting  proofs  of  a  climate  warmer  than  that  now
prevailing  in  England,  and  more  resembling  that  of  the
Mediterranean.  As  we  ascend  in  the  series,  the  shells  of
successive  groups  of  strata,  provincially  called  crag  in  Nor-
folk and  Suffolk,  are  seen  to  consist  less  and  less  of  southern
species,  while  the  number  of  northern  forms  is  always  aug-
menting, until  in  the  uppermost  or  newest  groups,  in  which
almost  all  the  shells  are  of  living  species,  the  fauna,  is  very
arctic  in  character,  and  that  even  in  the  52nd  and.  64th
degree  of  North  latitude.f

Pliocene  strata  of  Italy, — The  Pliocene  strata  of  Italy,
commonly  called  sub-Apennine,  point  in  like  manner  to  a
warm  climate.  Such,  for  example,  of  the  fossil  shells  of
Sienna^  Parma,  and  Asti  as  are  of  species  now  inhabiting
the  Mediterranean  and  the  Indian  Ocean,  correspond  in  aize
with  individuals  taken  from  the  warmer  of  the  two  seas,
those  now  surviving  in  the  Mediterranean  appearing  to  be
stunted  in  their  growth,  as  if  deprived  of  the  favourable  con-
ditions which  the  Pliocene  period  afforded  them  in  Italy  .J

♦  Edward  Forbes*  Memoirs  of  Geol.  {  Professors  Guidotti  of  Parma,  and

Snirey,  roL  i.  p.  399.     1846.  Bonelli  of  Turin,  pointed  out  to  me,  in

t  See  abore,  p.  196 ;  also  Elements  of  1 828,  many  examples  in  con6rmation  of

OcoL,  pp,  198,  204,  edit  of  1865  ;  and  this  point.
Student's  Elements,  1871,  p.  169.


1 98  WARM  CLIMATE  OF  UPPER  MIOCENE  PERIOD.     [Ch,  X.

It  may  also  be  observed,  that  the  extinct  species  of  the  sub-
Apennine  fauna  belong,  in  great  part,  to  forms  which  are
now  most  largely  developed  in  equatorial  regions,  as,  for
example,  the  genera  Caneellaria,  Cassidaria,  Fleurotoma,  and
Cypraea.

Warm  climate  of  Upper  Miocene  Period. — ^The  next  step
in  our  retrospective  survey  carries  us  to  the  monuments  of
the  Upper  Miocene  period.  In  the  marine  formations  of
this  era  a  third  or  more  of  the  testacea  belong  to  living
species,  not  a  few  of  which  are  now  inhabitants  of  more
southern  latitudes,  and  of  the  associated  fossil  species  un-
known as  living  some  belong  to  genera  now  characteristic
of  more  southern  climates.  Although  in  Great  Britain
Upper  Miocene  strata  are  entirely  wanting,  they  occur  in
Belgium  and  North  Germany,  where  they  contain  shells  of
the  genera  Conus,  Cancellaria,  and  Oliva — forms  all  of  them
foreign  to  our  seas  as  well  as  to  our  British  Pliocene  deposits,
and  proper  to  and  indicative  of  a  higher  temperature.

The  French  strata  of  the  same  age,  called  the  Faluns  of
the  Loire,  point  to  similar  inferences,  and,  like  the  contem-
poraneous beds  of  the  Vienna  basin,  contain  some  fossil  shells
of  species  now  living  in  Senegal  or  off  the  western  coast  of
Africa.  The  Upper  Miocene  flora  and  fauna  of  the  whole
of  Central  Europe  afford  unmistakable  evidence  of  a  climate
approaching  tliat  now  only  experienced  in  sub-tropical  re-
gions. In  one  of  the  newest  deposits  of  this  Upper  Miocene
formation,  Professor  H^er  has  detected,  at  (Eninghen,  in
Switzerland,  the  leaves,  fruits,  and  sometimes  flowers  of
about  500  species  of  plants,  in  which  we  find  a  near  re-
semblance to  the  flora  of  the  Carolinas  and  other  Southern
States  of  the  American  Union.  After  selecting  488  of  these
species  as  capable  of  comparison,  specifically  or  generically,
with  plants  now  living,  he  finds  that  131  are  such  as  might
be  referred  to  the  temperate  zone,  26(5  to  a  sub-tropical,
and  85  to  a  tropical  latitude.  In  the  present  state  of  the
globe,  the  island  of  Madeira  presents  the  nearest  approach
to  such  a  flora.  The  proportion  of  arborescent  as  compared
to  the  herbaceous  plants  is  very  great,  and  among  the  former
predominance  of  evergreens  implies  an  absence  of  severe


(


\


ch.  xj  fossils  of  the  siwalik  hills.  199

winter  cold.  A  rich  insect  fkuna,  sach  as  belongs  to  a  warm
climate,  is  also  attested  by  the  great  namber  of  the  species
of  those  genera  which  are  most  easily  preser^able  in  a  fossil
state.  The  reptiles  which  play  so  insignificant  a  part  in
the  Pliocene  &nna  of  Central  and  Northern  Europe  form  a
more  conspicuous  feature  in  these  Miocene  formations.  At
(Eninghen  there  are  two  tortoises  and  three  species  of  sala-
manders, one  of  them  more  gigantic  in  size  than  the  living
species  of  Japan.  Bones  of  the  monkey  tribe  are  also  met
with  in  Upper  Miocene  strata  near  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees
in  France.  Among  them  is  a  gibbon,  or  long-armed  ape,
equal  to  man  in  stature,  and  the  femur  of  a  large  species  of
this  family  has  been  detected  by  Dr.  Kaup  in  strata  of  the
same  age  at  Eppelsheim,  near  Darmstadt,  in  a  latitude
which  corresponds  to  the  southern  part  of  Cornwall.*  In
Greece  also,  near  Athens,  the  remains  of  Upper  Miocene
quadrumana  have  been  met  with,  confirming  the  inferences
as  to  the  warm  temperature  of  Europe  previously  drawn  by
naturalists  from  the  fossils,  shells,  and  corals  of  Touraine,
Bordeaux,  and  Vienna.

Fossils  of  the  Siwalik  Hills. — It  is  a  matter  of  no  small
interest  to  have  learnt  that  when  the  climate  of  Europe  was
sub-tropical,  a  still  greater  heat  prevailed  nearer  the  equator.
Our  best  information  on  this  subject  is  afforded  by  the
investigations  of  Dr.  Falconer  and  Sir  Proby  Cautley,  who
collected,  in  1837,  a  large  number  of  fossil  remains  from  the
Siwfilik  hills,  which  skirt  the  southern  base  of  the  Himalaya
to  the  west  of  the  river  Jumna.  Here  the  abundance  and
variety  of  the  fossil  mammalia  is  prodigious,  there  being  no
less  than  seven  species  of  proboscidians  of  the  genera  mas-
todon and  elephant.  With  these  a  huge  extinct  four-horned
ruminant,  called  Sivatherium,  was  found,  as  well  as  a  camel,
a  hippopotamus,  a  hyena,  and  more  than  one  species  of
monkey.  The  associated  reptiles  also  bear  witness  to  a  tem-
perature higher  than  that  of  any  European  strata  of  the
same  date,  for,  besides  some  extinct  saurians  larger  than  any
now  existing,  we  find  among  them  the  living  crocodile  of  the
Ganges,  0.  biporcatnsy  and  the  living  gavial  of  the  same  river,

•  Owen,  Geol.  Trans.,  1862,  and  Geologist,  1862,  p.  247.


200  UPPER  MIOCENE  STEATA.  [Ch,  X.

besides  a  colossal  extinct  tortoise,  of  wliich  the  shell  was  no
less  than  eight  feet  in  diameter.

Upper  Miocene  strata  of  the  West  Indies. — K  again  we  turn
to  the  Upper  Miocene  formations  of  the  West  Indies,  those,
for  example,  of  Antigua,  San  Domingo,  and  Jamaica,  we  dis-
cover in  them  species  of  corals  similar  to  those  found  in  beds
of  the  same  age  at  Vienna,  Bordeaux,  and  Turin,  and  some  of
which,  as  Dr.  Duncan  has  shown  (1863),  have  a  near  affinity
to  species  now  living  in  the  Pacific  (South  Sea),  Indian
Ocean,  and  Eed  Sea.  They  lead  irresistibly  to  the  opinion
that  there  was  a  much  greater  analogy  in  those  ages  than
there  is  now  between  the  temperature  of  the  West  Indies  in
lat.  18°  N.  and  that  of  Europe  in  lat.  48°  N.*

Dr.  Duncan  concludes  therefore,  not  only  that  there  was  no
Isthmus  of  Panama,  but  also  that  there  was  no  great  barrier
of  land  or  Atlantic  continent  separating  the  Miocene  seas  of
Europe  from  the  contemporaneous  seas  of  the  West  Indies.
Already  in  1860  Mr.  John  Carrick  Moore  had  pointed  out
that  certain  Tertiary  shells  of  San  Domingo  exhibited  affini-
ties to  the  Miocene  shells  of  Europe,t  and  that,  although
such  of  the  San  Domingo  species  as  agreed  with  the  living
were  chiefly  Atlantic  forms,  there  were  some  so  closely  allied
to  the  existing  Pacific  fauna  as  to  lead  him  to  infer  that
there  had  been  a  channel  in  Miocene  times  through  what  is
now  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  by  which  the  mollusca  could
have  migrated  &om  one  ocean  to  the  other.  Sach  an
hypothesis,  he  observes,  will  be  the  more  readily  accepted
when  we  consider  that  the  summit-level  of  the  Panama  Bail-
way  above  the  sea  is  only  250  feet,  and  that  the  isthmus
nowhere  attains  an  elevation  exceeding  1,000  feet,  which  is
not  half  the  height  to  which  the  marine  Miocene  strata  of
San  Domingo  have  been  uplifted  since  their  deposition.

Mr.  Etheridge  has  inferred  from  these  and  other  researches
that  the  separation  from  the  Pacific  dates  from  the  commenc-
ment  of  the  upheaval  of  the  Miocene  deposits  of  the  Isthmus
of  Panama,  which  upheaval  probably  was  not  completed  until
the  Pliocene  age.

*  Duncan,  West  Indian  Corals,  Qnart.  t  Quart.  Geol.  Jonm.,  1850,  vol.  vi.

Geol.  Journal,  p.  455,  vol.  zix.  1863.  p.  48.


Ch.  X.]  LOWER  MIOCENE  STRATA,  201

LowerMiocene  strata, — By  referring  to  our  table  at  page  135,
the  reader  will  see  that  the  Lower  Miocene  strata  come  next
in  order  as  we  recede  from  the  more  modem  formations  to
those  of  higher  antiquity.  They  contain  scarcely  any  living
species  of  shells  or  plants,  yet  so  many  of  their  fossil  remains
are  common  to  them  and  the  Upper  Miocene  formation,  that
this  fact  alone  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  they  would  afford
indications  of  a  warm  climate.  Such  an  anticipation  is  more
than  confirmed,  both  by  negative  and  positive  evidence ;  for,
in  the  first  place,  nearly  all  the  genera  of  plants  which  in
the  (Eninghen  beds  were  mentioned  as  characteristic  of  tem-
perate latitudes,  are  wanting  in  the  Lower  Miocene,  while
the  tropical  forms  are  more  numerous.  Among  these  last
are  palms  of  the  genus  Phoenicites,  closely  allied  to  the  date-
palm.  About  80  other  plants  are  enumerated  by  Heer,  all  of
which  would  be  cut  off  by  such  a  winter  as  now  prevails  in
Central  and  Southern  Europe.  Ligneous  plants  constitute
two-thirds  of  the  flora,  and  the  preponderance  of  evergreens
exceeds  even  that  observed  in  the  Upper  Miocene  strata  of
(Eninghen.  There  are  also  more  reptiles  in  these  older  beds
and  some  of  considerable  size.  Among  them  are  no  less
than  three  crocodiles  and  fifteen  land  and  fresh-water  tor-
toises.*

Miocene  fossil  flora  of  Arctic  latitudes. — The  Lower  Miocene
flora  has  been  traced  from  Italy  northwards  to  Devonshire,
and  even  to  Iceland.  In  these  high  latitudes,  however,  the
tropical  and  sub-tropical  genera  disappear,  though  the  vine,
tulip-tree,  and  some  other  forms  indicate  a  temperature
16®  or  20®  Fahr.  warmer  than  that  now  belonging  to  the
same  countries.f

We  find  in  certain  beds  of  lignite  or  surturbrand  in  Ice-
land, recently  examined  by  Professor  Heer,  an  assemblage  of
fossil  plants  resembling  in  many  respects  that  of  (Eninghen,
before  mentioned.  Though  not  of  so  sub- tropical  a  character,
they  employ  a  warmth  so  much  exceeding  that  now  enjoyed
in  Iceland  as  did  the  temperature  of  the  Upper  Miocene  flora


*  Heer,  Urwelt  der  Schweiz,  p.  401.

t  Heer  and  GaudiD,  Climat  du  Pays  tertiaire,  pp.  174,  207.


202       MIOCENE  FOSSIL  TREES  IN  AECTIC  LATITUDES.     [Ck.  X.

of  Central  Europe  surpass  that  of  the  vegetation  now  proper
to  the  same  region.*

The  extent  to  which  the  Miocene  flora  flourished  within
the  Arctic  circle,  even  as  far  towards  the  pole  as  our  explor-
ing expeditions  have  penetrated,  has  been  clearly  pointed
out  by  Professor  Heer,  in  an  important  treatise  on  the
fossil  flora  of  the  Arctic  regions.f  In  the  numerous  plates
which  illustrate  this  work,  we  see  figures  of  more  than  sixty
species  of  North  Greenland  fossil  plants  found  opposite
Disco  Island,  lat.  70°  N.  Among  them  are  several  species
of  Sequoia  {Wellin^tonia),  with  their  male  catkins  and
cones,  agreeing  specifically  with  Lower  Miocene  plants  of
Switzerland,  Germany,  or  England.  There  are  also  seven
other  conifers,  four  poplars,  two  willows,  three  species  of
beech,  four  of  oak  (some  of  which  have  leaves  half  a  foot
long),  a  plane-tree,  a  walnut,  a  plum  or  prunus,  a  buckthorn,
an  andromeda,  a  daphnogene  with  large  leathery  leaves,
and  several  other  evergreens,  some  of  extinct  genera.  The
large-leaved  trees  imply,  according  to  Heer,  a  high  summer
temperature,  while  the  evergreens  exclude  the  idea  of  a
very  cold  winter.  That  these  and  other  fossil  plants  fix>m
arctic  localities  really  lived  on  the  spot,  and  were  not  drifted
thither  by  marine  currents,  is  proved  by  the  quantity  of
leaves  pressed  together,  and  in  some  cases  associated  with
fruits,  also  by  the  marsh  plants  which  accompany  them,  and
by  the  upright  trees  with  roots  which  were  seen  by  Captain
Inglefield  and  by  Rink.

Still  farther  north  in  Spitzbergen,  in  lat.  78**  56'  N.,  no
less  than  95  species  of  plants  are  described  by  Heer,  many  of
them  agreeing  specifically  with  North  Greenland  fossils.  In
this  flora  we  observe  Taxodium  of  two  species,  a  hazel,  poplar,
alder,  beech,  plane-tree,  lime  (TiZta),  and  a  potamogeton,
which  last  indicates  a  fresh-water  formation,  accumulated
on  the  spot.  Such  a  vigorous  growth  of  fossil  trees,  in  a
country  within  12°  of  the  pole,  where  there  are  now  scarcely

*  Heer  and  Gaudin,  Climat  du  Pays  of  fossil  plants,  collected  by  M.  Nor-

tertiaire,  p.  178.  denskiold,  and  Captain  SirL.MeClin-

t  Heer,  Flora  Fossilis  Arctica,  with  tock,  Sir  K.  Madore,  Colomb,  Ingle-

40  illustrative  plates,  containing  figures  field,  and  others.


Ch.  XJ  ICE-ACnON  IN  THE  MIOCENE  PERIOD.  208

any  shrubs  except  a  dwarf  willow,  and  where  there  are  only  a
few  herbaceous  and  cryptogamoos  plants,  most  of  the  surface
being  covered  with  snow  and  ice,  is  truly  remarkable.  When
the  fossils  are  compared  with  the  Miocene  species  of  Central
,  Europe  and  Italy,  many  of  them  are  found  to  be  the  same,  and
it  is  clear  that  the  climate  was  not  only  much  warmer  than
now,  but  the  temperature  of  Europe  and  the  Arctic  circle  was
much  less  contrasted ;  nevertheless,  the  flora  of  Spitzbergen
was  by  no  means  so  sub-tropical  at  the  era  alluded  to  as  was
that  of  Switzerland,  Germany,  and  Devonshire,  for  in  the
Lower  Miocene  period  the  difTerence  of  latitude  made  itself
felt  as  now,  although  in  a  less  degree.  Professor  Heer
infers,  with  great  probability,  that  pines,  alders,  poplars,
willows,  and  other  hardy  genera  reached  the  pole  itself  in
Miocene  times,  if  there  was  land  there,  because  they  range  at
present  from  4  to  10  degrees  farther  north  than  the  Tax-
odium,  beech,  plane,  and  lime,  which  accompany  them  in  a
fossil  state  in  the  same  formation  at  Spitzbergen.  Some  of
the  last-mentioned  genera  are  in  a  higher  latitude  in  Spitz-
bergen, by  8,  17,  and  23  degrees,  than  the  living  represent-
atives of  the  same  genera.  We  cannot  hesitate,  therefore,
to  conclude  that  in  Miocene  times,  when  this  vegetation
flourished  in  Spitzbergen,  North  Greenland,  and  on  the
Mackenzie  river,  as  well  as  Banks  Land,  and  other  circum-
polar  countries,  there  was  no  snow  in  the  arctic  regions,  except
on  the  summit  of  high  mountains,  and  even  there  perhaps
not  lasting  throughout  the  year.

Ice^action  in  the  Miocene  Period. — K  it  be  asked  whether  in
the  entire  Miocene  series  there  are  no  indications  of  inter-
calated spells  of  colder  climate,  like  the  glacial  episode
before  mentioned  as  intervening  between  the  older  Pliocene
and  the  modem  eras,  I  may  reply  that  there  are  none  which
can  at  present  be  established  on  organic  evidence ;  but  our
geological  records  are  far  too  fragmentary  to  entitle  us
positively  to  assume  that,  in  the  course  of  so  vast  a  succes-
sion of  ages,  there  were  no  oscillations  of  temperature
analogous  to  those  which  certainly  occurred  between  the
close  of  the  Newer  Pliocene  period  and  our  own  time.  Pro-
fessor Eamsay,  who  has  so  successfully  devoted  much  time


204  SIGNS  OF  ICE-ACnOX  IN  TEBTIABT  TIMES.        [Ch.  X.

and  thonght  to  the  search  for  indications  of  glacial  action
in  remote  eras,  reminds  us  that  a  geologist  mnst  expect  to
encounter  great  difB.cultie8  in  such  investigations.  If,  at
some  future  era,  when  large  portions  of  the  existing  conti-
nents shall  have  been  submerged  and  overspread  with  marine
strata,  and  other  parts  of  tiiem  destroyed  bj  denudation,
we  should  have  the  task  assigned  to  us  of  detecting  those
spots  where  ancient  land-surfaces  had  escaped  destruction,  or
where  erratic  blocks  and  moraines  of  glaciers  were  extant,
we  might  well  despair  of  success.  It  rarely  happens  that  we
have  opportunities  of  examining  terrestrial  surfaces  of  high
antiquity,  and  when  visible,  their  extent  is  always  very  limited.
In  the  majority  of  cases  they  will  consist  of  rocks  incapable
of  receiving  and  preserving  a  glacial  polish  and  striation.
The  least  evanescent  of  the  proofs  of  ice-action,  which  our
era  is  likely  to  transmit  to  future  ages,  are,  unquestionably,
those  large  angular  erratics  which  have  been  carried  to  great
distances  from  their  parent  rocks ;  and  wherever  such  masses
occur  in  older  strata  they  deserve  particular  attention.  I
shall  proceed,  therefore,  to  describe  a  formation  of  Miocene
date,  which  I  have  myself  examined,  in  which  the  position
and  size  of  the  included  blocks  is  such  as  to  make  it  impos-
sible at  present  to  account  for  their  transportation  by  any
other  cause  than  the  buoyant  power  of  ice.

The  marine  deposits  alluded  to  consist  of  strata  of  sand-
stone and  conglomerate,  and  constitute  a  member  of  the
Miocene  formation  of  the  Collina  of  Turin,  a  chain  of  hills  in
the  suburbs  of  the  capital  of  Piedmont,  on  the  brow  of  which
stands  the  church  of  the  Superga.  These  strata  have  long
been  celebrated  for  containing  a  plentiful  store  of  fossil
shells  of  the  same  species  as  those  of  the  faluns  of  Tou-
raine,  Bordeaux,  and  Vienna.  The  annexed  diagram  will
give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  position  of  this  conglo-
merate (a),  which  is  highly  inclined  and  conformable  to  the
other  strata  which  dip  on  each  side  to  the  north-west  and
south-east  from  the  axis  of  the  chain.  I  examined  the
district  in  1857,  in  company  with  Signor  Grastaldi,  one  of  the
ablest  of  the  Italian  geologists,  and  one  well  versed  in  glacial
phenomena.


Ch.  X.]  LTPEH  illOCESE  PERIOD.  205

On  this  occasion  I  satisfied  myself  that  Signer  Gastaldi
-was  right  in  sappoaing  that  the  \arge  blocks  //,  lying  on  the
sar&ce  of  the  hills,  had  been  washed  out  of  the  beds  a  a,  by
the  Batna  action  which  has  hollowed  ont  the  valleys.*  In
other  words,  they  have  not  been  brought  from  a  distance,  as
was  once  snpposed,  daring  the  more  modem  or  Post-Pliocene
Glacial  period,  like  the  erratics  e,  which  rest  on  the  moraine
d,  bnt  have  been  washed  ont  of  the  Miocene  beds  in  the  im-
mediate neigbbonrhood,  viz.,  the  conglomerate  a.     This  last


a.  CoDglomenitM  of  Uioceue  age  viih  larga  blocks.

b.  Huine  sab-Apennioe  or  Flioc«De  Btr&ts.

«.  Diltmiini  or  SDdent  slluiiam  of  TBrioui  ages,  some  of  it  b«1oir  tlie
monine  d.

d.  Monine  of  lirea  of  the  Glacial  period,  with  amtie  blocks.

e.  Emtie  blocks  Ifiog  oo  tho  moraioe  d.

/.  Miocene  blocks  waahed  ont  of  tbe  coDglomeista  a,  ood  scaUu^  orer  Ihn
hilla  of  the  Snperga  chain.
N.R—Tho  diitaoce  fKna  the  Alps  to  the  Snperga  is  about  Diirtj  milra.

ifl  part  of  a  regnlax  series  of  strata,  composed  chiefly  of  sand
of  various  degrees  of  coarseness,  and  of  gravel,  in  which
are  rolled  pebbles  of  greenstone  (or  diorite),  limestone,  por-
phyry, and  some  other  rocks.  Among  them  we  occasionally
meet  with  fragments  of  serpentine  and  greenstone,  of  enor-
mons  size,  one  of  which  I  ascertained  by  measurement  to  be
14  feet  in  its  longest  diameter.  Signor  Gastaldi  has  seen
another  in  the  same  formation,  26  feet  long ;  they  are  angular,

*  Qaitaldj,  Sni  CoDglomeiBti  Micceni  del  Piemonte.     1861.


^


206  SIGNS  OF  ICE-ACTION  IN  TERTUEY  TIMES.       [Ch*  X.

and  several  of  those  which  I  saw,  exhibited  some  faint  strise
and  had  one  of  their  sides  polished,  in  a  manner  mnch  re-
sembling that  produced  by  glacial  action.  The  whole  thick-
ness of  the  beds  through  which  these  blocks  are  dispersed
varies  from  100  to  150  feet.  As  yet  they  have  yielded  no
organic  remains,  but  they  are  covered  by  strata  containing
shells  of  the  Upper  Miocene  formation,  and  they  rest  on
Lower  Miocene  strata  for  the  most  part  of  fresh-water  origin.
The  fauna  and  flora,  both  of  the  overlying  and  underlying
rocks,  have  the  same  sub-tropical  character  as  those  of
Miocene  date  in  Switzerland  and  in  Central  Europe  generally.
Hence  the  hypothesis  of  the  transport  of  such  huge  blocks  by
ice-action  has  naturally  been  resorted  to  most  unwillingly,  but
in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  it  is  the  only  one  which
appears  tenable.  The  beds  of  sandstone  alternating  with
those  in  which  the  blocks  are  enveloped  exhibit  no  signs  of
having  been  tumultuously  accumulated  as  by  a  flood.  The
erratics  seem  rather  to  have  fallen  quietly  into  their  places.
The  nearest  spots  where  any  similar  serpentine  and  greenstone
occur  are  about  twenty  miles  to  the  westward,  but  there  has
been  so  much  subsidence  of  the  country  during  the  Miocene
period,  so  much  subsequent  deposition  of  overlying  miocene,
pliocene,  and  alluvial  deposits,  and  such  changes  in  physical
geography,  that  we  cannot  decide  with  any  certainty  as
to  the  proximity  or  distance  of  the  spots  from  which  the
blocks  may  have  come.  The  absence  of  organic  remains
may  possibly  imply  a  sei  chilled  by  floating  ice,  or  by  a  cold
current  from  the  north ;  but  such  an  hypothesis  is  not  very
satisfactory,  because  the  thickness  attained  by  the  conglome-
rate in  some  parts  of  Piedmont  is  very  great,  far  exceeding
that  seen  in  the  vicinity  of  Turin.  We  must  conclude,  there-
fore, that  its  accumulation  occupied  a  great  lapse  of  time,
and  if  so,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  there  are  no  organic
remains  in  it :  for  although  the  temporary  influx  of  a  cold
current  might  well  be  supposed  to  annihilate  a  fauna  fitted
for  a  warmer  sea,  yet  the  long  continuance  of  such  a  current
would  naturally  fit  the  region  for  species  such  as  thrive  in
the  seas  of  colder  latitudes.  Perhaps  a  lofty  mountain,  with
glacier  reaching  the  sea,  would  be  the  least  objectionable


Ch.  X.]  ICE-ACTION  IN  THE  EOCENE  PERIOD.  207

hypothesis,  since  in  Patagonia  there  is  a  glacier  descending
from  the  Andes  in  Eyre  Sound,  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  and
another  in  the  neighbouring  Gulf  of  Penas,  lat.  46**  50'  (or  the
latitude  of  the  Bernese  Alps),  both  of  which  convey  large
erratic  blocks  to  the  Pacific,  into  which  they  are  floated  by
numerous  icebergs.

Eocene  Fauna  and  Flora, — In  the  flora  of  the  upper  mem-
bers of  this  great  series,  we  find  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Paris  and  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  some  plants  which,  like  the
palmetto,  attest  a  warmer  temperature.  Among  the  accom-
panying reptiles,  there  are  many  crocodiles  and  tortoises,
such  as  we  now  only  meet  with  in  more  southern  regions.
In  the  Middle  Eocene,  as  in  the  calcaire  grossier,  for  example,
near  Paris,  the  marine  testaceous  fauna  is  richer  and  more
varied  than  that  now  proper  to  seas  so  far  north.  The  flora
of  the  same  division  of  the  Tertiary  period,  as,  for  example,
that  of  Alum  Bay  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  of  Monte  Bolca  in
the  North  of  Italy,  or  that  of  Aix  en  Provence  in  the  South  of
Prance,  comprises  species  and  genera  having  a  great  affinity
to  Lower  Miocene  forms,  but  departing  farther  than  do  these
from  the  modem  European  type,  and,  according  to  Heer,
resembling  in  many  respects  plants  of  the  tropical  regions  of
Australia  and  India.

The  nummulitic  formation  of  this  era  is  of  world-wide
extent,  and  contains  many  corals  of  large  size,  of  genera  now
common  in  tropical  seas,  son^  of  the  same  fossil  species
ranging  from  Sinde  in  India  to  the  West  Indies.

K,  lastly,  we  turn  to  the  Lower  Eocene  strata,  we  find  in
the  London  clay  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey  fossil  fruits  of  the  ]
cocoa-nut,  screw-pine,  and  custard- apple,  reminding  us  of  .
the  hottest  parts  of  the  globe  ;  and  in  the  same  beds  are  six  j
species  of  Nautilue,  and  other  genera  of  shells,  such  as  Conus,  '
Voluta,  and  CanceUaria,  now  only  met  with  in  warmer  seas.  '
The  fish  also  of  the  same  strata,  of  which  50  species  have
been  described  by  Agassiz,  are  declared  by  him  to  be  charac-
teristic of  hotter  climates,  and  among  the  reptiles  are  sea-
snakes,  crocodiles,  and  several  species  of  turtle.

Supposed  eigne  of  ice^action  in  the  Eocene  Period. — ^In  a  bed
of  coarse  conglomerate  of  the  Eocene  period  in  the  Alps,


208  ICE-ACTION  IN  THE  EOCENE  PEBIOD.  [Ce.  X.

phenomena  in  many  respects  analogous  to  those  of  the
neighbourhood  of  Turin  present  themselves.  This  conglo-
merate is  a  subordinate  member  of  that  vast  deposit  of  sand-
stone and  shale  which  is  provinciallj  called  'flysch'  and
'  nagelflue/  and  which,  by  its  position  (for  it  is  devoid  of
organic  remains),  seems  referable  to  the  middle  or  '  nummu-
litic '  portion  of  the  great  Eocene  series.  The  well-known
^  Vienna  sandstone '  is  a  member  of  this  flysch,  which
extends  for  300  miles  at  least,  east  and  west,  from  Vienna
to  Switzerland,  along  the  northern  flanks  of  the  Alps,  and  is
again  seen  in  the  south,  near  Genoa,  and  in  several  parts  of
the  Apennines,  where  it  is  called  by  the  Italians  '  macigno.*
Its  thickness  is  very  great,  amounting  to  several  thousand
feet,  and  occasionally,  according  to  some  authorities,  to  6,000
feet.  It  is  often  finely  stratified,  and  singularly  barren  of
fossil  remains,  although  in  a  few  places  it  contains  fucoids.
Here  and  there,  as  in  the  Sihlthal,  near  the  lake  of  Ziifich,
and  in  the  Toggenburg  in  St.  Gall,  large  blocks  are  enclosed
in  it,  some  of  them  angular  and  others  rounded.  These
blocks  are  occasionally  of  limestone,  and  contain  ammonites
and  other  fossils  of  the  oolitic  and  liassic  formations,  as
described  by  Dr.  Bachmann.*  Blocks  also  of  a  red  variety
of  granite  of  a  peculiar  composition^  not  known  in  situ  in  any
part  of  the  Alps,  occur  in  the  same  conglomerate  of  the
flysch.  In  several  places  the  blocks  are  10  feet  long,  but  at
Habkeren,  on  the  north  side  of  the  lake  of  Thun,  many  are
seen  of  enormous  dimensions,  one  of  them  being  1 05  feet  in
length,  90  in  breadth,  and  45  in  height.  They  have  lost
their  edges,  either  by  friction  or  decomposition,  but  are  not
polished  or  striated.

There  has  been  a  lively  discussion  as  to  whether  the
largest  of  the  above-mentioned  Habkeren  blocks  came  out  of
the  flysch,  or  were  simply  erratics  of  the  Glacial  period ;  f
but  Escher  von  der  Linth,  Studer,  Eiitimeyer,  and  Bach-*
mann  are  clearly  of  opinion  that  they  have  been  washed  out
of  the  coarse  conglomerate.     The  flysch  of  Bolgen,  near

*  BHchmaim,  Petrifakten  und  erra-  t  Hurchison,  Structure  of  Alps,  Quart,

tieche  Jurablocke  im  Flysch  des  Sihl-      GeoL  Journ.,  vol.  t.  1849.
thals,  and  Toggenburg.


Cm»  X,]  ICE-ACTION  IN  THE  EOCENE  PERIOD.  209

Sonfhofen,  also  contains  foreign  blocks  of  considerable  size,
and  similar  masses,  as  I  am  informed  by  Professor  Suess,
occur  in  Tertiary  strata  of  the  same  age  in  the  Carpathians
and  Apennines,  but  neither  on  them  nor  on  any  others  have
any  glacial  striae  been  as  yet  observed.  We  have  to  account
not  only  for  the  wonderful  size  of  the  granitic  rocks,  varying
from  10  to  100  feet  in  diameter,  but  for  the  distance  which
they  have  travelled,  which  seems  to  be  implied  by  our
inability  to  refer  them  to  any  known  source.  They  are
distinguishable  by  their  mineral  character  from  all  granitic
erratics  of  the  true  or  modem  glacial  period,  such  as  are
strewed  over  the  surface  of  those  districts  of  Switzerland  where
there  is  no  outcrop  of  flysch  conglomerate.  The  hypothesis
that  these  huge  masses  were  transported  to  their  present
sites  by  glaciers  or  floating  ice,  has  been  always  objected  to
on  the  ground  that  the  Eocene  strata  of  nummulitic  age  in
Switzerland,  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  Europe,  contain
genera  of  fossil  plants  and  animals  characteristic  of  a  warm
climate.  It  has  been  particularly  remarked  by  M.  Desor,
that  the  strata  most  nearly  associated  with  the  flysch  in
the  Alps  are  rich  in  echinoderms  of  the  Spatangus  family,
which  have  a  decidedly  tropical  aspect.  The  entire  absence
of  shells,  or  of  organic  remains  generally,  may  perhaps
be  thought  to  favour  a  glacial  origin  for  the  flysch,  but
this  negative  character  is  too  common  in  strata  of  every
age  to  be  of  much  value,  except  in  connexion  with  other
proofs  of  intense  cold.  Nor  must  we  disguise  from  our-
selves the  fact,  that  in  the  seas  of  polar  regions  where
icebergs  abound  at  present  there  is  by  no  means  any  dearth
of  animal  life.  On  the  other  hand,  the  regular  stratification
and  even  fine  lamination  of  large  portions  of  the  flysch
cannot  be  said  to  be  inconsistent  with  a  glacial  origin,  for
on  the  Norfolk  coast  we  see  thinly  laminated  clays  devoid  of
Clonic  remains  forming  an  integral  part  of  unquestionable
glacial  deposits.

The  great  thickness  of  the  flysch,  and  the  fucoids  pre-
served in  a  few  beds  of  it,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was
of  marine  origin.  To  imagine  icebergs  carrying  such  huge
fragments  of  stone  in  so  southern  a  latitude,  and  at  a  period

VOL.  I.  P


210  ICE-ACnON  IN  THB  EOCENE  PERIOD.  [Ch.  X.

immediately  preceded  and  followed  by  the  signs  of  a  warm
climate,  is  one  of  the  most  perplexing  enigmas  which  the
geologist  has  yet  been  called  upon  to  solve.  It  would  per-
haps be  most  in  accordance  with  existing  analogies  to  sup-
pose a  mountainous  island  occupying  the  site  of  the  Austrian
and  Swiss  Alps  from  which  glaciers  descended  to  the  sea.
For  in  the  southern  part  of  New  Zealand,  between  latitudes
43°  and  44**  S.  in  the  southern  (formerly  called  the  middle)
island,  glaciers  coming  from  Mount  Cook,  the  loftiest  moun-
tain of  a  snow-covered  chain,  reach  to  within  500  feet  of  the
sea,  and  the  same  region  is  inhabited  not  only  by  tree-ferns,
but  by  an  Areca  palm.  These  plants  of  tropical  aspect  are
now  seen  flourishing  in  this  district,  very  near  to  moraines
and  angular  fragments  of  stone  recently  brought  down  by
ice  from  the  higher  regions.  But  we  shall  see  (Chap.  XVI.)
that  icebergs,  sometimes  carrying  huge  erratic  blocks,  float
at  the  present  time  in  both  hemispheres  to  parts  of  the  sea
hundreds  of  miles  from  land,  in  latitudes  nearer  the  equator
than  the  Swiss  Alps :  we  ought  not,  therefore,  to  wonder  at
the  occurrence  of  erratics  in  any  stratum  in  the  temperate
regions  of  the  globe,  at  periods  when  the  temperature
resembled  that  of  our  time,  nor  consider  them  as  by  any
means  implying  an  intensity  of  cold  equalUng  that  of  the
so-called  Glacial  Epoch.


211


CHAPTER  XL

FOBHEK  VICISSITUDES   IN   CLIMATE — continued.

WABM     CUMATB     DIPLIBD     BT     THB     FOSSILS    OF     THE     CHALK— CBKTACB0X7S
RKPTILBS — BOW    FAR    BXTINCT    OBNE&A    AND    0BDBB8     MAY     ENABLE  US    TO
IXFBB  THB    TBMFBBATURE  OF    ANCIENT     CLIMATES — BYIDENCB    OF    FLOATING
ICB    IN    THB    SEA    OF    TUB  WHITE  CHALK    OF   ENGLAND — WA&M   CLIMATE  OF
THB  OOUTIC    AND     TRIAS8IC  FKBIODS — WIDE    RANGE    OF    THE    SAME    FAUNA
FROM    SOUTH    TO     NORTH — ABUNDANCE    AND   WIDE   RANGE  OF  REPTILES    IM-
PLIES A   GENERAL  ABSENCE  OF  SEVERE    COLD — THB  NON-EXISTENCE   OF   CON-
TKMPORABY  WAWifAT.TA    WILL  NOT  EXPLAIN  THE  PREDOMINANCE  OF  REPTILES
IN    HIGH     LATITUDES — PERMIAN     FOSSILS — SUPPOSED     SIGNS     OP     ICE-ACTION
IN     THB     PERMIAN     PERIOD  —  UNIFORMITY     OP     THB      FOSSIL      ILORA     OVER
WIDB  ABBA8 — MELYILLB   ISLAND     COAL-PLANTS — HOW  FAB    THE  ABSENCE   OF
FLOWBRING  PLANTS  VITIATES  OUR    INFERFJfCES  AS  TO    ANCIENT   CLIMATES —
WHETHER      THE    ATMOSPHERE    WAS    SURCHARGED    WITH    CARBONIC    ACID    IN
Tint    COAL    PBBIOD  — FOSSIL    SHELLS     AND    COBALS    OF    THB    CABBONIFEROUS
STRATA— CLIMATE  IMPLIED   BT  THE   REPTILES  OB  AMPHIBIA   OF  THB    COAL —
DBTONIAN     PBBIOD,     AND     SUPPOSED    SIGNS    OF     ICE-ACTION    OF    THAT     ERA

CONSIDEBED CLIMATE  OF  THE   SILUBIAN  PERIOD — CONCLUDING  BEMABKS   ON

THE  CLIMATES   OF  THE  TEBTIABY,  SECONDABY,  AND   PBIMABY  EPOCHS.

Ik  the  last  chapter  I  endeavoured  to  trace  back  the  history
of  the  changes  of  climate  from  modem  times  to  the  Eocene
period,  and  we  found,  that  before  we  had  carried  back  our
retrospect  as  far  as  the  Newer  Pliocene  deposits,  proofs
already  presented  themselves,  both  organic  and  inorganic,  of
a  temperature  much  colder  than  that  now  prevailing  in
European  latitudes.  Although  this  Glacial  epoch,  as  it
has  been  called,  lasted  for  thousands,  if  not  hundreds  of
thousands  of  years,  it  was  of  so  modem  a  geological  date  as
to  belong  almost  exclusively  to  the  time  when  the  mollusca
were  the  same  as  those  now  living.  The  geographical  range
only  of  species  was  different,  because  an  arctic  fauna  was
enabled  by  aid  of  the  cold  to  invade  the  temperate  latitudes.
An  examination  of  the  fossils  of  the  Pliocene,  Miocene,  and
Eocene   strata,  viewed  successively  in  the  order  of  their

F  2


212       WAEMTH  IMPLIED  BY  FOSSILS  OF  THE  CHALK.  [Ch.  XI.

higher  antiquity,  afforded  us  evidence  of  a  temperature
continuaUy  increasing,  in  proportion  as  we  receded  farther
from  the  Glacial  epoch.  If,  in  certain  localities  in  or  near
the  Alps,  some  huge  transported  fragments  of  rock,  enclosed
in  miocene  and  eocene  conglomerates,  seemed  to  require  the
aid  of  ice  to  bring  them  into  the  sites  they  now  occupy,  a
local  combination  of  geographical  circamstances  may  perhaps
be  conceived,  which  might  account  for  such  exceptional  cases
without  requiring  a  general  refrigeration  of  climate  at  the
times  alluded  to,  or,  still  more  probably,  floating  icebergs  may,
as  suggested  (p.  210)  in  explanation  of  the  Habkeren  erratics
in  the  Alps,  have  brought  large  fragments  from  a  great
distance  without  requiring  us  to  suppose  a  lower  temperature
than  that  now  prevailing  on  the  earth.

Warm  climate  implied  by  the  fossils  of  the  Chalk  or  Upper
Cretaceous, — When  we  pass  beyond  the  gap  which  divides  the
Tertiary  from  the  Secondary  formations,  between  which  there
are  very  few  vertebrate  genera  and  no  species  of  invertebrata
in  common,  we  observe  in  the  cretaceous  strata  signs  of  a
warm  climate  similar  to  those  previously  derived  from  tertiary
plants,  shells,  corals,  and  reptiles.  Many  of  the  principal
members  of  this  cretaceous  series  have  been  traced  from  the
57th  degree  of  latitude  in  the  northern  hemisphere  to  dis-
tricts which  approach  within  10  or  12  degrees  of  the  equator,
as  at  Pondicherry,  Verdachellum,  and  Trichinopoly.  In
these  countries  deposits  occur,  which  by  their  ammonites  and
many  other  mollusca  were  recognised  by  the  late  Edward
Forbes  as  belonging  to  beds,  some  of  them  corresponding  to
our  English  Gault,  and  others  to  strata  which  immediately
overlie  and  underlie  that  formation.*  In  these  Indian  forma-
tions are  found  shells  of  the  genera  Cypreea,  Oliva,  Triton,
Pyrula,  Nerita,  and  Voluta,  which  belong  to  forms  now
characterising  tropical  seas,  and  some  of  which  only  made
their  first  appearance  in  European  latitudes  in  the  uppermost
or  Maestricht  chalk.  The  geographical  birthplace,  says
Forbes,  of  these  genera  seems  to  have  been  in  the  tropics
before  the  Tei-tiary  period,  during  which  last  they  made  a
great  figure  in  Europe  throughout  Eocene  and  Miocene  times,

*  See  Report  on  Fossils  collected  by      ton,  Quart.  Geol.  Joum.,  1846,  vol.  i.
C.  J.  Kaye,  Esq.,  and  Rev.  W.  H.  Eger-      p.  70.


Oh.  XI.]  CKETACEOUS  REPTILES.  213

retreating  again  southwards  in  the  Newer  Pliocene  era,  when
the  cold  of  the  approaching  Glacial  epoch  had  beg^n  to  make
itself  felt.

The  plants  of  the  Upper  Cretaceous  formation  of  Europe,
so  fiir  as  they  are  known,  have  such  an  affinity  with  the
Eocene  flora  as  to  point  in  the  same  direction  in  regard  to
the  existence  of  a  high  temperature.  They  contain  a  large
number  of  dicotyledonous  angiosperms,  whereas  the  Lower
Cretaceous  rocks  are  characterised  by  the  absence  of  these
last,  and  by  a  predominance  of  cycads  and  of  conifers  of  an
araucarian  type,  and  of  ferns  referred  by  some  botanists  to
genera  which  also  favour  the  hypothesis  of  a  warm  climate.

In  reasoning  on  the  organic  remains  of  the  Upper  Mio-
cene strata  of  Central  and  Southern  Europe,  we  had  the
advantage  of  drawing  our  inferences  as  to  the  high  tempe-
rature of  the  atmosphere  and  ocean  from  shells,  one-third  of
which  were  of  living  species,  while  our  conclusions  were  con-
firmed by  the  discovery  of  contemporaneous  genera  of  plants,
insects,  and  corals,  as  well  as  of  apes  and  monkeys.  The
reptiles  also  were  more  numerous,  some  of  them  of  larger
size  than  are  now  found  in  temperate  regions.  In  the  Lower
Miocene  formation,  crocodiles,  chelonians,  and  large  batra-
chians,  and  in  the  Eocene  deposits  the  same  genera  of
reptiles,  together  with  sea-snakes,  bore  testimony  in  like
manner  to  the  warm  temperature  of  the  seas,  lakes,  and
rivers.

When  we  pass  on  to  the  uppermost  member  of  the  Creta-
ceous series,  or  the  Maestricht  chalk,  as  it  is  called,  we  find
a  similarly  marked  development  of  reptile  life  in  regions
where  nothing  analogous  is  now  to  be  met  with.  Thus,  in
latitude  51**  N.,  we  encounter  in  St.  Peter's  Mount,  Maes-
tricht, the  aquatic  reptile  called  Mosasaurus,  which  was
twenty-four  feet  in  length.  The  same  genus  is  largely
represented  in  the  American  cretaceous  rocks,  from  the
various  divisions  of  which  Dr.  Leidy  has  obtained  more
than  twenty  genera  of  reptiles,  most  of  them  extinct,  but
some,  like  the  tortoises  {Trionyx  and  Emys)  and  the  croco-
diles, of  living  types.*     Several  of  the  crocodiles  of  this  age,

*  Leidy,  CretaceouB  Reptiles  of  United  States.  SmithBonian  contribation,  1865.


214  EXTINCT  ORDERS  INDICATE  TEMPERATURE.     [Ch.  XI.

both  in  Europe  and  America,  are  proccelian,  that  is  to  say,
they  have  the  anterior  portion  of  each  vertebra  concave,  and
the  posterior  part   convex,   in  which  respect  they  agree
anatomically  with  the  existing  species,  and  are  contrasted
with  all  the  older  known  genera  of  Mesozoic  age.  The  reader
will  observe,  on  consulting  Owen's  table  of  the  distribution
of  reptiles  in  past  geological  ages,*  that  of  the  five  living
orders,  crocodiles,  lizards,  tortoises,  snakes,  and  frogs,  the
two  last-mentioned  have  not  yet  been  traced  as  far  back  as
the  Secondary  or  Mesozoic  periods,  but  the  three  first,  the
Crocodilia,  Lacertia,   and  Chelonia,   are  met  with  in  ftill
strength  in  Cretaceous  times,  where  they  become  associated
with  no  less  than  three  extinct  orders,  namely.  Pterodactyls,
Ichthyosaurs,  and  Plesiosaurs.    Eespecting  the  first  of  these,
namely,  the  flying  reptiles,  it  has  been  argued,  that  we  have
no  right  to  assume  that  they  required  a  hot  climate,  because
they  are  so  highly  organised,  and  have  so  near  an  affinity  to
birds  in  structure,  that  they  may  have  been  warm-blooded,
and  as  capable  as  birds  of  sustaining  great  cold.     But  the
same  argument  will  not  apply  to  ichthyosaurs  or  to  plesio-
saurs, nor  to  the  numerous  chelonians  which  occur  in  the
different  divisions  of  the  Cretaceous  period,  including  the
Wealden  strata,  in  which  large  terrestrial  saurians  are  so
conspicuous.

H(yiu  far  extinct  orders  and  genera  may  indicate  temperature,
— It  has  been  objected,  that  in  speculating  on  the  habits  and
physiological  constitution  of  plants  and  animals  of  an  epoch
so  distant  from  our  own  as  the  Cretaceous,  we  enter  a  region
of  doubt  and  uncertainty,  because  even  the  Eocene  species
are  distinct  from  the  living  ones,  while  the  Cretaceous
fossils  differ  as  much  from  the  Eocene  as  do  the  latter  from
living  types.  Dr.  Fleming,  therefore,  when  engaged  in  a
controversy  with  Dean  Conybeare,  in  1830,  as  to  the  proofs
of  a  hotter  climate  in  the  olden  time,  declared  that  the
reasoning  of  his  opponents  was  illogical,  and  their  mode  of
dealing  with  the  subject  unfair.  *  They  were  playing,'  he  said,
*  with  loaded  dice ; '  for  the  large  number  of  genera  are  now

*  Owen,  Palaeontology,  p.  321.


Ch.  XI.]     FLOATINa  ICE  IN  SEA  OF  THE  WHITE  CHALK.      215

in  tropical  and  sub-tropical  zones,  not  because  tbej  conld
not  live  in  colder  regions,  but  simply  because  the  land
and  sea  in  those  zones  are  of  wider  extent,  and  support  in
equal  areas  a  greater  exuberance  and  variety  of  animal  and
vegetable  forms.  According,  therefore,  to  the  doctrine  of
chances,  the  majority  of  the  genera  of  any  past  epoch,  whether
they  be  extinct  or  not,  will  have  their  nearest  living  analogues
in  hot  countries.  Many  of  them  will  be  unrepresented  in
the  colder  parts  of  the  globe,  not  because  of  their  unsuitable-
ness  to  the  climate  of  such  regions,  but  because  of  the  com-
parative poverty  of  the  fiauna  and  flora  of  high  latitudes.
The  fact,  it  is  said,  that  the  same  genus  has  often  species
proper  to  the  torrid,  temperate,  and  frigid  zones,  is  enough
to  demonstrate  that  it  is  on  species  alone  that  we  can  rely  in
questions  of  climate.*

The  caution  here  enjoined  is  by  no  means  to  be  disregarded,
but  our  scepticism  on  this  head  may  be  carried  too  far.  If
three  assemblages  of  existing  species  were  submitted  to  a  good
naturalist,  one  of  them  coming  from  arctic,  another  from
tempei*ate,  and  a  third  from  tropical  latitudes,  he  would  be
able  at  once  to  assign  the  quarter  from  which  each  of  the
three  groups  had  been  obtained,  even  though  he  might  never
have  seen  any  one  of  the  species  before.  He  would  be  guided
partly  by  the  presence  of  certain  genera  and  orders,  and
partly  by  the  absence  or  feeble  representation  of  others  in
each  group.  It  is  by  reasoning  of  this  kind  that  we  are
able  to  arrive  at  conclusions  respecting  the  temperature  of
periods  when  most  of  the  genera  and  many  even  of  the  orders
of  plants  and  animals  differ  from  those  now  living,  and  it  must
be  remembered  that  when  we  study  the  modem  Tertiary  for-
mations, in  which  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  species  are
identical  with  living  ones,  we  are  able  to  infer  from  their
associates  what  was  the  climate  of  many  species  and  genera
of  animals  and  plants  long  since  extinct.  By  this  means,  our
data  of  comparison,  when  we  are  endeavouring  to  interpret
the  monuments  of  antecedent  epochs,  are  greatly  increased,
since  it  is  not  merely  to  the  living  creation  that  we  can
appeal.

»  Edinburgh  New  Phil.  Jour.,  1830.


216     FLOAiraO  ICE  IN  SEA  OF  THE  WHITE  CHALK.     [Ch.  XI.

Evidence  of  floaiing  ice  in  the  sea  of  the  White  Chalk  in
England. — The  homogeneous  character  of  the  white  chalk  or
upper  portion  of  the  great  Cretaceous  formation  throughout
a  large  part  of  Europe  is  now  explained  by  the  discovery  that
it  is  made  up  almost  exclusively  of  the  remains  of  the  cal-
careous shells  of  Foraminifera,  while  the  siliceous  portions
have  been  derived  chiefly  fix)m  plants  called  Diatoms.  It  was
ascertained,  when  soundings  were  made  for  the  Electric  Tele-
graph, that  calcareous  mud  of  a  similar  character  and  origin
is  now  forming  over  vast  areas  in  the  depths  of  the  Atlantic.
The  general  absence  from  the  white  chalk  of  sand,  pebbles,
drift-wood,  and  other  sig^  of  neighbouring  land,  is  thus  ac-
counted for,  but  the  occasional  discovery  of  single  and  per-
fectly isolated  stones,  usually  consisting  of  quartz  and  green
schist,  in  the  south-east  of  England,  has  naturally  excited
much  surprise.  In  what  manner  could  such  stones  have  been
carried  far  out  into  an  open  sea,  so  as  to  fall  to  the  bottom
without  any  admixture  of  other  foreign  matter  ?  I  formerly
endeavoured  to  explain  this  enigma  by  referring  to  a  fact
observed  by  Mr.  Darwin,  namely,  that  stones  of  considerable
size  are  occasionally  entangled  in  the  roots  of  floating  trees,
and  transported  to  great  distances  in  mid-ocean.  One  of
them,  as  big  as  a  man's  head,  was  conveyed  in  this  way  for
600  miles  to  Keeling  Island,  a  small  ring  of  coral  in  the
Indian  Ocean.  Seaweed  also,  called  Kelp,  Fvcus  venculosusy
when  uprooted,  fi*equently  bears  along  with  it  from  shallow
water  pebbles  and  earth  around  which  its  roots  have  grown.

But,  on  reconsidering  all  the  facts  now  observed,  I  agree
with  Mr.  Godwin-Austen  that  there  are  some  cases  which
we  cannot  account  for  without  introducing  the  agency  of
ice.  Thus,  for  example,  in  1857,  there  was  found  at
Purley,  near  Croydon,  in  the  body  of  the  white  chalk,  a
group  of  stones,  the  largest  of  which  consisted  of  syenite.
This  block  had  been  broken  up  by  the  workmen  before
it  was  examined  by  any  scientific  observer,  but  the
largest  of  the  fragments  was  ascertained  to  be  twelve
inches  in  diameter  in  two  directions,  and  to  weigh  upwards
of  twenty-four  pounds.  It  was  surrounded  by  granitic  sand
and  pebbles  of  greenstone,  and  its  dimensions  rendered


Ch.  XI.]  CLIMATE  OF  THE  OOLITIC  AND  TIOASSIC  PERIODS.     217

the  hypothesis  of  transportation  by  drift-timber  inadmissible.
There  was,  moreover,  a  total  absence  of  carbonaceous  matter,
such  as  might  have  been  looked  for  if  a  waterlogged  tree
had  sunk  on  the  spot.  Mr  Grodwin- Austen,  therefore,  has
suggested  that  the  pebbles  and  loose  sand  must  have  been
frozen  into  coast-ice,  and  then  floated  out  to  sea,  and  the
stones,  he  observes,  mineralogically  considered,  present  just
such  an  assemblage  as  might  now  be  found  on  a  beach  on
the  coast  of  Norway  in  lat.  60**  N.  As  to  the  degree  of  cold
required  for  the  formation  of  such  coast-ice,  it  may  not,  the
same  author  remarks,  have  exceeded  that  occasionally  ex-
perienced in  our  times  on  the  eastern  coast  of  England,  from
which  ice  has  lifted  and  floated  away  far  greater  weights.*

Another  example  of  a  rounded  block,  weighing  above
thirteen  pounds,  had  been  previously  noticed  in  the  *  chalk
with  flints,'  by  Mr.  Catt  (now  Mr.  Willett),  in  a  pit  near
Lewes.  Attached  to  it  was  Spondylua  lineatus,  with  serpulse
and  some  bryozoa.  It  had  evidently  been  rolled  before
transportation,  and  before  the  serpulee  had  fixed  themselves
on  it.  But  no  large  angular  blocks  have  as  yet  been  met
with  in  the  white  chalk,  of  such  a  size  as  to  imply  the  agency
of  glaciers  and  icebergs.

Climate  of  the  Oolitic  and  Triassic  Periods. — When  we
enquire  into  the  climatal  state  of  the  globe  in  times  which
preceded  the  Cretaceous,  we  find  a  very  general  agreement
among  zoologists  and  botanists  as  to  the  warmth  of  European
latitudes  in  the  Oolitic  and  Triassic  eras.  The  vegetation  of
these  periods  consists  chiefly  of  cycads,  conifers,  and  ferns.
Professor  Heer  remarks,  that  the  tree  which  is  most  common
in  the  Upper  Trias  in  Switzerland  has  a  near  affinity  to  a
living  African  species  of  Zamia,t  and  M.  Adolphe  Brongniart
had  long  before  expressed  his  opinion  that  the  plants  of  the
secondary  periods  favoured  the  hypothesis  of  a  climate  like
that  of  the  West  Indies.  The  same  genera,  and,  to  some
extent,  tlie  same  species  of  ammonites  and  some  other  sheUs
proper  to  oolitic  strata  in  Europe,  occur  also  in  formations  of
the  same  age  in  India,  as,  for  example,  in  Sciude  and  in
Cutch,  lat.  22"*  N.  In  a  northerly  direction  the  same  formations

♦  GeoL  Quart  Journ.,  vol.  xiv.,  1858.        t  Heer,  Urwelt  der  Schweia,  p.  61.


218  MANY  REPTILES  IMPLY  WARM  CLIMATE.  [Ch.  XI.

reach  within  13^  degrees  of  the  Pole,  as  was  shown  by  the
fossil  specimens  brought  home  by  Sir  Leopold  McClintock.
Among  these  the  Rev.  Samuel  Haughton  recognises  a  species
closely  allied  to  the  Ammonites  concavus  of  the  Lower  Oolite
which  was  found  at  Prince  Patrick's  Island,  lat.  77°  IV  N.
In  Cook's  Inlet  also,  lat.  60°  N.,  several  ammonites  of  Jurassic
types,  if  not  species,  were  obtained,  and  Belemnites  pazilloausy
a  British  liassic  fossil.  But  what  is  far  more  remarkable,
remains  of  ^  large  ichthyosaurus  of  liassic  type  were  brought
from  an  island  in  lat.  77°  16'  by  Sir  Edward  Belcher.  They
have  been  described  and  figured  by  Professor  Owen,  and  as
some  of  the  vertebrae  were  2^  inches  in  diameter,  the  animal
must  have  been  of  considerable  size.***"  More  recently,  in  1866,
the  remains  of  ichthyosaurians  were  found  by  the  naturalists
of  the  Swedish  expedition,  in  strata  of  Jurassic  age  in  Spitz-
bergen  in  the  still  more  northern  latitude  of  78°  30'.

Abundance  and  variety  of  reptiles  implies  warm  climate. —
The  reptiles  of  the  Oolite  and  Lias,  and  of  the  still  older
Trias,  are  so  numerous  and  diversified  in  form  that  the  period
of  the  secondary  or  mesozoic  rocks  has  been  called  the  age
of  reptiles.  The  number  of  marine  genera  alone  of  this  class
exceeds  fifty,  while  that  of  the  fresh-water  and  terrestrial
species,  including  those  of  aerial  habits,  is  almost  as  great  as
that  of  the  tribes  which  peopled  the  sea.  Some  of  these  were
more  highly  organised  than  any  animals  of  the  same  class
now  living,  as  the  Belodon,  for  example,  of  the  Upper  Trias,
a  saurian  about  the  size  of  the  largest  living  crocodile,
but  which  belonged  to  the  extinct  order  of  Dinosaurians.
Hermann  von  Meyer  ascertained,  in  1865,  that  it  possessed
breathing  apertures  or  spout-holes  like  the  whale,  so  that  we
might  imagine  it  to  have  been  capable  of  sustaining  a  cold
climate  were  it  not  associated  with  many  reptiles  of  lower
grade,  as  well  as  with  shells,  corals,  and  plants  which  be-
speak a  high  temperature.  On  the  whole,  no  less  than
eighty  reptiles  have  been  described  by  Hermann  von  Meyer,
all  derived  from  the  Trias  of  Germany  alone.  They  belong
entirely  to  extinct  orders,  but  all  of  which,  according  to

*  Last  of  Arctic  Voyages.


Ch.  XI.]        MANY  REPTILES  IMPLY  WARM  CLIMATE.  219

Owen,*  display  affinities  more  or  less  decided  to  living
families  of  the  same  class,  while  in  the  overlying  liassic  and
oolitic  groups  we  find  representatives  of  the  crocodilian  and
chelonian  orders  which  still  exist,  together  with  the  four
extinct  orders  the  Pterosaurs,  Ichthyosaurs,  Plesiosaurs,  and
Dinosaurs.  These  exhibit  various  grades  of  organization,
and  the  analogy  of  the  living  creation  is  strongly  in  favour
of  their  having  flourished  in  a  climate  in  which  the  heat  was
considerable  during  part  of  the  year,  and  the  winter  brief
and  never  severe.

Thus,  in  some  of  the  temperate  regions  of  the  southern
hemisphere  at  present,  where  the  winters  are  long  and  the
summers  cool,  there  is  an  entire  absence  of  reptile  life —
in  Tien*a  del  Fuego,  for  example,  and  in  the  woody  region
immediately  north  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan  (between  lati-
tudes 52°  and  66*^  S.),  and  in  the  Falkland  Islands.  Not
even  a  snake,  lizard,  or  frog,  is  met  with ;  although  in  these
same  countries  we  find  the  guanaco  (a  kind  of  llama),  a  deer,
the  puma,  a  large  species  of  fox,  many  small  rodentia,  and,  in
the  neighbouring  sea,  the  seal,  together  with  the  porpoise,
whale,  and  other  cetacea.

In  the  arctic  regions,  at  present,  reptiles  are  small,  and
sometimes  wholly  wanting,  where  birds,  large  land  quadru-
peds, and  cetacea  abound.  We  meet  with  bears,  wolves,
foxes,  musk-oxen,  and  deer,  walruses,  seals,  whales,  and
narwhals,  in  regions  of  ice  and  snow,  where  the  smallest
snakes,  efts,  and  frogs  are  rarely,  if  ever,  seen.

The  power  of  reptiles  to  bury  themselves  in  the  earth,  and
to  hybernate  in  a  state  of  torpidity,  enables  them  to  exist  in
extra  tropical  regions,  but  not  where  the  winter's  cold  is
excessive  or  of  long  duration.

Absence  of  mammalia  does  not  explain  the  wide  range  of
reptiles. — In  none  of  the  secondary  rocks,  as  before  stated,
have  any  mammalia  clearly  referable  to  the  placental  division
been  found,  whether  of  terrestrial  or  aquatic  genera.  Their
absence  may  partly  account  for  the  extraordinary  number  of
genera,  species,  and  individuals  of  the  reptile  class.    For  the

*  See  a  table  of  geological  distribution  of  reptiles  in  Owen's  Falseontologj,
p.  321,  2nd  edit,  1861.


220        REPTILES  OF  THE  GALAPAGOS  ARCHIPELAGO.     [Ch.  XI.

reptiles  enjoyed  in  those  periods  a  monopoly  of  a  large  portion
of  the  habitable  surface  which  they  are  now  obliged  to  share
with  the  more  powerful  mammalia.  In  the  struggle  for
existence  they  had  only  to  compete  with  marsupials  of  very
diminutive  size,  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  there  were  few  con-
temporary birds,  so  that  to  a  great  extent  the  reptiles  per-
formed the  ftmctions  in  the  air,  on  the  land,  and  in  the  water,
which  the  two  highest  classes  of  vertebrata  now  discharge.
But  granting  that  the  predominance  of  reptiles  is  checked  in
our  days  by  the  important  part  played  by  the  more  highly
organised  vertebrata,  we  can  by  no  means  attribute  the  present
scarcity  of  saurians  (crocodiles  and  iguanas),  lizards,  tortoises,
snakes,  and  the  larger  batrachians  in  high  latitudes,  as
contrasted  with  their  abundance  in  secondary  periods,  to  the
progress  which  the  animate  world  has  made  in  that  great
interval  towards  a  more  highly  organised  state.  All  the
above-mentioned  orders  of  reptiles  are  able  to  maintain  their
ground  at  present  against  the  ape,  elephant,  rhinoceros,  tiger,
deer,  and  other  mammalia,  large  and  small,  in  all  zones  where
they  are  favoured  by  suflBcient  heat.  If  they  are  absolutely
wanting  in  polar  regions  it  is  evidently  not  the  competition
of  the  bears,  musk-buffalos,  walruses,  and  whales  which  sets  a
limit  to  their  range  in  that  direction,  but  the  power  of  frost.
There  is  no  area  in  the  globe  at  present,  between  the
parallels  of  40°  and  60°,  where  a  climate  exists  like  that
which  we  may  suppose  to  have  prevailed  when  the  triassic
and  oolitic  rocks  were  formed.  But  perhaps  the  nearest
approach  to  it  may  be  found  in  the  Galapagos  Archipelago
(situated  nearly  600  miles  west  of  the  coast  of  Peru),  which
is  of  volcanic  origin  and  contains  ten  principal  islands,
some  of  them  from  3,000  to  4,000  feet  high,  and  one  of  them,
Albemarle  Island,  75  miles  long.  Placed  under  the  equator,
the  heat  is  greater  than  in  temperate  latitudes,  but  it  is
moderated  by  the  surrounding  ocean,  and  by  a  current  of
cold  water  which  flows  from  Patagonia  northwards  along  the
west  coast  of  South  America.  This  archipelago  has  been
called  the  land  of  reptiles,  from  the  extraordinary  number  of
large  tortoises,  together  with  lizards  and  snakes,  which  it
supports.     Among  the  lizards  are  two  species  of  a  peculiar


Ch.  XI.]      REPTILES  OF  THE  GALAPAGOS  ARCHIPELAGO.       221

genus,  called  Amblyrhyncns,  one  of  them  terrestrial  and  the
other  aquatic'.  The  latter  is  marine,  laying  its  eggs  in  the
seaweed  under  water ;  it  affords  the  only  living  example,
with  the  exception  of  some  sea-snakes,  of  a  reptile  proper  to
the  ocean,  and  it  serves  to  show  that  the  existence  of  seals
and  cetacea,  which  abound  in  the  Pacific,  forms  no  bar  to  the
coexistence  of  aquatic  reptiles  in  the  same  region.  The
number  of  individual  tortoises  and  other  reptiles  could  not
possibly  be  so  great  in  these  islands,  were  it  not  for  the
absence  of  mammalia,  for  a  single  indigenous  species  of
mouse  was  the  only  representative  of  this  class  when  Mr.
Darwin  visited  the  archipelago  in  the  Beagle  in  1835.  Even
this  rodent  seems  to  have  been  confined  to  Chatham  Island,
and  may  possibly  be  a  variety  of  a  South  American  form,
introduced  by  the  buccaneers.  In  James  Island  a  rat  be-
longing to  the  old-world  division,  no  doubt  brought  by  some
ship,  had  been  naturalised.  All  the  islands  were  uninhabited
by  man  until  about  1832,  when  the  first  small  colony  was
founded.  In  the  fauna  of  the  Galapagos  islands  we  have
therefore  a  state  of  things  very  analogous  to  that  of  the
secondary  periods  before  alluded  to.

The  rich  marine  fauna  of  the  St.  Cassian  beds  in  the
Austrian  Alps,  and  of  the  district  of  d'Esino  in  Lombardy,  so
well  illustrated  by  Stoppani,  affords  evidence,  through  its
gigantic  Ammonites  and  Orthocerata,  and  by  the  large  size  of
the  Gasteropoda  and  Lamellibranchiata,  that  in  the  east  of
Europe  the  seas  enjoyed  a  warm  climate,  at  the  same  time
that  in  the  west  the  triassic  reptiles  before  mentioned  were
swarming  on  the  land  and  in  the  rivers  and  estuaries.  This
St.  Cassian  fauna  is  known  to  extend  as  far  north  as  lat.  55**,
and  has  been  traced  as  far  south  in  India  as  the  Himalaya
mountains  in  lat.  30"*,  showing  that  the  elevated  temperature
alluded  to  was  of  wide  geographical  extent.

Triassic  conglomerate, — The  great  size  of  some  fragments
of  rock  in  the  New  Eed  Sandstone,  probably  of  Triassic  age,
in  Devonshire,  has  led  Mr.  Godvrin- Austen  to  refer  their
transport  to  ice-action  ;  but  this  opinion  has  been  contro-
verted by  Mr.  Pengelly,*  who  has  shown  that  such  masses

*  See  his  Paper  on  the  Bed  Sandstone  Conglomerates  of  Devonshire,  part  ii.


222  PERMIAN  FOSSILS.  [Ch.  XI.

may  not  have  travelled  far,  and  are  such  as  might  have  been
moved  by  breakers  beating  against  a  wasting  cliff.

Permian  fossils, — Between  the  Triassic  and  Permian  rocks
there  is  a  break  which  doubtless  implies  a  great  lapse  of  time,
of  which  the  records  are  wanting,  in  that  part  of  the  globe
as  yet  best  known  to  the  geologist.  It  constitutes  the  line
of  division  between  the  primary  and  secondary,  or  between
the  Mesozoic  and  Palseozoic  formations.  The  Permian  rocks
have  been  traced  as  far  north  as  Petschora-land  in  Russia
between  lat.  66**  and  70°  N.  They  occur  largely  in  Germany
and  England ;  and  in  North  America  have  been  traced  as  far
south  as  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  lat.  44"^  N.

Amongst  the  Permian  shells  we  find  the  genera  Nautilus
and  Orthoceras,  and  these  are  sometimes  accompanied  by
large  reptiles  of  a  family  called  Thecodonts,  which  combine
in  their  structure  many  characters  of  the  living  crocodiles
and  lacertians.  They  are  most  nearly  allied  to  the  Varanians
or  Monitors,  which  now  inhabit  tropical  countries.  The  fos-
sil plants  of  the  Permian  formation  are  very  like  those  of
the  antecedent  carboniferous  strata,  of  which  I  shall  pre-
sently speak,  and  indicate  the  prevalence  of  a  warm  and
moist  climate  throughout  a  great  part  of  the  northern
hemisphere.

Supposed  signs  of  ice^action  in  the  Permian  Period. — Pro-
fessor Bamsay,  in  an  able  memoir  published  in  1855,  gave
an  account  of  observations  made  by  him  on  a  brecciated
conglomerate  of  Permian  age  in  Shropshire,  Worcester-
shire, and  other  parts  of  England,  which  had  led  him  to
infer  the  action  of  floating  ice  in  the  seas  of  that  remote
period.  His  arguments  are  founded  on  the  following  facts : —
the  firagments  of  various  rocks  imbedded  in  these  breccias
are  often  angular,  and  of  large  size,  some  of  them  weighing
more  than  half  a  ton ;  they  are  very  often  flat-sided,  and  have
one  or  more  of  their  surfaces  polished  and  striated.  They  ,
are  generally  enveloped  in  a  red  unstratified  marl,  in  which
they  lie  confusedly,  like  stones  in  boulder-drift.  In  some
cases  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  the  nearest  points  from
which  these  stones  could  possibly  have  been  conveyed  are
the  mountains  of  Wales,  more  than  twenty,  thirty,  or  even


Ch.  XI.]  ICE-ACTION  IN  THE  PERMIAN  PERIOD.  223

fifty  miles  distant ;  and  it  is  inferred  that  the  only  way  in
which  they  could  have  retained  their  angular  shape,  after
being  transported  so  far  from  their  original  position,  is  by
being  carried  by  floating  ice.     Some  of  the  specimens  also
taken  by  the  Professor  out  of  the  breccia,  and  now  exhibited
in  London,  in  the  Jermyn  Street  Museum,  have  their  surfaces
rubbed,  flattened,   and  furrowed,   like  stones   subjected  to
glacial  action.     One   of  the  most  characteristic   of   these
specimens  was  obtained  from  a  spot  about  six  miles  south-
east of  Bridgenorth,  near  the  village  of  Enville  in  Worcester-
shire.    The  fragment  is  six  inches  in  its  longest  diameter,
consists  of   hard  dark  Cambrian   grit,   with    a    smoothed
surface,  exhibiting  parallel  sets  of  strise  in  more  than  one
direction,*  a  newer  set  crossing  the  older  one.     I  am  fully
satisfied  that  such  fragments  have  been  taken  out  of  the
breccia,  and  the  explanation  oflFered  by  Professor  Bam  say
appears  to  me  the  most  natural,  indeed  the  only  one  in  the
present  state  of   science   which  can  be   suggested.      That
glaciers  should  have  reached  the  sea  in  lat.  53**,  in  England,
cannot  surprise  us  when  we  see  them  coming  down  at  present
to  within  500  feet  of  the  sea  in  New  Zealand,  in  lat.  44**,  or
much  nearer  the  equator;  and  it  has  been  already  stated
(p.  210)  that  tree-ferns  and  even  palms  now  flourish  in  New
Zealand,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  these  glaciers.
It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind,  that  there  is  a  great  dearth
of  fossil  remains  in  the  Permian  conglomerates  of  Central
England ;  and  we  know  not  by  what  plants  or  animals  the
lands  and  seas  were  inhabited  at  the  time  of  their  accumula-
tion, and,  consequently,  we  are  ignorant,  so  far  as  we  depend
pn  organic  evidence,  of  the  nature  of  the   climate  which
prevailed  in  that  part  of  the  Permian  era,  when  the  stones
which  have  apparently  been  glaciated  were  carried  to  their
present  sites.     Professor  Suess,  who  has  studied  the  Permian
conglomerate  or  Eothliegende  in  various  parta  of  the  Alps,
says  that  it  shows  signs  of  great  denudation  of  pre-existing
land  by  the  large  quantity  of  quartz  pebbles  which  it  contains,
but  hitherto  no  signs  of  ice-borne  rocks  have  there  been  met

*  Ramsay,  Quart  GeoL  Joiirn.,  vol.  ii.  1855.


224  CLIMATE  OF  CARBONIFEROUS  PERIOD.  [Ch.  XI.

with.  The  Alpine  localities,  however,  are  about  5**  south  of
those  alluded  to  in  Great  Britain.

Climate  of  Carboniferous  Period — fossil  plants, — If  we  next
consider  the  climate  of  the  Carboniferous  period,  we  shall
find  that  botanists  have  considerably  modified  the  ideas  which
they  originally  entertained  respecting  the  tropical  tempera-
ture supposed  to  be  indicated  by  the  fossil  plants  of  that  era.
The  fruit  called  Trigonocarpon,  occurring  in  such  profusion
in  the  coal  measures,  was  at  first  referred  to  the  palm  tribe,
till  the  discovery  of  more  perfect  specimens  enabled  Dr.
Hooker  to  decide  that  it  was  not  a  palm,  but  more  probably
belonged  to  a  taxoid  conifer,  somewhat  like  the  Chinese
Salisburia.  The  structure  of  the  coniferous  wood  preserved
in  these  strata  exhibits  some  points  of  analogy  with  the
Araucarise  of  Chili,  Brazil,  New  Holland,  and  Norfolk  Island.

M.  Adolphe  Brongniart  has  observed  that  the  great  nu-
merical preponderance  of  ferns  over  other  forms  of  vegeta-
tion in  the  Carboniferous  era  gives  us  ground  to  conclude
that  the  climate  was  warm  and  moist.  It  must  be  confessed
that  this  reasoning  loses  some  of  its  force  when  we  consider
that  the  ancient  flora  is  almost  entirely  destitute  of  those
flowering  plants  which  now  constitute  three-fourths  of  the
living  vegetation.  The  ferns  of  the  Coal  period  had  fewer
rivals  to  compete  with,  and  more  space  in  which  to  develop
themselves  freely ;  still  the  fact  that  many  of  them  belong
to  arborescent  genera,  such  as  Caulopteris,  Zippea,  Sphalmo-
pteris,  and  Stemmatopteris,  would  incline  us  to  think,
according  to  the  analogy  of  the  living  creation,  that  the  cli-
mate was  warm,  moist,  and  equable,  for  tree-ferns  are  now
most  abundant  in  islands  of  the  tropical  ocean,  although
some  species  extend  in  New  Zealand,  as  before  stated,  as  far
towards  the  antarctic  regions  as  the  46th  degree  of  south
latitude.  A  warm  climate  seems  also  implied  by  the  other
vascular  cryptogams  which,  together  with  the  ferns,  from
nineteen -twentieths  of  the  carboniferous  flora.  They  belong
to  families  allied  to  ferns,  such  for  example  as  the  Sigillarise,
Lepidodendra,  and  Calamites,  and  most  of  them  attained  a
vastly  greater  size,  growing  even  to  the  height  of  forest  trees,
and  had  a  more  complex  structure,  than  any  of  their  modern


Ch.  XI.]  CLIMATE  OF  CARBONIFEROUS  PERIOD.  225

representatives.  Their  steins  had  also  a  lax  tissue  and,  like
living  cryptogams  of  the  same  families,  they  must  have
derived  the  greater  part  of  the  water  which  entered  into
their  composition,  as  well  as  their  carbon,  by  their  leaves
from  the  air.  They  probably  flourished,  therefore,  in  an
atmosphere  highly  charged  with  aqueous  vapour,  and  such
an  atmosphere  must  have  been  warm.  Yet  we  must  not
suppose  the  heat  to  have  been  tropical,  for  hot  sunshine,  by
promoting  the  decomposition  of  vegetable  matter,  is  adverse
to  the  formation  of  coal  as  it  is  to  that  of  peat.

As  to  the  geographical  range  in  the  northern  hemisphere
of  this  ancient  flora,  it  is  already  ascertained  that  it  extends
from  Alabama  in  the  United  States  in  lat.  30°  to  the  arctic
regions,  while  it  has  been  traced  in  Europe  from  central
Spain  in  lat.  38**  to  Scotland  in  lat.  56°.  In  the  arctic
regions  it  was  first  observed  in  Melville  Island,  in  lat.  75°,
during  Capt.  Parry's  expedition.  The  plants  then  collected
were  examined  by  the  late  Dr.  Lindley,  who  recognised  them
as  true  fossils  of  the  ancient  coal.*  The  original  collection  has
unfortunately  been  lost,  but  among  other  fossils  since  brought
from  the  same  'island  by  Sir  Leopold  McClintock,  Heer  has
recognised  ferns  of  the  genus  Schizopterie^  a  form  character-
istic of  the  ancient  coal.  Middendorf  found  Calamites  cannoe-
formw  in  a  very  high  latitude  near  the  mouths  of  the  Lena.
Von  Buch  has  described  strata  of  the  Coal  period  containing
characteristic  marine  fossils  in  Bear  Island,  lat.  74°  36'  N.,
midway  between  Spitzbergen  and  the  North  Cape,  in  about
the  same  parallel  as  Melville  Island ;  and  from  associated
rocks  of  the  same  age  and  in  the  same  locality  Heer  has
received  as  many  as  fifteen  species  of  plants  well  known  as
occurring  in  different  stages  of  the  European  Carboniferous

formation.!

After  what  was  said  at  p.  201  of  the  spread  of  the  Miocene
flora  over  the  arctic  regions,  and  its  near  approach  to  the
North  Pole,  the  reader  will  feel  no  surprise  at  finding  that
in  times  long  antecedent  there  was  an  equally  vigorous
vegetation  in  the  same  latitudes.     Moreover,  the  coal  plants

*  Penny  Cyclopaedia,  art.  Coal  Plants.        t  Student's  Elements,  p.  424.
VOL.   I.  Q


226  SUPPOSED  EXCESS  OF  [Ch.  XI.

were  of  different  genera,  and  some  few  of  them  perhaps  of
different  orders,  from  any  now  existing,  and  they  may  therefore
have  been  endowed  with  a  constitution  enabling  them  to  ac-
commodate themselves  to  a  long  polar  night.

We  know,  by  experiment,  that  plants  which  are  natives
of  the  tropics  can  dispense  more  easily  with  the  bright  light
of  those  countries  than  with  the  heat  of  the  same.  Few
palms  can  live  in  our  temperate  latitudes  without  pro-
tection from  the  cold;  but  when  placed  in  hot-houses
they  grow  luxuriantly,  even  under  a  cloudy  sky,  and  where
much  Ught  is  intercepted  by  the  glass  and  framework.
At  St.  Petersburg,  in  lat.  60°  N.,  many  tropical  plants  have
been  successfully  cultivated  in  hot-houses,  although  there
they  must  exchange  the  perpetual  equinox  of  their  native
regions  for  days  and  nights  which  are  alternately  protracted
to  nineteen  hours  and  shortened  to  five.  How  much  farther
towards  the  pole  even  the  existing  species  might  continue  to
live,  provided  a  due  quantity  of  heat  and  moisture  were  sup-
plied, has  not  yet  been  determined ;  but  St.  Petersburg  is
probably  not  the  utmost  limit,  and  we  should  expect  that  in
lat.  65°  at  least,  where  they  would  never  remain  twenty-four
hours  without  enjoying  the  sun's  light,  they  might  still  exist.

Supposed  excess  of  carbonic  acid  in  the  air, — That  the  air
was  charged  with  an  excess  of  carbonic  acid  in  the  Coal  period
has  long  been  a  favourite  theory  with  many  geologists,  who
have  attributed  partly  to  that  cause  an  exuberant  growth  of
plants.  It  has  been  said  that  there  is  ten  times  more  carbon
locked  up  in  a  solid  form  in  the  ancient  coal-measures  than
all  that  is  now  contained  in  the  atmosphere ;  but  granting  the
truth  of  this  estimate,  which  is  probably  far  below  the  mark,
the  soundness  of  the  inference  has  always  appeared  to  me
most  questionable.  The  atmosphere  now  receives  large  sup-
plies of  carbonic  acid  by  gaseous  emanations  from  the  interior
of  the  earth,  which  are  most  copiously  given  out  in  volcanic
regions, •and  especially  by  volcanos  during  eruptions.  Car-
buretted  hydrogen  also  escapes  from  beds  of  coal  and  lignite
and  other  fossiliferous  strata  in  which  organic  matter  is  de-
composing ;  the  same  gas  evidently  rising  from  great  depths  is
also  evolved  from  rents  in  the  granitic  and  other  crystalline


Ch.  XI.]  CARBONIC  ACID  IN  THE  AIK.  227

rocks  in  which  there  are  no  organic  remains.  But  it  does  not
follow  that  the  air  is  becoming  more  and  more  loaded  with
carbonic  acid,  for  there  are  causes  in  action  which  prevent  such
a  change  in  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere.  Wherever
drift-timber  is  buried  in  the  delta  of  a  river,  sea,  or  lake,  or
wherever  peat  is  forming,  we  behold  the  process  by  which
carbon  is  first  extracted  by  the  powers  of  vegetation  from  the
atmosphere,  and  then  locked  up  permanently,  or  for  ages,  in
the  earth's  crust.  As  to  the  volume  of  carbonaceous  matter
which  may  thus  be  accumulated,  it  is  a  mere  question  of  the
time  for  which  certain  species  of  plants,  together  with  the
conditions  fit  for  making  peat  and  for  burying  drift-timber,
may  endure.*

Some  botanists  are  of  opinion  that  the  Sigillaria  in  the
Carboniferous  period  played  the  same  part  which  is  now
performed  by  the  Sphagnum  in  Europe,  both  of  them  tending
to  relieve  the  atmosphere  of  part  of  the  carbonic  acid  which
is  incessantly  evolved  from  the  interior  of  the  earth.     Mr.
Darwin  attributes  the  small  quantity  of  peat  formed  in  some
regions  of  South  America  which  are  exceedingly  damp  to  the
absence  of  species  of  plants  peculiarly  fitted  for  its  produc-
tion.    The  abundance  of  coal,  therefore,  in  certain  districts
may   have  arisen  from   the   peculiarity   of  the   vegetation,
and  of  a  climate  which  prevented  decomposition,  rather  than
from  a  peculiarity  in  the  atmosphere  which  enveloped  the
globe  in  the  Carboniferous  period.     In  the  Runn  of  Kutch
there  is  a  great  annualdepositof  salt  caused  by  the  evaporation
of  sea-water ;  but  this  arises  from  geographical  causes  wholly
unconnected  with  the  chemical  condition  of  the  ocean,  which
is  not  supposed  to  contain  in  that  part  of  India  more  than  its
average  proportion  of  chloride  of  sodium.     The  quantity  of
rock  salt  stored  up  in  the  Runn  of  Kutch,  if  that  large  district
should  be  slowly  subsiding,  may  in  time  exceed  in  amount  all
the  brine  now  held  in  solution  by  the  ocean,  but  if  so,  future
geologists  will  have  no  right  to  conclude  that  during  such
an  accumulation  of  chloride  of  sodium  the  waters  of  the  sea
generally  were  more  salt  than  they  usually  are.      Nay,  it
would  be  even  safer  to  conclude  that  during  the  period  when

*  See  below,  Chap.  XVII.
q2


228  CARBONIFEROUS  AMPHIBIA.  [Ch.  XI.

80  much  rock  salt  was  forming,  the  waters  of  the  ocean  would
contain  less  than  their  average  quantity  of  brine.

Fossil  shells  and  corals  of  the  Carboniferous  Period. — If  we
now  turn  from  the  flora  to  the  fauna  of  the  Carboniferous
period,  we  find  among  the  invertebrate  animals  many,  large
chambered  shells  of  Cephalopoda,such  as  Nautilus,  Orthoceras,
and  others,  as  well  as  stone-lilies  or  encrinites,  and  corals,  all
of  which  families  flourished  in  those  secondary  periods,  when
for  reasons  already  explained,  a  warm  climate  is  supposed  to
have  prevailed.  It  may  indeed  be  objected,  in  regard  to  the
corals,  that  they  all  belong  to  types  only  met  with  in  the
primary  or  palaeozoic  rocks ;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  orders
Zoantharia  rugosa  and  Z.  tabnlata  of  Milne-Edwards,  which
with  one  exception  became  extinct  after  the  Permian  era ;
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  Palaeozoic  cup  and  star
corals  of  the  older  or  quadripartite  type  have  such  a  range,
from  tropical  to  northern  regions,  that  we  must  either  sup-
pose them  to  have  had  greater  powers  of  adaptation  to  differ-
ences of  climate,  or  that  the  seas  of  high  and  low  latitudes
had  a  more  equable  temperature  than  they  have  now.

Carboniferous  Amphibia. — No  representatives  of  the  Verte-
brata  have  been  found  in  the  Carboniferous  formation  except
reptiles  and  fish.  The  species  of  the  former  class  are  con-
fined to  two  extinct  orders,  Oanocephala  and  Labyrinthodonr-
tia^  which  are  represented  by  thirteen  genera  in  the  coal-
measures  of  England  and  Ireland.  Both  of  these  depart
widely  from  living  types,  but  approach  most  nearly  to  the
tailed  batrachians  of  our  time,  to  which  the  salamanders
and  certain  perennibranchiate  batrachians  belong.  All
these  are  members  of  the  sub-class  Amphibia,  which  are
regarded  by  many  zoologists  as  intermediate  between  true
reptiles  and  fish.  Their  nearest  living  allies  are  only  found  at
present  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  where  they  have,  accord-
ing to  Mr.  Gunther,  a  wide  range  from  north  to  south,  in
America,  as  well  as  Europe  and  Asia.  They  are  most
numerously  represented  in  genera,  species,  and  individuals
in  the  Southern  United  States,  and  on  the  table-land  of
Mexico.  In  Guatemala  we  find  that  in  lat.  15°  N.  they
have  already  become  scarce,  being  reduced  to  one  or  two


Ch.  XI.]  DEVONIAN  PERIOD.  229

I

forms.  As  to  their  extension  in  the  opposite  direction,  some
small  species  occur  in  the  Canadian  lakes ;  one  of  these,  of
the  Menobranchus  family,  Oiredan  hiemalisy  having  l)een
observed  as  far  north  as  Lake  Superior,  in  a  place  where  the
water  was  frozen  over  an  inch  thick  every  night  for  three
months.*  Such  a  geographical  distribution  is  confirmatory
of  the  conclusions  as  to  climate  to  which  we  have  been  led
by  the  plants  of  the  Carboniferous  era,  as  the  tailed  batra-
chians  attain  their  fullest  development  between  the  20th  and
40th  degrees  of  latitude,  or  in  a  warm  zone  free  from  intense
heat  or  cold.

Devonian  Period. — In  the  antecedent  Devonian  period
there  are  no  reptiles,  not  even  any  of  the  order  Amphibia.
There  are  abundance  of  Ganoid  fish,  which  have  their
nearest  living  analogues  in  the  rivers  of  Northern  Africa,
for  they  are  closely  related  to  the  African  Polypterus,  of
which  several  species  are  found  in  the  Nile,  and  others  in
the  rivers  of  Senegal.  The  associated  Placoid  fish  belong  also
to  a  family  found  chiefly  in  equatorial  regions,  though  having
a  wide  range  into  cooler  latitudes.  The  Devonian,  or  Old
Red  crustaceans,  such  as  Pterygotus  and  Eurypterus,  attain
some  of  them  a  length  of  five  or  six  feet,  and  are  therefore
most  comparable,  in  size  at  least,  to  crustaceans  such  as  the
King  Crab,  now  living  in  Japan  and  America,  and  in  regions
still  nearer  the  equator.  The  moUusca  and  corals  resemble
generically  those  of  the  Carboniferous  period.  The  Devonian
flora  is  chiefly  known  to  us  through  the  labours  of  American
geologists  in  the  State  of  New  York,  and  in  Canada  as  far
north  as  lat.  49''.  More  than  sixty  American  species  are
enumerated  by  Dr.  Dawson  from  that  continent,  and  they
comprise  so  large  a  portion  of  the  carboniferous  genera,
including  tree-ferns,  as  to  point  to  a  similarity  of  climate.
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  European  plants  of  correspond-
ing age,  so  far  as  they  are  known.

Supposed  signs  of  ice-action  in  the  Old  Red  Sandstone y  or
Devonian  Period. — The  Rev.  J.  G.  Cumming,  in  1848,  in  his
History  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  compared  the  conglomerate  of  the
Old  Red  Sandstone  to  *  a  consolidated  ancient  boulder  clay;'

*  Dr.  Samuel  Kneeland,  Proceed.  Boston  Soc.  Nat  Hist.,  voL  vi.  p.  152.


230  CLIMATE  OF  THE  SILURIAN  PERIOD.  fCn.  XI.

and  more  recently  (1866),  Professor  Eamsay  has  pointed  out
that  the  conglomerate  of  the  same  age  seen  at  Kirkby-Lons-
dale,  and  Sedbergh,  in  Westmorland  and  Yorkshire,  contains
stones   and  blocks  distinctly   scratched,   and    with    longi-
tudinal and  cross  striations,  like  the  markings  produced  by
glacial  action.     I  have  myself  examined  this  rock,  and  have
seen  blocks  taken  from  it  which  exhibit   such   markings,
some  of  them  undistinguishable  from  those  which  I  hare
observed   on  blocks  taken  from  beneath   a   glacier.     But
Professor  Bamsay  has  himself  adverted  to  the  fact,  that  the
conglomerate  above  alluded  to  has  been  subjected  to  violent
movements  in  diflFerent  directions,  and  to  great  pressure
after  it  was  buried  under  thousands  of  feet  of  carboniferous
strata.     In  consequence  of  these  movements,  some  markings
have  been  produced  within  the  body  of  the  rock  itself,  one
pebble  having  occasionally  been  squeezed  and  forced  against
another,  so  as  to  indent  it.     Many  of  the  pebbles  also,  and
stones  two  feet  and  more  in  diameter,  have  acquired  that
polish  which  is  called  slickenside;  and  the  same  may  be
seen  in   various   parts   of  the   marly   matrix.       We   must
not  forget  that  the  district  in  question  is  exactly  in  the
line  of  a  great  system  or  succession  of  faults,  so  that  here
there  has  been  an  unusual  repetition  of  movement  and  dis-
location of  rock,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  decide  in  many
cases  to  what  kind  of  mechanical  action  the  eflfects  alluded
to  have  been  due.    More  evidence,  I  think,  must  be  obtained
before  we  can  feel  perfectly  convinced  that  the  markings  in
question  have  had  a  glacial  origin.

Climate  of  the  Silurian  Period. — When  we  enquire  into  the
climate  of  the  Silurian  and  still  older  formations,  we  find
ourselves  deprived  of  some  important  classes  of  evidence  on
which  we  have  relied  when  considering  the  organic  remains
of  the  formations  of  later  date.  Reptiles  fail  us  entirely,
as  in  the  Devonian  rocks ;  fish  are  wanting,  except  a  few
remains  in  the  Upper  Silurian ;  of  plants  there  are  none,
save  a  few  doubtful  fucoids  and  a  few  cryptogamic  sporangia
in  the  Upper  Ludlow ;  we  must  therefore  be  content  to  form
our  opinion  as  to  the  state  of  the  climate  from  those  genera
of  invertebrate  animals  of  which  there  is  a  great  profusion.


Ch.  XI.]  CONCLUDINa  REMARKS  ON  CLMATE.  23 1

but  whicli  usually  in  the  primary  strata  depart  widely  from
tertiary  and  living  types.  Of  the  probable  bearing  on  climate
of  the  large  crustaceans  of  the  genera  Eurypterus  and  Ptery-
gotus  I  have  already  spoken  when  treating  of  the  Devonian
beds,  and  we  find  them  equally  well  represented  by  other
species  of  the  same  genera  in  the  higher  beds  of  the  under-
lying Silurian.  The  numerous  trilobites,  large  chambered
cephalopods,  the  corals,  and  the  crinoids  are  also  so  like  those
of  the  newer  members  of  the  Palaeozoic  series  as  to  make  us
incline  to  believe  that  a  similar  climate  prevailed  in  the
northern  hemisphere,  and  a  somewhat  uniform  temperature
from  equatorial  to  very  high  latitudes.  In  speculating,
however,  on  this  subject,  we  must  not  forget  that  much
light  has  recently  been  thrown  by  deep-sea  dredging  on  the
uniformity  of  temperature  which  may  prevail  in  the  ocean
from  high  to  low  latitudes,  at  depths  now  known  to  be
inhabited,  though  formerly  supposed  to  be  below  the  zero  of
animal  life.

Concluding  remarks  on  Climate. — The  result  then  of  our  ex-
amination in  this  and  in  the  preceding  chapter  of  the  organic
and  inorganic  evidence  as  to  the  state  of  the  climate  of  former
geological  periods  is  in  favour  of  the  opinion  that  the  heat
was  generally  in  excess  of  what  it  now  is.  There  have
been  oscillations  of  temperature,  and  at  least  one  period
of  excessive  cold  of  comparatively  modem  date.  In  the
greater  part  of  the  Miocene  and  preceding  Eocene  epochs
the  fauna  and  flora  of  Central  Europe  were  subtropical,
and  a  vegetation  resembling  that  now  seen  in  Northern
Europe  extended  into  the  arctic  regions  as  far  as  they
have  yet  been  explored,  and  probably  reached  the  pole
itself.  In  the  Secondary  or  Mesozoic  ages,  the  pre-
dominance of  reptile  life,  and  the  general  character  of  the
fossil  types  of  that  great  class  of  vertebrata,  indicate  a
warm  climate  and  an  absence  of  frost  between  the  40th
parallel  of  latitude  and  the  pole,  a  large  ichthyosaurus
having  been  found  in  lat.  77®  16'  N.  The  great  development
also  of  the  tetrabranchiate  and  dibranchiate  cephalopoda,
with  the  general  chara<;ter  of  the  mollusca  and  corals,  as
well  as   of  the  plants,  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  the


232  CONCLUDING  REMARKS  ON  CLIMATE.  [Ch.  XI.

inferences  deduced  from  the  associated  fossil  reptiles.  If  we
then  carry  back  our  retrospect  to  the  primary  or  Palaeozoic
ages,  we  find  an  assemblage  of  plants  which  imply  that  a  warm,
humid,  and  equable  climate  extended  in  the  Carboniferous
period  uninterruptedly  from  the  30th  parallel  of  latitude  to
within  a  few  degrees  of  the  pole,  or  to  northern  regions
where  at  present  the  severe  winter's  frost,  and  the  almost
universal  covering  of  snow  lasting  for  many  months,  pre-
clude the  existence  of  a  luxuriant  vegetation.  A  still  older
flora,  the  Devonian,  so  far  as  we  have  yet  traced  its  geo-
graphical extension,  leads  to  similar  inferences,  and  the
invertebrate  fauna  of  the  Devonian,  Silurian,  and  Cambrian
rocks  has  such  a  generic  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Carboni-
ferous, Permian,  and  Triassic  periods  as  to  imply  that  a
similarity  of  conditions  in  regard  to  temperature  prevailed
throughout  the  whole  of  these  six  periods.

As  to  the  supposed  indications  of  ice-action  in  the  Miocene
and  Eocene  and  the  still  remoter  Permian  periods,  the  reader
must  not  forget  the  caution  already  given  (p.  210),  that
should  we  meet  with  erratic  blocks  of  the  largest  size,  having
one  or  more  glaciated  surfaces,  included  in  sedimentary  strata
between  latitudes  40''  and  50°,  these  blocks  may  have  been
carried  to  their  present  destination  without  the  aid  of  glacial
conditions  more  intense  than  those  now  supplied  by  the
present  state  both  of  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres.
We  learn  from  Captain  Evans's  ice-chart  *  that  in  January
1850  icebergs  reached  even  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in
lat,  35**  S. ;  and  we  shall  see  in  Chapter  XVI.  that  large  erratic
blocks  have  been  seen  imbedded  in  icebergs  floating  far  from
land  in  the  southern  seas.

*  Admiralty  Charts,  1865,  No.  1241.    See  also  p.  249.


233


CHAPTEE  XTI.

VICISSITUDES   IN   CLIMATE   CAUSED   BY   GEOGEAPHICAL

CHANGES.

ON  THE  CAUSES  OF  VICISSITUDES  IN  CLIMATE — ON  THE  PRESENT  DIFFUSION
OF  HEAT  OYER  THE  GLOBE — MEAN  ANNUAL  ISOTHERMAL  LINES — DEPENDENCE
OF  THE  MEAN  TEMPERATURE  ON  THE  RELATIVE  POSITION  OF  LAND  AND  PEA —
CLIMATE  OF  SOUTH  GEORGIA  AND  TIF^HA  DEL  FUEGO — COLD  OF  THE  ANTARC-
TIC  REGION OPEN   SEA   NEAR  THE    NORTH  POLE — EFFECT    OF  CURRENTS    IN

EQUALISING  THE  TEMPERATURE  OF  HIGH  AND  LOW  LATITUDES — THE  PRESENT
PROPORTION  OF  POLAR  LAND  ABNORMAL — SUCCESSION  OF  GEOGRAPHICAL
CHANGES  REVEALED  TO  US  BY  GEOLOGY — MAP  SHOWING  THE  AMOUNT  OF
EUROPEAN  LAND  WHICH  HAS  BEEN  UNDER  WATER  SINCE  THE  COMMENCEMENT
OF  THE  EOCENE  PERIOD — ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  EXISTING  CONTINENTS — CHANGES
IN  GEOGRAPHY  WHICH  PRECEDED  THE  TERTIARY  EPOCH — MAP  SHOWING  THE
UNEQUAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND  AND  WATER  ON  THE  GLOBE — FORMER
GEOGRAPHICAL  CHANGES  WHICH  MAY  HATE  CAUSED  THE  FLUCTUATIONS  IN
CLIMATE  REVEALED  TO  US  BY  GEOLOGY — IDEAL  MAP  WITH  THE  EXCESS  OF
LAND  REMOVED  FROM  POLAR  TO  TROPICAL  REGIONS — GREAT  DEPTH  OF  THE  SEA
AS  COMPARED  TO  THE  MEAN  HEIGHT  OF  THE  LAND,  AND  ITS  CONNECTION  WITH
THE   SLOWNESS   OF   CLIMATAL   CHANGES.

Causes  of  vicissitudes  in  climate. — As  our  retrospective  survey
of  the  fossiliferous  rocks  of  successive  periods,  given  in  the
last  two  chapters,  has  led  us  to  infer  that  the  earth's  surface
has  experienced  great  changes  of  climate  since  it  has  been
inhabited  by  living  beings,  we  have  next  to  enquire  how
such  vicissitudes  can  be  reconciled  with  the  existing  order  of
nature.  The  earlier  speculators  in  geology  availed  them-
selves of  this,  as  of  every  obscure  problem,  to  confirm  their
views  concerning  a  period  when  the  planet  was  in  a  nascent
or  half-formed  state,  or  when  the  laws  of  the  animate  and
inanimate  world  differed  essentially  from  those  now  esta-
blished ;  afd  in  this,  as  in  many  other  cases,  they  succeeded,
to  no  small  extent,  in  diverting  attention  from  that  class  of
facts  which,  if  fully  understood,  might  have  led  the  way
to  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena.  At  first  it  was  imagined
tha^  the  earth's  axis  had  been  for  ages  perpendicular  to  the


234  CAUSES  OF  VICISSITUDES  IN  CLIMATE.         [Ch.  XH.

plane  of  the  ecliptic,  so  that  there  was  a  perpetual  equinox,
and  uniformity  of  seasons  throughout  the  year;  that  the
planet  enjoyed  this  *  paradisiacal '  state  until  the  era  of  the
great  flood ;  but  in  that  catastrophe,  whether  by  the  shock
of  a  comet,  or  some  other  convulsion,  it  lost  its  equipoise,  and
hence  the  obliquity  of  its  axis,  giving  rise  to  the  varied  sea-
sons of  the  temperate  zone,  and  the  long  nights  and  days  of
the  polar  circles.

When  the  progress  of  astronomical  science  had  exploded
this  theory,  it  was  assumed,  that  the  earth  at  its  creation
was  in  a  state  of  igneous  fluidity,  and  that,  ever  since  that
era,  it  had  been  cooling  down,  contracting  its  dimensions,  and
acquiring  a  solid  crust.  It  was  also  taken  for  granted  that
this  original  crust  was  the  same  as  that  which  we  are  now
studying,  and  which  contains  the  monuments  of  a  long  series
of  revolutions  in  the  animate  world.  This  notion,  however
arbitrary,  was  well  calculated  for  lasting  popularity,  because
it  referred  the  mind  directly  to  the  beginning  of  things,  and
required  no  support  from  any  ulterior  hypothesis.  But  the
progress  of  geological  investigation  gradually  dissipated  the
idea,  at  first  universally  entertained,  that  the  granite  or
crystalline  foundations  of  the  earth's  crust  were  of  older  date
than  all  the  fossiliferous  strata.  It  has  now  been  demon-
strated that  this  opinion  is  so  far  from  the  truth  that  it  is
difficult  to  point  to  a  single  mass  of  volcanic  or  plu tonic  rock
which  is  more  ancient  than  the  oldest  known  organic  remains.
Such  being  the  case,  the  question  of  original  fluidity,  although
a  matter  of  legitimate  speculation  to  the  physicist,  is  one
with  which  the  geologist  is  but  little  concerned.  It  may
relate  to  a  state  of  things  which  preceded  our  earliest  records
by  a  lapse  of  ages  many  times  greater  than  the  entire  series
of  geological  epochs  with  which  we  are  acquainted.

If,  instead  of  indulging  in  conjectures  as  to  the  state  of  the
planet  at  the  era  of  its  creation,  we  fix  our  thoughts  steadily
on  the  connection  at  present  existing  between  climate  and
the  distribution  of  land  and  sea,  and  then  consider  what
influence  former  fluctuations  in  the  physical  geography  of  the
globe  must  have  had  on  superficial  temperature,  we  may


Ch.  XII.]        DIFFUSION  OF  HEAT  OVER  THE  GLOBE.  235

make  a  near  approximation  to  a  true  theory.  But  the  eflFect
of  former  variations  in  the  heat  and  cold  of  the  diflFerent
seasons  in  the  year,  caused  by  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,
combined  with  the  revolution  of  the  apsides,  and  still  more
by  variations  in  the  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit,  will  have
to  be  taken  into  account,  as  subsidiaiy  to  the  more  dominant
influence  of  geographical  conditions.  Should  doubts  and
obscurities  still  remain,  they  should  be  ascribed  to  our
limited  acquaintance  with  the  laws  of  Nature,  not  to  revolu-
tions in  her  economy.  They  should  stimulate  us  to  farther
research,  not  tempt  us  to  indulge  our  fancies  respecting
imaginary  changes  of  internal  temperature,  or  the  unsettled
state  of  the  surface  of  a  planet  before  it  was  prepared  for  the
habitation  of  living  beings.

Diffusion  of  heat  over  the  globe. — In  considering  the  laws
which  regulate  the  diffusion  of  heat  over  the  globe,  we  must
be  careful,  as  Humboldt  well  remarks,  not  to  regard  the
climate  of  Europe  as  a  type  of  the  temperature  which  all
countries  placed  under  the  same  latitude  enjoy.  The  physi-
cal sciences,  observes  this  philosopher,  always  bear  the  im-
press of  the  places  where  they  began  to  be  cultivated  ;  and
as,  in  geology,  an  attempt  was  at  first  made  to  liken  all  the
volcanic  phenomena  to  those  of  Italy,  so  in  meteorology,  a
small  part  of  the  old  world,  the  centre  of  the  primitive
civilisation  of  Europe,  was  for  a  long  time  considered  a  type
to  which  the  climate  of  all  corresponding  latitudes  might  be
referred.  But  this  region,  constituting  only  one-seventh  of
the  whole  globe,  proved  eventually  to  be  the  exception  to  the
general  rule.  For  the  same  reason,  we  may  warn  the  geolo-
gist to  be  on  his  guard,  and  not  hastily  to  assume  that  the
temperature  of  the  earth  in  the  present  era  is  a  type  of  that
which  most  usually  obtains,  since  he  contemplates  far
mightier  alterations  in  the  position  of  land  and  sea,  at  dif-
ferent epochs,  than  those  which  now  cause  the  climate  of
Europe  to  differ  from  that  of  other  countries  in  the  same
parallels  of  latitude.

It  is  now  well  ascertained  that  zones  of  equal  warmth,  both
in  th^  atmosphere  and  in  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  are  neither


236


DIFFERENT  TEMPEBATUBES


[CH.Xn.


parallel  to  the  equator  nor  to  each  other.*  It  is  also  known
that  the  mean  annual  temperature  may  be  the  same  in  two
places  which  enjoy  very  different  climates,  for  the  seasons
may  be  nearly  uniform,  or  violently  contrasted,  so  that  the
lines  of  equal  winter  temperature  do  not  coincide  with  those
of  equal  annual  heat  or  isothermal  lines.  The  deviations  of
all  these  lines  from  the  same  parallel  of  latitude  are  deter-
mined by  a  multitude  of  circumstances,  among  the  principal
of  which  are  the  position,  direction,  and  elevation  of  the
continents  and  islands,  the  position  and  depths  of  the  sea,
and  the  direction  of  winds  and  currents.

On  comparing  the  two  continents  of  Europe  and  America,
it  is  found  that  places  in  the  same  latitude  have  sometimes
a  mean  difference  of  temperature  amounting  to  11**,  or  even
in  a  few  cases  to  17°  Fahr. ;  and  some  places  on  the  two
continents,  which  have  the  same  mean  temperature,  differ
from  7**  to  17''  in  latitude.  Thus,  Cumberland  House,  in
North  America  (see  fig.  9,  p.  240),  having  the  same  latitude
(64°  N.)  as  the  city  of  York  in  England,  stands  on  the  iso-
thermal line  of  32°,  w^hich  we  have  to  seek  in  Europe  at  the
North  Cape,  in  lat.  71°,  but  its  summer  heat  exceeds  that  of
Brussels  or  Paris.f  The  principal  cause,  says  Humboldt,  of
the  greater  intensity  of  cold  in  corresponding  latitudes  of
North  America,  as  contrasted  with  Europe,  is  the  connection
of  America  with  the  polar  circle,  by  a  large  tract  of  land,  some
of  which  is  from  three  to  five  thousand  feet  in  height ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  the  separation  of  Europe  from  the  arctic
circle  by  an  ocean.     The  ocean  has  a  tendency  to  preserve


*  We  are  indebted  to  Alex,  von  Hum-
boldt for  having  first  collected  together
the  scattered  dat^  on  which  he  founded
an  approximation  to  a  true  theory  of
the  distribution  of  heat  over  the  globe.
Many  of  these  data  were  derived  from
the  author's  own  observations,  and  many
from  the  works  of  M.  Pierre  Provost,  of
Geneva,  on  the  radiation  of  heat,  and
from  other  writers. — See  Humboldt  on
Isothermal  Lines,  Al^moires  d'Arcueil,
tom.  iii.  translated  in  the  Edin.  Phil.
Journ.  vol.  iii.  July  1820.

The  map  of  Isothermal  Lines,  pub-


lished by  Humboldt  and  Dove  in  1848
(re-edited  by  Dove  in  1853,  from  which
fig.  9  is  extracted),  supplies  a  large
body  of  well-established  datu  for  such
investigations,  of  which  Mr.  Hopkins
availed  himself  in  an  able  essay  *  On
the  Causes  which  may  have  produced
Changes  in  the  Earth's  Superficial
Temperature.'— Q.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.
1862,  p.  56.

t  Sir  J.  Richardson's  Appendix  to
Sir  G.  Bach's  Journal,  1843-1845,  p.
478.


Ch.  XII.]  OF  COREESPONDING  LATITUDES.  287

everywhere  a  mean  temperature,  which  it  communicates  to
the  contiguous  land,  so  that  it  tempers  the  climate,  mode-
rating alike  an  excess  of  heat  or  cold.  The  elevated  land,  on
the  other  hand,  rising  to  the  colder  regions  of  the  atmO'
sphere,  becomes  a  great  reservoir  of  ice  and  snow,  arrests,
condenses,  and  congeals  vapour,  and  communicates  its  cold
to  the  adjoining  country.  For  this  reason,  among  others,
Greenland,  forming  part  of  a  continent  which  stretches
northward  to  the  82nd  degree  of  latitude,  experiences  under
the  GOth  parallel  a  more  rigorous  climate  than  Lapland
under  the  72nd  parallel.

But  if  land  be  situated  between  the  45th  parallel  and  the
equator,  it  produces,  unless  it  be  of  great  height,  exactly  the
opposite  eflfect ;  for  it  then  warms  the  tracts  of  land  or  sea
that  intervene  between  it  and  the  polar  circle.  For  the  sur-
face being  in  this  case  exposed  to  the  vertical  or  steeply
sloping  rays  of  the  sun,  absorbs  a  large  quantity  of  heat,  and
raises  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  which  is  in  contact
with  it.  For  this  reason,  the  western  parts  of  the  old  conti-
nent derive  warmth  from  Africa,  *  which,  like  an  immense
furnace,  distributes  its  heat  to  Arabia,  to  Turkey  in  Asia,
and  to  Europe.'*  The  north-eastern  extremity  of  Asia,  on
the  contrary,  experiences  in  the  same  latitude  extreme  cold ;
for  it  has  the  land  of  Siberia  on  the  north  between  the  65th
and  70th  parallel,  while  to  the  South  it  is  separated  from
the  equator  by  the  Pacific  Ocean.

A  large  proportion  of  the  sun's  heat  is  employed  in  the
tropics  in  changing  water  from  the  liquid  to  the  gaseous
state,  being  thus  absorbed  without  aflfecting  the  thennometer.
The  moist  aerial  currents,  therefore,  which  take  their  rise
over  the  ocean  and  damp  regions  of  equatorial  land,  carry
a  large  quantity  of  latent  heat  to  more  northern  latitudes,
which  is  set  free  as  the  wind  cools  and  precipitates  its  vapour
in  the  form  of  water  or  snow.  *  Thus  aqueous  vapour,'  says
Herschel,  '  becomes  an  agent  in  the  transfer  of  heat,  in  its
latent  state,  from  one  part  of  the  globe  or  from  one  region
of  the  atmosphere  to  another.'f  The  upper  trade  winds  (or
anti-trades),  which  pass  freely  above  the  peaks  of  all  but  the

*  Malte-Crun,  Phya.  Geol.  book  xvii.      t  Herpchel,  Meteorology,  1862,  art.  61.


238  AGENCY  OF  THE  WINDS  [Ch.  XII.

highest  mountains,  axe  able  to  pursue  an  almost  unbroken
course  over  tropical  and  subtropical  latitudes,  until  they
come  to  those  more  northern  regions  where  the  act  of  con-
densation releases  probably  as  much  as  three-fourths  of  their
heat.  The  surface  of  the  land  is  sometimes  raised  to  a  tempe-
rature of  159"  F.  in  South  Africa,  and  perhaps  even  higher  in
Australia  (see  p.  283),  while  the  surface  of  the  ocean  is
rarely  heated  over  80°  T.  The  effect  therefore  of  land  at  the
equator  will  be  to  cause  the  hot  air  to  rise  with  much  greater
velocity  than  it  would  off  the  ocean,  and  to  carry  rapidly,
from  localities  moist  enough  to  provide  it  with  aqueous
vapour,  a  large  volume  of  heat  to  more  northern  latitudes.
We  must  not  forget  also  that,  besides  this  action  at  great
heights  of  what  has  been  called  the  upper  trade  winds,  aerial
currents,  such  as  the  well-known  Scirocco  in  Italy  and  the
Tohn  in  Switzerland,  blowing  from  tropical  to  temperate
regions  at  a  lower  level,  occasionally  cause  the  rapid  melting
of  the  snows  of  the  Apennines  and  Alps.

In  July  1841,  according  to  M.  Denzler,  the  Fohn  blew
tempestuously  at  Algiers,  and,  crossing  the  Mediterranean,
in  six  hours  reached  Marseilles,  and  in  five  hours  more  it
was  at  Geneva  and  the  Valais,  throwing  down  a  large  extent
of  forest  in  the  latter  district,  while  in  the  cantons  of  Zurich
and  the  Grisons  it  suddenly  turned  the  leaves  of  many  trees
from  green  to  yellow.  In  a  few  hours  new-mown  hay  was
dried  and  ready  for  the  haystack.  The  snow-line  of  the
Alps  was  seen  by  M.  Irscher  the  astronomer,  from  his
observatory  at  NeufchS^tel,  by  aid  of  the  telescope,  to  rise
sensibly  every  day  while  the  Fohn  was  blowing.  Its  in-
fluence is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  summer  season,  for  in
the  winter  of  1852  it  visited  Ziirich  at  Christmas,  and  in  a
few  days  all  the  surrounding  country  was  stripped  of  its  snow,
even  in  the  shadiest  places  and  on  the  crests  of  high  ridges ;
and  Escher  von  der  Linth  has  pointed  out  that,  in  propor-
tion to  the  number  of  days  that  this  dry  wind  blows,  the
Alpine  glaciers  advance  or  retreat  in  particular  years.

Another  way  in  which  the  winds  have  a  powerful,  though
indirect,  influence  on  climate  is  by  giving  origin  to  the  princi-
pal currents  of  the  ocean.  Humboldt,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  237),
assigned  as  a  cause  for  the  rigorous  climate  of  Greenland,


Ch.  Xnj  IN  THE  DISTBIBUTION  OF  HEAT.  239

that  it  is  connected  with  more  northern  latitudes  by  elevated
land«  But,  besides  this  reason,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind
that  the  eastern  coast  of  that  country  is  skirted  for  a
thousand  miles  by  the  cold  waters  of  the  Greenland  current
flowing  from  the  North  Pole,  while  Lapland  is  warmed  by
the  waters  of  the  Gulf-stream  flowing  from  the  south.

It  will  be  seen  at  p.  246  how  much  warmth  is  conveyed
by  this  stream  to  the  west  of  Europe,  but  the  point  which
concerns  us  here  is  that,  if  the  land  now  at  the  equator  in
the  region  where  the  upper  trade  wind  gains  its  heat  and
force  were  replaced  by  ocean,  the  supply  of  hot  air  would
be  less,  and  the  average  velocity  of  the  trade  winds  would  be
diminished.  Now  the  equatorial  current  of  the  North  Atlantic
is  heaped  up  in  the  Caribbean  Sea  in  a  great  measure  by  the
confluent  northern  and  southern  trades,  and  any  diminution
in  this  force  must  lessen  the  head  of  water  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  and  consequently  the  force  of  the  Gulf-stream.
There  can  be  little  doubt  therefore  that  the  present  abnor-
mal preponderance  of  land  at  the  equator  has  a  great  effect  in
raising  the  temperature  of  the  surface  of  the  globe,  both  by
its  continuity  from  tropical  to  temperate  regions,  and  by
its  influence  in  increasing  the  warm  aerial  and  oceanic
currents.

In  consequence  of  the  more  equable  temperature  of  the
waters  of  the  ocean,  the  climate  of  islands  and  of  coasts
differs  essentially  from  that  of  the  interior  of  continents,  the
more  maritime  climates  being  characterised  by  mild  winters
and  more  temperate  summers ;  for  the  sea  breezes  moderate
the  cold  of  winter,  as  well  as  the  heat  of  summer.  When,
therefore,  we  trace  round  the  globe  those  belts  in  which  the
mean  annual  temperature  is  the  same,  we  often  find  great
differences  in  climate ;  for  there  are  insular  climates  in  which
the  seasons  are  nearly  equalised,  and  excessive  climates,  as
they  have  been  termed,  where  the  temperature  of  winter  and
summer  is  strongly  contrasted.  The  whole  of  Europe,  com-
pared with  the  eastern  parts  of  America  and  Asia,  ha^  an
'insular'  climate.  The  northern  part  of  China,  and  the
Atlantic  region  of  the  United  States,  exhibit  'excessive
climates.'  We  find  at  New  York,  says  Humboldt,  the  sum-
mer of  Bome  and  the  winter  of  Copenhagen  ;  at  Quebec,  the


Ch.  Xn.]  MEAN  ANNUAL  ISOTHERMAL  LINES.  241

summer  of  Paris  and  the  winter  of  Petersburg.  At  Pekin
in  China,  where  the  mean  temperature  of  the  year  is  that
of  the  coasts  of  Brittany,  the  scorching  heats  of  summer  are
greater  than  at  Cairo,  and  the  winters  as  rigorous  as  those  of
XJpsala.

Mean  annual  isothermal  lines. — ^If  lines  be  drawn  round  the
globe  through  all  those  places  which  have  the  same  winter
temperature,  they  are  found  to  deviate  from  the  parallels  of
latitudes  much  farther  than  the  lines  of  equal  mean  annual
heat.  The  lines  of  equal  winter  in  Europe,  for  example,  are
often  curved  so  as  to  reach  parallels  of  latitude  9"^  or  10°
distant  from  each  other,  whereas  the  isothermal  lines  of
that  continent,  or  those  passing  through  places  having  the
same  mean  annual  temperature,  diflPer  only  from  4"^  to  5°.
If  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  annexed  map  (fig.  9)  by  Pro-
fessor Dove,  he  will  see  that  the  isothermal  line  of  32**  Fr.
or  the  freezing  point  of  fresh-water,  curves  so  as  to  vary  as
much  as  14  degrees  of  latitude  in  passing  from  east  to  west,  or
from  the  south  of  Asiatic  Bussia  (lat.  56°)  to  the  north  of
Norway  (lat.  70°).  The  same  line  then  trends  southward
from  Norway  to  Iceland,  and  passing  to  the  southernmost
point  of  Greenland,  in  lat.  60°,  continues  its  course  south-
westwards  to  the  south  of  Hudson's  Bay,  lat.  51°  15',  a  point
more  than  18  degrees  south  of  that  which  it  had  reached
in  the  arctic  sea.  It  then  inclines  again  northwards  through
N.  America  to  Behring's  Straits.

The  isothermal  of  14°  Pahr.  is  equally  remarkable :  passing
from  Siberia,  about  50  miles  south  of  Yakutsk,  lat.  62°  2'
north,  (which  lies  to  the  east  of  the  limits  of  our  map,)  it
inclines  northwai*ds  to  the  north  of  Spitzbergen,  in  lat.  79°,
then  passes  southwards  through  the  north  of  Greenland,  to
63°,  in  Hudson's  Bay,  reaching  the  same  parallel  from  which
it  started  in  Siberia,  then  again  it  inclines  north-westwards
bejond  the  arctic  circle  till  it  reaches  Point  Barrow  in
Bussian  America,  lat.  71°  40'.  From  such  facts  it  is  obvious
that  the  curves  of  those  lines  in  the  same  hemisphere  which
represent  the  same  mean  annual  temperature  are  by  no
means  dependent  on  astronomical  causes  or  on  latitude
alone.

VOL.  I.  R


242  CONTRAST  OF  THE  CLIMATES  OF  [Ch.  XIL

Befpendence  of  the  mean  temperature  on  the  relative  position
of  land  and  sea. — ^When  the  meteorologist  enquires  into  the
state  of  things  south  of  the  equator,  he  finds  the  contrast  of
the  temperature  prevailing  in  certain  lands  similarly  situated
as  regards  their  distance  from  the  pole,  equally  striking,  not-
withstanding that,  on  the  whole,  there  is  a  greater  unifor-
mity of  climate  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  in  consequence
of  a  greater  predominance  of  sea  over  land.  The  most  re-
markable illustration  of  this  contrast  is  afforded  by  the  island
of  South  Georgia,  800  miles  due  east  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,
in  latitude  54°  S.,  or  at  the  same  distance  frx)m  the  equator
as  Yorkshire.  Captain  Cook,  speaking  of  this  island,  says,
in  his  second  voyage,  that  in  January  (corresponding  to  our
July)  they  never  had  the  temperature  more  than  10®  F.  above
freezing,  and  snow  fell  occasionally  in  the  same  month,  the
perpetual  snows  descending  to  the  level  of  the  ocean.  No
trees  or  shrubs  were  to  be  seen  in  summer,  although  here  and
there,  after  a  partial  melting  of  the  ice  on  the  coast,  a  few
rocks  were  scantily  covered  with  moss  and  tufts  of  grass.*

This  state  of  things  is  remarkable  when  we  reflect  that
the  highest  mountains  in  Scotland,  nearly  4,500  feet  high,
and  four  degrees  nearer  the  pole,  do  not  retain  snow  even  on
their  summits  throughout  the  year ;  and  Principal  J.  D.
Forbes  observed,  that  there  is  no  place  as  yet  known  in  the
northern  hemisphere  where  the  snow-line  comes  down  to  the
level  of  the  sea.f  The  exact  height  of  the  mountains  in
S.  Georgia  is  not  known,  but  they  are  described  as  being  very
high,  and  in  Sandwich  Land,  five  degrees  to  the  south,  in
a  latitude  corresponding  nearly  to  the  north  of  Scotland,
mountains  10,000  feet  high  have  been  observed,  and  in  those
islands,  on  the  1st  of  February,  the  hottest  time  of  the  year,
the  whole  country  from  the  top  of  the  mountains  to  the  brink
of  the  sea-cliffs  was  covered  with  snow  many  fathoms  thick.
It  was  stated  that  Tierra  del  Fuego  is  only  800  miles  west-

*  Mr.  Hopkins  raises  the  question  Soc.  p.  85.     1852.    Bat  the  great  navi-

whether,  in  South  Georgia,  the  descent  gator  is  generally  so  accurate  that  I  see

of  glaciers  to  the  margin  of  the  sea  no  reason  for  calling  his  statements  in

might  not  have  been  mistaken  by  Capt.  question.

Cook  for  the  descent  of  the  snow-line  t  J.  D.  Forbes,  Norway,  p.  205.
to  the  sea-level.    Quart.  Joum.  Geol.


Ch.  Xn.]  8.  GEORGIA  AND  TIERRA  DEL  FUEGO.  243

ward  of  S.  Georgia.     As  it  is  in  the  same  latitude,  as  well
as  in  the  same  hemisphere,  the  contrast  in  climate  which  it
presents  must  be  quite  independent  of  what  we  may  term
astronomical  causes.     In  Tierra  del  Puego  the  lower  limit
of  the  snow-line  ascends,  according  to  Darwin,  to  between
8,000  and  4,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  there  are
forests  on  the  flanks  of  the  hills  to  a  height  of  1,000  or  1,500
feet.*    There  are  many  flowers  in  the  same  region  and  hum-
ming-birds in  summer,  yet  a  high  range  of  land  runs  across
the  middle  of  Tierra  del  Puego  from  east  to  west,  reaching
at  one  point,   in  Mt.   Sarmiento,   a  height  of  6,000  feet.
Glaciers  also  descend  to  the  sea  on  the  Patagonian  side  in
lat.  53%  at  a  point  where  the  strait  intersects  the  main  chain
of  mountains  which  continues  the  Andes  into  Tierra  del  Puego.
Pleating  icebergs  moreover  abound  oflF  Cape  Horn,  where  no
less  than  2,000  of  them  are  sometimes  counted  in  the  spring
season.     There  may,  perhaps,  be  a  still  greater  number  of
icebergs  coming  from  the  antarctic  continent  to  that  part  of
the  ocean  which  surrounds  S.  Georgia ;  but  the  chief  cause
of  the  difference  in  climate  between  S.  Georgia  and  Tierra
del  Puego  is  probably  the  presence  of  the  neighbouring  low
region  of  Patagonia,  which  causes  in  a  great  part  of  the  year
the  winds  from  the  north  to  be  heated  to  an  extent  which  the
atmosphere  can   never  acquire  when  passing  over  the  sea
which  extends  for  twenty  degrees  north  of  S.  Georgia.

Dr.  Hector  has  remarkedf  that  the  north-west  winds,  when
they  blow  for  several  days  in  succession  from  Australia  to  the
southern  island  of  New  Zealand,  are  so  hot  and  dry  as  to  cause
great  floods  by  the  sudden  melting  of  the  snow  on  the
southern  Alps  of  that  island.  He  observes  that  if  Australia
were  submerged,  or  if,  at  some  former  period,  the  sea  covered
a  larger  portion  of  the  space  now  occupied  by  that  continent,
the  New  Zealand  glaciers,  which  are  now  of  considerable
size,  would  have  been  more  voluminous.  I  call  the  reader's
attention  to  this  fact,  because,  in  speculating  on  a  change  of
climate  due  to  altered  geographical  conditions,  it  is  too  often


*  Darwin's  Journal,  pp.  145,  209.
t  Letter  to  Dr.  J.  Hooker,  July  15,  1864.

B  2


244  COLD  OF  THE  ANTARCTIC  BEGIONS.  [Ch.  XH.

assumed  that  the  alteration  must  have  taken  place  in  the
immediate  region  where  the  temperature  has  been  modified*
Cold  of  the  antarctic  regions. — The  cold  of  the  antarctic
regions  was  conjectured  by  Cook  to  be  due  to  the  existence  of
a  large  tract  of  land  between  the  70th  degree  of  south  lati-
tude and  the  pole.  The  soundness  of  these  and  other  specu-
lations of  that  great  navigator  has  since  been  singularly
confirmed  by  the  exploring  expedition  of  Sir  James  Ross  in
1841.  He  observed  that  the  temperature  south  of  the  60th
degree  of  latitude  seldom  rose  above  32^  Fahr.  During  the
two  summer  months  (January  and  February)  of  the  year  1841,
the  range  of  the  thermometer  was  between  ll''  and  82**  Fahr. ;
and  scarcely  once  rose  above  the  freezing  point.  He  also
ascertained  that  Victoria  Land,  extending  from  71°  to  79®
south  latitude,  wa*  skirted  by  a  great  barrier  of  ice  in  lat.  78»
south,  which  rose  only  150  feet  above  water,  and  he  estimated
its  total  thickness  above  and  below  water  for  about  600
miles  to  be  not  more  than  1,000  feet,  and  here  the  height  of
the  inland  country  ranges  from  4,000  to  15,000  feet,  as  in
Mt.  Melbourne.  This  elevated  region  is  opposite  New  Zealand
and  Tasmania ;  the  whole  of  it  was  entirely  covered  with
snow,  except  a  narrow  ring  of  black  earth  (scoria?  ?)  sur-
rounding the  huge  crater  of  Mt.  Erebus,  an  active  volcano,
which  rises  1 2,400  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Another
part  of  the  antarctic  land,  namely,  that  which  approaches
nearest  to  South  America  or  Cape  Horn,  as,  for  example,
Graham's  Land,  and  Louis  Philippe  Land,  reaches  also  a
great  altitude,  namely,  from  4,000  to  7,000  feet.  The  exist-
ence of  such  heights  and  of  so  vast  an  area  of  land — probably
exceeding  in  dimensions  the  whole  of  Australia — may  Well
account  for  the  intense  cold,  which  reaches  to  the  60th  degree
of  latitude,  and  sometimes  farther,  towards  the  equator  in
the  southern  hemisphere.  Captain  Biscoe,  in  1831-2,  de-
scribes Graham's  and  Enderby's  Lands,  between  latitudes  64**
and  68"^  south,  as  presenting  a  most  wintry  aspect  in  summer,
and  as  being  nearly  destitute  of  animal  life.  In  corresponding
latitudes  of  the  northern  hemisphere,  owing  chiefly  to  the
influence  of  the  Gulf-stream,  we  not  only  meet  with  herds  of
wild  herbivorous  animals,  but  with  land  (Lapland,  Iceland,


Ch.  XII.]  CURRENTS  EQUALISE  TEMPERATURE.  245

and  Greenland)  which  man  himself  inhabits,  and  where  he
has  even  built  ports  and  inland  villages.

The  chief  causes  of  the  intense  cold  of  high  southern
latitudes  are  twofold :  first,  the  vast  height  and  extent  of  the
antarctic  continent ;  and  secondly,  what  is  no  less  important,
the  almost  entire  absence  of  land  in  the  South  Temperate
Zone,  where  its  presence  would  warm  the  atmosphere.  It
may  imdoubtedly  be  said,  that  some  part  of  the  cold  of
south  polar  latitudes  is  due  to  the  fact  that  their  winters
occur  when  the  earth  is  at  its  greatest  distance  from  the
sun,  and  they  are  eight  days  longer  than  the  winters  of
the  northern  hemisphere.  That  this  cause  is  not  without  its
effect  in  somewhat  augmenting  the  quantity  of  antarctic  ice,
even  with  the  present  moderate  excentricity  of  the  earth's
orbit,  is  most  probable,  and  the  amount  might  be  increased
if  a  still  larger  excentricity  happened  to  concide  with  land
of  equal  extent  and  elevation  at  the  South  Pole ;  but  I  shall
endeavour  to  show  in  the  next  chapter,  that  the  influence  of
excentricity  will  always  be  quite  subordinate  to  geographical
conditions  in  determining  climate.

Effect  of  currents  in  equalising  the  temperature  of  high  and
low  latitudes. — The  dominant  influence  of  the  position  of  land
in  reference  to  north  polar  temperature  is  well  shown  by  the
fact  that  there  is  open  sea  nearer  the  pole  than  the  northern
extremity  of  Greenland.  Antecedently  to  experience  it  might
have  been  thought  that  the  thickness  of  the  ice  would  in-
crease as  it  extended  northwards ;  but  Parry  penetrated
within  about  seven  degrees,  and  Kane  within  five  degrees,  of
the  North  Pole,  and  they  both  of  them  found  open  sea  there,
though  they  had  reached  a  latitude  so  much  higher  than
that  in  which  the  continent  of  Greenland  is  enveloped  in  a
winding-sheet  of  perpetual  snow  and  ice;  From  such  facts
the  geologist  may  learn  that,  although  in  the  Glacial  epoch
certain  mountain-chains  and  adjoining  low-lands  may  have
been  buried  in  temperate  latitudes  under  a  vast  covering  of
ice,  yet  the  waters  of  the  ocean  in  much  higher  latitudes
may  not  at  the  same  period  have  been  frozen.  We  are  by  no
means  called  upon  as  geologists  to  embrace  the  opinion  that
an  ice-cap  once  reached  continuously  from  the  pole  to  lat*


246  EFFECT  OF  THE  GULF-STREAM  IN  RAISINa      [Ch.  XH.

50%  still  less  to  40^  in  the  temperate  zone.    It  has  long  been
a  favourite  opinion  of  northern  voyagers  that  there  is  open
sea  during  part  of  the  year  at  the  pole  itself,  and  the  observa-
tions of  Eschricht  and  Beinhardt  on  the  migrations  of  the
Greenland  whale  are  rather  confirmatory  of  this  idea.   It  ap-
pears that  this  northern  whale,  Bakena  Mysticeius,  is  different
from  the  whale  called  B.  Biscayensisy  a  species  now  almost
extirpated,  and  which  once  inhabited  the  British  seas  and
the  Bay  of  Biscay.     In  winter  the  Greenland  whales  accom-
pany the  ice  when  it  floats  farthest  to  the  south  in  Baffin's
Bay,  but  in  the  summer,  when  the  ice  is  only  to  be  found
farther  north,  they  migrate  to  parts  of  the  sea  nearer  the
pole,  having  been  seen  as  far  north  as  man  has  yet  pene-
trated.    Apparently  they  retreat  to  the  polar  sea,  which
cannot  therefore  be  covered  by  a  continuous  sheet  of  ice,  for
in  that  case  they   would  be   suffocated,   since  they  must
occasionally  come  to  the  surface  to  breathe.      They  could,
however,  pass  under  considerable  barriers  of  ice  provided
there  were  openings  here  and  there ;  and  so  they  may  per*
haps  reach  a  more  open  sea  near  the  pole,  and  find  sustenance
there  during  a  day  of  more  than  five  months'  duration.   This
open  sea  is  partly  due  to  marine   currents,  by  which  the
seas  of  higher  and  lower  latitudes  exchange  their  warm  and
•  cold  waters.     Of  the  equalising  effect  of  such  currents,  as
regards  temperature,  the  Gulf-stream,  which  is  chiefly  caused,
as  we  shall  see  in  Chapter  XX.,  by  the  trade  winds,  affords  the
best  illustration.  The  waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  were  calcu-
lated by  Rennell  to  attain  in  summer  a  temperature  of  86^
Fahr.,  and  more  lately  (in  1860)  Prof.  Bache  estimated  their
temperature  in  June  at  84"^  T.,  or  8**  above  that  of  the  Atlantic
in  the  same  latitude.     From  this  great  reservoir  or  caldron
of  warm  water,  a  constant  current  pours  forth  through  the
straits  of  Bahama  at  the  rate  of  three  or  four  miles  an
hour.      According  to   Prof.  Bache,  it  is  twenty-five  miles
wide  off  Cape   Florida,   and    its    width    increases  to   127
miles  off  Sandy  Hook,  in  lat.  40**  30'.     Here  it  has  a  tem-
perature of  80°  F.  for  a  depth   of  15  fathoms,  or  90  feet,
a  heat  retained  in  one  place  as  far  down  as  100  fathoms,  while
it  continues  to  be  50''  F.  to  a  depth  of  500  fathoms.   Between


Ch.  Xn.]      THE  TEMPERATURE  OF  WEST  OF  EUROPE.  247

it  and  the  land  for  the  whole  length  of  the  eastern  coast  of
the  United  States  flows  a  cold  current  in  an  opposite  direc-
tion, varying  in  width,  but  usually  more  than  200  miles  wide,
and  having  a  temperature  of  only  40°  F.  ;*  so  that  here  we
see  an  active  transference  continually  going  on,  of  tropical
heat  to  the  poles  and  of  polar  cold  to  the  tropics.  Large
icebergs  coming  from  Baffin's  Bay,  having  their  lower  parts
immersed  in  the  colder  current,  move  southwards  in  spite  of
the  opposite  direction  in  which  the  superficial  stream  is  run-
ning, and  sometimes  in  direct  opposition  to  a  wind  from  the
south.  When  the  Gulf-stream  skirts  the  great  bank  of  New-
foundland, it  still  retains  a  temperature  of  8**  above  that  of
the  surrounding  sea.  In  about  seventy-eight  days  it  reaches
the  Azores,  after  flowing  nearly  3,000  geographical  miles,
and  here  it  has,  according  to  Dr.  Petermann,  a  temperature
of  81°  F.  From  thence  it  extends  its  course  a  thousand  miles
farther,  so  as  to  reach  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  still  retaining  an
excess  of  5°  above  the  mean  temperature  of  that  sea.  As
it  has  been  known  to  arrive  there  in  the  months  of  November
and  January,  it  must  tend  greatly  to  moderate  the  cold  of
winter  in  countries  on  the  west  of  Europe.  Passing  on  to
the  south-west  of  the  Faroe  islands,  lat.  59°  35',  it  still  retains
a  heat  of  5V  F.  at  the  surface,  and  44''  F.  at  a  depth  of
500  fathoms.  Its  further  course  has  been  minutely  and
carefully  worked  out  by  Dr.  Petermann,  in  accordance  with
the  results  of  all  the  exploring  expeditions  made  up  to  the
year  1870,  by  means  of  which  he  traces  it  to  Nova  Zembla
with  a  heat  of  36°  5'  F.,  and  beyond  this  with  a  diminishing
temperature  into  the  Polar  Basin.f

In  the  centre  of  the  North  Atlantic  there  is  a  large  tract,
between  the  parallels  of  33°  and  45°  N.  lat.,  which  Rennell
called  the  *  recipient  of  the  Gulf  water.'  This  mass  of  water
is  nearly  stagnant,  is  warmer  by  7°  or  10°  than  the  waters  of
the  Atlantic,  and  may  be  compared  to  the  fresh  water  of  a
river  overflowing  the  heavier  salt  water  of  the  sea.  Bennell
estimates  the  area  of  the  *  recipient,'  together  with  that

*  Bache  on  the  Gulf-stream. — Ame-      Geographische  Mittheilungen,  16.  Band
rican  Journal  of  Science,  1860.  1870,  Noe.  VI.  and  VII.

t  Petermann,  'Der  Golfstrom  etc.,*


248        TEMPERATURE  RAISED  BY  THE  GULF-STREAM.  [Ch.  XH.

covered  by  the  main  current,  as  being  2,000  miles  in  length
from  E.  to  W.,  and  850  in  breadth  from  N.  to  S.,  which,  he
remarks,  is  a  larger  area  than  that  of  the  Mediterranean.
The  heat  of  this  great  body  of  water  is  kept  up  by  the  inces-
sant and  quick  arrivals  of  fresh  supplies  of  warm  water  from
the  south;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  general
climate  of  parts  of  Europe  and  America  is  materially  affected
by  this  cause.

Principal  J.  D.  Forbes  calculated  that  the  quantity  of
heat  thrown  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean  by  the  Gulf-stream  on
a  winter's  day  would  raise  the  temperature  of  the  atmo-
sphere which  rests  on  France  and  Great  Britain  from  the
freezing  point  to  summer's  heat.*  Scoresby  remarked  that
the  influence  of  the  Gulf-stream  extends  to  Spitzbergen,  in
79°  of  N.  latitude,  and  that  the  great  glaciers  which  fill  all
the  valleys  of  that  island  are  cut  off  abruptly  at  the  beach  by
the  remnant  of  heat  which  the  ocean  still  derives  from  this
source.

In  BaflSn's  Bay,  on  the  west  coast  of  Greenland,  where  the
temperature  of  the  sea  is  not  mitigated  by  the  same  cause,
the  glaciers  stretch  out  from  the  shore,  and  furnish  repeated
crops  of  mountainous  masses  of  ice  which  float  off  into  the
ocean.t  The  number  and  dimensions  of  these  bergs  are  pro-
digious. Capt.  Sir  John  Eoss  saw  several  of  them  together
in  BaflSn's  Bay  aground  in  water  1,500  feet  deep !  Many
of  them  are  driven  down  into  Hudson's  Bay,  and,  accumu-
lating there,  diffuse  excessive  cold  over  the  neighbouring
continent ;  so  that  Sir  John  Franklin  reported,  that  at  the
mouth  of  Hayes'  River,  which  lies  in  the  same  latitude  as
the  north  of  Prussia  or  the  south  of  Scotland,  ice  is  found
everywhere  in  digging  wells,  in  summer,  at  the  depth  of
four  feet !  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  every  four  or  five
years  a  large  number  of  icebergs,  floating  from  Greenland,
are  stranded  on  the  west  coast  of  Iceland.  The  inhabitants
are  then  aware  that  their  crops  of  hay  will  fail,  in  con-
sequence of  fogs  which  are   generated  almost  incessantly ;

*  Travels  in  Norway,  p.  202.  the  Glaciers  of  Spitzbergen,  &c.  Edin.

t  Scoresby 's  Arctic  Regions,  vol.  i.      New  Phil.  Journ.  vol.  iii,  p.  07.
p.  208.— Dp.  Latta'fl  Observations  on


Ch.  XII.1  ICEBERGS  AFFECT  TEMPERATURE.  249

and  the  dearth  of  food  is  not  confined  to  the  land,  for  the
temperature  of  the  water  ia  bo  changed  that  the  fish  entirely
desert  the  coast.

In  the  northern  hemisphere  icebergs  are  constantly  floated
as  far  south  in  the  Atlantic  as  the  latitude  of  Madrid  in
Europe,  or  New  York  in  America;  the  farthest  point  to
which  they  are  habitnally  carried  lies  to  the  S,E.  of  New-
foundland, in  mid-ocean,  and  about  half-way  between  the
Azores  and  New  York,  in  W.  long.  45°.  In  the  southern
hemisphere  they  float  to  latitudes  several  degrees  nearer
the  equator,  as,  for  example,  to  points  oSF  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  between  lat.  36°  and  39°  *  One  of  these  (see  fig.  10)
was  two  miles  in  circumference,  and  150  feet  high,  appear-
Fig.  10.


'  (TJiSlkm


Iceberg  «md  oCF  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  April  1829.
L«t.  39"  13'  S.    Long.  48=  46'  E.

ing  like  chalk  when  the  sun  was  obscured,  and  having  the
lustre  of  refined  sugar  when  the  sun  was  shining  on  it.
Others  rose  from  250  to  800  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,
and  were  therefore  of  great  volume  below ;  since  it  is  as-
certained, by  experiments  on  the  buoyancy  of  ice  floating  in
sea  water,  that  for  every  cubic  foot  seen  above  there  must  at
least  be  eight  cubic  feet  below  water,  but  it  will  depend  on
the  shape  of  the  berg  and  the  position  of  its  centre  of  gravity
to  what  depth  under  water  the  mass  will  eiteud.t  If  ice
islands  from  the  north  polar  regions  floated  as  far  towards
the  equator  as  they  do  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  they
might  reach  Cape  St.  Vincent,  and  there,  being  drawn  by
the  current  that  always  sets  in  from  the  Atlantic  through

*  On  Icebel^  id  Low  I^tiludea,  by      nrnB  mnde.     Phil.  Tmns.  1S30.
Capt.  Ilorabtugh,  by  whom  the  sketch  t  Rennell  on  Currenta,  p.  B5.


250  TEMPEKATURE  AFFECTED  BY  [Ch.  XH.

the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  be  drifted  into  the  Medit<erraneany
so  that  the  serene  sky  of  that  delightful  region  might  soon
be  deformed  by  clouds  and  mists.

The  current  which  flows  from  the  Indian  Ocean  through
the  Mozambique  Channel,  having  a  breadth  of  nearly  a
hundred  miles  and  a  velocity  varying  from  two  to  four  miles
an  hour,  conveys  warm  water  from  a  tropical  to  a  temperate
region.  A  current  which  flows  in  an  opposite  direction
from  Cape  Horn  northwards,  along  the  west  coast  of  South
America,  conveys  colder  water  towards  the  tropics.

These  oceanic  rivers,  as  they  have  been  called,  exercise  a
great  control  over  the  temperature  of  the  air  in  certain
areas,  causing  deviations  in  the  isothermal  lines  already
alluded  to  (p.  241).  Their  course  being  to  a  great  extent
dependent  on  the  position  of  the  land,  they  add  greatly  to
the  influence  which  geographical  conditions  exert  on  the
state  of  the  climate  at  any  given  period.  For  instance,  the
waters  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  which  are  driven  westward  and
piled  up  by  the  continued  influence  of  the  east  wind,  are  now
deflected  back  by  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  But  it  is  obvious
that  if  this  isthmus  had  no  existence,  these  waters  would
flow  on  westward  into  the  Pacific  Ocean,  instead  of  giving
origin  to  the  Gulf-stream.  And  as  the  watershed  of  the
isthmus  is  in  one  part  only  250  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,
the  breach  here  supposed  is  no  extravagant  speculation,  but
would  be  effected  by  a  change  of  level  not  greater  than  we
can  show  to  have  occurred  in  parts  of  the  British  isles  since
the  commencement  of  the  Glacial  period.

Present  proportion  of  polar  land  abnormal. — It  has  been
well  said,  that  the  earth  is  covered  by  an  ocean,  in  the  midst
of  which  are  two  great  islands  and  many  smaller  ones ;  for
the  whole  of  the  continents  and  islands  occupy  about  two-
sevenths,  or  a  little  more  than  one- fourth,  of  the  whole  super-
ficies of  the  spheroid ;  the  area  of  the  sea  to  that  of  the
land  being  as  two  and  a  half  to  one.  Now,  according  to
this  analogy,  we  may  fairly  speculate  on  the  probability
that  there  would  not  be  usually,  at  any  given  epoch  of  tJie
past,  more  than  about  one-fourth  dry  land  in  a  particular
region ;  as,  for  example,  near  the  poles,  or  between  them  and


Ch.  XII.]      ABNORMAL  PROPORTION  OF  POLAR  LAND.  251

the  60th  parallels  of  N.  and  S.  latitude.  If,  therefore,  at
present  there  should  happen  to  be,  in  both  these  quarters
of  the  globe,  much  more  than  this  average  proportion  of
land,  if  the  land  should  actually  be  equal  in  area  to  the  sea,
and  some  of  it  in  the  arctic  region  8,000  feet  in  height,  and
in  the  antarctic  15,000  feet,  this  alone  affords  ground  for
concluding  that,  in  the  present  state  of  things,  the  mean
heat  of  temperate  and  polar  regions  is  far  below  that  which
in  a  more  ordinary  state  of  the  earth's  surface  they  would
enjoy.

This  presumption  is  greatly  heightened  when  we  discover
that  there  is  a  deficiency  of  land  between  the  tropics,  where,
in  consequence  of  its  being  exposed  to  the  direct,  or  nearly
direct,  rays  of  the  sun,  it  would  produce  the  greatest  heat.
For  in  the  inter- tropical  regions  of  the  globe  the  sea  is  to  the
land  as  four  to  one,  instead  of  two  and  a  half  to  one.  It  is
clear,  therefore,  that  we  have  at  present  not  only  more  than
the  usual  degree  of  cold  in  the  polar  regions,  but  also  less
than  the  average  quantity  of  heat  within  the  tropics.

The  reader  will  at  once  perceive  tliat  if  it  be  a  legitimate
speculation  on  the  part  of  the  geologist  to  assume,  that  in
past  times  the  polar  regions  had  usually  within  them  the
normal  proportion  of  sea  and  land,  of  two  and  a  half  to  one,
between  lat.  60°  and  the  poles,  instead  of  so  abnormal  a  pro-:
portion  as  one  to  one,  the  climate  of  the  temperate  regions
would  be  much  warmer ;  and  if  there  were  periods  when  a
deep  ocean  interspersed  with  a  few  islands  prevailed  at  both
poles  (an  event  which  would  probably  not  be  rare),  there
might  be  an  entire  absence  of  permanent  snow  and  ice,  even
on  the  summit  of  the  highest  mountains.  If  such  were  the
case,  there  would  still  be  oceanic  currents  causing  an  ex-
change of  temperature  between  high  and  low  latitudes,
but  none  of  them  would  convey  floating  ice  to  lower  the
temperature  of  the  sea  between  the  arctic  and  antarctic
circles  and  the  tropics.  In  the  present  geographical  state
of  the  globe,  the  Alps,  in  latitude  46°,  are  covered  with
perpetual  snow,  and  even  under  the  equator  itself  a  mountain
20,000  feet  high  has  lately  been  discovered  in  Eastern  Africa,
which  has  its  uppermost  4,000  feet  always  above  the  lowest


252  SUCCESSION  OF  GEOaRAPHICAL  CHANGES  [Ch.  Xn.

limit  of  snow ;  *  but  these  mountainous  heights  would  be
very  differently  circumstanced  if  the  aerial  currents  which
circulate  freely  from  polar  to  equatorial  latitudes  were  not
reduced  in  temperature  by  the  wide  extent  of  snow  and  ice
now  prevailing  in  both  polar  areas  at  all  seasons  of  the
year.

Succession  of  geographical  changes  revealed  to  tis  by  geology.
— To  those  whose  attention  has  never  been  called  to  the  former
changes  in  the  earth's  surface  which  geology  reveals  to  us,
the  position  of  land  and  sea  appears  fixed  and  stable.  It
may  not  seem  to  have  undergone  any  material  alterations
since  the  earliest  times  of  history ;  but  when  we  enquire
into  the  subject  more  closely,  we  become  convinced  that  there
is  annually  some  small  variation  in  the  geography  of  the
globe.  In  every  century  the  land  is  in  some  parts  raised,
and  in  others  depressed  in  level,  and  so  likewise  is  the  bed
of  the  sea.  By  these  and  other  ceaseless  changes,  the  con-
figuration of  the  earth's  surface  has  been  remodelled  again
and  again,  since  it  was  the  habitation  of  organic  beings,  and
the  bed  of  the  ocean  has  been  lifted  up  to  the  height  of  some
of  the  loftiest  mountains.  The  imagination  is  apt  to  take
alarm  when  called  upon  to  admit  the  formation  of  such
irregularities  in  the  crust  of  the  earth,  after  it  had  once
become  the  habitation  of  living  creatures ;  but,  if  time  be
allowed,  the  operation  need  not  subvert  the  ordinary  repose
of  nature  ;  and  the  result  is  in  a  general  view  insignificant,
if  we  consider  how  slightly  the  highest  mountain-chains
cause  our  globe  to  differ  from  a  perfect  sphere.  Chimborazo,
though  it  rises  to  more  than  21,000  feet  above  the  sea,  would
be  represented,  on  a  globe  of  about  six  feet  in  diameter,  by  a
grain  of  sand  somewhat  less  in  diameter  than  the  letter  o  in
this  type.

The  superficial  inequalities  of  the  earth,  then,  may  be
deemed  minute  in  quantity,  and  their  distribution  at  any
particular  epoch  must  be  regarded  in  geology  as  temporary
peculiarities,  like   the   height   and   outline    of  the  cone  of

♦  Kellimandjaro,  discovered  by  Dr.       found  it  to  be  20,065  feet  high.     Geo-
Redmann,  in   1848,  and  measured   in       graph.  Journ.  toIs.  xxxir.  xzzv.
1862  by  Baron  Von  dor  Decken,  who


Ch.  XII.]      REVEALED  TO  US  BY  GEOLOGY.  253

Vesuvius  in  the  interval  between  two  eruptions.  But  al-
though, in  reference  to  the  magnitude  of  the  globe,  the
unevenness  of  the  surface  is  so  unimportant,  it  is  on  the
position  and  direction  of  these  small  inequalities  that  the
temperature  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  sea,  and  the  circula-
tion both  of  the  aerial  and  oceanic  currents,  are  mainly
dependent.

Before  I  insist  on  the  great  fluctuations  in  temperature,
to  which  the  ever-varying  form  of  the  earth's  crust  must
inevitably  give  rise,  it  will  be  desirable  to  say  something
of  those  geographical  changes  which  are  demonstrated  by
our  geological  records  to  have  taken  place.  The  reader  has
been  in  some  degree  prepared  for  the  contemplation  of  such
revolutions  by  what  we  have  said  in  our  retrospective  survey  of
former  states  of  the  animate  creation  as  bearing  on  climate.
He  has  been  told  that  even  since  the  commencement  of  the
Glacial  period,  when  the  living  species  of  testacea  and  most
of  the  existing  animals  and  plants  were  in  being,  great
changes  in  the  height  of  European  lands  have  occurred ;
what  was  formerly  the  bed  of  the  sea  having  been  raised,
together  with  its  marine  shells,  to  elevations  of  500  and  even
1,400  feet,  and  corresponding  subsidences,  attended  by  the
submergence  of  much  ancient  land,  having  taken  place
within  an  era  so  modem  in  the  history  of  the  earth.  In
one  part  of  this  Glacial  period  we  find  proofs  that  England
and  Ireland  were  united  to  each  other,  and  to  the  con-
tinent, while  at  other  times  they  were  broken  up  into  an
archipelago  of  small  islands ;  we  also  find  that  large  parts  of
Northern  Germany,  and  Russia,  were  beneath  a  sea  often
covered  with  floating  ice ;  and  that  the  Desert  of  the  Sahara
was  under  water  between  lats.  20**  and  30**  N.,  so  that  the
eastern  part  of  the  Mediterranean  communicated  with  that
part  of  the  ocean  now  bounded  by  the  west  coast  of  Africa.
The  Atlantic  also  penetrated  far  into  what  is  now  the  basin
of  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  the  White  Mountains  in  New
Hampshire  constituted  an  archipelago.  In  short,  a  map  of
the  northern  hemisphere,  even  in  glacial  times,  would  bear
but  a  distant  resemblance  to  our  present  maps  of  the  same
region,  and  so  far  as  we  are  acquainted  with  the  geology  of


254  CHANGES  IN  THE  EABTH'S  GEOGRAPHY        [Ch.  Xn.

equatorial  countries,  they  have  undergone  an  equal  amount
of  alteration.  This  may  be  seen  by  anyone  who  will  consult
Darwin's  map  of  coral  reefs  and  active  volcanos,  which  shows
how  many  large  areas  have  been  the  theatres,  some  of  subsi-
dence, others  of  elevation  on  a  great  scale,  while  the  species
of  shells  and  corals  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  have  remained
unchanged.  The  continent  of  South  America,  from  lat.  84®.
S.  to  Patagonia,  appears  also  to  have  been  upraised  through-
out its  entire  width,  since  the  beginning  of  the  Post-Tertiary
period.  The  geographical  distribution  of  the  quadrupeds,
birds,  and  insects  in  the  islands  of  the  Malay  Archipelago
has  enabled  Mr.  Wallace  to  demonstrate  the  former  union
of  those  islands  with  each  other  and  mth  the  mainland
since  the  present  species  were  in  being.  He  has  shown  that
the  Indian  fauna  exhibits  an  abundance  of  species  common
to  both  sides  of  those  straits,  wherever  the  depth  does  not
exceed  100  fathoms,  whereas  if  the  soundings  are  deeper,
even  though  the  separated  lands  be  in  sight  of  each  other,
the  birds  and  mammalia  are  quite  distinct."^

If  we  reflect  on  these  facts,  and  consider  what  a  brief  space
of  time  the  Post-Tertiary  era  constitutes  as  compared  to  the
whole  of  the  Pliocene  period,  and  if  we  then  endeavour  to
form  an  idea  of  the  duration  of  the  antecedent  Eocene  and
Miocene  epochs  by  reference  to  the  greater  changes  in
organic  life  of  which  they  afford  evidence,  we  shall  be  pre-
pared to  find  that  a  map  representing  the  position  of  the
land  and  sea  in  the  earliest  division  of  the  Eocene  period
will  be  wholly  unlike  the  picture  which  corresponding  por-
tions of  the  globe  now  present.

In  the  accompanying  map  (Plate  I.)  the  proofs  of  submerg-
ence, during  the  period  alluded  to,  in  all  the  districts  dis-
tinguished by  ruled  lines,  are  of  a  most  unequivocal  charac-
ter ;  for  the  areas  thus  indicated  are  now  covered  by  deposits
containing  the  fossil  remains  of  shells  and  other  creatures
which  could  only  have  lived  in  salt  water.  The  most  ancient
part  of  the  period  referred  to  cannot  be  deemed  very  remote,
considered  geologically ;  because  the  deposits  of  the  Paris

*  Wallace,  A.,  Physical  Geography  of  Malay  Archipelago,  Journ.  of  Roy.
Geograph.  Soc.  1864.


Ch.  XII.]  SINCE  THE  EOCENE  PERIOD.


254


CHANGES  IN  THE  EARTn'S  GEOGRAPHY         [Ch.  XII.


— ll»  lli  WW


Ch.  XII.]  SINCE  THE  EOCENE  PERIOD.  255

and  London  basins,  and  many  other  districts  belonging  to
the  older  Tertiary  epoch,  are  newer  than  the  greater  part  of
the  sedimentary  rocks,  those  commonly  called  Secondary
and  Primary  (Mesozoic  and  Palaeozoic),  of  which  the  crust  of
the  globe  is  composed.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the  compara-
tively recent  epoch  to  which  this  retrospect  is  carried,  the
variations  in  the  distribution  of  land  and  sea  depicted  on  the
map  form  only  a  part  of  those  which  must  have  taken  place
during  the  same  period.  An  approximation  merely  has
been  made  to  an  estimate  of  the  amount  of  sea  converted  into
latid  in  parts  of  Europe  best  known  to  geologists ;  but  we
cannot  determine  how  much  land  has  become  sea  during  the
same  period ;  and  there  have  been  repeated  interchanges  of
land  and  water  in  the  same  places,  of  which  no  account  could
be  taken.  *

I  was  anxious,  even  in  the  title  of  this  map,  to  guard  the
reader  against  the  supposition  that  it  was  intended  to  repre-
sent the  state  of  the  physical  geography  of  part  of  Europe  at
any  one  point  of  time.  The  difficulty,  or  rather  the  impossi-
bility, of  restoring  the  geography  of  the  globe  as  it  may  have
existed  at  any  former  period,  especially  a  remote  one,  consists
in  this,  that  we  can  only  point  out  where  part  of  the  sea  has
been  turned  into  land,  and  are  almost  always  unable  to  de-
termine what  land  may  have  become  sea.  All  maps,  there-
fore, pretending  to  represent  the  geog^^aphy  of  remote  geo-
logical epochs  must  be  to  a  great  extent  ideal.  The  map
under  consideration  is  not  a  restoration  of  a  former  state  of
things  at  any  particular  moment  of  time,  but  a  synoptical
view  of  a  certain  amount  of  one  kind  of  change  (the  conver-
sion of  sea  into  land)  known  to  have  been  brought  about
"within  a  given  period.

The  vertical  movements  to  which  the  land  is  subject  in
certain  regions,  consist  of  the  alternate  subsidence  and  up-
rising of  the  surface;    and   such   oscillations  at  successive

*  In  compiling    this   map   I    have  M.  de  Vemeuirs  excellent  map  of  Spain

availed  myself  of  the  government  sur-  has   also   enabled   me    to  extend  the

veys  of  England,  France,  and  Germanj,  ruled  lines  over  part  of  that  country

and  of  the  important  map  of  Russia,  where  before  his  survey  no  tertiary

published  by  Sir  Roderick  Murchison,  strata  were  supposed  to  exist.
M.  de  Vemeuil,  and  Count  Eeyserling.


256  CHANGES  SINCE  THE  TERTIARY  PERIOD.        [Ch.  XH.

periods,  a  great  area  may  have  been  entirely  covered  with
marine  deposits,  although  the  whole  may  never  have  been
beneath  the  waters  at  one  time ;  nay,  even  though  the  rela-
tive proportion  of  land  and  sea  may  have  continued  unaltered
throughout  the  whole  period.  I  believe,  however,  that
since  the  commencement  of  the  Tertiary  period  the  dry
land  in  the  northern  hemisphere  has  been  continually  on  the
increase,  both  because  it  is  now  greatly  in  excess  beyond  the
average  proportion  which  land  bears  to  water  on  the  globe
generally,  and  because  a  comparison  of  the  Secondary  and
Tertiary  strata  affords  indications  of  a  passage  from  the  con-
dition of  an  ocean  interspersed  with  islands  to  that  of  a
large  continent.

But  supposing  it  were  possible  to  represent  all  the  vicissi-
tudes in  the  distribution  of  land  and  sea  that  have  occurred
during  the  Tertiary  period,  and  to  exhibit  not  only  the
actual  existence  of  land  where  there  was  once  sea,  but  also
the  extent  of  surface  now  submerged  which  may  once  have
been  land,  the  map  would  still  fail  to  express  all  the  important
revolutions  in  physical  geography  which  have  taken  place
within  the  epoch  under  consideration.  For  the  oscillations
of  level,  as  was  before  stated,  have  not  merely  been  such  as
to  lift  up  the  land  from  below  the  water,  but  in  some  cases
to  occasion  an  additional  rise  of  tracts  which  had  already
emerged.  Thus  the  Alps  have  acquired  4,000,  and  even  in
some  places  more  than  10,000  feet  of  their  present  altitude
since  the  commencement  of  the  Eocene  period;  and  the
Pyrenees  have  attained  their  present  height,  which  in  Mont
Perdu  exceeds  11,000  feet,  since  the  deposition  of  the  num-
mulitic  or  Eocene  division  of  the  Tertiary  series.  Some  of
the  Tertiary  strata  at  the  base  of  the  chain  are  only  a  few
hundred  feet  above  the  sea,  and  retain  a  horizontal  posi-
tion, without  partaking  in  general  in  the  disturbances  to
which  the  older  series  has  been  subjected  ;  so  that  the  great
barrier  between  France  and  Spain  was  almost  entirely  up-
heaved in  the  interval  between  the  deposition  of  certain
groups  of  Tertiary  strata.

On  the  other  hand,  some  mountain-chains  may  have  been
lowered  during  the  same  lapse  of  ages,  in  an  equal  degree.


Ch.  XII.]  ANTIQUITY  OF  EXISTING  CONTINENTS.  257

and  shoals  have  probably  been  converted  into  deep  abysses,
as  seems  decidedly  to  have  taken  place  in  the  Mediterranean.
Geologists  are  now  agreed  that  the  limestone  and  associated
strata  called  nummulitic  belong  to  the  Eocene  group;  as
these  rocks  enter  into  the  structure  of  some  of  the  most  lofty
and  disturbed  parts  of  the  Alps,  Apennines,  Carpathians,
Pyrenees,  and  other  mountain-chains,  and  form  many  of
the  elevated  lands  of  Africa  and  Asia,  their  position  almost
implies  the  ubiquity  of  the  Eocene  ocean  in  regions  which
are  now  dry  land,  not,  indeed,  by  the  simultaneous,  but
by  the  successive,  occupancy  of  the  whole  ground  by  its
waters.*

Antiquity  of  existing  continents, — It  is  perfectly  consistent
with  the  preceding  observations  to  affirm  that  our  present
continents  are  extremely  ancient.  They  have  all  of  them,  it
is  true,  undergone  many  minor  modifications  in  their  form
even  in  Post-Tertiary  times,  some  parts  of  them  having  been
submerged,  and  others  so  much  raised  as  to  have  been  united
with  what  are  now  islands  lying  at  some  distance  from  them.
But  the  principal  masses  of  land  have  continued  so  long
above  water,  that  each  of  them  is  now  tenanted  by  a  distinct
set  of  animals  and  plants.  More  than  this :  we  find,  when
we  examine  the  fossil  remains  of  land  quadrupeds  of  Pliocene
date  proper  to  each  continent,  that  although  they  may  be  of
extinct  species,  they  are  allied  in  structure  to  the  living
mammalia  of  the  same  region.  Extinct  species  of  kan-
garoo, for  example,  and  of  other  marsupials,  preceded  the
living  marsupials  on  the  Australian  continent.  In  like
manner,  species  of  elephant  and  rhinoceros,  and  of  catar-
rhine  monkeys,  of  forms  no  longer  in  existence,  inhabited
India  in  Miocene  and  Pliocene  times,  before  the  living
representatives  of  the  same  genera  and  families  were  in
being ;  while,  in  the  New  World,  the  platyrrhine  quadru-
mana  and  the  sloths,  armadillos,  and  other  South  American
forms  belonging  to  an  extinct  fauna,  flourished  in  times  im-
mediately antecedent  to  those  of  the  recent  mammalia  of  the
same  continent.

♦  See  Sir  R.  MurchiBon's  Paper  on  the      and  my  Anniyersary  Address  for  1860,
Alps,  Quart.  Joum.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  v. ;      ibid.  vol.  vi.

VOL.  I.  B


258  ANTIQUITY  OF  EXISTING  CONTINENTa  [Ch.  XH.

The  complete  dissimilarity,  also,  of  the  marine  fauna  on
the  opposite  sides  of  several  continents  attests  the  perma-
nence of  the  great  barriers  of  land,  which  have,  from  a
remote  age,  prevented  the  migration  of  fish,  moUusca,  and
other  aquatic  tribes  from  one  sea  to  the  other.  But  the
distinctness  of  these  marine  provinces  does  not  go  back  to
the  Lower  Miocene  period ;  and  even  when  we  carry  back
our  retrospect  to  the  Upper  Miocene,  we  find  evidence  that
the  moUusca  and  corals  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans  by
no  means  belonged  to  such  distinct  assemblages  of  species
as  they  do  now.  There  must  have  been  up  to  that  time  a
communication  through  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  as  is  proved
by  the  study  of  the  corals  and  marine  shells  of  the  West
Indian  islands.*  If  we  go  back  still  further — ^to  the  terres-
trial plants  and  animals  of  the  Eocene  period — ^we  find  such  a
mixture  of  forms  now  having  their  nearest  living  allies  in
the  most  distant  parts  of  the  globe,  that  we  cannot  doubt
that  the  distribution  of  land  and  sea  bore  scarcely  any
resemblance  to  that  now  established,  while  in  regard  to
the  ocean  of  that  era,  what  we  have  said  (p.  207)  of  marine
strata  of  the  Eocene  period  shows  how  many  mountain-
chains  forming  the  backbones  of  the  present  continents  were
submerged  when  the  marine  fauna  of  that  period  were  already
in  existence.

Continents  therefore,  although  permanent  for  whole  geo-
logical epochs,  shift  their  positions  entirely  in  the  course  of
ages.  The  great  slowness  with  which  the  change  is  always
brought  about  results  from  a  peculiarity  in  the  external  con-
figuration of  the  earth's  crust,  which  I  shall  point  out  in  the
sequel  of  this  chapter  (see  p.  268).

Both  in  the  eastern  and  western  hemispheres  north  of  the
equator,  when  we  carry  our  retrospect  beyond  the  limits  of
the  tertiary  rocks,  and  pass  on  to  the  antecedent  cretaceous
formations,  we  find  abundant  proofs  of  an  open  sea  in  regions
which  are  now  continental.  In  the  oldest  part  of  this  period,
in  the  south  of  England,  we  find  in  the  Wealden  strata  the
memorials  of  the  delta  of  a  large  river,  implying  a  contour

♦  See  Papers  by  John  Carrick  Moore,       Elements    of    Geology,    6tli    edition,
Esq.,  and  Dr.  Duncan,  referred  to  in       1866,  p.  271.


Ch.  XII.]  FORMER  GEOGRAPHICAL  CHANGES.  259

of  land  and  sea  which  has  no  reconcilable  relation  to  exist-
ing geographical  conditions ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that,
although  the  foundations  of  this  delta  sank  during  the  accu-
mulation of  the  fluviatile  strata  as  much  as  1,000  or  some-
times 1,500  ft.,  yet  there  continued  to  be  land  in  the  neigh-
bourhood in  the  south-east  of  England ;  which  can  scarcely
be  explained  except  by  supposing  that  an  upward  movement
was  taking  place  in  the  vicinity  of  a  downward  one,  or  that
adjoining  parts  of  the  surface  were  moving  slowly  in  opposite
directions.

The  frequent  unconformability  of  strata  of  different  ages
is  a  proof  that,  if  we  had  a  series  of  maps,  in  which  restora-
tions of  the  physical  geography  of  thirty  or  more  periods
were  depicted,  they  would  probably  bear  no  more  resemblance
to  each  other  or  to  the  actual  position  of  land  and  sea  than
does  the  map  of  one  hemisphere  at  present  bear  to  that  of
the  other.

The  height  to  which  ammonites,  shells,  and  corals  have
been  traced  in  the  Alps,  Andes,  and  Himalaya  is  suflScient
to  show  that  the  materials  of  all  those  chains  were  elabo-
rated under  water,  and  some  of  them  in  seas  of  no  slight
depth.  Beds  of  coal,  in  the  ancient  carboniferous  formation,
attest  the  former  existence  of  land,  since  the  plants  from
which  they  are  derived  must  have  grown  on  low  swamps
covered  with  forests.  The  sand  and  shales  which  over-
and  under-lie  them  must  have  been  formed  at  the  ter-
mination of  large  hydrographical  basins,  each  drained  by
a  great  river  and  its  tributaries ;  and  the  accumulation  of
sediment  bears  testimony  to  contemporaneous  denudation
on  a  large  scale,  and,  consequently,  to  an  area  of  land  pro-
bably containing  within  it  one  or  more  mountain-chains.

In  the  case  of  the  great  Ohio  or  Appalachian  coal-field,  the
largest  in  the  world,  it  seems  clear  that  the  uplands  drained
by  one  or  more  great  rivers  were  chiefly  to  the  eastward,
or  occupied  a  space  now  covered  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean,
for  the  mechanical  deposits  of  mud  and  sand  increase  greatly
in  thickness  and  coarseness  of  material  as  we  approach  the
eastern  borders  of  the  coal-field,  or  the  south-east  flanks  of
the  Alleghany  Mountains,  near  Philadelphia — in  other  words,

a  2


260  ANCIENT  GEOGRAPHICAL  CHANGES.  [Oh.  Xn.

as  we  get  nearer  to  the  Atlantic.  In  that  region  numerons
beds  of  pebbles,  often  of  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  are  seen  to
alternate  with  beds  of  pure  coal.

It  has  also  been  observed,  in  reference  not  only  to  the
Carboniferous  but  to  the  antecedent  Devonian  and  Silurian
rocks  of  North  America,  that  all  the  mechanical  deposits  as  we
travel  from  the  Atlantic  border  to  the  Mississippi  diminish
constantly  in  thickness,  while  the  limestones  and  rocks  of
organic  origin,  or  open-sea  deposits,  with  corals  and  encri-
nites,  increase  and  replace  the  others.

But  the  American  coal-fields  are  all  comprised  within  the
30th  and  50th  degrees  of  north  latitude ;  and  there  is  no
reason  to  presume  that  the  lands  at  the  borders  of  which  they
originated  ever  penetrated  so  far,  or  in  such  masses,  into  the
colder  and  arctic  regions,  as  to  generate  a  cold  climate.
One  of  the  members  of  the  Carboniferous  group,  the  moun-
tain limestone,  was  of  marine  origin,  and  its  occupancy
of  large  areas  in  Europe  and  the  United  States,  and  in  parts
of  North  America  bordering  the  Arctic  Sea,  makes  it  quite
conceivable  that  there  may  have  been  such  a  condition  of
things  at  the  period  of  the  coal  as  might  give  rise  to  a  general
warmth  and  uniformity  of  climate  throughout  the  globe.

The  Silurian  strata  now  constituting  parts  of  many  upland
or  mountainous  regions  in  Europe  and  America  were  formed
for  the  most  part  in  deep  seas  far  from  land,  which  may
account  for  their  being  almost  entirely  destitute  of  the
remains  of  terrestrial  plants.

Present  unequal  distribution  of  land  and  sea. — Without
dwelling  longer  on  the  proofs  with  which  geology  supplies  us
of  former  changes  in  physical  geography,  it  is  not  too  much
to  say  that  every  spot  which  is  now  dry  land  has  been  sea  at
some  former  period,  and  every  part  of  the  space  now  covered
by  the  deepest  ocean  has  been  land.  The  present  distribu-
tion of  land  and  water  encourages  us  to  believe  that  almost
every  conceivable  transformation  in  the  external  form  of  the
earth's  crust  may  have  been  gone  through.  In  one  epoch
the  land  may  have  been  chiefly  equatorial,  in  another  for  the
most  part  polar  and  circumpolar.  At  one  period  most  of  it
may  have  been  north  of  the  line,  in  another  south  of  it ;  or


Ch.  XII.]      UNEQUAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND  AND  SEA.  261

at  one  time  all  in  the  west,  at  another  the  whole  of  it  in  the
east.  In  illustration  of  this  point,  it  may  be  well  to  state
that  there  is  now  just  twice  as  much  land  in  the  eastern  as
there  is  in  the  western  hemisphere ;  and  even  assuming  the
existence  of  an  antarctic  continent,  more  than  twice  as  much
land  north  of  the  equator  as  south  of  it.  But  what  is  most
singular,  as  showing  the  capricious  distribution  of  the  land
in  the  present  state  of  the  earth's  crust,  we  find  it  possible
so  to  divide  the  globe  into  two  equal  parts,  that  one  hemi-
sphere shall  contain  as  much  land  as  water,  while  the  other
is  so  oceanic  that  the  sea  is  to  the  land  very  nearly  as  8  to  1.*
This  is  shown  by  projecting  the  hemispheres  on  the  plane  of
the  horizon  of  a  point  in  lat.  52**  N.  and  in  long.  6**  W.  of
Greenwich  (see  p.  262).  The  point  alluded  to  is  situated  in
St.  George's  Channel,  about  midway  between  Pembroke  and
Wexford,  and  the  eye  of  the  observer  is  supposed  to  be  so
placed  above  it  as  to  see  from  thence  one-half  of  the  globe.
In  such  a  position  he  would  behold  at  one  view  the  greatest
possible  quantity  of  land,  or,  if  transferred  to  the  opposite  or
antipodal  point,  the  greatest  possible  quantity  of  water.

In  previous  editions  I  used,  in  illustration  of  the  same  sub-
ject, a  map  projected  for  me  by  the  late  Mr.  James  Gardner
on  the  horizon  of  London,  for  he  regarded  that  metropolis
as  the  centre  of  the  Land  hemisphere.  The  maps  now  pre-
sented to  the  reader  have  been  executed  by  Mr.  Trelawny
Saunders,  who  has  so  divided  the  globe  as  to  add  to  the  Land
hemisphere  part  of  S.  America,  including  a  portion  of  the
Peruvian  coast,  while  an  equivalent  area  of  the  China  Sea  is
transferred  to  the  Water  hemisphere.  Intimately  connected
with  the  excess  of  land  in  the  one  hemisphere  as  compared
to  that  in  the  other  is  the  fact  that,  even  allowing  for  the
antarctic  continent  as  expressed  in  the  map,  only  one-
thirteenth  part  of  the  dry  land  has  any  land  directly
opposite  to  it.  Thus,  in  fig.  11  the  land  shaded  black
between  the  China  Sea  and  Lake  Baikal  answers  to  that  por-
tion of  S.  America  and  Tierra  del  Fuego  which  is  antipodal
to  it.      Farther   north,  a   part  of  the  continent  of  Asia,

♦  The  exact  proportion  of  land  to  sea,       1*106  in  the  Land  Hemisphere,  and  1  to
as  calculated  by  Mr.  Saunders,  is  1  to      7*988  in  tiie  Water  Hemisphere.


UlflftUAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND  AND  SKA.     [Ch.  ML


Ch.  Xn.]     UNEQUAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND  AND  SEA.  263

extending  along  the  arctic  sea,  as  well  as  a  large  tract  of
Greenland  and  other  arctic  lands  shaded  in  the  same  manner,
are  antipodal  to  the  antarctic  continent.  The  dark  spots  in
South  America  represent  tracts  antipodal  to  Java,  Borneo,
Celebes  and  the  Philippines,  a  part  of  Sumatra,  and  the
Malay  peninsula.  The  specks  in  Africa  bear  a  similar  rela-
tion to  the  islands  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  the  dark  patches
in  Spain  and  Morocco  mark  those  countries  as  partially  anti-
podal to  New  Zealand.

The  limits  of  the  supposed  antarctic  continent  have  been
drawn  with  reference  to  the  known  position  of  Victoria,
Wilkes',  Enderby's,  and  Graham's  Lands,  and  the  points
where  Boss,  Weddell,  and  other  navigators  were  stopped  by
the  ice ;  but  in  order  not  to  exaggerate  the  proportion  of  dry
land  in  the  unexplored  area,  I  have  assumed  one-eighth  of  it
to  be  sea.  This  reduction  has  been  made  by  extending  the
basin  of  the  ocean  somewhat  nearer  the  pole  than  the  points
to  which  our  navigators  have  yet  penetrated,  both  between
Graham's  and  Enderby's  Lauds  and  between  the  latter  and
Termination  Land,  in  the  former  of  which  regions  the  ships
were  usually  stopped  by  pack-ice  before  reaching  the  70th
and  in  the  other  the  65th  degree  of  latitude.  On  the  other
hand,  I  have  thought  it  safer  not  to  represent  all  the  unex-
plored area  at  the  N.  Pole  as  sea;  and  have  therefore  given
one-eighth  of  it  as  land,  which  has  been  done  by  introducing
several  supposed  islands  in  the  open  sea  said  to  exist  off  the
Russian  coast,  and  off  the  N.W.  of  Greenland.

Former  geographical  changes  which  may  have  caused  the
fluctuations  in  climate  revealed  to  vs  by  geology. — Having  now
shown  the  reader  that  there  have  been  endless  changes  in
the  form  of  the  earth's  crust  in  geological  times,  whereby
the  position  as  well  as  the  height  and  depth  of  the  land  and
sea  has  been  made  to  vary  incessantly,  and  that  on  these
geographical  conditions  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere
and  of  the  ocean  in  any  given  region  and  at  any  given  period
must  mainly  depend,  I  shall  next  proceed  to  speculate  on  the
nature  of  the  changes  which,  if  assumed,  might  account  for
the  leading  facts  revealed  to  us  by  geology,  as  explained  in
the  last  two  chapters.


264    GEOGRAPHICAL  CHANGES  CAUSING  FLUCTUATIONS  [CK.Xn.

In  order  that  our  speculations  may  be  confined  within  the
strict  limits  of  analogy,  I  shall  assume,  1st,  That  the  propor-
tion of  dry  land  to  sea  continues  always  the  same.  2ndly,
That  the  volume  of  the  land  rising  above  the  level  of  the  sea
is  a  constant  quantity ;  and  not  only  that  its  mean,  but  that
its  extreme  height,  is  liable  only  to  trifling  variations.  Srdly,
That  on  the  whole,  and  in  spite  of  local  changes,  both  the
mean  and  extreme  depth  of  the  sea  are  invariable;  and
4thly,  That  the  grouping  together  of  the  land  in  continents
is  a  necessary  part  of  the  economy  of  nature.  I  think  it
consistent  with  due  caution  to  make  this  last  assumption,
because  it  is  possible  that  the  laws  which  govern  the  sub-
terranean forces,  and  which  act  simultaneously  along  certain
lines,  cannot  but  produce  at  every  epoch,  continuous  moun-
tain-chains ;  so  that  the  subdivision  of  the  whole  land  into
innumerable  islands  may  be  precluded.

If  it  be  objected,  that  the  maximum  of  elevation  of  land
and  depth  of  sea  are  probably  not  constant,  nor  the  gather-
ing together  of  all  the  land  in  certain  parts,  nor  even  per-
haps the  relative  extent  of  land  and  water,  I  reply,  that  the
arguments  about  to  be  adduced  will  be  strengthened  if,  in
these  peculiarities  of  the  surface,  there  be  considerable
deviations  from  the  present  type.  If,  for  example,  all  other
circumstances  being  the  same,  the  land  is  at  one  time  more
divided  into  islands  than  at  another,  a  greater  uniformity
of  climate  might  be  produced,  the  mean  temperature  remain-
ing unaltered ;  or  if,  at  another  era,  there  were  mountains
higher  than  the  Himalaya,  these,  more  especially  when
placed  in  high  latitudes,  would  cause  a  greater  excess  of
cold.  Or,  if  we  suppose  that  at  certain  periods  no  chain  of
hills  in  the  world  rose  beyond  the  height  of  10,000  feet,  a
greater  heat  might  then  have  prevailed  than  is  compatible
with  the  existence  of  mountains  thrice  that  elevation.

Since  I  first  proposed  in  1830  to  account  for  the  more
genial  climates  of  former  times,  by  showing  that  there  is
now  an  excess  of  land  in  polar  regions,  Mr.  Hopkins  made
some  important  calculations  to  prove  that,  by  reasoning  on
data,  supplied  by  the  isothermal  maps  of  Dove,  we  may  infer
that  a  great  alteration  in  climate  would  be  brought  about


Ch.  Xn.]  IN   CUMATB  REVEALED  BY  GEOLOGY.  265       V.

in  the  northern  hemisphere  by  what  every  geologist  must
regard  as  slight  alterations  in  geography.  If,  said  he,  we
assume ;  1st,  the  diversion  9f  the  Gulf-stream  from  its  present
northerly  course ;  2ndly,  the  depression  of  the  existing  land
of  Northern  and  Western  Europe  to  the  amount  of  no  more
than  500  feet ;  and  Srdly,  a  cold  current  from  the  North,
sweeping  over  this  submerged  area,  the  effect  would  be,  that
both  on  Snowdon  and  the  lower  mountains  of  the  West  of
Ireland  the  snow-line  would  descend  to  within  1,000  feet  of
the  sea-level,  and  glaciers  reach  the  sea.*  Now  everyone
who  is  aware  of  the  rising  and  sinking  of  land,  of  which  we
have  proofs  since  the  present  species  of  animals  and  plants
were  in  existence,  or  since  the  commencement  of  the  Glacial
epoch,  will  be  prepared  to  concede  that,  without  violating
probability,  we  may  imagine  far  more  important  changes  to
have  occurred  since  the  older  Pliocene  period  than  those
above  suggested.  Even  if  we  admit  that  the  Glacial  period
began  as  far  back  as  the  close  of  the  Newer  Pliocene  era,  when
perhaps  5  in  100  of  the  mollusca  were  of  different  species  from
those  now  living,  we  might  still  fairly  speculate  on  the  lapse
of  a  period  more  than  ten  times  as  long  since  the  older
Pliocene  deposits  were  formed,  for  in  these  more  than  half
the  shells  belong  to  extinct  species.  We  might  reckon  on  a
tenfold  greater  amount  of  geographical  change  as  having
occurred  in  an  interval  sufficient  te  allow  of  fluctuations  in
organic  life  on  so  much  grander  a  scale.  Even  if  changes  in
the  position  of  land  and  sea  are  brought  about  as  slowly
as  those  now  in  progress,  so  as  to  be  quite  insensible  to
ordinary  observation,  we  may  still  be  prepared  to  believe  that
when  we  go  back  to  the  older  Pliocene  period,  land  between
the  arctic  and  antarctic  circles  and  the  pole  may  have  been
so  much  less  in  quantity  as  compared  to  what  it  now  is,  that,
instead  of  being  equal  in  area  to  the  sea,  it  may  only  have
been  in  the  proportion  of  about  1  to  2^.  But  such  a  reduc-
tion of  the  quantity  of  land  in  high  latitudes  would  be
accompanied  by  an  equivalent  increase  of  land  in  temperate
or  tropical  regions,  unless  we  suppose  the  general  surface  of
the  earth's  crust  to  have  been  less  irregular  than  it  is  now —

*  Quarterly  Joum.  Geol.  Soc.  1852.


266  MAP  REPRESENTING  NORTH  AND  SOUTH        [Ch.  XH.

an  hypothesis  which  we  are  not  entitled  to  make.  Conse-
quently, whatever  is  lost  to  polar  areas,  where  land  gives
rise  to  an  augmentation  of  cold,  would  be  gained  in  those
lower  latitudes,  where  it  causes  an  increase  of  warmth.
Therefore  a  more  normal  state  of  geography,  or  one  in  which
the  polar,  temperate,  and  equatorial  regions  would  each
contain  more  nearly  than  they  do  now  a  proportion  of  one
part  land  to  two  and  a  half  parts  sea,  would  bring  back
those  genial  climates  which  generally  obtained  in  the  past
history  of  the  world.  It  may  perhaps  be  thought  that  the
proofs  lately  brought  to  light  of  a  rich  vegetation  having
existed  in  Tertiary  and  even  Cretaceous  times  within  10®  of
the  pole,  attest  a  greater  extent  of  land  in  very  high  latitudes
than  is  consistent  with  the  theory  above  proposed.  But  the
reader  must  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  always  assuming  that
rather  more  than  a  fourth  of  the  arctic  area  may  have
consisted  of  land,  and  this  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  pro-
duce the  fossil  plants  hitherto  discovered.  It  should  also  be
remembered  that  we  must  not  take  for  granted  that  the  land
from  which  arctic  Tertiary  strata  derived  their  fossil  plants
was  all  above  water  at  the  same  time,  since  even  if  it  belongs
to  one  era,  such  as  the  Miocene,  there  may  have  been  great
oscillations  of  level  and  conversion  of  sea  into  land  and  land
into  sea  during  the  successive  phases  of  the  Miocene  vegeta-
tion.

The  accompanying  map  (fig.  13)  may  help  the  reader  to
imagine  what  would  be  the  amoimt  of  change,  if  the
geography  of  the  globe  were  altered  from  its  present  ex-
ceptional state  to  what  I  consider  a  more  normal  condition
of  things.  In  this  ideal  map  the  excess  of  land  is  removed
from  the  arctic  and  antarctic  zones,  and  transferred  to
the  tropical  zone,  which  last,  after  this  accession,  contains
only  its  normal  quantity  of  land,  or  a  proportion  to  the  water
of  about  1  to  2i.  The  land  thus  shifted  from  the  poles  has
not  been  placed  at  random  in  the  tropics,  but  has  been  made
to  fill  those  oceanic  spaces  which  are  supposed  to  have  been
above  water  in  Post- Tertiary,  or  at  least,  in  Newer  Pliocene
times,  in  accordance  with  Darwin's  map  of  coral  atolls.
No  doubt  during  such  an  amount  of  transposition  of  sea  and


Ch.  xu.]       polar  lands  in  normal  quahtity.  267


268  NORMAL  QUANTITY  OF  LAND.        [Ch.  XII.

land  in  the  polar  and  equatorial  zones,  there  would  be  a
corresponding  amount  of  change  in  the  outline  of  continents
and  islands  in  other  regions ;  but  those  changes,  if  taking
place  within  the  same  zone,  might  have  but  slight  effect  on
the  general  climate  of  the  globe  or  the  average  temperature
of  the  atmosphere.  So  long  as  the  conversion  of  sea  into
land  or  land  into  sea  does  not  cause  any  alteration  in  the
proportions  of  land  to  water  in  the  same  zones,  a  vast  amount
of  fluctuation  may  take  place  without  those  zones  being
rendered  warmer  or  colder.  Even  if  the  land  and  sea  in  the
eastern  and  western  hemispheres  were  to  change  places,  this
need  not  affect  the  general  temperature  of  the  earth's  surface,
although  the  transfer  of  an  equal  volume  of  land  from  the
torrid  zone  to  the  arctic  or  antarctic  regions  would  cause  a
prodigious  refrigeration  in  all  latitudes.  I  have  therefore
left  the  land  and  sea  as  they  now  are,  that  those  variations
in  geography  which  would  affect  climate  may  be  more  easily
recognised.  In  this  same  map  it  will  be  seen  that  the  dimi-
nution of  arctic  and  antarctic  land  would  enable  oceanic
currents  to  flow  more  freely  from  high  to  low,  and  from  low
to  high  latitudes,  so  that  there  might  always  be  much  open
sea  at  the  poles.  But  I  have  not  attempted  to  deal  in  this
map  with  submarine  geography  or  the  shape  of  the  sea-
bottom,  which  must  nevertheless  often  affect  the  course  and
direction  of  ocean  currents,  as  well  as  that  slow  movement
by  which  an  interchange  of  waters  of  different  temperature
may  be  effected  between  the  equatorial  and  polar  seas.

Great  depth  of  the  sea  as  compared  to  the  mean  height  of  the
land  cmxnected  with  the  slowness  of  climatal  changes. — I  shall
conclude  this  chapter  by  observing  that  if  at  any  former  period
the  climate  of  the  globe  was  much  warmer  or  colder  than  it
is  now,  it  would  have  a  tendency  to  retain  that  higher  or
lower  temperature  for  a  succession  of  geological  epochs.
That  tendency  would  usually  be  in  favour  of  warmer  climates,
because  these  would  be  consistent  with  a  normal  state  of
geography ;  but  if  once  abnormal  conditions  like  the  pre-
sent prevailed,  they  would  be  persistent  for  an  indefinite
lapse  of  ages.  The  slowness  of  climatal  change  here  alluded
to  would  arise  from  the  great  depth  of  the  sea  as  compared


Ch.  Xn.]  GREAT  DEPTH  OF  SEA.  269

to  the  height  of  the  land,  and  the  consequent  lapse  of  time
required  to  alter  the  position  of  continents  and  great  oceanic
basins.

To  one  who  contemplates  the  vast  amount  of  geographical
change  which  has  occurred  in  Post-Tertiary,  and  still  more
in  Pliocene  and  Miocene  times,  it  might  at  first  sight
appear  that  in  the  course  of  such  a  period  as  might  corre-
spond with  the  disappearance  of  one  set  of  organic  beings
and  the  coming  in  of  another,  there  would  be  an  almost  un-
limited revolution  in  the  outward  form  of  the  earth's  crust.
But  such  an  opinion  would  not  be  in  harmony  with  the  facts
which  have  come  to  our  knowledge  of  late  years  in  regard  to
the  average  height  of  the  continents  as  contrasted  with  the
enormous  depth  of  the  sea,  both  as  inferred  theoretically
from  observations  on  the  tidal  wave,  and  proved  practically
by  deep-sea  soundings.  These  have  been  very  generally
supposed  to  demonstrate  that  the  average  depth  of  the  sea  is
15,000  feet ;  while  the  mean  height  of  the  land  is  only  1,000
feet.  Even  if  this  estimate  of  the  average  depth  of  the  ocean
be  an  exaggeration,  as  some  suspect,  yet  its  excess  over  the
height  of  the  land  is  indisputable,  for  inequalities  amounting
to  three  or  five  miles,  which  on  the  land  are  so  exceptional
as  to  be  confined  to  a  few  peaks  and  narrow  ridges,  occur  in
the  abysses  of  the  ocean  continuously  over  wide  areas.  The
effect  therefore  of  vertical  movements,  equalling  1,000  feet
in  both  directions,  upward  and  downward,  is  to  cause  a  vast
transposition  of  land  and  sea  in  those  areas  which  are  now
continental,  and  adjoining  to  which  there  is  much  sea  not
exceeding  1,000  feet  in  depth.  But  movements  of  equal
amount  would  have  no  tendency  to  produce  a  sensible  altera-
tion in  the  Atlantic  or  Pacific  Oceans,  or  to  cause  the  oceanic
and  continental  areas  to  change  places.  Depressions  of
1,000  feet  would  submerge  large  areas  of  the  existing  land,
but  fifteen  times  as  much  movement  would  be  required  to
convert  such  land  into  an  ocean  of  average  depth,  or  to  cause
an  ocean  three  miles  deep  to  replace  any  one  of  the  existing
continents.  It  is  quite  essential  to  bear  in  mind  this  remark-
able feature  in  the  physical  geography  of  the  earth,  when  we
are  speculating  on  the  cause  of  the  permanence  of  a  particular


270


MAPS  SHOWINQ   EXTKE3IE  OF  HEAT  [Ck.  Xlt.


climate,  or  distribution  of  beat  or  cold  during  a  aeries  of
epochs.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  chances,  it  would  not
often  happen  that  even  one  of  the  polar  regions  wonld  con-


f  ^"''fi^^.^  ■W  -"^s^lif'^  .


Extreme  of  CoM.


OMEHTATTtiss.— Tlieaa  roapg  are  int*nded"toBbunr  that  continents  iind  islnnds
hnving  the  Siime  ehnpe  nnd  reUtivs  dim^ni^ions  ns  those  now  eiiating,  might  be
plnced  BO  BH  to  occupy  either  the  equatorial  or  polar  regions.

In  flg.  14,  scareelj  nnj  of  the  land  extends  from  ihf  Equator  towards  ths  polss
beyond  the  30th  parallel  of  latitude;  and  in  flg.  15,  a  ver7  email  proportion  of  it
extends  from  the  poles  towards  the  Equator  beyond  tha  40th  parallel  of  latitude.


Ch.  XII.]  AND  EXTREME  OF  COLD.  271

tain  80  much  land  as  each  of  them  does  at  present,  but  great
indeed  would  be  the  chances  against  the  simultaneous  pre-
ponderance of  such  an  abnormal  quantity  of  land,  both  in
arctic  and  antarctic  latitudes.

The  annexed  maps  will  enable  the  reader  to  understand
the  manner  in  which  land,  having  the  same  proportion  to
the  sea  of  1  to  2^  as  it  now  has,  might  be  collected  together
in  equatorial  or  polar  regions.  Such  extremes  may  never
have  occurred,  but  we  may  safely  conclude  that  there  may
sometimes  have  been  an  approximation  to  them  in  the  course
of  those  ages  to  which  our  geological  records  refer.  A
glance  at  these  maps  will  make  it  evident  that  in  the  present
state  of  the  globe  we  are  much  nearer  to  the  winter  than  to
the  summer  of  the  *  Annus  Magnus,'  or  great  cycle  of  terres-
trial climate.


272


CHAPTER  XIII.

VICISSITUDES   OP   CLIMATE,   HOW   PAR   INPLUENCED   BY

ASTRONOMICAL   CHANGES.

THE  PRBCB88ION  OF  THB  EQUINOXES,  AKD  TABIATIONS  IK  THE  KXCEMTBICnT
OF  THB  earth's  ORBIT,  CONSIDERED  AS  AFFECTING  CLIMATE — SIB  JOHK
HERSCHBL's  TIEWS  upon  THIS  SUBJECT — LATER  THEORIES  AS  TO  THE  EFFBCT
OF  ASTRONOMICAL  CAUSES— CLIMATES  OF  THE  8UCCE8SITB  PHASES  OF  PRS-
CES8I0N — PREDOMINATING  EFFECT  OF  GEOGRAPHICAL  CAUSES  ON  THB  PBBSBMT
CLIMATB  OF  THB  EARTH — HOW  FAB  WE  MAT  SPECULATE  ON  A  PBOBABLB
DATE  FOR  THE  GLACIAL  PBBIOD — EVAPORATION  OF  ICE  AND  SNOW  Df  A  DBT
WAT — RADIATION  OF  HEAT  IMPEDED  BT  A  COVERING  OF  SNOW — ABSENCE  OF
RECURRENT  GLACIAL  PERIODS  IN  THE  EARLIER  FORMATIONS — VARIATION  TK
THE  OBLIQUITT  OF  THB  ECLIPTIC — SUPPOSED  VARIATIONS  IN  THB  TBMFBRA-
TUBE  OF   SPACE — SUPPOSED   DIMINUTION   OF    THE   KARTH*S   PBIMTTIVB  HBAT.

In  the  last  chapter  we  were  chiefly  occupied  in  consider-
ing how  far  changes  in  physical  geography  or  in  the  position
of  land  and  sea  may  account  for  those  variations  of  climate
to  which  geology  bears  testimony.  I  endeavoured  to  show
that  this  class  of  causes  must  always  have  exerted  a  dominant
influence ;  and  we  may  now  consider  how  far  those  variations
in  the  relative  position  of  our  planet  to  the  sun  and  the
other  heavenly  bodies  which  astronomy  reveals  to  us,  may
have  co-operated  with  geographical  conditions  in  bringing
about  fluctuations  of  temperature  on  the  globe  in  former
ages.

The  infltvenee  of  astronomical  cJiangee  on  climate  considered
by  Sir  J.  EerscheL — Sir  John  Herschel  in  1832*  entertained
the  question  whether  there  are  any  astronomical  causes
which  might  ofier  a  possible  explanation  of  the  difference
between  the  actual  temperature  of  the  earth's  surface  and
the  climates  which  appear  formerly  to  have  prevailed.  *  Geo-
meters/ he  observed,  ^  had  demonstrated  the  absolute  inva-
riability of  the  earth's  mean  distance  from  the  sun,  whence  it
would  seem  to  follow  that  the  mean  annual  supply  of  light

*  Trans.  Geol.  Soc  2nd  scries,  vol.  iii.


Ch.  Xin.]     ASTRONOMICAL  CAUSES  AFFECTING  CLIMATE.       273

and  heat  would  be  alike  inrariable.  This,  howeyer,  is  not
exactly  true :  the  total  quantity  of  lieat  received  in  one  re-
volution is  inversely  proportional  to  the  minor  axis ;'  still,  as
the  extreme  amount  of  difference  in  the  quantity  of  heat
annually  received,  owing  to  such  change  in  the  minor  axis,
can  never  by  possibility  exceed  the  whole  supply  in  a  ratio
of  more  than  1,003  to  1,000,  it  may,  he  says,  be  neglected  in
our  geological  speculations.

But  there  is  another  way  in  which  changes  in  the  excen-
tricity  of  the  orbit  affect  climate.  Climate  depends,  not
merely  on  the  absolute  amount  of  heat,  but  on  the  manner
in  which  it  is  distributed  through  different  parts  of  the  year,
especially  in  the  polar  and  circumpolar  zones  of  the  earth.
There  are  in  fact  three  astronomical  causes  which  by  their
combination  with  each  other  and  with  varying  geographical
conditions  may  exert  a  sensible  influence  on  the  earth's
climate.  These  are  the  phenomena  known  as  the  excentricity
of  the  earth's  orbit,  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  and  the
revolution  of  the  apsides.

It  is  well  known  that  the  orbit  of  our  earth  round  the  sun
is  not  circular,  but  elliptical,  the  sun  occupying  one  of  the
foci  of  the  ellipse  (see  figs.  16  to  19,  p.  276),  so  that  the  earth
in  its  yearly  course  now  approaches  in  December,  or  our
northern  winter,  three  millions  of  miles  nearer  the  sun  than
it  does  in  June  (see  fig.  16),  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth
from  the  sun  being  91,400,000  miles.*  The  extreme  point
of  approach  is  called  perihelion,  the  extreme  point  of  distance
aphelion.

The  difference  of  three  millions  of  miles  which  now  ex-
presses the  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  is  not  constant :
at  present  the  orbit  is  becoming  every  year  more  circular,  at  a
very  slow  and  somewhat  irregular  rate,  and  it  will  become  in
23,980  years  after  a.d.  1800  neai'ly  as  circular  as  it  can  ever
be,  or  will  approach  a  minimum  excentricity,  when  the  differ-
ence between  perihelion  and  aphelion  will  only  slightly  exceed
half  a  million  of  miles,  or  one-sixth  of  the  present;  after  this
the  excentricity  will  again  increase  at  the  same  slow  rate.
The  movement  will  not  be  constant  in  one  direction,  but  will

*  Herschers  Astronomy,  art.  368.
VOL.  I.  T


-^


274       ASTRONOMICAL  CAUSES  AFFECTING  CLIMATE.     [Ch.  Xni.

vary  within  fixed  limits,  tlie  extreme  range  of  difference
which  it  can  ever  attain  amounting  to  fourteen  millions  of
miles,  as  was  shown  by  Lagrange  towards  the  end  of  the
last  century,  and  more  exactly  by  Leverrier  in  1839.  The
cause  of  these  perturbations  is  the  attraction  of  the  nearest
and  largest  planets,  Jupiter  and  Saturn  playing  the  principal
part,  and  Venus  and  Mars  also  exerting  a  sensible  influence.
Whatever  be  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth's  orbit,  says  Sir  J.
Herschel,  the  two  hemispheres  must  receive  equal  absolute
quantities  of  light  and  heat  per  annum,  the  proximity  of  the
sun  in  perigee  or  its  distance  in  apogee  exactly  compensa-
ting the  effect  of  its  swifter  or  slower  motion.*  But  the
same  writer,  in  1858,  alluding  to  some  speculations  of
Keynauld,  speaks  of  the  marked  effects  on  climate  which  great
variations  in  excentricity  might  produce,  causing  the  charac-
ters of  the  seasons  in  the  two  hemispheres  to  be  strongly  con-
trasted. So  long  as  the  position  of  the  earth's  perihelion
remained  the  same  as  now  ^  we  should  have  in  the  northern  a
short  but  very  mild  winter,  with  a  long  but  very  cool  summer
— i.e.,  an  approach  to  perpetual  spring ;  while  the  southern
hemisphere  would  be  inconvenienced,  and  might  be  rendered
uninhabitable  by  the  fierce  extremes  caused  by  concentrating
half  the  annual  supply  of  heat  into  a  summer  of  very  short
duration,  and  spreading  the  other  half  over  a  long  dreary
winter,  sharpened  to  an  intolerable  intensity  of  frost  when  at
its  climax,  by  the  much  greater  remoteness  of  the  sun  ;'t
and  he  goes  on  to  observe  that,  in  consequence  of  the  pre-
cession of  the  equinoxes,  combined  with  the  secular  movement
of  the  aphelion,  the  state  of  the  northern  and  southern
hemispheres  here  alluded  to,  would  in  the  course  of  about
11,000  years  be  reversed,  and  as  such  alternations  of  cli-
mate must  in  the  immense  periods  of  the  past  which  the
geologist  contemplates  have  happened,  not  once  only,  but

*  This  follows,  observes   Herschel,  bo  divided  into  two  portions  by  a  line

from  a  very  simple  theorem,  which  may  drawn  in  any  direction  through  the  sun's

be  thus  stated :  *  The  amount  of  heat  centre,  the  heat  received  in  describing

received  by  the  earth   from   the  sun,  the  two  unequal  segments  of  the  ellipse

while  describing  any  part  of  its  orbit,  is  so  produced  will  be  eqiial. — Geol.  Trans,

proportional  totheangle  describe  I  round  vol.  iii.  part  ii.  p.  298 ;  second  series,
the  bun  8  centre.'    So  that  if  the  orbit  f  Herschel's  Astronomy,  art.  368  c.


Ch.  XIII.]  PRECESSION  OF  THE  EQUINOXES.  275

thousand  of  times,  *  it  is  not  impossible/  he  adds,  *  that
some  of  the  indications  of  widely  different  climates  in  former
times  may  be  referable,  in  part  at  least,  to  this  cause.'

The  precession  of  the  equinoxes  here  alluded  to  is  due,  as
is  well  known,  to  the  attraction  of  the  sun  and  moon  on  the
protuberant  matter  at  the  earth's  equator,  and  its  effect  is
to  cause  the  different  seasons  of  the  northern  and  southern
hemisphere  to  coincide  successively  with  all  the  points
through  which  the  earth  passes  in  its  orbit  round  the  sun.
This  great  cycle  of  change  would  be  gone  through  in  25,868
years  were  it  not  shortened  by  being  combined  with  another
movement  called  the  revolution  of  the  apsides,  or,  in  the
passage  above  cited  from  Herschel,  the  *  motion  of  the
aphelion.'  This  last  consists  of  a  gradual  change  in  the
direction  of  the  major  axis  of  the  earth's  orbit,  due  to  the
same  disturbing  forces  which  cause  the  ellipticity  of  the
orbit  to  vary,  namely,  the  attraction  of  the  larger  and  nearer
planets.  The  result  of  the  combination  of  these  two  causes
of  perturbation  is  that  in  about  10,500  years  the  present
astronomical  state  of  things  will  be  reversed,  and  in  21,000
years  the  seasons  will  have  made  a  complete  revolution,  so  as
again  to  coincide  with  the  same  point  in  the  orbit  as  at
present.  For  example,  our  winter  in  the  northern  hemi-
sphere occurs  at  present  in  perihelion  (see  fig.  16),  our  pole
being  turned  away  from  the  sun  when  the  earth  is  nearest  to
the  sun.  But  in  consequence  of  the  precession  of  the  equi-
noxes and  the  revolution  of  the  apsides,  our  winter  will  have
passed  in  5,250  years  through  about  one  quarter  of  the  orbit,
and  will  occur  at  a,  fig.  17.  In  another  5,250  years  it  will
have  reached  aphelion  (see  fig.  18),  and  our  long  northern
winter  nights  will  coincide  with  the  greatest  distance  of  the
earth  from  the  sun.  In  another  5,250  years  it  will  have
reached  a,  fig.  19 ;  and,  finally,  21,000  years  from  the  time
at  which  it  started,  the  earth  will  again  arrive  at  that  point
in  which  our  winter  and  the  antarctic  summer  coincide  with
perihelion  (fig.  16).

If  the  orbit  were  circular,  and  our  planet  always  equi-
distant from  the  sun,  this  precession  of  the  equinoxes  would
have  no  effect  upon  climate ;  but  the  orbit  being  elliptical,  it

T  2


276


PRECESSION  OF  THE  EQUINOXBgL


[CK.XIIL


is  easy  to  see  that,
winter  in  perihelion,
rigorous  than  winter


Northern  winter

and  foathem

rammer  loliitioes  In

periheUon.


astronomically  speaking,  the  northern
as  shown  in  fig.  IC,  onght  to  be  less
of  the  same  hemisphere  in  aphelion,  as

tiff  lb


Northem

andaoothcm
<    winter  eolfltloeB  In
^  aphelion.


Eqninox

in
perihelion.


Bqnlnox

in
apheUoo.


S''l^tirp


\


Northern  fmramcr

and
uinto
perihi


lem  fmramcr      ^^>^^
d  southern        ^a?C— »
TsoUtioMin     HJ^         y

erihelioti.  ''J^P^  I


/


Korthern  winter
and  southern

fiuromer  eoUrticet
in  aphelion.


Diagram  illustrative  of  the  Procession  of  the  Equinoxes.

In  orfler  to  give  a  clear  idea  of  the  ellipse,  it  has  been  drawn  as  though  the
reader  looked  down  ujkjh  it  directly  from  above,  wliile  the  figures  of  the  globe  are
dmwn  as  they  would  appear  if  placed  rather  more  on  a  level  with  the  eye.

The  black  patches  represent  winter ;  the  white  patches,  summer.

in  fig.  18,  because  the  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun
in  the  first  case  is  less.
M.  Adh(5mar,  in  a  work  entitled  '  Les  E^volutions  de  la


Ch.  XIII.]  CLIMATAL  EFFECTS  OF  EXCENTRICITY.  277

Mer,'  published  in  1840,  suggested  that  a  sensible  effect  has
already  resulted  from  the  deviation  which  has  occurred  since
the  year  1248,  of  the  position  of  the  perihelion  from  the  time
of  the  winter  solstice  in  the  north.  By  this  movement  the
nearest  approach  to  the  sun  now  occurs  eleven  days  after
the  shortest  day.  M.  Venetz  had  previously  pointed  out,  as
an  historical  fact,  that  before  the  tenth  century  the  Swiss
glaciers  were  larger  than  they  are  now,  and  that  then,  after
retreating  for  four  centuries,  they  advanced  again,  and  have
been  slowly  reacquiring  their  former  dimensions.  In  other
words,  at  that  period  when  the  sun  was  nearest  the  earth  in
midwinter  or  for  two  centuries  before  and  two  after  1248,
there  was  the  greatest  melting  of  ice  in  the  northern  hemi-
sphere. It  may  be  questioned  whether  this  slight  astro-
nomical change,  which  could  hardly  produce  more  than  a
difference  of  half  a  degree  Fahrenheit  between  the  cold  of
the  present  winter  and  that  of  1248,  would  be  appreciable
in  the  course  of  600  years ;  but  the  observation  may  help  the
reader  to  understand  in  what  direction  the  precession  of  the
equinoxes,  if  capable  of  producing  a  sensible  change,  would
now  be  affecting  climate.

It  is  obvious  that  this  effect  would  be  intensified  whenever
the  ellipticity  of  the  orbit  is  increased,  for  the  difference
of  distance  between  aphelion  and  perihelion  is  now  only
3,000,000  miles,  but  it  would  be  at  some  periods  as  much
as  14,000,000,  causing,  as  Mr.  CroU  has  pointed  out,  a  differ-
ence of  heat  received  at  the  two  points  amounting  to  about
one-fifth  of  the  entire  heat  received  from  the  sun,  because
the  amount  of  such  heat  varies  inversely  as  tlie  squares  of
the  distance.*

Suggestions  by  Mr.  Croll  as  to  the  effects  of  excentricity  on
climate. — Upon  this  difference  of  heat  Mr.  Croll  has  founded
a  theory  which  attempts  to  account  for  former  changes  of
climate  by  the  tendency  which  a  maximum  excentricity
would  have  to  exaggerate  the  cold  in  that  hemisphere  in
which  winter  occurred  in  aphelion. f     In  consequence,  he

♦   See    Ilerschel's  Astronomy,    art.      of  climates  during  geological  epochs.
3G8  a.  Phil.  Mag.,  August  1864.

t  Croll  on  the  physical  cause  of  change


278  SUPPOSED  EFFECT  ON  CLIMATE  [Ch.  XHI.

siys,  of  the  lowering  of  the  temperature  by  one-fifth  in  that
hemisphere  in  which  winter  occurs  when  the  earth  is  fieurthest
from  the  sun,  all  the  moisture  precipitated  from  ther  air  in
high  latitudes  would  fall  in  the  form  of  snow  instead  of  rain ;
and  the  heat  in  the  same  hemisphere  of  summer  in  perihelion,
although  one-fifth  greater  than  what  we  now  experience^  would
be  insufficient  to  remove  the  accumulation  of  winter  snow.
The  direct  power  of  the  sun's  rays  would  be  greatly  intensified
when  the  sky  was  cloudless,  but  t^e  melting  of  so  much  ice
would,  he  thinks,  in  a  great  measure  neutralise  their  force
by  giving  rise  to  fogs  and  an  overcast  sky.  This  point  I  shall
discuss  more  fully  in  the  sequel  (pp.  280  and  289),  but  it  ap-
pears to  me  that  he  is  here  obliged  to  make  an  assumption  for
which  we  liave  no  certain  data — namely,  that  the  intensely
bhizing  sun  in  a  clear  sky  which  would  first  melt  the  ice
would  afterwards  be  sufficiently  overcome  by  fog  to  check
and  almost  prevent  further  melting,  in  spite  of  the  continued
.supply  of  excessive  heat  during  the  summer.  In  accordance
with  this  view  he  maintains  that,  while  one  hemisphere
during  this  maximum  excentricity  would  be  enduring  the
extreme  cold  of  a  lengthened  winter,  and  having  its  summer
heat  chilled  by  the  melting  of  ice,  the  other  hemisphere
would  be  enjoying  simultaneously  the  perpetual  spring  alluded
to  by  Herschel ;  the  polar  winter  occurring  in  perihelion,
when  the  temperature  was  one-fifth  greater  than  at  present,
and  there  being  no  accumulation  of  snow  beyond  what  the
sun's  rays  could  dissipate  during  the  course  of  the  year.

He  has  also  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  vast  accumulation
of  ice  which  would  alternately  take  place  at  each  pole  during
that  phase  of  precession  in  which  winter  would  occur  when
the  planet  was  farthest  from  the  sun,  would  so  derange  the
c»arth's  centre  of  gravity  as  to  draw  the  ocean  towards  that
pole,  and  cause  the  submergence  of  part  of  the  land.  M.
Adhemar,  in  1843,  had  already  endeavoured  to  account  for
cei'tain  geological  phenomena  by  a  coincidence  of  tlie  winter
solstice  with  aphelion,  but  without  connecting  them,  as  Mr.
CroU  has  done,  with  that  greater  excentricity  of  the  earth's
orbit,  which  must  occasionally  in  the  course  of  ages  vastly
exaggerate  the  effects  alluded  to.     Although  the  deficiency


Ch,  Xni.]  OF  EXTREME  EXCENTRICITY.  279

of  our  data  is  such  that  we  caunot  jet  decide  to  what  extent
this  excess  of  ice  would  act  as  a  disturbing  cause,  yet,  as
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  must  have  given  rise  at  certain
periods  to  some  diflFerence  in  the  ocean's  level,  we  are  greatly
indebted  to  those  scientific  writers  who  have  called  atten-
tion to  a  vera  causa  hitherto  neglected.

In  the  memoir  above  alluded  to,  little  or  no  influence  is
ascribed  by  Mr.  Croll  to  abnormal  geographical  conditions,
such  as  now  prevail ;  and  which,  according  to  the  principles
explained  in  the  last  chapter,  I  consider  by  far  the  most
influential  in  the  production  of  great  cold.  Granting  that
under  favourable  geographical  circumstances  the  greatest
accumulation  of  snow  would  always  take  place  at  that  pole
where  midwinter  happened  to  occur  in  aphelion,  I  also
think  it  probable  that,  be  the  amount  of  excentricity  great  or
small,  there  would  be  no  increase  of  cold  from  year  to  year,
so  often  as  the  distribution  of  land  and  sea  is  not  excep-
tional, or  whenever  a  normal  condition  of  things  obtains
as  expressed  in  the  ideal  map,  fig.  13,  p.  267.  More-
over, it  appears  to  me  almost  certain,  that  whenever  a
deep  ocean  prevailed  at  both  poles,  the  astronomical  causes
alone  would  be  powerless  for  the  storing  up  of  ice,  and
during  extreme  excentricity,  the  minor  axis  of  the  ellipse
being  shortened,  the  total  quantity  of  heat  received  from  the
sun  would  be  slightly  in  excess  of  the  present,*  and  so  far  as
it  went  would  be  in  an  opposite  direction  to  that  which
would  bring  about  glacial  periods.  In  extreme  excentricity
there  is  at  least  as  great  an  excess  of  heat  in  summer  in
perihelion  as  there  is  loss  in  winter  in  aphelion,  so  that  we
cannot  suppose  the  total  amount  of  snow  lying  on  the  ground
to  be  increased  unless  there  should  intervene  some  cause  to
mitigate  the  extreme  heat  of  summer.  This  has  been
supposed  by  Mr.  Croll  to  be  the  case  when  he  says,  as  above,
that  the  first  action  of  the  summer  sun  would  be  to  raise  a
fog  which  would  effectually  prevent  the  sun's  rays  from  reach-
ing the  earth.  But  in  the  papers  in  which  he  advances  this
supposition  he  does  not  state  the  reasons  why  anything  like  a

*  See  p.  273  ;  and  Meech,  Intensity  of  the  Son's  Heat  and  Lights  Smithsonian
Contributions,  1857.


280  EFFECTS  OF  PRECESSION.  [Ch.XIU.

Tmiyersal  arctic  fog  should  be  produced.  The  heating  effect
of  the  sun,  for  the  first  part  of  the  summer  at  least,  is  con-
tinuallj  increasing,  and  consequently  the  power  of  the  heated
air  to  absorb  aqueous  vapour  is  also  augmenting ;  it  is  there-
fore not  easy  to  see  how  fogs  could  arise,  except  where  an
abnormal  quantity  of  high  snow-covered  land  was  collected
around  the  pole.

Climates  of  the  successive  phases  of  precession  with  increased
excentricity. — But  there  is  another  circumstance  tending  to
the  equalisation  of  the  heat,  which  must  be  borne  in  mind,
lest  we  should  exaggerate  the  effects  of  excentricity  on
climate,  even  when  intensified  by  such  abnormal  conditions
of  the  earth's  geography  as  now  prevail.  We  ought  not  to
divide  the  21,000  years  before  spoken  of  as  constituting  the
cycle  caused  by  precession  and  the  revolution  of  the  apsides
into  two  equal  parts,  as  M.  Adhemar  and  others  have  pro-
posed, one  of  which  in  a  given  hemisphere  should  be  a  cold
period  when  the  winters  coincide  with  aphelion,  and  the
other  a  warm  period  when  the  winters  coincide  with  peri-
helion. For  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  will  be  no
sharply  defined  line  between  the  warmest  and  coldest  periods,
but  a  gradual  transition  between  these  extremes.  We  shall
get  a  clearer  notion  therefore  of  the  varying  climatal  condi-
tions if  we  divide  the  cycle  of  precession  into  four  quarters
(as  in  figs.  16  to  19,  p.  276),  in  the  first  of  which  there  is  an
accumulation  of  ice  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  because  of
the  coincidence  of  the  long  antarctic  night  and  short  days
with  the  greatest  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  sun,  or,  in
other  words,  because  the  southern  winter  happens  when  the
earth  is  at  or  near  aphelion,  and  granting,  for  the  sake  of
argument,  Mr.  CrolPs  hypothesis  of  the  accumulation  of  fogs
and  clouds,  the  more  intense  heat  of  5,250  summers  in  peri-
helion is  supposed  to  be  unequal  to  the  task  of  melting  the
snows  of  an  equal  number  of  winters.  Then  follows  the
next  quarter,  when  the  vernal  equinox  occurs  at  the  least
distance  from  the  sun,  and  an  equable  climate  is  produced,
whatever  be  the  amount  of  excentricity ;  for  the  5,250
winters  and  summers  will  be  of  nearly  equal  duration,  and
the  siunmer  and  winter  distances  from  the  sun  also  equal.


Ch.  Xin.]  EFFECT  OF  GEOGRAPHICAL  CAUSES.  281

both  of  which  causes  will  combine  to  make  these  seasons  vary
but  little  from  the  mean,  and  will  cause  a  reduction  of  the
snow  and  ice  accumulated  in  the  preceding  quarter.  In  the
third  quarter  the  cold  of  all  the  winters  is  neutralised  by
proximity  to  the  sun,  while  the  heat  of  the  summers  is  in
like  manner  moderated  by  the  earth's  distance  from  it,  so
that  here  again  an  equal  climate  is  produced.  In  the
fourth  quarter,  the  autumnal  equinox  falling  at  or  near
aphelion,  the  same  effects  will  be  produced  as  in  the  second
quarter,  and  there  will  be  no  great  exaggeration  of  heat  or
cold,  like  that  which  must  take  place  in  the  first  quarter.
This  first  quarter  therefore  is  the  only  one  in  which,  under
favourable  geographical  conditions  like  the  present,  an  accu-
mulation of  ice  and  snow  will  take  place  at  whichever  pole
has  its  winter  in  aphelion.

Present  effect  of  geographical  causes  on  the  climate  of  the
earth, — A  good  illustration  is  afforded  of  the  preponderating
influence  of  geographical  causes  by  the  result  of  Dove's
observations  on  the  present  mean  temperature  of  the  whole
surface  of  the  globe  in  perihelion  as  contrasted  with  its  tem-
perature in  aphelion.

The  present  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  amounts,  as
before  stated  (p.  273),  to  no  more  than  a  million  and  a  half  of
miles  in  opposite  directions  from  its  mean  distance  from  the
sun,  which  is  ninety-one  millions.  The  difference  of  distance
of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  in  aphelion  and  perihelion,  is  there-
fore no  less  than  one-thirtieth  of  the  mean  distance,  and  the
planet  therefore  ought  to  be  colder  at  the  one  time  and
hotter  at  the  other,  not  merely  by  one-thirtieth  of  the  heat
received  from  the  sun,  but  by  about  one-fifteenth,  because  the
heat  varies  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distance.  Yet,  as
if  in  violation  of  this  law,  when  the  temperatures  of  all  places
north  and  south  of  the  line  are  reduced  to  an  average,  it  is
found  that  the  surface  of  the  whole  planet  is  actually  warmer
in  June  than  in  December,  i.e.  in  aphelion  than  in  perihelion.
This  result,  which  in  an  astronomical  point  of  view  appears
so  paradoxical,  is  explained  in  a  satisfactory  manner  when
we  take  into  consideration  that  the  effect  of  land  under
sunshine  is  to  throw  heat  into  the  general  atmosphere,  and


282  CLIMATE  OF  THE  EARTH  AFFECTED  [Ok.  XHI.

80  distribute  it  by  the  carrying  power  of  the  air  over  the
whole  earth.*  For  the  great  extent  of  land  which  exists
between  the  equator  and  the  fiftieth  degi-ee  of  north  latitude
is  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  during  a  long  summer,  whereas
the  extent  of  ocean  in  corresponding  latitudes  in  the  south-
ern hemisphere  prevents  any  similar  generation  of  heat  during
summer,  notwithstanding  that  here,  according  to  Herschel's
estimate,  the  power  of  the  sun  is  greater  by  23**  F.  when
the  planet  is  in  perihelion.

Another  illustration  of  the  counteracting  effect  of  geo-
graphical causes  is  afforded  by  the  extreme  climates  of
Canada  and  other  parts  of  North  America,  as  well  as  of  cer-
tain parts  of  Siberia  and  China,  as  contrasted  with  the  more
equable  climates  of  the  southern  hemisphere*  A  very  dif-
ferent result  might  be  looked  for  if  the  ascendency  of
astronomical  causes  were  complete ;  for  in  that  hemisphere
where  winter  coincides  with  the  greatest  and  summer  with
the  least  distance  from  the  sun,  the  seasons  would  have  been
most  contrasted  were  it  not  that  the  preponderance  of  sea  as
compared  to  land  produces  an  equable  or  what  is  called  an
*■  insular '  climate.

The  fact  that  the  cold  is  now  greater  throughout  a  large
part  of  the  southern  hemisphere  would  seem  at  first  sight
almost  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  the  theory  that  the  coin-
cidence of  the  winter  solstice  with  aphelion  exerts  a  powerful
refrigerating  effect.  But  the  difference  of  about  10**  F.  in
temperate  latitudes  in  the  southern  hemisphere  is  shown  by
Dove's  tables  to  be  due  to  a  deficiency  of  land,  which  is  in
excess  in  corresponding  latitudes  of  the  northern  hemisphere.
Without  denying  that  the  astronomical  cause  alluded  to  may
exercise  some  influence,  it  is  obviously  insignificant  as
contrasted  with  the  power  of  geographical  conditions.  Sir
John  Herschel,  indeed,  computes  on  theoretical  grounds  that
there  ought  to  be  a  difference  of  23°  F.  when  two  places  are
compared  at  the  saYne  season  and  in  the  same  latitudes  on
opposite  sides  of  the  equator ;  that  is  to  say,  the  summer
coinciding  with  perihelion  ought  to  have  a  temperature  of
11^°  higher,  and  the  winter  in  aphelion  a  temperature  lower

*  Herechers  Astronomj,  1 86i»  p.  236,  art.  376.


Ch.  XIII.]  BY  GEOGRAPHICAL  CAUSES.  288

by  the  same  amount,  than  the  same  seasons  in  the  opposite
hemisphere,  where  these  astronomical  conditions  are  reversed.
The  results  of  observation  are  not  in  harmony  with  this  theory,
the  diflFerence  really  indicated  by  the  thermometer  being  only
half  that  which  is  required  by  theory.  Yet  there  are  some
limited  areas  where,  according  to  Herschel,  the  excentricity
makes  itself  felt.  The  heat,  he  says,  in  the  interior  of
Australia  is  greater  than  in  the  deserts  of  North  Africa
in  corresponding  latitudes  ;  and  he  has  himself  observed  the
temperature  of  the  surface  soil  in  South  Africa  to  reach
159°  F.,  which  is  higher  than  it  rises  in  our  hemisphere,
where  summer  does  not  coincide  with  perihelion.*  The
question,  however,  of  the  measurement  of  heat  depends  upon
an  arbitrary  assumption  as  to  the  temperature  of  space,  or
the  degrees  of  heat  which  our  thermometers  would  indicate
if  they  could  be  placed  at  some  point  beyond  our  atmosphere
and  shaded  from  the  sun.  As  it  is  impossible  to  test  this  ex-
perimentally, and  different  physicists  of  the  highest  eminence
are  not  agreed  even  as  to  the  conditions  of  the  problem,  I  shall
not  enter  into  calculations,  the  accuracy  of  which  cannot  at
present  be  depended  upon.

The  simple  fact  that  totally  different  climates  exist  now  in
the  same  hemisphere  and  under  the  same  latitude  would
alone  suflBce  to  prove  that  their  occurrence  cannot  be  exclu-
sively due  to  astronomical  influence.  The  reader  has  only  to
refer  to  p.  243  to  see  that  the  climates  of  South  Georgia  and
Tierra  del  Fuego  are  at  present  so  different  that  the  former
might  be  supposed  to  belong  to  a  glacial  period,  while  the
latter,  by  its  flowers  and  humming-birds  in  the  winter,  and  the
genera  of  marine  moUusca  in  the  adjoining  sea,  might  indi-
cate to  the  traveller,  as  well  as  to  some  future  geologist,  such
a  temperature  as  has  been  spoken  of  as  perpetual  spring.  This
contrast  is  due  to  geographical  causes,  which  if  reversed,
so  that  Tierra  del  Fuego  became  the  oceanic  island,  would
reverse  the  climates  also.  Mr.  Darwin,  in  the  last  edition
of  his  *  Origin  of  Species,'t  has  inclined  towards  adopting
Mr.  CroU's  theory  of  alternate  glaciation  and  perpetual
spring   in  the   opposite   hemispheres,  on  the  ground    that

*  Herschel's  Astronomj,  1864,  art.  369,  note.  t  Pp.  450*461.


284  DATES  OF  THE  VARIATIONS  IN  [Ch.  XUI.

it  would  account  for  some  anomalies  in  the  distribution  of
animals  and  plants,  by  affording  a  refuge  for  tropical  life
during  a  period  of  extreme  cold.  But  it  appears  to  me  that
such  cases  as  the  one  just  mentioned  of  South  Georgia  and
Tierra  del  Fuego  are  a  warning  against  assuming  that  glacia-
tion  must  be  universal  in  all  corresponding  latitudes  of  the
same  hemisphere,  and  that  until  we  know  what  climate  the
countries  now  inhabited  by  tropical  animals  and  plants  were
enjoying  in  glacial  times,  it  is  premature  to  contend  with
imaginary  difficulties  as  to  the  survival  of  forms  which  would
have  been  extinguished  if  the  snow  and  ice  had  been  universal
down  to  latitude  65**,  even  over  one  hemisphere  at  a  time.

How  far  we  may  speculate  on  a  probable  date  for  tlis  Olacial
Period, — From  what  I  have  now  said  in  this  and  the  preceding
chapter,  it  will  be  seen  that  I  consider  the  former  changes  of
climate  and  the  quantity  of  ice  now  stored  up  in  polar  lati-
tudes to  have  been  governed  chiefly  by  geographical  condi-
tions. Nevertheless,  since  I  also  consider  it  probable  that
a  much  larger  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  if  combined
with  the  present  excess  of  polar  land  would  produce  an
exaggeration  of  cold  in  both  hemispheres,  it  becomes  a  matter
of  no  small  interest  to  ascertain  the  dates  of  those  variations
in  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  which  may  throw  lighten  the
times  when  the  cold  first  came  on,  when  it  reached  its  height,
and  when  it  was  succeeded  by  the  great  thaw  which  reduced
the  ice  to  its  present  limits.

On  my  applying  to  the  Astronomer  Royal,  Sir  George  Airy,
for  assistance  in  this  enquiry,  he  suggested  to  Mr.  Stone,  of
the  Greenwich  Observatory,  to  make  some  of  the  required
calculations ;  and  that  eminent  mathematician  undertook,  by
the  use  of  Leverrier's  formula,  to  determine  when  the  last
high  excentricity  occurred.  He  found  that  it  happened
210,065  years  ago,*  and  that  no  other  excentricity  approach-
ing to  this  in  amount  could  be  obtained  by  going  back  half  a
million  of  years  from  the  present  era.  The  difference  between
the  greatest  and  least  distances,  at  the  time  alluded  to  by
Mr.  Stone,  was  about  eleven  millions  of  miles,  while  at  the
maximum  the  difference  would  be  about  fourteen  millions.

*  Letter  to  the  Author,  May  15,  1865 ;  and  see  Phil.  Mag.,  June  1865.


Ch.  Xni.]  THE  EXCENTRICITIES  OF  THE  ORBIT.


285


At  present  it  is  about  three  millions,  so  that  the  proportions
of  distance  are  expressed  by  the  figures  3  11  14.  Hence,  as
Mr.  Stone  observes,  *  whatever  climatic  changes  may  have

Table  showing  the  yariations  in  the  ezcentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  for  a  million
years  before  a.d.  1800,  and  some  of  the  climatal  effects  of  sach  variations.


1

2

8

4

Nnmber  of  yean
before  a.d.  1800

Excentricity
of  orbit

DUfetenoeof

distance  iu  miUioiu

of  miles

Nnmber  of

winter  days  in

excess

0,

•0168

3

81

60,000

•0131

H

6-3

A

100.000

•0473

H

23

150.000

•0332

6

161

Ht

200,000

•0667

10^

27-7

210,000

•0676

lOi

27-8

260,000

.0268

^

12-6

800,000

•0424

7y

20*6

360.000

•0196

H

0-6

400,000

•0170

3

82

460,000

•0808

H

16

600,000

■0388

7

18*8

650,000

•0166

3

8

600,000

•0417

7*

20-3

660,000

•0226

4

11

700,000

•0220

4

10-2

fa

750,000

•0576

lOi

27  8

C<b

800,000

•0132

2:

6-4

u

850,000

•0747

13i

36-4

900,000

•0102

1::

49

D

960,000

•0517

9
2i

261

1,000,000

•0161

7-3

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  TABLE.

Column  1.   Division  of  a  million  years  preceding  1800  into  twenty  equal  parts.

Column  2,  computed  by  Mr.  James  CroU  by  aid  of  Leverrier's  formula,  gives
the  ezcentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit  in  parts  of  a  unit  equal  to  the  mean  distance
or  half  the  longer  diameter  of  the  ellipse.

Column  3,  which  together  with  the  following  column  has  been  computed  by  Mr.
John  Carrick  Moore,  gives  in  millione  of  miles  the  difference  between  the  greatest
and  least  distances  of  the  earth  from  the  lun,  during  the  eccentricities  given  in
Column  2.

Column  4  gives  the  number  of  days  by  which  winter  occurring  in  aphelion  is
longer  than  the  summer  in  perihelion.

taken  place  at  some  distant  period  through  the  existence  of
the  absolute  maximum  of   excentricity,  corresponding  and
but  slightly  inferior  changes  must  have  taken  place  about
210,000  years  before  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.'
Mr.  CroU,  following  up  the  series  of  calculations  begun  by


286  DATES  OF  THE  VARIATIONS  IN  [Ch.  XIH.

Mr.  Stone  rendered  a  greater  service  to  science  by  accomplish-
ing the  laborious  task  of  computing  the  changes  of  ezcen-
tricity  for  a  million  years  preceding  and  a  million  following
A.D.  1800.    I  have  taken  the  first  two  colunms  of  the  annexed
table  from  his  memoir,  and  the  results  given  in  the  other
two  columns  have  been  computed  by  my  friend  Mr.  John
Carrick  Moore,  who  by  his   mathematical  and  geological
knowledge  has  rendered  me  invaluable  assistance  in  all  liiese
enquiries  on  changes  of  climate.     It  appears  to  me  that  the
third  and  fourth  columns  will  help  the  reader  more  clearly
to  appreciate  the  variations  in  temperature  which  are  indi-
cated by  the  figures  in  the  second  column.     A  glance  at  this
table  will  show  that  there  are  four  periods  in  the  course  of
the  last  million  of  years,  namely,  those  marked  A,  B,  C,  D,
in  which  there  has  been  a  large  excentricity.     For  in  A  it
was  nearly  three  times  as  great  as  it  is  at  present ;  in  B  three
and  a  half  times ;  in  C  we  find  two  periods,  one  three  and  a
half  and  the  other  four  and  a  half  times  as  great,  with  an
intervening  small  excentricity ;  and  lastly,  in  the  period  D,
more  than  three  times  the  present  excentricity.

The  attempt  to  assign  a  chronological  value  to  any  of  our
geological  periods  except  the  latest  must,  in  the  present
state  of  science,  be  hopeless.  Nevertheless,  independently  of
all  astronomical  considerations,  it  must,  I  think,  be  conceded,
that  the  period  required  for  the  coming  on  of  the  greatest
cold,  and  for  its  duration  when  most  intense,  and  the  oscil-
lations to  which  it  was  subject  (p.  192),  as  well  as  the  retreat
of  the  glaciers  and  the  *  great  thaw '  or  disappearance  of
snow  from  many  mountain-chains  where  the  snow  was  once
perpetual,  required  not  tens  but  hundreds  of  thousands  of
years.  Less  time  would  not  sufiice  for  the  changes  in  physical
geography  and  organic  life  of  which  we  have  evidence.  To
a  geologist,  therefore,  it  would  not  appear  startling  that  the
greatest  cold  should  be  supposed  to  have  coincided  with  the
period  B,  200,000  years  ago,  although  this  date  must  be
considered  as  very  conjectural,  and  one  which  may  be  as
likely  to  err  in  deficiency  of  time  as  in  excess.  I  formerly
speculated*  on   the   more  remote   periods    C   and    D    for

*  Principles,  10th  ed.,  1867.


Ch  XIII.]  THE  EXCENTRICITIES  OF  THE  ORBIT.  287

the  Glacial  period,  but  upon  reconsideration  it  appears  to
me  that  geographical  conditions  are  so  paramount  that
we  must  not  go  further  back  in  time  than  we  are  able  fairly
to  assume  that  the  principal  geographical  features  of  the
continents  and  oceanic  basins  approximated  to  those  now
prevailing.  If,  for  example,  the  Alps  and  Jura  were  as  high
or  perhaps  higher  than  now,  we  may  suppose  that  whenever
the  winter  of  the  northern  hemisphere  coincided  with  aphelion
during  a  period  of  high  excentricity,  the  Alpine  glaciers  would
have  been  far  in  excess  of  what  they  are  now,  whereas  if  we
go  back  800,000  or  1,000,000  years  to  C  or  D,  in  order  to
reach  a  somewhat  higher  excentricity,  we  know  not  how  far
the  geography  may  have  coincided  with  that  now  established,
so  as  to  allow  of  the  excentricity  augmenting  or  diminishing
the  glaciation  of  the  poles.  There  may,  for  example,  have
been  no  Gulf-stream,  the  Sahara  may  have  been  submerged,
and  a  great  many  other  areas  may  have  been  so  differently
circumstanced  that  it  would  be  rash  to  reason  upon  the  state
of  climate,  whether  general  or  local.

We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  distance  of  our  planet
from  the  sun  during  part  of  the  year  would  cause  so  much
cold  as  to  counterbalance  the  heat  resulting  from  greater
proximity  at  another  period  of  the  year,  unless  the  distribu-
tion of  land  and  sea  was  unfavourable  to  that  interchange  of
warmth  and  cold  between  polar  and  equatorial  regions  on
which  the  very  existence  of  ice  and  snow  on  the  earth  depends.
If  I  am  right  in  believing  that  the  present  geographical
circumstances  are  exceptional,  then  the  climates  of  the  pole
will  be  equally  exceptional,  and  will  have  been  so  during  the
whole  period  when  the  continents  and  oceans  gradually
assumed  their  present  form.  This  form  is  favourable,  as  we
now  see,  to  the  simultaneous  glaciation  of  both  polar  region^,
and  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  local  excess  of  ice  and  snow
will  vary  in  each  hemisphere  in  proportion  as  winter  coincides
with  aphelion.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  we  should  find
periods  in  the  Newer  Pliocene  and  Post-Tertiary  deserving
the  appellation  of  '  Glacial,'  while  a  wider  geological  survey
might  show  us  few  or  no  monuments  of  such  glaciation,
even  in  the  shape  of  erratics,  although  if  glacial  conditions


288  ISOTHERMALS  OF  GLACIAL  PERIOD.  [Ch.  XIH.

had  preyailedy  they  ought  to  have  abounded  between  the
thirtieth  and  fiftieth  parallels  of  latitude  in  formations
requiring  such  vast  periods  for  their  accumulation  as  the
Cretaceous,  Neocomian,  and  Carboniferous.

With  regard  to  the  more  recent  excentricities  of  the  periods
A  and  6,  when  a  predomiuance  of  land  in  high  latitudes  may
more  safely  be  assumed,  the  fact  which  would  seem  to  me
most  favourable  to  the  connection  of  a  large  ezcentricity  with
an  excess  of  cold  is  the  following :

By  referring  to  the  map  of  Isothermal  Lines  (fig.  9,  p.
240),  the  reader  will  see  that  the  mean  annual  isothermals  of
14%  23%  32%  41%  and  50°  Pahr.,  are  all  of  them  in  their
range  from  Europe  to  North  America  deflected  from  13°  to
18°  of  latitude  in  a  southerly  direction  in  their  passage  from
east  to  west.  The  late  Edward  Forbes  has  also  shown  in
one  of  his  maps,^  that  the  living  arctic  fauna  extends  in  like
manner  10°  farther  south  on  the  west  side  of  the  Atlantic
than  on  the  east  side.  This  difference,  as  before  pointed  oat
(p.  239),  is  dependent  on  purely  geographical  and  not  on
astronomical  causes ;  the  direction  of  the  Gulf-stream  from
south-west  to  north-east-  -the  cold  polar  current  flowing
south  along  the  east  coast  of  North  America — the  extension
of  the  land  of  the  latter  continent  continuously  towards  the
pole  in  the  same  latitudes  as  those  where  there  is  open  sea
to  the  north  of  Europe,  are  suflScient  to  explain  the  present
course  of  the  isothermals ;  and  if  the  cold  were  now  aug-
mented by  the  coming  on  of  a  large  excentricity,  the
isothermals  alluded  to  would  exhibit  the  same  curves,  their
position  being  shifted  farther  south  because  the  new  re-
frigerating influence  would  operate  equally  on  the  eastern
and  western  hemisphere.  If  the  effect  would  not  be  exactly
equal  on  both  sides  the  Atlantic,  it  would  be  in  favour
of  greater  curves  in  the  direction  in  which  they  now  bend,
because  the  increase  of  snow  and  ice  would  be  greatest  on
the  side  where  there  is  most  land  in  very  high  latitudes.

Now  we  find  that  in  the  Glacial  period  all  signs  of  glacia-
tion,  such  as  erratic  blocks,  scored  surfaces  of  rock,  striated
boulders,  and  deposits  filled  with  arctic  species  of  marine

*  Memoirs  of  the  Survey  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  i.  plate  vii.


Ch.  Xni.]  EVAPORATION  OF  ICE  AND  SNOW.  289

shells,  are  to  be  seen  in  full  force  on  the  North  American
continent  ten  or  more  degrees  farther  south  than  in  Europe.
If  we  could  assume,  therefore,  that  geographical  conditions
had  been  constant,  these  phenomena  would  be  in  favour  of
our  attributing  the  greater  intensity  of  cold  in  the  Glacial
Period  to  a  maximum  excentricity.  Our  full  reliance,  how-
ever, on  this  line  of  reasoning  is  somewhat  weakened  when
we  reflect  that  a  moderate  amount  of  geographical  change
in  a  very  high  latitude — such  as  the  addition  of  some  islands
near  the  pole,  or  the  increased  height  of  some  of  the  land  now
existing  between  latitudes  70**  and  80**  N. — might  exaggerate
the  cold  both  of  the  eastern  and  western  hemispheres,  acting
alike  on  northern  Europe  and  North  America.  We  know,
as  a  positive  fact,  that  geographical  changes  have  taken  place
in  the  height  and  position  of  land  since  the  commencement
of  the  Glacial  Period,  although  we  cannot  a&m  that  when
the  cold  was  at  its  height  there  was  a  greater  proportion  of
land  in  high  latitudes  than  at  present.  If  at  that  time  it
were  in  excess,  we  are  more  certain  that  the  change  alluded
to  would  intensify  the  cold  than  we  are  that  a  change  of
excentricity  would  have  the  same  eflFect;  for  the  last*  men-
tioned conclusion  depends  upon  the  soundness  of  the  hypo-
thesis that,  in  spite  of  the  annual  supply  of  solar  heat  being
always  equal,  the  more  intense  heat  of  summer  cannot  over-
come the  increased  winter's  cold  whenever  the  latter  gives
rise  to  a  much  greater  snowfall.

Evaporation  of  ice  and  snow. — Now  observations  on  the
Swiss  glaciers  have  shown  to  what  an  extent  those  rivers  of
ice  are  often  lowered  by  evaporation,  or  by  the  passage  of
the  ice  into  a  gaseous  form,  without  its  having  passed
through  the  intermediate  fluid  condition.  When  certain  dry
winds  blow,  the  snow  wastes  away  like  camphor  without
melting;  and  as  we  see  the  average  number  of  inches  of
rainfall  to  diminish  constantly,  though  very  irregularly,  as
we  pass  from  the  equator  to  the  pole,  so  we  may  reckon  on  a
diminution  of  the  quantity  of  snow  and  the  prevalence  near
the  pole  of  a  dry  air,  especially  if  there  be  snow-covered
lands   farther   south    intercepting   aerial   currents   blowing

VOL.  I.  u


290  EVAPORATION  OF  ICE  AND  SNOW.  [Ch.  XIH.

from  warmer  regions,  and  causing  them  to  part  with  their
moisture  in  the  form  of  snow.

Mr.  Darwin,  during  his  visit  to  Central  Chili,  was  informed
that  during  one  dry  and  very  long  summer  all  the  snow  dis-
appeared from  Aconcagua,  although  it  attains  the  height  of
23,000  feet.  It  is  probable,  he  adds,  that  much  of  the  snow
at  these  great  heights  is  evaporated  rather  than  thawed.*

In  the  Himala}'us^  where  some  of  the  mountain-peaks  attain
the  height  of  29,000  feet,  the  snow-line  on  the  southern  side
of  the  chain  occurs  at  13,000,  and  on  the  northern  at  16,000
feet,  or,  according  to  some  authorities,  even  at  18,000.  *  For
the  moist  winds  of  the  south-west  monsoon,'  says  Herschel,
^  deposit  their  snow  almost  wholly  on  the  southern  side,  while
the  northern  is  exposed  to  the  evaporation  of  one  of  the
driest  regions  of  the  globe.'  In  like  manner,  when  winds
from  the  temperate  zone  first  meet  the  frozen  air  of  the
antarctic  regions,  they  will  part  with  their  moisture,  so
that  the  snow  will  increase  on  the  outer  margin  of  the
antarctic  continent  rather  than  in  the  interior.  As  it  is  well
known  that  great  falls  of  snow  take  place  chiefly  when  the
thermometer  is  about  32°  F.,  and  that  little,  if  any,  ever  falls
when  the  temperature  is  much  lower,  it  would  certainly  be
rash  to  assume  that  intense  cold  near  the  pole  during  the
aphelion,  when  the  excentricity  is  very  large,  tends  to  gene-
rate more  snow  than  the  dry  atmosphere  can  absorb.

Much  snow  was  seen  by  Rink  to  have  vanished  from  the
surface  of  Greenland  in  the  latter  months  of  autumn,  so  that
lines  of  erratic  blocks  were  disclosed  to  view.  In  like  manner,
Ross  and  Hooker  observed  blocks  of  stone  on  the  snows  of
Victoria  Land — facts  which  would  be  inexplicable  if  much  of
the  snow  which  falls  annually  were  not  removed  from  the
surface  by  evaporation  and  liquefaction  in  high  latitudes.
Mr.  Alexander  Agassiz,  when  living  on  the  shores  of  Lake
Superior,  describes  the  thermometer  as  being  at  5**  below
zero  for  four  months  in  the  year,  and  says  that  the  average
annual  snowfall  of  fifteen  years  was  seventy-two  feet.  Yet
the  snow  never  lay  more  than  six  feet  thick  on  the  ground,
and  disappeared  completely  in  the  summer,  the  snow  being

*  Darwin,  Joaroal  of  the  Beagle,  184^,  p.  246.


Ch.  Xni.]       ABSJINCE  OF  RECURRENT  GLACIAL  EPOCHS.         291

chiefly  got  rid  of  by  evaporation  like  camphor.  He  also
mentions  that  the  ground  beneath  the  snow  never  firoze,  and
upon  this  point  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  a  covering  of
snow  extending  over  a  large  area  and  enduring  for  a  long
time  must  have  the  effect  of  preventing  loss  by  radiation,
snow  being  a  very  bad  conductor  of  heat.

It  is  observed  in  Canada  and  New  England  that  parts  of
a  meadow  which  are  laid  bare  in  winter  by  the  wind  having
blown  away  its  snow  are  often  frozen  for  a  depth  of  two
feet  or  more,  so  that,  when  spring  returns,  this  portion  of
the  surface  remains  brown  and  barren,  while  the  rest  of  the
field,  having  retained  its  heat  during  winter  in  consequence
of  the  covering  of  snow,  is  green  and  clothed  with  a  rapidly
growing  vegetation.  Dr.  Hooker  found  in  like  manner  that
after  the  melting  of  the  snow  on  the  Himalaya  the  warmth
of  the  soil  was  far  above  the  mean  temperature  of  the
region,  owing  to  the  same  cause.  In  this  way  there  may
be  some  compensation,  the  excess  of  heat  absorbed  by  the
land  during  a  short  but  hot  summer  being  less  freely  parted
with  in  winter  owing  to  the  snow.  This  loss  by  radiation
during  a  protracted  winter  is  only  one  of  many  elements  as
yet  undetermined  which  complicate  the  problem  on  which
we  are  speculating.

Absence  of  recurrent  Olacial  epochs  in  the  earlier  formations, —
If  we  now  turn  from  the  physical  difficulties  raised  by  the
astronomical  theory  to  the  question  of  palseontological  evi-
dence, we  find  that  if  the  sketch  which  we  have  given  in  the
tenth  and  eleventh  chapters  of  the  former  states  of  climate
revealed  to  us  by  palseontological  research  be  an  approxima-
tion to  the  truth,  glacial  periods  have  not  been  perpetually
recurring  in  the  northern    temperate   zone,  as  they  ought
to  have  done  were  a  large  excentricity  alone  sufficient,  apart
from  the  co-operation  of  all  other  causes,  to  intensify  the
cold  of  high  latitudes.      It  was  shown  that  the  flora  and
fauna  do  not  exhibit  signs  of  violent  revolutions  from  hot  to
cold  and  from  cold  to  hot  periods.     On  the  contrary,  the
continuity  of  forms,  particularly  in  the  class  of  reptiles,  from
the  Carboniferous  to  the  Cretaceous  period,  is  opposed  to  the
intercalation  of  glacial  epochs  corresponding  in  importance

T7   2


292  CLIMATE  AFFECTED  BY  VARIATION  IN  [Oh.  XIH.

to  that  of  Post-Pliocene  date.  The  Carboniferous  Period
must  have  endured  for  a  lapse  of  centuries  sufficient  to
allow  several  great  cycles  of  excentricity  to  be  gone  through.
Yet  there  must  have  been  nevertheless  a  long  suspension
in  the  temperate  latitudes  of  the  northern  hemisphere  of
cold  such  as  we  now  experience,  for  we  do  not  find  in  strata
of  that  age  15,000  feet  thick  in  Nova  Scotia  any  proofs  of
intercalated  glacial  epochs.  The  peculiar  vegetation  of  the
coal  was  persistent  throughout  the  greater  part  of  the  ages
required  for  the  deposition  of  so  great  a  thickness  of
sediment,  in  which  one  forest  after  another  was  buried  on  the
spot  where  it  had  grown.*

This  absence  of  recurrent  periods  of  cold  is  perfectly  ex-
plicable, if  I  am  right  in  concluding  that  they  can  only  be
brought  about  by  an  abnormal  quantity  of  land  in  high
latitudes ;  for  under  ordinary  geographical  conditions  a
maximum  excentricity  would  only  tend  to  render  the  climate
less  equable,  and  not  colder.  If  the  ocean  prevailed  in  the
polar  regions  there  would  be  no  permanent  snow,  or  no  more
than  the  summer's  thaw  would  dissipate ;  and  the  difference
in  the  total  quantity  of  heat  being  as  1003  to  1000,  may,
as  Sir  J.  Herschel  observed,  be  neglected,  and  would,  if  ap-
preciable, have  a  heating  and  not  a  refrigerating  influence.

We  may  indeed  imagine  an  extreme  excentricity  and
Avinter  in  aphelion  to  have  sometimes  co-operated,  with
favoumble  geographical  conditions,  to  produce  an  excess  of
cold ;  but  we  know  so  little  of  the  probable  distribution  of
land  in  earlier  times  that  I  shall  not  repeat  my  former
attemx)t  to  calculate  the  possible  comparative  duration  of  the
Glacial  and  antecedent  Tertiaiy,  Secondary,  and  Primary
Epochs  by  a  comparison  of  the  supposed  relative  amount  of
change  in  the  organic  world  which  has  been  brought  about
in  ooiTCsponding  periods.

Variation  in  the  ohliqnity  of  the  ecliptic. — Hitherto  we  have
been  considering  the  effect  on  climate  of  changes  in  the  ex-
centricity of  the  orbit,  as  if  the  earth's  axis  of  rotation  were
always  inclined,  as  now,  at  an  angle  of  23**  28'  to  the  plane

*  See  Elements  of  Geologj'  by  the  Author,  p.  482.


Ch.  XIII.]


THE  OBLIQUITY  OF  THE  ECLIPTIC.


293


of  the  ecliptic ;  but  it  is  well  known  that  this  angle  is  made
to  vary  by  about  forty-eight  seconds  per  century  by  the
action  of  the  planets  on  the  earth,  by  which  the  plane  of  the
ecliptic  is  now  becoming  more  nearly  coincident  from  year  to
year  with  the  equator.    This  diminution  of  the  obliquity  will
go  on  for  ages,  after  which  *  it  will  again  increase,  and  thus
oscillate  backwards  and  forwards  about  a  mean  position,  the
extent  of  its  deviation  to  one  side  and  the  other  being  less
than  1**  21^'*     But  Sir  John  Herschel  informed  me  that
although  this  limit  as  calculated  by  Laplace  is  true  as  re-
gards the  last  100,000  years,  yet,  if  millions  of  years  are
taken  into  account,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  deviation  may
possibly  be  sometimes  greater,  and  may  even  be  found  to
extend  as  much  as  three  or  even  four  degrees  on  each  side
of  the  mean.t    The  questions  entered  into  by  Laplace  and
Leverrier  respecting  secular  changes  of  the  ecliptic  relative
to  a  fixed  plane,  and  possible  changes  in  the  position  of  the
earth's  equator,  must  be  the  subject  of  laborious  computa-
tions before  astronomers  will  have  decided  what  may  be  the
extreme  range   of  obliquity,  but  they  are   agreed  that  it
must  be  confined  within  very  narrow  limits.     The  result  of
this  movement,  whether  we  adopt  the  higher  or  lower  limit
above  alluded  to,  would  be  to  lessen  or  augment,  according
to  its  direction,  the  effects  to  which  the  precessional  move-
ment gives  rise.      Whenever  the  obliquity  is  greater  than
now,  more  of  the  arctic  and  antarctic  regions  would  be  ex-
posed to  a  long  night  in  winter,  and  consequently  the  cold
at  that  season  would  be   greater,  and  under  the  opposite
circumstances  the  reverse  would  take  place.     The  bearing  of
this  cause  on  geological  phenomena  would  be  twofold.     So
often  as  the  extreme  of  possible  obliquity  happened  to  com-
bine with  the  maximum  excentricity  and  with  geographical


*  Herschel's  Aetronomy,  art.  640.

t  Letter  to  the  Author,  Oct.  1866.
Mr.  Belt  remarks  (Quart.  Jouro.  of
Science,  Oct.  1874,  p.  443)  that  when
Laplace  and  Leverrier  fixeil  the  limit  of
Tariation,  it  was  not  known  that  the
diameter  of  the  equatorial  circumference
is  two  miles  longer  in  one  direction  than


in  the  other,  and  that  this  would  be
a  diuturbing  element  in  the  problem.
As,  however,  Sir  J.  Herschel  mentions
this  difference  in  his  Astronomy,  7th  ed.
1864,  he  was  aware  of  it  when  he  gave
me  the  extreme  limit  which  he  considered
possible.


294  SUPPOSED  VAEIATIONS  IN  [Ch.  XHI.

circumstances  of  an  abnormal  character  like  those  now  pre-
vailing in  high  latitudes,  a  greater  intensity  of  cold  would  be
produced  than  could  exist  without  such  a  combination,  and
so  far  this  would  favour  a  glacial  epoch.  But  when,  on  the
other  hand,  the  obliquity  was  at  its  minimum,  the  cold  would
be  lessened,  even  though  all  the  other  conditions  which
promote  it  were  in  full  force.  It  may  also  be  remarked  that
if  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  could  ever  be  diminished  to
the  extent  of  four  degrees  below  its  present  inclination,  snch
a  deviation  would  be  of  geological  interest,  in  so  far  as  it
would  cause  the  sun's  light  to  be  disseminated  over  a  broader
zone  inside  of  the  arctic  and  antarctic  circles.  Indeed,  if  the
date  of  its  occurrence  in  past  times  could  be  ascertained,  this
greater  spread  of  the  solar  rays,  implying  a  shortening  of
the  polar  night,  might  help  in  some  slight  degree  to  account
for  a  vegetation  such  as  now  characterises  lower  latitudes,
having  had  in  the  Miocene  and  Carboniferous  periods  a  much
wider  range  towards  the  pole.  Were  an  adequate  supply  of
light  thus  aflPorded,  the  warmth  required  by  such  a  flora
would  rarely  have  been  wanting  in  past  times,  for,  according
to  principles  before  laid  down,  a  more  genial  climate  would
usually  prevail  in  high  latitudes,  that  is  to  say  whenever  the
earth's  geography  was  in  a  normal  state.

In  Mr.  Meech's  valuable  paper,  before  cited  (p.  279),  he
treats  of  the  eflects  of  altered  obliquity ;  but  he  states*  that
his  results  as  to  the  intensity  of  solar  radiation  apply  only  to
the  outside  of  the  earth's  atmosphere.  If  his  readers  fail  to
bear  this  in  mind,  they  will  be  in  danger  of  greatly  over-
rating the  increased  heat  in  polar  regions  caused  by  dif-
ferent phases  of  precession,  excenti'icity,  and  obliquity  of  the
ecliptic ;  for  a  large  deduction  will  probably  have  to  be  made
for  the  greater  amount  of  atmosphere  through  which  the
calorific  rays  must  pass  in  very  high  latitudes.

The  investigration  of  the  true  calorific  effect  of  the  sun's
i-ays  for  CYCry  5^  of  altitude,  allowing  for  the  increased  length
of  path  traversed  by  the  oblique  rays,  is  given  by  Sir  J.
Leslie  and  Mr.  Traill.f     From  this  it  appears  that  the  total

*  Meech,  Smithsonian  Contributions,  1857.  pp.  21  and  43.
t  Article  '  Climate/  Eucycl.  Britann.


Ch.  XIII.]  THE  TEMPERATURE  OF  SPACE.  295

annual  quantity  of  heat  received  at  the  equator,  latitude  45^,
and  the  poles  will  be  as  the  numbers  115,  51,  and  14  respec-
tively. Even  these  figures  represent  the  comparative  quantity
of  heat  at  the  higher  latitudes  as  being  more  than  the
truth ;  for  they  are  computed  on  the  supposition  of  constant
sunshine.  As  cloud  prevails  to  a  greater  extent  in  the
high  latitudes  than  at  the  equator,  the  disproportion  will  be
increased.

Supposed  variations  in  the  temperature  of  space. — Another
astronomical  hypothesis  respecting  the  possible  cause  of
secular  variations  in  climate  has  been  proposed  by  a  dis-
tinguished mathematician  and  philosopher,  M.  Poisson.  He
begins  by  assuming,  1st,  that  the  sun  and  our  planetary
system  are  not  stationary,  but  carried  onward  by  a  common
movement  through  space.  2ndly,  that  every  point  in  space
receives  heat  as  well  as  light  from  innumerable  stars  sur-
rounding it  on  all  sides,  so  that  if  a  right  line  of  indefinite
length  be  produced  in  any  direction  from  such  point,  it  must
encounter  a  star  either  visible  or  invisible  to  us.  3rdly,
he  then  goes  on  to  assume,  that  the  different  regions  of
space,  which  in  the  course  of  millions  of  years  are  traversed
by  our  system,  must  be  of  very  unequal  temperature,  inas-
much as  some  of  them  must  receive  a  greater,  others  a  less
quantity  of  radiant  heat  from  the  great  stellar  enclosura
If  the  earth,  he  continues,  or  any  other  large  body,  pass  from
a  hotter  to  a  colder  region,  it  would  not  readily  lose  in  the
second  all  the  heat  which  it  has  imbibed  in  the  first  region,
but  retain  a  temperature  increasing  downwards  from  the
surface,  as  is  the  actual  condition  of  our  planet.*

Now  the  opinion  originally  suggested  by  Sir  W.  Herschel,
that  our  sun  and  its  attendant  planets  were  all  moving
onward  through  space,  in  the  direction  of  the  constellation
Hercules,  is  very  generally  thought  by  modern  astronomers
to  be  confirmed.  But  the  amount  of  the  movement  is  still
uncertain,  and  great  indeed  must  be  its  extent  before  this
cause  alone  can  work  any  material  alteration  in  the  terre-
strial climates.     Mr.  Hopkins,  when  treating  of  this  theory,

*  Poisson,  Th^rie  roatb^mat  de  la  Chaleur,  Comptes  rendus  de  TAcad.  des
Sci.,  Jan.  30,  1837.


296  SUPPOSED  GRADUAL  DIMINUTION  [Ch.  XUI.

remarked  that,  so  far  as  we  are  acquainted  with  the
position  of  stars  not  very  remote  from  the  sun,  they
seem  to  be  so  distant  from  each  other,  that  there  are  no
points  in  space  among  them  where  the  intensity  of  radia-
ting heat  would  be  comparable  to  that  which  the  earth
derives  from  the  sun,  except  at  points  very  near  to  each  star.
Thus,  in  order  that  the  earth  should  derive  a  degree  of  heat
from  stellar  radiation  comparable  to  that  now  derived  from
the  sun,  it  must  be  in  close  proximity  to  some  particular  star,
leaving  the  aggregate  effect  of  radiation  from  the  other  stars
nearly  the  same  as  at  present.  This  approximation,  how-
ever, to  a  single  star  could  not  take  place  consistently  with
the  preservation  of  the  motion  of  the  earth  about  the  sun,
according  to  its  present  laws.

Suppose  oiu*  sun  should  approach  a  star  within  the  pre-
sent distance  of  Neptune.  That  planet  could  no  longer
remain  a  member  of  the  solar  system,  and  the  motions  of
the  other  planets  would  be  disturbed  in  a  degree  which  no
one  has  ever  contemplated  as  probable  since  the  existence
of  the  solar  system.  But  such  a  star,  supposing  it  to  be  no
larger  than  the  sun,  and  to  emit  the  same  quantity  of  heat,
would  not  send  to  the  earth  much  more  than  one-thousandth
part  of  the  heat  which  she  derives  from  the  sun,  and  would
therefore  produce  only  a  very  small  change  in  terrestrial
temperature.*

Supposed  gradual  diminutioji  of  the  earWs  primitive  heat. —
The  gradual  diminution  of  the  supposed  primitive  heat  of  the
globe  has  been  resorted  to  by  many  geologists  as  the  prin-
cipal cause  of  alterations  of  climate.  The  matter  of  our
planet  is  imagined,  in  accordance  with  the  conjectures  of
Leibnitz,  to  have  been  originally  in  an  intensely  heated  state,
and  to  have  been  parting  ever  since  with  portions  of  its
heat,  and  at  the  same  time  contracting  its  dimensions.
There  are,  undoubtedly,  good  grounds  for  inferring,  frx)m  re-
cent observation  and  experiment,  that  the  temperature  of  the
earth  increases  as  we  descend  from  the  surface  to  that  slight
depth  to  which  man  can  penetrate ;  but  there  are  no  positive
proofs  of  a  secular  decrease  of  internal  heat  accompanied

*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  1852,  p.  62.


Ch.  XIIIJ  of  the  EAETffS  PRIMITIVE  HEAT.  297

by  contraction.  On  the  contrary,  Laplace  has  shown,  by
reference  to  astronomical  observations  made  in  the  time
of  Hipparchus,  that  in  the  last  two  thousand  years  at  least
there  has  been  no  sensible  contraction  of  the  globe  by  cooling ;
for  had  this  been  the  case,  even  to  an  extremely  small  amount,
the  day  would  have  been  shortened,  whereas  its  length  has
certainly  not  diminished  during  that  period  by  a-J-g^th  of  a
second.

I  shall  allude  in  the  second  volume  to  many  objections
which  may  be  urged  against  the  theory  of  the  intense  heat
of  the  earth's  central  nucleus,  and  shall  then  enquire  how  far
the  observed  augmentation  of  temperature,  as  we  descend
below  the  surface,  may  be  referable  to  other  causes  uncon-
nected with  the  supposed  pristine  fluidity  of  the  entire
globe.  '


298


CHAPTER  XIV.

UNIFORMITY   IX   THE   SERIES   OP   PAST   CHANGES    IN    THE
ANIMATE    AND   INANIMATE   WORLD.

SUPPOSED   ALTERNATE   PERIODS   OF   REPOSE   AND    DISORDER — OBSERTED    FACTS

IX   WHICH   THIS   DOCTRINE    HAS   ORIGINATED THESE   MAT   BE    KXPLAIX8D    BT

SUPPOSING   A    CNIFORM    AND     UNINTERRrPTED    SERIES    OF   CHANGES TWPKie-

FOLD  CONSIDERATION  OF  THIS  SUBJECT  '.  I-IRST,  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE
LAWS  WHICH  GOVERN  THE  FORMATION  OF  FOSSILIFEROUS  STRATA,  AND  THB
SHIFTING  OF  THE  AREAS  OF  SEDIMENTARY  DEPi>SITION  ;  SECONDLT,  IN  BK-
FERENCE  TO  THE  LIVING  CRRATION,  EXTINCTION  OF  SPECIES,  AND  ORIOIX  OF
Nl'rW  ANIMALS  AND  PLANTS  ;  THIRDLY.  IN  REFERENCE  TO  TUB  CHASTOBB
PRODUCED  IN  THE  EARTHS  CRUST  BY  THE  CONTINTANCE  OF  SUBTBRRANEAX
MOVEMENTS  IN  CERTAIN  AREAS,  AND  THEIR  TRANSFERENCE  AFTKB  LOXO
PERIODS  TO  NEW  AREAS  —ON  THE  COMBINED  INFLUENCE  OF  ALL  TUKSB
MODES  AND  CAUSES  OF  CHANUE  IN  PRODUCING  BREAKS  AND  CHASMS  IN  TBB
CHAIN  OF  REC(»RDS — CONCLUDING  REMARKS  ON  THE  IDBNTITY  OF  THE
ANCIENT   AND    PRESENT    SYSTEM    OF    TERR>:STRIAL   CHANGES.

0  rig  in  of  the  doctrine  of  alternate  periods  of  repose  aiid
disorder. — It  has  been  truly  observed,  that  when  we  arrange
the  known  fossiliterous  formations  in  chronological  order,
they  constitute  a  broken  and  defective  series  of  monuments :
we  pass  without  any  intermediate  gradations  from  systems
of  strata  which  are  horizontal,  to  other  systems  which  are
highly  inclined — from  rocks  of  peculiar  mineral  composition
to  others  which  have  a  character  wholly  distinct — from  one
assemblage  of  organic  remains  to  another,  in  which  fre-
quently nearly  all  the  species,  and  a  large  part  of  the  genera,
are  different.  These  violations  of  continuity  are  so  common
as  to  constitute  in  most  regions  the  rule  rather  than  the
exception,  and  they  have  been  considered  by  many  geologists
as  conclusive  in  favour  of  sudden  revolutions  in  the  inani-
mate and  animate  world.  We  have  already  seen  that,
according  to  the  speculations  of  some  Avriters,  there  have
been  in  the  past  history  of  the  planet  alternate  periods  of


Ch.  XIV.]  UNIFORMITY  OF  CHANGE.  299

tranquillity  and  convulsion,  the  former  enduring  for  ages,  and
resembling  the  state  of  things  now  experienced  by  man ;  the
other  brief,  transient,  and  paroxysmal,  giving  rise  to  new
mountains,  seas,  and  valleys,  annihilating  one  set  of  organic
beings,  and  ushering  in  the  creation  of  another.-

It  will  be  the  object  of  the  present  chapter  to  demonstrate
that  these  theoretical  views  are  not  borne  out  by  a  fair
interpretation  of  geological  monuments.  It  is  true  that  in
the  solid  framework  of  the  globe  we  have  a  chronological
chain  of  natural  records,  many  links  of  which  are  wanting  :
but  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the  phenomena  leads  to  the
opinion  that  the  series  was  originally  defective— that  it  has
been  rendered  still  more  so  by  time — that  a  great  part  of
what  remains  is  inaccessible  to  man,  and  even  of  that
fraction  which  is  accessible  nine-tenths  or  more  are  to  this
day  imexplored.

The  readiest  way,  perhaps,  of  persuading  the  reader  that
we  may  dispense  with  great  and  sudden  revolutions  in  the
,  geological  order  of  events  is  by  showing  him  how  a  regular
and  uninterrupted  series  of  changes  in  the  animate  and  in-
animate world  must  give  rise  to  such  breaks  in  the  sequence,
and  such  unconformability  of  stratified  rocks,  as  are  usu-
ally thought  to  imply  convulsions  and  catastrophes.  It  is
scarcely  necessary  to  state  that  the  order  of  events  thus
assumed  to  occur,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  should  be  in
harmony  with  all  the  conclusions  legitimately  drawn  by
geologists  from  the  structure  of  the  earth,  and  must  be
equally  in  accordance  with  the  changes  observed  by  man  to
be  now  going  on  in  the  living  as  well  as  in  the  inorganic
creation.  It  may  be  necessary  in  the  present  state  of
science  to  supply  some  part  of  the  assumed  course  of  nature
hypothetically ;  but,  if  so,  this  must  be  done  without  any
violation  of  probability,  and  always  consistently  with  the
analogy  of  what  is  known  both  of  the  past  and  present
economy  of  our  system.  Although  the  discussion  of  so  com-
prehensive a  subject  must  carry  the  beginner  far  beyond  his
depth,  it  will  also,  it  is  hoped,  stimulate  his  curiosity,  and
prepare  him  to  read  some  elementary  treatises  on  geology
with  advantage,  and  teach  him  the  bearing  on  that  science


300  causf:s  of  variation  [Ch.  xiv.

of  the  changes  now  in  progress  on  the  earth.  At  the  same
time  it  may  enable  him  the  better  to  understand  the  inti-
mate connection  between  the  Second  and  Third  Books
of  this  work,  one  of  which  is  occupied  with  the  clianges
of  the  inorganic,  the  latter  with  those  of  the  organic
creation.
Iq  pursuance,  then,  of  the  plan  above  proposed,  I  will

m

consider  in  this  chapter,  first,  the  laws  which  regulate  tlie
denudation  of  strata  and  the  deposition  of  sediment ;  secondly,
those  which  govern  the  fluctuation  in  the  animate  world ;  and
thirdly,  the  mode  in  which  subterranean  movements  affect
the  earth's  crust.

Uniformity  of  change  considered^  first,  in  reference  to  denudor-
tion  and  sedimentary  depositioyi. — First,  in  regard  to  the  laws
governing  the  deposition  of  new  strata.  If  we  survey  the
surface  of  the  globe,  we  immediately  perceive  that  it  is
divisible  into  areas  of  deposition  and  non-deposition ;  or,  in
other  words,  at  any  given  time  there  are  spaces  which  are
the  recipients,  others  which  are  not  the  recipients,  of
sedimentary  matter.  No  new  strata,  for  example,  are  thrown
down  on  dry  land,  which  remains  the  same  from  year  to  year ;
whereas,  in  many  parts  of  the  bottom  of  seas  and  lakes,  mud,
sand,  and  pebbles  are  annually  spread  out  by  rivers  and
cuiTcnts.  There  are  also  great  masses  of  limestone  growing
in  some  seas,  chiefly  composed  of  corals  and  shells,  or,  as
in  the  depths  of  the  Atlantic,  of  chalky  mud  made  up  of
foraminifera  and  diatomacese.

As  to  the  dry  land,  so  far  from  being  the  receptacle  of
fresh  accessions  of  matter,  it  is  exposed  almost  everywhere
to  waste  away.  Forests  may  be  as  dense  and  lofty  as  those
of  Brazil,  and  may  swarm  with  quadrupeds,  birds,  and  insects,
yet  at  the  end  of  thousands  of  years  one  layer  of  black  mould
a  few  inches  thick  may  be  the  sole  representative  of  those
myriads  of  trees,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruits,  those  innumer-
able bones  and  skeletons  of  birds,  quadrupeds,  and  reptiles,
which  tenanted  the  fertile  region.  Should  this  land  be  at
length  submerged,  the  waves  of  the  sea  may  wash  away  in  a
few  hours  the  scanty  covering  of  mould,  and  it  may  merely
impart  a  darker  shade  of  colour  to  the  next  stratum  of  marl,


Ch.  XIV.]  IN  MINERAL  CHARACTER.  301

sand,  or  other  matter  newly  thrown  down.  So  also  at  the
bottom  of  the  ocean  where  no  sediment  is  accumulating,
seaweed,  zoophytes,  fish,  and  even  shells,  may  multiply  for
ages  and  decompose,  leaving  no  vestige  of  their  form  or  sub-
stance behind.  Their  decay,  in  water,  although  more  slow,
is  as  certain  and  eventually  as  complete  as  in  the  open  air.
Nor  can  they  be  perpetuated  for  indefinite  periods  in  a  fossil
state,  unless  imbedded  in  some  matrix  which  is  impervious  to
water,  or  which  at  least  does  not  allow  a  free  percolation  of
that  fluid,  impregnated,  as  it  usually  is,  with  a  slight  quantity
of  carbonic  or  other  acid.  Such  a  free  percolation  may  be
prevented  either  by  the  mineral  nature  of  the  matrix  itself,
or  by  the  superposition  of  an  impermeable  stratum ;  but  if
unimpeded,  the  fossil  shell  or  bone  will  be  dissolved  and
removed,  particle  after  particle,  and  thus  entirely  effaced,
unless  petrifaction  or  the  substitution  of  some  mineral  for
the  organic  matter  happen  to  take  place.
.  That  there  has  been  land  as  well  as  sea  at  all  former
geological  periods,  we  know  from  the  fact  that  fossU  trees
and  terrestrial  plants  are  imbedded  in  rocks  of  every  age,
except  those  which  are  so  ancient  as  to  be  very  imperfectly
known  to  us.  Occasionally  lacustrine  and  fluviatile  shells,
or  the  bones  of  amphibious  or  land  reptiles,  point  to  the  same
conclusion.  The  existence  of  dry  land  at  all  periods  of  the
past  implies,  as  before  mentioned,  the  partial  deposition  of
sediment,  or  its  limitation  to  certain  areas ;  and  the  next
point  to  which  I  shall  call  the  reader's  attention  is  the  shift-
ing of  these  areas  from  one  region  to  another.

First,  then,  variations  in  the  site  of  sedimentary  deposition
are  brought  about  independently  of  subterranean  movements.
There  is  always  a  slight  change  from  year  to  year,  or  from
century  to  century.  The  sediment  of  the  Rhone,  for  example,
thrown  into  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  is  now  conveyed  to  a  spot  a
mile  and  a  half  distant  from  that  where  it  accumulated  in  the
tenth  century,  and  six  miles  from  the  point  where  the  delta
began  originally  to  form.  We  may  Iook  forward  to  the  period
when  this  lake  will  be  filled  up,  and  then  the  distribution  of
the  transported  matter  will  be  suddenly  altered,  for  the  mud
and  sand  brought  down  from  the  Alps  will  thenceforth,  instead


302  UNIFORMITY  OF  CHANGE  [Ch.  XIV.

of  being  deposited  near  Geneva,  be  carried  nearly  200  miles
southwards,  where  the  Rhone  enters  the  Mediterranean.

In  the  deltas  of  large  rivers,  such  as  those  of  the  Gkinges
and  Indus,  the  mud  is  first  carried  down  for  many  centuries
through  one  arm,  and  on  this  being  stopped  up  it  is  dis-
charged by  another,  and  may  then  enter  the  sea  at  a  point
60  or  100  miles  distant  from  its  first  receptacle.  The  direc-
tion of  marine  currents  is  also  liable  to  be  changed  by  various
accidents,  as  by  the  heaping  up  of  new  sandbanks,  or  the
wearing  away  of  cliflFs  and  promontories.

But,  secondly,  all  these  causes  of  fluctuation  in  the  sedi-
mentary areas  are  entirely  subordinate  to  those  great  upward
or  downward  movements  of  land,  which  will  presently  be
spoken  of,  as  prevailing  over  large  tracts  of  the  globe.  By
such  elevation  or  subsidence  certain  spaces  are  gradually
submerged  or  made  gradually  to  emerge :  in  the  one  case
sedimentary  deposition  may  be  suddenly  renewed  after  having
been  suspended  for  one  or  more  geological  periods,  in  the  other
as  suddenly  made  to  cease  after  having  continued  for  ages.

If  deposition  be  renewed  after  a  long  interval,  the  new
strata  will  usually  differ  greatly  from  the  sedimentary  rocks
previously  formed  in  the  same  place,  and  especially  if  the
older  rocks  have  suffered  derangement,  which  implies  a
change  in  the  physical  geography  of  the  district  since  the
previous  conveyance  of  sediment  to  the  same  spot.  It  may
happen,  however,  that,  even  where  the  two  groups,  the
superior  and  the  inferior,  are  horizontal  and  conformable  to
each  other,  they  may  still  differ  entirely  in  mineral  charac-
ter, because,  since  the  origin  of  the  older  formation,  the
geography  of  some  distant  country  has  been  altered.  In  that
country  rocks  before  concealed  may  have  become  exposed  by
denudation ;  volcanos  may  have  burst  out  and  covered  the
surface  with  scoriae  and  lava  ;  or  new  lakes,  intercepting  the
sediment  previously  conveyed  from  the  upper  country,  may
have  been  formed  by  subsidence  ;  and  other  fluctuations  may
have  occurred,  by  which  the  materials  brought  down  from
thence  by  rivers  to  the  sea  have  acquired  a  distinct  mineral
character.


Ch.  XIV.]  IN  THE  ANIMATE  WORLD.  303

It  is  well  known  that  the  stream  of  the  Mississippi  is
charged  with  sediment  of  a  diflFerent  colour  from  that  of  the
Arkansas  and  Bed  Rivers,  which  are  tinged  with  red  mud,
derived  from  rocks  of  porphyry  and  red  gypseous  clays  in  *  the
far  west/  The  waters  of  the  Uruguay,  says  Darwin,  drain-
ing a  granitic  country,  are  clear  and  black;  those  of  the
Parana,  red.*  The  mud  with  which  the  Indus  is  loaded,  says
Bumes,  is  of  a  clayey  hue  ;  that  of  the  Chenab,  on  the  other
hand,  is  reddish ;  that  of  the  Sutlej  is  more  paJe.f  The  same
causes  which  make  these  several  rivers,  sometimes  situated  at
no  great  distance  the  one  from  the  other,  to  diflFer  greatly  in
the  character  of  their  sediment,  will  make  the  waters  draining
the  same  country  at  different  epochs,  especially  before  and
after  great  revolutions  in  physical  geography,  to  be  entirely
dissimilar.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  marine  cur-
rents will  be  affected  in  an  analogous  manner  in  consequence
of  the  formation  of  new  shoals,  the  emergence  of  new  islands,
the  subsidence  of  others,  the  gradual  waste  of  neighbouring
coasts,  the  growth  of  new  deltas,  the  increase  of  coral  reefs,
volcanic  eruptions,  and  other  changes.

Uniformity  of  change  considered,  secondly,  in  reference  to  the
living  creation. — Secondly,  in  regard  to  the  vicissitudes  of  the
living  creation,  all  are  agreed  that  the  successive  groups  of
sedimentary  strata  found  in  the  earth's  crust  are  not  only
dissimilar  in  mineral  composition  for  reasons  above  alluded
to,  but  are  likewise  distinguishable  from  each  other  by  their
organic  remains.  The  general  inference  drawn  from  the
study  and  comparison  of  the  various  groups,  arranged  in
chronological  order,  is  this :  that  at  successive  periods  distinct
tribes  of  animals  and  plants  have  inhabited  the  land  and
waters,  and  that  the  organic  types  of  the  newer  formations
are  more  analogous  to  species  now  existing  than  those  of
more  ancient  rocks.  If  we  then  turn  to  the  present  state  of
the  animate  creation,  and  enquire  whether  it  has  now  become
fixed  and  stationary,  we  discover  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is
in  a  state  of  continual    flux — that  there  are  many  causes

»  Darwin's  Journal,  p.  163,  2nd  ed.  f  Juurn.  Roy.  Geograph.  Soc.,  vol.

p.  139.  iii.  p.  142.


304  UNIFORMITY  OF  CHilNGE  [Ch.  XIV.

in  action  which  tend  to  the  extinction  of  species,  and
which  are  conclusive  against  the  doctrine  of  their  unlimited
durability.

There  are  also  causes  which  give  rise  to  new  varieties  and
races  in  plant<s  and  animals,  and  new  forms  are  continually
supplanting  others  which  had  endured  for  ages.   But  natural
history  has  been  successfully  cultivated  for  so  short  a  period,
that  a  few  examples  only  of  local,  and  perhaps  but  one  or  two
of  absolute,  extirpation  of  species  can  as  yet  be  proved,  and
these  only  where  the  interference  of  man  has  been  conspi-
cuous.    It  will  nevertheless  appear  evident,  from  the  facts
and  arguments  detailed  in  the  chapters  which  treat  of  the
geographical  distribution  of  species  in  the  next  volume,  that
man  is  not  the  only  exterminating  agent ;  and  that,  inde-
pendently of  his  intervention,  the  annihilation  of  species  is
promoted  by  the  multiplication  and  gradual  diffusion  of  every
animal  or  plant.     It  will  also  appear  that  every  alteration
in  the  physical  geography  and  climate  of  the  globe  cannot
fail  to  have  the  same  tendency.     If  we  proceed  still  farther,
and  enquire  whether  new  species  are  substituted  from  time
to  time  for  those  which  die  out,  we  find  that  the  successive
introduction  of  new  forms  appears  to  have  been  a  constant
part  of  the  economy  of  the  terrestrial  system,  and  if  we  have
no  direct  proof  of  the  fact  it  is  because  the  changes  take
place  so  slowly  as  not  to  come   within  the  period  of  exact
scientific  observation.      To  enable  the  reader  to  appreciate
the  gradual  manner  in  which  a  passage  may  have  taken
place  from  an  extinct  fauna  to  that  now  living,  I  shall  say  a
few  words  on  the  fossils  of  successive  Tertiary  periods.   When
we  trace  the  series  of  formations  from  the  more  ancient  to  the
more  modern,  it  is  in  these  Tertiary  deposits  that  we  first
meet  with  assemblages  of  organic  remains  having  a  near
analogy  to  the  fauna  of  certain  parts  of  the  globe  in  our  own
time.     In  the  Eocene,  or  oldest  subdivisions,  some  few  of  the
testacea  belong  to  existing  species,  although  almost  all  of
them,  and  apparently  all  the  associated  vertebrata,  are  now
extinct.   These  Eocene  strata  are  succeeded  by  a  great  num-
ber of  more  modern  deposits,  which  depart  gradually  in  the


Ch.  XIV.]  IN  THE  ANIMATE  WORLD.  305

character  of  their  fossils  from  the  Eocene  type,  and  approach
more  and  more  to  that  of  the  living  creation.  In  the  present
state  of  science,  it  is  chiefly  by  the  aid  of  shells  that  we  are
enabled  to  arrive  at  these  results,  for  of  all  classes  the  tes-
tacea  are  the  most  generally  diffused  in  a  fossil  state,  and
may  be  called  the  medals  principally  employed  by  nature  in
recording  the  chronology  of  past  events.  In  the  Upper
Miocene  rocks  (No.  5  of  the  table,  p.  135)  we  begin  to  find
a  considerable  number,  although  still  a  minority,  of  recent
species,  intermixed  with  some  fossils  common  to  the  precede
ing,  or  Eocene,  epoch.  We  then  arrive  at  the  Pliocene  strata,
in  which  species  now  contemporary  with  man  begin  to  pre-
ponderate, and  in  the  newest  of  which  nine-tenths  of  the
fossils  agree  with  species  still  inhabiting  the  neighbouring
sea.  It  is  in  the  Post-Tertiary  strata,  where  all  the  shells
agree  with  species  now  living,  that  we  have  discovered  the
first  or  earliest  known  remains  of  man  associated  with  the
bones  of  quadrupeds,  some  of  which  are  of  extinct  species.

In  thus  passing  from  the  older  to  the  newer  members  of
the  Tertiary  system,  we  meet  with  many  chasms,  but  none
which  separate  entirely,  by  a  broad  line  of  demarcation,  one
state  of  the  organic  world  from  another.  There  are  no
signs  of  an  abrupt  termination  of  one  fauna  and  flora,  and
the  starting  into  life  of  new  and  wholly  distinct  forms.
Although  we  are  far  from  being  able  to  demonstrate  geologi-
cally an  insensible  transition  from  the  Eocene  to  the  Miocene,
or  even  from  the  latter  to  the  recent  fauna,  yet,  the  more  we
enlarge  and  perfect  our  general  survey,  the  more  nearly  do
we  approximate  to  such  a  continuous  series,  and  the  more
gradually  are  we  conducted  from  times  when  many  of  the
genera  and  nearly  all  the  species  were  extinct,  to  those  in
which  scarcely  a  single  species  flourished  which  we  do  not
know  to  exist  at  present.  Dr.  A.  Philippi,  indeed,  after  an
elaborate  comparison  of  the  fossil  tertiary  shells  of  Sicily  with
those  now  living  in  the  Mediterranean,  announced,  as  the
result  of  his  examination,. that  there  are  strata  in  that  island
which  attest  a  very  gi'adual  passage  from  a  period  when  only
thirteen  in  a  hundred  of  the  shells  were  like  the  species  now

VOL.  I.  X


306  UNIFORMITY  OF  CHANGE.  [Ch.  XIV.

living  in  the  sea,  to  an  era  when  the  recent  species  had
attained  a  proportion  of  ninety-five  in  a  hundred.  There  is,
therefore,  evidence,  he  says,  in  Sicily  of  this  revolution  in  the
animate  world  having  been  effected  'without  the  intervention
of  any  convulsion  or  abrupt  changes,  certain  species  having
from  time  to  time  died  out,  and  others  having  been  intro-
duced, until  at  length  the  existing  fauna  was  elaborated.'

In  no  part  of  Europe  is  the  absence  of  all  signs  of  man
or  his  works,  in  strata  of  comparatively  modem  date,  more
striking  than  in  Sicily.  In  the  central  parts  of  that  island
we  observe  a  lofby  table-land  and  hills,  sometimes  rising  to
the  height  of  8,000  feet,  capped  with  a  limestone,  in  which
from  70  to  85  per  cent,  of  the  fossil  testacea  are  specifically
identical  with  those  now  inhabiting  the  Mediterranean.
These  calcareous  and  other  argillaceous  strata  of  the  same
age  are  intersected  by  deep  valleys  which  appear  to  have  been
gradually  formed  by  denudation,  but  have  not  varied  mate-
rially in  width  or  depth  since  Sicily  was  first  colonised  by
the  Greeks.  The  limestone,  moreover,  which  is  of  so  late  a
date  in  geological  chronology,  was  quarried  for  building
those  ancient  temples  of  Girgenti  and  Syracuse,  of  which  the
ruins  carry  us  back  to  a  remote  era  in  human  history.  If
we  are  lost  in  conjectures  when  speculating  on  the  ages
required  to  lift  up  these  formations  to  the  height  of  several
thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  and  to  excavate  the  valleys,  how
much  more  remote  must  be  the  era  when  the  same  rocks  were
gradually  formed  beneath  the  waters !

The  intense  cold  of  the  Glacial  period  was  spoken  of  in
the  tenth  chapter.  Although  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  in
detecting  proofs  of  the  origin  of  man  antecedently  to  that
epoch,  we  have  yet  found  evidence  that  most  of  the  testacea,
and  not  a  few  of  the  quadrupeds,  which  preceded,  were  of  the
same  species  as  those  which  followed  the  extreme  cold.  To
whatever  local  disturbances  this  cold  may  have  given  rise  in
the  distribution  of  species,  it  seems  to  have  done  little  in
effecting  their  annihilation.  We  may  conclude  therefore,
from  a  survey  of  the  tertiary  and  modern  strata,  which  con-
stitute a  more  complete  and  unbroken  series  than  rocks
of  older  date,  that  the  extinction  and  creation  of  species


Ch.  XIV.]  SUBTERRANEAN  MOVEMENTS.  307

have  been,  and  are,  the  result  of  a  slow  and  gradual  change
in  the  organic  world.

Uniformity  of  change  consideredy  thirdly y  in  reference  to  suh-
terranean  movements, — Thirdly,  to  pass  on  to  the  last  of  the
three  topics  before  proposed  for  discussion,  the  reader  will  find
in  the  account  given  in  the  Second  Book,  Vol.  II.,  of  the
earthquakes  recorded  in  history,  that  certain  countries  have,
from  time  immemorial,  been  rudely  shaken  again  and  again ;
while  others,  comprising  by  far  the  largest  part  of  the  globe,
have  remained  to  all  appearance  motionless.     In  the  regions
of  convulsion  rocks  have  been  rent  asunder,  the  surfkce  has
been  forced  up  into  ridges,  chasms  have  opened,  or  the  ground
throughout  large  spaces   has  been   permanently   lifted   up
above,  or  let  down  below,  its  former  level.     In  the  regions  of
tranquillity  some  areas  have  remained  at  rest,  but  others
have  been  ascertained,  by    a  comparison  of  measurements
made  at    different  periods,  to   have   risen  by  an  insensible
motion,  as  in  Sweden,  or  to  have  subsided  very  slowly,  as  in
Greenland.    That  these  same  movements,  whether  ascending
or  descending,  have  continued  for  ages  in  the  same  direction
has  been   established  by   historical  or  geological  evidence.
Thus  we  find  on  the  opposite  coasts  of  Sweden  that  brackish
water  deposits,  like  those  now  forming  in  the  Baltic,  occur
on  the  eastern  side,  and  upraised  strata  filled  with  purely
marine  shells,  now  proper  to  the  ocean,  on  the  western  coast.
Both  of  these  have  been  lifted  up  to  an  elevation  of  several
hundred  feet  above  high-water  mark.     The  rise  within  the
historical  period  has  not  amounted  to  many  yards,  but  the
greater   extent  of  antecedent   upheaval   is   proved   by  the
occurrence  in  inland  spots,  several  himdred   feet   high,  of
deposits  containing  fossU  shells  of  species  now  living  either
in  the  ocean  or  the  Baltic*

It  must  in  general  be  more  diflScult  to  detect  proofs  of
slow  and  gradual  subsidence  than  of  elevation;  but  the  theory
which  accounts  for  the  form  of  circular  coral  reefs  and  lagoon
islands,  and  which  will  be  explained  in  the  concluding
chapter  of  this  work,  will  satisfy  the  reader  that  there  are
spaces  on  the  globe,  several  thousand  miles  in  circumference,

*  See  vol.  ii.  p.  185.
X  2


308  UNIFORMITy  OF  CHANGE.  [Ck.  XIV.

throughout  which  the  downward  movement  has  predominated
for  ages,  and  yet  the  land  has  never,  in  a  single  instance,
gone  down  suddenly  for  several  himdred  feet  at  once.  Yet
geology  demonstrates  that  the  persistency  of  subterranean
movements  in  one  direction  has  not  been  perpetual  through-
out all  past  time.  There  have  been  great  oscillations  of
level,  by  which  a  surface  of  dry  land  has  been  submerged  to
a  depth  of  several  thousand  feet,  and  then  at  a  period  long
subsequent  raised  again  and  made  to  emerge.  Nor  have  the
regions  now  motionless  been  always  at  rest ;  and  some  of
those  which  are  at  present  the  theatres  of  reitei*ated  earth-
quakes have  formerly  enjoyed  a  long  continuance  of  tran-
quillity. But,  although  disturbances  have  ceased  after  having
long  prevailed,  or  have  recommenced  after  a  suspension  for
ages,  there  has  been  no  universal  disruption  of  the  earth's
crust  or  desolation  of  the  surface  since  times  the  most
remote.  The  non-occurrence  of  such  a  general  convulsion
is  proved  by  the  perfect  horizontality  now  retained  by
some  of  the  most  ancient  fossiliferous  strata  throughout  wide
areas.

That  the  subterranean  forces  have  visited  different  parts
of  the  globe  at  successive  periods  is  inferred  chiefly  from  the
unconformability  of  strata  belonging  to  groups  of  different
ages.  Thus,  for  example,  on  the  borders  of  Wales  and
Shropshire,  we  find  the  slaty  beds  of  the  ancient  Silurian
system  inclined  and  vertical,  while  the  beds  of  the  overlying
carboniferous  shale  and  sandstone  are  horizontal.  All  are
agreed  that  in  such  a  case  the  older  set  of  strata  had  suf-
fered great  disturbance  before  the  deposition  of  the  newer  or
carboniferous  beds,  and  that  these  last  have  never  since  been
violently  fractured,  nor  have  ever  been  bent  into  folds,
whether  by  sudden  or  continuous  lateral  pressure.  On  the
other  hand,  the  more  ancient  or  Silurian  group  suffered  only
a  local  derangement,  and  neither  in  Wales  nor  elsewhere  are
all  the  rocks  of  that  age  found  to  be  curved  or  vertical.

In  various  parts  of  Europe,  for  example,  and  particularly
near  Lake  Wener  in  the  south  of  Sweden,  and  in  many  parts
of  Russia,  the  Silmian  strata  maintain  the  most  perfect  hori-
zontality ;  and  a  similar  observation  may  be  made  respecting


Ch.  XIV.]  SUBTERRANEAN  MOVEMENTS.  309

limestones  and  shaJes  of  like  antiquity  in  the  great  lake
district  of  Canada  and  the  United  States.  These  older
rocks  are  still  as  flat  and  horizontal  as  when  first  formed ;
yet,  since  their  origin,  not  only  have  most  of  the  actual
mountain-chains  been  uplifted,  but  some  of  the  very  rocks
of  which  those  mountains  are  composed  have  been  formed,
some  of  them  by  igneous  and  others  by  aqueous  action.

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  instances  of  similar  uncon-
formability  in  formations  of  other  ages ;  but  a  few  more
will  suflSce.  The  carboniferous  rocks  before  alluded  to  as
horizontal  on  the  borders  of  Wales  are  vertical  in  the
Mendip  hills  in  Somersetshire,  where  the  overlying  beds  of
the  New  Eed  Sandstone  are  horizontal.  Again,  in  the  Wolds
of  Yorkshire  the  last-mentioned  sandstone  supports  on  its
curved  and  inclined  beds  the  horizontal  Chalk.  The  Chalk
again  is  vertical  on  the  flanks  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  the  ter-
tiary strata  repose  unconformably  upon  it.

As  almost  every  country  supplies  illustrations  of  the  same
phenomena,  they  who  advocate  the  doctrine  of  alternate
periods  of  disorder  and  repose  may  appeal  to  the  facts  above
described,  as  proving  that  every  district  has  been  by  turns
convulsed  by  earthquakes  and  then  respited  for  ages  from
convulsions.  But  so  it  might  with  equal  truth  be  aflSrmed
that  every  part  of  Europe  has  been  visited  alternately  by
winter  and  summer,  although  it  has  always  been  winter  and
always  summer  in  some  part  of  the  planet,  and  neither  of
these  seasons  has  ever  reigned  simultaneously  over  the
entire  globe.  They  have  been  always  shifting  from  place
to  place ;  but  the  vicissitudes  which  recur  thus  annually  in
a  single  spot  are  never  allowed  to  interfere  with  the  inva-
riable uniformity  of  seasons  throughout  the  whole  planet.

So,  in  regard  to  subterranean  movements,  the  theory  of
the  perpetual  uniformity  of  the  force  which  they  exert  on  the
earth's  crust  is  quite  consistent  with  the  admission  of  their
alternate  development  and  suspension  for  long  and  indefi-
nite periods  within  limited  geographical  areas.

If,  for  reasons  before  stated,  we  assume  a  continual  extinc-
tion of  species  and  appearance  of  others  on  the  globe,  it  will
then  follow  that  the  fossils  of  strata  formed  at  two  distant


310  CAUSES  OF  BREAKS  IN  [Ch.  XIV.

periods  on  the  same  spot  will  differ  even  more  eertainlj
than  the  mineral  composition  of  those  strata.  For  rocks  of
the  same  kind  have  sometimes  been  reproduced  in  the  same
district  after  a  long  interval  of  time ;  whereas  all  the  evi-
dence derived  from  fossil  remains  is  in  favour  of  the  opinion
that  species  which  have  once  died  out  have  never  been
reproduced.  The  submergence,  then,  of  land  must  be  often
attended  by  the  commencement  of  a  new  class  of  sedimentary
deposits,  characterised  by  a  new  set  of  fossil  animals  and
plants,  while  the  reconversion  of  the  bed  of  the  sea  into  land
may  arrest  at  once  and  for  an  indefinite  time  the  formation  of
geological  monuments.  Should  the  land  again  sink,  strata
will  again  be  formed;  but  one  or  many  entire  revolutions
in  animal  or  vegetable  life  may  have  been  completed  in  the
interval.

As  to  the  want  of  completeness  in  the  fossUiferous  series,
which  may  be  said  to  be  almost  universal,  we  have  only  to
reflect  on  what  has  been  already  said  of  the  laws  governing
sedimentary  deposition,  and  those  which  give  rise  to  fluctua-
tions in  the  animate  world,  to  be  convinced  that  a  very  rare
combination  of  circumstances  can  alone  give  rise  to  such  a
superposition  and  preservation  of  strata  as  will  bear  testi-
mony to  the  gradual  passage  from  one  state  of  organic  life
to  another.  To  proiluce  such  strata  nothing  less  will  be  re-
quisite than  the  fortunate  coincidence  of  the  following  con-
ditions :  first,  a  never-failing  supply  of  sediment  in  the  same
region  throughout  a  period  of  vast  duration ;  secondly,  the
fitness  of  the  deposit  in  every  part  for  the  permanent  preser-
vation of  imbedded  fossils  ;  and,  thirdly,  a  gradual  subsidence
to  prevent  the  sea  or  lake  from  being  filled  up  and  converted
into  land.

It  will  appear  in  the  chapter  on  coral  reefs,*  that,  in  cer-
tain parts  of  the  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans,  most  of  these
conditions,  if  not  all,  are  complied  with,  and  the  constant
growth  of  coral,  keeping  pace  with  the  sinking  of  the  bottom*
of  the  sea,  seems  to  have  gone  on  so  slowly,  for  such  indefi-
nite periods,  that  the  signs  of  a  gradual  change  in  organic

*  See  last  chapter  of  vol.  ii.  of  this  work.


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  SEQUENCE  OF  FORMATIONS.  811

life  might  probably  be  detected  in  that  quarter  of  the  globe
if  we  could  explore  its  submarine  geology.  Instead  of  the
growth  of  coralline  limestone,  let  us  suppose,  in  some  other
place,  the  continuous  deposition  of  fluviatile  mud  and  sand,
such  as  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra  have  poured  for
thousands  of  years  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  Part  of  this  bay,
although  of  considerable  depth,  might  at  length  be  filled  up
before  an  appreciable  amount  of  change  was  effected  in  the
fish,  moUusca,  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  sea  and  neigh-
bouring land.  But  if  the  bottom  be  lowered  by  sinking  at
the  same  rate  that  it  is  raised  by  fluviatile  mud,  the  bay  can
never  be  turned  into  dry  land.  In  that  case  one  new  layer  of
matter  may  be  superimposed  upon  another  for  a  thickness  of
many  thousand  feet,  and  the  fossils  of  the  inferior  beds  may
differ  greatly  from  those  entombed  in  the  uppermost,  yet
every  intermediate  gradation  may  be  indicated  in  the  pas-
sage from  an  older  to  a  newer  assemblage  of  species.  Grant-
ing, however,  that  such  an  unbroken  sequence  of  monuments
may  thus  be  elaborated  in  certain  parts  of  the  sea,  and  that
the  strata  happen  to  be  aU  of  them  well  adapted  to  preserve
the  included  fossils  from  decomposition,  how  many  accidents
must  still  concur  before  these  submarine  formations  vrill  be
laid  open  to  our  investigation !  The  whole  deposit  must  first
be  raised  several  thousand  feet,  in  order  to  bring  into  view
the  very  foundation;  and  during  the  process  of  exposure
the  superior  beds  must  not  be  entirely  swept  away  by  denu-
dation.

In  the  first  place,  the  chances  are  nearly  as  three  to  one
against  the  mere  emergence  of  the  mass  above  the  waters,
because  nearly  three-fourths  of  the  globe  are  covered  by  the
ocean.  But  if  it  be  upheaved  and  made  to  constitute  part  of
the  dry  land,  it  must  also,  before  it  can  be  available  for  our
instruction,  become  part  of  that  area  already  surveyed  by
geologists.  In  this  small  fraction  of  land  already  explored,
and  still  very  imperfectly  known,  we  are  required  to  find  a
set  of  strata  deposited  under  peculiar  conditions,  and  which,
having  been  originally  of  limited  extent,  would  have  been
probably  much  lessened  by  subsequent  denudation.

Yet  it  is  precisely  because  we  do  not  encounter  at  every


312  CAUSES  OF  BREAKS  IN  [Ch.  XIV,

step  the  evidence  of  sach  gradations  from  one  state  of  the
organic  world  to  another,  that  so  many  geologists  have  em-
braced the  doctrine  of  great  and  sudden  revolutions  in  the
history  of  the  animate  world.  Not  content  with  simply
availing  themselves,  for  the  convenience  of  classification,  of
those  gaps  and  chasms  which  here  and  there  interrupt  the
continuity  of  the  chronological  series,  as  at  present  known,
they  deduce,  from  the  frequency  of  these  breaks  in  the  chain
of  records,  an  irregular  mode  of  succession  in  the  events
themselves,  both  in  the  organic  and  inorganic  world.  But,
besides  that  some  links  of  the  chain  which  once  existed  are
now  entirely  lost  and  others  concealed  from  view,  we  have
good  reason  to  suspect  that  it  was  never  complete  originally.
It  may  undoubtedly  be  said  that  strata  have  been  always
forming  somewhere,  and  therefore  at  every  moment  of  past
time  Nature  has  added  a  page  to  her  archives ;  but,  in  refer-
ence to  this  subject,  it  should  be  remembered  that  we  can  never
hope  to  compile  a  consecutive  history  by  gathering  together
monuments  which  were  originally  detached  and  scattered
over  the  globe.  For,  as  the  species  of  organic  beings  con-
temporaneously inhabiting  remote  regions  are  distinct,  the
fossils  of  the  first  of  several  periods  which  may  be  preserved
in  any  one  country,  as  in  America  for  example,  will  have  no
connection  with  those  of  a  second  period  found  in  India,  and
will  therefore  no  more  enable  us  to  trace  the  signs  of  a
gradual  change  in  the  living  creation,  than  a  fragment  of
Chinese  history  will  fill  up  a  blank  in  the  political  annals  of
Europe.

The  absence  of  any  deposits  of  importance  containing
recent  shells  in  Chili,  or  anywhere  on  the  western  coast  of
South  America,  naturally  led  Mr.  Darwin  to  the  conclusion
that  *  where  the  bed  of  the  sea  is  either  stationary  or  rising,
circumstances  are  far  less  favourable  than  where  the  level  is
sinking  to  the  accumulation  of  conchiferous  strata  of  sufficient
thickness  and  extension  to  resist  the  average  vast  amount  of
denudation.*  *  In  like  manner  the  beds  of  superficial  sand,
clay,  and  gravel,  with  recent  shells,  on  the  coasts  of  Norway

•  Darwin's  S.  America,  pp.  136, 139.


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  SEQUENCE  OF  FORMATIONS.  313

and  Sweden,  where  the  land  has  risen  in  Post-Tertiary  times,
are  so  thin  and  scanty  as  to  incline  us  to  admit  a  similar
proposition.  We  may  in  fact  assume  that  in  all  cases  where
the  bottom  of  the  sea  has  been  undergoing  continuous
elevation,  the  total  thickness  of  sedimentary  matter  accumu-
lating at  depths  suited  to  the  habitation  of  most  of  the
species  of  shells  can  never  be  great,  nor  can  the  deposits  be
thickly  covered  by  superincumbent  matter,  so  as  to  be  con-
solidated by  pressure.  When  they  are  upheaved,  therefore,
the  waves  on  the  beach  will  bear  down  and  disperse  the  loose
materials  ;  whereas,  if  the  bed  of  the  sea  subsides  slowly,  a
mass  of  strata,  containing  abundance  of  such  species  as  live
at  moderate  depths,  may  be  formed  and  may  increase  in
thickness  to  any  amount.  It  may  also  extend  horizontally
over  a  broad  area,  as  the  water  gradually  encroaches  on  the
subsiding  land.

Hence  it  will  follow  that  great  violations  of  continuity  in
the  chronological  series  of  fossiliferous  rocks  will  always
exist,  and  the  imperfection  of  the  record,  though  lessened,
will  never  be  removed  by  future  discoveries.  For  not
only  will  no  deposits  originate  on  the  dry  land,  but  those
formed  in  the  sea  near  land,  which  is  undergoing  constant
upheaval,  will  usually  be  too  slight  in  thickness  to  endure
for  ages.

In  proportion  as  we  become  acquainted  with  larger  geo-
graphical areas,  many  of  the  gaps,  by  which  a  chronological
table,  like  that  given  at  page  135,  is  rendered  defective,
will  be  removed.  We  were  enabled  by  aid  of  the  labours
of  Professor  Sedgwick  and  Sir  Roderick  Murchison,  to  inter-
calate, in  1838,  the  marine  strata  of  the  Devonian  period,
with  their  fossil  shells,  corals,  and  fish,  between  the  Silurian
and  Carboniferous  rocks.  Previously  the  marine  fauna  of
these  last-mentioned  formations  wanted  the  connecting
links  which  now  render  the  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other
much  less  abrupt.  In  like  manner  the  Upper  Miocene  has
no  representative  in  England,  but  in  France,  Germany,  and
Switzerland  it  constitutes  a  most  instructive  link  between
the  living  creation  and  the  middle  of  the  great  Tertiary
period.     Still  we  must  expect,  for  reasons  before  stated,  that


314  CONCLUDING  REMAEKS  ON  [Ch.  XIV.

chasms  will  for  ever  continue  to  occur,  in  some  parts  of  our
sedimentary  series.

Co7icluding  remarks  on  the  consistency  of  the  theory  of  gra-
dual change  with  the  existence  of  great  breaks  in  the  series. —
To  return  to  the  general  argument  pursued  in  this  chapter,
it  is  assumed,  for  reasons  above  explained,  that  a  slow  change
of  species  is  in  simultaneous  operation  everywhere  through-
out the  habitable  surface  of  sea  and  land ;  whereas  the
fossilisation  of  plants  and  animals  is  confined  to  those  areas
where  new  strata  are  produced.  These  areas,  as  we  have
seen,  are  always  shifting  their  position,  so  that  the  fossilising
process,  by  means  of  which  the  commemoration  of  the  par-
ticular state  of  the  organic  world,  at  any  given  time,  is
effected,  may  be  said  to  move  about,  visiting  and  revisiting
different  tracts  in  succession.

To  make  still  more  clear  the  supposed  working  of  this
machinery,  I  shall  compare  it  to  a  somewhat  analogous  case
that  might  be  imagined  to  occur  in  the  history  of  human
affairs.  Let  the  mortality  of  the  population  of  a  large  country
represent  the  successive  extinction  of  species,  and  the  births
of  new  individuals  the  introduction  of  new  species.  While
these  fluctuations  are  gradually  taking  place  everywhere,  sup-
pose commissioners  to  be  appointed  to  visit  each  province  of
the  country  in  succession,  taking  an  exact  account  of  the
number,  names,  and  individual  peculiarities  of  all  the  in-
habitants, and  leaving  in  each  district  a  register  containing
a  record  of  this  information.  If,  after  the  completion  of  one
census,  another  is  immediately  made  on  the  same  plan,  and
then  another,  there  will  at  last  be  a  series  of  statistical
documents  in  each  province.  When  those  belonging  to  any
one  province  are  arranged  in  chronological  order,  the  con-
tents of  such  as  stand  next  to  each  other  will  differ  according
to  the  length  of  the  intervals  of  time  between  the  taking  of
each  census.  If,  for  example,  there  are  sixty  provinces,  and
all  the  registers  are  made  in  a  single  year  and  renewed
annually,  the  number  of  births  and  deaths  will  be  so  small,
in  proportion  to  the  whole  of  the  inhabitants,  during  the
interval  between  the  compiling  of  two  consecutive  documents,
that  the  individuals  described  in  such  documents  will  be


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  SEQUENCE  OF  FORMATIONS.  S15

nearly  identical ;  whereas,  if  the  survey  of  each  of  the
sixty  provinces  occupies  all  the  commissioners  for  a  whole
year,  so  that  they  are  unable  to  revisit  the  same  place  until  the
expiration  of  sixty  years,  there  will  then  be  an  almost  entire
discordance  between  the  persons  enumerated  in  two  consecu-
tive registers  in  the  same  province.  There  are,  undoubtedly,
other  causes,  besides  the  mere  quantity  of  time,  which  may
augment  or  diminish  the  amount  of  discrepancy.  Thus,  at
some  periods  a  pestilential  disease  may  have  lessened  the
average  duration  of  human  life;  or  a  variety  of  circum-
stances may  have  caused  the  births  to  be  unusually  nume-
rous, and  the  population  to  multiply ;  or  a  province  may  be
suddenly  colonised  by  persons  migrating  from  surrounding
districts.

These  exceptions  may  be  compared  to  the  accelerated  rate
of  fluctuations  in  the  fauna  and  flora  of  a  particular  region,
in  which  the  climate  and  physical  geography  may  be  under-
going an  extraordinary  degree  of  alteration.

But  I  must  remind  the  reader  that  the  case  above  pro-
posed has  no  pretensions  to  be  regarded  as  an  exact  parallel
to  the  geological  phenomena  which  I  desire  to  illustrate ;  for
the  commissioners  are  supposed  to  visit  the  different  pro-
vinces in  rotation ;  whereas  the  commemorating  processes
by  which  organic  remains  become  fossilised,  although  they
are  always  shifting  from  one  area  to  the  other,  are  yet  very
irregular  in  their  movements.  They  may  abandon  and  revisit
many  spaces  again  and  again,  before  they  once  approach
another  district ;  and,  besides  this  source  of  irregularity,  it
may  often  happen  that,  while  the  depositing  process  is  sus-
pended, denudation  may  take  place,  which  may  be  compared
to  the  occasional  destruction  by  fire  or  other  causes  of  some
of  the  statistical  documents  before  mentioned.  It  is  evident
that  where  such  accidents  occur  the  want  of  continuity  in
the  series  may  become  indefinitely  great,  and  that  the  monu-
ments which  follow  next  in  succession  will  by  no  means  be
equidistant  from  each  other  in  point  of  time.

If  this  train  of  reasoning  be  admitted,  the  occasional  dis-
tinctness of  the  fossil  remains,  in  formations  immediately  in
contact,  would  be  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  existing


316  CONCLUDING  REMARKS  ON  [Ch.  XIV.

laws  of  sedimentary  deposition  and  snbterranean  moyement,
accompanied  by  a  constant  dying-out  and  renovation  of
species.

As  all  the  conclusions  above  insisted  on  are  directly  opposed
to  opinions  still  popular,  I  shall  add  another  comparison,  in
the  hope  of  preventing  any  possible  misapprehension  of  the
argument.  Suppose  we  had  discovered  two  buried  cities  at
the  foot  of  Vesuvius,  immediately  superimposed  upon  each
other,  with  a  great  mass  of  tuff  and  lava  intervening,  just  as
Portici  and  Resina,  if  now  covered  with  ashes,  would  overlie
Herculaneum.  An  antiquary  might  possibly  be  entitled  to
infer,  from  the  inscriptions  on  public  edifices,  that  the  in-
habitants of  the  inferior  and  older  city  were  Greeks,  and  those
of  the  modern  towns  Italians.  But  he  would  reason  very
hastily  if  he  also  concluded  from  these  data,  that  there  had
been  a  sudden  change  from  the  Greek  to  the  Italian  language
in  Campania.  But  if  he  afterwards  found  three  buried  cities,
one  above  the  other,  the  intermediate  one  being  Roman,
while,  as  in  the  former  example,  the  lowest  was  Greek  and
the  uppermost  Italian,  he  would  then  perceive  the  fallacy  of
his  former  opinion,  and  would  begin  to  suspect  that  the
catastrophes,  by  which  the  cities  were  inhumed,  might  have
no  relation  whatever  to  the  fluctuations  in  the  language  of
the  inhabitants ;  and  that,  as  the  Roman  tongue  had  evi-
dently intervened  between  the  Greek  and  Italian,  so  many
other  dialects  may  have  been  spoken  in  succession,  and  the
passage  from  the  Greek  to  the  Italian  may  have  been  very
gradual,  some  terms  growing  obsolete,  while  others  were
introduced  from  time  to  time.

If  this  antiquary  could  have  shown  that  the  volcanic
paroxysms  of  Vesuvius  were  so  governed  as  that  cities  should
be  buiied  one  above  the  other,  just  as  often  as  any  variation
occurred  in  the  language  of  the  inhabitants,  then,  indeed,  the
abrupt  passage  from  a  Greek  to  a  Roman,  and  from  a  Roman
to  an  Italian  city,  would  afford  proof  of  fluctuations  no  less
sudden  in  the  language  of  the  people.

So,  in  Geology,  if  we  could  assume  that  it  is  part  of  the
plan  of  Nature  to  preserve,  in  every  region  of  the  globe,  an
unbroken  series  of  monuments  to  commemorate  the  vicissi-


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  SEQUENCE  OF  FORMATIONS.  317

tudes  of  the  organic  creation,  we  might  infer  the  sadden
extirpation  of  species,  and  the  simultaneous  introduction  of
others,  as  often  as  two  formations  in  contact  are  found  to
include  dissimilar  organic  fossils.  But  we  must  shut  our
eyes  to  the  whole  economy  of  the  existing  causes,  aqueous,
igneous,  and  organic,  if  we  fail  to  perceive  that  such  is  }iot
the  plan  of  Nature,

I  shall  now  conclude  the  discussion  of  a  question  with
which  we  have  been  occupied  since  the  beginning  of  the  fifth
chapter — namely,  whether  there  has  been  any  interruption,
from  the  remotest  periods,  of  one  uniform  and  continuous
system  of  change  in  the  animate  and  inanimate  world.  We
were  induced  to  enter  into  that  enquiry  by  reflecting  how  much
the  progress  of  opinion  in  Geology  had  been  influenced  by
the  assumption  that  the  analogy  was  slight  in  kind,  and  still
more  slight  in  degree,  between  the  causes  which  produced
the  former  revolutions  of  the  globe,  and  those  now  in  every-
day operation.  It  appeared  clear  that  the  earlier  geologists
had  not  only  a  scanty  acquaintance  with  existing  changes,
but  were  singularly  unconscious  of  the  amount  of  their
ignorance.  With  the  presumption  naturally  inspired  by
this  unconsciousness,  they  had  no  hesitation  in  deciding  at
once  that  time  could  never  enable  the  existing  powers  of
nature  to  work  out  changes  of  great  magnitude,  still  less
such  important  revolutions  as  those  which  are  brought  to
light  by  Geology.  They  therefore  felt  themselves  at  liberty
to  indulge  their  imaginations  in  guessing  at  what  might
be,  rather  than  enquiring  what  is ;  in  other  words,  they
employed  themselves  in  conjecturing  what  might  have  been
the  course  of  Nature  at  a  remote  period,  rather  than  in
the  investigation  of  what  was  the  course  of  Nature  in  their
own  times.

It  appeared  to  them  far  more  philosophical  to  speculate
on  the  possibilities  of  the  past,  than  patiently  to  explore  the
realities  of  the  present ;  and,  having  invented  theories  under
the  influence  of  such  maxims,  they  were  consistently  unwil-
ling to  test  their  validity  by  the  criterion  of  their  accordance
with  the  ordinaiy  operations  of  Nature.  On  the  contrary,
the  claims  of  each  new  hypothesis  to  credibility  appeared


318  ANCIENT  IDEAS  AS  TO  [Ch.  XIV.

enhanced  by  the  great  contrast,  in  kind  or  intensity,  of  the
causes  referred  to  and  those  now  in  operation.

Never  was  there  a  dogma  more  calculated  to  foster  indo-
lence, and  to  blunt  the  keen  edge  of  curiosity,  than  this
assumption  of  the  discordance  between  the  ancient  and  exist-
ing causes  of  change.  It  produced  a  state  of  mind  unfayour-
able  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  candid  reception  of  the
evidence  of  those  minute  but  incessant  alterations  which
every  part  of  the  earth's  surface  is  undergoing,  and  by  which
the  condition  of  its  living  inhabitants  is  continually  made  to
vary.  The  student,  instead  of  being  encouraged  with  the
hope  of  interpreting  the  enigmas  presented  to  him  in  the
earth's  structure — instead  of  being  prompted  to  undertake
laborious  enquiries  into  the  natural  history  of  the  organic
world,  and  the  complicated  eflFects  of  the  igneous  and  aqueous
causes  now  in  operation — was  taught  to  despond  from  the
first.  Geology,  it  was  affirmed,  could  never  rise  to  the  rank
of  an  exact  science ;  the  greater  number  of  phenomena  must
for  ever  remain  inexplicable,  or  only  be  partially  elucidated
by  ingenious  conjectures.  Even  the  mystery  which  invested
the  subject  was  said  to  constitute  one  of  its  principal  charms,
affording,  as  it  did,  full  scope  to  the  fancy  to  indulge  in  a
boundless  field  of  speculation.

The  course  directly  opposed  to  this  method  of  philoso-
phising consists  in  an  earnest  and  patient  enquiry,  how  far
geological  appearances  are  reconcilable  with  the  effect  of
changes  now  in  progress,  or  which  may  be  in  progress  in
regions  inaccessible  to  us,  but  of  which  the  reality  is  attested
by  volcanos  and  subterranean  movements.  It  also  endea-
vours to  estimate  the  aggregate  result  of  ordinary  operations
multiplied  by  time,  and  cherishes  a  sanguine  hope  that  the
resources  to  be  derived  from  observation  and  experiment,  or
from  the  study  of  Nature  such  as  she  now  is,  are  very  far  fh)m
being  exhausted.  For  this  reason  all  theories  are  rejected
which  involve  the  assumption  of  sudden  and  violent  cata-
strophes and  revolutions  of  the  whole  earth,  and  its  inhabit-
ants— theories  which  are  restrained  by  no  reference  to
existing  analogies,  and  in  which  a  desire  is  manifested  to
cut,  rather  than  patiently  to  untie,  the  Gordian  knot.


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  SYSTEM  OF  TERRESTRUL  CHANGES.  319

We  have  now,  at  least,  the  advantage  of  knowing,  from
experience,  that  an  opposite  method  has  always  put  geolo-
gists on  the  road  that  leads  to  truth — suggesting  views  which,
although  imperfect  at  first,  have  been  found  capable  of  im-
provement, until  at  last  adopted  by  universal  consent;  while
the  method  of  speculating  on  a  former  distinct  state  of  things
and  causes  has  led  invariably  to  a  multitude  of  contradictory
systems,  which  have  been  overthrown  one  after  the  other —
have  been  found  incapable  of  modification — and  which  have
often  required  to  be  precisely  reversed.

The  remainder  of  this  work  will  be  devoted  to  an  investi-
gation of  the  changes  now  going  on  in  the  crust  of  the  earth
and  its  inhabitants.  The  importance  which  the  student  will
attach  to  such  researches  will  mainly  depend  on  the  degree  of
confidence  which  he  feels  in  the  principles  above  expounded.
If  he  firmly  believes  in  the  resemblance  or  identity  of  the
ancient  and  present  system  of  terrestrial  changes,  he  will
regard  every  fact  collected  respecting  the  causes  in  diurnal
action  as  aflEbrding  him  a  key  to  the  interpretation  of  some
mystery  in  the  past.  Events  which  have  occurred  at  the
most  distant  periods  in  the  animate  and  inanimate  world
will  be  acknowledged  to  throw  light  on  each  other,  and  the
deficiency  of  our  information  respecting  some  of  the  most
obscure  parts  of  the  present  creation  will  be  removed.  For
as,  by  studying  the  external  configuration  of  the  existing
land  and  its  inhabitants,  we  may  restore  in  imagination  the
appearance  of  the  ancient  continents  which  have  passed
away,  so  may  we  obtain  from  the  deposits  of  ancient  seas  and
lakes  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  subaqueous  processes
now  in  operation,  and  of  many  forms  of  organic  life  which,
though  now  existing,  are  veiled  from  sight.  Bocks,  also,
produced  by  subterranean  fire  in  former  ages,  at  great  depths
in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  present  us,  when  upraised  by
gradual  movements,  and  exposed  to  the  light  of  heaven,  with
an  image  of  those  changes  which  the  deep-seated  volcano
may  now  occasion  in  the  nether  regions.  Thus,  although  we
are  mere  sojourners  on  the  surface  of  the  planet,  chained  to
a  mere  point  in  space,  enduring  but  for  a  moment  of  time,
the  human  mind  is  not  only  enabled  to  number  worlds  beyond


320  THE  SYSTEM  OF  TERRESTRIAL  CHANGES.  [Ch.  XIV.

the  unassisted  ken  of  mortal  eye,  but  to  trace  the  events  of
indefinite  ages  before  the  creation  of  our  race,  and  is  not
even  withheld  from  penetrating  into  the  dark  secrets  of  the
ocean,  or  the  interior  of  the  solid  globe ;  free,  like  the  spirit
which  the  poet  described  as  animating  the  universe,


ire  per  omnes

Terrasque,  tractusqne  maris,  ccelumque  profimdum.


821


BOOK  n.


CHANGES   IX  THE   INOEGANIC  WORLD    NOW    IN    PROGRESS.


CHAPTER    XV.

AQUEOUS     GAUSES.

DITISIOM  OF  THE  SUBJECT  nTTO  CHAN0B8  OP  THE  OROAKIC  AND  IKORQJkyiC
VORLD — INOROAKIC  CAUSES  OF  CHANOB  DIVIDED  INTO  AQUEOUS  AND  lONEOUS
— AQUEOUS  CAUSES  FIRST  CONSIDERED — FALL  OF  RAIN — RECENT  RAIN-PRINTS
IN  MUD — EARTH-PTRAVIDS  FORMED  BT  RAIN  IN  THE  TYROL  AND  SWISS  ALPS
— dwarf's  TOWER  NEAR  VIR8CH — DBSTROTINQ  AND  TRANSPORTING  POWER
OF  RUNNING  WATER — NEWLT-FORMED  VALLEYS  IN  GEORGIA — SINUOSITIES  OF
RIVERS — TWO  STREAMS  WHEN  UNITED  DO  NOT  OCCUPY  A  BED  OF  DOUBLE
bURFACE — INUNDATIONS  IN  SCOTLAND — FLOODS  CAUSED  BY  LANDSLIPS  IN
THE  WHITE  MOUNTAINS — BURSTING  OF  A  LAKE  IN  SWITZEBIJIND — DEVASTA-
TIONS CAUSED  BY  THE  ANIO  AT  TIVOLI — EXCAVATIONS  DC  THE  LAVAS  OF  ETNA
BT  SICILIAN  RIVERS— GORGE  OP  THE  SIMETO — GRADUAL  RECESSION  OF  THE
CATARACT   OF   NIAGARA.

Geology  was  defined  to  be  the  science  which  investigates  the
former  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  organic  as  well
as  in  the  inorganic  kingdoms  of  Nature.  As  vicissitudes  in
the  inorganic  world  are  most  apparent,  and  as  on  them  many
fluctuations  in  the  animate  creation  must  depend,  they  may
claim  our  first  consideration.  The  great  agents  of  change
in  the  inorganic  world  may  be  divided  into  two  principal
classes,  the  aqueous  ^nd  the  igneous.  To  the  aqueous  belong
Rain,  Rivers,  Springs,  Currents,  and  Tides,  and  the  action  of
Frost  and  Snow ;  to  the  igneous,  Volcanos  and  Earthquakes.
Both  these  classes  are  instruments  of  degradation  as  well
as  of  reproduction  ;  but  they  may  also  be  regarded  as  an-
tagonist forces.  For  the  aqueous  agents  are  incessantly
labouring  to  reduce  the  inequalities  of  the  earth's  surface
to  a  level ;  while  the  igneous  are  equally  active  in  restoring

VOL.    I.  Y


\


322  INORGANIC  CAUSES  OF  CHANGE.  [Ch.  XV.

the  unevenness  of  the  external  cmst,  partly  by  heaping  up
new  matter  in  certain  localities,  and  partly  by  depressing  one
portion,  and  forcing  ont  another,  of  the  earth's  envelope.

It  is  difficult,  in  a  scientific  arrangement,  to  give  an
accurate  view  of  the  combined  effects  of  so  many  forces
in  simultaneous  operation ;  because  when  we  consider  them
separately,  we  cannot  easily  estimate  either  the  extent  of
their  effic8<jy  or  the  kind  of  results  which  they  produce.  We
are  in  danger,  therefore,  when  we  attempt  to  examine  the
influence  exerted  singly  by  each,  of  overlooking  the  modifi-
cations which  they  produce  on  one  another ;  and  these  are  so
complicated,  that  sometimes  the  igneous  and  aqueous  forces
co-operate  to  produce  a  joint  effect,  to  which  neither  of  them
unaided  by  the  other  could  give  rise, — as  when  repeated
earthquakes  unite  with  running  water  to  widen  a  valley ;  or
when  a  thermal  spring  rises  up  from  a  great  depth,  and  con-
veys the  mineral  ingredients  with  which  it  is  impregnated
from  the  interior  of  the  earth  to  the  surface.  Sometimes
the  organic  combine  with  the  inorganic  causes ;  as  when  a
reef,  composed  of  shells  and  corals,  protects  one  line  of  coast
from  the  destroying  power  of  tides  or  currents,  and  turns  them
against  some  other  point;  or  when  drift  timber,  floated
into  a  lake,  fills  a  hollow  to  which  the  stream  would  not  have
had  sufficient  velocity  to  convey  earthy  sediment.

It  is  necessary,  however,  to  divide  our  observations  on  these
various  causes,  and  to  classify  them  systematically,  endea-
vouring as  much  as  possible  to  keep  in  view  that  the  effects
in  nature  are  mixed  and  not  simple,  as  they  may  appear  in
an  artificial  arrangement.

'  In  treating,  in  the  first  place,  of  the  aqueous  causes,  we
may  consider  them  under  two  divisions  :  first,  those  which
are  connected  with  the  circulation  of  water  from  the  land  to
the  sea,  under  which  are  included  the  phenomena  of  rain,
rivers,  glaciers,  and  springs;  secondly,  those  which  arise
from  the  movements  of  water  in  lakes,  seas,  and  the  ocean,
wherein  are  comprised  the  phenomena  of  waves,  tides,  and
currents.  In  turning  our  attention  to  the  former  division,
we  find  that  the  effects  of  rivers  may  be  subdivided  into,  first,
those  of  a  destroying  and  transporting,  and,  secondly,  those


Ch,  XV.]  ACTION  OF  KAIN.  328

of  a  renovating  nature;  in  the  former  are  included  the  erosion
of  rocks  and  the  transportation  of  matter  to  lower  levels ;  in
the  renovating  class,  the  formation  of  deltas  by  the  influx
of  sediment,  and  the  shallowing  of  seas ;  but  these  processes
are  so  intimately  related  to  each  other,  that  it  will  not  always
be  possible  to  consider  them  under  their  separate  heads.

ACTION  OF  RAIN,

Variations  in  average  rainfall. — It  is  well  known  that  the
capacity  of  the  atmosphere  to  absorb  aqueous  vapour,  and
hold  it  in  suspension,  increases  with  every  increment  of
temperature.  This  capacity  is  also  found  to  augment  in  a
higher  ratio  than  the  augmentation  of  the  heat.  Hence,  as
was  first  suggested  by  the  geologist  Dr.  Hutton,  when  two
volumes  of  air,  of  diflFerent  temperatures,  both  saturated  with
moisture,  mingle  together,  clouds  and  rain  are  produced  5  for
a  mean  degree  of  heat  having  resulted  from  the  union  of  the
two  moist  airs,  the  excess  of  vapour  previously  held  in  sus-
pension by  the  warmer  of  the  two  is  given  out,  and  if  it  be
in  sufficient  abundance  is  precipitated  in  the  form  of  rain.

As  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  diminishes  gradually  '
from  the  equator  towards  the  pole,  the  evaporation  of  water
and  the  quantity  of  rain  diminish  also.     According  to  Hum-  ■
boldt's  computation,  the  average  annual  depth  of  rain  at  the  \
equator  is  96  incTies,  while  in  lat.  45°  it  is  only  29  inches,
and  in  lat.  60"^  not  more  than  17  inches.     But  there  are  so  ^'
many  disturbing  causes,  that  the  actual  discharge,  in  any
given  locality,  may  deviate  very  widely  from  this  rule.     In  *
England,  for  example,  where  the  average  fall  at  London  is
24i  inches,  as  ascertained  at  the  Greenwich  Observatory,
there  is  such    irregularity  in  some  districts,  that  while  at
Whitehaven,  in  Cumberland,  there  fell  in  1849,  32  inches,
the  quantity  of  rain  in  Borrowdale,  near  Keswick  (only  15
miles  to  the  eastward),  was  no  less  than  142  inches !  *    As  .
a  rule,  the  amount  of  rain  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Great
Britain  is   more   than  double  that   which  falls  in  the  less
elevated  regions.     The  mean  yearly  fall  of  rain  at  Upsala,  ,

*  Miller^  Phil.  Trans.  1851,  p  155.

T  2


324  AVERAGE  RAINFALL  [Ch.  XV.

'  near  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  lat.  60"*  N.,  is  nearly  16  inches,
t  while  at  Bergen  on  the  Atlantic  coast,  in  the  same  lat.  and
;  only  440  miles  distant,  the  fall,  according  to  Professor  J.  D.
*  Forbes,  is  77  inches.  This  difference  arises  from  the  position
of  Bergen  on  the  shore  of  the  ocean  where  the  prevailipg
westerly  winds  discharge  their  moisture  before  crossing
Norway  and  Sweden,  on  their  way  to  the  borders  of  the
Baltic.  Winds  blowing  from  the  sea  are  generally  surcharged
with  moisture,  while  those  blowing  from  the  land  are  com-
paratively dry,  and  it  is  almost  everywhere  found  that  the
quantity  of  rain  diminishes  as  we  proceed  from  the  borders
.  of  the  ocean  into  the  interior  of  continents.  In  India,
Colonel  Sykes  found  by  observations  made  in  1847  and  1848
that  at  places  situated  between  17*^  and  18**  north  lat.,  on  a
line  drawn  across  the  Western  Ghauts  in  the  Deccan,  the
average  fall  of  rain,  diminishing  as  we  proceed  eastward,  varied
from  219  to  21  inches.*  The  annual  average  in  Bengal  is
probably  below  80  inches,  yet  Dr.  Joseph  Hooker  witnessed
at  Chirapoonjee,  in  the  year  1850,  a  fall  of  30  inches  in  24
hours,  and  in  the  same  place  during  a  residence  of  six  months
(from  June  to  November)  530  inches  !  This  occurred  on  the
south  face  of  the  Khasia  (or  Garrow)  mountains  in  Eastern
Bengal  (see  map,  p.  46 S),  where  the  fall  during  the  whole  of
the  same  year  probably  exceeded  600  inches.  So  extraordinary
a  discharge  of  water  is  very  local,  as  will  presently  be  seen,
and  may  be  thus  accounted  for.  Warm,  southerly  winds,
blowing  over  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  and  becoming  laden  with
vapour  during  their  passage,  reach  the  low  level  delta  of  the
Ganges  and  Brahmapootra,  where  the  ordinary  heat  exceeds
that  of  the  sea,  and  where  evaporation  is  constantly  going  on
from  countless  marshes  and  the  arms  of  the  great  rivers.
A  mingling  of  two  masses  of  damp  air  of  different  tempera-
tures probably  causes  the  fall  of  70  or  80  inches  of  rain,  which
takes  place  on  the  plains.  The  monsoon,  having  crossed  the
delta,  impinges  on  the  Khasia  mountains,  which  rise  abruptly
from  the  plain  to  a  mean  elevation  of  between  4,000  and  5,000
feet.  Here  the  wind  not  only  encounters  the  cold  air  of  the
mountains,  but,  what  is  far  more  effective  as  a  refrigerating

♦  Phil.  Trans.  1850,  p.  354.


Ch.  XV.]  IN  DIFFERENT  LATITUDES.  325

cause,  the  aerial  current  is  made  to  flow  upwards,  and  to
ascend  to  a  height  of  several  thousand  feet  above  the  sea.
Both  the  air  and  the  vapour  contained  in  it,  being  thus  re-
lieved of  much  atmospheric  pressure,  expand  suddenly  and  are
cooled  by  rarefaction.     The  vapour  is  condensed,  and  about  r
500  inches  of  rain  are  thrown  down  annually,  nearly  twenty  \'
times  as  much  as  falls  in  Great  Britain  in  a  year,  and  almost  '
all  of  it  poured  down  in  six^  months.     The  channel  of  every
torrent  and  river  is  swollen  at  this  season,  and  much  sand-
stone and  other  rocks  are  reduced  to  sand  and  gravel  by  the
flooded  streams.     So  great  is  the  superficial  waste  (or  denu-
dati(m)y  that  what  would  otherwise  be  a  rich  and  luxuriantly
wooded  region  is  converted  into  a  wild  and  barren  moorland.

After  the  current  of  warm  air  has  been  thus  drained  of  a
large  portion  of  its  moisture,  it  still  continues  its  northerly
course  to  the  opposite  flank  of  the  Khasia  range,  only  20
miles  fiirther  north,  and  here  the  fall  of  rain  is  reduced  to  70
inches  in  the  year.  The  same  wind  then  blows  northwards
across  the  valley  of  the  Brahmapootra,  and  at  length  arrives
so  dry  and  exhausted  at  the  Bhootan  Himalaya  (lat.  28®  N.),
that  those  mountains,  up  to  the  height  of  5,000  feet,  are
naked  and  sterile,  and  all  their  outer  valleys  arid  and  dusty.
The  aerial  current  still  continuing  its  northerly  course  and
ascending  to  a  higher  region,  becomes  further  cooled,  con-
densation again  ensues,  and  Bhootan,  above  5,000  feet,  is
densely  clothed  with  vegetation.*

In  another  part  of  India,  immediately  to  the  westward,
similar  phenomena  are  repeated.  The  same  warm  and  humid
winds,  copiously  charged  with  aqueous  vapour  from  the  Bay
of  Bengal,  hold  their  course  due  north  for  300  miles,  across
the  flat  and  hot  plains  of  the  Ganges,  till  they  encounter
the  lofty  Sikkim  mountains.  (See  map,  p.  468.)  On  the
southern  flank  of  these  they  discharge  such  a  deluge  of  rain
that  the  rivers  in  the  rainy  season  rise  twelve  feet  in  as  many
hours.  Numerous  landslips,  some  of  them  extending  three  or
four  thousand  feet  along  the  face  of  the  mountains,  composed
of  fragments  of  granite,  gneiss,  and  slate,  descend  into  the
beds  of  streams,  and   dam    them   up  for   a  time,  causing

*  Hooker's  Himalajan  JourDal,  ined.


326  FALL  OF  RAIN.  [Ch.  XV.

temporary  lakes,  which  soon  burst  their  barriers.  *  Day  and
night,'  says  Dr.  Hooker,  *  we  heard  the  crashing  of  falling
trees,  and  the  sound  of  boulders  thrown  violently  against  each
other  in  the  beds  of  torrents.  By  such  wear  and  tear  rocky
fragments  swept  down  from  the  hills  are  in  part  converted
into  sand  and  fine  mud ;  and  the  turbid  Granges,  daring  its
inundation,  derives  more  of  its  sediment  from  this  source  than
from  the  waste  of  the  fine  clay  of  the  alluvial  plains  below.**

In  the  districts  above  alluded  to,  and  in  other  regions  on
the  verge  of  the  tropics,  a  greater  quantity  of  rain  falls
annually  than  at  the  equator.

Eainless  regions  are  generally  situated  in  the  interior  of
great  continents,  as  in  the  great  Sahara  of  Africa,  and  in
parts  of  Arabia  and  Pei*sia.  In  these  cases,  the  moisture
which  the  winds  derive  from  the  nearest  sea  is  expended  on
the  lands  nearer  the  coasts.  If  there  are  exceptions  to  this
rule,  or  coast  regions  destitute  of  rain,  as  that  extending
from  the  north  of  Chili  in  lat.  30°  south  to  Peru  in  lat.  8**
south,  it  is  where  the  prevailing  winds  are  intercepted  by  a
chain  like  the  Andes,  and  made  to  part  with  all  their  moisture
before  they  reach  the  lower  regions  to  the  leeward.

From  such  facts  the  reader  will  infer  that  in  the  course  of
successive  geological  periods  there  will  be  great  variations  in
the  quantity  of  rain  falling  in  one  and  the  same  region.  At
one  period  there  may  be  no  rain  during  the  year;  at
another,  a  fall  of  100  or  500  inches;  and  these  two  last
averages  may  occur  on  the  opposite  flanks  of  a  mountain-
chain  not  more  than  20  miles  wide.  While,  therefore,  the
valleys  in  one  district  are  widened  and  deepened  annually,
they  may  remain  stationary  in  another,  the  superficial  soil
being  protected  from  waste  by  a  dense  covering  of  vegetation.

In  the  course  of  ages,  the  height  of  the  land  and  its  position
relatively  to  the  ocean  will  be  more  or  less  changed,  and  we
must  be  careful,  when  speculating  on  the  quantity  of  pluvial
action  in  past  ages,  and  the  rate  of  the  excavation  of  valleys,
to  remember,  that  there  may  have  been  periods  of  drought  as
well  as  of  flood,  the  fall  being  in  defect,  as  well  as  in  excess,
of  the  present  annual  mean.

*  Hookor's  Himalayan  Journal,  inod.


Ch.  XV.]  RECENT  KAIN-PKINTS.  827

Recent  rain-prints, — ^When  examining,  in  1842,  the  exten-
sive mud-flats  of  Nova  Scotia,  which  are  exposed  at  low  tide
on  the  borders  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  I  observed  not  only
the  foot-prints  of  birds  which  had  recently  passed  over  the
mud,  but  also  very  distinct  impressions  of  rain-drops.      A.
I)eculiar  combination  of  circumstances  renders  these  mud-flats
admirably  fitted  to  receive  and  retain  any  markings  which
may  happen  to  be  made  on  their  surface.     The  sediment
with  which  the  waters  are  charged  is  extremely  fine,  being
derived  from  the  destruction  of  cliffs  of  red  sandstone  and
shale,  and,  as  the  tides  rise  fifby  feet  and  upwards,  large  areas
are  laid  dry  for  nearly  a  fortnight  between  the  spring  and  neap
tides.    In  this  interval  the  mud  is  baked  in  summer  by  a  hot
sun,  so  that  it  solidifies  and  becomes  traversed  by  cracks,
caused  by  shrinkage.     Portions  of  the  hardened  mud  may
then  be  taken  up  and  removed  without  injury ;  and  a  cross
section  of  it  exhibits  numerous  layers,  formed  by  successive
tides,  each  layer  being  usually  very  thin,  sometimes  only
one-tenth  of  an  inch  thick.     When  a  shower  of  rain  falls,
the  highest  portion  of    the    mud-covered  flat  is   usually
too   hard  to  receive   any  impressions ;   while  that  recently
uncovered   by  the  tide  near  the  water's  edge   is  too  soft.
Between  these  areas  a  zone  occurs,  almost  as  smooth  and
even  as  a  looking-glass,  on  which  every  drop  forms  a  cavity
of  circular  or  oval  form,  and,  if  the  shower  be  transient,
these  pits  retain  their  shape  permanently,  being  dried  by  the
sun,  and  being  then  too  firm  to  be  effaced  by  the  action  of
the  succeeding  tide,  which  deposits  upon  them  a  new  layer
of  mud.     Hence  we  often  find,  on  splitting  open  a  slab  an
inch  or  more  thick,  on  the  upper  surface  of  which  the  marks
of  recent  rain  occur,  that  an  inferior  layer,  deposited  during
some  previous  rise  of  the  tide,  exhibits  on  its  under  side
perfect  casts  of  rain-prints,  which  stand  out  in  relief,  the
moulds  of  the  same  being  seen  on  the  layer  below.     But  in
some  cases,  especially  in  the  more  sandy  layers,  the  markings
have  been  somewhat  blunted  by  the  tide,  and  by  several
rain-prints  having  been  joined  into  one  by  a  repetition  of
drops  falling  on  the   same   spot;    in  which  case  the  casts
present  a  very  irregular  and  blistered  appearance.


S28  BECEHT  BAIN-FRISTS.  [Cb.  XT.

The  finest  examples  which  I  hare  aeen  of  these  raiD-prints
were  sent  to  me  by  Dr.  Webster,  from  Kentrille,  on  the
boi'ders  of  the  Baj  of  Mines,  in  Nova  Scotia.  They  were  made
by  a  hearj  shower,  which  fell  on  the  2l8t  of  July  1849,  when
the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides  were  at  their  maximtun.  The
impressions  (see  fig.  20)  consist  of  cup-shaped  or  hemisphe-
rical caTities,  the  average  size  of  which  is  from  one-eighth  to
one-tenth  of  an  inch  across,  bat  the  largest  are  fally  half  an
inch  in  diameter,  and  one-tenth  of  an  inch  deep.  The  depth
ia- chiefly  below  the  general  surface  or  plane  of  stratification,
but  the  walls  of  the  cavity  consist  partly  of  a  prominent  rim
of  sandy  mud,  formed  of  the  matter  which  has  been  forcibly
expelled  from  the  pit.  All  the  cavities,  having  an  oval  form,
are  deeper  at  one  end,  where  they  have  also  a  higher  rim.

Fig.  20.


Eecent  rain-prints,  formed  July  21, 18*D,at  KentTille,  Bnj  of  Fund j,  Nova  Scotia.
Tbo  nrrov  represents  tlie  directioD  of  the  idlower.

and  all  the  deep  ends  have  the  same  direction,  showing  towards
whi'>h  quarter  the  wind  waa  blowing.  Two  or  more  drop^
are  sometimes  seen  to  have  interfered  with  each  other ;  in
which  case  it  is  ueuaUy  possible  to  determine  which  drop  fell
last,  its  rim  being  unbroken.

On  some  of  the  specimens  the  winding  tubular  tracks  of
worms  are  eeen,  which  have  been  bored  just  beneath  the  sur-
face (see  fig.  20,  left  tide).     They  occasionally  pass  under  the


Ch.  XV.]  KECENT  RAIN-PRINTS.  829

middle  of  a  rain-mark,  having  been  formed  subsequently.
Sometimes  the  worms  have  dived  beneath  the  surface,  and
then  reappeared.  All  these  appearances,  both  of  rain-prints
and  worm-tracks,  are  of  great  geological  interest,  as  their
exact  counterparts  are  seen  in  rocks  of  various  ages  even  in
formations  of  very  high  antiquity  (e.g.  the  Carboniferous).*
Small  cavities,  often  corresponding  in  size  to  those  produced
by  rain,  are  also  caused  by  air-bubbles  rising  up  through  sand  •
or  mud ;  but  these  diflFer  in  character  from  rain-prints,  being
usually  deeper  than  they  are  wide,  and  having  their  sides
steeper.  These,  indeed,  are  occasionally  vertical,  or  over-
arching, the  opening  at  the  top  being  narrower  than  the  pit
below.  In  their  mode,  also,  of  mutual  interference  they  are
unlike  rain-prints.f

In  consequence  of  the  eflFects  of  mountains  in  cooling
currents  of  moist  air,  and  causing  the  condensation  of
aqueous  vapour  in  the  manner  above  described  (p.  323),  it
follows  that  in  every  country,  as  a  general  rule,  the  more
elevated  regions  become  perpetual  reservoirs  of  water,  which
descends  and  irrigates  the  lower  valleys  and  plains.  The
largest  quantity  of  water  is  first  carried  to  the  highest  region,
and  made  to  descend  by  steep  declivities  towards  the  sea ;  so
that  it  acquires  superior  velocity,  and  removes  more  soil
than  it  would  do  if  the  rain  had  been  distributed  over  the
plains  and  mountains  equally  in  proportion  to  their  relative
areas.  The  water  is  also  made  by  these  means  to  pass  over
the  greatest  distances  before  it  can  regain  the  sea*

Earth-pyramids  or  stone-capped  pillars  of  Botzen  in  the
Tyrol. — It  is  not  often  that  the  effects  of  the  denuding  action
of  rain  can  be  studied  separately  or  as  distinct  from  those
of  running  water.  There  are,  however,  several  cases  in  the
Alps,  and  especially  in  the  Tyrol  near  Botzen,  which  present
a  marked  exception  to  this  rule,  where  columns  of  indurated
mud,  varying  in  height  from  twenty  to  a  hundred  feet,  and
usually  capped  by  a  single  stone,  have  been  separated  by  rain
from  the  terrace  of  which  they  once  formed  a  part,  and  now

*  See  El«*ment8  of  Geology,  Index,      Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  1851,  vol.  vii.
Rain-print8.'  p.  239.

t  See  Ljell  on  recent  and  fossil  rains.


330  EABTH-PILLABS  [Ch.  XV.

stand  at  yarious  levels  on  the  steep  slopes  bounding  narrow
valleys.  Botzen  is  situated  on  the  Eisack,  two  miles  above
the  junction  of  that  river  with  the  Adige,  and  is  836  feet
above  the  sea.  It  is  in  the  valleys  of  two  tributary  streams
which  join  the  Eisack  a  short  distance  above  Botzen,  that
the  principal  groups  of  pillars  occur.  Those  nearest  to  the
town  and  situated  about  a  league  and  a  half  to  the  N.E.  of  it,
are  in  the  ravine  of  the  Katzenbach,  elevated  about  1,700
feet  above  Botzen  ;  they  are  the  most  remarkable  of  any  for
their  number,  size,  and  beauty.  The  other  pillars  occur  in
the  ravine  of  the  Finsterbach,  near  Elobenstein,  at  the
height  of  about  2,200  feet  above  Botzen,  and  three  and  a
half  leagues  N.E.  of  that  town.  These  I  shall  describe  more
particularly,  as  the  late  Sir  John  F.  W.  Herschel  had  the
kindness  to  enable  me  to  give  an  accurate  representation  of
them  drawn  by  himself  in  1824,  by  the  aid  of  the  camera
lucida.  I  have  not  room  to  give  his  entire  drawing,  but  have
selected  a  part  of  it,  representing  the  entrance  of  a  tributary
ravine  into  the  main  valley.  (See  Plate  II.)  In  such  smaller
ravines,  the  same  features  which  are  seen  on  the  boundary
cliflfs  of  the  main  valley  are  repeated,  with  no  other  dif-
ference than  the  diminished  distance  which  separates  the
opposite  banks,  and  the  lesser  size  and  number  of  the  columns
stretching  from  the  top  of  each  bank  down  to  the  brook
which  flows  at  the  bottom.  The  breadth  of  the  valley  of  the
Finsterbach  is  between  600  and  700  feet,  and  its  depth  from
400  to  500,  The  pillars  are  many  hundreds  in  number,  and
the  precipitous  banks  from  which  they  spring  slope  at  angles
of  from  32°  to  45°.  The  lower  part  of  each  column  has
usually  several  flat  sides,  so  that  it  assumes  a  pyramidal
instead  of  a  conical  shape.  The  columns  consist  of  red
unstratified  mud,  with  pebbles  and  angular  pieces  of  stone,
large  and  small,  irregularly  dispersed  through  them.  The
whole  mass,  in  short,  out  of  which  they  are  shaped  answers
in  character  to  the  moraine  of  a  glacier,  and  some  of  the
included  fragments  of  rock  have  one  or  more  of  their  faces
smoothed  or  polished,  furrowed  and  scratched,  in  a  manner
which  clearly  indicates  their  glacial  origin.  The  stones  have
not  their  longer  axes  arranged  in  one  direction,  as  would  be


Ck.  XV.]


FOBMED  BY  BAIN.


881


the  case  if  they  had  been  deposited  by  raoning  water.  The
matrix  of  hard  mud  has  been  derived  evidently  from  tlie  de-
composition of  the  red  porphyry,  of  which  the  whole  of  this
country  is  made  up,  and  the  moat  numerous  and  largeut  of
the  capping-stones  consist  of  the  same  porphyry ;  hut  blocks
of  granite  two  or  three  feet  in  diameter,  which  must  have
come  from  a  great  distance,  as  well  as  boulders  of  a  hard
chlorite  rock  equally  foreign  to  the  immediate  neighbour-
hood, are  also  scattered  sparingly  through  the  reddish  matrix.
The  Finst«rbach,  besides  cutting  thi-ough  this  unatratified
mass,  has  excavated  its  channel  for  a  depth  of  several  yards
through  the  underlying  porphyry,  or  at  one  point  through  a
sandstone  of  the  Lower  Trias  which  occasionally  appears  in
this  region.  The  series  of  geological  fevents  of  which  we
have  evidence  both  in  this  ravine  and  in  that  of  the  Katzen-
bacb,  will  be  better  understood  by  reference  to  the  diagram,
fig.  21.  First  a  valley  a  b  c  was  excavated  in  a  conntry
consisting  almost  entirely  of  red  porphyry.     Secondly,  this


\    ^'


DRgnm
■    Ou     nB    f    I


)f  the  Forma  on  of  Earth  p  Hun
n  lej  h  U  wed  ou   of  porphyry
(1  up  Ibe  nilley.


dbed.  JIormQel,:ftbjKl«i;

/.  Chasm  cat  hy  torroni  ttiruugh  the  moniitie  b«fore  the  Brat  enrth-

pillart  vers  funned.
h  i,  Chnnnel  of  torrrnt  cicnvaled  in  porphyry  below  the  level  of  the
original  valley.
g  ih.  Outline  of  the  present  valley,  the  earth-pillan  marked  by  dark
linen  Wing  Btill  Btnnding. '  The  faint  outlines  between  ff  and  A
represent  portions  of  earth-pillan  and  their  cupping-Btoaes  now
deMrojed.
original  valley  was  filled  up  in  its  lower  part  by  moraine
matter,  d  b  e  d,  probably  left  by  a  large  glacier  as  it  re-
treated up  the  valley  at  the  close  of  the  Glacial  period.


332  EARTH-PILLABS  [Ch.  XV.

Thirdly,  the  chasm  /  b  was  cut  out  of  this  moraine  by  the
Finsterbach,  the  red  mud  presenting  a  perpendicular  face
towards  the  chasm.     This  mud,  which  is  very  hard  and  solid
when  dry,  becomes  traversed  by  vertical  cracks  after  having
been  moistened  by  rain  and  then  dried  by  the  sun.     Those
portions  of  the  surface  which  are  protected  from  the  direct
downward  action  of  rain  by  a  stone  or  erratic  block,  become
gradually  detached  and  isolated  near  the  edge  of  the  ravine,
as  in  the  case  of  the  incipient  columns  at  g  and  A.     If  the
capping-stone  be  small,  it  soon  falls  off  and  the  column  ter-
minates upwards  in  a  point ;  but  if  it  be  large,  sometimes
several  feet  or  yards  in  diameter,  the  column  may  acquire  a
great  height,  and,  although  tapering  more  and  more  in  its
upper  portion  wher^  its  sides  have  been  longest  exposed  to
the  beating  of  the  rain,  it  still  continues  to  support  the  over-
hanging mass,  which  often  looks  as  if  poised  on  a  point.
Many  of  the  fallen  blocks,  once  the   cappings   of  pillars
which  have  disappeared,  are  now  seen  in  the  bed  of  the
torrent,  and  their  former  position  and  the  pillars  on  which
they  rested  are  expressed  by  the  faint  outlines  given  in  the
figure.     The  lower  parts  of  some  of  these  ancient  columns
still  exist,  because  they  have  acquired  new  capping-stones  by
the  weathering  out  at  the  surface  of  blocks  originally  buried
at  great  depths  in  the  moraine.     Had  the  torrent  ever  risen
during  the  long  period  required  for  the  formation  of  the
pillars,  even  a  few  yards  above  its  present  height,  it  would
have  swept  away  the  lower  columns,  which  are  due  therefore
to  pluvial  action,  not  interfered  with  by  fluviatile  erosion.

If  we  ascend  above  a  or  c,  to  heights  commanding  a
general  view  of  the  valley  and  moraine,  the  lateral  terraces
d  g  and  h  e  look  almost  flat  when  contrasted  with  the  pre-
cipitous cliffs  g  i  and  h  %  for  the  latter  slope  at  angles  varying,
as  above  stated,  from  32°  to  45"^,  whereas  the  terraces  afford-
ing rich  pastures  and  arable  lands  slope  at  angles  varying
from  10°  to  16°.  Here  and  there  a  large  boulder  or  an
angular  erratic  block  is  seen  lying  on  the  surface,  as  between
h  and  e,  which  at  some  future  time  will  probably  become  the
head  of  a  column.  I  measured  one  of  the  capping-stones  on
the  left  bank  of  the  Finsterbach  not  far  below  the  bridge,  and


Oh.  XV.]  IN  THE  TYROL.  833

found  it  to  be  10  feet  in  diameter,  and  the  pillar  which  sup-
ports it  60  feet  high.  It  seems  to  have  owed  its  superior
height  to  the  large  dimensions  of  the  capping-stone,  which
has  served  as  a  shed  to  protect  the  indurated  mud  from  the
rain  and  sun.  Near  the  edge  of  the  cliflF  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  this  large  column  a  wooden  roof  has  been  constructed
to  prevent  that  part  of  the  terrace  bordering  the  edge  of  the
ravine  along  which  the  road  passes  from  being  split  up  into
columns  by  the  action  of  the  sun  and  rain.  The  necessity  of
this  shed  attests  the  manner  in  which  the  denudation  proceeds,
and  shows  how  its  progress  can  be  arrested.  Some  pillars
on  the  Katzenbach  have  an  elegant  appearance,  being  per-
fectly round  and  vertically  grooved  or  fluted.  These  grooves
are  caused  by  included  stones  which  at  diflFerent  heights
project  slightly  and  give  rise  to  an  unequal  rate  of  waste.
In  various  instances  such  stones  give  origin  to  small  lat^eral
pillars,  producing  what  may  be  called  cluster  columns.  Both
in  the  main  valley  and  its  tributaries  the  columns  are  ar-
ranged in  rows,  which  descend  from  the  edge  of  the  terrace
to  the  torrent,  as  represented  between  h  and  i ;  but  between
such  parallel  groups  or  rows  are  spaces  devoid  of  columns  '
and  filled  with  wood,  for  the  most  part  fir-trees,  which  form
a  picturesque  background  to  the  pillars  when  seen  in  profile.
These  intermediate  spaces  were  probably  all  oAce  occupied
by  columns,  which  have  been  undermined  and  swept  away
by  occasional  and  temporary  floods.

I  was  informed  by  Herr  von  Kaschnitz  that  in  1849,  in
cutting  the  road  near  the  bridge  over  the  Finsterbach,  some
trees  and  bushes  being  removed,  the  water  was  able  to  collect
during  heavy  rains,  and  scoop  out  a  small  channel  in  the
moraine  matter,  which  it  deepened  yearly,  until  it  under-
mined and  removed,  in  the  course  of  fifteen  years,  no  less  than
twenty  pillars  or  pyramids,  and  left  in  their  place  a  straight
empty  gully  which  I  saw,  and  which  in  the  course  of  time  will
no  doubt  be  filled  with  forest  trees.  The  natural  fall  of  trees
or  landslips  may  sometimes  aflFord  an  opportunity  for  such
torrential  action  to  come  into  play.  In  the  absence  of  this,
or  of  an  earthquake,  the  columns,  which  often  take  centuries
to  form,  seem  capable  of  enduring  for  ages.


334  EARTH-PILLAKS  [Ch.  XV.

I  have  stated  that  some  of  the  stones  in  the  pillars  are
glaciated,  although  the  instances  are  rare,  and  I  may  add  that
the  red  porphyry  at  several  points  in  the  district  called  Bitten,
where  the  earth-pillars  occur,  exhibits  on  its  surface  those
dome-shaped  protuberances  called  'roches  moutonn6es,*  con-
firming the  theory  of  the  former  presence  of  glaciers  in  this
district.  The  entire  absence  of  shells,  fluviatile  or  terrestrial,
or  of  bones  or  any  organic  remains  in  the  old  moraines  and
pillars  derived  from  them,  supports  .the  same  view.  But  it
may  be  asked  why  such  remarkable  columns  are  so  seldom
met  with,  seeing  that  glacier  moraines,  *  till '  or  boulder  clays,
are  almost  universal  throughout  a  large  part  of  the  Alps,
Scotland,  Scandinavia,  and  North  America.  The  fact  is,
that  incipient  and  imperfect  columns  may  be  seen  in  many
districts,  but  it  happens  that  near  Botzen  the  red  porphyry
has  given  rise,  by  its  disintegration,  to  dense  masses  of
mud  of  a  peculiarly  solid,  homogeneous  nature,  weathering
with  a  vertical  face,  and  having  in  perfection  every  other  re-
quisite for  making  pillars,  namely,  first  the  absence  of  strati-
fication which,  when  present,  usually  implies  the  unequal
destructibility  of  dififerent  layers ;  and,  secondly,  the  occur-
rence of  numerous  and  often  very  large  interspersed  stones
and  blocks  of  rock.

Earth-pillars  in  the  Canton  of  Valais  in  Stvitzerland, — ^Among
many  other  examples  of  earth-pillars  which  I  have  seen  in  the
Alps,  some  of  the  finest  occur  in  the  canton  of  Valais  in
Switzerland,  though  none  of  them  form  so  striking  a  feature
in  the  scenery  as  those  near  Botzen.  Those  at  Stalden,  in
the  valley  of  the  Vispbach,  are  best  known  to  tourists,  and
others  occur  near  TJseigne,  between  Sion  and  Evolena  on  the
Borgne,  another  tributary  of  the  Rhone,  which,  like  the  Visp,
joins  it  on  its  southern  or  left  bank:

The  lower  portions  of  both  these  valleys,  like  those  of
the  Tyrol,  before  mentioned,  have  first  been  filled  with
moraine  matter — in  the  case  of  the  Borgne,  more  than  600
feet  thick — and  through  the  unstratified  mass  ravines  have
been  cut  by  the  action  of  the  river,  while  rain  has  been  active
in  widening  their  dimensions.  In  both  cases  the  hardened
mud,  drift,  or  moraine  matter,  derived  chiefly  from  the  decom-


Ch.  XV.]  OF  SWITZERLAND.  835

position  of  mica-scliist,  is  of  a  whitish  colour,  but  some  in-
cluded stones  of  serpentine,  greenstone,  and  limestone,  with
surfaces  distinctly  glaciated,  betray  the  glacier  origin  of  the
formation.  The  columns  near  Stalden  on  the  Visp,  about  ten
miles  below  Zermatt,  were  more  numerous  and  beautiful  in
1821  than  they  are  now.  This  I  ascertained  by  comparing
their  present  condition  with  a  drawing  made  in  that  year  by
Sir  John  Herschel.  Tn  July  1855  an  earthquake  inflicted
much  injury  on  the  town  of  Visp,  so  that  in  passing  through
it  three  years  afterwards,  I  saw  rents  still  open  in  the  walls
of  many  of  the  houses.  I  then  learnt  that  the  same  shock
had  thrown  down  a  large  part  of  one  of  the  principal
columns,  which  was  50  feet  or  more  in  height,  and  of  which
the  capping-stone  was  15  feet  in  diameter.  The  channel  of
the  torrent,  a  small  tributary  of  the  Visp,  had  been  deranged
by  landslips,  and  I  observed  that  the  active  denudation  which
I  saw  beginning  in  1857,  had  committed  no  small  havoc
among  the  pillars,  in  the  eight  years  which  intervened  be-
tween that  date  and  my  second  visit  in  1865.

It  is  probable  that  few  great  valleys  have  been  excavated
in  any  part  of  the  world,  by  rain  and  running  water  alone.
During  some  part  of  their  formation,  subterranean  move-
ments have  lent  their  aid  in  accelerating  the  process  of  ero-
sion. Such  movements  being  intermittent  and  often  suspraded
for  ages,  and  in  many  cases  causing  changes  of  level  without
any  vibratory  jar,  their  influence  may  easily  be  underrated
or  overlooked  by  geologists.  At  a  lower  point  on  the  Visp-
bach,  half-way  between  the  towns  of  Stalden  and  Visp,  my
guide  pointed  out  to  me,  in  1857,  a  ferruginous  spring  near
the  right  bank  of  the  river,  which  had  never  been  seen  until
1855,  when  it  was  laid  open  by  a  landslip,  which  consisted
of  a  great  mass  of  drift,  probably  moraine  matter  belonging
to  the  old  river  terrace.  A  powerful  rill  of  water  flowing  from
this  spring  had  already  in  three  years  scooped  out  a  gully,
and  eight  years  afterwards,  in  1865, 1  found  that  it  had  cut
its  way  much  farther  back,  deepening  and  widening  the  small
chasm,  so  that  a  vineyard  which  had  been  continuous  before
1855  was  then,  in  1865,  divided  by  a  gap  more  than  forty
yards  wide.     This  modem  ravine  was  about  fifteen  feet  deep


836


DWABFS  TOWEK.


[Ca.  xv;


at  its  upper  extremity,  at  an  elevation  of  200  feet  above  the
Tiap,  and  the  depth  increased  gradually  nearer  the  river.
The  shock  of  1855  is  believed  to  have  shaken  the  Alps  and
the  adjoining  country  over  an  area  300  miles  long  and  200  -
broad.  We  know  not  what  changes  of  level  it  effected,  whe-
ther the  whole  country  was  upheaved  or  sank  an  inch,  or  a
foot,  or  a  yard  bj  the  event,  or  whether  ita  position  was
unaltered.  But  we  cannot  doubt,  that  it  ia  to  a  repetition  of
such  movements  reiterated  throughout  inde6nite  ages  that
we  owe  the  very  existence  of  land  above  the  level  of  the  sea.
We  may  also  be  assured  that  the  shape  of  every  district,  some-
times even  the  minor  details  of  its  topography,  are  to  a  cer-
tain extent  modified  by  the  same  agency.

Fig.  22.


Dwarfs  Tower  {Zwergli-Tliurm)  near  Vissch  in  ihu  carton  of  VsUis.
From  a  sketcli  by  lady  Ljell,  taken  Sept,  1857-'

Dwarfs  Tower  near  Viesck. — In  most  of  the  valleys  which
comniunicate  with  the  principal  valley  of  the  Rhone  above
the  lake  of  Geneva,  there  is  still  a  large  remnant  of  that
superficial  drift  and  moraine  matter  which  was  left  there  at
the  close  of  the  Glacial  epoch.    But  even  where  we  find  no

■  Avaliinplies  liad,  in  18.17.  Ilirown  down  some  tre«s,  but  the  artist  bas  removed
others  to  produce  the  clearing  here  rcprewated.


Ch.  XV.]  ACTION  OF  RIVERS.  337

signs  of  the  lateral  valleys  having  been  first  filled  up  with
drift  to  a  certain  height  above  their  present  streams,  and
then  hollowed  out  again,  it  is  probable  that  such  denuding
action  has  not  been  wanting.  In  favour  of  such  an  opinion,
I  may  refer  to  two  isolated  stone-capped  columns  of  hardened
mud  and  gravel,  which  are  to  be  seen  in  a  pine  forest  near
the  village  of  Viesch,  in  a  picturesque  glen  at  the  bottom  of
which  flows  a  stream  bearing  the  appropriate  name  of  the
La  wine  Bach  or  *  Avalanche  Brook/  The  column  which  is
here  figured  (fig.  22)  occurs  on  the  left  side  of  the  glen
about  500  feet  above  the  brook  on  a  steep  slope,  the  angle  of
which  is  about  45®.  The  fundamental  rock  consists  of  mica-
schist.  The  height  of  the  column  is  about  40  feet,  its
greatest  diameter  about  10  feet,  and  its  irregular  summit
is  capped  by  angular  blocks  of  gneiss.  Fragments  of
the  same  and  of  micaceous  and  talcose  schist  and  pebbles
of  white  quartz  enter  largely  into  the  composition  of  *  the
tower,'  and  many  rocky  fragments  which  may  once  have
formed  the  capping-stones  of  other  columns  are  everywhere
strewed  over  the  ground.  There  is  a  second  similar  pillar
within  80  or  100  yards  of  the  larger  one,  which  is  about  half
as  high  and  capped  by  a  single  stone  about  7  feet  in  diameter.
The  base  of  this  smaller  tower  is  at  a  higher  level  by  about
60  feet  than  the  summit  of  the  larger  one.  I  could  detect
no  scratches  or  signs  of  glacial  polishing  on  any  of  the  stones
which  enter  into  the  composition  of  these  *  towers  ; '  but  this
may  perhaps  be  owing  to  the  absence  of  limestone,  serpen-
tine, and  greenstone  rocks,  which  are  much  more  favoui'able
than  gneiss  for  acquiring  and  retaining  glacial  markings.
Avalanches  of  snow  descend  annually  the  steep  slopes  of  this
glen,  with  such  force  as  frequently  to  uproot  the  largest  pine-
trees  ;  and  when  we  consider  the  destructive  power  of  this
cause  and  the  earthquakes  which  have  occurred  again  and
again  in  the  neighbourhood,  we  cannot  but  wonder  that  even
two  isolated  columns  have  been  spared  to  attest  the  former
existence  of  a  mass  of  matter  which  seems  once  to  have
levelled  up  the  lower  part  of  this  narrow  valley  to  a  height
of  500  or  600  feet  above  the  channel  of  the  present  stream.
Action  of  rivers. — The  pillars  of  Botzen  before  described

VOL.  I.  z


338  ACTION  OF  EIVEBS.  [Or.  XT.

(p.  329),  especiall;  the  tallest  and  most  tapering  of  them,  owe
tiieir  formation  to  the  force  of  separate  raindrops,  the  water
not  having  been  able  to  collect  into  rills;  but  it  is  rarely  pos-
sible to  draw  a  clear  line  of  demarcation  between  the  actios  of


Ravine  od  tlio  farm  of  PomoDS,  near  Mi  Hedge  vi  Up,  Georgia,  as  it  appeared

January  1846.

EitiiTnted  in  twenty  years,  65  feet  deep,  aud  180  feet  Lroad.

rain  and  that  of  running  water.  When  travelling  in  Georgia
and  Alabama,  in  1846,  I  saw  in  both  these  States  the  com-
mencement of  handreds  of  valleys  in  places  where  the  native
foreat  had  recently  been  removed.  One  of  these  newly  formed
gulltyB  or  ravines  is  represented   in  the  annexed  woodcut.


Ch.  XV.]  NEWLY  FORMED  GULLEYS,  339

from  a  drawing  which  I  made  on  the  spot.  It  occurs  three
miles  and  a  half  due  west  of  Milledgeville,  the  capital  of
Georgia,  and  is  situated  on  the  farm  of  Pomona,  on  the
direct  road  to  Macon.*

In  1826,  before  the  land  was  cleared,  it  had  no  existence ;
but  when  the  trees  of  the  forest  were  cut  down,  cracks  three
feet  deep  were  caused  by  the  sun's  heat  in  the  clay ;  and
during  the  rains,  a  sudden  rush  of  water  through  the  princi-
pal crack  deepened  it  at  its  lower  extremity,  from  whence
the  excavating  power  worked  backwards,  till  in  the  course  of
twenty  years,  a  chasm  measuring  no  less  than  55  feet  in
depth,  300  yards  in  length,  and  varying  in  width  from  20  to
180  feet,  was  the  result.  The  high  road  has  been  several
times  turned  to  avoid  this  cavity,  the  enlargement  of  which
is  still  proceeding,  and  the  old  line  of  road  may  be  seen  to
have  held  its  course  directly  over  what  is  now  the  vridest
part  of  the  ravine.  In  the  perpendicular  walls  of  this  great
chasm  appear  beds  of  clay  and  sand,  red,  white,  yellow,  and
green,  produced  by  the  decomposition  in  situ  of  homblendic
gneiss  with  layers  and  veins  of  quartz,  which  remain  entire
to  prove  that  the  whole  mass  was  once  crystalline.

The  termination  of  the  cavity  on  the  right  hand  in  the
foreground  is  the  head  or  upper  end  of  the  ravine,  and  in
almost  every  case,  such  gulleys  are  lengthened  by  the  streams
cutting  their  way  backwards.  The  depth  at  the  upper  end
is  often,  as  in  this  case,  considerable,  and  there  is  usually  at
this  point,  during  floods,  a  small  cascade.

I  infer,  from  the  rapidity  of  the  denudation,  which  only
began  here  after  the  removal  of  the  native  wood,  that  this
spot,  elevated  about  600  feet  above  the  sea,  has  been  always
covered  with  a  dense  forest,  from  the  remote  time  when  it
first  emerged  from  the  sea.

It  is,  however,  probable  that  when  the  granite  and  gneiss
first  rose  above  the  waters,  they  consisted  entirely  of  hard
rock  which  had  not  yet  been  exposed  to  superficial  decom-
position and  disintegration.  Still  we  may  conclude  that  the
forest  has  been  continuous  from  the  time  when  the  upper  por-
tion of  these  rocks  began  to  be  acted  upon  by  rain,  carbonic

•  Lyell's  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  1846,  vol  ii.  p.  25.

z  2


340  SINUOSITIES  OF  RIVERS.  [Ch.  XV.

acid,  the  winter's  frost,  the  intense  summer  heat,  and  other
causes.  I  could  cite  other  regions  in  Georgia  and  Alabama
where  the  cutting  down  of  the  trees,  which  had  prevented
the  rain  from  collecting  into  torrents  and  running  ofiF  in  sud-
den land-floods,  has  given  rise  to  recent  ravines  from  70  to  80
feet  deep  in  Tertiary  and  Cretaceous  formations.

fSinuosities  of  rivers. — In  proportion  as  such  valleys  are
widened,  sinuosities  are  caused  by  the  deflection  of  the
stream  first  to  one  side  and  then  to  the  other.  The  unequal
hardness  of  the  materials  through  which  the  channel  is
eroded  tends  partly  to  give  new  directions  to  the  lateral  force
of  excavation.  When  by  these,  or  by  accidental  shifkings  of
the  alluvial  matter  in  the  channel,  the  current  is  made  to
cross  its  general  line  of  descent,  it  eats  out  a  curve  in  the
opposite  bank,  or  in  the  side  of  the  hills  bounding  the  valley,
from  which  curve  it  is  turned  back  again  at  an  equal  angle,
so  that  it  recrosses  the  line  of  descent,  and  gradually  hollows
out  another  curve  lower  down  in  the  opposite  bank,  till  the
whole  sides  of  the  valley,  or  river  bed,  present  a  succession  of
salient  and  retiring  angles.  Among  the  causes  of  deviation
from  a  straight  course  by  which  torrents  and  rivers  tend  in
mountainous  regions  to  widen  the  valleys  through  which
they  flow  may  be  mentioned  the  confluence  of  lateral
torrents,  swollen  irregularly  at  diflFerent  seasons  by  partial
storms,  and  discharging  at  diflFerent  times  unequal  quantities
of  sand,  mud,  and  pebbles,  into  the  main  channel.  The
curves  formed  by  the  winding  of  rivers  in  their  alluvial  plains
increase  in  magnitude  in  proportion  to  the  volume  of  the
rivers.  Thus  the  Mississippi,  about  eighty  miles  north-west
of  New  Orleans,  near  Port  Hudson,  makes  a  circuit  of
twenty-six  miles  and  returns  to  within  one  mile  of  the  point
from  which  it  set  out ;  this  occurred  at  Raccourci,  which  I
visited  in  1846,*  and  in  the  same  year,  immediately  below
the  city  of  New  Orleans,  where  the  stream  is  about  three-
quarters  of  a  mile  wide,  there  was  a  bend  of  eighteen  miles,
after  which  the  river  came  within  five  or  six  miles  of  the
point  from  which  it  started.  The  extent  of  these  curves
depends  on  many  conditions,  especially  on  the   nature  aud

*  Second  Visit  to  tho  United  States,  vol.  ii.  p.  193.


Ch.  XV.]


TKANSPORTINa  POWER  OF  WATER.


341


tenacity  of  the  alluvial  soil,  often  strengthened  by  the  stems
and  roots  of  buried  trees,  and  on  the  slope  or  fall  of  the
river's  bed.

When  the  tortuous  flexures  of  a  river  are  extremely  great,
the  aberration  from  the  direct  line  of  descent  may  be  restored
by  the  river  cutting  through  the  isthmus  which  separates
two  neighbouring  curves.  Thus,  in  the  annexed  diagram,  the
extreme  sinuosity  of  the  river  has  caused  it  to  return  for  a
brief  space  in  a  contrary  direction  to  its  main  course,  so  that


a  peninsula  is  formed,  and  the  isthmus  (at  a)  is  consumed  on
both  sides  by  currents  flowing  in  opposite  directions.  In  this
case  an  island  is  soon  formed, — on  either  side  of  which  a
portion  of  the  stream  usually  remains.

Transporting  power  of  water, — In  regard  to  the  transporting
power  of  water,  we  may  often  be  surprised  at  the  facility
with  which  streams  of  a  small  size,  and  descending  a  slight
declivity,  bear  along  coarse  sand  and  gravel ;  for  we  usually
estimate  the  weight  of  rocks  in  air,  and  do  not  reflect  on
their  comparative  buoyancy  when  submerged  in  a  denser
fluid.  The  specific  gravity  of  many  rocks  is  not  more  than
twice  that  of  water,  and  very  rarely  more  than  thrice,  so
that  almost  all  the  fragments  propelled  by  a  stream  have  lost
a  third,  and  many  of  them  half,  of  what  we  usually  term
their  weight.

It  has  been  proved  by  experiments,  in  contradiction  to  the
theories  of  the  earlier  writers  on  hydrostatics,  to  be  a
universal  law,  regulating  the  motion  of  running  water,  that
the  velocity  at  the  bottom  of  the  stream  is  everywhere  less
than  in  any  part  above  it,  and  is  greatest  at  the  surface.
Also,  that  the  superficial  particles  in  the  middle  of  the
stream  move  more  swiftly  than  those  at  the  sides.  This  re-
tardation of  the  lowest  and  lateral  currents  is  produced  by
friction ;  and  when  the  velocity  is  suflSciently  great,  the  soil


342  TRANSPORTINa  POWEB  OF  WATER.  [Ch.  XV.

composing  the  sides  and  bottom  gives  way.  A  velocity  of
three  inches  per  second  at  the  bottom  is  stated  to  be  sufficient
to  tear  up  fine  clay, — six  inches  per  second,  fine  sand, — ^twelve
inches  per  second,  fine  gravel, — and  three  feet  per  second,
stones  of  the  size  of  an  egg.^  Mr.  Jamieson  has  remarked  f
that  if  the  pebbly  bed  of  a  rapidly  flowing  river  be  examined,
it  will  be  found  that  the  pebbles  have  a  tendency  to  arrange
themselves  in  the  position  shown  in  fig.  25,  which  is  probably

Fig.  25.


that  of  greatest  resistance  to  the  stream.  Some  sections  of
recent  gravel  in  the  bed  of  the  river  Dee  display  this  arrange-
ment, showing  that  the  gravel  had  been  lodged  by  a  rapid
current  of  water  flowing  down  the  valley.

Those  peculiar  inequalities  or  ridges  on  the  surface  of  sand
or  sandstone  which  are  called  ripple-marks  arise  from  the
unequal  force  of  the  current  by  which  the  particles  of  sand
are  drifted  along  the  bottom.  The  ridges  are  at  right  angles
to  the  impelling  force,  and  are  steepest  on  their  leeward  side.
They  are  formed  equally  by  currents  of  wind  (as  on  sand
dunes),  and  under  water,  usually  at  slight  depths.  The  follow-
ing is  the  manner  in  which  I  once  observed  the  motion  of
the  air  to  produce  this  effect  on  a  large  extent  of  level  beach,
exposed  at  low  tide  near  Calais.  Clouds  of  fine  white  sand
were  blown  from  the  neighbouring  dunes,  so  as  to  cover  the
shore  and  whiten  a  dark  level  surface  of  sandy  mud,  and  this
fresh  covering  of  sand  was  beautifully  rippled.  On  levelling
all  the  small  ridges  and  furrows  of  this  ripple  over  an  area  of
several  yards  square,  I  saw  them  perfectly  restored  in  about
ten  minutes,  the  general  direction  of  the  ridges  being  always
at  right  angles  to  that  of  the  wind.  The  restoration  began
by  the  appearance  here  and  there  of  small  detached  heaps  of
sand,  which  soon  lengthened  and  joined  together,  so  as  to
form  long  sinuous  ridges  with  intervening  furrows.  Each
ridge  had  one  side  slightly  inclined,  and  the  other  steep;

♦  Encyc.  Brit,  art.  *  Riverg.*  t  Quart.  G^eoL  Joum.  vol.  xvi.  p.  3-19.


Ch.  XV.]      TRANSPOBTINa  POWER  OF  WATER.         843

the  lee  side  being  always  steep,  as  6,  e, — d,  e ;  the  windward
side  a  gentle  slope,  as  a,  6, — c,  d,  fig.  26.  When  a  gust  of
wind  blew  with  suflScient  force  to  drive  along  a  cloud  of  sand,
all  the  ridges  were  seen  to  be  in  motion  at  once,  each  en-
croaching on  the  furrow  before  it,  and,  in  the  course  of  a  few
minutes,  filling  the  place  which  the  furrows  had  occupied.
The  mode  of  advance  was  by  the  continual  drifting  of  grains
of  sand  up  the  slopes  a  b  and  c  (2,  which  grains,  when  they
arrived  at  b  and  d,  fell  over  the  scarps  b  c  and  d  e,  and
were  under  shelter  from  the  wind ;  so  that  they  remained
stationary,  resting,  according  to  their  shape  and  momentum,
on  different  parts  of  the  descent,  and  a  few  only  rolling  to
the  bottom.  In  this  manner  each  ridge  was  distinctly  seen
to  move  slowly  on  as  often  as  the  force  of  the  wind  augmented.
Occasionally  part  of  a  ridge,  advancing  more  rapidly  than  the
rest,  overtook  the  ridge  immediately  before  it  and  became
confounded  with  it,   thus  causing  those   bifurcations  and

Fig.  26.


branches  which  are  so  common  on  the  surfEice  of  sandstones
of  all  ages.  In  such  sandstones,  as  well  as  now  on  the  sea-
coast  at  low  tide,  we  may  often  detect  two  systems  of  ripples
interfering  with  each  other;  one  more  ancient  and  half
effaced,  and  a  newer  one,  in  which  the  grooves  and  ridges
are  more  distinct,  and  in  a  different  direction.  This  crossing
of  two  sets  of  ripples  arises  from  a  change  in  the  direction  of
the  tidal  or  other  current,  or  of  the  wind.

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  running  water  derives  its
power  of  rounding  off  the  angles  of  hard  rocks  and  of  under-
mining cliffs,  by  setting  in  motion  much  sand,  fine  and  coarse,
and  gravel,  which  it  throws  against  every  obstacle  lying  in  its
way.  The  force  thus  acquired  by  torrents  in  mountainous
regions  is  more  easily  understood;  but  a  question  naturally
arises,  how  the  more  tranquil  rivers  of  the  valleys  and  plains,
flowing  on  comparatively  level  ground,  can  remove  the
prodigious  burden  which  is  discharged  into  them  by  their


344  BTVER  FLOODS  IN  SCOTLA>T).  [Ch.  XV.

namerons  tributaries,  and  by  what  means  they  are  enabled
to  conrej  the  whole  mass  to  the  sea  9  If  thej  had  not  this
removing  power,  their  channels  would  be  annnallj  choked
ap,  and  the  Tallejs  of  the  lower  conntij,  and  plains  at  the
base  of  mountain-chains,  would  be  continually  strewed  over
with  fragments  of  rock  and  sterile  sand.  But  this  evil  is
prevented  by  a  general  law  regulating  the  conduct  of  running
water, — that  two  equal  streams  do  not,  when  united,  occupy
a  bed  of  double  surface.  Nay,  the  width  of  the  principa,l
river,  after  the  junction  of  a  tributary,  sometimes  remains
the  same  as  before,  or  is  even  lessened.  The  cause  of  this
apparent  paradox  was  long  ago  explained  by  the  Italian
writers  who  had  studied  the  confluence  of  the  Po  and  its
feeders  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy.

The  addition  of  a  smaller  river  augments  the  velocity  of
the  main  stream,  often  in  the  same  proportion  as  it  does  the
quantity  of  water.  The  cause  of  the  greater  velocity  is,  first,
that  after  the  union  of  two  rivers  the  water,  in  place  of  the
friction  of  four  banks,  has  only  that  of  two  to  surmount;
2dly,  because  the  main  body  of  the  stream,  being  farther
distant  from  the  banks,  flows  on  with  less  interruption ;  and
lastly,  because  a  greater  quantity  of  water  moving  more
swiftly,  digs  deeper  into  the  river's  bed.  By  this  beautiful
adjustment,  the  water  which  drains  the  interior  country  is
made  continually  to  occupy  less  room  as  it  approaches  the
sea  ;  and  thus  the  most  valuable  part  of  our  continents,  the
rich  deltas  and  great  alluvial  plains,  are  prevented  from
being  constantly  under  water.

River  floods  in  Scotland^  1829. — Many  remarkable  illustra-
tions of  the  power  of  running  water  in  moving  stones  and
heavy  material  were  afibrded  by  the  storm  and  floods  which
occurred  on  the  3rd  and  4th  of  August  1829  in  Aberdeen-
shire and  other  counties  in  Scotland.  The  elements  during
this  storm  assumed  all  the  characters  which  mark  the
tropical  hurricanes ;  the  wind  blowing  in  sudden  gusts  and
whirlwinds,  the  lightning  and  thunder  being  such  as  are
rarely   witnessed   in   our    climate,   and  heavy  rain   falling

ithout  intermission.  The  floods  extended  almost  simulta-
y,  and  with  equal  violence,  over  that  part  of  the  north-


Ch.  XV.]  RIVER  FLOODS  IN  SCOTLAND.  345

east  of  Scotland  which  would  be  cut  off  by  two  lines  drawn
from  the  head  of  Loch  Bannoch  (lat.  56*40  N.,  long.  4*26
W.),  one  towards  Inverness  and  the  other  to  Stonehaven.
The  united  line  of  the  different  rivers  which  were  flooded
could  not  be  less  than  from  five  to  six  hundred  miles  in
length ;  and  their  courses  were  marked  throughout  by  the
destruction  of  bridges,  roads,  crops,  and  buildings.  Sir  T.
D.  Lauder  has  recorded  the  destruction  of  thirty-eight
bridges,  and  the  entire  obliteration  of  a  great  number  of
farms  and  hamlets.  On  the  Nairn,  a  fragment  of  sandstone,
fourteen  feet  long  by  three  feet  wide  and  one  foot  thick,  was
carried  above  200  yards  down  the  river.  Some  new  i*avines
were  formed  on  the  sides  of  mountains  where  no  streams
had  previously  flowed,  and  ancient  river  channels,  which  had
never  been  filled  from  time  immemorial,  gave  passage  to  a
copious  flood.*

The  bridge  over  the  Dee  at  Ballater  consisted  of  five
arches,  having  upon  the  whole  a  water-way  of  260  feet.
The  bed  of  the  river,  on  which  the  piers  rested,  was  com-
posed of  rolled  pieces  of  granite  and  gneiss.  The  bridge  was
built  of  granite,  and  had  stood  uninjured  for  twenty  years ;
but  the  different  parts  were  swept  away  in  succession  by  the
flood,  and  the  whole  mass  of  masonry  disappeared  in  the  bed
of  the  river.  *  The  river  Don,'  observes  Mr.  Farquharson,  in
his  account  of  the  inundations,  ^  has  upon  my  own  premises
forced  a  mass  of  four  or  five  hundred  tons  of  stones,  many  of
them  two  or  three  hundred  pounds'  weight,  up  an  inclined
plane,  rising  six  feet  in  eight  or  ten  yards,  and  left  them  in
a  rectangular  heap,  about  three  feet  deep,  on  a  fiat  ground : —
the  heap  ends  abruptly  at  its  lower  extremity.'  t

The  power  even  of  a  small  rivulet,  when  swollen  by  rain,
in  removing  heavy  bodies,  was  exemplified  in  August  1827,
in  the  College,  a  small  stream  which  fiows  down  a  slight
declivity  from  the  eastern  water-shed  of  the  Cheviot  Hills.
Several  thousand  tons'  weight  of  gravel  and  sand  were
transported  to  the  plain  of  the  Till,  and  a  bridge,  then  in

•  Sir  T.  D.  Lauder's  Account  of  the  t  Quarterly  Journ.  of  Sci.,  &c.  No.

Great  Floods   in  Morayshire,  Augiist      xiii.  New  Series,  p.  331.
1829.


■^


846  FLOODS  CAUSED  BY  LANDSLIPS.  [Ch.  XV.

progress  of  buildiiag,  was  carried  away,  some  of  the  arch-
stones  of  which,  weighing  from  half  to  three-quarters  of  a
ton  each,  were  propelled  two  miles  down  the  rivulet.  On  the
same  occasion,  the  current  tore  away  from  the  abutment  of
a  mill-dam  a  large  block  of  greenstone-porphyry,  weighing
nearly  two  tons,  and  transported  it  to  the  distance  of  a
quarter  of  a  mile.  Instances  are  related  as  occurring  repeat-
edly, in  which  from  one  to  three  thousand  tons  of  gravel  are,
in  like  manner,  removed  by  this  streamlet  to  still  greater
distances  in  one  day.*

Floods  caused  hy  landsUpSy  1826. — The  power  which  run-
ning water  may  exert,  in  the  lapse  of  ages,  in  widening  and
deepening  a  valley,  does  not  so  much  depend  on  the  volume
and  velocity  of  the  stream  usually  flowing  in  it,  as  on  the
number  and  magnitude  of  the  obstructions  which  have,  at
different  periods,  opposed  its  free  passage.  If  a  torrent,
however  small,  be  effectually  dammed  up,  the  size  of  the
valley  above  the  temporary  barrier,  and  its  declivity  below,
and  not  the  dimensions  of  the  torrent,  will  determine  the
violence  of  the  d^b&cle.  The  most  universal  source  of  local
deluges  are  landslips,  slides,  or  avalanches,  as  they  are  some-
times called,  when  great  masses  of  rock  and  soil,  or  in  some
cases  ice  and  snow,  are  precipitated  into  the  bed  of  a  river,
the  boundary  cliffs  of  which  have  been  thrown  down  by  the
shock  of  an  earthquake,  or  undermined  by  springs  or  other
causes.  Volumes  might  be  filled  with  the  enumeration  of
instances  on  record  of  these  terrific  catastrophes ;  I  shall
therefore  select  a  few  examples  derived  from  regions  which  I
have  myself  visited.

Two  dry  seasons  in  the  White  Mountains,  in  New  Hamp-
shire (United  States),  were  followed  by  heavy  rains  on  the
28th  August  1826,  whenirom  the  steep  and  lofty  acclivities
which  rise  abruptly  on  both  sides  of  the  river  Saco,  innumer-
able rocks  and  stones,  many  of  suflBcient  size  to  fill  a  common
apartment,  were  detached,  and  in  their  descent  swept  down
before  them,  in  one  promiscuous  and  frightful  ruin,  forests,
shrubs,  and  the  earth  which  sustained  them.  Although  there
are  numerous  indications  on  the  steep  sides  of  these  hills  of

•  Culley,  Proceed.  Geol.  Soc.  1829.


Ch.  XV.]  FLOODS  IN  NOKTH  AMERICA.  847

former  slides  of  the  same  kind,  yet  no  tradition  had  been
handed  down  of  any  similar  catastrophe  within  the  memory
of  man,  and  the  growth  of  the  forest  on  the  very  spots  now
devastated  clearly  showed  that  for  a  long  interval  nothing
similar  had  occurred.  One  of  these  moving  masses  was  after-
wards found  to  have  slid  three  miles,  with  an  average  breadth
of  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  The  natural  excavations  commenced
generally  in  a  trench  a  few  yards  in  depth  and  a  few  rods  in
width,  and  descended  the  mountains,  widening  and  deepening
till  they  became  vast  chasms.  At  the  base  of  these  hollow
ravines  was  seen  a  confused  mass  of  ruins,  consisting  of
transported  earth,  gravel,  rocks,  and  trees.  Forests  of  spruce-
fir  and  hemlock,  a  kind  of  fir  somewhat  resembling  our  yew
in  foliage,  were  prostrated  with  as  much  ease  as  if  they  had
been  fields  of  grain ;  for  where  they  disputed  the  ground,  the
torrent  of  mud  and  rock  accumulated  behind,  till  it  gathered
sufficient  force  to  burst  the  temporary  barrier.

The  valleys  of  the  Amonoosuck  and  Saco  presented  for
many  miles  an  uninterrupted  scene  of  desolation,  all  the
bridges  being  carried  away,  as  well  as  those  over  the  tributary
streams.  In  some  places,  the  road  was  excavated  to  the  depth
of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet ;  in  others  it  was  covered  with
earth,  rocks,  and  trees,  to  as  great  a  height.  The  water
flowed  for  many  weeks  after  the  flood,  as  densely  charged  with
earth  as  it  could  be  without  being  changed  into  mud,  and
marks  were  seen  in  various  localities  of  its  having  risen  on
either  side  of  the  valley  to  more  than  twenty-five  feet  above
its  ordinary  level.  Many  sheep  and  cattle  were  swept  away,
and  the  Willey  family,  nine  in  number,  who  in  alarm  had
deserted  their  house,  were  destroyed  on  the  banks  of  the  Saco ;
seven  of  their  mangled  bodies  were  afterwards  found  near  the
river,  buried  beneath  drift-wood  and  mountain  ruins.*  Eleven
years  after  the  event,  the  deep  channels  worn  by  the  ava-
lanches of  mud  and  stone,  and  the  immense  heaps  of  boulders
and  blocks  of  granite  in  the  river  channel,  still  formed,  says
Professor  Hubbard,  a  picturesque  feature  in  the  scenery,  t

When  I  visited  the  country  in  1845,  eight  years   after

*  Silliman*8  Journal,  vol.  xy.  No.  2,  p.  216.    Jan.  1829,
t  Ibid.  Tol.  zxxiv.  p.  115.


348        FLOODS  IN  THE  VALLEY  OF  BAGNES.     [Ch.  XV.

Professor  Hubbard,  I  found  the  signs  of  devastation  still  very
striking;  I  also  particularly  remarked  that,  although  the
surface  of  the  bare  granitic  rocks  had  been  smoothed  by  the
passage  over  them  of  so  much  mud  and  stone,  there  were  no
continuous  parallel  and  rectilinear  furrows,  nor  any  of  the
fine  scratches  or  striae  which  characterise  glacial  action.  The
absence  of  these  is  nowhere  more  clearly  exemplified  than  in
the  bare  rocks  over  which  passed  the  great  *  Willey  slide '  of
1826*

But  the  catastrophes  in  the  White  Mountains  are  insigni-
ficant, when  compared  to  those  which  are  occasioned  by  earth-
quakes, when  the  boundary  hills,  for  miles  in  length,  are
thrown  down  into  the  hollow  of  a  valley.  I  shall  have  opipor-
tunities  of  alluding  to  inundations  of  this  kind  when  treating
expressly  of  earthquakes,  and  shall  content  myself  at  present
with  selecting  an  example  of  a  flood  due  to  a  different  cause.

Flood  in  the  valley  of  Bagnes,  1818. — The  valley  of  Bagnes
is  one  of  the  largest  of  the  lateral  embranchments  of  the  main
valley  of  the  Rhone,  above  the  Lake  of  Geneva.  Its  upper  por-
tion was^  in  1818,  converted  into  a  lake  by  the  damming  up
of  a  narrow  pass,  by  avalanches  of  snow  and  ice,  precipitated
from  an  elevated  glacier  into  the  bed  of  the  river  Dranse.  In
the  winter  season,  during  continued  frost,  scarcely  any  water
flows  in  the  bed  of  this  river  to  preserve  an  open  channel,  so
that  the  ice  barrier  remained  entire  until  the  melting  of  the
snow  in  spring,  when  a  lake  was  formed  above,  about  half
a  league  in  length,  which  finally  attained  in  some  parts
a  depth  of  about  200  feet,  and  a  width  of  about  700  feet.
To  prevent  or  lessen  the  mischief  apprehended  from  the
sudden  bursting  of  the  barrier,  an  artificial  gallery,  700
feet  in  length,  was  cut  through  the  ice,  before  the  water
had  risen  to  a  great  height.  When  at  last  it  reached
such  an  elevation  as  to  fiow  through  the  tunnel,  it  dis-
solved the  ice,  and  thus  deepened  its  channel,  until  nearly
half  of  the  whole  contents  of  the  lake  were  slowly  drained
off.  But  at  length,  on  the  approach  of  the  hot  season,
the  central  portion  of  the  remaining  mass  of  ice  gave  way
with  a  tremendous  crash,  and  the  residue  of  the  lake  was

•  See  LyeU'g  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  vol.  i.  p.  69.


Ch.  XV.]     FLOODS  IN  THE  VALLEY  OF  BAGNES.        849

emptied  in  half  an  hour.  In  the  course  of  their  descent,  the
waters  encountered  several  narrow  gorges,  and  at  each  of
these  they  rose  to  a  great  height,  and  then  burst  with  new
violence  into  the  next  basin,  sweeping  along  rocks,  forests,
houses,  bridges,  and  cultivated  land.  For  the  greater  part
of  its  course  the  flood  resembled  a  moving  mass  of  rock  and
mud,  rather  than  of  water.  Some  fragments  of  granitic
rocks,  of  enormous  magnitude,  and  which  from  their  dimen-
sions, might  be  compared  without  exaggeration  to  houses,
were  torn  out  of  a  more  ancient  alluvium,  and  borne  down  for
a  quarter  of  a  mile.  One  of  the  fragments  moved  was  sixty
paces  in  circumference.*  The  velocity  of  the  water,  in  the
first  part  of  its  course,  was  thirty-three  feet  per  second,  which
diminished  to  six  feet  before  it  reached  the  Lake  of  Geneva,
where  it  arrived  in  six  hours  and  a  half,  the  distance  being
45  miles.t

This  flood  left  behind  it,  on  the  plains  of  Martigny,  thou-
sands of  trees  torn  up  by  the  roots,  together  with  the  ruins
of  buildings.  Some  of  the  houses  in  that  town  were  filled
with  mud  up  to  the  second  story.  After  expanding  in  the
plain  of  Martigny,  it  entered  the  Rhone,  and  did  no  further
damage ;  l?ut  some  bodies  of  men,  who  had  been  drowned
above  Martigny,  were  afterwards  found,  at  the  distance  of
about  thirty  miles,  fioating  on  the  farther  side  of  the  Lake
of  Geneva,  near  Vevay.

The  waters,  on  escaping  fi-om  the  temporary  lake,  inter-
mixed with  mud  and  rock,  swept  along  for  the  first  four  miles
at  the  rate  of  above  twenty  miles  an  hour ;  and  M.  Escher,
the  engineer,  calculated  that  the  flood  furnished  300,000
cubic  feet  of  water  every  second — an  efflux  which  is  five  times
greater  than  that  of  the  Rhine  below  Basle.  Now  if  part  of
the  lake  had  not  been  gradually  drained  ofiF,  the  flood  would
have  been  n^^arly  double,  approaching  in  volume  to  some  of
the  largest  rivers  in  Europe.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that,
when  we  are  speculating  on  the  excavating  force  which  a  river
may  have  exerted  in  any  particular  valley,  the  most  important

♦  This  Mock  was  measured  hy  Capt.       in  1818,  Ed.  Phil.  Journ.,  vol.  i.  p.  187,
B.  Hall,  R.N.  from  Memoir  of  M.  Escher.

^  Inundation  of  the  Val  de  Bagnes,


350  FLOOD  AT  TIVOLI.  [Ch.  XV.

question  is,  not  the  volume  of  the  existing  stream,  nor  the
present  levels  of  its  channel,  nor  even  the  nature  of  the  rocks,
but  the  probability  of  a  succession  of  floods  at  some  period
since  the  time  when  the  valley  may  have  been  first  elevated
above  the  sea.

For  several  months  after  the  d6b&<;le  of  1818,  the  Dranse,
having  no  settled  channel,  shifted  its  position  continnallj
from  one  side  to  the  other  of  the  valley,  carrying  away  newly
erected  bridges,  undermining  houses,  and  continuing  to  be
charged  with  as  large  a  quantity  of  earthy  matter  as  the  fluid
could  hold  in  suspension.  I  visited  this  valley  four  months
after  the  flood,  and  was  witness  to  the  sweeping  away  of  a
bridge,  and  the  undermining  of  part  of  a  house.  The  greater
part  of  the  ice-barrier  was  then  standing,  presenting  vertical
cliflFs  150  feet  high,  like  ravines  in  the  lava-currents  of  Etna
or  Auvergne,  where  they  are  intersected  by  rivers.

Inundations,  precisely  similar,  are  recorded  to  have  occurred
at  former  periods  in  this  district,  and  from  the  same  cause.
In  1595,  for  example,  a  lake  burst,  and  the  waters,  descend-
ing with  irresistible  fury,  destroyed  the  town  of  Martigny,
where  from  sixty  to  eighty  persons  perished.  In  a  similar
flood,  fifty  years  before,  140  persons  were  drowned.

Flood  at  Tivoliy  1826. — I  shall  conclude  Vith  one  more
example  derived  from  a  land  of  classic  recollections,  the
ancient  Tibur,  and  which,  like  all  the  other  inundations  above
alluded  to,  occurred  within  the  present  century.  The  younger
Pliny,  it  will  be  remembered,  describes  a  fiood  on  the  Anio,
which  destroyed  woods,  rocks,  and  houses,  with  the  most
sumptuous  villas  and  works  of  art.*  Often  for  four  or  five
centuries  consecutively,  this  '  headlong  stream,*  as  Horace
truly  called  it,  has  remained  within  its  bounds,  and  then,
after  so  long  an  interval  of  rest,  has  at  different  periods
inundated  its  banks  again,  and  widened  its  channel.  The
last  of  these  catastrophes  happened  15th  Nov.  1826,  after
excessively  heavy  rains,  and  a  lively  description  of  the  event
was  given  to  me  by  eye-witnesses  when  I  visited  the  spot  in
1829.  The  waters  appear  to  have  been  impeded  by  an
artificial  dike,  by  which  they  were  separated  into  two  parts,

•  Lib.  viii.  Epist.  17.


Ch.  XV.]  FLOOD  AT  TIVOLI.  851

a  short  distance  above  Tivoli.  They  broke  through  this  dike ;
and,  leaving  the  left  trench  dry,  precipitated  themselves,  with
their  whole  weight,  on  the  right  side.  Here  they  under-
mined, in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  a  high  cliff,  and  widened
the  river's  channel  about  fifteen  paces.  On  this  stood  the
church  of  St.  Lucia,  and  about  thirty-six  houses  of  the  town
of  Tivoli,  which  were  all  carried  away,  presenting,  as  they
sank  into  the  roaring  flood,  a  terrific  scene  of  destruction  to
the  spectators  on  the  opposite  bank.  As  the  foundations
were  gradually  removed,  buildings,  some  of  them  edifices  of
considerable  height,  were  first  traversed  with  numerous  rents,
which  soon  widened  into  large  fissures,  until  at  length  the
roofs  fell  in  with  a  crash,  and  then  the  walls  sank  into  the
river,  and  were  hurled  down  the  cataract  below.

The  destroying  agency  of  the  fiood  came  within  two
hundred  yards  of  the  precipice  on  which  the  beautiful  temple
of  Vesta  stands ;  but  fortunately  this  precious  relic  of  anti-
quity was  spared,  while  the  wreck  of  modem  structures  was
hurled  down  the  abyss.  Vesta,  it  will  be  remembered,  in
the  heathen  mythology,  personified  the  stability  of  the  earth;
and  when  the  Samian  astronomer,  Aristarchus,  first  taught
that  the  earth  revolved  on  its  axis,  and  round  the  sun,  he
was  publicly  accused  of  impiety,  for  *  moving  the  everlasting
Vesta  from  her  place.'  Playfair  observed,  that  when  Hutton
ascribed  instability  to  the  earth's  surface,  and  represented
the  continents  which  we  inhabit  as  the  theatre  of  incessant
change  and  movement,  his  antagonists,  who  regarded  them
as  unalterable,  assailed  him  in  a  similar  manner  with  accu-
sations founded  on  religious  prejudices.*  We  might  appeal
to  the  excavating  power  of  the  Anio  as  corroborative  of  one
of  the  most  controverted  parts  of  the  Huttonian  theory ;  and
if  the  days  of  omens  had  not  gone  by,  the  geologists  who  now
worship  Vesta  might  regard  the  catastrophe  as  poiiientous.
We  may,  at  least,  recommend  the  modern  votaries  of  the
goddess  to  lose  no  time  in  making  a  pilgrimage  to  her  shrine,
for  the  next  flood  may  not  respect  the  temple.

Excavation  of  rocks  by  running  water, — The  rapidity  with
which  even  the  smallest  streams  hollow  out  deep  channels  in

*  IlliiBtr.  of  Hutt.  Theory,  §  3»  p.  147.


352  LAVA  EXCAVATED  BY  THE  SDIETO.  [Ch.  XV.

soft  and  destructible  soils  is  remarkably  exemplified  in  vol-
canic countries,  where  the  sand  and  half-consolidated  ta&
oppose  but  a  slight  resistance  to  the  torrents  which  descend
the  mountain-side.  After  the  heavy  rains  which  followed  the
eruption  of  Vesuvius  in  1824,  the  water  flowing  from  the
Atrio  del  Cavallo  cut,  in  three  days,  a  new  chasm  through
strata  of  tuff  and  ejected  volcanic  matter,  to  the  depth  of
twenty-five  feet.  I  found  the  old  mule  road,  in  1828,  inter-
sected by  this  new  ravine.

But  deep  chasms  may  be  gradually  eroded  through  the
hardest  rock,  by  running  water,  charged  with  foreign  matter.
Good  illustrations  of  this  phenomenon  may  be  seen  in  many
valleys  in  Central  Finance  where  the  channels  of  rivers  have
been  barred  up  by  solid  currents  of  lava,  through  which  the
streams  have  re-excavated  a  passage,  often  of  great  width
and  from  twenty  to  seventy  feet  in  depth.  In  these  cases
there  are  decisive  proofs  that  neither  the  sea,  nor  any  de-
nuding wave  or  extraordinary  body  of  water,  has  passed  over
the  spot  since  the  melted  lava  was  consolidated.  Every
hypothesis  of  the  intervention  of  sudden  and  violent  agency
is  entirely  excluded,  because  the  cones  of  loose  scoriae,  out  of
which  the  lavas  flowed,  are  oftentimes  at  no  great  elevation
above  the  rivers,  and  have  remained  undisturbed  during  the
whole  period  which  has  been  sufficient  for  Ihe  hollowing  out
of  such  enormous  ravines.

Recent  pxcavation  by  the  Simeto. — At  the  western  base  of
Etna,  a  current  of  lava  (a  a,  fig.  27),  descending  from  near
the  summit  of  the  great  volcano,  has  flowed  to  the  distance
of  five  or  six  miles,  and  then  reached  the  alluvial  plain  of
the  Simeto,  the  largest  of  the  Sicilian  rivers,  which  skirts
the  base  of  Etna,  and  falls  into  the  sea  a  few  miles  south  of
Catania.  The  lava  entered  the  river  about  three  miles  above
the  town  of  Aderno,  and  not  only  occupied  its  channel  for
some  distance,  but,  crossing  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  valley,
accumulated  there  in  a  rocky  mass.  Gemmellaro  gives  the
year  1603  as  the  date  of  the  eruption.*  The  appearance  of
the  current  clearly  proves  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  modem
of  those  of  Etna ;  for  it  has  not  been  covered  or  crossed  by

♦  Quadro  Istorico  dell'  Etna,  1824.


Ch.  XV.]


LAVA  EXCAVATED  BY  THE  SIMETO.


353


subsequent  streams  or  ejections,  and  the  olive-trees  which  had
been  planted  on  its  surface  were  all  of  small  size  when  I
examined  the  spot  in  1828,  yet  thej  were  all  older  than  the
natural  wood  on  the  same  lava.  In  the  course,  therefore,  of
about  two  centuries,  the  Simeto  has  eroded  a  passage  from
fiftj  to  several  hundred  feet  wide,  and  in  some  parts  from
forty  to  fifty  feet  deep.

The  portion  of  lava  cut  through  is  in  no  part  porous  or
scoriaceous,  but  consists  of  a  compact  homogeneous  mass  of
hard  blue  rock,  somewhat  inferior  in  weight  to  ordinary
basalt,  and  containing  crystals  of  olivine  and  glassy  felspar.
The  general  declivity  of  this  part  of  the  bed  of  the  Simeto
is  not  considerable ;  but,  in  consequence  of  the  unequal
waste  of  the  lava,  two  waterfalls  occur  at  Passo  Manzanelli,


Fig.  27


Recent  excavation  of  lava  at  the  foot  of  Etna  by  the  river  Simeto.


each  about  six  feet  in  height.  Here  the  chasm  (b,  fig.  27)  is
about  forty  feet  deep,  and  only  fifty  broad.

The  sand  and  pebbles  in  the  river-bed  consist  chiefly  of  a
brown  quartzose  sandstone,  derived  from  the  upper  country ;
but  the  materials  of  the  volcanic  rock  itself  must  have
greatly  assisted  the  attrition.  This  river,  like  the  Caltabiano
on  the  eastern  side  of  Etna,  has  not  yet  cut  down  to  the
ancient  bed  of  which  it  was  dispossessed,  and  of  which
the  probable  position  is  indicated  in  the  above  diagram
(c,  fig.  27).

On  entering  the  narrow  ravine  where  the  water  foams
down  the  two  cataracts,  we  are  entirely  shut  out  from  all
view  of  the  surrounding  country ;  and  a  geologist  who  is
accustomed  to  associate  the  characteristic  features  of  the
landscape  with  the  relative  age  of  certain  rocks,  can  scarcely


VOL.  1.


AA


854  FALLS  OF  KUGAKA.  [Ce«  XT.

•

dissuade  himself  from  the  belief  that  he  is  contemplating  a
scene  in  some  rocky  gorge  of  very  ancient  date.  The  ex-
ternal forms  of  the  hard  blue  lava  are  as  massive  as  any  of
the  oldest  trap-rocks  of  Scotland.  The  solid  surface  is  in
some  parts  smoothed  and  almost  polished  by  attrition,  and
covered  in  others  with  a  light-coloured  lichen,  which  imparts
to  it  an  air  of  antiquity,  which  greatly  heightens  the  delusion.
But  the  moment  we  re-ascend  the  cliff  the  spell  is  broken ;  for
we  scarcely  recede  a  few  paces,  before  the  ravine  and  river
disappear,  and  we  stand  on  the  black  and  rugged  surface  of
a  vast  current  of  lava,  which  seems  unbroken,  and  which
we  can  trace  up  nearly  to  the  distant  summit  of  that  majestic
cone  which  Pindar  called  the  *  pillar  of  heaven,'  and  which
still  continues  to  send  forth  a  fleecy  wreath  of  vapour,  re-
minding us  that  its  fires  are  not  extinct,  and  that  it  may
again  give  out  a  rocky  stream,  wherein  other  scenes  like
that  now  described  may  present  themselves  to  future  ob-
servers.

Falls  of  Niagara. — The  falls  of  Niagara  afford  a  magnifi-
cent example  of  the  progressive  excavation  of  a  deep  valley
in  solid  rock.  That  river  flows  over  an  elevated  table-land,
in  which  the  basin  of  Lake  Erie  forms  a  depression.  Where
the  river  issues  from  the  lake,  it  is  nearly  a  mile  in  width,
and  330  feet  above  the  level  of  Lake  Ontario,  which  is  about
thirty  miles  distant.  For  the  first  fifteen  miles  below  Lake
Erie  the  surrounding  country,  comprising  Upper  Canada  on
the  west,  and  the  state  of  New  York  on  the  east,  is  almost  on  a
level  with  its  banks,  and  nowhere  more  than  thirty  or  forty  feet
above  them.*  (See  Plate  III.)  The  river  being  occasionally
interspersed  with  low  wooded  islands,  and  having  sometimes
a  width  of  three  miles,  glides  along  at  first  with  a  clear,
smooth,  and  tranquil  current,  falling  only  fifteen  feet  in  as
many  miles,  and  in  this  part  of  its  course  resembling  an  arm

*  The  reader  will  find  in  my  Travel  referred  more   fully  to  these  and  to

jn  North  America,  Tol.i.ch.  2,  a  coloured  Mr.  Hall's  Report  on  the  Geology  of

geological  map  and  section  of  the  Nia-  New  York,  as  well  as  to  the  earlier

gara  district,  also  a  birdVeye  view  of  writings  of  Hennepin  and  Kalm  in  the

the  Falls  and  adjacent  country,  coloured  same  work,  and  have  speculated  on  the

geologically,  of  which  the  first  idea  was  origin  of  the  escarpment  over  which  the

suggested    by  the    excellent    original  falls  may  have  been  originally  predpi-

sketch  given  by  Mr.  Bakewell.    I  have  tated.    Vol.  i.  p.  32,  and  yol.  ii.  p.  93.


Ch.  XV.]  FALLS  OF  NLiaARA.  355

of  Lake  Erie.  But  its  character  is  afterwards  entirely
changed,  on  approaching  the  Bapids,  where  it  begins  to
rush  and  foam  over  a  rocky  and  uneven  limestone  bottom,
for  the  space  of  nearly  a  mile,  till  at  length  it  is  thrown
down  perpendicularly  165  feet  at  the  Falls.  Here  the  river
is  divided  into  two  sheets  of  water  by  an  island  called  Goat
Island,  the  larger  cataract  being  more  than  a  third  of  a  mile
broad,  the  smaller  one  having  a  breadth  of  600  feet.  When
the  water  has  precipitated  itself  into  a  pool  of  vast  depth,  it
rushes  with  great  velocity  down  the  sloping  bottom  of  a
narrow  chasm,  for  a  distance  of  seven  miles.  This  ravine
varies  from  200  to  400  yards  in  width  from  clifiF  to  clifiF;
contrasting,  therefore,  strongly  in  its  breadth  with  that  of
the  river  above.  Its  depth  is  from  200  to  300  feet,  and  it
intersects  for  about  seven  miles  the  table-land  before  described,
which  terminates  suddenly  at  Queenstown  in  an  escarpment
or  long  line  of  inland  clifiF  facing  northwards,  towards  Lake
Ontario.  The  Niagara,  on  reaching  the  escarpment  and
issuing  from  the  gorge,  enters  the  flat  country,  which  is  so
nearly  on  a  level  with  Lake  Ontario,  that  there  is  only  a  fall
of  about  four  feet  in  the  seven  additional  miles  which  inter-
vene between  Queenstown  and  the  shores  of  that  lake.

It  has  long  been  the  popular  belief  that  the  Niagara  once
flowed  in  a  shallow  valley  across  the  whole  platform,  from  the
present  site  of  the  Falls  to  the  escarpment  (called  the
Queenstown  Heights),  where  it  is  supposed  that  the  cataract
was  first  situated,  and  that  the  river  has  been  slowly  eating
its  way  backwards  through  the  rocks  for  the  distance  of  seven
miles.  This  hypothesis  naturally  suggests  itself  to  every
observer,  who  sees  the  narrowness  of  the  gorge  at  its  termi-
nation, and  throughout  its  whole  course,  as  far  up  as  the
Falls,  above  which  point  the  river  expands  as  before  stated.
The  boundary  cliflFs  of  the  ravine  are  usually  perpendicular,
and  in  many  places  undermined  on  one  side  by  the  im-
petuous stream.  The  uppermost  rock  of  the  table-land  at
the  Falls  consists  of  hard  limestone  (a  member  of  the  Silurian
series),  about  ninety  feet  thick,  beneath  which  lie  soft  shales
of  equal  thickness,  continually  undermined  by  the  action  of
the  spray,  which  rises  from  the  pool  into  which  so  large  a

A  ▲  2


356  FALLS  OF  NIAGARA.  [Ch.  XV.

body  of  water  is  projected,  and  is  driren  yiolently  by  gusts
of  wind  against  the  base  of  the  precipice.     In  consequence  of
this  action,  and  that  of  frost,  the  shale  disintegrates  and
crumbles  away,  and  portions  of  the  incumbent  rock  orerhang
forty  feet,  and  often  when  unsupported  tumble  down,  so  that
the  Falls  do  not  remain  absolutely  stationary  at  the  same
spot,  eyen  for  half  a  century.     Accounts  have  come  down  to
us,  from  the  earliest  period  of  observation,  of  the  frequent
destruction  of  these  rocks,  and  the  sudden  descent  of  huge
fragments  in    1818   and   1828  is  said  to  have  shaken  the
adjacent  country  like  an  earthquake.     The  earliest  trarellerSy
Hennepin  and  Ealm,  who  in  1678  and  1751  visited  the  Falls,
and  published  views  of  them,  attest  the  fact,  that  the  rocks
have  been  suflFering  from  dilapidation  for  more  than  a  century
and  a  half,  and  that  some  slight  changes,  even  in  the  scenery
of  the  cataract,  have  been  brought  about  within  that  time.
The  idea,  therefore,  of  perpetual  and  progressive  waste  is
constantly  present  to  the  mind  of  every  beholder;  and  as  that
part  of  the  chasm,  which  has  been  the  work  of  the  last  150
years,  resembles  precisely  in  depth,  width,  and  character  the
rest  of  the  gorge  which  extends  seven  miles  below,  it  is  most
natural  to  infer,  that  the  entire  ravine  has  been  hollowed  out
in  the  same  manner,  by  the  recession  of  the  cataract.

It  must  at  least  be  conceded,  that  the  river  supplies  an
adequate  cause  for  executing  the  whole  task  thus  assigned  to
it,  provided  we  grant  sufficient  time  for  its  completion ;  but,
as  this  part  of  the  country  was  a  wilderness  till  near  the
end  of  the  last  century,  we  can  obtain  no  accurate  data  for
estimating  the  exact  rate  at  which  the  cataract  has  been
receding.  Mr.  Bakewell,  son  of  the  eminent  geologist  of
that  name,  who  visited  Niagara  in  1829,  made  the  first
attempt  to  calculate,  from  the  observations  of  one  who  had
lived  forty  years  at  the  Falls,  and  who  had  been  the  first
settler  there,  that  the  cataract  had  during  that  period  gone
back  about  a  yard  annually.  But  after  the  most  careful
enquiries  which  I  was  able  to  make,  during  my  visit  to  the
spot  in  1841-2,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  average  of
one  foot  a  year  would  be  a  much  more  probable  conjecture.
In  that  case,  it  would  have  required  35,000  years  for  the


Ch.  XV.]  FALLS  OF  NUGARA.  3S7

retreat  of  the  Falls,  from  the  escarpment  of  Queenstown  to
their  present  site.  It  seems  by  no  means  improbable  that
such  a  result  would  be  no  exaggeration  of  the  truth,  although
we  cannot  assume  that  the  retrograde  movement  has  been
uniform.  An  examination  of  the  geological  structure  of  the
district,  as  laid  open  in  the  ravine,  shows  that  at  every  step
in  the  process  of  excavation,  the  height  of  the  precipice,  the
hardness  of  the  materials  at  its  base,  and  the  quantity  of
fallen  matter  to  be  removed,  must  have  varied.  At  some
points  it  may  have  receded  much  faster  than  at  present,  but
in  general  its  progress  was  probably  slower,  because  the
cataract,  when  it  began  to  recede,  must  have  had  nearly
twice  its  present  height,  and  therefore  twice  the  quantity  of
rock  to  remove.

From  observations  made  by  me  in  1841,  when  I  had  the
advantage  of  being  accompanied  by  Mr.  Hall,  State  geologist
of  New  York,  and  in  1842,  when  I  re-examined  the  Niagara
district,  I  obtained  geological  evidence  of  the  former  exist-
ence of  an  old  river-bed,  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  indicates  the
orisrinal  channel  throu<jh  which  the  waters  once  flowed  from
the  Falls  to  Queenstown,  at  the  height  of  nearly  300  feet
above  the  bottom  of  the  present  gorge.  The  geological
monuments  alluded  to  consist  of  patches  of  sand  and  gravel,
forty  feet  thick,  containing  fluviatile  shells  of  the  genera
Unio,  Cyclas,  Melania,  &c.,  such  as  now  inhabit  the  waters
of  the  Niagara  above  the  Falls.  The  identity  of  the  fossil
species  with  the  recent  is  unquestionable,  although  bones  of
the  extinct  mastodon  (M.  giganteiis)  are  associated  with  the
same  in  Goat  Island.  These  fresh-water  deposits  occur  at
several  points  along  the  cliflFs  bounding  the  ravine,  so  that
they  prove  the  former  extension  of  an  elevated  shallow
valley,  four  miles  below  the  Falls,  a  distinct  prolongation  of
that  now  occupied  by  the  Niagara,  in  the  elevated  region
intervening  between  Lake  Erie  and  the  Falls.  Whatever
theory  be  framed  for  the  hollowing  out  of  the  ravine  further
down,  or  for  the  three  miles  which  intervene  between  the
whirlpool  and  Queenstown,  it  will  always  be  necessary  to
suppose  the  former  existence  of  a  barrier  of  rock,  not  of  loose
and   destructible   materials,   such  as  those  composing  the


858  FALLS  OF  NIAGARA.  [Ch.  XV.

drift  in  this  district,  somewhere  immediately  below  the
whirlpool.  By  that  barrier  the  waters  were  held  back  for
ages,  when  the  fluviatile  deposit,  forty  feet  in  thickness,  and
250  feet  above  the  present  channel  of  the  river,  originated*
If  we  are  led  by  this  evidence  to  admit  that  the  cataract  has
cut  back  its  way  for  four  miles,  we  can  have  little  hesitation
in  referring  the  excavation  of  the  remaining  three  miles
below  to  a  like  agency,  the  shape  of  the  chasm  being  precisely
similar.

There  have  been  many  speculations  respecting  tbe  future
recession  of  the  Falls,  and  the  deluge  that  might  be  oc^
casioned  by  the  sudden  escape  of  the  waters  of  Lake  Erie,  if
the  ravine  should  ever  be  prolonged  sixteen  miles  backwards.
But  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  the  geological  succ-ession
of  the  rocks,  brought  to  light  by  the  State  Survey,  has
satisfied  every  geologist  that  the  Falls  would  diminish
gradually  in  height  before  they  travelled  back  two  miles,  and
in  consequence  of  a  gentle  dip  of  the  strata  toihe  south,  the
massive  limestone  now  at  the  top  would  then  be  at  their
base,  and  would  retard,  and  perhaps  put  an  effectual  stop  to>
the  excavating  process.*

•  Since  I  visited  the  Falls  I  have  re-  "which  have  been  precipitated  into  the

peatedly  seen  in  the  American  news-  chasm  below.    Some  of  these  alterations

papers  accounts  of  changes  caused  in  have  rendered  it  impossible  to  reach  a

the  outline  of  the  cataract  by  the  wear-  spot  under  the  sheet  of  falling  water  to

ing  away  of  the  channel  and  the  under-  which  I  was  led  by  my  guide  in  1S41»
mining  of    huge    fnigments  of    rock.


859


CHAPTER  XVI.

TRANSPORTATION  OF   SOLID   MATTER  BY  ICE.

CARRYINO  POWER  OF  RITER-ICR — BOCXS  AKIOTALLT  CONVETBO  INTO  THS
6T.  LAWRRyCB  BY  ITS  TRIBUTARIB8— OROUXD-ICB  ;  ITS  ORIODC  AND  TRAKS-
PORTINO  POWER— GLACIERS — THEORY  OF  THEIR  DOWNWARD  MOYXMEtTr^
SMOOTHED  AND  GROOVED  ROCKS — THE  MORAIXE  UWSTRATIFIED—TERBACE  OR
BEACH  FORMED  BY  A  GLACIER- LAKE  IN  SWITZERLAND — ICEBERGS  COVERED  WITH
MT7D  AND  STONES — LIMITS  OF  GLACIERS  AND  ICEBERGS — THEIR  EFFECTS  ON
THE  BOTTOM  WHEN  THEY  RUN  AGROITND— PACKING  OF  COA8T-ICB — BOULDBRS
DRIFTED  BY  ICE  ON  COAST  OF  LABRADOR — BLOCKS  MOVED  BY  ICE  IN  THE
BALTIC.

The  power  of  running  water  to  carry  sand,  gravel,  and  fSrag-
ments  of  rock  to  considerable  distances  is  greatly  augmented
in  those  regions  where,  during  some  part  of  the  year,  the
frost  is  of  sufficient  intensity  to  convert  the  water,  either  at
the  surface  or  bottom  of  rivers,  into  ice.

This  subject  may  be  considered  under  three  different
heads : — first,  the  effect  of  surface-ice  and  ground-ice,  in  en-
abling streams  to  remove  gravel  and  stones  to  a  distance ;
secondly,  the  action  of  glaciers  in  the  transport  of  boulders,
and  in  the  polishing  and  scratching  of  rocks ;  thirdly,  the
floating  off  of  portions  of  glaciers  charged  with  solid  matter,
as  icebergs,  into  the  sea,  and  the  drifting  of  coast-ice.

River-ice. — Pebbles  and  small  pieces  of  rock  may  be  seen
entangled  in  ice,  and  floating  annually  down  the  Tay  in
Scotland,  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  that  river.  Similar  obser-
vations might  doubtless  be  made  respecting  almost  all  the
larger  rivers  of  England  and  Scotland;  but  there  seems
reason  to  suspect  that  the  principal  transfer  from  place  to
place  of  pebbles  and  stones  adhering  to  ice  goes  on  unseen
by  us  under  water.  For  although  the  specific  gravity  of  the
compound  mass  may  cause  it  to  sink,  it  may  still  be  very


360  TRANSPORTATION  OF  SOLID  MATTER  [Ch.  XVI.

buoyant,  and  easily  borne  along  by  a  feeble  current.  The
ice,  moreover,  melts  very  slowly  at  the  bottom  of  running
streams  in  winter,  as  the  water  there  is  often  nearly  at  the
freezing  point,  as  will  be  seen  from  what  will  be  said  in  the
sequel  of  ground-ice.

As  we  travel  eastward  in  Europe  in  the  latitudes  of  Great
Britain,  we  find  the  winters  more  severe,  and  the  rivers  more
regularly  frozen  over.  M.  Lariviere  relates  that,  being  at
Memel  on  the  Baltic  in  1821,  when  the  ice  of  the  river
Niemen  broke  up,  he  saw  a  mass  of  ice  thirty  feet  long  which
had  descended  the  stream,  and  had  been  thrown  ashore.  In
the  middle  of  it  was  a  triangular  piece  of  granite,  about  a
yard  in  diameter,  resembling  in  composition  the  red  granite
of  Finland.*

When  rivers  in  the  northern  hemisphere  flow  from  south
to  north,  the  ice  first  breaks  up  in  the  higher  part  of  their
course,  and  the  flooded  waters,  bearing  along  large  icy  frag-
ments, often  arrive  at  parts  of  the  stream  which  are  still
firmly  frozen  over.  Great  inundations  are  thus  frequently
occasioned  by  the  obstructions  thrown  in  the  way  of  the
descending  waters,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Mackenzie  in  North
America,  and  the  Irtish,  Obi,  Yenesei,  Lena,  and  other  rivers
of  Siberia.  (See  map,  fig.  7,  p.  180.)  A  partial  stoppage  of
this  kind  occurred  Jan.  31,  1840,  in  the  Vistula,  about  a
mile  and  a  half  above  the  city  of  Dantzic,  where  the  river,
choked  up  by  packed  ice,  was  made  to  take  a  new  course  over
its  right  bank,  so  that  it  hollowed  out  in  a  few  days  a  deep
and  broad  channel,  many  leagues  in  length,  through  a  tract
of  sand-hills  which  were  from  40  to  60  feet  high.

In  Canada,  where  the  winter's  cold  is  intense,  in  a  latitude
corresponding  to  that  of  central  France,  several  tributaries
of  the  St.  Lawrence  begin  to  thaw  in  their  upper  course,
while  they  remain  frozen  over  lower  down,  and  thus  large
slabs  of  ice  are  set  free  and  thrown  upon  the  unbroken  sheet
of  ice  below.  Then  begins  what  is  called  the  packing  of  the
drifted  fragments ;  that  is  to  say,  one  slab  is  made  to  slide
ever  another,  until  a  vast  pile  is  built  up,  and  the  whole,
being  frozen  together,  is  urged  onwards  by  the  force  of  the

*  Consid.  SOT  les  Blocs  errat.     1829.


Ch.  XVI.]  BY  RIVER-ICE.  361

dammed-up  waters  and  drift-ice.  Thus  propelled,  it  not  only
forces  along  boulders,  but  breaks  oflF  from  cliffs,  which  border
the  rivers,  huge  pieces  of  projecting  rock.  By  this  means
several  buttresses  of  solid  masonry,  which,  up  1o  the  year
1836,  supported  a  wooden  bridge  on  the  St.  Maurice,  which
falls  into  the  St.  Lawrence,  near  the  town  of  Trois  Rivieres,
lat  46°  20',  were  thrown  down,  and  conveyed  by  the  ice  into
the  main  river ;  and  instances  have  occurred  at  Montreal  of
wharfs  and  stone  buildings,  from  30  to  60  feet  square,  having
been  removed  in  a  similar  manner.  We  learn  from  Captain
Bayfield  that  anchors  laid  down  within  high-water  mark,  to
secure  vessels  hauled  on  shore  for  the  winter,  must  be  cut  out
of  the  ice  on  the  approach  of  spring,  or  they  would  be  carried
away.  In  1834,  the  Gulnare's  bower-anchor,  weighing  half
a  ton,  was  transported  some  yards  by  the  ice,  and  so  firmly
was  it  fixed,  that  the  force  of  the  moving  ice  broke  a  chain-
cable  suited  for  a  10-gun  brig,  and  which  had  rode  the
Gulnare  during  the  heaviest  gales  in  the  gulf.  Had  not  this
anchor  been  cut  out  of  the  ice,  it  would  have  been  carried
into  deep  water  and  lost.*

The  scene  represented  in  the  annexed  plate  (PI.  IV.),  from
a  drawing  by  Lieutenant  Bowen,  R.N.,  will  enable  the  reader
to  comprehend  the  incessant  changes  which  the  transport  of
boulders  produces  annually  on  the  low  islands,  shores,  and
bed  of  the  St.  Lawrence  above  Quebec.  The  fundamental
rocks  at  Richelieu  Rapid,  situated  in  lat.  46^  N.,  are  lime-
stone and  slate,  which  are  seen  at  low  water  to  be  covered
with  boulders  of  granite.  These  boulders  owe  their  spheroidal
form  chiefly  to  weathering,  or  the  action  of  frost,  which
causes  the  surface  to  exfoliate  in  concentric  plates,  so  that
all  the  more  prominent  angles  are  removed.  At  the  point  a  is
a  cavitj'  in  the  mud  or  sand  of  the  beach,  now  filled  with
water,  which  was  occupied  during  the  preceding  winter  (1835)
by  the  huge  erratic  fc,  a  mass  of  granite,  70  tons'  weight,
found  in  the  spring  following  (1836)  at  the  distance  of  several
feet  from  its  former  position.  Many  small  islands  are  seen
on  the  river,  such  as  c  d,  which  afford  still  more  striking
proofs  of  the  carrying  and  propelling  power  of  ice.     These

*  Capt  Bayfield,  Geol.  Soc  Proceedings,  vol.  ii.  p.  223.


362  GROUND-ICE  AND  OLACIEBS.  [Ch.  XVI.

islets  are  never  under  water,  yet  every  winter  ice  is  thrown
upon  them  in  such  abundance,  that  it  packs  to  the  height  of
20,  and  even  30  feet,  bringing  with  it  a  continual  supply  of
large  stones  or  boulders,  and  carrying  away  others;  the
greatest  number  being  deposited,  according  to  Lieutenant
Bowen,  on  the  edge  of  deep  water.  On  the  island  d,  on  the
left  of  the  accompanying  view,  a  lighthouse  is  represented,
consisting  of  a  square  wooden  building,  which,  having  no
other  foundation  than  the  boulders,  requires  to  be  taken  dowii
every  winter,  and  rebuUt  on  the  re-opening  of  the  river.

These  effects  of  frost,  which  are  so  striking  on  the  St.
Lawrence  above  Quebec,  are  by  no  means  displayed  on  a
smaller  scale  below  that  city,  where  the  gulf  rises  and  falls
with  the  tide.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  in  the  estuary,  between
the  latitudes  47"*  and  49**,  that  the  greatest  quantity  of  gravel
and  boulders  of  large  dimensions  are  carried  down  annually
towards  the  sea.  Here  the  frost  is  so  intense,  that  a  dense
sheet  of  ice  is  formed  at  low  water,  which,  on  the  rise  of  the
tide,  is  lifted  up,  broken,  and  thrown  in  heaps  on  the  ex-
tensive shoals  which  border  the  estuary.  When  the  tide
recedes,  this  packed  ice  is  exposed  to  a  temperature  some-
times 30**  below  zero,  which  freezes  together  all  the  loose
pieces  of  ice,  as  well  as  the  granitic  and  other  boulders.  The
whole  of  these  are  often  swept  away  by  a  high  tide,  or  when
the  river  is  swollen  by  the  melting  of  the  snow  in  spring.
One  huge  block  of  granite,  15  feet  long  by  10  feet  both  in
width  and  height,  and  estimated  to  contain  1,500  cubic  feet>
was  conveyed  in  this  manner  some  distance  in  the  year  1837,
its  previous  position  being  well  known,  as  up  to  that  time  it
had  been  used  by  Captain  Bayfield  as  a  mark  for  the  survey-
ing station.

Orovnd-ice, — When  a  current  of  cold  air  passes  over  the
surface  of  a  lake  or  stream  it  abstracts  from  it  a  quantity
of  heat,  and  the  specific  gravity  of  the  water  being  thereby
increased,  the  cooled  portion  sinks.  This  circulation  may
continue  until  the  whole  body  of  fluid  has  been  reduced  to
the  temperature  of  40°  F.,  after  which  if  the  cold  increase,
the  vertical  movement  ceases,  the  water  which  is  uppermost
expands  and  floats  over  the  heavier  fluid  below,  and  when  it


Ch.  XVI.]  GROUND-ICE  AND  GLACIERS.  363

has  attained  a  temperature  of  32^  Fahr.  it  sets  into  a  sheet
of  ice.  It  would  seem  therefore  impossible,  according  to  this
law  of  congelation,  that  ice  should  ever  form  at  the  bottom
of  a  river ;  and  yet  such  is  the  fact,  and  many  speculations
have  been  hazarded  to  account  for  so  singular  a  phenomenon.
M.  Arago  is  of  opinion  that  the  mechanical  action  of  a
running  stream  produces  a  circulation  by  which  the  entire
body  of  water  is  mixed  up  together  and  cooled  alike,  and  the
whole  being  thus  reduced  to  the  freezing  point,  ice  begins  to
form  at  the  bottom  for  two  reasons,  first,  because  there  is
less  motion  there,  and  secondly,  because  the  water  is  in
contact  with  solid  rock  or  pebbles  which  have  a  cold  surface.*
Even  in  the  Thames  we  learn  from  Dr.  Plott  that  pieces  of
this  kind  of  ice,  having  gravel  frozen  on  to  their  under  side,
rise  up  from  the  bottom  in  winter,  and  float  on  the  surface.
In  the  Siberian  rivers,  Weitz  describes  large  stones  as  having
been  brought  up  from  the  river*s  bed  in  the  same  manner,
and  made  to  float.f  It  is  a  common  remark  in  Bussia  that
where  the  bottom  of  the  stream  is  muddy,  ground-ice  forms
less  readily,  and  that  it  is  produced  most  freely  when  the
sky  is  cloudless.  In  that  case,  stones  lying  in  the  channel
part  with  their  heat  by  radiation  more  rapidly.  By  an  ad-
mirable provision  of  nature,  it  is  in  those  countries  where
river-courses  are  most  liable  to  be  choked  up  by  large  stones
brought  down  from  the  upper  country  by  floating  ice,  that
ground-ice  comes  to  the  aid  of  the  carrying  power  of  running
water.

Glaciers. — ^As  the  atmosphere  becomes  colder  in  propor-
tion as  we  ascend  in  it,  there  are  mountainous  heights  even
in  tropical  countries  where  the  heat  of  summer  is  insufficient
to  melt  the  winter's  snow.  But  to  reach  the  lower  limit  of
peri>etual  snow  at  the  equator,  we  must  rise  to  an  elevation
of  about  16,000  feet  above  the  sea  (see  above,  p.  251).  In
the  Swiss  Alps,  in  lat.  46°  N.,  we  find  the  line  of  perpetual
snow  descending  as  low  as  8,500  feet  above  the  sea,  the
loftier  peaks  of  the  Alpine  chain  being  from  12,000  to  15,000

*  M.  Arago.  Annuaire,&c.  1833;  and  +  Journ.   of   Roy.  Geograph.    Soc

Rev.  J.  Farquhareon,  Phil.  Trans.  1835,      vol.  vi.  p.  416.
p.  329.


364


QROUND-ICB  AND   GLACIEfiS.


[Ch  XVI.


feet  high.  The  frozen  mass  augmenting  from  year  to  year
would  add  indefinitely  to  the  altitude  of  alpine  summits,
were  it  not  relieved  by  its  descent  through  the  larger  and
deeper  vaJleys  to  regions  far  below  the  general  snow-line.
To  these  it  slowly  finds  its  way  in  the  form  of  rivers  of  ice
called  glaciers,  the  consolidation  of  which  is  produced  by
pressure,  and  by  the  congelation  of  water  infiltered  into  the
porous  mass,  which  is  always  undergoing  partial  liquefkction

Fig.  28.


on  its  surface.  In  a  day  of  hot  sunshine,  or  mild  rtiin,  in-
numerable rills  of  pure  and  sparkling  water  run  in  icy  chan-
nels along  the  surfiice  of  the  glaciers,  wliich  in  the  night
shrink  and  come  to  nothing.  They  are  often  precipitated
in  bold  cascades  into  deep  fissures  in  the  ice,  and  contribute
together  with  springs  to  form  torrents,  which  flow  in  tunnels
at  the  bottom  of   the  glaciers  for  many  a  league,  and  at


Ch.  XVI.]  CAUSE  OF  GLACIER  MOTION.  365

length  issue  at  their  extremities,  from  beneath  beautiful
caverns  or  arches.  The  waters  of  these  streams  are  always
densely  charged  with  the  finest  mud,  produced  by  the  grind-
ing of  rock  and  sand  under  the  weight  of  the  moving  mass.
(See  fig.  28.)  The  length  of  time  during  which  these  glaciers
have  existed  must  have  been  so  great,  and  there  is  so  much
evidence  of  their  dimensions  having  been  formerly  greater
than  now,  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  erosion,  or  of
the  widening  and  deepening  of  the  valley  must  be  attributed
to  ice-action.  But  to  what  extent  the  valleys  in  which  the
Swiss  glaciers  move  were  excavated  by  rivers  before  the
valleys  were  fiUed  with  ice  we  have  no  positive  data  at
present  for  deciding.

The  length  of  the  Swiss  glaciers  is  sometimes  between
twenty  and  thirty  miles ;  their  width  in  the  middle  portion
where  they  are  broadest,  occasionally  two  or  three  miles;
their  depth  or  thickness  sometimes  more  than  600  feet.
When  they  descend  steep  slopes  and  precipices,  or  are  forced
through  narrow  gorges,  the  ice  is  broken  up,  and  assumes
the  most  fantastic  and  picturesque  forms,  with  lofby  peaks
and  pinnacles,  projecting  above  the  general  level.  These
snow-white  masses  are  often  relieved  by  a  dark  background
of  pines,  as  in  the  valley  of  Chamouni ;  and  are  not  only
surrounded  with  abundance  of  the  wild  rhododendron  in  fall
flower,  but  encroach  still  lower  into  the  region  of  cultivation,
and  trespass  on  fields  where  the  tobacco-plant  is  flourishing
by  the  side  of  the  peasant's  hut.

The  cause  of  glacier  motion  has  during  the  last  quarter
of  a  century  been  a  subject  of  careful  investigation  and  much
keen  controversy.  Although  a  question  of  physics,  rather
than  of  geology,  it  is  too  interesting  to  allow  me  to  pass
it  by  without  some  brief  mention.  De  Saussure,  whose
'  Travels  in  the  Alps '  are  full  of  original  observations,  as  well
as  sound  and  comprehensive  general  views,  conceived  that
the  weight  of  the  ice  might  be  sufficient  to  urge  it  down  the
slope  of  the  valley,  if  the  sliding  motion  were  aided  by  the
water  flowing  at  the  bottom.  For  this  *  gravitation  theory '
Charpentier,  followed  by  Agassiz,  substituted  the  hypothesis
of  dilatation.     The  most  solid  ice  is  always  permeable  to


866  MOTION  OF  GLACIERS.  [Ch.  XVI.

water,  and  penetrated  by  innumerable  fissures  and  capillary
tubes,  often   extremely   minute.     These   tubes  imbibe  the
aqueous  fluid  during  the  day,  which  freezes,  it  is  said,  in  the
cold  of  the  night,  and  expands  while  in  the  act  of  conge-
lation.    The  distension  of  the  whole  mass  exerts  an  immense
force,  tending  to  propel  the  glacier  in  the  direction  of  least
resistance — *  in  other  words,  down  the  valley.'    This  theory
was  opposed  by  Mr.  Hopkins  on  mathematical  and  mechanical
grounds,  in  several  able  papers.     Among  other  objections,
he  pointed  out  that  the  friction  of  so  enormous  a  body  as
a  glacier  on  its  bed  is  so  great,  that  the  vertical  direction
would  always  be  that  of  least  resistance,  and  if  a  considerable
distension  of  the  mass  should  take  place,  by  the  action  of
freezing,  it  would  tend  to  increase  its  thickness,  rather  than
accelerate  its  downward  progress.     He  also  contended  (and
his  arguments  were  illustrated  by  many  ingenious  experi-
ments) that  a  glacier  can  move  along  an  extremely  slight
slope,  solely  by  the  influence  of  gravitation,  owing  to  the
constant  dissolution  of  ice  in  contact  with  the  rocky  bottom,
and  the  number  of  separate  fragments  into  which  the  glacier
is  divided  by  fissures,  so  that  freedom  of  motion  is  imparted
to  its  several  parts  somewhat  resembling  that  of  an  imperfect
fluid.      To  this  view  Principal  James  D.  Forbes  objected
that  gravitation  would  not  supply  an  adequate  cause  for  the
sliding  of  solid  ice  down  slopes  having  an  inclination  of  no
more  than  four  or  five  degrees,  still  less  would  it  explain  how
the  glacier  advances  where  the  channel  expands  and  con-
tracts.    The  Mer  de  Glace  in  Chamouni,  for  example,  after
being  2,000  yards  wide,  passes  through  a  strait  only  900  yards
in  width.     Such  a  gorge,  it  is  contended,  would  be  choked
up  by  the  advance  of  any  solid  mass,  even  if  it  be  broken
up  into  numerous  fragments.      The   same   acute   observer
remarked,  that  water  in  the  fissures  and  pores  of  glaciers
cannot,  and  does  not,  part  with  its  latent  heat,  so  as  to  freeze
every  night  to  a  great  depth,  or  far  in  the  interior  of  the
mass.    Had  the  dilatation  theory  been  true,  the  chief  motion
of  the  glacier  would  have  occurred  about  sunset,  when  the
freezing  of  the  water  must  be  greatest,  and  it  had,  in  fact,
been  at  first  assumed  by  those  who  favoured  that  hypothesis.


Ch.  XVI.]  MOTION  OF  GLACIERS.  367

that  the  mass  moved  faster  at  the  sides,  where  the  melting  of
ice  was  promoted  by  the  sun's  heat,  reflected  from  boundary
precipices.

Agassiz  appears  to  have  been  the  first  to  commence,  in
1841,  aided  by  a  skilful  engineer,  M.  Escher  von  der  Linth,
a   series  of   exact  measurements   to  ascertain  the  laws   of
glacier   motion,   and    he  soon  discovered,   contrary   to   his
preconceived  notions,  that  the  stream  of  ice  moved  more
slowly  at  the  sides  than  at  the  centre,  and  faster  in  the
middle  region  of  the  glacier  than  at  its  extremity.*     Piin-
cipal  J.  D.  Forbes,  who  had  joined  Professor  Agassiz  during
his  earlier  investigations  in  the  Alps,  undertook  himself  an
independent  series  of  experiments,  which  he  followed  up  with
great  perseverance,  to  determine  the  laws  of  glacier  motion.
These  he  found  to  agree  very  closely  with  the  laws  governing
the  course  of  rivers,  their  progress  being  greater  in  the  centre
than  at  the  sides,  and  more  rapid  at  the  surface  than  at  the
bottom.     This  fact  was  verified  by  carefully  fixing  a  great
number  of  marks  in  the  ice,  arranged  in  a  straight  line,
which  gradually  assumed  a  beautiful  curve,  the  middle  part
pointing  down   the  glacier,  and   showing  a  velocity  there,
double  or  treble  that  of  the  lateral  parts,  t     He  ascertained
that  the  rate  of  advance  by  night  was  nearly  the  same  as  by
day,  and  that  even  the  hourly  march  of  the  icy  stream  could
be  detected,  although  the  progress  might  not  amount  to
more  than    six  or  seven    inches  in  twelve  hours.      By  the
incessant  though  invisible  advance  of  the  marks  placed  on
the  ice,  *  time,'  says  Mr.  Forbes,  '  was  marked  out  as  by  a
shadow  on  a  dial,  and  the  unequivocal  evidence  which  I  ob-
tained, that  even  whilst  walking  on  a  gla<;ier  we  are,  day  by
day,  and  hour  by  hour,  imperceptibly  carried  on  by  the  resist-
less flow  of  the  icy  stream,  filled  me  with  admiration.'^     In
order  to  explain  this  remarkable  regularity  of  motion,  and  its
obedience  to  laws  so  strictly  analogous  to  those  of  fluids,  the
same  writer  proposed  the  theory,  the  germ  of  which  was  first
hinted  by  Eendu,  that  the  ice,  instead  of  being  solid  and

*  Seo  Sjrst^me  glaciaire,  by  Agassiz,       ciers,  Aug.  1844.
Guyot,  and  Desor,  pp.  436,  437,  446.  {  J.  D.  Forbes.   Travels  in  the  Alps,

t  J.  D.  Forbes.     8th  Letter  on  Gla-       Ist  ed.  p.  133.


368  MOTION  OF  GLACIERS.  [Ch.  XVI.

compact,  is  a  viscous  or  plastic  body,  capable  of  yielding  to
great  pressure,  and  the  more  so  in  proportion  as  its  tem-
perature is  higher,  or  as  it  approaches  more  nearly  to  the
melting  point.  He  endeavoured  to  show  that  this  hypothesis
would  account  for  many  complicated  phenomena,  especially
for  a  ribboned  or  veined  structure  which  is  everywhere
observable  in  the  ice,  and  might  be  produced  by  lines  of
discontinuity,  arising  from  the  diflPerent  rates  at  which  the
various  portions  of  the  semi-rigid  glacier  advance  and  pass
each  other.  Many  examples  were  adduced  to  prove  that  a
glacier  can  model  itself  to  the  form  of  the  gi-ound  over  which
it  is  forced,  exactly  as  would  happen  if  it  possessed  a
certain  ductility,  and  this  power  of  yielding  under  intense
pressure  was  supposed  not  to  be  irreconcilable  with  the  idea
of  the  ice  being  sufificiently  compact  to  break  into  fragments
when  the  strain  upon  its  parts  is  excessive ;  as  where  the
glacier  turns  a  sharp  angle,  or  descends  upon  a  rapid  or
convex  slope.  The  increased  velocity  in  summer  was  attri-
buted partly  to  the  greater  plasticity  of  the  ice,  when  not
exposed  to  intense  cold,  and  partly  to  the  hydrostatic  pres-
sure of  the  water  in  the  capillary  tubes,  which  imbibe  more
of  this  liquid  in  the  hot  season.

Mr.  Hopkins,  on  the  other  hand,  assuming  the  ice  to  be  a
rigid,  not  a  viscous  mass,  attributed  the  more  rapid  motions
in  the  centre  to  the  unequal  rate  at  which  the  broad  stripes
of  ice,  intervening  between  longitudinal  fissures,  advance;
but  besides  that  there  are  parts  of  the  glacier  where  no  such
fissures  exist,  such  a  mode  of  progression,  said  Mr.  Forbes,
would  cause  the  borders  of  large  transverse  rents,  or  *  cre-
vasses,' to  be  jagged  like  a  saw,  instead  of  being  perfectly
even  and  straight-edged.*  An  experiment  made  in  1853  by
Mr.  Christie,  secretary  to  the  Royal  Society,  demonstrated
that  ice,  under  great  pressure,  possesses  a  sufficient  degree  of
moulding  and  self-adapting  power  to  allow  it  to  be  acted
upon,  as  if  it  were  a  pasty  or  viscous  substance.     A  hollow

♦  See   Mr.   Hopkins   oh   Motion   of  enoe  l.>etween  him  and  Principal  Forbes

Glaciers,  Cambridge  Phil.  Trans.  1844,  little  more  than  one  of  degree.   (Forth*

and  Phil.  Mag.  1845.    Some  of  the  con-  summary  of    Principal   J.  D.  Forbes*

ct^ssions  of  this  author  as  to  a  ct-rtain  views,  see  Phil.  Trans.  1846,  pt,  2.)
plasticity  in  the  mass,  made  the  differ-


Ch.  XVI.]  THEORY  OF  REGELATION.  369

shell  of  iron  an  inch  and  a  half  thick,  the  interior  being  ten
inches  in  diameter,  was  filled  with  water,  in  the  course  of  a
severe  winter,  and  exposed  to  the  frost,  with  the  fuze-hole
uppermost.  A  portion  of  the  water  expanded  in  freezing,  so
as  to  protrude  a  cylinder  of  ice  from  the  fuze-hole ;  and  this
cylinder  continued  to  grow  inch  by  inch  in  proportion  as  the
central  nucleus  of  water  froze.  As  we  cannot  doubt  that  an
outer  shell  of  ice  is  first  formed,  and  then  another  within,
the  continued  rise  of  the  column  through  the  fuze-hole  must
proceed  from  the  squeezing  of  successive  shells  of  ice,  concen-
trically formed,  through  the  narrow  orifice ;  and  yet  the  pro-
truded cylinder  consisted  of  entire,  and  not  of  fragmentary
ice.*

When  the  hypothesis  of  viscosity  had  been  so  admirably
worked  out  and  illustrated  by  Forbes  as  to  appear  to  be
firmly  established,  Dr.  Tyndall  objected  that  it  would  account
for  a  part  only  of  the  facts.  Ice,  he  admitted,  deports  itself
as  a  viscous  body  in  cases  where  it  is  subjected  to  pressure
alone,  but  when  tension  comes  into  play  the  analogy  with  a
viscous  body  ceases.  *The  glacier  widens,  bends,  and
narrows,  and  its  centre  moves  more  quickly  than  its  sides.
A  viscous  mass  would  undoubtedly  do  the  same.  But  the
most  delicate  experiments  on  the  capacity  of  ice  to  yield  to
strain, — to  stretch  out  like  treacle,  honey,  or  tar, — have  failed
to  detect  this  stretching  power.  Is  there,'  he  asks,  *  then,  any
other  physical  quality  to  which  the  power  of  accommodation
possessed  by  glacier-ice  may  be  referred  ?'t

Faraday  had  called  attention,  in  1850,  to  the  fact  that  if
two  pieces  of  ice  having  throughout  a  temperature  of  32''  F.,
and  each  melting  at  its  surface,  are  made  to  touch  each
other,  they  will  freeze  together  at  the  points  of  contact
This  effect  will  take  place  even  if  the  two  pieces  are  plunged
into  hot  water  and  held  together  for  half  a  minute.  In
virtue  of  this  property,  which  has  been  called  *  regelation/  a
mass  of  ice  crushed  into  fragments  may  be  squeezed  forcibly
into  a  mould,  and  then  subjected  to  hydraulic  pressure  so
that  the  parts  are  brought  into  still  closer  proximity.     It  is

*  This  experiment  is  cited  by  Mr.  f  Tyndall,  Heat  as  a  Mode  of  Motion,

Forbes,  Phil.  Trans.  1846,  p.  206.  1863,  pp.  185,  189.

VOL.  I.  B  B


370  TRANSPOBTATION  OF  ROCKS  BY  GLACIEBS.    [Oh.  XVI.

then  converted  into  a  coherent  cake  of  ice.  All  the  touching
surfaces  of  the  icy  fragments  are  cemented  together  by
regelation,  by  virtue  of  which  property  the  substance  may  be
made  to  take  any  shape  we  please.  *  It  is  easy,  therefore/
says  Tyndall,  *  to  understand  how  a  substance  so  endowed
can  be  squeezed  through  the  gorges  of  the  Alps — can  bend
so  as  to  accommodate  itself  to  the  flexures  of  the  Alpine
valleys,  and  can  permit  of  a  diflFerential  motion  of  its  parts,
without  at  the  same  time  possessing  a  sensible  trace  of
viscosity.'

The  agency  of  glaciers  in  producing  permanent  geological
changes  consists  partly  in  their  power  of  transporting  gravel,
sand,  and  huge  stones  to  great  distances,  and  partly  in  the
smoothing,  polishing,  and  scoring  of  their  rocky  channels,
and  the  boundary  walls  of  the  valleys  through  which  they
pass.  At  the  foot  of  every  steep  cliflF  or  precipice  in  high
Alpine  regions,  a  talus  is  seen  of  rocky  fragments  detached
by  the  alternate  action  of  frost  and  thaw.  If  these  loose
masses,  instead  of  accumulating  on  a  stationary  base,  happen
to  fall  upon  a  glacier,  they  will  move  along  vrith  it,  and,  in
place  of  a  single  heap,  they  will  form  in  the  course  of  years  a
long  stream  of  blocks.  If  a  glacier  be  twenty  miles  long,
and  its  annual  progression  about  500  feet,  it  will  require
about  two  centuries  for  a  block  thus  lodged  upon  its  surface
to  travel  down  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  regions,  or  to
the  extremity  of  the  icy  mass.  This  terminal  point  remains
usually  unchanged  from  year  to  year,  although  every  part  of
the  ice  is  in  motion,  because  the  liquefaction  by  heat  is  just
sufficient  to  balance  the  onward  movement  of  the  glacier,
which  may  be  compared  to  an  endless  file  of  soldiers,  pour-
ing into  a  breach,  and  shot  down  as  fast  as  they  advance.

The  stones  carried  along  on  the  ice  a»e  called  in  Switzer-
land the  *  moraines '  of  the  glacier.  There  is  always  one
line  of  blocks  on  each  side  or  edge  of  the  icy  stream,  and  ofben
several  in  the  middle,  where  they  are  an-anged  in  long  ridges
on  mounds  of  snow  and  ice,  often  several  yards  high.  The
reason  of  their  projecting  above  the  general  level  is  the  non-
liquefaction  of  the  ice  in  those  parts  of  the  surface  of  the
glacier  which  are  protected  from  the  rays  of  the  sun,  or  the


Ch.  XVI.]     TRANSPORTATION  OF  ROCKS  BY  GLACIERS.  371

action  of  the  wind,  by  the  covering  of  earth,  sand,  and  stones.
(See  fig.  28,  p.  364.)  The  cause  of  ^  medial  moraines '  was
first  explained  by  Agassiz,  who  referred  them  to  the  conflu-
ence of  tributary  glaciers.*  Upon  the  union  of  two  streams
of  ice,  the  right  lateral  moraine  of  one  of  the  streams  comes
in  contact  with  the  left  lateral  moraine  of  the  other,  and
they  afterwards  move  on  together,  in  the  centre,  if  the
confluent  glaciers  are  equal  in  size,  or  nearer  to  one  side  if
unequal.

Fragments  of  stone  and  sand,  which  fall  through  crevasses
in  the  ice  and  get  interposed  between  the  moving  glacier  and
the  fundamental  rock,  are  pushed  along  so  as  to  have  their
angles  more  or  less  worn  oflF,  and  many  of  them  are  entirely
ground  down  into  mud.  Some  blocks  are  pushed  along  be-
tween the  ice  and  the  steep  boundary  rocks  of  the  valley,  and
these,  like  the  rocky  channel  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  often
become  smoothed  and  polished,  and  scored  with  parallel  fur-
rows, or  with  lines  and  scratches  produced  by  hard  minerals
such  as  crystals  of  quartz,  which  act  like  the  diamond  upon
glass.t  This  effect  is  perfectly  different  from  that  caused  by
the  action  of  water,  or  a  muddy  torrent  forcing  along  heavy
stones ;  for  these  not  being  held  fast  like  fragments  of  rock
in  ice,  and  not  being  pushed  along  under  great  pressure,
cannot  scoop  out  long  rectilinear  furrows  or  grooves  parallel
to  each  other.J  The  discovery  of  such  markings  at  various
heights  far  above  the  surface  of  the  existing  glaciers,  and  for
miles  beyond  their  present  terminations,  affords  geological
evidence  of  the  former  extension  of  the  ice  beyond  its  present
limits  in  Switzerland  and  other  countries.

The  moraine  of  the  glacier,  observes  Charpentier,  is
entirely  devoid  of  stratification,  for  there  has  been  no  sorting
of  the  materials,  as  in  the  case  of  sand,  mud,  and  pebbles,
when  deposited  by  running  water.  The  ice  transports  indif-
ferently, and  to  the  same  spots,  the  heaviest  blocks  and  the
finest  particles,  mingling  all  together,  and  leaving  them  in
one  confused  and  promiscuous  heap  wherever  it  melts.  §

*  Etudes  snr  les  Glaciers,  1840.  §  Charpentier,  Ann.  des  Mines,  torn.

t  See  Elements  of  Geol.  ch.  xi.  viii. ;  see  also  Papers  by  ])01.  Yenets

X  Agassiz,  Jam.  Ed.  New  Phil.  Joum.      and  Agassiz.
No.  54,  p.  388.

B  B  2


372  GLACIER  LAKE— THE  MARJELEN  SEE.  [Cm.  XV]

In  the  foreground  of  the  woodcut,  fig.  28,  p.  364,  somi
dome-shaped  masses  of  smoothed  rock  are  represented,  callec
in  Switzerland  ^roches  moutonn^es,'  for  they  are  comparec
to  the  backs  of  sheep  which  are  lying  down.  These  ow<
their  rounded  and  smooth  outline  to  the  action  of  the  glaciei
when  it  was  more  in  advance,  the  inequalities  of  the  haxi
rock  haying  been  planed  and  rubbed  off,  in  the  manner  before
described.  In  1857  I  was  able  to  pass  for  some  distance
under  the  terminal  arch  of  the  great  glacier  of  the  Vieseh,
a  tributary  of  the  Upper  Rhone.  It  was  in  autumn  (Sept
1st),  and  during  the  preceding  summer  the  glacier  had  re-
treated many  yards.  Under  the  arch  on  one  side  was  a  flooi
of  white  granite  streaked,  not  only  with  straight  furrowfl
freshly  made,  but  also  with  many  parallel  black  lines  whicli
had  been  ruled  by  fragments  of  soft,  dark  blue  slate,  fixed  in
the  moving  ice.  According  as  the  impinging  stones  had
been  harder  or  softer  than  the  floor  over  which  they  grated
they  had  either  cut  lasting  rectilinear  furrows  in  the  reel
or  had  merely  left  superficial  black  markings  which  the
glacier  torrent  of  the  ensuing  winter  would  speedily  wasb
away.

Glacier  lake — Mdrjelen  See. — There  are  several  instances
in  the  Himalaya  where  glaciers  descending  from  lateral
valleys  cross  the  main  valley  and  convert  a  portion  of  it  intc
a  lake  by  damming  up  the  river.  The  converse  of  this  maji
sometimes  happen,  as  where  a  glacier  descending  the  main
valley  causes  a  lake  by  blocking  up  the  lower  end  of  a  tribu-
tary valley.  An  example  of  this  occurs  in  the  Swiss  Alps,  a
few  miles  above  Brieg,  in  the  Canton  of  Valais,  where  the
great  glacier  of  Aletsch  gives  rise  in  this  way  to  a  small  lake
called  the  Marjelen  See,  which,  after  lasting  for  periods
varying  from  three  to  five  years,  is  periodically  drained  bj
changes  which  take  place  in  the  internal  structure  of  the
glacier.  Rents  or  *  crevasses '  in  the  ice  open  and  give
passage  to  the  waters,  which  escape  in  a  few  hours,
producing  destructive  inundations  in  the  country  below<
Nothing  is  then  left  but  a  small  stream  flowing  at  the
bottom  of  the  basin,  which  last,  after  an  interval  of  aboul
a  year,  is  again  filled,  the  water  rising  to  its  old  level,  and


Ch.  XVI.]  GLACIER  LAKE— THE  MARJELEN  SEE.  373

SO  continuing  for  several  years.  This  old  level  is  deter-
mined, not  by  the  height  of  the  glacier-dam,  but  by  that  of
a  watershed,  or  col,  which  separates  the  Marjelen  See  from
the  adjoining  valley  of  the  Viesch  glacier,  which  lies  to  the
eastward.  (See  fig.  30,  p.  374.)  The  Marjelen  See  was  about
two  miles  in  circumference  when  I  visited  it  in  August  1865,
and  about  forty  feet  below  its  normal  level ;  for  in  the  month
of  June,  in  the  preceding  year,  it  had  undergone  one  of  its
periodical  drainages,  and  the  basin  had  not  yet  been  filled
again.  Such  a  state  of  things  gave  me  an  opportunity  of
examining  a  point  of  great  geological  interest,  namely,  the
form  and  structure  of  a  large  terrace  or  line  of  beach  which
encircles  the  lake  basin  all  round  its  margin,  and  which  con-
stitutes its  shore  when  it  is  full,  and  when  its  surplus  waters
flow  over  to  the  Viesch  valley.  I  satisfied  myself  that  this
terrace  is  a  counterpart  of  one  of  those  ancient  shelves  or
parallel  roads,  as  they  are  called,  of  Glen  Roy  in  Scotland,
which,  as  Agassiz  first  suggested,  were  probably  formed  on
the  edge  of  lakes  dammed  up  by  ice,  which  may  have  existed
in  the  Glacial  period  in  Scotland.  The  terrace  or  beach  of
the  Marjelen  See  consists  chiefly  of  sand  and  small  pebbles
of  quartz,  with  stones  of  mica- schist,  gneiss,  granite,  and
a  hornblende  rock,  most  of  them  angular  and  from  a  few
inches  to  four  feet  in  diameter.  The  sand  was  stratified,  but
1  could  find  no  organic  remains  in  it.  The  width  of  the
shelf,  a  h  (see  fig.  29),  is  about  sixteen  paces,  and  its  slope
varies  from  angles  of  5^  to  \h^.  The  slope  from  6  to  c,
which  is  under  water  when  the  lake  is  full,  has  an  angle  of
29°.  The  vertical  height  of  the  upper  part  of  the  shelf  a,
above  the  lowest  portion,  c,  is  thirty-six  feet.  The  funda-
mental rock  consists  of  highly  inclined  mica-schist.  The
materials  of  the  terrace  or  shelf  are  such  as  might  have
been  derived  chiefly  from  the  waste  of  the  steeply  sloping
flanks  of  the  boundary  heights  /  a,  but  they  consist,  no
doubt,  in  part  of  fragments  of  rock,  stranded  by  miniature
icebergs,  such  as  e  (fig.  29),  of  which  many  are  continu-
ally detached  from  the  barrier  of  ice  at  the  lower  end  of
the  lake.  I  saw  many  of  these  bergs  floating  on  the  lake,
with  stones  and  mud  frozen  into  them,  parts  of  the  moraine


374


GLACIER  LAKE— THE  MABJELEN  SEE.         [Gh.  XVL


of  the  Aletscli  Glacier,  and  which  may  have  come  from
distant  mountains.     The  icy  fragments  were  melting,  and


Fig.  29.


Mar/elen    See


Section  of  the  glacier  lake  called  the  Marjclen  See.

ahc.  Terrace  of  detrital  matter  formed  on  the  mai;gin  of  the  lake  when  fall.

d.  Surface  of  lake  40  feet  below  its  usual  level.

e.  Mass  of  floating  ice  with  included  stones  detached  from  the  dam.

f.  Boundary  hill  composed  of  mica-echist.

as  their  centres  of  gravity  changed,  they  frequently  capsized.
The  materials  thus  transported  must  be  strewed  in  part  over
the  whole  bottom  of  the  lake,  but  by  far  the  greater  number


Aletxeh
Glacier


Y
1

I

lee  {


Fig.  30.


Mar/elen     See


Col


\    \    \    K


\    \    '

Mica  \  Schift


\


yaUeyff\f0tek
frlaeier


Relative  position  of  the  lake  called  Marjelen  See  and  the  Valley  of  Viesch.

a  b.  Col  or  dividing  ridge  between  the  two  valleys.
c.  Vertical  cliff  of  ice  forming  the  dam.

must  be  stranded  on  the  shore  when  the  lake  is  fuD,  or  in
its  normal  condition.     In  fig.  30  the  position  of  the  lake


Ch.  XVI.]         GLACIER  LAKE— THE  MARJELEN  SEE.  375

dammed  up  by  the  Aletsch  Glacier,  and  its  relation  to  the
adjoining  valley  of  Viesch  are  shown.  The  col  or  lowest
depression  between  the  two  valleys  is  seen  at  a  6,  and  along
this  level  the  stream  issuing  from  the  Marjelen  See,  at  a,
flows  habitually  to  6,  where  it  falls  in  a  cascade  over  the
rocks,  on  its  way  to  the  valley  of  Viesch.  In  passing  from
a  to  &,  it  cuts  through  ancient  moraine  matter,  and  its
channel  has  been  deepened  artificially  several  feet,  with  a
view  of  preventing  the  Marjelen  See  from  rising  to  its  full
height,  thereby  lessening  the  magnitude  of  the  floods  caused
by  the  bursting  of  the  icy  dam.  The  Mayor  or  Castellan  of
Viesch  showed  me  an  old  document,  from  which  I  learnt
that  towards  the  end  of  the  17th  century  (1683)  the  govern-
ment of  the  Canton  of  Valais  were  busy  with  a  scheme  for
draining  the  Marjelen  See,  and  diminishing  the  volume  of
its  periodical  inundations.  This  record  is  valuable,  as
teaching  us  that  both  the  ordinary  and  exceptional  con-
dition of  the  lake,  about  two  centuries  ago,  were  the  same
as  now.

Those  geologists  who  have  contended  that  the  old  beaches
or  parallel  roads  of  Lochaber  in  Scotland  were  formed  on  the
margins  of  sheets  of  water  blocked  up  by  ice,  have  some-
times been  met  with  the  objection  that  we  can  hardly  imagine
such  a  blockage  to  be  permanent,  or  to  retain  the  water
steadily  at  the  same  level.  Now,  as  to  the  constancy  of  the
level,  it  is  admitted  that  each  of  the  Scotch  shelves  coincides
with  a  watershed  or  col  dividing  the  glen  in  which  the  shelf
occurs  from  an  adjoining  glen.  Provided  the  dam  of  ice  be
higher  than  this  watershed,  it  may  evidently  vary  in  magni-
tude to  any  amount  without  in  any  way  affecting  the  level  of
the  beach  or  marginal  terrace  of  detrital  matter.  But  we
also  learn  from  the  Marjelen  See,  that  even  if  the  ice-dam
periodically  gives  way,  and  is  renewed,  after  months  or  years,
it  will  not,  if  the  physical  geography  of  the  district  remains
unaltered,  affect  the  constancy  of  the  level  at  which  the  prin-
cipal beach  or  road  is  formed.*

♦  In  the  •  Antiquity  of  Man '  I  have  concluding    with    the  papers  of   Mr.

piven   a  description   of  the   'parallel  Jamieson,  of  Ellon,  in  support  of  the

roads  '  alluded  to,  and  have  referred  to  glacier-lake  theory,
the  numerous  authors  on  the  subject,


376  ICEBERGS.  [Ch.  XVI.

Icebergs. — In  countries  situate  in  high  northern  latitudes,
like  Spitzbergen,  between  70**  and  SO**  N.,  glaciers,  loaded
with  mud  and  rock,  descend  to  the  sea,  and  there  huge  frag-
ments of  them  float  oflf  and  become  icebergs.  Scoresby
counted  600  of  these  bergs  drifting  along  in  latitudes  69**  and
70°  N.,  which  rose  above  the  surface  from  the  height  of  100
to  200  feet,  and  measured  from  a  few  yards  to  a  mile  in  cir-
cumference.* Many  of  them  were  loaded  with  beds  of  earth
and  rock  of  such  thickness,  that  the  weight  was  conjectured
to  be  from  50,000  to  100,000  tons.  Specimens  of  the  rocks
were  obtained,  and  among  them  were  granite,  gneiss,  mica-
schist,  clay- slate,  granular  felspar,  and  greenstone.  Such
l)ergs  must  be  of  great  magnitude,  because  the  mass  of  ice
below  the  level  of  the  water  is  about  eight  times  greater  than
that  above.  Wherever  they  are  dissolved,  it  is  evident  that
the  ^  moraine '  will  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  In  this
manner  many  submarine  valleys,  mountains,  and  platforms
become  strewed  over  with  gravel,  sand,  mud,  and  scattered
blocks  of  foreign  rock,  of  a  nature  perfectly  dissimilar  from  all
in  the  vicinity,  and  which  may  have  been  transported  across
unfathomable  abysses.  If  the  bergs  happen  to  melt  in  still
water,  so  that  the  earthy  and  stony  materials  may  fall  tran-
quilly to  the  bottom,  the  deposit  will  probably  be  unstratified,
like  the  terminal  moraine  of  a  glacier ;  but  whenever  the
materials  are  under  the  influence  of  a  current  of  water  as
they  fall,  they  will  be  sorted  and  aiTanged  according  to  their
relative  weight  and  size,  and  therefore  more  or  less  perfectly
stratified.

We  have  already  stated  that  some  ice-islands  have  been
known  to  drift  from  Baffin's  Bay  to  the  latitude  of  the
Azores,  and  from  the  South  Pole  to  the  immediate  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  so  that  the  area  over
which  the  effects  of  moving  ice  may  be  experienced  com-
prehends a  large  portion  of  the  globe.

In  the  account  given  by  Messrs.  Dease  and  Simpson,  of
their  arctic  discoveries  in  1888,  we  learn  that  in  lat.  71**  N.,
long.  156°  W.,  they  found  a  long  low  spit,  named  Point
Barrow,  composed  of  gravel  and  coarse  sand,  in  some  parts

*  Voyage  in  1822,  p.  233.


Ch.  XVI.]  ICEBERGS.  377

more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  broad,  which  the  pressure  of
the  ice  had  forced  up  into  numerous  mounds,  that,  viewed
from  a  distance,  assumed  the  appearance  of  huge  boulder
rocks.'*

The  fact  is  important,  as  showing  how  masses  of  drift-ice,
when  stranding  on  submarine  banks,  may  exert  a  lateral
pressure  capable  of  bending  and  dislocating  any  yielding
strata  of  gravel,  sand,  or  mud.  The  banks  on  which  icebergs
occasionally  run  aground  between  Baffin's  Bay  and  New-
foundland, are  many  hundred  feet  under  water,  and  the  force
with  which  they  are  struck  will  depend  not  so  much  on  the
velocity  as  the  momentum  of  the  floating  ice-islands.  The
same  berg  is  often  carried  away  by  a  change  of  wind,  and
then  driven  back  again  upon  the  same  bank,  or  it  is  made  to
rise  and  fall  by  the  waves  of  the  ocean,  so  that  it  may  alter-
nately strike  the  bottom  with  its  whole  weight,  and  then  be
lifted  up  again,  until  it  has  deranged  the  superficial  beds
over  a  wide  area.  In  this  manner  the  geologist  may  account,
perhaps,  for  the  circumstance  that  in  Scandinavia,  Scotland,
and  other  countries  where  erratics  are  met  with,  the  beds  of
sand,  loam,  and  gravel  are  often  vertical,  bent,  and  contorted
into  the  most  complicated  folds,  while  the  underlying  strata,
although  composed  of  equally  pliant  materials,  are  horizontal.
But  some  of  these  curvatures  of  loose  strata  may  also  have
been  due  to  repeated  alternations  of  layers  of  gravel  and
sand,  ice  and  snow,  the  melting  of  the  latter  having  caused
the  intercalated  beds  of  indestructible  matter  to  assume  their
present  anomalous  position.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  icebergs  must  often  break
off  the  peaks  and  projecting  points  of  submarine  mountains,
and  must  grate  upon  and  polish  their  surface,  furrowing  or
scratching  them,  and  reducing  them  to  dome-shaped  masses,
in  precisely  the  same  way  as  we  have  seen  that  glaciers  act
on  the  solid  rocks  over  which  they  are  propelled. t

We  learn  from  Von  Buch  that  the  most  southern  point  on

•  Journ.   of    Roy.    Geograph.    Soc.  of  Geology,  6th  ed.  p.  144,  and  Student's

vol.  viii.  p.  221.  Elements,  p.  150,  a  more  full  account

t  In    my    Travels    in   N.   America,  of  the  action  of  floating  ice  and  coast  •

pp.  19,  23,  &c.,  and  Second  Visit  to  the  ice,  and  its  bearing  on  geology,  will  be

U.S.,  vol.  i.  ch.  2,  also  in  my  EUements  found.


S^8


[Ca.  XVI.


the  continent  of  Europe  at  which  a  glacier  comes  down  to
the  sea  is  in  Norway,  in  lat.  67°  N.*  But  Mr.  Darwin  haa
shown  tliat  they  extend  to  the  eea,  in  South  America,  in
latitudes  more  than  20°  nearer  the  equator  than  in  Europe.
Thus  in  Chili,  for  example,  they  occur,  as  before  stated,  in
the  Gulf  of  Penas,  in  the  latitude  of  Central  Prance ;  and  in
Sir  George  Eyre's  Sound,  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  they  give
origin  to  icebei^s,  which  were  seen  in  1834  carrying  angular
pieces  of  granite,  and  stranding  them  in  fiords,  where  the
Fig.  31.


a  miles  E.^^E.  of  Endecby's  Land.
Sketched  bj  Mr.  John  M'Nub.t


shores  were  composed  of  clay-alate.J  A  certain  proportion,
however,  of  the  ice-islands  seen  Boating  both  in  the  northern
and  southern  hemispheres,  are  probably  not  generated  by
glaciers,  but  rather  by  the  accumulation  of  coast-ice.  When
the  sea  Ireezes  at  the  base  of  a  lofty  precipice,  the  sheet  of  ice
is  prevented  from  adhering  to  the  land  by  the  rise  and  fall
of  the  tide.     Nevertheless,  it  often  continues  on  shore  at  the


•  Trareli  in  Norway.  ii.  p.  626.

■f  Jonrn.  of  Boy.  Qeograph.  Soc.  vol.  t  Darwin's  Joumul,  p.  283,


Ch.  xvi.]  icebergs.  379

foot  of  the  cliff,  and  receives  accessions  of  drift-snow  blown
from  the  land.  Under  the  weight  of  this  snow  the  ice
sinks  slowly  if  the  water  be  deep,  and  the  snow  is  generally
converted  into  ice  by  partial  liquefaction  and  re-congelation.
In  this  manner,  islands  of  ice,  of  great  thickness  and  many
leagues  in  length,  originate,  and  are  eventually  blown  out  to
sea  by  off-shore  winds.  In  their  interior  are  enclosed  many
fragments  of  stone  which  have  fallen  upon  them  from  over-
hanging cliffs  during  their  formation.  Such  floating  ice-
bergs are  commonly  flat-topped,  but  their  lower  portions  are
liable  to  melt  in  latitudes  where  the  ocean  at  a  moderate
depth  is  usually  warmer  than  the  surface  water  and  the  air.
Hence  their  centre  of  gravity  changes  continually,  and  they
turn  over  and  assume  very  irregular  shapes.

In  a  voyage  of  discovery  made  in  the  antarctic  regions
in  1839,  a  dark-coloured  angular  mass  of  rock  was  seen
imbedded  in  an  iceberg,  drifting  along  in  mid  ocean  in  lat.
61°  S.  That  part  of  the  rock  which  was  visible  was  about
12  feet  in  height,  and  from  5  to  6  in  width,  but  the  dark
colour  of  the  surrounding  ice  indicated  that  much  more  of
the  stone  was  concealed.  The  annexed  drawing  (fig.  31)  was
made  by  Mr.  M'Nab,  when  the  vessel  was  a  quarter  of  a
mile  distant.*  This  iceberg,  one  of  many  observed  at  sea  on
the  same  day,  was  between  250  and  300  feet  high,  and  was
no  less  than  1,400  miles  from  any  certainly  known  land.  It
is  exceedingly  improbable,  says  Mr.  Darwin,  in  his  notice  of
this  phenomenon,  that  any  land  will  hereafter  be  discovered
within  100  miles  of  the  spot,  and  it  must  be  remembered  that
the  erratic  was  still  firmly  fixed  in  ice,  and  may  have  sailed
for  many  a  league  farther  before  it  dropped  to  the  bottom.f

Captain  Sir  James  Ross,  in  his  antarctic  voyage,  in  1841-2
and  3,  saw  multitudes  of  icebergs  transporting  stones  and
rocks  of  various  sijtes,  with  frozen  mud,  in  high  southern
latitudes.  His  companion.  Dr.  J.  Hooker,  informs  me  that
he  came  to  the  conclusion,  that  most  of  the  southern  ice-
bergs have  stones  in  them,  although  they  are  usually  con-
cealed from  view  by  the  quantity  of  snow  which  falls  upon
them.

*  Journ.  of  Boy.  Geograph.  Soc.  vol.  iz.  p.  526.  t  Ibid.


380  COAST-ICE.  [Ch.  XVI.

Betrcmspartation  of  ancient  glacial  boulders, — ^The  borders
of  the  Canadian  lakes,  and  the  beds  of  the  torrents  and
rivers,  about  1,000  in  number,  which  flow  into  those  lakes,
are  strewn  with  boulders  and  erratic  blocks  which  are  either
distinctly  glaciated,  or  polished  and  striated  in  such  a  way  as
to  imply  that  they  belong  to  the  ancient  period  of  intense  cold,
when  the  country  was  covered  with  glaciers.  Every  year
great  numbers  of  these  blocks  are  lifted  up  by  ground-ice  from
the  bottom  (see  p.  362)  when  the  river  is  frozen  over,  and  on
the  breaking  up  of  the  ice  they  are  carried  down  by  the
river  into  the  lake,  and  drifted  for  a  hundred  miles  or  more
in  all  directions  by  the  wind,  and  fall  to  the  bottom,  so  that
at  some  ftiture  period  geologists  not  on  their  guard  might
refer  the  glaciation  of  these  blocks  to  the  present  era  instead
of  the  remote  period  at  which  they  acquired  their  superficial
ice-markings.*

Coast-ice. — It  appears,  then,  that  large  stones,  mud,  and
gravel  are  carried  down  by  the  ice  of  rivers,  estuaries,  and
glaciers,  into  the  sea,  where  the  tides  and  currents  of  the
ocean,  aided  by  the  wind,  may  cause  them  to  drift  for  hnn-
dreds  of  miles  from  the  place  of  their  origin.  But  we  have
not  yet  considered  the  transporting  agency  of  coast-ice,  which
is  often  very  active  on  the  shores  of  the  ocean  far  from  the
points  where  rivers  enter.

The  saline  matter  which  sea-water  holds  in  solution  pre-
vents its  congelation  except  where  the  most  intense  cold
prevails.  But  the  drifting  of  the  snow  from  the  land  often
renders  the  surface-water  brackish  near  the  coast,  so  that  a
sheet  of  ice  is  readily  formed  there ;  and  by  this  means  a
large  quantity  of  gravel  is  frequently  conveyed  from  place  to
place,  and  heavy  boulders  also,  when  the  coast-ice  is  packed
into  dense  masses.  Both  the  large  and  small  stones,  thus
conveyed,  usually  travel  in  one  direction  like  shingle -beaches,
and  this  was  observed  to  take  place  on  the  coast  of  Labrador
and  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  between  the  latitudes  50**  and
60**  N.,  by  Captain  Bayfield  during  his  survey  in  1839.  The
line  of  coast  alluded  to  is  strewed  over  for  a  distance  of  no
less  than  700  miles  with  ice-borne  boulders,  often  six  feet  in

*  Letter  of  Henry  Landor,  Canada,  to  C.  Darwin,  March  10,  1869.


Ck.  XVI.]


ICE-BORliE  BOULDEBS.


diameter,  which  are  for  the  most  purt  on  their  way  from
north  to  Bouth,  or  in  the  direction  of  the  prevailing  current.
Some  points  on  this  coast  have  loeen  observed  to  be  occasion-
ally deserted,  and  then  again  at  another  season  thichly
bestrewed  with  erratics.

The  accompanying  drawing  (fig.  32),  for  which  I  am
indebted  to  Lient.  Bowen,  B.N.,  represents  the  ordinary
appearance  of  the  Labrador  coast,  between  the  latitudes  of
50°  and  60°  N.  ConntlesB  blocks,  chiefly  granitic,  and  of
various  sizes,  are  seen  lying  between  high  and  low  water
mark.    Captain  Bayfield  saw  similar  masses  carried  by  ice

Fig.  32.


BoalderB,  chiefly  of  grsniM,  Btmnded  bj  ice  on  the  coast,  of  Labndor,  between
lat.  50O  and  60°  N.     (Lieat.  Bowen,  R.N.)

through  the  Straits  of  Belle  Isle,  between  Newfoundland  and
the  American  continent,  which  he  conceives  may  have  tra-
velled in  the  course  of  years  from  Baffin's  Bay,  a  distance
which  may  be  compared  in  our  hemisphere  to  the  drifting  of
erratics  from  Lapland  and  Iceland  as  far  south  as  Germany,
France,  and  England.

It  may.  be  asked,  In  what  manner  have  these  erratic  blocks
been  originally  detached  9  We  may  answer  that  Bome  have
fallen  from  precipitous  cliff's,  others  have  been  lifted  up  from
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  adhering  by  their  tops  to  the  ice,  while
others  have  been  brought  down  by  rivers  and  glaciers.


382  ICE-DKIFTED  EOCKS  OF  THE  BALTIC.         [Ch.  XVI.

The  erratics  of  North  America  are  sometimes  angfular,  but
most  of  them  have  acquired  a  spheroidal  form,  either  by
friction  or  decomposition.  The  granite  of  Canada,  as  before
remarked  (p.  361),  has  a  tendency  to  exfoliation,  and  scales
off  in  concentric  coats  when  exposed  to  the  spray  of  the  sea
during  severe  frosts.  The  range  of  the  thermometer  in  that
country  usually  exceeds,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  100®,  and
sometimes  120"*  F. ;  and  to  prevent  the  granite  used  in  the
buildings  of  Quebec  from  peeling  off  in  winter,  it  is  necessary
to  oil  and  paint  the  squared  stones.

In  parts  of  the  Baltic,  such  as  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia,  where
the  quantity  of  salt  in  the  water  amounts  in  general  to  one
fourth  only  of  that  in  the  ocean,  the  entire  surface  freezes
over  in  winter  to  the  depth  of  6  or  6  feet.  Stones  are
thus  frozen  in,  and  afterwards  lifted  up  about  3  feet
perpendicularly  on  the  melting  of  the  snow  in  summer,  and
then  carried  by  floating  ice-islands  to  great  distances.  Pro-
fessor Von  Baer  states,  in  a  communication  on  this  subject
to  the  Academy  of  St.  Petersburg,  that  a  block  of  granite,
weighing  a  million  of  pounds,  was  carried  by  ice  during  the
winter  of  1837-8  from  Finland  to  the  island  of  Hockland;
and  two  other  huge  blocks  were  transported  about  the  years
1806  and  1814  by  packed  ice  on  the  south  coast  of  Finland,
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  pilots  and  inhabitants,
one  block  having  travelled  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  and
lying  about  18  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea."**"

More  recently  Dr.  Forchhammer  has  shown  that  in  the
Sound,  the  Great  Belt,  and  other  places  near  the  entrance  of
the  Baltic,  ground-ice  forms  plentifully  at  the  bottom,  and
then  rises  to  the  surface,  charged  with  sand,  gravel,  stones,
and  seaweed.  Sheets  of  ice,  also,  with  included  boulders,
are  driven  up  on  the  coast  during  storms,  and  *  packed '  to  a
height  of  50  feet.  The  Danish  professor  relates  a  striking
fact  to  prove  that  large  quantities  of  rocky  fragments  are
annually  carried  by  ice  out  of  the  Baltic.  *  In  the  year  1807,'
he  says,  *  at  the  time  of  the  bombardment  of  the  Danish
fleet,  an  English  sloop  of  war,  riding  at  anchor  in  the  roads
at  Copenhagen,  blew  up.     In  1844,  or  thirty-seven  years

*  Jam.  £d.  New  Phil.  Journ.  No.  zlviii.  p.  439.


Ch.  XVI.]         ICE-DRIFTED  BOOKS  OF  THE  BALTIC.  883

afterwards,  one  of  our  divers,  known  to  be  a  trustworthy
man,  went  down  to  save  whatever  might  yet  remain  in  the
shipwrecked  vessel.  He  found  the  space  between  decks
entire,  but  covered  with  blocks  from  six  to  eight  cubic
feet  in  size,  and  some  of  them  heaped  one  upon  the  other.
He  also  affirmed,  that  all  the  sunk  ships  which  he  had  visited
in  the  Sound,  were  in  like  manner  strewed  over  with  blocks.'
Dr.  Forchhammer  also  informs  us,  that  during  an  intense
frost  in  February  1844?  the  Sound  was  suddenly  frozen  over,
and  sheets  of  ice,  driven  by  a  stoim,  were  heaped  up  at  the
bottom  of  the  Bay  of  Taarbeijk,  theatening  to  destroy  a
fishing-village  on  the  shore.  The  whole  was  soon  frozen  to-
gether into  one  mass,  and  forced  up  on  the  beach,  forming  a
mound  more  than  16  feet  high,  which  threw  down  the  walls
of  several  buildings.  *  When  I  visited  the  spot  next  day,
I  saw  ridges  of  ice,  sand,  and  pebbles,  not  only  on  the  shore,
but  extending  far  out  into  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  showing  how
greatly  its  bed  had  been  changed,  and  how  easily,  where  it  is
composed  of  rock,  it  may  be  furrowed  and  streaked  by  stones
firmly  fixed  in  the  moving  ice.'*

*  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  G^l.  de  France,  1847,  torn.  It.  pp.  1182,  1183.


384


CHAPTEE  XVII.

PHENOMENA   OF   SPBIKOS.

ORIOIX  OF  SPEnrOS — ABTKSIAN  WRLLS — BORIX08  AT  PAEI8 — UTB  FISH
RI8IXO  nf  THE  ARTESIAN  WELLS  US  THE  SAHARA — DISTDTCT  CAUSES  BT  WHICH
MIXEKAL  AXD  THERXAL  WATERS  XAT  BE  RAISED  TO  THE  SURFACE — THRIR
C02nfBCTIOX  WITH  VOLCAIHC  AOEXCY — THERMAL  WATERS  OF  BATH — CALCA-
REOUS SPRQCOS — TRATERTOr  OF  THE  ELSA— BATHS  OF  SAK  TIONONE  AlTD  OF
SAN  FILIPFO,  NEAR  RADICOFAXI — SPHEROIDAL  STRUCTURE  IN  TRAVERTIN —
LAKE  OF  THE  80LFATARA,  NEAR  ROXE — TRAYERTIN  AT  CASCADE  OF  TTVOLI —
GYPSEOUS,  SILICEOUS,  AND  FERRUGINOUS  SPRINGS — BRINE  SPRINGS — CAR-
BONATED SPRINGS — DI8INTEORATION  OF  GRANITE  IN  AUTERONB — ^PBTBOLEUX
SPRINGS — FITCU   LAKE  OF  TRINIDAD.

Origin  of  springs. — The  action  of  running  water  on  the  sur
face  of  the  land  having  been  considered,  we  may  next  tun
our  attention  to  what  may  be  termed  Hhe  subterraneai
drainage,'  or  the  phenomena  of  springs.  Everyone  is  familiaj
with  the  fact,  that  certain  porous  soils,  such  as  loose  sane
and  gravel,  absorb  water  with  rapidity,  and  that  the  grounc
composed  of  them  soon  dries  up  after  heavy  showers.  If  c
well  be  sunk  in  such  soils,  we  often  penetrate  to  considerable
depths  before  we  meet  with  water;  but  this  is  usually  foun€
on  our  approaching  some  lower  part  of  the  porous  formatior
where  it  rests  on  an  impervious  bed;  for  here  the  water,
unable  to  make  its  way  downwards  in  a  direct  line,  accumu-
lates as  in  a  reservoir,  and  is  ready  to  ooze  out  into  anj
opening  which  may  be  made,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  see
the  salt  water  filtrate  into,  and  fill,  any  hollow  which  we  dig
in  the  sands  of  the  shore  at  low  tide.

The  facility  with  which  water  can  percolate  loose  and
gravx'lly  hoUh  is  clearly  illustrated  by  the  effect  of  the  tides
in  tluj  'I'hames  between  Richmond  and  London.  The  river,
in  thin  part  of  its  course,  flows  through  a  bed  of  gravel  over-
lying clay,  and  the  porous  superstratum  is  alternatelj
HatuniU.'d  by  the  water  of  the  Thames  as  the  tide  rises,  and


Ch.  XVII.]  ORIGIN  OF  SPRINGS.  385

then  drained  again  to  the  distance  of  several  hundred  feet
from  the  banks  when  the  tide  falls,  so  that  the  wells  in  this
tract  regularly  ebb  and  flow.

The  transmission  of  water  through  a  porous  medium  being
80  rapid,  we  may  easily  understand  why  Springs  are  thrown
out  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  where  the  upper  set  of  strata  con-
sist of  chalk,  sand,  or  other  permeable  substances,  while  the
subjacent  are  composed  of  clay  or  other  retentive  soils.  The
only  diflSculty,  indeed,  is  to  explain  why  the  water  does  not
ooze  out  everywhere  along  the  line  of  junction  of  the  two
formations,  so  as  to  form  one  continuous  land-soak,  instead
of  a  few  springs  only,  and  these  oftentimes  far  distant  from
each  other.  The  principal  cause  of  such  a  concentration  of
the  waters  at  a  few  points  is,  first,  the  existence  of  in-
equalities in  the  upper  surface  of  the  impermeable  stratum,
which  lead  the  water,  as  valleys  do  on  the  external  surface
of  a  country,  into  certain  low  levels  and  channels;  and,
secondly,  the  frequency  of  rents  and  fissures,  which  act  as
natural  drains.  That  .the  generality  of  springs  owe  their
supply  to  the  atmosphere  is  evident  from  this,  that  they
vary  in  the  dififerent  seasons  of  the  year,  becoming  languid
or  entirely  ceasing  to  fiow  after  long  droughts,  and  being
again  replenished  after  a  continuance  of  rain.  Many  of
them  are  probably  indebted  for  the  constancy  and  uniformity
of  their  volume  to  the  great  extent  of  the  subterranean
reservoirs  with  which  they  communicate,  and  the  time  re-
quired for  these  to  empty  themselves  by  percolation.  Such
a  gradual  and  regulated  discharge  is  exhibited,  though  in  a
less  perfect  degree,  in  all  great  lakes;  for  these  are  not
sensibly  affected  in  their  levels  by  a  sudden  shower,  but  are
only  slightly  raised,  and  their  channels  of  efflux,  instead  of
being  swollen  suddenly  like  the  bed  of  a  torrent,  carry  off
the  surplus  water  gradually.

Much  light  has  been  thrown,  of  late  years,  on  the  theory  ,
of  springs,  by  the  boring  of  what  are  called  by  the  French
*  Artesian  wells,'  because  the  method  has  long  been  known
and  practised  in  Artois :  and  it  is  now  demonstrated  that
there  are  sheets,  and  in  some  places  currents,  of  fresh  water,

VOL.    I.  0  0


386  ARTESIAN  WELIJ3.  [Ch.  XVII

at  various  depths  in  the  earth.  The  instrament  employed  ii
excavating  these  wells  is  a  large  auger,  and  the  cavity  bore^
is  usually  from  three  to  four  inches  in  diameter.  If  a  har^
rock  is  met  with,  it  is  first  triturated  by  an  iron  rod,  and  the
materials,  being  thus  reduced  to  small  fragments  or  powder
are  readily  extracted.  To  hinder  the  sides  of  the  well  from
falling  in,  as'  also  to  prevent  the  spreading  of  the  ascending
water  in  the  surrounding  soil,  a  jointed  pipe  is  introduced,
formed  of  wood  in  Artois,  but  in  other  countries  more  com-
monly of  metal.  It  frequently  happens  that,  after  passing
through  hundreds  of  feet  of  retentive  soils,  a  water-bearing
stratum  is  at  length  pierced,  when  the  fluid  immediatelj
ascends  to  the  surface  and  flows  over.  The  flrst  rush  of  the
water  up  the  tube  is  often  violent,  so  that  for  a  time  the
water  plays  like  a  fountain,  and  then,  sinking,  continues  to
flow  over  tranquilly,  or  sometimes  remains  stationary  at  a
certain  depth  below  the  orifice  of  the  well.  This  spouting  ol
the  water  in  the  first  instance  is  owing  to  the  disengagemeni
of  air  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  both  of  which  often  bubble  up
with  the  water.*

At  Sheerness,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames,  a  well  was
bored  on  a  low  tongue  of  land  near  the  sea,  through  300  feet
of  the  blue  clay  of  London,  below  which  a  bed  of  sand  and
pebbles  was  entered,  belonging,  doubtless,  to  the  Woolwich
beds:  when  this  stratum  was  pierced,  the  water  burst  up
with  impetuosity,  and  filled  the  well.  By  another  perforation
at  the  same  place,  the  water  was  found  at  the  depth  of  328
feet  below  the  surface  clay ;  it  first  rose  rapidly  189  feet,  and
then,  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  ascended  to  an  elevation
of  8  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ground.  In  1824  a  well  was
dug  at  Fulham,  near  the  Thames,  at  the  Bishop  of  London's,
to  the  depth  of  31 7  feet,  which,  after  traversing  the  Tertiary
strata,  was  continued  through  67  feet  of  chalk.  The  water
immediatelj^  rose  to  the  surface,  and  the  discharge  was  about
50  gallons  per  minute.  In  the  garden  of  the  Horticultural
Society  at  Chiswick,  the  borings  passed  through  19  feet  ol
gravel,  242^  feet  of  clay  and  loam,  and  67^  feet  of  chalk,  and

♦  Consult  J.  Prestwich,  Water-bearing  Strata  around  London.     1861.     (Van
Voorst.)


Ch.  XVII.]  ARTESIAN  WELLS.  387

the  water  then  rose  to  the  surface  from  a  depth  of  329  feet.*
At  the  Duke  of  Northumberland's,  above  Chiswick,  the
borings  were  carried  through  a  still  greater  thickness  of  in-
cumbent strata  down  to  the  chalk,  which  was  reached  at  the
depth  of  620  feet,  when  a  considerable  volume  of  water  was
obtained,  which  rose  4  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  ground.
In  a  well  of  Mr.  Brooks,  at  Hammersmith,  the  "rush  of  water
from  a  depth  of  360  feet  was  so  great  as  to  inundate  se?eral
buildings  and  do  considerable  damage;  and  at  Tooting,  a
sufficient  stream  was  obtained  to  turn  a  wheel,  and  raise  the
water  to  the  upper  stories  of  the  houses. f  In  1838,  the  total
supply  obtained  from  the  chalk  near  London  was  estimated
at  six  million  gallons  a  day,  and  in  1851  at  nearly  double
that  amount,  the  increase  being  accompanied  by  an  average
fall  of  no  less  than  two  feet  a  year  in  the  level  to  which  the
water  rose.  The  water  stood  commonly,  in  1822,  at  high-
water  mark,  and  had  sunk  in  1851  to  45,  and  in  some  wells
to  65,  feet  below  high-water  mark.:^  This  fact  shows  the
limited  capacity  of  the  subterranean  reservoir.

In  the  last  of  three  wells  bored  through  the  chalk  at
Tours,  to  the  depth  of  several  hundred  feet,  the  water  rose
32  feet  above  the  level  of  the  soil,  and  the  discharge  amounted
to  300  cubic  yards  of  water  every  twenty-four  hours.  §  By
way  of  a  scientific  experiment,  the  sinking  of  a  well  was
commenced  at  Grenelle,  in  the  suburbs  of  Paris,  in  1834,
which  had  reached,  in  November  1839,  a  depth  of  more  than
1,600  English  feet,  and  yet  no  water  ascended  to  the  surface.
The  government  were  persuaded  by  M.  Arago  to  persevere,
if  necessary,  to  the  depth  of  more  than  2,000  feet ;  but  when
they  had  descended  above  1,800  English  feet  below  the
surface,  and  reached  the  chloritic  series  (or  upper  green-
sand),  the  water  rushed  up  through  the  boring,  which  was
about  10  inches  in  diameter  at  its  upper,  and  6  at  its  lower,
extremity.  The  discharge  every  twenty-four  hours  was  at
the  rate  of  half  a  million  of  gallons  of  limpid  and  warm
water,   the   temperature    being  82"*   P.      This   implies   an

*  Sabine,  Joum.  of  Sci.  No.  xxxiii.  J  Prestwich,  p.  69.

p.  72.  1824.  §  BuU.  de  la  Soc  QM.  de  France,

t  Hericart  de  Thury,  '  Puits  for^s/      torn.  iii.  p.  194.

p.  49.

c  0  2


388


ARTESIAN  WELLS.


[Ch.  xvn.


augmentation  of  30°  P.  beyond  the  average  of  flprings  in  the
latitude  of  Paris,  making  a  rate  of  increase  of  1°  P.  for  every
60  English  feet  of  descent.  The  depth  at  which  the  succes-
sive strata,  both  tertiary  and  cretaceous,  were  encountered,
agreed  very  closely  with  the  anticipations  of  the  scientific
advisers  of  this  most  spirited  undertaking.

Mr.  Briggs,  the  British  consul  in  Egypt,  obtained  water
between  Cairo  and  Suez,  in  a  calcareous  sand,  at  the  depth
of  30  feet ;  but  it  did  not  rise  in  the  well."**"  But  other  borings
in  the  same  desert,  of  variable  depth,  between  60  and  800
feet,  and  which  passed  through  alternations  of  sand,  clay,
and  siliceous  rock,  yielded  water  at  the  surface.f

The  rise  and  overflow  of  the  water  in  Artesian  wella  is
generally  referred,  and  apparently  with  reason,  to  the  same
principle  as  the  play  of  an  artificial  fountain.  Let  the  porous
stratum  or  set  of  strata,  a  a,  rest  on  the  impermeable  rock  d.

Fig.  33.


and  be  covered  by  another  mass  of  an  impermeable  nature.
The  whole  mass  a  a  may  easily,  in  such  a  position,  become
saturated  with  water,  which  may  descend  from  its  higher
and  exposed  parts — a  hilly  region  where  rain  falls  abun-
dantly. Suppose  that  at  some  point,  as  at  6,  an  opening
be  made,  which  gives  a  free  passage  upwards  to  the  waters
confined  in  a  a,  at  so  low  a  level,  that  they  are  subjected
to  the  pressure  of  a  considerable  column  of  water  collected
in  the  more  elevated  portion  of  the  same  stratum.  The
water  will  then  rush  out,  just  as  the  liquid  from  a  large
barrel  which  is  tapped,  and  it  will  rise  to  a  height  corre-
sponding to  the  level  of  its  point  of  departure,  or,  rather,  to
a  height  which  balances  the  pressure  previously  exerted  by


*  Bou6,  R^8um6  des  Prog,  de  la  Gdol.
en  1832,  p.  184.


t  Seventh  Rep.  Brit  Asaoc.    1837,
p.  66.


Ch.  XVII.]  AKTESIAN  WELLS.  389

the  confined  waters  against  the  roof  and  sides  of  the  stratum
or  reservoir  a  a.  In  like  manner,  if  there  happen  to  be  a
natural  fissure  c,  a  spring  will  be  produced  at  the  surface
on  precisely  the  same  principle.

Among  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  Artesian  wells,  we  may
mention  those  numerous  rents  and  faults  which  abound  in
some  rocks,  and  the  deep  ravines  and  valleys  by  which  many
countries  are  traversed;  for,  when  these  natural  lines  of
drainage  exist,  there  remains  a  small  quantity  only  of  water
to  escape  by  artificial  issues.  We  are  also  liable  to  be  baffled
by  the  great  thickness  either  of  porous  or  impervious  strata,
or  by  the  dip  of  the  beds,  which  may  carry  off  the  waters
from  adjoining  high  lands  to  some  trough  in  an  opposite
direction,  as  when  the  borings  are  made  at  the  foot  of  an
escarpment  where  the  strata  incline  inwards,  or  in  a  direction
opposite  to  the  face  of  the  cliffs.

The  mere  distance  of  hills  or  mountains  need  not  dis-
courage us  from  making  trials  :  for  the  waters  which  fall  on
these  higher  lands  readily  penetrate  to  great  depths  through
highly  inclined  or  vertical  strata,  or  through  the  fissures  of
shattered  rocks,  and,  after  flowing  for  a  great  distance,  must
often  re-ascend  and  be  brought  up  again  by  other  fissures,  so
as  to  approach  the  surface  in  the  lower  country.  Here  they
may  be  concealed  beneath  a  covering  of  undisturbed  hori-
zontal beds,  which  it  may  be  necessary  to  pierce  in  order  to
reach  thein.  It  should  be  remembered,  that  the  course  of
waters  flowing  under  ground  bears  but  a  remote  resemblance
to  that  of  rivers  on  the  surface,  there  being,  in  the  one  case,
a  constant  descent  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  level  from  the
source  of  the  stream  to  the  sea ;  whereas,  in  the  other,  the
water  may  at  one  time  sink  far  below  the  level  of  the  ocean,
and  afterwards  rise  again  high  above  it.

AmoDg  other  curious  facts  ascertained  by  aid  of  the  borer,
it  is  proved  that,  in  strata  of  different  ages  and  compositions,
there  are  often  open  passages  by  which  the  subterranean
waters  circulate.  Thus,  at  St.  Ouen,  in  France,  five  distinct
sheets  of  water  were  interaected  in  a  well,  and  from  each  of
these  a  supply  obtained.  In  the  third  water-bearing  stratum,
at  the  depth  of  150  feet,  a  cavity  was  found  in  which  the


390  ARTESIAN  WELIS.  [Cb.  XVI]

borer  fell  suddenly  about  a  foot,  and  tbence  the  water  aa
cended  in  great  volume.*  A  Bimilar  falling  of  tlie  instm
ment  several  feet  perpendicularly,  as  if  in  a  hollovr  apocf
Itas  been  remarked  in  England  and  otber  countries.  A
Tours,  in  1830,  a  well  was  perforated  quite  tlirongh  the  chaU
when  the  water  suddenly  brought  up,  from  a  depth  of  36
feet,  a  great  quantity  of  fine  aand,  with  much  vegetabl
matter  and  sheila.  Branches  of  a  thorn  several  inclies  long
much  blackened  by  their  stay  in  the  water,  were  recogniset
aa  also  the  stems  of  marsh  plants,  and  aome  of  their  rootn
which  were  still  white,  together  with  the  seeds  of  the  sam
in  a  state  of  preservation,  which  showed  that  they  had  nc
remained  more  than  three  or  four  months  in  the  wate:
Amon^  the  seeds  were  those  of  the  marsh-plant  Oaiiui
vliginosum ;  and  among  the  shells,  a  fresh-water  species,  Pla
norbis  marginatus,  and  some  land  species,  as  Helix  rotundat
and  H.  striata.  M.  Dujardin,  who,  with  others,  observe
this  phenomenon,  supposes  that  the  waters  had  flowed  froi
some  valleys  of  Auvergne  or  the  Vivarais,  distant  about  IS
miles,  since  the  preceding  autumn.t

An  analogous  phenomenon  is  recorded  at  Reimke,  nea
Boclium  in  Westphalia,  where  the  water  of  an  Artesian  we
brought  up,  from  a  depth  of  15G  feet,  several  small  fisl
throe  or  four  inches  long,  the  nearest  streams  in  the  countr
being  at  the  distance  of  some  leagues.^  In  some  Artesia
wells  sunk  by  the  French  in  the  nortb-eastem  part  of  tb
desert  of  the  Sahara,  small  fish  have  been  frequently  brougl
up  alive,  with  the  first  gash  of  water,  from  a  depth  of  17
feet.  M.  Desor  informs  us  that  in  January  1863  he  Ba
some  of  these  fish  in  a  well  in  the  Oasis  of  Ain-Tala.  The
were  of  the  genus  Cyprinodon,  not  blind  like  those  take
from  the  underground  caverns  of  Adelsbei^  or  Kentuck
but  with  perfect  eyes.§  The  nearest  ponds  or  lakes  wei
at  a  great  distance  on  the  surface  of  the  desert,  and  in  th
and  the  other  cases  before  mentioned  of  the  subterranee
transportation  of  shells,  fish,  and  fragments  of  plants,  \

o  H.  de  Tbnry,  p.  295.
t  Bull,  do  U  8oc.  Oeol  de  Tra.uee,
torn,  i.  p.  93.


Ch.  XVn.]  MINERAL  AND  THERMAL  SPRINGS,  391

see  evidence  of  the  water  not  having  been  simply  filtered
through  porous  rock,  but  having  flowed  through  continuous
underground  channels.  Such  examples  suggest  the  idea  that
the  leaky  beds  of  rivers  are  often  the  feeders  of  springs.

MINERAL   AND    THERMAL   SPRINGS.

Almost  all  springs,  even  those  which  we  consider  the  purest,
are  impregnated  with  some  foreign  ingredients,  which,  being
in  a  state  of  chemical  solution,  are  so  intimately  blended  with
the  water  as  not  to  affect  its  clearness,  while  they  render  it
in  general  more  agreeable  to  our  taste,  and  more  nutritious
than  simple  rain-water.  But  the  springs  called  mineral  con-
tain an  unusual  abundance  of  earthy  matter  in  solution,  and
the  substances  with  which  they  are  impregnated  correspond
remarkably  with  those  evolved  in  a  gaseous  form  by  volcanos.
Many  of  these  springs  are  thermal,  or  have  a  higher  tempera-
ture than  that  which  belongs  to  ordinary  springs  in  the  same
neighbourhood,  and  they  rise  up  through  all  kinds  of  rock ;
as,  for  example,  through  granite,  gneiss,  limestone,  or  lava,
but  are  most  frequent  in  volcanic  regions,  or  where  violent
earthquakes  have  occurred  at  eras  comparatively  modern.

The  water  given  out  by  hot  springs  is  generally  more  volu-
minous and  less  variable  in  quantity  at  different  seasons  than
that  proceeding  from  any  others.  In  many  volcanic  regions,
jets  of  steam,  called  by  the  Italians  ^stufas,'  issue  from
fissures,  at  a  temperature  high  above  the  boiling  point,  as  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Naples,  and  in  the  Lipari  Isles,  and  are
disengaged  unceasingly  for  ages.  Now,  if  such  columns  of
steam,  which  are  often  mixed  with  other  gases,  should  be
condensed  before  reaching  the  surface  by  coming  in  contact
with  strata  filled  with  cold  water,  they  may  give  rise  to  ther-
mal and  mineral  springs  of  every  degree  of  temperature.  It
is,  indeed,  by  such  means  rather  than  by  hydrostatic  pressure
that  in  many  cases  we  can  best  account  for  the  rise  of  large
bodies  of  water  from  great  depths ;  nor  can  we  hesitate  to
admit  the  adequacy  of  the  cause,  if  we  suppose  the  expansion
of  the  same  elastic  fluids  to  be  sufficient  to  raise  columns
of  lava  to  the  lofty  summits  of  volcanic  mountains.  Several
gases,  carbonic  acid  in  particular,  are  disengaged  in  a  free


'->


392  MINERAL  AND  THERMAL  SPRINGS.  [Ch,  XVH.

state  from  the  soil  of  various  districts,  especially  in  regions  of
active  or  extinct  volcanos ;  and  the  same  are  found  more  or
less;,  intimately  combined  with  the  waters  of  all  mineral
springs,  both  cold  and  thermal.  Dr.  Daubeny  and  other
writers  have  remarked,  not  only  that  these  springs  are  most
abundant  in  volcanic  regions,  but  that,  when  remote  fix>m
them,  their  site  usually  coincides  with  the  position  of  some
great  derangement  in  the  strata;  a  fault,  for  example,  or
great  fissure,  indicating  that  a  channel  of  communication  has
been  opened  with  the  interior  of  the  earth  at  some  former
period  of  local  convulsion.  It  is  also  ascertained  that  at
great  heights  in  the  Pyrenees  and  Himalaya  Mountains,  hot
springs  burst  out  from  granitic  rocks,  and  they  are  abundant
in  the  Alps  also,  these  chains  having  all  been  disturbed  and
dislocated  at  times  comparatively  modem,  as  can  be  shown
by  independent  geological  and  sometimes  historical  evidence.

The  small  area  of  volcanic  regions  may  appear,  at  first
sight,  to  present  an  objection  to  these  views,  but  not  so  when
we  include  earthquakes  among  the  effects  of  igneous  agency.
A  large  proportion  of  the  land  hitherto  explored  by  geologists
can  be  shown  to  have  been  rent  or  shaken  by  subterranean
movements  since  the  oldest  Tertiary  strata  were  formed.  It
will  also  be  seen,  in  the  sequel,  that  new  springs  have  burst
out,  and  others  have  had  the  volume  of  their  waters  aug-
mented, and  their  temperature  suddenly  raised,  after  earth-
quakes, so  that  the  description  of  these  springs  might  almost
with  equal  propriety  have  been  given  under  the  head  of
^  igneous  causes,'  as  they  are  agents  of  a  mixed  nature,  being
at  once  igneous  and  aqtieous.

As  examples  of  changes  which  have  occurred  in  historical
times,  I  may  here  mention,  that  during  the  great  earthquake
at  Lisbon  in  1755,  the  temperature  of  the  spring  caUed  La
Source  de  la  Reine,  at  Bagneres  de  Luchon  in  the  Pyrenees,
was  suddenly  raised  as  much  as  To""  F.,  or  changed  from  a
cold  spring  to  one  of  122"*  F.,  a  heat  which  it  has  since  re-
tained. It  is  also  recorded  that  the  hot  springs  at  Bagneres
diBigorre,  in  the  same  mountain-chain,  became  suddenly
cold  during  a  great  earthquake  which,  in  1660,  threw  down
several  houses  in  that  town.


Ch.  XVII.]  MINERAL  AND  THERMAL  SPRINGS.  393

But  how,  it  will  be  asked,  can  the  regions  of  volcanic  heat
send  forth  such  inexhaustible  supplies  of  water  ?  The  diffi-
culty of  solving  this  problem  would,  in  truth,  be  insurmount-
able, if  we  believed  that  all  the  atmospheric  waters  found
their  way  into  the  basin  of  the  ocean  ;  but,  in  boring  near  the
shore,  we  often  meet  with  streams  of  fresh  water  at  the  depth
of  several  hundred  feet  below  the  sea  level ;  and  most  of  these
probably  descend  far  beneath  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  Tet,
how  much  greater  may  be  the  quantity  of  salt  water  which
sinks  beneath  the  floor  of  the  ocean,  through  the  porous
strata  of  which  it  is  often  composed,  or  through  fissures  rent
in  it  by  earthquakes  !  After  penetrating  to  a  considerable
depth,  this  water  may  encounter  a  heat  of  sufficient  intensity
to  convert  it  into  vapour,  even  under  the  high  pressure  to
which  it  would  then  be  subjected.  This  heat  would  probably
be  nearest  the  surface  in  volcanic  countries,  and  farthest  from
it  in  those  districts  which  have  been  longest  free  from  erup-
tions or  earthquakes.

In  corroboration  of  such  an  opinion,  I  may  mention,  that
in  regions  where  volcanic  eruptions  still  occur,  hot  springs
are  abundant,  and  occasionally  attain  a  boiling  temperature,
while,  in  proportion  as  we  recede  from  such  centres  of  igneous
activity, the  thermal  waters  decrease  in  frequency  and  average
heat.  In  central  France,  or  in  the  Eifel  in  Germany,  we
find  cones  and  craters  so  perfect  in  their  form,  and  streams  of
lava  bearing  such  a  relation  to  the  shape  of  existing  valleys,
as  to  indicate  that  the  internal  fires  have  become  dormant  in
comparatively  recent  times.  It  is  precisely  in  these  countries
that  hot  springs  play  a  conspicuous  part.

It  would  follow,  from  the  views  above  explained,  that  there
must  be  a  twofold  circulation  of  terrestrial  waters  $  one  caused
by  solar  heat,  and  the  other  by  heat  generated  in  the  interior
of  our  planet.  We  know  that  the  land  would  be  unfit  for
vegetation,  if  deprived  of  the  waters  raised  into  the  atmo-
sphere by  the  sun ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  mineral  springs  are
powerful  instruments  in  rendering  the  surface  subservient
to  the  support  of  animal  and  vegetable  life.  Their  heat  is
believed  to  promote  the  development  of  the  aquatic  tribes  in
many  parts  of  the  ocean,  and  the  substances  which  they  carry


394  MINERAL  SPRINGS.  [Ch.  XVII.

up  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth  to  the  habitable  surface,  are
of  a  nature  and  in  a  form  which  adapt  them  peculiarly  for
the  nutrition  of  animals  and  plants.

As  these  springs  derive  their  chief  importance  to  the  geo-
logist from  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  earthy  materials
which,  like  volcanos,  they  convey  from  below  upwards,  they
may  properly  be  considered  in  reference  to  the  ingredients
which  they  hold  in  solution.  These  consist  of  a  great  variety
of  substances  ;  but  chiefly  salts  composed  of  carbonic,  sul-
phuric, and  hydrochloric  acids  combined  with  bases  of  lime,
magnesia,  alumina,  and  iron.  Chloride  of  sodium,  silica,  and
free  carbonic  acid,  as  well  as  nitrogen,  are  commonly  pre-
sent ;  there  are  also  springs  of  petroleum  or  liquid  bitumen,
and  of  naphtha.

The  ingredients  of  mineral  springs,  such  as  common  salt,
chloride  of  magnesium,  and  others,  so  often  agree  with  the
constituents  of  sea-water,  that  the  theory  of  their  marine
origin  has  been  naturally  suggested.  Such  materials  are,  no
doubt,  often  to  be  obtained  from  those  strata  through  which
the  descending  rain-water  flows ;  but  in  many  cases  they
may  come  from  the  sea  even  where  the  substances  are  not
found  in  the  same  relative  proportions  as  in  sea-water  ;  for,
where  hot  springs  charged  with  gaseous  matter  penetrate
through  rocky  masses,  the  decomposition  of  various  minerals
must  often  be  going  on  ;  and,  where  new  chemical  combina-
tions take  place,  some  of  the  gaseous,  earthy,  or  metallic
ingredients  of  springs  may  be  intercepted  in  their  upward
course.

Among  the  gases,  nitrogen  is  often  largely  evolved  from
springs,  as  it  is  from  volcanic  craters  during  eruptions.  This
gas  may  be  derived,  says  Dr.  Daubeny,  from  atmospheric
air,  which  is  always  dissolved  in  rain-water,  and  which,  when
this  water  penetrates  the  earth's  crust,  must  be  carried  down
to  great  depths,  so  as  to  reach  the  heated  interior.  When
there,  it  may  be  subjected  to  deoxidating  processes,  so  that
the  nitrogen,  being  left  in  a  free  state,  may  be  driven  up-
wards by  the  expansive  force  of  heat  and  steam,  or  by  hydro-
static pressure.

Thermal  waters  of  Bath. — The  hot  springs  of  Bath  may


Ch.  XVn.]  THERMAL  WATERS  OF  BATH.  895

serve  a«  an  example  of  mineral  waters  containing  in  solution
a  variety  of  ingredients  frequently  met  with  in  thermal
springs.  Their  mean  temperature  is  120**  Fahr.,  which  is  not
only  much  above  that  of  any  other  springs  in  England,  but  is
exceptionally  high  in  Europe,  when  we  take  into  account
their  great  distance  from  any  region  of  active  or  extinct
volcanos,  or  of  violent  earthquakes.  Thus  they  are  400
miles  distant  from  the  Eifel  volcanos,  lying  E.S.E.  of  them,
and  440  miles  from  those  (also  extinct)  of  Auvergne,  which
lie  to  the  S.E.  The  daily  evolution  of  nitrogen  gas  amounts,
according  to  Dr.  Daubeny,  to  no  less  than  250  cubic  feet  in
volume.  This  gas  is  largely  disengaged  from  volcanic  craters
during  eruptions,  and  carbonic  acid  gas  is  also  evolved  from
the  same  springs.  The  other  substances  held  in  solution
are  the  sulphates  of  lime  and  of  soda,  and  the  chlorides  of
sodium  and  magnesium.  As  the  uniformity  of  temperature
at  all  seasons  of  the  year  is  remarkable  in  this,  and  in
thermal  springs  generally,  so  is  the  uniformity  of  the  dis-
charge of  water  from  century  to  century,  and  of  the  mineral
ingredients  held  in  solution.  If  we  compare  the  hot  water
forced  up  by  springs  from  below  to  the  vast  clouds  of  aqueous
vapour  evolved,  for  days  or  weeks  in  succession,  from  volcanic
craters  iu  eruption,  so  we  may  liken  the  voluminous  masses
of  solid  matter  raised  from  great  depths  by  the  hot  spring,
to  the  lava  which  the  volcano  pours  out  on  the  surface.
There  is  more  analogy  in  the  work  done  by  the  two  agents,
in  raising  up  matter  from  great  depths,  than  is  commonly
imagined.  The  waters  of  Bath  are  not  conspicuous  among
European  hot  springs  for  the  quantity  of  foreign  matter  which
they  contain,  yet  Professor  Bamsay  has  calculated  that,  if
the  mineral  ingredients  which  they  pour  out  were  solidified,
they  would  form  in  one  year  a  square  column  nine  feet  in
diameter,  and  no  less  than  140  feet  in  height.  All  this
matter  is  now  quietly  conveyed  by  a  stream  of  limpid  water,
in  an  invisible  form,  to  the  Avon,  and  by  the  Avon  to  the
sea ;  but  if,  instead  of  being  thus  removed,  it  were  deposited
round  the  orifice  of  eruption,  like  the  siliceous  layers  which
encrust  the  circular  basin  of  an  Icelandic  geyser,  we  should
soon  see  a  considerable  cone  built  up,  with  a  crater  in  the


396  CALCAEEOUS  SPBINGS.  [Ch.  XVU.

middle ;  and  if  the  action  of  the  spring  were  intermittent,
so  that  ten  or  twenty  years  should  elapse  between  the  periods
when  solid  matter  was  emitted,  or  (say)  an  interval  of  three
centuries,  as  in  the  case  of  Vesuvius  between  1306  and  1631,
the  discharge  would  be  on  so  grand  a  scale  as  to  afford  no
mean  object  of  comparison  with  the  intermittent  outpourings
of  a  volcano.*

Calcareous  spritigs. — Springs  which  are  highly  charged
vrith  calcareous  matter  produce  a  variety  of  phenomena  of
much  interest  in  geology.  It  is  known  that  rain-water
collecting  carbonic  acid  from  the  atmosphere  has  the  pro-
perty of  dissolving  the  calcareous  rocks  over  which  it  flows,
and  thus,  in  the  smallest  ponds  and  rivulets,  matter  is  often
supplied  for  the  earthy  secretions  of  testacea,  and  for  the
growth  of  certain  plants  on  which  they  feed.  But  many
springs  hold  so  much  carbonic  acid  in  solution,  that  they
are  enabled  to  dissolve  a  much  larger  quantity  of  calcareous
matter  than  rain-water ;  and  when  the  acid  is  dissipated  in
the  atmosphere,  the  mineral  ingredients  are  thrown  down,  in
the  form  of  porous  tufa  or  of  more  compact  travertin.

Auvergne, — Calcareous  springs,  although  most  abundant  in
limestone  districts,  are  by  no  means  confined  to  them,  but
flow  out  indiscriminately  from  all  rock  formations.  In
Central  France,  a  district  where  the  primary  rocks  are  un-
usually destitute  of  limestone,  springs  copiously  charged  with
carbonate  of  lime  rise  up  through  the  granite  and  gneiss.
Some  of  these  are  thermal,  and  probably  derive  their  origin
from  the  deep  source  of  volcanic  heat,  once  so  active  in  that
region.  One  of  these  springs,  at  the  northern  base  of  the
hill  upon  which  Clermont  is  built,  issues  from  volcanic
peperino,  which  rests  on  granite.  It  has  formed,  by  its  in-
crustations, an  elevated  mound  of  travertin  or  white  con-
cretionary limestone,  240  feet  in  length,  and,  at  its  termina-
tion, sixteen  feet  high  and  twelve  wide.  Another  incrusting
spring  in  the  same  department,  situated  at  Chaluzet,  near
Pont  Gibaud,  rises  in  a  gneiss  country,  at  the  foot  of  a  regular
volcanic  cone,  at  least  twenty  miles  from  any  calcareous  rock.

*  Lyell.    Anniversary  Address,  British  Association,  1864.


Ch.  XVnj  CALCAREOUS  SPRINGS.  397

Some  masses  of  tufaceous  deposit,  produced  by  this  spring,
have  an  oolitic  texture.

Valley  of  the  Eha. — If  we  pass  from  the  volcanic  district
of  France  to  that  which  skirts  the  Apennines  in  the  Italian
peninsula,  we  meet  with  innumerable  springs  which  have
precipitated  so  much  calcareous  matter  that  the  whole  ground
in  some  parts  of  Tuscany  is  coated  over  with  tu&  and
travertin,  and  sounds  hollow  beneath  the  foot.

In  other  places  in  the  same  country,  compact  rocks  are
seen  descending  the  slanting  sides  of  hills,  very  much  in  the
manner  of  lava  currents,  except  that  they  are  of  a  white
colour  and  terminate  abruptly  when  they  reach  the  course
of  a  river.  These  consist  of  a  calcareous  precipitate  from
springs,  some  of  which  are  still  flowing,  while  others  have
disappeared  or  changed  their  position.  Such  masses  are
frequent  on  the  slope  of  the  hills  which  bound  the  valley  of
the  Elsa,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Arno,  which  flows  near
CoUe,  through  a  valley  several  hundred  feet  deep,  shaped
out  of  a  lacustrine  formation,  containing  fossil  shells  of
existing  species.  I  observed  here  that  the  travertin  wps  un-
conformable to  the  lacustrine  beds,  its  inclination  according
with  the  slope  of  the  sides  of  the  valley.  One  of  the  finest
examples  which  I  saw  was  at  the  Molino  delle  Caldane,  near
Colle.  The  Sena  and  several  other  small  rivulets  which  feed
the  Elsa  have  the  property  of  incrusting  wood  and  herbs
with  calcareous  stone.  In  the  bed  of  the  Elsa  itself,  aquatic
plants,  such  as  Charse,  which  absorb  large  quantities  of  car-
bonate of  lime,  are  very  abundant.

Baths  of  San  Vxgnone. — Those  persons  who  have  merely
seen  the  action  of  petrifying  waters  in  England,  will  not
easily  form  an  adequate  conception  of  the  scale  on  which  the
same  process  is  exhibited  in  those  regions  which  lie  nearer  to
the  active  centres  of  volcanic  disturbance.  One  of  the  most
striking  examples  of  the  rapid  precipitation  of  carbonate  of
lime  from  thermal  waters,  occurs  in  the  hill  of  San  Vignone
in  Tuscany,  at  a  short  distance  from  Badicofani,  and  only  a
few  hundred  yards  from  the  high  road  between  Siena  and
Rome.  The  spring  issues  from  near  the  summit  of  a  rocky
hill,  about  100  feet  in  height.    The  top  of  the  hill  stretches


TBAVEBTIH  OF  SAN  VIONONE.


[Ca.  xvn.


in  a  geutl;  iaclined  platform  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Ajniata,
a  lofty  eminence,  which  consista  in  great  part  of  Tolcanic
products.  The  fundamental  rock,  from  which  the  spring
issues,  is  a  black  slate,  with  serpentine  (b  h,  fig.  34),  belong-
ing to  the  older  Apennine  formation.  The  water  is  hot,  has
a  strong  taste,  and,  when  not  in  very  small  qaantity,  is  of  a
bright  green  colour.  So  rapid  is  the  deposition  near  the
source,  that  in  the  bottom  of  a  conduit  pipe  for  carrying  off
the  water  to  the  baths,  and  which  is  inclined  at  an  angle  of
30°,  half  a  foot  of  solid  travertin  is  formed  every  year,  A
more  compact  rock  is  produced  where  the  water  flows  slowly ;
and  the  precipitation  in  winter,  when  there  is  least  evapora-
tion, is  said  to  be  more  solid,  but  less  in  quantity  by  one
fourth,  than  in  summer.    The  rock  is  generally  white  ;  some


Fig.  3*.


S«ction  of  travartin,  San  Vigi


parts  of  it  are  compact,  and  ring  to  the  hammer ;  others  are
cellular,  and  with  such  cavities  as  are  seen  in  the  carious
part  of  bone  or  the  siliceous  millstone  of  the  Paris  basin.  A
portion  of  it  also  below  the  village  of  San  Vignone  consists
of  incrustations  of  long  vegetable  tubes,  and  may  be  called
tufa.  Sometimes  the  travertin  assumes  precisely  the  botry-
oidal  and  mammillary  forms,  common  to  similar  deposits  in
Anvergne,  of  a  much  older  date ;  and,  like  them,  it  often
scales  off  in  thin,  slightly  undulating  layers.

A  large  mass  of  travertin  (c,  fig.  34)  descends  the  hill  from
the  point  where  the  spring  issues,  and  reaches  to  the  distance
of  about  half  a  mile  east  of  San  Vignone.  The  beds  take
the  slope  of  the  hill  at  about  an  angle  of  6°,  and  the  planes
of  stratification  are  perfectly  parallel.     One  stratum,  com-


Ch.  XVII.]  TRAVERTIN  OF  SAN  FILIPPO.  899

posed  of  many  layers^  is  of  a  compact  nature,  and  fifteen
feet  thick ;  it  serves  as  an  excellent  building  stone,  and  a
mass  of  fifteen  feet  in  length  was,  in  1828,  cutout  for  the
new  bridge  over  the  Orcia.  Another  branch  of  it  (a,  fig.  34)
descends  to  the  west,  for  a  length  of  250  feet,  varying  in
thickness,  but  sometimes  more  than  20  feet  deep :  it  is  then
cut  off  by  the  small  river  Orcia,  as  some  glaciers  in  Switzer-
land descend  into  a  valley  till  their  progress  is  suddenly
arrested  by  a  transverse  stream  of  water.

The  abrupt  termination  of  the  mass  of  rock,  at  the  river
where  its  thickness  is  undiminished,  clearly  shows  that  it
would  proceed  much  farther  if  not  arrested  by  the  stream,
over  which  it  impends  slightly.  But  it  cannot  encroach
upon  the  channel  of  the  Orcia,  being  constantly  undermined,
so  that  its  solid  fragments  are  seen  strewed  amongst  the
alluvial  gravel.  However  enormous,  therefore,  the  mass  of
solid  rock  may  appear  which  has  been  given  out  by  this
single  spring,  we  may  feel  assured  that  it  is  insignificant  in
volume  when  compared  to  that  which  has  been  carried  to
the  sea  since  the  time  it  began  to  flow.  What  may  have
been  the  leAgth  of  that  period  of  time  we  have  no  data  for
conjecturing.  In  quarrying  the  travertin,  Boman  tiles  have
been  sometimes  found  at  the  depth  of  five  or  six  feet.

Baths  of  San  Filippo. — On  another  hill,  not  many  miles
from  that  last  mentioned,  and  also  connected  with  Mount
Amiata,  the  summit  of  which  is  about  three  miles  distant,
are  the  celebrated  baths  of  San  Filippo.  The  subjacent  rocks
consist  of  alternations  of  black  slate,  limestone,  and  serpen-
tine. There  are  three  warm  springs  containing  carbonate
and  sulphate  of  lime,  and  sulphate  of  magnesia.  The
water  which  supplies  the  baths  falls  into  a  pond,  where  it
lias  been  known  to  deposit  a  solid  mass  thirty  feet  thick  in
about  twenty  years.*  A  manufactory  of  medallions  in  basso-
relievo  is  carried  on  at  these  baths.  The  water  is  conducted
by  canals  into  several  pits,  in  which  it  deposits  travertin  and
crystals  of  sulphate  of  lime.  After  being  thus  freed  from
its  grosser  parts,  it  is  conveyed  by  a  tube  to  the  summit  of
a  small  chamber,  and  made  to  fall  through  a  space  of  ten  or

*  Dr.  Grosse  on  the  fiaths  of  San  Filippo,  Ed.  Phil.  Joorn.  toL  iu  p.  292.


400  SPHEROIDAL  TRAVERTIN.  [Ch.  XVIL

twelve  feet.  The  current  is  broken  in  its  descent  by  nume-
rous crossed  sticks,  by  which  the  spray  is  dispersed  around
upon  certain  moulds,  which  are  rubbed  lightly  over  with  a
solution  of  soap,  and  a  deposition  of  solid  matter  like  marble
is  the  result,  yielding  a  beautiful  cast  of  the  figures  formed
in  the  mould.  The  geologist  may  derive  from  these  experi-
ments considerable  light,  in  regard  to  the  high  slope  of  the
strata  at  which  some  semi-cr}'stalline  precipitations  can  be
formed ;  for  some  of  the  moulds  are  disposed  almost  perpen-
dicularly, yet  the  deposition  is  nearly  equal  in  all  parts.

Spheroidal  structure  in  travertin, — Travertin  of  Tivolu — But
what  renders  this  recent  limestone  of  peculiar  interest  to
the  geologist,  is  the  spheroidal  form  which  it  assumes,
analogous  to  that  of  the  cascade  of  Tivoli  (see  fig.  85),  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Rome.  Here  the  calcareous  waters  of
the  Anio  incrust  the  reeds  which  grow  on  its  banks,  and
the  foam  of  the  cataract  of  Tivoli  forms  beautiful  pendent
stalactites.  On  the  sides  of  the  deep  chasm  into  which  the
cascade  throws  itself  there  is  seen  an  extraordinary  accumu-
lation of  horizontal  beds  of  tufa  and  travertin,  from  four
to  five  hundred  feet  in  thickness.  The  section  imme-
diately under  the  temples  of  Vesta  and  the  Sibyl  displays,
in  a  precipice  about  four  hundred  feet  high,  some  spheroids
which  are  from  six  to  eight  feet  in  diameter^  each  concentric
layer  being  about  the  eighth  of  an  inch  in  thickness.  The
following  diagram  exhibits  about  fourteen  feet  of  this  im-
mense mass,  as  seen  in  the  path  cut  out  of  the  rock  in
descending  from  the  temple  of  Vesta  to  the  Grotto  di
Nettuno.  I  have  not  attempted  to  express  in  this  drawing
the  innumerable  thin  layers  of  which  these  magnificent
spheroids  are  composed,  but  the  lines  given  mark  some  of
the  natural  divisions  into  which  they  are  separated  by  minute
variations  in  the  size  or  colour  of  the  laminae.  The  undula-
tions also  are  much  smaller  in  proportion  to  the  whole  cir-
cumference than  in  the  drawing.  The  beds  (a  a)  are  cf  hard
travertin  and  soft  tufa ;  below  them  is  a  pisolite  (6),  the
globules  being  of  difierent  sizes  :  underneath  this  appears  a
mass  of  concretionary  travertin  (c  c),  some  of  the  spheroids
being  of  the  above-mentioned  extraordinary  size.     In  some


».-.


Ch.  XVII.J


TEAVEBTIN  IS  TIVOLI.


401


places  (as  at  d)  there  is  a  mass  of  amorphous  limestone,  or
tufa,  surrouDded  by  concentric  layers.  At  the  bottom  ia
another  bed  of  pisolite  (b),  in  which  the  small  nodules  are
about  the  size  and  shape  of  beans,  and  some  of  them  of
filberts,  intermixed  with  some  smaller  oolitic  grains.  In  the
tufaceous  strata,  wood  is  seen  converted  into  a  light  tnfa.

Fig.  3S.


n  of  fpheroiJal  concretionBry


uodsr  tlis  Cuscode  of  Tiroli,


The  lamination  of  some  of  the  concentric  masses  is  so  minute
that  sixty  may  be  counted  in  the  thickness  of  an  inch;
yet,  notwithstanding  these  marks  of  gradual  and  successive
deposition,  sections  are  sometimes  exhibited  of  what  might
seem  to  be  perfect  spheres.  This  tendency  to  a  mammillary
and  globalar  structure  arises  from  the  facility  with  which
TOL.  I.  D  D


402  CALCAREOUS  PRECIPITATES.  [Oh.  XVU.

the  calcareous  matter  is  precipitated  in  nearly  eqnal  quan-
tities on  all  sides  of  any  fragment  of  shell  or  wood,  or  any
inequality  of  the  surface  over  which  the  mineral  water  flows,
the  form  of  the  nucleus  being  readily  transmitted  through
any  number  of  successive  envelopes.  But  these  masses  can
never  be  perfect  spheres,  although  they  often  appear  such
when  a  transverse  section  is  made  in  any  line  not  in  the
direction  of  the  point  of  attachment.  There  are,  indeed,
occasionally  seen  small  oolitic  and  pisolitic  grains,  of  which
the  form  is  globular :  for  the  nucleus,  having  been  for  a  time
in  motion  in  the  water,  has  received  fresh  accessions  of
matter  on  all  sides.

In  the  same  manner  I  have  seen,  on  the  vertical  walls  ot
large  steam  boilers,  the  heads  of  nails  or  rivets  covered  by
a  series  of  enveloping  crusts  of  calcareous  matter,  usually
sulphate  of  lime ;  so  that  a  concretionary  nodule  is  formed,
preserving  a  nearly  globular  shape,  when  increased  to  a
mass  several  inches  in  diameter.  In  these,  as  in  many
travertins,  there  is  often  a  combination  of  the  concentric  and
radiated  structure.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  whole  of  this  deposit
was  formed  in  an  extensive  lake  which  existed  at  the  close
of  the  period  of  volcanic  activity  by  which  the  lavas  and
tuffs  of  the  Roman  territorj'  were  formed.  The  external
configuration  of  the  country  has  since  been  greatly  changed,
and  the  Anio  now  throws  itself  into  a  ravine  excavated  in
the  ancient  travertin.  Its  waters  give  rise  to  masses  of  cal-
careous stone,  scarcely  if  at  all  distinguishable  from  the  older
rock.  T  was  shown,  in  1828,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  tra-
vertin, the  hollow  left  by  a  cart-wheel,  in  which  the  outer
circle  and  the  spokes  had  been  decomposed,  and  the  spaces
which  they  filled  left  void.  It  seemed  to  me  at  the  time
impossible  to  explain  the  position  of  this  mould,  without
supposing  that  the  wheel  was  imbedded  before  the  lake  was
drained ;  but  Sir  R.  Murchison  suggests  that  it  may  have
been  washed  down  by  a  flood  into  the  gorge  in  modern  times,
and  then  incrusted  with  calcareous  tufa  in  the  same  manner
as  the  wooden  beam  of  the  church  of  St.  Lucia  was  swept
down  in   1826,  and  stuck  fast  in  the  Grotto  of  the  Syren,


Ch.  XVII.]  LAKE  OF  THE  SOLFATARA.  403

where  it  still  remains,  and  will  eventually  be  quite  imbedded
in  travertin.*

Campagna  di  Roma. — The  country  around  Rome,  like  many
parts  of  the  Tuscan  States  already  referred  to,  has  been  at
some  former  period  the  site  of  numerous  volcanic  eruptions ;
and  the  springs  are  still  copiously  impregnated  with  lime,
carbonic  acid,  and  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  A  hot  spring
was  discovered  about  1827,  near  Civita  Vecchia,  by  Signor
Riccioli,  which  deposits  alternate  beds  of  a  yellowish  tra-
vertin, and  a  white  granular  rock,  not  distinguishable,  in
hand  specimens,  either  in  grain,  colour,  or  composition,  from
statuary  marble.  There  is  a  passage  between  this  and
ordinary  travertin.  The  mass  accumulated  near  the  spring
is  in  some  places  about  six  feet  thick.

Lake  of  the  Solfatara, — In  the  Campagna,  between  Rome
and  Tivoli,  is  the  Lake  of  the  Solfatara,  called  also  Lago  di
Zolfo  {Jiacus  albula),  into  which  flows  continually  a  stream  of
tepid  water  from  a  smaller  lake,  situated  a  few  yards  above
it.  The  water  is  a  saturated  solution  of  carbonic  acid  gas,
which  escapes  from  it  in  such  quantities  in  some  parts  of  its
surface,  that  it  has  the  appearance  of  being  actually  in  ebulli-
tion. '  I  have  found  by  experiment,'  says  Sir  Humphry  Davy,
'  that  the  water  taken  from  the  most  tranquil  part  of  the
lake,  even  after  being  agitated  and  exposed  to  the  air,  con-
tained in  solution  more  than  its  own  volume  of  carbonic  acid
gas,  with  a  very  small  quantity  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.
Its  high  temperature,  which  is  pretty  constant  at  80°  of  Fahr.,
and  the  quantity  of  carbonic  acid  that  it  contains,  render  it
peculiarly  fitted  to  aflfbrd  nourishment  to  vegetable  life.  The
banks  of  travertin  are  everywhere  covered  with  reeds,  lichen,
confeiTa3,  and  various  kinds  of  aquatic  vegetables ;  and  at  the
same  time  that  the  process  of  vegetable  life  is  going  on,  the
crystallisations  of  the  calcareous  matter,  which  is  everywhere
deposited,  in  consequence  of  the  escape  of  carbonic  acid,
likewise  proceed.  There  is,  I  believe,  no  place  in  the  world
where  there  is  a  more  striking  example  of  the  opposition  or
contrast  of  the  laws  of  animate  and  inanimate  nature,  of  the

*  Murchison,  Geol.  Quart.  Journ.  1850,  vol.  ri.  p.  293.

D  D  2


404  SULPHUREOUS  AND  GYPSEOUS  SPRINGS.     [Ch.  XVII.

forces  of  inorganic  chemical  affinity,  and  those  of  the  powers
of  life.'  *

The  same  observer  informs  ns  that  he  fixed  a  stick  in  a
mass  of  travertin  covered  by  the  water  in  the  month  of  May,
and  in  April  following  he  had  some  difficulty  in  breaking,
with  a  sharp-pointed  hammer,  the  mass  which  adhered  to
the  stick,  and  which  was  several  inches  in  thickness.  The
upper  part  was  a  mixture  of  light  tufa  and  the  leaves  of  coii-
fervae;  below  this  was  a  darker  and  ifiore  solid  travertin,
containing  black  and  decomposed  masses  of  confervse ;  in  the
inferior  part  the  travertin  was  more  solid,  and  of  a  grey
colour,  but  with  cavities  probably  produced  by  the  decompo-
sition of  vegetable  matter.f

The  stream  which  flows  out  of  this  lake  fills  a  canal  about
nine  feet  broad  and  four  deep,  and  is  conspicuous  in  the
landscape  by  a  line  of  vapour  which  rises  from  it.  It  de-
posits calcareous  tufa  in  this  channel,  and  the  Tiber  probably
receives  from  it,  afl  well  as  from  numerous  other  streams,
much  carbonate  of  lime  in  solution,  which  may  contribute  to
the  rapid  growth  of  its  delta.  A  large  proportion  of  the
most  splendid  edifices  of  ancient  and  modem  Rome  are  built
of  travertin,  derived  from  the  quarries  of  Ponte  Lucano,
where  there  has  evidently  been  a  lake  at  a  remote  period,  on
the  same  plain  as  that  already  described.

Snlphuremis  and  gyjjsemi^  springs, — The  quantity  of  other
mineral  ingredients  wherewith  springs  in  general  are  im-
pregnated is  insignificant  in  comparison  to  lime,  and"  this
earth  is  «i08t  frequently  combined  with  carbonic  acid.  But,
as  sulphuric  acid  and  sulphuretted  hydrogen  are  very  fre-
quently supplied  by  springs,  gypsum  may,  perhaps,  be  de-
posited largely  in  certain  seas  and  lakes.  Among  other
gypseous  precipitates  at  present  known  on  the  land,  I  may
mention  those  of  Baden,  near  Vienna,  from  the  springs
which  feed  the  public  bath.  Some  of  these  supply  singly
from  600  to  1,000  cubic  feet  of  water  per  hour,  and  deposit  a
fine  powder,  composed  of  a  mixture  of  sulphate  of  lime  with
sulphur  and  muriate  of  lime.  J     The  thermal  waters  of  Aix,

♦Consolidationof  Travel,  pp.  123-125.      tion   physique  du    Bassin  de  Vienoe,
t  Ibid.  p.  127.  p.  10.

I  C.  Prevost,  Essai  btu  la  Constitu-


Ch.  XVn.]  SILICEOUS  SPRINGS.  405

in  Savoy,  in  passing  through  strata  of  Jurassic  limestone,
turn  them  into  gypsum  or  sulphate  of  lime.  In  the  Andes,
at  the  Puenta  del  Inca,  Lieutenant  Brand  found  a  thermal
spring  at  the  temperature  of  91**  Pahr.,  containing  a  large
proportion  of  gypsum  with  carbonate  of  lime  and  other  in-
gredients.* Many  of  the  mineral  springs  of  Iceland,  says
Professor  Bunsen,  deposit  gypsum,t  and  sulphureous  acid
gas  escapes  plentifully  from  them  as  from  the  volcanos
of  the  same  island.  It  may,  indeed,  be  laid  down  as  a
general  rule,  that  the  mineral  substances,  as  before  stated,
dissolved  in  hot  springs  agree  very  closely  with  those  which
are  disengaged  in  a  gaseous  form  from  the  craters  of  active
volcanos.

Siliceous  springs. — Azores. — In  order  that  water  should
hold  a  very  large  quantity  of  silica  in  solution,  it  seems  ne-
cessary that  it  should  be  raised  to  a  high  temperature.  J  The
hot  springs  of  the  Valle  das  Pernas,  in  the  island  of  St.
Michael,  rising  through  volcanic  rocks,  precipitate  vast
quantities  of  siliceous  sinter.  Around  the  circular  basin  of
the  largest  spring,  which  is  between  twenty  and  thirty  feet
in  diameter,  alternate  layers  are  seen  of  a  coarser  variety  of
sinter  mixed  with  clay,  including  grass,  ferns,  and  reeds,  in
different  states  of  petrifaction.  In  some  instances,  alumina,
which  is  likewise  deposited  from  the  hot  waters,  is  the  mi-
neralising material.  Branches  of  the  same  ferns  which  now
flourish  in  the  island  are  found  completely  petrified,  pre-
serving the  same  appearance  as  when  vegetating,  except  that
they  acquire  an  ash-grey  colour.  Pragments  of  wood,  and
an  entire  stratum  from  three  to  five  feet  thick,  composed  of
reeds  now  common  in  the  island,  have  become  completely
mineralised.

The  most  abundant  variety  of  siliceous  sinter  occurs  in
layers,  from  a  quarter  to  half  an  inch  in  thickness,  accumu-
lated on  each  other  often  to  the  height  of  a  foot  and  upwards,
and  constituting  parallel,  and  for  the  most  part  horizontal,
strata  many  yards  in  extent.  This  sinter  has  often  a  beau-
tiful semi-opalescent  lustre.     A  recent  breccia  is  also  in  the


*  Travels  across  the  Andes,  p.  240.  X  Daubeny  on  Volcanoes,  p.  222.

t  Annalen  der  Chem.  1847.


406  GEYSERS  OF  ICELAND.  [Ch.  XVIL

act  of  forming,  composed  of  obsidian,  pumice,  and  8Coris&,
cemented  by  siliceous  sinter.*

Geysers  of  Iceland. — The  origin  of  the  Icelandic  geysers,
or  the  cause  of  the  intermittent  play  of  those  thermal  foun-
tains, will  be  fully  considered  in  Chap.  XXX  m.  when  volcanic
action  is  treated  of.  I  shall  merely  allude  to  them  here  as
illustrating  the  deposition  of  silex  now  in  progres8.t  The
circular  reservoirs  into  which  the  geysers  fall,  are  lined  in
the  interior  with  a  variety  of  opal,  and  round  the  edges  with
sinter.  The  plants  incrusted  with  the  latter  substance  have
much  the  same  appearance  as  those  incrusted  with  calcareous
tufa  in  our  own  country.  They  consist  of  various  grasses,  the
horse-tail  (JEquisetum)^  and  leaves  of  the  birch-tree,  which
are  the  most  common  of  all,  though  no  trees  of  this  species
now  exist  in  the  surrounding  country.  The  petrified  stems
also  of  the  birch  occur  in  a  state  much  resembling  agatised
wood.  J

By  analysis  of  the  water,  Faraday  ascertained  that  the
solution  of  the  silex  is  promoted  by  the  presence  of  the
alkali,  soda.  He  suggested  that  the  deposition  of  silica
in  an  insoluble  state  takes  place  partly  because  the  water
when  cooled  by  exposure  to  the  air  is  unable  to  retain  as
much  silica  as  when  it  issues  from  the  earth  at  a  temperature
of  180*'  or  190°  Fahr.,  and  partly  because  the  evaporation  of
the  water  decomposes  the  compound  of  silica  and  soda  which
previously  existed.  This  last  change  is  probably  hastened
by  the  carbonic  acid  of  the  atmosphere  uniting  with  the  soda.
The  alkali,  when  disunited  from  the  silica,  would  readily  be
dissolved  in  and  removed  by  running  water. §

Mineral  waters,  even  when  charged  with  a  small  propor-
tion of  silica,  as  those  of  Ischia,  may  supply  certain  species
of  corals,  sponges,  and  infusoria  with  matter  for  their  sili-
ceous secretions  ;  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  rivers  obtain
silex  in  solution  from  another  and  far  more  general  source,
namely,  the  decomposition  of  felspar.     When  this  mineral,

♦  Dr.  Webster  on  the  Hot  Spriogs  of  %  M.   Robert,    Bulletin   de  la   Soc.

Furnaa,  Ed.  Phil.  Journ.  vol.  vi.  p.  306.  OisA.  de  France,  torn.  vii.  p.  11.

t  See  a  cut  of  the  Icelandic  geyser,  §  Barrow's  Iceland,  p.  200.
Chap.  XXXm.


Ch.  XVII.]  FERRUGINOUS  AND  BRINE  SPRINGS.  407

which  is  so  abundant  an  ingredient  in  the  hypogene  and  trap-
pean  rocks,  has  disintegrated,  it  is  found  that  the  residue,
called  porcelain  clay,  contains  but  a  small  proportion  of  the
silica  which  existed  in  the  original  felspar,  the  other  part
having  been  dissolved  and  removed  by  water.*

Ferruginous  springs. — The  waters  of  almost  all  springs  con-
tain some  iron  in  solution  ;  and  it  is  a  fact  familiar  to  all,
that  many  of  them  are  so  copiously  impregnated  with  this
metal,  as  to  stain  the  rocks  or  herbage  through  which  they
pass,  and  to  bind  together  sand  and  gravel  into  solid  masses.
We  may  naturally,  then,  conclude  that  this  iron,  which  is
constantly  conveyed  from  the  interior  of  the  earth  into  lakes
and  seas,  and  which  does  not  escape  again  from  them  into
the  atmosphere  by  evaporation,  must  act  as  a  colouring  and
cementing  principle  in  the  subaqueous  deposits  now  in  pro-
gress. Geologists  are  aware  that  many  ancient  sandstones
and  conglomerates  are  bound  together  or  coloured  by  iron.

Brine  springs. — So  great  is  the  quantity  of  chloride  of
sodium  in  some  springs,  that  they  yield  one  fourth  of  their
weight  in  salt.  They  are  rarely,  however,  so  saturated,  and
generally  contain,  intermixed  with  salt,  carbonate  and
sulphate  of  lime,  magnesia,  and  other  mineral  ingredients.
The  brine  springs  of  Cheshire  are  the  richest  in  our  country;
those  of  North wich  being  almost  saturated.  There  are  others
also  in  Lancashire  and  Worcestershire  which  are  extremely
rich.f  They  are  known  to  have  flowed  for  more  than  1,000
years,  and  the  quantity  of  salt  which  they  have  carried  into
the  Severn  and  Mersey  must  be  enormous.  These  brine
springs  rise  up  through  strata  of  sandstone  and  red  marl,
which  contain  large  beds  of  rock  salt.  The  origin  of  the
brine,  therefore,  may  be  derived  in  this  and  many  other
instances  from  beds  of  fossil  salt ;  but,  as  chloride  of  sodium
is  one  of  the  products  of  volcanic  emanations  and  of  springs
in  volcanic  regions,  the  original  source  of  salt  may  be  as  deep-
seated  as  that  of  lava.

Many  springs  in  Sicily  contain  muriate  of  soda,  and  the

*  See  LyeH'B  Elements  of  Geology ;  f  L.  Horner,  Geol.  Trans,  vol.  iii.

and  Dr.  Turner,  Jam.  Ed.  New  Phil.       p.  94.
Journ.  No.  xxx.  p.  246.


408  CARBONATED  SPRINGS.  [Ch.  XVH.

^  fiame  salso/  in  particular,  is  impregnated  with  so  large  a
quantity,  that  cattle  refuse  to  drink  of  it.  A  hot  spring
rising  through  granite,  at  Saint  Nectaire,  in  Auvergne,
may  be  mentioned  as  one  of  many,  containing  a  large
proportion  of  salt,  together  with  magnesia  and  other  in-
gredients.*

Carbonated  springs, — Auvergne. — Carbonic  acid  gas  is  very
plentifully  disengaged  from  springs  in  almost  all  countries,
but  particularly  near  active  or  extinct  volcanos.  It  has  the
property  of  decomposing  many  of  the  hardest  rocks  with
which  it  comes  in  contact,  particularly  that  numerous  class  in
whose  composition  felspar  is  an  ingredient.  It  renders  the
oxide  of  iron  soluble  in  water,  and  contributes,  as  was  before
stated,  to  the  solution  of  calcareous  matter.  In  volcanic  dis-
tricts these  gaseous  emanations  are  not  confined  to  springs,
but  rise  xip  in  the  state  of  pure  gas  from  the  soil  in  various
places.  The  Grotto  del  Cane,  near  Naples,  affords  an  example,
and  prodigious  quantities  are  now  annually  disengaged  from
every  part  of  the  Limagne  d' Auvergne,  where  it  appears  to
have  been  plentifully  evolved  from  time  immemorial  As
the  acid  is  invisible,  it  is  not  observed,  except  an  excavation
be  made,  wherein  it  often  accumulates,  so  that  it  will  ex-
tinguish a  candle.  There  are  some  springs  in  this  district
where  the  water  is  seen  bubbling  and  boiling  up  with  much
noise,  in  consequence  of  the  abundant  disengagement  of  this
gas.  In  the  environs  of  Pont  Gibaud,  not  far  from  Clermont,
a  rock  belonging  to  the  gneiss  formation,  in  which  lead-mines
are  worked,  has  been  found  to  be  quite  saturated  with  car-
bonic acid  gas,  which  is  constantly  disengaged.  The  car-
bonates of  iron,  lime,  and  manganese  are  so  dissolved,  that
the  rock  is  rendered  soft,  and  the  quartz  alone  remains  un-
attacked.t  Not  far  off  is  the  small  volcanic  cone  of  Chaluzet,
which  once  broke  up  through  the  gneiss,  and  sent  forth  a
lava-stream.

Disengagement  of  free  carbonic  acid, — Prof.  Bischoff,  in  his
histor)^  of  volcanos,  J  has  shown  what  enormous  quantities  of

♦  Ann.  de  TAuvergne,  torn.  i.  p.  234.  {   Edinb.   New    Phil.    Journ.    Oct.

t  Ann.  Scient.  de  I'Auvergne,  tom.ii.       1839.
June  1829.


Ch.  XVII.]  ATMOSPHERE  OF  CARBONIC  ACID.  409

carbonic  acid  gas  are  exhaled  in  the  vicinity  of  the  extinct
craters  of  the  Rhine  (in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Laacher-
see,  for  example,  and  the  Eifel),  and  also  in  the  mineral
springs  of  Nassau  and  other  countries,  where  there  are  no
such  traces  of  modem  volcanic  action.  It  would  be  easy  to
calculate  in  how  short  a  period  the  solid  carbon  thus  emitted
from  the  intmor  of  the  earth  in  an  invisible  form,  would
amount  to  a  quantity  as  great  as  could  be  obtained  from  the
trees  of  a  large  forest,  and  how  many  thousand  years  would
be  required  to  supply  the  materials  of  a  dense  seam  of  pure
coal  from  the  same  source.  I  have  already  alluded  (p.  226)
to  the  doctrine  favoured  by  some  geologists  of  the  existence
of  an  atmosphere  highly  charged  with  carbonic  acid,  at  the
period  of  the  ancient  coal-plants,  and  have  endeavoured  to
show  that  the  opinion  is  untenable.*  We  have  no  right  to
draw  such  an  inference  as  to  the  former  chemical  consti-
tution of  the  atmosphere,  until  we  have  data  for  estimating
the  volume  of  carbonic  acid  gaa  emitted  from  the  earth  in
volcanic  regions,  or  given  out  by  dead  animal  and  vegetable
substances  during  putrefaction,  and  comparing  it  with  the
volume  of  the  same  gas  annually  extracted  from  the  air,
and  afterwards  stored  up  in  the  earth's  crust  in  the  form  of
peat,  buried  timber,  and  organic  matter  derived  from  the
animal  kingdom.

Disintegrating  effects  of  carbonic  acid. — The  disintegration
of  granite  is  a  striking  feature  of  large  districts  in  Auvergne,
especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Clermont.  This  decay  was
called  by  Dolomieu  *  la  maladie  du  granite.'  The  pheno-
menon may,  without  doubt,  be  ascribed  to  the  continual
disengagement  of  carbonic  acid  gas  from  numerous  fissures.

In  the  plains  of  the  Po,  between  Verona  and  Parma,
especially  at  Villa  Franca,  south  of  Mantua,  I  observed  gi'eat
beds  of  alluvium,  consisting  chiefly  of  pebbles  of  crystalline
rock,  percolated  by  spring- water,  charged  with  carbonate  of
lime  and  carbonic  acid  in  great  abundance.  They  are  for
the  most  part  incrusted  with  calc-sinter ;  and  the  rounded
blocks  of  gneiss,  which  have  all  the  outward  appearance  of

*  See  Ljeirs  Travels  in  N.  America.    June  1829.


410  PETROLEUM  SPRINGS.  [Ch.  XVU.

solidity,  and  which  could  only  have  acquired  their  shape  by
trituration  when  extremely  hard,  have  been  so  disintegrated
by  the  carbonic  acid  as  readily  to  fall  to  pieces.

The  subtraction  of  many  of  the  elements  of  rocks  by  the
solvent  power  of  carbonic  acid,  ascending  both  in  a  gaseous
state  and  mixed  with  spring-water  in  the  crevices  of  rocks,
must  be  one  of  the  most  active  sources  of  those  internal
changes  and  rearrangements  of  particles  so  often  observed
in  strata  of  every  age.  The  calcareous  matter,  for  example,
of  shells,  is  often  entirely  removed  and  replaced  by  carbonate
of  iron,  pyrites,  silex,  or  some  othe^  ingredient,  such  as
mineral  waters  usually  contain  in  solution.  It  rarely  happens,
except  in  limestone  rocks,  that  the  carbonic  acid  can  dissolve
all  the  constituent  parts  of  the  mass ;  and  for  this  reason,
probably,  calcareous  rocks  are  almost  the  only  ones  in  which
great  caverns  and  long  winding  passages  are  found.

Petroleum  springs, —  Springs  of  which  the  waters  contain  a
mixture  of  petroleum,  or  rock  oil,  which  is  a  compound  of
hydrogen  and  carbon,  and  the  various  minerals  allied  to  it,
such  as  naphtha  and  asphalt  or  mineral  pitch,  are  very  nu-
merous. All  these  substances,  says  Mr.  T.  Sterry  Hunt,  are
forms  of  bitumen,  some,  like  petroleum,  being  fluid,  others,
like  asphalt,  being  solid  at  orditiary  temperatures.  They  are
supposed  to  be  all  of  organic  origin,  derived  partly  from
terrestrial,  partly  from  marine  plants,  and  sometimes  from
animal  remains ;  for  portions,  says  Mr.  Hunt,  of  the  tissues
of  various  marine  animals  of  low  grade  are  destitute  of  nitro-
gen, and  very  similar  in  mineral  composition  to  the  woody
fibre  of  plants.  The  probability,  in  some  cases,  of  an  animal
origin  has  been  especially  inferred  from  the  abundance  of
animal  remains,  and  the  paucity  of  those  of  plants  in  the
beds  containing  them.*  Petroleum  is  found  in  formations  of
every  age,  from  the  Lower  Silurian  up  to  the  Tertiary ;  but
a  large  number  of  the  oil-wells  of  the  United  States,  which
have  lately  attracted  so  much  attention,  are  in  Devonian  and
Silurian  rocks.

In  some  instances  the  petroleum  appears  to  filter  slowly
into  the  wells  from  the  porous  strata  around,  which  are  satu-

•  Judd's  Letter,  Dec.  3,  1874.


Ch,  XVII.]  GREAT  PITCH  LAKE  OF  TRINIDAD.  411

rated  with  it,  while  at  other  times  the  boring  instrument
seems  to  strike  upon  a  fissure  communicating  with  a  reser-
voir which  furnishes  at  once  great  volumes  of  oil.*

The  great  pitch  lake  of  Trinidad  is  situated,  according  to
Mr.  Wall,  in  Tertiary  strata,  chiefly  Upper  Miocene,  but
partly,  perhaps,  Lower  Pliocene.  The  asphalt  is  derived  from
bituminous  shales,  containing  vegetable  remains,  which  are
sometimes  seen  in  the  process  of  transformation,  with  their
organic  structure  more  or  less  obliterated.  Occasionally  the
bituminous  substance  becomes  plastic  and  even  oily,  and  rises
to  the  surface.t  Such  changes  from  oil  to  a  pitch  may  be
brought  about,  says  Mr.  T.  S.  Hunt,  partly  by  the  evaporation
of  the  volatile  ingredients,  and  partly  by  oxidation  from
the  air.

Captain  Mallet  observes  that,  near  Cape  La  Braye,  in  the
island  of  Trinidad,  fluid  bitumen  sometimes  oozes  out  from
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  rises  to  the  surface.  The  same
author  quotes  Gumilla,  as  stating,  in  his  *  Description  of  the
Orinoco,'  that,  *  about  seventy  years  ago,  a  spot  of  land  on  the
western  coast  of  Trinidad,  near  half-way  between  the  capital
and  an  Indian  village,  sank  suddenly,  and  was  immediately
replaced  by  a  small  lake  of  pitch,  to  the  great  terror  of  the
inhabitants.' J

A  similar  subsidence,  at  an  earlier  period,  may  probably
have  given  rise  to  the  great  pitch  lake  of  Trinidad,  the  cavity
having  become  gradually  filled  with  asphalt.  Every  geologist
is  fiimiliar  with  the  odour  emitted  from  what  are  called  fetid
limestones  when  first  broken.  The  Niagara  limestone  of  the
Upper  Silurian  group  in  America  is  sometimes  so  impreg-
nated with  bitumen,  that  this  substance,  when  the  stone  is
burned  for  lime,  flows  from  the  kiln  like  tar.§

*  Sterry  Hunt,  Canadian  Naturalist,  J  Mallet,  cited  by  Dr.  Nugent,  Geol.

vol.  vi.  p.  245.     August,  1861.  Trans,  vol.  i.  p.  69.     1811.

t  Wall.      Quart.   Geol.  Journ.  vol.  §  T.  S.  Hunt,  ibid.  p.  246.
xri.  p.  468.     1860.


412


CHAPTER  XVIIL

BEPBODUCTIVE  EFFECTS  OF  KIYEBS.

LAKB  DELTAS — OBOWTH  OF  THE  DELTA  OF  THE  UFPBR  RHOXB  Of  THB  LAKE
OF  GENEVA — PLAYFAIB  OX  THB  ORIOIX  OF  LAKE  BASUTS — COXPUTATIOir  OF
THE  AOE  OF  DELTAS — BBCE2fT  DEPOSITS  IX  JAKE  STPERIOB — DELTAS  OF
IXLAXD  SEAS — COUBSB  OF  THE  FO — ABTIFIOAL  KMBAKKMBXTS  OF  THB  PC
AXD  ADIOE — DELTA  OF  THE  PO,  AXD  OTHER  BIVBRS  EXTKBIXO  THB  ADRI-
ATIC  RAPID   CtJXTEBSIOX  OF  THE  GULF   INTO     LAND — MINBRAL   CHARACTKRS

OF  THB  XEW  DEPOSITS — XABIXE  DELTA  OF  THE  BHOXE — TABI0U8  PBOOFS
OF  ITS  IKCREASB — STOXT  VATTRB  OF  ITS  DEPOSITS— COAST  OF  ASIA  MDTOB
— DELTA  OF  THE  XILE — CHROXOLOGICAL  COMPTTATIOX  OF  THB  GROWTH  UF
THB  XILK  XTD  AT   MEMPHIS.

DELTAS  IN  LAKES.

I  HAVE  already  spoken  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the
action  of  running  water,  and  of  the  denuding  power  of  rivers,
but  we  can  only  form  a  just  conception  of  the  excavating
and  removing  force  exerted  by  such  bodies  of  water,  when
we  have  the  advantage  of  examining  the  reproductive  effects
of  the  same  agents:  in  other  words,  of  beholding  in  a  palpable
form  the  aggregate  amount  of  matter  which  they  have
thrown  down  at  certain  points  in  their  alluvial  plains,  or  in
the  basins  of  lakes  and  seas.  Yet  it  will  appear,  when  we
consider  the  action  of  currents,  that  the  growth  of  deltas
affords  a  very  inadequate  standard  by  which  to  measure  the
entire  carrying  power  of  running  water,  since  a  considerable
portion  of  fluviatile  sediment  is  swept  far  out  to  sea.

Deltas  may  be  divided  into,  first,  those  which  are  formed
in  lakes ;  secondly,  those  in  inland  seas,  where  the  tides  are
almost  imperceptible;  and,  thirdly,  those  on  the  borders  of
the  ocean.  The  most  characteristic  distinction  between  the
lacustrine  and  marine  deltas  consists  in  the  nature  of  the
organic  remains  which  become  imbedded  in  their  deposits ;


Ch.  XVIII.]  LAKE  OF  GENEVA.  413

for,  in  the  case  of  a  lake,  it  is  obvious  that  these  must  consist
exclusively  of  such  genera  of  animals  as  inhabit  the  land  or
the  waters  of  a  river  oi*  lake ;  whereas,  in  the  other  case,
there  will  be  an  admixture,  and  most  frequently  a  predomi-
nance, of  animals  which  inhabit  salt  water.  In  regard,
however,  to  the  distribution  of  inorganic  matter,  the  deposits
of  lakes  and  seas  are  formed  under  very  analogous  circum-
stances.

Lake  of  Geneva. — Lakes  exemplify  the  first  reproductive
operations  in  which  rivers  are  engaged  when  they  convey  the
detritus  of  rocks  and  the  ingredients  of  mineral  springs  from
higher  to  lower  regions.     The  accession  of  new  land  at  the  \
mouth  of  the  Rhone,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  j
or  the  Leman  Lake,  presents  us  with  an  example  of  a  con-  \
siderable  thickness  of  strata  which  have  accumulated  since  -
the  historical  era.     This  sheet  of  water  is  about  1,200  feet  (
above  the  sea,  thirty-seven  miles  long,  and  its  breadth  is
from  two  to  eight  miles.     The  shape  of  the  bottom  is  very
irregular,  the  depth  having   been   found  to  vary  from  20
to  160  fathoms.*     The  Rhone,  where  it  enters  at  the  upper  ^
end,  is   turbid   and  discoloured;    but  its  waters,  where  it',
issues  at  the  town  of  Geneva,  are  beautifully  clear  and  trans-  !
parent.   An  ancient  town,  called  Port  Vallais  (Portus  Yalesise
of  the  Romans),  once  situated  at  the  water's  edge,  at  the  |
upper  end,  is  now  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  inland— this  '
intervening   alluvial  tract  having  been  €tcquired  in   about
eiffht  centuries.     The  remainder  of  the  delta  consists  of  a
flat  alluvial  plain,  about  five  or  six  miles  in  length,  composed
of  sand  and  mud,  a  little  raised  above  the  level  of  the  river,
and  full  of  marshes.

Sir  Henry  De  la  Beche  found,  after  numerous  soundings
in  all  parts  of  the  lake,  that  there  was  a  pretty  uniform  depth
of  from  120  to  160  fathoms  throughout  the  central  region,
and  on  approaching  the  delta  the  shallowing  of  the  bottom
began  to  be  very  sensible  at  a  distance  of  about  a  mile  and
three-quarters  from  the  mouth  of  the  Rhone ;  for  a  line
drawn  from  St.  Gingoulph  to  Vevey  gives  a  mean  depth  of
somewhat  less  than   600  feet,  and  fit)m  that  part  to   the

*  De  la  Beche,  Ed.  Phil.  Journ.  vol.  ii.  p.  107.    Jao.  1820.


414  LAKE  OF  GENEVA.  [Ch.  XVIU.

Khone,  the  flaviatile  mud  is  always  found  along  the  bottom.^
We  may  state,  therefore,  that  the  new  strata  annually  pro-
duced are  thrown  down  upon  a  slope  about  two  miles  in
length;  so  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  depth  of  the
lake,  the  new  deposits  are  inclined  at  so  slight  an  angle,
that  they  would  be  termed,  in  ordinary  geological  language,
horizontal.

The  strata  probably  consist  of  alternations  of  finer  and
coarser  particles ;  for,  during  the  hotter  months  from  April
to  August,  when  the  snows  melt,  the  volume  and  velocity  of
the  river  are  greatest,  and  large  quantities  of  sand,  mud,
vegetable  matter,  and  drift-wood  are  introduced ;  but  during
the  rest  of  the  year  the  influx  is  comparatively  feeble,  so
much  so,  that  the  whole  lake,  according  to  Saussure,  stands
six  feet  lower.  If,  then,  we  could  obtain  a  section  of  the
accumulation  formed  in  the  last  eight  centuries,  we  should
see  a  great  series  of  strata,  probably  from  600  to  900  feet
thick,  and  nearly  two  miles  in  length,  inclined  at  a  very
slight  angle.  A  much  more  considerable  deposit  of  similarly
stratified  matter,  of  an  age  antecedent  to  the  historical,
would  be  seen  extending  to  the  original  head  of  the  lake  five
or  six  miles  distant  from  the  accumulations  of  the  last  800
years.  Simultaneously  with  the  gro%vth  of  the  principal  delta,
a  great  number  of  rapid  torrents  are  bringing  down  large
masses  of  sand  and  pebbles,  and  forming  smaller  deltas  at
their  mouths  round  the  borders  of  the  lake.  The  body  of
water  in  such  torrents  is  too  small  to  enable  them  to  spread
out  the  transported  matter  over  so  extensive  an  area  as  the
Rhone  does.  Thus,  for  example,  there  is  a  depth  of  eighty
fathoms  within  half  a  mile  of  the  shore,  immediately  opposite
the  great  torrent  which  enters  east  of  Ripaille,  so  that  the
dip  of  the  strata  in  that  minor  delta  must  be  about  four
times  as  great  as  that  of  the  deposits  formed  by  the  main
river  at  the  upper  extremity  of  the  lake.f

The  capacity  of  this  basin  being  now  ascertained,  it  would
be  an  interesting  subject  of  enquiry,  to  determine  in  what
number  of  years  the  Leman  Lake  will  bo  converted  into  dry
land.     It  would  not  be  very  difficult  to  obtain  the  elements

*  De  la  Beche,  MS.  t  Ibid.


Ch.  XVni.]  LAKE  OF  GENEVA.  415

for  such  a  calculation,  so  as  to  approximate  at  least  to  the
quantity  of  time  required  for   the   accomplishment   of  the
result.     The  number  of   cubic  feet  of  water  annually  dis-
charged by  the  river  into  the  lake  being  estimated,  experi-
ments might  be  made  in  the  winter  and  summer  months,  to
determine  the  proportion  of  matter  held  in  suspension  or  in
chemical  solution  by  the  Rhone.     It  would  be  also  necessary
to  allow  for  the  heavier  matter  drifted  along  at  the  bottom,
which  might  be  estimated  on  hydrostatic  principles,  when
the  average  size  of  the  gravel  and  the  volume  and  velocity  of
the  stream  at  different  seasons  were  known.     Supposing  all
these  observations  to  have  been  made,  it  would  be  more  easy
to  calculate  the  future  than  the  former  progress  of  the  delta,
because  it  would  be  a  laborious  task  to  ascertain,  with  any
degree  of  precision,  the  original  depth  and  extent  of  that
part  of  the  lake  which  is  already  filled  up.     Even  if  this
information  were  actually  obtained  by  borings,  it  would  only
enable  us  to  approximate  within  a  certain  number  of  centu-
ries to  the  time  when  the  Rhone  began  to  form  its  present
delta ;  but  this  would  not  give  us  the  date  of  the  origin  of
the  Leman  Lake  in  its  present  form,  because  the  river  may
have  flowed  into  it  for  thousands  of  years,  without  importing
any  sediment  whatever.     Such  would  have  been  the  case,  if
the  waters  had  first  passed  through  a  chain  of  upper  lakes ;
and  that  this  was  actually  the  fact,  seems  indicated  by  the
course   of  the   Rhone   between  Martigny  and  the  Lake  of
Geneva,  and,  still  more  decidedly,  by  the  channels  of  many
of  its  principal  feeders.

If  we  ascend,  for  example,  the  valley  through  which  the
Dranse  flows,  we  find  that  it  consists  of  a  succession  of
basins,  one  above  the  other,  in  each  of  which  there  is  a  wide
expanse  of  flat  alluvial  lands,  separated  from  the  next  basin
by  a  rocky  gorge,  once  perhaps  the  barrier  of  a  lake.  The
river  seems  to  have  filled  these  lakes,  one  after  the  other,
and  to  have  partially  cut  through  the  barriers,  some  of  which
it  is  still  gradually  eroding  to  a  greater  depth.  Before,
therefore,  we  can  pretend  even  to  hazard  a  conjecture  as  to
the  era  at  which  the  principal  delta  of  Lake  Leman  or  any
other  delta  commenced,  we  must  be  thoroughly  acquainted


416  LAKE  OF  GENEVA.  [Ch.  XVIH.

witli  the  geographical  features  and  geological  history  of  the
whole  system  of  higher  valleys  which  communicate  with  the
main  stream,  and  all  the  changes  which  they  have  under-
gone since  the  last  series  of  convulsions  which  agitated  and
altered  the  face  of  the  country.

Playfair,  in  his  *  Illustrations  of  the  Huttonian  Theory  of
the  Earth/  after  declaring  that  he  agreed  in  opinion  with  the
Scotch  geologist  that  the  principal  valleys  of  the  Alps  and
other  mountains  have  been  excavated  by  rivers,  frankly  admits
that  the  Lake  of  Geneva  seems  to  offer  an  objection  to  that
theory.  The  valley  above  is  so  deep  and  broad,  that  the  ma-
terials removed  from  it  ought  to  have  filled  up  the  lake  again
and  again  'on  any  reasonable  supposition  concerning  its
original  magnitude.'  What  has  become  of  all  the  materials
which  the  Rhone  has  brought  down  from  the  higher  region  ?
To  explain  away  the  difficulty,  he  suggests,  among  other
hypotheses,  that  the  lake  had  no  existence  while  the  river  was
eroding  the  valley  above.  Part,  both  of  the  rising  and
sinking  of  the  land,  he  observes,  has  happened  within  periods
comparatively  modem.  *The  elevations  and  depressions
may  not  be  the  same  for  every  spot ;  they  may  be  partial,  and
one  part  of  a  stratum  or  body  of  strata  may  rise  to  a  greater
height  or  be  more  depressed  than  another.  It  is  not  impos-
sible that  this  process  may  affect  the  depth  of  lakes  and
change  the  relative  level  of  their  sides  and  bottom.*  *  The
Vallais,'  he  also  adds,  *  which  we  consider  as  the  work  of  the
Rhone,  may  not  have  owed  all  its  inequalities  to  the  running
of  water.  It  may,  when  the  Alps  rose  out  of  the  sea,  have
included  many  depressions  of  the  surface  which  the  river
joined  together,  and  from  being  a  series  of  lakes  formed  into
one  great  valley.'  f  A  suggestion  has  lately  been  made,  that
the  rock-basin  which  the  Lake  of  Geneva  fills  may  have  been
scooped  out  by  ice.  That  it  was  once  occupied  by  a  glacier
I  fully  admit,  but  that  the  action  of  the  glacier  hollowed  out
the  cavity  is  an  hypothesis  which  appears  to  me  quite  un-
tenable, for  reasons  which  I  liave  explained  elsewhere.J

*  Playfair.      Illustrations  of  Hut-  J  Elements  of   Geology,  edition   of

tonian  Theory,  p.  366.  1865,  p.  170  ;  and  Student's  Elements,

t  Ibid.  p.  367.  p.  160.


Ch.  XVm.]  LAKE  SUPERIOR.  417

Lake  Superior. — Lake  Superior  is  the  largest  body  of  fresh
water  in  the  world,  being  above  1,700  geographical  miles  in
circumference  when  we  follow  the  sinuosities  of  its  coasts,
and  its  length,  on  a  curved  line  drawn  through  its  centre,
being  more  than  400,  and  its  extreme  breadth  above  150
geographical  miles.  Its  surface  is  nearly  as  large  as  the
whole  of  England  proper.  Its  average  depth  varies  from  80
to  150  fathoms  ;  but,  according  to  Captain  Bayfield,  there  is
reason  to  think  that  its  greatest  depth  would  not  be  overrated
at  200  fathoms,  so  that  its  bottom  is,  in  some  parts,  nearly  600
feet  below  the  level  of  the  Atlantic,  its  surface  being  about
as  much  above  it.  There  are  appearances  in  dififerent  parts
of  this,  as  of  the  other  Canadian  lakes,  leading  us  to  infer
that  its  waters  formerly  occupied  a  higher  level  than  they
reach  at  present ;  for  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the
present  shores,  parallel  lines  of  rolled  stones  and  sand  are
seen  rising  one  above  the  other,  like  the  seats  of  an  amphi-
theatre- These  ancient  lines  of  shingle  are  exactly  similar
to  the  present  beaches  in  most  bays,  and  they  often  attain  an
elevation  of  40  or  50  feet,  and  sometimes  several  hundred
feet,  above  the  present  level.  The  heaviesi;  gales  of  wind  do
not  raise  the  water  more  than  three  or  four  feet,  and  the
loose  materials,  says  Agassiz,  which  lie  within  the  action  of
heavy  storms,  are  entirely  deprived  of  vegetation,  whereas
the  set  of  beaches  next  above  are  covered  by  a  few  crypto-
gamous  and  herbaceous  plants.  At  a  still  higher  level,  and
retreating  more  and  more  from  the  shores,  are  terraces  on
which  grow  shrubs  and  small  trees,  and  above  these  older
beaches  are  precipitous  banks  cut  out  of  loose  materials,
which  must  have  been  worn  for  a  considerable  time  by  the
action  of  the  waves.  Six,  ten,  and  even  fifteen  such  terraces
may  sometimes  be  distinguished  one  above  the  other.  All
these  beaches  and  terraces  are  composed  of  remodelled  glacial
drift,  the  stones  having  lost  more  or  less  of  their  scratches
and  polished  appearance,  and  having  been  rolled  into  ordinary
pebbles.  M.  Agassiz,  when  discussing  the  question  how  so
many  changes  may  have  been  produced  in  the  level  of  the  old
shore  of  the  lake,  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  the  land  has

VOL.   I.  E  E


418  LAKE  SUPERIOR  [Ch,  XVm*

risen  unequally,  rather  than  that  the  waters  have  been
repeatedly  lowered  by  the  successive  wearing  down  or  re-
moval of  the  barrier  on  the  side  where  it  is  lowest  at  present.*
If  we  are  compelled  to  grant  that  such  inequalities  of  move*
ment  have  occurred  in  Post-glacial  times,  we  may  well
suppose  that  others  of  far  greater  extent  contributed,  before
and  during  the  Glacial  period,  to  form  the  basin  of  the  great
lake  itself.

The  streams  which    discharge  their  waters  into   Lake
Superior,  without  reckoning  many  of  smaller  size,  are  several
hundred  in  number ;  and  the  quantity  of  water  supplied  by
them  is  many  times  greater  than  that  discharged  at  the
Falls  of  St.  Mary,  the  only  outlet.     The  evaporation,  there-
fore, is  very  great,  and  such  as  might  be  expected  from  so
vast  an  extent  of  surface.     On  the  northern  side,  which  is
encircled  by  mountains  of  old  crystalline  rock,  the  rivers
sweep  in  many  large  boulders  with  smaller  grayel  and  sand,
chiefly  composed  of  granitic  and  trap  rocks.    There  are  also
currents  in  the  lake  in  various  directions,  caused  by  the  con-
tinual prevalence  of  strong  winds,  and  to  their  influence  we
may  attribute  the  diflfusion  of  finer  mud  far  and  wide  over
great  areas  ;  for  by  numerous  soundings  made  during  Capt.
Bayfield's  survey,  it  was  ascertained  that  the  bottom  consists
genemlly  of  a  very  adhesive  clay,  containing  shells  of  the
species  at  present  existing  in  the  lake.     When  exposed  to
the  air,  this  clay  immediately  becomes  so  indurated  as  to
require  a  smart  blow  of  the  hammer  to  break  it.     It  effer-
vesces slightly  with  diluted  nitric  acid,  and  is  of  different
colours  in  different  parts  of  the  lake ;  in  one  district  blue,  in
another  red,  and  in  a  third  white,  hardening  into  a  substance
resembling  pipeclay.f     From  these  statements,  the  geologist
will  not  fail  to  remark  how  closely  these  recent  lacustrine
formations  in  America  resemble  the  tertiary  argillaceous  and
calcareous  marls  of  lacustrine  origin  in  Central  France.     In
both  cases  many  of  the  genera  of  shells  most  abundant,  as
Lymnea  and  Planorbis,  are  the  same ;  and  in  regard  to  other

*  Agassiz,  Lake  Superior,  p.  416.

t  Trans,  of  Lit.  and  Hist.  Soc.  of  Quebec,  toL  i.  p.  6.     1829.


Ch.  XVra.]  DELTAS  OF  INLAND  SEAS.  419

classes  of  organic  remains  there  must  be  the  closest  analogy,
as  I  shall  endeavour  more  fully  to  explain  when  speaking  of
the  imbedding  of  plants  and  animals  in  recent  deposits*

DELTAS  OF  INLAND  SEAS.

Having  thus  briefly  considered  some  of  the  lacustrine
deltas  now  in  progress,  we  may  next  turn  our  attention  to
those  of  inland  seas.

Deltas  of  the  Po  and  Adige. — ^The  Po  afibrds  an  instructive
example  of  the  manner  in  which  a  great  river  bears  dovni  to
the  sea  the  matter  poured  into  it  by  a  multitude  of  tributaries
descending  from  loffcy  chains  of  mountains.  It  has  been
calculated  by  Mr.  Geikie  that  this  river  removes  one  foot  of
rock  from  the  general  surface  of  its  basin  in  729  years/  The
changes  gradually  effected  in  the  great  plain  of  Northern  Italy
since  the  time  of  the  Roman  republic  are  considerable.  Ex-
tensive lakes  and  marshes  have  been  gradually  filled  up,  as
those  near  Placentia,  Parma,  and  Cremona,  and  many  have
been  drained  naturally  by  the  deepening  of  the  beds  of  rivers.
Deserted  river-courses  are  not  unfrequent,  as  that  of  the
Serio  Morto,  which  formerly  fell  into  the  Adda,  in  Lombardy,
The  Po  also  itself  has  often  deviated  from  its  course,  having,
after  the  year  1390,  deserted  part  of  the  territory  of  Cremona,
and  invaded  that  of  Parma ;  its  old  channel  being  still  re-
cognisable, and  bearing  the  name  of  Po  Morto.  There  is
also  an  old  channel  of  the  Po  in  the  territory  of  Parma,  called
Po  Vecchio,  which  was  abandoned  in  the  twelfth  century,
when  a  great  number  of  towns  were  destroyed.

To  check  these  and  similar  aberrations,  a  general  system
of  embankment  has  been  adopted  ;  and  the  Po,  Adige,  and
almost  all  their  tributaries,  are  now  confined  between  high
artificial  banks.  The  increased  velocity  acquired  by  streams
thus  closed  in,  enables  them  to  convey  a  much  larger  portion
of  foreign  matter  to  the  sea  ;  and,  consequently,  the  deltas
of  the  Po  and  Adige  have  gained  far  more  rapidly  on  the
Adriatic  since  the  practice  of  embankment  became  almost
universal.     But,  although  more  sediment  is  borne  to  the  sea,

*  Traos.  Geol.  Soc.  of  Glasgow,  1868,  vol.  iii.  p.  164.

B  B  2


420  DELTAS  OF  THE  PO  AND  ADIGE.  [Ch.  XVIIL

part  of  the  sand  and  mud,  which  in  the  natural  state  of
things  would  be  spread  out  by  annual  inundations  over  the
plain,  now  subsides  in  the  bottom  of  the  river-channels ;  and,
their  capacity  being  thereby  diminished,  it  is  necessary,  in
order  to  prevent  inundations  in  the  following  spring,  to  ex-
tract matter  from  the  bed,  and  to  add  it  to  the  banks  of  the
river.  Hence  it  happens  that  these  streams  now  traverse
the  plain  on  the  top  of  high  mounds,  like  the  waters  of
aqueducts,  and  at  Ferrara  the  surface  of  the  Po  has  become
more  elevated  than  the  roofs  of  the  houses.*  The  magnitude
of  these  barriers  is  a  subject  of  increasing  expense  and
anxiety,  it  having  been  sometimes  found  necessary  to  give
an  additional  height  of  nearly  one  foot  to  the  banks  of  the
Adige  and  Po  in  a  single  season.

The  practice  of  embankment  was  adopted  on  some  of  the
Italian  rivers  as  early  as  the  thirteenth  century ;  and  Dante,
"writing  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth,  describes,  in  the
seventh  circle  of  hell,  a  rivulet  of  tears  separated  from  a
burning  sandy  desert  by  embankments  *like  those  which,
between  Ghent  and  Bruges,  were  raised  against  the  ocean,  or
those  which  the  Paduans  had  erected  along  the  Brenta  to
defend  their  villas  on  the  melting  of  the  Alpine  snows.*

Quale  i  Fiamniinghi  tra  Guzzante  o  Bruggia,
Teraendo  il  tiotto  cbe  in  ver  lor  a'  avventa,
Fan  no  lo  schermo,  perch^  il  mar  si  fuggia  ;

E  quale  i  Patiovan  lungo  la  Brenta,
l*er  difender  lor  ville  e  lor  castelli,
Anzi  che  Chiarentana  il  caldo  senta.

Infemoj  Canto  xv.

In  the  Adriatic,  from  the  northern  part  of  the  Gulf  of
Ti'ieste,  where  the  Isonzo  enters,  down  to  the  south  of
Ravenna,  there  is  an  uninterrupted  series  of  recent  acces-
sions of  land,  more  than  100  miles  in  length,  which  within
the  last  2,000  years  has  increased  from  two  to  twenty  miles
in  breadth.  A  line  of  sand-bars  of  gi-eat  length  has  been
formed  nearly  all  along  the  western  coast  of  this  gulf,  in-
side of  which  are  lagunes,  such  as  those  of  Venice,  and  the
large  lagune  of  Comacehio,  20  miles  in  diameter.     Newly

*  Prony,  see  Cuvier,  Disc,  prelim,  p.  1-16.


Ch.  XVIII.]  DELTAS  OF  THE  PO  AND  ADIGE.  421

deposited  mud  brought  down  by  tlie  streams  is  continually
lessening  the  depth  of  the  lagunes,  and  converting  part  of
them  into  meadows.*  The  Isonzo,  Tagliamento,  Piave,
Brenta,  Adige,  and  Po,  besides  many  other  inferior  rivers,
contribute  to  this  advance  of  the  coast-line  and  to  the
shallowing  of  the  lagunes  and  the  gulf.

The  Po  and  the  Adige  may  now  be  considered  as  entering
by  one  common  delta,  for  two  branches  of  the  Adige  are  con-
nected with  arms  of  the  Po,  and  thus  the  principal  delta
has  been  pushed  out  beyond  those  bars  which  separate  the
lagunes  from  the  sea.  The  rate  of  the  advance  of  this  new
land  has  been  accelerated,  as  before  stated,  since  the  system
of  embanking  the  rivers  became  general,  especially  at  that
point  where  the  Po  and  Adige  enter.  The  waters  are  no
longer  permitted  to  spread  themselves  far  and  wide  over  the
plains,  and  to  leave  behind  them  the  larger  portion  of  their
sediment.  Mountain  torrents  also  have  become  more  turbid
since  the  clearing  away  of  forests,  which  once  clothed  the
southern  flanks  of  the  Alps.  It  is  calculated  that  the  mean
rate  of  advance  of  the  delta  of  the  Po  on  the  Adriatic
between  the  years  1200  and  1600  was  25  yards  or  metres  a
year,  whereas  the  mean  annual  gain  from  1600  to  1804  was
70  metres,  t

Adria  was  a  seaport  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  and  had,  in
ancient  times,  given  its  name  to  the  gulf;  it  is  now  about
twenty  Italian  miles  inland.  Bavenna  was  also  a  seaport,
and  is  now  about  four  miles  from  the  main  sea.  Yet,  even
before  the  practice  of  embankment  was  introduced,  the
alluvium  of  the  Po  advanced  with  rapidity  on  the  Adriatic ;
for  Spina,  a  very  ancient  city,  originally  built  in  the  district
of  Ravenna,  at  the  mouth  of  a  great  arm  of  the  Po,  was,  so
early  as  the  commencement  of  our  era,  eleven  miles  distant
from  the  sea.  J  .

But  although  so  many  rivers  are  rapidly  converting  the
Adriatic  into  land,  it  appears,  by  the  observations  of  M.
Morlot,  that  since  the  time  of  the  Uomans  there  has  been  a

*  See  Do    Beaumont,  Geologie   pra-      prelim.
tiquo,  vol.  i.  p.  323.     1844.  J  Brocchi,  Conch.  Fos6.Sabap.  vol.  i.

t  Pronj,  cited  hy  Cuvier,  Discours      p.  118.


422  DELTA  OF  THE  PO.  [Qu  XYin.

treneral  sabsidence  of  the  coast  and  bed  of  this  sea  in  the
9»ame  region  to  the  amount  of  five  feet,  so  that  the  advunce
of  the  new-made  land  has  not  been  so  fast  as  it  would  haye
been  had  the  level  of  the  coast  remained  unaltered.  The
signs  of  a  much  greater  depression  anterior  to  the  historical
period  have  also  been  brought  to  light  bj  an  Artesian  well,
bored  at  Venice  in  1847,  to  the  depth  of  more  than  400  feet,
which  still  failed  to  penetrate  through  the  modem  flnviatile
deposit.  The  auger  passed  chiefly  through  beds  of  sand  and
clay;  but  at  four  several  depths,  one  of  them  very  near  the
bottom  of  the  excavation,  it  pierced  beds  of  turf,  or  accumu-
lations of  vegetable  matter,  precisely  similar  to  those  now
formed  superficially  on  the  extreme  borders  of  the  Adriatic.
Hence  we  learn  that  a  considerable  area  of  what  was  once
land  has  sunk  down  400  feet  in  the  course  of  ages.*

The  greatest  depth  of  the  Adriatic,  between  Dalmatia  and
the  mouths  of  the  Po,  is  twenty-two  fathoms ;  but  a  large
part  of  the  Gulf  of  Trieste  and  the  Adriatic,  opposite  Venice,
is  less  than  twelve  fathoms  deep.  Farther  to  the  south,
where  it  is  less  affected  by  the  influx  of  great  rivers,  the  gulf
deepens  considerably.  Donati,  after  dredging  the  bottom,
discovered  the  new  deposits  to  consist  partly  of  mud  and
partly  of  rock,  the  rock  being  formed  of  calcareous  matter,
iiicrusting  shells.  Ho  also  ascertained  that  particular  species
of  testacea  were  grouped  together  in  certain  places,  and  were
becoming  slowly  incorporated  ^vith  the  mud  or  calcareous
precipitates.t  Olivi,  also,  found  some  deposits  of  sand,  and
others  of  mud,  extending  half-way  across  the  gulf;  and  he
states  that  their  distribution  along  the  bottom  was  evidently
determined  by  the  prevailing  current.  J  It  is  probable,  there-
fore, that  the  finer  sediment  of  all  the  rivers  at  the  head  oi
the  Adriatic  may  be  intermingled  by  the  influence  of  the  cur-
rent ;  and  all  the  central  parts  of  the  gulf  may  be  considered
as  slowly  filling  up  with  horizontal  deposits,  similar  to  those
of  the  Subapennine  hills,  and  containing  many  of  the  same
species  of  shells.     The  Po  merely  introduces  at  present  fine

*  Apchiac.  Histoire  des  Progrfes  de  la       i.  p.  39.
Geol.  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  232.  +  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  9i

t  Brocchi,  Cooch.  Foss.  Subap.  toI.


Ch.  XVni.]        DELTA  OF  THE  RHONE.  423

sand  and  mud,  for  it  carries  no  pebbles  farther  than  the  spot
where  it  joins  the  Trebia,  west  of  Piacenza.  At  the  northern
borders  of  the  Gulf  of  Trieste,  the  Isonzo,  Tagliamento,  and
many  other  streams,  are  forming  immense  beds  of  sand  and
some  conglomerate ;  for  here  some  high  mountains  of  Alpine
limestone  approach  within  a  few  miles  of  the  sea.

In  the  time  of  the  Romans,  the  hot  baths  of  Monfalcone
were  on  one  of  several  islands  of  Alpine  limestone,  between
which  and  the  mainland,  on  the  north,  was  a  channel  of  the
sea,  about  a  mile  broad.  This  channel  is  now  converted  into
a  grassy  plain,  which  surrounds  the  island  on  all  sides.
Among  the  numerous  changes  on  this  coast,  we  find  that  the
present  channel  of  the  Isonzo  is  several  miles  to  the  west  of
its  ancient  bed,  in  part  of  which,  at  Bonchi,  the  old  Eoman
bridge  which  crossed  the  Via  Appia  was  lately  found  buried
in  fluviatile  silt.

Marine  delta  of  the  Rhone. — The  lacustrine  delta  of  the
Rhone  in  Switzerland  has  already  been  considered  (p.  413) ;
its  contemporaneous  marine  delta  may  now  be  described.
Scarcely  has  the  river  passed  out  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva  before
its  pure  waters  are  again  filled  with  sand  and  sediment  by
the  impetuous  Arve,  descending  from  the  highest  Alps,  and
bearing  along  in  its  current  the  granitic  sand  and  impalpable
mud  annually  brought  down  by  the  glaciers  of  Mont  Blanc.
The  Ehone  afterwards  receives  vast  contributions  of  trans-
ported matter  from  the  Alps  of  Dauphiny,  and  the  primary
and  volcanic  mountains  of  Central  France;  and  when  at
length  it  enters  the  Mediterranean,  it  discolours  the  blue
waters  of  that  sea  with  a  whitish  sediment,  for  the  distance
of  between  six  and  seven  miles,  throughout  which  space  the
current  of  fresh  water  is  perceptible.

Strabo's  description  of  the  delta  is  so  inapplicable  to  its
present  configuration,  as  to  attest  a  complete  alteration  in
the  physical  features  of  the  country  since  the  Augustan  age.
It  appears,  however,  that  the  head  of  the  delta,  or  the  point
at  which  it  begins  to  ramify,  has  remained  unaltered  since  the
time  of  Pliny,  for  he  states  that  the  Ehone  divided  itself  at
Aries  into  two  arms.  This  is  the  case  at  present ;  one  of
the  branches,  the  western,  being  now  called  Le  Petit  Bhone^


424  DELTA  OF  THE  BH05E.  [Ck.  XVm.

wliich  18  again  subdiyided  before  entering  tbe  Mediterranean.
The  advance  of  the  base  of  the  delta,  in  the  last  eighteen
centurieSy  is  demonstrated  bj  many  cnrions  antiquarian
monuments.  The  most  striking  of  these  is  the  great  and
unnatural  detour  of  the  old  Roman  road  irom  XJgemnm  to
Beziers  {Jioitcrrw)^  which  went  round  by  Nismes  (Nemausus).
It  is  clear  that,  when  this  was  first  constructed,  it  was  im-
{>o88ibl(3  to  pass  in  a  direct  line,  as  now,  across  the  delta,  and
that  either  tlie  sea  or  marshes  intervened  in  a  tract  now  con-
sisting of  terra  firma."*^  Astruc  also  remarks,  that  all  the
places  on  low  lands,  lying  to  the  north  of  the  old  Roman  road
between  Nismes  and  Beziers,  have  names  of  Celtic  origin,
evidently  given  to  them  by  the  first  inhabitants  of  the
country;  whereas,  the  places  lying  south  of  that  road,
towards  the  sea,  have  names  of  Latin  derivation,  and  were
clearly  founded  after  the  Roman  language  had  been  intro-
duced.

Another  proof,  also,  of  the  great  extent  of  land  which  has
conio  into  existence  since  the  Romans  conquered  and  colo-
nised CJaul,  is  derived  from  the  fact,  that  the  Roman  writers
never  mention  the  thermal  waters  of  Balaruc  in  the  delta,
although  they  wore  well  acquainted  with  those  of  Aix,  and
others  still  more  distant,  and  attached  great  importance  to
thoni,  as  tlioy  invariably  did  to  all  hot  springs.  The  waters  of
Baluruo,  thort^tbro,  must  have  fonnerly  issued  under  the  sea

a  oonuuou  phonomonon  on  the  borders  of  the  Mediter-
ranean; and  on  the  advance  of  the  delta  they  continued  to
tlow  out  thnuisjh  the  now  dojx^sits.

Amons;  the  niori^  direct  pnx^fs  of  the  increase  of  land,  we
find  that  Moso,  dosorilvil  under  the  appellation  of  Mesna
OoUis  by  romjH^nius  MoliU+  and  stated  by  him  to  be  nearly
an  island,  is  now  tur  inland.  Xotre-Dame  des  Ports,  also,
was  u  harKnir  in  S^^S,  and  is  now  two  leairues  from  the  shore.
PsiiluuHli  was  an  island  in  SI"*,  and  is  now  two  leases  from
the  soa.  Si^voral  old  linos  of  towers  and  sea-marks  occur  at
dift'ortMit  distan^vs  fn>m  the  present  Oixist,  all  indicating  the
$uc\\^ve  n^tn^at  of  the  s^^u^  for  each  line  has  in  its  turn

•  M^rai.  sl'A>:r-c.  ciux:  bv  Vo^  H:*  v;!.  i  «   -S;>.

^^ok    .,1.    v..    T.


Ch.  XVIII.]  DELTA  OF  THE  RHONE.  425

become  useless  to  mariners ;  which  may  well  be  conceived,
when  we  state  that  the  Tower  of  Ti^naux,  erected  on  the  shore
so  late  as  the  year  1737,  is  already  a  mile  remote  from  it.*

By  the  confluence  of  the  Rhone  and  the  currents  of  the
Mediterranean,  driven  by  winds  from  the  south,  sand-bars
are  often  formed  across  the  mouths  of  the  river :  by  these
means  considerable  spaces  become  parted  off  from  the  sea,
and  subsequently  from  the  river  also,  when  it  shifts  its  chan-
nels of  eflSux.  As  some  of  these  lagunes  are  subject  to  the
occasional  ingress  of  the  river  when  flooded,  and  of  the  sea
during  storms,  they  are  alternately  salt  and  fresh.  Others,
after  being  filled  with  salt  water,  are  often  lowered  by  evapo-
ration till  they  become  more  salt  than  the  sea ;  and  it  has
happened,  occasionally,  that  a  considerable  precipitate  of
chloride  of  sodium  has  taken  place  in  these  natural  salterns.
During  the  latter  part  of  Napoleon's  career,  when  the  excise
laws  were  enforced  with  extreme  rigour,  the  police  was  em-
ployed to  prevent  such  salt  from  being  used.  The  fluviatile
and  marine  shells  inclosed  in  these  small  lakes  often  live
together  in  brackish  water ;  but  the  uncongenial  nature  of
the  fluid  usually  produces  a  dwarfish  size,  and  sometimes
gives  rise  to  strange  varieties  in  form  and  colour.

Captain  Smyth,  in  his  survey  of  the  coast  of  the  Medi-
terranean, found  the  sea,  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Rhone,  to
deepen  gradually  from  four  to  forty  fathoms,  within  a  distance
of  six  or  seven  miles,  over  which  the  discoloured  fresh  water
extends.  The  inclination  of  the  new  deposits  must  be  too
slight  to  be  appreciable,  the  slope  being  about  a  tenth  of
that  already  mentioned  in  the  Lake  of  Geneva  (p.  413),  which
would  appear  to  the  eye,  in  sections  of  the  length  usually
exhibited  in  quarries,  as  horizontal.  When  the  wind  blew
from  the  south-west,  the  ships  employed  in  the  survey  were
obliged  to  quit  their  moorings  ;  and  when  they  returned,  the
new  sand-banks  in  the  delta  were  found  covered  over  with  a
great  abundance  of  marine  shells.  By  this  means  we  learn
how  occasional  beds  of  drifted  marine  shells  may  become
interstratified  with  fresh-water  strata  at  a  river's  mouth.

*  Boucho,  Chorographie  et  Hist,  de  Provence,  vol.  i.  p.  23,  cited  by  Von  Hoff,
vol.  i.  p.  290.


426  DELTAS  OX  THE  COAST  OF  ASIA  MINOR.      [Cii.  XVm.

Stony  nature  of  its  deposits. — That  a  great  proportion,  at
least,  of  the  new  deposit  in  the  delta  of  the  Bhone  consists  of
rocky  and  not  of  loose  incoherent  matter,  is  perfectly  ascer-
tained. In  the  Museum  at  Montpelier  is  a  cannon  taken  np
from  the  sea  near  the  mouth  of  the  river,  imbedded  in  a  crys-
talline calcareous  rock.  Large  masses,  also,  are  continoally
taken  up  of  an  arenaceous  rock,  cemented  by  calcareous
matter  including  multitudes  of  broken  shells  of  recent  species.
The  observations  in  the  nineteenth  century  made  on  this
subject  corroborate  the  former  statement  of  Marsilli  in  the
eighteenth,  that  the  earthy  deposits  of  the  coast  of  Langnedoc
form  a  stony  substance,  for  which  reason  he  ascribes  a  certain
bituminous,  saline,  and  glutinous  nature  to  the  substances
brou<rht  down  with  sand  bv  the  Ehone.*  If  the  number  of
mineral  springs  charged  with  carbonate  of  lime  which  £Edi
into  the  Bhone  and  its  feeders  in  different  parts  of  France
be  considered,  we  shall  feel  no  surprise  at  the  lapidification
of  the  newly-deposited  sediment  in  this  delta.  It  shoold  be
remembered,  that  the  fresh  water  introduced  by  rivers,  being
lighter  than  the  water  of  the  sea,  floats  over  the  latter,  and
remains  upon  the  surface  for  a  considerable  distance.  Con-
sequently it  is  exjwsed  to  as  much  evaporation  as  the  waters
of  a  lake :  and  the  area  over  which  the  river  water  is  spread,
at  the  junction  of  great  rivers  and  the  sea,  may  well  be  com-
pared, in  point  of  extent,  to  that  of  considerable  lakes.

Xow,  it  is  well  known,  that  so  great  is  the  quantity  of  water
carried  off  by  evaporation  in  some  lakes,  that  it  is  nearly
equal  to  the  water  flowing  in :  and  in  some  inland  seas,  as
the  Caspian,  it  is  quite  equal.  We  may,  therefore,  well  sop-
pose  that,  in  eases  where  a  strong  current  does  not  interfere,
the  greater  portion  not  only  of  the  matter  held  mechanicaHy
in  susjvnsion,  but  of  that  also  which  is  in  chemical  solution,
may  be  precipitated  at  no  great  distance  from  the  shore.
When  these  finer  ingredients  are  extremely  small  in  quantity,
they  may  only  suffice  to  supply  crustaceous  animals,  corals,
and  marine  plants,  with  the  earthy  particles  necessary  for
their  secretions ;  but  whenever  it  is  in  excess  ^as  generally
happens  if  the  basin  of  a  river  lie  partly  in  a  district  of  active

•  Hist,  phvft.  ic  li  McT.


Ch.  XVm.]  DELTA  OF  THE  KILE.  427

or  extinct  volcanos),  then  will  solid  deposits  be  formed,  and
the  shells  will  at  once  be  included  in  a  rocky  mass.

Deposits  on  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor, — Examples  of  the  ad-
vance of  the  land  upon  the  sea  are  aflforded  by  the  southern
coast  of  Asia  Minor.  Admiral  Sir  F.  Beaufort  has  pointed
out  in  his  survey  the  great  alterations  eifected  since  the  time
of  Strabo,  where  havens  are  filled  up,  islands  joined  to  the
mainland,  and  where  the  whole  continent  has  increased  many
miles  in  extent.  Strabo  himself,  on  comparing  the  outline
of  the  coast  in  his  time  with  its  ancient  state,  was  convinced,
like  our  countryman,  that  it  had  gained  very  considerably
upon  the  sea.  The  new-formed  strata  of  Asia  Minor  consist
of  stone,  not  of  loose  incoherent  materials.  Almost  all  the
streamlets  and  rivers,  like  many  of  those  in  Tuscany  and  the
south  of  Italy,  hold  abundance  of  carbonate  of  lime  in  solu-
tion, and  precipitate  travertin,  or  sometimes  bind  together
the  sand  and  gravel  into  solid  sandstones  and  conglomerates.
Every  delta  and  sand-bar  thus  acquires  solidity,  which  often
prevents  streams  from  forcing  their  way  through  them,  so
that  their  mouths  are  constantly  changing  their  position.*

Delta  of  the  Nile.— That  Egypt  was  '  the  gift  of  the  Nile,'
was  the  opinion  of  her  priests  before  the  time  of  Hero-
dotus ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  fertility  of  the
allurial  plain  above  Cairo,  and  the  very  existence  of  the
delta  below  that  city,  are  due  to  the  action  of  the  great  river,
or  to  its  power  of  transporting  mud  from  the  interior  of
Africa,  and  depositing  it  on  its  inundated  plains,  as  well  as
on  that  space  which  has  been  reclaimed  from  the  Mediterra-
nean, and  converted  into  land.

The  depth  of  the  Mediterranean  is  about  twelve  fathoms
at  a  small  distance  from  the  shore  of  the  delta ;  it  after-
wards increases  gradually  to  50,  and  then  suddenly  descends
to  380  fathoms.  We  learn  from  Lieut.  Newbold  that  nothing
but  the  finest  and  lightest  ingredients  reach  the  Mediterra-
nean, where  he  has  observed  the  sea  discoloured  by  them
to  the   distance  of  40  miles  from  the  shore.f    The  small,

*  Karamania,  or  a  brief  description  t  Quart.  Journ.  G-eol.  Soc.  1848,  vol.

of  tho  Coast  of  Asia  Minor,  &c.    Lon-      ir.  p.  342.
don,  1817.


428  DELTA  OF  THE  NILE.  [Ch,  XVUI.

progress  of  the  delta  in  the  last  2,000  years  aflfords,  perhaps,
no  measure  for  estimating  its  rate  of  growth  before  it  had  en-
croached so  much  upon  the  coast-line  of  the  Mediterranean.
A  powerful  current  now  sweeps  along  the  shores  of  Africa,
from  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  to  the  prominent  convexity
of  Egypt,  the  western  side  of  which  is  continually  the  prey
of  the  waves  ;  so  that  not  only  are  fresh  accessions  of  land
checked,  but  ancient  parts  of  the  delta  are  carried  away.
By  this  cause  Canopus  and  some  other  towns  have  been
overwhelmed.  The  marine  current  alluded  to  is  caused  by
the  prevalence  for  nine  months  of  the  year  of  winds  from  the
north-west,  but  they  turn  in  the  opposite  direction  when-
ever, during  the  remaining  months,  a  wind  sets  in  from  the
east.  Another  reason,  however,  for  the  slow  advance  of  the
delta  for  the  last  two  or  three  thousand  years,  is  the  slow
subsidence  of  the  land,  to  which  allusion  will  be  made  in  the
sequel.

The  Nile  for  the  last  1,500  miles  of  its  course  is  not  joined
by  a  single  tributary,  great  or  small ;  a  geographical  pecu-
liarity exhibited  by  no  other  river  in  the  world.  In  Nubia,
however,  during  violent  thunderstorms,  temporary  torrents
are  sometimes  formed,  some  of  them  as  low  down  as  be-
tween the  first  and  second  cataracts,  which  wash  gravel,
sand,  and  mud  into  the  Nile.  The  winds  also  blow  clouds
of  sand  into  it  from  the  desert  where  the  valley  is  narrow
above  the  first  cataract.  About  100  miles  above  Cairo,  or
200  from  the  sea,  the  average  width  of  the  valley  is  about  five
miles ;  and  I  am  informed  by  the  Rev.  Barham  Zincke,  who
has  lately  returned  from  Egypt  (1871),  that  the  bluflfs  which
bound  the  plain  on  the  east  and  west,  are  composed,  some  of
them  of  limestone  and  some  of  sandstone,  and  are  about  400
feet  high.  In  sailing  up  the  stream  for  about  450  miles,
sometimes  the  eastern  and  sometimes  the  western  bluflf  is  iu
sight,  and  they  conveyed  to  him  the  appearance  of  having
been  cut  by  the  Nile,  as  if  the  river  had  excavated  its  own
valley.  But  when  we  arrive  at  the  first  cataract  at  Assouan,
the  rocks,  being  formed  of  granite,  seem  to  have  afforded
greater  resistance  to  the  erosive  power  of  the  river,  which
there  flows  through  a  narrow  gorge  instead  of  a  wide  alluvial
plain.


Ch.  XVni.]  DELTA  OF  THE  NILE.  429

In  passing  through  so  many  degrees  of  latitude  exposed
to  a  hot  sun  and  to  arid  winds  blowing  from  the  surround-
ing deserts,  the  river  loses  much  of  its  water  by  evapora-
tion, especially  where  it  is  spread  out  over  the  plains  during
the  season  of  inundation,  which  lasts  about  four  months.
The  sediment  annually  left  behind  on  the  plain  consists  of
an  extremely  thin  film  of  matter,  most  of  the  mud  being
thrown  down  on  the  banks,  which  here,  as  in  all  other  great
rivers,  are  higher  than  the  flat  region  between  them  and
the  heights  bounding  the  valley  on  each  side,  so  that  during
the  flood  season  the  banks  are  seen  alone  emerging  above
the  waters,  and  forming  two  long  narrow  strips  of  land.
The  base  of  the  delta  is  more  than  200  miles  in  length,  if
we  include  in  it  all  that  part  of  the  coast  which  intervenes
between  the  ancient  extreme  eastern  and  western  arms ;  but
these  are  blocked  up  at  present;  and  that  part  of  the  coast-line,
about  90  miles  in  length,  which  extends  from  the  Rosetta  to
the  Damietta  branches  is  the  only  portion  now  usually  called
the  Delta.  The  diameter  of  this  low  tract  from  south  to
north,  or  from  the  coast  to  the  head  of  the  delta  near  Cairo
(or  to  the  ancient  site  of  Memphis,  thirty  miles  distant  on
the  other  side  of  the  river),  is  about  100  miles.  In  this  re-
gion the  rate  of  the  deposition  of  sediment  is  considerably
less  than  in  the  alluvial  plain  above,  owing  to  the  wide  spread
of  the  waters  east  and  west.  The  height  of  the  river  at
Assouan  or  the  ancient  Philse,  where  the  first  cataract  occurs,
is  300  feet  above  its  level  at  Cairo,  a  distance  of  555  statute
miles,  following  the  course  of  the  river,  which  gives  an  ave-
riige  fall  of  rather  more  than  half  a  foot  (6*486  inches)
per  mile ;  but  the  fall  between  the  head  of  the  delta  and  the
sea  is  much  less  considerable.  According  to  Sir  J.  G.  Wil-
kinson, the  alluvial  matter  formed  in  1,700  years  on  the  land
about  Elephantine,  or  near  the  first  cataract,  lat.  24°  5',  is
about  9  feet  in  thickness;  at  Thebes,  lat.  25°  43',  about
7  feet  in  the  same  period  ;  and  at  Heliopolis  and  Cairo,
lat.  80°,  about  5  feet  10  inches ;  and  the  amount  is  consider-
ably less  at  Rosetta  and  the  other  mouths  of  the  Nile,
lat!  31°  30'.

The  bed  of  the  Nile  always  keeps  pace  with  the  general
elevation  of  the  soil  of  Egypt;   and  the  river-banks,  like


430  DELTA  OF  THE  NILE.  [Cu.  XVIH.

those  of  the  Mississippi  and  its  tributaries  (see  p.  489),  are
much  higher  than  the  flat  land  at  a  distance,  so  that  they
are  seldom  covered,  as  before  mentioned  (p.  429),  daring  the
highest  inundations.  In  consequence  oJT  the  gradual  rise  of
the  river's  bed,  the  annual  flood  is  continually  spreading  over
a  wider  area,  and  the  alluvial  soil  encroaches  on  the  desert,
covering,  to  the  depth  of  several  feet  or  yards,  the  base  of
statues  and  temples  which  the  waters  never  reached  3,000
years  ago.  Although  the  sands  of  the  Libyan  deserts  have
in  some  places  been  drifted  into  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  yet
these  aggressions,  says  Wilkinson,  are  far  more  than  counter-
balanced by  the  fertilising  effect  of  the  water  which  now
reaches  further  inland  towards  the  desert,  so  that  the  number
of  square  miles  of  arable  soil  is  greater  at  present  than  at
any  previous  period.

The  composition  of  the  Nile-mud  resembles  very  closely
that  of  the  Loess  or  old  inundation  mud  of  the  Rhine.  The
following  careful  analysis  is  given  of  it  by  Lassaigne:  *  Silica,
42'50 ;  alumina,  24*25 ;  carbonate  of  lime,  3*85 ;  peroxide  of
iron,  13*65;  magnesia,  1*05;  carbonate  of  magnesia,  1*20;
humic  acid,  2*80;  water,  10*70.  It  was  shown  by  recent
borings,  which  will  presently  be  mentioned,  to  be  very
generally  devoid  of  stratification,  except  near  the  margin  of
the  valley,  where  violent  winds  have  blown  quartzose  sand
from  the  adjacent  deserts,  so  as  to  cause  alternations  of  sand
and  loam  in  thin  layers.  It  is  also  stated  that  around  Cairo,
where  artificial  excavations  have  been  made,  or  in  other
places  where  the  river  has  undermined  its  banks,  the  mud  is
divided  into  layers  of  different  colours,  each  of  them  not
exceeding  a  sheet  of  thin  pasteboard  in  thickness.

The  late  Mr.  L.  Horner,  F.R.S.,  was  of  opinion  that  the
general  absence  of  all  indication  of  successive  deposition
might  be  attributed  to  the  extreme  thinness  of  the  layer  of
matter  annually  thrown  down  on  the  greater  part  of  the
alluvial  plain.  The  tenuity  of  this  layer  is  guch  as  not  to
average,  according  to  the  best  observers,  six  inches  in  a
century.  The  new  superficial  deposit,  which  is  added  to  a
soil  already  softened  by  a  submergence  of  several  months,

*  Quart.  Gool.  Journ.  1849,  vol.  v.  p.  20.    Memoirs.  *


Ch.  XVIII.]  DELTA  OF  THE  NILE.  431

must  be  indistinguishable  from  it.  Deep  shrinkage  cracks
are  formed  both  in  the  new  and  old  soil,  where  they  have
been  exposed  to  a  hot  sun,  and  into  these  is  drifted  dust,
raised  in  clouds  by  the  winds.  The  action  also  of  worms,
insects,  and  the  roots  of  plants,  must  be  added  to  these  dis-
turbing causes,  so  that  it  is  evident  that  no  distinction  can
be  left  between  the  deposits  of  two  successive  years,  even
at  points  where  the  labours  of  the  agriculturist  have  not
intervened  to  annihilate  all  lines  of  separation.

As  the  pyramids  and  other  monuments  of  Egypt  carry  us
back  to  prehistoric  times  of  more  ancient  date  than  do  any
equally  authentic  memorials  yet  known  in  other  lands,  it  is
there,  if  anywhere,  that  we  may  hope  to  obtain  data  for  esti-
mating roughly  at  least  the  number  of  years  which  have  been
required  to  bring  about  a  given  amount  of  change  in  the
alluvial  plain  of  a  great  river.

Herodotus  observes,  ^that  the  country  round  Memphis
seemed  formerly  to  have  been  an  arm  of  the  sea  gradually
filled  by  the  Nile,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Meander,  Ache-
lous,  and  other  streams,  had  formed  deltas.  Egypt,  therefore,'
he  says,  '  like  the  Red  Sea,  was  once  a  long  narrow  bay,  and
both  gulfs  were  separated  by  a  small  neck  of  land.  If  the
Nile,'  he  adds,  *  should  by  any  means  have  an  issue  into  the
Arabian  Gulf,  it  might  choke  it  up  with  earth  in  20,000  or
even,  perhaps,  in  10,000  years ;  and  why  may  not  the  Nile
have  filled  a  still  greater  gulf  with  mud  in  the  space  of  time
which  has  passed  before  our  age  ? '  *

Mr.  Homer  suggested  to  the  Boyal  Society,  in  185C,
that  they  should  have  excavations  and  borings  made  in  the
alluvial  plain  of  the  Nile,  with  a  view  of  ascertaining  the
thickness  of  the  mud  which  had  accumulated  round  the
base  of  the  obelisk  at  Heliopolis  and  the  pedestal  of  the
statue  of  Rameses  at  Memphis,  the  object  being  to  obtain  a
clironometric  scale,  by  ascertaining  what  thickness  of  sedi-
ment had  been  formed  in  a  given  time,  and  applying  that
scale  for  measuring  the  antiquity  of  similar  mud  previously
thrown  down  on  the  site  of  those  monuments  before  their
erection.     The  most  important  result  was  obtained  from  an

*  Euterpe,  XI.


432  MODE  OF  COMPUTING  [Ch.  XVIII.

excavation  and  boring  made  near  the  base  of  the  pedestal  <^
the  colossal  statue  of  Barneses,  the  middle  of  whose  reign,
according  to  Lepsius,  was  1361  years  B.C.  Assuming  with
Mr.  Horner  *  that  the  lower  part  of  the  platform  or  founda-
tion c  (fig.  36)  was  14 J  inches  below  the  surface  of  the
ground,  or  alluvial  flat  a  by  at  the  time  it  was  laid,  there  had
been  formed  between  that  period  and  the  year  a.d«  1850,  or

Fig.  36.
Psdestal


Nile      Mud  Wfy  JfUe       Mud


Detirt    Sand


Section  to  explain  the  thieknems  of  Nilo  mud  on  the  site  of  the  pedestal  of

tlic  Btatue  of  Kameses  at  Memphis.

a  b.  Supposed  level  of  the  great  Plain  when  the  foundation

of  the  pedestal  was  laid.
c.  Level  of  lowest  part  of  foundation  of  pedestal.
d  e.  Thickness  of  mud  accumulateil  since  the  erection  of

the  pedestal.
fg.  Shaft,  10  ft.  doep,  sunk  near  the  pedestal.
ijh.  Boring  carried  down  14  ft.  below  the  bottom  of  the

sliaft  to  the  junction  of  the  Nile  mud  with  the

untlerl^nng  desert  sand.
/  k.  Mount  Is  thrown  up  to  protect  the  area  of  the  Temple

from  the  inundations  of  the  Nile.
/  III.  Present  level  of  the  alluvial  plain  of  the  Nile.

durin^jf  a  space  of  3,211  years,  a  deposit  of  9  feet  4  inches
froin  d  to  V,  round  the  pedestal,  which  gives  a  mean  increase
of  3.^  iiK'licjH  in  a  hundred  years.  It  was  farther  ascertained,
by  Hiiikiii^  a  shaft/ r/  near  the  pedest-al,  and  by  a  boring  in
th(*  MiiiiH^  jilace  carried  to  the  additional  depth  ^  /i,  that
b<;l<MV  i  hu  level  of  the  old  plain  a  b  the  thickness  of  old  Nile

*  Horner,  On  Alluvial  Land  of  Egypt,  Phil.  Trans,  part  i.  for  1855.


Ch.  XVIII.]  ANTIQUITY  OF  NILE  MUD.  433

mud/ A  resting  on  desert  sand  amounted  to  32  feet;  and  it
was  therefore  inferred  by  Mr.  Horner  that  the  lowest  layer
at  h  (in  which  a  fragment  of  burnt  brick  was  found)  was
more  than  13,000  years  old,  or  was  deposited  13,496  years
before  the  year  1850,  when  the  boring  was  made.

The  date  of  the  reign  of  Bameses  has  been  a  matter  of
discussion ;  but,  even  if  antiquaries  should  diflFer  by  a  few
centuries,  the  era  fixed  by  Lepsius  may  be  taken  as  a  suflS-
cient  approximation  to  the  truth  to  be  available  for  the  object
here  proposed.

To  this  mode  of  computation  it  was  objected  by  Mr.
Samuel  Sharpe,  that  the  Egyptians  were  in  the  habit  of
enclosing  with  embankments  such  as  i  fe,  fig.  36,  the  areas
on  which  they  erected  temples  and  statues,  so  as  to  exclude
the  waters  of  the  Nile.  Herodotus  tells  us  that  in  his  time
those  spots  from  which  the  Nile  waters  had  in  this  manner
been  shut  out  for  centuries  appeared  sunk,  and  could  be
looked  down  into  from  the  surrounding  ground,  that  ground
having  been  raised  by  the  gradual  accumulation  of  sediment
resulting  from  the  annual  inundations.  The  whole  thickness
therefore  d  e  oi9  feet  4  inches  of  mud  in  which  the  pedestal
of  the  statue  was  buried,  instead  of  indicating  3,215  years,  is
simply  the  produce  of  the  much  shorter  period  which  has
elapsed  since  Memphis  fell  into  decay,  or  since  the  mounds
i  h  gave  way  and  allowed  the  river  to  inundate  the  site  of
the  statue.  But  Sir  John  Lubbock,  in  reply  to  this  objec-
tion, has  truly  remarked  that  what  we  are  really  in  search  of
is  the  extent  to  which  the  flat  plain  of  Memphis  I  m  has  been
raised  by  the  accumulation  of  Nile  sediment  since  the  statue
was  erected ;  and  although  the  river  when  it  broke  through
the  embankments  and  washed  mud  from  them  into  the  enclo-
sure might  perhaps  in  a  few  years  raise  the  enclosed  area  up
to  the  level  of  the  great  plain  outside  I  m,  yet  it  could  never
heighten  that  area  above  the  general  level.  The  exceptional
rapidity  of  accumulation,  observes  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  would  only
be  the  complement  of  the  exceptional  want  of  deposition
which  had  preceded.*

Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  on  reading  my  Antiquity  of  Man,  p.  36,

♦  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  The  Reader,  March  26,  1864.
VOL.    I.  F  P


434  DELTA  OF  THE  NILE.  [Ch.  XVIH.

sent  me  this  same  answer  to  Mr.  Sharpens  objection,  which
had  occurred  to  him  independently.  The  explanation  will
perhaps  remove  some  of  the  difficulties  which  Mr.  Franks  and
other  antiquaries  experienced  in  regard  to  the  date  assigned
by  Mr.  Horner,  in  accordance  with  his  scale,  to  several  pieces
of  sculpture  and  pottery  found  at  different  levels  in  sinking
through  the  ten  feet  of  soil  6  d,  in  which  the  lower  part  of
the  pedestal  was  buried.  It  is  most  desirable,  however,  that
fresh  enquiries  should  be  made  to  extend  and  verify  the
observations  already  so  successfully  begun  by  Mr.  Homer,
with  the  assistance  of  a  native  engineer,  Hekekyan  Bey,  and
under  the  auspices  of  the  Eoyal  Society,  liberally  assisted  by
the  late  Viceroy  of  Egypt.

In  all  calculations  referring  to  the  growth  of  aUuvial
deposits,  or  to  the  effects  of  aqueous  denudation,  our  chief
difficulty  in  geology  arises  from  our  inability  to  measure
correctly  the  accompanying  movements  of  the  land.  The
position  of  certain  tombs  near  Alexandria,  and  their  present
level  relatively  to  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  ruins  of  certain
towns  half  submerged  in  the  Lake  Menzaleh,  are  generally
admitted  to  imply  that  there  has  been  a  sinking  of  the  land
in  Egypt  within  the  historical  period.

The  occurrence  of  former  oscillations  of  level  is  also  attested
by  the  existence,  at  different  heights,  from  30  to  100  feet  and
upwards,  above  the  level  of  the  present  alluvial  plain,  of  a
succession  of  terraces  composed  of  fluviatile  alluvium.  In
these  Messrs.  Adams  and  Murie  have  detected  fossil  shells  of
the  same  species  as  those  now  inhabiting  the  waters  of  the
Nile,  such  as  JEtheria  semilunata,  Iridiria  nilotica^  Bulirmis
pullus^  and  Gyrena  jluminalis.  The  last-mentioned  shell  is
familiar  to  us  as  being  so  common  in  the  ancient  or  Post-
pliocene  river-deposits  of  the  Thames,  in  London  and  the
neighbourhood,  in  which  the  bones  of  a  hippopotamus  and
other  extinct  animals  are  found.

Such  terraces  occur  both  above  and  below  the  first  cata-
ract; in  one  of  them,  at  Kalabshe  in  Nubia,  the  molar  teeth
of  a  large  hippopotamus  were  obtained,  and  were  identified
by  the  late  Dr.  Falconer  with  the  species  now  living  in  the
Nile.


Ch.  XVIll.]  DELTA  OF  THE  NILE.  435

These  and  other  proofs  of  gradual  movements  which  have
occurred  in  Post-tertiary  times,  in  Egypt,  might  have  been
looked  for  by  geologists,  after  they  had  come  by  independent
researches  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  northern  borders  of  the
Red  Sea  and  a  large  part  of  the  Sahara,  or,  in  other  words,
vast  regions  east  and  west  of  Egypt,  had  been  upraised  within
the  Post-pliocene  epoch.  On  the  one  side  is  the  Great  Desert,
formerly  submerged  beneath  the  sea,  and  now  laid  dry,*  with
the  Cardium  edule  frequently  strewn  over  its  surface ;  on  the
othier  side,  or  to  the  eastward,  are  littoral  deposits  200  feet
high,  bordering  the  western  shore  of  the  Red  Sea  (lat.  28**
N.),  which  are  chiefly  made  up  of  corals  and  shells  of  recent
species,  indicating  a  modem  conversion  of  the  ancient  sea-
bottom  into  land.  During  such  great  continental  movements
we  cannot  suppose  the  intervening  valley  of  the  Nile  to
have  remained  stationary  in  its  level,  or  that  the  great  river
never  shifted  its  position,  and  never  deepened  its  channel,
whether  cutting  through  accumulations  of  its  own  mud,  or
through  subjacent  rocks  of  sandstone  and  granite.

*  Elements  of  Geology,  p.  174.


rrl


436


CHAPTER  XIX.
EEPRODUCTiVE  EFFECTS  OP  EiVERS — Continued.

DELTAS  FOBHED  UXDEB  TIIB  INFLX7ENCE  OF  TIDES — BASIN  AXD  DELTA  OF
THE  MISSISSIPPI — ALLUVIAL  PLAIN — BITEB-BANKS  AND  BLUFFS — CUBYBS  OF
THE  RITEB — NATURAL  RAFTS  AND  SNAGS — MUD-LUMPS  NEAR  THE  MOX7TH8,  AND

THEIR    PROBABLE     ORIGIN — NEW   LAKES,   AND    EFFECTS    OF    BABTHQUAKXS

ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  DELTA — SECTION  IN  ARTESIAN  WELL  AT  NEW  OB-
LEANS — DELTA  OF  THE  AMAZONS —DELTA  OF  THE  GANGES  AND  BBAHMA-
POOTRA — HEAD  OF  THE  DELTA  AND  SUNDERBUNDS — ISLANDS  FOBKED  AXD
DESTROYED — CROCODILES — AMOUNT  OF  FLUVIATILE  SEDIMENT  IN  THE  WATER
— ARTESIAN  BORING  AT  CALCUTTA — PROOFS  OF  SUBSIDBNCB — ^AGB  OF  THE
DELTA — CONTBBOENCB  OF  DELTAS — ORIGIN  OF  EXISTING  DELTAS  NOT  CON-
TEMPORANEOUS— GROUPING  OF  STRATA  AND  STRATIFICATION  IN  DELTAS —
CONGLOMERATES — CONSTANT    INTERCHANGE   OF  LAND    AND    SEA.

In  the  last  chapter  several  examples  were  given  of  the  deltas
of  inland  seas,  where  the  influence  of  the  tides  is  almost
imperceptible.  We  may  next  consider  those  marine  or
oceanic  deltas,  where  the  tides  play  an  efficient  part  in  the
dispersion  of  fluviatile  sediment,  as  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,
where  they  exert  a  moderate  degree  of  force,  and  in  the  Bay
of  Bengal,  where  they  are  extremely  powerful.  In  regard  to
estuaries,  which  Eennell  termed  '  negative  deltas,'  they  will
be  treated  of  more  properly  when  our  attention  is  specially
turned  to  the  operations  of  tides  and  currents  in  the  2l8t,
22nd,  and  23rd  chapters*  In  this  case,  instead  of  the  land
gaining  on  the  sea  at  the  river's  mouth,  the  tides  penetrate
far  inland  beyond  the  genei'al  coast-line.

BASIN  AND  DELTA  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.

Ejctent  of  the  basin. — The  hydrographical  basin  of  the  Mis-
sissippi displays,  on  the  grandest  scale,  the  action  of  running
wUter  on  the  surface  of  a  vast  continent.  This  magnificent
river  rises  nearly  in  the  forty-ninth  parallel  of  north  lati-
tude, and  flows  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  the  twenty-ninth — a


Ch.  XIX.]       BASIN  AND  DELTA  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  437

course,  including  its  meanders,  of  more  than  3,000  miles.
It  passes  from  a  cold  climate,  where  the  hunter  obtains  his
furs  and  peltries,  traverses  the  temperate  latitudes,  and  dis-
charges its  waters  into  the  sea  in  the  region  of  rice,  the
cotton-plant,  and  the  sugar-cane.  From  near  its  mouth
at  the  Balize  a  steamboat  may  ascend  for  2,000  miles  with
scarcely  any  perceptible  diflference  in  the  width  of  the  river.
Several  of  its  tributaries,  the  Red  Eiver,  the  Arkansas,  the
Missouri,  the  Ohio,  and  others,  would  be  regarded  elsewhere
as  of  the  first  importance,  and,  taken  together,  are  navigable
for  a  distance  many  times  exceeding  that  of  the  main  stream.
The  surface  drained  by  the  Mississippi  and  its  tributaries  is
equal  in  extent  to  more  than  half  the  continent  of  Europe,
or  Europe  exclusive  of  Russia,  Norway,  and  Sweden.

No  river  affords  a  more  striking  illustration  of  the  law
before  mentioned,  that  an  augmentation  of  volume  does  not
occasion  a  proportional  increase  of  surface,  nay,  is  even
sometimes  attended  with  a  narrowing  of  the  channel.  The
Mississippi  is  half  a  mile  wide  at  its  junction  with  the  Mis-
souri, the  latter  being  also  of  equal  width ;  yet  the  united
waters  have  only,  from  their  confluence  to  the  mouth  of  the
Ohio,  a  medial  width  of  about  half  a  mile.  The  junction  of
the  Ohio  seems  also  to  produce  no  increase,  but  rather  a
decrease,  of  surface.*  The  St.  Francis,  White,  Arkansas,
and  Red  rivers  are  also  absorbed  by  the  main  stream  with
scarcely  any  apparent  increase  of  its  width,  although  here
and  there  it  expands  to  a  breadth  of  IJ,  or  even  to  2  miles.
On  arriving  at  New  Orleans,  it  is  somewhat  less  than  half  a
mile  wide.  Its  depth  there  is  very  variable,  the  greatest  at
high  water  being  168  feet.  The  mean  rate  at  which  the
whole  body  of  water  flows  is  variously  estimated ;  according
to  Mr.  Forshey  the  mean  velocity  of  the  current  at  the
surface  somewhat  exceeds  2^  miles  an  hour  when  the  water
is  at  a  mean  height.  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot  found
at  Natchez  a  velocity  of  nearly  three  miles  an  hour,  at  the
depth  of  five  feet  from  the  surface.  For  300  miles  above
New  Orleans  the  distance  measured  by  the  winding  river  is
about  twice  as  great  as  the  distance  in  a  right  line.     For  the

*  Flint's  Geography,  vol.  i.  p.  142.


438  CURVES  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  [Ch,  XDC.

first  100  miles  from  the  mouth  the  rate  of  fall  is  1*80  inch
per  mile,  for  the  second  hundred  2  inches,  for  the  third  2*30,
for  the  fourth  2"57.  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot  give
about  4^  inches  as  the  average  fall  per  mile  from  Memphis
to  the  mouth,  a  distance  of  855  miles.

The  alluvial  plain  of  the  Mississippi  begins  to  be  of  great
width  below  Cape  Girardeau,  50  miles  above  the  junction  of
the  Ohio.  At  this  junction  it  is  about  50  miles  broad,80uth
of  which  it  contracts  to  about  30  miles  at  Memphis,  expands
again  to  80  miles  at  the  mouth  of  the  White  River,  and  then
suffers  various  contractions  and  expansions  until  it  reaches
the  head  of  the  delta,  or  the  point  where  the  Mississippi  sends
off  its  highest  branch  or  arm,  called  the  Atchafalaya.  The
delta  has  a  diameter  from  N.W.  to  S.E.  of  about  200  miles,
and  a  breadth  in  the  opposite  direction  of  about  140.  It
comprises,  according  to  the  survey  of  1860,  an  area  of  about
12,300  miles,  but  to  this  I  shall  again  refer.

Curves  of  the  Mississippi. — The  river  traverses  the  plain  in
a  meandering  course,  describing  immense  curves.  After
sweeping  round  the  half  of  a  circle,  it  is  carried  in  a  rapid
current  diagonally  across  the  ordinary  direction  of  its
channel,  to  another  curve  of  similar  shape.  Opposite  to
each  of  these,  there  is  always  a  sand-bar,  answering,  in  the
convexity  of  its  form,  to  the  concavity  of '  the  bend,'  as  it  is
called.*  The  river,  by  continually  wearing  these  curves
deeper,  returns,  in  the  manner  before  described  (p.  341),  on
its  own  track,  so  that  a  vessel  in  some  places,  after  sailing
for  twenty-five  or  thirty  miles,  is  brought  round  again  to
within  a  mile  of  the  place  whence  it  started.  When  the
waters  approach  so  near  to  each  other,  it  sometimes  happens
at  high  floods  that  they  burst  through  the  small  tongue  of
land,  and  insulate  a  portion,  rushing  through  what  is  called
the  *  cut-off,'  80  that  vessels  may  pass  from  one  point  to
another  in  half  a  mile  to  a  distance  which  it  previously
required  a  voyage  of  more  than  twenty  miles  to  reach.  As
soon  as  the  river  has  excavated  the  new  passage,  bars  of  sand
and  mud  are  formed  at  the  two  points  of  junction  with  the
old  bend,  which  is  soon  entirely  separated  from  the  main

*  Flint's  Greog.  vol.  i.  p.  152.


Ch.  XIX.]  ALLUVIAL  PLAIN.  439

river  by  a  continuous  mud-bank  covered  with  wood.  The
old  bend  then  becomes  a  semicircular  lake  of  clear  water,
inhabited  by  large  gar-fish  {Lepidostei)^  alligators,  and  wild
fowl,  which  the  steamboats  have  nearly  driven  away  from
the  main  river.  A  multitude  of  such  crescent-shaped  lakes,
scattered  far  and  wide  over  the  alluvial  plain,  the  greater
number  of  them  to  the  west,  but  some  of  them  also  eastward
of  the  Mississippi,  bear  testimony  to  the  extensive  wanderings
of  the  great  stream  in  former  ages.  For  the  last  two  hundred
miles  above  its  mouth  the  course  of  the  river  is  much  less
winding  than  above,  there  being  only  in  the  whole  of  that
distance  one  great  curve,  that  called  the  *  English  Turn.'
This  greater  straightness  of  the  stream  is  ascribed  by  Mr.
Forshey  to  the  superior  tenacity  of  the  banks,  wliich  are  more
clayey  in  this  region.

The  Mississippi  has  been  incorrectly  described  by  some  of
the  earlier  geographers,  as  a  river  running  along  the  top  of


^^,i?jJU- — ^"^ ^ 7^^--4iU^=adt


Section  of  channel,  bank,  levees  (a  and  6),  and  swamps  of  Mississippi  River.

a  long  hill,  or  mound  in  a  plain.  In  reality  it  runs  in  a
valley,  from  100  to  200  or  more  feet  in  depth,  as  a,  c,  6,
fig.  37,  its  banks  forming  long  strips  of  land  parallel  to  the
course  of  the  main  stream,  and  to  the  swamps  g  f  and  d  e
lying  on  each  side.  These  extensive  morasses,  which  are
commonly  well  wooded,  though  often  submerged  for  months
continuously,  are  rarely  more  than  fifteen  feet  below  the
summit  level  of  the  banks.  The  banks  themselves  are  oc-
casionally overflowed,  but  are  usually  above  water  for  a
breadth  of  about  two  miles.  They  follow  all  the  curves  of
the  great  river,  and  near  New  Orleans  are  raised  artificially
by  embankments  (or  levees),  of  which  sections  are  seen  at  a
and  fc,  fig.  37,  through  which  the  river  when  swollen  some-
times  cuts   a  deep  channel   (or  crevasse),  inundating  the


440  WASTE  OF  THE  BANKS,  [Ck.  XIX,

adjoining  low  lands  and  swamps,  and  not  sparing  the  lower
streets  of  the  great  city.

The  cause  of  the  uniform  upward  slope  of  the  rirer-bank,
d  by  above  the  adjoining  alluvial  plain  is  this:  when  the
waters  charged  with  sediment  pass  over  the  banks  in  the
flood  season,  their  velocity  is  checked  among  the  herbage
and  reeds,  and  they  throw  down  at  once  the  coarser  and
more  sandy  matter  with  which  they  are  charged.  But  the
fine  particles  of  mud  are  carried  farther  on,  so  that  at  the
distance  of  two  miles,  a  thin  film  of  fine  clay  only  subsides,
forming  a  stiflf  unctuous  black  soil,  which  gradually  en-
velops the  base  of  trees  growing  on  the  borders  of  the
swamps.

Waste  of  tlie  hanks. — It  has  been  said  of  a  mountain  torrent,
that  *  it  lays  down  what  it  wUl  remove,  and  removes  what  it
has  laid  down ; '  and  in  like  manner  the  Mississippi,  by  the
continual  shifting  of  its  course,  sweeps  away,  during  a  great
portion  of  the  year,  considerable  tracts  of  alluvium,  which
were  gradually  accumulated  by  the  overflow  of  former  years,
and  the  matter  now  left  during  the  spring-floods  will  be  at
some  future  time  removed.  After  the  flood  season,  when  the
river  subsides  within  its  channel,  it  acts  with  destructive
force  upon  the  alluvial  banks,  softened  and  diluted  by  the
recent  overflow.  Several  acres  at  a  time,  thickly  covered  with
wood,  are  precipitated  into  the  stream ;  and  large  portions
of  the  islands  are  frequently  swept  away.

Captain  Hall,  writing  in  1829,  observes  that  some  years
"before,  *  when  the  Mississippi  was  regularly  surveyed,  all  its
islands  were  numbered,  from  the  confluence  of  the  Missouri
to  the  sea :  but  every  season  makes  such  revolutions,  not  only
in  the  number  but  in  the  magnitude  and  situation  of  these
islands,  that  this  enumeration  is  now  almost  obsolete.  Some-
times large  islands  are  entirely  melted  away ;  at  other  places
they  have  attached  themselves  to  the  main  shore,  or,  which
is  the  more  correct  statement,  the  interval  has  been  filled
up  by  myriads  of  logs  cemented  together  by  mud  and
rubbish.'  *

Rafts, — One  of  the  most  interesting  features  in  the  great

*  Travels  in  North  America,  vol.  iii.  p.  361.


Ch.  XIX.]  RAFTS.  441

rivers  of  this  part  of  America  is  the  frequent  accumulation
of  what  are  termed  *  rafts,'  or  masses  of  floating  trees,
which  have  been  arrested  on  their  progress  by  snags,  islands,
shoals,  or  other  obstructions,  and  made  to  accumulate,  so  as
to  form  natural  bridges  reaching  entirely  across  the  stream.
One  of  the  largest  of  these  was  called  the  raft  of  the  Atcha-
falaya,  an  arm  of  the  Mississippi,  which  branches  off  a  short
distance  below  its  junction  with  the  Red  River.  The  Atcha-
falaja,  being  in  a  direct  line  with  the  general  direction  of  the
Mississippi,  catches  a  large  portion  of  the  timber  annually
brought  down  from  the  north ;  and  the  drift  trees  collected
in  about  thirty-eight  years  previous  to  1816  formed  a  con-
tinuous raft,  no  less  than  ten  miles  in  length,  220  yards  wide,
and  eight  feet  deep.  The  whole  rose  and  fell  with  the
water,  yet  was  covered  with  green  bushes  and  trees,  and  its
surface  enlivened  in  the  autumn  by  a  variety  of  beautiful
flowers.  It  went  on  increasing  till  about  1835,  when  some
of  the  trees  upon  it  had  grown  to  the  height  of  about  sixty
feet.  Steps  were  then  taken  by  the  State  of  Louisiana  to
clear  away  the  whole  raft  and  open  the  navigation,  which
was  effected,  not  without  great  labour,  in  the  space  of  four
years.

The  rafts  on  Red  River  are  equally  remarkable ;  in  some
parts  of  its  course,  cedar  trees  are  heaped  up  by  themselves,
and  in  other  places  pines.  On  the  rise  of  the  waters  in
summer  hundreds  of  these  are  seen :  some  with  their  green
leaves  still  upon  them,  just  as  they  have  fallen  from  a  neigh-
bouring bank;  others  leafless,  broken,  and  worn  in  their
passage  from  a  far  distant  tributary.  Wherever  they  accumu-
late on  the  edge  of  a  sand-bar  they  arrest  the  current  and
soon  become  covered  with  sediment.  On  this  mud  the  young
willows  and  the  poplars  called  cotton-wood  spring  up,  their
boughs  still  farther  retarding  the  sti*eam,  and,  as  the  inunda-
tion rises,  accelerating  the  deposition  of  new  soil.  The  bank
continuing  to  enlarge,  the  channel  at  length  becomes  so
narrow  that  a  single  long  tree  may  reach  from  side  to  side,
and  the  remaining  space  is  then  soon  choked  up  by  a
quantity  of  other  timber  which  has  become  waterlogged  and
has  sunk  to  the  bottom.     This  raft,  say  Messrs.  Humphreys


442  RAFTS  AND  SNAGS.  [Ch.  XIX.

and  Abbot,  formed  a  dam  in  1860,  which  backed  the  Bed
River  between  twenty  and  thirty  miles,  and  threw  about
three-quarters  of  its  water  through  two  natural  outlets  into
Soda  Lake,  affording  a  navigation  round  the  right  bank  of
the  raft.*

*  Unfortunately  for  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,'  ob-
serves Captain  Hall,  *  some  of  the  largest  trunks,  after  being
cast  down  from  the  position  on  which  they  grew,  get  their
roots  entangled  with  the  bottom  of  the  river,  where  they  re-
main anchored,  as  it  were,  in  the  mud.  The  force  of  the
current  naturally  gives  their  tops  a  tendency  downwards,  and,
by  its  flowing  past,  soon  strips  them  of  their  leaves  and
branches.  These  fixtures,  called  snags,  or  planters,  are  ex-
tremely dangerous  to  the  steam-vessels  proceeding  up  the
stream,  in  which  they  lie  like  a  lance  in  rest,  concealed  be-
neath the  water,  with  their  sharp  ends  pointed  directly  against
the  bows  of  the  vessels  coming  up.  For  the  most  part  these
formidable  snags  remain  so  still  that  they  can  be  detected
only  by  a  slight  ripple  above  them,  not  perceptible  to  inex-
perienced eyes.  Sometimes,  however,  they  vibrate  up  and
down,  alternately  showing  their  heads  above  the  surface,  and
bathing  them  beneath  it.'t  So  imminent  was  the  danger
caused  by  these  snags,  that  a  steamboat  was  constructed  and
provided  with  machinery  by  which  the  greater  number  of
these  trunks  of  trees  were  drawn  out  of  the  mud.

The  prodigious  quantity  of  wood  annually  drifted  down  by
the  Mississippi  and  its  tributaries  is  a  subject  of  geological
interest,  not  merely  as  illustrating  the  manner  in  which
abundance  of  vegetable  matter  becomes,  in  the  ordinary  course
of  nature,  imbedded  in  submarine  and  estuary  deposits,  but  as
attesting  the  constant  destruction  of  soil  and  transportation
of  matter  to  lower  levels  by  the  tendency  of  rivers  to  shift
their  courses.  Each  of  these  trees  must  have  required  many
years,  some  of  them  centuries,  to  attain  their  full  size ;  the  soil,
therefore,  whereon  they  grew,  after  remaining  undisturbed
for  long  periods,  is  ultimately  torn  up  and  swept  away.

*  Humphreys  and  Al)bot,  Report  of  t  Travels   in   N.  America,   vol.  iii.

Mississippi  Surrey,  1861.  p.  362.


Ch.  XIX.]  MUD-LUMPS  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  448

It  is  also  found  in  excavating  at  New  Orleans,  even  at  the
depth  of  several  yards  below  the  level  of  the  sea,  that  the
soil  of  the  delta  contains  innumerable  trunks  of  trees,  layer
above  layer,  some  prostrate,  as  if  drifted,  others  broken  oflF
near  the  bottom,  but  remaining  still  erect,  and  with  their
roots  spreading  on  all  sides,  as  if  in  their  natural  position.
In  such  situations  they  appeared  to  me  to  indicate  a  sinking
of  the  ground,  as  the  trees  must  formerly  have  grown  in
marshes  above  the  sea-level.  In  the  higher  parts  of  the  allu-
vial plain,  for  many  hundred  miles  above  the  head  of  the
delta,  similar  stools  and  roots  of  trees  are  also  seen  buried  in
stiff  clay  at  different  levels,  one  above  the  other,  and  exposed
to  view  in  the  banks  at  low  water.  They  point  clearly  to  the
successive  growth  of  forests  in  the  extensive  swamps  of  the
plain,  where  the  ground  was  slowly  raised,  year  after  year,
by  the  mud  thrown  down  during  inundations.  These  roots
and  stools  belong  chiefly  to  the  deciduous  cypress  (Taxodium
distichum)  and  other  swamp  trees,  and  they  bear  testimony  to
the  constant  sliifting  of  the  course  of  the  great  river,  which  is
always  excavating  land  originally  formed  at  some  distance
from  its  banks.

Mud-lumps  off  the  mmiths  of  the  river. — The  most  southern
or  seaward  part  of  the  delta  of  the  Mississippi  is  a  long
narrow  tongue  of  land  protruding  itself  for  fifty  miles  into
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  terminating  in  several  arms  or
passes,  as  they  are  called,  which  have  a  fan-shaped  arrange-
ment (see  map,  fig.  38),  the  south-west  pass  being  that
through  which  all  the  water  is  now  poured  out,  while  each
of  the  others  has,  by  turns,  at  some  former  period,  been  the
principal  channel  of  discharge.  The  narrow  tongue  of  land
above  alluded  to  consists  simply  of  two  low  banks  covered
with  reeds,  young  willows,  and  poplars.

In  appearance  these  banks  answer  precisely  to  those  of  the
river  in  the  alluvial  plain  (see  fig.  37,  p.  439)  when  the  inun-
dation is  at  its  height,  and  nothing  is  seen  above  water  but
the  upper  portions  of  the  banks ;  but  in  the  one  case  we
have  on  each  side  a  wide  expanse  of  fresh  water  interrupted
only  by  the  tops  of  the  tallest  trees  which  grow  in  the  swamps.


441  THE  MISSISSIPPI  BELOW  NEW  OBLEAHS.       [Ci.  XIX.

while  in  the  other  we  have  <»i  each  aide  the  salt  watar  of
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  of  a  bluiah-green  colonr.


Fig.  38.

IJ^

^\

V^^            \       „      ICMt

)ts^

J^

^^JT^-^

POKTCHARTRAIN^I

^

^^^

*it]     w-

^r  "^

5

^^^^

V\    SiS

m

^^^ ..  .»^

•^cAfcVSv^

Stnlu

„  .„,,„.        ^^^Ss^"

"  i^&  "'"^..■

,.

"•'^'„  "^

/E

95

Map  of  pnn  of  tho  Jelta  ot  the  MiBaissippi  lielosr  New  Orleans.*


In  this  region,  where  so  rapid  a  conversion  is  going  on  from
sea  into  land,  a  phenomenon  occurs  which  is  without  parallel,

*  BuiDpbrejB  and  Abbot,  BepoK  on  the  Mississippi  Birer,  PUte  11.


Ch.  XIX.]


MUD-LCMPS  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.


U5


80  far  as  I  am  aware,  in  the  delta  of  any  other  river.  I  often
heard,  during  my  visit  in  1845  to  the  pilot  station  called  the
Balize,  of  the  swelling  up  of  the  muddy  bottom  of  the  gulf  to
the  height  of  several  feet,  or  even  yards,  above  the  level  of
high  tide,  and  this  in  places  where  there  had  previously  been

Fig.  39.


Mail  showing  ths  poaitiong  of  the  Wart  and  Cmt'b  Mud-lumps  at  the  Sorth-
KiibC  Pasa  of  the  Miaaiasippi  Riv«r,   from  a  eurvej  of  Capt.  Takott,    in


a  depth  of  several  fathoms.  The  pilots  told  me  that  these
'  inud -lumps,'  as  they  call  them,  sometimes  displayed  on  their
surface  the  anchors  of  vessels,  and,  in  one  instance,  a  cargo  of

*  Thia  mnp  nnd  the  vieira  of  tho  two      to  me  bj  Geo.  Humphreja,  of  the  U.S.
mud-lumpa  were  kiodl?  communicated      Eoginesn.


446


MUtt-LUMPS  OF  THE  mSSISaiPPt


[Ca.ZIX.


heavy  stones  from  a  vessel  whicli  was  known  to  hare  been
wrecked  in  water  ten  feet  deep.  The  island  of  the  Belize
originated  in  this  manner,  and  five  salt  apringB  were  described
as  rising  in  it,  by  certain  French  surveyors,  as  long  ago  as  the
year  1726.*  Mr.  Forshey  states  that,  in  1832,  a  mud-iBland
made  its  appearance,  in  the  middle  of  which  a  spring  issaed.
These  new  islands,  as  we  learn  from  the  subsequent  survey  of
Captain  Talcott  in  1839,  vary  from  an  acre  to  several  acres
in  extent.  The  gradual  rise  of  some  of  them  was  watched
during  the  survey,  from  two  feet  below  water  to  three  feet
above  it,  and  it  was  observed  that  they  were  always  situated

Fig.  40.


fi.  View  of  Cirr's  Lump,  N.E,  Paa».
Eitreme  htight  Hi)ovc  lowwHter,  8  feet.

off  sojne  one  of  the  moutkg  of  the  river.  They  have  never  been
known  to  make  their  appearance  in  that  part  of  the  delta
where  no  modern  additions  are  being  made  to  the  land.
Sometimes  they  attain  a  height  of  10  or  even  18  feet  above
the  level  of  the  sea  (see  figs.  40,  41),  They  are  composed
almost  entirely  of  tenacious  mud,  usually  homogeneous,  but
occasionally  mixed  with  sand.  This  mud  is  chiefly  pushed
up  bodily,  but  some  of  it  consists  of  matter  brought  up  by  a
spring  to  the  t,op  of  the  dome-shaped  mass,  and  thrown  down
on  the  surface  on  all  sides,  over   which  the   muddy  water


■  ThomuBf,  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  QM.  de  Fiance,  t


i.  p.  2eS.   1860-40.


Ch.  XIX.]  MUD-LUMPS  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  447

pours.  So  much  carburetted  hj-drogen  or  inflammable  gaa
is  emitted,  together  with  Bait  or  brackish  water,  that  Col.
Sidell  suggests  that  they  deserve  the  name  of  gas  vents
rather  than  of  springs.  The  tabular  cavities  up  whi(;h  the
springs  rise  are  about  6  inches  in  diameter,  vertical,  acd  as
regular  in  form  as  if  bored  by  an  anger.  One  which  was
sounded  was  fonnd  to  be  24  feet  deep,  aud  the  lead  at  the
bottom  of  the  line  seemed  to  be  still  slowly  sinking  tlirough
thick  mud.  The  springs  issue  at  first  from  the  centre  and
highest  part,  and  afterwards  enccessively  through  cracks  at
Fig.  41.


S.S.W.  View  of  the  mnd-Iump  called  the  Wart,  N.E.  Pau.
Extreme  height  above  loir  vatci,  14  het.

lower  and  lower  levels,  and  in  some  of  the  oldest  mud-lumps
they  have  altogether  ceased  to  flow.

During  storms,  when  the  surface  of  tiie  gulf  is  raised  by  the
prevalence  of  certain  winds,  the  salt  wateV  is  blown  into  the
passes,  and  the  waves  undermine  parts  of  these  mud-lumps.
The  steepness  and  occasional  verticality  of  the  sides  in  the
Wart  and  Carr's  Lump  (figs.  40  and  41)  are  due  to  such
denuding  action.  Hurricanes  have  been  known  to  sweep
away  an  entire  mud-lump,  or  at  least  such  portions  of  it  eu


448  ORiaiN  OF  MUB-LUMPS  AT  [Ch.  XDL

projected  above  low  water.  Col.  Sidell  informs  me,  that
when  an  excavation  was  made  at  New  Orleans  for  the  founda-
tion of  the  Custom  House,  some  years  after  the  survey  of  1839,
the  digging  appeared  to  him  to  be  in  the  body  of  an  old  mud-
lump  ;  *  and  no  doubt  many  such  would  be  found  in  the  older
parts  of  the  delta,  and  they  would  present  a  very  perplexing
enigma  to  a  geologist  who  had  no  clue  to  their  mode  of
origin.  We  learn  from  Professor  Hilgardf  that  in  1862  Mr.
D.  H.  Avery  found  on  the  coast  of  Louisiana,  at  a  distance  of
140  geographical  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  a
deposit  of  rock-salt  of  very  modem,perhaps  post-Tertiary,  age.
It  occurred  in  a  little  island  called  Petit  Anse,  which  rises
partly  from  the  sea  and  partly  from  the  coast-marsh.  As
this  salt  formation  is  said  to  be  144  acres  in  extent  and  88
feet  thick,  it  may  perhaps  be  more  or  less  continuous  under
the  delta  and  be  connected  with  the  salt  springs  in  the  island
of  the  Balize  mentioned  at  p.  446.  We  need  feel  no  surprise
at  the  quantity  of  gaseous  matter  disengaged  from  cracks  in
these  newly-raised  islands,  when  we  recollect  that  almost
everywhere  in  Europe,  where  a  successful  Artesian  boring
has  been  made,  the  water  at  first  spouts  up  to  a  height  far
beyond  that  to  which  it  would  be  carried  by  simple  hydro-
static pressure.  A  portion  of  the  propelling  force  usually
consists  of  atmospheric  air  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  which  last
is  generated  by  the  decomposition  of  animal  and  vegetable
matter.  Of  the  latter  there  must  be  always  a  great  store  in
the  recent  deposits  of  a  delta  like  that  of  the  Mississippi,  as
they  enclose  much  drift-timber  at  all  depths,  and  the  pent-up
gaseous  matter  will  be  ready  to  escape  wherever  the  overlying
impervious  clays  are  upheaved  and  rent.

Origin  of  the  mud-lumps. — I  am  informed  by  Col.  Sidell,
that  when  one  of  the  lumps  was  blown  up  with  gunpowder,
a  great  ebullition  of  gas,  chiefly  carburetted  hydrogen,  took
place,  and  left  a  crater-shaped  hollow.  Such  gas  has  also
been  known  to  be  given  out  for  several  years  in  succes-
sion ;  from  which  facts  the  Colonel  infers,  that  when  it
cannot  get  vent  it  may  sometimes  accumulate  to  such
an  amount  as  to  be  able  to  overcome  the  pressure  of  the

♦  Letter  to  tho  Author.  Oct.  16,  1866.
t  American  Jouru.  of  Science,  vol.  xlvii.


Ch.  XIX.J  THE  MOUTHS  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  449

incumbent  mud,  and  force  it  up  in  the  shape  of  a  mud-lump.
But  this  hypothesis  leaves  unexplained  the  important  fact
that  the  swelling  up  of  the  bottom  always  takes  place  off
what  are  called  *the  passes,'  or  off  the  extremity  of  the
delta,  near  those  points  where  the  chief  load  of  fresh  sand,
gravel,  and  sediment  is  thrown  down  on  the  muddy  bottom
of  the  gulf.  The  decay  of  drift  timber  and  other  vegetable
matter  must  be  going  on  actively  at  various  depths  all
over  the  delta,  and  often  far  fix)m  the  river's  mouth;  so
that  it  seems  to  me  more  probable  that  the  gaseous  ema-
nations play  only  a  secondary  part,  helping  to  bring  up
mud  from  below  and  deposit  it  on  the  slopes  of  the  newly
raised  mound,  as  in  the  eruption  of  a  mud  volcano.  The
initiatory  moving  power  may  probably  be  derived  from  the
downward  pressure  of  the  gravel,  sand,  and  sediment  accu-
mulated during  the  flood  season  off  the  various  mouths  or
passes,  upon  a  yielding  bottom  of  fine  mud  and  sand.  This
new  deposit,  according  to  Messrs  Humphreys  and  Abbot,
forms  annually  a  mass  of  no  less  than  one  mile  square,
having  a  thickness  of  twenty-seven  feet.  It  consists  of  mud,
coarse  sand,  and  gravel,  which  the  river  lets  fall  some-
what abruptly  when  it  first  comes  in  contact  with  the  still
salt  water  of  the  gulf.  A  cubic  mass  of  such  enormous
volume  and  weight  thrown  down  on  a  foundation  of  yielding
mud,  consisting  of  materials  which,  as  being  very  fine  and
impalpable,  had  long  before  been  carried  out  farthest  from
the  land,  may  well  be  conceived  to  exert  a  downward  pres-
sure capable  of  displacing,  squeezing,  and  forcing  up  some
parts  of  the  adjoining  bottom  of  the  gulf,  so  as  to  give  rise
to  new  shoals  and  islands.

Railway  engineers  are  familiar  with  the  swelling  up  of  a
peat-moss  or  the  bed  of  a  morass,  on  some  adjoining  part  of
which  a  new  embankment  has  been  constructed.  I  saw  an
example  of  this  in  the  year  1839,  in  the  Loch  of  Eescobie,
in  Forfarshire,  five  miles  east  of  the  town  of  Forfar.  That
lake  had  been  partially  drained,  and  the  railway  mound
was  carried  over  newly-exposed,  soft,  and  swampy  ground,
which  gave  way  so  as  to  let  the  mound  sink  down  fifteen
feet.    It  then  became  necessary  to  pile  up  additional  matter

VOL.   I.  GO


450  ORIGIN  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI  MUD-LU3IP8.      [Cm.  ^nr

fifteen  feet  thick  in  order  to  obtain  the  required  level.  On
one  side  of  the  embankment,  the  bog,  when  I  visited  the
place,  had  swollen  np  in  a  ridge  40  feet  long  and  8  feet
high,  the  upper  portion  consisting  of  peaty  matter  traversed
by  numerous  willow  roots.  In  the  highest  part  of  this  up-
raised mass  were  several  irregular  cracks  about  six  feet  in
their  greatest  width,  and  open  for  a  depth  of  two  yards  or
more.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  rail>vay  mound,  and  about
100  yards  distant  from  it,  in  the  middle  of  what  remained
of  the  half-drained  loch,  a  new  island  or  *  mud-lump  *  was
seen,  which  had  begun  to  rise  slowly  in  1837,  and  had  at-
tained before  1840  a  height  of  several  yards,  with  a  length
of  about  100  feet,  and  a  width  of  25  feet.  It  was  still  strewed
over  with  dead  fresh- water  mussels  and  other  shells ;  but
many  land  plants  had  already  sprung  up,  so  that  its  surface
was  green.

In  1852  I  saw  a  remarkable  instance  of  such  a  downward
and  lateral  pressure,  in  the  suburbs  of  Boston  (U.  S.),  near
the  South  Cove.  With  a  view  of  converting  part  of  an
estuary  overflowed  at  high  tide  into  dry  land,  they  had
thrown  into  it  a  vast  load  of  stone  (chiefly  granite)  and  sand,
upwards  of  900,000  cubic  yards  in  volume.  Tinder  this
weight  the  mud  had  sunk  down  many  yards  vertically.
Meanwhile  the  adjoining  bottom  of  the  estuary,  supporting
a  dense  growth  of  salt-water  plants,  only  visible  at  low  tide,
had  been  forced  gradually  upward,  in  the  course  of  many
months,  so  as  to  project  five  or  six  feet  above  high-water
mark.  The  upraised  mass  was  bent  into  five  or  six
parallel  anticlinal  folds ;  and  below  the  upper  layer  of  turf,
consisting  of  salt-marsh  plants,  mud  was  seen  above  the  level
of  high  tide,  full  of  sea- shells,  such  as  My  a  arenaria^  Modiola
pUcatula^  Sanguinolarxa  fiisca^  Nassa  ohsoleta^Natica  triseriata^
and  others.  In  some  of  these  curved  beds  the  layers  of  shells
were  quite  vertical.  The  upraised  area  was  75  feet  wide,  and
several  hundred  yards  long.

Formations  of  lakes  in  Louisiana. — Another  striking  feature
in  the  basin  of  the  Mississippi,  illusti-ative  of  the  changes  now
in  progress,  is  tile  formation  by  natural  causes  of  great  lakes,
and  the  drainage  of  others.     These  are  especially  frequent  in


Ch.  XIX.]         FORMATION  OF  LAKES  IN  LOUISIANA.  451

the  basin  of  the  Red  River  in  Louisiana,  where  the  largest  of
them,  called  the  Bistineau,  is  more  than  thirty  miles  long,
and  has  a  medium  depth  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet.  In
the  deepest  parts  are  seen  numerous  cypress-trees  {Taxodium
distichum)  of  all  sizes,  now  dead,  and  most  of  them  with
their  tops  broken  by  the  wind,  yet  standing  erect  under
water.  This  tree  resists  the  action  of  air  and  water  longer
than  any  other,  and,  if  not  submerged  throughout  the  whole
year,  will  retain  life  for  an  extraordinary  period.  Lake.
Bistineau,  as  well  as  Black  Lake,  Cado  Lake,  Spanish  Lake,
Natchitoches  Ijake,  and  many  others,  have  been  formed,  ac-
cording to  Darby,  by  the  gradual  elevation  of  the  bed  of  the
Red  River,  in  which  the  alluvial  accumulations  have  been  so
great  as  to  raise  its  channel,  and  cause  its  waters,  during  the
flood  season,  to  flow  up  the  mouths  of  many  tributaries,  and
to  convert  parts  of  their  courses  into  lakes.  In  the  autumn,
when  the  level  of  Red  River  is  again  depressed,  the  waters
rush  back,  and  some  lakes  become  grassy  meadows,  with
streams  meandering  through  them.*  Thus,  there  is  a  peri-
odical flux  and  reflux  between  Red  River  and  some  of  these
basins,  which  are  merely  reservoirs,  alternately  emptied  and
filled,  like  our  tide  estuaries — with  this  difiFerence,  that  in
the  one  case  the  land  is  submerged  for  several  months  con-
tinuously, and  in  the  other  twice  in  every  twenty-four  hours.
It  has  happened,  in  several  cases,  that  a  raft  of  timber  or  a
bar  has  been  thrown  by  the  Red  River  across  some  of  the
openings  of  these  channels,  and  then  the  lakes  become,  like
Bistineau,  constant  repositories  of  water.  But,  even  in
these  cases,  their  level  is  liable  to  annual  elevation  and
depression,  because  the  flood  of  the  main  river,  when  at  its
height,  passes  over  the  bar ;  just  as,  where  sandhiUs  close
the  entrance  of  an  estuary  on  the  Norfolk  or  Suffolk  coast,
the  sea,  during  some  high  tide  or  storm,  has  often  breached
the  barrier  and  inundated  again  the  interior.

The  plains  of  the  Red  River  and  the  Arkansas  as^  so  low
and  flat,  says  Mr.  Featherstonhaugh,  that,  whenever  the
Mississippi  rises  thirty  feet  above  its  ordinary  level,  those

*

*  Darby's  Louisiana,  p.  88.
o  o  2


452  FORMATION  OF  LAKES  IN   LOUISIANA.         [Ch.  XDC

great  tributaries  are  made  to  flow  back,  and  inundate  a  region
of  vast  extent.  Both  the  streams  alluded  to  contain  red
sediment  derived  from  the  decomposition  of  red  porphyry ;
and  since  1833,  when  there  was  a  great  inundation  in  the
Arkansas,  an  immense  swamp  has  been  formed  near  the
Mammelle  Mountain,  comprising  30,000  acres,  with  here  and
there  lagoons,  where  the  old  bed  of  the  river  was  situated ;
in  which  are  seen  standing  innumerable  trees,  for  the
most  part  dead,  of  cypress,  cotton-wood,  or  poplar,  the
triple-thomed  acacia,  and  others  of  great  size.  Their
trunks  appear  as  if  painted  red  for  about  fifteen  feet  from
the  ground ;  at  which  height  a  perfectly  level  line  extends
through  the  whole  forest,  marking  the  rise  of  the  waters
during  the  last  flood.*

Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot  mention  that  the  upper
part  of  the  Bed  Biver  lies  in  a  gypseous  formation  contain-
ing much  red  clay,  from  which,  as  well  as  from  the  porphyry
alluded  to  by  Featherstonhaugh,  the  colour  of  the  sediment
may  be  derived.t

But  most  probably  the  causes  above  assigned  for  the  recent
origin  of  these  lakes  are  not  the  only  ones.  Subterranean
movements  have  altered,  so  lately  as  the  years  1811-12,  the
relative  levels  of  various  parts  of  the  basin  of  the  Mississippi,
situated  300  miles  north-east  of  Lake  Bistineau.  In  those
years  the  great  valley,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  to  that  of
the  St.  Francis,  including  a  tract  300  miles  in  length,  and
exceeding  in  area  the  whole  basin  of  the  Thames,  was  con-
vulsed to  such  a  degree  as  to  create  new  islands  in  the  river,
and  lakes  in  the  alluvial  plain.  Some  of  these  were  on  the
left  or  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  and  were  twenty  miles  in
extent ;  as,  for  example,  those  named  Beelfoot  and  Obion  in
Tennessee,  formed  in  the  channels  or  valleys  of  small  streams
bearing  the  same  names.

But  the  largest  area  aflFected  by  the  great  convulsion  lies
eight  or  ten  miles  to  the  westward  of  the  Mississippi,  and
inland  from  the  town  of  New  Madrid,  in  Missouri.     It  is


*  Featherstonhaugh,   Geol.   Report.  t  Report  on  the  Mississippi,  p.  40.

Washington,  1835,  p.  84.


Ch.  XIX.]     THE  *  SUNK  COUNTRY '  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.         453

called  the  '  sunk  country/  and  is  said  to  extend  along  the
course  of  the  White  Water  and  its  tributaries,  for  a  distance
of  between  seventy  and  eighty  miles  north  and  south,  and
thirty  miles  or  more  east  and  west.  Throughout  this  area,
innumerable  submerged  trees,  some  standing  leafless,  others
prostrate,  are  seen ;  and  so  great  is  the  extent  of  lake  and
marsh,  that  an  active  trade  in  the  skins  of  musk-rats,  mink,
otters,  and  other  wild  animals,  is  now  carried  on  there.  In
March  1846  I  skirted  the  borders  of  the  *sunk  country'
nearest  to  New  Madrid,  passing  along  the  Bayou  St.  John
and  Little  Prairie,  where  dead  trees  of  various  kinds,  some
erect  in  the  water,  others  fallen,  and  strewed  in  dense  masses
over  the  bottom,  in  the  shallows,  and  near  the  shore,  were
conspicuous.  I  also  beheld  countless  rents  in  the  adjoining
dry  alluvial  plains,  caused  by  the  movements  of  the  soil,
in  1811-12,  still  open,  though  the  rains,  frost,  and  riv^r
inundations  have  greatly  diminished  their  original  depth.
I  observed,  moreover,  numerous  circular  cavities,  called
'  sink  holes,'  from  ten  to  thirty  yards  wide,  and  twenty  feet
or  more  in  depth,  which  interrupt  the  general  level  of  the
plain.  These  were  formed  by  the  spouting  out  of  large
quantities  of  sand  and  mud  during  the  earthquakes.^

That  the  prevailing  changes  of  level  in  the  delta  and  allu-
vial plain  of  the  Mississippi  have  been  caused  by  the  subsi-
dence, rather  than  the  upheaval  of  land,  appears  to  me
established  by  the  fact  that  there  are  no  protuberances  of
upraised  alluvial  soil,  projecting  above  the  level  surface  of  the
great  plain.  It  is  true  that  the  gradual  elevation  of  that
plain,  by  new  accessions  of  matter,  would  tend  to  efface
every  inequality  derived  from  this  source ;  but  we  might  cer-
tainly have  expected  to  find  more  broken  ground  in  the  great
plain  westward  of  the  Mississippi,  had  local  upthrows  of
alluvial  strata  been  of  repeated  occurrence.

In  regard  to  the  strata  composing  the  lower  part  of  the
great  delta,  an  observation  of  Darby  deserves  attention.  In
the  steep  banks  of  the  Atchafalaya,  before  alluded  to,  the


*   For    an    account  of   the  'sunk      1811-1812,  see  Ljell's  Second  Visit  to
country/  shaken  by  the  earthquake  of      the  United  States,  cb.  xzziii.


454  ANTIQUITY  OF  MISSISSIPPI  DELTA  [Ch.  XIX.

following  section,  says  he,  is  observable  at  low  water: — firet
an  upper  stratum,  consisting  invariably  of  bluish  clay,
common  to  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi ;  below  this  a  stratum
of  red  ochreous  earth,  peculiar  to  Red  River,  under  which
the  blue  clay  of  the  Mississippi  again  appears;  and  this
arrangement  is  constant,  proving,  as  that  geographer  re-
marks, that  the  waters  of  the  Red  River  occupied  alternately,
at  some  former  periods,  considerable  tracts  below  their  pre-
sent point  of  union.*  Such  alterations  are  probably  common
in  submarine  spaces  situated  between  two  converging  deltas ;
for,  before  the  two  rivers  unite,  there  must  almost  always  be
a  certain  period  when  an  intermediate  tract  will  by  turns  be
occupied  and  abandoned  by  the  waters  of  each  stream ;  since
it  can  rarely  happen  that  the  season  of  highest  flood  will  pre-
cisely correspond  in  each.  In  the  case  of  the  Red  River  and
Mississippi,  which  carry  off  the  waters  from  countries  placed
under  widely  distant  latitudes,  an  exact  coincidence  in  the
time  of  greatest  inundation  is  very  improbable.

Antiquity  of  the  delta  and  alluvial  plain. — After  I  had
examined  the  pilot  station  called  the  Balize,  near  the  mouth
of  the  Mississippi,  in  1846,  I  endeavoured  to  estimate  the
quantity  of  sedimentary  matter  contained  in  the  delta  and  in
the  alluvial  plain,  and  to  calculate  the  minimum  of  time
which  the  river  must  have  acquired  to  deposit  so  vast  a  mass
of  matter.  The  area  of  the  delta  was  assumed  by  Mr.  Forshey
to  be  about  13,600  square  British  miles  in  extent.  In  the
more  recent  survey  of  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot,  in  1861,
it  is  taken  to  be  somewhat  less,  or  12,300  square  miles.  The
average  depth  of  the  fluviatile  formation  in  this  area  I  sap-
posed  to  be  somewhat  more  than  500  feet,  and  for  facility  of
calculation  I  assumed  it  to  be  528  feet,  or  ^  of  a  mile.  My
conjectures  on  this  head  were  founded  partly  on  the  depth  of
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  between  the  southern  point  of  Florida  and
the  Balize,  and  partly  on  borings  600  feet  deep,  in  the  delta
near  Lake  Pontchartrain,  nortn  of  New  Orleans,  in  which
the  bottom  of  the  alluvial  matter  was  said  not  to  have
been  reached  at  that  depth — a  result  confirmed,  as  we  shall

*  Darby's  Louisiana,  p.  103.


Ch.  XIX.]  AND  ALLUVIAL  PLAIN.  455

presently  see  by  a  more  recent  experiment.  For  tlie  quantity
of  sediment  contained  in  the  water  I  adopted  Mr.  Eiddell's
estimate  of  yijVy  ^^  weight,  and  this  does  not  diflFer  materially
from  the  results  obtained  by  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot
after  a  long  series  of  careful  measurements,  for  they  give  the
solid  contents  as  j-jtt'

From  the  data  above  stated  as  to  the  thickness  of  the  delta-
deposits  and  the   quantity  of  solid  matter   brought    down
annually  by  the  river  (which  would  amount  to  3,702,758,400
cubic  feet),  I  inferred  that  the  accumulation  of  the  whole
deposit  must  have  taken  67,000  years.     But,  in  the  course  of
their  survey,  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  quantity  of  water  annually  discharged  by  the
Mississippi  into  the  gulf  had  been  greatly  underrated.   They
also  remarked  that  the  river  pushes  along  the  bottom  of  its
channel  even  to  its  mouth  a  certain  quantity  of  sand  and
gravel,  of  which  I  had  taken  no  account,  equal,  according  to
them,  to  about  -j^  of  the  mud  held  in  suspension  by  the  river.
Allowing,  therefore,  for  this  addition  and  for  the  larger  dis-
charge of  muddy  water,  they  make  the  whole  mass  of  trans-
ported matter  nearly  double  that   which   I  had  assumed;
consequently  the  number  of  years  required  for  the  growth  of
the  whole  delta  would  be  reduced  to  about  one  half,  or  to
about  33,500  years,  if  my  former  assumed  data  as  to  the
probable  thickness  of  the  deposit  be  adopted.

But  in  1854*  another  Artesian  well  was  bored  at  New
Orleans  to  the  depth  of  630  feet,  through  strata  containing
shells  of  recent  species,  without  any  signs  of  the  foundations
of  the  modem  deposit  having  been  reached.  The  mineral
character  of  the  strata  pierced  through,  as  given  in  the  report
of  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot,  will  be  seen  to  consist
throughout  of  various  coloured  clays  and  sands,  with  much
vegetable  matter.  One  bed  of  sand  at  the  depth  of  582  feet
is  described  as  nearly  stony,  but  the  rest  as  unconsolidated.
At  the  depth  of  66  feet,  cypress  roots  {Taxodium  distichum)
and  water  worn  pebbles  are  mentioned — again  at  130  feet  bark
of  the  cypress  occurred,  as  I  learn  from  Professor  Hilgard,

*  Report  of  Survey  of  Mifldssippi  River,  p.  101.


456  COAST-PLIOCENE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.  [Ch.

and  at  the  depth  of  153  feet  a  cedar  log  in  a  sound  state.
All  these  remains  are  exactly  of  such  a  character  as  we
should  expect  to  find  in  a  formation  accumulated  in  the  sea
off  the  mouths  of  the  great  river.

General  Humphreys  has  had  the  kindness,  at  my  request,
to  submit  the  shells  which  were  brought  up  from  various
depths  to  Professor  Hilgard,  author  of  a  valuable  report  on
the  geology  of  the  State  of  Mississippi,  and  he  informs  me
that  in  one  stratum  occurring  at  the  depth  of  41  feet  in  the
Artesian  boring,  and  which  was  composed  exclusively  of
shells,  he  has  found  22  pieces  of  moUusca  in  a  determinable
state.  All  of  them  are  of  species  now  living  in  the  gulf,  and
of  which,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  he  has  himself  col-
lected specimens  on  the  shores  of  Ship  Island,  near  the  main-
land (see  map,  fig.  38,  p.  444).  They  all  belong  to  salt-water
genera,  such  as  Mactra,  Area,  Cardium,  Lucina,  Venus,  Pan-
dora, Astarte,  Donax,  Tellina,  Oliva,  Marginella,  Buccinum,
Natica,  &c.  Eecent  marine  shells  occurred  at  intervals  so  far
down  as  235  feet;  but  among  the  species  obtained  at  that  depth
were  a  Tellina  and  Cardium  which  Mr.  Hilgard  has  not  yet
been  able  to  name.  He  remarks,  however,  that  they  do  not
agree  with  any  of  the  American  Miocene  or  Eocene  species
known  to  him.  From  much  greater  depths,  and  near  the
bottom  of  the  boring,  shells  of  living  species  were  again
identified,  and  among  them  Veiius  Paphia,  Area  transversaj
A,  poiiderosay  and  Gnathodon  cuneatuSy  the  latter  bivalve  being
one  which  swarms  in  the  lagoons  of  the  delta,  such  as  Lake
Pontchartrain,  in  such  numbers  that  the  dead  shells  are  used
for  making  roads.  Professor  Hilgard  compares  the  upper
portions  of  the  deposit  pierced  through,  to  a  formation  called
by  him  ^  Coast-Pliocene '  (which  appears  to  me  of  Post-
Pliocene  age),  occurring  at  slight  elevations  above  the  sea
along  the  coast  of  the  gulf  in  the  State  of  Mississippi  (see
a,  a,  map  p.  444).  Some  beds  of  this  formation  he  de-
scribes as  containing  the  common  eatable  oyster  of  America,
0.  Virginicay  together  with  Mytilus  hamatus^  and  the  living
barnacle  of  that  coast,  while  in  other  parts  it  is  full  of  the
roots  and  trunks  of  the  deciduous  cypress.  As  the  beds  con-
taining these  shells  are  now  some  feet  above  the  level  of  the


Ch.  XIX.]     NATURE  OF  THE  DELTA  AT  NEW  ORLEANS.  457

sea,  they  bear  witness  to  an  upheaval  of  the  bottom  of  the
gulf  at  a  very  modem  period.

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  base  of  the  marine
formation  was  not  reached  in  the  Artesian  well  at  New
Orleans  at  a  depth  of  630  feet.  It  will  be  seen  by  the  map
(fig.  38)  that  at  the  distance  of  only  twelve  miles  from  the
mouth  of  the  South  Pass  the  soundings  already  give  a  depth
of  95  fathoms.  Eight  miles  farther  in  the  same  direction  we
find  144  fathoms,  then  at  32  miles  452  fathoms — ^beyond  this
600,  and  they  increase  to  1,000  fathoms  before  we  arrive  at
the  Florida  Straits.  When  we  consider  the  manner  in  which
the  delta  at  and  below  New  Orleans  protrudes  beyond  the
general  coast-line,  and  that  at  a  distance  from  the  Balize
equal  to  that  which  separates  the  Balize  from  New  Orleans,
the  gulf  is  3,000  feet  deep,  it  seems  probable  that  the  recent
deposit  if  it  could  be  gauged  would  prove  to  be  far  more  than
600  feet  thick,  and  might  even  attain  twice  or  thrice  that
thickness.  We  must  be  prepared  to  find  that  the  great  bulk
of  it  will  contain  marine  and  not  fluviatile  shells,  and  that  a
large  part  of  the  whole  will  consist  of  fine  clay,  although
here  and  there  pebbles  and  sand  brought  down  to  the  bar
will  have  been  spread  out  during  storms  over  wide  areas.

In  my  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States  (vol.  ii.  p.  154),
I  have  remarked  that  ^  all  the  pilots  agree,  that  when  the
Mississippi  is  at  its  height,  it  pours  several  streams  of  fr^sh
water,  tinged  with  yellow  sediment,  for  twelve  or  more  miles
into  the  gulf  beyond  its  mouths.  These  streams,  floating
over  the  heavier  salt  water,  spread  out  into  broad  superficial
sheets  or  layers,  which  the  keels  of  vessels  plough  through,
turning  up  a  furrow  of  clear  blue  water,  which  forms  a  dark
streak  in  the  middle  of  the  ship's  wake.  We  may  infer,
therefore,  that  both  in  the  summer,  when  the  swollen  river  is
turbid  and  depositing  mud,  and  in  winter,  when  the  sea  is
making  reprisals  on  the  delta,  there  is  a  large  amount  of
sediment  dispersed  far  and  wide  and  carried  by  currents  to
the  deeper  and  more  distant  parts  of  the  gulf.'

We  learn,  from  the  recent  survey  of  Humphreys  and  Abbot,
that  the  narrow  strip  of  land  formed  near  the  present  mouths
or  passes  has  been  advancing  for  some  time  at  the  rate  of


458  GROWTH  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI  DELTA.  [Ch.  XIX

262  feet  a  year;  but  this  fact  supplies  us  with  no  data  for
estimating  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  whole  delta  in  past
times.  On  comparing  an  Admiralty  survey  map  a  hundred
years  old,  executed  by  Captain  Gould*  between  the  years
1764  and  1771,  with  the  maps  made  a  hundred  years  after-
wards by  the  United  States  surveyors  (that  by  TaJcott  in
1838,  and  that  of  Humphreys  and  Abbot  in  1860),  it  appears
that  the  land  at  the  South  Pass  (see  map,  fig.  88),  instead
of  having  advanced  has  receded  about  four  miles  within  the
last  century.  This  return  of  the  sea  to  its  old  limits  is  doubt-
less owing  to  this  pass  having  ceased  to  be  a  great  channel
of  discharge,  so  that,  instead  of  new  additions  being  made
to  the  banks,  there  has  been  a  loss  even  of  some  of  the  land
that  had  been  gained.  The  denudation  in  such  cases  may
not  extend  to  a  depth  of  many  feet ;  but  it  shows,  not  only
how  diflScult  it  is  to  estimate  the  average  rate  of  advance  of
the  land  by  observations  made  during  short  periods,  but  how
extensively  the  coarse  materials  first  thrown  down  on  the
bars  may  subsequently  be  removed  and  spread  out  in  thin
strata  over  large  spaces.  Even  if  we  compare  the  two
American  surveys  already  alluded  to,  of  1838  and  1860,  we
find  that  in  this  interval  of  twenty- two  years  a  bank  of  new
land  in  the  Pass  a  I'Outre,  measuring  two  miles  east  and
west  by  half  a  mile  north  and  south,  had  been  lost  or  cut
away  by  the  waves.

In  boring  vertically  through  any  part  of  the  delta,  we  may
expect  to  pass  occasionally  through  brackish-water  strata,
formed  in  lagoons,  and  through  others  containing  purely
marine  shells ;  and  if  there  have  been  oscillations  in  the  level
of  the  ground,  as  may  well  be  supposed  in  the  case  of  tens
of  thousands  of  years,  there  will  be  alternations  of  fluviatile
beds  and  fresh-water  cypress  swamps,  with  clays  and  sands
containing  marine  shells.  On  the  whole,  I  am  not  disposed
to  regard  the  estimate  which  I  made  in  1846  of  the  time
required  for  the  accumulation  of  the  delta,  as  extravagant.
The  rate  at  which  the  river  accomplishes  a  given  amount  of
work  is  no  doubt  nearly  double  what  I  supposed,  as  shown

*  Admiral  Richards,  of  the  Hydrographical  Office,  had  the  kindness  to  show  me
the  original  of  this  map.


Ch.  XIX.]  *  BLUFFS '  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  459

by  Messrs.  Humphreys  and  Abbot ;  but,  on  the  other  band,
the  quantity  of  work  done,  or  of  mud  and  sand  which  has
been  carried  down  into  the  gulf,  is  far  greater  than  that
which  I  assumed  as  the  basis  of  my  calculation.

We  have  no  information  obtained  by  borings  in  regard  to
the  thickness  of  the  alluvial  deposit  in  the  pl^in  above  the
delta,  the  superficial  area  of  which  is  about  equal  to  that  of
the  delta  itself.  I  assumed  it  to  average  half  that  of  the
delta,  or  264  feet.  I  grounded  this  conclusion  partly  on  the
idea  that  the  valley  had  been  subsiding,  as  a  part  of  it  sank
during  the  earthquake  of  New  Madrid  in  1811-12,  and  partly
on  the  fact  that  the  Mississippi  is  continually  shifting  its
course  in  the  great  alluvial  plain,  cutting  its  channel  to  the
depth  of  100  feet,  and  sometimes  even  to  250  feet, — filling  up
on  one  side  as  much  space  as  it  scoops  out  on  the  other ;  and
these  changes  alone  must,  I  think,  have  given  a  considerable
depth  to  the  alluvial  deposit,  independently  of  the  filling  up
of  the  original  basin  of  the  great  river,  the  capacity  of  which
was  probably  increased  by  repeated  subsidences.

If  we  ascend  the  Mississippi  for  165  miles  above  New
Orleans,  we  find  at  Port  Hudson,  on  the  east  or  left  bank  of
the  river,  a  cliff  continually  undermined  by  the  stream.  This
cliff  I  examined  in  1846,  and  the  state  of  it  had  been  well
described  sixty-nine  years  before  by  Bartram  the  botanist.
At  the  base  of  it,  about  forty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  gulf,
is  a  buried  forest,  with  the  stools  and  roots  in  their  natural
position,  and  composed  of  such  trees  as  now  live  in  the  swamps
of  the  delta  and  alluvial  plain,  the  deciduous  cypress  being  the
most  conspicuous  of  them.  Above  this  buried  forest  the  bluff
rises  to  a  height  of  about  75  feet,  and  it  affords  a  section  of
beds  of  river-sand,  including  trunks  of  trees  and  pieces  of
drift-wood,  and  above  the  sand  a  brown  clay.  From  the  top
of  the  cliff  the  ground  slopes  to  a  height  of  150  feet  above  the
level  of  the  buried  forest,  or  about  200  feet  above  the  sea.
From  this  section  we  learn  that  there  have  been  great
movements  and  oscillations  of  level  since  the  Mississippi
began  to  form  an  alluvial  plain,  and  to  drift  down  timber  into
it,  and  to  bury  under  its  8and  and  sediment  ancient  forests,
resembling  those  which  now  flourish  in  the  swamps  of  its


460  '  BLUFFS '  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  [Ch.  XIX.

plain  and  delta.  When  the  trees  were  buried,  the  ground
was  probably  sinking,  after  which  it  must  have  been  raised
again,  so  as  to  allow  the  stream  to  cut  through  its  old  allu-
vium. The  depth  of  this  ancient  fluviatile  formation  is  seen
to  be  no  less  than  200  feet,  without  any  signs  of  the  bottom
being  reached.  In  character  it  is  identical  with  the  deposit
called  Coast- Pliocene  by  Prof.  Hilgard  (see  p.  456,  and  a,  a,
map,  p.  444),  of  which,  I  presume,  it  is  a  continuation,  but
no  marine  shells  have  been  detected  in  Hudson's  Bluff,  like
those  occasionally  met  with  on  the  coast.

If,  again,  we  ascend  the  river  to  about  sixty-five  miles  due
north  of  Port  Hudson,  or  about  225  above  New  Orleans,  we
observe  another  bluff  at  Natchez,  on  the  same  left  bank  of
the  river,  more  than  200  feet  in  perpendicular  height.  The
lower  part  of  this  cliff  consists  of  gravel  and  sand,  while  the
uppermost,  sixty  feet  in  thickness,  is  a  mass  of  loam  exactly
resembling  the  loess  of  the  valley  of  the  Bhine,  without  stra-
tification, and  full  of  land-shells,  such  as  Helix  and  Pupa,
together  with  the  amphibious  genus  Succinese,  all  of  species
now  living  in  the  same  country.  At  a  few  points  in  the
lower  part  of  this  formation,  I  observed  shells  of  living  spe-
cies of  Lymnea,  Planorbis,  and  Cyclas,  genera  which  inhabit
ponds,  and  which  may  indicate  the  channel  of  an  ancient  river,
on  the  borders  of  which,  after  it  had  shifted  its  course,  the
loess  was  deposited  during  inundations.  This  same  loess  is
continuous  over  a  vast  extent  of  country,  always  increasing
in  thickness  near  the  Mississippi.  It  occurs  in  a  bluff  at
Vicksburg,  eighty  miles  due  north  of  Natchez  (see  section,
fig.  42),  where  it  forms  a  broad,  flat  table-land,  extending
inland  about  twenty-six  miles  from  the  Mississippi,  or  east-
ward from  d  to  e.  It  also  recurs,  as  I  learnt  from  Mr.
Porshey,  to  the  west  of  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  in
Louisiana,  or  at  c,  fig.  42.

The  only  fossils  of  a  truly  fluviatile  character  which  have
been  met  with  anywhere  in  this  loess  are  the  remains  of  three
fish  discovered  lately  (March  19,  1866,)  by  Colonel  Green.
They  were  found  in  the  great  platform  of  loess,  two  miles
north  of  Vicksburg,  and  only  four  feet  below  the  surface,  at
the  height  of  200  feet  above  high-water  mark.     They  are


Ch.  XIX.]        LOESS  DEPOSITED  BY  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  461

considered  by  Dr.  Leidy  to  belong  to  the  living  buffalo-fish
of  the  Mississippi,  and  they  probably  indicate  some  local  and
exceptional  conditions,  connected  with  a  more  rapid  accumu-


Looisiana.


Fig.  42.
Vallbt  of  thb  MrwnBfgPFi.


i  J  1  4

1.  Modern  aUnTinm  of  MteaifliipFl.      S.  Loam  or  Loew.     S.  /.  Eocene.     4.  Cretaceoug.

lation  than  usual  of  mud  on  a  part  of  the  inundated  plain
on  which  no  organic  remains  were  usually  preserved  except
land-shells  and  Succinese.  I  consider  the  loess,  from  its  homo-
geneous nature,  the  absence  of  stratification,  and  its  terre-
strial and  amphibious  shells,  to  have  been  formed  by  a  great
river  which,  like  the  Nile,  inundated  the  wide  plains  bor-
dering it  on  each  side.  Granting  this,  we  must  assume  that
since  it^  accumulation  there  have  been  great  changes  in  the
level  of  the  basin  of  the  Mississippi.  How  far  the  loess  may
have  been  anterior  to  all  the  formations  pierced  through  in
the  well  at  New  Orleans,  or  whether  it  may  have  been  con-
temporaneous with  some  of  them,  is  a  point  I  cannot  pretend
to  decide,  especially  as  the  Port  Hudson  formation  bears  tes-
timony to  oscillations  of  level  at  a  very  modem  period.  But
it  is  evident  that  the  basin  of  the  great  river  has  under-
gone important  changes  since  the  loess  was  deposited,
although  the  species  of  land-shells  contained  therein  are  all
now  living.  As  to  the  mammalia,  of  which  some  bones  have
been  found  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  loess  and  in  clay  at
its  base,  they  are  many  of  them  of  extinct  species.  Among
these  are  Mastodon  gtganteusy  a  species  of  Megalonyxy  a  Mylo-
don,  Bison  latifrons,  Equvs  Americanvs,  Felis  atrox  Leidy  (a
large  carnivore  of  the  size  of  the  tiger),  two  species  of  deer,
two  of  bear  and  other  quadrupeds,  some  extinct  and  others
still  living.

Before  we  take  leave  of  the  great  delta  we  may  derive  an
instructive  lesson  from  the  reflection  that  the  new  deposits
already  formed,  or  now  accumulating,  whether  marine  or
fresh-water,  greatly  resemble  in  composition,  and  in  the
general  character  of  their  organic  remains,  many  ancient


462  DELTA  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.  [Ch.  XIX.

sti'ata  which  enter  largely  into  the  structure  of  the  earth's
crust.  Yet  there  is  no  sudden  revolution  in  progress,  whether
on  the  land  or  in  the  waters,  whether  in  the  animate  or  the
inanimate  world.  Notwithstanding  the  excessive  destruction
of  soil  and  uprooting  of  trees,  the  region,  which  yields  a  never-
failing  supply  of  drift-wood,  is  densely  clothed  with  noble
forests,  and  is  almost  unrivalled  in  its  power  of  supporting
animal  and  vegetable  life.  In  spite  of  the  undermining  of
many  a  lofty  bluff  and  the  encroachments  of  the  delta  on
the  sea — in  spite  of  the  earthquake,  which  rends  and  fissures
the  soil,  or  causes  areas  more  than  sixty  miles  in  length  to
sink  down  several  yards  in  a  few  months — the  general  features
of  the  district  remain  unaltered,  or  are  merely  undergoing  a
slow  and  insensible  change.  Herds  of  wild  deer  graze  on
the  pastures,  or  browse  upon  the  trees ;  and,  if  they  diminish
in  number,  it  is  only  where  they  give  way  to  man  and  the
domestic  animals  which  follow  in  his  train.  The  bear,  the
wolf,  the  fox,  the  panther,  and  the  wild  cat  still  maintain
themselves  in  the  fastnesses  of  the  forests  of  cypress  and  gum-
tree.  The  racoon  and  the  opossum  are  everywhere  abundant;
while  the  musk-rat,  otter,  and  mink  still  frequent  the  rivers
and  lakes,  and  a  few  beavers  and  buffaloes  have  not  yet  been
driven  from  their  ancient  haunts.  The  waters  teem  with
alligators,  tortoises,  and  fish,  and  their  surface  is  covered
with  millions  of  migratory  waterfowl,  which  perform  their
annual  voyage  between  the  Canadian  lakes  and  the  shores  of
the  Mexican  Gulf.  The  power  of  man,  it  is  true,  begins
almost  everywhere  to  be  sensibly  felt,  and  many  parts  of  the
wilderness  to  be  replaced  by  towns,  orchards,  and  gardens.
The  gilded  steamboats,  like  moving  palaces,  stem  the  force
of.  the  current,  or  shoot  rapidly  down  the  descending  stream
through  the  solitudes  of  the  forests  and  prairies.  Already
does  the  flourishing  population  of  the  great  valley  far  exceed
that  of  the  thirteen  United  States  when  first  they  declared
their  independence.  Such  is  the  state  of  a  continent  where
trees  and  stones  are  hurried  annually,  by  a  thousand  torrents,
from  the  mountains  to  the  plains,  and  where  sand  and  finer
matter  are  swept  down  by  a  vast  current  to  the  sea,  together
with  the  wreck  of  countless  forests  and  the  bones  of  animals


Ch.  XIX.]  DELTA  OF  THE  AMAZONS.  463

which  perish  in  the  inundations.  When  these  materials  reach
the  gulf,  they  do  not  render  the  waters  unfit  for  aquatic
animals ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  sea  here  swarms  with  life,
as  it  generally  does  where  the  influx  of  a  great  river  furnishes
a  copious  supply  of  organic  and  mineral  matter.  Yet  some
people,  when  they  behold  the  spoils  of  the  land  heaped  in
successive  strata,  and  blended  confusedly  with  the  remains
of  fishes,  broken  shells,  and  corals — when  they  see  portions
of  erect  trunks  of  trees  with  their  roots  still  retaining  their
natural  position,  and  one  tier  of  them  preserved  above  another
— are  apt  to  imagine  that  they  are  viewing  the  signs  of  a
turbulent  instead  of  a  tranquil  and  settled  state  of  the
planet.  They  read  in  such  phenomena  the  proof  of  chaotic
disorder  and  reiterated  catastrophes,  instead  of  indications
of  a  surface  as  habitable  as  the  most  delicious  and  fertile
districts  now  tenanted  by  man.

Delta  of  the  Amazons. — What  has  generally  been  called  the
delta  of  the  Amazons  forms,  according  to  Mr.  Bates,*  an
irregular  triangle,  of  which  each  side  measures  about  180
miles ;  but  the  island  of  Marajo,  which  is  as  large  as  Sicily,
occupies  a  great  portion  of  this  space,  and  inside  of  this  to
the  west  there  are  other  smaller  islands,  all  now,  like  Mar^'o,
surrounded  by  different  arms  of  the  Amazons,  and  of  the
Para,  the  waters  of  which  are  blended  in  a  common  estuary.
The  valley  of  the  Amazons  has  been  lately  examined  by
Professor  Agassiz,  who  describes  it  as  consisting  of  three
formations,  all  of  which  he  considers  to  be  of  Post- tertiary
date,  and  to  have  been  deposited  in  succession  far  and
wide  in  the  great  basin.f  The  lowest  is  a  sandstone  ;  the
next  above  consists  of  mottled  plastic  clays,  overlaid  by  a  series
of  finely  laminated  clays  of  various  colours,  and  containing
well-preserved  leaves  of  plants  supposed  to  belong  to  the
existing  vegetation  of  the  country.  These  clays  pass  upwards
into  sands  and  sandstone,  occasionally  divided  by  an  argilla-
ceous layer,  and  at  some  points,  as  at  Obydos,  on  the  mainland,
nearly  800  miles  westward  of  Marajo,  calcareous  beds  occur
^vitll  fresh-water  bivalve  shells  of  existing  species.     Over  this

*  Henry  Walter  Bates,  Delta  of  the  t  Agassiz,  Physical  History  of  Valley

Amnzons,   Brit.  Assoc.   Report,    1864,      of   Amazons,  Atlantic    Monthly,  vol.
p.  137.  xyiii.  July  and  August  1866.


464  AGE  OF  THE  FORMATIONS  OF  [Ch.  XDL

occurs  the  third  deposit,  which  appears  to  me,  from  the  de-
scription given  of  it  by  Agassiz,  to  resemble  in  some  parts
inundation-mud  or  loess,  and  in  others  the  produce  of  land-
floods,  which,  after  denuding  the  subjacent  sandstone,  have
left  masses  of  unstratified  materials  to  level  up  the  uneyen  sur-
face of  the  denuded  strata.  The  above-mentioned  formations
have  been  traced,  according  to  Agassiz,  over  an  area  8,000
miles  in  length  and  700  in  breadth,  and  their  united  thick-
ness exceeds  800  feet.  By  the  earlier  observers  the  stratified
portions  of  this  series  were  supposed  to  be  of  marine  origin,
and  were  successively  referred  to  the  Devonian,  Triassic,  and
Tertiary  epochs ;  but  Agassiz  inferred  that  they  were  of
modem  date,  and,  wherever  he  had  opportunities  of  examin-
ing them,  of  fresh-water  origin.  The  Obydos  fossils  above
alluded  to,  which  former  travellers  ascribed  to  the  genera
Avicula,  Solen,  and  Area,  are  in  reality,  according  to  Agassiz,
Unios  or  fresh- water  bivalves  of  the  family  of  Naiades,  greatly
resembling  in  shape  the  marine  genera  above  mentioned,  but
of  species  now  living  in  the  Amazons.  Mr.  Bates  informs
me  that  Spix  and  Martins  considered  certain  calcareous  beds
of  the  same  formation,  which  occur  nearer  the  sea  and  are  used
for  making  lime,  to  be  of  marine  origin.  These  sheU-beds  are
found  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tocantins,  on  the  island  of  Marajo,
and  towards  the  sea-coast  near  Vigia.  From  the  latter  place
Mr.  Bates  himself  procured  large  marine  univalves  of  existing
species,  some  of  them  allied  to  Fusus.

More  lately  (October  1870)  Professor  James  Orton,  of
Vassor  College,  New  York,  found  shells  indicating  fresh  or
brackish  water  life  in  the  coloured  plastic  clays  at  Pabos,
more  than  2,000  miles  up  the  river,  which  he  considers  to  be
the  equivalent  of  the  mottled  plastic  clays  of  Agassiz.  Mr.
Conrad,  to  whom  these  shells  were  submitted,  states  that  most
of  the  forms  are  very  singular  and  unique,  belonging  to  about
seventeen  extinct  species,  referable  to  nine  genera,  of  which
only  three  are  now  living.  From  this  it  is  inferred,  says
Professor  Orton,  that  the  formation  cannot  be  late  Tertiary,
and  may  be  Miocene.*   The  great  mass  of  shells  are  bivalves

*  See  n.  Woodward  on  Tertiary  Shells      Conrad,  American  Joum.  of  Conchology,
of  the  Amazons  Valley,  Ann.  and  Mag.       Oct.  10,  1870.
of  Nat.  Hist.,  Jan.  and  Feb.  1871 ;  and


Ch.  XIX.]  THE  DELTA  OF  THE  AMAZONS.  465

of  Conrad's  new  genus  Anysothyris  {Pachydan  Odhb),  now
represented  in  the  estuary  of  the  La  Plata  by  Potomomya
(Azara)  lahiata.  Assuming  that  the  seventeen  species  are
all  extinct,  this  would  imply  that  this  fossil  fauna  recedes
more  from  that  now  living  than  does  Qny  known  member
even  of  the  Lower  Miocene  of  Europe.

That  we  should  be  unable  to  form  even  a  probable  guess  as
to  the  geological  and  geographical  relations  of  these  deposits,
in  a  country  which  has  only  been  surveyed  in  what  must  be
called  a  rapid  and  hurried  visit  during  a  single  season,  is  not
wonderful.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  scientific  expedition
had  explored  for  the  first  time  the  valley  of  the  Rhine.  On
entering  the  Scheldt  they  would  find  at  Antwerp  Pliocene
strata,  in  some  of  which  the  great  majority  of  shells  agree
with  those  now  living  in  the  neighbouring  sea.  Pursuing
their  course  up  the  river  for  200  or  300  miles,  they  would
behold  on  both  sides  of  the  valley  of  the  Rhine,  as  between
Bingen  and  Basle,  a  mass  of  loess,  with  recent  land  and  am-
phibious shells,  from  100  to  200  feet  thick,  having  sometimes,
but  rarely,  at  the  bottom,  fresh-water  deposits,  with  living
species  of  Lymnea,  Planorbis,  and  Paludina  comparable  in
age  to  those  of  Obydos ;  while  at  Bonn,  Mayence,  and  other
places  they  would  find  Tertiary  strata  containing  at  various
heights  fresh-water,  brackish,  and  marine  fossils,  for  the  most
part  of  extinct  species  and  Miocene  date.  In  the  report  of
such  a  supposed  expedition  made  for  the  first  time  it  would
be  unreasonable  to  expect  that  the  successive  changes  in
organic  life  or  physical  geography  of  the  Tertiary  and  recent
formations  of  the  Rhenish  basin  should  be  clearly  determined,
seeing  that  after  the  study  of  more  than  half  a  century  we
have  not  yet  accomplished  this  end.  Yet  the  basin  of  the
Rhine  is  only  a  fourth  part  the  size  of  that  of  the  Amazons.

In  order  to  explain  the  great  Amazonian  formation  above
described,  Professor  Agassiz  conceives  that  the  whole  valley
was  for  a  long  period  converted  into  a  lake,  by  a  large  dam
or  barrier  stretching  across  its  seaward  extremity,  and  which
has  since  been  removed  by  the  ocean.  A  similar  hypothesis
has  been  advanced  again  and  again  to  account  for  the  vast
extent  of  old  fiuviatile  and  lacustrine  deposits,  as  well  as

VOL.    I.  HE


466  LANDSLIPS  ON  SHORES  OF  THE  AMAZONS.     [Gk.  ZDLr

for  the  inundation-mud  called  loess,  wliich  onoe  filled  the
lower  portions  of  the  basins  of  most  of  the  principal  rivers  of
the  world,  such  as  the  Mississippi,  Nile,  Danube,  and  Shine.
I  have  elsewhere*  endeavoured  to  show  that  such  pheno-
mena are  the  natural  result  of  oscillations  in  the  level  of  the
land,  extending  over  large  continental  areas,  bj  which  the
fall  of  the  rivers  is  lessened  at  certain  periods,  giving  rise
to  accumulations  of  matter  more  or  less  lacustrine,  while
subsequently,  when  a  movement  takes  place  in  an  opposite
direction,  the  rivers  cut  through  their  old  deposits,  re-exca-
vating the  valleys  and  often  eroding  them  below  their  original
depth.  There  is  nothing  new,  therefore,  in  the  character  of
the  Amazonian  clays,  sands,  and  loess,  so  far  at  least  as  they
are  of  recent  and  post-Tertiary  date,  except  the  grand  scale
on  which  they  are  developed.  Geologists  have  usually  been
driven  to  abandon  the  theory  of  a  seaward  dam  at  the
mouths  of  great  rivers,  such  as  the  Bhine  and  Mississippi,  by
the  difficulty  of  imagining  first  the  construction  of  such
barriers  after  the  valley  was  formed,  and  then  their  subse-
quent disappearance.

Professor  Agassiz  has  hazarded  the  startling  conjectaie
that  the  Amazonian  basin  was  closed  up  and  converted  into
a  lake  by  the  terminal  moraine  of  a  glacier,  which  stretched
for  thousands  of  miles  from  west  to  east,  and  entered  the  sea
under  the  equator.  But  this  distinguished  naturalist  can-
didly confesses  that  he  failed  to  discover  any  of  those  proofs
which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard,  even  in  temperate  lati-
tudes, as  essential  for  the  establishment  of  the  former  exist-
ence of  glaciers  where  they  are  now  no  more.  No  glaciated
pebbles,  or  far-transported  angular  blocks,  with  polished  and
striated  sides,  no  extensive  surface  of  rock,  smooth  and  tra-
versed by  rectilinear  furrows,  were  observed.

The  islands,  such  as  Marajo  and  others,  off  the  present
mouth  of  the  Amazons,  certainly  imply  that  vast  encroach-
ments of  the  ocean  have  taken  place  since  the  clays  and
sands  above  described  were  formed.  We  are  also  informed
by  Agassiz  that  even  in  the  last  ten  years  the  sea  has  grained
upon  the  land  on  one  part  of  the  coast  as  much  as  200  yards,

*  See  abore,  p.  301,  and  Ant.  of  Man,  p.  333 ;  Elements  of  Geology,  p.  US.


Ch.  XIX.]     DELTA  OF  GANGES  AND  BRAHMAPOOTRA.  467

and  within  the  last  twenty  years  one  island  north-east  of
the  Bay  of  Vigia  has  been  entirely  swept  away,  while  it  is
probable  that  the  Paranahyba  and  some  other  rivers  in  the
province  of  Maranham,  which  now  enter  the  ocean  by  indepen-
dent mouths,  were  once  tributaries  of  the  Amazons.  From
Mr.  Bates  we  learn  that,  about  140  miles  inland  from  the
present  coast-line,  is  a  low  flat  area  about  80  miles  in  length
and  width,  wholly  formed  of  mud  and  sediment  in  compara-
tively  recent  times,  by  the  Amazons.  The  same  traveller
gives  us  a  graphic  account  of  the  rate  at  which  the  great
river  in  the  higher  parts  of  its  course  is  denuding  its  banks.
^  One  morning,'  he  says,  *  I  was  awoke  before  sunrise  by  an
unusual  sound  resembling  the  roar  of  artillery;  the  noise
came  from  a  considerable  distance,  one  crash,  succeeding
another.  I  supposed  it  to  be  an  earthquake,  for,  although
the  night  was  breathlessly  calm,  the  broad  river  was  much
agitated,  and  the  vessel  rolled  heavily.  Soon  afterwards  another
loud  explosion  took  place,  followed  by  others,  which  lasted
for  an  hour  till  the  day  dawned,  and  we  then  saw  the  work
of  destruction  going  forward  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,
about  three  miles  off.  Large  masses  of  forest,  including  trees
of  colossal  size,  probably  200  feet  in  height,  were  rocking  to
and  fro,  and  falling  headlong  one  after  another  into  the
water.  After  each  avalanche,  the  wave  which  it  caused  re-
turned on  the  crumbly  bank  with  tremendous  force,  and
caused  the  fall  of  other  masses  by  undermining.  The  line
of  coast  over  which  the  landslip  extended  was  a  mile  or  two
in  length ;  the  end  of  it,  however,  was  hid  from  our  view  by
an  intervening  island.  It  was  a  grand  sight ;  each  downfall
created  a  tloud  of  spray ;  the  concussion  in  one  place  causing
other  masses  to  give  way  a  long  distance  from  it,  and  thus
the  crashes  continued,  swaying  to  and  fro  with  little  prospect
of  a  termination.  When  we  glided  out  of  sight  two  hours
after  sunrise  the  destruction  was  still  going  on.*  *

DELTA  OF  THE  GANGES  AND  BRAHMAPOOTRA.

As  an  example  of  a  large  delta  advancing  upon  the  sea
in  spite  of  the  action  of  a  very  powerful  tide,  I  shall  next

*  Bates,  Naturalist  on  the  Amazuns,  toI.  ii.  p.  172.    1863.

H  H  2


468


DELTA  OF  OAKOES  AIO)  BBAHHAFOOTRA.      CC&  XIX.


describe  that  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra  (or  Bamun-
pooter] .  These,  the  two  principal  rivers  of  India,  descend
from  the  highest  mountains  in  the  world,  and  partialljr  min^
their  waters  in  the  low  plains  of  Hindoostan,  before  reaching
the  head  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  The  Brahmapootra,  some-
what the  latter  of  the  two,  formerly  passed  to  the  east  of
Dacca,  eren  so  lately  as  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,
pouring  most  of  its  waters  into  one  of  the  numerous  channels
in  the  delta  called  '  the  Megna.'  By  that  name  the  main
stream  was  always  spoken  of  by  Benndl  and  others  in  their
Fig.  13.


.^

«;i^                   •••"j-c-

1     ,^S,  j  \^jt^"""^^^^^

;•«•- -" -  a

|™™„...,.,. m

1  "^S!.!!!!!;!    ei

fM-

MiF  of  the  Dklta  of  the  (ta»<ik9  and  BnAinui>ooTS*F
memoirs  on  this  region.  But  the  main  trunk  now  unites  with
an  iirm  of  the  Ganges  considerably  higher  up,  at  a  point
about  100  miles  distant  from  the  sea;  and  it  is  constantly,
uceonliiig  to  Dr.  Hooker,  working  its  way  westward,  having
formerly,  as  may  be  seen  by  aucient  maps,  moved  eastward
for  a  long  period.

The  area  of  the  delta  of  the  combined  rivers — for  it  is  im-
possible now  to  distinguish  what  belongs  to  each — is  consider-
ably more  than  double  that  of  the  NUe,  even  if  we  exclude


Ch.  XIX.]  THE  SUNDERBUNDS.  469

from  the  delta  a  large  extent  of  low,  flat,  alluvial  plain,  doubt-
less of  fluviatile  origin,  which  stretches  more  than  100  miles
to  the  hills  west  of  Calcutta  (see  map,  fig.  43,)  and  much
farther  in  a  northerly  direction  beyond  the  head  of  the  great
delta.  The  head  of  a  delta,  as  befpre  stated,  is  that  point
where  the  first  arm  is  given  ofiF.  Above  that  point  a  river
receives  the  waters  of  tributaries  flowing  from  higher  levels ;
below  it,  on  the  contrary,  it  gives  out  portions  of  its  waters
to  lower  levels  through  channels  which  flow  into  adjoining
swamps,  or  which  run  directly  to  the  sea.  In  the  great
delta  of  Bengal  there  may  be  said  to  be  two  heads  nearly
equi-distant  from  the  sea,  that  of  the  Ganges  (g,  map,  fig.  43),
about  thirty  miles  below  Bajmahal,  or  216  statute  miles  in  a
direct  line  from  the  sea,  and  that  of  the  Brahmapootra  (b)
below  Chii*apoonjee,  where  the  river  issues  from  the  Khasia
mountains,  a  distance  of  224  miles  from  the  Bay  of  Bengal.

It  will  appear,  by  reference  to  the  map,  that  the  great
body  of  fresh  water  derived  from  the  two  rivers  enters  the
bay  on  its  eastern  side ;  and  that  a  large  part  of  the  delta
bordering  on  the  sea  is  composed  of  a  labyrinth  of  rivers
and  creeks,  all  filled  with  salt  water,  except  those  imme-
diately communicating  with  the  Hoogly,  or  principal  arm
of  the  Ganges.  This  tract  alone,  known  by  the  name  of
the  Woods,  or  Sunderbunds  (more  properly  Soonderbuns),  a
wilderness  infested  by  tigers  and  crocodiles,  is,  according  to
Rennell,  equal  in  extent  to  the  whole  principality  of  Wales.*

On  the  sea-coast  there  are  eight  great  openings,  each  of
which  has  evidently,  at  some  ancient  period,  served  in  its
turn  as  the  principal  channel  of  discharge.  Although  the
flux  and  reflux  of  the  tide  extend  even  to  the  heads  of  the
delta  when  the  rivers  are  low,  yet,  when  they  are  periodically
swollen  by  tropical  rains,  their  volume  and  velocity  counter-
act the  tidal  current,  so  that,  except  very  near  the  sea,  the
ebb  and  flow  become  insensible.  During  the  flood  season,
therefore,  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra  almost  assume  in
their  delta  the  character  of  rivers  entering  an  inland  sea;
the  movements  of  the  ocean  being  then  subordinate  to  the

*  Account  of  the  Ganges  and  Burrampooter  Riven,  by  Major  RenneU,  Phil.
Trans.  1718.


470  ISLANDS  FORMED  AND  DESTROYED  [Cb.  XIX.

force  of  the  rivers,  and  only  slightly  disturbing  their  opera-
tions. The  great  gain  of  the  delta  in  height  and  area  takes
place  during  the  inundations ;  and,  during  other  seasons  of
the  year,  the  ocean  makes  reprisals,  scouring  out  the  chan-
nels, and  sometimes  devouring  rich  aUuvial  pkins.

Islands  formed  and  destroyed, — Major  R.  H*  Colebrooke,  in
his  account  of  the  course  of  the  Ganges,  relates  examples  of
the  rapid  filling  up  of  some  of  its  branches,  and  the  excava-
tion of  new  channels  where  the  number  of  square  miles  of
soil  removed  in  a  short  time  (the  column  of  earth  being  114
feet  high)  was  truly  astonishing.  Forty  square  miles,  or
25,600  acres,  are  mentioned  as  having  been  carried  away,  in
one  place,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years.*  The  immense  trans-
portation of  earthy  matter  by  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra
is  proved  by  the  great  magnitude  of  the  islands  formed  in
their  channels  during  a  period  far  short  of  that  of  a  man's
life.  Some  of  these,  many  miles  in  extent,  have  originated
in  large  sand-banks  thrown  up  round  the  points  at  the  angu-
lar turning  of  the  rivers,  and  afterwards  insulated  by  breaches
of  the  streams.  Others,  formed  in  the  main  channel,  are
caused  by  some  obstruction  at  the  bottom.  A  large  tree,  or
a  sunken  boat,  is  sometimes  sufficient  to  check  the  current
and  cause  a  deposit  of  sand,  which  accumulates  till  it
usurps  a  considerable  portion  of  the  channel.  The  river
then  undermines  its  banks  on  each  side,  to  supply  the  de-
ficiency in  its  bed,  and  the  island  is  afterwards  raised  by
fresh  deposits  during  every  flood.  In  the  great  gulf  below
Luckipour,  formed  by  the  united  waters  of  the  Ganges  and
Megna,  some  of  the  islands,  says  Rennell,  rival  in  size  and
fertility  the  Isle  of  Wight.  While  the  river  is  forming  new
islands  in  one  part,  it  is  sweeping  away  old  ones  in  others.
Those  newly  formed  are  soon  overrun  with  reeds,  long  grass,
the  Tamarix  Indica,  and  other  shrubs,  forming  impenetrable
thickets,  where  the  tiger,  the  rhinoceros,  the  buffalo,  deer,
and  other  wild  animals,  take  shelter.  It  is  easy,  therefore,
to  perceive,  that  both  animal  and  vegetable  remains  may
occasionally  be  precipitated  into  the  flood,  and  become  im-
bedded in  the  sediment  which  subsides  in  the  delta.

♦  Trans,  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  14.


Ch.  XIX.]        IN  THE  GANGES  AND  BRAHMAPOOTRA.  471

Three  or  four  species  of  crocodile,  of  two  distinct  sub-
genera, abound  in  the  Ganges,  and  its  tributary  and  con-
tiguous waters ;  and  Mr.  H.  T.  Colebrooke  informed  me,  that
he  had  seen  both  forms  in  places  far  inland,  several  hundred
miles  from  the  sea.     The  Gangetic  crocodile,  or  Guvial  (in
correct  orthography,  Garial),  is  confined  to  the  fresh  water,
living  exclusively  on  fish ;  but  the  commoner  kinds,  called
£oomiah  and  Muggar,  frequent  both  fresh  and  salt,  being
much  larger  and  fiercer  in  salt  and  brackish  water.*    These
animals  swarm  in  the  brackish  water  along  the  line  of  sand-
banks, where  the  advance  of  the  delta  is  most  rapid.     Hun-
dreds of  them  are  seen  together  in  the  creeks  of  the  delta,  or
basking  in  the  sun  on  the  shoals  without.     They  will  attack
men  and  cattle,  destroying  the  natives  when  bathing,  and
tame  and  wild  animals  which  come  to  drink.     *  I  have  not  un-
frequently,'  says  Mr.  Colebrooke,  *  been  witness  to  the  horrid
spectacle  of  a  floating  corpse  seized  by  a  crocodile  with  such
avidity  that  he  half  emerged  above  the  water  with  his  prey
in  his  mouth.'   The  geologist  will  not  fail  to  observe  how  pe-
culiarly the  habits  and  distribution  of  these  saurians  expose
them  to  become  imbedded  in  the  horizontal  strata  of  fine
mud   which    are   annually    deposited    over  many    hundred
square  miles  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal.     The  inhabitants  of  the
land  who  happen  to  be  drowned  or  thrown  into  the  water
are  usually  devoured  by  these  voracious  reptiles ;  but  we  may
suppose  the  remains  of  the  saurians  themselves  to  be  con-
tinually entombed  in  the  new  formations.    The  number,  also,
of  bodies  of  the  poorer  class  of  Hindoos  thrown  annually  into
the  Ganges  is  so  great,  that  some  of  their  bones  or  skeletons
can  hardly  fail  to  be  occasionally  enveloped  in  fluviatile  mud.
It  sometimes  happens,  at  the  season  when  the  periodical
flood  is  at  its  height,  that  a  strong  gale  of  wind,  conspiring
with  a  high  spring-tide,  checks  the  descending  current  of  the

*  Cuvior  referred  the  true  crocodiles  tus  appears  to  be  confined  to  the  estuary ;

of  the  Grtinges  to  a  single  species,  C.  and  C.  palustris,  to  range  from   the

biporcatm.     But  I  learn  from  Dr.  Fal-  estuary  to  the  central  parts  of  Bengal.

coDcr  that  there  are  three  well-marked  The  Garial  (C  palustria)  is  found  along

species,  C.  biporcatus,  C.  palustris,  and  with  C,  bombifrons  in  the  north,  and

C.  bombifrons.     C.  bombifrons  occurs  in  descends  to  the  region  of  C  hipoTcatu$

the  northern  branches  of  the  Ganges,  in  the  estuary.
1,000  miles  from  Calcutta ;  C.  biporoa'


472  FLOODS  AND  DEPOSITS  IN  THE  DELTA.        [Cil

river,  and  gives  rise  to  most  destructive  inundations.  From
this  cause,  in  the  year  1763,  the  waters  at  Luckiponr  rose
six  feet  above  their  ordinary  level,  and  the  inhabitants  of  a
considerable  district,  with  their  houses  and  cattle^  were
totally  swept  away.

The  population  of  all  oceanic  deltas  are  particularly  exposed
to  suffer  by  such  catastrophes,  recurring  at  considerable  in-
tervals of  time;  and  we  may  safely  assume  that  such  tragical
events  have  happened  again  and  again,  since  the  Grang^tic
delta  was  inhabited  by  man.  K  human  experience  and  fore-
thought cannot  always  guard  against  these  calamities,  still
less  can  the  inferior  animals  avoid  them;  and  the  monu-
ments of  such  disastrous  inundations  must  be  looked  for  in
great  abundance  in  strata  of  all  ages,  if  the  surface  of  our
planet  has  always  been  governed  by  the  same  laws.  When
we  reflect  on  the  general  order  and  tranquillity  that  reign  in
the  rich  and  populous  delta  of  Bengal,  notwithstanding  the
havoc  occasionally  committed  by  the  depredations  of  the
ocean,  we  perceive  how  unnecessary  it  is  to  attribute  the  im-
bedding of  successive  races  of  animals  in  older  strata  to  ex-
traordinary energy  in  the  causes  of  decay  and  reproduction
in  the  infancy  of  our  planet,  or  to  those  general  catastrophes
and  sudden  revolutions  so  often  resorted  to.

Deposits  in  the  delta. — The  quantity  of  mud  held  in  suspen-
sion by  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra  is  found,
as  might  be  expected,  to  exceed  that  of  any  of  the  rivers
alluded  to  in  this  or  the  preceding  chapters ;  for,  in  the  first
place,  their  feeders  flow  from  mountains  of  unrivalled  alti-
tude, and  do  not  clear  themselves  in  any  lake,  as  does  the
Ehine  in  the  Lake  of  Constance,  or  the  Rhone  in  that  of
Geneva.  And,  secondly,  their  whole  course  is  nearer  the
equator  than  that  of  Ihe  Mississippi,  or  any  great  river
respecting  which  careful  experiments  have  been  made,  to  de-
termine the  quantity  of  its  water  and  earthy  contents.  The
fall  of  rain,  moreover,  as  we  have  before  seen,  is  excessive  on
the  southern  flanks  of  the  first  range  of  mountains  which  rise
from  the  plains  of  Hindoostan,  and  still  more  remarkable  is
the  quantity  sometimes  poured  down  in  one  day.  (See  above,
p.  324.)      The  sea,  where  the   Ganges  and  Brahmapootra


Ch.  XIX.]     *  THE  SWATCH '  IN  THE  BAY  OF  BENGAL.  473

discharge  their  main  stream  at  the  flood  season,  only  recovers
its  transparency  at  the  distance  of  from  60  to  100  miles  from
the  delta;  and  we  may  take  for  granted  that  the  current  con-
tinues to  transport  the  finer  particles  much  farther  south
than  where  the  surface  water  first  becomes  clear.  The  gene-
ral slope,  therefore,  of  the  new  strata  must  be  extremely
gentle.  According  to  the  best  charts,  there  is  a  gradual
deepening  from  four  to  about  sixty  fathoms,  as  we  proceed
from  the  base  of  the  delta  to  the  distance  of  about  one
hundred  miles  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  At  some  few  points
seventy,  or  even  one  hundred,  fathoms  are  obtained  at  that
distance.

One  remarkable  exception,  however,  occurs  to  the  regu-
larity of  the  shape  of  the  bottom.  Opposite  the  middle  of
the  delta,  at  the  distance  of  thirty  or  forty  miles  from  the
coast,  there  is  a  deep  submarine  valley,  called  the  ^swatch  of
no  ground,'  about  fifteen  miles  in  breadth,  where  soundings
varying  from  180  to  300  fathoms  fail  to  reach  the  bottom.
(See  map,  p.  468.)  This  phenomenon  is  the  more  extra-
ordinary, since  the  depression  runs  north  to  within  five  miles
of  the  line  of  shoals ;  and  not  only  do  the  waters  charged  with
sediment  pass  over  it  continually,  but,  during  the  monsoons,
the  sea,  loaded  with  mud  and  sand,  is  beaten  back  in  that
direction  towards  the  delta.  As  the  mud  is  known  to  extend
for  eighty  miles  farther  into  the  gulf,  a  considerable  thickness
of  matter  must  have  been  deposited  in  *  the  swatch.'  We
may  conclude,  therefore,  either  that  the  original  depth  of  this
part  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal  was  excessive,  or  that  subsidences
have  occurred  in  modem  times.  The  latter  conjecture  is  the
less  improbable,  as  the  delta  near  Calcutta  has  certainly  been
sinking  (as  shown  by  Artesian  borings,  see  p.  476)  during
the  period  of  its  formation.  Parts  of  Bengal  have  also  been
convulsed  in  the  historical  era  by  earthquakes,  and  actual
subsidences  have  taken  place  in  the  neighbouring  coast  of
Chittagong,  while  *  the  swatch '  lies  not  far  from  the  volcanic
band  which  connects  Sumatra,  Barren  Island,  and  Eamree.*

Mr.  Fergusson  has  suggested  that  '  the  swatch,'  in  which

*  See  below,  Chnps.  XXUI.  and  XXX.


474  EDMONSTONE  ISLAND.  [Ch.  XIX.

soundings  have  been  made  to  the  depth  of  no  less  than  1,800
feet  without  reaching  the  bottom,  is  a  channel  ^  scooped  out*
by  the  force  of  the  tides,  or  one  which  they  have  had  power  to
keep  clear.  In  support  of  this  view  he  observes  that  the  tides
of  the  Hoogly  have  a  rotatory  motion ;  *  but  he  is  unable  to
confirm  this  by  any  exact  observations  as  to  their  velocity,
such  as  might  warrant  us  in  ascribing  so  extraordinary  an
efiFect  to  their  excavating  power.  To  me  it  seems  less  diflScnlt
to  conceive  the  pre-existence  of  a  submarine  valley  2,000  feet
or  more  deep,  which  may  have  formed  part  of  the  original
basin  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  Before  the  two  great  rivers
the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra  reach  this  deep  and  central
part  of  the  gulf  they  meet  the  tidal  current,  and,  their  speed
being  checked,  they  part  with  their  sediment,  which  has  in
this  way  been  prevented  from  filling  up  *  the  swatch.'

Opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Hoogly  River,  and  immediately
south  of  Saugor  Island,  four  miles  from  the  nearest  land  of
the  delta,  a  new  islet  was  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the
present  century,  called  Edmonstone  Island,  on  the  centre  of
which  a  beacon  was  erected  as  a  landmark  in  1817.  In  1818
the  island  had  become  two  miles  long  and  half  a  mile  broad,
and  was  covered  with  vegetation  and  shrubs.  Some  houses
were  then  built  upon  it,  and  in  1820  it  was  used  as  a  pilot
station.  The  severe  gale  of  1823  divided  it  into  two  parts,
and  so  reduced  its  size  as  to  leave  the  beacon  standing  out  in
the  sea,  where,  after  remaining  seven  years,  it  was  washed
away.  The  islet  in  1836  had  been  converted  by  successive
storms  into  a  sand-bank,  half  a  mile  long,  on  which  a  sea-
mark was  placed.

Although  there  is  evidence  of  gain  at  some  points,  the
general  progress  of  the  coast  is  very  slow;  for  the  tides,
when  the  river  water  is  low,  are  actively  employed  in  remov-
ing alluvial  matter.  In  the  Sunderbunds  the  usual  rise  and
fall  of  the  tides  is  no  more  than  eight  feet,  but,  on  the  east
side  of  the  delta.  Dr.  Hooker  observed,  in  the  winter  of  1851,
a  rise  of  from  sixty  to  eighty  feet,  producing  among  the
islands  at  the  mouths  of  the  Megna  and  Fenny  Rivers  a  lofty

•  Ferg:u8son,   Changes   in  Delta  of  the   Ganges,   Quart.   G^ol.   Joorn.   toL
six.     1863.


Ch.  XIX.]  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  THE  TIDES.  475

wave  or  *  bore '  as  they  ascend,  and  causing  the  river  water  to
be  ponded  back,  and  then  to  sweep  down  with  great  violence
when  the  tide  ebbs.  The  bay  for  forty  miles  south  of  Chitta-
gong  is  so  fresh  that  neither  algse  nor  mangroves  will  grow  on
it.  We  may,  therefore,  conceive  how  effective  may  be  the
current  formed  by  so  great  a  volume  of  water  in  dispersing
fine  mud  over  a  wide  area.  Its  power  is  sometimes  augmented
by  the  agitation  of  the  bay  during  hurricanes  in  the  month
of  May.  The  new  superficial  strata  consist  entirely  of  fine
sand  and  mud ;  such,  at  least,  are  the  only  materials  which
are  exposed  to  view  in  regular  beds  on  the  banks  of  the
numerous  creeks.  Neither  here  nor  higher  up  the  Granges
could  Dr.  Hooker  discover  any  land  or  fresh-water  shells  in
sections  of  the  banks,  which  in  the  plains  higher  up  some-
times form  cliffs,  eighty  feet  in  height,  at  low  water.  In  like
manner  I  have  elsewhere  stated*  that  I  was  unable  to  find
any  buried  shells  in  the  delta  or  modern  river  cliffs  of  the
Mississippi.

The  Ganges  is  always  raising  the  level  of  its  bed  and  banks
in  the  same  manner  as  the  Mississippi,  before  described
(p.  439,  diagram,  fig.  37) ;  and  we  learn  from  Sir  Proby
Cautley  and  Colonel  Baker,  that  even  artificial  canals  con-
structed for  inland  navigation  in  India,  such  as  those  of  the
Jumna,  through  which  the  water  flows  freely,  deposit  in  like
manner  much  of  the  coarser  matter  immediately  on  their
banks,  so  that  these  last  form  a  miniature  representation  of
those  of  larger  rivers.  Mr.  J.  Fergusson,  in  his  paper  on  the
Delta  of  the  Ganges, t  differing  from  all  writers  of  authority
who  preceded  him,  has  argued  that  the  sediment  is  thrown
down  in  consequence  of  the  overflowing  river  being  checked
by  meeting  with  the  still  water  of  the  jheels  or  lakes  corre-
sponding to  those  seen  at  gfsnd  d  e,  fig.  37,  p.  439.  In  point
of  fact,  however,  the  deposition  of  the  coarser  matter  takes
place  immediately  on  the  highest  part  of  the  banks,  where  the
waters  first  begin  to  overflow,  and  before  they  reach  those
lakes  which  occur  at  a  lower  level  in  the  alluvial  plain  on  each
side  of  the  main  river.  The  banks  are  of  equal  height  and
as  continuous  where  no  jheels  exist.

*  Second  Visit  to  United  States,  vol.  ii.  p.  145.  t  FezgOMon,  ibid.


1


476  NATURE  OF  THE  STRATA  [Ciu

No  sabstance  so  coarse  as  gravel  occurs  in  anj  part  of  the
delta  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra,  nor  nearer  the  sea
than  400  miles.  Yet  it  is  remarkable  that  the  boring  of  an
Artesian  well  at  Fort  William,  near  Calcutta,  in  the  years
1835-40,  displayed,  at  the  depth  of  120  feet,  clay  and  sand
with  pebbles.  This  boring  was  carried  to  a  depth  of  481  feet
below  the  level  of  Calcutta,  and  the  geological  section  obtained
in  the  operation  has  been  recorded  with  great  care.  Under
the  surface  soil,  at  a  depth  of  about  ten  feet,  they  came  to  a
stiff  blue  claj  about  forty  feet  in  thickness ;  below  which  was
sandy  clay,  containing  in  its  lower  portion  abundance  of  de-
cayed vegetable  matter,  which  at  the  bottom  assumed  the
character  of  a  stratum  of  black  peat  two  feet  thick.  This
peaty  mass  was  considered  as  a  clear  indication  (like  the  '  dirt-
bed  '  of  Portland)  of  an  ancient  terrestrial  surface,  with  a
forest  or  Sunderbund  vegetation.  Logs  and  branches  of  a
red-coloured  wood  occur  both  above  and  immediately  below
the  peat,  so  little  altered  that  Dr.  Wallich  was  able  to  identify
them  with  the  Soondri  tree,  Heritiera  littoralis,  one  of  the  most
prevalent  forms  at  the  base  of  the  delta.  Dr.  Falconer  tells
me  that  similar  peat  has  been  met  with  at  other  points  round
Calcutta  at  the  depth  of  nine  feet  and  twenty-five  feet.  It
appears,  therefore,  that  there  has  been  a  sinking  down  of  what
was  originally  land  in  this  region,  to  the  amount  of  seventy
feet  or  more;  for  Calcutta  is  only  a  few  feet  above  the
level  of  the  sea,  and  the  successive  peat-beds  seem  to
imply  that  the  subsidence  of  the  ground  was  gradual  or  in-
terrupted by  several  pauses.  Continuing  the  boring  at  Fort
William,  they  entered,  below  the  vegetable  mass,  upon  a
stratum  of  yellowish  clay  about  ten  feet  thick,  containing
horizontal  layers  of  kunkar  (or  kankar),  a  nodula,  concre-
tionary, argillaceous  limestone,  met  with  abundantly  at
greater  or  less  depths  in  all  parts  of  the  valley  of  the  Ganges,
over  many  thousand  square  miles,  and  always  presenting  the
same  characters,  even  at  a  distance  of  one  thousand  miles
north  of  Calcutta.  Some  of  this  kunkar  is  said  to  be  of  very
recent  origin  in  deposits  formed  by  river  inundations  near
Saharanpoor.     After  penetrating  120  feet,  they  found  loam


Ch.  XIX.]  NEAR  CALCUTTA.  477

containing  water-worn  fragments  of  mica-slate  and  other
kinds  of  rock,  of  a  size  which  the  current  of  the  Ganges  can
no  longer  transport  to  this  region.  In  the  various  beds
pierced  through  below,  consisting  of  clay,  marl,  and  friable
sandstone,  with  kunkar  here  and  there  intermixed,  no  organic
remains  of  decidedly  marine  origin  were  met  with.  Too  posi-
tive a  conclusion  ought  not,  it  is  true,  to  be  drawn  fi^m  such
a  fact,  when  we  consider  the  narrow  bore  of  the  auger  and
its  efiFect  in  crushing  shells  and  bones.  Nevertheless,  it  is
worthy  of  remark,  that  the  only  fossils  obtained  in  a  recog-
nisable state  were  of  a  fluviatile  or  terrestrial  character.
Thus,  at  the  depth  of  350  feet,  the  bony  shell  of  a  tortoise,
or  trionyx,  a  fresh-water  genus  resembling  the  living  species
of  Bengal,  was  found  in  sand.  From  the  same  stratum,  also,
they  drew  up  the  lower  half  of  the  humerus  of  a  ruminant,
of  the  size  and  shape,  says  Dr.  Falconer,  of  the  shoulder-
bone  of  the  Cervus  pordnus,  or  common  hog-deer,  of  India.
At  the  depth  of  380  feet,  clay  with  fragments  of  lacustrine
shells  was  incumbent  on  what  appears  clearly  to  have  been
another  '  dirt-bed,'  or  stratum  of  decayed  wood,  implying  a
period  of  repose  of  some  duration,  and  a  forest-covered  land,
which  must  have  subsided  300  feet,  to  admit  of  the  subse-
quent superposition  of  the  overlying  deposits.  It  has  been
conjectured  that,  at  the  time  when  this  area  supported
trees,  the  land  extended  much  farther  out  into  the  Bay  of
Bengal  than  now,  and  that  in  later  times  the  Ganges,  while
enlarging  its  delta,  has  been  only  recovering  lost  ground  from
the  sea.

At  the  depth  of  about  400  feet  below  the  surface,  an  abrupt
change  was  observed  in  the  character  of  the  strata,  which
were  composed  in  great  part  of  sand,  shingle,  and  boulders,
the  only  fossils  observed  being  the  vertebras  of  a  crocodile,
shell  of  a  trionyx,  and  fragments  of  wood  very  little  altered
and  similar  to  that  buried  in  beds  far  above.  These  gravelly
beds  constituted  the  bottom  of  the  section  at  the  depth  of
481  feet,  when  the  operations  were  discontinued  in  conse-
quence of  an  accident  which  happened  to  the  auger.

The  occurrence  of  pebbles  at  the  depths  of  120  and  400  feet


478  ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  DELTA.  [C«.  XTL

implies  important  changes  in  the  geographical  condition  of
the  region  round  or  near  Calcutta.  The  fell  of  the  river,  or
the  general  slope  of  the  alluvial  plain,  may  have  been  for-
merly greater ;  or,  before  a  general  and  perhaps  nneqnal  sab-
sidence,  hills  once  nearer  the  present  base  of  the  delta  may
have  risen  several  hundred  feet,  forming  islands  in  the  bay,
which  may  have  sunk  gradually,  and  become  buried  under
fluviatile  sediment.

Antiquity  of  the  delta. — It  would  be  a  matter  of  no  small
scientific  interest,  if  experiments  were  made  to  enable  ns  to
determine,  with  some  degree  of  accuracy,  the  mean  qnantity
of  earthy  matter  discharged  annually  into  the  sea  by  the
united  waters  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra.  The  Bev.
Mr.  Everest  instituted,  in  1831-2,  a  series  of  observations  on
the  earthy  matter  brought  down  by  the  Ganges,  at  Ghaze-
poor,  500  miles  from  the  sea.  He  found  that,  in  1831,  the
number  of  cubic  feet  of  water  discharged  by  the  river  per
second  at  that  place  was  during  the

Kaina  (4  months)  ....  494,208
Winter  (6  months)  ....  71,200
Hot  weather  (3  months)    .        .        .      36,330

SO  that  we  may  state  in  round  numbers  that  500,000  cubic
feet  per  second  flow  down  during  the  four  months  of  the  flood
season,  from  June  to  September,  and  about  60,000  per  second
during  the  remaining  eight  months.

The  average  quantity  of  solid  matter  suspended  in  the  water
during  the  rains  was,  by  weight,  ^^^th  part ;  but  as  the  water
is  about  one  half  the  specific  gravity  of  the  dried  mud,  the
solid  matter  discharged  is  Q^ih.  part  in  bulk,  or  577  cubic
feet  per  second.  This  gives  a  total  of  6,082,041,600  cubic
feet  for  the  discharge  in  the  122  days  of  the  rain.  The  pro-
portion of  sediment  in  the  waters  at  other  seasons  was  com-
paratively insignificant,  the  total  amount  during  the  five
winter  months  being  only  247,881,600  cubic  feet,  and  during
the  three  months  of  hot  weather,  38,154,240  cubic  feet.  The
total  annual  discharge,  then,  would  be  6,368,077,440  cubic
feet.


Ch.  XIX.]     SEDIMENT  BBOUaHT  DOWN  BY  THE  GANGES.      479

This  quantity  of  mud  would  in  one  year  raise  a  surface  of
22R^  square  miles,  or  a  square  space,  each  side  of  which  should
measure  15  miles,  a  height  of  one  foot.  To  give  some  idea  of
the  magnitude  of  this  result,  we  will  assume  that  the  specific
gravity  of  the  dried  mud  is  only  one  half  that  of  granite  (it
would,  however,  be  more) :  in  that  case,  the  earthy  matter
discharged  in  a  year  would  equal  3,184,038,720  cubic  feet  of
granite.  Now  about  12^  cubic  feet  of  granite  weigh  one  ton ;
and  it  is  computed  that  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt,  if  it  were
a  solid  mass  of  granite,  would  weigh  about  6,000,000  tons.
The  mass  of  matter,  therefore,  carried  down  annually  would,
according  to  this  estimate,  more  than  equal  in  weight  and
bulk  forty-two  of  the  great  pyramids  of  Egypt,  and  that
borne  down  in  the  four  months  of  the  rains  would  equal
forty  pyramids.  But  if,  without  any  conjecture  as  to  what
may  have  been  the  specific  gravity  of  the  mud,  we  attend
merely  to  the  weight  of  solid  matter  actually  proved  by  Mr.
Everest  to  have  been  contained  in  the  water,  we  find  that  the
number  of  tons'  weight  which  passed  down  in  the  122  days
of  the  rainy  season  was  339,413,760,  which  would  give  the
weight  of  fifty-six  pyramids  and  a  half;  and  in  the  whole
year  355,361,464  tons,  or  nearly  the  weight  of  sixty  pyramids.

The  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt  covers  eleven  acres,
and  its  perpendicular  height  is  about  five  hundred  feet.  It
is  scarcely  possible  to  present  any  picture  to  the  mind  which
will  convey  an  adequate  conception  of  the  mighty  scale  of  this
operation,  so  tranquilly  and  almost  insensibly  carried  on  by
the  Ganges,  as  it  glides  through  its  alluvial  plain,  even  at  a
distance  of  500  miles  from  the  sea.  It  may,  however,  be
stated,  that  if  a  fleet  of  more  than  eighty  Indiomen,  each
freighted  with  about  1,400  tons'  weight  of  mud,  were  to  sail
down  the  river  every  hour  of  every  day  and  night  for  four
months  continuously,  they  would  only  transport  from  the
higher  country  to  the  sea  a  mass  of  solid  matter  equal  to  that
borne  down  by  the  Ganges,  even  in  this  part  of  its  course,
in  the  four  months  of  the  flood  season.  Or  the  exertions
of  a  fleet  of  about  2,000  such  ships  going  down  daily  with
the  same  burden,  and  discharging  it  into  the  gulf,  would


480  AMOUNT  OF  SEDIMENT  DEPOSITED  [Cm.  XIX.

be  no  more  than  equivalent  to  the  operations  of  the  great
river.

The  most  voluminous  current  of  lava  which  has  flowed
from  Etna  within  historical  times  was  that  of  1669.  FeiTum»
after  correcting  Borelli's  estimate,  calculated  the  quantitj
of  cubic  yards  of  lava  in  this  current  at  140,000,000-  Now
this  would  not  equal  in  bulk  one-fifth  of  the  sedimentarj
matter  which  is  carried  down  in  a  single  year  by  the  Ganges,
past  Ghazepoor,  according  to  the  estimate  above  explained;
so  that  it  would  require  five  grand  eruptions  of  Etna  to
transfer  a  mass  of  lava  from  the  subterranean  regions  to  the
surface,  equal  in  volume  to  the  mud  carried  down  in  one
year  to  Ghazepoor.

Colonel  B.  Strachey,  of  the  Bengal  Engineers,  has  re-
marked to  me,  not  only  that  Ghazepoor,  where  Mr.  Everest's
observations  were  made,  is  500  miles  from  the  sea,  bnt  that
the  Ganges  has  not  been  joined  there  by  its  most  important
feeders.  Tliese  drain  upon  the  whole  750  miles  of  the
Himalaya,  and  no  more  than  150  miles  of  that  mountain-
chain  have  sent  their  contributions  to  the  main  trunk  at
Ghazepoor.  Below  that  place,  the  Ganges  is  joined  by  the
Gogra,  Gunduk,  Khosee,  and  Teesta  from  the  north,  to  say
nothing  of  the  Sone  flowing  from  the  south,  one  of  the
larjjest  of  the  rivers  which  rise  in  the  table-land  of  Central
India.  (See  map,  fig.  43,  p.  468.)  Moreover,  the  remaining
600  miles  of  the  Himalaya  comprise  that  eastern  portion  of
the  basin  where  the  rains  are  heaviest.  (See  above,  p.  324.)
The  quantity  of  water,  therefore,  carried  down  to  the  sea  may
probably  l>e  four  or  five  times  as  much  as  that  which  passes
Ghazepoor.

The  Brahmapootra,  according  to  Major  Wilcox,*  in  the
month  of  January,  when  it  is  near  its  minimum,  discharges
150,000  cubic  feet  of  water  per  second  at  Gwalpara,  not
many  miles  above  the  head  of  its  delta.  Taking  the
proportions  observed  at  Ghazepoor  at  the  different  seasons
as  a  guide,  the  probable  average  discharge  of  the  Brahma-
pootra for  the  whole  year  may  be  estimated  at  about  the
same  as  that  of  the  Ganges.     Assuming  this;  and  secondly,

*  Asiatic  Kesenrch»e.  vol.  xvii.  p  ^66.


Ch.  XIX.]       BY  THE  GANGES  AND  BRAHMAPOOTRA.  481

in  order  to  avoid  the  risk  of  exaggeration,  that  the  propor-
tion of  sediment  in  their  waters  is  about  a  third  less  than
Mr.  Everest's  estimate,  the  mud  borne  down  to  the  Bay  of
Bengal  in  one  year  would  equal  40,000  millions  of  cubic
feet,  or  between  six  and  seven  times  as  much  as  that  brought
down  to  Ghazepoor,  according  to  Mr.  Everest's  calculations
in  1831,  and  five  times  as  much  as  that  conveyed  annually
by  the  Mississippi  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.

Colonel  Strachey  estimates  the  annually  inundated  portion
of  the  delta  at  250  miles  in  length  by  80  in  breadth,  making
an  area  of  20,000  square  miles.  The  space  south  of  this
in  the  bay,  where  sediment  is  thrown  down,  may  be  300
miles  from  E.  to  W.  by  150  N.  and  S.,  or  45,000  square
miles,  which,  added  to  the  former,  gives  a  surface  of  65,000
square  miles,  over  which  the  sediment  is  spread  out  by  the
two  rivers.  Suppose  then  the  solid  matter  to  amount  to
40,000  millions  of  cubic  feet  per  annum,  the  deposit,  he
observes,  must  be  continued  for  forty-five  years  and  three-
tenths  to  raise  the  whole  area  a  height  of  one  foot,  or
13,600  years  to  raise  it  300  feet ;  and  this,  as  we  have  seen,
is  much  less  than  the  thickness  of  the  fluviatile  strata
actually  penetrated  (and  the  bottom  not  reached)  by  the
auger  at  Calcutta.

Nevertheless  we  can  by  no  means  deduce  from  these  data
alone  what  will  be  the  future  rat/e  of  advance  of  the  delta,
nor  even  predict  whether  the  land  will  gain  on  the  sea,  or
remain  stationary.  At  the  end  of  13,000  years  the  bay
may  be  even  less  shallow  than  now,  provided  a  moderate  de-
pression, corresponding  to  that  experienced  in  part  of  Green-
land for  many  centuries,  shall  take  place  (see  p.  128).  A
subsidence  quite  insensible  to  the  inhabitants  of  Bengal,  not
exceeding  two  feet  three  inches  in  a  century,  would  be  more
than  sufficient  to  counterbalance  all  the  efforts  of  the  two
mighty  rivers  to  extend  the  limits  of  their  delta.  We  have
seen  that  the  Artesian  borings  at  Calcutta  attest,  what  the
vast  depth  of  the  '  swatch '  may  also  perhaps  indicate,  that
the  antagonist  force  of  subsidence  has  predominated  for  ages
over  the  influx  of  fluviatile  mud,  preventing  it  from  raising
the  plains  of  Bengal,  which  now  at  Calcutta  are  only  a  few

VOL.    I.  II


482  CONCLUDING  REMARKS  ON  DELTAS.  [Cte.  XDL

inches  above  the  level,  or  from  filling  up  a  larger  portion  of
the  bay.

CONCLUDING  REMARKS  ON  DELTAS.

Convergence  of  deltas. — If  we  possessed  an  accurate  seiieB
of  maps  of  the  Adriatic  for  many  thousand  years,  our  re-
trospect would,  without  doubt,  carry  us  gradaallj  back  to
the  time  when  the  number  of  rivers  descending  from  the
mountains  into  that  gulf  by  independent  deltas    was  £eu:
greater.     The  deltas  of  the  Po  and  the  Adige,  for  instance,
would  separate  themselves  within   the  Post-Tertiary  era,
as,  in   all  probability,  would  those  of  the  Isonzo    and  the
Torre.      If,   on  the  other  hand,   we  speculate   on   future
changes,  we  may  anticipate  the  period  when  the  number
of  deltas  will  greatly  diminish ;  for  the  Po   cannot   con-
tinue to  encroach  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  in  a  hundred  years,
and  other  rivers  to  gain  as  much  in  six  or  seven  centuries
upon  the  shallow  gulf,  without  new  junctions  occurring  from
time  to  time  ;  so  that  Eridanus,  *  the  king  of  rivers,'  will  con-
tinually boast  a  greater  number  of  tributaries.     The  Granges
and  the  Brahmapootra  have  perhaps  become  partially  con-
fluent in  the  same  delta  within  the  historical,  or  at  least
within  the  human,  era;  and  the  date  of  the  junction  of  the
Red  Eiver  and  the  Mississippi  would,  in  all  likelihood,  have
been  known,  if  America  had  not  been  so  recently  discovered.
The  union  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  must  undoubtedlv
have  been  one  of  the  modern  geographical  chang^es  of  our
earth,  for  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  informs  me  (1853)   that  the
delta  of  those  rivers  has  advanced  two  miles  in  the  last  sixty
years,  and  is  supposed  to  have  encroached  about  forty  miles
upon  the  Gulf  of  Persia  in  the  course  of  the  last  twenty-five
centuries.

When  the  deltas  of  rivers,  having  many  mouths,  converge,
a  partial  union  at  first  takes  place  by  the  confluence  of  some
one  or  more  of  their  arms ;  but  it  is  not  until  the  main
trunks  are  connected  above  the  head  of  the  common  delta,
that  a  complete  intermixture  of  their  joint  waters  and  sedi-
ment takes  place.  The  union,  therefore,  of  the  Po  and
Adige,  and  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmapootra,  is  still  incom-


Ch.  XIX.]  AGE  OF  EXISTING  DELTAS.  483

plete.  If  we  reflect  on  the  geographical  extent  of  surface
drained  by  rivers  such  as  now  enter  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  and
then  consider  how  complete  the  blending  together  of  the
greater  part  of  their  transported  matter  has  already  become,
and  throughout  how  vast  a  delta  it  is  spread  by  numerous
arms,  we  no  longer  feel  so  much  surprise  at  the  area  occu-
pied by  some  ancient  formations  of  homogeneous  mineral
composition.  But  our  surprise  will  be  still  farther  lessened
when  we  afterwards  enquire  (Ch.  xxii.)  into  the  action  of
tides  and  currents  in  disseminating  sediment.

Age  of  existing  deltas. — If  we  could  take  for  granted,  that
the  relative  level  of  land  and  sea  had  remained  stationary
ever  since  all  the  existing  deltas  began  to  be  formed — could
we  assume  that  their  growth  commenced  at  one  and  the
same  instant  when  the  present  continents   acquired  their
actual  shape — we  might  understand  the  language  of  geolo-
gists who  speak  of  *  the  epoch  of  existing  continents.'    They
endeavour  to  calculate  the  age  of  deltas  from  this  imaginary
fixed  period ;  and  they  calculate  the  gain  of  new  land  upon
the  sea,  at  the  mouth  of  rivers,  as  having  begun  everywhere
simultaneously.     But  the  more  we  study  the  history  of  deltas
the  more  we  become  convinced  that  upward  and  downward
movements  of  the  land  and  contiguous  bed  of  the  sea  have
exerted,  and  continue  to  exert,  an  influence  on  the  physical
geography  of  many  hydrographical  basins,  on  a  scale  com-
parable in  magnitude  or  importance  to  the  amount  of  fluvia-
tile  deposition  effected  in  an  equal  lapse  of  time.     In  the
basin  of  the  Mississippi,  for  example,  proofs  both  of  descend-
ing and  ascending  movements,  to  a  vertical  amount  of  several
hundred  feet,  can  be  shown  to  have  taken  place  since  the
existing  species  of  land  and  fresh-water  shells  lived  in  that
region.*

The  deltas  also  of  the  Po  and  Granges  have  each,  as  we  have
seen  (pp.  422  and  476),  when  probed  by  the  Artesian  auger,
borne  testimony  to  a  gradual  subsidence  of  land  to  the  extent
of  several  hundred  feet — old  terrestrial  surfaces  or  *  dirt-beds,'
turf,  peat,  forest-land,  having  been  pierced  at  various  depths.

*  Lyeli's  Second  Vint  to  the  United  Statee,  vol.  ii.  chap.  84.

Ii2


^


484  GROUPING  OF  CTRATA  IX  DELTAS.  [Ot  XDL

The  changes  of  level  at  the  mouth  of  the  Indus  in  Catch  (see
below,  Ch.  XXVIII.),  and  those  of  New  Madrid  in  the  valkj
of  the  Mississippi  (see  p.  453  and  Ch.  xxviii.),  are  eqoaUy
instructive,  as  demonstrating  unceasing  fluctuations  in  ibe
levels  of  those  areas  into  which  running  water  is  transporting
sediment.  If,  therefore,  the  exact  age  of  aU  modem  deltas
could  be  known,  it  is  scarcely  probable  that  we  should  find
any  two  of  them  in  the  world  to  have  coincided  in  date^  or  in
the  time  when  their  earliest  deposits  originated.

Grouping  of  strain  in  deltas. — The  changes  which  have
taken  place  in  deltas,  even  within  the  times  of  history,  may
suggest  many  imi)ortant  considerations  in  regcard  to  the
manner  in  which  subaqueous  sediment  is  distributed.  If  a
lake,  for  example,  be  encircled  on  two  sides  by  lofty  moun-
tains, receiving  from  them  many  rivers  and  torrents  of  dif-
ferent sizes,  and  if  it  is  bounded  on  the  other  sides,  where  the
surplus  waters  issue,  by  a  comparatively  low  country,  it  is
not  diflficult  to  define  some  of  the  leading  geological  features
which  must  characterise  the  lacustrine  formation,  when  this
basin  shall  have  been  gradually  converted  into  dry  land  by
the  influx  of  sediment.

The  detritus  waslicvi  down  by  rivers  and  torrents  from
the  adjoining  heights  to  the  edge  of  the  lake  would  sink
at  once  into  deep  water,  all  the  heavier  pebbles  and  sand
subsiding  near  the  shore.  The  finer  mud  would  be  carried
somewhat  fai*ther  out,  but  not  to  the  distance  of  many
miles,  for  the  greater  part,  as  is  seen  where  the  lUione  enters
the  Lake  of  Geneva,  falls  down  in  clouds  to  the  bottom,
not  far  from  the  river's  mouth.  Thus  alluvial  tracts  are
formed  near  the  shore  at  the  mouths  of  every  torrent  and
river ;  pebbles  and  sand  are  then  transported  farther  from
the  mountains ;  but  in  their  passage  they  decrease  in  size
by  attrition,  and  are  in  part  converted  into  mud  and  sand.
At  length  sonu^  of  the  numerous  deltas,  which  are  all  di-
rected towards  a  common  centre,  approach  near  to  each
other ;  those  of  adjoining  torrents  become  united,  and  each
is  merged,  in  its  turn,  in  the  delta  of  the  largest  river,  which
advances  most  rapidly  into  the  lake,  and  renders  all  the  minor
streams,  one  after  the  other,  its  tributaries.      The  various


Ch.  XIX.]  GROUPING  OF  STRATA  IN  DELTAS.  485

mineral  ingredients  of  all  are  thus  blended  together  into  one
homogeneous  mixture,  and  the  sediment  is  poured  out  from
a  common  channel  into  the  lake.

As  the  average  size  of  the  transported  particles  decreases,
while  the  force  and  volume  of  the  main  river  augments,  the
newer  deposits  are  diffused  continually  over  a  wider  area,  and
are  consequently  more  horizontal  than  the  older.  When  at
first  there  were  many  independent  deltas  near  the  borders  of*
the  basin,  their  separate  deposits  differed  entirely  from  each
other ;  one  may  have  been  charged,  like  the  Arve  where  it
joins  the  Rhone,  with  white  sand  and  sediment  derived  from
granite — another  may  have  been  black,  like  many  streams  in
the  Tyrol,  flowing  from  the  waste  of  decomposing  rocks  of
dark  slate — a  third  may  have  been  coloured  by  ochreous  se-
diment, like  the  Red  River  in  Louisiana — a  fourth,  like  the
Elsa  in  Tuscany,  may  have  held  much  carbonate  of  lime  in
solution.  At  first  they  would  each  form  distinct  deposits  of
sand,  gravel,  limestone,  marl,  or  other  materials ;  but  after
their  junction,  new  chemical  combinations  and  a  distinct
colour  would  be  the  result,  and  the  particles,  having  been
conveyed  ten,  twenty,  or  a  greater  number  of  miles  over
alluvial  plains,  would  become  finer.  The  more  q^ncient  sys-
tem of  strata  would  be  composed  for  the  most  part  of  coarser
materials,  and  would  sometimes  dip  at  a  considerable  angle,
especially  if  consisting  of  beds  of  pebbles.  The  beds  in
the  newer  group  would,  on  the  whole,  be  finer-grained,
and  more  homogeneous  in  colour  and  mineral  composition,
throughout  large  areas.  But,  although  the  law  of  arrange-
ment here  alluded  to  would  cause  the  older  or  more  littoral
to  be  characterised  in  great  part  by  coarser  materials  than
the  newer  group,  this  latter,  as  it  is  advanced  to  a  great  dis-
tance from  the  shore,  would  be  thrown  down,  not  imme-
diately on  older  rocks,  but  on  strata  made  up  of  the  finest
mud  which  had  been  carried  out  to  great  distances  when  the
littoral  deltas  first  began  to  form.  For  this  reason  some  of
the  newer  strata  of  sand  or  coarser  materials  are  often  found
to  overlie  an  older  set  of  much  finer  grain.  By  reflecting  on
these  facts,  we  see  that  the  law  of  arrangement  must  be  very
complex,  more  especially  the  relation  between  the  relative


486  CAUSES  OF  STRATIFICATION  IN  DELTAS.        [Ol  XIX.

age  of  the  different  groups  of  sediment  and  the  fineness  of

their  component  materials.

In  those  deltas  where  the  tides  and  strong^  marine  cnirenti
interfere,  the  above  description  would  only  be  applicable  with
certain  modifications.  If  a  series  of  earthquakes  accompany
the  growth  of  a  delta,  and  change  the  levels  of  the  land  from
time  to  time,  as  in  the  region  where  the  Indus  now  enters
•  the  sea,  the  phenomena  will  depart  still  more  widely  finom
the  ordinary  type.  If,  after  a  protracted  period  of  rest,  a
delta  sink  down,  pebbles  may  be  borne  along  in  shallow
water  near  the  foot  of  the  boundary  hills,  so  as  to  form  con-
glomerates overlying  the  fine  mud  previously  thrown  into
deeper  water  in  the  same  area.

Caiises  of  stratification  in  deltas. — The  stratified  arrange-
ment, which  is  observed  to  prevail  so  generally  in  aqueous
deposits,  is  most  frequently  due  to  variations  in  the  velocity
of  running  water,  which  cannot  sweep  along  particles  of
more  than  a  certain  size  and  weight  when  moving  at  a  given
rate.  Hence,  as  the  force  of  the  stream  augments  or  de-
creases, the  materials  thrown  down  in  successive  layers  at
particular  places  arc  rudely  sorted,  a<;cording  to  their  dimen-
sions, form,  and  specific  gravity.  Where  this  cause  has  not
operated,  as  where  sand,  mud,  and  fragments  of  rock  are
conveyed  by  a  glacier,  a  confused  heap  of  rubbish  devoid  of
all  stratification  is  jn'oduced.

Natural  divisions  are  also  occasioned  in  deltas  by  the  in-
ten'al  of  time  which  separates  annually  the  deposition  of
matter  during  the  periodical  rains,  or  melting  of  the  snow
upon  the  mountains.  The  deposit  of  each  year  may  acquire
some  degree  of  consistency  before  that  of  the  succeeding
year  is  sui>erimposed.  A  variety  of  circumstances  also  gives
rise  annually,  or  sometimes  fi'oni  day  to  day,  to  slight  varia-
tions in  colour,  fineness  of  the  particles,  and  other  charac-
ters, by  which  alteraations  of  strata  distinct  in  texture  and
mineral  ingredients  must  be  produced.  Thus,  for  example,
at  one  period  of  the  year,  drift  wood  may  be  carried  down,
and,  at  another,  mud,  as  was  before  stated  to  be  the  case  in
the  delta  of  the  Mississippi ;  or  at  one  time,  when  the  volume
and  velocity  of  the  stream  are  greatest,  pebbles  and   sand


Ch.  XIX.]       CAUSES  OF  STRATIFICATION  IN  DELTAS.  487

may  be  spread  over  a  certain  area,  over  which,  when  the
waters  are  low,  fine  matter  or  chemical  precipitates  are
formed.  During  inundations,  the  turbid  current  of  fresh
water  often  repels  the  sea  for  many  miles ;  but  when  the
river  is  low,  salt  water  again  occupies  the  same  space.
When  two  deltas  are  converging,  the  intermediate  space  is
often,  for  reasons  before  explained,  alternately  tlie  receptacle
of  different  sediments  derived  from  the  converging  streams
(see  p.  454).  The  one  is,  perhaps,  charged  with  calcareous,
the  other  with  argillaceous  matter ;  or  one  sweeps  down  sand
and  pebbles,  the  other  impalpable  mud.  These  differences
may  be  repeated,  with  considerable  regularity,  until  a  thick-
ness of  hundreds  of  feet  of  alternating  beds  is  accumulated.
The  multiplication,  also,  of  shells  and  corals  in  particular
spots,  and  for  limited  periods,  gives  rise  occasionally  to  lines
of  separation,  and  divides  a  mass  which  might  otherwise  be
homogeneous  into  distinct  strata.

An  examination  of  the  shell  marl  now  forming  in  the
Scotch  lakes,  or  the  sediment  termed  *  warp,'  which  subsides
from  the  muddy  water  of  the  Humber  and  other  rivers,
shows  that  recent  deposits  are  often  composed  of  a  great
number  of  extremely  thin  layers,  either  even  or  slightly  un-
dulating, and  preserving  a  general  parallelism  to  the  planes
of  stratification.  Sometimes,  however,  the  laminse  in
modern  strata  are  disposed  diagonally  at  a  considerable
angle,  which  appears  to  take  place  where  there  are  confiict-
ing  movements  in  the  waters.  In  January  1829  I  visited,
in  company  with  Professor  L.  A.  Necker,  of  Geneva,  the
confluence  of  the  Rhone  and  Arve,  when  those  rivers  were
very  low,  and  were  cutting  channels  through  the  vast  heaps
of  debris  thrown  down  from  the  waters  of  the  Arve  in  the
preceding  spring.  One  of  the  sand-banks  which  had  formed
in  the  spring  of  1828,  where  the  opposing  currents  of  the  two
rivers  neutralised  each  other,  and  caused  a  retardation  in  the
motion,  had  been  undermined  ;  and  fig.  44  on  the  following
page  is  an  exact  representation  of  the  arrangement  of  laminsa
exposed  in  a  vertical  section.  The  length  of  the  portion  here
seen  is  about  twelve  feet,  and  the  height  five.  The  strata
A  A  consist  of  irregular  alternations  of  pebbles  and  sand  in


488  CAUSES  OF  STRATIFICATIOS  IN  DELTAS.       [C3]fc  XEL

undulating  beds :  below  these  are  seams  of  very  fine  Bajid,
B  B,  some  aa  thin  as  paper,  others  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch
thick.  The  strata  c  c  are  composed  of  layers  of  fine  greenisli-
grey  sand  as  thin  as  paper.  Some  of  the  inclined  beds  will
be  seen  to  be  thicker  at  their  upper,  others  at  their  lower,
extremity,  the  inclination  of  some  being  very  conBiderable.


SectiOD  cif  a  iwnil'ljniik  in
lUiouc,  sbouing  thii  al


G  btd  of  the  Arre  at  iu  conflueDce  with  the
.ificutLon  or  dpponu  where  cnrrents  meet.


Theae  layers  must  have  accumulated  one  ou  the  other  by
lateral  apposition,  probably  when  one  of  the  rivers  was  reiy
gradually  increasing  or  diminishing  in  Telocity,  so  that  the
point  of  greatest  retardation  caused  by  their  coudieting  car-
rents  shifted  slowly,  allowing  the  sediment  to  be  thrown  down
in  successive  layers  on  a  sloping  bank.  The  same  phenomenon
is  exhibited  in  older  strata,  of  all  ages.*

If  the  bed  of  a  lake  or  of  the  sea  be  sinking,  whether  at  a
uniform  or  an  unequal  rate,  or  oscillating  in  level  daring  the
deposition  of  sediment,  these  movements  will  give  rise  to  a
different  class  of  phenomena,  aa,  fur  example,  to  repeated
alternations  of  shallow-water  and  deep-water  deposits,  each
with  peculiar  organic  remains,  or  to  frequent  repetitions  of
eimilar  beds  formed  at  a  uniform  depth,  and  enclosing  the
same  organic  remains,  and  to  other  results  too  complicated
and  varied  to  admit  of  enumeration  here.

Formation  of  conglomerates. — Along  the  base  of  the  Mari-
time Alps,  between  Toulon  and  Genoa,  the  rivers,  with  few
exceptions,  are  now  forming  strata  of  conglomerate  and  sand.
Their  channels  are  often  several  miles  in  breadth,  some  of
■  See  Elementi  of  Geologj,  6th  cd.  p.  16,  and  Stadenl's  Elemento,  p.  17,


Ch.  xixj  formation  of  conglomerates.  489

them  being  dry,  and  the  rest  easily  forded  for  nearly  eight
months  in  the  year,  whereas  daring  the  melting  of  the  snow
they  are  swollen,  and  a  great  transportation  of  mud  and
pebbles  takes  place.  In  order  to  keep  open  the  main  road
carried  along  the  sea-coast  from  France  to  Italy,  it  was
necessary  to  remove  annually  great  masses  of  shingle  brought
down  during  the  flood  season.  A  portion  of  the  pebbles  are
seen  in  some  localities,  as  near  Nice,  to  form  beds  of  shingle
along  the  shore,  but  the  greater  part  are  swept  into  a  deep
sea.  The  small  progress  made  by  the  deltas  of  minor  rivers
on  this  coast  need  not  surprise  us,  when  we  recollect  that
there  is  sometimes  a  depth  of  two  thousand  feet  at  a  few
hundred  yards  from  the  beach,  as  near  Nice.  Similar  obser-
vations might  be  made  respecting  a  large  proportion  of  the
rivers  in  Sicily,  and,  among  others,  respecting  that  which,
immediately  north  of  the  port  of  Messina,  hurries  annually
vast  masses  of  granitic  pebbles  into  the  sea.

I  may  here  conclude  my  remarks  upon  deltas,  observing
that,  imperfect  as  is  our  information  of  the  changes  which
they  have  undergone  within  the  last  three  thousand  years,
they  are  sufficient  to  show  how  constant  an  interchange  of
sea  and  land  is  taking  place  on  the  face  of  our  globe.  In
the  Mediterranean  alone,  many  flourishing  inland  towns,
and  a  still  greater  number  of  ports,  now  stand  where  the
sea  rolled  its  waves  since  the  era  of  the  early  civilisation  of
Europe.  If  we  could  compare  with  equal  accuracy  the
ancient  and  actual  state  of  all  the  islands  and  continents,
we  should  probably  discover  that  millions  of  our  race  are  now
suppoi'tpd  by  lands  situated  where  seas  and  lakes  prevailed
in  earlier  ages.  While  in  many  districts  land  animals  and
forests  now  abound  where  ships  once  sailed,  it  is  no  less
true,  on  the  other  hand,  that  inroads  of  the  ocean  and  sub-
mergence of  land  by  the  sinking  down  of  the  earth's  crust
have  taken  place  over  equally  wide  areas.  When  all  these
revolutions,  gradually  brought  about  by  aqueous  and  igneous
agency,  are  duly  considered,  we  shall,  perhaps,  acknowledge
the  justice  of  the  conclusion  of  Aristotle,  who  declared  that
the  whole  land  and  sea  on  our  globe  periodically  changed

places.*

*  See  p.  22.


490


CHAPTER  XX.

DESTROYING   AND   TEANSPOETINO   EFFECTS    OP    TIDES   AlTD

CUEEENTS.

DIFFEBEXCRS  IN  THR   R1SR   OF  THE  TIDES — CAUSES  OF  CURBBSTTS I.AOnX.A0

AND    GULF    CURRENTS — CURRENT    IN    lAKE    ERIE — 8UBFACK     CUBBSMT     DITO

THE    MEDITERRANEAN     DUE    TO     EXCESS     OF    EYAPORATIOM' ffO    FBRJCAXiarr

UNDER-CURRENT   IN   THE   STRAITS  OF   GIBRALTAR,  BUT  TIDAX  ACnOlT   TO  THl
BOTTOM — CONTRAST  OF  TEMPERATURE    BETWEEN    THE    KEDITBRRAlfjBAK  AND

ATLANTIC — CURRENTS   IN  THE  BLACK  SEA — ^VELOCITY  OP  CUBBBirTS QJOrmtML

OCEANIC  CIRCULATION — ACTION  OF  THE  SEA  ON  THE  BRITISK  COAUT SHBTLAND

ISLANDS — LAR(iE  BLOCKS    REMOVED ISLES  REDUCED  TO  CLUSTERS  OF  BOCKS —

ORKNEY   ISLES — "WASTE    OF  EAST   COAST   OF   SCOTLAND — AND     BAST    OQA8T  OF

ENGLAND — WASTE  OF  THE  CLIFFS   OF   HOLDERNESS»   NORFOLK,  ANI>  8UFTOLX

ECCLES  CHURCH  IN  1839  AND  1862 —  SAND-DUNKS  HOW  FAR  CHROXOICBTBRS —

SILTING   UP  OF  ESTUARIES — YARMOUTH   ESTUARY — SUFFOLK    COAST DUmnCH

— ESSEX  COAST — ESTUARY  OF  THE  THAMES — GOODWIN  SANDS COAST  OF  KXlTr

FORMATION     OF   THE     STRAITS     OF    DOVER — SOUTH     COAST     OF     K2rOI.AlfD

SUSSEX — HANTS — DORSET — PORTLAND — ORIGIN  OF  THE  CHBSIL  BAKK TOR  BAT

— ST.  Michael's  mount,  Cornwall — coast  of  brittant.

Although  the  movements  of  great  bodies  of  water,  termed
tides  and  currents,  are  in  general  due  to  very  distinct  causes,
their  effects  cannot  be  studied  separately ;  for  they  produce,
by  their  joint  action,  aided  by  that  of  the  waves,  those
changes  which  are  objects  of  geological  interest.  These
forces  may  be  viewed  in  the  same  manner  as  we  before  con-
sidered rivers — first,  as  employed  in  destroying  portions  of  the
solid  crust  of  the  earth,  and  removing  them  to  other  places ;
secondly,  as  productive  of  new  strata.

Tides. — It  would  be  superfluous  at  the  present  day  to  oflFer
any  remarks  on  the  cause  of  the  tides.  They  are  not  percep-
tible in  lakes  or  in  most  inland  seas ;  in  the  Mediterranean
even,  deep  and  extensive  as  is  that  sea,  they  are  scarcely  sen-
sible to  ordinary  observation,  their  effects  being  quite  sub-
ordinate to  those  of  the  winds  and  currents.  In  some  places,
however,  as  in  the  Straits  of  Messina,  there  is  an  ebb  and
flow  to  the  amount  of  two  feet  and  upwards ;  at  Naples  of
twelve  or  thirteen    inches;    and   at  Venice,  according   to


Ch.  XX.]  TIDES.  491

Rennell,  of  five  feet.*  In  the  Syrtes,  also,  of  the  ancients,
two  wide  shallow  ^Ifs,  which  penetrate  very  far  within  the
northern  coast  of  Africa  between  Carthage  and  Cyrene,  the
rise  is  said  to  exceed  five  feet.t  The  eflfect  of  the  tide  in  the
celebrated  Straits  of  Euripus  in  Greece  is  very  remarkable.
These  straits  at  Chalcis  or  Negropont  are  only  about  fifty
feet  wide  and  twenty  feet  deep,  and  Captain  Spratt  observed
during  his  survey  of  the  Mediterranean  that  for  about  four
days  before  and  five  after  the  full  and  new  moon  the  tide  runs
with  great  regularity  six  hours  to  the  north  and  then  six
hours  to  the  south  at  a  rate  of  several  miles  an  hour.  The
rise  and  fall  is  about  one  foot  on  the  southern  side  of  the
straits  and  as  much  as  twenty-six  inches  on  the  northern.
At  other  times  he  found  that  the  tide  was  absorbed  by  the
influence  of  local  winds  and  was  very  irregular.

In  islands  remote  from  any  continent,  the  ebb  and  flow  of
the  ocean  is  very  slight,  as  at  St.  Helena,  for  example,  where
it  is  rarely  above  three  feet.  J  In  any  given  line  of  coast,  the
tides  are  greatest  in  narrow  channels,  bays,  and  estuaries,
and  least  in  the  intervening  tracts  where  the  land  is  promi-
nent. Thus,  at  the  entrance  of  the  estuary  of  the  Thames  and
Medway,  the  rise  of  the  spring  tides  is  eighteen  feet ;  but
when  we  follow  our  eastern  coast  from  thence  northward,  to-
wards Lowestoft  and  Yarmouth,  we  find  a  gradual  diminution,
until,  at  the  places  last  mentioned,  the  highest  rise  is  only
seven  or  eight  feet.  From  this  point  there  begins  again  to
be  an  increase,  so  that  at  Cromer,  where  the  coast  again  re-
tires towards  the  west,  the  rise  is  sixteen  feet ;  and  towards
the  extremity  of  the  gulf  called  *  the  Wash,*  as  at  Lynn  and
in  Boston  Deeps,  it  is  from  twenty- two  to  twenty- four  feet,
and  in  some  extraordinary  cases  twenty-six  feet.  From
thence  again  there  is  a  decrease  towards  the  north,  the  ele-
vation at  the  Spurn  Point  being  from  nineteen  to  twenty  feet,
and  at  Flamborough  Head  and  the  Yorkshire  coast  from  four-
teen to  sixteen  feet.§

At  Milford  Haven,  in  Pembrokeshire,  at  the  mouth  of  the

*  Geog.  of  Herod.  toL  ii.  p.  331.  Science,  March  1829.
t  Ibid.  p.  328.  §  The  heights  of  these  tides  were

X  Romme,  Vents  et  Courans,  vol.  ii.  giyen  me  by  the  late  Captain  Hewitt ,

p.  2.    Kev.  F.  Fallows,  Qoart  Joum.  of  R.N.


492  CURRENTS.  [Ol  XX.

Bristol  Channel,  the  tides  rise  thirty-six  feet ;  and  at  King-
Koad,  near  Bristol,  forty-two  feet.  At  Chepstow  ou  the  Wye,
a  small  river  which  opens  into  the  estuary  of  the  Severn,  they
reach  fifty  feet  and  sometimes  sixty-nine,  and  even  seventy-
two  feet.*  A  current  which  seta  in  on  the  French  coast^  to
the  west  of  Cape  La  Hague,  becomes  pent  up  by  Guernsey,
Jersey,  and  other  islands,  till  the  rise  of  the  tide  is  from
twenty  to  forty-five  feet,  which  last  height  it  attains  at
Jersey,  and  at  St.  Malo,  a  seaport  of  Brittany.  The
tides  in  the  Basin  of  Mines,  at  the  head  of  the  Bay  of
Fundy,  in  Nova  Scotia,  rise  to  the  height  of  seventy  feet.
There  are,  however,  some  coasts  where  the  tides  seem  to
oiFer  an  exception  to  the  rule  above  mentioned;  for  while
there  is  scarcely  any  rise  in  the  estuary  of  the  Plata  in  South
America,  there  is  an  extremely  high  tide  on  the  open  coast
of  Patagonia,  farther  to  the  south.  Yet  even  in  this  region
the  tides  reach  their  greatest  elevation  (about  fifty  feet)  in
the  Sti-aits  of  Magellan,  and  so  far  at  least  they  conform  to
the  general  rule.

Causes  of  currents. — That  movements  of  no  inconsiderable
magnitude  should  be  impressed  on  a  wide  expanse  of  ocean»
by  winds  blowing  for  many  months  in  one  direction,  may
easily  be  conceived,  when  we  observe  the  eflFects  produced  in
our  own  seas  by  the  temporary  action  of  the  same  canse.  It
is  well  known  that  a  strong  south-west  or  north-west  wind
invariably  raises  the  tide  to  an  unusual  height  along  the
west  coast  of  England  and  in  the  Channel,  and  that  a  north-
west wind  of  any  continuance  causes  the  Baltic  to  rise  two
feet  and  upwards  above  its  ordinary  level.  Smeaton  ascer-
tained by  experiment,  that  in  a  canal  four  miles  in  length,
the  water  was  kept  up  four  inches  higher  at  one  end  than  at
the  other  merely  by  the  action  of  the  wind  along  the  canal ;
and  the  late  Major  Rennell  informs  us  that  a  large  piece  of
water,  ten  miles  broad,  and  generally  only  three  feet  deep,
has,  by  a  strong  wind,  had  its  waters  driven  to  one  side,  and
sustained  so  as  to  become  six  feet  deep,  while  the  windward
side  was  laid  dry.f

*  On  the  authority  of  Admiral  Sir  +  Rennell  on  the  Channel  Current.

F.  Beaufort,  E.N.


Ch.  XX.]  CURRENTS.  493

As  water,  therefore,  he  observes,  when  pent  up  so  that  it
cannot  escape,  acquires  a  higher  level,  so  in  a  place  tvhere  it
can  escape,  the  same  operation  produces  a  current ;  and  this
current  will  extend  to  a  greater  or  less  distance,  according  to
the  force  by  which  it  is  produced.

In  such  large  bodies  of  water  as  the  North  American
lakes,  the  continuance  of  a  strong  wind  in  one  direction
often  causes  the  accumulation  of  the  water  on  the  leeward
side;  and  while  the  equilibrium  is  being  restored  power-
ful currents  are  occasioned.  In  October  1833  a  strong
current  in  Lake  Erie,  caused  partly  by  the  set  of  the
waters  towards  the  outlet  of  the  lake,  and  partly  by  the  pre-
vailing wind,  burst  a  passage  through  the  extensive  penin-
sula called  Long  Point,  and  soon  excavated  a  channel  more
than  nine  feet  deep  and  nine  hundred  feet  wide,  which  was
afterwards  widened  and  deepened.*  On  the  opposite,  or
southern  coast  of  this  lake,  in  front  of  the  town  of  Cleveland,
the  degradation  of  the  cliffs  had  been  so  rapid  for  several
years  preceding  a  survey  made  in  1837  as  to  threaten  many
towns  with  demolition.!

Major  Rennell  J  has  divided  currents  according  to  their
origin  into  drift  and  stream  currents ;  the  former  being  due
to  constant  and  prevalent  winds  impelling  the  surface  water
to  leeward  until  it  meets  with  some  obstacle  which  stops  it
and  occasions  an  accumulation,  this  accumulation  then
giving  rise  to  a  stream-current.  The  obstacle  may  be  either
land  or  banks  or  a  stream-current  already  formed.  A  stream-
current  may  be  of  any  bulk,  or  depth,  or  velocity ;  a  drift-
current  is  shallow,  and  rarely  exceeds  in  velocity  the  rate  of
half  a  mile  an  hour.

One  of  the  chief  oceanic  currents  is  that  which  flows  through
the  Mozambique  Channel,  and  there  skirts  the  south-east
coast  of  Africa,  having  a  breadth  of  ninety  miles  and  a
velocity  of  between  two  and  four  miles  an  hour.  On  reach-
ing the  Cape,  it  is  turned  westward  by  the  Lagullas,  a  great
shoal   or  rather  a  submerged  chain  of  mountains,  which,

*  From   notes  given   mo   by  Capt.  J  Investigation   of  the  Currents  of

Bayfield,  R.N.  the  Atkntic  Ocean,   p.  21.      London,

t  Silliman's  Journ.  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  349.       1832.


494  CURRENTS.  [CiL  XX.

rising  from  a  deep  ocean,  comes  within  100  fathoms  of  the
surface.     The  deflection  of  this  current,  says  BeiiDeU,  proves
that  it  is  more  than  100  fathoms  deep,  otherwise  the  main
body  of  it  would   pass    across   the    bank  instead  of  being
deflected  westward,  so  as  to  flow  round  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope.      It  is  then  joined  by  a  current  from  the  south  or
from  antarctic  latitudes,  and,  continuing  its  course,  takes  a
northerly  direction  along  the  western  coast  of  Africa,  till  it
reaches   the  Bight  or   Bay  of  Benin.     There  it  is  turned
westward,  partly  by  the  form  of  the  coast  and  partly  perhaps
by  meeting  the  Guinea  current,  which  runs  from  the  north
into  the   same   great  bay.     From  the  centre  of  this  bay
proceeds  what  is  called  the  equatorial  current  of  the  Atlantic,
having  a  width  of  from  160    to   450  nautical  miles,  and
holding  a  westerly  course  across  that  ocean,  which  it  tra-
verses from  the  coast  of  Guinea  to  that  of  Brazil.      The
whole  length  is  said  to  be  about  4,000  geographical  miles,
and  its  velocity  from  twenty-five  to  seventy-nine  miles  per
day,  the  mean  rate  being  about  thirty  miles.

On  approaching  the  N.E.  promontory  of  South  America,
called  Cape  St.  Roque,  it  diWdes  itself  into  two  parts,  one
portion  of  which  pursues  a  southerly  course  along  the  coast
of  Brazil,  while  the  principal  part  of  it  flows  westward,  and,
skirting  the  coast  of  Guiana,  is  reinforced  by  the  waters  of
the  Amazons  and  Orinoco.  After  passing  the  island  of
Trinidad,  it  expands  and  contributes  in  some  degree  to  raise
the  waters  of  the  Caribbean  Sea  and  Gulf  of  Mexico,  which
are  also  supposed  to  be  heaped  up  by  the  blowing  of  the
north-east  trade  winds — a  combination  of  circumstances
which  gives  rise  to  the  Gulf-stream.

The  last-mentioned  current  has  already  been  alluded  to  in
the  twelfth  chapter  (p.  239)  as  moderating  the  cold  of  a  large
part  of  the  northern  hemisphere.  A  curious  fact  is  related
by  Genoi'al  Sabine  as  illustrating  the  combined  effects  of  the
equatorial  and  Gulf  currents  last  alluded  to.  He  happened
to  visit  the  African  coast  in  1822,  when  a  vessel  was  wrecked
at  Cape  Lopez,  near  the  equator,  and  the  year  after  he  was
at  Hammerfest,  in  Norway,  near  the  Noi^th  Cape  of  Europe,
when  casks  of  palm  oil  derived  from  the  same   wrecked


CH.XX.]  CAUSES  OF  CURRENTS.  495

vessel  were  thrown  on  shore.  They  had  crossed  the  Atlantic
south  of  the  line  in  a  direction  from  east  to  west,  made  the
circuit  of  the  West  Indian  Islands,  and  then  recrossed  the
Atlantic  north  of  the  line  from  west  to  east.  The  last  or
northern  part  of  their  course  may  possibly,  says  General
Sabine,  have  been  due  not  wholly  to  the  original  impulse  of
the  Gulf-stream,  but  to  the  west  and  south-west  winds  which
prevail  to  the  northward  of  the  trades.

From  the  above  statements  we  may  understand  why
Eennell  has  characterised  some  of  the  principal  currents  as
oceanic  rivers,  which  he  describes  as  being  from  50  to  250
miles  in  breadth,  and  having  a  rapidity  exceeding  that  of  the
largest  navigable  rivers  of  the  continents,  and  so  deep  as  to
be  sometimes  obstructed,  and  occasionally  turned  aside,  by
banks,  the  tops  of  which  do  not  rise  within  forty,  fifty,  or
even  one  hundred  fathoms  of  the  surface  of  the  sea.*

Currents  flowing  alternately  in  opposite  directions  are
occasioned  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides.  The  effect  of
this  cause,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel,  is  most  striking  in
estuaries  and  channels  between  islands.

Current  into  the  Mediterranean  due  to  excess  of  evaporation. —
Another  cause  of  oceanic  currents  is  evaporation  by  solar
heat.  Of  this  the  current  which  sets  constantly  from  the
Atlantic  into  the  Mediterranean  is  a  good  example.  The
late  Admiral  Smyth  found,  during  his  survey,  that  a  central
current  ran  constantly  at  the  rate  of  from  three  to  six  miles
an  hour  eastward  into  the  inland  sea,  the  body  of  water  being
three  miles  and  a  half  wide.  But  there  are  also  two  lateral
currents — one  on  the  European,  and  one  on  the  African  side ;
each  of  them  from  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  two  miles  broad,
and  flowing  at  about  the  same  rate  as  the  central  stream.
These  lateral  currents  ebb  and  flow  with  the  tide,  setting
alternately  into  the  Mediterranean  and  into  the  Atlantic.
But  it  is  a  generally  received  opinion  that,  in  spite  of  their
action,  there  is  an  excess  of  water  flowing  inwards,  to  make
up  for  the  loss  which  the  Mediterranean  suffers  by  evapora-
tion.    For  the  winds  blowing  fix^m  the  shores  of  Africa  are

*  Rennell  on  Currents,  p.  58.


496


CURRENTS  AND  DEPTHS  OF  MEDITERRAIIEAN.   [CiL  XX,


hot  and  dry,  and  the  temperature  of  the  air  investing  the
g^reat  inland  sea,  as  well  as  that  of  the  water,  is  hig^her  on
an  average  than  the  eastern  part  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  the
same  latitude.

The  western  basin  of  the  Mediterranean,    or   that  lying
to  the  west  of  Sicilj,  between  a,  b  (fig.  45),  was  estimated

Fig.  46.


a"


StniiU

of

Gibrtiltar,


MEDITERRANEAN.

Wesftm  BoMin.


GrertAr-
Eastern  BoMin,    ehipdrngt.


Section  of  the  Mediterranean  Basins.

A.  Submarine  ridge,  about  167  fjithoms  deep,  between  Capes   Trafalgar  and
Sjxirtel.

B.  Adventure  and  Medina  Bunks,  about  200  fathoma  deep,  between  Sicily  and
Africa.

C.  Ritl^e.  about  200  fathoms  deep,  between  the  Eastern  Basin  and  Greek  Archi-
pelago.

D.  Asia  Minor.

by  Captain  Spratt  in  1845  to  have,  at  depths  below  one
hundred  fathoms,  a  temperature  of  about  20*^  P.  higher
than  that  of  the  Atlantic  in  the  same  latitude.*  This
extra  ordinal'^  difference  would  be  impossible  but  for  the
existence  of  a  submarine  barrier  of  rock  (a,  fig.  45)    which


*  Capt.  Spratt  estimated  tho  tempera-
tures of  the  two  sea.sat  o9\°  and  39^°.
Sinee  tlien  more  porfrct  th»Tnv>metors
have  been  brought  ijito  use.  which  show
a  temperature  of  o5i°  in  the  Meditt-r-


rjinean,  and  35^  in  the  Atlantic.  As,
however,  this  error  affects  both  seas
equally,  it  does  not  in  any  way  ritiate

the  previous  generalisation.


Ch.  XX.]  CURRENTS  AND  DEPTHS  OF  MEDITERRANEAN.  497

was  found  by  Admiral  Smyth  to  extend  from  Cape  Trafalgar
to  Cape  Spartel,  which  are  only  22  miles  apart.  He  ascer-
tained that  the  crest  of  this  ridge  could  in  no  part  be  lower
than  220  fathoms  from  the  surface ;  but  Capt.  Spratt  informs
me  that  the  French  surveyors,  in  their  more  recent  surveys
of  1854  and  1863,  have  proved  that  the  deepest  soundings,
which  are  near  the  Tangier  side,  do  not  exceed  167  fathoms.
The  ridge  being  from  five  to  seven  miles  broad,  the  shal-
lowest part  of  the  continuous  crest  may  even  now  have  es-
caped observation,  and  it  forms  a  parting  wall  by  which  the
colder  waters  of  the  Atlantic  are  prevented  from  invading  the
Mediterranean.*  It  was  formerly  supposed  that  the  saltness
of  the  water  increased  in  proportion  to  the  depth  ;  but  Captain
Spratt's  observations  do  not  bear  out  this  conclusion,  though
the  iEgean  is  slightly  fresher  at  the  surface  near  the  Darda-
nelles, from  which  a  current  charged  with  much  river  water
is  constantly  flowing.

The  question  was  raised  as  much  as  200  years  ago,  in  1673,
by  Dr.  Smith,  whether  there  is  not  a  counter-under-current
from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Atlantic,  pouring  back  the
surplus  water  which  is  over  and  above  that  required  to  coun-
terbalance evaporation,  and  the  idea  of  such  a  counter-current
was  again  suggested  in  1724  by  the  following  circumstance.
M.  de  I'Aigle,  commander  of  a  privateer  called  the  *  Phoenix,'
of  Marseilles,  gave  chase  to  a  Dutch  merchant-ship  near
Ceuta  Point,  and  coming  up  with  her  in  the  middle  of  the
gut,  between  Tarifa  and  Tangier,  gave  her  one  broadside,
which  directly  sunk  her.  A  few  days  after,  the  sunken  ship,
with  her  cargo  of  brandy  and  oil,  was  cast  ashore  near  Tan-
gier, which  is  at  least  four  leagues  to  the  westward  of  the
l^lace  where  she  went  down,  and  to  which  she  must  have
floated  in  a  direction  contrary  to  the  course  of  the  central
current.t  This  fact,  however,  affords  no  evidence  of  an  under-
current, because  the  ship,  when  it  approached  the  coast,
would  necessarily  be  within  the  influence  of  a  lateral  current,
which  running  westward  twice  every  twenty-four  hours,
might  have  brought  back  the  vessel  to  Tangier.

*  Capt.  Spratt,  Travels  and  Researches  in  Crete,  1865.
t  Phil.  Trans.  1724.

VOL.  I.  K  K


L


498         CtTHBEKTS  AND  DEPTHS  OF  MEDITERBANEAN.  [a

An  attempt  to  test  the  tmth  of  a  return  auderKm
was  made  in  1870,  under  the  superintendence  of  Ca;
Calver,  B.N.,  in  command  of  the  surveying  vessel  'Porcu]
sent  out  hy  the  Admiralty.  Dr.  Carpenter,  who  accompt
the  expedition,  infen-ed  from  the  experiments  then  m
that  there  was  a  constant  current  flowing  at  the  depth  o:
fathoms  out  of  the  Mediterranean,  an  opinion  opposed  to
which  I  had  expressed  in  my  former  edition  (1867,  p.
as  such  a  current  appeared  to  me  irreconcilable  witl
shallowness  of  tlie  water  over  the  submarine  barrier  b
mentioned ;  and  I  found  that  Captain  Spratt,  to  whom  1
indebted  for  much  of  my  former  knowledge,  agreed  wit
in  thinking  that  the  proofs  of  the  permanent  under-cni
insisted  ui>on  by  Dr.  Carpenter  were  inconclasiTe,  thong
pointed  out  at  the  same  time  that '  in  such  a  strait  as  tb
Gibraltar,  where  there  are  iiila!  infliieiteet  combined  witl
general  insets  from  the  Atlantic,  an  under -cnrrent  at  ce
times  is  a  possibility.'  t  Last  autumn  the  Admiralty,  in  fu3
pursuance  of  the  observations  of  1870,  sent  out  the  snrvc
vessel  '  Shearwater,'  commanded  by  Captain  Nares,  1
and  provided  with  more  perfect  apparatus  for  making  ex
ments  upon  tlie  under-current.  From  the  report  of  Caj
Nares,  kindly  lent  me  by  Adniirnl  Richards,  we  learn
the  outward  movement  observed  by  the  '  Porcupine  '  h
the  inflowing  cun-ent  is,  not  a  permanent  under-current
the  result  of  the  Mcditerraneii  n  tide,  which  extends  t<
bottom  of  the  Straits,  running  alternately  for  several  1
westward  and  for  an  equal  number  of  hours  eastv
according  to  the  flood  and  ebb  of  the  tide,  as  shown  bi
rise  and  full  of  the  water  on  the  shore.

This  tide,  when  in  a  direction  opposed  to  that  of
surface  current  which  flows  in  from  the  Atlantic,  checks
certain  extent  that  influx,  and  when  aided  by  easterly  v
was  found  by  Captain  JTares  to  cause,  even  at  the  surfa
set  to  the  westward.  Its  action  apjwars,  however,  t
mnch  more  i-egular  in  the  depths  of  the  Straits  wfaer«
lees  interfered  with  either  by  winds  or  by  the  surface  in


Ch.  XX.]  GREATEST  VELOCITY  OF  CURRENTS.  499

On  comparing  the  results  of  the  experiments  made  by  the
surveying  officers  in  the  two  expeditions,  I  find  nothing  irre-
concilable  or  antagonistic.  The  outward  movement  reported
by  Captain  Calver  is  confirmed  by  Captain  Nares,  with  the
additional  fact  that,  during  the  ebb  of  the  tide  this  move-
ment is  reversed,  thus  proving  that  the  under-current  is  the
effect  of  tidal  action.  Captain  Nares  states  that  the  bottom
water  in  the  strait  '  ran  to  the  westward  more  rapidly  with
the  flood  than  it  ran  to  the  eastward  with  the  ebb.'  But  he
docs  not  lay  much  stress  on  this  point ;  and  Admiral  Bichards
informs  me  that  the  observations  of  the  *  Shearwater '
lasting  only  six  days,  and  chiefly  during  the  prevalence  of
easterly  winds,  were  in  his  opinion  too  few  to  decide  whether
the  volume  of  water  carried  out  to  the  Atlantic  was  in  ex-
cess of  that  carried  in.

The  Black  Sea  being  situated  in  a  higher  latitude  than  the
Mediterranean,  and  being  the  receptacle  of  rivers  flowing
from  the  north,  is  much  colder,  and  its  loss  by  conversion  into
vapour  less  considerable.  It  contributes  a  steady  supply  of
water  to  the  Mediterranean,  by  a  current  flowing  outwards,
for  the  most  part  of  the  year,  through  the  Dardanelles  at  a
rate  of  two  or  three  miles  an  hour.  The  discharge,  however,
at  the  Bosphorus  into  the  Sea  of  Marmora  is  so  small,  when
compared  to  the  volume  of  water  carried  in  by  rivers,  as  to
imply  a  great  amount  of  evaporation  even  in  the  Black  Sea.

There  has  been  some  difficulty  in  explaining  how  the
Black  Sea  maintains  its  salinity  in  spite  of  the  vast  body  of
fresh  water  brought  down  into  it  by  rivers.  But  some  light
is  thrown  upon  this  point  by  Captain  Spratt's  experiments
at  Constantinople  and  Kertch  during  the  years  1853  to  1856.
It  was  then  ascertained  that,  although  a  current  of  the
Black  Sea  flow^s  for  a  great  part  of  the  year  across  the  Sea
of  Marmora  and  through  the  Dardanelles,  yet  there  is  for
several  days  in  the  year  a  strong  reverse  current  into  the
Black  Sea  from  the  Mediterranean.*  This  reverse  current
occurs  mainly  during  the  autumn  and  winter  months,  when
the  Black  Sea  rivers  are  at  their  lowest,  and  when  strong
westerly  gales  in  the  Mediterranean  and  ^SJgean  raise  the

*  Spratts  Crete,  vol.  ii.  p.  349.
K  X  2


500  GREATEST  VELOCITY  OF  CrKREXT&  [Ot  XX.

waters  of  the  latter  to  a  higher  level  than  the  Black  Sea.  la
these  cases  the  iDfliix  is  even  greater  than  the  ontflowing
current  at  other  perii>ls.  and  thus  maintains  in  the  Sea  d
Marmora  a  salinity  equal  to  that  of  the  Mediterranean,  and
in  the  Black  Sea  rather  more  than  half  that  amonnt.  The
depth  of  the  rid?e  across  the  Bosphorus  or  channel  of  Con-
stantini'ple  is  not  more  than  20  fathoms,  and  that  of  the
Dardanelles  ab.jut  30.  so  that  the  depth  of  the  ordinair
currents  carrie«l  eastward  by  this  cause  is  limited  by  the
shallowness  of  these  r.utlets.

Evaix-ration  by  solar  heat,  besides  affecting  the  level  of
a«h*>inincr  seas  in  the  way  above  mentioned,  grimes  origin,  by
tli».'  formation  of  aqueous  vap<»ur  and  rain,  to  all  the  rivers
wliioh  dm  in  the  land,  and  some  of  these  are  of  snch  masni-
tr.i.le  as  to  auijmeiit  xhx,'  vulume  and  velocity  of  great  oceanic
cunvnts.  Thus  the  river  Amazons,  as  General  Sabine  ob-
servtM.l  in  1^22,  j-rv serves  a  vek»eity  of  nearly  three  miles  an
hour  at  a  distance  of  upwards  of  oOO  miles  from  its  mouth.
its  oriiriniil  direction  In-ing  scarcely  altered,  and  the  fresh
wator  havinir  «-»nlv  li.come  partiallv  mixed  with  that  of  the
oee;iii.  The  river  Plate,  savs  Eennell.  has  still  a  velocitvof
a  mile  an  liv-ur.  an-l  a  breadth  C'f  more  than  SOO  miles,  at  a
distance  of  not  Ir^ss  than  0«.n>  miles  from  its  mouth.

(fi\'.iir\<f  r.J.u''ift/  oT  ffn^itf^i. — The  ordinarv  velocitv  of  the
jirinoipiil  cTin-ents  of  the  ocean  is  from  one  to  three  miles
p-^r  hour:  but  when  the  boundary  lands  converge,  lame
bodies  of  water  are  driven  '^'radiially  into  a  narrow  space,
and  then,  wanting'  lateral  room,  are  compelled  to  raise  their
level.  "Whenever  this  occurs,  their  velocitv  is  much  increased.
Thr*  cuiT*»iit  which  runs  throutrh  the  Eace  of  Aldemev,
l>jtw..-rn  the  island  of  that  name  in  the  English  Channel  and
th-  nuiinhmd.  has  a  veLxntv  of  about  ei^ht  miles  an  hour.
Cii'-tuin  Hewitt  fi.»und  that  in  the  Penthind  Firth,  the  stream.
in  ordinary  spri:iL'-tid».'S.  runs  ten  miles  and  a  half  an  hour.
ai.d  about  thirteen  milus  durin^r  violent  storms.  The  greatest
v.,'ii  'ciTy  of  xh*j  tidal  cunvnt  through  tlie  "  Shoots '  or  Xew
Passaire.  in  the  Bristol  Channel,  is  fourteen  English  miles  an
hour:  and  Captain  King:  observed,  in  his  survev  of  the
Straits   of  ^Magellan,  that  the  tide   ran  at  the  same  rate


Ch.  XX.]  GREATEST  VELOCITY  OF  CURRENTS.  501

through  the  *  First  Narrows/  and  about  eight  geographical
miles  an  hour  in  other  parts  of  those  straits.

When  currents  have  been  set  in  motion  by  some  one  or  all
of  the  forces  enumerated  in  this  chapter,  namely,  the  winds,
the  tides,  evaporation,  and  the  influx  of  rivers,  another  cause
comes  into  play  in  modifying  their  direction.  I  allude  to  the
rotation  of  the  earth  on  its  axis,  which,  however,  can  only  act
when  the  current  so  raised  happens  to  be  from  south  to  north
or  from  north  to  south.

The  principle  on  which  this  cause  operates  is  probably
familiar  to  the  reader,  as  it  has  long  been  recognised  in  the
case  of  the  trade  winds.  Without  enlarging,  therefore,  on
the  theory,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  offer  an  example  of  the
mode  of  action  alluded  to.  When  a  current  flows  from  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  towards  the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  it  consists
of  a  mass  of  water,  which,  on  doubling  the  Cape,  in  lat.  35**,
has  a  rotatory  velocity  of  about  800  miles  an  hour;  but  when
it  reaches  the  line,  where  it  turns  westward,  it  has  arrived
at  a  parallel  wliere  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  whirled  round
at  the  rate  of  1,000  miles  an  hour,  or  about  200  miles  faster.
If  this  great  mass  of  water  was  transferred  suddenly  from
the  higher  to  the  lower  latitude,  the  deficiency  of  its  rotatory
motion,  relatively  to  the  land  and  water  with  which  it  would
come  into  juxtaposition,  would  be  such  as  to  cause  an  appa-
rent motion  of  the  most  rapid  kind  (of  no  less  than  200  miles
an  hour)  from  east  to  west.

In  the  case  of  such  a  sudden  transfer,  the  eastern  coast  of
America,  being  carried  round  in  an  opposite  direction,  might
strike  against  a  large  body  of  water  with  tremendous  violence,
and  a  considerable  part  of  the  continent  might  be  sub-
merged. The  disturbance  does  not  occur,  because  the  water
of  the  stream,  as  it  advances  gradually  into  new  zones  of  the
sea  which  are  moving  more  rapidly,  acquires  by  friction  an
accelerated  velocity.  Yet  as  this  motion  is  not  imparted
instantaneously,  the  fluid  is  unable  to  keep  up  with  the
full  speed  of  the  new  surface  over  which  it  is  successively
brought.  Hence,  to  borrow  the  language  of  Herschel,  when
he  speaks  of  the  trade  winds,  ^  it  lags  or  hangs  back,  in  a
direction  opposite  to  the  earth's  rotation,  that  is,  from  east


I
i

1


502  GREATEST  VELOCITY  OF  CURRENTS.  [Ci


to  west;'  and  thus  a  current,  which  would  have  mn  si
northwards  from  the  Antarctic  Ocean  to  the  ^Equator  hn
the  rotation,  may  acquire  a  relative  direction  toi^rards  the  ^
A  striking  example  in  the  northern  hemisphere  of  a  sii
deflection  westward  is  aflbrded  by  the  polar  current,  tt]
beaded  with  floating  ice,  flows  southward  from  the  A
Sea  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Spitzbergen,  having^  a  bre
of  between  40  and  50  miles,  and  after  passing^  the  sout
extremity  of  Greenland,  tlien  trends  towards  the  west  n
the  influence  of  the  earth's  rotation,  that  westerly  tend
increasing  as  it  enters  latitudes  of  increased  rotatory  velo
Here  it  unites  with  other  cold  and  ice-laden  currents  :
Baffin's  Bav,  and  then  continues  its  course  towards
Labrador  coast,  and  rounding  Xewfoundland  descends  a
the  eastern  coast  of  the  United  States  at  a  rate  varying  :
half  a  mile  to  three-qiiai-ters  of  a  mile  an  hour,  formi
cold  current  about  'JoU  fathoms  in  depth  inside  or  west^
of  the  Gulf-stream.  This  last  stream  affords  an  examp
a  motion  exactly  the  converse  of  the  Labrador  cur
Flowing  at  first  from  about  lat.  20°  N.,  it  is  impressed
a  velocity  of  rotation  of  about  9-1-0  miles  an  hour,  and
to  lat.  40^,  where  the  earth  revolves  only  at  the  ral
7GG  miles,  or  1 74  miles  slower.  In  this  case  a  relative  mc
of  an  (►pposite  kind  results;  and  the  current  retains  an  ei
of  rotatory  velocity,  tending  continually  to  deflect  it  eastv
The  two  cuiTents  therefore  have  a  tendency  to  keep  sei)a:
the  one  from  an  excess  and  the  other  from  a  deficienc
rotatory  motion.  In  the  region  where  the  two  streams
8ide  by  side  we  find  the  remarkable  i)henomenon  know
the  cold  Willi,  an  almost  vertical  division  between  the  wai
waters  of  the  Gulf-stream,  which  range  from  60°  to  85**  F;
and  the  Labrador  current,  which,  even  at  its  surface,  <
has  a  temperature  in  the  winter  months  30®Falir.  lower
!  the  warm  stream  fiowing  past  it.     Each  of  these  currents

.'  its  own  peculiar  fauna,  and  Professor  Bache  found  that  the

'  of  demarcation  between  them  becomes  more  defined   at

I  depth  of  50  fathoms  than  at  the  surface.   At  ivliat  de

J  owing  to  condensation,  the   Labrador  current  may  ace

such  specific  gravity  as  to  cause  it  to  pass  under  the  wai


Ch.  xx.j  oceanic  circulation.  503

stratum  is  not  yet  well  ascertained,  but  the  low  temperature
of  40°  Eahr.  found  off  Florida  at  the  depth  of  300  fathoms
while  the  surface  has  a  temperature  of  80**  Fahr.  would  seem
to  be  due  to  the  action  of  the  cold  under-current.

This  is  one  of  the  best  illustrations  of  the  grand  scale  on
which  the  Arctic  waters  may  restore  equilibrium  in  regard
to  level  and  temperature  by  transferring  bodily  southwards
large  masses  of  cold  water,  not  creeping  along  the  bottom,
but  as  above  stated  250  fathoms  in  depth,  and  having  all  the
characters  of  ordinary  currents  which  have  no  doubt  been
created  by  the  action  of  the  wind  and  tide,  and  which  do  not
derive  their  motion  from  mere  differences  in  temperature
and  specific  gravity  between  polar  and  equatorial  waters.
Those  winds  by  which  large  ice-floes,  after  remaining  for
weeks  in  certain  bays  or  coasts,  are  made  to  shift  their
quarters  must  give  rise  to  drift-currents,  and  these  to  stream-
currents  ;  and  if  the  Gulf-stream  and  other  flows  of  warmer
water  from  equatorial  regions  pour  into  the  Arctic  basin,  they
must  escape  in  such  streams  as  that  seen  on  the  coast  of
Labrador.  The  shallowness  of  Behriug's  Straits,  which  are
only  of  the  depth  of  those  of  Dover,  would  prevent  any  large
outflow  into  the  Pacific;  and  as  the  only  known  outlets  from
this  cul-de-sac  will  therefore  be  through  BaflBn's  Bay  and
between  Spitzbergen  and  Greenland,  this  may  account  for  the
force  and  magnitude  of  the  Labrador  current.

Between  Iceland  and  the  Faroe  Islands  the  Gulf-stream
and  Polar  current  fight,  as  Dr.  Petermann  expresses  it,*
for  the  mastery ;  and  the  result  of  this  struggle  is  a  sea
striped  with  warm  and  cold  areas,  as  was  shown  by  Lord
Dufferin  in  1856,  and  by  Wallich  in  the  *  Bulldog'  expedi-
tion commanded  by  Sir  Leopold  M'Clintock  in  1860.  These
facts  are  particularly  interesting  as  having  been  fully  con-
firmed by  the  late  deep-sea  dredgings  between  the  Faroe  and
Shetland  Islands.  Here  Drs.  Carpenter  and  Wyville  Thomson
found  two  areas  which,  although  having  the  same  temperature
of  51°  Fahr.  at  the  surface,  began  to  differ  at  the  depth  of  150
fathoms.  The  one  area,  inhabited  by  its  own  peculiar  fauna,
comprising  large  foraminifera  and  siliceous  sponges  of  more

*  Dcr  GK)lf-8trom,  Geographische  Mittheilungen.   Jugtus  Perthes.    Band  16. 1870.


^


504  OCEANIC  CIRCULATION.  [Cm.  XX.

southern  types,  lost  very  little  in  temperature  below  150
fathoms,  and  at  a  depth  of  500  fathoms  had  still  a  warmth  of
45°  Fahr.  The  other,  or  cold  area,  lost  temperature  rapidly
after  the  depth  of  100  fathoms,  and  at  one  place  below  350
fathoms  was  colder  than  the  freezing  point  of  firesh  water.
The  water  in  this  area  gave  proof  of  its  northern  origin  by
containing  echinoderms  and  other  organic  remains  proper  to
Norwegian  and  still  higher  latitudes.  It  has  been  objected
that  we  have  no  right  to  attribute  to  the  influence  of  the
Gulf-stream  the  warmth  of  all  the  water  which  we  may  find
in  the  Northern  Atlantic  above  the  normal  temperature  of  the
latitude.  But  when  recognising  the  influence  of  that  stream
in  the  Atlantic  we  do  not,  as  Dr.  Petermann  justly  observes,
refer  the  whole  of  it  to  the  current  which  flows  out  of  the
Gulf  of  Mexico,  or  deny  that  it  has  received  accessions  upon
its  way :  we  rather  retain  the  name  of  Gulf-stream  just  as  we
do  that  of  a  river  from  its  source  to  its  delta,  although  many
tributaries  coming  from  different  regions  may  have  swollen
and  modified  its  volume.  The  main  fsict  that  the  Gulf-stream
does  reach  the  shores  of  Europe  is  proved  by  the  well-known
drifting  of  West  Indian  seeds  to  the  coast  of  Ireland  (see  VoL
II.  Chap.  XL.),  and  doubtless  the  south-westerly  winds  which
prevail  so  largely  in  the  Atlantic  must  do  much  in  propelling
the  superficial  waters  in  the  same  direction  as  tliey  are
carried  by  the  regular  currents.

Oceanic  circfidation. — Besides  those  sensible  currents  arising
from  the  various  causes  already  mentioned,  a  theory  of
general  oceanic  circulation  first  propounded  by  Maury  has
lately  been  brought  into  prominence  by  Dr.  Carpenter
in  order  to  account  for  the  cold  found  at  great  depths  both
in  temperate  and  tropical  regions.  Captain  Shortlajid,  in  his
line  of  soundings  made  in  1868  for  the  laying  down  of  the
electric  cable  between  Aden  and  Bombay,  found  a  tempera-
ture of  34''-3  Fahr.  at  a  depth  of  1,800  fathoms  (11,400  feet),
and  in  the  cruise  of  the  *  Porcupine '  in  1869  the  bottom  tem-
perature between  latitudes  50°  and  70®  N.  was  in  several  cases
found  to  be  below  the  freezing  point  of  fresh  water.  That
these  low  temperatures  cannot  be  caused  by  mere  depth  is  evi-
dent from  the  fact  that  in  the  Mediterranean  sounding  have


Ch.  XX.]  OCEANIC  CIRCULATION.  505

been  made  to  the  depth  of  l'^,800  feet,  or  nearly  as  deep  as  the
Alps  are  high,  without  ever  reaching  a  temperature  below
55°  Fahr.  When  we  reflect  therefore  that  the  Aden  line  of
telegraph  is  fifteen  degrees  north  of  the  equator,  and  that  cold
water  can  only  come  to  that  spot  from  the  southern  hemi-
sphere, we  are  brought  to  the  conclusion  that  the  whole  of
the  equatorial  abysses  of  the  ocean  are  in  some  part  at  least  tra-
versed by  a  continuous  mass  of  water  not  much  above  32°  Fahr.
It  is  an  acknowledged  fact  that  when  salt  water  in  arctic
and  antarctic  latitudes  is  cooled  to  a  temperature  below  that
at  which  fresh  water  freezes,  its  greater  specific  gravity
causes  it  to  sink,  but  it  does  not  become  ice  until  it  attains
the  temperature  of  27°  Fahr.  or  even  25°  Fahr.  if  the  saltness
somewhat  exceeds  the  average.  If  on  arriving  at  the  bottom
it  finds  there  water  of  less  specific  gravity  it  will  displace  it,
and  it  is  inferred  that  thus  a  movement  will  be  induced
towards  warmer  latitudes,  producing  what  Dr  Carpenter  has
well  characterised  as  a  *  creeping  flow.'  The  direction  of  this
movement  must  be  governed  by  local  conditions  or  the  shape
of  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  and  it  may  take  years  in  traversing
the  ninety  degrees  between  the  poles  and  the  equator.  Its
progress  may  be  so  gradual  as  not  to  cause  what  in  ordinary
language  would  be  termed  oceanic  currents,  and  may  even
be  consistent  with  that  perfect  stillness  found  generally  to
prevail  in  the  abysses  of  the  ocean.  Captain  Spratt  reminds
us  that  during  the  soundings  taken  across  the  Atlantic  the
sounding  line  on  several  occasions  coiled  itself  upon  the
sinker  when  some  200  or  300  fathoms  more  than  the  actual
depth  happened  accidentally  or  intentionally  to  have  been
paid  out  from  the  ship,  and  thus  the  coils  came  up  in  a
bunch  together  round  the  deep-sea  lead.  Such  facts  tell
strongly  against  the  existence  of  anything  like  a  sensible
current,  but  on  the  other  hand  they  do  not  prove  the  water
to  be  motionless,  because  the  tension  of  the  hempen  sounding-
line  might  be  such  as  to  afford  some  resistance  to  a  slight
and  almost  imperceptible  movement,  such  as  might  still  be
sufiicient  in  the  course  of  time  to  convey  cold  water  to  all
those  submarine  regions  where  there  is  a  free  communication,
or  where  no  continuous  shoal  or  chain  of  submarine  mountains
intervenes.


506  OCEANIC  CIRCULATION.  [Gh.  XX.

If  such  a  movement  be  taking  place^  however  slowlj,  it
must  be  counterbalanced  by  a  return  of  water  back  from  the
equator  to  the  poles,  and  how  this  may  be  readily  effected
will  be  evident  to  the  reader  after  what  has  been  said  of  the
powerful  effect  of  the  winds  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean.    It
is  quite  unnecessary  to  seek  for  some  recondite  cause^  such  as
the  expansion  of  water  by  heat  in  the  equatorial  zone  raising
the  level  of  the  sea  and  causing  a  flow  to  the  poles  down  a
gently  inclined  plane.     This  theory,  which  is  by  no  means  a
new  one,  was  considered  by  Sir  John  Herschel  in  his  *  Physical
Geography,'  where  he  shows  that  the  slope  between  tropical
and  temperate  latitudes,  a  distance  of  3,000  or  4,000  miles,
would  be  so  insignificant  that  the  accelerating  force  produced
would  not  exceed  one  two-millionth  part  of  gravity,  and  would
be  inefficient  as  a  motor  power.     Moreover  it  remains  to  be
proved  as  a  matter  of  fact  whether  the  surface  of  the  equatorial
ocean  is  really  elevated  by  solar  heat  above  the  level  of  the
polar  seas.     The  su2>erficial  temperature  averages  79®-8  Fahr.
for  the  whole  year,  so  that  the  amount  of  evaporation  may  be
expected  to  exceed  that  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  only
attains  an  equally  high  temperature  at  the  surface  during  the
extreme  heat  of  summer,  and  falls  about  twent^'-five  degrees
lower  in  winter.     If  then  in  spite  of  this  smaller  quantity  of
heat  it  is  only  by  an  indraught  from  the  Atlantic  that  the
level  of  the  inland  sea  can  be  sustained,  it  may  be  questioned
whether,  taking  into  account  evaporation,  barometric  pres-
sure, floating  icebergs,  and  other  conflicting  and  compensating
causes  in  the  open  ocean,  we  have  sufficient  data  to  enable  us  to
infer  in  what  direction  a  movement  would  be  induced.     Indeed
it  seems  almost  idle  to  be  speculating  upon  supposed  under-
currents so  imperceptible  as  not  to  be  tested  by  a  sounding-
line,  and  surface  flows  dej^ending  upon  a  slope  only  capable  of
producing  an  accelerating  force  of  one  two-millionth  part  of
gravity,  when  we  have  known  currents  flowing  for  thousands
of  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  south  to  north,  which  reach
for  hundreds  of  fathoms,  from  the  surface  to  the  bottom  of
deep  seas,  and  flow  so  many  miles  a  day  as  to  render  them
capable  of  transferring  in  short  periods  of  time  great  volumes
of  water  of  different  temperatures  from  one  part  of  the  globe
to  another.


Ch.  XX.]  SHETLAND  ISLANDS.  507


DESTROYING  AND  TRANSPORTING  POWER  OF  CURRENTS.

After  these  preliminary  remarks  on  the  nature  and  causes  of
currents,  their  velocity  and  direction,  we  may  next  consider
their  action  on  the  solid  materials  of  the  earth.  We  shall
find  that  their  efforts  are,  in  many  respects,  strictly  analogous
to  those  of  rivers.  I  have  already  treated,  in  the  third  chapter,
of  the  manner  in  which  currents  sometimes  combine  with
ice,  in  carrying  mud,  pebbles,  and  large  fragments  of  rock  to
great  distances.  Their  operations  are  more  concealed  from
our  view  than  those  of  rivers,  but  extend  to  wider  areas,  and
are  therefore  of  more  geological  importance.

Action  of  the  sea  on  the  British  coast — Shetland  Islands. — If
we  follow  the  eastern  and  southern  shores  of  the  British
Islands,  from  our  Ultima  Thule  in  Shetland  to  the  Land's
End  in  Cornwall,  we  shall  find  evidence  of  a  series  of  changes
since  the  historical  era,  very  illustrative  of  the  kind  and
degree  of  force  exerted  by  tides  and  currents  co-operating
with  the  waves  of  the  sea.  In  this  survey  we  shall  have  an
opportunity  of  tracing  their  joint  power  on  islands,  promon-
tories, bays,  and  estuaries  ;  on  bold,  lofty  cliffs,  as  well  as  on
low  shores ;  and  on  every  description  of  rock  and  soil,  from
granite  to  blown  sand.

The  northernmost  group  of  the  British  Islands,  the  Shet-
land, are  composed  of  a  great  variety  of  rocks,  including
granite,  gneiss,  mica-slate,  serpentine,  greenstone,  and  many
othei-s,  with  some  secondary  rocks,  chiefly  sandstone  and  con-
glomerate. These  islands  are  exposed  continually  to  the
uncontrolled  violence  of  the  Atlantic,  for  no  land  intervenes
between  their  western  shores  and  America.  The  prevalence,
therefore,  of  strong  westerly  gales  causes  tbe  waves  to  be
sometimes  driven  with  tremendous  force  upon  the  coast,  while
there  is  also  a  current  setting  from  the  north.  The  spray  of
the  sea  aids  the  decomposition  of  the  rocks,  and  prepares  them
to  be  breached  by  the  mechanical  force  of  the  waves.  Steep
cliffs  are  hollowed  out  into  deep  caves  and  lofty  arches ;  and
almost  every  promontory  ends  in  a  cluster  of  rock,  imitating
the  forms  of  columns,  pinnacles,  and  obelisks.


508  EFFECTS  OF  LIGflTXINa.  [C«.  XX,

Drifting  of  large  masses  of  rock. — Modem  observatious  show
that  the  reduction  of  continuous  tracts  to  such  insular  masses
is  a  process  in  which  nature  is  still  actively  eng^ag^ed.  *The
Isle  of  Stenness,'  says  Dr.  Hibbert,  *  presents  a  scene  of  une-
qualled desolation.  In  stormy  winters,  huge  blocks  of  stones
are  overturned,  or  are  removed  from  their  native  beds,  and
hurried  up  a  slight  acclivit}'  to  a  distance  almost  iucrediUe.
In  the  winter  of  1802,  a  tabular-shaped  tnass^  eight  feet  two
inches  by  seven  feet,  and  five  feet  one  inch  thick,  was  dis-
lodged from  its  bed,  and  removed  to  a  distance  of  from
eighty  to  ninety  feet.  I  measured  the  recent  bed  from
which  a  block  had  been  carried  away  the  preceding  winter
(a.d.  1818),  and  found  it  to  be  seventeen  feet  and  a  half  by
seven  feet,  and  the  depth  two  feet  eight  inches.  The  removed
mass  had  been  borne  to  a  distance  of  thirty  feet,  when  it  was
shivered  into  thirteen  or  more  lesser  fragments,  some  of  which
were  carried  still  farth<?r,  from  30  to  120  feet.  A  block,  nine
feet  two  inches  by  six  feet  and  a  half,  and  four  feet  thick,  was
hurried  up  the  acclivity  to  a  distance  of  510  feet.'  *

At  Northmavine,  also,  angular  blocks  of  stone,  some  of
which  are  represented  in  the  annexed  figure  40,  have  been
removed  in  a  similar  manner  to  considerable  distances  by  the
waves  of  the  sea.

Effects  of  lightning, — In  addition  to  numerous  examples  of
masses  detached  and  driven  by  the  waves,  tides,  and  currents
from  their  phice,  some  remarkable  efiects  of  lightning  are
recorded  in  these  isles.  At  Funzie,  in  Fetlar,  about  the
middle  of  tlie  last  century,  a  rock  of  mica- schist,  105  feet
long,  ten  feet  broad,  and  in  some  places  four  feet  thick,  was
in  an  instant  torn  by  a  fiash  of  lightning  from  its  bed,  broken
into  three  large  and  several  smalhM*  fragments.  One  of  these,
twenty-six  feet  long,  ten  feet  broad,  and  four  feet  thick,  was
simply  turned  over.  The  second,  which  was  twenty-eight
feet  long,  seventeen  broad,  and  five  feet  in  thickness,  was
hurled  across  a  high  point  to  the  distance  of  50  yards.
Another  broken  mass,  about  forty  feet  long,  was  thrown  still

*  Dt-«cripticn  of  Shethind  Isles,  p.       inclel»t<'d  for  the  following  renresentA-
627.     Edin.  1822,  tx)  which  work  I  am      tions  of  rocks  iu  the  Shetbmd  Isles.


Ch.  XX.]  ACTIOS  OF  THE  SEA.  509

fai'ther,  but  in  the  same  direction,  quite  into  the  sea.    There
were  also  many  smaller  fragments  scattered  up  and  down.*

When  we  thus  see  electricity  co-operating  with  the  violent
movements  of  the  ocean  in  heaping  up  piles  of  shattered
rocks  on  dry  land  and  beneath  the  waters,  we  cannot  but
admit  that  a  region  which  shall  be  the  theatre,  for  myriads
of  ages,  of  the  action  of  such  disturbing  causes,  might  pre-
sent, at  some  future  period,  if  upraised  far  above  the  bosom
of  the  deep,  a  scene  of  havoc  and  ruin  that  may  compare
with  any  now  found  by  the  geologist  on  the  surface  of  our
contiuents.

FiR.  «.


SloQj  fragments  drifted  bj  ths  se

In  some  of  the  Shetland  Isles,  as  on  the  west  of  Meikle
Roe,  dikes,  or  veins  of  soft  granite,  have  mouldered  away ;
while  the  matrix  in  which  they  were  enclosed,  being  of  thft
same  substance,  but  of  a  (inner  texture,  has  remained  un-
altered. Thus,  long  narrow  ravines,  sometimes  twenty  feet
iviile,  are  laid  open,  and  often  give  access  to  the  waves.
After  describing  some  huge  cavernous  apertures  into  which
the  sea  flows  for  250  feet  in  Loeness,  Dr.  Hibbert,  writing  in
1822,  enumerates  other  ravages  of  the  ocean.  '  A  mass  of
rock,  the  average  dimensions  of  which  may  perhaps  be  rated
iit  twelve  or  thirteen  feet  square,  and  four  and  a  half  or  five
ill  thickness,  was  first  moved  from  its  bed,  about  fifty  years
ago,  to  a  distance  of  thirty  feet,  and  has  since  been  twice
turned  over.'

Passage  forced  by  the  sea  through  porphyritic  rocks. — 'But
>  Dr.  Hibbert,  from  HSS.  of  Bev.  Oeorfce  Low,  of  F«tlar.


510  ACTIOS  OF  THE  SEA.  [Qfc  XX.

the  most  sublime  scene  is  where  a  maral  pile  ofporph^,
eecftping  the  process  of  disintegration  that  ia  devastating  the
coast,  appears  to  have  been  left  as  a  sort  of  rampart  agunet
the  inroads  of  the  ocean; — the  Atlantic,  when  provoked  by
wintry  gales,  battel's  against  it  with  all  the  force  of  real
arti}Ierj' — the  waves  having,  in  their  repeated  assaults,  forced
themselves  an  entrance.  This  breach,  named  the  Grind  of
the  Navir  (fig.  -1-7),  is  widened  every  winter  by  the  otct-

Fig.  47.


Orimi  of  llie  Niivit  -p;i>:»;ijti;  fnroeii  by  llie  »eii  tliroHgh  roots  of  hard  porphjrj.


wliohning  surge  that,  finding  a  passage  through  it,  separates
large  stones  from  its  sides,  and  forces  them  to  a  distance  of
no  less  than  180  feet.  In  two  or  three  spots,  the  fragments
which  have  Ix-en  detached  are  brought  together  in  immense
heaps,  that  appt^ar  us  an  aocutnuhvtion  of  cubical  masses,
the  produet  of  some  quarry.'  "

It  is  evident  from  this  example,  that  although  the  greater
indestructibility  of  s()nio  rocks  may  enable  them  to  with-
stand, for  a  lunger  time,  the  action  of  the  elements,  yet  ther
cannot  permanently  resi.st.  There  are  localities  in  Shetland
in  which  rock^  of  almost  eveiy  variety  of  mineral  composi-
tion are  suffering  disintegration;  thus  the  sea  makes  great
inroads  ou  the  clay  slate  of  Fitfel  Head,  on  the  serpentine
•  HibbLTt,  p.  528.


Oh.  XX.]


THE  DBOHOS.


511


of  the  Vord  Hill  in  Fetlor,  and  on  the  mica-schist  of  the
Bay  of  Trieste,  on  the  east  coast  of  the  same  island,  which
decomposes  into  angular  blocks.     The  quartz  rock  on  the

Fig.  48.


Granitie  rocks  named  the  Drongs,  between  Papa  Stour  and  Hitlairick  Nesa,

east  of  Walls,  and  the  gneiss  and  mica-schist  of  Gartliness,
suffer  the  same  fate.

Destruction  of  i$lanth. — Such   devastation   cannot   be  in-
cessantly committed  for  thousands  of  years  without  dividing

Fig,  i*.


Granitic  rocks  to  the  south  of  Hilliwick  Kces,  Shetland.


islands,  until  they  become  at  last  mere  clusters  of  rocks,  the
last  shreds  of  masses  once  continuous.  To  this  state  many
appear    to    have  been  reduced,  and    innumerable   fantastic


512  DESTRUCTION  OF  ISLA>T)S.  [Cl  XX

forms  are  assumed  by  rocks  adjoining  these  islands,  to  which
the  name  of  Drongs  is  applied,  as  it  is  to  those  of  simikr
shape  in  Faroe.*

Tlie  granitic  rocks  (fig.  48)  between  Papa  Stour  and  Hills-
wick  Ness  afford  an  example.  A  still  more  singular  cluster
of  rocks  is  seen  to  the  south  of  Hillswick  Ness  (fig.  49),  which
presents  a  variety  of  forms  as  viewed  from  different  points,
and  has  often  been  likened  to  a  small  fleet  of  vessels  with
spread  sails.f  We  may  imagine  that  in  the  coarse  of  time
Hillswick  Ness  itself  may  present  a  similar  wreck,  from  the
unequal  decomposition  of  the  rocks  whereof  it  is  composed,
consisting  of  gneiss  and  mica-schist  traversed  in  all  direc-
tions b}'  veins  of  felspar- porphyry.

Midway  between  the  groups  of  Shetland  and  Orkney  is
Fair  Island,  said  to  be  composed  of  sandstone  with  high  per-
pendicular cliflPs.  The  current  runs  with  such  velocity,  that
during  a  calm,  and  when  there  is  no  swell,  the  rocks  on  its
shores  are  white  with  the  foam  of  the  sea  driven  against
them.  The  Orkni'vs,  if  carefully  examined,  would  probably
illustrate  our  present  topic  as  much  as  the  Shetland  oronp.
The  north-east  i)ro!nontory  of  Sanda,  one  of  these  islands,
lias  been  cut  off  in  modern  times  by  the  sea,  so  that  it
became  what  is  now  called  Start  Island,  where  a  lighthouse
was  erected  in  1807,  since  which  time  the  new  strait  has
grown  broader.

J'Jditt  roast  of  Scotlaml. — To  pass  over  to  the  mainland  of
Scotland,  we  find  that  in  Inverness-shire  there  have  been
inroads  of  the  sea  at  Fort  George,  and  others  in  Morayshire,
which  have  swept  away  the  old  town  of  Findhorn.  On  the
coast  of  Kincardineshire,  an  illustration  was  afforded,  at  the
close  of  the  last  century,  of  the  eft'ect  of  promontories  in  pro-
tecting a  line  of  low  shore.  The  village  of  Mathers  two
miles  south  of  Johnshaven,  w^as  built  on  an  ancient  shin<Tle
beach,  protected  by  a  projecting  ledge  of  limestone  rock.
This  was  quarried  for  lime  to  such  an  extent  that  the  sea
broke  through,  and  in  171)5  carried  away  the  whole  villa <^e  in
one  night,  and  penetrated  150  yards  inland,  where  it  has
maintained  its  ground  ever  since,  the   new   village    having

*  Hibbert,  p.  ,519.  t  Ibid.


Ch.  XX.]  ESTUARY  OF  THE  T AY— BELL  ROCK.  513

been  built  farther  inland  on  the  new  shore.  In  the  Bay  of
Montrose,  we  find  the  North  Esk  and  the  South  Esk  rivers
pouring  annually  into  the  sea  large  quantities  of  sand  and
2)ebbles ;  yet  they  have  formed  no  deltas,  for  the  waves,  aided
by  the  current,  setting  across  their  mouths,  sweep  away  all
the  materials.  Considerable  beds  of  shingle,  brought  down
by  the  North  Esk,  are  seen  along  the  beach.

Proceeding  southwards,  we  learn  that  at  Arbroath,  in  For-
farshire, which  stands  on  a  rock  of  red  sandstone,  gardens
and  houses  have  been  carried  away  since  the  commencement
of  the  present  century  by  encroachments  of  the  sea.  In  the
same  county,  at  Button  Ness,  it  had  become  necessary,  before
1828,  to  remove  the  lighthouses  at  the  mouth  of  the  estuary
of  the  Tay,  which  were  built  on  a  tract  of  blown  sand,  the
sea  having  encroached  for  three-quarters  of  a  mile.

Estuary  of  the  Tay — Bell-Rock  Lighthouse, — The  combined
power  which  waves  and  currents  can  exert  in  estuaries  (a
term  which  I  confine  to  bays  entered  both  by  rivers  and  the
tides  of  the  sea)  was  remarkably  exhibited  during  the  build-
ing of  the  Bell-Bock  Lighthouse,  off  the  mouth  of  the  Tay.
The  Bell  Rock  is  a  sunken  reef,  consisting  of  red  sandstone,
being  from  twelve  to  sixteen  feet  under  the  surface  at  high
water,  and  about  twelve  miles  from  the  mainland.  At  the
distance  of  100  yards,  there  is  a  depth,  in  all  directions,  of
two  or  three  fathoms  at  low  water.  In  1807,  during  the
erection  of  the  lighthouse,  six  large  blocks  of  granite,  which
had  been  landed  on  the  reef,  were  removed  by  the  force  of
the  sea,  and  thrown  over  a  rising  ledge  to  the  distance  of
twelve  or  fifteen  paces;  and  an  anchor,  weighing  about  22
ewt.,  was  thrown  up  upon  the  rock.*  Mr.  Stevenson  infonns
us,  moreover,  that  drift  stones,  measuring  upwards  of  thirty
cubic  feet,  or  more  than  two  tons'  weight,  have,  during
storms,  been  often  cast  uj)on  the  rock  from  the  deep  water.f

Coaat  of  Fife  and  Firth  of  Forth. — On  the  coast  of  Fife,  at
St.  Andrew's,  a  tract  of  land,  said  to  have  intervened  between
the  castle  of  Cardinal  Beaton  and  the  sea,  has  been  entirely

*  Account  of  Erection  of  Bell-Rock  t  Ed.  Phil.   Journ.   vol.  iii.   p.  54.

Lighthouse  p.  163.  1820.

VOL.  I.  L  L


oU


EyCRuACH3IENTS  OF  THE  SEA  OX


lCm,SL


8w«>pt  away,  as  were  the  last  remains  of  the  I^ory  of  Cnil,
in  l¥)'^.  On  both  sides  of  the  Firth  of  Forth,  land  has  been
consumed;  at  North  R-rwick  in  particolar,  and  at  Xewharen,
where  an  arsenal  and  dock,  built  in  the  reign  of  James  IT.,
in  the  fifteenth  century,  has  been  overflowed.

Eaift  coast  of  Enrjland, — If  we  now  proceed  to  the  English
coast,  we  find  records  of  numerous  lands  hairinfif  been  des-
troyed in  Northumberland,  as  those  near  Bamborongfa  and
Holy  LsLiDd,  and  at  Tynemouth  Castle,  which  now  OYerhan^
the  sea,  althouj^h  formerly  separated  from  it  by  a  strip  (rf
land.  At  Hartlepool,  and  several  other  parts  of  the  coast  of
Durham  composed  of  magnesian  limestone,  the  sea  >iag  maA*
considerable  inroads.

Coast  of  Yorkshire. — Almost  the  whole  coast  of  Xorkshiie,
from  the  mouth  of  the  Tees  to  that  of  the  Hnmber  is  in  a
state  of  gradual  dilapidation.  That  part  of  the  cliffs  whicli
consists  of  lias,  the  oolite  series,  and  chalk,  decays  slowlr.
These  rocks  present  abrupt  and  naked  precipices,  often  300
feet  in  height ;  and  it  is  only  at  a  few  points  that  the  grass?
covering  of  the  sloping  talus  marks  a  temporary  relaxation
of  the  erosive  action  of  the  sea.  The  chalk  cliffs  are  worn
into  caves  and  needles  in  the  projecting  headland  of  flam-
borough,  where  they  are  decomposed  by  the  sea  sprav,  and
slowly  crumble  away.  But  the  waste  is  most  rapid  between
that  promontory  and  Spurn  Point,  or  the  coast  of  Holdemess,
as  it  is  called,  a  tract  consisting  of  beds  of  clay,  g^ravel,  sand,
and  chalk  rubble.  The  argillaceous  beds  which  are  irregu-
larly intermixed  cause  many  springs  to  be  thrown  out,  and
this  facilitates  the  undermining  process,  the  waves  beating
against  th«'m,  and  a  strong  current  setting  chiefly  from,  the
north.  The  wasteful  action  is  very  conspicuous  at  Dimlin^^on
Height,  the  loftiest  point  in  Holdemess,  where  the  beacon
stands  on  a  clifi'  1 4G  feet  above  high  water,  composed  of  clav
with  pt.'bbles  scatten^d  through  it.*  *  For  man  j  years  '  says
Professor  PLillii>s,  'the  rate  at  which  the  cliffs  recede  from
Bridlington  to  Spurn,  a  distance  of  thirty-six  miles,  has  been
found  by  measurement  to  equal  on  an  average  two  and  a
quarter  yards  annually,  which  upon  thirty-six  miles  of  coast

*  Phillii/s's  Geolog}'  of  Yorkfihire,  p.  61.


Ch.  XX.]  THE  EASTERN  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  615

would  amount  to  about  thirty  acres  a  year.  At  this  rate,  the
coast,  the  mean  height  of  which  above  the  sea  is  about  forty
feet,  has  lost  one  mile  in  breadth  since  the  Norman  Conquest,
and  more  than  two  miles  since  the  occupation  of  York
(Eboracum)  by  the  Eomans/  *  The  extent  of  this  denudation,
as  estimated  by  the  number  of  cubic  feet  of  matter  removed
annually,  will  be  again  spoken  of  in  Chapter  xxii.

In  the  old  maps  of  Yorkshire,  we  find  spots,  now  sand-
banks in  the  sea,  marked  as  the  ancient  sites  of  the  towns
and  villages  of  Auburn,  Hartbnm,  and  Hyde.     *  Of  Hyde,'
says  Pennant,  *  only  the  tradition  is  left ;  and  near  the  vil-
lage of  Hornsea,  a  street  called  Hornsea  Beck  has  long  since
been  swallowed. 't    Owthorne  and  its  church  have  also  been
in  great  part  destroyed,  and  the  village  of  Kilnsea ;  but  these
villages  have  been  rebuilt  farther  inland.    The  annual  rate  of
encroachment  at  Owthorne  for  several  years  preceding  1830
is  stated  to  have  averaged  about  four  yards.     Not  unreason-
able fears  are  entertained  that  at  some  future  time  the  Spurn
Point  will  become  an  island,  and  that  the  ocean,  entering
into  the  estuary  of  the  Humber,  will  cause  great  devastation.^
Pennant,  after  speaking  of  the  silting  up  of  some  ancient
ports  in  that  estuary,  observes,  *  But,  in  return,  the  sea  has
made  most  ample  reprisals ;  the  site,  and  even  the  very  names
of  several  places,  once  towns  of  note  upon  the  Humber,  are
now  only   recorded   in    history.      Ravensper  was    at    one
time  a  rival  to  Hull  (Madox,  Ant.  Exch.  i.  422),  and  a  port
so  very  considerable  in  1332,  that  Edward  Baliol  and  the
confederated  English  barons  sailed  from  hence   to  invade
Scotland ;  and  Henry  IV.,  in  1399,  made  choice  of  this  port
to  land  at,  to  efiect  the  deposal  of  Eichard  II. ;  yet  the
whole  of  this  has  long  since  been  devoured  by  the  merciless
ocean ;  extensive  sands,  dry  at  low  water,  are  to  be  seen  in
their  stead.' §

Pennant  describes  Spurn  Head  as  a  promontory  in  the  form

*  Rivers,  Mountains,  and  Sea-Coast  J  Phillips's   Geology  of  Yorkshiro,

of  Yorkshire,  p.  122.     1853,  London.  p.  60.

t  Arctic  Zoology,  vol.  i.  p.  10.  In-  §  Arctic  Zoology,  vol.  i.  p.  13.  In-
troduction, tioduction.

L  L  2


516  EXCROACHMEXTS  OF  THE  SEA   OX  [Ch.  SX.

of  a  sickle,  and  says  the  land,  for  some  miles  to  the  nortli,
was  *  perpetually  preyed  on  by  the  fury  of  the  German  Sea,
which  devours  whole  acres  at  a  time,  and  exposes  on  the
shores  considerable  quantities  of  l>eautiful  amber.'

Llncohishire. — The  maritime  district  of  Lincolnshire  con-
sists chiefly  of  lands  that  lie  below  the  level  of  the  sea,  beiu^
protected  by  embankments.  Some  of  the  fens  "ivere  embanked
and  drained  by  the  Romans  ;  but  after  their  departure  the
sea  returned,  and  large  tracts  were  covered  with  beds  of  silt
containing  marine  shells,  now  again  converted  into  produc-
tive lands.  Many  dreadful  catastrophes  by  incursions  of  the
sea  are  recorded,  whereby  several  parishes  have  been  at
different  times  overwhelmed.

Xorfolh. — The  decav  of  the  cliffs  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  is
incessant.  At  Hunstanton,  on  the  north,  the  undermining
of  the  lower  arenaceous  beds  at  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  causes
masses  of  red  and  white  chalk  to  be  precipitated  from  above.
Between  Hunstanton  and  Wey bourne,  low  hills,  or  dunes,  of
blown  sand,  are  formed  along  the  shore,  from  fifty  to  sixty
feet  high.  They  are  conq)Osed  of  dry  sand,  bound  in  a  com-
pact mass  by  the  long  creeping  roots  of  the  plant  called
^Marram  {Armulo  arena rin).  Such  is  the  present  set  of  the
tides  that  the  harbours  of  Clay,  Wells,  and  other  places,  are
securely  defended  by  these  barriers  ;  affording  a  clear  proof
that  it  is  not  the  strength  of  the  material  at  particular  points
that  determines  whether  the  sea  shall  be  progressive  or
stationary,  but  the  general  contour  of  the  coast.

The  waves  constantly  undermine  the  low  chalk  clifb,
covered  with  sand  and  clay,  between  Weyboume  and  Sher-
riii;^liam,  a  certain  ix)rtion  of  them  being  annually  removed.
At  the  latter  town  I  ascertained,  in  1820,  some  facts  which
throw  light  on  the  rate  at  which  the  sea  gains  upon  the  land.
It  was  computed,  when  the  present  inn  was  built,  in  1805,
that  it  would  require  seventy  years  for  the  sea  to  reach  the
spot:  the  mean  loss  of  land  being  calculated,  from  previous
ob.servations,  to  bo  somewliat  less  than  one  3'ard  aunuallv.
The  distance  between  the  house  and  the  sea  was  fifty  yards*
but  no  allowance  was  made  for  the  slope  of  the  ground  being
fovii  the  sea,  in  consequence  of  which  the  waste  was  natu-


Ch.  XX.]  THE  EASTERN  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  517

rally  accelerated  every  year,  as  the  cliff  grew  lower,  there
being  at  each  succeeding  period  less  matter  to  remove  when
portions  of  equal  area  fell  down.  Between  the  years  1824
and  1829,  no  less  than  seventeen  yards  were  swept  away,
and  only  a  small  garden  was  then  left  betweeu  the  building
and  the  sea.  There  was,  in  1829,  a  depth  of  twenty  feet
(sufficient  to  float  a  frigate)  at  one  point  in  the  harbour  of
that  port,  where,  only  forty-eight  years  before,  there  stood  a
cliff  fifty  feet  high,  with  houses  upon  it !  If  once  in  half  a
century  an  equal  amount  of  change  were  produced  suddenly
by  the  momentary  shock  of  an  earthquake,  history  would  be
filled  with  records  of  such  wonderful  revolutions  of  the
earth's  surface  ;  but  if  the  conversion  of  high  land  into  deep
sea  be  gradual,  it  excites  only  local  attention.  The  flag-staff
of  the  Preventive  Service  station,  on  the  south  side  of  this
harbour,  was  thrice  removed  inland  between  the  years  1814
and  1829,  in  consequence  of  the  advance  of  the  sea.

Farther  to  the  south  we  find  cliffs,  composed,  like  those  of
Holderness  before  mentioned,  of  alternating  strata  of  blue
clay,  gravel,  loam,  and  fine  sand.  Although  they  sometimes
exceed  300  feet  in  height,  the  havoc  made  on  the  coast  is
most  formidable.  The  whole  site  of  ancient  Cromer  now
forms  part  of  the  German  Ocean,  the  inhabitants  having
gradually  retreated  inland  to  their  present  situation,
whence  the  sea  still  threatens  to  dislodge  them.  In  the
winter  of  1825,  a  fallen  mass  was  precipitated  from  near  the
lighthouse,  which  covered  twelve  acres,  extending  far  into
the  sea,  the  cliffs  being  250  feet  in  height.*  The  undermin-
ing by  springs  has  sometimes  caused  large  portions  of  the
upper  part  of  the  cliffs,  with  houses  still  standing  upon  them,
to  give  way,  so  that  it  is  impossible,  by  erecting  breakwaters
at  the  base  of  the  cliffs,  permanently  to  ward  off  the  danger.
Mr.  Redman  states  that  during  the  twenty-three  years  which
elapsed  between  the  Ordnance  Survey  of  1838  and  the  year
18G1,  a  portion  of  the  cliff,  composed  of  sand  and  clay,  be-
tween Cromer  and  Mundesley,  receded  330  feet,  amounting
to  a  mean  annual  waste  of  fourteen  feet ;  and  the  cliff  at

*  Taylor  g  Geology  of  Ea6t  Norfolk,  p.  32.


518


ESCROACHiTESTS  OF  THE  SEA   OS


[CkS.


Hnppisburgh  has,  according  to  his  estimate,  ^rasted  at  the  nt«
of  aVxmt  seven  feet  a  year  for  sixtr  years  preceding  1864.*

On  the  same  coast,  says  Mr.  R.  C  Taylor,  the  ancient  ril-
Inges  of  Sbipden,  Wimpwell,  and  Eccles  have  disappeared:
ueveral  manors  and  large  portions  of  neighboaring  psrishe)
having.  pit?ce  aftor  piecp,  been  swallowed  np ;  nor  has  there
lA-cn  any  intennisijion,  from  time  immemorial,  in  the  lavagei
of  the  sea  along  a  line  of  coast  twenty  miles  in  lengrth,  on


WfT  uf  lliv  Liiri.d  Cliurcli  of  V-rcks,  Korfolk,  i.D.  1839.


iG  inliinil  si'ipp  of  llip  liills  of  blown  fRoA  U  g1
tlie  I.i^'litliou.'t  of  IlaiWroufh.  X.W.  of  tlie  1


this  Tiew,  with
a  (he  dinaDce.


which  these  places  stood. t  Of  Eceles,  however,  a  monumeDt
still  remiiins  in  the  ruined  tower  of  tlie  old  church.  So  early
MS  1605  the  inhabitants  petitioned  James  I.  for  a  reduction
f»f  taxes,  as  300  acres  of  land,  and  all  their  houses,  save  four-
liten,  had  then  been  destroyed  by  the  sea,  Xot  one-half
that  number  of  acres  now  remains  in  the  parish,  and  hills
of  blown  sjuid,  called  '  Marrams '  from  tlie  plant  by  wliich
tliey   are  ovei^rown,  now  occupy   the  site   of   the    houses


ash,  J.  ]!.  JtcdmiiD,  C.E.,  IVw.  InM.
vil  Knt'in<!sn',  Tol.  ziiii.  pp.  31-33,


t^  Tnjlor-s  Gcologj-  of  Eatt   Norfolk,


Ch.  XX.]  THE  EASTEBS  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  519

which  were  still  extant  in  1605.  When  I  viaited  the  spot
in  1839,  I  found  the  tower  of  the  church  half  buried  in  the
dunes  of  aajid,  as  represented  in  the  drawing  {fig.  50),  and
twenty-three  years  afterwards  my  friend  the  Rev.  S.  W.
King  made  a  sketch  from  nearly  the  same  spot,  which  is
given  in  fig.  51,  In  the  interval  the  sand  dunes,  which  are
always  moving  inland,  had  considerably  altered  their  position
in  reference  to  the  tower,  which  after  the  storm  of  1862  was

Eg.  51.


EccUb  Towcp  as  it  «ppenred  after  the  storm  of  .N'ovombep  1862,  from  n  drawing
by  Bev.  S.  W.  King,  taken  from  naarly  the  same  pot.ilioii  na  flg.  fio.

seen  as  represented  in  fig.  51,  on  the  sea-side,  the  waves
having  washed  the  foundations  of  the  edi6ce.*  The  level
of  the  base  of  the  tower,  and  of  the  ruins  of  the  nave  and
chancel  of  the  church  (see  fig.  51)  has  now  such  a  relation
to  high-water  mark,  that  Mr.  King  naturally  suggests  that
there  must  have  been  a  subsidence  of  this  part  of  the  coast
since  the  church  was  built.  The  precise  date  of  ita  erection
is  unknown,  but  the  upper  or  octagonal  part  of  the  tower  is
supposed  to  date  from  the  I6th  century,  and  this  addition

*  Mr.  Redmnn  hjis  pven  an  i
of  Eoclos  Toirer  as  s^en  by  him  in


620  SILTING  UP  OF  ESTUARIES.  [Ck.  XL

would  not  have  been  made  at  that  period  had  the  site  been
considered  as  in  danger  from  the  encroachments  of  the  sea.

Observations  on  the  level  of  the  foundations  of  bnildingi
now  within  reach  of  the  tide  may  hereafter  lead  izs  to  an
exact  estimate  of  a  change  of  level  if  there  be  one  in  pro-
gress, although,  antecedently  to  experience,  we  might  hare
anticipated  that  a  wasting  coast  was  less  favourable  than  anj
other  for  ascertaining  whether  the  land  was  rising,  sinking,
or  stationary.  As  the  tide  rises  eight  feet  at  liowestoft,  and
sixteen  at  Cromer,  it  becomes  a  question  whether  in  the
course  of  four  or  five  centuries  its  mean  level  at  any  giren
point  on  this  eastern  coast  may  vary  sufficiently  to  explain
the  present  position  of  the  ruined  church  at  £eeles  relativeh
to  high-water  mark,  but  I  am  not  aware  that  we  haTe
any  recorded  data  for  confirming  or  inralidatiiig  snch  tn
hypothesis.

M.  E.  de  Beaumont  has  suggested  that  sand-dnnes  in
Holland  and  other  countries  may  serve  as  natnral  chrono-
meters, by  which  the  date  of  the  existing  continents  may  be
ascertained.  The  sands,  he  says,  are  continually  blown  b-
land  by  the  force  of  the  winds,  and  by  observing  the  rate  of
their  march  we  may  calculate  the  period  when  the  move-
ment commenced.*  But  the  example  just  given  will  satisfy
every  ge^li^gist  that  we  cannot  ascertain  the  starting-point
of  dunes,  all  coasts  being  liable  to  waste,  and  the  shores  of
the  Low  Countries  in  particular  being  not  only  exposed  to
inroads  of  the  sea,  but,  as  M.  do  Beaumout  himself  has  well
shown,  liavin<jf  even  in  historical  times  underffoue  a  chan^^
of  level.  The  dunes  may  indeed,  in  some  cases,  be  made
use  of  as  chronometers,  to  enable  us  to  assign  a  minimnm
of  antiquity  to  existing  eoast-lines;  but  this  test  must  be
applied  with  great  caution,  so  variable  is  the  rate  at  which
the  sands  mav  advance  into  the  interior.

Hills  of  blown  sand,  between  Eecles  and  Winterton,  have
barred  up  and  excluded  the  tide  for  manv  hundred  vears
from  the  mouths  of  several  small  estuaries;  but  there  are
records  of  nine  breaches,  from  20  to  120  yards  wide,  havin^^

*  D-j  Dfaumor.t,  Ge-.logie  Pratique,  p.  218^


Ch.  XX.]  SILTING  UP  OF  ESTUARIES.  521

been  made  through  these,  by  which  immense  damage  was
done  to  the  low  grounds  in  the  interior.  A  few  miles  south
of  Happisburgh,  also,  are  hills  of  blown  sand,  which  extend
to  Yarmouth.  These  dunes  afford  a  temporary  protection
to  the  coast,  and  an  inland  cliff  about  a  mile  long,  at  Win-
terton,  shows  clearly  that  at  that  point  the  sea  must  have
penetrated  formerly  farther  than  at  present.

Silting  up  of  estuaries. — At  Yarmouth,  the  sea  has  not
advanced  upon  the  sands  in  the  slightest  degree  since  the
reign  of  Elizabeth.  In  the  time  of  the  Saxons,  a  great
estuary  extended  as  far  as  Norwich,  which  city  is  represented
even  in  the  thii'teenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  as  ^situ-
ated on  the  banks  of  an  arm  of  the  sea.'  The  sands
whereon  Yarmouth  is  built  first  became  firm  and  habitable
ground  about  the  year  1008,  from  which  time  a  line  of  dunes
has  gradually  increased  in  height  and  breadth,  stretching
across  the  whole  entrance  of  the  ancient  estuary,  and  ob-
structing the  ingress  of  the  tides  so  completely  that  they
are  only  admitted  by  the  naiTOw  passage  which  the  river
keeps  open,  and  which  has  gradually  shifted  several  miles
to  the  south.  The  ordinary  tides  at  the  river's  mouth  rise,
at  present,  only  to  the  height  of  three  or  four  feet,  the  spring
tides  to  about  eight  or  nine.

By  the  exclusion  of  the  sea,  thousands  of  acres  in  the  in-
terior have  become  cultivated  lands  ;  and,  exclusive  of  smaller
pools,  upwards  of  sixty  freshwater  lakes  have  been  formed,
varying  in  depth  from  fifteen  to  thirty  feet,  and  in  extent
from  one  acre  to  twelve  hundred.*  The  Yare,  and  other
rivers,  frequently  communicate  with  these  sheets  of  water ;
and  thus  tliey  are  liable  to  be  filled  up  gradually  with  lacus-
trine and  fluviatile  deposits,  and  to  be  converted  into  land
covered  with  forests.  Yet  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  the
acquisition  of  new  land  fit  for  cultivation  in  Norfolk  and
Sulfolk  indicates  any  permanent  growth  of  the  eastern  limits
of  our  island  to  compensate  its  reiterated  losses.  No  delta
can  form  on  such  a  shore.

In  the  sea  immediately  off  Yarmouth  is  a  great  range  of

»  Taylor*»  Geology  of  East  Norfolk,  p.  10.


522  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  THE  SEA  [CtL  XX.

sand-banks  parallel  to  the  shore,  the  shape  of  which  iraries
slowly  from  year  to  year,  and  often  suddenly  after  great
storms.  Captain  Hewitt,  B.N.,  found  in  these  banks,  in  1836,
a  broad  channel  sixty-five  feet  deep,  where  there  was  only  a
depth  of  four  feet  during  a  prior  survey  in  1822.  The  sea  had
excavated  to  the  depth  of  sixty  feet  in  the  course  of  fourteen
years,  or  perhaps  a  shorter  period.  The  new  channel  thus
formed  served  in  1838  for  the  entrance  of  ships  into  Yarmouth
Soads ;  and  the  magnitude  of  this  change  shows  how  easily
a  new  set  of  the  waves  and  currents  might  cause  the  sub-
mergence of  the  land  gained  within  the  ancient  estuary  of
the  Tare.

That  great  banks  should  be  thrown  across  the  month  of
estuaries  on  our  eastern  coast,  where  there  is  not  a  large  body
of  river- water  to  maintain  an  open  channel,  is  perfectly  intel-
ligible, when  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  marine  current,  sweep-
ing along  the  coast,  is  charged  with  the  materials  of  wasting
cliflFs,  and  ready  to  form  a  bar  anywhere  the  instant  its  course
is  interrupted  or  checked  by  any  opposing  stream.  The
mouth  of  the  Yare  has  been,  within  the  last  five  centuries,
diverted  about  four  miles  to  the  south.  In  like  manner  it  is
evident  that,  at  some  remote  period,  the  river  Aide  entered
the  sea  at  Aldborough,  until  its  ancient  outlet  was  barred  up
and  at  length  transfen-ed  to  a  point  no  less  than  ten  miles
distant  to  the  south-west.  In  this  case,  ridges  of  sand
and  shingle,  like  those  of  Lowestoft  Ness,  which  will  be
described  by-and-by,  have  been  thrown  up  between  the  river
and  the  sea ;  and  the  ancient  sea-cliflF  is  now  to  be  seen  in-
land.    (See  fig.  52.)

It  may  be  asked  why  the  rivers  on  our  east  coast  are  always
deflected  southwards,  although  the  tidal  current  flows  alter-
nately from  the  south  and  north  ?  The  cause  is  to  be  found
in  the  superior  force  of  what  is  commonly  called  *  the  flood
tide  from  the  north,'  a  tidal  wave  derived  from  the  Atlantic,
a  small  part  of  which  passes  eastward  up  the  English  Channel,
and  through  the  Straits  of  Dover  and  then  northwards,  while
the  principal  body  of  water,  moving  much  more  rapidly  in  a
more  open  sea,  on  the  western  side  of  Britain,  first  passes


Ch.  XXJ


ON  THE  SUFFOLK  COAST.


523


the  Orkneys,  and  then,  taming,  flows  down  between  Norway
and  Scotland,  and  sweeps  with  great  velocity  along  our
eastern  coast.  It  is  well  known  that  the  highest  tides  on
this  coast  are  occasioned  by  a  powerful  north-west  wind,
which  raises  the  eastern  part  of  the  Atlantic,  and  causes  it
to  pour  a  greater  volume  of  water  into  the  German  Ocean.
This  circumstance  of  a  violent  off-shore  wind  being  attended
with  a  rise  of  the  waters,  instead  of  a  general  retreat  of  the
sea,  naturally  excites  the  wonder  of  the  inhabitants  of  our
coast  In  many  districts  they  look  with  conBdence  for  a
rich  harvest  of  that  valuable  manure,  the  sea-weed,  when
the  north-westerly  gales  prevail,  and  are  rarely  disap-
pointed.

Coast  of  Suffolk. — The  cliflFs  of  Suffolk,  to  which  we  next

Fig.  62.


Map  of  Lowestoft  Ness,  Suffolk.*


a,  a.  The  dotted  lines  express  a  series  of  sand  and  shingle,  forming  the
extremity  of  the  triangular  space  called  the  Ness.

h,  6,  b.  The  dark  line  represents  the  inland  cliff  on  which  the  town  of
Lowestoft  stands,  between  which  and  the  sea  is  thb  Ness.

proceed,  are  somewhat  less  elevated  than  those  of  Norfolk,
but  composed  of  similar  alternations  of  clay,  sand,  and
gravel.  From  Gorleston,  in  Suffolk,  to  within  a  few  miles
north  of  Lowestoft,  the  cliffs  are  being  slowly  undermined.
Near  the  last-mentioned  town  there  is  an  inland  cliff  about
sixty  feet  high,  the  sloping  talus  of  which  is  covered  with  turf
and  heath.  Between  the  cliff  and  the  sea  is  a  low  flat  tract  of
sand,  called  the  Ness,  nearly  three  miles  long,  and  for  the  most
part  out  of  reach  of  the  highest  tides  (see  fig.  52).  The  point

»  From  ytt.  R.  C.  Taylor^s  Mem.    See  Phil.  Mag.  Oct.  1827,  p.  297.


524  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  THE  SEA   ON  [Ch.  XX,

of  the  Ness  projects  from  the  base  of  the  original  cliff  to  the
distance  of  6G0  yards.  This  accession  of  land,  says  Mr.
Taylor,  has  been  effected  at  distinct  and  distant  intervals,
by  the  influence  of  currents  running  between  the  land
and  a  shoal  called  the  Holm  Sand,  about  a  mile  off  Lowes-
toft. The  lines  of  growth  in  the  Ness  are  indicated  by  a
series  of  concentric  ridges  or  banks  enclosing  limited  areas,
and  several  of  these  rideres  have  been  formed  within  the
observation  of  persons  now  living.  A  rampart  of  heavy
materials  is  first  thrown  up  to  an  unusual  altitude  by  some
extraordinary  tide  attended  with  a  violent  gale.  Subse-
quent tides  extend  the  base  of  this  high  bank  of  shingle,  and
the  interstices  are  then  filled  with  sand  blown  from  the
beach.  The  Arundo  and  other  sea-side  plants  by  degrees
obtain  a  footing ;  and  creeping  jilong  the  ridge,  give  solidity
to  the  mass,  and  form  in  some  cases  a  matted  covering  of
turf.  Meanwhile  another  mound  is  forming  externally,
which  by  the  like  process  rises  and  gives  protection  to  the
first.  If  the  sea  forces  its  way  through  one  of  the  external
and  incomplete  mounds,  the  breach  is  soon  repaired.  After
a  while  the  maritime  plants  within  the  areas  enclosed  by
these  embankments  are  succeeded  by  a  better  species  of
herbage  affording  good  pasturage,  and  the  sands  become
sufficiently  firm  to  support  buildings.

Destruction  of  Dumuich  by  the  sea. — Of  the  gradual  destruc-
tion of  Dunwich,  once  the  most  considerable  seaport  on  this
coast,  we  hav^e  many  authentic  records.  Gardner,  in  his
history  of  that  borough,  published  in  1754,  shows,  by  refer-
ence to  documents,  beginning  with  Doomsday  Book,  that
the  cliffs  at  Dunwich,  Southwold,  Easton,  and  Pakefield
have  been  always  subject  to  waste.  At  Dunwich,  in
particular,  two  tracts  of  land  which  had  been  taxed  in  the
eleventh  century,  in  the  time  of  King  Edward  the  Confessor,
are  mentioned,  in  the  Conqueror's  survey,  made  but  a  few
3'ears  afterwards,  as  having  been  devoured  by  the  sea.  The
losses,  at  a  subsequent  period,  of  a  monastery, — at  another
of  several  churches, — afterwards  of  the  old  port, — then  of
four  hundred  houses  at  once, — of  the  church  of  St.  Leonard,
the  high-road,  town-hall,  gaol,  and  many  other  buildings*


Ch.  XX.]  THE  EASTERN  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  S25

are  mentioned,  with  the  dates  when  they  perished.  It  is
stated  that,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  not  one  quarter  of
the  town  was  left  standing ;  yet,  the  inhabitants  retreating
inland,  the  name  was  preserved,  as  has  been  the  case  with
many  other  ports,  when  then*  ancient  site  has  been  blotted
out.  There  is,  however,  a  church,  of  considerable  antiquity,  ^
still  standing,  the  last  of  twelve  mentioned  in  some  records.
In  1 740,  the  laying  open  of  the  churchyard  of  St.  Nicholas
and  St.  Francis,  in  the  sea-cliffs,  is  well  described  by
Gardner,  with  the  cofBns  and  skeletons  exposed  to  view —
some  lying  on  the  beach,  and  rocked

In  cradle  of  the  rude  imperious  surge.

Of  these  cemeteries  no  remains  can  now  be  seen.  Eay  also
says,  *  that  ancient  writings  make  mention  of  a  wood  a  mile
and  a  half  to  the  east  of  Dunwich,  the  site  of  which  must  at
present  be  so  far  within  the  sea.'*  This  city,  once  so  flourish-
ing and  populous,  is  now  a  small  village,  with  about  twenty
houses  and  one  hundred  inhabitants.

There  is  an  old  tradition,  *that  the  tailors  sat  in  their
shops  at  Dunwich,  and  saw  the  ships  in  Yarmouth  Bay ; '
but  when  we  consider  how  far  the  coast  at  Lowestoft  Ness
l>rojects  between  these  places,  we  cannot  give  credit  to  the
tale,  which,  nevertheless,  proves  how  much  the  inroads  of
the  sea  in  times  of  old  had  prompted  men  of  lively  imagina-
tion to  indulge  their  taste  for  the  marvellous.

Gardner's  description  of  the  cemeteries  laid  open  by  the
waves  reminds  us  of  the  scene  which  has  been  so  well
depicted  by  Bewick,t  and  of  which  numerous  points  on  the
same  coast  might  have  suggested  the  idea.  On  the  verge  of
a  cliff,  which  the  sea  has  undermined,  are  represented  the
unshaken  tower  and  western  end  of  an  abbey.  The  eastern
aisle  is  gone,  and  the  pillars  of  the  cloister  are  soon  to  follow.
The  waves  have  almost  isolated  the  promontory,  and  invaded
the  cemetery,  where  they  have  made  sport  with  the  mortal
relics,  and  thrown  up  a  skull  upon  the  beach.  In  the  fore-
«;fround  is  seen  a  broken  tombstone,  erected,  as  its  legend

*  Const-quoncos  of  the  Deluge,  Phys.  t  History  of  British  Birds,  rol.  ii.  p.

Theol.  Discourses.  220,  ed.  18*21.


526  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  THE  SEA.  [Gh.  XX.

tells,  *to  perpetuate  the  memory* — of  one  whose  name  is
obliterated,  as  is  that  of  the  county  for  which  he  was  *  Costos
Botulorum.'  A  cormorant  is  perched  on  the  monument,  de-
filing it,  as  if  to  remind  some  moraliser,  like  Hamlet,  of 'the
base  uses '  to  which  things  sacred  may  be  turned.  Had  this
excellent  artist  desired  to  satirize  certain  popular  theories  of
geology,  he  might  have  inscribed  the  stone  to  the  memory  of
some  philosopher  who  taught  *  the  permanency  of  existing
continents ' — ^  the  era  of  repose  * — *  the  impotence  of  modem
causes.'

The  incursions  of  the  sea  at  Aldborough  were  formerly  very
destructive,  and  this  borough  is  known  to  have  been  once
situated  a  quarter  of  a  mile  east  of  the  present  shore.  The
inhabitants  continued  to  build  farther  inland,  till  they  arrived
at  the  extremity  of  their  property,  and  then  the  town  de-
cayed greatly :  but  two  sand-banks,  thrown  up  at  a  short
distance,  now  afford  a  temporary  safeguard  to  the  coast.
Between  these  banks  and  the  present  shore,  where  the  cur-
rent now  flows,  the  sea  is  twenty-four  feet  deep  on  the  spot
where  the  town  formerly  stood.

Essex. — Harwich  is  said  to  have  owed  its  rise  to  the  de-
struction of  Orwell,  a  town  which  stood  on  the  spot  now
called  '  the  west  rocks,'  and  was  overwhelmed  by  an  inroad
of  the  sea  since  the  Conquest.  Apprehensions  have  been
entertained  that  the  isthmus  on  which  Harwich  stands  may
at  no  remote  period  become  an  island,  for  the  sea  may  be
expected  to  make  a  breach  near  Lower  Dovercourt,  where
Beacon  CliflF  is  composed  of  horizontal  beds  of  London  clay
containing  septaria.  It  had  wasted  away  considerably
between  the  years  1829  and  18*38,  at  both  which  periods  I
examined  this  coast.  In  that  short  interval  several  gardens
and  many  houses  had  been  swept  into  the  sea,  and  in  April
1838  a  whole  street  was  threatened  with  destruction.  The
advance  of  the  sea  is  much  accelerated  by  the  traffic  carried
on  in  septaria,  which  are  shipped  off  for  cement  as  fast  as
they  fall  down  upon  the  beach.  These  stones,  if  allowed  to
remain  in  heaps  on  the  shore,  would  break  the  force  of  the
waves,  and  retard  the  conversion  of  the  peninsula  into  an
island,  an  event  which  might  be  followed  by  the  destruction


Ch.  XX.]  KENT— THE  ISLE  OF  SHEPPEY.  527

of  the  town  of  Harwich.  Captain  Washington,  E.N.,  as-
certained, in  1847,  that  Beacon  Cliff,  above  mentioned,  which
is  about  fifty  feet  high,  had  given  way  at  the  rate  of  forty
feet  in  forty-seven  years,  between  1709  and  1756:  eighty
feet  between  1756  and  1804;  and  three  hundred  and  fifty
feet  between  the  latter  period  and  184)  ;  showing  a  I'apidly
accelerated  rate  of  destruction.*

Among  other  losses  it  is  recorded  that,  since  the  year
1807,  a  field  called  the  Vicar's  Field,  which  belonged  to  the
living  of  Harwich,  has  been  overwhelmed  ;t  and  in  the  year
1820  there  was  a  considerable  space  between  the  battery  at
Harwich,  built  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  and
the  sea;  part  of  the  fortification  had  been  swept  away  in
1829,  and  the  rest  then  overhung  the  water.

At  Walton-on-the-Naze,  in  the  same  county,  the  cliffs,
composed  of  London  clay,  capped  by  the  shelly  sands  of  the
crag,  reach  the  height  of  about  100  feet,  and  are  annually
undermined  by  the  waves.  The  old  churchyard  at  Walton
has  been  washed  away,  and  the  cliffs  to  the  south  are  con-
stantly disappearing.

Kent. — Isle  of  Sheppey. — On  the  coast  bounding  the  estuary
of  the  Thames,  there  are  numerous  examples  both  of  the  gain
and  loss  of  land.  The  Isle  of  Sheppey,  which  is  now  about
six  miles  long  by  four  in  breadth,  is  composed  of  London
clay.  The  cliffs  on  the  north,  which  are  from  100  to  200
feet  high,  decay  rapidly,  fifty  acres  having  been  lost  in  twenty
years,  between  1810  and  1830.  The  church  at  Minster,  now
near  the  coast,  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  middle  of  the
island  in  1780;  and  if  the  present  rate  of  destruction  should
continue,  we  might  calculate  the  period,  and  that  not  a  very
remote  one,  when  the  whole  island  will  be  annihilated.  On
the  coast  of  the  mainland,  to  the  east  of  Sheppey,  is  Heme
Bay  ;  a  place  still  retaining  the  name  of  a  bay,  although  the
term  is  no  longer  appropriate,  as  the  waves  and  currents  have
swept  away  the  ancient  headlands.  There  was  formerly  a
small  promontory  in  the  line  of  the  shoals  where  the  present


*  Tidal     HarlKJur    Commissioners*  t  On  the  anthoritj  of  Dp.  Mitchell,

First  Report,  1845,  p.  176.  F.G.S.


r)28  ESCHOACHMEXTS  OF  THE  SEA  [Cm.  XL

pier  is  built,  by  which  the  larger  bay  was  divided  into  two
oalled  tho  Upper  and  Lower.*

Still  fjiithcr  east  staii  Ja  tlie  church  of  Reculver,  upon  a  cliff,
about  twenty-five  f'l-et  hii;;h,  composed  of  saud  with  some  intCT-
stratilit'il  slabs  of  clayej'  Baudstone.  Reculver  (RegulTiumj
was  an  iuiixirtaiit  military  station  in  the  time  of  the  Romans,
and  uppeuia.  from  Leland's  account,  to  have  been,  so  late  u
Henry  VlII.'s  reign,  nearly  one  mile  distant  from  the  sea.
In  the  'Genlleniun's  Magazine'  there  ie  a  view  of  it,  taken
in  1781,  which  still  represents  a  considerable  space  as  inter-


1.  Me  (if  Sli,.j.i>,.j-.     i  Aiii'U'iii  i-liapi'l  noir  ll<■I•t^>7l^l.    Tht  wrtL-tgB  between

veiling  between  the  north  wall  of  tliu  churchyard  and  the
cliff. t  Soiui"  time  before  the  year  17^0,  the  waves  had  reached
the  yite  of  the  ancient  Roimm  camp,  or  fortification,  the  walls
of  which  had  continued  for  sevfral  years  atter  they  were
miderniined  to  overhang  the  sea,  being  firmly  cemented  into
one  uiiiss.  The}-  were  ei;^hty  y:irds  neiti'er  the  sea  than  the
church,  and  they  are  spoken  of  in  the  •  Topi 'graph ica  Britan-
nica,"  in  (he  year  1760,  as  having  leeeutly  fallen  down.  In
1S04-,  part  of  the  churchyard  with  some  adjoining  houses  was
washed  away,  and  the  ancient  cliurcli,  with  its  two  spires,  was

•  On  the  iiiilhiiritv  uf  W.  Gimiid.  K-q.,  aud  W.  Kk-lmrJfon,  Esq..  F.G.S.
i  Vol.  ii.  .^l-v^.•^L■ril■s.  ISU'J.  p.  801,


Ch.  XX.]


ON   THE   COAST   OF  KENT.


529


disma,ntled  and  abandoned  aa  a  place  of  worship,  but  kept  in
repair  as  a  landmark  well  known  to  mariners.  I  visited  the
spot  in  Jane  1851,  and  saw  human  bones  and  part  of  a  wooden
coffin  projecting  from  the  cliff,  near  the  top.  The  whole  build-
ing would  probably  have  been  swept  away  long  ere  this,  had
not  the  force  of  the  waves  been  checked  by  an  artificial
causeway  of  stones  and  lat^  wooden  piles  driven  into  the
sands  on  the  beach  to  break  the  force  of  the  waves.

Isle  of  Thdnet. — The  Isle  of  Thonet  was,  in  the  time  of  the

Fig.  61.


Becnlrer  Chnrch,  in  1S34.

Romans,  separated  from  the  rest  of  Kent  by  a  navigable
chiiniiel,  through  which  the  Roman  Beets  sailed  on  their  way
to  and  from  London.  Bede  describes  this  small  estuary  as
being,  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century,  three  furlongs
in  breadth ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  it  began  to  grow  shallow
about  tlie  period  of  the  Norman  Conquest  It  was  so  far  silted
up  in  the  year  1845  that  an  Act  was  obtained  to  build  a
bridge  across  it ;  and  it  has  since  become  marsh  land  with
small  streams  running  through  it.     On  the  coast.  Bedlam

VOL.   I.  H  Bl


f


fiSO


ENCROACHHEITTS  OF  TEE  BEA


[CK.X


Farm,  belongiog  to  the  hospital  of  that  name,  lost  eight
acres  in  the  tweotj  years  preceding  1830,  the  land  beinf
composed  of  chalk  from  forty  to  fifty  feet  above  the  level  (tf
the  sea.  It  has  been  computed,  that  the  average  waste  of
the  clifi"  between  the  North  Foreland  and  the  Becaivera,  s
distance  of  about  eleven  miles,  is  not  less  Uian  two  feet  per
annum.  The  chalk  cliffs  on  the  south  of  Thanet,  between
Bamsgate  and  Pegwell  Bay,  had  on  an  aveni^  lost  three
feet  per  annnm  during  the  ten  years  preceding  1830.

Goodwin  Sands. — The  Goodwin  Sands  lie  opposite  this  port
of  the  Kentish  coast.  They  are  about  ten  miles  in  length,
and  are  m  some  parts  three,  and  in  others  seven,  miles  dis-


Fig.  fiS.


Slmtcapcare's  Cliff


tant  from  the  shore ;  and,  for  a  certain  space,  are  laid  bare  at
low  water.  That  they  are  a  remnant  of  land,  and  not  '  a
mere  accumulation  of  sea  sand,'  as  Bennell  imagined,*  may
be  presumed  from  the  fact  that,  when  the  erection  of  a  light-
house on  this  shoal  was  in  contemplation  by  the  Trinity
Board  in  the  year  1817,  it  was  found,  by  borings,  that  the
bank  consisted  of  fifteen  feet  of  sand,  resting  on  blue  clay ;
and,  by  subsequent  borings,  the  subjacent  chalk  has  been
reached.  An  obscure  tradition  has  come  down  to  us,  that
the  estates  of  Earl  Goodwin,  the  father  of  Harold,  who
died  in  the  year  1053,  were  situated  here,  and  some  have

■  Qeot.  of  Berod.  vol.  ii.  p.  326.


Ch.  XX.]  ON  THE  COAST  OF  KENT.  531

conjectured  that  they  were  overwhelmed  by  the  flood  men-
tioned in  the  Saxon  Chronicle,  suh  anno  1099.  The  last
remains  of  an  island.  Consisting,  like  Sheppey,  of  clay,  may
perhaps  have  been  carried  away  about  that  time.

There  are  other  records  of  waste  in  the  county  of  Kent,  as
at  Deal ;  and  at  Dover,  where  Shakspeare's  Cliff,  composed
entirely  of  chalk,  has  suffered  greatly,  and  continually  di-
minishes in  height,  the  slope  of  the  hill  being  towards  the
land.  (See  fig.  55.)  There  was  an  immense  landslip  from
this  cliff  in  1810,  by  which  Dover  was  shaken  as  if  by  an
earthquake,  and  a  still  greater  one  in  1772.*  We  may  sup-
pose, therefore,  that  the  view  from  the  top  of  the  precipice
in  the  year  1600,  when  the  tragedy  of  *  Kiog  Lear  *  was
written,  was  more  *  fearful  and  dizzy  ^  than  it  is  now.  The
best  antiquarian  authorities  are  agreed  that  Dover  Harbour
was  formerly  an  estuary,  the  sea  flowing  up  a  valley  between
the  chalk  hills.  The  remains  found  in  different  excavations
confirm  the  description  of  the  spot  given  by  Caesar  and  An-
toninus, and  there  is  clear  historical  evidence  to  prove  that
at  an  early  period  there  was  no  shingle  at  all  at  Dover.f

Straits  of  Dover. — In  proceeding  from  the  northern  parts
of  the  German  Ocean  towards  the  Straits  of  Dover,  the  water
becomes  gradually  more  shallow,  so  that  in  the  distance  of
about  two  hundred  leagues,  we  pass  from  a  depth  of  120
fathoms  to  that  of  58,  38,  18,  and  at  one  point  near  the
middle  of  the  Channel  even  less  than  2  fathoms.  The
shallowest  part  follows  a  line  drawn  between  Bomney  Marsh
and  Boulogne.  From  this  point  the  English  Channel  again
deepens  progressively  as  we  proceed  westward,  so  that  the
Straits  of  Dover  may  be  said  to  part  two  seas.}:

Whether  England  was  formerly  united  to  Prance  has  often
been  a  favourite  subject  of  speculation.  So  early  as  1605  our
countryman  Verstegan,  in  his  *  Antiquities  of  the  English
Nation/  observed  that  many  preceding  writers  had  main-
tained this  opinion,  but  without  supporting  it  by  any  weighty
reasons.     He  accordingly  endeavours  himself  to  confirm  it  by

*  Dodsley'8  Ann.  Regist.  1772.  %  Stovenson,  Ed.  Phil.  Jonrn.  No.  v.

t  See  J.  B.  Redman  on  Changes  of  p.  46,  and  Dr.  Fitton,    Geol.   Tmns,

S  £.  Coast  of  England,  Proceed.  Instit.  2d  seriee,  toI,  iv.  plate  9.
C^ril  Engin.  vol.  xi.  1851,  1852.

M  M  2


532  EXCROACHMENTS  OF  THiAvSEA  [OlXX.

various  arguments,  the  principal  of  which  are,  firsts  the  prox-
imity and  identity  of  the  composition  of  the  opposite  clifi
and  shores  of  Albion  and  Gallia,  which,  whether  flat  and
sandy,  or  steep  and  chalky,  correspond  exactly  with  each
other ;  secondly,  the  occurrence  of  a  submarine  ridge,  callfid
*  Our  Lady's  Sand,'  extending  from  shore  to  shore  at  no  greit
depth,  and  which  from  its  composition  appears  to  be  the
original  basis  of  the  isthmus ;  thirdly,  the  identity  of  the
noxious  animals  in  France  and  England,  which  cottld  neither
have  swum  across,  nor  have  been  introduced  by  man.     Thus
no  one,  he  says,  would  have  imported  wolves,  therefore  *  these
wicked  beasts  did  of  themselves  pass  over.'    He  supposes  the
ancient  isthmus  to  have  been  about  six  English  miles  in
breadth,  composed  entirely  of  chalk  and  flint,  and  in  some
places  of  no  great  height  above  the  sea-level.     The  operation
of  the  waves  and  tides,  he  says,  would  have  been  more  power-
ful when  the  straits  were  narrower,  and  even  now  they  are
destroying  cliff's  composed  of  similar  materials.     He  SQgg^t«
the  possible  co-operation  of  earthquakes ;  and  when  we  con-
sider liow  many  submarine  forests  skirt  the  southern  and
t»astern  shores  of  England,  and  that  there  are  raised  beaches
at  many  points  above  the  sea-level,  containing  fossil  shells  of
recent  species,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  such  up-
ward and   downward  movements,  taking  place  perhaps  as
slowly  as  those  now  in  progi'ess  in  Sweden  and  Greenland,
may  liave  greatly  assisted  the  denuding  force  of  *  the  ocean
stream,'  Tlorafjiolo  fiiya  aOevo9  ^ClKeavolo,

Folkrstoiie. — At  Folkestone  the  sea  undermines  the  chalk
and  subjacent  strata.  About  the  year  1716  there  was  a  re-
markable sinking  of  a  tract  of  land  near  the  sea,  so  that
houses  became  visible  from  certain  points  at  sea,  and  from
particular  spots  on  the  sea  cliffs,  from  whence  they  could  not
be  seen  previously.  In  the  description  of  this  subsidence  in
the  Phil.  Trans.  171G,  it  is  said,  'that  the  land  consisted  of  a
solid  stony  mass  (chalk),  resting  on  wet  clay  (gault),  so  that
it  slid  forwards  towards  the  sea,  just  as  a  ship  is  launched  on
tallowed  planks.'  It  is  also  stated,  that  within  the  memory
of  persons  then  living,  the  cliff  there  had  been  washed  away
to  the  extent  of  ten  rods*


Ch.  XX  ]     ON  THE  SOUTH  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.        533

Encroachments  of  the  sea  at  Hythe  are  also  on  record ;
but  between  this  point  and  Eye  there  has  been  a  gain  of
land  within  the  times  of  history ;  the  rich  level  tract  called
Eomney  Marsh,  or  Dungeness,  about  ten  miles  in  width  and
five  in  breadth,  and  formed  of  silt,  having  received  great  ac-
cession.    Mr.  Bedman  has  cited  numerous  old  charts  and
trustworthy   authorities  to  prove  that  the  average  annual
increase  of  the  promontory   amounted  for  two  centuries,
previous  to  1844,  to  nearly  six  yards.      Its  progress,  how-
ever, has  fluctuated  during  that  period ;  for  between  1689
and  1794,  a  term  of  105  years,  the  rate  was  as  much  as  8^
yards  per  annum.     He  observes  *  that  this  great  accumula-
tion, commonly  called  Eomney  Marsh,  is  composed  for  a
distance  of  about  two  miles  of  undulating  ridges  marking
the  periodical  accessions  made  to  the  coast,  like  the  rings  of
growth  in  timber.**     It  is  ascertained  that  the  shingle  is
derived  from  the  westward.    Whether  the  pebbles  are  stopped
by  the  meeting  of  the  tide  from  the  north  flowing  through
the  Straits  of  Dover,  with  that  which  comes  up  the  Channel
from  the  west,  as  was  formerly  held,  or  by  the  check  given
to  the  tidal  current  by  the  waters  of  the  Eother,  as  some
maintain,  is  still  a  disputed  question.     There  is,  however,
no  doubt  that  since  the  Point  of  Dungeness  has  advanced,
forming  a  great  natural   groin,   it  intercepts   the    shingle
which  formerly  travelled  eastward  and  was  accumulated  by
artificial  groins  at  Hythe.     The  martello  towers  erected  on
the  low  coast  S.  and  S.W.  of  Hythe  must  ere  long  perish,  as
Mr.  Mackeson  has  pointed  out  to  me,  for  want  of  a  supply
of  protecting  shingle.     At  Dymchurch  the  towers  numbered
2(5,  27,  have  already  been  removed,  their  destruction  being
threatened  by  the  advancing  tide.     The  town  of  Winchelsea,
situated  to  the  south  of  Eomney  Marsh,  was  destroyed  in
the  reign  of  Edward  I.,  the  mouth  of  the  Eother  stopped  up,
and  the  river  diverted  into  another  channel.     In  its  old  bed,
an  ancient  vessel,  apparently  a  Dutch   merchantman,  was
found  about  the  year  1824.     It  was  built  entirely  of  oak,
and  much  blackened.f     Large  quantities  of  hazel-nuts,  peat,
and  wood  are  found  in  digging  in  Eomney  Marsh.

*  Redman,  Proc.  Civil  Engin.  vol.  xi.  p.  169.
t  £din.  Joarn.  of  Science,  No.  xix.  p.  56.


534  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  THE  SEA  [Ch.  XX.

South  coast  of  England. — Westward  of  Hastingps,  or  of  St
Leonard's,  the  shore-line  has  been  giving^  way  as  &r  u
Pevensey  Bay,  where  formerly  there  existed  a  haven  now
entirely  blocked  up  by  shingle.  The  waste  has  amounted
for  a  series  of  years  to  seven  feet  per  annum  in  some  places,
and  several  martello  towers  had  in  consequence,  before  1851,
been  removed  by  the  Ordnance.*  At  the  promontory  of  Beachy
Head  a  mass  of  chalk,  three  hundred  feet  in  length,  and  from
seventy  to  eighty  in  breadth,  fell  in  the  year  1818  with  a  tre-
mendous crash ;  and  similar  slips  have  since  been  frequenLf

About  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the  town  of  Newhayen,  the
remains  of  an  ancient  entrenchment  are  seen  on  the  brow  of
Castle  Hill.  This  earthwork,  supposed  to  be  British,  was
evidently  once  of  considerable  extent  and  of  an  oval  form,
but  the  greater  part  has  been  cut  away  by  the  sea.  The
cliffs,  which  are  undermined  here,  are  high ;  more  than  one
hundred  feet  of  chalk  being  covered  by  tertiary  clay  and  sand,
from  sixty  to  seventy  feet  in  thickness.  In  a  few  centuries
the  last  vestiges  of  the  Woolwich  Beds  or  plastic  clay  forma-
tion on  the  southern  borders  of  the  chalk  of  the  South  Downs
on  this  coast  will  probably  be  annihilated,  and  future  geolo-
gists will  learn,  from  historical  documents  only,  the  ancient
geographical  boundaries  of  this  group  of  strata  in  that
direction.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  estuary  of  the  Ouse,
on  the  east  of  Newhaven  harbour,  a  bed  of  shingle,  composed
of  chalk  flints  derived  from  the  waste  of  the  adjoining  clif&,
had  accumulated  at  Seaford  for  several  centuries.  In  the
great  storm  of  November  1824,  this  bank  was  entirely  swept
away,  and  the  town  of  Seaford  inundated.  Another  great
beach  of  shingle  is  now  forming  from  fresh  materials.

The  whole  coast  of  Sussex  has  been  incessantly  encroached
upon  by  the  sea  from  time  immemorial ;  besides  the  camp  at
Newhaven,  two  ancient  earthworks  of  unknown  date,  one  near
Seaford,  and  the  other  near  Eastbourne,  have  been  partially
destroyed  by  the  encroachments  of  the  sea.  Although  sud-
den inundations  only,  which  overwhelmed  fertile  or  inhabited
tracts,  are  noticed  in  history,  the  records  attest  an  extraor-

•  Redman,  as  cited,  p.  315.

t  Webster,  Geol.  Traus.  vol.  ii.  p.  192,  1st  series.


Ch.  XX.]  ON  THE  SOUTH  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  535

dinary  amount  of  loss.  During  a  period  of  no  more  than
eighty  years,  there  are  notices  of  about  twenty  inroads,  in
which  tracts  of  land  of  from  twenty  to  four  hundred  acres  in
extent  were  overwhelmed  at  once,  the  value  of  the  tithes
being  mentioned  in  the  Taxatio  Ecclesiastica.^  In  the  reign
of  Elizabeth,  the  town  of  Brighton  was  situated  on  that
tract  where  the  chain  pier  now  extends  into  the  sea.  In  the
year  1665  twenty-two  tenements  had  been  destroyed  under
the  cliff.  At  that  period  there  still  remained  under  the
cKff  113  tenements,  the  whole  of  which  were  overwhelmed  in
1703  and  1705.  No  traces  of  the  ancient  town  are  now
perceptible,  yet  there  is  evidence  that  the  sea  has  merely
resumed  its  ancient  position  at  the  base  of  the  cliffs,  the  site
of  the  old  town  having  been  nothing  more  than  a  beach
abandoned  by  the  ocean  for  ages.

Hampshire. — Isle  of  Wight. — It  would  be  endless  to  allude
to  all  the  localities  on  the  Sussex  and  Hampshire  coasts
where  the  land  has  given  way ;  but  I  may  point  out  the  re-
lation which  the  geological  structure  of  the  Isle  of  Wight
bears  to  its  present  shape,  as  attesting  that  the  coast  owes
its  outline  to  the  continued  action  of  the  sea.  Through  the
middle  of  the  island  runs  a  high  ridge  of  chalk  strata,  in  a
vertical  position,  and  in  a  direction  east  and  west.  This
chalk  forms  the  projecting  promontory  of  Culver  Cliff  on
the  east,  and  of  the  Needles  on  the  west;  while  Sandown
Bay  on  the  one  side,  and  Compton  Bay  on  the  other,  have
been  hollowed  out  of  the  softer  sands  and  argillaceous  strata,
which  are  inferior,  in  geological  position,  to  the  chalk.

The  same  phenomena  are  repeated  in  the  Isle  of  Purbeck,
where  the  line  of  vertical  chalk  forms  the  projecting  promon-
tory of  Handfast  Point ;  and  Swanage  Bay  marks  the  deep
excavation  made  by  the  waves  in  the  softer  strata,  corre-
sponding to  those  of  Sandown  Bay.

Hurst  Castle  Bank— progressive  motion  of  sea  beaches, —
Although  the  loose  pebbles  and  grains  of  sand  composing
any  given  line  of  sea  beach  are  carried  sometimes  one  way,
sometimes  another,    they  have,   nevertheless,   an   ultimate

•  Mantell,  Geology  of  Sussex,  p.  293.


536  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  THE  SEA  [C1.SI.

motion  in  one  particular  direction.*  Their  progress,  for
example,  on  the  south  coast  of  England,  is  from  west  to  east,
which  is  owing  partly  to  the  action  of  the  waves  driven  east-
wards by  the  prevailing  wind,  and  partly  to  the  current,  or
the  motion  of  the  general  body  of  water  cansed  by  the  tides
and  winds.  The  force  of  the  waves  gives  motion  to  pebbles
which  the  velocity  of  the  currents  alone  would  be  unable  to
carry  forwards ;  but  as  the  pebbles  are  finallj  redooed  to
sand  or  mud,  by  continual  attrition,  they  are  brought  within
the  influence  of  a  current ;  and  this  cause  must  determine
the  course  which  the  main  body  of  matter  derived  fix)in
wasting  cliffs  will  eventually  take.

It  appears,  from  the  observations  of  Mr.  Palmer  and
others,  that  if  a  pier  or  groin  be  erected  anywhere  on  our
southern  or  south-eastern  coast  to  stop*  the  prepress  of  the
beach,  a  heap  of  shingle  soon  collects  on  the  western  side  of
such  artificial  barriers.  The  pebbles  continue  to  accumu-
late till  they  rise  as  high  as  the  pier  or  groin,  after  which
they  pour  over  in  great  numbers  during  heavy  gales-f

The  western  entrance  of  the  Solent,  a  channel  dividing
the  Isle  of  Wight  from  the  mainland,  is  crossed  for  more  than
two-thirds  of  its  width  by  the  shingle-bank  of  Hurst  Castle,
which  is  about  two  miles  long,  seventy  yards  broad,  and
twelve  feet  high,  presenting  an  inclined  plane  to  the  west.
This  singular  bar  consists  of  a  bed  of  rounded  chalk  flints,
resting  on  a  submarine  argillaceous  base.  The  flints  and  a
few  other  pebbles,  intermixed,  are  derived  from  the  waste  of
Hordwell,  and  other  cliffs  to  the  westward,  where  tertiary
strata,  capped  with  a  covering  of  broken  chalk  flints,  fix)m
five  to  fifty  feet  thick,  are  rapidly  undermined.  In  the  great
storm  of  November  1824,  this  bank  of  shingle  was  moved
bodily  forwards  for  forty  yards  towards  the  north-east;  and
certain  piles,  which  served  to  mark  the  boundaries  of  two
manors,  were  found  after  the  storm  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  bar.     At  the  same  time  many  acres  of  pasture  land

*  See  Palmer  on  Shingle  Beaches,  down  ;  and  are  used  either  to  break  the

Phil.  Trans.  1834,  p.  568.  force  of  the  waves,  or  to  retain    the

t  Groins  are  formed  of  piles  and  beach,
wooden   planks,  or  of  faggots  staked


CH.XX.]  ON  THE  SOUTH  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  537

were  covered  by  shingle,  on  the  farm  of  Westover,  near
Lymington.  But  the  bar  was  soon  restored  to  its  old  position
by  pebbles  drifted  from  the  west;  and  it  appears  from
ancient  maps  that  it  has  preserved  the  same  general  outline
and  position  for  centuries.*

Mr.  Austen  remarks  that,  as  a  general  rule,  it  is  only  when
high  tides  concur  with  a  gale  of  wind,  that  the  sea  reaches
the  base  of  cliffs  so  as  to  undermine  them.  But  the  waves
are  perpetually  employed  in  abrading  and  fashioning  the
materials  already  strewed  over  the  beach.  Much  of  the
gravel  and  shingle  is  always  travelling  up  and  down,  between
high- water  mark  and  a  slight  depth  below  the  level  of  the
lowest  tides,  and  occasionally  the  materials  are  swept  away
and  carried  into  deeper  water.  Owing  to  these  movements,
every  portion  of  our  southern  coast  may  be  seen  at  one  time
or  other  in  the  condition  of  bare  rock.  Yet  other  beds  of
sand  and  shingle  soon  collect,  and,  although  composed  of  new
materials,  invariably  exhibit  on  the  same  spots  precisely
similar  characters.!

The  cliffs  between  Hurst  Shingle  Bar  and  Christchurch  are
undermined  continually,  the  sea  having  often  encroached  for
a  series  of  years  at  the  rate  of  a  yard  annually.  Within  the
memory  of  persons  now  living,  it  has  been  necessary  thrice
to  remove  the  coast-road  farther  inland.  The  tradition,
therefore,  is  probably  true,  that  the  church  of  Hordwell  was
once  in  the  middle  of  that  parish,  although  now  (1830)  very
near  the  sea.  The  promontory  of  Christchurch  (Hengistbury)
Head  gives  way  slowly.  It  is  the  only  point  between
Lymington  and  Poole  Harbour,  in  Dorsetshire,  where  any
hard  stony  masses  appear  in  the  cliffs.  Five  layers  of  large
ferruginous  concretions,  somewhat  like  the  septaria  of  the
London  clay,  have  occasioned  a  resistance  at  this  point,  to
which  we  may  ascribe  this  headland.  In  the  meantime,  the
waves  have  cut  deeply  into  the  soft  sands  and  loam  of  Poole
Bay;  and  after  severe  frosts,  great  landslips  take  place,
which  by  degrees  become  enlarged  into  narrow  ravines,  or
chines,  as  they  are  called,  with  vertical  sides.     One  of  these

*  Redman,  as  cited,  p.  315.  Valley  of  the  English  Channel,  Quart.

t  Rob.  A.  C.  Godwin- Austen  on  the      Jonrn.  G.  S.  vol.  vi  p.  72.


538  THE  CHESIL  BANK.  [G&XL

chines,  near  Boscomb,  has  been  deepened  twenty  feet  withm
a  few  years  (1 830).  At  the  head  of  each  there  is  a  spring,  the
waters  of  which  have  been  chiefly  instromental  in  prodacing
these  narrow  excavations,  which  are  sometimes  from  100  to
150  feet  deep.

hie  of  Portland. — The  peninsulas  of  Purbeck  and  Portland
are  continually  wasting  away.  In  the  latter,  the  soft  argil-
laceous substratum  (Eimmeridge  clay)  hastens  the  dilapida-
tion of  the  superincumbent  mass  of  limestone.

In  16G5  the  cliflFs  adjoining  the  principal  quarries  in  Port-
land gave  way  to  the  extent  of  one  hundred  yards,  and  fell
into  the  sea;  and  in  December  1734,  a  slide  to  the  extent  of
1 50  yards  occurred  on  the  east  side  of  the  isle.  But  a  much
more  memorable  occurrence  of  this  nature,  in  1792,  occasioned
probably  by  the  undermining  of  the  cliffs,  is  thus  described  in
Hutchin's  History  of  Dorsetshire : — *  Early  in  the  morning
the  road  was  observed  to  crack ;  this  continued  increasing,
and  before  two  o'clock  the  ground  had  sunk  several  feet,  and
was  in  one  continued  motion,  but  attended  with  no  other
noise  than  what  was  occasioned  by  the  separation  of  the
roots  and  brambles,  and  now  and  then  a  falling  rock.  At
night  it  seemed  to  stop  a  little,  but  soon  moved  again ;  and,
before  morning,  the  ground  from  the  top  of  the  cliff  to  the
water-side  had  sunk  in  some  places  fifty  feet  perpendicularly.
The  extent  of  ground  that  moved  was  about  a  mile  and  a
quarter  from  north  to  south,  and  600  yards  from  east  to
west.'

Formation  of  the  Chesil  Bank. — Portland  is  connected  with
the  mainland  by  the  Chesil  Bank,  a  ridge  of  shingle  about
fifteen  miles  long,  the  first  part  of  which,  near  Portland,
for  a  length  of  about  two  miles,  has  the  sea  on  each  side  of
it.  It  then  continues  seven  miles  farther  in  a  north-westerly
direction  as  far  as  Abbotsbury,  sloping  steeply  on  the  one
side  towards  the  sea,  and  on  the  other  towards  a  narrow
channel  called  the  Fleet,  which  may  be  regarded  as  an  estuary
the  waters  of  which  are  brackish.  It  then  stretches  for  five
miles  farther  as  a  pebbly  beach  thrown  against  the  coast  of
Dorsetshire.

The  pebbles  forming  this    immense   barrier  are   chiefly


Ch.  XX.]  DORSETSHIRE— DEVONSHIRE.  589

siliceous,  all  loosely  thrown  together,  and  rising  to  the  height
of  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  above  the  ordinary  high-water
mark;  and  forty  feet  at  the  south-eastern  end,  which  is
nearest  the  Isle  of  Portland,  where  the  pebbles  are  largest.
Here  its  width  is  about  600  feet,  which  diminishes  to  about
500  at  Abbotsbury.

That  part  of  the  bar  which  attaches  Portland  to  the  main-
land rests  on  Eimmeridge  clay,  which  is  sometimes  exposed
to  view  during  storms.  The  clay  may  have  formed  a  shoal^
and  the  set  of  the  tides  in  the  narrow  channel  may  have  ar-
rested the  course  of  the  pebbles,  which  are  always  coming
from  the  west.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that,  throughout  the
Chesil  Bank,  the  pebbles  increase  gradually  in  size  as  we
proceed  south-eastward,  or  as  we  go  farther  from  the  quarter
which  supplied  them.  Had  the  case  been  reversed,  we  should
naturally  have  attributed  the  circumstance  to  the  constant
wearing  down  of  the  pebbles  by  friction,  the  beach  along
which  they  are  rolled  being  seventeen  miles  in  length.  But
the  true  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  is  doubtless  this :
the  strongest  currents  or  movements  of  the  sea  during  storms,
when  a  gale  from  the  south-west  co-operates  with  the  tide,
act  with  greater  power  in  the  more  open  channel  or  farthest
from  the  head  of  the  bay ;  within  the  bay  the  land  affords
more  shelter  from  the  wind  and  waves.  In  other  words,  the
force  of  the  sea  increases  southwards,  and  as  the  direction
of  the  bank  is  from  north-west  to  south-east,  the  size  of  the
masses  coming  from  the  westward  and  thrown  ashore  must
always  be  largest  where  the  motion  of  the  waves  and  currents
is  most  violent.  Colonel  Beid  states  that  all  calcareous
stones  rolled  along  from  the  west  are  soon  ground  into  sand^
and  in  this  form  they  pass  round  Portland  Island.*

The  storm  of  1824  burst  over  the  Chesil  Bank  with  great
fury,  and  the  village  of  Chesilton,  built  upon  its  southern
extremity,  was  overwhelmed,  with  many  of  the  inhabitants.
During  another  gale  on  the  23rd  Nov.,  1852,  the  south-west
wind  threw  in  upon  the  bank  during  the  night  and  early
part  of  the  following  day  a  mass  of  shingle  amounting  by

*  See  Palmer  on  Motion  of  Shingle      Col.  Sir  W.  Reid,  Papers  of   Royal
Beaches,  Phil.  Trans.  1834,  p.  568 ;  and      Engineers,  1838,  toL  ii.  p.  128.


£40  DORSETSHIBE— D£V0N9Hm£.  [Cl.  XX.

measurement,  according  to  Mr.  Coode,  C.£.,  to   no  less  than
three  and  a  half  millions  of  tons.*

The  storm  before  alluded  to  of  1824  carried  awaj  part  of
the  Breakwater  at  Plymouth,  and  huge  masses  of  rock,  from
two  to  five  tons  in  weight,  were  lifted  from  the  bottom  of  the
weather  side,  and  rolled  fairly  to  the  top  of  tlie  pile.  One
block  of  limestone,  weighing  seven  tons,  was  ^^ashed  round
the  western  extremity  of  the  Breakwater,  and  carried  150
feet.t  The  propelling  power  is  derived  in  these  cases  from
the  breaking  of  the  waves,  which  run  fastest  in  shallow  water,
and  for  a  short  space  far  exceed  the  most  rapid  currents  in
swiftness.  It  was  in  the  same  month,  and  also  daring  a
spring-tide,  that  a  great  flood  is  mentioned  on  the  coasts  of
England,  in  the  year  1099.  Florence  of  Worcester  says,
*  On  the  third  day  of  the  nones  of  Nov.  1099,  the  sea  came
out  upon  the  shore  and  buried  towns  and  men  very  many,  and
oxen  and  sheep  innumerable.'  We  also  read  in  the  Saxon
Chronicle,  for  the  year  1099,  *This  year  eke  on  St.  Martin's
mass  day,  the  11th  of  Novembre,  sprung  up  so  much  of  the
sea  flood,  and  so  myckle  harm  did,  as  no  man  minded  that  it
ever  afore  did,  and  there  was  the  ylk  day  a  new  moon.'

South  of  the  Bill,  or  southern  point  of  Portland,  is  a
remarkable  shoal  in  the  channel  at  the  depth  of  seven  fathoms,
called  '  the  Shambles,'  consisting  entirely  of  rolled  and
broken  shells  of  Vxirpura  lapillns,  Mytihts  edulisy  and  other
species  now  living.  This  mass  of  light  materials  is  always
in  motion,  varying  in  height  from  day  to  day,  and  yet  the
shoal  remains  constant.

Dorsetshire — Devonshire, — At  Lyme  Regis,  in  Dorsetshire,
the  *  Church  Cliffs,'  as  they  are  called,  consisting  of  lias
about  one  hundred  feet  in  height,  gradually  fell  away  at  the
rate  of  one  yard  a  year,  from  1800  to  1829.  J

An  extraordinary  landslip  occurred  on  the  24th  of  De-
cember, 1839,  on  the  coast  in  Devonshire  between  Lyme
Regis  and  Axmouth,  which  has  been  described  by  the
Rev.  W.  D.  Conybeare,  to  whose  kindness  I    am  indebted

*  Coodc,  Prw.  Inst,  of  Civ.  Krgineere,       p.  82.
1852-3,  vol.  xii.  p.  546.  +  Acconling  to  the  measuremect  of

t  De  la  Beche,  Geological  Manual,       Carpent  of  Lyme.


Ca.  SX.]


LANDSLIP  VEAE  AXMOUTH.


541


for  the  accompanjing  aectdon,  fig.  56.  The  tract  of  downs
ra,nging  there  along  the  coast  is  capped  by  chalk  (A),  which
rests  on  sandstone,  alternating  with  chert  (i),  beneath  which
is  more  than  100  feet  of  loose  sand  (t),  with  concretions  at
the  bottom,  and  belonging,  like  i,  to  the  upper  greensand
formation  or  chioritic  series ;  the  whole  of  the  above  masses,
A,  i,  fc,  repose  on  retentive  beds  of  clay  (I),  belonging  to
the  lias,  which  shelves  towards  the  sea.  Numerous
springs  issuing  from  the  loose  sand  (k)  have  gradaally
removed  portions  of  it,  and  thus  undermined  the  super-
stratum, 80  as  to  have  caused  subsidences  at  former  times,


Fig.  S6.


Landslip,  near  Aimouth.  Dec  1839.     (Ber.  AV.  D.  ConjrbeaK.)

A.  Tract  of  Downa  still  renutning  at  their  oiiginal  lerel.

B.  Now  ratine.

C.  D.  Sunk  and  fmrtared  strip  united  to  A,  before  tlie  oonvnision.
I),  G.  Biadon  undsrcliff  hb  before,  bat  more  Sssureil,  and  thriut  forward
about  Bfty  feet  toward  the  sea.

F.  PvTnmidsl  crag,  lunk  from  seventy  to  twenty  foet  in  height.

G.  New  reef  npheaved  from  the  ■«».


!ind  to  have  produced  a  line  of  undercliff  between  D  and
E.  In  1839  an  excessively  wet  season  had  saturated  all
the  rocks  with  moisture,  so  as  to  increase  the  weight  of  the
incumbent  mass,  from  which  the  support  had  already  been
withdrawn  by  the  action  of  springs.  Thus  the  superstrata
were  precipitated  into  hollows  prepared  for  them,  and  the
adjacent  masses  of  partially  undermined  rock,  to  which  the
movement  was  communicated,  were  made  to  slide  down  on  a
slippery  basis  of  watery  sand  towards  the  sea.    These  causes


(


542


COAST  OF  DEVOIT.


[CI.  XX.


^ve  rise  to  a  convulsion,  which  began  on  the  mormng  of  the
24th  of  December,  with  a  crashing  noise ;  and,  on  the  eren-
ing  of  the  same  day,  fiseures  were  seen  opening  in  the
ground,  and  the  walls  of  tenements  rending^  and  sinking,
until  a  deep  chasm  or  ravine,  B,  was  formed  extending  nearlj
three-quarters  of  a  mile  in  length,  with  a  depth  of  from
100  to  150  feet,  and  a  breadth  exceeding  240  feet.  At  the
bottom  of  this  deep  gulf  lio  fragments  of  the  original  snr-
face  thrown  together  in  the  wildest  confusion.  In  conse-
quence of  lateral  movements,  the  tract  intervening  between

Fig.  67.


View  of  th«  Axmouth  Undi^Iip  from  Grcnt  Ilindon.  looking  ireHtvaid  to

llio  SiJmoulIi  hills,  and  c-stiiary  of  the  Eio.    From  an  origioal

dmwing  by  Mrs.  Bucklnnd.

the  new  fissure  and  the  sea,  including  the  ancient  undercliB',
was  fractured,  and  the  whole  line  of  sea-cliff  carried  bodily
forwards  for  many  yards.  '  A  remarkable  pyramidal  crag,
F,  off  Culverhole  Point,  which  lately  formed  a  distinguishing
landmark,  has  sunk  from  a  height  of  about  seventy  to  twenty
feet,  and  the  main  cliff,  E,  previously  more  than  fifty  feet
distant  from  this  insulated  crag,  is  now  brought  almost  close
to  it.  This  motion  of  the  sea-cliff  has  produced  a  farther
effect,  which  may  rank  among  the  most  striking  phenomena


Ch.  XX.]  ST.  MICHAEL'S  MOUNT,  CORNWALL.  548

of  this  catastrophe.  The  lateral  pressure  of  the  descending
rocks  has  urged  the  neighbouring  strata,  extending  beneath
the  shingle  of  the  shore,  by  their  state  of  unnatural  conden-
sation, to  burst  upwards  in  a  line  parallel  to  the  coast —
thus  an  elevated  ridge,  G,  more  than  a  mile  in  length,  and
rising  more  than  forty  feet,  covered  by  a  confused  assemblage
of  broken  strata,  and  immense  blocks  of  rock,  invested  with
sea- weed  and  corallines,  and  scattered  over  with  shells  and
star-fish,  and  other  productions  of  the  deep,  forms  an  ex-
tended reef  in  front  of  the  present  range  of  cliffs.*

A  full  account  of  this  remarkable  landslip,  with  a  plan,
sections,  and  many  fine  illustrative  drawings,  was  published
by  Messrs.  Conybeare  and  Buckland,t  from  one  of  which
fig.  57  has  been  reduced.

Tor  Bay. — ^The  shores  which  bound  Tor  Bay  give  way  con-
tinually at  many  points  ;  their  waste  forms  the  subject  of  a
memoir  published  by  Mr,  Pengelly,  in  1861.  J  He  has  shown
that  thrice  in  the  course  of  the  last  hundred  years  it  has  been
necessary  to  carry  the  road  between  Torquay  and  Paignton
farther  inland.  A  solid  mass  of  masonry,  built  for  the  pro-
tection of  the  present  road,  was  swept  away  by  the  waves  in
a  storm,  in  October  1859,  at  which  time  the  neighbouring
cliffs  were  also  undermined  at  many  points  on  the  coast,
comprising  some  precipitous  rocks  of  limestone.

8L  MichaeVa  Mount y  Cornwall. — When  we  reflect  on  the
great  amount  of  change  caused  by  the  undermining  power  of
the  waves,  and  by  landslips  in  the  last  three  or  four  cen-
turies on  our  southern  coasts,  and  the  proofs  of  submergence
of  numerous  forests  which  have  sunk  at  some  unknown
period,  and  which  extend  here  and  there  fix)m  the  shore  line
to  some  distance  out  at  sea ;  it  becomes  a  matter  of  surprise
that  we  should  find  a  single  point  where  the  outline  of  the
present  coast  can  be  demonstrated  to  have  remained  for
nineteen  centuries  unaltered.  For  this  reason  St.  Michael's
Mount,  in  Cornwall,  deserves  our  special  attention,  for  it  can
be  shown  that  all  the  characteristic  features  in  its  physical


*  Rov.  W.  D.  Conybeare,  letter  dated  t  London,  J.  Murray,  1840.

Axminster,  Dec.  21,  1839.  t  Geologist,  toI.  W.  p.  447.    1861.


544  ST.  MICHAELS  MOUNT.  COENWAIX.  [Ck.  XX

geography  have  been  retained  throughout  that  long  series  of
centuries  identically  such  as  they  now  are.

The  Mount  (see  figs.  58,  59,  and  60,  pp.  545  and  546)  con-
sists chiefly  of  granite,  with  some  slate  rock,  like  that  of  the
adjoining  coast.  It  is  195  feet  high,  with  precipitous  sides,
and  is  situated  near  the  head  of  Mount's  Bay,  ^rhich  is  dis-
tant about  ten  miles  eastward  from  the  Land's  £nd.  Twice
in  every  twenty-four  hours  is  this  mount  an  island,  and  twice
when  the  tide  falls  it  is  connected  by  a  narrow  isthmus  with
the  mainland.  This  isthmus  is  composed  of  the  slate  before
mentioned,  the  same  which  enters  into  the  stmcture  of  part
of  the  Mount,  where  it  is  penetrated  by  veins  of  granite  at
the  junction  of  the  two  formations.  At  the  highest  spring
tides  there  is  no  less  than  twelve  feet  of  water  on  the  isth-
mus, and  six  at  neap  tides :  in  ordinary  weather  it  is  usually
dry  for  five  hours  at  low  tide.  The  annexed  views  (p.  545)
will  give  the  reader  can  idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  Mount
at  high  and  low  water.*

As  there  is  no  other  rock  on  our  coast  which  is  twice
alternately  an  island  and  a  promontory  every  twenty-four
hours,  this  circumstance  alone  would  be  almost  conclusive
in  favour  of  the  opinion,  that  the  Mount  is  the  Ictis  of
Diodorus  Siculus.  That  historian,  writing  in  the  year  9  B.C.,
thus  speaks  of  the  trade  of  the  ancients  with  Britain: —
'  The  inhabitants  of  Belerium  are  hospitable,  and,  on  account
of  their  intercourse  with  strangers,  civilised  in  their  habits.'
'  It  is  they  who  produce  tin,  which  they  melt  into  the  form
of  astragali,  and  they  carry  it  to  an  island  in  front  of  Britain,
called  Ictis.  This  island  is  left  dry  at  low  tides,  and  they
then  transport  the  tin  in  carts  from  the  shore.  Here  the
traders  buy  it  from  the  natives,  and  carry  it  to  Gaul,  over
which  it  travels  on  horseback  in  about  thirty  da^'s,  to  the
mouths  of  the  Rhone.'

About  the  year  1823,  a  block  of  tin,  now  in  the  museum  of
the  Royal  Institute  of  Cornwall  at  Truro,  was  dredged  up
in  Falmouth  Harbour  (see  fig.  Gl).     It  has  the  form,  says


*  For  the  original  of  figs.  58  and  o9,  I  am   indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Sir
Hf  nrv  J  anus.


Ch,  XXO  ST.  MICHAEL'S  MOUNT,  COBNWALL.  545

Sir  H.  JanieB,  which  Dioclorua  might  well  have  compared  to
an  astragalus;  one  side  slightly  convex  (see  fig.  61),  as  if  to


enable  it  to  fit  the  bottom  of  a  boat,  the  whole  being  so  shaped
that  it,  might  be  easily  slung  bj  cords  on  the  side  of  a  horse,


and  two  of  these  balancing  each  other  would  constitute  such
it  load  as  a  horse  might  conveniently  carry*    In  addition  to


•  C.l,  8ir  H.  Jnmoa  on  Block  of  Tin  dredged  up  ii
nnunl  Report  Eojul  Inrt.  Cornirall,  1863.
VOL.    I.  K  K


FalmDuth  Harbour,  4&th


546


8T.  MICHAEL'S  MOXWT.  nORKWAr.T..


[QlX


the  above  consideratioDS,  Dr.  Barham  has  shown  that  the  letig
of  Diodoms  not  oolj  answers  geographically  to  St.  Micfaael'i

Fig.eo.


Mount,  but  19  just  such  a  promontorj  as  would  have  been
selected  by  foreign  traders  as  well  adapted  for  defence.     It


Surface  bdiI  tide  v\


The  bluok  ia  etnnippd  with  a,  small  representation  of  itself,  as  Men  in  Che  lover
right-hand  corner  of  Iha  drmiing.

still  affords  a  good  port,  daily  frequented  by  vessels,  where
cargoes  of  tin  are  sometimes  taken  on  board,  after  having


Ch.  XX.]  ST.  MICHAEL'S  MOUNT.  CORNWALL.  647

been  transported,  as  in  the  olden  time,  at  low  tide  across  the
isthmus.  Colliers  of  600  tons*  burden  can  now  enter  the
harbour,  i^hich  is  on  the  landward  or  sheltered  side  of  the
Mount  (as  seen  in  figs.  68, 60),  and  the  depth  of  water  would
have  sufficed  to  float  the  largest  vessels  which  the  Fhcenicians
and  other  ancient  navigators  employed  when  they  traded
with  the  Cassiterides,  five,^if  not  ten,  centuries  before  the
Christian  era.

According  to  Carew,  the  old  name  of  St.  Michael's  Mount,
^Caraclowse  in  Cowse,'  signifies,  in  the  Cornish  language,
*  The  Hoare  Eock  in  the  wood,*  and  from  this  some  have  in-
ferred  that  the  rock  was  once  surrounded  with  forest-covered
land.  At  present  there  are  no  trees  upon  the  Mount,  only  a
few  shrubs,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  how  such  a  name
could  ever  have  been  appropriate  since  the  days  of  Diodorus,
when  the  Mount  was  evidently  already  isolated,  and  the
isthmus  such  as  it  is  now.  Mr.  Pengelly  has  lately  entered
into  a  full  discussion  of  this  subject,*  stating  truly,  that  to
make  such  a  name  appropriate,  we  are  required  to  assume
that  the  Mount  was  surrounded  by  land  covered  with  trees ;
a  geographic-al  state  of  things  which  at  once  carries  us  back
much  more  than  nineteen  centuries,  and  yet  the  Cornish
language  is  assumed  to  have  been  spoken  when  the  designa-
tion of  the  ^  Rock  in  the  Wood '  was  assigned  to  the  Mount.
Whether  we  endeavour  to  explain  the  altered  geographical
conditions  by  encroachments  of  the  sea  on  the  land,  and  the
sweeping  away  of  a  low  tract  which  once  filled  the  bay,  or
by  a  general  subsidence  of  the  whole  region  to  a  lower  level,
we  should  have  to  assign  a  date  to  the  old  forest  anterior  to
Phoenician  times,  and  thus  ascribe  a  fabulous  antiquity  to
the  Cornish  tongue.  Here,  no  doubt,  as  elsewhere,  the
waves  have  in  the  course  of  the  last  twenty  or  thirty  cen-
turies converted  some  tracts  of  land  into  sea.  Near  Pen-
zance, for  example,  in  the  same  bay,  it  is  recorded  that
thirty-six  acres  of  pasture  land  called  ^  the  Green  *  have
been  gradually  removed  and  reduced  to  a  bare  sandy  beach,
since  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  It  is  also  known  that  the
grandfather  of  the  present  Vicar  of  Madron  (1866)  received

*  Pengelly,  Papers  read  at  Brit.  Assoc.,  Birmingham,  1866.

N  N  2


548  ST.  MICHAEL'S  HOXJ>*T,  CORNWAIX.  [Ck.  XX.

tithe  for  land  which  was  situated  under  the  clifP  at  Penzance.
Mr.  Pengelly  also  mentions  that  the  coast  near  Marazioa
(see  fig.  60),  which  is  only  a  third  of  a  mile  distant  firom
the  Mount,  has  yielded  slowly  at  some  points  within  the
memory  of  persons  now  living,  but  so  gradnallj  that  the  rate
of  waste  cannot  have  exceeded  ten  feet  per  century ;  and  he
calculates  that  if  this  cause  of  change  is  alone  appealed  to,
it  would  have  taken  ten  thousand  years  or  more,  before  our
time,  to  remove  so  much  land  as  would  have  stretched  firom
the  mainland  to  the  Mount.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  some-
what forced  hypothesis  to  assume  that  whereas  a  retrospect
of  nineteen  centuries  displays  to  us  the  Mount  geographicallj
the  same  as  it  now  is,  yet  shortly  before  that  time,  when
Cornish  was  spoken,  there  was  a  sinking  down  and  sub-
mergence of  a  wooded  tract.

There  have  certainly  been  depressions  here,  as  in  so  many
other  parts  of  the  English  coast,  but  they  may  have  happened
very  long  before  the  time  of  history.  Thus  for  example,
between  Newlyn  and  St.  Michael's  Mount,  as  Boase  relates,*
there  is  seen  under  the  sand  black  vegetable  mould  full  of
hazel-nuts,  and  the  branches,  leaves,  and  trunks  of  forest
trees,  the  elm  among  others,  all  of  indigenous  species.  The
roots  are  seen  in  the  soil  in  their  natural  position.  The  wing-
cases  of  insects  have  also  been  found  among  the  vegetable
matter.  The  stratum  has  been  traced  seaward  as  far  as  the
ebb  permits,  and  it  implies  the  downward  movement  of  a  level
tract  which  preserved  its  horizon tality  when  subsiding.  If
'we  endeavour  to  form  a  conjecture  as  to  the  probable  date  of
such  a  submergence,  we  find  ourselves  involved  in  a  geological
enquiry  of  vast  extent,  although  the  event  is  so  modem  as  to  be
comprised  within  the  human  period.  Thus,  to  revert  again  to
tho  Devonshire  coast,  there  is  a  subujerged  forest  at  Torquay,
and  much  peaty  matter  resting  on  bluish  clay,  which  may  be
traced  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Tor  Abbey,  at  a  height  of
about  eighty- four  feet  above  the  sea,  for  three-quarters  of  a  mile
to  the  shore.  The  same  bed  extends  to  an  unknown  distance
seaward,   many  stumps  and  roots*  of  trees   being  observed

*  Boapo,  cited  by  De  la  Bechc  m  his  Rej^K)rt  on  the  Geology  of  Devon,  &Cm
chap.  xiii.


Ch.  XX.]     INROADS  OF  THE  SEA  ON  THE  WEST  COAST.  549

firmly  fixed  in  the  olaj,  and  bones  of  the  deer,  wild  hog,
horse,  and  the  extinct  Boa  longifrons  occurring  in  the  peat ;
with  these,  the  antler  of  a  red-deer  was  observed  by  Mr.
Pengelly,  having  several  cuts  on  it  made  by  a  sharp  in-
strument, and  the  whole  fashioned  into  a  tool  for  piercing.
From  this  forest-bed,  at  a  point  in  the  bay  where  there  is
a  depth  of  more  than  thirty  feet  of  water,  the  fishermen  drew
up  in  their  trawl,  a  few  years  before  1851,  the  molar  tooth
of  the  mammoth,  or  Elephcut  primigenius,  stained  with  the
black  colour  of  the  peat,  and  retaining  much  of  its  animal
matter,  its  fresh  condition  being  probably  due  to  the  anti-
septic quality  of  the  peat.  The  specimen  is  now  in  the
Torquay  Museum,  and  it  is  interesting  as  serving  to  establish
the  fact  that  the  mammoth  survived  when  the  surface  of
this  region  had  already  acquired  its  present  configuration,
so  far  as  relates  to  the  direction  and  depth  of  the  valleys  in
the  bottom  of  one  of  which  the  peafc  alluded  to  was  formed.
I  mention  these  facts  to  show  that  submarine  forests  on  this
coast  cannot  be  safely  appealed  to  in  confirmation  of  changes
which  may  have  occurred  in  the  historical  period.  They  may
belong  to  the  close  of  the  paleolithic  era,  although  long  sub-
sequent to  the  filling  of  the  caves  of  Brixham  and  Kent's
Hole,  near  Torquay,  when  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  and  cave-
bear  CO- existed  with  man,  before  the  excavation  of  some  of
the  valleys  which  now  descend  to  the  sea  on  this  coast.

To  return  to  Cornwall:  the  oldest  historians  mention  a
tradition  of  the  submersion  of  the  Lionnesse,  a  country  said
to  have  stretched  from  the  Land's  End  to  the  Scilly  Islands.
The  tract,  if  it  ever  existed,  must  have  been  thirty  miles  in
length,  and  perhaps  ten  in  breadth.  The  land  now  remaining
on  either  side  is  from  two  hundred  to  three  hundred  feet
high ;  the  intervening  sea  about  three  hundred  feet  deep.
Although  there  is  no  authentic  evidence  for  this  romantic
tale,  it  probably  originated  in  some  former  inroads  of  the
Atlantic,  accompanying,  perhaps,  a  subsidence  of  land  on  this
coast.

If  we  then  turn  to  the  Bristol  Channel,  we  find  that  both
on  the  north  and  south  sides  of  it  there  are  numerous  re-
mains of  submerged  forests ;  to  one  of  these^  at  Porlock  Bay,


550         INROADS  OF  THE  SEA  ON  THE  WEST   COAST.      [GlXL

on  the  coast  of  Somersetshire,  Mr.  God  win- Austen  *  hu
lately  called  particular  attention,  and  has  shown  that  it  ex-
tends far  from  the  land.  There  is  indeed  good  reason  to  be-
lieve that  there  was  once  a  woodland  tract  uniting  Som^set-
shire  and  Wales,  through  the  middle  of  which  the  ancient
Severn  flowed.  The  former  existence  of  such  land  enables  og
to  comprehend  how  along  the  southern  coast  of  Glamor^
ganshire  fissures  and  caves  in  the  face  of  precipitous  clifi,
at  the  base  of  which  the  sea  now  beats,  maj  have  been
inhabited  by  the  hyena  and  bear,  or  became  the  receptadeft
of  the  bones  of  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  tiger,  reindeer  and
other  quadrupeds,  most  of  them  now  extinct.  In  one  of  these
caves  no  less  than  1,000  antlers  of  the  reindeer  were  foond.

At  St.   Bride's  Bay,  in   Pembrokeshire,   and  proceeding
farther  to  the  north  in  Cardiganshire  and  again  in  North
Wales  (as  in  Anglesea  and  Denbighshire),  we  have  repetitions
of  the  same  appearances  of  ancient  forests  adjoining  the  coast.
One  of  these  in  Anglesea  reminds  us  in  a  striking  manner
of  the  phenomena  before  mentioned  as  characterising  the
forest-bed  of  Tor  Abbey.     A  bed  of  peat  three  feet  thick,
with   the  stumps  and  roots  of  trees,  was  observed  by  the
Honourable  W.  Staaley,  exposed  at  low  water  in  the  harbour
of  Holyhead,  and  stretching  upwards  to  a  slight  elevation
above  the  sea,  where  the  excavjitions  made  for  the  railway  in
1849  brought  to  light  two  perfect  heads  of  the  mammoth.
The  tusks  and  molars  lay  two  feet  below  the  surface  in  the
peat,  which  was  covered  by  the  stiff  blue  clay.f     It  is  not
improbable  that  this  mammoth  survived  most  of  the   lost
species  which  were  its   contemporaries  in  what   has  been
called  the  Cavern  period.     At  the  same  time,  we   must  not
forget  that  the  fauna,  not  only  of  the  bronze  age,  but  of  the
oldest  lake-dwellers  of  Switzerland  to  whom  the  use  of  metals
was  unknown,  was  identical  with  that  of  the  historical  era,
no  mixture  of  the  bones  of  the  mammoth  or  of  Bos  longifranSf
or  even  of  the  reindeer,  having  been  detected,  whether  among
the  wild  or  domestic  animals  of  the  lacustrine  habitations

*  Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  1866,  vol.  zxii.  has  been  presented  to  the  British  Mu-

p.  1 .  scum  by  the  Hon.  W.  Stanley,  M JP.,  on

t  One  of  these   skulls,   referred  by  whose  property  they  were  found.
Prof.    Owen    to    Llepkas  primigeniuHi


Ch.  XX.]  THE  WEST  COAST  OF  ENGLAND.  551

of  Switzerland  or  in  the  kitchen-middens  of  Denmark.  If,
therefore,  all  the  littoral,  sunk  forests  of  the  south  and  west
of  England  are  referable  to  about  the  same  geological  period,
the  occasional  presence  in  them  of  the  mammoth  will  entitle
them  to  be  regarded  as  very  ancient,  or  of  a  date  inteiTening
between  the  era  of  the  lake-dwellings  and  that  of  the  oldest
epoch  to  which  man  has  yet  been  traced  back.

West  coast  of  England. — Having  now  brought  together
an  ample  body  of  proofs  of  the  destructive  operations  of  the
waves,  tides,  and  currents,  on  our  eastern  and  southern
shores,  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  enter  into  details  of  changes
on  the  western  coast,  for  they  present  merely  a  repetition  of
the  same  phenomena,  and  in  general  on  an  inferior  scale.
On  the  borders  of  the  estuary  of  the  Severn  the  flats  of
Somersetshire  and  Gloucestershire  have  received  enormous
accessions,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  coast  of  Cheshire,
between  the  rivers  Mersey  and  Dee,  has  lost,  since  the  year
1764,  many  hundred  yards,  and  some  affirm  more  than  half
a  mile,  by  the  advance  of  the  sea  upon  the  abrupt  clifiPs  of
red  clay  and  marls.  Within  the  period  above  mentioned
several  lighthouses  have  been  successively  abandon'ed.*  There
are  traditions  in  Pembrokeshire  t  and  Cardiganshire  J  of  far
greater  losses  of  territory  than  that  which  the  Lionnesse  tale
of  Cornwall  pretends  to  commemorate.  They  are  all  impor-
tant, as  demonstrating  that  the  earliest  inhabitants  were
familiar  with  the  phenomenon  of  incursions  of  the  sea.

Loss  of  land  on  the  coast  of  France. — The  French  coast,
particularly  that  of  Brittany,  where  the  tides  rise  to  an  ex-
traordinary height,  is  the  constant  prey  of  the  waves.  In
the  ninth  century  many  villages  and  woods  are  reported  to
have  been  carried  away,  the  coast  undergoing  great  change,
whereby  the  hill  of  St.  Michel  was  detached  from  the  main-
land. The  parish  of  Bourgneuf,  and  several  others  in  that
neighbourhood,  were  overflowed  in  the  year  1500.  In  1 735,
during  a  great  storm,  the  ruins  of  Palnel  were  seen  uncovered
in  the  sea.§

*  Stevenson,    Jameson'B    Ed.  New  p.  228.
Phil.  Journ.  No  8.  p.  386.  |  Meyrick's  Cardigan.

t  Camden,  who  cites  Giraldus ;  also  §  Von  Hoff,  Geschichte,  &c.  vol.  i.

Ray,  *  On  the  Deluge,'  Phys.  Theol.,  p.  49.


552


CHAPTER  XXI.

ACTION   OP   TIDES   AND   OUBBENTS— COn/tHttad.

INROADS  OF  THE  SEA  AT  THE  M0X7THS   OF  THB  RHINE  IN   HOLLAND CHAKOES

IN  THB  ARMS  OF  THB  RHINE — PROOFS  OF  SUBSIDENCE  OF  LAND — BSTUABT
OF  THE  BIES  BOSCH,  FORMUD  IN  1421 — ZX7YDBR  ZEE,  IN  THE  THIBTKEirrH
CBNTUBT — ISLANDS  DBSTROTBD — DELTA  OF  THB  BUS  CONTBBTBD  UXTO  A
BAY — ESTUARY  OF  THE  DOLLABT  FORMED — ENCROACHMKNT  OF  THB  SEA  OK
THB  COAST  OF  8LESWICK — ON  THE  SHORES  OF  NORTH  AMERICA — BALTIC
CURRENTS — CIMBRIAK  DELUGE — TIDAL  WAVE,   CALLED  THB  BORB.

Inroads  of  the  sea  at  the  mouths  of  the  Rhine. — ^Thb  line  of
British  coast  considered  in  the  preceding  chapter  offered  no
example  of  the  conflict  of  two  great  antagonistic  forces ;  the
influx,  on  the  one  hand,  of  a  river  draining  a  large  continent,
and,  on  the'  other,  the  action  of  the  waves,  tides,  and  currents
of  the  ocean.  But  when  we  pass  over  by  the  Straits  of
Dover  to  the  Continent,  and  proceed  north-eastwards,  we
find  an  admirable  illustration  of  such  a  contest,  where  the
ocean  and  the  Rhine  are  opposed  to  each  other,  each  dis-
puting the  ground  now  occupied  by  Holland ;  the  one  striving
to  shape  out  an  estuary,  the  other  to  form  a  delta.  There
was  evidently  a  period  when  the  river  obtained  the  ascen-
dency, when  the  shape  and  perhaps  the  relative  level  of  the
coast  and  set  of  the  tides  were  very  different ;  but  for  the  last
two  thousand  years,  during  which  man  has  witnessed  and
actively  participated  in  the  struggle,  the  result  has  been
in  favour  of  the  ocean ;  the  area  of  the  whole  territory  hav-
ing become  more  and  more  circumscribed ;  natural  and  arti-
ficial barriers  have  given  way,  one  after  another ;  and  many
hundred  thousand  human  beings  have  perished  in  the  waves.
Changes  in  tlis  arms  of  the  Rhine. — The  Rhine,  after  flowing
jfrom  the  Grison  Alps,  copiously  charged  with  sediment,  first
purifies  itself  in  the  Lake  of  Constance,  where  a  large  delta


Cu.  XXI.]      CHANGES  IN   THE  ARMS  OF   THE  RHINE.  553

is  formed;  then  swelled  by  the  Aar  and  numeroaa  other
tributaries,  it  flows  for  more  than  six  hundred  miles  towards
the  north ;  when,  entering  a  low  tract,  it  divides  into  two
arms,  about  ten  miles  north-east  of  Cleves, — a  point  which
may  be  considered  the  head  of  its  delta.  (See*,  map,  fig.
€2.)  In  speaking  of  the  delta,  I  do  not  mean  to  assume  that
all  that  part  of  Holland  which  is  comprieed  within  the
several  arms  of  the  Rhine  can  be  called  a  delta  in  the

Fig.  62.


]-.l-

^?:r.T _

Urllfftl«na

»

^

I

""^

•i

*

1

Line  of  C«st  tmrn  Nlenpon

v->

iL

'

a

in  n-blch

jgjg^St

^^^^H

IJ

HUtortoal  Period.      '•

i

eM°

■^1

)\i

r  f

V

'                         Aff„

1

w^

■v^

1

)r

w

'"'"^1^

s»

^Es

t^

s

\

1

W«(«h.™^^^°"^

^^

%z

-    \

'-O

^•■l.jrnd^dfi^V^

/

\  '

^

/

hr.rp

J   )

\

^

'x

-

u=

^  B      K     J.P^4l

L-_

ir      {_ —

^

^^^=^

-=:

. — -

The  dark  tint  hetTcen  Aotwerp  and  Niouport  TepreBsnta  part  of  the  Npthet-
laada  which  was  land  ia  the  time  ol'  the  Kamans,  tben  OTerflowed  by
the  sot  before  and  during  tbe  Sth  contuiy,  and  afwrwunla  ruconTeitad
into  land.


strictest  sense  of  the  term ;  because  some  portion  of  the
country  thus  circumscribed,  as,  for  example,  a  part  of  Gielder-
land  and  Utrecht,  consists  of  strata  which  may  have  been
deposited  in  the  sea  before  the  Khine  existed.  These  older
tracts  may  either  have  been  raised  like  the  TTllah  Bund  in


554     INROADS  OF  SEA  AT  MOUTHS  OF  THE  RHINE.      [Gs.XXL

Cutch,  during  the  period  when  the  sediment  of  the  Bhine
was  converting  a  part  of  the  sea  into  land,  or  they  may  have
constituted  islands  previously.

When  the  river  divides  north  of  Cleves,  the  left  arm  takes
the  name  of  the  Waal ;  and  the  right,  retaining  that  of  the
Rhine,  is  connected,  a  little  farther  to  the  north,  by  an  arti-
ficial canal  with  the  river  Yssel.     The  Rhine  then  flowing
westward  divides  again  south-east  of  Utrecht,  and  from  this
point  it  takes  the  name  of  the  Leek,  a  name  which  was  given
to  distinguish  it  from  the  northern  arm  called  the  Old  Rhine,
which  was  sanded  up  until  after  the  year  1825,  when  a
channel  was  cut  for  it,  by  which  it  now  enters  the  sea  at
Catwyck.    It  is  common,  in  all  great  deltas,  that  the  principal
channels  of  discharge  should  shift  from  time  to  time,  but  in
Holland  so  many  magnificent  canals  have  been  constructed,
and  have  so  diverted,  from  time  to  time,  the  course  of  the
waters,  that  the  geographical  changes  in  this  delta  are  end-
less, and  their  history,  since  the  Roma.n  era,  forms  a  compli-
cated topic  of  antiquarian  research.     The  present  head  of  the
delta  is  about  forty  geographical  miles  from  the  nearest  part
of  the  gulf  called  the  Zuyder  Zee,  and  more  than  twice  that
distance  from  the  general  coast-line.     The  present  head  of
the  delta  of  the  Nile  is  about  80  or  90  geographical  miles
from  the  sea  ;  that  of  the  Ganges,  as  before  stated,  220 ;  and
that  of  the  Mississippi  about  180,  reckoning  from  the  point
where  the  Atchafalaya  branches  off  to  the  extremity  of  the
new  tongue  of  land  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.     But  the  com-
parative distance  between  the  heads  of  deltas  and  the  sea
affords  no  positive  data  for  estimating  the  relative  magnitude
of  the  alluvial  tracts  formed  by  their  respective  rivers,  for  the
ramifications  depend  on  many  varying  and  temporary  circum-
stances, and  the  area  over  which  they  extend  does  not  hold
any  constant  proportion  to  the  volume  of  water  in  the  river.
The   Rhine,  for  instance,  has  at  present  three  mouths.
About  two-thirds  of  its  waters  flow  to  the  sea  by  the  Waal,
and  the  remainder  is  carried  partly  to  the  Zuyder  Zee  by  the
Yssel,  and  partly  to  the  ocean  by  the  Leek.     As  the  whole
coast  to  the  south  as  far  as  Ostend,  and  on  the  north  to  the
entrance  of  the  Baltic,  has,  with  few  exceptions,  from  time


Cu.  XXI.]      INROADS  OF  SEA  AT  MOUTHS  OF  THE  RHINE.     555

immemorial,  yielded  to  the  force  of  the  waves,  it  is  evident
that  the  common  delta  of  the  Bhine,  Mease,  and  Scheldt
(for  these  three  rivers  may  all  be  considered  as  discharging
their  waters  into  the  same  part  of  the  sea),  would,  if  its
advance  had  not  been  checked,  have  become  extremely  pro-
minent ;  and  even  if  it  had  remained  stationary,  would  long
ere  this  have  projected  far  beyond  the  rounded  outline  of  the
coast,  like  that  strip  of  land  already  described  at  the  mouth
of  the  Mississippi.  But  we  find,  on  the  contrary,  that  the
islands  which  skirt  the  coast  have  not  only  lessened  in  size,
but  in  number  also,  while  great  bays  have  been  formed  in  the
interior  by  incursions  of  the  sea.

In  order  to  explain  the  incessant  advance  of  the  ocean  on
the  shores  and  inland  country  of  Holland,  M.  E.  de  Beau-
mont has  suggested  that  there  has  in  all  probability  been  a
general  depression  or  sinking  of  the  land  below  its  former
level  over  a  wide  area.  Such  a  change  of  level  would  enable
the  sea  to  break  through  the  ancient  line  of  sand-banks  and
islands  which  protected  the  coast— would  lead  to  the  en-
largement of  bays,  the  formation  of  new  estuaries,  and  ulti-
mately to  the  entire  submergence  of  land.  These  views
appear  to  be  supported  by  the  fact  that  several  peat-mosses
of  fresh-water  origin  now  occur  under  the  level  of  the  sea,
especially  on  the  site  of  the  Zuyder  Zee  and  Lake  Flevo,  pre-
sently to  be  mentioned.  Several  excavations  also  made  for
wells  at  Utrecht,  Amsterdam,  and  Botterdam  have  proved,
that  below  the  level  of  the  ocean,  the  soil  near  the  coast  con-
sists of  alternations  of  sand  with  marine  shells,  and  beds  of
peat  and  clay,  which  have  been  traced  to  the  depth  of  fifty
feet  and  upwards.*

I  have  said  that  the  coast  to  the  south  as  far  as  Ostend
has  given  way.  This  statement  may  at  first  seem  opposed  to
the  fact,  that  the  tract  between  Antwerp  and  Nieuport,
shaded  black  in  the  map  (fig.  62,  p.  553),  although  now
dry  land,  and  supporting  a  large  population,  has,  within  the
historical  period,  been  covered  with  the  sea.  This  region,
however,  consisted,  in  the  time  of  the  Romans,  of  woods*
marshes,  and  peat- mosses,  protected  from  the  ocean  by  a

*  M.  £.  de  Beaumont,  G^ologie  Fnitique,  toI.  i.  p.  316,  and  ibid.  p.  260.


556        INROADS  OF  THE  SEA  IN  HOLLAND.     [Ch.  XXL

chain  of  sandy  dunes,  which  were  afterwards  broken  through
during  storms,  especially  in  the  fifth  century.  The  waters
of  the  sea  during  these  irruptions  threw  down  upon  the
barren  peat  a  horizontal  bed  of  fertile  clay,  which  is  in  some
places  three  yards  thick,  full  of  recent  shells  and  works  of
art.  The  inliabitants,  by  the  aid  of  embankments  and  the
sand  dunes  of  the  coast,  have  succeeded,  although  not  with-
out frequent  disasters,  in  defending  the  soil  thus  raised  by
the  marine  deposit.*

Inroads  of  the  sea  in  Holland, — If  we  pass  to   the   north-
ward  of  the  territory  just  alluded  to,  and  cross  the  Scheldt^
we  find  that  between  the  fourteenth  and  eighteenth  centu-
ries parts  of  the  islands  Walcheren  and  Beveland  were  swept
away,  and  several  populous  districts  of  Kadsand — losses  which
far  more  than  counterbalance  the  gain  of  land  caused  by  the
sanding-up  of  some  pre-existing  creeks.     In  1658  the  island
Orisant  was  annihilated.     One  of  the  most  memorable  in-
roads of  the  sea  occurred  in  1421,  when  the  tide,  pouring
into  the  mouth  of  the  united  Meuse  and  Waal,  burst  through
a  dam  in  the  district  between  Dort  and  Gertrudenberg,  and
overflowed  seventy-two  villages,  forming   a  large   sheet  of
water  called  the  Bies  Bosch.     (See  map,  fig.  62.)     Thirty-
five  of  the  villages  were  irretrievably  lost,  and  no  vestige,
even  of  their  ruins,  was  afterwards  seen.     The  rest  were  re-
deemed, and  the  site  of  the  others,  though  still  very  gene-
rally represented  on  maps  as  an  estuary,  has  in  fact  been
gradually  filled  up  by  alluvial  deposits,  and  had  become  in
1835,  as  I  was  informed  by  Professor  Moll,  an  immense
plain,  yielding  abundant  crops  of  hay,  though  still  uninha-
bited.    To  the  north  of  the  Meuse  is  a  long  Une  of  shore
covered  with  sand  dunes,  where  great  encroachments  have
taken  place  from  time  to  time,  in  consequence  chiefly  of  the
prevalence   of  south-easterly  winds,  which  blow  down  the
sands  towards  the  sea.     The  church  of  Scheveningen,  not  far
from  the  Hague,  was  once  in  the  middle  of  the  village,  and
now  stands  on  the  shore,  half  the  place  having  been  over-
whelmed by  the  waves  in  1570.     Catwyck,  once  far  from  the

*  Belpaire,  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  Roy.  de  Bnixelles,  torn.  x.  1837.     Dutoont,  Bulletin
of  the  same  Soc.  torn.  v.  p.  643.


Ch.  XXI.]  FORMATION  OF  THE  ZUYDER  ZEE.  667

sea,  is  now  upon  the  shore ;  two  of  its  streets  having  been
overflowed,  and  land  torn  away  to  the  extent  of  200  yards  in
1719.  It  is  only  by  aid  of  embankments  that  Petten,  and
several  other  places  farther  north,  have  been  defended
against  the  sea.

In  1853  the  Dutch  Government  laid  dry,  by  means  of
steam  power,  a  great  sheet  of  water  westward  of  Amsterdam,
formerly  called  the  Lake  of  Haarlem,  and  so  represented  in
our  map,  h  (fig.  62),  extending  over  45,000  acres.  This  gained
land  lies  thirteen  feet  beneath  the  mean  level  of  the  ocean  ;
and  in  1859,  when  I  visited  it,  supported  an  agricultural
population  of  5,000  souls.*

Formation  of  the  Zuyder  Zee  and  Straits  of  Staveren, — Still
more  important  are  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  on
the  coast  opposite  the  right  arm  of  the  Rhine,  or  the  Yssel,
where  the  ocean  has  burst  through  a  large  isthmus,  and  en-
tered the  inland  lake  Flevo,  which,  in  ancient  times,  was,
according  to  Pomponius  Mela,  formed  by  the  overflowing  of
the  Rhine  over  certain  lowlands.  It  appears  that,  in  the
time  of  Tacitus,  there  were  several  lakes  on  the  present  site
of  the  Zuyder  Zee,  between  Friesland  and  Holland.  The
successive  inroads  by  which  these,  and  a  great  part  of  the
adjoining  territory,  were  transformed  into  a  great  gulf,  began
about  the  commencement,  and  were  completed  towards  the
close,  of  the  thirteenth  century.  Alting  gives  the  following
relation  of  the  occurrence,  drawn  from  manuscript  docu-
ments of  contemporary  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring  pro-
vinces. In  the  year  1205,  the  island  now  called  Wieringen,
to  the  south  of  the  Texel,  was  still  a  part  of  the  mainland,
but  during  several  high  floods,  of  which  the  dates  are  given,
ending  in  December  1251,  it  was  separated  from  the  conti-
nent. By  subsequent  incursions,  the  sea  consumed  great
parts  of  the  rich  and  populous  isthmus,  a  low  tract  which
stretched  on  the  north  of  Lake  Flevo,  between  Staveren  in
Friesland  and  Medemblick  in  Holland  (see  map,  fig.  62),
till  at  length  a  breach  was  completed  about  the  year  1252,
and  afterwards  widened.      Great  destruction  of  land  took

*  For  a  fuller  description  of  thia  drained  tract,  see  Lyell's  '  Antiquity  of  Man.'
p.  147.


5S8


DESTEUCTION  OF  ISLANDS.


[Cm.  rsL


place  when  the  sea  first  broke  in,  and  man^  towns  vrere  swept
away ;  but  there  was  afterwards  a  reaction  to  a  certain
extent,  lai^  tracts,  at  first  submerged,  having  been  gradn-
ally  redeemed.  The  new  straits  south  of  Staveren  are  more
than  half  the  width  of  those  of  Dover,  but  are  very  shallow,
the  greatest  depth  not  exceeding  two  or  three  fathoms.  The
new  bay  is  of  a  aoraewhat  circular  form,  and  between  thirty
and  forty  miles  in  diameter.  How  much  of  this  space  may
formerly  have  been  occupied  by  Lake  Blevo  is  nnknown.
Desfniction  of  islands. — A  aeries  of  islands  stretching  from

Fie.  63.


-Inntl  of  Hi.ligo1uDd,  vith  Sandy  Island.


a.  Sandy  Island  in  tlio  {liatanct  said  M  ha\o  bran  formerly  nniud  with  the
b  b.  Struta  of  a  light  grcun  colour  sep.irating  tbe  beds  of  red  marl  and  sandstone.

the  Texel  to  the  mouths  of  the  Weser  and  Elbe  are  probably
the  la«t  relics  of  a  tract  once  continuous.  They  have  greatly
diminished  in  size,  and  have  lost  about  a  third  of  their  num-
ber, since  the  time  of  Pliny;  for  that  naturalist  counted
twenty-three  islands  between  the  Texel  and  the  Eider,  in
Schleswig- Holstein,  whereas  there  are  now  only  sixteen,  in-


Ch.  XXI.]  THE  DOLLAKT  FORMED.  559

eluding  Heligoland  and  Neuwerk.*  The  island  of  Heligoland,
at  the  mouth  of  the  Elbe,  consists  of  a  rock  of  red  marl  and
sandstone  of  the  Trias  formation  (or  Keuper  and  Bunter  of
the  Germans),  and  is  bounded  by  perpendicular  red  cliffs,
above  200  feet  high.  (See  fig.  63.)  Although,  according  to
some  accounts,  it  has  been  greatly  reduced  in  size  since  the
year  800,  M.  Wiebel  assures  us  that  the  ancient  map  by
Meyer  cannot  be  depended  upon,  and  that  the  island,  ac-
cording to  the  description  still  extant  by  Adam  of  Bremen,
was  not  much  larger  than  now  in  the  time  of  Charle-
magne. On  comparing  the  map  made  in  the  year  1793  by
the  Danish  engineer  Wessel,  the  average  encroachment  of
the  sea  on  the  cliffs,  between  that  period  and  1848  (or  about
half  a  century),  amounted  to  about  three  feet  a  year  for  the
whole  circumference  of  the  island.f  According  to  some
authorities,  Sandy  Island  (see  a,  fig.  63),  now  separated  from
Heligoland  by  a  navigable  channel,  formed,  within  the
memory  of  man,  a  portion  of  the  larger  island.  On  the
other  hand,  some  few  islands  off  the  Dutch  and  Danish
coasts  have  extended  their  bounds  in  one  direction,  or  become
connected  with  others,  by  the  sanding-up  of  channels  ;  but
even  these,  like  Juist,  have  generally  given  way  as  much  on
the  north  towards  the  sea  as  they  have  gained  on  the  south,
or  land  side.

The  Dollart  farmed. — While  the  delta  of  the  Rhine  has
suffered  so  materially  from  the  movements  of  the  ocean,  it
can  hardly  be  supposed  that  minor  rivers  on  the  same  coast
should  have  been  permitted  to  extend  their  deltas.  It  ap-
pears that  in  the  time  of  the  Romans  there  was  an  alluvial
plain  of  great  fertility,  where  the  Ems  entered  the  sea  by
three  arms.  This  low  country  stretched  between  Groningen
and  Friesland,  and  sent  out  a  peninsula  to  the  north-east
towards  Emden.  (See  map,  fig.  62.)  A  flood  in  1277  first
destroyed  part  of  the  peninsula.  Other  inundations  followed
at  different  periods  throughout  the  fifteenth  century.  In
1507,  a  part  only  of  Torum,  a  considerable  town,  remained
standing;  and  in  spite  of  the  erection  of  dams,  the  remainder

*  Von  Hoff,  vol.  i.  p.  364.

t  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  See.  toI.  iv.  p.  32  ;  Memoirs.


560  COAST  OF  SCHLESWIG.  [Cm.  XXL

of  that  place,  together  with  market-towns,  villages,  and
monasteries,  to  the  number  of  fifty,  were  finally  overwhelmed.
The  new  gulf,  which  was  called  the  Dollart,  although  small
in  comparison  to  the  Zuyder  Zee,  occupied  no  less  than  six
square  mi]es  at  first ;  but  part  of  this  space  was,  in  the  course
of  the  two  following  centuries,  again  redeemed  from  the  sea.
The  small  bay  of  Leybucht,  farther  north,  was  formed  in  a
similar  manner  in  the  thirteenth  century ;  and  the  bay  of
Harlbucht  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth.  Both  of  these
have  since  been  partially  reconverted  into  dry  land.  Another
new  estuary,  called  the  Gulf  of  Jahde,  near  the  month  of  the
Weser,  scarcely  inferior  in  size  to  the  Dollart,  has  been
gradually  hollowed  out  since  the  year  1016,  between  which
era  and  I60I  a  space  of  about  four  square  miles  has  been
added  to  the  sea.  The  rivulet  which  now  enters  this  inlet  is
very  small ;  but  Aren  conjectures  that  an  arm  of  the  Weser
had  once  an  outlet  in  that  direction.

Coast  of  Schleswig, — Farther  north  we  find  so  many  records
of  waste  on  the  western  coast  of  Schleswig,  as  to  lead  ns  to
anticipate  that,  at  no  distant  period  in  the  history  of  the
physical  geography  of  Europe,  Jutland  may  become  an
island,  and  the  ocean  may  obtain  a  more  direct  entrance  into
the  Baltic.  Indeed,  the  temporary  insulation  of  the  northern
extremity  of  Jutland  has  been  effected  no  less  than  four  times
within  the  records  of  history,  the  ocean  having  as  often  made
a  breach  through  the  bar  of  sand,  which  usually  excludes  it
from  the  Lyni  Fiord.  This  long  frith  is  1 20  miles  in  length,
including  its  windings,  and  communicates  at  its  eastern  end
with  the  Baltic.  The  last  irruption  of  salt  water  happened
in  182  i,  and  the  fiord  was  still  open  in  1837,  when  some
vessels  of  thirty  tons'  biu'den  pa.ssed  through.

The  Marsh  islands  between  the  rivers  Elbe  and  Eider  are
more  banks,  like  the  lands  formed  of  the  *  warp  '  in  the  Hum-
ber,  2)rotected  by  dikes.  Some  of  them,  after  having  been
inhabited  with  security  for  more  than  ten  centuries,  have
been  suddenly  overwhelmed.  In  this  manner,  in  1216,  no
less  than  10,000  of  the  inhabitants  of  Eiderstede  and  Dit-
marsch  perished;    and  on  the  11th  of  October,  1634,  the


Ck.  XXI.]


DESTBUCTIOS  OF  NORDSTRASD.


561


islands  and  the  whole  coast,  as  far  as  Jutland,  anflered  bj  a
dreadful  deluge.

Destruction  of  Nordetravd  by  ike  sea. — Nordstracd,  up  to
the  jreax  1240,  was,  with  the  islands  Sjlt  and  Fohr  (see  map,
Bg.  64),  BO  nearly  connected  with  the  mainland  as  to  uppear


Fig.  e*.


a—

'■1M\

n

]

Ite  l!^

^^\\  1

I'^

if^ii^'^

'oiijiSH^^^^H^^^H

i^p

1

Line  of  coa«t  from  the  nortli  of  Ilnllandto  the  Bultie,  shoving  iJie  poEitioii
of  ielands  vbich  have  lu&ered  voste  in  the  hiiitorical  period.

a  peninsula,  and  was  called  North  Fnesland,  a  highly  culti-
vated and  populous  district.  It  measured  from  nine  to  eleven
geographical  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  six  to  eight
from  east  to  west.  In  the  above-mentioned  year  it  was  torn
asunder  from  the  continent,  and  in  part  overwhelmed.  The
VOL.   I.  0  0  _^^fc^


562  CIMBBIAN  DELUGE.  [Cl  XXL

Isle  of  Nordstrand,  thus  formed,  was,  towards  the  end  of
the  sixteenth  century,  only  sixteen  geographical  miles  in  cir-
cumference, and  was  still  celebrated  for  its  cnltiFation  and
numerous  population.  After  many  losses,  it  still  contained
9,000  inhabitants.  At  last,  in  the  year  1634,  on  the  even-
ing of  the  11th  of  October,  a  flood  passed  over  the  whole
island,  whereby  1,300  houses,  with  many  churches,  were  lost;
above  6,000  men  perished,  and  50,000  head  of  cattle.  Three
small  islets,  one  of  them  still  called  Nordstrand,  alone  re-
mained, which  are  now  continually  wasting.

The  redundancy  of  river  water  in  the  Baltic,  especially
during  the  melting  of  ice  and  snow  in  spring,  causes  in
general  an  outward  current  through  the  channel  called  the
Cattegat.  But  after  an  unusual  continuance  of  north-
westerly gales,  especially  during  the  height  of  the  spring-
tides, the  Atlantic  rises,  and  pouring  a  flood  of  water  into
the  Baltic,  commits  dreadful  devastations  on  the  isles  of  the
Danish  Archipelago.  This  current  even  acts,  though  with
diminished  force,  as  far  eastward  as  the  vicinity  of  Dantzic*
Accounts  written  during  the  last  ten  centuries  attest  the
wearing  down  of  promontories  on  the  Danish  coast,  the
deepening  of  gulfs,  the  severing  of  peninsulas  from  the  main-
land, and  the  waste  of  islands,  while  in  several  cases  marsh
land,  defended  for  centuries  by  dikes,  has  at  last  been  over-
flowed, and  thousands  of  the  inhabitants  overwhelmed  in  the
waves.  Thus  the  island  Barsoe,  on  the  coast  of  Schleswig
(see  fig.  64),  has  lost,  year  after  year,  an  acre  at  a  time,  and
the  island  Alsen  suffers  in  like  manner.

Cimbrian  deluge. — As  we  have  already  seen  that,  during  the
flood  above  mentioned,  6,000  men  and  50,000  head  of  cattle
perished  on  Nordstrand,  on  the  western  coast  of  Jutland,  we
are  well  prepared  to  find  that  this  peninsula,  the  Cimbrica
Chersonesus  of  the  ancients,  has  from  a  remote  period  been
the  theatre  of  like  catastrophes.  Accordingly,  Strabo  re-
cords a  story,  although  he  treats  it  as  an  incredible  fiction,
that,  during  a  high  tide,  the  ocean  rose  upon  this  coast  so
rapidly  that  men  on  horseback  were  scarcely  able  to  escape.t

♦  See  examples  in  Von  Hoff,  rol.  i.  p.  73,  "who  cites  Pisansky.
t  Book  \ii.  Cimbri.


Ch.  XXI.]        INROADS  OF  SEA  IN  NORTH  AMERICA.  663

Florus,  alluding  to  the  same  tradition,  says, '  The  Cimbrians,
Teutons,  and  Tigurini,  flying  from  the  extreme  limits  of  Gaul,
when  the  ocean  had  overflowed  their  territory,  were  looking
out  in  all  parts  of  the  world  for  new  settlements/*  This
event,  commonly  called  the  *  Cimbrian  Deluge,*  is  supposed
to  have  happened  about  three  centuries  before  the  Christian
era ;  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  principal  catastrophe
was  preceded  and  followed  by  many  devastations  like  those
experienced  in  modem  times  on  the  islands  and  shores  of
Jutland,  and  such  calamities  may  well  be  conceived  to  have
forced  on  the  migration  of  some  maritime  tribes.

Inroads  of  the  sea  on  the  eastern  shores  of  North  America, —
After  so  many  authentic  details  respecting  the  destruction
of  the  coast  in  parts  of  Europe  best  known,  it  will  be  un-
necessary to  multiply  examples  of  analogous  changes  in
more  distant  regions  of  the  world.  It  must  not,  however,
be  imagined  that  our  own  sea  coasts  are  wearing  away  at  an
exceptionally  rapid  rate.  Thus,  for  example,  if  we  pass  over
to  the  eastern  coast  of  North  America,  where  the  tides  rise  in
the  Bay  of  Fundy  to  a  great  elevation,  we  find  many  facts
attesting  the  incessant  demolition  of  land.  Cliffs,  of  ten  several
hundred  feet  high,  composed  of  sandstone,  red  marl,  and
other  rocks,  which  border  that  bay  and  its  numerous  estu-
aries, are  perpetually  undermined.  The  ruins  of  these  cliflFs
are  gradually  carried,  in  the  form  of  mud,  sand,  and  large
boulders,  into  the  Atlantic  by  powerful  currents,  aided  at
certain  seasons  by  drift  ice,  which  forms  along  the  coast,  and
freezes  round  large  stones.

At  Capfe  May,  on  the  north  side  of  Delaware  Bay,  in  the
United  States,  the  encroachment  of  the  sea  was  shown  by
observations  made  consecutively  for  sixteen  years,  from  1804
to  1820,  to  average  about  nine  feet  a  year ;  f  and  at  Sullivan's
Island,  which  lies  on  the  north  side  of  the  entrance  of  the
harbour  of  Charlestown,  in  South  Carolina,  the  sea  carried
away  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  land  in  three  years  ending  in
17864

*  '  Cimbri,  Teutoni,  atque  Tigurini,  toto  orbo  quserebant' — Lib.  iii.  cap.  3.
ab  extremis  Galli»  profogi,  cnm  terras  t  New  Monthly  Mag.  voL  yi.  p.  69.

eorum  inundasset  Oceanus,  novaa  sedes  %  Von  Hof^  toL  i.  p.  96.

o  o  2


564  TIDAL  WAVE  CALLED  *  THE  BOBE/  [Ql  XXL

Tidal  wave  called  *  the  Bore.* — Before  conclnding  my  re-
marks on  the  action  of  the  tides,  I  must  not  omit  to  men-
tion the  wave  called  ^the  Bore/  which  is  sometimes  pro-
duced in  a  river  where  a  large  body  of  water  is  made  to  rise
suddenly,  in  consequence  of  the  narrowing  of  the  channel.
The  wave  terminates  abruptly  on  the  inland  side  ;  becaose
the  quantity  of  water  contained  in  it  is  so  great,  and  its
motion  so  rapid,  that  time  is  not  allowed  for  the  snrfisuse  of
the  river  to  be  immediately  raised  by  means  of  transmitted
pressure.  A  tide  wave  thus  rendered  abrupt  has  a  close
analogy,  observes  Dr.  Whewell,  to  the  waves  whick  curl  over
and  break  on  a  shelving  shore.*

The  Bore  which  enters  the  Severn,  where  the  phenomenon
is  of  almost  daily  occurrence,  is  sometimes  nine  feet  high,
and  at  spring-tides  rushes  up  the  estuary  with  extraordinary
rapidity.  The  finest  example  which  I  have  seen  of  this  wave
was  in  Nova  Scotia,t  where  the  tide  is  said  to  rise  in  some
places  seventy  feet  perpendicular,  and  to  be  the  highest  in
the  world.  In  the  large  estuary  of  the  Skubenacadie,  which
is  connected  with  another  estuary  called  tiie  Basin  of  Mines,
itself  an  embranchment  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  a  vast  body  of
water  comes  rushing  up,  with  a  roaring  noise,  into  a  long
narrow  channel,  and  while  it  is  ascending,  has  all  the  ap-
pearance of  pouring  down  a  slope  as  steep  as  that  of  the
celebrated  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence.  In  picturesque
efiFect,  however,  it  bears  no  comparison,  for  instead  of  the
transparent  green  water  and  snow-white  foam  of  the  St
Lawrence,  the  whole  current  of  the  Shubenacadie  is  turbid
and  densely  charged  with  red  mud.  The  same  phenomenon
is  frequently  witnessed  in  the  principal  branches  of  the
Ganges  and  in  the  Megna  as  before  mentioned  (p.  476).  ^  In
the  Hoogly,'  says  Rennell,  *  the  Bore  commences  at  Hoogly
Point,  the  place  where  the  river  first  contracts  itself,  and  is
perceptible  above  Hoogly  Town ;  and  ao  quick  is  its  motion,
that  it  hardly  employs  four  hours  in  travelling  from  one  to
the  other,  though  the  distance  is  nearly  seventy  miles.  At
Calcutta  it  sometimes  occasions  an  instantaneous  rise  of  five

*  Phil.  Trans.  1833,  p.  204.  rica,  in  1842,  vol.  ii.  p.  166.     London,

t  See  Lyell's  Travels  in  North  Ame-       1845.


Ch.  XXI.]  TIDAL  WAVE  CALLED  *  THE  BORE.'  565

feet ;  and  both  here,  and  in  every  other  part  of  its  track,  the
boats,  on  its  approach,  immediately  qnit  the  shore,  and  make
for  safety  to  the  middle  of  the  river.  In  the  channels,
between  the  islands  in  the  mouth  of  the  Megna,  the  height
of  the  Bore  is  said  to  exceed  twelve  feet ;  and  is  so  terrific  in
its  appearance,  and  dangerous  in  its  consequences,  that  no
boat  will  venture  to  pass  at  spring-tide/*  These  waves  may
sometimes  cause  inundations,  undermine  cliffs,  and  still  more
frequently  sweep  away  trees  and  land  animals  from  low
shores,  so  that  they  may  be  carried  down,  and  ultimately
imbedded  in  fluviatile  or  submarine  deposits.

*  Bennell,  Phil.  Trans.  178L


/


566


CHAPTER  XXn.

EEPEODUCTIVE    EFFECTS  OP  TIDES  AND   GXJBBENTS.

DEFOSITINO  POWEB  OF  TIDAI.  CUBRENTS — SILTINO  T7P  OF  BSTUABIBB  1>OBS
NOT  COMPENSATB  TUB  LOSS  OF  LAND  ON  THB  BOBDBBS  OF  THB  OCMAN —
ORIGIN  OF  SHOALS  AND  TALLEYS  IN  THB  BED  OF  THB  OBBMAK  OCBAV —
COMPOSITION  AND  BXTENT  OF  ITS  SAND-BANKS— STRATA  DBFOSITBD  BT
CURRENTS  IN  THB  ENGLISH  CHANNEL — AT  THB  MOUTHS  OF  THB  AJCASONS,
ORINOCO,  AND  MISSISSIPPI — WIDE  ARBA  OYBR  WHICH  STRATA  MAT  BE  FOBJCKD
BY   THIS   CAUSE.

Depositing  power  of  tidal  currents, — Feom  the  facts  enume-
rated in  the  last  chapter,  it  appears  that  on  the  borders  of
the  ocean,  currents  and  tides  co-operating  with  the  waves  of
the  sea  are  most  powerful  instruments  in  the  destruction  and
transportation  of  rocks;  and  as  numerous  tributaries  dis-
charge their  alluvial  burden  into  the  channel  of  one  great
river,  so  we  find  that  many  rivers  deliver  their  earthy  con-
tents to  one  marine  current,  to  be  borne  by  it  to  a  distance,
and  deposited  in  some  deep  receptacle  of  the  ocean.  The
current,  besides  receiving  this  tribute  of  sedimentary  matter
from  streams  draining  the  land,  acts  also  itself  on  the  coast,
as  does  a  river  on  the  cliflFs  which  bound  a  valley.  Yet  the
waste  of  the  cliflFs  by  marine  cuiTents  constitutes  on  the
whole  a  very  insignificant  portion  of  the  denudation  annually
eflfected  by  aqueous  causes,  as  I  shall  point  out  in  the  sequel
of  this  chapter  (p.  572).

In  inland  seas,  where  the  tides  are  insensible,  or  on  those
parts  of  the  borders  of  the  ocean  where  they  are  feeble,  it  is
scarcely  possible  to  prevent  a  harbour  at  a  river's  mouth
from  silting  up  ;  for  a  bar  of  sand  or  mud  is  formed  at  points
where  the  velocity  of  the  turbid  river  is  checked  by  the  sea,
or  where  the   river  and  a  marine   current   neutralise  each


Ch.  XXn.]     DEPOSITING  POWER  OF  TIDAL  CURRENTS.  567

other's  force.  For  the  current,  as  we  have  seen,  may,  like
the  river,  hold  in  suspension  a  large  quantity  of  sediment*
or,  co-operating  with  the  waves,  may  cause  the  progressive
motion  of  a  shingle  beach  in  one  direction.  I  have  already
alluded  to  the  erection  of  piers  and  groins  at  certain  places
on  our  southern  coast,  to  arrest  the  course  of  the  shingle  and
sand  (see  p.  536).  The  immediate  effect  of  these  temporary
obstacles  is  to  cause  a  great  accumulation  of  pebbles  on  one
side  of  the  barrier,  afber  which  the  beach  still  moves  on
round  the  end  of  the  pier  at  a  greater  distance  from  the
land.  This  interference,  however,  with  the  natural  course  or
movement  of  the  materials  of  the  beach  is  often  attended
with  a  serious  evil,  for  during  storms  the  waves  throw  sud-
denly into  the  harbour  the  vast  heap  of  pebbles  which  have
collected  for  years  behind  the  groin  or  pier,  as  happened
during  a  great  gale  (Jan.  1839)  at  Dover.

The  formation  and  keeping  open  of  large  estuaries  are  due
to  the  combined  injluence  of  tidal  currents  and  rivers;  for
when  the  tide  rises,  a  large  body  of  water  suddenly  enters
the  mouth  of  the  river,  where,  becoming  confined  within
narrow  bounds,  while  its  momentum  is  not  destroyed,  it  is
urged  on,  and,  having  to  pass  through  a  contracted  channel,
rises  and  runs  with  increased  velocity,  just  as  a  stream  when
it  reaches  the  arch  of  a  bridge  scarcely  large  enough  to  give
passage  to  its  waters,  rushes  with  a  steep  fall  through  the
arch.  During  the  ascent  of  the  tide,  a  body  of  fresh  water,
flowing  down  from  the  inland  country,  is  arrested  in  its
course  for  several  hours ;  and  thus  a  large  lake  of  fresh  and
brackish  water  is  accumulated,  which,  when  the  sea  ebbs,  is
let  loose,  as  on  the  removal  of  an  artificial  sluice  or  dam.
By  the  force  of  this  retiring  water,  the  alluvial  sediment  both
of  the  river  and  of  the  sea  is  swept  away,  and  transported
to  such  a  distance  from  the  mouth  of  the  estuary,  that  a  small
part  only  can  return  with  the  next  tide.

It  sometimes  happens,  that  during  a  violent  storm  a  large
bar  of  sand  is  suddenly  made  to  shift  its  position,  so  as  to
prevent  the  free  influx  of  the  tides,  or  efflux  of  river  water.
Thus  about  the  year  1500  the  sands  at  Bayonne  were  sud-
denly thrown  across  the  mouth  of  the  Adour.     The  river,


568  SOLTING  UP  OF  ESTUARIEar.  [Ck.  XXIL

flowing  back  upon  itself^  soon  forced  a  passage  to  the  noitli-
ward  along  the  sandy  plain  of  Capbreton^  till  at  last  it
reached  the  sea  at  Boucau,  at  the  distance  of  seven  leagues
from  the  point  where  it  had  formerly  entered.  It  was  not
till  the  year  1579  that  the  celebrated  architect  Louis  de  Foix
undertook,  at  the  desire  of  Henry  III.,  to  re-open  the  ancient
channel,  which  he  at  last  effected  with  great  difficulty.*

In  the  estuary  of  the  Thames  at  London,  and  in  the  Gironde,
the  tide  rises  only  for  fire  hours  and  ebbs  seven,  and  in  all
estuaries  the  water  requires  a  longer  time  to  ran  down  than
up ;  so  that  the  preponderating  force  is  always  in  the  direc-
tion which  tends  to  keep  open  a  deep  and  broad  passage.  But
for  reasons  already  explained,  there  is  naturally  a  tendency
in  all  estuaries  to  silt  up  partially,  since  eddies,  and  back-
waters, and  points  where  opposing  streams  meet,  are  very
numerous,  and  constantly  change  their  position.

Many  writers  have  declared  that  the  gain  on  our  eastern
coast,  since  the  earliest  periods  of  history,  has  more  than
counterbalanced  the  loss ;  but  they  hare  been  at  no  pains  to
calculate  the  amount  of  loss,  and  have  often  forgotten  that,
while  the  new  acquisitions  are  manifest,  there  are  rarely  any
natural  monuments  to  attest  the  former  existence  of  the  land
that  has  been  carried  away.  They  have  also  taken  into  their
account  those  tracts  artificially  recovered,  which  are  often  of
great  agricultural  importance,  and  may  remain  secure,  per-
haps, for  thousands  of  years,  but  which  are  only  a  few  feet
above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea,  and  are  therefore  exposed
to  be  overflowed  again  by  a  small  proportion  of  the  force  re-
quired to  move  cliffs  of  considerable  height  on  our  shores.
If  it  were  true  that  the  area  of  land  annually  abandoned  by
the  sea  in  estuaries  were  equal  to  that  invaded  by  it,  there
would  still  be  no  compensation  in  kind.

The  tidal  current  which  flows  out  from  the  north-west,
and  which,  deflected  and  confined  in  the  German  Ocean,
bears  against  the  eastern  coast  of  England,  transports,  as
we  have  seen,  materials  of  various  kinds.  Aided  by  the
waves,  it  undermines  and  sweeps  away  the  granite,  gneiss,
trap    rocks,  and  sandstone   of   Shetland,  and   removes    the

*  Nouvello  Chronique  de  la  Ville  do  Bayonne,  pp.  113,  189.     1827.


Ch.  XXn.]  SILTING  UP  OF  ESTUARIES.  569

gravel  and  loam  of  the  cliffs  of  Holdemess,  Norfolk,  and
Suffolk,  which  are  between  twenty  and  three  hundred  feet  in
height,  and  which  waste  at  various  rates  of  from  one  foot  to
six  yards  annually.  It  also  bears  away,  in  co-operation  with
the  Thames  and  the  tides,  the  strata  of  London  clay  on  the
coasts  of  Essex  and  Sheppey.  The  sea  at  the  same  time  con-
sumes the  chalk  with  its  flints  for  many  miles  continuously
on  the  shores  of  Kent  and  Sussex — commits  annual  ravages
on  the  freshwater  beds,  capped  by  a  thick  covering  of  chalk-
flint  gravel,  in  Hampshire,  and  continually  saps  the  founda-
tion of  the  Portland  limestone.  It  receives,  besides,  duiing
the  rainy  months,  large  supplies  of  pebbles,  sand,  and  mud,
which  numerous  streams  from  the  Grampians,  Cheviots,  and
other  chains,  send  down  to  the  sea.  To  what  regions,  then,  is
all  this  nrntter  consigned  P  It  is  not  retained  in  mechanical
suspension  by  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  nor  does  it  mix  with
them  in  a  state  of  chemical  solution, — it  is  deposited  some-
wherey  yet  certainly  not  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
our  shores  ;  for,  in  that  case,  there  would  soon  be  a  cessation
of  the  encroachment  of  the  sea,  and  large  tracts  of  low  land,
like  Romney  Marsh,  would  almost  everywhere  encircle  our
island.

As  there  is  now  o,  depth  of  water,  exceeding  thirty  feet,  in
some  spots  where  towns  like  Dunwich  flourished  but  a  few
centuries  ago,  it  is  clear  that  the  current  not  only  carries  far
away  the  materials  of  the  wasted  cliffs,  but  is  capable  also  of
keeping  clear  the  bed  of  the  sea  to  a  certain  moderate  depth.

Origin  of  shoals  and  valleys  in  the  bottom  of  the  German
Ocean.-  -To  what  extent  in  a  downward  direction  this  power
of  submarine  erosion  extends,  is  a  question  of  the  highest
geological  interest,  and  one  respecting  which  we  have  at
present  no  very  accurate  information.  The  sea  between
Great  Britain  and  the  Continent  of  Europe  has  rarely  a
depth  of  more  than  50  fathoms,  and  the  only  part  which
exceeds  100  fathoms  is  a  narrow  channel  skirting  the  western
coast  of  Norway  and  Sweden,  which  varies  from  200  to  300
fathoms,  and  attains  at  one  point,  near  the  entrance  of  the
Baltic,  the  extraordinary  depth  of  430  fathoms,  or  2,580  feet.
Some  hydrographers  are  of  opinion  that  even  this  channel


570  THE  SILVEB  PITS  AND  DOGGEB  BAKE.        [G&  XXH

has  been  scooped  out  by  a  tidal  current,  but  to  me  it  appears
more  probable  that  it  indicates  the  original  depth  of  this  port
of  the  ocean  where  fresh  sediment  has  not  been  thrown  down*
Nevertheless,  there  are  some  submarine  valleys,  or  long
narrow  ravines,  traversing  the  shallow  parts  of  the  German
Ocean,  which  seem  to   have   been   due  to  a  tidal  current,
capable  either  of  scouring  out  a  channel,  or  of  keeping  one
clear  by  not  allowing  it  to  become  the  receptacle  of  matter
drifted  towards  it  from  the  nearest  coast.     Of  this  nature  is
the  depression  called  the  Outer  Silver  Pits,  about  60  miles
due  east  of  Flamborough  Head,  the  deepest  part  of  which  is
about  40  fathoms,  or  240  feet.     If  the  Mississippi,  with  a
surface  velocity  of  three  miles  an  hour,  can  push  along  sand
and  gravel  at  the  bottom,  and  keep  open  a  channel  from  150
to  200  feet  in  depth,  a  marine  current,  sometimes  flowing  at
a  still  greater  rate,  may  well  be  supposed  to  excavate  or  keep
clear  the  Silver  Pits.  Mr.  Murray,  in  the  memoir  explanatory
of  his  map  of  the  North  Sea,  in  which  he  has  embodied  the
results  of  Captain  Hewitt's  survey,  assumes  that  this  ravine,
and  also  the  Inner  Silver  Pits,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Hum-
ber,  have  been  scooped  out  by  the  tidal  current,  whereas  the
great  shoals  north  and  south  of  the  Silver  Pits  are  areas  in
which  drift  matter  and   comminuted  shells  are  constantly
heaped  up  in  comparatively  tranquil  water.    The  great  shoal
to  the  north,  called  the  Dogger  Bank,  about  60  miles  east  of
the  coast  of  Northumberland,  is  no  less  than  200  miles  in  its
longest  diameter ;  it  has  been  compared  in  size  to  the  whole
principality  of  Wales.    In  this  area  there  is  one  tract  75  miles
long  and  20  broad,  nowhere  exceeding  15  fathoms  in  depth,
while  the  shallowest  parts  were  found  by  Captain  Hewitt
to  be  only  42  feet  under  water,  and  in  one  place  the  wreck
of  a  ship  had  caused  it  to  be  still  shallower.     South  of  the
Silver  Pits  there  is  another  vast  area  of  shoals,  which  we
may  safely  regard  as  the  receptacle  both  of  sediment  brought
down  by  rivers  and  of  matter  derived  from  the  waste  of  the
British  coast.     Entire  as  well  as  broken  shells  are  dredged
up  on  the  Dogger  and  other  banks  over  which  fishermen
annually  trawl  their  nets.    Currents  running  sometimes  from
the  north,  and  sometimes  from  the  south,  remove  parts  of  the


Ch.  XXIL]     DENUDlKa  AND  TRANSPORTINa  AGENTS.  571

banks  during  heavy  gales,  causing  the  sands  to  shift  their
position,  in  which  case  the  strata,  when  re-deposited,  must
greatly  resemble  the  so-called  crag  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk.
Nor  can  there  fail,  in  the  course  of  ages,  to  be  spots  where
some  of  the  unconsolidated  older  tertiary  formations,  such,
for  example,  as  the  Bagshot  sand  and  London  clay,  will  be
denuded  with  as  much  facility  as  the  modem  sand-banks ;
such  denudation  would  inevitably  take  place  during  oscilla-
tions in  the  level  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  like  those  which
we  know  to  have  occurred  during  and  since  the  Glacial
epoch.  Whenever  the  sea  scooped  out  such  channels  in  the
ancient  strata,  fossil  shells  of  extinct  species  would  be
mingled  with  recent  ones,  and  both  the  one  and  the  other
would  often  be  more  or  less  rolled.  As  the  bones  also  of  the
elephant  and  other  extinct  mammalia  are  occasionally
dredged  up  with  oysters  attached  to  them,  from  the  bed  of
the  sea  between  Suffolk  and  the  Netherlands,  such  fossil
bones  would  be  occasionally  included  in  the  new  formations.
The  chief  difference  in  character  between  the  Pliocene  and
modem  strata  will  consist  in  the  intermixture  in  the  latter
of  works  of  art  together  with  the  bones  of  man ;  monuments
of  hundreds,  nay  thousands,  of  wrecked  vessels,  which  in  the
last  twenty  centuries  have  sxmk  on  these  banks,  and  so  im-
peded for  a  time  the  free  passage  over  them  of  shelly  sand,
as  to  produce  shoals  reaching  within  thirty  feet  of  the
surface.

So  great  is  the  quantity  of  mud  held  in  suspension  by  the
tidal  current  on  our  shores,  that  it  is  found  useful  artificially
to  introduce  the  water  into  certain  lands  reclaimed  from  the
sea  and  which  are  below  the  level  of  high  tide ;  and  by  re-
peating this  operation,  which  is  called  *  warping,'  for  two  or
three  years,  considerable  tracts  have  been  raised,  in  the
estuary  of  the  Humber,  to  the  height  of  about  six  feet  above
their  former  level.  If  a  current,  charged  with  such  materials,
meets  with  deep  depressions  in  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  it  must
often  fill  them  up ;  just  as  a  river,  when  it  meets  with  a  lake
in  its  course,  fills  it  gradually  with  sediment.

Comparative  efficacy  of  rivers  and  currents  as  transporting
and  denuding  agents. — I  have  said  (p.  566}  that  the  action  of


572        ARRANQEHENT  OF  UATEBIAL8  IK  CUKBBNT     [Ck.

the  waves  and  currents  on  sea-clifis,  or  their  power  to  rei
matter  from  above  to  below  the  sea-level,  is  inaigni&cui
comparison  with  the  power  of  rivers  to  perform  the  i
task.  As  an  illustration  we  may  take  the  coast  of  Ho
ness,  described  in  Chap.  zz.  (p.  514).  It  is  comp
as  we  have  seen,  of  very  destructible  materials,  is  thirt
miles  long,  and  its  average  height  may  be  taken  at  forty
As  it  has  wasted  away  at  the  rate  of  two  and  a  quarter  j
annually,  for  a  long  period,  it  will  be  found  on  calcoL
that  the  quantity  of  matter  thrown  down  into  the  sea  (
year,  and  removed  by  the  current,  amounts  to  51,821,600  <
feet.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  united  Ganges  and  Bral
pootra  cairy  down  to  the  Bay  of  Bengal  40,OOO,00(
cubic  feet  of  solid  matter  every  year,  so  that  their  ti
porting  power  is  no  less  than  780  times  greater  than  th
the  sea  on  the  coast  above  mentioned  ;  and  in  order  to
duce  a  result  equal  to  that  of  the  two  Indian  rivers,  we
have  a  line  of  wasting  coast,  like  that  of  Eoldemees,  n
28,000  miles  in  length,  or  longer  than  the  entire  cin
ference  of  the  globe  by  above  3,000  miles.  The  reason
great  a  difference  in  the  results  may  be  understood  wbe
reflect  tliat  the  operations  of  the  ocean  are  limited  to  a  sj
line  of  cliff  surrounding  a  large  area,  whereas  great  r:
with  their  tributaries,  and  the  mountain  torrents  which
into  them,  act  simultaneously  on  a  length  of  bank  ali
indefinite.

Nevertheless  we  are  by  no  means  entitled  to  infer  that
denuding  force  of  the  great  ocean  is  a  geological  cam
small  efficacy,  or  inferior  to  that  of  rivers.  Its  chief  influi
is  exei-ted  at  moderate  depths  below  the  surface,  on  all  ti
areas  which  are  slowly  rising,  or  are  attempting,  as  it  v
to  rise  above  the  sea.  From  data  hitherto  obtained  resp
ing  subterranean  movements,  we  can  scarcely  speculate  o
average  rate  of  upheaval  of  more  than  two  or  three  feet
century.  An  elevation  to  this  amount  is  taking  plac
Scandinavia,  aud  probably  in  many  submarine  areas  as
as  those  ivbich  we  know  to  be  sinking  from  the  proofs
rived  from  circular  lagoon  islands  or  coral  atolls.*
*  Sen  the  Inst  clupter  in  Vol.  II.


L


Ch.  XXn.]     DEPOSITS  AND  THEIR  WIDE  DIFFUSION.  578

Suppose  strata  as  destructible  as  the  greater  part  of  the
Tertiary,  Cretaceous,  and  Wealden  deposits  of  the  British
Isles,  or  the  coal-measures  or  mud-stones  of  the  Silurian
periods,  to  be  thus  slowly  upheaved,  how  readily  might  they
all  be  swept  away  by  waves  and  currents  in  an  open  sea !
How  entirely  might  each  stratum  disappear  as  it  was  brought
up  successively  and  exposed  to  the  breakers !  Shoals  of  wide
extent  might  be  produced,  but  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how
any  continent  could  ever  be  formed  under  such  cu'cumstances.
Were  it  not  indeed  for  the  hardness  and  toughness  of  some
limestones  and  of  many  crystalline  and  volcanic  rocks  which
are  often  capable  of  resisting  the  action  of  the  waves,  few
lands  might  ever  emerge  from  the  midst  of  an  open  sea.

Arrangement  of  materials  in  current  deposits  and  their  wide
diffusion. — It  has  been  ascertained  by  soundings  in  all  parts
of  the  world,  that  where  new  deposits  are  taking  place  in  the
sea,  coarse  sand  and  small  pebbles  commonly  occur  near  the
shore,  while  farther  from  land,  and  in  deeper  water,  finer
sand  and  broken  shells  are  spread  out  over  the  bottom.  Still
farther  out,  the  finest  mud  and  ooze  are  alone  met  with.
Mr.  Austen  observes  that  this  rule  holds  ^^d  in  every  part
of  the  English  Channel  examined  by  him.  He  also  informs
us,  that  where  the  tidal  current  runs  rapidly  in  what  is  called
*  races,'  where  surface  undulations  are  perceived  in  the  calmest
weather,  over  deep  banks,  the  discoloration  of  the  water  does
not  arise  from  the  power  of  such  a  current  to  disturb  the
bottom  at  a  depth  of  40  to  80  fathoms,  as  some  have  sup-
posed. In  these  cases,  a  column  of  water,  sometimes  500
feet  in  height,  is  moving  onwards  with  the  tide  clear  and
transparent  above,  while  the  lower  portion  holds  fine  sediment
in  suspension  (a  fact  ascertained  by  soundings),  when  sud-
denly it  impinges  upon  a  bank,  and  its  height  is  reduced  to
300  feet.  It  is  thus  made  to  boil  up  and  flow  off  at  the  surface,
a  process  which  forces  up  the  lower  strata  of  water  charged
with  fine  particles  of  mud,  which  in  their  passage  from  the
coast  had  gradually  sunk  to  a  depth  of  300  feet  or  more.*

One  characteristic  effect  of  the  action  of  currents  is,  the

*  Bobt  A.  C.  AoAten,  i^ottit.  Journ.  Qeol.  Soc  toI.  tI.  p.  76.


574  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SEDIMENT  [Ck.  XXIL

immense  extent  over  which  they  may  be  the  means  of  dif-
fusing homogeneous  mixtures.  Even  off  coaBts  where  there
are  no  large  rivers,  they  may  still  have  the  power  of  spread-
ing far  and  wide  over  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  not  only  sand
and  pebbles,  but  the  finest  mud.  Thus  for  severed  thou&and
miles  along  the  western  coast  of  South  America,  comprising
the  larger  parts  of  Peru  and  Chili,  there  is  a  perpetual  rolling
of  shingle  along  the  shore,  part  of  which,  as  Mr.  Darwin  has
shown,  is  incessantly  reduced  to  the  finest  mnd  by  the
waves,  and  swept  into  the  depths  of  the  Pacific  by  the  tides
and  currents.  The  same  author,  however,  has  remarked  that^
notwithstanding  the  great  force  of  the  waves  on  that  shore,
all  rocks  60  feet  under  water  are  covered  by  sea-weed,  show-
ing that  the  bed  of  the  sea  is  not  denuded  at  that  depth,  the
effect  of  the  winds  being  comparatively  superficial.

In  regard  to  the  distribution  of  sediment  by  currents  it
may  be  observed,  that  the  rate  of  subsidence  of  the  finer  mud
carried  down  by  every  great  river  into  the  ocean,  or  of  that
caused  by  the  rolling  of  the  waves  upon  a  shore,  must  be  ex-
tremely slow ;  for  the  more  minute  the  separate  particles  of
mud,  the  more  slowly  will  they  sink  to  the  bottom,  and  the
sooner  will  they  acquire  what  is  called  their  terminal  velocity.
It  is  well  known  that  a  solid  body,  descending  through  a
resisting   medium,  falls  by  the  force  of  gravity,  which  is
constant,  but  its  motion  is  resisted  by  the  medium  more  and
more  as  its  velocity  increases,  until  the  resistance  becomes
sufficient  to  counteract  the  further  increase  of  velocity.     For
example,  a  leaden  ball,  one  inch  in  diameter,  falling  through
air  of  density  as  at  the  earth's  surface,  will  never  acquire
greater  velocity  than  260  feet  per  second,  and,  in  water,  its
greatest  velocity  will  be  8  feet  6  inches  per  second.     If  the
diameter  of  the   ball  were   -^^  of  an  inch,  the  terminal
velocities  in  air  would  be  26  feet,  and  in  water  '86  of  a  foot
per  second.

Now,  every  chemist  is  familiar  with  the  fact  that  minute
particles  descend  with  extreme  slowness  through  water,  the
extent  of  their  surface  being  very  great  in  proportion  to  their
weight,  and  the  resistance  of  the  fluid  depending  on  the
amount  of  surface.     A  precipitate  of  sulphate  of  baryta,  for


Ch.  XXII.]  OVER  WIDE  AREAS.  575

example,  will  sometimes  require  more  than  five  or  six  hours
to  subside  one  inch  ;*  while  oxalate  and  phosphate  of  lime
require  nearly  an  hour  to  subside  about  an  inch  and  a  half
and  two  inches  respectively,t  so  exceedingly  small  are  the
particles  of  which  these  substances  consist.

When  we  recollect  that  the  depth  of  the  ocean  is  supposed
frequently  to  exceed  three  miles,  and  that  currents  run
through  different  parts  of  that  ocean  at  the  rate  of  four
miles  an  hour,  and  when  at  the  same  time  we  consider  that
some  fine  mud  carried  away  from  the  mouths  of  rivers  and
from  sea-beaches,  where  there  is  a  heavy  surf,  as  well  as  the
impalpable  powder  showered  down  by  volcanos,  may  subside
at  the  rate  of  only  an  inch  per  hour,  we  shall  be  prepared  to
find  examples  of  the  transportation  of  sediment  over  areas  of
indefinite  extent.

*  On  the  authority  of  Mr.  Faraday.        t  On  the  authority  of  Mr.  R.  Phillips.


57«


CHAPTER  XXin.

IGNEOUS   CAUSES.

CHANOE9  OF  THE  INORGANIC  WORLD,  COXTIKUED — ^IQXBOUS  CAUSBS — DITI-
8ION  OF  THE  SUBJECT — DISTINCT  VOLCANIC  REGIONS — RKGIOIT  OF  THB  AKDB8
— SYSTEM     OF     VOLCANOS     EXTENDING     FROM    THE    ALBU1XAX    ISLBS   TO   THB

MOLVCCA     AND     9UNDA    ISLANDS — POLYNESIAN   ARCHIPBLAOO TOLCAMIC     M-

OION     EXTENDING     FROM     CENTRAL     ASIA     TO     THE     AZORES TBADITION     OF

DELUGES    ON  THE    SHORES    OF  THE     BOSPHORUS,    HBLLBSPONT,    AXD     GBlECIAir
ISLES— PERIODICAL  ALTERNATION   OF  EARTHQUAKES   IN   SYRIA  AND  SOXTTHERK
ITALY — WESTERN   LIMITS   OF   THE   EUR6PEAN   REGION — ^EARTHQUAKSS     BASER
AND    MORE    FEKBLR  AS  WE   RECEDE    FROM   THE   CENTRES   OF  VOLCANIC  ACTION
— EXTINCT   VOLCANOS   NOT   TO    BE   INCLXTDBD    IN   LINES   OF   ACTIVE  VKNTS.

We  have  hitherto  considered  the  changes  wrought,  since  the
times  of  history  and  tradition,  by  the  continued  action  of
aqueous  causes  on  the  earth's  surface ;  and  we  have  next  to
examine  those  resulting  from  igneous  agency.     As  the  rivers
and  springs  on  the  land,  and  the  tides  and  currents  in  the
sea,  have,  with  some    slight  modifications,  been  fixed  and
constant  to  certain  localities  from  the  earliest   period*    of
which  we  have  any  records,  so  the  volcano  and  the  earth-
quake have,  with  few  exceptions,  continued,  during  the  same
lapse  of  time,  to  disturb  the  same  regions.     But  as  there  are
signs,  on  almost  every  part  of  our  continent,  of  great  power
having  been  exerted  by  running  water  on  the  surface  of  the
land,  and  by  waves,  tides,  and  currents  on  cliflFs  bordering
the  sea,  where,  in  modern  times,  no  rivers  have  excavated,
and  no  waves  or  tidal  currents  undermined — so  we  find  signs
of  volcanic   vents  and  violent  subterranean   movements  in
places  where  the  action  of  fire  or  internal  heat  has  long  been
dormant.     We  can  explain  why  the  intensity  of  the  force  of
aqueous  causes  should  be  developed  in  succession  in  different
districts.     Currents,  for  example,  tides,  and  the  waves  of  the


Ch.  XXIII.]  POSITION  OF  VOLCANIC  VENTS.  577

sea,  cannot  destroy  coasts,  shape  out  or  silt  up  estuaries,
break  through  isthmuses,  and  annihilate  islands,  form  shoals
in  one  place,  and  remove  them  from  another,  without  the
direction  and  position  of  their  destroying  and  transporting
power  becoming  transferred  to  new  localities.  Neither  can
the  relative  levels  of  the  earth's  crust,  above  and  beneath  the
waters,  vary  from  time  to  time,  as  they  are  admitted  to  have
varied  at  former  periods,  and  as  it  will  be  demonstrated  that
they  still  do,  without  the  continents  being,  in  the  course  of
ages,  modified,  and  even  entirely  altered,  in  their  external
configuration.  Such  events  must  clearly  be  accompanied  by
a  complete  change  in  the  volume,  velocity,  and  direction  of
the  streams  and  land  floods  to  which  certain  regions  give
passage.  That  we  should  find,  therefore,  clififs  where  the
sea  once  committed  ravages,  and  from  which  it  has  now
retired — estuaries  where  high  tides  once  rose,  but  which  are
now  dried  up — valleys  hollowed  out  by  water,  where  no
streams  now  flow,  is  no  more  than  we  should  expect ; — these
and  similar  phenomena  are  the  necessary  consequences  of
physical  causes  now  in  operation ;  and  if  there  be  no  insta-
bility in  the  laws  of  nature,  similar  fluctuations  must  recur
again  and  again  in  time  to  come.

But,  however  natural  it  may  be  that  the  force  of  running
water  in  numerous  valleys,  and  of  tides  and  currents  in  many
tracts  of  the  sea,  should  now  be  apenty  it  is  by  no  means  so
easy  to  explain  why  the  violence  of  the  earthquake  and  the
fire  of  the  volcano  should  also  have  become  locally  extinct  at
successive  periods.  We  can  look  back  to  the  time  when  the
marine  strata,  whereon  the  great  mass  of  Etna  rests,  had  no
existence ;  and  that  time  is  extremely  modem  in  the  earth's
history.  This  alone  affords  ground  for  anticipating  that  the
eruptions  of  Etna  will  one  day  cease.

Nee  quae  sulfureis  ardet  fornacibus  JEtna
Ignea  semper  erit,  neque  enimfuit  iff f tea  semper,

(Ovid,  Mdam.  lib.  xv.  340)

are  the  memorable  words  which  are  put  into  the  mouth  of
Pythagoras  by  the  Boman  poet,  and  they  are  followed  by
speculations  as  to  the  cause  of  volcanic  vents  shifting  their

VOL.  I.  P  P


678  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDAEIES  [Ck.  TTimx

positions.  Whatever  doubts  the  philosopher  expresses  as  to
the  nature  of  these  causes,  it  is  assumed  as  incontroyertible
that  the  points  of  eruption  will  hereafter  vary,  beeatise  theg
have  formerly  done  so ;  a  principle  of  reasoning  which,  as  I
have  endeavoured  to  show  in  former  chapters,  has  been  too
much  set  at  nought  by  some  of  the  earlier  schools  of  geology,
which  refused  to  conclude  that  great  revolutions  in  the  earth'8
surface  are  now  in  progress,  or  that  they  will  take  place
hereafter,  because  they  have  often  been  repeated  in  former
ages.

Division  of  the  subject — Volcanic  action  may  be  defined  to
be  '  the  influence  exerted  by  the  heated  interior  of  the  earth
on  its  external  covering.'  K  we  adopt  this  definition,  with-
out connecting  it,  as  Humboldt  has  done,  with  the  theory  of
secular  refrigeration,  or  the  cooling  down  of  an  original
heated  and  fluid  nucleus,  we  may  then  class  under  a  general
head  all  the  subterranean  phenomena,  whether  of  volcanos,
or  earthquakes,  and  those  insensible  movements  of  the  land,
by  which,  as  will  afterwards  appear,  large  districts  may  be
depressed  or  elevated,  without  convulsions.  According  to
this  view,  I  shall  consider,  first,  the  volcano ;  secondly,  the
earthquake ;  thirdly,  the  rising  or  sinking  of  land  in  countries
where  there  are  no  volcanos  or  earthquakes ;  fourthly,  the
probable  causes  of  the  diflerent  changes  which  result  from
subterranean  agency.

It  is  a  very  general  opinion  that  earthquakes  and  volcanoe
have  a  common  origin;  for  both  are  confined  to  certain
regions,  although  the  subterranean  movements  are  as  a  role
by  no  means  most  violent  in  the  immediate  proximity  of  vol-
canic vents,  especially  if  the  discharge  of  aeriform  fluids
and  melted  rock  is  made  constantly  from  the  same  crater.
But  as  there  are  particular  regions,  to  which  both  the  points
of  eruption  and  the  movements  of  great  earthquakes  are
confined,  I  shall  begin  by  tracing  out  the  geographical
boundaries  of  some  of  these,  that  the  reader  may  be  aware
of  the  magnificent  scale  on  which  the  agency  of  subterranean
fire  is  now  simultaneously  developed.  Over  the  whole  of  the
vast  tracts  alluded  to,  active  volcanic  vents  are  distributed  at
intervals,  and  most  commonly  arranged  in  a  linear  direction.


Ch.  XXni.]  OF  VOLCANIC  REGIONS.  679

Throughout  the  intermediate  spaces  there  is  often  abundant
evidence  that  the  subterranean  fire  is  at  work  continuously,
for  the  ground  is  convulsed  from  time  to  time  by  earthquakes ;
gaseous  vapours,  especially  carbonic  acid  gas,  are  disengaged
plentifully  from  the  soil ;  springs  often  issue  at  a  very  high
temperature,  and  their  waters  are  usually  impregnated  with
the  same  mineral  matters  as  are  discharged  by  volcanos
during  eruptions.

When  a  volcano  is  isolated  like  Etna,  it  is  supposed  to  have
opened  a  communication  with  the  interior  by  a  star-shaped
fissure,  whereas  vents  which  are  linearly  arranged  imply  a
long  line  of  dislocation  in  the  earth's  crust,  analogous  to
those  great  lines  of  rending,  upheaval,.or  dislocation  to  which
the  axes  of  mountain- chains  are  due.  We  know  that  when
the  side  of  a  great  volcanic  cone  is  rent,  an  open  and  straight
fissure  is  sometimes  formed  many  miles  in  length,  as  was  the
case  on  Etna  in  1669,  when  a  rent  twelve  miles  long  was
produced,  at  the  bottom  of  which  incandescent  lava  waB
seen.  Here  and  there  along  the  line  of  such  a  rent,,  cones
of  eruption  are  thrown  up  in  succession  at  points  where  the
gaseous  matter  obtains  the  freest  access  to  the  surface,  and
has  power  to  force  up  lava  and  scoria.  What  is  here  dis-
played on  a  small  scale  is  exhibited  in  grander  dimensions
where  active  volcanos  form  chains  thousands  of  miles  in  length.
The  distances  to  which  trap  dikes  or  the  lava  which  once
fiUed  the  lower  parts  of  vertical  rents  can  sometimes  be
traced,  is  another  monument  of  the  same  kind  of  action.
Some  of  the  dikes  in  the  north-east  of  England — Yorkshire,
Durham,  and  Northumberland — for  instance,  may  be  followed
from  20  to  60  miles  in  nearly  straight  lines,  and  were  no
doubt  at  some  remote  period  connected  with  fissures  ext^end-
ing  upwards  perhaps  even  to  what  was  then  the  surface  of
the  earth's  crust,  whether  covered  by  the  sea  or  atmosphere.
M.  Alexis  Perrey,  in  his  History  of  Earthquakes,  has  shown
that  violent  subterranean  movements  are  most  frequent  along
the  axes  of  mountain-chains.


p  p  2


580  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDABDBS  [Gs.  XXm.


VOLCANIC  REGIONS.

Region  of  the  Andes  of  South  America* — Of  the  gwat
volcanic  regions,  that  of  the  Andes  of  South  America  is  one
of  the  best  defined ;  it  aSbrds  an  illustration  of  tlie  linear
arrangement  already  alluded  to,  of  which  there  is  no  good  ex-
emplification in  Europe,  where  the  most  active  Tolcanic  vents
are  isolated.  If  we  turn  first  to  that  part  of  the  Cordillera
which  extends  from  lat.  2®  N.  or  northward  of  Qnito,  to  lat
43°  S.  or  southward  of  Chili,  we  have,  in  a  space  compre-
hending forty-five  degrees  of  latitude,  an  alternation  on  a
grand  scale  of  districts  of  active  with  those  of  extinct  vol-
canos,  or  which,  if  not  spent,  have  at  least  been  dormant  for
the  last  three  centuries.  How  long  an  interval  of  rest  may
entitle  us  to  consider  a  volcano  as  entirely  extinct  is  not
easily  determined ;  but  we  know  that  in  Ischia  there  inters
vened  between  two  consecutive  eruptions  a  pause  of  seven-
teen centuries ;  and  the  discovery  of  America  is  an  ^vent  of
far  too  recent  a  date  to  allow  us  even  to  conjecture  whether
different  portions  of  the  Andes,  nearly  the  whole  of  which
are  subject  to  earthquakes,  may  not  experience  alltemately
a  cessation  and  renewal  of  eruptions.  Nor  does  the  linear
series  seem  to  end  even  with  the  southern  limits  ©f  the
Cordillera,  for  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the  Pnegian  vol-
canos  in  lat.  54°  30'  S.,  and  those  of  South  Shetland,  lat.  61'
S.,  belong  to  the  same  chain.

The  principal  line  of  active  vents  which  have  been  «een  in
eruption  in  the  Andes  extends  fi'om  lat.  43®  28'  S.;  or,  ttom
Yantales,  opposite  the  Isle  of  Chiloe,  to  Coquimbo,  in  lat.  80*
S. ;  to  these  thirteen  degrees  of  latitude  succeed  more  than
eight  degrees,  in  which  no  recent  volcanic  eruptions  have
been  observed.  We  then  come  to  the  volcanos  of  Bolivia
and  Peru,  reaching  six  degrees  from  S.  to  N.,  or  from  lat
21°  S.  to  lat.  15°  S.  Between  the  Peruvian  volcanos  and
those  of  Quito,  another  space  intervenes  of  no  less  than
fourteen  degrees  of  latitude,  said  to  be  free  from  volcanic
action  so  far  as  yet  known.  The  volcanos  of  Quito  then
succeed,  beginning  about  100  geographical  miles  south  of


ch.  xxiu.]  of  volcanic  regions.  681

the  equator,  and  continning  for  about  130  miles  north  of  it,
when  there  occurs  another  undisturbed  interval  of  more  than
six  degrees  of  latitude,  after  which  we  arrive  at  the  volcanos
of  Guatemala  or  Central  America,,  north  of  the  Isthmus  of
Panama.*

Having  thu£^  taraced  out  the  line  from  south  to  north,  I  may
first  state,  in  regard  to  the  numerous  vents  of  Chili,  that  the
volcanos  of  Yantales  and  Osorno  were  in  eruption  during  the
great  earthquake  of  1835,  at  the  same  moment  that  the  land
was  shaken  in  Chiloe,  and  in  some  parta  of  the  Chilian  coast
permanently  upheaved ;  whilst  at  Juan  Fernandez,  at  the  dis-
tance of  no  less  than  720  geographical  miles  from  Yantales,
an  eruption  took  place  beneath  the  sea.  We  have  thus
proofs  of  a  great  subterranean  disturbance  extending  simul-
taneously over  an  area  about  900  miles  (60  to  a  degree)  north
and  south,  and  in  one  part  at  least  600  due  east  and  west.
Some  of  the  volcanos  of  Chili  are  of  great  height,  as  that  of
Antuco,  in  lat.  37°  40^  S.,  the  summit  of  which  is  at  least
16,000  feet  above  the  sea.  From  the  flanks  of  this  volcano,
at  a  great  height,  immense  currents  of  lava  have  issued,  one
of  which  flowed  in  the  year  1828.  This  event  is  said  to  be  an
exception  to  the  general  rule  ;  few  volcanos  in  the  Andes,  and
none  of  those  in  Quito^  having  been  seen  in  modem  times  to
pour  out  lava,  but  having  merely  ejected  vapour  or  scorise.

Both  the  basaltic  (or  augitic)  lavas^  and  those  oi  the  fel-
spathic  class,  occur  in  Chili  and  other  parts  of  the  Andes ;
but  the  volcanic  rocks  of  the  felspathic  family  are  said  by
Von  Buch  to  be  generally  not  trachyte,  but  a  rock  which  has
been  called  andesite,  or  a  mixture  of  augite  and  albite.  The
last-mentioned  mineral  contains  soda  instead  of  the  potash
found  in  common  felspar.

The  volcano  of  Bancagua,  lat.  34**  15'  S.,  is  said  to  be
always  throwing  out  ashes  and  vapours  like  Stromboli,  a
proof  of  the  permanently  heated  state  of  certain  parts  of  the
interior  of  the  earth  below.  A  year  rarely  passes  in  Chili
without  some  slight  shocks  of  earthquakes,  and  in  certain
districts  not  a  month.     Those  shocks  which  come  from  the

*  See  Von  Bach's    DescripUon    of      valuable  sketch  of  the  principal  volcanos
Canary  Islands  (Paris,  ed.  1836)  for  a      of  the  globe.


582  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDARIES  [Oil  XXm.

side  of  the  ocean  are  the  most  violent,  and  the  same  is  said  to
be  the  case  in  Peru.  The  town  of  Copiapo  was  laid  waste
by  this  terrible  scourge  in  the  years  1778,  1796,  and  1819,
or  in  both  cases  after  regular  intervals  of  twenty-three  yean.
There  have,  however,  been  other  shocks  in  that  coantry  in
the  periods  intervening  between  the  dates  above  mentioned,
although  probably  all  less  severe,  at  least  on  the  exact  site  of
Copiapo.  The  evidence  against  a  regular  recurrence  of  vol-
canic convulsions  at  stated  periods  is  so  strong  as  a  general
fact,  that  we  must  be  on  our  guard  against  attachmg  too
much  importance  to  a  few  striking  but  probably  accidental
coincidences.  Among  these  last  might  be  adduced  the  case
of  Lima,  violently  shaken  by  an  earthquake  on  the  1 7th  of
June,  1578,  and  again  on  the  very  same  day,  1678;  or  the
eruptions  of  Coseguina  in  the  years  1709  and  1809,  which
are  the  only  two  recorded  of  that  volcano  previous  to  that  of
1835.*

Of  the  permanent  upheaval  of  land  after  earthquakes  in
Chili,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  in  the  next  chapter,
when  it  will  also  be  seen  that  great  shocks  often  coincide
with  eruptions,  either  submarine,  or  from  the  cones  of  the
Andes,  showing  the  connection  between  the  force  which
elevates  continents  with  that  which  causes  volcanic  out-
bursts, t

The  space  between   Chili  and  Peru,  in  which  no  volcanic
action  has  been  observed,  is  150  nautical  leagues  troia  south
to  north.     It  is,  however,  as  Von  Buch  observes,  that  part  of
the  Andes  which  is  least  known,  being  thinly  peopled,  and
in  some  parts  entirely  desert.     The  volcanos  of  Peru  rise
from  a  lofty  platform  to  vast  heights  from  17,000  to  20,000
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.     The  lava  which  has  issued
from  Viejo,  lat.  16°  55'  S.,  accompanied  by  pumice,  is  com-
posed of  a  mixture  of  crystals  of  albitic  felspar,  hornblende,
and  mica,  a  rock  which  has  been  considered  as  one  of  the
varieties  of  andesite.     Some  tremendous  earthquakes  which
have  visited  Peru  in  modern  times  will  be  mentioned  in  a
subsequent  chapter.

The  volcanos   of   Quito,   occurring  between  the   second

*  Darwin,  Geol.  Trans.  2ud  series,  toI.  v.  p.  612.  t  Ibid.  p.  606.


ch.  xxiil]  of  volcanic  regions.  683

degree  of  south  and  the  third  degree  of  north  latitude,  rise
to  vast  elevations  above  the  sea,  many  of  them  being  between
14,000  and  18,000  feet  high.  The  Indians  of  Lican  have  a
tradition  that  the  mountain  called  L' Altar,  or  Capac  Urcu,
which  means  *  the  chief,*  was  once  the  highest  of  those  near
the  equator,  being  higher  than  Chimborazo ;  but  in  the  reign
of  Ouainia  Abomatha,  before  the  discovery  of  America,  a
prodigious  eruption  took  place,  which  lasted  eight  years,  and
broke  it  down.  The  fragments  of  trachyte,  says  M.  Bous-
singault,  which  once  formed  the  conical  summit  of  this
celebrated  mountain,  are  at  this  day  spread  over  the  plain.*
Cotopaxi  is  the  most  lofty  of  all  the  South  American  vol-
canos  which  have  been  in  a  state  of  activity  in  modern
times,  its  height  being  18,858  feet ;  and  its  eruptions  have
been  more  frequent  and  destructive  than  those  of  any  other
mountain.  It  is  a  perfect  cone,  usually  covered  with  an
enormous  bed  of  snow,  which  has,  however,  been  sometimes
melted  suddenly  during  an  eruption ;  as  in  January  1803,  for
example,  when  the  snows  were  dissolved  in  one  night.

Deluges  are  often  caused  in  the  Andes  by  the  liquefaction
of  great  masses  of  snow,  and  sometimes  by  the  rending  open,
during  earthquakes,  of  subterranean  cavities  filled  with
water.  In  these  inundations  fine  volcanic  sand,  loose  stones,
and  other  materials  which  the  water  meets  with  in  its
descent,  are  swept  away,  and  a  vast  quantity  of  mud,  called
'  moya,*  is  thus  formed  and  carried  down  into  the  lower
regions.  Mud  derived  from  this  source  descended,  in  1797,
from  the  sides  of  Tunguragua  in  Quito,  and  filled  valleys  a
thousand  feet  wide  to  the  depth  of  six  hundred  feet,  damming
up  rivers  and  causing  lakes.  In  these  currents  and  lakes  of
moya,  thousands  of  small  fish  are  sometimes  enveloped,
which,  according  to  Humboldt,  have  lived  and  multiplied  in
subterranean  cavities.  So  great  a  quantity  of  these  fish  were
ejected  from  the  volcano  of  Imbaburu  in  1691,  that  fevers,
which  prevailed  at  the  period,  were  attributed  to  the  effluvia
arising  from  the  putrid  animal  matter.

In  Quito,  many  important  revolutions  in  the  physical
features  of  the  country  are  said  to  have  resulted,  within  the

*  Ball,  de  la  Soc.  Gr^I.  de  Frnnce,  2Qd  S^r.  torn.  yi.  p.  56.


584  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDARIES  [Ch.  ^i^ttt

memory  of  man,  from  the  earthquakes  by  which  it  has  been
convulsed.  M.  Boussingault  declares  his  belief,  that  if  a
full  register  had  been  kept  of  all  the  convulsions  experienced
here  and  in  other  populous  districts  of  the  Andes,  it  would
be  found  that  the  trembling  of  the  earth  had  been  inces-
sant. The  frequency  of  the  movement,  he  thinks,  is  not  due
to  volcanic  explosions,  but  to  the  continual  falling  in  of  masses
of  rock  vrhich  have  been  fractured  and  upheaved  in  a  solid
form  at  a  comparatively  recent  epoch;  but  a  longer  series
of  observations  would  be  requisite  to  confirm  this  opinion.
According  to  the  same  author,  the  height  of  several  moun*
tains  of  the  Andes  has  diminished  in  modern  times.^

The  great  crest  or  cordillera  of  the  Andes  is  depressed
at  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  to  about  1,000  feet  above  the
sea-level,  and  the  watershed  between  the  two  seas  near  the
Gulf  of  San  Miguel  is  only  150  feet  high.  What  some  geogra-
phers regard  us  a  continuation  of  that  chain  in  Central
America  lies  to  the  east  of  a  series  of  volcanos,  many  of
which  are  active,  in  the  provinces  of  Paste,  Popayan,  and
Guatemala.  Coseguina,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Gulf  of
Fonseca,  was  in  eruption  in  January  1835,  and  some  of  its
ashes  fell  at  Truxillo,  on  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.
What  is  still  more  remarkable,  on  the  same  day,  at  Kingston
in  Jamaica,  the  same  shower  of  ashes  fell,  having  been  car-
ried by  an  upper  counter-current  against  the  regular  east
wind  which  was  then  blowing.  Kingston  is  about  700  miles
distant  from  Coseguina,  and  these  ashes  must  have  been
more  than  four  days  in  the  air,  having  travelled  1 70  miles  a
day.  Eight  leagues  to  the  southward  of  the  cratei,  the  ashes
covered  the  ground  to  the  depth  of  three  yards  and  a  half
destroying  the  woods  and  dwellings.  Thousands  of  cattle
perished,  their  bodies  being  in  many  instances  one  mass  of
scorched  flesh.  Deer  and  other  wild  animals  sought  the
towns  for  protection ;  many  birds  and  quadrupeds  were  found
suffocated  in  the  ashes,  and  the  neighbouring  streams  were
strewed  with  dead  fish.f  Such  facts  throw  light  on  geo-
logical monuments,  for  in  the  ashes  thrown  out  at  remote

♦Bull,  de  la  Soc.  G^ol.  de  France,  t   Caldcleugh,    Phil.    Trans.    1836,

torn.  vi.  p.  66.  p.  27.


Ch.  xxiil]  of  volcanic  regions.  585

periods  from  the  volcanos  of  Auvergne,  now  extinct,  we  find
the  bones  and  skeletons  of  lost  species  of  quadrupeds.

Mexico, — The  great  volcanic  chain,  after  having  thus  pur-
sued its  course  for  several  thousand  miles  from  south  to
north,  sends  off  a  branch  in  a  new  direction  in  Mexico,  in
the  parallel  of  the  city  of  that  name,  and  is  prolonged  in  a
great  platform,  between  the  eighteenth  and  twenty-second
degrees  of  north  latitude.  Five  active  volcanos  traverse
Mexico  from  west  to  east — Tuxtla,  Orizaba,  Popocatepetl,
Jorullo,  and  Colima.  Jorullo,  which  is  in  the  centre  of  the
great  platform,  is  no  less  than  120  miles  from  the  nearest
ocean — an  important  circumstance,  as  shovdng  that  the
proximity  of  the  sea  is  not  a  necessary  condition,  although
certainly  a  very  general  characteristic,  of  the  position  of
active  volcanos.  The  extraordinary  eruption  of  this  moun-
tain, in  1759,  will  be  described  in  the  sequel.  If  the  line
which  connects  these  five  vents  be  prolonged  in  a  westerly
direction,  it  cuts  the  volcanic  group  of  islands  called  the
Isles  of  Eevillagigedo,  in  the  Pacific.

To  the  north  of  Mexico  there  are  said  to  be  three,  or
according  to  some,  five  volcanos  in  the  peninsula  of  Cali-
fornia ;  and  a  volcano  is  reported  to  have  been  in  eruption
on  the  N.  W.  coast  of  America,  near  the  Columbia  Eiver,  lat.
45°  37'  N.

West  Indies. — To  return  to  the  Andes  of  Quito,  Von  Buch
was  inclined  to  believe  that  if  we  were  better  acquainted  with
the  region  to  the  east  of  the  Madalena,  and  with  New  Gra-
nada and  the  Caraccas,  we  might  find  the  volcanic  chain  of
the  Andes  to  be  connected  with  that  of  the  West  Indian,
or  Caribbee  Islands.  The  truth  of  this  conjecture  has  almost
been  set  at  rest  by  the  eruption,  in  1848,  of  the  volcano  of
Zamba  in  New  Granada,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Mada-
lena.*

Of  the  West  Indian  Islands  there  are  two  parallel  series,
the  one  to  the  west,  which  are  all  volcanic,  and  which  rise  to
the  height  of  several  thousand  feet ;  the  other  to  the  east,  for
the  most  part  composed  of  calcareous  rocks,  and  of  moderate
height.     In  the  former  or  volcanic  series,  are  Granada,  St.

*  Comptes  RenduB,  1849,  toI.  xzix.  p.  581.


586  GEOGRAPHICAL  B0UNDABIE8.  [Ch.  XXIH.

Vincent,  St.  Lucia,  Martinique,  Dominica,  Gruadaloupe,  Mont-
serrat,  Nevis,  and  St.  Eustace.  In  the  calcareous  chain  are
Tobago,  Barbadoes,  Marie  Galante,  Grandeterre,  Desirade,
Antigua,  Barbuda,  St.  Bartholomew,  and  St.  Martin.  The
most  considerable  eruptions  in  modern  times  have  been  those
of  St.  Vincent.  Great  earthquakes  have  agitated  St.  Do-
mingo, as  will  be  seen  in  the  thirtieth  chapter.

I  have  before  mentioned  (p.  459)  the  violent  earthquake
which  in  1812  convulsed  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  at  New
Madrid  for  the  space  of  300  miles  in  length,  of  which  more
will  be  said  in  the  twenty-eighth  chapter.  This  happened
exactly  at  the  same  time  as  the  great  earthquake  of  Carac-
cas,  so  that  it  is  possible  that  these  two  points  are  parts  of
one  subterranean  volcanic  region.  The  Island  of  Jamaica,
with  a  tract  of  the  contiguous  sea,  has  often  experienced
tremendous  shocks ;  and  these  are  frequent  along  a  line
extending  from  Jamaica  to  St.  Domingo  and  Porto  Rico.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that,  without  taking  account  of  the
West  Indian  and  Mexican  branches,  a  linear  train  of  vol-
canos  and  tracts  shaken  by  earthquakes  may  be  traced  from
the  Island  of  Chiloe  and  opposite  coast  to  Mexico,  or  even
perhaps  to  the  mouth  of  the  Columbia  River—  a  distance  upon
the  whole  as  great  as  from  the  pole  to  the  equator.  In
regard  to  the  western  limits  of  the  region,  they  lie  deep  be-
neath the  waves  of  the  Pacific,  and  must  continue  unknown
to  us.  On  the  east  they  are  not  prolonged  to  a  great  dis-
tance, except  where  they  include  the  West  Indian  Islands ;
for  there  seem  to  be  no  indications  of  volcanic  eruptions  in
Buenos  Ayres,  Brazil,  and  the  United  States  of  North  Ame-
rica east  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  In  California,  Oregon,
and  north-west  America,  ten  or  twelve  volcanos  are  men-
tioned.

Volcayiic  region  from  the  Aleiitian  Isles  to  the  Moluccas  and
Isles  of  Sunda, — On  a  scale  which  equals  or  surpasses  that
of  the  Andes,  is  another  line  of  volcanic  action,  which  com-
mences, on  the  north,  with  the  Aleutian  Isles  in  Russian
America,  and  extends,  first  in  a  westerly  direction  for  nearly
200  geographical  miles,  and  then  southwai'ds,  with  a  few  in-
terruptions, throughout  a  space  of  between  sixty  and  seventy


688  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDAEIES  [Ch.  XXIIL

degrees  of  latitude  to  the  Moluccas,  where  it  sends  off  a
branch  to  the  south-  east,  while  the  principal  train  continues
westerly  through  Sumbawa  and  Java  to  Sumatra,  and  then
in  a  north-westerly  direction  to  the  Bay  of  Bengal.*  This
volcanic  line,  observes  Von  Buch,  may  be  said  to  follow
throughout  its  course  the  external  border  of  the  continent  of
Asia  ;  while  the  branch  which  has  been  alluded  to  as  striking
south-east  from  the  Moluccas,  passes  from  New  Guinea  to
New  Zealand,  conforming,  though  somewhat  rudely,  to  the
outline  of  Australia.f

The  connection,  however,  of  the  New  Guinea  volcanos  with
the  line  in  Java  (as  laid  down  in  Von  Buch's  map)  is  not
clearly  made  out.  By  consulting  Darwin's  map  of  coral  reefs
and  active  volcanos,  J  the  reader  will  see  that  we  might  almost
with  equal  propriety  include  the  Mariana  and  Bonin  volcanos
in  a  band  with  New  Guinea.  Or  if  we  allow  so  much  latitude
in  framing  zones  of  volcanic  action,  we  must  also  suppose
the  New  Hebrides,  Solomon  Isles,  and  New  Ireland  (see  map
fig.  65,  p.  587)  to  constitute  one  line  with  the  New  Hebrides,
which  lie  to  the  south  of  the  same  map.

The  northern  extremity  of  the  volcanic  region  of  Asia,  as
described  by  Von  Buch,  is  on  the  borders  of  Cook^s  Inlet,
north-east  of  the  Peninsula  of  Alaska,  where  one  volcano,  in
about  the  sixtieth  degree  of  latitude,  is  said  to  be  14,000  feet
high.  In  Alaska  itself  are  cones  of  vast  height,  which  have
been  seen  in  eruption,  and  which  are  covered  for  two-thirds
of  their  height  downwards  with  perpetual  snow.  The  snmmit
of  the  loftiest  peak  is  truncated,  and  is  said  to  have  fallen  in
during  an  eruption  in  1786.  From  Alaska  the  line  is  con-
tinued through  the  Aleutian  or  Fox  Islands  to  Kamtschatka.
In  the  Aleutian  Archipelago  eruptions  are  frequent,  and  about
thirty  miles  to  the  north  of  Unalaska,  near  the  Isle  of  Um-
nack,  a  new  island  was  formed  in  1796.  It  was  first  observed
after  a  storm,  at  a  point  in  the  sea  from  which  a  column  of
smoke  had  been  seen  to  rise.  Flames  then  issued  from  the
new  islet  which  illuminated  the  country  for  ten  miles  round ;

*  See  map  of  volcanic  lines  in  Von  Coral  Reefs,  &c.  London,  1842.    In  the

Buch's  work  on  the  Canaries.  annexed  map,  fig.  65,  I  have  copied

t  Von  Buch,  ibid.  409.  withpermissionasmallpartof  theTala>

X  Darwin,  Structure  and  Bistrib.  of  able  map  acoompanjiiig  that  work.


€h.  XXIII.]  OF  VOLCANIC  REGIONS.  689

a  frightful  eai*thquake  shook  the  new-formed  cone,  and
showers  of  stones  were  thrown  as  far  as  Umnack.  The  erup-
tion continued  for  several  months,  and  eight  years  afterwards,
in  1804,  when  it  was  explored  by  some  hunters,  the  soil  was
so  hot  in  some  places  that  they  could  not  walk  on  it.  Accord-
ing to  Langsdorf  and  others,  this  new  island,  which  is  now
several  thousand  feet  high  and  two  or  three  miles  in  circum-
ference, has  been  continually  found  to  have  increased  in  size
when  successively  visited  by  different  travellers ;  but  we  have
no  accurate  means  of  determining  how  much  of  its  growth,
if  any,  has  been  due  to  upheaval,  or  how  far  it  has  been
exclusively  formed  by  the  ejection  of  ashes  and  streams  of
lava.  It  seems,  however,  to  be  well  attested  that  eai*thquakes
of  the  most  ^rrific  description  agitate  and  alter  the  bed  of
the  sea  and  surface  of  the  land  throughout  this  tract.

The  line  is  continued  in  the  southern  extremity  of  the
Peninsula  of  Kamtschatka,  where,  according  to  Dittmar,  there
are  twelve  active  and  twenty-six  extinct  volcanic  cones.  The
largest  and  most  active  of  these  is  Klutschew,  lat.  56**  3'  N.,
which  rises  at  once  from  the  sea  to  the  prodigious  height  of
15,000  feet.  Within  700  feet  of  the  summit,  Erman  saw,  in
1829,  a  current  of  lava,  emitting  a  vivid  light,  flow  down  the
north-west  side  to  the  foot  of  the  cone.  Large  quantities  of
ice  and  snow  opposed  for  a  time  a  .barrier  to  the  lava,  until  at
length  the  fiery  torrent  overcame,  by  its  heat  and  pressure,
this  obstacle,  and  poured  down  the  mountain  side  with  a
frightful  noise,  which  was  heard  for  a  distance  of  more  than
fifty  miles.*

Mont  Blanc  is  15,760  feet  high,  but  a  flow  of  lava  from  its
summit  to  the  base  in  the  valley  of  Chamouni  would  give  a
very  inadequate  idea  of  the  descent  of  the  Kamtschatka  cur-
rent, because  Chamouni  is  8,500  feet  above  the  level  of  the

sea.t

The  Kurile  chain  of  islands  constitutes  the  prolongation  of
the  Kamtschatka  range,  where  a  train  of  volcanic  mountains,
nine  of  which  are  known  to  have  been  in  eruption,  trends  in  a

*  Von  Buch,  Descrip.  des  lies  Canar.      Kamtschatka,  and  Kurile  region,  see
p.  450,  who  cites  Erman  and  others.  Alexis  Perrey,  Soc.  Imp.  de  Lyon,  1863.

t  For  later  eruptions  in  the  Alaska,


590  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDARIES  [Ck.  XXm.

southerly  direction.  The  line  is  then  continued  to  the  south-
west in  the  great  island  of  Jesso,  and  again  in  Nipon,  the
principal  of  the  Japanese  group.  It  then  extends  bj  Loo
Choo  and  Formosa  to  the  Philippine  Islands,  and  thence  by
Sangir  and  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  Celebes  to  the
Moluccas  (see  map,  fig.  65).  Afterwards  it  passes  west¥rard
through  Sumbawa  to  Java.

There  are  said  to  be  thirty-eight  considerable  volcanos  in
Java,  some  of  which  are  more  than  10,000  feet  high.  They
are  remarkable  for  the  quantity  of  sulphur  and  sulphureous
vapours  which  they  discharge.  They  rarely  emit  Java,  but
rivers  of  mud  issue  from  them,  like  the  moya  of  the  Andes  of
Quito.  The  memorable  eruption  of  Galongoon,  in  1822,  will  be
described  in  the  twenty-sixth  chapter.  The  crater  of  Taschem,
at  the  eastern  extremity  of  Java,  contains  a  lake  strongly
impregnated  with  sulphuric  acid,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  long,
from  which  a  river  of  acid  water  issues,  which  supports  no
living  creature,  nor  can  fish  live  in  the  sea  near  its  confluence.
There  is  an  extinct  crater  near  Batur,  called  Guevo  Upas,  or
the  Valley  of  Poison,  about  half  a  mile  in  circumference,
which  is  justly  an  object  of  terror  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
country.  Every  living  being  which  penetrates  into  this  valley
falls  down  dead,  and  the  soil  is  covered  with  the  carcases  of
tigers,  deer,  birds,  and  even  the  bones  of  men ;  all  killed  by
the  abundant  emanations  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  by  which  the
bottom  of  the  valley  is  filled.

In  another  crater  in  this  land  of  wonders,  near  the  volcano
of  Talaga  Bodas,  we  learn  from  Mr.  Reinwardt,  that  the
sulphureous  exhalations  have  killed  tigers,  birds,  and  innu-
merable insects ;  and  the  soft  parts  of  these  animals,  such  as
fibres,  muscles,  nails,  hair,  and  skin,  are  very  well  preserved,
while  the  bones  are  corroded,  and  entirely  destroyed.

We  learn  from  observations  made  in  1844,  by  Mr.  Jukes,
that  a  recent  tertiary  formation  composed  of  limestone  and
resembling  the  coral  rock  of  a  fringing  reef,  clings  to  the
flanks  of  all  the  volcanic  islands  from  the  east  end  of  Timor
to  the  west  end  of  Java.  These  modern  calcareous  strata
are  often  white  and  chalk-like,  sometimes  1,000  feet  and  up-
wards above  the  sea,  regularly  stratified  in  thick  horizontal


Ch.  XXni.]  OF  VOLCANIC  REGIONS.  691

beds,  and  they  show  that  there  has  been  a  general  elevation
of  these  islands  at  a  comparatively  modem  period.*

The  same  linear,  arrangement  which  is  observed  in  Java
holds  good  in  the  volcanos  of  Sumatra,  some  of  which  are  of
great  height,  as  Berapi,  which  is  more  than  12,000  feet  above
the  sea,  and  is  continually  emitting  vapour.  Hot  springs  are
abundant  at  its  base.  The  volcanic  line  then  inclines  slightly
to  the  north-west,  and  points  to  Barren  Island,  lat.  12°  15'
N.,  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal ;  a  volcano  often  observed  to  emit
smoke  and  vapours,  and  from  which  lava  has  proceeded  since
1780  (see  below.  Chap,  xxvii.)  The  volcanic  train  then
extends,  according  to  Dr.  Macclelland,  to  the  island  of  Nar-
condam,  lat.  18®  22'  N.,  which  is  a  cone  seven  or  eight  hun-
dred feet  high,  rising  from  deep  water,  and  said  to  present
signs  of  lava  currents  descending  from  the  crater  to  the  base.
Afterwards  the  train  stretches  in  the  same  direction  to  the
volcanic  island  of  Bamree,  about  lat.  19°  N.,  and  the  adjoin-
ing island  of  Cheduba,  which  is  represented  in  old  charts  as
a  burning  mountain.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  Chittagong  coast,
which  in  1672  was  .convulsed  by  a  tremendous  earthquake
(see  Chap.  xxx.)t

To  enumerate  all  the  volcanic  regions  of  the  Indian  and
Pacific  oceans  would  lead  me  far  beyond  the  proper  limits  of
this  treatise ;  but  it  will  appear  in  the  last  chapter  of  this
work,  when  coral  reefs  are  treated  of,  that  the  islands  of
the  Pacific  consist  alternately  of  linear  groups  of  two  classes,
the  one  loffcy,  and  containing  active  volcanos,  and  marine
strata  above  the  sea-level,  and  which  have  been  undergoing
upheaval  in  modem  times ;  the  other  very  low,  consisting  of
reefs  of  coral,  usually  with  lagoons  in  their  centres,  and  in
which  there  is  evidence  of  a  gradual  subsidence  of  the
ground.  The  extent  and  direction  of  these  parallel  volcanic
bands  has  been  depicted  with  great  care  by  Darwin  in  his
map  before  cited  (p.  587).

The  most  remarkable  theatre  of  volcanic  activity  in  the
Northern  Pacific — or,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  world — occurs

*  Paper  read  at  meeting  of  Brit.  t  Macclelland,  Report  on  Coal  and

A  860C.  Southampton,  Sept.  1846.  Min.  Resources  of  India.  Calcutta,  ,1 838.


592  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDARIES  [Gx.  XXUL

in  the  Sandwich  Islands,  which  have  been  admirablj  treated
of  in  a  work  published  by  Mr.  Dana  in  1849.*

Volcanic  region  from  Central  Asia  to  the  Azores. — Another
great  region  of  subterranean  disturbance  is  that  which  has
been  imagined  to  extend  through  a  large  part  of  Central  Asia
to  the  Azores,  that  is  to  say,  from  China  and  Tartaiy  through
Lake  Aral  and  the  Caspian  to  the  Caucasus  and  the  countries
bordering  the  Black  Sea,  then  again  through  part  of  .Asia
Minor  to  Syria,  aad  westward  to  the  Grecian  Islands,  Greece,
Naples,  Sicily,  the  southern  part  of  Spain,  Portugal,  and  the
Azores.  The  breaks  in  this  supposed  continuous  series  of
volcanic  disturbances  are  of  such  extent  that  the  connection
as  a  linear  group  cannot  be  insisted  on,  but  it  may  be  useful
in  helping  us  to  remember  the  geographical  limits  within
which  certain  volcanos  and  earthquakes  of  historical  date
have  been  witnessed.  Eespecting  the  eastern  extremity  of
this  line  in  China,  we  have  little  information,  but  many
violent  earthquakes  are  known  to  have  occurred  there.  The
volcano  said  to  have  been  in  eruption  in  the  seventh  centuiy
in  Central  Tartary  is  situated  on  the  northern  declivity  of
the  Celestial  Mountains,  not  far  distant  from  the  large  lake
called  Issikoul;  and  Humboldt  mentions  other  vents  and
solfataras  in  the  same  quarter,  which  are  all  worthy  of  notice,
as  being  far  more  distant  from  the  ocean  (260  geographical
miles)  than  any  other  known  points  of  eruption  on  the
globe.

We  find  on  the  western  shores  of  the  Caspian,  in  the
country  round  Baku,  a  tract  called  the  Field  of  Fire,  which
continually  emits  inflammable  gas,  while  springs  of  naphtha
and  petroleum  occur  in  the  same  vicinity,  as  also  mud
volcanos  (see  Chap,  xxvii.)  Syria  and  Palestine  abound
in  volcanic  appearances,  and  very  extensive  areas  have  been
shaken,  at  different  periods,  with  great  destruction  of  cities
and  loss  of  lives.  Continual  mention  is  made  in  history  of
the  ravages  committed  by  earthquakes  in  Sidon,  Tyre,
Berytus,  Laodicea,  and  Antioch,  and  in  the  Island  of  Cyprus.

*  Geology  of  the  American  Exploring      of  Geology,  *  Sandwich  I.  Volcanoe' —

Expedition.     See  also  Lyell's  Elements      Index.


Ch.  xxiu.]  of  volcanic  regions.  593

The  country  around  the  Dead  Sea  exhibits  in  some  spots
layers  of  sulphur  and  bitumen,  forming  a  superficial  deposit,
supposed  by  Mr.  Tristram  to  be  of  volcanic  origin.  A  district
near  Smyrna,  in  Asia  Minor,  was  termed  by  the  Greeks
Catacecaumene,  or  ^  the  burnt  up,'  where  there  is  a  large  arid
territory,  without  trees,  and  with  a  cindery  soil.*  This
country  was  visited  in  1841  by  Mr.  W.  J.  Hamilton,  who
found  in  the  valley  of  the  Hermus  perfect  cones  of  scoriie,
with  lava-streams,  like  those  of  Auvergne,  conforming  to  the
existing   river-channels,  and  with   their   surface   undecom-

posed.t

Grecian  Archipelago. — Proceeding  westwards,  we  reach  the
Grecian  Archipelago,  where  Santorin,  afterwards  to  be  de-
scribed, is  the  grand  centre  of  volcanic  action  (Vol.  ii.  Chap,
xxvii.)

It  was  Von  Buch's  opinion  that  the  voleanos  of  Greece
were  arranged  in  a  line  running  N.N.W.  and  S.S.E.,  and
that  they  aflTorded  the  only  example  in  Europe  of  active
voleanos  having  a  linear  direction ;  but  M.  Virlet,  on  the
contrary,  announces  as  the  result  of  his  investigations,  made
during  the  French  expedition  to  the  Morea  in  1829,  that
there  is  no  one  determinate  line  of  direction  for  the  volcanic
phenomena  in  Greece,  whether  we  follow  the  points  of  erup-
tions, or  the  earthquakes,  or  any  other  signs  of  igneous
agency.J

Macedonia,  Thrace,  and  Epirus  have  always  been  subject
to  earthquakes,  and  the  Ionian  Isles  are  continually  con-
vulsed.

Respecting  Southern  Italy,  Sicily,  and  the  Lipari  Isles,  it
is  unnecessary  to  enlarge  here,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  again
to  allude  to  them.  I  may  mention,  however,  that  a  band  of
volcanic  action  has  been  traced  by  Dr.  Daubeny  across  the
Italian  Peninsula,  from  Ischia  to  Mount  Vultur,  in  Apulia,
the  commencement  of  the  line  being  found  in  the  hot  springs
of  Ischia,  after  which  it  is  prolonged  through  Vesuvius  to
the  Lago  d'Ansanto,  where  gases  similar  to  those  of  Vesuvius

♦  Strabo,  e<l.  Fal.  p.  900.  t  Virlet,  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  Geol.  de

t  Kesearches  in  Asia  Minor,  vol.  ii.      France,  torn.  iii.  p.  109.
p.  39.

VOL.  I.  Q  Q


594  GEOaBAPHICAL  BOUNDARIES  [Oil  XXUL

are  evolved.  Its  farther  extension  strikes  Moiint  Ynltor,  a
lofty  cone  composed  of  tuff  and  lava,  trom.  one  side  of  which
carbonic  acid  and  sulphuretted  hydrogen  are  emitted.*

Traditions  of  deluges, — The  traditions  which  have  come
down  to  us  from  remote  ages  of  great  inundations  said  to
have  happened  in  Greece  and  on  the  confines  of  the  Grecuw
settlements,  had  doubtless  their  origin  in  a  series  of  local
catastrophes,  caused  principally  by  earthquakes.  The  fre-
quent migrations  of  the  earlier  inhabitants,  and  the  total
want  of  written  annals  long  after  the  settlement  of  each
country,  make  it  impossible  for  us  at  this  distance  of  time  to
fix  either  the  true  localities  or  probable  dates  of  these  events.
The  first  philosophical  writers  of  Greece  were,  therefore,  a4
much  at  a  loss  as  ourselves  to  offer  a  reasonable  conjecture
on  these  points,  or  to  decide  how  many  catastrophes  might
sometimes  have  become  confounded  in  one  tale,  or  how  much
this  tale  may  have  been  amplified,  in  after  times,  or  obscured
by  mythological  fiction.  The  floods  of  Ogyges  and  Deuca-
lion are  commonly  said  to  have  happened  before  the  Trojan
war;  that  of  Ogyges  more  than  seventeen,  and  that  of  Deu-
calion more  than  fifteen,  centuries  before  our  era.  As  to  the
Ogygian  flood,  it  is  generally  described  as  having  laid  waste
Attica,  and  was  referred  by  some  writers  to  a  great  overflow-
ing of  rivers,  to  which  cause  Aristotle  also  attributed  the
deluge  of  Deucalion,  which,  he  says,  affected  Hellas  only,  or
the  central  part  of  Thessaly.  Others  imagined  the  same
event  to  have  been  due  to  an  earthquake,  which  threw  down
masses  of  rock,  and  stopped  up  the  course  of  the  Peneus  in
the  narrow  defile  between  Mounts  Ossa  and  Olympus.

As  to  the  deluge  of  Samothrace,  which  is  generally  re-
ferred to  a  distinct  date,  it  appears  that  the  shores  of  that
small  island  and  the  adjoining  mainland  of  Asia  were  inun-
dated by  the  sea.  Diodorus  Siculus  says  that  the  inhabi-
tants had  time  to  take  refuge  in  the  mountains,  and  save
themselves  by  flight ;  he  also  relates,  that  long  after  the  event
the  fishermen  of  the  island  drew  up  in  their  nets  the  capitals
of  columns,  ^  which  were  the  remains  of  cities  submerged

*  Daubeny  on  Mount  Vultur,  Ashmolean  Memoirs.    Oxford,  1835.


Ch.  XXni.]  OF  VOLCANIC  REGIONS.  S&5

by  that  terrible  catastrophe.'*  These  statements  scarcely
leave  any  doubt  that  there  occurred,  at  the  period  alluded
to,  earthquakes  and  inroads  of  the  sea  accompanied  by  a
subsidence  of  the  coast.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  story
of  the  bursting  of  the  Black  Sea  through  the  Thracian  Bos-
phorus  into  the  Grecian  Archipelago,  which  accompanied,
and,  as  some  say,  caused  the  Samothracian  deluge,  may  have
reference  to  a  wave,  or  succession  of  waves,  raised  in  the
Euxine  by  the  same  convulsion.

We  know  that  subterranean  movements  and  volcanic  erup-
tions are  often  attended  not  only  by  incursions  of  the  sea,  but
also  by  violent  rains,  and  the  complete  derangement  of  the
river  drainage  of  the  inland  country,  and  by  the  damming
up  of  the  outlets  of  lakes  by  landslips,  or  obstructions  in  the
courses  of  subterranean  rivers,  such  as  abound  in  Thessaly
and  the  Morea.  We  need  not  therefore  be  surprised  at  the
variety  of  causes  assigned  for  the  traditional  floods  of  Greece,
by  Herodotus,  Aristotle,  Diodorus,  Strabo,  and  others.  As
to  the  area  embraced,  had  all  the  Grecian  deluges  occurred
simultaneously,  instead  of  being  spread  over  many  centuries,
and  had  they,  instead  of  being  extremely  local,  reached  at  once
from  the  Euxine  to  the  south-western  limit  of  the  Pelopon-
nesus, and  from  Maced(xiia  to  Rhodes,  the  devastation  would
still  have  been  more  limited  than  that  already  alluded  to,
p.  581,  which  visited  Chili  in  1835,  when  a  volcanic  eruption
broke  out  in  the  Andes,  opposite  Chiloe,  and  another  at  Juan
Fernandez,  distant  720  geographical  miles,  at  the  same
time  that  several  lofty  cones  in  the  Cordillera,  400  miles
to  the  eastward  of  that  island,  threw  out  vapour  and  ignited
matter.  Throughout  a  great  part  of  the  space  thus  recently
shaken  in  South  America,  cities  were  laid  in  ruins,  or  the  land
was  permanently  upheaved,  or  mountainous  waves  rolled  in-
land from  the  Pacific.

Periodical  alternation  of  earth^uaTces  in  Syria  and  Southern
Italy. — It  has  been  remarked  by  Von  Hoff,  that  from  the
commencement  of  the  thirteenth  to  the  latter  half  of  the
seventeenth  century,  there  was  an  almost  entire  cessation  of

*  Book  V.  ch.  xlvi.— See  Letter  of  M.  Virlet,  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  CWd.  de
France,  torn.  ii.  p.  341.

a  Q  2


596  GEOGRAPHICAL  BOUNDARIES  [CiL  XXm.

earthquakes  in  Syria  and  Judea ;  and,  during  this  interral  of
quiescence,  the  Archipelago,  together  with  part  of  the  ad-
jacent coast  of  Asia  Minor,  as  also  Southern  Italy  and  Sicilj,
suffered  greatly  from  earthquakes ;  while  Yolcanic  eruptionB
were  unusually  frequent  in  the  same  regions.     A  more  ex-
tended comparison,  also,  of  the  history  of  the  sabterranean
convulsions  of  these  tracts  seems  to  confirm  the  opinion,  that
a  violent  crisis  of  commotion  never  visits  both  at  the  same
time.     It  is  impossible  for  us  to  declare,  as  yet,  whether  this
phenomenon  is  constant  in  this  and  other  regions,  because
we  can  rarely  trace  back  a  connected  series  of  events  farther
than  a  few  centuries;    but   it  is   well  known  that,  where
numerous  vents  are  clustered  together  within  a  small  area,
as  in  many  archipelagos  for  instance,  two  of  them  are  never
in  violent  eruption  at  once.     If  the  action  of  one  becomes
very  great  for  a  century  or  more,  the  others  assume  the  ap-
pearance of  spent  voleanos.     It  is,  therefore,  not  improbable
tliat  separate  provinces  of  the  same  great  range  of  volcanic
fires  may  hold  a  relation  to  one  deep-seated  focus,  analogous
to  that  which  the  apertures  of  a  small  group  bear  to  some
more  superficial  rent  or  cavity.     Thus,  for  example,  we  may
conjecture  that,  at  a  comparatively  small  distance  from  the
surface,  Ischia  and  Vesuvius   mutually  communicate  with
certain  fissures,  and  that  each  affords  relief  alternately  to
elastic  fluids  and  lava  there  generated.     So  we  may  suppose
Southeni  Italy  and  Spia  to  be  connected,  at  a  much  greater
depth,  with  a  lower  part  of  the  very  same  system  of  fissures;
in  which  case  any  obstruction  occurring  in  one  duct  mav
have  the  effect  of  causing  almost  all  the  vapour  and  melted
matter  to  be  forced  up  the  other,  and  if  they  cannot  get  vent,
they  may  be  the  cause  of  violent  earthquakes.     Some  objec-
tions advanced  against  this  doctrine  that  'voleanos  act  as
safety-valves,'  will  be  considered  in  the  sequel.*

The  north-eastern  portion  of  Africa,  including  Egypt,
which  lies  six  or  seven  degrees  ^auth  of  the  volcanic  line
already  traced,  has  been  almost  always  exempt  from  earth-
quakes ;  but  the  north-western  portion,  especially  Fez  and
Morocco,  which  fall  within  the  line,  suffer  greatly  from  time

*«ee  Vol.  II.  Ch.  XXXU.,  Causes/  Volcanic  Emptitmt,


Ch.  XXm.]  OF  VOLCANIC  REGIONS.  597

to  time.  The  southern  part  of  Spain,  and  also  of  Portugal,
have  generally  been  exposed  to  the  same  scourge  simultane*
ously  with  Northern  Africa.  The  provinces  of  Malaga,  Murcia,
and  Granada,  and  in  Portugal  the  country  round  Lisbon,
are  recorded  at  several  periods  to  have  been  devastated  by
great  earthquakes.  It  will  be  seen,  from  Michell's  account
of  the  gpreat  Lisbon  shock  in  1755,  that  the  first  movement
proceeded  from  the  bed  of  the  ocean  ten  or  fifteen  leagues
from  the  coast.  So  late  as  February  2,  1816,  when  Lisbon
was  vehemently  shaken,  two  ships  felt  a  shock  in  the  ocean
west  from  Lisbon;  one  of  them  at  the  distance  of  120,
and  the  other  262  French  leagues  from  the  coast* — a  fact
which  is  more  interesting,  because  a  line  drawn  through  the
Grecian  Archipelago,  the  volcanic  region  of  Southern  Italy,
Sicily,  Southern  Spain,  and  Portugal,  will,  if  prolonged  west-
ward through  the  ocean,  strike  the  volcanic  group  of  the
Azores,  which  may  possibly  therefore  have  a  submarine  con-
nection with  the  European  line.

In  regard  to  the  volcanic  system  of  Southern  Europe,  it
may  be  observed,  that  there  is  a  central  tract  where  the
greatest  earthquakes  prevail,  in  which  rocks  are  shattered,
mountains  rent,  the  surface  elevated  or  depressed,  and  cities
laid  in  ruins.  On  each  side  of  this  line  of  greatest  commo-
tion there  are  parallel  bands  of  country  where  the  shocks  are
less  violent.  At  a  still  greater  distance  (as  in  Northern  Italy,
for  example,  extending  to  the  foot  of  the  Alps),  there  ai-e
spaces  where  the  shocks  are  much  rarer  and  more  feeble,  yet
possibly  of  sufficient  force  to  cause,  by  continued  repetition,
some  appreciable  alteration  in  the  external  form  of  the  earth's
crust.  Beyond  these  limits,  again,  all  countries  are  liable  to
slight  tremors,  at  distant  intervals  of  time,  when  some  great
crisis  of  subterranean  movement  agitates  an  adjoining  vol-
canic region ;  but  these  may  be  considered  as  mere  vibrations,
propagated  mechanically  through  the  external  covering  of
the  globe,  as  sounds  travel  almost  to  indefinite  distances
through  the  air.  Shocks  of  this  kind  have  been  felt  in  Eng-
land, Scotland,  Northern  France,  and  Germany — particularly
during  the  Lisbon  earthquake.  But  these  countries  cannot,
*  Verneur,  Journal  des  Voyages,  torn.  iv.  p.  111. — Von  Hoff,  vol.  ii.  p.  275.


598  BOUNDARIES  OF  VOLCANIC  REGIONS.        [Oh.  XXm.

on  this  account,  be  supposed  to  constitute  parts  of  the  south-
em  volcanic  region,  any  more  than  the  Shetland  and  Orkney
Islands  can  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  Icelandic  circle,
because  the  sands  ejected  from  Hecla  have  been  wafted
thither  by  the  winds.

Besides  the  continuous  spaces  of  subterranean  disturbance,
of  which  we  have  merely  sketched  the  outline,  there  are  other
disconnected  volcanic  groups,  of  which  several  will  be  men-
tioned hereafter.

Lines  of  active  aiid  extinct  volcano$  not  to  be  oonfoundecL —
We  must  always  be  careful  to  distinguish  between  lines  of
extinct  and  active  volcanos/even  where  they  appear  to  ran  in
the  same  direction ;  for  ancient  and  modem  systems  may  in-
terfere with  each  other.   Already,  indeed,  we  have  proof  that
this  is  the  case ;  so  that  it  is  not  by  geographical  position,
but  by  reference  to  the  species   of  organic  beings  alone,
whether  aquatic  or  terrestrial,  whose  remains  occur  in  beds
interstratified  with  lavas,  that  we  can  clearly  distinguish  the
relative  age  of  vokanos  of  which  no  eruptions  are  recorded.
Had  Southern  Italy  been  known  to  civilised  nations  for  as
short  a  period  as  America,  we  should  have  had  no  record  of
eruptions  in  Ischia ;    yet  we  might  have  assured  ourselves
that  the  lavas  of  that  isle  had  flowed  since  the  Mediterranean
was  inhabited  by  the  species  of  testacea  now  living  in  the
Neapolitan  seas.     With  this  assurance,  it  would  not  have
been  rash  to  include  the  numerous  vents  of  that  island  in  the
modern  volcanic  group  of  Campania.

On  similar  grounds  we  may  infer,  without  much  hesitation,
that  the  eruptions  of  Etna,  and  the  modem  earthquakes  of
Calabria,  are  a  continuation  of  that  action  which,  at  a  some-
what  earlier  period,  produced  the  submarine  lavas  of  the  Val
di  Noto  in  Sicily.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  lavas  of  the
Euganean  Hills  and  the  Vicentin,  although  not  wholly  beyond
the  range  of  earthquakes  in  Northern  Italy,  must  not  be
confounded  with  any  existing  volcanic  system ;  for  when  they
flowed,  the  seas  were  inhabited  by  animals  of  the  Eocene
period,  almost  all  of  them  distinct  from  those  now  known  to
live,  whether  in  the  Mediterranean  or  other  parts  of  the
globe.


599


CHAPTER  XXIV,

VOLCANIC   DISTRICT   OP   NAPLES,

HISTOBT  OF  THB  VOLCANIC  EBUPTIOXS  DC  THB  UISTBICT  ROUyD  XAPLES —
EABLY  CONYULSIOXS  IK  THB  ISLAND  OF  ISCHIA — NVMEBOUS  COKES  THROWK
UP  THKRB — LAKB  ATBBXUS — THE  80LFATABA — BBKEWAL  OF  THB  BBUPTIONS
OF  VBSUVIUS,  A.D.  79 — FLIKY's  DBSCBIPTIOK  OF  THB  PHKNOMBNA — HIS
SILENCE  BESPBCTINO  THB  DBSTBCCTION  OF  HBBC17LANECM  AND  POMPEII —
SUBSEQUENT  HIbTOBY  OF  TESUTIUS — LAVA  DISCHABGED  IN  ISCHIA  IN  1302
— PAUSE  IN  THB  ERUPTIONS  OF  VESUVIUS— MONTE  NUOVO  THROWN  UP —
UNIFOBMITY  OF  THB  VOLCANIC  OPEBATION8  OF  VBSUVIUS  AND  PHLBOBjEAN
FiELDS   IN   ANCIBNT  AND   MODEBN  TIMES.

I  SHALL  next  give  a  sketch  of  the  history  of  some  of  the  vol-
canic vents  dispersed  throughout  the  great  regions  before
described,  and  consider  the  composition  and  arrangement  of
their  lavas  and  ejected  matter.  The  only  volcanic  region
known  to  the  ancients  was  that  of  the  Mediterranean ;  and
even  of  this  they  have  transmitted  to  us  very  imperfect
records  relating  to  the  eruptions  of  the  three  principal  dis-
tricts, namely,  that  round  Naples,  that  of  Sicily  and  its  isles,
and  that  of  the  Grecian  Archipelago.  By  far  the  most  con-
nected series  of  records  throughout  a  long  period  relates  to
the  first  of  these  provinces ;  and  these  cannot  be  too  atten-
tively considered,  as  much  historical  information  is  indis-
pensable in  order  to  enable  us  to  obtain  a  clear  view  of  the
connection  and  alternate  mode  of  action  of  the  different  vents
in  a  single  volcanic  group.

Early  convuisioiis  in  the  Island  of  Ischia. — The  Neapolitan
volcanos  extend  from  Vesuvius,  through  the  Phlegrsean  Fields,
to  Procida  and  Ischia,  in  a  somewhat  linear  arrangement,
ranging  from  the  north-east  to  the  south-west,  as  will  be
seen  in  the  annexed  map  of  the  volcanic  district  of  Naples
(fig.  66).     Within  the  space  above  limited,  the  volcanic  force


600


VorCANIC  EEOPTIOKS  OP  I8CHIA.  [Cm.  XXIV.


is  BometimeB  developed  in  single  emptions  from  a  consider-
able number  of  irregularly  scattered  points ;  bat  a  great  port
of  its  action  has  been  confined  to  one  principal  and  habitual
vent,  Vesuvius  or  Somma.  Before  the  Christian  era,  from
the  remotest  periods  of  which  we  have  any  tradition,  this
principal  vent  was  in  a  state  of  inactivity.  Bat  terrific
convulsions  then  took  place  &om  time  to  time  in  Ischia
(PithecQsa),  and  seem  to  have  extended  to  the  neig-hbooring
isle  of  Procida  (Prochyta) ;  for  Strabo*  mentions  a  story  of

Tig.  66.


VOLCANIC  DIS

NAPLES.


J^MCtmfi'*'!/'


A.  Astroni.         H.  Monto  Enrbflro.         H.  Honto  Xna


S.  The  Sulfatart.


Procida  having  been  torn  asunder  from  Ischia ;  and  Plinyf
derives  its  name  from  its  having  been  poured  forth  by  an
eruption  from  Ischia.

The  present  circumference  of  Ischia  along  the  water's  edge
is  eighteen  miles,  its  length  from  west  to  east  about  five,  and
its  breadth  from  north  to  south  three  miles.  Several  Greek
colonies  which  settled  there  before  the  Cliristion  era  were
compelled  to  abandon  it  in  consequence  of  the  violence  of  the
eruptions.     First  the  Erythraians,  and  afterwards  the  Chal-


•  Lib.  t


t  Nat.  nirt.  lib,  ii


Ch.  XXIV.]  VOLCANIC  ERUPTIONS  OF  ISCHIA.  601

cidians,  are  mentioned  as  having  been  turned  out  by  earth-
quakes and  igneous  exhalations.  A  colony  was  afterwards
established  by  Hiero,  king  of  Syracuse,  about  380  years
before  the  Christian  era ;  but  when  they  had  built  a  fortress,
they  were  compelled  by  an  eruption  to  fly,  and  never  again
returned.  Strabo  tells  us  that  Timaeus  recorded  a  tradition,
that,  a  little  before  his  time,  Epomeus,  the  principal  moun-
tain in  the  centre  of  the  island,  vomited  fire  during  great
earthquakes;  that  the  land  between  it  and  the  coast  had
ejected  much  fiery  matter,  which  flowed  into  the  sea,  and
that  the  sea  receded  for  the  distance  of  three  stadia,  and  then
returning,  overflowed  the  island.  This  eruption  is  supposed
by  some  to  have  been  that  which  formed  the  crater  of  Monte
Corvo  on  one  of  the  higher  flanks  of  Epomeo,  above  Foria,
the  lava-current  of  which  may  still  be  traced,  by  aid  of  the
scoriae  on  its  surface,  from  the  crater  to  the  sea.

To  one  of  the  subsequent  eruptions  in  the  lower  parts  of
the  isle,  which  caused  the  expulsion  of  the  first  Greek  colony,
Monte  Rotaro  has  been  attributed,  and  it  bears  every  mark
of  recent  origin.  The  cone,  which  I  examined  in  1828,  is
remarkably  perfect,  and  has  a  crater  on  its  summit  pre-
cisely resembling  that  of  Monte  Nuovo  near  Naples ;  but  the
hill  is  larger,  and  resembles  some  of  the  more  considerable
cones  of  single  eruption  near  Clermont  in  Auvergne,  and,
like  some  of  them,  it  has  given  vent  to  a  lava-stream  at  its
base,  instead  of  its  summit.  A  small  ravine  swept  out  by  a
torrent  exposes  the  structure  of  the  cone,  which  is  composed
of  innumerable  inclined  and  slightly  undulating'  layers  of
pumice,  scorioe,  white  lapilli,  and  enormous  angular  blocks  of
trachyte.  These  last  have  evidently  been  thrown  out  by
violent  explosions,  like  those  which  in  1822  launched  from
Vesuvius  a  mass  of  augitic  lava,  of  many  tons'  weight,  to
the  distance  of  three  miles,  which  fell  in  the  garden  of
Prince  Ottajano.  The  cone  of  Rotaro  is  covered  with  the
arbutus,  and  other  beautiful  evergreens.  Such  is  the  strength
of  the  virgin  soil,  that  the  shrubs  have  become  almost
arborescent ;  and  the  growth  of  some  of  the  smaller  wild
plants  has  been  so  vigorous,  that  botanists  have  scarcely
been  able  to  recognise  the  species.


602  VOLCANIC  ERUPTIONS  OF  I8CHIA,  [Ch.  XKIT.

The  emption  which  dislodged  the  Syracosan  colony  ia  sap-
posed  to  have  given  rise  to  that  mighty  current  which  fomu
the  promontory  of  Zaro  and  Caruso.  The  sor&ce  of  these
lavas  is  still  very  arid  and  bristling,  and  is  coveted  with
black  scorife;  so  that  it  is  not  withoat  great  labour  that
human  industry  has  redeemed  some  small  spots,  and  con-
verted them  into  vineyards.  Upon  the  produce  of  these
vineyards  the  population  of  the  island  is  almost  entirely
supported.  It  amounted  when  I  was  first  there,  in  1828,  to
about  twenty-five  thousand,  and  was  on  the  increase.

From  the  date  of  the  great  eruption  last  alluded  to,  down
to  our  own  time,  Ischia  has  enjoyed  tranquillity,  with  the

Fig.  67.


from  the  Wcgt.     From  a  drawing  bj  Q.  P-  Scropo,


0.  Monlfl  F.pomoo.  b,  Monte  Vico.

e.  Another  of  tlio  minor  conea  witli  it  crattr.*

exception  of  one  emission  of  lava  hereafter  to  be  described,
which,  although  it  occasioned  much  local  damage,  does  not
appear  to  have  devastated  the  whole  country,  in  the  manner
of  more  ancient  explosions.  There  are,  upon  the  whole,  on
different  parts  of  Epomeo,  or  scattered  through  the  lower
tracts  of  Ischia,  twelve  considerable  volcanic  cones  which
have  been  thrown  up  since  the  island  was  raised  above  the
siirface  of  the  deep;  and  many  streams  of  lava  may  have
flowed,  like  that  of  'Arso'  in  1302,  without  cones  having
been  produced ;  so  that  this  island  may,  for  ages  before  the
period  of  the  remotest  traditions,  have  served  as  a  safety-
valve  to  the  whole  Terra  di  Lavoro,  while  the  fires  of  Vesu-
vius were  dormant,

"  See  G.  Poulelt  Sctope,  Geol.  Trans.  2d  series,  vol.  ii.  pi.  H.


Ch.  XXIV.]  LAKE  AVERNUa— VESUVIUS.  603

Lake  Avemu%, — It  seems  also  clear  that  Avemus,  a  circular
lake  near  Puzzuoli,  about  half  a  mile  in  diameter,  which  is
now  a  salubrious  and  cheerful  spot,  once  exhaled  roephitic
vapours,  such  as  are  often  emitted  by  craters  after  eruptions.
There  is  no  reason  for  discrediting  the  account  of  Lucretius,
that  birds  could  not  fly  over  it  without  being  stifled,  although
they  may  now  frequent  it  uninjured.*  There  must  have  been
a  time  when  this  crater  was  in  action ;  and  for  many  cen-
turies afterwards  it  may  have  deserved  the  appellation  of
'  atri  janua  Ditis,'  emitting,  perhaps,  gases  as  destructive  of
animal  life  as  those  suffocating  vapours  given  out  by  Lake
Quilotoa,  in  Quito,  1797,  by  which  whole  herds  of  cattle
on  its  shores  were  killed,t  or  as  those  deleterious  emanations
which  annihilated  all  the  cattle  in  the  island  of  Lancerote,
one  of  the  Canaries,  in  1730.J  Bory  St.  Vincent  mentions,
that  in  the  same  isle  birds  fell  lifeless  to  the  ground ;  and  Sir
William  Hamilton  informs  us  that  he  picked  up  dead  birds
on  Vesuvius  during  an  eruption.

Solfatara. — The  Solfatara,  near  Puzzuoli,  which  may  be
considered  as  a  nearly  extinguished  crater,  appears,  by  the
accounts  of  Strabo  and  others,  to  have  been  before  the  Chris-
tian era  in  very  much  the  same  state  as  at  present,  giving
vent  continually  to  aqueous  vapour,  together  with  sulphu-
reous and  muriatic  acid  gases,  like  those  evolved  by  Vesuvius.

Ancient  history  of  Vesuvius. — Such,  then,  were  the  points
where  the  subterranean  fires  obtained  vent,  from  the  earliest
period  to  which  tradition  reaches  back,  down  to  the  first  cen-
tury of  the  Christian  era ;  but  we  then  arrive  at  a  crisis  in  the
volcanic  action  of  this  district — one  of  the  most  interesting
events  witnessed  by  man  during  the  brief  period  throughout
which  he  has  observed  the  physical  changes  on  the  earth's
surface.  From  the  first  colonisation  of  Southern  Italy  by  the
Greeks,  Vesuvius  afforded  no  other  indications  of  its  volcanic
character  than  such  as  the  naturalist  might  infer,  from  the
analogy  of  its  structure  to  other  volcanos.     These  were  recog-

♦  De  Rerum  Nat.  vi.  740. — Forbes,  %  Von    Buch,   Ueber  einen   vulcan-

on  Biiy  of  Naples,  £din.  Journ.  of  Sci.,  ischen  Ausbruch  auf  der  Insel  Lanze-

No.  iii.  new  series,  p.  87.  JaD.  1830.  rote.

t  Humboldt,  Voy.,  p.  317.


604  ERUPTION  OF  VESUVIUS.  A.D.  79.  fCn.  XXIV.

nised  by  Strabo,  but  Pliny  did  not  include  this  mountain  in
his  list  of  active  vents.  The  ancient  cone  was  of  a  very
regular  form,  terminating  not  as  at  present,  in  two  peaks^
but  with  a  summit  which  presented,  when  seen  from  a  dis-
tance, the  ordinary  outline  of  an  abruptly  truncated  cone.  On
the  summit,  as  we  learn  from  Plutarch,  there  was  a  crater
with  steep  cliffs,  and  having  its  interior  overgrown  with  wild
vines,  and  with  a  sterile  plain  at  the  bottom.  On  the  ex-
terior, the  flanks  of  the  mountains  were  clothed  with  fertile
fields  richly  cultivated,  and  at  its  base  were  the  populous
cities  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii.  But  the  scene  of  repose
was  at  length  doomed  to  cease,  and  the  volcanic  fire  was  re-
called to  the  main  channel,  which  at  some  former  unknown
period  had  given  passage  to  repeated  streams  of  melted  lava,
sand,  and  scorise.

Renewal  of  Us  eruptions. — The  first  symptom  of  the  revival
of  the  energies  of  this  volcano  was  the  occiurence  of  an
earthquake  in  the  year  63  after  Christ,  which  did  considerable
injury  to  the  cities  in  its  vicinity.  Prom  that  time  to  the
year  79  slight  shocks  were  frequent;  and  in  the  month  of
August  of  that  year  they  became  more  numerous  and  violent,
till  they  ended  at  length  in  an  eruption.  The  elder  Pliny,
who  commanded  the  Roman  fleet,  was  then  stationed  at
Misenum ;  and  in  his  anxiety  to  obtain  a  near  view  of  the
phenomena,  he  lost  his  life,  being  suffocated  by  sulphureous
vapours.  His  nephew,  the  younger  Pliny,  remained  at
Misenum,  and  lias  given  us,  in  his  Letters,  a  lively  descrip-
tion of  the  awful  scene.  A  dense  column  of  vapour  was  first
seen  rising  vertically  from  Vesuvius,  and  then  spreading  it-
self out  laterally,  so  that  its  upper  portion  resembled  the
head,  and  its  lower  the  trunk  of  the  pine,  which  characterises
the  Italian  landscape.  This  black  cloud  was  pierced  occa-
sionally by  flashes  of  fire  as  vivid  as  lightning,  succeeded  by
dark-ness  more  profound  than  night.  Ashes  fell  even  upon
the  ships  at  Misenum,  and  caused  a  shoal  in  one  part  of  the
sea — the  ground  rocked,  and  the  sea  receded  from  the  shores,
80  that  many  marine  animals  were  seen  on  the  dry  sand.
The  appearances  above  described  agree  perfectly  with  those


Ch.  XXIV.]  ERUPTION   OF  VESUVIUS,  A.D,   79,  605

witnessed  in  more  recent  eruptions,  especially  those  of  Monte
Nuovo  in  1538,  and  of  Vesuvius  in  1 822.

The  younger  Pliny,  although  giving  a  circumstantial  detail
of  so  many  physical  facts,  and  describing  the  eruption  and
earthquake,  and  the  shower  of  ashes  which  fell  at  Stabise,
makes  no  allusion  to  the  sudden  overwhelming  of  two  large
and  populous  cities,  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii.  In  explana-
tion of  this  omission,  it  has  been  suggested  that  his  chief
object  was  simply  to  give  Tacitus  a  full  account  of  the  par-
ticulars of  his  uncle's  death.  It  is  worthy,  however,  of  re-
mark, that  had  the  buried  cities  never  been  discovered,  the
accounts  transmitted  to  us  of  their  tragical  end  might  well
have  been  discredited  by  the  majority,  so  vague  and  general
are  the  narratives,  or  so  long  subsequent  to  the  event.  Taci-
tus, the  friend  and  contemporary  of  Pliny,  when  adverting  in
general  terms  to  the  convulsions,  says  merely  that  *  cities
were  consumed  or  buried.'  *

Suetonius,  although  he  alludes  to  the  eruption  inciden-
tally, is  silent  as  to  the  cities.  They  are  mentioned  by
Martial,  in  an  epigram,  as  immersed  in  cinders  ;  but  the  first
historian  who  alludes  to  them  by  name  is  Dion  Cassiu8,t
who  flourished  about  a  century  and  a  half  after  Pliny.  He
appears  to  have  derived  his  information  from  the  traditions
of  the  inhabitants,  and  to  have  recorded,  without  discrimina-
tion, all  the  facts  and  &bles  which  be  could  collect.  He  tells
us,  ^  that  during  the  eruption  a  multitude  of  men  of  super-
human stature,  resembling  giants,  appeared,  sometimes  on
the  mountain,  and  sometimes  in  the  environs — that  stones
and  smoke  were  thrown  out,  the  sun  was  hidden,  and  then
the  giants  seemed  to  rise  again,  while  the  sounds  of  trumpets
were  heard,  &c.  &c. ;  and  finally,'  he  relates,  *  two  entire
cities,  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii,  were  buried  under  showers
of  ashes,  while  all  the  people  were  sitting  in  the  theatre.'
That  many  of  these  circumstances  were  invented,  would  have
been  obvious,  even  without  the  aid  of  Pliny's  letters ;  and
the  examination  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  enables  us  to
prove  that  none  of  the  people  were  destroyed  in  the  theatres,
and  indeed,  that  there  were  very  few  of  the  inhabitants  who

*  *  HaoBte  ant  obrats  urbes.'— Hist.  lib.  i.  t  Hist.  Bom.  lib.  Izvi.


^


606  ERUPTION  IS  ISCHIA,  A.D.   1802.  [Ch.  XXIV.

did  not  escape  from  both  cities.  Yet  some  lives  were  lost,
and  there  was  ample  foundation  for  the  tale  in  its  most
essential  particulars.

It  does  not  appear  that  in  the  year  79  any  lava  flowed  from
Vesuvius ;  the  ejected  substances,  perhaps,  consisted  entirely
of  lapilli,  sand,  and  fragments  of  older  lava,  as  when  Monte
Nuovo  was  thrown  up  in  1538.  The  first  era  at  which  we
have  authentic  accounts  of  the  flowing  of  a  stream  of  lava  is
the  year  1036,  which  is  the  seventh  eruption  from  the  revi-
val of  the  fires  of  the  volcano.  A  few  years  afterwards^  in
1049,  another  eruption  is  mentioned,  and  another  in  1138
(or  1139),  after  which  a  great  pause  ensued  of  168  years.
During  this  long  interval  of  repose,  two  minor  vents  opened
at  distant  points.  First,  it  is  on  tradition  that  an  eruption
took  place  from  the  Solfatara  in  the  year  1198,  during  the
reign  of  Frederick  II.,  Emperor  of  Germany ;  and  although
no  circumstantial  detail  of  the  event  has  reached  us  from
those  dark  ages,  we  may  receive  the  fact  without  hesitation.*
Nothing  more,  however,  can  be  attributed  to  this  eruption,
as  Mr.  Scrope  observes,  than  the  discharge  of  a  light  and
scoriform  trachytic  lava  (that  of  Monte  Olivano),  of  recent
aspect,  resting  upon  the  strata  of  loose  tuff  which  cover  the
principal  mass  of  trachyte. f

Volcanic  eruption  in  Iscliia^  1302. — The  other  occurrence  is
well  authenticated, — the  eruption,  in  the  year  1302,  of  a
lava-stream  from  a  new  vent  on  the  south-east  end  of  the
Island  of  Ischia.  During  part  of  1301,  earthquakes  had
succeeded  one  another  with  fearful  rapidity ;  and  they  ter-
minated at  last  with  the  discharge  of  a  lava-stream  from  a
point  named  the  Campo  del  Arso,  not  far  from  the  town  of
Ischia.  The  lava  ran  quite  down  to  the  sea — a  distance  of
about  two  miles :  in  colour  it  varies  from  iron  grey  to  red-
dish black,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  glassy  felspar  which  it
contains.  Its  surface  is  almost  as  sterile,  after  a  period  of
five  centuries,  as  if  it  had  cooled  down  yesterday.  A  few
scantlings  of  wild  thyme,  and  two  or  three  other  dwarfish

♦  The  earliest  authority,  says  Mr.  &c.,  No.  i.,  new  series,  p.  127.    July,

Forbes,  given  for  this  fact,  appfyirs  to  1829.

be  Capaccio,  quoted  in  the  Terra  Tre-  t  Geol.  Trans.,  second  series,  vol.  ii.

mante  of  Bonito. — Edin.  Journ.  of  Sci.  p.  346.


Ch.  XXIV.]         HISTORY  OF  VESUVIUS  AFTER  1188.  607

plants  alone  appear  in  the  interstices  of  the  scorisB,  while
the  Vesuvian  lava  of  1767  is  already  covered  with  a  luxuriant
vegetation.  Pontanus,  whose  country-house  was  burnt  and
overwhelmed,  describes  the  dreadful  scene  as  having  lasted
two  months.*  Many  houses  were  swallowed  up,  and  a  par-
tial emigration  of  the  inhabitants  followed.  This  eruption
produced  no  cone,  but  only  a  slight  depression,  hardly  de-
serving the  name  of  a  crater,  where  heaps  of  black  and  red
scorise  lie  scattered  around.  Until  this  eruption,  Ischia  is
generally  believed  to  have  enjoyed  an  interval  of  rest  for
about  seventeen  centuries ;  but  Julius  Obsequens,t  who  flou-
rished A.D.  214,  refers  to  some  volcanic  convulsions  in  the
year  662  after  the  building  of  Rome  (91  B.C.)  As  Pliny,
who  lived  a  century  before  Obsequens,  does  not  enumerate
this  among  other  volcanic  eruptions,  the  story  has  been
thought  erroneous,  and  it  may  perhaps  relate  to  some  sub-
terranean commotions  of  no  great  violence.

History  of  Vesuvius  after  1138. — To  return  to  Vesuvius : —
the  next  eruption  occurred  in  1306 ;  between  which  era  and
1631  there  was  only  one  other  (in  1500),  and  that  a  slight
one.  It  has  been  remarked,  that  throughout  this  period
Etna  was  in  a  state  of  such  unusual  activity  as  to  lend  coun-
tenance to  the  idea  that  the  great  Sicilian  volcano  may
sometimes  serve  as  a  channel  of  discharge  to  elastic  fluids
and  lava  that  would  otherwise  rise  to  the  vents  in  Campania.
But  we  have  not  sufiicient  data  as  yet  to  enable  us  to  form
an  opinion  whether  such  a  coincidence  may  not  have  been
accidental  and  exceptional.  When  volcanic  vents  are  dis-
tinctly arranged  in  a  linear  series,  the  subterranean  connec-
tion of  different  portions  of  the  line  may  be  speculated  upon
more  freely.

Formation  of  Monte  Nuovo,  1538. — The  great  pause  was
also  marked  by  a  memorable  event  in  the  Phlegrsean  Fields
— the  sudden  formation  of  a  new  mountain  in  1538,  of  which
we  have  received  authentic  accounts  from  contemporary
writers.

The   height  of  this   mountain,  called  ever  since  Monte


*  Lib.  vi.  de  Bello  Neap,  in  Gnevii  Thesaur.
t  Prodig.  libel,  c  cziy.


FORMATION  OF  MONTE  snOTO.


[C».  XXIT.


Nuovo,  has  been  determined,  bj  the  Italian  minemlogist
Pini,  to  be  440  English  feet  above  the  level  of  the  bay ;  its
base  is  about  8,000  feet,  or  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half
in  circumference.  According  to  Pini,  the  depth  of  the
crater  is  421  English  feet  from  the  summit  of  the  hill,  so
that  its  bottom  is  only  nineteen  feet  above  the  level  of  the
sea.  The  cone  is  declared,  by  the  best  authorities,  to  stand
partly  on  tbe  site  of  the  Lucrine  Lake  (4,  fig.  69),  which
was  nothing  more  than  the  crater  of  a  pre-eiistent  volcano,


Fig.  68.


i?allcd  Baths  of


Scufe  di  Tritoli.


and  was  almost  entirely  filled  during  the  explosion  of  1538.
Nothing  now  remains  but  a  shallow  pool,  separated  from  tbe

sea  by  an  elevated  beach,  raised  artificially.

Sir  William  Hamilton  has  given  us  two  original  letters
describing  this  eruption.  The  first,  by  Falconi,  dated  ISSS,
contains  the  following  passages.*  '  It  is  now  two  years  since
there  have  been  i'requent  earthquakes  at  PuzzuoH,  Naples,
and  the  neighbouring  parts.  On  the  day  and  in  the  night
betbre  the  eruption  (of  Monte  Nuovo),  about  twenty  shocks,
great  and  small,  were  felt.  The  eruption  began  on  the  2yth
*  Campi  I'hiegntt,  p.  TO.


Ch.  SXIV.]  ERUPTIOH  OF  SEPTEMBER,  1638.  609

of  September,  15S8,  It  wae  on  a  Sunday,  about  one  o'clock
in  the  night,  when  flames  of  fire  were  seen  between  the  hot
baths  and  Tripergola.  In  a  short  time  the  fire  increased  to
such  a  degree,  that  it  burst  open  the  earth  in  this  place,  and
threw  up  so  great  a  quantity  of  ashes  and  pumice-stones,
mixed  with  water,  as  covered  the  whole  country.  The  neit
morning  (alter  the  formation  of  Monte  Nuovo)  the  poor  in-
habitants of  Pnzziioli  quitted  their  habitations  in  terror,
covered  with  the  muddy  and  bhuik  shower,  which  continued
the  whole  day  in  that  country — flying  from  death,  but  with


The  Phlegneaa  Fields.*

I.  Monte  NuoTO.  4.  Lucrine  Lnke.

3.  ilonle  Biirbaro.  5,  The  Sulfiituu.

3.  Lake  ATernus.  6.  PaczuoU.

7.  Bay  of  Bnix.

death  painted  in  their  countenances.  Some  with  tlieir
children  in  their  arms,  some  with  sacks  full  of  their  goods;
others  leading  an  ass,  loaded  with  their  frightened  family,
towards  Naples ;  others  carrying  quantities  of  birds,  of  various
sorts,  that  had  fallen  dead  at  the  beginning  of  the  eruption ;
others,  again,  with  fish  which  they  had  found,  and  which  were
to  be  met  with  in  plenty  on  the  shore,  the  sea  having  left

*  These  represontHtioQi  of  the  Phle-       Phl^rsi.'       The    faithfuln^^e   of    his
grtfnn   ^■iel'i^  fip".  68  Hnd  09,  urn  re-       colourtd    cJulinMtionB    of    the   scontry
duced  from  riowH  given  by  Sir  William      of  that  countrj  cannot  bo  too  highly
Hamilton   ia   hie  great   work   '  Campi      praised.
VOL.    I.  &  U


610  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NUOVO.  [Ch.  XSIV.

them  dry  for  a  considerable  time.  I  accompanied  Signer
Moramaldo  to  behold  the  wonderful  eflFects  of  the  eruption.
The  sea  had  retired  on  the  side  of  Baise,  abandoning  a  con-
siderable tract,  and  the  shore  appeared  almost  entirely  dry,
from  the  quantity  of  ashes  and  broken  pumice-stones  thrown
up  by  the  eruption.  I  saw  two  springs  in  the  newly-dis-
covered ruins ;  one  before  the  house  that  was  the  Queen's,  of
hot  and  salt  water,'  &c.

So  far  Falconi :  the  other  account  is  by  Pietro  Giacomo  di
Toledo,  which  begins  thus  : — *  It  is  now  two  years  since  this
province  of  Campagna  has  been  afflicted  with  earthquakes,
the  country  about  Puzzuoli  much  more  so  than  any  other
parts :  but  on  the  27  th  and  the  28  th  of  the  month  of  September
last,  the  earthquakes  did  not  cease,  day  or  night,  in  the  town
of  Puzzuoli:  that  plain  which  lies  between  Lake  Avemus,
the  Monte  Barbaro,  and  the  sea,  was  raised  a  little^  and  many
cracks  were  made  in  it,  from  some  of  which  issued  water ;  at
the  same  time  the  sea,  immediately  adjoining  the  plain,  dried
up  about  two  hundred  paces,  so  that  the  fish  were  left  on  the
sand  a  prey  to  the  inhabitants  of  Puzzuoli.     At  last  on  the
29th  of  the  same  month,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  night,  the
earth  opened  near  the  lake,  and  discovered  a  horrid  mouth,
from  which  were  vomited  furiously  smoke,  fire,  stones,  and
mud,  composed  of  ashes,  making  at  the  time  of  its  opening
a  noise  like  the  loudest  thunder.     The  stones  which  followed
were  by  the  flames  converted  to  pumice,  and  some  of  these
were  larger  than  an  ox.     The  stones  went  about  as  high  as  a
cross-bow  can  carry,  and  then  fell  down,  sometimes  on  the
edge,  and  sometimes  into  the  mouth  itself.     The  mud  was
of  the  colour  of  ashes,  and  at  first  very  liquid,  then  by  de-
grees less  so,  and  in  such  quantities,  that  in  less  than  twelve
hours,  with  the  help  of  the  above-mentioned  stones,  a  moun-
tain was  raised  of  1,000  paces  in  height.     Not  only  Puzzuoli
and  the  neighbouring  country  was  full  of  this  mud,  but  the
city  of  Naples  also  ;  so  that  many  of  its  palaces  were  defaced
by  it.     Now  this  eruption  lasted  two  nights  and  two  days
without  intermission,  though,  it  is  true,  not  always  with  the
same  force ;  the  third  day  the  eruption  ceased,  and  I  went
up  with  many  people  to  the  top  of  the  new  hill,  and  saw


C?H.  XXIV.]  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NUOVO.  611

down  into  its  mouth,  which  was  a  round  cavity  about  a
quarter  of  a  mile  in  circumference,  in  the  middle  of  which
the  stones  which  had  fallen  were  boiling  up,  just  as  a  caldron
of  water  boils  on  the  fire.  The  fourth  day  it  began  to  throw
up  again,  and  the  seventh  much  more,  but  still  with  less
violence  than  the  first  night.  At  this  time  many  persons
who  were  on  the  hill  were  knocked  down  by  the  stones  and
killed,  or  smothered  with  the  smoke.  In  the  day  the  smoke
still  continues,  and  you  often  see  fire  in  the  midst  of  it  in  the
night-time.'*

It  will  be  seen  that  both  these  accounts,  written  imme-
diately after  the  birth  of  Monte  Nuovo,  agree  in  stating  that
the  sea  retired ;  and  one  mentions  that  its  bottom  was  up-
raised ;  but  they  attribute  the  origin  of  the  new  hill  exclu-
sively to  the  jets  of  mud,  showers  of  scoriae,  and  large  frag-
ments of  rock,  cast  out  from  a  central  orifice,  for  several
days  and  nights.  Baron  Von  Buch,.  however,  in  his  excellent
work  on  the  Canary  Islands,  and  volcanic  phenomena  in
general,  has  declared  his  opinion  that  the  cone  and  crater  of
Monte  Nuovo  were  formed,  not  in  the  manner  above  de-
scribed, but  by  the  upheaval  of  solid  beds  of  white  tuflF,
which  were  previously  horizontal,  and  were  pushed  up  in
1538,  so  as  to  dip  away  in  all  directions  from  the  centre,
with  the  same  inclination  as  the  sloping  surface  of  the  cone
itself.  ^  It  is  an  error,'  he  says,  ^  to  imagine  that  this  hill
was  formed  by  eruption,  or  by  the  ejection  of  pumice,  scoriae,
and  other  incoherent  matter ;  for  the  solid  beds  of  upraised
tuff  are  visible  all  round  the  crater,  and  it  is  merely  the
superficial  covering  of  the  cone  which  is  made  up  of  ejected

scoriee.'t

In  confirmation  of  this  view,  M.  Dufrenoy  has  cited  a  pas-
sage from  the  works  of  Porzio,  a  celebrated  physician  of  that
period,  to  prove  that  in  1538  the  ground  where  Monte
Nuovo  stands  was  pushed  up  in  the  form  of  a  great  bubble
or  blister,  which  on  bursting  gave  origin  to  the  present  deep
crater.  Porzio  says,  *that  after  two  days  and  nights  of
violent  earthquakes,  the  sea  retired  for  nearly  200  yards ;  so
that  the  inhabitants  could  collect  great  numbers  of  fish  on

♦  Campi  Phlegraei,  p.  77.  t  P.  347.     ParJB,  1836.

B   R  2


^


612  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NTTOVO.  [Ch.  XXIV.

this  part  of  the  shore,  and  see  some  springs  of  fresh  water
which  rose  up  there.  At  length,  on  the  third  day  of  the
calends  of  October  (September  29),  they  saw  a  large  tract  of
ground  intervening  between  the  foot  of  Monte  Barbaro  and
part  of  the  sea,  near  the  Lake  Avemus,  rise,  and  suddenly
assume  the  form  of  an  incipient  hill ;  and  at  two  o'clock  at
night,  this  heap  of  earth,  opening  as  it  were  its  mouth,
vomited,  with  a  loud  noise,  flames,  pumice-stones,  and
ashes.'*

So  late  as  the  year  1846  a  fourth  manuscript  (vmitten  im-
mediately after  the  eruption)  was  discovered  and  published
in  Germany.     It  was  written  in  1538  by  Francesco  del  Nero,t
who  mentions  the  drying  up  of  the  bed  of  the  sea  near
Puzzuoli,  which  enabled  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  to  cany
off  loads  of  fish.     At  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  of
the  29th  September,  the  earth  sank  down  about  fourteen  feet
in  that  place  where  the  volcanic  orifice  now  appears,  and
there  issued  forth  a  small  stream  of  water,  at  first  cold,  and
afterwards  tepid.     At  noon,  on  the  same  day,  the  earth  began
to  swell  up  in  the  same  spot  where  it  had  sunk  down  fourteen
feet,  so  as  to  form  a  hill.     About  this  time  fire  issued  forth,
and  gave  rise  to  the  great  gulf,  *with  such  a  force,  noise,
and  shining  light,  that  I,  who  was  standing  in  my  garden,
was  seized  with  terror.     Forty  minutes  afterwards,  although
unwell,  I  got  upon  a  neighbouring  height,  from  which  I  saw
all  that  took  place,  and  by  my  troth  it  was  a  splendid  fire,
that  threw  up  for  a  long  time  much  earth  and  many  stones,
which  fell  back  again  all  round  the  gulf,  in  a  semicircle  of
from  one  to  three  bow-shots  in  diameter,  and,  filling  up  part
of  the  sea,  formed  a  hill  nearly  of  the  height  of  Monte  Mo-
rello.     Masses  of  earth  and  stones,  as  large  as  an  ox,  were
shot  up  from  the  fiery  gulf  into  the  air,  to  a  height  which  I

*  '  Magnus   terrae   tractus,  qui  inter  Omnia,  Medica,  Phil.,  et  Mathemat,  in

radices  montis,  quern  Barbarum  incolse  unum  collecta,  1736,  cited  by  Duir^DOJi

appellant,  et  mare  juxtaATernumjacet,  M^m.   pour  servir  a  une  Description

sese  erigere  videbatur,  et  montis  8ubit6  G^Iogique  de  la  France,  torn.  iv.  p.  274.

nascentis  figuram  imitari.    £o  ipso  die  t  See  Neues  Jahr  Bach  for  1846,  and

hor&    noctis  II.,   iste    teme  cumulus,  a  translation  in  the  Quarterly  Journ.  of

aperto  veluti  ore,  magno  cum  fremitu,  the  Geol.  Soc.  for  1847,  vol.  iii.  P-  20.

magnos  ignes  evomuit;  pumicesque,  et  Memoirs,
lapides,    cineresque.'  —  Porzio,    Opera


Ch.  XXIV.]  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NUOVO.  61 3

estimate  at  a  mile  and  a  half.  When  they  descended,  some
were  dry,  others  in  a  soft  muddy  state.'  He  concludes  by
alluding  again  to  the  sinking  of  the  ground,  and  the  eleva-
tion of  it  which  followed,  and  says  that  to  him  it  was  incon-
ceivable how  such  a  mass  of  stones  and  ashes  could  havo
been  poured  forth  from  the  gulf.  He  also  refers  to  the  ac-
count which  Porzio  was  to  draw  up  for  the  Viceroy.

On  comparing  these  four  accounts,  recorded  by  eye-wit-
nesses, there  appears  to  be  no  real  discrepancy  between
them.  It  seems  clear  that  the  ground  first  sank  down  four-
teen feet  on  the  site  of  the  future  volcano,  and  after  having
subsided  it  was  again  propelled  upwards  by  the  lava  mingled
with  steam  and  gases,  which  were  about  to  burst  forth.
Jets  of  red-hot  lava,  fragments  of  fractured  rock,  and  occa-
sionally mud  composed  of  a  mixture  of  pumice,  tu£F,  and
sea-water,  were  hurled  into  the  air.  Some  of  the  blocks  of
stone  were  very  large,  leading  us  to  infer  that  the  ground
which  sank  and  rose  again  was  much  shattered  and  torn  to
pieces  by  the  elastic  vapours.  The  whole  hill  was  not  formed
at  once,  but  by  an  intermitting  action  extending  over  a  week
or  more.  It  seems  that  the  chasm  opened  between  the  Triper-
gola  and  the  baths  in  its  suburbs,  and  that  the  ejected
materials  fell  and  buried  that  small  town.  A  considerable
part,  however,  of  the  hill  was  formed  in  less  than  twenty-
four  hours,  and  in  the  same  manner  as  on  a  smaller  scale  the
mud  cones  of  air  volcanos  are  produced,  with  a  cavity  in  the
middle.  There  is  no  diflSculty  in  conceiving  that  the
pumiceous  mud,  if  so  thrown  out,  may  have  set  into  a  kind
of  stone  on  drying,  jast  as  some  cements,  composed  of  vol-
canic ashes,  are  known  to  consolidate  with  facility.

I  am  informed  that  Baron  Yon  Buch  discovered  some
marine  shells  of  existing  species,  such  as  occur  fossil  in  the
tnflf  of  the  neighbourhood,  in  beds  exposed  low  down  in  the
wall  of  the  crater  of  Monte  Nuovo.  These  may  have  been
ejected  in  the  mud  mixed  with  sea- water  which  was  cast  out
of  the  boiling  gulf;  or,  as  Signor  Arcangelo  Soacchi  has
suggested,"**^  they  may  have  been  derived  from  the  older  tuft,
which  contains  marine  shells  of  recent  species.     The  same

*  Mem.  Roj.  Acad.  Nap.  1849.


614  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NUOTO.  [Ch.  XXIV.

observer  remarks  that  Porzio's  account  upon  the  whole  cor-
roborates the  doctrine  of  the  cone  having  been  formed  by
eruption,  in  proof  of  which  he  cites  the  following  passage  :—
^  But  what  was  truly  astonishing,  a  hill  of  pumice-stones  and
ashes  was  heaped  up  round  the  gulf,  to  the  height  of  a  mile
in  a  single  night.' ^  Signor  Scacchi  also  adds  that  the
ancient  temple  of  Apollo,  now  at  the  foot  of  Monte  Nuovo,
and  the  walls  of  which  still  retain  their  perfect  perpendicu-
larity, could  not  possibly  have  maintained  that  position  had
the  cone  of  Monte  Nuovo  really  been  the  result  of  upheaval.

Tripergola  was  much  frequented  as  a  watering-place,  and
contained  an  hospital  for  those  who  resorted  there  for  the
benefit  of  the  thermal  springs ;  and  it  appears  that  there
were  no  fewer  than  three  inns  in  the  principal  street.  Had
Porzio  stated  that  any  of  these  buildings,  or  the  ruins  of
them,  were  seen  by  himself  and  others  raised  up  above  the
plain,  a  short  time  before  the  first  eruption,  so  as  to  stand  on
the  summit  or  slope  of  a  newly-raised  hillock,  we  might  have
been  compelled,  by  so  circumstantial  a  narrative,  to  adopt
M.  Dufr^noy's  interpretation.

But  in  the  absence  of  such  evidence,  we  most  appeal  to
the  crater  itself,  where  we  behold  a  section  of  the  whole
mountain,  without  being  able  to  detect  any  original  nucleus
of  upheaved  rock  distinct  from  the  rest :  on  the  contrary,  the
whole  mass  is  similar  throughout  in  composition,  and  the
cone  very  symmetrical  in  form ;  nor  are  there  any  clefts,  such
as  might  be  looked  for,  as  the  effect  of  the  sudden  upthrow
of  stony  masses.  Mr.  Constant  Provost  has  well  remarked  that
if  beds  of  solid  and  non-elastic  materials  had  yielded  to  a
violent  pressure  directed  jfrom  below  upwards,  we  should  find
not  simply  a  deep  empty  cavity,  but  an  irregular  opening,
where  many  rents  converged ;  and  these  rents  would  be  now
seen  breaking  through  the  walls  of  the  crater,  widening  as
they  approach  the  centre.  (See  fig.  70,  a,  6.)t  Not  a  single
fissure  of  this  kind  is  observable  in  the  interior  of  Monte
Nuovo,  where  the  walls  of  the   crater  are  continuous  and

*  *  Vemm  qnod  omnem  snperat  ad-  aspicitur.'
miratioDeiii,inon8circumeamToraginem  t  M^m  de  la  Soc.  G^l.  de  FnDe«»

ex  pumicibas  et  cinere  plnsquam  mille  torn.  ii.  p.  91.
pissuum  altitudine  iiD4  node  coogestus


-    ^     W'


Ch.  XXIV.]  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NUOVO.  615

entire ;  nor  are  there  any  dikes  implying  that  rents  had  ex-
isted which  were  afterwards  filled  with  lava  or  other  matter.

It  has  moreover  been  often  urged
by  Von  Buch,  De  Beaumont,  and  ^^S-  7^-

others,   who   ascribe  the    conical
form   of  volcanos    chiefly  to  up-
heaval from  below,  that   in   such    .
mountains  there  are  a  great  num-  .^  y  .

ber  of  deep   rents    and    ravines,  ^         /     \

which  diverge  on  all  sides  like  the  7  f

spokes  of  a  wheel,  from  near  the

central  axis  to  the  circumference  or  base  of  the  cone,  as  in
the  case  of  Palma,  Cantal,  and  Teneriflfe.  Yet  the  entire
absence  of  such  divergent  fissures  or  ravines,  in  such  cases
as  Monte  Nuovo,  Somma,  or  Etna,  is  passed  by  unnoticed,
and  appears  to  have  raised  in  their  minds  no  objection  to
their  favourite  theory.

It  is,  indeed,  admitted  by  M.  Dujfr^noy  that  there  are  some
facts  which  it  is  very  diflScult  to  reconcile  with  his  own
view  of  Porzio's  record.  Thus,  for  example,  there  are  cer-
tain Soman  monuments  at  the  base  of  Monte  Nuovo,  and  on
the  borders  of  Lake  Avernus,  such  as  the  temples  of  Apollo
(before  mentioned)  and  Pluto,  which  do  not  seem  to  have
suffered  in  the  least  degree  by  the  supposed  upheaval.  *  The
walls  which  still  exist  have  preserved  their  vertical  position,
and  the  vaults  are  in  the  same  state  as  other  monuments  on
the  shores  of  the  Bay  of  Baise.  The  long  gallery  which  led
to  the  Sibyl's  Cave,  on  the  other  side  of  Lake  Avernus,  has
in  like  manner  escaped  injury,  the  roof  of  the  gallerj'  re-
maining perfectly  horizontal,  the  only  change  being  that  the
soil  of  the  chamber  in  which  the  Sibyl  gave  out  her  oracles
is  now  covered  by  a  few  inches  of  water,  which  merely  indi-
cates a  slight  alteration  in  the  level  of  Lake  Avernus.'  *  On
the  supposition,  then,  that  pre-existing  beds  of  pumiceous
tuff  were  upraised  in  1538,  so  as  to  form  Monte  Nuovo,  it  is
acknowledged  that  the  perfectly  undisturbed  state  of  the  con-
tiguous soil  en  which  these  ancient  monuments  stand,  is  very
different  from  what  might  have  been  expected.


Bufr^Doy,  M^m.  pour  soirir,  &c.,  p.  277.


616  ERUPTION  OF  MONTE  NUOVO.  [Ch.  XXTV.

Mr.  Darwin,  in  his  *  Volcanic  Islands,'  has  described  several
crateriform  hills  in  the  Galapagos  Archipeli^o  as  composed
of  tufiF  which  has  evidently  flowed  like  mad,  and  yet  on  con-
solidating has  preserved  an  inclination  of  twenty  and  even
thirty  degrees.  The  tuff  does  not  fold  in  continuous  sheets
round  the  hills  as  would  have  happened  if  they  had  been
formed  by  the  upheaval  of  horizontal  layers.  The  author
describes  the  composition  of  the  tuff  as  very  similar  to  that
of  Monte  Nuovo,  and  the  high  angles  at  which  the  beds
slope,  both  those  which  have  flowed  and  those  which  have
fallen  in  the  form  of  ashes,  entirely  removes  the  diflSculty
supposed  by  M.  Dufr^noy  to  exist  in  regard  to  the  slope  of
Monte  Nuovo,  where  it  exceeds  an  angle  of  18**  to  20°.*  Mr.
Dana,  also,  in  his  account  of  the  Sandwich  Islands,!  shows
that  in  the  *  cinder  cones '  of  that  region,  the  strata  have  an
original  inclination  of  between  35**  and  40%  while  in  the
*  tufa  cones '  formed  near  the  sea,  the  beds  slope  at  about  an
angle  of  30^  The  same  naturalist  also  observed  in  the
Samoan  or  Navigator  Islands  in  Polynesia,  that  fragments  of
fresh  coral  had  been  thrown  up  together  with  volcanic  mat-
ter to  the  height  of  200  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea  in
cones  of  tufa.  J

In  October,  1857, 1  re-examined  Monte  Nuovo  in  company
with  Prof.  A.  Scacchi.  On  the  south  side  of  the  mountain  I
saw  both  large  and  small  blocks  of  trachyte  entering  into  its
composition,  together  with  scoriae,  just  as  we  might  have  ex-
pected from  the  accounts  handed  down  to  us  of  the  eruption.
In  the  interior  of  the  crater  on  the  east  and  north-east  side
an  internal  talus  is  seen,  the  beds  of  which  slope  at  angles  of
26°  and  30®  towards  the  centre  or  axis  of  the  cone  as  at
a,  fig.  71.  Such  taluses  are  well  known  as  characterisiiig
cones  of  eruption,  being  formed  by  those  ejected  materials
which  fall  inside  the  margin  of  the  wall  of  the  crater,  and
which,  although  for  the  most  part  ejected  again  during  sub-
sequent explosions,  often  leave  some  monuments  of  their
former  existence.     We  found  several  fragments  of  marine

*  Darwin's  Volcanic  Islands,  p.  106,      Expedition,  in  1838 — 1842,  p.  354.
note.  J  Ibid.  p.  328.


t  Qeologj  of  the  American  Exploring


Ck.  XXIV.]     VOLCANOS  OF  THE  PHLEGR.EAN  FIELDS.


617


shells,  Cardiumy  Cerithium^  &c.,  as  well  as  of  Roman  bricks,
in  these  strata,  and  I  myself  picked  up  three  pieces  of
pottery.  Such  remains  are  just  what  we  might  have  looked
for ;  they  are  such  as  would  have  been  showered  down  from
above  on  a  spot  where  the  gaseous  explosions  burst  through
marine  accumulations  like  those  of  the  Starza,  and  by  which
the  houses  of  Tripergola  were  blown  into  the  air.

I  shall  again  revert  to  the  doctrine  of  the  origin  of  vol-
canic cones  by  upheaval,  when  speaking  of  Vesuvius,  Etna,
and  Santorin,  and  shall  now  merely  add,  that,  in  1538,  the
whole  coast,  from  Monte  Nuovo  to  beyond  Puzzuoli,  was  up-
raised to  the  height  of  many  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  Medi-

Fig  71.


Section  of  Monte  Nuovo  showing  the  internal  talus,  n,  a,  on  the  inner  slope  of

the  crater  on  its  north-east  side.

terranean,  and  has  since  retained  the  greater  part  of  the
elevation  then  acquired.  The  proofs  of  these  remarkable
changes  of  level  will  be  considered  at  length  when  the  phe-
nomena of  the  temple  of  Serapis  are  described.*

Volcanos  of  the  Phlegrcean  Fields. — Immediately  adjoining
Monte  Nuovo  is  the  larger  volcanic  cone  of  Monte  Barbaro
(2,  fig.  69,  p.  609),  the  *  Gaurus  inanis  '  of  Juvenal — an  ap-
pellation given  to  it  probably  from  its  deep  circular  crater,
which  is  about  a  mile  in  diameter.  Large  as  is  this  cone,  it
was  probably  produced  by  a  single  eruption ;  and  it  does  not,
perhaps,  exceed  in  magnitude  some  of  the  largest  of  those
formed  in  Ischia,  within  the  historical  era.  It  is  composed
chiefly  of  indurated  tufa  like  Monte  Nuovo,  stratified  con-
formably to  its  conical  surface.  This  hill  was  once  very  cele-
brated for  its  wines,  and  is  still  covered  with  vineyards ;  but
when  the  vine  is  not  in  leaf  it  has  a  sterile  appearance,  and,
late  in  the  year,  when  seen  from  the  beautiful  Bay  of  Baiie,

*  See  Chap.  XXIX.


I


618  VOLCANOS  OF  THE  FHLB&RSAK  FIELDS.       [Cil  XXIT.

it  often  contrasts  so  strongly  in  yerdnie  with  Monte  Naovo,
which  is  always  clothed  with  arbatos,  myrtle,  and  other  wild
evergreens,  that  the  stranger  might  well  imagine  the  cone  of
older  date  to  be  that  thrown  up  in  the  sixteenth  century.*

There  is  nothing,  indeed,  so  calculated  to  instruct  the
geologist  as  the  striking  manner  in  which  the  recent  volcanic
hills  of  Ischia,  and  that  now  under  consideration,  blend  with
the  surrounding  landscape.     Nothing  seems  wanting  or  re-
dundant ;  every  part  of  the  picture  is  in  such  perfect  harmony
with  the  rest,  that  the  whole  has  the  appearance  of  having
been   called   into   existence  by  a  single  effort  of  creative
power.     Yet  what  other  resalt  could  we  have  anticipated  if
Nature  has  ever  been  governed  by  the  same  laws  9     Each  new-
mountain   thrown   up — each  new   tract  of  land  raised  or
depressed  by  earthquakes — should  be  in  perfect  accordance
with  those  previously  formed,  if  the  entire  configuration  of
the  surface  has  been  due  to  a  long  series  of  similar  dis-
turbances.    Were  it  true  that  the  greater  part  of  the  diy
land  originated  simultaneously  in  its  present  state,  at  some
era  of  paroxysmal  convulsion,  and  that  additions  were  after-
wards  made   slowly  and    successively  during   a    period  of
comparative  repose ;  then,  indeed,  there  might  be  reason  to
expect  a  strong  line  of  demarcation  between  the  signs  of
the  ancient  and  modem  changes.     But  the  very  continuity
of  the  plan,  and  the  perfect  identity  of  the  causes,  are  to
many  a  source  of  deception ;  since  by  producing  a  unity  of
efiFect,  they  lead  them  to  exaggerate  the  energy  of  the  agents
which  operated  in  the  earlier  ages.     In  the  absence  of  all
historical  information,  they  are   as  unable  to  separate  the
dates  of  the  origin  of  different  portions  of  our  continents,
as  the  stranger  is  to  determine,  by  their  physical  features
alone,  the  distinct  ages  of  Monte  Nuovo,  Monte  Barbaro,
Astroni,  and  the  Solfatara.

The  vast  scale  and  violence  of  the  volcanic  operations  in
Campania,  in  the  olden  time,  has  been  a  theme  of  decla-
mation, and  has  been  contrasted  with  the  comparative  state

♦  Hamilton  (writing  in  1770)  says,  Phlegnei,  p.  69.  This  remark  was  no
'  the  new  mountain  produces  as  yet  but  longer  applicable  when  I  saw  it,  in
a    Tery    slender    vegetation.' — Campi       1828.


Ch.  XXIV.]         MODERN  ERUPTIONS  OF  VESUVIUS.  619

of  quiesceDce  of  this  delightful  region  in  the  modem  era.
Instead  of  inferring,  from  analogy,  that  the  ancient  Vesnvius
was  always  at  rest  when  the  craters  of  the  Phlegraean  Fields
were  burning — ^that  each  cone  rose  in  succession, — and  that
many  years,  and  often  centuries,  of  repose  intervened  between
di£Ferent  eruptions, — geologists  seem  to  have  generally  con-
jectured that  the  whole  group  sprang  up  from  the  ground
at  once,  like  the  soldiers  of  Cadmus  when  he  sowed  the
dragon's  teeth.  As  well  might  they  endeavour  to  persuade
us  that  on  these  Phlegrsean  Fields,  as  the  poets  feigned,
the  giants  warred  with  Jove,  ere  yet  the  puny  race  of  mortals
were  in  being.

Modem  eruptions  of  Vesuvius. — For  nearly  a  century  after
the  birth  of  Monte  Nuovo,  Vesuvius  continued  in  a  state  of
tranquillity.  There  had  then  been  no  violent  eruption  for
492  years ;  and  it  appears  that  the  crater  was  then  exactly
in  the  condition  of  the  present  extinct  volcano  of  Astroni,
near  Naples.  Bracini,  who  visited  Vesuvius  not  long  before
the  eruption  of  1631,  gives  the  following  interesting  descrip-
tion of  the  interior : — *  The  crater  was  five  miles  in  circum-
ference, and  about  a  thousand  paces  deep:  its  sides  were
covered  with  brushwood,  and  at  the  bottom  there  was  a  plain
on  which  cattle  grazed.  In  the  woody  parts  wild  boars  fre-
quently harboured.  In  one  part  of  the  plain,  covered  with
ashes,  were  three  small  pools,  one  filled  with  hot  and  bitter
water,  another  Salter  than  the  sea,  and  a  third  hot,  but  taste-
less.'* But  at  length  these  forests  and  grassy  plains  were
consumed,  being  suddenly  blown  into  the  air,  and  their  ashes
scattered  to  the  winds.  In  December,  1631,  seven  streams  of
lava  poured  at  once  from  the  crater,  and  overflowed  several
villages  on  the  flanks  and  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.
Besina,  partly  built  over  the  ancient  site  of  Herculaneum,
was  consumed  by  the  fiery  torrent.  Great  floods  of  mud
were  as  destructive  as  the  lava  itself, — no  uncommon  occur-
rence during  these  catastrophes  ;  for  such  is  the  violence  of
rains  produced  by  the  evolutions  of  aqueous  vapour,  that
torrents  of  water  descend  the  cone,  and  becoming  charged

*  Hamilton's  Campi  Phlegraei,  folio,  voL  i.  p.  62 ;   and  Brieslak,  Campanie,
tome  i.  p.  186.


620  MODERN  EKUPTIONS  OF  VESUVIUS,  [Ch.  XXIY.

with  impalpable  volcanic  dust,  and  rolling  along  loose  ashes,
acquire  sufficient  consistency  to  deserve  their  ordinary  appel-
lation of  *  aqueous  lavas.'

A  brief  period  of  repose  ensued,  which  lasted  only  until
the  year  1666,  from  which  time  to  the  present  there  has  been
a  constant  series  of  eruptions,  with  rarely  an  interval  of  rest
exceeding  ten  years.  During  these  three  centuries,  no  ir-
regular volcanic  agency  has  convulsed  other  points  in  this
district.  Brieslak  remarked,  that  such  irregular  convulsions
had  occurred  in  the  Bay  of  Naples  in  every  second  century ;
as,  for  example,  the  eruption  of  the  Solfatara  in  the  twelfth ;
of  the  lava  of  Arso,  in  Ischia,  in  the  fourteenth;  and  of
Monte  Nuovo  in  the  sixteenth:  but  the  eighteenth  has
formed  an  exception  to  this  rule,  and  this  seems  accounted
for  by  the  unprecedented  number  of  eruptions  of  Vesuvius
during  that  period;  whereas,  when  the  new  vents  opened,
there  had  always  been,  as  we  have  seen,  a  long  intermittence
of  activity  in  the  principal  volcano.


621


CHAPTER  XXV.

VOLCANIC   DI8TBICT   OP   NAPLES— COnimuei.

DIVBNSIONS  AKD  8TBUCTURB  OP  THB  COlfB  OP  TBSXJVItJS — FLUIDITY  AND
MOTION  OP  LAVA — ROPY  SCOBLS — DIKES — HYPOTHESIS  OP  ELEVATION  CRATERS
NOT  APPLICABLE  TO  80MMA  AND  VESUVIUS — SECTIONS  SEEN  IN  VALLEYS  ON
THE  NORTH  SIDE  OP  MONTE  SOMMA — ALLUVIUMS  CALI.ED  'AQUEOUS  LAVAS*
— ORIGIN  AND  COMPOSITION  OP  THE  MATTER  FNViXOPINO  HERCX7LANEUM
AND  POMPBn — CONDITION  AND  CONTENTS  OF  THE  BURIED  CITIES — SMALL
NUMBER  OF  SKELETONS — STATE  OF  PRESERVATION  OF  ANIMAL  AND  VEOE-
TABLE  SUBSTANCES — BOLLS  OP  PAPYRUS — 8TABI* — TORRE  DEL  ORECO —
CONCLUDING   REMARKS   ON   THE   CAMPANIAN  VOLCANOS.

Structure  of  the  cone  of  Vesuvius. — Between  the  end  of  the
eighteenth  century  and  the  year  1822,  the  great  crater  of
Vesuvius  had  been  gradually  filled  by  lava  boiling  up  from
below,  and  by  scoriaD  falling  from  the  explosions  of  minor
mouths  which  were  formed  at  intervals  on  its  bottom  and
sides.  In  place  of  a  regular  cavity,  therefore,  there  was  a
rough  and  rocky  plain,  covered  with  blocks  of  lava  and  sco-
riae, and  cut  by  numerous  fissures,  from  which  clouds  of
vapour  were  evolved.  But  this  state  of  things  was  totally
changed  by  the  eruption  of  October  1822,  when  violent  ex-
plosions, during  the  space  of  more  than  twenty  days,  broke
up  and  threw  out  all  this  accumulated  mass,  so  as  to  leave
an  immense  gulf  or  chasm,  of  an  irregular,  but  somewhat
elliptical  shape,  about  three  miles  in  circumference  when
measured  along  the  very  sinuous  and  irregular  line  of  its
extreme  margin,  but  somewhat  less  than  three-quarters  of  a
mile  in  its  longest  diameter,  which  was  directed  from  N.E.
to  S.W.*  The  depth  of  this  tremendous  abyss  has  been
variously  estimated ;  for  firom  the  hour  of  its  formation  it

♦  Account   of  the  Eruption  of  Ve-      Scrope,  Esq.,  Joum.  of  Sci.  &c.  rol.  xv.
tuvius    in   October    1822,    by  G.    P.      p.  175.


622  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  CONE  OF  VESUVroS.     [Ch.  XXV.

diminished  daily  by  the  dilapidatioD  and  falling  in  of  its  sides.
It  measured,  at  first,  according  to  the  account  of  some
authors,  2,000  feet  in  depth  from  the  extreme  part  of  the
existing  summit;*  but  Mr.  Scrope,  when  he  saw  it,  soon
after  the  eruption,  estimated  its  depth  at  less  than  half  that
amount.  More  than  800  feet  of  the  cone  was  carried  away
by  the  explosions,  so  that  the  mountain  was  reduced  in
height  from  about  4,200  to  3,400  feet-t

As  we  ascend  the  sloping  sides,  the  volcano  appears  a  mass
of  loose  materials — a  mere  heap  of  rubbish,  thrown  together
without  the  slightest  order ;  but  on  arriving  at  the  brim  of
the  crater,  and  obtaining  a  view  of  the  interior,  we  are  agree-
ably surprised  to  discover  that  the  conformation  of  the  whole
displays  in  every  part  the  most  perfect  symmetry  and  ar-
rangement. The  materials  are  disposed  in  regular  strata,
slightly  undulating,  appearing,  when  viewed  in  front,  to  be
disposed  in  horizontal  planes.  But,  as  we  make  the  circuit
of  the  edge  of  the  crater,  and  observe  the  cliffs  by  which  it  is
encircled  projecting  or  receding  in  salient  or  retiring  angles,
we  behold  transverse  sections  of  the  currents  of  lava  and
beds  of  sand  and  scoriae,  and  recognise  their  true  dip.  We
then  discover  that  they  incline  outwards  from  the  axis  of  the
cone,  at  angles  varying  from  25**  to  40**.  The  whole  cone,  in
fact,  is  composed  of  a  number  of  concentric  coatings  of  alter-
nating lavas,  sand,  and  scorise.  Every  shower  of  ashes
which  has  fallen  from  above,  and  every  stream  of  lava  de-
scending from  the  lips  of  the  crater,  have  conformed  to  the
outward  surface  of  the  hill,  so  that  one  conical  envelope  may
be  said  to  have  been  successively  folded  round  another,  until
the  aggregation  of  the  whole  mountain  was  completed.  The
marked  separation  into  distinct  beds  results  from  the  difiFer-
ent  colours  and  degrees  of  coarseness  in  the  sands,  scorise,
and  lava,  and  the  alternation  of  these  with  each  other.  The
greatest  diflBculty,  on  the  first  view,  is  to  conceive  how  so
much  regularity  can  be  produced,  notwithstanding  the  un-
equal distribution  of  sand  and  scoriae,  driven  by  prevailing


♦  Mr.  Forbes,  Account  of  Mount  Ve-      p.  195.    Oct  1828.
suvius,  Edin.  Joum.  of  Sci.  No.  xyiii.  t  Ibid.  p.  195.


Ch.  XXV.]     STRUCTURE  OF  THE  CONE  OF .  VESUVIUS.  623

winds  in  particular  eruptions,  and  the  small  breadth  of  each
sheet  of  lava  as  it  fii'st  flows  out  from  the  crater.

But,  on  a  closer  examination,  we  find  that  the  appearance
of  extreme  uniformity  is  delusive;  for  when  a  number  of
beds  thin  out  gradually,  and  at  diflFerent  points,  the  eye  does
not  without  difficulty  recognise  the  termination  of  any  one
stratum,  but  usually  supposes  it  continuous  with  some  other,
which  at  a  short  distance  may  lie  precisely  in  the  same  plane.
The  difficulty,  moreover,  of  following  any  given  layer  is  in-
creased by  its  undulating  form,  produced  by  the  moulding  of
successive  layers  on  the  outer  sides  of  a  cone,  which  can
never  preserve  perfect  symmetry  owing  to  its  irregular  mode
of  growth.  As  countless  beds  of  sand  and  scorise  constitute
the  greater  part  of  the  whole  mass,  these  may  sometimes
mantle  continuously  round  the  whole  cone ;  and  even  lava-
streams  may  be  of  considerable  breadth  when  first  they  over-
flow, and  since,  in  some  eruptions,  a  considerable  part  of  the
upper  portion  of  the  cone  breaks  down  at  once,  may  form  a
sheet  extending  as  far  as  the  space  which  the  eye  usually
takes  in,  in  a  single  section.

The  high  inclination  of  some  of  the  beds,  and  the  firm
union  of  the  particles  even  where  there  is  evidently  no  ce-
ment, is  another  striking  feature  in  the  volcanic  tuffs  and
breccias,  which  seems  at  first  not  very  easy  of  explanation.
But  the  great  eruption  of  1822  afforded  ample  illustration  of
the  manner  in  which  these  strata  are  formed.  Fragments  of
lava,  scorifle,  pumice,  and  sand,  when  they  fall  at  slight  dis-
tances from  the  summit,  are  only  half  cooled  down  from  a
state  of  fusion,  and  are  afterwards  acted  upon  by  the  heat
from  within,  and  by  fumeroles  or  small  crevices  in  the  cone
through  which  hot  vapours  are  disengaged.  Thus  heated,
the  ejected  fragments  cohere  together  strongly;  and  the
whole  mass  acquires  such  consistency  in  a  few  days,  that
fragments  cannot  be  detached  without  a  smart  blow  of  the
hammer.  At  the  same  time  sand  and  scorise,  ejected  to  a
greater  distance,  remain  incoherent.*

Sir  William  Hamilton,  in  his  description  of  the  eruption  of
1779,  says  that  jets  of  liquid  lava,  mixed  with  stones  and

*  Monticelli  and  Covelli,  Storia  di  FoDon.  del  Vesuv.  id  1821-^.3.


624  FLUID  LAVA.  [C?h.  XXV.

scoriae,  were  thrown  up  to  the  height  of  at  least  10,000
feet,  having  the  appearance  of  a  column  of  fire.*  Some  of
these  were  directed  by  the  winds  towards  Ottajano,  and  some
of  them,  falling  almost  perpendicularly,  still  red-hot  and
liquid,  on  Vesuvius,  covered  its  whole  cone,  part  of  the
mountain  of  Somma,  and  the  valley  (the  Atrio)  between
them.  The  falling  matter  being  nearly  as  vividly  inflamed
as  that  which  wa«  continually  issuing  fresh  fix)m  the  crater,
formed  with  it  one  complete  body  of  fire,  which  could  not  be
less  than  two  miles  and  a  half  in  breadth,  and  of  the  extra-
ordinary height  above  mentioned,  casting  a  heat  to  the  dis-
tance of  at  least  six  miles  roimd  it.  Dr.  Clarke,  also,  in  his
account  of  the  eruption  of  1793,  says  that  millions  of  red-hot
stones  were  shot  into  the  air  full  half  the  height  of  the  cone
itself,  and  then  bending,  fell  all  round  in  a  fine  arch.  On
another  occasion  he  says  that,  as  they  fell,  they  covered
nearly  half  the  cone  with  fire.

The  same  author  has  also  described  the  different  appear-
ance of  the  lava  at  its  source,  and  at  some  distance  from  it,
when  it  had  descended  into  the  plains  below.  At  the  point
where  it  issued,  in  1793,  from  an  arched  chasm  in  the  side  of
the  mountain,  the  vivid  torrent  rushed  with  the  velocity  of  a
flood.  It  was  in  perfect  fusion,  unattended  with  anY  scoria
on  its  surface,  or  any  gross  materials  not  in  a  state  ot  com-
plete solution.  It  flowed  with  the  translucency  of  honey,
*in  regular  channels,  cut  finer  than  art  can  imitate,  and
glowing  with  all  the  splendour  of  the  sun.' — *  Sir  William
Hamilton,'  he  continues, '  had  conceived  that  no  stones  thrown
upon  a  current  of  lava  would  make  any  impression.  I  was
soon  convinced  of  the  contrary.  Light  bodies,  indeed,  of
five,  ten,  and  fifteen  pounds'  weight,  made  little  or  no  im-
pression even  at  the  source ;  but  bodies  of  sixty,  seventy,  and
eighty  pounds  were  seen  to  form  a  kind  of  bed  on  the  surface

^  w         of  the  lava,  and  float  away  with  it.     A  stone  of  300  cwt.,  that
k  '^      had  been  thrown  out  by  the  crater,  lay  near  the  source  of

'  '  ^^  the  current  of  lava:  I  raised  it  upon  one  end,  and  then  let  it
fall  upon  the  liquid  lavaT,  when  it  gradually  sank  beneath  the
surface,  and  disappeared.     If  I  wished  to  describe  the  manner

^  *  Crtmpi  Phlegraei.

■»


Ch.  XXV.]  FLUID  LAVA.  625

in  which  it  acted  upon  the  lava,  I  should  say  that  it  was  like
a  loaf  of  bread  thrown  into  a  bowl  of  very  thick  honey,  which
gradually  involves  itself  in  the  heavy  liquid,  and  then  slowly
sinks  to  the  bottom.

^  The  lava,  at  a  small  distance  from  its  source,  acquires  a
darker  tint  upon  its  surface,  is  less  easily  acted  upon,  and,  as
the  stream  widens,  the  surface,  having  lost  its  state  of  per-
fect solution,  grows  harder  and  harder,  and  cracks  into  in-
numerable fragments  of  very  porous  matter,  to  which  they
give  the  name  of  scoriae,  and  the  appearance  of  which  has
led  many  to  suppose  that  it  proceeded  thus  from  the  moun-
tain.    There  is,  however,  no  truth  in  this.     AU  lava,  at  its
first  exit  from  its  native  volcano,  flows  out  in  a  liquid  state,
and  all  equally  in  fusion.     The  appearance  of  the  scoriae  is  to
be  attributed  only  to  the  action  of  the  external  air,  and  not
to  any  difference  in  the  materials  which  compose  it,  since  any
lava  whatever,  separated  from  its  channel,  and  exposed  to
the  action  of  the  external  air,  immediately  cracks,  becomes
porous,  and  alters  its  form.     As  we  proceeded  downward,
this  became  more  and  more  evident;  and  the   same  lava
which,  at  its  original  source,  flowed  in  perfect  solution,  un-
divided, and  free  from  incumbrances   of  any  kind,  a  little
farther  down  had  its  surface  loaded  with  the  scorise  in  such
a  manner,  that,  upon  its  arrival  at  the  bottom  of  the  moun-
tain, the  whole  current  resembled  nothing  so  much  as  a  heap
of  unconnected  cinders  from  an  iron-foundry.'     In  another
place  he  says,  that  *  the  rivers  of  lava  in  the  plain  resembled
a  vast  heap  of  cinders,  or  the  scoriae  of  an  iron-foundry,  roll-
ing slowly  along,  and  falling  with  a  rattling  noise  over  one
another.'*     Von  Buch,  who  was  in  company  with  MM.  de
Humboldt  and  Gay-Lussac,  describes  the  lava  of  1805  (the
most  fluid  on  record)  as  shooting  suddenly  before  their  eyes
from  top  to  bottom  of  the  cone  in  one  single  instant.     Pro-
fessor J.  D.  Forbes  remarks  that  the  length  of  the  slope  of
the  cone  proper  being  about  1,300  feet,  this  motion  must
correspond  to  a   velocity  of  many   hundred  feet  in  a  few
seconds,  without  interpreting  Von  Buch's  expression  literally.
The  same  lava,  when  it  reached  the  level  road  at  Torre  del

•  Otter's  Life  of  Dr.  Clarke.
VOL.   I.  SB


626  FLUID  LAVA.— EOPY  8C0RLB.  [Ch.  XXV.

Greco,  moved  at  the  rate  of  only  eighteen  inches  per  minute,
or  three-tenths  of  an  inch  per  second.*  *  Although  common
lava,'  observes  Professor  Forbes,  *  is  nearly  as  liquid  as  melted
iron  when  it  issues  from  the  orifice  of  the  crater,  its  fluidity
rapidly  diminishes,  and  as  it  becomes  more  and  more  bur-
dened by  the  consolidated  slag  through  which  it  has  to  force
its  way,  its  velocity  of  motion  diminishes  in  an  almost  incon-
ceivable degree ;  and  at  length,  when  it  ceases  to  present  the
slightest  external  trace  of  fluidity,  its  movement  can  only  be
ascertained  by  careful  and  repeated  observations,  just  as  in
the  case  of  a  glacier.'t

It  appears  that  the  intensity  of  the  light  and  heat  of  the
lava  varies  considerably  at  different  periods  of  the  same
eruption,  as  in  that  of  Vesuvius  in  1819  and  1820,  when  Sir
H.  Davy  remarked  diflFerent  degrees  of  vividness  in  the  white
heat  at  the  point  where  the  lava  originated,  t

When  the  expressions  *  flame '  and  *  smoke '  are  used  in
describing  volcanic  appearances,  they  must  generally  be
imderstood  in  a  figurative  sense.  We  are  informed,  indeed,
by  M.  Abich,  that  he  distinctly  saw,  in  the  eruption  of  Vesu-
vius in  1834,  the  flame  of  burning  hydrogen ;  §  but  what  is
usually  mistaken  for  flame  consists  of  vapour  or  scoriae,  and
impalpable  dust  illuminated  by  that  vivid  light  which  is
emitted  from  the  crater  below,  where  the  lava  is  said  to  glow
with  the  splendour  of  the  sun.  The  clouds  of  apparent  smoke
are  formed  either  of  aqueous  and  other  vapour,  or  of  finely
comminuted  scori®.

Ropy  scoriw. — In  their  descriptions  of  lava,  geologists
often  speak  of  *  ropy  scoriae,'  for  sometimes  a  large  portion
of  the  scoriform  surface  assumes  the  appearance  of  coils  of
cable.  This  structure  I  saw  very  conspicuously  displayed
by  the  lava  of  1857,  where  it  had  poured  over  fipom  the  lip
of  the  crater  and  descended  the  N.N.E.  side  of  the  cone.
There  were  no  loose  fragments  of  scorise  upon  it,  and  the
surface  had  the  form  partly  of  ropes  and  partly  of  the  roots
of  trees.     Occasionally  we  may  observe  such  lavas  on  Etna

♦  Phil.  Trans.  1846,  p.  154.  §  Balletm  de  la  Soc.  G60I  de  France,

t  Ibid.  p.  148.  torn.  vii.  p.  43  ;  and  Illustration  of  Ve-

X  Ibid.  p.  241.  fiuvins  and  £tna,  p.  3.


Ch.  XXV.]


ROPY  SCORI.E.


627


and  Vesuvius,  especially  near  the  points  from  which  they
issued,  exhibiting,  for  a  short  distance,  flattened  spaces  a  few
feet  or  yards  wide,  on  which  the  rope-like  coils  are  arranged
one  within  another,  all  bending  the  same  way,  as  a  b  c  in
fig.  72.     I  had  an  opportunity  in  1858  of  seeing  the  manner

Fig.  72.


in  which  this  structure  originates.  The  highest  crater  of
Vesuvius  was  then  tranquil  or  only  emitting  steam ;  but  half
way  down  the  mountain  on  the  side  towards  Naples  and
below  the  Piano  di  Ginestra,  were  two  cones  which  had  re-
cently been  thrown  up.  Near  the  base  of  one  of  these  was
a  grotto,  from  which  lava  had  been  flowing  without  inter-
mission for  several  months,  and  was  still  pouring  out  in  a
perfectly  liquid  state.  It  had  built  up  a  ridge  between  10
and  15  feet  in  height,  at  the  top  of  which  it  had  formed
a  straight  canal  5  feet  wide.  At  the  point  where  it  issued
from  the  grotto,  it  seemed  as  fluid  as  water,  and  was  at  a
white  heat.  In  order  to  enable  me  to  approach  near  enough
to  watch  its  movements  without  being  scorched,  my  guides
held  up  between  me  and  the  fiery  stream  a  buU's-hide  screen
pierced  with  small  holes,  through  which  we  looked.

At  the  distance  of  about  two  yards  fix)m  the  grotto,  the
lava  flowing  with  great'  velocity  in  the  canal,  began  to  turn
from  white  to  red,  and  a  few  feet  farther  on  it  acquired  a
darker  colour,  and  many  small  separate  pieces  of  sconce  were
seen  floating  on  its  surface,  showing  that  solidification  had
commenced.  About  four  yards  fix)m  the  point  of  efflux,  the
surface  of  the  stream  had  already  become  black,  and  the  de-
tached pieces  of  scoriae  had  begun  to  be  pressed  against  each
other  so  as  to  unite,  and  they  soon  became  welded  together
into  continuous  ropy  coils,  each  set  bending  forward  in  the
middle  where  the  stream  ran  fastest,  and  fitting  one  within
the  other,  as  in  fig.  72,     Their  successive  formation  and

■  8  2


628  RECENT  DIKESL  [Dl  XXT.

arrangement  reminded  me  of  the  manner  in  which  wreaths
of  foam  collect  on  a  rirer  below  a  cataract  or  the  piers  of
a  bridge,  and  being  carried  by  a  current  or  by  the  wind
against  a  bank  or  island,  retain  for  some  time  the  marks  of
having  been  formed  on  the  surface  one  after  the  other.  The
course  of  a  lara-stream  may  always  be  known  by  the  direc-
tion in  which  such  coils  are  bent.

Dikes  in  the  recent  coney  how  formed. — ^The  inclined  strata
before  mentioned  which  dip  outwards  in  all  directions  from
the  axis  of  the  cone  of  Vesuvius,  are  intersected  by  veins  or
dikes  of  compact  lava,  for  the  most  part  in  a  vertical  position.
In  1828  these  were  seen  to  be  about  seven  in  number,  some  of
them  not  less  than  400  or  500  feet  in  height,  and  thinning
out  before  they  reached  the  uppermost  part  of  the  cone.
Being  harder  than  the  beds  through  which  they  pass,  they
have  decomposed  less  rapidly,  and   therefore   stand  out  in
relief.     When  I  visited  Vesuvius,  in  November  1828,  I  was
prevented  from  descending  into  the  crater  by  the  constant
ejections  then  thrown  out ;  so  that  I  got  sight  of  three  only
of  the  dikes;   but    Signor    Monticelli    had   previously  had
drawings  made  of  the  whole,  which  he  showed  me.     The
dikes  which  I  saw  were  on  that  side  of  the  cone  which  is
encircled  by   Somma.   The  eruption  before  mentioned,  of
1828,  began  in  March,  and  in  the  November  following  the
ejected  matter  had   filled  up  nearly  one-third  of  the  deep
abyss  formed  at  the  close  of  the  eruption  in  1822.      In
November  I  found  a  single  black  cone  at  the  bottom  of  the
crater  continually  throwing  out  scoriae,  while  on  the  exterior
of  the  cone  I  observed  the  lava  of  1822,  which  had  flowed
out  six  years  before,  not  yet  cool,  and  still  evolving  much
heat  and  vapour  from  crevices.

Hoffmann,  in  1832,  saw  on  the  north  side  of  Vesuvius,
near  the  peak  called  Palo,  a  great  many  parallel  bands  of
lava,  some  from  6  to  8  feet  thick,  alternating  with  scoria
and  conglomerate.  These  beds,  he  says,  were  cut  through
by  many  dikes,  some  of  them  5  feet  broad.  They  resemble
those  of  Somma,  the  stone  being  composed  of  grains  of  leucite
and  augite.*

*  Geognost.  Beobachtungeo,  kc  p.  132.    Berlin,  1839.


Ch.  XXV.]  RECENT  DIKES.  629

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  dikes  above  mentioned
have  been  produced  by  the  filling  up  of  open  fissures  with
liquid  lava ;  but  of  the  date  of  their  formation  we  know
nothing  farther  than  that  they  are  all  subsequent  to  the  year
79,  and,  relatively  speaking,  that  they  are  more  modem  than
all  the  lavas  and  scorise  which  they  intersect.  A  consider-
able number  of  the  upper  strata  are  not  traversed  by  them.
That  the  earthquakes,  which  almost  invariably  precede  erup-
tions, occasion  rents  in  the  mass,  is  well  known;  and,  in
1822,  three  months  before  the  lava  flowed  out,  open  fissures,
evolving  hot  vapours,  were  numerous.  It  is  clear  that  such
rents  must  be  injected  with  melted  matter  when  the  column
of  lava  rises,  so  that  the  origin  of  the  dikes  is  easily  ex-
plained, as  also  the  great  solidity  and  crystalline  nature  of
the  rock  composing  them,  which  has  been  formed  by  lava
cooling  slowly  under  great  pressure.

Scacchi,  in  his  detailed  narrative  of  what  happened  from
day  to  day  in  the  eruption  of  1850,  gives  an  account  of  a  long
linear  opening  or  fi-acture  on  the  N.N.E.  side  of  the  cone  of
Vesuvius,  from  one  part  of  which  lava  issued.  This  chasm
marked,  no  doubt,  the  site  of  what  has  now  become  a  dike
traversing  the  mountain.  When  Signor  Scacchi  accompanied
me  to  the  Atrio,  in  1858,  the  chasm  alluded  to  was  still  visible
on  the  slope  of  the  cone,  though  even  then  it  had  been
partly  filled  by  the  lava  of  1857,  which  descending  from  the
lip  of  the  crater  had  flowed  into  it.

It  has  been  suggested  that  the  frequent  rending  of  volcanic
cones  during  eruptions  may  be  connected  with  the  gradual
and  successive  upheaval  of  the  whole  mass  in  such  a  manner
as  to  increase  the  inclination  of  the  beds  composing  the
cone;  and  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  before  proposed
for  the  origin  of  Monte  Nuovo,  Von  Buch  supposes  that  the
present  cone  of  Vesuvius  was  formed  in  the  year  79,  not
by  eruption,  but  by  upheaval ;  and  that  it  wag  not  produced
by  the  repeated  superposition  of  scorise  and  lava  cast  out  or
flowing  from  a  central  source,  but  by  the  uplifting  of  strata
previously  horizontal.  The  entire  cone,  according  to  his  view,
rose  at  once,  such  as  we  now  see  it,  from  the  interior  and
middle  of  Somma,  and  has  since  received  no  accession  of


630  KECENT  DIKES.  [Ol  XXV.

height,  but,  on  the  contrary,  has  ever  since  been  diminishing
in  eleyation.*

I  shall  endeavour  to  show  that  this  hypothesis  of  Yon
Buch,  whether  applied  to  the  modem  cone  of  Vesuvius  or  to
the  more  ancient  cone  called  Somma,  is  wholly  untenable.
But  before  enlarging  on  this  topic,  I  may  mention  some  facts
recorded  by  M.  Abich  in  his  account  of  the  Vesuvian  erup-
tions of  1833  and  1834,  because  they  might  seem  at  first
sight  to  favour  the  possibility  of  such  a  mode  of  origin.t  In
the  year  1834,  the  great  crater  of  Vesuvius  had  been  filled
up  nearly  to  the  top  with  lava,  which  had  consolidated  and
formed  a  level  and  unbroken  plain,  except  that  one  small
cone  of  scoriae  had  been  thrown  up,  which  rose  in  the  middle
of  the  plain  like  an  island  in  a  lake.  At  length  this  fiat  area
of  lava  was  broken  by  a  fissure  which  passed  from  N.E.  to
S.W.,  and  along  this  line  a  great  number  of  minute  cones
emitting  vapour  were  produced.  The  first  act  of  formation  of
these  minor  cones  consisted,  according  to  Abich,  of  a  partial
upheaval  of  beds  of  lava  previously  horizontal,  and  which
had  been  rendered  flexible  by  the  heat  and  tension  of  elastic
fluids,  which,  rising  from  below,  escaped  from  the  centre  of
each  new  monticule.  There  would  be  considerable  analogy
between  this  mode  of  origin  and  that  ascribed  by  Von  Buch
to  Vesuvius  and  Somma,  if  the  dimensions  of  the  upraised
masses  were  not  on  so  different  a  scale,  and  if  it  was  safe  to
reason  from  the  inflation  of  bladders  of  half-used  lava,  from
15  to  25  feet  in  height,  to  mountains  attaining  an  altitude
of  several  thousand  feet,  and  having  their  component  strata
strengthened  by  intersecting  dikes  of  solid  lava.

At  the  same  time  M.  Abich  mentions,  that  when,  in  August
1834,  a  great  subsidence  took  place  in  the  platform  of  lava
within  the  great  crater,  so  that  the  structure  of  the  central
cone  was  laid  open,  it  was  seen  to  have  been  evidently  formed,
not  by  upheaval,  but  by  the  fall  of  cinders  and  scoriae  which
had  been  thrown  out  during  successive  eruptions.  J

Mr.  Scrope,  writing  in  1827,  attributed  the  formation  of  a

*  Von  Buch,  Descrip.  Phys.  des  lies      Gdol.  sui  le  Vesure  et  ITtna.    Berlio,
Canaries,  p.  342.     Paris,  1836.  1887.

t  Abich,  Vues  lUnst.  de  Ph^nom.  {  Ibid.  p.  2.


\


Ch.  XXV.]         ORIGIN  OF  THE  CONE  OF  VESUVIUS.  681

volcanic  cone  chiefly  to  matter  ejected  from  a  central  orifice,
but  partly  to  the  injection  of  lava  into  dikes,  and  *  to  that
force  of  gaseous  expansion,  the  intensity  of  which,  in  the
central  parts  of  the  cone,  is  attested  by  local  earthquakes,
which  so  often  accompany  eruptions/*  The  inclination  of
some  of  the  lavas  may,  no  doubt,  have  been  modified  in  some
cases  during  the  rending  and  dislocation  of  the  cone,  but  I
do  not  believe,  any  moi*e  than  does  the  author  just  cited,  that
such  disturbances  have  played  a  conspicuous  part  in  giving
to  volcanic  mountains  the  configuration,  whether  external  or
internal,  by  which  they  are  distinguished.

Previous  to  the  year  79  of  our  era,  Vesuvius  appears,  from
the  description  of  its  figure  given  by  Strabo,  to  have  been  a
truncated  cone,  having  a  level  and  even  outline  as  seen  from
a  distance.  That  it  had  a  crater  on  its  summit,  we  may
infer  from  a  passage  in  Plutarch,  on  which  Dr.  Daubeny  has
judiciously  commented  in  his  treatise  on  volcanos.f  The  walls
of  the  crater  were  evidently  entire,  except  on  one  side,  where
there  was  a  single  narrow  breach.  When  Spartacus,  in  the
year  72  B.C.,  encamped  his  gladiators  in  this  hollow,  Clodius,
the  praetor,  besieged  him  there,  keeping  the  single  outlet
carefully  guarded,  and  then  let  down  his  soldiers  by  scaling
ladders  over  the  steep  precipices  which  surrounded  the  crater,
at  the  bottom  of  which  the  insurgents  were  encamped.  On
the  side  towards  the  sea,  the  walls  of  this  original  cavity,
which  must  have  been  three  miles  in  diameter,  have  been
destroyed,  and  Brieslak  was  the  first  to  announce  the  opinion
that  this  destruction  happened  during  the  tremendous  erup-
tion which  occurred  in  a.d.  79,  when  the  new  cone,  now  called
Vesuvius,  was  thrown  up,  which  stands  encircled  on  three
sides  by  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  cone,  called  Monte  Somma.

In  the  annexed  diagram  (fig.  73)  it  will  be  seen  that  on
the  side  of  Vesuvius  opposite  to  that  where  a  portion  of  the
ancient  cone  of  Somma  (a)  still  remains,  is  a  projection  (6)
called  the  Pedamentina,  which  some  have  supposed  to  be
part  of  the  circumference  of  the  ancient  crater  broken  down
towards  the  sea,  and  over  the  edge  of  which  the  lavas  of  the

*  Geol.  Trans.  2nd  series,  vol.  iL  p.  341.
t  2nd  edit.  1848,  p.  216.


632


OSIGIK  OF  THE  CONE  OF  VESUVIUS,        [Ch.  XXV.


modem  YesnTius  Iiave  poured ;  the  axis  of  the  present  cone
of  YesuviuB  being,  according  to  Visconti,  precisely  eqaidistant
from  the  escarpment  of  Somma  and  the  Fedamentina.

In  the  same  dif^^m  I  have  represented  the  slanting  beds
of  the  cone  of  Vesuvins  as  becoming  horizontal  in  the  Atrio
del  Cavallo  at  (c),  where  the  base  of  the  new  cone  meets  the
precipitous  escarpment  of  Somma;  for  when  the  lara  flows
down  to  this  point,  as  happened  in  1822,  its  descending  conrse
is  arrested,  and  it  then  runs  in  another  direction  along  this

Fig,  73.


Sappowd  seetioD  of  Vcnivint  and  Somm*.

a.  ModU  Sommii,  or  th«  ramsins  of  tlie  andent  cone  of  Ve«Drius.

b.  Thfi  Pedamentina,  a  terrace-like  projetUon,  encircling  the  baae  of  the  recent

coneofTesuTiuaon  the  BOntii  aide.

e.  Atrio  del  Cavallo.*
d,  e.  Crater  left  by  eruption  of  1822.

/.  Small  cone  thrown  up  in  1828,  at  the  bottom  of  the  great  crater.
g,g.  Dikes  inierBeeting  Somma.
A,  h.  Dikes  intersecting  the  recent  cone  of  Vesaviua.

N.B.  The  inclination  ofthe  beds  at  ii,«,/,(I,ia  conaiderablj.eiBggerated  in  thii
diagram  for  want  of  more  apace.

small  valley,  circling  round  the  base  of  the  cone.  Sand  and
scorite,  also,  blown  by  the  winds,  collect  at  the  base  of  the
cone,  and  are  then  swept  away  by  torrents ;  so  that  there  is
always  here  a  flattish  plain,  as  represented.  In  the  same
manner,  the  small  interior  cone  (/)  must  be  composed  of
sloping  beds,  termuiating  in  a  horizontal  plain ;  for,  while
this  monticule  was  gradually  gaining  height  by  successive
ejections  of  lava  and  scorite,  in  1828,  it  was  always  snr-
"  So  called  Irom  travellers  leaving  their  horses  and  molaa  there  when  they
prepare  to  ascend  the  cone  on  foot


Ch.  XXV.]  VESUVIAN  MINERALS.  633

rounded  by  a  flat  pool  of  semi-fluid  lava,  into  which  scoriae
and  sand  were  thrown.

In  the  steep  semicircular  escarpment  of  Somma,  which
faces  the  modem  Vesuvius,  we  see  a  great  number  of  sheets  of
lava  inclined  at  an  angle  of  about  26^  and  in  some  rare  cases
of  30®  and  more.  They  alternate  with  scorise,  and  are  inter-
sected by  numerous  dikes  from  two  to  four  feet  thick,  which,
like  the  sheets  of  lava,  are  composed  chiefly  of  augite,  with
crystals  of  leucite,  but  the  rock  in  the  dikes  is  more  compact,
having  cooled  and  consolidated  under  greater  pressure.  I
saw  one  dike  two  feet  thick  composed  of  leucite  and  augite
in  that  part  of  the  wall  of  the  Atrio  called  Canale  del  In-
ferno, which  was  as  vesicular  as  ordinary  lava ;  but  this  case
is  quite  exceptional.  Some  of  the  dikes  cut  through  and
shift  others,  so  that  they  have  evidently  been  formed  during
successive  eruptions.

Vesuvian  minerals. — A  great  variety  of  minerals  are  found
in  the  lavas  of  Vesuvius  and  Somma ;  augite,  leucite  (called
by  the  French  amphig^ne),  felspar,  mica,  and  olivine  are
most  abundant.  It  is  an  extraordinary  fact,  that,  in  an  area,
of  three  square  miles  round  Vesuvius,  a  greater  number  of
simple  minerals  have  been  found  than  in  any  spot  of  the  same
dimensions  on  the  surface  of  the  globe.  Hauy  enumerated
only  380  species  of  simple  minerals  as  known  to  him ;  and
no  less  than  eighty-two  had  been  found  on  Vesuvius  and  in
the  tuflFs  on  the  flanks  of  Somma  before  the  end  of  the  year
1828.  Many  of  these  are  peculiar  to  that  locality.  Some
mineralogists  have  conjectured  that  the  greater  part  of  these
were  not  of  Vesuvian  origin,  but  thrown  up  in  fragments
from  some  older  formation,  through  which  the  gaseous  ex-
plosions burst.  But  none  of  the  older  rocks  in  Italy,  or
elsewhere,  contain  such  an  assemblage  of  mineral  products ;
and  the  hypothesis  seems  to  have  been  prompted  by  a  dis-
inclination to  admit  that,  in  times  so  recent  in  the  earth's
history,  the  laboratory  of  Nature  could  have  been  so  prolific
in  the  creation  of  new  and  rare  compounds.  Had  Vesuvius
been  a  volcano  of  high  antiquity,  formed  when  nature

Wantoned  as  in  her  prime,  and  played  at  will
Her  yirgin  fancies,


634  ELEVATION  CRATERS  NOT  APPLICABLE         [Ch.  XXV.

it  would  have  been  readily  admitted  that  these,  or  a  much
greater  variety  of  substances,  had  been  sublimed  in  the
crevices  of  lava,  just  as  several  new  earthy  and  metallic
compounds  are  known  to  have  been  produced  by  fumeroles,
since  the  eruption  of  1822.

At  the  fortress  near  Torre  del  Greco  a  section  is  exposed,
fifteen  feet  in  height,  of  a  current  which  ran  into  the  sea ;
and  it  evinces,  especially  in  the  lower  part,  a  decided  tendency
to  divide  into  rude  columns.

Mr.  Scrope  mentions  that,  in  the  cliffs  encircling  the
modern  crater  of  Vesuvius,  he  saw  many  currents  ofiFering  a
columnar  division,  and  some  almost  as  regularly  prismatic  as
any  ranges  of  the  older  basalts ;  and  he  adds,  that  in  some
the  spheroidal  concretionary  structure,  on  a  large  scale,
was  equally  conspicuous.  Brieslak  also  informs  us  that,  in
the  siliceous  lava  of  1737,  which  contains  augite,  leucite,
and  crystals  of  felspar,  he  found  very  regular  prisms  in  a
quarry  near  Torre  del  Greco ;  an  observation  confirmed  by
modern  authorities.

Hypothesis  of  elevation  craters  not  applicable  to  Monte
Somma  or  to  Vesuvius. — It  has  been  imagined  by  MM.  Von
Buch  and  Dufr^noy,  that  a  large  part  of  the  tufaceous  strata
which  rise  in  Somma  to  more  than  half  the  height  of  the
mountain  are  of  submarine  origin,  an  opinion  which  I  shall
show  to  be  quite  untenable.  The  same  writers,  as  well  as
M.  E.  de  Beaumont,  have  also  taught  that  the  sheets  of
lava  which  we  see  in  the  great  section  of  Somma  laid  open
in  the  Atrio,  could  not  originally  have  been  inclined  at  angles
of  more  than  four  or  five  degrees,  so  that  four-fifths  of  their
present  slope  must  be  due  to  their  having  been  subsequently
heaved  up  and  tilted.  Their  original  approach  to  horizontality
was  inferred  from  the  compact  structure  of  many  of  the  beds,
as  well  as  their  supposed  parallelism  and  continuity  in  the
line  of  their  strike.  M.  E.  de  Beaumont,  in  particular,  has
contended  that  if  they  had  run  down  a  greater  inclination
than  four  degrees,  and  still  more  decidedly  if  they  had  poured
down  a  slope  exceeding  twenty  degrees,  they  would  have
consisted  not  of  broad  sheets  of  solid  rock,  but  of  narrow
streams  of  porous  lava  and  scorise.


Ch.  XXV.]       TO  MONTE  SOMMA  OR  TO  VESUVIUS.  636

I  should  have  been  at  a  loss  to  account  for  the  support
which  the  theoretical  views  above  stated  have  received  from
men  of  such  eminence,  had  I  not  been  assured  by  my  scien-
tific friends  at  Naples  that  no  one  of  those  geologists  ever
visited  the  numerous  ravines  which  intersect  the  north  side  of
Monte  Somma.  In  exploring  these  deep  and  narrow  valleys  I
had  the  good  fortune  to  be  accompanied  by  Signor  Guiscardi,
than  whom  no  one  possesses  a  more  thorough  knowledge  of
the  structure  and  composition  both  of  Vesuvius  and  Monte
Somma.  On  looking  at  the  latter  mountain  from  the  north,
I  was  struck  with  its  general  resemblance  to  old  volcanic
cones  such  as  I  have  seen  in  the  Canary  Islands  (Palma,  for
example),  or  such  as  Junghuhn  has  described  in  Java.  Prom
the  crest  of  the  great  escarpment  of  the  *  Atrio,*  or  what  the
Spaniards  would  call  the  *  Caldera,'  deep  ravines  or  *  barran-
cos,'  very  near  each  other  radiate  outwards  in  all  directions,
towards  the  north-west,  north,  and  north-east,  very  shallow
near  the  summit,  but  becoming  rapidly  deeper  and  having
precipitous  sides  towards  their  terminations,  as  near  the  towns
or  villages  of  Santa  Anastasia,  Somma,  and  Ottajano.  At  the
upper  end  of  the  ravine-like  portion  of  several  of  these  valleys
is  frequently  seen  a  precipice  over  which  a  cascade  falls  in
the  rainy  season  when  the  channel  of  the  torrent  above  is  full
of  water.  Passing  upwards  from  St.  Anastasia  into  the  valley
called  the  Casa  deU'  Acqua,  I  saw  at  the  head  of  that  ravine
a  perpendicular  cliflF,  which  is  the  site  of  one  of  these  water-
falls, which  was  dry  at  the  time.  The  clifiF  was  60  feet  in
height,  and  consisted  of  thin  beds  of  stony  lava  interstrati-
fied  with  others  which  were  more  scoriaceous,  and  some  of
which  were  formed  of  loose  pieces  of  scorice.  At  the  head  of
an  adjoining  ravine  called  the  Fosso  di  Cancheroni,  is  a  much
finer  precipice,  between  200  and  300  feet  high,  over  which
the  water  is  thrown  after  heavy  rains.  It  exhibits  a  great
succession  of  beds  of  lava,  some  of  them  of  a  red  colour,
and  much  like  the  modem  streams  from  Vesuvius,  divided  by
strata  of  scoriae,  tuff,  and  breccia,  the  latter  containing  frag-
ments of  lava  often  leucitic,  sometimes  angular,  and  sometimes
rounded  by  attrition.  These  last  imply  that  there  were
gullies  of  aqueous  erosion  on  the  ancient  flanks  of  Somma.


636  ELEVATION  CRATERS  NOT  APPLICABLE         [Ch.  XXV.

The  ravine-like  character  of  these  *  barrancos '  is  due,  I
conceive,  to  their  having  been  excavated  by  torrents  cutting
their  way  backwards.  In  a  neighbouring  valley,  namely,
that  of  Olivelli,  are  seen  trachytic  lavas  with  pumiceous
tufiFs  like  those  which  cover  Pompeii,  but  of  much  older
date.  Blocks  of  white  dolomite,  sometimes  more  than  a  foot
in  diameter,  occur,  though  rarely  in  the  ancient  tuffs,  as
well  as  blocks  of  lava  four  or  five  feet  in  diameter.  Above
the  village  of  Somma  we  examined  the  parallel  and  adjoining
ravines  called  the  Vallone  di  Panico  and  the  Vallone  di  Cas-
tello.  Although  they  are  very  near  each  other,  the  dissimi-
larity of  the  sections  which  they  present  to  the  geologist  is
very  marked.  It  is  the  same  everywhere,  the  greatest  diver-
sity of  character  prevailing  in  the  details  of  structure  instead
of  that  uniformity,  for  explaining  which  the  theory  of  up-
heaval or  elevation  craters  was  invented.  Thus,  on  the  right
side  of  the  ravine  called  the  Casa  dell'  Acqua  is  seen  a  pink
lava  more  than  30  feet  thick,  containing  crystals  of  augite
and  leucite,  and  inclined  at  an  angle  of  20  degrees,  to  which
there  is  nothing  answering  in  the  next  closely  adjoining
valleys  to  the  east  and  west.  The  same  dense  mass  terminates
abruptly  at  its  lower  end.  Some  of  the  lavas  and  tuffs  in
the  same  ravine  are  unconformable  to  other  sets,  and  must
have  flowed  down  after  valleys  had  been  excavated  in  the
flanks  of  the  old  cone.  The  entire  absence  of  dikes  in  most
of  the  valleys,  even  in  those  upper  parts  of  them  which  are
only  separated  by  a  distance  of  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the
section  in  the  Atrio  where  the  dikes  are  so  abundant,  would
have  surprised  me  had  I  not  been  familiar  with  the  same
phenomenon  in  other  volcanic  mountains,  especially  the
Canaries,  where  the  dikes  are  almost  entirely  confined  to  the
vicinity  of  the  grand  centres  of  eruption.

The  annexed  section  (fig.  74)  may  give  some  idf*a  of  the
general  character  of  the  north  of  Somma,  so  far  as  it  is  pos-
sible to  represent  in  one  view  the  structure  of  a  cone,  the
separate  parts  of  which  are  so  unlike  each  other.  The  dikes
so  conspicuous  in  the  Atrio  terminate  soon  after  the  crest  a ;
from  a  to  6  a  great  thickness  of  stony  and  scoriaceous  lava,
dipping  at  angles  of  about  20  degrees,  is  most  conspicuous ;


Ch.  XXV.]       TO  MONTE  SOMMA  OR  TO  VESUVIUS.  687

and  from  6  to  c  white  pnmiceous  tuffs  abound,  some  beds
having  a  steep,  others  a  very  slight  dip,  while  towards  the
plain  at  d  modem  tufaceous  alluvium  is  spread  over  the
surface.

In  no  one  of  the  tuffs  in  these  sections  have  any  marine
shells  been  found ;  but,  what  is  still  more  decisive  of  the  sub-
aerial  origin  of  the  whole  mass,  is  the  frequent  occurrence  of
the  leaves  of  ferns  and  of  dicotyledonous  shrubs  and  trees.
These  have  been  found  in  the  valleys  above  St.  Sebastian  as
well  as  above  St.  Anastasia  and  Ottajano— in  a  word,  along
the  whole  range  of  the  flanks  of  the  mountain,  from  east  to
west.  Sometimes  trunks  of  trees  and  carbonised  wood  occur
in  the  tuffs  at  heights  of  1,000  and  2,000  feet  above  the

Fig.  74.


Section  of  the  north  side  of  Monte  Somma  and  Vesuvius.

sea,  as  in  the  valley  of  the  Casa  dell'  Acqua.  Leaves  of  the
oak  are  not  uncommon,  but  those  of  the  butcher's  broom,
Rtiscvs  aculeatvs^  are  by  far  the  most  frequent.  I  believe  that
a  rich  terrestrial  flora  will  one  day  be  obtained  from  these
tuffs.

Fossil  sea-sheUs  have  been  found  in  ejected  fragments  of
sandstone  and  tuff  in  the  older  parts  of  Vesuvius  on  the  side
of  Naples  at  the  height  of  972  feet  above  the  sea;  especially
at  a  place  near  the  Fosso  Grande  called  the  Bivo  di  Quaglia,
which  I  visited  with  Signor  Guiscardi.  That  gentleman  has
published  an  account  of  about  a  hundred  species  of  marine
shells,  all  of  them  save  one,  Buccinum  semistriatum^  of  species
now  living  in  the  Mediterranean,  which  he  has  obtained  froxa
fragments  of  tuff  and  sandstone  cast  up  into  the  air  at  some


638      ELEVATION  CRATERS  NOT  APPLICABLE    [Ch.  XXV.

remote  period  and  then  imbedded  in  the  old  tuffis  like  pieces
of  dolomite  and  other  rocks  foreign  to  the  monntain.  They
only  prove  that  some  of  the  early  eruptions  burst  through  tnffe
of  marine  origin  like  those  found  between  Naples  and  Vesu-
vius. Such  tofiBs  contain  similar  shells,  but  seem  only  to  rise
to  the  height  of  about  thirty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.

As  to  the  sea-shells  said  to  have  been  found  on  the  north
side  of  Somma,  I  learned  that  the  guides,  finding  such  fossils
to  be  in  request,  have  been  in  the  habit  of  taking  from  the
sea-shore  fragments  of  tuff  covered  with  the  recent  Vermetus
and  passing  them  off  as  fossils  belonging  to  ancient  and
highly  elevated  beds  on  the  flanks  of  Somma.

There  is  nothing  in  the  dimensions  of  Somma  which  is
opposed  to  the  notion  of  its  having  originated  from  the  same
central  axis  of  eruption  as  that  by  which  the  modem  Vesu-
vius has  been  formed.  I  observed  in  1857  that  the  top  of
the  escarpment  where  it  lowers  towards  Ottajano,  as  well  as
the  flank  of  the  old  mountain  below,  was  almost  entirely
devoid  of  vegetation,  from  the  sterilising  effect  of  the  volcanic
sand  and  lapilli  which  fell  upon  it  during  the  eruption  of
1822,  and  which  were  more  than  a  foot  thick  at  this  great
distance  from  the  crater.  I  found  in  them  some  of  those  pear-
shaped  masses  of  scoriae  called  volcanic  bombs,  also  projected
from  the  crater  in  1822.  This  circumstance,  together  with
the  fact  that  the  opposite  side  of  Vesuvius  was  in  like  man-
ner reached  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  present  centre  of
eruption  by  the  matter  then  ejected,  is  a  clear  proof  that  we
want  no  greater  power  than  that  possessed  by  the  existing
volcanos  to  reconstruct  a  cone  having  as  large  a  diameter  as
Somma.  No  upheaval  is  wanted  to  perform  such  a  feat,  the
ordinary  forces  of  the  elastic  vapours  being  amply  sufficient
to  form  such  a  cone  by  ejected  matter  only.

The  ravines  then  on  the  north  side  of  Somma  demonstrate
that  the  origin  of  that  mountain  was  due  to  successive
flows  of  lava  and  showers  of  scoriae,  and  that  there  were  many
long  intervals  of  rest  between  successive  eruptions,  during
which  valleys  of  aqueous  erosion  were  scooped  out,  and
forest-trees  and  shrubs  had  time  to  grow.  These  plants
were  sometimes  buried  in  showers  of  pumiceous  matter,  or


i


Ch.  XXV.]       TO  MONTE  SOMMA  OR  TO  VESUVIUS.  639

in  mud  sweeping  down  the  steep  slopes.  But  how,  it  will  be
asked,  can  we  reconcile  with  all  these  appearances  the  struc-
ture of  the  mountain  at  a  short  distance  from  the  ravines
above  described,  such  as  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  grand  section
of  the  Atrio  ?  In  reply  to  this  question,  I  may  remark  that
there  is  no  difSculty  when  once  a  close  inspection  is  made  of
the  arrangement  and  composition  of  those  beds  which  are  in-
tersected by  numerous  dikes  in  the  great  escarpment  alluded
to.  They  are  as  irregidar  as  the  modem  lava-streams  and
showers  of  ashes  which  in  the  years  1855  and  1857  descended
slopes  of  between  18  and  30  degrees,  and  formed  new  em-
velopes  of  the  cone  arranged  one  above  the  other.

In  that  part  of  the  precipice  exposed  in  the  Atrio  which
is  called  Canale  del  Inferno,  flows  of  lava  may  be  seen  12  feet
thick,  and  consisting  exclusively  of  fragmentary  scoriae.  In
many  other  cases  the  only  part  composed  of  solid  rock  is  no
more  than  one  or  two  feet  thick,  above  and  below  which  the
mass  is  scoriaceous  and  fragmentary.  Not  a  few  of  these  lavas
may  originally  have  formed  narrow  stripes  on  the  steep  slope
of  the  ancient  Somma,  like  those  narrow  bands  which  I  saw
formed  by  the  lavas  of  1855-57  and  1858,  and  some  of  which
I  watched  descending^  rapidly  in  1857  down  the  modem  cone.
But  the  enquiry  will  still  be  made,  how  is  it  possible  that
those  continuous  and  horizontal  sheets  of  stony  lava,  the
edges  of  which  every  observer  recognises  in  the  escarpment  of
Somma,  could  have  been  formed  by  narrow  rills  of  fluid  matter
descending  a  slope  of  20  degrees  ?  The  simple  answer  is,  that
there  are  no  such  extensive  stony  beds.  Signor  Guiscardi  and
I  convinced  ourselves,  in  1858,  that  the  supposed  existence  of
them  is  a  delusion.  There  are  some  beds  of  whitish  tuff",  one
in  particular,  which  is  very  conspicuous,  which  the  eye  traces
for  a  great  length,  in  the  middle  of  the  great  section,  and
which,  seen  at  the  distance,  have  the  character  of  stony  layers.
They  may  have  been  produced  simultaneously  throughout
their  whole  extent  in  the  same  manner  as  some  layers  of
scoria^  of  modem  date,  which  have  been  seen  to  fall  red-hot
from  the  air,  and  to  cover  the  wide  expanse  of  the  mountain-
side with  a  mantle  of  fire.  But  when  real  sheets  of  stony
lava  are  examined,  they  are  never  seen  to  reach  far  in  a


640


STRUCTURE  OF  LAVA  STREAMS.


[Ch.  XXV.


%


horizontal  direction,  bnt  thin  out,  and  pass  laterally  into

scoriee.

I  measured  carefully  the  dimensions  of  one  of  the  numerous
streams  of  1857,  and  found  it  to  be  60  feet  wide,  and  inclined,
like  the  surface  of  the  cone  on  which  it  rested,  at  angles
varying  from  18  to  28  degrees.  Its  average  thickness  was
10  feet.  Having  had  opportunities  of  studying  several  fine
cross-sections  of  the  modern  lavas  of  Mount  Etna,  which  had
consolidated  on  still  steeper  slopes,*  I  feel  sure  that  a  sec-
tion of  the  stream  in  question  would  be  such  as  is  repre-
sented at  No.  1,  fig.  75,  in  which  the  central  mass  b  would


Structure  of  successive  juxtaposed  modem  lava-streams.

be  as  compact  and  stony  as  the  ordinary  lava  of  Somma,
while  a  and  c  would  consist  of  scoriaceous  materials.     The
lower  layer  of  scorise  c  is  usually  the  least  thick ;  it  is  formed
in  part  by  the  sudden  cooling  of  the  lava  pouring  over  the
cold  and  damp  soil,  while  the  upper  bed  a  is  that  which  con-
solidates by  contact  with  air.     But  as  the  mass  ab  c  would
rest  on  an  old  lava,  the  layer  c  would  join  on  to  the  upper
scorise  of  a  subjacent  stream,  so  that  the  solid  and  stony  mass
b  would  be  separated  by  a  bed  of  considerable  thickness  from
the  solid  layer  next  below.     The  stream  No,  2  next  flows
down  and  has  a  similar  structure,  and  to  this  succeeds  the
third  stream.  No.  3,  which  fills  up  the  interspace  between
Nos.  1  and  2,  and  is  also  made  up  in  like  manner  of  three
parts;   a  cross-section  of  the  whole  exhibiting  a  central,
almost  continuous  stony  layer  of  precisely  homogeneous  rock,
because  all  of  the  lavas  proceed  from  one  caldron  of  fluid
matter,  like  those  thirty  or  more  currents  which  issued  from
the  crater  in  1857.     Probably  the  beds  of  Monte  Somma
seen  in  the  Atrio  at  the  bottom  of  the  great  section  were
formed  originally  near  the  base  of  the  cone,  which  had  only
then  attained  a  small  part  of  its  present  dimensions,  and  the

*  See  paper  by  the  author  on  the  Structure  of  Etna,  Phil.  Trans.  1858,  p.  734.


Ch.  XXV.]  HERCULANEUM  AND  POMPEII.  641

inclination  there  being  less  than  18  degrees,  some  currents
may  have  been  wider  than  those  which  I  saw  in  1857,  shoot-
ing down  slopes  of  30  degrees.

In  the  escarpment  of  the  Atrio,  the  stony  lavas  form  no
more  than  a  seventh  part  of  the  whole  mass,  the  rest  consist-
ing of  tuff  or  volcanic  sand  and  fragmentary  scoriae.  I
observed  at  many  points  ropy  lavas  in  this  section,  and  some
grottos  which  indicate  tunnels  like  those  in  which  modern
lavas  often  flow  (see  above,  p.  627).  For  a  short  distance,
some  stony  layers  in  the  AtHo  have  so  steep  a  dip  as  to
resemble  dikes ;  but  I  doubt  whether  even  these  have  been
tilted,  for  some  of  the  lava  of  1857,  on  the  N.N.E.  side  of  the
cone  near  the  summit,  flowed  down  a  steep  slope,  reaching
at  one  point  an  angle  of  43  degrees.  I  observed  that  its  surface
was  ropy  and  root-like,  and  had  evidently  consisted  of  very
viscous  lava.  It  formed  what  was  called  the  *  gibbosity  *  of
1857,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  contained  within  it  a  stony
layer  having  a  dip  of  at  least  40  degrees.  Such  gibbosities  are
caused  by  the  abrupt  termination  of  viscous  streams,  which
stop  at  different  heights  on  the  flanks  of  the  cone  for  want
of  a  sufficient  supply  of  melted  matter  to  enable  them  to
proceed  farther.

Mass  enveloping  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii, — I  have  spoken
in  the  description  of  fig.  74  of  the  alluvial  matter  which
covers  the  plain  c,  d,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  Aqueous
vapours  are  evolved  copiously  from  volcanic  craters  during
eruptions,  and  often  for  a  long  time  subsequently  to  the  dis-
charge of  scorise  and  lava ;  these  vapours  are  condensed  in
the  cold  atmosphere  surrounding  the  high  volcanic  peak,  and
heavy  rains  are  thus  caused.  The  floods  thus  occasioned
sweep  along  the  impalpable  dust  and  light  scoriae,  till  a  cur-
rent of  mud  is  produced,  which  is  called  in  Campania  *  lava
d'  acqua,'  and  is  often  more  dreaded  than  an  igneous  stream
(lava  di  fuoco),  from  the  greater  velocity  with  which  it  moves.
On  the  27th  of  October,  .1822,  one  of  these  alluviums  de-
scended the  cone  of  Vesuvius,  and,  after  overspreading  much
cultivated  soil,  flowed  suddenly  into  the  villages  of  St.  Sebas-
tian and  Massa,  where,  filling  the  streets  and  interior  of
some  of  the  houses,  it  suffocated  seven  persons.    It  will,

VOL.   I.  T  T


642  HERCULANEUM  AND  POMPEn.  [Ch.  XXV.

therefore,  happen  very  frequently  that,  towai*ds  the  base  of
a  volcanic  cone,  alternations  will  be  found  of  lava,  alluvium,
and  showers  of  ashes.  The  great  eruption,  in  1822,  caused
a  covering  only  a  few  inches  thick  on  Pompeii.  Several  feet
are  mentioned  by  Prof.  J.  D.  Forbes,*  but  he  must  have
measured  in  spots  where  it  had  drifted.  The  dust  and  ashes
were  five  feet  thick  at  the  top  of  the  crater,  and  decreased
gradually  to  ten  inches  at  Torre  dell'  Annunziata.  The  size
and  weight  of  the  ejected  fragments  diminished  very  regu-
larly in  the  same  continuous  stratum,  as  the  distance  from
the  centre  of  projection  was  greater.

To  which  of  these  two  latter  divisions  the  mass  enveloping
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  should  be  referred,  has  been  a
question  of  the  keenest  controversy;  but  the  discussion
might  have  been  shortened,  if  the  combatants  had  reflected
that,  whether  volcanic  sand  and  ashes  were  conveyed  to  the
towns  by  running  water,  or  through  the  air,  during  an  erup-
tion,  the  interior  of  buildings,  so  long  as  the  roofs  remain
entire,  together  with  all  underground  vaults  and  cellars,
could  be  filled  only  by  an  alluvium.  We  learn  from  history
that  a  heavy  shower  of  sand,  pumice,  and  lapilli,  sufficiently
great  to  render  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum  uninhabitable,
fell  for  eight  successive  days  and  nights  in  the  year  79,  ac-
companied by  violent  rains.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  find  a
very  close  resemblance  between  the  strata  covering  these
towns  and  those  composing  the  minor  cones  of  the  Phle-
grsean  Fields,  accumulated  rapidly,  like  Monte  Nuovo,  during
a  continued  shower  of  ejected  matter ;  with  this  difference,
however,  that  the  strata  incumbent  on  the  cities  would  be
horizontal,  whereas  those  on  the  cones  are  highly  inclined ;
and  that  large  angular  fragments  of  rock,  which  are  thrown
out  near  the  vent,  would  be  wanting  at  a  distance  where
small  lapilli  only  can  be  found.  Accordingly,  with  these  ex-
ceptions, no  identity  can  be  more  perfect  than  the  form  and
distribution  of  the  matter  at  the  base  of  Monte  Nuovo,  as
laid  open  by  the  encroaching  sea,  and  the  appearance  of  the
beds  superimposed  on  Pompeii.  That  city  is  covered  with
numerous  alternations  of  different  horizontal  beds  of  tuff  and

*  £d.  Journ.  of  Science,  No.  xiz.  p.  131.    Jan.  1829.


Ch.  XXV.]  BEDS  OF  TUFF  AND  LAPILLL  64S

lapilli,  for  the  most  part  thin,  and  subdivided  into  very  fine
layers.  I  observed  the  following  section  near  the  amphi-
theatre, in  November  1828 — (descending  series) : —

Ftot.    Inches.

1.  Black  sparkling  sand  from  the  eruption  of  1822,  containing

minute  regularly  formed  crystals  of  augite  and  tourmaline

2.  Vegetable  mould       ......

3.  Brown  incoherent  tuff,  full  of  pisolitic  globules^  divided

into  layers,  from  half  an  inch  to  three  inches  in  thickness  .

4.  Small  scoriffi  and  white  lapilli  ....

6.  Brown  earthy  tuff,  with  numerous  pisolitic  globules
G.  Brown  earthy  tuff,  with  lapilli  divided  into  layers    .

7.  Layer  of  whitish  lapilli  .....

8.  Grey  solid  tuff  ......

9.  Pumice  and  white  lapilli       .....


0

2i

3

0

1

6

0

3

0

9

4

0

0

1

0

3

0

3

10

3i

Many  of  the  ashes  in  these  beds  are  vitrified,  and  harsh  to
the  touch.  Crystals  of  leucite,  both  fresh  and  fia^rinaceous,
have  been  found  intermixed.*  The  depth  of  the  bed  of
ashes  above  the  houses  is  variable,  but  seldom  exceeds  12  or
14  feet,  and  it  is  said  that  the  higher  part  of  the  amphi-
theatre always  projected  above  the  surface ;  though  if  this
were  the  case,  it  seems  inexplicable  that  the  city  should
never  have  been  discovered  till  the  year  1750.  It  will  be
observed  in  the  above  section,  that  two  of  the  brown,  half-
consolidated  tuffs  are  filled  with  small  pisolitic  globules.
This  circumstance  is  not  alluded  to  in  the  animated  contro-
versy which  the  Royal  Academy  of  Naples  maintained  with
one  of  their  members,  Signor  Lippi,  as  to  the  origin  of  the
strata  incumbent  on  Pompeii.  The  mode  of  aggregation  of
these  globules  has  been  fully  explained  by  Mr.  Scrope,  who
saw  them  formed  in  great  numbers  in  1822,  by  rain  falling
during  the  eruption  on  fine  volcanic  sand,  and  sometimes
also  produced,  like  hail  in  the  air,  by  the  mutual  attraction
of  the  minutest  particles  of  fine  damp  sand.  Their  occur-
rence, therefore,  agrees  remarkably  well  with  the  accoimt  of
heavy  rain,  and  showers  of  sand  and  ashes,  recorded  in
history.t

♦  Forbes,    Ed.    Journ.    of   Science,  +  Scrope,  Geol.  Trans.,  second  series,

No.  xii.  p.  130.  Tol.  ii.  p.  346.

T  T  2


644  HEBCULANEUH  AND  POMFEH.  [Cs.  XXV.

Idppi  entitled  his  work,  ^  F£l  il  faoco  o  I'acqna  che  sotterd
Pompei  ed  Ercolano  ?  **  and  he  contended  that  the  two  cities
were  neither  destroyed  in  the  year  79,  nor  by  a  volcanic  erup-
tion, but  purely  by  the  agency  of  water  charged  with  trans-
ported matter.  His  letters  wherein  he  endeavoured  to  dis-
pense, as  far  as  possible,  with  igneous  agency,  even  at  the
foot  of  the  volcano,  were  dedicated,  with  great  propriety,  to
Werner,  and  afforded  an  amusing  iUustration  of  the  polemic
style  in  which  geological  writers  of  that  day  indulged  them-
selves. His  arguments  were  partly  of  an  historical  nature,
derived  fix>m  the  silence  of  contemporary  historians,  respect-
ing the  fate  of  the  cities,  and  partly  drawn  from  physical
proofe.  He  pointed  out  with  great  clearness  the  resemblance
of  the  tu&ceous  matter  in  the  vaults  and  cellars  at  Hercula-
neum  and  Pompeii  to  aqueous  alluviums,  and  its  distinctness
from  ejections  which  had  fallen  through  the  air.  Nothing,
he  observes,  but  moist  pasty  matter  could  have  received  the
impression  of  a  woman's  breast,  which  was  found  in  a  vault
at  Pompeii,  or  have  given  the  cast  of  a  statue  discovered  in
the  theatre  at  Herculaneum.  It  was  objected  to  him,  that
the  heat  of  the  tuff  in  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  was  proved
by  the  carbonisation  of  the  timber,  corn,  papyn^-roUs,  and
other  vegetable  substances  there  discovered :  but  Lippi  re-
plied with  truth,  that  the  papyri  would  have  been  burnt  up,
if  they  had  come  in  contact  with  fire,  and  that  their  being
only  carbonised  was  a  clear  demonstration  of  their  having
been  enveloped,  like  fossil-wood,  in  a  sediment  deposited
from  water.  The  Academicians,  in  their  report  on  his
pamphlet,  assert,  that  when  the  amphitheatre  was  first
cleared  out,  the  matter  was  arranged  on  the  steps  in  a  suc-
cession of  concave  layers,  accommodating  themselves  to  the
interior  form  of  the  building,  just  as  snow  would  lie  if  it  had
fallen  there.  This  observation  is  highly  interesting,  and
points  to  the  difference  between  the  stratification  of  ashes
in  an  open  building  and  of  mud  derived  from  the  same  in  the
interior  of  edifices  and  cellars.  Nor  ought  we  to  call  the
allegation  in  question,  because  it  could  not  be  substantiated
at  the  time  of  the  controversy  after  the  matter  had  been  all

*  Napoli,  1816.


Ch.  XXV.]  POMPEH—INFUSORIAL  TUFF.  645

removed ;  although  Lippi  took  advantage  of  this  removal,
aad  met  the  arguments  of  his  antagonists  by  requiring  them
to  prove  the  fact.  No  stream  of  lava  has  ever  reached
Pompeii  since  it  was  first  built,  although  the  foundations  of
the  town  stand  upon  the  old  leucitic  lava  of  Somma ;  several
streams  of  which,  with  tuff  interposed,  had  been  cut  through
in  excavations.

Infusorial  beds  covering  Pompeii. — A  most  singular  and
unexpected  discovery  was  made,  in  1844-45,  by  Professor
Ehrenberg  respecting  the  nature  of  many  of  the  layers  of
ashes  and  pumice  enveloping  Pompeii.  He  ascertained  that
they  were,  in  great  part,  of  organic  and  fresh-water  origin,
consisting  of  the  siliceous  cases  of  microscopic  infusoria.
What  is  still  more  surprising,  this  fact  proves  to  be  by  no
means  an  isolated  or  solitary  example  of  an  intimate  relation
between  organic  life  and  the  results  of  volcanic  activity.  On
the  Bhine,  several  beds  of  tuff  and  pumiceous  conglomerate,
resembling  the  mass  incumbent  upon  Pompeii  and  closely
connected  with  extinct  volcanos,  are  now  ascertained  to  be
made  up  to  a  great  extent  of  the  siliceous  cases  of  infusoria
(or  rather  Diatomacese),  invisible  to  the  naked  eye  and  often
half  fused.*^  No  less  than  94  distinct  species  have  already
been  detected  in  one  mass  of  this  kind,  more  than  150  feet
thick,  at  Hochsimmer,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Bhine,  near
the  LaacherHsee.  Some  of  these  Bhenish  infusorial  accumula-
tions appear  to  have  fallen  in  showers,  others  to  have  been
poured  out  of  lake-craters  in  the  form  of  mud,  as  in  the
Brohl  valley.

In  Mexico,  Peru,  the  Isle  of  France,  and  several  other
volcanic  regions,  analogous  phenomena  have  been  observed,
and  everywhere  the  species  of  infusoria  belong  to  fresh-water
and  terrestrial  genera,  except  in  the  case  of  the  Patagonian
pumiceous  tuffs,  specimens  of  which,  brought  home  by  Mr.
Darwin,  are  found  to  contain  the  remains  of  marine  animal-
cules. In  various  kinds  of  pumice  ejected  by  volcanos,  the
microscope  has  revealed  to  Professor  Ehrenberg  the  siliceous

*  Not  a  few  of  the  organic  bodies,  are  now  regarded  by  botanists  as  plants,

celled  by  Ehrenberg  'infasoria,'  such  and  are  called  Diatomacese  and  Des-

as  Gaillonella  and  Bacillaria,  once  snp-  midiae.
posed  to  belong  to  the  animal  kingdom,


646


INFUSORIAL  TOFF.


[Ch.  XXV.


cases  of  infasoria  often  ludf  obliterated  by  the  action  of
heat,  and  the  fine  dost  thrown  out  into  the  air  daring  erup-
tions is  sometimes  referable  to  these  most  minute  organic
substances  brought  up  fix>m  considerable  depths,  and  some-
times mingled  with  small  particles  of  vegetable  matter.

In  what  manner  did  the  solid  coverings  of  these  most
minute  plants  and  animalcules,  which  can  only  originate  and
increase  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  sink  down  and  penetrate
into  subterranean  cavities,  so  as  to  be  ejected  from  the  vol-
canic orifices?  We  have  of  late  years  become  familiar  with
the  fact  in  the  process  of  boring  Artesian  wells,  that  the
seeds  of  plants,  the  remains  of  insects,  and  even  small  fish,
with  other  organic  bodies,  are  carried  in  an  uninjured  state
by  the  underground  circulation  of  waters,  to  the  depth  of
many  hundred  feet.  With  still  greater  faciliiy  in  a  volcanic
region  we  may  conjecture,  that  water  and  mud  full  of  in-
visible infusoria  may  be  sucked  down,  from  time  to  time,  into
subterranean  rents  and  hollows  in  cavernous  lava  which  has
been  permeated  by  gases,  or  in  rocks  dislocated  by  earth-
quakes. It  often  happens  that  a  lake  which  has  endured  for
centuries  in  a  volcanic  crater,  disappears  suddenly  on  the
approach  of  a  new  eruption.  Violent  shocks  agitate  the
surrounding  region,  and  ponds,  rivers,  and  wells  are  dried
up.  Large  cavities  far  below  may  thus  become  filled  with
fen-mud  chiefly  composed  of  the  more  indestructible  and
siliceous  portions  of  infusoria,  destined  perhaps  to  be  one
day  ejected  in  a  fragmentary  or  half-fused  state,  yet  without
the  obliteration  of  all  traces  of  organic  structure.*

Herculaneum. — It  was  remarked  that  no  lava  has  flowed


*  See  Ehrenberg,  Proceedings  (Be-
nch te)  of  the  Royal  Acad,  of  Sci.  Berlin,
1844,  1845,  and  an  excellent  abstract  of
his  papers  by  Mr.  Ansted  in  the  Quart.
Joum.  of  the  Geol.  Soc  London,  No.  7,
Aug.  1846.  In  regard  to  marine  infu-
soria found  in  volcanic  tuff,  it  is  well
known  that  on  the  shores  of  the  island
of  Cephalonia  in  the  Mediterranean
(Proceedings,  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  ii.  p.  220)
there  is  a  cavity  in  the  rock,  into  which
the  sea  has  been  flowing  for  ages,  and
many  others  doubtless  exist  in  the  leaky


bottom  of  the  ocean.  The  marine  cur-
rent has  been  rushing  in  for  many  years,
and  as  the  infusoria  inhabiting  the
waters  of  the  Mediterranean  are  ex-
ceedingly abundant,  a  vast  store  of  their
cases  may  accumulate  in  submarine  ca-
verns (the  water,  perhaps,  being  con-
verted into  steam,  and  so  escaping  up-
wards), and  they  may  then  be  cast  up
again  to  furnish  the  materials  of  vol-
canic tuff,  should  an  eruption  occur  like
that  which  produced  Graham  Island,  off
the  coast  of  Sicily,  in  1831.


Ch.  XXV.]  HERCTJLANEUM  AND  POMPEU.  647

over  the  site  of  Pompeii,  since  that  city  was  built,  but  with
Herculaneum  the  case  is  different.  Although  the  substance
which  fills  the  interior  of  the  houses  and  the  vaults  in  that
buried  city  must  have  been  introduced  in  a  state  of  mud,  like
that  found  in  similar  situations  in  Pompeii,  yet  the  super-
incumbent mass  differs  wholly  in  composition  and  thickness.
Herculaneum  was  situated  several  miles  nearer  to  the  vol-
cano, and  has,  therefore,  been  always  more  exposed  to  be
covered,  not  only  by  showers  of  ashes,  but  by  alluviums  and
streams  of  lava.  Accordingly,  masses  of  both  have  accu-
mulated on  each  other  above  the  city,  to  a  depth  of  nowhere
less  than  70,  and  in  many  places  of  112  feet.*

The  tuff  which  envelopes  the  buildings  consists  of  com-
minuted volcanic  ashes,  mixed  with  pumice.  A  mask  em-
bedded in  this  matrix  has  left  a  cast,  the  sharpness  of  which
was  compared  by  Hamilton  to  those  in  plaster  of  Paris ;  nor
was  the  mask  in  the  least  degree  scorched,  as  if  it  had  been
imbedded  in  heated  matter.  This  tuff  is  porous ;  and,  when
first  excavated,  is  soft  and  easily  worked,  but  acquires  a  con-
siderable degree  of  induration  on  exposure  to  the  air.  Above
this  lowest  stratum  is  placed,  according  to  Hamilton,  ^  the
matter  of  six  eruptions,'  each  separated  from  the  other  by
veins  of  good  soil.  In  these  soils  Lippi  states  that  he  col-
lected a  considerable  number  of  land  shells — an  observation
which  is  no  doubt  correct ;  for  many  snails  burrow  in  soft
soils,  and  some  Italian  species  descend,  when  they  hybernate,
to  the  depth  of  five  feet  and  more  from  the  surface.  Delia
Torre  also  informs  us  that  there  is  in  one  part  of  this  super-
imposed mass  a  bed  of  true  siliceous  lava  {lava  dipietra  dura) ;
and,  as  no  such  current  is  believed  to  have  flowed  till  near
1,000  years  after  the  destruction  of  Herculaneum,  we  must
conclude  that  the  origin  of  a  large  part  of  the  covering  of
Herculaneum  was  long  subsequent  to  the  first  inhumation  of
the  place.  That  city,  as  well  as  Pompoii,  was  a  seaport.
Herculaneum  is  still  very  near  the  shore,  but  a  tract  of  land,
a  mile  in  length,  intervenes  between  the  borders  of  the  Bay
of  Naples  and  Pompeii.  In  both  cases  the  g^in  of  land  is
due  to  the  filling  up  of  the  bed  of  the  sea  with  volcanic

*  Hamilton,  Obsenr.  on  Mount  Verannf,  p.  94.    London,  1774.


643  OBJECTS  DISCOVERED  IN  [Ch.  XXV.

matter,  and  not  to  elevation  by  earthquakes,  for  there  has
been  no  change  in  the  relative  level  of  land  and  sea.  Pom-
peii stood  on  a  slight  eminence  composed  of  the  lavas  of  the
ancient  Vesuvius,  and  flights  of  steps  led  down  to  the  water's
edge.  The  lowermost  of  these  steps  are  said  to  be  still  on
an  exact  level  with  the  sea.

Conditions  and  contents  of  the  buried  cities. — After  these  ob-
servations on  the  nature  of  the  strata  enveloping  and  sur-
rounding the  cities,  we  may  proceed  to  consider  their  internal
condition  and  contents,  so  far  at  least  as  they  offer  facts  of
geological  interest.    Notwithstanding  the  much  greater  depth
at  which  Herculaneum  was  buried,  it  was  discovered  before
Pompeii,  by  the  accidental  circumstance  of  a  well  being
sunk,  in  1713,  which  came  right  down  upon  the  theatre,
where  the  statues  of  Hercules  and  Cleopatra  were  soon  found.
Whether  this  city  or  Pompeii,  both  of  them  founded  by
Greek  colonies,  was  the  more  considerable,  is  not  yet  deter-
mined ;  but  both  are  mentioned  by  ancient  authors  as  among
the  seven  most  flourishing  cities  in  Campania.     The  walls  of
Pompeii  were  three  miles  in  circumference  ;  but  we  have,  as
yet,  no  certain  knowledge  of  the  dimensions  of  Herculaneum.
In  the  latter  place  the  theatre  alone  is  open  for  inspection ;
the  Forum,  Temple  of  Jupiter,  and  other  buildings,  having
been  filled  up  with  rubbish  as  the  workmen  proceeded,  owing
to  the  diflSculty  of  removing  it  from  so  great  a  depth  below
ground.     Even  the  theatre  is  only  seen  by  torchlight,  and
the  most  interesting  information,  perhaps,  which  the  geolo-
gist obtains  there,  is  the  continual  formation  of  stalactite  in
the  galleries  cut  through  the  tuff;  for  there  is  a  constant
percolation  of  water  charged  with  carbonate  of  lime  mixed
with  a  small  portion  of  magnesia.     Such  mineral  waters
must,  in  the  course  of  time,  create  great  changes  in  many
rocks ;  especially  in  lavas,  the  pores  of  which  they  may  fill
with  calcareous  spar,  so  as  to  convert  them  into  amygdaloids.
Some  geologists,  therefore,  are  unreasonable  when  they  ex-
pect that  volcanic  rocks  of  remote  eras  should  accord  precisely
with  those  of  modem  date  ;  since  it  is  obvious  that  many  of
those  produced  in  our  own  time  will  not  long  retain  the  same
aspect  and  internal  composition.


Ch.  XXV.]  HERCULANEUM  AND  POMPEII.  649

Both  at  Herculanenm  and  Pompeii,  temples  have  been
found  with  inscriptions  commemorating  the  rebuilding  of
the  edifices  after  they  had  been  thrown  down  by  an  earth-
quake.* This  earthquake  happened  in  the  reign  of  Nero,
sixteen  years  before  the  cities  were  overwhelmed.  In  Pom-
peii, one-fourth  of  which  is  now  laid  open  to  the  day,  both
the  public  and  private  buildings  bear  testimony  to  the
catastrophe.  The  walls  are  rent,  and  in  many  places  tra-
versed by  fissures  still  open.  Columns  are  lying  on  the
ground  only  half  hewn  from  huge  blocks  of  travertin,  and  the
temple  for  which  they  were  designed  is  seen  half  repaired.
In  some  few  places  the  pavement  had  sunk  in,  but  in  general
it  was  undisturbed,  consisting  of  large  irregular  flags  of
lava  joined  neatly  together,  in  which  the  carriage  wheels
have  ofben  worn  ruts  an  inch  and  a  half  deep.  In  the  wider
streets,  the  ruts  are  numerous  and  irregular ;  in  the  narrower
there  are  only  two,  one  on  each  side,  which  are  very  con-
spicuous. It  is  impossible  not  to  look  with  some  interest
even  on  these  ruts,  which  were  worn  by  chariot  wheels  more
than  seventeen  centuries  ago ;  and,  independently  of  their
antiquity,  it  is  remarkable  to  see  such  deep  incisions  so  con-
tinuous in  a  stone  of  great  hardness.

Small  number  of  skeletons. — A  very  small  number  of
skeletons  have  been  discovered  in  either  city ;  and  it  is  clear
that  most  of  the  inhabitants  not  only  found  time  to  escape,
but  also  to  carry  with  them  the  principal  part  of  their  valu-
able eflfects.  In  the  barracks  of  Pompeii  were  the  skeletons
of  two  soldiers  chained  to  the  stocks,  and  in  the  vaults  of  a
country-house  in  the  suburbs  were  the  skeletons  of  seventeen
persons,  who  appear  to  have  fled  there  to  escape  from  the
shower  of  ashes.  They  were  found  enclosed  in  an  indurated
tuflT,  and  in  this  matrix  was  preserved  a  perfect  cast  of  a
woman,  perhaps  the  mistress  of  the  house,  with  an  infant  in
her  arms.  Although  her  form  was  imprinted  on  the  rock,
nothing  but  the  bones  remained.  To  these  a  chain  of  gold
was  suspended,  and  on  the  fingers  of  the  skeletons  were  ring^
with  jewels.  Against  the  sides  of  the  same  vault  was  ranged
a  long  line  of  earthen  amphorse.

*  Swinburne  and  Lalande.    Paderni,  Phil.  Trans.  1758,  vul.  i.  p.  619.


650  HEBCULANEUM  AND  POMPEIL  [Ch.  XXV.

The  writings  scribbled  by  the  soldiers  on  the  walls  of  their
barracks,  and  the  names  of  the  owners  of  each  honse  written
over  the  doors,  are  still  perfectly  l^ble.  The  colours  of
fresco  paintings  on  the  stuccoed  walls  in  the  interior  of
boildings  are  almost  as  yivid  as  if  they  were  just  finished.
There  are  public  fountains  decorated  with  shells  laid  out  in
patterns  in  the  same  fashion  as  those  now  seen  in  the  town
of  Naples  ;  and  in  the  room  of  a  painter,  who  was  perhaps  a
naturalist,  a  large  collection  of  shells  was  found,  comprising
a  great  variety  of  Mediterranean  species,  in  as  good  a  state
of  preservation  as  if  they  had  remained  for  the  same  number
of  years  in  a  museum.  A  comparison  of  these  remains  with
those  found  so  generally  in  a  fossil  state  would  not  assist  us
in  obtaining  the  least  insight  into  the  time  required  to  pro-
duce a  certain  degree  of  decomposition  or  mineralisation;
for,  although  under  favourable  circumstances  much  greater
alteration  might  doubtless  have  been  brought  about  in  a
shorter  period,  yet  the  example  before  us  shows  that  an  in-
humation of  seventeen  centuries  may  sometimes  effect  nothing
towards  the  reduction  of  shells  to  the  state  in  which  fossils
are  usually  found.

The  wooden  beams  in  the  houses  at  Herculaneum  are  black
on  the  exterior,  but,  when  cleft  open,  they  appear  to  be  almost
in  the  state  of  ordinary  wood,  and  the  progress  made  by  the
whole  mass  towards  the  state  of  lignite  is  scarcely  appreciable.
Some  animal  and  vegetable  substances  of  more  perishable
kinds  have  of  course  suffered  much  change  and  decay,  yet
the  state  of  preservation  of  these  is  truly  remarkable.
Fishing-nets  are  very  abundant  in  both  cities,  often  quite
entire ;  and  their  number  at  Pompeii  is  the  more  interesting
from  the  sea  being  now,  as  we  stated,  a  mile  distant.  Linen
has  been  found  at  Herculaneum,  with  the  texture  well  de-
fined ;  and  in  a  fruiterer's  shop  in  that  city  were  discovered
vessels  full  of  almonds,  chestnuts,  walnuts,  and  fruit  of  the
^  carubiere,'  all  distinctly  recognisable  from  their  shape.  A
loaf,  also,  still  retaining  its  form,  was  found  in  a  baker's
shop,  with  his  name  stamped  upon  it.  On  the  counter  of
an  apothecary  was  a  box  of  pills  converted  into  a  fine  earthy
substance;  and  by  the  side  of  it  a  small  cylindrical  roll


Ch.  XXV.]  PAPYRI  FOUND  IN  HERCULANEUM  AND  POMPEU.    651

evidently  prepared  to  be  cut  into  pills.  By  the  side  of  these
was  ajar  containing  medicinal  herbs.  In  1827,  moist  olives
were  found  in  a  square  glass  case,  and  ^  caviare/  or  roe  of  a
fish,  in  a  state  of  wonderful  preservation.  An  examination
of  these  curious  condiments  has  been  published  by  Covelli
of  Naples,  and  they  are  preserved  hermetically  sealed  in  the
museum  there.*

Papyri. — There  is  a  marked  difference  in  the  condition  and
appearance  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  substances  found  at
Pompeii  and  Herculaneum;  those  of  Pompeii  being  pene-
trated by  a  grey  pulverulent  tu£P,  those  in  Herculaneum  seem-
ing to  have  been  first  enveloped  by  a  past<e  which  consolidated
round  them,  and  then  allowed  them  to  become  slowly  carbon-
ised. Some  of  the  rolls  of  papyrus  at  Pompeii  still  retain  their
form ;  but  the  writing,  and  indeed  almost  all  the  vegetable
matter,  appear  to  have  vanished,  and  to  have  been  replaced
by  volcanic  tuff  somewhat  pulverulent.  At  Herculaneum  the
earthy  matter  has  scarcely  ever  penetrated ;  and  the  vegetable
substance  of  the  papyrus  has  become  a  thin  friable  black
matter,  almost  resembling  in  appearance  the  tinder  which
remains  when  stiff  paper  has  been  burnt,  in  which  the  letters
may  still  be  sometimes  traced.  The  small  bundles  of  papyri,
composed  of  five  or  six  rolls  tied  up  together,  had  sometimes
lain  horizontally,  and  were  pressed  in  that  direction,  but
sometimes  they  had  been  placed  in  a  vertical  position.  Small
tickets  were  attached  to  each  bundle,  on  which  the  title  of
the  work  was  inscribed.  In  one  case  only  have  the  sheets
been  found  with  writing  on  both  sides  of  the  pages.  So
numerous  are  the  obliterations  and  corrections,  that  many
must  have  been  original  manuscripts.  The  variety  of  hand-
writings is  quite  extraordinary:  nearly  all  are  written  in
Greek,  but  there  are  a  few  in  Latin.  They  were  almost  all
found  in  a  suburban  villa  in  the  library  of  one  private  indi-
vidual ;  and  the  titles  of  four  hundred  of  those  least  injured,
which  have  been  read,  are  found  to  be  unimportant  works,
but  all  entirely  new,  chiefly  relating  to  music,  rhetoric,  and
cookery.  There  are  two  volumes  of  Epicurus  *  On  Nature,'
and  the  others  are  mostly  by  writers  of  the  same  school,  only

*  Prof.  J.  D  Forbes,  Edin.  Jooni.  of  Sci,  No.  six.  p.  180.    Jan.  1829.


652  PAPYBI  FOUND  IN  HERCULANBUM  AND  POMPEH.  [Ch.  XXV.

one  fragment  having  been  discovered,  bj  an  opponent  of  the
Epicurean  system,  Ohrjsippos.  In  one  of  the  manuscripts
which  was  in  the  hands  of  the  interpreters  when  I  visited  the
museum  in  1828,  the  author  indulges  in  the  speculation  that
all  the  Homeric  personages  were  allegorical — ^that  Agamem-
non was  the  ether,  Achilles  the  sun,  Helen  the  earth,  Paris
the  air,  Hector  the  moon,  &c.  If  the  opinion  of  some  anti-
quaries be  correct  that  not  one-hundredth  partof  Herculaneum
has  yet  been  explored,  we  may  still  hope  that  some  rolls  of
papyrus  may  yet  be  found  containing  some  of  the  lost  works
of  the  Augustan  age,  or  of  eminent  Greek  historians  and
philosophers.

Stahias. — Besides  the  cities  already  mentioned,  Stabise,  a
small  town  about  six  miles  from  Vesuvius,  and  near  the  site
of  the  modem  Castel-a-Mare  (see  map  of  volcanic  district  of
Naples,  p.  600),  was  overwhelmed  during  the  eruption  of  79.
Pliny  mentions  that,  when  his  uncle  was  there,  he  ¥ra8
obliged  to  make  his  escape,  so  great  was  the  quantity  of
falling  stones  and  ashes.  In  the  ruins  of  this  place,  a  few
skeletons  have  been  found  buried  in  volcanic  ejections,  to-
gether with  some  antiquities  of  no  great  value,  and  rolls  of
papyrus,  which,  like  those  of  Pompeii,  were  illegible.

Torre  del  Greco  overflowed  by  lava. — Of  the  towns  hitherto
mentioned,  Herculaneum  alone  has  been  overflowed  by  a
stream  of  melted  matter ;  but  this  did  not,  as  we  have  seen,
enter  or  injure  the  buildings,  which  were  previously  enveloped
or  covered  over  with  tuff.  But  burning  torrents  have  often
taken  their  course  through  the  streets  of  Torre  del  Greco,
and  consumed  or  enclosed  a  large  portion  of  the  town  in
solid  rock.  It  seems  probable  that  the  destruction  of  three
thousand  of  its  inhabitants  in  1631,  which  some  accounts
attribute  to  boiling  water,  was  principally  due  to  one  of  those
alluvial  floods  which  we  before  mentioned;  but,  in  1737,
the  lava  itself  flowed  through  the  eastern  side  of  the  town,
and  afterwards  reached  the  sea;  and,  in  1794,  another  cur-
rent, rolling  over  the  western  side,  filled  the  streets  and
houses,  and  killed  more  than  four  hundred  persons.  The
main  street  is  now  quarried  through  this  lava,  which  supplied
building  stones  for  new  houses  erected  where  others  had  been


Ch.  XXV.]        DESTKUCTION  OF  TORRE  DEL  GRECO.  653

annihilated.  The  church  was  half-buried  in  a  rocky  mass,
but  the  upper  portion  served  as  the  foundation  of  a  new
edifice.

The  number  of  the  population  when  I  was  first  there,  in
1828,  was  estimated  at  fifteen  thousand ;  and  a  satisfactory
answer  may  readily  be  returned  to  those  who  enquire  how
the  inhabitants  can  be  so  ^  inattentive  to  the  voice  of  time
and  the  warnings  of  nature,'  "^  as  to  rebuild  their  dwellings
on  a  spot  so  often  devastated.  No  neighbouring  site  un-
occupied by  a  town,  or  which  would  not  be  equally  insecure,
combines  the  same  advantages  of  proximity  to  Naples,  to
the  sea,  and  to  the  rich  lands  on  the  flanks  of  Vesuvius.  If
the  present  population  were  exiled,  they  would  immediately
be  replaced  by  another,  for  the  same  reason  that  the  Ma-
remma  of  Tuscany  and  the  Campagna  di  Boma  will  never  be
depopulated,  although  the  malaria  fever  commits  more  havoc
in  a  few  years  than  the  Yesuvian  lavas  in  as  many  centuries.
The  district  around  Naples  supplies  one  amongst  innumer-
able examples,  that  those  regions  where  the  surface  is  most
frequently  renewed,  and  where  the  renovation  is  accom-
panied, at  different  intervals  of  time,  by  partial  destruction
of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  may  nevertheless  be  amongst
the  most  habitable  and  delightful  on  our  globe,  and  the
remark  applies  as  well  to  parts  of  the  surface  which  are  the
abode  of  aquatic  animals  as  to  those  which  support  terres-
trial species.  The  sloping  sides  of  Vesuvius  give  nourishment
to  a  vigorous  and  healthy  population  of  about  eighty  thou-
sand souls ;  and  the  surrounding  hills  and  plains,  together
with  several  of  the  adjoining  isles,  owe  the  fertility  of  their
soil  to  matter  ejected  by  prior  eruptions.  Had  the  funda-
mental limestone  of  the  Apennines  remained  uncovered
throughout  the  whole  area,  the  country  could  not  have  sus-
tained a  twentieth  part  of  its  present  inhabitants.  This  will
be  apparent  to  every  geologist  who  has  marked  the  change
in  the  agricultural  character  of  the  soil  the  moment  he  has
passed  the  utmost  boundary  of  the  volcanic  ejections,  as
when,  for  example,  at  the  distance  of  about  seven  miles  from

*  Sir  H.  D&Tj,  ConsoUitioEB  in  Trayel,  p.  60.


654  DESTRUCTIOir  OF  TOBRE  DEL  OBBOO.       [Cm*  JXY.

YesnYias,  he  leaves  the  plain  and  ascends  the  decliviiy  of  the
Sorrentine  Hills.

Yet  fieiYonred  as  this  region  has  been  bj  Natnie  from  time
immemorial,  the  signs  of  the  changes  imprinted  on  it  during
the  period  that  it  has  served  as  the  habitation  of  man  maj
appear  in  after-ages  to  indicate  a  series  of  nnparaUeled
disasters.     Let  ns  suppose  that  at  some  future  time  the  Medi-
terranean should  form  a  gulf  of  the  great  ocean,  and  that
the  waves  and  tidal  current  should  encroach  on  the  shores  of
Campania,  as  it  now  advances  upon  the  eastern  coast  of
England ;  the  geologist  will  then  behold  the  towns  already
buried,  and  manj  more  which  will  evidently  be  entombed
hereafter,  laid  open  in  steep  clifiFis,  where  he  will  discover
buildings  superimposed  above  each  other,  with  thick  inter-
vening strata  of  tuff  or  lava — some  unscathed  by  fire,  like
those  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii;    others  half  melted
down,  as  in  Torre  del  Greco ;  and  many  shattered  and  thrown
about  in  strange  confusion,  as  in  Tripergola,  beneath  Monte
Nuovo.     Among  the  ruins  will  be  seen  skeletons  of  men,  and
impressions  of  the  human  form  stamped  in  solid  rocks  of  tuff.
Nor  will  the  signs  of  earthquakes  be  wanting.     The  pavement
of  part  of  the  Domitian  Way,  and  the  temple  of  the  nymphs,
submerged  at  high  tide,  will  be  uncovered  at  low  water,
the  columns  remaining  erect  and  uninjured.     Other  temples
which  had  once  sunk  down,  like  that  of  Serapis,  will  be  found
to  have  been  upraised  again  by  subsequent  movements.    K
they  who  study  these  phenomena,  and  speculate  on  their
causes,  assume  that  there  were  periods  when  the  laws  of
Nature  or  the  whole  course  of  natural  events  differed  greatly
from  those  observed  in  their  own  time,  they  will  scarcely
hesitate  to  refer  the  wonderful  monuments  in  question  to
those  primeval  ages.      When  they  consider  the  numerous
proofs  of  reiterated  catastrophes  to  which  the  region  was
subject,  they  may,  perhaps,  commiserate  the  unhappy  fate  of
beings  condemned  to  inhabit  a  planet  during  its  nascent  and
chaotic  state,  and  feel  grateful  that  their  favoured  race  has
escaped  such  scenes  of  anarchy  and  misrule.

Yet  what  was  the  real  condition  of  Campania  during  those
years  of  dire  convulsion  ?     *  A  climate,'  says  Forsyth,  *  where


Ch.  XXV.]        REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  BURIED  CITIES.  665

heaven's  breath  smells  sweet  and  wooingly — a  vigorous  and
luxuriant  nature  unparalleled  in  its  productions — a  coast
which  was  once  the  feiry-land  of  poets,  and  the  favourite  re-
treat of  great  men.  Even  the  tyrants  of  the^  creation  loved
this  alluring  region,  spared  it,  adorned  it,  lived  in  it,  died  in
it.'*  The  inhabitants,  indeed,  have  enjoyed  no  immunity
from  the  calamities  which  are  the  lot  of  mankind ;  but  the
principal  evils  which  they  have  suflFered  must  be  attributed
to  moral,  not  to  physical,  causes — to  disastrous  events  over
which  man  might  have  exercised  a  control,  rather  than  to
the  inevitable  catastrophes  which  result  from  subterranean
agency.  When  Spartacus  encamped  his  army  of  ten  thou-
sand gladiators  in  the  old  extinct  crater  of  Vesuvius,  the
volcano  was  more  justly  a  subject  of  terror  to  Campania  than
it  has  ever  been  since  the  rekindling  of  its  fires.

*  Forsyth's  Italy,  vol.  ii.


END  OP  THE   PIBST   VOLUME.


LOXDOX  t    PRIXTKD    BT

•romswooDK  axd  oo.,  niw-btrkr  ■quaai

AXD    PARLUMKVT    BTBUT


BRANNER  L».  L^  C^  A\


0
