©arfcerra  ®otoer
SLitiravg.

- o -

A  :  4  :


ACCESSION  NUMBER


PRESS  MARK


^ary


Wellcome  Library


PRINCIPLES

OK

GEOLOGY,


BEING


AN  ATTEMPT  TO  EXPLAIN  THE  FORMER  CHANGES
OF  THE  EARTH’S  SURFACE,

BY  REFERENCE  TO  CAUSES  NOW  IN  OPERATION.


BY

CHARLES  LYELL,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,

FOR.  SEC.  TO  THE  GEOL.  SOC.,  PROF.  OF  GF.OL.  TO  KING'S  COLL.,  LONDON.


“  The  inhabitants  of  the  globe,  like  all  the  other  parts  of  it,  are  subject  to  change.  It  is
not  only  the  individual  that  perishes,  but  whole  species.”

“  A  change  in  the  animal  kingdom  seems  to  be  a  part  of  the  order  of  nature,  and  is  visible
in  instances  to  which  human  power  cannot  have  extended.”

Playfair,  Illustrations  of  the  Huttoiiian  Theory ,  §  413.


IN  THREE  VOLUMES.

Vol.  II.

SECOND  EDITION ,  CORRECTED .


LONDON:

JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEM ARLE-STREET.


MDCCC  XXXIII.


LONDON:  .

Printed  by  William  Clowks,
Stamford  Street.


TO

WILLIAM  JOHN  BRODERIP,  Esq  ,  B.  A.

BARRISTER  AT  LAW,

F.R.S.,  F.I..S.,  ETC.,

VICE  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  GEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF  LONDON.


My  Dear  Friend,

In  dedicating  this  volume  to  you,  I  am  glad  of  an
opportunity  of  acknowledging  the  kind  interest  which  you
have  uniformly  taken  in  the  success  of  my  labours,  and  the
valuable  assistance  which  you  have  afforded  me  in  several
departments  of  Natural  History.

I  am,

My  Dear  Friend,

Yours,  very  sincerely,

Charles  Lyell.


London ,  December  8 thy  1831.


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.


In  the  Preface  to  the  first  edition  of  this  volume  the  author
stated  that  he  had  found  it  impossible  to  compress  into  two
volumes,  according  to  the  original  plan  of  his  work,  the  wide
range  of  subjects  which  it  was  necessary  to  discuss  in  order
fully  to  explain  his  theoretical  views.  He  therefore  deter¬
mined  to  extend  the  6  Principles  of  Geology  1  to  three  volumes.
The  last  of  these  is  now  in  the  press,  and  will  very  shortly
be  laid  before  the  public.

London ,  December  7th ,  1832.


CONTENTS.


V OK.  II.


CHAPTER  I.

PAGE

Changes  of  the  Organic  World  now  in  progress— Division  of  the  subject—
Examination  of  the  question,  Whether  Species  have  a  real  existence  in  Na¬
ture  ? — Importance  of  this  question  in  Geology — Sketch  of  Lamarck’s  argu¬
ments  in  favour  of  the  Transmutation  of  Species,  and  his  conjectures  respect¬
ing  the  Origin  of  existing  Animals  and  Plants — His  Theory  of  the  trans¬
formation  of  the  Orang  Outang  into  the  Human  Species  .  .  1

CHAPTER  II.

Recapitulation  of  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  theory  of  transmutation  of
species — Their  insufficiency — The  difficulty  of  discriminating  species  mainly
attributable  to  a  defective  knowledge  of  their  history — Some  mere  varieties
possibly  more  distinct  than  certain  individuals  of  distinct  species — Variability
in  a  species  consistent  with  a  belief  that  the  limits  of  deviation  are  fixed — No
facts  of  transmutation  authenticated — Varieties  of  the  Dog — The  Dog  and
Wolf  distinct  species — Mummies  of  various  animals  from  Egypt  identical  in
character  with  living  individuals — Seeds  and  plants  from  the  Egyptian
tombs — Modifications  produced  in  plants  by  agriculture  and  gardening  .  1 8

CHAPTER  III.

Whether  species  have  a  real  existence  in  Nature,  continued — Variability  of
a  species  compared  to  that  of  an  individual — Species  which  are  susceptible  of
modification  maybe  altered  greatly  in  a  short  time,  and  in  a  few  generations;
after  which  they  remain  stationary — The  animals  now  subject  to  man  had
originally  an  aptitude  to  domesticity — Acquired  peculiarities  which  become
hereditary  have  a  close  connexion  with  the  habits  or  instincts  of  the  species  in
a  wild  state — Some  qualities  in  certain  animals  have  been  conferred  with  a
view  of  their  relation  to  man — Wild  elephant  domesticated  in  a  few  years,  but
its  faculties  incapable  of  further  development  .  .  .  37

CHAPTER  IV.

Consideration  of  the  question  whether  species  have  a  real  existence  in
nature,  continued — Phenomena  of  hybrids — Hunter’s  opinions  as  to  mule
animals — Mules  not  strictly  intermediate  between  the  parent  species — Hybrid


vni


CONTENTS.


PAUE

plants — Experiments  of  Kolreuter — The  same  repeated  by  Wiegmann —
Vegetable  hybrids  prolific  throughout  several  generations — Why  so  rare  in  a
wild  state — De  Candolle’s  opinion  respecting  hybrid  plants — The  phenomena
of  hybrids  confirms  the  doctrine  of  the  permanent  distinctness  of  species —
Theory  of  the  gradation  in  the  intelligence  of  animals  as  indicated  by  the
facial  angle — Discovery  of  Tiedemann  that  the  brain  of  the  foetus  in  mam¬
malia  assumes  successively  the  form  of  the  brain  of  a  fish,  reptile,  and  bird —
Bearing  of  this  discovery  on  the  theory  of  progressive  development  and
transmutation— -Recapitulation  .  .  .  .  .  51

CHAPTER  V.

Laws  which  regulate  the  geographical  distribution  of  species— Analogy  of
climate  not  attended  with  identity  of  species — Botanical  geography — Stations
— Habitations— Distinct  provinces  of  indigenous  plants — Vegetation  of
islands — Marine  vegetation — In  what  manner  plants  become  diffused — Effects
of  wind,  rivers,  marine  currents — Agency  of  animals — Many  seeds  pass
through  the  stomachs  of  animals  and  birds  undigested — Agency  of  man  in
the  dispersion  of  plants,  both  voluntary  and  involuntary — Its  analogy  to  that
of  the  inferior  animals  .  .  .  .  69


CHAPTER  VI.

Laws  which  regulate  the  geographical  distribution  of  species,  continued —
Geographical  distribution  of  animals — Buffon  on  the  specific  distinctness
of  the  quadrupeds  of  the  old  and  new  world — Different  regions  of  indigenous
mammalia— Quadrupeds  in  islands — Range  of  the  Cetacea — Dissemination
of  quadrupeds — their  powers  of  swimming — Migratory  instincts — Drifting  of
quadrupeds  on  ice-floes — On  floating  islands  of  drift-timber — Migrations  of
Cetacea— Habitations  of  birds — Their  migrations  and  facilities  of  diffusion
—Distribution  of  reptiles  and  their  powers  of  dissemination  .  .  90

CHAPTER  VII.

Laws  which  regulate  the  geographical  distribution  of  species,  continued —
Geographical  distribution  and  migrations  of  fish — of  testacea — Causes  which
limit  the  extension  of  many  species — Their  mode  of  diffusion— Geographical
range  of  zoophytes — Their  powers  of  dissemination — Distribution  of  insects
— Migratory  instincts  of  some  species — Certain  types  characterize  particular
countries — Their  means  of  dissemination — Geographical  distribution  and
diffusion  of  man — Speculations  as  to  the  birth-place  of  the  human  species —
Progress  of  human  population — Drifting  of  canoes  to  vast  distances — On  the
involuntary  influence  of  man  in  extending  the  range  of  many  other  species  1(  9

CHAPTER  VIII.

Theories  respecting  the  original  introduction  of  species — Proposal  of  an
hypothesis  on  this  subject — Supposed  centres  or  foci  of  creation — Why  the


CONTENTS.


IX


PAGK

distinct  provinces  of  animals  and  plants  have  not  become  more  blended  together
— Brocchi’s  speculations  on  the  loss  of  species — Stations  of  plants  and  animals
— Complication  of  causes  on  which  they  depend — Stations  of  plants,  how
affected  by  animals — Equilibrium  in  the  number  of  species,  how  preserved —
Peculiar  efficacy  of  insects  in  this  task — Rapidity  with  which  certain  insects
multiply  or  decrease  in  numbers — Effect  of  omnivorous  animals  in  preserving
the  equilibrium  of  species — Reciprocal  influence  of  aquatic  and  terrestrial  spe¬
cies  on  each  other  .  .  .  .  .  ~  .  128


CHAPTER  IX.

The  circumstances  which  constitute  the  stations  of  animals  are  changeable
— Extension  of  the  range  of  one  species  alters  the  condition  of  others — Sup¬
posed  effects  which  may  have  followed  the  first  entrance  of  the  Polar  bears  into
Iceland — The  first  appearance  of  a  new  species  in  a  region  causes  the  chief
disturbance — Changes  known  to  have  resulted  from  the  advance  of  human
population — Whether  man  iucreases  the  productive  powers  of  the  earth — ■
Indigenous  quadrupeds  and  birds  of  Great  Britain  known  to  have  been  extir-
pated — Extinction  of  the  Dodo — Rapid  propagation  of  the  domestic  quadru¬
peds  over  the  American  continent — Power  of  exterminating  species  no  pre¬
rogative  of  man — Concluding  remarks  .  .  .  .  147

CHAPTER  X.

Influence  of  inorganic  causes  in  changing  the  habitations  of  species — Powers
of  diffusion  indispensable,  that  each  species  may  maintain  its  ground — How
changes  in  the  physical  geography  affect  the  distribution  of  species — Rate  of
the  change  of  species  cannot  be  uniform,  however  regular  the  action  of  the
inorganic  causes — Illustration  derived  from  subsidences  by  earthquakes — from
the  elevation  of  land  by  the  same — from  the  formation  of  new  islands — from
the  wearing  through  of  an  isthmus — Each  change  in  the  physical  geography
of  large  regions  must  occasion  the  extinction  of  species — Effects  of  a  general
alteration  of  climate  on  the  migration  of  species — Gradual  refrigeration  causes
species  in  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres  to  become  distinct — eleva¬
tion  of  temperature  the  reverse — Effects  in  the  distribution  of  species  which
must  result  from  vicissitudes  in  climate  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  trans¬
mutation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ]G4

CHAPTER  XI.

Theory  of  the  successive  extinction  of  species  consistent  with  their  limited
geographical  distribution — The  discordance  in  the  opinions  of  botanists  re¬
specting  the  centres  from  which  plants  have  been  diffused  may  arise  from
changes  in  physical  geography  subsequent  to  the  origin  of  living  species —
Whether  there  are  grounds  for  inferring  that  the  loss  from  time  to  time  of
certain  animals  and  plants  is  compensated  by  the  introduction  of  new  species  p


CONTENTS.


X

PAGE

—Whether  any  evidence  of  such  new  creations  could  be  expected  within  the
historical  era,  even  if  they  had  been  as  frequent  as  cases  of  extinction  P — The
question  whether  the  existing  species  have  been  created  in  succession  can
only  be  decided  by  reference  to  geological  monuments  .  .  182

CHAPTER  XII.

Effects  produced  by  the  powers  of  vitality  on  the  state  of  the  earth’s  surface
—Modifications  in  physical  geography  caused  by  organic  beings  on  dry  land
inferior  to  those  caused  in  the  subaqueous  regions — Why  the  vegetable  soil
does  not  augment  in  thickness — Organic  matter  drifted  annually  to  the  sea,
and  buried  in  subaqueous  strata — Loss  of  nourishment  from  this  source,  how
supplied— The  theory,  that  vegetation  is  an  antagonist  power  counterbalancing
the  degradation  caused  by  running  water,  untenable — That  the  igneous  causes
are  the  true  antagonist  powers,  and  not  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable
life — Conservative  influence  of  vegetation — Its  bearing  on  the  theory  of  the
formation  of  valleys,  and  on  the  age  of  the  cones  of  certain  extinct  volcanos —

Rain  diminished  by  the  felling  of  forests — Distribution  of  the  American
forests  dependent  on  the  direction  of  the  predominant  winds — Influence  of
man  in  modifying  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe  .  .  191

CHAPTER  XIII.

Effects  produced  by  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable  life  on  the  material
constituents  of  the  earth’s  crust' — Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  deposits  on
emerged  land — Growth  of  Peat — Peat  abundant  in  cold  and  humid  climates —

Site  of  many  ancient  forests  in  Europe  now  occupied  by  peat — Recent  date  of
many  of  these  changes — Sources  of  Bog  Iron-ore — Preservation  of  animal
substances  in  peat — Carnes  of  its  antiseptic  property — Miring  of  quadrupeds —
Bursting  of  the  Solway  Moss — Bones  of  herbivorous  quadrupeds  found  in  peat
- — Imbedding  of  animal  remains  in  caves  and  fissures — Formation  of  bony
breccias — Human  bones  and  pottery  intermixed  with  the  remains  of  extinct
quadrupeds  in  caves  in  the  South  of  France — Inferences  deducible  from  such
associations  .  .  .  .  .  .  215

CHAPTER  XIV.

Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  alluvium  and  the  ruins  caused  by  land¬
slips — Effects  of  sudden  inundations — Of  landslips — Terrestrial  animals  most
abundantly  preserved  in  alluvium  and  landslips,  where  earthquakes  prevail —
Erroneous  theories  which  may  arise  from  overlooking  this  circumstance —

On  the  remains  of  works  of  art  included  in  alluvial  deposits — Imbedding  of
organic  bodies  and  human  remains  in  blown  sand — Temple  of  Ipsambul  on
the  Nile — Dried  carcasses  of  animals  buried  in  the  sands  of  the  African
deserts — Towns  overwhelmed  by  sand-floods  in  England  and  France — Im-


CONTEXTS.


XI


PAG  E

bedding  of  organic  bodies  and  works  of  art  in  volcanic  formations  on  the
land — Cities  and  their  inhabitants  buried  by  showers  of  ejected  matter — by
lava — In  tuffs  or  mud  composed  of  volcanic  sand  and  ashes  .  .  234

CHAPTER  XV.

Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  subaqueous  deposits — Division  of  the  sub¬
ject — Phenomena  relating  to  terrestrial  animals  and  plants  first  considered — -
Wood  sunk  to  a  great  depth  in  the  sea  instantly  impregnated  with  salt-water
— Experiments  of  Scoresby — Drift  timber  carried  by  the  Mackenzie  into  Slave
Lake  and  into  the  sea — Cause  of  the  abundance  of  drift  timber  in  this
river — Floating  trees  in  the  Mississippi — In  the  Gulf  stream — Immense
quantity  thrown  upon  the  coast  of  Iceland,  Spitzbergen,  and  Labrador — Im¬
bedding  of  the  remains  of  insects — of  the  remains  of  reptiles — Why  the  bones
of  birds  are  so  rare  in  subaqueous  deposits — Imbedding  of  terrestrial  quadru¬
peds — Effects  of  a  flood  in  the  Solway  Firth— Wild  horses  annually  drowned
in  the  savannahs  of  South  America— Skeletons  in  recent  shell  marl — Drifting
of  mammiferous  and  other  remains  by  tides  and  currents  .  .  24G

CHAPTER  XVI.

Imbedding  of  the  remains  of  man  and  his  works  in  subaqueous  strata —
Drifting  of  bodies  to  the  sea  by  river  inundations — Destruction  of  bridges  and
houses — Burial  of  human  bodies  in  the  sea — Loss  of  lives  by  shipwreck — •
Circumstances  under  which  human  corpses  may  be  preserved  under  a  great
thickness  of  recent  deposits — Number  of  wrecked  vessels — Durable  character
of  many  of  their  contents— Examples  of  fossil  skeletons  of  men — Of  fossil
canoes,  ships,  and  works  of  art — Of  the  chemical  changes  which  certain
metallic  instruments  have  undergone  after  long  submergence— Effects  of  the
subsidence  of  land  in  imbedding  cities  and  forests  in  subaqueous  strata  —
Earthquake  of  Cutch  in  1819 — Submarine  forests — Example  on  the  coast  of
Hampshire — Origin  of  submarine  forests — Berkeley’s  arguments  for  the
recent  date  of  the  creation  of  man — Concluding  remarks  .  .  260

CHAPTER  XVII.

Imbedding  of  aquatic  species  in  subaqueous  strata — Inhumation  of  fresh¬
water  plants  and  animals — Shell  marl — Fossilized  seed-vessels  and  stems  of
Chara — Recent  deposits  in  the  American  lakes — Fresh-water  species  drifted
into  seas  and  estuaries — Lewes  levels — Alternations  of  marine  and  fresh¬
water  strata,  how  caused — Imbedding  of  marine  plants  and  animals —
Cetacea  stranded  on  our  shores — Their  remains  should  be  more  conspicuous
in  marine  alluvium  than  the  bones  of  land  quadrupeds — Liability  of  littoral
and  estuary  testacea  to  be  swept  into  the  deep  sea — Effects  of  a  storm  in  the
Firth  of  Forth — Burrowing  shells  secured  from  the  ordinary  action  of  waves
and  currents — Living  testacea  found  at  considerable  depths  .  .  279


XII


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XVIII.

PAGE

Formation  of  coral  reefs — They  are  composed  of  shells  as  well  as  corals —
Conversion  of  a  submerged  reef  into  an  island — Extent  and  thickness  of  coral
formations — The  Maldiva  Isles — Growth  of  coral  not  rapid — Its  geological
importance — Circular  and  oval  forms  of  coral  islands — Shape  of  their  lagoons
— Causes  of  their  peculiar  configuration — -Openings  into  the  lagoons — Why
the  windward  side  both  in  islands  and  submerged  reefs  is  higher  than  the
leeward — Stratification  of  coral  formations — Extent  of  some  reefs  in  the
Pacific — That  the  subsidence  by  earthquakes  in  the  Pacific  exceeds  the  ele¬
vation  due  to  the  same  cause — Elizabeth,  or  Henderson’s  Island — Coral  and
shell  limestones  now  in  progress,  exceed  in  area  any  known  group  of  ancient
rocks — The  theory  that  all  limestone  is  of  animal  origin,  considered — The
hypothesis  that  the  quantity  of  calcareous  matter  has  been  and  is  still  on  the
increase,  controverted  .  .  *  *  .291


ERRATA.

Frontispiece,  for  Montagnola,  read  Montagnuola.

Page  86,  line  2  from  bottom,  for  erigiron,  read  erigeron.
141,  —  5  do.  —  irridana,  —  viridana.

219,  —  17  do.  —  galce,  —  gale.

Map.  for  p.  304,  read  p.  312.


2  ()


2,0  2  i

I  -  | .  i-.-i  i— -


% O  •  X>

r-  Ji  i


Craccuv


a;


atyort


>1,


'"'X,


Jo


Gn  fj


s  v


7S\


\


a

,\


I V9


MAP  shewing  the  extent  of  surface  in  EUROPE  which  has  been  covered  bv  Water
since  the  commencement  of  the  deposition  of  the  older  TERTIARY  strata

strata  of  the  Paris  &  London  Basins  Jbc  AV. 1  *

Constructed  chiefly  from  die  Geological  J lap  of  Fairope  by  .1  f  A  Ron*


Oh  sci  vat  ions.


I  The portion  ruled  dais  comprehends  die  present  Sea.  together  with  die  spate  which  ean  be
\ proved  to  have  been  submerged  during  some  part  of  the  period  above  men tio nett  The
whole  f/rea  thus  delineated  may  never  have  been  submerged  at  one  rime  bat  <fi/ferent
I  parts  in  smoession  yet  it  is  probable  dint  die  proportion  of  dry  land  has  during  the
\ whole  period  been  on  die  increase.

The  space  admired  R*m1  Xr  Blue  nii{v  never  have  been  under  hater  since  the  tommenee
merit  of  die  te/a  under  consideration  but  this  inferenct •  rests  on  negative  evidence  «?*
may  require  here  alter  to  be  modified  .

I  Primary  and  Transition  Formations,  flbe  sfHtoe  led  white  is  erdnr  une.rplortd  ge*>logickilly
_  -  oris  ti*o  hide  known  to  warrant  an  opinion  respetring

_J  •  cion  dan  /).  ( it*  submergence  during  the  tertiary  epoch .

bora  more  detailed  explanation  of  this  Map  sc*'  'Description  of  the  dates  .(•  Map?  p.304.


2  O


?>()


.)


4  0


Loudon,  J  nblishcd  by  John  Murray.  Albemarle  S^fet .


Engraved  by  J. Gardner:


PRINCIPLES  OF  GEOLOGY.


CHAPTER  I.

Changes  of  the  Organic  World  now  in  progress — Division  of  the  subject — Exa¬
mination  of  the  question,  Whether  Species  have  a  real  existence  in  Nature  P — -
Importance  of  this  question  in  Geology — Sketch  of  Lamarck’s  arguments  in
favour  of  the  Transmutation  of  Species,  and  his  conjectures  respecting  the
Origin  of  existing  Animals  and  Plants — His  Theory  of  the  transformation  of
the  Orang  Outang  into  the  Human  Species.

CHANGES  OF  THE  ORGANIC  WORLD  NOW  IN  PROGRESS.

Division  of  the  Subject. — In  our  first  volume  we  treated  of  the
changes  which  have  taken  place  in  the  inorganic  world  within
the  historical  era,  and  we  must  next  turn  our  attention  to  those
now  in  progress  in  the  animate  creation.  In  examining  this
class  of  phenomena,  we  shall  treat  first  of  the  vicissitudes  to
which  species  are  subject,  and  afterwards  consider  the  influence
of  the  powers  of  vitality  in  modifying  the  surface  of  the  earth
and  the  material  constituents  of  its  crust.

The  first  of  these  divisions  will  lead  us,  among  other  topics,
to  inquire,  first,  whether  species  have  a  real  and  permanent
existence  in  nature ;  or  whether  they  are  capable,  as  some
naturalists  pretend,  of  being  indefinitely  modified  in  the  course
of  a  long  series  of  generations  ?  Secondly,  whether,  if  species
have  a  real  existence,  the  individuals  composing  them  have
been  derived  originally  from  many  similar  stocks,  or  each  from
one  only,  the  descendants  of  which  have  spread  themselves
gradually  from  a  particular  point  over  the  habitable  lands  and
waters  ?  Thirdly,  how  far  the  duration  of  each  species  of

animal  and  plant  is  limited  by  its  dependance  on  certain  fiuc-
Vol,  II.  R


2


lamarck’s  theory  of  the


[Ch.  I.


tuating  and  temporary  conditions  in  the  state  of  the  animate
and  inanimate  world  ?  Fourthly,  whether  there  be  proofs  of
the  successive  extermination  of  species  in  the  ordinary  course
of  nature,  and  whether  there  be  any  reason  for  conjecturing
that  new  animals  and  plants  are  created  from  time  to  time,  to
supply  their  place  ?

WHETHER  SPECIES  HAVE  A  REAL  EXISTENCE  IN  NATURE.

Importance  of  this  question  in  Geology. — Before  we  can  ad¬
vance  a  step  in  our  proposed  inquiry,  we  must  be  able  to  define
precisely  the  meaning  which  we  attach  to  the  term  species.
This  is  even  more  necessary  in  geology  than  in  the  ordinary
studies  of  the  naturalist  ;  for  they  who  deny  that  such  a  thing
as  a  species  exists,  concede  nevertheless  that  a  botanist  or
zoologist  may  reason  as  if  the  specific  character  were  constant,
because  they  confine  their  observations  to  a  brief  period  of
time.  Just  as  the  geographer,  in  constructing  his  maps  from
century  to  century,  may  proceed  as  if  the  apparent  places  of
the  fixed  stars  remained  absolutely  the  same,  and  as  if  no
alteration  was  brought  about  by  the  precession  of  the  equi¬
noxes,  so  it  is  said  in  the  organic  world,  the  stability  of  a  spe¬
cies  may  be  taken  as  absolute,  if  we  do  not  extend  our  views
beyond  the  narrow  period  of  human  history  ;  but  let  a  suffi¬
cient  number  of  centuries  elapse,  to  allow  of  important  revolu¬
tions  in  climate,  physical  geography,  and  other  circumstances,
and  the  characters,  say  they,  of  the  descendants  of  common
parents  may  deviate  indefinitely  from  their  original  type.

Now,  if  these  doctrines  be  tenable,  we  are  at  once  presented
with  a  principle  of  incessant  change  in  the  organic  world,  and
no  degree  of  dissimilarity  in  the  plants  and  animals  which  may
formerly  have  existed,  and  are  found  fossil,  would  entitle  us  to
conclude  that  they  may  not  have  been  the  prototypes  and  pro¬
genitors  of  the  species  now  living.  Accordingly  M.  Geoffroy
St.  Hilaire  has  declared  his  opinion,  that  there  has  been
an  uninterrupted  succession  in  the  animal  kingdom  effected
by  means  of  generation,  from  the  earliest  ages  of  the  world


Ch.  I.]


TRANSMUTATION  OF  SPECIES.


3


up  to  the  present  day ;  and  that  the  ancient  animals  whose
remains  have  been  preserved  in  the  strata,  however  different,
may  nevertheless  have  been  the  ancestors  of  those  now  iti
being.  Although  this  notion  is  not  generally  received,  we
feel  that  we  are  not  warranted  in  assuming  the  contrary,  with¬
out  fully  explaining  the  data  and  reasoning  by  which  we  con¬
ceive  it  may  be  refuted.

We  shall  begin  by  stating  as  concisely  as  possible  all  the
facts  and  ingenious  arguments  by  which  the  theory  has  been
supported,  and  for  this  purpose  we  cannot  do  better  than  offer
the  reader  a  rapid  sketch  of  Lamarck’s  statement  of  the  proofs
which  he  regards  as  confirmatory  of  the  doctrine,  and  which  he
has  derived  partly  from  the  works  of  his  predecessors,  and  in
part  from  original  investigations.

We  shall  consider  his  proofs  and  inferences  in  the  order  in
which  thy  appear  to  have  influenced  his  mind,  and  point  out
some  of  the  results  to  which  he  was  led  while  boldly  following
out  his  principles  to  their  legitimate  consequences.

Lamarck's  arguments  in  favour  of  the  Transmutation  of
Species — The  name  of  species,  observes  Lamarck,  has  been
usually  applied  to  4  every  collection  of  similar  individuals,
produced  by  other  individuals  like  themselves  *.*  This
definition,  he  admits,  is  correct,  because  every  living  indi¬
vidual  bears  a  very  close  resemblance  to  those  from  which  it
springs.  But  this  is  not  all  which  is  usually  implied  by  the
term  species,  for  the  majority  of  naturalists  agree  with  Linnaeus
in  supposing  that  all  the  individuals  propagated  from  one
stock  have  certain  distinguishing  characters  in  common  which
will  never  vary,  and  which  have  remained  the  same  since  the
creation  of  each  species.

In  order  to  shake  this  opinion,  Lamarck  enters  upon  the
following  line  of  argument.  The  more  we  advance  in  the
knowledge  of  the  different  organized  bodies  which  cover  the
surface  of  the  globe,  the  more  our  embarrassment  increases,  to
determine  what  ought  to  be  regarded  as  a  species,  and  still

*  Phil.  Zool.  tom.  i.  p.  54.

B  2


4  Lamarck’s  theory  of  the  [Ch.  I.

more  how  to  limit  and  distinguish  genera.  In  proportion  as
our  collections  are  enriched,  we  see  almost  every  void  filled
up,  and  all  our  lines  of  separation  effaced;  we  are  reduced  to
arbitrary  determinations,  and  are  sometimes  fain  to  seize  upon
the  slight  differences  of  mere  varieties,  in  order  to  form  cha¬
racters  for  what  we  choose  to  call  a  species,  and  sometimes  we
are  induced  to  pronounce  individuals  but  slightly  differing,  and
which  others  regard  as  true  species,  to  be  varieties.

The  greater  the  abundance  of  natural  objects  assembled
together,  the  more  do  we  discover  proofs  that  everything  passes
by  insensible  shades  into  something  else :  that  even  the  more
remarkable  differences  are  evanescent,  and  that  nature  has,
for  the  most  part,  left  us  nothing  at  our  disposal  for  establish¬
ing  distinctions,  save  trifling  and,  in  some  respects,  puerile
particularities.

We  find  that  many  genera  amongst  animals  and  plants  are
of  such  an  extent,  in  consequence  of  the  number  of  species
referred  to  them,  that  the  study  and  determination  of  these
last  has  become  almost  impracticable.  When  the  species  are
arranged  in  a  series,  and  placed  near  to  each  other,  with  due
regard  to  their  natural  affinities,  they  each  differ  in  so  minute
a  degree  from  those  next  adjoining,  that  they  almost  melt  into
each  other,  and  are  in  a  manner  confounded  together.  If  we
see  isolated  species,  we  may  presume  the  absence  of  some  more
closely  connected,  and  which  have  not  yet  been  discovered.
Already  are  there  genera,  and  even  entire  orders, — nay  whole
classes,  which  present  an  approximation  to  the  state  of  things
here  indicated.

If,  when  species  have  been  thus  placed  in  a  regular  series,
we  select  one,  and  then,  making  a  leap  over  several  interme¬
diate  ones,  we  take  a  second,  at  some  distance  from  the  first,
these  two  will,  on  comparison,  be  seen  to  be  very  dissimilar;
and  it  is  in  this  manner  that  every  naturalist  begins  to  study
the  objects  which  are  at  his  own  door.  He  then  finds  it  an
easy  task  to  establish  generic  and  specific  distinctions ;  and  it
is  only  when  his  experience  is  enlarged,  and  when  he  has  made


Ch.  I.]


TRANSMUTATION  OF  SPECIES.


5


himself  master  of  the  intermediate  links,  that  his  difficulties
and  ambiguities  begin.  But  while  we  are  thus  compelled  to
resort  to  trifling  and  minute  characters  in  our  attempt  to  sepa¬
rate  species,  we  find  a  striking  disparity  between  individuals
which  we  know  to  have  descended  from  a  common  stock,  and
these  newly-acquired  peculiarities  are  regularly  transmitted
from  one  generation  to  another,  constituting  what  are  called
races.

From  a  great  number  of  facts,  continues  the  author,  we  learn
that  in  proportion  as  the  individuals  of  one  of  our  species
change  their  situation,  climate  and  manner  of  living,  they
change  also,  by  little  and  little,  the  consistence  and  proportions
of  their  parts,  their  form,  their  faculties,  and  even  their  orga¬
nization,  in  such  a  manner  that  everything  in  them  comes  at
last  to  participate  in  the  mutations  to  which  they  have  been
exposed.  Even  in  the  same  climate  a  great  difference  of
situation  and  exposure  causes  individuals  to  vary  ;  but  if  these
individuals  continue  to  live  and  to  be  reproduced  under  the
same  difference  of  circumstances,  distinctions  are  brought
about  in  them  which  become  in  some  degree  essential  to  their
existence.  In  a  word,  at  the  end  of  many  successive  genera¬
tions,  these  individuals,  which  originally  belonged  to  another
species,  are  transformed  into  a  new  and  distinct  species  *.

Thus,  for  example,  if  the  seeds  of  a  grass,  or  any  other
plant  which  grows  naturally  in  a  moist  meadow,  be  acci¬
dentally  transported,  first  to  the  slope  of  some  neighbouring
hill,  where  the  soil,  although  at  a  greater  elevation,  is  damp
enough  to  allow  the  plant  to  live ;  and  if,  after  having  lived
there,  and  having  been  several  times  regenerated,  it  reaches
by  degrees  the  drier  and  almost  arid  soil  of  a  mountain
declivity,  it  will  then,  if  it  succeeds  in  growing  and  perpe¬
tuates  itself  for  a  series  of  generations,  be  so  changed  that
botanists  who  meet  with  it  will  regard  it  as  a  particular  spe¬
cies  f.  The  unfavourable  climate  in  this  case,  deficiency  of
nourishment,  exposure  to  the  winds,  and  other  causes,  give
*  Phil,  Zool.  tom.  i.  p.  62.  f  Ibid.


[Ch.  I.


6  CHANGES  IN  ANIMALS  AND  PLANTS

rise  to  a  stunted  and  dwarfish  race,  with  some  organ  more
developed  than  others,  and  having  proportions  often  quite
peculiar.

What  nature  brings  about  in  a  great  lapse  of  time,  we  occa¬
sion  suddenly  by  changing  the  circumstances  in  which  a  species
has  been  accustomed  to  live.  All  are  aware  that  vegetables
taken  from  their  birth-place  and  cultivated  in  gardens,  undergo
changes  which  render  them  no  longer  recognizable  as  the  same
plants.  Many  which  were  naturally  hairy  become  smooth
or  nearly  so  ;  a  great  number  of  such  as  were  creepers  and
trailed  along  the  ground,  rear  their  stalks  and  grow  erect.
Others  lose  their  thorns  or  asperities  ;  others  again,  from  the
ligneous  state  which  their  stem  possessed  in  hot  climates,
where  they  were  indigenous,  pass  to  the  herbaceous,  and,
among  them,  some  which  were  perennials  become  mere  annuals.
So  well  do  botanists  know  the  effects  of  such  changes  of  cir¬
cumstances,  that  they  are  averse  to  describe  species  from
garden  specimens,  unless  they  are  sure  that  they  have  been  cul¬
tivated  for  a  very  short  period.

‘  Is  not  the  cultivated  wheat,’  ( Triticum  sativum )  asks
Lamarck,  ‘  a  vegetable  brought  by  man  into  the  state  in  which
*  we  now  see  it  ?  Let  any  one  tell  me  in  what  country  a  similar
4  plant  grows  wild,  unless  where  it  has  escaped  from  cultivated
4  fields  ?  Where  do  we  find  in  nature  our  cabbages,  lettuces,

4  and  other  culinary  vegetables,  in  the  state  in  which  they
4  appear  in  our  gardens  ?  Is  it  not  the  same  in  regard  to
4  a  great  quantity  of  animals  which  domesticity  has  changed
4  or  considerably  modified*  ?’  Our  domestic  fowls  and
pigeons  are  unlike  any  wild  birds.  Our  domestic  ducks  and
geese  have  lost  the  faculty  of  raising  themselves  into  the  higher
regions  of  the  air,  and  crossing  extensive  countries  in  their
flight,  like  the  wild  ducks  and  wild  geese  from  which  they
were  originally  derived.  A  bird  which  we  breed  in  a  cage
cannot,  when  restored  to  liberty,  fly  like  others  of  the  same
species  which  have  been  always  free.  This  small  alteration  of

*  Phil.  Zool.  tom.  i  p.  2 27.


Ch.  I.]


CAUSED  BY  DOMESTICATION.


7


circumstances,  however,  has  only  diminished  the  power  of
flight,  without  modifying  the  form  of  any  part  of  the  wings.
But  when  individuals  of  the  same  race  are  retained  in  captivity
during  a  considerable  length  of  time,  the  form  even  of  their
parts  is  gradually  made  to  differ,  especially  if  climate,  nourish¬
ment,  and  other  circumstances,  be  also  altered.

The  numerous  races  of  dogs  which  we  have  produced  by
domesticity  are  nowhere  to  be  found  in  a  wild  state.  In
nature  we  should  seek  in  vain  for  mastiffs,  harriers,  spaniels,
greyhounds,  and  other  races,  between  which  the  differences  are
sometimes  so  great,  that  they  would  be  readily  admitted  as
specific  between  wild  animals;  f  yet  all  these  have  sprung
*  originally  from  a  single  race,  at  first  approaching  very  near
4  to  a  wolf,  if,  indeed,  the  wolf  be  not  the  true  type  which  at
4  some  period  or  other  was  domesticated  by  man.’

Although  important  changes  in  the  nature  of  the  places
which  they  inhabit  modify  the  organization  of  animals  as  well
as  vegetables,  yet  the  former,  says  Lamarck,  require  more
time  to  complete  a  considerable  degree  of  transmutation,  and,
consequently,  we  are  less  sensible  of  such  occurrences.  Next
to  a  diversity  of  the  medium  in  which  animals  or  plants  may
live,  the  circumstances  which  have  most  influence  in  modifying
their  organs  are  differences  in  exposure,  climate,  the  nature  of
the  soil,  and  other  local  particulars.  These  circumstances  are
as  varied  as  are  the  characters  of  species,  and,  like  them,  pass
by  insensible  shades  into  each  other,  there  being  every  inter¬
mediate  gradation  between  the  opposite  extremes.  But  each
locality  remains  for  a  very  long  time  the  same,  and  is  altered
so  slowly  that  we  can  only  become  conscious  of  the  reality  of
the  change,  by  consulting  geological  monuments,  by  which  we
learn  that  the  order  of  things  which  now  reigns  in  each  place
has  not  always  prevailed,  and  by  inference  anticipate  that  it
will  not  always  continue  the  same  *.

Every  considerable  alteration  in  the  local  circumstances  in


*  Phil.  Zool.,  tom.  i.  p.  232.


8


lamarck’s  theory  of  the


[Ch.  I.


which  each  race  of  animals  exists,  causes  a  change  in  their
wants,  and  these  new  wants  excite  them  to  new  actions  and
habits.  These  actions  require  the  more  frequent  employment
of  some  parts  before  but  slightly  exercised,  and  then  greater
development  follows  as  a  consequence  of  their  more  frequent
use.  Other  organs  no  longer  in  use  are  impoverished  and
diminished  in  size,  nay,  are  sometimes  entirely  annihilated,
while  in  their  place  new  parts  are  insensibly  produced  for  the
discharge  of  new  functions

We  must  here  interrupt  the  author’s  argument,  by  observ¬
ing  that  no  positive  fact  is  cited  to  exemplify  the  substitution
of  some  entirely  new  sense,  faculty,  or  organ,  in  the  room  of
some  other  suppressed  as  useless.  All  the  instances  adduced
go  only  to  prove  that  the  dimensions  and  strength  of  members
and  the  perfection  of  certain  attributes  may,  in  a  long  suc¬
cession  of  generations,  be  lessened  and  enfeebled  by  disuse  ;
or,  on  the  contrary,  be  matured  and  augmented  by  active  exer¬
tion,  just  as  we  know  that  the  power  of  scent  is  feeble  in  the
greyhound,  while  its  swiftness  of  pace  and  its  acuteness  of  sight
are  remarkable — that  the  harrier  and  stag-hound,  on  the  con¬
trary,  are  comparatively  slow  in  their  movements,  but  excel  in
the  sense  of  smelling.

We  point  out  to  the  reader  this  important  chasm  in  the
chain  of  the  evidence,  because  he  might  otherwise  imagine
that  we  had  merely  omitted  the  illustrations  for  the  sake  of
brevity,  but  the  plain  truth  is,  that  there  were  no  examples  to
be  found  ;  and  when  Lamarck  talks  ‘  of  the  efforts  of  internal
sentiment,’  ‘  the  influence  of  subtle  fluids,’  and  the  f  acts  of
organization,’  as  causes  whereby  animals  and  plants  may
acquire  new  organs ,  he  gives  us  names  for  things,  and  with  a
disregard  to  the  strict  rules  of  induction,  resorts  to  fictions,  as
ideal  as  the  '  plastic  virtue/  and  other  phantoms  of  the  middle
ages.

It  is  evident,  that  if  some  well  authenticated  facts  could

*  Phil,  Zooh,  torn,  i.  p.  234.


Ch.  I.]


TRANSMUTATION  OF  SPECIES.


have  been  adduced  to  establish  one  complete  step  in  the  pro¬
cess  of  transformation,  such  as  the  appearance,  in  individuals
descending  from  a  common  stock,  of  a  sense  or  organ  entirely
new,  and  a  complete  disappearance  of  some  other  enjoyed  by
their  progenitors,  that  time  alone  might  then  be  supposed
sufficient  to  bring  about  any  amount  of  metamorphosis.  The
gratuitous  assumption,  therefore,  of  a  point  so  vital  to  the
theory  of  transmutation,  was  unpardonable  on  the  part  of  its
advocate.

But  to  proceed  with  the  system ;  it  being  assumed  as  an
undoubted  fact,  that  a  change  of  external  circumstances  may
cause  one  organ  to  become  entirely  obsolete,  and  a  new  one  to
be  developed,  such  as  never  before  belonged  to  the  species,  the
following  proposition  is  announced,  which,  however  staggering
and  absurd  it  may  seem,  is  logically  deduced  from  the  assumed
premises.  ‘  It  is  not  the  organs,  or,  in  other  words,  the  nature
and  form  of  the  parts  of  the  body  of  an  animal  which  have
given  rise  to  its  habits,  and  its  particular  faculties,  but,  on  the
contrary,  its  habits,  its  manner  of  living,  and  those  of  its  pro¬
genitors  have  in  the  course  of  time  determined  the  form  of  its
body,  the  number  and  condition  of  its  organs,  in  short,  the
faculties  which  it  enjoys.  Thus  otters,  beavers,  water-fowl,
turtles,  and  frogs,  were  not  made  web-footed  in  order  that
they  might  swim  ;  but  their  wants  having  attracted  them  to
the  water  in  search  of  prey,  they  stretched  out  the  toes  of  their
feet  to  strike  the  water  and  move  rapidly  along  its  surface.
By  the  repeated  stretching  of  their  toes,  the  skin  which  united
them  at  the  base,  acquired  a  habit  of  extension,  until  in  the
course  of  time  the  broad  membranes  which  now  connect  their
extremities  were  formed.

In  like  manner  the  antelope  and  the  gazelle  were  not
endowed  with  light  agile  forms,  in  order  that  they  might
escape  by  flight  from  carnivorous  animals;  but  having  been
exposed  to  the  danger  of  being  devoured  by  lions,  tigers,  and
other  beasts  of  prey,  they  were  compelled  to  exert  themselves
in  running  with  great  celerity,  a  habit  which,  in  the  course  of


10  lamarck’s  theory  of  the  [Ch.  I.

many  generations,  gave  rise  to  the  peculiar  slenderness  of  their
legs,  and  the  agility  and  elegance  of  their  forms.

The  cameleopard  was  not  gifted  with  a  long  flexible  neck
because  it  was  destined  to  live  in  the  interior  of  Africa,  where
the  soil  was  arid  and  devoid  of  herbage,  but  being  reduced  by
the  nature  of  that  country  to  support  itself  on  the  foliage  of
lofty  trees,  it  contracted  a  habit  of  stretching  itself  up  to  reach
the  high  boughs,  until  its  fore-legs  became  longer  than  the
hinder,  and  its  neck  so  elongated,  that  it  could  raise  its  head  to
the  height  of  twenty  feet  above  the  ground.’

Another  line  of  argument  is  then  entered  upon,  in  further
corroboration  of  the  instability  of  species.  In  order  it  is  said
that  individuals  should  perpetuate  themselves  unaltered  by
generation,  those  belonging  to  one  species  ought  never  to  ally
themselves  to  those  of  another :  but  such  sexual  unions  do
take  place,  both  among  plants  and  animals  ;  and  although  the
offspring  of  such  irregular  connexions  are  usually  sterile,  yet
such  is  not  always  the  case.  Hybrids  have  sometimes  proved
prolific  where  the  disparity  between  the  species  was  not  too
great;  and  by  this  means  alone,  says  Lamarck,  varieties  may
gradually  be  created  by  near  alliances,  which  would  become
races,  and  in  the  course  of  time  would  constitute  what  we  term
species

But  if  the  soundness  of  all  these  arguments  and  inferences
be  admitted,  we  are  next  to  inquire,  what  were  the  original
types  of  form,  organization,  and  instinct,  from  which  the
diversities  of  character,  as  now  exhibited  by  animals  and  plants,
have  been  derived?  We  know  that  individuals  which  are
mere  varieties  of  the  same  species,  would,  if  their  pedigree
could  be  traced  back  far  enough,  terminate  in  a  single  stock ;
so  according  to  the  train  of  reasoning  before  described,  the
species  of  a  genus,  and  even  the  genera  of  a  great  family,  must
have  had  a  common  point  of  departure.  What  then  was  the
single  stem  from  which  so  many  varieties  of  form  have  rami¬
fied  ?  Were  there  many  of  these,  or  are  we  to  refer  the  origin

*  Phil.  Zool.  p.  64.


Ch.  I.J


TRANSMUTATION  OF  SPECIES.


11


of  the  whole  animate  creation,  as  the  Egyptian  priests  did  that
of  the  universe,  to  a  single  egg  ?

In  the  absence  of  any  positive  data  for  framing  a  theory  on
so  obscure  a  subject,  the  following  considerations  were  deemed
of  importance  to  guide  conjecture.

In  the  first  place,  if  we  examine  the  whole  series  of  known
animals,  from  one  extremity  to  the  other,  when  they  are
arranged  in  the  order  of  their  natural  relations,  we  find  that  we
may  pass  progressively,  or  at  least  with  very  few  interrup¬
tions,  from  beings  of  more  simple  to  those  of  a  more  com¬
pound  structure  ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  complexity  of  their
organization  increases,  the  number  and  dignity  of  their  facul¬
ties  increase  also.  Among  plants  a  similar  approximation  to
a  graduated  scale  of  being  is  apparent.  Secondly,  it  appears
from  geological  observations,  that  plants  and  animals  of  more
simple  organization  existed  on  the  globe  before  the  appear¬
ance  of  those  of  more  compound  structure,  and  the  latter
were  successively  formed  at  later  periods :  each  new  race
being  more  fully  developed  than  the  most  perfect  of  the  pre¬
ceding  era.

Of  the  truth  of  the  last-mentioned  geological  theory,  La¬
marck  seems  to  have  been  fully  persuaded  ;  and  he  also  shows
that  he  was  deeply  impressed  with  a  belief  prevalent  amongst
the  older  naturalists,  that  the  primeval  ocean  invested  the
whole  planet  long  after  it  became  the  habitation  of  living
beings,  and  thus  he  was  inclined  to  assert  the  priority  of  the
types  of  marine  animals  to  those  of  the  terrestrial,  and  to  fancy,
for  example,  that  the  testacea  of  the  ocean  existed  first,  until
some  of  them,  by  gradual  evolution,  were  improved  into  those
inhabiting  the  land.

These  speculative  views  had  already  been,  in  a  great  degree,
anticipated  by  Demaillet  in  his  Telliamed,  and  by  several
modern  writers,  so  that  the  tables  were  completely  turned  on
the  philosophers  of  antiquity,  with  whom  it  was  a  received
maxim,  that  created  things  were  always  most  perfect  when  they
came  first  from  the  hands  of  their  Maker,  and  that  there  was  a


12  lamarck’s  theory  of  the  [Ch.  I.

tendency  to  progressive  deterioration  in  sublunary  things  when
left  to  themselves—

■ — - — —  omnia  fatis

In  pejus  ruere,  ac  retro  sublapsa  referri.

So  deeply  was  the  faith  of  the  ancient  schools  of  philosophy
imbued  with  this  doctrine,  that  to  check  this  universal  prone¬
ness  to  degeneracy,  nothing  less  than  the  re-intervention  of  the
Deity  was  thought  adequate ;  and  it  was  held,  that  thereby  the
order,  excellence,  and  pristine  energy  of  the  moral  and  phy¬
sical  world  had  been  repeatedly  restored.

But  when  the  possibility  of  the  indefinite  modification  of  in¬
dividuals  descending  from  common  parents  was  once  assumed,
as  also  the  geological  inference  respecting  the  progressive
development  of  organic  life,  it  was  natural  that  the  ancient
dogma  should  be  rejected,  or  rather  reversed ;  and  that  the
most  simple  and  imperfect  forms  and  faculties  should  be  con¬
ceived  to  have  been  the  originals  whence  all  others  were  de¬
veloped.  Accordingly,  in  conformity  to  these  views,  inert
matter  was  supposed  to  have  been  first  endowed  with  life  ;
until,  in  the  course  of  ages,  sensation  was  superadded  to  mere
vitality  :  sight,  hearing,  and  the  other  senses,  were  afterwards
acquired  ;  and  then  instinct  and  the  mental  faculties,  until,
finally,  by  virtue  of  the  tendency  of  things  to  progressive
improvement ,  the  irrational  was  developed  into  the  rational.

The  reader,  however,  will  immediately  perceive,  that  if  all
the  higher  order  of  plants  and  animals  were  thus  supposed  to
be  comparatively  modern,  and  to  have  been  derived  in  a  long
series  of  generations  from  those  of  more  simple  conformation,
some  further  hypothesis  became  indispensable,  in  order  to  ex¬
plain  why,  after  an  indefinite  lapse  of  ages,  there  were  still  so
many  beings  of  the  simplest  structure.  Why  have  the  ma¬
jority  of  existing  creatures  remained  stationary  throughout
this  long  succession  of  epochs,  while  others  have  made  such
prodigious  advances?  Why  are  there  such  multitudes  of
infusoria  and  polyps,  or  of  confervas  and  other  cryptogamic
plants?  Why,  moreover,  has  the  process  of  development


Ch.  I.]


TRANSMUTATION  OF  SPECIES.


13


acted  with  such  unequal  and  irregular  force  on  those  classes  of
beings  which  have  been  greatly  perfected,  so  that  there  are
wide  chasms  in  the  series;  gaps  so  enormous,  that  Lamarck
fairly  admits  we  can  never  expect  to  fill  them  up  by  future
discoveries  P

The  following  hypothesis  was  provided  to  meet  these  objec¬
tions.  Nature,  we  are  told,  is  not  an  intelligence,  nor  the
Deity,  but  a  delegated  power — a  mere  instrument — a  piece  of
mechanism  acting  by  necessity — an  order  of  things  constituted
by  the  Supreme  Being,  and  subject  to  laws  which  are  the  ex¬
pressions  of  his  will.  This  nature  is  obliged  to  proceed  gra¬
dually  in  all  her  operations ;  she  cannot  produce  animals  and
plants  of  all  classes  at  once,  but  must  always  begin  by  the
formation  of  the  most  simple  kinds ;  and  out  of  them  elabo¬
rate  the  more  compound,  adding  to  them  successively,  different
systems  of  organs,  and  multiplying  more  and  more  their  num¬
ber  and  energy.

This  Nature  is  daily  engaged  in  the  formation  of  the  ele¬
mentary  rudiments  of  animal  and  vegetable  existence,  which
correspond  to  what  the  ancients  termed  spontaneous  genera¬
tions.  She  is  always  beginning  anew,  day  by  day,  the  work
of  creation,  by  forming  monads,  or  f  rough  draughts’
(ebauches),  which  are  the  only  living  things  she  gives  birth
to  directly.

There  are  distinct  primary  rudiments  of  plants  and  animals,
and  probably  of  each  of  the  great  divisions  of  the  animal  and
vegetable  kingdoms*.  These  are  gradually  developed  into
the  higher  and  more  perfect  classes  by  the  slow,  but  unceasing
agency  of  two  influential  principles:  first,  the  tendency  to
progressive  advancement  in  organization,  accompanied  by
greater  dignity  in  instinct,  intelligence,  &c. ;  secondly,  the
force  of  external  circumstances ,  or  of  variations  in  the  physical
condition  of  the  earth,  or  the  mutual  relations  of  plants  and
animals.  For  as  species  spread  themselves  gradually  over  the
globe,  they  are  exposed  from  time  to  time  to  variations  in
*  Auimaux  sans  Vert,,  tom.  i.  p.  56,  Introduction.


14


CONVERSION  OF  THE  ORANG-OUTANG


[Ch.  I.


climate,  and  to  changes  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  their
food  ;  they  meet  with  new  plants  and  animals  which  assist  or
retard  their  development,  by  supplying  them  with  nutriment,
or  destroying  their  foes.  The  nature  also  of  each  locality
is  in  itself  fluctuating,  so  that  even  if  the  relation  of  other
animals  and  plants  were  invariable,  the  habits  and  organiza¬
tion  of  species  would  be  modified  by  the  influence  of  local
revolutions.

Now,  if  the  first  of  these  principles,  the  tendency  to  pro -
gressive  development ,  were  left  to  exert  itself  with  perfect
freedom,  it  would  give  rise,  says  Lamarck,  in  the  course  of
ages,  to  a  graduated  scale  of  being,  where  the  most  insensible
transition  might  be  traced  from  the  simplest  to  the  most  com¬
pound  structure,  from  the  humblest  to  the  most  exalted  degree
of  intelligence.  But  in  consequence  of  the  perpetual  inter¬
ference  of  the  external  causes  before  mentioned,  this  regular
order  is  greatly  interfered  with,  and  an  approximation  only  to
such  a  state  of  things  is  exhibited  by  the  animate  creation,
the  progress  of  some  races  being  retarded  by  unfavourable,
and  that  of  others  accelerated  by  favourable,  combinations  of
circumstances.  Hence,  all  kinds  of  anomalies  interrupt  the
continuity  of  the  plan,  and  chasms,  into  which  whole  genera
or  families  might  be  inserted,  are  seen  to  separate  the  nearest
existing  portions  of  the  series.

Lamarck's  theory  of  the  transformation  of  the  Orang-
Outang  into  the  human  species. — Such  is  the  machinery  of  the
Lamarckian  system  ;  but  our  readers  will  hardly,  perhaps,  be
able  to  form  a  perfect  conception  of  so  complicated  a  piece  of
mechanism,  unless  we  exhibit  it  in  motion,  and  show  in  what
manner  it  can  work  out,  under  the  author’s  guidance,  all  the
extraordinary  effects  which  we  behold  in  the  present  state  of
the  animate  creation.  We  have  only  space  for  exhibiting  a
small  part  of  the  entire  process  by  which  a  complete  metamor¬
phosis  is  achieved,  and  shall,  therefore,  omit  the  mode  where¬
by,  after  a  countless  succession  of  generations,  a  small  gelat¬
inous  body  is  transformed  into  an  oak  or  an  ape.  We  pass


Ch.  I.]


INTO  THE  HUMAN  SPECIES.


15


on  at  once  to  the  last  grand  step  in  the  progressive  scheme,
whereby  the  orang-outang,  having  been  already  evolved  out
of  a  monad,  is  made  slowly  to  attain  the  attributes  and  dig¬
nity  of  man.

One  of  the  races  of  quadrumanous  animals  which  had
reached  the  highest  state  of  perfection,  lost,  by  constraint  of
circumstances,  (concerning  the  exact  nature  of  which  tradition
is  unfortunately  silent,)  the  habit  of  climbing  trees,  and  of
hanging  on  by  grasping  the  boughs  with  their  feet  as  with
hands.  The  individuals  of  this  race  being  obliged  for  a  long
series  of  generations  to  use  their  feet  exclusively  for  walking,
and  ceasing  to  employ  their  hands  as  feet,  were  transformed
into  bimanous  animals,  and  what  before  were  thumbs  became
mere  toes,  no  separation  being  required  when  their  feet  were
used  solely  for  walking.  Having  acquired  a  habit  of  holding
themselves  upright,  their  legs  and  feet  assumed  insensibly  a
conformation  fitted  to  support  them  in  an  erect  attitude,  till  at
last  these  animals  could  no  longer  go  on  all  fours  without  much
inconvenience.

The  Angola  orang,  Simia  troglodytes ,  Linn.,  is  the  most
perfect  of  animals,  much  more  so  than  the  Indian  orang,
Simia  Satyrus,  which  has  been  called  the  orang-outang,
although  both  are  very  inferior  to  man  in  corporeal  powers
and  intelligence.  These  animals  frequently  hold  themselves
upright,  but  their  organization  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently
modified  to  sustain  them  habitually  in  this  attitude,  so  that
the  standing  posture  is  very  uneasy  to  them.  When  the  In¬
dian  orang  is  compelled  to  take  flight  from  pressing  danger,  he
immediately  falls  down  upon  all  fours,  showing  clearly  that
this  was  the  original  position  of  the  animal.  Even  in  man,
whose  organization,  in  the  course  of  a  long  series  of  genera¬
tions,  has  advanced  so  much  farther,  the  upright  posture  is
fatiguing  and  can  only  be  supported  for  a  limited  time,  and  by
aid  of  the  contraction,  of  many  muscles.  If  the  vertebral
column  formed  the  axis  of  the  human  body,  and  supported  the
head  and  all  the  other  parts  in  equilibrium,  then  might  the


16  CONVERSION  OF  THE  ORANG-OUTANG  [Ch,  I.

upright  position  be  a  state  of  repose :  but  as  the  human
head  does  not  articulate  in  the  centre  of  gravity  ;  as  the  chest
belly,  and  other  parts,  press  almost  entirely  forward  with  their
whole  weight,  and  as  the  vertebral  column  reposes  upon  an
oblique  base,  a  watchful  activity  is  required  to  prevent  the
body  from  falling.  Children  which  have  large  heads  and  pro¬
minent  bellies  can  hardly  walk  at  the  end  even  of  two  years,
and  their  frequent  tumbles  indicate  the  natural  tendency  in
man  to  resume  the  quadrupedal  state.

Now,  when  so  much  progress  had  been  made  by  the  quadru-
manous  animals  before  mentioned,  that  they  could  hold  them¬
selves  habitually  in  an  erect  attitude,  and  were  accustomed  to
a  wide  range  of  vision,  and  ceased  to  use  their  jaws  for  fighting,
and  tearing,  or  for  clipping  herbs  for  food,  their  snout  became
gradually  shorter,  their  incisor  teeth  became  vertical,  and  the
facial  angle  grew  more  open.

Among  other  ideas  which  the  natural  tendency  to  perfection
engendered,  the  desire  of  ruling  suggested  itself,  and  this  race
succeeded  at  length  in  getting  the  better  of  the  other  animals,
and  made  themselves  masters  of  all  those  spots  on  the  surface
of  the  globe  which  best  suited  them.  They  drove  out  the
animals  which  approached  nearest  to  them  in  organization  and
intelligence,  and  which  were  in  a  condition  to  dispute  with
them  the  good  things  of  this  world,  forcing  them  to  take
refuge  in  deserts,  woods  and  wildernesses,  where  their  multi¬
plication  was  checked,  and  the  progressive  development  of
their  faculties  retarded,  while  in  the  mean  time  the  dominant
race  spread  itself  in  every  direction,  and  lived  in  large  com¬
panies  where  new  wants  were  successively  created,  exciting
them  to  industry,  and  gradually  perfecting  their  means  and
faculties.

In  the  supremacy  and  increased  intelligence  acquired  by  the
ruling  race,  we  see  an  illustration  of  the  natural  tendency  of
the  organic  world  to  grow  more  perfect,  and  in  their  influence
in  repressing  the  advance  of  others,  an  example  of  one  of  those
disturbing  causes  before  enumerated,  that  force  of  external  cir «


Ch.  1.]


INTO  THE  HUMAN  SPECIES.


17


cumstances ,  which  causes  such  wide  chasms  in  the  regular
series  of  animated  beings.

When  the  individuals  of  the  dominant  race  became  very
numerous,  their  ideas  greatly  increased  in  number,  and  they
felt  the  necessity  of  communicating  them  to  each  other,  and
of  augmenting  and  varying  the  signs  proper  for  the  comma-

....  -i  .

nication  of  ideas.  Meanwhile  the  ^.inferior  quadrumanous
animals,  although  most  of  them  were  gregarious,  acquired
no  new  ideas,  being  persecuted  and  restless  in  the  deserts,
and  obliged  to  fly  and  conceal  themselves,  so  that  they
conceived  no  new  wants.  Such  ideas  as  they  already  had
remained  unaltered,  and  they  could  dispense  with  the  com¬
munication  of  the  greater  part  of  these.  To  make  them¬
selves,  therefore,  understood  by  their  fellows,  required  merely
a  few  movements  of  the  body  or  limbs — whistling,  and  the
uttering  of  certain  cries  varied  by  the  inflexions  of  the  voice.

On  the  contrary,  the  individuals  of  the  ascendant  race,  ani¬
mated  with  a  desire  of  interchanging  their  ideas,  which  became
more  and  more  numerous,  were  prompted  to  multiply  the
means  of  communication,  and  were  no  longer  satisfied  with
mere  pantomimic  signs,  nor  even  with  all  the  possible  inflexions
of  the  voice,  but  made  continual  efforts  to  acquire  the  power
of  uttering  articulate  sounds,  employing  a  few  at  first,  but
afterwards  varying  and  perfecting  them  according  to  the  in¬
crease  of  their  wants.  The  habitual  exercise  of  their  throat,
tongue  and  lips,  insensibly  modified  the  conformation  of  these
organs,  until  they  became  fitted  for  the  faculty  of  speech  *.

In  effecting  this  mighty  change,  c  the  exigencies  of  the  indi-
viduals  were  the  sole  agents,  they  gave  rise  to  efforts,  and  the
organs  proper  for  articulating  sounds  were  developed  by  their
habitual  employment.’  Hence,  in  this  peculiar  race,  the
origin  of  the  admirable  faculty  of  speech  ;  hence  also  the  diver¬
sity  of  languages,  since  the  distance  of  places  where  the  indi¬
viduals  composing  the  race  established  themselves,  soon  fa¬
voured  the  corruption  of  conventional  signs  f.

*  Lamarck's  Phil.  Zook,  tom.  i.  p.  35 G.  f  Ibid.  p.  35 7.

Vol.  II.  r


CHAPTER  II.


Recapitulation  of  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  theory  of  transmutation  of
species — Their  insufficiency — The  difficulty  of  discriminating  species  mainly
attributable  to  a  defective  knowledge  of  their  history — Some  mere  varieties
possibly  more  distinct  than  certain  individuals  of  distinct  species — Variability
in  a  species  consistent  with  a  belief  that  the  limits  of  deviation  are  fixed — No
facts  of  transmutation  authenticated — Varieties  ef  the  Dog- — The  Dog  and
Wolf  distinct  species — Mummies  of  various  animals  from  Egypt  identical  in
character  with  living  individuals — Seeds  and  plants  from  the  Egyptian  tombs
—Modifications  produced  in  plants  by  agriculture  and  gardening.

RECAPITULATION  OF  THE  ARGUMENTS  IN  FAVOUR  OF  THE
THEORY  OF  THE  TRANSMUTATION  OF  SPECIES.

The  theory  of  the  transmutation  of  species,  considered  in  the
last  chapter,  has  met  with  some  degree  of  favour  from  many
naturalists,  from  their  desire  to  dispense,  as  far  as  possible,
with  the  repeated  intervention  of  a  First  Cause,  as  often  as
geological  monuments  attest  the  successive  appearance  of  new
races  of  animals  and  plants,  and  the  extinction  of  those  pre¬
existing.  But,  independently  of  a  predisposition  to  account,
if  possible,  for  a  series  of  changes  in  the  organic  world,  by  the
regular  action  of  secondary  causes,  we  have  seen  that  many
perplexing  difficulties  present  themselves  to  one  who  attempts
to  establish  the  nature  and  the  reality  of  the  specific  character.
And  if  once  there  appears  ground  of  reasonable  doubt,  in
regard  to  the  constancy  of  species,  the  amount  of  transform¬
ation  which  they  are  capable  of  undergoing  may  seem  to
resolve  itself  into  a  mere  question  of  the  quantity  of  time
assigned  to  the  past  duration  of  animate  existence.

Before  we  enter  upon  our  reasons  for  rejecting  Lamarck’s
hypothesis,  we  shall  recapitulate,  in  a  few  words,  the  pheno¬
mena,  and  the  whole  train  of  thought,  by  which  we  conceive
it  to  have  been  suggested,  and  which  have  gained  for  this  and


Ch.  II.]  PERMANENCE  OF  THE  SPECIFIC  CHARACTER.  19

analogous  theories,,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  a  con-
siderable  number  of  votaries.

In  the  first  place,  the  various  groups  into  which  plants  and
animals  may  be  thrown,  seem  almost  invariably,  to  a  beginner,
to  be  so  natural,  that  he  is  usually  convinced  at  first,  as  was
Linnaeus  to  the  last,  4  that  genera  are  as  much  founded  in
nature  as  the  species  which  compose  them  When  by  ex¬
amining  the  numerous  intermediate  gradations,  the  student
finds  all  lines  of  demarcation  to  be  in  most  instances  obliterated,
even  where  they  at  first  appeared  most  distinct,  he  grows  more
and  more  sceptical  as  to  the  real  existence  of  genera,  and  finally
regards  them  as  mere  arbitrary  and  artificial  signs,  invented
like  those  which  serve  to  distinguish  the  heavenly  constellations
for  the  convenience  of  classification,  and  having  as  little  pre¬
tensions  to  reality.

Doubts  are  then  engendered  in  his  mind  as  to  whether
species  may  not  also  be  equally  unreal.  The  student  is
probably  first  struck  with  the  phenomenon,  that  some  indi¬
viduals  are  made  to  deviate  widely  from  the  ordinary  type
by  the  force  of  peculiar  circumstances,  and  with  the  still  more
extraordinary  fact,  that  the  newly-acquired  peculiarities  are
faithfully  transmitted  to  the  offspring.  How  far,  he  asks,
may  such  variations  extend  in  the  course  of  indefinite  periods
of  time,  and  during  great  vicissitudes  in  the  physical  condition
of  the  globe  P  His  growing  incertitude  is  at  first  checked  by
the  reflection  that  nature  has  forbidden  the  intermixture  of
the  descendants  of  distinct  original  stocks,  or  has,  at  least,
entailed  sterility  on  their  offspring,  thereby  preventing  their
being  confounded  together,  and  pointing  out  that  a  multitude
of  distinct  types  must  have  been  created  in  the  beginning,  and
must  have  remained  pure  and  uncorrupted  to  this  day.

Relying  on  this  general  law,  he  endeavours  to  solve  each
difficult  problem  by  direct  experiment,  until  he  is  again
astounded  by  the  phenomenon  of  a  prolific  hybrid,  and  still
more  by  an  example  of  a  hybrid  perpetuating  itself  through  -

*  Sir  J.  Smith’s  Introduction  to  Botany.


20  PERMANENCE  OF  THE  SPECIFIC  CHARACTER.  [ Cli.  II,

out  several  generations  in  the  vegetable  world.  He  then  feels
himself  reduced  to  the  dilemma  of  choosing  between  two  alter¬
natives,  either  to  reject  the  test,  or  to  declare  that  the  two
species,  from  the  union  of  which  the  fruitful  progeny  has
sprung,  were  mere  varieties.  If  he  prefer  the  latter,  he  is  com¬
pelled  to  question  the  reality  of  the  distinctness  of  all  other
supposed  species  which  differ  no  more  than  the  parents  of  such
prolific  hybrids ;  for  although  he  may  not  be  enabled  imme¬
diately  to  procure,  in  all  such  instances,  a  fruitful  offspring,
yet  experiments  show,  that  after  repeated  failures  the  union  of
two  recognized  species  may  at  last,  under  very  favourable  cir¬
cumstances,  give  birth  to  a  fertile  progeny.  Such  circum¬
stances,  therefore,  the  naturalist  may  conceive  to  have  occurred
again  and  again,  in  the  course  of  a  great  lapse  of  ages.

His  first  opinions  are  now  fairly  unsettled,  and  every  stay
at  which  he  has  caught  has  given  way  one  after  another ;  he
is  in  danger  of  falling  into  any  new  and  visionary  doctrine
which  may  be  presented  to  him  ;  for  he  now  regards  every  part
of  the  animate  creation  as  void  of  stability,  and  in  a  state  of
continual  flux.  In  this  mood  he  encounters  the  Geologist,
who  relates  to  him  how  there  have  been  endless  vicissitudes  in
the  shape  and  structure  of  organic  beings  in  former  ages — how
the  approach  to  the  present  system  of  things  has  been  gradual
— that  there  has  been  a  progressive  development  of  organiza¬
tion  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  life,  from  the  most  simple
to  the  most  complex  state — that  the  appearance  of  man  is  the
last  phenomenon  in  a  long  succession  of  events — and  finally,
that  a  series  of  physical  revolutions  can  be  traced  in  the  inor¬
ganic  world,  coeval  and  coextensive  with  those  of  organic
nature.

These  views  seem  immediately  to  confirm  all  his  precon¬
ceived  doubts  as  to  the  stability  of  the  specific  character,  and
he  thinks  he  can  discern  an  inseparable  connexion  between  a
series  of  changes  in  the  inanimate  world,  and  the  capability  of
species  to  be  indefinitely  modified  by  the  influence  of  external
circumstances.  Henceforth  his  speculations  know  no  definite


Ch.  il.]  PERMANENCE  OF  THE  SPECIFIC  CHARACTER.  21

bounds  ;  lie  gives  the  rein  to  conjecture,  and  fancies  that  the
outward  form,  internal  structure,  instinctive  faculties,  nay,
that  reason  itself  may  have  been  gradually  developed  from
some  of  the  simplest  states  of  existence — -that  all  animals,  that
man  himself,  and  the  irrational  beings,  may  have  had  one  com¬
mon  origin  ;  that  all  may  be  parts  of  one  continuous  and
progressive  scheme  of  development  from  the  most  imperfect  to
the  more  complex  ;  in  fine,  he  renounces  his  belief  in  the  high
genealogy  of  his  species,  and  looks  forward,  as  if  in  compensa¬
tion,  to  the  future  perfectibility  of  man  in  his  physical,  intel¬
lectual,  and  moral  attributes.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  what  is  defective  in  evi¬
dence,  and  what  fallacious  in  reasoning,  in  the  grounds  of
these  strange  conclusions.  Blumenbach  judiciously  observes,
6  that  no  general  rule  can  be  laid  down  for  determining
the  distinctness  of  species,  as  there  is  no  particular  class  of
characters  which  can  serve  as  a  criterion.  In  each  case
we  must  be  guided  by  analogy  and  probability .*  The  mul¬
titude,  in  fact,  and  complexity  of  the  proofs  to  be  weighed,  is
so  great,  that  we  can  only  hope  to  obtain  presumptive  evi¬
dence,  and  we  must,  therefore,  be  the  more  careful  to  derive
our  general  views  as  much  as  possible  from  those  observations
where  the  chances  of  deception  are  least.  We  must  be  on  our
guard  not  to  tread  in  the  footsteps  of  the  naturalists  of  the
middle  ages,  who  believed  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  genera¬
tion  to  be  applicable  to  all  those  parts  of  the  animal  and  vege¬
table  kingdoms  which  they  least  understood,  in  direct  contra¬
diction  to  the  analogy  of  all  the  parts  best  known  to  them  ;  and
who,  when  at  length  they  found  that  insects  and  cryptogamous
plants  were  also  propagated  from  eggs  and  seeds,  still  persisted
in  retaining  their  old  prejudices  respecting  the  infusory  animal¬
cules  and  other  minute  beings,  the  generation  of  which  had
not  then  been  demonstrated  by  the  microscope  to  be  governed
by  the  same  laws.

Lamarck  has  indeed  attempted  to  raise  an  argument,  in
favour  of  his  system,  out  of  the  very  confusion  which  has


22


CAUSES  OF  THE  DIFFICULTY


[Ch.  II.


arisen  in  the  study  of  some  orders  of  animals  and  plants,  in
consequence  of  the  slight  shades  of  difference  which  separate
the  new  species  discovered  within  the  last  half  century.  That
the  embarrassment  of  those  who  attempt  to  classify  and  dis¬
tinguish  the  new  acquisitions  poured  in  such  multitudes  into
our  museums  should  increase  with  the  augmentation  of
their  number  is  quite  natural ;  for  to  obviate  this  it  is  not
enough  that  our  powers  of  discrimination  should  keep  pace
with  the  increase  of  the  objects,  but  we  ought  to  possess  greater
opportunities  of  studying  each  animal  and  plant  in  all  stages
of  its  growth,  and  to  know  profoundly  their  history,  their
habits  and  physiological  characters,  throughout  several  gene¬
rations.  For,  in  proportion  as  the  series  of  known  animals
grows  more  complete,  none  can  doubt  that  there  is  a  nearer
approximation  to  a  graduated  scale  of  being ;  and  thus  the
most  closely  allied  species  will  possess  a  greater  number  of
characters  in  common.

Cause  of  the  difficulty  of  discriminating  species. — But,  in
point  of  fact,  our  new  acquisitions  consist,  more  and  more  as
we  advance,  of  specimens  brought  from  foreign  and  often  very
distant  and  barbarous  countries.  A  large  proportion  have
never  even  been  seen  alive  by  scientific  inquirers.  Instead
of  having  specimens  of  the  young,  the  adult,  and  the  aged
individuals  of  each  sex,  and  possessing  means  of  investigating
the  anatomical  structure,  the  peculiar  habits  and  instincts  of
each,  what  is  usually  the  state  of  our  information  ?  A  single
specimen,  perhaps,  of  a  dried  plant,  or  a  stuffed  bird  or  qua¬
druped  ;  a  shell  without  the  soft  parts  of  the  animal  ;  an
insect  in  one  stage  of  its  numerous  transformations ;  these
are  the  scanty  and  imperfect  data,  which  the  naturalist  pos¬
sesses.  Such  information  may  enable  us  to  separate  species
which  stand  at  a  considerable  distance  from  each  other ;  but
we  have  no  right  to  expect  anything  but  difficulty  and  ambi¬
guity,  if  we  attempt,  from  such  imperfect  opportunities,  to
obtain  distinctive  marks  for  defining  the  characters  of  species,
which  are  closely  related.


Ch.  II.]


OF  DISCRIMINATING  SPECiES.


23


If  Lamarck  could  introduce  so  much  certainty  and  preci¬
sion  into  the  classification  of  several  thousand  species  of  recent
and  fossil  shells,  notwithstanding  the  extreme  remoteness  of
the  organization  of  these  animals  from  the  type  of  those  ver-
tebrated  species  which  are  best  known,  and  in  the  absence  of
so  many  of  the  living  inhabitants  of  shells,  we  are  led  to  form
an  exalted  conception  of  the  degree  of  exactness  to  which  spe¬
cific  distinctions  are  capable  of  being  carried,  rather  than  to
call  in  question  their  reality.

When  our  data  are  so  defective,  the  most  acute  naturalist
must  expect  to  be  sometimes  at  fault,  and,  like  the  novice,  to
overlook  essential  points  of  difference,  passing  unconsciously
from  one  species  to  another,  until,  like  one  who  is  borne  along
in  a  current,  he  is  astonished,  on  looking  back,  at  observing
that  he  has  reached  a  point  so  remote  from  that  whence  he  set
out.

It  is  by  no  means  improbable  that  when  the  series  of  species
of  certain  genera  is  very  full,  they  may  be  found  to  differ  less
widely  from  each  other,  than  do  the  mere  varieties  or  races  of
certain  species.  If  such  a  fact  could  be  established,  it  would
by  no  means  overthrow  our  confidence  in  the  reality  of  species,
although  it  would  certainly  diminish  the  chance  of  our  obtain¬
ing  certainty  in  our  results.

Some  mere  varieties  possibly  more  distinct  than  certain  indi¬
viduals  of  distinct  species. — It  is  almost  necessary,  indeed,  to
suppose  that  varieties  will  differ  in  some  cases,  more  decidedly
than  some  species,  if  we  admit  that  there  is  a  graduated  scale
of  being,  and  assume  that  the  following  laws  prevail  in  the
economy  of  the  animate  creation  first,  that  the  organiza¬
tion  of  individuals  is  capable  of  being  modified  to  a  limited
extent  by  the  force  of  external  causes ;  secondly,  that  these
modifications  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  transmissible  to  their
offspring ;  thirdly,  that  there  are  fixed  limits  beyond  which
the  descendants  from  common  parents  can  never  deviate  from
a  certain  type  ;  fourthly,  that  each  species  springs  from  one
original  stock,  and  can  never  be  permanently  confounded  by


24


CAUSES  OF  VARIABILITY


[Ch.  II.


intermixing  with  the  progeny  of  any  other  stock ;  fifthly,
that  each  species  shall  endure  for  a  considerable  period  of
time.  Now  if  we  assume,  for  the  present,  these  rules  hypo¬
thetically,  let  us  see  what  consequences  may  naturally  be
expected  to  result.

We  must  suppose,  that  when  the  Author  of  Nature  creates
an  animal  or  plant,  all  the  possible  circumstances  in  which  its
descendants  are  destined  to  live  are  foreseen,  and  that  an
organization  is  conferred  upon  it  which  will  enable  the  species
to  perpetuate  itself  and  survive  under  all  the  varying  circum¬
stances  to  which  it  must  be  inevitably  exposed.  Now  the
range  of  variation  of  circumstances  will  differ  essentially  in
almost  every  case.  Let  us  take  for  example  any  one  of  the
most  influential  conditions  of  existence,  such  as  temperature.
In  some  extensive  districts  near  the  equator,  the  thermometer
might  never  vary  throughout  several  thousand  centuries  for
more  than  20°  Fahrenheit;  so  that  if  a  plant  or  animal  be
provided  with  an  organization  fitting  it  to  endure  such  a
range,  it  may  continue  on  the  globe  for  that  immense  period,
although  every  individual  might  be  liable  at  once  to  be  cut  off
by  the  least  possible  excess  of  heat  or  cold  beyond  the  deter¬
minate  quantity.  But  if  a  species  be  placed  in  one  of  the
temperate  zones,  and  have  a  constitution  conferred  on  it
capable  of  supporting  a  similar  range  of  temperature  only,  it
will  inevitably  perish  before  a  single  year  has  passed  away.

The  same  remark  might  be  applied  to  any  other  con¬
dition,  as  food  for  example  :  it  may  be  foreseen  that  the
supply  will  be  regular  throughout  indefinite  periods  in  one
part  of  the  world,  and  in  another  very  precarious  and  fluc¬
tuating  both  in  kind  and  quantity.  Different  qualifications
may  be  required  for  enabling  species  to  live  for  a  considerable
time  under  circumstances  so  changeable.  If,  then,  temperature
and  food  be  among  those  external  causes,  which  according  to
certain  laws  of  animal  and  vegetable  physiology  modify  the
organization,  form,  or  faculties  of  individuals,  we  instantly
perceive  that  the  degrees  of  variability  from  a  common


Ch.  II.]


IN  THE  SAME  SPECIES.


25


standard  must  differ  widely  in  the  two  cases  above  supposed,
since  there  is  a  necessity  of  accommodating  a  species  in  one  case
to  a  much  greater  latitude  of  circumstances  than  in  the  other.

If  it  be  a  law,  for  instance,  that  scanty  sustenance  should
check  those  individuals  in  their  growth  which  are  enabled
to  accommodate  themselves  to  privations  of  this  kind,  and
that  a  parent,  prevented  in  this  manner  from  attaining  the
size  proper  to  its  species  should  produce  a  dwarfish  offspring,
a  stunted  race  will  arise,  as  is  remarkably  exemplified  in  some
varieties  of  the  horse  and  dog.  The  difference  of  stature  in
some  races  of  dogs  in  comparison  to  others,  is  as  one  to  five  in
linear  dimensions,  making  a  difference  of  a  hundred-fold  in
volume  *.  Now  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  species  in
general  are  by  no  means  susceptible  of  existing  under  a  diver¬
sity  of  circumstances,  which  may  give  rise  to  such  a  disparity
in  size,  and  consequently,  there  will  be  a  multitude  of  distinct
species,  of  which  no  two  adult  individuals  can  ever  depart  so
widely  from  a  certain  standard  of  dimensions  as  the  mere
varieties  of  certain  other  species, — the  dog  for  instance.  Now
we  have  only  to  suppose  that  what  is  true  of  size,  may  also
hold  in  regard  to  colour  and  many  other  attributes,  and  it  will
at  once  follow  that  the  degree  of  possible  discordance  between
varieties  of  the  same  species,  may  in  certain  cases  exceed  the
utmost  disparity  which  can  arise  between  two  individuals  of
many  distinct  species.

The  same  remarks  may  hold  true  in  regard  to  instincts  ;  for
if  it  be  foreseen  that  one  species  will  have  to  encounter  a  great
variety  of  foes,  it  may  be  necessary  to  arm  it  with  great  cun¬
ning  and  circumspection,  or  with  courage  or  other  qualities
capable  of  developing  themselves  on  certain  occasions  3  such
for  example  as  those  migratory  instincts  which  are  so  remark¬
ably  exhibited  at  particular  periods,  after  they  have  remained
dormant  for  many  generations.  The  history  and  habits  of
one  variety  of  such  a  species  may  often  differ  more  consi¬
derably  from  some  other  than  those  of  many  distinct  species
*  Cuvier,  Disc.  Prelira.,  p.  128,  sixth  edition.


26


EXTENT  OF  KNOWN


[Ch.  II.

which  have  no  such  latitude  of  accommodation  to  circum¬
stances.

Extent  of  known  variability  in  Species. — Lamarck  has
somewhat  misstated  the  idea  commonly  entertained  of  a  species,,
for  it  is  not  true  that  naturalists  in  general  assume  that  the
organization  of  an  animal  or  plant  remains  absolutely  con¬
stant,  and  that  it  can  never  vary  in  any  of  its  parts.  All  must
be  aware  that  circumstances  influence  the  habits,  and  that  the
habits  may  alter  the  state  of  the  parts  and  organs  *.  But  the
difference  of  opinion  relates  to  the  extent  to  which  these  modi¬
fications  of  the  habits  and  organs  of  a  particular  species  may
be  carried.

Now  let  us  first  inquire  what  positive  facts  can  be  adduced
in  the  history  of  known  species,  to  establish  a  great  and  per¬
manent  amount  of  change  in  the  form,  structure,  or  instinct  of
individuals  descending  from  some  common  stock.  The  best
authenticated  examples  of  the  extent  to  which  species  can  be
made  to  vary,  may  be  looked  for  in  the  history  of  domesti¬
cated  animals  and  cultivated  plants.  It  usually  happens  that
those  species,  both  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom,  which
have  the  greatest  pliability  of  organization,  those  which  are
most  capable  of  accommodating  themselves  to  a  great  variety
of  new  circumstances,  are  most  serviceable  to  man.  These
only  can  be  carried  by  him  into  different  climates,  and  can  have
their  properties  or  instincts  variously  diversified  by  differences
of  nourishment  and  habits.  If  the  resources  of  a  species  be  so
limited,  and  its  habits  and  faculties  be  of  such  a  confined  and
local  character,  that  it  can  only  flourish  in  a  few  particular
spots,  it  can  rarely  be  of  great  utility.

We  may  consider,  therefore,  that  in  perfecting  the  arts  of
domesticating  animals  and  cultivating  plants,  mankind  have
first  selected  those  species  which  have  the  most  flexible  frames
and  constitutions,  and  have  then  been  engaged  for  ages  in
conducting  a  series  of  experiments,  with  much  patience  and
at  great  cost,  to  ascertain  what  may  be  the  greatest  possible

*  Phil.  Zool.,  tom.  i.  p.  266.


Ch.  II.]


VARIABILITY  IN  SPECIES.


27


deviation  from  a  common  type  which  can  be  elicited  in  these
extreme  cases.

Varieties  of  the  Dog. — The  modifications  produced  in  the
different  races  of  dogs,  exhibit  the  influence  of  man  in  the
most  striking  point  of  view.  These  animals  have  been  trans¬
ported  into  every  climate,  and  placed  in  every  variety  of  cir¬
cumstances  ;  they  have  been  made,  as  a  modern  naturalist
observes,  the  servant,  the  companion,  the  guardian,  and  the
intimate  friend  of  man,  and  the  power  of  a  superior  genius  has
had  a  wonderful  influence,  not  only  on  their  forms,  but  on  their
manners  and  intelligence  *.  Different  races  have  undergone
remarkable  changes  in  the  quantity  and  colour  of  their  cloth¬
ing  :  the  dogs  of  Guinea  are  almost  naked,  while  those  of  the
Arctic  circle  are  covered  with  a  warm  coat  both  of  hair  and
wool,  which  enables  them  to  bear  the  most  intense  cold  without
inconvenience.  There  are  differences  also  of  another  kind  no
less  remarkable,  as  in  size,  the  length  of  their  muzzles,  and  the
convexity  of  their  foreheads.

No  facts  of  transmutation  authenticated . — But  if  we  look
for  some  of  those  essential  changes  which  would  be  required  to
lend  even  the  semblance  of  a  foundation  for  the  theory  of
Lamarck,  respecting  the  growth  of  new  organs  and  the
gradual  obliteration  of  others,  we  find  nothing  of  the  kind.
For  in  all  these  varieties  of  the  dog,  says  Cuvier,  the  relation
of  the  bones  with  each  other  remain  essentially  the  same;  the
form  of  the  teeth  never  changes  in  any  perceptible  degree,
except  that  in  some  individuals,  one  additional  false  grinder
occasionally  appears,  sometimes  on  the  one  side,  and  sometimes
on  the  other  j*.  The  greatest  departure  from  a  common  type,
and  it  constitutes  the  maximum  of  variation  as  yet  known  in
the  animal  kingdom,  is  exemplified  in  those  races  of  dogs
which  have  a  supernumerary  toe  on  the  hind  foot  with  the
corresponding  tarsal  bones,  a  variety  analogous  to  one  pre¬
sented  by  six-fingered  families  of  the  human  race  J.

*  Dureau  de  la  Malle,  Ann.  des  Sci.  Nat.  tom.  xxi.  p.  63.  Sept.  1830.

|  Disc.  Prel.,  p.  129,  sixth  edition.  t  Ibid.


28


EGYPTIAN  MUMMIES  IDENTICAL


[Ch.  II.


Lamarck  has  thrown  out  as  a  conjecture,,  that  the  wolf  may
have  been  the  original  of  the  dog,  but  he  has  adduced  no  data
to  bear  out  such  an  hypothesis.  4  The  wolf,’  observes  Dr.
Prichard,  (  and  the  dog  differ,  not  only  with  respect  to  their
habits  and  instincts,  which  in  the  brute  creation  are  very  uni¬
form  within  the  limits  of  one  species;  but  some  differences
have  also  been  pointed  out  in  their  internal  organization,  par¬
ticularly  in  the  structure  of  a  part  of  the  intestinal  canal*.’

Domestic  animals  in  South  America  have  reverted  to  their
original  character  .—It  is  well  known  that  the  horse,  the  ox,
the  boar,  and  other  domestic  animals,  which  have  been  intro¬
duced  into  South  America,  and  have  run  wild  in  many  parts,
have  entirely  lost  all  marks  of  domesticity,  and  have  reverted
to  the  original  characters  of  their  species.  But  the  dog  has
also  become  wild  in  Cuba,  Hayti,  and  in  all  the  Caribbean
islands.  In  the  course  of  the  seventeenth  century,  they
hunted  in  packs  from  twelve  to  fifty,  or  more  in  number, jand
fearlessly  attacked  herds  of  wild  boars  and  other  animals.  It
is  natural,  therefore,  to  inquire  to  what  form  they  reverted  ?
Now  they  are  said  by  many  travellers  to  have  resembled  very
nearly  the  shepherd’s  dog ;  but  it  is  certain  that  they  were
never  turned  into  wolves.  They  were  extremely  savage,  and
their  ravages  appear  to  have  been  as  much  dreaded  as  those  of
wolves,  but  when  any  of  their  whelps  were  caught,  and  brought
from  the  woods  to  the  towns,  they  grew  up  in  the  most  perfect
submission  to  man.

Mummies  of  animals  in  Egyptian  tombs  identical  with
species  still  living. — As  the  advocates  of  the  theory  of  trans¬
mutation  trust  much  to  the  slow  and  insensible  changes  which
time  may  work,  they  are  accustomed  to  lament  the  absence
of  accurate  descriptions,  and  figures  of  particular  animals
and  plants,  handed  down  from  the  earliest  periods  of  his¬
tory,  such  as  might  have  afforded  data  for  comparing  the

*  Prichard,  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  96,  who  cites  Professor  Giil-
denstadt.


Ch.  II.]  WITH  SPECIES  STILL  LIVING.  29

condition  of  species,  at  two  periods  considerably  remote.  But
fortunately,  we  are  in  some  measure  independent  of  such
evidence,  for,  by  a  singular  accident,  the  priests  of  Egypt  have
bequeathed  to  us  in  their  cemeteries,  that  information,  which
the  museums  and  works  of  the  Greek  philosophers  have  failed
to  transmit.

For  the  careful  investigation  of  these  documents,  we  are
greatly  indebted  to  the  skill  and  diligence  of  those  naturalists
who  accompanied  the  French  armies  during  their  brief  occupa¬
tion  of  Egypt :  that  conquest  of  four  years,  from  which  we  may
date  the  improvement  of  the  modern  Egyptians  in  the  arts  and
sciences,  and  the  rapid  progress  which  has  been  made  of  late
in  our  knowledge  of  the  arts  and  sciences  of  their  remote  pre¬
decessors.  Instead  of  wasting  their  whole  time,  as  so  many
preceding  travellers  had  done,  in  exclusively  collecting  human
mummies,  M.  Geoffroy  and  his  associates  examined  diligently,
and  sent  home  great  numbers  of  embalmed  bodies  of  conse¬
crated  animals,  such  as  the  bull,  the  dog,  the  cat,  the  ape,  the
ichneumon,  the  crocodile,  and  the  ibis.

To  those  who  have  never  been  accustomed  to  connect  the
facts  of  Natural  History  with  philosophical  speculations,  who
have  never  raised  their  conceptions  of  the  end  and  import
of  such  studies  beyond  the  mere  admiration  of  isolated  and
beautiful  objects,  or  the  exertion  of  skill  in  detecting  specific
differences,  it  will  seem  incredible  that  amidst  the  din  of  arms,
and  the  stirring  excitement  of  political  movements,  so  much
enthusiam  could  have  been  felt  in  regard  to  these  precious
remains.

In  the  official  report  drawn  up  by  the  Professors  of  the
Museum  at  Paris,  on  the  value  of  these  objects,  there  are
some  eloquent  passages  which  may  appear  extravagant,  unless
we  reflect  how  fully  these  naturalists  could  appreciate  the
bearing  of  the  facts  thus  brought  to  light  on  the  past  history
of  the  globe.

‘  It  seems,’  say  they,  ‘  as  if  the  superstition  of  the  ancient
Egyptians  had  been  inspired  by  Nature,  with  a  view  of  trans-


30


EGYPTIAN  MUMMIES  IDENTICAL


[Ch.  II.


mitting  to  after  ages  a  monument  of  her  history.  That  ex¬
traordinary  and  whimsical  people,,  by  embalming  with  so
much  care  the  brutes  which  were  the  objects  of  their  stupid
adoration,  have  left  us,  in  their  sacred  grottos,  cabinets  of
zoology  almost  complete.  The  climate  has  conspired  with  the
art  of  embalming  to  preserve  the  bodies  from  corruption,  and
we  can  now  assure  ourselves  by  our  own  eyes  what  was  the
state  of  a  great  number  of  species  three  thousand  years  ago.
We  can  scarcely  restrain  the  transports  of  our  imagination,  on
beholding  thus  preserved,  with  their  minutest  bones,  with  the
smallest  portions  of  their  skin,  and  in  every  particular  most
perfectly  recognizable,  many  an  animal,  which  at  Thebes  or
Memphis,  two  or  three  thousand  years  ago,  had  its  own  priests
and  altars

Among  the  Egyptian  mummies  thus  procured  were  not  only
those  of  numerous  wild  quadrupeds,  birds,  and  reptiles,  but,
what  wras  perhaps  of  still  greater  importance  in  deciding  the
great  question  under  discussion,  there  were  the  mummies  of
domestic  animals,  among  which  those  above-mentioned,  the
bull,  the  dog,  and  the  cat,  were  frequent.  Now  such  was  the
conformity  of  the  whole  of  these  species  to  those  now  living,
that  there  was  no  more  difference,  says  Cuvier,  between  them
than  between  the  human  mummies  and  the  embalmed  bodies
of  men  of  the  present  day.  Yet  some  of  these  animals  have
since  that  period  been  transported  by  man  to  almost  every
variety  of  climate,  and  forced  to  accommodate  their  habits  to
new  circumstances,  as  far  as  their  nature  would  permit.  The
cat,  for  example,  has  been  carried  over  the  whole  earth,  and,
within  the  last  three  centuries,  has  been  naturalized  in  every
part  of  the  new  world,  from  the  cold  regions  of  Canada  to  the
tropical  plains  of  Guiana ;  yet  it  has  scarcely  undergone  any
perceptible  mutation,  and  is  still  the  same  animal  which  was
held  sacred  by  the  Egyptians.

Of  the  ox,  undoubtedly,  there  are  many  very  distinct  races ;

*  Ann.  du  Museum  d’Hist.  Nat.,  tom.  i.  p.  234.  1802.  The  reporters  were

MM.  Cuvier,  Lacepede,  and  Lamarck.


Ch.  II.]


WITH  SPECIES  STILL  LIVING.


but  the  bull  Apis,  which  was  led  in  solemn  processions  by  the
Egyptian  priests,  did  not  differ  from  some  of  those  now  living.
The  black  cattle  that  have  run  wild  in  America,  where  there
were  many  peculiarities  in  the  climate  not  to  be  found,  per¬
haps,  in  any  part  of  the  old  world,  and  where  scarcely  a
single  plant  on  which  they  fed  was  of  precisely  the  same
species,  instead  of  altering  their  form  and  habits,  have  actually
reverted  to  the  exact  likeness  of  the  aboriginal  wild  cattle  of
Europe.

In  answer  to  the  arguments  drawn  from  the  Egyptian  mum¬
mies,  Lamarck  said  that  they  were  identical  with  their  living
descendants  in  the  same  country,  because  the  climate  and
physical  geography  of  the  banks  of  the  Nile  have  remained
unaltered  for  the  last  thirty  centuries.  But  why,  we  ask,
have  other  individuals  of  these  species  retained  the  same  cha¬
racters  in  so  many  different  quarters  of  the  globe,  where  the
climate  and  many  other  conditions  are  so  varied  ?

Seeds  and  Plants  from  the  Egyptian  tombs. — The  evidence
derived  from  the  Egyptian  monuments  was  not  confined  to
the  animal  kingdom  ;  the  fruits,  seeds,  and  other  portions  of
twenty  different  plants,  were  faithfully  preserved  in  the  same
manner ;  and  among  these  the  common  wheat  was  procured
by  Delille,  from  closed  vessels  in  the  sepulchres  of  the
kings,  the  grains  of  which  retained  not  only  their  form  but
even  their  colour,  so  effectual  has  proved  the  process  of  em¬
balming  with  bitumen  in  a  dry  and  equable  climate.  No
difference  could  be  detected  between  this  wheat  and  that
which  now  grows  in  the  East  and  elsewhere,  and  similar  iden¬
tifications  were  made  in  regard  to  all  the  other  plants.

Native  country  of  the  common  wheat. — And  here  we  may
observe,  that  there  is  an  obvious  answer  to  Lamarck’s  objec¬
tion  *,  that  the  botanist  cannot  point  out  a  country  where  the
common  wheat  grows  wild,  unless  in  places  where  it  may  have
been  derived  from  neighbouring  cultivation.  All  naturalists
are  well  aware  that  the  geographical  distribution  of  a  great

*  Phil.  Zool.  tom.  i.,  p.  227.


32


VARIETIES  IN  PLANTS


[Ch.  II.


number  of  species  is  extremely  limited,  and  that  it  was  to  be
expected  that  every  useful  plant  should  first  be  cultivated  suc¬
cessfully  in  the  country  where  it  was  indigenous,  and  that,
probably,  every  station  which  it  partially  occupied,  when  grow¬
ing  wild,  would  be  selected  by  the  agriculturist  as  best  suited
to  it  when  artificially  increased.  Palestine  has  been  conjec¬
tured,  by  a  late  writer  on  the  Cerealia,  to  have  been  the  ori¬
ginal  habitation  of  wheat  and  barley,  a  supposition  which
appears  confirmed  by  Hebrew  and  Egyptian  traditions,  and  by
tracing  the  migrations  of  the  worship  of  Ceres,  as  indicative  of
the  migrations  of  the  plant  *.

If  we  are  to  infer  that  some  one  of  the  wild  grasses  has  been
transformed  into  the  common  wheat,  and  that  some  animal  of
the  genus  canis ,  still  unreclaimed,  has  been  metamorphosed
into  the  dog,  merely  because  we  cannot  find  the  domestic  dog,
or  the  cultivated  wheat,  in  a  state  of  nature,  we  may  be  next
called  upon  to  make  similar  admissions  in  regard  to  the  camel;
for  it  seems  very  doubtful  whether  any  race  of  this  species  of
quadruped  is  now  wild.

Changes  in  Plants  produced  by  cultivation. — But  if  agri¬
culture,  it  will  be  said,  does  not  supply  examples  of  extra¬
ordinary  changes  of  form  and  organization,  the  horticulturist
can,  at  least,  appeal  to  facts  which  may  confound  the  pre¬
ceding  train  of  reasoning.  The  crab  has  been  transformed
into  the  apple  ;  the  sloe  into  the  plum  :  flowers  have  changed
their  colour  and  become  double ;  and  these  new  characters
can  be  perpetuated  by  seed, — a  bitter  plant  with  wavy  sea-
green  leaves  has  been  taken  from  the  sea-side  where  it  grew
like  wild  charlock,  has  been  transplanted  into  the  garden,  lost
its  saltness,  and  has  been  metamorphosed  into  two  distinct
vegetables  as  unlike  each  other  as  is  each  to  the  parent  plant
—the  red  cabbage  and  the  cauliflower.  These,  and  a  multi¬
tude  of  analogous  facts,  are  undoubtedly  among  the  wonders
of  nature,  and  attest  more  strongly,  perhaps,  the  extent  to
which  species  may  be  modified,  than  any  examples  derived

*  L’Origine  et  la  Patrie  ties  Cereales,  &c.  Ann.  des  Sci.  Nat.  tom.  ix,,  p.  61.


Ch.  II.]


PRODUCED  BY  HORTICULTURE.


33


from  the  animal  kingdom.  But  in  these  cases  we  find,  that
we  soon  reach  certain  limits,  beyond  which  we  are  unable  to
cause  the  individuals,  descending  from  the  same  stock,  to  vary  ;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  these  extraor¬
dinary  varieties  could  seldom  arise,  and  could  never  be  per¬
petuated  in  a  wild  state  for  many  generations,  under  any  ima¬
ginable  combination  of  accidents.  They  may  be  regarded  as
extreme  cases  brought  about  by  human  interference,  and  not
as  phenomena  which  indicate  a  capability  of  indefinite  modi¬
fication  in  the  natural  world.

The  propagation  of  a  plant  by  buds  or  grafts,  and  by  cut¬
tings,  is  obviously  a  mode  which  nature  does  not  employ  ;  and
this  multiplication,  as  well  as  that  produced  by  roots  and
layers,  seems  merely  to  operate  as  an  extension  of  the  life  of  an
individual,  and  not  as  a  reproduction  of  the  species,  as  happens
by  seed.  All  plants  increased  by  the  former  means  retain
precisely  the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  individual  to  which  they
owe  their  origin,  and  like  an  individual,  they  have  only  a
determinate  existence  ;  in  some  cases  longer  and  in  others
shorter  *.  It  seems  now  admitted  by  horticulturists,  that
none  of  our  garden  varieties  of  fruit  are  entitled  to  be  con¬
sidered  strictly  permanent,  but  that  they  wear  out  after  a
timef;  and  we  are  thus  compelled  to  resort  again  to  seeds;
in  which  case  there  is  so  decided  a  tendency  in  the  seedlings
to  revert  to  the  original  type,  that  our  utmost  skill  is  some¬
times  baffled  in  attempting  to  recover  the  desired  variety.

Varieties  of  the  Cabbage. — The  different  races  of  cab¬
bages  afford,  as  we  have  admitted,  an  astonishing  example  of
deviation  from  a  common  type;  but  we  can  scarcely  con¬
ceive  them  to  have  originated,  much  less  to  have  lasted  for
several  generations,  without  the  intervention  of  man.  It  is
only  by  strong  manures  that  these  varieties  have  been  ob¬
tained,  and  in  poorer  soils  they  instantly  degenerate.  If,


*  Smith's  Introduction  to  Botany,  p.  138.  Edit.  1807.
f  See  Mr.  Knight’s  Observations,  Hort.  Trans.,  vol.  ii.  p.  160.
Vox..  II.


34


VARIETIES  IN  PLANTS


[Ch.  II.


therefore,  we  suppose  in  a  state  of  nature  the  seed  of  the  wild
Brassica  oleracea  to  have  been  wafted  from  the  sea-side  to
some  spot  enriched  by  the  dung  of  animals,  and  to  have  there
become  a  cauliflower,  it  would  soon  diffuse  its  seed  to  some
comparatively  sterile  soils  around,  and  the  offspring  would
relapse  to  the  likeness  of  the  parent  stock,  like  some  indivi¬
duals  which  were  seen  growing  in  1831  on  the  cornice  of  old
London  Bridge.

But  if  we  go  so  far  as  to  imagine  the  soil,  in  the  spot
first  occupied,  to  be  constantly  manured  by  herds  of  wild
animals,  so  as  to  continue  as  rich  as  that  of  a  garden,  still  the
variety  could  not  be  maintained,  because  we  know  that  each
of  these  races  is  prone  to  fecundate  others,  and  gardeners
are  compelled  to  exert  the  utmost  diligence  to  prevent  cross¬
breeds.  The  intermixture  of  the  pollen  of  varieties  growing
in  the  poorer  soil  around,  would  soon  destroy  the  peculiar
characters  of  the  race  which  occupied  the  highly-manured
tract;  for,  if  these  accidents  so  continually  happen  in  spite  of
us  among  the  culinary  varieties,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  soon
this  cause  might  obliterate  every  marked  singularity  in  a  wild
state.

Besides,  it  is  well-known  that  although  the  pampered  races
which  we  rear  in  our  gardens  for  use  or  ornament  may  often
be  perpetuated  by  seed,  yet  they  rarely  produce  seed  in  such
abundance,  or  so  prolific  in  quality,  as  wild  individuals;  so  that
if  the  care  of  man  were  withdrawn,  the  most  fertile  variety
would  always,  in  the  end,  prevail  over  the  more  steril.

Similar  remarks  may  be  applied  to  the  double  flowers  which
present  such  strange  anomalies  to  the  botanist.  The  ovarium,
in  such  cases,  is  frequently  abortive,  and  the  seeds,  when  pro¬
lific,  are  generally  much  fewer  than  where  the  flowers  are
single.

Changes  caused  by  soil. — Some  curious  experiments  recently
made  on  the  production  of  blue  instead  of  red  flowers  in  the
Hydrangea  hortensis,  illustrate  the  immediate  effect  of  certain
soils  on  the  colours  of  the  calyx  and  petals.  In  garden-mould


Ch.  II.]


PRODUCED  BY  HORTICULTURE.


35


or  compost,  the  flowers  are  invariably  red ;  in  some  kinds  of
bog-earth  they  are  blue ;  and  the  same  change  is  always  pro¬
duced  by  a  particular  sort  of  yellow  loam.

Varieties  of  the  Primrose. — Linnaeus  was  of  opinion  that  the
primrose,  oxlip,  cowslip,  and  polyanthus,  were  only  varieties
of  the  same  species.  The  majority  of  modern  botanists,  on
the  contrary,  consider  them  to  be  distinct,  although  some  con¬
ceived  that  the  oxlip  might  be  a  cross  between  the'cowslip  and
the  primrose.  Mr.  Herbert  has  lately  recorded  the  following
experiment ^  I  raised  from  the  natural  seed  of  one  umbel
of  a  highly-manured  red  cowslip,  a  primrose,  a  cowslip,  oxlips,
of  the  usual  and  other  colours,  a  black  polyanthus,  a  hose-in¬
hose  cowslip,  and  a  natural  primrose  bearing  its  flower  on  a
polyanthus  stalk.  From  the  seed  of  that  very  hose-in-hose
cowslip  I  have  since  raised  a  hose-in-hose  primrose.  I  there¬
fore  consider  all  these  to  be  only  local  varieties  depending
upon  soil  and  situation.  *  *’  Professor  Henslow  of  Cambridge
has  since  confirmed  this  experiment  of  Mr.  Herbert,  so  that
we  have  an  example,  not  only  of  the  remarkable  varieties
which  the  florist  can  obtain  from  a  common  stock,  but  of  the
distinctness  of  analogous  races  found  in  a  wild  state  f .

On  what  particular  ingredient,  or  quality  in  the  earth,  these
changes  depend,  has  not  yet  been  ascertained  J.  But  gar¬
deners  are  well  aware  that  particular  plants,  when  placed
under  the  influence  of  certain  circumstances,  are  changed  in
various  ways  according  to  the  species ;  and  as  often  as  the
experiments  are  repeated  similar  results  are  obtained.  The
nature  of  these  results,  however,  depends  upon  the  species,
and  they  are,  therefore,  part  of  the  specific  character;  they
exhibit  the  same  phenomena  again  and  again,  and  indicate
certain  fixed  and  invariable  relations  between  the  physiological
peculiarities  of  the  plant,  and  the  influence  of  certain  external
agents.  They  afford  no  ground  for  questioning  the  instability

*  Hort.  Trans.,  vol.  iv.  p.  19.

f  Loudon’s  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Sept.  1830,  vol.  iii.  p.  408.

J  Hort.  Trans.,  vol.  iii.  p.  173.


3(>


VARIETIES  IN  PLANTS.


[Ch.  II.


of  species,  but  rather  the  contrary ;  they  present  us  with
a  class  of  phenomena  which,  when  they  are  more  thoroughly
understood,  may  afford  some  of  the  best  tests  for  identifying
species,  and  proving  that  the  attributes  originally  conferred,
endure  so  long  as  any  issue  of  the  original  stock  remains  upon
the  earth*


CHAPTER  III.


Whether  species  have  a  real  existence  in  Nature,  -Variability  of  a

species  compared  to  that  of  an  individual — Species  which  are  susceptible  of
modification  may  be  altered  greatly  in  a  short  time,  and  in  a  few  generations  ;
after  which  they  remain  stationary — The  animals  now  subject  to  man  had
originally  an  aptitude  to  domesticity — Acquired  peculiarities  which  become
hereditary  have  a  close  connexion  with  the  habits  or  instincts  of  the  species  in
a  wild  state — Some  qualities  in  certain  animals  have  been  conferred  with  a
view  of  their  relation  to  man — Wild  elephant  domesticated  in  a  few  years,  but
its  faculties  incapable  of  further  development.

WHETHER  SPECIES  HAVE  A  REAL  EXISTENCE  IN  NATURE,

continued.

Variability  of  a  species  compared  to  that  of  an  individual .—
We  endeavoured  in  the  last  chapter  to  show,  that  a  belief  in
the  reality  of  species  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  a
considerable  degree  of  variability  in  the  specific  character.
This  opinion,  indeed,  is  little  more  than  an  extension  of  the
idea  which  we  must  entertain  of  the  identity  of  an  individual,
throughout  the  changes  which  it  is  capable  of  undergoing.

If  a  quadruped,  inhabiting  a  cold  northern  latitude,  and
covered  with  a  warm  coat  of  hair  or  wool,  be  transported  to  a
southern  climate,  it  will  often,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  shed
a  considerable  portion  of  its  coat,  which  it  gradually  recovers
on  being  again  restored  to  its  native  country.  Even  there  the
same  changes  are,  perhaps,  superinduced  to  a  certain  extent
by  the  return  of  winter  and  summer.  We  know  that  the
Alpine  hare  *  and  the  ermine  f  become  white  during  winter,  and
again  obtain  their  full  colour  during  the  warmer  season ;  that
the  plumage  of  the  ptarmigan  undergoes  a  like  metamorphosis
in  colour  and  quantity,  and  that  the  change  is  equally  tem¬
porary.  We  are  aware  that,  if  we  reclaim  some  wild  animal,
and  modify  its  habits  and  instincts  by  domestication,  it  may,
*  Lepus  varidbilis. — Pallas.  +  Mustela  ermiuea.— -Linn.


38


EXTENT  OF  CHANGE  IN  SPECIES.


[Ch.  III.


if  it  escapes*  become  in  a  few  years  nearly  as  wild  and  untrac-
table  as  ever ;  and  if  the  same  individual  be  again  retaken,  it
may  be  reduced  to  its  former  tame  state.  A  plant  is  placed
in  a  prepared  soil  in  order  that  the  petals  of  its  flowers  may
multiply,  and  their  colour  be  heightened  or  changed ;  if  we
then  withhold  our  care,  the  flowers  of  this  same  individual
become  again  single.  In  these,  and  innumerable  other  in¬
stances,  we  must  suppose  that  the  individual  was  produced  with
a  certain  number  of  qualities  ;  and,  in  the  case  of  animals,  with
a  variety  of  instincts,  some  of  which  may  or  may  not  be  deve¬
loped  according  to  circumstances,  or  which,  after  having  been
called  forth,  may  again  become  latent  when  the  exciting  causes
are  removed.

Now  the  formation  of  races  seems  the  necessary  consequence
of  such  a  capability  in  individuals  to  vary,  if  it  be  a  general
law  that  the  offspring  should  very  closely  resemble  the  parent.
But,  before  we  can  infer  that  there  are  no  limits  to  the  devia¬
tion  from  an  original  type  which  may  be  brought  about  in
the  course  of  an  indefinite  number  of  generations,  we  ought
to  have  some  proof  that,  in  each  successive  generation,  indi¬
viduals  may  go  on  acquiring  an  equal  amount  of  new  pecu¬
liarities,  under  the  influence  of  equal  changes  of  circumstances.
The  balance  of  evidence,  however,  inclines  most  decidedly  on
the  opposite  side,  for  in  all  cases  we  find  that  the  quantity  of
divergence  diminishes  from  the  first  in  a  very  rapid  ratio.

Species  which  are  susceptible  of  modification  may  be  greatly
altered  in  a  few  generations. — It  cannot  be  objected,  that  it
is  out  of  our  power  to  go  on  varying  the  circumstances  in  the
same  manner  as  might  happen  in  the  natural  course  of  events
during  some  great  geological  cycle.  For  in  the  first  place,
where  a  capacity  is  given  to  individuals  to  adapt  themselves  to
new  circumstances,  it  does  not  generally  require  a  very  long
period  for  its  development ;  if,  indeed,  such  were  the  case,  it  is
not  easy  to  see  how  the  modification  would  answer  the  ends
proposed,  for  all  the  individuals  would  die  before  new  quali¬
ties,  habits,  or  instincts  were  conferred.


Ch.  III.]


EXTENT  OF  CHANGE  IN  SPECIES.


39


When  we  have  succeeded  in  naturalizing  some  tropical
plant  in  a  temperate  climate,  nothing  prevents  us  from  attempt¬
ing  gradually  to  extend  its  distribution  to  higher  latitudes,  or
to  greater  elevations  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  allowing  equal
quantities  of  time,  or  an  equal  number  of  generations  for
habituating  the  species  to  successive  increments  of  cold.
But  every  husbandman  and  gardener  is  aware  that  such  expe¬
riments  will  fail  \  and  we  are  more  likely  to  succeed  in  making
some  plants,  in  the  course  of  the  first  two  generations,  sup¬
port  a  considerable  degree  of  difference  of  temperature  than
a  very  small  difference  afterwards,  though  we  persevere  for
many  centuries.

It  is  the  same  if  we  take  any  other  cause  instead  of  tem¬
perature;  such  as  the  quality  of  the  food,  or  the  kind  of
dangers  to  which  an  animal  is  exposed,  or  the  soil  in  which  a
plant  lives.  The  alteration  in  habits,  form,  or  organization,  is
often  rapid  during  a  short  period  ;  but  when  the  circumstances
are  made  to  vary  further,  though  in  ever  so  slight  a  degree,  all
modification  ceases,  and  the  individual  perishes.  Thus  some
herbivorous  quadrupeds  may  be  made  to  feed  partially  on  fish
or  flesh,  but  even  these  can  never  be  taught  to  live  on  some  herbs
which  they  reject,  and  which  would  even  poison  them,  although
the  same  may  be  very  nutritious  to  other  species  of  the  same
natural  order.  So  when  man  uses  force  or  stratagem  against
wild  animals,  the  persecuted  race  soon  becomes  more  cautious,
watchful,  and  cunning ;  new  instincts  seem  often  to  be  deve¬
loped,  and  to  become  hereditary  in  the  first  two  or  three
generations  ;  but  let  the  skill  and  address  of  man  increase,
however  gradually,  no  further  variation  can  take  place,  no  new
qualities  are  elicited  by  the  increasing  dangers.  The  altera¬
tion  of  the  habits  of  the  species  has  reached  a  point  beyond
which  no  ulterior  modification  is  possible,  however  indefinite
the  lapse  of  ages  during  which  the  new  circumstances  operate.
Extirpation  then  follows,  rather  than  such  a  transformation  as
could  alone  enable  the  species  to  perpetuate  itself  under  the
new  state  of  things.


40  ACQUIRED  INSTINCTS  HEREDITARY.  [Ch.  III.

Animals  now  subject  to  man  had  originally  an  aptitude  to
domesticity . — It  has  been  well  observed  by  M.  F.  Cuvier  and
M.  Dureau  de  la  Malle,  that  unless  some  animals  had  mani¬
fested  in  a  wild  state  an  aptitude  to  second  the  efforts  of  man,
their  domestication  would  never  have  been  attempted.  If
they  had  all  resembled  the  wolf,  the  fox,  and  the  hyaena,  the
patience  of  the  experimentalist  would  have  been  exhausted  by
innumerable  failures  before  he  at  last  succeeded  in  obtaining
some  imperfect  results;  so,  if  the  first  advantages  derived  from
the  cultivation  of  plants  had  been  elicited  by  as  tedious  and
costly  a  process  as  that  by  which  we  now  make  some  slight
additional  improvement  in  certain  races,  we  should  have  re¬
mained  to  this  day  in  ignorance  of  the  greater  number  of  their
useful  qualities.

Acquired  instincts  of  some  animals  become  hereditary  .—-It
is  undoubtedly  true,  that  many  new  habits  and  qualities  have
not  only  been  acquired  in  recent  times  by  certain  races  of  dogs,
but  have  been  transmitted  to  their  offspring.  But  in  these
cases  it  will  be  observed,  that  the  new  peculiarities  have  an  inti¬
mate  relation  to  the  habits  of  the  animal  in  a  wild  state,  and
therefore  do  not  attest  any  tendency  to  departure  to  an  inde¬
finite  extent  from  the  original  type  of  the  species.  A  race  of
dogs  employed  for  hunting  deer  in  the  platform  of  Santa  Ft
in  Mexico,  affords  a  beautiful  illustration  of  a  new  hereditary
instinct.  The  mode  of  attack,  observes  M.  Roulin,  which
they  employ,  consists  in  seizing  the  animal  by  the  belly  and
overturning  it  by  a  sudden  effort,  taking  advantage  of  the
moment  when  the  body  of  the  deer  rests  only  upon  the  fore¬
legs.  The  weight  of  the  animal  thus  thrown  over,  is  often  six
times  that  of  its  antagonist.  The  dog  of  pure  breed  inherits  a
disposition  to  this  kind  of  chase,  and  never  attacks  a  deer  from
before  while  running.  Even  should  the  latter,  not  perceiving
him,  come  directly  upon  him,  the  dog  steps  aside  and  makes  his
assault  on  the  flank,  whereas  other  hunting-dogs,  though  of
superior  strength  and  general  sagacity,  which  are  brought  from
Europe,  are  destitute  of  this  instinct.  For  want  of  similar


Ch.  III.]


ACQUIRED  INSTINCTS  HEREDITARY.


41


precautions,  they  are  often  killed  by  the  deer  on  the  spot,  the
vertebras  of  their  neck  being  dislocated  by  the  violence  of  the
shock  *.

A  new  instinct  has  also  become  hereditary  in  a  mongrel  race
of  dogs  employed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  banks  of  the  Mag¬
dalena  almost  exclusively  in  hunting  the  white-lipped  pecari.
The  address  of  these  dogs  consists  in  restraining  their  ardour,
and  attaching  themselves  to  no  animal  in  particular,  but  keep¬
ing  the  whole  herd  in  check.  Now,  among  these  dogs  some
are  found,  which,  the  very  first  time  they  are  taken  to  the
woods,  are  acquainted  with  this  mode  of  attack ;  whereas,  a
dog  of  another  breed  starts  forward  at  once,  is  surrounded  by
the  pecari,  and  whatever  may  be  his  strength  is  destroyed  in  a
moment.

Some  of  our  countrymen,  engaged  of  late  in  conducting  the
principal  mining  associations  in  Mexico  f,  carried  out  with
them  some  English  greyhounds  of  the  best  breed  to  hunt  the
hares  which  abound  in  that  country.  The  great  platform
which  is  the  scene  of  sport  is  at  an  elevation  of  about  nine
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  mercury  in
the  barometer  stands  habitually  at  the  height  of  about  nine¬
teen  inches.  It  was  found  that  the  greyhounds  could  not
support  the  fatigues  of  a  long  chase  in  this  attenuated  atmos¬
phere,  and  before  they  could  come  up  with  their  prey,  they  lay
down  gasping  for  breath ;  but  these  same  animals  have  pro¬
duced  whelps  which  have  grown  up,  and  are  not  in  the  least
degree  incommoded  by  the  want  of  density  in  the  air,  but  run
down  the  hares  with  as  much  ease  as  the  fleetest  of  their  race
in  this  country.

The  fixed  and  deliberate  stand  of  the  pointer  has  with  pro¬
priety  been  regarded  as  a  mere  modification  of  a  habit,  which
may  have  been  useful  to  a  wild  race  accustomed  to  wind  game,
and  steal  upon  it  by  surprise,  first  pausing  for  an  instant  in
order  to  spring  with  unerring  aim.  The  faculty  of  the  Re-

*  M.  Roulin,  Ann.  ties  Sci.  Nat.,  tom.  xvi.p.  16,  1829.
f  The  Real  del  Monte  Company.


42


INFLUENCE  OF  DOMESTICATION.


[Ch.  Ill,


triever,  however,  may  justly  be  regarded  as  more  inexplicable
and  less  easily  referrible  to  the  instinctive  passions  of  the
species.  M.  Majendie,  says  a  French  writer  in  a  recently-
published  memoir,  having  learnt  that  there  was  a  race  of  dogs
in  England,  which  stopped  and  brought  back  game  of  their
own  accord,  procured  a  pair,  and  having  obtained  a  whelp
from  them  kept  it  constantly  under  his  eyes,  until  he  had  an
opportunity  of  assuring  himself  that,  without  having  received
any  instruction,  and  on  the  very  first  day  that  it  was  carried  to
the  chase,  it  brought  back  game  with  as  much  steadiness  as
dogs  which  had  been  schooled  into  the  same  manoeuvre  by
means  of  the  whip  and  collar.

Such  attainments,  as  well  as  the  habits  and  dispositions
which  the  shepherd’s  dog  and  many  others  inherit,  seem  to  be
of  a  nature  and  extent  which  we  can  hardly  explain  by  sup¬
posing  them  to  be  modifications  of  instincts  necessary  for  the
preservation  of  the  species  in  a  wild  state.  When  such  remark¬
able  habits  appear  in  races  of  this  species,  we  may  reasonably
conjecture  that  they  were  given  with  no  other  view  than  for
the  use  of  man  and  the  preservation  of  the  dog,  which  thus
obtains  protection.

Attributes  of  animals  in  their  relation  to  man. — As  a  gene¬
ral  rule,  we  fully  agree  with  M.  F.  Cuvier  that,  in  studying
the  habits  of  animals,  we  must  attempt,  as  far  as  possible,
to  refer  their  domestic  qualities  to  modifications  of  instincts
which  are  implanted  in  them  in  a  state  of  nature ;  and  that
writer  has  successfully  pointed  out,  in  an  admirable  essay  on
the  domestication  of  the  mammalia,  the  true  origin  of  many
dispositions  which  are  vulgarly  attributed  to  the  influence  of
education  alone  *.  But  we  should  go  too  far  if  we  did  not
admit  that  some  of  the  qualities  of  particular  animals  and
plants  may  have  been  given  solely  with  a  view  to  the  con¬
nexion  which  it  was  foreseen  would  exist  between  them  and
man-— especially  when  we  see  that  connexion  to  be  in  many

*  Mem.  du  Mas.  d’Hist.  Nat.— -Jameson,  Ed.  New  Phil.  Journ.,  Nos.  6,  7,  8.


Ch.  III.]


ACQUIRED  INSTINCTS  HEREDITARY.


43


cases  so  intimate,  that  the  greater  number,  and  sometimes  all
the  individuals  of  the  species  which  exist  on  the  earth,  are
in  subjection  to  the  human  race.

We  can  perceive  in  a  multitude  of  animals,  especially  in
some  of  the  parasitic  tribes,  that  certain  instincts  and  organs
are  conferred  for  the  purpose  of  defence  or  attack  against  some
other  species.  Now  if  we  are  reluctant  to  suppose  the  exist¬
ence  of  similar  relations  between  man  and  the  instincts  of  many
of  the  inferior  animals,  we  adopt  an  hypothesis  no  less  violent,
though  in  the  opposite  extreme  to  that  which  has  led  some  to
imagine  the  whole  animate  and  inanimate  creation  to  have  been
made  solely  for  the  support,  gratification,  and  instruction  of
mankind.

Many  species  most  hostile  to  our  persons  or  property  mul¬
tiply  in  spite  of  our  efforts  to  repress  them ;  others,  on  the
contrary,  are  intentionally  augmented  many  hundred-fold  in
number  by  our  exertions.  In  such  instances  we  must  imagine
the  relative  resources  of  man  and  of  species,  friendly  or
inimical  to  him,  to  have  been  prospectively  calculated  and
adjusted.  To  withhold  assent  to  this  supposition  would  be  to
refuse  what  we  must  grant  in  respect  to  the  economy  of  Nature
in  every  other  part  of  the  organic  creation ;  for  the  various
species  of  contemporary  plants  and  animals  have  obviously
their  relative  forces  nicely  balanced,  and  their  respective  tastes,
passions,  and  instincts  so  contrived,  that  they  are  all  in  perfect
harmony  with  each  other.  In  no  other  manner  could  it  hap¬
pen  that  each  species,  surrounded  as  it  is  by  countless  dangers,
should  be  enabled  to  maintain  its  ground  for  periods  of  con¬
siderable  duration.

The  docility  of  the  individuals  of  some  of  our  domestic
species  extending,  as  it  does,  to  attainments  foreign  to  their
natural  habits  and  faculties,  may  perhaps  have  been  conferred
with  a  view  to  their  association  with  man.  But  lest  species
should  be  thereby  made  to  vary  indefinitely,  we  find  that  such
habits  are  never  transmissible  by  generation.

A  pig  has  been  trained  to  hunt  and  point  game  with  great


44


INFLUENCE  OF  DOMESTICATION.


[Cli.  III.


activity  and  steadiness  *;  and  other  learned  individuals,  of  the
same  species,  have  been  taught  to  spell ;  but  such  fortuitous
acquirements  never  become  hereditary,,  for  they  have  no  rela¬
tion  whatever  to  the  exigencies  of  the  animal  in  a  wild  state,
and  cannot  therefore  be  developments  of  any  instinctive  pro¬
pensities.

Influence  of  domestication.— An  animal  in  domesticity,  says
M.  F.  Cuvier,  is  not  essentially  in  a  different  situation  in  re¬
gard  to  the  feeling  of  restraint  from  one  left  to  itself.  It  lives
in  society  without  constraint,  because  without  doubt  it  was  a
social  animal,  and  it  conforms  itself  to  the  will  of  man,  because
it  had  a  chief  to  which  in  a  wild  state  it  would  have  yielded
obedience.  There  is  nothing  in  its  new  situation  that  is  not
conformable  to  its  propensities ;  it  is  satisfying  its  wants  by
submission  to  a  master,  and  makes  no  sacrifice  of  its  natural
inclinations.  All  the  social  animals  when  left  to  themselves
form  herds  more  or  less  numerous,  and  all  the  individuals  of
the  same  herd  know  each  other,  are  mutually  attached,  and
will  not  allow  a  strange  individual  to  join  them.  In  a  wild
state,  moreover,  they  obey  some  individual,  which  by  its
superiority  has  become  the  chief  of  the  herd.  Our  domestic
species  had  originally  this  sociability  of  disposition,  and  no
solitary  species,  however  easy  it  may  be  to  tame  it,  has  yet
afforded  true  domestic  races.  We  merely,  therefore,  develope
to  our  own  advantage,  propensities  which  propel  the  indi¬
viduals  of  certain  species  to  draw  near  to  their  fellows.

The  sheep  which  we  have  reared  is  induced  to  follow  us,
as  it  would  be  led  to  follow  the  flock  among  which  it  was
brought  up ;  and  when  individuals  of  gregarious  species  have
been  accustomed  to  one  master,  it  is  he  alone  whom  they
acknowledge  as  their  chief,  he  only  whom  they  obey. — 4  The
elephant  only  allows  himself  to  be  led  by  the  carnac  whom  he
has  adopted ;  the  dog  itself,  reared  in  solitude  with  its  master,
manifests  a  hostile  disposition  towards  all  others ;  and  every  -

*  In  the  New  Forest,  near  Ringwood,  Hants,  by  Mr.  Toomer,  keeper  of
Broomy  Lodge.


Ch.  III.]


INFLUENCE  OF  DOMESTICATION.


45


body  knows  how  dangerous  it  is  to  be  in  the  midst  of  a  herd
of  cows,  in  pasturages  that  are  little  frequented,  when  they
have  not  at  their  head  the  keeper  who  takes  care  of  them.'

6  Everything,  therefore,  tends  to  convince  us  that  formerly
men  were  only,  with  regard  to  the  domestic  animals,  what  those
who  are  particularly  charged  with  the  care  of  them  still  are,
namely  members  of  the  society,  which  these  animals  form
among  themselves,  and  that  they  are  only  distinguished  in  the
general  mass  by  the  authority  which  they  have  been  enabled  to
assume  from  their  superiority  of  intellect.  Thus,  every  social
animal  which  recognizes  man  as  a  member,  and  as  the  chief  of
its  herd,  is  a  domestic  animal.  It  might  even  be  said  that
from  the  moment  when  such  an  animal  admits  man  as  a  mem¬
ber  of  its  society,  it  is  domesticated,  as  man  could  not  enter
into  such  a  society  without  becoming  the  chief  of  it

But  the  ingenious  author  whose  observations  we  have  here
cited,  admits  that  the  obedience  which  the  individuals  of  many
domestic  species  yield  indifferently  to  every  person  is  without
analogy  in  any  state  of  things  which  could  exist  previously
to  their  subjugation  by  man.  Each  troop  of  wild  horses,  it  is
true,  has  some  stallion  for  its  chief,  who  draws  after  him  all
the  individuals  of  which  the  herd  is  composed ;  but  when  a
domesticated  horse  has  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  and  has
served  several  masters,  he  becomes  equally  docile  towards  any
person ,  and  is  subjected  to  the  whole  human  race.  It  seems
fair  to  presume,  that  the  capability  in  the  instinct  of  the  horse
to  be  thus  modified,  was  given  to  enable  the  species  to  render
greater  services  to  man  ;  and,  perhaps,  the  facility  with  which
many  other  acquired  characters  become  hereditary  in  various
races  of  the  horse,  may  be  explicable  only  on  a  like  supposition.
The  amble,  for  example,  a  pace  to  which  the  domestic  races
in  Spanish  America  are  exclusively  trained,  has  in  the  course
of  several  generations,  become  hereditary,  and  is  assumed  by
all  the  young  colts  before  they  are  broken  in  f.

*  Mem.  du  Mus.  d’Hist.  Nat.
f  Bureau  de  la  Malle,  Ann.  des  Sci.  Nat.,  tom.  xxi.  p.  58.


46


MODIFICATIONS  OF  INSTINCTS


[Ch.  III.


It  seems  also  reasonable  to  conclude,  that  the  power  be¬
stowed  on  the  horse,  the  dog,  the  ox,  the  sheep,  the  cat,  and
many  species  of  domestic  fowls,  of  supporting  almost  every
climate,  was  given  expressly  to  enable  them  to  follow  man
throughout  all  parts  of  the  globe— in  order  that  we  might
obtain  their  services,  and  they  our  protection.  If  it  be  ob¬
jected  that  the  elephant,  which,  by  the  union  of  strength,
intelligence,  and  docility,  can  render  the  greatest  services  to
mankind,  is  incapable  of  living  in  any  but  the  warmest  lati¬
tudes,  we  may  observe,  that  the  quantity  of  vegetable  food
required  by  this  quadruped  would  render  its  maintenance,  in
the  temperate  zone  too  costly,  and  in  the  arctic  impossible.

Among  the  changes  superinduced  by  man,  none  appear  at
first  sight  more  remarkable  than  the  perfect  tameness  of  cer¬
tain  domestic  races.  It  is  well  known  that,  at  however  early
an  age  we  obtain  possession  of  the  young  of  many  unreclaimed
races,  they  will  retain  throughout  life  a  considerable  timidity
and  apprehensiveness  of  danger ;  whereas,  after  one  or  two
generations,  the  descendants  of  the  same  will  habitually  place
the  most  implicit  confidence  in  man.  There  is  good  reason,
however,  to  suspect  that  such  changes  are  not  without  analogy
in  a  state  of  nature,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  in  situations
where  man  has  not  interfered.

Thus,  Dr.  Richardson  informs  us,  in  his  able  history  of  the
habits  of  North  American  animals,  that,  4  in  the  retired  parts
of  the  mountains,  where  the  hunters  had  seldom  penetrated,
there  is  no  difficulty  in  approaching  the  Rocky  Mountain
sheep,  which  there  exhibit  the  simplicity  of  character  so  remark¬
able  in  the  domestic  species ;  but  where  they  have  been  often
fired  at,  they  are  exceedingly  wild,  alarm  their  companions,  on
the  approach  of  danger,  by  a  hissing  noise,  and  scale  the  rocks
with  a  speed  and  agility  that  baffles  pursuit  V

It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  as  man,  in  diffusing  himself
over  the  globe,  has  tamed  many  wild  races,  so  also  he  has  made


*  Fauna  Boreali- Americana,  p.  273.


Ch.  III.]


BY  DOMESTICATION.


47


many  tame  races  wild.  Had  some  of  the  larger  carnivorous
beasts,  capable  of  scaling  the  rocks,  made  their  way  into  the
North  American  mountains  before  our  hunters,  a  similar  alter¬
ation  in  the  instincts  of  the  sheep  would  doubtless  have  been
brought  about.

Wild  elephants  domesticated  in  a  few  years. — No  animal
affords  a  more  striking  illustration  of  the  principal  points  we
have  been  endeavouring  to  establish  than  the  elephant.  For,
in  the  first  place,  the  wonderful  sagacity  with  which  he  accom¬
modates  himself  to  the  society  of  man,  and  the  new  habits
which  he  contracts,  are  not  the  result  of  time  nor  of  modifica¬
tions  produced  in  the  course  of  many  generations.  These
animals  will  breed  in  captivity,  as  is  now  ascertained  in  oppo¬
sition  to  the  vulgar  opinion  of  many  modern  naturalists,  and  in
conformity  to  that  of  the  ancients  dElian  and  Columella*.  Yet
it  has  always  been  the  custom,  as  the  least  expensive  mode  of
obtaining  them,  to  capture  wild  individuals  in  the  forests,  usu¬
ally  when  full  grown,  and  in  a  few  years  after  they  are  taken,
sometimes,  it  is  said,  in  the  space  of  a  few  months,  their  educa¬
tion  is  completed.

Had  the  whole  species  been  domesticated  from  an  early
period  in  the  history  of  man,  like  the  camel,  their  superior
intelligence  would  doubtless  have  been  attributed  to  their  long
and  familiar  intercourse  with  the  lord  of  the  creation  :  but
we  know  that  a  few  years  is  sufficient  to  bring  about  this  won¬
derful  change  of  habits ;  and,  although  the  same  individual
may  continue  to  receive  tuition  for  a  century  afterwards,  yet
it  makes  no  further  progress  in  the  general  development  of
its  faculties.  Were  it  otherwise,  indeed,  the  animal  would
soon  deserve  more  than  the  poet’s  epithet  of  f  half-reason-
ing.’

From  the  authority  of  our  countrymen  employed  in  the  late
Burmese  war,  it  appears,  in  corroboration  of  older  accounts,
that,  when  elephants  are  required  to  execute  extraordinary


*  Mr.  Corse  on  the  Habits,  &c.,  of  the  Elephant,  Phil.  Trans.,  1799.


48


MODIFICATIONS  OF  INSTINCTS


[Ch.  III.


tasks,  they  may  be  made  to  understand  that  they  will  receive
unusual  rewards.  Some  favourite  dainty  is  shown  to  them,  in
the  hope  of  acquiring  which  the  work  is  done.  And  so  per¬
fectly  does  the  nature  of  the  contract  appear  to  be  understood,
that  the  breach  of  it  on  the  part  of  the  master  is  often  attended
with  danger.  In  this  case,  a  power  has  been  given  to  the
species  to  adapt  their  social  instincts  to  new  circumstances
with  surprising  rapidity ;  but  the  extent  of  this  change  is  de¬
fined  by  strict  and  arbitrary  limits.  There  is  no  indication  of
a  tendency  to  continued  divergence  from  certain  attributes  with
which  the  elephant  was  originally  endued,  no  ground  whatever
for  anticipating  that,  in  thousands  of  centuries,  any  material
alteration  could  ever  be  effected.  All  that  we  can  infer  from
analogy  is,  that  some  useful  and  peculiar  races  might  probably
be  formed,  if  the  experiment  were  fairly  tried,  and  that  some
individual  characteristic,  now  only  casual  and  temporary,  might
be  perpetuated  by  generation.

In  all  cases,  therefore,  where  the  domestic  qualities  exist  in
animals,  they  seem  to  require  no  lengthened  process  for  their
development,  and  they  appear  to  have  been  wholly  denied  to
some  classes,  which  from  their  strength  and  social  nature
might  have  rendered  great  services  to  man  ;  as,  for  example,
the  greater  part  of  the  quadrumana.  The  orang-outang,
indeed,  which,  for  its  resemblance  in  form  to  man,  and  appa¬
rently  for  no  other  good  reason,  has  been  assumed  by  Lamarck
to  be  the  most  perfect  of  the  inferior  animals,  has  been  tamed
by  the  savages  of  Borneo,  and  made  to  climb  lofty  trees,  and
to  bring  down  the  fruit.  But  he  is  said  to  yield  to  his  mas¬
ters  an  unwilling  obedience,  and  to  be  held  in  subjection  only
by  severe  discipline.  We  know  nothing  of  the  faculties  of
this  animal  which  can  suggest  the  idea  that  it  rivals  the  ele¬
phant  in  intelligence,  much  less  anything  which  can  coun¬
tenance  the  dreams  of  those  who  have  fancied  that  it  might
have  been  transmuted  into  f  the  dominant  race.’  One  of  the
baboons  of  Sumatra  ( Simla  carpolegus)  appears  to  be  more
docile,  and  is  frequently  trained  by  the  inhabitants  to  ascend


Ch.  III.]


BY  DOMESTICATION.


49


trees  for  the  purpose  of  gathering  cocoa-nuts,  a  service  in
which  the  animal  is  very  expert.  He  selects,  says  Sir  Stam¬
ford  Raffles,  the  ripe  nuts  with  great  judgment,  and  pulls  no
more  than  he  is  ordered  *.  The  capuchin  and  cacajao  mon¬
keys  are,  according  to  Humboldt,  taught  to  ascend  trees  in  the
same  manner,  and  to  throw  down  fruit  on  the  banks  of  the
lower  Orinoco  j.

We  leave  it  to  the  Lamarckians  to  explain  how  it  happens
that  those  same  savages  of  Borneo  have  not  themselves  ac-

O

quired,  by  dint  of  longing  for  many  generations  for  the  power
of  climbing  trees,  the  elongated  arms  of  the  orang,  or  even
the  prehensile  tails  of  some  American  monkeys.  Instead  of
being  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  subjugating  stubborn  and
untractable  brutes,  we  should  naturally  have  anticipated  *  that
their  wants  would  have  excited  them  to  efforts,  and  that
continued  efforts  would  have  given  rise  to  new  organs or,
rather,  to  the  re-acquisition  of  organs  which,  in  a  manner  irre-
concileable  with  the  principle  of  the  progressive  system,  have
grown  obsolete  in  tribes  of  men  which  have  such  constant  need
of  them.

Recapitulation. — It  follows,  then,  from  the  different  facts
which  we  have  considered  in  this  chapter,  that  a  short  period
of  time  is  generally  sufficient  to  effect  nearly  the  whole  change
which  an  alteration  of  external  circumstances  can  bring  about
in  the  habits  of  a  species,  and  that  such  capacity  of  accommo¬
dation  to  new  circumstances  is  enjoyed  in  very  different  degrees
by  different  species.

Certain  qualities  appear  to  be  bestowed  exclusively  with  a
view  to  the  relations  which  are  destined  to  exist  between  differ¬
ent  species,  and,  among  others,  between  certain  species  and
man  ;  but  these  latter  are  always  so  nearly  connected  with  the
original  habits  and  propensities  of  each  species  in  a  wild  state,

*  Linn.  Trans.,  vol.  xiii.  p.  244.

f  Pers.  Narr.  of  Travels  to  the  Equinoctial  Regions  of  the  New  Continent  in
the  years  1799-1804.

Vol.  II.


E


50


RECAPITULATION.


[Ch.  III.


that  they  imply  no  indefinite  capacity  of  varying  from  the  ori¬
ginal  type.  The  acquired  habits  derived  from  human  tuition
are  rarely  transmitted  to  the  offspring  ;  and  when  this  happens,
it  is  almost  universally  the  case  with  those  merely  which  have
some  obvious  connexion  with  the  attributes  of  the  species  when
in  a  state  of  independence.


CHAPTER  IV.


Consideration  of  the  question  whether  species  have  a  real  existence  in  nature,
continued — Phenomena  of  hybrids— Hunter’s  opinions  as  to  mule  animals — ■
Mules  not  strictly  intermediate  between  the  parent  species- — Hybrid  plants —
Experiments  of  Kolreuter — The  same  repeated  by  Weigmann — Vegetable  hy¬
brids  prolific  throughout  several  generations — Why  so  rare  in  a  wild  state — >
De  Candolle’s  opinion  respecting  hybrid  plants — The  phenomena  of  hybrids
confirms  the  doctrine  of  the  permanent  distinctness  of  species — Theory  of  the
gradation  in  the  intelligence  of  animals  as  indicated  by  the  facial  angle — Dis¬
covery  of  Tiedemann  that  the  brain  of  the  foetus  in  mammalia  assumes  suc¬
cessively  the  form  of  the  brain  of  a  fish,  reptile,  and  bird — Bearing  of  this
discovery  on  the  theory  of  progressive  development  and  transmutation — Re¬
capitulation,

WHETHER  SPECIES  HAVE  A  REAL  EXISTENCE  IN  NATURE,

continued.

Phenomena  of  hybrids . — We  have  yet  to  consider  another
class  of  phenomena,  those  relating  to  the  production  of  hybrids,
which  have  been  regarded  in  a  very  different  light  with  refer¬
ence  to  their  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  permanent  distinct¬
ness  of  species ;  some  naturalists  considering  them  as  affording
the  strongest  of  all  proofs  in  favour  of  the  reality  of  species  ;
others,  on  the  contrary,  appealing  to  them  as  countenancing
the  opposite  doctrine,  that  all  the  varieties  of  organization  and
instinct  now  exhibited  in  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,
may  have  been  propagated  from  a  small  number  of  original
types.

HYBRID  ANIMALS.

In  regard  to  the  mammifers  and  birds,  it  is  found  that  no
sexual  union  will  take  place  between  races  which  are  remote
from  each  other  in  their  habits  and  organization ;  and  it  is
only  in  species  that  are  very  nearly  allied  that  such  unions
produce  offspring.  It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  general  rule,
admitting  of  very  few  exceptions  among  quadrupeds,  that  the


52


EXPERIMENTS  ON


[Ch.  IV.


hybrid  progeny  is  steril,  and  there  seem  to  be  no  well-authen¬
ticated  examples  of  the  continuance  of  the  mule  race  beyond
one  generation.  The  principal  number  of  observations  and
experiments  relate  to  the  mixed  offspring  of  the  horse  and  the
ass  ;  and  in  this  case  it  is  well  established  that  the  he-mule
can  generate,  and  the  she-mule  produce.  Such  cases  occur  in
Spain  and  Italy,  and  much  more  frequently  in  the  West  Indies
and  New  Holland  ;  but  these  mules  have  never  bred  in  cold
climates,  seldom  in  warm  regions,  and  still  more  rarely  in  tem¬
perate  countries.

The  hybrid  offspring  of  the  she-ass  and  the  stallion,  the
7 ivvos-  of  Aristotle,  and  the  hinnus  of  Pliny,  differs  from  the
mule,  or  the  offspring  of  the  ass  and  mare.  In  both  cases,
says  Buffon,  these  animals  retain  more  of  the  dam  than  of
the  sire,  not  only  in  the  magnitude  but  in  the  figure  of  the
body;  whereas,  in  the  form  of  the  head,  limbs,  and  tail,  they
bear  a  greater  resemblance  to  the  sire.  The  same  naturalist
infers,  from  various  experiments  respecting  cross-breeds  be¬
tween  the  he-goat  and  ewe,  the  dog  and  she-wolf,  the  goldfinch
and  canary-bird,  that  the  male  transmits  his  sex  to  the  greatest
number,  and  that  the  preponderance  of  males  over  females
exceeds  that  which  prevails  where  the  parents  are  of  the  same
species.

Hunter's  opinion .- — The  celebrated  John  Hunter  has  ob¬
served,  that  the  true  distinction  of  species  must  ultimately  be
gathered  from  their  incapacity  of  propagating  with  each  other,
and  producing  offspring  capable  of  again  continuing  itself.
He  was  unwilling,  however,  to  admit  that  the  horse  and  the
ass  were  of  the  same  species,  because  some  rare  instances  had
been  adduced  of  the  breeding  of  mules,  which  he  attributed  to
a  degree  of  monstrosity  in  the  organs  of  the  mule,  for  these  he
suggested  might  not  have  been  those  of  a  mixed  animal,  but
those  of  the  mare  or  female  ass.  ‘  This,’  he  argues,  "is  not  a
far-fetched  idea,  for  true  species  produce  monsters,  and  many
animals  of  distinct  sex  are  incapable  of  breeding  at  all ;  and  as
we  find  nature,  in  its  greatest  perfection,  deviating  from  gene-


Ch.  IV.]


HYBRID  ANIMALS.


53


ral  principles,  why  may  it  not  happen  likewise  in  the  production
of  mules,  so  that  sometimes  a  mule  shall  breed  from  the  cir¬
cumstance  of  its  being  a  monster  respecting  mules  ?’

That  the  dog ,  wolf,  and  jackal  are  the  same  species. — Yet,
in  the  same  memoir,  this  great  anatomist  inferred  that  the
wolf,  the  dog,  and  the  jackal  were  all  of  one  species,  because
he  had  found,  by  two  experiments,  that  the  dog  would  breed
both  with  the  wolf  and  the  jackal ;  and  that  the  mule,  in
each  case,  would  breed  again  with  the  dog.  In  these  cases,
however,  we  may  observe  that  there  was  always  one  parent  at
least  of  pure  breed,  and  no  proof  was  obtained  that  a  true
hybrid  race  could  be  perpetuated;  a  fact  of  which  we  believe
no  examples  are  yet  recorded,  either  in  regard  to  mixtures  of
the  horse  and  ass,  or  any  other  of  the  mammalia.

Should  the  fact  be  hereafter  ascertained,  that  two  mules
can  propagate  their  kind,  we  must  still  inquire  whether  the
offspring  may  not  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  monstrous
birth,  proceeding  from  some  accidental  cause,  or  rather,  to
speak  more  philosophically,  from  some  general  law  not  yet
understood,  but  which  may  not  be  permitted  permanently  to
interfere  with  those  laws  of  generation,  whereby  species  may,
in  general,  be  prevented  from  becoming  blended.  If,  for  ex¬
ample,  we  discovered  that  the  progeny  of  a  mule  race  degene¬
rated  greatly  in  the  first  generation,  in  force,  sagacity,  or  any
attribute  necessary  for  its  preservation  in  a  state  of  nature,
we  might  infer  that,  like  a  monster,  it  is  a  mere  temporary
and  fortuitous  variety.  Nor  does  it  seem  probable  that  the
greater  number  of  such  monsters  could  ever  occur  unless  ob-
tained  by  art ;  for  in  Hunter’s  experiments,  stratagem  or  force
was,  in  most  instances,  employed  to  bring  about  the  irregular
connexion  *.

Mules  not  strictly  intermediate  between  the  parent  species. —
It  seems  rarely  to  happen  that  the  mule  offspring  is  truly
intermediate  in  character  between  the  two  parents.  Thus
Hunter  mentions  that,  in  his  experiments,  one  of  the  hybrid
*  Phil.  Trans.,  1787.  Additional  Remarks,  Phil.  Trans.,  1789.


54


EXPERIMENTS  ON


[Ch.  IV.


pups  resembled  the  wolf  much  more  than  the  rest  of  the  lit¬
ter  ;  and  we  are  informed  by  Wiegmann  that,  in  a  litter  lately
obtained  in  the  Royal  Menagerie  at  Berlin,  from  a  white
pointer  and  a  she-wolf,  two  of  the  cubs  resembled  the  com¬
mon  wolf-dog,  but  the  third  was  like  a  pointer  with  hanging
ears.

There  is  undoubtedly  a  very  close  analogy  between  these
phenomena  and  those  presented  by  the  intermixture  of  distinct
races  of  the  same  species,  both  in  the  inferior  animals  and  in
man.  Dr.  Prichard,  in  his  6  Physical  History  of  Mankind,’
cites  examples  where  the  peculiarities  of  the  parents  have  been
transmitted  very  unequally  to  the  offspring ;  as  where  chil¬
dren,  entirely  white,  or  perfectly  black,  have  sprung  from  the
union  of  the  European  and  the  negro.  Sometimes  the  colour,
or  other  peculiarities  of  one  parent,  after  having  failed  to  show
themselves  in  the  immediate  progeny,  reappear  in  a  subsequent
generation,  as  where  a  white  child  is  born  of  two  black  parents,
the  grandfather  having  been  a  white  *.

The  same  author  judiciously  observes  that,  if  different  spe¬
cies  mixed  their  breed,  and  hybrid  races  were  often  propagated,
the  animal  world  would  soon  present  a  scene  of  confusion  ;  its
tribes  would  be  everywhere  blended  together,  and  we  should
perhaps  find  more  hybrid  creatures  than  genuine  and  uncor¬
rupted  races  f.

HYBRID  PLANTS.

Kolreuter's  experiments. — The  history  of  the  vegetable  king¬
dom  has  been  thought  to  afford  more  decisive  evidence  in
favour  of  the  theory  of  the  formation  of  new  and  permanent
species  from  hybrid  stocks.  The  first  accurate  experiments  in
illustration  of  this  curious  subject  appear  to  have  been  made
by  Kolreuter,  who  obtained  a  hybrid  from  two  species  of
tobacco,  Nicotiana  rustica  and  N.  paniculata,  which  differ
greatly  in  the  shape  of  their  leaves,  the  colour  of  the  corolla,
and  the  height  of  the  stem.  The  stigma  of  a  female  plant  of

*  Yol.  i.  p.  217.


f  Ibid.,  vul.  i.  p.  97.


Ch.  IV.]


HYBRID  PLANTS.


55


N.  rustica  was  impregnated  with  the  pollen  of  a  male  plant  of
N.  paniculata.  The  seed  ripened  and  produced  a  hybrid
which  was  intermediate  between  the  two  parents,  and  which,
like  all  the  hybrids  which  this  botanist  brought  up,  had  imper¬
fect  stamens.  He  afterwards  impregnated  this  hybrid  with
the  pollen  of  N.  paniculata ,  and  obtained  plants  which  much
more  resembled  the  last.  This  he  continued  through  several
generations,  until,  by  due  perseverance,  he  actually  changed
the  Nicotiana  rustica  into  the  Nicotiana  paniculata .

The  plan  of  impregnation  adopted  was  the  cutting  off  of  the
anthers  of  the  plant  intended  for  fructification  before  they
had  shed  pollen,  and  then  laying  on  foreign  pollen  upon  the
stigma.

Wiegmann' s  experiments. — The  same  experiment  has  since
been  repeated  with  success  by  Wiegmann,  who  found  that  h
could  bring  back  the  hybrids  to  the  exact  likeness  of  either
parent,  by  crossing  them  a  sufficient  number  of  times.

The  blending  of  the  characters  of  the  parent  stocks,  in  many
other  of  Wiegmann’s  experiments,  was  complete  ;  the  colour
and  shape  of  the  leaves  and  flowers,  and  even  the  scent,  being
intermediate,  as  in  the  offspring  of  the  two  species  of  verbascum.
An  intermarriage,  also,  between  the  common  onion  and  the  leek
(. Allium  cepa  and  A.  porrum )  gave  a  mule  plant,  which,  in  the
character  of  its  leaves  and  flowers,  approached  most  nearly  to
the  garden  onion,  but  had  the  elongated  bulbous  root  and  smell
of  the  leek.

The  same  botanist  remarks  that  vegetable  hybrids,  when
not  strictly  intermediate,  more  frequently  approach  the  female
than  the  male  parent  species,  but  they  never  exhibit  characters
foreign  to  both.  A  recross  with  one  of  the  original  stocks
generally  causes  the  mule  plant  to  revert  towards  that  stock  ;
but  this  is  not  always  the  case,  the  offspring  sometimes  conti¬
nuing  to  exhibit  the  character  of  a  full  hybrid.

In  general,  the  success  attending  the  production  and  per¬
petuity  of  hybrids  among  plants  depends,  as  in  the  animal
kingdom,  on  the  degree  of  proximity  between  the  species  inter-


56


RARITY  OF  HYBRIDS  AMONG


[Ch.  IV.


married.  If  their  organization  be  very  remote,  impregnation
never  takes  place  ;  if  somewhat  less  distant,  seeds  are  formed,
but  always  imperfect  and  steril.  The  next  degree  of  relation¬
ship  yields  hybrid  seedlings,  but  these  are  barren  ;  and  it  is
only  when  the  parent  species  are  very  nearly  allied  that  the
hybrid  race  may  be  perpetuated  for  several  generations.  Even
in  this  case,  the  best  authenticated  examples  seem  confined  to
the  crossing  of  hybrids  with  individuals  of  pure  breed.  In
none  of  the  experiments  most  accurately  detailed  does  it  appear
that  both  the  parents  were  mules.

Wiegmann  diversified  as  much  as  possible  his  mode  of  bring¬
ing  about  these  irregular  unions  among  plants.  He  often
sowed  parallel  rows,  near  to  each  other,  of  the  species  from
which  he  desired  to  breed,  and  instead  of  mutilating,  after
Kolreuter’s  fashion,  the  plants  of  one  of  the  parent  stocks,  he
merely  washed  the  pollen  off  their  anthers.  The  branches  of
the  plants  in  each  row  were  then  gently  bent  towards  each
other  and  intertwined,  so  that  the  wind,  and  numerous  insects,
as  they  passed  from  the  flowers  of  one  to  those  of  the  other
species,  carried  the  pollen  and  produced  fecundation.

Vegetable  hybrids  why  rare  in  a  wild  state. — The  same
observer  saw  a  good  exemplification  of  the  manner  in  which
hybrids  may  be  formed  in  a  state  of  nature.  Some  wallflowers
and  pinks  had  been  growing  in  a  garden,  in  a  dry  sunny  situ¬
ation,  and  their  stigmas  had  been  ripened  so  as  to  be  moist,
and  to  absorb  pollen  with  avidity,  although  their  anthers  were
not  yet  developed.  These  stigmas  became  impregnated  by
pollen  blown  from  some  other  adjacent  plants  of  the  same  spe¬
cies,  but  had  they  been  of  different  species,  and  not  too  remote
in  their  organization,  mule  races  must  have  resulted.

When,  indeed,  we  consider  how  busily  some  insects  have
been  shown  to  be  engaged  in  conveying  anther-dust  from  flower
to  flower,  especially  bees,  flower-eating  beetles,  and  the  like,  it
seems  a  most  enigmatical  problem  how  it  can  happen  that  pro¬
miscuous  alliances  between  distinct  species  are  not  perpetually


occurring.


Ch.  IV,]


PLANTS  IN  A  WILD  STATE.


57


How  continually  do  we  observe  the  bees  diligently  employed
in  collecting  the  red  and  yellow  powder  by  which  the  stamens  of
flowers  are  covered,  loading  it  on  their  hind  legs,  and  carrying
it  to  their  hive  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  their  young  !  In  thus
providing  for  their  own  progeny,  these  insects  assist  materially
the  process  of  fructification  *.  Few  of  our  readers  need  be
reminded  that  the  stamens  in  certain  plants  grow  on  different
blossoms  from  the  pistils,  and  unless  the  summit  of  the  pistil
be  touched  with  the  fertilizing  dust,  the  fruit  does  not  swell,
nor  the  seed  arrive  at  maturity.  It  is  by  the  help  of  bees
chiefly,  that  the  development  of  the  fruit  of  many  such  species
is  secured,  the  powder  which  they  have  collected  from  the
stamens  being  unconsciously  left  by  them  in  visiting  the  pistils.

H  ow  often,  during  the  heat  of  a  summer’s  day,  do  we  see
the  males  of  dioecious  plants,  such  as  the  yew-tree,  standing
separate  from  the  females,  and  sending  off  into  the  air,  upon
the  slightest  breath  of  wind,  clouds  of  buoyant  pollen  !  That
the  zephyr  should  so  rarely  intervene  to  fecundate  the  plants
of  one  species  with  the  anther  dust  of  others,  seems  almost  to
realize  the  converse  of  the  miracle  believed  by  the  credulous
herdsmen  of  the  Lusitanian  mares —

Ore  omnes  versse  in  Zephyrum,  stant  rupibus  altis,

Exceptantque  leves  auras  :  et  srepe  sine  ullis
Conjugiis,  vento  gravidae,  mirabile  dictuf.

But,  in  the  first  place,  it  appears  that  there  is  a  natural
aversion  in  plants,  as  well  as  in  animals,  to  irregular  sexual
unions ;  and  in  most  of  the  successful  experiments  in  the  ani¬
mal  and  vegetable  world,  some  violence  has  been  used  in  order
to  procure  impregnation.  The  stigma  imbibes,  slowly  and
reluctantly,  the  granules  of  the  pollen  of  another  species,  even
when  it  is  abundantly  covered  with  it;  and  if  it  happen  that,
during  this  period,  ever  so  slight  a  quantity  of  the  anther-dust
of  its  own  species  alight  upon  it,  this  is  instantly  absorbed,
and  the  effect  of  the  foreign  pollen  destroyed.  Besides,  it  does

*  See  Barton  on  the  Geography  of  Plants,  p.  67.
t  Georg,  lib.  iii.  273.


58


RARITY  OF  HYBRIDS  AMONG


[Ch.  IV.


not  often  happen  that  the  male  and  female  organs  of  fructifica¬
tion,  in  different  species,  arrive  at  a  state  of  maturity  at  pre¬
cisely  the  same  time.  Even  where  such  synchronism  does
prevail,  so  that  a  cross  impregnation  is  effected,  the  chances
are  very  numerous  against  the  establishment  of  a  hybrid  race.

If  we  consider  the  vegetable  kingdom  generally,  it  must  be
recollected,  that  even  of  the  seeds  which  are  well  ripened,  the
greater  part  are  either  eaten  by  insects,  birds,  and  other  ani¬
mals,  or  decay  for  want  of  room  and  opportunity  to  germinate.
Unhealthy  plants  are  the  first  which  are  cut  off  by  causes
prejudicial  to  the  species,  being  usually  stifled  by  more  vigorous
individuals  of  their  own  kind.  If,  therefore,  the  relative
fecundity  or  hardiness  of  hybrids  be  in  the  least  degree  inferior,
they  cannot  maintain  their  footing  for  many  generations,  even
if  they  were  ever  produced  beyond  one  generation  in  a  wild
state.  In  the  universal  struggle  for  existence,  the  right  of  the
strongest  eventually  prevails  ;  and  the  strength  and  durability
of  a  race  depends  mainly  on  its  prolificness,  in  which  hybrids
are  acknowledged  to  be  deficient.

Centaurea  hybrida ,  a  plant  which  never  bears  seed,  and  is
supposed  to  be  produced  by  the  frequent  intermixture  of  two
well-known  species  of  Centaurea,  grows  wild  upon  a  hill  near
Turin.  Ranunculus  lacerus ,  also  steril,  has  been  produced
accidentally  at  Grenoble,  and  near  Paris,  by  the  union  of  two
Ranunculi  ;  but  this  occurred  in  gardens*.

Mr.  Herbert'1  s  experiments — Mr.  Herbert  in  one  of  his  in¬
genious  papers  on  mule  plants,  endeavours  to  account  for  their
non-occurrence  in  a  state  of  nature,  from  the  circumstance  that
all  the  combinations  that  were  likely  to  occur,  have  already
been  made  many  centuries  ago,  and  have  formed  the  various
species  of  botanists  ;  but  in  our  gardens,  he  says,  whenever
species,  having  a  certain  degree  of  affinity  to  each  other,  are
transported  from  different  countries,  and  brought  for  the  first
time  into  contact,  they  give  rise  to  hybrid  species  f .  But  we
have  no  data,  as  yet,  to  warrant  the  conclusion,  that  a  single

*  Hon.  and  Rev.  W.  Herbert,  Ilort.  Trans.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  41.  f  Ibid,


Ch.  IV.]


PLANTS  IN  A  WILD  STATE.


59


permanent  hybrid  race  has  ever  been  formed,  even  in  gardens,
by  the  intermarriage  of  two  allied  species  brought  from  distant
habitations.  Until  some  fact  of  this  kind  is  fairly  established,
and  a  new  species,  capable  of  perpetuating  itself  in  a  state  of
perfect  independence  of  man,  can  be  pointed  out,  we  think  it
reasonable  to  call  in  question  entirely  this  hypothetical  source
of  new  species.  That  varieties  do  sometimes  spring  up  from
cross  breeds,  in  a  natural  way,  can  hardly  be  doubted,  but  they
probably  die  out  even  more  rapidly  than  races  propagated  by
grafts  or  layers.

Opinions  of  De  Candolle  respecting  hybrid  plants. — De
Candolle,  whose  opinion  on  a  philosophical  question  of  this
kind  deserves  the  greatest  attention,  has  observed,  in  his  Essay
on  Botanical  Geography,  that  the  varieties  of  plants  range
themselves  under  two  general  heads  :  those  produced  by  exter¬
nal  circumstances,  and  those  formed  by  hybridity.  After
adducing  various  arguments  to  show  that  neither  of  these

o  o

causes  can  explain  the  permanent  diversity  of  plants  indigenous
in  different  regions,  he  says,  in  regard  to  the  crossing  of  races,
*  I  can  perfectly  comprehend,  without  altogether  sharing  the
opinion,  that  where  many  species  of  the  same  genera  occur  near
together,  hybrid  species  may  be  formed,  and  I  am  aware  that
the  great  number  of  species  of  certain  genera  which  are  found
in  particular  regions  may  be  explained  in  this  manner ;  but
I  am  unable  to  conceive  how  any  one  can  regard  the  same
explanation  as  applicable  to  species  which  live  naturally  at  great
distances.  If  the  three  larches,  for  example,  now  known  in  the
world,  lived  in  the  same  localities,  I  might  then  believe  that
one  of  them  was  the  produce  of  the  crossing  of  the  two  others  ;
but  I  never  could  admit  that  the  Siberian  species  has  been
produced  by  the  crossing  of  those  of  Europe  and  America.  I
see,  then,  that  there  exist,  in  organized  beings,  permanent  dif¬
ferences  which  cannot  be  referred  to  any  one  of  the  actual
causes  of  variation,  and  these  differences  are  what  constitute
species


*  Essai  Elementaire,  &c.  3me.  pavtie.


60


DIFFICULTIES  ATTENDING  THE


[Ch.  IV.


Distinctness  of  species  confirmed  by  the  phenomena  of  hy¬
brids. — The  most  decisive  arguments,  perhaps,  amongst  many
others,  against  the  probability  of  the  derivation  of  permanent
species  from  cross  breeds,  are  to  be  drawn  from  the  fact  alluded
to  by  De  Candolle,  of  species  having  a  close  affinity  to  each
other  occurring  in  distinct  botanical  provinces,  or  countries
inhabited  by  groups  of  distinct  species  of  indigenous  plants.
For  in  this  case  naturalists  who  are  not  prepared  to  go  the
whole  length  of  the  transmutationists,  are  under  the  necessity
of  admitting,  that  in  some  cases  species  which  approach  very
near  to  each  other  in  their  characters,  were  so  created  from  their
origin ;  an  admission  fatal  to  the  idea  of  its  being  a  general
law  of  nature,  that  a  few  original  types  only  should  be  formed,
and  that  all  intermediate  races  should  spring  from  the  inter¬
mixture  of  those  stocks.

This  notion,  indeed,  is  wholly  at  variance  with  all  that  we
know  of  hybrid  generation  ;  for  the  phenomena  entitle  us  to
affirm,  that  had  the  types  been  at  first  somewhat  distant,  no
cross-breeds  would  ever  have  been  produced,  much  less  those
prolific  races  which  we  now  recognise  as  distinct  species.

Difficulties  attending  the  propagation  of  hybrid  races. — In
regard,  moreover,  to  the  permanent  propagation  of  hybrid
races  among  animals,  insuperable  difficulties  present  them¬
selves,  when  we  endeavour  to  conceive  the  blending  together  of
the  different  instincts  and  propensities  of  two  species,  so  as  to
insure  the  preservation  of  the  intermediate  race.  The  common
mule,  when  obtained  by  human  art,  may  be  protected  by  the
power  of  man ;  but  in  a  wild  state,  it  would  neither  have  pre¬
cisely  the  same  wants  as  the  horse  or  the  ass :  and  if,  in  con¬
sequence  of  some  difference  of  this  kind,  it  strayed  from  the
herd,  it  would  soon  be  hunted  down  by  beasts  of  prey  and
destroyed.

If  we  take  some  genus  of  insects,  such  as  the  bee,  we  find
that  each  of  the  numerous  species  has  some  difference  in  its
habits,  its  mode  of  collecting  honey,  or  constructing  its  dwell¬
ing,  or  providing  for  its  young,  and  other  particulars.  In


Ch.  IV.]


PROPAGATION  OF  HYBRIDS.


61


the  case  of  the  common  hive-bee,  the  workers  are  described,  by
Kirby  and  Spence,  as  being  endowed  with  no  less  than  thirty
distinct  instincts  *.  So  also  we  find  that  amongst  a  most
numerous  class  of  spiders,  there  are  nearly  as  many  different
modes  of  spinning  their  webs  as  there  are  species.  When  we
recollect  how  complicated  are  the  relations  of  these  instincts
with  co-existing  species,  both  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  king¬
doms,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  imagine  that  a  bastard  race  could
spring  from  the  union  of  two  of  these  species,  and  retain  just
so  much  of  the  qualities  of  each  parent  stock  as  to  preserve  its
ground  in  spite  of  the  dangers  which  surround  it.

We  should  also  ask,  if  a  few  generic  types  alone  have  been
created  among  insects,  and  the  intermediate  species  have  pro¬
ceeded  from  hybridity,  where  are  those  original  types,  com¬
bining,  as  they  ought  to  do,  the  elements  of  all  the  instincts
which  have  made  their  appearance  in  the  numerous  derivative
races?  So  also  in  regard  to  animals  of  all  classes,  and  of
plants  ;  if  species  in  general  are  of  hybrid  origin,  where  are
the  stocks  which  combine  in  themselves  the  habits,  properties,
and  organs,  of  which  all  the  intervening  species  ought  to  afford
us  mere  modifications  ?

Recapitulation  of  the  arguments  from  hybrids . — Wesh  all
now  conclude  this  subject  by  summing  up,  in  a  few  words,  the
results  to  which  the  consideration  of  the  phenomena  of  hybrids
has  led  us.  It  appears  that  the  aversion  of  individuals  of  dis¬
tinct  species  to  the  sexual  union  is  common  to  animals  and
plants,  and  that  it  is  only  when  the  species  approach  near  to
each  other  in  their  organization  and  habits,  that  any  offspring
are  produced  from  their  connexion.  Mules  are  of  extremely
rare  occurrence  in  a  state  of  nature,  and  no  examples  are  yet
known  of  their  having  procreated  in  a  wild  state.  But  it  has
been  proved,  that  hybrids  are  not  universally  steril,  provided
the  parent  stocks  have  a  near  affinity  to  each  other,  although
the  continuation  of  the  mixed  race,  for  several  generations,

*  lutr.  to  Eatom.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  504.  Ed.  1817.


G2


HYBRIDS.


[Ch.  IV.


appears  hitherto  to  have  been  obtained  only  by  crossing  the
hybrids  with  individuals  of  pure  species,  an  experiment  which
by  no  means  bears  out  the  hypothesis  that  a  true  hybrid  race
could  ever  be  permanently  established.

Hence  we  may  infer,  that  aversion  to  sexual  intercourse  is,
in  general,  a  good  test  of  the  distinctness  of  original  stocks,  or
of  species ,  and  the  procreation  of  hybrids  is  a  proof  of  the  very
near  affinity  of  species.  Perhaps,  hereafter,  the  number  of
generations  for  which  hybrids  may  be  continued,  before  the
race  dies  out  (for  it  seems  usually  to  degenerate  rapidly),  may
afford  the  zoologist  and  botanist  an  experimental  test  of  the
difference  in  the  degree  of  affinity  of  allied  species.

We  may  also  remark,  that  if  it  could  have  been  shown  that
a  single  permanent  species  had  ever  been  produced  by  hybri-
dity  (of  which  there  is  no  satisfactory  proof),  it  might  cer¬
tainly  have  lent  some  countenance  to  the  notions  of  the  ancients
respecting  the  gradual  deterioration  of  created  things,  but  none
whatever  to  Lamarck’s  theory  of  their  progressive  perfecti¬
bility;  for  observations  have  hitherto  shown  that  there  is  a
tendency,  in  mule  animals  and  plants,  to  degenerate  in  orga¬
nization.

We  have  already  remarked,  that  the  theory  of  progressive
development  arose  from  an  attempt  to  ingraft  the  doctrines  of
the  transmutationists  upon  one  of  the  most  popular  generaliza¬
tions  in  geology.  But  modern  geological  researches  have  almost
destroyed  every  appearance  of  that  gradation  in  the  successive
groups  of  animate  beings,  which  was  supposed  to  indicate  the
slow  progress  of  the  organic  world  from  the  more  simple  to  the
more  compound  structure.  In  the  more  modern  formations,
we  find  clear  indications  that  the  highest  orders  of  the  terres¬
trial  mammalia  were  fully  represented  during  several  successive
epochs ;  but  in  the  monuments  which  we  have  hitherto  exa¬
mined  of  more  remote  eras,  in  which  there  are  as  yet  discovered
few  fluviatile,  and  perhaps  no  lacustrine  formations,  and,  there¬
fore,  scarcely  any  means  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  the  zoology


Ch.  IV.]


FACIAL  ANGLE.


63


of  the  then  existing  continents,,  we  have  only  as  yet  found  one
example  of  a  mammiferous  quadruped.  The  recent  origin  of
man,  and  the  absence  of  all  signs  of  any  rational  being  holding
an  analogous  relation  to  former  states  of  the  animate  world,
affords  one,  and  the  only  reasonable  argument,  in  support  of  the
hypothesis  of  a  progressive  scheme,  but  none  whatever  in  favour
of  the  fancied  evolution  of  one  species  out  of  another.

Theory  of  the  gradation  in  Intellect  as  shown  hy  the  facial
angle. — When  the  celebrated  anatomist.  Camper,  first  at¬
tempted  to  estimate  the  degrees  of  sagacity  of  different  animals,
and  of  the  races  of  man,  by  the  measurement  of  the  facial  angle,
some  speculators  were  bold  enough  to  affirm,  that  certain  simim
differed  as  little  from  the  more  savage  races  of  men,  as  do
these  from  the  human  race  in  general ;  and  that  a  scale  might
be  traced  from  ‘  apes  with  foreheads  villanous  low,’  to  the
African  variety  of  the  human  species,  and  from  that  to  the
European.  The  facial  angle  was  measured  by  drawing  a  line
from  the  prominent  centre  of  the  forehead  to  the  most  advanced
part  of  the  lower  jaw-bone,  and  observing  the  angle  which  it
made  with  the  horizontal  line  ;  and  it  was  affirmed,  that  there
was  a  regular  series  from  birds  to  the  mammalia.

The  gradation  from  the  dog  to  the  monkey  was  said  to  be
perfect,  and  from  that  again  to  man.  One  of  the  ape  tribe  has
a  facial  angle  of  42",  and  another,  which  approximated  nearest
to  man  in  figure,  an  angle  of  50°.  To  this  succeeds  (longo  sed
proximus  intervallo)  the  head  of  the  African  negro,  which,  as
well  as  that  of  the  Kalmuc,  forms  an  angle  of  70°,  while  that  of
the  European  contains  80°.  The  Roman  painters  preferred
the  angle  of  95°,  and  the  character  of  beauty  and  sublimity,  so
striking  in  some  works  of  Grecian  sculpture,  as  in  the  head  of
Apollo,  and  in  the  Medusa  of  Sisocles,  is  given  by  an  angle
which  amounts  to  100°  *.

A  great  number  of  valuable  facts  and  curious  analogies  in
comparative  anatomy,  were  brought  to  light  during  the  inves¬
tigations  which  were  made  by  Camper,  John  Hunter  and
*  Prichard’s  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  159.


64


DIFFERENT  RACES  OF  MEN.


[Ch.  IV.


others,  to  illustrate  this  scale  of  organization;  and  their  facts
and  generalizations  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  fanciful
systems  which  White  and  others  deduced  from  them  *.

That  there  is  some  connexion  between  an  elevated  and  capa¬
cious  forehead  in  certain  races  of  men,  and  a  large  development
of  the  intellectual  faculties,  seems  highly  probable  ;  and  that  a
low  facial  angle  is  frequently  accompanied  with  inferiority  of
mental  powers,  is  certain  ;  but  the  attempt  to  trace  a  graduated
scale  of  intelligence  through  the  different  species  of  animals
accompanying  the  modifications  of  the  form  of  the  skull,  is  a
mere  visionary  speculation.  It  has  been  found  necessary  to
exaggerate  the  sagacity  of  the  ape  tribe  at  the  expense  of  the
dog,  and  strange  contradictions  have  arisen  in  the  conclusions
deduced  from  the  structure  of  the  elephant,  some  anatomists
being  disposed  to  deny  the  quadruped  the  intelligence  which
he  really  possesses,  because  they  found  that  the  volume  of  his
brain  was  small  in  comparison  to  that  of  the  other  mammalia,
while  others  were  inclined  to  magnify  extravagantly  the  supe¬
riority  of  its  intellect,  because  the  vertical  height  of  its  skull
is  so  great  when  compared  to  its  horizontal  length.

Different  races  of  men  belong  all  to  one  species. — It  would  be
irrelevant  to  our  subject  if  we  were  to  enter  into  a  farther  dis¬
cussion  on  these  topics,  because,  even  if  a  graduated  scale  of  or¬
ganization  and  intelligence  could  have  been  established,  it  would
prove  nothing  in  favour  of  a  tendency,  in  each  species,  to  attain
a  higher  state  of  perfection.  We  may  refer  the  reader  to  the
writings  of  Blumenbach,  Prichard,  Lawrence,  and  others,
for  convincing  proofs  that  the  varieties  of  form,  colour,  and
organization  of  different  races  of  men,  are  perfectly  consistent
with  the  generally  received  opinion,  that  all  the  individuals
of  the  species  have  originated  from  a  single  pair  ;  and  while
they  exhibit  in  man  as  many  diversities  of  a  physiological  na¬
ture,  as  appear  in  any  other  species,  they  confirm  also  the
opinion  of  the  slight  deviation  from  a  common  standard  of  which
a  species  is  capable.

*  Ch.  White  on  the  regular  Gradation  in  Man,  &c.,  1799.


Ch.  IV.]


DISCOVERIES  OF  TIEDEMANN.


65


The  power  of  existing  and  multiplying  in  every  latitude,  and
in  every  variety  of  situation  and  climate,  which  has  enabled  the
great  human  family  to  extend  itself  over  the  habitable  globe,  is
partly,  says  Lawrence,  the  result  of  physical  constitution,  and
partly  of  the  mental  prerogative  of  man.  If  he  did  not  possess
the  most  enduring  and  flexible  corporeal  frame,  his  arts  would
not  enable  him  to  be  the  inhabitant  of  all  climates,  and  to  brave
the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  and  the  other  destructive  in¬
fluences  of  local  situation  *.  Yet,  notwithstanding  this  flexi¬
bility  of  bodily  frame,  we  And  no  signs  of  indefinite  departure
from  a  common  standard,  and  the  intermarriages  of  individuals
of  the  most  remote  varieties  are  not  less  fruitful  than  between
those  of  the  same  tribe.

Tiedemann  on  the  brain  of  the  foetus  in  vertebrated  animals.
■ — There  is  yet  another  department  of  anatomical  discovery,  to
which  we  must  not  omit  some  allusion,  because  it  has  appeared
to  some  persons  to  afford  a  distant  analogy,  at  least,  to  that
progressive  development  by  which  some  of  the  inferior  species
may  have  been  gradually  perfected  into  those  of  more  complex
organization,  Tiedemann  found,  and  his  discoveries  have  been
most  fully  confirmed  and  elucidated  by  M.  Serres,  that  the
brain  of  the  foetus,  in  the  highest  class  of  vertebrated  animals,
assumes,  in  succession,  the  various  forms  which  belong  to  fishes,
reptiles,  and  birds,  before  it  acquires  those  additions  and  modi¬
fications  which  are  peculiar  to  the  mammiferous  tribe.  So  that
in  the  passage  from  the  embryo  to  the  perfect  mammifer,  there
is  a  typical  representation,  as  it  were,  of  all  those  transforma¬
tions  which  the  primitive  species  are  supposed  to  have  under¬
gone,  during  a  long  series  of  generations,  between  the  present
period  and  the  remotest  geological  era.

If  you  examine  the  brain  of  the  mammalia,  says  M.  Serres,
at  an  early  stage  of  uterine  life,  you  perceive  the  cerebral  hemi¬
spheres  consolidated,  as  in  fish,  in  two  vesicles  isolated  one  from
the  other;  at  a  later  period,  you  see  them  affect  the  configura¬
tion  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  of  reptiles  ;  still  later  again,

*  Lawrence,  Lectures  on  Phys.  Zool.  and  Nat.  Hist,  of  Man,  p,  192.  Ed.  1823.

Vol.  II.  F


DISCOVERIES  OF  TIEDEMANN.


[Ch.  IV.


68

they  present  you  with  the  forms  of  those  of  birds  ;  finally,  they
acquire,  at  the  era  of  birth,  and  sometimes  later,  the  permanent
forms  which  the  adult  mammalia  present.

The  cerebral  hemispheres,  then,  only  arrive  at  the  state
which  we  observe  in  the  higher  animals  by  a  series  of  successive
metamorphoses.  If  we  reduce  the  whole  of  these  evolutions
to  four  periods,  we  shall  see  that  in  the  first  are  born  the  cere¬
bral  lobes  of  fishes,  and  this  takes  place  homogeneously  in  all
classes.  The  second  period  will  give  us  the  organization  of
reptiles  ;  the  third  the  brain  of  birds  ;  and  the  fourth  the  com¬
plex  hemispheres  of  mammalia.

If  we  could  develop  the  different  parts  of  the  brain  of  the
inferior  classes,  we  should  make  in  succession  a  reptile  out  of  a
fish,  a  bird  out  of  a  reptile,  and  a  mammiferous  quadruped  out
of  a  bird.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  could  starve  this  organ  in
the  mammalia,  we  might  reduce  it  successively  to  the  condition
of  the  brain  of  the  three  inferior  classes.

Nature  often  presents  us  with  this  last  phenomenon  in  mon¬
sters,  but  never  exhibits  the  first.  Among  the  various  defor¬
mities  which  organized  beings  may  experience,  they  never  pass
the  limits  of  their  own  classes  to  put  on  the  forms  of  the  class
above  them.  Never  does  a  fish  elevate  itself  so  as  to  assume
the  form  of  the  brain  of  a  reptile  ;  nor  does  the  latter  ever
attain  that  of  birds  ;  nor  the  bird  that  of  the  matnmifer.  It
may  happen  that  a  monster  may  have  two  heads,  but  the  con¬
formation  of  the  brain  always  remains  circumscribed  narrowly
within  the  limits  of  its  class  *.

Bearing  of  these  discoveries  on  the  theory  of  progressive
development. — It  will  be  observed,  that  these  curious  pheno¬
mena  disclose,  in  a  highly  interesting  manner,  the  unity  of  plan
that  runs  through  the  organization  of  the  whole  series  of  ver-
tebrated  animals  ;  but  they  lend  no  support  whatever  to  the
notion  of  a  gradual  transmutation  of  one  species  into  another,
least  of  all  of  the  passage,  in  the  course  of  many  generations,

*  E.  R.  A.  Serres,  Anatomie  Compare  du  Cerveau,  illustrated  by  numerous
plates,  tome  i.,  1824.


Ch.  IV.]


RECAPITULATION.


67


from  an  animal  of  a  more  simple,  to  one  of  a  more  complex
structure.  On  the  contrary,  were  it  not  for  the  sterility  im¬
posed  on  monsters,  as  well  as  on  hybrids  in  general,  the  argu¬
ment  to  be  derived  from  Tiedemann’s  discovery,  like  that
deducible  from  experiments  respecting  hybridity,  would  be  in
favour  of  the  successive  degeneracy ,  rather  than  the  perfec¬
tibility,  in  the  course  of  ages,  of  certain  classes  of  organic
beings.

Recapitulation.— For  the  reasons,  therefore,  detailed  in  this
and  the  two  preceding  chapters,  we  draw  the  following  infer¬
ences,  in  regard  to  the  reality  of  species  in  nature.

First,  That  there  is  a  capacity  in  all  species  to  accommo¬
date  themselves,  to  a  certain  extent,  to  a  change  of  external
circumstances,  this  extent  varying  greatly  according  to  the
species.

2dly.  When  the  change  of  situation  which  they  can  endure
is  great,  it  is  usually  attended  by  some  modifications  of  the
form,  colour,  size,  structure,  or  other  particulars ;  but  the
mutations  thus  superinduced  are  governed  by  constant  laws,
and  the  capability  of  so  varying  forms  part  of  the  permanent
specific  character.

3dly.  Some  acquired  peculiarities  of  form,  structure,  and
instinct,  are  transmissible  to  the  offspring;  but  these  consist  of
such  qualities  and  attributes  only  as  are  intimately  related  to
the  natural  wants  and  propensities  of  the  species.

4thly.  The  entire  variation  from  the  original  type,  which
any  given  kind  of  change  can  produce,  may  usually  be  effected
in  a  brief  period  of  time,  after  which  no  farther  deviation  can
be  obtained  by  continuing  to  alter  the  circumstances,  though
ever  so  gradually, — indefinite  divergence,  either  in  the  way  of
improvement  or  deterioration,  being  prevented,  and  the  least
possible  excess  beyond  the  defined  limits  being  fatal  to  the
existence  of  the  individual.

5thly.  The  intermixture  of  distinct  species  is  guarded  against
by  the  aversion  of  the  individuals  composing  them  to  sexual
union,  or  by  the  sterility  of  the  mule  offspring.  It  does  not


G8


RECAPITULATION.


[Ch.  IV.


appear  that  true  hybrid  races  have  ever  been  perpetuated  for
several  generations,  even  by  the  assistance  of  man  ;  for  the
cases  usually  cited  relate  to  the  crossing  of  mules  with  indi¬
viduals  of  pure  species,  and  not  to  the  intermixture  of  hybrid
with  hybrid.

6thly.  From  the  above  considerations,  it  appears  that  species
have  a  real  existence  in  nature,  and  that  each  was  endowed,  at
the  time  of  its  creation,  with  the  attributes  and  organization  by
which  it  is  now  distinguished.


CHAPTER  V.


Laws  which  regulate  the  geographical  distribution  of  species — Analogy  of  climate
not  attended  with  identity  of  species — Botanical  geography — Stations — Habi¬
tations — Distinct  provinces  of  indigenous  plants — Vegetation  of  islands —
Marine  vegetation — In  what  manner  plants  become  diffused — Effects  of  wind,
rivers,  marine  currents — Agency  of  animals — Many  seeds  pass  through  the
stomachs  of  animals  and  birds  undigested — Agency  of  man  in  the  dispersion
of  plants,  both  voluntary  and  involuntary — Its  analogy  to  that  of  the  inferior
animals.

LAWS  WHICH  REGULATE  THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION

OF  SPECIES.

Next  to  determining  the  question  whether  species  have  a  real
existence,  the  consideration  of  the  laws  which  regulate  their
geographical  distribution  is  a  subject  of  primary  importance
to  the  geologist.  It  is  only  by  studying  these  laws  with  atten¬
tion,  by  observing  the  position  which  groups  of  species  occupy
at  present,  and  inquiring  how  these  may  be  varied  in  the
course  of  time  by  migrations,  by  changes  in  physical  geography,
and  other  causes,  that  we  can  hope  to  learn  whether  the  dura¬
tion  of  species  be  limited,  or  in  what  manner  the  state  of  the
animate  world  is  affected  by  the  endless  vicissitudes  of  the
inanimate.

Different  regions  inhabited  by  distinct  species. — That  dif¬
ferent  regions  of  the  globe  are  inhabited  by  entirely  distinct
animals  and  plants  is  a  fact  which  has  been  familiar  to  all
naturalists  since  Buffon  first  pointed  out  the  want  of  specific
identity  between  the  land  quadrupeds  of  America  and  those  of
the  Old  World.  The  same  phenomenon  has,  in  later  times,
been  forced,  in  a  striking  manner,  upon  our  attention,  by  the
examination  of  New  Holland,  where  the  indigenous  species  of
animals  and  plants  were  found  to  be,  almost  without  exception,
distinct  from  those  known  in  other  parts  of  the  world.

But  the  extent  of  this  parcelling  out  of  the  globe  amongst
different  nations ,  as  they  have  been  termed,  of  plants  and  ani-


70


BOTANICAL  GEOGRAPHY.


[Ch.  V.


mals,— the  universality  of  a  phenomenon  so  extraordinary  and
unexpected,  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the  most  interesting
facts  clearly  established  by  the  advance  of  modern  science.

Scarcely  fourteen  hundred  species  of  plants  appear  to  have
been  known  and  described  by  the  Greeks,  Homans,  and
Arabians.  At  present,  more  than  three  thousand  species  are
enumerated,  as  natives  of  our  own  island  *.  In  other  parts  of
the  world  there  have  been  collected,  perhaps,  upwards  of
seventy  thousand  species.  It  was  not  to  be  supposed,  there¬
fore,  that  the  ancients  should  have  acquired  any  correct  notions
respecting  what  may  be  called  the  geography  of  plants,  although
the  influence  of  climate  on  the  character  of  the  vegetation
could  hardly  have  escaped  their  observation.

Analogy  of  climate  not  attended  ivith  identity  of  species. —
Antecedently  to  investigation,  there  was  no  reason  for  pre¬
suming  that  the  vegetable  productions,  growing  wild  in  the
eastern  hemisphere,  should  be  unlike  those  of  the  western,
in  the  same  latitude ;  nor  that  the  plants  of  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  should  be  unlike  those  of  the  South  of  Europe;  situa¬
tions  where  the  climate  is  little  dissimilar.  The  contrary  sup¬
position  would  have  seemed  more  probable,  and  we  might  have
anticipated  an  almost  perfect  identity  in  the  animals  and  plants
which  inhabit  corresponding  parallels  of  latitude.  The  dis¬
covery,  therefore,  that  each  separate  region  of  the  globe,  both
of  the  land  and  water,  is  occupied  by  distinct  groups  of
species,  and  that  most  of  the  exceptions  to  this  general  rule
may  be  referred  to  disseminating  causes  now  in  operation,  is
eminently  calculated  to  excite  curiosity,  and  to  stimulate  us  to
seek  some  hypothesis  respecting  the  first  introduction  of  species
which  may  be  reconcileable  with  such  phenomena.

BOTANICAL  GEOGRAPHY.

A  comparison  of  the  plants  of  different  regions  of  the  globe
affords  results  more  to  be  depended  upon  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge  than  those  relating  to  the  animal  kingdom,

*  Barton’s  Lectures  on  the  Geography  of  Plants,  p.  2.


Ch.  V.]


BOTANICAL  GEOGRAPHY.


71


because  the  science  of  botany  is  more  advanced,  and  probably
comprehends  a  great  proportion  of  the  total  number  of  the
vegetable  productions  of  the  whole  earth.

Humboldt. — Humboldt,  in  several  eloquent  passages  of  his
Personal  Narrative,  was  among  the  first  to  promulgate  philo¬
sophical  views  on  this  subject.  Every  hemisphere,  says  tins
traveller,  produces  plants  of  different  species  ;  and  it  is  not  by
the  diversity  of  climates  that  we  can  attempt  to  explain  why
equinoctial  Africa  has  no  lauriniae,  and  the  New  World  no
heaths;  why  the  calceolarias  are  found  only  in  the  southern
hemisphere  ;  why  the  birds  of  the  continent  of  India  glow  with
colours  less  splendid  than  the  birds  of  the  hot  parts  of  America  ;
finally,  why  the  tiger  is  peculiar  to  Asia,  and  the  ornitho-
rhynchus  to  New  Holland*.

c  We  can  conceive,’  he  adds,  6  that  a  small  number  of  the
families  of  plants,  for  instance  the  musaceae  and  the  palms,
cannot  belong  to  very  cold  regions,  on  account  of  their  internal
structure  and  the  importance  of  certain  organs  ;  but  we  cannot
explain  why  no  one  of  the  family  of  melastomas  vegetates  north
of  the  parallel  of  thirty  degrees  ;  or  why  no  rose-tree  belongs  to
the  southern  hemisphere.  Analogy  of  climates  is  often  found
in  the  two  continents  without  identity  of  productions  j\’

De  Candolle. — The  luminous  essay  of  He  Candolle  on
‘  Botanical  Geography’  presents  us  with  the  fruits  of  his  own
researches  and  those  of  Humboldt,  Brown,  and  other  eminent
botanists,  so  arranged,  that  the  principal  phenomena  of  the
distribution  of  plants  are  exhibited  in  connexion  with  the
causes  to  which  they  are  chiefly  referriblef.  6  It  might  not,
perhaps,  be  difficult,’  observes  this  writer,  f  to  find  two  points,
in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  or  in  equinoctial  America
and  Africa,  which  present  all  the  same  circumstances :  as  for
example,  the  same  temperature,  the  same  height  above  the  sea*

*  Pers.  Nar.  vol.  v.  p.  180.  f  Ibid.

|  Essai  Elementaire  de  Geographie  Botanique.  Extrait  du  18e  vol.  du  Diet,
des  Sci.  Nat.


72


STATIONS  AND  HABITATIONS  OF  PLANTS.


[CJh.  V.


a  similar  soil,  an  equal  dose  of  humidity,  yet  nearly  all,  perhaps
all ,  the  plants  in  these  two  similar  localities  shall  be  distinct.
A  certain  degree  of  analogy,  indeed,  of  aspect,  and  even  of
structure,  might  very  possibly  be  discoverable  between  the
plants  of  the  two  localities  in  question,  but  the  species  w'ould
in  general  be  different.  Circumstances,  therefore,  different
from  those  which  now  determine  the  stations ,  have  had  an
influence  on  the  habitations  of  plants.’

Stations  and  habitations  of  plants. — As  we  shall  frequently
have  occasion  to  speak  of  the  stations  and  habitations  of  plants
in  the  technical  sense  in  which  the  terms  are  used  in  the  above
passage,  we  may  remind  the  geological  reader  that  station  in¬
dicates  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  locality  where  each  species  is
accustomed  to  grow,  and  has  reference  to  climate,  soil,  humi¬
dity,  light,  elevation  above  the  sea,  and  other  analogous  cir¬
cumstances  ;  whereas  by  habitation  is  meant  a  general  indication
of  the  country  where  a  plant  grows  wild.  Thus  the  station  of
a  plant  may  be  a  salt-marsh,  in  a  temperate  climate,  a  hill-side,
the  bed  of  the  sea,  or  a  stagnant  pool.  Its  habitation  may  be
Europe,  North  America,  or  New  Holland  between  the  tropics.
The  study  of  stations  has  been  styled  the  topography,  that  of
habitations  the  geography  of  botany.  The  terms  thus  defined,
express  each  a  distinct  class  of  ideas,  which  have  been  often
confounded  together,  and  which  are  equally  applicable  in
zoology.

Distinct  provinces  of  indigenous  plants. — In  further  illus¬
tration  of  the  principle  above  alluded  to,  that  difference  of  lon¬
gitude,  independently  of  any  influence  of  temperature,  is
accompanied  by  a  great,  and  sometimes  a  complete  diversity  in
the  species  of  plants,  He  Candolle  observes,  that  out  of  2891
species  of  phanerogamic  plants  described  by  Pursh,  in  the
United  States,  there  are  only  385  which  are  found  in  northern
or  temperate  Europe.  MM.  Humboldt  and  Bonpland,  in  all
their  travels  through  equinoctial  America,  found  only  twenty-
four  species  (these  being  all  cyperacea  and  graminea)  common


Ch.  V.]


VEGETATION  OF  ISLANDS.


73


to  America  and  any  part  of  the  Old  World.  On  comparing
New  Holland  with  Europe,  Mr.  Brown  ascertained  that  out  of
4100  species,  discovered  in  Australia,  there  were  only  166
common  to  Europe,  and  of  this  small  number  there  were  some
few  which  may  have  been  transported  thither  by  man.

But  it  is  still  more  remarkable,  that  in  the  more  widely-
separated  parts  of  the  ancient  continent,  notwithstanding  the
existence  of  an  uninterrupted  land-communication,  the  diver¬
sity  in  the  specific  character  of  the  respective  vegetations  is
almost  as  striking.  Thus  there  is  found  one  assemblage  of
species  in  China,  another  in  the  countries  bordering  the  Black
Sea  and  the  Caspian,  a  third  in  those  surrounding  the  Mediter¬
ranean,  a  fourth  in  the  great  platforms  of  Siberia  and  Tartary,
and  so  forth.

The  distinctness  of  the  groups  of  indigenous  plants,  in  the
same  parallel  of  latitude,  is  greatest  where  continents  are  dis¬
joined  by  a  wide  expanse  of  ocean.  In  the  northern  hemi¬
sphere,  near  the  Pole,  where  the  extremities  of  Europe,  Asia,
and  America  unite  or  approach  near  to  one  another,  a  consider¬
able  number  of  the  same  species  of  plants  are  found,  common
to  the  three  continents.  But  it  has  been  remarked,  that  these
plants,  which  are  thus  so  widely  diffused  in  the  Arctic  regions,
are  also  found  in  the  chain  of  the  Aleutian  islands,  which  stretch
almost  across  from  America  to  Asia,  and  which  may  probably
have  served  as  the  channel  of  communication  for  the  partial
blending  of  the  Floras  of  the  adjoining  regions.  It  has,
indeed,  been  found  to  be  a  general  rule,  that  plants  found  at
two  points  very  remote  from  each  other,  occur  also  in  places
intermediate.

Vegetation  of  islands. — In  islands  very  distant  from  con¬
tinents  the  total  number  of  plants  is  comparatively  small ;  but
a  large  proportion  of  the  species  are  such  as  occur  nowhere
else.  In  so  far  as  the  Flora  of  such  islands  is  not  peculiar  to
them,  it  contains,  in  general,  species  common  to  the  nearest
main  lands  *.

*  Prichard,  vol.  i.  p.  36.  Brown,  Appendix  to  Flinders,


74


DISTINCT  BOTANICAL  REGIONS.


[Ch.  V.


The  islands  of  the  great  southern  ocean  exemplify  these
rules ;  the  easternmost  containing  more  American,  and  the
western  more  Indian  plants  *.  Madeira  and  Teneriffe  contain
many  species,  and  even  entire  genera,  peculiar  to  them  ;  but
they  have  also  plants  in  common  with  Portugal,  Spain,  the
Azores,  and  the  north-west  coast  of  Africa  f.

In  the  Canaries,  out  of  533  species  of  phanerogamous  plants,
it  is  said  that  310  are  peculiar  to  these  isles,  and  the  rest  iden¬
tical  with  those  of  the  African  continent ;  but  in  the  Flora  of
St.  Helena,  which  is  so  far  distant  even  from  the  western
shores  of  Africa,  there  have  been  found,  out  of  sixty-one  native
species,  only  two  or  three  which  are  to  be  found  in  any  other
part  of  the  globe.

Number  of  botanical  provinces . — Be  Candolle  has  enume¬
rated  twent}^  great  botanical  provinces  inhabited  by  indigenous
or  aboriginal  plants ;  and  although  many  of  these  contain  a
variety  of  species  which  are  common  to  several  others,  and
sometimes  to  places  very  remote,  yet  the  lines  of  demarcation
are,  upon  the  whole,  astonishingly  well  defined  J.  Nor  is  it
likely  that  the  bearing  of  the  evidence  on  which  these  general
views  are  founded  will  ever  be  materially  affected,  since  they
are  already  confirmed  by  the  examination  of  seventy  or  eighty
thousand  species  of  plants.

The  entire  change  of  opinion  winch  the  contemplation  of
these  phenomena  has  brought  about  is  worthy  of  remark.  The
first  travellers  were  persuaded  that  they  should  find,  in  distant
regions,  the  plants  of  their  own  country,  and  they  took  a  plea¬
sure  in  giving  them  the  same  names.  It  was  some  time  before
this  illusion  was  dissipated  ;  but  so  fully  sensible  did  botanists
at  last  become  of  the  extreme  smallness  of  the  number  of
phaenogamous  plants  common  to  different  continents,  that  the


*  Forster,  Observations,  &c.

f  Humboldt,  Pers.  Nar.,  vol.  i.  p.  270  of  the  translation.  Prichard,  Phys.
Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  37.

J  See  a  farther  subdivision  by  which  twenty-seven  provinces  are  made,  by  M.
Alph.  De  Candolle,  son  of  De  Candolle.  Monogr.des  Campanulas.  Paris,  1830.


Ch.  V.]


MARINE  VEGETATION.


75


ancient  Floras  fell  into  disrepute.  All  grew  diffident  of  the
pretended  identifications,  and  we  now  find  that  every  naturalist
is  inclined  to  examine  each  supposed  exception  with  scrupulous
severity  *.  If  they  admit  the  fact,  they  begin  to  speculate  on
the  mode  whereby  the  seeds  may  have  been  transported  from
one  country  into  the  other,  or  inquire  on  which  of  two  conti¬
nents  the  plant  was  indigenous,  assuming  that  a  species,  like
an  individual,  cannot  have  two  birth-places.

Marine  Vegetation . — The  marine  vegetation  is  less  known,
but  we  learn  from  Lamouroux,  that  it  is  divisible  into  different
systems,  apparently  as  distinct  as  those  on  the  land,  notwith¬
standing  that  the  uniformity  of  temperature  is  so  much  greater
in  the  ocean.  For  on  that  ground  we  might  have  expected
the  phenomenon  of  partial  distribution  to  have  been  far  less
striking,  since  climate  is,  in  general,  so  influential  a  cause  in
checking  the  dispersion  of  species  from  one  zone  to  another.

Stations  of  marine  plants. — The  number  of  hydrophytes,  as
they  are  termed,  is  very  considerable,  and  their  stations  are
found  to  be  infinitely  more  varied  than  could  have  been  antici¬
pated  ;  for  while  some  plants  are  covered  and  uncovered  daily
by  the  tide,  others  live  in  abysses  of  the  ocean,  at  the  extraor¬
dinary  depth  of  one  thousand  feet  ;  and  although  in  such  situ¬
ations  there  must  reign  darkness  more  profound  than  night,  at
least  to  our  organs,  many  of  these  vegetables  are  highly  coloured.
From  the  analogy  of  terrestrial  plants  we  should  have  inferred
that  the  colouring  of  the  algae  was  derived  from  the  influence
of  the  solar  rays  ;  yet  we  are  compelled  to  doubt  when  we
reflect  how  feeble  must  be  the  rays  which  penetrate  to  these
great  depths.

The  subaqueous  vegetation  of  the  Mediterranean  is,  upon
the  whole,  distinct  from  that  of  the  Atlantic  on  the  west,  and
that  part  of  the  Arabian  gulf  which  is  immediately  contiguous
on  the  south.  Other  botanical  provinces  are  found  in  the
West-Indian  seas,  including  the  gulf  of  Mexico;  in  the  ocean
which  washes  the  shores  of  South  America,  in  the  Indian  ocean

*  De  Candolle,  Essai  Elemen.  de  Geog.  Botan.,  p.  45.


76


AGENCY  OF  THE  WINDS  IN  THE


[Ch.  V.


and  its  gulfs,  in  the  seas  of  Australia,  and  in  the  Atlantic  basin,
from  the  40°  of  north  latitude  to  the  pole.  There  are  very
few  species  common  to  the  coast  of  Europe  and  the  United
States  of  North  America,  and  none  common  to  the  Straits  of
Magellan  and  the  shores  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land.

It  must  not  be  overlooked,  that  the  distinctness  alluded  to
between  the  vegetation  of  these  several  countries  relates  strictly
to  species  and  not  to  forms.  In  regard  to  the  numerical  pre¬
ponderance  of  certain  forms,  and  many  peculiarities  of  internal
structure,  there  is  a  marked  agreement  in  the  vegetable  pro¬
ductions  of  districts  placed  in  corresponding  latitudes,  and
under  similar  physical  circumstances,  however  remote  their
position.  Thus  there  are  innumerable  points  of  analogy  be¬
tween  the  vegetation  of  the  Brazils,  equinoctial  Africa,  and
India ;  and  there  are  also  points  of  difference  wherein  the
plants  of  these  regions  are  distinguishable  from  all  extra- tropical
groups.  But  there  are  very  few  species  common  to  the  three
continents.  The  same  may  be  said,  if  we  compare  the  plants
of  the  Straits  of  Magellan  with  those  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land,
or  the  vegetation  of  the  United  States  with  that  of  the  middle
of  Europe :  the  species  are  distinct,  but  the  forms  are  in  a  great
degree  analogous.

Let  us  now  consider  what  means  of  diffusion,  independently
of  the  agency  of  man,  are  possessed  by  plants,  whereby,  in  the
course  of  ages,  they  may  be  enabled  to  stray  from  one  of  the
botanical  provinces  above  mentioned  to  another,  and  to  esta¬
blish  new  colonies  at  a  great  distance  from  their  birth-place.

Manner  in  which  plants  become  diffused .- — The  principal  of
the  inanimate  agents  provided  by  nature  for  scattering  the
seeds  of  plants  over  the  globe,  are  the  movements  of  the  atmo¬
sphere  and  of  the  ocean,  and  the  constant  flow  of  water  from
the  mountains  to  the  sea.  To  begin  with  the  winds :  a  great
number  of  seeds  are  furnished  with  downy  and  feathery  ap¬
pendages,  enabling  them,  when  ripe,  to  float  in  the  air,  and  to
be  wafted  easily  to  great  distances  by  the  most  gentle  breeze.
Other  plants  are  fitted  for  dispersion  by  means  of  an  attached


Ch.  V.]


DISPERSION  OF  SEEDS.


77


wing,  as  in  the  case  of  the  fir-tree,  so  that  they  are  caught  up
by  the  wind  as  they  fall  from  the  cone,  and  are  carried  to  a
distance.  Amongst  the  comparatively  small  number  of  plants
known  to  Linnaeus,  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  thirty-eight
genera  are  enumerated  as  having  winged  seeds.

Agency  of  the  winds. — As  winds  often  prevail  for  days,
weeks,  or  even  months  together,  in  the  same  direction,  these
means  of  transportation  may  sometimes  be  without  limits  ;  and
even  the  heavier  grains  may  be  borne  through  considerable
spaces,  in  a  very  short  time,  during  ordinary  tempests ;  for
strong  gales,  which  can  sweep  along  grains  of  sand,  often  move
at  the  rate  of  about  forty  miles  an  hour,  and  if  the  storm  be
very  violent,  at  the  rate  of  fifty-six  miles  *.  The  hurricanes
of  tropical  regions,  which  root  up  trees  and  throw  down  build¬
ings,  sweep  along  at  the  rate  of  ninety  miles  an  hour,  so  that,
for  however  short  a  time  they  prevail,  they  may  carry  even  the
heavier  fruits  and  seeds  over  friths  and  seas  of  considerable
width,  and,  doubtless,  are  often  the  means  of  introducing  into
islands  the  vegetation  of  adjoining  continents.  Whirlwinds
are  also  instrumental  in  bearing  along  heavy  vegetable  sub¬
stances  to  considerable  distances.  Slight  ones  may  frequently
be  observed  in  our  fields,  in  summer,  carrying  up  haycocks
into  the  air,  and  then  letting  fall  small  tufts  of  hay  far  and
wide  over  the  country ;  but  they  are  sometimes  so  powerful  *
as  to  dry  up  lakes  and  ponds,  and  to  break  off  the  boughs  of
trees,  and  carry  them  up  in  a  whirling  column  of  air.

Franklin  tells  us,  in  one  of  his  letters,  that  he  saw  in
Maryland,  a  whirlwind  which  began  by  taking  up  the  dust
which  lay  in  the  road,  in  the  form  of  a  sugar-loaf  with  the
pointed  end  downwards,  and  soon  after  grew  to  the  height
of  forty  or.  fifty  feet,  being  twenty  or  thirty  in  diameter.  It
advanced  in  a  direction  contrary  to  the  wind,  and  although
the  rotatory  motion  of  the  column  was  surprisingly  rapid,  its
onward  progress  was  sufficiently  slow  to  allow  a  man  to  keep
pace  with  it  on  foot.  Franklin  followed  it  on  horseback,

*  Annuaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes.


78


DISPERSION  OF  PLANTS


[Ch.  V.


accompanied  by  his  son,  for  three-quarters  of  a  mile,  and  saw
it  enter  a  wood,  were  it  twisted  and  turned  round  large  trees
with  surprising  force.  These  were  carried  up  in  a  spiral  line,
and  were  seen  flying  in  the  air,  together  with  boughs  and  in¬
numerable  leaves,  which,  from  their  height,  appeared  reduced
to  the  apparent  size  of  flies.  As  this  cause  operates  at  different
intervals  of  time  throughput  a  great  portion  of  the  earth’s
surface,  it  may  be  the  means  of  bearing  not  only  plants  but
insects,  land-testacea  and  their  eggs,  with  many  other  species
of  animals,  to  points  which  they  could  never  otherwise  have
reached,  and  from  which  they  may  then  begin  to  propagate
themselves  again  as  from  a  new  centre.

Distribution  of  Cryptogamous  plants . — It  has  been  found
that  a  great  numerical  proportion  of  the  exceptions  to  the
limitation  of  species  to  certain  quarters  of  the  globe,  occur  in
the  various  tribes  of  cryptogamic  plants.  Linnaeus  observed,
that  as  the  germs  of  plants  of  this  class,  such  as  mosses,  fungi,
and  lichens,  consist  of  an  impalpable  powder,  the  particles  of
which  are  scarcely  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  there  is  no  diffi¬
culty  to  account  for  their  being  dispersed  throughout  the
atmosphere,  and  carried  to  every  point  of  the  globe,  where
there  is  a  station  fitted  for  them.  Lichens  in  particular  ascend
to  great  elevations,  sometimes  growing  two  thousand  feet
above  the  line  of  perpetual  snow,  at  the  utmost  limits  of
vegetation,  and  where  the  mean  temperature  is  nearly  at  the
freezing  point.  This  elevated  position  must  contribute  greatly
to  facilitate  the  dispersion  of  those  buoyant  particles  of  which
their  fructification  consists  *.

Some  have  inferred,  from  the  springing  up  of  mushrooms
whenever  particular  soils  and  decomposed  organic  matter  are
mixed  together,  that  the  production  of  fungi  is  accidental,  and
not  analogous  to  that  of  perfect  plants  f .  But  Fries,  whose
authority  on  these  questions  is  entitled  to  the  highest  respect,
has  shown  the  fallacy  of  this  argument  in  favour  of  the  old

*  Linn.,  Tour  in  Lapland,  vol.  ii.  p.  282.
t  Lindley,  Introd.  to  Nat.  Syst.  of  Botany,  who  cites  Fries.


Ch.  V.]


BY  WINDS  AND  CURRENTS.


79


doctrine  of  equivocal  generation.  *  The  sporules  of  fungi,’
says  this  naturalist,  c  are  so  infinite,  that  in  a  single  individual
of  Reticularia  maxima,  I  have  counted  above  ten  millions,  and
so  subtile  as  to  be  scarcely  visible,  often  resembling  thin  smoke;
so  light  that  they  may  be  raised  perhaps  by  evaporation  into
the  atmosphere,  and  dispersed  in  so  many  ways  by  the  attrac¬
tion  of  the  sun,  by  insects,  wind,  elasticity,  adhesion,  &c.,  that
it  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  place  from  which  they  may  be
excluded.’

Agency  of  rivers  and  currents . — In  turning  our  attention,  in
the  next  place,  to  the  instrumentality  of  the  aqueous  agents  of
dispersion,  we  cannot  do  better  than  cite  the  words  of  one  of
our  ablest  botanical  writers.  ‘  The  mountain- stream  or  tor¬
rent,’  observes  Keith,  ‘  washes  down  to  the  valley  the  seeds
which  may  accidentally  fall  into  it,  or  which  it  may  happen  to
sweep  from  its  banks  when  it  suddenly  overflows  them.  The
broad  and  majestic  river,  winding  along  the  extensive  plain,
and  traversing  the  continents  of  the  world,  conveys  to  the
distance  of  many  hundreds  of  miles  the  seeds  that  may  have
vegetated  at  its  source.  Thus  the  southern  shores  of  the
Baltic  are  visited  by  seeds  which  grew  in  the  interior  of  Ger¬
many  ;  and  the  western  shores  of  the  Atlantic  by  seeds  that
have  been  generated  in  the  interior  of  America*.’  Fruits,
moreover,  indigenous  to  America  and  the  West  Indies,  such
as  that  of  the  Mimosa  scandens,  the  cashew-nut,  and  others,
have  been  known  to  be  drifted  across  the  Atlantic  by  the
Gulf  stream,  on  the  western  coasts  of  Europe,  in  such  a  state
that  they  might  have  vegetated  had  the  climate  and  soil  been
favourable.  Among  these  the  Guilandina  Bonduc,  a  legu¬
minous  plant,  is  particularly  mentioned,  as  having  been  raised
from  a  seed  found  on  the  west  coast  of  Ireland  f .

Sir  Hans  Sloane  states  that  several  kinds  of  beans  cast
ashore  on  the  Orkney  Isles  and  the  coast  of  Ireland,  are  de¬
rived  from  trees  which  grow  in  the  West  Indies,  and  many  of

*  System  of  Physiological  Botany,  vol.  ii.  p.  405.
f  Brown,  Append,  to  Tuckey,  No.  V.  p.  481.


80


AGENCY  OF  ISLANDS


[Ch.  V.


them  in  Jamaica.  He  conjectures  that  they  may  have  been
conveyed  by  rivers  into  the  sea,  and  then  by  the  Gulf  stream
to  greater  distances,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sea-weed  called
Lenticula  marina,  or  Sargasso,  which  grows  on  the  rocks  about
Jamaica,  is  known  to  be  ‘  carried  by  the  winds  and  cur¬
rent  towards  the  coast  of  Florida,  and  thence  into  the  North
American  ocean,  where  it  lies  very  thick  on  the  surface  of  the
sea

The  absence  of  liquid  matter  in  the  composition  of  seeds
renders  them  comparatively  insensible  to  heat  and  cold,  so  that
they  may  be  carried  without  detriment  through  climates  where
the  plants  themselves  would  instantly  perish.  Such  is  their
power  of  resisting  the  effects  of  heat,  that  Spallanzani  mentions
some  seeds  that  germinated  after  having  been  boiled  in  water  j-.
When,  therefore,  a  strong  gale,  after  blowing  violently  off  the
land  for  a  time,  dies  away,  and  the  seeds  alight  upon  the  sur¬
face  of  the  waters,  or  wherever  the  ocean,  by  eating  away  the
sea-cliffs,  throws  down  into  its  waves  plants  which  would  never
otherwise  approach  the  shores,  the  tides  and  currents  become
active  instruments  in  assisting  the  dissemination  of  almost  all
classes  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.

In  a  collection  of  six  hundred  plants  from  the  neighbourhood
of  the  river  Zaire,  in  Africa,  Mr.  Brown  found  that  thirteen
species  were  also  met  with  on  the  opposite  shores  of  Guiana
and  Brazil.  He  remarked  that  most  of  these  plants  were  only
found  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  river  Zaire,  and  were  chiefly
such  as  produced  seeds  capable  of  retaining  their  vitality  a  long
time  in  the  currents  of  the  ocean.

The  migration  of  plants  aided  by  islands.— Islands,  more¬
over,  and  even  the  smallest  rocks,  play  an  important  part  in
aiding  such  migrations,  for  when  seeds  alight  upon  them  from
the  atmosphere,  or  are  thrown  up  by  the  surf,  they  often
vegetate  and  supply  the  winds  and  waves  with  a  repetition
of  new  and  uninjured  crops  of  fruits  and  seeds,  which  may
afterwards  pursue  their  course  through  the  atmosphere,  or
*  Phil.  Trans.  1696,  t  System  of  Physiological  Botany,  vol.  ii.  p.403.


Ch.  V.j


BY  WINDS  AND  CURRENTS.


81


alono'  the  surface  of  the  sea,  in  the  same  direction.  The  num-
ber  of  plants  found  at  any  given  time  on  an  islet  affords  no
test  whatever  of  the  extent  to  which  it  may  have  co-operated
towards  this  end,  since  a  variety  of  species  may  first  thrive
there  and  then  perish,  and  be  followed  by  other  chance-comers
like  themselves.

Currents  and  winds  in  the  arctic  regions  drift  along  icebergs
covered  with  an  alluvial  soil  on  which  herbs  and  pine-saplings
are  seen  growing,  which  often  continue  to  vegetate  on  some
distant  shore  where  the  ice-island  is  stranded.

Dispersion  of  marine  plants.— -  With  respect  to  marine  vege¬
tation,  the  seeds  being  in  their  native  element,  may  remain
immersed  in  water  without  injury  for  indefinite  periods,  so  that
there  is  no  difficulty  in  conceiving  the  diffusion  of  species
wherever  uncongenial  climates,  contrary  currents,  and  other
causes,  do  not  interfere.  All  are  familiar  with  the  sight  of  the
floating  sea -weed

‘  Flung  from  the  rock  on  ocean’s  foam  to  sail,

Where’er  the  surge  may  sweep,  the  tempest’s  breath  prevail.’

Remarkable  accumulations  of  that  species  of  sea- weed  gene¬
rally  known  as  gulf- weed,  or  sargasso,  occur  on  each  side  of
the  equator  in  the  Atlantic,  Pacific,  and  Indian  Oceans.  Co¬
lumbus  and  other  navigators,  who  first  encountered  these  banks
of  algae  in  the  Northern  Atlantic,  compared  them  to  vast  inun¬
dated  meadows,  and  state  that  they  retarded  the  progress  of
their  vessels.  The  most  extensive  bank  is  a  little  west  of  the
meridian  of  Fayal,  one  of  the  Azores,  between  latitude  35°  and
36°;  violent  north  winds  sometimes  prevail  in  this  space,  and
drive  the  sea-weed  to  low  latitudes,  as  far  as  the  24th  or  even
the  20th  degree  *.

The  hollow  pod-like  receptacles  in  which  the  seeds  of  many
algae  are  lodged,  and  the  filaments  attached  to  the  seed-vessels
of  others,  seem  intended  to  give  buoyancy,  and  we  may  observe
that  these  hydrophytes  are  in  general  proliferous,  so  that  the
smallest  fragment  of  a  branch  can  be  developed  into  a  perfect


Vol.  II.


*  Greville,  Introduction  to  Algae  Britannic®,  p.  12.


G


82


AGENCY  OF  ANIMALS


[Ch.  V.


plant.  The  seeds,  moreover,  of  the  greater  number  of  species
are  enveloped  with  a  mucous  matter  like  that  which  surrounds
the  eggs  of  some  fish,  and  which  not  only  protects  them  from
injury,  but  serves  to  attach  them  to  floating  bodies  or  to  rocks.

Agency  of  animals  in  the  distribution  of  plants. — But  we
have  as  yet  considered  part  only  of  the  fertile  resources  of
nature  for  conveying  seeds  to  a  distance  from  their  place  of
growth.  The  various  tribes  of  animals  are  busily  engaged  in
furthering  an  object  whence  they  derive  such  important
advantages.  Sometimes  an  express  provision  is  found  in  the
structure  of  seeds  to  enable  them  to  adhere  firmly  by  prickles,
hooks,  and  hairs,  to  the  coats  of  animals,  or  feathers  of  the
winged  tribe,  to  which  they  remain  attached  for  weeks,  or  even
months,  and  are  borne  along  into  every  region  whither  birds
or  quadrupeds  may  migrate.  Linnaeus  enumerates  fifty  genera
of  plants,  and  the  number  now  known  to  botanists  is  much
greater,  which  are  armed  with  hooks,  by  which,  when  ripe,
they  adhere  to  the  coats  of  animals.  Most  of  these  vegetables,
he  remarks,  require  a  soil  enriched  with  dung.  Few  have
failed  to  mark  the  locks  of  wool  hanging  on  the  thorn-bushes,
wherever  the  sheep  pass,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  wolf  or  lion
never  give  chace  to  herbivorous  animals  without  being  uncon¬
sciously  subservient  to  this  part  of  the  vegetable  economy.

A  deer  has  strayed  from  the  herd  when  browsing  on  some
rich  pasture,  when  he  is  suddenly  alarmed  by  the  approach  of
his  foe.  He  instantly  plunges  through  many  a  thicket,  and
swims  through  many  a  river  and  lake.  The  seeds  of  the
herbs  and  shrubs  adhere  to  his  smoking  flanks,  and  are  washed
off  again  by  the  streams.  The  thorny  spray  is  torn  off  and
fixes  itself  in  his  hairy  coat,  until  brushed  off  again  in  other
thickets  and  copses.  Even  on  the  spot  where  the  victim  is
devoured,  many  of  the  seeds  which  he  had  swallowed  imme¬
diately  before  the  pursuit  may  be  left  on  the  ground  uninjured.

The  passage,  indeed,  of  undigested  seeds  through  the  sto¬
machs  of  animals  is  one  of  the  most  efficient  causes  of  the  dis¬
semination  of  plants,  and  is  of  all  others,  perhaps,  the  most


€h.  V.]


IN  DIFFUSING  PLANTS.


83


likely  to  be  overlooked.  Few  are  ignorant  that  a  portion  of
the  oats  eaten  by  a  horse  preserve  their  germinating  faculty  in
the  dun o\  The  fact  of  their  being  still  nutritious  is  not  lost
on  the  sagacious  rook.  To  many,  says  Linnaeus,  it  seems
extraordinary,  and  something  of  a  prodigy,  that  when  a  field
is  well  tilled  and  sown  with  the  best  wheat,  it  frequently  pro¬
duces  darnel  or  the  wild  oat,  especially  if  it  be  manured  with
new  dung  :  they  do  not  consider  that  the  fertility  of  the  smaller
seeds  is  not  destroyed  in  the  stomachs  of  animals

Agency  of  Birds. — Some  birds  of  the  order  Passeresj  devour
the  seeds  of  plants  in  great  quantities,  which  they  eject  again
in  very  distant  places,  without  destroying  its  faculty  of  vege¬
tation  ;  thus  a  flight  of  larks  will  fill  the  cleanest  field  with  a
great  quantity  of  various  kinds  of  plants,  as  the  melilot  trefoil
( Medicctgo  lupulina),  and  others  whose  seeds  are  so  heavy  that
the  wind  is  not  able  to  scatter  them  to  any  distance.  In  like
manner,  the  blackbird  and  missel-thrush,  when  they  devour
berries  in  too  great  quantities,  are  known  to  consign  them  to
the  earth  undigested  in  their  excrement  f

Pulpy  fruits  serve  quadrupeds  and  birds  as  food,  while  their
seeds,  often  hard  and  indigestible,  pass  uninjured  through  the
intestines,  and  are  deposited  far  from  their  original  place  of
growth  in  a  condition  peculiarly  fit  for  vegetation  §.  So  well
are  our  farmers,  in  some  parts  of  England,  aware  of  this  fact,
that  when  they  desire  to  raise  a  quick-set  hedge  in  the  shortest
possible  time,  they  feed  turkeys  with  the  haws  of  the  com¬
mon  white-thorn  (Cratcegus  oxyacantha ),  and  then  sow  the
stones  which  are  ejected  in  their  excrement,  whereby  they
gain  an  entire  year  in  the  growth  of  the  plant  ||.  Birds  when
they  pluck  cherries,  sloes,  and  haws,  fly  away  with  them  to


*  Linnaeus,  Amoen.  Acad.,  vol.  ii.  p.  409.
f  Amoen.  Acad.,  vol.  iv.,  Essay  75,  §  8.
t  Ibid.  vol.  vi.  §  22.

§  Smith’s  Introd.  to  Phys.  aud  Syst.  Botany,  p.  304,  1807.

||  This  information  was  communicated  to  me  by  Professor  Henslow,  of
Cambridge.


Ci  2


84


AGENCY  OF  BIRDS


[  Ch.V


some  convenient  place,  and  when  they  have  devoured  the  fruit
drop  the  stone  into  the  ground.  Captain  Cook,  in  his  account
of  the  volcanic  island  of  Tanna,  one  of  the  New  Hebrides,
which  he  visited  in  his  second  voyage,  makes  the  following
interesting  observation.  c  Mr.  Forster,  in  his  botanical  ex-
cursion  this  day,  shot  a  pigeon,  in  the  craw  of  which  was  a
wild  nutmeg.  He  took  some  pains  to  find  the  tree  on  this
island,  but  his  endeavours  were  without  success^/  It  is  easy,
therefore,  to  perceive,  that  birds  in  their  migrations  to  great
distances,  and  even  across  seas,  may  transport  seeds  to  new
isles  and  continents.

The  sudden  deaths  to  which  great  numbers  of  frugivorous
birds  are  annually  exposed,  must  not  be  omitted  as  auxiliary
to  the  transportation  of  seeds  to  new  habitations.  When  the
sea  retires  from  the  shore,  and  leaves  fruits  and  seeds  on  the
beach,  or  in  the  mud  of  estuaries,  it  might,  by  the  returning
tide,  wash  them  away  again,  or  destroy  them  by  long  immer¬
sion;  but  when  they  are  gathered  by  land  birds  which  fre¬
quent  the  sea-side,  or  by  waders  and  water-fowl,  they  are  often
borne  inland,  and  if  the  bird  to  whose  crop  they  have  been
consigned  is  killed,  they  may  be  left  to  grow  up  far  from  the
sea.  Let  such  an  accident  happen  but  once  in  a  century,  or  a
thousand  years,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  spread  many  of  the
plants  from  one  continent  to  another ;  for,  in  estimating  the
activity  of  these  causes,  we  must  not  consider  whether  they  act
slowly  in  relation  to  the  period  of  our  observation,  but  in  refer¬
ence  to  the  duration  of  species  in  general.

Let  us  trace  the  operation  of  this  cause  in  connexion  with
others.  A  tempestuous  wind  bears  the  seeds  of  a  plant  many
miles  through  the  air,  and  then  delivers  them  to  the  ocean  ;
the  oceanic  current  drifts  them  to  a  distant  continent ;  by  the
fall  of  the  tide  they  become  the  food  of  numerous  birds,  and  one
of  these  is  seized  by  a  hawk  or  eagle,  which,  soaring  across  hill
and  dale  to  a  place  of  retreat,  leaves,  after  devouring  its  prey,
the  unpalatable  seeds  to  spring  up  and  flourish  in  a  new  soil.

*  Book  iii.,  ch.  iv.


€h.  V.]


IN  DIFFUSING  PLANTS.


85


The  machinery  before  adverted  to  is  so  capable  of  disse¬
minating  seeds  over  almost  unbounded  spaces,  that  were  we
more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  economy  of  nature  we
might  probably  explain  all  the  instances  which  occur  of  the
aberration  of  plants  to  great  distances  from  their  native  coun¬
tries.  The  real  difficulty  which  must  present  itself  to  every
one  who  contemplates  the  present  geographical  distribution  of
species,  is  the  small  number  of  exceptions  to  the  rule  of  the
non-intermixture  of  different  groups  of  plants.  Why  have
they  not,  supposing  them  to  have  been  ever  so  distinct  origin¬
ally,  become  more  blended  and  confounded  together  in  the
lapse  of  ages  ?

Agency  of  man  in  the  dispersion  of  plants. — But  in  addition
to  all  the  agents  already  enumerated  as  instrumental  in  dif¬
fusing  plants  over  the  globe,  we  have  still  to  consider  man- —
one  of  the  most  important  of  all.  He  transports  with  him,
into  every  region,  the  vegetables  which  he  cultivates  for  his
wants,  and  is  the  involuntary  means  of  spreading  a  still  greater
number  which  are  useless  to  him,  or  even  noxious.  f  When
the  introduction  of  cultivated  plants  is  of  recent  date,  there  is
no  difficulty  in  tracing  their  origin  ;  but  when  it  is  of  high
antiquity,  we  are  often  ignorant  of  the  true  country  of  the
plants  on  which  we  feed.  No  one  contests  the  American  origin
of  the  maize  or  the  potato,  nor  the  origin,  in  the  old  world,  of
the  coffee-tree  and  of  wheat.  But  there  are  certain  objects
of  culture,  of  very  ancient  date,  between  the  tropics,  such,  for
example,  as  the  banana,  of  which  the  origin  cannot  be  verified.
Armies,  in  modern  times,  have  been  known  to  carry,  in  all
directions,  grain  and  cultivated  vegetables  from  one  extremity
of  Europe  to  the  other,  and  thus  have  shown  us  how,  in  more
ancient  times,  the  conquests  of  Alexander,  the  distant  expedi¬
tions  of  the  Romans,  and  afterwards  the  Crusades,  may  have
transported  many  plants  from  one  part  of  the  world  to  the
other

But  besides  the  plants  used  in  agriculture,  the  number  which
*  De  Candolle,  Essai  Elemen.  &c.  p.  50.


86


AGENCY  OF  MAN  IN  THE


[Ch.  V.


have  been  naturalized  by  accident,  or  which  man  has  spread
unintentionally,  is  considerable.  One  of  our  old  authors,  Jos-
selyn,  gives  a  catalogue  of  such  plants  as  had,  in  his  time,
sprung  up  in  the  colony  since  the  English  planted  and  kept
cattle  in  New  England.  They  were  two  and  twenty  in  number.
The  common  nettle  was  the  first  which  the  settlers  noticed,
and  the  plantain  was  called  by  the  Indians,  f  English  man’s
foot,’  as  if  it  sprung  from  their  footsteps  *,

(  We  have  introduced  everywhere,5  observes  De  Candolle,

*  some  weeds  which  grow  among  our  various  kinds  of  wheat,
and  which  have  been  received,  perhaps,  originally  from  Asia
with  them.  Thus,  together  with  the  Barbary  wheat,  the  in¬
habitants  of  the  south  of  Europe  have  sown,  for  many  ages,
the  plants  of  Algiers  and  Tunis.  With  the  wools  and  cottons
of  the  East,  or  of  Barbary,  there  are  often  brought  into
France  the  grains  of  exotic  plants,  some  of  which  naturalize
themselves.  Of  this  I  will  cite  a  striking  example.  There  is,
at  the  gate  of  Montpellier,  a  meadow  set  apart  for  drying
foreign  wool  after  it  has  been  washed.  There  hardly  passes  a
year  without  foreign  plants  being  found  naturalized  in  this
drying-ground.  I  have  gathered  there  Centaurea  parviflora,
Psoralea  palsestina,  and  Hypericum  crispum.5  This  fact  is  not
only  illustrative  of  the  aid  which  man  lends  inadvertently  to
the  propagation  of  plants,  but  it  also  demonstrates  the  multi¬
plicity  of  seeds  which  are  borne  about  in  the  woolly  and  hairy
coats  of  wild  animals.

The  same  botanist  mentions  instances  of  plants  naturalized
in  sea-ports  by  the  ballast  of  ships,  and  several  examples  of
others  which  have  spread  through  Europe  from  botanical
gardens,  so  as  to  have  become  more  common  than  many  indi¬
genous  species.

It  is  scarcely  a  century,  says  Linnaeus  since  the  Canadian
erigiron,  or  flea-bane,  was  brought  from  America  to  the  bota¬
nical  garden  at  Paris,  and  already  the  seeds  have  been  carried

*  Quarterly  Review,  vol,  xxx.  p.  8.

4  Essay  on  the  Habitable  Earth,  Amoen.  Acad.,  vol.  ii.  p.  409.


Ch.  V.]


DISPERSION  OF  PLANTS.


87


by  the  winds,  so  that  it  is  diffused  over  France,  the  British
islands,  Italy,  Sicily,  Holland,  and  Germany.  Several  others
are  mentioned  by  the  Swedish  naturalist,  as  having  been  dis¬
persed  by  similar  means.  The  common  thorn-apple,  Datura
stramonium ,  observes  Willdenow,  now  grows  as  a  noxious  weed
throughout  all  Europe,  with  the  exception  of  Sweden,  Lapland,
and  Russia.  It  came  from  the  East  Indies  and  Abyssinia  to
us,  and  was  so  universally  spread  by  certain  quacks  who  used
its  seed  as  an  emetic  *.

In  hot  and  ill- cultivated  countries,  such  naturalizations  take
place  more  easily.  Thus  the  Chenopodium  ambrosioides,
sown  by  Mr.  Burch  ell  on  a  point  of  St.  Helena,  multiplied  so
in  four  years  as  to  become  one  of  the  commonest  weeds  in  the
island

The  most  remarkable  proof,  says  De  Candolle,  of  the  extent
to  which  man  is  unconsciously  the  instrument  of  dispersing
and  naturalizing  species,  is  found  in  the  fact,  that  in  New  Hol¬
land,  America  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  the  aboriginal
European  species  exceed  in  number  all  the  others  which  have
come  from  any  distant  regions,  so  that,  in  this  instance,  the
influence  of  man  has  surpassed  that  of  all  the  other  causes
which  tend  to  disseminate  plants  to  remote  districts.

Although  we  are  but  slightly  acquainted,  as  yet,  with  the
extent  of  our  instrumentality  in  naturalizing  species,  yet  the
facts  ascertained  afford  no  small  reason  to  suspect  that  the
number  which  we  introduce  unintentionally,  exceeds  all  those
transported  by  design.  Nor  is  it  unnatural  to  suppose  that  the
functions,  which  the  inferior  beings  extirpated  by  man  once
discharged  in  the  economy  of  nature,  should  devolve  upon  the
human  race.  If  we  drive  many  birds  of  passage  from  different
countries,  we  are  probably  required  to  fulfil  their  office  of  car¬
rying  seeds,  eggs  of  fish,  insects,  molluscs,  and  other  creatures,
to  distant  regions  ;  if  we  destroy  quadrupeds,  we  must  replace
them,  not  merely  as  consumers  of  the  animal  and  vegetable
substances  which  they  devoured,  but  as  disseminators  of  plants,

*  Principles  of  Botany,  p.  389.


f  Ibid.


88


AGENCY  OF  MAN  IN  THE


[Ch.  V.


and  of  the  inferior  classes  of  the  animal  kingdom.  We  do  not
mean  to  insinuate  that  the  same  changes  which  man  brings
about,  would  have  taken  place  by  means  of  the  agency  of  other
species,  but  merely  that  he  supersedes  a  certain  number  of
agents,  and  so  far  as  he  disperses  plants  unintentionally,  or
against  his  will,  his  intervention  is  strictly  analogous  to  that  of
the  species  so  extirpated.

We  may  observe,  moreover,  that  if,  at  former  periods,  the
animals  inhabiting  any  given  district  have  been  partially  altered
by  the  extinction  of  some  species,  and  the  introduction  of
others,  whether  by  new  creations  or  by  immigration,  a  change
must  have  taken  place  in  regard  to  the  particular  plants  con¬
veyed  about  with  them  to  foreign  countries.  As  for  example,
when  one  set  of  migratory  birds  is  substituted  for  another,  the
countries  from  and  to  which  seeds  are  transported  are  imme¬
diately  changed.  Vicissitudes,  therefore,  analogous  to  those
which  man  has  occasioned,  may  have  previously  attended  the
springing  up  of  new  relations  between  species  in  the  vegetable
and  animal  worlds.

It  may  also  be  remarked,  that  if  man  is  the  most  active  agent
in  enlarging,  so  also  is  he  in  circumscribing  the  geographical
boundaries  of  particular  plants.  He  promotes  the  migration
of  some,  he  retards  that  of  other  species,  so  that  while  in  many
respects  he  appears  to  be  exerting  his  power  to  blend  and
confound  the  various  provinces  of  indigenous  species,  he  is,
in  other  ways,  instrumental  in  obstructing  the  fusion  into  one
group  of  the  inhabitants  of  contiguous  provinces.

Thus,  for  example,  when  two  botanical  regions  exist  in  the
same  great  continent,  such  as  the  European  region ,  compre¬
hending  the  central  parts  of  Europe  and  those  surrounding
the  Mediterranean,  and  the  Oriental  region ,  as  it  has  been
termed,  embracing  the  countries  adjoining  the  Black  Sea  and
the  Caspian,  the  interposition  between  these  of  thousands  of
square  miles  of  cultivated  lands,  opposes  a  new  and  powerful
barrier  against  the  mutual  interchange  of  indigenous  plants.
Botanists  are  well  aware  that  garden  plants  naturalize  and  dif-


Ch.  V.]


DISPERSION  OF  PLANTS.


89


fuse  themselves  with  great  facility  in  comparatively  unreclaimed
countries,  but  spread  themselves  slowly  and  with  difficulty  in
districts  highly  cultivated.  There  are  many  obvious  causes
for  this  difference  ;  by  drainage  and  culture  the  natural  variety
of  stations  is  diminished,  and  those  stray  individuals  by  which
the  passage  of  a  species  from  one  fit  station  to  another  is
effected,  are  no  sooner  detected  by  the  agriculturist,  than  they
are  uprooted  as  weeds.  The  larger  shrubs  and  trees,  in  par¬
ticular,  can  scarcely  ever  escape  observation,  when  they  have
attained  a  certain  size,  and  will  rarely  fail  to  be  cut  down  if
unprofitable.

The  same  observations  are  applicable  to  the  interchange  of
the  insects,  birds,  and  quadrupeds  of  two  regions  situated  like
those  above  alluded  to.  No  beasts  of  prey  are  permitted  to
make  their  way  across  the  intervening  arable  tracts.  Many
birds  and  hundreds  of  insects,  which  would  have  found  some
palatable  food  amongst  the  various  herbs  and  trees  of  the  pri¬
meval  wilderness,  are  unable  to  subsist  on  the  olive,  the  vine,
the  wheat,  and  a  few  trees  and  grasses  favoured  by  man.  In
addition  therefore,  to  his  direct  intervention,  man,  in  this  case,
operates  indirectly  to  impede  the  dissemination  of  plants,  by
intercepting  the  migrations  of  animals,  many  of  which  would
otherwise  have  been  active  in  transporting  seeds  from  one  pro¬
vince  to  another.

Whether  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  the  influence  of  man
will  tend,  after  a  considerable  lapse  of  ages,  to  render  the  geo¬
graphical  range  of  species  in  general  more  extended,  as  De
Candolle  seems  to  anticipate,  or  whether  the  compensating
agency  above  alluded  to  will  not  counterbalance  the  exceptions
caused  by  our  naturalizations,  admits  at  least  of  some  doubt.
In  the  attempt  to  form  an  estimate  on  this  subject,  we  must  be
careful  not  to  underrate,  or  almost  overlook,  as  some  appear
to  have  done,  the  influence  of  man  in  checking  the  diffusion  of
plants,  and  restricting  their  distribution  to  narrower  limits.


CHAPTER  VI.


Laws  which  regulate  the  geographical  distribution  of  species,  continued—- Geo¬
graphical  distribution  of  animals — Buffon  on  the  specific  distinctness  of  the
quadrupeds  of  the  old  and  new  world — Different  regions  of  indigenous
mammalia — Quadrupeds  in  islands — Range  of  the  Cetacea — Dissemination
of  quadrupeds — their  powers  of  swimming — Migratory  instincts — Drifting  of
quadrupeds  on  ice-floes — On  floating  islands  of  drift-timber — Migrations  of
Cetacea — Habitations  of  birds — Their  migrations  and  facilities  of  diffusion — -
Distribution  of  reptiles  and  their  powers  of  dissemination.

LAWS  WHICH  REGULATE  THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBU¬
TION  OF  SPECIES,  continued .

Geographical  distribution  of  animals. — Although  in  specu¬
lating  on  ‘philosophical  possibilities,’  said  Buffon,  the  same
temperature  might  have  been  expected,  all  other  circumstances
being  equal,  to  produce  the  same  beings  in  different  parts  of
the  globe,  both  in  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,  yet  it
is  an  undoubted  fact,  that  when  America  was  discovered,  its
indigenous  quadrupeds  were  all  dissimilar  from  those  pre¬
viously  known  in  the  old  world.  The  elephant,  the  rhinoceros,
the  hippopotamus,  the  cameleopard,  the  camel,  the  dromedary,
the  buffalo,  the  horse,  the  ass,  the  lion,  the  tiger,  the  apes,  the
baboons,  and  a  number  of  other  mammalia,  were  nowhere  to
be  met  with  on  the  new  continent ;  while  in  the  old,  the
American  species,  of  the  same  great  class,  were  nowhere  to  be
seen — the  tapir,  the  lama,  the  pecari,  the  jaguar,  the  couguar,
the  agouti,  the  paca,  the  coati,  and  the  sloth.

These  phenomena,  although  few  in  number  relatively  to  the
whole  animate  creation,  were  so  striking  and  so  positive  in  their
nature,  that  the  French  naturalist  caught  sight  at  once  of  a
general  law  in  the  geographical  distribution  of  organic  beings,
namely,  the  limitation  of  groups  of  distinct  species  to  regions
separated  from  the  rest  of  the  globe  by  certain  natural  barriers.
It  was,  therefore,  in  a  truly  philosophical  spirit  that,  relying


Ch.  VI.]


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.


91


on  the  clearness  of  the  evidence  obtained  respecting  the  larger
quadrupeds,  he  ventured  to  call  in  question  the  identifications
announced  by  some  contemporary  naturalists,  of  species  of
animals  said  to  be  common  to  the  southern  extremities  of
America  and  Africa  *.

Causes  which  prevent  the  migration  of  animals. — >  The
migration  of  quadrupeds  from  one  part  of  the  globe  to  the
other,  observes  one  of  our  ablest  writers,  is  prevented  by  un¬
congenial  climates  and  the  branches  of  the  ocean  which  inter¬
sect  continents.  *  Hence  by  a  reference  to  the  geographical
site  of  countries,  we  may  divide  the  earth  into  a  certain  number
of  regions  fitted  to  become  the  abodes  of  particular  groups  of
animals,  and  we  shall  find,  on  inquiry,  that  each  of  these  pro¬
vinces,  thus  conjecturally  marked  out,  is  actually  inhabited  by
a  distinct  nation  of  quadrupeds  f  .’

Where  the  continents  of  the  old  and  new  world  approxi¬
mate  to  each  other  towards  the  north,  the  narrow  straits
which  separate  them  are  frozen  over  in  winter,  and  the  dis¬
tance  is  further  lessened  by  intervening  islands.  Thus  a
passage  from  one  continent  to  another  becomes  practicable  to
such  quadrupeds  as  are  fitted  to  endure  the  intense  cold  of  the
arctic  circle.  Accordingly,  the  whole  arctic  region  has  become
one  of  the  provinces  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and  contains  many
species  common  to  both  the  great  continents.  But  the  tem¬
perate  regions  of  America,  which  are  separated  by  a  wide
extent  of  ocean  from  those  of  Europe  and  Asia,  contain  each
a  distinct  nation  of  indigenous  quadrupeds.  There  are  three
groups  of  tropical  mammalia  belonging  severally  to  America,
Africa,  and  continental  India,  each  inhabiting  lands  separated
from  each  other  by  the  ocean.

In  Peru  and  Chili,  says  Humboldt,  the  region  of  the  grasses,

*  Button,  vol.  v. — On  the  Virginian  Opossum.

f  Prichard’s  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  54.  In  some  of  the  prelimi¬
nary  chapters  will  be  found  a  sketch  of  the  leading  facts  illustrative  of  the
geographical  distribution  of  animals,  drawn  up  with  the  author’s  usual  clearness
and  ability.


92


DISTRIBUTION  OF


[Ch.  VI.


which  is  at  an  elevation  of  from  twelve  thousand  three  hun¬
dred  to  fifteen  thousand  four  hundred  feet,  is  inhabited  by
crowds  of  lama,  guanaco,  and  alpaca.  These  quadrupeds,
which  here  represent  the  genus  camel  of  the  ancient  continent,
have  not  extended  themselves  either  to  Brazil  or  Mexico,
because,  during  their  journey,  they  must  necessarily  have
descended  into  regions  that  were  too  hot  for  them  *.

Animals  in  New  Holland . — New  Holland  is  well  known  to
contain  a  most  singular  and  characteristic  assemblage  of  mam-
miferous  animals,  consisting  of  more  than  forty  species  of  the
marsupial  family,  of  which  scarcely  any  congeners  occur  else¬
where,  except  a  few  species  in  some  islands  of  the  Indian
archipelago  and  the  opossums  of  America.  There  are  it
appears  some  examples  of  marsupial  animals  in  the  eastern
hemisphere  out  of  the  Australian  continent.  Thus  the  Pha-
langista  vulpina  inhabits  both  Sumatra  and  New  Holland.
The  P.  ursina  is  found  in  the  island  of  Celebes;  P.  chrysorrhos
in  the  Moluccas;  P.  maculata  in  Banda  and  Aboyna;  P.  ca-
vifrons,  ibid  j-.

This  almost  exclusive  occupation  of  the  Australian  con¬
tinent  by  the  kangaroos  and  other  tribes  of  pouched  animals,
although  it  has  justly  excited  great  attention,  is  a  fact,
nevertheless,  in  strict  accordance  with  the  general  laws  of  the
distribution  of  species ;  since,  in  other  parts  of  the  globe,  we
find  peculiarities  of  form,  structure,  and  habit,  in  birds,
reptiles,  insects,  or  plants,  confined  entirely  to  one  hemisphere,
or  one  continent,  and  sometimes  to  much  narrower  limits.

In  the  south  of  Africa . — The  southern  region  of  Africa,
where  that  continent  extends  into  the  temperate  zone,  consti¬
tutes  another  separate  zoological  province,  surrounded  as  it  is
on  three  sides  by  the  ocean,  and  cut  off  from  the  countries  of
milder  climate,  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  by  the  intervening
torrid  zone.  In  many  instances,  this  region  contains  the  same
genera  which  are  found  in  temperate  climates  to  the  northward

*  Description  of  the  Equatorial  Regions,
f  Temmiuck,  Mammologie.


Ch.  VI.]


MAMMIFEROUS  QUADRUPEDS.


93


of  the  line ;  but  then  the  southern  are  different  from  the
northern  species.  Thus  in  the  south  we  find  the  quagga  and
the  zebra :  in  the  norths  the  horse,  the  ass,  and  the  jiggetai  of
Asia.

The  south  of  Africa  is  spread  out  into  fine  level  plains  from
the  tropic  to  the  Cape ;  in  this  region,  says  Pennant,  besides
the  horse  genus,  of  which  five  species  have  been  found,  there
are  also  peculiar  species  of  rhinoceros,  the  hog,  and  the  hyrax,
among  pachydermatous  races  ;  and  amongst  the  ruminating,
the  giraffe,  the  Cape  buffalo,  and  a  variety  of  remarkable  ante¬
lopes,  as  the  springbok,  the  oryx,  the  gnou,  the  leucophoe,  the
pygarga,  and  several  others  *.

In  the  Indian  archipelago. — The  Indian  archipelago  pre¬
sents  peculiar  phenomena  in  regard  to  its  indigenous  mam¬
malia,  which,  in  their  generic  character,  recede  in  some
respects  from  that  of  the  animals  of  the  Indian  continent,  and
approximate  to  the  African.  The  Sunda  isles  contain  a  hip¬
popotamus,  which  is  wanting  in  the  rivers  of  Asia ;  Sumatra,
a  peculiar  species  of  tapir,  and  a  rhinoceros  resembling  the
African  more  than  the  Indian  species,  but  specifically  dis¬
tinguishable  from  both  f .

Beyond  the  Indian  archipelago  is  an  extensive  region,  in¬
cluding  New  Guinea,  New  Britain,  and  New  Ireland,  together
with  the  archipelago  of  Solomon’s  Islands,  the  New  Hebrides,
and  Louisiade,  and  the  more  remote  groups  of  isles  in  the
great  southern  ocean,  which  may  be  considered  as  forming  one
zoological  province.  Although  these  remarkable  countries  are
extremely  fertile  in  their  vegetable  productions,  they  are  almost
wholly  destitute  of  native  warm-blooded  quadrupeds,  except  a
few  species  of  bats,  and  some  domesticated  animals  in  the  pos¬
session  of  the  natives  J.

Quadrupeds  in  Islands. — Quadrupeds  found  on  islands

*  Pennant’s  Hist,  of  Quadrupeds,  cited  by  Prichard,  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,
vol.  i.  p.  66.

f  Prichard,  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  p.  66  ;  Cuvier,  Ann.  du  Museum,  tom,  vii.

%  Prichard,  ibid.,  p.  56.


94


DISTRIBUTION  OF


[Ch.  VI.


situated  near  the  continents,  generally  form  a  part  of  the  stock
of  animals  belonging  to  the  adjacent  main  land ;  f  but  small
islands  remote  from  continents  are  in  general  altogether  desti¬
tute  of  land  quadrupeds,  except  such  as  appear  to  have  been
conveyed  to  them  by  men.  Kerguelen’s  Land,  Juan  Fer¬
nandez,  the  Gallapagos,  and  the  Isles  de  Lobes,  are  examples
of  this  fact.  Among  all  the  groups  of  fertile  islands  in  the
Pacific  Ocean,  no  quadrupeds  have  been  found,  except  dogs,
hogs,  rats,  and  a  few  bats.  The  bats  have  been  found  in  New
Zealand  and  the  more  westerly  groups ;  they  may  probably
have  made  their  way  along  the  chain  of  islands  which  ex¬
tend  from  the  shores  of  New  Guinea  far  into  the  Southern
Pacific.  The  hogs  and  the  dogs  appear  to  have  been  con¬
veyed  by  the  natives  from  New  Guinea.  The  Indian  isles,
near  New  Guinea,  abound  in  oxen,  buffaloes,  goats,  deer,  hogs,
dogs,  cats,  and  rats;  but  none  of  them  are  said  to  have
reached  New  Guinea,  except  the  hog  and  the  dog.  The  New
Guinea  hog  is  of  the  Chinese  variety,  and  was  probably  brought
from  some  of  the  neighbouring  isles,  being  the  animal  most  in
request  among  savages.  It  has  run  wild  in  New  Guinea.
Thence  it  has  been  conveyed  to  the  New  Hebrides,  the  Tonga
and  Society  Isles,  and  to  the  Marquesas  ;  but  it  is  still  wanting
in  the  more  easterly  islands,  and,  to  the  southward,  in  New
Caledonia.

c  Dogs  may  be  traced  from  New  Guinea  to  the  New  Hebrides
and  Fiji  isles ;  but  they  are  wanting  in  the  Tonga  isles,
though  found  among  the  Society  and  Sandwich  islanders,  by
some  of  whom  they  are  used  for  food  :  to  the  southward  they
have  been  conveyed  to  New  Caledonia  and  New  Zealand.  In
Easter  Island,  the  most  remotely  situated  in  this  ocean,  there
are  no  domestic  animals  except  fowls  and  rats,  which  are  eaten
by  the  natives  :  these  animals  are  found  in  most  of  the  islands ;
the  fowls  are  probably  from  New  Guinea.  Rats  are  to  be
found  even  on  some  desert  islands,  whither  they  may  have
been  conveyed  by  canoes  which  have  occasionally  approached


Ch.  VI.]


M AM MIFEROUS  QUADRUPEDS.


the  shores.  It  is  known,  also,  that  rats  occasionally  swim  in
large  numbers  to  considerable  distances  *.*

Geographical  range  of  the  Cetacea.— It  is  natural  to  suppose
that  the  geographical  range  of  the  different  species  of  cetacea,
should  be  less  correctly  ascertained  than  that  of  the  terrestrial
mammifers.  It  is,  however,  well  known  that  the  whales  which
are  obtained  by  our  fishers  in  the  South  Seas,  are  distinct  from
those  of  the  North  ;  and  the  same  dissimilarity  has  been  found
in  all  the  other  marine  animals  of  the  same  class,  so  far  as  they
have  yet  been  studied  by  naturalists.

Dispersion  of  Quadrupeds. — Let  us  now  inquire  what  faci¬
lities  the  various  land  quadrupeds  enjoy  of  spreading  them¬
selves  over  the  surface  of  the  earth.  In  the  first  place,  as  their
numbers  multiply,  all  of  them,  whether  they  feed  on  plants,  or
prey  on  other  animals,  are  disposed  to  scatter  themselves  gra¬
dually  over  as  wide  an  area  as  is  accessible  to  them.  But  be¬
fore  they  have  extended  their  migrations  over  a  large  space,
they  are  usually  arrested  either  by  the  sea,  or  a  zone  of  uncon¬
genial  climate,  or  some  lofty  and  unbroken  chain  of  mountains,
or  a  tract  already  occupied  by  a  hostile  and  more  powerful
species.

Their  powers  of  sw darning. — -Rivers  and  narrow  friths  can
seldom  interfere  with  their  progress,  for  the  greater  part  of
them  swim  well,  and  few  are  without  this  power  when  urged
by  danger  and  pressing  want.  Thus,  amongst  beasts  of  prey,
the  tiger  is  seen  swimming  about  among  the  islands  and  creeks
in  the  delta  of  the  Ganges,  and  the  jaguar  traverses  with  ease
the  largest  streams  in  South  America  f.  The  bear,  also,  and
the  bison,  stem  the  current  of  the  Mississippi.  The  popular
error,  that  the  common  swine  cannot  escape  by  swimming
when  thrown  into  the  water,  has  been  contradicted  by  several
curious  and  well-authenticated  instances  during  the  recent
floods  in  Scotland.  One  pig,  only  six  months  old,  after
having  been  carried  down  from  Garmouth  to  the  bar  at  the

*  Prichard,  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  75.

■j*  Button,  vol.  v.  p.  204.


96


DISPERSION  OF


[Ch.  VI.


mouth  of  the  Spey,  a  distance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  swam
four  miles  eastward  to  Port  Gordon  and  landed  safe.  Three
others,  of  the  same  age  and  litter,  swam  at  the  same  time  five
miles  to  the  west,  and  landed  at  Blackhill  *,

In  an  adult  and  wild  state,  these  animals  would  doubtless
have  been  more  strong  and  active,  and  might,  when  hard
pressed,  have  performed  a  much  longer  voyage.  Hence  islands
remote  from  the  continent  may  obtain  inhabitants  by  casualties
which,  like  the  late  storms  in  Morayshire,  may  only  occur  once
in  many  centuries,  or  thousands  of  years,  under  all  the  same
circumstances.  It  is  obvious  that  powerful  tides,  winds,  and
currents,  may  sometimes  carry  along  quadrupeds  capable,  in
like  manner,  of  preserving  themselves  for  hours  in  the  sea  to
very  considerable  distances,  and  in  this  way,  perhaps,  the  tapir
(  Tapir  Indicus)  may  have  become  common  to  Sumatra  and
the  Malayan  peninsula.

To  the  elephant,  in  particular,  the  power  of  crossing  rivers  is
essential  in  a  wild  state,  for  the  quantity  of  food  which  a  herd
of  these  animals  consumes  renders  it  necessary  that  they  should
be  constantly  moving  from  place  to  place.  The  elephant
crosses  the  stream  in  two  ways.  If  the  bed  of  the  river  be
hard,  and  the  water  not  of  too  great  a  depth,  he  fords  it.  But
when  he  crosses  great  rivers,  such  as  the  Ganges  and  the  Niger,
the  elephant  swims  deep,  so  deep  that  the  end  of  his  trunk
only  is  out  of  the  water ;  for  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference
to  him  whether  his  body  be  completely  immersed,  provided  he
can  bring  the  tip  of  his  trunk  to  the  surface,  so  as  to  breathe
the  external  air.

Animals  of  the  deer  kind  frequently  take  to  the  water,
especially  in  the  rutting  season,  when  the  stags  are  seen  swim¬
ming  for  several  leagues  at  a  time,  from  island  to  island,  in
search  of  the  does,  especially  in  the  Canadian  lakes ;  and  in
some  countries  where  there  are  islands  near  the  sea-shore,  they
fearlessly  enter  the  sea  and  swim  to  them.  In  hunting  excur-

*  Sir  T.  I).  Lauder,  Bart.,  on  the  Floods  in  Morayshire,  August  1829,  p.  302,
second  edition.


Ch.  VI.]


MAMMIFEROUS  QUADRUPEDS.


97


sions,  in  North  America,  the  elk  of  that  country  is  frequently
pursued  for  great  distances  through  the  water.

The  large  herbivorous  animals,  which  are  gregarious,  can
never  remain  long  in  a  confined  region,  as  they  consume  so
much  vegetable  food.  The  immense  herds  of  bisons  which
often,  in  the  great  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  blacken  the  surface
near  the  banks  of  that  river  and  its  tributaries,  are  continually
shifting  their  quarters,  followed  by  wolves  which  prowl  about
in  their  rear.  ‘  It  is  no  exaggeration,’  says  Mr.  James,  *  to
assert,  that  in  one  place,  on  the  banks  of  the  Platte,  at  least
ten  thousand  bisons  burst  on  our  sight  in  an  instant.  In  the
morning  we  again  sought  the  living  picture,  but  upon  all  the
plain,  which  last  evening  was  so  teeming  with  noble  animals,
not  one  remained

Migratory  instincts. —Besides  the  disposition  common  to
the  individuals  of  every  species  slowly  to  extend  their  range
in  search  of  food,  in  proportion  as  their  numbers  augment,
a  migratory  instinct  often  develops  itself  in  an  extraordinary
manner,  when,  after  an  unusually  prolific  season,  or  upon  a
sudden  scarcity  of  provisions,  great  multitudes  are  threatened
by  famine.  We  shall  enumerate  several  illustrations  of  these
migrations,  because  they  may  put  us  upon  our  guard  against
attributing  a  high  antiquity  to  a  particular  species  merely
because  it  is  diffused  over  a  great  space ;  they  show  clearly
how  soon,  in  a  state  of  nature,  a  newly-created  species  might
spread  itself,  in  every  direction,  from  a  single  point.

In  very  severe  winters,  great  numbers  of  the  black  bears  of
America  migrate  from  Canada  into  the  United  States;  but
in  milder  seasons,  when  they  have  been  well  fed,  they  remain
and  hybernate  in  the  north  f .  The  rein-deer,  which  in  Scan¬
dinavia  can  scarcely  exist  to  the  south  of  the  sixty  fifth  parallel,
descends,  in  consequence  of  the  greater  coldness  of  the  climate,
to  the  fiftieth  degree,  in  Chinese  Tartary,  and  often  roves


*  Expedition  from  Pittsburg  to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  voh  ii.  p.  153.
f  Richardson’s  Fauna  Boreali- Americana,  p.  16.


Von.  II.


•I  I


98


MIGRATIONS  OF


[Ch.  VI.


into  a  country  of  more  southern  latitude  than  any  part  of
England.

In  Lapland,  and  other  high  latitudes,  the  common  squirrels,
whenever  they  are  compelled,  by  want  of  provisions,  to  quit
their  usual  abodes,  migrate  in  amazing  numbers,  and  travel
directly  forwards,  allowing  neither  rocks,  forests,  nor  the
broadest  waters,  to  turn  them  from  their  course.  Great  num¬
bers  are  often  drowned  in  attempting  to  pass  friths  and  rivers.
In  like  manner  the  small  Norway  rat  sometimes  pursues  its
migrations  in  a  straight  line  across  rivers  and  lakes;  and  Pen¬
nant  informs  us  that  when,  in  Kamtschatka,  the  rats  become
too  numerous,  they  gather  together  in  the  spring,  and  proceed
in  great  bodies  westward,  swimming  over  rivers,  lakes,  and
arms  of  the  sea.  Many  are  drowned  or  destroyed  by  water-
fowl  or  fish.  As  soon  as  they  have  crossed  the  river  Penchim,
at  the  head  of  the  gulf  of  the  same  name,  they  turn  southward,
and  reach  the  rivers  Judoma  and  Ochot  by  the  middle  of  July,
a  district  surprisingly  distant  from  their  point  of  departure.

The  lemings,  also,  of  Scandinavia,  often  pour  down  in
myriads  from  the  northern  mountains  and  devastate  the  coun¬
try.  They  generally  move  in  lines  which  are  about  three  feet
from  each  other,  and  exactly  parallel,  and  they  direct  their
march  from  the  north-west  to  the  south-east,  going  directly
forward  through  rivers  and  lakes,  and  when  they  meet  with
stacks  of  hay  or  corn,  gnawing  their  way  through  them  instead
of  passing  round  #.

Vast  troops  of  the  wild  ass,  or  onager  of  the  ancients,  which
inhabit  the  mountainous  deserts  of  Great  Tartary,  feed,  during
the  summer,  in  the  tracts  east  and  north  of  Lake  Aral.  In  the
autumn  they  collect  in  herds  of  hundreds,  and  even  thousands,
and  direct  their  course  towards  the  north  of  India,  and  often  to
Persia,  to  enjoy  a  warm  retreat  during  winter  f.  Bands  of  two
or  three  hundred  quaggas,  a  species  of  wild  ass,  are  some¬
times  seen  to  migrate  from  the  tropical  plains  of  southern

*  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  ii.  p.  872.  f  Wood’s  Zoography,  vol.  i.  p.  11.


Ch.  VI.]


MAMMIFEROUS  QUADRUPEDS.


99


Africa  to  the  vicinity  of  the  Malaleveen  river.  During  their
migrations  they  are  followed  by  lions,  who  slaughter  them
night  by  night  *.

The  migratory  swarms  of  the  springbok,  or  Cape  antelope,
afford  another  illustration  of  the  rapidity  with  which  a  species,
under  certain  circumstances,  may  be  diffused  over  a  continent.
When  the  stagnant  pools  of  the  immense  deserts  south  of  the
Orange  river  dry  up,  which  often  happens  after  intervals  of
three  or  four  years,  myriads  of  these  animals  desert  the  parched
soil,  and  pour  down  like  a  deluge  on  the  cultivated  regions
nearer  the  Cape.  The  havoc  committed  by  them  resembles
that  of  the  African  locusts ;  and  so  crowded  are  the  herds,  that
*  the  lion  has  been  seen  to  walk  in  the  midst  of  the  compressed
phalanx  with  only  as  much  room  between  him  and  his  victims
as  the  fears  of  those  immediately  around  could  procure  by
pressing  outwards  f.

Dr.  Horsfield  mentions  a  singular  fact  in  regard  to  the  geo¬
graphical  distribution  of  the  Mydaus  meliceps,  a  kind  of  pole¬
cat  inhabiting  Java.  This  animal  is  4  confined  exclusively  to
those  mountains  which  have  an  elevation  of  more  than  seven
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ocean  :  on  these  it  occurs
with  the  same  regularity  as  many  plants.  The  long-extended
surface  of  Java,  abounding  with  conical  points  which  exceed
this  elevation,  affords  many  places  favourable  for  its  resort.
On  ascending  these  mountains,  the  traveller  scarcely  fails  to
meet  with  this  animal,  which,  from  its  peculiarities,  is  univer¬
sally  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  these  elevated  tracts,  while  to
those  of  the  plains  it  is  as  strange  as  an  animal  from  a  foreign
country.  In  my  visits  to  the  mountainous  districts,  I  uni¬
formly  met  with  it,  and,  as  far  as  the  information  of  the  natives
can  be  relied  on,  it  is  found  on  all  the  mountains  j.s

*  On  the  authority  of  Mr.  Campbell.  Library  of  Eatert.  Know.,  Menageries,

vol.  i.  p.  152.

|  Cuvier’s  Animal  Kingdom,  by  Griffiths,  vol.  ii.  p.  109,  Library  of  Enter!.
Know.,  Menageries,  vol.  i.  p.  366.

I  Zoological  Researches  in  Java,  No.  2.

IS  °

11  u


DRIFTING  OF  QUADRUPEDS  ON


[Ch.  VI.


Now,  if  we  were  asked  to  conjecture  how  the  Mydaus  arrived
at  the  elevated  regions  of  each  of  these  isolated  mountains,  we
should  say  that  before  the  isle  was  peopled  by  man,  by  whom
their  numbers  are  now  thinned,  they  may  occasionally  have
multiplied  so  as  to  be  forced  to  collect  together  and  migrate ;
in  which  case,  notwithstanding  the  slowness  of  their  motions,
some  few  would  succeed  in  reaching  another  mountain,  some
twenty,  or  even,  perhaps,  fifty  miles  distant :  for  although  the
climate  of  the  hot  intervening  plains  would  be  unfavourable

t

to  them,  they  might  support  it  for  a  time,  and  would  find  there
abundance  of  insects  on  which  they  feed.  Volcanic  eruptions,
which  at  different  times  have  covered  the  summits  of  some  of
these  lofty  cones  with  steril  sand  and  ashes,  may  have  occasion¬
ally  contributed  to  force  on  these  migrations.

Drifting  of  animals  on  ice-floes .- — The  power  of  the  terres¬
trial  mammalia  to  cross  the  sea  is  very  limited,  and  we  have
already  stated  that  the  same  species  is  scarcely  ever  common  to
districts  widely  separated  by  the  ocean.  If  there  be  some
exceptions  to  this  rule  they  generally  admit  of  explanation,  for
there  are  natural  means  whereby  some  animals  may  be  floated
across  the  water,  and  the  sea  sometimes  wears  a  passage
through  a  neck  of  land,  leaving  individuals  of  a  species  on
each  side  of  the  new  channel.  Polar  bears  are  known  to  have
been  frequently  drifted  on  the  ice  from  Greenland  to  Iceland  ;
they  can  also  swim  to  considerable  distances,  for  Captain  Parry,
on  the  return  of  his  ships  through  Barrow’s  Strait,  met  with  a
bear  swimming  in  the  water  about  midway  between  the  shores,
which  were  about  forty  miles  apart,  and  where  no  ice  was  in
sight  *.  4  Near  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,’  observes  Scoresby,
4  they  have  been  seen  on  the  ice  in  such  quantities,  that  they
were  compared  to  flocks  of  sheep  on  a  common — and  they  are
often  found  on  field-ice,  above  two  hundred  miles  from  the
shore  f-’  Wolves,  in  the  arctic  regions,  often  venture  upon
the  ice  near  the  shore,  for  the  purpose  of  preying  upon  young

*  Append,  to  Parry’s  Second  Voyage,  years  1819-20.
t  Account  of  the  Arctic  Regions,  vol.  i.  p.  518.


Ch.  VI.]


ICE-FLOES  AND  FLOATING  ISLANDS.


101


seals  which  they  surprise  when  asleep.  When  these  ice-floes
get  detach ed,  the  wolves  are  often  carried  out  to  sea,  and
though  some  may  be  drifted  to  islands  or  continents,  the  greater
part  of  them  perish,  and  have  been  often  heard  in  this  situa¬
tion  howling  dreadfully,  as  they  die  by  famine  *.

During  the  short  summer  which  visits  Melville  Island,
various  plants  push  forth  their  leaves  and  flowers  the  moment
the  snow  is  off  the  ground,  and  form  a  carpet  spangled  with
the  most  lively  colours.  These  secluded  spots  are  reached
annually  by  herds  of  musk-oxen  and  rein-deer,  which  travel
immense  distances  over  dreary  and  desolate  regions,  to  graze
undisturbed  on  these  luxuriant  pastures  -f*.  The  rein-deer
often  pass  along  in  the  same  manner,  by  the  chain  of  the  Aleu¬
tian  Islands,  from  Behring’s  Straits  to  Kamtschatka,  subsist¬
ing  on  the  moss  found  in  these  islands  during  their  passage  J.

On  floating  islands  of  drift-wood . — Within  the  tropics  there
are  no  ice-floes ;  but,  as  if  to  compensate  for  that  mode  of
transportation,  there  are  floating  isles  of  matted  trees,  which
are  often  borne  along  through  considerable  spaces.  These  are
sometimes  seen  sailing  at  the  distance  of  fifty  or  one  hundred
miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,  with  living  trees  standing
erect  upon  them.  The  Amazon,  the  Congo,  and  the  Orinoco,
also  produce  these  verdant  rafts,  which  are  formed  in  the  man¬
ner  already  described  when  speaking  of  the  great  raft  of  the
Atchafalaya,  an  arm  of  the  Mississippi,  where  a  natural  bridge
of  timber,  ten  miles  long,  and  more  than  two  hundred  yards
wide,  has  existed  for  more  than  forty  years,  supporting  a
luxurious  vegetation,  and  rising  and  sinking  with  the  water
which  flows  beneath  it  §.  That  this  enormous  mass  will  one
day  break  up  and  send  down  a  multitude  of  floating  islands  to
the  gulf  of  Mexico,  is  the  hope  and  well-founded  expectation
of  the  inhabitants  of  Louisiana.

On  these  green  isles  of  the  Mississippi,  observes  Make-

*  Turton,  in  a  note  to  Goldsmith’s  Nat.  Hist.,  vol.  iii.  p.  43.
f  Supplement  to  Parry’s  First  Voyage  of  Disc.,  p.  189.

+  Godman’s  American  Nat.  Hist.,  vol.  i.  p.  22.  §  Seo  ante,  vol.  i.  chap.  xi.


102


FLOATING  ISLANDS.


[Ch.  VI.


Brim  *,  young  trees  take  root,  and  the  pisliar  and  nenuphar
display  their  yellow  flowers :  there  serpents,  birds,  and  the  cay¬
man  alligator,  come  to  repose,  and  all  are  sometimes  carried  to
the  sea,  and  engulphed  in  its  waters.

In  a  memoir  lately  published,  a  naval  officer  informs  us,  that
as  he  returned  from  China  by  the  eastern  passage,  he  fell  in,
among  the  Moluccas,  with  several  small  floating  islands  of
this  kind,  covered  with  mangrove-trees  interwoven  with  under¬
wood.  The  trees  and  shrubs  retained  their  verdure,  receiving
nourishment  from  a  stratum  of  soil  which  formed  a  white
beach  round  the  margin  of  each  raft,  where  it  wras  exposed  to
the  washing  of  the  waves  and  the  rays  of  the  sunf.  The  oc¬
currence  of  soil  in  such  situations  may  easily  be  explained,  for
all  the  natural  bridges  of  timber  which  occasionally  connect
the  islands  of  the  Ganges,  Mississippi,  and  other  rivers,  with
their  banks,  are  exposed  to  floods  of  water,  densely  charged
with  sediment.

Captain  W.  XL  Smyth  informs  me,  that  when  cruizing  in
the  Cornwallis  amidst  the  Philippine  Islands,  he  has  more
than  once  seen,  after  those  dreadful  hurricanes  called  typhoons,
floating  islands  of  wood,  with  trees  growing  upon  them,  and
that  ships  have  sometimes  been  in  imminent  peril,  in  conse¬
quence  of  mistaking  them  for  terra-firma.

It  is  highly  interesting  to  trace,  in  imagination,  the  effects
of  the  passage  of  these  rafts  from  the  mouth  of  a  large  river  to
some  archipelago,  such  as  those  in  the  South  Pacific,  raised
from  the  deep,  in  comparatively  modem  times,  by  the  opera¬
tions  of  the  volcano  and  the  earthquake,  and  the  joint  labours
of  coral  animals  and  testacea.  If  a  storm  arise,  and  the  frail
vessel  be  wrecked,  still  many  a  bird  and  insect  may  succeed  in
gaining,  by  flight,  some  island  of  the  newly-formed  group,
while  the  seeds  and  berries  of  herbs  and  shrubs,  which  fall  into
the  waves,  may  be  thrown  upon  the  strand.  But  if  the  surface
of  the  deep  be  calm,  and  the  rafts  are  carried  along  by  a  cur-

*  System  of  Geography,  vol.  y.  p.  157.
f  United  Service  Journal,  No.  24,  p.  697.


Ch.  VI.]


MIGRATIONS  OF  THE  CETACEA,


103


rent,  or  wafted  by  some  slight  breath  of  air  fanning  the  foliage
of  the  green  trees,  it  may  arrive,  after  a  passage  of  several
weeks,  at  the  bay  of  an  island,  into  which  its  plants  and  ani¬
mals  may  be  poured  out  as  from  an  ark,  and  thus  a  colony  of
several  hundred  new  species  may  at  once  be  naturalized.

We  may  remind  the  reader,  that  we  merely  advert  to  the
transportation  of  these  rafts  as  of  extremely  rare  and  acci¬
dental  occurrence  ;  but  it  may  account,  in  tropical  countries,  for
some  of  the  rare  exceptions  to  the  general  law,  of  the  confined
range  of  species.

Migrations  of  the  Cetacea . — Many  of  the  cetacea,  the  whales
of  the  northern  seas  for  example,  are  found  to  desert  one  tract
of  the  sea,  and  to  visit  another  very  distant,  when  they  are
urged  by  want  of  food  or  danger.  The  seals  also  retire  from
the  coasts  of  Greenland  in  July,  return  again  in  September,
and  depart  again  in  March,  to  return  in  June.  They  proceed
in  great  droves  northwards,  directing  their  course  where  the
sea  is  most  free  from  ice,  and  are  observed  to  be  extremely  fat
when  they  set  out  on  this  expedition,  and  very  lean  when  they
come  home  again  *.

Species  of  the  Mediterranean ,  Euxine ,  and  Caspian ,  iden¬
tical. — Some  naturalists  have  wondered  that  the  sea  calves,
dolphins,  and  other  marine  mammalia  of  the  Mediterranean  and
Euxine  should  be  identical  with  those  found  in  the  Caspian  ;
and  among  other  fanciful  theories,  they  have  suggested  that
they  may  dive  through  subterranean  conduits,  and  thus  pass
from  one  sea  into  the  other.  But  as  the  occurrence  of  wolves
and  other  noxious  animals,  on  both  sides  of  the  British  channel,
was  adduced  by  Desmarest,  as  one  of  many  arguments  to
prove  that  England  and  France  were  once  united,  so  the  cor¬
respondence  of  the  aquatic  species  of  the  inland  seas  of  Asia
with  those  of  the  Black  Sea,  tends  to  confirm  the  hypothesis
for  which  there  are  abundance  of  independent  geological  data,
that  those  seas  were  connected  together  by  straits  at  no  remote
period  of  the  earth’s  history.

*  Kraut z,  vol.  i.  p.  129,  cited  by  Goldsmith,  Nat.  Hist.,  vol.  iii.  p.  260.


104


habitations  op  birds.


[Ch.  VI.


Geographical  Distribution  and  Migrations  of  Birds .

We  shall  now  offer  a  few  observations  on  some  of  the  other
divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom.  Birds,  notwithstanding  their
great  locomotive  powers,  form  no  exception  to  the  general  rules
already  laid  down,  but,  in  this  class  as  in  plants  and  terrestrial
quadrupeds,  different  groups  of  species  are  circumscribed
within  definite  limits.  We  find,  for  example,  one  assemblage
in  the  Brazils,  another  in  the  same  latitudes  in  central  Africa,
another  in  India,  and  a  fourth  in  New  Holland.  But  some
species  again  are  so  local,  that  in  the  same  archipelago,  a  single
island  frequently  contains  a  species  found  in  no  other  spot  on
the  whole  earth  ;  as  is  exemplified  in  some  of  the  parrot  tribes.
In  this  extensive  family,  which  are,  with  few  exceptions,  in-*
habitants  of  tropical  regions,  the  American  group  has  not  one
in  common  with  the  African,  nor  either  of  these  with  the  par¬
rots  of  India  *.

Another  illustration  is  afforded  by  that  minute  and  beautiful
tribe,  the  humming  birds.  The  whole  of  them  are,  in  the
first  place,  peculiar  to  the  new  world ;  but  there,  although
some  have  a  considerable  range,  as  the  Trochilus  flammifrons
which  is  common  to  Lima,  the  island  of  J uan  Fernandez  and
the  Straits  of  Magellan  f,  other  species  are  peculiar  to  some  of
the  West  India  islands,  and  have  not  been  found  elsewhere  in
the  western  hemisphere.  The  ornithology  of  our  own  country
affords  a  no  less  striking  exemplification  of  the  same  law,  for
the  common  grouse  ( Tetrao  scoticus )  occurs  nowhere  in  the
known  world  except  in  the  British  isles.

Some  species  of  the  vulture  tribe  are  said  to  be  true  cos¬
mopolites,  and  the  common  wild  goose,  Anas  anser ,  Linn.,  if
we  may  believe  some  ornithologists,  is  a  general  inhabitant
of  the  globe,  being  met  with  from  Lapland  to  the  Cape  of

*  Prichard,  vol.  i.  p.  47.

f  Captain  King,  during  liis  late  survey,  found  this  bird  at  the  Straits  of  Magel¬
lan,  in  the  mouth  of  May,  the  depth  of  winter,  sucking  the  flowers  of  the  large
species  of  fuchsia,  then  in  bloom  in  the  midst  of  a  shower  of  snow.


Ch.  VI.]


TIlEIIl  POWERS  OF  DIFFUSION.


105


Good  Hope,  frequent  in  Arabia,  Persia,  China,  and  Japan,
and  in  the  American  continent,  from  Hudson’s  Bay  to  South
Carolina  *.  An  extraordinary  range  has  also  been  attributed
to  the  nightingale,  which  extends  from  western  Europe  to
Persia,  and  still  farther.  In  a  work  entitled  Specchio  Compa¬
rative  y ,  by  Charles  Bonaparte,  many  species  of  birds  are
enumerated  as  common  to  Rome  and  Philadelphia ;  the
greater  part  of  these  are  migratory,  but  some  of  them,  such
as  the  long-eared  owl,  Strix  otus,  are  permanent  in  both
countries.

Their  facilities  of  diffusion. — In  parallel  zones  of  the
northern  and  southern  hemispheres,  a  great  general  corre¬
spondence  of  form  is  observable,  both  in  the  aquatic  and
terrestrial  birds,  but  there  is  rarely  any  specific  identity ;  and
this  phenomenon  is  truly  remarkable,  when  we  recollect  the
readiness  with  which  some  birds,  not  gifted  with  great  powers
of  flight,  shift  their  quarters  to  different  regions,  and  the
facility  with  which  others,  possessing  great  strength  of  wing,
perform  their  aerial  voyages.  Some  migrate  periodically  from
high  latitudes,  to  avoid  the  cold  of  winter,  and  the  accompani-
ments  of  cold, — scarcity  of  insects  and  vegetable  food  ;  others,
it  is  said,  for  some  particular  kinds  of  nutriment  required  for
rearing  their  young:  for  this  purpose,  they  often  traverse  the
ocean  for  thousands  of  miles,  and  recross  it  at  other  periods,
with  equal  security.

Periodical  migrations,  no  less  regular,  are  mentioned  by
Humboldt,  of  many  American  water-fowl,  from  one  part  of  the
tropics  to  another  in  a  zone  where  there  is  the  same  tempe¬
rature  throughout  the  year.  Immense  flights  of  ducks  leave
the  valley  of  the  Orinoco,  when  the  increasing  depth  of  its
waters  and  the  flooding  of  its  shores  prevent  them  from  catch¬
ing  fish,  insects,  and  aquatic  worms.  They  then  betake  them¬
selves  to  the  Rio  Negro  and  Amazon,  having  passed  from
the  eighth  and  third  degrees  of  north  latitude,  to  the  first  and

*  Bewick’s  Birds,  vol.  ii.  p.  294,  who  cites  Lathann
f  Pisa,  1827  (not  sold).


106


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  AND


[Ch.  VI.


fourth  of  south  latitude,  directing  their  course  south-south¬
east.  In  September,  when  the  Orinoco  decreases  and  re-enters
into  its  channel,  these  birds  return  northwards  *.

The  insectivorous  swallows  which  visit  our  island  would
perish  during  winter,  if  they  did  not  annually  repair  to  warmer
climes.  It  is  supposed,  that  in  these  aerial  excursions  the
average  rapidity  of  their  flight  is  not  less  than  fifty  miles  an
hour,  so  that,  when  aided  by  the  wind,  they  soon  reach  warmer
latitudes.  Spallanzani  calculated  that  the  swallow^  can  fly  at
the  rate  of  ninety-two  miles  an  hour,  and  conceived  that  the
rapidity  of  the  swift  might  be  three  times  greater  -f.  The
rate  of  flight  of  the  eider  duck  ( Anas  mollis sirn a)  has  been
ascertained  to  be  ninety  miles  an  hour ;  and  that  of  hawks
and  several  other  tribes  to  be  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles.

When  we  reflect  how  easily  different  species,  in  a  great  lapse
of  ages,  may  be  each  overtaken  by  gales  and  hurricanes,  and,
abandoning  themselves  to  the  tempest,  be  scattered  at  random
through  various  regions  of  the  earth’s  surface,  where  the  tem¬
perature  of  the  atmosphere,  the  vegetation,  and  the  animal
productions,  might  be  suited  to  their  wants,  we  shall  be  pre¬
pared  to  find  some  species  capriciously  distributed,  and  to  be
sometimes  unable  to  determine  the  native  countries  of  each.
Captain  Smyth  informs  me,  that  when  engaged  in  his  survey
of  the  Mediterranean,  he  encountered  a  gale  in  the  gulf  of
Lyons,  at  the  distance  of  between  twenty  and  thirty  leagues
from  the  coast  of  France,  which  bore  along  many  land  birds
of  various  species,  some  of  which  alighted  on  the  ship,  while
others  were  thrown  with  violence  against  the  sails.  In  this
manner  islands  become  tenanted  by  species  of  birds  inhabiting
the  nearest  main  land.

Geographical  Distribution  and  Dissemination  of  Reptiles.

A  few  facts  respecting  the  third  great  class  of  vertebrated
animals  will  suffice  to  show  that  the  plan  of  nature  in  regard

*  Voyage  aux  Regions  Equinoxiales,  tome  vii.  p.  429.
t  Fleming,  Phil,  Zool.,  vol.  ii.  p.  43,


Ch.  VI.]


DISSEMINATION  OF  REPTILES.


107


to  their  location  on  the  globe  is  perfectly  analogous  to  that
already  exemplified  in  other  parts  of  the  organic  creation,  and
has  probably  been  determined  by  similar  causes.

Habitations  of  Reptiles. — Of  the  great  saurians,  the  gavials
which  inhabit  the  Ganges,  differ  from  the  cayman  of  America,
or  the  crocodile  of  the  Nile.  The  monitor  of  New  Holland  is
specifically  distinct  from  the  Indian  species;  these  latter  again
from  the  African,  and  all  from  their  congeners  in  the  new
world.  So  in  regard  to  snakes;  we  find  the  boa  of  America,
represented  by  the  python,  a  different  though  nearly  allied
genus,  in  India.  America  is  the  country  of  the  rattle-snake,
Africa  of  the  cerastes,  and  Asia  of  the  hooded  snake  or  cobra
di  capello.

Reptiles  in  Ireland . — There  is  a  legend  that  St.  Patrick
expelled  all  reptiles  from  Ireland,  and  certain  it  is  that  none
of  the  three  species  of  snakes  common  in  England,  nor  the
toad,  have  been  observed  there  by  naturalists.  They  have
our  common  frog,  and  our  water-newt,  and  according  to  Ray
(Quad.  264.)  the  green  lizard  ( Lacerta  viridis).  Schultes  the
botanist  observed,  a  few  years  since,  in  his  tour  in  England,
that  there  were  two  great  islands  in  Europe  of  which  the  floras
were  unknown,  Sardinia  and  Ireland ;  we  believe  he  might
also  have  added  the  fauna  of  the  latter  country.

Migrations  of  the  larger  Reptiles. — The  range  of  the  large
reptiles  is,  in  general,  quite  as  limited  as  that  of  some  orders  of
the  terrestrial  mammalia.  The  great  saurians  sometimes  cross
a  considerable  tract,  in  order  to  pass  from  one  river  to  another ;
but  their  motions  by  land  are  generally  slower  than  those  of
quadrupeds.  By  water,  however,  they  may  transport  them¬
selves  to  distant  situations  more  easily.  The  larger  alligator
of  the  Ganges  sometimes  descends  beyond  the  brackish  water
of  the  Delta  into  the  sea,  and  in  such  cases  it  might  chance
to  be  drifted  away  by  a  current,  and  survive  till  it  reached  a
shore  at  some  distance ;  but  such  casualties  are  probably  very
rare  *.

*  Malte-Brun  says  (Syst,  of  Geog,,  vol.  viii  \>.  193),  that  a  crocodile  is  still  pre-


108


DISSEMINATION  OF  REPTILES.


[Ch.  VI.


Migrations  of  Turtles. — Turtles  migrate  in  large  droves
from  one  part  of  the  ocean  to  another  during  the  ovipositing
season.  Dr.  Fleming  *  mentions  that  an  individual  of  the
hawk’s  bill  turtle  ( Chelonia  imbricatd)  so  common  in  the
American  seas,  has  been  taken  at  Papa  Stour,  one  of  the  West
Zetland  islands ;  and  according  to  Sibbald,  ‘  the  same  animal
came  into  Orkney,1  Another  was  taken  in  1774,  in  the  Severn
according  to  Turton.  Two  instances  also  of  the  occurrence  of
the  leathern  tortoise  (C.  coriacea ),  on  the  coast  of  Cornwall,
in  1756,  are  mentioned  by  Borlase.  These  animals  of  more
southern  seas  can  only  be  considered  as  stragglers  attracted  to
our  shores  during  uncommonly  warm  seasons  by  an  abundant
supply  of  food,  or  driven  by  storms  to  high  latitudes.

Boa  Constrictor  drifted  by  currents  to  St.  Vincent’s. — Some
of  the  smaller  reptiles  lay  their  eggs  on  aquatic  plants ;  and
these  must  often  be  borne  rapidly  by  rivers,  and  conveyed  to
distant  regions  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  dispersion  of  seeds
before  adverted  to.  But  that  the  larger  ophidians  may  be
themselves  transported  across  the  seas  is  evident  from  the  fol¬
lowing  most  interesting  account  of  the  arrival  of  one  at  the
island  of  St.  Vincent.  It  is  worthy  of  being  recorded,  says  the
Rev.  L.  Guildingf,  6  that  a  noble  specimen  of  the  Boa  con¬
strictor  was  lately  conveyed  to  us  by  the  currents,  twisted
round  the  trunk  of  a  large  sound  cedar  tree,  which  had  pro¬
bably  been  washed  out  of  the  bank  by  the  floods  of  some  great
South  American  river,  while  its  huge  folds  hung  on  the
branches,  as  it  waited  for  its  prey.  The  monster  was  fortu¬
nately  destroyed  after  killing  a  few  sheep,  and  his  skeleton
now  hangs  before  me  in  my  study,  putting  me  in  mind  how
much  reason  I  might  have  had  to  fear  in  my  future  rambles
through  the  forests  of  St.  Vincent,  had  this  formidable  reptile
been  a  pregnant  female,  and  escaped  to  a  safe  retreat.’

served  at  Lyons  that  was  taken  from  the  Rhone,  about  two  centuries  ago ;  but  no
particulars  are  given.

*  Brit.  Animals,  p.  149;  who  cites  Sibbakl.
f  Zool.  Journ.,  vol.  iii.  p.  406.  Dec.  1827.


CHAPTER  VII.


Laws  which  regulate  the  geographical  distribution  of  species,  continued— Geo¬
graphical  distribution  and  migrations  of  fish-— of  testacea — Causes  which  limit
the  extension  of  many  species — Their  mode  of  diffusion — Geographical  range
of  zoophytes — Their  powers  of  dissemination — Distribution  of  insects — Migra¬
tory  instincts  of  some  species — Certain  types  characterize  particular  countries—
Their  means  of  dissemination —  Geographical  distribution  and  diffusion  of  man
—Speculations  as  to  the  birth-place  of  the  human  species — Progress  of  human
population — Drifting  of  canoes  to  vast  distances — On  the  involuntary  influence
of  man  in  extending  the  range  of  many  other  species.

LAWS  WHICH  REGULATE  THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION

OF  SPECIES,  continued.

Geographical  Distribution  and  Migrations  of  Fish. ■ — Although
we  are  less  acquainted  with  the  habitations  of  marine  ani¬
mals  than  with  the  grouping  of  the  terrestrial  species  before
described,  yet  it  is  well  ascertained  that  their  distribution
is  governed  by  the  same  general  laws.  The  testimony  borne
by  MM.  Peron  and  Lesueur  to  this  important  fact  is  *re-
markably  strong.  These  eminent  naturalists,  after  collect¬
ing  and  describing  many  thousand  species  of  marine  animals
which  they  brought  to  Europe  from  the  southern  hemisphere,
insist  most  emphatically  on  their  distinctness  from  those  north
of  the  equator ;  and  this  remark  they  extend  to  animals  of  all
classes,  from  those  of  a  more  simple  to  those  of  a  more  com¬
plex  organization,  from  the  sponges  and  medusae  to  the  cetacea.
f  Among  all  those  which  we  have  been  able  to  examine/  say
they,  ‘  with  our  own’  eyes,  or  with  regard  to  which  it  has  ap¬
peared  to  us  possible  to  pronounce  with  certainty,  there  is  not
a  single  animal  of  the  southern  regions  which  is  not  distin¬
guished  by  essential  characters  from  the  analogous  species  in
the  northern  seas

The  fish  of  the  Arabian  gulf  are  said  to  differ  entirely  from


*  Sur  les  Habitations  des  Animaux  Marins. —  Ann.  du  Mus.,  tom.  xv.,  cited  by
Prichard,  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  51.


110


MIGRATIONS  OF  FISH.


[Ch.  VII.


those  of  the  Mediterranean,  notwithstanding  the  proximity  of
these  seas.  The  flying-fish  are  found  (some  stragglers  ex¬
cepted)  only  between  the  tropics, — in  receding  from  the  line
they  never  approach  a  higher  latitude  than  the  fortieth  paral¬
lel.  Those  inhabiting  the  Atlantic  are  said  to  be  different
species  from  those  of  the  eastern  ocean  *.  The  electric  gym-
notus  belongs  exclusively  to  America,  the  trembler,  or  Silurus
electricus ,  to  the  rivers  of  Africa  ;  but  the  torpedo,  or  cramp-
fish,  is  said  to  be  dispersed  over  all  tropical  and  many  temperate
seas  f .

All  are  aware  that  there  are  certain  fish  of  passage  which
have  their  periodical  migrations  like  some  tribes  of  birds.
The  salmon,  towards  the  season  of  spawning,  ascends  the  rivers
for  hundreds  of  miles,  leaping  up  the  cataracts  which  it  meets
in  its  course,  and  then  retreats  again  into  the  depths  of  the
ocean.  The  herring  and  the  haddock,  after  frequenting  cer¬
tain  shores  in  vast  shoals  for  a  series  of  years,  desert  them  again
and  resort  to  other  stations,  followed  by  the  species  which  prey
on  them.  Eels  are  said  to  descend  into  the  sea  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  producing  their  young,  which  are  seen  returning  into
the  fresh  water  by  myriads,  extremely  small  in  size,  but  pos¬
sessing  the  power  of  surmounting  every  obstacle  which  occurs
in  the  course  of  a  river,  by  applying  their  slimy  and  glutinous
bodies  to  the  surface  of  rocks,  or  the  gates  of  a  lock,  even  when
dry,  and  so  climbing  over  it  J.

GmeJin  says,  that  the  anseres  subsist  in  their  migrations
on  the  spawn  of  fish,  and  that  oftentimes  when  they  void  the
>pawn,  two  or  three  days  afterwards,  the  eggs  retain  their
vitality  unimpaired  §.  When  there  are  many  disconnected
freshwater  lakes  in  a  mountainous  region,  at  various  elevations,
each  remote  from  the  other,  it  has  often  been  deemed  incon¬
ceivable  how  they  could  all  become  stocked  with  fish  from  one
common  source  ;  but  it  has  been  suggested,  that  the  minute
eggs  of  these  animals  may  sometimes  be  entangled  in  the  fea-

*  Malte-Brun,  vol.  i.  p.  507.  f  Ibid.

+  Phil.  Trans.,  1747,  p.  395.  §  Amoen.  Acad.,  Essay  75.


Ch.  VI L]


MIGRATIONS  OF  TESTACEA.


thers  of  water-fowl.  These,  when  they  alight  to  wash  and
plume  themselves  in  the  water,  may  often  unconsciously  con¬
tribute  to  propagate  swarms  of  fish,  which,  in  due  season,  will
supply  them  with  food.  Some  of  the  water-beetles,  also,  as
the  dyticidse,  are  amphibious,  and  in  the  evening  quit  their
lakes  and  pools,  and  flying  in  the  air  transport  the  minute  ova
of  fishes  to  distant  waters.  In  this  manner  some  naturalists
account  for  the  fry  of  fish  appearing  occasionally  in  small  pools
caused  by  heavy  rains.

Geographical  Distribution  and  Migrations  of  Testacea.

The  testacea,  of  which  so  great  a  variety  of  species  occurs
in  the  sea,  are  a  class  of  animals  of  peculiar  importance  to  the
geologist,  because  their  remains  are  found  in  strata  of  all  ages,
and  generally  in  a  higher  state  of  preservation  than  those  of
other  organic  beings.  Climate  has  a  decided  influence  on  the
geographical  distribution  of  species  in  this  class  ;  but  as  there
is  much  greater  uniformity  of  temperature  in  the  waters  of  the
ocean,  than  in  the  atmosphere  which  invests  the  land,  the  dif¬
fusion  of  many  marine  molluscs  is  extensive.

Causes  which  limit  the  extension  of  many  species. — Some
forms,  as  those  of  the  nautili,  volutte,  and  cyprsea?,  attain  their
fullest  development  in  warm  latitudes ;  and  most  of  their
species  are  exclusively  confined  to  them.  Peron  and  Lesueur
remark,  that  the  Haliotis  gigantea,  of  Van  Diemen’s  land,  and
the  Phasianella,  diminish  in  size  as  they  follow  the  coasts  of
New  Holland  to  King  George’s  Sound,  and  entirely  disappear
beyond  them  *.  Almost  all  the  species  of  South  American
shells  differ  from  those  of  the  Indian  archipelago  in  the  same
latitudes  ;  and  on  the  shores  of  many  of  the  isles  of  the  South
Pacific,  peculiar  species  have  been  obtained.  But  we  are  as
yet  by  no  means  able  to  sketch  out  the  submarine  provinces  of
shells,  as  the  botanist  has  done  those  of  the  terrestrial,  and  even
of  the  subaqueous  plants.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,
that  the  boundaries  in  this  case,  both  of  latitude  and  longitude,

*  Ann.  da  May.  d’Hist.  Nat.,  tom.  xv.


112  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  AND  [Ch.  VII.

will  be  found  in  general  well  defined.  The  continuous  lines  of
continents,  stretching  from  north  to  south,  prevent  a  particular
species  from  belting  the  globe,  and  following  the  direction  of
the  isothermal  lines.  The  inhabitants  of  the  .West  Indian
seas,  for  example,  cannot  enter  the  Pacific  without  passing
round  through  the  inclement  climate  of  Cape  Horn.  Currents
also  flowing  permanently  in  certain  directions,  and  the  influx
at  certain  points  of  great  bodies  of  fresh  water,  limit  the  exten¬
sion  of  many  species.  Those  which  love  deep  water  are  ar¬
rested  by  shoals  ;  others,  fitted  for  shallow  seas,  cannot  migrate
across  unfathomable  abysses.

Great  range  of  some  species. — Some  few  species,  however,

have  an  immense  range,  as  the  Bulla  aperta  for  example,  which

is  found  in  almost  all  zones.  The  habitation  of  the  Bulla

striata  extends  from  the  shores  of  Egypt  to  the  coasts  of  Eng-

•»

land  and  France,  and  it  recurs  again  in  the  seas  of  Senegal,
Brazil,  and  the  West  Indies.  The  Turbo  petrceus  inhabits  the
seas  of  England,  Guadaloupe,  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  *,
and  many  instances  of  a  similar  kind  might  be  enumerated.

The  lanthina  fragilis  has  wandered  into  almost  every  sea,
both  tropical  and  temperate.  This  4  common  oceanic  snail  ’
derives  its  buoyancy  from  an  admirably-contrived  float,  which
has  enabled  it  not  only  to  disperse  itself  so  universally,  but  to
become  an  active  agent  in  disseminating  other  species  which
attach  themselves,  or  their  ova,  to  its  shell  f .

It  is  evident  that  among  the  testacea,  as  in  plants  and  the
higher  order  of  animals,  there  are  species  which  have  a  power
of  enduring  a  wide  range  of  temperature,  whereas  others
cannot  resist  a  considerable  change  of  climate.  Among  the
freshwater  molluscs,  and  those  which  breathe  air,  Ferrussac


*  Fer.  Art.  Geogr.  Fhys.  Diet.  Class.  d’FIist.  Nat.

-j-  Mr.  Broderip  possesses  specimens  of  lanthina  fragilis ,  bearing  more  than  one
species  of  barnacle  ( Pentelasmis ),  presented  to  him  by  Captain  King  and  Lieu¬
tenant  Graves.  One' of  these  specimens,  taken  alive  by  Captain  King  far  at  sea,
and  a  little  north  of  the  equator,  is  so  loaded  with  those  cirrhipeds,  and  with
numerous  ova,  that  all  the  upper  part,  of  its  shell  is  invisible.


Ch.  VII.]


M IGRATIONS  OF  TESTACEA.


113


mentions  a  few  instances  of  species  of  almost  universal  dif¬
fusion.

The  Helix  putris  ( Succinea  putris ,  Lam.),  so  common  in
Europe,  where  it  reaches  from  Norway  to  Italy,  is  also  found
in  Egypt,  in  the  United  States,  in  Newfoundland,  Jamaica,
Tranquebar,  and,  it  is  even  said,  in  the  Marianne  Isles.  As
this  animal  inhabits  constantly  the  borders  of  pools  and  streams
where  there  is  much  moisture,  it  is  not  impossible  that  different
water-fowl  have  been  the  agents  of  spreading  some  of  its  mi¬
nute  eggs,  which  may  have  been  entangled  in  their  feathers.
Helix  aspersa,  one  of  the  commonest  of  our  larger  land-shells,
is  found  in  South  America,  at  the  foot  of  Chimborazo,  as  also
in  Cayenne.  Some  conchologists  have  conjectured  that  it  was
accidentally  imported  in  some  ship ;  for  it  is  an  eatable  species,
and  these  animals  are  capable  of  retaining  life,  during  long
voyages,  without  air  or  nourishment*.

Confined  range  of  others. — Mr.  Lowe,  in  a  memoir  just
published  in  the  Cambridge  Transactions,  enumerates  seventy-
one  species  of  land  mollusca,  collected  by  him  in  the  islands  of
Madeira  and  Porto  Santo,  sixty  of  which  belonged  to  the  genus
Helix  alone,  including  as  subgenera  Bulimus  and  Achatina,
and  excluding  Vitrina  and  Clausilia; — -forty-four  of  these  are
new.  It  is  remarkable  that  very  few  of  the  above-mentioned
species  are  common  to  the  neighbouring  archipelago  of  the
Canaries  ;  but  it  is  a  still  more  striking  fact  that,  of  the  sixty
species  of  the  three  genera  above  mentioned,  thirty- one  are
natives  of  Porto  Santo ;  whereas,  in  Madeira,  which  contains
ten  times  the  superficies,  were  found  but  twenty-nine.  Of  these
only  four  were  common  to  the  two  islands,  which  are  only


,!:  Four  individuals  of  a  large  species  of  Bulimus,  from  Valparaiso,  were  brought
to  England  by  Lieutenant  Graves,  who  accompanied  Captain  King  in  his  late
expedition  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan.  They  had  been  packed  up  in  a  box  and
enveloped  in  cotton,  two  for  a  space  of  thirteen,  one  for  seventeen,  and  a  fourth
for  upwards  of  twenty  months ;  but,  on  being  exposed  by  Mr.  Broderip  to  the
warmth  of  a  fire  in  London,  and  provided  with  tepid  water  and  leaves,  they  revived,
and  lived  for  several  months  in  Mr.  Loildmes’  palm-house.

Von.  II.


I


114


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  AND


[Ch.  VII.


separated  by  a  distance  of  twelve  leagues ;  and  two  even  of
these  four  (namely,  Helix  rhodostoma  and  H.  ventrosa )  are
species  of  general  diffusion,  common  to  Madeira,  the  Canaries,
and  the  South  of  Europe  *.

The  confined  range  of  these  molluscs  may  easily  be  ex¬
plained,  if  we  admit  that  species  have  only  one  birth-place ;
and  the  only  problem  to  be  solved  would  relate  to  the  excep¬
tions — to  account  for  the  dissemination  of  some  species  through¬
out  several  isles  and  the  European  continent.  May  not  the
eggs,  when  washed  into  the  sea  by  the  undermining  of  cliffs,
or  blown  by  a  storm  from  the  land,  float  uninjured  to  a  distant
shore  ?

Their  mode  of  diffusion.— Notwithstanding  the  proverbially
slow  motion  of  snails  and  molluscs  in  general,  and  although
many  aquatic  species  adhere  constantly  to  the  same  rock  for
their  whole  lives,  they  are  by  no  means  destitute  of  provision
for  disseminating  themselves  rapidly  over  a  wide  area.  Some
lay  their  eggs  in  a  sponge-like  nidus,  wherein  the  young  remain
enveloped  for  a  time  after  their  birth,  and  this  buoyant  sub¬
stance  floats  far  and  wide  as  readily  as  sea- weed.  The  young
of  other  viviparous  tribes  are  often  borne  along,  entangled  in
sea-weed.  Sometimes  they  are  so  light  that,  like  grains  of
sand,  they  can  be  easily  moved  by  currents.  Balani  and  ser-
pulae  are  sometimes  found  adhering  to  floating  cocoa-nuts,  and
even  to  fragments  of  pumice.  In  rivers  and  lakes,  on  the
other  hand,  aquatic  univalves  usually  attach  their  eggs  to
leaves  and  sticks  which  have  fallen  into  the  water,  and  which
are  liable  to  be  swept  away  during  floods,  from  tributaries
to  the  main  streams,  and  from  thence  to  all  parts  of  the  same
basins.  Particular  species  may  thus  migrate  during  one  sea¬
son  from  the  head  waters  of  the  Mississippi,  or  any  other  great
river,  to  countries  bordering  the  sea,  at  the  distance  of  many
thousand  miles.

An  illustration  of  the  mode  of  attachment  of  these  eggs  will
be  seen  in  the  annexed  cut.  (No.  1.)

*  Camb.  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  iv.,  1831.


Ch.  VII.]


MIGRATIONS  OF  TESTACEA.


115


Eggs  of  fresh-water  Molluscs.

Fig.  1.  Eggs  of  Ampullaria  ovata  (a  fluviatile  species),  fixed  to  a  small  sprig
which  had  fallen  into  the  water.

Fig.  2.  Eggs  of  Planorbis  albus,  attached  to  a  dead  leaf  lying  under  water.

Fig.  3.  Eggs  of  the  common  Limneus  (L.  vulgaris),  adhering  to  a  dead  stick
under  water.

The  habit  of  some  testacea  to  adhere  to  floating  wood  is
proved  by  their  fixing  themselves  to  the  bottoms  of  ships.  By
this  mode  of  conveyance  Mytilus  polymorphus  has  been  brought
from  northern  Europe  to  the  Commercial  Docks  in  the  Thames.,
where  the  species  is  now  domiciled.

A  lobster  ( Astacus  marinus )  was  lately  taken  alive  covered
with  living  mussels  ( Mytilus  edulis)*,  and  a  large  female  crab
( Cancer  pcigurus ),  covered  with  oysters,  and  bearing  also
anomia,  ephippium,  and  actinise,  was  taken  in  April,  1832,  off*
the  English  coast.  The  oysters,  seven  in  number,  include
individuals  of  six  years’  growth,  and  the  tw7o  largest  are  four
inches  long  and  three  inches  and  a  half  broad.  Both  the  crab
and  the  oysters  were  seen  alive  by  Mr.  Robert  Brown  f .

*  The  specimen  is  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  the  Zool.  Soc.  of  London.

t  This  specimen  is  in  the  collection  of  my  friend  Mr.  Broderip,  who  observes
that  this  crab,  which  was  apparently  in  perfect  health,  could  not  have  cast  her
shell  for  six  years,  whereas  some  naturalists  have  stated  that  the  species  moults

I  2


116


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ZOOPHYTES.


[Ch.  ViX.


From  this  example  we  learn  the  manner  in  which  oysters
may  be  diffused  over  every  part  of  the  sea  where  the  crab
wanders ;  and  if  they  are  at  length  carried  to  a  spot  where
there  is  nothing  but  fine  mud,  the  foundation  of  a  new  oyster-
bank  may  be  laid  on  the  death  of  the  crab.  In  this  instance
the  oysters  survived  the  crab  many  days,  and  were  only  killed
at  last  by  long  exposure  to  the  air.

Geographical  Distribution  and  Migrations  of  Zoophytes.

Zoophytes  are  very  imperfectly  known,  but  there  can  be
little  doubt  that  each  maritime  region  possesses  species  peculiar
to  itself.  The  madrepores,  or  Jamelliferous  polyparia,  are
found  in  their  fullest  development  only  in  the  tropical  seas  of
Polynesia  and  the  East  and  West  Indies,,  and  this  family  is
represented  only  by  a  few  species  in  our  seas.  Those  even  of
the  Mediterranean  are  inferior  in  size,  and,  for  the  most  part,
different  from  such  as  inhabit  the  tropics.  Peron  and  Lesueur,
after  studying  the  Holothurise,  Medusas,  and  other  congeners
of  delicate  and  changeable  forms,  came  to  the  conclusion  that
each  kind  has  its  place  of  residence  determined  by  the  tempe¬
rature  necessary  to  support  its  existence.  Thus,  for  example,
they  found  the  abode  of  Pyrosoma  Atlantica  to  be  confined  to
one  particular  region  of  the  Atlantic  ocean*.

Their  powers  of  dissemination. — Let  us  now  inquire  how
the  transportation  of  polyps  from  one  part  of  the  globe  to
another  is  effected.  Many  of  them,  as  in  the  families  Flustra
and  Sertularia,  attach  themselves  to  sea- weed,  and  are  occa¬
sionally  drifted  along  with  it.  Many  fix  themselves  to  the
shells  of  gasteropods,  and  are  thus  borne  along  by  them  to
short  distances.  Some  polyps,  like  the  sea-pens,  swim  freely
about  in  the  sea.  But  the  most  frequent  mode  of  transporta¬
tion  probably  consists  in  the  buoyancy  of  their  eggs,  or  certain
small  vesicles  which  are  detached  and  are  capable  of  becoming

annually,  without  limiting  the  moulting  period  to  the  early  stages  of  growth  of
the  animal.

*  Voy.  aux  Terres  Australes,  tome  i.  p.  492.


Ch.  VII.]


DISTRIBUTION  OF  INSECTS.


117


the  foundation  of  a  new  colony.  These  gems,  as  they  have
been  called,  may  be  swept  along  by  a  wave  that  breaks  upon
a  coral  reef,  and  may  then  be  borne  by  a  current  to  a  distance.

That  some  zoophytes  adhere  to  floating  bodies  is  proved  by
their  being  found  attached  to  the  bottoms  of  ships,  as  in  the
case  of  testacea  before  alluded  to.

Geographical  Distribution  and  Migrations  of  Insects.

Before  we  conclude  our  sketch  of  the  manner  in  which  the
habitable  parts  of  the  earth  are  shared  out  among  particular
assemblages  of  organic  beings,  we  must  offer  a  few  remarks
on  insects,  which,  by  their  numbers,  and  the  variety  of  their
powers  and  instincts,  exert  a  prodigious  influence  in  the  eco¬
nomy  of  animate  nature.  As  a  large  portion  of  these  minute
creatures  are  strictly  dependent  for  their  subsistence  on  certain
species  of  vegetables,  the  entomological  provinces  must  coin¬
cide  in  a  considerable  degree  with  the  botanical.

Certain  types  characterize  particular  countries. — All  the
insects,  says  Latreille,  brought  from  the  eastern  parts  of  Asia
and  China,  whatever  be  their  latitude  and  temperature,  are
distinct  from  those  of  Europe  and  of  Africa.  The  insects  of
the  United  States,  although  often  they  approach  very  close  to
our  own,  are  nevertheless  specifically  distinguishable  by  some
characters.  In  South  America,  the  equinoctial  lands  of  New
Grenada  and  Peru  on  the  one  side,  and  of  Guiana  on  the
other,  contain  for  the  most  part  distinct  groups  ;  the  Andes
forming  the  division,  and  interposing  a  narrow  line  of  severe
cold  between  climates  otherwise  very  similar  *.

Migratory  instincts. — The  insects  of  the  United  States,  even
those  of  the  northern  provinces  as  far  as  Canada,  differ  speci¬
fically  from  the  European,  while  those  of  Greenland  appear  to
be  in  a  great  measure  identical  with  our  own.  Some  insects
are  very  local,  while  a  few,  on  the  contrary,  are  common  to
remote  countries,  between  which  the  torrid  zone  and  the  ocean

*  Geograpliie  Generate  des  Insectes  et  des  Arachnides.  Mein,  du  Mus.  d’Hist
Nat.,  tome  iii.


118


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  AND


[Ch.  VII.


intervene.  Thus  our  painted  lady  butterfly  (  Vanessa  cardui )
reappears  in  New  Holland  and  Japan  with  scarcely  a  varying
streak  *.  The  same  species  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  few  insects
which  are  universally  dispersed  over  the  earth,  being  found  in
Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America ;  and  its  wide  range  is  the
more  interesting  because  it  seems  explained  by  its  migratory
instinct,  seconded,  no  doubt,  by  a  capacity  enjoyed  by  few
species,  of  enduring  a  great  diversity  of  temperature.

A  vast  swarm  of  this  species,  forming  a  column  from  ten  to
fifteen  feet  broad,  was,  a  few  years  since,  observed  in  the  Can¬
ton  de  Vaud ;  they  traversed  the  country  with  great  rapidity
from  north  to  south,  all  flying  onwards  in  regular  order,  close
together,  and  not  turning  from  their  course  on  the  approach  of
other  objects.  Professor  Bonelli,  of  Turin,  observed  in  March
of  the  same  year,  a  similar  swarm  of  the  same  species,  also
directing  their  flight  from  north  to  south,  in  Piedmont,  in  such
immense  numbers,  that  at  night  the  flowers  were  literally
covered  with  them.  They  had  been  traced  from  Coni,  Raconi,
Susa,  &c.  A  similar  flight  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  is
recorded  by  M.  Louch,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of
Turin.  The  fact  is  the  more  worthy  of  notice,  because  the
caterpillars  of  this  butterfly  are  not  gregarious,  but  solitary
from  the  moment  that  they  are  hatched  ;  and  this  instinct  re¬
mains  dormant,  while  generation  after  generation  passes  away,
till  it  suddenly  displays  itself  in  full  energy  when  their  numbers
happen  to  be  in  excess.

Not  only  peculiar  species  but  certain  types  distinguish  par¬
ticular  countries  ;  and  there  are  groups,  observes  Kirby,  which
represent  each  other  in  distant  regions,  whether  in  their  form,
their  functions,  or  in  both.  Thus  the  honey  and  wax  of
Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  are  in  each  case  prepared  by  bees
congenerous  with  our  common  hive-bee  (Apis,  Latr.)  ;  while
in  America,  this  genus  is  nowhere  indigenous,  but  is  replaced
by  Meliponaand  Trigona  ;  and  in  New  Holland  by  a  still  dif¬
ferent,  but  undescribed  typeJ.

*  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  iv.  p.  487.  f  Ibid.,  p.  497.


Ch.  VII.]


MIGRATIONS  OF  INSECTS.


119


Their  means  of  dissemination. — As  almost  all  insects  are
winged,  they  can  readily  spread  themselves  wherever  their  pro¬
gress  is  not  opposed  by  uncongenial  climates,  or  by  seas,  moun¬
tains,  and  other  physical  impediments  ;  and  these  barriers  they
can  sometimes  surmount  by  abandoning  themselves  to  violent
winds,  which,  as  we  before  stated,  when  speaking  of  floating
seeds,  may  in  a  few  hours  carry  them  to  very  considerable  dis¬
tances.  On  the  Andes  some  sphinxes  and  flies  have  been
observed  by  Humboldt,  at  the  height  of  19,180  feet  above
the  sea,  and  which  appeared  to  him  to  have  been  involuntarily
carried  into  these  regions  by  ascending  currents  of  air  *.

White  mentions  a  remarkable  shower  of  aphides  which  seem
to  have  emigrated,  with  an  east  wind,  from  the  great  hop  plan¬
tations  of  Kent  and  Sussex,  and  blackened  the  shrubs  and
vegetables  where  they  alighted  at  Selbourne,  spreading  at  the
same  time  in  great  clouds  all  along  the  vale  from  Farnham  to
Alton.  These  aphides  are  sometimes  accompanied  by  vast
numbers  of  the  common  lady -bird  ( Coccinella  semptem-punc-
tata ),  which  feed  upon  them  f .

It  is  remarkable,  says  Kirby,  that  many  of  the  insects  which
are  occasionally  observed  to  emigrate,  as,  for  instance,  the
libellulse,  coccinellas,  carabi,  cicadse,  &c.,  are  not  usually  social
insects,  but  seem  to  congregate,  like  swallows,  merely  for  the
purpose  of  emigration  J.  Here,  therefore,  we  have  an  example
of  an  instinct  developing  itself  on  certain  rare  emergencies,
causing  unsocial  species  to  become  gregarious,  and  to  venture
sometimes  even  to  cross  the  ocean.

Diffused  by  winds  and  currents.— To  the  armies  of  locusts
darkening  the  air  in  Africa,  and  traversing  the  globe  from
Turkey  to  our  southern  counties  in  England,  we  need  not  here
allude.  When  the  western  gales  sweep  over  the  Pampas,  they
bear  along  with  them  myriads  of  insects  of  various  kinds.  As
a  proof  of  the  manner  in  which  species  may  be  thus  diffused,

*  Description  of  the  Equatorial  Regions — Malte-Brun,  vol.  v.  p.  379.
f  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  ii.  p,  9,  1817.  J  Ibid.,  p.  12.


120


DISTRIBUTION  OF  INSECTS.


[Ch.  VII.


we  may  mention  that  when  the  Creole  frigate  was  lying  in  the
outer  roads  off  Buenos  Ayres,  in  1819,  at  the  distance  of  six
miles  from  the  land,  her  decks  and  rigging  were  suddenly
covered  with  thousands  of  flies  and  grains  of  sand.  The  sides
of  the  vessel  had  just  received  a  fresh  coat  of  paint,  to  which
the  insects  adhered  in  such  numbers  as  to  spot  and  disfigure
the  vessel,  and  to  render  it  necessary  partially  to  renew  the
paint  *.  Captain  W.  H.  Smyth  was  obliged  to  repaint  his
vessel,  the  Adventure,  in  the  Mediterranean,  from  the  same
cause.  He  was  on  his  way  from  Malta  to  Tripoli,  when  a
southern  wind  blowing  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  then  one  hun¬
dred  miles  distant,  drove  such  myriads  of  flies  upon  the  fresh
paint,  that  not  the  smallest  point  was  left  unoccupied  by  insects.

To  the  southward  of  the  river  Plate,  off  Cape  St.  Antonio,
and  at  the  distance  of  fifty  miles  from  land,  several  large  dra¬
gon-flies  alighted  on  the  Adventure  frigate,  during  Captain
King’s  late  expedition  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan.  If  the  wind
abates  when  insects  are  thus  crossing  the  sea,  the  most  delicate
species  are  not  necessarily  drowned,  for  many  can  repose  with¬
out  sinking  on  the  unruffled  surface  of  the  deep.  The  slender
long-legged  tipulae  have  been  seen  standing  on  the  surface  of
the  sea,  when  driven  out  far  from  our  coast,  and  took  wing
immediately  on  being  approached  f.  Exotic  beetles  are  some¬
times  thrown  on  our  shore,  which  revive  after  having  been  long
drenched  in  salt-water;  and  the  periodical  appearance  of  some
conspicuous  butterflies  amongst  us,  after  being  unseen  for  five
or  fifty  years,  has  been  ascribed,  not  without  probability,  to  the
agency  of  the  winds.

%  rivers,  animals  and  birds. — Inundations  of  rivers,  ob¬
serves  Kirby,  if  they  happen  at  any  season  except  in  the  depth
of  winter,  always  carry  down  a  number  of  insects,  floating  on.
the  surface  of  bits  of  stick,  weeds,  & c.,  so  that  when  the  waters
subside,  the  entomologist  may  generally  reap  a  plentiful  har-

*  I  am  indebted  to  Lieutenant  Graves,  R.  N.,  for  this  information.

f  I  state  this  fact  on  the  authority  of  my  friend,  Mr.  John  Curtis.


Ch.  VII.]


DIFFUSION  OF  MAN.


121


vest.  In  the  dissemination,  moreover,  of  these  minute  beings,
as  in  that  of  plants,  the  larger  animals  play  their  part.  Insects
are,  in  numberless  instances,  borne  along  in  the  coats  of  animals,
or  the  feathers  of  birds  ;  and  the  eggs  of  some  species  are  capa¬
ble,  like  seeds,  of  resisting  the  digestive  powers  of  the  stomach,
and  after  they  are  swallowed  with  herbage,  may  be  ejected
again  unharmed  in  the  dung.

Geographical  Distribution  and  Diffusion  of  Man .

We  have  reserved  for  the  last  our  observations  on  the  range
and  diffusion  of  the  human  species  over  the  earth,  and  the  in¬
fluence  of  man,  in  spreading  other  animals  and  plants,  especially
the  terrestrial.

Speculations  as  to  the  birth-place  of  the  human  species. —
Many  naturalists  have  amused  themselves  in  speculating  on  the
probable  birth-place  of  mankind,  the  point  from  which,  if  we
assume  the  whole  human  race  to  have  descended  from  a  single
pair,  the  tide  of  emigration  must  originally  have  proceeded.  It
has  been  always  a  favourite  conjecture,  that  this  birth-place
was  situated  within  or  near  the  tropics,  where  perpetual  sum¬
mer  reigns,  and  where  fruits,  herbs,  and  roots  are  plentifully
supplied  throughout  the  year.  The  climate  of  these  regions,
it  has  been  said,  is  suited  to  a  being  born  without  any  covering,
and  who  had  not  yet  acquired  the  arts  of  building  habitations
or  providing  clothes.

Progress  of  human  population. — c  The  hunter  state,’  it  has
been  argued,  4  which  Montesquieu  placed  the  first,  was  pro¬
bably  only  the  second  stage  to  which  mankind  arrived,  since  so
many  arts  must  have  been  invented  to  catch  a  salmon  or  a  deer,
that  society  could  no  longer  have  been  in  its  infancy  when  they
came  into  use  *.*  When  regions  where  the  spontaneous  fruits
of  the  earth  abound  became  overpeopled,  men  would  naturally
diffuse  themselves  over  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the  tempe¬
rate  one  ;  but  a  considerable  time  would  probably  elapse  be¬
fore  this  event  took  place ;  and  it  is  possible,  as  a  writer  before

*  Brand’s  Select  Dissert,  from  the  Amoen.  Acad.,  vol.  i.  p.  118.


122


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  AND


[Ch.  VII.


cited  observes,  that  in  the  interval  before  the  multiplication  of
their  numbers  and  their  increasing  wants  had  compelled  them
to  emigrate,  some  arts  to  take  animals  were  invented,  but  far
inferior  to  what  we  see  practiced  at  this  day  among  savages.
As  their  habitations  gradually  advanced  into  the  temperate
zone,  the  new  difficulties  they  had  to  encounter  would  call
forth  by  degrees  the  spirit  of  invention,  and  the  probability  of
such  inventions  always  rises  with  the  number  of  people  in¬
volved  in  the  same  necessity  *.

A  distinguished  modern  writer,  who  coincides  for  the  most
part  in  the  views  above  mentioned,  has  introduced  one  of  the
persons  in  his  second  dialogue  as  objecting  to  the  theory  of  the
human  race  having  gradually  advanced  from  a  savage  to  a
civilized  state,  on  the  ground  that  c  the  first  man  must  have
inevitably  been  destroyed  by  the  elements  or  devoured  by
savage  beasts,  so  infinitely  his  superiors  in  physical  force
He  then  contends  against  the  difficulty  here  started  by  various
arguments,  all  of  which  were,  perhaps,  superfluous,  for  if  a
philosopher  is  pleased  to  indulge  in  conjectures  on  this  subject,
why  should  he  not  assign,  as  the  original  seat  of  man,  some
one  of  those  large  islands  within  the  tropics,  which  are  as  free
from  wild  beasts  as  Van  Diemen’s  Land  or  Australia?  Here
man  may  have  remained  for  a  period  peculiar  to  a  single  isle,
just  as  some  of  the  large  anthropomorphous  species  are  now
limited  to  one  island  within  the  tropics.  In  such  a  situation,
the  new-born  race  might  have  lived  in  security,  though  far
more  helpless  than  the  New  Holland  savages,  and  might  have
found  abundance  of  vegetable  food.  Colonies  may  afterwards
have  been  sent  forth  from  this  mother  country,  and  then  the
peopling  of  the  earth  may  have  proceeded  according  to  the
hypothesis  before  alluded  to.

In  an  early  stage  of  society  the  necessity  of  hunting  acts
as  a  principle  of  repulsion,  causing  men  to  spread  with  the
greatest  rapidity  over  a  country  until  the  whole  is  covered

*  Brand’s  Select  Dissert,  from  the  Amoen.  Acad.,  vol.  i.  p.  118,
f  Sir  II.  Davy,  Consolations  in  Travel,  p.  74.


Ch.  VII.]


DIFFUSION  OF  MAN.


123


with  scattered  settlements.  It  has  been  calculated  that  eight
hundred  acres  of  hunting-ground  only  produce  as  much  food
as  half  an  acre  of  arable  land.  When  the  game  has  been  in
a  great  measure  exhausted,  and  a  state  of  pasturage  succeeds,
the  several  hunter  tribes,  being  already  scattered,  may  multiply
in  a  short  time  into  the  greatest  number  which  the  pastoral
state  is  capable  of  sustaining.  The  necessity,  says  Brand,
thus  imposed  upon  the  two  savage  states,  of  dispersing  them¬
selves  far  and  wide  over  the  country,  affords  a  reason  why,  at
a  very  early  period,  the  worst  parts  of  the  earth  may  have
become  inhabited.

But  this  reason,  it  may  be  said,  is  only  applicable  in  as  far  as
regards  the  peopling  of  a  continuous  continent ;  whereas  the
smallest  islands,  however  remote  from  continents,  have  almost
invariably  been  found  inhabited  by  man.  St.  Helena,  it  is
true,  afforded  an  exception  ;  for  when  that  island  was  dis¬
covered  in  1501,  it  was  only  inhabited  by  sea-fowl,  and  occa¬
sionally  by  seals  and  turtles,  and  was  covered  with  a  forest  of
trees  and  shrubs,  all  of  species  peculiar,  as  we  before  observed,
with  one  or  two  exceptions,  and  which  seem  to  have  been
expressly  created  for  this  remote  and  insulated  spot.

Drifting  of  canoes  to  vast  distances . — But  very  few  of  the
numerous  coral  islets  and  volcanos  of  the  vast  Pacific,  capable
of  sustaining  a  few  families  of  men,  have  been  found  un¬
tenanted  ;  and  we  have,  therefore,  to  inquire  whence  and  by
what  means,  if  all  the  members  of  the  great  human  family  have
had  one  common  source,  could  those  savages  have  migrated.
Cook,  Forster,  and  others,  have  remarked  that  parties  of
savages  in  their  canoes  must  often  have  lost  their  way  and
must  have  been  driven  on  distant  shores,  where  they  were
forced  to  remain,  deprived  both  of  the  means  and  of  the  re¬
quisite  intelligence  for  returning  to  their  own  country.  Thus
Captain  Cook  found  on  the  island  ofWateoo,  three  inhabitants
of  Otaheite,  who  had  been  drifted  thither  in  a  canoe,  although
the  distance  between  the  two  isles  is  five  hundred  and  fifty
miles.  In  1696,  two  canoes,  containing  thirty  persons,  who


124


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  AND


[Ch.  VII.


had  left  Ancorso,  were  thrown  by  contrary  winds  and  storms
on  the  island  of  Samar,  one  of  the  Philippines,  at  a  distance  of
eight  hundred  miles.  In  1721,  two  canoes,  one  of  which  con¬
tained  twenty-four,  and  the  other  six  persons,  men,  women,,
and  children,  were  drifted  from  an  island  called  Baroilep,  to
the  island  of  Guam,  one  of  the  Marians*.

Kotzebue,  when  investigating  the  Coral  isles  of  Radack,  at
the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Caroline  isles,  became  acquainted
with  a  person  of  the  name  of  Kadu,  who  was  a  native  of  Ulea,
an  isle  fifteen  hundred  miles  distant,  from  which  he  had  been
drifted  with  a  party.  Kadu  and  three  of  his  countrymen,  one
day  left  Ulea  in  a  sailing  boat,  when  a  violent  storm  arose,  and
drove  them  out  of  their  course ;  they  drifted  about  the  open
sea  for  eight  months,,  according  to  their  reckoning  by  the  moon,
making  a  knot  on  a  cord  at  every  new  moon.  Being  expert
fishermen,  they  subsisted  entirely  on  the  produce  of  the  sea ;
and  when  the  rain  fell,  laid  in  as  much  fresh  water  as  they  had
vessels  to  contain  it.  £  Kadu,’  says  Kotzebue,  f  who  was  the
best  diver,  frequently  went  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  where
it  is  well  known  that  the  water  is  not  so  salt,  with  a  cocoa-nut
shell,  with  only  a  small  opening/  When  these  unfortunate
men  reached  the  isles  of  Radack,  every  hope  and  almost  every
feeling  had  died  within  them ;  their  sail  had  long  been  de¬
stroyed,  their  canoe  had  long  been  the  sport  of  winds  and  waves,
and  they  were  picked  up  by  the  inhabitants  of  Aur,  in  a  state
of  insensibility  f ;  but  by  the  hospitable  care  of  those  islanders
they  soon  recovered,  and  were  restored  to  perfect  health.

Captain  Beechey,  in  his  late  voyage  to  the  Pacific,  fell  in
with  some  natives  of  the  Coral  Islands,  who  had  in  a  similar
manner  been  carried  to  a  great  distance  from  their  native
country.  They  had  embarked  to  the  number  of  one  hundred
and  fifty  souls,  in  three  double  canoes,  from  Anaa,  or  Chain
Island,  situate  about  three  hundred  miles  to  the  eastward  of
Otaheite.  They  were  overtaken  by  the  monsoon,  wliich  dis-

*  Malte-Brun’s  Geography,  vol.  iii.  p.  419.
t  Kotzebue’s  V0jaoe,  1815' — 1818.  Quarterly  Review,  vohxxvi.  p.  361.


Ch.  VII.]


DIFFUSION  OF  MAN.


125


persed  the  canoes,  and,  after  driving  them  about  the  ocean,  left
them  becalmed,  so  that  a  great  number  of  persons  perished.
T  wo  of  the  canoes  were  never  heard  of,  but  the  other  was
drifted  from  one  uninhabited  island  to  another,  at  each  of  which
the  voyagers  obtained  a  few  provisions ;  and  at  length,  after
having  wandered  for  a  distance  of  six  hundred  miles,  they
were  found  and  carried  to  their  home  in  the  Blossom  *.

The  space  traversed  in  some  of  these  instances  was  so  great,
that  similar  accidents  might  suffice  to  transport  canoes  from
various  parts  of  Africa  to  the  shores  of  South  America,  or  from
Spain  to  the  Azores,  and  thence  to  North  America.  So  that
man,  even  in  a  rude  state  of  society,  is  liable  to  be  scattered
involuntarily  by  the  winds  and  waves  over  the  globe,  in  a
manner  singularly  analogous  to  that  in  which  many  plants  and
animals  are  diffused.  We  ought  not,  then,  to  wonder  that
during  the  ages  required  for  some  tribes  of  the  human  race  to
attain  that  advanced  stage  of  civilization  which  empowers  the
navigator  to  cross  the  ocean  in  all  directions  with  security,  the
whole  earth  should  have  become  the  abode  of  rude  tribes  of
hunters  and  fishers.  Were  the  whole  of  mankind  now  cut  off,
with  the  exception  of  one  family,  inhabiting  the  old  or  new
continent,  or  Australia,  or  even  some  coral  islet  of  the  Pacific,
we  should  expect  their  descendants,  though  they  should  never
become  more  enlightened  than  the  South  Sea  Islanders  or  the
Esquimaux,  to  spread  in  the  course  of  ages  over  the  whole
earth,  diffused  partly  by  the  tendency  of  population  to  increase
beyond  the  means  of  subsistence,  in  a  limited  district,  and
partly  by  the  accidental  drifting  of  canoes  by  tides  and  currents
to  distant  shores.

Involuntary  influence  of  Man  in  diffusing  Animals  and

%

Plants .

Many  of  the  general  remarks  which  we  made  respecting  the
influence  of  man  in  spreading  or  in  checking  the  diffusion  of

*  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Pacific,  &c.,  in  the  years  1825,  1826,  1827.
1828,  p.  170.


126


DISPERSION  OF  ANIMALS  BY  MAN.


[Ch.  VII.


plants  apply  equally  to  his  relations  with  the  animal  kingdom.
We  shall  be  led  on  a  future  occasion  to  speak  of  the  instru¬
mentality  of  our  species  in  naturalizing  useful  animals  and
plants  in  new  regions,  when  we  explain  our  views  of  the  effects
which  the  spreading  and  increase  of  certain  species  exert  in  the
extirpation  of  others.  At  present  we  shall  confine  ourselves  to
a  few  remarks  on  the  involuntary  aid  which  man  lends  to  the
dissemination  of  species.  ,

In  the  mammiferous  class  our  influence  is  chiefly  displayed
in  increasing  the  number  of  quadrupeds  which  are  serviceable
to  us,  and  in  exterminating  or  reducing  the  number  of  those
which  are  noxious.

Sometimes,  however,  we  unintentionally  promote  the  multi¬
plication  of  inimical  species,  as  when  we  introduced  the  rat,
which  was  not  indigenous  in  the  New  World,  into  all  parts  of
America.  They  have  been  conveyed  over  in  ships,  and  now
infest  a  great  multitude  of  islands  and  parts  of  that  continent.
In  like  manner  the  Norway  rat  has  been  imported  into  Eng¬
land,  where  it  plunders  our  property  in  ships  and  houses.

The  great  viper  (fer  de  lance),  a  species  no  less  venomous
than  the  rattle-snake,  which  now  ravages  Martinique  and  St.
Lucia,  was  accidentally  introduced  by  man,  and  exists  in  no
other  part  of  the  West  Indies.

Many  parasitic  insects,  which  attack  our  persons,  andvsome
of  which  are  supposed  to  be  peculiar  to  our  species,  have  been
carried  into  all  parts  of  the  earth,  and  have  as  high  a  claim  as
man  to  an  universal  geographical  distribution.

A  great  variety  of  insects  have  been  transported  in  ships
from  one  country  to  another,  especially  in  warmer  latitudes.
Notwithstanding  the  coldness  of  our  climate,  we  have  been  un¬
able  to  prevent  the  cockroach  ( Blatta  orient  alls')  from  entering
and  diffusing  itself  in  our  ovens  and  kneading  troughs,  and
availing  itself  of  the  artificial  warmth  which  we  afford.  It  is
well  known  also  that  beetles,  and  many  other  kinds  of  ligni-
perdous  insects,  have  been  introduced  into  Great  Britain  in
timber ;  especially  several  North  American  species.  6  The


Ch.  VII.]


DISPERSION  OF  ANIMALS  BY  MAN.


127


commercial  relations/  says  Malte-Brun*,  ‘  between  France  and
India,  have  transported  from  the  latter  country  the  aphis,  which
destroys  the  apple-tree,  and  two  sorts  of  Neuroptera,  the  luci-
fuga  and  flavicola,  mostly  confined  to  Provence  and  the  neigh¬
bourhood  of  Bordeaux,  where  they  devour  the  timber  in  the
houses  and  naval  arsenals.’

Among  molluscs  we  may  mention  the  teredo  navalis,  which
is  a  native  of  equatorial  seas,  but  which,  by  adhering  to  the
bottom  of  ships,  was  transported  to  Holland,  where  it  has
been  most  destructive  to  vessels  and  piles.  The  same  species
has  also  become  naturalized  in  England,  and  other  countries
enjoying  an  extensive  commerce.  Bulimus  undatus ,  a  land
species  of  considerable  size,  native  of  Jamaica  and  other  West
Indian  islands,  has  been  imported,  adhering  to  tropical  timber,
into  Liverpool,  and  is  now  naturalized  in  the  woods  near  that
townf .

In  all  these  and  innumerable  other  instances  we  may  regard
the  involuntary  agency  of  man  as  strictly  analogous  to  that  of
the  inferior  animals.  Like  them,  we  unconsciously  contribute
to  extend  or  limit  the  geographical  range  and  numbers  of  cer¬
tain  species,  in  obedience  to  general  rules  in  the  economy  of
nature,  which  are  for  the  most  part  beyond  our  control.

*  Syst.  of  Geog.,  vol.  viii.  p.  169.  f  On  the  authority  of  Mr.  Broderip.


CHAPTER  VIII.


Theories  respecting  the  original  introduction  of  species — Proposal  of  an  hypo¬
thesis  on  this  subject — Supposed  centres  or  foci  of  creation — Why  the  distinct
provinces  of  animals  and  plants  have  not  become  more  blended  together —
Brocchi’s  speculations  on  the  loss  of  species — Stations  of  plants  and  animals
— Complication  of  causes  on  which  they  depend — -Stations  of  plants,  how
affected  by  animals — Equilibrium  in  the  number  of  species,  how  preserved —
Peculiar  efficacy  of  insects  in  this  task — Rapidity  with  which  certain  insects
multiply  or  decrease  in  numbers — Effect  of  omnivorous  animals  in  preserving
the  equilibrium  of  species— Reciprocal  influence  of  aquatic  and  terrestrial  species
on  each  other.

THEORIES  RESPECTING  THE  ORIGINAL  INTRODUCTION  OF

SPECIES.

Theory  of  LinncBUs. — -It  would  be  superfluous  to  examine  the
various  attempts  which  were  made  to  explain  the  phenomena
of  the  distribution  of  species  alluded  to  in  the  preceding  chap¬
ters,  in  the  infancy  of  the  sciences  of  botany,  zoology,  and
physical  geography.  The  theories  or  rather  conjectures  then
indulged  now  stand  refuted  by  a  simple  statement  of  facts  ;
and  if  Linnseus  were  living,  he  would  be  the  first  to  renounce
the  notions  which  he  promulgated.  For  he  imagined  the
habitable  world  to  have  been  for  a  certain  time  limited  to  one
small  tract,  the  only  portion  of  the  earth’s  surface  that  was  as
yet  laid  bare  by  the  subsidence  of  the  primaeval  ocean.  In  this
fertile  spot  he  supposed  the  originals  of  all  the  species  of  plants
which  exist  on  this  globe  to  have  been  congregated,  together
with  the  first  ancestors  of  all  animals  and  of  the  human  race.
6  In  qua  commode  habitaverint  animalia  omnia,  et  vegetabilia
lmte  germinaverint.’  In  order  to  accommodate  the  various
habitudes  of  so  many  creatures,  and  to  provide  a  diversity  of
climate  suited  to  their  several  natures,  the  tract  in  which  the
creation  took  place  was  supposed  to  have  been  situated  in  some
warm  region  of  the  earth,  but  to  have  contained  a  lofty  moun¬
tain  range,  on  the  heights  and  in  the  declivities  of  which  were


Ch.  VIII.]


INTRODUCTION  OF  SPECIES.


129


to  be  found  all  temperatures  and  every  clime,  from  the  torrid
to  the  frozen  zone

That  there  never  was  a  universal  ocean  since  the  planet  was
inhabited,  or  rather  since  the  oldest  groups  of  strata  yet  known
to  contain  organic  remains  were  formed,  is  proved  by  the  pre¬
sence  of  terrestrial  plants  in  all  the  older  formations ;  and  if
this  conclusion  was  not  established,  yet  no  geologist  could  deny
that,  since  the  first  small  portion  of  the  earth  was  laid  dry,
there  have  been  many  entire  changes  in  the  species  of  plants
and  animals  inhabiting  the  land.

Proposal  of  an  hypothesis  on  this  subject. — But  without
dwelling  on  the  above  and  other  refuted  theories,  let  us  inquire
whether  we  can  substitute  some  hypothesis  as  simple  as  that  of
Linneeus,  to  which  the  phenomena  now  ascertained  in  regard
to  the  distribution  both  of  aquatic  and  terrestrial  species  may
be  referred. The  fo  llowing  may, perhaps,  be reconcileable  with
known  facts  :  — Each  species  may  have  had  its  origin  in  a
single  pair,  or  individual,  where  an  individual  was  sufficient,
and  species  may  have  been  created  in  succession  at  such  times
and  in  such  places  as  to  enable  them  to  multiply  and  endure
for  an  appointed  period,  and  occupy  an  appointed  space  on  the
globe.

In  order  to  explain  this  theory,  let  us  suppose  every  living
thing  to  be  destroyed  in  the  western  hemisphere,  both  on  the
land  and  in  the  ocean,  and  permission  to  be  given  to  man  to
people  this  great  desert,  by  transporting  into  it  animals  and
plants  from  the  eastern  hemisphere,  a  strict  prohibition  being
enforced  against  introducing  two  original  stocks  of  the  same
species.

Now  the  result  we  conceive  of  such  a  mode  of  colonizing

O

would  correspond  exactly,  so  far  as  regards  the  grouping  of
animals  and  plants,  with  that  now  observed  throughout  the
globe.  It  would  be  necessary  for  naturalists,  before  they  im¬
ported  species  into  particular  localities,  to  study  attentively

De  terra  habitabili  incremento  ;  also  Prichard,  Phys.  Hist,  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.
p.  17,  where  the  hypotheses  of  different  naturalists  are  enumerated.

Vol.  II.


K


130


INTRODUCTION  OF  SPECIES.


[Ch.  VIII.


the  climate  and  other  physical  conditions  of  each  spot.  It
would  be  no  less  requisite  to  introduce  the  different  species  in
succession,  so  that  each  plant  and  animal  might  have  time  and
opportunity  to  multiply  before  the  species  destined  to  prey
upon  it  was  admitted.  Many  herbs  and  shrubs,  for  example,
must  spread  far  and  wide  before  the  sheep,  the  deer,  and  the
goat  could  be  allowed  to  enter,  lest  they  should  devour  and
annihilate  the  original  stocks  of  many  plants,  and  then  perish
themselves  for  want  of  food.  The  above-mentioned  herbivo¬
rous  animals  in  their  turn  must  be  permitted  to  make  consider¬
able  progress  before  the  entrance  of  the  first  pair  of  wolves  or
lions.  Insects  must  be  allowed  to  swarm  before  the  swallow
could  be  permitted  to  skim  through  the  air  and  feast  on  thou¬
sands  at  one  repast.

It  is  evident  that,  however  equally  in  this  case  our  original
stocks  were  distributed  over  the  whole  surface  of  land  and
water,  there  would  nevertheless  arise  distinct  botanical  and
zoological  provinces*  for  there  are  a  great  many  natural  bar¬
riers  which  oppose  common  obstacles  to  the  advance  of  a  variety
of  species.  Thus,  for  example,  almost  all  the  animals  and
plants  naturalized  by  us  towards  the  extremity  of  South
America,  would  be  unable  to  spread  beyond  a  certain  limit,
towards  the  east,  west,  and  south,  because  they  would  be
stopped  by  the  ocean,  and  a  few  of  them  only  would  succeed
in  reaching  the  cooler  latitudes  of  the  northern  hemisphere,
because  they  would  be  incapable  of  bearing  the  heat  of  the
tropics,  through  which  they  must  pass.  In  the  course  of  ages,
undoubtedly,  exceptions  would  arise,  and  some  species  might
become  common  to  the  temperate  and  polar  regions,  or  both
sides  of  the  equator ;  for  we  have  before  shown  that  the  powers
of  diffusion  conferred  on  some  classes  are  very  great.  But  we
should  confidently  predict  that  these  exceptions  would  never
become  so  numerous  as  to  invalidate  the  general  rule.

Some  of  the  plants  and  animals  transplanted  by  us  to  the
coast  of  Chili  or  Peru  would  never  be  able  to  cross  the  Andes,
so  as  to  reach  the  Eastern  plains;  nor,  for  a  similar  reason,


Ch.  VIII.]


SUPPOSED  CENTRES  OF  CREATION.


131


would  those  first  established  in  the  Pampas,  or  the  valleys  of
the  Amazon  and  the  Orinoco,  ever  arrive  at  the  shores  of  the
Pacific.

In  the  ocean  an  analogous  state  of  things  would  prevail ;  for
there,  also,  climate  would  exert  a  great  influence  in  limiting
the  range  of  species,  and  the  land  would  stop  the  migrations  of
aquatic  tribes  as  effectually  as  the  sea  arrests  the  dispersion
of  the  terrestrial.  As  certain  birds,  insects,  and  the  seeds  of
plants,  can  never  cross  the  direction  of  prevailing  winds,  so
currents  form  natural  barriers  to  the  dissemination  of  many
oceanic  races.  A  line  of  shoals  may  be  as  impassable  to  pela¬
gian  species,  as  are  the  Alps  and  the  Andes  to  plants  and
animals  peculiar  to  plains ;  while  deep  abysses  may  prove  in¬
superable  obstacles  to  the  migrations  of  the  inhabitants  of
shallow  waters.

Supposed  centres,  or  foci,  of  creation. — It  is  worthy  of  obser¬
vation,  that  one  effect  of  the  introduction  of  single  pairs  of  each
species  must  be  the  confined  range  of  certain  groups  in  spots
which,  like  small  islands,  or  solitary  inland  lakes,  have  few
means  of  interchanging  their  inhabitants  with  adjoining  regions.
Now  this  congregating,  in  a  small  space,  of  many  peculiar
species,  would  give  an  appearance  of  centres,  or  foci,  of  creation,
as  they  have  been  termed,  as  if  there  were  favourite  points
where  the  creative  energy  has  been  in  greater  action  than  in
others,  and  where  the  numbers  of  peculiar  organic  beings  have
consequently  become  more  considerable.

We  do  not  mean  to  call  in  question  the  soundness  of  the  in¬
ferences  of  some  botanists,  as  to  the  former  existence  of  certain
limited  spots  whence  species  of  plants  have  been  propagated,
radiating,  as  it  were,  in  all  directions  from  a  common  centre.
On  the  contrary,  we  conceive  these  phenomena  to  be  the  neces¬
sary  consequences  of  the  plan  of  nature  before  suggested,
operating  during  the  successive  mutations  of  the  surface,  some
of  which  the  geologist  can  prove  to  have  taken  place  subse¬
quently  to  the  period  when  many  species  now  existing  vrere

created.  In  order  to  exemplify  how  this  arrangement  of

K  2


132


SUPPOSED  CENTRES  OF  CREATION.


[Ch.  VIII.


plants  may  have  been  produced,  let  us  imagine  that,  about
three  centuries  before  the  discovery  of  St.  Helena  (itself  of
submarine  volcanic  origin),  a  multitude  of  new  isles  had  been
thrown  up  in  the  surrounding  sea,  and  that  these  had  each  be¬
come  clothed  with  plants  emigrating  from  St.  Helena,  in  the
same  manner  as  the  wild  plants  of  Campania  have  diffused
themselves  over  Monte  Nuovo.  Whenever  the  first  botanist
investigated  the  new  archipelago,  he  would,  in  all  probability,
find  a  different  assemblage  of  plants  in  each  of  the  isles  of
recent  formation  ;  but  in  St.  Helena  itself,  he  would  meet  with
individuals  of  every  species  belonging  to  all  parts  of  the  archi¬
pelago,  and  some,  in  addition,  peculiar  to  itself,  viz.,  those
which  had  not  been  able  to  obtain  a  passage  into  any  one  of  the
surrounding  new-formed  lands.  In  this  case,  it  might  be  truly
said  that  the  original  isle  was  the  primitive  focus,  or  centre,  of
a  certain  type  of  vegetation,  whereas,  in  the  surrounding  isles,
there  would  be  a  smaller  number  of  species,  yet  all  belonging
to  the  same  group.

But  this  peculiar  distribution  of  plants  would  not  warrant
the  conclusion  that,  in  the  space  occupied  by  St.  Helena,  there
had  been  a  greater  exertion  of  creative  power  than  in  the  spaces
of  equal  area  occupied  by  the  new  adjacent  lands,  because,
within  the  period  in  which  St.  Helena  had  acquired  its  peculiar
vegetation,  each  of  the  spots  supposed  to  be  subsequently  con¬
verted  into  land,  may  have  been  the  birth-places  of  a  great
number  of  marine  animals  and  plants,  which  may  have  had
time  to  scatter  themselves  far  and  wide  over  the  southern
Atlantic.

Why  distinct  provinces  have  not  been  more  blended. — Per¬
haps  it  may  be  objected  to  some  parts  of  the  foregoing  train  of
reasoning,  that  during  the  lapse  of  past  ages,  especially  during
many  partial  revolutions  of  the  globe  of  comparatively  modern
date,  different  zoological  and  botanical  provinces  ought  to  have
become  more  confounded  and  blended  together— that  the  dis¬
tribution  of  species  approaches  too  nearly  to  what  might  have

m  expected,  if  animals  and  plants  had  been  introduced  into


Ch.  VIII.]


BROCCHI  ON  THE  LOSS  OF  SPECIES.


133


tbe  globe  when  its  physical  geography  had  already  assumed
the  features  which  it  now  wears  ;  whereas  we  know  that,  in
certain  districts,  considerable  geographical  changes  have  taken
place  since  species  identical  with  those  now  in  being  were
created.

Brocchi' s  speculations  on  the  loss  of  species. — These,  and
many  kindred  topics,  cannot  be  fully  discussed  until  we  have
considered,  not  merely  the  general  laws  which  may  regulate
the  first  introduction  of  species,  but  those  which  may  limit
their  duration  on  the  earth.  Broccbi,  whose  untimely  death
in  Egypt  is  deplored  by  all  who  have  the  progress  of  geology
at  heart,  has  remarked,  when  hazarding  some  interesting  con¬
jectures  respecting  f  the  loss  of  species,’  that  a  modern  natural¬
ist  had  no  small  assurance,  who  declared  f  that  individuals
alone  were  capable  of  destruction,  and  that  species  were  so
perpetuated  that  nature  could  not  annihilate  them,  so  long  as
the  planet  lasted,  or  at  least  that  nothing  less  than  the  shock
of  a  comet,  or  some  similar  disaster,  could  put  an  end  to  their
existence  The  Italian  geologist,  on  the  contrary,  had  satis¬
fied  himself,  that  many  species  of  testacea,  which  formerly
inhabited  the  Mediterranean,  had  become  extinct,  although  a
great  number  of  others,  which  had  been  the  contemporaries  of
those  lost  races,  still  survived.  He  came  to  the  opinion,  that
about  half  the  species  which  peopled  the  waters  when  the  Sub-
apennine  strata  were  deposited,  had  gone  out  of  existence  ;  and
in  this  inference  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  far  wrong.

But  instead  of  seeking  a  solution  of  this  problem,  like  some
other  geologists  of  his  time,  in  a  violent  and  general  catas¬
trophe,  Brocchi  endeavoured  to  imagine  some  regular  and  con¬
stant  law  by  which  species  might  be  made  to  disappear  from
the  earth  gradually  and  in  succession.  The  death,  he  sug¬
gested,  of  a  species  might  depend,  like  that  of  individuals,  on
certain  peculiarities  of  constitution  conferred  upon  them  at
their  birth,  and  as  the  longevity  of  the  one  depends  on  a  cer-

*  Necker,  Phytozool.  Philosophy  p.  21.  Brocchi,  Conch.  Foss.  Subap.,  tome
i.  p.  229.


134


BROCCHI  ON  THE  LOSS  OF  SFEC1ES.


[Ch.  VIII.


tain  force  of  vitality,  which,  after  a  period,  grows  weaker  and
weaker,  so  the  duration  of  the  other  may  be  governed  by  the
quantity  of  prolific  power  bestowed  upon  the  species,  which,
after  a  season,  may  decline  in  energy,  so  that  the  fecundity  and
multiplication  of  individuals  may  be  gradually  lessened  from
century  to  century,  c  until  that  fatal  term  arrives,  when  the
embryo,  incapable  of  extending  and  developing  itself,  aban¬
dons,  almost  at  the  instant  of  its  formation,  the  slender  prin¬
ciple  of  life  by  which  it  was  scarcely  animated, — -and  so  all  dies
with  it.’

Now  we  might  coincide  in  opinion  with  the  Italian  naturalist,
as  to  the  gradual  extinction  of  species  one  after  another,  by
the  operation  of  regular  and  constant  causes,  without  admitting
an  inherent  principle  of  deterioration  in  their  physiological
attributes.  We  might  concede  f  that  many  species  are  on  the
decline,  and  that  the  day  is  not  far  distant  when  they  will  cease
to  exist yet  deem  it  consistent  with  what  we  know  of  the
nature  of  organic  beings,  to  believe  that  the  last  individuals  of
each  species  retain  their  prolific  powers  in  their  full  intensity.

Brocchi  has  himself  speculated  on  the  share  which  a  change
of  climate  may  have  had  in  rendering  the  Mediterranean  unfit
for  the  habitation  of  certain  testacea,  which  still  continued  to
thrive  in  the  Indian  ocean,  and  of  others  which  were  now  only
represented  by  analogous  forms  within  the  tropics.  He  must
also  have  been  aware  that  other  extrinsic  causes,  such  as  the
progress  of  human  population,  or  the  increase  of  some  one  of
the  inferior  animals,  might  gradually  lead  to  the  extirpation  of
a  particular  species,  although  its  fecundity  might  remain  to
the  last  unimpaired.  If,  therefore,  amid  the  vicissitudes  of  the
animate  and  inanimate  world,  there  are  known  causes  capable
of  bringing  about  the  decline  and  extirpation  of  species,  it  be¬
came  him  thoroughly  to  investigate  the  full  extent  to  which
these  might  operate,  before  he  speculated  on  any  cause  of  so
purely  hypothetical  a  kind,  as  4  the  diminution  of  the  prolific
virtue.’

If  it  could  have  been  shown  that  some  wild  plant  had


€h.  VIII.]


STATIONS  OF  PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS.


135


insensibly  dwindled  away  and  died  out,  as  sometimes  happens
to  cultivated  varieties  propagated  by  cuttings,  even  though
climate,  soil,  and  every  other  circumstance  should  continue
identically  the  same — if  any  animal  had  perished  while  the
physical  condition  of  the  earth,  and  the  number  and  force  of
its  foes,  with  every  other  extrinsic  cause,  remained  unaltered,
then  might  we  have  some  ground  for  suspecting  that  the
infirmities  of  age  creep  on  as  naturally  on  species  as  upon
individuals.  But  in  the  absence  of  such  observations,  let  us
turn  to  another  class  of  facts,  and  examine  attentively  the  cir¬
cumstances  which  determine  the  stations  of  particular  animals
and  plants,  and  perhaps  we  shall  discover,  in  the  vicissitudes
to  which  these  stations  are  exposed,  a  cause  fully  adequate  to
explain  the  phenomena  under  consideration.

Stations  of  plants  and  animals. — Stations  comprehend  all
the  circumstances,  whether  relating  to  the  animate  or  inanimate
world,  which  determine  whether  a  given  plant  or  animal  can
exist  in  a  given  locality,  so  that  if  it  be  shown  that  stations
can  become  essentially  modified  by  the  influence  of  known
causes,  it  will  follow  that  species,  as  well  as  individuals,  are
mortal.

Every  naturalist  is  familiar  with  the  fact,  that  although  in  a
particular  country,  such  as  Great  Britain,  there  may  be  more
than  three  thousand  species  of  plants,  ten  thousand  insects,  and
a  great  variety  in  each  of  the  other  classes,  yet  there  will  not
be  more  than  a  hundred,  perhaps  not  half  that  number,  inhabit¬
ing  any  given  locality.  There  may  be  no  want  of  space  in  the
supposed  tract ;  it  may  be  a  large  mountain,  or  an  extensive
moor,  or  a  great  river-plain,  containing  room  enough  for
individuals  of  every  species  in  our  island  ;  yet  the  spot  will
be  occupied  by  a  few  to  the  exclusion  of  many,  and  these
few  are  enabled,  throughout  long  periods,  to  maintain  their
ground  successfully  against  every  intruder,  notwithstanding
the  facilities  which  species  enjoy,  by  virtue  of  their  powers  of
diffusion,  of  invading  adjacent  territories.

The  principal  causes  which  enable  a  certain  assemblage  of


136


CAUSES  WHICH  DETERMINE  THE


[Ch.  VIIL


plants  thus  to  maintain  their  ground  against  all  others  depend,
as  is  well  known,  on  the  relations  between  the  physiological
nature  of  each  species,  and  the  climate,  exposure,  soil,  and
other  physical  conditions  of  the  locality.  Some  plants  live
only  on  rocks,  others  in  meadows,  a  third  class  in  marshes.
Of  the  latter,  some  delight  in  a  fresh-water  morass, — others  in
salt  marshes,  where  their  roots  may  copiously  absorb  saline
particles.  Some  prefer  an  alpine  region  in  a  warm  latitude,
where,  during  the  heat  of  summer,  they  are  constantly  irri¬
gated  by  the  cool  waters  of  melting  snows.  To  others  loose
sand,  so  fatal  to  the  generality  of  species,  affords  the  most
proper  station.  The  Car  ex  armaria  and  the  Elymus  arena -
rius  acquire  their  full  vigour  on  a  sandy  dune,  obtaining  an
ascendency  over  the  very  plants  which  in  a  stiff  clay  would
immediately  stifle  them.

Where  the  soil  of  a  district  is  of  so  peculiar  a  nature  that  it
is  extremely  favourable  to  certain  species,  and  agrees  ill  with
every  other,  the  former  get  exclusive  possession  of  the  ground,
and,  as  in  the  case  of  heaths,  live  in  societies.  In  like  manner
the  Bog  moss  ( Sphagnum  palustre )  is  fully  developed  in  peaty
swamps,  and  becomes,  like  the  heath,  in  the  language  of
botanists,  a  social  plant.  Such  monopolies,  however,  are  not
common,  for  they  are  checked  by  various  causes.  Not  only  are
many  species  endowed  with  equal  powers  to  obtain  and  keep
possession  of  similar  stations,  but  each  plant,  for  reasons  not
fully  explained  by  the  physiologist,  has  the  property  of  render¬
ing  the  soil  where  it  has  grown  less  fitted  for  the  support  of
other  individuals  of  its  own  species,  or  even  other  species  of
the  same  family.  Yet  the  same  spot,  so  far  from  being  impo¬
verished,  is  improved,  for  plants  of  another  family.  Animals
also  interfere  most  actively  to  preserve  an  equilibrium  in  the
vegetable  kingdom.

Equilibrium  in  the  number  of  species ,  how  preserved. — ‘  All
the  plants  of  a  given  country,’  says  De  Candolle,  in  his  usual
spirited  style,  4  are  at  war  one  with  another.  The  first  which
establish  themselves  by  chance  in  a  particular  spot,  tend,  by


Ch.  VIII.]


STATIONS  OF  PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS.


137


the  mere  occupancy  of  space,  to  exclude  other  species — the
greater  choke  the  smaller,  the  longest  livers  replace  those  which
last  for  a  shorter  period,  the  more  prolific  gradually  make
themselves  masters  of  the  ground,  which  species  multiplying
more  slowly  would  otherwise  fill.’

In  this  continual  strife,  it  is  not  always  the  resources  of  the
plant  itself  which  enable  it  to  maintain  or  extend  its  ground.
Its  success  depends,  in  a  great  measure,  on  the  number  of  its
foes  or  allies,  among  the  animals  and  plants  inhabiting  the
same  region.  Thus,  for  example,  a  herb  which  loves  the  shade
may  multiply,  if  some  tree  with  spreading  boughs  and  dense
foliage  flourish  in  the  neighbourhood.  Another,  which,  if
unassisted,  would  be  overpowered  by  the  rank  growth  of  some
hardy  competitor,  is  secure,  because  its  leaves  are  unpalatable
to  cattle,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  annually  crop  down  its
antagonist,  and  rarely  suffer  it  to  ripen  its  seed.

Oftentimes  we  see  some  herb  which  has  flowered  in  the
midst  of  a  thorny  shrub,  when  all  the  other  individuals  of  the
same  species,  in  the  sunny  fields  around,  are  eaten  down,  and
cannot  bring  their  seed  to  maturity.  In  this  case,  the  shrub
has  lent  his  armour  of  spines  and  prickles  to  protect  the  de¬
fenceless  herb  against  the  mouths  of  the  cattle ;  and  thus  a  few
individuals  which  occupied,  perhaps,  the  most  unfavourable
station  in  regard  to  exposure,  soil,  and  other  circumstances,
may  nevertheless,  by  the  aid  of  an  ally,  become  the  principal
source  whereby  the  winds  are  supplied  with  seeds  which  per¬
petuate  the  species  throughout  the  surrounding  tract.

In  the  above  example  vve  see  one  plant  shielding  another
from  the  attacks  of  animals ;  but  instances  are,  perhaps,  stiL
more  numerous,  where  some  animal  defends  a  plant  against  the
enmity  of  some  other  subject  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.

Scarcely  any  beast,  observes  a  Swedish  naturalist  *,  will
touch  the  nettle,  but  fifty  different  kinds  of  insects  are  fed  by
it.  Some  of  these  seize  upon  the  root,  others  upon  the  stem  ;
some  eat  the  leaves,  others  devour  the  seeds  and  flowers :  but


*  Amain.  Acad.  vol.  vi.,  p.  17,  §  12.


138


equilibrium  of  species


[Ch.  VIII.


for  this  multitude  of  enemies,  the  nettle  would  annihilate  a
great  number  of  plants.  Linnaeus  tells  us,  in  his  Tour  in
Scania,  that  goats  were  turned  into  an  island  which  abounded
with  the  Agrostis  arundinacea ,  where  they  perished  by  famine;
but  horses  which  followed  them,  grew  fat  on  the  same  plant.
The  goat,  also,  he  says,  thrives  on  the  meadow-sweet  and  water-
hemlock,  plants  which  are  injurious  to  cattle  *.

Every  plant,  observes  Wilcke,  has  its  proper  insect  allotted
to  it  to  curb  its  luxuriancy,  and  to  prevent  it  from  multiplying
to  the  exclusion  of  others.  ‘  Thus  grass  in  meadows  sometimes
flourishes  so  as  to  exclude  all  other  plants  :  here  the  Phalaena
graminis  ( Bombyx  gram.),  with  her  numerous  progeny,  find  a
well-spread  table;  they  multiply  in  immense  numbers,  and  the
farmer  for  some  years  laments  the  failure  of  his  hay  crop ;  but
the  grass  being  consumed,  the  moths  die  with  hunger,  or  remove
to  another  place.  Now  the  quantity  of  grass  being  greatly
diminished,  the  other  plants,  which  were  before  choked  by  it,
spring  up,  and  the  ground  becomes  variegated  with  a  multi¬
tude  of  different  species  of  flowers.  Had  not  nature  given  a
commission  to  this  minister  for  that  purpose,  the  grass  would
destroy  a  great  number  of  species  of  vegetables,  of  which  the
equilibrium  is  now  kept  up  f.’

In  the  above  passage  allusion  is  made  to  the  ravages  com¬
mitted  in  1740  and  the  two  following  years  in  many  provinces
of  Sweden,  by  a  most  destructive  insect.  The  same  moth  is
said  never  to  touch  the  fox-tail  grass  so  that  it  may  be  classed
as  a  most  active  ally  and  benefactor  of  that  species,  and  as
peculiarly  instrumental  in  preserving  it  in  its  present  abun¬
dance.  A  discovery  of  Rolander,  cited  in  the  treatise  of
Wilcke  above-mentioned,  affords  a  good  illustration  of  the
checks  and  counterchecks  which  nature  has  appointed  to  pre¬
serve  the  balance  of  power  amongst  species.  f  The  Phalaena
strobilella  has  the  fir  cone  assigned  to  it  to  deposit  its  eggs
upon  ;  the  young  caterpillars  coming  out  of  the  shell  consume

*  Amceu.  Acad.,  vol.  vii.  p.  409.  f  Ibid.,  vol.  vi.,  p.  17,  §  11  and  12.
j  Kirby  and  Spence,  vul,  i.  p.  178.


Ch.  VIII.]


PRESERVED  BY  INSECTS.


139


the  cone  and  superfluous  seed ;  but  lest  the  destruction  should
be  too  general,  the  Ichneumon  strobilellse  lays  its  eggs  in  the
caterpillar,  inserting  its  long  tail  in  the  openings  of  the  cone
till  it  touches  the  included  insect,  for  its  body  is  too  large  to
enter.  Thus  it  fixes  its  minute  egg  upon  the  caterpillar,  which
being  hatched  destroys  it  *.*

Agency  of  insects. — Entomologists  enumerate  many  paral¬
lel  cases  where  insects,  appropriated  to  certain  plants,  are
kept  down  by  other  insects,  and  these  again  by  parasites
expressly  appointed  to  prey  on  them  f .  Few,  perhaps,  are
in  the  habit  of  duly  appreciating  the  extent  to  which  insects
are  active  in  preserving  the  balance  of  species  among  plants,
and  thus  regulating  indirectly  the  relative  numbers  of  many  of
the  higher  orders  of  terrestrial  animals.

The  peculiarity  of  their  agency  consists  in  their  power
of  suddenly  multiplying  their  numbers  to  a  degree  which  could
only  be  accomplished  in  a  considerable  lapse  of  time  in  any
of  the  larger  animals,  and  then  as  instantaneously  relapsing
without  the  intervention  of  any  violent  disturbing  cause,  into
their  former  insignificance.

If,  for  the  sake  of  employing,  on  different  but  rare  occasions,
a  power  of  many  hundred  horses,  we  were  under  the  necessity
of  feeding  all  these  animals  at  great  cost  in  the  intervals  when
their  services  were  not  required,  we  should  greatly  admire  the
invention  of  a  machine,  such  as  the  steam-engine,  which  was
capable  at  any  moment  of  exerting  the  same  degree  of  strength
without  any  consumption  of  food  during  periods  of  inaction.
The  same  kind  of  admiration  is  strongly  excited  when  we  con¬
template  the  powers  of  insect  life,  in  the  creation  of  which
nature  has  been  so  prodigal.  A  scanty  number  of  minute  indi¬
viduals,  only  to  be  detected  by  careful  research,  are  ready  in
a  few  days,  weeks,  or  months,  to  give  birth  to  myriads  which
may  repress  any  degree  of  monopoly  in  another  species,  or
remove  nuisances,  such  as  dead  carcasses,  which  might  taint
the  air.  But  no  sooner  has  the  destroying  commission  been
*  Amcen.  Acad.,  vol.  vi.  §  14.  f  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  iv.  p.  218.


140


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  SPECIES


[Ch.  VIII.


executed  than  the  gigantic  power  becomes  dormant— each  of
the  mighty  host  soon  reaches  the  term  of  its  transient  existence,
and  the  season  arrives  when  the  whole  species  passes  naturally
into  the  egg,  and  thence  into  the  larva  and  pupa  state.  In
this  defenceless  condition  it  may  be  destroyed  either  by  the
elements,  or  by  the  augmentation  of  some  of  its  numerous  foes
which  may  prey  upon  it  in  these  stages  of  its  transformation  ;
or  it  often  happens  that  in  the  following  year  the  season  proves
unfavourable  to  the  hatching  of  the  eggs  or  the  development
of  the  pupae.

Thus  the  swarming  myriads  depart  which  may  have  covered
the  vegetation  like  the  aphides,  or  darkened  the  air  like  locusts.
In  almost  every  season  there  are  some  species  which  in  this
manner  put  forth  their  strength,  and  then,  like  Milton’s  spirits
which  thronged  the  spacious  hall,  f  reduce  to  smallest  forms
their  shapes  immense’—

—  ■  . . — -  So  thick  the  aery  crowd

Swarm’d  and  were  straiten’d  ;  till,  the  signal  given,

Behold  a  wonder !  they  hut  now  who  seem’d
In  bigness  to  surpass  earth’s  giant  sons,

Now  less  than  smallest  dwarfs.

A  few  examples  will  illustrate  the  mode  in  which  this  force
operates.  It  is  well  known  that,  among  the  countless  species
of  the  insect  creation,  some  feed  on  animal,  others  on  vegetable
matter,  and,  upon  considering  a  catalogue  of  8000  British
insects  and  arachnids,  Mr.  Kirby  found  that  these  two  divi¬
sions  were  nearly  a  counterpoise  to  each  other,  the  carnivorous
being  somewhat  preponderant.  There  are  also  distinct  spe¬
cies,  some  appointed  to  consume  living,  others  dead  or  putrid
animal  and  vegetable  substances.  One  female,  of  Musca  car-
naria ,  will  give  birth  to  20,000  young ;  and  the  larvae  of
many  flesh-flies  devour  so  much  food  in  twenty-four  hours,
and  grow  so  quickly,  as  to  increase  their  weight  two  hundred¬
fold  !  In  five  days  after  being  hatched  they  arrive  at  their
full  growth  and  size,  so  that  there  was  ground,  says  Kirby,
for  the  assertion  of  Linnaeus,  that  three  flies  of  M.  vomitoria


Ch.  VIII.]


PRESERVED  BY  INSECTS.


141


could  devour  a  dead  horse  as  quickly  as  a  lion  * ;  and  another
Swedish  naturalist  remarks,  that  so  great  are  the  powers  of
propagation  of  a  single  species,  even  of  the  smallest  insects,
that  each  can  commit,  when  required,  more  ravages  than  the
elephant  f .

Next  to  locusts,  the  aphides,  perhaps,  exert  the  greatest
power  over  the  vegetable  world,  and,  like  them,  are  sometimes
so  numerous  as  to  darken  the  air.  The  multiplication  of  these
little  creatures  is  without  parallel,  and  almost  every  plant  has
its  peculiar  species.  Reaumur  has  proved  that  in  five  gene¬
rations  one  aphis  may  be  the  progenitor  of  5,904,900,000
descendants  ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  in  one  year  there  may  be
twenty  generations  J.  Mr.  Curtis  §  observes  that,  as  among
caterpillars  we  find  some  that  are  constantly  and  unalterably
attached  to  one  or  more  particular  species  of  plants,  and  others
that  feed  indiscriminately  on  most  sorts  of  herbage,  so  it  is
precisely  with  the  aphides ;  some  are  particular,  others  more
general  feeders;  and  as  they  resemble  other  insects  in  this
respect,  so  they  do  also  in  being  more  abundant  in  some  years
than  others.  In  1793  they  were  the  chief,  and  in  1798  the
sole  cause  of  the  failure  of  the  hops.  In  1794,  a  season  almost
unparalleled  for  drought,  the  hop  was  perfectly  free  from  them,
while  peas  and  beans,  especially  the  former,  suffered  very  much
from  their  depredations.

The  ravages  of  the  caterpillars  of  some  of  our  smaller  moths
afford  a  good  illustration  of  the  temporary  increase  of  a  species.
The  oak-trees  of  a  considerable  wood  have  been  stripped  of
their  leaves  as  bare  as  in  winter,  by  the  caterpillars  of  a  small
green  moth  ( Tortrix  irridana ),  which  has  been  observed  the
year  following  not  to  abound  ||.  The  Gamma  moth  ( Plusia
gamma),  although  one  of  our  common  species,  is  not  dreaded
by  us  for  its  devastations,  but  legions  of  their  caterpillars  have
at  times  created  alarm  in  France,  as  in  1735.  Reaumur

*  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  i.  p.  250.  f  Wilcke,  Amoen.  Acad.,  chap.  ii.

|  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  i.  p.  174.  §  Trans.  Linn.  Soc.,  vol.  vi.

j|  Lib.  Ent.  Know.,  Insect  Trans.,  p.  203.  See  Haworth  Lep.


142


DEVASTATIONS  CAUSED  BY  LOCUSTS.


[Ch.  VIII.


observes  that  the  female  moth  lays  about  400  eggs ;  so  that  if
twenty  caterpillars  were  distributed  in  a  garden,  and  all  lived
through  the  winter  and  became  moths  in  the  succeeding  May,
the  eggs  laid  by  these,  if  all  fertile,  would  produce  800,000  *.
A  modern  writer,  therefore,  justly  observes  that,  did  not  Pro¬
vidence  put  causes  in  operation  to  keep  them  in  due  bounds,
the  caterpillars  of  this  moth  alone,  leaving  out  of  consideration
the  2000  other  British  species,  would  soon  destroy  more  than
half  of  our  vegetation  -f*.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  last  century  an  ant,  most  destructive
to  the  sugar-cane  ( Formica  saccharivora ),  appeared  in  such
infinite  hosts  in  the  island  of  Grenada,  as  to  put  a  stop  to  the
cultivation  of  that  vegetable.  Their  numbers  were  incredible.
The  plantations  and  roads  were  filled  with  them  ;  many  domes¬
tic  quadrupeds,  together  with  rats,  mice,  and  reptiles,  and  even
birds,  perished  in  consequence  of  this  plague.  It  was  not  till
1780  that  they  were  at  length  annihilated  by  torrents  of  rain,
which  accompanied  a  dreadful  hurricane  J.

Devastations  caused  by  Locusts. — We  may  conclude  by
mentioning  some  instances  of  the  devastations  of  locusts  in
various  countries.  Among  other  parts  of  Africa,  Cyrenaica
has  been  at  different  periods  infested  by  myriads  of  these  crea¬
tures,  which  have  consumed  nearly  every  green  thing.  The
effect  of  the  havoc  committed  by  them  may  be  estimated  by
the  famine  they  occasioned.  St.  Augustin  mentions  a  plague
of  this  kind  in  Africa  which  destroyed  no  less  than  eight  hun¬
dred  thousand  men  in  the  kingdom  of  Masanissa  alone,  and
many  more  upon  the  territories  bordering  upon  the  sea.  It  is
also  related,  that  in  the  year  591  an  infinite  army  of  locusts
migrated  from  Africa  into  Italy,  and,  after  grievously  ravag¬
ing  the  country,  were  cast  into  the  sea,  when  there  arose  a
pestilence  from  their  stench  which  carried  off  nearly  a  million
of  men  and  beasts.

In  the  Venetian  territory,  also,  in  1478,  more  than  thirty

*  Reaumur,  ii.  237.  +  Lib.  Ent.  Know.,  Insect  Trans.,  p.  212.

J  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  i.  p.  183.  Castle,  Phil.  Trans.,  xxx.  346.


Ch.  VIII.]


DEVASTATIONS  CAUSED  BY  LOCUSTS.


143


thousand  persons  are  said  to  have  perished  in  a  famine,  occa¬
sioned  by  this  scourge  ;  and  other  instances  are  recorded  of
their  devastations  in  France,  Spain,  Italy,  Germany,  &c.  In
different  parts  of  Russia  also,  Hungary,  and  Poland,”— in
Arabia  and  India,  and  other  countries,  their  visitations  have
been  periodically  experienced.  Although  they  have  a  pre¬
ference  for  certain  plants,  yet,  when  these  are  consumed,  they
will  attack  almost  all  the  remainder.  In  the  accounts  of  the
invasions  of  locusts,  the  statements  which  appear  most  marvel¬
lous  relate  to  the  prodigious  mass  of  matter  which  encumbers
the  sea  wherever  they  are  blown  into  it,  and  the  pestilence
arising  from  its  putrefaction.  Their  dead  bodies  are  said  to
have  been,  in  some  places,  heaped  one  upon  another,  to  the
depth  of  four  feet,  in  Russia,  Poland,  and  Lithuania ;  and
when,  in  southern  Africa,  they  were  driven  into  the  sea  by  a
north-west  wind,  they  formed,  says  Barrow,  along  the  shore,
for  fifty  miles,  a  bank  three  or  four  feet  high  *.  But  when  we
consider  that  forests  are  stripped  of  their  foliage,  and  the  earth
of  its  green  garment,  for  thousands  of  square  miles,  it  may  well
be  supposed  that  the  volume  of  animal  matter  produced  may
equal  that  of  great  herds  of  quadrupeds  and  flights  of  large
birds  suddenly  precipitated  into  the  sea.

The  occurrence  of  such  events  at  certain  intervals,  in  hot
countries,  like  the  severe  winters  and  damp  summers  returning
after  a  series  of  years  in  the  temperate  zone,  affect  the  propor¬
tional  numbers  of  almost  all  classes  of  animals  and  plants,  and
are  probably  fatal  to  the  existence  of  many  which  would  other¬
wise  thrive  there,  while,  on  the  contrary,  they  must  be  favour¬
able  to  certain  species  which,  if  deprived  of  such  aid,  might
not  maintain  their  ground.

Although  it  may  usually  be  remarked  that  the  extraordinary
increase  of  some  one  species  is  immediately  followed  and
checked  by  the  multiplication  of  another,  yet  this  is  not  always
the  case,  partly  because  many  species  feed  in  common  on  the
same  kinds  of  food,  and  partly  because  many  kinds  of  food  are

*  Travels  in  Africa,  p.  257.  Kirby  and  Spence,  vol.  i.  p.  215.


144


RECIPROCAL  INFLUENCE  OF


[Ch.  VIII.


often  consumed  indifferently  by  one  and  the  same  species.  In
the  former  case,  where  a  variety  of  different  animals  have  pre¬
cisely  the  same  taste,  as,  for  example,  when  many  insectivorous
birds  and  reptiles  devour  alike  some  particular  fly  or  beetle,
the  unusual  numbers  of  the  latter  may  only  cause  a  slight  and
almost  imperceptible  augmentation  of  each  of  those  species  of
bird  and  reptile.  In  the  other  instance,  where  one  animal
preys  on  others  of  almost  every  class,  as,  for  example,  where
our  English  buzzards  devour  not  only  small  quadrupeds,  as
rabbits  and  field-mice,  but  also  birds,  frogs,  lizards,  and
insects,  the  profusion  of  any  one  of  these  last  may  cause  all
such  general  feeders  to  subsist  more  exclusively  upon  the  spe¬
cies  thus  in  excess,  and  the  balance  may  thus  be  restored.

Effect  of  omnivorous  animals  in  preserving  the  equilibrium
of  species. — The  number  of  species  which  are  nearly  omnivo¬
rous  is  considerable ;  and  although  every  animal  has,  perhaps,
a  predilection  for  some  one  description  of  food  rather  than
another,  yet  some  are  not  even  confined  to  one  of  the  great
kingdoms  of«the  organic  world.  Thus  when  the  racoon  of  the
West  Indies  can  neither  procure  fowls,  fish,  snails,  nor  insects,
it  will  attack  the  sugar-canes,  and  devour  various  kinds  of
grain.  The  civets,  when  animal  food  is  scarce,  maintain  them¬
selves  on  fruits  and  roots.

Numerous  birds,  which  feed  indiscriminately  on  insects  and
plants,  are  perhaps  more  instrumental  than  any  other  of  the
terrestrial  tribes  in  preserving  a  constant  equilibrium  between
the  relative  numbers  of  different  classes  of  animals  and  vege¬
tables.  If  the  insects  become  very  numerous  and  devour  the
plants,  these  birds  will  immediately  derive  a  larger  portion  of
their  subsistence  from  insects,  just  as  the  Arabians,  Syrians,
and  Hottentots  feed  on  locusts,  when  the  locusts  devour  their
crops.

Reciprocal  influence  of  aquatic  and  terrestrial  species. — The
intimate  relation  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  water  to  those  of  the
land,  and  the  influence  exerted  by  each  on  the  relative  number
of  species,  must  not  be  overlooked  amongst  the  complicated


Ch.  VIII.]


AQUATIC  AND  TERRESTRIAL  SPECIES.


145


causes  which  determine  the  existence  of  animals  and  plants  in
certain  regions.  A  large  proportion  of  the  amphibious  quad¬
rupeds  and  reptiles  prey  partly  on  aquatic  plants  and  animals,
and  in  part  on  terrestrial  ;  and  a  deficiency  of  one  kind  of  prey
causes  them  to  have  immediate  recourse  to  the  other.  The
voracity  of  certain  insects,  as  the  dragon-fly,  for  example,  is
confined  to  the  water  during  one  stage  of  their  transformations,
and  in  their  perfect  state  to  the  air.  Innumerable  water-birds,
both  of  rivers  and  seas,  derive  in  like  manner  their  food  indif¬
ferently  from  either  element ;  so  that  the  abundance  or  scarcity
of  prey  in  one  induces  them  either  to  forsake  or  more  con¬
stantly  to  haunt  the  other.  Thus  an  intimate  connexion
between  the  state  of  the  animate  creation  in  a  lake  or  river,  and
in  the  adjoining  dry  land,  is  maintained ;  or  between  a  conti¬
nent,  with  its  lakes  and  rivers,  and  the  ocean.  It  is  well  known
that  many  birds  migrate,  during  stormy  seasons,  from  the  sea¬
shore  into  the  interior,  in  search  of  food  ;  while  others,  on  the
contrary,  urged  by  like  wants,  forsake  their  inland  haunts,  and
live  on  substances  rejected  by  the  tide.

The  migration  of  fish  into  rivers  during  the  spawning  sea¬
son  supplies  another  link  of  the  same  kind.  Suppose  the  salmon
to  be  reduced  in  numbers  by  some  marine  foes,  as  by  seals  and
grampuses,  the  consequence  must  often  be,  that  in  the  course
of  a  few  years  the  otters  at  the  distance  of  several  hundred
miles  inland  will  be  lessened  in  number  from  the  scarcity  of  fish.
On  the  other  hand,  if  there  be  a  dearth  of  food  for  the  young
fry  of  the  salmon  in  rivers  and  estuaries,  so  that  few  return  to
the  sea,  the  sand-eels  and  other  marine  species,  which  are  usually
kept  down  by  the  salmon,  will  swarm  in  greater  profusion.

It  is  unnecessary  to  accumulate  a  greater  number  of  illus¬
trations  in  order  to  prove  that  the  stations  of  different  plants
and  animals  depend  on  a  great  complication  of  circumstances, —
on  an  immense  variety  of  relations  in  the  state  of  the  animate
and  inanimate  worlds.  Every  plant  requires  a  certain  climate,
soil,  and  other  conditions,  and  often  the  aid  of  many  animals,

in  order  to  maintain  its  ground.  Many  animals  feed  on  cer-
Vol.  II.  L


146


STATIONS.


[Ch.  VIII.


tain  plants,  being  often  restricted  to  a  small  number,  and  some¬
times  to  one  only  ;  other  members  of  the  animal  kingdom  feed
on  plant-eating  species,  and  thus  become  dependent  on  the  con¬
ditions  of  the  stations  not  only  of  their  prey,  but  of  the  plants
consumed  by  them.

Having  duly  reflected  on  the  nature  and  extent  of  these
mutual  relations  in  the  different  parts  of  the  organic  and  in¬
organic  worlds,  we  may  next  proceed  to  examine  the  results
which  may  be  anticipated  from  the  fluctuations  now  continually
in  progress  in  the  state  of  the  earth’s  surface,  and  in  the  geo¬
graphical  distribution  of  its  living  productions.


CHAPTER  IX.


The  circumstances  which  constitute  the  stations  of  animals  are  changeable—
Extension  of  the  range  of  one  species  alters  the  condition  of  others — Supposed
effects  which  may  have  followed  the  first  entrance  of  the  Polar  bears  into
Iceland — The  first  appearance  of  a  new  species  in  a  region  causes  the  chief
disturbance — Changes  known  to  have  resulted  from  the  advance  of  human
population — Whether  man  increases  the  productive  powers  of  the  earth — -
Indigenous  quadrupeds  and  birds  of  Great  Britain  known  to  have  been  extir¬
pated — Extinction  of  the  Dodo — Rapid  propagation  of  the  domestic  quadrupeds
over  the  American  continent — Power  of  exterminating  species  no  prerogative
of  man — Concluding  remarks.

THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  WHICH  CONSTITUTE  THE  STATIONS
OF  ANIMALS  ARE  CHANGEABLE.

We  have  seen  that  the  stations  of  animals  and  plants  depend
not  merely  on  the  influence  of  external  agents  in  the  inanimate
world,  and  the  relations  of  that  influence  to  the  structure  and
habits  of  each  species,  but  also  on  the  state  of  the  contempo¬
rary  living  beings  which  inhabit  the  same  part  of  the  globe.
In  other  words,  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  a  certain
species  in  a  given  locality,  or  of  its  thriving  more  or  less  therein,
is  determined  not  merely  by  temperature,  humidity,  soil,  ele¬
vation,  and  other  circumstances  of  the  like  kind,  but  also  by
the  existence  or  non-existence,  the  abundance  or  scarcity,  of  a
particular  assemblage  of  other  plants  and  animals  in  the  same
region.

If  we  show  that  both  these  classes  of  circumstances,  whether
relating  to  the  animate  or  inanimate  creation,  are  perpetually
changing,  it  will  follow  that  species  are  subject  to  incessant
vicissitudes;  and  if  the  result  of  these  mutations,  in  the  course
of  ages,  be  so  great  as  materially  to  affect  the  general  condition
of  stations ,  it  will  follow  that  the  successive  destruction  of  spe¬
cies  must  now  be  part  of  the  regular  and  constant  order  of
Nature.

L  2


148


EFFECT  OF  THE  EXTENSION


[Ch.  IX,


Extension  of  the  range  of  one  species  alters  the  condition  of
others . — It  will  be  desirable,  first,  to  consider  the  effects  which
every  extension  of  the  numbers  or  geographical  range  of  one
species  must  produce  on  the  condition  of  others  inhabiting  the
same  regions.  When  the  necessary  consequences  of  such  ex¬
tensions  have  been  fully  explained,  the  reader  will  be  prepared
to  appreciate  the  important  influence  which  slight  modifications
in  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe  may  exert  on  the  condi¬
tion  of  organic  beings.

In  the  first  place  it  is  clear  that,  when  any  region  is  stocked
with  as  great  a  variety  of  animals  and  plants  as  the  productive
powers  of  that  region  will  enable  it  to  support,  the  addition  of
any  new  species,  or  the  permanent  numerical  increase  of  one
previously  established,  must  always  be  attended  either  by  the
local  extermination  or  the  numerical  decrease  of  some  other
species.

There  may  undoubtedly  be  considerable  fluctuations  from
year  to  year,  and  the  equilibrium  may  be  again  restored  with¬
out  any  permanent  alteration  ;  for,  in  particular  seasons,  a
greater  supply  of  heat,  humidity,  or  other  causes,  may  augment
the  total  quantity  of  vegetable  produce,  in  which  case  all  the
animals  subsisting  on  vegetable  food,  and  others  which  prey  on
them,  may  multiply  without  any  one  species  giving  way  ;  but
whenever  the  aggregate  quantity  of  vegetable  produce  remains
unaltered,  the  progressive  increase  of  one  animal  or  plant  im¬
plies  the  decline  of  another.

All  agriculturists  and  gardeners  are  familiar  with  the  fact
that,  when  weeds  intrude  themselves  into  the  space  appropri¬
ated  to  cultivated  species,  the  latter  are  starved  in  their  growth
or  stifled.  If  we  abandon  for  a  short  time  a  field  or  garden,  a
host  of  indigenous  plants,

The  darnel,  hemlock,  and  rank  fumitory,

pour  in  and  obtain  the  mastery,  extirpating  the  exotics,  or  put¬
ting  an  end  to  the  monopoly  of  some  native  plants.

If  we  inclose  a  park,  and  stock  it  with  as  many  deer  as  the
herbage  will  support,  we  cannot  add  sheep  without  lessening


Ch.  IX.]


OF  TIIE  RANGE  OF  SPECIES.


149


the  number  of  the  deer;  nor  can  other  herbivorous  species  be
subsequently  introduced,  unless  the  individuals  of  each  species
in  the  park  become  fewer  in  proportion.

So,  if  there  be  an  island  where  leopards  are  the  only  beasts
of  prey,  and  the  lion,  tiger,  and  hyasna  afterwards  enter,  the
leopards,  if  they  stand  their  ground,  will  be  reduced  in  number.
If  the  locusts  then  arrive  and  swarm  greatly,  it  may  deprive  a
large  number  of  phytophagous  animals  of  their  food,  and
thereby  cause  a  famine,  not  only  among  them,  but  among  the
beasts  of  prey  ;—certain  species,  perhaps,  which  had  the  weak¬
est  footing;  in  the  island  will  thus  be  annihilated.

We  have  seen  how  many  distinct  geographical  provinces  there
are  of  aquatic  and  terrestrial  species,  and  how  great  are  the
powers  of  migration  conferred  on  different  classes,  whereby  the
inhabitants  of  one  region  may  be  enabled  from  time  to  time  to
invade  another,  and  do  actually  so  migrate  and  diffuse  them¬
selves  over  new  countries.  Now,  although  our  knowledge  of
the  history  of  the  animate  creation  dates  from  so  recent  a
period,  that  we  can  scarcely  trace  the  advance  or  decline  of
any  animal  or  plant,  except  in  those  cases  where  the  influence
of  man  has  intervened,  yet  we  can  easily  conceive  what  must
happen  when  some  new  colony  of  wild  animals  or  plants
enters  a  region  for  the  first  time,  and  succeeds  in  establishing
itself.

Supposed  effects  of  the  first  entrance  of  the  Polar  bear
into  Iceland. — Let  us  consider  how  great  are  the  devasta¬
tions  committed  at  certain  periods  by  the  Greenland  bears,
when  they  are  drifted  to  the  shores  of  Iceland  in  consider¬
able  numbers  on  the  ice.  These  periodical  invasions  are
formidable  even  to  man ;  so  that,  when  the  bears  arrive,  the
inhabitants  collect  together,  and  go  in  pursuit  of  them  with
fire-arms — each  native  who  slays  one  being  rewarded  by  the
king  of  Denmark.  The  Danes  of  old,  when  they  landed  in
their  marauding  expeditions  upon  our  coast,  hardly  excited
more  alarm  ;  nor  did  our  islanders  muster  more  promptly  for
the  defence  of  their  lives  and  property  against  a  common


150


EFFECT  OF  THE  EXTENSION


[Ch.  IX.


enemy  than  the  modern  Icelanders  against  these  formidable
brutes.  It  frequently  happens,  says  Henderson,  that  the
natives  are  pursued  by  the  bear  when  he  has  been  long  at  sea,
and  when  his  natural  ferocity  has  been  strengthened  by  the
keenness  of  hunger  ;  if  unarmed,  it  is  frequently  by  stratagem
only  that  they  make  their  escape  *.

Let  us  cast  our  thoughts  back  to  the  period  when  the  first
Polar  bears  reached  Iceland,  before  it  was  colonized  by  the
Norwegians  in  874 ;  we  may  imagine  the  breaking  up  of  an
immense  barrier  of  ice,  like  that  which,  in  1816  and  the  follow¬
ing  year,  disappeared  from  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  which
it  had  surrounded  for  four  centuries.  By  the  aid  of  such
means  of  transportation,  a  great  number  of  these  quadrupeds
might  effect  a  landing  at  the  same  time,  and  the  havoc  which
they  would  make  among  the  species  previously  settled  in  the
island  would  be  terrific.  The  deer,  foxes,  seals,  and  even
birds,  on  which  these  animals  sometimes  prey,  would  be  soon
thinned  down.

But  this  would  be  a  part  only,  and  probably  an  insignificant
portion,  of  the  aggregate  amount  of  change  brought  about  by
the  new  invader.  The  plants  on  which  the  deer  fed  being
less  consumed  in  consequence  of  the  lessened  numbers  of  that
herbivorous  species,  would  soon  supply  more  food  to  several
insects,  and  probably  to  some  terrestrial  testacea,  so  that  the
latter  would  gain  ground.  The  increase  of  these  would  fur¬
nish  other  insects  and  birds  with  food,  so  that  the  numbers  of
these  last  would  be  augmented.  The  diminution  of  the  seals
would  afford  a  respite  to  some  fish  which  they  had  persecuted  ;
and  these  fish,  in  their  turn,  would  then  multiply  and  press
upon  their  peculiar  prey.  Many  water-fowls,  the  eggs  and
young  of  which  are  devoured  by  foxes,  would  increase  when
the  foxes  were  thinned  down  by  the  bears  ;  and  the  fish  on
which  the  water-fowls  subsisted  would  then,  in  their  turn,  be
less  numerous.  Thus  the  numerical  proportions  of  a  great
number  of  the  inhabitants,  both  of  the  land  and  sea,  might  be

*  Journal  of  a  Residence  in  Iceland,  p.  276.


Ch.  IX.]


OF  THE  RANGE  OF  SPECIES.


151


permanently  altered  by  the  settling  of  one  new  species  in  the
region ;  and  the  changes  caused  indirectly  might  ramify  through
all  classes  of  the  living  creation,  and  be  almost  endless.

An  actual  illustration  of  what  we  have  here  only  proposed
hypothetically,  is  in  some  degree  afforded  by  the  selection  of
small  islands  by  the  eider  duck  for  its  residence  during  the
season  of  incubation ;  its  nests  being  seldom  if  ever  found
on  the  shores  of  the  main  land,  or  even  of  a  large  island.
The  Icelanders  are  so  well  aware  of  this,  that  they  have
expended  a  great  deal  of  labour  in  forming  artificial  islands,
by  separating  from  the  main  land  certain  promontories,  joined
to  it  by  narrow  isthmuses.  This  insular  position  is  neces¬
sary  to  guard  against  the  destruction  of  the  eggs  and  young
birds,  by  foxes,  dogs,  and  other  animals.  One  year,  says
Hooker  *,  it  happened  that,  in  the  small  island  of  Vidoc,
adjoining  the  coast  of  Iceland,  a  fox  got  over  upon  the  ice9
and  caused  great  alarm,  as  an  immense  number  of  ducks  were
then  sitting  on  their  eggs  or  young  ones.  It  was  long  before
he  was  taken,  which  was  at  last,  however,  effected  by  bringing
another  fox  to  the  island,  and  fastening  it  by  a  string  near
the  haunt  of  the  former,  by  which  he  was  allured  within  shot
of  the  hunter.

The  first  appearance  of  a  new  species  causes  the  chief
disturbance. — It  is  usually  the  first  appearance  of  an  animal
or  plant,  in  a  region  to  which  it  was  previously  a  stranger,
that  gives  rise  to  the  chief  alteration ;  since,  after  a  time,
an  equilibrium  is  again  established.  But  it  must  require  ages
before  such  a  new  adjustment  of  the  relative  forces  of  so
many  conflicting  agents  can  be  definitively  settled.  The  causes
in  simultaneous  action  are  so  numerous,  that  they  admit  of  an
almost  infinite  number  of  combinations ;  and  it  is  necessary
that  all  these  should  have  occurred  once  before  the  total
amount  of  change,  capable  of  flowing  from  any  new  disturbing
force,  can  be  estimated.

Thus,  for  example,  suppose  that  once  in  two  centuries  a

*  Tour  in  Iceland,  vol.  i.,  p.  64,  second  edition.


152  CHANGES  CAUSED  BY  THE  PROGRESS  [Cfi.  IX,

frost  of  unusual  intensity,  or  a  volcanic  eruption  of  immense
violence  accompanied  by  floods  from  the  melting  of  glaciers,
should  occur  in  Iceland  ;  or  an  epidemic  disease,  fatal  to  the
larger  number  of  individuals  of  some  one  species,  and  not
affecting  others, — these,  and  a  variety  of  other  contingencies,
all  of  which  may  occur  at  once,  or  at  periods  separated  by  dif¬
ferent  intervals  of  time,  ought  to  happen  before  it  would  be
possible  for  us  to  declare  what  ultimate  alteration  the  presence
of  any  new  comer,  such  as  the  bear  before-mentioned,  might
occasion  in  the  animal  population  of  the  isle.

Every  new  condition  in  the  state  of  the  organic  or  inor¬
ganic  creation,  a  new  animal  or  plant,  an  additional  snow-clad
mountain,  any  permanent  change,  however  slight  in  com¬
parison  to  the  whole,  gives  rise  to  a  new  order  of  things,  and
may  make  a  material  change  in  regard  to  some  one  or  more
species.  Yet  a  swarm  of  locusts,  or  a  frost  of  extreme  in¬
tensity,  may  pass  away  without  any  great  apparent  derange¬
ment  ;  no  species  may  be  lost,  and  all  may  soon  recover  their
former  relative  numbers,  because  the  same  scourges  may  have
visited  the  region  again  and  again,  at  some  former  periods.
Every  plant  that  was  incapable  of  resisting  such  a  degree  of
cold,  every  animal  which  was  exposed  to  be  entirely  cut  off*  by
famine,  in  consequence  of  the  consumption  of  vegetation  by
the  locusts,  may  have  perished  already,  so  that  the  subsequent
recurrence  of  similar  catastrophes  is  attended  only  by  a  tem¬
porary  change.

CHANGES  CAUSED  BY  MAN.

We  are  best  acquainted  with  the  mutations  brought  about
by  the  progress  of  human  population,  and  the  growth  of  plants
and  animals  favoured  by  man.  To  these,  therefore,  we  should,
in  the  first  instance,  turn  our  attention.  If  we  conclude,  from
the  concurrent  testimony  of  history  and  of  the  evidence  yielded
by  geological  data,  that  man  is,  comparatively  speaking,  of
very  modern  origin,  we  must  at  once  perceive  how  great  a  revo¬
lution  in  the  state  of  the  animate  world  the  increase  of  the


Ch.  IX.]


OF  HUMAN  POPULATION.


153


human  race,  considered  merely  as  consumers  of  a  certain
quantity  of  organic  matter,  must  necessarily  cause.

Whether  man  increases  the  productive  powers  of  the  earth. — -
It  may,  perhaps,  be  said,  that  man  has,  in  some  degree,  com¬
pensated  for  the  appropriation  to  himself  of  so  much  food,  by
artificially  improving  the  natural  productiveness  of  soils,  by
irrigation,  manure,  and  a  judicious  intermixture  of  mineral
ingredients  conveyed  from  different  localities.  But  it  admits
of  reasonable  doubt,  whether,  upon  the  whole,  we  fertilize  or
impoverish  the  lands  which  we  occupy.  This  assertion  may
seem  startling  to  many,  because  they  are  so  much  in  the
habit  of  regarding  the  sterility  or  productiveness  of  land  in
relation  to  the  wants  of  man,  and  not  as  regards  the  organic
world  generally.  It  is  difficult,  at  first,  to  conceive,  if  a
morass  is  converted  into  arable  land,  and  made  to  yield  a  crop
of  grain,  even  of  moderate  abundance,  that  we  have  not  im¬
proved  the  capabilities  of  the  habitable  surface — that  we  have
not  empowered  it  to  support  a  larger  quantity  of  organic  life.
In  such  cases,  a  tract,  before  of  no  utility  to  man,  may  be
reclaimed  and  become  of  high  agricultural  importance,  but  it
may  yield,  at  the  same  time,  a  scantier  vegetation.  If  a  lake
be  drained  and  turned  into  a  meadow,  the  space  will  provide
sustenance  to  man,  and  many  terrestrial  animals  serviceable  to
him,  but  not  perhaps  so  much  food  as  it  previously  yielded  to
the  aquatic  races.

If  the  pestiferous  Pontine  Marshes  were  drained  and  covered
with  corn,  like  the  plains  of  the  Po,  they  might,  perhaps,  feed
a  smaller  number  of  animals  than  they  do  now  ;  for  these  mo¬
rasses  are  filled  with  herds  of  buffaloes  and  swine,  and  they
swarm  with  birds,  reptiles,  and  insects.

The  felling  of  dense  and  lofty  forests  which  covered,  even
within  the  records  of  history,  a  considerable  space  on  the
globe,  now  tenanted  by  civilized  man,  must  usually  have
lessened  the  amount  of  vegetable  food  throughout  the  space
where  these  woods  grew.  We  must  also  take  into  our  account


154


CHANGES  CAUSED  BY  THE  PROGRESS


[Ch.  IX.


the  area  covered  by  towns,  and  a  still  larger  surface  occupied
by  roads.

If  we  force  the  soil  to  bear  extraordinary  crops  one  year,  we
are,  perhaps,  compelled  to  let  it  lie  fallow  the  next.  But
nothing  so  much  counterbalances  the  fertilizing  effects  of
human  art  as  the  extensive  cultivation  of  foreign  herbs  and
shrubs,  which,  although  they  are  often  more  nutritious  to  man,
seldom  thrive  with  the  same  rank  luxuriance  as  the  native
plants  of  a  district.  Man  is,  in  truth,  continually  striving  to
diminish  the  natural  diversity  of  the  stations  of  animals  and
plants  in  every  country,  and  to  reduce  them  all  to  a  small
number  fitted  for  species  of  economical  use.  He  may  succeed
perfectly  in  attaining  his  object,  even  though  the  vegetation
be  comparatively  meagre,  and  the  total  amount  of  animal
life  be  greatly  lessened.

Spix  and  Martins  have  given  a  lively  description  of  the
incredible  number  of  insects  which  lay  waste  the  crops  in
Brazil,  besides  swarms  of  monkeys,  flocks  of  parrots,  and  other
birds,  as  well  as  the  paca,  agouti,  and  wild  swine.  They  de¬
scribe  the  torment  which  the  planter  and  the  naturalist  suffer
from  the  musquitoes,  and  the  devastation  of  the  ants  and
blattee  ;  they  speak  of  the  dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed
from  the  jaguar,  the  poisonous  serpents,  lizards,  scorpions,
centipedes,  and  spiders.  But  with  the  increasing  population
and  cultivation  of  the  country,  observe  these  naturalists,  these
evils  will  gradually  diminish  ;  when  the  inhabitants  have  cut
down  the  woods,  drained  the  marshes,  made  roads  in  all  direc¬
tions,  and  founded  villages  and  towns,  man  will  by  degrees
triumph  over  the  rank  vegetation  and  the  noxious  animals,
and  all  the  elements  will  second  and  amply  recompense  his
activity  *.

The  number  of  human  beings  now  peopling  the  earth  is
supposed  to  amount  to  eight  hundred  millions,  so  that  we  may
easily  understand  how  great  a  number  of  beasts  of  prey,  birds.


*  Travels  in  Brazil,  vol.  i.,  p.  2G0.


Ch.  IX.]


OF  IIUMxVN  POPU  L  ATI  ON.


155


and  animals  of  every  class,  this  prodigious  population  must
have  displaced,  independently  of  the  still  more  important  con¬
sequences  which  have  followed  from  the  derangement  brought
about  by  man  in  the  relative  numerical  strength  of  particular
species.

Indigenous  quadrupeds  and  birds  extirpated  in  Great
Britain . — Let  us  make  some  inquiries  into  the  extent  of  the
influence  which  the  progress  of  society  has  exerted  during  the
last  seven  or  eight  centuries,  in  altering  the  distribution  of
our  indigenous  British  animals.  Dr.  Fleming  has  prosecuted
this  inquiry  with  his  usual  zeal  and  ability,  and  in  a  memoir  *
on  the  subject  has  enumerated  the  best-authenticated  examples
of  the  decrease  or  extirpation  of  certain  species  during  a  period
when  our  population  has  made  the  most  rapid  advances.  We
shall  offer  a  brief  outline  of  his  results.

The  stag,  as  well  as  the  fallow  deer  and  the  roe,  were  for¬
merly  so  abundant  that,  according  to  Lesley,  from  five  hundred
to  a  thousand  were  sometimes  slain  at  a  hunting-match  ;  but
the  native  races  would  already  have  been  extinguished,  had
they  not  been  carefully  preserved  in  certain  forests.  The  otter,
the  marten,  and  the  polecat,  were  also  in  sufficient  numbers  to
be  pursued  for  the  sake  of  their  fur  ;  but  they  have  now  been
reduced  within  very  narrow  bounds.  The  wild  cat  and  fox
have  also  been  sacrificed  throughout  the  greater  part  of  the
country,  for  the  security  of  the  poultry-yard  or  the  fold.
Badgers  have  been  expelled  from  nearly  every  district  which
at  former  periods  they  inhabited.

Besides  these,  which  have  been  driven  out  from  some  haunts,
and  everywhere  reduced  in  number,  there  are  some  which  have
been  wholly  extirpated;  such  as  the  ancient  breed  of  indigenous
horses,  the  wild  boar,  and  the  wild  oxen,  of  which  last,  how¬
ever,  a  few  remains  are  still  preserved  in  the  parks  of  some  of
our  nobility.  The  beaver,  which  was  eagerly  sought  after  for
its  fur,  had  become  scarce  at  the  close  of  the  ninth  century,
and,  by  the  twelfth  century,  was  only  to  be  met  with,  accord-

*  Ed.  Phil.  Journ.,  No.xx.ii.,  p.  287.  Oct.  1824.


156


CHANGES  CAUSED  BY  THE  PROGRESS


[Ch.  IX.


ing  to  Giraldus  de  Barri,  in  one  river  in  Wales,  and  another
in  Scotland.  The  wolf,  once  so  much  dreaded  by  our  ances¬
tors,  is  said  to  have  maintained  its  ground  in  Ireland  so  late
as  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  (1710),  though  it
had  been  extirpated  in  Scotland  thirty  years  before,  and  in
England  at  a  much  earlier  period.  The  bear,  which  in
Wales  was  regarded  as  a  beast  of  the  chace  equal  to  the  hare
or  the  boar  *,  only  perished  as  a  native  of  Scotland  in  the  year
1057  f .

Many  native  birds  of  prey  have  also  been  the  subjects  of
unremitting  persecution.  The  eagles,  larger  hawks,  and  ravens,
have  disappeared  from  the  more  cultivated  districts.  The
haunts  of  the  mallard,  the  snipe,  the  redshank,  and  the  bittern,
have  been  drained  equally  with  the  summer  dwellings  of  the
lapwing  and  the  curlew.  But  these  species  still  linger  in  some
portion  of  the  British  isles  ;  whereas  the  large  capercailzies,
or  wood  grouse,  formerly  natives  of  the  pine-forests  of  Ire¬
land  and  Scotland,  have  been  destroyed  within  the  last  fifty
years.  The  egret  and  the  crane,  which  appear  to  have  been
formerly  very  common  in  Scotland,  are  now  only  occasional
visitants  J.

The  bustard  ( Otis  tarda),  observes  Graves  in  his  British
Ornithology  §,  6  was  formerly  seen  in  the  downs  and  heaths  of
various  parts  of  our  island,  in  flocks  of  forty  or  fifty  birds  ;
whereas  it  is  now  a  circumstance  of  rare  occurrence  to  meet
with  a  single  individual.’  Bewick  also  remarks,  4  that  they
were  formerly  more  common  in  this  island  than  at  present ;
they  are  now  found  only  in  the  open  counties  of  the  south  and
east,  in  the  plains  of  Wiltshire,  Dorsetshire,  and  some  parts  of
Yorkshire.’  In  the  few  years  that  have  elapsed  since  Bewick
wrote,  this  bird  has  entirely  disappeared  from  Wiltshire  and
Dorsetshire  ||.

These  changes,  we  may  observe,  are  derived  from  very  im-

*  Ray,  Syn.  Quad.,  p.  214.  +  Fleming,  Ed.  Phil.  Journ.,  No.  xxii.  p.  295.

J  Fleming,  ibid.,  p.  292.  §  Vol.  iii.,  London,  1821.

||  Laud  Birds,  vol.  i.  p.  316,  Ed.  1821.


Ch.  IX.]


OF  HUMAN  POPULATION.


157


perfect  memorials,  and  relate  only  to  the  larger  and  more
conspicuous  animals  inhabiting  a  small  spot  on  the  globe ;  but
they  cannot  fail  to  exalt  our  conception  of  the  enormous  revo¬
lutions  which,  in  the  course  of  several  thousand  years,  the  whole
human  species  must  have  effected.

Extinction  of  the  Dodo. — The  kangaroo  and  the  emu  are
retreating  rapidly  before  the  progress  of  colonization  in  Aus¬
tralia ;  and  it  scarcely  admits  of  doubt,  that  the  general  cul¬
tivation  of  that  country  must  lead  to  the  extirpation  of  both.
The  most  striking  example  of  the  loss,  even  within  the  last  two
centuries,  of  a  remarkable  species,  is  that  of  the  dodo — a  bird
first  seen  by  the  Dutch  when  they  landed  on  the  Isle  of  France,
at  that  time  uninhabited,  immediately  after  the  discovery  of
the  passage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.
It  was  of  a  large  size  and  singular  form  ;  its  wings  short,  like
those  of  an  ostrich,  and  wholly  incapable  of  sustaining  its  heavy
body,  even  for  a  short  flight.  In  its  general  appearance  it
differed  from  the  ostrich,  cassowary,  or  any  known  bird.

Many  naturalists  gave  figures  of  the  dodo  after  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  there  is  a  painting
of  it  in  the  British  Museum,  which  is  said  to  have  been  taken
from  a  living  individual.  Beneath  the  painting  is  a  leg,  in  a
fine  state  of  preservation,  which  ornithologists  are  agreed  cannot
belong  to  any  other  known  bird.  In  the  museum  at  Oxford,
also,  there  is  a  foot  and  a  head,  in  an  imperfect  state,  but  M.
Cuvier  doubts  the  identity  of  this  species  with  that  of  which
the  painting  is  preserved  in  London  *.

*  Some  have  complained  that  inscriptions  on  tomb-stones  convey  no  general
information  except  that  individuals  were  born  and  died,  accidents  which  must
happen  alike  to  all  men.  But  the  death  of  a  species  is  so  remarkable  an  event  in
natural  history,  that  it  deserves  commemoration,  and  it  is  with  no  small  interest
that  we  learn,  from  the  archives  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  the  exact  day  and
year  when  the  remains  of  the  last  specimen  of  the  dodo,  which  had  been  per¬
mitted  to  rot  in  the  Ashmolean  museum,  were  cast  away.  The  relics,  we  are  told,
were  c  a  Musaeo  subducta,  annuente  Vice-cancellario  aliisque  curatoribus,  ad  ea
lustranda  convocatis,  die  Januarii,  8V0.,  A.D.,  1755.’-—  Zool.  Journ.,  No.  12,  p.  559.
1828.


158


RAPID  PROPAGATION  OF


[Ch.  IX.


In  spite  of  the  most  active  search,  during  the  last  century,
no  information  respecting  the  dodo  was  obtained,  and  some
authors  have  gone  so  far  as  to  pretend  that  it  never  existed  ;
but  amongst  a  great  mass  of  satisfactory  evidence  in  favour  of
the  recent  existence  of  this  species,  we  may  mention  that  an
assemblage  of  fossil  bones  were  recently  discovered,  under  a
bed  of  lava,  in  the  Isle  of  France,  and  sent  to  the  Paris
museum  by  M.  Desjardins.  They  almost  all  belonged  to  a
large  living  species  of  land-tortoise,  called  Testudo  Indica ,  but
amongst  them  were  the  head,  sternum,  and  humerus  of  the
dodo.  M.  Cuvier  showed  me  these  valuable  remains  in  Paris,
and  assured  me  that  they  left  no  doubt  in  his  mind  that  the
huge  bird  was  one  of  the  gallinaceous  tribe  *.

Rapid  propagation  of  domestic  quadrupeds  over  the  Ameri¬
can  continent.  — Next  to  the  direct  agency  of  man,  his  indirect
influence  in  multiplying  the  numbers  of  large  herbivorous
quadrupeds  of  domesticated  races,  may  be  regarded  as  one  of
the  most  obvious  causes  of  the  extermination  of  species.  On
this,  and  on  several  other  grounds,  the  introduction  of  the
horse,  ox,  and  other  mammalia,  into  America,  and  their  rapid
propagation  over  that  continent  within  the  last  three  centuries,
is  a  fact  of  great  importance  in  natural  history.  The  extraor¬
dinary  herds  of  wild  cattle  and  horses  which  overran  the  plains
of  South  America,  sprung  from  a  very  few  pairs  first  carried
over  by  the  Spaniards  ;  and  they  prove  that  the  wide  geo¬
graphical  range  of  large  species  in  great  continents  does  not
necessarily  imply  that  they  have  existed  there  from  remote

Humboldt  observes,  in  his  Travels^,  on  the  authority  of
Azzara,  that  it  is  believed  there  exist,  in  the  Pampas  of  Buenos
Ayres,  twelve  million  cows  and  three  million  horses,  without
comprising  in  this  enumeration  the  cattle  that  have  no  acknow¬
ledged  proprietor.  In  the  Llanos  of  Caraccas,  the  rich  hateros,
or  proprietors  of  pastoral  farms,  are  entirely  ignorant  of  the

*  Sur  quelques  Ossemens,  &c. — Ann.  des  Sci.,  tome  xxi.  p.  103.  Sept.  1830.

f  Pers.  Nar.  vol.  iv.


Ch.  IX.]  DOMESTIC  QUADRUPEDS  IN  AMERICA.  159

number  of  cattle  they  possess.  The  young  are  branded  with  a
mark  peculiar  to  each  herd,  and  some  of  the  most  wealthy
owners  mark  as  many  as  fourteen  thousand  a  year.  In  the
northern  plains,  from  the  Orinoco  to  the  lake  of  Maracaybo,
M.  Depons  reckoned  that  one  million  two  hundred  thousand
oxen,  one  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  horses,  and  ninety
thousand  mules,  wandered  at  large  *.  In  some  parts  of  the
valley  of  the  Mississippi,  especially  in  the  country  of  the  Osage
Indians,  wild  horses  are  immensely  numerous.

The  establishment  of  black  cattle  in  America  dates  from
Columbus’s  second  voyage  to  St.  Domingo.  They  there  mul¬
tiplied  rapidly  ;  and  that  island  presently  became  a  kind  of
nursery  from  which  these  animals  were  successively  trans¬
ported  to  various  parts  of  the  continental  coast,  and  from  thence
into  the  interior.  Notwithstanding  these  numerous  exporta¬
tions,  in  twenty-seven  years  after  the  discovery  of  the  island,
herds  of  four  thousand  head,  as  we  learn  from  Oviedo,  were
not  uncommon,  and  there  were  even  some  that  amounted  to
eight  thousand.  In  1587,  the  number  of  hides  exported  from
St.  Domingo  alone,  according  to  Acosta’s  report,  was  thirty-five
thousand  four  hundred  and  forty-four  ;  and  in  the  same  year
there  were  exported  sixty-four  thousand  three  hundred  and
fifty  from  the  ports  of  New  Spain.  This  was  in  the  sixty-fifth
year  after  the  taking  of  Mexico,  previous  to  which  event  the
Spaniards,  who  came  into  that  country,  had  not  been  able  to
engage  in  anything  else  than  warf.

All  our  readers  are  aware  that  these  animals  are  now  esta¬
blished  throughout  the  American  continent,  from  Canada  to
Paraguay.

The  ass  has  thriven  very  generally  in  the  New  World ;  and
we  learn  from  Ulloa,  that  in  Quito  they  ran  wild,  and  multi¬
plied  in  amazing  numbers,  so  as  to  become  a  nuisance.  They
grazed  together  in  herds,  and  when  attacked,  defended  them¬
selves  with  their  mouths.  If  a  horse  happened  to  stray  into


*  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xxi.  p.  335.


f  Ibid.


160


EETN-DEER  IN  ICELAND.


[Ch.  IX.


the  places  where  they  fed,  they  all  fell  upon  him,  and  did  not
cease  biting  and  kicking  till  they  left  him  dead  *.

The  first  hogs  were  carried  to  America  by  Columbus,  and
established  in  the  island  of  St.  Domingo  the  year  following  its
discovery  in  November,  1493.  In  succeeding  years  they  were
introduced  into  other  places  where  the  Spaniards  settled ;  and,
in  the  space  of  half  a  century,  they  were  found  established  in
the  New  World,  from  the  latitude  of  25°  north,  to  the  40th
degree  of  south  latitude.  Sheep,  also,  and  goats  have  mul¬
tiplied  enormously  in  the  New  World,  as  have  also  the  cat  and
the  rat,  which  last,  as  we  before  stated,  has  been  imported  un¬
intentionally  in  ships.  The  dogs  introduced  by  man,  which
have  at  different  periods  become  wild  in  America,  hunted  in
packs,  like  the  wolf  and  the  jackal,  destroying  not  only  hogs,
but  the  calves  and  foals  of  the  wild  cattle  and  horses.

Ulloa  in  his  voyage,  and  Buffon  on  the  authority  of  old
writers,  relate  a  fact  which  illustrates  very  clearly  the  principle
before  explained  by  us,  of  the  check  which  the  increase  of  one
animal  necessarily  offers  to  that  of  another.  The  Spaniards
had  introduced  goats  into  the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez,  where
they  became  so  prolific  as  to  furnish  the  pirates  who  infested
those  seas  with  provisions.  In  order  to  cut  off  this  resource
from  the  buccaneers,  a  number  of  dogs  were  turned  loose  into
the  island;  and  so  numerous  did  they  become  in  their  turn,
that  they  destroyed  the  goats  in  every  accessible  part,  after
which  the  number  of  the  wild  dogs  again  decreased  f.

Increase  of  rein-deer  imported  into  Iceland. — As  an  ex¬
ample  of  the  rapidity  with  which  a  large  tract  may  become
peopled  by  the  offspring  of  a  single  pair  of  quadrupeds,  we
may  mention,  that  in  the  year  1773  thirteen  rein-deer  were
exported  from  Norway,  only  three  of  which  reached  Iceland.
These  were  turned  loose  into  the  mountains  of  Guldbringe
Syssel,  where  they  multiplied  so  greatly,  in  the  course  of  forty

*  Ulloa’s  Voyage.  Wood’s  Zoog.,  vol.  i.  p.  9.

|  Buffon,  vol.  v.  p.  100.  Ulloa’ s  Voyage,  vol.  ii.  p.  220.


MAN  OF  MODERN  DATE.


161


Ch.  ik.]


years,  that  it  was  not  uncommon  to  meet  with  herds  consisting
of  from  forty  to  one  hundred  in  various  districts.

In  Lapland,  observes  a  modern  writer,  the  rein-deer  is  a
loser  by  his  connexion  with  man,  but  Iceland  will  be  this
creature’s  paradise.  There  is,  in  the  interior,  a  tract  which
Sir  G.  Mackenzie  computes  at  not  less  than  forty  thousand
square  miles,  without  a  single  human  habitation,  and  almost
entirely  unknown  to  the  natives  themselves.  There  are  no
wolves;  the  Icelanders  will  keep  out  the  bears;  and  the  rein¬
deer,  being  almost  unmolested  by  man,  will  have  no  enemy  what¬
ever,  unless  it  has  brought  with  it  its  own  tormenting  gad-fly  *.

Besides  the  quadrupeds  before  enumerated  by  us,  our
domestic  fowls  have  also  succeeded  in  the  West  Indies  and
America,  where  they  have  the  common  fowl,  the  goose,  the
duck,  the  peacock,  the  pigeon,  and  the  guinea-fowl.  As  these
were  often  taken  suddenly  from  the  temperate  to  very  hot
regions,  they  were  not  reared  at  first  without  much  difficulty  ;
but  after  a  few  generations  they  became  familiarized  to  the
climate,  which,  in  many  cases,  approached  much  nearer  than
that  of  Europe  to  the  temperature  of  their  original  native
countries.

The  fact  of  so  many  millions  of  wild  and  tame  individuals  of
our  domestic  species,  almost  all  of  them  the  largest  quadrupeds
and  birds,  having  been  propagated  throughout  the  new  con¬
tinent  within  the  short  period  that  has  elapsed  since  the  dis¬
covery  of  America,  while  no  appreciable  improvement  can  have
been  made  in  the  productive  powers  of  that  vast  continent,
affords  abundant  evidence  of  the  extraordinary  changes  which
accompany  the  diffusion  and  progressive  advancement  of  the
human  race  over  the  globe.  That  it  should  have  remained  for
us  to  witness  such  mighty  revolutions  is  a  proof,  even  if  there
was  no  other  evidence,  that  the  entrance  of  man  into  the  planet
is,  comparatively  speaking,  of  extremely  modern  date,  and  that
the  effects  of  his  agency  are  only  beginning  to  be  felt.

Population  which  the  globe  is  capable  of  supporting  — -A

*  Travels  in  Iceland  in  1810,  p.  342.


Van.  II.


M


162  EFFECTS  OF  THE  DIFFUSION  OF  MAN.  [Ch.  IX.

modern  writer  has  estimated,  that  there  are  in  America  up¬
wards  of  four  million  square  miles  of  useful  soil,  each  capable
of  supporting  two  hundred  persons;  and  nearly  six  million,
each  mile  capable  of  supporting  four  hundred  and  ninety  per¬
sons  *.  If  this  conjecture  be  true,  it  will  follow,  as  that  author
observes,  that  if  the  natural  resources  of  America  were  fully
developed,  it  would  afford  sustenance  to  five  times  as  great  a
number  of  inhabitants  as  the  entire  mass  of  human  beings
existing  at  present  upon  the  globe.  The  new  continent,  he
thinks,  though  less  than  half  the  size  of  the  old,  contains  an
equal  quantity  of  useful  soil,  and  much  more  than  an  equal
amount  of  productive  power.  Be  this  as  it  may,  we  may  safely
conclude  that  the  amount  of  human  population  now  existing,
constitutes  but  a  small  proportion  of  that  which  the  globe  is
capable  of  supporting,  or  which  it  is  destined  to  sustain  at  no
distant  period,  by  the  rapid  progress  of  society,  especially  in
America,  Australia,  and  certain  parts  of  the  old  continent.

Power  of  exterminating  species  no  prerogative  of  man.- — But
if  we  reflect  that  already  many  millions  of  square  miles  of  the
most  fertile  land,  occupied  originally  by  a  boundless  variety  of
animal  and  vegetable  forms,  have  been  already  brought  under
the  dominion  of  man,  and  compelled,  in  a  great  measure,  to
yield  nourishment  to  him,  and  to  a  limited  number  of  plants
and  animals  which  he  has  caused  to  increase,  we  must  at  once
be  convinced,  that  the  annihilation  of  a  multitude  of  species
has  already  been  effected,  and  will  continue  to  go  on  hereafter,
in  certain  regions,  in  a  still  more  rapid  ratio,  as  the  colonies
of  highly- civilized  nations  spread  themselves  over  unoccupied
lands.

Yet,  if  we  wield  the  sword  of  extermination  as  wre  advance,
we  have  no  reason  to  repine  at  the  havoc  committed,  nor  to
fancy  with  the  Scotch  poet,  that  i  we  violate  the  social  union
of  nature;’  or  complain  with  the  melancholy  Jaques,  that  we

Are  mere  usurpers,  tyrants,  and  what’s  worse.

To  fright  the  animals  and  to  kill  them  up
In  their  assign’d  and  native  dwelling-place.

*  Maclaren,  Art.  America.  Encyc.  Britannica.


Ch.  IX.]


CONCLUDING  REMARKS.


163


We  have  only  to  reflect,  that  in  thus  obtaining  possession
of  the  earth  by  conquest,  and  defending  our  acquisitions  by
force,  we  exercise  no  exclusive  prerogative.  Every  species
which  has  spread  itself  from  a  small  point  over  a  wide  area
must,  in  like  manner,  have  marked  its  progress  by  the  diminu¬
tion  or  the  entire  extirpation  of  some  other,  and  must  main¬
tain  its  ground  by  a  successful  struggle  against  the  encroach¬
ments  of  other  plants  and  animals.  That  minute  parasitic
plant,  called  6  the  rust1  in  wheat,  has,  like  the  Hessian  fly,
the  locust,  and  the  aphis,  caused  famines  ere  now  amongst  the
‘  lords  of  the  creation.’  The  most  insignificant  and  diminu¬
tive  species,  whether  in  the  animal  or  vegetable  kingdom,  have
each  slaughtered  their  thousands,  as  they  disseminated  them¬
selves  over  the  globe,  as  well  as  the  lion,  when  first  it  spread
itself  over  the  tropical  regions  of  Africa.

Concluding  remarks. -—We  cannot  conclude  this  division  of
our  subject  without  observing,  that  although  we  have  as  yet
considered  one  class  only  of  the  causes  (the  organic)  whereby
species  may  become  exterminated,  yet  the  continued  action  of
these  alone,  throughout  myriads  of  future  ages,  must  work  an
entire  change  in  the  state  of  the  organic  creation,  not  merely
on  the  continents  and  islands,  where  the  power  of  man  is
chiefly  exerted,  but  in  the  great  ocean,  where  his  control  is
almost  unknown.  The  mind  is  prepared  by  the  contempla¬
tion  of  such  future  revolutions  to  look  for  the  signs  of  others,
of  an  analogous  nature,  in  the  monuments  of  the  past.  In¬
stead  of  being  astonished  at  the  proofs  there  manifested  of
endless  mutations  in  the  animate  world,  they  will  appear  to  one,
who  has  thought  profoundly  on  the  fluctuations  now  in  pro¬
gress,  to  afford  evidence  in  favour  of  the  uniformity  of  the
system,  unless,  indeed,  we  are  precluded  from  speaking  of  uni¬
formity  when  we  characterize  a  principle  of  endless  variation.


M  2


CHAPTER  X.


Influence  of  inorganic  causes  in  changing  ihe  habitations  of  species — Powers
of  diffusion  indispensable,  that  each  species  may  maintain  its  ground — How
changes  in  the  physical  geography  affect  the  distribution  of  species — Rate  of
the  change  of  species  cannot  be  uniform,  however  regular  the  action  of  the
inorganic  causes — Illustration  derived  from  subsidences  by  earthquakes — from
the  elevation  of  land  by  the  same — from  the  formation  of  new  islands — from
the  wearing  through  of  an  isthmus — Each  change  in  the  physical  geography
of  large  regions  must  occasion  the  extinction  of  species — Effects  of  a  general
alteration  of  climate  on  the  migration  of  species — Gradual  refrigeration  causes
species  in  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres  to  become  distinct — eleva¬
tion  of  temperature  the  reverse — Effects  in  the  distribution  of  species  which
must  result  from  vicissitudes  in  climate  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  trans¬
mutation.

INFLUENCE  OF  INORGANIC  CAUSES  IN  CHANGING  THE  HA¬
BITATIONS  OF  SPECIES.

Having  shown  in  the  last  chapter  how  considerably  the  nume¬
rical  increase  or  the  extension  of  the  geographical  range  of  any
one  species  must  derange  the  numbers  and  distribution  of
others,  let  us  now  direct  our  attention  to  the  influence  which
the  inorganic  causes  described  in  our  first  volume  are  continu¬
ally  exerting  on  the  habitations  of  species.

So  great  is  the  instability  of  the  earth’s  surface,  that  if
Nature  were  not  continually  engaged  in  the  task  of  sowing
seeds  and  colonizing  animals,  the  depopulation  of  a  certain
portion  of  the  habitable  sea  and  land  would  in  a  few  years  be
considerable.  Whenever  a  river  transports  sediment  into  a
lake  or  sea,  the  aquatic  animals  and  plants  which  delight  in
deep  water  are  expelled  :  the  tract,  however,  is  not  allowed  to
remain  useless,  but  is  soon  peopled  by  species  which  require
more  light,  and  heat,  and  thrive  where  the  water  is  shallow.
Every  addition  made  to  the  land  by  the  encroachment  of  the
delta  of  a  river  banishes  many  subaqueous  species  from  their
native  abodes  ;  but  the  new-formed  plain  is  not  permitted  to


Ch.  X.]  POWERS  OF  MIGRATION  INDISPENSABLE.  1G5

lie  unoccupied,  being  instantly  covered  with  terrestrial  vege¬
tation.  The  ocean  devours  continuous  lines  of  sea-coast,  and
precipitates  forests  or  rich  pasture  land  into  the  waves  ;  but
this  space  is  not  lost  to  the  animate  creation,  for  shells  and  sea¬
weed  soon  adhere  to  the  new-made  cliffs,  and  numerous  fish
people  the  channel  which  the  current  has  scooped  out  for  itself.
No  sooner  has  a  volcanic  isle  been  thrown  up  than  some  lichens
begin  to  grow  upon  it,  and  it  is  sometimes  clothed  with  verdure,
while  smoke  and  ashes  are  still  occasionally  thrown  from  the
crater.  The  cocoa,  pandanus,  and  mangrove  take  root  upon
the  coral  reef  before  it  has  fairly  risen  above  the  waves.  The
burning  stream  of  lava  that  descends  from  Etna  rolls  through
the  stately  forest,  and  converts  to  ashes  every  tree  and  herb
which  stands  in  its  way  ;  but  the  black  strip  of  land  thus  deso¬
lated  is  covered  again,  in  the  course  of  time,  with  oaks,  pines,
and  chesnuts,  as  luxuriant  as  those  which  the  fiery  torrent
swept  away.

Every  flood  and  landslip,  every  wave  which  a  hurricane  or
earthquake  throws  upon  the  shore,  every  shower  of  volcanic
dust  and  ashes  which  buries  a  country  far  and  wide  to  the
depth  of  many  feet,  every  advance  of  the  sand-flood,  every
conversion  of  salt  water  into  fresh  when'*  rivers  alter  their
main  channel  of  discharge,  every  permanent  variation  in  the
rise  or  fall  of  tides  in  an  estuary' — these  and  countless  other
causes  displace  in  the  course  of  a  few  centuries  certain  plants
and  animals  from  stations  which  they  previously  occupied.
If,  therefore,  the  Author  of  Nature  had  not  been  prodigal
of  those  numerous  contrivances,  before  alluded  to,  for  spread¬
ing  all  classes  of  organic  beings  over  the  earth— if  he  had  not
ordained  that  the  fluctuations  of  the  animate  and  inanimate
creation  should  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  each  other,  it  is
evident  that  considerable  spaces,  now  the  most  habitable  on
the  globe,  would  soon  be  as  devoid  of  life  as  are  the  Alpine
snows,  or  the  dark  abysses  of  the  ocean,  or  the  moving  sands
of  the  Sahara.

Powers  of  diffusion  indispensable  that  each  species  may


1GG


EFFECT  OF  CHANGES  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY  [Cli.  X.


maintain  its  ground. — The  powers  then  of  migration  and  diffu¬
sion  conferred  on  animals  and  plants  are  indispensable  to  enable
them  to  maintain  their  ground,  and  would  be  necessary  even
though  it  were  never  intended  that  a  species  should  gradually
extend  its  geographical  range.  But  a  facility  of  shifting  their
quarters  being  once  given,  it  cannot  fail  to  happen  that  the
inhabitants  of  one  province  should  occasionally  penetrate  into
some  other,  since  the  strongest  of  those  barriers  which  we
before  described  as  separating  distinct  regions  are  all  liable  to
be  thrown  down,  one  after  the  other,  during  the  vicissitudes
of  the  earth’s  surface.

How  changes  in  physical  geography  affect  the  distribution
of  species. — The  numbers  and  distribution  of  particular  species
are  affected  in  two  ways,  by  changes  in  the  physical  geography
of  the  earth.  First,  these  changes  promote  or  retard  the  mi¬
grations  of  species  ;  secondly,  they  alter  the  physical  conditions
of  the  localities  which  species  inhabit.  If  the  ocean  should
gradually  wear  its  way  through  an  isthmus,  like  that  of  Suez,
it  would  open  a  passage  for  the  intermixture  of  the  aquatic
tribes  of  two  seas  previously  disjoined,  and  would,  at  the  same
time,  close  a  free  communication  which  the  terrestrial  plants
and  animals  of  two  continents  had  before  enjoyed.  These
would  be,  perhaps,  the  most  important  consequences  in  regard
to  the  distribution  of  species,  which  would  result  from  the
breach  made  by  the  sea  in  such  a  spot  ;  but  there  would  be
others  of  a  distinct  nature,  such  as  the  conversion  of  a  certain
tract  of  land  which  formed  the  isthmus  into  sea.  This  space
previously  occupied  by  terrestrial  plants  and  animals  would  be
immediately  delivered  over  to  the  aquatic,  a  local  revolution
which  might  have  happened  in  innumerable  other  parts  of  the
globe,  without  being  attended  by  any  alteration  in  the  blending-
together  of  species  of  two  distinct  provinces.

Rate  of  change  of  species  cannot  be  uniform. — This  observa¬
tion  leads  us  to  point  out  one  of  the  most  interesting  conclu¬
sions  to  which  we  are  led  by  the  contemplation  of  the  vicissi¬
tudes  of  the  inanimate  world  in  relation  to  those  of  the  animate.


Ch.  X]


ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.


167


It  is  clear  that,  if  the  agency  of  inorganic  causes  be  uniform,
as  we  have  supposed,  they  must  operate  very  irregularly  on
the  state  of  organic  beings,  so  that  the  rate  according  to  which
these  will  change  in  particular  regions,  will  not  be  equal  in
equal  periods  of  time.

We  are  not  about  to  advocate  the  doctrine  of  general  catas¬
trophes  recurring  at  certain  intervals,  as  in  the  ancient  oriental
cosmogonies,  nor  do  we  doubt  that,  if  very  considerable  periods
of  equal  duration  could  be  taken  into  our  consideration  and
compared  one  with  another,  the  rate  of  change  in  the  living,
as  well  as  in  the  inorganic  world,  would  be  nearly  uniform  ;
but  if  we  regard  each  of  the  causes  separately,  which  we  know
to  be  at  present  the  most  instrumental  in  remodelling  the  state
of  the  surface,  we  shall  find  that  we  must  expect  each  to  be  in
action  for  thousands  of  years,  without  producing  any  extensive
alterations  in  the  habitable  surface,  and  then  to  give  rise,
during  a  very  brief  period,  to  important  revolutions.

We  shall  illustrate  this  principle  by  a  few  of  the  most  re¬
markable  examples  which  present  themselves.  In  the  course
of  the  last  century,  as  we  have  before  pointed  out,  a  consi¬
derable  number  of  instances  are  recorded  of  the  solid  surface,
whether  covered  by  water  or  not,  having  been  permanently
sunk  or  upraised  by  the  power  of  earthquakes.  Most  of
these  convulsions  are  only  accompanied  by  temporary  fluc¬
tuations  in  the  state  of  limited  districts,  and  a  continued  repe¬
tition  of  these  events  for  thousands  of  years  might  not  produce
any  decisive  change  in  the  state  of  many  of  those  great  zoolo¬
gical  or  botanical  provinces  of  which  we  have  sketched  the
boundaries.

Illustration  derived  from  subsidences  by  earthquakes. —
When,  for  example,  large  parts  of  the  ocean  and  even  of  inland
seas  are  a  thousand  fathoms  or  upwards  in  depth,  it  is  a  matter
of  no  moment  to  the  animate  creation  that  vast  tracts  should
be  heaved  up  many  fathoms  at  certain  intervals,  or  should  sub-
side  to  the  same  amount.  Neither  can  any  material  revolution
be  produced  in  South  America  either  in  the  terrestrial  or  the


168  EFFECT  OF  CHANGES  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY  [Ch.  X.

marine  plants  or  animals  by  a  series  of  shocks  on  the  coast  of
Chili,  each  of  which,  like  that  of  Penco,  in  1750,  should  uplift
the  coast  about  twenty-five  feet.  Nor  if  the  ground  sinks  fifty
feet  at  a  time,  as  in  the  harbour  of  Port  Royal,  in  Jamaica,  in
1692,  will  such  alterations  of  level  work  any  general  fluctua¬
tions  in  the  state  of  organic  beings  inhabiting  the  West  India
islands,  or  the  Caribbean  Sea.

It  is  only  when  these  subterranean  powers,  by  shifting  gra¬
dually  the  points  where  their  principal  force  is  developed,
happen  to  strike  upon  some  particular  region  where  a  slight
change  of  level  immediately  affects  the  distribution  of  land  and
water,  or  the  state  of  the  climate,  or  the  barriers  between
distinct  groups  of  species  over  extensive  areas,  that  the  rate  of
fluctuation  becomes  accelerated,  and  may,  in  the  course  of  a
few  years  or  centuries,  work  mightier  changes  than  had  been
experienced  in  myriads  of  antecedent  years.

Thus,  for  example,  a  repetition  of  subsidences  causing  the
narrow  isthmus  of  Panama  to  sink  down  a  few  hundred  feet,
might  in  a  few  centuries  bring  about  a  great  revolution  in  the
state  of  the  animate  creation  in  the  western  hemisphere.  Thou¬
sands  of  aquatic  species  would  pass  for  the  first  time  from  the
Caribbean  Sea  into  the  Pacific  ;  and  thousands  of  others,  be¬
fore  peculiar  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  would  make  their  way  into
the  Caribbean  Sea,  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  the  Atlantic.  A
considerable  modification  would  probably  be  occasioned  by  the
same  event  in  the  direction  or  volume  of  the  Gulf  stream,  and
thereby  the  temperature  of  the  sea  and  the  contiguous  lands
would  be  altered  as  far  as  the  influence  of  that  current  extends.
A  change  of  climate  might  thus  be  produced  in  the  ocean
from  Florida  to  Spitzbergen,  and  in  many  countries  of  North
America,  Europe,  and  Greenland.  Not  merely  the  heat,  but
the  quantity  of  rain  which  falls  would  be  altered  in  certain
districts,  so  that  many  species  would  be  excluded  from  tracts
where  they  before  flourished;  others  would  be  reduced  in
number  ;  and  some  would  thrive  more  and  multiply.  The
seeds  also  and  the  fruits  of  plants  would  no  longer  be  drifted


Ch.  X.j


ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.


169


in  precisely  the  same  directions,  nor  the  eggs  of  aquatic  ani¬
mals  ;  neither  would  species  be  any  longer  impeded  in  their
migrations  towards  particular  stations  before  shut  out  from
them  by  their  inability  to  cross  the  mighty  current.

Let  us  take  another  example  from  a  part  of  the  globe  which
is  at  present  liable  to  suffer  by  earthquakes,  namely,  the  low
sandy  tract  which  intervenes  between  the  sea  of  Azof  and  the
Caspian.  If  there  should  occur  a  sinking  down  to  a  trifling
amount,  and  such  ravines  should  be  formed  as  might  be  pro¬
duced  by  a  few  earthquakes,  not  more  considerable  than  have
fallen  within  our  limited  observation  during  the  last  one  hun¬
dred  and  forty  years,  the  waters  of  the  sea  of  Azof  would
pour  rapidly  into  the  Caspian,  which,  according  to  the  late
observations  of  Humboldt  #,  is  300  feet  below  the  level  of  the
Black  Sea.  The  Sea  of  Azof  wmdd  immediately  borrow  from
the  Euxine,  the  Euxine  from  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  Medi¬
terranean  from  the  Atlantic,  so  that  an  inexhaustible  current
would  pour  down  into  the  low  tracts  of  Asia  bordering  the  Cas¬
pian,  by  which  all  the  sandy  salt  steppes  adjacent  to  that  sea
would  be  inundated.  An  area  of  at  least  18,000  square  leagues,
now  below  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean,  would  be  converted
from  land  into  sea.

The  diluvial  waters  would  reach  the  salt  lake  of  Aral,  nor
stop  until  their  eastern  shores  were  bounded  by  the  high  land
which  in  the  steppe  of  the  Kirghis  connects  the  Altay  with  the
Himalaya  mountains.  Saratof,  Orenburg,  and  the  low  regions
of  the  Oxus  and  Jaxartes,  would  be  submerged.  A  few  years,
perhaps  a  few  months,  might  suffice  for  the  accomplishment  of
this  great  revolution  in  the  geography  of  the  interior  of  Asia ;
and  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  believe  in  the  permanence  of
the  energy  with  which  existing  causes  now  act,  not  to  anticipate
analogous  events  again  and  again  in  the  course  of  future  ages.

Illustration  derived  from  the  elevation  of  land  — Let  us  next
imagine  a  few  cases  of  the  elevation  of  land  of  small  extent  at
certain  critical  points,  as,  for  example,  in  the  shallowest  parts

*  Fragmens  de  Geologie,  &c.,  1831.


170  EFFECT  OF  CHANGES  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY  [Ch.  X.

of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  where  the  soundings  from  the  African
to  the  European  side  give  only  two  hundred  and  twenty
fathoms.  In  proportion  as  this  submarine  barrier  of  rock  was
upheaved,  to  effect  which  would  merely  require  the  shocks  of
partial  and  confined  earthquakes,  the  volume  of  water  which
pours  in  from  the  Atlantic  into  the  Mediterranean  would  be
lessened.  But  the  loss  of  the  inland  sea  by  evaporation  would
remain  the  same,  so  that  being  no  longer  able  to  draw  on  the
ocean  for  a  supply  sufficient  to  restore  its  equilibrium,  it  must
sink,  and  leave  dry  a  certain  portion  of  land  around  its  bor¬
ders.  The  current  which  now  flows  constantly  out  of  the
Black  Sea  into  the  Mediterranean  would  then  rush  in  more
rapidly,  and  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean  would  be  thereby
prevented  from  falling  so  low ;  but  the  level  of  the  Black  Sea
would,  for  the  same  reason,  sink,  so  that  when,  by  a  continued
series  of  elevatory  movements,  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  had
become  completely  closed  up,  we  might  expect  large  and  level
sandy  steppes  to  surround  both  the  Euxineand  Mediterranean,
like  those  occurring  at  present  on  the  skirts  of  the  Caspian,
and  the  Lake  of  Aral.  The  geographical  range  of  hundreds  of
aquatic  species  would  be  thereby  circumscribed,  and  that  of
hundreds  of  terrestrial  plants  and  animals  extended.

A  line  of  submarine  volcanos  crossing  the  channel  of  some
strait,  and  gradually  choking  it  up  with  ashes  and  lava,  might
produce  a  new  barrier  as  effectually  as  a  series  of  earthquakes  ;
especially  if  thermal  springs,  plentifully  charged  with  carbo¬
nate  of  lime,  silica,  and  other  mineral  ingredients,  should  pro¬
mote  the  rapid  multiplication  of  corals  and  shells,  and  cement
them  together  with  solid  matter  precipitated  during  the  inter¬
vals  between  eruptions.  Suppose  in  this  manner  a  stoppage
to  be  caused  of  the  Bahama  Channel  between  the  bank  of  that
name  and  the  coast  of  Florida.  This  insignificant  revolution,
confined  to  a  mere  spot  in  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  would,
by  diverting  the  main  current  of  the  Gulf  stream,  give  rise
more  effectually  than  the  opening  of  the  Straits  of  Panama
before  supposed,  to  extensive  changes  in  the  climate  and


Ch,  x.]  ON  TIIE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.  171

distribution  of  animals  and  plants  inhabiting  the  northern
hemisphere.

Illustration  from  the  formation  of  new  islands.— -A  repeti¬
tion  of  elevatory  movements  of  earthquakes  might  continue
over  an  area  as  extensive  as  Europe,,  for  thousands  of  ages,  at
the  bottom  of  the  ocean  in  certain  regions,  and  produce  no
visible  effects  ;  whereas,  if  they  should  operate  in  some  shallow
parts  of  the  Pacific,  amid  the  coral  archipelagos,  they  would
soon  give  birth  to  a  new  continent.  Hundreds  of  volcanic
islands  may  be  thrown  up  and  become  covered  with  vegeta¬
tion,  without  causing  more  than  local  fluctuations  in  the  ani¬
mate  world  ;  but  if  a  chain  like  the  Aleutian  archipelago  or
the  Kurile  isles  run  for  a  distance  of  many  hundred  miles,  so
as  to  form  an  almost  uninterrupted  communication  between  two
continents,  or  two  distant  islands,  the  migrations  of  plants,
birds,  insects,  and  even  of  some  quadrupeds,  may  cause  in  a

.

short  time  an  extraordinary  series  of  revolutions,  tending  to
augment  the  range  of  some  animals  and  plants,  and  to  limit  that
of  others.  A  new  archipelago  might  be  formed  in  the  Medi¬
terranean,  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  and  a  thousand  other  localities,
and  might  produce  less  important  events  than  one  rock  which
should  rise  up  between  Australia  and  Java,  so  placed  that
winds  and  currents  might  cause  an  interchange  of  the  plants,
insects,  and  birds,  of  the  latter  country.

From  the  wearing  through  of  an  isthmus. — If  we  turn  from
the  igneous  to  the  aqueous  agents,  we  find  the  same  tendency
to  an  irregular  rate  of  change,  naturally  connected  with  the
strictest  uniformity  in  the  energy  of  those  causes.  When  the
sea,  for  example,  gradually  encroaches  upon  both  sides  of  a
narrow  isthmus,  as  that  of  Sleswick,  separating  the  North  Sea
from  the  Baltic,  where,  as  we  stated,  the  cliffs  on  both  the
opposite  coasts  are  wasting  away  *,  no  material  alteration  re¬
sults  for  thousands  of  years,  save  only  that  there  is  a  progres¬
sive  conversion  of  a  small  strip  of  land  into  water.  A  few  feet


*  Yol  i.  chap.  xvi.


I  iZ


EFFECT  OF  CHANGES  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY


[Ch.  X.


only,  or  a  few  yards,  are  annually  removed  ;  but  when  at  last
the  partition  shall  be  broken  down,  and  the  tides  of  the  ocean
shall  enter  by  a  direct  passage  into  the  inland  sea,  instead  of
going  by  a  circuitous  route  through  the  Cattegat,  a  body  of
salt-water  will  sweep  up  as  far  as  the  Gulfs  of  Bothnia  and
Finland,  the  waters  of  which  are  now  brackish,  or  almost  fresh  ;
and  this  revolution  will  be  attended  by  the  local  annihilation  of
many  species.

Similar  consequences  must  have  resulted,  on  a  small  scale,
when  the  sea  opened  its  way  through  the  isthmus  of  Staveren
in  the  thirteenth  century,  forming  an  union  between  an  inland
lake  and  the  ocean,  and  opening,  in  the  course  of  one  century,
a  shallow  strait  more  than  half  as  wide  as  the  narrowest  part
of  that  which  divides  England  from  France.

Changes  in  physical  geography  which  must  occasion  extinc¬
tion  of  species. — It  will  almost  seem  superfluous,  after  we  have
thus  traced  the  important  modifications  in  the  condition  of
living  beings  which  flow  from  changes  of  trifling  extent,  to
argue  that  entire  revolutions  might  be  brought  about,  if  the
climate  and  physical  geography  of  the  whole  globe  were
greatly  altered.  Species,  we  have  stated,  are  in  general  local,
some  being  confined  to  extremely  small  spots,  and  depending
for  their  existence  on  a  combination  of  causes,  which,  if  they
are  to  be  met  with  elsewhere,  occur  only  in  some  very  remote
region.  Elence  it  must  happen  that,  when  the  nature  of  these
localities  is  changed,  the  species  will  perish  ;  for  it  will  rarely
happen  that  the  cause  which  alters  the  character  of  the  district
will  afford  new  facilities  to  the  species  to  establish  itself  else¬
where.

African  desert. — If  we  attribute  the  origin  of  a  great  part
of  the  desert  of  Africa  to  the  gradual  progress  of  moving  sands,
driven  eastward  by  the  westerly  winds,  we  may  safely  infer
that  a  variety  of  species  must  have  been  annihilated  by  this
cause  alone.  The  sand-flood  has  been  inundating,  from  time
immemorial,  the  rich  lands  on  the  west  of  the  Nile,  and  we


Ch.  X.]


ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.


173


have  only  to  multiply  this  effect  a  sufficient  number  of  times,
in  order  to  understand  how,  in  the  lapse  of  ages,  a  whole  group
of  terrestrial  animals  and  plants  may  become  extinct.

This  desert,  without  including  Bornou  and  Darfour,  extends,
according  to  the  calculation  of  Humboldt,  over  194,000  square
leagues,  an  area  far  more  than  double  that  of  the  Mediterra¬
nean,  which  occupies  only  79,800  square  leagues.  In  a  small
portion  of  so  vast  a  space,  we  may  infer  from  analogy  that
there  were  many  peculiar  species  of  plants  and  animals  which
must  have  been  banished  by  the  sand,  and  their  habitations
invaded  by  the  camel  and  by  birds  and  insects  formed  for  the
arid  sands.

There  is  evidently  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  catastrophe
to  favour  the  escape  of  the  former  inhabitants  to  some  adjoin¬
ing  province;  nothing  to  weaken,  in  the  bordering  lands,  that
powerful  barrier  against  emigration  —  pre-occupancy.  Nor,
even  if  the  exclusion  of  a  certain  group  of  species  from  a  given
tract  were  compensated  by  an  extension  of  their  range  over  a
new  country,  would  that  circumstance  tend  to  the  conservation
of  species  in  general ;  for  the  extirpation  would  merely  then  be
transferred  to  the  region  so  invaded.  If  it  be  imagined,  for
example,  that  the  aboriginal  quadrupeds,  birds,  and  other
animals  of  Africa  emigrated  in  consequence  of  the  advance  of
drift- sand,  and  colonized  Arabia,  the  indigenous  Arabian  spe¬
cies  must  have  given  way  before  them,  and  have  been  reduced
in  number  or  destroyed.

Let  us  next  suppose  that,  in  some  central  and  more  elevated
parts  of  the  great  African  desert,  the  upheaving  power  of
earthquakes  should  be  exerted  throughout  an  immense  series
of  ages,  accompanied  at  certain  intervals  by  volcanic  erup¬
tions,  such  as  gave  rise  at  once,  in  1755,  to  a  mountain  1600
feet  high,  on  the  Mexican  plateau.  When  the  continued  repe¬
tition  of  these  events  had  caused  a  mountain-chain,  it  is  obvious
that  a  complete  transformation  in  the  state  of  the  climate  would
be  brought  about  throughout  a  vast  area.

We  will  imagine  the  summits  of  the  new  chain  to  rise  so  as


174  EFFECT  OF  CHANGES  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY  [CluX.

to  be  covered,  like  Mount  Atlas,  for  several  thousand  feet,
with  snow,  during  a  great  part  of  the  year.  The  melting  of
these  snows,  during  the  greatest  heat,  would  cause  the  rivers
to  swell  in  the  season  when  the  greatest  drought  now  prevails  ;
the  waters,  moreover,  derived  from  this  source,  would  always
be  of  lower  temperature  than  the  surrounding  atmosphere,  and
would  thus  contribute  to  cool  the  climate.  During  the  nume-
rous  earthquakes  and  volcanic  eruptions  which  would  attend
the  gradual  formation  of  the  chain,  there  would  be  many  floods
caused  by  the  bursting  of  temporary  lakes  and  by  the  melting
of  snows  by  lava.  These  inundations  would  deposit,  alluvial
matter  far  and  wide  over  the  original  sands  at  all  levels,  as  the
country  assumed  various  shapes,  and  was  modified  again  and
again  by  the  moving  power  from  below,  and  the  aqueous  erosion
of  the  surface  above.  At  length  the  Sahara  would  be  fertil¬
ized,  irrigated  by  rivers  and  streamlets  intersecting  it  in  every
direction,  and  covered  by  jungle  and  morasses,  so  that  the
animals  and  plants  which  now  people  Northern  Africa  would
disappear,  and  the  region  would  gradually  become  fitted  for
the  reception  of  a  population  of  species  perfectly  dissimilar  in
their  forms,  habits,  and  organization.

There  are  always  some  peculiar  and  characteristic  features
in  the  physical  geography  of  each  large  division  of  the  globe  ;
and  on  these  peculiarities  the  state  of  animal  and  vegetable  life
is  dependent.  If,  therefore,  we  admit  incessant  fluctuations  in
the  physical  geography,  we  must,  at  the  same  time,  concede
the  successive  extinction  of  terrestrial  and  aquatic  species  to  be
part  of  the  economy  of  our  system.  When  some  great  class  of
stations  is  in  excess  in  certain  latitudes,  as,  for  example,  in
wide  savannahs,  arid  sands,  lofty  mountains,  or  inland  seas,  we
find  a  corresponding  development  of  species  adapted  for  such
circumstances.  In  North  America,  where  there  is  a  chain
of  vast  inland  lakes  of  fresh  water,  w  e  find  an  extraordinary
abundance  and  variety  of  aquatic  birds,  fresh  water  fish,  tes-
tacea,  and  small  amphibious  reptiles,  fitted  for  such  a  climate.
The  greater  part  of  these  would  perish  if  the  lakes  were  de-


Ch.  X.l  ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.  175

stroyed, — an  event  that  might  be  brought  about  by  some  of
the  least  of  those  important  revolutions  contemplated  in  geo¬
logy.  It  might  happen  that  no  fresh  water  lakes  of  corre¬
sponding  magnitude  might  then  exist  on  the  globe;  but  if
they  occurred  elsewhere,  they  might  be  situated  in  New  Hol¬
land,  Southern  Africa,  Eastern  Asia,  or  some  region  so  distant
as  to  be  quite  inaccessible  to  the  North  American  species  ;  or
they  might  be  situated  within  the  tropics,  in  a  climate  uninha¬
bitable  by  species  fitted  for  a  temperate  zone  ;  or,  finally,  we
may  presume  that  they  would  be  preoccupied  by  indigenous
tribes.

To  pursue  this  train  of  reasoning  farther  is  unnecessary  ;  the
reader  has  only  to  reflect  on  what  we  have  said  of  the  habita¬
tions  and  the  stations  of  organic  beings  in  general,  and  to
consider  them  in  relation  to  those  effects  which  we  have  con¬
templated  in  our  first  volume  as  resulting  from  the  igneous
and  aqueous  causes  now  in  action,  and  he  will  immediately
perceive  that,  amidst  the  vicissitudes  of  the  earth’s  surface,
species  cannot  be  immortal,  but  must  perish  one  after  the  other,
like  the  individuals  which  compose  them.  There  is  no  pos¬
sibility  of  escaping  from  this  conclusion,  without  resorting  to
some  hypothesis  as  violent  as  that  of  Lamarck,  who  imagined,
as  we  have  before  seen,  that  species  are  each  of  them  endowed
with  indefinite  powers  of  modifying  their  organization,  in  con¬
formity  to  the  endless  changes  of  circumstances  to  which  they
are  exposed.

EFFECTS  OF  A  GENERAL  ALTERATION  IN  CLIMATE  ON  THE

DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.

Some  of  the  effects  which  must  attend  every  general  altera¬
tion  of  climate  are  sufficiently  peculiar  to  claim  a  separate
consideration  before  concluding  the  present  chapter.

We  have  before  stated  that,  during  seasons  of  extraordinary
severity,  many  northern  birds,  and,  in  some  countries,  many
quadrupeds,  migrate  southwards.  If  these  cold  seasons  were
to  become  frequent,  in  consequence  of  a  gradual  and  general


176  EFFECTS  OF  CHANGES  OF  CLIMATE  [Ch.  X.

refrigeration  of  the  atmosphere,  such  migrations  would  be
more  and  more  regular,  until,  at  length,  many  animals,  now
confined  to  the  arctic  regions,  would  become  the  tenants  of  the
temperate  zone  ;  while  the  inhabitants  of  the  latter  would
approach  nearer  to  the  equator.  At  the  same  time,  many
species  previously  established  on  high  mountains  would  begin
to  descend,  in  every  latitude,  towards  the  middle  regions,  and
those  which  were  confined  to  the  flanks  of  mountains  would
make  their  way  into  the  plains.  Analogous  changes  would
also  take  place  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  heat  of  the  atmosphere  be  on  the
increase,  the  plants  and  animals  of  low  grounds  would  ascend
to  higher  levels,  the  equatorial  species  would  migrate  into  the
temperate  zone,  and  those  of  the  temperate  into  the  arctic
circle.

But  although  some  species  might  thus  be  preserved,  every
great  change  of  climate  must  be  fatal  to  many  which  can  find
no  place  of  retreat,  when  their  original  habitations  become
unfit  for  them.  For  if  the  general  temperature  be  on  the
rise,  then  is  there  no  cooler  region  whither  the  polar  species
can  take  refuge ;  if  it  be  on  the  decline,  then  the  animals  and
plants  previously  established  between  the  tropics  have  no
resource.  Suppose  the  general  heat  of  the  atmosphere  to  in¬
crease,  so  that  even  the  arctic  region  became  too  warm  for  the
musk-ox  and  rein-deer,  it  is  clear  that  they  must  perish  ;  so,
if  the  torrid  zone  should  lose  so  much  of  its  heat  by  the  pro¬
gressive  refrigeration  of  the  earth’s  surface,  as  to  be  an  unfit
habitation  for  apes,  boas,  bamboos,  and  palms,  these  tribes  of
animals  and  plants,  or  at  least  most  of  the  species  now  belong¬
ing  to  them,  would  become  extinct,  for  there  would  be  no
warmer  latitudes  for  their  reception.

It  will  follow,  therefore,  that  as  often  as  the  climates  of  the
globe  are  passing  from  the  extreme  of  heat  to  that  of  cold —
from  the  summer  to  the  winter  of  the  great  year  before  alluded
to  by  us* — the  migratory  movement  will  be  directed  con-


*  Vol.  i.  chap.  vii.


Ch.  X.]


ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.


177


stantly  from  the  poles  towards  the  equator ;  and  for  this  reason
the  species  inhabiting  parallel  latitudes,  in  the  northern  and
southern  hemispheres,  must  become  widely  different.  For  we
assume,  on  grounds  before  stated  that  the  original  stock  of
each  species  is  introduced  into  one  spot  of  the  earth  only,  and,
consequently,  no  species  can  be  at  once  indigenous  in  the  arctic
and  antarctic  circles.

But  when,  on  the  contrary,  a  series  of  changes  in  the  phy¬
sical  geography  of  the  globe,  or  any  other  supposed  cause,
occasions  an  elevation  of  the  general  temperature, — when  there
is  a  passage  from  the  winter  to  one  of  the  vernal  or  summer
seasons  of  the  great  cycle  of  climates,  then  the  order  of  the
migratory  movement  is  inverted.  The  different  species  of
animals  and  plants  direct  their  course  from  the  equator  towards
the  poles  ;  and  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres  may
become  peopled,  to  a  great  degree,  by  identical  species.  Such
is  not  the  actual  state  of  the  inhabited  earth,  as  we  have  already
shown  in  our  sketch  of  the  geographical  distribution  of  its
living  productions  ;  and  this  fact  adds  one  more  additional
proof  to  a  great  body  of  evidence,  derived  from  independent
sources,  that  the  general  temperature  has  been  cooling  down
during  the  epochs  which  immediately  preceded  our  own.

We  do  not  mean  to  speculate  on  the  entire  transposition  of
a  group  of  animals  and  plants  from  tropical  to  polar  latitudes,
or  the  reverse,  as  a  probable,  or  even  possible,  event ;  for
although  we  believe  the  mean  annual  temperature  of  one  zone
to  be  transferable  to  another,  we  know  that  the  same  climate
cannot  be  so  transferred.  Whatever  be  the  general  tempera¬
ture  of  the  earth’s  surface,  comparative  equability  of  heat  will
characterize  the  tropical  regions,  while  great  periodical  varia¬
tions  will  belong  to  the  temperate,  and  still  more  to  the  polar
latitudes.  These,  and  many  other  peculiarities  connected
with  heat  and  light,  depend  on  fixed  astronomical  causes,  such
as  the  motion  of  the  earth  and  its  position  in  relation  to  the


Voi,.  II.


*  Chap.  VIII.


N


178


EFFECTS  OF  CHANGES  OF  CLIMATE


[Ch.  X.


sun,  and  not  on  those  fluctuations  of  its  surface,  which  may
influence  the  general  temperature.

Among  many  obstacles  to  such  extensive  transferences  of
habitations  we  must  not  forget  the  immense  lapse  of  time  re¬
quired,  according  to  any  hypothesis  yet  suggested,  especially
that  which  has  appeared  to  us  most  feasible,  to  bring  about  a
considerable  change  in  climate.  During  a  period  so  vast,  the
other  causes  of  extirpation,  before  enumerated  by  us,  would
exert  so  powerful  an  influence  as  to  prevent  all,  save  a  very  few
hardy  species,  from  passing  from  equatorial  to  polar  regions,
or  from  the  tropics  to  the  pole.

But  the  power  of  accommodation  to  new  circumstances  is
great  in  certain  species,  and  might  enable  many  to  pass  from
one  zone  to  another,  if  the  mean  annual  heat  of  the  atmosphere
and  the  ocean  were  greatly  altered.  To  the  marine  tribes,
especially,  such  a  passage  would  be  possible,  for  they  are  less
impeded  in  their  migrations,  by  barriers  of  land,  than  are  the
terrestrial  by  the  ocean.  Add  to  this,  that  the  temperature  of
the  ocean  is  much  more  uniform  than  that  of  the  atmosphere
investing  the  land,  so  that  we  may  easily  suppose  that  most  of
the  testacea,  fish,  and  other  classes,  might  pass  from  the  equa¬
torial  into  the  temperate  regions,  if  the  mean  temperature  of
those  regions  were  transposed,  although  a  second  expatriation
of  these  species  of  tropical  origin  into  the  arctic  and  antarctic
circles  would  probably  be  impossible.

On  the  principles  above  explained,  if  we  found  that  at  some
former  period,  as  when,  for  example,  our  carboniferous  strata
were  deposited,  the  same  tree-ferns  and  other  plants  inhabited
the  regions  now  occupied  by  Europe  and  Van  Diemen’s  Land,
we  should  suspect  that  the  species  in  question  had,  at  some
antecedent  period,  inhabited  lands  within  the  tropics,  and  that
an  increase  of  the  mean  annual  heat  had  caused  them  to  emi¬
grate  into  both  the  temperate  zones.  There  are  no  geological
data,  however,  as  yet  obtained,  to  warrant  the  opinion  that
such  identity  of  species  existed  in  the  two  hemispheres  in  the
era  in  question.


Ch.  X.]  ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.  179

Let  us  now  consider  more  particularly  the  effect  of  vicissi¬
tudes  of  climate  in  causing  one  species  to  give  way  before  the
increasing  numbers  of  some  other.

When  temperature  forms  the  barrier  which  arrests  the  pro-
gress  of  an  animal  or  plant  in  a  particular  direction,  the
individuals  are  fewer  and  less  vigorous  as  they  approach  the
extreme  confines  of  the  geographical  range  of  the  species.
But  these  stragglers  are  ready  to  multiply  rapidly  on  the
slightest  increase  or  diminution  of  heat  that  may  be  favourable
to  them,  just  as  particular  insects  increase  during  a  hot  sum¬
mer,  and  certain  plants  and  animals  gain  ground  after  a  series
of  congenial  seasons.

In  almost  every  district,  especially  if  it  be  mountainous,
there  are  a  variety  of  species  the  limits  of  whose  habitations  are
conterminous,  some  being  unable  to  proceed  farther  without
encountering  too  much  heat,  others  too  much  cold.  Individuals,
which  are  thus  on  the  borders  of  the  regions  proper  to  their
respective  species,  are  like  the  out-posts  of  hostile  armies,
ready  to  profit  by  every  slight  change  of  circumstances  in  their
favour,  and  to  advance  upon  the  ground  occupied  by  their
neighbours  and  opponents.

The  proximity  of  distinct  climates,  produced  by  the  in¬
equalities  of  the  earth’s  surface,  brings  species  possessing  very
different  constitutions  into  such  immediate  contact,  that  their
naturalizations  are  very  speedy  whenever  opportunities  of  ad¬
vancing  present  themselves.  Many  insects  and  plants,  for
example,  are  common  to  low  plains  within  the  arctic  circle,
and  to  lofty  mountains  in  Scotland  and  other  parts  of  Europe.
If  the  climate,  therefore,  of  the  polar  regions  were  transferred
to  our  own  latitudes,  the  species  in  question  would  immediately
descend  from  these  elevated  stations  to  overrun  the  low
grounds.  Invasions  of  this  kind,  attended  by  the  expulsion  of
the  pre-occupants,  are  almost  instantaneous,  because  the  change
of  temperature  not  only  places  the  one  species  in  a  more  favour¬
able  position,  but  renders  the  others  sickly  and  almost  incapa¬
ble  of  defence.


N  2


180


EFFECTS  OF  CHANGES  OF  CLIMATE


[Ch.  X.


These  changes  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  transmutation.
- — Lamarck  appears  to  have  speculated  on  the  modifications  to
which  every  variation  of  external  circumstances  might  give  rise
in  the  form  and  organization  of  species,  as  if  he  had  indefinite
periods  of  time  at  his  command,  not  sufficiently  reflecting  that
revolutions  in  the  state  of  the  habitable  earth,  whether  by
changes  of  climate  or  any  other  condition,  are  attended  by  still
greater  fluctuations  in  the  relative  condition  of  contemporary
species.  They  can  avail  themselves  of  these  alterations  in  their
favour  instantly,  and  augment  their  numbers  to  the  injury  of
some  other  species  ;  wffiereas  the  supposed  transmutations  are
only  assumed  to  be  brought  about  by  slow  and  insensible  de¬
grees,  and  in  a  lapse  of  ages,  the  duration  of  which  is  beyond
the  reach  of  human  conception.  Even  if  we  thought  it  pos¬
sible  that  the  palm  or  the  elephant,  which  now  flourish  in
equatorial  regions,  could  ever  learn  to  bear  the  variable  seasons
of  our  temperate  zone,  or  the  rigours  of  an  arctic  winter,  we
should,  with  no  less  confidence,  affirm,  that  they  must  perish
before  they  had  time  to  become  habituated  to  such  new  circum¬
stances.  That  they  would  be  supplanted  by  other  species  at
each  variation  of  climate,  may  be  inferred  from  what  we  have
before  said  of  the  known  local  exterminations  of  species  which
have  resulted  from  the  multiplication  of  others.  Some  minute
insect,  perhaps,  might  be  the  cause  of  destruction  to  the  huge
and  powerful  elephant.

Suppose  the  climate  of  the  highest  part  of  the  woody  zone
of  Etna  to  be  transferred  to  the  sea-shore  at  the  base  of  the
mountain,  no  botanist  would  anticipate  that  the  olive,  lemon-
tree,  and  prickly  pear  ( Cactus  opuniia),  would  be  able  to  con¬
tend  with  the  oak  and  chestnut,  which  would  begin  forthwith
to  descend  to  a  lower  level,  or  that  these  last  would  be  able  to
stand  their  ground  against  the  pine,  which  would  also,  in  the
space  of  a  few  years,  begin  to  occupy  a  lower  position.  We
might  form  some  kind  of  estimate  of  the  time  which  might  be
required  for  the  migrations  of  these  plants  ;  whereas  we  have
no  data  for  concluding  that  any  number  of  thousands  of  years


Ch.  X.]


ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES.


181


would  be  sufficient  for  one  step  in  the  pretended  metamor¬
phosis  of  one  species  into  another,  possessing  distinct  attributes
and  qualities.

This  argument  is  applicable  not  merely  to  climate ,  but  to
any  other  cause  of  mutation.  However  slowly  a  lake  may  be
converted  into  a  marsh,  or  a  marsh  into  a  meadow,  it  is  evident
that  before  the  lacustrine  plants  can  acquire  the  power  of  living
in  marshes,  or  the  marsh -plants  of  living  in  a  less  humid  soil,
other  species,  already  existing  in  the  region,  and  fitted  for  these
several  stations,  will  intrude  and  keep  possession  of  the  ground.
So  if  a  tract  of  salt  water  becomes  fresh  by  passing  through
every  intermediate  degree  of  brackishness,  still  the  marine
molluscs  will  never  be  permitted  to  be  gradually  metamor¬
phosed  into  fluviatile  species  ;  because  long  before  any  such
transformation  can  take  place  by  slow  and  insensible  degrees,
other  tribes,  which  delight  in  brackish  or  fresh  water,  will  avail
themselves  of  the  change  in  the  fluid,  and  will,  each  in  their
turn,  monopolize  the  space.

It  is  idle  to  dispute  about  the  abstract  possibility  of  the  con¬
version  of  one  species  into  another,  when  there  are  known
causes  so  much  more  active  in  their  nature,  which  must  always
intervene  and  prevent  the  actual  accomplishment  of  such  con¬
versions.  A  faint  image  of  the  certain  doom  of  a  species  less
fitted  to  struggle  with  some  new  condition  in  a  region  which  it
previously  inhabited,  and  where  it  has  to  contend  with  a  more
vigorous  species,  is  presented  by  the  extirpation  of  savage  tribes
of  men  by  the  advancing  colony  of  some  civilized  nation.  In
this  case  the  contest  is  merely  between  two  different  races ,
each  gifted  with  equal  capacities  of  improvement — between  two
varieties,  moreover,  of  a  species  which  exceeds  all  others  in  its
aptitude  to  accommodate  its  habits  to  the  most  extraordinary
variations  of  circumstances.  Yet  few  future  events  are  more
certain  than  the  speedy  extermination  of  the  Indians  of  North
America  and  the  savages  of  New  Holland  in  the  course  of  a
few  centuries,  when  these  tribes  will  be  remembered  only  in
poetry  and  tradition.


CHAPTER  XL


Theory  of  the  successive  extinction  of  species  consistent  with  their  limited  geo¬
graphical  distribution — The  discordance  in  the  opinions  of  botanists  respect¬
ing  the  centres  from  which  plants  have  been  diffused  may  arise  from  changes
in  physical  geography  subsequent  to  the  origin  of  living  species — Whether
there  are  grounds  for  inferring  that  the  loss  from  time  to  time  of  certain  ani¬
mals  and  plants  is  compensated  by  the  introduction  of  new  species  ? — Whether
any  evidence  of  such  new  creations  could  be  expected  within  the  historical  era,
even  if  they  had  been  as  frequent  as  cases  of  extinction  ? — The  question  whe¬
ther  the  existing  species  have  been  created  in  succession  can  only  be  decided
by  reference  to  geological  monuments.


Successive  extinction  of  Species  consistent  with  their  limited

Geog rap h ica l  Distribution.

We  have  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  chapters  the  strict
dependence  of  each  species  of  animal  and  plant  on  certain  phy¬
sical  conditions  in  the  state  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  on  the
number  and  attributes  of  other  organic  beings  inhabiting  the
same  region.  We  have  also  endeavoured  to  show  that  all  these
conditions  are  in  a  state  of  continual  fluctuation,  the  igneous
and  aqueous  agents  remodelling,  from  time  to  time,  the  phy¬
sical  geography  of  the  globe,  and  the  migrations  of  species
causing  new  relations  to  spring  up  successively  between  dif¬
ferent  organic  beings.  We  have  deduced  as  a  corollary,  that
the  species  existing  at  any  particular  period  must,  in  the  course
of  ages,  become  extinct  one  after  the  other.  4  They  must  die
out,’  to  borrow  an  emphatical  expression  from  Buffon,  ‘  because
Time  fights  against  them.’

If  the  views  which  we  have  taken  are  just,  there  will  be  no
difficulty  in  explaining  why  the  habitations  of  so  many  species
are  now  restrained  within  exceedingly  narrow  limits.  Every
local  revolution,  such  as  those  contemplated  in  the  preceding
chapter,  tends  to  circumscribe  the  range  of  some  species,  while
it  enlarges  that  of  others  5  and  as  we  have  been  led  to  infer


Ch.  XI.]


CENTRES  OF  VEGETATION.


183


that  new  species  originate  in  one  spot  only,  each  must  require
time  to  diffuse  itself  over  a  wide  area.  The  recent  origin,
therefore,  of  some  species,  and  the  high  antiquity  of  others,
may  be  equally  consistent  with  the  general  fact  of  their  limited
distribution,  some  being  local,  because  they  have  not  existed
long  enough  to  admit  of  their  wide  dissemination  ;  others,
because  circumstances  in  the  animate  or  inanimate  world  have
occurred  to  restrict  the  range  which  they  may  once  have  ob¬
tained.

As  considerable  modifications  in  the  relative  levels  of  land
and  sea  have  taken  place  in  certain  regions  since  the  existing
species  were  in  being,  we  can  feel  no  surprise  that  the  zoologist
and  botanist  have  hitherto  found  it  difficult  to  refer  the  geo¬
graphical  distribution  of  species  to  any  clear  and  determinate
principles,  since  they  have  usually  speculated  on  the  pheno¬
mena,  upon  the  assumption  that  the  physical  geography  of  the
globe  had  undergone  no  material  alteration  since  the  introduc¬
tion  of  the  species  now  living.  So  long  as  this  assumption  was
made,  the  facts  relating  to  the  geography  of  plants  and  animals
appeared  capricious  in  the  extreme,  and  by  many  the  subject
was  pronounced  to  be  so  full  of  mystery  and  anomalies,  that
the  establishment  of  a  satisfactory  theory  was  hopeless.

Centres  from  which  plants  have  been  diffused . —  Some  bota¬
nists  conceived,  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  of  Willdenow,
that  mountains  were  the  centres  of  creation  from  which  the
plants  now  inhabiting  large  continents  have  radiated,  to  which
De  Candolle  and  others,  with  much  reason,  objected,  that  moun¬
tains,  on  the  contrary,  are  often  the  barriers  between  two  pro¬
vinces  of  distinct  vegetation.  The  geologist  who  is  acquainted
with  the  extensive  modifications  which  the  surface  of  the  earth
has  undergone  in  very  recent  geological  epochs,  may  be  able,
perhaps,  to  reconcile  both  these  theories  in  their  application
to  different  regions.

A  lofty  range  of  mountains,  which  is  so  ancient  as  to  date
from  a  period  when  the  species  of  animals  and  plants  differed
from  those  now  living,  will  naturally  form  a  barrier  between


184


CENTRES  OF  VEGETATION.


[Ch.  XX.


contiguous  provinces  ;  but  a  chain  which  has  been  raised,  in
great  part,  within  the  epoch  of  existing  species,  and  around
which  new  lands  have  arisen  from  the  sea  within  that  period,
will  be  a  centre  of  peculiar  vegetation.

*  In  France/  observes  De  Candolle  *,  ‘  the  Alps  and  Ce-
vennes  prevent  a  great  number  of  the  plants  of  the  south  from
spreading  themselves  to  the  northward  ;  but  it  has  been  re¬
marked  that  some  species  have  made  their  way  through  the
gorges  of  these  chains,  and  are  found  on  their  northern  sides,
principally  in  those  places  where  they  are  lower  and  more
interrupted.’  Now  the  chains  here  alluded  to  have  probably
been  of  considerable  height  ever  since  the  era  when  the  exist-
ing  vegetation  began  to  appear,  and  were  it  not  for  the  deep
fissures  which  divide  them,  they  might  have  caused  much  more
abrupt  terminations  to  the  extension  of  distinct  assemblages  of
species.

Parts  of  the  Italian  peninsula,  on  the  other  hand,  have
gained  a  considerable  portion  of  their  present  height  since  a
majority  of  the  marine  species  now  inhabiting  the  Mediterra¬
nean,  and  probably,  also,  since  the  terrestrial  plants  of  the  same
region,  were  in  being.  Large  tracts  of  land  have  been  added,
both  on  the  Adriatic  and  Mediterranean  side,  to  what  origi¬
nally  constituted  a  much  narrower  range  of  mountains,  if  not
a  chain  of  islands  running  nearly  north  and  south,  like  Cor¬
sica  and  Sardinia.  It  may  therefore  be  presumed  that  the
Apennines  have  been  a  centre  whence  species  have  diffused
themselves  over  the  contiguous  lower  and  newer  regions.  In
this  and  all  analogous  situations,  the  doctrine  of  Willdenow,
that  species  have  radiated  from  the  mountains  as  from  centres,
may  be  well  founded.


*  Essai  Elementaire,  &c.,  p.  46.


Ch.  XI.]


APPEARANCE  OP  NEW  SPECIES.


185


WHETHER  THERE  ARE  GROUNDS  FOR  INFERRING  THAT  THE
LOSS  FROM  TIME  TO  TIME  OF  CERTAIN  ANIMALS  AND
PLANTS  IS  COMPENSATED  BY  THE  INTRODUCTION  OF
NEW  SPECIES.

If  the  reader  should  infer,  from  the  facts  laid  before  him  in
the  preceding  chapters,  that  the  successive  extinction  of  animals
and  plants  may  be  part  of  the  constant  and  regular  course  of
nature,  he  will  naturally  inquire  whether  there  are  any  means
provided  for  the  repair  of  these  losses  ?  Is  it  part  of  the
economy  of  our  system  that  the  habitable  globe  should,  to  a
certain  extent,  become  depopulated  both  in  the  ocean  and  on
the  land  ;  or  that  the  variety  of  species  should  diminish  until
some  new  era  arrives  when  a  new  and  extraordinary  effort  of
creative  energy  is  displayed  ?  Or  is  it  possible  that  new  species
can  be  called  into  being  from  time  to  time,  and  yet  that  so
astonishing  a  phenomenon  can  escape  the  observation  of  natu¬
ralists  ?

Humboldt  has  characterized  these  subjects  as  among  the
mysteries  which  natural  science  cannot  reach  ;  and  he  observes
that  the  investigation  Qf  the  origin  of  beings  does  not  belong
to  zoological  or  botanical  geography.  To  geology,  however,
these  topics  do  strictly  appertain  ;  and  this  science  is  only  inte¬
rested  in  inquiries  into  the  state  of  the  animate  creation  as  it
now  exists,  with  a  view  of  pointing  out  its  relations  to  antece¬
dent  periods  when  its  condition  was  different.

Before  offering  any  hypothesis  towards  the  solution  of  so
difficult  a  problem,  let  us  consider  what  kind  of  evidence  we
ought  to  expect,  in  the  present  state  of  science,  of  the  first
appearance  of  new  animals  or  plants,  if  we  could  imagine  the
successive  creation  of  species  to  constitute,  like  their  gradual
extinction,  a  regular  part  of  the  economy  of  nature.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  obviously  more  easy  to  prove  that  a
species,  once  numerously  represented  in  a  given  district,  has
ceased  to  be,  than  that  some  other  which  did  not  pre-exist  has
made  its  appearance —  assuming  always,  for  reasons  before


186


SPECULATIONS  ON  THE


[Ch.  XI.


stated,  that  single  stocks  only  of  each  animal  and  plant  are
originally  created,  and  that  individuals  of  new  species  do  not
suddenly  start  up  in  many  different  places  at  once.

So  imperfect  has  the  science  of  natural  history  remained
down  to  our  own  times,  that,  within  the  memory  of  persons
now  living,  the  numbers  of  known  animals  and  plants  have
been  doubled,  or  even  quadrupled,  in  many  classes.  New
and  often  conspicuous  species  are  annually  discovered  in  parts
of  the  old  continent,  long  inhabited  by  the  most  civilized
nations.  Conscious,  therefore,  of  the  limited  extent  of  our
information,  we  always  infer,  when  such  discoveries  are  made,
that  the  beings  in  question  had  previously  eluded  our  re¬
search  ;  or  had  at  least  existed  elsewhere,  and  only  migrated
at  a  recent  period  into  the  territories  where  we  now  find  them.
It  is  difficult,  even  in  contemplation,  to  anticipate  the  time
when  we  shall  be  entitled  to  make  any  other  hypothesis  in
regard  to  all  the  marine  tribes,  and  to  by  far  the  greater  num¬
ber  of  the  terrestrial -such  as  birds,  which  possess  such
unlimited  powers  of  migration  ;  insects  which,  besides  their
numbers,  are  also  so  capable  of  being  diffused  to  vast  distances ;
and  cryptogamous  plants,  to  which,  as  to  many  other  classes,
both  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom,  similar  observations
are  applicable.

What  kind  of  evidence  of  such  new  creations  could  he  ex¬
pected ? — What  kind  of  proofs,  therefore,  could  we  reason¬
ably  expect  to  find  of  the  origin  at  a  particular  period  of  a  new
species  ?

Perhaps  it  may  be  said  in  reply  that,  within  the  last  two  or
three  centuries,  some  forest  tree  or  new  quadruped  might  have
been  observed  to  appear  suddenly  in  those  parts  of  England
or  France  which  had  been  most  thoroughly  investigated  ; —
that  naturalists  might  have  been  able  to  show  that  no  such
being  inhabited  any  other  region  of  the  globe,  and  that  there
was  no  tradition  of  anything  similar  having  before  been  ob¬
served  in  the  district  where  it  had  made  its  appearance.

Now,  although  this  objection  may  seem  plausible,  yet  its


Ch.  XI.]


APPEARANCE  OF  NEW  SPECIES.


187


force  will  be  found  to  depend  entirely  on  the  rate  of  fluctua¬
tion  which  we  suppose  to  prevail  in  the  animate  world,  and  on
the  proportion  which  such  conspicuous  subjects  of  the  animal
and  vegetable  kingdoms  bear  to  those  which  are  less  known
and  escape  our  observation.  There  are  probably  more  than  a
million,  perhaps  two  millions  of  species  of  plants  and  animals,
exclusive  of  the  microscopic  and  infusory  animalcules,  now
inhabiting  the  terraqueous  globe.  The  terrestrial  plants,  it  is
supposed,  may  amount,  if  fully  known,  to  about  100,000,  and
the  insects  to  four  times  that  number.  To  these  we  have
still  to  add,  for  the  remainder  of  the  terrestrial  classes,  many
of  the  invertebrated  and  all  the  vertebrated  animals.  As
to  the  aquatic  tribes,  it  remains  at  present  in  a  great  degree
mere  matter  of  conjecture  what  proportion  they  bear  to  the
denizens  of  the  land  ;  but  the  habitable  surface  beneath  the
waters  can  hardly  be  estimated  at  less  than  double  that  of  the
continents  and  islands,  even  admitting  that  a  very  consider¬
able  area  is  destitute  of  life,  in  consequence  of  great  depth,
cold,  darkness,  and  other  circumstances.  In  the  late  polar
expedition  it  was  found  that,  in  some  regions,  as  in  Baffin’s
Bay,  there  were  marine  animals  inhabiting  the  bottom  at  great
depths,  where  the  temperature  of  the  water  was  below  the
freezing  point.  That  there  is  life  at  much  greater  profundities
in  warmer  regions  may  be  confidently  inferred.  We  have  be¬
fore  stated  that  marine  plants  not  only  exist  but  acquire  vivid
colours  at  depths  where,  to  our  senses,  there  would  be  dark¬
ness  deep  as  night.

The  ocean  teems  with  life — the  class  of  polyps  alone  are
conjectured  by  Lamarck  to  be  as  strong  in  individuals  as  in¬
sects.  Every  tropical  reef  is  described  as  bristling  with  corals,
budding  with  sponges,  and  swarming  with  Crustacea,  echini,
and  testacea;  while  almost  every  tide- washed  rock  is  carpeted
with  fuci  and  studded  with  corallines,  actiniae,  and  mollusca.
There  are  innumerable  forms  in  the  seas  of  the  warmer  zones,
which  have  scarcely  begun  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  natu¬
ralist  ;  and  there  are  parasitic  animals  without  number,  three


188


SPECULATIONS  ON  THE


[Ch.  XI.


or  four  of  which  are  sometimes  appropriated  to  one  genus,  as
to  the  Balatna ,  for  example=  Even  though  we  concede,  there¬
fore,  that  the  geographical  range  of  marine  species  is  more
extensive  in  general  than  that  of  the  terrestrial,  (the  tempera¬
ture  of  the  sea  being  more  uniform,  and  the  land  impeding  less
the  migrations  of  the  oceanic  than  the  ocean  those  of  the  terres-
trial,)  yet  we  think  it  most  probable  that  the  aquatic  species
far  exceed  in  number  the  inhabitants  of  the  land.

Without  insisting  on  this  point,  we  may  safely  assume,  as
we  before  stated,  that,  exclusive  of  microscopic  beings,  there
are  between  one  and  two  millions  of  species  now  inhabiting  the
terraqueous  globe  ;  so  that  if  only  one  of  these  were  to  become
extinct  annually,  and  one  new  one  were  to  be  every  year  called
into  being,  more  than  a  million  of  years  would  be  required  to
bring  about  a  complete  revolution  in  organic  life.

We  are  not  hazarding  at  present  any  hypothesis  as  to  the
probable  rate  of  change,  but  none  will  deny  that  when  we  pro¬
pose  as  a  mere  speculation  the  annual  birth  and  the  annual
death  of  one  species  on  the  globe,  we  imagine  no  slight  degree
of  instability  in  the  animate  creation.  If  we  divide  the  surface
of  the  earth  into  twenty  regions  of  equal  area,  one  of  these
might  comprehend  a  space  of  land  and  water  about  equal  in
dimensions  to  Europe,  and  might  contain  a  twentieth  part  of
the  million  of  species  which  we  will  suppose  to  exist.  In  this
region  one  species  only  would,  according  to  the  rate  of  mor¬
tality  before  assumed,  perish  in  twenty  years,  or  only  live  out
of  fifty  thousand  in  the  course  of  a  century.  But  as  a  con¬
siderable  proportion  of  the  whole  would  belong  to  the  aquatic
classes,  with  which  we  have  a  very  imperfect  acquaintance,  we
may  exclude  them  from  our  consideration,  and  thus  one  only
might  be  lost  in  about  forty  years  among  the  terrestrial  tribes.
Now  the  mammiferous  quadrupeds  in  Great  Britain  are  only
to  other  terrestrial  species  of  organic  beings,  both  plants  and
animals,  in  the  proportion  of  about  one  to  two  hundred  and
eighty ;  and  taking  this  as  a  rude  approximation  to  a  general
standard,  it  would  require  more  than  eight  thousand  years


Ch.  XI.]


APPEARANCE  OF  NEW  SPECIES.


189


before  it  would  come  to  the  turn  of  this  conspicuous  class  to
lose  one  of  their  number  even  in  a  region  of  the  dimensions  of
Europe.

It  is  easy,  therefore,  to  conceive,  that  in  a  small  portion  of
such  an  area,  in  countries,  for  example,  of  the  size  of  England
and  France,  periods  of  much  greater  duration  must  elapse  be¬
fore  it  would  be  possible  to  authenticate  the  first  appearance  of
one  of  the  larger  plants  and  animals,  assuming  the  annual  birth
and  death  of  one  species  to  be  the  rate  of  vicissitude  in  the
animate  creation  throughout  the  world.

The  observations  of  naturalists  may,  in  the  course  of  future
centuries,  accumulate  positive  data,  from  which  an  insight  into
the  laws  which  govern  this  part  of  our  terrestrial  system  may
be  derived  ;  but  in  the  present  deficiency  of  historical  records,
we  have  traced  up  the  subject  to  that  point  where  geological
monuments  alone  are  capable  of  leading  us  on  to  the  discovery
of  ulterior  truths.  To  these,  therefore,  we  must  now  appeal,
carefully  examining  the  strata  of  recent  formation  wherein  the
remains  of  living  species,  both  animal  and  vegetable,  are
known  to  occur.  We  must  study  these  strata  in  strict  refer-
ence  to  their  chronological  order  as  deduced  from  their  super¬
position,  and  other  relations.  From  these  sources  we  may
learn  which  of  the  species,  now  our  contemporaries,  have  sur¬
vived  the  greatest  revolutions  of  the  earth’s  surface  ;  which
of  them  have  co-existed  with  the  greatest  number  of  animals
and  plants  now  extinct,  and  which  have  made  their  appearance
only  when  the  animate  world  had  nearly  attained  its  present
condition.

From  such  data  we  may  be  enabled  to  infer  whether  species
have  been  called  into  existence  in  succession  or  all  at  one
period  ;  whether  singly,  or  whether  by  groups  simultaneously  ;
whether  the  antiquity  of  man  be  as  high  as  that  of  any  of
the  inferior  beings  which  now  share  the  planet  with  him,  or
whether  the  human  species  is  one  of  the  most  recent  of  the
whole.

To  some  of  these  questions  we  can  even  now  return  a  satis-


190


APPEARANCE  OF  NEW  SPECIES.


[Ch.  XI.


factory  answer  ;  and  with  regard  to  the  rest,  we  have  some  data
to  guide  conjecture,  and  to  enable  us  to  speculate  with  advan¬
tage  :  but  it  would  be  premature  to  anticipate  such  discussions
until  we  have  laid  before  the  reader  an  ample  body  of  materials
amassed  by  the  industry  of  modern  geologists.


CHAPTER  XII.


Effects  produced  by  the  powers  of  vitality  on  the  state  of  the  earth’s  surface—
Modifications  in  physical  geography  caused  by  organic  beings  on  dry  land  in¬
ferior  to  those  caused  in  the  subaqueous  regions — Why  the  vegetable  soil  does
not  augment  in  thickness — Organic  matter  drifted  annually  to  the  sea,  and
buried  in  subaqueous  strata — Loss  of  nourishment  from  this  source,  how  sup¬
plied — The  theory,  that  vegetation  is  an  antagonist  power  counterbalancing
the  degradation  caused  by  running  water,  untenable— -That  the  igneous  causes
are  the  true  antagonist  powers,  and  not  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable  life
■ — Conservative  influence  of  vegetation — Its  bearing  on  the  theory  of  the  forma¬
tion  of  valleys,  and  on  the  age  of  the  cones  of  certain  extinct  volcanos — Rain
diminished  by  the  felling  of  forests — Distribution  of  the  American  forests  de¬
pendent  on  the  direction  of  the  predominant  winds — Influence  of  man  in  modi¬
fying  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe.

EFFECTS  PRODUCED  BY  THE  POWERS  OF  VITALITY  ON  THE
STATE  OF  THE  EARTH’S  SURFACE.

Ti-ie  second  branch  of  our  inquiry  respecting  the  changes  of
the  organic  world,  relates  to  the  effects  produced  by  the  powers
of  vitality  on  the  state  of  the  earth’s  surface,  and  on  the  mate¬
rial  constituents  of  its  crust.

By  the  effects  produced  on  the  surface,  we  mean  those  modi¬
fications  in  physical  geography  of  which  the  existence  of
organic  beings  is  the  direct  cause, — as  when  the  growth  of  cer¬
tain  plants  covers  the  slope  of  a  mountain  with  peat,  or  con¬
verts  a  swamp  into  dry  land ;  or  when  vegetation  prevents  the
soil,  in  certain  localities,  from  being  washed  away  by  running
water.

By  the  agency  of  the  powers  of  vitality  on  the  material  con¬
stituents  of  the  earth’s  crust,  we  mean  those  permanent  modi¬
fications  in  the  composition  and  structure  of  new  strata,  which
result  from  the  imbedding  therein  of  animal  and  vegetable
remains.  In  this  case,  organic  beings  may  not  give  rise  imme¬
diately  to  any  new  features  in  the  physical  geography  of
certain  tracts,  which  would  not  equally  have  resulted  from  the


192


EFFFCTS  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  VITALITY  [Ch.  XII.


mere  operation  of  inorganic  causes;  as,  for  example,  if  a  lake
be  filling  up  with  sediment,  held  in  suspension  by  the  waters
of  some  river,  and  with  mineral  matter  precipitated  from  the
waters  of  springs,  the  character  of  the  deposits  may  be  modified
by  aquatic  animals  and  plants,  which  may  convert  the  earthy
particles  into  shell,  peat,  and  other  substances :  but  the  lake
may,  nevertheless,  be  filled  up  in  the  same  time,  and  the  new
strata  may  be  deposited  in  nearly  the  same  order  as  would
have  prevailed  if  its  waters  had  never  been  peopled  by  living
beings.

In  treating  of  the  first  division  of  our  subject  we  may  remark,
that  when  we  talk  of  alterations  in  physical  geography,  we  are
apt  to  think  too  exclusively  of  that  part  of  the  earth’s  surface
which  has  emerged  from  beneath  the  waters,  and  with  which
alone,  as  terrestrial  beings,  we  are  familiar.  Here  the  direct
power  of  animals  and  plants  to  cause  any  important  variations
is,  of  necessity,  very  limited,  except  in  checking  the  progress
of  that  decay  of  which  the  land  is  the  chief  theatre.  But  if  we
extend  our  views,  and  instead  of  contemplating  the  dry  land
we  consider  that  larger  portion  which  is  assigned  to  the  aquatic
tribes,  we  discover  the  immediate  influence  of  the  living  crea¬
tion,  in  imparting  varieties  of  conformation  to  the  solid  exterior
which  the  sole  agency  of  inanimate  causes  would  not  produce,
to  be  very  great.

Thus,  when  timber  is  floated  into  the  sea,  it  is  often  drifted
to  vast  distances  and  subsides  in  spots  where  there  might  have
been  no  deposit,  at  that  time  and  place,  if  the  earth  had  not
been  tenanted  by  living  beings.  If,  therefore,  in  the  course
of  ages,  a  hill  of  wood,  or  lignite,  be  thus  formed  in  the  sub¬
aqueous  regions,  a  change  in  the  submarine  geography  may
be  said  to  have  resulted  from  the  action  of  organic  powers.
So  in  regard  to  the  growth  of  coral  reefs  :  it  is  probable  that
almost  all  the  matter  of  which  they  are  composed  is  supplied
by  mineral  springs,  which  we  know  often  rise  up  at  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  and  which,  on  land,  abound  throughout  volcanic
regions  thousands  of  miles  in  extent.  The  matter  thus  con-


Ch,  XII.]  ON  THE  STATE  OF  THE  EARTH’S  SURFACE.


193


stantly  given  out  could  not  go  on  accumulating  for  ever  in  the
waters,  but  would  be  precipitated  in  the  abysses  of  the  sea,
even  if  there  were  no  polyps  and  testacea ;  but  these  animals
arrest  and  secrete  the  carbonate  of  lime  on  the  summits  of
submarine  mountains,  and  form  reefs  many  hundred  feet  in
thickness,  and  hundreds  of  leagues  in  length,  where,  but  for
them,  none  might  ever  have  existed.

TVhy  the  vegetable  soil  does  not  augment  in  thickness. — If
no  such  voluminous  masses  are  formed  on  the  land,  it  is  not
from  the  want  of  solid  matter  in  the  structure  of  terrestrial
animals  and  plants,  but  merely  because,  as  we  have  so  often
stated,  the  continents  are  those  parts  of  the  globe  where  ac¬
cessions  of  matter  can  scarcely  ever  take  place, — where,  on
the  contrary,  the  most  solid  parts  already  formed  are,  each  in
their  turn,  exposed  to  gradual  degradation.  The  quantity  of
timber  and  vegetable  matter  which  grows  in  a  tropical  forest
in  the  course  of  a  century  is  enormous,  and  multitudes  of
animal  skeletons  are  scattered  there  in  the  same  period,  besides
innumerable  land-shells  and  other  organic  substances.  The
aggregate  of  these  materials  might  constitute,  perhaps,  a  mass
greater  in  volume  than  that  which  is  produced  in  any  coral-
reef  during  the  same  lapse  of  years  ;  but,  although  this  process
should  continue  on  the  land  for  ever,  no  mountains  of  wood  or
bone  would  be  seen  stretching  far  and  wide  over  the  country,
or  pushing  out  bold  promontories  into  the  sea.

The  whole  solid  mass  is  either  devoured  by  animals,  or
decomposes,  as  does  a  portion  of  the  rock  and  soil  on  which
the  animals  and  plants  are  supported.  For  the  decomposition
of  the  strata  themselves,  especially  of  their  alkaline  ingredients
and  of  the  organic  remains  which  they  so  frequently  include,
is  one  source  from  whence  running  water  and  the  atmosphere
may  derive  the  materials  which  are  absorbed  by  the  roots  and
leaves  of  plants.  Another  source  is  the  passage  into  a  gaseous
form  of  even  the  hardest  parts  of  animals  and  plants  which
die  and  are  exposed  to  putrefy  in  the  air,  where  they  are  soon

resolved  into  the  elements  of  which  thev  are  composed  ;  and
Voh.  II.  O


194


WIIY  VEGETABLE  MATTER  DOES  NOT


[Ch.  XII.


while  a  portion  of  these  parts  is  volatilized,  the  rest  is  taken
np  by  rain  water  and  sinks  into  the  earth  or  flows  towards  the
sea,  so  that  they  enter  again  and  again  into  the  composition  of
different  organic  beings.

The  principal  elements  found  in  plants  are  hydrogen,  carbon,
and  oxygen,  so  that  water  and  the  atmosphere  contain  all  of
them,  either  in  their  own  composition  or  in  solution  *.  The
constant  supply  of  these  elements  is  maintained  not  only  by
the  putrefaction  of  animal  and  vegetable  substances,  and  the
decay  of  rocks  before  mentioned,  but  also  by  the  copious  evo¬
lution  of  carbonic  acid  and  other  gases  from  volcanos  and
mineral  springs,  and  by  the  effects  of  ordinary  evaporation,
whereby  aqueous  vapours  are  made  to  rise  from  the  ocean  and
to  circulate  round  the  globe.

It  is  well  known  that  when  two  gases  of  different  specific
gravity  are  brought  into  contact,  even  though  the  heavier  be
the  lowermost,  they  become  uniformly  diffused  by  mutual
absorption  through  the  whole  space  which  they  occupy.  By
virtue  of  this  law,  the  heavy  carbonic  acid  finds  its  way  up¬
wards  through  the  lighter  air,  and  conveys  nourishment  to  the
lichen  which  covers  the  mountain  top.

The  fact,  therefore,  that  the  vegetable  mould  which  covers
the  earth’s  surface  does  not  decrease  in  thickness,  will  not
altogether  bear  out  the  argument  which  was  founded  upon  it
by  Playfair.  This  vegetable  soil,  he  observes,  consists  partly
of  loose  earthy  materials  easily  removed,  in  the  form  of  sand
and  gravel,  partly  of  finer  particles  suspended  in  the  waters,
which  tinge  those  of  some  rivers  continually,  and  those  of  all
occasionally,  when  they  are  flooded.  The  soil,  although  con¬
tinually  diminished  from  this  cause,  6  remains  the  same  in
quantity,  or  at  least  nearly  the  same,  and  must  have  done  so
ever  since  the  earth  was  the  receptacle  of  animal  or  vegetable
life.  The  soil,  therefore,  is  augmented  from  other  causes,


*  See  some  good  remarks  on  the  Formation  of  Soils,  Bakewell’s  Geology,
chap,  xviii.


Ch.  XII.]


INCREASE  ON  THE  SURFACE  OF  THE  LAND.


195


just  as  much,  at  an  average,  as  it  is  diminished  by  that  now
mentioned ;  and  this  augmentation  evidently  can  proceed  from
nothing  but  the  constant  and  slow  disintegration  of  the
rocks  *.

That  the  repair  of  the  earthy  portion  of  the  soil  can  only
proceed,  as  Playfair  suggests,  from  the  decomposition  of  rocks,
may  be  admitted  ;  but  the  vegetable  matter  may  be  supplied,
and  is  actually  furnished  in  a  great  degree,  by  absorption  from
the  atmosphere,  as  we  before  mentioned,  so  that  in  level  situa¬
tions,  such  as  in  platforms  that  intervene  between  valleys  where
the  action  of  running  water  is  very  trifling,  the  fine  vegetable
particles  carried  off  by  the  rain  may  be  perpetually  restored,
not  by  the  waste  of  the  rock  below,  but  from  the  air  above.

Organic  matter  drifted  annually  to  the  sea  and  buried  in
subaqueous  strata. — If  we  supposed  the  quantity  of  food  con¬
sumed  by  terrestrial  animals,  together  with  the  matter  absorbed
by  them  in  breathing,  and  the  elements  imbibed  by  the  roots
and  leaves  of  plants,  to  be  derived  entirely  from  that  supply  of
hydrogen,  carbon,  oxygen,  azote,  and  other  elements^  given
out  into  the  atmosphere  and  the  waters  by  the  putrescence  of
organic  substances,  then  we  might  imagine  that  the  vegetable
mould  would,  after  a  series  of  years,  neither  gain  nor  lose  a
single  particle  by  the  action  of  organic  beings.  This  conclu¬
sion  is  not  far  from  the  truth  ;  but  the  operation  which  reno¬
vates  the  vegetable  and  animal  mould  is  by  no  means  so  simple
as  that  here  supposed.  Thousands  of  carcasses  of  terrestrial
animals  are  floated  down  every  century  into  the  sea,  and,
together  with  forests  of  drift-timber,  are  imbedded  in  sub¬
aqueous  deposits,  where  their  elements  are  imprisoned  in  solid
strata,  and  may  there  remain  throughout  whole  geological
epochs  before  they  again  become  subservient  to  the  purposes
of  life.

Loss  of  nourishment  from  this  source  ho  w  supplied. — On  the
other  hand,  fresh  supplies  are  derived  by  the  atmosphere,  and
by  running  water,  as  we  before  stated,  from  the  disintegration

*  lllust.  of  II utt.  Theory,  §  103.

0  2


196


VEGETATION  NO  COUNTERPOISE


[Ch.  XII.


of  rocks  and  their  organic  contents,  and  from  the  interior  of
the  earth,  from  whence  all  the  elements  before  mentioned,
which  enter  principally  into  the  composition  of  animals  and
vegetables,  are  continually  evolved.  Even  nitrogen  has  been
recently  found  to  be  contained  very,  generally  in  the  waters  of
mineral  springs  *.

The  theory  that  vegetation  is  an  antagonist  power  counter¬
balancing  the  degradation  caused  by  running  water,  untenable.

- — If  we  suppose  that  the  copious  discharge  from  the  nether
regions,  by  springs  and  volcanic  vents,  of  carbonic  acid  and
other  gases,  together  with  the  decomposition  of  rocks,  may  be
just  sufficient  to  counterbalance  that  loss  of  matter  which,
having  already  served  for  the  nourishment  of  animals  and
plants,  is  annually  carried  down  in  organized  forms,  and  buried
in  subaqueous  strata,  we  believe  that  we  concede  the  utmost
that  is  consistent  with  probability.  When  more  is  required  by
a  theorist- — when  we  are  told  that  a  counterpoise  is  derived
from  the  same  source  to  that  enormous  disintegration  of  solid
rock  and  its  transportation  to  lower  levels,  which  is  the  annual
result  of  the  action  of  rivers  and  marine  currents,  we  must  en¬
tirely  withhold  our  assent.  Such  an  opinion  has  been  recently
advanced  by  an  eminent  geologist,  or  we  should  have  deemed
it  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  propositions  which  appear  to  us  so
clear  and  obvious.

The  descriptions  which  we  gave  of  the  degradation  yearly
going  on  through  the  eastern  shores  of  England,  and  of  the
enormous  weight  of  solid  matter  hourly  rolled  down  by  the
Ganges  or  the  Mississippi,  have  been  represented  as  extreme
cases,  calculated  to  give  a  partial  view  of  the  changes  now  in
progress,  especially  as  we  omitted,  it  is  said,  to  point  out  the
silent  but  universal  action  of  a  great  antagonist  power,  whereby
the  destructive  operations  before  alluded  to  are  neutralized,
and  even,  in  a  great  degree,  counterbalanced.

*  Are  there, ^  says  Professor  Sedgwick,  ‘  no  antagonist  powers

*  Dr.  Daubeny  has  ascertained  this  interesting  fact  in  his  late  tour  on  the  con¬
tinent.


Ch.  XII.]


TO  THE  LEVELLING  POWER  OF  WATER.


197


in  nature  to  oppose  these  mighty  ravages— -no  conservative
principle  to  meet  this  vast  destructive  agency  ?  The  forces  of
degradation  very  often  of  themselves  produce  their  own  limita¬
tion.  The  mountain-torrent  may  tear  up  the  solid  rock  and
bear  its  fragments  to  the  plain  below  ;  but  there  its  power  is
at  an  end,  and  the  rolled  fragments  are  left  behind  to  a  new
action  of  material  elements.  And  what  is  true  of  a  single  rock,
is  true  of  a  mountain-chain  ;  and  vast  regions  on  the  surface
of  the  earth,  now  only  the  monuments  of  spoliation  and  waste,
may  hereafter  rest  secure  under  the  defence  of  a  thick  vegetable
covering,  and  become  a  new  scene  of  life  and  animation.

c  It  well  deserves  remark  that  the  destructive  powers  of
nature  act  only  upon  lines,  while  some  of  the  grand  principles
of  conservation  act  upon  the  whole  surface  of  the  land.  By
the  processes  of  vegetable  life  an  incalculable  mass  of  solid
matter  is  absorbed,  year  after  year,  from  the  elastic  and  non¬
elastic  fluids  circulating  round  the  earth,  and  is  then  thrown
down  upon  its  surface.  In  this  single  operation  there  is  a  vast
counterpoise  to  all  the  agents  of  destruction.  And  the  deltas
of  the  Ganges  and  the  Mississippi  are  not  solely  formed  at  the
expense  of  the  solid  materials  of  our  globe,  but  in  part,  and  X
believe  also  in  a  considerable  part,  by  one  of  the  great  conser¬
vative  operations  by  which  the  elements  are  made  to  return
into  themselves

This  is  splendid  eloquence,  full  of  the  energy  and  spirit  that
breathes  through  the  whole  address

Monte  decurrens  velut  amnis,  imbres
Quem  super  notas  aluere  ripas,

Fervet,  immensusque  ruit —

but  we  must  pause  for  a  moment,  lest  we  be  hurried  away  by
its  tide.  Let  us  endeavour  calmly  to  consider  whither  it  would
carry  us.

If  by  the  elements  returning  into  themselves  be  meant  their
return  to  higher  levels,  it  is  certainly  possible  that  a  fraction  of
the  organic  matter  which  is  intermixed  with  the  mud  and  sand

*  Address  to  the  Geological  Society  on  the  Anniversary,  Feb.  1831,  p.  24,


VEGETATION  NO  COUNTERPOISE


[Ch.  XII.


deposited  in  alternate  strata  in  the  delta  of  the  Ganges,  may
have  been  derived  by  the  leaves  and  roots  of  plants  from  such
aqueous  vapour,  carbonic  acid,  and  other  gases,  as  had  ascended
into  the  atmosphere  from  lower  regions,  and  which  were  not,
therefore,  derived  from  the  waste  of  rocks  and  their  organic
contents,  or  from  the  putrescence  of  vegetables  previously  nou¬
rished  from  these  sources.  This  fraction,  and  this  alone,  may
then  be  deducted  from  the  mass  of  solid  matter  annually  trans¬
ported  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  and  what  remains,  whether
organic  or  inorganic,  will  be  the  measure  of  the  degradation
which  thousands  of  torrents  in  the  Himalaya  mountains,  and
many  rivers  of  other  parts  of  India,  bring  down  in  a  single
year.  Even  in  this  case  it  will  be  found  that  the  sum  of  the
force  of  vegetation  can  merely  be  considered  as  having  been  in
a  slight  degree  conservative ,  retarding  the  waste  of  land,  and
not  acting  as  an  antagonist  power.

But  the  untenable  nature  of  the  doctrine  which  wre  are  now
controverting  may  be  set  in  a  clearer  light  by  examining  the
present  state  of  the  earth’s  surface,  on  which  it  is  declared  that
*  an  incalculable  mass  of  solid  matter  is  thrown  down  year  after
year,’  in  such  a  manner  as  to  form  a  counterpoise  to  the  agents
of  decay.  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  the  vegetable  mould  is  seldom
more  than  a  few  feet  in  thickness,  and  that  it  often  does  not
exceed  a  few  inches  ?  Do  we  find  that  its  volume  is  more  con¬
siderable  on  those  parts  of  our  continents  which  we  can  prove,
by  geological  data,  to  have  been  elevated  at  more  ancient
periods,  and  where  there  has  been  the  greatest  time  for  the
accumulation  of  vegetable  matter,  produced  throughout  suc¬
cessive  zoological  epochs  ?  ,  On  the  contrary,  are  not  these
higher  and  older  regions  more  frequently  denuded,  so  as  to  ex¬
pose  the  bare  rock  to  the  action  of  the  sun  and  air  ?

Do  we  find  in  the  torrid  zone,  where  the  growth  of  plants  is
most  rank  and  luxurious,  that  accessions  of  matter  due  to  their
agency  are  most  conspicuous  on  the  surface  of  the  land  ?  On
the  contrary,  is  it  not  there  where  the  vegetation  is  most  active
that,  for  reasons  to  be  explained  in  the  next  chapter,  even  those


199


Ch.  XII.]  TO  THE  LEVELLING  POWER  OF  WATER.

superficial  peat  mosses  are  unknown  which  cover  a  large  area
in  some  parts  of  our  temperate  zone?  If  the  operation  of
animal  and  vegetable  life  could  restore  to  the  general  surface  of
the  continents  a  portion  of  the  elements  of  those  disintegrated
rocks,  of  which  such  enormous  masses  are  swept  down  annually
into  the  sea,  along  particular  river-courses  and  lines  of  coast,  the
effects  would  have  become  ere  now  most  striking ;  and  would
have  constituted  one  of  the  most  leading  features  in  the  struc¬
ture  and  composition  of  our  continents.  All  the  great  steppes
and  table-lands  of  the  world,  where  the  action  of  running  water
is  feeble,  would  have  become  the  grand  repositories  of  organic
matter,  accumulated  without  that  intermixture  of  sediment
which  so  generally  characterizes  the  subaqueous  strata.

Even  the  formation  of  peat  in  certain  districts  where  the
climate  is  cold  and  moist,  the  only  case,  perhaps,  which  affords
the  shadow  of  a  support  to  the  theory  under  consideration,
has  not  in  every  instance  a  conservative  tendency.  A  peat¬
moss  often  acts  like  a  vast  sponge,  absorbing  water  in  large
quantities,  and  swelling  to  the  height  of  many  yards  above  the
surrounding  country.  The  turfy  covering  of  the  bog  serves,
like  the  skin  of  a  bladder,  to  retain  for  a  while  the  fluid  within,
and  a  violent  inundation  sometimes  ensues  when  that  skin
bursts,  as  has  often  happened  in  Ireland,  and  many  parts  of
the  continent.  Examples  will  be  mentioned  by  us  in  a  sub¬
sequent  chapter,  where  the  Stygian  torrent  has  hollowed  out
ravines,  and  borne  along  rocks  and  sand,  in  countries  where
such  ravages  could  not  have  happened  but  for  the  existence  of
peat.  Here,  therefore,  the  force  of  vegetation  accelerates  the
rate  of  decay  of  land,  and  the  solid  matter  swept  down  to
lower  levels  during  such  floods  counterbalances,  to  a  certain
degree,  the  accessions  of  vegetable  mould  which  may  accrue  to
the  land  by  the  growth  of  peat.

We  may  explain  more  clearly  the  kind  of  force  which  we
imagine  vegetation  to  exert,  by  comparing  it  to  the  action  of
frost,  which  augments  the  height  of  some  few  Alpine  summits
by  causing  a  mass  of  perpetual  snow  to  lodge  thereon,  or  fills


200  IGNEOUS  CAUSES  THE  ANTAGONIST  POWER  [Ch.  XIl,

up  some  valleys  with  glaciers ;  but  although  by  this  process
of  congelation  the  rain-water  that  has  risen  by  evaporation
from  the  sea  is  retained  for  a  while  in  a  solid  form  upon  the
land„  and  although  some  elevated  spots  may  be  protected  from
waste  by  a  constant  covering  of  ice,  yet,  by  the  sudden  melting
of  snow  and  ice,  the  degradation  of  rocks  is  often  accelerated.
Although  every  year  fresh  snow  and  ice  are  formed,  as  also
more  vegetable  and  animal  matter,  yet  there  is  no  increase  ;
the  one  melts,  the  other  putrefies,  or  is  drifted  down  to  the  sea
by  rivers.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  frost  might  be  consi¬
dered  as  an  antagonist  power,  as  well  as  the  action  of  animal
and  vegetable  life,  and  these  by  their  combined  energy  might
restore  to  continents  a  portion  of  that  solid  matter  which  is
swept  down  into  the  sea  from  mountains  and  wasting  cliffs.
By  the  aid  of  such  machinery  might  a  theorist  repair  the
losses  of  the  solid  land,  sand  and  rocky  fragments  being
carried  down  annually  to  the  subaqueous  regions  from  hills  of
granite,  limestone,  and  shale,  while  vegetation  and  frost  might
raise  new  mountains,  which,  like  the  cliffs  in  Eschscholtz’s
Bay,  might  consist  of  icebergs  intermixed  with  vegetable
mould.

That  the  igneous  causes  are  the  true  antagonist  powers ,  and
not  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable  life. — We  have  stated
in  a  former  volume  that,  in  the  known  operation  of  the  igneous
causes,  a  real  antagonist  power  is  found  which  may  counter¬
balance  the  levelling  action  of  running  water  ;  and  there  seems
no  good  reason  for  presuming  that  the  upheaving  and  depress¬
ing  force  of  earthquakes,  together  with  the  heaving  up  of
ejected  matter  by  volcanos,  may  not  be  fully  adequate  to  restore
the  superficial  inequalities  which  rivers  and  oceanic  currents
annually  tend  to  lessen.  If  a  counterpoise  be  derived  from
this  source,  the  quantity  and  elevation  of  land  above  the  sea
may  for  ever  remain  the  same,  in  spite  of  the  action  of  the
aqueous  causes,  which,  if  thus  counteracted,  may  never  be
able  to  reduce  the  surface  of  the  earth  more  nearly  to  a  state
of  equilibrium  than  that  which  it  has  now  attained  ;  and,  on


Ch.  XII.]  TO  THE  ACTION  OF  RUNNING  WATER.  201

the  other  hand,  the  force  of  the  aqueous  agents  themselves
might  thus  continue  for  ever  unimpaired.  This  permanence
of  the  intensity  of  the  powers  now  in  operation  would  account
for  any  amount  of  disturbance  or  degradation  of  the  earth’s
crust,  so  far  as  the  mere  quantity  of  movement  or  decay  is
concerned  ;  provided  only  that  indefinite  periods  of  time  are
contemplated.

As  to  the  intensity  of  the  disturbing  causes  at  particular
epochs,  their  effects  have  as  yet  been  studied  for  too  short  a
time  to  enable  us  fully  to  compare  the  signs  of  ancient  convul¬
sions  with  the  permanent  monuments  left  in  the  earth’s  crust
by  the  events  of  the  last  few  thousand  years.  But,  notwith¬
standing  the  small  number  of  changes  which  have  been  wit¬
nessed  and  carefully  recorded,  observation  has  at  least  shown
that  our  knowledge  of  the  extent  of  the  subterranean  agency,
as  now  developed  from  time  to  time,  is  in  its  infancy ;  and
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  great  partial  mutations  in  the  struc¬
ture  of  the  earth’s  crust  are  brought  about  in  volcanic  regions,
without  any  interruption  to  the  general  tranquillity  of  the  ha¬
bitable  surface.

Some  geologists  point  to  particular  cases  of  enormous  dislo¬
cation  of  ancient  date,  and  confessedly  not  of  frequent  occur¬
rence,  where  shifts  in  the  strata  of  2000  feet  and  upwards
appear  to  have  been  produced  suddenly  and  at  one  effort.
But  they  have  been  at  no  pains  to  prove  that  similar  conse¬
quences  could  not  result  from  earthquakes  such  as  have
happened  within  the  last  3000  years.  They  have  usually
proceeded  on  a  priori  reasoning  to  assume  that  such  convul¬
sions  were  paroxysmal,  and  attended  by  catastrophes  such  as
have  never  occurred  in  modern  times.  It  would  be  irrelevant
to  the  subject  immediately  under  consideration  to  enter  into
a  long  digression  on  these  topics,  but  we  may  remind  the
reader  that  the  subsidence  of  the  quay  at  Lisbon  to  the  depth
of  600  feet  only  gave  rise  to  a  slight  whirlpool  ;  and  we  may
thence  infer  the  possibility  of  a  sinking  down  or  elevation  four
or  five  times  as  great,  especially  in  deeper  seas,  without  any


202


SYNCHRONISM  OF  THE  ACTION  [Ch.  XII.

superficial  disturbance  unparalleled  in  the  events  of  the  last
century.

If  a  certain  sect  of  geologists  were  as  anxious  to  reconcile
the  actual  and  former  course  of  nature  as  they  are  eager  to
contrast  them,  they  would  perceive  that  the  effects  witnessed
by  us  of  subterranean  action  on  supramarine  land  may  not
be  a  type  of  those  which  the  submerged  rocks  undergo,  and
they  would  proceed  with  more  caution  when  reasoning  from
a  comparison  between  the  accumulated  results  of  disturbing
causes  in  the  immensity  of  past  time,  and  those  which  are
recorded  in  the  meagre  annals  of  a  brief  portion  of  the
human  era.

The  same  rash  generalizations  which  are  now  made  respect¬
ing  eras  of  paroxysmal  violence  and  chaotic  derangement  led
formerly  to  the  doctrines  of  universal  formations,  the  improba¬
bility  of  which  might  have  been  foreseen  by  a  slight  reference
to  the  causes  now  in  operation.

To  the  same  modes  of  philosophizing  we  may  ascribe  the
unwillingness  of  some  naturalists  to  admit  that  all  the  fossil
species  are  not  the  same  as  those  now  living  on  the  globe ;
whereas,  if  the  facts  and  reasonings  set  forth  in  a  former  part
of  this  volume,  respecting  the  present  instability  of  the  organic
creation,  be  just,  it  might  always  a  priori  have  been  seen  that
the  species  inhabiting  the  planet  at  two  periods  very  remote
could  hardly  be  identical.

In  our  view  of  the  Huttonian  theory,  we  pointed  out  as  one
of  its  principal  defects  the  assumed  want  of  synchronism  in
the  action  of  the  great  antagonist  powers — the  introduction,
first,  of  periods  when  continents  gradually  wasted  away,  and
then  of  others  when  new  lands  were  elevated  by  violent  con¬
vulsions.  In  order  to  have  a  clear  conception  of  the  working
of  such  a  system,  let  the  reader  suppose  the  earthquakes  and
volcanic  eruptions  of  the  Andes  to  be  suspended  for  a  million
of  years,  and  sedimentary  deposits  to  accumulate  throughout
the  whole  of  that  period,  as  they  now  accumulate  at  the
mouths  of  the  Orinoco  and  Amazon,  and  along  the  inter-


Ch  XII.]


OF  THE  ANTAGONIST  POWERS.


203


vening  coast.  Then  let  a  period  arrive  when  the  subter¬
ranean  power,  which  had  obtained  no  vent  during  those  ten
thousand  centuries,  should  escape  suddenly  in  one  tremendous
explosion.

It  is  natural  that  geologists  who  reject  such  portions  of  the
Huttonian  theory  as  we  embrace  should  cling  fondly  to  those
parts  which  we  deem  unsound  and  unphilosophical.  They
have  accordingly  selected  the  distinctness  of  the  periods  when
the  antagonist  forces  are  developed,  as  a  principle  peculiarly
worthy  of  implicit  faith.  For  this  reason  they  have  declined
making  any  strenuous  effort  to  account  for  those  violations  of
continuity  in  the  series  of  geological  phenomena  which  are
exhibited  in  large  but  limited  regions ;  and  which  we  have
hinted  may  admit  of  explanation  by  the  shifting  of  the  volcanic
foci,  without  the  necessity  of  calling  into  our  aid  any  hypo¬
thetical  eras  of  convulsion.

In  the  oriental  cosmogonies,  as  we  have  seen,  both  the
physical  and  moral  worlds  were  represented  to  be  subject  to
gradual  deterioration,  until  a  crisis  arrived  when  they  were
annihilated,  or  reverted  to  a  state  of  chaos ;  there  had  been
alternating  periods  of  tranquillity  and  disorder — an  endless
vicissitude  of  destructions  and  renovations  of  the  globe.

In  the  spirit  of  this  antique  philosophy,  some  modern  geo¬
logists  conceive  that  nature,  after  long  periods  of  repose,  is
agitated  by  fits  of  4  feverish  spasmodic  energy,  during  which
her  very  frame- work  is  torn  asunder  *;’  these  paroxysms  of
internal  energy  are  accompanied  by  the  sudden  elevation  of
mountain  chains,  ‘  followed  by  mighty  waves  desolating
whole  regions  of  the  earth  f and,  according  to  some
authors,  whole  races  of  organic  beings  are  thus  suddenly
annihilated.

It  was  to  be  expected  that  when,  in  opposition  to  these  fa¬
vourite  dogmas,  we  enumerated  the  subterranean  catastrophes
of  the  last  one  hundred  and  forty  years,  pointing  out  how
defective  were  our  annals,  and  called  on  geologists  to  multiply
*  Prof.  Sedgwick,  Anniv.  Address,  &c.  1831,  p.  35.  f  Ibid.


204  CONSERVATIVE  INFLUENCE  OF  VEGETATION.  [Ch.  XII.

the  amount  of  disturbances  arising  from  this  source  by  myriads
of  ages  during  the  existence  of  successive  races  of  organic
beings,  that  we  should  provoke  some  vehement  expostula¬
tion.  We  could  not  hope  that  the  self-appointed  guardians
of  Nature’s  slumber  would  allow  us  with  impunity  thus  sud¬
denly  to  intrude  upon  her  rest,  or  that  they  would  fail  to
resent  so  rude  an  attempt  to  rouse  her  from  the  torpor  into
which  she  had  been  lulled  by  their  hypothesis.  We  were  pre¬
pared  to  see  our  proofs  and  authorities  severely  sifted,  our
inferences  rigorously  scrutinized  ;  but  we  never  supposed  it
possible  that  our  adversaries  would  set  up  (  as  a  vast  counter¬
poise  to  all  the  agents  of  destruction,’  a  cause  so  nugatory  as
4  the  single  operation  of  vegetable  life

Conservative  influence  of  vegetation. — As  it  will  appear  from
what  we  before  said  that  vegetation  cannot  act  as  an  antagonist
power  amid  the  mighty  agents  of  change  which  are  always
modifying  the  surface  of  the  globe,  let  us  next  inquire  how  far
its  influence  is  conservative, — how  far  it  may  retard  the  level¬
ling  power  of  running  water,  which  it  cannot  oppose,  much
less  counterbalance.

It  is  well  known  that  a  covering  of  herbage  and  shrubs  may
protect  a  loose  soil  from  being  carried  away  by  rain,  or  even  by
the  ordinary  action  of  a  river,  and  may  prevent  hills  of  loose
sand  from  being  blown  away  by  the  wind.  For  the  roots  bind
together  the  separate  particles  into  a  firm  mass,  and  the  leaves
intercept  the  rain-water,  so  that  it  dries  up  gradually  instead
of  flowing  off  in  a  mass  and  with  great  velocity.  The  old
Italian  hydrographers  make  frequent  mention  of  the  increased
degradation  which  has  followed  the  clearing  away  of  natural
woods  in  several  parts  of  Italy.  A  remarkable  example  was
afforded  in  the  Upper  Val  d’Arno,  in  Tuscany,  on  the  removal
of  the  woods  clothing  the  steep  declivities  of  the  hills  by  which
that  valley  is  bounded.  When  the  ancient  forest  laws  were
abolished  by  the  Grand  Duke  Joseph,  during  the  last  century,
a  considerable  tract  of  surface  in  the  Cassentina  (the  Clausen-
*  Prof.  Sedgwick’s  Anniv.  Address,  Feb.  1831,  p.  24.


Ch.  XII.]  CONSERVATIVE  INFLUENCE  OF  VEGETATION.


tinium  of  the  Romans)  was  denuded,  and,  immediately,  the
quantity  of  sand  and  soil  washed  down  into  the  Arno  increased
enormously.  Frisi,  alluding  to  such  occurrences,  observes,
that  as  soon  as  the  bushes  and  plants  were  removed,  the  waters
flowed  off  more  rapidly,  and,  in  the  manner  of  floods,  swept
away  the  vegetable  soil  *.

Its  bearing  on  the  formation  of  valleys ,  and  on  the  age  of
the  cones  of  certain  extinct  volcanos. — This  effect  of  vegetation
is  of  high  interest  to  the  geologist,  when  he  is  considering  the
formation  of  those  valleys  which  have  been  principally  due  to
the  action  of  rivers.  The  spaces  intervening  between  valleys,
whether  they  be  flat  or  ridgy,  when  covered  with  vegetation,
may  scarcely  undergo  the  slightest  waste,  as  the  surface  may
be  protected  by  the  green  sward  of  grass ;  and  this  may  be
renewed,  in  the  manner  before  described,  from  elements  derived
from  rain-water  and  the  atmosphere.  Hence,  while  the  river
is  continually  bearing  down  matter  in  the  alluvial  plain,  and
undermining  the  cliffs  on  each  side  of  every  valley,  the  height
of  the  intervening  rising  grounds  may  remain  stationary.

In  this  manner  a  cone  of  loose  scoriae,  sand  and  ashes,  such
as  Monte  Nuovo,  may,  when  it  has  once  become  densely  clothed
with  herbage  and  shrubs,  suffer  scarcely  any  further  dilapida¬
tion  ;  and  the  perfect  state  of  the  cones  of  hundreds  of  extinct
volcanos  in  France,  Campania,  Sicily,  and  elsewhere,  may
prove  nothing  whatever,  either  as  to  their  relative  or  absolute
antiquity.  We  may  be  enabled  to  infer  from  the  integrity  of
such  conical  hills  of  incoherent  materials,  that  no  flood  can
have  passed  over  the  countries  where  they  are  situated  since
their  formation  ;  but  the  atmospheric  action  alone  in  spots
where  there  happen  to  be  no  torrents,  and  where  the  surface
was  clothed  with  vegetation,  could  scarcely  in  any  lapse  of  ages
have  destroyed  them.

During  a  late  tour  in  Spain  I  was  surprized  to  see  a  dis¬
trict  of  gently  undulating  ground  in  Catalonia,  consisting  of
*  Treatise  on  Rivers  and  Torrents,  p.  5,  Garston’s  translation.


206


EFFECTS  OF  FORESTS  ON  CLIMATE.


[Ch.  XII.


red  and  grey  sandstone,  and  in  some  parts  of  red  marl,
almost  entirely  denuded  of  herbage,  while  the  roots  of  the  pines,
holm  oaks,  and  some  other  trees  were  half  exposed,  as  if  the
soil  had  been  washed  away  by  a  flood.  Such  is  the  state  of
the  forests,  for  example,  between  Orista  and  Vich,  and  near
San  Lorenzo.  Being  at  length  overtaken  by  a  violent  thunder¬
storm,  in  the  month  of  August,  I  saw  the  whole  surface,  even
the  highest  levels  of  some  flat-topped  hills,  streaming  with
mud,  while  on  every  declivity  the  devastation  of  torrents  was
terrific.  The  peculiarities  in  the  physiognomy  of  the  district
were  at  once  explained,  and  I  was  taught  that  in  speculating
on  the  greater  effects  which  the  direct  action  of  rain  may  once
have  produced  on  the  surface  of  certain  parts  of  England,  we
need  not  revert  to  periods  when  the  heat  of  the  climate  was
tropical.

In  the  torrid  zone  the  degradation  of  land  is  generally
more  rapid,  but  the  waste  is  by  no  means  proportioned  to  the
superior  quantity  of  rain  or  the  suddenness  of  its  fall,  the
transporting  power  of  water  being  counteracted  by  a  greater
luxuriance  of  vegetation,  A  geologist  who  is  no  stranger  to
tropical  countries  observes,  that  the  softer  rocks  would  speedily
be  washed  away  in  such  regions,  if  the  numerous  roots  of
plants  were  not  matted  together  in  such  a  manner  as  to  pro¬
duce  considerable  resistance  to  the  destructive  power  of  the
rains.  The  parasitical  and  creeping  plants  also  entwine  in
every  possible  direction  so  as  to  render  the  forests  nearly  im¬
pervious,  and  the  trees  possess  forms  and  leaves  best  calculated
to  shoot  off'  the  heavy  rains,  which  when  they  have  thus  been
broken  in  their  fall  are  quickly  absorbed  by  the  ground  be¬
neath,  or  when  thrown  into  the  drainage  depressions  give  rise
to  furious  torrents

Rain  diminished  by  felling  of  forests. — The  felling  of
forests  has  been  attended,  in  many  countries,  by  a  diminution
of  rain,  as  in  Barbadoes  and  Jamaica  f.  For  in  tropical

*  ])e  la  Beche,  Geol.  Man.  p.  184.  -j-  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  ii.  p.  294.


Ch.  XII.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  AMERICAN  FORESTS.  207

countries,  where  the  quantity  of  aqueous  vapour  in  the  atmo¬
sphere  is  very  great,  but  where,  on  the  other  hand,  the  direct
rays  of  the  sun  have  immense  power,  any  impediment  to  the
free  circulation  of  air,  or  any  screen  which  shades  the  earth  from
the  solar  rays,  becomes  a  powerful  cause  of  humidity,  and
wherever  dampness  and  cold  have  begun  to  be  generated  by
such  causes,  the  condensation  of  vapour  continues.  The
leaves  moreover  of  all  plants  are  alembics,  and  some  of  those
in  the  torrid  zone  have  a  remarkable  power  of  distilling
water,  thus  contributing  to  prevent  the  earth  from  becoming
parched  up.

Distribution  of  the  American  forests  dependent  on  the  direc¬
tion  of  the  predominant  winds.- — There  can  be  no  doubt  that
the  state  of  the  climate,  especially  the  humidity  of  the  atmo¬
sphere,  influences  vegetation,  and  that,  in  its  turn,  vegetation
reacts  upon  the  climate ;  but  some  writers  seem  to  have  attri¬
buted  too  much  importance  to  the  influence  of  forests,  par¬
ticularly  those  of  America,  as  if  they  were  the  primary  cause
of  the  moisture  of  the  climate.

The  theory  of  a  modern  author  on  this  subject,  4  that  forests
exist  in  those  parts  of  America  only  where  the  predominant
winds  carry  with  them  a  considerable  quantity  of  moisture
from  the  ocean,’  seems  far  more  rational.  In  all  countries,  he
says,  4  having  a  summer  heat  exceeding  70°,  the  presence  or
absence  of  natural  woods,  and  their  greater  or  less  luxuriance,
may  be  taken  as  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  humidity,  and  of
the  fertility  of  the  soil.  Short  and  heavy  rains,  in  a  warm
country,  will  produce  grass,  which,  having  its  roots  near  the
surface,  springs  up  in  a  few  days,  and  withers  when  the  mois¬
ture  is  exhausted  ;  but  transitory  rains,  however  heavy,  will  not
nourish  trees,  because,  after  the  surface  is  saturated  with  water,
the  rest  runs  off,  and  the  moisture  lodged  in  the  soil  neither
sinks  deep  enough,  nor  is  in  sufficient  quantity  to  furnish  the
giants  of  the  forest  with  the  necessary  sustenance.  It  may  be
assumed  that  twenty  inches  of  rain  falling  moderately,  or  at
intervals,  will  leave  a  greater  permanent  supply  in  the  soil  than


208


DISTRIBUTION  OF  AMERICAN  FORESTS.


[Ch.XII.


forty  inches  falling,  as  it  sometimes  does  in  the  torrid  zone,  in
as  many  hours  *.*

‘  In  all  regions/  he  continues,  ‘  where  ranges  of  mountains
intercept  the  course  of  the  constant  or  predominant  winds,  the
country  on  the  windward  side  of  the  mountains  will  be  moist,
and  that  on  the  leeward  dry,  and  hence  parched  deserts  will
generally  be  found  on  the  west  side  of  countries  within  the
tropics,  and  on  the  east  side  of  those  beyond  them,  the  pre¬
vailing  winds  in  these  cases  being  generally  in  opposite  direc¬
tions.  On  this  principle,  the  position  of  forests  in  North  and
South  America  may  be  explained.  Thus,  for  example,  in  the
region  within  the  thirtieth  parallel,  the  moisture  swept  up  by
the  trade-wind  from  the  Atlantic  is  precipitated  in  part  upon
the  mountains  of  Brazil,  which  are  but  low  and  so  distributed
as  to  extend  far  into  the  interior.  The  portion  which  remains
is  borne  westward,  and,  losing  a  little  as  it  proceeds,  is  at
length  arrested  by  the  Andes,  where  it  falls  down  in  showers
on  their  summits.  The  aerial  current,  now  deprived  of  all  the
humidity  with  which  it  can  part,  arrives  in  a  state  of  complete
exsiccation  at  Peru,  where,  consequently,  no  rain  falls.  In
the  same  manner  the  Ghauts  in  India,  a  chain  only  three  or
four  thousand  feet  high,  intercept  the  whole  moisture  of  the
atmosphere,  having  copious  rains  on  their  windward  side,  while
on  the  other  the  weather  remains  clear  and  dry.  The  rains  in
this  case  change  regularly  from  the  west  side  to  the  east,  and
vice  versa,  with  the  monsoons.  But  in  the  region  of  America,
beyond  the  thirtieth  parallel,  the  Andes  serve  as  a  screen  to
intercept  the  moisture  brought  by  the  prevailing  winds  from
the  Pacific  Ocean ;  rains  are  copious  on  their  summits,  and  in
Chili  on  their  western  declivities;  but  none  falls  on  the  plains
to  the  eastward ,  except  occasionally  when  the  wind  blows  from
the  Atlantic -f-/

We  have  been  more  particular  in  explaining  these  views,

*  Maclaren,  art.  America,  Encyc.  Britannica.

+  Ibid.,  where  the  position  of  the  American  forests,  in  accordance  with  this
theory,  is  laid  down  in  a  map.


Ch.  XII.]


INFLUENCE  OF  MAN.


209


because  they  appear  to  us  to  place  in  a  true  light  the  depend¬
ence  of  vegetation  on  climate,  notwithstanding  the  reciprocal
action  which  each  exerts  on  the  other,  the  humidity  being  in¬
creased,  and  more  uniformly  diffused  throughout  the  year,  by
the  gradual  spreading  of  wood.

INFLUENCE  OF  MAN  IN  MODIFYING  THE  PHYSICAL  GEOGRA¬
PHY  OF  THE  GLOBE.

Before  concluding  this  chapter,  we  must  offer  a  few  observa¬
tions  on  the  influence  of  man  in  modifying  the  physical  geo¬
graphy  of  the  globe,  for  we  must  class  his  agency  among  the
powers  of  organic  nature.

The  modifications  of  the  surface,  resulting  from  human
agency,  are  only  on  a  considerable  scale  when  we  have  obtained
so  much  knowledge  of  the  working  of  the  laws  of  nature  as  to
be  able  to  use  them  as  instruments  to  effect  our  purposes.  We
must  command  nature  by  obeying  her  laws,  according  to  the
saying  of  the  philosopher,  and  for  this  reason  we  can  never
materially  interfere  with  any  of  the  great  changes  which  either
the  aqueous  or  igneous  causes  are  bringing  about  on  the  earth.
In  vain  would  the  inhabitants  of  Italy  strive  to  prevent  the
tributaries  of  the  Po  and  Adige  from  bearing  down,  annually,
an  immense  volume  of  sand  and  mud  from  the  Alps  and  Apen¬
nines  ;  in  vain  would  they  toil  to  reconvey  to  the  mountains
the  mass  torn  from  them  year  by  year,  and  deposited  in  the
form  of  sediment  in  the  Adriatic.  But  they  have,  neverthe¬
less,  been  able  to  vary  the  distribution  of  this  sediment  over
a  considerable  area,  by  embanking  the  rivers,  and  preventing
the  sand  and  mud  from  being  spread  by  annual  inundations
over  the  plains.

We  have  explained  how  the  form  of  the  delta  of  the  Po  has
been  altered  by  this  system  of  embankment,  and  how  much
more  rapid,  in  consequence  of  these  banks,  have  been  the
accessions  of  land  at  the  mouths  of  the  Po  and  Adige  within
the  last  twenty  centuries.  There  is  a  limit,  however,  to  these
modifications,  since  the  danger  of  floods  augments  with  the

Vol.  II.  P


2L0


INFLUENCE  OF  MAN  IN  MODIFYING


[Ch.  XII.


increasing  height  of  the  river-beds,  while  the  expense  of  main¬
taining  the  barrier  is  continually  enhanced,  as  well  as  the  diffi¬
culty  of  draining  the  low  surrounding  country.

In  the  Ganges,  says  Major  R.  H.  Colebrooke,  no  sooner  is
a  slight  covering  of  soil  observed  on  a  new  sand-bank,  than  the
island  is  cultivated ;  water-melons,  cucumbers,  and  mustard,
become  the  produce  of  the  first  year,  and  rice  is  often  seen
growing  near  the  water’s  edge,  where  the  mud  is  in  large
quantity.  Such  islands  may  be  swept  away  before  they  have
acquired  a  sufficient  degree  of  stability  to  resist  permanently
the  force  of  the  stream  ;  but  if,  by  repeated  additions  of  soil,
they  acquire  height  and  firmness,  the  natives  take  possession,
and  bring  over  their  families,  cattle,  and  effects.  They  choose
the  highest  spots  for  the  sites  of  villages,  where  they  erect
their  dwellings  with  as  much  confidence  as  they  would  do  on
the  main  land  ;  for,  although  the  foundation  is  sandy,  the
uppermost  soil,  being  interwoven  with  the  roots  of  grass  and
other  plants,  and  hardened  by  the  sun,  is  capable  of  withstand¬
ing  all  attacks  of  the  river.  These  islands  often  grow  to  a
considerable  size,  and  endure  for  the  lives  of  the  new  posses¬
sors,  being  only  at  last  destroyed  by  the  same  gradual  process
of  undermining  and  encroachment  to  which  the  banks  of  the
Ganges  are  subject*.

If  Bengal  were  inhabited  by  a  nation  more  advanced  in  opu¬
lence  and  agricultural  skill,  they  might,  perhaps,  succeed  in
defending  these  possessions  against  the  ravages  of  the  stream
for  much  longer  periods;  but  no  human  power  could  ever
prevent  the  Ganges  or  the  Mississippi  from  making  and  un¬
making  islands.  By  fortifying  one  spot  against  the  set  of  the
current,  its  force  is  only  diverted  against  some  other  point ;
and,  after  a  vast  expense  of  time  and  labour,  the  property  of
individuals  may  be  saved,  but  no  addition  would  thus  be  made
to  the  sum  of  productive  land.  It  may  be  doubted  whether
any  system  could  be  devised  so  conducive  to  national  wealth
as  the  simple  plan  pursued  by  the  peasants  of  Hindostan,  who,

*  Asiatic  Trans.,  vol.  vii.


Ch.  XII.]  THE  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY  OF  THE  GLOBE.  211

wasting  no  strength  in  attempts  to  thwart  one  of  the  great  ope¬
rations  of  nature,  permit  the  alluvial  surface  to  be  perpetually
renovated,  and  find  their  losses  in  one  place  compensated  in
some  other,  so  that  they  continue  to  reap  an  undiminished
harvest  from  a  virgin  soil.

To  the  geologist  the  Gangetic  islands  and  their  migratory
colonies  may  present  an  epitome  of  the  globe  as  tenanted  by
man.  For  during  every  century  we  cede  some  territory  which
the  earthquake  has  sunk,  or  the  volcano  has  covered  by  its  fiery
products,  or  which  the  ocean  lias  devoured  by  its  waves.  On
the  other  hand,  we  gain  possession  of  new  lands,  which  rivers,
tides,  or  volcanic  ejections  have  formed,  or  which  subterranean
causes  have  upheaved  from  the  deep.  Whether  the  human
species  will  outlast  the  whole  or  a  great  part  of  the  continents
and  islands  now  seen  above  the  waters,  is  a  subject  far  beyond
the  reach  of  our  conjectures  ;  but  thus  much  may  be  inferred
from  geological  data, — that  if  such  should  be  its  lot,  it  will  be
no  more  than  has  already  fallen  to  pre-existing  species,  some
of  which  have,  ere  now,  outlived  the  form  and  distribution  of
land  and  sea  which  prevailed  at  the  era  of  their  birth.

We  have  before  shown,  when  treating  of  the  excavation  of
new  estuaries  in  Holland  by  inroads  of  the  ocean,  as  also  of
the  changes  on  our  own  coasts,  that  although  the  conversion  of
sea  into  land  by  artificial  labours  may  be  great,  yet  it  must
always  be  in  subordination  to  the  great  movements  of  the  tides
and  currents.  If,  in  addition  to  the  assistance  obtained  by
parliamentary  grants  for  defending  Dunwich  from  the  waves,
all  the  resources  of  Europe  had  been  directed  to  the  same  end,
the  existence  of  that  port  might  possibly  have  been  prolonged
for  many  centuries.  But,  in  the  meantime,  the  current  would
have  continued  to  sweep  away  portions  from  the  adjoining
cliffs  on  each  side,  rounding  off  the  whole  line  of  coast  into  its
present  form,  until  at  length  the  town  must  have  projected  as
a  narrow  promontory,  becoming  exposed  to  the  irresistible  fury
of  the  waves.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  observe,  that  the  control  which


212


INFLUENCE  OF  MAN  IN  MODIFYING


[Ch.  xn.


man  can  exert  over  the  igneous  agents  is  less  even  than  that
which  he  may  obtain  over  the  aqueous.  He  cannot  modify
the  upheaving  or  depressing  force  of  earthquakes,  or  the  periods
or  degree  of  violence  of  volcanic  eruptions  ;  and  on  these  causes
the  inequalities  of  the  earth’s  surface,  and,  consequently,  the
shape  of  the  sea  and  land,  appear  mainly  to  depend.  The
utmost  that  man  can  hope  to  effect  in  this  respect,  is  occasion¬
ally  to  divert  the  course  of  a  lava- stream,  and  to  prevent  the
burning  matter,  for  a  season  at  least,  from  overwhelming  a
city,  or  other  fruit  of  human  industry.

No  application,  perhaps,  of  human  skill  and  labour  tends
so  greatly  to  vary  the  state  of  the  habitable  surface,  as  that
employed  in  the  drainage  of  lakes  and  marshes,  since  not  only
the  stations  of  many  animals  and  plants,  but  the  general  cli¬
mate  of  a  district,  may  thus  be  modified.  It  is  also  a  kind  of
alteration  to  which  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  find
anything  analogous  in  the  agency  of  inferior  beings.  For  we
ought  always,  before  we  decide  that  any  part  of  the  influence
of  man  is  novel  and  anomalous,  carefully  to  consider  all  the
powers  of  other  animate  agents  which  may  be  limited  or  super¬
seded  by  him.  Many  who  have  reasoned  on  these  subjects
seem  to  have  forgotten  that  the  human  race  often  succeeds  to
the  discharge  of  functions  previously  fulfilled  by  other  species ;
a  topic  on  which  we  have  already  offered  some  hints,  when  ex¬
plaining  how  the  distribution  and  numbers  of  each  species  are
dependent  on  the  state  of  contemporary  beings.

Suppose  the  growth  of  some  of  the  larger  terrestrial  plants,
or,  in  other  words,  the  extent  of  forests,  to  be  diminished  by
man,  and  the  climate  to  be  thereby  modified,  it  does  not  follow
that  this  kind  of  innovation  is  unprecedented.  It  is  a  change
in  the  state  of  the  vegetation,  and  such  may  often  have  been
the  result  of  the  entrance  of  new  species  into  the  earth.  The
multiplication,  for  example,  of  certain  insects  in  parts  of  Ger¬
many,  during  the  last  century,  destroyed  more  trees  than  man,
perhaps,  could  have  felled  during  an  equal  period.

It  is  a  curious  fact,  to  which  we  shall  again  advert,  that  the


Ch.  XII.]  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe.


213


sites  of  many  European  forests,  cut  down  since  the  time  of  the
Romans,  have  become  peat-mosses;  and  thus  a  permanent
change  has  been  effected  in  these  regions.  But  other  woods,
blown  down  by  winds,  in  the  same  countries,  have  also  become
peat-bogs  ;  so  that,  although  man  may  have  accelerated  some¬
what  the  change,  yet  it  may  be  doubted  whether  other  animate
and  inanimate  causes  might  not,  without  his  interference,  have
produced  similar  results.  The  atmosphere  of  our  latitudes  may
have  been  slowly  and  insensibly  cooling  down  since  the  ancient
forests  began  to  grow,  and  the  time  may  have  arrived  when
slight  accidents  were  sufficient  to  cause  the  decrease  of  trees,
and  the  usurpation  of  their  site  by  other  plants.

We  do  not  pretend  to  decide  how  far  the  power  of  man,  to
modify  the  surface,  may  differ  in  kind  or  degree  from  that  of
other  living  beings,  but  we  suspect  that  the  problem  is  more
complex  than  has  been  imagined  by  many  who  have  speculated
on  such  topics.  If  new  land  be  raised  from  the  sea,  the  great¬
est  alteration  in  its  physical  condition,  which  could  ever  arise
from  the  influence  of  organic  beings,  would  probably  be  pro¬
duced  by  the  first  immigration  of  terrestrial  plants,  whereby
the  tract  would  become  covered  with  vegetation.  The  change
next  in  importance  would  seem  to  be  when  animals  enter,  and
modify  the  proportionate  numbers  of  certain  species  of  plants.
If  there  be  any  anomaly  in  the  intervention  of  man,  in  farther
varying  the  relative  numbers  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  it  may
not  so  much  consist  in  the  kind  or  absolute  quantity  of  altera¬
tion,  as  in  the  circumstance  that  a  single  species ,  in  this  case,
would  exert,  by  its  superior  power  and  universal  distribution,
an  influence  equal  to  that  of  hundreds  of  other  terrestrial
animals.

If  we  inquire  whether  man,  by  his  direct  removing  power,
or  by  the  changes  which  he  may  give  rise  to  indirectly,  tends,
upon  the  whole,  to  lessen  or  increase  the  inequalities  of  the
earth’s  surface,  we  shall  incline,  perhaps,  to  the  opinion  that
he  is  a  levelling  agent.  He  conveys  upwards  a  certain  quantity
of  materials  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth  in  mining  operations  ;


214


INFLUENCE  OF  MAN.


[Ch.  XII.


but,  on  the  other  hand,  much  rock  is  taken  annually  from  the
land,  in  the  shape  of  ballast,  and  afterwards  thrown  into  the
sea,  whereby,  in  spite  of  prohibitory  laws,  many  harbours,  in
various  parts  of  the  world,  have  been  blocked  up.  We  rarely
transport  heavy  materials  to  higher  levels,  and  our  pyramids
and  cities  are  chiefly  constructed  of  stone  brought  down  from
more  elevated  situations.  By  ploughing  up  thousands  of
square  miles,  and  exposing  a  surface  for  part  of  the  year  to  the
action  of  the  elements,  we  assist  the  abrading  force  of  rain,  and
destroy  the  conservative  effects  of  vegetation.

But  the  aggregate  force  exerted  by  man  is  truly  insignifi¬
cant,  when  we  consider  the  operations  of  the  great  physical
causes,  whether  aqueous  or  igneous,  in  the  inanimate  world.
If  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  attempt  to  quarry  away
the  lava  which  flowed  during  one  eruption  from  the  Icelandic
volcanos  in  1783  and  the  two  following  years,  and  should  at¬
tempt  to  consign  it  to  the  deepest  abysses  of  the  ocean,  wherein
it  might  approach  most  nearly  to  the  profundities  from  which
it  rose  in  the  volcanic  vent,  they  might  toil  for  thousands  of
years  before  their  task  was  accomplished.  Yet  the  matter
borne  down  by  the  Ganges  and  Burrampooter,  in  a  single  year,
probably  very  much  exceeds,  in  weight  and  volume,  the  mass
of  Icelandic  lava  produced  by  that  great  eruption*.


*  Vol.  i.  ch.  xiv.


CHAPTER  XIII.


Effects  produced  by  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable  life  on  the  material
constituents  of  the  earth’s  crust — Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  deposits  on
emerged  land — Growth  of  Peat — Peat  abundant  in  cold  and  humid  climates—
Site  of  many  ancient  forests  in  Europe  now  occupied  by  peat— Recent  date  of
many  of  these  changes — Sources  of  Bog  Iron-ore — Preservation  of  animal
substances  in  peat — Causes  of  its  antiseptic  property — Miring  of  quadrupeds —
Bursting  of  the  Solway  Moss — Bones  of  herbivorous  quadrupeds  found  in  peat
—Imbedding  of  animal  remains  in  caves  and  fissures — Formation  of  bony
breccias — Human  bones  and  pottery  intermixed  with  the  remains  of  extinct
quadrupeds  in  caves  in  the  South  of  France — Inferences  deducible  from  such
associations.

EFFECTS  PRODUCED  BY  THE  ACTION  OF  ANIMAL  AND  VEGE¬
TABLE  LIFE  ON  THE  MATERIAL  CONSTITUENTS  OF  THE
EARTH’S  CRUST.

We  now  come  to  the  second  subdivision  of  the  inquiry  ex¬
plained  in  the  preceding  chapter, — the  consideration  of  the
permanent  modifications  produced  in  the  material  constituents
of  the  earth’s  crust,  by  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable  life.

New  mineral  compounds,  such  as  might  never  have  existed
in  this  globe  but  for  the  action  of  the  powers  of  vitality,  are
annually  formed,  and  made  to  enter  into  deposits  accumulated
both  above  and  beneath  the  waters.  Although  we  can  neither
explain  nor  imitate  the  processes  of  animal  and  vegetable  life
whereby  those  substances  are  produced,  yet  we  can  investigate
the  laws  by  virtue  of  which  organic  matter  becomes  imbedded
in  new  strata, -—sometimes  imparting  to  them  a  peculiar  mine¬
ral  composition, — sometimes  leaving  durable  impressions  and
casts  of  the  forms  of  animate  beings  in  rocks,  so  as  to  modify
their  structure  and  appearance.

Division  of  the  subject. — It  has  been  well  remarked  by  M.
Constant  Prevost,  that  the  effects  of  geological  causes  are
divisible  into  two  great  classes  ;  those  produced  on  the  surface
during  the  immersion  of  land  beneath  the  waters,  and  those


216


ORGANIC  REMAINS  IN  PEAT.


[Ch.  XIIL


which  take  place  after  its  emersion.  Agreeably  to  this  classi¬
fication  we  shall  consider,  first,  in  what  manner  animal  and
vegetable  remains  become  included  and  preserved  in  solid
deposits  on  emerged  land,  or  that  part  of  the  surface  which  is
not  permanently  covered  by  water,  whether  of  the  sea  or  lakes ;
secondly,  the  manner  in  which  organic  remains  become  im¬
bedded  in  subaqueous  deposits.

Under  the  first  division  we  shall  treat  of  the  following
topics  : — 1st,  the  growth  of  peat,  and  the  preservation  of
vegetable  and  animal  remains  therein  ; — 2ndly,  the  preserva¬
tion  of  animal  remains  in  stalactite,  and  in  the  mud  of  caves
and  fissures 3dly,  the  burying  of  organic  remains  in  allu¬
vium  and  the  ruins  of  land-slips; — 4thly,  of  the  same  in
blown  sand ; — 5thly,  of  the  same  in  volcanic  ejections,  and
alluvions  composed  of  volcanic  productions.

The  growth  of  Peat  and  the  preservation  of  Vegetable  and

Animal  Remains  therein .

Toe  generation  of  peat,  when  not  completely  under  water,
is  confined  to  moist  situations,  where  the  temperature  is  low,
and  where  vegetables  may  decompose  without  putrefying.  It
may  consist  of  any  of  the  numerous  plants  which  are  capable
of  growing  in  such  stations ;  but  a  species  of  moss  ( Sphagnum
palustre)  constitutes  a  considerable  part  of  the  peat  found  in
marshes  of  the  north  of  Europe ;  this  plant  having  the  pro¬
perty  of  throwing  up  new  shoots  in  its  upper  part,  while  its
lower  extremities  are  decaying  *.  Reeds,  rushes  and  other
aquatic  plants  may  usually  be  traced  in  peat,  and  their
organization  is  often  so  entire,  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in
discriminating  the  distinct  species.

Analysis  of  Peat. — -In  general,  says  Sir  H.  Davy,  one  hun¬
dred  parts  of  dry  peat  contain  from  sixty  to  ninety-nine  parts  of
matter  destructible  by  fire,  and  the  residuum  consists  of  earths
usually  of  the  same  kind  as  the  substratum  of  clay,  marl,

*  For  a  catalogue  of  the  plants  which  contribute  to  the  generation  of  peat,  see
Dr.  Rennie  on  Peat,  pp.  171 -—178.  Dr.  Maccullocli's  Western  Isles,  vol.  i.  p.  129.


Ch.  XIII.]


AREA  COVERED  BY  PEAT.


217


gravel,  or  rock  on  which  they  are  found,  together  with  oxide
of  iron.  ‘  The  peat  of  the  chalk  counties  of  England,’  ob¬
serves  the  same  writer,  6  contains  much  gypsum ;  but  I  have
found  very  little  in  any  specimens  from  Ireland  or  Scotland,
and  in  general  these  peats  contain  very  little  saline  matter
From  the  researches  of  Dr.  Macculloch,  it  appears  that  peat
is  intermediate  between  simple  vegetable  matter  and  lignite,
the  conversion  of  peat  to  lignite  being  gradual,  and  being
brought  about  in  a  great  lapse  of  time  by  the  prolonged  action
of  water

Peat  abundant  in  cold  and  humid  climates. — Peat  is  some¬
times  formed  on  a  declivity  in  mountainous  regions  where
there  is  much  moisture,  but  in  such  situations  it  rarely  if  ever
exceeds  four  feet  in  thickness.  In  bogs,  and  in  low  grounds
into  which  alluvial  peat  is  drifted,  it  is  found  forty  feet  thick
and  upwards,  but  in  such  cases  it  generally  owes  one-half  of  its
volume  to  the  water  which  it  contains.  It  has  seldom,  if  ever,
been  discovered  within  the  tropics,  and  it  rarely  occurs  in  the
valleys  even  in  the  south  of  France  and  Spain.  It  abounds
more  and  more  in  proportion  as  we  advance  farther  from  the
equator,  and  becomes  not  only  more  frequent  but  more  in¬
flammable  in  northern  latitudes  J;  the  cause  of  which  may
probably  be  that  the  carbonic  acid  and  hydrogen,  which  are
the  most  inflammable  parts,  do  not  readily  assume  the  gaseous
form  in  a  cold  atmosphere.

Extent  of  surface  covered  by  peat . — There  is  a  vast  extent
of  surface  in  Europe  covered  with  peat,  which  in  Ireland  is
said  to  extend  over  a  tenth  of  the  whole  island.  One  of  the
mosses  on  the  Shannon  is  described  by  Dr.  Boates  to  be  fifty
miles  long,  by  two  or  three  broad ;  and  the  great  marsh  of
Montoire,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Loire,  is  mentioned  by
Blavier  as  being  more  than  fifty  leagues  in  circumference.  It
is  a  curious  and  well-ascertained  fact  that  many  of  these  mosses
of  the  north  of  Europe  occupy  the  place  of  immense  forests

*  Irish  Bog  Reports,  p.  209.  f  System  of  Geology,  vol.  ii.  p.  353.

I  Rev.  Dr.  Reunie  ou  Peat,  p.  260.


2L8


CONVERSION  OF  FORESTS


[Ch.  XIII.


of  pine  and  oak,  which  have  many  of  them  disappeared  within
the  historical  era.  Such  changes  are  brought  about  by  the
fall  of  trees  and  the  stagnation  of  water,  caused  by  their  trunks
and  branches  obstructing  the  free  drainage  of  the  atmospheric
waters,  and  giving  rise  to  a  marsh.  In  a  warm  climate  such
decayed  timber  would  immediately  be  removed  by  insects,  or
by  putrefaction ;  but,  in  the  cold  temperature  now  prevailing
in  our  latitudes,  many  examples  are  recorded  of  marshes  ori¬
ginating  in  this  source.  Thus,  in  Mar  forest  in  Aberdeen¬
shire,  large  trunks  of  Scotch  fir,  which  had  fallen  from  age
and  decay,  were  soon  immured  in  peat  formed  partly  out  of
their  perishing  leaves  and  branches,  and  in  part  from  the
growth  of  other  plants.  We  also  learn  that  the  overthrow  of
a  forest  by  a  storm,  about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  cen¬
tury,  gave  rise  to  a  peat-moss  near  Lochbroom,  in  Ross-shire,
where,  in  less  than  half  a  century  after  the  fall  of  the  trees,
the  inhabitants  dug  peat*.  Dr.  Walker  mentions  a  similar
change  when,  in  the  year  1756,  the  whole  wood  of  Drumlanrig
was  overset  by  the  wind.  Such  events  explain  the  occurrence,
both  in  Britain  and  on  the  continent,  of  mosses  where  the
trees  are  all  broken  within  tvro  or  three  feet  of  the  original  sur¬
face,  and  where  their  trunks  all  lie  in  the  same  direction  f.

Nothing  is  more  common  than  the  occurrence  of  buried  trees
at  the  bottom  of  the  Irish  peat-mosses,  as  also  in  most  of  those
of  England,  France,  and  Holland  ;  and  they  have  been  so  often
observed  with  parts  of  their  trunks  standing  erect,  and  with
their  roots  fixed  to  the  sub-soil,  that  no  doubt  can  be  enter¬
tained  of  their  having  generally  grown  on  the  spot.  They  con¬
sist  for  the  most  part  of  the  fir,  the  oak,  and  the  birch  ;  where
the  sub-soil  is  clay,  the  remains  of  oak  are  the  most  abundant ;
where  sand  is  the  substratum,  fir  prevails.  In  the  marsh  of
Curragh,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  vast  trees  are  discovered  standing
firm  on  their  roots,  though  at  the  depth  of  eighteen  or  twenty
feet  below  the  surface.  Some  naturalists  have  desired  to  refer
the  imbedding  of  timber  in  peat-mosses  to  aqueous  trans-
*  Dr.  Rennie’s  Essays,  p.  65.  f  Ibid.  p.  30.


Ch.  XIII.]


INTO  PEAT-MOSSES.


219


portation,  since  rivers  are  well  known  to  float  wood  into
lakes  ;  but  the  facts  above  mentioned  show  that;  in  numerous
instances,  such  an  hypothesis  is  inadmissible.  It  has  more¬
over  been  observed  that  in  Scotland,  as  also  in  many  parts  of
the  continent,  the  largest  trees  are  found  in  those  peat-mosses
which  lie  in  the  least  elevated  regions,  and  that  the  trees  are
proportionably  smaller  in  those  which  lie  at  higher  levels  ;
from  which  fact  De  Luc  and  Walker  have  both  inferred  that
the  trees  grew  on  the  spot,  for  they  would  naturally  attain  a
greater  size  in  lower  and  warmer  levels.  The  leaves  also,  and
fruits  of  each  species,  are  continually  found  immersed  in  the
moss  along  with  the  parent  trees,  as,  for  example,  the  leaves
and  acorns  of  the  oak,  the  cones  and  leaves  of  the  fir,  and  the
nuts  of  the  hazel.

Sometimes,  in  the  same  bog,  a  stratification  is  observed  of
different  kinds  of  wood,  oak  being  found  in  the  lowermost  stra¬
tum,  and  birch  and  hazel  in  a  second  bed  above.  Sometimes
still  higher,  a  stratum,  containing  alder  with  the  twigs  of  the
bog  myrtle  ( Myrica  galcef  have  been  found  ;  the  succession
of  strata,  in  this  instance,  indicating  a  gradual  conversion  of  a
dry  tract  into  a  swamp,  and  lastly  a  peat-moss.

The  durability  of  pine-wood,  which  in  the  Scotch  peat¬
mosses  exceeds  that  of  the  birch  and  oak,  is  due  to  the  great
quantity  of  turpentine  which  it  contains,  and  which  is  so  abun¬
dant  that  the  fir-wood  from  bogs  is  used  by  the  country  peo¬
ple,  in  parts  of  Scotland,  in  the  place  of  candles.  Such  resinous
plants,  observes  Dr.  Macculloch,  as  fir,  would  produce  a
fatter  coal  than  oak,  because  the  resin  itself  is  converted  into
bitumen  *.

Recent  origin  of  some  peat-mosses . — In  Hatfield-moss,  which
appears  clearly  to  have  been  a  forest  eighteen  hundred  years
ago,  fir-trees  have  been  found  ninety  feet  long,  and  sold  for
masts  and  keels  of  ships  ;  oaks  have  also  been  discovered  there
above  one  hundred  feet  long.  The  dimensions  of  an  oak  from
this  moss  are  given  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  No.  275,

*  Syst.  of  Geol.,  vol.  ii.  p.  356.


\


220


FORESTS  CONVERTED  INTO  PEAT-BOOS.  [Ch.  XIII.

which  must  have  been  larger  than  any  tree  now  existing  in  the
British  dominions.

In  the  same  moss  of  Hatfield,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Kincar¬
dine  and  several  others,  Roman  roads  have  been  found  covered
to  the  depth  of  eight  feet  by  peat.  All  the  coins,  axes,  arms,
and  other  utensils  found  in  British  and  French  mosses,  are
also  Roman  ;  so  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  European
peat-bogs  are  evidently  not  more  ancient  than  the  age  of
Julius  Csesar.  Nor  can  any  vestiges  of  the  ancient  forests  de¬
scribed  by  that  general,  along  the  line  of  the  great  Roman  way
in  Britain,  be  discovered,  except  in  the  ruined  trunks  of  trees
in  peat.

De  Luc  ascertained  that  the  very  site  of  the  aboriginal  forests
of  Hircinia,  Semana,  Ardennes,  and  several  others,  are  now
occupied  by  mosses  and  fens  ;  and  a  great  part  of  these  changes
have,  with  much  probability,  been  attributed  to  the  strict  orders
given  by  Severus,  and  other  emperors,  to  destroy  all  the  wood
in  the  conquered  provinces.  Several  of  the  British  forests,
however,  which  are  now  mosses,  were  cut  at.  different  periods
by  order  of  the  English  parliament,  because  they  harboured
wolves  or  outlaws.  Thus  the  Welsh  woods  were  cut  and  burnt
in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.  ;  as  were  many  of  those  in  Ireland
by  Henry  II.,  to  prevent  the  natives  from  harbouring  in  them
and  harassing  his  troops.

It  is  curious  to  reflect,  that  considerable  tracts  have  by  these
accidents  been  permanently  sterilized,  and  that  during  a  period
when  civilization  has  been  making  great  progress,  large  areas
in  Europe  have,  by  human  agency,  been  rendered  less  capable
of  administering  to  the  wants  of  man.  Rennie  observes  with
truth,  that  in  those  regions  alone  which  the  Roman  eagle
never  reached — in  the  remote  circles  of  the  German  empire,
in  Poland  and  Prussia,  and  still  more  in  Norway,  Sweden,
and  the  vast  empire  of  Russia — can  we  see  what  Europe  was
before  it  yielded  to  the  power  of  Rome  *.  Desolation  now
reigns  where  stately  forests  of  pine  and  oak  once  flourished,

*  Essays,  &e.,  p.  74.


Ch.  XIII.]  HUMAN  REMAINS  IN  PEAT.  221

such  as  might  now  have  supplied  all  the  navies  of  Europe  with
timber.

Sources  of  Bog  Iron-ore — At  the  bottom  of  peat-mosses
there  is  sometimes  found  a  cake,  or  i  pan,’  as  it  is  termed,  of
oxide  of  iron,  and  the  frequency  of  bog  iron-ore  is  familiar  to
the  mineralogist.  The  oak  which  is  so  often  found  dyed  black
in  peat,  owes  its  colour  to  the  same  metal.  From  what  source
the  iron  is  derived  is  by  no  means  obvious,  since  we  cannot  in
all  cases  suppose  that  it  has  been  precipitated  from  the  waters
of  mineral  springs.  According  to  Fourcroy  there  is  iron  in
all  compact  wood,  and  it  is  the  cause  of  one-twelfth  part  of
the  weight  of  oak.  The  heaths  ( Priced )  which  flourish  in  a
sandy,  ferruginous  soil,  are  said  to  contain  more  iron  than  any
other  vegetable.

It  has  been  suggested  that  iron,  being  soluble  in  acids,  may
be  diffused  through  the  whole  mass  of  vegetables,  when  they
decay  in  a  bog,  and  may,  by  its  superior  specific  gravity,  sink
to  the  bottom,  and  be  there  precipitated,  so  as  to  form  bog
iron-ore  ;  or  where  there  is  a  subsoil  of  sand  or  gravel,  it  may
cement  them  into  ironstone  or  ferruginous  conglomerate  *.

Preservation  of  animal  substances  in  Peat. — One  interesting
circumstance  attending  the  history  of  peat-mosses  is  the  high
state  of  preservation  of  animal  substances  buried  in  them  for
periods  of  many  years.  In  June,  1747,  the  body  of  a  woman
was  found  six  feet  deep,  in  a  peat-moor  in  the  Isle  of  Axholm,
in  Lincolnshire.  The  antique  sandals  on  her  feet  afforded  evi¬
dence  of  her  having  been  buried  there  for  many  ages  ;  yet  her
nails,  hair,  and  skin,  are  described  as  having  shown  hardly  any
marks  of  decay.  In  a  turbary  on  the  estate  of  the  Earl  of
Moira,  in  Ireland,  a  human  body  was  dug  up,  a  foot  deep  in
gravel,  covered  with  eleven  feet  of  moss  ;  the  body  was  com¬
pletely  clothed,  and  the  garments  seemed  all  to  be  made  of  hair.
Before  the  use  of  wool  was  known  in  that  country,  the  clothing
of  the  inhabitants  was  made  of  hair,  so  that  it  would  appear
that  this  body  had  been  buried  at  that  early  period  ;  yet  it  was


*  Dr.  Rennie,  Essays,  &c.,  p.  347.


222


ANIMAL  REMAINS  IN  PEAT.


[Ch.  XIII.


fresh  and  unimpaired  *.  In  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  we
find  an  example  recorded  of  the  bodies  of  two  persons  having
been  buried  in  moist  peat,  in  Derbyshire,  in  1674,  about  a
yard  deep,  which  were  examined  twenty-eight  years  and  nine
months  afterwards  ;  ‘  the  colour  of  their  skin  was  fair  and  na¬
tural,  their  flesh  soft  as  that  of  persons  newly  dead  f .’

Among  other  analogous  facts  we  may  mention,  that  in  dig¬
ging  a  pit  for  a  well  near  Dulverton,  in  Somersetshire,  many
pigs  were  found  in  various  postures,  still  entire.  Their  shape
was  well  preserved,  the  skin,  which  retained  the  hair,  having
assumed  a  dry,  membranous  appearance.  Their  whole  sub¬
stance  was  converted  into  a  white,  friable,  laminated,  inodorous,
and  tasteless  substance  ;  but  which,  when  exposed  to  heat,
emitted  an  odour  precisely  similar  to  broiled  bacon  J.

Cause  of  the  antiseptic  property  of  Peat. — We  naturally
ask  whence  peat  derives  this  antiseptic  property  ?  It  has  been
attributed  by  some  to  the  carbonic  and  gallic  acids  which  issue
from  decayed  wood,  as  also  to  the  presence  of  charred  wood
in  the  lowest  strata  of  many  peat-mosses,  for  charcoal  is  a
powerful  antiseptic,  and  capable  of  purifying  water  already
putrid.  Vegetable  gums  and  resins  also  may  operate  in  the
same  way  §.

The  tannin  occasionally  present  in  peat  is  the  produce,  says
Dr.  Macculloch,  of  tormentilla,  and  some  other  plants,  but  the
quantity  he  thinks  too  small,  and  its  occurrence  too  casual,  to
give  rise  to  effects  of  any  importance.  He  hints  that  the  soft
parts  of  animal  bodies,  preserved  in  peat-bogs,  may  have  been
converted  into  adipocire  by  the  action  of  water  merely  ;  an  ex¬
planation  which  appears  clearly  applicable  to  some  of  the  cases
above  enumerated  ||.

Miring  of  cpuadrupeds. — The  manner,  however,  in  which
peat  contributes  to  preserve,  for  indefinite  periods,  the  harder
parts  of  terrestrial  animals,  is  a  subject  of  more  immediate

*  Dr.  Rennie,  Essays,  &c.,  p.  521,  where  several  other  instances  are  referred  to.

f  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  xxxviii.,  1734.  J  Dr.  Rennie,  Essays,  &c  ,  p.  521.

§  Ibid.,  p.  531.  |1  Syst.  of  Geoh,  vol.  ii.  p.  340 — 34G.


Ch.  XIII.]


SOLWAY  MOSS.


223


interest  to  the  geologist.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  ani¬
mals  become  occasionally  buried  in  the  peat  of  marshy  grounds;
they  either  sink  down  into  the  semifluid  mud,  underlying  a
turfy  surface,  upon  which  they  have  rashly  ventured,  or,  at
other  times,  a  bog  ‘  bursts,’  in  the  manner  described  in  a
preceding  chapter,  and  animals  may  be  involved  in  the  peaty
alluvium.

In  the  extensive  bogs  of  Newfoundland,  cattle  are  sometimes
found  buried  with  their  heads  only  and  neck  above  ground,
and  after  having  remained  for  days  in  this  situation,  they  have
been  drawn  out  by  ropes  and  saved.  In  Scotland,  also,  cattle
venturing  on  the  f  quaking  moss’  are  often  mired,  or  *  laired,’
as  it  is  termed  ;  and  in  Ireland,  Mr.  King  asserts  that  the  num¬
ber  of  cattle  which  are  lost  in  sloughs  is  quite  incredible  *.

Solway  Moss. — The  description  given  of  the  Solway  moss
will  serve  to  illustrate  the  general  character  of  these  boggy
grounds.  That  moss,  observes  Gilpin,  is  a  flat  area,  about
seven  miles  in  circumference,  situated  on  the  confines  of  Eng¬
land  and  Scotland.  Its  surface  is  covered  with  grass  and
rushes,  presenting  a  dry  crust  and  a  fair  appearance;  but  it
shakes  under  the  least  pressure,  the  bottom  being  unsound
and  semifluid.  The  adventurous  passenger,  therefore,  who
sometimes  in  dry  seasons,  traverses  this  perilous  waste,  to  save
a  few  miles,  picks  his  cautious  way  over  the  rushy  tussocks  as
they  appear  before  him,  for  here  the  soil  is  firmest.  If  his
foot  slip,  or  if  he  venture  to  desert  this  mark  of  security,  it  is
possible  he  may  never  more  be  heard  of.

‘  At  the  battle  of  Solway,  in  the  time  of  Henry  VIII.  (1542),
when  the  Scotch  army,  commanded  by  Oliver  Sinclair,  was
routed,  an  unfortunate  troop  of  horse,  driven  by  their  fears,
plunged  into  this  morass,  which  instantly  closed  upon  them.
The  tale  was  traditional,  but  it  is  now  authenticated  ;  a  man
and  horse,  in  complete  armour,  having  been  found  by  peat-
diggers,  in  the  place  where  it  was  always  supposed  the  affair


*  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  xv.  p.  949.


224


BURSTING  OF  PEAT-MOSSES.


[Ch.  XIII.


had  happened.  The  skeleton  of  each  was  well  preserved,  and
the  different  parts  of  the  armour  easily  distinguished

This  same  moss,  on  the  16th  of  December,  1772,  having
been  filled  with  water  during  heavy  rains,  rose  to  an  unusual
height  and  then  burst.  A  stream  of  black  half-consolidated
mud  began  at  first  to  creep  over  the  plain,  resembling,  in  the
rate  of  its  progress,  an  ordinary  lava-current.  No  lives  were
lost,  but  the  deluge  totally  overwhelmed  some  cottages,  and
covered  400  acres.  The  highest  parts  of  the  original  moss
subsided  to  the  depth  of  about  twenty-five  feet,  and  the  height
of  the  moss,  on  the  lowest  parts  of  the  country  which  it  invaded,
was  at  least  fifteen  feet.

Bursting  of  a  peat-moss  in  Ireland . — A  recent  inundation
in  Sligo  (January,  1831)  affords  another  example  of  this  phe¬
nomenon.  After  a  sudden  thaw  of  snow  the  bog  between
Bloomfield  and  Geevah  gave  way,  and  a  black  deluge,  carrying
with  it  the  contents  of  a  hundred  acres  of  bog,  took  the  direc¬
tion  of  a  small  stream,  and  rolled  on  with  the  violence  of  a
torrent,  sweeping  along  heath,  timber,  mud,  and  stones,  and
overwhelming  many  meadows  and  arable  land.  On  passing
through  some  boggy  land,  the  flood  swept  out  a  wide  and  deep
ravine,  and  part  of  the  road  leading  from  Bloomfield  to  St.
James's  Well  was  completely  carried  away  from  below  the
foundation  for  the  breadth  of  200  yards.

Bones  of  herbivorous  quadrupeds  in  peat. — The  antlers  of
large  and  full-grown  stags  are  amongst  the  most  common  and
conspicuous  remains  of  animals  in  peat.  They  are  not  horns
which  have  been  shed,  for  portions  of  the  skull  are  found
attached,  proving  that  the  whole  animal  perished.  Bones  of
the  ox,  hog,  horse,  sheep,  and  other  herbivorous  animals,  also
occur;  and  in  Ireland  and  the  Isle  of  Man,  skeletons  of  a  gi¬
gantic  elk ;  but  no  remains  have  been  met  with  belonging  to
those  extinct  quadrupeds  of  which  the  living  congeners  inhabit
warmer  latitudes,  such  as  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  hippopota-

*  Observations  on  Picturesque  Beauty,  &c.,  1772.


Ch.  XIII.]


ANIMAL  REMAINS  IN  CAVES.


225


nius,  hyaena,  and  tiger,  though  these  are  so  common  in  super¬
ficial  deposits  of  silt,  mud,  sand,  or  stalactite,  in  various  locali¬
ties  throughout  Great  Britain.  Their  absence  seems  to  imply
that  they  had  ceased  to  live  before  the  atmosphere  of  this  part
of  the.  world  acquired  that  cold  and  humid  character  which
favours  the  growth  of  peat.

Remains  of  shijjs,  <^c.,  in  peat-mosses. — From  the  facts
before  mentioned,  that  mosses  occasionally  burst,  and  descend
in  a  fluid  state  to  lower  levels,  it  will  readily  be  seen  that  lakes
and  arms  of  the  sea  may  occasionally  become  the  receptacles  of
drift-peat.  Of  this,  accordingly,  there  are  numerous  examples,
and  hence  the  alternations  of  clay  and  sand  with  different
deposits  of  peat  so  frequent  on  some  coasts,  as  on  those  of
the  Baltic  and  German  Ocean.  W e  are  informed  by  Deguer
that  remains  of  ships,  nautical  instruments,  and  oars,  have
been  found  in  many  of  the  Dutch  mosses ;  and  Gerard,  in  his
History  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme,  mentions  that  in  the
lowest  tier  of  that  moss  was  found  a  boat  loaded  with  bricks,
proving  that  these  mosses  were  at  one  period  navigable  lakes
and  arms  of  the  sea,  as  were  also  many  mosses  on  the  coast  of
Picardy,  Zealand,  and  Friesland,  from  which  soda  and  salt  are
procured  *.  The  canoes,  stone  hatchets,  and  stone  arrow¬
heads,  found  in  peat  in  different  parts  of  Great  Britain,  lead  to
similar  conclusions, — but  these  will  more  properly  be  considered
when  we  treat  of  subaqueous  phenomena.

Imbedding  of  Animal  Remains  in  the  Stalactite  and  Mud  of

Caves  and  Fissures.

We  explained  in  the  former  volume  how  vast  fissures  have
been  formed  from  time  to  time  by  earthquakes,  and  suggested
that  the  continual  percolation  of  acidulous  waters  through
rocks  of  limestone  might  have  enlarged  these  fissures  into
caverns.  We  shall  now  consider  in  what  manner  the  remains
of  animals  may  become  preserved  in  rents  and  cavities,  con¬
fining  ourselves  at  present  to  the  monuments  of  events  which
*  Dr.  Rennie,  Essays  on  Peat  Moss,  p.  205.  *

Q


VOL.  II.


226


IMBEDDING  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS


[Ch  XIII.


are  known  or  can  be  inferred  to  have  happened  within  the
human  era.

As  the  same  caves  and  fissures  may  remain  open  throughout
periods  of  indefinite  duration,  and  may  become  the  receptacles
of  the  remains  of  species  inhabiting  a  country  at  very  different
epochs,  it  requires  the  utmost  care  to  avoid  confounding  to¬
gether  the  monuments  of  occurrences  of  very  distinct  dates.
Dr.  Buckland,  in  his  indefatigable  researches  into  this  class  of
phenomena,  has  often  guarded  with  great  skill  against  such
anachronisms,  pointing  out  the  comparatively  recent  preserva¬
tion  of  some  organic  relics  which  have  become  mingled  in  a.
common  tomb  with  those  of  older  date.

Fissures  in  calcareous  rocks. — Fissures  are  very  common  in
calcareous  rocks,  and  these  are  usually,  in  the  course  of  ages,
filled  up  in  part  by  small  angular  fragments  of  limestone,
which  scale  off  under  the  influence  of  frost  and  rain.  Vege¬
table  earth  and  land-shells  are  washed  in  at  the  same  time,
and  the  whole  mass  often  becomes  cemented  together  by  calca¬
reous  matter  dissolved  by  rain-water,  or  supplied  by  mineral
springs.  In  an  uncultivated  country  the  edges  of  such  fissures
are  usually  overgrown  with  bushes,  so  that  herbivorous  ani¬
mals,  especially  when  chased  by  beasts  of  prey,  or  when  care¬
lessly  browzing  on  the  shrubs,  are  liable  to  fall  in  and  perish.
Of  this  kind  is  a  fissure  still  open  in  Duncombe  Park,  in  York¬
shire,  where  the  skeletons  of  dogs,  sheep,  goats,  deer,  and  hogs,
have  been  found,  lodged  upon  different  ledges  that  occur
at  various  depths  in  a  rent  of  the  rock  descending  obliquely
downwards  *.

Above  the  village  of  Selside,  near  Ingleborough  in  York¬
shire,  a  chasm  of  enormous  but  unknown  depth  occurs  in  the
scar-limestone,  a  member  of  the  carboniferous  series.  4  The
chasm/  says  Professor  Sedgwick,  4  is  surrounded  by  grassy
shelving  banks,  and  many  animals,  tempted  towards  its  brink,
have  fallen  down  and  perished  in  it.  The  approach  of  cattle
is  now  prevented  by  a  strong  lofty  wall,  but  there  can  be  no

*  Buckland,  Reliquiae  Biluvianae,  p.  55.


Ch.  XIII.]  IN  THE  MUD  OF  CAVES  AND  FISSURES.


227


doubt  that,  during  the  last  two  or  three  thousand  years,  great
masses  of  bony  breccia  must  have  accumulated  in  the  lower
parts  of  the  great  fissure,  which  probably  descends  through
the  whole  thickness  of  the  scar-limestone,  to  the  depth  of  per¬
haps  five  or  six  hundred  feet

Formation  of  breccias . — A  fissure  in  the  limestone  of  the
Coiron,  in  France,  is  seen  on  the  high  road  between  Aubenas
and  Ville-Dieu,  filled  with  a  breccia,  consisting  of  angular  frag¬
ments  of  the  rock  and  land-shells  cemented  together.  The
mode  of  its  formation  is  admirably  illustrated  by  the  rapid
growth  of  a  similar  deposit  not  far  distant.  At  the  pass  of
Escrinet,  on  the  northern  escarpment  of  the  Coiron  hills,  near
Aubenas,  a  tabular  mass  of  limestone  is  seen  disintegrating
into  innumerable  angular  fragments,  which  are  transported  by
the  rain  to  the  foot  of  the  declivity,  where  they  have  accumu¬
lated  at  one  spot,  in  a  talus  fifty  feet  in  thickness  and  five  hun¬
dred  yards  wide.  The  upper  part  is  composed  for  the  most  part
of  loose  fragments,  on  which  numerous  land-shells  are  seen
living ;  the  lower  portion  is  consolidated  by  stalagmite  into  a
compact  mass  which  serves  for  mill-stones.  The  calcareous
cement  has  a  red  tinge,  but  not  of  so  deep  a  colour  as  most  of
the  Mediterranean  breccias  f.

By  the  decomposition  of  the  calcareous  rocks  near  Nice,  a
soil  is  produced  of  a  blood-red  colour  ;  and  red  breccias,  con¬
sisting  of  fragments  of  rock  and  land -shells  cemented  together,
are  continually  forming.  If  the  mountains  here  were  rent  by
earthquakes,  we  might  expect  the  fissures  to  be  gradually  filled
with  red  breccias  like  those  of  higher  antiquity  so  celebrated  in
many  parts  of  the  Mediterranean.

Preservation  of  organic  remains  in  caves. — It  often  happens
that  fissures  communicate  with  subterranean  caverns,  a  fact
somewhat  confirmatory  of  the  views  of  those  geologists  who
attribute  the  origin  of  limestone  caverns  in  great  part  to  the

*  Memoir  on  the  Structure  of  the  Lake  Mountains  of  the  North  of  England,
&c,,  read  before  the  Geological  Society,  January  5,  1831.

f  I  examined  this  spot  in  the  year  1828,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Murchison.

Q  2


228  IMBEDDING  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS  [Ch.  XIII.

movements  and  dislocations  of  the  strata.  In  this  case  the
fissure  may  serve  for  ages  as  a  natural  pit-fall  to  animals  pass¬
ing  by,  and  their  bones,  with  all  the  earth,  sand,  and  fragments
of  rock  that  fall  through  these  passages,  may  be  washed  down
or  subside  by  their  own  weight,  so  as  to  reach  the  cavern  below
where  thick  deposits  may  be  amassed.

Oftentimes  when  the  bones  of  animals  are  strewed  along;  the
bottom  of  fissures  or  caves  which  they  may  have  inhabited,  they
become  covered  over  with  mud  introduced  by  land-floods,  and
are  thus  preserved  from  decomposition.  Thus  on  the  floor  of
many  caverns  mentioned  by  Dr.  Buckland,  in  the  Mendip  hills
and  Derbyshire,  sedimentary  mud  has  been  left  in  recent  times
during  floods.

Alternations  of  stalagmite  and  alluvium. — -The  same  author
observed  in  every  cave  examined  by  him  in  Germany,  a  deposit
of  mud  or  sand,  sometimes  with,  and  sometimes  without,  an
intermixture  of  rolled  pebbles  and  angular  fragments  of  rock,
and  having  its  surface  covered  over  with  a  single  crust  of  sta¬
lagmite  *.  In  the  English  caves  he  remarked  a  similar  absence
of  alternations  of  alluvium  and  stalagmite.  On  the  banks  of
the  Meuse,  however,  at  Chockier^  about  two  leagues  from
Liege,  a  cavern  has  been  recently  discovered  where  there  are
three  distinct  beds  of  stalagmite,  between  each  of  which  occur
breccia  and  mud,  mixed  with  some  quartz  pebbles,  and  the
bones  of  extinct  quadrupeds  f.

But  this  exception  does  not  invalidate  the  generality  of  the
phenomenon  observed  by  the  Professor,  and  of  which  we  have
as  yet  seen  no  satisfactory  explanation.  The  principal  cause  we
suspect  to  be,  that  if  several  floods  pass  at  different  intervals
of  time  through  any  subterranean  passage,  the  last,  if  it  has
power  to  drift  along  fragments  of  rock,  will  also  tear  up  any
alternating  stalagmitic  and  alluvial  beds  that  may  happen  to
have  been  previously  formed.  Another  cause  may  be,  that  in
a  country  in  which  torrents  and  rivers  are  gradually  deepening

*  Rel.  Dil.,  p.  108.

t  Journ.  de  G6ologie,  tome  i.  p.  286.  July,  1830.


Ch.  XIII. J


IN  THE  MUD  OF  CAVES  AND  FISSURES.


229


their  channels,,  and  cutting  through  masses  of  cavernous  lime¬
stone  (an  excavating  process  which  is  most  rapid  during  epochs
of  subterranean  disturbance,  when  the  levels  of  a  district  are
altered),  it  will  only  happen  once  that  the  stream  will  break
into  hollows  or  fissures  communicating;  with  a  certain  series  of
caverns.  When  the  erosive  action  has  proceeded  farther,  and
the  river  has  sunk  to  a  greater  depth,  the  drainage  of  the  coun¬
try  will  be  effected  in  a  valley  at  a  level  inferior  to  that  of  the
caves,  and  consequently  no  transported  matter  will  afterwards
be  introduced  into  them.

In  the  cave  of  Paviland,  called  Goat’s  Hole,  on  the  coast  of
Glamorganshire,  besides  the  bones  of  many  extinct  animals
which  occur  in  a  mass  of  loam,  a  modern  breccia  has  been
formed,  consisting  of  earth  cemented  by  stalagmite,  and  con¬
taining  marine-shells  and  birds’  bones,  all  of  recent  species.
The  mouth  of  this  cave  is  from  thirty  to  forty  feet  above  high-
water  mark,  being  situated  in  a  lofty  cliff  of  limestone,  facing
the  estuary  of  the  Severn,  the  waves  of  which,  during  great
storms,  occasionally  dash  into  it.  The  left  side  of  a  human
skeleton  was  also  found  here  under  a  cover  of  six  inches  of
earth.  In  a  cavernous  aperture  leading  from  the  roof  of  this
cave  to  the  face  of  the  cliff  was  discovered  a  bed  of  brown
earth,  apparently  derived  from  dust  driven  in  continually  by
the  wind  ;  and  in  this  earth  were  the  bones  of  various  birds,  of
moles,  water  rats,  mice,  and  fish,  and  a  few  land-shells,  all
clearly  the  remains  of  modern  animals.  Their  presence  in  this
almost  inaccessible  spot  can  only  be  explained,  says  Dr.  Buck-
land,  f  by  referring  the  bones  of  birds,  moles,  rats,  and  mice,
to  the  agency  of  hawks,  and  the  fish-bones  to  that  of  sea-gulls.
The  land -shells,  which  are  such  as  live  at  present  on  the  rock
without,  may  easily  have  fallen  in.  Plad  there  been  any  sta¬
lagmite  uniting  these  bones  into  a  breccia,  they  would  have
afforded  a  perfect  analogy  to  the  accumulation  of  modern  birds’
bones,  by  the  agency  of  hawks,  at  Gibraltar

The  formation  last  alluded  to  occurs  in  perpendicular  fis-
*  Buckland,  Reliquiae  Diluvianae,  p.  03.


230


HUMAN  REMAINS  IN  CAVES.


[Ch.  XIII.


sures  at  the  north  extremity  of  the  rock  of  Gibraltar,  where  a
reddish  calcareous  earth,  containing  numerous  bones  of  small
birds,  is  in  the  act  of  accumulating.  Around  these  fissures  a
number  of  hawks  nestle  and  rear  their  young  in  the  breeding-
season,  and  the  bones  are  the  remains  of  their  food.  Major
Imrie  mentions  also  a  concretion  in  the  rocks  below  King’s
Lines,  Gibraltar,  consisting  of  pebbles  of  the  prevailing  calca¬
reous  rock,  wherein,  at  a  considerable  depth  under  the  surface,
part  of  a  green  glass  bottle  was  found  imbedded  *.

In  a  cave  of  mountain -limestone  at  Burringdon,  in  the  Men-
dip  hills,  supposed  to  have  been  once  used  as  a  place  of  sepul¬
ture  or  refuge,  human  bones  have  been  met  with,  encrusted
with  stalactite,  one  of  the  skulls  being  filled  with  this  substance
in  the  interior*)*.  The  state  of  the  bones,  says  Dr.  Buckland,
affords  indications  of  very  high  antiquity.

The  remains  of  human  skeletons  have  been  also  found  in
the  cave  of  Wokey  Hole,  near  Wells,  in  the  Mendips,  dis¬
persed  through  reddish  mud  and  clay,  and  some  of  them  united
by  stalagmite  into  a  firm  osseous  breccia.  4  The  spot  on  which
they  lie  is  within  reach  of  the  highest  floods  of  the  adjacent
river,  and  the  mud  in  which  they  are  buried  is  evidently
fluviatile  J.’

Bones  of  man  and  extinct  quadrupeds  intermixed . — We
shall  conclude  with  alluding  to  some  caverns  recently  examined
in  the  south  of  France,  in  which  human  bones  and  fragments
of  pottery  are  described  as  intermingled  in  the  same  deposits
with  the  remains  of  extinct  mammalia.  We  may  first  mention
the  cavern  of  Bize,  in  the  department  of  Aude,  where  M.
Marcel  de  Serres  met  with  a  small  number  of  human  bones
mixed  with  those  of  extinct  animals  and  with  land-shells.
They  occur  in  a  calcareous  stony  mass,  bound  together  by  a
cement  of  stalagmite.  On  examining  the  same  caverns,  M.
Tournal  found  not  only  in  these  calcareous  beds,  but  also  in  a
black  mud  which  overlies  a  red  osseous  mud,  several  human

*  Buckland,  Reliquiae  Diluvianae,  p.  156.
f  Ibid.,  p.  164.  t  Ibid., p.  165.


Ch.  XIII.]


HUMAN  REMAINS  IN  CAVES.


231


teeth,  together  with  broken  angular  fragments  of  a  rude  kind
of  pottery,  and  also  marine  and  terrestrial  shells  of  our  own
epoch.  The  teeth  preserve  their  enamel,  but  the  fangs  are  so
much  altered  as  to  adhere  strongly  when  applied  to  the  tongue.
Of  the  terrestrial  shells  thus  associated  with  the  bones  and  pot¬
tery,  the  most  common  are  Cyclostoma  elegans,  Bulimus  decol¬
late,  Helix  nemoralis  and  H.  nitida.  Among  the  marine  are
found  Pecten  jacobseus,  Mytilus  edulis,  and  Natica  mille-punc-
tata,  all  of  them  eatable  kinds.  Bones  of  quadrupeds  were
found  in  the  same  mass  belonging  to  three  new  species  of  the
deer  kind,  an  extinct  bear  (  Ursus  arctoideus ),  besides  the  wild
bull  ( Bos  unis'),  formerly  a  native  of  Germany  *.

In  the  same  part  of  France,  M.  de  Christol  has  found  in
caverns  in  a  tertiary  limestone  at  Pondres  and  Souvignargues,
situated  two  leagues  north  of  Lunel-viel,  (department  of  He-
rault,)  human  bones  and  pottery  confusedly  mixed  with  the
remains  of  the  rhinoceros,  bear,  hyaena,  and  many  other  terres¬
trial  mammifers.  They  were  imbedded  in  an  alluvial  mud,  of
the  solidity  of  calcareous  tufa,  and  containing  some  dint  pebbles
and  fragments  of  the  limestone  of  the  country.  Beneath  this
mixed  accumulation,  which  sometimes  attained  a  thickness  of
thirteen  feet,  is  the  original  floor  of  the  cavern,  about  a  foot
thick,  covered  with  bones  and  the  dung  of  animals  ( album
gr cecum),  in  a  sandy  and  tufaceous  cement.

The  human  bones  in  these  caverns  of  Pondres  and  Souvig-
nargues  were  found,  upon  a  careful  analysis,  to  have  parted
with  their  animal  matter  to  as  great  a  degree  as  those  of  the
hy  'dena  which  accompany  them,  and  are  equally  brittle,  and
adhere  as  strongly  to  the  tongue.

In  order  to  compare  the  degree  of  alteration  of  these  bones
with  those  known  to  be  of  high  antiquity,  M.  Marcel  de
Serres,  and  M.  Ballard,  Chemist  of  Montpellier,  procured
some  from  a  Gaulish  sarcophagus  in  the  plain  of  Lunel,  sup¬
posed  to  have  been  buried  for  fourteen  or  fifteen  centuries  at
least.  In  these  the  cellular  tissue  was  empty,  but  they  were

*  M.  Marcel  de  Serres,  Geognosie  des  Terrains  Tertiaires,  p,  64.  Introduction.


232


HUMAN  REMAINS  IN  CAVES.


[Ch.  XIII.


more  solid  than  fresh  bones.  They  did  not  adhere  to  the
tongue  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  the  caverns  of  Bize
and  Fondres,  yet  they  had  lost  at  least  three-fourths  of  their
original  animal  matter.

The  superior  solidity  of  the  Gaulish  bones  to  those  in  a
fresh  skeleton  is  a  fact  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  observa¬
tions  made  by  Mr.  Mantell  on  bones  taken  from  a  Saxon
tumulus  near  Lewes.

Inferences  deducible  from  such  associations. —  Let  us  now
consider  what  conclusions  are  deducible  from  the  important
facts  above  enumerated.  Must  we  infer  that  man  and  these
extinct  quadrupeds  were  contemporaneous  inhabitants  of  the
south  of  France  at  some  former  epoch  ?  We  should  unques¬
tionably  have  arrived  at  this  conclusion  if  the  bones  had  been
found  in  an  undisturbed  stratified  deposit  of  subaqueous
origin,  especially  if  it  contained  shells  in  regular  layers  like
that  of  North-Cliff  in  Yorkshire,  described  by  Mr.  Yernon,
from  which  we  learn  that  the  mammoth  coexisted  with  thir¬
teen  species  of  our  living  British  land  and  fresh-water  testacea*.
But  we  must  hesitate  before  we  draw  analogous  inferences
from  evidences  so  equivocal  as  that  afforded  by  the  mud,  sta¬
lagmites  and  breccias  of  caves,  where  the  signs  of  successive
deposition  are  wanting.

No  one  will  maintain  that  man,  the  hyaena,  and  the  bear,
were  at  once  joint  tenants  of  these  caverns;  and  if  it  be  neces¬
sary  to  assume  that  the  mud  and  pebbles  were  washed  into
their  present  position  by  floods,  the  same  inundations  might
possibly  have  caught  up  the  bones  lying  in  more  ancient  de¬
posits,  and  thus  have  mingled  the  whole  together  in  the  same
mass.

More  than  ordinary  caution  is  required  in  reasoning  on  the
occurrence  of  human  remains  and  works  of  art  in  alluvial
deposits,  since  the  chances  of  error  are  much  greater  than  when
wre  have  the  fossil  bones  of  the  inferior  animals  only  under
consideration.  For  the  floor  of  caves  has  usually  been  dis-


*  See  ante,  vul.  i.  chap.  ri.


Ch.  XIII.]


HUMAN  REMAINS  IN  CAVES.


233


turbed  by  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  each  country,  who  have
used  such  retreats  for  dwelling  places,  or  for  concealment,  or
sepulture.  In  such  spots  have  treasures  been  often  buried  in
periods  of  disturbance,  or  diligently  sought  for  in  times  of  tran¬
quillity.  The  excavations  made  in  Sicily  for  treasure-trove,
in  places  where  no  money  was  ever  buried,  are  believed  to
exceed  iri  number  all  the  spots  in  which  coin  was  ever  hid
during  the  wars  between  the  Saracens  and  Christians.

Dr.  Buckland,  in  speaking  of  the  cave  of  Paviland,  before
mentioned,  states  that  the  entire  mass  through  which  the  bones
wrere  dispersed,  appeared  to  have  been  disturbed  by  ancient
diggings,  so  that  the  remains  of  extinct  animals  had,  in  that
instance,  actually  become  mixed  with  the  recent  bones  and
shells.  In  the  same  cave  he  found  a  human  skeleton,  and  the
remains  of  recent  testacea  of  eatable  species,  which  may  have
been  carried  in  by  man.  The  same  observation  is  applicable
to  the  marine  testacea  of  the  cavern  of  Bize,  and  we  suspect
the  whole  phenomena  to  be  very  analogous.

To  decide  whether  certain  relics  have  been  introduced  by
man,  or  natural  causes,  into  masses  of  transported  materials,
must  almost  always  be  a  task  of  some  difficulty,  especially
where  all  the  substances,  organic  and  inorganic,  have  been
mixed  together  and  consolidated  into  one  breccia ;  a  change
soon  effected  by  the  percolation  of  water  charged  with  car¬
bonate  of  lime.  It  is  not  on  such  evidence  that  we  shall  readily
be  induced  to  admit  either  the  high  antiquity  of  the  human
race  or  the  recent  date  of  certain  lost  species  of  quadrupeds.


CHAPTER  XIV.


Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  alluvium  and  the  ruins  caused  by  landslips—
Effects  of  sudden  inundations — Of  landslips — Terrestrial  animals  most  abun¬
dantly  preserved  in  alluvium  and  landslips,  where  earthquakes  prevail —
Erroneous  theories  which  may  arise  from  overlooking  this  circumstance — On
the  remains  of  works  of  art  included  in  alluvial  deposits — Imbedding  of  organic
bodies  and  human  remains  in  blown  sand — Temple  of  Ipsambul  on  the  Nile —
Dried  carcasses  of  animals  buried  in  the  sands  of  the  African  deserts — Towns
overwhelmed  by  sand-floods  in  England  and  France — Imbedding  of  organic
bodies  and  works  of  art  in  volcanic  formations  on  the  land — Cities  and  their
inhabitants  buried  by  showers  of  ejected  matter — by  lava — -In  tuffs  or  mud
composed  of  volcanic  sand  and  ashes.

In  continuing  our  investigation  of  the  manner  in  which  the
animal  and  vegetable  creation  leave  permanent  marks  of  their
existence  on  the  emerged  lands  we  have  next  to  examine.

The  imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  alluvium ,  and  the  ruins

caused  by  landslips.

We  restrict  the  term  alluvium  to  such  transported  matter
as  has  been  thrown  down,  whether  by  rivers,  floods,  or  other
causes,  upon  land  not  permanently  submerged  beneath  the
waters  of  lakes  or  seas.

River  alluvium . — The  alluvium  of  the  bed  of  a  river  does
not  often  contain  any  animal  or  vegetable  remains,  for  the  whole
mass  is  so  continually  shifting  its  place,  and  the  attrition  of  the
various  parts  is  so  great,  that  even  the  hardest  rocks  contained
in  it  are,  at  length,  ground  down  to  powder.  But  when  sand,
mud,  and  rubbish,  are  suddenly  swept  by  a  flood,  and  then
let  fall  upon  the  land,  such  an  alluvium  may  envelop  trees  or
the  remains  of  animals,  which  may,  in  this  manner,  be  per¬
manently  preserved.

Effects  of  sudden  floods. — The  sudden  descent  of  a  body  of
water  which  had  been  discharged  by  a  small  artificial  drain


Ch.  XIV.]


VILLAGES  BURIED  BY  LANDSLIPS.


235


from  a  lake  in  Vermont,  in  the  United  States,  in  1810,  covered
a  wide  valley  with  the  spoils  of  the  land  washed  down  from
the  higher  country.  Deep  accumulations  of  mud  and  sand
were  spread  far  and  wide,  and,  in  some  places,  deposits  of
timber  were  heaped  up,  from  twenty  to  eighty  feet  in  height  *.

Effects  of  landslips. — Analogous  results  happen,  from  time
to  time,  when  the  course  of  a  river  has  been  obstructed  by  land¬
slips,  volcanic  ejections,  masses  of  ice,  or  other  impediments,
and  when  the  waters  of  temporary  lakes  so  caused  burst  through
the  barrier.  Besides  these  indirect  effects,  the  landslip,  by
suddenly  precipitating  large  masses  of  rock  and  soil  into  a
valley,  overwhelms  a  multitude  of  animals,  and  sometimes
buries  permanently  whole  villages,  with  their  inhabitants  and
large  herds  of  cattle.  Thus  three  villages,  with  their  entire
population,  were  covered,  when  the  mountain  of  Piz  fell  in
1772,  in  the  district  of  Treviso,  in  the  state  of  Venice  f;  and
part  of  Mount  Grenier,  south  of  Chambery,  in  Savoy,  which
fell  down  in  the  year  1248,  buried  five  parishes,  including  the
town  and  church  of  St.  Andre,  the  ruins  occupying  an  extent
of  about  nine  square  miles  J.

The  number  of  lives  lost  by  the  slide  of  the  Rossberg,  in
Switzerland,  in  1806,  was  estimated  at  more  than  800,  a  great
number  of  the  bodies  being  buried  under  mud  and  rock,  at
great  depths,  as  well  as  several  villages  and  scattered  houses.

In  the  same  country,  several  hundred  cottages,  with  eighteen

*

of  their  inhabitants  and  a  great  number  of  cows,  goats,  and
sheep,  were  victims  to  the  sudden  fall  of  a  bed  of  stones,  thirty
yards  deep,  which  descended  from  the  summits  of  the  Diable-
rets.  In  the  year  1618,  a  portion  of  Mount  Con  to  fell,  in  the
county  of  Chiavenna  in  Switzerland,  and  buried  the  town  of
Pleurs  with  all  its  inhabitants,  to  the  number  of  2430.

Terrestrial  animals  most  abundantly  preserved  where  earth¬
quakes  prevail. — It  is  unnecessary  to  multiply  examples  of
similar  local  catastrophes,  which,  however  numerous  they  may

*  Ed.  New  Phil.  Journ.,  No.  III.  146.  f  Malte-Brun’s  Geog.,  vol.  i.  435.

X  Bakewell,  Travels  in  the  Tarentaise,  vol.  i.  p.  201,


236


PRESERVATION  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS


[Ch.  XIV.


have  been  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Europe,  within  the
historical  period,  have  been,  nevertheless,  of  rare  occurrence  in
comparison  to  the  events  of  the  same  kind  which  take  place
in  regions  convulsed  by  earthquakes.  It  is  then  that  all  the
causes  whereby  terrestrial  animals  may  be  buried  in  superficial
alluvium  are  in  full  activity  ;  in  proof  of  which  we  need  only
refer  the  reader  to  our  description,  in  the  former  volume,  of
the  effects  of  great  subterranean  movements  in  disturbing;
the  drainage  of  a  country  and  altering  its  levels.  When  the
shocks  are  violent,  enormous  masses  of  rock  and  earth,  even
in  comparatively  low  and  level  countries,  are  detached  from
the  sides  of  valleys,  and  cast  down  into  the  river- courses.
The  slides  are  so  rapid  and  unexpected,  that  they  often  over¬
whelm,  in  the  day-time,  every  living  thing  upon  the  plain  ;
and  when  they  happen  in  the  night,  escape  is  impossible.
Although  the  streams  are  often  only  partially  dammed  up  by
the  ruins  thrown  into  their  channel,  the  waters,  nevertheless,
collect  in  sufficient  quantity  to  form  torrents  of  mud,  which,
as  we  have  seen  in  Calabria,  sometimes  bear  along  uprooted
trees,  and  overwhelm  animals,  until,  wherever  they  cease  to
move,  the  mass  shrinks  on  drying,  and  becomes  hard  and
compact  *.

Erroneous  theories  which  may  arise  from  overlooking  this
circumstance. — Many  geologists,  who  seem  desirous  of  ascrib¬
ing  as  little  power  as  possible  to  the  aqueous  causes  now  acting,
are  in  the  habit  of  overlooking  the  effects  which  the  force  of
running  water  can  produce,  when  combined  with  the  move¬
ments  of  ordinary  earthquakes.  In  a  country  like  Great
Britain,  where  the  height  of  mountain-chains  is  not  consider¬
able,  and  where  the  shocks  of  earthquakes  are  rare  and  ex¬
tremely  feeble,  scarcely  any  remains  of  terrestrial  animals  or
plants  are  buried  in  alluvial  deposits,  in  such  a  manner  as  to
lead  us  to  expect  that  they  will  be  preserved  for  indefinite
periods.  Some  skeletons,  it  is  true,  are  occasionally  imbedded,
as,  for  example,  in  the  mud  and  sand  produced  by  the  floods

*  Vol.  i.  chap.  xxiv.


Ch.  XIV.]


IN  ALLUVIUMS  AND  LANDSLIPS.


237


in  Scotland,  in  1829,  in  which  the  dead  and  mutilated  bodies
of  hares,  rabbits,  moles,  mice,  partridges,  and  even  the  bodies
of  men,  were  found  drifted  and  partially  buried  But  if
the  levels  of  a  country  remain  unchanged,  one  flood  usually
effaces  the  memorials  left  by  another,  and  there  is  rarely  a
sufficient  depth  of  undisturbed  transported  matter  in  any
one  spot,  to  preserve  the  organic  remains  permanently  from
destruction.

4

The  catastrophes,  on  the  other  hand,  which  arise  from  re¬
peated  earthquakes,  cause  not  only  the  death  of  many  animals,
but  their  frequent  inhumation  in  alluvium,  so  placed  as  to
escape  degradation  for  a  succession  of  ages.  When  a  valley
has  been  half  choked  up  with  mud,  sand,  and  gravel,  or  when
numerous  slides  from  the  boundary  hills  have  encumbered  it
with  ruin,  a  river  takes  a  new  direction,  finding,  perhaps,  its
way  through  a  new-formed  fissure.  From  that  moment  the
transported  matter  is  no  longer  exposed  to  be  undermined  and
removed  by  the  action  of  running  water.

Portions,  also,  of  plains  loaded  with  alluvial  accumulations
by  transient  floods,  may  be  gradually  upraised  by  earthquakes  ;
and,  if  any  organic  remains  have  been  imbedded  in  the  trans¬
ported  materials,  they  will,  after  such  elevation,  remain  undis¬
turbed,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  the  erosive  power  of  streams.
Every  fissure,  every  hollow  caused  by  the  sinking  in  of  land,
becomes  a  receptacle  of  organic  and  inorganic  substances,  hur¬
ried  along  by  transient  floods,  in  districts  where  the  drainage
is  repeatedly  deranged  by  subterranean  movements.

We  have  seen  that  the  ravines  which  opened  in  Calabria,
in  1783,  were  very  numerous,  varying  in  depth  from  fifty
to  two  hundred  feet  f;  and  that  animals  were  sometimes  en-
gulphed  during  the  shocks.  We  may  assume  that  many
others  fell  in  during  the  three  years  that  the  earthquakes
continued,  and  that  similar  casualties  happen  in  the  intervals
between  convulsions.  Every  inundation,  therefore,  caused  by

*  SirT.  D.  Lauder,  Bart.,  on  the  great  floods  in  Morayshire,  August,  1829,  p.  177-

f  Voh  i.  chap.  xxiv.


233


PRESERVATION  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS


[Ch.  XIV.


heavy  rains,  every  torrent  that  might  chance  to  be  in  the  line
of  any  of  these  chasms,  would  pour  in  a  quantity  of  mud,  sand,
and  rolled  pebbles,  together  with  fragments  of  the  adjacent
rocks,  and  under  these  the  animal  remains  might  lie  inhumed
for  ages.

Where  houses  with  their  inhabitants  have  been  swallowed
up  in  fissures,  there  appears  to  have  been  usually  a  sliding  in
of  all  the  loose  matter  which  Jay  upon  the  surface,  so  that,
in  such  rents,  we  might  look  for  rolled  pebbles,  mud,  sand,
angular  fragments  of  rocks,  ruins  of  buildings,  and  skeletons
of  men  and  animals,  at  the  depth  often  of  several  hundreds
of  feet.  It  is  obvious  that  a  suite  of  subterranean  caverns,
communicating  with  such  fissures,  might  become  wholly  or
partially  filled  with  these  various  materials  confusedly  mixed
together.

D  uring  the  great  earthquake  of  1693,  in  Sicily,  several
thousand  people  were  at  once  entombed  in  the  ruins  of  caverns
in  limestone,  at  Sortino  Vecchio ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  large
stream,  which  had  issued  for  ages  from  one  of  the  grottos
below  that  town,  changed  suddenly  its  subterranean  course,
and  came  out  from  the  mouth  of  a  cave  lower  down  the  valley,
where  no  water  had  previously  flowed.  To  this  new  point  the
ancient  mills  were  transferred.

When  the  courses  of  engulphed  rivers  are  thus  liable  to
change,  from  time  to  time,  by  alterations  in  the  levels  of  a
country,  and  by  the  rending  and  shattering  of  mountain  masses,
we  must  suppose  that  the  dens  of  wild  beasts  will  sometimes
be  inundated  by  subterranean  floods,  and  their  carcasses  buried
under  heaps  of  alluvium.  The  bones,  moreover,  of  individuals
which  have  died  in  the  recesses  of  caves,  or  of  animals  which
have  been  carried  in  for  prey,  may  be  drifted  along,  and  mixed
up  with  mud,  sand,  and  fragments  of  rock,  so  as  to  form
osseous  breccias.

Nor  should  we  omit  to  mention  the  havoc  committed  on  low
coasts,  during  earthquakes,  by  waves  of  the  sea  which  roll  in
upon  the  land,  bearing  everything  before  them,  for  many  miles


Ch.XIV.j


IN  ALLUVIUMS  AND  LANDSLIPS.


239


into  the  interior,  throwing  down  upon  the  surface  great  heaps
of  sand  and  rock,  by  which  the  remains  of  drowned  animals
may  be  overwhelmed.  Many  of  the  storms  termed  hurri¬
canes  have  evidently  been  connected  with  submarine  earth¬
quakes,  as  is  shown  by  the  atmospheric  phenomena  attendant
on  them,  and  by  the  sounds  heard  in  the  ground,  and  the
odours  emitted.  Such  were  the  circumstances  which  accom¬
panied  the  swell  of  the  sea  in  Jamaica,  in  1780,  when  a  great
wave  desolated  the  western  coast,  and,  bursting  upon  Savanna
la  Mar,  swept  away  the  whole  town  in  an  instant,  so  that  not
a  vestige  of  man,  beast,  or  habitation,  was  seen  upon  the
surface  *.

Now  let  us  suppose  that  in  a  tract  of  land  constantly  inha¬
bited  by  terrestrial  quadrupeds,  the  species  are  thrice  changed
under  the  gradual  influence  of  causes  before  considered  in  this
volume,  and  that,  during  the  first  and  last  of  the  zoological
epochs,  the  district  remains  entirely  free  from  earthquakes,  but
is  violently  convulsed  by  them  during  the  intermediate  era, —
we  should  expect,  for  reasons  above  considered,  that  the  fossil
remains  of  quadrupeds,  buried  in  alluvium,  would  be  confined
to  one  period  only,  viz.,  that  of  the  subterranean  movements.
If  the  series  of  shocks  should  happen  not  to  have  occupied  the
whole  of  the  second  epoch,  but  only  a  small  portion  of  it,  there
might  be  no  indication  whatever,  in  the  fossil  relics,  of  a  pas¬
sage  from  one  state  of  the  organic  world  to  another.  The
transition  would  appear  abrupt ;  and  they  who,  for  the  sake  of
economizing  past  time,  do  not  hesitate  to  magnify  the  energies
of  natural  agents  in  by-gone  ages,  might  then  imagine  one
paroxysmal  earthquake  to  have  caused  all  the  fissures,  caverns,
and  depressions,  and  one  accompanying  deluge  to  have  filled
the  whole  with  alluvial  matter,  annihilating,  at  the  same  time,
the  race  of  quadrupeds  of  which  the  bones  remain  interred.

IVorks  of  art,  in  alluvial  deposits. — But  although  we  con¬
ceive  that,  in  a  country  entirely  free  from  subterranean  move¬
ments,  a  long  succession  of  ages  might  pass  away  without  any

*  Edwards,  Hist,  of  West  Indies,  vol.  i.  p.  235,  Ed.  1801.


240  PRESERVATION  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS  [Ch.  XIV.

permanent  monuments  being  left  in  alluvium  of  the  terrestrial
animals  which  have  lived  upon  the  surface,  yet  it  appears
scarcely  possible  that  man,  if  he  has  made  considerable  progress
in  civilization,  should  fail  to  leave  some  lasting  signs  of  the
works  of  his  hands,  to  testify  his  former  existence.  We  are
informed  by  M.  Boblaye,  that  in  the  Morea,  the  formation
termed  ceramique,  consisting  of  pottery,  tiles,  and  bricks,  in¬
termixed  with  various  works  of  art,  enters  so  largely  into  the
alluvium  and  vegetable  soil  upon  the  plains  of  Greece,  and  into
hard  and  crystalline  breccias  which  have  been  formed  at  the
foot  of  declivities,  that  it  constitutes  a  real  stratum  which  might,
in  the  absence  of  zoological  characters,  serve  to  mark  our  epoch
in  a  most  indestructible  manner*.


Imbedding  of  Human  and  other  Remains  and  Works  of  Art

in  Blown  Sand.

Temple  of  Ipsambul. — The  drifting  of  sand  is  the  next
cause  which  we  may  consider  among  those  capable  of  preserving
the  remains  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  during  its  period  of
emersion.  We  have  already  alluded  to  the  African  deserts,  as
the  most  remarkable  example  of  desolation  produced  by  this
cause.  Innumerable  towns  and  cities  have  been  buried  to  the
westward  of  the  Nile,  between  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon
and  Nubia;  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  conceive  a  mode
whereby  interment  could  take  place  under  circumstances  more
favourable  to  the  conservation  of  monuments  for  indefinite
periods.  The  sand  which  surrounded  and  filled  the  great
temple  of  Ipsambul,  first  discovered  by  Burckhardt,  and  after¬
wards  partially  uncovered  by  Belzoni  and  Beechey,  was  so  fine
as  to  resemble  a  fluid  when  put  in  motion.  Neither  the  fea¬
tures  of  the  colossal  figures,  nor  the  colour  of  the  stucco  with
which  some  were  covered,  nor  the  paintings  on  the  walls,  had
received  any  injury  from  being  enveloped  for  ages  in  this  dry
impalpable  dust  f .


*  Ann.  des  Sci.  Nat.,  tome  xxii.  p.  117.  Feb.  1831.
t  Stratton,  Ed,  Phil.  Journ.,  No.  V.  p.  62.


C*h.  XIV.]  AND  works  of  art  in  blown  sand.  241

At  some  future  period,  perhaps,  when  the  pyramids  shall
have  perished,  the  action  of  the  sea,  or  an  earthquake,  may  lay
open  to  the  day  some  of  these  buried  temples.  Or  we  may
suppose  the  desert  to  remain  undisturbed,  and  changes  in  the
surrounding  sea  and  land  to  modify  the  climate  and  the  direc¬
tion  of  the  prevailing  winds,  so  that  these  may  then  waft  away
the  Lybian  sands  as  gradually  as  they  once  brought  them  to
those  regions.  Thus  many  a  town  and  temple  of  higher  anti¬
quity  than  Thebes  or  Memphis  might  reappear  in  their  original
integrity,  and  a  part  of  the  gloom  which  overhangs  the  history
of  earlier  nations  might  be  dispelled.

Dried  carcasses  on  African  sands. — Whole  caravans  are
said  to  have  been  overwhelmed  by  the  Lybian  sands ;  and
Burckhardt  informs  us  that  4  after  passing  the  Akaba,  near  the
head  of  the  Red  Sea,  the  bones  of  dead  camels  are  the  only
guides  of  the  pilgrim  through  the  wastes  of  sand.’  *  We  did
not  see,’  says  Captain  Lyon,  speaking  of  a  plain  near  the  Sou-
dah  mountains,  in  Northern  Africa,  f  the  least  appearance  of
vegetation  ;  but  observed  many  skeletons  of  animals,  which
had  died  of  fatigue  on  the  desert,  and  occasionally  the  grave  of
some  human  being.  All  these  bodies  were  so  dried  by  the
heat  of  the  sun,  that  putrefaction  appears  not  to  have  taken
place  after  death.  In  recently-expired  animals  I  could  not
perceive  the  slightest  offensive  smell ;  and  in  those  long  dead
the  skin  with  the  hair  on  it  remained  unbroken  and  perfect,
although  so  brittle  as  to  break  with  a  slight  blow.  The  sand-
winds  never  cause  these  carcasses  to  change  their  places,  for  in
a  short  time  a  slight  mound  is  formed  round  them,  and  they
become  stationary

Towns  overwhelmed  by  sand-floods. — The  burying  of  several
towns  and  villages  in  England  and  France  by  blown  sand  is
on  record  ;  thus,  for  example,  in  Suffolk,  in  the  year  16S8,
part  of  Downham  was  overwhelmed  by  sands  which  had  broken
loose  about  one  hundred  years  before,  from  a  warren  five  miles
to  the  south-west.  This  sand  had,  in  the  course  of  a  century,

*  Travels  in  North  Africa  in  the  years  1818,  1819,  and  1820,  p.  83.

Vol.  II.  R


242  IMBEDDING  OF  ORGANIC  AND  OTHER  REMAINS  [Ch.  XIV.

travelled  five  miles,  and  covered  more  than  a  thousand  acres  of
land

The  ruins  of  buildings  have  been  found  entire  in  the  drift-
sand  of  Cornwall,  as  we  before  mentioned,  as  also  land-shells.
One  of  the  latter  is  said  to  belong  to  a  species  which  is  un¬
known  at  present  in  this  country  f.  Near  St.  Pol  de  Leon,  in
Brittany,  a  whole  village  was  completely  buried  beneath  drift-
sand,  so  that  nothing  was  seen  but  the  spire  of  the  church  J.

Imbedding  of  Organic  Bodies  and  Works  of  Art  in  Volcanic

Formations  on  the  Land.

We  have  in  some  degree  anticipated  the  subject  of  this
section  in  a  former  volume,  when  speaking  of  the  buried  cities
around  Naples,  and  those  on  the  flanks  of  Etna§.  From
the  facts  referred  to  by  us,  it  appears  that  the  preservation
of  human  remains  and  works  of  art  has  been  frequently  due
to  the  descent  of  floods  caused  by  the  copious  rains  which
usually  accompany  eruptions.  These  aqueous  lavas,  as  they
are  called  in  Campania,  flow  with  great  rapidity,  and  in  1822
surprised  and  suffocated,  as  we  have  stated,  seven  persons
in  the  villages  of  St.  Sebastian  and  Massa,  on  the  flanks  of
Vesuvius.

In  the  tuffs,  moreover,  or  solidified  mud,  deposited  by  these
aqueous  lavas,  impressions  of  leaves  and  of  trees  have  been  ob¬
served.  Some  of  those  formed  after  the  eruption  of  Vesuvius
in  1822,  are  now  preserved  in  the  museum  at  Naples.

Lava  itself  may  become  indirectly  the  means  of  preserving
terrestrial  remains,  by  overflowing  beds  of  ashes,  pumice,  and
ejected  matter,  which  may  have  been  showered  down  upon  ani¬
mals  and  plants,  or  upon  human  remains.  Few  substances  are
better  non-conductors  of  heat  than  volcanic  dust  and  scorias,  so
that  a  bed  of  such  materials  is  rarely  melted  by  a  superimposed
lava-current.  After  consolidation,  the  lava  affords  secure  pro-

*  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  ii.  p.  722.  f  Vol.  i.  chap.  xvi.

J  Mem.  de  l’Acad.  des  Sci.  de  Paris,  1772. — Malte-Brun’s  Geog.  vol.  i.  p.  42&.

§  Vol.  i.  chaps,  xx.  and  xxi.


Oh.  XIV.]  IN  VOLCANIC  FORMATIONS  ON  THE  LAND.  243

tection  to  the  lighter  and  more  removeable  mass  below*  wherein
the  organic  relics  may  be  enveloped.  The  Herculanean  tuffs
containing  the  rolls  of  papyrus,  of  which  the  characters  are
still  legible,  have,  as  we  before  remarked,  been  for  ages  covered
by  lava.

Another  mode  whereby  lava  may  tend  to  the  conservation  of
imbedded  remains,  at  least  of  works  of  human  art,  is  by  over¬
flowing  them  when  not  intensely  heated,  in  which  case  they
often  suffer  little  or  no  injury.

Thus  when  the  Etnean  lava-current  of  1669  covered  four¬
teen  towns  and  villages,  and  part  of  the  city  of  Catania,  it  did
not  melt  down  a  great  number  of  statues  and  other  articles
in  the  vaults  of  Catania  ;  and  at  the  depth  of  thirty-five  feet
in  the  same  current,  on  the  site  of  Mompiliere,  one  of  the
buried  towns,  the  bell  of  a  church  and  some  statues  were  found
uninjured  #.

We  remarked  in  a  former  volume,  that  in  many  countries
which  have  been  peopled  from  remote  ages  by  civilized  nations,
and  have  been  at  the  same  time  the  theatres  of  volcanic  action,
there  must  be  innumerable  monuments  of  the  highest  value  to
the  historian,  which  continue  unobserved  f  because  they  have
not  been  searched  for.’  But  we  omitted  to  describe  in  detail
a  splendid  example  of  several  buried  cities  in  Central  India,
which  might  probably  be  made  to  yield  a  richer  harvest  to  the
antiquafy  than  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum  *f\  The  city  of
Oujein  (or  Oojain)  was,  about  fifty  years  before  the  Christian
era,  the  seat  of  empire,  of  art,  and  of  learning  ;  but  in  the  time
of  the  Rajah  Vicramaditya,  it  was  overwhelmed,  together,  as
tradition  reports,  with  more  than  eighty  other  large  towns  in
the  provinces  of  Malwa  and  Bagur,  f  by  a  shower  of  earth.’
The  city  which  now  bears  the  name  is  situated  a  mile  to  the
southward  of  the  ancient  town.  On  digging  on  the  spot  where
the  latter  is  supposed  to  have  stood,  to  the  depth  of  fifteen  or
eighteen  feet,  there  are  frequently  discovered,  says  Mr.  Hunter,
entire  brick  walls,  pillars  of  stone,  and  pieces  of  wood  of  an

*  Vol.  i.  chap.  xxi.  f  Ibid.,  chap,  xxiii.


244  BURIED  CITIES  IN  CENTRAL  INDIA.  [Ch.  XIV

extraordinary  hardness,  besides  utensils  of  various  kinds,  and
ancient  coins.  Many  coins  are  also  found  in  the  channels  cut
by  the  periodical  rains,  or  in  the  beds  of  torrents  into  which
they  have  been  washed.  *  During  our  stay  at  Oujein,  a  large
quantity  of  wheat  was  found  by  a  man  digging  for  bricks.  It
was,  as  might  have  been  expected,  almost  entirely  consumed,
and  in  a  state  resembling  charcoal.  In  a  ravine  cut  by  the
rains,  from  which  several  stone  pillars  had  been  dug,  I  saw  a
space  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet  long  and  seven  or  eight  high,
composed  of  earthen  vessels,  broken  and  closely  compacted
together.  It  was  conjectured,  with  great  appearance  of  proba¬
bility,  to  have  been  a  potter’s  kiln.  Between  this  place  and
the  new  town  is  a  hollow,  in  which,  tradition  says,  the  river
Sipparah  formerly  ran.  It  changed  its  course  at  the  time  the
city  was  buried,  and  now  runs  to  the  westward  The  soil
which  covers  Oujein  is  described  as  f  being  of  an  ash-grey
colour,  with  minute  specks  of  black  sand  f.’

That  the  4  shower  of  earth 5  which  is  reported  to  have
f  fallen  from  heaven,’  was  produced  by  a  volcanic  eruption,
we  cannot  doubt,  although  no  information  has  been  obtained
respecting  the  site  of  the  vent ;  and  the  nearest  volcano  of
which  we  read,  is  that  which  was  in  eruption  during  the  Cutch
earthquake  in  1819,  at  the  distance  of  about  thirty  miles  from
Bhooi,  the  capital  of  Cutch,  and  at  least  three  hundred  geo¬
graphical  miles  from  Oujein.

Captain  F.  Dangerfield,  who  accompanied  Sir  John  Mal¬
colm  in  his  late  expedition  into  Central  India,  states  that  the
river  Nerbuddah,  in  Malwa,  has  its  channel  excavated  through
columnar  basalt ,  on  which  rest  beds  of  marl  impregnated  with
salt.  The  upper  of  these  beds  is  of  a  light  colour,  and  from
thirty  to  forty  feet  thick,  and  rests  horizontally  on  the  lower
bed,  which  is  of  a  reddish  colour.  Both  appear  from  the
description  to  be  tuffs  composed  of  the  materials  of  volcanic
ejections,  and  forming  a  covering  from  sixty  to  seventy  feet

*  Narrative  of  Journey  from  Agra  to  Oujein,  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vi.  p.  36.

f  Asiatic  Journal,  vol.  ix.  p.  35.


Ch.  XIV.]


BURIED  CITIES  IN  CENTRAL  INDIA.


245


deep  overlying  the  basalt,  which  seems  to  resemble  some  of
the  currents  of  prismatic  lava  in  Auvergne  and  the  Vivarais.
Near  the.  middle  of  this  tufaceous  mass,  and  therefore  at  the
depth  of  thirty  feet  or  more  from  the  surface,  just  where  the
two  beds  of  tuff  meet.  Captain  Dangerfield  was  shown,  near
the  city  of  Mhysir,  buried  bricks  and  large  earthen  vessels,
said  to  have  belonged  to  the  ancient  city  of  Mhysir,  destroyed
by  the  catastrophe  of  Oujein  *.

*  Sir  J.  Malcolm’s  Cent.  Ind.~— Geol.  of  Malwa,  by  Captain  F.  Dangerfield,
App.  No.  ii.  pp.  324,325.


CHAPTER  XV.


Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  subaqueous  deposits — Division  of  the  subject—
Phenomena  relating  to  terrestrial  animals  and  plants  first  considered — Wood
sunk  to  a  great  depth  in  the  sea  instantly  impregnated  with  salt-water —
Experiments  of  Scoresby — Drift  timber  carried  by  the  Mackenzie  into  Slave
Lake  and  into  the  sea — Cause  of  the  abundance  of  drift  timber  in  this
river-— Floating  trees  in  the  Mississippi — In  the  Gulf  stream — Immense
quantity  thrown  upon  the  coast  of  Iceland,  Spitzbergen,  and  Labrador — Im¬
bedding  of  the  remains  of  insects — of  the  remains  of  reptiles — Why  the  bones
of  birds  are  so  rare  in  subaqueous  deposits — Imbedding  of  terrestrial  quadru¬
peds — Effects  of  a  flood  in  the  Solway  Firth — Wild  horses  annually  drowned
in  the  savannahs  of  South  America — Skeletons  in  recent  shell  marl — Drifting
of  mammiferous  and  other  remains  by  tides  and  currents.

IMBEDDING  OF  ORGANIC  REMAINS  IN  SUBAQUEOUS

DEPOSITS.

Division  of  the  subject.— -We  have  treated  hitherto  of  the
imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  deposits  formed  upon  the
emerged  land,  and  we  shall  next  consider  the  including  of  the
same  in  deposits  formed  under  water.

It  will  be  convenient  to  divide  this  branch  of  our  subject
into  three  parts  ;  considering,  first,  the  various  modes  whereby
the  relics  of  terrestrial  species  may  be  buried  in  subaqueous
formations ;  secondly,  the  modes  whereby  the  animals  and
plants  inhabiting  fresh-water  may  be  so  entombed;  thirdly,
the  manner  in  which  marine  species  may  become  preserved  in
new  strata.

The  phenomena  which  we  are  now  about  to  notice  demand
a  fuller  share  of  attention  than  those  previously  examined,
since  the  deposits  which  originate  upon  the  dry  land  are
insignificant  in  thickness,  superficial  extent,  and  durability,
when  contrasted  with  those  of  subaqueous  origin.  At  the
same  time,  the  study  of  the  latter  is  beset  with  greater  diffi¬
culties,  for  we  are  here  concerned  with  the  results  of  processes
much  more  removed  from  the  sphere  of  ordinary  observation.


Ch.  XV.]  IMBEDDING  OF  TERRESTRIAL  PLANTS.  247

There  is,  indeed,  no  circumstance,  as  we  before  remarked  *,
which  more  seriously  impedes  the  acquisition  of  just  views  in
the  etiology  of  our  science,  that  an  habitual  disregard  of  the
important  fact,  that  the  reproductive  effects  of  the  principal
agents  of  change  are  confined  to  another  element, — to  that
larger  portion  of  the  habitable  globe,  from  which,  by  our  very
organization,  we  are  almost  entirely  excluded.

Imbedding  of  Terrestrial  Plants.

When  a  tree  falls  into  a  river  from  the  undermining  of  the
banks,  or  from  being  washed  in  by  a  torrent  or  flood,  it  floats
on  the  surface,  not  because  the  woody  portion  is  specifically
lighter  than  water,  but  because  it  is  full  of  pores  containing
air.  When  soaked  for  a  considerable  time,  the  water  makes
its  way  into  these  pores,  and  the  wood  becomes  water-logged,
and  sinks.  The  time  required  for  this  process  varies  differ¬
ently  in  different  woods,  but  several  kinds  may  be  drifted  to
great  distances,  sometimes  across  the  ocean,  before  they  lose
their  buoyancy.

TVood  sunk  to  a  great  depth  in  the  sea  instantly  impregnated
with  salt  water. — If  wood  be  sunk  to  vast  depths  in  the  sea,
it  may  be  impregnated  with  water  suddenly.  Captain  Scoresby
informs  us,  in  his  Account  of  the  Arctic  Regions  *,  that  on
one  occasion  a  whale,  on  being  harpooned,  ran  out  all  the  lines
in  the  boat,  which  it  then  dragged  under  water,  to  the  depth
of  several  thousand  feet,  the  men  having  just  time  to  escape
to  a  piece  of  ice.  When  the  fish  returned  to  the  surface  c  to
blow/  it  was  struck  a  second  time,  and  soon  afterwards  killed.
The  moment  it  expired  it  began  to  sink, — an  unusual  circum¬
stance,  which  was  found  to  be  caused  by  the  weight  of  the
sunken  boat,  which  still  remained  attached  to  it.  By  means
of  harpoons  and  ropes  the  fish  was  prevented  from  sinking
until  it  was  released  from  the  weight  by  connecting  a  rope  to
the  lines  of  the  attached  boat,  which  was  no  sooner  done  than
the  fish  rose  again  to  the  surface.  The  sunken  boat  was  then
*  Vol.  i.  chap.  5.  t  Vol.  ii.  p.  191,


248


IMBEDDING  OF  TERRESTRIAL  PLANTS.


[Ch.  XV.


hauled  up  with  great  labour,  for  so  heavy  was  it,  that  although
before  the  accident  it  would  have  been  buoyant  when  full  of
water,  yet  it  now  required  a  boat  at  each  end  to  keep  it  from
sinking.  ‘  When  it  was  hoisted  into  the  ship,  the  paint  came
off  the  wood  in  large  sheets ;  and  the  planks,  which  were  of
wainscot,  were  as  completely  soaked  in  every  pore,  as  if  they
had  lain  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  since  the  flood  !  A  wooden
apparatus  that  accompanied  the  boat  in  its  progress  through
the  deep,  consisting  chiefly  of  a  pieee  of  thick  deal,  about
fifteen  inches  square,  happened  to  fall  overboard,  and,  though
it  originally  consisted  of  the  lightest  hr,  sank  in  the  water  like
a  stone.  The  boat  was  rendered  useless  ;  even  the  wood  of
which  it  was  built,  on  being  offered  to  the  cook  for  fuel,  was
tried  and  rejected  as  incombustible*.’

Captain  Scoresby  found  that,  by  sinking  pieces  of  hr,  elm,
ash,  &c.,  to  the  depth  of  4000  and  sometimes  6000  feet,  they
became  impregnated  with  sea- water,  and  when  drawn  up  again,
after  immersion  for  an  hour,  would  no  longer  float.  The
effect  of  this  impregnation  was  to  increase  the  dimensions  as
well  as  the  specific  gravity  of  the  wood,  every  solid  inch  having
increased  one-twentieth  in  size  and  twenty-one  twenty-fifths  in
weight  *)*.

Drift-wood  of  the  Mackenzie  river. — When  timber  is  drifted
down  by  a  river,  it  is  often  arrested  by  lakes,  and,  becoming
water-logged,  it  may  sink  and  be  imbedded  in  lacustrine  strata,
if  any  be  there  forming  :  sometimes  a  portion  boats  on  till  it
reaches  the  sea.  In  the  course  of  the  Mackenzie  River  we
have  an  example  of  vast  accumulations  of  vegetable  matter
now  in  progress  under  both  these  circumstances.

In  Slave  Lake  in  particular,  which  vies  in  dimensions  with
some  of  the  great  fresh -water  seas  of  Canada,  the  quantity  of
drift-timber  brought  down  annually  is  enormous.  4  As  the
trees,’  says  Dr.  Richardson,  4  retain  their  roots,  which  are
often  loaded  with  earth  and  stones,  they  readily  sink,  espe¬
cially  when  water-soaked,  and,  accumulating  in  the  eddies,
*  Account  of  the  Arctic  Regions,  vol.  ii.  p.  193.  -J-  Ibid.,  p.  202.


Ch.  XV.]


DRIFT-WOOD  OF  THE  MACKENZIE.


249


form  shoals,  which  ultimately  augment  into  islands.  A  thicket
of  small  willows  covers  the  new-formed  island  as  soon  as  it
appears  above  water,  and  their  fibrous  roots  serve  to  bind  the
whole  firmly  together.  Sections  of  these  islands  are  annually
made  by  the  river,  assisted  by  the  frost ;  and  it  is  interesting
to  study  the  diversity  of  appearances  they  present,  according
to  their  different  ages.  The  trunks  of  the  trees  gradually
decay  until  they  are  converted  into  a  blackish  brown  substance
resembling  peat,  but  which  still  retains  more  or  less  of  the
fibrous  structure  of  the  wood  ;  and  layers  of  this  often  alter¬
nate  with  layers  of  clay  and  sand,  the  whole  being  penetrated,
to  the  depth  of  four  or  five  yards  or  more,  by  the  long  fibrous
roots  of  the  willows.  A  deposition  of  this  kind,  with  the  aid
of  a  little  infiltration  of  bituminous  matter,  would  produce  an
excellent  imitation  of  coal,  with  vegetable  impressions  of  the
willow-roots.  What  appeared  most  remarkable  was  the  hori¬
zontal  slaty  structure  that  the  older  alluvial  banks  presented,
or  the  regular  curve  that  the  strata  assumed  from  unequal
subsidence.

‘  It  was  in  the  rivers  only  that  we  could  observe  sections  of
these  deposits,  but  the  same  operation  goes  on  on  a  much  more
magnificent  scale  in  the  lakes.  A  shoal  of  many  miles  in  extent
is  formed  on  the  south  side  of  Athabasca  Lake,  by  the  drift-
timber  and  vegetable  debris  brought  down  by  the  Elk  River;
and  the  Slave  Lake  itself  must  in  process  of  time  be  filled  up
by  the  matters  daily  conveyed  into  it  from  Slave-River.  Vast
quantities  of  drift  timber  are  buried  under  the  sand  at  the
mouth  of  the  river,  and  enormous  piles  of  it  are  accumulated
on  the  shores  of  every  part  of  the  lake

The  banks  of  the  Mackenzie  display  almost  everywhere
horizontal  beds  of  wood  coal,  alternating  with  bituminous  clay,
gravel,  sand,  and  friable  sandstone;  sections,  in  short,  of  such
deposits  as  are  now  evidently  forming  at  the  bottom  of  the
lakes  which  it  traverses.

Notwithstanding  the  vast  forests  intercepted  by  the  lakes,  a

*'  Dr.  Richardson’s  Geognost.  Obs.  on  Capt.  Franklin’s  Polar  Expedition.


250


DRIFT-WOOD  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.


[Ch.  xv.


still  greater  mass  of  drift-wood  is  found  where  the  Mackenzie
reaches  the  sea,,  in  a  latitude  where  no  wood  grows  at  present,
except  a  few  stunted  willows.  At  the  mouths  of  the  river  the
alluvial  matter  has  formed  a  barrier  of  islands  and  shoals,
where  we  may  expect  a  great  formation  of  coal  at  some  distant

The  abundance  of  floating  timber  on  the  Mackenzie  is  owing,
as  I  am  informed  by  Dr.  Richardson,  to  the  peculiar  direction
and  to  the  length  of  the  course  of  this  river,  which  runs  from
south  to  north,  so  that  the  sources  of  the  stream  lie  in  much
warmer  latitudes  than  its  mouths.  In  the  country,  therefore,
where  the  former  are  situated,  the  frost  breaks  up  at  an  earlier
season,  while  yet  the  waters  in  the  lower  part  of  its  course  are
ice-bound.  Hence  the  current  of  water,  rushing  down  north¬
ward,  reaches  a  point  where  the  thaw  has  not  begun,  and,  find¬
ing  the  channel  of  the  river  blocked  up  with  ice,  it  overflows
the  banks,  sweeping  through  forests  of  pines,  and  carrying
away  thousands  of  uprooted  trees.

Drift-wood  of  the  Mississippi. — We  have  already  observed*
that  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  is  much  impeded  by
trunks  of  trees  half  sunk  in  the  river.  On  reaching  the  Gulf
of  Mexico  many  of  them  subside  and  are  imbedded  in  the  new
strata  which  form  the  delta,  but  many  of  them  float  on  and
enter  the  Gulf  stream.  ‘  Tropical  plants  (says  M.  Constant
Prevost)  are  taken  up  by  this  great  current,  and  carried  in  a
northerly  direction,  till  they  reach  the  shores  of  Iceland  and
Spitzbergen  uninjured.  A  great  portion  of  them  are  doubtless
arrested  on  their  passage,  and  probably  always  in  the  same
inlets,  or  the  same  spots  on  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  ;  in  fact,
wherever  an  eddy  or  calm  determines  their  distribution,  which,
in  this  single  example,  extends  over  a  space  comprehended
between  the  equator  and  the  eightieth  degree  of  latitude — an
immense  space,  six  times  more  considerable  than  that  occu¬
pied  by  all  Europe,  and  thirty  times  larger  than  France.
The  drifting  of  various  substances,  though  regular,  is  not

*  Vol.  i.  ch.  xiv.


a


Ch.  XV.]  DRIFT-WOOD  OF  THE  NORTH  SEA.  251

continual ;  it  takes  place  by  intennittance  after  great  inun¬
dations  of  rivers,  and  in  the  intervals  the  waters  may  only
carry  sand  or  mud,  or  each  of  these  alternately,  to  the  same
localities  V

Drift  timber  on  coasts  of  Iceland ,  Spitzbergen,  fyc. — The
ancient  forests  of  Iceland,  as  Malte-Brun  observes,  have  been
improvidently  exhausted ;  but,  although  the  Icelander  can
obtain  no  timber  from  the  land,  he  is  supplied  with  it  abun¬
dantly  by  the  ocean.  An  immense  quantity  of  thick  trunks  of
pines,  firs,  and  other  trees,  are  thrown  upon  the  northern  coast
of  the  island,  especially  upon  North  Cape  and  Cape  Langaness,
and  are  then  carried  by  the  waves  along  these  two  promontories
to  other  parts  of  the  coast,  so  as  to  afford  sufficiency  of  wood
for  fuel  and  for  constructing  boats.  Timber  is  also  carried  to
the  shores  of  Labrador  and  Greenland  ;  and  Crantz  assures  us
that  the  masses  of  floating  wood  thrown  by  the  waves  upon
the  island  of  John  de  Mayen  often  equal  the  whole  of  that
island  in  extent  f .

In  a  similar  manner  the  bays  of  Spitzbergen  are  filled  with
drift-wood,  which  accumulates  also  upon  those  parts  of  the
coast  of  Siberia  that  are  exposed  to  the  east,  consisting  of  larch
trees,  pines,  Siberian  cedars,  firs,  and  Fernambucco  and  Cam-
peachy  woods.  These  trunks  appear  to  have  been  swept  away
by  the  great  rivers  of  Asia  and  America.  Some  of  them  are
brought  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  by  the  Bahama  stream,  while
others  are  hurried  forward  by  the  current  which,  to  the  north
of  Siberia,  constantly  sets  in  from  east  to  west.  Some  of  these
trees  have  been  deprived  of  their  bark  by  friction,  but  are  in
such  a  state  of  preservation  as  to  form  excellent  building  tim¬
ber  J.  Parts  of  the  branches  and  almost  all  the  roots  remain
fixed  to  the  pines  which  have  been  drifted  into  the  North  Sea,

*  Mem.  de  la  Soc.  d’Hist.  Nat.  de  Paris,  vol.iv.  p.  84.

t  Malte-Brun,  Geog.,  vol.  v.  part  i.  p.  112. — Crantz,  Hist,  of  Greenland,  tome  i.
pp.  50 — 54.

j  Olafsen,  Voyage  to  Iceland,  tome  i.  Malte-Brun’s  Geog.,  vol.  v.  part  i.

p.  112.


252


IMBEDDING  OF  PLANTS,


[Ch.  XV.


into  latitudes  too  cold  for  the  growth  of  such  timber,  but  the
trunks  are  usually  barked.

Lighter  parts  of  plants  carried  out  to  sea  hy  hurricanes. —
The  leaves  and  lighter  parts  of  plants  are  seldom  carried  out
to  sea,  in  any  part  of  the  globe,  except  during  tropical  hurri¬
canes  among  islands,  and  during  the  agitations  of  the  atmo¬
sphere  which  sometimes  accompany  earthquakes  and  volcanic
eruptions  *.

Concluding  remarks. — It  will  appear  from  these  observations
that,  although  the  remains  of  terrestrial  vegetation,  borne  down
by  aqueous  causes  from  the  land,  are  chiefly  deposited  at  the
bottom  of  lakes  or  at  the  mouths  of  rivers,  yet  a  considerable
quantity  is  drifted  about  in  all  directions  by  currents,  and  may
become  imbedded  in  any  marine  formation,  or  may  sink  down,
when  water-logged,  to  the  bottom  of  unfathomable  abysses,  and
there  accumulate  without  intermixture  of  other  substances.]

It  may  be  asked  whether  we  have  any  data  for  inferring  that
the  remains  of  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  existing  species
of  plants  will  be  permanently  preserved,  so  as  to  be  hereafter
recognizable,  supposing  the  strata  now  in  progress  to  be  at
some  future  period  upraised?  To  this  inquiry  we  may  reply
that  there  are  no  reasons  for  expecting  that  more  than  a  small
number  of  the  plants  now  flourishing  in  the  globe  will  become
fossilized,  since  the  entire  habitations  of  a  great  number  of
them  are  remote  from  lakes  and  seas,  and  even  where  they
grow  near  to  large  bodies  of  water,  the  circumstances  are  quite
accidental  and  partial  which  favour  the  imbedding  and  con¬
servation  of  vegetable  remains.  Those  naturalists,  therefore,
who  infer  that  the  ancient  flora  of  the  globe  was,  at  certain
periods,  less  varied  than  now,  merely  because  they  have  as  yet
discovered  only  a  few  hundred  fossil  species  of  a  particular
epoch,  while  they  can  enumerate  more  than  fifty  thousand  living
ones,  are  reasoning  on  a  false  basis,  and  their  standard  of  com¬
parison  is  not  the  same  in  the  two  cases.


*  De  la  Beebe,  Geol.  Manual,  p.  477.


Ch.  XV.]


INSECTS,  AND  REPTILES.


253


Imbedding  of  the  Remains  of  Insects.

I  have  observed  the  elytra  and  other  parts  of  beetles  in  a  band
of  fissile  clay,  separating  two  beds  of  recent  shell-marl,  in  the
Loch  of  Kinnordy.  Amongst  these,  Mr.  Curtis  recognized
Elater  lineatus  and  Atopa  cervina,  species  still  living  in  Scot¬
land.  These,  as  well  as  other  remains  which  accompanied  them,
appear  to  belong  to  terrestrial,  not  aquatic  species,  and  must
have  been  carried  down  in  muddy  water  during  an  inundation.
In  the  lacustrine  peat  of  the  same  locality,  the  elytra  of  beetles
are  not  uncommon  ;  but  in  the  deposits  of  drained  lakes  gene¬
rally,  and  in  the  silt  of  our  estuaries,  the  relics  of  this  class  of
the  animal  kingdom  are  extremely  rare.  In  the  blue  clay  of
very  modern  origin  of  Lewes  Levels,  Mr.  Mantell  has  found
the  Indusia,  or  cases  of  the  larvae  of  Phryganea,  in  abundance,
with  minute  shells  belonging  to  the  genera  Planorbis,  Limnea,
&c.,  adhering  to  them  *.

When  speaking  of  the  migrations  of  insects,  we  pointed  out
that  an  immense  number  are  floated  into  lakes  and  seas  by
rivers,  or  blown  by  winds  far  from  the  land  ;  but  they  are  so
buoyant  that  we  can  only  suppose- them,  under  very  peculiar
circumstances,  to  sink  to  the  bottom  before  they  are  either
devoured  by  insectivorous  animals  or  are  decomposed.

Remains  of  Reptiles.

As  the  bodies  of  several  crocodiles  were  found  in  the  mud
brought  down  to  the  sea  by  the  river  inundation  which  at¬
tended  an  earthquake  in  Java  in  the  year  1699,  we  may  imagine
that  extraordinary  floods  of  mud  may  stifle  many  individuals
of  the  shoals  of  alligators  and  other  reptiles  which  frequent
lakes  and  the  deltas  of  rivers  in  tropical  climates.  Thousands
of  frogs  were  found  leaping  about  among  the  wreck  carried
into  the  sea  by  the  late  inundations  in  Morayshire  f  ;  and  it
is  evident  that  whenever  a  sea-cliff  is  undermined,  or  land  is

*  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  iii.  part  i.  p.  201,  Second  Series.

-j-  Sir  T.  D.  Lauder’s  Account,  Second  Ed.,  p.  312.


254


IMBEDDING  OF  REMAINS  OF  BIRDS  AND  [Ch,  XV.

swept  by  other  violent  causes  into  the  sea,  land  reptiles  may  be
carried  in.


Remains  of  Birds.

We  might  have  anticipated  that  the  imbedding  of  the  remains
of  birds  in  new  strata  would  be  of  very  rare  occurrence,  for
their  powers  of  flight  insure  them  against  perishing  by  numer¬
ous  casualties  to  which  quadrupeds  are  exposed  during  floods  ;
and  if  they  chance  to  be  drowned,  or  to  die  when  swimming  on
the  water,  it  will  scarcely  ever  happen  that  they  will  be  sub¬
merged  so  as  to  become  preserved  in  sedimentary  deposits.
For  in  consequence  of  the  hollow  tubular  structure  of  their
bones  and  the  quantity  of  their  feathers,  they  are  extremely
light  in  proportion  to  their  volume,  so  that  when  first  killed
they  do  not  sink  to  the  bottom  like  quadrupeds,  but  float  on
the  surface  until  the  carcass  either  rots  away  or  is  devoured
by  predaceous  animals.  To  these  causes  we  may  ascribe  the
absence  of  any  vestige  of  the  bones  of  birds  in  the  recent  marl
formations  of  Scotland  ;  although  these  lakes,  until  the  moment
when  they  were  artificially  drained,  were  frequented  by  a  great
abundance  of  water-fowl.

Sir  T.  D.  Lauder  records  that  some  aquatic  birds  were
dashed  to  pieces  by  the  impetuous  waters  of  the  Deveron,  in
Aberdeenshire,  as  they  rushed  through  a  narrow  pass  among
the  rocks  during  the  floods  of  1829  *.  In  this  manner  may
torrents  charged  with  mud  occasionally  deposit  the  remains  of
birds  in  lacustrine  strata.

Imbedding  of  Terrestrial  Quadrupeds.

River  inundations  recur  in  most  climates  at  very  irregular
intervals,  and  expend  their  fury  on  those  rich  alluvial  plains
where  herds  of  herbivorous  quadrupeds  congregate  together.
These  animals  are  often  surprised,  and  being  unable  to  stem
the  current,  are  hurried  along  until  they  are  drowned,  when
they  sink  immediately  to  the  bottom.  Here  their  bodies  are
*  Account  of  the  Great  Floods,  &c.,  Second  Ed.,  p.  330.


Ch.  XV.]


TERRESTRIAL  QUADRUPEDS.


255


drifted  along,  together  with  sediment,  into  lakes  or  seas,  and
may  then  be  covered  by  a  mass  of  mud,  sand,  and  pebbles,
thrown  down  upon  them.  If  there  be  no  sediment  superim¬
posed,  the  gases  generated  by  putrefaction  usually  cause  the
bodies  to  rise  again  to  the  surface  about  the  ninth,  or  at  most
the  fourteenth  day.  The  pressure  of  a  thin  covering  would
not  be  sufficient  to  retain  them  at  the  bottom,  for  we  see  the
putrid  carcasses  of  dogs  and  cats,  even  in  rivers,  floating  with
considerable  weights  attached  to  them,  and  they  would  be  still
more  buoyant  in  sea- water.

In  cases  where  the  body  is  so  buried  in  drift-sand,  or  mud
accumulated  upon  it,  as  never  to  rise  again,  the  skeleton  may
be  preserved  entire  ;  but  if  it  comes  again  to  the  surface  while
in  the  process  of  putrefaction,  the  bones  commonly  fall  piece¬
meal  from  the  floating  carcass,  and  may  in  that  case  become
scattered  at  random  over  the  bottom  of  a  lake,  estuary,  or  sea,
so  that  a  jaw  may  afterwards  be  found  in  one  place,  a  rib  in
another,  a  humerus  in  a  third — all  included,  perhaps,  in  a
matrix  of  fine  materials,  and  where  there  may  be  evidence  of
very  slight  transporting  power  in  the  current,  or  even  of  none,
but  simply  of  some  chemical  precipitate.

A  large  number  of  the  bodies  of  drowned  animals,  if  they
float  into  the  sea  or  a  lake,  especially  in  hot  climates,  are  in¬
stantly  devoured  by  sharks,  alligators,  and  other  carnivorous
beasts,  which  may  have  power  to  digest  even  the  bones.  But
during  extraordinary  floods,  when  the  greatest  number  of  land
animals  are  destroyed,  the  waters  are  commonly  so  turbid,
especially  at  the  bottom  of  the  channel,  that  even  aquatic  spe¬
cies  are  compelled  to  escape  into  some  retreat  where  there  is
clearer  water,  lest  they  should  be  stifled.  For  this  reason,  as
well  as  the  rapidity  of  sedimentary  deposition  at  such  seasons,
the  probability  of  some  carcasses  becoming  permanently  im¬
bedded  is  considerable.

By  a  flood  in  the  Solway  Firth ,  1794. — One  of  the  most
memorable  floods  of  modern  date,  in  our  island,  is  that  which
visited  part  of  the  southern  borders  of  Scotland,  on  the  24th  of


256


IMBEDDING  OF  LAND  QUADRUPEDS.


[Ch.  XV.


January,  1794,  and  which  spread  particular  devastation  over
the  country  adjoining  the  Solway  Firth.  *

We  learn  from  the  account  of  Captain  Napier,  that  the
heavy  rains  had  swollen  every  stream  which  entered  the  Firth
of  Solway,  so  that  the  inundation  not  only  carried  away  a  great
number  of  cattle  and  sheep,  but  many  of  the  herdsmen  and
shepherds,  washing  down  their  bodies  into  the  estuary.  After
the  storm,  when  the  flood  subsided,  an  extraordinary  spectacle
was  seen  on  a  large  sand-bank,  called  ‘  the  beds  of  Esk,’  where
there  is  a  meeting  of  the  tidal  waters,  and  where  heavy  bodies
are  usually  left  stranded  after  great  floods.  On  this  single
bank  were  found  collected  together  the  bodies  of  nine  black
cattle,  three  horses,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty
sheep,  forty-five  dogs,  one  hundred  and  eighty  hares,  besides
a  great  number  of  smaller  animals,  and,  mingled  with  the  rest,
the  corpses  of  two  men  and  one  woman  *.

By  floods  in  Scotland ,  1829.— In  those  more  recent  floods
in  Scotland,  in  August  1829,  whereby  a  fertile  district,  six
hundred  miles  in  length,  became  a  scene  of  dreadful  desolation,
a  vast  number  of  animals  and  plants  were  washed  from  the
land,  and  found  scattered  about  after  the  storm,  around  the
mouths  of  the  principal  rivers.  An  eye-witness  thus  describes
the  scene  which  presented  itself  at  the  mouth  of  the  Spey,  in
Morayshire.  4  For  several  miles  along  the  beach,  crowds  were
employed  in  endeavouring  to  save  the  wood  and  other  wreck
with  which  the  heavy  rolling  tide  was  loaded ;  whilst  the
margin  of  the  sea  was  strewed  with  the  carcasses  of  domestic
animals,  and  with  millions  of  dead  hares  and  rabbits.  Thou¬
sands  of  living  frogs,  also,  swept  from  the  fields,  no  one  can
say  how  far  off,  were  observed  leaping  among  the  wreck  •fA

In  the  Savannahs  of  South  America. — We  are  informed  by
Humboldt,  that  during  the  periodical  swellings  of  the  large
rivers  in  South  America,  great  numbers  of  quadrupeds  are

*  Treatise  on  Practical  Store  Farming,  p.  25.

\  Sir  T.  D.  Lauder’s  Account  of  the  Great  Floods  in  Morayshire,  August
1829,  p.  312,  Second  Ed.


Ch.  XV.]


BY  RIVER  INUNDATIONS.


257


annually  drowned.  Of  the  wild  horses,  for  example.,  which
graze  in  immense  troops  in  the  savannahs,  thousands  are  said
to  perish  when  the  river  A  pure  is  swollen,  before  they  have
time  to  reach  the  rising  grounds  of  the  Llanos.  The  mares,
during  the  season  of  high  water,  may  be  seen,  followed  by  their
colts,  swimming  about  and  feeding  on  the  grass,  of  which  the
top  alone  waves  above  the  waters.  In  this  state  they  are  pur¬
sued  by  crocodiles ;  and  their  thighs  frequently  bear  the  prints
of  the  teeth  of  these  carnivorous  reptiles.  ‘  Such  is  the  plia¬
bility/  observes  the  celebrated  traveller,  f  of  the  organization
of  the  animals  which  man  has  subjected  to  his  sway,  that
horses,  cows,  and  other  species  of  European  origin,  lead,  for  a
time,  an  amphibious  life,  surrounded  by  crocodiles,  water-
serpents,  and  manatees.  When  the  rivers  return  again  into
their  beds,  they  roam  in  the  savannah,  which  is  then  spread
over  with  a  fine  odoriferous  grass,  and  enjoy,  as  in  their  native
climate,  the  renewed  vegetation  of  spring  */

By  floods  of  the  Ganges . — We  find  it  continually  stated,  by
those  who  describe  the  Ganges  and  Burrampooter,  that  these
rivers  carry  before  them,  during  the  flood  season,  not  only
floats  of  reeds  and  timber,  but  dead  bodies  of  men,  deer,  and
oxen  f.

In  Java ,  1699.— -We  have  already  referred  to  the  effects  of
a  flood  which  attended  an  earthquake  in  Java  in  1699,  when
the  turbid  waters  of  the  Batavian  river  destroyed  all  the  fish
except  the  carp  ;  and  when  drowned  buffaloes,  tigers,  rhino¬
ceroses,  deer,  apes,  and  other  wild  beasts,  were  brought  down
to  the  sea- coast  by  the  current,  with  several  crocodiles  which
had  been  stifled  in  the  mud  J.

On  the  western  side  of  the  same  island,  in  the  territory  of
Goulongong,  in  the  regencies,  a  more  recent  volcanic  eruption
(1821)  was  attended  by  a  flood,  during  which  the  river  Tjetan-
doy  bore  down  hundreds  of  carcasses  of  rhinoceroses  and
buffaloes,  and  swept  away  more  than  one  hundred  men  and

*  Humboldt’s  Pers.  Nar.  vol.  iv.  pp.  394 — 396.
f  Malte-Brun,  Geog.  vol.  iii.  p.  22.  J  See  vol.  i.  chap.  25.


258  REMAINS  OF  QUADRUPEDS  IN  MARL  LAKES.  [Ch.  XV.

women  from  a  multitude  assembled  on  its  banks  to  celebrate
a  festival.  Whether  the  bodies  reached  the  sea,  or  were  depo¬
sited,  with  drift  matter,  in  some  of  the  large  intervening
alluvial  plains,  we  are  not  informed  *.

In  Virginia ,  1771. — We  might  enumerate  a  great  number
of  local  deluges  that  have  swept  through  the  fertile  lands
which  border  on  large  rivers,  especially  in  tropical  countries,
but  we  should  surpass  the  limits  of  this  work.  We  may  ob¬
serve,  however,  that  the  destruction  of  islands,  in  rivers,  is
often  attended  with  great  loss  of  lives.  Thus,  when  the  prin¬
cipal  river  in  Virginia  rose,  in  1771,  to  the  height  of  twenty-
five  feet  above  its  ordinary  level,  it  swept  entirely  away  Elk
Island,  on  which  were  seven  hundred  head  of  quadrupeds, —
horses,  oxen,  sheep,  and  hogs, — and  nearly  one  hundred
houses  f .

The  reader  will  gather,  from  what  we  have  said  in  a  former
volume  respecting  the  deposition  of  sediment  by  aqueous
causes,  that  the  greater  number  of  the  remains  of  quadrupeds
drifted  away  by  rivers  must  be  intercepted  by  lakes  before
they  reach  the  sea,  or  buried  in  fresh-water  formations  near
the  mouths  of  rivers.  If  they  are  carried  still  farther,  the
probabilities  are  increased  of  their  rising  to  the  surface  in  a
state  of  putrefaction,  and,  in  that  case,  of  being  there  devoured
by  aquatic  beasts  of  prey,  or  of  subsiding  into  some  spots
whither  no  sediment  is'  conveyed,  and,  consequently,  where
every  vestige  of  them  will,  in  the  course  of  time,  disappear.

Skeletons  of  animals  in  recent  shell-marl,  Scotland.  —  In
some  instances,  the  skeletons  of  quadrupeds  are  met  with
abundantly  in  recent  shell-marls  in  Scotland,  where  we  cannot
suppose  them  to  have  been  imbedded  by  the  action  of  rivers  or
floods.  They  all  belong  to  species  which  now  inhabit,  or  are
known  to  have  been  indigenous  in  Scotland.  The  remains  of
several  hundred  skeletons  have  been  procured  within  the  last
century,  from  five  or  six  small  lakes  in  Forfarshire,  where  shell-

*  This  account  I  had  from  Mr.  Baumhauer,  Director-General  of  Finances  in
Java.  f  Scots  Mag.,  vol,  xxxiii.


ell.  XV.]  REMAINS  OF  QUADRUPEDS  IN  MARL  LAKES.  259

marl  has  been  worked.  Those  of  the  stag  ( Cervus  elaphus )
are  most  numerous,  and  if  the  others  be  arranged  in  the  order
of  their  relative  abundance,  they  will  follow  nearly  thus :  the
ox,  the  boar,  the  horse,  the  sheep,  the  dog,  the  hare,  the  fox,
the  wolf,  and  the  cat.  The  beaver  seems  extremely  rare,  but
it  has  been  found  in  the  shell-marl  of  Loch  Marlie,  in  Perth¬
shire,  and  in  the  parish  of  Edrom,  in  Berwickshire.

In  the  greater  part  of  these  lake  deposits  there  are  no  signs
of  floods,  and  the  expanse  of  water  was  originally  so  confined,
that  the  smallest  of  the  above-mentioned  quadrupeds  could
have  crossed,  by  swimming,  from  one  shore  to  the  other.
Deer,  and  such  species  as  take  readily  to  the  water,  may  often
have  been  mired  in  trying  to  land,  where  the  bottom  was  soft
and  quaggy,  and  in  their  efforts  to  escape,  may  have  plunged
deeper  into  the  marly  bottom.  Some  individuals,  we  suspect,
of  different  species,  have  fallen  in  when  crossing  the  frozen
surface  in  winter,  for  nothing  can  be  more  treacherous  than  the
ice  when  covered  with  snow,  in  consequence  of  the  springs,
which  are  numerous,  and  which,  always  retaining  an  equal
temperature,  cause  the  ice,  in  certain  spots,  to  be  extremely
thin,  while  in  every  other  part  of  the  lake,  it  is  strong  enough
to  bear  the  heaviest  weights.

Drifting  of  mammiferous  remains  hy  currents,  —  As  the
bones  of  mammalia  are  often  so  abundantly  preserved  in  peat,
and  in  such  lakes  as  we  have  just  described,  the  encroachments
of  a  sea  upon  a  coast  may  sometimes  throw  down  the  imbedded
skeletons,  so  that  they  may  be  carried  away  by  tides  and  cur¬
rents,  and  entombed  in  subaqueous  formations.  Some  of  the
smaller  quadrupeds,  also,  which  burrow  in  the  ground,  as  well
as  reptiles  and  every  species  of  plant,  are  liable  to  be  cast
down  into  the  waves  by  this  cause,  which  must  not  be  over¬
looked,  although  we  believe  it  to  be  of  comparatively  small  im¬
portance  amongst  the  numerous  agents  whereby  terrestrial
organic  remains  may  be  included  in  submarine  strata.


CHAPTER  XVI.


Imbedding  of  the  remains  of  man  and  his  works  in  subaqueous  strata — Drift¬
ing  of  bodies  to  the  sea  by  river-inundations — Destruction  of  bridges  and  houses
-—Burial  of  human  bodies  in  the  sea— Loss  of  lives  by  shipwreck — Circum¬
stances  under  which  human  corpses  may  be  preserved  under  a  great  thickness
of  recent  deposits — Number  of  wrecked  vessels — Durable  character  of  many
of  their  contents — Examples  of  fossil  skeletons  of  men — Of  fossil  canoes,
ships,  and  works  of  art — Of  the  chemical  changes  which  certain  metallic  in¬
struments  have  undergone  after  long  submergence — Effects  of  the  subsidence
of  land  in  imbedding  cities  and  forests  in  subaqueous  strata — Earthquake  of
Cutch  in  1819— -Submarine  forests — Example  on  the  coast  of  Hampshire — -
Origin  of  a  submarine  forest — Berkley’s  arguments  for  the  recent  date  of  the
creation  of  man — Concluding  remarks.

IMBEDDING  OF  THE  REMAINS  OF  MAN  AND  HIS  WORKS  IN

SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.

We  shall  now  proceed  to  inquire  in  what  manner  the  mortal
remains  of  man  and  the  works  of  his  hands  may  be  perma¬
nently  preserved  in  subaqueous  strata.  Of  the  many  hundred
million  human  beings  which  perish  in  the  course  of  every  cen¬
tury  on  the  land,  every  vestige  is  usually  destroyed  in  the
course  of  a  few  thousand  years,  but,  of  the  smaller  number  that
perish  in  the  waters,  a  considerable  proportion  must  frequently
be  entombed,  under  such  circumstances,  that  parts  of  them
may  endure  throughout  entire  geological  epochs.

We  have  already  seen  how  the  bodies  of  men,  together  with
th  ose  of  the  inferior  animals,  are  occasionally  washed  down
during  river-inundations  into  seas  and  lakes,  of  which  we  shall
now  enumerate  some  additional  examples.

Belzoni  witnessed  a  flood  on  the  Nile  in  September,  1818,
where,  although  the  river  only  rose  three  feet  and  a  half  above
its  ordinary  level,  several  villages,  with  some  hundreds  of  men,
women,  and  children,  were  swept  away  *.  We  mentioned  in

*  Narrative  of  Discovery  in  Egypt,  & c.,  London,  1820.


Ch.  XVI.]  IMBEDDING  OF  THE  REMAINS  OF  MAN.


261


a  former  volume  that  a  rise  of  six  feet  of  water  in  the  Ganges
in  1763  was  attended  with  a  much  greater  loss  of  lives.

In  the  year  1771,  at  the  time  of  the  bursting  of  the  Solway
moss  before  alluded  to,  when  the  inundations  in  the  north  of
England  appear  to  have  equalled  the  recent  floods  in  Moray¬
shire,  a  great  number  of  houses  and  their  inhabitants  were
swept  away  by  the  rivers  Tyne,  Can,  Wear,  Tees,  and  Greta;
and  no  less  than  twenty -one  bridges  were  destroyed  in  the
courses  of  these  rivers.  At  the  village  of  By  well  the  flood  tore
the  dead  bodies  and  coffins  out  of  the  churchyard,  and  bore
them  away,  together  with  many  of  the  living  inhabitants.
During  the  same  tempest  an  immense  number  of  cattle,  horses,
and  sheep,  were  also  transported  to  the  sea,  while  the  whole
coast  was  covered  with  the  wreck  of  ships.  Four  centuries
before  (in  1338),  the  same  district  had  been  visited  by  a  similar
continuance  of  heavy  rains  followed  by  disastrous  floods,  and
it  is  not  improbable  that  these  catastrophes  may  recur  periodi¬
cally.  As  the  population  increases,  and  buildings  and  bridges
are  multiplied,  we  must  expect  that  the  loss  of  lives  and  pro¬
perty  will  rather  augment  *.

Fossilization  of  human  bodies  hi  the  bed  of  the  sea. — If  to  the
hundreds  of  human  bodies  committed  to  the  deep  in  the  way
of  ordinary  burial  we  add  those  of  individuals  lost  by  ship¬
wreck,  we  shall  find  that,  in  the  course  of  a  single  year,  a  great
number  of  human  remains  are  consigned  to  the  subaqueous
regions.  We  shall  hereafter  advert  to  a  calculation  by  which
it  appears  that  more  than  five  hundred  British  vessels  alone,
averaging  each  a  burden  of  about  one  hundred  and  twenty
tons,  are  wrecked,  and  sink  to  the  bottom,  annually .  Of  these
the  crews  for  the  most  part  escape,  although  it  sometimes  hap¬
pens  that  all  perish.  In  one  great  naval  action  several  thou¬
sand  individuals  sometimes  share  a  watery  grave.

Many  of  these  corpses  are  instantly  devoured  by  predaceous
fish,  sometimes  before  they  reach  the  bottom ;  still  more  fre¬
quently  when  they  rise  again  to  the  surface,  and  float  in  a  state

*  Scots  Mag.,  vol.  xxxiii.  1771.


262


IMBEDDING  OF  THE  REMAINS  OF  MAN  [Ch.  XVI.


of  putrefaction.  Many  decompose  on  the  floor  of  the  ocean,
where  no  sediment  is  thrown  down  upon  them,  but  if  they  fall
upon  a  reef  where  corals  and  shells  are  becoming  agglutinated
into  a  solid  rock,  or  subside  where  the  delta  of  a  river  is  ad¬
vancing,  they  may  be  preserved  for  an  incalculable  series  of
ages  in  these  deposits.

Often  at  the  distance  of  a  few  hundred  feet  from  a  coral
reef  there  are  no  soundings  at  the  depth  of  many  hundred
fathoms.  Here,  if  a  ship  strike  and  be  wrecked,  it  may  soon
be  covered  by  calcareous  sand  and  fragments  of  coral  detached
by  the  breakers  from  the  summit  of  a  submarine  mountain,
and  which  may  roll  down  to  its  base.  Wrecks  are  known  to
have  been  common  for  centuries  near  certain  reefs,  so  that
canoes,  merchant  vessels,  and  ships  of  war,  may  have  sunk  and
have  been  enveloped  in  these  situations  in  calcareous  sand  and
breccia.  Suppose  a  volcanic  eruption  to  cover  such  remains
with  ashes  and  sand,  and  that,  over  the  tufaceous  strata  re¬
sulting  from  these  ejections,  a  current  of  lava  is  afterwards
poured,  the  ships  and  human  skeletons  might  then  remain
uninjured  beneath  the  superincumbent  rock,  like  the  houses
and  works  of  art  in  the  subterranean  cities  of  Campania.
That  cases  may  have  already  occurred  where  human  remains
have  been  thus  preserved  in  a  fossil  state  beneath  masses
more  than  a  thousand  feet  in  thickness,  is  by  no  means  impro¬
bable,  for,  in  some  volcanic  archipelagos,  a  period  of  thirty  or
forty  centuries  might  well  suffice  for  such  an  accumulation  of
matter.

We  stated  that,  at  the  distance  of  about  forty  miles  from
the  base  of  the  delta  of  the  Ganges,  there  is  a  circular  space
about  fifteen  miles  in  diameter  where  soundings  of  a  thousand
feet  sometimes  fail  to  reach  the  bottom.  As  during  the  flood
season  the  quantity  of  mud  and  sand  poured  by  the  great
rivers  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal  is  so  great  that  the  sea  only  re¬
covers  its  transparency  at  the  distance  of  sixty  miles  from  the
coast,  this  depression  must  be  gradually  shoaling,  especially  as
during  the  monsoons  the  sea,  loaded  with  mud  and  sand,  is


Ch.  XVI.]  AND  his  works  in  subaqueous  strata.  263

beaten  back  in  that  direction  towards  the  delta.  Now,  if  a  ship
or  human  body  sink  down  to  the  bottom  in  such  a  spot,  it  is
by  no  means  improbable  that  it  may  become  buried  under  a
depth  of  three  or  four  thousand  feet  of  sediment  in  the  same
number  of  years.

Even  on  that  part  of  the  floor  of  the  ocean  whither  no  ac¬
cession  of  drift  matter  is  carried  (a  part  which  we  believe  to
constitute,  at  any  given  period,  by  far  the  larger  proportion  of
the  whole  submarine  area),  there  are  circumstances  accompany¬
ing  a  wreck  which  favour  the  conservation  of  skeletons.  For
when  the  vessel  fills  suddenly  with  water,  especially  in  the
night,  many  persons  are  drowned  between  decks  and  in  their
cabins,  so  that  their  bodies  are  prevented  from  rising  again  to
the  surface.  The  vessel  often  strikes  upon  an  uneven  bottom,
and  is  overturned,  in  which  case  the  ballast,  consisting  of  sand,
shingle,  and  rock,  or  the  cargo,  frequently  composed  of  heavy
and  durable  materials,  may  be  thrown  down  upon  the  carcasses.
In  the  case  of  ships  of  war,  cannon,  shot,  and  other  warlike
stores,  may  press  down  with  their  weight  the  timbers  of  the
vessel  when  they  decay,  and  beneath  these  and  the  metallic
substances  the  bones  of  man  may  be  preserved.

Number  of  wrecked  vessels,— When  we  reflect  on  the  num¬
ber  of  curious  monuments  consigned  to  the  bed  of  the  ocean
in  the  course  of  every  naval  war  from  the  earliest  times,  our
conceptions  are  greatly  raised  respecting  the  multiplicity  of
lasting  memorials  which  man  is  leaving  of  his  labours.  During
our  last  great  struggle  with  France,  thirty-two  of  our  ships  of
the  line  went  to  the  bottom  in  the  space  of  twenty-two  years,
besides  seven  fifty-gun  ships,  eighty- six  frigates,  and  a  multi¬
tude  of  smaller  vessels.  The  navies  of  the  other  European
powers,  France,  Holland,  Spain,  and  Denmark,  were  almost
annihilated  during  the  same  period,  so  that  the  aggregate  of
their  losses  must  have  many  times  exceeded  that  of  Great  Bri¬
tain.  In  every  one  of  these  ships  were  batteries  of  cannon
constructed  of  iron  or  brass,  whereof  a  great  number  had  the
dates  and  places  of  their  manufacture  inscribed  upon  them  in


264


IMBEDDING  OF  THE  REMAINS  OF  MAN


[Ch.  XVI.


letters  cast  in  metal.  In  each  there  were  coins  of  copper,
silver,  and  often  many  of  gold,  capable  of  serving  as  valuable
historical  monuments  ;  in  each  were  an  infinite  variety  of  in¬
struments  of  the  arts  of  war  and  peace,  many  formed  of  mate¬
rials,  such  as  glass  and  earthenware,  capable  of  lasting  for
indefinite  ages  when  once  removed  from  the  mechanical  action
of  the  waves,  and  buried  under  a  mass  of  matter  which  may
exclude  the  corroding  action  of  sea-water.

But  the  reader  must  not  imagine  that  the  fury  of  war  is
more  conducive  than  the  peaceful  spirit  of  commercial  enter¬
prise  to  the  accumulation  of  wrecked  vessels  in  the  bed  of  the
sea.  From  an  examination  of  Lloyd’s  lists  from  the  year  1793,
to  the  commencement  of  1829,  it  has  appeared  that  the  num¬
ber  of  British  vessels  alone  lost  during  that  period  amounted,
on  an  average,  to  no  less  than  one  and  a  half  daily  *,  a  greater
number  than  we  should  have  anticipated,  although  we  learn
from  Moreau’s  tables  that  the  number  of  merchant  vessels  em¬
ployed  at  one  time  in  the  navigation  of  England  and  Scotland,
amounts  to  about  twenty  thousand,  having  one  with  another  a
mean  burden  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  tonsf.  Out  of  five
hundred  and  fifty-one  ships  of  the  royal  navy  lost  to  the  coun¬
try  during  the  period  above  mentioned,  only  one  hundred  and
sixty  were  taken  or  destroyed  by  the  enemy,  the  rest  having
either  stranded  or  foundered,  or  having  been  burnt  by  acci¬
dent  J,  a  striking  proof  that  the  dangers  of  our  naval  warfare,
however  great,  maybe  far  exceeded  by  the  storm,  the  hurri¬
cane,  the  shoal,  and  all  the  other  perils  of  the  deep.

Durable  nature  of  many  of  their  contents. — Millions  of  dol¬
lars  and  other  coins  have  been  sometimes  submerged  in  a  single
ship,  and  on  these,  when  they  happen  to  be  enveloped  in  a
matrix  capable  of  protecting  them  from  chemical  changes,
much  information  of  historical  interest  will  remain  inscribed,
and  endure  for  periods  as  indefinite  as  have  the  delicate  mark-

*  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  Captain  W.  H.  Smyth,  R.  N.,  for  this  information,
f  Caesar  Moreau’s  Tables  of  the  Navigation  of  Great  Britain.

J  I  give  these  results  on  the  authority  of  Captain  W.  H.  Smyth,  R.  N.


Ch.  XVI.]  AND  HIS  WORKS  IN  SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.  265

ings  of  zoophytes  or  lapidified  plants  in  some  of  the  ancient
secondary  rocks.  In  almost  every  large  ship,  moreover,  there
are  some  precious  stones  set  in  seals,  and  other  articles  of  use
and  ornament  composed  of  the  hardest  substances  in  nature,  on
which  letters  and  various  images  are  carved — engravings  which
they  may  retain  when  included  in  subaqueous  strata,  as  long
as  a  crystal  preserves  its  natural  form.

It  was  a  splendid  boast,  that  the  deeds  of  the  English  chi¬
valry  at  Agincourt  made  Henry’s  chronicle

— - as  rich  with  praise

As  is  the  ooze  and  bottom  of  the  deep
With  sunken  wreck  and  sumless  treasuries  ;

for  it  is  probable  that  a  greater  number  of  monuments  of  the
skill  and  industry  of  man  will,  in  the  course  of  ages,  be  col¬
lected  together  in  the  bed  of  the  ocean,  than  will  be  seen  at
one  time  on  the  surface  of  the  continents.

If  our  species  be  of  as  recent  a  date  as  we  suppose,  it  will  be
vain  to  seek  for  the  remains  of  man  and  the  works  of  his  hands
imbedded  in  submarine  strata,  except  in  those  regions  where
violent  earthquakes  are  frequent,  and  the  alterations  of  relative
level  so  great,  that  the  bed  of  the  sea  may  have  been  con¬
verted  into  land  within  the  historical  era.  We  do  not  despair
of  the  discovery  of  such  monuments  whenever  those  regions
which  have  been  peopled  by  man  from  the  earliest  ages,  and
which  are  at  the  same  time  the  principal  theatres  of  volcanic
action,  shall  be  examined  by  the  joint  skill  of  the  antiquary  and
the  geologist.

Power  of  human  remains  to  resist  decay. — There  can  be  no
doubt  that  human  remains  are  as  capable  of  resisting  decay  as
are  the  harder  parts  of  the  inferior  animals;  and  we  have
already  cited  the  remark  of  Cuvier,  that  ‘  in  ancient  fields
of  battle  the  bones  of  men  have  suffered  as  little  decomposition
as  those  of  horses  which  were  buried  in  the  same  grave  In
the  delta  of  the  Ganges  bones  of  men  have  been  found  in  dig¬
ging  a  well  at  the  depth  of  ninety  feet  f ;  but  as  that  river
*  Vol.  i.  chap.  ix.  f  Hoff.,  vol.  i.  p.  379.


266


IMBEDDING  OF  THE  REMAINS  OF  MAN


[Ch.  XVI.


frequently  shifts  its  course  and  fills  up  its  ancient  channels,  we
are  not  called  upon  to  suppose  that  these  bodies  are  of  ex¬
tremely  high  antiquity,  or  that  they  were  buried  when  that
part  of  the  surrounding  delta  where  they  occur  was  first  gained
from  the  sea.

Fossil  skeletons  of  men . — Several  skeletons  of  men,  more  or
less  mutilated,  have  been  found  in  the  West  Indies,  on  the
north-west  coast  of  the  main  land  of  Guadaloupe,  in  a  kind  of
rock  which  is  known  to  be  forming  daily,  and  which  consists
of  minute  fragments  of  shells  and  corals,  incrusted  with  a  cal¬
careous  cement  resembling  travertin,  which  has  also  bound  the
different  grains  together.  The  lens  shows  that  some  of  the
fragments  of  coral  composing  this  stone,  still  retain  the  same
red  colour  which  is  seen  in  the  reefs  of  living  coral  which  sur¬
round  the  island.  The  shells  belong  to  species  of  the  neigh¬
bouring  sea  intermixed  with  some  terrestrial  kinds  which  now
live  on  the  island,  and  among  them  is  the  Bulimus  Guada-
loupensis  of  Ferussac.  The  human  skeletons  still  retain  some
of  their  animal  matter,  and  all  their  phosphate  of  lime.  One
of  them,  of  which  the  head  is  wanting,  may  now  be  seen  in  the
British  Museum,  and  another  in  the  Royal  Cabinet  at  Paris.
According  to  Mr.  Konig,  the  rock  in  which  the  former  is  in¬
closed  is  harder  under  the  mason’s  saw  and  chisel  than  statuary
marble.  It  is  described  as  forming  a  kind  of  glacis,  probably
an  indurated  beach,  which  slants  from  the  steep  cliffs  of  the
island  to  the  sea,  and  is  nearly  all  submerged  at  high  tide.

Similar  formations  are  in  progress  in  the  whole  of  the  West-
Indian  archipelago,  and  they  have  greatly  extended  the  plain
of  Cayes  in  St.  Domingo,  where  fragments  of  vases  and  other
human  works  have  been  found  at  a  depth  of  twenty  feet.  In
digging  wells  also  near  Catania,  tools  have  been  discovered  in
a  rock  somewhat  similar.

Buried  ships,  canoes ,  and  works  of  art. — When  a  vessel  is
stranded  in  shallow  water,  it  usually  becomes  the  nucleus  of  a
sand-bank,  as  has  been  exemplified  in  several  of  our  harbours,
and  this  circumstance  tends  greatly  to  its  preservation.  About


Ch.  XVI.]


AND  WORKS  OF  ART.


267


fifty  years  ago,  a  vessel  from  Purbeck,  laden  with  three  hun¬
dred  tons  of  stone,  struck  on  a  shoal  off  the  entrance  of  Poole
harbour  and  foundered ;  the  crew  were  saved,  but  the  vessel
and  cargo  remain  to  this  day  at  the  bottom.  Since  that  period
the  shoal  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour  has  so  extended  itself
in  a  westerly  direction  towards  Peveril  Point  in  Purbeck,  that
the  navigable  channel  is  thrown  a  mile  nearer  that  Point  *.
The  cause  is  obvious ;  the  tidal  current  deposits  the  sediment
with  which  it  is  charged  around  any  object  which  checks
its  velocity.  Matter  also  drifted  along  the  bottom  is  arrested
by  any  obstacle,  and  accumulates  round  it  just  as  the  African
sand- winds,  before  described,  raise  a  small  hillock  over  the
carcasses  of  every  dead  camel  exposed  on  the  surface  of  the
desert.

We  alluded,  in  the  former  volume +,  to  an  ancient  Dutch
vessel,  discovered  in  the  deserted  channel  of  the  river  Pother,
in  Sussex,  of  which  the  oak  wood  was  much  blackened,  but  its
texture  unchanged.  The  interior  was  filled  with  fluviatile  silt,
as  was  also  the  case  in  regard  to  a  vessel  discovered  in  a  former
bed  of  the  Mersey,  and  another  disinterred  where  the  St.
Katherine  Docks  are  excavated  in  the  alluvial  plain  of  the
Thames.  In  like  manner  many  ships  have  been  found  pre¬
served  entire  in  modern  strata,  formed  by  the  silting  up  of
estuaries  along  the  southern  shores  of  the  Baltic,  especially  in
Pomerania.  Between  Bromberg  and  Nakel,  for  example,  a
vessel  and  two  anchors  in  a  very  perfect  state  were  dug  up  far
from  the  sea  J.

At  the  mouth  of  a  river  in  Nova  Scotia,  a  schooner  of  thirty-
two  tons,  Jaden  with  live  stock,  was  lying  with  her  side  to  the
tide,  when  the  bore,  or  tidal  wave,  which  rises  there  about  ten
feet  in  perpendicular  height,  rushed  into  the  estuary  and  over¬
turned  the  vessel,  so  that  it  instantly  disappeared.  After  the
tide  had  ebbed,  the  schooner  was  so  totally  buried  in  the  sand,


*  This  account  I  received  from  the  Honourable  Charles  Harris,
t  Vol.  i.  chap,  xv,  |  Hoff,  vol.i.  p.  3G8.


268


IMBEDDING  OF  WORKS  OF  ART


[Ch.  XVI.


that  the  taffrel  or  upper  rail  of  the  deck  was  alone  visible  *.
We  are  informed  by  Leigh,  that  on  draining  Martin  Meer,  a
lake  eighteen  miles  in  circumference,  in  Lancashire,  a  bed  of
marl  was  laid  dry,  wherein  no  fewer  than  eight  canoes  were
found  imbedded.  In  figure  and  dimensions  they  were  not
unlike  those  now  used  in  America.  In  a  morass  about  nine
miles  distant  from  this  Meer,  a  whetstone  and  an  axe  of  mixed
metal  were  dug  up  f .  In  Ayrshire  also,  three  canoes  were
found  in  Loch  Doon  some  few  years  ago ;  and  during  the  pre¬
sent  year  (1831)  four  others,  each  hewn  out  of  separate  oak
trees.  They  were  twenty-three  feet  in  length,  two  and  a  half
in  depth,  and  nearly  four  feet  in  breadth  at  the  stern.  In  the
mud  which  filled  one  of  them,  was  found  a  war-club  of  oak  and
a  stone  battle-axe.

Manner  in  ivhich  ships  may  he  preserved  in  a  deep  sea.-—' The
only  examples  of  buried  vessels  to  which  we  can  obtain  access,
are  in  such  situations  as  we  have  mentioned,  but  we  are  un¬
able  to  examine  those  which  have  been  subjected  to  great
pressure  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep  ocean.  It  is  extremely  pos¬
sible  that  the  submerged  wood-work  of  ships  which  have  sunk
where  the  sea  is  two  or  three  miles  deep,  has  undergone  greater
chemical  changes  in  an  equal  space  of  time,  for  the  experi¬
ments  of  Scoresby  before  mentioned  show  that  wood  may  at
certain  depths  be  impregnated  in  a  single  hour  with  salt-water,
so  that  its  specific  gravity  is  entirely  altered.

It  may  often  happen  that  hot  springs  charged  with  carbo¬
nate  of  lime,  silex  and  other  mineral  ingredients,  may  issue  at
great  depths,  in  which  case  every  pore  of  the  vegetable  tissue
may  be  injected  with  the  lapidifying  liquid,  whether  calcareous
or  siliceous,  before  the  smallest  decay  commences.  The  con¬
version  also  of  wood  into  lignite  is  probably  more  rapid
under  such  enormous  pressure.  But  the  change  of  the  timber
into  lignite  or  coal  would  not  prevent  the  original  form  of  a


*  Silliman’s  Geol.  Lectures,  p.  78,  who  cites  Penn,
f  Leigh’s  Lancashire,  p.  17,  a.  d.  1700.


Ch.  XVI.]


IN  SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.


2G9


ship  from  being  distinguished,  for  as  we  find  in  strata  of  the
carboniferous  era,  the  bark  of  the  hollow  reed-like  trees  con¬
verted  into  coal,  and  the  central  cavity  filled  with  sandstone,
so  might  we  trace  the  outline  of  a  ship  in  coal,  and  in  the  in¬
durated  mud,  sandstone,  or  limestone  filling  the  interior,  we
might  discover  instruments  of  human  art,  ballast  consisting  of
rocks  foreign  to  the  rest  of  the  stratum,  and  other  contents  of
the  ship.

Chemical  changes  in  submerged  metallic  substances. — Many
of  the  metallic  substances  which  fall  into  the  waters,  probably
lose,  in  the  course  of  ages,  the  forms  artificially  imparted  to
them  ;  but  under  many  circumstances  these  may  be  preserved
for  indefinite  periods.  The  cannon  inclosed  in  a  calcareous
rock,  drawn  up  from  the  delta  of  the  Rhone,  which  is  now  in
the  museum  at  Montpellier,  might  probably  have  endured
as  long  as  the  calcareous  matrix  ;  but  even  if  the  metallic
matter  had  been  removed  and  had  entered  into  new  combina¬
tions,  still  a  mould  of  its  original  shape  would  have  been  left,
corresponding  to  those  impressions  of  shells  which  we  see
in  rocks,  from  which  all  the  carbonate  of  lime  has  been  sub¬
tracted.  About  the  year  1776,  says  Mr.  King,  some  fisher¬
men  sweeping  for  anchors  in  the  Gull  stream,  (a  part  of  the
sea  near  the  Downs,)  drew  up  a  very  curious  old  swivel  gun,
near  eight  feet  in  length.  The  barrel,  which  was  about  five
feet  long,  was  of  brass ;  but  the  handle  by  which  it  was  tra¬
versed,  was  about  three  feet  in  length,  and  the  swivel  and  pivot
on  which  it  turned  were  of  iron.  Around  these  latter  were
formed  incrustations  of  sand  converted  into  a  kind  of  stone,  of
an  exceeding  strong  texture  and  firmness ;  whereas  round  the
barrel  of  the  gun,  except  where  it  was  near  adjoining  to  the
iron,  there  was  no  such  incrustation,  the  greater  part  of  it
being  clean  and  in  good  condition,  just  as  if  it  had  still  con¬
tinued  in  use.  In  the  incrusting  stone,  adhering  to  it  on  the
outside,  were  a  number  of  shells  and  corallines,  f  just  as  they
are  often  found  in  a  fossil  state.’  These  were  all  so  strongly


270


IMBEDDING  OF  WORKS  OF  ART


[Ch.  XVI.


attached,  that  it  required  as  much  force  to  separate  them  from
the  matrix,  ‘  as  to  break  a  fragment  off  any  hard  rock

In  the  year  1745,  continues  the  same  writer,  the  Fox  man-
of-war  was  stranded  on  the  coast  of  East  Lothian  and  went  to
pieces.  About  thirty-three  years  afterwards  a  violent  storm
laid  bare  a  part  of  the  wreck,  and  threw  up  near  the  place
several  masses  c  consisting  of  iron,  ropes,  and  balls,’  covered
over  with  ochreous  sand  concreted  and  hardened  into  a  kind
of  stone.  The  substance  of  the  rope  was  very  little  altered.
The  consolidated  sand  retained  perfect  impressions  of  parts  of
an  iron  ring,  ‘  just  in  the  same  manner  as  impressions  of  ex¬
traneous  fossil  bodies  are  found  in  various  kinds  of  strata  f .’

After  a  storm  in  the  year  1824,  which  occasioned  a  consider¬
able  shifting  of  the  sands  near  St.  Andrew’s  in  Scotland,  a  gun
barrel  of  ancient  construction  was  found,  which  is  conjectured
to  have  belonged  to  one  of  the  wrecked  vessels  of  the  Spanish
armada.  It  is  now  in  the  museum  of  the  Antiquarian  Society
of  Scotland,  and  is  encrusted  over  by  a  thin  coating  of  sand,
the  grains  of  which  are  cemented  by  brown  ferruginous  matter.
Attached  to  this  coating  are  fragments  of  various  shells,  as  of
the  common  cardium,  mya,  & c.

Many  other  examples  are  recorded  of  iron  instruments  taken
up  from  the  bed  of  the  sea  near  the  British  coasts,  incased  by  a
thick  coating  of  conglomerate,  consisting  of  pebbles  and  sand,
cemented  by  oxide  of  iron.

Dr.  Davy  describes  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  a
bronze  helmet  of  the  antique  Grecian  form,  taken  up  in  1825,
from  a  shallow  part  of  the  sea,  between  the  citadel  of  Corfu
and  the  village  of  Castrades.  Both  the  interior  and  exterior
of  the  helmet  were  partially  encrusted  with  shells,  and  a  deposit
of  carbonate  of  lime.  The  surface  generally,  both  under  the
incrustation  and  where  freed  from  it,  was  of  a  variegated  colour,
mottled  with  spots  of  green,  dirty  white,  and  red.  On  minute

*  Phil.  Trans.  1779.  f  Ibid.,  vol.  lxix,  1779.

|  1826,  part  ii.  p.  55.


Ch.  XVI.]


IN  SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.


271


inspection  with  a  lens,  the  green  and  red  patches  proved  to
consist  of  crystals  of  the  red  oxide  and  carbonate  of  copper,
and  the  dirty  white  chiefly  of  oxide  of  tin.

The  mineralizing  process,  says  Dr.  Davy,  which  has  pro¬
duced  these  new  combinations,  has  in  general  penetrated  very
little  into  the  substance  of  the  helmet.  The  incrustation  and
rust  removed,  the  metal  is  found  bright  beneath,  in  some
places  considerably  corroded  in  others  very  slightly.  It  proves
on  analysis  to  be  copper  alloyed  with  18.5  per  cent,  of  tin.
Its  colour  is  that  of  our  common  brass,  and  it  possesses  a
considerable  degree  of  flexibility  : —

f  It  is  a  curious  question/  he  adds,  4  how  the  crystals  were
formed  in  the  helmet,  and  on  the  adhering  calcareous  deposit.
There  being  no  reason  to  suppose  deposition  from  solution,  are
we  not  under  the  necessity  of  inferring,  that  the  mineralizing
process  depends  on  a  small  motion  and  separation  of  the  par¬
ticles  of  the  original  compound  ?  This  motion  may  have  been
due  to  the  operation  of  electro-chemical  powers  which  may
have  separated  the  different  metals  of  the  alloy.

Effects  of  the  subsidence  of  land  in  imbedding  cities  and  forests

in  subaqueous  strata .

We  have  hitherto  considered  the  transportation  of  plants
and  animals  from  the  land  by  aqueous  agents,  and  their  inhu¬
mation  in  lacustrine  or  submarine  deposits,  and  we  may  now
inquire  what  tendency  the  subsidence  of  tracts  of  land  by
earthquakes  may  have  to  produce  analogous  effects.  Several
examples  of  the  sinking  down  of  buildings  and  portions  of
towns  near  the  shore  to  various  depths  beneath  the  level  of
the  sea  during  subterranean  movements,  were  enumerated  in
a  former  volume,  when  we  treated  of  the  changes  brought
about  by  inorganic  causes.  The  events  alluded  to  were  com¬
prised  within  a  brief  portion  of  the  historical  period,  and  con¬
fined  to  a  small  number  of  the  regions  of  active  volcanos.
Yet  these  authentic  facts,  relating  merely  to  the  last  century
and  a  half,  gave  indications  of  considerable  change  which  must


272


CITIES  SUBMERGED  AND  IMBEDDED


[Ch.  XVI.


have  taken  place  in  the  physical  geography  of  the  globe.  If
daring  the  earthquake  of  Jamaica  in  1692,  some  of  the  houses
in  Port  Royal  subsided,  together  with  the  ground  they  stood
upon,  to  the  depth  of  twenty-four,  thirty-six,  and  forty-eight
feet  under  water,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  was  the  only
spot  throughout  the  whole  range  of  the  coasts  of  that  island
or  the  bed  of  the  surrounding  sea  which  suffered  similar  de¬
pressions.  If  the  quay  at  Lisbon  sank  at  once  to  the  depth  of
six  hundred  feet  in  1755,  we  must  not  imagine  that  this  was
the  only  point  on  the  shores  of  the  peninsula  where  similar
phenomena  might  have  been  witnessed.

If  during  the  short  period  since  South  America  has  been
colonized  by  European^we  have  proof  of  alterations  of  level  at
the  three  principal  ports  on  the  western  shores,  Callao,  Val¬
paraiso,  and  Conception  *,  we  cannot  for  a  moment  suspect
that  these  cities  so  distant  from  each  other  have  been  selected
as  the  peculiar  points  where  the  desolating  power  of  the  earth¬
quake  has  expended  its  chief  fury.  4  It  would  be  a  knowing
arrow  that  could  choose  out  the  brave  men  from  the  cowards/
retorted  the  young  Spartan,  when  asked  if  his  comrades  who
had  fallen  on  the  field  of  battle  were  braver  than  he  and  his
fellow  prisoners  ;  we  might  in  the  same  manner  remark  that  a
geologist  must  attribute  no  small  discrimination  and  malignity
to  the  subterranean  force,  if  he  should  suppose  it  to  spare  habi¬
tually  a  line  of  coast  many  thousand  miles  in  length,  with  the
exception  of  those  few  spots  where  populous  towns  have  been
erected.  If  then  we  consider  how  small  is  the  area  occupied
by  the  sea-ports  of  this  disturbed  region, — points  where  alone
each  slight  change  of  the  relative  level  of  the  sea  and  land  can
be  recognized,  and  reflect  on  the  proofs  in  our  possession  of  the
local  revolutions  that  have  happened  on  the  site  of  each  port,
within  the  last  century  and  a  half,  our  conceptions  must  be
greatly  exalted  respecting  the  magnitude  of  the  alterations
which  the  Andes  may  have  undergone  even  in  the  course  of
the  last  six  thousand  years.

*  See  vol.  i.  ante,  chaps,  xxiii.  and  xxv.


Ch.  XVI.]


IN  SUBAQUEOUS  DEPOSITS.


273


Cufch  earthquake. — We  cannot  better  illustrate  the  manner
in  which  a  large  extent  of  surface  may  be  submerged,  so  that
the  terrestrial  plants  and  animals  may  become  imbedded  in
subaqueous  strata,  than  by  referring  to  the  earthquake  of
Cutch,  in  1819,  alluded  to  by  us  in  a  former  volume  *.  It  is
stated  that,  for  some  years  after  that  earthquake,  the  withered
tamarisks  and  other  shrubs  protruded  their  tops  above  the
waves,  in  parts  of  the  lagoon  which  was  formed  by  subsi¬
dence  on  the  site  of  the  village  of  Sindree  and  its  environs  ;  but
after  the  flood  of  1826  they  were  seen  no  longer.  Every  geo¬
logist  will  at  once  perceive  that  forests  sunk  by  such  subter¬
ranean  movements,  may  become  imbedded  in  subaqueous
deposits  both  fluviatile  and  marine,  and  the  trees  may  still
remain  erect,  or  sometimes  the  roots  and  part  of  the  trunks  may
continue  in  their  original  position,  while  the  current  may  have
broken  off,  or  levelled  with  the  ground,  their  upper  stems  and
branches.

Submarine  forests. — But  although  a  certain  class  of  geolo¬
gical  phenomena  may  be  referred  to  the  repetition  of  such
catastrophes,  we  must  hesitate  before  we  call  in  to  our  aid  the
action  of  earthquakes,  to  explain  what  have  been  termed  sub¬
marine  forests,  observed  at  various  points  around  the  shores  of
Great  Britain.  We  have  already  hinted  that  the  explanation
of  some  of  these  may  be  sought  in  the  encroachments  of  the
sea,  in  estuaries,  and  the  varying  level  of  the  tides,  at  dis¬
tant  periods  on  the  same  parts  of  our  coast  j.  After  examining,
in  1829,  the  so-called  submarine  forest  of  Happisborough  in
Norfolk,  I  found  that  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  tertiary  lig¬
nite  of  the  f  Crag  ’  period  ;  which  becomes  exposed  in  the  bed
of  the  sea  as  soon  as  the  waves  sweep  away  the  superincumbent
strata  of  blueish  clay.  So  great  has  been  the  advance  of  the
sea  upon  our  eastern  shores  within  the  last  eight  centuries,  that
whenever  we  find  a  mass  of  submerged  timber  near  the  sea
side,  or  at  the  foot  of  the  existing  cliffs  which  we  cannot  sup¬
pose  to  be  a  mere  accumulation  of  drift  vegetable  matter,  we
*  Vol.  i.  chap,  xxiii.  t  Ibid.,  chap.  xv.


VOL.  II.


T


274


SUBMARINE  FOREST.


[Ch.  XVI.


should  endeavour  to  find  a  solution  of  the  problem,  by  reference
to  any  cause  rather  than  an  earthquake.  For  we  can  scarcely
doubt  that  the  present  outline  of  our  coast,  the  shape  of  its
estuaries,  and  the  formation  of  its  cliffs  are  of  very  modern
date,  probably  within  the  human  era,  whereas  we  have  no  rea¬
son  whatever  to  imagine  that  this  part  of  Europe  has  been
agitated  by  subterranean  convulsions,  capable  of  altering  the
relative  level  of  land  and  sea,  at  so  extremely  recent  a  period.

Mr.  Charles  Harris  discovered  lately  evident  traces  of  a
fir-wood,  beneath  the  mean  level  of  the  sea,  at  Bournmouth
in  Hampshire,  the  formation  having  been  laid  open  during
a  low  spring  tide.  It  is  situated  between  the  beach  and  a
bar  of  sand  about  two  hundred  yards  off,  and  extends  fifty
yards  along  the  shore,  cropping  out  from  beneath  the  sand
and  shingle.  It  also  lies  in  the  direct  line  of  the  Bournmouth
Valley,  from  the  termination  of  which  it  is  separated  by  two
hundred  yards  of  shingle  and  drift-sand.  Down  the  valley
flows  a  large  brook,  traversing  near  its  mouth  a  considerable
tract  of  rough,  boggy,  and  heathy  ground,  which  produces  a
few  birch-trees,  and  a  great  abundance  of  the  Myrica  gale.  On
either  side  of  the  valley  are  low  cliffs  of  barren  sandstone  and
gravel.  The  formation  itself  consists  of  a  stratum  of  soft  peat,
in  which  are  implanted  several  large  stumps  of  fir,  from  one  to
two  feet  in  height,  the  roots  and  bases  of  which  still  retain
their  bark.  The  sap-wood  of  these  is  soft  and  spongy,  but
perfectly  white,  and  exhibiting  its  original  character.  The
heart-wood  is  exceedingly  hard  and  tough,  and  in  the  larger
stumps,  of  a  greenish  hue  like  asbestos,  saturated  with  moisture
and  exhaling  a  strong  odour  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  This
odour,  and  the  greenish  colour  are  apparently  dependent  on  an
incipient  formation  of  iron  pyrites,  which  is  proceeding  with
some  rapidity  in  the  peaty  stratum  beneath.  The  pyrites
occurs  in  small  concretions,  enclosing  both  roots  and  fibres.
In  some  instances  it  may  be  seen  filling  up  the  hollow  stems  of
grass,  in  others  it  has  penetrated  to  the  heart  of  pieces  of  fir-
wood,  two  or  three  inches  in  diameter,  following  the  grain  of


Ch.  XVI.]


SUBMARINE  FOREST.


275


the  wood  and  often  supplying  its  place,  so  as  not  to  be  easily
perceivable  till  broken.

Seventy-six  rings  of  annual  growth  were  counted  in  a  trans¬
verse  section  of  one  of  the  trees,  which  was  fourteen  inches  in
diameter.  Besides  the  stumps  and  roots  of  fir,  rushes,  and
other  compressed  vegetable  matter  which  occur  in  the  peat,
pieces  of  alder  and  birch  are  found.  The  peat  in  the  centre
of  the  formation  was  pierced  two  feet  and  a  half,  without  being
passed  through  ;  towards  its  edges,  however,  it  is  seen  resting
on  a  stratum  of  blueish  pebbles,  clay,  and  sand,  which  crops
out  also  on  its  seaward  side,  and  is  precisely  similar  to  the  sand
and  pebbles  that  occur  on  the  adjoining  heaths.  The  whole
formation  was  known  to  exist  forty  years  since,  at  which  period
it  was  in  the  same  situation,  and  presented  the  same  appear¬
ance  as  at  present.

Origin  of  a  submarine  forest. — Now  as  the  sea  is  encroach¬
ing  on  this  shore,  we  may  suppose  that  at  some  former  period
the  Bourne  Valley  extended  far  lower,  and  that  its  extremity
consisted,  as  at  present,  of  rough  and  boggy  ground,  partly
clothed  with  fir-trees.  It  is  also  probable,  that  the  whole  of
this  rested  on  the  sand  and  pebbles  already  mentioned,  and
that  the  sea,  in  its  progressive  encroachments,  eventually  laid
bare,  at  low  water,  the  foundations  of  this  marshy  ground ;  in
this  case,  much  of  the  sand,  of  which  these  foundations  were
composed,  might  have  been  washed  out  by  the  rapid  descent
of  the  fresh  water  through  them,  at  the  fall  of  the  tide.  The
superstratum  of  vegetable  matter  being  matted  and  bound
together  by  the  roots  of  trees,  would  not  be  washed  away,  but
miffht  be  undermined,  and  thus  sink  down  below  the  level  of
the  sea,  until  the  waves  washed  sand  and  shingle  over  it.  This
operation  may  also  have  been  assisted  by  the  occasional  dam¬
ming  up  of  the  brook  by  the  sand  and  shingle  thrown  up
during  storms.  Mr.  Harris  informs  me  that  such  an  obstruction
actually  occurred  in  the  years  1818  and  1824,  and  the  bed  of  the
brook  was  completely  obliterated.  On  these  occasions  an  arti¬
ficial  channel  was  immediately  cut ;  had  this,  however,  not  been

T  2


276


SUBMERGED  CITIES.


[Ch.  XVI.


done,  the  lower  part  of  the  valley  would  have  been  flooded;  and
by  this  means  the  under  strata  would  have  become  more  saturated
with  water,  and  the  increased  pressure  would  have  augmented
the  tendency  of  the  water  to  escape  through  them.  In  con¬
firmation  of  this  hypothesis,  we  may  observe,  that  small  streams
of  fresh  water  often  pass  under  the  sands  of  the  sea-beach,  so
that  they  may  be  crossed  dry-shod,  whilst  the  water,  where  it
issues  again,  may  be  seen  to  carry  out  sand  and  pebbles  with
great  rapidity.  That  the  above-described  formation  should  have
slipped  from  the  adjoining  cliffs  is  highly  improbable,  as  all  its
parts  would  indicate  it  to  lie  in  situ,  especially  the  flags  and
rushes,  which  could  only  have  grown  in  the  bottom  of  the  val¬
ley,  where  they  were  freely  supplied  with  moisture.

Buildings  how  preserved  under  water.-—  Some  of  the  build¬
ings  which  have  at  different  times  subsided  beneath  the  level
of  the  sea,  have  been  immediately  covered  up  to  a  certain  ex¬
tent  with  strata  of  volcanic  matter  showered  down  upon  them.
Such  was  the  case  at  Tomboro  in  Sumbawa,  in  the  present
century,  and  at  the  site  of  the  Temple  of  Serapis,  in  the
environs  of  Puzzuoli,  probably  in  the  12th  century.  The
entrance  of  a  river  charged  with  sediment  in  the  vicinity,  may
still  more  frequently  occasion  the  rapid  envelopment  of  build¬
ings  in  regularly  stratified  formations.  But  if  no  foreign
matter  be  introduced,  the  buildings  when  once  removed  to  a
depth  where  the  action  of  the  waves  is  insensible,  and  where
no  great  current  happens  to  flow,  may  last  for  indefinite
periods,  and  be  as  durable  as  the  floor  of  the  ocean  itself,
which  may  often  be  composed  of  the  very  same  materials.
There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  tradition  mentioned  by  the
classic  writers,  that  the  submerged  Grecian  towns  of  Bura  and
Helice  were  seen  under  water  ;  and  I  am  informed  by  an  eye¬
witness  that  eighty- eight  years  after  the  convulsion  of  1692,
the  houses  of  Port  Boyal  were  still  visible  at  the  bottom  of
the  sea  *.

*  Admiral  Sir  Charles  Hamilton  frequently  saw  the  submerged  houses  of
Port  Royal  in  the  year  1780,  in  that  part  of  the  harbour  which  lies  between  the


Ch.  XVI.]


RECENT  ORIGIN  OF  MAN.


277


Berkley’s  arguments  for  the  recent  date  of  the  creation  of  man.
— We  cannot  conclude  this  chapter  without  recalling  to  the
reader’s  mind  a  memorable  passage  written  by  Berkley  a  cen¬
tury  ago,  in  which  he  inferred,  on  grounds  which  may  be
termed  strictly  geological,  the  recent  date  of  the  creation  of
man.  f  To  any  one,’  says  he,  f  who  considers  that  on  digging
into  the  earth  such  quantities  of  shells,  and  in  some  places
bones  and  horns  of  animals  are  found  sound  and  entire,  after
having  lain  there  in  all  probability  some  thousands  of  years;
it  should  seem  probable  that  guns,  medals,  and  implements  in
metal  or  stone  might  have  lasted  entire,  buried  under  ground
forty  or  fifty  thousand  years  if  the  world  had  been  so  old.
How  comes  it  then  to  pass  that  no  remains  are  found,  no  anti¬
quities  of  those  numerous  ages  preceding  the  Scripture  accounts
of  time  ;  that  no  fragments  of  buildings,  no  public  monuments,
no  intaglias,  cameos,  statues,  basso-relievos,  medals,  inscrip¬
tions,  utensils,  or  artificial  works  of  any  kind  are  ever  disco¬
vered,  which  may  bear  testimony  to  the  existence  of  those
mighty  empires,  those  successions  of  monarchs,  heroes,  and
demi-gods  for  so  many  thousand  years  ?  Let  us  look  forward
and  suppose  ten  or  twenty  thousand  years  to  come,  during
which  time  we  will  suppose  that  plagues,  famine,  wars,  and
earthquakes  shall  have  made  great  havoc  in  the  world,  is  it  not
highly  probable  that  at  the  end  of  such  a  period,  pillars,  vases,
and  statues  now  in  being  of  granite,  or  porphyry,  or  jasper,
(stones  of  such  hardness  as  we  know  them  to  have  lasted  two
thousand  years  above  ground,  without  any  considerable  altera¬
tion)  would  bear  record  of  these  and  past  ages?  Or  that  some
of  our  current  coins  might  then  be  dug  up,  or  old  walls  and
the  foundations  of  buildings  show  themselves,  as  well  as  the
shells  and  stones  of  the  primeval  world ,  which  are  preserved
down  to  our  times

Concluding  remarks . — That  many  signs  of  the  agency  of

town  and  the  usual  anchorage  of  men-of-war.  Bryan  Edwards  also  says  in  his
History  of  the  West  Indies,  (vol.  i.  p.  235,  Oct.  ed.  3  vols.  1801,)  that  in  1793
the  ruins  were  visible  in  clear  weather  from  the  boats  which  sailed  over  them.

*  Alciphron,  or  the  Minute  Philosopher,  vol.  ii.  pp.  84,  85.  1732,


278


RECENT  ORIGIN  OF  MAN.


[Ch.  XVI,


man  would  have  lasted  at  least  as  long  as  4  the  shells  of  the
primeval  world,5  had  our  race  been  so  ancient,  we  are  as  fully
persuaded  as  Berkley  ;  and  we  anticipate  with  confidence  that
many  edifices  and  implements  of  human  workmanship,  and  the
skeletons  of  men,  and  casts  of  the  human  form,  will  continue
to  exist  when  a  great  part  of  the  present  mountains,  continents,
and  seas  have  disappeared.  Assuming  the  future  duration  of
the  planet  to  be  indefinitely  protracted,  we  can  foresee  no  limit
to  the  perpetuation  of  some  of  the  memorials  of  man,  which
are  continually  entombed  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  or  in  the
bed  of  the  ocean,  unless  we  carry  forward  our  views  to  a  period
sufficient  to  allow  the  various  causes  of  change  both  igneous
and  aqueous,  to  remodel  more  than  once  the  entire  crust  of  the
earth.  One  complete  revolution  will  be  inadequate  to  efface
every  monument  of  our  existence,  for  many  works  of  art  might
enter  again  and  again  into  the  formation  of  successive  eras,  and
escape  obliteration  even  though  the  very  rocks  in  which  they
had  been  for  ages  imbedded  were  destroyed,  just  as  pebbles
included  in  the  conglomerates  of  one  epoch  often  contain  the
organized  remains  of  beings  which  flourished  during  a  prior  era.

Yet  it  is  no  less  true,  as  a  late  distinguished  philosopher
has  declared,  4  that  none  of  the  works  of  a  mortal  being  can  be
eternal  *. 5  They  are  in  the  first  place  wrested  from  the  hands
of  man,  and  lost  as  far  as  regards  their  subserviency  to  his  use,
by  the  instrumentality  of  those  very  causes  which  place  them
in  situations  where  they  are  enabled  to  endure  for  indefinite
periods.  And  even  when  they  have  been  included  in  rocky
strata,  when  they  have  been  made  to  enter  as  it  were  into
the  solid  framework  of  the  globe  itself,  they  must  nevertheless
eventually  perish,  for  every  year  some  portion  of  the  earth’s
crust  is  shattered  by  earthquakes  or  melted  by  volcanic  fire,
or  ground  to  dust  by  the  moving  waters  on  the  surface.  4  The
river  of  Lethe,’  as  Bacon  eloquently  remarks,  4  runneth  as  well
above  ground  as  below  -fv 5

*  Davy,  Consolations  in  Travel,  p.  276.

f  Essay  on  the  Vicissitude  of  Things.


CHAPTER  XVII.


Imbedding  of  aquatic  species  in  subaqueous  strata— Inhumation  of  fresh-water
plants  and  animals — Shell  marl — Fossilized  seed-vessels  and  stems  of  Chara
— Recent  deposits  in  the  American  lakes — Fresh-water  species  drifted  into
seas  and  estuaries — Lewes  levels — Alternations  of  marine  and  fresh-water
strata,  how  caused  —  Imbedding  of  marine  plants  and  animals — Cetacea
stranded  on  our  shores — Their  remains  should  be  more  conspicuous  in  marine
alluvium  than  the  bones  of  land  quadrupeds — Liability  of  littoral  and  estuary
testacea  to  be  swept  into  the  deep  sea — Effects  of  a  storm  in  the  Firth  of  Forth
— Burrowing  shells  secured  from  the  ordinary  action  of  waves  and  currents—
Living  testacea  found  at  considerable  depths.

IMBEDDING  OF  AQUATIC  SPECIES  IN  SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.

We  have  hitherto  treated  of  the  imbedding  of  terrestrial  plants
and  animals,  and  of  human  remains,  in  the  deposits  that  are
now  forming  beneath  the  waters,  and  we  come  next  to  consider
in  what  manner  aquatic  species  may  be  entombed  in  strata
formed  in  their  own  element.

Ft esh-iv at er  plants  and  animals. — The  remains  of  species
belonging  to  those  genera  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  king¬
doms  which  are  more  or  less  exclusively  confined  to  fresh¬
water  are  for  the  most  part  preserved  in  the  beds  of  lakes  or
estuaries,  but  they  are  oftentimes  swept  down  by  rivers  into
the  sea,  and  there  intermingled  with  the  exuvise  of  marine
races.  The  phenomena  attending  their  inhumation  in  lacus¬
trine  deposits  may  be  sometimes  revealed  to  our  observation
by  the  drainage  of  small  lakes,  such  as  are  those  in  Scotland,
which  have  been  laid  dry  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  shell  marl
for  agricultural  uses.

In  these  recent  formations,  as  seen  in  Forfarshire,  two  or
three  beds  of  calcareous  marl  are  sometimes  observed  separated
from  each  other  by  layers  of  drift  peat,  sand,  or  fissile  clay.
The  marl  often  consists  almost  entirely  of  an  aggregate  of
shells  of  the  genera  limnea,  planorbis,  valvata,  and  cyclas,  with
some  few  others,  species  of  all  which  now  exist  in  Scotland.


280


IMBEDDING  OF  FRESH-WATER  PLANTS  [Cli.  XVII.


A  considerable  proportion  of  the  testacea  appear  to  have  died
very  young,  and  few  of  the  shells  are  of  a  size  which  indicates
their  having  attained  a  state  of  maturity.  The  shells  are
sometimes  entirely  decomposed,  forming  a  pulverulent  marl ;
sometimes  they  are  in  a  state  of  good  preservation.  They  are
frequently  intermixed  with  stems  of  charm  and  other  aquatic
vegetables,  which  are  matted  together  and  compressed,  form¬
ing  laminae  often  as  thin  as  paper.

Fossilized  seed-vessels  and  stems  of  Char  a. — As  the  chara
is  an  aquatic  plant,  which  occurs  frequently  fossil  in  formations
of  different  eras,  and  is  often  of  much  importance  to  the  geolo¬
gist  in  characterizing  entire  groups  of  strata,  we  shall  describe
the  manner  in  which  the  recent  species  have  been  found  in  a
petrified  state.  They  occur  in  one  of  the  lakes  of  Forfarshire,
inclosed  in  nodules,  and  sometimes  in  a  continuous  stratum  of
a  kind  of  travertin.

The  seed-vessel  of  these  plants  is  remarkably  tough  and
No.  2.


Seed-vessel  of  Chara  hispida.

a ,  Part  of  the  stem  with  the  seed-vessel  attached.  Magnified.

b,  Natural  size  of  the  seed-vessel.

c,  Integument  of  the  Gyrogonite,  or  petrified  seed-vessel  of  Chara  hispida,  found

in  the  Scotch  marl-lakes.  Magnified.

d,  Section  showing  the  nut  within  the  integument.

c,  Lower  end  of  the  integument  to  which  the  stem  was  attached.


Ch.  XVII.]


IN  SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.


281


hard,  and  consists  of  a  membranous  nut  covered  by  an  integu¬
ment  (fig.  d,  diagram  No.  2),  both  of  which  are  spirally  striated
or  ribbed.  The  integument  is  composed  of  five  spiral  valves,
of  a  quadrangular  form  (fig.  g).  In  Charci  hispida,  which
abounds  in  the  lakes  of  Forfarshire,  and  which  has  become
fossil  in  the  Bakie  Loch,  each  of  the  spiral  valves  of  the  seed-
vessel  turns  rather  more  than  twice  round  the  circumference,
the  whole  together  making  between  ten  and  eleven  rings.  The
number  of  these  rings  differs  greatly  in  different  species,  but  in
the  same  appears  to  be  very  constant.

The  stems  of  charse  occur  fossil  in  the  Scotch  marl  in  great
abundance.  In  some  species,  as  in  Cham  hispida ,  the  plant
when  living  contains  so  much  carbonate  of  lime  in  its  vege¬
table  organization,  independently  of  calcareous  incrustation,
that  it  effervesces  strongly  with  acids  when  dried.  The  stems
of  Cham  hispida  are  longitudinally  striated,  with  a  tendency


No.  3.


a,  Stem  and  branches  of  the  natural  size.

b,  Section  of  the  stem  magnified.

c,  Showing  the  central  tube  surrounded  by  two  rings  of  smaller  tubes.


282


IMBEDDING  OF  FRESH-WATER  SPECIES  [Ch.  XVII.


to  be  spiral.  These  striae,  as  appears  to  be  the  case  with  all
charae,  turn  always  like  the  worm  of  a  screw  from  right  to  left,
while  those  of  the  seed-vessel  wind  round  in  a  contrary  direc¬
tion.  A  cross  section  of  the  stem  exhibits  a  curious  structure,
for  it  is  composed  of  a  large  tube  surrounded  by  smaller  tubes
(diagram  No.  3,  figs,  h,  c),  as  is  seen  in  some  extinct,  as  well
as  recent  species.  In  the  stems  of  several  species,  however,
there  is  only  a  single  tube  *.

The  valves  of  a  small  animal  called  cypris  (C.  ornata  Lam')
occur  completely  fossilized  like  the  stems  of  charm,  in  the
Scotch  travertin  above  mentioned.  This  cypris  inhabits  the
lakes  and  ponds  of  England,  where  it  is  not  uncommon.  Spe¬
cies  of  the  same  genus  also  occur  abundantly  in  ancient  fresh¬
water  formations.

Recent  deposits  in  N orth  American  lakes.-—  The  recent  strata
of  lacustrine  origin  above  alluded  to  are  of  very  small  extent,
but  analogous  deposits  on  the  grandest  scale  have  been  formed
in  the  great  lakes  of  North  America.  By  the  subsidence  of
the  waters  of  Lakes  Superior  and  Huron,  occasioned  probably
by  the  partial  destruction  of  their  barriers  at  some  unknown
period,  beds  of  sand  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  thick  are  ex¬
posed,  below  which  are  seen  beds  of  clay,  inclosing  shells  of  the
very  species  which  now  inhabit  the  lake  f .

But  no  careful  examination  appears  as  yet  to  have  been
made  of  recent  fresh- water  formations  within  the  tropics,  where
the  waters  teem  with  life,  and  where  in  the  bed  of  a  newly-
drained  lake  the  remains  of  the  alligator,  crocodile,  tortoise,
and  perhaps  some  large  fish,  might  be  discovered.

Imbedding  of  Fresh- water  Species  in  Estuary  and  Marine

Deposits .

In  Lewes  levels. — We  have  sometimes  an  opportunity  of
examining  the  deposits  which  within  the  historical  period  have

514  Geol.  Trans.,  vol.  ii.,  second  series,  p.  73.  On  Fresh-water  Marl,  &c.  By
C.  Lyell,  Esq.

-j-  Dr.  Bigsby,  Journal  of  Science,  &c.  No.  xxxvii.  pp.  262,  263.


Ch.  XVII.]


IN  SUBAQUEOUS  STRATA.


283


silted  up  some  of  our  estuaries ;  and  excavations  made  for
wells  and  other  purposes,  where  the  sea  has  been  finally  ex¬
cluded,  enable  us  to  observe  the  state  of  the  organic  remains  in
these  tracts.  The  valley  of  the  Ouse  between  Newhaven  and
Lewes,  is  one  of  several  estuaries  from  which  the  sea  has  re¬
tired  within  the  last  seven  or  eight  centuries ;  and  here  it
appears,  from  the  researches  of  Mr.  Mantell,  that  strata  of
thirty  feet  and  upwards  in  thickness  have  accumulated.  At
the  top,  beneath  the  vegetable  soil,  is  a  bed  of  peat  about  five
feet  thick,  inclosing  many  trunks  of  trees.  Next  below  is  a
stratum  of  blue  clay  containing  fresh -water  shells  of  about
nine  species,  such  as  now  inhabit  the  district.  Intermixed  with
these  was  observed  the  skeleton  of  a  deer.  Lower  down,  the
layers  of  blue  clay  contain,  with  the  above-mentioned  fresh¬
water  shells,  several  marine  species  well  known  on  our  coast.
In  the  lowest  beds,  often  at  the  depth  of  thirty-six  feet,  these
marine  testacea  occur  without  the  slightest  intermixture  of  flu-
viatile  species,  and  amongst  them  the  skull  of  the  narwal,  or
sea-unicorn  ( Monodon  monoceros ),  has  been  detected.  Under¬
neath  all  these  deposits  is  a  bed  of  pipe-clay,  derived  from  the
subjacent  chalk  *.

If  we  had  no  historical  information  respecting  the  former
existence  of  an  inlet  of  the  sea  in  this  valley,  and  of  its  gradual
obliteration,  the  inspection  of  the  section  above  described
would  show,  as  clearly  as  a  written  chronicle,  the  following
sequence  of  events.  First,  there  was  a  salt-water  estuary
peopled  for  many  years  by  species  of  marine  testacea  iden¬
tical  with  those  now  living,  and  into  which  some  of  the  larger
cetacea  occasionally  entered.  Secondly,  the  inlet  grew  shal¬
lower,  and  the  water  became  brackish,  or  alternately  salt  and
fresh,  so  that  the  remains  of  fresh-water  and  marine  shells  were
mingled  in  the  blue  argillaceous  sediment  of  its  bottom.
Thirdly,  the  shoaling  continued  until  the  river-water  prevailed,
so  that  it  was  no  longer  habitable  by  marine  testacea,  but  fitted

*  Mantell,  Geol.  of  Sussex,  p.  285j  also  Catalogue  of  Org.  Rem.,  Geol.  Trans,
v.  in.  part  i.  p.  201.  Second  Series.


284  IMBEDDING  OF  FRESH-WATER  SPECIES.  [Ch.  XVII.

only  for  the  abode  of  fluviatile  species  and  aquatic  insects.
Fourthly,  a  peaty  swamp  or  morass  was  formed  where  some
trees  grew,  or  perhaps  were  drifted  during  floods,  and  where
terrestrial  quadrupeds  were  mired.  Finally,  the  soil  being
only  flooded  by  the  river  at  distant  intervals,  became  a  verdant
meadow.

In  delta  of  Ganges. — We  have  stated,  when  speaking  of  the
delta  of  the  Ganges,  that  on  the  sea-coast  there  are  eight  great
openings,  each  of  which  has  evidently,  at  some  ancient  periods,
served  in  its  turn  as  the  principal  channel  of  discharge.  Now,
as  the  base  of  the  delta  is  two  hundred  miles  in  length,  it  must
happen  that,  as  often  as  the  great  volume  of  river-water  is
thrown  in  by  a  new  mouth,  the  waters  of  the  sea  will  at  one
point  be  converted  from  salt  to  fresh,  and  at  another  from
fresh  to  salt ;  for,  with  the  exception  of  those  parts  where
the  principal  discharge  takes  place,  the  salt-water  not  only
washes  the  base  of  the  delta,  but  enters  far  into  every  creek
and  lagoon.  It  is  evident  then  that  repeated  alternations
of  beds  containing  fresh-water  shells,  with  others  filled  with
corals  and  marine  exuvias,  may  here  be  formed,  and  each  series
may  be  of  great  thickness,  as  the  sea  on  which  the  Gangetic
delta  gains  is  of  considerable  depth,  and  intervals  of  centuries
elapse  between  each  alteration  in  the  course  of  the  principal
stream.

In  delta  of  Indus. — Analogous  phenomena  must  sometimes
be  occasioned  by  such  alternate  elevation  and  depression  of  the
land  as  was  shown  to  be  taking  place  in  the  delta  of  the  Indus*.
But  the  subterranean  movements  affect  but  a  small  number  of
the  deltas  formed  at  one  period  on  the  globe ;  whereas,  the
silting  up  of  some  of  the  arms  of  great  rivers  and  the  opening
of  others,  and  the  consequent  variation  of  the  points  where
the  chief  volume  of  their  waters  is  discharged  into  the  sea,  are
phenomena  common  to  almost  every  delta.

The  variety  of  species  of  testacea  contained  in  the  recent
calcareous  marl  of  Scotland,  before  mentioned,  is  very  small,
*  Vol.  ii.  first  ed.  p.  265 ;  and  vol.  i.  second  ed.  p.  465.


Ch.  XVII.]  imbedding  of  marine  plants  and  animals.


285


but  the  abundance  of  individuals  is  extremely  great,  a  circum¬
stance  which  characterizes  fresh-water  formations  in  general  as
compared  to  marine  ;  for  in  the  latter,  as  is  seen  on  sea-
beaches,  coral  reefs,  or  in  the  bottom  of  seas  examined  by
dredging,  wherever  the  individual  shells  are  exceedingly  nu¬
merous,  there  rarely  fails  to  be  a  vast  variety  of  species.

Imbedding  of  the  Remains  of  Marine  Plants  and  Animals .

Marine  Plants — We  have  alluded  to  the  large  banks  of
drift  sea-weed  which  occur  on  each  side  of  the  equator  in  the
Atlantic,  Pacific,  and  Indian  oceans  *.  These  when  they  sub¬
side  may  often  produce  considerable  beds  of  vegetable  matter.
In  Holland  submarine  peat  is  derived  from  fuci,  and  on  parts
of  our  own  coast  from  Zoster  a  marina.  In  places  where  algm
do  not  generate  peat,  they  may  nevertheless  leave  traces  of
their  form  imprinted  on  argillaceous  and  calcareous  mud,  as
they  are  usually  very  tough  in  their  texture.

Cetacea . — It  is  not  uncommon  for  the  larger  cetacea,  which
can  only  float  in  a  considerable  depth  of  water,  to  be  carried
during  storms  or  high  tides  into  estuaries,  or  upon  low  shores,
where,  upon  the  retiring  of  high  water,  they  are  stranded.
Thus  a  narwal  ( Monodon  monoceros )  was  found  on  the  beach
near  Boston  in  Lincolnshire,  in  the  year  1800,  the  whole  of
its  body  buried  in  the  mud.  A  fisherman  going  to  his  boat
saw  the  horn  and  tried  to  pull  it  out,  when  the  animal  began
to  stir  itself  T«  An  individual  of  the  common  whale  ( Baloena
mysticetus),  which  measured  seventy  feet,  came  ashore  near
Peterhead,  in  1682.  Many  individuals  of  the  genus  Balse-
noptera  have  met  the  same  fate.  W e  may  content  ourselves
with  referring  to  those  cast  on  shore  near  Burnt  Island,  and
at  Alloa,  recorded  by  Sibbalcl  and  Neill.  The  other  indi¬
vidual  mentioned  by  Sibbald,  as  having  come  ashore  at  Boyne,
in  Banffshire,  was  probably  a  llazor-back.  Of  the  genus  Ca-

*  Page  81.

f  Fleming’s  Brit.  Animals,  p.  37 ;  in  which  work  may  he  seen  many  other
cases  enumerated.


286


IMBEDDING  OF  THE  REMAINS


[Ch.  XVII.


todon  ( Cachalot ),  Ray  mentions  a  large  one  stranded  on  the
west  coast  of  Holland  in  1598,  and  the  fact  is  also  commemo¬
rated  in  a  Dutch  engraving  of  the  time  of  much  merit.  Sib-
bald;  too,  records  that  a  herd  of  Cachalots,  upwards  of  one
hundred  in  number;  were  found  stranded  at  Kairston,  Orkney.
The  dead  bodies  of  the  larger  cetacea  are  sometimes  found
floating  on  the  surface  of  the  waters,  as  was  the  case  with  the
immense  whale  exhibited  in  London  in  1831.  And  the  carcass
of  a  sea-cow  or  Lamantine  ( Halicora )  was;  in  1785;  cast  ashore
near  Leith.  We  might  enumerate  many  more  examples  de¬
rived  from  foreign  as  well  as  British  shores,  but  the  facts  above
cited  will  suffice  to  show  that  such  occurrences  are  not  rare.

To  some  accident  of  this  kind,  we  may  refer  the  position  of
the  skeleton  of  a  whale  seventy-three  feet  long,  which  was
found  at  Airthrey,  on  the  Forth,  near  Alloa,  imbedded  in  clay
twenty  feet  higher  than  the  surface  of  the  highest  tide  of  the
river  Forth  at  the  present  day.  From  the  situation  of  the
Roman  station  and  causeways  at  a  small  distance  from  the
spot,  it  is  concluded  that  the  whale  must  have  been  stranded
there  at  a  period  prior  to  the  Christian  era  *.

Other  fossil  remains  of  this  class  have  also  been  found  in
estuaries,  known  to  have  been  silted  up  in  recent  times,  one
example  of  which  we  have  already  mentioned  near  Lewes,  in
Sussex.  When  we  reflect  on  the  facility  with  which  these
marine  mammalia  are  thus  shown  to  run  aground  upon  shoals,
even  when  there  have  been  no  great  convulsions,  such  as  hur¬
ricanes  or  earthquakes  extending  under  the  ocean,  but  merely
such  disturbances  as  the  tides  and  storms  of  our  seas  may
cause,  we  may  be  better  enabled  to  form  a  sound  opinion,  in
regard  to  the  probability  of  certain  geological  theories,  which
have  acquired  no  small  share  of  popularity.  It  has  been  sug¬
gested,  that  if  the  ocean,  displaced  by  the  sudden  upheaving
of  some  great  mountain-chain,  such  as  the  Andes,  should  make
a  transient  passage  over  the  land,  a  covering  of  alluvium  might
be  left  strewed  over  the  hills  and  valleys,  and  that  in  this  allu-

*  Quart.  Journ.  of  Lit.  Sci.  &c.  No.  15,  p.  172.  Oct.  1819.


Ch.  XVII.]  OF  MARINE  PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS.  287

vium  might  be  contained  the  remains  of  mammalia  exclusively
terrestrial.  The  skeleton  of  the  gigantic  whale,  the  long  horn
of  the  narwal  (harder  than  ivory),  the  strong  grinders  of  the
lamantine,  these  and  other  marine  relics  of  the  era

Omne  cum  Proteus  pecus  egit  altos

Visere  montes,

might,  we  are  told,  be  entirely  wanting.  Not  one  of  them
would  be  conspicuous  amongst  the  refuse  of  the  f  bated  and
retiring  hood,’  but  instead  of  them  we  should  discover  the
bones,  tusks,  and  teeth  of  the  elephant  or  rhinoceros,  the  hip¬
popotamus,  ox,  and  horse,  with  occasionally,  perhaps,  some
intermixture  of  terrestrial  and  lacustrine  shells  !  Such,  we  are
taught,  would  be  the  memorials  of  a  marine  deluge  sweeping
over  our  continents  !  We  are,  however,  willing  to  admit  that
they  who  invent  causes  without  reference  to  known  analogies,
are  guilty  of  no  inconsistency  when  they  claim  some  licence  in
the  use  which  they  make  of  their  extraordinary  agents.  If  we
allow  them  to  4  call  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep  ’  to  do  their
bidding,  and  to  uplift  colossal  chains,  like  the  Andes,  suddenly
within  the  historical  era,  we  must  not  complain  that  the  effects
of  such  mighty  powers  are  not  always  such  as  the  analogy  of
the  ordinary  laws  of  Nature  would  have  led  us  to  anticipate.

Marine  Testacea. — The  aquatic  animals  and  plants  which
inhabit  an  estuary  are  liable,  like  the  trees  and  land  animals
which  people  the  alluvial  plains  of  a  great  river,  to  be  swept
from  time  to  time  far  into  the  deep.  For  as  a  river  is  per¬
petually  shifting  its  course,  and  undermining  a  portion  of  its
banks  with  the  forests  which  cover  them,  so  the  marine  current
alters  its  direction  from  time  to  time,  and  bears  away  the  banks
of  sand  and  mud,  against  which  it  turns  its  force.  These
banks  may  consist  in  great  measure  of  shells  peculiar  to  shal¬
low,  and  sometimes  brackish  water,  which  may  have  been
accumulating  for  centuries,  until  at  length  they  are  carried
away  and  spread  out  along  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  at  a  depth
at  which  they  could  not  have  lived  and  multiplied.  Thus
littoral  and  estuary  shells  are  more  frequently  liable  even  than


288


IMBEDDING  OF  MARINE  TESTACEA.


[Ch.  XVII.


fresh-water  species,  to  be  intermixed  with  the  exuviae  of  pe¬
lagic  tribes.

After  the  late  storm  of  February  4„  1831,  when  several
vessels  were  wrecked  in  the  estuary  of  the  Forth,  the  current
was  directed  against  a  bed  of  oysters  with  such  force,  that
great  heaps  of  them  were  thrown  alive  upon  the  beach,  and
remained  above  high-water  mark.  Many  of  these  oysters,  as
also  the  common  whelks  ( buccina ),  which  were  thrown  up
with  them,  in  a  living  state,  were  worn  by  the  long  attrition  of
sand  which  had  passed  over  them  as  they  lay  in  their  native
bed,  and  which  had  evidently  not  resulted  from  the  mere
action  of  the  tempest  by  which  they  had  been  cast  ashore.

From  these  facts  we  may  learn  that  the  union  of  the  two
parts  of  a  bivalve  shell  does  not  prove  that  it  may  not  have
been  transported  to  a  certain  distance  ;  and  when  we  find  shells
worn,  and  with  all  their  prominent  parts  rubbed  off,  they  may
still  have  been  imbedded  where  they  grew.

Burrowing  shells.  —  It  sometimes  appears  extraordinary
when  we  observe  the  violence  of  the  breakers  on  our  coast,
and  see  the  strength  of  the  current  in  removing  cliffs  and
sweeping  out  new  channels,  that  many  tender  and  fragile
shells  should  inhabit  the  sea  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  this
turmoil.  But  a  great  number  of  the  bivalve  testacea,  and
many  also  of  the  turbinated  univalves,  burrow  in  sand  or  mud.
The  solen  and  the  cardium,  for  example,  which  are  usually
found  in  shallow  water  near  the  shore,  pierce  through  a  soft
bottom  without  injury  to  their  shells  ;  and  the  pholas  can
drill  a  cavity  through  mud  of  considerable  hardness.  The
species  of  these  and  many  other  tribes  can  sink,  when  alarmed,
with  considerable  rapidity,  often  to  the  depth  of  several  feet,
and  can  also  penetrate  upwards  again  to  the  surface,  if  a  mass
of  matter  be  heaped  upon  them.  The  hurricane,  therefore,
may  expend  its  fury  in  vain,  and  may  sweep  away  even  the
upper  part  of  banks  of  sand  or  mud,  or  may  roll  pebbles  over
them,  and  yet  these  testacea  may  remain  below  secure  and
uninjured.


Ch.  XVII.]


IMBEDDING  OF  MARINE  TESTACEA.


289


Shells  become  fossil  at  considerable  depths. — We  have
already  stated  that,  at  the  depth  of  950  fathoms,  between
Gibraltar  and  Ceuta,  Captain  Smyth  found  a  gravelly  bot¬
tom,  with  fragments  of  broken  shells  carried  thither  pro¬
bably  from  the  comparatively  shallow  parts  of  the  neighbour¬
ing  straits,  through  which  a  powerful  current  flows.  Beds
of  shelly  sand  might  here,  in  the  course  of  ages,  be  accu¬
mulated  several  thousand  feet  thick.  But,  without  the  aid  of
the  drifting  power  of  a  current,  shells  may  accumulate  in  the
spot  where  they  live  and  die,  at  great  depths  from  the  surface,
if  sediment  be  thrown  down  upon  them ;  for,  even  in  our  own
colder  latitudes,  the  depths  at  which  living  marine  animals
abound  is  very  considerable.  Captain  Vidal  ascertained,  by
soundings  lately  made  off  Tory  island,  on  the  north-west  coast
of  Ireland,  that  Crustacea,  star-fish,  and  testacea,  occurred  at
various  depths  between  fifty  and  one  hundred  fathoms ;  and
he  drew  up  dentalia  from  the  mud  of  Galway  bay  in  230  and
240  fathoms  water.

The  same  hydrographer  discovered  on  the  Rockall  bank,
large  quantities  of  shells  at  depths  varying  from  forty-five  to
one  hundred  and  ninety  fathoms.  These  shells  were  for  the
most  part  pulverized,  and  evidently  recent,  as  they  retained
their  bright  colours.  In  the  same  region  a  bed  of  fish-bones
was  observed  extending  for  two  miles  along  the  bottom  of  the
sea  in  eighty  and  ninety  fathoms  water.  At  the  eastern  ex¬
tremity  also  of  Rockall  bank  fish-bones  were  met  with,  mingled
with  pieces  of  fresh  shell,  at  the  depth  of  235  fathoms.

Analogous  formations  are  in  progress  in  the  submarine
tracts  extending  from  the  Shetland  Isles  to  the  north  of  Ire¬
land,  wherever  soundings  can  be  procured.  A  continuous
deposit  of  sand  and  mud,  replete  with  broken  and  entire  shells,
echini,  &c.,  has  been  traced  for  upwards  of  twenty  miles  to
the  eastward  of  the  Faroe  islands,  usually  at  the  depth  of  from
forty  to  one  hundred  fathoms.  In  one  part  of  this  tract  (long.
6°  30',  lat.  61°  50')  fish-bones  occur  in  extraordinary  profu¬
sion,  so  that  the  lead  cannot  be  drawn  up  without  some  verte-
Vol.  II.  U


290


IMBEDDING  OF  MARINE  TESTACEA.


[Ch.  XVII.


brae  being  attached.  This  bone  bed,  in  which  a  few  shells  also
are  intermingled,  is  three  miles  and  a  half  in  length  and  forty-
five  fathoms  under  water.

In  the  British  seas,  the  shells  and  other  organic  remains  lie
in  soft  mud  or  loose  sand  and  gravel ;  whereas,  in  the  bed  of
the  Adriatic,  Donati  found  them  frequently  enclosed  in  stone
of  recent  formation,  a  distinction  that  might  have  been  antici¬
pated  from  the  abundance  of  calcareous  and  other  mineral
springs  in  the  Mediterranean  and  lands  adjoining,  and  their
absence  in  our  own  country.

During  his  survey  of  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  Captain
Belcher  found,  by  frequent  soundings  between  the  twenty-
third  and  twentieth  degrees  of  north  latitude,  that  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  at  the  depth  of  from  twenty  to  about  fifty  fathoms,
consists  of  sand,  with  a  great  intermixture  of  shells,  often
entire,  but  sometimes  finely  comminuted.  Between  the  eleventh
and  ninth  degrees  of  north  latitude,  on  the  same  coast,  at
soundings  varying  from  twenty  to  about  eighty  fathoms,  he
brought  up  abundance  of  corals  and  shells  mixed  with  sand.
These  also  were  in  some  parts  entire,  and  in  others  worn  and
broken.

In  all  these  cases  it  is  only  necessary  that  there  should  be
some  deposition  of  sedimentary  matter,  however  minute,  such
as  may  be  supplied  by  rivers  draining  a  continent,  or  currents
preying  on  a  line  of  cliffs,  in  order  that  stratified  formations,
hundreds  of  feet  in  thickness,  and  replete  with  organic  remains,
should  result  in  the  course  of  ages.


CHAPTER  XVIII.


Formation  of  coral  reefs — They  are  composed  of  shells  as  well  as  corals — Con¬
version  of  a  submerged  reef  into  an  island — Extent  and  thickness  of  coral
formations — The  Maldiva  isles — Growth  of  coral  not  rapid — Its  geological
importance — Circular  and  oval  forms  of  coral  islands — Shape  of  their  lagoons —
Causes  of  their  peculiar  configuration — Openings  into  the  lagoons — Why  the
windward  side  both  in  islands  and  submerged  reefs  is  higher  than  the  leeward
— Stratification  of  coral  formations — Extent  of  some  reefs  in  the  Pacific —
That  the  subsidence  by  earthquakes  in  the  Pacific,  exceeds  the  elevation  due
to  the  same  cause — Elizabeth,  or  Henderson’s  Island — Coral  and  shell  lime¬
stones  now  in  progress,  exceed  in  area  any  known  group  of  ancient  rocks—
The  theory  that  all  limestone  is  of  animal  origin  considered — The  hypothesis
that  the  quantity  of  calcareous  matter  has  been  and  is  still  on  the  increase,
controverted.


FORMATION  OF  CORAL  REEFS.

The  powers  of  the  organic  creation  in  modifying  the  form  and
structure  of  those  parts  of  the  earth’s  crust,  which  may  be  said
to  be  undergoing  repair,  or  where  new  rock-formations  are
continually  in  progress,  are  most  conspicuously  displayed  in
the  labours  of  the  coral  animals.  We  may  compare  the  ope¬
ration  of  these  zoophytes  in  the  ocean,  to  the  effects  produced
on  a  smaller  scale  upon  the  land,  by  the  plants  which  generate
peat.  In  the  case  of  the  Sphagnum,  the  upper  part  vegetates
while  the  lower  portion  is  entering  into  a  mineral  mass,  where
the  traces  of  organization  usually  remain,  but  in  which  life  has
entirely  ceased.  In  the  corals,  in  like  manner,  the  more  dura¬
ble  materials  of  the  generation  that  has  passed  away,  serve  as
the  foundation  on  which  living  animals  are  continuing  to  rear  a
similar  structure.

In  part  composed  of  shells. — The  calcareous  masses  usually
termed  coral  reefs,  are  by  no  means  exclusively  composed  of
zoophytes,  but  also  a  great  variety  of  shells ;  some  of  the
largest  and  heaviest  of  known  species  contributing  to  augment

the  mass.  In  the  south  Pacific,  great  beds  of  oysters,  mussels,

U  2


292


FORMATION  OF  CORAL  ISLANDS.


[Ch.  XVIII.


pinna?  marina,  and  other  shells,  cover  in  great  profusion  almost
every  reef ;  and,  on  the  beach  of  coral  islands,  are  seen  the
shells  of  echini  and  the  broken  fragments  of  crustaceous  ani¬
mals.  Large  shoals  of  fish  also  are  discernible  through  the
clear  blue  water,  and  their  teeth  and  hard  palates  are  probably
preserved,  although  a  great  portion  of  their  soft  cartilaginous
bones  may  decay.

Of  the  numerous  species  of  zoophytes  which  are  engaged  in
the  production  of  coral  banks,  some  of  the  most  common  be¬
long  to  the  genera  Meandrina,  Caryophyllia,  and  Astrea,  but
especially  the  latter.

How  converted  into  islands. — -The  reefs,  which  just  raise
themselves  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  are  usually  of  a  circular
or  oval  form,  and  are  surrounded  by  a  deep  and  often  un¬
fathomable  ocean.  In  the  centre  of  each,  there  is  usually  a
comparatively  shallow  lagoon  where  there  is  still  water,  and
where  the  smaller  and  more  delicate  kinds  of  zoophytes  find  a
tranquil  abode,  while  the  more  strong  species  live  on  the  exte¬
rior  margin  of  the  isle,  where  a  great  surf  usually  breaks.
When  the  reef,  says  M.  Chamisso,  a  naturalist  who  accompa¬
nied  Kotzebue,  is  of  such  a  height  that  it  remains  almost  dry
at  low  water,  the  corals  leave  off  building.  A  continuous  mass
of  solid  stone  is  seen  composed  of  the  shells  of  molluscs  and
echini,  with  their  broken  off  prickles  and  fragments  of  coral,
united  by  the  burning  sun,  through  the  medium  of  the  cement¬
ing  calcareous  sand,  which  has  arisen  from  the  pulverization  of
shells.  Fragments  of  coral  limestone  are  thrown  up  by  the
waves,  until  the  ridge  becomes  so  high,  that  it  is  covered  only
during  some  seasons  of  the  year  by  the  high  tides.  The  heat
of  the  sun  often  penetrates  the  mass  of  stone  when  it  is  dry,  so
that  it  splits  in  many  places.  The  force  of  the  waves  is  thereby
enabled  to  separate  and  lift  blocks  of  coral,  frequently  six  feet
long  and  three  or  four  in  thickness,  and  throw  them  upon  the
reef.  c  After  this  the  calcareous  sand  lies  undisturbed,  and
offers  to  the  seeds  of  trees  and  plants  cast  upon  it  by  the  waves,
a  soil  upon  which  they  rapidly  grow,  to  overshadow  its  daz-


Ch.  XVIII.]


EXTENT  OF  CORAL  REEFS.


293


zling  white  surface.  Entire  trunks  of  trees,  which  are  carried
by  the  rivers  from  other  countries  and  islands,  find  here,  at
length,  a  resting  place  after  their  long  wanderings  :  with  these
come  some  small  animals,  such  as  lizards  and  insects,  as  the
first  inhabitants.  Even  before  the  trees  form  a  wood,  the
sea-birds  nestle  here ;  strayed  land-birds  take  refuge  in  the
bushes ;  and,  at  a  much  later  period,  when  the  work  has  been
long  since  completed,  man  also  appears,  builds  his  hut  on
the  fruitful  soil  formed  by  the  corruption  of  the  leaves  of  the
trees,  and  calls  himself  lord  and  proprietor  of  this  new  crea¬
tion  *  ’

Extent  and  thickness. — The  Pacific  ocean,  throughout  a
space  comprehended  between  the  thirtieth  parallel  of  latitude
on  each  side  of  the  equator,  is  extremely  productive  of  coral.
The  Arabian  gulf  is  rapidly  filling  with  the  same,  and  it  is  said
to  abound  in  the  Persian  gulf.  Between  the  coast  of  Malabar
and  that  of  Madagascar,  there  is  also  a  great  sea  of  coral.
Flinders  describes  an  unbroken  reef  three  hundred  and  fifty
miles  in  length,  on  the  east  coast  of  New  Holland  ;  and,  be¬
tween  that  country  and  New  Guinea,  Captain  P.  King  found
the  coral  formations  to  extend  throughout  a  distance  of  seven
hundred  miles,  interrupted  by  no  intervals  exceeding  thirty
miles  in  length.

Maldiva  isles. — The  chain  of  coral  reefs  and  islets,  called  the
Malclivas,  situated  in  the  Indian  ocean  to  the  south-west  of
Malabar,  form  a  chain  four  hundred  and  eighty  geographical
miles  in  length,  running  due  north  and  south.  It  is  composed
throughout  of  a  series  of  circular  assemblages  of  islets,  the
larger  groups  being  from  forty  to  fifty  miles  in  their  longest
diameter.  Captain  Horsburgh,  whose  chart  of  these  islands  is
subjoined,  informs  me  that  outside  of  each  circle  or  atoll,  as  it
is  termed,  there  are  coral  reefs  sometimes  extending  to  the  dis¬
tance  of  two  or  three  miles,  beyond  which  there  are  no  sound¬
ings  at  immense  depths.  But  in  the  centre  of  each  atoll  there
is  a  lagoon  from  fifteen  to  twenty  fathoms  deep.  In  the  clian-

*  Kotzebue’s  Voyages,  1815-18,  vol.iii.  pp,  331 — 3.


294


LINEAR  DIRECTION  OF  CORAL  ISLES.  [Ch.  XVIII.


N).  4  .


nels  between  the  atolls,  no  sound¬
ings  have  been  obtained  at  the
depth  of  one  hundred  and  fifty
fathoms.

Laccadive  islands. — The  Lac¬
cadive  islands  run  in  the  same  line
with  the  Maldivas,  on  the  north,
as  do  the  isles  of  the  Chagos
Archipelago,  on  the  south,  so  that
these  may  be  continuations  of  the
same  chain  of  submarine  moun¬
tains,  crested  in  a  similar  manner
by  coral  limestone.  It  would  be
rash  to  hazard  the  hypothesis,  that
they  are  all  the  summits  of  volca¬
nos,  yet  we  might  imagine,  that  if
Java  and  Sumatra  were  submerged,
they  would  give  rise  to  a  somewhat
similar  shape  in  the  bottom  of  the
sea ;  for  the  volcanos  of  those
islands  observe  a  linear  direction,
and  are  often  separated  from  each
other  by  intervals,  corresponding
to  the  atolls  of  the  Maldivas  ;  and
as  they  rise  to  various  heights,
from  five  to  ten  thousand  feet
above  their  base,  they  might  leave
an  unfathomable  ocean  in  the  in¬
termediate  spaces.

In  regard  to  the  thickness  of
the  masses  of  coral,  MM.  Quoy
and  Gaimard  are  of  opinion,  that
the  species  which  contribute  most
actively  to  the  formation  of  solid
masses  do  not  grow  where  the  wa¬
ter  is  deeper  than  twenty-five  or


Ch.  XVIII.]


RATE  OF  THE  GROWTH  OF  CORAL-


295


thirty  feet.  But  the  branched  madrepores,  which  live  at  con¬
siderable  depth,  may  form  the  first  foundation  of  a  reef,  and
raise  a  platform  on  which  other  species  may  build  *,  and  the
sand  and  broken  fragments  washed  by  the  waves  from  reefs
may,  in  time,  produce  calcareous  rocks  of  great  thickness.

Growth  of  coral  not  rapid. — The  rapidity  of  the  growth  of
coral  is  by  no  means  great,  according  to  the  report  of  the
natives  to  Captain  Beechey.  In  an  island  west  of  Gambier’s
group,  our  navigators  observed  the  Chama  gigas  (Tridacna,
Lam.)  while  the  animal  was  yet  living,  so  completely  over¬
grown  by  coral,  that  a  space  only  of  two  inches  was  left  for  the
extremity  of  the  shell  to  open  and  shutf.  But  conchologists
suppose,  that  the  chama  may  require  thirty  years  or  more  to
attain  its  full  size,  so  that  the  fact  is  quite  consistent  with  a
very  slow  rate  of  increase  in  the  calcareous  reefs.  In  the  late
expedition  to  the  Pacific  no  positive  information  could  be
obtained,  of  any  channel  having  been  filled  up  within  a  given
period,  and  it  seems  established  that  several  reefs  had  re¬
mained  for  more  than  half  a  century,  at  about  the  same  depth
from  the  surface.

The  increase  of  coral  limestone,  however,  may  vary  greatly
according  to  the  sites  of  mineral  springs,  for  these  we  know
often  issue  in  great  numbers  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  in  vol¬
canic  regions,  as  in  the  Mediterranean,  for  example,  where
they  sometimes  cause  the  sea  at  great  depths  to  be  fresher
than  at  the  surface,  a  phenomenon  also  declared  by  the  South-
Sea  islanders  to  be  common  in  the  Pacific.

Its  geological  importance. — But  when  we  admit  the  increase
of  coral  limestone  to  be  slow,  we  are  merely  speaking  with  re¬
lation  to  the  periods  of  human  observation.  It  often  happens
that  parisitic  testacea  live  and  die  on  the  shells  of  the  larger
slow-moving  gasteropods  in  the  South  Seas,  and  become  en¬
tirely  inclosed  in  an  incrustation  of  compact  limestone,  while
the  animal,  to  whose  habitation  they  are  attached,  crawls  about

*  Journ.  of  Geograph.  Soc.  of  London,  1831,  p.  218.
t  Beechey’s  Voyage  to  the  Pacific,  &c.  p.  157.


296


ORIGIN  OF  THE  FORM  OF


[Ch.  XVIII.


and  bears  upon  his  back  these  shells,  which  may  be  considered
as  already  fossilized.  It  is,  therefore,  probable,  that  the  reefs
increase  as  fast  as  is  compatible  with  the  thriving  state  of  the
organic  beings  which  chiefly  contribute  to  their  formation ;
and  if  the  rate  of  augmentation  thus  implied  be  called,  in  con¬
formity  to  our  ordinary  ideas  of  time,  gradual  and  slow,  it  does
not  diminish,  in  the  least  degree,  the  geological  importance  of
such  calcareous  masses.

Suppose  the  ordinary  growth  of  coral  limestone  to  amount
to  six  inches  in  a  century,  it  will  then  require  three  thousand
years  to  produce  a  reef  fifteen  feet  thick  ;  but  have  we  any
ground  for  presuming  that,  at  the  end  of  that  period,  or  of  ten
times  thirty  centuries,  there  will  be  a  failure  in  the  supply  of
lime,  or  that  the  polyps  and  molluscs  will  cease  to  act,  or  that
the  hour  of  the  dissolution  of  our  planet  will  first  arrive,  as  the
earlier  geologists  were  fain  to  anticipate  ?

Instead  of  contemplating  the  brief  annals  of  human  events,
let  us  turn  to  some  natural  chronometers,  to  the  volcanic  isles
of  the  Pacific,  for  example,  which  shoot  up  ten  or  fifteen
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ocean.  These  islands
bear  evident  marks  of  having  been  produced  by  successive
volcanic  eruptions ;  and  coral  reefs  are  sometimes  found  on
the  volcanic  soil,  reaching  for  some  distance  from  the  sea  shore
into  the  interior.  When  we  consider  the  time  required  for
the  accumulation  of  such  mountain  masses  of  igneous  matter
according  to  the  analogy  of  known  volcanic  agency,  all  idea
of  extenuating  the  comparative  magnitude  of  coral  limestones,
on  the  ground  of  the  slowness  of  the  operations  of  lithogenous
polyps,  must  instantly  vanish.

Form  of  coral  islands. — The  information  collected  during
the  late  expedition  to  the  Pacific  throws  much  additional  light
on  the  peculiarities  of  form  and  structure  of  coral  islands.  Of
thirty-two  of  these,  examined  by  Captain  Beechey,  the  largest
was  thirty  miles  in  diameter,  and  the  smallest  less  than  a  mile.
They  were  of  various  shapes,  all  formed  of  living  coral,  except
one,  which,  although  of  coral  formation,  was  raised  about


Ch.  XVIII.]


CORAL  ISLANDS.


297


eighty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  encompassed  by  a
reef  of  living  coral.  All  were  increasing  their  dimensions  by
the  active  operations  of  the  lithophytes,  which  appeared  to  be
gradually  extending  and  bringing  the  immersed  parts  of  their
structure  to  the  surface.  Twenty-nine  of  the  number  had
lagoons  in  their  centres,  which  had  probably  existed  in  the
others,  until  they  were  filled ,  in  the  course  of  time,  by  zoo-
phytic  and  other  substances.

In  the  above-mentioned  islands,  the  strips  of  dry  coral  en¬
circling  the  lagoons,  when  divested  of  loose  sandy  materials
heaped  upon  them,  are  rarely  elevated  more  than  two  feet
above  the  level  of  the  sea  ;  and  were  it  not  for  the  abrupt
descent  of  the  external  margin  which  causes  the  sea  to  break
upon  it,  these  strips  would  be  wholly  inundated.  ‘  Those  parts
of  the  strip  which  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  waves  are  no
longer  inhabited  by  the  animals  that  reared  them,  but  have
their  cells  filled  with  a  hard  calcareous  substance,  and  present
a  brown  rugged  appearance.  The  parts  which  are  still  im¬
mersed,  or  are  dry  at  low  water  only,  are  intersected  by  small
channels,  and  are  so  full  of  hollows  that  the  tide,  as  it  recedes,
leaves  small  lakes  of  water  upon  them.  The  width  of  the
plain  or  strip  of  dead  coral,  in  the  islands  which  fell  under  our
observation,  in  no  instance  exceeded  half  a  mile  from  the  usual
wash  of  the  sea  to  the  edge  of  the  lagoon,  and  in  general  was
only  about  three  or  four  hundred  yards  Beyond  these
limits  the  sides  of  the  island  descend  rapidly,  apparently  by  a
succession  of  inclined  ledges,  each  terminating  in  a  precipice.
The  depth  of  the  lagoons  is  various ;  in  some  entered  by
Captain  Beechey,  it  was  from  twenty  to  thirty-eight  fathoms.

Whitsunday  Island. — In  the  annexed  cut  (No.  5),  one  of
these  circular  islands  is  represented  just  rising  above  the  waves,
covered  with  the  cocoa-nut  and  other  trees,  and  inclosing
within,  a  lagoon  of  tranquil  water.


*  Captaiu  Beechey,  part  i,  p.  188.


298


ORIGIN  OF  THE  FORM


[Ch.  XVIII


View  of  Whitsunday  Island  *.


Sections  of  Coral  Isles. — The  accompanying  section  will
enable  the  reader  to  comprehend  the  usual  form  of  such
islands.  (No.  6.)

No.  6.


Section  of  a  Coral  Island.

a  a  Habitable  part  of  the  island,  consisting  of  a  strip  of  coral,  inclosing  the
lagoon.  b  b  The  lagoon.


The  subjoined  cut  (No.  7.)  exhibits  a  small  part  of  the
section  of  a  coral  island  on  a  larger  scale.

No.  7.


Section  of  part  of  a  Coral  Island.


a  b  Habitable  part  of  the  island.

b  e  Slope  of  the  side  of  the  island,  plunging  at  an  angle  of  forty-five  to  the  depth
of  fifteen  hundred  feet.
c  c  Part  of  the  lagoon.

cl  d  Knolls  of  coral  in  the  lagoon,  with  overhanging  masses  of  coral,  resembling
the  capitals  of  columns.

*  This  plate  and  the  section  which  follows  are  copied,  by  permission  of  Cap¬
tain  Beechey,  from  the  illustrations  of  his  valuable  work  before  alluded  to.


Ch.  XVIII.]


OF  CORAL  ISLANDS.


299


Origin  of  their  peculiar  configuration. — The  circular  or  oval
forms  of  the  numerous  coral  isles  of  the  Pacific,  with  the
lagoons  in  their  centre,  naturally  suggest  the  idea  that  they
are  nothing  more  than  the  crests  of  submarine  volcanos,  having
the  rims  and  bottoms  of  their  craters  overgrown  by  coral.
This  opinion  is  strengthened  by  the  conical  form  of  the  sub¬
marine  mountain,  and  the  steep  angle  at  which  it  plunges  on
all  sides  into  the  surrounding  ocean.  It  is  also  well  known
that  the  Pacific  is  a  great  theatre  of  volcanic  action,  and
every  island  yet  examined  in  the  wide  region  termed  Eastern
Oceanica,  consists  either  of  volcanic  rocks  or  coral  limestones.

It  has  also  been  observed  that,  although  within  the  circular
coral  reefs,  there  is  usually  nothing  discernible  but  a  lagoon,
the  bottom  of  which  is  covered  with  coral,  yet  within  some  of
these  basins,  as  in  Gambier’s  group,  rocks  composed  of  porous
lava  and  other  volcanic  substances,  rise  up,  resembling  the  two
Kameni’s  and  other  eminences  of  igneous  origin,  which  have
been  thrown  up  within  the  times  of  history,  in  the  midst  of
the  Gulf  of  Santorin  *.

We  mentioned  that  in  volcanic  archipelagos  there  is  gene-
rally  one  large  habitual  vent,  and  many  smaller  volcanos  formed
at  different  points  and  at  irregular  intervals,  all  of  which  have
usually  a  linear  arrangement.  Now  in  several  of  the  groups  of
Eastern  Oceanica  there  appears  to  be  a  similar  disposition,  the
great  islands,  such  as  Otaheite,  Owhyhee,  and  Terra  del
Spirito  Santo,  being  habitual  vents,  and  the  lines  of  small  cir¬
cular  coral  isles  which  are  dependent  on  them  being  very
probably  trains  of  minor  volcanos,  which  may  have  been  in
eruption  singly  and  at  irregular  intervals.

The  absence  of  circular  groups  in  the  West  Indian  seas,  and
the  tropical  parts  of  the  Atlantic,  where  corals  are  numerous,
has  been  adduced  as  an  additional  argument,  inasmuch  as  vol¬
canic  vents,  though  existing  in  those  regions,  are  very  inferior
in  importance  to  those  in  the  Pacific  and  Indian  seas  f .  It
may  be  objected  that  the  circles  formed  by  some  coral  reefs  or

*  See  vol.  i.  chap.  22.  f  De  la  Beche,  Geol,  Man.  p.  141.


300  CAUSE  OF  THE  CHANNEL  INTO  THE  LAGOONS.  [Ch.  XVIII.

groups  of  coral  islets,  varying  as  they  do  from  ten  to  thirty
miles  and  upwards  in  diameter,  are  so  great  as  to  preclude  the
idea  of  their  being  volcanic  craters.  In  regard  to  this  objec¬
tion  we  may  refer  to  what  we  have  said  in  a  former  volume
respecting  the  size  of  the  so-called  craters  of  elevation,  many
of  which,  we  conceive,  may  be  the  ruins  of  truncated  cones  *.

Openings  into  the  Lagoons . — There  is  yet  another  pheno¬
menon  attending  the  circular  reefs,  to  which  we  have  not
alluded,  viz.,  the  deep  narrow  passage  which  almost  invariably
leads  from  the  sea  into  the  lagoon,  and  is  kept  open  by  the
efflux  of  the  sea  at  low  tides.  It  is  sufficient  that  a  reef  should
rise  a  few  feet  above  low-water  mark  to  cause  the  waters  to
collect  in  the  lagoon  at  high  tide,  and  when  the  sea  falls,  to  rush
out  violently  at  one  or  more  points  where  the  reef  happens  to
be  lowest  or  weakest.  At  first  there  are  probably  many  open¬
ings  ;  but  the  growth  of  the  coral  tends  to  obstruct  all  those
which  do  not  serve  as  the  principal  channels  of  discharge,  so
that  their  number  is  gradually  reduced  to  a  few,  and  often
finally  to  one.  This  event  is  strictly  analogous  to  that  wit¬
nessed  in  our  estuaries,  where  a  body  of  salt-water  accumulated
during  the  flow,  issues  with  great  velocity  at  the  ebb  of  the
tide,  and  scours  out  or  keeps  open  a  deep  passage  through  the
bar,  which  is  almost  always  formed  at  the  mouth  of  a  river.

When  we  controverted  in  our  first  volume  Von  Buch’s  theory
of  c  elevation  craters,’  we  mentioned  that  a  single  deep  gorge  is
described  as  always  connecting  the  central  cavity  of  such  craters
with  the  sea.  The  origin  of  this  channel  may  be  sought  in  the
action  of  the  tides,  which  affords,  we  think,  a  satisfactory  ex¬
planation.  Suppose  a  volcanic  cone,  having  a  deep  crater,  to
be  at  first  submarine,  and  to  be  then  gradually  elevated  by
earthquakes  in  an  ocean  where  tides  prevail,  a  ravine  cannot
fail  to  be  cut  like  that  which  penetrates  into  the  Caldera  of  the
isle  of  Palma.  The  opening  would  at  first  be  made  on  that
side  where  the  rim  of  the  crater  was  originally  lowest,  and  it
would  afterwards  be  deepened  as  the  island  rose,  so  as  always

*  See  vol.  i,  chap,  xxii.


Ch.  XVI II.]  HEIGHT  OF  TI1E  WINDWARD  SIDE.


301


to  descend  somewhat  lower  than  the  level  of  the  sea.  Captain
Beechey’s  observations,  therefore,  of  the  effect  of  the  tides  on
the  coral  islands,  corroborate  the  opinion  which  we  offered  re¬
specting  the  mode  of  formation  of  islands  having  a  configuration
like  Palma ;  whereas  the  theory  of  the  sudden  upheaving  of
horizontal  strata  into  a  conical  form,  affords  no  explanation
whatever  of  the  single  ravine  which  intersects  one  side  of  these
circular  islands.

In  the  coral  reefs  surrounding  those  volcanic  islands  in  the
Pacific  which  are  large  enough  to  feed  small  rivers,  there  is
generally  an  opening  or  channel  opposite  the  point  where  the
stream  of  fresh  water  enters  the  sea.  The  depth  of  these
channels  rarely  exceeds  twenty-five  feet,  and  they  may  be  at¬
tributed,  says  Captain  Beechey,  to  the  aversion  of  the  litho-
phy  tes  to  fresh  water,  and  to  the  probable  absence  of  the  mineral
matter  of  which  they  construct  their  habitations  *.

Why  the  windward  side  highest . — But  there  is  yet  another
peculiarity  of  the  low  coral  islands,  the  explanation  of  which  is
by  no  means  so  obvious.  They  follow  one  general  rule  in
having  their  windward  side  higher  and  more  perfect  than  the
other.  f  At  Gambier  .and  Matilda  islands  this  inequality  is
very  conspicuous,  the  weather  side  of  both  being  wooded,  and
of  the  former  inhabited,  while  the  other  sides  are  from  twenty
to  thirty  feet  under  water,  where,  however,  they  might  be  per¬
ceived  to  be  equally  narrow  and  well  defined.  It  is  on  the
leeward  side  also  that  the  entrances  into  the  lagoons  occur ;
and  although  they  may  sometimes  be  situated  on  a  side  that
runs  in  the  direction  of  the  wind,  as  at  Bow  Island,  yet  there
are  none  to  windward.’  These  observations  of  Captain  Beechey
accord  perfectly  with  those  which  Captain  Horsburgh  and
other  hydrographers  have  made  in  regard  to  the  coral  islands
of  other  seas.  Thus  the  Chagos  Isles  in  the  Indian  Ocean  are
chiefly  of  a  horse-shoe  form,  the  openings  being  to  the  north¬
west  ;  whereas  the  prevailing  wind  blows  regularly  from  the
south-east.  From  this  fortunate  circumstance  ships  can  enter


*  Voyage  to  the  Pacific,  &c.;  p.  194.


302


HEIGHT  OF  THE  WINDWARD  SIDE.


[Ch.  XVIIT.


and  sail  out  again  with  ease,  whereas,  if  the  narrow  inlets  were
to  windward,  vessels  which  once  entered  might  not  succeed  for
months  in  making  their  way  out  again.  The  well-known  secu¬
rity  of  many  of  these  harbours,  depends  entirely  on  this  for¬
tunate  peculiarity  in  their  structure.

In  what  manner  is  this  singular  conformation  to  be  accounted
for  ?  The  action  of  the  waves  is  seen  to  be  the  cause  of  the
superior  elevation  of  some  reefs  on  their  windward  sides,  where
sand  and  large  masses  of  coral  rock  are  thrown  up  by  the
breakers ;  but  there  are  a  variety  of  cases  where  this  cause
alone  is  inadequate  to  solve  the  problem  ;  for  reefs  submerged
at  considerable  depths,  where  the  movements  of  the  sea  cannot
exert  much  power,  have,  nevertheless,  the  same  conformation,
the  leeward  being  much  lower  than  the  windward  side  *.

I  am  informed  by  Captain  King,  that  on  examining  the  reefs
called  Rowley  Shoals,  which  lie  off  the  north-west  coast  of
Australia,  where  the  east  and  west  monsoons  prevail  alternately,
he  found  the  open  side  of  one  crescent-shaped  reef,  the  Impe-
rieuse,  turned  to  the  east,  and  of  another,  the  Mermaid,  turned
to  the  west ;  while  a  third  oval  reef,  of  the  same  group,  was
entirely  submerged.  This  want  of  conformity  is  exactly  what
we  should  expect,  where  the  winds  vary  periodically.

It  seems  impossible  to  refer  the  phenomenon  now  under  con¬
sideration  to  any  original  uniformity  in  the  configuration  of
submarine  volcanos,  on  the  summits  of  which  we  may  suppose
the  coral  reefs  to  grow ;  for  although  it  is  very  common  for
craters  to  be  broken  down  on  one  side  only,  we  cannot  imagine
any  cause  that  should  breach  them  all  in  the  same  direction.
But,  if  we  mistake  not,  the  difficulty  will  be  removed  if  we  call
in  another  part  of  the  volcanic  agency — subsidence  by  earth¬
quakes.  Suppose  the  windward  barrier  to  have  been  raised  by
the  mechanical  action  of  the  waves  to  the  height  of  two  or  three
yards  above  the  wall  on  the  leeward  side,  and  then  the  whole
island  to  sink  down  a  few  fathoms,  the  appearances  described
would  then  be  presented  by  the  submerged  reef,  A  repetition

*  Voyage  to  the  Pacific,  &c.,  p.  189,


Ch.XYIII.]  STRATIFICATION  OF  CORAL  FORMATIONS.


303


of  such  operations  by  the  alternate  elevation  and  depression  of
the  same  mass  (an  hypothesis  strictly  conformable  to  analogy)
might  produce  still  greater  inequality  in  the  two  sides,  espe¬
cially  as  the  violent  efflux  of  the  tide  has  probably  a  strong
tendency  to  check  the  accumulation  of  the  more  tender  corals
on  the  leeward  reef,  while  the  action  of  the  breakers  contributes
to  raise  the  windward  barrier.

Stratification  of  coral  formations. — The  calcareous  forma¬
tions  of  the  Pacific  are  probably  all  stratified,  although  single
beds  may  sometimes  attain  a  great  thickness.  The  occasional
drifting  of  sand  from  the  exposed  parts  of  a  reef  into  the  lagoon
or  the  surrounding  sea,  would  suffice  to  form  occasional  lines
of  partition,  especially  during  violent  tempests  which  occur
annually  among  the  South-Sea  islands.  The  decomposition  of
felspathic  lavas  may  supply  the  current  which  washes  and  un¬
dermines  the  cliffs  of  some  islands  with  fine  clay,  and  this  may
be  carried  to  great  distances  and  deposited  in  distinct  layers
between  calcareous  masses,  or  may  be  mingled  with  them  and
form  argillaceous  limestones.  Other  divisions  will  arise  from
the  arrangement  of  different  species  of  testacea  and  zoophytes,
which  inhabit  water  of  various  depths,  and  which  succeed  each
other  as  the  sea  deepens  by  the  fall  of  the  land  during  earth¬
quakes,  or  grows  shallower  by  elevation  due  to  the  same  cause,
or  by  the  accumulation  of  organic  substances  raising  the
bottom.

To  these  causes  of  minor  subdivision  must  be  added  another
of  great  importance, —the  ejection  of  volcanic  ashes  and  sand,
often  carried  by  the  wind  over  wide  areas,  and  the  flowing  of
horizontal  sheets  of  lava,  which  may  interrupt  suddenly  the
growth  of  one  coral  reef,  and  afterwards  serve  as  a  foundation
for  another.  An  example  of  this  kind  is  seen  in  the  isle  of
France,  where  a  bed  of  coral,  ten  feet  thick,  intervenes  between
two  currents  of  lava  and  in  the  West  Indies,  in  the  island
of  Dominica,  Maclure  observes  that  4  a  bed  of  coral  and  raa-

*  De  la  Beche,  Geol.  Man.,  p.  142.  Quoy  and  Gaimard,  Ann.  des  Sci.  Nat.,
tome  vi.


304


SUBSIDENCE  IN  EXCESS  IN  THE  PACIFIC.  [Ch.  XVIII.


drepore  limestone,  with  shells,  lies  horizontally  on  a  bed  of
cinders,  about  two  or  three  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the
sea,  at  Rousseau,  and  is  covered  with  cinders  to  a  considerable
height

Reefs  in  the  Pacific. — The  reefs  in  the  Pacific  are  sometimes
of  great  extent :  thus  the  inhabitants  of  Disappointment  Islands,
and  those  of  Duff’s  Group,  pay  visits  to  each  other  by  passing
over  long  lines  of  reefs  from  island  to  island,  a  distance  of  six
hundred  miles  and  upwards.  When  on  their  route  they  pre¬
sent  the  appearance  of  troops  marching  upon  the  surface  of  the
ocean  f.

A  reference  to  our  first  volume  will  show  that  a  series  of
ordinary  earthquakes  might,  in  the  course  of  a  few  centuries,
convert  such  a  tract  of  sea  into  dry  land ;  and  it  is  therefore
a  remarkable  circumstance  that  there  should  be  so  immense  an
area  in  eastern  Oceanica,  studded  with  minute  islands,  without
one  single  spot  where  there  is  a  wider  extent  of  land  than  be¬
long  to  such  islands  as  Otaheite,  Owhyhee,  and  a  few  others,
which  either  have  been  or  are  still  the  seats  of  active  volcanos.
If  an  equilibrium  only  were  maintained  between  the  upheaving
and  depressing  force  of  earthquakes,  large  islands  would  very
soon  be  formed  in  the  Pacific  ;  for,  in  that  case,  the  growth
of  limestone,  the  flowing  of  lava,  and  the  ejection  of  volcanic
ashes,  would  combine  with  the  upheaving  force  to  form  new
land.

Suppose  the  shoal  which  we  have  described  as  six  hundred
miles  in  length  to  sink  fifteen  feet,  and  then  to  remain  unmoved
for  a  thousand  years  ;  during  that  interval  the  growing  coral
may  again  approach  the  surface.  Then  let  the  mass  be  re¬
elevated  fifteen  feet,  so  that  the  original  reef  is  restored  to  its
former  position :  in  this  case  the  new  coral  formed  since  the
first  subsidence  will  constitute  an  island  six  hundred  miles  long.
An  analogous  result  would  have  occurred  if  a  lava-current

*  Observations  on  the  Geology  of  the  West  Indian  Islands,  Journal  of  Science,
&c.,  No.  X.  p.  318.

f  Malte-Brun’s  Geog.,  vol.  iii.  p.  401.


Ch.  XVIII.]  ELIZABETH  OR  HENDERSON^  ISLAND.  305

fifteen  feet  thick  had  overflowed  the  submerged  reef.  The
absence,  therefore,  of  more  extensive  tracts  of  land  in  the
Pacific  seems  to  show  that  the  amount  of  subsidence  by  earth¬
quakes  exceeds  in  that  quarter  of  the  globe  at  present  the  ele¬
vation  due  to  the  same  cause.

Elizabeth  or  Henderson's  Island . — We  mentioned  that  one
of  the  thirty-two  islands  examined  by  our  navigators  in  the
late  expedition  was  raised  about  eighty  feet  above  the  level  of
the  sea  *.  It  is  called  Elizabeth  or  Henderson’s  Island,  and
is  five  miles  in  length  by  one  in  breadth.  It  has  a  flat  surface,
and  on  all  sides  except  the  north  is  bounded  by  perpendicular
cliffs  about  fifty  feet  high,  composed  entirely  of  dead  coral,
more  or  less  porous,  honey -combed  at  the  surface,  and  harden¬
ing  into  a  compact  calcareous  mass,  which  possesses  the  frac¬
ture  of  secondary  limestone,  and  has  a  species  of  millepore
interspersed  through  it.  These  cliffs  are  considerably  under¬
mined  by  the  action  of  the  waves,  and  some  of  them  appear  on


No.  8.


Elizabeth  or  Henderson' s  Island.

No.  9.


Enlarged  view  of  part  of  Elizabeth  or  Henderson's  Island.


the  eve  of  precipitating  their  superincumbent  weight  into  the
sea.  Those  which  are  less  injured  in  this  way  present  no  alter¬
nate  ridges  or  indication  of  the  different  levels  which  the  sea
might  have  occupied  at  different  periods,  but  a  smooth  sur¬
face,  as  if  the  island,  which  has  probably  been  raised  by  vol¬
canic  agency,  had  been  forced  up  by  one  great  subterraneous
convulsion  f .

At  the  distance  of  a  few  hundred  yards  from  this  island,  no

*  According  to  some  accounts,  between  sixty  and  seventy  feet,
f  Beechey,  ibid.,  p.  46.


Von.  II.


X


306


EXTENT  OF  CORAL  FORMATIONS.


[Ch.  XVIII.


bottom  could  be  gained  with  two  hundred  fathoms  of  line.
It  will  be  seen  from  the  annexed  sketch,  communicated  to  me
by  Lieutenant  Smyth,  of  the  Blossom,  that  the  trees  come
down  to  the  beach  towards  the  centre  of  the  isle,  a  break  which
at  first  sight  resembles  the  openings  which  usually  lead  into
lagoons :  but  the  trees  stand  on  a  steep  slope,  and  no  hollow  of
an  ancient  lagoon  was  perceived.  The  reader  will  remark  that
such  a  mass  of  limestone  represents  exactly  those  horizontal
cappings  of  calcareous  strata  which  we  sometimes  find  on  hills
which  have  tabular  summits.

As  we  have  at  present  no  proof  that  Henderson’s  Island  has
been  upheaved  within  the  historical  period,  we  deviate  some¬
what  from  our  plan  when  we  describe  it  in  the  present  chapter;
but,  as  earthquakes  are  now  felt  from  time  to  time  in  this
part  of  the  Pacific,  and  as  indications  of  very  recent  changes
of  level  are  not  wanting  *,  it  is  by  no  means  improbable
that  the  era  of  the  elevation  of  this  island  may  not  be  very
remote.

Vast  area  of  coral  formations. — The  calcareous  masses  which
we  have  now  considered,  constitute,  together  with  the  asso¬
ciated  volcanic  formations,  the  most  extensive  of  the  groups  of
rocks  which  can  be  demonstrated  to  be  now  in  progress.  The
space  in  the  sea  which  they  occupy  is  so  vast,  that  we  may
safely  infer  that  they  exceed  in  area  any  group  of  ancient  rocks
which  can  be  proved  to  have  been  of  contemporaneous  origin.
We  grant  that  each  of  the  great  archipelagos  of  the  Pacific
are  separated  by  unfathomable  abysses,  where  no  zoophytes
may  live  and  no  lavas  flow,  where  not  even  a  particle  of  coral
sand  or  volcanic  scoriae  may  be  drifted :  we  confine  our  view  to
the  extent  of  reef  ascertained  to  exist,  and  assume  that  a  cer¬
tain  space  around  each  volcanic  or  coral  isle  has  been  covered
with  ejections  or  matter  from  the  waste  of  cliffs,  and  it  will
then  be  seen  that  the  space  occupied  by  these  formations  may
equal,  and  perhaps  exceed  in  area  that  part  of  our  continents
which  has  been  accurately  explored  by  the  geologist.

*  See  Captain  Beechey’s  Voyage* to  the  Pacific,  &c.,  pp.  159  and  191.


Ch.  XVIII.]  ANIMAL  ORIGIN  OF  LIMESTONE  CONSIDERED.  307

That  the  increase  of  these  calcareous  masses  should  be  prin¬
cipally,  if  not  entirely,  confined  to  the  shallower  parts  of  the
ocean,  or  in  other  words,  to  the  summits  of  submarine  ranges

o

of  mountains  and  elevated  platforms,  is  a  circumstance  of  the
highest  interest  to  the  geologist ;  for  if  parts  of  the  bed  of  such
an  ocean  should  be  upraised,  so  as  to  form  large  continents,
mountain-chains  might  appear,  capped  and  flanked  by  calca¬
reous  strata  of  great  thickness,  and  replete  with  organic  remains,
while  in  the  intervening  lower  regions  no  rocks  of  contemporary
origin  would  ever  have  existed.

Lime  ivhence  derived. — A  modern  writer  has  attempted  to
revive  the  theory  of  some  of  the  earlier  geologists,  that  all
limestones  have  originated  in  organized  substances.  If  we
examine,  he  says,  the  quantity  of  limestone  in  the  primary
strata,  it  will  be  found  to  bear  a  much  smaller  proportion  to
the  siliceous  and  argillaceous  rocks  than  in  the  secondary,  and
this  may  have  some  connexion  with  the  rarity  of  testaceous
animals  in  the  ancient  ocean.  He  further  infers  that  in  con¬
sequence  of  the  operations  of  animals,  c  the  quantity  of  calca¬
reous  earth  deposited  in  the  form  of  mud  or  stone  is  always
increasing  ;  and  that  as  the  secondary  series  far  exceeds  the
primary  in  this  respect,  so  a  third  series  may  hereafter  arise
from  the  depths  of  the  sea,  which  may  exceed  the  last  in  the
proportion  of  its  calcareous  strata  */

If  these  propositions  went  no  farther  than  to  suggest  that
every  particle  of  lime  that  now  enters  into  the  crust  of  the
globe,  may  possibly  in  its  turn  have  been  subservient  to  the
purposes  of  life  by  entering  into  the  composition  of  organized
bodies,  we  should  not  deem  the  speculation  improbable ;  but
when  it  is  hinted  that  lime  may  be  an  animal  product  combined
by  the  powers  of  vitality  from  some  simple  elements,  we  can
discover  no  sufficient  grounds  for  such  an  hypothesis,  and  many
facts  which  militate  against  it.

If  a  large  pond  be  made,  in  almost  any  soil,  and  filled  with
rain  water,  it  may  usually  become  tenanted  by  testacea,  for
*  Macculloch’s  Syst.  of  Geol.,  vol.  i.  p.  219.


308


THE  THEORY  THAT  CALCAREOUS  MATTER  [Ch.  XVIII.


carbonate  of  lime  is  almost  universally  diffused  in  small  quan¬
tities.  But  if  no  calcareous  matter  be  supplied  by  waters
flowing  from  the  surrounding  high  grounds  or  by  springs,  no
tufa  or  shell-marl  are  formed.  The  thin  shells  of  one  genera¬
tion  of  molluscs  decompose,  so  that  their  elements  afford  nutri¬
ment  to  the  succeeding  races  ;  and  it  is  only  where  a  stream
enters  a  lake,  which  may  introduce  a  fresh  supply  of  calcareous
matter,  or  where  the  lake  is  fed  by  springs,  that  shells  accumu¬
late  and  form  marl.

All  the  lakes  in  Forfarshire  which  have  produced  deposits
of  shell-marl,  have  been  the  sites  of  springs  which  still  evolve
much  carbonic  acid,  and  a  small  quantity  of  carbonate  of  lime.
But  there  is  no  marl  in  Loch  Fithie,  near  Forfar,  where  there
are  no  springs,  although  that  lake  is  surrounded  by  these  cal¬
careous  deposits,  and  although,  in  every  other  respect,  the  site
is  favourable  to  the  accumulation  of  aquatic  testacea.

We  find  those  charge  which  secrete  the  largest  quantity  of
calcareous  matter  in  their  stems,  to  abound  near  springs  im¬
pregnated  with  carbonate  of  lime.  We  know  that  if  the  com¬
mon  hen  be  deprived  altogether  of  calcareous  nutriment,  the
shells  of  her  eggs  will  become  of  too  slight  a  consistency  to
protect  the  contents,  and  some  birds  eat  chalk  greedily  during
the  breeding  season.

If  on  the  other  hand  we  turn  to  the  phenomena  of  inorganic
nature,  we  observe  that,  in  volcanic  countries,  there  is  an
enormous  evolution  of  carbonic  acid,  mixed  with  water  or  in  a
gaseous  form,  and  that  the  springs  of  such  districts  are  usually
impregnated  with  carbonate  of  lime  in  great  abundance.  No
one  who  has  travelled  in  Tuscany,  through  the  region  of  ex¬
tinct  volcanos  and  its  confines,  or  who  has  seen  the  map
recently  constructed  by  Targioni  to  show  the  principal  sites  of
mineral  springs,  can  doubt  for  a  moment,  that,  if  this  territory
was  submerged  beneath  the  sea,  it  might  supply  materials  for
the  most  extensive  coral  reefs.  The  importance  of  these  springs
is  not  to  be  estimated  by  the  magnitude  of  the  rocks  which
they  have  thrown  down  on  the  slanting  sides  of  hills,  although


Ch.  XVIII.]  IS  ON  THE  INCREASE  CONTROVERTED.  309

of  these  alone  large  cities  might  be  built,  nor  by  a  coating  of
travertin  that  covers  the  soil  in  some  districts  for  miles  in
length.  The  greater  part  of  the  calcareous  matter  passes  down
in  a  state  of  solution  to  the  sea  ;  and  a  geologist  might  as  well
assume  the  mass  of  alluvium  formed  in  a  few  years  in  the
bed  of  the  Po,  or  the  Ganges,  to  be  the  measure  of  the  quantity
deposited  in  the  course  of  centuries  in  the  deltas  of  those  rivers,
as  conceive  that  the  influence  of  the  carbonated  springs  in  Italy
can  be  estimated  by  the  mass  of  tufa  precipitated  by  them  near
their  sources.

It  is  generally  admitted  that  the  abundance  of  carbonate  of
lime  given  out  by  springs,  in  regions  where  volcanic  eruptions
or  earthquakes  prevail,  is  referrible  to  the  solvent  power  of
carbonic  acid.  For,  as  the  acidulous  waters  percolate  calca¬
reous  strata,  they  take  up  a  certain  portion  of  lime  and  carry
it  up  to  the  surface,  where,  under  diminished  pressure  in  the
atmosphere,  it  may  be  deposited,  or,  being  absorbed  by  animals
and  vegetables,  may  be  secreted  by  them.  In  Auvergne,
springs  charged  with  carbonate  of  lime  rise  through  granite,  in
which  case  we  must  suppose  the  calcareous  matter  to  be  derived
from  some  primary  rock,  unless  we  imagine  it  to  rise  up  from
the  volcanic  foci  themselves.

We  see  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  lime  now  on  the
surface,  or  in  the  crust  of  the  earth,  may  not,  as  well  as  the
silex,  alumine,  or  any  other  mineral  substance,  have  existed
before  the  first  organic  beings  were  created,  if  it  be  assumed
that  the  arrangement  of  the  inorganic  materials  of  our  planet
preceded  in  the  order  of  time  the  introduction  of  the  first
organic  inhabitants.

But  if  the  carbonate  of  lime  secreted  by  the  testacea  and
corals  of  the  Pacific,  be  chiefly  derived  from  below ,  and  if  it
be  a  very  general  effect  of  the  action  of  subterranean  heat  to
subtract  calcareous  matter  from  the  inferior  rocks,  and  to
cause  it  to  ascend  to  the  surface,  no  argument  can  be  derived
in  favour  of  the  progressive  increase  of  limestone  from  the
magnitude  of  coral  reefs,  or  the  greater  proportion  of  calca-


310


LIME  WHENCE  DERIVED.


[Ch.  XVIII.


reous  strata,  in  the  more  modern  formations.  A  constant
transfer  of  carbonate  of  lime  from  the  inferior  parts  of  the
earth’s  crust  to  its  surface^  would  cause  throughout  all  future
time,  and  for  an  indefinite  succession  of  geological  epochs,  a
preponderance  of  calcareous  matter  in  the  newer,  as  contrasted
with  the  older  formations.


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAR


FRONTISPIECE.

View  of  part  of  the  Valley  del  Bove,  on  the  East  side  of  the

great  Cone  of  Etna.

This  valley  is  a  cavity  of  immense  depth,  commencing  at  a
short  distance  below  the  summit  of  Etna,  and  descending
through  that  zone  of  the  mountain  where  lateral  eruptions  are
frequent.  The  general  dip  of  the  volcanic  beds  in  the  preci¬
pices  surrounding  this  valley  is  towards  the  sea,  but  exceptions
occur  where  lateral  cones  have  been  buried  in  the  manner  de¬
scribed  in  the  first  volume.  The  stupendous  precipices  sur¬
rounding  this  great  amphitheatre  vary  from  600  to  nearly  3000
feet  in  height,  and  they  are  traversed  on  all  sides  by  innume¬
rable  vertical  walls  or  dikes  of  compact  lava,  which  cut  through
the  sloping  beds  of  lava,  sand,  and  scorias,  of  which  the  great
cone  is  formed.  These  dikes,  which  will  be  described  in  the
next  volume,  seem  all  to  have  been  produced  by  ancient  lateral
eruptions  on  the  flanks  of  Etna.

The  causes  which  have  produced  this  great  depression  in
the  otherwise  symmetrical  cone  of  the  volcano  will  be  discussed
in  the  third  volume,  and  we  shall  merety  state  here  that  we
consider  the  conformation  of  the  rocky  barrier  encircling  the
cavity  as  entirely  at  variance  with  an  hypothesis  recently  pro¬
posed,  that  the  hollow  was  a  crater  of  eruption  from  whence
the  scoriae  of  the  surrounding  heights  have  proceeded.

We  have  introduced  two  colours  into  the  plate,  the  grey  to
express  that  part  of  the  mountain  which  may  have  been  formed
before  the  origin  of  the  ‘  Val  del  Bove,’  the  red  to  indicate  the
part  which  has  resulted  from  eruptions  subsequent  to  the


312


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAP.


formation  of  the  valley.  The  great  lava-currents  of  1819  and
1811,  described  in  the  first  volume,  are  seen  pouring  down
from  the  higher  parts  of  the  valley,  overrunning  the  forests  of
the  great  plain,  and  rising  up  in  the  foreground  on  the  left
with  a  rugged  surface,  on  which  small  hillocks  and  depressions
are  seen,  such  as  often  characterize  a  lava-current  immediately
after  its  consolidation.

The  small  cone.  No.  7,  was  formed  in  1811,  and  was  still
smoking  when  I  saw  it  in  1828.  Immediately  in  front  of  it
is  seen  another  cone,  formed  during  the  same  eruption.  The
other  small  volcano  to  the  left,  from  which  vapour  is  issuing,
was  formed,  I  believe,  in  1819.

This  sketch,  which  forms  part  of  a  panoramic  drawing  which
I  made  in  November,  1828,  is  merely  intended  to  assist  the
reader  in  comprehending  some  geological  details  into  which  we
shall  hereafter  enter,  on  the  structure  of  the  older  portion  of
Etna,  but  it  will  give  no  idea  of  the  extraordinary  geological
interest,  still  less  of  the  picturesque  grandeur  of  this  magnifi¬
cent  scene  of  desolation.  Nor  is  the  view  sufficiently  extensive
to  exhibit  the  entire  form  of  the  vast  amphitheatre,  part  only
of  the  northern,  and  scarcely  any  of  the  southern  boundary  of
which  is  included.


MAP

Showing  the  extent  of  Surface  in  Europe  which  has  been  covered
by  Water  since  the  Deposition  of  the  older  Tertiary  Strata.
( Strata  of  the  Paris  and  London  Basins,  Sfc .)

[Constructed  chiefly  from  M.  Arnie  Bone’s  Geological  Map  of  Europe.]

This  map  will  enable  the  reader  to  perceive  at  a  glance  the
great  extent  of  change  in  the  physical  geography  of  Europe
which  can  be  proved  to  have  taken  place  since  some  of  the
older  tertiary  strata  were  deposited.  The  most  ancient  part
of  the  period  to  which  the  map  refers  cannot  be  deemed  very


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAP.


3  13


remote,  considered  geologically,  because  the  deposits  of  the
Paris  and  London  basins,  of  Auvergne,  and  many  other  dis¬
tricts  belonging  to  the  older  tertiary  epoch,  are  newer  than
the  greater  part  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  of  which  the  crust  of
the  globe  is  composed.  The  species,  moreover,  of  marine  and
fresh-water  testacea,  of  which  the  remains  are  found  in  these
formations,  are  not  entirely  distinct  from  such  as  now  live ;  a
proportion  of  about  three  in  a  hundred  of  the  fossil  species
having  been  identified  with  species  now  living.  Yet,  notwith¬
standing  the  comparatively  recent  epoch  to  which  the  retro¬
spect  is  carried,  the  variations  in  the  distribution  of  land  and
sea  depicted  on  the  map  form  only  a  part  of  those  which  must
have  taken  place  during  the  period  under  consideration.  Some
approximation  has  merely  been  made  to  a  correct  estimate  of
the  amount  of  sea  converted  into  land  in  that  part  of  Europe
best  known  to  geologists,  but  we  cannot  determine  how  much
land  has  become  sea  during  the  same  period  ;  and  there  may
have  been  repeated  interchanges  of  land  and  water  in  the  same
places,  mutations  of  which  no  account  is  taken  in  the  map,  and
respecting  the  amount  of  which  little  accurate  information  can
ever  be  obtained  by  geologists.

The  proofs  of  submergence,  during  some  part  of  the  tertiary
period,  throughout  the  districts  distinguished  by  ruled  lines,
are  of  a  most  unequivocal  character  ;  for  the  area  thus  de¬
scribed  is  now  covered  by  deposits  containing  the  remains  of
aquatic  animals  belonging  to  tertiary  species.  We  have,  indeed,
extended  the  sea  in  two  or  three  instances  beyond  these  limits,
because  other  geological  data  have  been  obtained  for  inferring
the  submergence  of  these  tracts  subsequently  to  the  commence¬
ment  of  the  deposition  of  the  tertiary  strata.  Thus  we  shall
explain,  in  the  next  volume,  our  reasons  for  concluding  that
part  of  the  chalk  of  England  (the  north  and  south  downs,  for
example,  together  with  some  other  adjoining  secondary  tracts),
continued  beneath  the  sea  until  the  older  tertiary  beds  had
begun  to  accumulate.

It  is  possible  also  that  a  considerable  part  of  Caernarvon-


314


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAP.


shire  might  with  propriety  have  been  represented  as  sea,  if  our
information  respecting  the  geology  of  that  country  had  been
more  full  and  accurate  ;  for  marine  shells  have  been  found  in
sand  and  gravel  at  the  height  of  one  thousand  feet  above  the
level  of  the  sea,  on  the  summit  of  Moel  Tryfane,  between
Snowdon  and  the  Menai  Straits.  The  species  are  apparently
recent,  but  certainly  are  newer  than  the  older  tertiary  epoch*.

The  introduction  of  a  small  bay  where  the  river  Kibble
enters  into  the  sea  in  Lancashire  is  warranted  by  the  newly-
discovered  deposit  of  tertiary  shells  covering  an  area  of  about
thirty  miles  square  in  that  region  “I*.

A  portion  also  of  the  primary  district  in  Brittany  is  divided
into  islands,  because  it  has  been  long  known  to  be  covered  with
patches  of  marine  tertiary  strata ;  and  when  I  examined  the
disposition  of  these,  in  company  with  my  friend.  Captain  S.  E.
Cook,  R.N.,  in  1830,  I  was  convinced  that  the  sea  must  have
covered  much  larger  areas  than  are  now  occupied  by  these
small  and  detached  deposits.

The  former  connexion  of  the  White  Sea  and  the  Gulf  of
Finland  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  a  broad  band  of  tertiary
strata  extends  throughout  part  of  the  intervening  space.  We
have  represented  the  channel  as  somewhat  broader  than  the
tract  now  occupied  by  the  tertiary  formation,  because  the  latter
is  bordered  on  the  north-west  by  a  part  of  Finland,  which  is
extremely  low,  and  so  thickly  interspersed  with  lakes  as  to  be
nearly  half  covered  with  fresh-water.

Certain  portions  of  the  north-western  shores  of  Norway
have  been  left  blank,  because  the  discovery  by  Von  Bucli,
Brongniart,  and  others,  of  deposits  of  recent  shells  along  the
coast  of  Norway  and  Sweden,  at  several  places  and  at  various
heights  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  attest  the  comparatively


*  Joshua  Trimmer,  Esq.,  Proceedings  of  the  Geological  Society  of  London,
No.  22,  1831.  The  shells  were  exhibited  at  the  Geological  Society  when  the
memoir  was  read.

f  See  an  abstract  of  a  memoir  read  by  Mr.  Murchison,  Pres,  Geol.  Soc.,  Pro¬
ceedings  of  York  Meeting,  1831.


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAP.


315


recent  date  of  the  elevation  of  part  of  the  gneiss  and  other
primary  rocks  in  that  country,  although  we  are  unable  as  yet
to  determine  how  far  the  sea  may  have  extended.

On  the  other  hand,  a  considerable  space  of  low  land  along
the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia,  in  the  Baltic,  is  represented
as  sea,  because  the  growth  of  deltas  on  that  coast,  and  the
shallowing  of  the  water  by  sedimentary  deposits  during  the
historical  era,  leave  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  extent  of  the
gulf  must  have  been  very  much  greater  at  some  periods  since
the  older  tertiary  epoch.

The  low  granitic  steppe,  coloured  red,  to  the  north  of  the
Black  Sea,  has  not  been  represented  as  having  been  under
water  during  the  tertiary  period,  although,  from  the  quantity
of  marine  tertiary  strata  in  the  surrounding  districts,  it  is  far
from  improbable  that  it  has  recently  emerged.

We  were  anxious  in  the  observations  annexed  to  the  title  of
this  map,  to  guard  the  reader  against  the  supposition  that  it
was  intended  to  represent  the  state  of  the  physical  geography
of  part  of  Europe  at  any  one  period.  It  is  not  a  restoration
of  a  former  condition  of  things,  but  a  view  of  the  change  which
a  certain  amount  of  surface  has  undergone  within  a  given
period,  an  alteration  so  complete,  that  not  one  of  the  species  of
organic  beings  which  now  inhabit  the  large  space  designated
by  ruled  lines,  beyond  the  borders  of  the  existing  seas,  can
have  lived  there  during  some  other  period  subsequent  to  the
commencement  of  the  tertiary  era.

We  have  stated,  in  the  first  volume  *,  that  the  movements  of
earthquakes  occasion  the  subsidence  as  well  as  the  upraising  of
the  surface;  and  that,  by  the  alternate  rising  and  sinking  of
particular  spaces,  at  successive  periods,  a  great  area  may  have
been  entirely  covered  with  marine  deposits,  although  the
whole  may  never  have  been  beneath  the  waters  at  one  time  ;
nay,  even  though  the  relative  proportion  of  land  and  sea  may
have  continued  unaltered  throughout  the  whole  period.  We
believe,  however,  that  since  the  commencement  of  the  tertiary

*  Chap.  viii.


3  LB


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAP*


period,  the  dry  land  in  the  northern  hemisphere  has  been  con¬
tinually  on  the  increase,  not  only  because  it  is  now  greatly  in
excess  beyond  the  average  proportion  which  land  generally
bears  to  water  on  the  globe,  but  because  the  comparison  of  the
secondary  and  tertiary  strata  implies  a  passage  throughout  the
space  now  occupied  by  Europe,  from  the  condition  of  an  ocean
interspersed  with  islands  to  that  of  a  large  continent.

But  if  it  were  possible  to  represent  all  the  vicissitudes  in  the
distribution  of  land  and  sea  that  have  occurred  during  the
tertiary  period,  and  to  exhibit  not  only  the  actual  existence  of
land  where  there  was  once  sea,  but  also  the  extent  of  surface
now  submerged,  which  may  once  have  been  land,  the  map
would  still  fail  to  express  all  the  important  revolutions  in
physical  geography,  which  have  taken  place  within  the  epoch
under  consideration.  The  oscillations  of  level  have  not  merely
been  such  as  to  lift  up  the  land  from  below  the  waters  to  a
small  height  above  them,  but  in  some  cases  a  rise  of  several
thousand  feet  has  been  effected.  Thus  the  Alps  have  ac¬
quired  an  additional  altitude  of  from  2000  to  4000  feet,  and
even  in  some  places  still  more  ;  and  the  Apennines  owe  a
great  part  of  their  height  (from  1000  to  2000  feet  and
upwards)  to  subterranean  convulsions  which  have  happened
within  the  tertiary  epoch.

On  the  other  hand,  some  mountain  chains  may  have  been
lowered  during  the  same  series  of  ages,  in  an  equal  degree,
and  shoals  may  have  been  converted  into  deep  abysses.

It  would  be  superfluous  to  point  out  in  detail  the  bearing
of  the  facts  exhibited  in  this  map,  on  the  theories  proposed  in
a  former  part  of  this  volume,  respecting  the  migrations  of
animals  and  plants,  and  the  extinction  of  species ;  and  it  would
be  equally  unnecessary  to  enlarge  on  the  variations  in  local
climate,  which  must  have  accompanied  such  vicissitudes  in
physical  geography.

But  the  general  temperature,  also,  of  the  habitable  surface
of  the  globe,  as  well  as  the  local  climates,  may  have  been  con¬
siderably  modified  by  such  extraordinary  revolutions.  The


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES  AND  MAP.


317


alteration  in  climate,  implied  by  a  comparison  of  the  organic
remains  of  the  older  tertiary  strata,  and  the  species  of  living
animals  and  plants  does  not  appear  to  be  so  great  as  would  be
produced  if  the  temperature  of  our  tropics  were  now  trans¬
ferred  to  the  temperate  zone,  and  the  temperature  of  the  latter
to  the  arctic.  We  do  not,  therefore,  anticipate  that  the  reader,
who  has  duly  studied  the  arguments  explained  by  us  in  the
6th,  7th,  and  8th  chapters  of  the  first  volume,  will  object  to
the  adequacy  of  the  cause  proposed,  on  the  score  of  the  small
quantity  of  geographical  change  during  the  time  in  question.

But  if  there  be  good  reason  to  conclude  that  the  change
would  be  fully  adequate,  in  point  of  the  magnitude  of  its  effects,
this  cause,  we  conceive,  ought  to  supersede  every  other  of  a
purely  speculative  nature,  until  some  argument  can  be  adduced
to  prove  that  the  change  has  not  acted  in  the  right  direction*.

Some  persons,  but  slightly  acquainted  with  the  present  state
of  geology,  have  objected,  that  the  lands  in  high  northern
latitudes  have  not  been  recently  elevated.  If  they  had  re¬
flected  that  every  year  we  are  making  some  new  discoveries
respecting  the  periods  when  tracts  in  the  immediate  neigh¬
bourhood  of  the  great  European  capitals  emerged  from  the
deep,  and  had  they  sufficiently  considered  that  the  antiquity
of  a  group  of  rocks  has  no  necessary  connexion  with  the  date
of  its  elevation,  they  would  probably  have  seen  the  futility  of
such  arguments.  As  far  as  we  can  conjecture,  from  the  very
scanty  information  which  we  possess  of  the  geology  of  the
arctic  region,  there  is  no  want  of  proofs  of  comparatively
recent  alterations  of  level.

In  conclusion,  we  may  remark  that  the  portion  of  Europe
distinguished  in  this  map  by  colours  and  ruled  lines,  com¬
prises  the  greater  part  of  the  globe  now  known  to  geologists —
almost  all  at  least  that  is  known  in  such  a  manner  as  to  en¬
title  any  one  to  speculate  on  the  mutations  in  physical  geo¬
graphy  which  have  taken  place  during  the  tertiary  period.

*  See  Mr.  Herschel’s  remarks  on  a  change  of  climate. — Disc,  on  the  Study
of  Nat.  Phil.  pp.  146  and  148.


318


DESCRIPTION  OF  TIIE  PLATES  AND  MAP.


In  regard  to  other  parts  of  the  world,  we  have  no  reason  for
inferring,  from  any  data  hitherto  obtained,  that  during  an
equal  lapse  of  the  ages  which  immediately  preceded  our  times,
an  equal  amount  of  alteration  of  surface  may  not  have  taken
place.


LIST  OF  WOOD-CUTS.

1.  Eggs  of  fresh-water  Molluscs,  p.  115.

2.  Seed  vessel  of  Chara  hispida,  p.  280.

3.  Stem  and  branches  of  ditto,  p.  281.

4.  Chain  of  coral  islets,  called  the  Maldivas,  p.  294.

5.  View  of  Whitsunday  Island,  p.  298.

6.  Section  of  a  coral  island,  p.  298.

7.  Ditto  of  part  of  a  coral  island,  p.  298.

8.  Elizabeth,  or  Henderson’s  Island,  p.  305.

9.  Enlarged  view  of  part  of  ditto,  p.  305.


I  N  D  E  X.


VOL.  II.


Acquired  habits  of  animals  rarely  trans¬
missible.  page  50

Adige,  its  delta  increased  by  the  system  of
embankment,  209

Adriatic,  Donati  on  the  bed  of  the,  290
Lilian,  on  the  breeding  of  elephants  in
captivity,  47

Africa,  devastations  caused  by  locusts  in,
142

-  many  species  probably  annihilated

by  the  advance  of  the  sands  of,  172

-  dried  carcasses  of  camels  imbedded

in  the  deserts  of,  241

•  -  strata  now  forming  off  the  coast  of,

290

African  desert,  its  area  as  compared  to  the
Mediterranean,  173
Airthrey,  a  fossil  whale  found  at,  286
Algae,  great  depths  at  which  some  species
live,  75

•  -  may  leave  traces  of  their  form  in  cal¬

careous  mud,  285
Alloa,  whale  cast  ashore  at,  285

-  fossil  whale  found  near,  286

Alluvium,  definition  of,  234

-  stalagmite  found  alternating  with  in

French  caves,  228

- imbedding  of  organic  remains  in,

234

Alps,  have  been  greatly  raised  during  the
tertiary  epoch,  316

Alternations  of  marine  and  fresh-water
strata,  how  formed,  284
America,  specific  distinctness  of  the  ani¬
mals  in,  and  those  of  the  Old  World,
69,  90

- domesticated  animals  have  run  wild

in,  28,  158

-  rapid  multiplication  of  domestic  qua¬
drupeds  in,  158

-  number  of  plants  common  to  the  Old

World,  and,  72

-  number  of  square  miles  of  useful

soil  in,  162

Andes,  may  have  undergone  great  changes
of  level  in  the  last  6000  years,  272

-  effects  which  it  is  said  would  result

from  their  sudden  elevation,  286
Animal  kingdom,  theory  of  the  unnter-
rupted  succession  in  the,  2


Animal  origin  of  limestone  theory  con¬
sidered,  307

Animal  remains  in  caves  and  fissures,  225
Animals,  Lamarck’s  theory  of  the  produc¬
tion  of  new  organs  in,  7

-  imported  into  America  have  run

wild,  28

-  aptitude  of  some  kinds  to  domestica¬
tion,  40

-  hereditary  instincts  of,  40

-  domestic  qualities  soon  developed  in

some,  48

-  some  of  their  qualities  given  with  a

view  to  their  connexion  with  man,  42,
46,49

-  their  acquired  habits  rarely  trans¬
missible,  50

-  changes  in  the  brain  of  the  foetus  in

vertebrated,  65

-  their  agency  in  diffusing  plants,  82

- their  geographical  distribution,  90

-  different  regions  of  indigenous,  91

-  marsupial,  distribution  of,  92

- -  in  islands,  93

- -  their  powers  of  swimming,  95

-  migrations  of,  97

- -  their  power  of  crossing  the  sea  very

limited,  100

-  causes  which  determine  the  stations

of,  135,  145

— - —  influence  of  society  in  altering  the
distribution  of,  155

-  migratory  powers  indispensable  to,

165

- - -  manner  in  which  they  become  pre¬

served  in  peat,  222

- -  remains  of  those  most  common  in

peat-mosses,  225

-  most  abundantly  preserved  where

earthquakes  prevail,  236

- —  imbedded  by  floods  in  Scotland,

237

- imbedded  by  river  inundations,  254

-  imbedded  in  Scotch  marl-lakes,  258

Animate  creation,  changes  now  in  progress
in  the,  1

Antagonist  powers,  synchronism  of  their
action,  202

Antiseptic  property  of  peat,  whence  de¬
rived,  222


320


INDEX.


Ants,  their  ravages  in  Grenada,  142
Apennines,  have  been  a  vegetable  centre
whence  species  diffused  themselves,  184
- -  in  great  part  elevated  during  the  ter¬
tiary  epoch,  316

Aphides,  White’s  account  of  a  shower  of,

119

-  their  rapid  multiplication,  141

* -  ravages  caused  by,  141

Apure,  river,  wild  horses  drowned  in  great
numbers  by  the  annual  floods  of  the,
257

Aquatic  and  terrestrial  species,  their  re¬
ciprocal  influence,  144
Aquatic  species,  imbedding  of  their  re¬
mains  in  subaqueous  strata,  279
Aqueous  lavas  in  Campania,  seven  persons
destroyed  by,  242

Arabian  Gulf,  rapidly  filling  with  coral,
293

Arctic  region,  on  alterations  of  level  in  the,
319

Asia,  Central,  great  depression  in,  169
Ass,  the,  has  run  wild  in  Quito,  159

-  wild,  account  of  their  migrations  in

Tartary,  98

Astrea,  genus,  instrumental  in  the  forma¬
tion  of  coral,  292

Athabasca  Lake,  large  shoal  formed  by
drift-wood  in,  249

Atlantic,  absence  of  circular  coral  groups
in  the,  299

Aubenas,  fissures  filled  with  breccia  near,
227

Augustin,  St.,  on  a  plague  caused  by  lo¬
custs  in  Africa,  142

Australia,  the  kangaroo  and  emu  giving
way  in,  157

- - extent  of  coral  reefs  off  the  coast  of,

293

Auvergne,  tertiary  deposits  of,  313

Baboon  of  Sumatra,  trained  to  ascend
trees,  48

Bacon,  Lord,  on  the  vicissitudes  of  things,
278

Baffin’s  Bay,  marine  animals  found  at  great
depths  in,  187

Bakewell,  Mr.,  on  the  formation  of  soils,
194

— —  his  account  of  the  fall  of  Mount
Grenier,  235

Bakie  loch,  charse  found  in  a  fossil  state
in,  281

Ballard,  M.,  on  changes  which  some  human
bones  have  undergone,  in  fourteen  or
fifteen  centuries,  231

Barbadoes,  rain  diminished  by  the  felling
of  forests  in,  206.

Barriers  to  the  distribution  of  species,  re¬
marks  on,  179


Barrow,  Mr.,  his  account  of  a  bank  formed
in  the  sea  by  the  bodies  of  locusts,
143

Barton,  Mr.,  on  the  agency  of  insects  in
the  fructification  of  plants,  57

-  on  the  geography  of  plants,  70

Baumhauer,  Mr.,  his  account  of  a  violent
river-flood  in  Java,  258
Bears,  once  numerous  in  Wales,  156

-  black,  migrate  in  great  numbers,  97

Beaver,  once  an  inhabitant  of  Scotland  and
Wales,  155

-  remains  of  the,  found  in  shell-marl,

in  Perthshire,  259
Bee,  number  of  instincts  of  the,  61
Beechey,  Captain,  on  the  drifting  of  canoes
in  the  Pacific,  124

-  on  the  buried  temple  of  Ipsambul,

240

-  on  the  rate  of  the  growth  of  coral  in

the  Pacific,  295

-  on  the  situation  of  the  channels  into

the  lagoons  of  coral  islands,  301
• -  on  the  superior  height  of  the  wind¬

ward  side  of  coral  islands,  301
-  his  description  of  Elizabeth  or  Hen¬
derson’s  Island,  305

-  on  recent  changes  of  level  in  the

Pacific,  306

Belcher,  Captain,  on  the  strata  now  form¬
ing  in  the  sea  off  the  coast  of  Africa,
290

Belzoni,  on  the  buried  temple  of  Ipsam¬
bul,  240

-  his  account  of  a  flood  on  the  Nile,

260

Berkeley,  on  the  recent  origin  of  man,
277

Bewick,  on  the  great  geographical  range  of
some  birds,  105

- on  the  distribution  of  the  bustard  in

England,  156

Bhooi,  volcanic  eruption  at,  during  Cutch
earthquake,  244

Bigsby,  Dr.,  on  the  North  American  lakes,
282

Birds,  diffusion  of  plants  by,  83

-  geographical  distribution  of,  104

-  some  species  very  local,  104

-  great  range  of  some  species,  104

-  their  powers  of  diffusion,  105

-  periodical  migrations  of,  105

■ -  rate  of  the  flight  of,  106

-  frequently  overtaken  by  hurricanes,

106

-  their  agency  in  the  distribution  of

fish,  110

-  many  species  of,  unremittingly  per*

secuted,  156

-  recent  extermination  of  some  species

of,  156


INDEX.


321


Birds,  bones  of  in  Gibraltar  breccia,  229
-  rarity  of  their  remains  in  new  strata,

254

Bisons,  immense  herds  of  in  the  Mississippi
valley,  97

Size,  human  remains  found  mixed  with
extinct  mammalia  in  a  cave  at,  230
Black  cattle,  their  rapid  multiplication  in
South  America,  159

Black  Sea,  marine  tertiary  strata  found
near  the,  315

Blavier,  M.,  on  the  peat  at  the  mouth  of
the  Loire,  217

Bloomfield,  bursting  of  a  peat-moss  near,
224

Blown  sand,  imbedding  of  organic  remains,
&c.,  in,  240

Boa  constrictor,  account  of  one  conveyed
to  St.  Vincent’s  on  drift-wood,  108
Boates,  Dr.,  on  Irish  peat-bogs,  217
Boblaye,  M.,  on  the  formation  termed  ce-
ramique,  in  the  Morea,  240
Bog  iron-ore,  whence  derived,  221
Bonaparte,  C.,  on  the  birds  common  to
Rome  and  Philadelphia,  105
Bonelli,  Professor,  on  the  migrations  of  the
painted  lady  butterfly,  118
Bonpland,  on  the  plants  common  to  the
Old  and  New  World,  72
Bordeaux,  timber  destroyed  by  a  beetle
introduced  by  commerce  at,  127
Borneo,  the  orang-outang  taught  to  ascend
trees  by  the  inhabitants  of,  48
Boston,  a  narw'al  found  buried  in  mud  on
the  beach  near,  285
Botanical  geography,  70
Botanical  provinces,  their  number,  74

-  how  caused,  130

-  why  not  more  blended  together,  132

Bothnia,  gulf  of,  its  extent  formerly  much
greater,  315

Bournmouth,  submarine  forest  at,  274
Boyne,  a  large  whale  stranded  at,  285
Brand,  Rev.  J.  F.,  on  the  birth-place  of
man,  121

British  vessels,  average  number  wrecked
annually,  261,  264

* -  durable  nature  of  many  of  their  con¬

tents,  264

British  coasts,  cetacea  frequently  stranded
on  the,  285

Brittany,  a  village  in,  buried  under  blown
sand,  242

-  marine  tertiary  strata  of,  314

Brocchi,  his  remarks  on  the  extinction  of
species,  133

Broderip,  Mr.,  on  the  agency  of  lanthina
fragilis  in  disseminating  other  species,

112

-  some  large  bulimi  restored  to  life

after  twenty  months’  abstinence,  by,  113
Vol.  II.


Broderip,  Mr.,  on  the  moulting  of  the  shells
of  crabs,  115

-  on  the  naturalization  of  a  West  Indian

land-shell  near  Liverpool,  127
Bromberg,  a  vessel  and  two  anchors  dug
up  near,  267

Brongniart,  M.,  his  discovery  of  recent
shells  at  considerable  heights  in  Sweden,
314

Brown,  Mr.,  on  the  plants  common  to
Africa,  Guiana,  and  Brazil,  79
Buckland,  Dr.,  on  animal  remains  in  caves,
226

-  on  the  remains  of  recent  quadrupeds

in  fissures,  226

- -  on  stalagmite  of  caves,  228

-  on  human  remains  in  caves,  230

■ - -  on  the  organic  remains  in  the  cave

of  Paviland,  229

Buffaloes,  destroyed  in  great  numbers  by
a  river-flood  in  Java,  257
Buffon,  on  the  want  of  specific  identity  in
the  animals  of  the  Old  and  New  World,
69

-  on  the  geographical  distribution  of

animals,  90

-  on  the  check  which  the  increase  of

one  animal  offers  to  that  of  another,
160

-  his  remarks  on  the  gradual  extinc¬
tion  of  species,  182

Buildings  submerged  without  being  thrown
down,  examples  of,  2 76
Bura  and  Helice,  submerged  Grecian
towns,  276

Burckhardt,  buried  temple  of  Ipsambul
discovered  by,  240

-  his  account  of  the  carcasses  of  camels

in  the  Lybian  sands,  241
Burnt  island,  whale  cast  ashore  near,  285
Burrampooter,  bodies  of  men,  deer,  &c.,
conveyed  to  the  sea  by  the  floods  of  the,
257

Burringdon,  human  remains  found  in  a
cave  at,  230

Burrowing  shells  secure  from  the  ordinary
action  of  the  waves,  288
Bustards  recently  extirpated  in  England,
156

Bywell,  bodies  washed  out  of  the  church¬
yard  of,  by  floods,  261

Cabbages,  examples  of  deviation  from  a
common  type  shown  in  different  races
of,  33

Cachalots,  a  herd  of,  stranded  at  Kairston,
in  Orkney,  286

Caernarvonshire,  recent  discovery  of  ter¬
tiary  strata  in,  313

Calabria,  animals  how  preserved  in  allu¬
vium  in,  236

y


322


INDEX.


Calabria,  animals  engulphed  in  fissures  in,
237

Calcareous  marl  of  the  Scotch  lakes,  shells
found  in  the,  279

Calcareous  formations  of  the  Pacific,  pro¬
bably  all  stratified,  303

- -  their  great  extent,  306

Calcareous  matter,  the  theory  that  it  is  on
the  increase  controverted,  307
Caldera  of  the  isle  of  Palma,  ravine  in  the,
how  formed,  300

Callao,  recent  changes  of  level  caused  by
earthquakes  in,  272

Camels,  the  carcasses  of,  imbedded  in
drift  sand,  241.

Campania,  people  destroyed  by  aqueous
lavas  in,  242

Campbell,  Mr.,  on  the  migration  of  quag-
gas  in  South  Africa,  99
Camper,  on  the  gradation  in  intellect  as
shown  by  the  facial  angle,  63
Cannon  inclosed  in  calcareous  rock  taken
up  from  the  delta  of  the  Rhone,  269

- -  account  of  one  taken  up  near  the

Downs,  269

Canoes  full  of  men  and  women  drifted  to
great  distances,  123

-  eight  found  in  draining  Martin  Meer,

Lancashire,  268

- -  several  found  in  Loch  Doon,  268

Cape  Langaness,  drift-wood  abundant  at,  25 1
Carcasses  of  camels  in  drift-sand,  241
Caryophyllia,  coral  formed  by  the  genus,
292

Caspian,  on  the  level  of  the,  169
Caspian  and  Black  Sea  formerly  connected
by  straits,  103

Castle,  Mr.,  on  the  ravages  of  ants  in  Gre¬
nada,  142

Catalonia,  devastation  caused  by  torrents
in,  205

Catania,  part  of  the  town  of,  overflowed  by
lava,  243

. -  tools  discovered  in  digging  awell  at,

266

Catastrophes,  remarks  on  general,  167
Caterpillars,  ravages  caused  bv  some  kinds,

141

Catodon,  Ray’s  account  of  a  large  one
stranded  in  Holland,  286

-  a  herd  of  them  stranded  in  Orkney,

286

Caverns,  organic  remains  in,  may  in  some
cases  have  fallen  through  fissures,  227
Caves,  organic  remains  in,  225

-  preserved  by  sediment  introduced

by  land-floods,  228

- -  alternations  of  sediment  and  stalag¬
mite  in  some,  228

- Dr.  Buckland  on  human  remains  in,

230,  233


Caves,  marine  and  terrestrial  shells  of  eat¬
able  species  found  in,  231
Cayes,  works  of  art  found  at  a  depth  of
twenty  feet  at,  266
Central  India,  buried  cities  in,  243
Ceramique,  account  of  the  formation
termed,  240

Cetacea,  their  geographical  range,  95

- migrations  of  the,  103

-  identity  of  those  found  in  the  Medi¬
terranean  and  Caspian  Seas,  103

- imbedding  of  their  remains  in  recent

strata,  285

- often  stranded  on  low  shores  during

storms,  285

- their  remains  should  be  more  fre¬
quent  in  marine  alluvium  than  those  of
land  quadrupeds,  286
C  hag  os  isles,  their  linear  direction,  294

- —  openings  into  them  in  the  opposite

direction  to  the  prevailing  wind,  301
Chalk  of  the  north  and  south  downs  ele¬
vated  after  the  commencement  of  the
tertiary  era,  313

Chama  gigas,  time  which  it  requires  to
attain  its  lu  11  growth,  295
- found  in  the  Pacific  completely  over¬
grown  by  coral,  295

Chamisso,  M.,  on  the  formation  of  coral
islands,  292

Channel  into  the  lagoons  of  coral  islands,
how  formed,  300

Chara  hispida,  its  structure  described,  see
wood-cuts  Nos.  2  and  3,  280,  281
Charse,  fossilized  in  the  lakes  of  Forfar¬
shire,  280

Chockier,  three  alternations  of  stalagmite
and  alluvium  in  a  cave  at,  228
Christol,  M.  de,  on  human  remains,  &c.,
in  caves,  with  extinct  quadrupeds,  231
Climate,  its  influence  on  the  distribution
of  plants,  70

- effect  of  alterations  in,  on  the  distri¬
bution  of  species,  175

- its  influence  in  causing  one  species

to  give  way  before  another,  179

- influence  of  vegetation  on,  206

- on  the  alteration  which  changes  in

physical  geography  may  have  caused  in,
316

Coal,  formation  of,  at  the  mouths  of  the
Mackenzie,  249

Coiron,  land-shells  in  breccia  at,  227
Colebrooke,  Major  R.  H.,  on  the  formation
of  new  islands  in  the  Ganges,  210
Columella,  on  the  breeding  of  elephants  in
captivity,  46

Conception,  changes  of  level  caused  by
earthquakes  at,  272

Cones  formed  on  Etna  in  1819  and  1811
(see  frontispiece ),  312


INDEX.


Conservative  influence  of  vegetation,  204
Cook,  Captain,  on  the  diffusion  of  nutmeg
seeds  by  pigeons,  84

-  on  the  drifting  of  canoes  to  great

distances,  123

Cook,  Captain  S.  E.,  examined  Brittany
with  the  author,  314

Coral,  rate  of  the  growth  of,  in  the  Pacific,
295

-  its  growth  probably  varies  accord¬
ing  to  the  sites  of  mineral  springs,
295

- -  found  between  two  lava  currents  in

the  West  Indies,  303

Coral  animals,  their  action  compared  to
plants  which  generate  peat,  291

■  -  MM.  Quoy  and  Gaimard  on  the

depth  at  which  they  live,  294
Coral  islands,  formation  of,  292

- -  linear  direction  of,  see  wood-cut

No.  4,  295

- -  origin  of  the  form  of,  296

- two  sections  explaining  their  form,

see  diagrams  Nos.  6  and  7,  298
- - -  many  probably  the  crests  of  subma¬
rine  volcanos,  299

.  their  windward  side  higher  and  more

perfect  than  the  other,  301
Coral  reefs,  formation  of,  291

. -  great  beds  of  oysters,  &c.,  found  on,

in  the  Pacific,  291

-  genera  of  zoophytes  by  which  they

are  constructed,  292
-  their  extent,  293,  304,  306

■  -  linear  direction  of,  294

-  rapidity  of  the  growth  of,  295

- -  the  most  extensive  formation  now

in  progress,  306

Cornwall,  ruins  of  buildings  found  in  the
drift-sand  of,  242

Corse,  Mr.,  on  the  habits,  &c.  of  the  ele¬
phant,  46

Cowslip,  Linnaeus  on  the  varieties  of  the,
34

Crab  covered  with  living  oysters,  & c.,

115

Crantz,  on  the  drift-wood  of  the  North  Sea,

251

Creation,  supposed  centres,  or  foci,  of,  131
Crocodile  taken  in  the  Rhone,  107
Crocodiles  imbedded  by  a  river  inundation
in  Java,  253

Currents,  distribution  of  drift-timber  by,

252

Curtis,  Mr.,  on  the  ravages  caused  by
aphides,  141

Curtis,  Mr.  John,  on  the  power  of  the
tipulae  to  cross  the  sea,  120

-  on  insects  in  marl,  253

Cutch,  effects  of  the  earthquake  of,  in
1819,  273


Cuvier  on  the  variability  in  the  same  spe¬
cies,  25

-  on  the  varieties  of  the  dog,  27

-  on  identity  of  Egyptian  mummies

with  living  species,  30
— - —  on  the  migrations  of  the  Springbok,
99

-  on  the  extinction  of  the  Dodo,  158

-  on  the  durability  of  the  bones  of

men,  265

Cuvier,  M.  F.,  on  the  aptitude  of  some
animals  to  domestication,  40

-  on  the  influence  of  domestication,

42

Cypris  found  completely  fossilized  in
Scotch  marl-lakes,  282

-  not  uncommon  in  ponds  in  England,

282

Dangerfield,  Captain  F.,  on  buried  cities
in  Central  India,  244
Daubeney,  Dr.,  his  discovery  of  nitrogen
in  mineral  springs,  196
Davy,  Sir  H.,  his  analysis  of  peat,  216

-  his  objection  to  the  theory  of  the

gradual  civilization  of  man,  122

—  -  on  the  perishable  nature  of  the  works

of  man,  278

Davy,  Dr.,  on  the  changes  which  a  helmet
taken  up  from  the  sea  near  Corfu  had
undergone,  270

De  Candolle,  his  opinion  respecting  hybrid
plants,  59

- -  on  the  distribution  of  plants,  71,  74

-  on  the  agency  of  man  in  the  disper¬
sion  of  plants,  85

-  on  the  causes  of  stations  of  plants,

136

-  on  the  barriers  which  separate  dis¬
tinct  botanical  provinces,  183
De  Candolle,  M.  Alph.,  on  the  number  of
botanical  provinces,  74
Deer,  their  powers  of  swimming,  96

- -  formerly  very  abundant  in  Scotland,

155

- abundance  of  their  remains  in  the

Scotch  marl -lakes,  258
Deguer  on  remains  of  ships,  &c.,  in  the
Dutch  peat-mosses,  225
Degradation  of  land,  caused  by  rain,
206

De  la  Beche,  M.,  on  the  action  of  rain  in
the  tropics,  206

- -  on  the  drifting  of  the  lighter  parts  of

plants  to  sea  by  hurricanes,  252

-  on  the  coral  formations  of  the  West

Indian  seas,  299

—  -  on  the  alternation  of  coral  and  lava

in  the  Isle  of  France,  303
Demaillet,  speculative  views  of,  11

Y  2


324


INDEX.


Delille,  wheat  iound  in  the  Egyptian  tombs
by,  31

- -  on  the  native  country  of  the  com¬
mon  wheat,  32

Delta  of  the  Ganges,  alternations  of  ma¬
rine  and  fresh-water  strata  formed  in  the,

284

-  of  the  Indus,  recent  elevation  and

depression  of  the,  284

- -  of  the  Rhone,  cannon  inclosed  in

calcareous  rock  taken  up  from  the,
269

De  Luc  on  the  conversion  of  forests  into
peat-mosses,  220
Denudation  caused  by  rain,  206
Desert  of  Africa,  its  area  as  compared  to
that  of  the  Mediterranean,  173
Desjardin,  M.,  bones  of  the  dodo  found
fossil  under  lava  by,  158
Dikes  numerous  in  the  Val  del  Bove,  Etna,
311

Disappointment  Islands,  connected  with
Duff’s  group  by  coral  reefs,  304
Dislocations  of  strata,  ancient  and  modern,
remarks  on,  201

Distribution  of  species,  effect  of  changes
in  physical  geography  on  the,  166

-  effect  of  changes  in  climate  on,

175

Dodo,  on  the  recent  extinction  of  the,
157

Dog,  varieties  of  the,  27

- -  its  distinctness  from  the  wolf,  28

. -  hybrids  between  the  wolf  and,  53

Dogs,  Lamarck  on  the  numerous  races  of,
7

- -  examples  of  acquired  instincts  be¬
coming  hereditary  in,  40

• -  have  run  wild  in  America,  160

-  goats  in  Juan  Fernandez  destroyed

by,  160

Domestic  qualities  soon  developed  in
some  animals,  but  wholly  denied  to
others,  48

Domestication,  aptitude  possessed  by  some
animals  to,  40
-  influence  of,  42

Dominica,  a  bed  of  coral  found  between
two  lava-currents  in,  303
Donati  on  the  bed  of  the  Adriatic,  290
Downham,  part  of  the  town  of,  over¬
whelmed  by  blown  sand,  241
Downs,  account  of  a  cannon  taken  up  from
the  sea  near  the,  269

Drift  sea-weed,  large  banks  formed  by,

285

Drift-wood,  a  boa-constrictor  conveyed  to
St.  Vincent’s  on,  108

- - -  on  the  imbedding  of,  247

- - -  abundant  in  the  North  Sea,  251


Drift-wood  conveyed  in  all  directions  by
currents,  252

Drumlanrig  forest  overturned  by  the  wind
in  1756,  218

Duff’s  group,  these  islands  connected  with
Disappointment  Islands  by  coral  reefs,
304

Dulverton,  pigs  found  entire  in  digging  a
well  at,  222

Duncombe  Park,  bones  of  recent  quadru¬
peds  found  in  a  fissure  in,  226
Dureau  de  la  Malle,  M.,  on  the  changes
caused  by  man  in  different  races  of
dogs,  27

— -  on  the  aptitude  of  some  animals  to

domestication,  40

Dutch  peat-mosses,  remains  of  ships,  &c.,
found  in,  225

Dutch  vessel  found  in  the  old  channel  of
the  river  Rother,  267

Earth’s  surface,  effects  produced  by  the
powers  of  vitality  on  the,  191

-  permanent  modifications  produced

by  the  action  of  animal  and  vegetable
life  on  the,  215

Earthquakes,  animals  most  abundantly  pre¬
served  where  they  prevail,  235

- ravages  caused  by  the  waves  of  the

sea  on  low  coasts  during,  238

-  in  Sicily,  1693,  several  thousand

people  entombed  at  once  in  caverns,
during,  238

- -  effects  of  the  submersion  of  land  by,

271

-  their  effects  in  imbedding  cities  and

forests,  273

-  in  the  Pacific,  306

Edrom,  remains  of  the  beaver  found  in  the
parish  of,  259

Edwards,  his  account  of  the  destruction  of
the  towm  of  Savanna  la  Mar.  239
Egypt,  cities  and  towns  buried  under  drift-
sand  in,  240

Egyptian  mummies  identical  with  species
still  living,  28

Eider-ducks  destroyed  by  a  fox  drifted  on
ice  to  the  island  of  Vidoc,  151
Elephants,  their  sagacity  not  attributable
to  their  intercourse  with  man,  47

-  will  breed  in  captivity,  47

- their  powers  of  swimming,  96

Elevation,  effects  which  would  result  in
some  places  from  partial,  169

- and  subsidence,  effects  of  alternate,

315

Elizabeth  or  Henderson’s  Island,  described
(see  w'ood-cuts  Nos  8  and  9),  305
Elk  Island,  with  700  quadrupeds,  swept
away  by  a  river-flood  in  Virginia,  258


TNDEX.


325


Emu  in  Australia  will  become  extermi¬
nated,  157

Equilibrium  among  plants  kept  up  by  in¬
sects,  3  38

Eschscholtz’s  bay,  cliffs  consisting  of  ice
and  vegetable  mould  in,  200
Escrinet,  Pass  of,  conglomerate  now  form¬
ing  at,  227

Estuaries,  imbedding  of  fresh-water  species
in,  282  j

- description  of  the  manner  in  which

they  become  filled  up,  283
Etna,  fourteen  towns  and  villages  covered
at  once  by  the  lava  of,  243
- general  dip  of  the  volcanic  beds  of,

311

- -  lava  currents  of  1819  and  1811,  on,

312

- - recent  cones  formed  on,  312

Extermination  of  species,  no  prerogative
of  man,  162

Extinction  of  species,  successive,  part  of
the  economy  of  nature,  175,  182

Facial  angle,  on  the  gradation  in  intellect,
as  shown  by  the,  63

Faroe  islands,  deposits  now  forming  near
the,  289

Ferussac  on  the  distribution  of  fresh-water
molluscs,  112

Finland,  Gulf  of,  its  connexion  with  the
White  Sea,  314

Fish,  their  geographical  distribution,  109

- - migrations  of,  110

-  agency  of  birds  and  water-beetles  on

their  distribution,  110

-  great  beds  formed  by  their  bones  in

the  North  Sea,  289,  290
Fissures,  preservation  of  organic  remains
in,  226,  237

— -  on  their  communication  with  caverns,

227

Fleming,  Dr.,  on  the  rapid  flight  of  birds.
106

- — — .  his  account  of  turtles  taken  on  the
coast  of  England,  108
-  on  the  changes  in  the  animal  king¬
dom  caused  by  the  increase  of  human
population,  155

-  his  account  of  the  stranding  of  ce¬
tacea  on  the  British  coasts,  285
Flinders,  a  reef  of  coral  350  miles  long,
described  by,  293

Floating  islands  within  the  tropics,  animals
transported  by,  101
Floods  in  Scotland  in  1794,  255
-  in  1829,  256

Forests,  degradation  of  land  increased  by
their  destruction,  204

- rain  diminished  by  the  felling  of,

206


Forests  of  America,  cause  of  their  position,
207


— •  sites  of  many  ancient  ones  now  co¬
vered  by  peat,  212,  217
—  sometimes  overturned  by  storms,
218


212


in  Germany  destroyed  by  insects,


* - -  submarine,  remarks  on  their  forma¬

tion,  273

Forfarshire  Lakes,  shell  marl  deposits,  how
formed  in  the,  279,  308

-  charae  found  fossilized  in  !he — see

wood-cuts  Nos.  2  and  3,  280,  281
-  skeletons  of  animals  numerous  in


the,  258

Formation  of  coral  reefs,  291
Forth,  effects  of  a  storm  in  its  estuary,  Feb.
1831,  288

Fourcroy  on  the  occurrence  of  iron  in  all
compact  woods,  221

Fox  man-of-war,  changes  which  some  arti¬
cles  thrown  up  from  the  wreck  of  the,
had  undergone  in  33  years,  270
France,  human  bones  and  works  of  art
found  with  extinct  quadrupeds  in  the
south  of,  230

- number  of  ships  of  war  lost  during

the  last  war  with.  263
Franklin,  on  a  whirlwind  in  Maryland,  77
Fresh-water  formations,  recent,  not  yet
examined,  in  the  tropics,  282

-  the  variety  of  species  of  testacea  but

small  in,  284

Fresh-water  and  marine  strata,  alternations
of,  how  formed  in  the  delta  of  the  Gan¬
ges,  284

Fresh-water  plants  and  animals,  imbedding
of  their  remains  in  subaqueous  strata,
279,  282

Fries,  on  the  dispersion  of  cryptogamic
plants,  78

Frisi,  on  the  conservative  influence  of  ve¬
getation,  205

Frogs,  conveyed  to  the  sea  in  great  num¬
bers  by  floods,  in  Morayshire,  253
Frontispiece  described,  311


Gaimard,  M.,  on  the  depth  at  which  the
zoophytes,  that  form  coral,  live,  294
Gambier  Island,  its  windward  side  highest,
301

Gambier’s  group,  rate  of  the  growth  of
coral  in,  295

_  volcanic  rocks  found  in  the  lagoons

of,  299

Gamma  moth,  ravages  caused  by  the  ca¬
terpillars  of  the,  141
Ganges,  islands  formed  by  the,  210
- bodies  of  men,  deer,  and  oxen  con¬
veyed  to  the  sea  by  floods  ol  the,  257


INDEX.


Ganges,  bones  of  men  found  in  the  delta  of
the,  265

• -  alternations  of  marine  and  fresh¬

water  strata,  how  formed  in  its  delta,
284


Gases,  two  of  different  gravities  will  be¬
come  uniformly  diffused,  194
Genera,  Linnseus  on  their  real  existence,

19

Geographical  distribution  of  species,  on
the  laws  which  regulate  the,  69
Geographical  distribution  of  plants,  70

-  of  animals,  90

— — —  of  cetacea,  95
Geography  of  plants,  70
Geological  causes  divisible  into  two  great
classes,  215

Gerard,  M.,  on  the  peat  of  the  valley  of
the  Somme,  225

Germany,  forests  destroyed  by  insects  in,
212

Gibraltar,  birds’  bones  found  in  breccia  at,
229


- -  and  Ceuta,  shelly  strata  forming  at

great  depths  between,  289

Gmelin  on  the  agency  of  birds  in  the  dis¬
tribution  of  fish,  1 10

Goats,  rapid  multiplication  of,  in  South
America,  160

- — — -  in  Juan  Fernandez,  destroyed  by
dogs,  160

God  man  on  the  migrations  of  the  rein-deer,


101


Graves,  Lieut.,  some  bulimi  brought  to
England  by,  recovered  after  twenty
months’  abstinence,  113

-  on  the  diffusion  of  insects  by  the

w'ind,  120

Graves,  Mr.,  on  the  distribution  of  the  bus¬
tard,  156

Greenland,  timber  drifted  to  the  shores  of,
251

Grenada,  sugar-canes  destroyed  by  ants  in,
142

Greville,  Dr.,  on  some  remarkable  accumu¬
lations  of  drift  sea-weed,  81

Guadaloupe,  human  skeletons  imbedded  in
calcareous  rock  in  the  island  of,  266

Guilding,  Rev.  L.,  his  account  of  the  arri¬
val  of  a  boa  constrictor  in  St.  Vincent’s
on  drift  wood,  108

Giildenstadt,  on  the  distinctness  of  the  dog
and  wolf,  28

Gulf  of  Bothnia,  its  extent  formerly  much
greater,  315

Gulf  of  Finland,  its  geological  connexion
with  the  White  Sea,  314

Gulf  stream,  great  area  over  which  plants
are  drifted  by  the,  79,  25.

Gull-stream,  account  of  a  cannon  taken  up
in  the,  269


Gun-barrel,  with  shells  attached,  found  in
the  sands  near  St.  Andrew’s,  270
Gypsum,  Sir  H.  Davy  on  its  occurrence  in
peat,  217

Gyrogonite,  or  petrified  seed-vessel  of
Charae,  described  (see  wood-cut  No.  2),
280

Habitations  of  plants  described.  72
Habits  of  animals,  when  acquired  rarely
transmissible,  50

Hamilton,  Sir  Charles,  on  the  submerged
buildings  of  Port  Royal,  276
Hampshire,  submarine  forest  on  coast  of,
274

Happisborough,  remarks  on  the  so-called
submarine  forest  of,  273
Harris,  Hon.  C.,  on  the  effects  of  the
foundering  of  a  vessel  off  Poole  harbour,
267

— - —  on  a  submarine  forest  on  coast  of
Hampshire,  274

Hatfield  moss,  trees  of  vast  size  found  in,
219

Helice  and  Bura,  submerged  Grecian  towns,
276

Helix,  extensive  range  of  some  species  of,
113

. — _  some  species  of,  very  local,  113
Helmet,  changes  which  one  taken  up  from
the  sea,  near  Corfu,  had  undergone,
270

Henderson  on  the  drifting  of  the  polar
bear  to  Iceland,  1 50

Henderson’s  Island  described — see  wood-
cuts  Nos.  8  and  9,  305
Henslow,  Rev.  Prof.,  his  experiments  on
the  cowslip,  35

-  on  the  diffusion  of  plants  by  birds, 83

Herbert,  Hon.  Mr.,  on  some  remarkable
varieties  in  plants,  from  a  common  stock,
35

- -  his  experiments  on  the  cowslip,  35

-  on  hybrid  plants,  58

Herschel,  Mr.,  his  remarks  on  a  change
of  climate,  317

Hilaire,  M.  Geof.  St.,  on  the  uninterrupted
succession  in  the  animal  kingdom,  2
Hoff,  M.  Von,  on  human  remains  in  the
delta  of  the  Ganges,  265
- his  account  of  a  buried  vessel  be¬
tween  Bromberg  and  Nakel,267
Hogs,  rapid  multiplication  of,  in  South
America,  160

Holland,  the  teredo  navalis  brought  by
ships  to,  127

-  submarine  peat  found  in,  285

- -  a  large  cachalot  stranded  on  the

west  coast  of,  in  1598,  286
Hooker,  Dr.,  on  the  drifting  of  a  fox  on
ice,  151


IND  EX.


327


Horsburgh,  Capt.,  his  description  of  the
Mai  diva  Islands,  293

- -  on  the  situation  of  the  channels  into

the  lagoons  of  coral  islands,  301
Horses,  the  amble  hereuitary  in  some,  45
- -  numerous,  in  a  wild  state  in  Missis¬
sippi  valley,  158

— —  wild,  annually  drowned  in  great  num¬
bers  in  South  America,  257
Horsfield,  Dr.,  on  the  distribution  of  the
Mydaus  meliceps  in  Java,  99
Horticulture,  changes  in  plants  produced
by,  32

Human  bones,  changes  which  some  have
undergone  in  fourteen  or  fifteen  centu¬
ries,  231

Human  remains  in  peat-mosses,  221
— — ■  in  caves,  230

- their  durability,  265

-  found  in  the  delta  of  the  Ganges,

265

-  found  in  calcareous  rock  at  Guada-

loupe,  266

Humboldt  on  the  training  of  monkeys  to
ascend  trees,  49

■ -  on  the  distribution  of  species,  71

- -  on  the  plants  common  to  the  Old

and  New  World,  72

-  on  the  distribution  of  animals,  91

-  on  the  periodical  migrations  of  Ame¬
rican  water-fowl,  105

- on  the  drifting  of  insects  by  the

wind  in  the  Andes,  119
——  on  the  rapid  multiplication  of  domes¬
tic  quadrupeds  in  America,  158

-  on  a  great  depression  in  Central

Asia,  169

—  -  on  the  comparative  size  of  the  Afri¬

can  desert  and  the  Mediterranean,  173

- origin  of  beings  said  by  him  not  to

belong  to  zoological  geography,  185
- — —  his  account  of  the  annual  drowning
of  wild  horses  in  South  America,  by
river  floods,  256

Humming-birds  peculiar  to  the  New
World,  104

-  found  by  Captain  King  in  the  Straits

of  Magellan,  in  the  depth  of  winter,  104

- -  some  species  very  local,  104

Hunter,  John,  on  mule  animals,  52

—  -  on  the  identity  of  the  dog,  wolf,  and

jackal,  53

Hunter,  Mr.,  his  account  of  the  buried
city  of  Oujein,  243

H  uron,  Lake,  strata  containing  recent
shells,  found  on  the  shores  of,  282
Hurricanes,  many  of  them  connected  with
submarine  earthquakes,  239

-  leaves  of  plants  drifted  out  to  sea

by,  252

Huttonian  theory,  remarks  on  the,  202


Hybrid  races,  Lamarck  on  the  origin  oi,
'10

Hybrids,  phenomena  of,  51

- sometimes  prolific,  52

- -  John  Hunter’s  opinion  of,  52

-  not  strictly  intermediate  between

the  parent  species,  52

-  between  the  dog  and  wolf,  53

-  among  plants  prolific  through  seve¬
ral  generations,  54

■ — —  rare  among  plants  in  a  wild  state,  56
- -  difficulties  attending  their  propaga¬
tion,  61

Hydrophytes,  distribution  of,  75,  81

Ianthina  fragilis,  its  extensive  range,  112
• — —  an  active  agent  in  disseminating
other  species,  1 1 2
Icebergs,  plants  transported  by,  81
Ice-floes,  drifting  of  animals  on,  100
Iceland,  the  polar  bear  frequently  drifted
from  Greenland  to,  150

- -  rein-deer  imported  into,  160

Igneous  action,  remarks  on  its  intensity  at
different  epochs,  201

Igneous  causes,  the  real  antagonist  power
to  the  action  of  running  water,  201
Imbedding  of  organic  remains  in  deposits
on  emerged  land,  216
— —  in  peat-mosses,  221

-  in  caves  and  fissures,  225

—  ■  in  alluvium,  and  the  ruins  caused  by

landslips,  234

-  in  volcanic  formations  on  the  land,

242

-  in  subaqueous  deposits,  246

- -  by  river  inundations,  254

- -  in  recent  marl-lakes  in  Scotland,

258

Imperieuse,  coral  reef,  302
Imrie,  Major,  on  the  Gibraltar  breccia,  230
India,  buried  cities  in  Central,  243
Indians  of  North  America  will  become
exterminated,  181

Indus,  recent  alterations  of  level  in  its
delta,  273,  284

Inorganic  causes,  their  influence  in  chang¬
ing  the  habitations  of  species,  164
Insects,  the  fructification  of  plants  greatly
assisted  by,  56

• -  geographical  distribution  of,  117

- — —  migrations  of,  117
- certain  types  of,  distinguish  particu¬
lar  countries,  118

-  diffused  by  the  wind,  119

-  disseminated  by  animals,  birds,  river-

floods,  &c.,  120

-  power  of  some  kinds  of  to  cross  the

sea,  120

-  destructive  to  timber,  introduced  by

commerce,  126


328


INDEX.


Insects,  parasitic,  126

-  their  numbers  kept  down  by  other

insects,  139

-  peculiarity  of  their  agency  in  pre¬
serving  an  equilibrium  of  species,  139

-  rapid  propagation  of  some  kinds  of,

139

-  imbedding  of  the  remains  of,  253

-  only  preserved  under  peculiar  cir¬
cumstances,  253
Instincts  of  the  bee,  61
Instincts,  migratory,  occasional  develop¬
ment  of  in  animals,  97
-  new'  ones,  which  have  become  here¬
ditary  in  some  animals,  40

-  modified  by  domestication,  45

Ipsambul,  buried  temple  of,  240
Ireland,  tradition  of  the  destruction  of  the
reptiles  of,  by  St.  Patrick,  107

-  its  flora  but  little  known,  107

-  area  covered  by  peat  in,  217

-  trees  of  great  size  found  in  the  peat

of,  218

-  human  body  found  in  peat  in,  221

-  cattle  lost  in  great  numbers  in  the

bogs  of,  223

-  testacea  found  living  at  great  depths

on  the  N.  W.  coast  of,  289

■ -  deposits  now  in  progress  off  the

coast  of,  289

Iron,  common  in  all  compact  woods,  221

- - -  ore  in  peat,  whence  derived,  221

-  instruments,  account  of  some  taken

up  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  incased
in  conglomerate,  269
Islands,  vegetation  of,  73,  132

-  the  migration  of  plants  aided  by,

80


• -  animals  found  in,  93

-  of  the  Pacific,  animals  found  in,  94

— -  coral,  manner  in  which  they  are

formed,  292

-  of  drift-wood,  with  trees  growing  on

them,  discovered  at  sea,  102
Isle  of  France,  alternation  of  coral  and  lava
seen  in  the,  303

Isthmus  of  Sleswick,  action  of  the  sea  on
the,  171

-  effects  which  would  result  from  its

destruction,  172

Italian  peninsula,  in  great  part  elevated
since  present  marine  species  were  in
being,  184


Jamaica,  seeds  drifted  to  Europe  from,  80

-  subsidence  in  the  harbour  of  Port

Royal  in,  168,  272,  276

- -  rain  diminished  in,  by  the  felling  of

forests,  206

-  a  town  in,  swept  away  by  the  sea,


239


James,  Mr.,  on  the  herds  of  bisons  in  the
Mississippi  Valley,  97
Java,  imbedding  of  the  remains  of  reptiles
in,  253

- -  animals  destroyed  by  river-floods  in,

257

John  de  Mayen,  drift-wood  on  the  island
of,  251

Juan  Fernandez,  goats  destroyed  by  dogs
in,  160

Kamtschatka,  migrations  of  rats  in,  98
Kangaroo  is  giving  way  before  the  pro¬
gress  of  society  in  Australia,  157
Keith  on  the  dispersion  of  seeds  by  rivers
and  torrents,  79

King,  Mr.,  on  the  number  of  cattle  lost  in
bogs  in  Ireland,  223

-  his  account  of  cannon  taken  up  from

the  Downs,  269

King,  Captain  P.,  on  the  coral  reefs  of
New  Holland,  293,  302
Kinnordy,  Loch  of,  remains  of  insects
found  in  marl  in  the,  253
Kirby,  Rev.  Mr.,  on  the  instincts  of  the
bee,  61

-  on  the  distribution  of  insects,  118

-  on  the  dissemination  of  insects  by

river-floods,  120

--  on  the  rapid  propagation  of  some
insects,  140

-  on  the  devastations  caused  by  ants

in  Grenada,  142

Knight,  Mr.,  on  the  wearing  out  of  garden
varieties  of  fruit,  33

Kolreuter,  his  experiments  on  hybrids,  be¬
tween  two  species  of  tobacco,  54
Konig,  Mr.,  on  the  rock  in  which  the  hu¬
man  skeletons  from  Guadaloupe  are
imbedded,  266

Kotzebue,  his  account  of  a  canoe  drifted
1500  miles,  124

- on  the  formation  of  coral  islands,  292

Krantz,  on  the  migrations  of  seals,  103

Labrador,  drift  timber  carried  to  the  shores
of,  251

Laccadive  Islands,  their  linear  direction,
294

Lacepede  on  identity  of  Egyptian  mum¬
mies  with  living  species,  30
Lagoons  of  coral  islands,  volcanic  rocks
sometimes  found  in  them,  299

-  cause  of  the  narrow  opening  into

the,  300

-  the  entrances  into  them  alw'ays  on

the  leeward  side,  301
Lakes  of  North  America,  animals  inhabit¬
ing  them  would  be  destroyed  if  they
were  drained,  174


INDEX.


329


Lakes  of  North  America,  strata  containing
recent  shells  formed  by  the,  282
Lamantine  cast  ashore  near  Leith,  286
Lamarck,  his  definition  of  the  term  spe¬
cies,  3

-  his  theory  of  the  transmutation  of

species,  3

-  on  the  origin  of  the  cultivated

wheat,  6

- -  on  the  numerous  races  of  dogs,  7

• -  on  the  production  of  new  organs  in

animals,  8

—  — •  on  the  origin  of  hybrid  races,  10
-  his  theory  of  progressive  develop¬
ment,  11

-  his  definition  of  Nature,  13

-  on  the  conversion  of  the  orang-outang

into  the  human  species,  14

-  on  identity  of  Egyptian  mummies

with  living  species,  30

-  answer  to  his  objection  as  to  the

native  country  of  wheat,  31

- - -  on  the  power  of  species  to  modify

their  organization,  175,  180

-  on  the  abundance  of  polyps  in  the

ocean,  187

Lamouroux  on  the  distribution  of  hydro¬
phytes,  75

Lancashire,  eight  canoes  found  in  drain¬
ing  a  lake  in,  268

-  recent  discovery  of  a  bed  of  tertiary

shells  in,  314

Land  has  increased  in  the  northern  he¬
misphere  since  the  commencement  of
the  tertiary  era,  315

Landslips,  imbedding  of  organic  remains
in  the  ruins  caused  by,  235

- - villages  and  their  inhabitants  buried

by,  235

Lapland,  migrations  of  squirrels  in,  98
Latham  on  the  great  geographical  range  of
some  birds,  1 05

Latreille  on  the  geographical  distribution
of  insects,  1 17

Lauder,  Sir  T.  D.,  his  account  of  pigs
swimming  to  great  distances,  95

_ _  his  account  of  the  number  of  frogs

carried  down  to  the  sea  by  the  floods
in  Morayshire,  253,  256
— —  on  the  imbedding  of  animals  by
floods  in  Scotland,  237
Lava  currents,  of  1819  and  1811,  of  Etna,
described  (see  Frontispiece )  312
Lawrence  on  the  causes  which  enable
man  to  live  in  all  climates,  65
Leigh,  his  account  of  canoes  found  in
draining  Martin  Meer,  268
Lemings  of  Scandinavia  migrate  in  vast
numbers,  98

Lesley  on  the  former  abundance  of  deer
in  Scotland,  155


Lesueur  on  the  geographical  distribution
offish,  109

-  on  the  distribution  of  zoophytes,  116

Lewes,  state  of  some  human  bones  found
in  a  tumulus  near,  232

-  estuary  of  the  Ouse  recently  filled

up  near,  283

-  Levels,  indusia  found  in  the  blue

clay,  of  253

Lichens,  height  at  which  they  can  grow,  78
Lignite,  wood  probably  converted  into,
more  rapidly  under  great  pressure,  268
Limestone,  the  theory  that  it  is  all  of  ani¬
mal  origin,  considered,  307
Lindley  on  the  dispersion  of  cryptogamic
plants,  78

Linear  direction  of  coral  islands,  294
Linnaeus  on  the  constancy  of  species,  3

- -  on  the  real  existence  of  genera  in

nature,  19

-  on  the  distribution  of  seeds  by  ani¬
mals,  83

- on  the  diffusion  of  plants  by  man,  86

-  on  the  original  introduction  of  spe¬
cies,  128

- his  opinions  in  the  Amoen.  Acad.

cited,  83,  137,  138

Lisbon,  subsidence  of  the  quay  at,  201,
272

Liverpool,  a  West  Indian  land-shell  natu¬
ralized  near,  127

Lloyd’s  lists,  number  of  vessels  wrecked
between  1793  and  1829,  as  shown  by,
264

Lobster  covered  with  living  mussels,  115
Loch  Doon,  seven  canoes  found  in,  268
Loch  Fithie,  why  no  marl  formed  in,  308
Loch  Marlie,  remains  of  the  beaver  found
in,  259

Loch  of  Kinnordy,  remains  of  insects
found  in  marl  in  the,  253
Locusts,  devastations  caused  by,  142

- a  great  bank  formed  in  the  sea  by

their  dead  bodies,  143
London  basin,  tertiary  deposits  of  the,  313
Louch,  M.,  on  the  migration  of  the  painted
lady  butterfly,  118

Lowe,  Mr.,  on  the  land-mollusca  of  Ma¬
deira.  and  Porto  Santo,  113
Lybian  sands,  caravans  overwhelmed  by
the,  241

Lyon,  Capt.,  on  the  imbedding  of  the  car¬
casses  of  camels  in  the  African  sands,
241

Macculloch,  Dr.  on  the  gradation  from
peat  to  coal,  217

- -  on  the  occurrence  of  tannin  in  peat,

222

-  his  theory  that  all  limestone  is  of

animal  origin  considered,  307


330


INDEX.


Mackenzie,  Sir  G.,  on  the  importation  of
the  rein-deer  into  Iceland,  161
Mackenzie  river,  accumulation  of  vegetable
matter  in,  248

- -  beds  of  wood-coal  found  on  its

banks,  249

-  cause  of  the  abundance  of  drift-tim¬
ber  in,  250

Maclaren  on  the  quantity  of  useful  soil  in
America,  162

— —  on  the  position  of  the  American
forests,  207

Maclure,  Mr.,  on  the  alternation  of  coral
and  lava  in  the  West  Indies,  303
Madagascar,  great  extent  of  coral  near,

293

Majendie,  M.,  on  the  faculty  of  the  re¬
triever,  42

Malabar,  a  great  sea  of  coral  near,  293
Malcolm,  Sir  J.,  on  the  buried  cities  in
central  India,  215

Maldivas,  description  of  the  chain  of  coral
islands  called  the,  see  wood-cut,  No.  4,
293,  294

Malte-Brun  on  the  verdant  rafts  of  the
Mississippi,  101

-  his  account  of  a  crocodile  taken  in

the  Rhone,  107

- on  the  geographical  distribution  of

fish,  110

. - -  on  the  diffusion  of  man,  124

-  on  destructive  insects  introduced  by

commerce,  127

-  on  the  destruction  of  villages  by

landslips,  235

- -  on  the  burying  of  villages  under

blowu  sand,  242

- -  on  the  abundance  of  drift  wood  in

the  North  Sea,  251

-  on  the  drifting  of  bodies  to  the  sea

by  the  Ganges,  257

■ - on  the  coral  reefs  of  the  Pacific,  304

Mammalia,  different  regions  of  indigenous,
90

Man,  Lawrence  on  the  causes  which  en¬
able  him  to  live  in  all  climates,  65

-  his  agency  in  the  dispersion  of

plants,  85

-  geographical  distribution  and  diffu¬
sion  of,  121

- speculations  on  the  probable  birth¬
place  of,  121

-  his  involuntary  influence  in  diffusing

animals  and  plants,  125

-  changes  caused  by,  152

-  recent  origin  of,  161,  277

-  effects  of  the  diffusion  of,  161

- power  of  exterminating  species  no

prerogative  of,  162

— - his  influence  in  modifying  the  phy¬

sical  geography  of  ti  e  globe,  209


Man,  imbedding  of  the  remains  of,  and  his
works,  in  subaqueous  strata,  260
-  circumstances  under  which  his  re¬
mains  may  be  preserved  in  recent  de¬
posits,  262

-  perishable  nature  of  the  works  of,

278

Mantell,  Mr.,  on  the  superior  solidity  of
human  bones  from  a  Saxon  tumulus  to
those  in  a  recent  skeleton,  232

-  remains  of  insects  found  in  Lewes

levels  by,  253

■ -  his  description  of  the  recent  strata

in  the  valley  of  the  Ouse,  283
Map,  explanation  of  the,  312
Marine  and  fresh-water  strata,  alternations
of,  how  formed  in  the  delta  of  the
Ganges,  284

Marine  deposits,  imbedding  of  fresh-water
species  in,  282

Marine  formations  contain  in  general  a
great  variety  of  species,  285
Marine  plants  and  animals,  imbedding  of
the  remains  of,  285

Marine  testacea,  imbedding  of  the  remains
of,  287

-  great  depths  at  which  they  have

been  found  living,  289
Marine  vegetation,  75,81
Marl-lakes  of  Scotland,  animals  imbedded
in  the,  258

-  charae  found  fossilized  in  the,  280

Marsupial  animals,  distribution  of,  92
Martin  Meer,  eight  canoes  found  in  drain¬
ing,  268

Martius  on  the  changes  which  man  will
produce  in  Brazil,  154
Maryland,  account  of  a  whirlwind  in,  77
Matilda  Island,  its  windward  side  highest,
301

Meundrina,  coral  formed  by  the  genus,
292

Mediterranean,  its  area  as  compared  to  the
African  desert,  173

Melville  Island,  annual  migrations  of  ani¬
mals  into,  101

Men,  on  the  extermination  of  savage  tribes
of,  by  civilized  colonies,  181

- more  than  100  swept  away  by  a

river-flood  in  Java,  257

- several  hundreds  swept  away  by  the

Nile,  260

-  durability  of  the  bones  of,  265

• -  bones  of,  found  in  the  delta  of  the

Ganges,  265

Mendip  hills,  sediment  deposited  during
floods  in  the  caves  of  the,  228
Mermaid,  coral  reef,  302
Mersey,  a  vessel  discovered  in  its  former
bed,  267

Metallic  substances,  changes  which  some


INDEX.


331


taken  up  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea
have  undergone,  269

Mhysir,  a  buried  city  in  Central  India,
245

Migrations  of  animals,  97

■ -  of  cetacea,  103

-  of  birds,  105

-  of  fi>h,  109

-  of  insects,  1 17

Migratory  powers  indispensable  to  ani¬
mals  to  enable  them  to  keep  their  ground,
165

Mississippi,  floating  islands  in  the,  102

-  imbedding  of  terrestrial  plants  in  its

delta,  250

-  Valley,  wild  horses  very  numerous

in  parts  of  the,  1 59

Mompiliere  overflowed  by  lava  in  1669,
244

Monkeys  trained  to  ascend  trees,  48
Morayshire,  animals  conveyed  to  the  sea
by  floods  in,  256

Morea,  description  of  the  formation  termed
Ceramique  in  the.  240
Moreau,  Caesar,  his  tables  of  the  navigation
of  Great  Britain,  264

Montoire,  great  size  of  the  peat-moss  of,
217

Mount  Conto,  town  buried  by  the  fall  of
part-of,  235

Mount  Grenier,  five  villages  buried  by  the
fall  of  part  of,  235

Mountain  chains,  remarks  on  the  theory  of
their  sudden  elevation,  203
Mules  sometimes  prolific,  52
Murchison,  Mr.,  on  the  recent  conglome¬
rate  of  Escrinet,  227

• -  on  the  tertiary  strata  of  Lancashire,

314

Mussels,  migrations  of,  115

Nakel,  a  vessel  and  two  anchors  dug  up
near,  267

Napier,  Capt.,  his  account  of  the  animals
destroyed  by  floods  in  Scotland,  1794,
256

Narwal  found  buried  in  mud  on  the  beach
near  Boston,  285

-  skull  of  the,  found  in  recent  strata

in  the  valley  of  the  Ouse,  283
Nature,  as  defined  by  Lamarck,  13
Necker  supposed  species  could  not  be  an¬
nihilated,  133

Neill,  his  account  of  whales  stranded  at
Alloa,  &c.,  285

Nerbuddah  river,  its  channel  cut  through
columnar  basalt,  244

Newfoundland,  cattle  often  mired  in  the
bogs  of,  223

Newhaven,  valley  of  the  Ouse  recently
filled  up  near,  283


New  Holland,  mammiferous  quadrupeds
of,  92

- -  its  native  inhabitants  will  become

extinct,  181

-  extent  of  coral  reefs  off  the  coast  of,

293

Nice,  formation  of  breccias  near,  227
Nightingale,  extraordinary  range  of  the,
105

Nile,  cities  and  towns  buried  under  blowm
sand  near  the,  241

-  several  hundred  men  swept  away  by

a  flood  on  the,  260

Nitrogen  common  in  mineral  springs,  196
North  American  lakes,  animals  inhabiting
them  would  be  destroyed  by  their  drain¬
age,  174

-  strata  containing  recent  shells

formed  by  the,  282

North  Cape,  abundance  of  drift-wood
thrown  on,  251

Nova  Scotia,  account  of  a  vessel  over¬
turned  by  the  bore  or  tidal  wave  in,  267
Norway,  on  the  comparatively  recent  ele¬
vation  of  part  of,  314

Olafsen,  on  the  abundance  of  drift-wood
on  the  coast  of  Siberia,  251
Orang-outang,  Lamarck  on  its  conversion
into  the  human  species,  14
-  taught  to  climb  trees  by  the  inhabi¬
tants  of  Borneo,  48

Organic  remains,  imbedded  in  deposits  on
emerged  land,  216
- — —  in  peat,  216,  221

-  in  caves  and  fissures,  225

-  in  alluvium  and  the  ruins  caused  by

landslips,  234

-  in  blown  sand,  240

-  in  volcanic  formations  on  the  land,

242

- -  in  subaqueous  deposits,  246

Osseous  breccias,  remarks  on  the  forma¬
tion  of,  238

Otaheite,  an  habitual  volcanic  vent,  299
Oujein,  account  of  the  buried  city  of,  243
Ouse,  its  estuary  recently  filled  up,  283
-  section  of  the  beds  formed  in  its  es¬
tuary,  283

Owhyhee,  an  habitual  volcanic  vent,  299
Oysters,  &c.,  thrown  alive  on  the  beach  by
a  storm  in  the  Forth,  288

•  -  living,  attached  to  a  live  crab,  1J5

- —  migrations  of,  115

Pacific,  animals  found  in  the  islands  of  the
94  ’

-  volcanic  islands  of  the,  296

•  -  a  great  theatre  of  volcanic  action,

299

- -  all  the  islands  yet  examined  in  the,


INDEX.


are  formed  of  coral  or  volcanic  rocks,
299

Pacific,  the  calcareous  formations  of  the,
probably  all  stratified,  303

•  -  subsidence  greater  than  elevation  in

the,  304

- -  earthquakes  felt  from  time  to  time

in  the,  306

- - -  recent  changes  of  level  in  the,  306

- - -  calcareous  formations  in  the,  the

most  extensive  now  in  progress,  306

•  -  beds  of  oysters,  &c.,  found  on  the

coral  reefs  of  the,  291

- -  coral  very  abundant  in  the,  293

Panama,  effects  which  would  follow  the
sinking  down  of  the  isthmus  of,  168
Parasitic  testacea,  295
Paris  basin,  tertiary  deposits  of  the,  313
Paroxysmal  convulsions,  remarks  on,  202
Parrot  tribes,  their  geographical  distribu¬
tion,  104

Parry,  Captain,  on  the  swimming  of  the
Polar  bear,  1 00

- -  on  the  animals  of  Melville  Island,

101

Paviland  cave,  human  skeleton  found  in,
228,  233

Peat,  its  formation  has  not  always  a  con¬
servative  tendency,  199

-  on  its  growth  and  the  preservation

of  organic  and  other  remains  in  it,  216

•  -  abundant  in  hot  and  humid  climates,

217

-  area  in  Europe  covered  by,  217

-  site  of  ancient  forests  now  occupied

by,  213,  220

- human  remains  found  in,  221

-  its  antiseptic  property,  whence  de¬
rived,  222

—  — -  mosses,  accounts  of  the  bursting  of,
224

-  cattle  mired  in,  223

•  -  animal  remains  in,  224

-  submarine,  225,  285

Penco  uplifted  25  feet  in  1750,  168
Pennant  on  the  distribution  of  animals,
93

•  -  his  account  of  the  migrations  of  rats

in  Kamtschatka,  98

Peron  on  the  geographical  distribution  of
fish,  109

-  on  the  distribution  of  zoophytes,

116

Persian  Gulf,  coral  said  to  abound  in  the,
293

Peterhead,  a  large  whale  cast  ashore  near,
in  1682,  285

Physical  geography,  effect  of  changes  in,
on  the  distribution  of  species,  166,  316
- -  changes  which  have  taken  place  in,


since  the  deposition  of  the  older  tertiary
strata,  (see  map,')  312
Physical  geography,  effects  of  changes  in,
on  climate,  316

Pigs,  fortuitous  acquirements  of  some  not
hereditary,  43

- -  instances  of  their  swimming  to  great

distances,  95

-  the  carcasses  of  some  found  entire

at  Dulverton  in  digging  a  well,  222
Piz,  fall  of  the  mountain  of,  235
Plants,  varieties  in,  produced  by  horticul¬
ture,  32

- -  extent  of  variation  in,  33

-  influence  of  soil  on  the  colour  of  the

petals  of,  34

-  agency  of  the  wind  in  the  fructifica¬
tion  of,  57

-  their  geographical  distribution,  70

-  effect  of  climate,  &c.,  on  their  dis¬
tribution,  72

■ — 1 —  number  common  to  the  Old  and
New  World,  72

— —  distinct  provinces  of  indigenous,


72


-  in  islands,  73,  132

-  agency  of  the  winds  in  the  disper¬
sion  of,  76

-  on  the  dispersion  of  cryptogamic,  78

- agency  of  rivers  and  torrents  in  the

dispersion  of,  79

-  absence  of  liquid  matter  in  the  seeds

of,  80

- their  migrations  aided  by  islands,  80

- agency  of  animals  in  the  distribution

of,  82

- diffused  by  birds,  83

- agency  of  man  in  the  dispersion  of,

85


-  unfit  the  soil  where  they  have  grown

for  others  of  the  same  species,  136
- causes  which  determine  their  sta¬
tions,  136

-  equilibrium  among,  kept  up  by  in¬
sects,  137

-  elements  found  in,  194

- which  contribute  to  the  formation

of  peat,  216

- imbedding  of  the  remains  of  terres¬
trial,  in  subaqueous  deposits,  247

-  drifted  from  the  tropics  to  Iceland

by  (lie  Gulf  stream,  250

- their  lighter  parts  drifted  out  to  sea

by  hurricanes,  252

-  on  the  number  that  are  now  be¬
coming  fossilized,  252
- fresh-water,  imbedding  of  the  re¬
mains  of,  in  subaqueous  strata,  279
— —  marine  imbedding  of  the  remains
of,  285


INDEX.


Playfair,  on  the  formation  of  vegetable
soil,  194

Pleurs,  town  of,  and  its  inhabitants  buried
by  a  landslip,  235

Po,  its  delta  rapidly  increased  by  embank¬
ments,  209

Pointer,  its  stand  probably  a  modification
of  the  instinct  of  a  wild  race,  41
Polar  bears,  drifted  from  Greenland  to
Iceland,  100

- Scoresby  on  their  numbers,  100

-  Capt.  Parry  on  their  power  of  swim¬
ming,  100

-  effects  which  may  have  followed

their  first  entrance  into  Iceland,  150
Pomerania,  several  ships  found  entire  in
the  recent  formations  of,  267
Pondres,  human  remains  and  extinct  ani¬
mals  found  in  a  cave  at,  231
Poole  harbour,  effects  of  the  foundering  of
a  vessel  near  its  entrance,  267
Population,  human,  of  the  globe,  154

- -  changes  caused  by  the  progress  of,

155

Port  Royal,  subsidence  of,  in  1692,  168,
272,  27  6

Prevost,  M.  Constant,  his  division  of  geo¬
logical  causes,  215

-  on  the  drifting  of  plants  by  the  gulf-

stream,  250

Pre-occupancy  the  most  powerful  barrier
against  emigration,  173,  175
Prichard,  Dr.  on  the  distinct  origin  of  the
dog  and  wolf,  28

-  on  the  unequal  transmissibility  of

colour,  &c.,  54

- -  on  hybrid  races,  54

-  on  the  facial  angle,  63

-  on  the  geographical  distribution  of

animals,  91

-  on  animals  found  in  islands,  93

■ -  on  the  distribution  of  the  parrot

tribes,  104

-  his  account  of  Linnaeus’s  theory  of

the  introduction  of  species,  1 29
Progressive  development,  Lamarck’s  theory
of,  11

Pursh  on  the  phanerogamic  plants  of  the
United  States,  72

Quadrupeds,  domestic,  their  rapid  multi¬
plication  in  America,  158
• -  imbedding  of  the  remains  of  terres¬

trial,  254

Quaggas,  their  migrations  in  South  Africa,
98

Quoy,  M.,  on  the  depth  at  which  zoo¬
phytes  that  form  coral  live,  294

Raffles,  Sir  S.,  on  the  training  of  the
Sumatra  baboon  to  ascend  trees,  49


Rain,  remarks  on  the  action  of,  206

-  diminished  by  the  destruction  of

forests,  206

Rats  migrate  in  great  numbers  in  Kamt
schatka,  98

-  involuntarily  introduced  by  man

into  America,  126

Ray,  the  green  lizard  found  in  Ireland  ac¬
cording  to,  107

Reaumur  on  the  rapid  propagation  of  the
Aphis,  141

— —  on  the  ravages  of  the  Gamma  moth,
141

Rein-deer,  geographical  range  of  the,  97

-  migrations  of  the,  101

-  imported  into  Iceland,  161

Remains,  human,  and  extinct  animals
found  in  a  cave  at  Pondres,  231

-  found  in  Wokey  Hole,  230

Rennie,  Rev.  Dr.,  on  the  formation  of  peat,
216

-  on  the  recent  origin  of  some  peat¬
mosses,  218

-  on  the  destruction  of  European

forests  by  the  Romans,  220
— —  on  the  occurrence  of  iron-ore  in
peat-mosses,  224

- on  the  preservation  of  human  re¬
mains  in  peat,  221

- ■  on  submarine  peat,  225

Reptiles,  their  geographical  distribution,
106

-  distinct  regions  of  indigenous,  107

- their  powers  of  diffusion,  107

- -  in  Ireland,  legend  of  their  destruc¬
tion  by  St.  Patrick,  107
-  imbedding  of  the  remains  of  in  sub¬
aqueous  deposits,  253
Retriever,  M.  Majendie  on  the  faculty  of
the,  42

Rhinoceroses,  hundreds  swept  away  by  a
river  flood  in  Java,  257
Rhone,  a  cannon  imbedded  in  calcareous
rock  taken  up  from  its  delta,  269
Richardson,  Dr.,  on  the  rocky  mountain
sheep,  46

-  on  the  imbedding  of  drift  timber  in

Slave  Lake,  248

-  on  the  cause  of  the  abundance  of

drift-wood  in  the  Mackenzie,  250
River  inundations,  animals  imbedded  by,
254,  260

Rockall  bank,  recent  deposits  on  the,  289
Rocks,  their  antiquity  may  have  no  con¬
nexion  with  the  period  of  their  eleva¬
tion,  317

Rocky  mountain  sheep,  Dr,  Richardson
on  the,  46

Rolander  on  the  balance  of  power  among
species,  138

Roman  coins,  &c.,  discovered  in  peat,  220


334


INDEX.


Rossberg,  800  people  destroyed  by  the
slide  of  the,  235

Rother,  a  Dutch  vessel  found  buried  in  its
old  channel,  267

Roulin,  M.,  on  acquired  instincts  which
have  become  hereditary  in  dogs,  40
Rousseau,  alternation  of  coral  and  volcanic
cinders  at,  304

Running  water,  igneous  causes  the  an¬
tagonist  power  to  the  action  of,  200

Sand,  drift,  imbedding  of  organic  remains,
&c.  in  240

-  cities  and  towns  in  Egypt  buried

under,  240

-  carcasses  of  camels  imbedded  in,

241

Santorin,  gulf  of,  volcanic  rocks  in  the
lagoons  of  Gambier’s  group  like  those
in  the,  290

Sardinia,  its  flora  but  little  known,  107
Savanna  la  Mar,  town  of,  swept  away  by
the  sea,  239

Scotland,  peat-mosses  of,  219

-  cattle  often  mired  in  them,  223

- -  animals  imbedded  by  floods  in,  255

■ -  quadrupeds  found  imbedded  in  the

marl-lakes  of,  258

- shell  marl  obtained  from  some  small

lakes  in,  279

-  charae  found  fossil  in  the  marl-lakes

of,  280

- -  but  few  species  in  the  marls  of,  284

Scoresby,  Capt.,  his  experiments  on  the
impregnation  of  wood  by  sea-water,
247,  268

Sea,  its  ravages  on  low  coasts  during
earthquakes,  238

- -  sometimes  fresher  at  great  depths

than  at  the  surface,  295

-  estimate  of  the  amount  of,  converted

into  land  since  the  deposition  of  the  ter¬
tiary  strata,  313

Sea-cow  cast  ashore  near  Leith,  286
Seals,  their  migration,  103
Sea-weed,  large  banks  formed  by  drift,  81,
285

Sections  of  coral  islands  (see  diagrams
Nos.  6  and  7),  298

Sedgwick,  Professor,  his  theory  of  the
antagonist  power  of  vegetation  contro¬
verted,  196

-  on  eras  of  paroxysmal  convulsion,

203

-  on  the  preservation  of  organic  re¬
mains  in  fissures,  226
Selside,  great  fissure  in  limestone  at,
226

Serres,  E.  R.  A.,  on  the  changes  in  the
brain  of  the  foetus  in  vertebrated  ani¬
mals,  65


Serres,  M.  Marcel  de,  on  the  changes
which  some  human  bones  have  under¬
gone  in  fourteen  or  fifteen  centuries,
231

-  on  human  remains  in  French  caves,

231

Sheep,  great  multiplication  of,  in  South
America,  160

Shell  marl,  on  the  formation  of,  in  the
lakes  of  Scotland,  279,  303
Shells  found  in  the  calcareous  marl  of  the
Scotch  lakes,  279

Shetland  isles,  formations  now  in  pro¬
gress  between  Ireland  and  the,  289
Shifts  or  faidts,  ancient  and  modern,  com¬
pared,  201

Ships,  British,  number  aunually  wrecked,
261,  263

Ships  of  war,  number  lost  during  the  French
war,  263

-  several  found  buried  in  recent  strata,

225,  267

Sibbald  on  a  turtle  taken  in  the  Orkneys,
108

-  his  account  of  whales  stranded  at

Burnt  Island,  &c.,  285
Siberia,  drift-timber  accumulated  on  the
east  coast  of,  251

Sicily,  several  thousand  people  entombed
at  once  by  an  earthquake  in,  238
Silliman,  Professor,  his  account  of  a  ves¬
sel  overturned  by  the  bore  or  tidal-wave
in  Nova  Scotia,  267

Sindree,  a  new  salt-lake  formed  by  sub¬
sidence  in  the  delta  of  the  Indus  near,
273

Sipparah,  river,  its  course  changed,  244
Skeleton,  human,  imbedded  at  Guada-
loupe,  266

-  found  in  Paviland  cave,  229,  233

Slave  Lake,  accumulation  of  drift-timber
in,  248

Sligo,  bursting  of  a  peat-moss  in,  224
Slcane,  Sir  H.,  on  the  dispersion  of  seeds
by  the  Gulf  stream,  79
Smith,  Sir  J.,  on  the  propagation  of  plants
by  buds,  grafts,  &c.,  33

-  on  the  distribution  of  seeds  by  birds,

83

Smyth,  Capt.  W.  H.,  on  floating  islands  of
drift-wood,  102

-  on  the  drifting  of  birds  by  a  gale  of

wind  in  the  Mediterranean,  106

- -  on  the  diffusion  of  insects  by  the

wind,  120

-  on  the  average  number  of  British

merchant-vessels  lost  daily,  264
— —  on  the  number  of  men  of  war  lost
from  1793  to  1829,  264

-  found  broken  shells  at  great  depths

between  Gibraltar  and  Ceuta,  289


INDEX.


335


Smyth,  Lieutenant,  his  account  of  Hen¬
derson’s  Island,  306

Soil,  its  influence  on  the  colours  of  the
petals  of  plants,  34
Soils,  on  the  formation  of,  194

-  influence  of  plants  on,  136

Solway  moss  described,  223

•  -  a  man  and  horse,  in  armour,  found

in,  223

■ -  account  of  the  bursting  of,  224

Solway  Firth,  animals  washed  by  river-
floods  into,  255

Somme,  peat-mosses  in  the  valley  of  the,
225

Sortino  Vecchio,  several  thousand  people
entombed  at  once  in  caverns  at,  238
South  America,  wild  horses  annually
drowned  in  great  numbers  in,  257

- - -  recent  changes  oflevel  in,  272

Souvignargues,  human  remains  found  with
extinct  animals  in  a  cave  at,  231
Spallanzani  on  the  effects  of  heat  on  the
seeds  of  plants,  80

-  on  the  flight  of  birds,  106

Species,  definition  of  the  term,  2

-  Linnaeus  on  the  constancy  of,  3

— —  Lamarck’s  theory  of  the  transmuta¬
tion  of,  3

-  insufficiency  of  the  arguments  in

favour  of  the  transmutation  of,  21
-  causes  of  the  difficulty  of  discrimi¬
nating,  22

•  -  causes  of  variability  in  the  same,

24

-  extent  of  known  variability  in,  26

-  variability  of  a,  compared  to  that  of

an  individual,  37

- -  extent  of  change  in,  38

-  inferences  as  to  their  reality  in  na¬
ture,  67

-  laws  which  regulate  their  geographi¬
cal  distribution,  69

-  theories  respecting  their  first  intro¬
duction,  128

- proposal  of  an  hypothesis  as  to  their

first  introduction,  129

-  effects  which  would  result  from  the

introduction  of  single  pairs  of  each,
131

•  -  Brocchi  on  the  extinction  of,  133

- -  Rolander  on  the  balance  of  power

among,  138

-  reciprocal  influence  of  aquatic  and

terrestrial,  144

-  their  successive  destruction  part  of

the  order  of  nature,  147,  174,  182

- effect  of  the  extension  of  the  range

of,  148

-  power  of  exterminating  them  no

prerogative  of  man,  162


Species,  influence  of  inorganic  causes  in
changing  their  habitations,  164
-  effect  of  changes  in  physical  geo¬
graphy  on  their  distribution,  166,  316

-  effect  of  changes  of  climate  on  their

distribution,  175,  316

- influence  of  climate  in  causing  one

to  give  way  before  another,  179
-  barriers  which  oppose  their  distribu¬
tion,  179

-  remarks  on  the  conversion  of  one

into  another,  181

-  their  local  distribution,  182

- -  their  recent  origin,  or  antiquity  may

be  equally  consistent  with  their  distri¬
bution,  1S3

-  speculations  on  the  appearance  of

new,  185

-  on  the  time  which  might  be  re¬
quired  for  the  extinction  of  one  mam-
miferous,  188

Specific  character,  permanence  of  the,  18
Spence,  Mr.,  on  the  number  of  instincts  of
the  common  bee,  61

-  on  the  distribution  of  insects,  118

-  on  the  rapid  propagation  of  some

insects,  141

-  on  the  devastation  caused  by  ants  in

Grenada,  142

Spitzbergen,  bays  filled  with  drift-wood  in,
251

Spix,  M.,  on  the  changes  which  man  will
produce  in  Brazil,  154
Springbok,  or  Cape  antelope,  migrates  in
vast  herds,  99

Springs,  mineral,  in  the  Mediterranean,
295

Squirrels,  migrations  of  the  common,  in
Lapland,  98

St.  Andre  destroyed  by  a  landslip,  235
St.  Andrew’s,  a  gun-barrel  found  in  the
sands  near,  with  shells  attached  to  it,
270

St.  Domingo,  fragments  of  vases,  & c.,
found  at  a  depth  of  twenty  feet  in,
266

St.  Katherine  Docks,  a  vessel  found  buried
in  excavating  them,  267
St.  Patrick,  tradition  of  the  destruction  of
the  Irish  reptiles  by,  107
St.  Vincent,  account  of  the  arrival  of  a
boa-constrictor  on  drift-wood  in  the
island  of,  108

Stalagmite  alternating  with  alluvium  in
French  caves,  228
Stations  of  plants,  description  of,  72

-  of  animals,  circumstances  which

constitute  them  are  changeable,  147

-  of  animals  and  plants,  causes  by

which  they  are  determined,  135


336


index.


Staveren,  isthmus  burst  through,  172
Storm  of  February,  1831,  in  the  estuary
of  the  Forth,  effects  of,  28S
Stratton,  Mr.,  his  account  of  buried  tem¬
ples  in  Egypt,  240

Subaqueous  strata,  imbedding  of  aquatic
species  in,  279

Subaqueous  vegetation,  75,  81
Submarine  forests,  273

-  remarks  on  the  formation  of,  275

Submarine  peat,  found  in  Holland,  285

■ -  formed  on  the  English  coast,  285

Submersion  of  land  by  earthquakes,  effects
of  the,  271

Subsidence,  effects  which  would  result
from,  in  some  places,  168

-  of  Port  Royal  in  Jamaica,  168,  272,

276

-  of  the  quay  at  Lisbon,  272

- - -  in  the  delta  of  the  Indus,  273

—  -  in  Sumbawa,  276

-  of  the  North  American  lakes,  282

-  greater  than  elevation  in  the  Pacific,

305

-  and  elevation,  effects  of  alternate,

315

Subterranean  action,  our  knowledge  of  it
yet  in  its  infancy,  201
Sumbawa,  subsidence  in,  276
Superior,  Lake,  strata  containing  recent
shells  formed  by,  282
Sweden,  shells  of  recent  species  found  at
great  heights  in,  314

Switzerland,  town  destroyed  by  landslips
in,  235

Tannin,  its  occurrence  in  peat,  222
Temminck  on  the  distribution  of  marsu¬
pial  animals,  92

Temples  in  Egypt  buried  under  blown
sand,  240

Teredo  navalis,  introduced  into  Holland  on
the  bottoms  of  ships,  127
Terra  del  Spirito  Santo,  the  island  of,  an
habitual  volcanic  vent,  299
Terrestrial  species,  imbedding  of  the  re¬
mains  of  in  subaqueous  deposits,  246
Tertiary  strata,  changes  which  have  taken
place  in  physical  geography  since  their
deposition  (see  map),  312
Testacea,  their  geographical  distribution,
111

-  causes  which  limit  the  extension  of

many  species,  1 12

-  great  range  of  some  species  of,  112

—  .  some  kinds  capable  of  existing  with¬

out  air  or  nourishment  for  long  periods,

113

— —  their  powers  of  diffusion  (see  wood-
cut  No.  1),  115


Testacea,  but  few  species  ofiti  fresh-water
formations,  285

-  burrowing,  secured  from  the  ordi¬
nary  action  of  the  waves  and  currents,
288

— - marine,  depths  at  which  they  have

been  found  living,  289
-  parasitic,  295

Thames,  a  vessel  found  buried  in  the  allu¬
vial  plain  of  the,  267

Thunder-storm  in  Spain,  devastation  caused
by  a,  206

Tide,  channels  into  the  lagoons  of  coral
islands  kept  open  by  the,  300
Tides  and  currents,  drifting  of  the  remains
of  animals  by,  259

Tiedemann  on  the  changes  in  the  brain
in  the  foetus  of  vertebrated  animals,
65

Timber  destroyed  by  insects  introduced  by
commerce,  126

Tjetandoy  river,  effects  of  a  recent  flood
of  the,  in  Java,  257

Tobacco,  hybrids  between  two  species  of,
54

Toomer,  Mr.,  a  pig  trained  to  hunt  by,
44

Torrents  in  Catalonia,  devastation  caused
by,  206

Tory  Island,  testacea  found  living  at  great
depths  off,  289

Tournal,  M.,  human  teeth  and  fragments  of
pottery  found  in  a  cave  by,  230
Towms  destroyed  by  landslips,  235
Travertin  formed  in  Forfarshire  lakes,
280

-  charae  found  fossil  in,  in  Scotland,

280

-  cypris  found  fossilized  in,  282

Trimmer,  Mr.,  his  discovery  of  tertiary
strata  in  Wales,  314

Tropics,  recent  fresh-water  formations  of
the,  not  yet  examined,  282
Turtles  migrate  in  droves,  108

* -  sometimes  taken  on  the  English

coast,  108

Turton  on  the  drifting  of  wolves  out  to  sea
on  ice,  101

-  his  account  of  a  turtle  taken  in  the

Severn,  108

Ulloa  on  the  multiplication  of  the  ass  in
Quito,  159

-  on  the  destruction  of  goats  in  Juan

Fernandez,  by  dogs,  160
Universal  formations,  remarks  on,  202
Universal  ocean,  theory  of,  disproved,  129

Val  d’Arno,  effect  of  the  destruction  of
forests  in  the  upper,  204


INDEX.


HO'*'

do  t


Valley  del  Bove,  description  of  the  (see
Frontispiece ),  3 1 1

-  dikes  numerous  in  the,  311

-  dip  of  the  volcanic  beds  in  the,

311


Valparaiso,  recent  alterations  of  level
caused  by  earthquakes  at,  272

Variability,  cause  of,  in  the  same  species,
24

Variation  in  plants  produced  by  horticul¬
ture,  extent  of,  32

Vegetable  soil,  why  it  does  not  increase
on  the  surface,  194

-  formed  in  part  by  absorption  from

the  atmosphere,  195

Vegetation,  centres  of,  discordance  of
the  opinions  of  botanists  concerning,
183


-  no  counterpoise  to  the  levelling

power  of  water,  196

-  force  which  it  exerts  compared  to

the  action  of  frost,  199

-  its  conservative  influence,  204

-  its  influence  on  climate,  206

Vermont,  timber  imbedded  by  the  bursting
of  a  lake  in,  235

Vernon,  Mr.,  on  organic  remains  found  at
North-Cliff,  Yorkshire,  232
V  essel,  effects  of  the  foundering  of  one  off
the  mouth  of  Poole  Harbour,  267

-  account  of  one  overturned  by  the

bore  or  tidal  wave,  in  Nova  Scotia,
267

Vessels,  several  found  buried  in  recent
formations,  267

-  manner  in  which  they  rnay  become

preserved  in  subaqueous  strata,  268
Vesuvius,  people  destroyed  by  volcanic
alluvions  on,  242

Vicissitudes  in  the  distribution  of  land  and
sea  since  the  commencement  of  the  ter¬
tiary  era,  313

Vicramaditya,  Rajah,  cities  in  Central
India  overwhelmed  in  the  time  of  the.
243

\  idal,  Captain,  testacea  found  living  at
great  depths  by,  289

-  on  the  Rockal!  bank,  289

Villages  and  their  inhabitants  buried  by
landslips,  235

Ville  Dieu,  breccia  with  land-shells  now
forming  at,  227

Virginia,  account  of  the  destruction  of  Elk
Island  by  a  river  flood  in,  258
Vitality,  effects  produced  on  the  earth’s
surface  by  the  powers  of,  191

-  these  most  extensive  in  subaqueous

regions,  192

Volcanic  beds  of  Etna,  their  general  dip,
31 1

Vol  II.


Volcanic  cones,  their  perfect  state  no  proof
of  their  relative  age,  205

-  formations,  imbedding  of  organic

and  other  remains  in,  242

-  islands  of  the  Pacific,  296

Von  Buch,  his  discovery  of  deposits  of  re¬
cent  shells  in  Norway,  314
Vultures,  some  species  true  cosmopolites,
104

Walker,  Dr.,  on  the  overturning  of  forests
by  wind,  218

West  Indian  seas,  absence  of  circular  coral
reefs  in  the,  299

West  Indies,  a  bed  of  coral  found  between
two  lava  currents  in  the,  303
Whales  often  stranded  on  low  shores  by
storms,  285

Wheat,  Lamarck  on  the  origin  of  the  cul¬
tivated,  6

- -  answer  to  Lamarck’s  objection  as  to

its  native  country,  31

-  found  in  the  Egyptian  tombs,  31

Whirlwinds,  dispersion  of  seeds  by,  77
White,  Mr.  Ch.,  on  the  regular  gradation
in  man,  &c.,  64

White,  Rev.  Mr.,  on  a  shower  of  aphides,
119

White  Sea,  its  connexion  with  the  Gulf  of
Finland,  314

Whitsunday  Island,  description  of  (see
wood-cut  No.  5),  298
Wiegmann  on  hybrids  between  the  dog
and  wolf,  54

-  on  hybrid  plants,  55

Willdenow  on  the  diffusion  of  plants  by
man,  87

- -  on  centres  of  vegetable  creation,

183

Wind,  forests  sometimes  overturned  by
the,  21  8

Winds,  dispersion  of  seeds  by  the,  76

-  their  velocity,  77

Windward  side  of  coral  reefs,  on  the
cause  of  the  superior  height  of  the,
301

Wokey  Hole,  human  remains  found  in,
230

Wolf  and  dog  distinct  species,  28
— —  hybrids  between  the,  53
Wolves  frequently  drifted  out  to  sea  on
floating  ice,  100

-  extirpated  in  Great  Britain,  156

Wood,  Mr.,  on  the  migrations  of  the  wild
ass,  98

Wood  instantly  impregnated  with  salt¬
water  when  sunk  to  a  great  depth,
247

- -  on  the  imbedding  of  drift,  248

-  probably  converted  into  lignite

Z


338


INDKX.


more  rapidly  under  great  pressure,
268

Wood-grouse  extirpated  in  England  within
fifty  years,  156  -

Wreck,  changes  which  some  articles  thrown
up  from  a,  had  undergone  in  thirty-three
years,  270

Wrecks,  average  number  of  per  year,  261,
2f>3

-  manner  in  which  they  may  be  pre¬
served  in  subaqueous  strata,  262


Zoological  provinces,  how  formed,  130

-  why  not  more  blended  together,

132

Zoophytes,  their  geographical  distribution,
116

- their  powers  of  diffusion,  116

-  engaged  in  the  construction  of  coral

reefs,  292

- their  operations  compared  to  plants

which  generate  peat,  291
I  Zostera  marina,  submarine  peat  formed
’  from  the,  285


END  OK  THE  SECOND  VOLUMK.


Loudon:  Printed  by  \V.  Ci/OWiis,  cStamtord-street,


l


I


*


•V


*


*


»


#


!


#

#


*


4


4
