The Sikh Religion: Its Gurus, Sacred Writings and Authors, Vol. IV (Max Arthur Macauliffe, 1909)
================================================================================================
Volume IV of the first complete English account of Sikhism, with translations from the Granth Sahib — Guru Har Gobind to Guru Teg Bahadur. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1909 Oxford edition.

THE. SIKH RELIGION 

ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AND AUTHORS 

BY 

MAX ARTHUR MACAULIFFE 

ee wigt gay at, Haft sfes uaa; 
aet Gat ums 3, qe alat de usm, 

j= ~@ 
The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined: 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru ARJAN 

IN SIX VOLUMES 

VOL, IV 

OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

[909 

HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 

LIBRARY 
AUG 15 1966 
Y 

Vy SS 
ERsiry op WRSA 

11049409 

CONTENTS OF VOL. [V 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND, THE SIXTH GURU 
Gur Das’s ANALYSIS OF SIKHISM 

LIFE OF GuRU Har RAI, THE SEVENTH GURU 

LIFE OF GuRU HAR KRISHAN, THE EIGHTH GURU . 

LIFE OF GuRU TEG BAHADUR, THE NINTH GURU 
HYMNS OF GuRU TEG BAHADUR 
SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 

414 

GURU HAR GOBIND 

SIKH IV P.1 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND} 
tHe SIATH GURU 

CHAPTER [| 

Ille ego qui quondam gracili modulatus avena 
Carmen 
7... . we nunc horrentia Martis 

Arma virosque 2 cano. 

Lo! I the man whose muse whilom did mask, 

As time her taught, in lowly shepherd’s weeds, 

Am now enforced—a far unfitter task— 

For trumpets stern to change mine oaten reeds. 
SPENSER. 

THE early life of Guru Har Gobind has already 
been given in the life of his father Guru Arjan. On 

1 Besides the life of the sixth Guru by Bhai Santokh Singh, men- 
tioned in the Introduction, there is another work called Gur Bilas 
on the same subject. The name of the author is not given. In the 
preface to it itis stated that Bhai Mani Singh went to Nankana. The 
ragis were singing Gur Das’s compositions. When they came to the 
following— There were five cups, five priests, the great priest the 
sixth Guru sat on his throne—one Bhagat Singh, a devout Sikh of 
the locality, called upon Mani Singh to give an account of Guru Har 
Gobind, the sixth Guru, Mani Singh replied, ‘I will relate to thee 
what Guru Gobind Singh told Bhai Daya Singh, and what the latter 
communicated to me. One Dharm Singh was present, and heard 
Mani Singh’s narrative. He gave its details to the author of the Gur 
Bilas, whom he had previously baptized. The author of the work 
states that he completed it in Sambat 1775 (a.p. 1718). Sardar 
Kahn Singh of Nabha, however, gives it as his opinion that the work 
was compiled by Bhai Gurumukh Singh and Bhai Darbara Singh, 
a priest and a chorister respectively of the Sikh temple at Amritsar, 
and that they began their literary labour in the reign of Maharaja 
Ranjit Singh and finished it in the reign of Maharaja Sher Singh. 

We are also indebted for several details of the life of Guru Har 
Gobind to a manuscript life of that Guru in the Panjabi language, and 
also to the Hindi work, /é#haés Guru Khalsa, of Sadhu Gobind Singh 
of Banaras. 

* Virgil had only one hero; we have several. 

SIKH. IV B 

2 THE SIKH RELIGION 

ascertaining his father’s death, he caused the Granth 
Sahib to be read, and employed Bhai Budha for 
the purpose. The musicians of the temple sang the 
Gurus’ hymns to the accompaniment of their instru- 
ments. The singing and the reading of the Granth 
Sahib lasted for ten days. 

When the final rites were ended, Bhai Budha 
clothed Guru Har Gobind in new raiment, and placed 
before him a seli—a woollen cord worn as a necklace 
or twisted round the head by the former Gurus—and 
a turban, as appurtenances of his calling. Guru Har 
Gobind ordered that the seli should be placed in the 
treasury, apparently because 1t was not suited to 
the altered political condition of the Sikhs. He 
then: addressed Bhai Budha, ‘My endeavours shall 
be to fulfil thy prophecy. My seli shall be a sword- 
belt, and I shall wear my turban with a royal 
aigrette.’ He then sent for his arms, and arrayed 
himself in martial style so that, as the Sikh chronicler 
states, his splendour shone like the sun. 

Guru Har Gobind then, according to the custom 
usual on such occasions, summoned all his Sikhs, 
and invited the principal inhabitants of Amritsar 
toa banquet. He caused a large quantity of sacred 
food to be made and brought into the temple for 
the entertainment of his guests. While Bhai Budha 
read the Granth Sahib in the middle of a well-ordered 
assembly, Gur Das stood and waved a gorgeous 
chauri over the sacred volume. When the reading 
was ended, all the assembly reverently bowed their 
heads. The singers again began to sing the Gurus’ 
hymns. The Sadd was intoned and a solemn prayer 
offered. The Guru reaffirmed instructions for the 
euidance of future generations of Sikhs in the per- 
formance of obsequies :— 

‘When a Sikh dieth, let not the obsequies of Hindus 
be performed for him. Let sacred food be prepared 
and distributed, let the Granth Sahib be intoned and 
a solemn prayer offered, as I caused to be done on 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 3 

hearing of my father’s death. That is the way to 
prepare for the deceased a passage to Sach Khand.’ 

Only one body of men among his followers were 
dissatisfied at his accession. The masands, who 
used to collect offerings and tithes from the Sikhs, 
had become very corrupt and dishonest, and they 
now trembled for their misdeeds. They represented 
ta the Giru’s mother, “It is the reign of the 
Mughals. We have nobody of mature age to guide 
and protect us. The Guru is yet a boy. Chandu 
is still an enemy. The Guru girdeth on his arms, 
but for faqirs to lord it over men is a course that 
involveth peril. The preceding five Gurus never 
handled arms. If Jahangir hear of our Guru’s 
doings he will be angry ; and where shall we hide 
ourselves ?’ The Guru’s mother replied, ‘ Have no 
anxiety. Guru Nanak’s hand is on my son’s head. 
The Guru ever liveth. Bhai Budha’s words, that 
Har Gobind shall be a temporal as well as spiritual 
ruler and shall wield two swords, are about to be 
fulfilled.’ Notwithstanding, however, the courageous 
face she showed the masands, she remonstrated with 
the young Guru. ‘My son, we have no treasure, 
no state revenue, no landed property, no army. 
If thou walk in the way of thy father and grand- 
father, thou shalt be happy.’ The Guru replied 
in the words of Guru Arjan :— 

The Lord who is the Searcher of all hearts 
Is my guardian.! 

‘Have no anxiety whatever for me, everything shall 
be according to the will of God.’ 

The Guru then issued an encyclical letter to the 
masands to the effect that he would be pleased with 
those who brought offerings of arms and _ horses 
instead of money. On Monday, the fifth day of the 
light half of Har, Sambat 1663, he laid the founda- 
tion of the Takht Akal Bunga. When it was built 

1 Bhairo. 
B 2 

4 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of solid masonry, he took his seat on it. It is the 
corridor of the golden temple whereon the Akalis 
now sit and the arms of the Gurus are preserved. 

Bhai Budha, too, on seeing the young Guru in 
military harness mildly remonstrated with him. 
The Guru replied, ‘It is through thine intercession 
I obtained birth; and it is in fulfilment of thy 
blessing I wear two swords as emblems of spiritual 
and temporal authority. In the Guru’s house 
religion and worldly enjoyment shall be combined— 
the caldron to supply the poor and needy and the 
scimitar to smite oppressors.’ 

Several warriors and wrestlers hearing of the 
Guru’s fame came to him for service. He enrolled 
as his body-guard fifty-two heroes who burned for 
the fray. This formed the nucleus of his future 
army. Five hundred youths then came to him for 
enlistment from the Manjha (the country between 
the Ravi and the Bias), the Doab (the country 
between the Bias and the Satluj), and the Malwa? 
countries. These men told the Guru that they had 
no offerings to make him but their lives; for pay 
they only required instruction in his religion ; and 
they professed themselves ready to die in his service. 
The Guru gave them each a horse and weapons 
of war, and gladly enlisted them in his army. He 
made Bidhi Chand, Pirana, Jetha, Paira, and 
Langaha, each a captain of a troop of one hundred 
horse. 

After this several men out of employ and without 
a taste for manual labour flocked to the Guru’s 
standard. People began to wonder how he could 
continue to maintain such an army. The Guru 
quoted from Guru Arjan :— 

God putteth their food even before the insects which He 
created in rocks and stones ; 

* Malwa comprises that portion of the Panjab formed by the Patiala, 

Nabha, Jind, and Faridkot feudatory states, and the British districts 
of Firozpur and Ludhiana. 

THE AKAL BUNGA 

SIKH IV P.4 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 5 

He provideth every one with his daily food ; why, O man, 
art thou afraid ? . 

The Guru by quoting such passages and by his 
own hopefulness and force of character removed 
men’s fears. In a short time, besides such as 
required regular pay, hordes gathered round him, 
who were satisfied with two meals a day and a new 
uniform every half-year. 

Guru Har Gobind appears to have been the first 
Guru who systematically turned his attention to 
the chase. He rose before day, bathed, dressed 
himself in full armour, and then went to the Har 
Mandar—God’s temple—to worship. There he 
heard the Japji and the Asa ki War recited. He 
then preached to his Sikhs. After his sermon the 
Anand of Guru Amar Das and a concluding prayer 
were read. Upon this all repaired to breakfast 
which was distributed indiscriminately to the Guru’s 
troops and followers as they sat in rows for the pur- 
pose. The Guru was in the habit of afterwards 
taking rest for about an hour and then preparing for 
the chase. Accompanied by an army of forest 
beaters, hounds, tame leopards, and hawks of every 
variety, he used to sally forth and traverse long 
distances. 

Once a sadhu, or Hindu holy man, on seeing 
the Guru’s proceedings expressed contempt for him 
as a destroyer of life. The Guru quoted in justi- 
fication Guru Nanak’s verses on the subject of 
flesh. Upon this the holy man repented of his 
censure. 

Late in the afternoon the Guru used to sit on his 
throne, and give audience to his visitors and followers. 
Minstrels sang the Guru’s hymns and at twilight the 
‘Sodar’ was read. Then all stood up and with 
clasped hands, offered a prayer to the Almighty. 
At the conclusion of the service musical instruments 
of many sorts were played. The congregation then 

1 Gijaii. 

6 THE SIR RELIGION 

bowed to the Guru, and all adjourned for their 
evening repast. A sacred concert was afterwards 
held in which hymns were sung in the Kalian and 
Kanra measures. Next followed the minstrel Ab- 
dulla’s martial songs to inspire the Sikhs with love 
of heroic deeds and dispel feelings unworthy of 
walriors. 

The Sohila was then read, after which the Guru 
retired to his private apartment. Before going to 
sleep he used to place his head on his mother’s feet 
in respectful salutation and receive her blessing 
and embrace. 

The Guru was fond of reciting Guru Nanak’s com- 
positions to his Sikhs, particularly the following :— 

Thou art the Creator, the Arranger, 
Who having Thyself created the world recognized it as 
good. 

Thou art Thyself the True Guru, Thyself the Worshipper, 
Thyself the Creator of the universe. 

Thou art near, not distant. 

They who know this under the Guru’s instruction are 
pertect. 

There is profit in associating with them day and night ; 
this is the advantage of association with the Guru. 

In every age, O God, Thy saints are good. 

Their tongues are flavoured by singing Thy praises. 

They utter Thy praises, disregard misery and poverty, 
and have no apprehension from others. 

They remain awake and are never seen asleep. 

By serving up truth they save their associates and 
families. 

They have not the filth of sin; they are spotless; they 
abide in devotion and love. 

Ye men of God, understand the true Guru’s word. 

This youth is but for a moment ;! the body groweth old. 

O mortal, thou shalt die to-day or to-morrow ; repeat 
God’s name and meditate on it in thy heart. 

1 Sas. Literally—for a breath. oe 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 7 

O mortal, eschew falsehood and flattery.’ 

Death flayeth and killeth the false one :? 

The apostate suffereth for his falsehood and pride; he 
is tormented in both worlds. 

Renounce slander and envy of others. 

Man is ruined by perpetual reading, and to him peace 
cometh not. 

In the company of the saints praise the Name, and the 
Supreme God will be your Helper. 

Renounce the sins of lust and wrath ; 

Renounce works of pride and covetousness. 

Enter the true Guru’s protection, and you shall be saved ; 
thus shall you cross the terrible ocean, my brethren. 

In front is a noisome river and a poisonous whirlpool of fire. 

There will be no one to assist, the soul must go alone. 

The fiery flood formeth hissing waves : through perverse- 
ness man falleth and is burned therein. 

CHAPTER II 

According to the Sikh chronicler the Guru rained 
instruction like clouds in Sawan, and the Sikhs 
flourished under it like thirsty rice-fields. All the 
Sikhs revived like vegetables in season, but Chandu’s 
heart shrivelled up like the poisonous akk and the 
camel-thorn in the monsoons. Chandu’s daughter 
was still unwedded. It is written in the ‘ Chanakya 
Niti’ :4— 

Sleep cometh not at nights to three persons— 

1 Kabara. From this word comes the well-known saddr7, a man 
who sells to Anglo-Indians furniture purchased at auctions. 

2 Uchhahara. Believed to be the Panjabi wcherna. Others suppose 
it to be uchhalna, to leap, and translate the line—Death will make 
a bound and destroy the false one. 3 Maru Solha. 

4 Chanakya was a Brahman friend of the monarch Chandragupta. 
He wrote a work on polity and ethics, and has been called the Indian 
Machiavelli. His W7#/ was translated under the order of Guru Gobind 
Singh into elegant Hindi verse by Sainapat. 

8 THE SUA IKMPIGION 

A debtor, the father of a maid, and a man in fear of an 
eneiny. 

Chandu had to expiate the crime of having been 
instrumental in killing Guru Arjan; his daughter re- 
mained unwedded, and he feared the growing military 
power of Guru Har Gobind. Chandu’s aspirations, 
however, like those of a. poor man remained unful- 
filled. One day he was vaunting in his wife’s pre- 
sence, that if she said but the word, he would send 
Guru Har Gobind to his father. She replied, ‘ My 
lord, a tree beareth fruit at the proper season ; I fear 
that the thorns which we formerly planted shall now 
prick us. I hear that the young Guru hath vowed 
to avenge his father. May God preserve us! There 
is no reliance on Emperors. In a moment they 
become as if they had never known one. When 
we extended our enmity to Guru Arjan, what return 
did we obtain for it? Our daughter is still un- 
wedded, and thou art in fear. Wherefore let us 
make peace with the Guru.’ 

Upon this Chandu wrote to the Guru, ‘My 
daughter is virtuous. Make her thy slave. Thou 
art Guru, Iam the Emperor’s minister. A man’s 
dignity increaseth by an alliance with the exalted. 
If thou listen to my words, it shall be greatly to 
thine advantage. At present thou understandest not, 
but thou shalt hereafter. On a former occasion thy 
father’s Sikhs called me a dog. It did them no 
harm ; it was thy father who suffered for it. I have 
now forgotten my former enmity; but if thou listen 
not to my words, I will serve thee as I did thy 
father.’ The perusal of this letter brought all his 
father’s sufferings and dishonour to the Guru’s 
mind, and galled him to the heart. He wrote in 
reply, “What the Sikhs said is true. Even still 
thou utterest harsh words. Thou shalt assuredly 
suffer for all thy misdeeds. The torture thou didst 
inflict on such a philanthropic and peaceful Guru 
as my father, must bring its vengeance in time. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND e) 

Thou shalt die trodden in the dust and dishonoured 
by shoe-beatings inflicted by pariahs. Guru Ram 
Das hath said :— 

He who taketh reckoning from the Guru, shall lose 
everything in this world and the next. 

He shall gnash his teeth, foam at the mouth, and perish 
talking wildly. 

He shall ever strive for more wealth, and even his former 
wealth shall flee away. 

What shall he earn, what shall he eat in whose heart is 
the pain of anxiety ° 

He who beareth enmity to him who is without it, taketh 
all the sins of the world on his own head. 

His mouth blistereth uttering the slander of his heart ; 
and he shall find no shelter in this world or the next. 

If he obtain gold it shall turn into ashes; but, if he 
again enter the Guru’s protection, his previous sins shall 
be remitted. 

The slave Nanak meditateth night and day on the Name ; 
by remembering God his enormities and offences have been 
erased.! 

‘Tact according to my father’s orders, and rely on 
his words which ever prove true. He hath said :— 

Creatures and their designs are in God’s power; what 
He ordereth that must they do. 

When God is pleased, there is no need to fear. 

Sorrow shall never affect one by remembering Thee, O 
God. 

The ministers of Death shall never approach the Guru’s 
beloved Sikhs. 

The Cause of causes is all-powerful; there is none but 
Him. 

Nanak hath entered God’s asylum; my mind is sup- 
ported by the True One’s strength? 

‘And as to what thou hast written that a marriage 
alliance with thy family shall be greatly to my 

1 Gauri ki War I, 2 Bilawal. 

IO THE SIKH RELIGION 

dignity and advantage, my reply is in the words of 
Guru Arjan— 

He who withdrawing his heart from religion turneth it 
to worldly affairs, 

Shall be known as a sinner in both worlds. 

He who is pleasing to God is acceptable. 

God Himself knoweth His own power. 

He whom He causeth to perform the good acts of true 
religion, 

Shall not lose the viaticum of his faith, nor shall this 
world fail him. 

One God shineth in all things without interruption. 

Men remain at the different posts to which God appointed 
them. 

O my inaccessible, inapprehensible, and true Lord, 

Nanak speaketh as Thou causest him to speak.’ ? 

Chandu’s servant taking this reply to his master 
further inflamed his mind by expatiating on the 
Guru’s state and wealth. ‘ His glory,’ said the ser- 
vant, ‘is twice, nay four times greater than that of 
any previous Guru. His predecessors used to sit 
on couches; he sitteth upon a throne. He weareth 
arms, calleth himself the true king, taketh presents 
like an emperor, maintaineth an army of a thousand 
brave youths, and careth for nobody.’ 

Chandu found an opportunity of communicating 
this and the contents of the Guru’s letter to the 
Imperor Jahangir. He added on his own account, 
‘ Thy majesty summoned the present Guru’s father, 
Arjan, to Lahore and entrusted himto me. The pre- 
sent Guru hath on account of his father’s death 
vowed to take vengeance on thee. There is fear 
of an insurrection from his proceedings. If thou 
order me, I will watch his proceedings. Otherwise 
thou mayest summon him here, and admonish him. 
He hath grown too proud. Thrones are for 
emperors, not for beggars.’ 

1 Sish. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND II 

The IXmperor sent Wazir Khan and Kind Beg 
to summon the Guru. Wazir Khan, who was 
really a Sikh, on noticing the Emperor’s manner and 
countenance divined his object, and began to plead 
for Guru Har Gobind. He said, ‘I everywhere 
hear his praises—that he is a worshipper of the 
one God; that, though young in years, he 1s old 
in wisdom, ability, and knowledge of men; and 
that he hath worthily undertaken the duties of his 
high and onerous station.” The Emperor concealed 
his disapproval of this speech, and merely ordered 
Wazir Khan and Kind Beg to go to Amritsar and 
invite Guru Har Gobind to visit him in Dihh. 

Before his departure for Amritsar Wazir Khan 
made another representation to the Emperor—‘ I 
pray thy Majesty not to hold communication with 
any detractor of the Guru, and not to listen to any 
slander or calumny of him. The Guru hath no desire 
for empire. His wealth increaseth of itself by the 
power of his repetition of God’s name. When he 
arriveth here, thou shalt be well pleased with 
him.’ 

When the Guru heard the Emperor’s order from 
the lips of Wazir Khan, he said, ‘ The Emperor 
formerly summoned my father to Lahore, and fine 
service he performed for him! Six years have now 
elapsed since my father’s death, and what hath the 
Emperor done to make reparation to my family ?’ 
How can the subjects of such a monarch be happy ? 
Kind Beg replied, ‘O Guru, the Emperor was power- 
less in the matter. It was really Guru Arjan himself 
who did this, for by his supernatural power he might 
have averted his fate. Thou art also to blame for 
not having caused Chandu to be punished. He hath 
now again reported to the Emperor that thou hast 
erected a throne for thyself, raised an army, and art 
preparing to contend with the imperial forces.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘It was not for my father to display 
miracles before the Emperor; it is the evil man 

12 THE SIKH RELIGION 

himself who reapeth the reward of his evil deeds. 
I shall give a reply on the morrow to His Majesty’s 
message.’ 

At the afternoon meeting of the Sikhs the question 
was discussed whether the Guru should go to meet 
the Emperor or not. Bhai Budha and Bhai Salo 
counselled the Guru to go. Other Sikhs, on the 
contrary, advised him to make some pretext and 
not put himself in the Emperor’s power. The 
Guru in this difficulty went to consult his mother 
Ganga. When she heard of the Emperor’s sum- 
mons she remained silent. She sent for Bhai Salo, 
Bhai Jetha, and others to ask their advice, where- 
upon the following decision was arrived at—‘ The 
Emperor hath already caused us to apprehend harm 
from him. Guru Arjan went to him and never re- 
turned. We can now only regret that circumstance. 
Instead of the Guru let some trustworthy Sikhs 
wait on the Emperor. Should he desire to come 
here, we are all ready to resist him. The Sikhs are 
ready to sacrifice their lives to avenge Guru Arjan. 
We rejoice in our woodland life. The Emperor’s 
army will find it difficult to traverse the distance 
between us. Emperors are like cobras. One can 
only abide near them in trepidation and uncertainty. 
If the Emperor be angry at this determination, then 
war is the only resource.’ To this Mata Ganga 
added, ‘ The joy of my life was at an end when my 
husband separated from me. If my son now leave 
me, I cannot survive.’ 

The envoys invited Guru Har Gobind to make 
complaint to the Emperor against Chandu, and have 
his whole conduct thoroughly investigated. After 
consideration the Guru decided to appear before 
the Emperor. The envoys were very pleased. 
Wazir Khan reminded the Guru of the fact that his 
father Guru Arjan had cured him of dropsy and 
restored him to life. He professed to be the Guru’s 
disciple, and to desire the destruction of his enemy. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 13 

The Guru replied with the following slok of Guru 
Ram Das :— 

God’s saints worship God and magnify Him. 

The saints ever sing God’s praises ; God’s name bestoweth 
happiness. 

God ever bestoweth on His saints the greatness of the 
Name which ever increaseth. 

God hath seated His saints firmly in their homes! and 
protecteth His own honour. 

God will call for their accounts from the slanderers and 
severely punish them. 

The slanderer shall obtain the fruit of what he meditateth 
in his heart. 

What he doeth in secret, even underground, shall assuredly 
be laid bare. 

The slave Nanak on seeing God’s greatness 1s happy. 

The Guru continued, ‘It is God alone who will 
call the slanderers to account. Ill shall they then 
fare. Meditate not or do evil to any one.’ The Guru 
quoted from his father’s hymn :— 

Harbour not evil to another in thy heart, 
And thou shalt not have trouble, my friend. 

The Guru then made preparations for his journey. 
He assigned the secular duties of the Har Mandar # 
to Bhai Budha, and its spiritual duties to Bhai 
Gur Das. The Guru’s mother, seeing his resolve 
fixed, addressed him many words of affection, prayed 
for his safety, and repeated to him the following 
verses of her husband Guru Arjan :— 

Continually meditate on God’s name in thy heart, 

And thy associates and companions shall be saved. 

The Guru is ever with me: 

I ever repeat His name and remember Him. 

1 That is, they are no longer subject to transmigration. 

2 Gauri ki War I. ©. Mea. 

4 This, also called the Darbar Sahib, is known to Europeans as the 
Golden Temple in Amritsar. 

14 THE SIKH "RELIGION 

What He hath done is sweet to me. 
Nanak craveth the boon of His name.! 

The Guru set out for Dihli on Monday the second 
day of Magh 1669 (A.D. 1612). At the first halt 
on his journey, when parting with the Sikhs who had 
accompanied him thus far, he gave them the following 
injunctions :— The Har Mandar is specially devoted 
to God’s service, wherefore it should ever be respected. 
It should never be defiled with any impurity of the 
human body. No gambling, wine-drinking, lght 
behaviour with women, or slander, should be allowed 
therein. No one should steal, utter a falsehood, 
smoke tobacco, or contrive litigation in its precincts. 
Sikhs, holy men, guests, strangers, the poor and the 
friendless should ever receive hospitality from Sikhs. 
My people should ever be humble, repeat God’s 
name, promote their faith, meditate on the Guru’s 
words, and keep all his commandments.’ The 
Guru then continued his journey to Dihl with an 
escort of three hundred men. 

When the Guru reached the Jamna river, he 
pitched his camp in a flower garden near Majnun’s 
hillock, and dismissed the envoys Wazir Khan and 
Kind Beg to inform the Emperor of his arrival. 
Wazir Khan highly praised the Guru in the hope 
of obtaining a friendly reception for him at court. 
Crowds of Sikhs came forth from Dihli to see him. 
The Guru’s arrival recalled Guru Arjan’s death to 
their recollection and they began to mourn. The 
Guru consoled them by repeating to them his father’s 
words :— 

Fortunate are those saints of Thine, O God, in whose houses 
the wealth of Thy name dwelleth. 

Their advent into the world is acceptable, and profitable 
are their acts. 

O my God, I am a sacrifice to Thy saints. 

1 would make a chauri of my hair, wave it over them, 
and put the dust of their feet on my forehead. 

1 Asa. 

LIKE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 15 

Philanthropic men have come who are beyond birth and 
death ; 

They give their lives, apply men to devotion, and cause 
them to mect God. 

True their order; true their empire; with truth are 
they imbued. 

True is their happiness, and true their praise ; they know 
God to whom they belong. 

I would fan, draw water, and grind for God’s servant. 

Nanak’s supplication to God is, that he may obtain a sight 
of His servant. 

The Guru satisfied all the doubts of his Sikhs. 
His instruction dispelled the fog of their ignorance, 
all light shone on them, and divine knowledge filled 
their hearts. 

The Emperor received the Guru with great 
apparent respect. Seeing him very young and 
already installed as Guru, he put him the following 
question to test his knowledge of divinity :— 
‘ What is the essential difference between the Hindus 
who worship Ram Narayan, Parbrahm, and Para- 
meshar, and the Musalmans who pray to Allah, 
the bounteous Lord?’ The Guru replied with the 
following hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

The Bounteous One is the Cause of causes ; 

The Merciful One cherisheth all. 

Allah is invisible and unequalled ; 

He alone is God great and infinite. 

I bow to the one God, the Lord of the earth : 

The Creator pervadeth every place. 

As Madho He is Lord and Life of the world, 

The Destroyer of fear ; worship Him in thy heart. 
Whether known as Rikhikesh, Gopal, Gobind, 

‘Or Mukand,? Thou alone, O God, art the kind Master. 
Thou art at once Pir, Prophet, and Shaikh ; 

Master of hearts, Thou dispensest justice. 

1 Sahi. 

* The Hindi proper names in this hymn are all names of God. 

16 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art holier than the Quran and the other Muham- 
madan books. 

Whether as Narayan, Narhar, or the Compassionate, 

Thou pervadest every heart and art the heart’s support. 

As Wasdev Thou dwellest in every place. 

Thy sport is not understood. — 

Thou art the Bestower of kindness and mercy. 

Grant us devotion and worship of Thee, O Creator. 

Saith Nanak, when the Guru hath removed superstition, 

Allah and Parbrahm are the same. 

The Emperor then asked the Guru to explain the 
_order of the world. The Guru replied, “He who 
created it preserveth it and will destroy it. Endless 
animals visible and invisible, which sprang from the 
Creator, shall be again absorbed in Him. Through 
pride they all suffer. But when man meeteth the 
true Guru, and frequenteth the saints’ society, his 
pride and arrogance are swept away, and he obtaineth 
salvation.’ 

Upon this the Emperor inquired how man could 
keep his mind pure from the contact of the world. 
The Guru replied with the following hymn of Guru 
Amar Das :— 

When the heart is filthy, everything in man is filthy ; 
the heart is not cleansed by cleansing the body. 

The world is led astray by superstition, my brethren ; 
only a few know it. 

O my soul, repeat the one Name: 

The true Guru hath given me this treasure. 

Even when men learn the postures of the Sidhs and 
practise restraint of their senses, 

Neither their mental filth nor the filth of their pride 
departeth. ' 

There is no means of purifying the heart except by taking 
shelter in the true Guru. 

By meeting the true Guru, my brethren, the heart is 
changed beyond expression. 

1 Ramkali. 

A 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 17 

Saith Nanak, if any one die on meeting the true Guru 
and be again reanimated by his teaching, 

The filth of his selfishness shall depart and his heart 
become pure. 

The Emperor then asked, “O Guru, tell me who 
are holier, the Hindus or the Muhammadans. The 
four elements are equally diffused in all animals 
from the worm to the elephant, how then is it that 
their lights and understandings are different ?’ 

The Guru replied with the following hymn of 
Kabir :— 

In the beginning God by His Omnipotence created light 
and from it all the races of men. 

From the one light the whole world was created; then 
who is good and who is bad ? 

O my brethren, lose not yourselves in doubt. 

Creation is in the Creator, and the Creator in the creation ; 
He filleth every place. 

Matter is one, but the Fashioner fashioned it in various 
ways. 

There is no fault with the vessels of clay and no fault 
with the Potter.” 

The one true God is in all; everything turneth out as 
He hath ordained. 

He who obeyeth the will of God and recognizeth Him as 
one, is His servant. 

God is invisible; He cannot be seen; the Guru hath 
given me sweet molasses ? to eat. 

Saith Kabir, my doubts are abandoned since I have seen 
the Spotless One everywhere.! 

The Emperor was much interested in_ these 
hymns and with the Guru’s general exposition of 
his doctrines, and before dismissing him desired 
to hear his ideas on the duties and attributes of 

1 Wadhans. 

2 God cannot be blamed for creating vessels of clay, that is, human 
beings, and human beings cannot be blamed for being created by 
Him. 3 Good instruction. 4 Prabhati. 

SIKH. IV Cc 

L “ 

18 THE SHAM Fe LIGION 

a monarch. The Guru then said: ‘ A good monarch 
is ever philanthropic. He can never endure to 
see a man in misery without making great efforts 
with mind, body, and wealth to remove all his 
sufferings. If he see a man hungry or in need of 
a house to dwell in, he supplieth his necessities. 
He provideth poor persons with work—to repair 
a fallen well or bridge, to level an uneven road, 
or to plant trees on the roadside.’ Upon this the 
Guru took his leave. 

CHAPTER III 

The Emperor having heard that the Guru loved 
the chase requested him to accompany him one 
day on a hunting excursion. When in the forest, 
a tiger issued forth and rushed at the Emperor. 
Elephants and horses took fright, and the beaters 
who accompanied the party loudly shouted in 
distress. Bullets and arrows were discharged, but 
went right and left of the tiger. Tite Siipenor 
almost paralysed with fear called upon the Guru 
to save him. The Guru alighted from his horse, 
and taking his sword and shield ran between the 
Emperor and the tiger. As the tiger was going 
to spring, the Guru dealt him a blow with his sword, 
and he fell lifeless to the earth. The Emperor 
thanked his destiny that he was saved from the 
jaws of death by the Guru’s hand. 

When it was time for the Emperor to visit Agra, 
he invited the Guru to accompany him. The Guru, 
after repeated invitations, at last consented. As 
they were hunting on the way, the Emperor took 
the opportunity of telling him what people were 
saying against him—‘O Guru, my ministers and 
staff tell me that, although thou oughtest in reality 
to have no connexion with worldly affairs, yet thou 
callest thyself the true king of the world, and thy 
Sikhs call me who am descended from emperors, 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 19 

who am the lord of many lands, and the cherisher of 
my subjects, a false king. Is all this true?’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ I have never told any one to call me 
true king, but where there exists love between people, 
there is no need of formality, and a man 1s treated 
as he treateth others. I love my Sikhs in propor- 
tion to the love they bear me. In Guru Nanak’s 
view God is the only Emperor. He hath said in the 
Jap}i :— 

He is Emperor, King of kings; Nanak, all must remain 
subject to His will.’ 

The Emperor listened but was not convinced, and 
he and the Guru went off to their respective tents. 

In the afternoon a young grass-cutter, hearing 
that the Guru had come, desired tosee him. In reply 
to his inquiries some one, mistaking the Emperor 
for the Guru, said, ‘ There he is sitting under a tree.’ 
The grass-cutter went to make his prostration. He 
had only half an ana? asanoffering. Hedrewit forth, 
laid it before the Emperor, and thus addressed him, 
‘O true king, all earthly kings are false. Thy realm 
is permanent in every age. Protect me at my last 
hour, and extricate me from hell. I ama poor Sikh 
of thine; thy sovereignty is real and potent to 
protect.’ The Emperor said to his courtiers, “I cannot 
protect myself ; how can I save this man in the way 
he desireth ?’ The Emperor quite understood that 
the Guru had had no opportunity of prompting the 
petitioner to call him true king. He then addressed 
the grass-cutter, ‘I am a false king. There (pointing 
to the Guru) is the true king.’ The grass-cutter took 
up his half ana, and ran with it to the Guru who 
received him affectionately, and gave him the follow- 
ing instruction :—‘ My brother, meditate on God, live 
honestly, covet not thy neighbour’s wife or property, 
compassionate the suffering, obey the Guru’s com- 

1 An dna is worth a penny of English money. There are sixteen 
anas in a rupee, which is now worth one shilling and four pence. 

ce 

20 THE SIKH RELIGION 

mandments, and thou shalt be happy in this world, 
and the next.’ 

When in due time the Emperor and the Guru 
arrived in Agra, the Guru was received with great 
rejoicings by the people. Chandu thought to him- 
self, ‘The Guru will take revenge on me when 
he findeth an opportunity. I shall only be safe if by 
some means I succeed in having him imprisoned, and 
I must apply all my ingenuity and efforts to that 
end, 

The Emperor had a very severe illness in Agra, 
and considered what would be an auspicious time 
for him to sit on his throne after his recovery. It 
is said that, though a Muhammadan, he consulted 
an astrologer on the subject—a fact not improbable, 
seeing that his mother had been a Hindu princess 
and he was married to a lady of the same religion. 
Chandu went secretly to the astrologer, and told him 
how the Guru’s father had spurned his alliance, in 
consequence of which his daughter now sat neglected 
and despised at his door. On seeing her unwedded, 
he said he had no appetite by day and no sleep by 
night. Chandu accordingly gave a large bribe to 
the astrologer to contrive some plot by which Guru 
Har Gobind might be rendered powerless to do him 
injury. 

When the astrologer next day appeared before the 
Emperor, he said, ‘ A calamity hath been hanging over 
thee for five and a half years, and thou art in danger for 
two and a half years more. Saturn is a very powerful 
god and still pursueth thee. He will show thee the 
might of his arm once again. Thou hast already 
bestowed thy weight in gold as alms, and offered 
endless sacrifices, but one thing yet remaineth to 
be done. It behoves thy majesty to send some 
holy man into the fort at Gualiar to do penance there, 
and pray for thy good health so that thou mayest 
escape from the evil influences of the planets. If this 
be not done, thy life shall be in serious danger.’ 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 21 

The Emperor began to fear, and asked the advice 
of his ministers. They being instructed by Chandu 
supported the advice of the astrologer, and suggested 
that Guru Har Gobind, who was now in the Em- 
peror’s camp and in his power, should be sent into 
the fort in accordance with the astrologer’s warning 
and advice. Their advice well suited the Emperor’s 
inclination. 

When the Emperor mentioned his decision to the 
Guru, the latter accepted it without hesitation. 
Having formed his determination, the Guru ordered 
that his troops and his camp should remain where 
they were. He next morning took his five Sikhs 
with him, and went to obey the order of the Emperor. 
At his departure his troops represented to him that 
he was leaving the wicked Chandu to revel in his 
villanies. The Guru replied, ‘The time hath not 
yet come. God will accomplish everything when He 
pleaseth. Best is the fruit that slowly ripeneth.’ ! 

* Cunningham in his /7/¢s/ory of the Stkhs states that Har Gobind 
became ‘involved in difficulties with the Emperor about retaining for 
himself that money which he should have disbursed to his troops.’ 
Cunningham’s authority for this statement was Captain Troyer, the 
translator of the Dadzstin: ‘Har Gobind became involved in many 
difficulties ; one of them was that he appropriated to himself the pay 
due to the soldiers in advance; he carried also the sword against his 
father ; he kept besides many servants, and was addicted to hunting. 
Jahangir, on account of the money due to the army, and of the mulct 
imposed upon Arjan Mal, sent Har Gobind to the fort of Guiliar, &c.’ 

As this is such a serious and wholly unwarranted calumny of the Guru, 
we feel constrained to quote the original Persian— 

Uw yel @43 SF mc obj & oh we) lacs,!ye> Ls! 
> esl,» ‘4 alee wLsh wilb phe AG Cam SS eae — way 

= = . 
@ steed WY | sa ja doy) yeh ye Je orl > 
Here there is not one word about money due to the army, about 
Har Gobind’s criminal misappropriation, or about his having carried 
his sword against his father. The translation of the passage is this: 
‘Fle had many difficulties to contend with. One of them was, that he 
adopted the style of a soldier, wore a sword contrary to the custom of 

2 THE SUM REMGION 

There was joy in the fort when it was known that 
the Guru was coming. It contained many rajas 
who had been deprived of their kingdoms and 
thrones by Jahangir, and who now emaciated, filthy, 
foully clad, and subservient to low warders, dragged 
out a miserable existence. They believed that they 
should be released by the Guru’s intercession and 
then return to their states and their families. Hari 
Das the governor of the fort, too, was happy. He had 
long desired to see the Guru, but pressure of official 
duties had prevented him from absenting himself 
for the purpose. He now went forth to meet him, 
prostrated himself before him, and applied the dust 
of his feet to his head and body. The Guru’s first 
act was to cause clean clothes and better food to be 
supplied to the imprisoned rajas, and to endeavour 
to make their prison a paradise in comparison with 
the hell it had previously been.? 

Chandu wrote to Hari Das—‘ Thou and [J are ser- 

his father, maintained a retinue, and began to follow the chase. The 
Emperor in order to extort from him the balance of the fine which had 
been imposed on Arjan Mal, sent him to Gualiar, &c.’ 

We might suppose that Troyer had translated from a different text, 
and that the Dadzs/an has since his time been altered at somebody’s 
instigation, if some of the blunders of Troyer’s translation were not so 
very palpable. For instance, assigning to the expression darkhildaf-t- 
pidar shamsher bast the meaning that Har Gobind bore arms against 
his father, is not only opposed to the verbal and grammatical interpre- 
tation of the passage, but it is also opposed to the whole tenor of the 
accounts of both Arjan and Har Gobind given in the Dadzs/an itself. 
If the Persian writer had intended to convey the idea which Captain 
Troyer does, he would have written da mukabila-t-pidar shamsher bast; 
but this, though grammatical, would not have been true, for Har Gobind 
was devotedly attached to his father, and even vowed deathless ven- 
geance on his father’s enemies. It is indeed hard that the fame of Har 
Gobind should have been tarnished by the blunders of a translator. 
Dr. Trumpp in his Ad? Granth has, with his usual theological bias, 
repeated the strange calumny. 

1 The room in which the Guru was incarcerated was in a top 
story to the left as one enters the Gualiar fort by the Alamgir gate. 
Jt is on the eastern verge of the plateau, overlooks the ancient town of 
Gualiar, and commands a wide and not unpleasant prospect. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 23 

vants of the Emperor. I will assist thee in many 
ways, and grant thee a yearly income of five thousand 
rupees if thou find some means of disposing of the 
Guru who is now in thy power. It is because I 
depend on thee that I induced the Emperor to send 
him into the fort. Now that thou knowest my wishes, 
thou mayest act as it pleaseth thee, but, if thou do 
me the favour I desire, I shall never forget it. I 
depend altogether upon thee.’ Hari Das on receiving 
this letter placed it before the Guru for his informa- 
tion. 

The Guru took hardly any food,—his rations 
he distributed among the needy prisoners. The 
Sikhs who accompanied him represented ‘Thou 
eatest nothing while we fill our bellies twice a day. 
We curse ourselves that thou remainest hungry 
while we eat to repletion. Kindly tell us why 
thou actest so.’ The Guru replied, ‘If thou bring 
me food obtained by labour I will eat it.’ His 
Sikhs went next morning to a brazier’s shop and 
there hammered copper all day long. With their 
earnings they purchased food for the Guru, which 
he ate as ifit were ambrosia. The rajas prayed that 
the Guru might ever remain with them, and that the 
emperor might order the governor to treat him well, 
and never impose any hardship on him. 

Chandu again wrote to the governor, ‘ My friend 
Hari Das, I send thee a poisoned robe for the Guru. 
He who putteth it on shall die immediately. Tell 
him the Emperor sent it. If he weareth it not, then 
destroy him in any way practicable. Tell me what 
thou succeedest in doing, so that I may show my 
gratitude. There will not again be such an op- 
portunity.’ Hari Das, as before, placed this letter 
and the poisoned robe at the Guru’s disposal. The 
Guru upon this repeated the following hymn of 
Guru Arjan :— 

The slanderer shall crumble down 

24 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Like a wall of kallar: hear, ye brethren, thus shall he 
be known. 

The slanderer is glad when he seeth a fault; on seeing 
anything good he is filled with grief. 

He meditateth evil all day long, but it befalleth not ; 
the evil-minded man dieth meditating evil. 

The slanderer forgetteth God, and, when death approach- 
eth, quarrelleth with God’s saint. 

The Lord Himself preserveth Nanak ; what can wretched 
man do ? ? 

The Guru’s mother, finding that he did not return 
in due time, felt very anxious and sent Bhai Budha 
to bring him home. Bhai Budha on entering the 
Guru’s chamber thus addressed him, ‘ What a fine 
return is thy confinement in this fort for having 
killed the tiger and saved the Emperor’s life! The 
eyes of thy mother and of thy Sikhs are all turned 
towards thee. Night and day they await thy coming ; 
thou mayest escape if thou desire. Thy Sikhs who 
traverse great distances and endure great hardships 
in order to behold thee, are grievously disappointed.’ 
The Guru sent his mother and his Sikhs a letter 
of consolation, and expressed a hope that he should 
soon return to them. Hesaid he was happy in the 
fort where he could repeat God’s name apart 
from the distraction of worldly people, who ever 
importuned him to gratify their petty desires. He 
added that his fellow prisoners were happy with him, 
and he with them. He directed Bhai Budha on his 
return journey to call at Dihli, see to the protection 
of his camp, and have his horses grazed where there 
was good pasturage. 

' Bhai Jetha went on a mission to Dihli to secure 
the Guru’s release. He succeeded in soothing the 
Emperor, who had been troubled with fearful visions. 
The Guru remarked that Jetha appeared conceited 
after this performance. In order to humble him he 

1 Bilawal. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 25 

bade him take a vesse! to the Jamna and fetch him 
water. When Jetha returned with the water, the 
Guru ordered him to take it back again, and throw 
it where he had taken it from. Jetha obeyed the 
order. The Guru then asked, ‘ When thou didst 
fill the vessel did the river appear less ; and when thou 
didst put back the water did the river appear 
more?’ Jetha replied, ‘No, what is a vessel in 
comparison with a river?’ The Guru then said, 
‘The Guru is like the ocean, and thou like the vessel 
didst display in the Emperor’s case thy miraculous 
power. Such cleverness pleaseth me not.’ Bhai 
Jetha changed the subject, ‘O true king, all thy 
Sikhs are unhappy, and thy mother ts sore distressed 
on account of thine absence. Though thou art angry 
with me, I have been only fulfilling a former com- 
mandment of thine to do good to others whenever 
possible, an expression which I now venture to recall 
to thy memory, and beg that thou mayest return to 
Amritsar to cheer thy mother and bless thy people.’ 
The Guru replied by the following hymn of Guru 
Arjan :— 

Accept as good whatever Is ; 

Abandon thy pride ; 

Day and night ever sing God’s praises : 

Make this thy whole aim. 

Rejoice, O saint, and repeat God’s name. 

Reject artifice and too much cleverness; repeat the 
Gurw’s holy spell. 

Centre thy hopes in the one God alone ; 

Repeat God’s pure name ; : 

Bow to the Guru’s feet, 

And the Giver, the Bountiful, 

Will take thee across the terrible ocean. 

He in whose heart there 1s all treasure 

Hath no end or limits. 

He will preserve thee at last. 

Nanak hath obtained this treasure 

26 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Of God’s pure name. 
He who repeateth it shall obtain salvation. 
Nanak, it shall be obtained by God’s favour.! 

When the Emperor had heard Wazir Khan’s 
pleading on behalf of the Guru, whose sanctity was 
an object of general observation, he ordered that he 
should be presented to him. On hearing this the 
imprisoned rajas were much distressed. They appre- 
hended that they were now going to lose him whose 
presence had cheered their sufferings, and that they 
should have no one to cherish them and render 
them spiritual consolation. The Guru solaced them, 
and promised that he would not leave them until 
they were released. 

When Wazir Khan returned to Dihli, he reported 
the result of his mission to the Guru, and the Guru’s 
desire that the rajas should be released. The 
Emperor replied, ‘ The kings imprisoned in Gualiar 
are hostages for millions of money. Moreover, if 
I release them, there is danger of their inciting rebel- 
lion in my empire.’ On this some of the Emperor’s 
ministers, who were either friends or relations of the 
imprisoned rajas, represented that 1t was unnecessary 
to detain them any longer. Their spirits were now 
so cowed that there was no danger of their again 
disturbing His Majesty’s peace. The Emperor, after 
full reflection on this and Wazir Khan’s arguments for 
the Guru’s recall, replied, ‘I will so far meet the 
Guru’s wishes as not to further detain the rajas, 
and [ will entrust them to him on condition that he 
be surety for their loyal behaviour.’ 

When Wazir Khan returned with this order to 
Gualiar, the Guru stood up, and taking Wazir Khan 
and Hari Das the governor with him, went and caused 
the fetters of the kings to be struck off. They addressed 
him, ‘O true Guru, as thou hast cut these material 
fetters, so cut, we pray thee, our spiritual fetters 

1 Ramkali, 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 27 

also.’ They seized the hem of his garment and held 
it until he had promised them salvation. On his 
doing so they all repeated with one voice the verse 
of Guru Arjan :— 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet and freed the 
captive.! 

From this circumstance the Guru is still remem- 
bered in Gualiar as Bandi Chhor Baba, the holy man 
who freed the prisoners.’ 

Hari Das, the governor of the Gualiar fort and 
prison, expressed his regret on parting from the Guru. 
The Guru replied in the words of Guru Arjan :— 

Meditate in thy heart on the Guru’s image ; 
Obey the Guru’s word and instruction.’ 

‘That we have met in the flesh 1s a temporary 
matter, the result of destiny; but that we have met 
in the spirit is a matter to be treasured for ever. 
As Gur Das hath said, ‘“‘ I ama sacrifice to those Sikhs 
of the Guru who meet in the spirit.’’ And again 
Guru Nanak :— 

They who meet with their hearts really meet; that is 
a real meeting.’ 

‘While thou remainest in the Gualiar fort propagate 
the true faith, and, when thou thinkest of me, thou 
shalt behold me.’ 

Hari Das’s eyes were filled with tears, but he was 
comforted on hearing the Guru’s words of counsel 
and encouragement. 

The Guru with his five Sikhs set out with Wazir 
Khan for Dihli. The Guru took shelter in his old 

1 Maru. 

2 In the fort a cenotaph called Bandishar, probably a contraction of 
Bandi Chhor, is pointed out to visitors, at which both the Sikhs and the 
Muhammadans worship—the Muhammadans every Thursday evening, 
and thé Sikhs occasionally. At this spot the Guru used to pray. It 
is near a tank in and around which masonry work was constructed 
in ancient times. 

> Gaund. * Tilang, Ashtapadi. 

28 THE SIKH RELIGION 

quarters on Majnun’s hillock. The Emperor in- 
vited him to his presence and thus addressed him— 
‘Tam very thankful to thee ; thou hast rendered me 
great assistance. Thy prayers have removed the 
effects of the conjunction of planets unfavourable 
to me, and effectually cured my maladies.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ There was no conjunction of planets 
unfavourable to thee. That was only in the imagina- 
tion of thy advisers. Guru Nanak’s house is like 
a mirror. As a man presenteth himself to it so is 
he treated. What is there that cannot be found 
in the Guru’s house ?_ In it are the four great boons 
to mortals, but they can only be obtained by faith. 
He who hath devotion shall obtain the fruit thereof, 
as happened in the case of thine ancestors.’ 

The Emperor was struck with the beauty of a 
rosary the Guru carried. It was made from a yellow 
composition called kapur. The Emperor asked him 
for one of its beads. He would add it to his 
own rosary and preserve it in memory of the Guru. 
The Guru replied, that his father had a better 
rosary which he used to wear as a necklace, but 
it was now in Chandu’s possession. The Em- 
peror sent for Chandu and asked for the necklace. 
Chandu proceeded to his house to search for it. 
During his absence the Guru took occasion to bring 
the whole of Chandu’s conduct to the Emperor’s 
notice. Chandu, after a pretended search, repre- 
sented that the rosary had been lost. The Emperor 
suspected that he had really misappropriated it 
and would not produce it, and, as there were 
many other grounds for his displeasure with 
Chandu, he became quite satisfied of his perfidy and 
wickedness. 

The Emperor communicated to Guru Har Gobind 
the numerous complaints Chandu had made against 
him. The Emperor also pretended that Chandu had 
exceeded the orders he had received on the subject 
of Guru Arjan’s treatment. ‘ He told me,’ continued 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 29 

the Emperor, ‘ that thou saidst thou wouldst wreak 
vengeance on me. Therefore I sent Wazir Khan for 
thee, and now, on seeing thee and learning Chandu’s 
real character, my doubts and apprehensions regard- 
ing thee are all removed. Chandu is thine enemy, 
and thou mayest have revenge on him.’ The Guru 
replied that his father Guru Arjan did not wish to 
avenge himself on Chandu, for his principles were as 
stated in the following hymn of Guru Ram Das :— 

The true Guru is generous and compassionate ; he feeleth 
compassion ever. 

The true Guru’s heart is free from enmity, and in every- 
thing he beholdeth the one God. 

None who bear enmity to those who are without it shall 
abide. 

The true Guru wisheth well to all; how could any evil 
befall him ? 

As men feel towards the true Guru, so shall they be 
rewarded. 

Nanak, the Creator from whom nothing is concealed, 
knoweth everything.! 

The Guru continued, ‘O Emperor, if thou do jus- 
tice, thou shalt be honoured in God’s court, and if 
thou do injustice thou shalt have to account for it. 
Thou hast put a bell in front of thy gate, and, when 
anybody ringeth it, thou comest forth thyself and 
hearest his complaint. But even so, thou shalt only 
be acquitted of all blame in respect of my father, if 
thou do justice now. He bore enmity to no one, but 
was every one’s friend and endeavoured to contribute 
to every one’s happiness. God, who is the Bestower 
of the fruit of past acts, will fulfil His commandment 
to destroy the enemy. But, O Emperor, take my 
father’s necklace from Chandu. It is the duty of 
a king to cherish his subjects, and that can only be 
done by punishing thieves and harmful men.’ Upon 

1 Gauri ki War I. 

30 THE Sit! WELIGION 

this the Emperor made over Chandu, as was the 
custom at that time, to the Guru for punishment. 
On a signal from the Guru, Bhai Bidhi Chand and 
Bhai Jetha seized Chandu, led him outside the fort, 
took off his turban, tied his hands behind his back, 
and showered blows of slippers on his devoted head. 
While being thus castigated he was led through the 
streets of the city, a warning to all men. He was 
pelted with stones, mud, and filth, and several people 
spat on his face. He had said that he would attack 
the Guru like a mad dog, and his threat recoiled on 
himself. He would have died under the injuries 
he then received, only the Guru felt compassion and 
rescued him from the wrath of the people. The 
Guru caused his arms to be unbound, and put him 
into a house with a sentry over him, intending to 
take him alive to the scene of Guru Arjan’s death in 
Lahore. The Emperor sent for Chandu’s wife and 
son, and made them also over to the Guru, telling 
him to punish them ashe pleased. The Guru, in reply, 
uttered the following verses of Guru Amar Das :— 

Curses be on the head of the false one ; greatness to the 
true saint ! 

True is the Lord, true is His justice, ashes be on the 
head of the slanderer ! 1 

The most severe punishment that was inflicted on 
Chandu’s wife and son was to cause them to behold 
Chandu’s sufferings. The Sikhs bound him, and 
made him over to pariahs as if he were a dog. Dirt 
and filth continued to be poured on him, and he was 
reduced to a condition in which no one could re- 
cognize him. When his wife and son had seen his 
treatment, they were allowed to depart. Everybody 
congratulated the Guru on the mercy he had shown 
them. 

1 Bilawal ki War. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 3a 

CHAPTER IV 

The Guru desired to return to Amritsar, and duly 
informed the Emperor. The Emperor replied, ‘ I am 
not feeling well. My physicians tell me I must have 
change of air, and I shall thus regain my strength. 
I therefore intend to spend this summer in Kashmir. 
If thou desire to defer thy homeward journey until 
Thursday, the lucky thirteenth day of the half-lunar 
month, we will travel to Kashmir together, and I 
shall enjoy thy pleasant companionship.’ 

The Emperor and the Guru set out on the appointed 
day. Bhai Jetha, knowing the Guru’s compassionate 
disposition, concealed from his sight Chandu, led 
along amid the scavengers and dogs. The Guru’s tent, 
which was always pitched with the Emperor's, was 
magnificently appointed, and the Guru’s youth and 
beauty excited universal admiration. One day the 
Empress Nur Jahan, beholding him, asked one of her 
handmaidens who that handsome young man was who 
ever accompanied the Emperor. The servant, who 
was well acquainted with the Guru’s circumstances, 
detailed them to Her Majesty. The Empress longed 
to meet him, and on the following night made further 
inquiries regarding him of her husband. ‘ Hath 
that priest who accompanieth thee a wife?’ The 
Emperor, in ignorance of the Guru’s status, replied in 
the negative. The Empress said it was very strange 
that at his age, and possessing health and wealth, he 
should have sufficient continence to lead a single life. 

Next morning, as the Guru’s tent was on the bank 
‘of the Bias, and he was alone, the Empress, accom- 
panied by her co-queens, nearly as fair as she, went 
with the Emperor’s permission to visit the great 
Sikh priest. The Empress was struck with awe on 
beholding the Guru. He thus addressed her and 
her companions: ‘O fair queens, great hath been 
your good fortune that you have obtained in your 

32 THE SIKH RELIGION 

human birth high family and high position without 
any anxiety for your maintenance, and that, being 
so beautiful, you are an emperor’s consorts. Where- 
fore, worship God who gave you these manifold 
favours. Be virtuous ever. A woman’s happiness 
and salvation largely depend on her devotion to her 
husband. Fear God, preserve yourselves from sin 
and wickedness. Keep your hearts under restraint. 
However close may be the relationship of sons, 
wives, and husbands, at the last moment there shall 
be none to render assistance. It is only virtuous 
acts which uplift the soul to communion with God. 
The lower animals feel love and similar pleasures, 
but it is only human beings who are privileged to 
worship their Creator.’ The queens pondered on 
this discourse, returned to the Emperor, and ex- 
tolled the Guru’s passionless and sinless nature. 

When the Guru and the Emperor had crossed the 
river Bias, the Guru induced him to accompany him 
to Goindwal. There the Guru bathed in the Bawali, 
visited the upper room in which Guru Amar Das 
had lived, and held an affectionate interview with 
his sons. The Guru then said to the Emperor, ‘ I am 
now going to Amritsar, and thy Majesty may con- 
tinue thy journey to Lahore.’ The Emperor replied, 
‘May I too not behold thy sacred temple?’ The 
Guru, seeing the Emperor’s friendly curiosity, con- 
sented to conduct him to Amritsar. On the way 
they passed a night at Tarn Taran, whose history 
the Guru related to the Emperor. 

The Emperor encamped at the village of Gumtala, 
near Amritsar, where now the district court is held, 
while the Guru with his followers went into the city. 
Bhai Jetha preceded the party to inform the Guru’s 
mother and the Sikhs of his approach. All the 
inhabitants came forth to meet him. When the 
Guru arrived at the Takht Akal Bunga, Bhai Budha 
offered a thanksgiving for his return. The Guru, 
having performed all due worship and observances, 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 33 

prayed and circumambulated the temple. He then 
went to his private apartments, where his mother 
most affectionately greeted him after his long absence. 
The Emperor sent sacred food and offered to defray 
all the expenses of the completion of the temple. 
The Guru, however, wishing to retain for the Sikhs 
exclusive proprietary rights in it, replied, ‘ The place 
where the money of one person is spent becometh 
that person’s property. This temple erected to God 
belongeth to God. All are equal sharers in it. It 
will be gradually completed. The Sikhs will do the 
work. Like Guru Nanak’s religion, all are partners 
in it, and none are excluded.’ 

The Empress Nur Jahan, and her co-queens, went 
again to visit the Guru. They also went to see the 
temple, and ended by visiting the Guru’s mother. 
She gave them religious instruction, and recited 
to them the hymn which Guru Nanak addressed 
to Nur Shah, the queen of Kamrup. The Guru’s 
mother also recited to her visitors the following 
verses of Guru Nanak :— 

She who is pleasing to her beloved adorneth his home, 

While she who speaketh falsely is of no account ; 

She who speaketh falsely is of no account; her spouse 
will not even behold her. 

Her spouse forgetteth the wicked wife; false that she 
is, She passeth the night in separation.} 

The Emperor said to the Guru, ‘ Thou art a very 
young man. Many very beautiful women come to 
see thee. It is hard to subdue youthful passions. 
How dost thou succeed in doing so?’ The Guru 
replied by a parable : ‘ There was once a very religious 
and chaste man who had conquered his passions. 
A lewd and adulterous king used to wait on him. 
The saint once asked him what desire he sought to 
gratify by his attention to him. The king replied, 
‘Iam a lustful man. I ever desire sexual pleasures 

1 Dhanasari Chhant, 

SIKH. 1V D 

34 THE SIRE RELIGION 

and the gratification of all my desires.’”” The saint 
replied, “‘ Because of this enjoyment thou hast only 
eight days more of life which thou mayest enjoy as 
thou pleasest. On the ninth day thou shalt die.” 
The king inquired what he could do to avert his fate. 
The saint replied, “‘ Meditate on God’s name.” The 
king then abandoned worldly affairs, and so ap- 
plied himself to devotion that all impure desires 
left his mind. On the ninth day he went to the 
saint and told him how he had spent his time since 
their last interview. The saint said that his life was 
saved by the power of his devotion, and inquired how 
he had abandoned sensuality. The king replied that 
it was through fear of impending death. Then the 
saint said, “‘ That is an answer to the question thou 
didst propound. That is the way to avert thy fate. 
Thou thoughtest that thou shouldst die in eight 
days, so no evil desires entered thy mind, while, as 
for myself, I am not certain that death will not come 
and seize me at any moment. On this account my 
mind is unswayed by passion.”” O Emperor Jahangir, 
there is no reliance to be placed on death ; 1t cometh 
like a thief when we expect it not. If a man had 
information, he would not allow his house to be 
plundered. Guru Nanak hath said :— 

My brethren, know that death «mpendeth over your 
heads : 
Man is like a fish upon which the net falleth unawares.’ } 

After hearing this the Emperor remained a few days 
with the Guru, and then proceeded to Lahore. 

The Emperor left Wazir Khan and Kind Beg at 
Amritsar with instructions to endeavour to induce 
the Guru to go to visit him at Lahore. When they 
succeeded in doing so, the Guru went to his mother 
to communicate his intention, and make his obelsance 
to her before his departure. Having made new 
arrangements for the performance of the duties of 

1 Sri Rag, Ashtapadi. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 35 

the temple and the kitchen, he mounted his horse, 
and set out with a small escort. He remained for 
a night at a village half-way, and next day pitched 
his tent in Muzang, a suburb of Lahore. The fol- 
lowing morning he visited the birthplace of Guru 
Ram Das, the Bawali whose construction Guru Arjan 
had planned, and the place where he gave up his 
spirit. He caused a small temple to be erected 
there, and appointed Bhai Langaha to take charge 
of it. A large fair is held at the place yearly on 
the anniversary of Guru Arjan’s death—the fourth 
day of the hight half-of Jeth (May-June). 
' When people remarked that Chandu, who had 
been brought from Amritsar with the Guru’s party, 
justly suffered for his misdeeds, the Guru said that 
every man’s acts clung to him. Chandu was reduced 
to a most deplorable condition. His eyes became 
blind from weeping, his body dried up, and only 
a skeleton remained of what was once the sleek and 
handsome minister of the Emperor. He was daily 
led through the city streets, when the children used 
to throw handfuls of dust on his head, and the women 
to utter every imprecation on him. Bhai Bidhi 
Chand and Bhai Jetha delivered Chandu over to 
scavengers, who led him round the streets to beg. 
He who used to take bribes of thousands of rupees 
was now glad to get kauris and the leavings of others 
for his support. For a sacrificial mark on his fore- 
head he had now the marks of shoe-beatings, and for 
necklaces of pearls and diamonds he had old slippers 
suspended from his neck. After fifteen days of this 
treatment in Lahore death came to his relief. A 
grain-parcher, on seeing him, became so enraged 
that he struck him on the head with an iron ladle 
full of burning sand. On this Chandu fell with 
painful cries and swooned. The grain-parcher dealt 
him a similar blow as he lay unconscious on the 
ground. His skull was fractured, and his soul 
became the spoil of death’s myrmidons. The 
D2 

36 THE SIKH RELIGION 

scavengers threw his body into the river Ravi. 
When the Emperor heard of Chandu’s death, he said 
that he richly deserved his fate. The Guru, however, 
prayed that as Chandu had suffered torment for 
his sins in this life, God would pardon him hereafter. 

When Prithia’s son Mihrban heard of Chandu’s 
death he was greatly distressed. He said, ‘ Sulahi 
died when he set himself against the Guru. When 
my father, too, became the Guru’s enemy he perished 
in his thoughtless career. And now Chandu ts dead. 
It is not known what magic the Guru possesseth 
that no one may withstand him.’ Mihrban exchanged 
turbans with Karm Chand, Chandu’s son, in token 
of life-long friendship, and took counsel with him 
how to effect the Guru’s ruin. They proceeded to 
Prince Khuram, afterwards the Emperor Shah 
Jahan, and poisoned his mind against the Guru. 

When the Guru heard of Mihrban’s arrival in 
Lahore, he sent Bhai Paira and Bhai Pirana to try 
to dissuade him from his hostile designs. They 
exhorted him, ‘ Abandon strife and come to terms 
with the Guru. Nothing is gained by dissension. 
What did thy father gain by his enmity with Guru 
Arjan ? who said :— 

The advantage of union cannot be described, Nanak, it 
is beyond expression.* 

Thy jealousy shall cause misery even to thyself.’ 
Mihrban replied, ‘My father at his death enjoined 
me never to make friendship with the Guru. I cannot 
disregard my father’s injunctions.’ When the envoys 
represented the Guru’s supernatural power, Mihrban 
replied, ‘ ] am aware of that. Even with such power 
Guru Arjan abandoned Amritsar through fear of 
Sulahi, and was subsequently unable to avert his 
own death. The masands are now Har Gobind’s 
friends solely because he hath bribed them. My 

1 Literally—beyond the beyond. Gijari. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 37 

father, it is true, failed, but he was a poor unsophis- 
ticated man, unable to cope with my clever uncle 
Arjan. Why did not Har Gobind work miracles 
against Chandu when he caused him to be sent to the 
fortress of Gualiar ?’ Bhai Paira replied, ‘ Thou 
art still a child and knowest nothing. Great men 
have great endurance. They can endure the bad 
language of enemies as if it were a rain shower, 
and can withstand them like mountains.’ On 
hearing this, Mihrban’s anger blazed forth, and, 
seeing it, Bhai Paira and Bhai Pirana returned to 
the Guru. 

The Guru, on hearing of the failure of their nego- 
tiations, said, ‘I will go myself to Mihrban. He is 
my first cousin, and I will endeavour to conciliate 
him. Although he is at enmity with me, yet he 
cannot treat me with discourtesy.’ Muihrban gave 
him a respectful reception, and seated him by his 
side. The Guru opened the conversation, ‘ Thy 
father and mine are in heaven. We are both brothers 
now, so we ought not to bear each other enmity 
from which happiness can never result.’ The Guru 
then quoted the following slok of their common 
relation, Guru Ram Das :— 

He in whose heart there is jealousy shall never prosper. 

No one shall heed what he saith ; he is a fool ever crying 
in the wilderness. 

He in whose heart there is calumny is known as 
a calumniator; everything he hath done or doeth is 
in vain. 

He ever causelessly slandereth others; he cannot show 
his face to any one; it hath become black. 

In the Kal age the body is the field of works ; as man 
soweth so shall he reap. 

Justice is not administered on false evidence; when 
a man eateth poison he dieth. 

My brethren, behold the justice of the true Creator—as 
any one acteth, so shall be his reward. 

38 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The slave Nanak hath obtained all enlightenment and 
preached the words of God’s court.t 

The Guru continued, ‘ The Lord of the world, the 
Supreme Being will not be pleased to bestow happi- 
ness or prosperity on those who harbour evil in their 
hearts, while, on the contrary, the Creator will make 
him happy who is pleased with the happiness of 
others.” The Guru then quoted the following from 
Kabir :— 

Indulge not in envy and bickering, O my soul. 
Do good deeds and gain their reward.” 

The Guru concluded his remonstrance, ‘ Friend- 
ship is ambrosia, dissension poison. Wherefore 
banish dissension, and thou shalt be happy. Kings 
and emperors bow before the Guru’s throne. It is 
not proper for scions of his house to flatter or pay 
court to worldly people like Chandu’s son ; nor does 
it beseem them to squander the wealth of the Sikhs 
in illicit gratuities.’ 

Mihrban, far from being convinced by all this 
good advice, only became more enraged. He vented 
his wrath on the Guru, and said, ‘The enmity 
that hath subsisted between us I will never forget. 
Leave me.’ The Guru addressed him for the last 
time, ‘I desire that thou mayest live in peace, 
but who can set aside God’s will?’ Saying this 
the Guru retired to his tent. He remained several 
months at Lahore, preaching to his disciples and 
leading them to the paths of religion and rectitude. 

A masand named Sujan resided in Kabul. He 
had there amassed for the Guru great wealth from 
tithes and offerings, and considered how this 
wealth could reach the Guru, or be best ap- 
plied to his advantage. He had heard that the 
Guru had a great love for horses. He there- 
fore searched Kabul and Bukhara for a _ steed 

1 Gauri ki War I. 2 Asa. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 39 

worthy of his spiritual master. At last he found 
a horse of rare strain, beauty, and speed, which he 
purchased for a lakh of rupees as an offering likely 
to assist him in obtaining ultimate salvation and 
making the true king happy. Sujan covered the 
horse with dirty clothes, and took him with fifteen 
or twenty others which were going for sale to the 
Panjab. The object of these precautions was that 
the animal might not be specially remarked and 
coveted on the way by some Muhammadan official. 
In those days, whenever the Turks’ saw a good 
horse, a good sword, or anything else desirable, they 
appropriated it for themselves with scant ceremony 
towards the owner. As the cavalcade was crossing 
the Indus at Atak, the eye of an official happened 
to fall on the Guru’s horse, and he inquired whence 
it had come and whither it was going, remarking at 
the same time that it would make a suitable present 
for the Emperor. Sujan said that the other horses 
were for sale, but he was taking this particular one 
as an offering to the true king. 

The official endeavoured to persuade Sujan to let 
him have the animal, but in vain. He thereupon 
wrote to the Emperor Jahangir that a Sikh was 
taking a horse of untold value to Guru Har Gobind, 
and advised him to take possession of the animal 
by every possible means, for he was worthy of a 
monarch. The Emperor, whose friendship for the 
Guru had never been real, replied by sending some 
troops to the official with an order that he must 
not allow the horse to cross the river. If the owner 
were very greedy, the price of the animal should be 
paid him, but if he refused to take it, force should be 
employed. Sujan refused to surrender the horse on 
any consideration. He maintained that the Guru 
had paid for him, and he was consequently his 
property. The Emperor’s men told Sujan he might 

1 The Mughal Emperors and their followers are always called 
Turks in Sikh compositions. 

40 THE SIKH RELIGION 

give all the other horses to the Guru, but this 
particular one must be the Emperor’s perquisite. 
Sujan continued his journey to the Guru and told 
him how he had been robbed of the horse procured 
with such difficulty and solicitude. The Guru 
recommended patience, and predicted that nobody 
but himself should ever ride the animal. 

When the Emperor desired to mount, the animal 
shook its head, which was regarded as a bad omen. 
The Emperor then desisted, and ordered that he 
should be fed on rare mashes, but the next day the 
horse would neither eat nor drink. The Emperor’s 
most accomplished veterinary surgeons declared 
that an evil eye had caused the malady. Wazir 
Khan, the Guru’s friend, reminded the Emperor that 
the horse belonged to the Guru, and that property 
taken from others could not bring luck to its posses- 
sor. All known medicines were tried, but in vain. 
When the horse was on the point of death, Rustam 
Khan, the head Qazi, said, ‘If the holy Quran 
were read for him he might recover.’ Upon this the 
Imperor presented him to the Qazi with permission 
to exercise on him his spiritual power. 

As the Qazi was leading him home, the animal 
neighed when passing the Guru’s tent. This was 
interpreted as an appeal to the Guru to rescue him 
from the Qazi’s hands. The Guru sent for the Qazi 
with the object of negotiating the purchase of the 
horse. It was agreed between them that the Guru 
should have the horse for ten thousand rupees. The 
Qazi signed an agreement to that effect, and it was 
further stipulated that the price should be paid at 
the time of the Diwali fair in Amritsar. The Guru 
took the animal to the stable, and by simply patting 
him on the neck restored him to his usual strength. 

A Muhammadan saint, Mian Mir, originally named 
Muhammad Mir, born in Sistan in A.D. 1550, found 
his way like many other distinguished Muhammadans 
to the Panjab, and settled in a barren plain about 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 41 

five miles from Lahore. He gained a high reputa- 
tion for sanctity and devotion. Jahangir in his 
autobiography wrote of him:‘ Truly he is the 
beloved of God. In sanctity and purity of soul, he 
hath no equal in this age. This humble servant 
[namely the Emperor] used to go to the darwesh, 
who explained to him many minute points of 
theology. It was my desire to make him an offering 
of money; but as he was above worldly things, 
I dared not make the offer, and contented myself 
with the presentation of the skin of an antelope to 
serve as a mat for reading his prayers on.’ 

The Guru resolved to visit Mian Mir, and duly 
notified his intention. The saint went forth to 
meet him, entertained him in his house, and treated 
him in every way with the greatest respect. The 
Guru inquired to what degree of divine knowledge 
he had attained, if he had succeeded in keeping his 
mind under restraint and repressing his desires, and 
if he had yet felt the blissful inward satisfaction of 
having met God. Mian Mir courteously replied : 
‘He to whom thou showest favour hath found 
everything. Having abandoned all false worldly 
things I have found the true God, who is beyond 
conception and expression. Whoever hath seen 
Him hath abandoned pride and obtained peace. 
My mind is at rest and no longer tormented by 
desires. The pleasure of meeting God is incom- 
municable. In the words of Bhikan :— 

Though one try to utter God’s praises, they cannot be 
fully uttered ; 
They are like sweets to a dumb person.! 

‘The man who possesseth divine knowledge is 
happy at every time and in every place. The man 
who possesseth it not,iseverunhappy.’ After further 
conversation on the same and kindred subjects 
the Guru returned to his camp. The nobles who 

1 Sorath. 

42 THE SIKH RELIGION 

had heard the colloquy reported it to the Em- 
peror, and expressed to him their surprise that an 
elderly saint like Mian Mir should treat a married 
Sikh Guru with such respect. The Emperor asked 
Mian Mir for an explanation. Mian Mir replied: 
‘The Guru is a sincere believer in God. His heart 
is pure and his words leave an impression on the 
mind. From those who hear him all doubts depart. 
On this account I have received him, and thought 
him worthy of respect and reverence.’ 

CHAPTER V 

The Qazi, on seeing that the horse which was worth 
a lakh of rupees had recovered, and that the Guru 
daily rode him, felt that he had got the worst of the 
bargain, and began to clamour for his money without 
waiting for the Diwali fair. The Guru then reminded 
him of what had occurred: ‘ A Sikh paid a lakh of 
rupees for the horse, the Emperor seized and appro- 
priated him. The animal was dying when you sold 
him to me. I will, however, pay you the ten thousand 
rupees at the appointed time.’ 

On another occasion, as the Guru was taking his 
siesta, the Oazi came to dun him. Bhai Budha, who 
was sitting at the Guru’s door, said that that was 
not the time to approach the Guru, and suggested 
that the Qazi might return another day at an hour 
when it would be convenient for the Guru to receive 
him. The Qazi pressed Bhai Budha to awaken the 
Guru. He was not, he said, a courtier or royal 
favourite who might not be disturbed. Bhai Budha 
replied, ‘ What are wretched courtiers in comparison 
with our Guru? He is king of kings. Depart, come 
again. What time is this to come begging for 
money. The Qazi replied, ‘If I tell the Emperor, 
he will punish the Guru, and I shall then obtain the 
price of the horse.’ This threat Bhai Budha promptly 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 43 

resented : ‘Fool, put a guard on thy tongue. Thou 
knowest not God’s will.’ 

The Guru, hearing an uproar, awoke and came 
forward, when the Qazi thus angrily addressed him : 
“Thou pretendest ignorance. Thou neither payest 
me the promised money nor returnest me my horse, 
and yet thou sleepest without anxiety. Thou shalt 
see into what a pleasant sleep I will put thee. If 
thou study thine own interests, pay me for the 
horse, otherwise I will complain to the Emperor.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘Thou mayest tell the Emperor 
and act as it pleaseth thee.’ After this the Qazi 
departed. 

One morning the Guru called Bhai Budha, told 
him his business in Lahore was accomplished, and 
they must return home. Bhai Budha, having made 
all preparations, set out in advance. The Guru, 
with his army, then marched and overtook him. . 

There was in the house of the Qazi a daughter, 
named by the Sikhs Kaulan,' who was a disciple of 
Mian Mir. She, in addition to being very beautiful, 
was both amiable and virtuous. From her earliest 
years she had occupied her mind with praising God’s 
name and remembering Him in the company of 
saints. Even when she attained puberty she de- 
clined her parents’ suggestions to marry. When at 
home, she used to dwell in a lonely chamber. When- 
ever she went abroad, it was to behold her spiritual 
guide Mian Mir; otherwise she never even put her 
foot outside her house. In Mian Mir’s congregation, 
as she frequently heard, not only from Mian Mir 
himself but from other very holy men, various praises 
of Guru Har Gobind, so she also praised him in the 
midst of her own family. The Qazi, her father, was 
in the highest degree incensed with her; in the first 
place, for refusing marriage, and secondly, for ‘fre- 
quenting the society of faqirs. When, moreover, he 

1 This was the lady’s name after her conversion to the Sikh religion. 
Her original Muhammadan name is not known. 

49 THE SIKH RELIGION 

heard from her lips praises of Guru Har Gobind, he 
became exceedingly wroth, and thus addressed her : 
‘O infidel, thou praisest an infidel and obeyest not the 
law of Muhammad, according to which it is forbidden 
under penalty of death to praise an unbelieving 
person. Kaulan replied, ‘Father dear, the law of 
Muhammad doth not apply to holy men or to me. 
It applies rather to those fools who neither know nor 
obey anything besides. Saints are God’s servants. 
At the same time, He obeyeth them, and they may do 
what they please. They have no concern with the 
law of Muhammad.’ On hearing this and similar 
replies from his daughter, the Qazi’s heart burned 
with bigotry and indignation. On that very day 
he, in consultation with his brother Qazis, issued an 
order for the execution of his daughter for her sin 
of transgressing the Muhammadan law. Kaulan’s 
mother, on hearing this decision, informed not only 
her ‘daughter of it, but also Mian Mir. On this 
Mian Mir said to Kaulan: ‘There appeareth no means 
of saving thee here. Thou shalt be innocently put 
to death, as Mansur was by these tyrants.* It is 
better, therefore, that thou at once go to Amritsar 
and seek there the protection of Guru Har Gobind. 
In this age there is none but him to save thy life.’ 
Kaulan deemed her Pir’s advice the best. She at 
once packed up her effects, and taking with her 
a fellow disciple, set out for Amritsar. 

Meantime the Qazi was not idle. He complained 
to the Emperor that the Guru had promised to pay 
him the price of the horse, but now put him off with 
excuses. ‘ He procrastinateth, and will not fulfil his 
promise. If thy Majesty send an officer to remon- 

1 Husain ibn Mansir Sifi was put to death at Baghdad, a.p. 923, 
after suffering grievous torture and mutilation. In a state of mystic 
ecstasy he had cried out, ‘Iam the Truth (God).’ Being rebuked 
for this and told to say instead, ‘He is the Truth,’ he replied, ‘ Yes, 
He is all, but you say He is lost. Husain is lost; the drop hath 

disappeared, but the ocean remaineth as it was.’ 
2 Itthas Guru Khalsa. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 45 

strate with him, I shall consider [I have the money 
in my pocket. Otherwise, he will always put me off 
as he doeth now.’ The Emperor replied, ‘ When 
day breaketh, take one of my men to the Guru. 
I will send him word to pay thee all thy money, and 
I think he will not fail to do so.’ 

The Qazi, on visiting the site of the Guru’s camp 
at Lahore, found that he had departed, so he pre- 
pared to follow him. He knew that the Guru must 
have gone to Amritsar, but he was not certain 1f he 
would remain there or seek concealment in the 
neighbouring wilderness, where he would have no 
fear of the Emperor, as no army could enter it to 
capture him. The Qazi decided that his case would 
be hopeless if he did not set out at once. He would 
return to Lahore and seek the Emperor’s assistance, 
if the Guru failed to keep his promise or used violence 
towards him. 

On his way the Qazi met the Guru hunting to 
the west of Amritsar. The Qazi respectfully saluted 
him. The Guru complimented him on the celerity 
with which he had pursued him. The Qazi replied 
civilly, but at the same time made it very clear that 
he desired to obtain his money without further 
delay. The Guru invited him to remain for the 
night, and in the morning he would give him a 
cheque on a Lahore banker. 

Not long after the Qazi’s arrival in Amritsar he 
heard that his daughter was there. He besought her 
to return to her religion and her home, but she, 
exceedingly afraid of being put to death, did not at 
all desire to accompany him. He then went to 
where his pony was tethered, mounted him, and 
made the best of his way to Lahore. The Guru did 
his utmost to detain him for another day, until it 
was convenient for him to pay the price of the 
horse. 

The Qazi, on reaching home, found his wife in tears, 
and began in earnest to think of his own errors. 

46 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He said to himself, ‘My daughter would have 
remained at home had I treated her less cruelly.’ 
His wife levelled at him her bitterest taunts, and 
increased his repentance and mortification. He 
decided to go next day to the Emperor, and make 
his complaint. When he arrived in court he took 
off his turban, dashed it on the ground, and made 
other signs of distress, but as he spoke in tears the 
Emperor could not quite follow his story. Moreover, 
the Emperor was in a bad humour at the time, 
having been irritated by some petitioner immediately 
before. He angrily replied to the Qazi’s complaint : 
‘What disturbance is this that thou art causing ? 
I understand thee not. Thou speakest like a lunatic. 
Appear not bare-headed in my presence. Thou 
wast a sensible man once, but now thou seemest to 
have lost thy reason.’ 

Wazir Khan then interposed and made an inge- 
nious defence of the Guru. ‘Sire, what shall I say 
about anybody? It is a bad world, and the Qazi 
now appeareth to be as bad as the rest. He made 
his daughter miserable and used to beat her daily. 
Being thus helpless, she left her home and went to 
Amritsar. Through fear of her father, she has 
remained there and desireth not to return. The 
Guru, who is ever merciful, receiveth all visitors 
and provideth for them, the Qazi’s daughter among 
others. Mian Mir and other saints go to meet him, 
and treat him with respect. It is against such a 
man this fool maketh complaint. His case, more- 
over, is a very paltry one. Thou hast heard too 
much already. It is not proper to quarrel with the 
Guru. Some calamity may happen by interference.’ 

The Emperor then, addressing the Qazi, passed 
his final order: ‘ Art thou not ashamed of thyself ? 
It became thee not to have acted as thou hast done. 
It is not proper for thee to quarrel with priests. 
Thou oughtest rather to do them reverence. In 
open court thou hast rent the veil of thy modesty, 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND A7 

and rendered thyself despised of all men. Thy 
daughter was obliged to leave her home Be silent ; 
say no more ; thou hast received only thy deserts.’ 

The Qazi, complaining that the Emperor would 
not allow him to fully state his case, took up his 
turban and left the court. He then reflected: ‘On 
every side I am in trouble. The very haughty Guru 
will keep this ten thousand rupees. He thinketh 
I am utterly resourceless; How shall I teach him 
a lesson? He will not pay me my money, and he 
hath all but killed me. Moreover, my daughter hath 
forsaken me and embraced another faith; I cannot 
remedy what is done, so I must either take revenge 
or kill myself. I trusted to the Emperor Jahangir, 
but far from assisting me, he hath brought counter 
charges against me. What hath God done with me? 
I am in a dire dilemma, and sped by troubles on 
every side. The whole family is mourning for my 
daughter, and yet she is so estranged from us, that 
we can never on any account see her more.’ 

Kaulan began her altered life under the protection 
of the Guru, the friend of her spiritual adviser 
Mian Mir. She found consolation in repeating the 
following hymn of the Guru’s father, which she had 
learned by hearing it often recited by the Sikhs :— 

O mother, I awake by association with the saints ; 

On seeing the love of the Beloved, I repeat His name 
which is a treasure. 

Thirsting for a sight of Him, I long and look for Him ; 

I have forgotten my desire for other things. 

I have found the Guru, the giver of composure and 
peace ; 

On beholding him, my mind is wrapped up in God. 

On seeing God pleasure hath arisen in my heart ; Nanak, 
dear ¢o me is His ambrosial word 

The Sikh chronicler states that Kaulan in a 

1 Kedara. 

48 THE SIKH RELIGION 

previous birth desired to obtain the true Guru’s 
instruction and be happy. 

The Guru had a separate building prepared for 
her residence, and bade her occupy her time as she 
pleased. On beholding her continual dependence 
on God, he was specially pleased with her, and took 
care of her in every way. Some time passed in this 
manner, until one day Kaulan, putting together all 
her jewels, placed them before the Guru. With 
clasped hands she thus addressed him, ‘ Friend of 
the poor, be good enough to apply the price of these 
jewels to some religious object, by which my name 
may be remembered for some time in the world.’ The 
Guru accordingly, on the fifth day of the light half of 
the month of Magh, Sambat 1678 (A.D. 1621), caused 
a tank to be excavated in her name with the money. 
The tank is still famous as Kaulsar' (Kaulan’s tank) 
in the city of Amritsar. The Guru also constructed 
another tank called Bibeksar, which was meant to 
commemorate his spiritual instruction delivered on 
the spot to his followers. There are now altogether 
five sacred tanks in the vicinity of the Sikh temple 
in Amritsar: Santokhsar, Amritsar, Ramsar, Kaul- 
sar, and Bibeksar. 

The Sikhs in Amritsar were all the time apprehen- 
sive that the Emperor would send an army to arrest 
the Guru on the Qazi’s complaint. They were pre- 
pared, if necessary, for defence. The Emperor, how- 
ever, thought no more of the Qazi or his grievances, 
and refused to embroil himself with the Guru. The 
masands formed the next party of whom the Guru 
had to take account. They went and complained to 
his mother against him: ‘ The Guru’s proceedings 
please no one. The Qazi hath gone to complain to 
the Emperor. When the Emperor sendeth an army 
and maketh war on us, what shall we do? We 
have no kingdom and no large force to defend our- 

1 Ttthas Guru Khalsa. Some Sikhs suppose this name was given 
the tank because the lotus (Aaw/ ) flourishes in it. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 49 

selves. How can we cope with the Emperor? The 
Guru must abscond and leave his city. This place 
belonged to his father and grandfather. When it 
passeth out of his possession, where shall we abide ? ’ 

Mother Ganga replied, ‘I cannot help it. The 
first five Gurus preached doctrines of peace; my 
son the sixth Guru weareth arms. It must sooner 
or later come to war with the Emperor. I have 
continued to admonish him, and tell him that such 
conduct becometh him not. He is, however, very 
resourceful, and, if it come toa conflict, he will know 
how to defend himself. You and I can do nothing. 
If you think the Guru will listen to you, then advise 
him. Go and do everything to avert war, and convey 
to the Guru my feelings on the subject.’ As the 
masands were on the point of personally remonstrat- 
ing with the Guru, a messenger arrived from Lahore 
with a letter from Wazir Khan informing him of the 
Emperor’s decision on the Qazi’s complaints. The 
Sikhs were delighted at the result. The difficulty 
with the Emperor Jahangir, they hoped, was at an 
end. The vaticinations of the masands were falsified, . 
and the Guru and his party made up their minds 
to dwell for ever in Amritsar.’ 

Not long afterwards the Guru and his mother 
went to the shrine of Guru Nanak to see Sri Chand, 
Guru Nanak’s son, who lived there. The Guru 
made an offering of a horse and one thousand rupees. 
The Guru’s mother said to Sri Chand, ‘ Thou art 
now old, thou hast supernatural power, bless my 
son that he may have offspring.’ Sri Chand replied, 
with a line of Guru Arjan :— 

The vine of the race hath grown and shall last for many 
generations.” 

1 The Sikh chroniclers state that this occurred in the time of 
Shah Jahan, but this cannot be correct. Jahangir died in a.p. 1627, and 
Kaulan had taken up her residence in Amritsar at least seven years 
Brite that, for she was there when Baba Atal Rai was born. 

Asa. 

SIKH. IV E 

50 THE SIKH RELIGION 

It will be remembered that after Guru Arjan had 
refused to marry Har Gobind to Chandu’s daughter, 
the young Guru was offered two wives. One of 
them, Damodari, he had already married. When it 
was known that she had become pregnant, there 
were great rejoicings in both families. To the 
second lady, Nanaki, the daughter of Hari Chand, 
the Guru was not yet married, partly on account of 
her youth and partly on account of his absence in 
Dihli, Agra, Lahore, and other places. Hari Chand 
now wrote that the approaching Baisakhi would be 
a suitable time for the marriage. It was accordingly 
then celebrated with all due formalities and rejoicings. 

There was a Sikh called or styled Almast, which 
means the enthusiast. In his wanderings he arrived 
at that part of the district of Pilibhit where there 
had been built a temple to commemorate Guru 
Nanak’s visit. Guru Nanak, it is said, had left the 
mark of his five fingers on every leaf of a pipal tree 
there, and made sweet the bitter fruit of a soap-nut 
tree some forty miles to the east of it. Some Jogis, 
who had now taken possession, wanted to root up 
the Guru’s pipal, name the temple after Gorakh- 
nath, and abolish the name of Guru Nanak. Almast 
could not endure this. Considering the temple his 
own, he resided in it, and performed all the menial 
and religious duties connected with it. The Jogis 
sought to expel him, and thus stated their case, 
“Gorakhnath performed penance here, hence the 
name Gorakh-mata. Thy Guru only stayed here as 
a traveller for four days. How can the temple be 
his ?’ Almast pointed to the marks of Guru Nanak’s 
hand on every leaf of the pipal tree, and instanced 
the sweetness of the soap-nut. It would therefore 
not be proper for him to resign the place to the 
Jogis. He bluntly told them that Guru Har Gobind, 
who was now on Guru Nanak’s throne, would soon 
come and humble their pride. The Jogis were so 
angry at this, that they set fire to the pipal and left 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 51 

not a trace of it. Almast told them that when the 
Guru came, he would restore the tree, and whoever 
committed a sin against Guru Nanak should perish 
root and branch. 

Night and day Almast read the compositions of 
the Gurus. He used to pray, ‘O searcher of hearts, 
true Guru, render us assistance.’ [Enduring hunger 
and thirst and the inclemency of all seasons, Almast 
waited until Guru Har Gobind should come to repair 
and take possession of Guru Nanak’s temple. 

The parents of Damodari, the Guru’s wife, lived in 
the village of Dalla. Her eldest sister Ramo was 
married to Sain Das, who lived in Daroliin the present 
district of Firozpur. Sain Das had not been origin- 
ally a Sikh, but, owing to the good example and 
advice of his father-in-law Narain Das, and the ex- 
hortations of his wife Ramo, who was a grand- 
daughter of Bhai Paro, Guru Amar Das’s faithful 
attendant, he became a convert to the teachings of 
Guru Arjan. Sain Das was ever praying that Guru 
Har Gobind would visit his village. He built a man- 
sion to receive him, and vowed that no one should live 
in it until the Guru had hallowed it by his presence. 
Sain Das laid a beautiful bed with soft bedding, and 
over the pillow he put a canopy. He used every 
morning to lay flowers in the room and perfume it, 
and pray that the Guru would soon come to bless the 
place. His wife used often to press him to send for 
the Guru. On such occasions he would say, ‘ The 
Guru is omniscient and will come of his own accord. 
There is something wanting in our devotion, or we 
have committed some sin that his visit hath been so 
long delayed. We dare not write him a letter or 
send for him.’ On account of the troubles in which 
Almast was involved, and the devotion of Sain Das, 
the Guru decided on visiting Daroli and Pilibhit, 
and taking with him a troop of his armed retainers. 
His mother and his wives were to accompany him 
as far as Daroli, and stay with Ramo until he 

E 2 

52 THE SIs’ RELIGION 

joined them after bringing the Jogis of Pilibhit to 
reason. 

Bhai Budha, and indeed all the Sikhs, on hearing 
of the Guru’s resolve, were very much disheartened 
at the thought of being left in Amritsar without 
their leader. The Guru consoled them by saying 
that if they daily offered their adorations at the Har 
Mandar or Golden Temple, all their affairs should 
succeed. When the Guru found that his mother 
and his wives had arrived safely in Daroli, he com- 
pleted his preparations for the journey to Pilibhit. 

The Guru took his horses to Kartarpur, where he 
left them to be fed during his absence. There some 
Pathans of the village of Wadamir, ready equipped 
with swords and shields, offered themselves for 
service. With them was a tall and powerful youth 
of sixteen summers, who had large eyes, strong arms, 
thick neck, and sprouting beard. The Guru was 
impressed with his appearance, and inquired whose 
son he was. Ismail Khan, the head of the band of 
Pathans, replied, ‘ This youth was born in the village 
of Ghilzai Alim. His parents are dead. He is my 
nephew and liveth with me in Wadamir. I have 
brought him up. He is versed in both military and 
general knowledge, and his name is Painda Khan.’ 
The Guru inquired if he would accept service or not, 
to which Ismail Khan made reply, ‘ Sir, we keep not 
shops or till land; military service is what we 
aspire to. If thou desire to employ him in that 
capacity, thou mayest do so.’ The Guru gave him 
ten rupees as enlistment money, supplied him with 
dinner from his kitchen, and promised that on 
returning from his excursion he would retain him on 
his own personal staff. The Guru remained for some 
days in Kartarpur, and again had an interview with 
Painda Khan. He gave him a house and a female 
buffalo, and agreed to pay him five rupees a day 
as an officer of his army. 

When the Guru arrived in Nanakmata, which is 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 53 

several miles north of the city of Pilibhit, the Jogis, 
seeing his retinue, thought that some raja had 
arrived. On hearing who it was, they hid themselves 
in huts made of leaves. Almast came forth from his 
retirement on hearing the neighing of the Guru's 
steed, uttered thanksgiving that his spiritual master 
had arrived, and seemed like a dead man restored 
te life. 

Near the spot where the pipal had been, the Guru 
constructed a platform, and sitting on it repeated 
the Sodar. This being ended he sprinkled saffron 
on which he had breathed God’s name, when lo, it is 
said, the pipal emerged from the ground as a serpent 
from its lair! In proportion as the Guru sprinkled 
the saffron the pipal grew, and after one night 
appeared in full size in all its luxuriance. 

CHAPTER VI 

Next day, observing the Guru’s glory and splen- 
dour, the Jogis ran to their priest with the same 
haste as cowards flee from the field of battle, and 
related to him all that had occurred since Guru 
Nanak had visited the place. The priest called to 
their recollection how Guru Nanak had vanquished 
the Sidhs who opposed him, and advised them to 
subdue their pride, conceit, and arrogance, bow 
before the Guru, and seek his protection. The Jogis 
became very angry at not receiving a promise of 
assistance or even encouragement. One of them 
said, ‘Shall we who are Sidhs and Jogis, and live 
for endless years, bow before a child of yesterday, 
who, moreover, is not a celibate like ourselves ? ’ 
Another Jogi said, ‘Guru Nanak is no more, let us 
take possession of our temple.’ The Jogis consulted 
with one another, and came to the conclusion that 
until the Guru was in some way dishonoured, he 
would never leave them alone. They then in a body 

54 THE SIKH RELIGION 

went to the Guru in all the bravery of the habila- 
ments of their order—ochre-coloured robes, rings in 
their ears, selis on their necks, wallets on their 
shoulders, and crutches in their hands—and repre- 
sented to him, ‘ Thou art a married man; we are 
well-known holy ascetics. From of old this place, 
bearing the name of Gorakhnath, hath notoriously 
been ours. Wherefore leave it, and go and abide 
wherever it pleaseth thee!’ The Guru replied, 
‘Whom do you call a holy ascetic? I apply the 
name only to him who hath renounced pride and 
who hath the love of God in his heart. It is he, and 
not.a man who weareth an ascetic’s garb, who 
shall obtain salvation.’ | 

The Jogis, in order to terrify the Guru, then began 
to make a show of their pretended powers, and 
cries of ‘Strike the Guru! strike the Guru!’ arose 
from the whole band. The Sikhs began to grow 
apprehensive. The Guru pacified them, and said no 
harm should come to them. The Jogis exerted all 
their powers, but could produce no effect on the 
Guru. Weary and abashed, they returned to their 
priest, who told them that, on account of their 
pride, they had forfeited such reputation as they 
already possessed. Since that date the place has 
borne undisturbed the name Nanakmata, and re- 
mained in the possession of Udasi Sikhs. 

The Guru remained some time in that neighbour- 
hood. He occupied himself with the chase, with 
preaching to his Sikhs, and with the organization 
of a methodical Sikh service for them under the 
guidance of Almast. 

The Guru on his return journey proceeded to 
Daroli, where his mother and wives were anxiously 
awaiting him. They went forth to meet him, and 
great joy reigned in the village on his arrival. 

Sain Das said to the Guru, ‘ Almast is a very 
fortunate man, for whose sake thou didst undertake 
such a long journey, and whose devotion hath 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 55 

rendered thee so subservient to him. When did he 
become a Sikh?’ The Guru replied, ‘He was 
originally a goat-herd on the banks of the Ravi, 
and was known as “The simpleton”. He had long 
cherished a desire to see Guru Nanak, and, on 
accidentally doing so, love and devotion sprang up 
in his heart. He milked one of his goats, and offered 
the milk to the Guru. The only recompense he 
asked was to be allowed to gaze on the holy man. 
The Guru requested him to ask for some further 
favour. He replied as before, that his only desire 
was to behold the Guru. Then Guru Nanak said, 
“Twice three are six. Thou hast thrice desired 
to behold the Guru, and now thou shalt live to behold 
the sixth Guru in succession to me.”’ Sain Das 
on hearing this narrative congratulated Bhai Almast, 
and applied to his case the following hymn of Guru 
Arjan :— 

O God, by Thy favour I have dispelled my doubts ; 

I have reflected in my mind that by Thy favour every- 
thing 1s mine. 

By service to Thee millions of sins are erased ; by a sight 
of Thee sorrow departeth. 

By repeating Thy name | have obtained great happiness, 
and banished all my anxieties and maladies. 

In the company of the holy man I have forgotten lust, 
wrath, avarice, falsehood, and slander. 

I have cut off the shackles of mammon; Nanak, God, 
the Ocean of mercy, hath Himself saved me.! 

It was now time for Ramo, Sain Das’s wife, to 
hold a spiritual colloquy with the Guru—‘ Friend 
of the poor, true Guru, my prayer is that I may 
worship my husband with my body, and discharge 
all the duties of conjugal chastity, that the love of 
God may abide in my heart, and that I may ever 
remember His name, so that at the last He may 
assist me, and that I may have no fear of death, 

1 Devgandhari. 

56 THE SIKH RELIGION 

or hell, or further transmigration.’ The Guru re- 
plied, ‘God at all times assisteth those whose hearts 
are pure. With a pure mind meditate on His name, 
and accept His will. Then shalt thou be happy and 
all fear forsake thee.’ 

The time of Damodari’s lying-in was approaching, 
and her mother-in-law Ganga continued to pray for 
her safe delivery of ason. Damodari ever meditated 
on God and repeated Guru Nanak’s hymns and 
those of her husband’s father the late Guru. Ona 
Wednesday night when the moon was full, in the 
month of Kartik, Sambat 1670 (A.D. 1613), she 
gave birth to a son, who was afterwards named 
Gurditta, and who bore a remarkable likeness to 
Guru Nanak. When morning dawned, the Guru 
went to see his child, and then distributed alms to all 
applicants. Instead of worldly songs of rejoicings 
the compositions of the Gurus were sung on the 
auspicious occasion. The hymn composed by Guru 
Arjan on the birth of Har Gobind received special 
prominence. 

During the Guru’s long absence from Amritsar, 
prayers were offered there for his speedy return, 
and a letter was sent reminding him of his duty to 
return quickly to his Sikhs and the temple of his 
forefathers. He told his mother of the communica- 
tion he had received, and she highly commended 
his resolution to attend to it. The Sikhs who ac- 
companied him also pressed him not to delay. On 
his arrival in Amritsar the following, among other 
hymns of the fifth Guru, was sung with rapture :— 

O Guru, may I behold Thee and live, 

Then shall my fortune be completed, O God ! 1 
Hear this supplication, O my God ; 

Grant me Thy name and make me Thy servant. 
O God, the Giver, protect me in Thine asylum. 
1 Also translated— 

O God, may Thy full favour be extended to me, 
That through the Guru I may behold Thee and live ! 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 57 

By the Guru’s favour some rare person knoweth Thee. 

O God, my Friend, hear my supplication, 

That Thy lotus feet may dwell in my heart. 

Nanak uttereth this one prayer— 

That he may not forget Thee, Thou Lord of perfect 
exeellences ! ! 

The Guru having taken up his residence at home 
used to preach to his congregation and occasionally 
go on shooting excursions. When not occupied 
with preaching or prayer, he generally sat in the 
open air and received his Sikhs. The places where 
he used to sit are now called Pipali, Lohgarh, and 
Chaurasti Atari. During the Guru’s absence Bhai 
Budha organized a nightly sacred concert to be sung 
round the tank of Amritsar. The Guru, on hearing 
of it, said, ‘ This choir shall for ever abide, and I shall 
be always with it.’ 

Painda Khan arrived in Amritsar with the army 
and the horses the Guru had left in Kartarpur. 
Painda Khan’s ordinary gymnastic practice was to 
tie two large earthen vessels filled with sand to his 
brawny arms, and thus encumbered swing clubs 
weighing one hundred and sixty pounds each round 
his head. The Guru was pleased with him, and used 
to make him presents of valuable clothes, horses 
of Iraq, clarified butter, sugar, and all such food 
as was calculated to promote strength. 

Two men, called Niwala and Nihalu, went to the 
Guru, and asked how they could be saved. The 
following was the Guru’s reply: ‘As there is fire in 
all timber, but without attrition it lighteth not or dis- 
pelleth cold; and as butter is contained in milk 
but cannot be extracted without churning ; so there 
is divine knowledge which yieldeth the essence of 
happiness in the hymns of the true Guru. In 
perusing them there is great merit, but divine 
knowledge is not to be obtained unless man meditate 

 Suhi. 

58 THE SIKH RELIGION 

on them, implant them in his heart, and act according 
to them in all his affairs. It is then he shall obtain 
bliss and a knowledge of God, and dispel for ever the 
pain of transmigration.’ 

The Guru thus addressed Krishan and Pammu 
who also had sought his advice: ‘Even if an 
ignorant man read the Guru’s hymns, all his sins 
shall be remitted. When man putteth forward the 
feet of desire, he shall easily obtain divine knowledge 
by practice, and be strengthened in the service of the 
saints. But the sinners who read to receive honour 
from men, are worthy of expulsion from all societies. 
Though they cause themselves to be addressed by 
every one as gyanis, yet they have no faith or divine 
knowledge. Such people are proud, and associate 
not with the holy. They give themselves all praise 
in the hope of receiving money, but they never obtain 
divine knowledge. How can they who possess such 
pride enter God’s court ?’ 

There was an ancient Jogi in Garhshankar in the 
Jalandhar district, who gave out that Shiv had 
promised that whoever beheld him should secure 
emancipation. Many persons went to see the Jogi 
on that account. Tilak alone of his village refused. 
The Jogi became curious to know the cause, and 
decided that he would go to see him. Tilak at the 
interview put a screen between himself and the Jogi, 
so that the latter might not afterwards say that Tilak 
had seen him and thus obtained emancipation. Tilak 
told him that all his own devotion was centred in 
the Guru, and he would resort to no one else for his 
salvation. The Jogi on hearing accounts of the 
Guru’s teachings conceived a desire to visit him, 
and begged Tilak to introduce him. Tilak consented, 
and both proceeded to Amritsar for the purpose. 

The Jogi opened the conversation by saying to 
the Guru, ‘If Guru Nanak had divine power, why 
hast thou, who sayest thou art the sixth Guru, 
not preserved his original body ?’ By this the Jogi 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 59 

desired to know why Guru Nanak had not survived, 
and why it was necessary for him to appoint suc- 
cessors, The Guru replied, ‘The soul putteth on 
a body like clothes which when old fall into tatters. 
Kings and rich men take off their old clothes and put 
on new ones. Poor people patch and stitch their 
torn clothes, so that they may last a little longer ; 
but, when a man hath new clothes, why should he 
patch and wear the old ones?’! The Guru in 
support of this argument quoted the following verses 
of his father :— 

He who remembereth not God, leadeth the life of asnake ; ? 

So liveth the infidel who forgetteth the Name. 

He who liveth remembering God even for one moment, 

Shall last for hundreds of thousands and millions of days, 
Yea, for ever.® 

The Jogi on hearing this began to feel humble. He 
became profuse in his thanks both to the Guru and 
Tilak who had led him to Amritsar. He then begged 
the Guru to make him like Tilak, a believer in one 
God, and grant him the gift of faith. The Guru 
replied, ‘ God is in the power of love, but love is not 
that which can be bought. It is the gift of God, 
and is bestowed on him to whom He showeth mercy. 
If thou have faith, thou shalt obtain what thou 
prayest for from Guru Nanak’s house. The store 
of love and devotion, a little of which had been 
granted to the avatars, jogis, rikhis, and munis, 
was entrusted in full by the Creator to Guru Nanak. 
He hath generously distributed it with open hands 
and from him no account shall be taken. As hath 
been said :— 

He to whom God gave a drop of nectar became im- 
movable and immortal ; 

1 The Guru compares the Gurus to rich men who change their 
clothes, the Jogis to poor men who patch them. 

2 He may live long like the snake, but he possesses no knowledge 
of God. 3 Gauri Ashtapadi, 

60 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He entrusted a store of devotion to Guru Nanak, and 
then took no account from him.! 

The Guru on hearing of the pride of a certain 
reputed holy man, said, ‘God is not pleased with 
pride or insolence. See how humble Guru Nanak 
was, and what lessons of humility and devotion he 
gave to his Sikhs. Shaikh Farid did painful penance 
for twelve years in the forest living on tubers and 
roots, but on his return home his mother found he 
had not completely renounced pride. He was 
accordingly remanded to the forest where he renewed 
his penance for twelve years more, this time with 
body reversed in a well. Not satisfied with that, he 
went with a wooden cake tied over his stomach for 
a third term of twelve years in search of saints. In 
his wanderings he met a holy man whom he served. 
It was only then that he became emancipated from 
evil passions.’ 

One Sewa Das, a Brahman, who resided at Srinagar 
in Kashmir, and who had been converted by the 
Guru, became such an anchoret that he retained no 
love for his relations. When reproached for this 
by his mother Bhagbhari, he defended himself by 
repeating the following hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

Relations abandon one when alive ; 

Can any one when dead be benefited by them ° 

He for whom it is so predestined remembereth God in 
his soul and body. 

Mammon is of no avail— 

His thirst shall never depart 

Who hath partaken of the poison of deception. 

Without God’s name how shall one cross over 

The dangerous ocean of the world full of appalling woe ? © 

By meeting the company of saints, and worshipping 
God’s name, 

O Nanak, man’s father’s and mother’s families shall be 
saved.? 

1 Guru Arjan, Sorath. 2 Gauri. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 61 

Bhagbhari made a beautiful robe to give to the 
Guru when he visited her village. She did not 
know when that time would arrive, but she kept the 
robe for him, saying that as he was a searcher of 
hearts, and would consequently be attracted by her 
devotion, he would certainly visit her before she 
died. The Guru accordingly determined to proceed 
to Kashmir to meet her. 

On proceeding as far as Chaparnala near Sialkot, 
the Guru inquired of a Brahman, whom he casually 
met, where he could find water to drink and bathe in. 
The Brahman carelessly replied, that the soil was 
stony and water was very scant. Upon this the 
Guru drove a spear into the ground, and it is said, 
a spring of pure water issued forth. The Guru’s 
Sikhs constructed a tank at the spring. The Brah- 
man was quite put to shame by the power of the 
Guru, confessed that he had been drowning in the 
pride of caste, and asked pardon for not having 
recognized the Guru’s greatness. The Guru replied, 
‘The sins of him who repenteth shall be par- 
doned.’ The tank was called Gurusar, or the Guru’s 
tank. 

The Guru continued his journey into the moun- 
tains of Kashmir, where he received offerings of 
delicious apples, and admired the beautiful scenery 
and the temperate climate of the country. There 
he met Kattu Shah, a converted Muhammadan and 
faithful Sikh: who had visited him at Amritsar. The 
Guru passed a night in his house. Thence he pro- 
ceeded to Srinagar, where he found Sewa Das waiting 
for him and meditating on God. On hearing the 
neighing of the Guru’s horses, Sewa Das came forth 
and found the Guru already at his door. The Guru 
was received with great demonstrations of respect 
and affection. Sewa Das’s mother said she wor- 
shipped the very ground on which the Guru trod, 
and repeated for him the following hymn of Guru 
Arjan :— 

62 THE SIKH RELIGION 

May I remember the Guru at every breath ! 

The Guru is my soul, the true Guru is my capital— 

May I live continually beholding the Guru ! 

May I drink the water in which I have washed his feet ! 

May I ever bathe in the dust of the Guru’s feet ! 

May I thus wash away the filth of pride attached to 
preceding births ! 

May I fan that Guru 

Who hath put forth his hand and saved me from the 
great fire ! 

May I draw water for the house of that Guru 

From whom I learned the way of finding the Unknowable ! 

May I continually grind corn for the house of that Guru 

By whose favour mine enemies have all become friends ! 

The Guru who gave me life 

Hath purchased me and made me his slave. 

May I ever and ever make obeisance to that Guru 

Who caused me to love him ! 

Saith Nanak, my Guru is all powerful ; 

He hath removed my troubles and anxieties, my fears, 
doubts, and sufferings.t 

The Guru requested Sewa Das’s mother to bring 
the dress she had made for him. He put it on, and 
she blessed her fate that she had been so honoured. 
She began to praise the Guru for his condescension 
and repeated to him the following hymn of Rav 
Das :— 

Who but Thee, my Jewel, could do such a thing ? 
Cherisher of the poor, Lord of the earth, Thou hast put 
over my head the umbrella of spiritual sovereignty? 

Saying this she drank some of the water in which 
the Guru had washed his feet. Her son also partook 
of the same beverage, and the remainder she sprinkled 
over her house. She cooked with her own hands 
for the Guru as long as he remained her guest. 

The Guru was visited by crowds of Kashmiris, 

1 Gauri Ashtapadi. > Maru. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 63 

men and women, both from Srinagar and the sur- 
rounding villages, and many embraced Sikhism. 
The Guru satisfied their spiritual necessities by 
preaching to them the cardinal virtues, and their tem- 
poral necessities by feeding them from his ever open 
kitchen. A very remarkable circumstance is said 
to have occurred during the Guru’s stay in Srinagar. 
A company of Sikhs was coming from a distant village 
with offerings of honey for the Guru. On the way 
they stayed with Kattu Shah, who pressed them to 
let him have some of the offering. They refused, 
saying that they could not offer to the Guru Kattu 
Shah’s leavings. When the Sikhs reached the Guru, 
the honey was found rotten and full of worms. The 
Guru said, “This is the result of not having given 
to my Sikh in whom is the spirit of the Guru.’ He 
ordered them to return and satisfy Kattu Shah. 
Upon this, it 1s said, the honey became fresh and 
sweet as before. The Sikhs remarked on the dis- 
interestedness of the Guru, who preferred one of his 
Sikhs to himself. On this occasion the following 
hymns of the fourth Guru were sung :— 

No one knoweth the secret of the true Guru’s mind or 
what shall please him. 

The true Guru pervadeth the hearts of his Sikhs; he is 
pleased with him who loveth them. 

As the true Guru telleth them, so they act and pray ; 
the work of the Guru’s Sikhs findeth acceptance. 

No Sikh shall approach him who desireth to have any- 
thing done by Sikhs without the true Guru’s order. 

A Sikh will work for him who heartily worketh for the 
true Guru. 

A Sikh would never approach him who cometh and goeth 
to men for deception. 

Nanak proclaimeth God’s decree, that the creature who 
doeth anything without propitiating the true Guru shall 
suffer great misery." 

1 Gauri ki War I. 

64 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When God’s saints are praised, it is God’s glory. 
God is only pleased with His own praises when His saint 
is congratulated.1 

The Guru is a Sikh, and the Sikh is a Guru; they are 
both one, but it is the Guru who giveth instruction. 

He putteth the spell of God’s name in the heart, O Nanak, 
and then God is easily obtained. 

While the Guru was in Srinagar, Bhagbhari fixing 
her thoughts on him blended her spirit with her 
Creator. He built a temple before his depar- 
ture, and charged Sewa Das to remain and preach 
the true faith. The Guru returned to the Panjab 
by Baramula on the river Jihlam. The next day 
he visited the spot where the renowned Rikhi 
Kashyap had dwelt, and where Vishnu was said to 
have assumed the incarnation ofa dwarf. Thence the 
Guru proceeded to Gujrat in the Panjab. The people 
of that city were so satisfied with their own priest 
Shah Daula? that they only laughed at the Guru’s 
dress, appearance, and retinue. 

Shah Daula went to visit the Guru and expressed 
his deep regret for the offensive remarks made by 
his fellow-citizens. He insisted on the Guru staying 
a night with him. The Guru was pleased with his 
affection and devotion and said, ‘ Gujrat is a city 
of mockers. Shah Daula is God’s faqir.’ Shah 
Daula’s spiritual position was strengthened and 
enhanced by the Guru’s visit, instruction and 
patronage.’ 

The Guru thence proceeded to Wazirabad and 
thence to Hafizabad, both in the present district of 
Gujranwala. In Hafizabad he was hospitably received 

? Sorath ki War. 

2 Shah Daula was believed to have attained such illumination of 
mind that he could discover hidden treasure. His successors at Gujrat 
now produce a class of men with small heads who are let out to beg. 
For an account of Shah Daula see the Khulasat-ul-Tawarikh. 

8 Pandit Tara Singh’s Gur Tirath Sangrah. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 65 

by a Sikh called Karm Chand. The Guru read the 
Japji to him and explained its meaning, objects, and 
advantages. Karm Chand learning from the Guru 
the esoteric meaning of the hymns of the Granth 
Sahib obtained salvation during life. The Guru 
thence proceeded to a village called Muttu Bhai, 
sixteen miles south of Hafizabad, to whose inhabi- 
tants he communicated the principles of his religion. 
There he remained for some time. 

In the town of Mandiali, about five miles from 
Lahore, there dwelt a Sikh called Dwara. His wife 
Bhagan was a woman of great natural endowments. 
They had an only daughter, modest and pious, known 
among the Sikhs as Marwahi; but also called Maha- 
devi. In proportion as she had been dear to her 
parents in her infancy, so distressed did she render 
them now by her enforced celibacy. Dwara had a 
Sikh friend who advised him to wed his daughter to 
the Guru, of whom he uttered high praises as an 
inducement to the alliance. Dwara accordingly dis- 
patched marriage presents which reached the Guru 
in Muttu Bhai. The Guru graciously accepted them 
and dispatched his own return presents by Dwara’s 
agents. The marriage was afterwards duly solemnized 
in Mandiali with great pomp and ceremony. 

CHAPTER VII 

Bhai Langaha arrived from Lahore with informa- 
tion for the Guru—‘ My lord, thy father and grand- 
father constructed a temple and other sacred build- 
ings in Lahore. Religious services are duly per- 
formed there, and travelling strangers are received 
and treated with hospitality. The Qazi of Lahore is 
now jealous of thy fame. When he findeth oppor- 
tunity he maketh representations to the Emperor 
that our sacred buildings should be dismantled and 
mosques built on their site. Thy friend Wazir Khan, 

SIKH. IV F 

66 THE SIKH RELIGION 

however, is still alive and impedeth the Qazi’s 
designs.’ The Guru replied, ‘The dharmsal is 
God’s place. The fool who wisheth its end shall be 
quickly uprooted. The Guru’s dharmsal shall be 
ever permanent, God hath rendered its foundation 
immovable. Relying on Him continue to dispense 
the Guru’s hospitality.’ Bhai Langaha then re- 
turned to Lahore, and the Guru at the same time 
prepared to leave Mandiali. 

Thence the Guru proceeded to Talwandi, by this 
time called Nankana, the birthplace of Guru Nanak, 
and visited the scenes of his miracles there. The 
Nimani fair, called by the Hindus the Nirjala Ikadashi, 
heid on the 11th day of the light half of the month 
of Jeth, was at its height at the time. The Sikhs still 
observe this fair in commemoration of the Guru's 
visit. Thence the Guru proceeded to Madar, where 
Guru Arjan was said to have left his shoes after 
having touched the Sikh Kidara with them for 
tubercles on the neck. 

The Guru next went to Manga in the Lahore 
district to see the tree under which Guru Nanak 
had sat. Thence he proceeded to Amritsar where 
as usual great rejoicings were held on his return. 

His wife Damodari presented the Guru with 
another child, this time a daughter. Among the 
Sikhs a name is given to a new-born child by a process 
of divination. The Granth Sahib is opened and the 
initial letter of the first word of the last hymn on the 
right page becomes the initial of the child’s name. 
The Guru’s daughter was thus named Viro. 

Painda Khan, who had been recruited at Kar- 
tarpur, was continually pampered to increase his 
strength. He could raise the trunk of a tree weighing 
ten mans! and lift two young buffaloes. He could 
without the aid of rope or bridle arrest a horse 
running at full speed. No wrestler would engage 
with him. 

1 About 800 pounds avoirdupois. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 67 

In Har, Sambat 1674, Marwahi gave birth to a son 
whom the Guru called Suraj Mal. Nanaki, the Guru’s 
second wife, represented to the Guru that she had no 
offspring. The Guru asked her to have patience 
and promised that a son of hers should one day sit 
on the Guru’s throne. On Monday the 16th day of 
Maghar, Sambat 1675 (A.D. 1618), she gave birth to 
her first son who was called Ani Rai. 

One Rama of Batala on seeing the child Gurditta 
the Guru’s eldest born in his father’s lap, was pleased 
and thought what an excellent husband the boy 
would make for his daughter. He was, however, 
disheartened by the thought that he himself was 
only a poor man, and the Guru before whom em- 
perors and kings bowed was great and famous. 
What alliance could there be between an elephant 
and an ant, an eagle and a sparrow? Having, 
however, thought of the Guru’s other humble 
alliances after the rejection of a minister’s daughter, 
Rama decided on offering his daughter as a future 
wife for the Guru’s son Gurditta. The Guru con- 
sulted his mother, who gave it as her advice that the 
daughter of such an excellent Sikh ought not to be 
rejected. The Guru then consented to the union. 
The ardas (supplication) was read, and Rama’s mar- 
riage presents duly placed before Gurditta. 

One of the main occupations of elderly Oriental 
ladies is to contrive matrimonial alliances for their 
young relations. In process of time, as Viro the 
Guru’s daughter by Damodari was growing up, the 
Guru’s mother suggested to him that he ought to 
search for a spouse for her. The Guru replied that 
God would settle all such things. At the same time 
he did not forget his mother’s suggestion. At his 
levee one morning he saw a man in dirty clothes 
standing with his son at a distance. The Guru 
noticed something noble concealed under the man’s 
otherwise unpromising exterior, and beckoned him 
to approach. The Guru inquired his residence and 

F 2 

68 THE SIKH RELIGION 

status. He replied that his name was Dharma 
and his son was called Sadhu. They were residents 
of the village of Malha, and had little in the way of 
worldly wealth. Dharma politely added that his 
son was the gift of the Guru and consequently the 
Guru’s servant. They had both come to pay him 
their respects and solicit his blessing. The Guru 
seated Sadhu near him and without further con- 
sideration sent to his private apartments for marriage 
presents. He put them in God’s name into the 
boy’s lap. Dharma was surprised and confused 
at this unexpected accession of honour, and said to 
the Guru, ‘Honour of the unhonoured, where 1s 
a drop of water and where is the ocean ? Where is 
the ant and where is the elephant ? I am a poor 
creature and thou art the king of kings.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘In the Guru’s house this hath ever 
been the rule, that he whom nobody knoweth be- 
cometh conspicuous. Have no anxiety, remain 
humble as before, and everything shall prosper.’ 
The Guru’s mother had not been consulted as to 
the status of the proposed bridegroom, and when 
told what the Guru had done, did not fail to give 
emphatic expression to her adverse opinion. ‘ What 
hast thou seen in him? [I hear he is a very poor 
man.’ The Guru replied, “Mother dear, God will 
act for the best. The bridegroom is good and of 
good family. Father and son are Sikhs, and as 
for wealth there is no deficiency in the Guru’s store- 
house.’ 

On Wednesday at the full moon in the month of 
Kartik, Sambat 1677, Nanaki gave birth to another 
son. The midwife praised his qualities, and the 
Guru’s mother was delighted. When all the cere- 
monies attendant on childbirth were completed, the 
child was called Atal Rai. The Guru on seeing 
him uttered this prophecy: ‘ He shall be absorbed 
in fixed (atal) contemplation, be a benefactor to 
mankind, restore life to the dead, crown his life 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 69 

with glory, and after death attain the highest 
position in God’s court.’ 

A Sikh named Mihra resided at Bakala, a town 
near the river Bias. He built a mansion for the 
accommodation of the Guru, and went to Amritsar 
with the object of inviting him. The Guru gave 
him no definite promise, but said he would come at 
some time. Mihra then went to wait on the Guru’s 
mother,expecting a more satisfactory answer from her, 
and hoping she would prevail on the Guru to accept 
his invitation. It was the time of the wedding of 
her grandson Gurditta to Natti, also called Nihalo, 
daughter of Rama, and she was in a favourable 
mood to listen to a request. She at once consented 
to go to Bakala, told Mihra to proceed thither, 
and she would soon follow with her son the Guru. 
The Guru, on consideration, thought it proper to 
yield to his mother and accept theinvitation. He 
was in due course received by Mihra and the other 
inhabitants of the village with great respect and 
rejoicing. 

After three days Ganga the Guru’s mother in- 
formed him that as she had now seen her daughters- 
in-law, and her grandchildren, it was time for her 
to depart. She said that she had no further desires 
on earth to gratify, and would go to dwell at her hus- 
band’s feet. She gave orders that as Guru Arjan’s 
body was thrown into the Ravi near Lahore, so 
should hers be thrown into the Bias. Then collect- 
ing her thoughts, repeating the Japji, the Sukhmani, 
and the Anand, and concentrating her attention 
on Guru Nanak, she went to her final repose on 
the 1st day of Jeth, Sambat 1678 (A.D. 1621). Four 
Sikhs took her body into the Bias until the water 
reached their necks, and there allowed it to be borne 
on the stream. 

When the Guru after his mother’s death was 
preparing to return to Amritsar, Mihra pressed him 
to remain in Bakala and there celebrate the cere- 

70 , THE SIKH RELIGION 

monies of the tenth day after his mother’s death, 
that is, put on a turban and affix a patch to his fore- 
head according to ancient customs. The Guru 
replied, ‘The patch of Gurudom shall be applied 
here to the forehead of the ninth Guru. Thou shalt 
survive till then, and thy desire to behold his instal- 
lation shall be gratified.’ 

The Guru went to Amritsar without waiting for 
the ceremonies of the tenth day. When his wives 
and other relations heard of his mother’s death, 
they were naturally much grieved for the loss of such 
a capable and affectionate lady. They said, * We 
had no anxiety as long as she presided over us. 
Who will now give us counsel and consolation ?’ 
The Guru by way of solacing his people recited the 
Alahanian or Lamentations of Guru Nanak. 

Bhai Budha who had gone to Amritsar to condole 
with the Guru on his mother’s death, took an op- 
portunity of making a personal representation to 
him, “ Thy mother hath gone to heaven. I see thee 
girding on thine arms and preparing for battle. 
My body hath grown old. I am no longer strong for 
combat, and must return to my forest home as before.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘I am but fulfilling thy prophecy 
that I should wear two swords, and twist the necks 
of the Mughals. Thou mayest go to live where and 
how thou pleasest.’ 

The Guru practised all martial exercises and col- 
lected arms of every description. He hunted, 
witnessed exhibitions of strength by Painda Khan, 
and occasionally visited Kaulan to afford her 
spiritual consolation. 

Another son, who was named Teg Bahadur, was 
born to Nanaki on the fifth day of the dark half of 
Baisakh, Sambat 1679 (A.D. 1622). It was prophesied 
at his birth, that he should restrain his mind, subdue 
his passions, and beget a powerful arms-bearing and 
warrior son, who would promote religion, convert 
jackals into tigers, and sparrows into hawks. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 71 

There was a Sikh called Gurumukh who was 
married to a devoted wife. They were happy in 
every respect except that they had no children, 
They requested the Sikhs to pray for them, that their 
desires might be fulfilled. They were advised to serve 
Sikhs in every way, and they didso. The result was 
that they had a son in due course. When he was 
ten years of age, his parents died within a short 
interval of each other. The son was brought up 
without a trade or profession of any sort, and had to 
sell his household property to maintain himself. No- 
body would pay what was due to him; and if he 
owed anything, he had to pay twice or thrice more 
than was just, or, in default, pledge his house and 
movables. At last it came to pass that he found 
himself without house, or home, or property of any 
description except one solitary kauri. He took this 
humble coin to the market-place, but no one would 
give him food for it. His stomach was collapsing 
with hunger, and he began to weep and wail, ‘ I was 
my parents’ darling, but they gave me no education. 
How shall I earn my living?’ While thus complain- 
ing a company of Sikhs singing hymns was passing 
by. One of them asked him why he was thus stanc- 
ing all forlorn. Having told his story, he was urged 
to join the party and proceed to Amritsar to seck 
the Guru’s protection. He would obtain mainten- 
ance from the Guru's kitchen, for did not Guru 
Arjan say :— 

My brethren, eat food to satiety, 
And meditate on the ambrosial Name in your hearts.} 

Apart from maintenance the youth would obtain 
spiritual advantage by visiting the Guru. He ac- 
cordingly joined the Sikhs, and did menial service 
for them on the road. When not so occupied he was 
cominitting the Guru’s hymns to memory. So ab- 
sorbed was he in his devotions, that he forgot on 

1 Bilawal. 

72 THE SIKH RELIGION 

one occasion to proceed with his party. He was 
found wandering by a Pathan trooper and impressed 
to carry his luggage. It was then the era of Musal- 
man domination, and no one had the courage to set 
him free. He was lamenting his fate in having parted 
from the Sikhs, and being thus delayed in seeing the 
Guru, when he accidentally met a masand. Having 
saluted him he placed his kauri before him, and 
begged him to offer it to the Guru and supplicate 
him to grant an interview to a Sikh in distress. The 
masand took the kauri, blessed the son of Gurumukh, 
and proceeded on his way. 

The youth and the Pathan went on until they were 
wearled from the heat and the journey. The Pathan 
espied a clump of trees and an adjacent well where 
he stopped to take rest and quench his thirst. As 
he stood on the edge of the well the masonry gave 
way, and he was launched into the water with tons 
of masonry on his head. This was understood to be 
a punishment from heaven for his tyranny in im- 
pressing a devout Sikh, and causing him to undergo 
excessive hardship. Gurumukh’s son began to con- 
sider what he was to do with the Pathan’s luggage. 
He did not know his name oraddress. He therefore 
decided that the things were a windfall for himself. 
He opened the bundle and found some clothes, jewels, 
and one thousand gold muhars. He tied them all up 
again, and, taking them with him on the Pathan’s 
horse, set out for Amritsar. When darkness was 
coming on he sought a night’s lodging, and was con- 
ducted to the house of a Hindu. The Hindu hap- 
pened to have gone abroad, leaving his wife at 
home. The visitor handed her a rupee and requested 
her to bake him two cakes. She took the money, 
observed his bundle, and at once made up her 
mind if possible to relieve him of whatever he was 
carrying. She laid him on a bed in the deudhi, or 
outer reception-room, had his horse tied up, and 
began to prepare his dinner. She made him a savoury 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND ie 

dish, in which she mixed a potent narcotic and placed 
it before him. He took a morsel of the food, and re- 
peating ‘ Wahguru’, put it into his mouth. As the 
bard said in one of his verses in praise of Guru 
Amar Das :— 

The poison was changed into nectar when he uttered 
the True Guru’s name. 

The hostess called out to her guest every half-hour, 
and was astonished at hearing him speak in the 
ordinary manner. Before composing himself to sleep 
he repeated the Sohila with great devotion. 

Foiled in this attempt, the hostess thought of 
another plan whereby she might rob her guest. She 
persuaded him, on the pretext of safety, to go and 
sleep near his horse and leave his saddle-bags and 
bundle with her. She represented that if anything 
were stolen from him she would get a bad name; 
hence her thoughtfulness for him and herself. When 
she found the Sikh’s property in her possession, she 
hastened to a burglar who was a lover of hers, and 
requested him to come and kill the man who was 
sleeping in her reception-room. She said, ‘ He is my 
enemy, and it is proper to kill him; I will never forget 
the favour, and I will besides substantially reward 
thee.’ Having received a promise from the burglar, 
she returned home and went to sleep. By accident 
her husband returned home that very night. On 
entering the deudhi, and seeing a stranger, he in- 
quired who he was and his business. Gurumukh’sson 
informed him. The owner of the house, who was a 
kind and considerate man, took him within, the better 
to show his hospitality, and went himself to sleep in 
the deudhi. At the end of the night the burglar came 
and killed the master of the house, believing him to 
be the strange guest, and then absconded. In the 
morning it was ascertained that it was the newly 
arrived husband who had been killed, and not the 
wayfaring Sikh. The victim’s wife began to weep 

74 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and mourn, her husband was gone, and she found 
herself in the painful position of an Indian widow. 

Meantime the guest awoke, and heartily thanking 
the Guru for his escape took up his saddle-bags and 
bundle, mounted his horse, and lost no time in de- 
parting. On his escape he devoutly repeated the 
following hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

No hot wind toucheth him who is under the protection 
of the Supreme God. 

Round about me is God’s circle, so no trouble can afflict 
me, my brethren. 

I have met the perfect true Guru who hath reconciled 
me with God. 

He gave me God’s name as my medicine; I have fixed 
mine attention on the one God. 

That Preserver hath preserved me, and cured all my 
maladies. 

Saith Nanak, mercy hath been extended to me, and God 
hath become my helper.! 

In the Guru’s court it was usual for the masands to 
bring the offerings of the Sikhs and hand them to an 
officer called Ardasia or chamberlain. He used to 
call out the giver’s name and the nature of the offering 
and present it to the Guru. When it came to the 
presentation of Gurumukh’s son’s kauri, the Guru 
said, ‘He hath sent this kauri with faith, and hath 
received much more than a thousandfold from God. 
He is now on his way hither.’ While the Guru was 
speaking, and the masand who had brought the kauri 
was wondering how the Pathan could have parted 
with his impressed carrier, the Sikh arrived and ad- 
dressed the Guru, ‘O true king, this horse, these arms, 
clothing, and gold coins are all thine. It is thou who 
hast freed me from the tyranny of the Pathan, the 
poison of the evil woman, and the sword of the robber; 
and. now thou hast granted me a sight of thee, and 
the privilege of bathing in thine ambrosia] tank.’ 

1 Bilawal. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 75 

The Guru replied, ‘Thou hast with faith offered a 
kauri in return for which Guru Nanak hath granted 
thee a treasure. The horse, arms, and money 
are all thine.’ The Guru told the youth to trade 
with the property, do an honest business, give a 
tithe of his profits to the Sikh cause, and continue 
his religious duties as before. On the evil woman 
who caused her husband’s death, a poet composed 
the following :— 

As accursed is the wealth hoarded by a miser without 
generosity, 

As accursed is a learned man’s pride which benefiteth 
not the world, 

As accursed is beauty without wisdom, and accursed the 
wisdom which praiseth not God, 

As accursed is the tongue without God’s name, as accursed 
is the hand which serveth not His saints, 

As accursed are the ears which hear not God’s name, as 
accursed is the king whose minister is evil, 

As accursed is life without association with saints, so 1s 
woman’s life accursed without a husband. 

And on the Sikh who offered a kauri Bhai Gur 
Das composed the following :— 

When man goeth one step towards the protection of the 
Guru’s feet, the Guru advanceth a million steps to meet 
him. 

The true Guru ever remembereth him with love, who 
even once remembereth a particle of the Guru’s teaching. 

The Guru shall bestow all wealth on him who offereth 
even one kauri with faith, devotion, and love. 

The true Guru is an ocean of compassion ; unfathom- 
able is the knowledge of his greatness ; I bow, I bow, I bow 
to the Guru whose glory is indescribable.! 

1 Gur Das’s Aadvt. 

76 THE SIKH RELIGION 

CHAPTER VIII 

Sudden intelligence arrived that the Emperor 
Jahangir had died in Kashmir, whereupon his son 
Shah Jahan immediately assumed regal power. 
The Guru knowing the future addressed Strife, 
as an evil agency. ‘Go where thy companions . 
falsehood, worldly love, and pride, have their dwel- 
lings, and be happy with them. Thou shalt have 
enough blood’ there to fill the skull thou carriest.’ 

When Damodari's daughter was to be married to 
the son of Dharma, she wished to invite all her 
relations on the occasion, but the Guru would not 
agree, because he had a presentiment of hostilities 
on the part of the new Emperor. He knew that 
Mihrban (Prithia’s son) and Karm Chand (son of 
Chandu) had poisoned Shah Jahan’s mind against 
him. The Sikhs were all distressed at this, and said 
to him,‘ If thou invite not thy relations at such a time, 
how shall they be known as thy relations?’ The 
Sikhs not knowing the Guru’s real motive considered 
that he was too much occupied with Muhammadans 
and military exercises. It is true that he excessively 
pampered Painda Khan in every way, and used fre- 
quently to present him with offerings made by the 
Sikhs. This caused great heart-burning to others. 
It was decided that a deputation consisting of Bhais 
Tilak, Tirath, Niwala, Krishan, Tulsi, Yakhtu, amd 
others should wait on Bhai Gur Das, now an old 
man, possessing much influence with the Guru, and 
endeavour to persuade him to remonstrate with 
the Guru on his general conduct. On this cccasion 
Bhai Gur Das composed the following :— 

People say the former Gurus used to sit in the temple ; 
the present Guru remaineth not in any one place. 

The former Emperors used to visit the former Gurus ; 
the present Guru was sent into the fortress by the Emperor. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND a7 

In former times the Guru’s darbar could not contain the 
sect; the present Guru leadeth a roving life and feareth 
nobody. 

The former Gurus sitting on their thrones used to console 
the Sikhs ; the present Guru keepeth dogs and hunteth. 

The former Gurus used to compose hymns, listen to them, 
and sing them; the present Guru composeth not hymns, 
or listeneth to them, or singeth them. 

He keepeth not his Sikh followers with him, but taketh 
enemies of his faith and wicked persons as his guides and 
familiars. 

I say, the truth within him cannot possibly be concealed ; 
the true Sikhs like the bumble-bees are enamoured of his 
lotus feet. 

He supporteth a burden intolerable to others and asserteth 
not himself. 

Bhai Gur Das told the Sikhs that, though the Guru 
was blameless, yet in order to silence his detractors 
it was advisable to send for Bhai Budha to apprise 
the Guru of the scandal that had arisen. The Sikhs 
accordingly went to Bhat Budha in the forest and 
represented to him the state of affairs. They found 
him already prepared to set out for Amritsar. The 
Guru treated him with marked respect and seated 
him near him. He said ‘ Bhai Budha, thy body 
is old, but thy love is ever young. Why hast thou 
undertaken such a journey in this hot month of 
Jeth? Tell me thine object.’ Bhai Budha replied, 
“Thou art like the Ganges, like the sun, and like 
the fire. The Ganges swalloweth corpses and bones 
of the countless dead, and yet remaineth pure; the 
sun draweth towards it noxious vapours, and yet 
remaineth pure; fire burneth and consumeth the 
dead, and yet remaineth pure. Thou art like all 
three. The Sikhs seeing thy love for sport and mili- 
tary exercises fear for thee. Wherefore abandon 
them.’ The Guru laughed and replied, ‘ I have done 

1 War XXVI. | 

78 THE SIKH RELIGION 

nothing improper ; I am only obeying thine orders 
with my life, and improving the condition of my 
Sikhs.’ Upon this Bhai Budha returned to his 
forest dwelling. 

The Guru once in a vision beheld his father Guru 
Arjan surrounded by his saints. He thought that 
Guru Arjan thus addressed him—‘ As Guru Nanak 
on receiving God’s order resigned the supply office 
in Sultanpur, travelled in foreign countries, and 
preached the true Name, so the saints who are 
annoyed by the unjust acts of the Turks, pray thee 
to gird on thine arms, and make use of them to 
good effect against thine enemies, that the Sikhs 
may abide in peace.’ Guru Har Gobind replied, 
‘The words of the saints are immutable. What 
they propose God accomplisheth. I shall be engaged 
in many battles in which enemies and oppressors 
shall perish. The Guru on awaking took his bow 
and quiver, girded on his two swords, his daggers 
and other arms, and distributed horses, uniforms, 
armour, shields, and guns among his soldiers. 

A company of Sikhs came from the West to behold 
the Guru, and present him with offerings. As they 
were hungry and weary, the Guru desired to give 
them their dinner. The Guru’s servants represented 
that dinner had already been served, the fires were 
extinguished, the cooks had all dispersed, and even 
if they could be found, it would be very late to 
retire for rest after a second dinner had been pre- 
pared. The Guru then bethought him ofa room full 
of sweets collected for the marriage of his daughter, 
and ordered that they should be given to his 
visitors. The key of the room was with Damodari, 
the Guru’s wife, but she refused to give it up or 
bestow the sweets on any one till the bridegroom’s 
party had partaken of them. The Guru sent to 
her several times, but she obstinately adhered to 
her determination. The Guru then gave vent to 
his sentiments—‘ My Sikhs are dearer to me than 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 79 

life. Were they the first to taste the sweets, all 
obstacles to the marriage should be removed, but now 
the Muhammadans shall come and possess themse ves 
of them. My Sikhs are hke a garden. If its trees 
remain green they yield flowers, leaves, and wood for 
all purposes. Wherefore we should ever take care to 
foster Sikhs, and promote their comfort. From the 
days of Guru Nanak down to my father the fifth 
Guru, it hath ever been the practice to entertain five 
Sikhs, whenever anything of importance was to be 
done, and all efforts should thus prove successful. 
When wandering Sikhs come to my house and go 
away disappointed, it is but a just requital that the 
sweets should fall to the Muhammadans, and the 
marriage be interrupted.’ The bystanders began to 
tremble, but none of them durst beg the Guru to recall 
his curse. Fortunately, however, at that time a Sikh 
came with five mans of sweets as a contribution to 
the marriage feast. The Guru distributed the offer- 
ing among the Sikhs who had come from the West, 
and thus succeeded in discharging the duties of hos- 
pitality. 

The Emperor Shah Jahan went hunting from 
Lahore in the direction of Amritsar. The Guru at 
the same time was similarly occupied. Both hunting 
parties unconsc‘ously approached each other, but 
without meeting. The Emperor had a white hawk 
which had been sent him as a rare present from the 
King of Iran. As the Emperor was on the point of 
returning to Lahore, a Brahmani duck rose, and he 
with his own hand let fly the hawk in pursuit. The 
hawk which had been over pampered refused to strike, 
but began to play with the bird. The Emperor felt 
tired and did not wait to capture it, but hasted on 
his way to Lahore. He sent his huntsmen with 
some. troops to search, and concluded that they would 
bring him back his treasure. They went wherever 
they saw the duck rising before the hawk. The bird 
and the hawk eventually fled in the direction of the 

8o THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru’s party. The Sikhs at once let fly a hawk of 
their own which seized the duck. The Emperor’s 
hawk then joined in the seizure, and the Sikhs caught 
them both. They were pleased to behold such a 
beautiful hawk, and congratulated themselves on the 
acquisition. They decided that they would keep it 
for themselves since it had sought their protection. 

When the royal huntsman and his troopers arrived 
and saw the hawk, they told the Sikhs that it was 
theirs, and asked that it should be given them. The 
Sikhs refused to admit the ownership of men who 
were strangers to them, and said that, as they had 
caught the bird with difficulty in the forest, and it 
had no owner, they claimed it as their prize. The 
huntsman replied, ‘ Shah Jahan whose glory 1s great, 
is king of the whole world. The kings of all lands 
bow before him, and fear him. He hath left nowhere 
a rebel, and hath subjected all men to his authority. 
Know you him not? We are his servants. The 
hawk alighted here before our arrival. You have 
caught him, and made him your own. Give him 
up quickly, displease us not, or the Emperor will be 
angry. The Sikhs rejoined, ‘We will not give up 
the hawk through fear of the Emperor. Go and 
make a complaint to him whose power you so vaunt.’ 

The head huntsman renewed the remonstrance. 
‘ Fear you not the Emperor? Since you are within 
his cable-tow, why desire to behold a real exhibition ? 
You speak like intoxicated persons, and know not 
what you say. Even kings who have thousands of 
fighting men stand with clasped hands before the 
Emperor, and fear him in their hearts. If you give 
not up the hawk, how shall you escape ? Whither 
will you flee? When the Emperor’s army cometh 
and falleth on you with violence, who will fight on 
your side? Then you and the hawk will be captured 
and taken away. Ponder on my words.’ 

The Sikhs angrily retorted, ‘ Coward, why quarrel 
thus? Go off with thine arms in safety. Why pro- 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND SI 

voke chastisement for thine insolence? We shall 
see if the hawk belongeth to the Emperor or to us. 
Go before him and complain, and do what he will 
tell thee. Stand not quarrelling here. If thou desire 
to retain thy self-respect, abandon the hawk and go. 
Otherwise thou shalt leave thine arms behind thee,and 
suffer the disgrace thereof.’ As the altercation waxed 
hotter and more angry language was exchanged, 
the Sikh warriors called to arms, and inflicted severe 
chastisement on the Muhammadans. They who sur- 
vived hastened their steps to Lahore to report to the 
Emperor the seizure of the hawk and the violence of 
the Sikhs. Other enemies of the Guru thought it 
a good opportunity to revive the charges against him, 
and to remind the Emperor of his alleged misdeeds. 
‘The Guru,’ they said, ‘hath now crowned the 
measure of his iniquity by misappropriating the 
Emperor’s favourite hawk, and his Sikhs have slain 
several of the bodyguard.’ The Emperor was taunted 
with apathy and advised to arrest the Guru at once, 
lest he should seize some fort, rise 1n rebellion and 
defy constituted authority. 

The Emperor sent for Mukhlis Khan, one of his 
trusty general officers, seated him near him, gave him 
a dress of honour of great value and a swift and 
powerful charger with golden trappings, and ordered 
him to organize a military expedition to punish the 
Sikhs. Mukhlis Khan already commanded an army 
of seven thousand men, and he was empowered to 
take with him any further forces he might require. 
He was to bring the leader of the Sikhs and the hawk 
by any means he thought expedient to the Emperor ; 
and he should then be promoted to even a higher 
position than he had previously occupied. Mukhlis 
Khan told the Emperor that it was a very easy matter. 
At the very moment of his arrival in Amritsar he 
would arrest the Guru, and bring him before his 
Majesty without having to resort to force of arms. 

The Sikhs of Lahore hearing of the contemplated 

SIKH. 1V G 

82 THE SIKH SX@iGion 

military expedition against the Guru sent a swift mes- 
senger to apprise him of it. The messenger reached 
Amritsar in the evening. There was a place called 
Lohgarh, or the iron (strong) fortress, outside the city. 
It was really a platform raised to resemble a species 
of tower, where the Guru used often to hold his court 
in the afternoon. He hada high wall built round it, 
prepared it in other ways for defence, and posted 
within the enclosure a small detachment of twenty- 
five men in anticipation of attack. He took out all 
his weapons, cleaned and sharpened his swords, and 
distributed them among his troops. Meantime, there 
were great rejoicings in the Guru’s palace on account 
of his daughter’s approaching marriage, and women 
sang the marriage songs composed by the Gurus. 

His S.khs told the Guru that a big gun was neces- 
sary for the defence of Lohgarh. The Guru replied, 
‘There is a hollow tree lying there which will serve 
as acannon.’ It is said that from the hollow tree 
thus converted into a weapon of artillery the Sikhs 
subsequently discharged stones in such a manner 
as to dismay their adversaries and seriously thin 
their ranks. 

The Sikhs and their officers made preparations, 
and were soon ready for the fray. The Guru addressed 
his commander-in-chief Bhanu: ‘It is not good 
to have the fighting near our homes, let the battle 
be fought outside our city. In the first place, the 
enemy may enter our houses and plunder our pro- 
perty, and secondly, we may kill our own brave men 
in the darkness. It is better, too, that our families 
be removed for safety outside the city. They must 
only take with them the first articles on which they 
can lay their hands.’ 

Bhai Niwala, who appears to have been an elderly 
man, went into the Guru’s private apartments and 
brought forth his wives and children. For the 
approaching marriage everything that was necessary 
had been stored up, but there was no time now to 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 83 

make a nice selection, and many valuables must be 
left behind. The twenty-five brave Sikhs on duty 
in Lohgarh restrained the imperial host, but were 
unable to cause much destruction among them owing 
to the darkness of the night. The defenders of the 
fort said, that in the morning they would show 
their strength to the Turks, that they would fight 
their way to Lahore, capture and bring back the 
Emperor, and thus prove to the world that they 
really were the Guru’s soldiers. Meanwhile the 
Guru’s wives and children were all removed to a house 
near Ramsar. The Guru went to the temple and 
there fervently prayed for victory. He repeated on 
the occasion these lines of Guru Arjan :— 

Wicked men and enemies are all destroyed by Thee, O 
Lord, and Thy glory is manifested. 

Thou didst immediately destroy those who annoyed Thy 
saints.! 

Several other verses of the Guru’s father recurred 
to his memory at the time :-— 

God the Destroyer of fear removeth pride.? 
They who harbour it shall drop and fall on the ground 
like leaves. 

It was discovered at Ramsar that the Guru’s 
daughter Viro, whose marriage had been thus rudely 
interrupted, was missing. At this her mother began 
to weep and wail. Singha and Babak were sent to 
search for her. It appears that when the Guru’s 
family were leaving their abode, the girl was acci- 
dentally left in the upper story of the house. The 
Guru gave Singha and Babak his rosary to satisfy 
her that they had been really commissioned to 
search for her, and that no treachery was contem- 
plated. — 

The Sikh detachment in Lohgarh, though coura- 

1 Dhanisari 2 Maru Solha. 3 Gauri ki War I. 
C2 

84 THE SIKH RELIGION 

geous to the last degree, were too few to cope with 
the Muhammadan host, and after destroying hun- 
dreds of the enemy fell martyrs to the Guru’s cause. 
The Muhammadans proceeded to the Guru’s palace 
in search of him, and on finding it empty became 
furious. They took possession of the house in which 
the sweets had been stored for the marriage feast, 
and gorged themselves to repletion. Viro remained 
silent in the upper story, and would not through fear 
open the door even when invited to do so by Singha 
and Babak. When, however, her father’s rosary 
was shown her by the light of a lamp, she became 
satisfied that no deceit was intended. She then 
descended, and Singha put her on horseback in front 
of him. The horse, which used to be kept at Ramsar, 
knew his way through the city, and so Singha gave 
him free rein that he might make his way in the dark. 
Mukhlis Khan, who was standing on the brink of the 
holy tank, on hearing a horse pass, challenged the 
rider. Babak, who was walking by the horse, replied 
in Mukhlis Khan’s Turkish dialect, “We belong to 
you. We have grown weary of searching for you, 
but did not know where to find you. If you have 
seen the Guru anywhere pray tell us, and if not, then 
be on the alert.’ They were on the point of passing 
on when their movements were heard by one of the 
Muhammadan soldiers, who shouted aloud, ‘The 
Guru’s family is escaping, seize them.’ Upon this 
a Pathan soldier put his lance in rest for attack. 
Babak, noticing his action, discharged his musket, 
and the soldier fell like a plantain tree before a gale 
of wind. The Guru, hearing the report, sent Bidhi 
Chand and Painda Khan to assist Viro’s rescuers ; 
and they all made their way in safety to him and 
received countless congratulations. 

Three hours of night now remained. The Guru, 
feeling that his family would not be safe in Amritsar 
after daybreak, decided on at once sending them to 
Goindwal. It happened, too, that the coming day 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 85 

was the one fixed for Viro’s marriage. He ordered 
that his family and all the non-combatants of the 
city should halt at Jhabal, a town about seven miles 
to the south-west of Amritsar. They would spend 
the day there, and he would join them in the evening, 
when they would celebrate the marriage without 
interruption, and thence proceed to Goindwal. This 
was all arranged, and the Guru dispatched a guard 
of soldiers for the protection of his people. He took 
the precaution of sending two soldiers to stop the 
bridegroom’s procession, lest it might fall into the 
hands of the enemy. 

The enemy, wearied by the forced march of the 
previous day and their sleepless bivouac, and sur- 
feited by the Guru’s sweets, were sleeping on beds 
they had seized from the citizens. When they lay 
down they thought that the Guru had either been 
killed in the fight or had absconded. They were 
awakened by an unmistakable sound of muskets. 
Then began the conflict, the clashing of swords, and 
the hissing of bullets. Brave men fell and died, 
blood flowed in profusion, corpses were piled on one 
another, the wounded uttered piercing cries ; heads, 
bodies, arms, and legs were separated, and horses 
without riders careered round the city. 

Mukhlis Khan, on seeing his soldiers giving way, 
thus addressed them, ‘ Are you not ashamed to run 
away before a few Sikhs ? Charge, and either cap- 
ture or kill the Guru.’ The Turks, supposing that 
Bhai Bhanu, the Guru’s commander-in-chief, was 
the Guru himself, advanced against him. They were 
further incited to the combat by the shouts of Shams 
Khan, an officer of the imperial guard, and rushed 
on with drawn swords. Bhai Bhanu, too, cheered on 
his men, ‘ Advance, O Sikhs ; fight, and fear not. 
The Guru our preserver is with us. If your heads 
fly off, let them fly, but never allow yourselves to be 
called cowards. Charge in a body, strike and rout 
the enemy.’ On hearing these words of their chief, 

86 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the Sikhs set their teeth and charged, crying, ‘ Smite ! 
smite !’ and challenging the enemy. Such was their 
onslaught that Shams Khan and his troops fled 
precipitately. Mukhlis Khan sent Anwar Khan to 
Shams Khan’s assistance. Anwar Khan addressed 
him, “O Shams Khan, thou hast disgraced the names 
of Mughal and Pathan. Think of thine ancestry, 
stand and fight the enemy, and lose not heart. Even 
if thou save thyself for a moment by flight, that 
shall not long avail thee, for Mukhlis Khan will 
afterwards put thee to death, and thou shalt then 
burn in hell-fire.’ 

Hearing Anwar Khan’s reproaches, Shams Khan 
returned and roared defiance at his opponents. This 
produced some confusion in the Sikh ranks. On 
observing this, Bhai Bhanu rushed with great 
velocity to the protection of his troops, and caused 
them to fire a volley which killed Shams Khan’s 
horse. Bhai Bhanu then dismounted, and he and 
Shams Khan engaged in single combat. Bhai Bhanu 
said to him, ‘I will not suffer thee to escape now.’ 
Shams Khan replied, ‘ Defend thyself, IJ am going to 
strike.’ Bhai Bhanu received the sword on his shield, 
and then putting forward all his force, beheaded his 
adversary with one blow. The Muhammadans, see- 
ing their commander slain, rushed in a body on 
Bhai Bhanu, and assailed him on all sides. He, 
however, lost not heart, but cut down the enemy as 
if they were radishes. Observing him springing and 
roaring like a tiger, all feared to approach him. At 
last he received two bullets which passed through 
and through his body. With Wahguru on his lips 
the brave commander of the Guru’s army went to 
his repose at Guru Nanak’s feet. 

When Mukhlis Khan heard of Shams Khan’s 
death he dispatched a thousand horse under the 
command of Saiyid Muhammad Ali to the part of 
the field in which he had been slain. Muhammad 
Al’s troops fought with great determination, and 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 87 

inflicted appalling loss on the Sikhs. Heads and 
legs flew off until heaps were formed on the plains. 
Kites uttered shrieks of joy, and the demonesses 
attendant on the goddess of war belched on receiving 
such a surfeit of flesh and gore. The marksmen 
Bhai Tota, Nihalu, Tiloka, Ananta, and Nivala, 
killed many Musalmans. Singha, too, did good ser- 
vice in encouraging the Guru’s men, ‘ Fight now ; 
remember, my friends, this opportunity will not 
come again.’ A Muhammadan trooper in the Guru's 
army represented to him that his men were too few 
to cope with the thousands of brave troops against 
him. The Guru replied that he was not responsible 
for the war; they who sought it should perish 
therein. His helper was God. In the words of the 
Sukhmani :— 

If God infuse power into a little ant, 

It can reduce to ashes armies of hundreds of thousands 
and millions of men. 

He is the Preserver of all creatures. 

Singha continued valorous to the last. He 
advanced with five hundred warriors, fought like 
a tiger, and put the Muhammadan hosts to flight, 
as if they were so many jackals. Muhammad Ali, 
seeing his army fleeing, pressed to the van and 
endeavoured to rally them. He fired at Singha and 
wounded both him and his horse. His adversary, 
seeing that Singha was not yet dead, fired again but 
missed him. Singha recovered consciousness, drew 
forth an arrow as he lay on the ground, and taking 
steady aim drove it through Muhammad Ali's chest. 
The imperial army, on seeing him fall, fought with 
desperation to avenge him. Bhai Tota and Bhai 
Tiloka, who were so eager for the combat that they 
pushed others aside to reach the front, both fell 
mortally wounded. In the mélée that ensued the 
Sikhs and the Turkish army became blended like 
two torrents. The soldiers of both armies wrestled 

88 THE SIKH RELIGION 

with one another. The Muhammadans rushed on 
shouting ‘ Ya Ali! Ya Ali!’ The brave Singha in 
the conflict died a hero’s death. 

When the news of Singha’s death reached the Guru 
he dispatched the powerful Painda Khan against 
the Muhammadans. Painda Khan advanced with 
his troops like a hawk moving amongst quails. 
The Guru himself, too, went into the thick of the 
fight, and adjusting his arrows to his bow discharged 
them hissing like snakes, and killed countless 
Muhammadans. These fell to the earth as if they 
were drunkards intoxicated with wine or bhang. 
When Mukhlis Khan heard that the Guru had 
personally taken the field, and was destroying his 
army, he ordered all his troops to charge, and not 
allow the Sikh priest to escape, as they had done 
on the previous night. ‘God’, the Muhammadan 
chief said, ‘ hath now given the Guru into our hands ; 
we will send him to the Emperor and receive rewards 
and honours for his capture.’ 

Upon this the Imperial army in a body plied their 
arrows, swords,.and muskets, and rushed like clouds 
in the month of Sawan to the capture or destruction 
of the Guru, but the Guru’s arrows dispersed them 
like a westerly wind. When struck by him they lay 
on the ground like men in the deep sleep of indigestion 
induced by a surfeit of sweets. Those still able to 
fight advanced gnashing their teeth with rage, but 
on meeting the Guru wrung their hands in sorrow. 
The Guru in order to draw them on used sometimes 
to retire a little. The Turks would then advance and 
receive their death at his hands. Bhai Jaita and 
Takhtu thinking that the Guru’s retreat was due 
to weariness, prayed him to take a brief respite, 
and they would in the meantime hold the enemy 
in check. The Guru replied, ‘No; I have retreated 
ae they may advance and be all destroyed in a 

ody.’ 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 89 

CHAPTER IX 

Bidhi Chand and Painda Khan had been com- 
mitting great havoc among the Muhammadan 
army. They and Bhai Jati Mal—son of the hero 
Singha—Bhais Nanda, Piraga, Bhima, and Bhikhan 
mounted on their chargers, ran to the Guru’s assist- 
ance, and destroyed detachment upon detachment 
of the enemy. Bhai Nanda drew his sword, and 
cut off the heads of several Muhammadans. The 
conflict was so obstinate that the martial weapons 
on both sides were broken, and the combatants 
had then to fight with their fists. While they were 
thus contending, Muhammadans in their dismay and 
confusion fired both on the Guru’s troops and on 
their own. The Guru’s brave soldiers, Amira, Jaita, 
Tota, Krishan Das, Gulala, Gopala, Nihala, Diala, 
Takhtu, Mahita, Paira, Tiloka, Jati Mal, Piraga, 
Jetha, Bidhi, Chand, Babak, and Painda Khan 
cheerfully resolved to spurn life and devote them- 
selves soul and body to the Guru’s assistance. 

The Sikhs surrounded Ali Beg, Bahadur Khan, 
Saiyid Didar Ali, Mihr Ali, Ismail Khan, and others, 
who had acquired throughout India great fame in 
many a field. The brave youths Bidhi Chand and 
Painda Khan, lifting their lances, soon made their 
enemies’ horses riderless. The Guru himself so 
fought that no one whom he struck asked again for 
water. The Musalmans advanced against him with 
drawn swords. The four Sikhs Tota, Tiloka, Ananta, 
and Nihala hastened to hissupport. These four faith- 
ful and devoted Sikhs, having killed Bahadur Khan 
and the whole of his detachment, received the edge of 
the sword on their own necks, and went to heaven 
as a reward for their devotion. Seeing them fall 
Bhai Mohan, Bhai Bidhi Chand, Gopal Das, Jaita, 
Piraga, Paira, Damodar, Bhag Mal, Painda Khan, 
Jati Mal, Chandar Bhan, Chhajju, Gajju, Hira, 

90 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Moharu, Sujan, and other magnanimous Sikhs who 
had devoted their lives and property to the Guru, 
challenged, defied, and closed with the enemy. 

Mukhlis Khan then addressed his chosen warriors 
Karim Beg, Rahim Beg, Ali Beg, Jang Beg, Salamat 
Khan, and others: ‘ My brethren, why have you lost 
courage ? You enjoy revenue-free lands given you 
by the Emperor, and are called Sardars. Show your 
eratitude, earn fame and receive further rewards of 
bravery. The Guru hath no army, no soldiers, his 
Sikhs are common people. Charge, capture them, 
take them to the Emperor, and you shall receive re- 
wards.’ Saiyid Ali replied, ‘O my lord, thou speakest 
justly, but the Guru’s arrows are like black snakes. 
If one of them strike a man, he requireth nothing 
more. Painda Khan is a powerful and brave warrior. 
Thou sayest that the Guru’s army is worthless; open 
thine eyes and see. We brought seven thousand 
men against him, how many of them now remain ? 
The Guru is a lamp around which his enemies fly 
like moths and are reduced to ashes.’ 

Mukhlis Khan finding himself defeated sent an 
envoy to propose terms of peace. The envoy 
addressed the Guru as follows :—‘O true Guru, 
fighting becometh thee not. Consider 1f thou hast 
any kingdom to enable thee to fight. The Emperor 
hath hundreds of thousands of men, many fortresses, 
and endless resources. If thou come to terms, thou 
shalt abide in thy city. Thou art already in pos- 
session of revenue-free villages, and hast up to the 
present lost nothing. All rajas, nawabs, and rulers, 
are subject to the Emperor. Heis the lord of Balkh, 
Bukhara, Kabul, Balochistan, Hindustan and other 
countries. What power hast thou to contend with 
him? If thou suffer a reverse, on whom wilt thou 
rely for assistance ? Whither wilt thou flee for 
safety ? If thou hearken to my words, then will we 
make peace. Be satisfied with the Guruship. What 
wilt thou gain by a prolongation of hostilities ?’ 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND gi 

’ The Guru replied, ‘The Emperor is without the 
fear of God in his heart. Why should we go to make 
peace with him ? Our reliance is on Wahguru, the 
King of kings, whose creature this Emperor is. 
If his descendants persist in quarrelling with the 
Guru, they shall forfeit their empire. Let the 
Emperor protect his throne. The army of which 
he is so proud shall perish like the seven thousand 
you have brought against me. If you retire now, 
you may survive, but if you persist in fighting, not 
one of you shall escape.’ 

Mukhlis Khan on receiving this message considered 
how he could show his face to the Emperor if his 
troops retired without victory. On the other hand, 
were they to renew the combat, they would have 
no chance of escape; but at all events it was better 
to die fighting with the foe than to live by igno- 
minious flight. He therefore, after a short respite, 
ordered the renewal of hostilities. When the Guru’s 
men heard the Musalmans’ call to arms, they repre- 
sented to their spiritual and temporal master, ‘O true 
king, only one hundred of us armed men are ready for 
the combat. All the rest are sleeping after the toil 
of battle. Mukhlis Khan’s troops who fled from the 
field have now rallied and sounded the call to arms.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ We shall send them straight to 
death. Allow them not to escape.’ Bidhit Chand 
applauded the Guru’s determination. 

Upon this the Guru’s men called to arms, and 
lighting the fuses of their matchlocks advanced to 
repel the enemy. Every Musalman who advanced 
was slain. The Guru, who fought with conspicuous 
bravery and success, was a host in himself. He 
discharged in quick succession barbed and crescent- 
shaped arrows, which hissed as they left his bow- 
string, and killed men and horses of the opposing 
ranks. His handful of men blessed and praised his 
valour. Saiyid Sultan Beg, seeing his own army 
fast perishing, decided to make a united and 

92 THE SIKH RELIGION 

determined rush on the Guru, as the only means of 
- obtaining victory. The advice was accepted and the 
Musalmans charged. Bidhi Chand, Painda Khan, 
and Jati Mal hastened to oppose the onset of the 
enemy, and dealt them wholesale destruction. Sultan 
Beg aimed a lance at Bidhi Chand, whose horse 
providentially turned aside and thus saved his 
master. Upon this Sultan Beg retreated to escape 
a return stroke. Bidhi Chand called out to him, 
‘Stand, why fleest thou ?’ Sultan Beg received his 
adversary’s sword on his shield, and escaped for 
the moment. Bidhi Chand’s sword could not reach 
him as he fled, but a swift arrow overtook him. It 
pierced Sultan Beg’s body, and he fell lifeless from 
his horse. 

Painda Khan was equally successful in the combat. 
He made Didar Ali, the last survivor of Mukhlis 
Khan’s personal staff, bite the earth. Mukhlis 
Khan, now left alone, thought nothing remained for 
him but to engage the Guru himself. He said, 
“Let thee and me now decide the quarrel by single 
combat, and none else approach.’ In order to please 
him the Guru warned his own men to stand aside. 
He then discharged an arrow which killed Mukhlis 
Khan’s horse. Mukhlis Khan then said, ‘ Thou art 
on horseback and I am now on foot. Moreover, 
I want to fight with sword and shield, but thou art 
discharging arrows. It 1s not a fair fight.’ Upon 
this the Guru dismounted and said, ‘Show thy 
utmost skill and strike the first blow.’ The Khan 
aimed a blow, which the Guru avoided by a swift 
side movement. The next blow fell on the Guru’s 
shield. The Guru then said, ‘ Thou hast made two 
strokes which I have parried. Now it is my turn.’ 
The Guru then lifting his powerful arm dealt Mukhlis 
Khan a blow which cleft his head in twain. 

Painda Khan, Bidhi Chand, and Jati Mal killed 
the Musalmans who held their ground, but the great 
majority of them fled without venturing to look 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 93 

behind. After nine hours of fighting the Guru’s 
victory was complete. All his surviving Sikhs 
exchanged congratulations, and the drums of vic- 
tory joyously sounded. 

The Guru went to inspect the field of battle, and 
then visited Lohgarh. On seeing his faithful friends 
Mohan and Gopala groaning in death’s agonies, 
he wiped their mouths and said, ‘O Mohan and 
Gopala, whatever you ask me I will grant you. 
You have given your lives for my sake. There is 
nothing I would not give you.’ They replied, 
‘We feared that at our last moment we should not 
behold thee; but thou, being a searcher of hearts 
and omniscient, hast come to gratify us. We have 
now no further desire.’ The Guru again pressed 
them to ask for a favour. They replied, ‘ Grant us 
that in whatever shape thou mayest be, we may 
ever abide with thee. Grant us also that all who 
die fighting on thy behalf may receive salvation.’ 
Then the Guru: ‘I congratulate you on your 
disinterestedness. Both prayers shall be granted. 
You are happy in your death.’ Then fixing their 
thoughts on God they separated their eternal souls 
from their temporary bodies. 

The Guru had all the remaining corpses collected, 
washed, clothed with shrouds, and placed on funeral 
piles. He then with his own hands set fire to the wood. 
The battle extended to a distance of over four miles 
to the south of Amritsar, and there a dharmsal 
called the Sangrana or Battle was erected to com- 
memorate the Guru’s victory. The battle was 
fought in Sambat 1685 (A.D. 1628). A fair is 
held on the spot every year at the time of the full 
moon in the month of Baisakh. 

When the Guru had completed the last rites of his 
brave soldiers, he made preparations to go to his 
family in Jhabal. On arriving at Jhabal he had time 
to again turn his attention to his daughter’s marriage. 
He sent masands in advance to meet the bridegroom’s 

94 THE SIKH RELIGION 

procession. Dharma, the bridegroom’s father, con- 
trary to custom, humbled himself before the Guru, 
and prepared and dressed his son Sadhu for the 
ceremony. A Muhammadan soldier who happened 
to be in Jhabal at the time heard rejoicings, saw 
fireworks, and inquired the cause. He learned that 
it was on account of the marriage of the Guru’s 
daughter, and that the Guru had just arrived after 
destroying the imperial army. It at once occurred 
to the soldier, that if he killed the Guru, he should 
receive a large reward from the Emperor. The soldier 
thought that as the Guru was then without suspicion 
of harm and unguarded, his death might be easily 
effected. Even if the project did not succeed, he 
thought he would at any rate frighten him, and 
the marriage festivities might be interrupted. He 
took up his matchlock, lit a fuse, and aimed at the 
Guru. The musket burst, and killed the soldier 
instead of his intended victim. His death was 
attributed to God’s special intervention, and the 
marriage was duly celebrated. Sadhu the _ bride- 
groom was inspired to compose the following hymn 
on the occasion :— 

I was reading the lesson? of sin ; 

I was sitting at the shop of falsehood and deception, 

When the true Guru cut off my evil thoughts, 

And took and drew me out of hell. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice to the Guru. 

I was sullen, and blind, and saw not ; 

I was drowning in mammon. 

I praise the true Guru 

Who showed me light. 

The slave Sadhu hath seen the Guru, 

Washed his feet and drunk the nectareous water there- 
from. 

The perfect Guru hath given me to drink the nectar of 
the Name. 

1 Literally—tablet. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 95 

Before parting with his daughter the Guru gave her 
the following advice, ‘ How can I describe the worth 
and dignity of a husband? Service to him is the 
most important duty a wife can discharge. Greatly 
honour his elders, and heartily serve thy mother-in- 
law.’ Viro then went to take leave of her mother, who 
addressed her, ‘If thou desire to be happy, thou 
must ever serve thy husband. Ever consider the 
honour of thy family. Associate not with the evil. 
Rise early to perform thine ablutions, and read 
the Guru’s hymns. Let no complaint against thee 
reach me. In this way shalt thou enjoy all happi- 
ness. Hearken my beloved daughter. In a short 
time | will send for thee. Guru Nanak hath been 
our protector, otherwise thy marriage would not 
have been celebrated.’ Her mother then embraced 
her and showed great concern at her departure. The 
Guru returned to his private apartments and said, 
‘Daughters are other persons’ property. Why feel 
their loss?’ He again embraced his daughter and 
consoled her. Upon this Baba Gurditta came with 
great love in his heart, and he, too, embraced his 
sister. 

The Guru having no further business in Jhabal 
went with his family to visit Tarn Taran. On the 
way the Guru’s wives discussed the war and its 
causes —‘ Were our mother-in-law Ganga now alive, 
she would read the Guru a lesson. However, 
perhaps it is all for the best, for such a large army 
of the enemy hath been destroyed, and God hath 
preserved most of the Sikhs.’ The Guru after ad- 
miring the tank and blessing the memory of Guru 
Arjan proceeded to Goindwal. 

The Emperor was dismayed on hearing of the 
defeat of his troops by what he called an army of 
faqirs. It must have been, he thought, the result 
of charms, spells, and incantations. The Muham- 
madan survivors of the war then related its details 
in their own way. ‘Although the Sikhs were of 

96 THE SIKH RELIGION 

all castes and trades, they proved brave in battle, 
and the imperial army was not to blame for its 
defeat.’ When the Emperor heard of Mukhlis Khan’s 
death, he flared up like a fire on which clarified 
butter has been thrown for sacrifice. He called a 
council of his chiefs, at which it was decided that the 
Guru should be captured or killed in the attempt, 
lest he should seize the reins of empire. 

Wazir Khan, ever mindful of the Guru’s welfare, 
thus defended him, ‘ Sire, the Guru is nota rebel, and 
hath no design on thine empire. He hath ever been 
the support of the state. Had he minded to raise 
a rebellion, he would have followed up his victory, 
seized some fortress, and taken possession of a portion 
of thy Majesty’s dominion, or plundered one of thy 
treasuries. But he centreth not his thoughts in 
worldly wealth. Is it not a miracle that with not 
fully seven hundred men he destroyed an army of 
seven thousand?’ These and many other argu- 
ments urged by Wazir Khan were supported by 
other friends of the Guru at court. Their arguments 
convinced the Emperor, and he decided that it was 
not good to engage in further warfare with priests 
and faqirs, and that it would be well to forget the 
past. | 
The Guru having met his own relations and those 
of his predecessors at Goindwal, and visited all its 
sacred spots, took his departure for Kartarpur, 
accompanied by his trusty warriors Bidhi Chand, 
Jati Mal, Painda Khan, and others. He heard that 
Kaulan was ill, and went to render her necessary 
service. She could only address him in very feeble 
accents. He represented that she was fortunate in 
having left the society of bigots, in having been 
instructed in the Sikh faith, and in thus having been 
placed on the road to deliverance. He counselled 
her to reflect on God who was within her, and whom 
death could not approach. He told her that she had 
only twenty-four hours to live, and during that time 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 97 

she must meditate on her Creator. He also pro- 
mised to come to her at her departure. 

Next day a Sikh came to tell the Guru of a tiger 
in the neighbourhood which had killed the villagers’ 
cattle. The Guru ordered his horse and girded on 
his arms. Taking Bidhi Chand, Painda Khan, and 
others, he proceeded to the tiger’s lair. It was in 
a dense forest where other game too were in abun- 
dance. The Guru dismounted with the intention of 
meeting the tiger on foot with sword and shield. As 
the animal sprang up, his men called out to the 
Guru to use his gun, and not allow the beast to 
approach too close. The Guru, protecting his head 
with his shield awaited the tiger’s assault, and dealt 
him a blow with his sword on the flank that cut him 
in twain. The Sikhs were astonished at the Guru’s 
courage and strength, and sang congratulations. 

On returning home the Guru proceeded to Kaulan’s 
apartments and addressed her consolatory words. 
‘Be ready, prepare thyself, thine hour hath come. 
Dismiss all consideration for thy body and fix thine 
attention on God, who is unborn and imperishable. 
The world is unreal and only shineth with His light. 
The soul is pure, real, conscious, and happy. As long 
as man is proud of his body he is subject to birth 
and death, but when he hath obtained divine 
knowledge and passed beyond the bounds of love 
and hate, then he obtaineth deliverance. When 
Kaulan, after meditating on the Guru’s instruction, 
again opened her eyes, she addressed her last words 
to the Guru, ‘I thank thee! I thank thee! O patron 
of the homeless, that I found shelter in thee. Thou 
didst ina moment confer on me the position which 
Jogis for years vainly strive toattain. Thou didst 
dispel the ignorance which hung over my millions 
of births like an inveterate disease.’ She then fixed 
her attention on God, repeated ‘Wahguru’, and 
heaving her last breath departed to the heaven of 
her aspirations. The Guru ordered her maids and 

SIKH. IV H 

98 THE SIKH RELIGION 

manservant to prepare her for the last rites. Her 
maids bathed her and clothed her in a shroud and 
costly shawl. While the minstrel sang the Guru's 
hymns, her body was removed to the garden attached 

to her dwelling and there cremated. The Sohila was 
read and prayers offered for the repose of her soul. 

CHAPTER X 

While the Guru remained in Kartarpur, many men 
came to enlist under his banner. They said that no 
one else had power to contend with the Emperor or 
to kill such brave Muhammadans as had fallen in 
battle in Amritsar. The Guru was the bright gem 
of the world. So afraid was the Emperor of him, 
that he did not venture to send another army to 
avenge the recent defeat. The Guru set himself to 
replace the men who had fallen, and also to increase 
his army. He continued to instruct his soldiers in 
the science of warfare, and train them to archery 
and the use of fire-arms. 

Painda Khan soon became a source of concern to 
the Guru. He began to boast, ‘It is absurd for the 
Guru to enlist so many men. If I am allowed, 
I will show the Muhammadans what I can do. 
Having eaten the-Guru’s salt and been his servant, 
it is I who conquered the countless hosts opposed 
to him at Amritsar. With my arrow I skewered 
them ‘like trussed fowl. Had I not been there, no 
one would have had the courage to oppose them. 
The Guru’s Sikhs would have all fled... When the 
Guru heard this he said Painda Khan was not a trust- 
worthy servant, and that his boasting would end 
badly. Notwithstanding this, the Guru provided 
him with a wife of good family in the village of 
Chhotamir, gave him a house to live in, and supplied 
him with funds to commence housekeeping. After 
his marriage Painda Khan used to sleep at night 
in his own house and wait on the Guru by day, but 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 99 

after a little time the Guru, desiring to have some 
respite from Painda Khan’s boasting, ordered him 
to remain at home, and only visit him occasionally. 

Meantime offerings of money, horses, arms, and 
ammunition continued to be made to the Guru, and 
the spirit of his troops rose as they devoted them- 
selves to exercises. They used to boast that if the 
Guru but gave them the order, they would in a day 
capture Dihli and Lahore. They vowed that if 
ever again there was fighting they would make 
short work of the enemy. 

While the Guru was in that neighbourhood he 
killed many beasts of prey and protected useful 
animals. There was such public tranquillity that 
travellers could pass through the forests without ap- 
prehension. Thieves, burglars, and highway robbers 
concealed themselves as effectually as owls and bats 
do at sunrise. It appeared as if the Sat, or golden 
age of the world, had returned to the Doab. Songs 
of joy and happiness resounded in every village. 

One day the Guru took Painda Khan and other 
Sikhs into the forest with him. There enjoying 
the beautiful prospect, inhaling the odour of sweet 
smelling flowers, and listening to the singing of 
birds, the Guru in an exaltation of spirit recited the 
following hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

Tell me where there is any one in whom God is not. 

The Creator who is full of mercy conferreth all happiness : 
ever meditate on that God. 

Sing the praises of that God on whose thread creatures 
are strung. 

Remember that God who gave thee everything ; to whom 
else shouldst thou go ? 

Profitable is the service of my God; from it thou shalt 
obtain the fruit thy heart desireth. 

Saith Nanak, take the gain and profit of service, and 
thou shalt go home happy.! 

1 Sarang. 
H2 

100 THE SIKH RELIGION 

An ex-officer of the Emperor’s army came to seek 
the Guru’s assistance. The officer had been charged 
with cowardice and dismissed with a reprimand. 
At the moment of his visit the Guru was absorbed 
in divine contemplation. The officer was kept wait- 
ing and manifested his displeasure. The Guru 
observing his insolent manner said, ‘It is more 
glorious to contend with warriors than with faqirs. 
By annoying men engaged in God’s service thou 
shalt lose thy happiness in this world and the 
next.’ Hearing this the officer fell at the Guru’s feet, 
and begged pardon for his impatience and rudeness. 
The Guru pardoned him and instructed him to serve 
saints, worship God, practise forbearance, and repeat 
the true Name, and he should soon be reinstated 
in his original position. On this occasion the Guru 
repeated the following hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

Sit quietly in your homes, O dear saints of God ; 

The True Guru hath arranged your affairs. 

The Creator hath smitten the wicked and the evil, 

And preserved the honour of His saints. 

He hath subjected to me all kings and emperors, 

Since I have quaffed the great nectareous juice of the Name. 
Fearlessly worship God 

Whom the company of saints have granted you. 

Nanak hath sought the asylum of the Searcher of hearts, 
And taken the Lord God’s shelter.! 

The officer acted on the Guru’s advice, and in a 
few days the Emperor was moved to send for him 
and restore him to the rank from which he had been 
removed in disgrace. 

The rains had set in, and the very hot season was 
now over. The clouds wandering in the heavens 
showered moisture which comforted the body, as 
the words of philanthropic men who wander over 
the earth comfort the soul. Vivid lightning played 
among the parti-coloured clouds, gentle zephyrs 

1 Gauri. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND IOI 

diffused coolness, the earth saturated with water 
was covered with a carpet of verdure. Streams 
flowed in every direction, and tanks were filled to 
the brim. The greenness and the cleanliness of the 
trees afforded pleasure to the eye. The cuckoos 
called, frogs croaked, peacocks danced. The rain- 
bow—Indar’s bow without a string—reflected its 
beauty in the heavens, streams overflowed their 
banks, and the play of their waves and ripples excited 
gladness and exhilaration. The Guru praised the 
scene, and said that the months of Sawan and 
Bhadon gave renewed life unto mortals. 

It now became a question where the Guru was 
going to pass the rainy season, and on this subject 
he showed himself willing to accept the advice and 
suggestions of his Sikhs. One man said that there 
was a very beautiful place called Bagha on the 
elevated right bank of the river Bias. The river 
flowed pleasantly at its base, and contributed to 
the coolness of the climate. There was no mire in 
which the feet of men and beasts of burdenwould sink, 
and there was excellent shooting for an enthusiastic 
sportsman like the Guru. A second Sikh chimed 
in that the Guru ought certainly to see the place. 
A third recommended a thinly populated village 
called Ruhela, whither the Guru might proceed in 
order to confer salvation on its inhabitants. Ruhela 
was also on the right bank of the Bias. The Guru 
yielded to the last advice, and decided to go and 
spend the rainy season in or near Ruhela. 

The Guru thought it safe to dismiss his son 
Gurditta, and thus addressed him: ‘We are at 
enmity with the Muhammadans. It ts certain that 
they will attack us once more. Thou art still a child 
and not fit for arms or the fatigue of war. Moreover, 
thou. hast for some time been separated from thy 
relations who are awaiting thee. Wherefore go to 
Goindwal, and remain with thy mother and thy 
friends.’ The Guru, when setting out for the Bias, 

102 THE SIKH RELIGION 

prepared himself and his troops for the contingency 
of war. When Painda Khan heard this he expressed 
a desire to accompany him. The Guru remembering 
his boasting, and also feeling that God would give 
him victory without Painda Khan’s assistance, put 
him off with this reply, ‘Thou hast been recently 
married, and it is well for thee to abide at home, and 
cherish thy young wife. I am not going far—only 
to the bank of the Bias. When I need thee, I will 
send for thee.’ Painda Khan urged, ‘The Emperor 
is at enmity with thee. Should an army suddenly 
come and thou be attacked before I can arrive, men 
will curse me for not rendering thee timely assist- 
ance. The Guru replied, ‘I am leaving thee behind 
of my own free will. During my absence share thy 
food with others, touch not another’s wife or pro- 
perty, turn not thy back on the enemy, ever remember 
God, and cheerfully accept His will.’ Painda Khan 
then went home. 

The Guru set out from Kartarpur for the Bias. On 
arriving on the left bank of the river, which 1s low, 
he found boats ready to take him and his troops 
across to the right bank, which is lofty. The river 
separates the country which is called the Manjha 
on the north-west from the Doab on the south-east. 
On crossing he pitched his camp on the tumulus of 
an ancient village. He observed that the dwellings 
were only in one direction, and the rest of the land 
quite unoccupied. Accordingly he decided that this 
would be a very suitable site whereon to found a 
city. He was received in a friendly manner by the 
people, who congratulated themselves that without 
any exertion on their part the Guru had come to 
visit them. The landlord and chaudhri was Bhagwan 
Das, a Khatri of the Gherar tribe. In Sikh histories 
he is generally called by his tribal name. 

Gherar’s person is minutely described. He had 
a fat paunch, a short neck as if his body was swallow- 
ing it, a large mouth, thick lips, and small eyes. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 103 

Although his hair and beard had grown grey and 
he walked with the support of a stick, yet he was 
strong of body. The fastenings of his coat were 
generally undone, and he wore his turban and loin- 
cloth loose. He was clever at litigation, as became 
a Panjabi bania. Pride took up its abode in his heart, 
and he considered no one equal to himself. He 
fancied he was of the Guru’s caste, and harboured 
a rivalry with him which was fatal to friendship. 
Gherar was not long in hearing of the Guru’s arrival. 
He was also informed that the Guru was a very power- 
ful man, and had no fear of the Emperor, whose 
army he had recently destroyed. Gherar began to 
consider what the Guru's object could be. He went 
to him with pride in his heart, and did not salute 
him, but abruptly asked why he had left his home 
in the rainy season. The Guru replied, that on 
seeing this lofty place with the great river flowing 
beneath, he thought he would tarry there some days 
for the sake of sport. 

Gherar feeling angry ironically replied, ‘ Fine 
sport thou meanest! How thou hast prejudiced 
thine affairs! Thou hast made the Emperor thy 
deadly enemy, then how canst thou hope for peace ? 
Having ruined thy home thou hast fled hither 
from Amritsar. When a wise man erreth, he ought 
to take warning and amend his ways. The Gurus 
who preceded thee never used violence. The Em- 
peror and his subjects used all to visit them and 
bow before them. Thou hast struck out a new 
path.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘I have only injured myself. 
Why take it to heart ? Why should the troubles 
I have had fall on the heads of such people as thou ? 
The affairs of the Guru’s house shall ultimately be 
adjusted and the Turks deprived of empire ?’ 
Hearing this Gherar arose and hastened home. 

The Guru made such an impression on the people 
by his teachings that they invited him to stay with 

104 THE SIKH RELIGION 

them, and they would give him and his followers 
all the unoccupied land in the neighbourhood. 
Gherar, who was a bigoted Hindu, and, as we have 
seen, prejudiced against the Guru even long before 
his arrival, used all his efforts to induce his people 
to withdraw their offer to the Guru and expel him 
from the land? 

Gherar, who was unpopular for his oppression 
of the poor, was unable to persuade his people to 
act hostilely to the Guru, and was obliged for the 
time to curb his wrath. One day, however, as the 
Guru was denouncing Hindu superstitions Gherar 
rose from the assembly and communicated to the 
Brahmans of the village the Guru’s words, to which 
he made additions and comments of hisown. Hesaid 
that the Guru was reviling the Veds and Shastars, 
and that he ought to be banished from among them. 
He then began to utter vile abuse of the Guru, at 
which the Sikhs naturally took offence. There 
immediately arose a conflict between the Sikhs 
and the Hindus, in which Gherar was killed and 
thrown into the river. His people remembered his 
many acts of tyranny and regretted not his death. 
They were glad of the Guru’s instruction and pro- 
tection, and became daily more anxious that he 
should continue to abide among them. 

The Guru, having thus secured the goodwill of 
the people, communicated to Bidhi Chand his inten- 
tion of founding a city on the spot. Bidhi Chand 
replied in courtier phrase, that all places belonged 
to the world’s Guru, and that the lands and people 
with whom he was pleased were very fortunate. 
The Guru ordered that the city should be laid out 

1 Sadhu Gobind Singh states in his /has Guru Khdlsa that there had 
been previously on the land a town belonging to Chandu, which with 
the rest of his property was confiscated by the Emperor’s order. It 
remained uninhabited for some time, and was afterwards conferred by 
Sanad on the Guru. Gherar sought to dispossess him and appro- 

priate the land. This led to a conflict, in which Gherar and his 
retainers were killed. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 105 

on the morrow, that an enclosing wall should first 
of all be built, and the whole work completed without 
delay. 

Before the Sikhs took breakfast the next morning 
they repeated the following prayer: ‘Holy Guru 
Nanak, holy Guru Angad, holy Guru Amar Das, 
who grantest desires, holy Guru Ram Das, who art 
the source of happiness, holy Guru Arjan, who ful- 
fillest hopes, the holy Guru Har Gobind by your 
favour and by divine impulse desireth to found a 
city here. Be ever with him and assist him. 
Bestowers of happiness, by your favour all things 
prove successful. Ever vindicate the cause of your 
servants.’ Upon this all bowed their heads and ate 
the sacred food prepared for the occasion. After 
breakfast they beat the war drum and shouted in 
a body, ‘ Hail to the Guru !’ 

The Guru cut the first sod himself and summoned 
masons and labourers from neighbouring villages. 
He was now surrounded with a larger and more 
devoted body of followers than ever. He found 
leisure to devote to the superintendence and com- 
pletion of the city he had projected. It was sub- 
sequently called Sri Har Gobindpur in honour of 
the Guru. 

Ratan Chand, son of Gherar, vowed that he would 
avenge his father’s death or meet him by drowning 
himself. ‘I will trample the Guru’s dead body 
under my feet or secure him in fetters in a jail, or 
I will throw him into the river as his Sikhs did my 
father. I am on the best of terms with Abdulla 
Khan, the subadar of Jalandhar, to whom I shall 
go and complain. There too resideth Karm Chand, 
son of Chandu, who oweth the Guru a debt of revenge. 
We shall all three take counsel how we can arrest 
the Guru’s career.’ Ratan Chand hastened to Karm 
Chand, and urged him to join him against the com- 
mon oppressor. The present Guru had never met 
Shah Jahan. Nay more, there was special enmity 

106 THE SIKH RELIGION 

between them, for the Guru had destroyed his army. 
If therefore the sons of the murdered parents were 
to combine, it was thought they would succeed in 
compassing the Guru’s ruin. 

Karm Chand, Chandu’s son, when consulted 
replied, ‘ How shall we capture or kill the Guru ? 
He is a great warrior, and hath moreover an army 
with him. The Emperor knowing this hath stifled 
his wrath. It would not be possible for us to kill 
the Guru openly. We must seize him by some skil- 
ful ambush. I will not wear a turban on my head 
till I have killed or at least captured him. Then 
shall I enjoy life, whereas I am now passing my 
time as a dead man. If the gods assist us, we shall 
succeed. I will join in any expenditure that may 
be necessary. If it come to representations to the 
Emperor, I have great interest with him. Thou 
and I have both the same cause, namely, to avenge 
our murdered fathers. I at first, as fire, desired to 
destroy the Guru, but I could not do so alone. 
Now thou, like wind, hast met me. Fire and wind 
combined will produce a conflagration in which the 
Guru shall certainly perish. Thou hast come to me, 
as I anticipated when I heard of thy father’s death. 
Exert thyself and the desires of our hearts shall be 
fulfilled.’ 

They both next morning proceeded to the subadar 
of Jalandhar. Ratan Chand, taking off his turban 
and throwing it on the floor before the subadar, 
poured forth his grievances and his wrath. He 
pointed out that if swift action were taken, the 
Guru might be at once secured. If they delayed 
till he had constructed his projected fort, his capture 
would be impossible. Ratan Chand further repre- 
sented how pleased the Emperor would be were the 
Guru put into his hands, and what high promotion 
the subadar would receive. The subadar and his 
advisers were convinced by Ratan Chand’s argu- 
ments, and an immediate expedition was planned 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 107 

and organized against the Guru. The belief was 
that the principal part of the Guru’s army had been 
slain at Amritsar, and that he was now compara- 
tively defenceless. It was also supposed that the few 
men the Guru had now with him were a worthless 
rabble, since they had been enlisted from the dregs 
of the people. It was said that they consisted only 
of strolling singers, barbers, washermen, cobblers, and 
such like, who would disperse the moment they found 
themselves confronted with regular troops. As to 
their numbers they resembled a small amount of 
salt in a large amount of flour, and were unnoticeable 
and negligeable. 

When the Guru heard of Ratan Chand’s indict- 
ment and the preparations for an expedition to Sri 
Har Gobindpur, he simply said, ‘ What pleaseth 
God is the best.’ The subadar’s army is said to 
have amounted to ten thousand men, and to have 
descended on the Guru like a swollen tropical river 
making its way to the sea. Abdulla Khan disposed 
his forces into divisions. Bairam Khan received 
command of one thousand men; Muhammad Khan 
a tried warrior in many a field, a similar number ; 
Balwand Khan too received a divisional command. 
A division was entrusted to Ali Bakhsh, a renowned 
marksman. Imam Bakhsh was made commander 
of the fifth division. These five generals with their 
troops advanced and took the field. To each of his 
two sons, Nabi Bakhsh and Karim Bakhsh, who 
rode on chargers with gold embroidered saddles, the 
subadar gave the command of two thousand men. 
He retained one thousand horse as his own body- 
guard. 

When the Guru marshalled his army Bhai Jattu, 
an excellent marksman, appeared in the van with 
matchlock in hand. The Guru gave him command 
of two thousand horse. A troop of one hundred 
was given Bhai Kalyana. The Guru, seeing Bhai 
Nano well equipped and mounted, gave him also 

108 THE SIKH RELIGION 

a troop of one hundred horse. To Bhai Piraga, 
already tried in warfare, five hundred men were 
entrusted with orders to resist the first onslaught of 
the Muhammadans. A troop of four hundred horse 
was placed under the command of Bhai Mathura. 
Bhai Jagannath, popularly knownas Jagana,a power- 
ful and trained soldier, also received command of 
a similar force. Troops of horse mustering one 
hundred each were placed at the disposal of Bhai 
Shaktu and Bhai Paras Ram, both accomplished 
archers. Jati Mal, Bhai Molak and other officers 
were told off to support Bhai Bidhi Chand. Thus 
the Guru divided his army into eight troops or 
companies. 

It was as if the Guru were founding another city, 
and desired to give a feast on its inauguration. The 
Muhammadan army came as 1f they were Brahmans 
who desired to eat to repletion. The feast provided 
for them was shields for plates, swords for pumpkins, 
bullets for sweets, daggers for jalebis, arrows for gul-i- 
bihisht,!and other weapons for other dainties. Before 
coming to blows Abdulla Khan sent an envoy to 
endeavour to come to terms with the Guru, and 
induce him to abandon the city he was building. 
The Guru replied, ‘ You rely on the Emperor alone; 
I rely on the Immortal God. The great Guru hath 
granted me temporal as well as spiritual authority, 
and made me a lord of war as well as of hospitality ; 
but war I desire not, and shall not assume the 
aggressive. Unless you attack me I shall bear you 
no enmity. I covet no one’s property. If you 
quarrel with me I shall send you where I sent 
Mukhlis Khan. Should you fight with me, it can 
only lead to your own destruction. If you go home 
I will not pursue you. But you have only two 
means of safety, either make peace with me or flee. 
Should you fight, victory shall never be yours.’ 

This answer was not conciliatory, and both sides 

1 Jalebis and gul-t-bihisht are Indian sweetmeats. 

LIrfE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 109 

made preparations for the conflict. The Guru from 
the top of his rampart observed the enemy approach, 
and addressed his army. ‘ Brother Sikhs, this con- 
test is not for empire, for wealth, or for land. It is 
in reality a war for our religion. Wherefore turn 
not your backs on the foe, but confront them and 
destroy them. Let each commander keep watch 
over his men. Kill not those who flee or surrender. 
Lose not your courage, but fight to the death.’ 
Every species of weapon then known to Asiatic war- 
fare was brought into play. It is said that the 
Guru’s braves danced like peacocks, and the cowards 
among the enemy hid themselves like snakes on the 
approach of winter. As the battle advanced such 
was the mélée that it was difficult to distinguish 
friend from foe. 

CHAPTER XI 

As Muhammad Khan led the van, he was chal- 
lenged by Bhai Jattu whose horse he at once killed 
with an arrow. Then simultaneously Jattu dis- 
charged his musket at Muhammad Khan, and 
Muhammad Khan another arrow at Jattu. Bullet 
and arrow both took effect, and the two heroes fell 
mortally wounded. When Muhammad Khan fell, 
his division fled. To take his place Abdulla Khan 
ordered Bairam Khan to advance with his men and 
not retreat, so that it might never be said they had 
run away as cowards from the Sikhs. Bairam Khan 
with his thousand men crying ‘Strike! strike!’ 
advanced and was received by Bhai Mathura who 
had been ordered by the Guru to resist his attack. 
Mathura seeing the superior force directed against 
him said to his soldiers, ‘ My brethren, every one 
must die. Generations have died, and are dying. 
Others die in vain, but if you die, your death shall 
be profitable, since you give up your lives as an 
offering to the Guru, and shall join the court of 

IIo THE SIKH RELIGION 

heaven; but if, on the other hand, you vanquish 
your enemies, then empire shall be yours, and you 
shall enjoy uninterrupted happiness and repose. In 
either alternative great shall be your gain.’ 

The Sikhs fought with desperation and drove the 
enemy before them. Mathura disabled Bairam 
Khan’s horse with a bullet. Bairam Khan’s troop 
was then surrounded by the Sikhs and fought 
heroically. Seeing this, Mathura in a rage dis- 
mounted and rushed on Bairam Khan. Both heroes, 
brought by their impetuosity to close quarters, could 
not use their missiles, and engaged each other in 
a wrestling contest. Mathura got the better of the 
struggle, and throwing his adversary, snatched his 
sword from his scabbard and cut off his head. 
Bairam Khan’s army witnessing this, became en- 
raged, surrounded Bhai Mathura, and cut him to 
pleces. 

The Chief on seeing Bairam Khan slain ordered 
Balwand Khan to advance. Ali Bakhsh proceeded 
to support him. The Guru sent Kalyana to oppose 
them. Balwand Khan fought with great bravery 
and with his lance dispatched several Sikhs. Kal- 
yana seeing this took steady aim with his matchlock, 
and shot him through the heart. Seeing him lying 
on the field Ali Bakhsh called on his troops to 
avenge him. They surrounded Kalyana, but he 
kept them at bay with flights of arrows. When 
his quiver was empty he resorted to his sword. He 
was, however, no match for the numbers opposed to 
him, and gloriously fell with many wounds. His 
courage never failed him to the last, and he died 
repeating ‘ Wahguru ! ’ 

Ali Bakhsh again directed his troops against the 
Guru. Seeing this Bhai Nano opposed the onslaught. 
The Guru, patting him on the back, placed two 
hundred more men at his disposal. Thus Bhai Nano 
had three hundred in all at his command. They 
fought with great determination and inflicted great 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND TTT 

loss on the enemy. Ali Bakhsh took up his match- 
lock and fired at Nano but missed him. Nano then 
discharged an arrow at Ali Bakhsh, which went 
through his body. Seeing him fall the Muham- 
madan army began to flee. It was, however, rallied 
by Sardar Imam Bakhsh, who now came up with 
his division. Meanwhile Nano continued to slay 
the Muhammadans. Imam Bakhsh hastened to stop 
his career. Nano on seeing him fixed his thoughts 
on the Guru, and drawing his two-edged sword 
struck off his left hand. Imam Bakhsh without 
faltering used his remaining arm on Nano and 
killed him, upon which Nano’s troops retreated. 

The Guru extolled Nano’s bravery, and asked if 
there was any Sikh who could now sustain the fight. 
Bhai Piraga came forward and said, ‘My Lord, by 
thy favour I will destroy the army of the enemy.’ 
Bhai Jagana, Krishan, and other faithful officers 
with their troops went to Piraga’s support. When 
Bhai Jagana and other distinguished Sikhs were 
slain, Bidhi Chand came forward and asked the 
Guru’s permission to join the combat and support 
Bhai Piraga. This being granted, Bidhi Chand and 
the Sikhs fought with their usual valour, the result 
of which was that the Muhammadan army became 
demoralized, turned, and fled. Abdulla Khan, the 
Muhammadan chief, came on the scene with a stick 
in his hand to strike and restrain the fugitives. He 
then appealed to Karm Chand and Ratan Chand to 
enter the combat, show their bravery, and not allow 
‘it to be said that ten thousand imperial troops were 
killed in vain. The Chief also ordered his eldest son 
Nabi Bakhsh to advance with the troops under his 
command. 

When the Guru heard of this he was very pleased 
and thought the time had arrived for himself to 
enter the battle. It is said that when he twanged 
his bow his enemies trembled, and that when the 
neighing of his horse was heard as he entered the 

I12 THE SIKH RELIGION 

battle-field, there was widespread consternation in 
the Muhammadan ranks. — 

When the Guru showed himself fully accoutred to 
his troops, he called on them to slay Abdulla Khan 
and thus put an end to the combat. Karm Chand, 
Chandu’s son, said that he would now avenge his 
father’s death by killing Bidhi Chand and capturing 
the Guru. Bidhi Chand replied, ‘Take care! I will 
send thee to thy father.’ Karm Chand discharged 
showers of arrows. One of them struck Bidhi Chand 
and lodged in his body. Bidhi Chand drew it out 
and hurled it back on Karm Chand. It missed him, 
but struck his horse, causing the animal to reel and 
fall. Bidhi Chand then bound Karm Chand, dragged 
him before the Guru, and addressed him, ‘ Thou didst 
owe one debt to the Guru, in that thy father killed 
his, and now thou owest him another for having 
made war on him.’ Bidhi Chand offered to put 
him to death if the Guru allowed him. The Guru 
seeing him in that miserable plight took compassion 
on him, and ordered his release, saying it was not 
proper to kill a defenceless prisoner. 

When Karm Chand, thus released, found his way 
to the Chief he gave him the following version of 
the incident. ‘I went to the Guru to reconnoitre 
his army. He arrested and tortured me, but I 
escaped by stratagem and force of arms, and have 
brought thee this information. The Guru hath a 
very small army ; make a rush and we shall capture 
him with all his property.’ The Chief accordingly 
ordered his troops to charge, upon which there arose 
a sanguinary engagement on both sides. Nabi 
Bakhsh led one wing of the Muhammadan army, 
and his father the other. Karim Bakhsh, the Chief’s 
second son, on seeing his father personally engaged, 
hastened to his assistance. Their army, however, 
was destroyed like dry grass by a forest fire, prin- 
cipally owing to the exertions and bravery of Bhai 
Shaktu. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 113 

Nabi Bakhsh discharged an arrow at Paras Ram, 
one of the Sikh leaders, and severely wounded him. 
The Sikhs with Shaktu at their head gathered round 
and rescued him. After recovering consciousness he 
rushed with his sword on Nabi Bakhsh, and cut off 
his head with one blow. The Muhammadans on 
this attacked Paras Ram and Shaktu, and killed 
them both. The Chief wept aloud at the loss of 
his son, and expressed a pious wish that he himself 
had been slain instead. Karim Bakhsh, the Chief’s 
second son, went to console his father, saying he 
would avenge his brother, and either kill the Guru 
or be killed himself—a resolution which the chief 
applauded. As the youth advanced he descried the 

uru. He asked those who had no fear in their 
hearts or those who had no loved ones, to accom- 
pany him to seize and kill the Guru. .They who 
chose might retire from the conflict. The Chief 
hearing his words and fearing he was too sanguine 
of success, warned him not to advance, but hold his 
ground where he was, for the Guru was not merely 
the bravest of the Sikhs, but a veritable messenger of 
death. Therash youth heeded not his father’s counsel. 

The Guru on seeing Karim Bakhsh at a distance 
called out to Bhai Bidhi Chand, ‘Lo! the Chief's 
young son hath come to avenge his brother. The 
slanderers have incensed his mind. Now exert thy 
strength and engage him. He hath come to assault 
thee, but do thou assault him.’ Bidhi Chand 
shouting defiance advanced. The Chief sent Ratan 
Chand and Karm Chand to his son’s assistance. 
Then arose a desperate effort to capture the Guru. 
They cried out that the Guru had no army, that he 
should become their easy prey, and that they should 
receive suitable rewards from the Emperor. Such 
was the fury of the imperial troops that some of 
the Sikhs were on the point of giving way when 
they were kept in position by Bidhi Chand. Karim 
Bakhsh couching his lance directed it at Bidhi Chand, 

I 

SIKH. IV 

114 THE SIKH RELIGION 

but it only lighted on his saddle-bow. Bidhi Chand 
and Karim Bakhsh now rushed at each other with 
drawn swords. Karim Bakhsh dealt a blow at 
Bidhi Chand from which he was again providentially 
saved. It then for a time became a play of fence, 
when sword clashed against sword, until with one 
swashing blow Karim Bakhsh shattered Bidhi 
Chand’s weapon in twain. Bidhi Chand turned his 
horse and ran for another sword. On his return 
with a better tempered blade he dealt Karim Bakhsh 
a blow which terminated the combat. 

The sons of Chandu and Gherar, on seeing this, 
fled from the field, but were afraid to show their 
faces to the Chief, and so remained at a distance. 
Several followed their example, and were pursued 
by Bidhi Chand and other Sikhs at the head of their 
troops. The runaways told the Chief of his second 
son’s death, and the intelligence made him for a 
time unconscious. On being partially restored he 
began to mourn, ‘Alas! fool that I was not to 
consider that I was powerless against him about 
whom the Emperor was silent even after the loss 
of his army. Both my sons are dead, yet I behold 
the light of day. A curse on me and my life! I 
have been untrue to my Emperor and also to my 
relations, who warned me not to contend with the 
Guru. He hath killed five of my bravest officers 
and my two darling boys. My progeny is at an 
end, and there will be none to preserve my name 
in the world.’ 

The Chief endeavoured to rally Ratan Chand 
and Karm Chand :—‘ About two hours of day still 
remain. Advance and fight, and perhaps the Guru 
may come into our possession. Your boasts have 
all been in vain. Like jackals you are only fit to 
bark. There is even yet time to restore the fortune 
of war. Let me behold your manliness. Either 
conquer or die.’ The Chief then gave the order for 
a general advance. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 115 

The Guru, seeing the onslaught of the Muham- 
madans specially directed against himself, addressed 
his troops, ‘ My brethren, the Turks are advancing ; 
I will now myself fight and destroy those enemies 
who have without cause brought an army of thou- 
sands against God’s servant.’ Both armies then 
again hotly engaged. The Turks came as it were 
to offer themselves as sacrifice to the Guru. Abdulla 
Khan, maddened by the death of his sons, discharged 
flights of arrows, and heeded not whether he aimed 
at friend or foe. This was the most desperate por- 
tion of the conflict. None retreated, none sued for 
quarter. 

Under the favouring glance of the Guru the Sikhs 
who had formerly been weak as hares now became 
strong as lions. No matter what their birth or 
previous calling, they all proved themselves gallant 
heroes in the field. Abdulla Khan resolved to con- 
quer or die. He could not show himself again to the 
Emperor if his ten thousand troops were vanquished 
in vain. There would be no place in which to hide 
himself, and the earth would not open to receive 
him. It therefore would be better for him to receive 
death at the hands of the Guru. The Guru seeing 
Karm Chand and Ratan Chand in front addressed 
them, “What think you on? Now avenge your 
fathers. Retreat not like cowards. Be brave and 
stand before me; otherwise go where your fathers 
have gone.’ 

The Guru let fly an arrow which disabled Ratan 
Chand’s horse. Then Karm Chand advanced, drew 
his bow-string to his ear, and shot the Guru’s horse, 
the famous charger sent from Kabul which the Guru 
had obtained with such difficulty. The Guru drew_ 
forth the arrow and pierced Karm Chand’s horse 
with it. Ratan Chand and Karm Chand had now 
to fight on the ground. Joined by their Chief they 
discharged flights of arrows at the Guru, who saved 
himself by his dexterity. The arrows fell like 

12 

116 THE SIKH RELIGION 

showers of flowers around him, and it seemed as if 
the three men had been worshipping him and begging 
of him the gift of salvation. The Guru was left 
alone to contend against all three, as Bidhi Chand 
and his other heroes were engaged fighting in a 
distant part of the field. His enemies were very 
pleased to see the Guru alone and unhorsed, at the 
approach of evening too. He, however, felt that 
victory was ever on the side of religion, * God 
succoureth His servants,’ he thought, ‘and the 
proud and the wicked shall be vanquished.’ 

The Guru on being closely assailed by Karm Chand 
struck him with his shield and made him stagger 
and fall. Ratan Chand seeing this ran to his aid. 
The Guru drew forth his pistol and shot him. Then 
fearing that his enemy might still escape, he dis- 
charged an arrow, which completed his discom- 
fiture. Abdulla Khan now lost all command over 
himself, and struck out with his sword right and 
left, before and behind, above and below. The 
Guru at first received all his blows on his strong 
shield. Then gathering his strength he drew his 
falchion on the Chief, and severed his head from his 
body. By this time Karm Chand had recovered 
consciousness and rushed at the Guru saying, 
‘Whither goest thou after killing all my friends ? 
Deem not that by killing Ratan Chand the victory 
is thine.’ 

There ensued for a time a sword-play between 
the Guru and Karm Chand, until the sword of the 
latter was broken. The Guru as a holy man desiring 
to take no mean advantage of his adversary, put 
his own sword into his scabbard, and engaged with 
him in a wrestling combat. They were locked in 
one another’s arms, as if, after all the fighting, they 
had become fast friends. At last the Guru, seizing 
Karm Chand by both arms, swung him round as 
Krishan did his uncle Kans, and killed him by 
dashing his head on the ground. It had now become 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 117 

dark. The Chief and all his sardars were slain, his 
army had fled, the battle was ended, and victory 
remained with the Guru. Bidhi Chand lit a torch 
and passed through files of dead bodies in his search 
for his master, who was only found with delay and 
difficulty. 

The Guru went to his tent and Bidhi Chand 
sought out the wounded and attended to them. 
The next day was occupied with the disposal of the 
slain. The Chief, his two sons, and his five generals 
were all put into one grave. The bodies of the 
fallen Sikhs were brought to the Guru and their 
names announced. The Guru blessed them one by 
one, and caused them to be thrown into the river 
Bias. The bodies of the fallen Muhammadans 
shared the same fate. A platform was erected near 
the place where they were buried. In after days 
the Guru used occasionally to go and sit on it, and 
point out to Bidhi Chand and his other officers the 
advantages of a just cause, by means of which they 
had destroyed their proud enemies, and saved their 
own brave and loyal co-religionists. 

The Guru then delivered a funeral oration, in the 
course of which he said, ‘ Death is very potent and 
capable of altering human affairs in a moment. It 
maketh those who are laughing weep, and those who 
are weeping laugh.’ He then recited the following 
hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

This perishable world was made like a house of sand ; 

It is quickly destroyed like paper moistened with water, 

O man, behold and consider the True One in thy heart. 

Sidhs, Strivers, householders, and Jogis have departed 
abandoning their houses and homes. 

The world is like a nightly dream. 

What we see shall all perish ; why attach thyself to it, 
O fool ? 

1 Mansha is here used for man. The word generally means 
desire, but it is used by the tenth Guru in the sense of conscience. 

118 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Where are thy brothers and friends? Open thine eyes 
and look. 

One goeth, another shall go—each in his turn. 

They who serve the perfect true Guru shall have a fixed 
place at God’s door. 

The man Nanak is God’s slave, preserve his honour, 
O God.! 

And also the following :— 

O man, why art thou puffed up with pride ? 

Within thee are bad odour, impurity, and uncleanness ; 
what is visible is ashes. 

O mortal, remember Him who made all things, and who 
supporteth life and soul. 

The ignorant fool who forsaketh Him and attacheth him- 
self to other gods, shall be born again after death. 

I am blind, dumb, crippled, devoid of understanding ; 
O God, the Preserver, preserve me. 

God is omnipotent to act and cause others to act; Nanak, 
what a wretched creature is man ! 2 

“His evil fate urged Abdulla Khan so that with- 
out cause or provocation he marched against us with 
ten thousand men. Besides his two sons he 
hath lost his state, authority, and prosperity, and 
become himself the prey of death. It hath so dis- 
posed of him that no trace of him remaineth. There 
is no reliance to be placed on life. We know not 
when the last hour shall come. The only gain is 
worship, and repetition of God’s name. Hymns 
were then recited and prayers offered for the repose 
of the souls of all who had fallen in the battle. 

CHAPTER XII 

To the masands was entrusted the construction 
of the city of Sri Har Gobindpur. The surrounding 
walls were to have five gates ; streets and market- 
places were to be laid out ; and houses constructed 

1 Bilawal. 2 Devgandhari. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 119 

for those who thronged to offer homage to the Guru. 
Gherar’s son having been killed, all his relations 
fled, and the Guru remained in peaceable possession. 
He projected the construction of a Sikh temple, but 
it occurred to him that his Muhammadan troops 
and labourers would also require a temple for their 
worship. He therefore constructed with thoughtful 
impartiality both a temple and a mosque. He pur- 
chased horses for his men to replace those which had 
been killed in action. His soldiers now considered 
where they should find a horse worthy of being 
ridden by the Guru himself. Inquiries were made 
even in distant countries, but no horse could be 
found to take the place of the Guru’s famous steed, 
killed by an arrow from Karm Chand’s bow. 

While the minds of the Sikhs were thus exercised 
a rich contractor called Subhaga came from the west 
of the Panjab with an offering of five horses. The 
Guru selected the best among them for his own 
use. He gave the second to his son Gurditta, the 
third to Bhai Bidhi Chand, the fourth he sent to 
Painda Khan, and the fifth he kept in his stable to be 
subsequently disposed of as might be deemed ex- 
pedient or necessary. 

One day as the Guru sat in the midst of his 
Sikhs he said, “ According to the rules of our re- 
ligion the repetition of the Gurus’ hymns with 
due understanding and with a pure heart is God’s 
real worship.’ The Sikhs represented that they 
all read the Gurus’ hymns daily. The Guru re- 
plied, ‘He who can repeat the Japji and under- 
stand the divine knowledge contained therein, shall 
have his desires fulfilled, and obtain deliverance 
hereafter.” A Sikh named Gopal undertook the task. 
The Guru having caused his feet to be bathed, 
seated him on a lofty throne in front of him. Gopal 
then began to repeat the Japji. When he had 
nearly finished, the Guru began to consider what 
present he should make him. The wealth of the 

120 THE SIKH RELIGION 

world would be insignificant for a man of perfect 
piety. The Guru seriously intended to offer him 
the Guruship, and sent for five paise and a 
coco-nut to perform the ceremony of his appoint- 
ment. When Gopal came to the line, ‘God 
dwelleth in Sach Khand,’ in the thirty-seventh 
pauri of the great Sikh morning religious ser- 
vice, the Guru moved his feet to stand up and do 
obeisance to the reader as Guru. At that moment 
Gopal’s thoughts turned away from God, and he said 
to himself, ‘ Will the Guru reward me with his spare 
horse or not?’ The Guru read his thoughts, dis- 
closed them to him, and informed him that but 
for his mental wanderings he should receive the 
Guruship. The Guru gave him the fifth horse as 
his reward, but he lost the Guruship, which would be 
superior to the wealth of the world. So difficult 
is it to pray with attention. 

The party of Sikhs who had come with Subhaga 
received the Guru’s permission to visit the shrines 
and places sacred to the Gurus. They proceeded 
to Goindwal, and bathed in its Bawali. Thence 
they visited Khadur and Tarn Taran. From there 
they proceeded to the Guru’s forest to see Bhai 
Budha. They found Gur Das with him. Subhaga 
and his party told them who they were, and related 
all the incidents connected with the Guru’s occupa- 
tion of land on the margin of the Bias and the 
subsequent battle with the Muhammadans. As 
Subhaga and his party were departing for Amritsar, 
Bhai Budha and Bhai Gur Das accompanied them. 
Subhaga and his friends after visiting Amritsar and 
beholding God’s temple returned to their own 
country. Bhai Budha, Bhai Gur Das, and three 
other Sikhs named Jiwa, Ajitta, and Jodha, who 
joined them in Amritsar, all proceeded to see the 
Guru at Sri Har Gobindpur. When Bhai Budha 
had inspected the Guru’s city he said that as he was 
now old, it was necessary for him to retire from the 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND nzt 

active service of religion and return to his village 
Ramdas. He requested the Guru’s permission to 
do so, and at the same time prayed him to appoint 
a successor who would manage the villages granted 
to Bibi Bhani by the Emperor Akbar. His heart 
was sad at parting from the Guru, and he begged 
him to show himself to him whenever he invoked 
him. Bhai Gur Das remained with the Guru in 
Sri Har Gobindpur. 

A man called Khwaja had accompanied the Guru 
as groom from Kashmir, and was very attentive 
and faithful in the discharge of his duties. The 
Guru once seeing him, while running by his horse’s 
side, perspiring profusely, invited him to ask a favour. 
Khwaja only requested that he might ever have the 
privilege to behold him. The Guru gave him the 
true Name, and made him happy. His under- 
standing then became enlightened, the veil of false- 
hood dropped from his eyes, and he saw God, first 
in the world and then in himself, but informed no 
one of his spiritual happiness. 

One Jani a Saiyid—or reputed descendant of the 
prophet Muhammad—chanced to turn his attention 
to religion and became a faqir. He resided among 
faqirs in the hope of meeting some religious men 
who would give him spiritual consolation. In _ his 
wanderings he met some very eloquent men, but 
none of heroic devotion. Having heard of Khwaja’s 
spiritual attainments he went to him for information, 
‘O Khwaja, how hast thou escaped from the snares 
of the evilone? When I try to fix my mind on God, 
Tam beset with lust, wrath, avarice, worldly love, and 
pride. Howshall I free myself from these deadly sins ?’ 
Khwaja replied, ‘The true Guru hath banished my 
evil thoughts, and made me happy. Go thou and 
stand at his door. The Guru hath said :— 

If thou efface thyself and serve the Guru, thou shalt 
obtain some honour. 

122 THE SIKH RELIGION 

‘As the gold of the mine when twelve times 
annealed becometh fine gold, so the mind becometh 
pure by chastening and suffering. When the Guru 
knoweth thy heart’s devotion, he will at once make 
thee happy. If a poor man stand at a rich man’s 
door and remain there, he may, even though he 
receive buffets at first, obtain advantage at last.’ 
Jani on hearing this went and stood at the Guru’s 
door. The Guru sent for him, asked why he stood 
there, and what he wanted. Jani replied, ‘ Know- 
ing the things of this world to be perishable, I 
have abandoned them. Grant me a sight of the 
Ruler of the world and save me from the fire of 
hell.” The Guru rejoined, ‘ Tell me what else thou 
requirest. God is very remote.’ Jani refused to 
accept this answer, quoting Guru Arjan :— 

He who is infatuated with worldly love, deemeth God 
distant : 
But, saith Nanak, He is ever present! 

‘Tf thou, O Guru’, continued Jani, “show me God, 
then He will not be distant.’ 

The Guru upon this directed his Sikhs to build 
a wall between Jani and himself. The object of this 
apparently was to test the sincerity of Jani’s devotion. 
Jani, however, held his ground and kept his attention 
fixed on the Guru. He yielded not to hunger, thirst, 
or sleep, but remained at the Guru’s door. When- 
ever he saw a Sikh passing, he implored him to take 
his message to the Guru. The Guru wearied by his 
importunities at last said, “If he be in a great hurry 
to see me, let him leap into the river.’ Jani hearing 
this actually went to leap into the river. The Guru 
sent a Sikh to dissuade him. He then offered him 
wealth and supernatural power, but these boons were 
refused. Jani would only accept divine knowledge. 
The Guru then put his hand on his forehead, and made 
him happy. Another man called Lal Chand was 

1 Gauri. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 123 

attracted to the Guru by the religious proficiency 
attained by Khwaja and Jani, and remained in his 
service after they had departed. 

A deputation from Kashmir waited on the Guru, 
and requested him to send there as preacher Bhai 
Garhia, who is described as a very liberal, humble, 
and disinterested man. Bhai Garhia on his way 
encamped at some distance from the city of Gujrat, 
where he met Shah Daula. Bhai Garhia was well 
received in Kashmir. He used to sing the Gurus’ 
hymns and relate events in the lives of the Gurus. 
After some time Guru Har Gobind recalled him. 
Whatever offerings he received while in Kashmir 
he spent in the Guru’s name, and at his departure 
gave a feast in honour of his spiritual master. The 
Guru was pleased with the manner in which he had 
spent the offerings he had received in Kashmir. In 
due time Bhai Garhia returned to his native village. 

One day, as the Guru was sitting in open court, 
a proud Brahman called Nitya Nand, a native of 
Batala, entered leaning on his staff. His object 
was to discuss religious matters with the Guru. 
The Guru respectfully received him. Nitya Nand 
produced the Purans and began to read them. 
When he had finished, a Hindu invited him to read 
the Garur Puran, a Sanskrit composition recited 
for dying Hindus. According to it the soul reaches 
its abode in the next world a year after the dissolu- 
tion of the body. A Sikh called Sundar said, 
‘By the Guru’s favour I can traverse that road in 
twelve hours.’ Bhai Lala said, ‘I can do it in six 
hours.’ Bhai Manj said, ‘ I can do it in three hours.’ 
Bhai Nihala said, ‘ What need have we to go there 
at all?’ The Brahman then said to the Guru, 
‘Listen to what thy Sikhs are saying.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ What my Sikhs say is correct. The one 
year’s journey stated in thy text is only for sinners ; 
but for those who act without any worldly object, 
who possess divine knowledge, and who are saints 

124 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of God, there is no necessity to traverse the journey 
at all. The companions of a king have no need 
to go to a subordinate of his, nor are good men sent 
to prison. In the same way good men suffer not 
on the way to their last abode, and have no concern 
with thy Dharmraj. Wherefore as Guru Ram Das 
hath said :— 

They who have meditated on God the best Being, the 
Root of joy, are ever in extreme happiness. 

They have ceased to regard Dharmraj ; all their concern 
for death is at an end} 

‘Guru Arjan hath also said :— 

The road on which the evil passions plundered 

The traveller 1s far from the saints. 

It was the perfect Guru who pointed out to me the right 
road, 

Thy name, O Lord, is the way of salvation; the road 
of Death is distant. 

The port where that greedy tax-gatherer watcheth 

Is far from the saint. 

While very many are tortured by Death, 

The saints abide with the Supreme God. 

The recording angels write all men’s accounts : 

They will take no notice of the saints. 

Saith Nanak, for him who hath found the perfect true 
Guru 

Unblown trumpets play. 

‘As a man on horseback can traverse a road in 
one hour which taketh a man on foot three hours, 
and he who hath a better conveyance can traverse 
it still more quickly, so the good suffer not like the 
bad, and their road is different. The coming and 
going of the soul is the result of spiritual ignorance. 
As Guru Arjan hath said :— 

My transmigration is at an end ; 

My heated caldron hath become cold; the Guru hath 
given me the cooling Name.’ 

1 Bilawal. 2 Asa, - 38 Maru. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 125 
‘And again :— 

The saints who have taken God’s name as their support 
suffer not transmigration. 

It is all God’s play, saith Nanak; God is altogether in- 
comprehensible,’ ! 

On hearing this the Brahman obtained peace, 
and became satisfied that the Guru’s words were the 
essence and conclusion of all wisdom. He confessed, 
‘In the first place, I had pride of caste ; secondly, 
I had pride of learning which attacked me like fever ; 
but I thank the Guru, whose words are cooling, and 
who hath cooled with them my burning mind.’ The 
Brahman being thus humbled remained with the 
Guru, became a Sikh, and began to preach the Sikh 
religion. 

Bhai Budha remained in his village of Ramdas 
intent on his devotions. The True Name ever came 
spontaneously to his tongue. One night he saw 
Guru Arjan in a vision, and begged him to place him 
at his feet. Guru Arjan replied, ‘Guru Nanak hath 
made death subservient to thee. Thou hast seen 
six spiritual kings, and mayest when it pleaseth thee 
go to Sach Khand, and there obtain imperishable 
dignity.’ After this Bhai Budha awoke, and telling 
his son Bhana of the vision, said his end had come, 
for Wahguru had called him. 

Bhai Budha then sent for a banker friend of his 
and said to him, ‘Go to the Guru and remind him 
of a promise he once made to come to me whenever 
necessary. The Guru taking Bhai Gur Das and 
other Sikhs went to Bhai Budha, and took a last 
farewell of him. Bhai Budha had strength enough left 
to wash the Guru’s feet. He then drank some of the 
water therefrom and sprinkled the remainder over 
his house. It is said that, as the ocean is pleased on 
seeing the full moon, so was Bhai Budha pleased on 
beholding the Guru. The Guru said to him, ‘ Bhai 

1 Gauri. 

126 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Budha thou hast lived long. Thou hast been ever 
with the Gurus. Give me some instruction.’ Bhai 
Budha replied, ‘ Great king, thou art a sun; I am 
a fire-fly before thee. Thou hast come to save me, 
and to hear my dying words. Guru Nanak had no 
worldly concerns or designs. He travelled over 
many lands, and established in them the worship of 
the true Name. Guru Angad by the force of his 
piety and devotion pleased him, and obtained the 
Guruship. He gave it to Guru Amar Das, he to 
Guru Ram Das, and he to Guru Arjan who with 
open hands showered upon men happiness in this 
life and salvation in the next. Guru Arjan possessed 
a treasury of the Name, which was never exhausted. 
His fame hath spread over the world. Thou his son 
art spiritual and temporal lord and protector of the 
holy. Though divine, thou also performest a human 
part. Ihave been a servant of the Guru’s house for 
six generations. Succour me in the next world, and 
allow me not to suffer when I enter death’s door, 
which I fondly hope is the portal of salvation. Myson 
Bhana here is thy servant: take his arm and keep 
him at thy feet.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ Thou sawest Guru Nanak, and 
hast ever abided by his instruction. Guru Arjan 
hath said :— 

They with whom God is pleased love the saints’ society. 

They who touched Guru Nanak saved all their families. 

They to whom God hath been merciful have obtained 
all happiness. 

They who touched Guru Nanak have not been born again. 

They whose fetters the Merciful hath cut off, are geet 
to His worship. 

They who have touched Guru Nanak are ever emanci- 
pated in this world and the next.! 

‘Thou, O Bhai Budha, shalt assuredly obtain 
immortal bliss. Of this thy humility is an assurance.’ 
1 Guru Arjan’s Sawaiyas. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 127 

The Guru then put his hand on Bhai Budha’s 
head and blessed him. Next morning Bhat Budha 
arose before day and repeated the Japji. Then 
fixing the image of the true Guru in his heart and 
uttering ‘Wahguru! Wahguru!’ he departed for 
Sach Khand. The Guru and his Sikhs sang con- 
gratulations on the manner of Bhai Budha’s death 
after his long, holy, and eventful life, and lauded 
him for the assistance he had given in the propaga- 
tion and consolidation of the Sikh faith. The Guru 
himself ignited his funeral pile. 

At the request of Bhai Bhana the Guru, leaving 
his troops in Ramdas, proceeded with a few favourite 
Sikhs to Kartarpur on the right bank of the Ravi. 
They all did homage at the place where Guru Angad 
had received Guruship. The Guru after a three days’ 
sojourn re-crossed the river, and proceeded to Dehra 
Baba Nanak. Bhai Bhana inquired where the shrine 
of Guru Nanak was. The Guru replied, ‘It was not 
Guru Nanak’s desire to set up shrines whether great 
or small. On this account the river absorbed his 
remains.’ 

Dharm Chand, Guru Nanak’s grandson, with all 
his male relations came forth from Dehra Baba 
Nanak to receive the Guru and escort him to their 
temple. The Guru made an offering to the temple 
of one thousand rupees, and to Dharm Chand’s 
sons Mihr Chand and Manak Chand he presented 
clothes and golden bracelets. Dharm Chand, con- 
ceited at the Guru’s offering to his sons, began to 
think himself a person of great importance. Bhai 
Bhana on observing this remonstrated with him, 
and asked him to listen to the following stanza of 
Bhai Gur Das :— 

Sri Chand hath been continent from childhood and built 
the Guru’s shrine. 

Lakhmi Das his son and Dharm Chand his grandson had 
a high opinion of themselves, 

128 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Angad seated Mis servant on his throne, yet Datu 
kicked him off it. 

Mohan became a fanatic, and Mohri caused the top story, 
where Guru Amar Das had resided, to be revered. 

Prithia became deceitful and urged false complaints and 
accusations against the Guru. 

Mahadev became proud—the Gurus’ sons made men per- 
verse and led them astray. 

The odour of the sandal perfumeth not the bamboo.! 

Dharm Chand became humble on hearing this. 
The Guru at his levée next morning expressed a 
desire to visit Sri Chand, son of Guru Nanak. He 
went to a solitary place where Sri Chand was en- 
gaged in austerities. The Guru saluted and offered 
him presents. Sri Chand complimented him on his 
bravery in war: ‘Thou hast killed Moslems and 
given peace to the poor.’ The Guru politely replied, 
‘It was all the result of thy favour.’ The Guru 
then set out with Bhai Bhana to Ramdas, his father 
Bhai Budha’s village. Bhai Bhana entertained the 
Guru there for a month, which they passed in spiritual 
converse. 

The Guru's followers now reminded him that 
the Diwali fair would take place in a few days in 
Amritsar, and pressed him to return thither after 
his long absence. He took Bhai Bhana with him. 
On arriving there he sent for his family from Goind- 
wal and for Painda Khan from Kartarpur. Painda 
Khan on arriving expressed regret that the Guru had 
not sent for him to take part in the battle of the 
Bias. 

A daughter who was born to Painda Khan after 
the arrival of his family in Amritsar, was deemed 
a very unwelcome visitor. The Guru on hearing 
Painda Khan’s complaint on the subject, laughed 
and said that as God had sent her, so would He 

1 That is, proud men generally obtain no advantage by associating 
with the holy. War XXVI. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 129 

cherish her. Bhai Jetha asked the Guru why he 
laughed. The Guru replied, ‘This child is strife 
incarnate. On her account there shall be a great 

battle, in which many Moslems shall perish. This is 
God’s will.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

Natti, Gurditta’s wife, in due time became pregnant, 
whereat his mother Damodari greatly rejoiced. The 
Guru ordered Gurditta to go with his wife, spend the 
Baisakhi fair at Kartarpur, and take his place as 
expounder of the faith. While there a son was born 
to him. When the Guru in Amritsar heard of the 
glad event, he said that Gurditta’s son should prove 
a second Prithia. The Guru at the same time 
called Gurditta and his family. On their arrival 
in Amritsar the Guru put a shirt on the child and 
named him Dhir Mal. 

The Guru went one day a-hunting and heard a 
woman singing the following rustic verses :— 

Thou with the black beard and white turban, 
My name is Sulakhani, and I live in Chabba. 
I present a petition to the true Guru. 

May I, who am now without fruit, bear fruit ! 

Chabba isa village about four miles from Amritsar 
on the road to Tarn Taran and is near the Sangrana 
Or monument raised to those who fell in the Guru’s 
battle with the imperial forces. The lady was the 
wife of a Jat agriculturist. She had come to implore 
the Guru to intercede for her that she might have 
a son. The Guru prayed for her and she was sub- 
sequently blessed with a family of seven children. 
A bard has celebrated this occurrence as follows :— 

As the Guru was touring, a woman came to him to ask for 
a son, 

He said, ‘A son hath not been written on thy forehead’ ; 
on hearing this she was disappointed. 

SIKH. IV K 

130 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Then the Guru wrote on her forehead the figure one. 

At the time of writing his hand shook and one became 
seven. 

There were seven sons born; the universe knoweth it. 

By the Guru’s favour a stake is changed into a thorn. 

As the Guru on another occasion went hunting 
some thirty miles from Amritsar, he came on Sri 
Chand’s retreat. Sri Chand asked him to allow him 
to adopt one of his sons. The Guru with great 
reluctance gave his eldest son Gurditta, who appears 
to have accompanied him to the chase. Sri Chand, 
in token of adoption and succession to him, put on 
Gurditta’s head a Persian hat, and on his neck a 
string of lotus seeds. 

Baba Atal, the Guru’s son by Nanaki, while playing 
with the children of the city used to instruct them 
by his conversation. Whatever he said even jest- 
ingly had a profound meaning. He was so beloved 
by all, that no one refused his requests. The Guru 
used to take him in his lap, fondle him, and say, 
‘Display not thy power, or, if thou do, use it with 
discretion. Squander it not in vain.’ Baba Atal 
would reply, ‘Great king, thy treasury never 
faileth.’ 

There lived in Amritsar a Sikh named Gurumukh 
who had an only son called Mohan, eight years of 
age. He and Baba Atal used to play at bat and ball 
together. Once they played until nightfall. The 
victory remained with Baba Atal, and it was agreed 
between the two boys that Mohan should pay his 
forfeit in the morning. Both boys went home. At 
night Mohan arose for purposes of nature, and walking 
in the dark was bitten by a cobra. On hearing his 
screams his father and mother arose and found him 
fainting. A physician was called, but the poison had 
done its work, and the boy succumbed. 

Next morning Baba Atal proceeded to Mohan’s 
house. He heard weeping on the way, and on being 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 131 

told that Mohan was dead, said, ‘ No, he is not dead. 
He is alive. Come, I will fetch him.’ Saying this 
he went to the apartment where Mohan’s body was 
lying. Touching it with his bat he said, ‘ Mohan, 
arise. Utter Wahguru! Open thine eyes. Thou 
oughtest not to sleep so late, arise and pay me what 
I have won.’ Upon this, it is said, Mohan, though 
dead for four hours and a half, arose as if from 
sleep. A crowd of bystanders congratulated the 
Guru’s son, and said he had done a deed beyond 
the power of other mortal. 

The Guru while sitting in his court heard the 
rejoicings. People were saying, ‘ As is the father, so 
is the son, a treasury of miraculous power.’ But 
the Guru was not at all pleased. He said, ‘It hath 
ever been Baba Atal’s custom to dissipate his power. 
Now whenever a son may die, the parents will bring 
him to our door. Whose son shall we reanimate, and 
whose shall we allow to die ? God showeth no favour 
to man, who must enjoy or suffer the result of his 
acts, and the religion of saints and holy men pre- 
scribeth obedience to God’s will.’ 

While the Guru was thus speaking, Baba Atal 
returned from Mohan’s house. The Guru angrily 
addressed him: ‘Thou must be working miracles, 
while I teach men to obey God’s will.’ Baba Atal 
replied, “Great king, mayest thou live for ages! I 
depart to Sach Khand.’ Saying this he left the 
assembly. It did not occur to any one to seek him 
or beg the Guru to pardon him. It was thought 
that the boy had simply gone to his mother’s apart- 
ments. He had, however, actually gone to bathe 
in the Guru’s tank of nectar. After his ablutions 
he four times circumambulated the Golden Temple, 
and then went and sat on the margin of the Kaulsar. 
Bending his head forward he supported his chin with 
his bat, and repeated the Japji with his eyes directed 
towards the Temple. As he finished his morning 
devotions, his light blended with the light of God 

K 2 

132 THE SIRE @&LiGion 

on the tenth day of the dark half of Assu, Sambat 
1685, when he was in his ninth year. 

The Guru seeing his wives, children, and Sikhs 
lamenting their beloved Baba Atal said, ‘This world 
is perishable. Everything is the sport of death. It 
maketh the weepers laugh and the laughers weep, 
and produceth the other vicissitudes of life. Be con- 
soled. Baba Atal hath obtained immortal dignity and 
his fame shall for ever abide.’ When the Guru sent 
for a load of sandal wood to cremate him in the 
forest, the Sikhs suggested that the body should be 
taken near some inhabited place and not cremated 
in that unfrequented spot. The Guru replied, ‘ The 
city shall increase in population, and this shall be 
the centre of it. In the Guru’s city this place shall 
be as the Anpurna? in Banaras, where all comers 
are gratuitously filled with corn.’ Baba Atal at the 
time of cremation received the name of Kotwal, or 
police officer of the city, by which was meant that 
he would ever guard its inhabitants. The Guru 
said, ‘In commemoration of him who by God’s will 
hath resigned his body in his ninth year, a nine- 
storied shrine shall be erected which shall be seen 
from afar.’ The virtues and miracles of Baba Atal 
have been abundantly celebrated by the Sikhs in 
song and story. 

A great crowd of relations and friends came from 
Goindwal, Khadur, Daroli, Kartarpur, and other 
places to offer their condolences to the Guru on the 
death of hisson. He repeated for them the following 
hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

1 Anpirna,a name of Parbati, is supposed to be the Anna Perenna 
of the Romans, whom Varro placed in the same rank as Pallas and 
Ceres, and who was deified by the Roman people in consequence of 
having supplied them with food when they retired to Mount Aventine. 
Besides the almost identity of names there is a singular coincidence in 
the times of their worship, the festival of Anptirna taking place in the 
early part of the increase of the moon in the month of Chet (March- 
April). 

BABA ATAL’S SHRINE 

SIKH IV P, 132 

Oe —_ 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 133 

As a husbandman having sown his field 

Cutteth down the crop whether ripe or unripe,! 
So, O mortal, know that what is born shall die: 
God’s saint alone is permanent. 

Night shall assuredly follow day, 

And when the night is passed, morn shall dawn. 
The ill-fated sleep in the love of mammon, 

But by the Guru’s favour a few are wakeful. 

Saith Nanak, ever sing God’s praises, 

So shall thy face be bright and thy heart be pure. 

Sain Das, husband of the Guru’s sister-in-law, 
said to the Guru, ‘ Ordinary people suffer greatly 
on the loss of a son. What is the suffering of holy 
men in such cases?’ The Guru requested him to 
draw lines on the ground. He then requested him 
to erase them. He did so. The Guru then said, 
‘Thou hast had no pleasure in making these lines 
and no pain in erasing them.’ Sain Das replied, 
‘None whatever.’ Then said the Guru, ‘ That is all 
a holy man suffereth on the loss of a son.’ 

A Sikh called Prem Chand, resident of Kartarpur, 
proposed his daughter as a wife for Suraj Mal, the 
Guru's third son. 

One day a conversation arose in the presence of 
the Guru as to the difficulties of Sikhism. Bhai 
Gur Das admitted the fact, but said that at the same 
time men should have faith in their religion. He 
then recited the twentieth pauri of his thirty-fifth 
War :— 

If a mother become unchaste, how can her son disgrace 
her ? 

If a cow swallow a gem, one would not tear open her 
belly and kill her. 

Even if a husband visit several women, his wife should 
preserve her chastity. 

Even if a ruler make current a leather coin, the subjects 
are powerless, and ought to accept it. 

1 Unripe crops are frequently cut in the East. 2 Asa, 

134 THE SIKH RELIGION 

If Brahmans drink wine, shall people burn them ? ? 
leven if the Guru become a play-actor, his Sikhs should 
not lose their faith. 

The Guru was not pleased with the last verse, 
and thought he would do something to teach Gur Das 
humility. At the time he wanted two chargers, 
and was informed that Kabul alone produced horses 
worthy to bear him. He decided to send Bhai 
Gur Das thither, and gave him money to make the 
purchases. The horses were to be. bought subject 
to the Guru’s approval. Gur Das found two chargers 
priced at fifty thousand rupees each, and sent them 
to the Guru. The Guru approved and wrote to 
him to pay their price and return forthwith to 
Anunritsar. 

When the owner went to Gur Das for settlement, 
Gur Das seated him outside his tent and went within 
to count the money. On opening the saddle-bags 
he found that they contained not money but brick- 
bats. When he did not come forth from his tent 
within a reasonable time, the horse merchant went 
in to ascertain the cause of his delay. He found 
that Gur Das had escaped by an opening in the back 
of his tent, and left the saddle-bags, which to the 
merchant now appeared filled with money. The 
Sikhs who had come with Gur Das paid the merchant, 
returned with the balance to Amritsar, and in- 
formed the Guru of Gur Das’s sudden disappearance. 

Gur Das was afraid to return to the Guru, and 
sought refuge in Banaras, which he reached by a 
circuitous route after great hardship and suffering. 
Some Sikhs residing there received him with great 
respect on account of his former connexion with the 
Guru and his literary gifts. The Raja of the city 
heard from the Sikhs of the arrival of a very dis- 
tinguished member of their body, and went to do 
him honour. 

' lt is written in the Shastars that if a Brahman drinks wine, the 
only atonement is to kill himself by drinking it boiling hot. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 135 

The Raja used often to send for Gur Das and 
listen to his expositions of the hymns of the Gurus. 
Once several pandits and Sanyasis said, ‘ Banaras 
is the city of Shiv, and he dealeth salvation there to 
his worshippers. Wherefore abandon the teachings 
of the Guru and adore Shiv. What hast thou to 
gain from the Guru?’ Gur Das replied, ‘As a vir- 
tuous woman leaveth not her husband to go to 
another man, so will I not abandon the Guru to 
worship a Hindu god. A calf which leaveth its 
mother and goeth to a strange cow, only receiveth 
kicks. If a swan abandon Mansarowar, it will not 
elsewhere receive pearls as food. If a man leave 
an emperor and go to serve his subjects, he will 
feel his altered position. So the Guru’s Sikhs can- 
not leave God or preserve their honour by wor- 
shipping the gods and goddesses of His creation.’? 

The pandits represented, ‘The great God in 
Sanskrit literature bore the names Shiv, Gobind, 
Ram, &c. Why did Guru Nanak introduce the 
custom of uttering Wahguru and what is the meaning 
of the words ?’ Gur Das replied that Wahguru was 
the greatest of all names. ‘Wah means congratula- 
tion, and guru means great. Both words combined, 
therefore, mean congratulation to the Great God. 
They also mean that God is marvellous, that is, 
beyond human comprehension. ’? 

The pandits discussed with him the relative merits 
of Sanskrit and the vulgar tongue. They said that 
Sanskrit, which was a written language, was the 
language of the gods, and Hindi, which was a spoken 
language, the language of men. Gur Das replied, 
‘The Guru used the spoken language in order to 
communicate his ideas to men. Sanskrit was merely 
the language of priests. The current spoken lan- 
guage had preceded it and will succeed it. Sanskrit 

1 Gur Das’s Kadit. 

2 Another interpretation of Wahguru has been given already in 
the Life of Guru Amar Das. 

136 THE SIKH RELIGION 

only holdeth an intermediate position. It was the 
current language Krishan used in his exhortations 
to Arjan. Whenever any one readeth or preacheth 
a Sanskrit discourse, he must explain it in the 
language of the people. Speech can only be uttered 
by a being with a body. God hath no body, there- 
fore He speaketh no language, nor was Sanskrit 
composed by Him. It is now found only in books, 
and is therefore a dead language. It is a tree which 
beareth no fruit, while the current language on the 
contrary is a tree with fruit-bearing branches. The 
Guru seeing that human life was limited, compiled 
the Granth Sahib in easy language. Sanskrit is so 
difficult that a whole life must be spent in acquiring 
it, wherefore we use the spoken language which 
children and women can read and understand.’ It 
is on this account the Guru hath made the spoken 
language the vehicle for divine instruction. All 
persons of whatever caste may read it, not like 
your Sanskrit, a knowledge of which you deny to 
women and men of low caste.’ It is said that on 
this the pandits and Sanyasis of Banaras admitted 
the force of his argument and acknowledged them- 
selves vanquished. After a sojourn of two months 
in Banaras Gur Das felt an inclination to return to 
the Guru and brave his ire. 

Gur Das wrote to the Guru, ‘As a tethered calf 
crieth for its dam ; as a labourer who desireth to go 
home, but is forced to work for another, passeth his 
time in anxiety ; as a wife. detained by her parents 
and separated from her spouse pineth for him, so a 
Sikh desireth happiness at the Guru’s feet, but is 
kept in misery in a foreign land in obedience to his 
order.’ * 

The Guru sent Bhai Jetha and some Sikhs to 
fetch Gur Das, but not in the manner in which he 
had anticipated. The Guru sent by Jetha a letter 

1 This is not now the case, 2 Gur Das’s Kab7/. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 137 

to the governor of Banaras to say that Gur Das had 
deserted him without his permission, and requested 
that he might be sent under arrest for punishment. 
The governor was astonished on receiving the Guru’s 
letter, and said that he knew no thief called Gur 
Das, or Guru’s servant, but the Guru’s messengers 
might arrest himself and take him to serve the 
Guru. On this Gur Das, who had just finished 
reading the Japji, related to the governor and his 
staff the whole story of his journey to Kabul, and 
his flight from there, whereat there was further 
curlosity and astonishment. 

Gur Das’s hands were then tied behind his back, 
but, at the same time, he was dismissed with great 
respect by the governor and his people, who fully 
believed in his innocence. When the arresting party 
had proceeded about four miles on their homeward 
journey, Bhai Jetha unbound Gur Das, so that he 
might travel more comfortably. Bhai Gur Das had 
not requested this favour. When they arrived near 
Amritsar Bhai Jetha again bound his prisoner as 
before for presentation to the Guru. The Guru 
ironically told Gur Das that he was an excellent 
Sikh, and made several other cutting observations 
on his conduct. Bhai Gur Das replied :— 

If a mother poison her son, who is affectionate enough 
to save him ? 

If a sentry break into a house, who is to guard it ? 

If a guide take a traveller into a wilderness, to whom 
shall he complain ? 

If a fence devour the field, there will be no one to look 
after it. 

If the Guru become a play-actor and cause his Sikhs to 
doubt, what can the poor Sikhs do ?} 

The Guru pardoned him and suggested that he 
might complete the compositions in which he had 
been engaged prior to his arrest. 

1 War AXXY. 

138 THE SIKH RELIGION 

CHAPTER XIV 

The marriage of the Guru’s son Suraj Mal was 
duly celebrated with Khem Kaur, daughter of Prem 
Chand. One Lal Chand and his wife Bishan Kaur 
thought that they would like to betroth their 
daughter Gujari to Teg Bahadur, the Guru’s youngest 
son, on the occasion. When Lal Chand’s agent 
arrived with marriage presents, he did not know 
the name of the intended bridegroom, so Ani Kai, 
Teg Bahadur’s eldest brother, was asked if he would 
be married. He whose mind had been absorbed in 
spiritual thoughts, inquired what marriage meant. 
The agent explained the meaning and intention 
of the ceremony. Ani Rai replied, ‘ Married life is 
the foundation of misery. Sensual pleasures are 
like the husk of rice, spiritual pleasures like am- 
brosia.” Ani Rai could not be induced to alter his 
opinions or his condition. Teg Bahadur, who had 
really been intended by Lal Chand for his son-in- 
law, was then consulted as to whether he would 
marry, and he replied that he would implicitly obey 
his father. He was accordingly in public darbar 
formally betrothed to Gujari, Lal Chand’s daughter. 

Wali Khan, the surviving son of the Subadar of 
Jalandhar, was waiting for an opportunity to avenge 
his father. That opportunity had now arrived. The 
Ikmperor Shah Jahan was on his way from Dihh 
to Lahore. Wali Khan presented him a horse with 
a gold embroidered saddle and other costly gifts. 
The Emperor remarked to him that his father and 

elder brother had not come to wait on him. Wali 
' Khan replied that they had been killed by the 
priest of the Sikhs who had forcibly taken land in 
the village of Ruhela, thrown its owner Bhagwan 
Das Gherar into the river Bias, and caused an in- 
surrection in the country. Wali Khan then entered 
into all the details of the destruction of the army 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND ___ 139 

sent against the Guru. The Emperor was astonished, 
and inquired if there was any one who would lead 
another expedition against him. 

Wazir Khan, the Guru’s friend, was ready- with 
his ingenious pleading—‘ May it please thy Majesty, 
whosoever thou orderest is ready to proceed against 
the Guru, but it would not be improper to reflect 
before action. Had the Subadar of Jalandhar 
received thine orders when he marched against the 
Guru ? No; he made war on his own responsibility. 
Ask Wali Khan where the Guru is now. Is he 
entrenched as a rebel in Ruhela? Is he appropri- 
ating its land revenue? No; he is now living 
peaceably in Amritsar. He belongeth not to any 
Hindu or Muhammadan faction. The Gherar used to 
persecute his own people and oppress the poor. The 
Guru out of his own resources built them houses. 
He even built a mosque for Muhammadans on the 
land which he found unoccupied on the margin of 
the Bias. The Gherar was an ally of the Hindus, 
and he suffered for it. He came to fight and insult 
the Guru. The Sikhs could not tolerate his language. 
While quarrelling with them, he fell into the river, 
and was taken away by the current. His son Ratan 
Chand in collusion with Karm Chand, Chandu’s son, 
went to the Subadar to request him to aid them, 
and, as I hear from the best authority, tempted 
him with a very large bribe. It is on that account 
the Subadar made war on the Guru without thy 
Majesty’s authority. The Guru is a wonderful man. 
He hath no appliances of war and no troops. Thou 
art asked to believe that some petty shopkeepers 
killed ten thousand men of thine imperial army. 
If thou order me, I will go alone and destroy the 
fort the Guru is said to have constructed, and also 
the ‘mosque occupied by a priest and a few feeble 
beggars. This Subadar’s son ought to be punished. 
A long time hath elapsed since his father made war, 
and he hath only informed thee of it to-day.’ 

140 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Emperor was astonished and inquired why 
the Guru had constructed a mosque. Wazir Khan’s 
answer was prompt—‘ Sire, gurus and pirs are all 
men’s property. They feel neither love nor hate. 
The Guru sitteth on Guru Nanak’s throne. His 1s 
the abode of miracles. He looketh on Hindus and 
Muhammadans with an equal eye.’ The Emperor 
replied, ‘ Wazir Khan, I am pleased with thy faith- 
ful representation of the case. The Emperor then 
confiscated Wali Khan’s jagir’ and refused to grant 
him his father’s post. After this the Guru was left 
in peace for some time. Every one hesitated to 
make further complaints against him. 

Baba Gurditta, the Guru’s son, founded the city 
of Kiratpur under the following circumstances :—On 
the peak of the black ridge of the Kahlur mountain 
there once lived Budhan Shah, a Muhammadan 
priest famed as a miracle-worker. He kept two 
goats which, it is said, a tame tiger used daily to 
take to graze. Guru Nanak and Mardana once 
visited the place. Budhan Shah asked the Guru 
who he was, and for what purpose he had come. 
Mardana took it upon himself to reply, ‘ This 1s the 
divine Guru Nanak, who hath been born to instruct 
the world, because all people are engaged in filling 
their bellies and gratifying their evil passions to the 
forgetfulness of God. I am Mardana, by profession 
a minstrel. I sing and proclaim God’s praises.’ 
Budhan Shah was pleased to receive such visitors, 
and passed some time in conversing with the Guru 
on religious subjects. He then told him that he 
might depart, as the tiger was returning home with 
the goats and might possibly alarm him. The Guru 
replied, that all noxious animals were in the Creator’s 
power, and he had no apprehension from them. 

The tiger with his charge returned in the evening, 
and, it is said, first bowed at Guru Nanak’s feet 
and then at his own master’s. Budhan Shah, 

* A revenue-free tenure. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 141 

observing the tiger’s first obeisance to Guru Nanak, 
concluded that he must be a man possessing super- 
natural power, and treated him accordingly. He 
consulted him as to how pride could be erased from 
the heart, and the senses become disgusted with 
pleasure. Guru Nanak replied, ‘When a man 
obtaineth fresh milk he will not taste sour milk. 
Without spiritual pleasure man resorteth to the 
gratification of his senses. When he forsaketh 
temporal pleasure he obtaineth divine pleasure. 
When all false pleasures are forsaken, the true 
pleasure is obtained ; and when permanent pleasure 
is obtained, transitory pleasures please no more. 
When man’s attention is fixed on God, there en- 
sueth a state of profound exaltation, man’s thoughts 
cease to wander, the senses stray not, and celestial 
light dawneth on the mind.’ 

Budhan Shah asked Guru Nanak how celestial light 
was manifested. The Guru explained the process 
to him, upon which he fell into a trance. When he 
arose from it, he milked his goats and laid a pail 
of milk before the Guru. The Guru drank half of 
it himself and returned the other half to Budhan 
Shah, telling him to keep it in memory of him. 
Budhan Shah pressed him to remain with him, 
otherwise how long was he to preserve the milk ? 
The Guru replied, ‘ Wait until my Sikh (Gurditta) 
cometh, thy life shall last till then. He will found 
a city and abide here.’ Saying this the Guru 
departed. 

Guru Nanak was ever present to Budhan Shah’s 
thoughts. He looked at the milk every morning 
and found it preserved its freshness. After some time 
he learned that Guru Nanak had forsaken his body. 
He then heard of the succession of the Gurus— 
Angad, Amar Das, Ram Das, Arjan, and Har Gobind 
—and seeing that the milk remained as before, would 
often say, ‘O Guru, send thy Sikh to drink the milk 
and fulfil thy promise.’ 

142 THE SHKH RELIGION 

Har Gobind privately narrated all the circum- 
stances to his eldest son Gurditta, and sent him to 
Budhan Shah, whose devotion he commended. 
Gurditta took his wife and son Dhirmal with him. 
Budhan Shah met him on the bank of the Satluj, 
and asked him who he was, whence he had come, 
and if he knew Guru Har Gobind. Gurditta replied, 
‘O priest, thou hast the milk that was entrusted 
to thee. Bring it to me. The Guru is my father, 
and hath sent me to taste it... Budhan Shah gave 
him the milk. He tasted it and, it is said, found 
it sweet as if it had been just set. Budhan Shah then 
addressed Gurditta, ‘ This hilly land is all thine; 
fulfil my desires, and abide with me.’ Gurditta 
then laid the foundation of the city of Kiratpur at 
the base of the mountain. It was named Kiratpur 
as God’s praises—Kirat—were ever to be sung there. 

At the suggestion of Bhai Bhana the Guru visited 
his own native village Wadali, about four miles 
from Amritsar on the road to Lahore. He there 
pointed out the house in which he had been born. 
Thence he proceeded to the well with six Persian 
wheels constructed by Guru Arjan. There a villager 
represented to him that a wild boar was devastating 
the country and killing even cultivators. A hunting 
party was organized, the forest was beaten, and the 
boar rushed forth. The Guru told Painda Khan to 
attack the animal. He rushed forward but failed to 
strike. The boar then charged, threw horse and rider, 
and exulted in his feat. Burrowing the ground with 
his shining tusks, the animal again advanced to attack 
Painda Khan as he lay helpless. The Guru at once 
went to Painda Khan’s assistance, and drawing his 
sword confronted the boar. The boar made a charge 
which the Guru avoided by leaping aside. Then 
raising his sword and exerting all his strength, he 
struck the brute with such force across the back, 
that he cut him in twain. 

After this the Guru returned to Amritsar. Next 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 143 

morning Bhai Bhana prayed the Guru to relate to 
him the history of Amritsar, and he graciously did 
so. On another occasion Bhai Bhana asked the 
Guru to show him the forest land which the Emperor 
Akbar had granted to Bibi Bhani and within which 
Bhai Budha had dwelt. The Guru taking Gur Das 
and Bhai Bhana with him pointed out the locality. 
There they found that a solid brick building had 
been erected on Bhai Budha’s seat. It is situated 
some five miles south of Amritsar near the Bari 
Doab canal. An annual fair is held there on the 
21st of the month of Assu. 

In the month of Bhadon, during the rainy season, 
the Guru at Bhai Bhana’s suggestion proceeded with 
his Sikhs to Tarn Taran. They all bathed there at 
the time when there was no moon visible. It was 
the anniversary, according to lunar reckoning, of the 
excavation of the tank by Guru Arjan. 

At the request of his Sikhs the Guru then pro- 
ceeded to Cholha to see the temple which had been 
erected to commemorate Guru Arjan’s visit. During 
their visit Bhai Gur Das at the Guru’s request 
related the history of Cholha. 

Having left Cholha the Guru and his Sikhs went 
to visit the ruins of Vindpur, a village in which Guru 
Nanak had been inhospitably received by his tribes- 
men. The Guru there related its history. 

The Guru and his party thence proceeded to the 
ruins of Khanpur which Guru Arjan had once 
visited. Bidhi Chand narrated its history to Bhai — 
Bhana. Thence they all proceeded to Goindwal. 
On their arrival there, they met Sundar Das, the 
great-grandson of Guru Amar Das and author of 
the ‘Sadd’. 

One morning after the Guru had performed his 
devotions he went to Gur Das, whose end was now 
approaching. Gur Das begged pardon for any sins he 
might have committed. He then warmly embraced 
the Guru and Sundar Das, Asa preparation for his 

144 THE SIKH RELIGION 

death he recited the Asa ki War and said, ‘ There 
is no time now for delay. As I am dying, repeat 
Wahguru! Wahguru! Erect no shrine for me, but 
throw my remains from the pyre into the Bias.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘I thank thee, Bhai Gur Das, for 
having assisted in laying out the road of the Sikh 
faith. Among the Gurus’ Sikhs thy name shall be 
immortal.’ Bhai Gur Das having heard this medi- 
tated on God, drew a sheet over himself, and closed 
his eyes in eternal sleep on Friday the fifth day of 
the light half of Bhadon, Sambat 1686 (A. D. 1629). 
After performing Gur Das’s last rites the Guru 
returned to Amritsar by way of Khadur. 

Bhai Bhana took leave of the Guru in Amritsar 
and returned to his village of Ramdas. Bibi Viro 
and her husband Sadhu also prepared for their 
departure. The Guru blessed her, and said that 
she should have five brave sons. She and _ her 
husband then proceeded to their residence in Malha. 

A married couple called Jalhan and Ramki of the 
village of Dobhirana, situated some ten miles from 
Amritsar, were anxious that the Guru should pay 
them a visit. He accordingly went shooting in their 
neighbourhood. Jalhan and his wife congratulated 
themselves on their good fortune that they should 
at last behold the Guru. He remained with them 
foranight. During his visit he revealed his hazard- 
ous position, “O saint Jalhan, why do the Moslems 
cause me such annoyance? They are pursuing me 
and will not desist. Wherever I go, they attack 
me.’ Jalhan replied, ‘O great king, thou canst 
work miracles. In my opinion thou art doing deeds 
to please thyself. What power have the wretched 
Turks to contend with thee ? Thou art merely per- 
forming human play, and not thy supernatural réle. 
Maya hath come to thee and thou attachest her to 
thy feet. They who long for her bear thee enmity, 
and are ready to die or be slain themselves in a 
contest with thee. If thou rid thyself of her, thou 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 145 

shalt have peace.’ The Guru replied, ‘Since Maya 
hath become attached to me, I cannot detach myself 
from her, for I must now alter the constitution of 
Sikhism and defend my followers with force of arms.’ 
Jalhan had no further advice to offer, but on the 
contrary was willing to receive it. The Guru ex- 
horted him to honestly perform his worldly affairs 
in the station in which God had placed him, and 
never to forget his devotions. 

Gurditta and his wife Natti continued to reside 
in Kiratpur. There was a son born to them on 
Sunday the thirteenth day of the light half of 
Magh, Sambat 1687 (A. D. 1630). Gurditta sent a 
messenger to inform the Guru and invite him to 
Kiratpur on the joyful occasion; but the Guru had 
more pressing matters to attend to at the time. He 
opened the Granth Sahib, gave Gurditta’s child the 
name of Har Rai, and returned a message to the 
effect that he would soon proceed to Kiratpur. 

After a few months the Guru received a letter 
from Sain Das inviting him to attend the Baisakhi 
fair at Daroli. The Guru reflected on his own 
position. “The Emperor beareth me malice in his 
heart. The honour of my temple shall be preserved 
if I go to Malwa and make its forest my fort. If 
the Emperor send an army thither to pursue me, it 
will die of thirst without my taking the trouble to 
destroy it.’ Thus reflecting, the Guru consulted his 
wife Damodari. She replied, ‘ My lord, I am a slave 
obedient to thy will. If thou depart, I will go with 
thee. If thou leave me behind, here will I remain.’ 
Before leaving Amritsar the Guru went to the temple 
and prayed to God to preserve him and ever grant 
him victory. The Sikhs inquired who would take care 
of the temple in their absence. The Guru replied, 
‘The Sikhs will take care of it. We shall not 
return again.’ He complained to the people of 
Amritsar that they would be likely to suffer greatly 
were he to remain with them. He would now re- 

SIKH. IV L 

146 THE SDK RELIGION 

move the theatre of war to the forest, but would 
ever abide with them in the spirit. 

To his father-in-law Hari Chand, who said that 
the city would be ruined in his absence, the Guru 
represented, ‘The city shall increase in population 
day by day. He who meditateth evil to it shall die 
in misery himself. Here at the Guru’s feet shall be 
the spring of happiness in both worlds ; here shall 
the feast of the Name be ever served to my followers ; 
and here shall my Sikhs be ever happy. The 
foundation of the city hath been firmly laid, and 
never shall give way.’ He then proceeded on his 
journey, taking with him a mounted army of one 
thousand brave and devoted men. A band with 
banners flying preceded the party, and then came 
the Granth Sahib borne on the heads of two carriers. 
Sikhs were employed to wave fans over the sacred 
volume to add to its dignity, and hinder any thought- 
less insect from alighting on it. 

The Guru on arriving at Daroli by way of Tarn 
Taran was received with great affection by Sain 
Das. The Guru said to him, ‘ The cable of thy love 
hath so bound me that I have no hope of ever 
escaping from it.’ Sain Das replied, ‘In all ages 
this hath been God’s way. His name is Bhagat 
Watsal—the saints are dear to Him—He knoweth 
the love of His slaves. Whether one be a pandit, 
a jogi, or a king one cannot please God without 
love. If aman have love, even though he be poor 
and ignorant, yet is he dear to the Lord.’ 

An event occurred at the time of the Guru’s 
first visit to Daroli, which must be here narrated. 
In the village of Wadaghar in the present district 
of Firozpur was a Sikh called Akal, a carpenter by 
trade. He had been converted to Sikhism by Guru 
Kam Das and used often to visit Guru Arjan and 
Guru Har Gobind. He had an accomplished 
daughter for whom he desired to procure a husband, 
He found a suitable match for her in the person of 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 147 

Sadhu, son of Sada, a resident of the village of 
Tuklani. Akal’s family priest had made all in- 
quiries and performed all the necessary ceremonies, 
but had failed to inquire if the intended bridegroom 
were a Sikh or not. The priest replied to Akal’s 
inquiries that the boy was a Hindu held in high 
honour by his brethren ; and he deemed that sufficient 
without further investigation. Akal was not satis- 
fied, but said that God would put everything right. 
He heard some time afterwards that the bride- 
groom’s parents were followers of Sakhi Sarwar,’ yet 
he accepted the alliance fearing that he could not 
find another mate so suitable for his daughter. 
At the same time he felt severe twinges of con- 
science on the subject. Accordingly, at the time of 
his daughter’s departure after the wedding he gave 
her this admonition—‘ My beloved daughter, in all 
worldly matters obey and wait upon thy mother- 
in-law and thy husband, but never bow thy head 
to any but the Guru.’ The girl herself was much 
distressed at having to marry a youth of another 
religion, but she was obliged to accept her position. 
The marriage procession started from Wadaghar . 
to Tuklani in the early morning. The intervening 
route not being safe, the procession passed by Daroli, 
where the bride heard the Sikhs singing sacred hymns. 
Being informed that the Guru was encamped in the 
village, and fearing that she might not again have 
an opportunity of seeing him, she ordered her 
bearers to let her alight and go to do him homage. 
The Guru on seeing her asked who she was. A Sikh 
who knew her whole history answered for her. The 
girl then addressed the Guru, ‘ Thou art a searcher 
of hearts, and knowest that I am a daughter of 
a Sikh, while my parents-in-law are followers of 
Sakhi- Sarwar. [Evil is my fate that I am in the 
power of others. If thou convert my husband to 
1 A famous Baloch pir, whose shrine, not far from the Sulaiman 

Mountains, is yearly visited by pilgrims of various Indian religions. 
L2 

148 THE SLAM RELIGION 

the Sikh religion, I shall be perfectly happy.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘My daughter, have no anxiety, God 
will act for the best, As thy father and mother 
were Sikhs, so shall thy husband and children also 
be Sikhs, and thy wishes be fulfilled.” On hearing 
this the girl was consoled and felt satisfied that her 
evil destiny was now altered. 

Meantime Sada missed his daughter-in-law. On 
discovering that she had gone to visit the Guru, he 
became very angry and sent the bridegroom for her, 
saying, ‘ What have we to do with the Guru? We 
are worshippers of Sakhi Sarwar. If we bow to the 
Guru, our priest will be very angry with us. Go 
quickly and bring back thy wife.’ Sadhu thus 
found his way to the Guru’s presence. The Guru 
was then holding court, and hymns were being 
sung. He shone among his Sikhs like the moon 
among the stars. Sadhu became at once filled with 
devotion and said, ‘Alas! we have wasted our lives 
in vain. Being of the Hindu faith we reverence and 
worship a Muhammadan. We make an offering of 
a cake to Sakhi Sarwar and then eat his leavings.’ 
Upon this the Guru said, ‘ Bhai Sadhu, repeat the 
Name and amend thy life. Cease to worship Sakhi 
Sarwar. Sadhu, after some further parley, begged 
the Guru to make him a Sikh, and pardon his past 
sins. The Guru, seeing him fit for the favour, 
initiated him with the usual ceremonies, and said 
that he should have a son who also would be true 
to the Sikh faith. 

When the marriage procession reached home, the 
bridegroom’s relations took him to the family shrine 
of Sakhi Sarwar and asked him to worship. He at 
once remembered the words of Guru Nanak :— 

I will not fall into idolatry ; I will worship none but 
God ; I will not go to graves or places of cremation, * 

Saying this he kicked down the miniature likeness 
1 Sorath, Ashtapadi. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 149 

of a grave which had been erected for Sakhi Sarwar’s 
worship, and said, ‘I will repeat the true Name of 
Wahguru and amend my life.’ Sada thought his 
son had lost his reason, and began to remonstrate 
with him, ‘ My son, it is through Sakhi Sarwar’s 
favour we have obtained wealth and thou hast found 
a bride, and yet thou spurnest his household shrine.’ 
Sadhu far from being satisfied with what he had 
done continued his work of destruction. He seized 
a mattock and removed the last vestige of Sakhi 
Sarwar’s worship. The father renewed the masonry 
work but, as fast as he did so, the son demolished 
it. Faith in Sakhi Sarwar began to be shaken. 
People said that he had become powerless to defend 
himself, much less to defend others. By the Guru’s 
favour Sadhu’s wealth and happiness continued to 
increase. A child, a treasury of beauty, was born 
to him in Sambat 1672, and his devotion acquired 
new fervour. The Guru named the child Rup Chand 
on account of his beauty, and said he should become 
a great saint. 

When the boy had attained the age of fifteen years, 
he and his father Sadhu went one day during the 
hot weather to the forest to cut wood. They took 
with them a leather bottle filled with water to quench 
their thirst. They hung the bottle on a tree, and 
afterwards, on going to drink from it, found the 
water had become cool. They remembered the Guru 
and thought to themselves that this would be 
pleasant water for him to drink. Although the 
heat was terrific, as if it rained sparks of fire, they 
refrained from drinking and began to meditate on 
the Guru, ‘O true Guru, first drink this pure cool 
water, and then we will satisfy our thirst. Thou 
fulfillest the desires of thy servants. Iver present 
thou hearest their supplications. Drink this water. 
We may die, but we will never drink till thou hast 
tasted it.’ 

The village at Tuklani, where Sadhu and Rup 

150 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Chand lived, was some thirty miles distant, yet, it 1s 
said, the Guru heard their prayer as he lay in an 
apartment perfumed with sandal and fragrant grass 
and cooled by water sprinkled over a sandy floor. 
The Guru at once stood up and, leaving all his 
comforts, prepared to start in the appalling heat 
for Tuklani to see his Sikhs Sadhu and Rup Chand. 
He found them fainting from the heat, and called 
on them to arise. They arose as happy as the 
chatrik when he hears thunder presaging rain, or 
as the lotus when it beholds the sun. The Guru 
told them that he was thirsty and asked for cold 
water. On drinking from the leather bottle he 
said it was excellent, like nectar, and that he had 
never before drunk such delicious beverage. 

The Guru told them that the Sikh religion should 
ever remain in their family, but, as the people of 
Tuklani were annoyed at their having embraced it, 
and as the village would be destroyed on account of 
the several enormities of its inhabitants, Sadhu and 
Rup Chand ought to leave the place and found 
a village for themselves. The Guru was particularly 
pleased to see Rup Chand, and made him a present 
of clothes and arms. Rup Chand placed them 
reverently on his head, and said he would honour 
them. Through respect he refused to wear the 
sword which had ‘been worn by the Guru. Upon 
this the Guru seated him on the couch, and said he 
should have a congregation of his own, in which he 
should use his tongue instead of a sword, spread Guru 
Nanak’s doctrines, and make the Sikhs firm in their 
faith. “Keep thy kitchen’, said “he Guru, “ever 
open for the traveller and the stranger. What thou 
sayest shall be fulfilled, wealth and preternatural 
power shall hang upon thy tongue People will 
reverence thee, and great shall be thy glory.’ 

1 The lord of Bagrian in the Ludhiana district is a lineal de- 

scendant of Bhai Rtip Chand. He maintains a public kitchen up to 
the present time, as ordered by the Guru. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND | 1s1 

The Guru on the thirteenth day of the light half of 
the month of Baisakh, Sambat 1688, laid the founda- 
tion of a village on an open plain six miles distant 
from Tuklani and called it Bhai Rupa in honour of 
his Sikh protégé. Bhat Rupa is now a considerable 
town in the Nabha State. The Guru also ordered 
a house to be constructed for himself and promised 
on its completion to reside in it for some time. The 
Guru after a very brief visit to Bhai Rup Chand and 
his father, returned to Daroli, where he was joined 
by Gurditta and his wife and sons, Dhirmal and 
Har Rai. 

Damodari’s last hour had now arrived. She asked 
the Guru’s pardon for her sins or for any idle words 
she might have spoken during her married life. She 
said she had no fear of death and only felt one sorrow, 
that of leaving her husband. The Guru replied, 
‘Have no anxiety. Bodies meet subject to destiny, 
but it is the meeting of souls that is important.’ He 
further consoled her, gave her parting spiritual 
instruction, and said her salvation was assured. She 
then sent for all the members of her family, and took 
leave of each in turn. She departed this life on 
Wednesday, the twelfth day of the light half of Sawan, 
Sambat 1688 (A.D. 1631). The Guru ordered that 
instead of mourning for her death his Sikhs should 
read the Japji and Sohila for her eternal repose. 

Ramo was so sad at the loss of her sister, that she 
too pined away and died. Her husband, Sain Das, 
perished from the shock of his wife’s untimely death. 
Damodari’s parents, that is the Guru's parents-in-law, 
did not long survive Sain Das and Ramo. 

When the funeral ceremonies of his relations 
were completed, the Guru again began to consider 
his position. He trusted that Wazir Khan would 
prevent the dispatch of too powerful an army against 
him. He therefore decided on sending all his family 
and the Granth Sahib to Kartarpur, while he himself 
remained in Daroli. On seeing Sain Das’s un- 

152 THE SIKH RELIGION 

tenanted and desolate mansion, once the abode of - 
life and joy, the Guru repeated the following hymn 
of Guru Arjan :— 

Accursed the love of mother and father; accursed the 
love of brothers and relations ! 

Accursed the love of wife and the pleasure of sons ; accursed 
the love of home ! 

The love of the guild of saints is true; Nanak, happiness 
abideth with them. 

Perishable is the body, its strength faileth ; 

In old age the love of wealth increaseth. 

Though only a pilgrim in the world, man indulgeth in 
endless hopes 

While terrible Dharmraj counteth his breathings. 

Man falleth into the pit of mammon; God’s mercy is the 
real support of his body obtained with so much difficulty. 

They whose desires are evil, attach themselves to a mirage, 
an enchanted city, or the shadow of a tree. 

Thus perishable is the love of family: Nanak, remember 
God’s name.! 

One day the Guru addressed his Sikhs: ‘ Brethren 
dearer to me than life, you are one thousand brave 
men. Shall we remain here or proceed to spread our 
religion ?’ A Sikh replied, “O my lord, show thyself 
where the devout and grateful think of thee and 
await thee.’ The Guru beat the drum of departure, 
whereat the people of Daroli were very much grieved, 
and feared that they should have no one to protect 
them in his absence. The Guru recommended them 
to occupy their time in remembering God, in showing 
hospitality to travellers and visitors, and in repeating 
the true Name. Thus should all their desires be ful- 
filled, and their troubles and sorrows depart. Saying 
this the Guru and his party proceeded to his friends 
Sadhu and Rup Chand’s village. They had con- 
structed a splendid house for his reception. The 
Guru blessed them and exhorted them, as earnest 

1 Sahaskriti sloks. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 153 

and devout exponents of his religion, to practise 
charity and humility, in which case their homes 
should last for ever, and they should be reverenced 
asholy men. The Guru abode with them during the 
months of Bhadon and Assu. 

Near Bhai Rupa was a village called Kangar in 
the present state of Nabha, owned by Rai Jodh. He 
was third in descent from Mahar Mitha, who had 
been a contemporary of the Emperor Akbar. Mahar 
Mitha had a young daughter sixteen years of age, 
whose beauty attracted the Emperor’s notice. He 
vowed that if he did not obtain her with her parents’ 
consent, he would take her by force. Mahar Mitha, 
finding himself powerless to oppose a powerful 
monarch, sent him a message, that if he came veiled 
as an ordinary bridegroom, he might return with the 
coveted bride. Akbar consented, went to Mahar 
Mitha, and duly married his daughter. Mahar 
Mitha had a son called Chain Beg, who begot Amar 
Shah, who begot Rai Jodh. He had for a wife a 
sikh lady. At her request he went with very costly 
presents and a retinue of five hundred men to pay 
his respects to the Guru. His wife subsequently 
visited the Guru alone, and prayed him to make her 
husband a Sikh. The Guru replied, ‘ Thy progeny 
shall increase and all become Sikhs. Thy great- 
grandson shall receive and serve the tenth Guru 
who will grant him salvation.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

Tots trepi Tovs Oyous eg TrovOak ooLy nyovpat TpornKeLy pera 
THY TOAHY TOV omovdaoré pov avayveocty dvievat TE THY 
Otdvotav Kai mpos Tov émeiTa Kdpatov akpaorépay mapa- 
oKevd cel.’ 

It 1s said that Bidhi Chand, before he entered the 
service of the fifth Guru, had been a famous highway- 
1 Methinks it befits persons of literary pursuits to relax their minds 

after protracted serious reading, and thus render them fresher for 
subsequent application.—Luctan’s Veractous History. 

154 THE SIKH. RELIGION 

man and robber, and several of his exploits in that 
capacity are recorded. Once he stole some very valu- 
able buffaloes from Sultanpur. The owners awoke and 
hotly pursued him as far as the village of Cholha, where 
he was received by a man called Adali. Adali put 
the stolen buffaloes into a slimy pool so that when 
they emerged from it they were not recognized by 
the owners. Bidhi Chand, glad of his escape, begged 
Adali to make him a disciple. Adali said he had no 
spiritual power himself, and recommended him to 
go to Guru Arjan, who would grant him peace of 
mind. He also advised him to restore the stolen 
buffaloes to their owners and implore God’s pardon. 
Accordingly Adali took Bidhi Chand to the Guru 
and informed him that he desired to become a 
Sikh. Guru Arjan made him a Sikh and instructed 
him to renounce thieving, serve the saints, and medi- 
tate on God. Bidhi Chand represented, “ I have con- 
tracted this habit of thieving. The world is in the 
power of habit, which it is difficult to overcome.’ 
Guru Arjan replied, ‘Do good to others, forswear 
falsehood, read and ponder on the Gurus’ hymns and 
associate with saints, so shall all thy evil inclinations 
depart. Upon this Bidhi Chand abandoned his 
village and attached himself to Guru Arjan. Adali his 
guide and friend then went home, pleased at having 
placed Bidhi Chand in the way of redemption. 

One day Bidhi Chand said to Guru Arjan, ‘ I began 
from my childhood to commit theft. How shall I 
be saved hereafter ?’ Guru Arjan told him to repeat 
the following hymn :— 

The formless One, the Destroyer of sorrow, bringeth back 
what hath gone and freeth the captive. 

I know not good works, I know not cee I am greedy 
and avaricious. 

I am called a worshipper of God; preserve Thine own 
honour, 

O God; Thou art the honour of the unhonoured. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 155 

Thou makest something out of those who are nothing ; 
I am a sacrifice unto Thy power. 

As when a boy following his natural inclinations com- 
mitteth hundreds of thousands of faults, 

His father adviseth him, chideth him in several ways, 
but at last embraceth him ; 

So pardon my past offences, O God, and put me in Thy 
way for the future. 

God the Searcher of hearts knoweth everything; then to 
whom shall man go to redress grievances ? 

God is not pleased with the utterance of words; if it 
please Him, He preserveth our honour. 

Other shelters all have I tried: Thy shelter alone re- 
maineth me. 

Be merciful and compassionate, my Lord God, and _ hear 
Thou my supplication. 

Cause me to meet the perfect true Guru and put an end 
to my mental anxieties. 

God hath put His name as medicine into my mouth, and 
the slave Nanak abideth in happiness. 

Guru Arjan continued—‘ Thy past sins shall be 
pardoned if thou seek God’s protection, and cease 
to commit sin for the future. Serve saints and 
worshippers who repeat the Name, sweep their floors, 
draw them water, scrub their vessels, fan them, and 
shampoo them, and thou shalt gain all possible ad- 
vantages. Theft is a baneful habit. It 1s the cause 
of entanglements in this world. Thy service to the 
saints will only be profitable if thou renounce all 
desire to appropriate others’ property.’ 

Two masands, Bakht Mal and Tara Chand, had 
been deputed to Kabul to collect funds for the Guru. 
They returned with a company of Sikhs who also 
brought offerings for their spiritual master. They 
were besides bringing two horses of surpassing beauty 
and fleetness for the Guru, but the animals were 
forcibly seized by the Emperor’s officials and duly 

1 Sorath. 

156 THE SIKH RELIGION 

presented to him. Guru Har Gobind, who was then 
in Bhai Rupa, received the Sikhs with great ceremony. 
Having laid their offerings before him they proceeded 
to inform him of the seizure of the excellent steeds 
they had intended for him. He bade them be of 
good cheer and not take the matter too much to heart. 

Some of the Sikhs invited the masands to give an 
account of their travels, what countries they had 
traversed, whether they saw Amritsar on the way, and 
by what route they had returned? Theyreplied that 
in their anxiety to see the Guru they had first gone 
to Lahore where they thought he was, and had re- 
mained there some days to see the Muhammadan 
festival of the Baqar Id, during which an ox ts slain 
in commemoration of the intended sacrifice of Ismail’ 
by Abraham. They intended on their return journey 
to visit Amritsar and bathe in its sacred tank. The 
Sikhs hearing them mention Lahore asked them 
to give their impressions of it, and tell about the 
Emperor Shah Jahan, who was there at the time. They 
said that Shah Jahan publicly attended the mosque 
on the occasion, and the people of many villages came 
and assisted in the service. The Emperor appeared 
in great state on a beautiful tall elephant adorned 
with gold and silver trappings and bearing a glittering 
canopied hauda, whose ball-fringewas set with precious 
stones. The masands said that they could not count 
the imperial army, which on that occasion descended 
on the parade ground like clouds. 

‘Then came, led with embroidered silken ropes, the 
horses taken forcibly from us. Their bearing-reins 
were fastened to saddles studded with gems, which 
glittered in a manner to captivate the beholder. The 
horses were in superb condition and pranced as they 
were led along. The Emperor loved them so much 
that he would not allow them to go out of his sight. 
They appeared beautiful, as if made by Cupid’s own 
hands. If the god of the firmament saw them, even 

1 The Muhammadans have substituted Ismail for Isaac. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 157 

he would be enamoured of their beauty. We heard 
people say that the horses would cross a river with- 
out wetting their riders. One of them was called 
Dil Bagh and the other Gul Bagh. They were so 
swift that it was difficult to tell whether they put 
their legs on the ground or flew in the air. During 
our whole lives we have never seen such horses ; and, 
as they had been brought for the Guru, he ought 
certainly to possess them, so that he might in case 
of necessity have excellent chargers to bear him in 
a conflict with the enemy. What doth the Emperor 
want such horses for ? He cannot ride or fight like 
the Guru. The Guru is a man of great stature, 
and when mounted on such horses would appear 
doubly beautiful as he presented himself to his 
Sikhs, and would gladden their hearts as they beheld 
him.’ 

The party from Kabul returned home, except 
Bakht Mal and Tara Chand, who remained with the 
Guru at Bhai Rupa. Their conversation was ever of 
Dil Bagh and Gul Bagh. Bidhi Chand, notwith- 
standing his resolutions of amendment, began to 
consider how he could restore the belauded steeds. 
A horse destined for the Guru had once been taken 
away by the Emperor’s father and was duly re- 
covered. This afforded Bidhi Chand what he 
deemed a suitable pretext for his intended action. 
The Emperor was now at war with the Guru, had 
inflicted great losses on the Sikhs, and caused the 
death of many of his bravest warriors, and it would 
be a disgrace to allow him to retain possession of 
the horses brought all the way from Kabul for the 
Guru. It was impossible to secure them by purchase, 
and being very dear to the Emperor they were well 
guarded. Even were war to be declared against 
him, possession of the horses could not be obtained, 
as they were kept in an impregnable fortress. 

Some of the soldiers lately enlisted by the Guru 
said, ‘ We find on full consideration that no one 

158 THE SIKH RELIGION 

but Bidhi Chand can accomplish the enterprise of 
recovering the horses. He is so clever that he can 
do what all the world thinketh impossible. As there 
are no horses hke Dil Bagh and Gul Bagh, so there 
is no one like Bidhi Chand to secure possession of 
them. If Bidhi Chand by his great cleverness suc- 
ceed in bringing the horses, it will be a miracle 
famous throughout the world. Ram Chandar, on 
losing his queen Sita, selected the very wise and 
clever Hanuman, and dispatched him to Ceylon in 
search of his queen. Hanuman examined the whole 
island, discovered Sita, killed the great demons of 
Rawan’s army, set fire to his city, and crossed the 
ocean on his victorious homeward march. There is 
now a similar exploit to be performed. Hanuman’s 
fame still liveth in the world. Bidhi Chand will 
accomplish it, and his fame shall be resplendent.’ 
Bidhi Chand on hearing himself thus praised and 
encouraged said, ‘ What are Gul Bagh and Dil Bagh ? 
I would even bring the Guru the horses of the sun’s 
chariot.’ 

Bidhi Chand then with clasped hands uttered a 
prayer. ‘O Guru Arjan, Iam now bent on acting in 
opposition to thine injunctions; pardon me for ven- 
turing to restore to thy Sikhs horses wantonly taken 
from them by unrighteous Moslems. Assist me 
in the perilous path I am about to tread.’ He re- 
ceived the congratulations of his companions, and 
as soon as preparations for his journey were com- 
pleted departed for Lahore. On reaching the city 
gate he again considered how he was to perform the 
task. ‘I cannot break the fort wall which is very 
strong. The horses are well guarded and no stranger 
may approach them. There are several sentries at 
the gates. If I can only enter the stable-keeper’s 
service, then I may have access to the horses ; but he 
will not take me without an introduction ; wherefore 
I must try some means of obtaining access to him in 
some other way, so that I may succeed in my object.’ 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 159 

The manner in which, without the Guru’s knowledge, 
Bidhi Chand recovered the horses brought for him 
from Kabul, cannot afford edification to the strictly 
pious. We here, however, give a narrative current 
among the Sikhs partly to relieve the strain on the 
reader who has so far followed this serious narrative, 
and partly to show with what ingenuity, address, 
and daring Indians of former ages could succeed in 
transferring property. 

Bidhi Chand went to the house of a carpenter 
named Jiwan who had previously known him. Jiwan 
welcomed him as bringing a blessing on his house. 
Bidhi Chand in reply to Jiwan’s inquiries frankly told 
him the nature of his errand, and asked his advice, 
and all information regarding the Emperor, his horses, 
and their keepers. Jiwan was astonished and said, 
‘ Thou hast come on a difficult errand. The Emperor 
resideth in the Saman Burj—octagonal tower—and 
the horses are kept near him. They are guarded by 
hundreds of men who serve their master with great 
fidelity. There are many sentries ever under arms at 
the gates. The Darogha or stable-keeper’s name is 
Sondha Khan. He hath many subordinates. To 
say nothing of taking away the horses, the stable is 
inaccessible. How canst thou ever reach it? But 
if fortune favour thee, thou shalt accomplish a feat 
which is otherwise impossible. God can render what 
is difficult easy, can make the weak strong and the 
strong weak. Who but thee can reach the stables 
and obtain possession of the horses ?’ 

Bidhi Chand requested his host to make him a 
khurpa, or iron instrument for grubbing up grass, 
and pray that success might attend his efforts. Bidhi 
Chand then went to rest and slept soundly, while his 
friend Jiwan sat up all night making the khurpa. 
Next morning Bidhi Chand took it with a net to 
hold grass, and proceeded to the bank of the river 
Ravi. There he began to cut beautiful soft grass to 
take to the coveted horses. He already deemed 

160 THE SIKH RELIGION 

them the Guru’s, so he laboured with a will. He 
collected the grass with great care and put it in his 
net. He then took it to the market-place. Horse 
owners on seeing its emerald brightness hastened to 
negotiate for it. Bidhi Chand said that he would 
not sell it for less than a rupee, but no one would 
give him so much for a bundle of grass. He then 
moved on till he arrived opposite the gate of the 
fort. It was in the evening, and the time for the 
stable-keeper to go forth and breathe the fresh air 
on the margin of the Ravi. 

Bidhi Chand, on learning that Sondha Khan, the 
well-dressed man he saw before him, was the stable- 
keeper, congratulated himself for having been so 
fortunate as to meet on the very day after his arrival 
the man whose acquaintance he had so desired to 
make. When the grass was brought to the stable- 
keeper’s notice, he said that he had never seen such 
grass in all his life. It was fit for Dil Bagh and Gul 
Bagh, and he ordered his men to adjust the price 
and buy it for the horses. On observing Bidhi 
Chand he said that he appeared to be an honest man. 
Bidhi was ready with his reply, ‘ Thou art an appre- 
ciator of merit. Thou art very wise, and art there- 
fore employed in the Emperor’s service. I greatly 
desire that Dil Bagh and Gul Bagh should thrive, and 
to this end I have made great efforts. Now that 
this beautiful grass hath reached its proper place 
my wishes are fulfilled. As long as the horses of the 
true King ’—a title of the Guru not understood by 
the stable-keeper—‘ eat my grass, I will gladly sell 
it for whatever thou art pleased to give.’ 

His sweet words and civility induced Sondha Khan 
to take him with the grass on his head to where the 
horses were tethered with silken ropes. When Bidhi 
Chand laid down his bundle in front of them, they 
ate ravenously as if they had been fasting for a whole 
day. Before leaving the court he carefully surveyed 
the premises, and came to the conclusion that it 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 161 

would be very difficult to remove the horses. He 
went into the market-place, and changing the rupee 
he had received, distributed the money as alms, say- 
ing that he would never eat anything purchased 
with Muhammadans’ money, lest after taking away 
the prize he should be deemed ungrateful. 

After thus feeding the horses for six or seven days, 
they used to neigh welcome to him whenever he 
approached. He would then pat them on their backs 
to make them pleased with him. The stable-keeper 
one day inquired his name and whether he would 
consent to be a permanent servant. Bidhi Chand 
replied, ‘The wise call me Kasera.' I bring thee 
grass daily ; wherefore make me thy servant and 
thou shalt see me serve thee daily more and more, 
but I will not work for hire. As these are the true 
King’s horses, I will serve them for love. If ever I 
obtain my wishes, my service to the horses shall 
not go unrewarded.’ Bidhi Chand was accordingly 
appointed grass-cutter to the Emperor’s favourite 
steeds at a wage of one rupee per day. The stable- 
keeper on appointing him warned him to do good 
work and nothing should be deducted from his 
stipulated pay, a practice so usual in former times. 
Bidhi Chand replied, ‘What shall I say? Thou 
shalt see the service I will perform. Good men say 
little, and what they do say they fulfil in the end.’ 
When Bidhi Chand was not cutting or fetching grass, 
he was always occupied in washing and brushing the 
horses and attending to their comfort. 

Bidhi Chand requested the stable-keeper to give 
orders to the porters at all the fort gates to allow him 
free ingress and egress at all times. The stable- 
keeper took him round and gave all the necessary 
orders. Bidhi Chand continued his incessant labour 
and even did the work of the permanent stable-ser- 
vants, whereat they were much pleased. After some 
days Sondha Khan ordered that the bridling and the 

1 Bidhi Chand meant a ghasiydra or grass-cutter. 

SIKH. IV M 

162 THE SIKH RELIGION 

unbridling of the horses should be entrusted to Kasera. 
They had become attached to him on account of his 
great attention to them day and night. Sondha Khan 
then told Bidhi Chand his principal duty would be 
to groom the horses. He needed only go occasionally 
for grass. Bidhi Chand replied that he was not above 
any service whether it were to go for grass or remain 
and groom the horses. He spoke civilly to every one 
and won all hearts without paying any money. 

Whenever for the future Bidhi Chand went for 
grass he brought a large stone concealed in it. At 
midnight he used to fling the stone into the river 
which then flowed under the fort. When the stone 
fell into the water it made a great noise, and awakened 
everybody in the neighbourhood. Bidhi Chand’s 
object was, that people might suppose it was a fish 
or the falling of a wall or of a stone off the parapet ; 
and that the occupants of the fort would gradually 
become habituated to the noise, and take no notice 
of it when he leaped one of the horses over the battle- 
ment into the river. If he once succeeded in getting 
the horse outside the fort walls, he knew he should 
succeed in taking him to Bhai Rupa, the Guru’s resi- 
dence at the time. 

The Emperor once went to see the horses and was 
very pleased to observe their excellent condition. He 
admired Bidhi Chand, said he appeared a smart ser- 
vant, and ordered the stable-keeper to treat him well, 
that he might remain in his service. He then made 
him a suitable money present. Bidhi Chand, who 
lived on Jiwan’s earnings, entrusted the money to 
the stable-keeper, told him to retain it, and also his 
monthly salary until such time as he required funds 
for his expenses. The stable-keeper was deceived by 
this apparent generosity. He thought that Bidhi 
Chand, who was really greedy to obtain the horses, 
had no greed in his heart, and he continued to repose 
the utmost confidence in him. He deemed him the 
best of all his servants and made the others sub- 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 163 

ordinate to him. Though Bidhi Chand thus became 
their superior officer, he used to treat them affec- 
tionately, so that they might be on his side in the 
hour of need. 

Bidhi Chand congratulated himself on his progress 
thus far. The next object of his ambition was to 
obtain a saddle for one of the horses to assist him in 
his escape. He accordingly set to work to secure the 
friendship of the man who kept the keys of the 
Emperor's storehouse where his costly saddles were 
kept. In this also he succeeded by flattering and 
soft speeches. All the time he managed to conceal 
his extraordinary cleverness, and to pass for an igno- 
rant villager of mean understanding. As his fellow- 
servants listened to his simple talk, they began to 
love him and he gratified them in every way in his 
power. One day he said in their presence, ‘ These 
are very fine horses. Does his Majesty keep them 
to look at, so that his heart may rejoice ; or do they 
always remain standing like this in the stable? Have 
they any saddles, and if so what are their saddles 
like ? Will you show them to me ?’ Somebody said 
to him in reply, ‘Thou simpleton, their saddles are 
very costly, set with pearls and well-cut diamonds, 
and inlaid with glittering gems which shine like the 
stars in heaven. The saddles are each worth a 
lakh and a quarter of rupees. The like of thee can 
never have seen such saddles. Who would show them 
to ignorant villagers ? And who could possess them 
but emperors with unbounded wealth ?’ 

Bidhi Chand humbly represented, ‘ Pray consider 
me as one of yourselves. I am a servant of the 
horses of the true King. I live among you day and 
night. If my desire to see the saddles be not 
gratified, then everything I do is in vain. I have 
never seen a saddle of such value. Where did you 
have saddles made worth a lakh and a quarter of 
rupees each ? I am astonished at hearing such a 
thing. I have therefore a great desire to see them, 

M 2 

164 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and I beg you to gratify me. Another servant 
replied, ‘ The saddles are kept under lock and key 
and continually guarded. He in whose custody the 
keys are will show them to thee. Speak to him, he 
is here now.’ The custodian of the keys said he 
would be very pleased to show the saddles, if he 
received the stable-keeper’s permission, but other- 
wise he would be afraid to do so. The stable-keeper 
happened to arrive at the time, and asked the ser- 
vants what plot they were concocting. They replied, 
‘Thou hast employed Kasera, a very simple-minded 
fellow, who says things to set us all a-laughing. He 
desireth to know how a lakh and a quarter of rupees 
could be spent on a saddle.’ Bidhi Chand himself 
then told the darogha he could not rest until he had 
seen saddles of such astonishing value. 

The darogha told him that on the great Id festival 
both horses would be saddled and led out, and then 
he would see such a sight as he had never seen 
before. Bidhi Chand, to whom time was valuable 
and delay a thing to be avoided, then philosophically 
addressed the darogha, ‘ What dependence is there 
on life ? It may cease within an hour. Who knoweth 
whether even the breath we now expire shall return 
again ? The moment I heard every one praise the 
saddles I conceived a desire to behold their wonderful 
workmanship. A thing worth a lakh and a quarter 
of rupees is a wonder to me, and I shall not be happy 
till I see it. I am always with thee here, and am I 
not to have my natural desires gratified in such 
a matter? Wherefore, my master, I pray thee 
grant an order that their custodian show me the 
saddles.’ The darogha, overcome by these entreaties, 
ordered that Bidhi Chand should see the saddles. 
Bidhi Chand on seeing them pretended that he 
thought the diamonds were white stones, and the 
pearls grains of millet such as he had often chewed 
in his native village, and asked where the precious 
stones were of which he had heard so much. What 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 165 

he saw appeared to him of no value. At this every 
one laughed, and asked what he could know about 
precious stones. He had never heard of such things, 
and had never seen them before. Bidhi Chand, 
putting his hand on the diamonds, remarked that 
they were very hard, and would prick the Emperor’s 
body when he touched them. They could not 
possibly be comfortable things to sit on. The 
darogha explained to him, that what he saw were not 
things one could take into his hand and eat. They 
were for display on great occasions, and only found 
in the possession of emperors and great monarchs. 
Bidhi Chand replied, ‘ If a man like me got a thousand 
rupees it would last him for life. He could get a 
wife for himself and another for his son, when he had 
one, out of the money. It 1s only kings who squander 
money in vain.’ 

This conversation at an end, the darogha ordered 
Bidhi Chand to lift up the saddles and take them 
back into the store-room. Bidhi Chand kept his eyes 
well open, and took note of its interior. He also 
observed where the custodian laid the key after 
locking the door. Next day the darogha seeing him 
most attentive to the horses, ordered that he alone 
was to give them mashes and other food, and take 
care of them day and night. Meanwhile, Bidhi 
Chand carefully studied how he could take one or 
both away. He was ever searching for a low and 
suitable part of the fort’s ramparts over which he 
might leap them into the river. He said to himself, 
‘I must hit on some plan by which the servants may 
go to sleep and not hear or see me saddling the horses. 
If the grooms remain awake, they will most probably 
catch me in the act.’ 

All the grooms employed on the horses were fond 
of music and dancing women. One day, as they 
were all laughing and talking together, one of them 
turned to Bidhi Chand and said, ‘ Look here, brother 
Kasera, thou art a new servant and receivest the 

166 THE SIH RELIGION 

highest pay of us all. Thou hast also got a large 
present from the Emperor, and not yet given thy 
fellow-servants a dinner. This is not well of thee.’ 
This proposal was the very thing that Bidhi Chand 
had desired. He replied, ‘I am at the service of 
you all. Why should I not please you? I did not 
think of it ; you have reminded me. You have said 
well, and I have grasped your meaning. I am 
thinking, however, that it would not be proper for you 
who are of a different religion to receive food from 
my hands. I will do another thing as you ask me. 
You know well that Iam no miser. I will spend all 
I have on you. I will tell you what I wish to do 
myself. I will give you wine—a hogshead among 
you—and you may enjoy yourselves and get drunk 
to your hearts’ content. With my own hands I 
will fill your cups, and you shall be delighted when 
I have satisfied you. Be happy in the enjoyment of 
God’s gifts. There is no reliance on hfe. The 
pleasure of the day is the only gain.’ 

The grooms on hearing this were all delighted and 
shouted ‘ Bravo! Bravo Kasera!’ The prospect of 
getting drunk filled them with visions of bliss. They 
vowed that they would take no dinner that day, 
that they might the more eagerly partake of Bidhi 
Chand’s hospitality. They had dinner every day at 
home, but they had never yet joined in such a sym- 
posium as Kasera had proposed. Bidhi Chand 
at once saw his opportunity, and thus communed 
with himself, ‘ This is the eighth day of the dark half 
of the month, a convenient time for my purpose. It 
will be very dark in the beginning of the night. 
I will then jump one of the horses over the rampart, 
and after that when it is light make my way to Bhai 
Rupa. I will now so entertain my friends that they 
will curse me in the morning.’ 

Bidhi Chand then addressed his brother grooms— 
‘Let no one take dinner to-day. I adjure all of you 
to assemble here this evening. I will go and fetch 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 167 

the wine. When you have drunk it, you may eat as 
much as you please. After that you may go home 
to your wives. If you do not wish to go home, then 
remain here. Have no anxiety whatever to-day. 
Enjoy for the moment the pleasures of love and wine. 
I will arrange everything for you.’ 

Bidhi Chand went to his friend Jiwan, took twenty 
rupees from him to buy strong wine,’ and going 
to a publican asked for his most potent liquor. 
The publican told him he would charge him fifty 
per cent. above ordinary market price for a special 
distillation which he kept in his private house, 
and which he would not sell to ordinary customers. 
The publican described its virtues, ‘If a man drink 
even a little of it, he will so lose his senses that he 
cannot find even his own door. What higher praise 
can I bestow on it?’ Bidhi Chand told him that 
he would give him not fifty but one hundred per cent. 
above market price, if he supplied him with wine 
possessing four times the ordinary strength. 

When Bidhi Chand met his guests he told them all 
the trouble he had taken to procure them excellent 
wine, again pressed them to enjoy themselves, and 
assured them, with a covert meaning, that whenever 
he left them they should all remember him. Having 
addressed them loving words of that description he 
handed round the wine, but at first in small quan- 
tities. He then engaged them in pleasant conversa- 
tion, and they were delighted when he agreed with 
everything they said. As intoxication gradually 
came on, some were laughing and others thought 
they were in the seventh heaven. Hitherto he had 
taken care not to give them too much lest they should 
suspect his designs; but, when a watch of night 
had elapsed, he began to give them wine without 
measure, and they drank with open mouths. The 
sentries also joined in the carousals and said while 
Bidhi Chand was filling their cups, ‘ Listen, brother 

1 Spirits were then much cheaper in India than they are now. 

168 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Kasera, the sentry duty is thine to-night. Thou hast 
been so liberal of thy wine, that we cannot possibly 
remain awake, so keep guard thyself.’ Bidhi Chand 
replied, ‘Have no fear; I shall remain awake the 
whole night. Such is the dread of the Emperor 
that no one may approach. The whole country is 
under one powerful monarch. Who can come to 
spy out the land, much less to steal ?’ 

Saying this Bidhi Chand let the wine flow. He 
filled to the brim a special goblet for the custodian 
of the keys, who took it and laughingly said, ‘O 
Kasera, seeing thy friendship I will drink this cup 
from thy hands. The protection of my storehouse 
I now entrust to thee. Thou hast not taken wine, 
so thou wilt remain awake and be fully on the alert.’ 
Bidhi Chand assured him that he would remain awake 
and that no stranger, however daring,should approach 
the premises. The key-holder might therefore sleep 
soundly and comfortably. All the company were 
reassured on hearing Bidhi Chand’s cheerful words, 
and began to drink on, big and little, old and young. 
They soon became unconscious and fell down uttering 
incoherent nonsense. When they could no longer 
speak, they took off their clothes and rolled naked 
on the floor. Bidhi Chand took each man’s arm and 
inquired how he was, and on receiving no answer 
knew that his friends were disposed of for the night, 
and he himself was free for action. It is true he 
heard the distant sentries calling, but they could 
not interfere with his operations. 

The author of the ‘Gur Bilas’, or Life of Guru 
Har Gobind, here makes the following reflection on 
the use of wine. ‘ Wine is evil on this account that 
he who drinketh it loses his senses. A king who 
drinketh becometh like a beast, and easily falleth 
a prey to his enemy. Good men, hear me on this 
subject. Monarchs who have conquered powerful 
enemies have been blinded by the intoxication of 
wine. Their kingdoms have passed out of their 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 109 

possession, and they have become poor in an instant. 
Men holy, clever, and great have degraded themselves 
to the level of brutes by the use of wine. It would 
hold men captive even without fetters.’ 

Bidhi Chand finding all his guests lying on the 
floor in Bacchanalian slumber tied his waistband and 
adjusted his turban for action. He then went to the 
niche in the wall where he knew the key of the 
harness-room was kept and immediately found it. 
Having taken out a saddle he went to Dil Bagh and 
undid his silken headstall. Caressing the animal 
he put on his bridle and drew the reins over his neck. 
He then laid on the saddle-cloth and the saddle, and 
fastened tight the soft silken girths. He attached 
on either side the golden stirrups, and further 
secured the saddle by carefully passing the crupper 
under Dil Bagh’s tail. This done he untied the 
horse’s heel ropes. He then mounted, taking in 
his hand a whip with a golden handle which he found 
attached to the saddle. He cantered the animal 
backwards and forwards until he found that he had 
got into his full stride. Then applying the whip 
he faced him at the fort-wall over which he was to 
leap. The horse, which had never previously been 
struck even by the stalk of a flower, on receiving a cut 
with the whip roused himself at the unusual summons, 
gathered his strength, set his limbs, and on Bidhi 
Chand lifting the reins cleared without hesitation 
the high battlement with a bound, and plunged with 
his rider into the river. Bidhi Chand, well skilled in 
horsemanship, steadied the animal in the water and 
guided him safely to shore. 

The residents of the fort who were awake had 
become accustomed to the report of bodies falling 
into the water, and thought the splash they had 
heard was due to the falling of one of the battlements 
as the result of erosion of the river. Bidhi Chand 
drawing in his reins on the bank patted the horse, 
and encouraged him after the fright he had sustained. 

170 THE SIKH RELIGION 

While Bidhi Chand had been originally meditating 
this enterprise, he used to note every wall and rivulet 
and tree in the neighbourhood, and now carefully 
examining them took the road and directed his course 
to Bhai Rupa. The horse bounded along like the 
wind while Bidhi Chand gaily sang— 

May the Guru and God be always with me ! 
Remember, remember Him who ever protecteth 

The moon rose two hours after his departure, and 
then he was able to steer his way by its position in 
the sky. He avoided all towns and villages. On 
reaching Harike at the junction of the rivers Bias and 
Satluj, he introduced Dil Bagh again into deep 
water by plunging him into the foaming Ghara.’ 
The horse was found to correspond exactly with the 
description the Kabuli Sikhs had given. Dil Bagh 
appeared as if he had sprung from a sea of beauty 
by the combined agencies of exquisiteness and 
strength. 

CHAPTER XVI 

The morning after Bidhi Chand had departed from 
Lahore the darogha Sondha Khan, finding one of 
the Emperor’s favourite horses missing and all the 
sentries and grooms asleep, was not in an enviable 
frame of mind. The grooms and guards, when 
roused up, maintained that they had been watchful 
during the night, and said the horse must have sunk 
into the earth or soared to the celestial regions. The 
Emperor Shah Jahan bemoaned his irreparable loss— 
‘Who hath taken my most favourite steed and 
thus hastened his own destruction ? Can there be 
any one in the whole earth who hath not the fear 
of me in his heart? When the kings of other lands 
cannot keep a particle belonging to me in their pos- 

1 Asa. 
2 The Satluj is so called after its junction with the Bias. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND I7I 

session, who hath two heads that he can afford to 
sacrifice one of them for stealing my horse ? If my 
enemy were to hide himself in the retirement of the 
mountains or in desert fastnesses, my army would 
not desist till it had found him. Whoever hath 
taken my steed is now my greatest enemy. I will 
assuredly put him to death whoever and wherever 
he may be.’ The Emperor sent trackers with an 
escort in every direction to endeavour to trace the 
missing animal, but no clue could be obtained. 

The Sikhs who had brought the horses from Kabul, 
on receiving charge of Dil Baghin Bhai Rupa, observed 
that he did not eat his corn with a will, that tears 
were flowing from his eyes, and that his heart was 
sad. It wasnot known how he had become so weak. 
He was well groomed and treated with the utmost 
care. Rai Jodh thought that the horse had become 
weak as it was the first time he had been ridden any 
distance. He had previously been unaccustomed to 
travel and exertion. The Sikhs, however, came to 
the conclusion that the water which flowed from 
the horse’s eyes was simply the pain of his heart pro- 
jected on his body, and must be caused by separation 
from his hitherto inseparable stable companion. 
Bidhi Chand was easily able to confirm this opinion. 
‘This Dil Bagh of ours and Gul Bagh were tethered 
together. They used to eat corn, grass, and mashes 
of different sorts side by side, so that affection sprang 
up between them. Manifestly it is on account of 
his separation from his brother that tears are 
flowing from his eyes.’ This speech convinced 
everybody. 

Bidhi Chand therefore decided on bringing Dil 
Bagh’s brother to him from the Lahore fort, so that 
the horse might no longer suffer from the pangs of 
separation. He said to himself, ‘ Although hundreds 
of thousands of brave men with arms in their hands 
were on the alert, I could so deceive them, that 
I would take the horse away before their very eyes.’ 

£72 THE SIKH RELIGION 

After Bidhi Chand had set out for Lahore, Rai Jodh 
pressed the Guru to leave Bhai Rupa and go to his 
village of Kangar about four miles distant. Sadhu 
and Rup Chand, owners of the village of Bhai Rupa, 
desired to accompany the Guru, but he advised them 
to remain in their own village, and they should always 
have his company in the spirit. His bodily company 
would not he said be safe for them, for he was bent on 
perilous enterprises. He should have to encounter 
the Muhammadans in the blood-stained field of 
danger, when steel would resound on steel and brave 
men die amid the clash of arms. Meantime his 
beloved friends Sadhu and Rup Chand would lead 
the lives of saints, and practise the virtues of charity 
and benevolence in their native village. Sadhu and 
Rup Chand accepted the Guru’s decision, and made 
him their parting obeisance. Rup Chand’s wife also 
came and embraced the Guru’s feet. On the Guru’s 
arrival at Kangar he was similarly greeted by 
another lady, Rai Jodh’s wife, who made him large 
offerings. Such were the Guru’s gracious manners 
that he completely won Rai Jodh’s heart, and Rai 
Jodh daily showed him some new mark of affection. 

When Bidhi Chand arrived at the gate of Lahore 
he heard the town-crier publishing the theft of Dil 
Bagh, and offering to give the finder any reward he 
pleased. Bidhi Chand inquired what all this meant, 
and was duly informed by the Sikhs who were 
entertaining him of what had occurred. After 
considering his position, and the danger to himself 
in the event of failure, he carefully formed his 
plans. He went to a cloth-merchant and asked 
him to make him a fine Hindustani costume. He 
ordered three coats of different lengths, a paejama 
or trousers with a beautiful waistband, a turban 
several yards long with embroidered ends, and 
a pair of ornamental shoes low at the heels but with 
long toes pointed upwards. The cloth-merchant 
had everything ready by four o’clock in the after- 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 173 

noon, and his wife then served up dinner. Bidhi 
Chand expressed his satisfaction—' When one Sikh 
serveth another, the Guru valueth that more than 
service to himself, as he hath said, ‘‘ Knowing him 
to be my Sikh he hath honoured him.” On hearing 
of such love the Guru will be pleased.’ 

Bidhi Chand then asked his friendtogetamagician’s 
chain made for him by a clever smith before next 
morning, and not mention the circumstance to any 
one. On the morrow he put on his new dress and 
with coco-nut oil greased his long hair until it shone. 
He parted his beard in the centre, so that his chin 
could be seen. He also twisted up his moustaches. 
He then put on his three coats, one reaching below 
the knees, the second a shorter one over it, and the 
third a jacket over all. He tied on his turban in 
the shape of a shield, and buttoned his trousers 
at the ankles. He fastened its waistband so as 
to show the embroidered ends, and finally put 
on his long pointed shoes so that he looked a 
real Hindustani. He had just dressed when the 
magician’s chain he had ordered arrived. Holding 
it in his hand in front of him, he walked slowly into 
the streets and market-places and appeared an 
innocent and respectable man. At the same time 
people were astonished on seeing his strange costume, 
and thronged around him. Several questions were 
asked, ‘To what country does he belong ?’ ‘ What 
is his name?’ ‘Where doth he reside?’ Bidhi 
replied, ‘My country is far away. I am a profes- 
sional man and know something of occult science.’ 
So saying he strutted proudly along, followed by a 
crowd to the gate of the fort. 

Bidhi Chand sat down on a raised platform and in 
reply to further inquiries said, ‘ 1 am an experienced 
tracker and astrologer, and can trace anything that 
hath been lost.’ The crowd asked other questions 
which he answered oracularly, while at the same time 
he amused his audience. He procured a mirror into 

174 THE sti RELIGION 

which he frequently looked, and then adjusted his 
beard and moustaches ; and he would now and again 
handle and shake his chain ostentatiously before the 
multitude. It happened that a servant of the stable- 
keeper, who was passing that way, stopped to see 
what was going on and inquired who the stranger 
was. Bidhi Chand replied, ‘My name is Ganak.’ 
My ordinary residence is in a forest” in a distant 
country. I have come in quest of an opportunity 
to show my skill.’ 

The stable-keeper’s servant then began to tell him 
of the loss of the Emperor’s horse, and said that, if 
he thought he could give any clue to the recovery of 
the animal, he would introduce him to the Emperor 
who would generously reward him. Bidhi Chand 
then boasted of his skill. By merely smelling the 
ground, he said, he could tell the secrets of the upper 
and nether regions, to say nothing of this con- 
temptible planet. He could tell the Emperor in what 
direction the horse had been taken and where he was 
at that moment. He could not recover the horse, he 
admitted, for that was beyond his power, but the 
Emperor himself with his army could accomplish an 
enterprise of that nature. The Emperor heard of the 
self-constituted tracker and sent the stable-keeper to 
summon him. The stable-keeper went, and failing to 
recognize Bidhi Chand in his altered costume, took 
him inside the fort. He was duly presented to the 
Emperor, and stood up in court with the utmost confi- 
dence. In reply to the Emperor’s questions he said, 
“I dwell ina forest. Men call me “ Tracker Ganak.”’ 
My skill I obtained from an ancient and venerable seer. 
I can interpret omens, discover tracks, and read the 
stars and planets. J am a wanderer because certain 
persons bear me great enmity. They are many 
while I am but one. I have come hither to obtain 
justice, and I will give thee information regarding 

1 This word means a diviner by numbers. 
2 The Malwa country is sometimes still called the Jangal or forest. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 175 

the horse thou hast lost.’ The Emperor then con- 
ferred on him a costly robe, gave him a large sum 
to defray the expenses attendant on his residence 
at the capital, and promised him lakhs of rupees if 
he pointed out where the stolen horse was concealed. 

Upon this Bidhi Chand, holding his magician’s 
chain, put his hand on the ground and raised it three 
times to his forehead. He then ostentatiously bowed 
to his supposed patron saint and preceptor. He 
began to count by the aid of his thumb the joints of 
his fingers, so that all might think he was interpreting 
omens. He then said to the Emperor, ‘ I know where 
the horse is, but I want to have one look at the place 
whence he was stolen, and then I will give thee all 
information. I will tell thee the thief’s name and 
how he effected the theft. It is then for thyself to 
consider whether thou canst recover the animal 
peaceably or go to war for him.’ The Emperor 
promised Bidhi Chand a high office at court; he 
should have all his enemies in his power, and he should 
receive four lakhs of rupees on giving information 
which would lead to the recovery of the horse. 

Bidhi Chand requested the Emperor to reduce 
his promise to writing, and said, ‘ Let all the people 
in court pray with clasped hands that the two horses 
meet again. The prayers of many produce an effect, 
because the Lord is in the midst of a multitude. 
I shall obtain the desire of my heart if you will all 
heartily pray to God for my success.’ On this the 
courtiers clasped their hands and prayed that the 
stolen horse might again meet its mate. After this 
the Emperor reduced his promise to writing. Bidhi 
Chand then said, ‘ Let us now go to the place whence 
the horse was stolen. I will cast my chain and 
consider numbers, stars, and omens. I swear by 
my preceptor that I will tell thee truly where the 
horse is and the name of the thief. We diviners tell 
not lies, especially in the Emperor’s court.’ Upon 
this the Emperor, stable-keeper, Bidhi Chand, and 

176 THE SIKH RELIGION 

a few others went to the stables. Some tried to 
dissuade the Emperor from trusting the stranger, 
but the advice was disregarded. 

When the Emperor, in reply to Bidhi Chand, said 
that the horse which had been stolen had his saddle 
on, Bidhi said that, if it had been otherwise, he could 
by the calculations he had already made discover 
the tracks. If, however, the remaining horse were 
saddled and bridled, he would consider what could 
be done without the delay which would be necessary 
to recast his numbers. His suggestion was adopted. 
Upon this he said he would ply his skill energetically 
and not go to sleep that night. He hoped, by 
observing the motions of the stars, to discover before 
morning the tracks desired. He would then be ready 
to receive the stipulated reward. The Emperor 
pressed him not to wait till morning but impart his 
secret at once, in which case he should receive a 
further reward of a lakh and a quarter of rupees. 
Bidhi Chand said that he could only succeed in 
divining the tracks in solitude and tranquillity at 
the particular hour when the horse had been stolen, 
so he requested the Emperor to cause all the inhabi- 
tants to close their doors and go to sleep at that time. 
He also made it a condition that all the gates of the 
fort should be shut, so that there might be no noise 
made by the ingress or egress of its occupants. The 
Emperor was deceived into issuing orders according 
to Bidhi Chand’s wishes. When the fort gates were 
closed on one side, Bidhi Chand contrived to cause 
them to be opened on the other side, in order to 
effectually secure himself from pursuit. 

When everybody else had retired to rest, Bidhi 
Chand undid the ropes that bound the horse. He put 
his head on the ground and prayed for his success. 
It is said that the Emperor heard a noise as if 
a horse had got loose, but Bidhi Chand allayed his 
apprehensions, and said that he had discovered where 
the horse was, and would surely fulfil his promise 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 77 

to tell the name of the thief. Bidhi Chand appears 
to have also found means of locking from the outside 
the door of the passage which led from the Emperor’s 
apartments. He then said aloud, ‘ Hear everything, 
consider not the thief a person to be forgotten. Thy 
father, by the power of his army, formerly took pos- 
session of an excellent horse intended for the holy 
and worshipful Guru Har Gobind, whose fame is like 
that of the sun, and thou hast now in imitation of 
thy unjust father seized these noble steeds specially 
intended by pious Sikhs for their beloved Guru. 
I have made reprisal and taken the first horse by my 
ingenuity. My name is Bidhi Chand; I am the 
Guru’s servant. It was I who took home Dil 
Bagh, the horse thou art in search of. On account 
of separation from his mate he wept copiously on 
his arrival, and we could only induce him to eat and 
drink with difficulty. Wherefore, in the guise of 
a tracker and with a love for dumb animals, I have 
come to take his companion to join him. I[ am 
the thief, the true King is my master. Thou hast 
now given me Gul Bagh ready saddled. I have 
thoroughly gauged the wisdom of thy court. I will 
tell where the horse is, and in so doing remove all 
blame from myself. The Guru hath pitched his tent 
in the new village of Bhai Rupa. Know that Dil 
Bagh is standing there. Gul Bagh shall now go to 
join him.’ 

The Emperor on hearing this called to the darogha 
to stop the thief, but the darogha was also a prisoner 
and helpless. The Emperor again called out for 
help, but no help was forthcoming. The guards were 
all locked in. Bidhi Chand again addressed the 
Emperor, ‘Why art thou angry ? I have taken the 
horse, as was fit and proper. Remember the promise 
thou hast made me. I have not received my former 
wages as groom and grass-cutter, nor the present 
of a thousand rupees which thou madest me. Thou 
hast promised me four lakhs of rupees for tracking. 

SIKH. IV N 

178 THE SIKH RELIGION 

That thou hast not paid me. Again, thou didst 
promise a lakh and a quarter of rupees for immediate 
information. I have not yet received a kauri from 
thee. I have, therefore, virtually purchased the 
horses which with their saddles may be set against my 
account. Send me the balance and free thyself from 
the debt ; otherwise there shall remain an account 
between us which can only be adjusted in God’s 
court. If thou desire to stop me and determine not 
to pay me, then I shall go with the conviction that 
thou art a deceitful monarch. I have the keys of 
the fort here with me, and will throw them into the 
deep river. Make haste. Thou wilt have to find 
them before thou catchest me.’ Saying this, Bidhi 
Chand again prayed for the success of his enterprise, 
and finally addressedthe Emperor—‘ Whatever efforts 
are to be made, make now, so that thou mayest not 
be sorry after my departure. Say not that thou 
hast not had full information.’ Upon this he took 
the bunch of keys and calling out, ‘Going, going, 
gone, threw them into the deep water, and left the 
Emperor to search for them and his precious steeds. 

He then applied his whip to the horse. The 
animal pulled himself together, leaped over the 
battlement, and dropped into the deep water of the 
Ravi. Bidhi Chand then rode off with him as he 
had done his companion Dil Bagh, gaily singing as 
he went along. Both horses were entrusted to the 
Sikhs who had brought them from Kabul. 

The Sikh chronicler, who is partial to detail, states 
that when the two horses met they neighed each other 
welcome, rubbed noses and offered mutual salutations 
like two brothers who had met after long separation. 
The Kabuli Sikhs made them a present to the Guru. 
He changed Dil Bagh’s name into Jan Bhai, which 
means that the horse was as dear as life, and Gul 
Bagh’s name into Suhela, which means dear com- 
panion. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 179 

CHAPTER XVII 

There were warnings that the Emperor’s army 
would soon arrive to recover the horses, and it was 
necessary to prepare for defence and seek shelter in 
some advantageous position. Rai Jodh recom- 
mended the Guru to betake himself to a deep forest 
in which there was a tank, as otherwise there was no 
water for miles around. Two villages, Lahira and 
Marhaj, were subsequently built not far from this 
tank. The Guru with three thousand, and Rai Jodh 
with one thousand men marched to a tank in the 
lands of Nathana. The army was so disposed round 
the tank that when the enemy arrived they could not 
obtain access to its water, and must thus inevitably 
perish from thirst. 

The Emperor was thinking of proceeding himself 
to punish the Guru, but was dissuaded by Wazir 
Khan, who knew that his own happiness and pros- 
perity depended on the Emperor’s, and that the 
Guru would be victorious. Wazir Khan recom- 
mended that no artillery should be sent, but that 
the combat should be decided by swords, bows and 
arrows, and matchlocks. To this the Emperor 
agreed. Then, taking a naked sword in his hand 
and calling his chief secretary, he said, ‘ Is there any 
brave man who will undertake an expedition against 
the Guru?’ It was the custom of the time for a 
monarch on such occasions to lay down a sword and 
a packet of betel. Whoever put the betel into his 
mouth and took up the sword, bound himself to 
undertake the enterprise and defend the monarch’s 
cause. Up rose Lala Beg, a high officer of the im- 
perial army, and going through the usual ceremony 
said.he would lead an expedition against the Guru, 
and produce him with the stolen horses before the 
Emperor in a few days. Lala Beg’s brother Qamar 
Beg with his two sons, Qasim Beg and Shams Beg, 

N 2 

180 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and his nephew Kabuli Beg also volunteered. The 
Emperor made them anticipatory gifts—bracelets, 
necklaces, aigrettes for their turbans, and robes of 
honour—and put them in command of an army of 
thirty-five thousand horse and foot. He gave them 
orders not to delay, but make all possible speed 
and produce the Guru in chains before him. 

The imperial army marched to Bhai Rupa and 
not finding the Guru there proceeded to his new 
quarters. A spy named Hasan Khan was dis- 
patched by Lala Beg to make a reconnaissance. 
The nature of his errand was discovered by an 
expression which accidentally escaped him, namely, 
‘Our army is much larger.’ Upon this he was 
seized by the Sikhs, cuffed and kicked, whereupon 
he asked for mercy in the name of the Guru. The 
Guru ordered that he should be released and not 
put to death. He was asked to tell the strength 
of the imperial army, and he in gratitude gave true 
details. He was then given a dress of honour and 
dismissed. 

A curious device for discovering the movements 
of a hostile army is here mentioned by the author 
of the Suraj Parkash. Rai Jodh’s wife put some 
pearls on a tray so that, when the imperial army 
moved, the tramp of the soldiers’ feet might cause 
the pearls to vibrate and the necessary information 
would thus be obtained. 

When the spy Hasan Khan returned to his chief, 
he, in giving details of what he had seen, incidentally 
praised the Guru’s troops. Though few in number, 
they were, he said, brave as tigers and longing for 
the fray. The imperial army were as so many 
jackals before them. This enraged Lala Beg, and 
he dismissed his spy on the pretext of disaffection. 
Upon this Hasan Khan returned to the Guru, 
and begged his patronage and protection. The 
Guru welcomed him in opposition to the advice of 
Rai Jodh, who represented that it was impolitic to 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 181 

entertain an enemy’s spy. The Guru, in reply, said 
that it would not be proper for him to refuse pro- 
tection to any one who sought it. Moreover, this 
Hasan Khan in God’s mysterious way should be- 
come a very distinguished person. Orders were then 
issued to Bidhi Chand and Jetha to hold their troops 
in readiness for defence. The orders had not been 
given too soon. That very night Rai Jodh’s wife 
knew by the movement of her pearls that the 
Emperor’s army was approaching, and wrote to that 
effect to her husband who was with the Guru’s army, 
so that the Guru might be duly apprised. 

The imperial army was composed of several 
nationalities. Some had large heads, others long 
noses, and others again red cheeks. There were 
sable Ethiopians, Ruhelas, Yusufzais, Daudzais, 
Gilzais, Baloches, and Pathans. Preceded by torches 
they advanced to the sound of drums of many 
descriptions. Lala Beg said to his troops that the 
Guru had nothing of an army; with whom were 
they to fight ? They had only to go and seize the 
priest of the Sikhs. Qamar Beg addressing the Chief 
said, “O my brother, if thou send me, I will bring 
thee even the angel of Death, to say nothing of the 
Guru?’ Upon this the Chief placed seven thousand 
men at his disposal. On seeing him approach, 
Hasan Khan, the late imperial spy, informed the 
Guru of his name, position, and capabilities. 

Rai Jodh with a thousand men went to oppose 
Qamar Beg. He ordered his troops to use their 
matchlocks at a distance, and not allow the enemy 
to come to close quarters. Showers of bullets soon 
thinned the ranks of the imperial army marching in 
close formation, and totally destroyed the torch- 
bearers who had been leading the way. Then 
ensued darkness, upon which the imperial army fell 
into dire confusion. They used their swords and 
guns, and, goaded by their misadventure and the 
havoc caused by the Guru’s troops, heeded not 

182 THE SIKH RELIGION 

whether they slaughtered friend or foe. Very soon 
under all the circumstances—the darkness, the dust 
raised by men and horses, the day’s fatigue, the 
cold, and the severe losses in the ranks—they 
deemed it best to retreat. They thought their own 
troops who were in the rear were enemies, and 
received them with showers of bullets. Thus the 
imperial army was broken up and whole detach- 
ments fell by mutual slaughter. Qamar Beg left 
alone advanced in search of his army, and dis- 
charged showers of arrows as he proceeded. Rai 
Jodh finding an opportunity pierced Qamar Beg 
with his lance. He fell and soon after died in agony. 
Rai Jodh reported his victory to the Guru who 
warmly commended him. 

The Guru’s army was provided with sufficient 
firewood from the forest. The imperial army had 
no such comfort. Consequently at the end of the 
night the Emperor’s troops became frozen with the 
cold. When day dawned, there were heaps of 
soldiers of the imperial army found dead on the 
field. As the Guru surveyed them from an emi- 
nence, he was reminded of Hasan Khan’s words that 
his Sikhs were as brave as tigers, and that each of 
them should kill many flying jackals of the enemy. 

The Chief on seeing Qamar Beg and thousands of 
his men slain was in sore anxiety. He thought of 
advancing himself into the thick of the fight, but 
Shams Beg, Qamar Beg’s son, asked to be allowed 
to go instead. The Chief yielded and gave him com- 
mand of a division of his army. As Shams Beg 
advanced he saw his father’s dead body, and well nigh 
succumbed at the sight. He, however, succeeded in 
putting himself at the head of his troops. Hasan 
Khan, the quondam spy, pointed him out to the 
Guru: ‘ Behold that powerful youth in blue uniform 
on a steed painted blue, at the head of the imperial 
forces. It is necessary to send some very brave 
men to oppose him.’ The Guru sent Bidhi Chand 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 183 

with fifteen hundred men. He, on seeing his antag- 
onist, thus addressed him: “O boy, why comest 
thou to die? Seest thou not thy father already 
entered into Death’s abode? Why seekest thou 
to follow him? Thou art yet too young for the 
battle-field. Go home to thy mother’s protection.’ 
Shams Beg on hearing this angrily retorted, ‘If I 
die, I will take with me my father’s foe.’ Arrows 
and swords were then plied. Bidhi Chand’s powerful 
arm sent many Turks to untimely death. Though 
some of them fought well, they were defeated by 
the superior skill and bravery of Bidhi Chand and 
his troops. The two commanders, Bidhi Chand 
and Shams Beg, then approached each other and 
engaged in single combat. Bidhi Chand struck his 
adversary with his mailed fist, and sent him reeling 
totheearth. He then put his leg on his, and, taking 
hold of the other with his powerful arms, tore his 
body in twain. 

Lala Beg was enraged on seeing his nephew 
Shams Beg and his army slain. When he made 
a signal for some one to advance, his second nephew, 
Oasim Beg, offered himself, ‘If thou wilt allow me, 
I will go and avenge my father and brother.’ The 
chief, on seeing the young hero come forward, gave 
him command of his reserve. Hasan Khan pointed 
him out to the Guru as he approached, ‘O true King, 
Oasim Beg now advanceth against thee. He is a 
very powerful man and held in great esteem by the 
Emperor of Dihli. A brave warrior should be sent 
against him also. The Guru accordingly dispatched 
Bhai Jetha with five hundred men. Qasim Beg, 
seeing Bhai Jetha, thus addressed him: ‘O grey- 
beard, why comest thou with such a puny force to 
seek thy destruction? Go and enjoy a few days 
more of this world, and send to the battle-field him 
who hath killed my father and brother.’ Bhai 
Jetha replied, ‘I have enjoyed my life, but thou 
art young. I see thy beard is just sprouting. There 

184 THE SIKH RELIGION 

is yet time for thee to escape by flight and enjoy 
the wife of thy youth. Mistake not on seeing my 
small army. I, single-handed, will not suffer thee to 
abide alone, but will dispatch thee speedily to thy 
father and brother. If thou consent not to fly, let 
our armies engage, and then, if the issue be doubtful, 
we shall both decide the fortune of war by single 
combat.’ 

Except cannon every weapon of warfare known 
at the time was brought into requisition. Bullets 
fell like hail ; swords, knives, and daggers glittered 
like lightning, quivers were emptied, bow-strings 
snapped, arrows broke, and warriors wrestled in 
deadly combat. Some of the raw undisciplined 
forces began to plunder one another, and there was 
general riot and disorder. Jackals, wolves, kites, 
and vultures feasted on the bodies of the slain. 
There were heard on all sides cries of ‘ Kill him! 
kill him!’ ‘Let him not escape!’ When Bhai 
Jetha saw Qasim Beg’s army falling in numbers, he 
confronted him as he had promised, and let fly 
showers of arrows which killed Qasim Beg’s horse. 
Jetha then seized the rider by the legs, whirled him 
round his head, and dashed him to the ground as 
an Indian washerman beats soiled linen on a plank. 
Qasim Beg immediately expired, while Jetha stood 
on the battle-field like a pillar driven into the earth. 
The Chief, Lala Beg, hearing of the destruction of 
Qasim Beg and his army, was only able to invoke 
Allah, whom he had so trusted, for a successful issue 
of his engagement with the infidels. 

The Chief himself then advanced with all his 
remaining men. Hasan Khan, who was at the 
Guru’s side and now thoroughly devoted to his 
cause, advised the dispatch of a force to support 
Jetha. The Guru replied that Jetha was lke a 
tiger, and would dispose of his enemies. The Turks 
surrounded and endeavoured to kill him with arrows, 
but these flew right and left of him and ever missed 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 185 

their mark. Jetha on his own part discharged 
arrows which never sped in vain. Lala Beg, seeing 
the destruction caused by Jetha, now went to oppose 
him. Lala Beg first used his lance, but Jetha 
parried it. Lala Beg then drew his sword, but 
Jetha received the first blow on his own. The next 
time Lala Beg was more successful, for he cut down 
his brave adversary, who died uttering Wahguru. 
Thus emboldened by success, Lala Beg advanced 
with three thousand men in armour against the 
Guru. Jati Mal, the son of Singha, asked the Guru’s 
permission to show Lala Beg the strength of his 
arm, and cut down the Turks. The Guru consented 
to his stemming the onset of the enemy. 

Jati Mal rained showers of arrows on the Turks, 
and sent them to death’s abode with the speed of 
hill torrents hastening to the sea. Lala Beg himself 
hurried to oppose him, and discharged an arrow 
which struck Jati Mal on the breast, and made him 
fall fainting to the earth. The Guru, seeing Jati 
Mal fall, entered the battle-field on his bounding 
steed. In mild accents he invited Lala Beg to 
approach and measure his strength with his. Lala 
Beg would not come near, but dispatched arrows 
from a distance, all of which missed their mark. 
The Guru, taking steady aim, shot Lala Beg’s 
horse, which fell with its rider. The Guru, on seeing 
the Chief on the ground, dismounted so as not to 
take an unfair advantage of his adversary. The 
Chief assumed the offensive and aimed several blows 
of his sword at the Guru, who parried them all. 
The Guru then putting forward his strength, struck 
the Chief a blow which completely severed his head 
from his body. It was as if the Chief had in his 
devotion offered his head as a sacrifice to the Guru, 
and.the Guru in return had granted him escape 
from the ills of life and ultimate salvation. 

Kabuli Beg, the Chief’s sister’s son, was the only 
one of the commanders who now remained. On 

186 THE SIKH RELIGION 

seeing him advance and make a final effort to 
restore the fortune of the day, the faithful Hasan 
Khan called the attention of the Guru to his in- 
trepidity and the impetuosity of his attack. Kabuli 
Beg meant to gather such a harvest as reapers do 
when they enter a ripe field. Bidhi Chand, Rai 
Jodh, and Jati Mal, who by this time had somewhat 
recovered from his wound, bravely confronted him. 
The battle was then fought with extreme fury on 
both sides. The three Sikh warriors committed such 
havoc among Kabuli Beg’s troops that few remained. 
Kabuli Beg, maddened with rage on seeing the 
destruction they caused, rapidly discharged arrows 
which wounded all three. Seeing this the Guru 
himself hastened to their support. Kabuli Beg dis- 
charged arrows at the Guru which whizzed as they 
passed him. One arrow struck his horse, Gul Bagh, 
on the head and killed him. The Guru in retalia- 
tion killed Kabuli Beg’s horse. Kabuli Beg now 
approaching the Guru made a stroke at him with 
his sword, which the Guru received on his shield. 
Kabuli Beg again and again slashed at the Guru, 
but every blow was parried. The Guru then, to 
change the monotony of defence, said to him, ‘It 
is now my turn, be on thy guard.’ The Guru then 
dealt him such a blow as severed his head from 
his body. This ended the battle. The surviving 
Turks fled for their lives. Twelve hundred soldiers 
of the Guru were slain, and wounded. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Bidhi Chand, Rai Jodh, and Jati Mal went to 
congratulate the Guru on his victory. The battle, 
which had begun at midnight, lasted for eighteen 
hours on the 16th of Maghar, Sambat 1688 (A.D. 
1631). The Guru allowed Hasan Khan to return to 
Lahore with the survivors of the imperial army. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 187 

The plunder obtained from the bodies of the deceased 
Turks was divided among the poor. A descendant 
of Marhaj appropriated to himself a costly sword 
belonging to a fallen Pathan. When the Guru 
heard of it, he called upon the Sikh to relinquish 
it, for it was not proper to retain booty. The Sikh 
denied all knowledge of it. The Guru said that the 
sword should ply in the family of him who had 
stolen it. It turned out that the members of his 
family died within a year by mutual slaughter. The 
Guru established the scene of the battle as a place 
of pilgrimage. It is now called Gurusar, or the 
Guru’s tank. It lies near the village of Nathana, 
about three miles from the Rampura Phul railway 
station. The Raja of Nabha has at considerable ex- 
pense built an imposing temple on the spot where 
the Guru encamped. The bard, Abdulla, composed 
a dirge on the battle, which is no longer extant. 

It was noticed that the horse Dil Bagh was very 
distressed at the absence of his mate. The Guru 
addressed him words of consolation: ‘Such births 
as thine have been obtained and lost by sin. By 
sin hast thou obtained the body of a beast. Thy 
brother hath gone to heaven, have no more anxiety.’ 
It is said that upon this the horse recovered his 
usual spirits. Hasan Khan carried to the Emperor 
the news of the death of his generals and of the 
defeat of his army. The Emperor was in a fury. 
Wazir Khan was as usual ready with special pleading 
for the Guru: ‘ The Guru’s predecessors, from Guru 
Nanak down, had either done the Emperor’s line 
favours, or had been on good terms with them, 
and what was now to be gained by falling out 
with the Guru? This was the third time that the 
Emperor’s forces had been defeated by his army. 
What then was the advantage of carrying on the 
contest and aggravating the enmity ? I pray thy 
Majesty, let this be the end of it, and let bygones 
be bygones. Let another officer be appointed 

188 - THE SIKH RELIGION 

instead of Lala Beg the deceased chief.’ Upon this 
the Emperor, by the Guru’s occult inducement, gave 
Hasan Khan a dress of honour, and appointed him 
to a high office. 

After the Guru’s return to Kangar from the war, 
he went shooting in the adjoining forest. A hissing 
python crawled near his party. The Sikhs wanted 
to destroy it as vermin, but the Guru interposed and 
ordered them to allow the animal to approach him. 
The Guru touched it with his toe, whereupon it 
burst and died, and worms issued from its body. 
The Guru explained that it had been in a previous 
birth a very proud Mahant who used to embezzle 
his disciples’ property. He had not repeated God’s 
name or repented, so he became a python, and his 
victims in order to torture him, became the worms 
which now appeared. The Guru, quoting the follow- 
ing lines of the first Guru, granted him salvation :— 

They who give disciples hats! are fools, and they who 
receive them very shameless. 

A rat cannot go into its hole if there be a winnowing- 
fan tied to its belly.? 

By this the Guru meant that hypocritical priests 
who make disciples are fools and make fools of their 
disciples, and that man cannot obtain salvation so 
long as he is entangled with mammon. The Guru 
also quoted the following pauri from Gur Das :— 

Though one wear man’s five garments ;* 

Though his moustaches and whiskers appear beautiful and 
his dress be very effective ; 

Though he wear a hundred arms and associate with the 
elect ; 

1 It was and still is the custom in India for a religious teacher 
to take off his hat and put it on the head of his disciple as part of 
the ceremony of initiation. 

2 Malar ki War. 

3 The five garments of Gur Das’s time were paejama (drawers), kurta 
(shirt), angarkha (long coat), kamarband (waistband), dastar (turban). 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 189 

Though he be skilled in courtly graces, and known in 
many lands, 

Yet without virile power he cannot be deemed a man. 
What can a woman do with him ? . 

So if a man without virtues be called a guru, who shall 
do him obeisance ? 4 

When the Guru was leaving Kangar, Rai Jodh 
expressed a wish to remain for ever in his service. 
The Guru did not encourage him in this, but told 
him to abide in his village. He then promised 
that when he became Guru Gobind Singh, he would 
pay an affectionate visit to Rai Jodh’s family. He 
crossed the Satluj and proceeded to Kartarpur, 
whither he had sent his family and the Granth Sahib 
from Daroli. 

Preparations were now made for the marriage of 
the Guru’s son Teg Bahadur to Gujari, daughter of 
Lal Chand and Bishan Kaur. The ninth of Phagun, 
Sambat 1689, was fixed on as a suitable time for 
the purpose, and the marriage was then celebrated 
with great munificence and rejoicings. 

There was at that time one copy of the Granth 
with the Guru, and another at Mangat made by 
Bhai Banno. Bidhi Chand asked and obtained the 
Guru’s permission to make a third copy. 

One day as the Guru was hunting he had every- 
thing white on and about his person. He was 
clothed in white muslin, he was protected from the 
sun’s rays and the dust by a white umbrella, he 
carried his white hawk on his hand, rode on a 
white horse, and his groom waved a white chauri 
by his side. To him thus arrayed a father and son, 
Sikhs of Amritsar, presented themselves. The father 
represented that the son had with severe study 
learned the art of painting, and they were both 
ready to perform any service the Guru might desire. 
Bidhi Chand suggested that the youth should paint 

1 War XXXVI. 

190 THE SIKH RELIGION 

a picture of the Guru. The young man fixed his 
attention on the work, and drew a satisfactory like- 
ness of the Guru. The Guru presented the picture 
to Bidhi Chand. It is unfortunately no longer in 
existence. 

On the approach of the Baisakhi festival several 
Sikhs, including Rai Jodh, went to visit the Guru. 
A Sikh named Chitar Sain made him a present of 
a horse, a hawk, a dress, and some military weapons. 
The Guru gave all the offerings to Painda Khan 
except the hawk, which he reserved for his own son 
Gurditta. The dress and arms Painda Khan put 
on to adorn his person. He then appeared a magni- 
ficent warrior, and began to consider himself a very 
superior being. The Guru ordered him to appear 
before him always in that style. He mounted the 
horse which he had received, rode swiftly to his 
village, and showed himself to his admiring relations. 
Asman Khan, his son-in-law, asked him for all the 
presents given him by the Guru, but he very properly 
refused. 

Asman Khan then tried to steal them by suborning 
Painda Khan’s wife. He said that if he did not 
get them, he would either became a fagir or drown 
himself. She told this to Painda Khan, and re- 
presented how sad it would be if their daughter, 
Asman Khan’s wife, became a widow. Painda Khan, 
however, did not wish to displease the Guru by 
transferring the presents he had made him to 
another. Were the Guru to dismiss him, how could 
he maintain himself? Painda Khan’s, wife dis- 
regarding his strong remonstrance, stood up, and 
gave the sword, shield, and clothes which he had 
just taken off to her son-in-law, saying to her hus- 
band as she did so, ‘Thou needest nothing; the 
Guru will give thee other presents. May I not 
claim so much from thee ?’ She then laughed away 
her husband’s displeasure. Asman Khan at once 
put on his father-in-law’s dress, buckled on his 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND IgI 

sword and shield, mounted his horse, and went forth 
to amuse himself with the chase. Painda Khan 
seeing this stared in blank astonishment at his wife 
who had robbed him in his own house. He threw 
himself on his bed, heaved cold sighs, and considered 
what the Guru would say to him for parting with 
his presents. He felt for the time mentally disor- 
ganized and unable to pay his respects to the 
Guru. 

It happened that Gurditta, taking the hawk which 
had been presented to the Guru, went hawking on 
that very day. In opposition to the advice of his 
attendants, he let fly the bird at a time when it was 
not hungry. The hawk consequently did not return, 
but flew off to the village of Wadamir, where Asman 
Khan happened to be resting from the fatigue of the 
chase. Asman Khan captured it, thinking to him- 
self that if he took it to the Emperor instead of the 
one the Sikhs had formerly appropriated, he should 
be rewarded with a grant of land. 

Asman Khan, on returning home, told his mother- 
in-law all the events of the day. She said, ‘ Conceal 
the hawk. If the Guru hear that thou art in posses- 
sion of it, he will not fail to punish thee. Painda 
Khan said, ‘If thou give me the hawk I will take 
it to the Guru, and obtain his pardon for letting 
thee have his presents.’ Asman Khan laughingly 
said, ‘ Thou art ever prating of losing thine appoint- 
ment. I want this hawk to enable me to obtain 
a tract of country from the Emperor. Why shouldst 
thou be dependent on infidels for thy subsistence ? 
Pray to God to support thee.’ Father-in-law and 
son-in-law spent the whole night wrangling over the 
hawk, but without arriving at any satisfactory 
settlement. 

When the Guru heard that his son Gurditta’s 
hawk had been taken possession of by Asman Khan, 
he said, ‘ The will of God is very powerful. Worldly 
love destroyeth the understanding. Five days have 

1g2 THE SIKH RELIGION 

now elapsed, and Painda Khan through shame hath 
not come near me.’ Painda Khan did not venture 
to go near the Guru during the Baisakhi fair, which 
is generally a time of universal enjoyment. The 
Guru again remarking his absence sent for him. He 
appeared looking dejected and wearing dirty clothes. 
The Guru inquired the cause of his altered appear- 
ance. Where were the clothes and the horse he had 
received ? Was he in possession of Gurditta’s hawk ? 
If he told the truth he should be pardoned and 
recelve presents to make amends for those he had 
lost. 

Painda Khan, fearing his wife’s and son-in-law’s 
ire, falsely replied, ‘The horse and clothes thou 
gavest me are in my possession. As soon as thine 
order reached me, I hastened to come to thee with- 
out even thinking of my appearance. Were I in 
possession of the hawk, I would surrender it to thee. 
I would never detain thy property. Do me justice 
and listen not to slanderers.’ The Guru said, 
“Falsehood pleaseth me not. I have heard that 
thy son-in-law hath seized the hawk. There is even 
yet time for thee to make a full confession.’ Painda 
Khan swore by the Guru that he had not seen the 
hawk. Upon this the Guru whispered to Bidhi 
Chand to go and bring the hawk with all the offer- 
ings that had been presented to Painda Khan. 
Bidhi Chand found Asman Khan asleep, and quietly 
took all the property he had misappropriated. 
The Guru again pressed Painda Khan to tell the 
truth, but he swore for the third time that he knew 
nothing of the hawk, and that he was in full posses- 
sion of the Guru’s presents. Upon this the Guru 
called on Bidhi Chand to produce the hawk, the 
sword, and the dress he had taken from Asman 
Khan’s house. The Guru then in presence of his 
Sikhs charged Painda Khan with having sworn 
falsely three times in succession. When Painda 
Khan could make no reply, the Guru ordered him 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 193 

to be expelled from the darbar. The presence of 
Painda Khan had never been agreeable to the Sikhs, 
and they obeyed the Guru’s order with alacrity. 
They seized Painda Khan and submitted him to 
very rough treatment. He could not bring himself 
to ask the Guru’s pardon. On the contrary he thus 
addressed him: ‘I will go and complain to the 
Emperor. Thou shalt suffer as thy father did, and 
then I shall have my revenge.’ The Guru simply 
replied, ‘Go by all means and complain to thy 
heart’s content. Thou shalt reap the reward of 
thine acts.’ The Guru then caused him to be for- 
cibly expelled from the precincts of Kartarpur. 

When Painda Khan reached home he found his 
son-in-law Asman Khan weeping for the loss of the 
hawk. On seeing Painda Khan crestfallen and 
hearing him curse his fate, Asman Khan inquired 
the cause. Painda Khan then gave him all the 
details of his treatment at the hands of the Guru 
and his Sikhs, and vowed that he would have his 
revenge. He then went from his village of Chhota- 
mir to the Muhammadan village of Bassi. A resolu- 
tion was there passed at his instigation, that the 
priest of the Sikhs was a great tyrant, that his 
power daily increased to the public detriment, that 
he received countless offerings and possessed bound- 
less wealth, and that the Emperor should be invited 
to send an army to reduce him to subjection and 
take possession of all his property. Some people 
laughed, and said Painda Khan was an ungrateful 
scoundrel, who returned evil for good, and must one 
day inevitably receive his deserts. 

Painda Khan was able, under the promise of 
plunder, to induce five hundred horsemen to join 
him. Some far-seeing men among them, however, 
suggested that the advice of his cousin Qutub Khan, 
who was now governor of Jalandhar, should be taken 
before war was declared against the Guru. They 
accordingly proceeded to Jalandhar, where Painda 

SIKH. iV O 

194 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Khan laid his case before his cousin, and said, ‘A 
generous man is tested in famine time. Join me 
and assist me.’ Qutub Khan was surprised, and 
asked why such a crowd had favoured him with 
a visit. Painda Khan told him of the ill-treatment 
he had received, and begged him to induce the 
Emperor to send an army to punish the Guru. His 
cousin replied, ‘Thou sinner, masters are ever 
chastising their servants. What if the Guru hath 
taken his own property ? Thou hast eaten his salt 
and been brought up by him. Whatever desirable 
things the Guru obtaineth he ever bestoweth on 
thee. Disgrace not the Pathans by fighting with 
such aman. If thou do, the world will call thee 
ungrateful. If thou desire thie own advantage, 
make peace with the Guru.’ 

Painda Khan angrily replied, ‘ Perhaps thou hast 
eaten the Guru’s sacred food, and it speaketh 
within thee.’ Qutub Khan rejoined, “ Thou oughtest 
to be ashamed of thy words. I have never eaten 
the Guru’s food, sacred or profane ; but thou, having 
eaten it over and over again, hast been nourished 
on it. Everybody knoweth that thou desirest to 
fight with him whose menial thou hast been the 
greater part of thy life.’ Painda Khan then thought 
it proper to adopt a more concilatory tone, ‘ Deeming 
thee to be a Musalman and brother I have come 
to thee.’ Qutub Khan jeeringlyretorted, ‘Fine Musal- 
man thou art to desire to do evil to him whose salt 
thou hast eaten!’ Painda Khan ingeniously gave a 
new turn to the discussion, ‘I am waging a religious 
war. The Guru hath stolen thy master’s horses from 
the Lahore fort and ridden them. I desire to avenge 
that wrong.’ After much debate of this description 
Outub Khan said, ‘I have only been making trial 
of thee. True it certainly is that the Guru is an 
enemy of the Emperor. Proceed and I will follow 
and assist thee.’ Painda Khan and his cousin then 
swore fidelity to each other, and Painda Khan and 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 195 

his son-in-law proceeded to Lahore to lay their 
complaints in person before the Emperor. Qutub 
Khan promised to follow them. 

CHAPTER XIX 

When Painda Khan and his son-in-law reached 
Lahore, no one would allow them to approach the 
Emperor. They had spent all the money they had 
brought with them in maintaining themselves and 
their five hundred horses, and in bribing a courtier 
called Salamat Khan to procure them an audience ; 
but the ever-faithful Wazir Khan would not allow 
any one to poison the Emperor’s mind against the 
Guru. Painda Khan was consequently reduced to 
great straits. He could not return home, nor could 
he gain access to the Emperor. He was in the 
condition of a snake which takes a lizard into its 
mouth, and can neither swallow nor reject it. 

Qutub Khan soon arrived in Lahore, and listened 
to the story of his cousin Painda Khan’s disappoint- 
ment. He advised him to procure a long bamboo, 
tie a hen to the end of it, and lift her to the royal 
casement, when her clucking might perhaps awake 
the Emperor. Should this fail, he was to light 
torches at midnight and cause his five hundred men 
to raise a loud shout opposite the Emperor's apart- 
ments, upon which an audience might be vouch- 
safed him on the morrow. This expedient proved 
successful. Next morning the Emperor sent for the 
men who had disturbed his rest over night, but it 
was not with the object of giving them a satis- 
factory audience. He peremptorily demanded an 
explanation of their conduct. 

Before Painda Khan or Qutub Khan could address 
the Emperor on the subject of their grievances, 
Wazir Khan was ready with his usual pleading on 
behalf of the Guru. ‘Thy majesty, this is not 
an age for an honest man. The evils prophesied 

O02 

1g6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

for the thirteenth century? of our era have already 
begun. He whom thou treatest well doeth thee 
harm in return. This Painda Khan was a poor 
unprotected child. His parents were dead. The 
Guru found him as a waif, took pity on him, and 
brought him up as if he were his own son. He 
bestowed on him every valuable present he received 
for himself. He procured a wife for him and made 
provision for his family. It is through the Guru's 
munificence his daughter’s marriage hath been cele- 
brated. Now when he ought to be satisfied with 
his position, he hath stolen the Guru’s hawk, de- 
nied the offence on oath, and come to complain 
against the very man who cherished him and made 
him distinguished among his fellows. He hath thus 
committed the most heinous sin of ingratitude, the 
extreme of all wickedness.’ 

Wazir Khan in thus pleading was actuated as 
much by his devotion to the Emperor as by gratitude 
to the Guru. He knew the Guru’s power, and did 
not wish to embroil the Emperor in further warfare 
with him. It happened soon after, that there 
was urgent need of Wazir Khan’s services in 
a distant part of the empire, and thither he was 
accordingly dispatched. Painda Khan now found 
his opportunity of approaching the Emperor in 
person, and thus unburdened himself: ‘Sire, the 
Guru hath done me grievous wrong. I have been 
his servant. I asked him for my last six months’ 
salary, but, instead of giving it to me, he hath con- 
fiscated my clothes and arms, and expelled me with 
ignominy from his court. Three times hath he con- 
quered in war by my assistance. I have killed 
a large portion of thine army. Thy chiefs now 

1 This was a Moslem prophecy which like others has not been 
fulfilled. The fourteenth century of the Muhammadan era has already 
begun. It must be stated, however, that orthodox Muhammadans 
maintain that the prophecies were not for the thirteenth century but 
for the day of judgement. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 197 

know my strength.’ The Emperor inquired what 
wars he referred to, and where they had been fought. 
Qutub Khan replied, “ First the Guru had an engage- 
ment in Amritsar with Mukhlis Khan, who had an 
army of seven thousand men, secondly at Har 
Gobindpur with Abdulla Khan, the governor of the 
Jalandhar province, and thirdly at the Nathana 
tank with Lala Beg. They with their armies were 
all vanquished by thy petitioner Painda Khan’s 
assistance.’ 

Painda Khan continued, “I am so strong that I can 
throw an elephant. I can pulverize a rupee under my 
thumb. I bore with the kicking and cuffing I suf- 
fered from the Guru because [ had patience and con- 
fidence in thy justice. He is thy deadly enemy and 
hath killed thousands of thine army. Huis robbers 
have stolen thy horses from thy fort at Lahore. He 
seized thy white hawk and refused to surrender it. 
I am in his secrets, and if thou entrust an army to 
me, thou shalt assuredly succeed in reducing him 
to submission. I promise to bring him and the 
horses he stole to thee, or kill him and have my 
revenge.’ Then spoke the corrupt Salamat Khan in 
support of the charges: ‘ Painda Khan’s assistance 
is providential. The Guru hath quarrelled with him 
without reason, and he hath come to thee for justice. 
Look at him. He hath the frame of a giant. If 
thou but order he will catch the Guru by the neck 
and produce him before thee, and what the Guru 
hath in his treasury shall become thy spoil.’ 

By such representations was the mind of the 
Emperor influenced. He inquired the strength of 
the Guru’s army and the amount of his wealth. 
Painda Khan replied, ‘He hath no army. The halt, 
the cripple, the blind, the deaf and dumb, the 
diseased, the old, the poor, the lazy, and the good- 
for-nothings gather round him. Barbers, washer- 
men, pedlars, strolling minstrels, and similar unwar- 
like people compose what he calleth his army. As 

198 THE SIKH RELIGION 

for wealth, he possesseth millions upon millions.’ 
Salamat Khan chimed in, ‘Such an opportunity as 
this which God hath given us ought not to be lost.’ 
The Emperor was worked up to a passion and taking 
a sword in his hand said, ‘Is there any one of my 
officers brave enough to go and assist Painda Khan, 
and subdue the Guru who hath caused all this 
trouble.’ Kale Khan, governor of Peshawar, desir- 
ous of avenging the fate of his brother, Mukhlis Khan, 
rose and said, ‘May it please thy Majesty, I will 
capture the Guru and bring him before thee.’ 

The Emperor gave Kale Khan command of fifty 
thousand men, bestowed on him, as insignia of his 
appointment, a necklace of enormous pearls and 
a robe of gold lace, and ordered him to proceed 
forthwith against the Guru. Anwar Khan, a con- 
fidential officer of the Emperor, friend of the late 
Abdulla Khan, and anxious to be his avenger, joined 
Kale Khan with two thousand men. The Emperor 
decorated him too with a robe of honour worth five 
thousand rupees. Qutub Khan, Painda Khan, and 
Asman Khan also received dresses of honour, and 
were commissioned to fight under Kale Khan. The 
Emperor on dismissing them said that, when they 
returned victorious, they should receive further 
marks of his favour. But the Emperor did not 
reflect that his army was as the ocean, and the 
Guru as the barwanal, the fire that consumed it. 
The imperial troops were in reality like a herd of 
deer proceeding to engage with a tiger. 

‘Kale Khan crossing the Bias proceeded to Jalan- 
dhar. Qutub Khan entertained all the generals and 
provided for the encampment of the troops. During 
the following night they planned their campaign. 
While they were so engaged a voice of warning 
proceeded as from a neighbouring tree, ‘ One of thee 
hath been untrue to his salt. With him thousands 
shall perish. These troops which have come in 
proud array, are like moths hovering round a lamp. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 199 

The Chaughatta' (Chaghtai) monarch too is ill- 
advised, and is sowing thorns for his children.’ 

When the generals heard this mysterious boding, 
they came forth from their tents, looked hither and 
thither and examined the trees in the vicinity, but 
could not see the speaker. They then said among 
themselves, “The Guru is a great miracle-worker. 
This must be a voice from heaven.’ Painda Khan 
thought it necessary to encourage his brother 
generals, ‘Fear not; had the Guru the power of 
working miracles, could he not have made himself 
emperor of the whole world ? He hath been power- 
ful and victorious only through my assistance. Now 
victory shall no longer be his. You shall see my 
strength. If you allow me a free hand to plunder 
I shall capture the Guru this very day.’ Kale Khan 
thought it necessary to repress the speaker, ‘ Pride 
and braggadocio avail not. It seemeth to me it 
would be well to send an envoy to ascertain what 
the Guru meaneth—whether he will fight or come 
to terms with us.’ Anwar Khan suggested that 
they should make an offering to the Guru, and thus 
deceive him into believing that they were his friends. 
They would thus obtain an easy victory and succeed 
in capturing him. Qutub Khan was for more 
violent measures, ‘ Deceive him, deceive him! and 
overpower him in any way you can!’ 

A faithful Sikh hearing of the arrival of an enor- 
mous imperial army in Jalandhar hastened to 
inform the Guru. Next arrived a masand who said 
that the imperial army was approaching thick as 
flies, and suggested to the Guru that he should take 
measures to protect himself and his followers, as, 
when it rained iron, the showers would not fall like 
ordinary raindrops. The Guru replied by a hymn 
of Guru Amar Das :— 

God Himself protecteth His saints; what can a sinner do 
against them ? 

1 Babar, the Emperor’s ancestor, belonged to this family. 

200 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Proud fools practise pride, and die by eating poison. 

The few days they had to live are at an end; they shall 
be cut down like a ripe crop. 

They shall be spoken of according to their acts. 

The slave Nanak’s Master is great ; He is the Lord of all. 

Painda Khan’s voice was soon heard inciting the 
troops to make a sudden charge and surround the 
Guru. Qutub Khan again counselled patience and 
the dispatch of an envoy to endeavour to make 
peace. This was at last agreed on, and Anwar Khan 
was the envoy selected. Anwar Khan thought to 
pitch his tent near the Guru, and thus find a con- 
venient opportunity of treacherously slaying him. 
The Guru, however, took care that Anwar Khan 
should not continue long in too close proximity to 
him. And though Anwar Khan was provided with 
many presents for the Guru, yet the Guru refused 
to accept them. 

A goldsmith came to the Guru with unusually 
rich offerings. He presented golden dice set with 
gems and an embroidered chaupar-board with varie- 
gated pieces formed of sapphires, rubies, and topazes. 
Although the Guru did not approve of such articles 
as tended to divert men’s minds from God, and 
were sources of falsehood, sin, and trouble, yet he 
accepted them, so that he might preserve the gold- 
smith in his faith and devotion. The imperial envoy 
on seeing the presents said to the Guru, ‘ Thou 
acceptest the offerings of all other Sikhs, but not 
mine. What is the cause?’ The Guru replied, 
‘ The Guru’s house ts like a sea of milk. The offerings 
of the Sikhs are like streams which flow into it of 
their own accord, and blend with it. But thy heart 
is not sincere, and therefore, if put into the Guru’s 
sea of milk, would turn it acid and cause it to fer- 
ment.’ Anwar Khan rejoined, ‘ Wazir Khan fre- 
quently sent me with gifts to thee, and thou didst 

1 Gauri ki War I. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 201 

always accept them.’ The Guru said that they were 
gifts of love which easily amalgamated with the 
Guru’s milk. 

When Anwar Khan failed to persuade the Guru 
to take his presents, he challenged to play him at 
chaupar. The Guru replied that such play was not 
suitable for a priest. Anwar Khan pressed his pro- 
posal, and laid the chaupar-board before him. He 
had formed an idea that, if he conquered the Guru 
at the game, it would be a presage of victory for 
his army, and if the Guru defeated him, his army 
would also be defeated. The Guru at last con- 
sented to play with the envoy. Anwar Khan lost 
the first time, the second, and the third also, and 
then losing his temper with his game said to the 
Guru, ‘Thou art a cheat, thou hast won by trickery! 
Why have I always had threes ?’ The Guru replied, 
‘Cheating, deceit, and falsehood are the principal 
stock of thy house, while I am a faqir.’ Anwar 
Khan retorted, ‘A fine faqir thou art, hunting and 
enjoying thyself and practising warfare for thine 
own amusement. Thou art a great deceiver, and 
so have been all the Gurus from Baba Nanak down.’ 

The Guru could endure the insults to himself, but 
not the defamation of his predecessors. ‘If there 
is any Sikh of the Guru present, let him remove 
this fellow from my presence.’ Bidhi Chand duly 
obeyed the Guru’s order. Some Sikhs then on their 
own account administered Anwar Khan shoe-beatings 
until he fainted. The Guru interceded for him and 
allowed him to depart without renewed punishment. 

Anwar Khan on his return to his Chief reported 
the ill-treatment he had received, and advised an 
immediate attack on the Guru who had not one- 
tenth of the strength of the imperial army. Kale 
Khan was very pleased with this suggestion. Painda 
Khan too was for immediate action. Qutub Khan, 
however, was not so sanguine. The Guru had 
already had great experience of war; and it was 

202 THE SIKH RELIGION 

not likely that he would be now off his guard. It 
was, however, determined by a large majority of 
the generals to attack his position that very night. 
The Guru knowing their designs ordered Bidhi Chand 
to be on the alert. The Guru had by this time 
eighteen hundred regular fighting men who were 
supplied by his friends in Kartarpur. The whole 
force was so marshalled and disposed as to prevent 
surprise and capture. 

Meantime dissension was brewing in the Guru’s 
camp. Dhir Mal, his grandson, accepting the evil 
forebodings of the masands, said that the Guru would 
certainly be defeated. The imperial army had arrived 
like a flight of locusts. The Guru’s army was in- 
significant. It did not bear the same ratio to the 
imperial army as condiment to the viands of a feast. 
‘The Guru,’ continued .Dhir Mal, ‘is in one of his 
fits of obstinacy, and knoweth not the enemy’s 
prowess and strategy. I shall, therefore, probably 
attain my object and succeed him in his holy office.’ 
Dhir Mal’s mind having been thus perverted, he sat 
down and wrote the following letter :—‘ Brother 
Painda Khan, my grandfather hath expelled and 
disgraced thee without cause, but I know thee to 
be my friend, and I will do the best for thine interests. 
If thou come to-night and make a sudden attack, 
the fort and its treasure will fall into your hands, 
for here there is no preparation made. I will render 
thee every assistance.’ 

Needless to say that Painda Khan was highly 
pleased on receiving this letter. He showed it to 
the other generals, who were also pleased, par- 
ticularly when they learned the dissension in the 
Guru’s family. An immediate charge was ordered. 
The soldiers, heated with wine, began to boast and 
use ribald language. Dust arose and obscured the 
moon and stars. The earth shook beneath the 
tramp of the army. Sweets and offerings were 
vowed to Muhammadan saints for success. The 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 203 

Chief ordered that the whole army should assemble 
near Chhotamir, and thence they would assault 
Kartarpur and capture the Guru. It happened that, 
before the imperial army could enter Chhotamir, an 
earthquake occurred which swallowed the village 
with the greater portion of its inhabitants. Those 
who did not perish were plundered by the imperial 
troops. Painda Khan did his utmost to protect his 
fellow-citizens, but in vain. 

The Guru arose earlier than usual, and after bath- 
ing began his devotions. He repeated the Japji, and 
prepared sacred food. He then read the Anand, the 
third Guru’s song of rejoicing, and uttered a prayer 
suitable to the occasion. Sacred food was then 
distributed, and after partaking of it his soldiers 
received a substantial meal, upon which arms were 
served out to them. Jati Mal announced that the 
imperial army was approaching like a dust storm in an 
Indian summer. When the Guru heard this and other 
similar expressions of warning or dismay, he calmly 
said, ‘ Have no anxiety, stand fast, be united, put 
on your armour. The Creator will] act for the best.’ 

On receiving the Guru’s orders, Jati Mal, Ami 
Chand, Mihr Chand, and Bhai Lakhu, taking five 
hundred men, advanced and showered bullets and 
arrows at the enemy. Baba Gurditta asked his 
father's permission to enter the battle, but was 
ordered to keep guard in the village until daylight. 
The discharges of matchlocks were like fireworks 
at a wedding. The armies soon came to close com- 
bat when, it is said, twelve thousand of Kale Khan’s 
army slept their final sleep. Twenty thousand 
imperial troops then advanced. Kale Khan _ told 
them that the Guru’s army was insignificant, and, 
if they finished the fighting, they might plunder as 
much as they pleased. This permission greatly 
stimulated their bravery. Then ensued the usual 
carnage. Bows twanged, arrows hissed like snakes, 
bullets fell like hail. Here and there men engaged 

204 THE SIKH RELIGION 

in close combat with swords, knives, and daggers. 
Horses fell or fled without their riders. Elephants 
wandered in quest of their drivers and stable com- 
panions. The wounded became so attached to the 
battle-field that they could not rise. The dead fell 
in rows like corn laid by reapers. 

Qutub Khan, seeing the destruction of his troops, 
addressed Kale Khan, ‘We have made a great mis- 
take in engaging at night. Want of sleep hath 
disabled our brave soldiers. The darkness and the 
dust, too, have led to our troops turning against one 
another. Our Pathans are retreating before the 
Sikhs. Our losses are very serious, while the Guru's 
are practically none.’ Painda Khan said, “ Make 
one charge and the battle shall be at anend. Know 
ye any men among the Sikhs able to resist vour 
onset ?’ Kale Khan, the Chief, was not of this opinion, 
and replied, ‘Are the Sikhs sweet food which we 
can gulp down ? Our army hath all been slain or 
routed. The Sikhs have made our teeth so bitter ' 
that we cannot eat any more. No Pathan will now 
advance. Lead thyself.’ Then Painda Khan and 
his son-in-law, Asman Khan, taking lighted torches 
advanced at the head of their troops, but they were 
only seeking their own destruction. Kartarpur was 
like a lamp round which they were fluttering as 
moths. 

Bidhi Chand, Jati Mal, Lakhu, and Rai Jodh 
ranged themselves and their troops on the four sides 
of Kartarpur. Qutub Khan, Painda Khan, Asman 
Khan, and Kale Khan, at the head of their respective 
detachments, advanced against them. The Pathans 
were, however, powerless against the brave Sikhs 
fighting for their religion and their Guru. Bidhi 
Chand was seen as usual fighting bravely and 
practising with signal success the skill in archery 
which he had acquired during an eventful life of 

1 The Sikhs have inflicted such injury on us that we cannot bear 
to look at them again. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 205 

foray and warfare. There was seen the Guru in 
glittering armour, mounted on Dil Bagh, once the 
emperor's pride. Fortunate, says the chronicler, 
were the Pathan chiefs that they obtained the price- 
less advantage of beholding the Guru on his beautiful 
charger with his resplendent armour and trappings. 

Bidhi Chand discharged an arrow at Anwar Khan 
which struck him between the eyebrows, as if it 
were applying a Hindu sacrificial mark to his fore- 
head. He fell to the earth as if he were doing 
obeisance to the Guru, or begging his forgiveness 
and suing for salvation. The Guru’s order went 
forth that nobody who was fleeing should be put 
to death. The Sikhs were only to fight after chal- 
lenging the enemy face to face. The Guru’s arrows 
passed through the Muhammadan chiefs, Pathans, 
Mughals, and Saiyids, as if these men were only 
pancakes. Jati Mal and Qutub Khan encountered 
each other in the darkness and dust-cloud, but under 
the circumstances the contest between them re- 
mained undecided. 

CHAPTER XX 

Morning dawned on the combatants to find the 
Guru dispatching his enemies as the sun’s rays put 
darkness to flight. The Pathans died lke sparrows 
struck by hail or lightning. Their hopes of victory 
were abandoned, and their spirits could not revive. 
They began to say to one another, ‘ Fine friendship 
hath Painda Khan shown for Islam and fine booty 
have we got! While trying to empty the Guru’s 
treasury we have emptied the Emperor’s. We have 
awakened a sleeping tiger and sacrificed our lives 
and property. Thousands of brave Muhammadans 
have perished as the result of our espousing the 
cause of an ungrateful villain. Now we can neither 
flee away nor conquer. But it is better to turn 

200 THE SIKH RELIGION 

our face to the enemy and die than disgrace our- 
selves by flight.’ 

The generals also conferred among one another. 
They had been fighting, they said, for six hours, 
and far from having succeeded, half their army had 
perished. It was inexplicable how the Guru had 
become such a soldier. Let Painda Khan, who 
boasted that it was through him the Guru had 
obtained his former victories, and that he would at 
once capture him, now show his prowess and put 
his word to the proof. Painda Khan replied, ‘I am 
going to advance ; come and support me. In one 
bound I will catch the Guru as a tiger fasteneth on 
an elephant.’ Asman Khan followed up his father- 
in-law’s boasting : ‘I, single-handed, will capture and 
bring the Guru with his sons and all his Sikhs.’ 
Saying this, Panda Khan and Asman Khan entered 
the battle-field. The Muhammadan army then 
rallied and discharged arrows like rain in the Indian 
month of Sawan. 

Nanaki watched the battle from the top story of 
her house. She was delighted as she saw her son, 
Teg Bahadur, wielding his sword and dealing out 
destruction to the enemy. Baba Gurditta, the 
Guru’s eldest son, also fought valiantly, and made 
the Muhammadans feel the strength of his power- 
ful and well-practised arm. Asman Khan, seeing 
his troops dying by Gurditta’s hands, discharged 
arrows at him from afar, but it is said the Baba 
cut them with his sword as they flew in the air. 
Outub Khan, putting a cannon in position, fired at 
the Sikhs, but nothing could restrain the havoc 
they were dealing among the Muhammadans. The 
Guru displayed prodigies of strength, bravery, and 
martial skill, and the enemy were not able to cope 
with him even single-handed. 

The Muhammadans again began to bewail their 
evil destiny: ‘Alas! alas! why have we come 
hither ? We cannot, however, recall the time when 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 207 

we left our homes, our wives, and our children. 
What will the Emperor say ? Fine dresses of honour 
we shall obtain! We are undone ourselves and have 
undone our army.’ Qutub Khan advanced gnashing 
his teeth with rage as he observed the Guru shining 
like a sun on his favourite charger. Bhai Lakhu, 
seeing Qutub Khan’s onset, discharged an arrow at 
him which caused him to fall swooning to the ground. 
Seeing this a body of Pathans moved against Lakhu. 
For the space of three-quarters of an hour he kept 
the opposing forces at bay. The Musalmans sur- 
rounded Bhai Lakhu and killed his horse. Shouting 
victory to the true Guru, he still, defended himself 
with his sword. The Muhammadans said to one 
another, “ Thousands of us have been vanquished. 
This one man fighteth with his sword alone, and 
will not allow lances, arrows, or daggers to touch 
his body. He hath yet no need of the maids of 
paradise who bestow happiness on departed heroes.’ 
While men were thus speculating, Qutub Khan, who 
by this time had recovered consciousness, struck 
Bhai Lakhu on the forehead with an arrow, which 
caused him to reel and fall to the ground. Qutub 
Khan, then drawing his sword, struck the fallen hero as 
he lay wounded, and severed his head from his body. 

Bhai Lakhu’s death was a boon for the Muham- 
madans, and cheered their flagging spirits. Kale 
Khan again addressed Painda Khan, who seemed 
to have been playing the laggard: ‘ Painda Khan, 
half the day is now over and our army is perishing. 
Thou art the cause of this disaster: go forward and 
withstand the Guru. We will support thee.’ Ac- 
cordingly Kale Khan, Qutub Khan, and Asman 
Khan, putting Painda Khan in front, advanced 
against the Guru. The Guru, on seeing his deadly 
enemy Painda Khan, curbed his wrath and bided 
his opportunity. Bidhi Chand engaged with Kale 
Khan, and Baba Gurditta with Asman Khan. Painda 
Khan with his drawn sword confronted the Guru, 

208 THe SIKEA RELIGION 

and thus addressed his former friend and master, 
‘Stand, I will now revenge the ignominy thou hast 
caused me, and thus cool my burning breast. If 
thou desire to come to terms, do so at once, and 
I will take thee to the Emperor and induce him to 
pardon thy many offences.’ 

The Guru replied, “ Painda Khan, why use haughty 
language ? Now that the sword is in thy hand and 
that thou art ready to do or die, what time 1s it to 
talk of peace ? The man who runneth away and 
turneth his back to the foe, hath no longer regard 
for his religion. As to what thou talkest of revenge, 
I am here alone prepared to afford it thee. Thou 
mayest even strike the first blow, otherwise thou 
mayest regret it afterwards.’ Painda Khan, on 
hearing this, became enraged and brandished his 
sword. Inclining his body, he aimed a blow at the 
calf of the Guru’s leg. The Guru turned his horse 
aside to avoid it, but the sword struck his stirrup. 
He smiled and said, ‘O Painda Khan, strike me 
where thou pleasest, seize me, bind me, that thou 
mayest have no cause for repentance. Fear not 
that I shall flee thee. Painda Khan made another 
Stroke at the Guru, which he received on his shield. 
The Guru was merely showing his science, for hitherto 
he had not intended to kill his adversary. Painda 
Khan then tried to seize the Guru’s bridle, and take 
him and the famed Dil Bagh to the Emperor’s 
general. As Painda Khan was making his attempt, 
the Guru kicked him so forcibly as to cause him to 
stagger. He, however, recovered himself and again 
assumed the offensive. He had sufficient insolence 
to provoke the war, but he could not look straight 
in the face of the Guru whose presents he had 
received, whose leavings he had eaten, and whose 
cast-off clothes he had worn. It was the Guru’s 
wish that Painda Khan should even now admit that 
he had erred, and he would then restore him to his 
former position. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 209 

Instead of that the ill-starred man made another 
blow of his falchion at the Guru. His weapon parted 
from the handle and fell on the ground. The Guru, 
deeming it a point of honour not to take advantage 
of the misfortune of his enemy, alighted and said, 
“Ingratitude and slander, both of which thou hast 
been guilty of, are very serious crimes, but to kill 
the person I have cherished is not a course I desire 
to adopt.’ Painda Khan mockingly replied, ‘ Come, 
I will take thee to the Emperor.’ The Guru, under 
all the provocation, drew his two-edged scimitar and 
struck Painda Khan so forcibly that he fell prone 
onthe ground. The Guru said, ‘ Thou art a Musal- 
man. Now is the time to repeat thy creed.’ Painda 
Khan, repenting, replied, “O Guru, thy sword is my 
creed and my source of salvation.’ 

The Guru, on seeing Painda Khan’s dead body, 
was filled with pity and regret. He took his shield, 
and put it over his victim’s face so as to shade it 
from the sun, and bursting into tears, said, ‘ Painda 
Khan, I cherished thee, I reared thee, and I made 
thee a hero. Though men spoke ill of thee, I forgot 
thy failings, and evil to thee never entered my mind; 
but evil destiny so misled thee that thou broughtest 
an army against me. It is thine own acts of in- 
gratitude and insolence that have led to thy death 
at my hands. It is impossible to digest offerings 
without serving the saints and worshipping God, 
otherwise they ruin the understanding, become 
deadly poison to the body, and lead to man’s ulti- 
mate damnation. Though thou hast been ungrate- 
ful and untrue to thy salt, I pray the Almighty to 
grant thee a dwelling in heaven. 

Good men are honoured for their greatness ; God also 
adjusteth the affairs of the evil: 

He saveth sinners and those who fall away from Him.’? 

Asman Khan advanced, discharging arrows, and 
was confronted by Baba Gurditta, who showered 

1 Gur Das, X. 

SIKH. IV P 

210 THE SIKH RELICTON 

arrows on him in return. One of them struck 
Asman Khan on the eyebrow and penetrated his 
brain. Baba Gurditta, seeing him dead, stood at 
his head and wept copiously. The Guru came 
up and inquired the cause of his grief. Baba 
Gurditta replied, ‘He was my friend. We used to 
play together. He now tried to kill me with his 
arrows, from which I escaped, but one of mine hath 
lodged in his head. He reeled and fell, and never 
rose again. I have used great efforts to lift him 
up, but in vain.’ Saying this Baba Gurditta con- 
tinued to weep. The Guru inquired if dead men 
ever rose, and if he had ever known weeping of any 
avail. Baba Gurditta replied, ‘ This is the result 
of wearing arms. The mind becometh cruel. Take 
these weapons from me. I will now go home.’ 
Baba Gurditta then retired from the battle-field 
to weep over the friend of his youth, and embrace 
a more peaceful and holy life. 

The imperial army, hearing of the death of Painda 
Khan and Asman Khan, became totally demoralized. 
As they fled from the field they said, ‘The Guru 
is the death of the Pathans. Let us return to 
Lahore.’ Others, more jealous of their reputation, 
inquired how they could dare go home and endure 
the reproach of cowardice. They were now not fit 
to show their faces to any one, much less to the 
Emperor. They had accordingly better sound the 
drum for another charge, and either conquer or die. 
This advice prevailed, and another attempt was 
made to retrieve the day’s misfortune. Bidhi Chand, 
seeing the enemy advancing, warned the Guru to 
prepare to receive them. There was, however, no 
necessity for warning. The Guru continued to dis- 
charge an incessant shower of arrows which caused 
unwonted havoc. There was such a collection of 
corpses on the battle-field that it was difficult to 
move without treading on them. The earth was 
stained with gore as if it had put on a red garment. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 211 

As Qutub Khan advanced, the Guru observed 
him and shot his horse. Qutub Khan thus dis- 
mounted, continued to discharge arrows, which the 
Guru cut with his sword in their flight. Qutub 
Khan approaching nearer fought desperately, and 
for a whole hour engaged the Guru in single combat. 
At last the Guru, who had better staying power, 
cut off his head with a single stroke. Kale Khan 
the chief, on seeing Qutub Khan’s corpse, massed 
his troops and said, ‘ This is a war for our religion. 
Behold the Sikhs—how insignificant in number, yet 
how desperately they have fought! Ina few hours 
they have repelled all our charges. You have come like 
clouds, yet have achieved nothing. This is the last 
encounter. Take courage.’ Upon this the Muham- 
madan troops made a furious onslaught, but could 
make no sensible impression on the Sikhs. The 
imperial troops died in numbers, and now only 
about two thousand remained. Kale Khan became 
demented, and raised despairing cries. ‘QO God, 
who hath destroyed mine army ? whither hath it 
gone ?’ 

The Commander-in-chief now confronted the Guru 
and said, “ Har Gobind, thou art very clever in the 
science of arms. Thou hast killed thousands of my 
soldiers. Until I send thee where thou hast sent 
them, my debt will not be discharged.’ The Guru 
smiled and said, ‘ Kale Khan, the soldiers who have 
gone before are now awaiting thee. Thou abidest 
in sorrow here, therefore I am going to dispatch 
thee quickly to thy friends.’ 

Kale Khan, maddened by rage, discharged an arrow 
which whizzed past the Guru. A second arrow 
grazed the Guru’s forehead, and drops of blood 
bespattered his face, as if they were tilaks of 
victory. The Guru again addressed him, ‘I have 
seen thy science. Now observe mine.’ The Guru 
discharged an arrow which killed Kale Khan's 
horse. Kale Khan thus dismounted confronted the 

P2 

252 THE SITKA RELIGION 

Guru. The Guru thought it a point of honour also 
to dismount and offer his adversary a choice of 
arms. Kale Khan desired to fight with sword and 
shield. The Guru prepared to meet him with his 
own weapons. Sparks of fire issued from the clash 
of sword on sword. The Guru parried all his strokes. 
When not receiving them on his sword he dexterously 
stopped them with his shield. 

The chiefs of both armies fought thus for an hour, 
cut and guard. At last the Guru said to his adver- 
sary, ‘As thy name is Kale Khan, so Kal—death— 
knocketh at the gate of thy life.” Kale Khan on 
this became further enraged and dealt his blows 
recklessly and unskilfully. When the combat was 
becoming monotonous and the Guru had warded oft 
the last stroke, he said to his adversary, ‘ Not thus; 
this is the way to fence.’ The Guru, then putting 
forth all his strength, dealt Kale Khan a blow with 
his two-edged scimitar which severed his head from 
his body. On this the Musalmans and their leaders 
retreated like clouds before an Indian westerly wind. 
Bidhi Chand and Jati Mal shouted victory. On 
hearing this, Qasim Khan ran towards the Guru in 
the hope that he would fall on him unawares and 
have the drum of victory beaten for himself. The 
Guru warded off his blows for some time, and at last 
easily dispatched him to his departed friends. 

A Sikh subsequently asked the author of he 
Dabistan-1-M azahab, what the Guru meant by say- 
ing, “Not thus; this 1s the way to fence.’ Muhsan 
Fani replied that the Guru had not killed his enemy 
through hostility, but was merely giving him a lesson 
in sword-play.* 

It is said that several thousand Muhammadans but 
only seven hundred of the Guru’s brave and skilful 
Sikhs perished in this sanguinary battle. It ended 
an hour before nightfall on the 24th day of Har, 
Sambat 1691 (A.D. 1634). 

1 Dabtstan-1-Mazahab. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 213 

In the early morning the Guru determined to see 
his friend Budhan Shah, whose end was approaching, 
and who, the Guru well knew, was waiting for him 
near Kiratpur. The Guru started on his horse, and 
directed Bidhi Chand to follow with his family, and 
he would wait for them on the road. Bidhi Chand, 
taking charge of the Guru’s followers and some of his 
property, prepared for his journey. 

Dhir Mal and his mother Natti were the only 
members of the Guru’s family who did not accompany 
. him on his journey to Kiratpur. In the first place, 
Dhir Mal had turned traitor, and was ashamed to 
show his face to the Guru and his Sikhs. In the 
second place, he thought that, if he remained behind, 
he could take possession of all the Guru’s property, 
including the Granth Sahib. It will be remembered 
that Bidhi Chand had begun to make a copy of the 
sacred book. He told Dhir Mal that he had copied it 
as far as the Bilawal Rag, or more than one half of 
the whole, and, if he might take the Granth Sahib 
with him, he would soon finish copying the remainder. 
Dhir Mal replied, ‘Go to Kiratpur ; I will search the 
Guru’s house for the Granth Sahib, and if I find it, 
will send it to thee. When Bidhi Chand overtook 
the Guru, he told him of Dhir Mal’s continued con- 
tumacy. The Guru laughingly said, ‘ Kartarpur 
was founded by his ancestors. That is why he will 
not leaveit. He desires to improve it, and hence his 
remaining there. It was improper for him to break 
with his father and grandfather and to ally himself 
with the Muhammadans, but he is an incarnation of 
Prithia and means to establish a sect of hisown. Let 
the Granth Sahib remain with him. When the 
Sikhs feel devotion, they will deprive him of it.’ 

The Guru reached Phagwara on his journey. As 
the town was on the road to Lahore, whence reinforce- 
ments could easily be sent against him, he continued 
his march to Kiratpur. On arriving at the Satluj he 
pointed to a hill at the north, which he said the tenth 

214 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru would make his playground. Here the famous 
steed Dil Bagh, surnamed Jan Bhai, died from the 
effect of wounds in the recent battle. 

The Guru thence proceeded on his journey to 
Budhan Shah’s hut. Budhan Shah on awaking from 
a deep trance addressed him—‘ O true Guru, thou 
hast assumed birth to save the world. Although 
Gurus Nanak, Angad, Amar Das, Ram Das, Arjan, 
and thou have all had different bodies, they have 
been pervaded by the same light. My wishes -have 
been fulfilled, and, now that I behold thee, I have no 
further object in life. As thou hast come to me 
regardless of the care of thy body overspent in the 
fatigue of war, so assist me in the next world also. 
Guru Nanak promised me that I should behold him 
before my death, so his light in thee hath brightened 
my departure.’ 

The Guru left his son Baba Gurditta and Bidhi 
Chand with Budhan Shah, and, promising to return, 
departed to Kiratpur, which he made his permanent 
residence. There he bathed, performed his de- 
votions, and medicated his wound. Bidhi Chand 
inquired Budhan Shah’s age and circumstances. 
He replied, ‘In this Kal age few live for a hundred 
years, but by the Guru’s favour I have enjoyed a 
much longer span of life. Guru Nanak left milk with 
me and promised that a Sikh of his should return 
and drink it. Gurditta formerly came to me and 
received the trust. I pray him to deem me his 
servant and not forget me, and before he dieth to 
order his shrine to be made near mine.’ Baba 
Gurditta replied, ‘Why art thou sad? Remain 
with us for some time longer. Men worship thee, 
and thou art caressed and happy.’ Budhan Shah 
answered, ‘ However long I may remain, I must 
depart at last ; and this is the time to go while thou 
art by my side.’ 

The Guru returned from Kiratpur to Budhan Shah 
in time to bid him a last adieu. Budhan Shah 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 215 

grasped his feet and prayed for his intercession. His 
last words were, “My mind is sinful, evil passions 
have overmastered it. I have called myself Thy 
servant, O God, wherefore preserve the honour of 
Thy name.’ Saying this, Budhan Shah, fixing his 
thoughts on God, parted with his body. 

CHAPTER XXI 

After the Guru’s departure from Kartarpur, Dhir 
Mal possessed himself of a large amount of the 
Guru’s property. He then feared that the Emperor 
might send another army to wrest it from him and 
capture him in mistake for the Guru. He accordingly 
wrote to the Emperor, ‘ Sire, I desire thy victory and 
thy support, but thy troops were fated to die, so 
how could they be saved ? The Guru hath destroyed 
the whole army, but I am thy friend, and I pray thee 
to deem me so.’ 

The Emperor was distracted at the loss of his army. 
He said, ‘Several thousands of my troops slain ! 
Assuredly the Guru hath brought about the destruc- 
tion of the world!’ Wazir Khan, who by this time 
had returned to the Emperor, took the Guru’s part 
as he had so often done before. ‘ Sire, thou hast now 
ascertained for the fourth time that whosoever 
proceedeth with evil intention against the Guru, 
never returneth. Thine armies have been destroyed 
by the Guru’s supernatural power, and not by his 
material strength and strategy. Painda Khan was 
in the Guru’s secrets, but he died in return for his 
ingratitude and treachery. His family is ruined, 
and his town hath been swallowed up. I have often 
ventured to give thy Majesty advice, but thou hast 
deliberately sent thine armies to destruction.’ 

Then came Dhir Mal’s messenger with his letter. 
Wazir Khan read it to himself and was astonished at 
its contents. Whether the Emperor could read it 

210 THE SIKH RELIGION 

or not he accepted the following version of Dhir Mal’s 
missive from the lips of Wazir Khan: ‘O Sire, come 
to terms and be not at enmity with the Guru. Both 
thy steeds have been slain in battle, and there is now 
no hope of their recovery. The Guru is ever thine 
ally and well-wisher. Thou shalt have peace of 
mind by forgetting the past.’ It is to be feared 
that some Indian Rajas even in the present day have 
their communications read to them in this fashion, 
and are thus rendered incapable of administering 
their states. 

The Emperor was pleased at Wazir Khan’s version 
of Dhir Mal’s letter and said, ‘ Wazir Khan, thou 
gavest me good advice, but to my sorrow I did not 
accept it. Now write in reply that there shall be 
no enmity between the Guru and myself for the 
future.’ The ingenious Wazir Khan while adhering 
to the spirit of this order wrote a conciliatory letter 
to Dhir Mal. 

A messenger is said to have come about this time 
from an untraceable island in the Bay of Bengal to the 
Guru inviting him to go thither and bless the country. 
The Guru, however, could not leave his Sikhs to 
proceed to such a distant country, but deputed 
Bidhi Chand, who long before this had repented of 
his many misdeeds, to go and preach the principles 
of the Sikh religion. Bidhi Chand lost no time in 
executing the Guru’s order. On his way by the 
margin of the sea he arrived at a city called Devnagar. 
In an adjoining forest lived a fagir named Sundar 
Shah, who by the practice of painful austerities had 
obtained miraculous power and was extensively 
worshipped. Bidhi Chand rested under a withered 
tree outside the city, and in devotional ecstasy sang 
the following hymn of the third Guru :— 

The spring hath appeared ; the forests are in bloom ; 
Men and lower animals fixing their attention on God are 
flourishing. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND aT? 

It is in this way the heart becometh glad. 

Repeat God’s name day and night; under the Guru’s 
instruction pride is washed away. 

By preaching the verses and words of the true Guru 

This world becometh happy, and the true Guru is pleased. 

Fruit and flowers appear when God Himself causeth them. 

When man findeth the true Guru, he clingeth to the Root 
of joy. 

God is the spring ; all the world is His garden. 

Nanak, by perfect good fortune special service is obtained. 

It is said that on this the withered tree became 
green, and in consequence every one recognized 
Bidhi Chand’s miraculous power and did him homage. 
Sundar Shah on hearing of the miracle went riding 
on his tiger to see ‘the stranger. He expected that 
Bidhi Chand would incontinently take to flight on 
seeing the tiger. The crowd of worshippers round 
Bidhi Chand departed precipitately, but he fearlessly 
held his ground. Sundar Shah incited the animal 
to attack Bidhi Chand, but a glance from the latter 
changed, it is said, the animal into a pillar of stone. 
Sundar Shah and Bidhi Chand then held a religious 
discussion in which the former was vanquished. 

Sundar Shah pressed Bidhi Chand to remain with 
him, but he pleaded the Guru’s order to visit the 
island for which he was bound. He promised, how- 
ever, with the Guru’s permission, to return and spend 
his last days with Sundar Shah. Bidhi Chand went 
to his destination, preached the Sikh religion to the 
people, and made many converts. Having fulfilled 
the Guru’s instructions and accomplished his mission 
he returned to Kiratpur. 

The anonymous author of the Dabisian-t- 
Mazahab, who wrote under the nom de plume of 
Muhsan Fani, states that he corresponded with 
Guru Har Gobind, who always signed himself Nanak. 
That author’s testimony, therefore, regarding the 

1 Basant. 

218 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru we consider of the highest importance, and we 
shall give it as far as it extends :— 

Whilst the Guru and his party of Sikhs were at 
Kiratpur a Sikh called Bhairo cut off the nose of the 
goddess at Naina Devi, some ten miles distant. This 
was reported to the neighbouring Raja, who com- 
plained to the Guru of the outrage. Bhairo was 
summoned, and said he would admit the charge 
if the goddess herself attested it. Oneof the Raja’s 
courtiers said in reply, ‘O blockhead, how can the 
goddess speak ?’ Bhairo smiled and said, ‘We now 
know who the blockhead is. If the goddess cannot 
repel her assailant and give evidence against him, 
how can you hope for any advantage from her ?’ 
On this the Raja remained silent. 

One Jhanda, a very rich man, used to be very 
attentive to his devotions. When his foot was 
accidentally injured, Guru Har Gobind advised him 
not to wear shoes. Jhanda accordingly took off his 
shoes, and remained barefooted for three months. 
The Guru on hearing this said that he did not mean 
him to remain always barefooted, but only as long 
as his foot was sore. He then resumed his shoes. 
One day the Guru told his Sikhs to fetch firewood 
from the forest. Next day Jhanda was not to be 
found. The Sikhs searched for him, and about noon 
on the following day saw him with a bundle of fire- 
wood on his back. The Guru remonstrated with 
him for having undertaken such a menial office. 
He replied that the Guru had given an order to 
his Sikhs to fetch firewood, and, as he considered 
himself a Sikh, he decided to obey his order. Both 
these stories are given as instances of the Guru’s 
influence even over rich men. 

The Guru commissioned a man called Basava to 
proceed from Balkh to Iraq to purchase horses. As 
he had advanced one stage from Balkh, some one 
told him that his son had fallen suddenly ill, and 
advised him to return home. He replied, ‘If my 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 219 

son die, then let him die. There is sufficient fire- 
wood in the house to burn him. I will not flinch 
from my duty to the Guru.’ After his return home 
he heard that his son had died, but he felt no re- 
morse for having obeyed the Guru and proceeded 
on the journey he had undertaken. 

Muhsan Fani relates that as he was travelling 
with this man Basava from Kabul the fastening of 
his postin or sheep-skin jacket broke. Basava took 
off his janeu and gave it to him to tie his postin 
with, saying that janeus were best employed for 
such purposes. 

The Sikhs asked the Guru whom they should 
recognize as Guru when he was far away. He 
replied, ‘ Deem the Sikh who cometh to you with 
the Guru’s name on his lips as your Guru.’ The 
historian states that any one with the Guru’s name 
on his lips might then enter the house of a Sikh 
and receive welcome and hospitality. 

It became a custom of the Sikhs if any one of 
them desired a gift from heaven to mention his 
request before his brother Sikhs or before the Guru’s 
masands, and then all combined and prayed for 
the desired blessing. The Guru himself adopted 
the same custom. 

The Guru believed in one God. His disciples 
reprobate idol worship. They neither pray nor 
practise austerities in the Hindu fashion. They 
hold not sacred the temples of Hindus, or believe 
in their incarnations. They pay no regard to San- 
skrit compositions which the Hindus believe to be 
in the language of the gods. They believe that 
all the Gurus are the same as Nanak. The Sikhs 
are not restricted in the matter of eating or drinking. 
One Partap Mal, a learned man, said to a Hindu 
youth who felt caste restrictions irksome, and con- 
sequently desired to embrace Islam, ‘Why become a 
Muhammadan ? If thou desire to have no restrictions 
on what thou eatest and drinkest, then become a Sikh.’ 

220 THE SIKH. RELIGION 

The Sikhs increased under all the Gurus to such 
an extent that even in the time of Guru Arjan one 
or more representatives of the Sikh religion could 
be found in every Indian city. To such an extent 
was caste disregarded that Hindus of the Brahman 
caste became disciples of Sikh Khatris, for none of 
the Gurus was a Brahman ; and Khatris did homage 
to the Jat masands, who were a low section of 
Vaisyas. Guru Har Gobind gained a large number 
of followers in Kiratpur. He kept seven hundred 
horses in his stables, and always entertained three 
hundred horsemen and sixty artillery men. 

One day Baba Gurditta joined a hunting party. It 
happened that one of his Sikhs shot a cow by mistake 
for a deer. The shepherds came and arrested the 
offending Sikh. Baba Gurditta went to his assist- 
ance and offered to give compensation. The shep- 
herds, however, would have from the Guru’s son 
nothing less than the restoration of the cow to life. 
Gurditta found himself in a dilemma. If he restored 
the cow to life, the Guru would be angry, as he had 
been before with Baba Atal, and if he refused to 
satisfy the shepherds, they would detain his Sikh 
as a hostage. He was at last persuaded to reani- 
mate the cow. He accordingly put his cane on her 
head and said, ‘Arise, and eat thy grass!’ It is 
said that upon this the cow arose, and ran and 
joined the herd. 

The cause of Gurditta’s late return was inquired 
into, and he was obliged to give a narrative of the 
day’s events. The miracle wrought by him was 
reported to the Guru, who became angry, and said, 
‘It is not pleasing to me that any one should set 
himself up as God’s equal, and restore life to the 
dead." People die every day. Everybody will be 
bringing his dead to my door, and whom shall I 

1 Tt appears from this that the sixth Guru entertained no such special 

veneration for the cow as the Hindus have. He was only angry at 
the miracle wrought which altered the course of nature. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 22m 

select for reanimation ? Guru Nanak ordered that 
we should accept the will of God—‘ What pleaseth 
Thee, O Lord, 1s good.” If thou persist in doing 
acts contrary to God’s will thy further residence 
on earth is unprofitable.’ Baba Gurditta replied, 
‘Mayest thou live for ever! I depart.’ He then 
circumambulated the Guru in token of offering him- 
self as a sacrifice to him, and took his departure 
for Budhan Shah’s shrine. On arriving there he 
drove his cane into the ground, lay down, and, in 
the words of the Sikh chronicler, crossed the stream 
of the troubles of life at the early age of twenty-four 
years, in the Sambat year 1695 (A. D. 163 8). 

When Baba Gurditta did not return within a 
reasonable time, the Guru caused search to be 
instituted for him. His body was ultimately dis- 
covered. The Guru himself went to behold it, and 
was followed by other members of the family of the 
deceased, who mourned his untimely fate. 

After this the Guru sent to Kartarpur for Dhir Mal, 
Baba Gurditta’s elder son, and the Granth Sahib of 
which he had been left in custody. The Guru in- 
tended that the holy volume should be read for the 
repose of Gurditta’s soul, and also that Dhir Mal 
should be present to receive a turban after his 
father’s death in token of succession to his property 
and position. Dhir Mal possessed extraordinary 
acuteness for one so young. He said to himself, 
‘If I leave the land and money which have come 
into my possession and go for a turban to the Guru, 
every one will think me a fool. I have the Granth 
Sahib and I will keep it. He then addressed the 
messenger, ‘My father is not in Kiratpur. To 
whom shall I go? It is through fear of the Guru 
my father died. I do not desire to die yet. I will 
myself have the Granth Sahib read here for my 
deceased father. I do not deem it advisable to 
leave my property in charge of servants. My 
younger brother Har Rai is with the Guru. The 

222 THE SIKH RELIGION 

turban may be bound on him. What business have 
[ in Kiratpur ?’ 

The messenger represented to him, ‘ Thou art 
still young, and oughtest to be subject to thy grand- 
father the Guru. Itis thy duty to obey him. Come 
by all means with the Granth Sahib to the Guru. 
Leave thy property in charge of thy servants, who 
are trustworthy. Thou mayest afterwards return 
and take charge of it. Be not too much in love 
with earthly things. Obey the order of the Guru.’ 
Dhir Mal then volunteered the following statement, 
‘T have written to the Emperor and entered into 
an alliance with him. I have informed him that 
I now hold no parley with the Guru. If I go to 
the Guru, I shall prove false to the Emperor. And 
if the Emperor become angry and sack the city, to 
whom shall I go for redress ? I will not give up the 
Granth Sahib.’ Dhir Mal’s object was to secure the 
Guruship for himself. He hoped that, as long as he 
kept the sacred volume in his possession, the Sikhs 
would look on him as their religious leader. The 
messenger, however, failing to persuade Dhir Mal, 
succeeded in taking Natti, Dhir Mal’s widowed 
mother, to the Guru. When the Guru heard that 
Dhir Mal declined his invitation, he merely said, 
‘Mammon is very powerful. It hath led the world 
astray. Dhir Mal is a very unfortunate child.’ 

The Guru now sent for Bhai Bhana, son of Bhai 
Budha. Bhai Bhana on the way from his village 
of Ramdas called at Batala, and thence took with 
him Gurditta’s parents-in-law to the Guru. There 
was a great gathering of Sikhs at Kiratpur on the 
occasion. Bidhi Chand read the Granth Sahib as 
far as he had copied it for Gurditta’s repose. Bhai ° 
Rup Chand also presented himself on the occasion. 
His father had died not long previously. All friends 
and relations appeared and mourned Gurditta’s un- 
timely fate. They praised his virtues, his beauty, 
his affability, and his bravery. The Guru offered 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 223 

them all words of consolation, and begged them to 
dry their tears. He explained that Dhir Mal had 
acted with great treachery, and would neither come 
himself nor send the Granth Sahib. He would 
therefore bind the turban on the head of Har Rai, 
Dhir Mal’s youngest brother. Though very young in 
years, he was deemed worthy of succession to his 
grandfather. 

Suraj Mal, the Guru’s son by the Marwahi, was 
intelligent and performed his secular duties to his 
father’s satisfaction. Ani Rai, the Guru’s son by 
Nanaki, was a religious enthusiast. Teg Bahadur, 
the Guru’s son, also born of Nanaki, was worldly 
contempt incarnate. Satisfied that the world was 
transitory, he mixed not in it, but delighted in 
solitude. One day the Guru’s wife Nanaki addressed 
him, “O my lord, thou ever showest great kindness 
to Har Rai, who is only thy grandson, but thou 
never regardest thine own son Teg Bahadur, who 
is simple and unsophisticated. Fulfil my wishes to 
put him on thy throne.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Teg 
Bahadur is a Guru of gurus. There is none who 
can endure the unendurable so well as he. He hath 
obtained divine knowledge and renounced worldly 
love. If thou have patience the Guruship shall 
revert to him. From him shall be born a warrior 
who shall smite the Turks, free the earth from the 
burden of the evil, render Guru Nanak’s name 
illustrious, and spread his own glory and fame to 
the uttermost bounds of the world.’ 

The Marwahi dreamt that the late Damodari 
appeared to her and said, ‘ My sister, leave the 
world now. It is good to leave the fair when it 
is at its height. If thou live, thou shalt be greatly 
pained at the Guru’s death. If thou come with me, 
we shall both abide together in Sach Khand where 
there is perpetual happiness, where sorrow, sickness 
and death enter not, and where night and day the 
saints are ever hymning the Creator’s praise.’ 

224 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Marwahi on awaking related her dream to 
the Guru. He gave his interpretation to the effect 
that her end was near, and repeated for her the 
following hymn of Guru Nanak :— 

No one liveth as long as he desireth, or obtaineth his 
object. 

He who possesseth divine knowledge liveth for ever; it 
is he who remembereth God who is ever honoured. 

By ever husbanding life it passeth away in vain. 

Nanak, to whom shall we complain? Death taketh us 
away even without our permission. 

‘If thou desire to go,’ continued the Guru, ‘ I will 
quickly follow thee.’ She called her son Suraj Mal, 
told him she was going to leave the world, and 
begged him to be patient and mourn not for her. 
She impressed on him the propriety of ever obeying 
his father. She then called the other members of 
the family and took leave of them. Putting herself 
in a devotional attitude she recited the Japji, and 
repeating the true Name, the holy Wahguru, re- 
signed her spirit to her Creator. 

On the tenth day after Marwahi’s death Bidhi 
Chand finished reading for the repose of her soul 
the portions of the Granth Sahib he had copied. 
Her son Suraj Mal duly received a turban and a 
shawl on the occasion. The Guru now became daily 
sadder and resigned every comfort. He removed 
a comfortable mattress on which he had slept and 
only put one sheet under him. Pillows he entirely 
rejected. 

The Guru kept Har Rai continually beside him, 
and taught him worldly and spiritual knowledge. 
One day a Sikh called Daya Ram, from Anupshahr 
on the bank of the Ganges, appeared before the 
Guru. He had come with people of his country and 
some members of his family to do homage to the 
Guru. His daughters had previously heard of Har 

1 Supplementary sloks. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 225 

Rai and conceived a desire to wed him collectively. 
On seeing Har Rai the Guru’s grandson, Daya Ram 
betrothed his daughters to him. The nuptial cere- 
monies took place on the tenth day of Har, Sambat 
1697 (A.D. 1640). 

CHAPTER XXII 

Bidhi Chand after a stormy, eventful, and perilous 
life felt that his end was approaching. He remem- 
bered his promise to Sundar Shah to return to him 
that they might go to paradise together, and asked 
the Guru’s permission to proceed on his long terres- 
trial and celestial journeys. The Guru addressed him 
the following parting words: ‘ All worldly persons 
dread death; but the holy fear it not, and are 
happy since they exchange bodies, which are mines 
of sorrow and disease, for bodies which are like 
celestial light, and they roam for ever in the 
blissful fields of Sach Khand. Take Sundar Shah 
with thee to the Guru’s heaven, and I will come 
to you soon.’ Bidhi Chand put his son Lal Chand’s 
hand into the Guru’s and said, ‘I pray thee to 
cherish my son as thy servant.’ He then addressed 
his son, ‘ If thou desire to obtain the wishes of thy 
heart and to live happy, be faithful to the Guru 
and ever serve and obey him.’ Saying this, the old 
man’s eyes filled with tears. The Guru tenderly 
embraced him, and offered him further words of 
consolation—‘ This body is temporary and abideth 
not. How long can one keep life, which is like a 
mud vessel which breaketh sooner or later and 
alloweth its contents to flow away ? Look to thy 
soul, which is an emanation from God, and not to 
thy material body.’ Bidhi Chand on hearing this 
bowed to the Guru’s feet and, bidding farewell to 
the assembled Sikhs, went to join Sundar Shah and 
prepare for the road to paradise. 

Bidhi Chand after his toilsome and tedious journey 

SIKH, IV Q 

226 THE SIKH RELIGION 

to the south of India found his friend Sundar Shah 
contemplating God in a fit of abstraction. He said 
to him, ‘ My friend, arise, find a home with comfort 
and peace in God’s palace, and return not again to 
this world.’ Sundar Shah opening his eyes said, 
‘Brother, by thy favour my mind is at peace and 
all fear of death is dispelled. I have waited for 
thee, and now the wish of my heart is gratified.’ 
The people of the village came to see the devout 
Sikh from the Panjab, and received divine instruction 
from him for the space of three days. 

The fourth day, before Bidhi Chand arose for his 
devotions, he saw in a vision Bhais Budha, Paira, 
Pirana, Gur Das, Langaha, Jetha, and a whole 
assembly of departed Sikh saints. He heard them 
say, ‘“O Bidhi Chand, congratulations! By re- 
pentance and service to the Guru thou hast 
made thy life profitable. Come now with us to 
abide in Sach Khand.’ Bidhi Chand on hearing 
this trembled with joy. When he related his 
vision to Sundar Shah they both agreed to aban- 
don their bodies and proceed to join the bliss- 
ful Sikhs in their heavenly abode. The date of 
Bidhi Chand’s death is given as the eighth day of 
the light half of Bhadon, Sambat 1697. The Guru 
caused his partially copied Granth to be read for 
Bidhi Chand’s eternal repose, and bound a turban 
on his son Lal Chand’s head. 

The Guru continued to be very thoughtful. His 
discourses were ever on the transitory nature of 
human life and the propriety of accepting the divine 
will. One day in spring, as he was seated alone in 
his garden, he saw the flower-beds blooming and 
the creepers adorning and clinging to the trees like 
loving and chaste wives to their husbands. He 
began to reflect on the many benefits which trees 
conferred on man. Their leaves, blossoms, fruit, 
branches, bark, shade, timber are all for human 

1 Guru Arjan, Gauri Pirbi. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 227 

advantage. Whoever cometh to them with hope 
never goeth away disappointed. Even they who 
heartlessly throw stones at them receive their fruit. 
They supply food, covering, carriages, ships, utensils, 
furniture, perfume, and countless other favours. 

While the Guru was thus reflecting, Har Rai 
approached on horseback. On seeing the Guru at 
a distance he alighted and hastened to make his 
obeisance. He was dressed in the style of a noble- 
man of the time in a loose-flowing robe composed 
of one hundred and one pieces. ‘The wind expanded 
it, and it broke several flowers as the wearer pro- 
ceeded to the Guru. Har Rai on seeing the damage 
his dress had caused sat down and wept, saying, 
‘Alas! I have spoiled these flowers.’ A Sikh who 
had observed the occurrence informed the Guru. 
The Guru went and inquired why Har Rai was thus 
seated in sorrow. Har Rai dulyinformed him. The . 
Guru then said, ‘ Wear thy robe by all means, but 
lift up thy skirts when walking. It behoveth God’s 
servant to be tender to all things.’ Har Rai ever 
after remembered the Guru’s instruction as to how 
he was to carry his robe. 

When the Guru was pressed by some Sikhs to 
appoint his second son Suraj Mal as his successor, 
he replied, ‘ The Guruship is a heavy burden. Only 
the worthy can support it. The aspirant to it may 
know how to prophesy, but should keep his secrets 
to himself. Though he see offences he should 
forgive them. He should assist his Sikhs in their 
time of tribulation and give servants the reward of 
their services. Deeming the things of this world 
perishable, he should not covet them. Only he 
who possesseth these virtues is worthy to be a Guru. 
The Guru’s masands and servants are worthy of 
respect and receive offerings, but my son Suraj 
Mal is more worthy than they. He shall obtain 
other things—wealth, property, children—but the 
Guruship is the heritage of Har Rai.’ 

QO 2 

228 THE SIKH RELIGION 

One day the Guru received a letter to the effect 
that Manohar Das, the great-grandson of Guru Amar 
Das, was dead. Upon this the Guru remained for 
some time absorbed in thought. He then said, 
‘Congratulations to the saints! His name was 
Manohar—heart-stealing—and of a truth he stole 
God’s heart.’ A Kashmiri Sikh on hearing this 
inquired what virtues Manohar possessed that he 
received this extravagant eulogy. The Guru replied 
with great affection, ‘Manohar Das used to take 
Guru Arjan in his lap and play with him. It was 
by service to the Guru he obtained his greatness. 
He was free from covetousness, worldly love, and 
wrath, and never desired the world’s praises. His 
dependence was on the Name. That is why I con- 
geratulated him. I had myself intended to wait on 
him, but I was engaged in warfare, and now that 
he hath departed my opportunity of serving him 
hath gone.’ 

The Guru dispatched a letter to Anand Kai, 
Manohar Das’s son, who was living in Goindwal, 
and invited him to visit him. Anand Kai, over- 
joyed at the honour done him, speedily set out. 
The Guru went to meet him, and on account of the 
affection he bore him joined in carrying his palki.* 
Anand Rai, who did not desire such condescension 
from the Guru, alighted and said, ‘ Thou art on the 
Guru’s throne and a mine of virtue. Thou treatest 
me as of higher dignity than thyself, but I am not 
equal to the dust of thy feet. What if the bamboo 
groweth very tall? It is not equal in value to the 
smallest sandal tree.’ The Guru took his arm, con- 
ducted him to his private apartments, and ministered 
to his every comfort. Anand Kai persisted in saying 
that he was the Guru’s servant. This the Guru 
would not admit, and apologized to him for not 
having waited on him before for want of opportunity. 
‘ Without service to the saints,’ the Guru continued, 

1 Generally known as a palanquin. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 229 

‘life is vain and profitless. It is by such service 
the advantage of human birth is obtained.’ Anand 
Rai replied, ‘Thou hast lifted my palki as an ex- 
ample of humility to others. Kindly grant that my 
mind may continue lowly, that I. may be a true 
Sikh, and that worldly love may not enter my 
heart.’ The Guru replied, ‘ They who serve without 
hope of reward obtain distinction, but they who 
serve with ulterior motives merely accumulate sin.’ 

While the Guru and Anand Rai were thus con- 
versing, Man Singh and other servants of the latter 
arrived. The Guru respectfully seated them near 
him. He offered a tray full of rupees to Anand 
Rai, but he would not accept them. Anand Rai 
would not touch money of any description for the 
following reason. While Guru Amar Das was medi- 
tating on God, his son Mohri used to receive the 
offerings of the Sikhs. One day, while handling 
money, his hands became black, and he showed them 
to his father who said, ‘ My son, silver is white and 
beautiful, but when thou takest it into thy hands 
it turneth them black. In the same way the minds 
of those who covet it become black; and they 
fight and quarrel with one another until death 
releaseth them from their struggles.’ The Guru 
said to Anand Rai, ‘If thou wilt not accept my 
offering, then distribute the money among the 
needy.’ Upon this Anand Rai accepted it, saying 
that as it was a present from the Guru he would 
make it an exception. The Guru sent an escort of 
honour with him. 

A rebeck-player called Babak is_ frequently 
mentioned in the life of the sixth Guru. He was 
a very devout and able servant of the Guru 
and assisted in attracting listeners to the temple. 
After service one morning he told the Guru that he 
had been very happy with him. He had risen 
rapidly from the position of humble player to that 
of honoured courtier of the Guru. He prayed the 

230 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru to give his son the same position and dignity 
he had held himself. The Guru consoled him on 
his departure— His turn shall come to every one. 
No one may abide here. The day of departure is 
certain for all. Repeat the true Name which 
assisteth in both worlds. I will as long as I live 
protect thy sons and grandsons. By the power of 
the Word thy father obtained happiness. Thou too 
shalt be happy. Nothing shall be wanting to those 
who possess the Gurus’ hymns. He who readeth 
them and renounceth worldly love shall have the 
four great boons as his attendants.’ Babak took his 
leave, repaired to his house, and there with Wah- 
guru on his lips died a painless death. 

One day the Guru, observing Jati Mal’s devoted 
service, thus addressed him, ‘ Thy father Singha was 
with me in my first battle. Thou hast been with 
me in three battles, and bravely hast thou sus- 
tained thy part in destroying enemies. Thou lovest 
me, and art even a greater warrior than thy father. 
Thy son Daya Ram shall be with my grandson, 
Guru Gobind Singh, and assist in destroying the 
Turks. I am delighted with thy conspicuous gal- 
lantry, and invite thee to ask any gift in my power 
to bestow.’ Jati Mal replied that the only boon he 
desired was that at the last moment he might not 
suffer the pain of death, but remember God and be 
released from further transmigration. The Guru 
replied, ‘ The time for thy departure is nigh. Birth 
and death are the law of the body; hunger and 
thirst of life ; weal and woe of the senses ; joy and 
mourning of the mind. The soul is pure as ether. 
When it through ignorance taketh on itself the 
duties of body, life, senses, and mind, it becometh 
subject to desires and doubts, and falleth into 
worldly entanglements; but when it hath freed 
itself from these it obtaineth salvation and becometh 
absorbed in divine happiness. The soul associating 
with worldly wisdom falleth into ignorance and for- 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 231 

getteth God. The mind yielding to the senses mis- 
leadeth wisdom and falleth into sin. It is to the 
body the senses are attached. When the soul 
through divine knowledge separateth from the body, 
then it becometh pure, obtaineth salvation, is ab- 
sorbed in celestial happiness, and beholdeth God. 
Be not afraid of death, and be not desirous of life. 
Know the Creator who cherisheth all His creatures; 
then shalt thou be free from all mortal ills and 
obtain peace.’ On hearing this Jati Mal’s mind was 
happy. He put his son’s hand into the Guru’s, 
upon which the Guru assured him of the youth’s 
future welfare. Jati Mal went home, repeated Sat 
Nam Wahguru, and gave up his spirit. The Guru 
on hearing of his death, said :— 

The love of the worshipper shall go with him to the end. 
While alive he worshipped his Master, and at his departure 
kept Him in his heart.! 

The Guru deeply felt the loss of so many friends 
and relations, and thought it was time for himself, 
too, to depart and follow them. Preparing for death 
he abandoned all mundane affairs, and distributed his 
private property among those who had a claim to 
it. He then ordered the masands to collect all his 
Sikhs and bring them to him on the first day of 
the moon in the month of Chet. His Sikhs accord- 
ingly thronged from every quarter to see their Guru 
and do him homage on the day appointed. 

The Guru sent again for his grandson Dhir Mal, 
who was still living in Kartarpur. Dhir Mal being 
in possession of the Granth Sahib replied, “I am 
already a guru. If the Guru supersede me and 
appoint my younger brother, what shall it avail me 
to go to Kiratpur ?’ The messenger then went to 
Dhir-Mal’s mother and represented to her that people 
had come in thousands from all parts to the Guru, 
and it would not be right for her and her son 

. Maru. 

292 THE SIKH RELIGION 

to remain absent at such a critical time. Dhir 
Mal’s mother tried to persuade him to go to the 
Guru. She said, ‘Fail not to take thy place in the 
family circle. Thou art his eldest grandson. He 
appeareth, it is true, to love thy younger brother 
more. But go to the Guru in any case. Thou shalt 
have an honourable reception. If thou even now 
please him, he may appoint thee his successor.’ 

Dhir Mal persisted, ‘I possess the Granth, which 
is the outward and tangible sign of Guruship. The 
Guru may appoint whomsoever he pleaseth. I will 
deprive his nominee of the dignity, as I am on good 
terms with the Emperor. I hold this city of Kar- 
tarpur. Why should I go to the Guru?’ His 
mother replied, ‘The Guru will neither take the 
Granth nor the city from thee. He hath two grand- 
sons of whom thou art the elder. Thou shalt obtain 
greatness by pleasing him. When the Sikhs see 
thee seated near him, they will recognize thee as 
his elder grandson. If thou go not to him, who 
will acknowledge thee ? He is now about to appoint 
a successor. If he choose to bestow the Guruship on 
one of thine uncles, we cannot help it. But whether 
he giveth it to thee or not, have thyself respected 
by showing that thou art on friendly terms with 
him.’ 

These arguments were successful. Dhir Mal 
mounted his horse and proceeded to Kiratpur. 
The Guru received him affectionately. After the 
usual commonplaces of meeting and salutation 
Dhir Mal said, ‘I have written to the Emperor and 
adjusted the difference between thee and him. 
Therefore it is that thou dwellest in happiness and 
security.. When the Guru heard this he thought 
to himself, “This youth is deceitful and proud, and 
consequently not fit for the Guruship.’ Dhir Mal 
remained with the Guru and had ample opportunity 
of seeing that Har Rai was his favourite. It hap- 
pened that the Guru kept his private apartments 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 233 

for three days. Dhir Mal thought that that would 
be a good opportunity to put himself forward as 
the Guru’s successor, so in consultation with his 
masands he erected a throne, raised a canopy over 
it, and took his seat as Guru. When the Guru 
heard of this usurpation, he said, ‘I sent for him 
to receive my parting instruction, but he hath come 
to practise deceit and guile. The succession to the 
Guruship dependeth on the Guru’s pleasure, and can 
only be obtained by service, humility, and devotion. 
It is not to be obtained by pride and trickery.’ 
Dhir Mal on hearing this became very angry, and 
gave expression to his feelings, ‘Am I not the 
Guru’s grandson ? [ am heir to the Guruship. The 
Guru may give it to whomsoever he pleaseth. I 
have the power to take it from him afterwards. 
It is my mother who hath brought this disgrace 
on me by persuading me to come here.’ Saying 
this Dhir Mal mounted his horse and rode back to 
Kartarpur. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

When the Guru’s Sikhs in response to his summons 
arrived from all quarters in Kiratpur, the Holi 
festival was being celebrated according to Sikh 
ritual. On that occasion the following hymn of 
Guru Arjan was sung :— 

Let us worship the Guru! and make obcisance to Him. 
To-day is our day of rejoicing ; 
To-day we are very happy ; 
Our anxieties have departed since we have met God. 
To-day spring is in our hearts,? 
And, O God, we sing Thine endless praises. 
To-day our Phagan is celebrated.* 
> God 

2 Literally—houses, but the word is often used for the heart. 
3 The Holi is celebrated in the month of Phagan. 

234 THE SIKH RELIGION 

We begin to play on meeting God’s companions ; 
Our service to them shall be our Holi. 

The very red colour of God attacheth to us ;1 
Our souls and bodies bloom beyond comparison, 
And wither not in shade or sunshine ; 

They flourish in all seasons. 

It is ever spring when we meet the divine Guru: 
Then the tree of life is produced for us, 

And beareth many gems of flower and fruit. 

We are cloyed and satiated singing God’s praises— 
The slave Nanak meditateth on God.? 

The following hymn was sung to remind the 
Sikhs that their time must not be spent in 
frivolity :— 

Man is led astray by recreation and varied amusements 
and by the pleasures of the eyesight. 

Such delights are unreal, for even kings and emperors are 
involved in anxiety. 

My brethren, happiness is obtained by association with 
saints. 

Sorrow and anxiety depart from him for whom God hath 
so destined. 

I have wandered through all countries, and observed that 

Lords of wealth and great lords of the soil perished 
speaking of their property ; 

They fearlessly enforced their orders, and treated men 
with haughtiness ; 

They subjected every one to them, but being without 
the Name they were blended with the dust. 

Great monarchs, at whose gates stood the thirty-three 
karors of gods, Sidhs, and Strivers as servants, 

Whose dominion was over mountain and sea, all passed 
away, Nanak, like a dream.* 

1 The word rang means either colour or love. + Basant. 

3 These two lines are also translated— 

Those who enjoy much recreation, varied amusements, and plea- 
sures which lead the senses astray ; 

Who enjoy regal and imperial state, are involved in anxiety. 

4 Guru Arjan, Sri Rag. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 235 

The Guru added the following more particular 
instructions regarding the observance of the Holi 
festival : “He who drinketh wine and throweth mud 
and dust and blackeneth his face, shall have dust 
thrown on his head, and his face shall be blackened 
in the next world ; while he who uttereth lascivious 
expressions shall suffer pain in the lowest hell. It 
is those who take delight in the true Name who 
enjoy the real Holi; and it is for this purpose the 
soul obtaineth human birth in this world. Guru 
Arjan hath said :— 

Man hath come to hear and read God’s word. 

Vain is the human birth of those mortals who, forgetting 
the Name, conceive worldly desires. 

Understand this, O thoughtless man, that the saints have 
told the story of the Ineffable One. 

Receive the gain of worshipping God in thy heart, and 
thy transmigration shall be at an end. 

Effort, power, and cleverness are Thine; if Thou grant 
them to me, I will repeat Thy name. 

They are servants, and it is they, O Nanak, who are 
attached to service, who are pleasing to God.’! 

A day was appointed for a great assemblage at 
which the Guru’s successor was to be consecrated. 
When all were assembled Guru Har Gobind rose, 
clasped his hands in an attitude of supplication, and 
uttered a prayer to the Supreme Being for the 
success of the day’s proceedings. Then, taking Har 
Rai by the hand, he seated him on the throne of 
Guru Nanak. Bhai Bhana, son of Bhai Budha, 
affixed the tilak to Har Rai’s forehead and decorated 
him with a necklace of flowers. The Guru putting 
five paise—farthings—and a coco-nut on a tray 
offered them to Har Rai. He then circumambulated 
him- four times, bowed to him, and gave him the 
following instructions :—‘ A watch and a quarter 
before day, shake off sleep, rise, bathe, and recite 

I Sarang. 

236 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the Japji, which is the Guru’s spell. Be gentle in 
thy demeanour. Obtrude not thyself, repeat the 
Name, and cause others to do so. Sit in the com- 
pany of thy holy Sikhs twice a day.’ After this 
and similar instruction to his successor, the Guru 
addressed the Sikhs, ‘ In Har Rai now recognize me. 
The spiritual power of Guru Nanak hath entered 
him.’ Upon this the assembled Sikhs shouted con- 
gratulations and the minstrels began to sing. The 
heralds then announced that this was the seventh 
Guru duly appointed and consecrated. Bards and 
minstrels chanted the young Guru’s genealogy and 
eulogies. All were unanimous in saying that Har 
Rai, who by service had pleased his grandfather 
Guru Har Gobind, well merited the exalted position 
he had attained. 

Guru Har Gobind’s wife Nanaki thus addressed 
her spouse: ‘Thou didst promise that my son 
should be a Guru of the world, and that thy grand- 
son should be a greater warrior than thou. My 
lord, when shall this prophecy be fulfilled >’ The 
Guru replied, ‘I have told thee that thy son shall 
be a Guru, and he certainly shall. Everything 
cometh by patience.’ Go now to the village of Ba- 
kala, where my mother Ganga’s cenotaph is, and 
there abide. The Guru asked Suraj Mal what boon 
he desired for himself. He at once replied, ‘ To 
be a real Sikh.’ The Guru said, ‘ Well done! my 
son, well done! mayest thou live long! Thou shalt 
greatly flourish. Thine offspring shall be rich and 
reverenced. Abide with Har Rai, and thou shalt 
obtain all spiritual and temporal blessings.’ 

The Guru then retired for introspection and divine 
meditation into a house called Patalpuri, which he 
had constructed on the margin of the Satluj, and, 
as the other Gurus had done, exhorted his people 
not to mourn for him. ‘ This visible and tangible 
body is false, God alone is true.’ 

Bibi Viro his daughter came to him with tears 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 237 

in her eyes and said, “My mother departed and left 
me. Thou hast since then been a mother as well 
as a father to me. What shall I do without thee ?’ 
The Guru gave her every consolation, and thus con- 
cluded his address to her, ‘Sorrow not for me. 
Everything that is born must perish. Thou shalt 
have sons who shall fight on the side of thy nephew 
the tenth Guru, and display great valour.’ Guru 
Har Gobind then addressed words of parting or of 
advice and instruction to his friends and relations 
around him. 

Guru Har Rai put the departing Guru a question 
which needed an urgent reply—‘ O great king, thine 
enmity with the Turks hath ceased. The Emperor 
is possessed of treasure, arms, and fortresses. If 
he proceed against me, how am I to act?’ Guru 
Har Gobind replied, ‘Have no anxiety. He who 
proceedeth against thee with enmity in his heart 
shall never prevail against thee. God will be with 
thee and assist thee. Keep two thousand two 
hundred mounted soldiers ever with thee.’ 

To his Sikhs generally he said, ‘ The seventh king 
Guru Har Rai is now on Guru Nanak’s throne. 
I have attached you to the hem of his garment. 
If you serve him you shall obtain the fruit your 
hearts desire. He holdeth the storehouses both of 
salvation and of worldly enjoyment.’ When the 
Sikhs pressed him for further instruction he repeated 
the following hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

What is the moonlight on your floor? Better is God’s 
light within you. 

Among forms of worship, the best is the worship of God’s 
name. 

Among things to be relinquished, the best is the relin- 
quishment of lust, wrath, and avarice. 

Among things to be prayed for, best is it to pray to the 
Guru for God’s praises. 

Among vigils, the best is to awake to sing God’s praises. 

238 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Among things to be attached to, the best is attachment 
to the Guru’s feet. 

These things shall be obtained by him on whose forehead 
such destiny hath been written. 

Saith Nanak, he who hath entered God’s asylum findeth 
everything good.! 

The Guru, having recited this hymn, thus addressed 
his Sikhs and his family: ‘When I am gone, be 
glad and rejoice. I am now departing to my final 
home. Let there be no mourning in my house, but 
let every one rely on God. He who obeyeth my 
words shall be dear to me, and shall obtain salvation 
with me. Ever love the Guru’s hymns, and regale 
your hearts by reading and listening to them. 
Remember the true Name with devotion, and be 
daily more and more intoxicated with its sweetness.’ 

The Guru then caused attar of roses, saffron, and 
sandal to be sprinkled in all his apartments, and 
a great feast to be provided for his Sikhs. His 
rebeck-players he rewarded with money, clothes, and 
sweets. 

The Sikh writers state that at the Guru’s death 
the sky appeared rose-red, and there was soft singing 
heard in the firmament. Cool and fragrant zephyrs 
blew. All good-hearted and saintly men, dwellers 
on high who had attained the most exalted position, 
demigods, and Sidhs, singing his praises came to 
receive him, and shouted ‘ Victory! victory!’ 

The Guru was borne on a beautiful bier amid the 
singing of hymns, amongst which the following 
passage from the Sukhmani received special promi- 
nence :— 

He who knoweth God must always be happy, 

And God will blend him with Himself. 

He in whose heart God dwelleth is wealthy, 

Of high family, honoured, and obtaineth salvation during 
life. 

1 Maru Ashtapadi. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 239 

Hail! hail! hail! a man hath come 

By whose favour the whole world shall be saved. 
The object of his coming was 

That through him the Name might be remembered. 
He was saved himself and he saved the world : 

To him, Nanak, I ever make obeisance. 

The author of the Dabistan-1-Mazahab, who ap- 
pears to have been present at the Guru’s death, 
states that he died on Sunday the third day of the 
Muharrim, A. H. 1055 (A. D. 1645), after a spiritual 
and temporal reign of thirty-seven years and ten 
months." 

After the Guru’s cremation Lal Chand, son of Bidhi 
Chand, read the Granth as far as his father Bidhi 
Chand had copied it, that is, as far as the end of 
the Bilawal Rag. 

When the death ceremonies were all completed, 
Mata Nanaki and her son Teg Bahadur set out, 
according to the late Guru’s order, for Bakala, where 
they both dwelt until Teg Bahadur obtained the 
Guruship. Bhai Budha’s son Bhana entrusted his 
son Sarwan to the new Guru, and went to Ramdas, 
where he died. 

Bhai Gur Das in the following has briefly summed 
up the attributes of the first six Gurus :— 

The divine Guru Nanak was the Guru of gurus ; 

In an unseen and inscrutable manner he was absorbed 
in Angad, 

Who was absorbed in an unseen and invisible manner in 
Amar the immortal. 

1 Hinduised Sikh chroniclers have invented a story that the Guru 
caused himself to be shut up in Patalpuri, and ordered Guru Har Rai 
to lock the door and not open it until the seventh day. This, ac- 
cording to Abulfazl, was deemed by the Hindus the most meritorious 
form of death, and so ignorant and superstitious persons have at- 
tributed to the Guru this form of suicide. Had it occurred, it would 
certainly have been recorded by Muhsan Fani among the other details 
given by him. 

240 THE SIR RELTCION 

The nectar trickled into the mouth of him who was called 
Ram Das, the destroyer of enemies :1 

Guru Arjan by serving him bore his burden. 

Guru Har Gobind the measureless churned the nectar, 

And took his seat on eternal truth. 

He strung the Word of the Ungraspable and Unknowable 
Spirit. 

Under the Guru’s instruction he filled what could not be 
filled, and dispelled doubt and fear.” 

Another poet has composed the following on the 
same subject : 

The first Guru established this custom—he became the 
Guru’s slave and was called the Guru of his slaves (Sikhs). 

Amar Das by serving Guru Angad was proclaimed the 
true Guru. 

Ram Das by serving Amar Das as his servant pleased 
thie Gad. 

Guru Arjan obtained the nectareous fruit from Guru Ram 
Das whose nature was incomprehensible. 

Guru Har Gobind, the superior being, caused Guru Arjan 
to hail him as Guru. | 

The Guru cannot possibly be concealed from those who 
have obtained some knowledge by his favour. 

1 That is, the deadly sins. 2 Gur Das, War III. 

241 

omAl GURK DASS ANALYSIS OF THE 
Sith RELIGION 

WE have now arrived at a stage in the history of 
the Sikh Gurus and of the Sikh reformation when 
the religion of Guru Nanak may be said to have been 
consolidated by his genius, by the impress he left 
on his successors, by their general fidelity to his 
teachings and example, and by the piety and industry 
of Guru Arjan. 

The first five Gurus were, as we have seen, all 
sacred bards. The last of them, in addition to 
copious original compositions of his own, collected all 
the hymns of his predecessors into one volume in 
order to be a guide to Sikhs forall time. The sixth, 
seventh, and eighth Gurus have left no written 
memorials of their teachings. It, therefore, appears 
fitting at this stage to give the analysis of the tenets 
of the Sikh religion which is contained in the Wars of 
Bhai Gur Das, who was a contemporary of the 
fourth, fifth, andsixth Gurus, and who was acquainted 
with them and their contemporaries, especially Bhai 
Budha, an aged Sikh who had survived from the 
time of Guru Nanak. 

Gur Das’s Wars are forty in number. Each war 
is divided into a varying number of pauris, and 
each pauri contains from five to ten lines. The 
language is old and very difficult Panjabi. The Wars 
from which the following extracts are taken are 
given in the notes. 

The advantage of the society of the holy :— 

Trees which grow near sandal are perfumed like sandal. 
If any of the eight metals be touched by the philosopher’s 
stone, it becometh gold. As rivers, streams, and water- 

SIKH. IV R 

242 THE SIKH RELIGION 

courses which fall into the Ganges become the Ganges, so 
doth the society of holy men save sinners and wash 
away the filth of sin. It saveth countless souls from hell, 
and associateth with itself hundreds of thousands of the 
lost. The holy see God in the midst of them.t 

By associating with the holy the way of union with God 
is found in one’s own home. To cherish the Guru’s instruc- 
tion is to obtain salvation.? 

The elixir is beneficent and turneth baser metals into 
gold. The sandal-tree perfumeth other trees whether they 
bear fruit or not. Rain falleth everywhere whether the 
ground be good or bad. When the sun riseth, it diffuseth its 
beams through the warp and woof of the world. The earth 
hath the capacity of endurance. Though the ruby, jewels, 
gems, gold, iron, the philosopher’s stone are all produced 
from it, it regardeth not outrages. In the same way the 
company of the saints conferreth on men indiscriminately 
benefits which cannot be estimated.® 

The Sikh religion :— 

The Sikh religion is distinct, and superior to other religions. 

The faith of the Sikhs is fixed, and by it man is absorbed 
in God. 

Hundreds of thousands of groups of Sikhs form one group 
and have no false pride, that is, they harbour not contempt 
for one another on account of pride of birth.* 

The way of Sikhism is narrow ; it is sharper than the edge 
of a sword and finer thana hair. There is no creed equal to 
it in the past, present, or future. There is no second God ; 
there is only one God in this house.5 

There is but one dot of difference between the holy 
and the unholy :— 

There is but one step from the holy to the unholy. For 
instance, the word maharam (holy) by the addition of a 
point becometh mujaram (criminal). Sikhs, otherwise 
sensible, in a state of aberration ruin their minds by assisting 

1 War II. 2 Ti. wale. > Ac 2 1X: 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 243 

in superstitious ceremonies.'. They who are subordinate 
to the Guru perform his service and keep their secrets to 
themselves.” 

The unity of Sikhs :— 

Where there is one Sikh there is one Sikh ; where there are 
two Sikhs, there is a company of saints; where there are 
five Sikhs there is God.? 

Sikhs must have faith in the Guru’s words, and not allow 
their minds to wander. 

O Sikhs of the Guru, hear the Guru’s instruction. Be 
wise within but simple without. Fix your attention on the 
Word and be wakeful. Be deaf to everything except the 
Guru’s words. Behold the true Guru. Where there is not 
the company of the saints, the house is empty and dis- 
mantled. Utter the Guru’s word Wahguru, and silently 
quaff the cup of love. Salute and be humble to the Sikhs. 
Sprinkle in thy house the water in which thou hast washed 
their feet. Deem the Guru’s feet a lotus and thy mind 
a bumble-bee, and in this terrible ocean of the world keep 
thy faith distinct. The Guru is the true mediator to bestow 
salvation on man while alive. 

The Sikhs ponder on the words of the Ineffable, and 
abstain from praise and blame. Allowing the Guru’s 
instruction to enter their hearts, they speak civilly and 
thus comfort one another. ° The Sikhs’ virtues cannot be 
concealed. Aman may hide molasses, but ants will discover 
it. At the same time, the Sikhs have great endurance. 
Sugar-cane though sweet is pressed in a mill, and so must 
Sikhs suffer while conferring favours on others.® 

Worthy of praise are the hands of the Sikh who in the 
company of the saints doeth the Guru’s work, who draweth 
water, fanneth, grindeth, washeth his feet, and drinketh the 
water therefrom; who copieth the Guru’s hymns and 

1 This is also translated—Sikhs associating with saints become 
enthusiastic in devotion, and restrain their minds from thinking of 
other objects of worship than the one God. 

2 XI. This is also translated—The Master’s servants perform 

hard Jabour and never complain of it to others. 
* Salil. eam. 2 IY. ° VI. 

RZ 

244 THE SIKH RELIGION 

playeth the cymbals, the mirdang,! and the rebeck, in the 
company of the holy, who boweth and prostrateth himself 
and embraceth a brother Sikh; who liveth honestly, and 
who by his munificence conferreth favours on others ; who 
contented with touching the Guru as a philosopher’s stone, 
toucheth nothing else, and layeth not his hand on another’s 
wife or property ; who loveth another Sikh and embraceth 
the love, devotion, and fear of God; and who effaceth and 
asserteth not himself.? 

Blest are the feet of the Sikhs who walk in the Guru’s 
way, who go to the Guru’s door, and sit there with holy 
men, who search out the Guru’s Sikhs and haste to do them 
favours, who run not in mammon’s way, and who if they 
happen to possess wealth remain humble. Few are the slaves 
of the Commander, who do Him homage and thus escape 
from their bonds ; who adopt the custom of circumambulat- 
ing the Guru’s Sikhs and falling at their feet. The Guru’s 
Sikhs delight in such enjoyments.? 

The Sikhs erase the twelve tilaks of the Hindus, applied 
to various parts of the body, and apply in their stead the 
tilak of the Guru’s instruction? 

Effect of the Guru’s teaching :— 

By the Guru’s hymns the mind is satisfied and man 
reacheth his own home.* 

The Sikh who receiveth the Guru’s instruction is really 

a Sikh. 
t By the Guru’s instruction the four castes were blended 
in one society of saints. The Guru’s disciples assumed one 
red colour like that of the betel made from four ingredients— 
betel-leaf, betel-nut, catechu, and lime.‘ 

The true Guru, the real king, putteth the holy on the 
high road to salvation. He restraineth the deadly sins, 
evil inclinations, and worldly love. The Sikhs pass their 
time in remembering the Word with devotion, and therefore 
Death the tax-gatherer approacheth them not. The Guru 
hath dispersed the apostates and seated the guild of the 
saints in Paradise. By the spell of the Name he hath 

1 A small drum. V1: a Vall. + Od. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 245 

inculcated love, devotion, fear, charity, and ablutions. 
As the lotus remaineth dry in the water, so doth the Guru 
keep the holy man unaffected by the world. The Sikhs 
efface and assert not themselves.t 

The Guru’s instruction teacheth to praise Wahguru. The 
Veds know not and Sheshnag hath not discovered His secret. 

The Guru’s Sikh becometh of the Guru’s line, a supreme 
saint, and separateth falsehood from truth as the swan 
separateth water from milk.2 The Guru then becometh a 
disciple and the disciple a Guru. 

There can only be dealings at one shop, the owner of 
which is the true perfect Guru. He taketh demerits and 
selleth merits in exchange, and he dealeth honestly. He 
maketh the simmal-tree bear fruit, and he turneth dross 
into gold. He perfumeth the bamboo, and changeth the 
crow into a swan. He showeth the sun to the owl, and 
maketh the shell more beautiful than pearls. His hymns 
which are before us are superior to the Veds and the Quran.® 

The attributes of a disciple :— 

To become a disciple is, as it were, to become dead. 
It cannot be done by words. A disciple must be patient, 
faithful, possess a martyr’s spirit, and free himself from 
superstition and fear. He must be like a purchased slave 
fit to be yoked to any work which may serve his Guru. He 
must never be hungry, and never require sleep. He must 
be ready to grind and bring fresh water for his Guru. He 
must be ever prepared to fan and wash his Guru’s feet. He 
must be a sedate servant and never laugh or cry. Thus 
shall he obtain the position of a darwesh, be absorbed in 
the relish of the Beloved, arrive at the goal of emancipation, 
and receive those congratulations which the Muhammadans 
bestow on one another on seeing the moon of the Id festival.° 

. + 1k. 

3 An oriental belief arising from the peculiar conformation of the 
swan’s bill. 

4 XI. The eleventh War contains a list of the principal Sikhs up 
to the time of Gur Das. > MILT. 

6 IIJ. The Muhammadans are delighted to take food after the 
Ramzan fast. 

246 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The pious man :— ~ 

To the pious man who treasureth in his heart the Guru’s 
instruction and effaceth himself, God’s will will naturally 
be grateful. He shall find his real home by associating with 
the saints and fearing and loving God. Blest the mother 
who bore him; and profitable his advent into the world. 

Humility :— 

He who is humble is dear to the Guru.? 

He who is humble winneth, he who is proud loseth the 
game.” 

A pomegranate seed like a speck of dust entereth the dust. 
It becometh a green tree, and rejoiceth in its red blossoms. 
One tree hath a thousand flowers ; its flowers and fruit are 
superior one to the other. From one seed there are hundreds 
of thousands of fruits, and in every fruit there is a seed. 
There is no deficiency in that fruit. The more its fruits are 
gathered, the more it beareth fruit and flowers. The Guru’s 
religion teacheth to walk humbly, thus shall all Sikhs become 
great.® 

There are hundreds of thousands of men high, intermediate, 
and low, but the holy man calleth himself the lowest of the 
low.4 

The earth is the most humble of all, but in God’s court it 
obtaineth greatness for its patience. Some weed or plough 
it, and some pollute it. The holy obtain the fruit of peace 
in the house of contentment. They efface and assert them- 
selves not. Whether waking, dreaming, or sleeping deeply, 
they with love in their hearts remain absorbed in God. 
They remember the Guru’s hymns in the association of the 
saints.® 

The elephant is not eaten on account of its pride, and no 
one eateth the powerful lion. The goat is unhonoured, but 
obtaineth religious and secular distinction. It is eaten at 
deaths and marriages and accepted at feasts. Its flesh 

1 Ty. 
3 IV. In the fourth War Gur Das gives several examples of 
humility. 

£Viit. AW, 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 247 

is holy for worldly people, and strings for musical instru- 
ments are made from its entrails. Shoes which holy men 
wear are made from its skin. Trumpets and drums made 
from goat-skin afford pleasure by their music to the 
society of the saints.! 

To call oneself the lowest of the low is the Guru’s teaching, 
if any one act according to it. Sixty copper paise are equal 
to one silver rupee which is received with suspicion, while 
the paise are not. Ten rupees are equal to a gold coin 
which is recetved with more suspicion. For thousands of 
gold coins a diamond which is strung on a necklace is pur- 
chased, and that is received with still more suspicion. The 
Sikhs who fall at one another’s feet and become the dust 
of one another’s feet, are equal in thought, word, and deed 
to saints, and become freed from superstition and fear. 

There is sugar in a hornet’s nest, bees swarm together and 
produce honey. Silk and satin are obtained from worms. 
Canvas 1s made from beaten hemp. Muslin cometh from 
cotton seed. The lotus with which the bumble-bee 1s 
enchanted groweth in the mire. There is a jewel in the 
cobra’s head. The diamond is a stone. Musk is in the 
deer’s body. The sword fashioned from steel is called 
bhagauti (goddess). Odour from the civet cat perfumeth 
courts. From lowly things the greatest advantage is ob- 
tained.* 

Call thyself the lowest of the low, become a worm and be 
not conceited. Walk in the Guru’s way, and let a thousand 
of you be contained in one worm-hole.4 Wherever there is 
the smell of clarified butter and sugar, thither throng the 
worms ; so do Sikhs to hear the Guru’s words. When sugar 
is spilled in sand, worms pick up the grains. Through fear 
of the bhringi® the ant dieth, but the bhringi reanimateth 

1, AG. 

2 The second, third and fourth lines of this pauri in the original 
mean that the humble man goes more easily and securely to heaven 
than he who holds a high position in this world, and whose actions 
are therefore more severely scrutinized XXIII. 

REV. 

4 That is, quarrel not with one another if shut up in a small space. 

° Bhringi is the female of the large black bee. 

248 THE SIKH RELIGION 

it, and maketh it a bhringi like itself. He who receiveth the 
Guru’s instruction feareth to do evil deeds. The Guru’s 
instruction maketh him humble and again exalteth him. 
Thus do the Guru’s Sikhs receive the reward of happiness.? 

The Guru’s Sikhs who have dispelled their pride are 
continent and praiseworthy.® 

The Guru's religion and his teaching :— 

Become pious by association with the saints and associate 
not with the evil. The Guru’s religion conferreth happiness. 
Make not thyself miserable in other sects. Under the 
Guru’s instruction abandon caste, acquire the excellent 
colour of tambol.4 Behold the Guru’s school and put no 
faith in the six schools. Rely upon the Guru’s instruction. 
Be not led away by any other love. Act according to 
the Guru’s words; forsake not the way of humility, and, 
O ye pious, derive your pleasure from love and devotion.® 

The religion of the Guru conferreth happiness ; the per- 
verse wander in every direction.® 

The Guru’s hymn is the Guru’s image, and is repeated 
in the company of the saints.® 

How the Guru’s Sikhs love the society of the holy: — 

The people of the four castes observe the customs of their 
castes and tribes. The believers in the six books of the six 
schools perform six duties according to the wisdom of their 
respective spiritual advisers. Servants go and salute their 
masters, merchants deal in their own special merchandise, 
agriculturists sow different seedsin different fields, mechanics 
meet mechanics in their workshops—with such attention 
and love do the Guru’s Sikhs associate with the company of 
the saints.® 

Examples of hypocrisy and superstition :— 

1 If a Sikh were to die through fear of the Guru, the Guru would 
reanimate him and make him like himself. 

2 XXV. 3 XXXVIII. 

4 A compound of the four ingredients betel-leaf, betel-nut, catechu, 
and lime dyes the lips red; when the four castes are blended together 
in the Sikhs they assume an excellent colour. 

2 ey. SPxXOaV. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 249 

Into the practice of continence, austerities, hom, feasts, 
Hindu devotion, penance and gifts, hypocrisy largely 
entereth ; incantations and spells are plays on a large 
scale. The worship of the fifty-two heroes, of the eight 
joginis, of cemeteries and of places of cremation leads to 
great dissimulation. Men are employed in purak, kumbhak 
and rechak, in the performance of the niwali feat, and in the 
drawing up of their breath through the spinal marrow. Many 
employ themselves in sitting in the postures of the Sidhs, 
and obstinately abandon their homes. Hundreds of thou- 
sands of such tricks have I seen. The belief in the philoso- 
pher’s stone, the jewel in the serpent’s head, alchemy, 
miracles is all a matter of ignorance. Men are engaged in 
the worship of idols, gods, and goddesses, in fasting, uttering 
blessings and curses, but without the society of the saints 
and the repetition of the Guru’s hymns even very good 
men find not acceptance. The superstitious have bound 
themselves with a hundred knots of falsehood.! 

Paying attention to omens, the nine grihs, the twelve 
signs of the Zodiac, incantations, magic, divination by lines, 
and by the voice is all vanity. It is vain to draw conclusions 
from the cries of donkeys, dogs, cats, kites, malalis? and 
jackals. Omens drawn from meeting a widow, a man with 
a bare head, from water, fire, sneezing, breaking wind, 
hiccups, lunar and week days, unlucky moments, and 
conjunctions of planets are all superstition. If a woman 
who winks at every man try by deceit to inspire belief in 
her, how can her husband feel confidence ? The holy who 
reject such superstitions obtain happiness and salvation.! 

People worship departed heroes, ancestors, satis, deceased 
co-wives, tanks, and pits, but all this is of no avail. They 
who enjoy not the company of the saints and the Guru’s 
instruction, die and are born again and are rejected of God. 
It is the follower of the Guru who weareth God’s name as 
his diamond necklace. 

The Guru’s Sikhs lead a family life, but wearing a hair- 

t. 
2 Malali is a black carnivorous bird, a little larger than a sparrow. 

250 THE SIKH RELIGION 

tuft and a janeu, and putting the latter on the ear when 
performing offices of nature are all superstition. The 
Guru’s Sikhs recognize divine knowledge and the advantage 
of meditation on the Supreme Being who filleth all creation. 
When they associate with the holy, they are held in honour 
and accepted in God’s court.! 

The holy man rejecteth the worship of fire with its seven 
colours, trampleth on the army of the Bhairavs and the 
manifestations of Shiv, and is not pleased with omens from 
the seven Rohinis,? the seven days of the week, and seven 
women whose husbands are alive. 

The thirteen offerings * made by Hindus at feasts for an- 
cestors have led men astray in superstition. Hundreds of 
thousands of feasts are not equal to drinking the water in 
which a Sikh hath washed his feet. Hundreds of thousands 
of sacred feasts and offerings are not equal to putting one 
grain into a Sikh’s mouth. A Sikh enjoyeth supreme 
happiness in satisfying another.® 

The Sikhs reject superstition, rejoicing, and 
mourning :— 

On the occasion of Hindu marriages lascivious songs are 
sung and trumpets played on the part of the bride and 
bridegroom, but not so among the Sikhs. People weep 
and utter lamentations for the dead, but the Sikhs on such 
occasions read the Sohila in the company of the saints. 
The Sikhs have no concern with the Veds or the books of 
the Moslems, and neither rejoice at a birth nor mourn at 
a death. In the midst of desires they remain free from 
them.® 

= 1. 

2 Stars in the fourth lunar mansion specially worshipped by Hindu 
women to save them from widowhood. 

3 VII. The women indicated are the wives of the immortal 
Rikhis Marichi, Atri, Pulah, Pulsat, Kritu, Angira, Vishisht. Gurumat 
Sudhakar. 

4 An umbrella, shoes, clothes, a ring, a waterpot, a cloth to sit on, 
five cooking vessels, a stick, a copper vessel for distributing water, corn, 
cee food, cash, and a sacrificial thread. Garur Puran, chap. XIII. 

WII, PV. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 251 

The Sikhs heed not omens on the right or the left. They 
retrace not their steps on seeing a widow or a bare-headed 
man. They pay not attention to the voices of birds or to 
sneezing. They worship not or adore gods or goddesses. 
They allow not their bodies or minds to wander. The 
Guru’s Sikhs plant a true field and reap the harvest thereof.) 

Woman :— 

From a temporal and spiritual point of view woman is 
half man’s body and assisteth to salvation. She assuredly 
bringeth happiness to the virtuous.? | 

The perverse compared to the offspring of a 
courtesan :— : 

A courtesan who hath many lovers committeth every 
species of sin. An outcast from her people and her country, 
she bringeth shame on her father’s and mother’s and father- 
in-law’s families. She is ruined herself and ruineth others, 
and giveth them to eat of her poison. She is like the pipe 
which lureth the deer, or the lamp which burneth the moth, 
and is dishonoured in both worlds. She is a boat of stone 
which drowns its passengers. So are the minds of the 
perverse scattered and led astray by superstition in the 
company of the evil. And as a courtesan’s son beareth not 
his father’s name, so no one admitteth the ownership of 
the perverse.” 

The condition of the courtesan :— 

An abandoned woman leaving her father’s and father- 
in-law’s house becometh shameless, and washeth not away 
her evil reputation. Leaving her husband she enjoyeth 
her lover. How can she be happy when her heart is drawn 
in different directions ? She heedeth not advice, and is 
despised at assemblies of mourning and rejoicing. She 
weepeth when reproached and put to shame at every house. 
She is arrested for her sins, and punished by order of the 
court. She is neither dead nor alive, she suffereth misery ; 
she dwelleth not in her own house but searcheth for another 

1 2X. 2 Vv. 

252 THE SIKH RELIGION 

to ruin it. In her dubious circumstances she weaveth for 
herself a garland of vice.t 

The man who adheres not to one religion is com- 
pared to a courtesan who has many lovers :— 

The prostitute is a decorated and ornamented hell. She 
deceiveth by her airs and graces. As the hunter’s pipe 
allureth the deer, so do her songs allure men to their de- 
struction. She dieth an evil death, and obtaineth no 
entrance into God’s court. As she adhereth not to one 
lover, so the evil person who followeth two religions is un- 
happy. He is like a bad rupee nailed to the counter. He 
is ruined himself and he ruineth others.1 

The fate of the man who tries to follow two 
religions :— 

The evil man who followeth two religions is unhappy, 
and is as useless as an ostrich which cannot fly, which 
cannot be laden, and which strutteth ostentatiously. The 
elephant hath one set of teeth for display and another 
for eating. Goats have four teats, two on their necks 
and two attached to their udders. The latter contain milk, 
the former deceive those who expect milk from them. 
So turning one’s attention to two religions leadeth to 
disastrous failure.t 

A guest remaineth hungry among several houses. When 
a thing held in partnership is lost, scant are the weeping and 
mental anxiety. When many Dums strike a drum, the 
discord pleaseth no one. The crow which wandereth from 
forest to forest is not held in honour ; how can it be happy ? 
As a prostitute’s body suffereth from having many lovers, 
so they who worship others than the Guru are unhappy in 
their perversity.” 

The religious and secular observances of the 
Sikhs :— 

The Sikhs rising at the ambrosial hour of morning ? 
bathe. Collecting their thoughts and gently meditating on 

1 XXXII. > KXNIV. 
3 When three hours of night remain. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 253 

the unfathomable One, they repeat the Guru’s Japji. 
They then go into the company of saints, and sit with 
them. They become absorbed in remembering and loving 
the Word, and sing and hear the Guru’s hymns. They 
pass their time in the love and service and fear of God. 
They serve the Guru and observe his anniversaries. They 
sing the Sodar in company and heartily associate with one 
another. Having read the Sohila and made supplication 
at night, they distribute sacred food. Thus do the holy 
Sikhs gladly taste the fruit of happiness.! 

The Sikhs eat little food and drink little water. They 
speak little and boast not. They sleep little and only in 
the night, nor are they entangled in worldly love. When 
they enter a beautiful house they covet it not.2 

Adultery forbidden :— 

A man who hath one wife is continent and calleth 
another’s wife his daughter or his sister. To covet another 
man’s property is forbidden to a Sikh, as the swine is to 
the Musalman and the cow to the Hindu. 

The ordinary secular acts of a true Sikh are equal 
to all the religious ceremonies performed by members 
of other religious denominations :— 

The polite language of a Sikh is equal to a Hindu’s devo- 
tion. A Sikh beholdeth God everywhere with his eyes, 
and that is equal to a Jogi’s meditation. When a Sikh 
listeneth attentively to, or himself singeth, the word of God, 
that is equal to the five ecstatic sounds in the brain of a 
Jogi. When a Sikh doeth anything with his hands, that 
is equal to the obeisance and prostration of Hindus. When 
he walketh to behold the Guru, that is equal to an extremely 
holy circumambulation. When he eateth and clotheth 
himself, that is equal to the performance of Hindu sacrifice 
and offering. When he sleepeth, that is equal to a Jogi’s 
suspended animation. A Sikh withdraweth not his thoughts 
from where he hath fixed them. When a Sikh leadeth a 
family life, that is equal to salvation while alive. A Sikh 

> Wil. 2 eX. 

254 THE SIKH RELIGION 

hath no fear of the waves of the world’s ocean, and avarice 
entereth not his heart. He hath passed beyond the —— 
of blessings and curses and uttereth them not. 

Who are acceptable ?>— 

They who have restrained the five evil passions—lust, 
wrath, covetousness, worldly love and pride—and they 
who have embraced the five virtues—truth, contentment, 
mercy, honesty, and an understanding of the Granth—are 
acceptable.” 

Vishnu’s ten avatars and the ten parbs or festivals 
of the Hindus are unavailing :— 

Vishnu hath uselessly assumed ten avatars; he hath not 
shown unto man the one God who is invisible. The ten 
Hindu festivals observed at places of pilgrimages are not 
equal to the Guru’s anniversaries.? 

The helplessness of the Hindu gods and of the 
expounders of the Hindu religion :— 

Millions of Brahmas# have received the Veds without 
understanding a letter of them. 

Millions of Shivs who sit in religious attitude recognize 
neither the form, nor the outline, nor the garb of the Creator. . 

Millions of incarnations of Shiv in human form have not 
obtained even the slightest knowledge of God. 

Millions of serpents which repeat ever new names of God 
daily,® have not arrived at a knowledge of Him. 

They who have lived long and enjoyed all the pleasures 
of life, the followers of the six schools of philosophy, and of 

~ IE 2 Wl. 

3 The eighth and the fourteenth days of the lunar month, the day 
when there is no moon, the day of the full moon, the first day of the 
solar month, the seventeenth of the astronomical yogas, the vernal 
equinox, the autumnal equinox, the eclipse of the sun, the eclipse 
of the moon. 

4 Brahma is here considered merely as an exalted demigod of the 
Hindus. 

® The serpent Ananta on which Vishnu reposes is said to repeat a 
thousand new names of God daily. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 255 

the sects of Hinduism, have not recognized the true Name. 
Having received gifts they all forget the Giver. 

The Hindu god Brahma cannot be accepted as 
a moral guide :-— 

Brahma used to preach to others, but on seeing the beauty 
of Saraswati, fell in love with her, and forgot his four Veds.2 

Nor can man expect assistance from Ram or 
Krishan :— 

O fools, ye have not remembered the Creator, and ye deem 
that things made by Him are God Himself. 

Why the feet are selected for reverence and 
obeisance :— 

The head is above, the feet below, yet the head falleth on 
the feet in the act of prostration. They support the weight 
of the mouth, eyes, nose, ears, and hands. Q. What have 
the feet done that they should be worshipped to the exclus’on 
of other limbs? A. They go to the Guru’s asylum and to 
the companionship of the saints They go to the best 
of their ability to do good acts. May the Guru’s Sikhs 
wear my skin as shoes! Very fortunate are they to whose 
foreheads the dust of the holy man’s feet is applied.‘ 

Scarcity of those who return good for evil :— 

They who return good for evil are few in the world.! 

The unity of God :— 

As there is but one sun for the six seasons and the twelve 
months of the year, so the Guru’s Sikhs only behold the one 
God.? 

Guru Nanak’s Guru :— 

The Supreme Being, the All-pervading God is the divine 
Nanak’s Guru 
ev Tit 2, en RY. * TEX. 
® XIII. See also Sorath XI. 

256 THE STR RELIGION 

His extent :— 

Men have searched for God’s limit, but have not found 
it. They who went to search for His limit have not re- | 
turned.} 

His court is upright and sincere :— 

God’s court is independent; hypocrisy entereth not 
there:* 

Prayers for the extension of Sikhism :— 

May there be hundreds and thousands of Sikhs in every 
city and hundreds of thousands in every country ! ° 

May the Guru’s Sikhs become hundreds of thousands, 
yea, countless in the world, and may a Sikh temple decorate 
every place ! 4 

An exhortation to the same effect :— 

Having become learned in the Guru’s wisdom, enlighten 
the world.® 

The Sikhs externally and internally :— 
The true Sikhs dress like kings and think not of mammon.® 

Philanthropy :— 

To do good to others is the mark of a saint.® 

The advantages of conferring favours on Sikhs :— 

To feed a Sikh with parched gram is superior to hundreds 
of thousands of homs and feasts, and to cause his feet to 
be washed is superior to assemblages at places of pilgrimage 
on the occasion of the ten Hindu festivals. To repeat to 
a Sikh the Guru’s hymns is equal to hundreds of thousands 
of Hindu devotional exercises. No doubt or regret re- 
maineth when man hath even a glimpse of the Guru. Such 
a man is unscathed in the terrible ocean, and feareth not 
its waves. He who embraceth the Guru’s religion hath 
passed beyond the bounds of joy or grief for gain or loss.® 

1 Sexi. . Meal 3 ail). 
+ XS. © ae a ALY. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 257 
The Apostate :— 

The apostate who hath renounced the true Guru becometh 
the slave of a slave. Without the perfect Guru he 
wandereth in many a birth! 

Hewho renounceth the Guru, who is the ocean of happiness, 
wandereth forlorn in the world. He is at one time dashed 
down by the waves, and at another burnt in the fire of 
pride. He is bound and beaten at death’s gate and buffeted 
by Death’s myrmidons. Man like a herdsman remaineth 
here but for four days, yet he calleth himself Jesus or Moses. 
No one admitteth his own deficiency, but wearieth himself 
insisting that he is something great. The ocean-diver 
worketh and exhausteth himself often without recompense. 
Without the Guru there is painful strife. 

Current usages without the Guru’s instruction are 
of no avail :— 

Men who forget the true Giver beg from beggars. Minstrels 
sing martial songs, and praise the strife and contests of 
heroes. Barbers also sing songs. They who reward them 
for the sake of show die an evil death. Bards compose 
eulogies, recite them, and retail false genealogies. It is 
proper for priests to ask for alms civilly. Faqirs who 
threaten to stab themselves if they receive not alms or who 
wear wings, may beg from shop to shop, but without the 
true Guru there is naught but weeping and lamentation.! 

Inutility of Hindu places of pilgrimage :— 

They who leave the pilgrimage of the true Guru and go 
to bathe at the sixty-eight places of the Hindus, sit in 
contemplative attitude like cranes, and rend and eat the 
animals in the water. Elephants may be washed, but 
when they leave the water they bespatter themselves with 
dust. The gourd sinketh not in the water, nor doth its 
bitterness depart at a place of pilgrimage. If a stone 
be washed in water, its hardness is by no means softened. 
The superstition of the perverse man departeth not. He 

1 KY. 

SIKH. IV S 

258 THE SIKH KELIGION 

wandereth without house or home, and, being without the 
true Guru, cannot be saved.! 

Ask not for a giver from whom thou shalt have to appeal 
to another. Employ not a worthless banker who will 
afterwards defraud thee. Serve not such a master as will 
render thee liable to Death’s punishment. Engage not 
a physician who cannot cure the malady of pride. It is the 
filth of the body and not the filth of evil inclinations which 
is cleansed by bathing at places of pilgrimages. Why bathe 
at them ? Disciples should love such a priest as will con- 
fer on them happiness and composure.” 

True devotion is difficult for the worldly :— 

Every one may see jewels, but few can appraise them. 
Every one may listen to songs and minstrelsy, but few know 
how to fix their attention on the Guru’s words. 

The holy read the Guru’s hymns with attention to their 
meaning.® 

Few are they in the world who beheld Guru Nanak and 
listened to and obeyed his instruction.* 

The perverse fail in self-reliance :— 

Beasts and creatures without instinct are superior to the 
perverse. Man from being reasonable becometh unreasonable 
and looketh to another for help. A beast asketh not from 
a beast, nor doth a bird wait on a bird for assistance.! 

The perverse prefer the poison of sin to the nectar 
of virtue, impure blood to pure milk :— 

Vegetables in the forest bear fruit of many savours and 
perfumes. The mango, the peach, the apple, the pome- 
granate, the jaman,® the khirni,® the mulberry, the date, 
the pilun, the wild caper, the ber, the walnut—with these 
the cicala who eateth the akk is by no means pleased. It 
forsaketh ambrosial fruit and attacheth itself to poison, 
If a leech be applied to a female breast, it will not drink 

PRY. we 2 IL See: S VORX, 
° The Prunus Padus, bird cherry. 
° The ALimusops kaukt. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 259 

milk but only impure blood, so the perverse man, even if 
he hear the Guru’s hymns in the company of the saints, 
uttereth folly in his conceit. His love is deception and 
he obtaineth not a position in God’s court.! 

Truth :— 

Devotion, penance, hom, feasts, fasting, austerities, 
pilgrimages, alms-gifts, the service of gods and goddesses, 
ceremonies, are all inferior to truth, and so are hundreds 
of thousands of devices. Acting truly is labelled above them 
all.? 

Falsehood is as the bitter poisonous akk; truth is as the 
sweet mango. Truth is a king who sleepeth in peace ; 
falsehood is a thief who wandereth without a home, The 
king awaketh, seizeth the thief, and punisheth him in his 
court. 

Truth is beautiful like a turban on the head. Falsehood 
is a polluted clout. Truth is a powerful lion, falsehood a 
weak lamb. Deal in truth and thou shalt gain. Why 
deal in falsehood which causeth loss? Truth is a cur- 
rent coin, falsehood is counterfeit copper. Hundreds of 
thousands of stars in a dark night afford light, but when 
one sun riseth they all disappear. In the same way false- 
hood disappeareth before truth. Truth and falsehood stand 
to one another in the relation of a stone to an earthen vessel. 
If a stone be thrown at an earthen vessel it is the earthen 
vessel which will break. If the earthen vessel be thrown at 
a stone it is again the earthen vessel which will break. In 
either case it is the earthen vessel that suffereth.® 

Falsehood is an offensive weapon, truth a defensive 
armour. Falsehood is an enemy who ever looketh for his 
opportunity of attack, truth is a real friend who assisteth, 
Truth is a hero, falsehood amasseth what is false. Truth is 
immovable and on safe ground; falsehood standeth and 
trembleth on an insecure basis. Truth seizeth falsehood 
and’ knocketh it down. The whole world may see this. 
Falsehood which is deceitful ever aileth. Truth is ever safe 

Leva. © XVII. 3 XXX. 
$2 

260 THE SIKH "RELIGION 

and whole. Truth ever appeareth true and falsehood 
false.} 

The Sikhs ought to contract alliances with one 
another :— 

Let the Guru’s Sikhs contract alliances with the Guru’s 
Sikhs 2 

The equality of the Sikhs and their distinctive 
salutation :— 

When Moslems meet, their salute is ‘Salam alaikum!’ A 
Jogi saith *‘Adesh!’ and receiveth in reply ‘ Adpurukh 
Adesh!’ A Sanyasi saith “O namo!’ while several sects 
utter ‘Namo Narayan!’ Men bow to Brahmans and 
receive blessings. But the Sikhs of the true Guru say 
‘ Pairi pawana ’—I fall at your feet—which is the correct 
salutation? Thus the rich and poor, young and old, are 
on an equality. The saints exhale holiness as the sandal 
exhaleth perfume. There is no distinction among them. 

The universality of Guru Nanak’s religion :— 

The Ganges and Banaras belong to the Hindus, Makka 
and the Kaaba to the Musalmans, but Baba Nanak’s praises 
are sung in every house to the music of cymbals, drums, and 
rebecks.°® 

Holy men have no caste and are not liable to caste 
defilement :— 

As ghi is never impure, so the saints have no caste.® 

Follow the example of a tree and return good for 
evil :— 

It is the specialty of a tree that it returneth good for 
evil. He who loppeth its branches sitteth in its shade, and 
it returneth him good for evil. It giveth fruit when clods 

es. ete: 

3 This was the salutation up to the time of the tenth Guru. He 
ordained that, when Sikhs met, their salutation should be, Wahguriu 
jt ka Khalsa, Wahguri ji kt Fatah. 

4 XXIII. ON 2 TxA. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 261 

are thrown at it. When carved into a boat, it saveth him 
who carved it. The perverse who have not the endurance 
and generosity of trees, obtain not fruit, while for the 
worshipper countless fruit is produced. Few are the holy 
men who, like trees, serve God’s servants. O God, the 
world is his slave, who hath the qualities of a tree.! 

The custom of the world is to return good for good, but 
the custom of the Guru is to return good for evil. 

Even the holiest Hindus violate their own com- 
mandments :— 

The ten sects of Sanyasis and the twelve sects of Jogis go 
to strange houses to beg, and eat the food of alms which is 
forbidden them.} 

The fate of him who through pride rebels against 
God :— 

If any one, having an overweening conceit of himself, 
rebel against a king, the traitor is put to death. He is 
not allowed a cot to bear him, a winding sheet, a funeral 
pyre, ora grave. If rupees be coined not at the mint, they 
are counterfeit, and the coiners wreck their lives. If any 
one write a forged order, it shall be to his loss, and he shall 
shed bitter tears. He shall be disgraced, ride on a donkey, 
and be defiled ; and he shall have to wash off the dust that 
falleth on him. If a jackal assume sovereignty, his voice 
will betray him, and his reign shall not last long. He who 
attacheth himself to other than God will have to abide in 
an evil place.! 

The love of the disciple for his Guru should be 
superior to everything that has been said or sung of 
lovers in all ages and countries :— 

The lovers Laili and Majnun are known in the four 
quarters of the world. The excellent epic of Sorath and 
Bija is sung in every direction. The love of Sassi and 
Punnu, though they were of different castes, is everywhere 
spoken of. The fame of Sohni who used nightly to swim 
the Chinab to go to Mahinwal is well known. Ranjha and 

1 XXVI. 2 XXVIII. 

262 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Hir are renowned for the love they bore each other. But 
superior to all is the love the disciples bear their Guru. 
They sing it at the ambrosial hour of morning. 

Gur Das by familiar examples continues to describe 
the mutual love of the disciple and his Guru :— 

Opium-eaters eschew not opium, but sit down together 
to eat it. Gamblers indulge in play and lose their stakes. 
Thieves abandon not thieving and suffer punishment when 
caught. Though men have sold their clothes, and remain 
naked to provide money for courtesans, yet are they 
obstinate in doing evil. Sinners commit sin and abscond 
to avoid punishment, but, contrary to all these, the Sikhs 
of the Guru, whose companionship is far from injurious, 
love their Guru, and he absolveth them from all their sins.! 

Gur Das in his three hundred and twenty-third 
Kabit has given different expression to the same 
idea :— 

A thief abandoneth not thieving through fear of punish-| 
ment. The highwayman looketh for an opportunity of 
highway robbery. Even when a man, who is smitten 
with a prostitute, contracteth disease from her, he still 
hesitateth not to visit her. Even when the gambler hath 
lost everything, he refraineth not from gambling. A 
drunkard abstaineth not from intoxicants, but continueth 
to take them however much people censure him, and 
however much medical treatises may tell him of their evil 
effects. The base renounce not the sins to which they 
have once become addicted. Wherefore how can the holy 
renounce the companionship of saints ? 

The love of the Sikh for his Guru is superior to 
that for all his relations :— 

There are three degrees of relationship—first those of 
father, mother, sister, brother, and their offspring and 
alliances; second, mother’s father, mother’s mother, 
mother’s sisters, mother’s brothers; third, father-in-law, 

ee ONE 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 263 

mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law, for whom 
gold, silver, diamonds, and corals are amassed ; but dearer 
than all is the love of the Guru’s Sikhs for the Guru. 
This is the relationship which conferreth happiness.! 

The eyes are not satisfied with beholding sights and 
exhibitions ; the ears are not satisfied with hearing praise 
or blame, mourning or rejoicing ; the tongue is not satisfied 
with eating what affordeth pleasure and delight ; the nose 
is not satisfied with good or evil odour; nobody is satisfied 
with his span of life, and every one entertaineth false hopes ; 
but his disciples are satisfied with the Guru ; theirs is the true 
love.! 

ve none but the Guru ; all other love is false. Enjoy 
no other relish than his, for it would be poisonous. Be not 
pleased with any one else’s singing, for listening to it would 
bring no happiness. All acts not according to the Guru’s 
teaching are evil, and bear evil fruit. Walk only in the 
way of the true Guru. In all other ways there are thieves 
who cheat and rob. The love of the Guru’s Sikhs for the 
Guru causeth their souls to blend with the True One.! 

The chakor loveth the moon and gazeth at it continually. 
The chakwi loveth the sun, and on seeing it is happy. The 
lotus is known to love the water, and showeth his smiling 
face therein. The peacock and the chatrik shout with joy 
on seeing the sable clouds. A husband is dear to his wife, 
a mother taketh care of her children ; so a disciple loveth 
his Guru and accompanieth him to the end.! 

The fate of him who is not totally devoted to the 
Guru :— 

He who seeth not the Guru is blind, even though he have 
eyes. He who listeneth not to the Guru’s words is deaf, 
even though he have ears. He who singeth not the Guru’s 
hymns is dumb, even though he have a tongue. [Even 
though he who smelleth not the perfume of the Guru’s feet 
have a nose, it is as if it were cut off. He who doeth not 
the Guru’s work, even though he have hands, is without 
them, and waileth in sorrow. He in whose heart the Guru’s 

1 RAVI. 

264 THE SIGH RELIGION 

instruction abideth not, is without understanding and 
obtaineth not entrance into God’s court. Let no one abide 
with such a fool. 

The Guru’s spiritual lhberality :— 

The true Guru bestoweth the four boons which are spoken 
of even though the Sikhs ask not for them? 

The Sikh catechism :— 

Q. What is a Sikh’s ablution ? A. To receive the Guru’s 
instruction and with it wash away the filth of evil inclinations. 
OQ. What is a Sikh’s badge? A. A necklace of the Guru’s 
words. Q. What is a Sikh’s life? A. To be dead while 
alive and to renounce pride. Q. What is a Sikh’s duty? 
A. To obey the order of his Guru.? 

Covet not thy neighbour’s wife or property, and 
indulge not in slander :— 

When we see other men’s wives beautiful, we should 
consider them as our mothers, sisters, and daughters. 
Another’s property should be to the Sikhs as the swine to 
the Muhammadan and the cow to the Hindu. When 
the Sikhs hear slander of others, they should say ‘ There 
is none worse than ourselves.’ 3 

A Sikh ought to be ashamed to hear slander of another. 
Even if a holy man have miraculous power, he should not 
use 10:4 

Acceptance of God’s will inculcated :— 

He to whom the Master’s will is pleasing, is pleasing to 
the Master. He who obeyeth the Master’s will is honoured. 
The Master causeth his order to be obeyed. Man is a guest 
in this world. Wherefore he should relinquish claims and 
cease to urge them.® 

God is the True Guru :— 

The supreme God, the perfect God, the primal Being is 
the True Guru? 

1 Xl. © RV UM. Sax. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 265 
Loyalty :— 

Take not arms against thy sovereign! 

The loyalty of a man who hath eaten his master’s salt is 
proved when he falleth for him in the field of battle. He 
who striketh off the heads of his enemies is known as the 
bravest of the brave.? 

Even though some evil persons were saved, that 
Is no excuse for committing sin :— 

Even supposing Putana was saved because she was killed 
by Krishan when she sought to administer poison to him, that 
should not be deemed a good act. Even if the courtesan 
be held to be saved because she had taught her parrot to 
repeat God’s name, that is no reason why a woman should 
go to a man’s house for fornication. Even if Valmik who 
used to commit robbery was saved on meeting a holy man, 
that is no reason why one should fearlessly rob on the high- 
way. People say the huntsman who shot Krishan was 
saved, but that is no reason for snaring animals, Even if 
the butcher Sadhna was saved, a man should not recklessly 
take life. A boat may transport gold and iron, but they 
are not of the same colour or value. It is not right to hope 
for salvation by doing evil.? 

The good and the evil contrasted :— 

Enmity remaineth not in the mind of the good man, nor 
friendship in the mind of the bad man, as a line made in 
water quickly vanisheth. The good man forgetteth not 
friendship, nor the evil man enmity, as a line made on a 
stone is not readily effaced. Neither the desires of the 
evil man to do evil nor of the good man to do good are 
ultimately fulfilled. The good man docth not good, nor the 
evil man evil.? 

The difference between the holy and the unholy :-— 

Why should the branches of the bead-tree be compared 
with sweets? No one calleth the akk berries mangoes. 
Gilt jewels are not equal to gold. Crystal is not equal to 

! WAY. * KAX. 3 XXNI. 

266 THE SIKH RELIGION 

diamonds. Buttermilk and milk are both white, but of 
different quality and taste—so the holy and unholy are 
distinguished by their attributes.1 

The difference between associating with a wise man 
and a fool :— 

He who abideth with a sensible man will be satisfied with 
humble fare, but he who abideth with a fool will not be 
satisfied even with an empire.? 

Associate not with a fool :— 

A dog in anger biteth a man and he becometh mad. In 
affection it licketh him and he becometh disgusted. When 
charcoal is cool it blackeneth the hands, but when it is hot 
it burneth them. A snake which catcheth a musk-rat 
becometh blind if it let it go,? and leprous if it swallow it. 
If a tumour be cut it causeth pain ; and if it be allowed to 
remain it is unseemly. In the same way, if a family have 
a bad son, they suffer blame whether they abandon him or 
receive him. Contract neither friendship nor enmity with 
a fool. Remain aloof from both passions. In either camp- 
ing-place there is misery.” 

A female camel once swallowed a melon which stuck 
in her throat. A surgeon was called. He put a stone 
under the lower part of the camel’s neck, and with 
another stone struck the upper part and thus crushed 
the melon. The surgeon’s assistant, who saw the 
operation, gave out that he too was an accomplished 
surgeon, and set up in business on his own account. 
When an old woman went to him for treatment for 
some illness, he assumed that a melon had lodged in 
her throat also, and proceeded to cure her as his 
master had cured the camel. The result was that the 
inexperienced surgeon killed the old lady. 

Gur Das tells the story as follows :-— 

A surgeon cured a female camel. He put one stone 
beneath the camel’s neck and struck the upper part of the 

1 XXXV. 2 XXXII. 
3 The musk-rat scratches out its eyes. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 267 

camel’s neck with another, and thus broke the melon. 
His servant thought he had mastered the surgical art. He 
killed an old woman and there was general female lamenta- 
tion. The people seized the pretended surgeon, and gave 
him a sound beating, upon which his senses returned to him. 
When he was questioned, he confessed the whole circum- 
stance, and his imposture was then exposed. Sensible men 
took and expelled him, for a glass bracelet cannot rank with 
jewels. A fool has no sense. A bamboo could never equal 
sugar-cane. A fool hath only the body of a man; he was 
created a brute.! 

Associate not with the deceitful and the perverse:— 

If a man enter a house of lamp-black his face will be 
blackened. If seed be sown in a barren field, there will 
be no produce. If a child swing in a broken swing, he 
will fall and kill himself. Ifa man who knoweth not how 
to swim, lean on the shoulders of another equally ignorant, 
how shall he cross a deep river? Abide not with him who 
setteth fire to his own house, and then goeth to sleep. Such 
is the society of the deceitful and the perverse. A man is 
ever in fear of his life.” 

Gur Das describes an uproar raised by the folly of 
fools :— 

A man after bathing at a well forgot his turban and went 
home bare-headed. The women of his house were silly, 
and on seeing the unusual circumstance began to beat 
their heads as if a relation had died, for an Indian appearing 
bare-headed is a sign of mourning. He on seeing the women 
weeping began to cry aloud incontinently. Men and 
women hearing this assembled to mourn. A barber’s wife 
asked in whose name she should mourn. The man’s daughter- 
in-law said, ‘Go and ask my father-in-law the name of the 
man who is dead.’ There is an uproar raised in the 
company of fools like the cawing of rooks.! 

The Hindus and Moslems may hate one another, 
1 XXNXII. 2 XXAILY. 

268 THE SIKH RELIGION 

though they have both sprung from a common 
stock :— 

From the union of one couple two brothers were born, and 
these two brothers struck out two ways. The Hindus and 
the Muhammadans are both made out of the five elements, 
but two names are given to the same substance.! 

It is not the fault of the Sikh religion if an occasional 
Sikh obey not the Guru’s instructions and grow 
wicked :— 

When moth? is parched over the fire some grains remain 
hard. This is not the fault of the fire. If one fruit out 
of a thousand go bad, it is not the fault of the tree. It is 
not the fault of water that it will not rest ona hill. Ifa sick 
man die from not observing the regimen prescribed for him, 
it is not the fault of the doctor. Ifa barren woman have no 
offspring, it is not her husband’s fault. In the same way 
if an occasional perverse man accept not the Guru’s instruc- 
tion, it is his own and not the Guru’s fault.’ 

The apologue of the jackal which fell into a dyer’s 
vat applied to the boastful and hypocritical. 

A jackal fell into a dyer’s vat and was dyed. He went 
into the forest and pretended to be its king. The beasts 
waited at his door while he sat down in his glory. In- 
toxicated with falsehood and pride, he began to exercise 
his authority. But when he opened his lips to speak, he 
spoiled his disguise, as radish-eaters make themselves known 
by their belching. So the Mina who practiseth falsehood 
and disgraceful acts, was ruined at God’s court.’ 

Pretended gurus are like children at play :— 

On moonlight nights children play together.© They 
personate kings and subjects. Some take armies on ex- 
peditions, and some run away. They pay land revenue in 
potsherds. Being very fickle they leave off the play in 

1 XXXII. 2 Moth is an Indian pulse. 

& XXATYV. eee 
® This is specially the case before and afier the hot season in India. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 269 

an instant and run home. So they who, though possessing 
no merits, call themselves gurus, are counterfeit and evil. 

It is impossible to dispense with the Guru :— 

The mice fashioned a bell to put on the cat’s neck, but 
they could not do so. The flies resolved to bathe in ghi, 
but they never extricated themselves. Insects being short- 
lived have not time to divest themselves of impurity of 
birth ; if they did, how could they live? The bhambiris ? 
would live in the rainy season if they could, but they are 
killed by the rain. The kulangs would remain in the plains 
after Baisakh, but they cannot live in heat. People may 
say they can dispense with the Guru, but without him 
salvation cannot be obtained: men would wander in 
transmigration.} 

Secret initiation is not necessary. Hindus of all 
sects believe that until a guru secretly communicates 
the word of initiation into the disciple’s ear, salvation 
isnot obtained. Gur Das on the contrary writes :— 

Wahguru is the Guru’s spell; by repeating it pride 
departeth.3 

Gur Das indulges in self-abasement :— 

The owl is not pleased on beholding the sun or the chakwi 
the moon. The simmal-tree yieldeth no fruit, the bamboo 
groweth near the sandal but is not perfumed thereby. Ifyou 
give milk to a serpent to drink, it parteth not with its poison, 
nor showeth it any gratitude. The bitterness of the colo- 
cynth departeth not, the tick clingeth to the cow’s udder, 
but drinketh blood instead of milk. All these demerits 
reside in me. If any one do me a favour, I return it with 
an injury. Garlic hath never the perfume of musk.* 

I am wicked and sinful; I am an apostate and evil, 

1 XXXVI. 

2 Certain Indian insects which frequent pools and rivers in the 

rainy season. 
3 XIII. Gur Das means that there should be no secrecy in the 
initiation of a Sikh. 4 VI. 

270 THE SIKH RELIGION 

I ama thief, adulterer, and gambler ; I covet my neighbour’s 
house, J am a slanderer, unrighteous, dishonest, deceitful ; 
I deceive the country. I indulge in lust, wrath, pride, 
greed, and worldly love. I kill those who trust me; I am 
ungrateful and unfaithful ; who will defend me? The true 
Guru remembereth and pardoneth his disciples and singers.1 

There is nct, there was not, and there never will be such 
an ungrateful person as I. There is none so dishonest or 
so devoid of merit as J. There is no such slanderer as [ 
who have taken on my head the heavy sin of slandering the 
Guru. There is none so great an apostate as I who have 
committed the heinous sin of apostasy from the Guru. 
There is none so evil as I who have committed the sin of 
bearing enmity to him who is without it. There is no such 
treacherous friend as I who sit in a devotional attitude 
like a crane looking out for fish to devour. The great sin 
which I have committed in eating with those who do not 
obey the Guru’s words departeth not. There is no such 
backslider as I who have renounced the Guru’s religion 
and attached myself to a false one. I am called a disciple, 
but I meditate not on the Word? 

Filial duty inculcated :— 

A child is conceived by the union of father and mother, 
and while in the womb the mother is full of hope. She 
abstaineth from delicacies, and is shy to appear in public. 
She putteth her feet cautiously on the ground. She carrieth 
for nine months and suffereth in giving birth to the dear 
boy. She then nourisheth him with great trouble, and must 
be careful in what she eateth and drinketh. She suckleth 
and cautiously giveth him infant’s medicine. The parents 
provide him with clothing and food, and take thought for 
his betrothal and education. They entrust him to a tutor, 
and as in duty bound spend their earnings on him. The 
child should discharge this load of debt to the parents.? 

Filial ingratitude reprobated :— 

His parents are happy while performing the boy’s be- 
1 XXXVI- * XXXVI. 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 27t 

trothal. His mother cannot contain herself with joy, and 
she singeth festal strains. When the boy is married, she is 
delighted and singeth marriage songs. She voweth many 
offerings when her son bringeth his wife home. In return 
for all this the daughter-in-law ever giveth her husband 
bad advice, and slandereth her mother-in-law with the object 
of living separate from her. The son then becometh bad, 
forgetteth the countless favours conferred on him by his 
mother, and obligeth her to grind corn for the house. Few 
sons are dutiful as Sarwan} 

Hilal ingratitude is the result of marriage :— 

The wife the enchantress bewitcheth her husband. When 
he was born he forgot his God, and now that he is married 
he forgetteth his parents.” 

A man should never under any pretext forsake his 
parents :-— 

He who forsaketh his parents to listen to the Veds, shall 
never know their secret. He who forsaketh his parents 
to perform penance in the forest, shall go astray in the 
wilderness. He who forsaketh his parents to worship gods 
and goddesses, shall lose the reward of his devotion. He 
who forsaketh his parents to bathe in the sixty-eight places 
of pilgrimages, shall find them a whirlpool to drown him. 
He who forsaketh his parents to give alms, shall be deemed 
without faith or knowledge. He who forsaketh his parents 
to fast, shall die and be born again and stray in superstition. 
Such a person knoweth nothing of God or the Guru.? 

The Sikhs claim superiority to all races :-— 

The Sunni, the Shiah, and the Rafazi sects find favour 
with many, but they are all pagans and hypocrites and lost 
in superstition. The Christians and the Jews wander dis- 
traught in their pride. The Europeans, the Armenians, 
and the Turks are filled with vainglory. Faqirs dressed 

1 A man who most diligently served his blind parents. He was 
slain by mistake by Dasarath, Ram Chandar’s father. XXXVI. 
® XKKVAG. 

272 THE SIKH RELIGION 

in black, qalandars, darweshes, and twice as many more 
are not equal to one hair of a Sikh who hath dedicated 
himself to the Guru.1 

Truth is hidden both from the Hindus and the 
Muhammadans ; both sects have gone astray :— 

There are four castes of Hindus and four sects of Muham- 
madans in the world. The members of both religions are 
selfish, jealous, proud, bigoted, and violent. The Hindus 
make pilgrimages to Hardwar and Banaras ; the Muhamma- 
dans to the Kaaba of Makka. Circumcision is dear to the 
Muhammadans; tilaks and janeus to the Hindus. The 
Hindus invoke Ram, the Muhammadans Rahim; but in 
reality there is only one God. Since they have both for- 
gotten their sacred books, worldly greed and the devil 
have led them astray. Truth is hidden from both; the 
Brahmans and the Maulvis kill themselves by their ani- 
mosities. Neither sect shall find salvation.? 

The Hindus read the Veds; the Sufis and the Muham- 
madans the books of Islam. The Muhammadans abstain 
from food during the Ramzan and read Arabic prayers ; 
the Hindus rack their brains over idolatrous worship and 
periodical fastings. The founders of the six Hindu systems 
preach each a different doctrine. The Hindus have ten 
incarnations, the Muhammadans the Merciful One. Both 
sects practise bigotry and violence.? 

When Hindus and Moslems lay aside superstition, 
they form one body of Sikhs who quaff the cup of 
God’s love and obtain final deliverance :— 

They who are intoxicated with the cup of love in the 
Guru’s private court, behold the Unseen One. The Sikhs 
spurn as well the hundred and eight-beaded rosary of the 
Hindus as the hundred-beaded rosary of the Muhammadans. 
The Sikhs, treating both rosaries alike, repeat not the name 
Ram or Rahim at every bead. The two sects united form 
one body of Sikhs, and are not then separately mentioned, 
so when one speaketh of the game of chaupar the pieces are 

>. OO, NEL 2 J. ’ SOX, 

BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 273 

not spoken of. The Sikhs rejecting Shiv and his energy 
Durga arrive at their own home by means of the cup of 
God’s love. Unaffected by the three qualities, they attain 
the fourth degree of salvation. Baba Nanak proclaimed 
the true Word, and, by causing the true Sikhs to fix their 
attention on it, blended them with the True One who is the 
true King to whom truth is pleasing.! 

I‘xtracts from Gur Das’s Kabit against idolatry :— 

As a virtuous woman ever thinketh on her husband and 
desireth not to behold another man ; 

As the chatrik never longeth for lakes, rivers, or seas, 
but for cloud-drops, and singeth the praises of the Beloved ; 

As the chakor in no way desireth to behold the sun, 
but in every way longeth for the moon, which is dearer to 
it than life ; 

So do the Guru’s Sikhs naturally refrain from worshipping 
other gods, but not insultingly or disdainfully. 

If a man look at two mirrors no distinct reflection will 
be formed. If a man put his feet in two boats, he cannot 
reach the shore. 

If a man go in two directions, his feet will be worn out ; 
if a man travel by two roads, he will be puzzled and forget 
where to put down his feet. 

When there are two kings, the subject cannot be happy ; 
when a woman has two husbands, she cannot be chaste. 

When a Sikh of the Guru accepteth the support of other 
gods, accursed is his life in this world, and hereafter punish- 
ment from Death shall await him. 

According to the rules of society, the sacred books, and 
the teaching of divines, it is proper for a chaste woman to 
serve her lord in thought, word, and deed. 

To the chaste woman repetition of idols’ names, ablutions, 
alms, austerities, penance, pilgrimage, fasting, worship, 
and daily ceremonies are of no avail. 

1 XXXIX 

SIKH. 1V T 

274 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Burnt-offerings, feasts, food offered to idols, the worship 
of gods and goddesses, the singing of hymns and visiting 
strange temples are all vanity of vanities. 

So among the Guru’s Sikhs One Prop is the best ; medita- 
tion, contemplation and remembrance of other gods is 
harlotry. 

Clz‘ad Al HUIS 

TOHd ONNOA ONISSHATA IVA UVH nung 

) . seamatmnnepannene, | 

Desex XX 

Mire OF GURU HAR RAL THE 
SEVENTH GURU 

CHAPTER I[ 

WE have seen that Guru Har Gobind, the sixth 
Guru, had five sons, Baba Gurditta, Suraj Mal, 
Ani Rai, Baba Atal, and Teg Bahadur. Baba 
Gurditta, who predeceased his father, left two sons, 
Dhir Mal and Har Rai. Dhir Mal had proved disloyal 
and disobedient to his grandfather. Guru Har 
Gobind, wishing as far as possible to observe the 
custom of primogeniture, and seeing Har Rai steady, 
pious, and in every respect fitted for the Guruship, 
bestowed it on him with all due formality and 
ancient ceremony. | 

Guru Har Rai was born of Gurditta’s wife, Nihal 
Kaur, née Natti, on the thirteenth day of the light 
half of the moon of Magh, Sambat 1687, A.D. 1631. 
He was very attentive to his devotions and ablutions, 
and loved to repeat to his disciples the following 
verses of Gur Das :— 

Rise in the end of the night, instil into men’s minds the 
merits of the Name and of charity. 

Speak civilly, be humble, do good to others with the gifts 
of your hands. 

Sleep, eat, and speak little ; receive the Guru’s instruc- 
tion. 

Live on your earnings ; do good works ; even if you are 
great, be not conceited. 

Day and night go and associate with the saints and sing 
with them the Gurus’ hymns. 

Regale your hearts with the pleasure which the true 
Gurus’ words and instruction afford. 

Amid hopes remain without hopes.’ 

1 War XXVIII. 
T 2 

270 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru employed every device that sleep might 
not overcome him, and prevent his matutinal devo- 
tions which were the object of his earnest solicitude. 
Although many rich men came to visit him, he made 
no distinction between rich and poor, and centred 
his hopes only in God. His food was very simple. 
He desired not dainty dishes, and thanked God for 
all His mercies. Whatever valuable offerings were 
made him he used to spend on his guests. He was 
always surrounded, as it were, by a halo of visitors, on 
whom he conferred delight. 

During Guru Har Rai’s stay in Kiratpur a man 
named Bhagtu of the Bairar tribe, who had given 
Guru Arjan great assistance in excavating his tank, 
waited on him, said he was a cultivator by trade, 
and asked for employment. The Guru engaged him 
to superintend the cultivation of his land. Once, 
as Bhagtu was employed as overseer of the Guru’s 
reapers, they complained that he did not cause suffi- 
cient ghi to be put into their bread. At that time 
Bhagtu happened to see a man called Sangatia passing 
by with hides of ghi, and asked him to sell it, and 
he would receive payment on the morrow. Sangatia 
agreed; the ghi was purchased and distributed 
among the labourers. Sangatia went home, and, 
to his surprise, next morning found the hides he 
thought he had emptied filled with ghi as before. 
He returned to Bhagtu to inform him. Bhagtu 
offered him the stipulated price. Sangatia fell at 
his feet, and with thankfulness refused the money, 
telling him that the miracle wrought was the result 
of his kindness. Bhagtu replied that he himself had 
no power. Whatever merit he possessed was derived 
from the Guru. He invited Sangatia to go to the 
Guru and become his Sikh. Sangatia accordingly 
didso. The Guru initiated him, gave him the name 
of Pheru, and promised that he should have a kitchen 
of his own to supply the wayworn saint and stranger. 

In the afternoon the Guru used often to gird on his 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 277 

sword, equip himself with his bow and arrows, 
mount his horse, and proceed to the chase. He 
maintained two thousand two hundred mounted 
soldiers. These he kept by his grandfather Guru 
Har Gobind’s advice as a precautionary measure. 
The Guru took some of the animals he had obtained 
from the chase home with him, and freed and pro- 
tected them in a zoological garden, which he caused 
to be made for the recreation of his followers. 

In the evening the Guru used to hold his court, 
listen to hymns sung by his choir, and then give 
divine instruction. The advantages of devotion are 
briefly put by Guru Arjan. 

Learn the Word, my beloved, which is our support in 
life and in death. 

By remembering the one God your faces shall ever be 
bright and happy.! 

The Guru used to select suitable passages from 
the Granth Sahib to recite to his followers, such as:— 

Make effort, ye very fortunate, remember God the King ; 
Nanak, by remembering Him ye shall have all happiness, 
and your troubles, pains and doubts shall disappear. 

The Emperor Shah Jahan had four sons Dara 
Shikoh, Shuja Muhammad, Aurangzeb, and Murad 
Bakhsh. Dara Shikoh, who was the heir-apparent, 
was very dear to his father. Aurangzeb who was 
very cunning, clever, and ambitious, aimed at 
succeeding to the throne. He administered tiger's 
whiskers in a dainty dish to his eldest brother, 
who became dangerously ill in consequence. The 
best physicians were consulted, but could not devise 
a remedy. The patient’s illness daily increased. 
The Emperor, filled with anxiety, sent for diviners 
and -astrologers from every country, propitiated pirs 
and faqirs, and had recourse to all known charms, 
spells, and incantations, but without avail. 

1 Ramkali, Ashtapadi. 2 Asa Chhant. 

278 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When the wise men were all assembled, they arrived 
at the very obvious decision that, until the tiger’s 
whiskers were removed from Dara Shikoh’s bowels, 
there was no hope of recovery. They were of opinion 
that if a chebulic myrobalan weighing fourteen 
chitanks! and a clove weighing one masha could be 
produced and administered to the patient, he would 
be restored to health. For these articles the Emperor 
searched everywhere in his realm, but in vain. At 
last the prime minister, who had heard the fame of 
the Guru, was informed that the required simples 
were in his storehouse. Although the Emperor was 
hostile to the Guru, yet as the Guru’s house was a 
mine of sympathy and compassion for all, there was 
no doubt that he would grant the articles required. 
In order to show the Guru’s duty in such a case, the 
prime minister quoted the words of the fifth Guru :— 

The Guru embraceth him who seeketh his protection ; 
this is the function of the religious teacher.? 

The prime minister represented to the Emperor, 
“It becometh thee now, O sire, to forget thy former 
feelings of enmity, and entreat the Guru to grant 
thee what is required and thy wishes shall be imme- 
diately gratified. Inthe words of a Panjabi proverb, 
‘Self-interest causeth barley to be ground, even if 
it be wet.’? Shah Jahan found it necessary to 
humble himself before the Guru, and accordingly 
addressed him the following letter :— 

‘Thy predecessor, the holy Baba Nanak granted 
sovereignty to the Emperor Babar, the founder of 
my dynasty; Guru Angad was exceedingly well 
disposed to his son the Emperor Humayun; and 
Guru Amar Das removed many difficulties from my 
erandfather Akbar’s path. I regret that the same 

1 A chitank is five tolas or two ounces. 

2 Bihagra Chhant. 

3 Wet Indian barley is ground with more difficulty in a hand-mill 
than any other Indian grain. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI | 279 

ond 

friendly relations did not subsist between Guru Har 
Gobind and myself, and that misunderstandings 
were caused by the interference of strangers. For this 
I was not to blame. My son Dara Shikoh is now 
very ill. His remedy is in thy hands. If thou give 
the myrobalan and the clove which are in thy store- 
house, and add to them thy prayers, thou wilt confer 
an abiding favour on me. 

A noble took this letter to the Guru who was then 
in Kiratpur and presented it in darbar on the 
morning after his arrival. The Guru was pleased that 
the Emperor had such confidence in him as to write 
him such a friendly letter, and consented to give the 
necessary medicines. He quoted a line from the 
fourteenth slok of the Asa ki War, 

Why should they who come with hope depart dis- 
appointed ? 

‘Behold,’ said the Guru, ‘with one hand man 
breaketh flowers, and with the other he offereth them, 
but the flowers perfume both hands alike. Although 
the axe cuts the sandal-tree, yet the sandal per- 
fumeth the axe. The Guru ought, therefore, to 
return good for evil.’ The myrobalan and clove were 
weighed, and, as if God had so ordained, found of the 
required weight to cure the Emperor's beloved son 
and heir-apparent. It was explained that these 
medicines would cause the hardest substance taken 
into the stomach to be digested. To these articles 
the Guru added a pearl which was to be ground and 
used as a subsidiary remedy. The Guru was in 
the position of a tree which, though cut with a sharp 
axe, feels no anger and imputes no blame to the 
wood-cutter, but ministers unto his wants. 

The Emperor was naturally very pleased, forgot all 
his.enmity to the Guru, and vowed that he would 
never again cause him annoyance. The medicine 
was administered and effected a speedy and complete 
cure. 

280 THE SIKH RELIGION 

CHAPTER II 

A pious lady continually prayed that the Guru 
might eat bread cooked by her hands. One day she 
gained four paise by spinning, and bought wheaten 
flour and pulse for the money. She baked two cakes 
and took them to a spot by which the Guru used to 
pass daily. There she began to rack her brains how 
to procure access to him. Could she succeed in this, 
he would certainly take compassion on her old age 
and eat from her hands. The Guru, having by his 
supernatural power become aware of her desire, 
mounted his horse, and on his way to the chase, went 
joyfully to the spot where she was waiting. 

At the moment when she was reduced almost to 
a state of despair the Guru arrived, and asked her 
for some of the bread she had prepared. He said it 
would be very late when he returned from the chase, 
and he desired food to fortify himself until then. 
The Guru partook of the bread on horseback, with- 
out washing his hands, and said he had enjoyed it 
as if it were the most dainty food. The woman 
paid the Guru compliments for his humility in 
visiting her and accepting her hospitality. The 
Guru in return gave her spiritual instruction, and 
cut off the shackles of her transmigration. 

The Sikhs were astonished that the Guru had taken 
food from a strange woman, and eaten it on horse- 
back too without washing his hands. They asked him 
why he had done so. He gave no answer, but con- 
tinued his hunting excursion. Next day they pre- 
pared sweet cakes with great attention to cleanliness, 
and took them to the forest with the Guru, so as to 
obviate any necessity he might be under to take 
food that might possibly be unclean from the hands 
of a person who might be of low caste. In due time 
the Sikhs offered the Guru the cakes they had 
prepared. The Guru said, ‘ O Sikhs, I ate food from 
that woman’s hands because she was holy. This 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 281 

food which you have prepared with attention to 
ancient ceremonial is not pleasing to me. It is 
written in the Granth Sahib :— 

He whose deeds are pure is called a holy man,! 

from which it appears that salvation depends on good 
acts and not on the food which is eaten.’ 

The Sikhs replied, ‘O true king, yesterday thou 
atest two cakes on horseback from the hands of an 
old woman whom thou knewest not. There was no 
consecrated space and the food was in every way 
impure. To-day we have with great labour prepared 
and baked cakes for thee ; no impurity attacheth to 
them, and yet thou rejectest them. Be kind enough 
to explain the reason. We made a representation to 
thee yesterday on the subject but received no reply.’ 

The Guru gave the following explanation—‘ The 
woman with great devotion and faith prepared food 
for me out of what she had earned from the sweat of 
her brow. On this account the food was very pure, 
and I partook of it. The Guru hungereth for love 
and not for dainty food. In the matter of love for 
God no rule is recognized. 

‘Ye remember how Guru Nanak avoiding the 
society of the great and the wealthy, went to the 
house of Lalo who was a carpenter, abode with him, 
and lived on his coarse fare. It may therefore be 
easily understood that attention to culinary rules 
and exclusiveness in eating are of no avail without 
real devotion. It is not what man eateth that 
pleaseth God. It is man’s devotion that is acceptable 
to Him.’ 

On hearing this discourse the Sikhs’ doubts 
vanished. They replied, ‘O true king, grant that 
the love of God may arise in our hearts. Although 
we have in ourselves no merits, yet thou who hast 
vouchsafed us thy protection, art responsible for 
our safe keeping. By thy favour our boats shall 

reach the haven of the blest.’ 
1 Sukhmani. 

282 THE SIKH RELIGION 

During this colloquy the Guru and his party 
penetrated a deep forest. The Guru, seeing a black 
buck issue from the thickets, chased him on horseback 
at full speed and prevented his escape. The animal 
was caught and taken to the Guru’s zoological gardens. 
Men who had come long distances to see the Guru were 
pleased with his tenderness to animals, particularly 
to deer, which the kings of old used to sacrifice at 
their feasts. 

One day as the Guru was hunting he saw a 
wounded snake crawling with difficulty. It was 
tortured by worms which it tried to shake off by 
wriggling and shaking its body. The Guru not only 
put the animal out of its pain, but granted it salva- 
tion. The author of the Suva; Parkash states that 
its spirit in the form of a bright light was seen to issue 
from its body and soar to heaven. The Sikhs asked 
the Guru what lightit was. The Guru replied, ‘ This 
serpent was in somewhat the same state as the python 
seen by my grandfather in Malwa. This serpent had 
been a pandit in a previous age, who used to falsely 
vaunt the power of the Veds. He asserted that he 
himself was God, but his conduct in no wise justified 
such a boast. He used also to make injurious 
reflections on the Guru’s hymns, saying, ‘ What is 
a hymn in the vulgar dialect ?’ He did not know 
that Guru Nanak’s compositions were superior to 
the Veds. The pandit’s soul passed into this serpent, 
and the worms have been causing him to suffer for 
the deceit he practised on men. There were, how- 
ever, some good acts to his credit from previous 
births, and on this account he hath met Guru Nanak’s 
followers and obtained salvation. As Guru Arjan 
hath said :— 

By association with the saints man hath no travail ; 
There is no necessity to toil in their company : 
On beholding and meeting them man becometh happy.! 

1 Sukhmani. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 283 

‘Carefully remember that, however much you read 
Vedantic literature, it will be a source of misery 
unless you love God. Guru Arjan hath also said :— 

Though one be very beautiful, of high birth, clever, 
a divine in words and wealthy ; 

Yet shall he be deemed as dead, O Nanak, if he have no 
love for God.! 

‘Wherefore, O my Sikhs, believe in the words of 
Guru Nanak, worship God, and boast not of your 
Vedantism. He who, possessing no divine know- 
ledge, calleth himself a guru shall have no happiness, 
but on the contrary terrible suffering. The disciples 
of a false guru shall lose their human birth in this 
world. A guru who possesseth no holiness shall with 
his disciples endure terrible suffering. Wherefore, O 
my Sikhs, listen unto me, never consume any portion 
of offerings. They will not assist you in distress, but, 
on the contrary, lead you into the power of Death, 
whose punishment shall wring from you loud lamen- 
tations. Perform honest labour, serve the saints, 
and I shall everywhere be your succourer. As Guru 
Nanak hath said :— 

They who eat the fruit of their labour and bestow some- 
thing, 
O Nanak, recognize the right way? 

A deficiency in your weights or want of equality in 
your scales must be avoided. [ver abide firm in your 
faith.’ 

‘The Sikhs then asked the Guru to give them 
further instruction in the Sikh religion. He re- 
plied, ‘ You must read the Granth Sahib, and not 
worship any inanimate object. When a Sikh dieth, 
sacred food should be prepared and distributed after 
reading the Sohila. There should be no mourning, 
but hymns of the Gurus should be sung, and the 
Granth Sahib should be intoned. No gods or 

1 Bawan Akhari. * Sarang ki War. 

284 THE SIKH RELIGION 

goddesses should be deemed succourers of man. 
Reliance must be placed on the immortal God alone.’ 

A devout Sikh called Bhai Gonda abode with the 
Guru. He was a saint in thought, word, and deed. 
The Guru was very much pleased with his sincere 
devotion and said, ‘ O Bhai Gonda, go thou to Kabul, 
instruct the Sikhs there in the worship of the true 
Name, and preach the Sikh faith. Feed holy men 
and pilgrims with the offerings thou receivest, and 
send what remaineth for the maintenance of my 
kitchen. These are thy duties, and I am confident 
that thou wilt discharge them.’ 

Although Kabul was a foreign country and there 
was danger from Muhammadan bigotry in residing 
there, yet Gonda cheerfully accepted the task 
imposed on him. On arriving there he built a Sikh 
temple and carried out all the Guru’s instructions. 
In other respects the following lines of Guru Arjan, 
which he was accustomed to repeat, served him as 
a guide :— 

Meditate in thy heart on the Guru’s image ; 
Regale thy mind with the Guru’s word and spell. 
Put the Guru’s feet into thy heart, 

And ever bow to the Guru the Supreme Being. 

One day while Gonda was repeating the Japji, he 
fancied he was clinging to the Guru’s feet. He was 
in such a state of abstraction that he became quite 
unconscious. He grew as absorbed in the sight of 
the Guru as a drop of rain in the ocean. The Guru 
by his occult power knew what was passing in 
Gonda’s mind, and sat firmly on his throne keeping 
his feet together. When dinner was announced, as 
usual at mid-day, he made no response. When the 
announcement was repeated about an hour after- 
wards, he still remained silent. A third time after 
a longer interval dinner was announced, and the 
cook asked permission to serve it up, but even 

1 Gaund. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 285 

then the Guru spoke not. When several Sikhs were 
on the point of making a representation to him, he 
broke silence and said, ‘ Brother Sikhs, Bhai Gonda is 
in Kabul. He is in thought, word, and deed, a saint 
of the Guru. He to-day hath clasped my feet. How 
can I withdraw them from him? And how can I go 
to take my dinner until he hath let them go? I am 
therefore waiting until the conclusion of his meditation 
and obeisance. Bhai Gonda did not awake from 
his trance before twilight, and it was only then the 
Guru felt free to take his repast. 

When afterwards the Sikhs had an opportunity 
of interrogating Gonda they found the Guru’s words 
verified and his acts explained by Gonda’s reflections 
and movements during the state of trance. The 
Sikhs then were thoroughly convinced of the Guru’s 
greatness, and said that they themselves were poor 
ignorant people. As Guru Arjan has said :— 

The glory of the saints is special to the saints : 
My brethren, there is no difference between God and His 
saints.} 

And again :— 
Know that God and the Guru are one” 

The Sikhs said, ‘ The advantages of Guru Nanak’s 
religion are indescribable, and whoever leaveth it 
and strayeth to other sects, is greatly unfortunate, 
for he thereby loseth his priceless human birth.’ 
Once as Sikhs came great distances to the Baisakhi 
fair and made offerings according to their means, men 
and women circumambulated the Guru like bumble- 
bees hovering rounda lotus-flower. TheGuru inquired 
if there were any of his Sikhs who, having established 
a kitchen according to his means, shared his food 
with others. He received a reply that two or three 
Sikhs had come, who had established kitchens in 
several villages and distributed their food among 

1 Sukhmani. 2 Gaund. 

2806 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the Guru’s followers. The Guru ordered them to be 
called, and asked them on what principle they had 
established kitchens, and whether they entertained 
all Sikhs on the same terms as their relations. One 
Sikh replied— When a Sikh is kind enough to visit 
me at the time of distribution of food, I first satisfy 
him and then myself.’ A second said, ‘I cook and 
distribute food with my own hands.’ A third said, 
“TI wash the feet of Sikhs and drink the water there- 
from, for it is written in the Sukhmani :— 

Wash the feet of the holy men and drink the water there- 
from.’ 

A fourth Sikh replied, ‘ Whatever thine orders are, 
O true king, they shall be obeyed. I wipe Sikhs’ 
shoes, and place them before them as they are 
departing.’ 

The Guru interposed. ‘It is superfluous to say 
any more. I desire to know if ye feed a Sikh who 
presenteth himself after the time fixed for distribu- 
tion of food.’ The Sikhs requested the Guru to 
explain his meaning more fully. He said, ‘O Sikhs, 
when food is distributed and there is none left, 
what do ye do if a hungry Sikh afterwards present 
himself ?’ The Sikhs replied, ‘We do not serve food 
after the appointed time, and on that account no 
doubt some Sikhs go away disappointed.’ The 
Guru rejoined, “Ye ought to keep additional food 
ready, feed your guest, and not send him away disap- 
pointed. In the course I recommend there is great 
merit. I shall be well pleased with those who adopt 
it, and they shall enjoy happiness here and hereafter. 
Moreover, it 1s written in the Granth Sahib :— 

The true Guru is delighted when his disciple taketh food. 

‘He who through laziness and pride dismisseth a Sikh 
disappointed, shall gain no advantage from his past 
or present acts. Farid hath said :— 

1 Guru Ram Das, Gauri. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 287 

All men’s hearts are jewels ; to distress them is not at all 
good : 
If thou desire the Beloved, distress no one’s heart. 

‘There is also a Persian expression attributed to God 
even by the Muhammadans :— 

I can allow you to destroy a temple or a mosque, 
But to break another’s heart is an act that cannot be 
sanctioned. 

‘The temple and the mosque may be repaired or 
renewed, but not the broken heart.’ The Sikhs said, 
‘Only he on whom the Guru looketh with favour 
obtaineth such wisdom. We possess little wisdom, 
and have erred. It is by thy favour all our troubles 
are removed. Thy words are like the juice of nectar, 
mines of knowledge, arrows to destroy worldly love 
and hate, or guides to salvation.’ 

Two hill Rajas went with a strong force to the Guru 
under pretence of paying him a complimentary visit, 
but in reality to obtain tribute from him, and 
remove him from their country. On arriving in the 
neighbourhood of Kiratpur they encamped near a 
tank. The Guru on hearing of their arrival promptly 
sent ther supplies of every description. 

The Rajas presented themselves the next morning 
at the Guru’s levée, but while doing obeisance to 
him retained guile in their hearts. The Guru, by 
his occult power, knew their designs, and represented 
to them that fagirs were never called upon to pay 
tribute. If they desired anything from him he 
would give them divine instruction, which would be 
more advantageous than any sublunary wealth. 

The Rajas on hearing this found their business 
with the Guru at anend. They both stood up, then 
prostrated themselves before him, and begged to be 
put on the right way, for they had seriously erred. 
They confessed that they had come with evil inten- 
tions, but they would never again harbour thoughts 

288 THE SIKH RELIGION 

to the Guru’s detriment. The Guru replied, ‘ Show 
not your pride to the Guru. Go and rule your king- 
doms, oppress not your subjects. If ye do, the 
Creator will show you His anger, and consign you 
to hell. Adhere to your own wives, drink not wine, 
sleep not on the top stories of your palaces out of 
reach of your subjects. Let it not be that, while 
they are complaining below, ye are enjoying your- 
selves above. The subjects are the root, the Rajas the 
branches of the trees. Whatsoever king oppresseth 
his subjects applieth the axe to his kingdom. Con- 
struct tanks, wells, bridges, and schools, and extend 
religion through your kingdoms.’ The Rajas much 
edified by this discourse, took leave of the Guru and 
returned to their states. 

CHAPTER III 

There was a Sanyasi called Bhagwan Gir, who, 
in order to obtain spiritual consolation, went to 
visit the Guru in Kiratpur. The Guru advised him 
to proceed to Dehra Baba Nanak and join the 
Udasis there. This was tantamount to ordering 
Bhagwan Gir to relinquish his sect, for the Sanyasis 
worship Dattatre, while the Udasis have as their guru 
Sri Chand, the eldest son of Guru Nanak. 

The Mahant at Dehra Baba Nanak at that time 
was Mihr Chand, the great-grandson of Guru 
Nanak. The Guru commended Mihr Chand as a 
man of piety. Bhagwan Gir acted on the Guru’s 
advice. He prostrated himself before Mihr Chand, 
and received from him initiation, and the name 
Bhagat Bhagwan, or saint of God. Bhagwan Gir then 
travelled in various countries as a missionary, but 
without any success. He was not wanting in energy 
or eloquence, but no one would heed him or listen 
to his exhortations. Disheartened he returned to 
Mihr Chand to report his failure. 

Mihr Chand told him that, if he had desired to 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 289 

become a priest, he ought to have received initiation 
from Guru Har Rai who was the real Guru, and to 
have solicited his orders before proceeding on his 
mission. It was, however, not yet too late. Bhagat 
Bhagwan might even now go to the Guru and crave 
his blessing. On appearing before the Guru, Bhagat 
Bhagwan began to weep and repent of his error in 
not having asked his permission before he had set 
up as a teacher. The Guru cheerfully pardoned him, 
and said that he had now become acceptable in God’s 
court. The Guru directed him to go to Hindustan 
and reform its people. He was not to hide his light, 
but put it in a conspicuous place to illumine men’s 
minds. The Guru promised that he should be every- 
where well received, and that his preaching should be 
heartily accepted. Bhagat Bhagwan proceeded on 
his mission and irrigated with the water of his 
instruction the dried and shrivelled hearts of his 
Hindustani hearers. His disciples are now pros- 
perous land-owners in the north of India. 

One day his Sikhs inquired of the Guru whether 
those who read the Gurus’ hymns without under- 
standing them derived any spiritual advantage there- 
from. The Guru gave no reply at the time, and 
next morning went a-hunting. On a level plain on 
his way he saw pieces of a pot which had held butter. 
’ The sun was melting the butter on the potsherds. 
The Guru took one of them in his hand and said, 
“Ye see, my Sikh brethren, these are old potsherds, 
but when they are heated, the butter that hath 
adhered to them rapidly melteth. As the grease 
adhereth to the potsherds, so do the Gurus’ hymns 
to the hearts of his Sikhs. At the hour of death the 
Gurus’ instruction shall assuredly bear fruit. Whether 
understood or not, it hath within it the seed of 
salvation. Perfume still clingeth to the broken vase. 
The meaning of this parable is, that whoever daily 
readeth the Gurus’ hymns shall assuredly obtain 
peace. And even though he do not fully understand 

U 

SIKH, IV 

290 THE SIKH RELIGION 

them, God will undoubtedly assist him. Guru Ram 
Das hath said :-— 

The Word is the Guru, and the Guru is the Word, and in 
the Word is the essence of ambrosia. 

‘Guru Arjan too hath said :—“ God will not destroy 
your labour.” * 

‘That is, even though ye understand not, God will 
accept your prayers. God never in the slightest 
degree spoileth a good act, so why should daily 
repetition of our hymns be wasted?’ The Guru’s 
questioners were satisfied and their devotion in- 
creased. 

By his mother Natti’s advice the Guru went to 
Kartarpur to meet his elder brother Dhir Mal. The 
Guru remained with him some time, the greater part 
of which he spent in giving religious instruction to 
the crowds who flocked to see him. 

The Guru became a great centre of attraction at 
the Baisakhi festival in Kartarpur. Hymns were 
sung in concert such as :— 

O Guru, may I behold thee and live ! 

On that occasion Bhagtu returned with several Sikh 
friends to visit the Guru. He was now old, his hands 
trembled, and a cane supported his tottering steps. 
The Guru having received him with great respect and 
seated him near him, asked him when he was going 
to marry, that is, when he was going to become 
Death’s bride. The Guru had in mind the following 
verse of Shaikh Farid :— 

The soul is the bride, Death the bridegroom ; he will 
marry her and take her away. | 

The Guru receiving no answer repeated the ques- 
tion. Bhagtu believed that the Guru was banter- 
ing him, and went home without giving a reply. 
While there he reflected—‘ The Guru never speaketh 

1 Nat Ashtapadi. _ 2 Kedara Chhant. 3 Guru Arjan, Sihi. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 291 

in vain. His words ever prove true, and, though 
I am old, it is incumbent on me to marry and verify 
the Guru’s words.’ 

Bhagtu set out again to meet the Guru. On the 
way he saw a girl scaring birds off a field of bajra,' 
and decided to marry her if she gave her consent. 
He then addressed her, ‘ O fair one, I desire to fulfil 
the words of the Guru and marry thee. Pardon me 
for the proposal. Be these birds and trees our 
witnesses.’ The girl was astonished at his words, 
and felt so alarmed and abashed that she could make 
no reply. Bhagtu, however, decided to go through 
the form of a marriage ceremony with her, and instead 
of the actual circumambulations of the bride moved 
his cane, which did duty for her, round a blade of 
bajra, representing the Granth Sahib. This cere- 
mony over, Bhagtu continued his journey, leaving the 
girl in her bajra field to wonder at his eccentricity. 
When he reached the Guru the same question as 
before was put to him. He then mentioned his 
marriage on the way with the sole object of fulfilling 
the Guru’s words. The Guru explained, ‘I merely 
desired to ask thee thine age or, in other words, when 
thou wert likely to die and perform real marriage. 
Tarry with me now, and I will assist thee to the 
utmost of my power. She whom thou didst marry 
in misconception of my words, shall abide in virtue 
and continence ; and the children of thy former wife 
shall call her mother and be obedient to her.’ This 
event occurred in the beginning of the cold season 
when bajra ripens. Bhagtu lived until the end of 
the following April. 

The manner of his death was as follows :—He con- 
tracted a severe dysentery. Several Sikhs went to 
visit him in his illness. They used to say to him, 
‘Thou hast often cured others ; why not cure thy- 
self?’ He would reply, ‘ O Sikhs, entertain no such 
idea. The Guru in this world putteth an end to the 

1 A cereal largely cultivated in the Panjab, the Peneicellarta spicata. 

D2 

292 THE SIKH RELIGION 

sorrows of his Sikhs. In the realm of death no pain is 
felt. Some of my followers used to steal cattle, and 
give me their milk, but it was a stolen nutriment. 
For drinking it I have suffered in this world, but my 
pain shall end here. My suffering hath purified me, 
and I shall take my journey to the next world in 
happiness.’ Then uttering ‘ Wahguru ’ his life issued 
from his body as painlessly, in the words of the 
chronicler, as a garland of flowers falls from an ele- 
phant’s neck. 

-The Guru ordered a sumptuous bier and sent for 
musicians to sing the Gurus’ hymns to rebeck 
accompaniments on the occasion. 

The true Guru hath caused my cargo to arrive in safety. 
The heated caldron hath become cold; the Guru hath 
given me the cooling Name.! 

The Guru decided to set fire with his own hands to 
Bhagtu’s funeral pile, but the masands endeavoured 
to dissuade him. He silenced their remonstrances 
by telling them that Bhagtu, born to his parents in 
their old age, was the result of Guru Ram Das’s 
prayer, and therefore worthy of all honour. He was 
a real Sikh and dearer to the Guru than the Guru’s 
own relations. That was why he would kindle his 
pyre with his own hands. 

On one of the Guru’s preaching tours he stayed at 
Mukandpur in the present Jalandhar district. He 
there drove a bamboo shoot into the ground in 
memory of his visit ; and it still survives as a stately 
tree. Thence the Guru went to the country of Malwa 
and visited the tank near Nathana where Guru Har 
Gobind had fought. There Kala and Karm Chand, 
two brothers of the Marhaj tribe, came to him to 
complain that the people of the Kaura tribe would 
not allow them to live among them. Upon this the 
Guru sent for Jait Pirana, the head of the Kaura 
tribe, and endeavoured to induce him to give five 

1 Guru Arjan, Maru. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 293 

ploughs of land to the complainants for their 
maintenance. Jait replied with a Panjabi proverb, 
‘Gras daiye, bas na daiye ’—that is, give a morsel 
to eat, but not land to live upon—and represented 
that the complainants’ tribe could never subsist on 
five ploughs of Jand. The Guru replied, ‘ Guru 
Nanak will shed his blessing on the land, so that it 
will suffice for the Marhaj tribe.’ Still Jait refused. 

The Guru informed Kala and Karm Chand of the 
failure of his negotiations with Jait, and advised them 
to leave the place next morning, tarry where night 
overtook them, take possession of the land around 
them, and call it Marhaj. Thither too Jait followed 
them and warned them off. They refused to leave 
and quoted the Guru’s order. Kala went to the 
Guru to tell him of their second failure to establish 
a permanent residence. The Guru, seeing his friends’ 
difficulty, recommended forcible resistance to Jait 
and his people. Kala represented Jait’s strength and 
the hopelessness of a struggle with him. The Guru 
encouraged Kala to secure a habitation, and said 
that he himself would aid him and his party. This 
occurred in the Sambat year 1707, A.D. 1650. 

The rival tribes engaged in combat. Jait drew his 
sword on Kala but missed him. Kala in return cut 
Jait transversely through the body, as if the passage 
of his sword had been marked by fait’s sacrificial 
thread. This ended the warfare. After Kala’s 
party had settled in the land a second difficulty 
arose. Their neighbours would not intermarry with 
them. Here again the Guru interposed. He recom- 
mended the Sikhs who visited him to form marriage 
alliances with the Marhaj people. The Guru remained 
for some time at Nathana preaching to the people, 
and Kala and his friends frequently waited on him. 

The Guru by his diligent and earnest preaching 
made many disciples. His hearers abandoned the 
worship of cemeteries and cremation grounds, and 
embraced the simple worship of God. There Kala 

294 THE SIRH RELIGION 

and his two nephews Sandali and Phul, sons of Rup 
Chand, went to visit him. Phul was borne on Kala’s 
shoulder, and Sandali held Kala’s finger as he walked. 
When the children arrived in the Guru’s presence, 
Phul put his hand on his belly. The Guru asked 
why he did so, and Kala told him. Phul could not 
speak himself, and the only way he had of describing 
the pangs of hunger which he felt was to slap his 
belly. The Guru took compassion on him and said, 
“He shall become great, famous, and wealthy. The 
steeds of his descendants shall drink water as far 
as the Jamna; they shall have sovereignty for many 
generations, and be honoured in proportion as they 
serve the Guru.’ 

When Kala reached home, and his wife heard of 
the Guru’s benediction, she upbraided her husband 
for not having taken his own children to the Guru. 
‘They also should in that case become kings. Now 
our sons shall have to pay tribute to our nephew.’ 
Kala replied, ‘Destiny is very powerful. I knew 
not that the Guru would bestow such abundant 
blessings.’ Kala’s wife then put pressure on him 
to take his own sons to the Guru, and teach them 
to strike their bellies in token of hunger. When 
Kala and his sons appeared before the Guru, and 
the children enacted the part in which they had 
been instructed, the Guru demanded an explana- 
tion. Kala said he had thus acted in obedience to 
his wife’s orders. The Guru replied, ‘ The parents 
of these children are alive, but at the same time they 
shall have their own cultivation, eat the fruit of 
their toil, pay no tribute, and be dependent on 
no one. This prophecy has been fulfilled. Their 
descendants own twenty-two villages called the 
Bahia, which pay no land revenue. 

Phul had six sons, from the eldest of whom, namely 
Tilok Singh, the Rajas of Nabha and Jind are 
descended. Phul died in Sambat 1740, A.D. 1689. 
From Phul’s second son, Ram Singh, the Maharaja 

—— 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 295 

of Patiala is descended. These three are known as 
the Phul ke Raje, or Phulkian chiefs. The state 
of Patiala is now the largest, but it was the Raja of 
Nabha who in ancient times bore the title of Chaudhri, 
then an office of power, responsibility, and honour. 

CHAPTER IV 

We now return to the story of the girl who guarded 
the bajra field, and whom Bhagtu so unceremoniously 
wedded. She went and told her father that an 
eccentric old man had pretended to marry her, and 
she described all the strange proceeding. At the 
same time she vowed she would consider him her 
husband, and marry no one else. Her father inquired 
who the strange bridegroom was, and soon learned 
that it was no other than the saint Bhagtu. Father 
and daughter took no further action at the time. 
She remained in her father’s house and continued 
to work in his fields. It became known in due time 
that Bhagtu was dead, and that he had left two sons, 
Gaura and Jiwan, by a former wife. Gaura the elder 
soon became the Raja of Bhatinda. To him the girl’s 
father addressed himself with a view to procure her 
suitable maintenance. Gaura sent for her, received 
her with the greatest respect, and treated her as his 
own mother. 

Gaura visited the Guru when he was at Nathana. 
During his stay Jassa, the Guru’s chauri-bearer, said 
to him, “Marry me to thy second mother, Bhagtu’s 
virgin widow, who is now in thy house. My wife 
is dead. I am a widower, and the marriage of a 
widower and widow would be very suitable.’ Gaura 
felt insulted at the proposal, and bided his oppor- 
tunity to take revenge. He found it one day while 
they were both hunting with the Guru. The Guru 
had advanced in front of the party when Gaura drew 
his sword and killed Jassa. When the Guru heard of 
it, he forbade Gaura to enter his presence. 

206 THE SIKH RELIGION 

After this the Guru returned from Nathana to 
Kiratpur. Wherever he went he was followed by 
Gaura, who hoped to find an opportunity of soliciting 
his pardon, and a retractation of his curse. When 
the Guru arrived in Kiratpur, Gaura encamped a 
mile distant. For six months the Guru remained in 
Kiratpur, and was ever shadowed by Gaura. When 
the Guru again proceeded to Malwa, Gaura followed 
him. As the Guru was proceeding along the Satluj, 
he met some Muhammadan troops who were marching 
from Lahore to Dihli. One of the officers inquired 
the name of the party and was informed that it was 
Guru Har Rai and his bodyguard. The officer was 
already aware that it was the Guru’s grandfather, 
Guru Har Gobind, who had killed his grandfather, 
General Mukhlis Khan, at Amritsar, and he deter- 
mined on taking life for life. 

While the officer was thus inquiring and cogitating 
the Guru passed on. The officer then waylaid the 
Guru’s wives who were following, and attempted 
violence. Now came Gaura’s opportunity to per- 
form signal service for the Guru with the object of 
obtaining his pardon. The Guru had been forbidden 
by his grandfather Guru Har Gobind to engage in 
warfare, but Gaura might fight for him and defend 
his family. Gaura had his own troops. They set 
on the Musalmans and fought valiantly until night 
closed the combat. The Musalmans escaped under 
cover of the darkness, and the Guru’s wives succeeded 
in escaping their brutality. When the Guru heard 
of Gaura’s gallantry he at once sent for him Gaura 
was not allowed time to wash his face and hands, 
but was ushered stained with blood into the Guru’s 
presence. The Guru learned from him the events of 
the battle and pardoned him. After this Gaura 
was glad to return to his own territory. The Guru 
then marched to Kartarpur and discontinued his 
projected tour to Malwa. 

A Brahman of Kartarpur had obtained a son as 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 297 

tot 

the result of a vow that he would make h'm a tithe- 
paying Sikh of the Guru. The child, however, died 
during the Guru’s stay. The Brahman took the 
corpse with loud lamentations to the Guru’s door, 
and there sat down beside it. He said, ‘If my son 
revive not, I will die myself.’ The Guru remonstrated 
with him on his dissatisfaction with the will of God. 
‘The boy’s life was complete. When the oil is at 
an end, how can the lamp burn ? Guru Nanak hath 
said :— 

If a boy die amid his youthful sports, 

People will weep and say he was a merry boy. 

He who gave him took him, the weeper erreth. 

What can be done if he die in the ripeness of youth ? 
There is this difference—his friends and relations will 
mournfully speak of him as theirs! 

Accursed in the world are they who weep for the loss of 
worldly things.? 

‘O Brahman, it would have been worse had the 
boy died after marriage. Thou wouldst suffer 
misery from continually seeing his widow in thy 
house. The world is, as the Guru hath said, a 
chamber of lamp-black, and thy son hath died before 
becoming defiled with it.’ 

However much the Guru preached, the Brahman 
only learned one lesson, name'y, that he himself 
should die. The Sikhs took compassion, and inter- 
ceded w.th the Guru for him—‘ Cherisher of the 
poor, thou art potent to break and to mend. The 
Brahman hath now for a day and night lain pros- 
trate at thy door. Hungry and poor he too will 
die in thy presence.’ The masands also went and 
pleaded for the Brahman—‘ Great king, if this child 
revive not, people of other creeds will make various 
remarks to our discredit.’ The Guru replied, “Is 
there any among you who now make these repre- 

1 He will have more relations and friends to weep for him the 
older he grows. 2 Maru Solha. 

298 THE SIKH RELIGION 

sentations, sufficiently philanthropic to bestow his 
own life on the Brahman’s son ? ’ 

On hearing this the necks of the hearers sank 
into their bodies. The Guru put the question three 
times, but received no reply. Within less than half 
an hour Jiwan, Bhai Bhagtu’s younger son, drawing 
a winding-sheet over him, said, ‘O divine Guru 
Nanak, I will take this boy’s death on myself, and 
give my life to him.’ Saying this, he whose name 
was life—Jiwan—entered eternal life, and the 
Brahman’s son arose repeating the spell of the true 
Name. While the people were wondering, the Guru 
said, ‘ Blest is that Sikh who for the sake of another’s 
life hath not spared his own.’ When the Bairars, the 
tribe to whom Jiwan belonged, heard of his self- 
sacrifice, they hastened to appear before the Guru 
to express their displeasure—‘Great king, Jiwan was 
only eighteen years of age, and had but recently 
brought home his bride. She is pregnant, and who 
will cherish her now ? He hath but just entered the 
fair, and this is his fate.’ The Guru said, ‘A son 
shall be born in his house whom you shall call Sant 
Das. His offspring shall greatly increase and people 
many villages. It may be mentioned that his 
descendants now occupy a tract in the Firozpur 
district called Chak Bhai. After this the Guru 
returned to Kiratpur. 

The Emperor Shah Jahan kept near him his 
eldest son Dara Shikoh whom he loved. His second 
son Shujah Muhammad he made Governor of Bengal. 
Aurangzeb the third was appointed governor of the 
Dakhan, and Murad Bakhsh the fourth received the 
province of Gujrat. Their ambition, however, was 
not satisfied. They-each sought to become Emperors, 
and for this purpose amassed wealth and armies in 
their respective provinces. In doing so they prac- 
tised great oppression. They used to make the 
Rajput Rajas stand with clasped hands in front of 
them and bring their daughters to them for their 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 299 

enjoyment. Thus was a stigma attached to the 
Hindus like the spot on the moon. The Rajput 
princes had to obey in everything, or they would 
have had to don the poisoned skins of tigers and die. 
When Shah Jahan had reigned for many years, 
he contracted the germs of disease and showed no 
signs of recovery. No one but Dara Shikoh was 
allowed to approach him. A rumour then spread 
that His Majesty was dead, and this afforded a good 
opportunity to thieves and highway robbers to 
exercise their self-elected calling. There was general 
confusion far and near, and evil fate fell on the com- 
munity. Dara Shikoh intercepted letters and peti- 
tions to his father, and passed on them such orders 
as he thought expedient. People were afraid to go 
outside their houses. No complaints were listened 
to. [he Emperor’s sons became rebels, and assumed 
sovereignty in their own provinces. In every village 
men’s minds were unsettled like a boat in a whirlpool. 
It was ascertained that Shujah Muhammad had 
arrived at Banaras from Patna. When Dara Shikoh 
heard of his movements, he sent for Raja Jai Singh 
and ordered him to march against him. Jai Singh 
proceeded with all haste towards Banaras. He 
halted at Bahadurpur and Shujah Muhammad went 
forth to give him battle. Shujah Muhammad’s troops 
were defeated with great slaughter and he returned 
to Bengal pursued by Raja Jai Singh. The latter 
restored tranquillity in the districts of Patna and 
Manger, and dried the weeping eyes of the populace. 
Dara Shikoh dispatched Raja Jaswant Singh of 
Jodhpur to preserve order in the Dakhan. He gave 
him special instructions to punish Aurangzeb if he 
strove to make himself independent, and bring in 
chains Murad Bakhsh who had shown a disposi- 
tion.to usurp sovereignty. Jaswant Singh having 
received command of a large army, proceeded on 
his expedition. Before his arrival in the Dakhan 
Aurangzeb and Murad had united their armies. 
Jaswant Singh’s men fought valiantly, but could not 

300 THE SIKH RELIGION 

succeed against numbers and were obliged to retire. 
Aurangzeb was enraged that Dara Shikoh should have 
sent an army against him, and he at once prepared 
to retaliate and if possible seize the reins of empire. 
Prior to the departure of Jaswant Singh to the 
Dakhan, Shah Jahan and his son Dara Shikoh had 
resided in Agra. During Jaswant Singh’s absence 
they removed to Dihli for the benefit of Shah Jahan’s 
health, the climate of Agra not being suitable for him. 
After Jaswant Singh’s defeat Dara Shikoh put his 
father under restraint, and then made preparations 
to oppose Aurangzeb’s progress. The Emperor 
cautioned Dara Shikoh to beware of Aurangzeb who 
was deceitful and vindictive, but the warning was 
of no avail. Dara Shikoh proceeded with great 
pomp and rejoicing to oppose Aurangzeb. He 
pitched his camp at Samugarh near the margin of the 
river Chambal, and there awaited his brother’s 
approach. Aurangzeb soon appeared at the head 
of his own and Murad’s armies, and there ensued 
a determined battle. Aurangzeb succeeded in 
capturing several of Dara Shikoh’s nobles. Dara 
Shikoh himself fled from the field, and only halted 
in Dihli where he entrenched himself in the fort. 
Aurangzeb proceeded to Agra to seize his father 
who by this time had returned there. The old man 
was very ill, and in this condition was imprisoned 
by his undutiful son. Aurangzeb also imprisoned 
his brother Murad Bakhsh though he had assisted 
him to vanquish Dara Shikoh. He then proceeded 
to Dihli with his own and Murad’s armies, and 
Dara Shikoh’s fugitive battalions. Dara Shikoh, 
fearing that the Dihli nobles would assist his brother 
and that he himself would be captured, directed his 
steps to the Panjab, taking with him his faithful 
adherents and all his wealth and valuables. 
Aurangzeb then issued a proclamation that no 
one should assist or receive Dara Shikoh on pain of 
his highest displeasure. The result was that Dara 
Shikoh wandered an exile from town to town and 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 301 

village to village. In this extremity he decided on 
visiting the Guru, who had sent him the healing cloves 
and myrobalans. He was, in the first place, grateful 
to the Guru, and, in the second place, his favourite 
priest Mian Mir had been loud in the Guru’s praises. 
Dara Shikoh dispatched the following letter to the 
Guru. ‘O saint of the world, supremely pious, by 
meeting whom God’s light shineth on man, pure 
image of God, it is through thy favour man obtaineth 
salvation. My heart longeth to behold God, but 
only those to whom thou showest favour can do so. 
J desire to meet thee and by the fulfilment of this 
wish to remove my doubts. If I may fall at thy feet 
the wish of my heart will be fulfilled, but the duties 
of empire leave me no leisure and entangle me like 
a fish in a net. My priest Mian Mir hath praised 
thee, and since then I have desired to meet thee. 
Regard me with a look of affection. The Emperor 
forced empire on me, but I told him my heart desired 
not greatness. I was, however, obliged to obey my 
royal father’s mandate. Mercifully assist me!’ 

To this letter the Guru replied, ‘ O Prince, thou art 
the object of God’s grace, since the holy saint Mian 
Mir showeth thee favour. In the desire to tread in 
God’s way and know thyself thou hast obtained 
spiritual empire. Aurangzeb, who is unmindful of 
God, may obtain worldly empire, but shall suffer 
without respite in hell-fire. Fear not; be confident ; 
salvation shall be thy portion. Thou rulest over 
the eternal sovereignty of religion which will last 
for ever. Great is thy good fortune since thou 
lovest God’s name, and hast met Him who is un- 
equalled and indescribable. Ever blest is thy devo- 
tion. Wherefore be happy that thou hast obtained 
thy salvation. This world is a play and transient in 
its nature ; be not enamoured therewith.’ 

Dara Shikoh proceeded to Kiratpur in the hope of 
obtaining the Guru’s assistance, but found him 
absent. The prince then sent him a second letter 
which reached him in Khadur. The result was that 

302 - THE SIKH RELIGION 

the Guru and the prince had an interview on the 
right bank of the Bias. On this occasion the prince 
made large offerings to the Guru. The prince had 
been a diligent student of the Hindu and Muham- 
madan religions, and had adopted opinions which 
belonged to the enlightened era of Akbar. He put 
the Guru some questions and placed before him some 
of his theological doubts and difficulties. The Guru 
complimented him on his spiritual knowledge, and 
then gave him instruction in the Sikh religion, such 
instruction as has often been repeated in the preceding 
pages. The Guru added, ‘It 1s often the duty of 
kings to take arms and engage in battle, and either 
die themselves or kill their enemies for the acquisition 
of wealth and territory. Wherefore collect an army 
and obtain as many allies as possible. Go to Lahore, 
fortify thy position, fight when necessary, and obtain 
victory. God assisteth those who assist themselves. 
Once thou inflictest defeat on Aurangzeb, thou 
shalt have many Rajas for thine allies. They now 
know thine excellent disposition, and will declare 
themselves on thy side when they are convinced that 
their action is safe. Thou hast now no resource but 
the arbitrament of battle. All the kings of India 
are subject to the emperor who ruleth in Dihh, and 
if thou recapture it not, thou shalt have no abiding- 
place, for the master of that city shall be master of 
India. Therefore thou must struggle to collect 
troops for battle and prevent the establishment of 
Aurangzeb’s authority.’ Dara Shikoh on receiving 
this encouragement asked the Guru to grant him faith 
in God, and said, ‘ I do not require a fleeting temporal 
empire. I merely desire spiritual perfection. I will 
fight when compelled by my enemies to do so and 
endeavour to obtain victory. What God desireth is 
unalterable.’ 

The Guru and the prince retired to their respective 
tents for the night, and next morning the prince was 
informed that Aurangzeb’s army was pursuing him. 
He then departed for Lahore requesting the Guru to 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 303 

impede its progress as much as possible. Dara 
Shikoh was pursued with great vengeance and 
hostility by his brother’s army to Lahore, Multan, 
Bhakhar, and Gujrat in the present Bombay presi- 
dency. He was finally captured through the infamous 
agency of a Pathan named Jiwan who betrayed him. 
He was sent to Dihli, where his political conduct and 
his heterodox opinions were charged as offences against 
him. In the hope of softening his brother’s heart he 
addressed him the following letter :—‘ My brother 
and my emperor, all hail! I congratulate thee and 
thy children on the empire thou hast obtained. 
I have no worldly desires myself. I only want a 
nook to dwell in and a female servant to cook and 
fetch for me so that I may pray for thee.’ Entreaties 
never availed with Aurangzeb. Dara Shikoh was 
condemned by a jury of Muhammadan priests and 
executed on the plea of apostasy by his brother’s 
orders. The Guru’s words had made such an 
impression on his heart that he never uttered a sigh 
of pain or distress in his last moments. It is said 
that three hundred and seventy Muhammadan 
priests signed the order for his death. One man, 
named Sarmad, resolutely refused to sign it, and 
thus incurred Aurangzeb’s gravest displeasure.’ 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras 1X, Chapters 22, 23. Sarmad was a man of 
thought, learning and enterprise. Originally a Jew, he nominally 
accepted Islam. He left his native country, Kashan, and emigrated 
to India as a merchant and physician. He found a patron in Dara 
Shikoh, whom he nominated as the rightful successor of Shah Jahan. 
Sarmad used to sit by the roadside dressed in unfashionable raiment, 
and preach to the populace doctrines not in accordance with the rigid 
Moslem orthodoxy of Aurangzeb. It became well known that Sarmad 
instead of repeating the orthodox creed of Islam used to repeat a 
formula which did not acknowledge Muhammad as the prophet of 
God. On account of this, his friendship for Dara Shikoh, and his 
general unconventionality, Aurangzeb ordered that the ‘ long-tongued 
unbeliéver’ should die. His execution took place three years after the 
murder of Dara Shikoh. He was buried in the precincts of the great 
Jamma Masjid in Dihli. 

304 THE SIKH RELIGION 

CHAPTER V 

Aurangzeb was now secure on the throne of Dihli. 
He kept his father a prisoner in,Agra until he died. 
Dara Shikoh was dead, Shujah Muhammad had fled, 
and Murad Bakhsh was a prisoner with his father. 
Aurangzeb having acquired a bigoted Muhammadan 
training set himself to uproot the Hindu religion. 
He began with the temples and idols in the sacred 
city of Mathura, known even to the Greeks of the 
age of Alexander as a Hindu place of sanctity, and 
destroyed there every vestige of Hindu worship. 
He then destroyed the temples and idols in other 
parts of India. He pulled down the temple of 
Brahma in Pushkar and threw its materials into the 
neighbouring lake. He demolished seven hundred 
temples in the state of Ajmer. He then proceeded 
to Banaras, the great stronghold of Hinduism, where 
he found ample materials for his destructive fury. 
Wherever his iconoclastic zeal prevailed he built 
Muhammadan mosques. Whenever two or more 
men had a suit or a contention, it was always 
decided for the party who became Muhammadan. 

Meantime complaints were made to Aurangzeb 
against the Guru. The Guru, it was said, had met 
Dara Shikoh, blessed him, and assisted him in 
opposing the Emperor ; and it was also reported 
that he was preaching a religion distinct from 
Islam, and performing miracles in evidence of his 
divine mission. The Emperor was accordingly 
advised to send for him and convert him to Islam 
unless he could clearly establish his religious pre- 
tensions by the performance of miracles at the royal 
court. When the Guru was once converted, hundreds 
of thousands of Hindus would follow his example. 
Moreover, the Guru, who had been a friend of the 
Emperor’s enemy, Dara Shikoh, could never become 
his friend. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 305 

The Emperor accordingly addressed the following 
to the Guru :—‘ Guru Nanak’s house was the house 
of holy men. He treated friend and foe in the same 
way, but thou hast supported Dara Shikoh in his 
effort to obtain sovereignty. I have captured and 
put him to death, so he hath in no way benefited by 
thine assistance. But let bygones be bygones, and 
let us now be friends. Come to me. I am now 
enthroned as Emperor. I have a great desire to 
behold thee. Wherefore thou shouldst come to me 
without delay.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘I have no business with thee 
that thou shouldst have summoned me. I am not 
a king who payeth thee tribute, nor do I desire to 
receive anything from thee, nor do we stand in the 
relation of priest and disciple to each other, so 
wherefore hast thou summoned me ? So far from my 
having conferred empire on Dara Shikoh, it was the 
eternal throne and umbrella of religion I conferred 
on him. He had no wish for terrestrialempire. The 
empire he hath obtained is imperishable. It is only 
he whom God loveth who can be like Dara Shikoh. 
If thou have any doubt as to the empire Dara 
Shikoh hath obtained, meditate on himas thou goest 
to sleep, and thou shalt have a vision of the reality.’ 

The Guru’s words proved true. Aurangzeb one 
night saw his brother seated on his throne. Celestial 
maids were dancing round him. Sandal, attar ofroses, 
and other perfumes exhaled from them, and garlands 
of flowers adorned their persons. Aurangzeb dressed 
in dirty clothes in the style of a pariah was carrying 
a basket of filth. Rain fell at that moment and the 
filth overspread his features. Then up came a slave- 
driver and struck him such a blow with a stick that 
he fell on his face. Upon this the Emperor awoke 
and began to reflect. ‘ The Guru sent this dream to 
terrify me. Now what is to be done? I will not 
abate a jot of my efforts against him. [| will straight- 
way send an army to capture him and bring him 

SIKH. IV x 

306 THE SIKH RELIGION 

before me.’ Next morning, on awaking, the Emperor 
called one of his nobles and said, ‘ If Guru Har Rai 
will not come of his own accord, then arrest and 
produce him before me. If he struggle against his 
arrest, then write to me, and I will send a strong 
force with sufficient munitions of war to thine 
assistance.’ 

The noble, seeing the difficulty of the enterprise 
before him, left the royal presence. Go, however, he 
must, but his object was never accomplished. On 
the road he ate some badly cooked food which induced 
indigestion and caused his death. At that time 
a company of Sikhs arrived from Dihli to behold the 
Guru. They informed him of all the unsuccessful 
efforts made by the Emperor to arrest him, and they 
expressed their apprehension that some harm would 
befall him. The Guru replied, ‘ At the time of my 
obtaining the Guruship, my grandfather said that any 
person who strove to do me injury should vanish like 
hail before the fire. The Guru then quoted from 
Guru Arjan :— | 

God is the Lord of all creation; He specially assisteth 
His servants.t 

The Muhammadan priests counselled the Emperor 
not to use any harsh language in his summons to the 
Guru, but write to him in an apparently friendly 
manner. When the Guru arrived, the Emperor could 
treat him as he pleased. This advice the Emperor 
accepted, and wrote as follows :—‘ O holy Guru, thou 
art in the place of Guru Ram Das, who was univer- 
sally known as the Guru of the world and lord of 
miracles. He visited my ancestor the Emperor 
Akbar and was on friendly terms with him, so kindly 
come thou too and grant me a sight of thee. Show 
me thy miracles and tell me of the ways of God.’ 

The messenger duly arrived in Kiratpur and pre- 
sented the Emperor’s letter. The Guru consulted 

1 Gijari. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 307 

his Sikhs as to the expediency of going to Dihli, and 
putting himself into the Emperor’s power. His 
counsellors gave their opinion, ‘ Take care that 
matters go not from bad to worse. The Emperor is 
very obstinate. On the other hand, thou possessest 
miraculous power, and he on whose head thou placest 
thy hand can accomplish everything. Therefore in 
our humble opinion it is better for thee to go. But 
thou art a searcher of hearts, and knowest best.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ What you counsel is politic, 
but I have registered a vow that I will never look at 
the wicked Emperor Aurangzeb. In the first place, 
I have no business with him. Secondly, he is very de- 
ceitful and treacherous. Thirdly, he hath imprisoned 
his father and put to death his brother Dara Shikoh, 
who was a great saint, and believed in the All-per- 
vading Spirit. Fourthly, the Emperor, who is so 
cruel and bigoted and murdereth holy men, is every 
one’s enemy.’ 

Ram Rai, son of the Guru, arrived while the subject 
was under discussion. The descendants of the Guru 
were all assembled, and every one was giving his 
opinion. Some said ‘ Yes’, and some said ‘ No’. 
Upon this Ram Rai gave it as his opinion that some 
one should certainly go to the Emperor, otherwise 
their position would be one of great difficulty, as the 
Emperor would not be put off with excuses. Upon 
this the assembly turned towards Ram Rai and said, 
‘Thou art the Guru’s elder son and capable. Go 
thou and settle this matter, otherwise there will be 
great trouble. Aurangzeb hath quite determined to 
carry his design into execution. If thou go not, 
there will be a huge conflagration. It is not on any 
account proper to quarrel with the ruler of the period.’ 
Upon this Ram Rai said that if they all wished it, 
he would go himself to the Emperor and effect a 
satisfactory settlement with him. Guru Har Rai 
accordingly gave him permission to depart. 

The Guru on the departure of his son Ram Rai 

x@ 

308 THE STKE RELIGION 

for Dihli, enjoined him in all his words and actions 
to fix his thoughts on God, and everything would 
prove successful. He also impressed on him the pro- 
priety of not countenancing any objections the 
Emperor might make to the Granth Sahib, but of 
replying to him patiently and to the purpose. The 
Guru continued, ‘The Emperor Jahangir told my great 
grandfather Guru Arjan, that certain passages reflect- 
ing on the Muhammadans ought to be expunged, but 
he indignantly refused, and said he would never 
alter or abridge the writings of the Gurus. He 
suffered much in consequence, but he never flattered 
any one. JRam Rai was then instructed to rely on 
the divine power of the Gurus, and not in any way 
recede from the principles of his religion. 

Ram Rai made preparations for his journey, and 
next morning with Gurdas? and Tara (great-grand- 
son of Bhai Bahlo) and others took leave of the Guru 
and set out on his journey. When in due time they 
reached Dihh, the Emperor was informed by one of 
his staff that Guru Har Rai had not come himself, but 
had sent his son Ram Rai who might be subjected 
to the same trial as had been intended for his father. 
The Emperor then decided that, if his object in 
making trial of the Guru were not fulfilled by the 
Guru’s son, he would send for the Guru himself. 

It is said that Ram Rai performed several miracles 
in Dihli. The Emperor sent him poisoned robes which 
he wore unscathed. At one interview the Emperor 
had a sheet spread over a deep pit so that Ram Rai 
might fall into it, but the sheet, it is said, would not 
give way, and Ram Rai was miraculously preserved. 

By the Emperor’s order ameeting of Muhammadan 
priests was held for the purpose of interrogating 
Ram Kai on the subject of the Gurus’ hymns. The 
Emperor opened the conversation, “Ram Rai, your 
Guru Nanak hath written against the Moslem 
religion. In one place he hath said :— 

1 ‘This is not the author of the Wars. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 309 

Mitti Musalman ki pere pai kumiar ; 
Ghar bhande itan kian, jaldi kare pukar,! 

the translation of which is :— 

The ashes of the Muhammadan fall into the potter’s clod ; 
Vessels and bricks are fashioned from them; they cry out 
as they burn. 

‘ What say you the meaning is ? ’ 

Ram Rai began to reflect that it was with great diffi- 
culty he could please Aurangzeb. If he became sulky, 
then all his miracles would be of no avail. He there- 
fore determined toalter the line of Guru Nanak, in order 
to gratify the Emperor. He thus altogether forgot his 
father’s parting injunctions, and said, ‘ Thy Majesty, 
Guru Nanak wrote, ‘ Mitti beiman ki’, that is, the 
the ashes of the faithless, not of the Musalmans, fall 
into the potter’s clod. The text has been causelessly 
corrupted by ignorant persons and thy Majesty’s 
religion and mine defamed. The faces of the faithless 
and not of the Musalmans shall be blackened in both 
worlds. When alive they shall burn, and when dead 
their ashes shall be defiled.’ All the Muhammadan 
priests were pleased with this reply. The Emperor 
then conferred a mark of favour on Ram Rai and 
dissolved the assembly. 

The Sikhs of Dihli lost no time in reporting Ram 
Kai's perfidy to his father. Their envoy swiftly pro- 
ceeded to Kiratpur, informed the Guru of the pomp 
and honour with which Ram Rai had been received in 
Dihli, and detailed the miracles he had exhibited. 
They then explained how he had made an alteration 
in a lineof Guru Nanak in order to please the Emperor, 
and asked the Guru how far this was to proceed. 

The Guru was much distressed at the insult to Guru 
Nanak and the Granth Sahib, and said, ‘ The words 
of Guru Nanak are unerring arrows. Great priests, 
holy men, and miracle-workers revere his words. 

1 Asa ki War. 

310 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Nanak was a sovereign who established his 
empire over men.’ The Guru then passing in review 
the whole of Ram Rai’s conduct since his arrival in 
Dihh, his treachery to his faith, his unnecessary 
exhibition of miracles, and his long absence, decided 
that he was not fit for the Guruship. ‘The Guruship,’ 
said the Guru, ‘is like a tigress’s milk which can only 
be contained in a golden cup. Only he who is ready 
to devote his life thereto is worthy of it. Let Ram 
Rai not look on my face again. Let him abide with 
Aurangzeb, and amass money at his court. In the 
words of Guru Amar Das :— 

Let him who is worthy sit on the king’s throne.! 
The face of the liar shall be cursed ; the true saint only 
shall be magnified.’ ? 

When Ram Rai, who remained in Dihli, heard of 
his father’s decision to exclude him from the succes- 
sion, he began to repent and grieve :—* Alas! why 
have I done such an evil deed? To flatter a false 
monarch I have altered a word of the divine Guru 
Nanak, not one iota of whose writings is inaccurate.’ 
While Ram Rai said this in his heart, he began to 
boast to the world at large—‘ It is of no consequence. 
What care I for the Guruship? I have lakhs of 
rupees, I have endless Sikhs and followers. The 
Emperor is now a sincere friend of mine. Why should 
I desire the Guruship? I will seize it by force after 
my father’s death. I will now hold my court in 
Dihli. What care I for anybody ? I have hundreds 
of thousands of brave men at my disposal to support 
me.’ Thus stating the pros and cons of his position 
and tossing his opinions from side to side as if they 
were a magician’s ball, he gave himself airs as if he 
had been already appointed governor of a province. 

Prior to the departure of Ram Rai for Dihli a 
Sikh came from a distance to see the Guru, and 
asked him which of his sons should succeed him, 

’ Maru ki War 2 Bilawal ki War. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 311 

It is said that he suggested the following test—‘ Take 
a needle to where my two sons are reading the 
Granth Sahib by turns. Try to insert the needle 
into the couch on which the sacred volume is sup- 
ported. The couch which is most softened by the 
reading shall receive the needle. If thou but prick 
it, the needle will enter of its own accord.’ The 
Sikh took the needle and first tried to pierce the 
couch when Kam Rai was reading, but it failed to 
enter. He waited until it was the turn of the Guru’s 
youngest son, Har Krishan to read, and after a brief 
delay inserted the needle. It is said that it at once 
entered the couch which had become soft as wax by 
the force of Har Krishan’s devotion.’ 

The Sikh went and informed the Guru, but at his 
request kept private the result of the trial. The 
Guru then said, “The immortal God hath given thee 
answer. What impression will not Har Krishan’s 
voice make on soft minds since it produceth such an 
impression on hard wood ? It is only he whose words 
have such power who is fitted for the Guruship.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

After Ram Rai had resided in Dihli for some 
time he decided he would go to Kiratpur to endeavour 
to induce his father to reverse his decision regarding 
him. ‘The rope may be rotten, but the twist had 
not yet left it ’—that is, though his hopes were little, 
yet his desire for the Guruship remained. He took 
leave of the Emperor and proceeded to a spot twelve 
kos from Kiratpur. There he pitched his tent, and 
wrote to his father for permission to visit him. He 
said he had suffered for his sins and desired to implore 
the parental forgiveness. The Guru replied, “ Ram 

1 This parable is now understood by the Sikhs to mean that Ram 
Rai’s reading of the Granth Sahib produced no impression on the Sikh, 

while the devout manner in which Har Krishan intoned the sacred 
volume softened the Sikh’s heart. 

312 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Rai, thou hast disobeyed my order and sinned. 
How canst thou aspire to become a holy man? Go 
whither thy fancy leadeth thee. I will never see thee 
again on account of thine infidelity. If I appoint thee 
Guru, what thou hast done to-day others will do 
to-morrow.’ 

' Ram Rai on receipt of this letter proceeded to 
Lahore where he was well received. Apart from 
being the eldest son of the Guru and a reputed 
thaumaturge, he was also supported by the Sikhs 
through policy, for it was believed that he possessed 
the confidence of the Emperor. On this account 
men who had previously not been Sikhs, now became 
his disciples and espoused his cause. 

Ram Kai in process of time wrote to his uncle 
Dhir Mal to request him to intercede for him with his 
father. ‘Tell him that it is not a good thing to up- 
root a household. It is not proper to bestow the 
Guruship on my younger brother Har Krishan. 
On this some very severe comments will be made. 
When Prithia was superseded in favour of Guru 
Arjan, what troubles arose! Let not this happen 
again. I am besides on very good terms with the 
Emperor Aurangzeb, and I shall certainly complain 
to him.’ Dhir Mal took this letter to the Guru’s 
mother and persuaded her to accompany him to the 
Guru, who by this time had returned to Kartarpur, 
in the hope of prevailing on him to pardon Ram Rai. 
Dhir Mal and the Guru’s mother both pleaded 
earnestly and with their own natural eloquence 
expanded Ram Rai’s arguments. | 

The Guru replied, ‘ What I have done is not at all 
unusual, Guru Nanak having made trial of his sons 
gave the Guruship to a disciple. Guru Angad and 
Guru Amar Das, having also made trial of their sons, 
did not appoint them to succeed, but gave the Guru- 
ship to theirservants. After full consideration I have 
arrived at the conclusion that Ram Rai was blinded 
by the love of pelf when he so far forgot himself as to 

LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 313 

alter a word in a hymn of Guru Nanak to please the 
Emperor. What was done in the beginning will 
also be done now.’ 

Dhir Mal was not to be easily balked. He kept 
continually pressing Ram Rai’s claims on the Guru, 
so the latter, in order to avoid an altercation with his 
brother resolved to leave Kartarpur, and return to 
Kiratpur. There is an Oriental proverb that swans 
remain not in the mire ; so the Guru could not abide 
in evil association. He formed his plan overnight, 
set out next morning, and arrived in due course in 
Kiratpur where he gave a splendid banquet to his 
people. 

On one occasion when some Sikhs singing hymns 
from the Granth Sahib visited the Guru, he happened 
to be lying on his couch. On hearing the hymns he 
immediately arose. When asked the reason he said, 
‘Hear, my beloved Sikhs, the Guru is embodied 
in compositions whose sanctity is immeasurable 
and unrivalled. The Guru’s instruction is a raft 
to cross over the fiery ocean of the world. It con- 
ferreth happiness on the true Guru’s Sikhs, and 
removeth sin from the hearts of the readers. It may 
be called a lion to frighten the deer of avarice, or an 
elephant to break down the great tree of sorrow. It 
produceth divine knowledge and dispelleth ignorance. 
He who payeth respect to the Guru’s hymns shall 
without further effort cross over the terrible ocean 
of the world, for great is their efficacy. Were I not 
to show reverence for the Guru’s hymns, my Sikhs 
would not do so, and without such reverence bliss 
could not be obtained. That is why I rose from my 
couch. 

‘The Sikh who acteth according to the Guru's 
instruction, shall obtain the supreme dignity. It is 
only-he who hath no devotion or faith, who rever- 
enceth not the Guru’s words. Without reverence 
devotion is not obtained, and without devotion there 
is no holiness. Without lioliness how can there be 

314 THE Sik RELFGION 

deliverance ? And without deliverance the soul 
shall be subject to further transmigration and shall 
not be absorbed in God. It is incumbent on the 
Sikhs to obtain happiness by pondering on the 
Guru’s words. Pilgrimage, fasting, sacrifice, and 
painful austerities are of no avail. The Guru’s 
saint is my Sikh, and delighteth in the Guru’s hymns. 
Be assured that he who doth not, is no Sikh of 
mine.’ The Guru’s example to rise when the sacred 
volume is read is still observed by his followers. 
The Guru feeling his end approaching again 
thought of his successor. He had always felt that 
as Ram Rai, who was plotting and struggling for 
the Guruship, was unworthy, it must be left to some 
holy person. He remembered the wisdom of Kabir :— 

Do now the work of to-morrow ; and if thou do it now, 
do it at once. 

Nothing can be done hereafter when Death standeth over 
thy head. 

The Guru having thus resolved summoned a great 
council of his Sikhs at which the descendants of his 
predecessors attended. The occasion was celebrated 
with a banquet, great rejoicings, the songs of many 
minstrels, and the music of many rebeck-players. 
The Guru seated his second son Har Krishan, who 
was still a child, on a throne in the centre of the 
assembly. He then placed a coco-nut and five paise 
before him, circumambulated him three times, and 
had a tilak or patch put on his forehead. The whole 
company then rose and did obeisance to the young 
Guru. Guru Har Rai enjoined all his Sikhs to con- 
sider Har Krishan as his image, to put faith in him, 
and they should obtain salvation. Thus was the 
ceremony of Har Krishan’s installation complete. 

Guru Har Rai closed his eyes in divine pleasure 
and went to his final rest on Sunday the ninth day 
of the dark half of the month of Kartik, Sambat 
1718 (A.D. 166m). | 

Wisp wos MyEhic aA 

= a a 2 - 

-_—= 

mimmmemniaament 

] 
| 

GURU HAR KRISHAN 

SIKH IV P. 315 

315 

PIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN, 
tae PEIGHIE GURY 

CHAPTER [ 

GURU HAR KRISHAN, the second and younger son 
of Guru Har Rai and his wife Krishan Kaur, was 
born on the ninth day of the dark half of the month 
of Sawan in Sambat 1713 (A.D. 1656). The reason 
why his brother Ram Rai was superseded has 
already been given. Har Krishan, though appointed 
Guru at the age of five years and three months, gave 
promise of a docile spirit and acute intellect. Ac- 
cording to a Hindustani proverb, the nature and 
ultimate size of a tree can be judged by its sprouting 
leaves, so this child gave early indications of being 
worthy to succeed to the high dignity of his line. It 
is said that even at that early age Guru Har Krishan 
used to give his Sikhs instruction, resolve their doubts, 
and lead them on the way to salvation. Sikhs 
came from all quarters to visit him, and he sent 
preachers in every direction to fulfil his father’s 
pious object to propagate and extend the faith. 

Ram Kai was at the Emperor’s court in Dihli 
when his younger brother was appointed to the 
Guruship in Kiratpur. On hearing of it be became 
very envious. He said, ‘I first came here by my 
father Guru Har Rai’s order. This powerful km- 
peror hath so appreciated me that he hath given me 
much wealth. I have moreover extended the faith, 
and yet my father hath deprived me of the Guru- 
ship and conferred it on my younger brother.’ 
Although Ram Rai’s conscience told him that he 
had done wrong, yet, in the words of the chronicler, 
jealousy stopped the ears of his intelligence. 

3Tb THE SIKH RELIGION 

The masand Gurdas who attended on Ram Rai, 
noticing his troubled state of mind said, “ There is no 
need to be sad. Thou hast many disciples in this 
part of the country. Even the great Emperor him- 
self holdeth thee in honour. Of what consequence 
is Guru Har Rai’s neglect of thee?’ Ram Ral 
replied, ‘ Knowest thou not that when the Sikhs of 
this country learn that the Guruship hath been given 
to my younger brother, they will turn away from 
me and go to him?’ Gurdas was ready with an 
expedient, ‘Send thy masands in every direction 
to proclaim thee Guru, and say that whoever boweth 
to any other shall be accursed. By this device people 
will reverence thee as Guru Har Rai’s rightful suc- 
cessor. If, on the other hand, people reverence 
Guru Har Krishan and make him offerings, that 
needeth not disturb thy mind. He is thy younger 
brother begotten of a Guru and entitled to mainte- 
nance.’ 

Ram Rai did not approve of the latter, but he 
did of the former portion of Gurdas’s advice, 
namely, to have himself proclaimed Guru. He 
then assembled the masands, ordered them to go in 
every direction, proclaim his succession, and bring 
him the offerings of the faithful. Ram Rai reflected 
not on the words of Kabir :-— 

Where there is covetousness there is death ; where there 
is forgiveness there is God Himself. 

The object of the Guruship was to save the world, 
togive instruction in the true Name, and to blend men 
with their Creator, but Ram Rai thought it a means 
of amassing money, and for this among other reasons 
his father had set him aside. The masands followed 
the example of Ram Rai, and applied themselves, 
not to spread the religion of the Gurus, but to 
accumulate wealth for their pleasures. 

The disciples whose guru is blind act blindly 
themselves. The masands began to beat and plunder 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 27 

poor Sikhs, and threatened with the Guru’s curse all 
who resented their conduct. Ram Rai’s desire to 
collect large offerings was not fulfilled. The masands 
became proud and rebellious, and kept the greater 
part of the offerings for themselves. They treated 
Ram Rai asa nonentity, for they deemed that all the 
Sikhs were in their own power, and that they could 
appoint to the Guruship whomsoever they pleased. 
Ram Rai found himself completely at their mercy, 
and was obliged to act according to their dictation. 

After much reflection Ram Rai decided on laying 
his case before the Emperor. On obtaining an 
audience he thus addressed Aurangzeb, ‘Sire, my 
father hath gone on high, and my younger brother 
hath taken possession of his throne, his property, 
and offerings. This misfortune hath befallen me 
on account of my obedience to thee. My father 
was opposed to thee on that account, and at his 
death ordered my younger brother never to be 
reconciled to thee and never to look upon thy face. 
Now I pray thee to summon him to Dihli, and order 
him to exhibit miracles as I have done.’ 

Aurangzeb, who was himself the incarnation of 
deceit, instinctively knew what Ram Rai was plot- 
ting, but yet his conscience at first moved him 
to give good counsel, ‘O Ram Rai, thou art amply 
provided for. Why annoy thy younger brother ? 
He is also thy father’s son... When Ram Rai 
further pressed his plaint, it occurred to Aurang- 
zeb that he might avail himself of Ram Rai’s 
displeasure for his own religious and political pur- 
poses. He said to himself, ‘I want to convert all 
the Hindus to Islam, but I apprehend failure in 
the Panjab, for there the people greatly reverence 
the Guru, and, if they rise against me, I shall 
have great difficulty in effecting my design. I have 
already several times considered how I can induce 
the Guru to accept the Muhammadan faith. It 
was on that account I summoned Guru Har Rai. 

318 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He sent his son to me, and I have him now in my 
power. There is yet another brother, of whose 
resistance to my designs I am equally apprehensive ; 
but if I succeed in bringing him here, I may bribe 
him into acquiescence. If he obstinately resist, 
I will set both brothers at variance, and they shall 
die by mutual slaughter. In this way my faith 
will quickly spread in the Panjab, and I shall gain 
heaven by my success in converting the infidels. 
The Sikhs will never suspect that I have put both 
brothers to death. I shall kill the snake without 
breaking my stick.’ 

Aurangzeb having contrived this tortuous and 
wicked plan, called Raja Jai Singh of Amber (Jaipur) 
who happened to be at court and ordered him to 
summon Guru Har Krishan the successor of Guru Har 
Rai. ‘I wish to see him,’ said the monarch, ‘be careful 
that he be treated with all respect on his journey.’ 

Ram Rai was delighted on hearing of the order to 
summon his brother—‘ If my brother disobey, the 
Emperor will send an army to destroy him. If, on 
the other hand, he come here, it will be in disobedience 
to our father’s final order never to appear before 
Aurangzeb ; and he will then be deemed a greater 
sinner than I. If he run away through fear of the 
Emperor, I will then go and, establishing myself 
as Guru, take possession of Kiratpur.’ Aurangzeb 
was as much delighted as Ram Rai at the decision 
that had been arrived at, though for quite a different 
reason. 

Raja Jai Singh who had previously heard the 
Guru’s praises was pleased at the prospect of making 
his acquaintance, and of listening to his instruction. 
He was very glad that such a bigoted man as the 
Emperor had ordered the Guru to be summoned with 
the high respect due to his spiritual position. The 
Sikhs of Dihli also, who were displeased at Ram 
Rai’s proceedings, manifested their satisfaction at 
the hope of seeing the real Guru among them, and 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN — 319 

begged the Raja to inform him that not only the 
Emperor but the Sikhs of Dihli were thirsting to be- 
hold him. 

Raja Jai Singh sent a high official with orders that 
he was to invite rather than summon the Guru, and 
escort him to the imperial capital with all pomp and 
ceremony. The Raja knew that Ram Rai and the 
Guru were at variance, but he never suspected that 
the Emperor harboured any evil designs. 

When the high officer deputed to summon the 
Guru arrived in Kiratpur and delivered his message, 
the Guru knew that Ram Rai had instigated the 
Emperor to summon him, and said he would give 
a reply on the morrow. When the Guru, after 
breaking up the assembly in which the officer had 
been received, went to his house, he found his 
mother, his Sikhs, and his masands very sad. On 
inquiring the cause, his mother said that she was in 
perplexity as to what advice to give him, whether 
he should proceed to Dihli or not. He was a child, 
he had no father to take counsel with, his elder 
brother, a man of great craft and worldly experience, 
bore him enmity, and it was difficult to say what 
plan should be adopted. The Guru replied, ‘ Mother 
dear, what cause is there for anxiety ? Whatever 
Wahguru hath decided shall take place. Why be 
anxious regarding it? What can poor mortal do 
if he have not God’s succour? I hold my father’s 
opinion that it is better for me not to go to 
Aurangzeb or hold any intercourse with him.’ The 
Guru’s mother rejoined, ‘Thou speakest aright, but 
the Turks hold sway. The Emperor is obstinate and 
violent. If thou refuse, an army may be sent to 
fetch thee, in which case there would be sanguinary 
fighting and many lives lost.’ 

Next day the Guru sent for the officer and said, 
‘My brother is with the Emperor, I do not know that 
I can do anything for His Majesty by accepting his 
invitation.’ The officer replied, ‘ It is at thy brother's 

320 THE SIKH RELIGION 

suggestion the Emperor hath sent for thee, but he 
is very anxious to behold thee himself also, and 
the Sikhs of Dihli hunger for a sight of thee. Where- 
fore come with me and please them all.’ The Guru 
rejoined, ‘I will go by all means where I shall be 
received with love, but it hath been imposed on me 
as a duty not to look on the Emperor’s face. Write 
and tell Raja Jai Singh that, if the Sikhs of Dihli 
want me, I will go to them, but if the Raja desire 
me to meet the Emperor, I must decline the invita- 
tion.’ The officer then represented that Raja Jai 
Singh had promised to call the Guru to Dihli, but 
had not promised to bring him before the Emperor. 
The officer would, however, write to Raja Jai Singh, 
and obtain precise information as to what was in- 
tended. 

When an answer arrived the officer hastened to 
communicate it to the Guru—‘ Raja Jai Singh 
humbly requesteth the Guru to come to Dihli, so 
that he and the Guru’s Sikhs may behold him. The 
Guru may act as he pleaseth regarding an interview 
with the Emperor. If the Emperor force an inter- 
view on him, Raja Jai Singh will foil his intention by 
diplomacy.’ The Guru hearing this said, ‘It is 
well. I will set out the day after to-morrow.’ 

The Guru duly set out from Kiratpur. On the way 
he waited for some Sikhs who had come thither after 
his departure. Among them were the halt, the 
maimed, the leprous, &c., all of whom he cured by the 
imposition of hands. In the same way he waited on 
the road for other Sikhs who had come from distant 
countries to see him. Much time was thus spent, 
and Raja Jai Singh’s messenger had to remonstrate. 
On arriving at the village of Panjokhara near Ambala, 
the Guru made a boundary of sand and ordered 
that no Sikh should cross it after his departure, so 
that he might be able to expedite his journey. He 
said, ‘Let any Sikh who desireth to see me stand 
here and make his supplication, and he shall obtain 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 321 

his wishes.’ He left some of his disciples there to 
give instruction. There is now a temple on the spot 
in memory of the Guru’s visit. 

CHAPTER II 

While the Guru at Panjokhara! was meditating 
on God, a Sikh came and told him of a proud Brah- 
man who was in the neighbourhood. The Brahman 
had asked the Guru’s name, and learned that it was 
Sri Har Krishan. Hearing this the Brahman became 
very angry and said, “The poet of the Bhagavat 
Gita, whom none can equal, called God merely 
Krishan, and the Guru calleth himself Sri Har 
Krishan, as if he thought himself superior to Krishan. 
If he be such a Guru, let him come and translate 
the Gita with me.’ The -Guru replied to his in- 
formant, ‘The eyes of understanding are very good, 
but the cataract of pride so blindeth them that they 
cannot see God’s way. The proud think all persons 
beneath them.’ 

The Sikh, however, prevailed on the Guru to allow 
the Brahman to come to him. When the Brahman 
came he did not salute the Guru, but unceremoniously 
sat down in his presence. He then said, ‘ Thou who 
callest thyself Sri Har Krishan, must be greater than 
the god Krishan. Translate the Gita for a little 
while with me.’ The Guru replied, “The Brahmans 
of the present day are not deeply read. They are 
great talkers and arguers, and are deteriorating 
every day; and in the future they will have even 
less religion than they have now. What the Brah- 
mans know is not real knowledge, and they are 
strangers to God. I have not read the Gita, and 
were I to translate it with thee, thou wouldst say 
I was some rich man’s son who had had a private 
tutor, whereas I should translate by my spiritual 
power. Go and bring some ignorant rustic to discuss 

1 Pandit Tara Singh’s Gur Tirath Sangrah 

SIKH. IV Y 

322 THE SIKH RELIGION 

with thee, and when thou hast vanquished him, I 
will speak to thee.’ The Brahman went and brought 
an ignorant water-carrier called Chhajju from the 
nearest village. The Guru looked him full in the 
face and said, ‘ Thou hast become a great divinity 
scholar. Now discuss the meaning of the Shastars 
with this Brahman.’ The Brahman and the water- 
carrier accordingly began to discuss, and the water- 
carrier gave such learned replies, that the Brahman 
stood in astonished silence. The questions and 
replies related to Hindu theology. 

The pandit became convinced that the Guru had 
infused his supernatural power into the water- 
carrier. He accordingly begged the Guru’s pardon 
for the unceremonious manner in which he had 
approached him. The Brahman added, ‘ Thou art 
really the holy god Krishan. Make me thy disciple.’ 
The Guru did so and discoursed to him on humility. 

Raja Jai Singh went forth with bare feet to meet 
the Guru. The Emperor sent large presents on 
the Guru’s arrival and expressed a wish to see 
him. In reply to the Emperor’s message the Guru 
said, ‘ My elder brother is with the Emperor, and 
is ready to do whatever he desireth. I cannot 
meet the Emperor. My father with his dying 
words told me that my elder brother would transact 
all political affairs with His Majesty, and I had 
better not meddle with them. My mission is to 
preach the true Name. There is no one who can 
be so affectionate as a brother, and there is no 
one who at the same time can be a greater enemy. 
Witness the treatment of his brothers by the Em- 
peror himself. Ram Rai beareth me great enmity, 
and were the Emperor on receiving me to show me 
any favour, Ram Rai would become still more 
hostile, and grave dissensions in families had better 
be avoided. For this and other reasons my father 
forbade me to meet the Emperor.’ 

When this speech was reported to the Emperor, 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN — 323 

he was astonished that a child of seven years of age 
could have uttered it. He said the Guru must be 
some person possessing supernatural power, and 
nothing could be gained by annoying him. Such 
good thoughts however merely flashed across Aurang- 
zeb’s mind fora moment. They were but the light- 
ning shining through black clouds on a dark night, 
which quickly vanishes and leaves the landscape 
in greater darkness than before. Aurangzeb bided 
his time, for he knew the Guru must grant him the 
desired interview. 

Crowds of Sikhs thronged to see the Guru and 
recelve spiritual consolation from him. There was 
then a plague raging in Dihli, and those afflicted 
with it, who sought the Guru’s mediation, were all 
healed. Ram Rai finding the Sikhs falling away from 
himself, and flocking round the Guru, became greatly 
incensed and said to himself, ‘ The evil I intended 
for him has turned out to his advantage. I must now 
contrive some other expedient that he may not be 
able to oppose my designs.’ 

The following day the Emperor’s son was an- 
nounced. The prince said that his father desired 
to see the Guru. The Guru replied that he had 
already given his reason for not seeing the Emperor, 
and he repeated what he had said before, namely, 
“Ram Rai who is at court will transact with the 
Emperor any political or administrative business 
that may be necessary. If the Emperor desire any 
religious instruction, I will dictate it to thee and 
thou mayest write it in Persian characters. When 
he understandeth and acteth according to it, the 
blessing of Guru Nanak shall light on him, and he 
shall be happy.’ 

The Prince was astonished at this reply and said 
the.Guru might write down his instruction for the 
Emperor. The Guru then dictated the following 
hymn of Guru Nanak for the Emperor’s edifica- 
tion :— 

¥2 

324 THE SIKH RELIGION 

If the True God dwell not in the heart, 

What is eating, what clothing, 

What fruit, what clarified butter and sweet molasses, 
what fine flour and what meat ? 

What clothes, what a pleasant couch for billing and cooing, 

What an army, what mace-bearers and servants, and what 
palaces to dwell in ? 

Nanak, except the true Name all things are perishable, 

The prince took this hymn to his father who was 
much impressed with it, and his eyes for a moment 
opened to the truth, but the desire of converting the 
Guru to Islam and prolonging the enmity between 
the two brothers again blinded him. 

The Emperor once said in the course of private 
conversation to Raja Jai Singh, ‘Thou and others 
highly praise the Guru and say he possesseth miracu- 
lous power. Hast thou ever put him to the test? 
If thou have not done so, then do so now, and if 
thou find he possesseth any superhuman power, then 
let me know.’ Raja Jai Singh replied, ‘ It is difficult 
to put such persons to the test. Dealing with 
them is highly dangerous for they may utter curses 
instead of blessings, but I will, however, as thy 
Majesty ordereth, contrive some means of proving 
him.’ Jai Singh then went home and in con- 
sultation with his head queen contrived a plan to 
test the Guru. She was to dress herself as a slave, 
and sit with slaves behind the other queens when 
the Guru visited Jai Singh’s palace. If the Guru 
recognized her, then it might be considered a proof 
that he really was what his followers deemed him 
to be. 

The Guru by his supernatural power knew the 
plot laid for him, and became very sad at being 
expected to show to the world what saints and holy 
men conceal, namely, miraculous power; so when 
Jai Singh went to conduct him to his palace, he at 

1 Majh ki War. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 325 

first refused to receive him. On pressure, however, 
the Guru admitted Jai Singh to his presence. Jai 
Singh told him in a very respectful manner that his 
queens desired to see him. When the Guru com- 
plied with Jai Singh’s invitation, he found a large 
female assemblage ready to receive him. The Guru 
touched the front queen with a wand and said, 
‘Thou art not the head queen.’ In the same way 
he touched the other ladies of the zanana and rejected 
them all. At last he touched the head queen 
whom, notwithstanding her disguise, he recognized 
at the back of the assembly and said, ‘ Thou art the 
head queen.’ She was very pleased at being re- 
cognized in her menial attire. The Guru then said 
in reference to the trial made of him by Raja Jai 
Singh: ‘Guru Nanak will ever confer happiness on 
those who have unswerving faith. He will ever 
abide with them and assist them, and God will love 
them both in this world and the next. He whose 
mind is perplexed with doubts is not a true believer. 
He who through pride deemeth himself very exalted 
must like a lofty peak on the surface of the earth 
ultimately have a fall. Devotion, which 1s like rain, 
resteth not on lofty places. There the field of God's 
love germinateth not, and the harvest of salvation 
is not gathered.’ Upon this Raja Jai Singh and his 
queens admitted the Guru’s sanctity. 

CHAPTER III 

On the fourth day of the dark half of Chet, the day 
after the above occurrence, the Guru was seized with 
fever. His eyes were seen to grow red, his breathing 
became very rapid, and the heat of his body was felt 
at a considerable distance. His mother Krishan Kaur 
sat by him and began to lament, saying, ‘ My son, 
why art thou intent on thy death ? Thou hast only 
lately been seated on the Guru’s throne, thou art still 
a child, and it is too soon for thee to depart. Mayest 

326 THE SIKH RELIGION 

thou enjoy the full term of life, have a family, and 
then go to God! Why at this tender age turn thy 
thoughts away from the world ?’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ Mother dear, it is natural that 
thou shouldst feel this paroxysm of love, but have 
no anxiety forme. It 1s our duty to accept the will 
of the Almighty. As Guru Arjan hath said :— 

The Master may gather the crop whether it be green, half- 
ripe, or ripe and fit to be cut. 

The reapers! make preparations, bring sickles, and arrive 
on the ground. 

They cut the crop as it is measured out to them when the 
Owner giveth orders.? 

‘When it is the Husbandman’s pleasure He cutteth 
down the crop. There is no rule as to whether it 
must be green or half ripe. What torture Guru 
Arjan suffered, and yet he uttered not a groan! 
Why should we mourn for the body when it is 
God’s will that it should depart. What is to-day, 
and what to-morrow? Whatever God doeth is for 
the best.’ 

The Guru, however, thought it proper to go outside 
the city to the margin of the Jamna in order to 
breathe a purer atmosphere. He pitched his camp 
near Raja Jai Singh’s army. Raja Jai Singh himself 
lived in the city, and on hearing that the Guru had 
left it, sent an officer to ask if he had offended him 
in any way. The Guru explained the reason of his 
change of residence. 

Prior to the officer’s return Raja Jai Singh in- 
formed the Emperor of the manner in which he had 
tested the Guru. The Emperor then became still 
more anxious for an interview, and again ordered 
the Raja to procure it for him. When Raja Jai 
Singh returned to his palace, he heard of the Guru’s 
illness. He then went to inquire after his health, 
and also to discuss with him the subject of his inter- 

1 Death’s myrmidons. a Sri Nae. 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 327 

view with the Emperor. The Guru was, however, 
too ill to give any definite reply. 

Next day small-pox asserted itself. Its unmis- 
takable pimples appeared on the Guru’s body. With 
it a very violent fever raged and unconsciousness 
ensued. Sikh writers minutely describe the effects 
of the small-pox on the Guru’s tender and handsome 
person, and the pains he suffered. A man suffering 
from small-pox wriggles like a fish on hot sand. If 
he desire to lie down, he cannot doso. On whichever 
side he lies, he is pained and writhes in anguish and 
torture, which, as the chronicler piously remarks, may 
God not inflict even on an enemy! The Guru, 
however, uttered no cry of pain, but continued to 
repeat God’s name. 

During his illness every one was ordered to repeat 
the hymns of the Granth Sahib for the occasion. 
The Guru continued ill for several days> At last 
his condition grew desperate. He knew his end 
had arrived, and he invited all who desired to 
behold him for the last time to present themselves. 
Raja Jai Singh, masand Gurbakhsh, and many 
others went to his bedside. Gurbakhsh with clasped 
hands thus addressed him—‘ Great king, the pre- 
ceding Gurus before their departure entrusted their 
Sikhs either to servants or sons. Thou being so 
young art going to leave us without a Guru. 
How can the Sikhs endure such a calamity ? 
Cherish thy simple Sikhs, and, when thou hast a 
son who is fit for the Guruship, then mayest thou 
depart, not now.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘Be not anxious. The Creator 
will do what is best. My death cannot now be averted. 
The glory of Guru Nanak’s throne shall increase day 
by day. Gurus may die, but their hearts, that is, 
the-Granth Sahib, shall remain with you. It con- 
taineth instruction, divine knowledge, and the Guru’s 
spell. It will satisfy all men’s desires. Read it and 
act on its counsels, and Guru Nanak will ever assist 

328 THE SIKH RELIGION 

you. Wherefore waver not, but ever turn your 
thoughts towards the immortal God. Salvation is 
obtained through Guru Nanak’s mediation. Put 
faith in him, and remember his words.’ 

The Sikhs understood from the Guru’s language 
that he was about to die. They began to mourn his 
untimely fate and to reflect that there was none so 
competent as he to give them divine instruction. 
He on seeing their anxiety thus addressed them— 
‘This world is transitory. To fix your minds on 
it, to indulge in rejoicing or mourning, and to 
impute blame to God are all highly sinful acts. We 
ought all to accept God's will and deem his pleasure 
as our own. Whatever he doeth is for the best. As 
Baba Nanak hath said in the Japji— 

What pleaseth Thee, O God, is good. 

This body must one day perish. What mattereth it 
whether it perish now or after the fullness of years? 
He who obeyeth God’s will renounceth pride and 
other deadly sins. He remembereth the true Name, 
crosseth over the world’s terrible ocean, and is for 
ever emancipated from its troubles.’ 

Here the Guru’s strength failed him. He became 
silent and closed his eyes. After a short time he 
opened them and gazed affectionately on his Sikhs. 
Raja Jai Singh again appeared with the Emperor’s 
reiterated request for an interview. To this the Guru 
gave the same reply as before, and expressed a desire 
that the Emperor should fix his attention on the hymn 
he had written for him. 

Next day the Sikhs went in a body to behold their 
Guru. Gurbakhsh again addressed him, ‘ Great 
king, Ram Rai is on good terms with the Emperor 
here. In the Panjab there is Dhir Mal, as also other 
Sodhis who claim the Guruship. They are only 
waiting for thy death to assert their claims. Simple 
Sikhs will fall into their toils, and intelligent Sikhs 
will suffer in the midst of the ensuing troubles. In 

LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 329 

this manner this tree of Sikhism, which hath been 
hitherto cherished, will wither away. Every one 
will be a guru in his own house, and several sects 
of opinionative and heterodox Sikhs will arise. Be 
pleased to appoint some one like thyself for our 
salvation.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘Why be anxious? The tree 
planted by Guru Nanak’s holy hands shall never 
wither. Droughts, storms, and heat may prevail, 
but that shall never fade. There shall be twofold 
and fourfold miracles, and one Guru shall be blended 
with another.’ 

On this the Guru called for five paise and a coco- 
nut. He took them, and not being able to move 
his body, waved his hand three times in the air in 
token of circumambulating his successor, and said 
‘Baba Bakale’, that is, his successor would be found 
in the village of Bakala. When he could again 
speak he ordered the minstrels to sing the Gurus’ 
hymns and repeat God’s name. 

When midnight had passed and there was no 
indication of the Guru’s recovery, his mother, 
Krishan Kaur, who sat by his bed, looked at his 
handsome face, became very sad, and broke forth 
into lamentation—‘ What shall I do alone in the 
world having lost my dutiful son and my kind 
husband. Where shall I find them, and how shall 
I live without them?’ The Guru said in reply, 
‘Mother dear, feel no anxiety, the greater part of 
thy life hath been spent in happiness. Pass the 
remainder in God’s service. Guru Arjan hath said :— 

Where the physician cannot succeed, where there is 
neither sister nor brother, God alone assisteth. 

What He doeth cometh to pass, He washeth away the 
filth of sin; remember that Supreme Being." 

By remembering God thou shalt arrive at such 
a superior position that thou shalt never know 
1 Maru. 

330 THE SIKH RELIGION 

sorrow and never be separated from us.’ The Guru’s 
mother was much consoled by this speech. The 
Guru’s final order was that none should weep for 
him, but all were to sing the Gurus’ hymns. In the 
midst of the hymns and the repetition of God’s name, 
the Guru breathed his last on Saturday, the fourteenth 
day of the light half of the month of Chet, Sambat 
1721 (A.D. 1664). His body was cremated on a 
plain called Tilokhari south of Dihli on the bank 
of the Jamna, where his cinerary tomb is still pre- 
served. A temple was subsequently built at the 
place where he had resided when in the city. 

Z 
: . 
= , 
= 
— 
m2 
SP 

- 

TP Abigl 

GURU TEG BAHADUR 

SIKH IV P. 331 

331 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR, 
THE NINTH GURU 

CHAPTER [ 

GurRU TEG BAHADUR, youngest son of the sixth 
Guru, Har Gobind and his wife Nanaki, was born 
in what is now called Guru ke Mahal, Amritsar, 
in the Panjab on Sunday, the fifth day of the dark 
half of the month of Baisakh, a watch and a quarter 
before day in the Sambat year 1679 (A. D. 1622). 

Immediately after the child’s birth Guru Har 
Gobind with five Sikhs went to see him. On con- 
templating him the Guru knew that his son would 
be a great hero, powerful to endure the sword, and 
so he called him Teg Bahadur.’ He _ prophesied 
that the boy should have a son who would develop 
a third religion distinct from those of the Hindus 
and Musalmans, and who would also destroy the 
reign of tyranny in Hindustan. 

When Teg Bahadur was five years of age, he used 
to indulge in trains of thought, during which he 
would speak to no one. His mother Nanaki in- 
quired of his father why he tolerated this conduct 
on the part of his son. Guru Har Gobind consoled 
her by telling her that Teg Bahadur should become 
a Guru, prove very powerful, and sacrifice himself 
for the Sikh religion. 

Teg Bahadur was, as already stated, married to 
Gujari, daughter of Lal Chand, a native of Kartarpur 
in the Jalandhar District. After the death of Guru 
Har Gobind, Teg Bahadur with his mother and wife 
went to live in Bakala, where Guru Har Krishan 
subsequently said his successor should be found. 

1 Bhai Nand Ll calls the ninth Guru Tek Bahadur, that is, a powerful 
prop of the weak. 

332 THE SIKH KEETCRON 

When the Sodhis of Bakala heard of the last words 
of Guru Har Krishan, twenty-two of them claimed 
the right to succeed him. These self-made gurus 
forcibly took the offerings of the Sikhs who came 
to see the real Guru, with the result that true 
worshippers suffered great hardship for a consider- 
able time. At last a Sikh called Makkhan Shah of 
the Labana tribe came from Gujrat in the Dakhan 
with an offering of five hundred gold muhars which 
some time previously he had vowed to make to the 
Guru on escaping shipwreck. What was his surprise 
when he found that twenty-two Sodhis had installed 
themselves as gurus! In this state of confusion and 
uncertainty he resolved to make trial of the pre- 
tenders. He visited them all, and made them 
offerings of two gold muhars each. None of them 
knew that he had brought five hundred muhars for 
the real Guru. Every one of them extolled him- 
self, and said the others were hypocrites and de- 
ceivers. He thought of the words of Guru Arjan 
in the Sukhmani :— 

Goodness shall not even approach him 
Who calleth himself good. 

And again :— 

He who considereth himself low] 
Shall be deemed the most exalted of all ; 

and he came to the conclusion that these twenty-two 
men only claimed to be gurus in order to plunder 
the Sikhs. 

~ He then inquired if there were any one else in 
Bakala who claimed to be the Guru. He was told 
there was another man popularly called Tega, son of 
Guru Har Gobind, who dwelt there in silence and 
retirement, but had no ambition to undertake the 
onerous duties of the position. The masands told 
Makkhan Shah that if he desired to interview Tega 

1 Sukha Singh’s Gur Bilas, Chap. I. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 338 

he might go with them. Makkhan Shah on arriving — 
at Teg Bahadur’s house requested an interview. Teg 
Bahadur told his servant to inform Makkhan Shah 
that if he wanted to see him he must come alone. 
When he presented himself unaccompanied by the 
masands, Teg Bahadur reflected that as he had saved 
Makkhan Shah from shipwreck, so he must now dis- 
close himself. ‘Makkhan Shah hath made trial of all 
the pretenders,’ thought Teg Bahadur, ‘but found 
not the true Guru, and no pretender hath been able 
to satisfy him by telling him the object of his 
visit. If I now conceal myself from him he will 
lose faith in the Gurus. He hath placed great 
reliance on the last words of Guru Har Krishan, 
‘“ Baba Bakale’’, and if his desires be not fulfilled, 
he will die. Moreover he hath come from a great 
distance. Itis therefore on every account necessary 
that I should receive him and tell him his thoughts.’ 
Makkhan Shah was highly pleased on obtaining 
permission to interview Teg Bahadur, and concluded 
that he must be the true Guru of whom he had 
been in search. On being ushered into his presence, 
what did he see? The Guru was in deep contem- 
plation holding his senses under complete restraint. 
Makkhan Shah, however, fell at his feet, and placed 
his offering of two gold muhars in front of him. 
When the Guru saw the two coins and found Makkhan 
Shah seated near him, he said, ‘ How now, O Sikh, 
thou art trying to wheedle the Guru by presenting 
him with two gold muhars? Where are the five 
hundred gold muhars thou didst promise when thy 
vessel was sinking.’ Makkhan Shah was delight- 
fully surprised—‘O Great King, it is true. When 
my vessel full of merchandise was sinking, I invoked 
Guru Nanak, and vowed I would offer him five 
hundred gold muhars if it ever reached the shore.’ 
Makkhan Shah prostrated himself before Teg Baha- 
dur, hailed him true Guru and searcher of hearts, 
and presented him the five hundred gold muhars 

334 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of his vow. He then ascended a house-top and, 
waving a flag, proclaimed from there, ‘ I have found 
the Guru! I have found the Guru!!’ On hearing 
this the Sikhs assembled from every quarter, and 
with all due formalities and observances placed 
Teg Bahadur, then in his forty-third year and the 
very image of Guru Nanak, on the Guru's throne. 
On being installed he conferred robes of honour on 
his Sikhs. The twenty-two false gurus hid them- 
selves as darkness vanishes before the sun’s rays. 

Dhir Mal, the eldest son of Gurditta, seeing the 
offerings made to Guru Teg Bahadur and the honours 
he received, became violently jealous. One day he 
communicated his feelings to his masand, Sihan, 
who bade him be of good cheer, and promised that 
he would put a bullet through his enemy. The 
masand accordingly took about a score of men to 
kill the Guru. He fired and the bullet struck his 
intended victim, but did not prove fatal. The 
masand seized the opportunity to pack up and take 
away the Guru’s movable property. The Guru in 
his affliction retained his composure and evenness 
of mind. He felt no pleasure at access of wealth, 
nor grief at its departure, or at the bodily harm 
caused him, but was happy in the contemplation 
of God’s goodness. 

When Makkhan Shah heard of this occurrence 
from the Guru’s mother, he with the Sikhs pro- 
ceeded in a body to the Guru to condole with him. 
They found him absorbed in contemplation. Then 
with loud cries they went off to Dhir Mal’s residence. 
He closed his door against them, but they burst it 
open, seized him and his accomplices, and tying his 
masand’s hands behind his back, took him off to the 
Guru. They also recovered and restored to the 
Guru all the property which Dhir Mal and his men 
had taken away. Not only that, but they took 
Dhir Mal’s own private property also, including the 
Granth Sahib, and placed all at the Guru’s disposal. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 335 

The masand professed great contrition, and with 
much show of humility bent his head on the Guru’s 
feet. He said he had erred and asked pardon for 
his offence. ‘I am under thy protection; have 
mercy on me; O cherisher of the poor, hear the 
prayer of a sinner. Though I am a bad son, it is 
incumbent on thee, who art to me a father, to pre- 
serve mine honour.’ 

The Guru on seeing the masand so humbled and 
distressed ordered him to be released. Makkhan Shah 
remonstrated, and said that the man had only met 
his deserts. The Guru however was firm, and ordered 
all the property taken from Dhir Mal to be restored 
to him. He preached to Makkhan Shah and his Sikhs 
that the holy Guru Nanak gave them the wealth of 
the Name which was sufficient for all their wants— 
‘In anger man committeth evil deeds. He loseth at 
once his senses and his religion. When anger 
springeth up in a man’s heart, what crime is there 
he will not perpetrate? He thinketh nothing of 
sinning against his parents and his holy Guru. He 
taketh the life which he ought to protect, anduttereth 
nothing but harsh language. He will not refrain 
from any act even though he sacrifice his life in its 
execution. There is no greater sacrifice than life, 
and yet the foolish person will deliberately make it. 
The angry man’s soul burneth if he obtain not his 
desires. He cannot eat or sleep. Day and night 
he is tortured by his passion, and formeth endless 
plans for its gratification. In this way he passeth 
his time in misery. 

‘To exercise forgiveness is a great act. To exer- 
cise forgiveness is to give alms. Forgiveness 1s 
equal to ablutions at all places of pilgrimage. For- 
giveness ensureth man’s salvation. There is no 
virtue equal to forgiveness. Wherefore generously 
exercise it. Never abandon this virtue, but ever 
preserve it in your hearts. You are ordered in the 
Granth Sahib to lay up the wealth of the Name, so 

336 THE SIKH RELIGION 

that it may accompany you in this world and in the 
next. This wealth is only found in the companion- 
ship of good men, and cannot be obtained by any 
other means. My followers possess this wealth 
which is superior to all jewels and gems. The saints 
hoard it day and night. It cannot be purchased, 
no thief can steal, no fire consume, no water drown 
it, whereas worldly wealth is generally accumulated 
by sin. Thieves can steal it, pickpockets purloin 
it, kings seize it, fire burn it, and earth rot it. At 
the hour of death this sinful wealth only causeth 
regret, and, through man’s desires being fixed on it, 
his soul falleth into terrible hell.’ 

CHAPTER II 

The Guru spent some time at Bakala communi- 
cating similar instruction. In the month of Magh, 
Sambat 1722, he went to Amritsar to bathe in the 
sacred tank, and behold the paradisal temple of 
Guru Ram Das. He bathed, but the ministrants! 
of the sacred edifice closed the doors of the Har 
Mandar against him. He saluted it however from 
without, then went beyond the precincts, and rested 
on a spot where now is a stone platform dedicated 
tohim. He said it was they who were rotten within, 
who had through greed of offerings entered the 
temple. 

The Guru then went and sat on a common near 
the spot where now is a cattle-market, and on which 
is erected a damdama, or resting-place, 1n his honour. 
When the inhabitants of Amritsar heard what had 
occurred, they went in a body to him, and with 
great humility prayed him to return and revoke his 
prophetic curse, because 1t was his holy ancestors 
who had founded the edifice. The Guru denied 

1 Then called Mutasadis or clerks, but now known as Pujaris or 
receivers of offerings. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 337 

that his words bore the significance of a curse. He 
had merely stated the condition in which the minis- 
trants then were, and in which they should remain. 

Meanwhile a company of Sikhs came from the 
village of Walla, and with great humility prayed 
him to go and live with them and bless their village, 
a prayer to which the Guru graciously acceded. On 
leaving Amritsar the Guru was escorted by the 
women of the city. On seeing their devotion he 
said, ‘God’s love and devotion shall ever abide 
among you. In commemoration of the Guru’s 
visit a fair called the Kothe da Mela is held yearly at 
Walla on the day of the full moon in the month of 
Magh. 

Having communicated religious instruction to the 
inhabitants of Walla, the Guru returned to his 
favourite Bakala. Here too he was not allowed to 
abide in peace, for the old jealousy and enmity of the 
Sodhis had revived. He therefore decided not to re- 
main there, but proceed in the direction of the river 
Bas. On arriving at its margin he saw some of 
his men carrying the Granth Sahib and said to 
them: ‘ You surely have not brought any of Dhir 
Mal’s property with you?’ They replied that they 
had returned everything they had taken from him 
except the Granth Sahib which they had brought 
with them. He became angry that they had taken 
any of Dhir Mal’s property and ordered the Granth 
Sahib to be restored to him. The Guru upon this 
crossed the river.' 

Meanwhile the Guru pursuing his journey arrived 
at the village of Hazara situated not far from 
Kartarpur, where a memorial Sikh church was subs 
sequently built in commemoration of his visit. The 
next day he reached Durga near Nawashahar where 
also an edifice was erected in his honour. The 

1 Bhai Santokh Singh states that the Guru entrusted the Granth 
Sahib to the river and informed Dhir Mal, whereupon the latter went 
and took possession of it. 

SIKH. IV Z 

338 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru thence proceeded by very easy stages to 
Kiratpur. There again he was plagued with the 
jealousy of the Sodhis, and sought rest on some land 
about six miles distant, which he subsequently pur- 
chased from the Kahlur Raja. He there laid the 
foundation of the city of Anandpur in the month of 
Har, Sambat 1722 (A. D. 1665). 

On hearing of the founding of the city, Dhir Mal 

and the Sodhis became still more envious of the 
Guru, and determined to ruin him. Of this the 
Guru was duly warned by his people. He merely 
said in reply that he himself entertained no envy or 
jealousy of any one. ‘ He who is angry with the 
Guru without cause shall obtain his deserts. I do 
not desire to annoy any one. The Guru’s love and 
kindliness are at the disposal of all. I have received 
Guru Nanak’s order to cause the true Name to be 
repeated throughout the world.’ 
_ The Guru at that time had another cause of dis- 
quietude. The Sikhs of Dihli sent a messenger to 
inform him that Dhir Mal had instigated Ram Rai 
to complain again to the emperor regarding his 
supersession. The Guru dismissed the messenger, 
and told him to put the minds of the Dihli Sikhs 
at ease. He at the same time wrote to them, 
“What can a thousand enemies do to those on 
whose side God the great Guru is? Kings and 
emperors are all in His power. No one can be 
touched except by His will.’ 

The Guru determined to change his abode, as well 
to giveinstructions to his Sikhs as to avoidannoyance 
from his relations. On hearing of his intention the 
people of Anandpur waited on him. They represented 
that they had all come thither through reliance on 
him, and yet he was now going to leave them. 
They had left their homes for the twofold advantage 
of being able to see the Guru and derive material 
profit from their change of residence. The Guru 
preached to them in reply to their representations— 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAMADUR 339 

‘ This world is transitory. You ought never to fix 
your hearts on it. Profit and loss, weal and woe, 
rejoicing and mourning, which come according to 
God's will, ought to be equally endured. Perform 
the duties of your religion, and repeat God’s name. 
Meditation on God’s name is the only means of sal- 
vation in this world. Wherefore ponder on it, give 
alms and practise ablution, serve saints with your 
mind, body, and wealth ; speak civilly to every one, 
but keep your thoughts fixed on God. A great 
being shall be born who shall come to abide here, 
and contribute to the extension and importance 
of this city. I have only sown the seed; he shall 
shade this place like an overspreading tree.’ 

On the 15th of Maghar, Sambat 1722, the Guru 
set out on his tour from Anandpur. His first long 
halt was at Mulowal in the Patiala State. On 
arriving there the people complained to him that 
they could only obtain drinking water from a great 
distance. There was a well near, but its water was 
brackish and unwholesome. He told them to repeat 
God’s name over it, draw water therefrom, and they 
should find it pure and sweet. [rom that day the 
well has yielded sweet water. It is still known as 
the Guru’s well. 

The Guru then proceeded to Handiaya, where 
there was a severe epidemic of fever and great con- 
sequent mortality. The inhabitants went to put 
themselves under his protection and implore him to 
save them. Upon this the Guru uttering the true 
Name, threw a glance of favour on them and healed 
them of all their maladies. Having given them the 
usual religious instruction he proceeded slowly to 
Dhilwan. 

Thence the Guru proceeded to the villages of 
Khiwa and Bhikki. In the latter lived a man 
called Desu who was a disciple of Sakhi Sarwar, 
He, however, went to see the Guru. The Guru, 
on seeing a piece of bent iron hanging from his 

Z2 

340 THE SMSH RELIGION 

neck, asked him what it was. He said it was an 
article that satisfied all his necessities. It gave 
him corn, money, and clothing, and he worshipped 
it every day. ‘I offer a breakfast of bread and 
sweets,’ said he, ‘to Sakhi Sarwar. The priest 
having read a blessing and set aside a portion thereof, 
returneth me the remainder, which I distribute 
among the people after satisfying myself.’ The 
Guru on hearing this said that Desu, a Hindu, did 
what a true-born Musalman would never do, and he 
was ruining his prospects both in this world and the 
next. The Guru then gave him spiritual instruction 
and he became a Sikh. At parting the Guru pre- 
sented him with five arrows in memory of the 
occasion. 

On arriving at home Desu fell ill. His wife said 
it was all the result of his having forsaken Sakhi 
Sarwar and taken the Guru’s arrows with him. 
She pressed him to return the arrows and resume his 
religious allegiance to the Baloch Pir. At first 
Desu stoutly refused, but afterwards consented. His 
wife then broke the arrows and threw the pieces 
away. After some days Desu died, leaving a son 
called Gainda. Gainda’s brother-in-law committed 
a murder, and was killed by Gainda. The other 
brothers-in-law then joined and killed Gainda. And 
Gainda’s son was poisoned by his relations for the 
sake of his property. Desu’s death and the tragic 
fate of his relations were popularly attributed to his 
desertion of the Guru. 

The Guru then proceeded to Maur on the Southern 
Panjab Railway, where he was awaited by a great 
concourse of people to whom he preached the true 
Name. He induced the people to sink a well. It 
should be buttressed with baked bricks when an 
opportunity offered. The Guru thence went to 
Maisarkhana, and thence to Talwandi Sabo, now 
known to the Sikhs as Damdama. He thence 
travelled to Kot Dharmwala and was everywhere 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR © 341 

received with affection by the people. During his 
journey he was pursued by two thieves, one a 
Musalman and the other a Hindu, who watched day 
and night for an opportunity to steal his horse. 
While the Guru wearied with travel lay asleep on 
a dark night, the thieves, it is said, saw from their 
place of concealment a tiger issue from a lonely 
forest and make three prostrations before the sleep- 
ing Guru. The Musalman thief became afraid and 
said to the Hindu, ‘ The Guru whom a carnivorous 
animal not only toucheth not, but boweth to, must 
be some wonder-worker.’ The Musalman would 
therefore never steal his horse, but would go home. 
The Hindu thief could not avoid recognizing the 
Guru’s power, but at the same time remained fixed 
in his resolution to commit the theft. On awaking in 
the morning the Guru heard of the theft, and 1n reply 
to his men said that the horse and the thief would 
be found standing on a certain spot to the north 
of his camp. He accordingly sent his servants, and 
ordered them to bring the horse and the thief before 
him. The Guru asked the thief why he had stolen 
the horse, and why he had remained standing with 
the animal instead of running away. The thief told 
him all that had occurred prior to the theft, and 
added that when he had mounted the horse he 
became blind and could not see his way. He had 
travelled several miles but could not find the road, 
and therefore halted at the place where he was 
arrested. In his contrition he afterwards climbed 
a jand tree, broke off a portion of a branch, and 
impaled himself on the stump. The place is now 
called Sulisar. Thus did the thief gather the fruit 
of his sins. Such is the punishment, as saith Shaikh 
Farid, that awaiteth those who perpetrate evil 
deeds. 
The Guru then proceeded slowly to Dhamdhan in 
the Bangar tract, now a station of the Southern 
Panjab Railway. It is related that the Guru pre- 

342 THE SIKH RELIGION 

sented the Chaudhri of the village with funds to 
construct a well and a dharmsal for the reception of 
travellers. The inhabitants at that time largely 
subsisted on plunder, and the Guru was anxious to 
wean them from that mode of livelihood. One of 
them took milk to the Guru which he refused as 
being the produce of theft and violence. 

The Guru was accompanied by a Sikh called 
Mihan who was totally devoted to his service. He 
drew water, brought firewood from the forest, and 
performed the most menial offices for him. He 
always kept a cushion on his head for lifting burdens. 
It was continually wet from water dripping on it, 
and his head in consequence soon festered. One 
day as he was on the point of depositing a pitcher 
of water which he had brought, his cushion and 
turban fell off when maggots were seen to issue from 
a sore in his head. The Guru’s mother and wife 
observed this, and brought it to the Guru’s notice. 
The Guru sent for Mihan, gave him a robe of honour, 
and promised him that he should be a Mahant, or 
superior of a religious order. The Guru then put 
his hand on his head, and its pain and sores dis- 
appeared. Upon this, Mihan obtained a knowledge 
of God and of the past, present, and future. The 
Guru presented him with a bullock of the famed 
Nagauri breed and a drum and banner to grace his 
new position. 

The Guru then proceeded to Tekpur also called 
Baharjakh. He abode there for three days in the 
house of a carpenter who conducted him as far as 
Kaithal. Thence he proceeded to Barna. The Guru 
there took occasion to preach against the use of 
tobacco. ‘Save thy people from the vile drug, and 
employ thyself in the service of Sikhs and holy men. 
Rely on the Guru who is the protector in both 
worlds. He giveth his hand and saveth from 
affliction. When thy people abandon the degrading 
smoke and cultivate their lands, their wealth and 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 343 

prosperity shall greatly increase, and they shall 
want for nothing. They shall possess cows and 
buffaloes in abundance, and they shall be respected 
by the world, but when they inhale the vile vegetable, 
they shall grow poor and lose their wealth.’ Bhai 
Santokh Singh, author of the Suraj Parkash, gives 
his own testimony after a visit to the village of 
Barna, that, as long as the people abstained from 
tobacco, they were happy, but that those who in- 
dulged in its use became idle and lost all their pro- 
perty. Men spent money on tobacco which they 
ought to have applied to the purchase of grain to 
live on or sow in their fields. Bhai Santokh Singh 
baptized several of their descendants according to 
the rites prescribed by the tenth Guru, and did all in 
his power to induce them to abstain from the 
pernicious stimulant. 

CHAPTER III 

The Guru proceeded to Kurkhetar (Thanesar) on 
the occasion of a solar eclipse. He was received 
with the greatest distinction by all the holy men pre- 
sent, to say nothing of his own numerous followers. 
During his stay there he preached the true Name. 
Then he went to Bani Badrpur where he contri- 
buted a bag of rupees for the excavation of a well. 
Thence he crossed the Jamna and hunted on the 
way. He shot some animals which he strung to 
his saddle and took to the town of Kara Manak,' 
where lived an eminent saint called Maluk Das. 
Having heard that the Guru killed animals, he 
refused to receive him. It is said that, as next day 
the saint was laying food before his idol, he found 
it to his horror changing into meat. He felt that 
this must have been a miracle wrought by the Guru 
to bring him to his senses, so he thought it proper 

1 In this itinerary we follow the author of the Siraj Parkash, who 
wrote his work at Kaithal, near the towns and villages mentioned. 

344 THE SIKH RELIGION 

{o go and bow before him. He mentally argued, 
however, that if the Guru had the preternatural 
power attributed to him, he would first send for 
him. The Guru knew what was passing in his mind, 
and sent his servants and a palki to fetch him. He 
went to the Guru, received initiation and instruc- 
tion, and became one of his most devoted followers. 

The Guru on his missionary tour visited Agra, 
Itawa, and Priyag. While at Priyag, Nanaki, the 
Guru’s mother, approached him with a request of 
the highest importance. She said that all her de- 
sires had been fulfilled, but there was yet one 
remaining. She remembered that her late husband 
Guru Har Gobind had promised that a great being 
should be born in the house of Guru Teg Bahadur, 
and she was awaiting that event. The Guru replied 
that all her desires should soon be fulfilled, and she 
should have a grandson who would save the true 
religion. She had only to meditate continually on 
Guru Nanak. The Guru remained six months at 
Priyag, during which time his wife Gujari, to the 
great joy of his mother, became pregnant. 

The Guru next proceeded with his family to 
Banaras. He rested in a house which he called 
Shabd ka kotha, or the mansion of the Word. It is 
in that part of the city known as Resham Katra. 
He there received the usual honours from his 
followers. Over the spot on which he rested a 
raised platform has since been erected, and the place 
is now known at the Bari Sangat or the Great Society. 
The Guru’s shoes and coat are still preserved in 
memory of his visit. He thence proceeded to the 
river Karmnasha, so called because it was believed 
that all the good acts of a man who bathed in it 
would be forfeited. The Guru scorning that tradi- 
tion bathed in its waters, and affirmed that the river 
could never wash away the result of good deeds." 

1 It is said that Raja Trisanku of the Solar dynasty, having killed 
a Brahman, was purified by a saint, who collected waters from all the 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 345 

The Guru then went to the village of Sarasrawan, 
where lived a very devout and truthful disciple 
popularly known as Chacha Phaggo. He had built 
a very beautiful mansion with a stately portico and 
a large hall of entrance. He was perpetually asked 
by his neighbours why he had built such a large 
building, and especially such a large portico and 
entrance chamber. He said his object was that 
when the Guru paid a visit he should not have 
the trouble of alighting, but could enter the man- 
sion on horseback. Within it he had placed a superb 
couch for the Guru to lhe on. Chacha Phaggo kept 
the building locked so that the couch might not 
be soiled. Every morning he used to perfume it 
and then close the doors, declaring that he would 
not live in the edifice himself until the Guru had 
once entered it, and hallowed it with his footsteps. 
People laughed at him, and asked what hope there 
was that the Guru, who resided in the Panjab, 
should ever visit his village. Chacha Phaggo dis- 
regarded such banter, and maintained that the 
Guru would certainly come and fulfil his desires, 
as Guru Nanak went to the house of Lalo; and 
therefore he had made arrangements for a suit- 
able reception. It turned out, as Chacha Phaggo 
had anticipated, that in due time he had the happi- 
ness of entertaining the Guru. 

The Guru thence departed for Gaya. There the 
Brahmans visited him in a body, and explained the 
virtues of that famous place of pilgrimage. They 
made no mention of Budha having made his great 
renunciation and penance there—events never men- 

streams in the world to wash away the sin. These waters after the 
purification collected in the spring from which the Karmnasha river 
issues. 

A more probable cause of the evil reputation of the river is that it 
once formed the boundary between the Aryan colonies of the north 
and the aborigines of the south, and all Aryans who crossed it were 
said to have passed beyond the pale of religious merit. Travellers who 
still cross, take care that not a drop of its water touches their bodies. 

3.46 THE SIKH RELIGION 

tioned for centuries by ordinary Hindus. They said 
if barley rolls were offered at Gaya for the souls of 
ancestors, they would immediately go to heaven, 
even though they had already entered hell. Upon 
this they pressed the Guru to give them money for 
the ceremony. The Guru refused to satisfy their 
cupidity. He exhorted them to meditate on God 
and instructed them in divine knowledge. Having 
exposed the hypocrisy and deceit of the Brahmans, 
he taught his Sikhs how to remain for ever free 
from their toils. He then recited for their edification 
the hymn in Rag Asa composed by Guru Nanak at 
Gaya, the second Ashtapadi of the Sukhmani, and 
the following hymn of Kabir :— 

Nobody obeyeth his parents when alive, yet he giveth them 
feasts when dead ; 

Say how shall the poor parents obtain what the ravens and 
the dogs have eaten. 

Let some one explain to me what kushal ! means ; 

The world dieth talking of kushal ; how ever shall kushal 
be obtained ? 

Men make goddesses and gods of clay, and offer them 
living sacrifices. 

As your lifeless gods, so your deceased, who ask not for 
what they want themselves. 

You kill living things, and you worship lifeless things ; at 
the last moment great shall be your suffering. 

You know not the worth of God’s name, and you shall be 
drowned 7n the sea of terror. 

You waver? and know not the supreme God; wherefore 
you worship gods and goddesses. 

Saith Kabir, you have not thought of the Unknowable, and 
you have become entangled in the deadly sins.? 

1 Kushal, comfort or happiness. The word is uttered by the 
Brahmans alter being feasted at the shradhs, to denote that the manes 
for whom the ceremony is performed are happy. ‘The word is also 
used to express the thanks or satisfaction the Brahmans feel when they 
have filled their bellies on such occasions. 

? You feel no certainty in your devotion. 3 Gauri Kabir. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 347 

After this the Guru dismissed the Brahmans and 
departed in disgust from their place of pilgrimage.! 

The Guru in the progress of his mission arrived 
at Patna, then as now a strong Muhammadan 
centre. Crowds of both sexes hearing of his re- 
ligious fame went to behold him and make him 
offerings. They warmly invited him to abide with 
them, give them religious instruction, and render 
them happy. The Guru replied: ‘ Wherever is the 
congregation of saints, there it is God’s order for 
me to abide.’ 

There lived in Patna a Sikh confectioner, called 
Bhai Jaita, who through humility always wore soiled 
clothes. Noticing this the Sikhs thought that he 
never bathed, and they twitted him on the subject. 
He told them they might go to his house, and see 
if he did or did not. They accordingly sent two of 
their body disguised as travellers. He received 
them, washed their feet, performed every menial 
service for them, and gave them bed and supper. 
A watch and a quarter before day Bhai Jaita arose, 
and performed his sacred ablutions. He then medi- 
tated on God and the Guru till daybreak, after which 
he went to his shop to attend to his business. On 
hearing of Bhai Jaita’s devotion, the Guru went to 
stay with him, while the Sikhs prepared a magni- 
ficent mansion, the present local Har Mandar, for the 
reception of the head of their religion. 

When the Guru after some time had completed 
his instructions, he, knowing the future, said one day 
to his mother Nanaki: ‘ Remain here with thy 

1 There is a little Sikh temple on the site of the edifice in which 
Guru Teg Bahadur lived when he visited Gaya. We found there one 
man who could read the Granth Sahib, but who did not understand it. 
The principal ministrant wore the sacrificial thread of the Hindus. 
Within the temple were little statues of Krishan, Radha, Baldeo, and 
other idolatrous articles of worship. On the outer wall of the temple 
were™ represented Guru_Nanak, his sons and his attendants. In 
friendly proximity to them were representations of Haniman, Ram 
Chandar, and his consort Sita. 

348 THE SIKH RELIGION 

daughter-in-law ; I must depart.’ His mother re- 
plied, ‘ Thou knowest my love for thee; I cannot 
live for a moment without thee, and now thou art 
going to leave me.’ He represented to her that 
many Sikhs were waiting for him in a distant land, 
and he must go to them. His wife, Gujari, seeing 
that the Guru’s mother’s remonstrances were of no 
avail, then began to ply her own entreaties—‘ O 
Guru, thou art leaving me alone in this foreign 
country. I have no peace when I behold thee not. 
What shall become of me?’ On hearing these 
words the Guru remained thoughtful for some time, 
and at last replied—‘ The prophecy of my father, 
Guru Har Gobind, is now about to be accomplished. 
A son shall soon be born to thee, who shall be great 
and powerful, extend the faith, establish Sikh 
supremacy, root out the wicked, and destroy the 
enemies of truth and true religion. Wherefore 
remain thou here to give him birth. Thou wouldst 
suffer great hardship in travelling, so be happy here. 
IY shall soon return after having made a tour 
through Bengal.’ The Guru’s wife felt the force 
of these words, and remained silent. 

After this conversation the Guru performed his 
devotions and went to sleep. He arose next morn- 
ing some hours before day, and engaged in worship. 
As his minstrels began to chant the Asa ki War, 
an envoy arrived with many offerings from Ram 
Singh, son of Mirza Raja Jai Singh of Amber (Jaipur) 
in Rajputana and fourth in descent from Raja Man 
Singh, who had been a distinguished general under 
the Emperor Akbar. The envoy related the object 
of his mission: ‘The Emperor Aurangzeb hath 
ordered my master to send a military expedition to 
the Kamrup country.!. Thy name is cherisher of 

1 «Ram Singh, who succeeded Mirza Raja Jai Singh, had the 
mansab of four thousand conferred upon him, and was sent against 
the Assamese. Tod’s Rajasthan, vol. II, ‘Annals of Amber’, chap. i. 

The Sikh accounts of this expedition are not attested either by the 
Muhammadan historians or by the annals of Rajpitana. It was not 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 349 

those who seek thy protection. Wherefore merci- 
fully assist my master that he may conquer Kamrup, 
and remain thou in Patna until he arrive in person 
to offer thee homage and solicit thy succour.’ The 
Guru granted both requests, but at the same time 
kept the future in view. 

Raja Ram Singh soon appeared accompanied by 
his ministers and a large retinue of soldiers. He 
proceeded on the afternoon of the day of his arrival 
to make a state visit to the Guru, and on arriving 
in his presence made his prostrations, presented his 
offerings, and begged the Guru’s protection. The 
Guru quoted for him from the Sukhmani :— 

The king of the whole world would be unhappy, 
But he would become happy by repeating God’s name. 

And again :— 

Where there are very great difficulties, 
God’s name will at once save thee. 

The Guru then invited him to state the object of 
his visit. He spoke as follows :—‘ O true Guru, we 
Rajas of Hindustan were subject to the Emperor 
Akbar. The king of Kamrup alone became a rebel, 
and defied his authority. The Emperor then ex- 
pressed his desire that some brave general should 
take an army and conquer that country. When the 
I¢mperor’s wishes were communicated to his bravest 
Muhammadan officers, none of them volunteered 
for the expedition. On the contrary they repre- 
sented that even with the greatest bravery it would 
be impossible to carry out the Emperor’s desigii. 
There was, however, they represented, among the 
Hindu Rajput chiefs one man, Raja Man Singh, 
Raja Bishan Singh, whose regal dignity was, according to ‘T’od, only 
for a short period, who went on this expedition. He was, according 
to the annals of Jaipur, only four years of age when Guru Teg 
Bahadur was executed. ‘here was no Raja Bishan Singh of Jodhpur ; 
and Man Singh was not killed in the expedition he undertook to 
Kamriip under the emperor Akbar. 

350 THE SIKH RELIGION 

who might be sent on the perilous errand. If he 
perished in the attempt, no matter, there would be 
only one enemy the less ; and if he were victorious, 
it would be so much the better. The Emperor 
would have one more country subjected to his 
authority. 

‘Akbar was pleased with this suggestion, and 
next day in public darbar informed Raja Man Singh, 
who he said was the first of all his brave Rajput 
princes, that he had appointed him to lead the 
expedition. The Raja had no choice but to accept 
the post, and as soon as possible proceeded with the 
Emperor’s army against the rebellious king. The 
tents of Man Singh’s army extended for miles on the 
frontier, and, notwithstanding the spells and incan- 
tations of the inhabitants of Kamrup, was com- 
pletely successful. | 

‘ Now again the inhabitants of Kamrup and Asam 
have proved rebellious to authority. The Emperor 
recently sent Mir Jumla to subdue them but, though 
at first successful, he was obliged to relinquish his 
victories. His cavalry was cut off, a pestilence 
destroyed his infantry, and he himself perished of 
exposure and fatigue before he had reached Dhaka 
(Dacca) on his return journey.® 

‘ Aurangzeb’s advisers have suggested that he 
should send me. They say if I conquer the country, 
it will be an addition to his sovereignty ; and, if 
I be killed, the Emperor may annex the whole of 
Rajputana. The Emperor accordingly sent for me, 
and ordered me to go and subdue Kamrup. On 
hearing this I went home, and told my mother and 
queens of the order I had received. They became 
alarmed, and asked me if I desired an untimely death. 
They represented that there was none so brave as 

1 Amn-t-Akbari, XXX, 30, and Tod’s Rajasthan. 

2 History of India, by Elphinstone, whose account is based on 
KKhafi Khan and Bernier.. See also AZir Jumla’s Invasion of Asam, 
by Shahab-ul-din Talash. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 351 

Mir Jumla, and if he perished what hope was there 
for me? Of all the generals who had been sent 
on that errand none except Raja Man Singh had 
ever returned. Then I too saw the danger of my 
position. It was certain death to command the 
invading army, and it would be equally fatal for me 
to disobey the Emperor’s orders. 

‘My principal queen then came to my assistance 
with her advice. She said, “‘ My father’s family 
were Sikhs of Guru Nanak. On Guru Nanak’s 
throne 1s now seated Guru Teg Bahadur. Go and 
ask for his protection and support, and thy prayer 
shall not be in vain. Guru Arjan hath said: ‘ Em- 
brace him who seeketh thy protection. This is the 
duty of the religious teacher.’ 

‘““The Guru can fulfil the desires of all creatures 
and grant deliverance even to the lowest animals. 
The Guru’s father, Guru Har Gobind, secured the 
release of fifty-two Rajput kings confined in the 
fortress of Gualiar by order of the Emperor Jahangir. 
Since then all Rajas are Sikhs, and reverence the 
holy Guru. We too are the Guru’s Sikhs. Thou 
hast forgotten the favours conferred on us by the 
Gurus, and therefore art thou unhappy.” 

‘O Guru, on receiving this cheering advice from 
my queen, I was consoled and regained my peace of 
mind. Hence I have come from distant Rajputana 
to seek the protection of thy holy feet.’ 

The Guru smiled and directed the Raja to con- 
tinually meditate on God’s name. ‘God’s name,’ 
as Guru Arjan hath said, ‘ is medicine for all diseases. 
Guru Nanak will assist thee, and thou shalt conquer 
Kamrup.’* . 

Raja Ram Singh was overjoyed on hearing this 

1 From a map attached to a ‘Report of Bhutan and adjacent 
countries’, by Captain Pemberton (1838), it appears that Kamriip once 
comprised the whole of the present district of Goalpara and Kamrip 
between the state of Bhutin on the north and the river Brahmaputar 
on the south. The Asam of old times lay south of the Brahmaputar. 

352 THE STM RELIGION 

promise from the Guru, and having offered a prayer 
distributed sacred food to the whole company. His 
faith was confirmed, and he received initiation as 
a Sikh by the ceremony of charanpahul. On the 
following day he had a further request to make the 
Guru, namely, that he should accompany him in his 
expedition. in which case victory would certainly 
incline to his side. The Guru agreed, bearing in mind 
that, while accompanying the Raja, he would have 
an excellent opportunity of preaching to his Sikhs, 
and extending the Sikh religion throughout the 
countries traversed. 

CHAPTER IV 

The Guru offered words of consolation to his 
mother and wife, and, entrusting them to his brother- 
in-law Kripal Chand, bade them an affectionate 
farewell. He then set out with the Raja. Wherever 
he went he was received with great honour by the 
people, to whom he communicated religious instruc- 
tion, and on whom he enjoined devotion to the 
Deathless Being. He and the Raja marched through 
Munger, Rajmahal, and Maldah. In the latter place 
was a dharmsal, but its ministrants did not come to 
visit him. He was informed that they had all gone 
to a fair in the village of Pandua, but that on their 
return they would pay him their respects. He 
replied that he could not meet those who went to 
such idolatrous gatherings. In Maldah the Guru 
met only one Sikh, a confectioner, who begged him 
to go and take refreshment in his house. The Guru 
did so, gave him instruction, and blessed him. 

In the morning the Guru set out with the 
Raja. Their next halt was in Dhaka. There 
resided a masand called Bulaki whose mother had 
vowed that, if the Guru ever visited the place, she 
would seat him on a beautiful couch she had pre- 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 353 

pared, dress him with cloth she had spun herself, 
and give him a dainty meal prepared by her own 
hands. The Guru knowing her heart’s desire went 
without other guidance straight to her residence. 
He called to her from outside, whereat she was over- 
joyed, ran forth and placed her head on his feet. 
She took him within, and lavished on him all the 
attentions which she had previously vowed. The 
Guru said he had come to visit her on account of 
her pure devotion, and invited her to ask him a 
favour. She replied that the only favour she craved 
was to be allowed to remain ever near him. He 
rejoined that she might behold him whenever after 
ablution she deeply meditated on God, directed her 
love to His lotus feet, and repeated His true name. 

Bulaki informed all the Sikh inhabitants of the 
Guru’s arrival. They came in crowds to do him 
honour, and receive his instruction and_ bene- 
dictions. The Guru on seeing their enthusiasm, 
said that Dhaka was the storehouse of his faith. 
He suggested to the Sikhs to build a dharmsal in 
their city where God’s praises should be ever sung, 
for Guru Nanak had ordained that singing God's 
praises was the highest form of worship. The Guru 
also directed them to hold meetings on the anniver- 
saries of the Gurus, and ever worship the Deathless 
Being. 

As the Guru was about to depart, masand Bulaki’s 
mother came to visit him again. She begged that 
he might remain a few days longer in their midst. 
He replied that he had much to do elsewhere and 
must proceed. He directed her to worship Wahguru 
and serve the saints, and she should be happy. She 
sent for a painter, and had a picture of the Guru 
made. She hung it over the couch on which he 
had sat. Thus she was able to behold the Guru 
whenever her secular avocations admitted. 

The Guru and the Raja then set out for the city 
of Rangamati on the right bank of the Brahmaputar. 

SIKH. IV A a 

354 THE SIKH RELIGION 

There the Guru took up his quarters, and the Raja 
and his host followed hisexample. When the king 
of Kamrup heard of Raja Ram Singh’s arrival to 
attack him, he vowed that he would destroy him 
and his army. He began to make incantations 
and spells, but none succeeded. As ignorance pales 
before knowledge, so did the sorcerers fail and 
grow weary of their efforts. The king of Kamrup 
then sent for all the women of his 'and who were 
famous for their magical skill. They too could not 
succeed against the Guru. The king then felt con- 
vinced that there must be some divine personage 
with the invading army who thwarted the efforts 
of all sorcerers. He went to worship at the temple 
of the goddess Kamakhsha, offered her sacrifice, 
and received a blessing from her priests, He then 
set about making immediate preparation to defeat 
Raja Ram Singh. 

He thought of a novel plan of hostilities. It was 
to divert a tributary of the Brahmaputar by making 
a huge dam across it and turning it on Raja Ram 
Singh’s army. The Guru apprised the Raja that 
a great torrent should come that night and his army 
was in danger. The Sikhs in Raja Ram Singh’s 
service removed their tents, but several Musalmans 
who did not believe in the Guru or heed his warning, 
were swept away. 

The king’s mother saw in a vision the goddess 
Devi, who thus addressed her :—‘ O mother, Guru 
Nanak hath taken birth in this age. On his throne 
is now seated the ninth Guru, Teg Bahadur. He 
is here with Raja Ram Singh who hath become 
a disciple of his. Nowadays the Guru is sovereign. 
No one hath strength to oppose him. Go, make 
obeisance to him, and ask pardon for thy sins, and 
thy rule shall be everlasting ; otherwise it shall 
perish.’ 

The dowager queen communicated this order of the 
goddess to her son, and he accordingly prepared to 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 355 

go to interview the Guru. He took with him an 
escort and presents, and, crossing the tributary of 
the Brahmaputar previously referred to, proceeded 
to the Guru’s tent. After prostration he said that 
he had come by order of the goddess to pray for 
pardon and protection. He begged the Guru not to 
allow him to fall into the power of the Moslems. 
The Guru replied that Raja Ram Singh was a very 
religious man. He told the king to fear not; his 
empire should be permanent ; he ought to meet 
Raja Ram Singh, and hold no communication with 
the Muhammadans. The king was delighted with 
this speech, and begged the Guru to set foot in his 
city, bless it, and take Raja Ram Singh, but no 
Muhammadans with him. The Guru without making 
him any promise dismissed him. 

The Guru then went among Raja Ram Singh’s 
troops, and preached the blessings of peace. He 
quoted from Guru Nanak’s ‘ Sidh Gosht ’? :-— 

A holy man renounceth enmity and hostility. 

Raja Ram Singh’s army had no intention to pro- 
long the enmity, and declared themselves willing to 
accept the Guru’s advice. 

The Guru then sent for Raja Ram Singh himself, 
told him the whole conversation with the king, and 
asked him to beat the drum of victory. The Raja 
was delighted with the Guru’s negotiations. He 
said that the news was like the water of life dropped 
into a dying man’s mouth. The Guru then told him 
to prepare to cross the tributary of the Brahmaputar 
with him, and take care that he took no Muham- 
madans in his train as their presence would be 
offensive to the king of Kamrup. The Guru and 
Raja Ram Singh crossed the river with an escort of 
a thousand Rajputs. They were received in a 
friendly manner by the king who advanced to meet 
them. The Guru sat down placing the royal dispu- 
tants on either hand, and effected a reconciliation 

Aa2 

356 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and an interchange of friendly offices between them. 
By his influence they both exchanged turbans in 
token of life-long amity. Raja Ram Singh made 
large presents to the Guru. while the king of Kamrup 
asked him for some souvenir which he might look 
at and worship in his absence. The Guru took his 
bow and arrow and, aiming at a pipal-tree, drove 
the arrow through and through it. He told the 
king that he might always remember him by the 
mark on the tree. The Guru then gave him in- 
struction to repeat the true Name, serve the saints, 
and, if ever he encountered a difficulty, address his 
supplication to the immortal God and rely on the 
words of the Guru. He should not even by mistake 
worship cremation-grounds, cemeteries, temples, or 
goddesses, and he should ever associate with the 
virtuous. The Guru driving a dagger into the earth 
then addressed himself to both kings: ‘ Let all the 
land on this side of the dagger belong to the Emperor, 
and all on the other side to the king of Kamrup, and 
let both monarchs forget their enmity.’ This they 
both agreed to, and thus was the serious quarrel 
adjusted and bloodshed avoided. 

At Dhubri, the capital of Kamrup, the Guru in- 
formed Raja Ram Singh’s officers that Guru Nanak 
had visited the place and rendered it holy by his 
footsteps. Guru Teg Bahadur then requested that 
each soldier should bring five shieldfuls of earth to 
raise, in memory of the founder of the Sikh religion, 
a mound which could be seen at a great distance. 
The whole of Raja Ram Singh’s army joined in the 
work, and it is said to have been accomplished in 
afew hours. The Guru then had a pavilion erected 
at the top. Some of the Guru’s followers remained 
in Kamrup, and their descendants are now found 
both in Dhubri and Chaotala. 

The Guru spent a few days on the cool and pleasant 
bank of the great river. Crowds hearing of his fame 
came long distances to see him, and obtain from 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 357 

him the fulfilment of their desires. He was held 
in great honour throughout the whole country, and 
his reputation having reached Raja Ram of Asam, 
that monarch came to do him homage. The Raja 
had no offspring and earnestly desired a son. He 
brought his two wives, and they made obeisance to 
the Guru. The Raja congratulated himself on being 
so fortunate as to obtain a sight of the great priest 
and leader of the Sikhs, and asked him for religious 
instruction. This request was granted, and the king 
was delighted. He proceeded next morning to wait 
on the Guru, but, when it came to making his 
request, he felt abashed. The Guru knowing the 
working of his mind encouraged him to speak. He 
then asked the Guru to grant him the boon of an 
heir to his throne, as he had been hitherto deprived 
of the fruit of this world. He said, addressing the 
Guru: ‘O great king, bring this sinking craft to 
shore.’ In reply the Guru took off his signet ring, 
stamped its impression on the Raja’s thigh, and thus 
addressed him: ‘O king, the impression of my seal 
shall be on thy son’s forehead. By this know that 
it is Guru Nanak who hath mercifully granted thee 
offspring. Make thou thy son a Sikh of the house of 
the Guru.’ After this the Raja drank the water in 
which the Guru’s feet had been bathed, thus became 
a Sikh, and returned happy to his capital. 

At this juncture a messenger arrived from Patna 
to inform the Guru of the birth of his son. On 
hearing this Raja Ram Singh inaugurated great 
rejoicings. Guns were discharged, the best musicians 
exhibited their skill, and copious alms were bestowed 
on the poor. 

On the birth of the child the Sikh historian re- 
marks: ‘It hath ever been usual that, when God 
seeth- His people suffering, He sendeth a saviour of 
the world.’ Guru Gobind Singh afterwards, in his 
Vichitar Natak, described the circumstances of his 
birth. He was born three hours before sunrise on 

358 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the seventh day of the light half of the month of 
Poh, in the Sambat year 1723 (A.D. 1666). It is 
stated that on Guru Teg Bahadur’s departure to 
Asam with Raja Ram Singh, he directed his wife 
Gujari to give the name Gobind Rai to a son who 
should be born to her in his absence. 

CHAPTER V 

At the time of Gobind Rai’s birth there lived in the 
city of Kuhram a Satyid called Bhikan Shah. On 
the young Guru’s natal morning Bhikan Shah looked 
and bowed towards the east. His disciples asked 
him why he bowed, contrary to all Muhammadan 
custom, in the direction to which only Hindus turned 
in their matutinal worship of the sun. He replied 
that there had just been born in Patna a spiritual 
and temporal king who should establish religion and 
destroy the evil. He vowed that he would go to 
worship the new-born sovereign, and would perform 
a daily fast till he had seen him. He went by Dihli 
and arrived in Patna suffering great hunger and 
fatigue. He sat down near the Guru’s house, but 
apart from the crowd who had come to offer their 
congratulations. When the crowd had dispersed, 
Kripal Chand, the child’s uncle, went to Bhikan 
Shah, and asked him for what purpose he had come. 
He told him the nature of his vow, and asked to see 
the new-born child. The mother and grandmother 
were afraid of the Muhammadans and their Emperor 
Aurangzeb. They therefore tried to put off Saiyid 
Bhikan Shah, and told him he might return after 
three months when they would show him the child. 
The Saiyid remonstrated on receiving this answer, 
and represented that he was only a faqir, and had 
come hundreds of miles to see the boy. At last, by 
the advice of Kripal Chand, the mother and grand- 
mother gave way, and consented that the faqir 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 359 

should behold the child but only in public, in presence 
of the Sikhs of Patna, and amid the soul-inspiring 
strains of the Gurus’ hymns with rebeck accom- 
paniments. 

When the infant was produced, the whole assem- 
bly rose to do him honour and present their offerings. 
The Saiyid too presented his, and bowed at the 
young spiritual prince’s feet. He placed before him 
two earthen vessels covered with muslin, one con- 
taining milk and the other water. The child play- 
fully touched both vessels. Upon this the faqir took 
them up, and prepared to leave amid the thanks of 
the Sikhs for having been the means of giving them 
a sight of their future Guru. They asked Bhikan 
Shah what he meant by the two vessels. He said 
that if the child had only touched one of them, no 
Muhammadan should be left in the land; but as he 
had touched both, the Hindus and Muhammadans 
should abide, and the child should include them both 
in his religion.' Saying this the Saiyid departed. 

When Guru Teg Bahadur had adjusted the quarrel 
between Raja Ram Singh and the king of Kamrup, 
and had also heard of the birth of his son, he and 
the Raja set out for Patna. Travelling stage by 
stage they at length arrived on the bank of the 

1 There are different versions of this legend. The Khalsa Tract 
Society gives the following: A light was seen in the heavens by a 
pious faqir and his disciples on the occasion of the Guru's birth. The 
faqir explained the meaning of the phenomenon. He said that some 
one beloved of God, who would be at once a saint and hero, was born 
into the world. The faqir followed the direction of the light until he 
arrived at the child’s residence in Patna. He made several entreaties, 
which were at last granted, to see the young Guru. The faqir bowed 
and placed an offering before him, He then filled two small vessels, 
one with milk and the other with water, and placed them before the 
child to make trial of him. If the child spilled the one containing 
milk it meant he was a Hindu: if he spilled the one containing water 
he would be deemed a Muhammadan. The Guru impartially spilled 
both vessels, by which the faqir understood that the child would not 
be an adherent of either Hindiism or Islam. He would have his own 
distinct religion, and confer salvation on sinful mortals. 

360 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Ganges. The Guru sent a message to his mother 
that he would reach home early in the morning. 
His mother and wife bathed, and put on their best 
dresses to receive him. On their arrival Raja Ram 
Singh beholding the future Guru presented him a 
large quantity of jewels and dresses, and foretold 
his future prowess and fame. 

When the family was alone, his wife asked the 
Guru how far he had penetrated into Kamrup. He 
replied as far as Guru Nanak had gone. He also 
informed her that he had erected at Dhubri, where 
Guru Nanak once preached, a high mound and 
surmounted it with a temple which could be seen 
at a considerable distance. Some of his companions 
remained there to guard the temple and preach the 
true religion. He said that he was the Creator’s 
servant and went in the triple capacity of friend to 
Raja Ram Singh, preacher of God’s word, and 
averter of bloodshed. After a few days’ rest and 
spiritual comfort Raja Ram Singh went to Dihli to 
report his success to the Emperor, and thence re- 
turned to his kingdom. 

The chroniclers of the life of Guru Gobind Singh 
delight to relate stories of his childhood. He re- 
ceived a little boat from a merchant’s son, and took 
great pleasure in rowing it on the Ganges. Once 
in so doing he dipped his feet into the water, upon 
which the Sikhs repeated the words of Guru Ram 
Das: ‘ The Ganges, Jamna, Godavari, and Saraswati 
endeavour to obtain the dust of the saint’s feet.’ * 
He used to set other children fighting and watch 
their contests. On being lectured by his mother 
on this impropriety he would go to sleep. On 
awaking early in the morning he used to be seen 
in a devotional attitude. 

From his earliest years Gobind Rai was accus- 
tomed to practise shooting with a pellet-bow, and 
organize a company of boys of his own age to practise 

1 Rag Malar. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR _ 361 

with him. His father used to seat him near him 
and tell him that, though the practise was meri- 
torious, the time for putting it into effect had not yet 
arrived. 

CHAPTER VI 

After a protracted residence at Patna Guru Teg 
Bahadur turned his thoughts towards the Panjab, 
and communicated his resolve to return thither to 
his mother Nanaki. Hesaid to her, ‘ O mother dear, 
it is now a long time since I left the Panjab. If 
thou permit me, I will go, give instruction to my 
Sikhs there, and lead them the right way. Remain 
here with thy grandson and nurse him. When he 
groweth strong, bring him to me.’ His mother 
became very thoughtful on hearing this, and repre- 
sented that the Panjab was politically in a very 
unsettled state. Moreover, he had been Jong absent 
in the Kamrup country, had only now returned, and 
it was too soon to leave her again. While thus 
speaking tears of love rained from her eyes. The 
Guru represented to her that man’s body was un- 
stable, and vain was love for it. He on that occasion 
composed the following hymn :— 

I have seen that love of the world is false ; 

Everybody, whether wife or friend, is intent on his own 
happiness ; 

Everybody speaketh of his relations, and attacheth his 
heart to them with love ; 

At the last moment nobody will accompany him ; this is 
a strange custom. 

Stupid man as yet understandeth nothing, though I have 
grown weary of continually instructing him. 

Nanak, if man sing the praises of God, he shall cross over 
the terrible ocean.1 

On hearing this hymn the Guru’s mother was 

1 Devgandhari. 

362 THE SIKH RELIGION 

consoled, and offered no further objection to her 
son’s departure. 

The Guru then addressed himself to his wife 
Gujari, ‘O my good wife, I am going to the Panjab. 
The city of Anandpur which hath been built must 
be inhabited. Remain here, bring up thy son, and 
oppose not his wishes. After some time I will send 
for thee. My reason for asking thee not to thwart 
him is because he is the beloved servant of the 
Deathless Being. When he groweth up, he shall 
perform great deeds for the world. He shall destroy 
the evil and cherish his religion. J have received 
God’s order to go to the Panjab, and discharge 
several duties there. Ever remember the Deathless 
Being.’ On hearing this his wife’s eyes filled with 
tears, and she replied in her weeping, ‘ O my husband, 
I have none but thee. Our child is still young. My 
mother-in-law is old. To whom art thou going to 
entrust me?’ The Guru replied, ‘This body is 
temporary, the soul is ever permanent. The com- 
position of the body is like that of the current of 
a river. Whoever fixeth his love on it isa fool. Be 
satisfied with whatever is God’s will. Knowing this 
give thy mind contentment. Ever love thy son and 
repeat the true Name.’ 

After this conversation the Guru’s son went to 
him and said, ‘ Father dear, I have heard that thou 
art going to the Panjab. Take me with thee.’ * 
The Guru replied, ‘My son, thou art still young. 
Thou wouldst have great suffering on the way. 
Therefore remain here for some time, and I will send 
for thee afterwards. It is thou who hast to do all 
the work at Anandpur.’ At the Guru’s departure 
his wife pressed him not to make a long march on 
that day and to keep his child with him, so that the 
parting between father and son might not be too 

1 Supposing this to have been really uttered by the child Gobind 

Rai, it would show that his father Guru Teg Bahadur had spent a con- 
siderable time on the expedition, and again at Patna after his return. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 363 

abrupt, and that the latter might be able to endure 
it without too much sorrowing. To this the Guru 
agreed. His first march was within the city of 
Patna itself, where all his Sikhs went to bid him 
farewell and sing the Gurus’ hymns for his safe 
journey. 

The Guru taking with him his treasurer, the devout 
Mati Das, and four other faithful Sikhs, proceeded 
march by march till he arrived at Ropar in the 
Ambala district, where a large crowd of Sikh followers 
came to see him and make him offerings. He 
then directed his route to Kiratpur, where he met 
his half-brother Suraj Mal, who was overjoyed at 
seeing him. To him the Guru communicated the 
news of the birth of his son, whereat Suraj Mal was 
greatly delighted. He introduced his grandsons 
Gulab Rai and Sham Das to the Guru, who bestowed 
costly dresses on them. While staying at Kiratpur, 
the Guru visited Patalpuri where Guru Har Gobind 
had breathed his last. The Guru after staying at 
Kiratpur for some time departed for Anandpur. When 
he arrived, there was great rejoicing. The whole 
city went forth to receive him and do him homage. 

Gobind Rai, though still a child, used daily to 
practise the use of arms. Whenever the sons of 
worthy men and Sikhs visited him, he used to 
instruct them in military tactics. In Gobind’s area 
was a well of sweet water which the neighbours used 
to draw. One day as a Muhammadan woman went 
with her pitcher a pellet from the boy’s bow acci- 
dentally struck her on the forehead. She went with 
tears and lamentations to Gujari, and threatened 
to report to the Emperor the mischief the child had 
been doing in the city. The mother pleaded that her 
son was still very young, and knew not right from 
wrong. After further parley Gujari gave her money 
to buy clarified butter and sweets, upon which she 
promised that she would make no further complaint 
against Gobind Kai. 

364 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Gujari chased the boy with the object of chastising 
him. He ran upstairs and closed the door behind 
him. She then began to scold, and asked him if he 
was not afraid of the Emperor. He called out to 
her that he was afraid of none but the Deathless 
God. On hearing this his mother desisted from her 
intention, and Nanaki, his grandmother, then quietly 
went upstairs and brought him down to his mother. 
Addressing the latter Nanaki said, ‘The boy shall 
be a great warrior like his grandfather, Guru Har 
Gobind.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

One day Guru Teg Bahadur thought of his death, 
and determined to send ior his son Gobind so that 
he might come to cherish and protect Anandpur in 
the day of its bereavement. At the same time 
Gobind Rai in Patna was thinking of his father. 
He said to his mother that when his father was 
leaving for Anandpur he promised to write on 
arriving at his destination, but as yet they had not 
heard from him. The boy expressed his desire to 
go to the Panjab. His mother replied that they 
would go when the Guru ordered it. The boy then 
urged that it seemed good to leave Patna with which 
he was not pleased. Huis mother informed him that 
the masands in and around Patna were good and 
obedient men, and satisfied their wants, but they 
would have great difficulties in the Panjab where 
they would find envy and jealousy, and where, 
moreover, they would be in danger from the hostility 
of the Emperor. His mother would not therefore 
consent to leave Patna. 

Gobind Rai sent for a scribe to whom he dictated 
a letter to the masand Bulaki, who was employed to 
collect the Sikh offerings of Dhaka, ordering him to 
make a very costly palki and ornament it with gold 
andivory for hisjourney. This article Bulaki caused 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR — 365 
to be made as quickly as possible by the best artists 
the country could afford. The boy’s mother was highly 
pleased on seeing it, and pointed it out as an instance 
of the obedience and good-will of the masands in 
that part of India. Gobind Rai, however, on 
examining the palkz found that what the masands 
represented to be gold work only contained one part 
of gold to nine of copper, and to prove what he said 
he had it promptly and publicly burned. He made 
the dishonesty of the masands a reason for again 
urging on his mother the necessity of going to the 
Panjab where he said he had many things of import- 
ance to do. At that very time his father’s letter 
arrived summoning him, his mother, and his Sikhs 
to Anandpur. When the news of Gobind’s intended 
departure had spread, several persons came with 
offerings, and among others a banker called Jagat 
Seth, who offered him the shelter and hospitality 
of his many houses on the way northward—an offer 
which the boy was not disinclined to accept. 

Before Gobind Rai departed, a deputation waited 
on him and begged him to leave his cradle as a 
memorial behind him. When they urged that there 
was nobody left to confer spiritual benefits on them, 
he told them that whatever supplications they 
addressed to God with a pure mind should be ac- 
cepted. 

The first place of any importance at which Gobind 
Rai halted on his route was a town south of Banaras 
called Chhota Mirzapur. On reaching Banaras, the 
ancient stronghold of Hinduism, crowds came with 
offerings to him. They were enchanted as well with 
his mental as his physical beauty. They said they 
were beggars and had come to beg of him. Their 
applications were not in vain. Whereupon every- 
one praised him and said: ‘ How generous and how 
young!’ He remained there for several days. He 
used to hold court in the morning and then delight 
in sitting in a boat on the Ganges, from which he 

366 THE SIR RELIGION 

admired the scenery, the verdure on the one hand, 
and on the other the stately and picturesque temples 
and mansions rising from the margin of the sacred 
river. 

From Banaras Gobind Rai proceeded to Ajudhia. 
There crowds came with offerings to behold him, and 
on seeing his beauty were loud in their praises and 
foretold his greatness asa hero. The Sikh historian 
relates that flocks of monkeys—animals so cherished 
at the Hindu shrine of Ajudhia—went to the Guru’s 
tent. He first fed them with parched gram and 
then threw a lump of molasses among them, for 
which they all began to fight, some using their teeth 
and others their hands. The boy on seeing the 
simian combat was delighted, for even at that early 
age he loved the battle and the fray. 

Gobind Rai then proceeded with his mother and 
followers to Lakhnau (Lucknow), then as now the 
capital of Awadh (Oude), where they were all hos- 
pitably entertained by Baba Fatah Chand, the 
religious superior of the Sikhs, to whom the party 
gave a letter of thanks for his hospitality—a letter 
still preserved by the Sikh Mahant of that city. 
Gobind Rai and his party then proceeded towards 
Anandpur. On the way they tarried at Lakhnaur, 
a town about nine miles from Ambala in the Panjab. 
There Bhai Kripal, the Guru’s uncle, went in advance 
of the party to procure conveyances for the remain- 
der of the journey to Anandpur. 

While Gobind Rai was at Lakhnaur his favourite 
amusement was playing at mimic warfare. Under 
the tutorship of Magan he used to form the boys of 
the town into opposing armies and engage them in 
sham fights and martial exercises. While Gobind Rai 
was thus engaged he was visited by Saiyid Bhikan 
Shah—owner of the villages of Kuhram and Siana 
four miles from Lakhnaur—who had previously gone 
to see him at his birth in Patna, and knew that the 
boy was destined one day to bestow the Mughal 

CIP er GORU TEG BAHADUR 367 

empire on the Sikhs. Bhikan Shah had obtained 
the village of Thaska from the Emperor, and he came 
to beg Gobind Rai to allow him to remain in undis- 
turbed possession of it during the Sikh Government 
which was to follow. Gobind Rai promised that no 
one should molest him. Upon this Saiyid Bhikan 
Shah fell at his feet. When he as a Musalman was 
reproached for prostrating himself before a Sikh 
child, he justified his action by saying that the boy 
was on the spiritual throne of Guru Nanak, that he 
should be seen hereafter in God’s court, and that 
whatever God did now He did through Gobind Rai’s 
mediation. The boy had assumed birth to establish 
the Khalsa religion, and overthrow the empire of the 
Turks. 

In due time Bhai Kripal Chand arrived with horses 
and carriages to take Gobind Rai and his mother and 
grandmother to Anandpur. Before his departure 
he went on a shooting excursion accompanied by his 
uncle’s huntsmen. On that occasion one Ghogha, 
who lived in the neighbouring village of Naneri, came 
to him to beg forgiveness for an offence formerly 
committed. Once when Guru Teg Bahadur had 
gone on a pilgrimage to preach the faith, Ghogha 
abducted his female servant. He came now to make 
his peace with God and the Guru. He prayed 
Gobind Rai to go to his house and bless it with his 
presence. Gobind Rai in view of the man’s sincere 
repentance generously pardoned him. 

The young boy set out, and was followed by his 
mother and the remaining members of the family. 
After a few nights’ journey they arrived at Kiratpur. 
Here Gobind Rai was met by Gulab Rai and Sham 
Das, grandsons of his uncle, the late Suraj Mal. 
They escorted him to their house and treated him 
with: respect and affection. At Kiratpur Gobind 
visited the shrines of Baba Gurditta, Guru Har 
Gobind, and Guru Har Rai. As he approached 
Anandpur, the women and men of the city_came 

368 THE SIKH RELIGION 

forth to escort him. They were all astonished and 
fascinated on seeing the beauty of the young Guru. 
Kripal Chand pointed out to him the hill of Naina 
Devi and the Satluj flowing by, places with which 
he was afterwards to be so intimately associated. 
He was affectionately received by his father who at 
once ministered to his physical and intellectual 
wants. 

CHAPTER VIII 

The cruel and bigoted Emperor Aurangzeb still 
reigned in Dihli. As we have previously seen, he 
had imprisoned and starved to death his own 
father, killed his own brothers—Dara Shikoh and 
Murad—and disgraced his eldest son Muazim, 
afterwards Bahadur Shah. On account of all his 
crimes he was heartily hated even by his own 
co-religionists. He then sent for his priests and 
asked them what he was to do to regain the sym- 
pathy of the Muhammadans. His counsellors said 
he could only do so by converting the Hindus to 
Islam. He should send money and other presents 
to Makka and Madina. His priests would take them 
and bring him credentials from those holy cities to 
show that he was an orthodox and religious Muham- 
madan. All this being done he was to issue pro- 
clamations throughout the empire that the Hindus 
should embrace Islam, and that those who did so 
should receive jagirs, state service, and all the im- 
munities granted to royal favourites. The Emperor 

1 According to the Szraj Parkash, Gobind Rai, though summoned 
by his father from Patna to Anandpur, never met him again. But, 
according to Bhai Sukha Singh’s Gur Bilas, an older work, Gobind 
Rai reached his father in Anandpur. Indeed, this would appear to 
be the case from Gobind Rai’s own statement. He writes: ‘ They 
took me to the Panjab where nurses of different sorts fondled me and 
cherished me in every way. I received instruction in various forms.’ 
It is certain that this was imparted under his father’s supervision. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 369 

took the advice of his priests, and all the plans 
suggested were adopted. 

The experiment of conversion was first tried in 
Kashmir. There were two reasons for this. In the 
first place, the Kashmiri Pandits were supposed to 
be educated, and it was thought that, if they were 
converted, the inhabitants of Hindustan would 
readily follow their example ; secondly, Peshawar 
and Kabul, Muhammadan countries, were near, and 
if the Kashmiris offered any resistance to their con- 
version, the Muhammadans might declare a religious 
war and overpower and destroy them. It was also 
believed by the Emperor-—without foundation as it 
afterwards turned out—that the Kashmiri Brahmans 
might be tempted by promises of money and govern- 
ment appointments, because the beggary and mean- 
ness of the inhabitants of that country were pro- 
verbial.? 

The Emperor Akbar by the force of wealth 
and military genius not only subdued Muhammadan 
India but also Rajputana. His obsequious ministers 
signed a document which allowed him as the shadow 
of God on earth full jurisdiction to decide all religious 
questions. Instead of the Muhammadan creed he 
was gratified with the formula, ‘ There is no God 
but God, and Akbar is God’s representative.’ Men 
prostrated themselves before him, offered him vows, 
and addressed him as a deity. He caused his name 
to be inserted in the hymns to the gods and goddesses, 
and poets were found to grant him divine honours. 
Aurangzeb who deemed himself an orthodox Muham- 
madan thought that byhisown line of action he shou!d 
be even greater and more successful than Akbar. 

Sher Afghan Khan, the Emperor’s viceroy in 
Kashmir, set about converting the Kashmiris by the 
sword and massacred those who persevered in their 
adherence to the faith of their forefathers. It is 

1 Khulasat ul-Tawarikh. Abul Fazal wrote—‘ The bane of this 
country is its people.’ 
SIKH. IV B b 

370 THE SIKH RELIGION 

said there was piled up a heap of one man and a 
quarter, or a hundred weight of 7anews or sacrificial 
threads. The Hindus who would not be converted 
and whom Sher Afghan Khan’s troops could not 
capture fled the country. Even Muhammadans who 
in any way assisted the Hindus were mercilessly put 
to death. 

At last Sher Afghan Khan began to reflect that 
there was too much slaughter, and it might happen 
to him as it did to the Emperor Humayun, whom 
Sher Shah, the Afghan chief, expelled from India, 
or as it happened to the Muhammadans whose seed 
had been extirpated from his dominions by Raja 
Jaipal, whose motto was, ‘ When I die there shall 
be an end of the world.’ Thus reflecting, Sher 
Afghan Khan sent for the Kashmiri Pandits, in- 
formed them of the Emperor’s order, said he was 
only obeying it, and begged their forgiveness. They 
became silent for a while, and then sued for a respite 
of six months to consider whether they should 
embrace Islam or die for their religion. Sher Afghan 
Khan after all the slaughter of which he had been 
the instrument, was glad to accede to their request. 

Meanwhile the process of conversion went on in 
India. Aurangzeb at first resorted to the four means 
of traditional Indian policy in dealing with the 
Hindus. He made peaceable overtures, then offered 
money, then threatened punishment, and lastly 
caused dissension among them. When these mea- 
sures failed, he had recourse to forcible conversion. 
He destroyed temples and converted them into 
mosques. He killed cows, so sacred in Hindu estima- 
tion, threw their flesh into wells, and forced Hindus 
to drink the water therefrom. Not satisfied with 
this defilement, he used to send the Hindus to 
mosques and force them to pray to the misnamed 
Rahim (merciful God), instead of their own Ram, 
a god of mildness and compassion. 

When the respite of six months obtained from 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 371 

Sher Afghan Khan was approaching its end, the 
Kashmiri Pandits were supernaturally informed 
that in this last age of the world Guru Nanak 
was spiritual king. He would protect religion. No 
Hindu god had power to doso. The ninth king in 
succession to him, Guru Teg Bahadur, was now on 
his throne. They should repair to him, and he would 
protect their honour and their faith. 

The Pandits heard that the Guru was then at 
Anandpur on the bank of the Satluj, and thither they 
proceeded. On their way they stayed at Amritsar, 
where they bathed in the sacred tank of Guru 
Kam Das. They then proceeded to Anandpur, where 
they arrived after much discomfort and suffering, 
owing to their ignorance of travel in an unknown 
country in the plains of India and in the hot season. 

On their arrival in Anandpur, they told the Guru 
their sad story—how the Hindus of their country 
were being converted notwithstanding the respite 
granted to themselves, and how a man and a quarter 
weight of zaneuws had been collected from Hindu 
converts to Islam. They represented to the Guru 
that he had been born with the express object of 
preserving religion, that his very name had power to 
cherish those who sought his protection ; and thev 
implored him to preserve the honour of their faith 
in whatever way he deemed most expedient. 

The Guru sat silent, and for some time pondered 
on their request. His darling boy Gobind was then 
playing in the hall, and on seeing his father sad and 
thoughtful went to him. His father spoke not, but 
tenderly embraced him. The boy said, ‘ Father 
dear, why sittest thou silent to-day ? Why not 
regard me with thy usual look of affection ? What 
offence have I committed that thou wilt not even 
look cheerfully on me?’ The Guru taking com- 
passion on his dear child—dear as only Gobind Rai 
could be—seated him near him and said, * My son, 
thou knowest nothing yet. Thou art still a child. 

Bb2 

372 THE SIKH RELIGION 

This matter on which the Kashmiris have come is 
of vital importance. The world is grieved by the 
oppression of the Turks. No brave man is now to 
be found. He who is willing to sacrifice his life shall 
free the earth from the burden of the Muhammadans.’ 
The child replied: ‘ For that purpose who is more 
worthy than thou who art at once generous and 
brave ?’? 

When Guru Teg Bahadur heard this from his 
child’s lips he divined everything that was to follow. 
Fle told the Kashmiris to go in a body to Dihli and 
make the following representation to the Emperor : 
‘Guru Teg Bahadur, the ninth Sikh Guru is now 
seated on the throne of the great Guru Nanak, who 
is protector of faith and religion. First make him 
a Musalman and then all the people, including our- 
selves, will of our own accord adopt the faith.’ 
They obeyed the Guru and proceeded to Dihli to 
urge his self-sacrificing proposal. The Emperor, 
after consulting his Muhammadan doctors, adopted 
it with extreme joy. He said, ‘If the Guru become 
not a Muhammadan, he will at any rate show us 
a miracle.’ Having thus decided the Emperor sent 
two officers to summon him. He was full of hope, 
which he expressed to his Qazis, that, once the Guru 
was converted, there would be a large accession of 
Hindu and Sikh converts. 

The officers who bore the Emperor’s order to the 
Guru, billeted themselves on the towns and villages 
through which they passed. Four porters pressed 
into service at every village for each officer were 
obliged to take his palki to the next. In this way 
they were not long in comfortably accomplishing the 
journey to Anandpur. On hearing that the Guru 
gave audience in the morning, they sent word that 
they had a message for him from the Emperor. The 
Guru said that he was already expecting them, and 
he was not sorry that they had at last arrived. He 

1 Sukha Singh’s Gur Bilas, Chap. V. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 373 

read the Emperor’s order, and wrote in reply that 
he would come to Dihli after the rainy season. He 
then handed his letter to the officers and dismissed 
them. They proceeded on their return journey 
without further molestation of the Guru. 

CHAPTER IX 

The Guru took leave of his family and his devoted 
Sikhs, and began his journey to Dihli on the first day 
of the month of Har—early in June immediately 
preceding the rains—when the heat is extreme in 
northern India. On his way he visited his sincere 
Muhammadan friend Saif-ul-din who lived at Saifa- 
bad, near the present fort of Bahadurgarh in the 
Patiala state, where an imposing temple has been 
erected in honour of the Guru. This man received 
him with great honour, and invited him to stay with 
him during the rainy season. The Guru accepted 
the invitation, and during his stay gave religious 
instruction and spiritual happiness to many faithful 
Sikhs. Saif-ul-din ever found some new service to 
perform for the Guru, and their conversation was 
continually of God. Saif-ul-din became a convert 
to the Guru’s faith. 

At the close of the rains in the beginning of October 
Aurangzeb again sent two messengers to hasten the 
Guru’s progress to Dihli. They went to Anandpur, 
but he was not there. They tried Amritsar but with 
similar ill success. They then returned to Dihli, and 
reported that the Guru had fled. Aurangzeb dis- 
patched orders all over his empire to find and arrest 
him. The Guru remembered his own promise and 
took his leave of Saif-ul-din. Saif-ul-din became 
very sad at parting with his guest, and begged him 
to take him with him. The Guru excused himself on 
the ground that he had private business, in which 
it would be irksome for him to assist. He then 
dismissed all his Sikhs except five, namely, Mati Das, 

374 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Gurditta of the line of Bhai Budha, and three others 
whose names are said to have been Uda, Chima, and 
Dayala, and proceeded to give himself up to the 
Emperor at Dihli. 

The Guru and his five followers first halted at 
Garhi near Samana, in the Patiala state. The 
Guru pitched his tent outside the village wallg. 
While there a Pathan, who had been introduced to 
him at Saifabad, went and paid him homage, and 
made him offerings. He begged the Guru to remain 
with him for some days. The Guru said he must 
move onward, and asked his Pathan friend to allow 
him. 

The Guru went thence to a village called Hali. 
There lived a masand who through fear of the Muham- 
madans would not even visit him. The Guru next 
proceeded to Chikha in the present Karnal district, 
where lived a masand called Galaura. The Guru 
had once found him as a waif, and brought him up 
to manhood. He then left his service and went to his 
native village, where he was now delighted to receive 
his old master. The Guru knowing his devotion 
stayed with him and gave him spiritual instruction. 
Galaura’s wife, who is described as a very simple- 
minded person, the Guru blessed, and to Galaura 
himself he gave a quiver full of arrows to serve him in 
the hour of need. He exhorted him to act honestly 
on all occasions and he should prosper, but if he ever 
acted dishonestly he should perish. 

The Guru then proceeded to Karha where there 
was a temple erected to Guru Har Gobind, who had 
rested there when he was going to visit Nanakmata. 
There resided another masand who through fear of 
the Muhammadans would not visit the Guru. The 
Guru, however, received great attention from an 
agriculturist whom he induced to dig a Bawal 
for the benefit of wayfarers. The Guru then went 
to the village of Khar where he passed the night 
giving religious instruction to Sikhs. When they 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR = 375 

heard him they began to moralize on the political 
condition. They said that the Turks had arrived 
at such a pitch of power that no one could with- 
stand them. He replied, ‘The king who acteth 
according to his religion, who practiseth justice, who is 
not greedy, who protecteth and showeth mercy to his 
subjects, who dispelleth their sorrows and conferreth 
happiness on them instead, who receiveth only 
reasonable revenue, who suppresseth thieves and 
robbers, who removeth the many similar obstacles to 
good government, and who ever acteth honestly, shall 
secure sovereignty for his descendants. 

‘But those who, though they may have obtained 
empire by virtuous conduct in previous births, now 
perform evil deeds, who devote themselves mainly 
to sexual pleasures, and neither listen to nor make 
themselves acquainted with the sufferings of their 
subjects, who seize wealth by every means in their 
power, and who feel not compassion for the poor, 
shall find their empire and dignity daily decrease. 
Aurangzeb hath now formed very evil designs 
and seeketh to destroy the Hindu religion. In the 
wantonness of his pride he practiseth violence and 
oppression. His suffering subjects fear for their 
lives. Wherefore it is now abundantly manifest 
that his empire and dignity cannot abide but shall 
all gradually perish, and that there shall none of his 
progeny remain even to beat a drum.’ * 

Many Rajas of the present age who suppose their 
position is the result of greatly meritorious acts in 
previous births, and that they have nothing to do but 
enjoy themselves in this, may not unwisely ponder 
on the Guru’s words. 

Next morning the Guru reached Khatkar in the 
Patiala state. He sent for flour and dal, and had 
them cooked for his dinner. During the night the 
villagers formed a design to steal his horse, which 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras XII, Chap. 34. The Guru’s prophecy has 
been amply fulfilled. 

376 THE SIKH RELIGION 

they saw was of excellent strain and of great value. 
Six men went to take away the animal, but, it is said, 
were immediately stricken blind and had to abandon 
their design. On this they recovered their sight and 
went to their homes. On discussing the incident 
there, they learned that the horse belonged to a cele- 
brated priest. They then decided to go with offerings 
and beseech his pardon. They asked for another 
favour, that the Guru should sweeten the brackish 
water of their village. Both requests were granted. 
The Guru, drawing an arrow from his quiver, said 
that, as far as the arrow flew, the water of the earth 
should become sweet. They were enjoined to sink 
a well within that radius, and their labour should be 
rewarded. In this way the Guru continued his 
journey, conferring temporal and spiritual favours 
on his audience until he reached Agra. There he 
encamped in a garden outside the city. 

The Guru sent for a shepherd boy he saw in the 
garden and asked him to do him a favour. The 
Guru took from his finger a large gold ring set with 
diamonds, and asked the shepherd to go and pledge 
it and bring him two rupees’ worth of sweets. The 
shepherd said he had no cloth in which to wrap 
them. Upon this the Guru took off a very valuable 
shawl he wore, and handed it to him for the purpose. 
The boy, not knowing the Guru, enjoined him to look 
after his herd of sheep and goats, and departed on 
his errand. The Sikhs who accompanied the Guru 
were astonished at what he had done. Mati Das 
took the liberty of saying, ‘ Have we not money ? 
why hast thou parted with thy ring ? Moreover, in- 
stead of a handkerchief thou hast given thy valuable 
shawl to bring the sweets in.’ The Guru replied that 
what he had done had been done by God’s will which 
could not be set aside by hundreds of devices. 

The shepherd went into the city, and stopping at 
a confectioner’s shop showed the ring. The con- 
fectioner on examining it said it was a priceless 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 377 

article, and asked the boy from whom he had 
received it. The boy told him, whereupon the con- 
fectioner weighed the sweets. When the boy pre- 
sented the shawl to wrap them up in, the confectioner 
became still more astonished. He said that the boy 
must have stolen both the ring and the shawl, as 
the owner of the latter could never have sent it to 
be spoiled with sweets. The confectioner accordingly 
arrested the shepherd and took him to the police 
office. The boy, on being interrogated, said he had 
got both the ring and the shawl from a stranger who 
had taken shelter in a certain garden, and he described 
him and his five companions. The police officer sent 
two policemen to make inquiries regarding the visitor. 

When the policemen arrived, they asked the Guru 
who he was. The Guru candidly told them his name 
and station. On hearing this one of the constables 
returned to the police office to give information and 
the other remained to watch the Guru. The Kotwal 
was delighted to hear that Guru Teg Bahadur had 
been found at last, and to think that he should get 
a large reward from the Emperor for his capture. 
The police officer then went to the governor of the 
fort, told him the circumstances, and chuckled at 
the thought that they should all become great men 
after the capture of the much-sought-for Guru. The 
Governor of the fort ordered one hundred horsemen 
to equip themselves and accompany the police officer 
to arrest the Guru. The Guru frankly replied to 
all their questions. They then informed him that 
the Emperor had sent written orders in all directions 
to arrest him, and asked him to kindly go with them 
to the fort, and they would inquire the Emperor’s 
wishes regarding him. The Guru at once ordered 
his horse to be saddled and with his five Sikh fol- 
lowers entered the fort. The Guru at his arrest 
and in the fort preserved his marvellous equanimity, 
never showing the slightest sign of displeasure or 
disappointment. 

378 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Governor of the fort and the police officer 
reported the arrest to the Emperor. The latter was 
overjoyed at the capture of the great Guru of the 
Sikhs. He said that his wish had been fulfilled, and 
he would now convert the Guru to Islam, and the 
Muhammadan religion would then be rapidly ac- 
cepted by the people. He sent off a regiment of 
twelve hundred horse to Agra to bring the Guru to 
his presence. He explained to them that the 
prisoner must not escape. If any persons were to 
assist him in endeavouring to do so, the regiment was 
to perform its duty. The soldiers were not, however, 
to annoy the Guru in any way on the journey to Dihli. 

CHAPTER X 

When the Guru with his five Sikhs arrived in Dihli 
the Emperor sent for him and thus addressed him, 
“It is my pleasure that there should be but one reli- 
gion. Hinduism is false and worthless, and those 
who profess it will suffer punishment in hell. I pity 
them and therefore wish to do them a favour. If 
they of their own accord keep the Jd, and fast, and 
repeat the Muhammadan creed and prayers, I will 
reward them with wealth, appointments, land- 
revenue grants, and lands with irrigating wells. In 
this case thou, too, shalt have many disciples, and 
thou shalt become a great priest of Islam. Therefore 
accept my religion, and thou shalt receive from me 
whatever thy heart desireth.’ The Guru replied, 
‘OQ Emperor, thou and I and all people must walk 
according to God’s will. If it were the will of God that 
there should be only one religion, He would not have 
allowed the Muhammadan and Hindu religions to exist 
at the same time. He hath no partner and can do as 
He pleaseth. Neither thou nor I can oppose Him.’ 

The Emperor seized on the Guru’s expression that 
all men must walk according to God’s will and said, 
‘God the most high appeared to me in a vision, and 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR = 379 

told me to convert the whole world to Islam. I am 
therefore obeying God’s order.’ The Guru replied, 
‘I know not whether thou or thy God speaketh 
falsely. However, since thou wilt not believe, I will 
give thee ocular proof of what I say.’ The Guru 
then requested the Emperor to send for five mans of 
pepper, and he did so. The Guru had it made into 
a heap which he caused to be ignited. It burned for 
twenty-four hours and was apparently reduced to 
ashes. The Guru then desired that the heap of 
ashes should be pounded and sifted. When this was 
done three pepper pods came out whole. The Guru 
then said, ‘ O king, thou hast now got thine answer. 
Thou wishest to make one religion out of two, but 
God wisheth to make three religions out of two. 
Him whom the Creator desireth to preserve not even 
firecan touch. On that account, O king, be satisfied 
with what He hath done. As these three pepper 
pods have been saved from the fire, so shall three 
religions, Hinduism, Islam, and Sikhism survive to 
future ages.’ 

Upon this the Emperor ordered that the Guru 
should be closely imprisoned, and sufficient guards 
placed over him to prevent his escape. The Guru 
then wrote as follows to his wife:—‘ The Turks have 
imprisoned me in Dihli. Paying due regard to the 
words of Guru Nanak to the Emperor Babar, I 
have come here to deprive them of their sovereignty.’ 
Wherefore have no anxiety for me. Cherish our son 
and recognize him as the Guru’s image.’ Both Mata 
Gujari and her mother-in-law received this letter 
as if their hearts had been pierced with arrows. 
The messenger essayed to console them. He pointed 
out that the Guru had brought his fate on himself 
as the result of a prayer of certain Kashmiri pandits. 
His family ought not therefore to take the matter 
to heart, but accept his fate with resignation. 

1 The Emperor Babar’s descendants were Humaytin, Akbar, 
Jahangir, Shahjahan, Aurangzeb, and Bahadur Shah. 

380 THE SIKH RELIGION 

After a conference with his Muhammadan doctors 
and ministers the Emperor again sent for the Guru, 
and said he would perform for him every service 1n 
his power if he embraced Islam, otherwise he would 
have him severely tortured. The Guru replied, 
‘Hear, O Aurangzeb, I will never embrace Islam. 
Thou and I and all creatures are the servants, not 
the equals of God. The world is subject to Him. 
The prophet of Makka who originated the religion 
thou professest, was unable to impose one faith on the 
world, so how canst thou do so? Hewas not able 
to convert even his own uncle to Islam. Of what 
account art thou? The aswad stone which the 
Muhammadans set up in memory of Adam, and 
which they call celestial, but which the Hindus call 
the lingam, is worshipped by Musalman pilgrims. Is 
it anything more than an idol ?} When Muhammad 
drove idolatry out of Makka, the inhabitants formed 
a design to assassinate him. When he became 
aware of this, he made his escape at night to Madina, 
leaving all his property behind, and never returned. 
Canst thou justly say that he enjoyed God’s special 
favour ? Nay, we are all God’s people. God alone is 
master ; He can do what He pleaseth. O Aurangzeb, 
who art thou and what power hast thou to convert 
the whole world to Islam ? The Guru hath said, 
“Death laugheth over man’s head, but the brute 
knoweth it not.” O king, through pride thou 
thinkest not that thou too shalt assuredly die. He 
who practiseth pride shall be utterly extirpated.’ 

On hearing this the Emperor became enraged and 
remanded the Guru to prison, giving orders that he 
should be tortured until he accepted Islam. The 
more, however, he was tortured, the more isis he 
appeared. 

1 The Hindus believe that the aswad or black stone of Makka was 
a lingam in pre-Islamic times. ‘The Muhammadans when rejecting 
idolatry preserved the stone on account of old associations, and 
inserted it in the wall of their great temple. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 381 

Notwithstanding the Guru’s repeated refusals, the 
Emperor still entertained hopes that he might be 
converted. Messengers continued to be sent at 
intervals to renew the Emperor’s promises, and ask 
the Guru to perform a miracle or embrace Islam. 
The Guru replied that a miracle was the wrath of 
God ; and to undo what God had done, that is, to 
circumcise himself would be a crime against heaven. 
He would not consent to the Emperor’s proposals. 
He did not want office or power ; he felt no greed 
in his heart, and he would not embrace Islam, but 
the Emperor might act as he pleased. 

In the Gurumukhi chronicles there is frequent 
mention of the Guru having gone outside his prison 
walls to meet and dine with his Sikhs. This is attri- 
buted to his thaumaturgic power. One day as he 
was on the top story of his prison, the Emperor 
thought he saw him looking towards the south in the 
direction of the imperial zanana. He was sent for 
next day and charged with this grave breach of 
Oriental etiquette and propriety. The Guru replied, 
‘Emperor Aurangzeb, I was on the top story of my 
prison, but I was not looking at thy private apart- 
ments or at thy queens. I was looking in the direc- 
tion of the Europeans who are coming from beyond 
the seas to tear down thy pardas and destroy thine 
empire.’ A Sikh writer states that these words 
became the battle-cry of the Sikhs in the assault on 
Dihli in 1857 under General John Nicholson, and 
that thus the prophecy of the ninth Guru was 
gloriously fulfilled. 

Mati Das, the Guru’s faithful Sikh, charged his 
master with practising too much humility, and 
talked of destroying the whole sect of Muhammadans 
and putting an end to the Mughal rule. The Guru 
remonstrated with him, and said that man must accept 
and obey the will of God. Mati Das replied that the 

1 Life of Guru Teg Bahadur, by Nardin Singh. The statement is 
also recorded in a work called the Gur Bans Prakash. 

382 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru’s sufferings were intolerable. A conversation 
ensued in which the Guru referred to Guru Nanak’s 
promise to Babar that his empire should abide for a 
time. Guru Teg Bahadur said, ‘ The gift the Holy 
Guru Nanak gave may not, it is true, be easily 
recalled. But I will offer my life and in doing so 
prove the Turks to be false and deprive them of 
sovereignty. If I lay not down my life here, the 
great Turkish Empire in India will long survive ; 
but since its monarchs have committed great enor- 
mities, I will now extirpate them and their line.’ 

This conversation was overheard by a priest who 
reported it to the Emperor. Mati Das was in con- 
sequence bound between two pillars and his body 
cut in twain with a saw. When the executioners 
began to apply the saw to his body, he began to 
repeat the Japji. Itis said that, even when his body 
was divided in two, he continued to repeat the 
great morning prayer of the Sikhs, and only became 
silent when its repetition was complete. 

On witnessing the martyrdom of Mati Das, the 
Guru’s other Sikhs became sore afraid. They went to 
him at night and represented their danger. He told 
them that they were frée to leave him. They 
pointed to the chains on their feet, and asked how 
their release could be effected ? Through the Guru’s 
miraculous interposition their fetters fell off, the 
prison doors all stood open, and the guards snored in 
the sleep of neglect. One of the Sikhs, Bhai Gurditta, 
repented at last and remained with the Guru to 
suffer his fate. When the Guru was questioned by 
the jailor as to how his three Sikhs had escaped, he 
replied in the words of Guru Arjan :— 

‘God playeth in everything Himself ; 
One man He rescueth, another He envelopeth in the wave ; 

As He causeth men to dance, so they dance according to 
the past acts of each 

1 Siraj Parkash, Ras XI, Chap. 55. ® Mare. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 383 

‘The great God who created them hath rescued 
them from prison. What hast thou to do with them 
now ? Thy business is with me. It is I who have 
been imprisoned. Those Sikhs only remained through 
their regard for me.’ 

The Guru sent a message by the departing Sikhs 
to his son to abide fearlessly in Anandpur. The time 
for him to leave his own body had arrived, and he 
would leave it in Dihli. He would have to leave 
it all the same had he remained in Anandpur. He 
enjoined his son to grieve not for him as he had 
brought his troubles on himself. He would turn 
to ashes the fruit of the meritorious acts which the 
emperor had performed in former births, and by 
which he had obtained sovereignty. 

Gobind Rai on hearing his father’s message, 
received it with equanimity, but his grandmother 
and mother began to weep. He tried to console them, 
and said, ‘ We will abide in Anandpur and destroy 
the Turks.’ His mother upon this cautioned silence 
lest some agent of the Emperor should hear his 
words. Gobind replied that that was not a time for 
silence or concealment. 

CHAPTER XI 

When the Governor of the Dihli jail reported that 
three of the Guru’s Sikhs had escaped, the Emperor 
ordered the Guru to be locked in an iron cage, and 
a sentry with a drawn sword placed on guard over 
him. The Guru on hearing this order calmly replied 
with a hymn of Guru Arjan :— 

They who commit sin shall assuredly be ruined ; 

Azrail shall seize and smite them ; 

The Creator will put them into hell, and the Accountant 
there will ask for their accounts." 

The Guru in reply to the further demand of the 

1 Maru. 

384 THE SIKH RELIGION 

officer sent by the Emperor answered as he had done 
on a former occasion—‘ I will not accept thy law or 
thy religion, and I will not abandon my faith. The 
glory of the Turkish power is now at an end since 
thou art forcibly depriving men of their religion. 
I will dig up the roots of the Turks and throw them 
into the briny ocean, since what is melted with salt 
never reviveth, and they shall never again have 
sway in Hindustan.’ The Guru is said to have also 
quoted the hymn of Guru Nanak :— 

When kings, lions, headmen, and dogs, 

Instead of watching, rest in sleep, 

King’s servants inflict wounds with their nails, 

And taste and drink the subjects’ blood. 

Bhai Gurditta who was still fettered was allowed 
to wait on the Guru. Soon after this a messenger 
arrived bearing a letter from his wife and son. 
After making inquiries regarding them, the Guru 
wrote his first slok for the general instruction of 
his followers :— 

He who singeth not God’s praises rendereth his life useless ; 

Saith Nanak, worship God, O my soul, as the fish loveth 
water. 

He then wrote the fiftieth slok for his wife Gujari’s 
special consolation :— 

Ram passed away, Rawan passed away with his large 
family ; 

Saith Nanak, nothing is permanent ; the world is like a 
dream. 

For all in sorrow he wrote the fifty-first slok :— 

Be anxious only regarding what is not expected ; 
It is the way of the world, Nanak, that nothing is per- 
manent. 

To his son he sent the fifty-third slok :— 

My strength is exhausted, 1 am in chains, and have no 
resource. 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR _ 385 

Saith Nanak, God is now my refuge ; He will succour me 
as He did the elephant. 

And also the fifty-fifth :— 

My associates and companions have all abandoned me ; no 
one remaineth with me to the last ; 
Saith Nanak, in this calamity God is mine only support. 

It is believed that the Guru during his captivity 
composed most of his other sloks and hymns, and 
sent them with the above by the messenger. The 
Guru said to him at parting: ‘ My end hath come; 
console all my people. We must all be satisfied with 
God’s will. Take this letter quickly, and bring me 
an answer.’ 

Gobind Rai replied to the slok addressed to him 
with the fifty-fourth slok in the collection bearing 
the name of the ninth Guru in the Granth Sahib :— 

Strength is thine ; thy fetters are loosed ; thou hast every 
resource ; 

Nanak, everything is in thy power ; it is only thou who 
canst assist thyself.1 

The Guru was very pleased at receiving this slok 
and message from his son, and remarked that he was 
fit for the Guruship. He sent into the city of Dihhi 
for five paise and a coco-nut to forward him in token 
of his appointment to the Sikh spiritual sovereignty. 
When the five paise and the coco-nut arrived, the 
Guru placed them in front of him, meditated on his 
distant son, and bowed to him. He sent the articles 
to Gobind Rai with the fifty-sixth slok :-— 

The Name remaineth, saints remain, Guru Gobind remain- 
eth ; 

Saith Nanak, few are they who in this world follow the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Before the messenger reached Anandpur the Guru's 

1 This couplet is the only composition of the tenth Guru found in 
the Granth Sahib. 
SIKH. IV Cae 

386 THE SIKH RELIGION 

family was in great distress on account of a vision 
which his wife had had. She thought that she saw 
the Guru place five paise and a coco-nut before his 
son Gobind and bow to him in token of his appoint- 
ment, and then she beheld the Guru’s head separated 
from his body. She requested her son to send a Sikh 
at once to ascertain 1f the vision had any reality. 
If the messenger met on the road the Sikh who was 
expected from Dihli, he was to let him come on, and 
himself proceed to Dihli to obtain the latest informa- 
tion regarding the Guru. 

Meanwhile the Emperor kept his thoughts on the 
Guru’s conversion. He sent for a Muhammadan 
priest and told him to take one of the nobles with him 
to the prisoner with this message, “ Thou art to accept 
the Muhammadan religion or work a miracle. If 
thou work a miracle, thou mayest remain a Guru as 
thou art. If thou accept Islam, then shalt thou 
be advanced to an exalted position, and be happy. 
If thou fail to accept these offers, thou shalt be put 
to death. This is my final decision.’ 

The Guru replied in the same purport as before, 
and added—‘ I will never abandon my faith. I want 
no honour in this life ; I want honour hereafter. The 
threat of death possesseth no terrors for me, since 
I must one day assuredly leave this perishable body. 
For death I am prepared and I cheerfully accept it.’ 

The Emperor on hearing this reply was greatly 
incensed, and ordered that the Guru should be 
executed. 

Meantime the messenger from the Guru’s son and 
wife arrived from Anandpur. The Guru said to 
him: ‘My last hour hath come. Stand thou 
near me. My head shall fall into thy lap. Fear 
nobody, but take it to Anandpur, and cremate it 
there.’ On hearing this not only the Sikh, but the 
Muhammadan governor of the jail began to weep. 
The Guru gave them religious instruction, and con- 
soled them. Then turning to his faithful companion, 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR _ 387 

Gurditta, he said: ‘Thou shalt be released after my 
death.’ Gurditta replied, ‘O great king, it is at thy 
feet I wish to leave my body.’ The Guru rejoined : 
—O my brother, thy cremation-ground shall be 
where Bhai Budha used to graze the horses of 
Guru Har Gobind when he was in the fortress of 
Gualiar. The place is only about six miles distant. 
Thou shalt leave thy body there, and come to me in 
heaven.’ 

Then came Saiyid Adam Shah with a warrant 
for the Guru’s execution, accompanied by all the 
Emperor’s courtiers and Muhammadan priests of 
Dihli. Adam Shah, who revolted from the office of 
executioner of the Guru, asked him why he was bent 
on losing his life in vain, and begged him to embrace 
Islam. The Guru replied :—‘ The Sikh religion is 
dearer to me than life, and I cannot renounce it even 
under the pressure of immediate and certain death. 
The Guru was then taken out of his cage, and allowed 
to perform his ablutionsat a neighbouring well. There 
appeared a great crowd to witness the execution. 
The Guru, leaving the well, went and sat under 
a banyan-tree, still extant, where he recited the 
Japji. He then told Adam Shah to take his 
sword and strike his neck when he bowed to God 
at the conclusion of his devotions. Adam Shah did 
so. It is said that the Guru’s head flew off into the 
faithful Sikh’s lap. 

It is recorded that immediately afterwards a great 
storm arose which filled every one’s eyes with dust. 
The Sikh unobserved by any one took away the Guru’s 
head to Anandpur, hasting with it as fast as his feet 
could carry him. The execution of Guru Teg 
Bahadur occurred on the afternoon of Thursday the 
fifth day of the light half of the month of Maghar in 
the Sambat year 1732 (A.D. 1675). 

CC2 

388 THE SIKH RELIGION 

CHAPTER XII 

The Emperor on hearing of the Guru’s execution 
became sad and repentant. His mind is said to have 
been agitated like leaves moved by the wind. He 
reflected: ‘As the Guru by his death hath fixed a 
stain on me, so I think that my own life will now be 
my guest for only a few days.’ His courtiers on 
hearing this endeavoured to console him: ‘O mighty 
monarch, the Guru disobeyed thine orders, so what 
sin was there in killing him ? Thou didst flay and put 
to death such a great man as Sarmad, so why be 
distressed in the Guru’s case ? Why trouble regarding 
an accomplished fact ? ’ On hearing this the Emperor 
outwardly appeared consoled, but could never really 
regain his peace of mind. 

A Sikh of the Labana tribe, on happening to 
see the Guru’s dead body was greatly grieved, and 
said to himself: ‘A curse on the Sikhs who look 
on and allow this dishonour to the corpse of their 
Guru!’ The Labana went home, and reproached 
his tribesmen on the subject. They collected oxen 
on which they loaded sacks, and carts on which they 
loaded cotton, and drove them in the direction of the 
Guru’s corpse. In this way they hoped that their 
removing it for the performance of the last sad rites 
would not be noticed. They also hoped to elude 
pursuit in the dust-storm which arose after the 
Guru’s death. The city guards were greatly troubled 
by the storm, and dispersed in different directions. 
Five Sikhs then took up the Guru’s body, put it on 
a cart, and succeeded in taking it unobserved through 
the crowd. When they had taken it outside the city 
the dust-storm subsided. 

The Sikhs’ houses were all thatched, so when the 
pyre was lighted in them, they would take fire, and in 
this way the Guru’s body would not be discovered. 
When it was duly reduced to ashes, they cried out 
that their houses had caught fire, and called on their 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 389 

neighbours to assist them in extinguishing it. The 
houses, however, were soon burnt to ashes, and the 
call to their neighbours to help them was futile as it 
had been intended. Next day they collected the 
Guru’s remains and buried them in a copper vessel 
in the earth immediately under his funeral pyre. 
Over his remains, at a spot now known as Rakab 
Gunj, a shrine was subsequently erected. 

The Emperor censured his staff for allowing the 
Guru’s head and body to disappear, and deemed his 
own object frustrated in having put the Guru to 
death. In his general distress at what had occurred 
he was not able to take his dinner, and retired 
hungry. He dreamt that Bhai Mati Das appeared 
to him, upturned his bed, and ordered him to leave 
Dihli. The Emperor was unable to sleep for the 
remainder of the night, and endeavoured to lull his 
conscience by a repetition of the creed and the prayers 
of his religion. 

While all this was taking place, the Guru’s family 
heard of his death, the efforts made to convert him, 
and his noble replies to all the overtures made. 
The messenger told how the Guru had sent for five 
paise and a coco-nut, bowed to his son Gobind, made 
him his successor, and infused his light into him. 
His message to his son was to extend the true religion, 
and destroy the wicked. The whole assembly began 
to weep, but the young Guru endeavoured to console 
them. He said that there should be no mourning 
for true men like his father, who on seeing the 
decline of religion had assumed human birth, and 
having placed religion on a firm basis returned to his 
heavenly home. ‘ According to the words of Guru 
Arjan :— 

Philanthropic men have come who are beyond birth and 
death ; 

They give their lives, turn men to devotion, and cause 
them to meet God. 

390 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Consequently, my brethren, your mourning’ is 
vain.’ 

The young Guru who knew that his father’s head 
was being brought to Anandpur by the last messenger 
sent to Dihli, dispatched two Sikhs to meet and 
escort it. The Sikhs fell in with its bearer about 
a mile from Anandpur. He told them to return and 
ask Guru Gobind Rai if his father’s head was to be 
cremated at Anandpur or Kiratpur where were the 
shrines of the sixth and seventh Gurus and relations 
of theirs. The young Guru decided that Guru Teg 
Bahadur’s head should be taken to Anandpur for the 
last rites. 

A pyre of sandal wood was constructed and attar 
of roses sprinkled on the head which the young Guru 
took and solemnly placed on the pyre. He then 
repeated the preamble of the Japji and ignited the 
pyre with his own hands. While the head was being 
cremated, the Sikh congregation sang hymns of the 
Guru. They called to memory and spoke of Guru 
Teg Bahadur’s philanthropic and_ self-sacrificing 
deeds. .The Sohila was then read with a conclud- 
ing benediction and sacred food distributed. When 
Guru Gobind Rai reached home, he caused the 
reading of the Gurus’ hymns to be begun, and this 
was continued for ten days, when alms were freely 
distributed. Guru Gobind Rai was in due time 
proclaimed the tenth Guru. There were great 
rejoicings on the occasion. Bards and poets assembled 
to sing the new Guru’s praises while certain Sikhs 
were sad at heart as they thought of the late Guru 
Teg Bahadur. The memory of their kind friend and 
spiritual leader ever occurred to them. 

After the death of Guru Teg Bahadur the Muham- 
madans set at liberty his faithful attendant Gurditta, 
a lineal descendant of Bhat Budha. He then went 
to where Bhai Budha used to graze the sixth 
Guru’s horses, and there after seeing the seat of 
his ancestors gave up his spirit. His son Ram 

LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 391 

Kaur, who was then only thirteen years of age, 
became a very learned Gurumukhi scholar. It 
was he who gave the tenth Guru the ¢élak, or 
patch of spiritual sovereignty, in the presence of the 
descendants of all the Gurus. The enthronement of 
Guru Gobind Rai was performed on the fifth day 
of the first half of Phagan (February), A.D. 1676, with 
great state in a lofty building erected for the occasion. 

One day the Labana who had cremated Guru Teg 
Bahadur’s body paid Guru Gobind Rai a visit, and 
detailed all the circumstances subsequent to Guru 
Teg Bahadur’s death. When the Labana said that 
the Sikhs were afraid to touch the body, Guru Gobind 
Rai vowed that he would make Sikhs such that one 
of them could hold his ground against one hundred 
thousand others. When the Labana told the Guru 
that he had buried the ashes of his father, the Guru 
ordered him to leave them where they were for the 
present. He would go there himself one day, and 
erect a temple on the spot. 

The Labana continued to describe the mental 
state of Aurangzeb after the execution of the Guru. 
When Aurangzeb imprisoned his own father the latter 
gave him three counsels—not to try to convert the 
Hindus, to pay his State servants well, and not to 
engage in war in the Dakhan. All these counsels 
Aurangzeb disregarded, the first two through bigotry 
and greed, and the third through the advice of 
a wandering fagir who told him it would now be 
impossible for him to remain in Dihli. Aurangzeb 
therefore decided to make an expedition against 
King Tana Shah in the Dakhan. From that moment 
Aurangzeb’s power declined, and now no trace is left 
of his imperial line. 

Such is the account of the death of Guru Teg 
Bahadur given by the Sikh historians. The Muham- 
madan author of the Szyar-ul-Mutaakharin states 
that Aurangzeb had the Guru’s body cut up into 
pieces and suspended in different parts of the imperial 

392 THE SIKH RELIGION 

capital. Whether this be true or not, it is certain that 
the other circumstances related by the Muhammadan 
writer are utterly incompatible with the whole tenor 
of Guru Teg Bahadur’s life and writings, and cannot 
be accepted as even an approach to history.’ 

Guru Gobind Rai thus writes of his father :— 

He protected the frontal marks and sacrificial threads of 
the Hindus 

And displayed great bravery in this Kal age. 

When he put an end to his life for the sake of holy men, 

He gave his head, but uttered not a groan. 

He suffered martyrdom for the sake of his religion ; 

He gave his head but swerved not from his determination. 

God’s people would be ashamed 

To perform the tricks of mountebanks and cheats 

Having broken his potsherd on the head of the King of 
Dihli he departed to paradise. 
No one else coming into the world acted like Teg Bahadur. 

The world was in mourning for the demise of Teg Bahadur ; 
There was weeping for him in the whole world, but rejoicing 
in paradise.® 

The following hymn of Guru Teg Bahadur is 
frequently sung in assemblies of Sikhs :— 

Put the support of God’s lotus feet into thy heart, and 
unite it with them. 

The mind desireth evil, but it should be restrained by the 
Gurw’s instruction. 

Give thy head rather than forsake those whom thou hast 
undertaken to protect. 

Guru Teg Bahadur said, give thy life, but aaa not 
thy faith. 

~ 1 The Siyar-ul-Mutaakharin contains many obvious misstatements 
regarding the other Gurus also. 

2 That is, he might have performed a miracle and saved himself, 
but he scorned to do so. 

3 Vachitar Natak, Chap. v. 

393 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR: 

GAURI 

I 

O good people, renounce your mental pride, 

Day and night flee from lust, wrath, and the company of 
the evil. 

He who recognizeth pleasure and pain, honour and dis- 
honour as the same, 

And who keepeth aloof from joy and sorrow, knoweth the 
Real Thing in the world. 

One should renounce praise and blame and search for the 
dignity of Nirvan : 

Nanak, this is a difficult part to play ; only a few pious 
men know how to do so. 

II 

O good people, God hath thus made creation— 

Some perish, others think that they shall live for ever ; 
this is a wonderful thing and cannot be understood. 

Mortal is in the power of lust, anger, and worldly love, 
and hath forgotten God. 

The body which, like a nightly dream, is unreal man 
deemeth real.? 

Whatever is visible shall all vanish like the shadows of 
the clouds : 

Nanak, they who know that the world is unreal shall 
abide under God’s protection. 

Ill 

The praise of God entereth not into the heart of man ; 

Day and night he remaineth absorbed in mammon ; say 
how shall he sing God’s praises. 

1 The hymns of the ninth Guru are not found in the oldest copy of 
the Granth Sahib preserved at Kartarpur. They were incorporated in 

the sacred volume by the tenth Guru at Damdama. 
* That is, permanent. 

394 THE SIKH RELIGION 

In this way he bindeth himself to children, friends, 
mammon, and selfishness. 

This world is false as a mirage, yet man on beholding it 
fleeth after it. 

The Lord, the Cause of happiness in this world and the 
next, is forgotten by the fool. 

Nanak, among millions few there are who find the way to 
worship God. 

IV 

O good people, the heart cannot be restrained ; 

It is fickle, greed abideth with it, therefore it cannot 
be kept stable : 

Within it is violent rage which causeth all wisdom to be 
forgotten, 

And which hath stolen the jewel of divine knowledge from 
all men : nothing can withstand it. 

All the Jogis making efforts and the eulogists singing 
God’s praises have failed to steady their minds. 

Nanak, when God is merciful, everything is successful. 

V 

O good people, sing God’s praises : 

You have obtained priceless human life ; why waste it in 
vain ? 

Enter into the sanctuary of God who is the purifier of 
sinners and the friend of the poor. 

Why forget Him, by remembering whom the elephant’s 
fear departed ? 

Lay aside pride, worldly love, and self, and then apply 
your minds to God’s worship. 

Nanak saith, this is the way of salvation ; become a fol- 
lower of the Guru and you shall attain it. 

VI 
O mother, let some one instruct this erring mind. 
Man hath heard the Veds and the Purans and the ways 
of holy men, yet he singeth not God’s praises even for a 
moment ; 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 395 

Having obtained a human body so difficult to obtain, he 
passeth his life in vain. 

Worldly love is a very toilsome forest, yet man conceiveth 
love for it. 

He feeleth no love for God who is ever with him at home 
and abroad. 

Nanak, consider him in whose heart God is contained as 
delivered. 

Vil 

O good people, in God’s asylum there is rest. 

The advantage of the study of the Veds and the Purans is 
to remember God’s name. 

The man who is untouched by covetousness, worldly love, 
selfishness, joy, and sorrow, 

And who is not a slave to his passion, is the image of God ; 

So is he who deemeth heaven and hell, ambrosia and 
poison, gold and copper, as the same ; 

And so also is he who deemeth praise and blame as the 
same, and who is not enslaved by avarice and worldly love : 

Recognize him as possessed of divine knowledge who hath 
not the entanglements of pain and pleasure. 

Nanak, admit that such a mortal is saved. 

Vill 

O man, why hast thou become crazy ° 

Knowest thou not that life decreaseth day and night, and 
that thou art degraded by avarice ? 

In the body and the beautiful house and wife which 
thou deemest thine own, 

Thou hast no share ; see and carefully reflect on this. 

Thou hast lost the jewel of Auman life, and thou knowest 
not God’s way ; 

Thou hast not been absorbed in the feet of the Lord even 
for a moment, and thou hast passed thy life in vain. 

Saith Nanak, that man is happy who singeth God’s name 
and praises ; 

Mammon hath bewitched all the rest of men; they shall 
not obtain the fearless dignity. 

396 THE SIKH RELIGION 

IX 

O heedless man, fear sin. 

Enter the protection of Him who is compassionate to the 
poor and the destroyer of every fear. 

Clasp to thy heart the name of Him whose praises the Veds 
and Purans sing. 

Pure is the name of God in the world ; by ever remember- 
ing it all filth of sin shall be cleansed. 

Thou shalt not again obtain a human body; make some 
efforts now for thy deliverance. 

Nanak saith, by lauding Him who is full of mercy thou 
shalt cross the terrible ocean. 

ASA 

To whom shall I describe man’s troubles ? 

The prey of avarice he hasteth in every direction in the 
hope of wealth ; 

For the sake of pleasure he undergoeth much suffering, 
and is the slave of every individual ; 

Like a dog he wandereth from door to door, and heedeth 
not God’s worship ; 

He loseth his human life in vain, and is not ashamed of 
men’s laughter. 

Nanak, why dost thou not sing God’s praises so that thine 
evil inclinations may depart ? 

DEVGANDHARI 

I 

Man doeth not a particle of my bidding. 

I have been instructing him, yet he abstaineth not from 
wickedness ; 

He hath gone mad by the intoxication of mammon, and 
repeateth not God’s praises ; 

By fraud he deceiveth the world and filleth his own belly ; 

Like a dog’s tail he is never straight, and lendeth not an 
ear to what I tell him. 

1 The gydnis generally translate this verse—O man, fear even 
unintentional sin. 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 397 

Saith Nanak, continually repeat the name of God, so shalt 
thou be successful. 
II 

All thy relations are only for life ; 

Thy mother, father, brothers, sons, kinsmen, and the wife 
of thy house, 

When the soul parteth from thy body, cry out and call 
thee a ghost ; 

Nobody keepeth thee even half a ghari; they expel thee 
from the house. 

The structure of the world is like a mirage ; understand 
this and ponder on it in thy heart. 

Saith Nanak, ever repeat God’s name by which deliverance 
is obtained. 

It 

I have seen that the love of the world 1s false ; 

Everybody, whether wife or friend, 1s intent on his own 
happiness ; 

Everybody speaketh of his relations, and attacheth his 
heart to them with love ; 

At the last moment nobody will accompany him : this is 
a strange custom. 

Stupid man as yet understandeth nothing, though I have 
grown weary of continually instructing him. 

Nanak, if man sing the praises of God, he shall cross over 
the terrible ocean. 

BIHAGRA 

Nobody knoweth God’s ways ; 

Jogis, jatis, penitents, and several wise men have grown 
weary thinking of Him ; 

He can in a moment make a beggar a king, or a king 
a beggar ; 

What is empty He filleth, and what is full He emptieth ; 
this is a practice of God ; 

He-hath spread His own illusion, and He Himself behold- 
eth it ; 

He assumeth many shapes and p/ayeth many sports, yet 
is distinct from everything. 

398 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Incomputable, illimitable, unseen, and spotless is He who 
hath unsettled all men’s minds. 

Satth Nanak, O mortal, lay aside all doubt, and think 
upon God’s feet. 

SORATH 

I 

O man, love God ; 

Hear His praises with thine ears, and sing His songs with 
thy tongue. 

Associate with holy men, remember God, and thou shalt 
be cleansed from sin. | 

Death wandereth about, O friend, like a serpent with pro- 
truding fangs, 

And it will seize thee sooner or later; understand this in 
thy heart. 

Saith Nanak, worship God; thine opportunity is passing 
away. 

Il 

Man’s intentions are never carried out ; 

He neither adoreth God, nor worshippeth at places of 
pilgrimage,! so Death seizeth him by the top-lock. 

Know that wives, friends, sons, carriages, property, 
wealth, the whole world, 

And everything else is false; only adoration of God is 
tie. 

Grown weary of wandering about for many ages, man 
hath at last obtained a human body : 

Nanak saith, O man, it is now thy turn to meet God ; 
why not remember Him ? 

Til 

O man, what evil inclinations hast thou entertained ? 

Thou hast found pleasure in other men’s wives and in 
calumny, and God thou hast not served ; 

Thou hast not known the way of deliverance, but hast 
hurried to amass wealth. 

1 By pilgrimage is here meant the society of saints. 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 399 

At last nothing shall accompany thee ; in vain hast thou 
entangled thyself. | | 

Thou hast not worshipped God, nor served holy men, nor 
hath any divine knowledge sprung up in thy heart. 

God is in thy heart, yet thou searchest for Him in the 
wilderness ; 

Thou hast grown weary of wandering in many births, and 
hast not acquired a stable mind ; 

Having now acquired a human body worship God’s feet ; 
Nanak giveth thee this advice. 

IV 

O man, think of seeking God’s protection ; 

Fix His praises in thy heart, by meditating on whom 
such a person as the courtesan was saved ; 

By remembering Him Dhru became immovable, and ob- 
tained the fearless dignity. 

Why hast thou forgotten the Lord, who is such a Remover 
of sorrow ? 

When the elephant took the protection of the Ocean of 
mercy, he escaped from the crocodile. 

How far shall I describe the praises of the Name? He 
who repeateth it bursteth his bonds. 

The sinner Ajamal, the world knoweth, was saved in a 
moment. 

Nanak saith, think upon the Fulfiller of desires, and thou 
too shalt be saved. 

V 

What efforts shall mortal make 

By which he may obtain God’s service and dispel the 
fear of death ? 

Say what science shall he study, and then what acts and 
religious ceremonies shall he perform ? 

What is that great name, by remembering which man 
may cross the dreaded ocean ? 

In the Kal age there is one Name, that of the Ocean of 
mercy, by repeating which man may obtain deliverance ; 

There is no other religious ceremony equal to that, as 
shown by sacred writings. 

400 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He who is called the Lord of the earth, remaineth ever 
free from joy and sorrow, uncontaminated by the world, 
And unaffected by it, O Nanak, like a mirror ; He dwelleth 
within thee. 
VI 

O mother, how shall I behold the Lord of the earth ? 

In the darkness of great worldly love and spiritual igno- 
rance my heart hath been entangled ; 

I have lost the whole of my life in wandering, and not 
obtained a stable mind ; 

I have night and day pursued sinful pleasures, and have 
not abandoned sinful habits. 

I have never associated with saints or sung God’s praises. 

Nanak, in me is no virtue; take me, O God, under Thy 
protection. 

Vil 

O mother, my heart is not under my control ; 

Night and day it chaseth sinful pleasures ; how shall I 
restrain it ? 

Although I have heard the teachings of the Veds, the 
Purans and the Simritis, yet I have not given them a place 
in my heart for an instant ; 

I have coveted others’ goods and others’ wives, and have 
passed my life in vain ; 

I have become mad with the intoxication of mammon, 
and I know not any divine knowledge ; 

The Pure One dwelleth in my heart, yet I know not His 
SEEret. 

Since I have entered the asylum of the Saints,! my evil 
thoughts have all dispersed. 

Nanak, when I thought upon the Fulfiller of desires, 
Death’s noose was cut. 

Vill 

O man, hold this for certain in thy heart— 
The whole world is like a dream, and in its destruction 
there shall be no delay. 

1 The Gurus, his predecessors. 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR gor 

As a wall of sand, even when elaborately built lasteth 
not four days, 

So is the pleasure of mammon ; why art thou entangled 
in it, O ignorant man ? 

This very day come to thy senses; no harm is yet done ; 
repeat God’s name. 

Saith Nanak, I have proclaimed unto thee, O man, the 
special teaching of holy men. 

1. 4 

I have seen no friend in this world ; 

The whole world is attached to one for its own interest, 
but man will have no companion in adversity. 

Wives, friends, sons, and relatives are all attached to 
wealth ; 

When they see a man poor, they all forsake his company 
and flee. 

What shall I say to this demented heart which is attached 
to them ? 

I have forgotten the praises of the Lord of the poor and 
the Destroyer of fear ; 

However much I have striven, my heart remaineth as 
crooked as a dog’s tail, and will not straighten. 

Saith Nanak, O God, have regard for Thy practice of 
forgiveness ; I have uttered Thy name. 

Xx 

O man, thou hast not embraced the Guru’s instruction, 

What availeth thee to shave thy head, and put on an 
ochre-dyed garment ? 

Having abandoned truth thou hast attached thyself to 
falsehood, and lost thy Auman life in vain ; 

Thou hast filled thy belly by deceit, and slept like a beast ; 

Thou knowest not how to worship God, and thou hast 
sold thyself to mammon. 

O madman, thou hast remained entangled with sin, and 
forgotten the jewel of the Name ; 

Thou hast been thoughtless, thou hast not thought of 
God, thou hast passed thy life in vain. 

SIKH. IV D d 

402 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Saith Nanak, O God, recognize Thy daily practice of 
forgiveness ; mortal ever erreth. 

XI 

He who in adversity heedeth it not, 

Who in prosperity feeleth neither affection nor fear, and 
who deemeth gold as dross ; 

Who uttereth neither praise nor blame, and who suffereth 
not from avarice, worldly love, or pride ; 

Who is unaffected by joy or sorrow, by honour or dis- 
honour ; 

Who hath renounced all hopes and desires, and expecteth 
nothing from the world ; 

Whom lust and wrath touch not—in such a person’s 
heart God dwelleth. 

He to whom the Guru hath shown favour knoweth the 
way to this, 

And shall be blended with God, O Nanak, as water with 
water. 

XII 

My dear friends, know this in your hearts— 

The whole world is entangled in its own pleasures; no- 
body is any one else’s friend. 

In prosperity many persons come and sit together by one, 
encircling him on all sides ; 

When adversity befalleth him, all abandon him and no- 
body cometh near him. 

The wife of one’s home who hath been dearly loved, and 
who hath ever been attached to her husband, 

On the departure of his soul from his body fleeth away 
crying, “Ghost! ghost!’ 

Such is the conduct of those whom we love : 

At the last moment, Nanak, none but God is of any avail. 

DHANASARI 
I 
O Sir, why goest thou to search in the forest ? 

God though ever apart dwelleth everywhere, and is con- 
tained even in thee. 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR § 403 

As in flowers there is odour and in a mirror reflection, 

So God dwelleth continually in thy heart ; search for Him 
there, O brother. 

Whether thou art abroad or at home, know that there is 
but one God ; this knowledge the Guru hath given me. 

Nanak, without knowing thyself the scum of doubt shall 
not be removed. 

Il 

O good people, this world hath been led astray by super- 
stition ; 

It hath forsaken the memory of God’s name, and it hath 
been sold to mammon. 

It is involved in the love of mother, father, brother, son, 
and wife ; 

Day and night it is mad with the intoxication of youth, 
wealth, and splendour ; 

It is not attached to Him who is compassionate to the 
poor and ever the Destroyer of sorrow. 

Nanak, among millions few there are who become attached 
to the Guru and recognize God. 

Il 

Think not that that Jogi 

In whose heart thou recognizest covetousness, worldly 
love, and selfishness is united with God. 

He who neither calumniateth nor flattereth others, to 
whom gold and iron are the same, 

And who is free from joy or sorrow, is properly called 
a Jogi. 

The restless mind of man hasteth in every direction, but 
whoever steadily fixeth it, 

Saith Nanak, thou mayest rest assured is saved. 

IV 
What effort shall I now make 
That my mental anxiety may be at an end, and | may 
cross the terrible ocean ? 
I have done nothing good since I was born, wherefore I 
fear the more ; 
Dd2 

404 THE SIKH RELIGION 

I have not sung God’s praises in thought, word, or deed ; 
in my heart I feel anxious regarding this ; 

Although I have heard the Guru’s instruction, yet no 
spiritual knowledge hath resulted ; I fill my belly like a 
beast— | 

Saith Nanak, O God, adopt Thy daily practice of for- 
giveness, and I a sinner shall be saved. 

JAITSARI 
I 

My erring mind hath been entangled with mammon ; 

The more works I performed when devoted to avarice, 
the more I entangled myself ; 

I had no understanding, I devoted myself to sinful plea- 
sures, and I forgot God’s praises ; 

The Lord who was with me I did not recognize, I ran 
searching for Him into the forest. 

The jewel of God was in my heart, but I knew it not. 

Nanak, without worshipping God life is lost in vain. 

II 

O God, preserve mine honour : 

When the fear of Death entered my heart, I clung to Thine 
asylum, O Ocean of mercy. 

I was a great sinner, stupid and avaricious, but I have 
now grown weary of committing sin. 

I have not forgotten the fear of Death; in my anxiety 
my body hath wasted away, 

I have been running in every direction contriving plans 
for my salvation ; 

But though the pure God dwelt in my heart, I knew it not. 

I have no virtues nor have I performed devotion or pen- 
ance : what work shall I now perform ? 

Nanak, I have grown weary and have sought Thy pro- 
tection ; O God, grant me salvation. 

III 
O man, embrace true instruction. 
Admit that without the name of God all this world is 
false ; 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR = 405 

Know that the Lord, for whom the Jogis grow weary of 
searching without finding His limit, 

Is near thee, but without form or outline. 

God’s name is the purifier of the world, yet thou hast 
never remembered it. 

Saith Nanak, I have entered Thine asylum; O Thou to 
whom the world boweth down, preserve me as is Thy 
practice. 

TopI 

What shall I say of my baseness ? 

I have been entangled in the love of gold and woman, and 
have not sung God’s praises. 

Believing this false world to be true I conceived an attach- 
ment for it ; 

I never remembered the Protector of the poor, who is 
my companion and helper ; 

I remained night and day absorbed in worldly affairs, 
and the filth of my heart forsook me not. 

Saith Nanak, I have now nowhere salvation except in the 
protection of God. 

TILANG 
I 

O mortal, if thou have wisdom, then think of God night 
and day ; 

Every moment life is passing away like water from a 
cracked vessel. 

Why singest thou not the praises of God, thou ignorant 
fool ? 

Attached to false avarice thou hast not thought of death ; 

No harm hath yet been done if thou even now sing God's 
praises. 

Saith Nanak, by singing them thou shalt obtain the fear- 
less dignity. 
nl 

Awake, O man, awake ; why dost thou heedlessly sleep ? 

The body which was born with thee shall not depart with 
thee ; 

406 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The mother, father, sons, and relatives whom thou 
lovest, 

Will throw thy body into the fire when the soul departeth 
from it. 

Know that the affairs of the world last only during life. 

Nanak, sing God’s praises ; everything is like a dream. 

Til 

O man, sing the praises of God who is with thee : 

The opportunity is passing away, obey my words. 

Thou hast loved too well wealth, equipages, women, and 
empire. 

When Death’s noose falleth on thy neck, all shall become 
the property of others. 

O madman, thou hast intentionally ruined thine affairs ; 

Thou didst not shrink from the commission of sin or 
dismiss pride. 

Hear, O my brother, how the Guru hath instructed me. 

Nanak loudly proclaimeth—seek God’s protection. 

BILAWAL 
[ 

Recognize God’s name as the remover of sorrow : 

Know in thy heart that by remembering Him Ajamal and 
the courtesan were saved ; 

The elephant’s fear departed directly he muttered God’s 
name. 

The boy Dhru listened to Narad’s instruction, and became 
engrossed in worship ; 

He obtained the durable, immortal, and fearless rank, and 
the world was amazed. 

Nanak saith, admit that God the Protector of saints is 
near thee. 

II 

Without God’s name thou shalt suffer ; 

Without piety doubts are not at an end; the Guru gave 
me this secret. 

If thou enter not God’s asylum, what shall pilgrimage 
and fasting avail thee ? 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 407 

Be assured that the practice of Jog and sacrificial feasts 
are fruitless if man forget the praises of God. 

Such man as layeth aside both pride and worldly love, 
and singeth God’s praises, 

Saith Nanak, shall be said to have obtained salvation 
during life. 

IT] 

He in whom there is no devotion to God, 

Hath lost his life in vain ; bear this in mind. 

I speak verily unto you; believe his piety to be fruitless 

Who performeth pilgrimage and even fasting, but who 
hath not control over his heart. 

As water penetrateth not stone immersed in it, 

So deem that mortal who worshippeth not. 

In the Kal age salvation is obtained by the name of God ; 
the Guru discloseth this secret. 

Saith Nanak, he is a great man who singeth God’s praises. 

RAMKALI 

I 

O my soul, take shelter in God’s name ; 

By remembering it evil thoughts are dispelled, and the 
rank of nirvan obtained. 

Know that that man is very fortunate who singeth God’s 
praises ; 

Having lost the sins of different births he shall go to 
heaven. 

At the last moment Ajamal thought of God, 

And obtained in an instant the state which superior Jogis 
desire. 

The elephant had no merits, no learning, and what 
religious ceremonies had he performed ? 

Yet, O Nanak, behold the daily practice of God who 
granted him safety. 

II 

O my good people, what way shall man now adopt 

By which all evil thoughts may be dispelled and his heart 
be steeped in devotion to God. 

' Religious instruction will have no effect on his hard heart. 

408 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The heart remaineth entangled by mammon, and knoweth 
naught of divine knowledge. 

Whose name is that in the world by remembering which 
thou shalt obtain the rank of nirvan ? 

When the saints were compassionate and kind they taught 
me this— 

Know that he who hath sung God’s praises hath performed 
all religious duties ; 

And he who night and day claspeth God’s name to his 
heart, even for a moment, 

Shall lose all fear of Death and reform his life. 

Ill 

O mortal, think of God: 

Every moment life decreaseth ; night and day it passeth 
away in vain. 

Thou hast lost thy youth in sensual pleasures and thy 
childhood in ignorance ; 

Thou hast grown old and even now thou understandest 
not in what folly thou art entangled. 

Why hast thou forgotten God who gave thee human 
birth ? 

Thou hast not sung for a moment the praises of Him by 
remembering whom man obtaineth salvation. 

Why art thou proud of worldly wealth ? it will not depart 
with any one. 

Nanak saith, think upon the Fulfiller of desires ; He will 
be our Helper at last. 

MARU 
I 

God’s name ever bestoweth comfort ; 
By remembering it Ajamal was saved, and the courtesan 
also obtained deliverance ; 

Panchali! at the royal assemblage remembered the name 
of God ; 

1 Yudhishtar, the eldest of the five Pandav princes, staked his king- 
dom, his brothers, himself, and lastly his wife Draupadi in a gambling 
match with Duryodhan the eldest of the Kaurav princes, and lost them 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 409 

The Merciful One removed her suffering and enhanced 
His own renown. 

The Ocean of mercy assisteth whomsoever hath sung 
His praises ; 

Saith Nanak, relying on this I have come and sought 
His protection. 

II 

Now what shall I do, O mother ? 

I have lost my whole life in sensual pleasures and have 
not remembered God. 

When Death throweth his halter on my neck, I shall have 
lost all my reason.} 

Except the name of God what shall assist me in that 
affliction ? 

The wealth thou deemest thine own becometh in one 
moment another’s. 

Saith Nanak, I have been reflecting in my mind that 
I have never sung God’s praises. 

III 

O mother, I have not renounced the pride of my heart ; 

I have passed my life in the intoxication of worldly love, 
and have not applied myself to the worship of God. 

When Death’s mace fell upon my head, then I awoke from 
my slumber. 

But what availeth present repentance ? I shall not escape 
even by running? 

When this thought arose in my mind I fell in love with 
the Guru’s feet. 

Life is only profitable, Nanak, when we are absorbed in 
God’s praises. 

all. Duryodhan finding himself in possession of Draupadi ordered her 
to sweep his house. On her refusal she was dragged by Dhusisan, 
Duryodhan’s brother, before an assemblage of the Kauravs. He 
endeavoured to pull off her clothes, but God saved her from disgrace. 
Draupadi is here called Panchili, for she was daughter of Driipad 
the king of Panchal. 

1 I shall have no consciousness to repent and make up for lost 
opportunities. 

* Also translated—Unfortunate that I am, I shall not escape. 

410 THE SIKH RELIGION 

BASANT 

I 

O good people, know that this body is temporary ; 

The God who dwelleth within it recognize as permanent. 

This world is like wealth obtained in a dream; why be 
elated on beholding it ? 

Why are you wrapped up in it? nothing shall depart 
with you. 

Renounce both flattery and slander ; take God’s praises 
to thy heart. 

Nanak, the one God filleth all things. 

Ju 

The sinner hath given lust a seat in his heart ; } 

Wherefore his restless mind is not restrained. 

This net of lust is cast 

Over Jogis, Jangams, and Sanyasis. 

They who remember the name of God 

Cross over the terrible ocean. 

The slave Nanak hath taken refuge in God ; 

Grant me Thy name, O God, that I may continue to sing 
Thy praises. 

Il 

O mother, I have obtained God’s name as my wealth ; 

My heart hath ceased to wander and lain down to rest. 

Worldly love and selfishness have fled from my body, and 
pure spiritual knowledge hath sprung up 7 me. 

Avarice and worldly love cannot touch me; I have em- 
braced God’s service. 

When I acquired the jewel of the Name, the fear of con- 
tinual birth was at an end. 

When all covetousness hath departed from the heart it 
is absorbed in special happiness. 

He to whom the Ocean of mercy is compassionate, singeth 
His praises. 

' Also translated—Man hath implanted sinful lust in his heart. 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 411 

Saith Nanak, this form of wealth some rare holy man 
obtaineth. 

IV 

O my soul, why hast thou forgotten God’s name ? 

When the body perisheth thou shalt have to do with 
Death. 

This world is a hill of smoke ; 

What induced thee to consider it real ? 

Understand that wealth, wife, property, and home 

Will not depart with thee ; 

The worship of God alone will accompany thee. 

Saith Nanak, adore Him with unmixed love. 

V 

Why hast thou gone astray and attached thyself to false 
avarice ? 

There is no harm done if even to-day thou awake. 

Know that this world is like a dream ; 

It will be destroyed in a moment ; accept this as true. 

Adore that God day and night, O my friend, 

Who dwelleth continually with thee. 

Sing the praises of Him, 

Saith Nanak, who will assist thee at the last moment. 

SARANG 

If 

Thou hast no helper but God ; 

Who hath a mother, father, son, or wife? who hath a 
brother ? 

Of all the wealth, land, and property which thou deemest 
thine own, 

Nothing shall depart with thee when thou diest ; why art 
thou wrapped up in them ? 

Thou hast not increased thy love for Him who is com- 
passionate to the poor and ever the Destroyer of misery. 

Nanak saith, the whole world is unreal like a nightly 
dream. 

412 THE SIKH RELIGION 

1b 

O my soul, why art thou entangled in sensual pleasures ? 

In this world none may remain ; one cometh and another 
goeth. 

Who hath body and wealth ? who hath property ? what 
shall one love ? 

Everything which is visible shall vanish like the shadow 
of a cloud. 

Lay aside pride, grasp the protection of the saints, and 
thou shalt at once obtain salvation. 

Nanak, without worshipping God there is no happiness 
even in one’s dreams. | 

III 

Why, O man, hast thou wasted thy life ? 

Intoxicated by worldly love thou hast attached thyself 
to sensual pleasures and not entered God’s protection. 

This world is all a dream ; so why art thou covetous ? 

Everything that was created shall perish; nothing shall be 
allowed to remain. | 

This temporary body thou deemest permanent; in this 
way hast thou entangled thyself. 

Nanak, only he who. applieth his mind to the adoration 
of God, shall obtain salvation in this world.! 

IV 

I never heartily sang the praises of God ; 

I remained attached to sensual pleasures night and day, 
and did what pleased myself. 

I never carefully listened to the Gurw’s instruction: I 
became entangled with others’ wives. 

I busied myself greatly in calumniating others, and under- 
stood not the counsels I received. | 

How far shall I describe my acts—how I have wasted 
my life ? 

Saith Nanak, in me are all demerits ; protect me, O God, 
I have come to thy sanctuary. 

1 That is, shall obtain salvation during life. 

HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 413 

JAIJAWANTI ! 

I 

Remember God, remember God, this is thy duty ; 

Abandon the companionship of worldly love ; cling to 
God’s sanctuary ; admit that the pleasures of the world are 
false ; everything is unreal. 

Consider wealth as a dream; of what art thou proud ? 
the empire of the earth is as a wall of sand. 

The slave Nanak saith, thy body shall be destroyed ; 
yesterday passed away moment by moment, so also shall 
to-day. 

II 

Adore God, adore God ; thy life passeth away. 

Why should I warn thee every moment ? why under- 
standest thou not, O fool ? The body is like hail, it vanisheth 
in a moment. 

Reject all doubt and repeat God’s name; at the last 
moment this alone will depart with thee. 

Forsake sensual pleasures as poison; take the praise of 
God to thy heart ; Nanak proclaimeth, the opportunity is 
passing away. 

ITI 

O man, what shall be thy condition ? 

In this world the only means of salvation is God’s name 
to which thou hast not attentively listened; thou hast 
been excessively addicted to sensual pleasures, and not 
diverted thy thoughts from them. 

Thou hast obtained human life, yet thou hast not remem- 
bered God for a moment ; thou hast been in subjection to 
the charms of woman and thy feet are fettered. 

Nanak proclaimeth, the extension of the world is like 
a dream ; why thinkest thou not upon God to whom mam- 
mon is but a handmaiden ? ? 

LV 
Thy life shall pass away, shall pass away in vain in a 
Though thou hearest night and day the ancient histories, 

1 The ninth is the only Guru who has written in this measure. 
2 Why worship the servant instead of the Master? 

A414 THE SIKH RELIGION 

yet, O silly man, thou understandest them not ; Death hath 
arrived ; whither shalt thou flee ? 

That body of thine which thou thinkest permanent shall 
become dust; why repeatest thou not the name of God, 
thou shameless fool ? 

Introduce the service of God into thy heart ; renounce 
mental pride, so shalt thou, Nanak asserteth, be illustrious 
in the world. 

SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 

I 
He who singeth not God’s praises rendereth his life 
useless ; 
Saith Nanak, worship God, O my soul, as the fish loveth 
water. Il 

Why art thou enamoured of the deadly sins ? thou re- 
nouncest them not for a moment. 

Saith Nanak, repeat God’s name, O my soul, so that 
Death’s noose may not fall on thee. 

Itt 
Youth hath passed away in vain, old age hath overcome 
the body ; 
Saith Nanak, worship God, O my soul, thy life passeth 
away. IV 
Thou hast become old ; knowest thou not that thy time 
hath arrived ? 

Saith Nanak, O crazy man, why worshippest thou not 
God ? V 

Wealth, wife, riches, all that thou deemest thine own— 
None of these shall depart with thee ; Nanak, know this 
as true. VI 

God is the Saviour of sinners, the Dispeller of fear, the 
Lord of the helpless ; 
Saith Nanak, know Him, He dwelleth ever with thee. 

SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 415 

Vil 
Thou hast not loved Him who gave thee a human body 
and wealth : 
Saith Nanak, O crazy man, why dost thou abjectly 
tremble ? 
VItil 
Saith Nanak, hear O man, why rememberest thou not 
God 
Who gave thee human body, wife, wealth, prosperity, 
and commodious mansions ? 

IX 
God and no other is the Bestower of all happiness ; 
Saith Nanak, hear, O man, by remembering Him deliver- 
ance is obtained. 

xX 
Adore God, O my friend, by remembering Him deliver- 
ance is obtained ; 
Saith Nanak, hear, O man, life is ever growing shorter. 

XI 
O clever and wise man, know that thy body is composed 
of five elements ; 
Be sure, Nanak, that thou shalt blend with that from 
which thou hast sprung. 

XII 
The saints proclaim that God dwelleth in every heart— 
Saith Nanak, adore Him, O man, and thou shalt cross 
over the terrible ocean. 

XIII 
Saith Nanak, hear, O man, in God’s image is he 
Who is unaffected by weal or woe, by covetousness, 
worldly love, or pride. 

XIV 
Saith Nanak, hear, O man, know that he is saved 
Who uttereth neither praise nor blame, and to whom gold 
and iron are the same. 

416 THE SIKH RELIGION 

XV 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, know that he is saved 
Who feeleth neither joy nor sorrow, and who treateth an 
enemy and a friend as the same. 

XVI 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, call him a person possessed of 
divine knowledge, 
Who inspireth no fear, and who hath no fear of others. 

XVII 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, good fortune 1s inscribed on 
that man’s forehead, 

Who hath abandoned all evil passions, and donned the 
garb of retirement. 

XVIII 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, God dwelleth in the heart of 
him 
Who hath abandoned mammon and selfishness, and re- 
nounced everything. 
XIX 
The man who having renounced selfishness recognizeth 

God as the Creator, 
Saith Nanak, is saved ; be sure, my soul, that this is true. 

XX 
In the Kal age God’s name is the destroyer of fear and 
the banisher of evil thoughts ; 
He who night and day repeateth it, Nanak, shall be suc- 
cessful in his undertakings. 

XXI 

Utter God’s praises with thy tongue, and hear God’s 
name with thine ears ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, thou shalt not then be put 
into Death’s prison. 

SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 417 

XAIT 

The mortal who renounceth selfishness, covetousness, 
worldly love, and conceit, 
Saith Nanak, shall be saved himself and shall save others. 

XXIII 

Know that the world is like a dream or! a play ; 
There is nothing real in it, Nanak, but God. 

XAIV 

Day and night mortal wandereth after wealth ; 
Among millions, O Nanak, few there are who remember 
God. 
XXV 

As bubbles are formed from water and continually dis- 
appear ; 
So was this world constructed,? saith Nanak; hear this, 
O my friend. 
XXVI 

Mortal, blinded by the intoxication of mammon, payeth 
no heed to anything ; 
Saith Nanak, without uttering God’s name Death’s noose 
shall fall on him. 
XXVII 

If thou desire eternal happiness take God’s protection ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, difficult of attainment is 
human birth. 

XXVIII 

Fools and ignorant people run after wealth ; 

Saith Nanak, without repeating God’s name their lives 
pass in vain. 

XXIX 

Know that that mortal is like God who worshippeth night 
and day ; 

Between God’s saint and God there is no difference ; 
Nanak, recognize that this is true. 

1 Ar in the original. ‘The word, however, eenerally means ‘and.’ 

2 That is, men are born and die like bubbles, 
SIKH. 1V BE 

418 THE SIKH RELIGION 

XXX 
Man is entangled with mammon and forgetteth God’s 
name ; 
Saith Nanak, without repeating God’s name of what 
avail is life ? 
XXXI 
Mortal blinded by the intoxication of mammon remem- 
bereth not God ; | 
Saith Nanak, without worshipping God Death’s noose 
shall fall on man. 

XAXXIT 

Man shall find many companions in weal, but none in 
woe ; 

Saith Nanak, worship God, O man, and He will assist 
thee at the last moment. 

AXXIIT 

Man wandereth about in various births without having 
his fear of death removed ; 

Saith Nanak, O man, worship God, and thou shalt dwell 
in the fearless state. 

XXXIV 
I have made many efforts, but have not effaced the pride 
of my heart ; 
Iam bound by my evil thoughts, saith Nanak; preserve 
me from them, O God. 

XXXV 

Know that there are three stages of life, childhood, youth, 
and then old age ; 
Saith Nanak, admit that they are all in vain without 
worshipping God. 
XXXVI 

What thou oughtest to have done thou hast not done ; 
thou hast fallen into the net of covetousness ; 

Nanak, the opportunity hath now passed away; why 
weepest thou, O blind man ? 

SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 419g 
XAXVIT 
The heart is absorbed in mammon and cannot escape 

from it, O my friend ; 
As a picture painted on a wall, O Nanak, leaveth it not. 
XXXVITI 
Man desireth one thing, but something different hap- 
peneth ; 
_ He meditateth deceiving others, O Nanak, and a halter 
Is put round his neck. 
XXXIX 
Man maketh many efforts to obtain happiness, but none 
to obtain misery ;1} 
Saith Nanak, hear, O man, what pleaseth God happeneth. 
XL 
on world goeth about begging ; God is the Bestower 
of all; 
Saith Nanak, remember Him, O man, and thy desires 
shall be fulfilled. 
AL] 
Why entertainest thou false pride? Know that the 
world is like a dream ; 
In it there is nothing which is thine, Nanak preacheth. 
XLII 
Man is proud of his body which perisheth in a moment, 
my friend ; 
The man who reciteth God’s praises, Nanak, hath con- 
quered the world. 
XLII 
Ixnow that he in whose heart there is recollection of God, 

hath obtained salvation ; 
Between that man and God there is no difference ; Nanak, 

accept this as a fact. 
: XLIV 

Consider that person, O Nanak, as a hog or a dog 
In whose heart there is no devotion to the one Ged. 

1 It comes of itself according to prenatal acts. 

420 THE SIKH RELIGION 

AV 

As a dog never abandoneth his master’s house, 
Nanak, in the same way worship God with single mind 
and single heart. 

XLVI 
Going on pilgrimages, fasting, and giving alms, while 
pride is in the heart, 

Nanak, these things are as fruitless as an ——_ S 
bathing.1 

KEViIl 

Thy head shaketh, thy legs totter, thine eyes are devoid 
of lustre ; 

Saith Nanak, this is the case with thee, yet thou art not 
absorbed in God’s love. 

XLVITI 

I have particularly observed that in this world no one is 
another’s friend ; 
Nanak, only devotion to God is permanent; preserve 
that in thy heart. 
Mele TX 

Know, my friend, that the structure of the world is all 
unstable ; 
Saith Nanak, like a wall of sand it is not permanent. 

IL 

Ram passed away, Rawan passed away with his large 
family ; 
Saith Nanak, nothing is permanent; the world is like 
a dream. 
if 

Be anxious only regarding what is not expected ; 2 

1 There can be no purity as long as sin dwells in the heart ; ablutions 
will then be like those of the elephant which after being bathed be- 
spatters himself with mud. 

eh thy friends die, weep not over much for them, as their death 
is certain. 

SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR = 421 

It is the way of the world, Nanak, that nothing is per- 
manent. 

LI 
What is born dieth to-day, to-morrow, or the next day ; 
Nanak, sing God’s praises, and lay aside all entangle- 
ments. 
LYII* 
God’s name to which nothing is equal I have clasped to 
my heart ; 

By remembering it my troubles are at an end, and I 
behold Thee, O God ! 

1 Sloks LIII, LIV, LV, and LVI have already been given in the 
Life of Guru Teg Bahadur. 

END OF VOL. IV 

OXFORD 
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 

-— Cr 

— 

Robarts Library 

DUE DATE: 

For Touch Tone 
telephone renewals 
call 971-2490 
Hours: 
Mon. to Fri 8:30 am to midnight 
Saturday 9 am to 10 pm 
Sunday 1 PM to 10 pm 

For telephone renewals 
call 978-8450 

Hours: 
Man oe 

ee ee 

tae 

athe 
Sate Sh Sate 
+ ee 

LR OR 

See eneer 

ee 

eoeeoyn rie parah 

A Patel 
IG 

sar iaete'a Det 

r 

peeve 

SOT ep 

valet . 
oblate gleta® 

@a* 

oat 

ae 

teh fayehy 

en retetered on 

’ 

a idea root